ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSICS 

Published by 

ATARAXIAINC 

111 River Street 

Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774 

Copyright © 2005 by Ataraxiainc, Bogota, Chibchombia 

Published by Ataraxiainc, Bogota, Chibchombia 

Published simultaneously in the Earth planet 

All parts of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as no 
permitted under Sections of the Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the 
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance 
Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the 
Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Legal Department, 

Ataraxiainc, Bogota, Chibchombia e-mail: Ataraxiainc@Gmail.com. 

Trademarks: ATARAXIAINC 


LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND THE 
AUTHOR MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE 
ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND 
SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION 
WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE 
CREATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE ADVICE 
AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY 
SITUATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER 
IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL 
SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF A 
COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE SOUGHT. NEITHER THE 
PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING 
HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN 
THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER 
INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES 
THE INFORMATION THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR 
RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT 
INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED 
BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS READ. 


For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact 
our Customer Care Department within the “(-$”=$(%&/&)%$=, outside the U.S. at 
“ =$(%(“% $$__” (/$-- ‘$)($, or fax |@#-€#A4Z@F. 


Ataraxiainc also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print 
may not be available in electronic books. 


Library of Congress Control Number: - !”$&$+-+)=(% / 
ISBN: !2°=:)$(%/&-/-+* 
Manufactured in the Chibchombian World 


10987654321 


20/QW/RQ/QU/IN 


Opik (Opik), Ernst Julius (1893-1985) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Opik (Opik), Ernst Julius (1893-1985) 


Born in Estonia, Opik studied at Moscow University, 
and helped establish Turkestan University in Tashkent, 
becoming the Astronomer (director) at Tartu Observatory 
in Estonia. He fled the Red Army by horse cart during 
the Second World War and went to Armagh Observatory 
(Northern Ireland) in 1948. His wide-ranging interests are 
reflected in his discoveries and theories. These include 
the discovery of degenerate stars, e.g. white dwarfs, in 
his calculation of the density of o* Eridani (1915). He 
calculated the distance of M31 as 450 000 parsecs from the 
Sun (1922). He computed by hand evolutionary models 
of main-sequence stars into giants (1938) over a decade 
earlier than the computer computations of HOYLE and 
SCHWARZSCHILD. He predicted the density of craters on the 
surface of Mars, which was confirmed 15 years later by 
planetary probes. He put forward an unproven theory 
of the Ice Ages based on a calculation of changes in the 
convection in the internal structure of the Sun rather than 
MILANKOVITCH cycles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Angstrom, Anders Jonas (1814—74) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Angstrom, Anders Jonas (1814-74) 


Physicist, born in L6dg6, Sweden. He was keeper of the 
observatory and professor at Uppsala where he studied 
heat, magnetism and optics and examined the spectra of 
the Sun and auroras. His name is commemorated with 
the angstrom unit, 10-!° m, which is used for measuring 
wavelengths of light and x-rays, and the separation of 
atoms in molecules and crystals. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


61 Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


61 Cygni 


The star 61 Cygni is important because of its large proper 
motion, first measured at the Palermo Observatory by 
Giuseppe Piazzi (1746-1826). The star became popularly 
knownas ‘Piazzi’s flying star’. Its measured annual proper 
motion of 5.23” is still the seventh largest known, and is 
the largest for a naked-eye star (apparent magnitude 4.8). 

This star was also the first to have its annual parallax 
reliably determined, by Friedrich Bessel (1784-1846). 
Bessel’s measurement of 0.314”, made at Konigsberg with 
Fraunhofer’s 6.25 inch heliometer in 1838, compares quite 
well with the modern value of 0.286”. Determinations of 
stellar parallax made in the same year by other observers 
were far less accurate. It is the eleventh closest star, at a 
distance of 11.4 light-years. 

61 Cygni is also a well-known binary system, with 
a period of 653.3 years. Its components are currently 
separated by 30.3” at position angle 150°. The primary 
star 61 Cyg A is an orange dwarf, spectral type K5V, 
of apparent magnitude 5.20 and absolute magnitude 7.5. 
Its companion 61 Cyg B is also an orange dwarf, of 
spectral type K7V, with an apparent magnitude of 6.05 
and absolute magnitude 8.3. The system is reputed 
to be the most extensively observed double star, some 
thousands of visual observations being supplemented by 
more than 34.000 photographic plates. Precise astrometric 
measurements of these plates have indicated that the 
system has at least one invisible component, believed to 
bea planet of similar mass to Jupiter, and perhaps as many 
as three, with orbital periods of between 5 and 12 years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Abastumani Astrophysical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Abastumani Astrophysical 
Observatory 


The Abastumani Astrophysical Observatory (AbAO)— 
longitude, 42.83; latitude, 41.81 degrees—was founded in 
1932. It is located in Abastumani, in the south-west part 
of the Republic of Georgia, 250 km west of the capital city 
Tbilisi, on the top of Mount Kanobili at 1700 m. 

AbAO’s primary mission is to enable astronomers 
of the former Soviet Union to carry out high-quality 
observations. The average number of clear nights is 
130 per year with 25% of seeings smaller than one 
arcsec. At present, about 100 staff members work at the 
Observatory in six departments and four laboratories. The 
Observatory’s main facilities are 125 cm Ritchey—Chrétien 
and 70 cm meniscus telescopes. 

The major research areas are accretion disks and 
pulsars astrophysics, solar system cosmogony, objec- 
tive prism spectroscopy, low-amplitude short-period vari- 
ables, AGNs variability, solar physics, solar—terrestrial 
phenomena and atmospheric physics. 

For further information see 
http://gamma.bu.edu/webt/abastumani. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Abbe, Ernst (1840-1905) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Abbe, Ernst (1840-1905) 


Born in Eisenach, Grand Duchy of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach 
(now Germany), Abbe became director of the observatory 
at Jena and research director of the CARL ZEISS optical works 
in Jena. He discovered the Abbe sine condition, which 
describes a lens that will form an image, without defects 
of coma and spherical aberration. His mathematical 
treatment founded the present-day science of optics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Abbott, Francis (1799-1883) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Abbott, Francis (1799-1883) 


Watchmaker, born in Derby, England, convict, transported 
to Tasmania in 1845. He made astronomical observations 
at the Rossbank Observatory after the end of his sentence 
until its closure in 1854 and in his private laboratory in 
Hobart. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Abell Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Abell Clusters 


Abell clusters are the most conspicuous groupings of 
galaxies identified by George Abell on the plates of the 
first photographic survey made with the SCHMIDT TELESCOPE 
at Mount Palomar in the 1950s. Sometimes, the term Abell 
clusters is used as a synonym of nearby, optically selected 
galaxy clusters. 

George Abell constructed a catalogue containing 
2712 of the richest such groupings in the northern sky, 
which was later extended to the southern sky. It is 
no exaggeration to say that the total sample of 4076 
cluster candidates over the whole sky has revolutionized 
the study of the large-scale structure in the universe. 
The Abell catalogue has formed the basis for the first 
quantitative studies of the densest component of the large- 
scale structure in the local universe. In recent years, the 
definition of samples of candidate clusters from wide-field 
survey plates has been repeated with automatic plate- 
scanning machines. This showed objectively that the 
subjective factor in Abell’s visual selection is quite small, 
at least for the richer and more nearby clusters. 

The reality of the cluster candidates in Abell’s 
catalogue has been the subject of some debate, until 
spectroscopic observations of large numbers of galaxies in 
the directions of the Abell clusters showed convincingly 
that only a small fraction of the rich clusters are the result 
of chance superpositions. That is, a very large fraction of 
the rich cluster candidates in the catalogue made by Abell 
(or, including the southern clusters, by Abell, Corwin and 
Olowin) represent compact, localized peaks in the spatial 
distribution of galaxies, mostly with redshifts less than 0.2, 
and held together by gravity. 

Already in the 1930s, Fritz zwicky had concluded that 
the luminous matter (i.e. the galaxies) in clusters represents 
only about 10% of the total cluster mass, most of which can 
therefore be detected only through its gravitation. This 
has led to estimates of the total mass (both visible and 
dark matter) by various means. The most common of 
those are the velocities of the galaxies in the cluster, the 
amount and temperature of the hot (x-ray-emitting) gas 
and the distortion of the images of galaxies at distances 
well beyond that of the cluster by GRAVITATIONAL LENSING. 

For a long time, several of the better-known Abell 
clusters, like those in the COMA BERENICES and PERSEUS 
constellations, have shaped our vision of the class of 
rich, populous, clusters. In this schematic view, rich 
clusters are smooth, round and virialized structures. This 
idealized picture coexisted with the knowledge that there 
are significant variations in the various properties of the 
Abell clusters. This has led to many studies of those 
properties, and of correlations between them, as well as to 
several attempts to describe the formation and evolution 
of rich clusters. It is now realized that clusters are still 
forming and evolving at the present epoch. 

Among the cluster properties that can be studied, 
and for which theoretical predictions have been made are 
the 3D shape (or rather, the axial ratios of the galaxy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


distribution), the composition of the galaxy population 
(i.e. the fractions of galaxies of different morphological 
types), the distributions of the luminosities of the galaxies, 
the detailed dynamics of the various galaxy classes, 
dynamical substructure and segregation and the fraction 
of the total mass consisting of baryonic (i.e. ‘ordinary’ 
nucleonic) matter. An important recent development is 
the search for, and study of, galaxy clusters at very large 
distances (i.e. at high redshifts), which are the ‘forebears’ 
of the local rich clusters in the Abell catalogue. For those 
younger clusters at high redshifts, the Abell clusters serve 
as a local, present-day, reference population. 


Abell clusters as a subset of the total cluster 
population 

When searching for cluster candidates on the Palomar Sky 
Survey plates, Abell had no information about distances 
(or redshifts) of the galaxies. Therefore he used the 
distribution of the galaxies in apparent magnitude to select 
those peaks in the projected galaxy distribution that are 
most likely to correspond to a spatially compact structure. 
Taking the magnitude of the 10th brightest galaxy as an 
approximate ‘standard candle’, a redshift was estimated; 
this yields the angle subtended by a fixed linear size 
of 1.5h-! Mpc at the distance of the cluster (where h is 
the value of the present Hubble parameter, expressed in 
units of 100 km s-! Mpc"). In a circular aperture with 
radius equal to that angle, the number of galaxies with a 
magnitude not more than two magnitudes fainter than the 
third-brightest galaxy was counted. Finally, the number of 
unrelated galaxies in the aperture (and down to the same 
magnitude limit) was estimated from the galaxy density 
in background fields without obvious cluster candidates. 

The corrected number of galaxies (the richness count, 
i.e. the estimated number of members in the aperture 
above the magnitude limit) was found to have an 
uncertainty of about 17. Therefore, only clusters with 
a corrected galaxy count of at least 50 were considered 
by Abell to have been sampled in an unbiased fashion 
out to redshifts of 0.1-0.2. In Abell’s original (‘northern’) 
catalogue, 1682 of the 2712 cluster candidates have a count 
of at least 50. The lower limit in richness count must 
be applied if one uses the Abell catalogue for statistical 
purposes. Clearly, many less rich clusters exist but at larger 
distances—redshifts their contrast with respect to the field is 
too low to allow a robust definition of a statistically reliable 
sample. 

In recent years, an extensive redshift survey (the 
ESO Nearby Abell Cluster Survey) has been made of 
close to 6000 galaxies in about 100 cluster candidates 
(mostly from the southern part of the Abell, Corwin and 
Olowin catalogue) with a richness count of at least 50 
and estimated redshifts less than 0.1 (see GALAXY REDSHIFT 
suRVEYS). The contamination in these redshift surveys by 
galaxies that do not belong to the main cluster is far from 
negligible, i.e. about 25%. However, the majority of the 
redshift surveys contains a spatially compact cluster to 
which at least 50% of the galaxies with measured redshifts 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Abell Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


belong. Only about 10% of the candidate clusters appear 
to be a superposition of two almost equally rich (but 
relatively poor) systems at different redshifts along the 
same line of sight. 

For the spatially compact systems, the velocity 
dispersion shows a global correlation with richness count 
(clusters with higher richness counts on average have 
larger velocity dispersions), but the correlation is very 
broad (at least a factor of 2 in both quantities). The 
uncertainty in the visually estimated richness counts 
might be thought to be responsible for this, but the width 
of the relation does not decrease if one uses richness counts 
based on machine scanning instead of the original ones. 

For asample of about 150 Abell clusters with redshifts 
less than 0.15, cluster masses were calculated from the 
relative velocities and positions of the galaxies, assuming 
that the virial theorem holds in the central regions of the 
clusters. The cluster masses correlate fairly well with 
the velocity dispersions, but the mass distributions in 
the various intervals of richness counts appear to have 
considerable overlap. Therefore, application of a limit 
in richness count to a sample of Abell clusters (which is 
necessary for practical reasons) induces quite a diffuse 
limit in mass. 

The clusters, or rather cluster candidates, in Abell’s 
catalogue with richness counts of at least 50 are therefore a 
subset of all clusters in the mass range from about 4 x 10% 
to 2 x 10'°M>. However, for clusters with a velocity 
dispersion of at least 800 km sl, essentially all richness 
counts are larger than 50. In other words, all clusters with 
a velocity dispersion of at least 800 km s~! are contained 
in the sample with a limiting count of 50, and the estimate 
of their space density is unbiased. Clusters with apparent 
velocity dispersions greater than about 1200 km s-! turn 
out either to be superpositions or to have lots of dynamical 
substructure. 

With the advent of all-sky x-ray surveys like those 
from the EINSTEIN (HEAO-2) and ROSAT missions, it has become 
possible to construct complete samples of clusters for 
which the x-ray flux from the hot gas in the potential well of 
the cluster is larger than a threshold value. This produces 
cluster catalogues that are fundamentally different from, 
and thus complementary to, the Abell catalogue, although 
there is quite some overlap. The mass of the x-ray gas 
is generally at least as large as the mass of the cluster 
galaxies, but the combined mass of these two baryonic 
components is typically only 10-15% of the total mass. 
When the total mass of a cluster can be estimated both 
from the kinematics of the galaxies and from the x-ray 
temperature and brightness, the two estimates in general 
agree reasonably well. 


Properties of the galaxy population in Abell 
clusters 

In the past, several schemes have been proposed for the 
classification of Abell clusters. All of them summarize 
in one way or another the distribution of the cluster 
galaxies in position, magnitude or morphological type, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


or any combination of those. The projected distribution 
of the galaxies has many forms and ranges between the 
following extremes. There may be a central concentration 
of bright galaxies, generally of early type, ie. ellipticals, 
and frequently one of them is a cD galaxy, ie. a 
giant elliptical surrounded by an extended envelope (see 
ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES). At the other extreme there are clusters 
that do not have a clear central concentration. 

In some clusters, the galaxy distribution is quite 
smooth, and in general those clusters contain relatively 
few spiral galaxies. When the fraction of spiral galaxies 
is large, the galaxy distribution is in general less regular. 
The relative fractions of early- and late-type galaxies are 
correlated with richness count, and this is a manifestation 
of the morphology-—density relation. The latter shows 
a clear correlation between the relative fractions of 
ellipticals, lenticulars (SOs) and spiral galaxies, and the 
(local) projected galaxy density (and therefore radial 
distance). The SOs may contribute up to 50% in the center, 
with ellipticals not far behind and spiral galaxies about 
10%. In the outer parts, ellipticals are almost absent while 
spiral galaxies may represent up to 60%. Note that these 
are global values: individual clusters show a considerable 
spread around these. 

Even though ina sizeable fraction of the Abell clusters 
the galaxy distribution is not very regular or circularly 
symmetric, one can always derive the azimuthally 
averaged projected number density profile 2(R), in which 
R is the projected distance from the cluster center, i.e. 
the shortest distance between the line of sight through a 
galaxy and the cluster center. Several expressions have 
been proposed for the mathematical description of &(R), 
all of which have three parameters. Those are the central 
value of &(R), i.e. U(R = 0), a characteristic length R, (the 
distance at which &(R) has decreased by a given factor, 
say 2) and a measure of the decrease of &(R) in the outer 
parts (generally the logarithmic slope a of =(R)). 

Recently, &(R) has been derived for galaxies of 
different morphological types in about 70 rich Abell 
clusters. In individual clusters, the number of galaxies 
of a particular type is generally not sufficient to allow 
an accurate estimate of the three parameters of U(R). 
By properly combining data for many clusters one can 
compare the representations of &(R) for ellipticals, SOs, 
spirals and galaxies with emission lines (mostly very ‘late’ 
spirals, such as Sc and Sd, with ionized gas in their 
interstellar medium). In other words, by sacrificing the 
detailed properties of individual clusters, one obtains a 
picture of an average rich Abell cluster. 

There appears to be a clear correlation between galaxy 
type and X(R): the characteristic length R, increases 
markedly from early to late galaxy type (from about 0.1 to 
0.5 Mpc). This shows that ellipticals are indeed much more 
centrally concentrated than spirals, while the emission- 
line galaxies form the most extended population. These 
differences must be accompanied by differences in the 
kinematics of galaxies of the various types, because all 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Abell Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


galaxy classes move in the same cluster potential, which 
is mostly determined by the dark matter. 

Such kinematical differences are indeed observed: 
the ellipticals and SOs show the smallest dispersion of 
the line-of-sight component of their velocities, and this 
dispersion varies little with projected distance from the 
center. Spirals, and in particular emission-line galaxies, 
have a larger velocity dispersion (by as much as 20- 
30%) which decreases markedly towards larger projected 
distances. Actually, the kinematics of the emission-line 
galaxies indicates that they have not yet traversed the 
dense central cores, which is probably the reason why they 
have not yet lost their line-emitting gas in encounters with 
other galaxies. 

Combining the projected galaxy distributions with 
the kinematics one may estimate the distribution of the 
total (visible plus dark) mass via the Jeans equation of 
stellar dynamics. By comparing the distribution of the 
dark matter with that of the luminosity of the galaxies, 
one can in principle study the variation of the so-called 
mass-to-light ratio with distance from the cluster center. 
This may give clues about details of the formation process, 
such as the effects of galaxy encounters, the role of the dark 
matter haloes of the galaxies, etc. 


Abell clusters as cosmological probes 

Several observational properties of Abell clusters have 
been used to constrain the theories of formation of large- 
scale structure in the universe and the parameters in those 
theories (see also UNIVERSE: SIMULATIONS OF STRUCTURE AND 
GALAXY FORMATION). These properties include the spatial 
distribution of Abell clusters, their shapes and their 
masses. In different ways, these all carry information on 
the way in which the largest well-developed structures in 
the universe have formed through the growth of the initial 
fluctuations in the matter density. 

The spatial distribution of Abell clusters has been 
analyzed through the two-point correlation function &(r), 
ie. the fraction of cluster pairs with a certain separation, 
in excess of the expected number of pairs for a random 
distribution, which has been derived for clusters of various 
richness counts. In general, the correlation function 
is found to have a power-law form: &(r) = (r/ro)7’; 
the exponent y (about 2) does not appear to depend 
on the limiting richness count, but the value of the 
correlation length ro does, and is larger for the richer 
clusters (with a characteristic value of about 20 Mpc). 
In principle, these data allow one to derive the value of 
the cosmological density as well as the amplitude of the 
fluctuation spectrum. 

Another aspect of the distribution of rich Abell 
clusters is that they are generally located in the vertices 
where the sheets and filaments in the general galaxy 
distribution come together. Therefore, the distribution 
of rich clusters has sometimes been compared with 
the distribution of the vertices in so-called Voronoi 
tesselations, which are geometric partitionings of space. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The shapes of Abell clusters have been derived 
from the projected distributions of galaxies. Using the 
galaxy positions irrespective of galaxy type, one can 
calculate the apparent ellipticity of a cluster. In general, 
the richer clusters are less elongated than the less rich 
ones. The apparent ellipticities for a cluster sample 
of about 100 northern Abell clusters suggest that the 
elongated clusters are prolate (cigar like) rather than 
oblate. Comparison of these data with the results of 
numerical N-body calculations can constrain the theories 
of structure formation. 

The full distribution of the masses of a volume-limited 
sample of Abell clusters (i.e. its shape and normalization) 
can also give information for cosmological structure 
formation theory. As the sample of Abell clusters with a 
limiting richness count of 50 has a rather badly defined 
completeness at smaller masses, one must restrict the 
comparison between observations and predictions to the 
most massive clusters for which the Abell catalog is 
complete. 

Itis far from trivial to derive independent information 
for the several parameters in the formation theories that 
influence the properties of the most massive structures. 
Yet, there seems to be general agreement that the latter 
are more naturally understood in a universe in which the 
matter density is considerably smaller than the critical 
density. 


Bibliography 
Book: 


Giurin G and Mezzetti M (ed) 1999 Observational 
Cosmology: The Development of Galaxy Systems (Astron. 
Society of the Pacific Conf. Ser. 176) 


Journal articles: 


Abell G O 1958 The distribution of rich clusters of galaxies 
Astrophys. J. Suppl. 3 211-88 

Abell G O, Corwin H G and Olowin R P 1989 A catalog of 
rich clusters of galaxies Astrophys. J. Suppl. 70 1-138 


Reviews: 


Bahcall N A 1977 Clusters of galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 15 505 

Bahcall N A 1988 Large-scale structure in the Universe 
indicated by galaxy clusters Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 26 631 

Sarazin C L 1986 X-ray emission from clusters of galaxies 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 58 1 


Peter Katgert 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aberration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aberration 


(1) The apparent displacement of a star from its mean 
position on the celestial sphere due to the velocity of 
the Earth in its orbit around the Sun. The phenomenon 
was discovered in 1729 by James Bradley (1693-1762) 
who was, in fact, trying to measure stellar parallax. The 
displacement is caused by the combination of the velocity 
of the Earth and the velocity of light approaching from the 
source. If the Earth were stationary, light froma star would 
arrive from the true direction of this source, but the motion 
of the Earth causes the light to appear to be approaching 
from a point which is slightly displaced in the direction 
of the Earth’s motion. In the course of a year, as the Earth 
travels round the Sun, a star will trace out a small ellipse in 
the sky about its mean position. The maximum radius of 
this ellipse (in radians) is equal to the ratio of the speed of 
the Earth to the speed of light (30 km s~!:300 000 km s™'), 
that is about 20.5 seconds of arc. The eccentricity of the 
ellipse depends on the celestial latitude of the star (the 
figure becomes a circle at the pole of the ecliptic and a 
straight line on the ecliptic). 

The displacement due to aberration is much greater 
than that due to parallax (the annual parallax of the nearest 
star is 0.76 seconds of arc) and this must be allowed for 
before the parallax can be determined for a star. A similar, 
though smaller, aberration effect occurs due to the speed 
of rotation of the Earth on its axis. This is known as diurnal 
aberration. 

(2) In optical systems, such as lenses and curved 
mirrors, aberration refers to the inability of the system to 
produce a perfect image. Unlike a plane mirror, which 
does not create aberrations, a lens or curved mirror is an 
imperfect image producer, becoming ideal only for rays 
passing through (or reflecting from) its center parallel to 
the optical axis (a line through the center, perpendicular 
to the lens surfaces). The main aberrations are chromatic, 
spherical, coma and astigmatism. 


See also: astigmatism, atmospheric refraction, chromatic 
aberration, coma, scintillation, spherical aberration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Abetti, Antonio (1846-1928) and Abetti, Giorgio (1882— 
1982) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Abetti, Antonio (1846-1928) and 
Abetti, Giorgio (1882-1982) 


Antonio was born in San Pietro di Gorizia, Italy. A 
civil engineer, he turned to astronomy and became 
director of the observatory in Arcetri and professor of 
astronomy at the University of Florence. His main 
interest was positional astronomy, observation of minor 
planets, comets and star occultations. In 1874 he observed 
the transit of Venus across the Sun’s disk through a 
spectroscope. His son, Giorgio Abetti, was a solar 
physicist, born in Padova, Italy. He succeeded his father 
as director of the Arcetri Observatory. In the United States 
at Mount Wilson Observatory, he took up solar physics 
and, on his return to Italy, established a spectroheliograph 
in Arcetri, about 180 degrees in longitude away from 
Mount Wilson, to give nearly 24 h coverage of solar 
phenomena. Discovered the radial motion of gases in 
sunspots (Evershed—Abetti effect). He was well known as a 
popularizer of astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Absolute Zero ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Absolute Zero 


The lowest possible temperature; according to the kinetic 
theory of gases, this is the temperature at which all 
motion of atoms and molecules ceases. This temperature 
is equivalent to —273.16°C, and defines the zero of the 
kelvin, or absolute, temperature scale. 


See also: black-body radiation, temperature scales. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Absorption Spectrum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Absorption Spectrum 


A pattern of dark lines or bands superimposed on a 
continuous spectrum. When a continuous spectrum of 
radiation (a broad range of wavelengths) passes through 
a material medium (for example, a cool, low-pressure 
gas), selective absorption occurs at certain particular 
wavelengths. This gives rise to a series of dips in 
intensity (absorption lines) which, in the visible region 
of the spectrum, appear as dark lines against the bright 
background of the ‘rainbow’ band of colors that comprises 
the continuous spectrum. 

Photons of electromagnetic radiation may be ab- 
sorbed through radiative excitation, a process that occurs 
when an electron in one of the lower energy levels of an 
atom or ion absorbs a photon with energy precisely equal 
to the difference in energy between that level and one of 
the higher permitted levels and, as a result, jumps (makes 
an ‘upward transition’) from the lower to the higher level. 
Because the energy of a photon is inversely proportional 
to wavelength, the larger the energy gap, the shorter the 
wavelength of the radiation that is absorbed when an elec- 
tron makes a particular transition. An electron does not 
normally remain in an excited level for long (typically 
10-8 s). When it drops down again, it emits a photon or 
photons that may or may not have the same wavelength 
as the one that was originally absorbed (depending on 
whether it drops directly to its original level or descends in 
aseries of smaller steps). If it drops ina series of steps, each 
of which corresponds to the emission of a photon of lower 
energy (and longer wavelength) than the one that was orig- 
inally absorbed, the total number of photons of the original 
energy will be reduced and the spectrum will be depleted 
at the input wavelength. Furthermore, although all the 
input photons were traveling along essentially the same 
direction (from the source to the observer), the re-emitted 
photons travel away in random directions. Consequently, 
far fewer photons at the absorption wavelength reach the 
observer than photons of other wavelengths. The result- 
ing absorption line is darker than the adjacent part of the 
continuous spectrum but, because some photons of that 
wavelength do reach the observer, not totally black. 

Because each permitted transition corresponds to 
absorbing light of one particular wavelength, atoms or 
ions of a particular element produce absorption lines 
at a number of different wavelengths, each chemical 
element having its own distinctive ‘fingerprint’ pattern 
of absorption lines. The shortest-wavelength lines 
correspond to the largest energy gaps (i.e. to transitions 
from the lowest, or ‘ground’, level of the atom or ion). 
If an electron absorbs a photon with energy in excess of 
the ionization energy (or ‘ionization potential’), it will 
be removed from the atom. The absorption spectrum of 
a particular species of atom consists of several series of 
lines, corresponding to the various permitted transitions, 
the short-wavelength limit of the series corresponding to 
the photon energies above which ionization takes place. 
Because ionizing photons can, in principle, have any value 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of energy above the ionization energy, absorption can take 
place over a continuous range of wavelengths, shorter 
than the series limit. Absorption of this kind is called an 
absorption continuum. 

The prominence (‘strength’) of any particular line 
depends on the number of atoms of the appropriate 
chemical element that have electrons residing in the energy 
level from which the relevant upward transition takes 
place (the degree of excitation). That, in turn, depends 
on the abundance of the particular chemical element 
(the relative proportion of that element in the absorbing 
substance) and on a number of other factors, in particular 
the temperature (the higher the temperature, the greater 
the proportion of electrons in excited states). 

In addition to producing absorption through elec- 
tronic transitions (like atoms and ions), molecules may 
also absorb (or emit) radiation by changing their states of 
vibration (their constituent atoms vibrate relative to each 
other) or rotation (a molecule, having a physical shape, 
can rotate about a particular axis). Molecular absorption 
spectra are complex, their various lines often merging into 
broader bands. 


See also: atom, continuous spectrum, electromagnetic 
radiation, element (chemical), emission spectrum, energy, 
ion, ionization, molecule, photon, quantum theory, 
wavelength. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Abul Wafa Mohammad al-Buzjani (940-97) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Abul Wafa Mohammad al-Buzjani 
(940-97) 


Born in Buzjan, Nishapur (now Iran), Abul Wafa 
flourished as a mathematician and astronomer at the 
observatory at Sharaf al Daula, where he was the first 
to build a wall quadrant (over 6 m long) to observe star 
positions. Best known for trigonometry, he contributed to 
the theory of the Moon, in which he first used the tangent 
function, and introduced the secant and cosecant. The 
trigonometric tables that he calculated were 100 000 times 
more accurate than Ptolemy’s. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Acceleration ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Acceleration 


Rate of change of velocity. This is expressed in units of 
meters per second per second (m s~’), or other equivalent 
units. Thus, an acceleration of 10 m s~? would imply an 
increase in velocity of 10 meters per second in one second. 


See also: energy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Accretion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Accretion 


The process by which a celestial body increases its mass by 
aggregating smaller objects which collide with it. Several 
types of object grow by accretion. In binary stars in which 
mass transfer is taking place, one member grows at the 
expense of the other; black holes, including supermassive 
black holes believed to be present in active galactic nuclei, 
also increase their mass by accretion. In both these cases 
matter is accumulated via an accretion disk orbiting the 
accreting object. 

The process is particularly important in the formation 
of planets. Dust grains in a protoplanetary disk (or 
proplyd) around a young star collide and coalesce, 
gradually building up larger objects, which in turn 
collide and merge. Objects accreted in this initial 
phase of planet formation, while their sizes are in the 
range from millimeters to tens of kilometers, are termed 
planetesimals. Once an object’s size is measurable in 
kilometers its own gravity becomes a factor in accretion. 
Collisional mergers between planetesimals allow larger 
bodies to be built up, and these are termed protoplanets, 
objects of a thousand kilometers or more. The subsequent 
evolution of protoplanets proceeds by mutual collisions 
of increasing violence, and the accretion of fragments 
produced in these collisions. The bodies left orbiting the 
star when this final phase of bombardment is over are 
termed planets. 


See also: accretion disks, black hole, solar system: 
formation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Accretion Disks 


By accretion one understands in astrophysics the accumu- 
lation of matter onto a heavy object, under the influence 
of its pull of gravity. The object can be, for example, a star, 
a black hole or a neutron star. Most of the objects of these 
types are quite isolated, without much gas around that 
could be pulled in by their gravity. Accordingly, the vast 
majority of stars do not show any evidence of accretion, 
while most neutron stars and black holes in our galaxy are 
unobservable for this reason. 

While somewhat exotic compared with normal stars 
or galaxies, accretion disks attract attention because they 
are involved in a wide range of highly visible phenomena. 
These range from the formation of our planetary system 
and the rings of Saturn to the x-ray binaries in our galaxy 
and the collimated jets from protostars and accreting black 
holes. 

The observable effects of accretion can range from 
modest to quite dramatic. This depends on the amount of 
mass accreted per unit time, but even more on the depth of 
the potential well of the gravitational field of the accreter. 
The simplest model of accretion would be a free particle 
falling radially to the accreter from a large distance. If it 
starts from rest at infinity, it arrives at the surface R of an 
accreter of mass M with the escape speed vu. = (GM/R)'/”. 
We can also write this as ve/c = (rg/2R)'/”, where rz = 
2GM/c? = 2.8M/Mo, km is the Schwarzschild radius of 
the mass M. For a neutron star with M = 1.4M, and 
R = 10 km, for example, the particle would arrive at the 
surface with some 30% of the speed of light. Accretion 
onto compact objects, in which M/R is large, is therefore 
accompanied by the release of large amounts of energy. 

A free particle attracted to a compact object from a 
large distance has only a small chance of hitting it. If its 
initial motion is not directed very precisely to the object, it 
will just make an orbit around and return to the same large 
distance. In other words the cross section for accretion by 
free particles is small. The same effect plays a role when 
we consider the more realistic case of accretion of a gas and 
is then called the ‘angular momentum problem’, discussed 
below. 

The accreting gas might, for example, be provided by 
a protostellar cloud, in the case of a growing protostar, or 
by a companion star in a binary. If the accreting star is 
a neutron star or black hole, such a binary is called an 
X-RAY BINARY; if it is a white dwarf, the binary is called 
a CATACLYSMIC BINARY. Finally, accretion of some form of 
interstellar matter onto a massive black hole in the nucleus 
of a galaxy produces an ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS (AGN). 

Figure 1 shows an artist’s impression of an accretion 
disk fed by mass overflow from the secondary in a binary. 
Images like this cannot be made with telescopes. Almost 
all disks are so small, as seen from Earth, that their 
geometry can be inferred only by indirect means. Disks 
that can be observed directly are our planetary system, 
the rings of Saturn and spiral galaxies. None of these, 
however, is typical for gaseous accretion disks. Our solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Artist’s impression of a binary system consisting of a 
low-mass main sequence star (red) and a white dwarf. The main 
sequence star fills its Roche lobe and transfers mass to the white 
dwarf. Because of the orbital motion of the stars around each 
other, the mass-transferring stream of gas is not directed straight 
to the white dwarf and accumulates in an orbiting accretion 
disk. The impact of the stream on the disk edge causes a bright 
hot spot. (Copyright Dana Berry and Keith Horne, Space 
Telescope Science Institute.) 


system is only the solid residue of an accretion disk that 
existed during its formation. In the case of Saturn’s rings, 
the particles making up the rings also behave more like free 
particles than like a gas. The disks in spiral galaxies are 
much more complicated than gaseous disks. Also, galactic 
disks are not old enough to have accreted much onto the 
galactic core since their formation. 

The best prospect for directly observing accretion 
disks is in protostars. They are the largest disks 
in angular diameter, as seen from Earth, and with 
currently developing high-resolution infrared and mm- 
wave imaging detailed observations of their structure 
will be possible (see INFRARED ASTRONOMY). Large ‘proplyds’ 
(protoplanetary disks) have been imaged in the optical 
by the Hubble Space Telescope; an example is shown in 
figure 4 of the article on YOUNG STELLAR OBJECTS. 

In the case of binary systems like figure 1, information 
on the size, thickness and temperature of the disk is 
provided by eclipses. If the binary is oriented such that 
the Earth happens to be near its orbital plane, the disk 
and the mass-providing secondary star eclipse each other 
regularly as the components orbit around each other. The 
shape of the light curve in different wavelengths can then 
be used to infer the properties of the disk, such as its size 
and temperature (figure 2; see also BINARY STARS). 


Accretion temperatures 
A characteristic temperature in accretion problems is the 
virial temperature, 


T, = |P|/R (1) 


where R = 8.314 x 10’ erg g-! K! mol"! is the molar 
gas constant and ® the depth of the potential well. At 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


<j line of sight white dwarf 


occulted 
region 7 


= 


— 


secondary star 


(a) 


0,5 0,5 


0,9 00 01¢@ 0,9 0,0 


Short wavelengths 


0,1 @ 
Long wavelengths 


(b) (c) 


Figure 2. Light curve of an eclipsing binary with an accretion 
disk around the primary star. The accretion disk widens the 
eclipse of the primary star. Details of the light curve can be used 
to infer size and temperature of the disk. (Figure modified after 
Frank, King and Raine 1992 Accretion Power in Astrophysics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).) 


a distance r from a point mass in Newtonian gravity, 
® = —GM/r. If all the kinetic energy gained by dropping 
into the potential well were dissipated into internal energy 
(heat), the gas would reach a temperature of the order T,. 
For aneutronstar, T, ~ 2x 10" K, corresponding toa mean 
thermal energy per proton of the order 1 GeV. The radiation 
actually observed from accreting systems indicates much 
lower temperatures. This is because a thermal plasma 
at this temperature radiates energy at an enormous rate, 
much higher than can be supplied by the infalling gas. 
Instead of T,, the gas settles at a lower temperature, such 
that the dissipated energy is roughly balanced by energy 
lost by radiation. 

A second characteristic temperature is obtained by 
assuming that the radiation is emitted as if by a black 
body from the surface of the accreting object. Equating 
the luminosity L = 42r?o0T* of a black body of radius R 
and temperature 7g to the energy generated by accretion 
at arate M (mass per unit time) yields 


GMM - 
Ta = ( (2) 


4n R°o 


where o = 5.6692 x 10° erg cm K~‘ s“! is the constant 
in Stefan—Boltzmann’s law. Actual temperatures differ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from this, since the emitted spectrum differs from that of 
a black body, the emitting surface is not equal to that of 
the accreting object or, in the case of black holes, much of 
the accretion energy is swallowed by the hole rather than 
being radiated. Still, Tg often provides a good order of 
magnitude for the observed temperatures. The reason is 
that in these cases the accreting gas is optically thick, so that 
by repeated photon emission and absorption processes the 
accretion energy is reprocessed into something like a black 
body spectrum. For a cataclysmic variables, protostars 
and AGN, Tg ~ 10*-10° K, for x-ray binaries around 10’ K, 
corresponding to photon energies of 1-10 eV and 1 keV, 
respectively. Optically thin accretion processes can also 
occur, however (see below under ‘Radiation processes, 
two-temperature accretion’), producing photons of much 
higher energies. 


Radiation pressure and the Eddington limit 

The photons released by an accreting object exert a force 
on the accreting gas. By scattering (or by absorption 
and reemission) on an atom, ion or electron, the outward 
direction of the photon is changed into a more random 
direction. The outward momentum of the photons is 
thereby transferred to the gas: the radiation exerts an 
outward force. If F = L/4mr* is the radiative energy 
flux at distance r, and « the opacity of the gas (scattering 
plus absorption), the acceleration due to this force is graq = 
Fx«/c. This force is just balanced by the inward acceleration 
of gravity g = GM/r? when the luminosity L has a value 
called the Eddington limit or Eddington luminosity: 


Ly = 40 GMc/k. (3) 


A steady photon source, bound by gravity, cannot have a 
luminosity significantly exceeding this limit. At a larger 
luminosity, the atmosphere of the source is blown off by 
radiation (this happens, for example in a Nova explosion). 
The value of the Eddington luminosity depends on the 
opacity of the gas, and thereby on its state of ionization. It 
depends on the mass of the source but not its size. Close 
to the compact object in an x-ray binary the gas is nearly 
fully ionized, usually of normal stellar composition, and 
electron scattering the dominant radiation process, with 
opacity x ~ 0.3 cm’ g~!. The Eddington limit is then 


Le ~ 1.5 x 10°M/Mo erg s"'. (4) 


For a neutron star of 1.4Mo, this is about 50000 times the 
luminosity of the Sun. 

If this luminosity is generated by accretion, equating 
it to the accretion energy defines the Eddington accretion 
rate 

Mz = 4acR/k (5) 


or about 1.5 x 10-$Mo yr7! for a neutron star of 10 km 
radius. A neutron star cannot accrete much more than 
this. The radiation pressure building up would prevent 
further accretion, and the gas would accumulate in an 
extended atmosphere around the star instead of settling 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


onto the neutron star surface. (This assumes that radiation 
is only by photons: at sufficiently high temperature and 
density energy losses by neutrinos become important.) 
The accretion rate onto a black hole can be much higher 
than Mg. An atmosphere surrounding a hole is not 
supported at its base, but flows in through the horizon. 
In the process it takes with it the photons trapped in the 
gas. Depending on the density of such an atmosphere, the 
accretion rate can be arbitrarily high. The luminosity as 
seen from Earth does not become much bigger than Lg, 
however. 


Disks 

Mass transfer in a binary 

As an example for the formation of an accretion disk, 
consider a binary in which one of the stars is large enough 
to fill its Roche lobe (See CLOSE BINARY STARS), the other being 
a compact star (white dwarf, neutron star or black hole). 
The Roche-lobe-filling star is called the secondary, since it 
is the less massive star in such binaries. Mass flows off 
the secondary at the inner Lagrange point L;. The orbit 
of a hypothetical free particle from this point is shown 
in figure 3. Except directly at L;, the orbital velocity is 
very high compared with the sound speed of the gas. 
Consequently, its path is almost ballistic, i.e. close to that 
of a free particle. Since gas clouds cannot flow through 
each other, however, the ballistic flow ceases at the first 
intersection point of the orbit. The supersonic relative 
motion of the two parts of the gas stream is dissipated 
here through shock waves, heating the gas and deflecting 
the stream. 

The further evolution of the stream depends on 
additional physics such as the rate at which the gas can 
cool. An example of what the stream might look like after 
a few orbital periods of the binary is shown in figure 4. The 
orbiting gas has accumulated into a ring; newly arriving 
gas is incorporated into the ring through a system of shock 
waves. The strongly non-circular motion of the gas has 
settled into a more quiet circular orbit; most of the energy 
dissipated in the process has been radiated away. Leaving 
aside perturbations by the impacting stream, and in the 
absence of viscous forces, the gas can orbit indefinitely on 
such circular orbits. 


The ‘angular momentum problem’ 

In the process of settling onto a circular orbit, a great deal 
of energy is dissipated, but the angular momentum of 
the gas around the primary has not changed (neglecting 
corrections due to the gravitational pull of the secondary). 
Since a circular orbit has the lowest energy for a given 
angular momentum, the gas can only sink further into the 
gravitational potential and accrete onto the primary, if it 
can lose some angular momentum. Finding the process 
by which this is done in real systems is called the angular 
momentum problem. We have illustrated it here with the 
example of mass transfer in a binary, but the same problem 
arises for the formation of stars from interstellar clouds or 
the accretion of gas onto the massive black holes in AGN. In 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Binary showing Roche lobes, the lobe-filling secondary 
star (M2, hatched) and the orbit of a particle released from the 
inner Lagrange point. The ‘rosette’ shape of the orbits around 
the primary (M;) is caused by the orbital motion of the binary. 


Figure 4. Hydrodynamic simulation of mass transfer in a binary, 
showing the accumulation of gas in a ring. An additional 
viscous process has to be added to make the gas accrete onto the 
primary star (at the center of the ring). 


these cases, the initial angular momentum due to random 
motion of the gas clouds is many orders of magnitude 
larger than can be accommodated by the accreting object. 
Rather than accreting directly, the gas forms a disk, acting 
like a temporary ‘parking orbit’. The orientation of the disk 
is given by the direction of the total angular momentum 
vector of the clouds, while the time it takes the gas to spiral 
in through the disk depends on the processes solving the 
angular momentum problem. 


Viscous disks 

In many cases (dwarf novae and x-ray transients; see x- 
RAY BINARY STARS) the accretion onto the compact object is 
episodic, in the form of outbursts. The decay of such an 
outburst gives some information on the accretion time, 
that is, the time it takes the gas to spiral in from the 
secondary star to the accreting primary. For dwarf novae, 
for example, this time is a few days, showing that the 
angular momentum transport process allows accretion 
in a few days or less of the mass that is involved in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


producing the outburst. Though actual numbers are 
model dependent, these observations indicate angular 
momentum transport 12-15 orders of magnitude more 
efficient than expected from the natural viscosity of the 
gas. The process responsible for the angular momentum 
transport in disks is not known with certainty. In view 
of this uncertainty, the theory of accretion disks makes 
an arbitrary assumption about the angular momentum 
transport process. It is assumed that the disk behaves, 
in effect, like a fluid with a very high viscosity. 

Such an enhanced viscosity does indeed solve the 
angular momentum problem. As a thought experiment, 
start with a ring of gas orbiting at some distance from 
the source of the gravitational potential. Viscous stress 
between neighboring orbits rotating at slightly different 
velocity makes the ring spread both outward and inward, 
forming a disk. This spreading has a remarkable property: 
if sufficient time is available, almost all the mass accretes 
onto the central object. A small amount of mass in the 
the outer parts of the disk expands indefinitely, carrying 
away almost all the angular momentum of the original 
ring. The time for spreading toa given distance is inversely 
proportional to the viscosity. 

A characteristic velocity in the disk is the isothermal 
sound speed c, = (RT)"*, where T is the temperature 
at the midplane of the disk (the surfaces are cooler). A 
characteristic frequency is the orbital frequency 2. The 
unknown disk viscosity v can then be measured in terms 
of a dimensionless viscosity a, defined by 


v= ace/Q. (6) 


Where observational indications, such as the decay time 
of an outburst, are available, they indicate viscosities in 
the range a = 10-°-1. Such values are then used when 
making theoretical estimates of the structure of accretion 
disks. The assumption that the angular momentum 
transport processes can be represented by equation (6), 
with a something of order unity, is called the a-viscosity 
assumption. 


Thin disks 
Accretion disks tend to be cool because the accretion times 
are long and sufficient time is available to radiate away the 
dissipated gravitational energy. If they are cool, the effects 
of gas pressure are small. To see this consider the equation 
of motion for an ideal gas in a gravitational potential of a 
point mass M, ® = —GM/r: 

du 1 

ap Vp-V® (7) 
where v is the velocity, p the mass density and p the gas 
pressure. Ata distance ro, a characteristic time scale fy is the 
inverse of the Kepler frequency, 9 = Q7' = (r3/GM)'”. 
Introducing dimensionless quantities t/ = t/t, r' = r/ro, 
V’ =nV,v' = v/Qro, the equation of motion for a gas of 
temperature T becomes 


dv’ 


brs 


Pes 
= T, V' ln Dp a) (8) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where f is a unit vector in the radial direction and T, the 
virial temperature introduced above. For processes taking 
place on a length scale rp and time scale fp the terms in this 
equation are of order unity, except the pressure term which 
involves the factor T/T,. T/T, is of order unity if all the 
dissipated energy stays in the gas, but, when cooling is 
effective, it can be very small. The pressure term is then 
small, and the gas flows ballistically in the potential ®. 

A disk with T/T, « 1 rotates approximately on 
circular Kepler orbits. The orbital motion is supersonic, 
with Mach number M = Qr/c, ~ (T,/T)'. The thickness 
of the disk is found by considering the vertical distribution 
of gas at some distance ro, assuming it to be in hydrostatic 
equilibrium in a frame rotating with the Keplerian rate 
Q(ro). An isothermal gas is then distributed with height 
z above the orbital plane as p ~ exp[—3(z/ H)*], where H 
is the scale height, H = ro(T/T,)!/* = c,/Q. If radiative 
losses are small, the disk is hot, and the aspect ratio H/ro 
is of order unity. Efficiently radiating disks on the other 
hand are cool and geometrically thin, H/r < 1. 

Under the assumption H/r < 1 the hydrodynamic 
equations for an axisymmetric, plane, viscous disk are 
simple. To lowest order, the radial equation of motion 
reduces to vy = Qr. The azimuthal equation of motion 
can be combined with the continuity equation into a single 
equation governing the surface density © = ee p dz: 


dx 39 
oto Or 


[2 ° vrr')| ; (9) 
r 


As expected, this equation is of the diffusion type. 
It shows that, for a cool disk, all physical factors 
influencing the evolution of the disk enter only through 
the viscosity v. This viscosity, of course, also contains 
most of the assumptions about unknown processes. 
Usually, additional equations are needed to determine 
how radiative cooling affects the temperature structure of 
the disk, on which v depends. 

For steady accretion, and not too close to the central 
object, the accretion rate is related to the viscosity by 


M = 3nvd. (10) 


A high viscosity implies a low surface density, since 
the accreting mass spends little time in the disk. The 
characteristic time t, for gas orbiting at a distance r to 
accrete is the viscous time scale, 


2 
t=r/ve — (11) 
For cool disks, this is long compared with the orbital time 
scale. On the other hand, a long time scale implies that 
there is plenty of time for the disk to cool by radiation, 
so there is a certain circularity in the mechanism that 
fixes the disk temperature. In a given situation (central 
mass, distance), the disk temperature is determined by the 
mass accretion rate and the dominant cooling process. In 


some cases, disks can exist in either of two stable steadily 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tt 
log (vz) 
radiative 
disk structure,/ 
4 


--------3> 


partial ionisation 
| 


| 
t 


— log 


Figure 5. Dependence of the viscous stress v= on surface mass 
density © ina disk where hydrogen is partially ionized. If the 
mean accretion rate requires a viscous stress in the range where 
the slope of the curve is negative, this part of the disk is unstable 
and executes a limit cycle as sketched by the arrows. 


accreting states, a cool one with long accretion times and 
a hot one with short accretion times. In other cases, disk 
models are found to be unstable for certain mass transfer 
rates, oscillating between states of high and low accretion. 
The details of the cooling processes determine when such 
multiple accretion states exist (see ‘Radiation processes, 
two-temperature accretion’ below). 


Disk instabilities 

The vertical structure of a disk is determined by the 
need to transport the viscously dissipated energy to the 
radiating surfaces. For a given surface density &, this 
structure determines the temperature and viscosity of the 
disk. In conditions where the energy transport process 
changes rapidly with temperature, the viscous stress vX 
can depend non-monotically on the surface mass density, 
in the form of an ‘S-curve’, as illustrated in figure 5. If the 
mean accretion rate which is imposed (for example, by the 
mass-transfering secondary star) lies in the range where & 
decreases with increasing v X (cf equation (10)), the disk is 
unstable. Instead of accreting steadily, it executes a limit 
cycle alternating between states of high and low accretion. 
Usually, conditions like those in figure 5 occur only in 
limited regions of the disk, for example in the region of 
partial ionization of hydrogen. If this region contains 
enough mass, however, the limit cycle will affect the entire 
disk. This is believed to be the cause of the dwarf nova 
outbursts in cataclysmic variables. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Angular momentum transport processes 
Historically, the idea that some form of hydrodynamic 
turbulence exists in disks has played a significant role. 
It was part already of the ideas of Kant and of Laplace, 
who proposed that the solar system was formed from an 
initially gaseous disk-like cloud. If vm is the microscopic 
viscosity of the gas, the Reynolds number r?Q/vm in an 
accretion disk is very large, a situation called ‘fiercely 
turbulent’ in fluid mechanics (where high Reynolds 
numbers and turbulence are considered equivalent). The 
assumption is that the shear flow in a disk would be 
unstable and develop into turbulence, as in laboratory 
shear flows. This has been questioned in the astrophysical 
community, on account of the fact that the flow in a cool 
disk is close to Kepler orbits, which are very stable. At 
the time of writing, the issue is still controversial, but 
it seems quite possible that a Keplerian gas flow does 
not, in fact, produce hydrodynamic turbulence. A closely 
analogous laboratory case is the rotating Couette flow. 
Significantly, this experiment has not shown turbulence 
for the conditions corresponding to an accretion disk, 
in which the rotation frequency decreases with distance 
but the specific angular momentum increases (although 
turbulence abounds for other parameter values). Attempts 
to demonstrate turbulence for this case by analytical 
studies or numerical simulations of the experiment have 
also been negative. 

Among the processes known to work are spiral shock 
waves. In a large disk (in the sense that the outer 
radius is much larger than the inner radius), a small 
compressive perturbation propagating inward steepens 
into a weak shock wave. Dissipation in the shock damps 
the wave, but since it also propagates into a flow of 
increasing velocity, the interaction between wave and 
mean flow though the shock increases its amplitude. 
In the absence of other processes damping the wave, a 
shock of finite strength develops by the balance between 
shock dissipation and energy extraction from the mean 
flow. The process produces a modest amount of angular 
momentum transport, corresponding to a = 0.01(H/r)?””. 
For protostellar disks, this is in the range of the values 
inferred from observations, but it is too low for cataclysmic 
variables and x-ray binaries. 

If the disk is massive enough that self-gravity is 
important, angular momentum transport by gravitational 
instability is possible. The intrinsic growth rate of a 
gravitational instability is of the order (27Gp)'/”. If this 
is larger than the shear rate ~Q, instability can grow ina 
disk; if it is smaller, a prospective perturbation is sheared 
apart before it can grow. In terms of a characteristic disk 
mass My = 2r7oH, this condition can be written as 
Ma > MH/r. Such disks are called self-gravitating. Self- 
gravity is more important in cool disks, with small aspect 
ratio H/r. With the viscosities assumed, the masses of 
disks in observed systems can be estimated. For x-ray 
binaries and cataclysmic variables they turn out to be quite 
small, less than 10-* Mo, and self-gravity is unimportant. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In the outer parts of disks in AGN, and in particular 
in protostellar disks, on the other hand, self-gravity can be 
important (see YOUNG STELLAR OBJECTS). In this case, consider 
a disk cooling by radiation so that H/r decreases with 
time. As the threshold for instability is reached, non- 
axisymmetric irregularities with length scales of the order 
H are formed, which exert forces on each other. The shear 
flow acting on these forces dissipates energy, which in 
turn heats the disk. A balance is reached at a temperature 
just above the threshold for gravitational instability, and 
angular momentum is transported by the gravitational 
and pressure forces between the perturbations. This 
process is likely to be important in young protostellar 
disks, with inferred masses of the order of a few per cent 
of a solar mass (see STAR FORMATION). 

The currently favorite process for non-self-gravitating 
disks relies on the fact that most disks are partially or 
fully ionized and hence support magnetic fields (see 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS). The possibility that the actual 
angular momentum transport in disks is done by some 
form of small-scale magnetic field has already been 
proposed by Shakura and Sunyaev together with their 
introduction of the a-viscosity assumption. It can be 
shown that an initially weak magnetic field in an accretion 
disk is unstable, its energy density growing by extracting 
energy from the shear flow. The mathematics of the 
process was computed around 1960 by Velikhov and by 
Chandrasekhar, its physical interpretation given by Fricke 
in 1972 and its importance for accretion disks finally 
realized by Balbus and Hawley in 1992. Numerous three- 
dimensional numerical simulations since then have shown 
how this instability gives rise to the magnetic turbulence 
postulated earlier. For sufficiently ionized disks the 
process yields an effective viscosity a ~ 0.1. It is a 
small-scale magnetic field, with length scales in the radial 
direction of the order of the disk thickness H, and appears 
to behave roughly as expected from a viscous process. The 
magnetic field appears to break the dynamic constraints 
that prevent a Keplerian flow from becoming turbulent by 
purely hydrodynamic means. Insome respects the process 
resembles the hydrodynamic turbulence proposed earlier, 
but differs in important aspects as well. The angular 
momentum transport, for example, is dominated by the 
magnetic (Maxwell) stresses rather than by fluid motions. 


Planets inside disks 

Planets grow from a protostellar disk at the same time as 
the star is formed (see SOLAR SYSTEM: FORMATION). A planet 
like Jupiter is massive enough to significantly affect the 
dynamics of this disk. By its tidal effect it clears a gap, 
a region of low gas density around its orbit, as shown in 
figure 6. The tidal force excites waves in the disk which 
propagate away from the planet. Through the tidal forces, 
the planet attracts gas from the sides of the gap which 
accretes onto it in the form of two streams. On the other 
hand, the disk also exerts a gravitational torque on the 
planet. By this force, the planet’s angular momentum 
changes. It moves to a different orbit, usually closer to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


star. The planets in our solar system are therefore probably 
not at the distances where their formation started. An 
extreme example of this ‘drifting planet’ process may be 
the massive planets observed in very tight orbits around 
some nearby stars (see EXTRASOLAR PLANETARY COMPANIONS 
AND BROWN DWARFS). 


Radiation processes, two-temperature accretion 

The radiation produced by a disk depends on its optical 
thickness t. The energy released in the disk by viscous 
dissipation, per unit surface area and time, at a distance 
r from the central mass M is of the order W = GMM /r°. 
This heat diffuses out by radiation. If t (more precisely, 
the optical thickness for absorption processes) is large, the 
radiation emitted at the surface is roughly a black-body 
spectrum. The approximate surface temperature T, of a 
cool optically thick disk is then given by equation (2), with 
R replaced by the distance r. 

If the accretion is steady, so that Mis independent of 
r, the predicted temperature varies as r~*/*. In the case of 
protostellar disks and disks in cataclysmic variables, these 
temperatures are similar to those of normal stellar surfaces, 
and the same radiation processes determine the details 
of the emitted spectrum. In accreting black holes and 
neutron stars, the predicted temperatures are of the order 
1 keV (10’ K). Indeed, the x-ray spectra of these objects 
often show a component that agrees with this prediction. 
Usually, however, there is an additional hard component 
of much more energetic photons, around 100 keV. It often 
dominates the radiated energy. In these binaries there is an 
additional component in the accreting plasma that behaves 
differently from an optically thick disk. The precise nature 
of this plasma is one of the classical problems of x-ray 
astronomy, which at the time of writing has not been 
solved entirely. From the observed spectrum, it appears 
to be a thermal plasma of modest optical thickness (t ~ 1) 
and a temperature around 100 keV, much hotter than the 
cool disk. The main process producing hard photons 
under such conditions is inverse Compton scattering of 
soft photons by hot electrons. 

In the neighborhood of black holes and neutron stars 
accretion is possible not only via a cool optically thick 
disk. Theory also predicts the possibility of accretion 
via a hot state (cf discussion above under ‘Thin disks’). 
In this state, the protons are near the virial temperature, 
while the electrons are much cooler. The accretion 
flow is geometrically thick (H/r ~ 1) but optically 
thin. Under these conditions, the Coulomb interactions 
between ions and electrons can be slow compared with the 
accretion time (depending on accretion rate and viscosity 
parameter). Since the electrons radiate much more 
effectively, and are inefficiently heated by the ions, they 
remain much cooler than the ions: the accretion plasma 
is not in thermal equilibrium. The Coulomb interaction 
rate decreases with increasing electron temperature while 
radiation losses by inverse Compton and synchrotron 
radiation increase. In a flow of modest optical depth, 
the inverse Compton losses increase exponentially above 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10 
5 
5 
= 0a 
> 
-5 
-10 


0 3 10 


z (AU) 


Figure 6. Numerical simulation of a growing gaseous planet inside the protoplanetary disk. The planet has cleared a gap in the disk 
and accretes gas from the sides of this gap. (W Kley, Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Jena.) 


about 100 keV, so that this asomewhat natural temperature 
to expect for the emitted radiation. The possibility of 
such a two-temperature accretion flow to explain the hard 
spectra of x-ray binaries has already been proposed in the 
beginning of the x-ray astronomy era. The geometry of 
such a flow and the nature of its interaction with the cool 
disk component are still uncertain, however. 


Jets from disks 


Most systems with accretion disks appear able to produce 
strongly collimated outflows called jets, at least at some 
periods in their existence (See ASTROPHYSICAL JETS). Jets with 
relativistic flow speeds are known from accreting black 
holes, both the stellar mass holes in x-ray binaries and 
the massive holes in AGN. Jets at more modest speeds are 
produced by protostars. They are also known from at least 
one accreting neutron star (Cir X-1) and an accreting white 
dwarf (R Aqr). The connection between disks and jets is 
thus suggestive, but at the same time puzzling. Although 
jets always seem to be associated with accreting systems 
in which there is direct or indirect evidence for a disk, not 
all systems with disks produce jets, or not all the time. A 
good example are the HERBIG-HARO OBJECTS produced by jets 
from protostars, which clearly demonstrate that the jets in 
this case are episodic or highly variable in time (see also 
PRE-MAIN SEQUENCE STARS). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Summary of types of disk 
On a stellar scale, disks are produced in binaries by 
overflow of gas from one of the components onto the 
other. The sizes of these disks are as large as normal stars, 
from a few tenths to a few solar radii. If the primary 
(the mass-receiving star) is a white dwarf, such as in 
cataclysmic variables, the inner parts of the disk radiate 
mostly in the UV, the outer parts in visible light. The mass 
transfer through these disks is often unstable, causing 
dwarf nova outbursts. If the primary is a neutron star 
or stellar-mass black hole, the inner disk radiates in x- 
rays. Mass transfer in these disks is also unstable at low 
transfer rates, causing the so-called soft x-ray transients. 
They sometimes produce jets at relativistic speeds. Disks 
around stars in the process of formation, the protostellar 
disks (also called PROTOPLANETARY DISKS), are much larger 
(around 100 AU). Their inner regions radiate in the visible, 
the outer parts at infrared to radio wavengths. They are 
probably also unstable, causing the FU Ori outbursts, and 
are associated with jets and Herbig—Haro objects. Disks 
in AGN rotate around massive ((10°-10°) Ma) black holes 
at the centers of active galaxies. Their central regions 
radiate both in the UV and in x-rays and often produce the 
relativistic jets seen in double-lobed radio sources. Their 
sizes are somewhat uncertain, but probably of the order of 
a parsec or larger. 

Disks are also seen around BE STARS. The mass in these 
disks is believed to be slowly expelled by the rapidly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rotating star. Some of their properties are similar to those 
of accretion disks, but with mass drifting away rather 
than accreting onto the star. They are sometimes called 
excretion or decretion disks. 


Bibliography 

Frank J, King A R and Raine D J 1992 Accretion Power in 
Astrophysics 2nd edn (Cambridge University Press 
Astrophysics Series vol 21) (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Pringle J E 1981 Accretion disks in astrophysics Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 19 137-62 

Spruit H C 2000 Accretion disks 
http://arXiv.org /abs/astro-ph/0003144 


H Spruit 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ace (Advanced Composition Explorer) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ace (Advanced Composition 
Explorer) 


NASA mission to study the solar corona, interplanetary 
medium, solar wind and cosmic rays. Launched August 
1997 and placed in a halo orbit at the L1 Lagrangian point 
between Earth and Sun. It carries six high-resolution 
spectrometers and three monitoring instruments with a 
collecting power 10 to 1000 times greater than past or 
planned experiments. Its mission is to sample low-energy 
particles of solar origin and high-energy galactic particles. 
(See also EXPLORER.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Achernar ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Achernar 


The star a Eridani, at the mouth of the great river depicted 
in ancient star maps. It is a bluish-white main-sequence 
star, spectral type B3Vp, and at apparent magnitude 0.45 
is the ninth brightest star in the heavens. It is at a distance 
of 142 light-years, and has a parallax of 0.023”. Its absolute 
magnitude is —2.7. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Achilles ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Achilles 


The first Trojan asteroid to be discovered, by Max Wolf in 
1906, designated (588) Achilles. It belongs to the largest 
group of Trojans, orbiting ahead of Jupiter around the Ly 
Lagrangian point. It has an estimated diameter of 147 km, 
and orbits the Sun at a mean distance of 5.17 AU (774 
million km) in a period of 11.78 years. The inclination is 
10° and the eccentricity 0.15. Like the majority of Trojans, 
Achilles is D-type, with a reddish reflectance spectrum 
indicating a carbon-rich surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Achondrite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Achondrite 


One of the two main divisions of stony meteorites, 
the other being chondrites. Unlike the chondrites, the 
achondrites lack chondrules—millimeter-sized grains of 
silicate—and have a coarser crystalline structure than the 
chondrites. They contain almost no nickel-iron or sulfide. 
Achondrites are classified principally by their calcium 
content. The main calcium-rich (about 5%) varieties are the 
eucrites and howardites; the main calcium-poor (1% or less) 
types are the aubrites, diogenites and ureilites. Howardites, 
eucrites and diogenites are known collectively as HED 
meteorites or basaltic achondrites. The basaltic achondrites 
have all the characteristics of igneous terrestrial rocks, 
such as basalt, that were once molten, and are therefore 
inferred to be fragments from the crust of a parent body 
that underwent at least partial differentiation; the prime 
candidate is the Asteroid (4) Vesta. The largest known 
single achondritic mass is a 1 tonne fragment of the Norton 
County (Kansas, 1948) meteorite. Into this category also 
fall all known lunar meteorites, whose composition is 
consistent with them having been ejected from the surface 
of the Moon by impact, and all of the SNC meteorites, 
believed to have been ejected from the surface of Mars. 


Compare: Chondrites. 


See also: SNC meteorite, Vesta. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Acousto-Optic Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Acousto-Optic Spectrographs 


The acousto-optic spectrograph (AOS) has played an 
interesting niche role in radio astronomical observation. 
By using the interaction between a laser beam and an 
ultrasonic vibration generated from the incoming radio 
signal, the AOS makes possible sensitive, wide-band 
observations of radio phenomena which vary in both 
frequency and time. This has been especially true 
in observations of solar radio emissions and in wide- 
band spectral line observations as found at millimeter 
wavelengths. Extensions of the technique have been 
applied to radio antenna arrays as an alternative signal 
processing technique to the use of high-speed digital 
electronics. However, the inherently analog nature of the 
instrument along with the enormous advances in digital 
technology have reduced progressively those areas of 
application where the AOS has a distinct advantage over 
purely digital approaches. Nevertheless, the simplicity, 
compactness and a capacity to process a thousand or more 
resolution channels over a radio bandwidth of a gigahertz 
or more continue to make the AOS a useful instrument in 
MILLIMETER and INFRARED ASTRONOMY for both ground-based 
and space-based observations. 

The core component of the AOS is the ultrasonic 
delay line in which a piezoelectric transducer bonded to 
an acoustic transmission medium converts the applied 
electrical signal into a travelling ultrasonic acoustic wave 
in the form of progressive wavefronts and troughs of 
increased and decreased material density. In a typical 
crystal medium where the acoustic velocity is of order 
3 mm us", it is quite feasible to achieve (along a 30 
mm length of medium) a 10 ws sample of the incoming 
signal. Through polished faces to the medium, this can 
be probed with an applied laser beam which has been 
expanded and collimated. The density variations are, in 
effect, an optical phase grating and cause scattering of the 
light. This is the acousto-optic interaction in which light 
is scattered at an angle from the applied light. The sine 
of this angle is directly proportional to the frequency of 
the applied radio signal. In the limit of small angles and 
small scattered light, energy at the various frequencies 
within the applied radio signal will produce a proportional 
amount of optical energy at angles proportional to the 
frequency. Alens is used to focus the scattered light onto an 
integrating, one-dimensional solid-state photodiode array 
for read-out to a computer or a display or for recording 
on a moving piece of film. That is, the one-dimensional 
distribution of light intensity is an optical representation 
of the power spectrum of the applied radio signal. The 
limit to resolution of two closely spaced spectral features 
is then the inverse of the interaction length which, in this 
example of a 10 ws system, would be of order 100 kHz. 

The technique was first described by Lambert [1] 
in 1962 and first applied to RADIO ASTRONOMY in 1966 at 
CSIRO in Australia by Cole [2] using a water acousto- 
optic medium, with a 1 MHz bandwidth and by recording 
through a slit onto continuously moving film. It was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reported to the 1966 URSI conference in Munich. An 
improved instrument using a fused silica medium giving 
800 resolution cells over a 100 MHz bandwidth was 
reported in 1973 [3] which produced radio spectra of 
solar burst activity and led to various instruments being 
built for solar and Jupiter time-resolved radio emission 
spectroscopy. These were at observatories in the Soviet 
Union, Finland, China, Japan and Australia. 

Progressive improvements to the AOS included better 
acoustic impedance matching between the transducer and 
medium in order to increase the fractional bandwidth of 
the interaction and the use of solid-crystal acousto-optic 
media such as lithium niobate, lithium tantalate and lead 
molybdate to improve the efficiency and spectral range 
over which the spectrograph would work. 

However, it was the development of the one- 
dimensional solid-state photodiode array and the micro- 
computer which provided the improvements needed for 
accurate astronomical spectral line observations. By inte- 
grating the light onto the photodiodes and by use of cali- 
bration, it became possible to use the computer to integrate 
and subtract background in order to observe weak spectral 
lines. Although this was first demonstrated by adding a 
photodiode array to the existing solar instrument [4], the 
first serious AOS spectral line applications were carried 
out with the Parkes radio telescope in 1977 [5]. 

The clear advantages of the AOS in simplicity, spectral 
range and number of channels were apparent and resulted 
in a number of observatories in Japan, France, Germany 
and Australia constructing AOSs. As the bandwidth 
and channel capacity of the transducers and available 
photodiode arrays grew, the instruments became focused 
more and more on the challenges of millimeter wavelength 
spectral line observations. 

However, other, unique results were obtained with 
the AOS. The capacity to obtain high-time-resolution 
and frequency-resolution spectra over wide bandwidths 
revealed very clearly the structure of interplanetary 
SCINTILLATION phenomena previously only interpreted from 
observations taken at widely spaced, discrete frequencies 
[6]. Similarly, much detail was revealed in real-time and 
very wide fractional bandwidth observations of PULSAR 
SIGNALS [7]. Such observations revealed in a very graphic 
way the complex phenomena of pulsar signals including 
interstellar dispersion, Faraday rotation and scintillation. 

Extension of the technique to the processing of RADIO 
INTERFEROMETER data becomes possible by a number of 
techniques which would include construction of a series 
of acoustic beams displaced in an analogous manner to 
the radio antennas along a one-dimensional antenna array. 
In this case the optics can display a two-dimensional 
image of the spectrum as before but, orthogonally, radio 
spatial image data. However, although demonstrated in 
principle, the inherently analog nature of the technique 
has not been able to achieve the extremely high dynamic 
ranges now required in radio astronomical imaging and 
able to be achieved with digital processing techniques. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Acousto-Optic Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The usefulness of the AOS therefore becomes 
apparent as observations move into the sub-millimeter 
and infrared spectral ranges where the spectral details 
require very wide spectral coverage combined with a large 
number of resolution channels. Digital circuitry does not 
currently operate at such speeds and any digital solution 
becomes bulky and consumes significant power. Both of 
these commodities are scarce on the spacecraft needed to 
take the observing instrument above the Earth’s absorbing 
atmosphere. 

The AOS therefore continues to form a useful niche 
technique within radio astronomical observation. It 
provides access to a range of frequencies, resolution and 
channel number not easily possible by other techniques. 
However, the inexorable progress of digital techniques has 
restricted progressively the area of its unique advantage 
to the more exotic fields of space, millimeter and infrared 
astronomy. 


Bibliography 

[1] Lambert L 1962 Wide-band, instantaneous spectrum 
analyzers employing delay-line light modulators 
IRE Nat. Conv. Rec. 10 (part 6) 69-78 

[2] Cole T W 1968 Electro-optic spectrograph for radio 
astronomy Opt. Technol. 131-5 

[3] Cole T W 1973 An electrooptical radio spectrograph 
Proc. IEEE 61 (9) 1321-3 

[4] Cole T W 1975 Electro-optical processing in radio 
astronomy Opt. Acta 22 (2) 83-92 

[5] Cole T W and Milne D K 1977 Acousto-optical radio 
spectrograph for spectral integration Proc. ASA 3 (2) 
108-11 

[6] Cole T W and Slee O B 1980 Spectra of interplanetary 
scintillation Nature 285 (5760) 93-5 

[7] Cole TW 1980 The AOS: widening the radio sky Sky 
Telesc. 60 (2) 108-10 


Trevor Cole 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galactic Nuclei: Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Galactic Nuclei: Variability 


Variability studies have been essential in understanding 
the physics of ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI, AGN, because the 
size of the region emitting the enormous amount of energy 
characteristic of AGN is too small to be resolved even with 
existing or planned optical/infrared (IR) INTERFEROMETERS. 

AGN emit a continuum radiation coming from the 
vicinity of the BLACK HOLE. They also emit intense and 
broad emission lines originating in fast-moving gas clouds 
located in a small region around the continuum source: the 
broad line region or BLR. 

The flux level of the continuum and the intensity 
of the spectral emission lines emitted by AGN undergo 
variations on timescales ranging from hours to years 
depending on the energy range and on the intrinsic 
luminosity of the AGN. 

When the flux emitted by a source of energy varies 
significantly (say by a factor of 2) with a timescale t this 
flux variation sets a limit to the size R of the emitting region 
suchthat R < ct. InAGN the combination of the enormous 
amount of energy emitted and the very small size of the 
emission regions set by the short variability timescale is 
not compatible with the energy being produced by normal 
stellar processes. The most popular model for the energy 
production in AGN and the basis of the current paradigm 
is that AGN/quasars are powered by accretion of matter 
onto a SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLE. 

At higher photon energies, more rapid and higher 
amplitude variability is observed, e.g. the x-rays vary 
more than the optical (figure 1). The variability timescales 
tend to be longer in intrinsically brighter objects. The 
timescales and the correlations and delays between the 
variations of the continuum flux and of the various spectral 
line intensities provide information on the nature of the 
physical processes emitting the lines and the continuum, 
and on the location of the regions from which they 
originate. 

The term AGN is used here regardless of redshift 
and luminosity and therefore encompasses the terms 
Seyfert 1 and QSO or quasar, which are often used to 
designate medium- and high-luminosity AGN separately. 
In general, there are more data and of higher quality 
available for Seyfert 1s than for quasars. The reason 
is that they are numerous and quite a few are located 
within 100 Mpc of the Earth and are easily observable 
with the current instrumentation. In contrast, quasars are 
rare and even the closest ones are at such large distances 
from us that the flux received on Earth is much less than 
that from Seyfert 1s (there is one exception, 3C 273). In 
summary, the body of knowledge of AGN variability is 
dominated by the observations of Seyfert 1s, which have 
led to physical models which satisfactorily explain the 
observed phenomena. It remains to be investigated how 
these models apply to much brighter and to much fainter 
AGN. 

The AGN that are the subject of this article are those 
in which the central optical, UV, and x-ray source is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


50-150 keV 


Flux Density 


25 30 35 
Julian Date — 2,449,300 


Figure 1. Variations of the continuum flux at different energies 
during a 10 d intensive monitoring of the AGN NGC 4151. The 
light curves are shifted vertically for convenience and a 10 % 
change is indicated by the bar. (From R A Edelson et al 1996 
Astrophys. J. 470 364) 


viewed directly and where the variations are not amplified 
by relativistic effects (see ACTIVE GALAXIES: OVERVIEW; UNIFIED 
MODEL). For nearly a dozen Seyfert 1s, and especially for 
three of them (NGC 4151, NGC 5548 and NGC 7469), and 
for the quasar 3C 273, large international collaborations 
have organized long coherent campaigns of observations, 
some comprising simultaneous observations in the optical, 
UV and x-ray ranges, producing large amounts of data 
of uniform quality and gathered with optimum time 
sampling. A number of Seyfert 1s (~30) have been 
monitored less extensively but still sufficiently to establish 
that the results from the best studied Seyfert 1s are 
representative. 


Variability of the continuum flux 

The electromagnetic spectrum (continuum spectrum) 
of radio-quiet AGN, after subtraction of the stellar 
continuum emitted by the host galaxy, extends from 
~1 mm to ~100 keV with a prominent broad peak in the 
UV-extreme UV (EUV) range and a secondary peak in the 
IR (see ACTIVE GALAXIES: OBSERVATIONS). The x-ray emission is 
dominated by a power law component (1-10 keV; a ~ 0.9 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galactic Nuclei: Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where f, « v~*), which steepens in the hard x-ray range 
(>50 keV), possibly with a cutoff around 100 keV. 

It is recalled here that in the theory of accretion disks, 
the accreted matter spirals in towards the center under 
the gravitational attraction of the black hole. The matter, 
however, does not flow freely. It has an internal stress 
(very likely of magnetic origin) whose dissipation pro- 
duces heat, and also sets the timescale of the propagation 
of the accreted matter towards the center. Astronomers 
talk about the disk being heated by viscosity and about 
viscous timescales, and theoreticians can calculate the en- 
ergy produced by viscosity, the resulting spectrum emit- 
ted by the disk, and the timescales on which the radiation 
from the disk varies in response to a varying accretion rate 
(ACCRETION DISK). The observed spectral shape of the contin- 
uum of AGN from 1200-5000 A (or 10-2.5 eV) is roughly 
consistent with thermal emission from an accretion disk. 
However, the variations of the UV continuum flux occur 
on timescales of days, weeks or months which are shorter 
by many orders of magnitude than the timescales expected 
from variations in the accretion rate. Remarkably, in NGC 
4151 and NGC 5548, the medium energy x-ray flux (2- 
10 keV) and the optical/UV flux vary simultaneously (fig- 
ure 1) with the high-energy variations being much larger 
than the low-energy variations. 

Taken together, these observations suggest a model 
where the surface of the disk is irradiated by the central 
variable x-ray source. 

The x-ray source variability itself is believed to be 
due to explosive reconnections of magnetic-field lines 
permeating the accretion disk and the corona (the gas of 
hot electrons surrounding the central parts of the disk) 
through a phenomenon reminiscent of the solar flares in 
the solar corona. A significant fraction of the accretion 
energy is spent in this way in heating the corona. 

The hot electrons transfer some of their energy to 
ambient UV photons (emitted by the disk) and soft 
x-ray photons and produce medium and hard energy 
x-ray photons via inverse Compton emission. This 
‘Comptonization and reprocessing model’ explains the 
simple correlation among x-rays and UV emission on short 
timescales in NGC 4151 and NGC 5548, and also explains 
the average slope of the x-ray spectrum, the high-energy 
cutoff and other features of AGN x-ray spectra. 

But life is not so simple and the good correlation 
x-rays vs UV flux observed in NGC 4151 and NGC 5548, 
might have been a lucky circumstance in the intricate 
interplay between the hot electron gas, the UV photons, 
and the x-ray photons (‘which is the chicken and which is 
the egg?’). In fact, in a third Seyfert 1 nucleus extensively 
observed simultaneously in the UV and x-ray, NGC 
7469, the UV variations sometimes lag behind the x-ray 
variations and sometimes are simultaneous with the x- 
ray variations. This case places some serious doubt on 
the reprocessing picture provided earlier. A close look 
at the data, however, reveals a striking similarity of the 
variations in the two energy ranges, which suggests a basic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


link between the emission in the two energy ranges such 
as generally provided by Comptonization. 

The most extreme soft x-ray variability occurs in 
narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxies (NLS1), a subset of AGN 
with very intense soft x-ray emission and very steep soft 
x-ray spectra, narrow optical emission lines and prominent 
optical Fe II emission. To explain the absence of broad 
lines in NLS1, it has been proposed that the intense soft 
x-rays could blow away the inner broad-line region (BLR) 
or ionize it to states currently undetectable. The steep soft 
x-ray spectrum of NLS1 may indicate a high accretion rate 
or a small black hole mass. 

Turning now to the infrared range, variations, when 
detected at all, are of smaller amplitude and longer 
timescale than in the optical, and are consistent with being 
the delayed response of dust around the central source to 
the long-term variations of the UV and x-ray continuum 
flux. 


The emission line variations 

A method to estimate the black hole mass 

Monitoring of the flux variations of the continuum and the 
spectral line intensities of several Seyfert 1s have shown 
that the intensities of the spectral lines mimic the variations 
of the optical/UV continuum but with a certain time delay 
t. This delay is interpreted as the time needed for the 
light from the central continuum source located in the 
immediate vicinity of the black hole to reach the gas clouds 
emitting the spectral lines (and located around the central 
continuum source) and increase or decrease the emissivity 
of the gas (figure 2). 

The time delay t gives a measure of the distance 
d ~ ct of the line-emitting gas clouds from the central 
continuum source. This method can be expanded to map 
the line emission region and it is known as ‘reverberation 
mapping’. 

A rough estimate of the mass of the central black 
hole can then be calculated from the variations of the 
variable component of an emission line by combining 
the component width (which gives the virial velocity of 
the gas clouds) and t (which is the delay by which the 
component variations follow the continuum variations). 
The assumption that the clouds’ motions are orbital 
motions in the gravity field of the black hole is strongly 
supported by the fact that the blue and red wing of any 
line or line component vary together (i.e. one wing does 
not vary before or after the other one, to first order; see 
below). 

This method of determining the mass of the central 
black hole has been applied to more than a dozen AGN and 
yields values in the ranges a few 10°Mo to a few 10°Mo. 


The velocity field of the gas 

One of the crucial elements contributed by variability 
studies is that the broadest emission lines vary with the 
largest amplitude and on the shortest timescale, indicating 
that the fastest moving gas is closest to the center. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galactic Nuclei: Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 5548 
45 
7 Oo Continuum 
6 @ Lines 4 
Continuum Total Line 
5 
Flux 356 Flux 
4 
(x10"*) (x10"') 
3 3 
2 
1 2.6 
(?) 50 100 150 200 250 
Time (days) 


Figure 2. The UV continuum flux (open symbols; left vertical scale in erg s~! cm~* A“) and the emission line intensities (here the sum 
of all the lines; dots; right vertical scale in erg s~! cm~) as a function of time for the AGN at the center of the galaxy NGC 5548. The 

delay of ~15 d between the two light curves means that the lines are formed at a distance of ~15 light d or 5 x 101° cm. (From D Maoz 
1997 Emission Lines in Active Galaxies: New Methods and Techniques. ASP Conf. Ser. 113 ed B M Peterson, F-Z Cheng and A S Wilson (San 


Francisco, CA: Astronomical Society of the Pacific) p 138.) 


The detailed variations in line intensity and profile 
provide the answer to the question which is critical to the 
determination of the mass, as to whether the clouds are 
gravitationally bound to the central black hole: The line 
profile variations do not show the systematic effect of one 
wing responding before the other that would be expected 
for radial flows: The blue wing would be observed to vary 
first in the case of outward flows and spherical winds, and 
the red wing would be observed to vary first in the case 
of spherical accretion'. This, and the fact that the fastest 
moving gas is closest to the center, strongly suggest that 
the high ionization clouds are in orbital motions (chaotic 
or rotation motions) in the gravitational field of the black 
hole, with only minor components of net infall or outflow. 
Chaotic motions are ruled out because the gas clouds 
would be destroyed when crossing the accretion disk. 

The most detailed result on the velocity field in the 
BLR comes from an intensive monitoring of the C IV line 
profile during ‘a month in the life of NGC 4151’, with 
nearly complete 1 d sampling over a 35 d interval. The 
analysis of the variations in each interval of velocity in 
the C IV line profile shows the variations to be consistent 
with gravitational motions around a mass of ~10’ Mo. This 
value agrees with that resulting from observations of the 
entire UV spectrum of NGC 4151 at other epochs, which 
show a linear relation between the response time of a 
line and the inverse square of the line width. A similar 
study of NGC5548 yields a mass of (5 + 3) x 10’M.. Note 
that in both NGC 5548 and NGC 4151, there is possibly a 
weak signature of an infall component. Other AGN give 
consistent results (albeit less detailed) and it is tentatively 


1 Take the example of an expanding sphere of gas whose 
emissivity varies under the influence of the varying central 
continuum. A signal from the central source—for example, 
an increase of flux—treaches all the points of the sphere 
simultaneously, but the first signal which we receive from the 
sphere originates from the part closest to us and which is in motion 
towards us. We will, therefore, first observe an increase of the 
short-wavelength part, or blue wing, of the emission line. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


concluded that the line width is dominated by rotation. 
This forms the basis of the estimate of the black hole mass 
from the response of the emission line intensities to the 
continuum flux variations. The uncertainties attached to 
this method are difficult to evaluate and are probably less 
than a factor 10. 


The ‘disk and wind’ model 

In AGN spectra there are low-ionization lines, such as 
the Balmer lines and lines of Fe II and Mg II, and high- 
ionization lines (the strongest are lines of CIV, N V, He II, 
Si IV). Interpretation of the observations show that the 
low-ionization lines come from a flat aggregate of very 
dense clouds (N, > 10"! cm~? and total optical thickness 
of 1074 cm~*) which is identified with the relatively cool 
part (surface temperature of 5000 K) of the accretion disk. 

The high-ionization lines, in contrast, come from a 
comparatively more dilute medium, above and below the 
disk, the lines of the most highly ionized elements being 
the broadest. This indicates that the degree of ionization 
is correlated with the gas velocity (figure 3). 

Remarkably, the high-ionization lines are not exactly 
at the redshift of the low-ionization lines (emitted by the 
accretion disk), which themselves are at the host galaxy 
redshift. They are blueshifted (by 0 to ~1500 km s7') 
with respect to the disk and the host galaxy, indicating 
that the highly ionized gas is flowing out towards us. (By 
symmetry, a flow is probably moving away from us, on the 
other side of the disk, but is hidden from view because the 
disk is opaque). The combination of rotation and outflow 
from the disk suggests and is consistent with a model 
where the high ionization lines are emitted by gas clouds 
emerging from the disk, still retaining a large part of the 
angular momentum that the gas had in the disk. 

Such motions are predicted by the magnetohydrody- 
namical model of accretion disks in which magnetically ac- 
celerated winds are formed from filaments pulled from the 
originally dense low-ionized material of the accretion disk 
and subjected to the intense central ionizing field. This 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galactic Nuclei: Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


8 February 1992 


Difference Spectrum 


| 


Hy  Hella4686 “Hp 


4000 4500 


Wavelength (A) 


5000 


Figure 3. The variations over 44 d of the optical spectrum of 

the active nucleus of NGC 3783. The difference between the two 
spectra illustrates the large width and variability of the 

high ionization line of He II as compared to the other 

lines. The continuum spectrum is steeper at high state, a 
general property of AGN. Same unit of flux on both panels, 
10-! erg s~! cm~? A7!. (From G M Stirpe et al 1994 Astrophys.J. 
425 609) 


forms a highly ionized wind above and below the disk. 
The physics of these phenomena, however, is complicated 
and many features of this promising model remain un- 
specified at present. 


Current problems and future developments 
There remain a number of questions and exciting avenues 
of investigation. 

First, the theoretical investigation of the magneto- 
hydrodynamical effects which, together with the gravity 
field of the black hole, dominate the physics in the black 
hole surroundings needs to be vigorously pursued. 

Second, the variability phenomenon has been best 
observed and is best understood in the case of the medium 
luminosity AGN (total luminosity L ~ 10*-10* erg s~'), 
but variability data on powerful quasars (up to 10” erg s~) 
and on very low luminosity AGN (10° erg s~') are still 
very few. Fortunately, the relevant observations are under 
way. They will make it possible to investigate the entire 
parameter space defined by the black hole mass and the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


accretion rate and to understand the specific characteristics 
of the accretion process in the different regions of this 
parameter space (e.g. advection, accretion of single stars, 
super-Eddington accretion rate). 

Finally, although this article is focused on the directly 
observable variability of AGN, i.e. occuring on timescales 
of hours to years, it is pointed out that other variability 
phenomena must occur on longer timescales, say 10°, 
10° or 10° yr. Particularly relevant to this is the recent 
discovery (from measurements of the velocities of stars 
in the nucleus of nearby galaxies) that black holes are 
likely to be present in the centers of non-active galaxies, 
including our own Galaxy, with masses roughly in the 
same range of values as those determined from AGN 
investigations. Anumber of questions then naturally arise 
such as to whether AGN could be recurrent phenomena 
with dormant phases, and whether they can be fuelled by 
gas produced through the evolution of the stars in the host 
galaxy or whether the accreted material always come from 
outside the host galaxy. 


Bibliography 

Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

An assessment of the current state of the field with 
numerous references is given by: 

Ulrich M-H, Maraschi L and Urry C M 1997 Variability of 
active galactic nuclei Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 
445-502 


Marie-Helene Ulrich 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galactic Nucleus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Galactic Nucleus 


The central region of an active galaxy within which 
exceptionally large amounts of energy are being generated. 
An active galactic nucleus (AGN) emits strongly over a 
wide range of wavelengths, from x-ray to radio, the most 
powerful examples radiating a thousand times as much 
energy as the galaxies within which they are embedded. 
Typical luminosities range from about 10°” to 10” or even 
10“ watts. The spectrum of the radiation emitted by an 
AGN is markedly different from that of an ordinary galaxy 
(which shines with the combined light of its constituent 
stars and nebulae) and implies that some mechanism other 
than stellar radiation is needed to explain its copious 
output of energy. Many AGNs appear to be ejecting jets of 
highly energetic particles. In some cases one jet is seen, in 
others two oppositely directed jets are visible. 

Many AGNs vary in brightness by substantial 
amounts over timescales as short as years, months, days, 
or even hours. Because a source of light cannot vary in 
brightness on a timescale shorter than the time taken for 
light to cross the diameter of the source, these short-term 
variations imply that the energy sources in AGNs must be 
very compact. For example, if an AGN varies in one year, 
its energy source must be no more than a light-year across; 
if it varies in one day, its energy source must be less than 
a light-day across. Consequently, some AGNs appear to 
be radiating up to a thousand times as much energy as a 
conventional galaxy from a region of space comparable in 
size to the solar system. 

A widely supported hypothesis suggests that each 
and every AGN contains a supermassive black hole, with 
a mass of between ten million and several billion solar 
masses that is accreting matter from its surroundings. 
Because all galaxies are rotating, infalling matter will 
preserve its angular momentum (rotational motion) and 
will form a rapidly spinning disk of gas (an accretion disk) 
around the central black hole. Kinetic energy provided by 
infalling matter as it ploughs into the disk, and frictional 
effects within the disk, raise the temperature of the disk 
to very high values, causing it to radiate copious amounts 
of energetic radiation. The gravitational energy released 
by infalling matter is more than adequate to account for 
the power outputs of all types of active galactic nuclei. 
Because a black hole is so small compared with the size of 
a galaxy, and most of the energy is radiated from the inner 
regions of the accretion disk, this model neatly accounts 
for the very compact nature of the energy sources in AGNs. 

By a process that is still not fully understood, the 
central ‘engine’ accelerates streams of charged particles 
to relativistic speeds (large fractions of the speed of light). 
The inner part of the disk is believed to form a nozzle that 
confines the outward flow of energetic particles into two 
oppositely directed jets that shoot out perpendicular to the 
plane of the disk. 

Many astronomers believe that the same basic model 
(the ‘unified model’) can account for all kinds of active 
galaxy (Seyfert galaxies, radio galaxies, quasars, BL Lacs 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and blazars). According to this model, the supermassive 
black hole and its inner accretion disk is surrounded by 
a thick dusty torus (‘donut’) of matter, and the type of 
active galaxy that is seen depends on the orientation of 
the torus and jets relative to the observer’s line of sight. 
The jet radiates most strongly along its axis. The view of 
an observer, who is looking along, or very close to, this 
axis, will be dominated by the head-on jet, and a violently 
variable source with no spectral lines (a BL Lac or blazar) 
will be seen. Looking at a modest angle to the jet, an 
observer will see an unobscured compact source (a quasar) 
inside the torus. From. viewpoint closer to the plane of the 
torus, the central ‘engine’ is hidden from view, and we see 
only the jets and lobes (extended radio-emitting clouds) of 
aradio galaxy. Asimilar picture applies to Seyfert galaxies, 
a type II Seyfert being seen when the central engine and 
the gas clouds in its vicinity are hidden, and a type I Seyfert 
when the observer’s line of sight looks over the rim of the 
torus towards the innermost regions of the AGN. 

There is strong observational evidence to support the 
suggestion that active galactic nuclei contain supermas- 
sive black holes. In particular, scans across the centers of a 
significant number of active galaxies have shown that the 
intensity of starlight rises sharply in a central brightness 
‘spike’ in a way that is consistent with stars being bunched 
together in the gravitational field of a highly massive com- 
pact object. Furthermore, where it has been possible to 
measure the orbital velocities of gas clouds in the inner- 
most cores of active galaxies, the results indicate that these 
clouds are moving in the gravitational fields of extremely 
massive compact objects. For example, measurements of 
the intensity of light and the rotational velocities in the 
core of the giant elliptical galaxy M87 (in the Virgo cluster) 
are consistent with the presence of a supermassive black 
hole of some three billion solar masses. Furthermore, high- 
resolution images obtained by the Hubble Space Telescope 
have revealed flattened disks of gas and dust in the cores 
of a number of active galaxies. 


See also: accretion, active galaxies, astrophysical jets, 
black hole, blazar, BL Lacertae objects, quasar, radio 
galaxy, Seyfert galaxies. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


‘Active galaxy’ is a general term which refers to any 
galaxy that produces significant emission in addition 
to that from its constituent stars, stellar remnants and 
interstellar medium. The characterization of such galaxies 
as ‘active’ is because the unusual emission characteristics 
are generally assumed to be associated with high-energy, 
eruptive phenomena. The earliest consistent user of the 
word ‘activity’ as applied to the nuclei of galaxies seems 
to have been V A Ambartsumian. 

In most cases, this non-stellar emission appears to 
originate in the very center, or nucleus, of the galaxy, 
and these sources are known generically as ‘active galactic 
nuclei’ (AGN). A galaxy that harbors such a source is 
known as the AGN host. Historically, some other types 
of sources, such as STARBURST GALAXIES, that have some 
phenomenological similarities to AGN (e.g. strong near- 
UV emission) have also been known as active galaxies, 
though in these cases the activity might not be confined to 
the nuclear regions. 

AGN are the most luminous long-lived sources in 
the universe. They emit strong radiation over the entire 
observable wavelength range, from x-rays and y-rays 
through long-wavelength radio. A complete picture of the 
emission of an AGN can be obtained only by observing 
it at many wavelengths, preferably simultaneously over 
the entire spectrum because they are variable sources. 
There are a number of different classes of AGN (see 
ACTIVE GALAXIES: OVERVIEW); SEYFERT GALAXIES constitute the 
low-luminosity end of the AGN phenomenon, i.e. their 
nuclear luminosities are roughly comparable with the total 
starlight from the host galaxy. Higher-luminosity AGN 
are known as ‘quasars’ or ‘quasi-stellar objects’ (QSOs) 
(See QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: OVERVIEW) With the former being 
reserved (originally) for the stronger radio sources, and 
the latter weaker; in these cases the optical light from the 
AGN can exceed, sometimes by factors of more than 100, 
the stellar light from the host galaxy at all wavelengths. 
There are a wide variety of subclasses within these groups, 
based on the relative prominence of UV-optical emission 
lines, radio properties and polarization (see POLARIZATION 
IN ACTIVE GALAXIES). These will be mentioned below as 
necessary. 

This section will discuss the current status of 
observations over the electromagnetic spectrum. We first 
discuss the continuous emission of AGN in terms of 
their ‘spectral energy distributions’ (SEDs), i.e. amount 
of energy emitted in various wavebands. We then focus 
on the prominent emission lines that are detected in the 
UV-optical (and, more recently, x-ray) spectra of most 
AGN and follow this with a brief description of absorption 
features in AGN spectra. Spatially resolved structures in 
AGN are also discussed. 


Spectral energy distributions 


The SEDs of normal stars (and galaxies) are well 
approximated as blackbodies in the temperature range 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


46 _ ap Ss 


eee 
‘= 
EUV Gap 


IR Bump 


ae Blue Bump 


Inflection Soft X-ray Excess 


Far—IR Cut-off 4 


425 = 


log vL, (Jy Hz) 


40 F- + 


—— Radio-—quiet 

—-— Radio-loud 

l L L 1 ! 1 1 L ! L L 1 1 h L ! 
10 12 14 16 18 
log v (Hz) 


Figure 1. The median radio-soft x-ray spectral energy 
distribution for radio-loud (dashed) and radio-quiet (solid) 
low-redshift quasars. Data from Elvis et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 
Suppl. 95 1. 


2000-50000 K, and thus their emission is strongly 
concentrated in the ultraviolet (UV) through near-infrared 
(IR) parts of the spectrum. In contrast, AGN emit 
comparable energy (per unit logarithmic bandwidth) over 
most of the observable spectrum, as can be seen in figure 1. 
The one exception is the radio region, in which ‘radio- 
loud’ (RL) AGN are some 3 orders of magnitude brighter 
than their ‘radio-quiet’ (RQ) counterparts. These RL AGN 
constitute ~10% of the population. Figure 1 shows the 
low-redshift median SED for RL and RQ objects from a 
sample of more than 40 AGN. It is plotted as log(vL,) 
versus log v, which shows the energy output in each 
waveband and also highlights the important structure in 
the SED. 

Our knowledge of these SEDs is limited by current 
observational technology to fairly low-redshift, bright 
sources and includes (as is clear in figure 1) important gaps 
in various wavebands. 


1. The absence of observations at high energies (y-rays) 
is due to current technical limitations; higher-energy 
detectors are not sensitive enough to detect most 
AGN. Those that have been detected so far are 
generally core-dominated (CD) RL AGN, i.e. those 
whose emission is boosted by a relativistic flow along 
our line of sight (see ACTIVE GALAXIES: UNIFIED MODEL for 
more detail). 

2. The EUV gap, between the far-UV and soft x-ray 
regions of the spectrum (i.e. between 912 A and about 
0.1 keV, spanning a factor of about 10 in photon 
energy), is due to the large opacity of the interstellar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


medium in our own Galaxy to hydrogen-ionizing 
photons. Photons in this energy range are especially 
important because these drive the strong emission 
lines seen throughout the UV and optical spectra of 
AGN. 

3. The gap between the submillimeter and_ short- 
wavelength radio is again due to technological limits. 
New detectors and satellites have recently reduced 
these limitations considerably and revealed sharp far- 
IR spectral breaks for all but the CD RL AGNs. 


The most prominent feature of AGN SEDs is the 
strong peak in the UV spectrum. The feature, which 
is often known as the ‘big blue bump’ (BBB), begins in 
the near-IR and may extend all the way to soft x-ray 
energies. It is observed with a combination of low- 
resolution optical and UV spectroscopy and/or multicolor, 
optical photometry. It canbe plausibly identified as arising 
in an accretion disk (AD) containing material with a wide 
range of temperatures and orbiting around a supermassive 
black hole. The BBB peaks in the extreme UV, which is 
consistent with the expected emission from an AD around 
a ~10°Mo black hole that is accreting material at the 
Eddington rate. 

The IR emission from RQ AGN is mainly observed 
via multicolor photometry, although IR spectroscopy is 
a rapidly expanding field. The IR spectrum is thought 
to be dominated by thermal emission from dust in the 
host galaxy or a molecular torus that surrounds the AGN. 
The most compelling evidence for this interpretation is as 
follows. 


1. There is a local minimum in AGN SEDs at 
a wavelength of about 1 wm. This probably 
represents emission from the highest-temperature 
(about 1500 K) grains that can exist in the vicinity of an 
AGN, at higher temperatures, i.e. smaller distances 
from the central source, dust will sublimate. 

2. In some AGN, the infrared continuum has been 
observed to vary, apparently in response to earlier, 
similar continuum variations in the UV-optical 
spectrum (see ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI: VARIABILITY). The 
light-travel time inferred is consistent with the 
maximum distance at which grains exposed to the 
AGN radiation field should sublimate. 

3. The sharp break in the far-[R-submillimeter region 
of the SED in all but CD RL AGNs is generally too 
steep to be ascribable to optically thick synchrotron 
emission or to single-temperature blackbody emis- 
sion, but is consistent with thermal emission from 
grains (depending somewhat on the unknown grain 
emissivity law). 


In RL AGN, the IR is probably a mix of isotropic 
thermal and beamed non-thermal emission. The beamed 
emission dominates in the CD RL AGN as it is boosted 
by relativistic outflow along our line of sight. Strong 
evidence for this interpretation is provided by the 
coordinated variability observed in several of these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sources, most notably 3C 273, which is the brightest nearby 
QSO and consequently has been extensively monitored. 
Preliminary results in the mid- and far-IR from the ESA 
satellite ISO show the progression from non-thermal to 
thermal emission in a small sample of CD and lobe- 
dominated RLAGN and RQ AGN, supporting this general 
picture. 

While the UV-optical-IR emission from AGN appears 
to be predominantly thermal in origin, both the high- 
and low-energy extremes of the observable SEDs are 
thought to be produced by non-thermal processes. 
X-ray observations of AGN are largely confined to 
very low-resolution spectroscopy which yields the global 
continuum shape. The principal feature of RQ AGN 
hard x-ray spectra is a power-law continuum (F, « v™, 
with a ~ 0.9) over the range ~1-100 keV. The spectrum 
generally turns over at energies 2100 keV and is thought 
to arise through repeated Compton scattering of thermal 
or non-thermal photons. 

RLAGN show a harder x-ray spectrum than their RQ 
counterparts (Figure 1). The relative strength of this hard 
component increases with the core dominance of the radio 
source, implying that the emission is beamed similarly 
to the radio and supporting an origin in Compton up- 
scattering of the radio synchrotron photons. CD RL AGN 
are, to date, the only AGN detected in the high-energy 
y-rays, implying that beaming is a key factor. A few 
very high-energy observations have been made, including 
ground-based detection of Cerenkov showers that occur 
when TeV energy photons hit the Earth’s atmosphere. 
So far, the AGN detected by this method are all BL Lac 
objects (See BL LACERTAE OBJECTS). Similar to CD RL AGN, 
the observed emission from these sources is apparently 
dominated by a relativistic beam or jet (see ASTROPHYSICAL 
yETS) directed towards the observer. 

At energies around 10 keV and above, RQ AGN 
spectra also have a ‘hard tail’ above the x-ray power 
law which is stronger in lower-luminosity sources. 
This is thought to arise through ‘Compton reflection’ 
(a combination of inelastic scattering of higher-energy 
photons and photoelectric absorption of lower-energy 
photons) off relatively cooler material. This feature is 
strong enough that the cooler material must cover about 
half of the sky as seen from the x-ray source itself, which 
has led to speculation that the reflecting body must be the 
AD itself, with the x-ray source located somewhere above 
it. An example of such a spectrum is shown in figure 2. 


Spectral variability 

One of the most remarkable characteristics of AGN is 
their strong flux variability. Indeed, the very existence of 
intraday continuum variability puts a severe upper limit 
(set by light travel time and source coherence arguments) 
on the size of the continuum source, and thus provides one 
of the strongest arguments for identifying an AD around 
a supermassive black hole as the source of continuum 
radiation. At a fundamental level, the cause of continuum 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.1 


Compton 


reflection 


0.01 


Photons keV" 


L Ni Ka 
FeKa- “Fe KB 
| 1 | | | | jt | | | | 
1 10 100 


Photon energy (keV) 


0.001 


Figure 2. An x-ray reflection model with an input power 
spectrum F, « v~°” (dotted line) irradiates a slab of ‘cold’ 

(T < 10° K) gas in the limit of zero height on the disk axis. The 
lower spectrum shows the reflected spectrum, in which 
fluorescence lines appear prominently. At high energies, the 
reflected spectrum turns down as a result of Compton 
down-scattering within the slab. Data courtesy of I George, 
figure from Peterson (1997). 


variability is not understood, although AD instabilities are 
sometimes invoked as a driving mechanism. 

In general, the most rapid and highest-amplitude 
variations are seen at the highest photon energies. X-ray 
flux variations have been detected in Seyfert galaxies 
on time scales as short as several minutes. For 
phenomenological purposes, we can characterize the 
strength of the variations as a function of temporal 
frequency f by their ‘power density spectra’, which are 
conventionally modeled as a power law, i.e. P(f) « f~* 
where a is typically in the range 1-2 for most AGN. The 
case a = 0 is ‘white noise’, i.e. the amplitude of variation 
is independent of time scale, and a = 1 corresponds 
to variations that can be described as a random walk. 
Larger values of a correspond to increased amplitudes 
of variability over longer time scales (lower frequencies 
f). In some cases, e.g. NGC 4151 and 3C 390.3, the most 
prominent variations seem to occur quasi-simultaneously 
(i.e. simultaneous to within less than a day) from x-rays (or 
even y-rays for NGC 4151) through to optical wavebands. 
The smaller-amplitude structures in the light curves differ 
across the spectrum, with lower amplitudes and less 
structure seen at lower photon energies. The near- 
simultaneity of the variations requires that the variations 
are driven by radiation rather than, for example, by 
propagation of disturbances through the AD on the much- 
longer viscous time scale. These observations, along with 
detection of the x-ray hard tail and the Fe Ka emission line, 
point to ‘reprocessing’ models, in which a variable x-ray 
source illuminates the AD from above, with the absorbed 
x-ray energy driving variations observed at lower photon 
energies. 

In at least one case (the Seyfert galaxy NGC 7469), 
however, the x-ray variations do not correlate well with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the UV-optical variations; variations of similar fractional 
amplitude are seen in both the x-ray and UV-optical 
regions, but there is no clear causal relationship between 
them. 

It is in this same object, however, that a time 
delay between UV and optical variations has been 
detected. This is the only Seyfert galaxy that has 
been monitored sufficiently well for such wavelength- 
dependent continuum time delays to be detected. Relative 
to the variations in the shortest-wavelength UV, variations 
at longer wavelengths are delayed by an amount t « A*9, 
which is precisely the wavelength dependence expected 
if the variations arise in a thin AD that is irradiated by 
a variable x-ray source. Of course, this interpretation 
fails utterly to account for the observed lack of correlation 
between the UV-optical and x-ray variations. At this 
time, NGC 7469 seems to present serious difficulties for 
reprocessing models, although no other explanation of the 
coupling (or lack of coupling) between the x-ray and UV- 
optical variations has been forthcoming. 

Extreme flux variations are observed in BL Lac objects 
as well. In this case, however, the fundamental origin of 
the variations is probably related to the propagation of 
shocks through the relativistic jet. Unlike the Seyferts, 
while there is a close correspondence between the 
variations in different bands, a completely consistent 
relationship between time delay and wavelength has 
not yet emerged; the same source can apparently show 
different behavior at different times, and the reason for 
this is not understood. 


Emission lines 

Basic properties of UV—optical lines 

Strong broad emission lines are a defining characteristics 
of all types of AGN, except BL Lacertae objects in which 
the, presumably present, emission lines are swamped by 
the highly beamed continuum emission from the jet. In the 
UV-optical-IR part of the spectrum, the most prominent 
emission lines (those with equivalent widths! larger than 
some tens of A) are usually LyaA 1215, C IV 11549, 
C I] 41909, Mg II 42798, HB 44861, Ha 16563 and 
Pa A1.88um (figure 3). In most Seyferts and quasars, 
the observed emission arises in two physically distinct 
regions, a spatially compact (10%-10!” cm) ‘broad-line 
region’ (BLR) with relatively high particle densities (ne ~ 
10" cm~*) and large velocity dispersions (vpwrm * 1000- 
10000 km s7'), and a spatially extended (100 pc-1 kpc) 
‘narrow-line region’ (NLR) with relatively low particle 
densities (n. © 10° cm~3) and smaller velocity dispersions 
(vewHm < 1000 km s~'). Certain nebular ‘forbidden’ lines, 
such as [O III] 444959, 5007, are prominent features of 
narrow-line spectra but are not observed in broad-line 
spectra. In the low-density NIR, both the Balmer lines 
and the [O III] are in the low-density limit in which the 
emissivity is proportional to ne, However, in the denser, 


1 The equivalent width of an emission line can be thought of as 
the width (in wavelength units) of underlying continuum that 
would be required to produce the same emission-line flux. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


30 | T T T 1 : 
Lyo. 11216 | 
z O IIT] 414959, 5007 
= 20/-—- [ 1 | 
5 
sy CIV A1549 
: i rt 
: HB 14861 
a C IM] 41909 Hy 24340 
~ 10 -— “i 
2 Hd = 
O VI A1035 Mg II 12798 
gt | | I f f | 
2000 4000 6000 


Rest wavelength (A) 


Figure 3. A mean optical-UV QSO spectrum formed by 
averaging spectra of over 1000 QSOs from the Large Bright 
Quasar Survey, with prominent emission lines marked. Data 
courtesy of S Morris and K T Korista. 


but much lower-mass BLR, the Balmer lines are still in 
the low-density limit, but the [O III] lines are in the high- 
density limit in which the emissivity is proportional only to 
Ne. The [OII]] lines from the broad-line region are thus very 
weak relative to the Balmer lines, and the forbidden lines 
are often referred to as being ‘collisionally suppressed’. 
Seyfert galaxies have traditionally been divided into 
two spectroscopic subclasses: type 1 Seyferts have both 
broad-line and narrow-line emission, whereas type 2 
Seyferts have only narrow lines. In some and possibly 
all cases, the type 2 objects are those whose BLRs are 
obscured from our direct vision by dust. Spectra of 
quasars are always similar to those of type 1 Seyferts. The 
question of whether or not there are any bona fide ‘type 2 
quasars’ remains open. Recent polarimetry has revealed 
broad lines in some ultraluminous infrared galaxies: 
spectroscopically these could sometimes be classified as 
the elusive type 2 quasars, but fundamentally these are still 
obscured type 1 quasars. Beyond semantics, the question 
is whether or not unified models explain all type 2 objects. 


Emission-line variability 

The broad components of AGN emission lines vary in 
flux in response to changes in the continuum flux, with 
time delays that are assumed to be due to light travel-time 
effects within the BLR. Indeed, measurement of the BLR 
size relies on measurement of the mean time delays (or 
‘lags’) between continuum and emission-line variations. 
This process, known as ‘reverberation mapping’, has been 
carried out successfully for more than two dozen AGN. 
The BLR sizes in Seyfert galaxies are in the range of a 
few to around 100 light-days (ie. rstr * 10°!” cm), 
and scale with luminosity approximately as rgrr « LY”, 
consistent with the simplest theory. Different lines in a 
given AGN respond with different time delays, usually 
in the sense that higher-ionization lines respond faster 
than lower-ionization lines; this indicates that the BLR 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


has a radially stratified ionization structure and that the 
maximum variability response of different lines occurs at 
different radii. The range of time responses is such that 
the outer edge of the BLR is at least 10 times larger than 
the inner edge. 

In principle, reverberation mapping should be able 
to determine the velocity field of the BLR because the 
broad lines are resolved in line-of-sight (Doppler) velocity. 
For example, if the BLR clouds were traveling radially 
outwards from the central source, then an external 
observer would see the short-wavelength (relatively 
blueshifted) gas on the near side of the nucleus respond to 
continuum variations before seeing the long-wavelength 
(relatively redshifted) gas on the far side of the nucleus. 
The absence of such a strong signature indicates that the 
predominant gas motions are not radial. However, current 
observations are not extensive enough to determine 
whether the BLR gas is confined to a disk or has some 
different geometry. 

Regardless of the details, if it is accepted that the 
BLR gas motions are primarily orbital around the central 
source, the mass of the central source (Mblackhole) Can 
be measured by combining measurements of the size of 
the region with emission-line width, i.e. to within some 
geometry-dependent factor of order unity, Mblackhole © 
TBLR UeWHM- For the two dozen or so low-luminosity AGN 
for which this has been done, masses in the range (10° 
10°)Mo have been inferred. 

The narrow emission lines generally do not vary 
on time scales of years or less because the longer light- 
travel and recombination times tend to smear out the 
effects of any continuum variations. Reports of narrow- 
line variability are rare. Probably the best case for actual 
narrow-line variability is the case of the broad-line radio 
galaxy 3C 390.3, which seems to have an abnormally 
compact, high-density NLR. 

Narrow-line widths seem to correlate well with 
the central masses of the AGN host galaxy on scales 
comparable with the size of the NLR (i.e. the interior 
galactic bulge mass), although there is also clear evidence 
that part of the narrow-line widths and asymmetries is due 
to interaction with jets. 


The x-ray iron (Fe) Ka line 

In the low-resolution spectra typically obtained in the 
x-ray region by satellites such as ASCA (Japan), SAX 
(Italy) and RXTE (USA), a fluorescent Fe Ka emission 
line is commonly observed. This emission line tends 
to be stronger in lower-luminosity sources. The energy 
at which the line is observed crudely indicates the 
ionization state of the emitting material. A wide range of 
behavior is seen from unresolved, cool lines (i.e. from low- 
ionization material), consistent with an origin in absorbing 
material along our line of sight through the quasar, e.g. 
the molecular torus, to hot, resolved lines with widths, 
UewHm = 10000 km s“!, which imply material much closer 
to the central AGN than the UV and optical lines discussed 
above. In a few of these, most notably MCG-6-30-15, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


complex line profiles are observed which suggest emission 
from very close to the central AGN. This interpretation is 
very attractive as the line then provides our only direct 
observation of the inner AD and is extremely important for 
diagnosing and constraining both AD and central-source 
models. 

X-ray satellites, such as XMM (ESA) and the Chandra 
X-Ray Observatory (NASA), both launched in 1999, will 
be able to observe Fe Ka emission in a larger fraction of 
the AGN population. Their gratings will also provide 
extremely high spectral resolution (E/AE > 100-1000), 
allowing more detailed profile studies as well as the 
detection of more and weaker lines in bright, nearby AGN. 


Spatially resolved structures in AGN 

The narrow-line region 

Whereas the size and structure of the BLR must be inferred 
indirectly by processes such as reverberation mapping, the 
NLR is sufficiently extended that, in the nearer AGN, it 
can be spatially resolved with the Hubble Space Telescope 
or, in some cases, even with ground-based observations. 
The NLR is typically approximately axisymmetric, with its 
long axis coinciding with the radio axis in those sources in 
which extended radio emission is detected. In some cases, 
there appear to be shock fronts at the interface between the 
radio-emitting plasma and the interstellar medium in the 
host galaxy. While the narrow-line emission is apparently 
driven primarily by photoionization by the central source, 
strong emission from post-shock cooling regions is also 
detected. 

In some cases, narrow-line emission seems confined 
to wedge-shaped ‘ionization cones’ that emanate from the 
nucleus. The opening angles of these cones are typically 
30°-100°. These cones are thought to be a result of 
anisotropy in the AGN radiation field that is introduced on 
much smaller scales by an obscuring torus that surrounds 
the central source. 


AGN host galaxies 

In the present-day universe, AGN constitute fewer than 5— 
10% of all bright galaxies. Why are some galaxies ‘active’, 
whereas others are not? Does the AGN phenomenon 
represent a transient phase in galaxy evolution (noting that 
there were far more AGN in the distant past than there are 
today? Attempts to address these problems have led to 
studies of the ‘host galaxies’ of AGN. This is often a difficult 
undertaking, since AGN are typically at large distances, 
so the host galaxies are faint and have small angular sizes, 
and, in the case of quasars in particular, much of the host- 
galaxy light is simply lost in the glare of the quasar. 

Carl Seyfert’s original list of high-surface-brightness 
emission-line galaxies was composed almost entirely of 
spiral galaxies. Over time, the definition of ‘AGN’ has 
become primarily spectroscopic (based on the presence of 
strong emission lines, except in the case of BL Lac objects). 
High-luminosity AGN are found in both elliptical and 
spiral galaxies, although at low redshift RLAGN are found 
preferentially in ellipticals. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Until relatively recently, it was generally believed 
that there is a correlation between AGN and host-galaxy 
luminosity: more luminous AGN reside in more luminous 
galaxies. There are, however, strong selection effects that 
can lead to such a conclusion. Recent observations of 
quasars with the Hubble Space Telescope (to aid detection 
of faint host galaxies with high-luminosity AGN) and more 
through survey work on nearby galaxies (to find weak 
AGN in luminous hosts) have not supported the existence 
of a strong correlation between AGN and _host-galaxy 
luminosities. Faint AGN are found in both low- and high- 
luminosity host galaxies, whereas high-luminosity AGN 
are found only in more luminous hosts. 

As a result in a large part of observations with 
the Hubble Space Telescope, it now seems that virtually 
all galaxies harbor supermassive black holes in their 
nuclei (See SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES IN AGN). Identification 
of supermassive objects requires measurement of high 
velocity dispersions on small spatial scales (thus requiring 
the high angular resolution obtainable with space-based 
imaging), leading to virial mass measurements. The 
most interesting question now seems to be shifting from 
‘do supermassive black holes exist?’ to ‘why are some 
supermassive black holes accreting mass (AGN) whereas 
others are not (normal galaxies)?’ Whether or not the 
nucleus is fueled may be related to how easy it is to drive 
gas into the galaxy nucleus, and this may in turn depend 
on host-galaxy characteristics. 


Extended x-ray emission 

The high (for the x-ray) spatial resolution of the High 
Resolution Imager on the ROSAT x-ray satellite (~5”) 
facilitated imaging of bright, nearby Seyfert galaxies such 
as NGC 1068 and NGC 4151. X-ray imaging shows that 
a significant fraction (up to ~50%) of the x-ray emission 
can originate in an extended region around the central 
AGN. In a few sources, this x-ray emission is spatially 
correlated with the NLR. The origin of the extended x-ray 
emission could be due to electron scattering of the central 
x-ray emission or to x-ray emission from a hot, outflowing 
wind. The Chandra X-Ray Observatory (NASA) with its 
unprecedented spatial resolution (~0.5”) will allow many 
more of these spatial studies to be made. 


Megamaser emission 

Among the most exciting observations of AGN in 
recent years are those of water maser emission in the 
radio regime. Radio observations, because of the long 
wavelengths and correspondingly larger telescopes that 
can be built or synthesized’, are currently unsurpassed 


? The required surface accuracy of a telescope is proportional to 
the wavelength at which it is to be used. The relatively crude 
surface accuracy required for a radio telescope means that large 
collecting surfaces are comparatively easy and cheap to fabricate 
and maintain. Furthermore, the low frequencies involved make it 
relatively easy to correlate signals from individual radio receivers 
separated by large distances and thus attain higher angular 
resolution through interferometry. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in the spatial resolution they can obtain, typically down 
to milliarcsecond (mas) levels. Recent observations 
of water maser emission in the low-luminosity Seyfert 
1.9 galaxy NGC 4258 has shown several components 
whose velocities accurately follow a Keplerian rotation 
curve. Combined with their angular positions, these 
maser sources indicate a warped, inclined, geometrically 
thin, sub-parsec-scale, molecular disk, and lead to an 
estimate of (3.5 + 0.1)x10’ Mg for the mass of the central 
black hole, the first direct and precise such measurement. 
Maser observations of other sources have also provided 
information on similar scales, but so far none as detailed 
as NGC 4258. 


Absorption lines 


Optical and UV 

The optical and UV spectra of AGN contain absorption 
features due to material along the line of sight between 
us and the optical-UV continuum source both within the 
AGN itself and in intervening space. 

The intervening absorbers, whose redshifts are 
always lower than those of the background QSO, 
are most numerous in high-redshift QSOs with their 
correspondingly longer line of sight. They are dominated 
by lines from the fundamental transition of neutral 
hydrogen, Lya 41215. Known as the ‘Lyman a forest’, 
these lines provide a wealth of information concerning 
the distribution of cold material in the universe. The 
range of column densities in these absorbing systems is 
wide, Ny © 10-107! cm~?, so that metal features, Mg II 
4.2798, CIV 4.1549 and Lyman limit breaks are observed 
in a subset. At high redshift, where only the brightest 
sources, mostly QSOs, are visible to us, the Lyman a 
forest provides our only view of the cold material and 
so is a very important window on the early universe for 
cosmological studies (See QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: INTERVENING 
ABSORPTION LINES). 

The most interesting class of absorbers, in terms 
of QSO studies, is that of associated—intrinsic absorbers. 
These are high column density, metal line systems which 
occur in more than 50% of all AGN and whose redshift is 
close to and sometimes even slightly in excess of that of the 
background QSO. In UV-optical spectra with sufficiently 
high resolution (<5 A), the lines are often visible within the 
broad emission-line profiles. This makes them difficult 
to study as neither their profiles, which often include 
multiple components, nor those of the emission lines they 
absorb are known. High-resolution and signal-to-noise 
data are required and, even then, the uncertainties tend to 
be high. The absorption is thought to originate in material 
close to the nucleus of the QSO and moving relative to it, 
usually in an outward direction. They show a range of 
ionization from low, where Mg II is the dominant line, 
to high, where C IV or even O VI 11034 predominate. 
These high-ionization absorbers are thought to also be 
responsible for the x-ray warm absorbers discussed below. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ror TT, Fat TT TTT _7 a ae Va 
ale NVA1240 BAL QSO 1413+1143 — | 
Zem = 2.545 
ve ) — CIV A1s49 7 
o< 
‘5 2e ; | 
3 O VI21035 taaaes 
7 SiIV 1400 | 
an 
i 4 
oD 
3 
EB — 
Ss 
we 
1 i | i 1 i 1 | 1 1 1 1 | 1 
5000 6000 7000 


Observed wavelength (A) 


Figure 4. An example of a QSO spectrum showing BALs. Data 
courtesy of C B Foltz, figure from Peterson (1997). 


X-ray warm absorbers 

The soft x-ray spectral region is strongly affected by atomic 
absorption due to any material along the line of sight 
between us and the x-ray source within the AGN itself. 
Our Galaxy has a significant column density of neutral 
(cold) material whose signature is present in AGN soft 
x-ray spectra (in the range 0.1-5 keV). The host galaxy of 
the AGN produces a similar signature. In addition to this 
cold absorption, absorption by ionized (warm) material is 
often observed in the soft x-ray spectra. This is generally 
evidenced by the presence of strong absorption at the 
edge(s) of highly-ionized oxygen (O VII or O VIII) or, in 
lower-resolution data, a ‘leakage’ of soft photons above 
the expectations of cold absorption since the low-energy 
opacity decreases as the ionization increases. 

Indications are that all or nearly all QSOs showing 
x-ray warm absorption also have associated absorption 
lines in the UV which include high-ionization lines such 
as O VIand N VA 1240. Recent work has shown that high- 
column-density, outflowing material can produce both the 
x-ray and the UV features of such absorbers. The resulting 
combination of UV and x-ray constraints on the absorbing 
material has provided us with unprecedentedly strong 
diagnostics for the absorber. It appears to be high-column- 
density (Ny * 10°°-? cm7?) material, outflowing from 
the central regions at velocities ~100-1000 km s“!, located 
between the BLR and NLR at ~10” cm and often including 
several distinct components within an individual system. 


Broad absorption lines 

The most dramatic absorption features seen in the UV- 
optical spectra of QSOs are the broad absorption lines 
(BALs) (figure 4). These are high-column-density (Ny ~ 
10-8 cm~) intrinsic absorbers outflowing from the QSO 
nucleus. They have a range of ionization (hence C IV or 
Mg II BALs) and a wide range of velocities sometimes 
approaching ~10% of the speed of light. The absorption 
generally contains a great deal of structure although a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


small subset have smooth P-Cygni-type profiles indicating 
a smooth, spherical outflow. Since they absorb out 
so much of the QSO continuum and line emission, 
it is very hard to study them quantitatively. High- 
resolution and high-signal-to-noise spectra are essential 
along with detailed modeling of both emission and 
absorption features in order to build up information 
on the column densities as a function of velocity for 
this material. Interpretation is generally in terms of a 
turbulent, outflowing wind close to the QSO nucleus and 
covering a significant fraction of the central continuum 
source and the BLR. These sources are universally weak 
x-ray emitters, mostly undetected down to limits well 
below those of other QSOs. The strong absorption seen 
in those few detected to date leads to an interpretation 
in terms of absorption of the x-ray emission by the same, 
outflowing wind and suggests that the column densities 
is at the high end of the quoted range. 


Bibliography 

Blandford R D, Netzer H and Woltjer R 1990 Active Galactic 
Nuclei (Berlin: Springer) 

Osterbrock D E 1989 Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and 
Active Galactic Nuclei (Mill Valley: University Science 
Books) 

Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Belinda J Wilkes and Bradley M Peterson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observing their Variability by Amateurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Galaxies: Observing their 
Variability by Amateurs 


Amateurs began to take an interest in observing the 
brighter active galactic nuclei (AGN) relatively soon after 
their discovery in the late 1960s, although a small num- 
ber were observed as if variable stars prior to this. 
Leading amateurs have thus been observing the brighter 
AGNs for more than three decades, monitoring changes 
in their brightness. In addition, many recreational 
observers have tracked down these faint specks visually, 
especially 3C273 in Virgo, and marveled at the view, 
although less at their appearances than their extraordi- 
nary nature. 

The first formal coordinated program for amateurs 
to monitor AGNs began in the UK in the late 1970s with 
the British Astronomical Association’s Variable Star 
Section adding 3C273, NGC 4151 and Markarian 421 to 
its program. These were monitored visually as if faint 
variable stars. As telescopic apertures increased over the 
1980s, more AGNs were added to the program. The 
Astronomer organization took up an interest and added 
this class of objects to its program, which remains 
active—observations are still being published in The 
Astronomer magazine monthly. 

The potential for serious photographic work 
was realized in the late 1980s, the technique enabling 
the addition of several fainter examples that were too 
faint for most visual observers. This was a limited suc- 
cess, the difficulties of photographic patrolling limiting 
the popularity. It was not until the advent of the 
CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) and its availability to 
the amateur that the next boost to AGN observation 
was given. Of professional interest in amateur observa- 
tions, there is no doubt—support and encouragement 
having been given by several international 
astronomers, CCDS, FILTERS AND CCD PHOTOMETRY FOR 
AMATEURS. 


The broad aims of amateur AGN observations are 
threefold: 


¢ to monitor apparent changes in brightness of accessi- 
ble AGNs (see figure 1); 

e to measure such changes and build up as accurate a 
light curve in visible wavelengths as possible; 

e to alert professional astronomers to unusual activity, 
and anticipated activity of interest, and provide rou- 
tine observations on a regular basis. 


In order to monitor as many AGNSs as often as pos- 
sible, a coordinated program has been set up. There are 
currently over 20 AGNSs available to the well-equipped 
amateur (some are listed in table 1). Although most are 
relatively faint, several are accessible to modest tele- 
scopes visually and all should be fairly straightforward 
targets for CCD users. 

Observers are encouraged to make observations as 
regularly as skies and conditions allow. Almost all AGNs 
on the program are plotted in Uranometria 2000, 
although some have alternative designations from their 
more popular terms. However, use of coordinates should 
allow identification without difficulty. 

Once located, the AGN’s brightness can be estimat- 
ed or measured, visually, photographically or with a 
CCD. Each has its merits and problems. In favor of a 
visual approach is the ability to observe several objects in 
the session; the results are rapidly obtained and the 
equipment is relatively inexpensive, although realistical- 
ly a larger aperture is needed for such faint objects. 
However, the telescope need not be equatorially mount- 
ed. Set against these advantages are the problems of find- 
ing relatively faint objects from less than ideal sites, with 
problematic sky conditions, due to light pollution, moon- 
shine, high cirrus and so forth. Experience in variable 
star work is essential. Inevitably, some observer bias 
occurs, although this can be compensated for, as with 
other variable star observations. Even if the AGN itself 


Table 1 

Object Right ascension Declination Constellation Type Magnitude or Uranometria 2000, 
approximate range chart number 

3C66A 02h 22m 39s +43 n 05 16 AND BLLAC 14-163 62 

3C120 (BW TAU) 04h 33m 05 n 21 TAU BLLAC _ 13.7-14.6 178 

OJ287 08h 54m 48.9s 20 n 06 32 CNC BLLAC  12.4-16 142 

Markarian 421 11h 04m 27s 38 n 12 32 UMA BLLAC  13.6-14 106 

NGC 4151 12h 10m 39 n 24 CVN Seyfert 11.1 74 

Markarian 205 12h 21m 44s 75 n 18 37 DRA BLLAC 145 9 

W Comae 12h 21m 31.6s 28n 1358 COM BLLAC  11.5-16 148 

3C273 12h 29m 6.8s 02n03m07s_ VIR Quasar 12.2 238 

3C279 12h 56m 11s 05 s 47 21 VIR Quasar 17.7 284 

BL Lacertae 22h 02m 42 n 16 LAC BLLAC  12.5-15 87 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Observing their Variability by Amateurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


G28? 1261 Z2i:3e-21 UT 21-84-2868 


HI287 YaGl-36 28°92:58 WT 2-2-2688 


Figure 1. The dramatic rise in brightness of the very active BL Lacertae object OJ287 in Cancer is demonstrated in this pair of images. 
The image of 21 April 2000 shows the AGN to be at magnitude 16, that of 28 December 2000 at 14.5. Both images were obtained with a 
Meade LX 200, 250 mm 6.3 SCT and Starlight Xpress CCD camera; the April image was exposed for 80 s, that in December for 160 s. 


Neither was filtered. 


poses no great problem, the fainter comparison stars may 
well be difficult. While the numbers of AGNs available 
are limited, there are still over a dozen to be observed by 
the owners of a 16 in telescope or larger. 

Photography would seem to reduce some of these 
barriers. Fainter magnitudes can be reached so more 
active galaxies become available and the comparisons are 
more easily accessed. Personal bias is reduced and the 
results are easily displayed and reproduced. However, 
an equatorial or driven telescope becomes essential, rais- 
ing the financial commitment. For the accurate results 
which the time and financial outlay deserve, standard- 
ization and formal measurement become necessary. This 
would require the observer to use a standard film (Kodak 
103aB was recommended in the past, but it is difficult to 
obtain and other emulsions need to be tested). Also, fil- 
tered images are desirable, and for accurate magnitude 
estimates microdensitometric measures are ideal. Add to 
this the laborious process of photography itself and dark 
room work, and it is perhaps understandable that the 
photographic programs of the late 1980s never really 
came to fruition. The chance of discovering a nova or 
supernova is often adequate incentive to be involved in 
patrol work, but monitoring of an existing object year in, 
year out, is perhaps less enticing. 

The CCD revolution seems be the answer to this. 
Images made with CCDs can go very deep, even with 
modest apertures. Many AGNs are available to owners 
of 10 in telescopes equipped with a CCD. Finding objects 
with smaller CCD chips was once notoriously difficult 
but modern GoTo facilities of many modern telescopes 
mean that the field can be confidently found and then the 
AGN identified from charts and imaged really quite 
rapidly and a measurement made. 

Computer software is becoming more sophisticated 
and, with care, photometry accurate to around 0.1 mag- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


nitudes should be possible. The data are easily stored on 
disk and retrieved at leisure. Rapid comparison with a 
master image is possible to show any significant changes 
in brightness. This happy state of affairs is tempered by 
the need to spend a fair amount of money on equipment. 
In addition to a driven telescope, there is the CCD cam- 
era and computer plus necessary software. So to achieve 
the first meaningful CCD image of an AGN may cost the 
observer several thousand dollars. 

Also, not all CCDs have the same sensitivities. Most 
have a red bias, which distorts the results, but different 
cameras have different profiles, so, for photometry to be 
really useful to the professionals, it is increasingly clear 
that filtration is needed (see CCDS, FILTERS AND CCD PHO- 
TOMETRY FOR AMATEURS, FILTERS). It may ultimately be 
acceptable to use just B and V filters, even one of these. 
However, simple monitoring without photometry does 
not need filtered images and this can still be useful even 
if no filters are available to the observer. At present the 
majority of observations remain visual, with some CCD 
imaging, but, with more CCD users looking for serious 
projects, the emphasis may change. 

AGNs offer a wonderful challenge to the serious 
amateur observer who wishes to contribute in their small 
way to an area of science in which the professionals wel- 
come help, if provided carefully (see also ACTIVE GALAX- 
IES: OBSERVATIONS). While not giving much in the way of 
spectacular views, AGNs feed the imagination in a way 
that is equally satisfying to the enquiring mind. The tech- 
niques are improving, the quality of results will become 
more refined and the study of the deepest of deep-sky 
objects is about to take off. 

Nick Hewitt 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Galaxies: Overview 


Defining an ‘ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS’ (AGN) can be 
difficult. The last two words are relatively simple, as an 
AGN is an energetic event which is never found anywhere 
in the universe except within the central parsecs of a 
galaxy. This is not surprising, because any dynamical 
friction should soon force any very massive compact object 
to settle down into the center of the galactic gravitational 
potential. 

AGALACTIC NUCLEUS is said to be ‘active’ if it generates a 
‘substantial’ (or detectable) amount of energy by processes 
different from those found anywhere else in galaxies. That 
is, the energy of the ‘activity’ is not produced by evolution 
of stars and interstellar matter. This definition is clean 
because it is theoretical. The actual observational task 
of identifying AGN can be messy, especially when the 
nonstellar activity is weak compared with the background 
of normal stellar processes, including birth and death. 
Classifying AGN meaningfully is harder. Understanding 
their physical nature is harder still. 

The problems are further complicated because the 
nonstellar activity releases energy in many forms, and 
at photon wavelengths covering nearly the entire elec- 
tromagnetic spectrum. Since observing instruments and 
methods differ markedly from one waveband to an- 
other, many overlapping wavelength-specific classifica- 
tion schemes and models have been proposed. 

Not surprisingly, astronomers became aware of the 
more spectacular and luminous examples of AGN first. 
These nuclei were sufficiently luminous that they could 
outshine the entire galaxy in which they resided. They 
were also very distant, and it was often not possible, before 
very sensitive imaging had detected the surrounding 
galaxy, to distinguish their optical appearance from that 
of a star. This led to their designation as ‘quasistellar’ 
objects. Some of the first of these were also powerful radio 
sources, and the term was soon abbreviated to ‘quasar’, 
which now generally refers to all high-luminosity AGN 
(See QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: OVERVIEW). Their unique nature 
became more obvious when studying their spectra, in 
almost any wavelength region. 

These unique properties have now been found in ac- 
tive nuclei spanning an extraordinary range in luminos- 
ity!. There are only surprisingly subtle spectroscopic dif- 
ferences between a quasar with a luminosity of 10* erg s~ 
and what had previously been identified as a ‘Seyfert 
galaxy nucleus’ of luminosity 10” erg s~'. The evidence 
is overwhelming that these two astronomical categories 
must have a single common physical explanation. Thus 
today, hardly any distinction is made between ‘quasar’ 
and ‘Seyfert 1 nucleus’, as their main difference is (some- 
what arbitrarily) in their luminosity. It follows that this 
overview of AGN should be supplemented by reading the 
accompanying chapters on quasars in this Encyclopedia. 


1 The vast range of AGN luminosities, much larger than what is 
seen in stars for example, is one of their outstanding features. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Understanding The Central Engine in AGN 

There are several key ideas which are being used to 
organize and make sense of our large and growing 
observational information about AGN. 


Unified Models 

Since the earliest AGN studies, it was recognized that 
they can show strong observational differences in spite 
of many other similarities. Two characteristics seem to 
have a sufficiently bimodal distribution to justify using 
them to divide AGN into two pairs of classes: strong 
radio emission (which distinguishes radio-loud (RL) from 
radio-weak (RW) AGN) and broad permitted line emission 
(which distinguishes type 1 Seyfert nuclei from type 2). A 
more extensive discussion of these ideas is given in ACTIVE 
GALAXIES: UNIFIED MODEL and ACTIVE GALAXIES: VARIABILITY. 

The majority of quasars are only moderately stronger 
radio sources than normal galaxies. (They are sometimes 
referred to as radio-quiet (RQ) AGN, although strictly 
speaking they do emit some radio flux so that RW is a more 
accurate description.) An important minority of quasars 
are well known for the beams of high-energy particles they 
accelerate. The radio emission from these jets is nearly 
always bipolar—a key indicator that the central engine can 
have axial symmetry. In many models, this jet—lobe axis 
is the spin axis of the central massive black hole. In the 
most dramatic subsample of RLAGN, the ‘blazars’ (loosely 
named after the prototype object BL Lacertae), the highly 
polarized, violently variable, steep red continuum was 
identified as nonthermal synchrotron emission. Blazar 
is an informal term used to encompass the prototypical 
nonthermal BL Lacertae objects (with very weak emission 
lines) as well as the optically violently variable quasars. 
Interferometric maps showed that the core-dominated 
radio emission generally had a one-sided jet, which often 
appears to be expanding at apparent transverse speeds 
several times larger than c. The most extreme of these 
objects appear to emit a substantial fraction of their energy 
in the gamma rays, and possibly even up to TeV energies. 
All of these remarkable (and manifestly nonstellar) blazar 
properties were soon understood as the result of viewing a 
relativistic jet (of electrons and either protons or positrons), 
which is emerging from the active nucleus close to our line 
of sight. This nearly ‘pole-on’ viewing angle produces 
several relativistic effects such as Doppler boosting of 
the ‘beamed’ synchrotron emission and a compression 
of apparent timescales which accounts for ‘superluminal 
motion’ without violating special relativity. The one- 
sided nature of the innermost jets is usually attributed to 
‘Doppler favoritism’. If there is currently an outflow in the 
opposite direction (which is predicted by some theoretical 
models, but not yet confirmed), it is invisible because 
Doppler de-boosting makes it thousands of times fainter. 

An immediate consequence of the beaming explana- 
tion of core-dominated RL AGN is that more AGN with 
radio jets must be pointing away from Earth. These must 
be detectable by their isotropic emission (lines or extended 
radio lobes), as either lobe-dominated RLAGN, or perhaps 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


‘radiogalaxies’ (whose optical properties can be Sefyert 2s 
or even low-ionization emission line regions (LINERs)). 
The (unbeamed) emission lines may or may not be de- 
tectable but are harder to detect over the glare of the am- 
plified nonthermal jet continuum. 

These studies proved that the central engine in AGN 
(the RL ones, at least) have a strong bipolar symmetry 
which has been preserved over millions of years or more 
in the largest double-lobe radio sources. They also proved 
that the observational appearance of RL AGN can depend 
dramatically on our viewing angle. However, it is not 
yet certain how completely these same insights may be 
transferred to the majority of AGN, which are RW. 

Broad permitted emission lines are usually taken as 
one of the defining characteristics of AGN. They arise from 
high-density photoionized gas. Their high ionization state 
and large velocity range both indicate that they arise in a 
‘broad line region’ (BLR) relatively near the central engine. 
However, for every broad-emission-line AGN of a given 
luminosity (classified as a ‘Seyfert 1’), there is at least one 
galactic nucleus which might otherwise be classified as 
a Seyfert, but which lacks broad line emissions and is 
classified as a ‘Seyfert 2’. In the Seyfert 2s it is difficult or 
impossible to view the central engine, and its surrounding 
BLR, directly. In a minority of cases, strong evidence for 
the central engine is present, in the form of either a highly 
absorbed (Ny ~ 10% cm~*) hard-x-ray continuum source 
or broad Balmer emission line wings seen in the spectrum 
of linearly polarized light. 

Less direct evidence is the detection of fluorescent 
emission from the x-ray Ka line at 6.4 keV. In some Seyfert 
2s, the very large equivalent width of this line (about an 
order of magnitude larger than in unobscured Seyfert 1s) 
is interpreted as being powered by a nuclear hard-x-ray 
source, virtually none of which is visible along our direct 
line of sight to the nucleus. A similar argument has been 
made from UV spectroscopy: adding up all the ionizing 
photons inferred from the UV continuum seems to be 
inadequate to account for all the Seyfert emission line flux 
detected, and especially for the infrared continuum also 
associated with the active nucleus. Assuming that the 2— 
10 wm continuum in Seyfert 1s and 2s is AGN energy that 
has been re-radiated by dust grains (see ‘Reprocessing’ 
section below), even more unseen nonstellar power is 
implied in Seyfert 2s. This ‘energy deficit’ argues for a 
high-energy power source which is present but not directly 
observable. However, these arguments are not conclusive. 
The energy accounting has many large uncertainties, and 
there are other plausible explanations of the Ka emission 
line that do not require the existence of a buried AGN x-ray 
source. Although it is difficult to obtain the very sensitive 
observations required for these tests, many thorough 
observations have failed to reveal any direct evidence of 
nonstellar continuum from a central engine. The more 
extended indications which are seen in these Seyfert 2s— 
narrow emission lines and radio sources—could have been 
produced by an AGN which ‘turned off’ centuries ago. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This raises an empirical question of whether most 
Seyfert nuclei can turn on and off over intervals of 
centuries. Although none has been observed for that long’, 
very few complete Seyfert 2 < Seyfert 1 transitions have 
ever been seen, in decades of observing. Nonetheless, the 
unification assumption is that all of these Seyfert 2s harbor 
a currently active central engine, which is just extremely 
obscured. 

Even if unification is generally correct, it simply 
requires optically thick gas, with a very large associated 
dust extinction, between us and the nuclei of Seyfert 2 
galaxies. All we know is that this obscuring region must be 
large enough to cover up the broad emission line region, 
as viewed by a significant portion of the lines of sight to 
the central engine’. Similarly, dust grains must intercept 
a substantial portion of the central continuum and re- 
radiate it to produce the strong near- to mid-IR emission 
characteristic of both Seyfert 1 and 2 nuclei. 

A popular special version of unification proposes 
that this absorbing matter is strongly nonspherical, and 
is distributed in a fat torus (of characteristic diameter 
parsecs to tens of parsecs) which is co-axial with the central 
engine. In the fat torus model the absence of obscuring 
material above the poles of the torus allows photons 
from the nuclear central engine to scatter into a clear line 
of sight to the Earth. The result would be a scattered 
nuclear spectrum—broad emission lines and nonstellar 
continuum—which we observe only in polarized light. 
Since the torus is supposed to be aligned with the axis 
of the central engine, the polarization E vector should be 
parallel to the radio axis. The latter is difficult to measure 
but is approximately parallel to the polarization in some 
of the best-measured Seyfert 2s. Further weak evidence 
for a preferred ‘escape axis’ for ionizing AGN photons is 
the loose tendency for extended ionized emission lines in 
Seyfert 2s to come from bipolar ‘cones’. 

In many Seyfert 2s, however, there is evidence (e.g. 
from HST imaging) that much obscuration instead occurs 
in galactic dust lanes. These are observed to be hundreds 
of parsecs in extent and not related to the central engine at 
all, except that they happen to block our view of it. Itis still 
not clear how many, if any, Seyfert 1s and 2s really harbor 
complete fat tori wrapped around their central engines. 


Thermal emission from an accretion flow 

The enormous energy outputs from very small volumes 
that are observed in luminous quasars are believed to 
be generated by black hole accretion. To avoid greatly 
exceeding the Eddington limit, the accreting black holes 
must have masses of several 10°10? Suns. However, 
the conversion of the gravitational potential energy of the 
inflowing matter into radiation is not at all efficient if there 
is a purely radial infall. Also, general considerations of 


? However, NGC 1068 = Messier 71 might, in a bright Seyfert 1 
state, have been marginally visible to the naked eye. 

3 Since the space density of Seyfert 2s is somewhat higher than 
that of Seyfert 1s, this covering fraction of obscuration must be 
larger than 50% 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the angular momentum of gas deep in a galactic nucleus 
strongly suggest that the accretion flow must end up 
rotating rapidly as it nears the black hole. Then it can 
only accrete and power the AGN if it experiences friction. 
Although not yet well understood, this crucial process 
transfers angular momentum outward, allowing the black 
hole to be fueled. This accretion is accompanied by a large 
release of radiative energy, which powers the AGN. The 
fact that angular momentum is important in the accretion 
flow is supported by the observation that the central 
engine is bipolar. Its symmetry axis is naturally identified 
with the spin axis of the accretion flow and is the direction 
of the most likely outflows. There is also observational 
evidence that we observe directly the radiation emitted 
thermally from this accretion flow, as it spirals into the 
black hole. 

One of the defining characteristics of the spectrum of 
the central AGN continuum source is a broad hump which 
appears to peak somewhere in the UV. This inflection, 
referred to as the ‘ultraviolet excess’ or ‘big blue bump’, 
often contains the largest portion of the total AGN 
luminosity. 

The main arguments in favor of a thermal origin of 
this blue—UV continuum are as follows. 


@ Its spectral shape. The broad peak in the UV can be fitted 
by asum of thermally emitting regions spanning a range 
of temperatures, centered on ~30000 K. In a simple 
optically thick accretion disk, such as would be expected 
for most luminous AGN, the thermal temperature of the 
accretion flow is proportional tor~*/*. With the inclusion 
of relativistic corrections, the sum of thermal emission 
from rings of varying radii adds up to a spectrum with 
a broad peak which is flat in flux density units (F, = 
constant) and has a high-frequency turn-over. Models 
which treat the disk as a sum of blackbodies provide 
remarkably good fits to all the optical-UV spectral 
energy distributions observed in AGN. 


@ Its peak frequency. The effective temperature in an 
accretion flow is approximately determined by the 
balance between the gravitational potential energy 
released as a result of viscous accretion and the radiation 
emitted*. In a thin disk this condition is Taccretion = 
(3G MyyM /8xr3)'/4 = (30 000 K) (Mg)'/4(L/Leaaington)/”. 
The luminosities and peak frequencies observed in the 
continuum spectra of Seyfert 1 nuclei and quasars are 
consistent with the equilibrium temperatures predicted 
for disk accretion. The required respective mass infall 
rates are ~ several per cent and ~ tens of per cent of the 
Eddington limit for the inferred black hole masses’. 


Even for the highest plausible values of viscosity 
(corresponding to the most rapid inflow), the accretion 


4 In fact the viscous torques transport some of this potential 
energy outward, but most of it should eventually emerge as 
photons. 

5 Above the Eddington accretion rate, the disk is expected to 
thicken somewhat, but its overall observational properties may 
not change very greatly. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


flow is still expected to be very opaque to electron 
scattering and is probably effectively optically thick 
(Tetfective = (Testi)? > 1). The best observational 
evidence for this is the high inferred emissivity of the 
gas emitting the UV continuum. It is true that optically 
thin thermal models can also fit the observed optical— 
UV continuum. The characteristic temperatures of the 
bremstrahlung emission would have to be 100000 K or 
higher, because free-free emission peaks at around vinin = 
kT /h, rather than the higher value for a Planck function: 
Vthick = 3kT /h. EUV emission lines that might be expected 
from such a luminous plasma have not yet been seen. 
The most serious difficulty with the free-free hypothesis is 
explaining how the very large continuum luminosity of a 
quasar is emitted from a small area. For the UV brightness 
of a luminous quasar such as 3C 273 to vary on timescales 
of months requires a small thermally emitting region with 
high emissivity, so high, in fact, that the emitter must have 
an optical depth exceeding 1. At this point the emitted 
spectrum will resemble optically thick emission more than 
an optically thin L, « exp(—hv/kT) spectrum. 

The principal limitations or incompletenesses of the 
thin accretion disk model are the weakness of any observed 
spectral feature at the Lyman limit, the low amount 
of linear polarization, and multiwavelength monitoring 
evidence for reprocessing, discussed in the next section. 
The spectrum emerging from an accretion disk at a given 
radius depends on the vertical structure of the disk 
‘atmosphere’. A ring of an accretion disk differs radically 
from the atmosphere of any star, but it has recently become 
computationally feasible to make realisticnon-LTE models 
of the emergent spectrum. Many UV-emitting rings of 
the disk have low enough temperatures that they should 
still contain some fraction of neutral hydrogen. This 
should lead to a sharp increase in the bound-free opacity 
across the Lyman edge. Some models predict that this 
will lead to a spectral jump, with the flux above the 
Lyman limit either higher or lower than the flux below 
it. These discontinuities are not in general observed. 
Opacity in the accretion disk is probably dominated by 
electron scattering. A pure electron scattering atmosphere 
of infinite optical depth viewed at an average inclination 
of cosi = 0.5 should emit a thermal continuum which is 
linearly polarized by almost 3%. The position angle of the 
electric vector should be parallel to the projected major axis 
of the disk—perpendicular to the disk spin axis. However, 
observations show that most AGN polarizations are under 
0.5% in the UV®. Also, in those cases where a radio ‘axis’ 
can be defined, it is not generally perpendicular to the E 
vector of the polarized flux. The greatest uncertainties 
in this test are the assumptions that the disk surface is 
perfectly flat and that magnetic fields in the disk are small 
enough to avoid causing appreciable Faraday rotation. 

One deficiency of the simple thin accretion disk 
models that may be related to these observational conflicts 


& However, the linear polarization appears, mysteriously, to 
increase dramatically, at rest wavelengths shorter than ~800 A. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is the likely presence of a hot optically thin corona above 
the photosphere of the disk surface. The fast electrons in 
this low-density gas can Comptonize the thermal photons 
escaping from the dense disk, modifying their spectrum 
and polarization. 


Reprocessing 

In the simplest accretion disk models, all of the thermal 
energy emitted by the disk was derived directly from 
gravitational potential energy, which is transported 
outwards by viscous torques. We know, however, that 
AGN also emit up to 10% or 20% of their luminosity at x- 
ray frequencies. These photon energies are too high to be 
readily explained by the thermal accretion disk paradigm, 
and their flux near the center is very high. Depending on 
the geometry, some of these x-rays could be re-absorbed 
by the optically thick accreting gas before they manage to 
escape. Some absorption of x-rays is probably required to 
explain the ‘Compton reflection’ hump observed around 
10-30 keV (see discussion in ACTIVE GALAXIES: OBSERVATIONS). 
Reprocessing of x-rays is presumed to be the origin of the 
strong Fe Ka emission line seen in many AGN. 

Reprocessing of photons at radii much larger than 
where they originated tends to degrade the energies of 
the photons that escape. In the simplest case, where the 
equilibrium blackbody temperature of the reprocessing 
matter drops as Tequy « L'/4r-'? (where L is the 
luminosity of the central point source), the resulting 
thermal continuum spectrum tends to steepen to a slope 
of L, « v-!. Some reprocessing must occur; the main 
questions are: where and how much? 

The first question is easy to answer assuming the 
absorbed photons are thermalized: the radius of the 
reprocessing determines Toqui of the emerging radiation, 
which should peak somewhere around a few hv/kTogui- 
The second question can be answered if we can measure 
the fraction of the total amount of energy which has been 
absorbed. If we assume that the reprocessing matter (gas, 
and dust if Tegui is under 1000 K) is opaque to incoming 
high-energy photons, then the energy budget can tell us 
its total sky covering fraction, i.e. the fraction of the sky 
as seen by the central continuum ‘point source’ which 
is covered by absorbers. By definition, the reprocessed 
luminosity cannot exceed the luminosity of the original 
high-energy continuum source in the center. It is actually 
unlikely that their luminosities would even be equal, 
because that would imply that 100% of the lines of sight 
to the center are blocked, in which case we should not be 
able to see it directly at all. 

The best observational proof of reprocessing is to 
show that time variability in the primary waveband is then 
duplicated by the same flux changes at the reprocessed 
wavelength, except with a lag. The delay time in this 
‘reverberation’ should equal the amount of time it takes 
light to travel across a region whose radius is given by 
the value of Tequii expected for the wavelength of the 
reprocessed continuum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The best evidence for reprocessing is for the near- 
infrared continuum, which caries a substantial fraction 
(20% or more) of the total energy budget of most AGN. 
In several cases, simultaneous monitoring of the near- 
infrared and optical or UV continua has shown the 
expected correlated brightening and fading. The delay 
of the infrared light curve with respect to the light curve 
at shorter wavelengths is consistent with thermal re- 
emission by hot dust grains within a light year (or even 
light month) of the central powerhouse. The response 
is mostly from the hottest grains, surviving at just below 
their sublimation temperature of around 1000-1500 K. The 
distance from the central engine at which dust equilibrates 
to this temperature is proportional to the square root of the 
central luminosity, explaining the range of expected dust 
reverberation radii. 

Less decisive evidence suggests that some of the 
optical continuum, and possibly even the UV continuum, 
in some Seyfert 1 nuclei, may have a measurable 
contribution from reprocessed x-rays. This is in several 
well-sampled x-ray and optical-UV light curves where 
a correlation and lag were detected. The lags are so 
small that they imply that the influence of the high-energy 
photons propagates outward to the low-energy emitting 
region at very high speed. The lags are consistent with 
this speed being c, as it should be if the influence is 
carried by photons which are then reprocessed. However, 
the variability of the x-rays (in other galaxies, as well 
as in some of these Seyfert 1s at other epochs) is often 
not correlated with changes at other wavelengths, casting 
doubt on whether much of the optical-UV light in most 
AGN is actually reprocessed from the x-rays. 


Influence of host galaxies 

Galaxies with Seyfert nuclei account for only a fraction 
of all galaxies. This estimation is complicated by the 
difficulty of identifying AGN with very low nonstellar 
luminosities. For example, many galaxies have weak 
emission line spectra with line ratios intermediate between 
those of H II regions and Seyfert nuclei, which are referred 
to as ‘LINER’ galaxies. Although these LINER spectra can 
be explained by fast shocks, they might still be included 
as having active nuclei (and the case is getting stronger 
for at least some of the members of this heterogeneous 
class). If so, then it is even possible that most galaxies are 
in some sense ‘active’. The most definitive evidence of 
a truly nonstellar nucleus is probably a compact central 
source of hard x-rays, preferably variable. However, 
this would be obscured by gas with a column density of 
10% cm~, which is optically thick to Thomson electron 
scattering of hard x-rays. It may not be entirely surprising 
that, outside of the nucleus, the ‘host galaxies’ themselves 
hardly appear different from galaxies lacking obvious 
AGN. Avery powerful AGN can have some limited effects 
on the interstellar medium of its galaxy, such as ionizing 
it, shocking and compressing it, and in some special cases 
even inducing stars to form, near an outflowing jet for 
example. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A deeper mystery is what properties of the galaxy 
cause the AGN in the first place. The two most obvious 
ones are the origin of a massive black hole and the ability 
to provide enough fuel close into the nucleus to ‘feed’ it. 
The formation of a massive black hole probably requires 
the dynamical collapse of a dense star cluster in the dense 
center of a galaxy. As the first dense structures to come 
together in the young universe are thought to be proto- 
galactic bulges, there is some weak theoretical motivation 
for associating massive black holes with modern-day 
bulges. The dramatically higher (by orders of magnitude) 
proper space density of luminous AGN in the early 
universe requires that many seemingly ‘normal’ galaxies 
today must once have harbored an AGN central engine. 
If it was a black hole, it should still be present, and may 
be detectable by its gravitational acceleration of stars and 
gas within a few hundred parsecs. (The gravity of a black 
hole of mass M,, dominates out to a radius of roughly 
G My, /o07 where o is the characteristic velocity dispersion 
in the stellar system.) This region is small enough that 
it can only be resolved optically in the nearest galaxies 
with the best spectrographs (Hubble Space Telescope, 
or ground-based telescopes with excellent seeing). The 
kinematic search for nearby massive black holes (using 
Doppler spectroscopy to measure orbital velocities around 
the nucleus) is still in its early phases, with less than a few 
dozen detections (see also SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES IN AGN). 
These provide a tentative suggestion that the central black 
hole mass might correlate linearly with the total galactic 
bulge mass, with a normalization constant of about half of 
a per cent. However, this claimed correlation may have 
enormous scatter or may not even prove significant when 
an unbiased sample of galaxies is studied intensively and 
upper limits to M), are all included. 

In the near future, the set of galaxies with reliable 
central black hole masses has unfortunately very little 
intersection with the set of active nuclei for which mass 
estimates can be attempted. This is because the latter 
is measured from nonstellar emission, while the former 
comes from nonactive emission. If one of these dominates 
and is easily studied, the other will not be well measured. 
Nonetheless, the current evidence on black holes, mostly 
in nonactive galaxies, suggests that the key potential 
ingredient for the central engine—the massive black 
hole—may be present in many or even most galaxies. The 
fact that most of them today are not Seyferts must then be 
attributable to a lack of fuel. 

Even assuming the most efficient known models, 
black hole accretion disks, the energetics of the most 
powerful quasars require tens of solar masses per year 
to be supplied to the central parsec of the galaxy. To 
reach such a small radius, the fuel—probably gas—must 
lose essentially all of its orbital angular momentum. On 
theoretical grounds, the required torques may be provided 
by distortions and asymmetries in the gravitational 
potential of the host galaxy, such as bars (see GALAXIES: 
CLASSIFICATION; FORMATION)’ . 


7 Two controversial observational claims may support applying 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Unfortunately, it has been difficult to show much 
association between the presence of close companions and 
an active nucleus. Also there is no correlation between 
bars and Seyfert activity. One possibility is that bars 
and/or encounters only enhance nuclear activity with a 
great delay (of perhaps a billion years), since it could 
take that many orbits for the gas to eventually fall down 
into the nucleus. One possible indication of this is the 
finding that Seyfert galaxies are more likely to show rings, 
which may be long-lived relics of bars that have already 
dissipated. A possible connection between Seyfert activity 
and earlier star-formation activity is the observation that 
the disks of Seyfert host galaxies tend to have higher 
surface brightnesses than those of non-Seyfert galaxies. 


Future prospects 

Understanding AGN is a seriously data-limited problem. 
Its typical variability proves that the central engine is not 
in a steady state. We can turn this into an asset in trying to 
understand it, but only if we can obtain extensive, nearly 
continuous time histories of the emission from individual 
AGN. Beyond limited time sampling, the two most serious 
observational limitations have been the following. 


e Inadequate observations of many of the wavelength regions 
where AGN emit. AGN are the most broad-band emitters 
in the universe, and many of the wavelengths at which 
they emit are blocked by the Earth’s atmosphere, or more 
fundamentally by H I absorption in the intergalactic 
medium (shortward of a rest wavelength of 912 A). 


@ Inadequate spatial resolution. |The largest relevant 
scales for most of the interesting and extreme AGN 
phenomena are of order 10 pc or even less. 


Fortunately both of these limitations are rapidly 
easing with the advent of new detectors and observatories. 
The critical AGN observations during the next decade 
will benefit from new and planned space observatories 
and new ground-based techniques such as interferometry. 
Also, the ultimate in spatial resolution is becoming 
available by using intensive monitoring to detect light- 
travel delays, as in reverberation mapping. 


Matthew Malkan 


this idea to star formation. One is that spiral galaxies with bars 
are more likely to have higher rates of recent star formation than 
unbarred spirals. Another is that close galaxy encounters, which 
also apply ann = 2 mode perturbation to the galactic potential, 
are also associated with elevated rates of star formation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Unified Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Galaxies: Unified Model 


Objects known as ‘ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI’ (AGN) can 
be grouped into a wide variety of phenomenological 
subclasses that have many overlapping or similar 
properties. The first known ‘active galaxies’ were the 
high-surface-brightness spiral galaxies identified by Carl 
Seyfert in 1943. Almost two decades later, the first radio 
surveys of the sky led to the identification of other objects 
(radio galaxies, such as Centaurus A, and quasars, such as 
3C 48) that we now also think of as active galaxies, though 
the similarities between the radio sources and Seyfert’s 
spirals were not obvious at the time of discovery. Early 
failure to recognize the underlying similarities of these 
objects was largely because the different identification 
techniques used isolated extreme members of the active- 
galaxy population: radio-source identifications tended 
to yield relatively high-luminosity, high-redshift quasars 
(short for ‘quasistellar radio sources’), often members of 
the ‘blazar’ class (see BLLACERTAE OBJECTS), in which beamed 
emission from a relativistic jet dominates most of the 
observed spectrum. On the other hand, identification of 
bright galactic cores led to identification of the spatially 
common, relatively low-luminosity radio-quiet Seyfert 
nuclei (see ACTIVE GALAXIES: OBSERVATIONS). 

It was only in the late 1960s and 1970s that optical, 
color-based detection criteria (either multiple-color broad- 
band photometry or low-dispersion spectroscopy) began 
to yield large enough samples of both high- and low- 
luminosity AGN that the fundamental similarities began 
to become clear. Indeed, color-based selection of AGN 
led to the discovery that most high-luminosity AGN are 
not of the ‘radio-loud’ quasar variety, but are ‘radio-quiet’ 
sources that came to be known as ‘QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS’ 
(QSOs). Despite the emerging similarities between Seyfert 
galaxies and QSOs, important differences among types of 
AGN were also identified, leading to a broad and fairly 
complex AGN taxonomy (see ACTIVE GALAXIES: OVERVIEW). 

Comparison of various types of AGN should help us 
understand which phenomena are fundamental to nuclear 
activity and which are somehow incidental or secondary. 
In some cases, as we will see below, differences among 
various types can be used to infer source structure on 
scales too small to resolve directly. Some of the important 
questions that arise in this context include the following. 
Why are only ~10% of active galaxies radio-loud? Why 
are broad emission lines weak or absent in the UV-optical 
spectra of BL Lac objects? Why do some Seyfert galaxies 
have no broad emission lines? 


Unification 

Principles 

In attempting to explain the differences among various 
classes of AGN, our goal is to explain the widest variety 
of phenomena using the simplest model that is consistent 
with the data. A simple hypothesis to explain much 
of AGN phenomenology is that the differences among 
various types of AGN arise from orientation dependence; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


simply put, we try to ‘unify’ various AGN types in 
terms of a single basic source structure whose appearance 
to the observer depends strongly on viewing angle. 
There is indeed abundant direct evidence that AGN have 
axisymmetric structure and thus radiate anisotropically; 
the observable properties of a particular source will thus 
depend on the location of the observer. It is therefore 
postulated in such ‘AGN unification’ schemes that the 
different appearance of one class compared with a second 
is the result of viewing the same type of object at a different 
angle. Properties that may depend on viewing angle and 
may so contribute to intrinsic anisotropy in these sources 
include absorption by dust or optically thick gas in any 
non-spherically symmetric distribution and relativistic 
motion which leads to Doppler boosting of the emission 
which peaks in the direction of this motion. Unification 
schemes incorporating one or both of these intrinsic source 
properties seek to explain at least part of the wide diversity 
we observe in AGN in terms of these differences in viewing 
angle. There are several unification schemes seeking to 
unify two or more classes of AGN that have met with some 
degree of success; several of these are outlined in table 1 
and will be described below. 


Table 1. Possible simple unifications. 


Orientation 
Radio 
properties Face on Edge on 
Radio quiet Seyfert 1 Seyfert 2 
QSO ULIRG? 
Radioloud BLRG NLRG 
Core dominated Lobe dominated 
BL Lac FRI 


Quasar-OVV FRI 


An obvious key element in any unification scheme is 
proof of its plausibility. If we hypothesize, for example, 
that some specific type of AGN (say, BL Lacertae objects) 
are members of some particular broad class or ‘parent 
population’ (say, Fanaroff—Riley class I radio sources’), 
then the space density of the subclass must be consistent 
with the space density of the parent population times 
the probability of observing a member of the parent 
population at a suitable orientation. Determining the 
space density of the parent population is often a difficult 
task in itself and must rely on source identifications based 
on some property which is supposed to be isotropic. Hard 
x-ray emission, for example, is thought to be emitted 
approximately isotropically by non-blazar AGN, and in 
principle hard x-ray emission may be the best way to 


1 Fanaroff and Riley showed that extended radio sources can 
be divided into two luminosity classes that have different 
morphologies. Class I (FR I) are less luminous sources, 
Ly (1.4 GHz) S 10° erg s-! Hz!, that are brightest in the center 
with decreasing surface brightness towards the edges. Class II 
(FR II) sources are the more luminous sources, which are limb- 
brightened or have non-central regions of enhanced emission. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Unified Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


find a homogeneous sample of AGN. Indeed hard x-rays 
are probably the sine qua non of an active nucleus. In 
practice, however, relatively low hard x-ray sensitivities 
have limited detection of AGN to those that are relatively 
nearby and thus apparently bright. For radio sources 
(which includes blazars), radiation from the optically thin 
extended lobes is assumed to be emitted isotropically 
and in principle can be used to identify objects with 
intrinsically similar luminosities. 


The basic model 

The current AGN paradigm is built around an axisym- 
metric central engine that consists of an accretion disk 
surrounding a supermassive (210°Mj) black hole (see su- 
PERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES IN AGN). The UV-optical continuum 
emission is supposed to arise primarily in the accretion 
disk. Bi-directional relativistic jets emerge from this sys- 
tem along the disk axis, emitting Doppler-boosted radia- 
tion via synchrotron and inverse Compton mechanisms. 
Both the jets and the accretion disk structure are thought 
to contribute to the x-ray emission. The broad emission 
lines (whose width can be characterized in terms of the full 
width at half-maximum, FWHM ~ 1500-10000 km s+) 
that are so prominent in the UV-optical spectra of AGN 
are produced in relatively dense (electron densities n. ~ 
10"! cm~%) gas clouds at distances from the black hole of 
several hundred to several thousand gravitational radii 
(Rerav = GM/ c*, where M is the mass of the central black 
hole, G is the gravitational constant, and c is the speed of 
light). On parsec scales, this entire system is embedded in 
a dusty torus that is opaque over most of the electromag- 
netic spectrum; this torus plays a key role in AGN unifica- 
tion models since it shields both the accretion disk, broad- 
line region, and inner jet structure from the direct view of 
external observers in the torus plane. The torus absorbs 
radiation from the central source and re-emits this energy 
in the infrared. Narrow emission lines (FWHM < 300- 
800 km s~') arise in low-density clouds at the torus scale 
and beyond, mostly driven by radiation from the central 
source, and therefore largely constrained to lie along the 
system axis. 


AGN unification schemes 

Seyfert types 

Probably the best known unification scheme is that 
between the two types of SEYFERT GALAXIES. In the mid-1970s, 
Khachikian and Weedman found that Seyfert galaxies fell 
into two spectroscopic classes, those with both narrow and 
broad emission lines (type 1 or Sy1) and those with narrow 
lines only (type 2 or Sy2). The narrow-line spectra of types 
1 and 2 are statistically indistinguishable from one another, 
so Sy2s seem to be Sy1s without the broad lines. Moreover, 
Sy2s are typically less luminous than Syls by about 1 
magnitude in the optical part of the spectrum. This led to 
unification hypotheses in which Sy2s are intrinsically Sy1s 
whose continuum and broad-line emission is attenuated in 
the direction of the observer. While simple and attractive, 
this hypothesis had two major difficulties: first, why is the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


AGN continuum source extinguished by only a factor of 
a few, but the broad lines by an apparently larger factor? 
Second, the shape of the Sy2 continuum does not look like 
a dust-attenuated Syl AGN continuum, i.e. Sy2 continua 
do not appear to be highly reddened by passage through 
a medium in which the absorption or scattering cross- 
section decreases with increasing wavelength. 

A breakthrough occurred in the early 1980s when 
Antonucci and Miller found that the polarization spectra 
of some Sy2 galaxies such as NGC 1068 (see the articles 
ON NGC 1068 and POLARIZATION IN ACTIVE GALAXIES) contained 
broad emission lines like those seen in Syl spectra. At 
least some Sy2 galaxies contain broad emission lines, but 
with their strength greatly reduced such that they are 
dominated by the continuum and narrow lines except 
when viewed in polarized light. Since the most common 
cause of polarization is scattering of light by either dust 
or electrons, this observation led to an interpretation 
of Sy2 galaxies as edge-on Syl galaxies where optically 
thick material in a flattened, disk-like geometry obscures 
our direct view of the broad emission-line region, as 
described above and illustrated in figure 1. The broad 
lines are visible in polarized light when they are scattered 
into our line of sight by dust or electrons above and/or 
below this material. In the case of NGC1068, the 
AGN continuum light is ~16% polarized, independent 
of wavelength through the UV-optical spectrum, which 
argues that the scattering mechanism is electrons rather 
than dust, since the Thomson scattering cross-section is 
wavelength independent while dust scattering is strongly 
wavelength dependent. In other polarized Sy2s, however, 
there is evidence that dust scattering also plays a role. 
The polarization spectra of these Sy2s also show that 
the emission lines are more strongly polarized than the 
continuum. There is apparently a second unpolarized 
component to the featureless AGN continuum that 
constitutes some 60-90% of the total continuum and has 
approximately the same spectral shape as the polarized 
component. The origin of the unpolarized component is 
unclear, although it may arise from free-free emission in 
the scattering region itself. In any case, the existence of 
this component explains why the non-stellar continuum 
in Sy2s is not as thoroughly suppressed as the broad lines. 

Predictions of the relative numbers of each class 
provide an important test but are very sensitive to 
assumptions such as the opening angle of the torus 
and the angular dependence of the luminosity. Within 
these limitations the relative numbers are consistent with 
expectations and indicate torus semi-opening angles of 
~60°. As more Sy2 galaxies and lower-luminosity AGN, 
such as LINERs (low-ionization nuclei emission region 
galaxies), are observed in polarized light, more edge-on 
Syl galaxies are discovered. It is not yet clear, however, 
whether all AGN, or even all Seyfert galaxies, fit into 
this scheme. Current studies show a detection rate for 
polarized broad lines in Sy2 galaxies of ~50%, implying 
that many Sy2 galaxies either do not possess a scattering 
region or that they have no broad-line region. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Unified Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ionization zone 
boundary 


Gas & dust torus 


NLR clouds 
(50-100 pc) 


Seyfert 2 


ENLRG 
clouds 
(kpc) /) 


Figure 1. The conceptual scheme for unification of Sy1 and Sy2 
galaxies (not to scale) with an optically thick torus of cool 
material surrounding the continuum source (central circle) and 
the broad emission-line region (BLR, small ‘clouds’ surrounding 
continuum source). From Peterson (1997), originally from 

R W Pogge. 


Seyfert 1 


X-ray observations of AGN also generally support 
this unification picture. The x-ray luminosities of Sy2 
galaxies are lower than those of Sy1 galaxies. Moreover, 
Sy2 galaxies have significantly larger amounts of soft x- 
ray absorption, corresponding to equivalent columns of 
neutral hydrogen, Ny * 107-73 cm~?, in comparison with 
Ny © 10°°?! cm for Syl galaxies. This is consistent 
with our line of sight through the AGN being through an 
optically thick torus of cold material. 

A similar unification scheme probably explains the 
difference between ‘broad-line radio galaxies’ (BLRGs), 
which might be described to first-order accuracy as radio- 
loud Sy1, and ‘narrow-line radio galaxies’ (NLRGs), which 
have Sy2-like optical spectra. A schematic of the geometry 
to unify the strong-lined radio galaxies is shown in figure 2. 

A remaining puzzle is the apparent lack of an 
equivalent bifurcation in the higher-luminosity QSOs; 
there is no generally accepted class of ‘QSO 2s’ which 
would correspond to the low-luminosity Sy2 galaxies. The 
most likely candidates for dust-obscured QSOs are near 
IR-selected AGN, some of which do show broad lines in 
polarized light, or the cooler, ultraluminous IR galaxies 
(ULIRGs) whose emission may be predominantly due to 
reprocessing by cool dust. At the present time, it is clear 
that some ULIRGs harbor unseen AGN, but others are 
powered by starbursts, not by bone fide AGN. 


Core- and lobe-dominated quasars and radio galaxies 


As noted earlier, only about 10% of AGN are strong radio 
sources. Within this subset, there is a wide range of radio 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Viewing angle 
relative to 
the jet axis 


Relativistic jet 


ae 


Nucleus 


To the radio hotspot 


Figure 2. A scheme for unification of strong-line (BLRG, NLRG 
and quasars (QSR)) radio sources. Compare with figure 1 
(rotated through 90°). Here the BLR is shown as a shaded shell 
around the continuum source (circular spot). From Kembhavi 
and Narlikar (1999), originally from R Athreya. 


morphological structures (see also RADIO EMISSION FROM 
BINARY STARS) from classical double-radio sources on scales 
as large as megaparsecs to small, core-dominated sources 
with little or no extended structure. The core-dominated 
sources commonly show superluminal motion indicating 
relativistic outflow velocities close to our line of sight (see 
SUPERLUMINAL MOTION). Classical double sources often have 
one-sided, highly collimated jet structures extending from 
their compact core towards one of the extended lobes. 
The one-sided nature of the jets can be understood in a 
relativistic scenario whereby an approaching jet and an 
oppositely directed receding jet are respectively Doppler 
boosted and dimmed by relativistic effects. Thus both 
of these properties are consistent with relativistic jets 
originating in the core of a radio source and feeding 
the outer lobes. This suggests that the main variable 
governing the observed morphology of a radio AGN is its 
orientation to our line of sight. In core-dominated sources 
we are looking down the relativistic jet, while in double 
sources the jet is projected onto the plane of the sky. 

A prime test of this unification scheme is to compare 
the relative numbers of core- and lobe-dominated sources 
and the distribution of projected sizes for radio AGN with 
the model predictions. The jet is highly collimated so that 
the main uncertainty is the amount of boosting due to 
the relativistic motion in the jet, determined by the bulk 
Lorentz factor y = (1 — V?/c?)~/?, where V is the outflow 
velocity and c the velocity of light. It is thus difficult 
to match core- and lobe-dominated objects in intrinsic 
luminosity and so ensure that relativistic beaming effects 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Unified Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are not a factor in any comparative studies. In general, 
these studies show that there are too many core-dominated 
sources compared with the lobe-dominated ones and that 
the former are too large when de-projected based on the 
observed Lorentz factor. There is also a lack of two-sided 
jets, ie. sources aligned with the plane of the sky. Many of 
these inconsistencies can be solved if the highly luminous 
FR II radio galaxies (BLRGs and NLRGs) are included in 
the unification. In this case, the lobe-dominated, radio- 
loud QSOs are viewed at an angle intermediate between 
those of the radio galaxies, and the QSOs and the larger size 
of the radio galaxies matches that of the de-projected core- 
dominated sources. However this solution introduces a 
new problem, namely that the narrow [O III] 4A 4959, 5007 
line emission is significantly (by a factor of 4-10) weaker 
in radio galaxies than in quasars, which requires that 
these lines also be emitted anisotropically for unification 
to work. The similar strength of the lower ionization [O II] 
i 3727 line in the two classes supports this scenario since 
it originates at larger distances from the AGN core and so 
is expected to be emitted more isotropically. 

Within the context of this orientation picture, the 
inclination of a radio source is related to the ratio of core 
to lobe luminosity, largely as a result of the relativistic 
boosting of the core luminosity. This parameter, known 
as core dominance R, can then be used to study the 
dependence of other parameters on inclination. For 
example the widths of the broad Hf and C IV emission 
lines indicate that face-on (core-dominated) objects tend 
to have relatively narrow broad lines (FWHM ~ 1000- 
5000 km s~! while edge-on (lobe-dominated) have a wider 
range of line width (FWHM *% 1000-10000 km s~'). This 
result suggests that the orientations of the broad emission- 
line region and the obscuring torus are similar. 


Blazars and radio sources 

With the recognition that blazar emission originates in 
relativistic jets towards the observer, radio galaxies with 
jets in the plane of the sky presented themselves as 
candidates for ‘misaligned’ blazars. Blazars themselves 
fall into two distinct categories, ‘BL Lacs’ and ‘optically 
violent variables’ (OVVs), and these seem to be drawn 
from different parent distributions of radio galaxies. The 
primary distinction between OVVs and BL Lacs is that 
OVVs have strong UV and optical emission lines so their 
UV-optical spectra resemble those of non-beamed AGN, 
whereas in BL Lacs other spectral features are swamped 
by the emission from the jet. OVVs also have higher 
luminosities and higher inferred Lorentz factors than BL 
Lacs. 

It is possible to make a fairly convincing argument 
that BL Lacs reside in FR I radio galaxies. By 
disregarding the spatially unresolved blazar core emission 
and considering only the luminosity of the ‘extended’ 
radio source (presumably the ‘lobes’ seen along their axis), 
it is found that FR I galaxies and BL Lacs have comparable 
radio luminosity, supporting the notion that they are 
drawn froma single population. The luminosity functions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and space densities are also consistent with unification 
of these two types of object. It should be mentioned 
at least in passing that BL Lacs themselves have been 
sometimes divided into radio-selected and x-ray-selected 
subcategories, and on average sources in these categories 
tend to have spectral energy distributions that peak, not 
surprisingly, at low and high frequencies, respectively. 
Recent work suggests that these are not, in fact, distinct 
classes, but rather represent the extremes of a continuous 
distribution in peak wavelength for the entire class of BL 
Lacs. 

The more luminous FR II radio galaxies afford a 
plausible parent population for OVVs. Compared with 
the FR I-BL Lac unification scheme, this is more difficult 
to demonstrate, at least in part because the FR II population 
is relatively less homogeneous. 


‘Grand unification’: radio-loud and radio-quiet 
AGN 

One of the longest-standing questions in AGN astro- 
physics is why, despite being optically similar, a small mi- 
nority (S10%) of AGN are radio loud while the remainder 
are radio quiet? Any unification scheme that can explain 
the difference between these two major classes of AGN 
would go a long way towards explaining the AGN phe- 
nomenon in general, and is therefore sometimes referred 
to as ‘grand unification’. There is a clear dichotomy be- 
tween the radio-loud and radio-quiet sources; for a given 
IR through soft x-ray luminosity, the radio-loud AGNs are 
2-3 orders of magnitude more luminous in the radio than 
the radio-quiet objects. There are very few objects of in- 
termediate radio luminosity so the distribution of radio 
power relative to power at shorter wavelengths is clearly 
bimodal. In other words, the evidence clearly points to 
two distinct AGN populations defined by relative radio 
luminosity. 

An early suggestion advanced by Scheuer and 
Readhead was that the radio-loud and radio-quiet objects 
constitute a single population in which the radio-louds 
represent the sources with axes oriented towards the 
observer. This failed, however, to account for the lack of 
extended radio emission in the radio quiets. 

Radio-quiet and radio-loud AGN differ in other 
respects. Radio-loud AGN are, on average, about a factor 
of 3 brighter in the mid-energy x-rays (0.2-3.5 keV) with 
somewhat flatter spectral slopes (i.e. relatively more high- 
energy photons). This is thought to be due to the presence 
of beamed X-ray emission related to the radio-emitting jet 
and provides evidence for the unification of core- and lobe- 
dominated radio-loud AGN discussed above. However, 
the difference in x-ray spectral slope would be hard to 
account for ina grand unification scenario. 

The emission-line spectra of the two types of object 
also show differences, at least in a statistical sense (e.g. 
stronger optical Fe II blends, weaker narrow lines and 
narrower broad lines in the radio-quiet objects). 

Until relatively recently it was believed that broad 
relatively blueshifted absorption-line features that are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxies: Unified Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


indicative of mass outflows are only found in radio-quiet 
AGN; it is now clear that these also occur in radio-loud 
AGN, although at the present time it appears that the 
flows in radio-loud objects have relatively lower terminal 
velocities. The outflowing material responsible for the 
absorption is generally thought to be accelerated away 
from the surface of the torus and so expected to be present 
at certain orientations in both radio-loud and radio-quiet 
AGN. 

No satisfactory explanation for the differences 
between radio-loud and radio-quiet sources has yet 
emerged. Although hard to understand, it was for a 
long time thought that the nature of the host galaxy 
determined the radio class with radio-quiet AGN in 
spiral hosts and radio-loud AGN in ellipticals. However, 
recent observations with the Hubble Space Telescope have 
shown that at high luminosity nearly all AGN lie in 
elliptical galaxies. It is now widely suspected that the 
angular momentum of the central black hole might be the 
determining factor, since the orbital motions of charged 
particles around the black hole might determine whether 
or not electromagnetic effects will be sufficiently powerful 
to generate and collimate jets. 


Bibliography 

Antonucci R 1993 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 31 473 

Goodrich R W 1997 Emission Lines in Active Galaxies: New 
Methods and Techniques (Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific Conference Series vol 113) ed B M Peterson, F-Z 
Cheng and AS Wilson, pp 445-52 

Kembhavi A K and Narlikar J V 1999 Quasars and 
Active Galactic Nuclei: an Introduction (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Urry C M and Padovani P 1995 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 107 
803 


Bradley M Peterson and Belinda J Wilkes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Galaxy 


A galaxy that has an exceptionally high luminosity and 
which radiates large amounts of non-stellar radiation. 
A typical active galaxy will exhibit all or most of the 
following properties: an overall luminosity in excess of 
10°” watts; a much higher output of x-ray, ultraviolet, 
infrared and radio radiation than a normal galaxy; a 
highly luminous and compact central core, known as 
an active galactic nucleus (AGN), which, in many cases, 
varies rapidly in brightness; narrow jets of radiating matter 
emerging from the central core; large-scale clouds of radio- 
emitting material; and, in some cases, broad emission lines 
in its spectrum. Much of the energy radiated by an active 
galaxy is emitted by charged particles moving at high 
speeds in magnetic fields (synchrotron radiation) rather 
than by stars 

Active galaxies are classified according to their 
appearance, luminosity and spectra into the following 
principal types: Seyfert galaxies, radio galaxies, quasars, 
BL Lacertae objects (BL Lacs) and blazars. 


Seealso: active galactic nucleus, astrophysical jets, blazar, 
BL Lacertae objects, galaxy, quasar, radio galaxy, Seyfert 
galaxies, synchrotron radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Optics 


A system that enables the shape and relative positions 
of the principal optical elements of a telescope to be 
adjusted to compensate for optical errors induced by a 
variety of possible sources of deformation in the system. 
Sources of deformation include: flexure of the primary 
mirror or telescope structure as the orientation of the 
telescope changes, thermal effects induced by changing 
temperatures, buffeting by wind or manufacturing errors 
in the shape of the mirrors. An active optics system 
monitors the quality of the image of a reference star, 
calculates the optical errors (including, for example, coma 
and astigmatism) and adapts the shape and relative 
positions of primary and secondary mirrors to counteract 
these errors. The shape of the primary mirror is controlled 
by a system of actuators that applies forces to the rear of 
the mirror. The primary mirror in such a system has to be 
thin relative to its diameter in order to respond effectively 
to these forces. For example, the primary mirror in each of 
the four telescopes that comprise the European Southern 
Observatory’s Very Large Telescope has a diameter of 
8.2m, a weight of 23 tonnes and a thickness of only 175 mm, 
the shape of each mirror being controlled by 150 actuators. 


See also: adaptive optics, astigmatism, coma, mirror. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Active Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Active Region 


A localized region of the Sun’s surface and atmosphere 
that displays most or all of the following phenomena: 
sunspots, faculae, plages, filaments, prominences, flares 
and bright condensations in the corona. The underly- 
ing feature of a typical active region is a bipolar mag- 
netic region, an area of concentrated magnetic fields that, 
although often complex in structure, contains approxi- 
mately equal quantities of positive and negative magnetic 
flux. The overall diameter of an active region, within 
which the general magnetic field strength is about 0.01 T, 
may be several hundred thousand kilometers; localized 
fields of up to 0.4 T occur within sunspots. 

An active region begins to form when magnetic flux 
tubes (bundles of magnetic field lines) erupt through the 
photosphere from below to create loop structures that have 
positive magnetic polarity where they emerge from the 
solar surface, and negative polarity where they re-enter 
the solar surface. Typically, an active region will grow 
to its maximum extent in about 10 days and may persist 
for several months, declining slowly as its underlying 
magnetic fields dissipate. The sunspots that form within 
an active region usually disappear within 2-4 weeks. 


See also: chromosphere, corona, faculae, filament, flare, 
plage, prominence, sunspots. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Adams, John Couch (1819-92) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Adams, John Couch (1819-92) 


Born in Laneast, Cornwall, England, he became fellow 
and mathematical tutor at Cambridge. He developed 
a procedure for numerical integration of differential 
equations and, inspired by MARY SOMERVILLE, he deduced 
mathematically the existence and location of the planet 
Neptune from its perturbations on the planet Uranus. 
Neptune was discovered by JOHANN GALLE in Berlin, in 
September 1846, using URBAIN LEVERRIER’S independently 
computed position. Adams’ claim to priority was 
advanced shortly thereafter, and it transpired that, with 
a letter of introduction from JAMES CHALLIS in Cambridge, 
Adams had applied to GEorcE airy, the Astronomer Royal, 
for some kind of assistance, though he failed to secure 
an interview with Airy, and nothing further happened. 
This seems to have been because of Adams’ youth 
and unforceful personality, and Airy’s unapproachability. 
Challis himself made a start to a somewhat half-hearted 
search for Neptune on the basis of Adams’ calculations, but 
was overtaken by Galle. Adams was appointed professor 
of astronomy at Cambridge in 1858, and was director of 
the Cambridge Observatory from 1861. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Adams, Walter Sydney (1876-1956) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Adams, Walter Sydney (1876-1956) 


Born in Antioch, Syria, to American missionary parents, 
he worked under GEORGE HALE at Yerkes Observatory at the 
University of Chicago, accompanying Hale to California 
to set up the Mount Wilson Observatory, and becoming its 
director on Hale’s retirement. He helped design the 200 in 
telescope for Mount Palomar Observatory. His method 
of spectroscopic parallaxes, a technique using spectra to 
give indications of stellar luminosities, made it possible 
to measure the distances to more distant stars than those 
whose parallax could be measured by the trigonometric 
method. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Adaptive Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Adaptive Optics 


A system that enables the optical surfaces of telescope 
mirrors to be continuously modified to compensate for 
distortions in incoming light waves as they pass through 
the Earth’s atmosphere. Light waves froma distant source, 
such as a Star, arrive at the top of the atmosphere as 
straight parallel wavefronts (rather like waves advancing 
across the surface of the ocean) but are then distorted by 
the atmosphere and arrive as ‘corrugated’ wavefronts at 
the primary mirror of a telescope. Because all parts of 
such a wavefront cannot be focused at the same point, the 
image quality is degraded, so limiting, quite severely, the 
resolutions that can be achieved by large ground-based 
telescopes. The adaptive optics technique senses and 
counteracts these wavefront distortions. 

Wavefront distortions are sensed by monitoring a 
suitable bright star, if there happens to be one in the field 
of view of the telescope, or by monitoring an artificial 
‘star’ generated by shining a powerful sodium laser beam 
into the upper atmosphere. The laser beam stimulates the 
emission of light by sodium atoms in a layer that exists 
at an altitude of about 100 km, so generating a star-like 
point of light that may be positioned conveniently close to 
the object that is being studied by the telescope. Because 
light from this artificial ‘star’ travels down to the telescope 
along (almost) the same path as the light from the object 
of interest, it suffers the same wavefront distortions. A 
wavefront sensor measures the distortions, and a real- 
time control computer instructs a set of actuators located 
behind a thin flexible mirror to alter the mirror shape 
and thereby cancel out the wavefront distortions. Because 
the distortions induced by the atmosphere are continually 
changing, the system has to sense and respond to them as 
rapidly as possible—tens or even hundreds of times per 
second. 

In principle, adaptive optics systems ought to be able 
to allow telescopes to achieve resolutions approaching 
their theoretical limits. A system of this kind has been in 
operation on the European Southern Observatory’s 3.6 m 
New Technology Telescope since 1992. Adaptive optics 
systems on the Very Large Telescope (an array of four 
8.2 m telescopes) are expected to enable this instrument 
to achieve its theoretical (diffraction limited) resolution at 
near-infrared wavelengths. 


See also: active optics, instrumentation: adaptive optics, 
mirror, resolving power. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Adelard of Bath (1075-1160) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Adelard of Bath (1075-1160) 


Born in Bath, England, a teacher and translator of scientific 
work from the Arabic, Adelard traveled in France, Italy, 
Syria and Palestine. On returning to Bath, he translated 
Euclid’s Elements from Arabic, and his translation became 
for centuries the chief geometry textbook in the West. He 
also translated the zij (astronomical table) of Muhammed 
ibn Musa al-Khwarazmi. He wrote works on the abacus 
and on the astrolabe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aepinus, Franz Ulrich Theodosius (1724—1802) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aepinus, Franz Ulrich Theodosius 
(1724-1802) 


Mathematician, born in Rostock, Mecklenberg-Schwerin 
(now Germany), he was director of the Observatory in 
Berlin and a professor at St Petersburg. His book An 
Attempt at a Theory of Electricity and Magnetism was the 
first work to apply mathematics to such a theory, and 
he demonstrated the effects of parallax in the transit of 
a planet (Venus) across the Sun’s disk. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aerolite ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aerolite 


An obsolete name for a stony meteorite. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aglaonike (c. 200 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aglaonike (c. 200 Bc) 


A natural philosopher of ancient Greece, she is referred 
to as a sorceress who could make the Moon disappear at 
will. She might therefore be regarded as the first recorded 
woman astronomer in that she seems to have mastered the 
art of predicting lunar eclipses, presumably by knowledge 
of the Metonic cycle, by which lunar eclipses repeat 
themselves every 19 years. The cycle was discovered in the 
fifth century BC by Babylonian astronomers and named for 
METOS. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Air Force Maui Optical Station 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Air Force Maui Optical Station 


Located on the island of Maui, Hawaii. Instruments 
include visible and infrared sensors and the 3.67 m (145 in) 
Advanced Electro-Optical System (AEOS) telescope, 
which is fitted with adaptive optics. This is the US 
Air Force’s largest and most advanced telescope system. 
The telescope is used to track and image Earth-orbiting 
satellites and astronomical objects such as asteroids. 

The AEOS telescope was made available to the civilian 
astronomical community on 1 September 1999, under a 
pilot program agreed by the Air Force Office of Scientific 
Research and the National Science Foundation’s Division 
of Astronomical Sciences. The agreement will make 
available 100 observing nights over a 2 year period to 
determine the level of interest in the AEOS facility from 
the US astronomical community. 

For further information see 
http:/ /ulua.mhpcc.af.mil/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Airglow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Airglow 


The airglow consists of the non-thermal radiation emitted 
by EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE. The thermal emission of Earth, 
heated by sunlight and subsequently radiating to space, 
takes place in the infrared portion of the spectrum, at 
wavelengths longer than 7 wm. In its simplest form, the 
airglow arises from de-excitation of molecules, atoms or 
ions excited by solar UV photons or energetic particles, 
and the resulting emitted photons are generally, although 
not exclusively, located in the visible and UV ranges of 
the spectrum. The existence of a night sky glow, long 
after sunset, shows that indirect mechanisms play an 
important role in producing airglow. In this case, the 
initial energy, brought by solar photons, is stored in the 
high atmosphere under the form of radicals or molecules 
able to recombine through exothermic reactions during 
the night and produce atoms or molecules in their excited 
states, with subsequent photonic emissions. The airglow 
does not include the radiation produced by lightning or 
meteor trains. Although the distinction is more difficult to 
establish, auroral phenomena, occurring at high latitudes 
and resulting from localized, intense precipitation of 
particles whose origins are outside the atmosphere, are 
not considered as being airglow. In contrast to AURORAS, 
and in spite of the fact that the general mechanism of 
emission (excitation—de-excitation) is of the same nature, 
the airglow occurs at any time and any latitude, ina much 
less sporadic way. 

Historically, the existence of a terrestrial component 
of the light in the night sky was recognized in the 
years around 1900. Yntenna, who first established by 
photometric methods the existence of airglow, remarked 
on the large variability of this phenomenon from night 
to night and showed that the star light scattered by 
atmospheric molecules was insufficient to explain the 
night sky light. Spectroscopic techniques showed that the 
green line of atomic oxygen at 558 nm was present over 
the whole sky at all times and confirmed the existence 
of a ‘permanent aurora’. Rayleigh (JOHN WILLIAM STRUTT) 
showed in the 1920s that the geographical pattern of the 
oxygen green line differed from that of the aurora, and 
that the N} bands seen in auroras were absent from the 
night sky. Rayleigh first expressed the brightness of the 
green line in terms of the number of atomic transitions per 
second in a column of unit cross-sectional area along the 
line of sight. He gave his name to the photometric unit 
universally used today for airglow studies: one rayleigh 
(or 1 R) represents an omnidirectional emission rate of 10° 
photons per square centimeter per second. The oxygen red 
lines at 630-636 nm were predicted and observed around 
1930, as well as the D line of sodium. 

Although ground-based spectrophotometric instru- 
ments provide a convenient way to monitor the spatial and 
temporal variations of the airglow, they are not appropri- 
ate for the retrieval of the emission vertical profiles. One 
possibility is to use rocket-borne zenith photometers flown 
through the airglow layers. Differentiation of the signal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with respect to altitude allows the retrieval of the local vol- 
ume emission rate as a function of altitude. Another way 
to proceed is to perform airglow measurements from an or- 
bital platform in limb viewing geometry. This technique 
has several advantages. Because the signal is integrated 
along a tangential path, the intensity of the measured sig- 
nal is greatly enhanced. It makes weak features, like the 
airglow continuum emission, easier to detect and charac- 
terize. Second, the tangential view allows the separation 
of the background galactic signal from the atmospheric 
glow because the galactic signal is directly provided by 
measurements performed at very high altitudes, where 
the atmospheric density is virtually zero. 

The vertical profiles of several identified night 
airglow lines, as observed from the space shuttle STS-37 
mission orbiting at 267 km altitude, are plotted in 
figure 1. The well known green line of oxygen at 
557.7 nm, produced by the O('S)-> O(D) transition, covers 
a relatively narrow altitude region and strongly peaks 
around 100 km altitude. Some emission is also recorded in 
the red line of oxygen at 630 nm, due to the O(!D)—> O(P) 
transition. The signal at 762 nm results from radiative de- 
excitation of an excited state of O2. The case of atomic and 
molecular oxygen lines will be treated in a more detailed 
way in the following section. The D line of Na at 589 nm, 
due to Na(??P)->Na(?S), peaks around 90 km, similarly to 
the OH (6-0) Meinel band at 527 nm. The OH emission is 
produced by the reaction cycle 


H +03 > OH* +O: 


where OH* is a rotationally excited level of OH, with 
a vibrational quantum number v less than 9 (no bands 
originating from v > 9 are detected) and a recycling 
mechanism of the type 


OH +0 > H+Op. 


The 527 nm band is produced by the v = 6 —> 0 de- 
excitation of OH*. Note that the strong peak at low altitude 
in the 630 nm emission is due to the (9-3) band of OH. 
Because the chemistry of sodium also involves ozone (O3) 
through the cycle 


Na+0O3 + NaO +O, 
NaO +O — Na+O, 


a coupling between the airglow OH intensities and the Na 
density (derived either from lidar measurements or from 
airglow measurements) may be expected, and is definitely 
exhibited by measurements. 

There is also a bright emission that extends from 400 
to 600 nm. It is due to O, in the near ultraviolet and blue 
ranges, up to 480 nm, and NO; at longer wavelengths. The 
O, band emission mainly consists of Herzberg I, Herzberg 
II and Chamberlain bands, as detailed in the next section. 
The NO) diffuse feature may be attributed to the radiative 
recombination of NO and O, and is a true continuum. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Airglow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) (b) 


527 


NO, 


mel 


Heignt (Km) 
Height (Ken) 


OH 


557.7 


{c) 


557.7 


119 


505 


100 


35 


Heignt (km) 


hetero 


L 1 i 
400 600 800 1000 1200 0.0 2000 


Royleighs 


L 3 oe 4 i J 
4000 6000 8000 00 2000 4000 6000 e000 
Royleighs 


Royteigns 


589 Na 


meight (Km) 


(d) (e) 
ios 630 
200 | 
E € 
x x 
S150 b = rae 
= 
rd : 
? 2 
da = 
so _t i i 4 : 
300 Tooo 1500 2000 2500 3000 0.0 26000 


Royieighs 


_1 1 i 1 1 H L L i 
40000 66000 80000 0.0 S00 1000 1500 2000 2500 $000 3500 «000 
Rayteighs 


Figure 1. Altitude profiles of Earth’s airglow in six wavelength ranges as seen from the space shuttle on the STS-37 mission. (From 


Mende et al 1993 J. Geophys. Res. 98 19 117.) 


A profile taken at 527 nm is shown in figure 1. The 
marked airglow peak between 95 and 105 km altitude 
is in good agreement with microwave measurements of 
thermospheric NO made during the same solar cycle, 
suggesting a maximum concentration region between 100 
and 110 km. 

The study of upper atmospheric airglow (dayglow 
and nightglow) emissions, either from ground-based 
spectrometry or by using spectrometers as well as imagers 
on board satellites like the Dynamics Explorer and 
Space Shuttle, has seen very substantial progress in 
the last 20 years. These measurements have allowed 
the characterization of thermospheric and ionospheric 
processes, in fields of both aeronomy and dynamics, 
with the help of laboratory and theoretical advances. 
The interpretation of airglow measurements is extremely 
complicated, involving the detailed characteristics of the 
excitation fluxes (solar UV/EUV, particles), interaction 
mechanisms (direct excitation of molecules, atoms or ions, 
indirect excitation through dissociation and ionization 
processes, as well as chemical reactions), chemical cycles, 
radiative transfer of airglow light. Oxygen emission lines 
in the nightglow are now detailed. 


Excitation of oxygen emissions in the nightglow 
of Earth 

The red doublet of oxygen at 630 nm and 636.4 nm, 
resulting from the O('D)—O@P) transition, that is from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the first excited level to the ground state, with transition 
probabilities of 0.0069 and 0.0022 s~' respectively, is 
observed during several hours after sunset. Since the 
average emission time of O('D) is equal to the inverse 
of the transition probability, that is a few minutes, direct 
excitation of oxygen atoms by solar UV photons followed 
by de-excitation cannot explain the persistence of the red 
glow for a long time after sunset. The source of O('D) 
during night time is dissociative recombination of O; ions 


O; +e7 > O+O('D). 


The O3 ions result from the night time decay of ionization 
which is controlled by charge exchange reactions that 
converts O* ions into O3 ions. 

The vertical distribution of the red line emission is 
complex and may be shown to evolve with time in a 
different way at different altitudes. Below 200 km, the 
red line emission is weak because O* is deactivated (or 
‘quenched’) by collisions with air molecules in a time 
smaller than the emission time. Above 200 km, the 
combined effects of the collisional quenching rate, which 
decreases with altitude, and the vertical variation of the 
electronic density, which increases with altitude, results 
in a strong increase, for increasing altitudes, of the red 
line glow. An important application of the measurement 
of thermospheric nightglow emissions, like the oxygen 
red line, is the inference of winds and temperatures 
from high-resolution spectroscopy. By using Fabry-Perot 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Airglow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and Michelson interferometers, the thermospheric neutral 
wind at the 250 km altitude level has been retrieved 
from the O('D) 630 nm emission line by measuring the 
associated Doppler shift, which yields the line-of-sight 
wind vector. Neutral temperatures may be inferred from 
the width of the line. Doppler spectroscopy of airglow 
lines is a powerful means to study the dynamics of the 
thermosphere, strongly controlled by thermal tides and 
general wave activity. 

The green line of oxygen at 558 nm, which results 
from the O(!S)—+O(‘D) transition between the second and 
the first excited states, is known to arise from the 100 km 
neighborhood, that is definitely lower atmospheric levels 
than the red lines. Although a part of the green line may 
arise from dissociative recombination of O; in the F region 


O; +e > Of +0°* 


another mechanism must be invoked to explain the low 
emission altitude of this line. Sydney Chapman proposed 
a mechanism of ‘photochemical excitation’ 


0+0+0- > 0,+0('S) 


where one of the O atoms is excited by some of the energy 
liberated in the association of two O atoms. This process 
results in a maximum O concentration around 100 km, 
which is consistent with the location of the green line 
emission. De-excitation of O('S) into O('D) occurs through 
quenching by ambient air molecules (mainly molecular 
nitrogen). 

The so-called Chapman process, although it may 
participate in the green line emission, is now thought 
to be of secondary importance. At the beginning of the 
1960s, Barth and Hildebrandt found in the laboratory that 
the emission produced by the previous process is much 
too small to account for the observed glow. This result 
stimulated Barth to put forward, in 1964, the following 
two-step mechanism: 


O+0+M—>0O;+M 


where M is an air molecule and O} an excited state of the 
O, molecule, followed by the excitation transfer process 


O} + OCP) > O, + O'S). 


The net effect of these two reactions, obtained by adding 
them, is similar to the effect of the single Chapman 
reaction. The other loss processes are deactivation through 
quenching by collision with an air molecule 


O5+M—> O,+M 
or radiation of a photon through radiative de-excitation 
O5 > O2 + hv. 


Therefore, the Barth process may give rise simultaneously 
to both O('S) (green line) and O, (762 nm line) emissions. 
Comparison of the two corresponding profiles in figure 1 
may be shown to be consistent with the two-step scheme, 
despite the 10 km difference between the peak altitudes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fv 120% 2ZA< [50° 
26- Bw oo 
25 Be Ss 
a A © + B te 7 
oH oO i") Oi oO 
2a a cane 4 
‘| & Zo 6 ye 
to t§ i 7 
2.5 we 25 Bo a pe 
Om 8 ege oa RN 
aj ; aye Oot D A r 7 
o BSVrye eS ov + =] 
22-0 Te pag st {ko Pes AO 
Oo HOG® cD |po} wo oO 
E Bo Cte g iL vkM 
Zz alls er & 
a ells Ola! et B mos 
Q = B iC] zZzo 
20) = ma Ia 
1.9 + 
'.8Ry 4 
(een ee fp ag a 8g Se 
400 500 600 700 800 
° 
WAVELENGTH (A) 


Figure 2. Nadir viewed UV dayglow spectrum between 350 and 
950 A acquired by the STP78-1 satellite from 600 km between 
50°N and 50°S latitudes. (From Chakrabarti et al 1983 J. Geophys. 
Res. 88 4898.) 


Dayglow and twilight emissions 

Airglow emissions are also observed during the day, 
and they mainly reflect the diurnal variation of the 
concentration of emitting species. Twilight spectra may 
be observed at the transition between the dark and fully 
illuminated atmosphere, as the shadow height moves 
vertically over the full range of emissive layers. In the 
day time, several lines and bands are very bright, mainly 
due to higher production rates. Indeed, dayglow and 
twilight emissions mainly result from direct excitation 
by solar ultraviolet photons, photoelectrons produced 
through ionization processes in the ionosphere, and by 
resonance scattering or fluorescence of solar radiation. 
Such energetic phenomena result in a complex ultraviolet 
dayglow spectrum, as shown in figure 2. These 
measurements were made from an Earth-orbiting satellite 
(STP78-1), since ultraviolet photons are prevented from 
penetrating down to the ground due to the screening 
effect of the atmosphere. Even at near-UV or visible 
wavelengths, dayglow are difficult to acquire with 
ground-based instruments because of the high level of the 
background scattered solar light. 

The short-wavelength ultraviolet spectrum is domi- 
nated by singly ionized and neutral lines of oxygen (O I, 
O II) and nitrogen (N I, N II). These lines are produced 
by ultraviolet photons and photoelectron impact. Short- 
wavelength lines are produced by de-excitation from high- 
energy upper states, which cannot be excited by chemical 
or recombination reactions. Several atomic and ionic lines 
in the dayglow spectrum are also lines that appear in the 
solar spectrum, like the He I line at 584 A. In the case of 
helium, this phenomenon is due to resonant scattering of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Airglow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the He solar emission line. Similar features are observed at 
834 A (O II triplet), 1216 A and 1025 A (H I, Lya and Ly), 
1302-1306 A (OI triplet) and others wavelengths. They 
are due to resonant scattering or fluorescence. 


Molecular oxygen emissions in the airglows of 
Earth, Venus and Mars 

Whereas the case of the O('S) state is well understood, 
the detailed process of O) emissions is still not well 
known. In addition to the discrete 762 nm QO, band, 
there is a near-UV-blue extended emission attributed to 
Herzberg and Chamberlain bands. In previous reactions, 
the excited bound state O% of O, can be A$, A’3Ay or 
c!X, (figure 3). The main precursor of O('S) could be 
O,(c!Z;), but it is still not certain what the nature of the 
precursor is, and that is still an active field of investigation 
today. In Earth’s atmosphere, the Herzberg I system is 
the major cause of the blue nightglow continuum, with an 
average emission of 400 R. From spaceborne observations 
of the Venus airglow by the Soviet Venera probes, similar 
oxygen airglows were found, although in quite different 
amounts. The Venus molecular oxygen nightglow shows 
a strong pre-eminence of the Herzberg II system (2700 R). 
Such large differences are due to the different chemical 
compositions of the atmospheric environment for Earth 
and Venus (see VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). In the luminous layers, 
the ambient air (N2+O2 for Earth, CO2 for Venus) density is 
nearly 100 times larger on Venus than on Earth, the reverse 
situation occurring for O (three times less on Venus than 
on Earth). Because the collisional quenching of O2(A?=;*) 
is mainly realized by air molecules, whereas O2(c 1y5) is 
preferentially quenched by collisions with O, Herzberg I 
bands are weak on Venus and Herzberg II bands are 
strongly enhanced with respect to the case of Earth (2700 R 
on Venus versus 100 R on Earth). Another interesting 
feature is the extreme weakness of the oxygen green line in 
Venus nightglow (5 R versus 120 R on Earth), which was an 
important element in favoring the Barth mechanism over 
to the Chapman process. 

As seen in figure 3, a glow of the infrared atmospheric 
system of a'A, — X°X> is expected in the infrared, at 
1.27 um. This glow, first detected on Venus by the French 
spectroscopist Pierre Connes and his collaborators at the 
end of the 1970s is quite intense (>1 MR, that is 10° R). 
Such a strong emission is also measured on Earth. Due to 
the long radiative lifetime of O2(a! Ag) (1h), the analysis is 
complicated by transport across the terminator. Photolysis 
of O3 under sunlit conditions according to the following 
reaction 

O3 +hv > O2(a'A,) + O('D) 


constitutes part of the source in the dayglows of Earth and 
Mars, but it is negligible on Venus. The major source in 
the nightglows of all the terrestrial planets, the dayglow 
of Venus and a part of the dayglows of Earth and Mars, is 
the recombination of O atoms produced in the photolysis 
of O2 on Earth and CO, on Venus and Mars (see MARs: 
ATMOSPHERE). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENERGY LIFE 
eV sec 

RECOMBINATION ENERGY ————— 5.12 
A*x? 4.34 0.25 
3p 4.26 50 
a Se ae 4.16 0,85 


4.05 25,50 


I 9438Z43H 


| TT 9438243H 


NIVIYIEWVHD 


aera 


b 'S ie eal 163 12 
o Ag 0.97 3800 
IR 
ems | eee 
x°s, 0 


Figure 3. The six lowest levels of molecular oxygen and the 
corresponding band systems (from Krasnopolsky 1983). 


Connes measured individual rotational lines of this 
band in the Martian spectrum with the 5 m telescope on 
Mount Palomar in 1973 and 1975. Rotational temperatures 
and airglow intensities were derived from the spectra. In 
each spectrum, equivalent widths of about 30 lines were 
measured to be typically 0.005-0.01 nm. By ratioing the 
equivalent width to the line strength, and by examining 
the dependence of this ratio on the energy of the upper 
rotational state of the transition, a rotational temperature 
of 200 K was deduced, which corresponds to the real 
temperature averaged over the airglow altitude profile. 
Typical airglow intensities of 3 to 30 MR, depending 
on latitude, were found. Assuming the quenching rate 
coefficient by air molecules (CO2 on Mars) is known, it is 
possible to infer the ozone amount from 1.27 4m airglow 
measurements, although in a rather inaccurate way. 


Bibliography 

Barth C A, Stewart A I F, Bougher S W, Hunten D M, 
Bauer S J and Nagy A F 1992 Aeronomy of the 
current Martian atmosphere Mars ed H H Kieffer, 
B M Jakosky, C W Snyder and MS Matthews (Tucson, 
AZ: The University of Arizona Press) pp 1054-89 

Chamberlain J W 1995 Physics or the Aurora and Airglow 
(Classics in Geophysics volume 1) (Washington, DC: 
American Geophysical Union) 

Fox J L 1997 Airglow Encyclopaedia of Planetary Sciences ed 
J H Shirley and R W Fairbridge (London: Chapman 
and Hall) 

Krasnopolsky V A 1983 Venus spectroscopy in the 3000- 
8000 A region by Veneras 9 and 10 Venus ed DM 
Hunten, L Colin, T M Donahue and V I Moroz 
(Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press) 
pp 459-83 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Airglow ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rees M H 1989 Physics and Chemistry of the Upper 
Atmosphere (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Solomon S C 1991 Optical aeronomy Rev. Geophys. Suppl. 
1089-109 


Eric Chassefiére 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Airy Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Airy Disk 


The bright spot at the center of the diffraction pattern that 
is formed when a point source, such as a star, is imaged at 
the focus of a telescope. Light waves from a distant star 
arrive at the Earth as a series of parallel wavefronts (rather 
like waves rolling onto a beach). When these wavefronts 
are interrupted at the edge of a telescope’s aperture (the 
rim of the objective or primary mirror), and are brought 
to a focus, interference effects between different parts of 
each wavefront result in the formation of a diffraction 
pattern. For a point source, the resulting image (assuming 
a perfect optical system) consists of a central spot of 
light surrounded by a series of light and dark fringes, 
or rings. According to theory, 84% of the light energy 
is concentrated into the central spot (the Airy disk), the 
diameter of which depends on the aperture of the telescope 
and the wavelength of the light. The radius of the first dark 
minimum in light intensity, that lies immediately outside 
the Airy disk, is given, in radians, by 1.22A/D, where i 
denotes wavelength and D the aperture of the telescope. 
The central spot is known as the Airy disk because this type 
of diffraction pattern was first investigated by Sir George 
Biddell Airy (1801-92), the seventh Astronomer Royal. 


See also: aperture, Rayleigh limit, resolving power. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Airy, Sir George Biddell (1801-92) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Airy, Sir George Biddell (1801-92) 


A brilliant Cambridge mathematician (Senior Wrangler 
1823, i.e. leader of the graduating mathematics class), Airy 
became the seventh Astronomer Royal in 1835 after a brief 
period as Lucasian Professor at Cambridge. His output 
was prodigious, and he published nearly 400 scientific 
papers and 150 reports on various scientific issues, such 
as the gauge of railways, spectacles to correct astigmatism, 
and methods to correct for compass readings in ships made 
of iron. His work on optics is recognized by the use of 
the term Airy disc for the resolution element of a telescope 
due to diffraction at its aperture, which he studied. As 
Astronomer Royal, he saw that the Royal Observatory 
at Greenwich was re-equipped with modern instruments 
and that its work was carried out punctiliously by its 
many human ‘calculators’ and observers, insisting that 
everything was carried out in the best way, namely his 
way. This regime was effective in raising standards. He 
himself determined the density of the Earth, the mass of 
the planet Jupiter and its rotation period. He calculated 
the orbits of comets and cataloged stars. He made 
numerous contributions to the prediction of the motion 
of the Moon, and analysed transits of the planet Venus 
and eclipses, including the eclipse predicted by THALES. 
As a result of the accuracy of the observations made 
under Airy at Greenwich, and his practical exploitation 
of the railway telegraph to distribute it, Greenwich Mean 
Time was established in 1880 as the official time service 
throughout Britain, and afterwards became the basis for 
the timekeeping of the world. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aitken, Robert Grant (1864-1951) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aitken, Robert Grant (1864-1951) 


Astronomer, born in California, Aitken became director 
of the Lick Observatory. He made systematic visual 
surveys of binary stars, measuring their positions visually. 
His massive New General Catalogue of Double Stars 
(1932) contained data on 17000 stars that allowed orbit 
determinations of many, from which it was possible to 
calculate data on the masses of the stars’ components. He 
also measured positions of comets and planetary satellites 
and computed orbits. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Akebono (EXOS-D) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Akebono (EXOS-D) 


Japanese satellite launched in 1989 to study Earth’s 
auroras. Named from the Japanese for the ‘rising Sun’. 
Auroral image capability was lost in early 1995, but other 
instruments continue to operate. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


al-Battani, Abu Abdullah [known as Albategnius] (c. 
868—c. 929) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


al-Battani, Abu Abdullah [known as 
Albategnius] (c. 868—c. 929) 


Born in Harran, in present-day Syria, al-Battani spent most 
of his life in Raqqa, situated on the bank of the Euphrates, 
where he was educated and flourished as a scholar and 
a Sabean which means ‘worshipper of the stars’. His 
best-known achievement was the determination of the 
solar year as being 365 days, 5 hours, 46 minutes and 24 
seconds, an extremely accurate value that was used in the 
Gregorian Calendar reform of the Julian Calendar. Using 
trigonometrical rather than geometrical methods, he also 
determined the true and mean orbit of the Sun, proving 
the variation of the apparent angular diameter of the Sun 
(an indication of the variable distance between Sun and 
Earth) and the possibility of annular eclipses. He wrote a 
number of books on astronomy and trigonometry, his most 
famous book being his astronomical treatise with tables (a 
zij), which was translated into Latin in the twelfth century 
as De Scienta Stellarum—De Numeris Stellarum et Motibus. 
His treatise on astronomy was extremely influential in 
Europe till the Renaissance, with translations available for 
centuries in several languages. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Albedo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Albedo 


A measure of the reflectivity of a material or object. For 
bodies in the solar system, albedo is the proportion of 
sunlight falling on them that is reflected away. It is 
measured on a scale from 0 (a perfectly absorbing black 
surface) to 1 (a perfectly reflecting white surface). 

Albedo may be defined in various ways. The most 
common is geometrical albedo, sometimes called physical 
albedo. This is the ratio of the amount of light reflected 
from an object, as viewed from the direction of the Sun, to 
the amount that would be reflected by a perfectly diffusely 
reflecting sphere (which by definition has an albedo of 1) 
of the same size and at the same distance as the object. As 
well as applying to visible light, geometrical albedo may 
be defined for radiation in any specified wavelength range; 
bolometric geometrical albedo applies to all wavelengths. 
Bond albedo, also known as spherical albedo, is defined 
similarly but for radiation of all wavelengths reflected in all 
directions; itis named after George Phillips Bond. Another 
measure is hemispherical albedo: the ratio of scattered to 
incident light as a function of the angle of incidence, and 
again the body is assumed to be a perfectly diffusely 
reflecting sphere. 

Of the major planets, Mercury has the lowest 
geometrical albedo, at 0.11 (comparable to the Moon’s 
0.12), while Venus, by virtue of its blanket of highly 
reflective clouds, has the highest, 0.65. The lowest albedo 
in the solar system seems to be possessed by the particles 
that make up the rings of Neptune, which probably 
have a value close to the theoretical lower limit of zero. 
Asteroids which originally formed between about 2.5 and 
3.5 AU from the Sun, where it was cool enough for 
dark carbonaceous compounds to condense from the solar 
nebula, but not water ice, have albedo values as low as 0.02. 
The highest measured albedo is that of Saturn’s satellite 
Enceladus, to which some sources assign a value of 1.0. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Albireo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Albireo 


The star 6 Cygni, said to represent the eye of the swan in 
the ancient constellation figure. It is seen as a single star 
of apparent magnitude about 2.9 with the unaided eye, 
but with good binoculars or a small telescope it appears as 
a beautiful double, comprising an orange star (6! Cyg) of 
apparent magnitude 3.05, spectral type K3IL, with a bluish- 
white companion (f* Cyg) of apparent magnitude 5.17 
and spectral type B8V. Their separation is 34.4” at position 
angle 54°. The system is 380 light-years distant, having 
a parallax of 0.008”. The absolute magnitudes of the two 
stars are B! Cyg —2.3, 6 Cyg —0.2. 

With more powerful instruments 6' Cyg can be 
further resolved: it is a binary system with components 
of apparent magnitude 3.4 and 5.5, separated by 0.39” at 
position angle 152°. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


al-Biruni, Abu Raihan (973-1048) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


al-Biruni, Abu Raihan (973-1048) 


Born in Kheva near Ural, present-day Uzbekhistan, al- 
Biruni was a polymath and traveler (to India), making 
contributions in mathematics, geography and geology, 
natural history, calendars and astronomy. His book 
Qanun-i Masoodi, which he dedicated to his patron Sultan 
Masood, discusses astronomy, trigonometry, solar, lunar 
and planetary motions, including the question whether 
the Earth rotates or not. He undertook experiments 
(observations) related to astronomical phenomena, for 
example eclipses and the dates of the equinoxes, and 
determined that, compared with the speed of sound, the 
speed of light is immense. He recognized the Milky Way 
as ‘a collection of countless fragments of the nature of 
nebulous stars’. Al-Biruni’s quest for scientific knowledge 
is epitomized by his statement that the phrase Allah is 
omniscient does not justify ignorance. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Albumazar [Abu Mashar al-Balkhi; Abu-Mashar; Abu 
Maschar] (787-885) 


Albumazar [Abu Mashar al-Balkhi; 
Abu-Mashar; Abu Maschar] (787-885) 


Astronomer and astrologer, born in Balkh, Afghanistan, 
flourished in Baghdad. An eleventh century Latin 
translation of his Introduction to Astrology introduced the 
West to Aristotelian physics. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aldebaran 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aldebaran 


The star a Tauri, a red giant of spectral type K5III, apparent 
magnitude 0.87. Its distance is 65 light-years, its parallax 
0.050”. The absolute magnitude is —0.6. Aldebaran 
appears at the eastward corner of the striking triangular 
open cluster the Hyades, although it is not actually a 
member of the cluster which is much more distant (about 
100 light-years). The name derives from the Arabic Al 
Dabaran, ‘the Follower’—presumably of the Pleiades. 

Aldebaran was one of the ‘Royal Stars’ or ‘Guardians 
of the Sky’ of the Persian astronomer/astrologers c. 
3000 Bc. Although not the brightest stars these four were 
carefully chosen, apparently to mark the seasons, as they 
are approximately 6 h apart in right ascension. Aldebaran 
(ancient Persian name Tascheter) was prominent in the 
evening sky in March and was associated with the vernal 
equinox; the others were Regulus (summer solstice), 
Antares (autumnal equinox) and Fomalhaut (winter 
solstice). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aldrin, Edwin Eugene, Jr [‘Buzz’] (1930-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aldrin, Edwin Eugene, dr [‘Buzz’] 
(1930-) 


Astronaut, born in Montclair, NJ, trained as a fighter 
pilot (Korean War), he space-walked during the Gemini 
12 mission, and was pilot of the lunar module of Apollo 
11, the first manned lunar landing. Aldrin followed NEIL 
ARMSTRONG as the second man to walk on the Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Alexis (Array of Low Energy X-ray Imaging Sensors) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alexis (Array of Low Energy X-ray 
Imaging Sensors) 


US Department of Energy satellite launched under the US 
Air Force Space Test Programme in April 1993. Recovered 
after the loss of a solar panel during launch. Designed to 
monitor soft x-ray sources. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


al-Farghani, Abu’l-Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn 
Kathir (c. 860) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


al-Farghani, Abu’l-Abbas Ahmad ibn 
Muhammad ibn Kathir (c. 860) 


Born in Farghana, Transoxiana (northern Iran), he wrote A 
Book on Celestial Motion and Science of the Stars (Kitab fi al- 
Harakat al-Samawiya wa Jawami Ilm al-Nujum), which was 
translated several times into Latin and Hebrew starting 
in the twelfth century. The book spread knowledge of 
Ptolemaic astronomy in Europe, at least until this role was 
taken over by Sacrobosco’s Sphere on which it was based; 
DANTE, for example, used it as a source of astronomical 
knowledge. He determined the diameter of the Earth to 
be 6500 miles and. found the distances and diameters of 
the planets. He also wrote a summary of the Almagest and 
a Book on the Construction of Sun-dials. He was additionally 
an engineer, but not a very good one, judging by the 
story that he built the beginning of an irrigation canal 
from the Tigris deeper than the rest of its length, so that 
not enough water would run through to its other end. 
The explanation given for Al-Farghani’s mistake is that, a 
theoretician rather than a practical engineer, he had never 
successfully made anything. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Alfonso X [Alfonso X of Castile; Alfonso the 
Astronomer; Alfonso the Wise] (1221-84) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alfonso X [Alfonso X of Castile; 
Alfonso the Astronomer; Alfonso the 
Wise] (1221-84) 


King of Leon and Castile (from 1252), born in Burgos, 
Spain, founded the Castilian national culture. He 
commissioned the first general history of Spain to be 
composed in Castilian, a translation of the Old Testament, 
a great code of laws (Siete Partidas) and a planetary 
table. The planetary tables were a development of the 
work of Azarchiel (the Toledan Tables). These included 
data on astronomical phenomena, and calculations of the 
future positions of the planets according to Azarchiel’s 
re-working of the Ptolemaic theory. It was Alfonso who 
financed and directed a team of astronomers led by Ishak 
ben Said, called Hasan, and Jehuda ben Mose Cohen to 
make the calculations, which were finished just as Alfonso 
became king, and published as the Alfonsine Tables. They 
survived as the standard work of astronomical prediction 
in Europe in manuscript and printed form for 300 years. 
Alfonso remarked during this time, apparently because of 
the arbitrariness and complexity of the Ptolomaic theory of 
the planets, that he wished that he had been around at the 
time of the creation since he could have given the Almighty 
some good advice. The major discrepancies which built up 
with time between the calculations in the Alfonsine Tables 
and reality was the inspiration to TYCHO BRAHE in 1563 at 
the age of 16 to begin making systematic astronomical 
observations, a motivation stimulated into action by his 
startling observations of the New Star of 1572. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Alfvén, Hannes Olof Gdsta (1908-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alfvén, Hannes Olof Gosta (1908-95) 


Physicist, born in Norrkorping, Sweden, Nobel prizewin- 
ner (1970), developed plasma physics, and applied the- 
ory to a wide range of physical and astrophysical phe- 
nomena including charged particle beams in accelera- 
tors, and interplanetary and magnetospheric physics. He 
founded magnetohydrodynamics, the branch of physics 
which shows how magnetic and electrical phenomena act 
on gases that are hot and in motion. His theory is used in 
rocket propulsion, aerodynamic braking of space vehicles, 
explanations of solar—terrestrial ‘weather’, the formation 
of comet tails, the formation of the solar system, the dy- 
namics of plasmas in our Galaxy, and the fundamental na- 
ture of the universe itself. In 1937 he postulated the galactic 
magnetic field as the ‘bottle’ which contained cosmic rays, 
and in 1950 identified non-thermal radiation from astro- 
nomical sources as synchrotron radiation, which is pro- 
duced by fast-moving electrons in the presence of magnetic 
fields: this is essentially the theoretical basis for most of 
radioastronomy. Alfvén held positions in Uppsala, Stock- 
holm and California. His ideas were often original and 
therefore regarded as unorthodox: his career was marked 
by disputes over publications and controversy with estab- 
lished leaders. He was active in the worldwide nuclear 
disarmament movement. Alfvén waves, named after him, 
are electromagnetic waves that propagate through a highly 
conducting medium, such as the ionized gas of the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Algol 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Algol 


Algol, also known as £ Persei, is the prototype of a class 
of ECLIPSING BINARY STARS that undergo dramatic brightness 
changes during the eclipses. Like other Algols, Algol itself 
consists of a hot, unevolved primary and a cool, evolved 
secondary. It is this large difference in temperatures 
between the two stars that gives rise to the dramatic 
eclipses. When the hot primary is eclipsed by the cool 
secondary, the overall brightness of the system drops from 
its out-of-eclipse brightness of 2.1 magnitudes to about 3.4 
magnitudes. These eclipses, repeating every 2.87 days, 
are easily seen with the naked eye, and it is obvious that 
the ancients observed them given that Algol is invariably 
associated with something evil or demonic. The name 
Algol comes from the Arabic Ra’s Al Ghul meaning ‘the 
head of the demon.’ The Greeks saw Algol as the blinking 
eye of Medusa, whose severed head was held aloft by the 
hero Perseus. The modern discovery of the eclipses was 
made by MONTANARI in 1670 and their proper explanation 
was made by GooprickE in 1782. 


A triple system 

Algol has been studied extensively from the radio to the 
x-ray end of the spectrum with techniques ranging from 
photometry and spectroscopy to interferometry. Algol is 
actually a triple system, with the eclipsing pair known as 
AB and the tertiary component Algol C orbiting them with 
a period of 1.86 years. Algol A, the hot primary, is a B8 V 
star and Algol B is a K subgiant, while Algol C is a late A 
or early F star. 


Close binary evolution 

Algol has played an important role in our understanding 
of the evolution of CLOSE BINARY STAR systems. The Algol 
Paradox arose when researchers discovered that the less 
massive secondary was more evolved than the primary. 
Since high-mass stars evolve more rapidly than low-mass 
stars, Algol presented a puzzling situation. Through 
the work of Hoyle, Morton and others, the paradox was 
resolved when they showed that the now less massive 
secondary had once been the more massive one. When 
it evolved to core hydrogen exhaustion and expanded, it 
reached the inner critical surface, also known as the ROCHE 
Lose. Having the more massive component of a binary in 
contact with the Roche lobe leads to an instability that 
results in rapid mass transfer to the other component. 
The mass transfer is so extensive that it reverses the ratio 
of the masses, leaving the system in a semi-detached 
configuration (one star filling its Roche lobe while the other 
is smaller than the lobe). 

Evolutionary studies by Sarna indicate that the 
system initially consisted of 2.8M > and 2.5Mo stars. The 
2.8M. star evolved, reached its Roche lobe, transferred 
mass to the other star and now has a mass of 0.8Mo. The 
initially 2.5Mo star now has a mass of 3.7Mo, meaning that 
0.8Mz was lost from the system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Current work 

Current work on Algol is focused primarily on studying 
the nature of the circumstellar matter and its interaction 
with the two stars. Doppler tomography and polarimetry 
show promise as tools to uncover the nature of the 
circumstellar matter. 


Bibliography 

Kim H 1989 BV light curve analysis of Algol Astrophys J. 
342 1061-7 

Liou J-C and Wilson R E 1993 Quantitative modeling 
and impersonal fitting of Algol polarization curves 
Astrophys. J. 413 670-9 

Pen X, Shao M and Colavita M 1993 High angular 
resolution measurements of Algol Astrophys. J. 413 
L129-L131 

Sarna M 1993 The evolutionary status of Beta Per Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 262 534-42 

Terrell D 1992 Demon variables Astronomy 20 34-9 


Dirk Terrell 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Algonquin Radio Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Algonquin Radio Observatory 


A Canadian radioastronomy observatory in Ontario. The 
main instrument is a 46 m (150 ft) fully steerable dish which 
began operation in May 1966. The telescope was operated 
by the National Research Council of Canada until 1989. 
It is now jointly supported by the Space Geodynamics 
Laboratory of the Center for Research in Earth and Space 
Technology at York University in Toronto, and the Federal 
Government's Geodetic Survey Division in Ottawa. 

Today it is mainly used in international VLBI 
programs to maintain the International Celestial Reference 
Frame. By measuring the precise celestial locations of 
about 100 quasars, geophysicists are able to study tectonic 
movements on the Earth, and measure variables such as 
the planet’s rates of precession, nutation and rotation. 

It is still used occasionally for astrophysical research. 
Recent examples include imaging of supernova remnants 
and precise determination of pulsar rotation. 

For further information see 
http://www.sgl.crestech.ca/cglbi/stations /algo.htm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


al-Khwarizmi, Abu Abd-Allah Mohammad ibn Musa 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


al-Khwarizmi [al-Khawarizmi; 
al’Khwarizmi], Abu Abd-Allah 
[Abdullah; Ja’far] Mohammad 
[Muhammad] ibn Musa [Bin Musa] 
(c. 800—c. 850) 


Born at Khawarizm (Kheva), south of the Aral Sea, 
he flourished in Baghdad from 813 to 833. He was 
an astronomer and geographer but is best known as 
a mathematician. The word algebra was derived from 
his book Al-Jabr wa-al-Mugabilah. He brought into 
mathematics the use of zero and the rest of the Indian 
system of numerals (now known as ‘Arabic numerals’), 
and developed the decimal system. His name survives 
in English in the word algorithm. The development of 
astronomical tables by him was a significant contribution 
to the science of astronomy, on which he also wrote a 
book derived from an earlier Sanskrit astronomical work, 
brought to Baghdad around AD 770. The contribution of 
al-Khwarizmi to geography is also outstanding, in that not 
only did he revise proLEMy’s views on geography, but also 
corrected them in detail as well as his map of the world. 
His other contributions include original work related to 
clocks, sundials and astrolabes. His books were widely 
translated, and a twelfth century Latin translation of Al 
Jabr introduced this new science to the West. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Allegheny Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Allegheny Observatory 


At the Alleghany Observatory, University of Pittsburgh, 
the Thaw 0.76 m f/18 red-light refractor and Multichannel 
Astrometric Photometer is a major contributor of accurate 
parallaxes, stellar masses and the astrometic search for 
extra solar planets. Founded in 1869, the Observatory 
established the standard time service, often called Rail- 
Road Time. 

Previous directors of note include Samuel Pierpont 
Langley, who began his experiments with the wing 
and invented the bolometer here; James Keeler, who 
showed the rings of Saturn to be made up of particles; 
John Brashear, known for his exceptional astronomical 
optics; and Frank Schlesinger the father of photographic 
astrometry. 

For further information see 
http://www.pitt.edu/~aobsvrty/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Allen, Clabon [‘Clay’] Walter (1904-87) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Allen, Clabon [‘Clay’] Walter (1904-87) 


Australian solar physicist, author of an influential 
photometric atlas of the solar spectrum, theoretical 
analyses of the Sun’s atmosphere, and Astrophysical 
Quantities, a compendium of astronomical data. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Allen, David (1946-94) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Allen, David (1946-94) 


English-born infrared observational astronomer at the 
Anglo-Australian Observatory, Sydney. Made and used 
instruments on a wide range of astronomical objects; first 
person to detect surface features on Venus, from infrared 
emission of ground beneath the clouds. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Allende Meteorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Allende Meteorite 


The largest known fall of a carbonaceous chondrite. On 
8 February 1969 an exceptionally brilliant fireball was 
seen in the skies of northern Mexico, followed by a 
series of sonic booms. The next day a meteorite was 
found in the village of Pueblito de Allende. This was 
the first of hundreds of fragments, totalling 2 tonnes, 
subsequently collected from the surrounding area. The 
elliptical strewnfield—the name given to the area in which 
the fragments of a meteorite fall—measured about 7 x 
50 km; the largest single fragment (110 g) was found at its 
far tip. It has been estimated that the parent body weighed 
as much as 30 tonnes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Almanac ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Almanac 


An annual publication that tabulates daily positional 
and related data for the Sun, Moon, planets and other 
celestial bodies, and lists events and phenomena such as 
lunar phases, times of sunrise and sunset and eclipses. 
Almanacs of this kind are used primarily by astronomers 
and navigators. 


See also: ephemerides. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Alpha Centauri 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alpha Centauri 


The star w Centauri, also known (especially to navigators) 
as ‘Rigel Kentaurus’ or ‘Rigil Kent’. With an apparent 
visual magnitude of —0.28 it is the third brightest star in 
the sky. A telescope, however, shows it to be a binary 
system, the components being a yellow G2V star, a Cen 
A, of magnitude —0.01, and an orange K1V star, a Cen B, 
of magnitude 1.35. Their separation is currently 19.1” at 
position angle 215°; the period is 81.2 years. The absolute 
magnitudes of the component stars are 4.3 for a Cen Aand 
5.7 for a Cen B. There is also a much more distant third 
member of the multiple star system, Proxima Centauri, of 
apparent magnitude 11.01; it is separated from the main 
pair by 2.2° at position angle 213°. Proxima (a Cen C) is so 
named as it is believed to be the closest star to the Sun, at 
a distance of 4.22 light-years, parallax 0.772”. The parallax 
of the main binary pair is 0.742”, equivalent to a distance 
of 4.39 light-years. Proxima is a red dwarf of very low 
luminosity (absolute magnitude 15.4, spectral type M5Ve). 
It is a noted flare star, which often (but unpredictably) 
brightens briefly by about one magnitude. 


See also: Proxima Centauri. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Alpha Centauri A+B 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alpha Centauri A+B 


Alpha Centauri A and Alpha Centauri B comprise the 
closest BINARYSYSTEM to Earth. A third star, PROXIMACENTAURI, 
is thought to be in orbit about the center of mass of Alpha 
Centauri A and B. Other common names for this binary 
include Rigel Kentaurus and Toliman. 

The word Centauri translates to the centaur, a 
mythological creature that was half human and half horse. 
It is believed that this constellation was named for Chiron, 
an unusually wise and gentle creature who was a tutor 
to Heracles. When Heracles accidentally wounded the 
immortal Chiron with a poisoned arrow, Zeus graciously 
allowed him to die, giving him a place among the stars. 

Alpha Centauri A and B are located in the southern 
sky at right ascension 14 hours 39 minutes 36 seconds 
and declination —60°, 50 minutes and 07 seconds at a 
distance of 4.4 light-years. Alpha Centauri A, with spectral 
type G2, has apparent and absolute magnitudes of 0.0 
and 4.4 respectively. Alpha Centauri B, spectral type 
K1, has apparent and absolute magnitudes of 1.3 and 5.7 
respectively. Note that the difference between absolute 
and apparent magnitudes for each star is the same. This is 
a direct result of the fact that they are at the same distance. 

The supposed third star in the system, Proxima 
Centauri, is much dimmer. It has a spectral type of M5 
and apparent and absolute magnitudes of 11.1 and 15.5 
respectively. This star is believed to be orbiting about 
the center of mass for Alpha Centauri A and B along 
a hyperbolic orbit. It has been suggested that this star 
system could be extended to include as many as 12 stars. 

Since this binary system is the closest to Earth, and 
may have additional members of non-trivial influence, 
it provides an excellent environment for studying 
gravitationally bound stellar systems that orbit about 
a common center of mass. Accurate measurements of 
the size, mass and orbital parameters for these stars are 
necessary in order to fine-tune methods for determining 
the same parameters for more distant multiple stellar 
systems. 


Robert Mohr 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Alpha Particle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alpha Particle 


Term that is sometimes used to describe a helium nucleus, 
a positively charged particle that consists of two protons 
and two neutrons, bound together. Alpha particles, 
which were discovered by Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937) 
in 1898, are emitted by atomic nuclei that are undergoing 
alpha radioactivity. During this process, an unstable 
heavy nucleus spontaneously emits an alpha particle and 
transmutes (changes) into a nucleus of a different (lighter) 
element. Studies of the way in which alpha particles were 
scattered by atoms in thin sheets of mica and gold led 
Rutherford, in 1910, to the discovery of the atomic nucleus. 

Alpha particles are found in the solar wind and 
are produced in collision events in high-energy particle 
accelerators. An important nuclear reaction, called the 
triple-alpha reaction, which welds helium nuclei (alpha 
particles) together to form carbon nuclei, occurs in red 
giant stars. 


See also: atom, cosmic rays, neutron, nucleosynthesis, 
proton, radioactivity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Alpher, Ralph Asher (1921-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alpher, Ralph Asher (1921-) 


Physicist, born in Washington, DC. With HANS BETHE 
and GEORGE GAMow, he proposed in 1948 the ‘alpha- 
beta-gamma’ theory of the creation of the elements by 
successive addition of nucleons to hydrogen to build up 
the periodic table (the alpha part of the name of the theory 
referred to Alpher). This idea, subsequently shown by 
MARGARET BURBIDGE, Geoffery Burbidge, WILLIAM FOWLER and 
FRED HOYLE to be incorrect, became part of the ‘big bang’ 
model of the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


al-Quhi, Abu Sahl Wayjan ibn Rustam (c. 940-c. 1000) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


al-Quhi, Abu Sahl Wayjan ibn Rustam 
(c. 940—c. 1000) 


Persian geometer and astronomer born in Tabaristan (now 
Mazanderan, Iran), built and directed an observatory in 
Shiraz to study the planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


al-Sufi, Abu al-Rahman (903-86) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


al-Sufi, Abu al-Rahman (903-86) 


Persian astronomer, published works on astronomical 
instruments. Revised proLemy’s star catalog as the Book 
of the Constellations of the Fixed Stars, with improved 
magnitudes, stars named by reference to constellation 
figures (much copied, for example by ALFONSO x as Libros 
del Saber de Astronomia), and nebulae, including the 
Andromeda Galaxy (M31). However, the work was not 
entirely original since not all the star positions were re- 
observed. Al-Sufi also mentions a ‘nebulous star’ north of 
delta Velorum, which is probably the open cluster IC 2391, 
and an asterism in Vulpecula (Brocchi’s Cluster, Collinder 
399, also known as the Coat-hanger Cluster). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Altazimuth Mounting 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Altazimuth Mounting 


A telescope mounting that has axes in the horizontal and 
vertical planes to enable the telescope to be swivelled 
in altitude (perpendicular to the horizon) and azimuth 
(parallel to the horizon). This type of mounting 
is simpler, cheaper to construct, and less prone to 
flexure and changes of balance than the equatorial 
mounting. However, because (except for observers 
located at the north and south poles of the Earth) both 
the altitude and the azimuth of a celestial object change 
continuously as a result of its diurnal motion across the 
sky, the telescope must be driven around both axes at 
varying speeds. Because of the difficulties involved in 
achieving this before the development of computer control 
techniques, until recently the overwhelming majority of 
optical astronomical telescopes (apart from some small 
instruments and specialist amateur telescopes such as the 
Dobsonian) were attached to equatorial mountings. In 
recent years, altazimuth mountings in which the drive 
rates for the two axes are computer controlled have 
become the only way to construct large modern optical 
telescopes such as the two 10 m Keck telescopes (the largest 
individual optical telescopes), the component telescopes 
of the Very Large Telescope (VLT) and the 8 m Gemini 
instruments and are economical for all optical telescopes 
over, say, 2 m aperture. Altazimuth mountings are also 
widely used for large radio dishes. 


See also: altitude, azimuth, celestial coordinates, diurnal 
motion, Dobsonian telescope, equatorial mounting, 
Nasmyth telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Altitude 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Altitude 


The angle between the horizon and a star, measured in 
a direction perpendicular to the plane of the horizon. 
Together with a value of azimuth, this specifies the position 
in the sky of a celestial body at a particular instant, as seen 
by an observer at a particular point on the Earth’s surface. 

Due to the rotation of the Earth, the altitude of a 
star continually changes. For example, an observer in the 
northern hemisphere will see a star rise in the east, reach its 
maximum altitude when due south (culmination), and set 
in the west. Observers located at the north or south poles, 
however, will see stars move parallel to the horizon, so 
maintaining constant altitude. 

Altitude also refers to the height of an object (e.g. an 
artificial satellite) above mean sea level. 


Seealso: azimuth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Alvarez, Luis Walter (1911-88) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alvarez, Luis Walter (1911-88) 


Physicist and astronomer, born in San Francisco, CA, pro- 
fessor at the University of California, Nobel prizewinner 
(1968) for his discoveries in particle physics. Used cosmic 
rays to ‘x-ray’ the pyramids of Egypt, finding in partic- 
ular that the tombs in the Great Pyramid at Giza had no 
hidden rooms. Alvarez (and his son) discovered globally 
distributed iridium at the Cretaceous/Tertiary boundary 
in the Earth’s geological record (which, described in terms 
of geological strata, is a widespread discontinuity in rock 
types and directions, and can be interpreted as a whole- 
sale change in the Earth’s climate). He proposed that the 
change of climate and the disappearance of the dinosaurs 
at that time, some 65 million years ago, resulted from a cat- 
aclysmic collision of an asteroid with the Earth, asteroids 
being relatively rich in iridium. The crater of the colli- 
sion has since been identified in the Yucatan peninsula of 
north-eastern Mexico. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


al-Zarqali [known as Azarchiel, Azaquiel, Azachel or 
As Sarkali] (around 1080) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


al-Zargali [known as Azarchiel, 
Azaquiel, Azachel or As Sarkali] 
(around 1080) 


Spanish Islamic astronomer and instrument-maker (in 
Andalusia). Developed new theories of solar motion and 
edited the Toledan Tables, based in part on Indian methods 
of calculation of the positions of the planets. These tables 
influenced the Alfonsine Tables (see ALFONSO x). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


AM Herculis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


AM Herculis 


AM Herculis (AM Her) is the prototype and brightest of 
a class of short-period CATACLYSMIC BINARIES (CB) in which a 
strongly magnetic WHITE DwarrF accretes gas from a Roche- 
lobe filling sub-solar mass companion. The magnetic field 
is sufficiently strong (B; 2 20 MG; MG = 10° gauss) to 
affect qualitatively the most fundamental characteristics 
of the binary: preventing the formation of an accretion 
disk and forcing mass transfer to occur entirely through 
one or more gas streams; channeling flow near the 
white dwarf into a near-radial funnel which liberates its 
accretion energy in a shock above the magnetic pole; and 
synchronizing the rotation of the white dwarf to the orbital 
motion of the companion, such that all basic phenomena 
are orchestrated on a common period Pspin = Porb- 
Because the gas arrives at the white dwarf surface 
under virtual free-fall, the post-shock plasma temperature 
is high and AM Her-type binaries are strong x-ray emitters. 
Most of the current catalog of ~50 such systems (see x- 
RAY BINARY STARS) results from all-sky satellite surveys for 
x-rays. AM Her itself was cataloged as a VARIABLE STAR a 
half-century before its identification with the x-ray source 
3U 1809+50 attracted the attention of observers. With 
typical periods in the range 1.5 S Pop S 4h and stellar 
masses M, ~ 0.6Mo, M2 ~ 0.2Mo, an entire AM Her-type 
binary would commonly fit within the disk of the Sun. 
The systems (figure 1) are therefore compact laboratories 
for studying the physics of high-temperature, magnetized 
PLASMAS as Well as the magnetic interactions between stars. 


The accretion spot 

Traditionally, the defining characteristic of an AM Her- 
type binary has been the strong optical circular polar- 
ization (~5%-30%) of the cyclotron emission radiated in 
the post-shock flow just above the white dwarf surface. 
Cyclotron emission is the radiation of high-speed (but 
non-relativistic) electrons spiraling around magnetic field 
lines, and one of the very few astrophysical processes 
which gives rise to a tendency for the electric vector of 
the emitted radiation to oscillate in a pattern with a net 
circular component, as opposed to purely linear behav- 
ior (linear polarization) or no preferential pattern (un- 
polarized). The property is so unique to the magnetic 
synchronized CBs as to earn them the designation po- 
lars. 

The emission spectrum of an electron gyrating in a 
magnetic field occurs at multiples of the Larmor angular 
frequency 

eB 


Qy = : 
MeC 


By analogy with isolated white dwarfs, the strong optical 
circular polarization of AM Her was initially interpreted 
to occur near the cyclotron fundamental w, = w,, hence 
to imply a magnetic field strength Bj ~ 200 MG. 
However, spectropolarimetric observations during a lapse 
in ACCRETION (figure 2) revealed the Zeeman signature of a 
magnetic field of only 10-20 MG in the absorption lines of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Sketch of the cataclysmic binary AM Her as seen from 
the Earth for a binary phase g ~ 0.1. Gas flows through the 
inner Lagrangian point of the low-mass companion star in a 
largely free-falling stream onto an accretion shock located near 
the magnetic pole of the white dwarf. From here, the emission of 
x-rays and circularly polarized optical/infrared cyclotron 
emission dominates the light output of the system. The binary 
orbits in a counter-clockwise fashion around the center of mass 
(cross) in this figure. 


H& Fe DAS6o 


iz, » Tia | To 


S00 $500 5000 
WAVELENGTH {4} 


Figure 2. Total flux (bottom) and circular polarization (top) 
spectra of AM Her obtained during a lapse in accretion. Evident 
are the polarized, Zeeman-split absorption lines of Ha, HB, and 
Hy ina photospheric field of 10-20 MG. The TiO features 
originate on the cool companion star. 


the hydrogen Balmer series. Since the secondary star was 
also evident in this low state, the Zeeman spectrum was 
assigned to the disk-averaged photosphere of the magnetic 
white dwarf and the high-state polarized light attributed 
to cyclotron emission in harmonic numbers 5 S m < 10. 
Subsequently, individual thermally broadened cyclotron 
harmonics were recognized in high-state spectra, and a 
polar field strength of 14 MG was inferred!. 

The accretion stream impacts the white dwarf with a 


| The field pattern is not that of a centered dipole (see table 1). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


AM Herculis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


velocity 
v ~ J/2GM,/R, ~ 3000 kms. 


In addition to cyclotron radiation, the post-shock flow 
cools by x-ray bremsstrahlung (free-free emission) with 
a characteristic temperature kThrem ~ 20-30 keV. The 
~50% of each of these components which is directed 
downward is absorbed and re-radiated by the white dwarf, 
giving rise to a third, ‘blackbody’, component which was 
predicted by the original models to have a luminosity 
Leg ~ Leyc + Lorem, and temperature kTgg ~ 20 eV (in 
the soft x-rays). These ideas were very broadly consistent 
with early observations. However, a ‘reversed’ x-ray mode 
of AM Her was later observed in which the hard and 
soft x-rays were each strongly modulated on the binary 
period, but antiphased with each other. It was quickly 
realized that this mode signifies the temporary activation 
of gas flow onto the opposite magnetic pole. Here, for 
whatever reason, accretion apparently occurs primarily in 
the form of dense clumps each of mass ~101 g that deposit 
their kinetic energy deep in the atmosphere of the white 
dwarf, heating the surrounding photosphere from below 
to ~10° K. Direct evidence for ‘blobby’ accretion exists in 
the form of flickering in the optical and x-ray light curves 
even in the ‘normal’ x-ray mode; hence clumps must be 
more or less important in all flows, a trait which distorts the 
energy balance from that predicted by the simple model’. 

For the stellar parameters listed in table 1, the 
observed total high-state luminosity of AM Her, L ~ 
5 x 10” erg s“!, implies an accretion rate 


y LR -10 -1 
M= ~1x10™ Mog yr 
GM, on 


with the low-state mass-transfer rate down by an order 
of magnitude or more. The emission is not likely to be 
uniform over the stream footpoint; a high-density core 
will be relatively compressed and radiate primarily in 
the hard x-rays, while a more rarefied sheath will have a 
greater stand-off shock height and favor cyclotron cooling. 
Because of the importance of irradiation from above and 
sub-photospheric heating, the soft x-rays are expected to 
arise from still larger regions. These ideas are confirmed by 
a variety of observations which reveal that the spot area as 
a fraction of the white dwarf surface varies from f < 107+ 
for the bremsstrahlung emission to f ~ 0.1 for the heated 
polar cap in the near-UV. 


The gas stream 

InaRocne-Losé filling accretion binary, mass transfer occurs 
through the inner Lagrangian point L1, where the net 
gravitational force in the co-rotating coordinate frame is 
zero. Launched by their modest thermal velocity, atoms 
are quickly ionized by the intense x-ray/UV radiation and 
accelerate toward the white dwarf under the combined 


? This stochastic flickering should be distinguished from the 
quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs) observed in optical light and 
attributed to oscillations of the shock front. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Properties of AM Her 


Apparent magnitude, my 12-15.8 
Period, P 3.09 h 
White dwarf mass, My ~0.45Mo 
Companion star mass, M2 ~0.23M6 
Companion star spectral type M4-5 
Distance, D 90 pe 
Field strength, B; (dipolar) 18 MG 
Dipole offset, AR1/Ri 0.17 
Inclination, i 50° 
Dipole colatitude, 6 55° 
Dipole longitude, 30° 


influence of the increasing gravitational field and Coriolis 
effects. The result is to divert the stream in the prograde 
direction. Inanon-magnetic CB, the gas then loops around 
the white dwarf, collides with the upstream flow, and 
diffuses into an ACCRETION DISK surrounding the compact 
star. In the AM Her-type systems, the magnetic field of 
the white dwarf begins to dominate the kinematics of the 
ionized stream at roughly the Alfvén radius, given by 

B? a pu 


8x 


This transition from ballistic to magnetically controlled 
regions of the flow occurs at a distance of ~5-10R, 
above the white dwarf surface. Downstream of the 
‘coupling region’, the plasma clumps are more or less 
fully threaded by the rapidly increasing magnetic field and 
approximately follow dipolar trajectories. In general, this 
includes deflecting the flow out of the orbital plane (see 
figure 1). 

Because the original stream has a non-negligible 
cross section and coupling occurs over a significant linear 
distance, different portions of the stream eventually trace 
different field lines to the surface and the resulting 
accretion footpoint better resembles an arc than a circular 
spot. Indeed, gas is already traveling at a speed of 
~1000 km s~! when it encounters the magnetosphere of 
the white dwarf, so threading is unlikely to be a casual 
process. When AM Her is in its two-pole mode, the 
flow apparently branches from the coupling region into a 
second stream which impacts the magnetic star at a site 
roughly diametrically opposite the main pole. A more 
familiar example of the same physics is the twin auroral 
zones produced by the capture of solar flare particles by 
the Earth’s magnetosphere. 

The radiatively-ionized gas stream is also a copious 
emitter of recombination radiation. Due to the high- 
velocity, collimated flow, emission lines are broad and 
highly variable in radial velocity as well as in profile 
throughout the orbit. In contrast to a typical astrophysical 
nebula, the line flux from the stream shows Fry ~ Fug ~ 
Fre, indicating high optical depths in the dense flow 
(N. = 103 cm=?). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


AM Herculis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The stellar components 

Cyclotron opacities at high harmonic number are strongly 
direction dependent and polarization sensitive. For 
viewpoints near the local magnetic field direction, the 
emission is comparatively faint and circularly polarized 
with a sense (+/—) that reflects the field polarity. 
Perpendicular lines of sight measure strong linear 
polarization and a source enhanced by the effects of 
‘cyclotron beaming’. Because the accretion funnel and 
resulting shock are affixed to roughly radial magnetic field 
lines on the co-rotating white dwarf, the variations of 
cyclotron flux and polarization depend on the detailed 
geometry of the binary: the inclination i, the co-latitude 
of the magnetic pole £, and the longitude of the field 
axis relative to the stellar line of centers yy. When phase- 
resolved observations of the polarized cyclotron light 
are combined with radial-velocity studies of the funnel 
emission lines and stellar absorption lines, these quantities 
can be more or less uniquely determined and remarkably 
detailed pictures of the systems constructed. Moreover, 
comparison of magnetic field strengths in the opposing 
accretion regions of two-pole systems can be used to 
deduce the morphology of the field pattern on the white 
dwarf (e.g. dipole, offset dipole, quadrupole). The entries 
in table 1 and the scale drawing in figure 1 result from such 
analyses of AM Her. 

In virtually all CBs, the mass of the secondary is 
sufficiently low that the star’s main-sequence lifetime 
exceeds the age of the Galaxy and it is assumed to be 
largely unevolved. When the star can be observed directly, 
such as in a low-accretion state, the measured spectral 
type is generally consistent with the inferred mass and 
radius. However, for M, < Mj, contact between the 
donor star and its Roche surface can be maintained in 
the face of mass transfer only if angular momentum is 
removed from the system. This implies that the orbit 
must decay with time—and the period decrease—at least 
until the secondary becomes fully degenerate. Current 
ideas identify the angular momentum loss mechanism 
with gravitational radiation plus, for the higher mass- 
transfer rates of objects with P = 3h, magnetic braking by 
a solar-type wind swept outward along the magnetic field 
lines of the tidally-locked magnetic companion star. It has 
been argued that this situation is modified when a strongly 
magnetic, synchronized primary star is present, since a 
large fraction of the field lines of the secondary would 
then terminate on the white dwarf. The reduced number 
of ‘open’ lines from the secondary star would reduce the 
effectiveness of the magnetic braking mechanism. The 
synchronized systems—including AM Her—do indeed 
appear to have accretion rates that are systematically lower 
than non-magnetic CBs at the same orbital period, so it 
is possible that the magnetic field even affects the period 
evolution of the binary. At the same time, it is not clear 
that even two decades of observation is a sufficiently long 
baseline to evaluate the secular mass-transfer rate of a close 
binary which has evolutionary timescales ranging from 
~10°-10' yr (for nova eruptions) to nearly 10° yr (for orbital 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


period decay). The cause of the low-accretion states, which 
include an abrupt shut-off in the x-ray flux of AM Her by 
a factor 7 in just 40 min and can persist for many months, 
is also unknown. 


Spin/orbit synchronism 
The primary star of AM Her is subject to an accretion 
torque 


21 : 
Nace ~ ~p Rim ~5 x 10% dyncm 


where R,; is the distance of the L1 point from the white 
dwarf. Left alone, this would spin up the white dwarf on 
a timescale t ~ 10° yr. Thus, the accretion torque must 
be balanced by an offsetting torque which maintains the 
spin period of the white dwarf equal to the orbital period of 
the companion. Because any magnetic interaction must be 
weaker when the component separation is larger (binary 
younger), it is often felt that an additional, dissipative, 
torque must act to slow the white dwarf spin rate and 
initially synchronize the motions. Among the proposed 
possibilities are magnetostatic interactions with either 
intrinsically magnetic or nonmagnetic secondary stars, 
and magnetohydrodynamic effects in which electrical 
currents are driven through the rarefied plasma medium 
of the binary. While it is probably not possible to be 
conclusive in any individual case, empirical clues as to 
the nature of the interaction(s) are potentially available in 
the distribution of dipole longitudes y for the equilibrium 
configurations and in possible drifts or slow angular 
oscillations of the dipole within the binaries. Real-time 
observations of re-synchronizing magnetic NOvA systems 
which have been decoupled by nova eruptions also hold 
promise for elucidating this unique aspect of the physics 
of AM Her-type systems. 


Bibliography 

An inkling of the excitement (and confusion) which 
surrounded the early work on AM Her can be gained 
from four successive papers in the 15 March 1977 
issue of Astrophys. J., including especially: Tapia S 
1977 Discovery of a magnetic compact star in the AM 
Herculis/3U 1809+50 system Astrophys. J. 212 125. 

Much of the initial physics and the model for a syn- 
chronized system was presented by Stockman H S, 
Schmidt G D, Angel J R P, Liebert J, Tapia S and Beaver 
EA 1977 New observations and a slow rotator model 
of the x-ray binary AM Herculis Astrophys. J. 217 815. 

A comprehensive summary of modern research on 
magnetic as well as non-magnetic CBs is compiled by 
Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 


Gary Schmidt 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Amateur Astronomical Societies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Amateur Astronomical Societies 


Amateur astronomy has a long and distinguished history. 
For example, William Herschel, discoverer of the planet 
Uranus and perhaps the greatest of all observers, began 
his career as an amateur; in 1845 the third Earl of 
Rosse built what was then much the most powerful 
telescope in the world—the Birr Castle 72 in reflector— 
and used it to discover the spiral forms of the objects 
we now know to be galaxies. Modern amateurs carry 
out work which professionals have no time to do, are 
disinclined to do or are not equipped to do (see AMATEUR- 
PROFESSIONAL COLLABORATION IN ASTRONOMY). However, an 
observer working on his own can produce relatively little 
of value—and this is where amateur astronomical societies 
play such a major role. 

It is important to note that to a considerable degree 
amateur and professional societies show considerable 
overlap. For example, in Britain the ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL 
society, the main professional organization, has many 
amateur members, and in fairly recent times some 
amateurs have even served as presidents (for example, 
W H Steavenson, a medical doctor). The BRITISH 
ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION (BAA) is mainly amateur but 
also includes many professionals, and past presidents 
have included several Astronomers Royal. The same 
situation applies in most other countries. Even the 
INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION, the controlling body of 
world astronomy, has a few amateur members. 

Britain has always been prominent in astronomical 
research, so it may be useful to give a brief account of how 
the various societies have developed there. 

The Royal Astronomical Society, of course, dates 
back to the 1820s, and one of the earliest presidents 
was Sir William Hershel (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). There 
were restrictions on entry; in particular, no women were 
allowed to become fellows until much later. There 
was a clear need for a national amateur society, and 
in the 1880s came the Liverpool Astronomical Society, 
which mushroomed into an international organization. 
Then, suddenly, it collapsed, partly because of financial 
problems and partly because of poor administration. It 
was then that the BAA was formed; its first meeting was 
held in London in 1890. 

From the outset, the BAA set out to be an 
observational society, and different sections were formed, 
each controlled by an experienced director. For example, 
one section was devoted entirely to the observation of the 
planet Jupiter, and regular reports were issued, both in 
the Association’s monthly Journal and in the specialized 
Memoirs (see ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES AND PUBLICATIONS). It 
is probably true to say that these publications represent 
the best and most continuous series of observations 
of Jupiter available, and the work continues today, 
although it is true that the space-probe results have to 
some extent superseded any Earth-based observational 
program. Other sections dealt with the Sun, the Moon, 
Mars, comets, variable stars and so on. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Initially, the BAA was frowned upon by the Royal 
Astronomical Society, but it soon became clear that there 
would be no conflict of interest, and for many years now 
the two societies have been based in the same building at 
Burlington House in Piccadilly. Various branches of the 
BAA were established, although one by one they decided 
to break away and become totally independent. Only the 
New South Wales Branch in Australia remains today. 

There were no restrictions on entry, and there have 
been some very young members!. However, at one point 
it was felt that there could be a need a for society catering 
entirely for young people. A proposal for a junior section 
was put to the BAA Council but was not accepted. This 
led to the formation of the Junior Astronomical Society 
(JAS), and it was assumed that young enthusiasts would 
join the JAS and then move on to the BAA. This did happen 
initially, but in the 1960s the JAS decided to become a 
parallel organization; it is now known as the Society for 
Popular Astronomy. 

There can be no doubt that the BAA has been an 
extremely successful organization, and for many years it 
was in a class of its own. To some extent this is still true, 
but it was centered mainly in London, and there was a 
need for local societies also. By now almost every major 
city and town in the British Isles has its own society, and 
many of these are affiliated to the BAA. 

One great advantage of a local society is that it can 
set up an observatory. Public observatories in Britain are 
rare, and local societies have been invaluable in filling this 
gap. Some are extremely well equipped and capable of 
carrying out work of professional standard. Moreover, 
many young enthusiasts who begin by joining their nearest 
society go on to become professional astronomers. School 
societies flourish, although it is true that they depend on 
the presence of a least one dedicated member of staff. 
A few schools even have their own radio astronomy 
observatories (Taunton School in Somerset, for example). 

There are many amateur societies in Scotland and also 
inIreland. Active societies also exist in the Channel Islands 
and the Isle of Man. All these various societies are linked 
and work together to their mutual benefit. Moreover, 
many of them publish their own regular journals, and their 
activities and results are reported in national periodicals 
such as Modern Astronomer and Astronomy Now. 

The situation in the United States is much better from 
the public observatory point of view, and amateur societies 
are very numerous indeed. Of particular importance is the 
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF VARIABLE STAR OBSERVERS (AAVSO), 
which is the largest organization of its kind anywhere 
in the world and produces a vast number of important 
observations. Predictably it is made up of both amateurs 
and professionals, but for sheer visual work it is the 
amateurs who are the most prolific, especially now 
that they can use electronic devices such as CCDs and 


1 Tf] may add a personal note: I was elected in 1934, at the age of 
11, when the President was the then Astronomer Royal, Sir Harold 
Spencer Jones. I became President exactly 50 years later. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Amateur Astronomical Societies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


can produce results which will satisfy any professional 
researcher. To list all the other major societies would take 
many pages, but particular mention should be made of 
the ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY OF THE PACIFIC, which has many 
amateur members. 

Canada has two main societies: the Canadian 
Astronomical Society (mainly professional) and the ROYAL 
ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY OF CANADA (part professional, part 
amateur). The same sort of situation applies in Australia 
and in New Zealand. Amateur societies flourish in almost 
all European countries and in Russia. Japan, of course, has 
a great tradition of amateur observational work, and here 
too there are both national and local organizations. 

Naturally, all societies—national and local—have 
their regular meetings, and these are invaluable, because 
it is often possible to invite well-known speakers who will 
be able to give advice and encouragement. 

Financial considerations are always very much to the 
fore. Subscription rates are kept as low as possible, but 
bills have to be paid, particularly if premises of any kind 
are involved. Local authorities will often help, though 
others are much less cooperative (in Britain, one society 
was recently forced to abandon its observatory because 
the council decided to increase the ground rent to an 
impossible amount). However, even a society which has 
no headquarters or observatory will almost certainly have 
members who possess telescopes of their own and will 
make them available to newcomers. By now there are also 
some ambitious societies which are setting up their own 
planetaria—and surely a planetarium is the best possible 
educational aid. There are plenty of these in the United 
States and a few in Britain, notably the planetarium now 
being erected near Chichester, in Sussex, by the South 
Downs Astronomical Society. 

There has been one setback in recent years. It was 
proposed to form an international amateur organization 
to correlate the work of societies all over the world, 
and during the 1960s, at a General Assembly of the 
International Astronomical Union, such an organization 
was actually set up: the International Union of Amateur 
Astronomers (IUAA). It has issued some publications and 
has held several meetings in different countries, but it has 
to be admitted that it has never been a real success, again 
for reasons of financial constraint. In the future it is hoped 
that it will be extended and that it will play a really useful 
role, but it is difficult to organize, and much remains to be 
done. 

Meanwhile, amateur astronomical societies exist 
in virtually all countries. Their value cannot be 
overestimated, and today, in the Space Age, their role is 
even more important than it has been in past years. 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Amateur-Professional Collaboration in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Amateur—Professional Collaboration 
in Astronomy 


It is probably true to say that, in most branches of science, 
the day of the amateur is over. No modern amateur can 
expect to undertake important research work in physics, 
for example, where elaborate and expensive equipment is 
essential; neither can he expect to make a major theoretical 
discovery, because a very rigorous training is needed. 
True, there is still scope for some good amateur work in 
geology and paleontology, but it is with astronomy that 
the amateur really comes into his own. 

A century ago, there were various branches of 
astronomy in which the amateur reigned supreme. The 
best observations of the Moon and the surfaces of the 
planets were made by amateurs, and this was still true 
until not long before the Second World War. It is also 
worth remembering that in 1845 the 3RD EARL OF ROSSE, 
with no expert help, built what was then much the most 
powerful telescope ever constructed—the 72 in reflector at 
Birr Castle, in Ireland—and used it to discover the forms 
of the objects then called spiral nebulae, and now known 
to be external galaxies. (It is pleasing to note that, after 
a long period of neglect, the Birr telescope has now been 
restored to full use, even though it is of course by no means 
the equal of a modern telescope of the same aperture.) 

Around 1900, photography took over from the eye 
for most branches of astronomy. Today photography is 
itself being superseded by electronic aids, such as CHARGE- 
COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs), which are far more sensitive. No 
longer does the astronomer have to spend hours in a 
cold, dark dome, making sure that his telescope is still 
firmly fixed on its target object; he need not be in the 
dome at all, or even in the same country. Everything 
comes through on a television screen. This has obvious 
advantages, quite apart from comfort, but it does mean 
that the professional astronomer seldom or never actually 
looks through a telescope, and he has no need to have a 
practical knowledge of the sky. It is almost certainly true 
to say that few professional astronomers can recognize 
more than half a dozen constellations!. Some amateurs, 
on the other hand, have a truly encyclopedic knowledge 
of the sky and can identify many hundreds of stars with 
no trouble at all. 

Amateur equipment has changed markedly in the 
recent past. Fifty years ago the average amateur used 
a telescope of moderate aperture—say up to 18 in 
for a REFLECTOR—and was more concerned with visual 
work than with photography. Today, the well-equipped 
amateur has become skilled in electronics. Using a CCD 
with, say, a 15 in telescope, a modern amateur can produce 
results which would match those of major professional 
observatories in the immediate post-war era. 


1 | well remember one well-known professional astronomer 
telephoning me to say that he had just found a nova, and was 
about to notify the Royal Observatory. In fact, he had made a 
completely independent discovery of the planet Saturn. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There are, of course, some amateurs who do not 
use telescopes at all. Naked-eye work can be useful, 
particularly with regard to meteors and aurorae (see the 
article on NAKED-EYE ASTRONOMY). However, binoculars can 
be very valuable indeed (see BINOCULARASTRONOMY), notably 
in the hands of those amateurs who spend their time 
in searching for comets and novae. George Alcock, an 
English schoolmaster, has now discovered four comets and 
three novae, all with the aid of powerful binoculars. He 
‘sweeps’ the sky, and his knowledge of the star patterns 
is so good that he can recognize a newcomer at a glance. 
He is not alone in this; there have been many recent comet 
discoveries by amateurs—including the two most recent 
‘great’ comets, Hyakutake of 1996 and Hale—Bopp of 1997. 

One of the outstanding amateurs of the present day is 
an Australian clergyman, the Rev. Robert Evans. He uses 
a portable telescope and scans external galaxies to search 
for supernovae. So far he has found more than 20. A 
supernova is a colossal stellar outburst, marking the death 
of a star; in our own Galaxy no naked-eye supernovae 
have been seen since the year 1604, but they do occur 
in the outer systems, many millions of light-years away. 
Nobody can tell when a supernova will burst forth, and it 
is important to obtain observations as early as possible, 
so that the advance warnings given by amateurs such 
as Evans are of vital significance. Searches of this kind 
are now being carried on by many amateurs, with great 
success. Some observers, such as Evans, work visually; 
others use photography or CCD equipment. It is hardly 
necessary to add that contributions of this kind are very 
warmly welcomed by professional astronomers. 

Ordinary novae can also be identified by amateurs, 
with their knowledge of the sky, and in recent years 
several minor planets or asteroids have also been found 
in the same way. Clearly it is essential to give prompt 
notification of a discovery. There are centers in many 
countries, but every confirmed discovery is announced 
by the telegram service of the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL 
UNION (IAU), which has world-wide coverage. It is also 
true, of course, that many alleged ‘discoveries’ turn out to 
be false alarms, and every effort is made to filter these out 
before they waste valuable observing time. 

Variable-star work has always been a major part 
of amateur observational astronomy. VARIABLE STARS are 
of many kinds. Some, such as the Cepheids, are as 
regular as clockwork; others, such as the Mira stars, 
differ in behavior from one cycle to another; yet others 
are completely irregular, so that one can never tell what 
they will do next. There are so many variable stars 
that professional astronomers cannot hope to keep track 
of them all, and great reliance is placed on amateur 
work. Much of this is purely visual. The procedure is 
to compare the variable with nearby stars which do not 
fluctuate. With a little practice it is not difficult to make 
estimates correct to one-tenth of a magnitude, and for most 
purposes this is good enough. Using photometers, it is 
possible to obtain estimates which are far more accurate 
that this, and it is true that most modern amateurs who are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Amateur-Professional Collaboration in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


seriously concerned with variable-star research do have 
photometric equipment. A really large telescope is not 
essential; a reflector of, say, 6-12 in aperture will give 
its owner more work than he can possible handle. The 
results are correlated by organizations such as the Variable 
Star Section of the BRITISH ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION and the 
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF VARIABLE STAR OBSERVERS. 

There are some variables which are within naked-eye 
range; such is Gamma Cassiopeiae, in the W of Cassiopeia, 
which is an unstable ‘shell’ star. It is usually just below 
the second magnitude, but in the late 1930s brightened 
up abruptly by more than half a magnitude, subsequently 
sinking to below magnitude 3 before returning to its 
normal state. The early observations of the 1930s outburst 
were amateur, and one never knows when the same will 
happen again. Many dozens of variables can be followed 
with binoculars, and accurate light curves can be drawn 
up. 

So far as the Moon is concerned, amateur work led 
the way for many years. Before the possibility of space 
missions, most professionals were concerned only with 
lunar movements, and amateur maps were the best of 
the time. There was also the chance of making really 
interesting discoveries, such as formations in the libration 
areas, near the edge of the Earth-turned hemisphere. 
When the Russians sent up their first circumlunar probe, 
Lunik 3, in 1959, they obtained photographs of the far 
side, which is never visible from Earth because it is 
always turned away from us; amateur maps were used to 
correlate the Lunik 3 results with the Earth-turned regions. 
However, the situation has changed now. Space missions 
have enabled us to obtain detailed charts of the entire 
Moon, and amateur cartography has lost its value, but 
there is still work to be done. Although the Moon is 
more or less inert, there are occasional very brief, obscure 
outbreaks which are known as TLP or transient lunar 
phenomena. Presumably these are due to mild release 
of gases from below the crust, and they have been seen 
so often, and by so many reliable observers (including 
a few professionals), that it is difficult to question their 
reality. Confirmation of their reality was obtained in 1999 
by A Dolfus using visual and polarimetric measurements. 
Dedicated amateurs are studying them, and the results are 
of great interest. 

Occultations of stars by the Moon are still useful, 
and amateurs are expert at timing them. There are also 
occultations of star by asteroids, and because the tracks 
are so narrow the amateur has a great advantage; he can 
take a suitable telescope to just the right place at just the 
right time, which the professional cannot do. Important 
measurements of asteroid positions and dimensions have 
been made in this way. 

Amateur solar work is also becoming of increasing 
importance. Casual tracking of sunspots is interesting, but 
for real solar research a considerable amount of complex 
equipment is needed. H-alpha filters are now common, 
and there are a few excellent spectrohelioscopes; indeed 
one leading British amateur solar researcher, Commander 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Henry Hatfield, has gone so far as to build his entire house 
round his spectrohelioscope. Amateur observations of 
flares and associated phenomena are used to supplement 
the work carried out at major professional observations. 

Now that we have the amazingly detailed views of 
the planets from the various space missions, it might be 
thought that amateur planetary observation has lost all its 
value. This is most emphatically not the case. For example, 
at the present time (2000) Saturn is not being monitored by 
any probe. Major outbreaks do occur there from time to 
time, and many of these are first seen by amateurs; for 
example, the brilliant white spot of 1933 was discovered 
by an amateur, wT HAY, probably best remembered by the 
general public as Will Hay, the stage and screen comedian. 
The latest white spot was also first seen by an amateur, 
Wilber; only later was it imaged by the Hubble Space 
Telescope. It is very likely that the next violent outbreak 
on Saturn, whenever it occurs, will also be an amateur 
discovery, and early notification means that professional 
equipment can be used as soon as possible. Jupiter is 
another favorite target for amateurs, because the surface 
features are always changing; on the Giant Planet there is 
never any lack of something new to see. 

For Jupiter, and perhaps Saturn, a modest telescope 
can be used with success. Mars is much more of a problem, 
because a high magnification is necessary, but when the 
planet is near opposition the amateur with, say, a 12 in or 
15 in telescope can help in monitoring cloud phenomena 
and the behavior of the polar caps—particularly if he has 
access to electronic equipment. 

Even with remote Pluto there is scope. Very 
occasionally Pluto occults a star, and when this last 
happened amateur measurements were very valuable; 
pre-occultation fading of the star confirmed that Pluto does 
have an extensive if highly tenuous atmosphere. 

In astronomy, as in all other sciences, cooperation is 
of paramount important. There is no point in making 
an observation unless other workers hear about it. The 
controlling body of world astronomy is the IAU, which 
really is international—and remained so even during 
the worst part of the Cold War. There are some 
amateur members of the IAU, and there have even been 
amateur officials. General Assemblies are held every 
3 years, in different countries; that of 2000 will be in 
England (Manchester), following 1997 (Holland) and 1994 
(Argentina). During the 1960s an attempt was made to 
form an analogous amateur organization, the International 
Union of Amateur Astronomers. It does exist, but it 
would be idle to pretend that it has been as successful 
as had been hoped, and better organization is needed. 
Meanwhile, all countries have their national societies—in 
Britain, for example, the British Astronomical Association, 
which is mainly amateur and has an observational record 
second to none. Most major towns and cities of the world 
have their own societies, and there is a pleasing amount 
of cooperation, both national and international (see also 
AMATEUR ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Amateur-Professional Collaboration in Astronomy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


All in all, it is fair to say that amateur astronomers 
undertake work which the professional does not wish to 
do, does not have the time to do or genuinely cannot do. 
It is also true that amateur work is valued and warmly 
welcomed and that the amateur astronomer is every bit as 
important now as he has been in the past. 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Ambartsumian [Ambarzumjan], Viktor Amazaspovich 
(1908-96) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ambartsumian [Ambarzumjan], Viktor 
Amazaspovich (1908-96) 


Astrophysicist, born in Armenia, professor at the 
University of Leningrad and at Erevan, founded the 
Byurakan Astronomical Observatory. He applied an 
original and creative scientific imagination to a range of 
observational phenomena in astronomy. He suggested 
that T Tauri stars are very young and that loose stellar 
associations are dissociatiating. He made the connection 
between the various energetic phenomena in galaxies (jets, 
high-speed motions, bright ultraviolet luminosities, etc) as 
pointing to energetic sources at the centers of galaxies, now 
identified as massive black holes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


American Association of Variable Star Observers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


American Association of Variable Star 
Observers 


The largest organization of variable star observers in the 
world, with over 1000 members in more than 40 countries. 
Its database contains over 9 million observations of 
variable stars. The organization’s headquarters are in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

It was founded in 1911 by amateur observer William 
Tyler Olcott. Inspired by a talk at the 1909 meeting of 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 
Olcott began to send his observations of variations in 
stellar brightness to Edward Pickering at Harvard College 
Observatory. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.aavso.org/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


American Astronomical Society (AAS) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


American Astronomical Society (AAS) 


Founded in 1899, the AAS is a non-profit scientific society 
created to promote the advancement of astronomy and 
closely related branches of science. Its membership 
consists primarily of professional researchers in the 
astronomical sciences, but also includes educators, 
students and others interested in the advancement of 
astronomical research. About 85% of the membership 
is drawn from North America. The AAS operates in 
five major areas: Publications, Meetings, Education, 
Employment and Public Policy. Its headquarters are in 
Washington, DC. 

The AAS research journals, The Astrophysical Journal 
and The Astronomical Journal, appear in both print and 
electronic formats. The Bulletin of the American Astronomical 
Society reports the latest institutional developments and 
documents the content of the meetings held by the AAS 
and its five Divisions. AAS meetings, held twice a year, 
provide a forum for the presentation of scientific results. 

For further information see 
http://www.aas.org/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anaxagoras of Clazomenae (c. 500—c. 428 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anaxagoras of Clazomenae 
(c. 500—c. 428 Bc) 


Born in Clazomenae, now Turkey, an Athenian philoso- 
pher who correctly explained the phases of the Moon and 
eclipses of the Moon and the Sun. He believed, like the 
atomists, that the heavens and the Earth were brought into 
existence by the same processes and composed of the same 
particles, but also recognized that further agencies were re- 
quired to create their motions, identifying that agency as 
‘mind’ (nous). He was impeached for impiety, for claim- 
ing that the Sun was a red-hot stone, ignited by its motion, 
and larger than the Peloponnesus, but not a god, and that 
the Moon was Earth that reflected the Sun’s light. He was 
banished to Ionia. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anaximander of Miletus (c. 611—c. 547 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anaximander of Miletus 
(c. 611-c. 547 Bc) 


Greek philosopher, born in Miletus, pupil of THALES. 
Believed that the Earth was a cylinder with a diameter 
three times its height, unsupported, at the center of the 
universe. We live on the top end of the cylinder. His 
theory of the universe was that objects are formed from 
a vortex process by which light objects were flung out 
to their periphery. This separated hot and cold, moist 
and dry, and Earth and ether. He thought the Moon and 
Sun and stars were self-luminous wheels of fire. He is 
credited with producing the first map of the Earth, and 
with being the first to speculate on the relative distances 
of the heavenly bodies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anaximenes of Miletus (c. 585—c. 525 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anaximenes of Miletus 
(c. 585—c. 525 Bc) 


Greek philosopher, born in Miletus, pupil of ANAXIMANDER. 
The first Greek to distinguish clearly between planets and 
stars, Anaximenes conceived the idea that the stars were 
fixed like nails on a crystalline sphere, which he apparently 
believed was a hemisphere and rotated like a hat ona head. 
He believed the primary substance of the universe was 
air, which could form the other elements of water, earth 
and fire by compression and rarefaction. For example, the 
Earth was made from dense air, which, vaporized, made 
the Sun, Moon and planets. Credited with the invention of 
the gnomon, the central shadow-casting stem of a sundial; 
he certainly appears to have had an interest in sundials 
and exhibited at Sparta the sundial called Sciotherion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anderson, Carl David (1905-91) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anderson, Carl David (1905-91) 


Physicist, born in New York City, NY, Nobel prizewinner 
(1936, shared with victor HESss) for his discovery of the 
positron (anti-electron) while studying cosmic rays at the 
California Institute of Technology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Andromeda 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Andromeda 


(abbrev. And, gen. Andromedae; area 722 sq. deg.) A 
northern constellation that lies between Perseus and 
Pegasus, and culminates at midnight in early October. It 
is named after the daughter of King Cepheus and Queen 
Cassiopeia in Greek mythology, who was rescued by 
Perseus from being sacrificed to the sea monster Cetus, 
and is usually shown on early celestial charts as a chained 
maiden. Its brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. 
AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Andromeda are a Andromedae (Alpheratz or 
Sirrah), magnitude 2.1, 6 Andromedae (Mirach), also 
magnitude 2.1, and y Andromedae (Almach), a fine orange 
(K3) and bluish-white (B8) double star, magnitudes 2.3 
and 5.0, separation 10”. All other stars are of the third 
magnitude or fainter. a Andromedae, which marks the 
north-east corner of the Square of Pegasus, was originally 
designated 5 Pegasi. a, 6B and y Andromedae form a 
slightly curved line of stars, pointing diagonally away 
from the Square. 

To the north-west of 8 Andromedae are two fourth- 
magnitude stars, 4 and v Andromedae, which are at almost 
aright angle to the line joining a, 6 and y. About 1° west of 
v lies the Andromeda Galaxy (M31, NGC 224), the largest 
spiral galaxy in the Local Group, which, at a distance of 
2.7 million light-years, is just visible to the unaided eye as 
a faint misty patch. 

Other interesting objects in Andromeda include the 
Mira-type variable stars R Andromedae (range 5.8-14.9, 
period about 409 days) and W Andromedae (range 6.7— 
14.6, period about 396 days), NGC 752, an open cluster 
of several dozen stars fainter than eighth magnitude, and 
NGC 7662, a ninth-magnitude planetary nebula. 


See also: Andromeda Galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Andromeda Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Andromeda Galaxy 


The Andromeda galaxy is the closest sprRAL GALAXY to the 
MILKY WAY, just visible to the naked eye on a dark night as a 
faint smudge of light in the constellation Andromeda. The 
earliest records of the Andromeda nebula, as it is still often 
referred to, date back to AD 964, to the ‘Book of the Fixed 
Stars’ published by the Persian astronomer AL-sUri. The first 
European to officially note the Andromeda nebula was 
Simon Mayer, a German mathematician and astronomer, 
who was not aware of Al-Stifi’s earlier work. The object 
is number 31 in the famous MESSIER CATALOG, which dates 
back to the 18th century, and is therefore often referred to as 
M31. Another alias for the Andromeda galaxy is NGC 224, 
since it is number 224 in the NEW GENERAL CATALOG (NGC) 
compiled by preYER in 1888. Modern measurements based. 
on Cepheid variables place M31 at a distance of 740 kpc 
or about 2.4 million light-years. This makes it the closest 
spiral galaxy to the Milky Way. It is the dominant member 
of the LOCAL GRouP, and as such it has and continues to fill 
an important role in studies of galaxy structure, evolution 
and dynamics, stellar populations, star formation and 
interstellar medium. Crucial historical developments 
include HuBBLE’s work in the 1920s on the distance to M31, 
which proved that galaxies outside our own Milky Way 
exist, and BAADE’s work in the 1940s on stellar populations 
which led to the concepts of old (population IT) and young 
(population I) stars. Many small companion galaxies 
believed to be associated with M31 have been identified, 
some only in the past year. They are M32 (low-luminosity 
elliptical), NGC 147, 185 and 205 (dwarf ellipticals), IC 10 
(dwarf irregular), LGS 3 (transition object between dwarf 
irregular and dwarf spheroidal) and And I, II, III, V and VI 
(dwarf spheroidals). Itis likely that more faint companions 
remain to be discovered. Figure 1 shows an optical image 
of the Andromeda galaxy. 


Morphology, mass and stellar content 

The Andromeda galaxy is a large, early-type spiral of 
HUBBLE CLASSIFICATION Sb, luminosity class I-II. It has a 
prominent central bulge of stars with an effective radius of 
2 kpc, which extends smoothly into an extended flattened 
spheroidal component of old stars. As in most spiral 
galaxies, in addition to the bulge or spheroidal component, 
there is a thin disk of stars and gas with superposed spiral 
arm structure. The combined light from the disk stars 
declines exponentially with distance from the center, as 
is common for spiral galaxies. The disk scale length is 
about 5-6 kpc, and M31 is some 50% larger than our 
Milky Way Galaxy and about twice as luminous. The disk 
becomes bluer at larger radial distance from the center, 
and this could be caused by a relatively larger fraction 
of younger stars there, or a lower abundance of heavy 
elements. Abundance determinations of oxygen, nitrogen 
and sulfur in the interstellar medium of M31 do indeed 
show an overall decrease in these elements compared with 
hydrogen with increasing radial distance. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Optical image of the Andromeda galaxy and two of its 
nearby elliptical companions, M32 (below center) and NGC205 
(upper right corner). The image measures 100’ ona side, 
corresponding to 21.5 kpc. Based on photographic data obtained 
using the Oschin Schmidt Telescope on Palomar Mountain. The 
Palomar Observatory Sky Survey was funded by the National 
Geographic Society. The Oschin Schmidt Telescope is operated 
by the California Institute of Technology and Palomar 
Observatory. The plates were processed into the present 
compressed digital format with their permission. The Digitized 
Sky Survey was produced at the Space Telescope Science 
Institute (ST Scl) under US Government grant NAG W-2166. 
Copyright © 1994, Association of Universities for Research in 
Astronomy, Inc. All rights reserved. 


The sPIRAL ARM structure of M31 has been difficult to 
determine, owing to its orientation on the sky. Spiral arm 
segments show up clearly in the distributions of young 
massive stars and various interstellar medium tracers such 
as ionized, neutral and molecular hydrogen gas, and dust, 
but it has not been possible to link the spiral arm segments 
into an unambiguous grand design spiral structure. A 
further complication is that the interaction with the close 
small elliptical companion M32 seems to have distorted the 
spiral arms as well. The outer stellar and gaseous disks, 
beyond about 20 kpc, bend out of the principal plane, 
producing a phenomenon known as warping. Given its 
bulge size and luminosity, there seems little doubt that 
M31 is an earlier-type spiral than our Milky Way. For 
example, the total number of GLOBULAR CLUSTERS, which 
has been shown to be related to the bulge or spheroid 
luminosity, is probably between 400 and 500 in M31, 
almost a factor 3 larger than for the Milky Way. The 
velocity dispersion of the stars in the bulge of M31 is about 
155 km s“!, while for the Milky Way this is 130 kms“. 

From its H I rotational velocity out to 30 kpc radius, 
one can infer that M31 has a mass of at least 3 x 10" solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Andromeda Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


masses, but the total mass will probably be much higher 
depending on the unknown radial extent of a DARK MATTER 
halo,acommon component in spiral galaxies inferred from 
the high rotational velocities of gas clouds in the far outer 
disks. The timing argument for the Local Group implies a 
mass of a few times 10!” solar masses for M31. Given these 
figures, dark matter must strongly dominate over the mass 
implied by the visible stars and gas. 

The stellar populations in M31 are discussed in the 
article M31: THE OLD STELLAR POPULATIONS, so a brief summary 
willsuffice here. The bulge and spheroid population is old, 
although the considerable spread in metal abundances of 
the stars in the bulge and also the outer halo implies a 
more complicated formation scenario than a very rapid 
initial collapse. There is no current star formation in the 
inner bulge, contrary to the situation in the Milky Way. 
The properties of the globular clusters of M31 are similar 
in many ways to those of the Milky Way, i.e. the globular 
clusters are old, show a range of metal abundances and 
the same overall correlations between velocity dispersion 
and luminosity, central and average surface brightness as 
the Galactic globular clusters. A small number of young 
massive clusters is found in the disk, at about 10 kpc from 
the center. Such clusters are common in late-type galaxies, 
such as M33 and the Magellanic Clouds, but apparently 
rare in early-type spirals. These could be the progenitors 
to (low-mass) globular clusters. Interestingly, these objects 
are mostly concentrated in the tidally disturbed SW spiral 
arm, and they may be similar to young blue clusters 
observed in interacting galaxies. 

One of the advantages of the close distance of M31 to 
us is that it enables unique experiments. One of these is the 
recent attempt to detect MICROLENSING towards M31 bulge 
stars to constrain the nature of the dark matter. While 
M31 is too distant to resolve most of its light in individual 
stars, microlensing can in principle still be detected as a 
brightening of individual pixels on the detector, if one star 
of the many contributing to the brightness of that pixel is 
being lensed by a dark object in M31’s halo. Several of 
these studies are now underway, thereby extending the 
ongoing microlensing observations of the Galactic bulge 
and of the Magellanic Clouds. 


The central region 

The Andromeda galaxy does not contain a particularly 
active nucleus at its center, but there does appear to be a 
BLACKHOLE of about 3x 10’ solar masses there. The evidence 
for this comes from measurements of the stellar velocities 
close to the center both with the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE 
and from the ground. The morphology of the central 
region is quite surprising, with two peaks in the brightness 
distribution separated by 0.5 arcsec. The currently favored 
interpretation is that this apparent double nucleus is 
actually caused by a single eccentric disk of stars orbiting 
the black hole. The brighter of the two ‘nuclei’ would 
then be caused by stars piling up near the apocenter of the 
eccentric disk, where their speeds are low, while the fainter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


‘nucleus’ would be due to the increase in density towards 
the center. 

The lack of strong nuclear activity associated with the 
black hole could be due to the general lack of interstellar 
medium in the M31 bulge. No HI or CO has been detected 
within 1 kpc from the center, although there are some 
dust clouds seen in projection against the bright stellar 
continuum. A faint diffuse ‘spiral disk’ is seen in ionized 
gas, witha radial extent of about 500 pc, but it only contains 
a small amount of mass, perhaps as little as 1500 solar 
masses total. This gas possibly originates from mass lost 
by low-mass evolving stars in the form of stellar winds. 
The lack of activity also manifests itself in the weak level 
of radio continuum emission, about a factor of 10 less than 
for the Galactic center. 


Star formation and interstellar medium 

As the closest nearby spiral, M31 has been a prime target 
for exploring the properties of various gaseous phases 
of the interstellar medium and massive stars, and the 
connections between them. The spatial distribution of all 
these components, be they neutral or ionized gas, dust or 
OB stars, is very similar: there is a general lack of gas and 
young stars in the inner several kpc, some gas and star 
formation in spiral arms 3-5 kpc from the center, strong 
concentrations in an annulus between 8 and 12 kpc and 
modest concentrations in arms out to 15 kpc. Beyond 
this, the H I disk continues to show spiral structure out 
to 25 kpc or so, with weak ongoing STAR FORMATION in 
selected regions. Star formation rates can be estimated 
from the distribution of ionized gas (H II regions and 
diffuse ionized gas), which requires hot, luminous, hence 
massive and young, stars to ionize it, far-infrared emission 
radio continuum emission and UV light. In addition, 
the proximity of M31 allows detection of individual OB 
stars and of evolved tracers of young massive stars such 
aS WOLF-RAYET STARS and. LUMINOUS BLUE VARIABLES. All these 
tracers indicate that the overall level of star formation 
activity in M31 is quite low, about ~ 0.3-0.5 solar masses 
yr, compared with the Milky Way and other spirals, 
such as M33. In addition, M31’s largest star-forming 
complexes appear modest compared with those found in 
other galaxies. 

The mass of atomic hydrogen gas is about 4 x 10° 
solar masses, while that of molecular hydrogen is more 
than a factor of 10 lower; the uncertainty in the conversion 
factor of the CO line flux to molecular gas mass makes 
the latter estimate rather inaccurate, but the low molecular 
hydrogen surface density is consistent with the overall low 
rate of star formation in M31. There is some evidence for 
the presence of very cold molecular gas in M31, which 
might have further implications for the total molecular 
gas mass. M31 was one of the first external spirals 
where a widespread distribution of ionized gas outside of 
traditional H II regions was detected. This diffuse ionized 
gas, also referred to as warm ionized medium, is the 
dominant component, in terms of mass and spatial extent, 
of ionized gas in galaxies. It requires a large amount of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Andromeda Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


energy to remain ionized, and its widespread distribution 
implies that the morphology of the interstellar medium 
has to be very porous, or else the ultraviolet photons from 
OB stars could not travel far from their origins before being 
absorbed. 

Information on cosmic RAYS and the magnetic field 
distribution in M31 has been obtained from detailed 
radio continuum observations at several frequencies. The 
radio continuum is strongly dominated by non-thermal 
synchrotron emission, stemming from highly relativistic 
electrons spiraling ina magnetic field. Information on field 
strength and direction can be inferred from the intensity 
of the emission, the polarization vectors and the rotation 
measures observed towards extragalactic background 
sources. The large-scale magnetic field extends from 5 kpc 
interior to the star formation annulus to as far as 25 kpc 
from the center. The main field organization is toroidal, 
aligned along the annulus, with some evidence for a 
poloidal component extending into the halo. The structure 
of the field appears to be that expected for an even-mode 
DYNAMO. 


Outlook for the future 

There is no question that the Andromeda galaxy will 
continue to play a central role in future investigations of 
the morphology and evolution of galaxies, just as it has 
in the past. With the next generation of telescopes, on the 
ground and in space, we can expect new results in many 
areas, such as microlensing studies, high-resolution maps 
of all the interstellar medium components, abundance 
measurements in individual stars and further unraveling 
of the star formation history of M31’s disk and bulge. 


Bibliography 

An extensive overview of the characteristics of the 
Andromeda galaxy, providing references to all relevant 
papers from before 1992, is given in the monograph 


Hodge P W 1992 The Andromeda Galaxy (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 


Photographs indicating the positions of open clusters, 
globular clusters, OB associations and dust clouds in the 
Andromeda Galaxy are presented in 


Hodge P W 1981 Atlas of the Andromeda Galaxy (Seattle, WA: 
University of Washington Press) 


A good impression of the morphology of H II regions 
and diffuse ionized gas can be obtained from 


Walterbos RA Mand Braun R 1992 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 
92 625 


A complete CO map is presented by 
Dame T M et al 1993 Astrophys. J. 418 730 


The most recent information on the magnetic field is 
discussed by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Han J Let al 1998 Astron. Astrophys. 335 1117 


The properties of the globular cluster system are 
discussed in 


Djorgovski S G et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 474 L19 


while the most recent compilation of globular clusters is 
presented by 


Barmby P et al 2000 Astron. J. 119 727 


The properties of the central black hole and stellar 
dynamics are discussed by 


Kormendy J et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 522 772 
Statler T S et al 1999 Astron. J. 117 894 


René Walterbos 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anglo-Australian Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anglo-Australian Observatory 


The Anglo-Australian Observatory (AAO) operates two 
optical telescopes at Siding Spring Mountain, the 3.9 m 
Anglo-Australian telescope and the (1.2 m) 47 in UK 
Schmidt Telescope. These telescopes are located beside 
the spectacular Warrumbungle National Park outside 
Coonabarabran in New South Wales, 450 km northwest 
of Sydney. 

The Anglo-Australian Telescope (AAT) was estab- 
lished after representations had been made to the Aus- 
tralian and British governments in the mid-1960s. The 
agreement was secured in an act of the Australian Par- 
liament, The Anglo-Australian Telescope Agreement Act, 
1970. Each government contributes equally in return for 
equal use of the telescopes. The AAT was inaugurated in 
1974. 

The UK Schmidt Telescope (UKST) is a special 
purpose survey telescope. Its initial task was the first 
detailed photographic survey in blue light of the southern 
skies. Other major projects have since been undertaken, 
and more are in progress. The UKST recently began an Ha 
survey of the southern Milky Way and Magellanic Clouds. 

The AAO spends 15% of its budget each year on new 
instruments and associated software and detectors. 

Over the past decade, the AAO has pioneered the use 
of optical fibres in astronomy. The recently completed 2dF 
uses optical fibers to enable 400 objects to be analysed at 
once. The 2dF is being used in a very ambitious project to 
map a very large volume of the universe. The 2dF Redshift 
Survey aims to measure the redshifts of 250000 galaxies 
over two years. In parallel, there is a similar redshift 
survey of 30000 quasars. 

The AAO has recently begun building a fiber 
positioner similar to the 2dF for the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN 
OBSERVATORY’S Very Large Telescope (VLT). 

David Malin, an astronomer at the AAO, has devel- 
oped techniques to make astronomical color photographs 
from plates taken in three separate colors. These beautiful 
images have earned recognition as among the finest in the 
world. 

For further information see 
http://www.aao.gov.au. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Angstrom ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Angstrom 


Aunit of length frequently used to describe the wavelength 
of light. It is named after the Swedish physicist Anders 
Jonas Angstrom (1814-74), a founder of spectroscopy. It is 
equal to 107"? meters (i.e. one ten thousand millionth of a 
meter) and is denoted by the symbol A. Most of the visible 
spectrum lies in the wavelength range 3900 to 7500 A. 


See also: light, wavelength. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Angular Momentum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Angular Momentum 


A property of rotating bodies or systems of masses 
which is dependent upon the distribution and velocities 
of the masses about the axis of rotation. The angular 
momentum of a single particle of mass, m, moving in 
a circular orbit of radius, R, at velocity, v, is given by 
mvR. Angular momentum is a conserved quantity, in 
other words, the total angular momentum of a system 
is constant. Thus if a large slowly rotating gas cloud 
contracts, its rotational velocity must increase to conserve 
angular momentum, as it contracts, therefore, it spins 
more rapidly. Appropriate SI units for angular momentum 
are kilogram meters squared per second (kg m’* s7'). 
The conservation of angular momentum is of central 
importance to such questions as star formation, the origin 
of planetary systems, etc. 


See also: meridian, oblateness. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anomalous Cosmic Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anomalous Cosmic Rays 


The anomalous cosmic rays are an ionic component of 
the cosmic-ray flux which is observed, in the heliosphere, 
to be significant at energies ranging from 20 MeV to 
more than 500 MeV. They consist of a number of ion 
species ranging from hydrogen to beyond neon, but 
anomalous carbon is significantly underabundant. The 
highest kinetic energy reported for this component is 
more than 1.6 GeV. Observations from detectors on board 
heliospheric spacecraft show that their intensity continues 
to increase out to the maximum distance reached by 
current spacecraft, indicating that they are accelerated 
in the outer solar system. They were first seen in the 
early 1970s and were initially called anomalous cosmic 
rays because of their unusual composition and because 
their spectrum was unlike that of the already well-known 
galactic or solar cosmic rays. This name has stuck, even 
though we now know much more about the nature and 
origin of these particles. 

In 1974 it was suggested that the anomalous 
component was the result of the acceleration, in the 
heliosphere, of recently ionized interstellar neutral atoms 
(see also COSMIC RAYS: PROPAGATION IN THE HELIOSPHERE). The 
neutral atoms stream into the solar system from the 
interstellar medium and are then ionized by solar 
ultraviolet radiation or by charge exchange with the 
SOLAR WIND. This hypothesis explained very nicely the 
unusual composition of the anomalous component, since 
only initially neutral interstellar particles can enter the 
heliosphere to participate in the process. For example, 
carbon ions, which are nearly fully ionized in the 
interstellar medium and hence are mostly prevented by 
the interplanetary magnetic field from entering the solar 
system, are notably depleted in the anomalous cosmic 
rays. More-recent observations have established that the 
bulk of the anomalous cosmic rays are indeed singly 
charged, as expected in this picture. 

Later, in 1981, it was pointed out that many features 
of the anomalous component could be explained if the 
major part of the acceleration of the newly ionized 
particles occurs at the termination shock of the solar 
wind, by the mechanism of diffusive shock acceleration. 
Subsequent sophisticated numerical simulations carried 
out in the mid-1980s clearly showed that energetic, singly 
charged particles could be accelerated very efficiently at 
the termination shock. The essential observed features 
of the spectrum and spatial gradients could be explained 
very naturally in terms of this picture. This picture of 
acceleration of newly ionized interstellar neutrals and 
subsequent acceleration to high energies at the termination 
shock of the solar wind is now the standard paradigm 
(see also SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES). This paradigm 
is illustrated schematically in figure 1, which shows 
the incoming neutral atoms, their ionization and the 
subsequent acceleration at the termination shock of the 
solar wind. A typical observed anomalous cosmic- 
ray spectrum (with the solar and galactic contributions 
removed) is shown in figure 2(a). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Interstellar 


Termination Shock Neutral 


Anomalous Cosmic Ray 


Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the heliosphere and the 
acceleration of the anomalous cosmic rays. Shown are the 
incoming interstellar neutral, the ionization to form a pickup ion 
and the subsequent acceleration and propagation of the 
anomalous cosmic ray. 


Acceleration 

The acceleration of the anomalous cosmic rays from low 
energies to the typical observed energies of ~200-300 MeV 
must occur in less than a few years, because otherwise 
further electron loss would occur owing to interactions 
with ambient gas, and they would not be singly charged. 
In fact, independent of the acceleration site or model, the 
observed fact that anomalous cosmic-ray oxygen particles 
at ~160 MeV are still mainly singly charged implies that 
the total path length they have traversed since being 
accelerated is less than 0.2 pc. Given that they cannot travel 
ina straight line because of the ambient, irregular magnetic 
fields, this fact requires that the anomalous cosmic rays 
must be locally accelerated. At their observed speed, 
this implies that the time since acceleration is less than 
a few years. Diffusive shock acceleration at the quasi- 
perpendicular termination shock of the solar wind, which 
accomplishes the acceleration to ~200 MeV in about a 
half a year, is the only process known at present which 
can accomplish the acceleration in the allowed time. In 
particular, the commonly invoked second-order Fermi 
acceleration mechanism, involving fluctuating electric 
fields associated with waves, is far too slow. 

Diffusive shock acceleration is contained within the 
Parker cosmic-ray transport equation (see equation (1) of 
the main article on Cosmic Rays), if one allows the wind flow 
to have a compressive discontinuity corresponding to the 
shock. This compressive discontinuity is the site of the 
acceleration. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anomalous Cosmic Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1.0000 Ea 


an o- © 

S ee ®> 

oO 

= aa © 

5 o1o00pH 4’ AW Moy : 

8 4 “He 

wn 

. ie sae 

E * e) 

~ 0.0100} 4a’ * | 

K 

oa x 

ae * 

je} x 

& 0.00105 ¥ 4 

ne x 

© \ 

= 

oO \ 
0.0001 * 

10 100 1000 


Energy (MeV) 
(4) 


100.00 : 


Shock 


Oxygen | 


10.00 


dj/dT (arbitrary units) 


10 100 
T (MeV) 


(b) 


Figure 2. (a) Energy spectra of anomalous oxygen, helium and hydrogen observed near 21 AU in 1985 (Cummings and Stone 1987). (b) 
Plot of the computed energy spectra of anomalous oxygen near the heliospheric equator, for two radii, and for the two signs of the 
heliospheric magnetic field. The full curves correspond to the case where the northern heliospheric magnetic field is directed outward, 
corresponding to the present sunspot minimum. The broken curves are the same for the 1986 sunspot minimum. 


The acceleration process at a quasi-perpendicular 
shock may be shown to be more closely related to the 
particle drift in the ambient electric field associated with 
the motion of the fluid than to the compression of the 
fluid at the shock, although mathematically it is contained 
in the compression term of the transport equation. It 
may be shown that the energy AT gained by a particle 
having electric charge Ze, at a quasi-perpendicular shock, 
is approximately the electrostatic potential energy A@ 
gained in drifting along the shock face: AT ~ Ze Ad. We 
may write for the solar wind 


(Ad) max = Byr?Qo/c 
~ 240 MeV/Z (1) 
where c is the speed of light and the numerical value 
results from using a radial magnetic field of 3.5 y at a 
radius of 1 AU and a solar rotational angular velocity 
Qo = 2.9 x 10°%. It follows, then, that for particles 
having charge Z, there is in general a characteristic energy 
T. ~ Ze(Ad)max above which the spectrum begins to 
decrease rapidly. Because of this, any multiply charged 
particles should be accelerated to higher energies than 
singly charged ones. Particles will ‘drift off’ of the shock 
before gaining more energy. Singly charged particles 
accelerated at the termination shock would then have an 
energy spectrum at the termination shock which is roughly 
a power law and which exhibits a decrease above an energy 
between 200 and 300 MeV. This behavior is seen in figure 
2(a). This energy limit will not necessarily produce a sharp 
cutoff in the energy spectrum because the diffusion will 

cause some particles to gain more energy and some less. 
Multiply charged particles can be produced by further 
interactions with ambient material. These then could gain 
much more energy, depending on their charge, and will 
therefore become dominant at higher energies, beyond 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the characteristic energy for singly charged particles. 
Observations in the past few years have observed a 
transition to multiply charged anomalous cosmic rays at 
energies greater than some 240 MeV. 


Results of model calculations 
The scenario discussed above has been incorporated into 
both two- and three-dimensional numerical simulations of 
transport and acceleration in the heliosphere, which solve 
the transport equation for realistic parameters. 

We note that the general heliospheric magnetic field 
(see article on the SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD) changes sign every 
11 yr, during sunspot maximum. The motions of energetic 
charged particles depend toa significant degree on the sign 
of the magnetic field. In particular, the drift velocity, given 
for an isotropic distribution of particles of velocity w and 
momentum p in an ambient magnetic field B(r), is given 
by the expression 


pew Vv B 
= x=. 
3Ze B? 


Va (2) 
Clearly, Va reverses direction with the change in sign 
of the magnetic field. During the current period of 
sunspot minimum, the northern magnetic field of the Sun 
is directed outward from the Sun, whereas prior to the last 
maximum it was directed inward. The present models 
are most accurate during sunspot minimum, when the 
interplanetary current sheet is closest to being equatorial, 
and so we basically discuss two heliospheres, one near 
a sunspot minimum when the field is outward (current) 
and one near the next sunspot minimum, when the field 
is inward. 

First consider the model results for the case where 
low-energy particles are injected uniformly at all latitudes 
at the shock. The computed and observed spectra are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anomalous Cosmic Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


150 
1005 


SOF 


OF 


AU 


—50+ 


—100f 


—150 L Ll L Ll Ll 


—15@-100-50 0 50 100 150 
AU 


150 
1005 zi 


SO 5 a 


0 x 


—50Fr za 


AU 


—100F q 


-—150 L L 1 Ll i 


—150-100-50 OQ 50 100 150 
AU 


Figure 3. Equal-intensity contours computed for 8 MeV/nucleon anomalous oxygen, as a function of position in a meridional plane, as 
computed for the model parameters discussed in the text. The left panel is for the present sunspot minimum and the right is for the 


1986 minimum. 


compared in figure 2, for data taken in 1985 (northern 
magnetic field inward). The computed energy spectra of 
anomalous oxygen are clearly in good agreement with the 
observed spectra. This is also true of other spectra, as well. 

Figure 3 illustrates contour plots of the intensity of the 
modeled anomalous oxygen as a function of heliocentric 
radius and polar angle, ina solar meridional plane. We see 
that the intensity increases with radius, much as does that 
of the galactic cosmic rays, out to the termination shock 
(at a radius of 60 AU). Beyond, the intensity decreases 
out to the outer boundary of the heliosphere. Along the 
shock, the maximum intensity occurs at a latitude which 
shifts as the sign of the magnetic field changes. If the 
northern interplanetary magnetic field is outward (A > 0), 
the particles drift toward the pole along the shock face and 
then inward and down from the poles to the current sheet, 
and the intensity maximum is near the poles. For A < 0, 
the drifts are in the opposite direction, and the maximum 
shifts to the equator. 

There have been numerous measurements of the 
radial and latitudinal gradients of the anomalous 
component. It is a general feature of the simulations 
of anomalous cosmic rays and galactic cosmic rays that, 
for identical parameters, the latitudinal gradients of the 
anomalous cosmic rays are significantly larger than those 
for galactic particles. This is in large part due to the large 
latitudinal gradient of anomalous cosmic rays induced by 
drift during the acceleration at the shock. This is also true 
in the models. 

Arobust prediction of the models is that the latitudinal 
gradient near the current sheet, near sunspot minimum, 
should change sign in alternate sunspot minima. In 
particular, during the last sunspot minimum, near 1975, 
the intensity of both galactic cosmic rays and the 
anomalous component should increase away from the 
current sheet, whereas during the 1986 sunspot minimum 
the cosmic rays should decrease away from the current 
sheet. Near sunspot minimum, when the current sheet 
is nearly flat, the effects of these drifts are expected to be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the most important. In 1977, PIONEER observed a positive 
gradient of anomalous helium away from the current 
sheet, as predicted. Observations carried out during the 
last sunspot minimum during a period in 1984 and 1985, 
when the current sheet tilt went below the latitude of the 
VOYAGER 1 spacecraft, found that the sign of the latitudinal 
gradient changed from being positive to negative, again 
as predicted by the theory. 


Pickup ions 

The above discussion has summarized the present 
status of the acceleration of anomalous cosmic rays 
to the highest energies observed, in excess of 1 GeV. 
Diffusive acceleration at the termination shock of the solar 
wind seems to be the most likely mechanism for this 
acceleration. 

Not yet fully resolved is the question of how 
previously unaccelerated pickup ions are accelerated to 
energies large enough to be further accelerated at the 
termination shock. This ‘injection problem’ stems from 
the fact the the non-accelerated pickup ions have speeds 
that are less than or equal to the convection speed of 
the solar wind and hence are not mobile enough to 
encounter the nearly perpendicular shock the many times 
necessary to gain significant energy. It has been shown 
that propagating shocks more readily accelerate low- 
energy pickup ions than shocks that stand in the solar 
wind. Consequently, they are more natural injectors of 
particles and may represent the first stage in a two-step 
process in accelerating pickup ions to anomalous cosmic- 
ray energies. 


Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by NASA/JPL as part of an 
interdisciplinary investigation on the Ulysses mission, 
JPL contract number 960843. It was also supported in 
part by the National Science Foundation under grant 
ATM 9616547 and by the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration under grants NAG 2251 and NAGW 1931. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anomalous Cosmic Rays ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Cummings A C and Stone E C 1987 Energy spectra of 
anomalous cosmic-ray oxygen during 1977-1987m 
Proc. 20th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. (Moscow) vol 3, p 421 

Jokipii J R and Giacalone G 1998 The theory of anomalous 
cosmic rays Cosmic Rays in the Heliosphere (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

Jokipii J R and McDonald F B 1995 The quest for the limits 
of the heliosphere Sci. Am. (April) 

Klecker B The anomalous component of cosmic rays in the 
3-D heliosphere Space Sci. Rev. 72 419 


J R Jokipii 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Anomaly 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anomaly 


For a particle moving in a conic orbit, the true anomaly is 
the angle between the point of closest approach to a focus, 
the focus, and the position of the particle. In the case of a 
planet moving around the Sun in an elliptical orbit, its true 
anomaly at any particular instant is the angle between its 
perihelion position, the Sun (which lies at one focus of the 
ellipse), and the position of the planet at that instant. 

For a body moving around a massive body in an 
elliptical orbit, the mean anomaly at a particular instant 
is the angle through which a particle moving at uniform 
angular speed on a circle of area equal to the ellipse (and 
with an orbital period equal to that of the real body in 
its elliptical orbit) will have moved in the time which has 
elapsed since the real body last passed its closest approach 
to the massive body. For an ellipse, mean anomaly equals 
true anomaly at opposite ends of the major axis; for a 
circular orbit, mean and true anomaly are identical at 
all times. The concept of mean anomaly is useful in the 
calculation of the time taken for a body to move along a 
segment of its orbit. 


See also: barycenter, ellipse, inclination, node, sidereal 
period, synodic period. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Antapex ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Antapex 


The point on the celestial sphere directly opposite the solar 
apex (the point towards which the Sun is moving). The 
antapex is located in the constellation of Columba, at about 
right ascension 6 h and declination —30°. 


See also: apex, celestial sphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Antares 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Antares 


The star a Scorpii, said to represent the heart of the 
scorpion. The name derives from ‘rival to Mars’, that 
planet being of similar brightness and color at favorable 
oppositions. It is a striking red supergiant star, spectral 
type Milb, apparent magnitude 1.06. It is 604 light-years 
distant (parallax 0.005”), its apparent brightness being 
due to its great intrinsic luminosity (absolute magnitude 
—5.3). Antares is a slow, irregular, pulsating variable, its 
magnitude varying by +0.14. There is a binary companion 
of magnitude 5.3 at position angle 274°, separation 2.9"; the 
binary period is estimated to be of the order of 1000 years. 

Antares was known as Satevis by Persian observers c. 
3000 Bc and was one of their four ‘Royal Stars’. It marked 
the autumnal equinox, being prominent during September 
evenings. 


See also: Aldebaran. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anthelme, Voituret (c. 1618-83) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anthelme, Voituret (c. 1618-83) 


Born in Chatenay-Vaudin, France, Carthusian monk; 
discovered the nova variable star R Vulpecula in 1672. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Anthropic Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anthropic Principle 


Early humans started with the ‘anthropocentric’ view that 
we are located at the center of the universe. Phenomena 
tended to be interpreted anthropomorphically and even 
the laws of nature seemed to be human-centered in the 
sense that they could be exploited for our own purposes. 
However, this perspective was soon shattered: first 
by NICOLAUS COPERNICUS’ revelation that the Earth moves 
around the Sun and then by NewTon’s ‘Principia’ which led 
to the ‘mechanistic’ view of the world (see also COSMOLOGY: 
ABRIEF HISTORY). Mechanism says that the universe is a giant 
machine in which the laws of nature operate completely 
oblivious to the presence of humanity. In the last 40 yr or 
so, however, there has developed a reaction to mechanism 
which is called the ‘anthropic’ view (Barrow and Tipler 
1986). This says that, in some respects, the universe has to 
be the way it is because otherwise it could not produce life 
and we would not be here speculating about it. Although 
the term ‘anthropic’ derives from the Greek word for 
‘man’, it should be stressed that this is really a misnomer 
since most of the arguments pertain to life in general rather 
than humans in particular. 

To start with a very simple illustration of an anthropic 
argument, consider the question, why is the universe 
as big as it is? The mechanistic answer is that, at any 
particular time, the size of the observable universe is the 
distance travelled by light since the big bang (see Bic 
BANG THEORY). Since the universe’s present age is about 
10'° yr, its present size is about 10’° light-years. Inherent 
in this straightforward answer is the belief that there is 
no compelling reason the universe has the size it does; it 
just happens to be 10”° yr old. There is, however, another 
answer to this question, one which Robert Dicke first gave 
(Dicke 1961). His argument runs as follows. In order for 
life to exist, there must be carbon or at least some form 
of chemistry. Now carbon is produced by cooking inside 
stars and this process takes about 10!° yr. Only after this 
time can the star explode as a SUPERNOVA, scattering the 
newly baked elements throughout space, where they may 
eventually become part of life-evolving planets. On the 
other hand, the universe cannot be much older than 10”° yr, 
else all the material would have been processed into stellar 
remnants such aS WHITE DWARFS, NEUTRON STARS and. BLACK 
HOLES. Since all the forms of life we can envisage require 
the existence of stars, this suggests that life can only exist 
when the universe is aged about 10” yr. 

This startling conclusion turns the mechanistic 
answer on its head. The very hugeness of the universe 
which seems at first to point to humanity’s insignificance 
is actually a consequence of its existence. This is not to 
say that the universe itself could not exist with a different 
size, only that we could not be aware of it when its size 
was different. Of course, it could just be a coincidence 
that the age of the universe happens to be about the 
time required to produce intelligent life. Also, Freeman 
Dyson has argued that life could persist well after 10!° yr 
(Dyson 1979). However, this argument does at least give 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a taste for the type of reasoning the anthropic principle 
entails. Indeed, the evidence for the anthropic principle 
rests almost entirely on the large number of numerical 
‘coincidences’ in physics which seem to be prerequisites 
for the emergence of life and which would otherwise have 
to be regarded as purely fortuitous. 


Scales of structure 

Most anthropic arguments involve dimensionless combi- 
nations of constants of physics, such as the speed of light 
(c), Planck’s constant (f), the gravitational constant (G), 
the charge of the electron (e) and the masses of elemen- 
tary particles such as the proton (m,) and the electron 
(m.). For example, the electric ‘fine structure’ constant, 
a = e?/hc = 1/137, determines the strength of the electric 
interaction and plays a crucial role in any situation where 
electromagnetism is important. Likewise the gravitational 
fine structure constant, ag = Gms, /he = 6 x 10-°*, de- 
termines the strength of the gravitational interaction and 
plays an important role in determining the structure of 
very large objects (such as stars). The fact that a is so 
much smaller than a reflects the fact that the gravitational 
force between two protons is so much smaller than the elec- 
tric force between them. Gravity dominates the structure 
of large bodies only because these tend to be electrically 
neutral, so that the electric forces cancel out. 

What is remarkable is that straightforward physics 
shows that, to an order of magnitude, a and ag determine 
the mass and the size of nearly every naturally occurring 
object in the universe (Carr and Rees 1979). This is 
illustrated in figure 1, from which one can read off 
the scales associated with the universe, galaxies, stars, 
planets, asteroids, exploding black holes, humans, atoms 
and protons. Also shown are the Planck scales, the 
fundamental mass and length units associated with 
QUANTUM Gravity effects. The scales are given in grams 
and centimeters but also as powers of a and a times the 
proton mass and the size of ahydrogen atom. For example, 
all stars have a mass of roughly aa 2 ~ 10 times the 
proton mass; the largest planets (such as Jupiter) have a 
mass which is smaller than this by a factor «*/*; and the 
mass of humans—if we assume that they must live on a 
planet with a suitable temperature and a life-supporting 
atmosphere and that they must not shatter whenever they 
fall down—is of order (a/ac)*/* times the proton mass. 
The characteristic mass of a galaxy is less understood but, 
on one possible argument, can be written as agat times 
the proton mass. One can express the sizes of these objects 
similarly. It should be stressed that the dependences on a 
and ag in figure 1 are all consequences of straightforward 
physics. No anthropic argument has been introduced, 
except—as we shall see shortly—in deriving the scale of 
the universe itself. 


The weak and strong anthropic principles 

We now return to Dicke’s assertion that the age of the 
universe (f9) must be roughly the nuclear-burning time 
of a star. We can make this argument more specific 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anthropic Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


log fal 
| 


Universe 
G ye 


50- 
40h 
7+ 
3% 3 oe 
30 a’ta “2 
20+ 


hole 


© Exploding 


= 
Planets 
/ 


“Asteroids” 
; 


Proton | 3 | 
-30 sf ee ee Beas eee tina tae gs 
-30 -20 ~10 0 10 20 30 
R 
log (E] 


Figure 1. The mass and length scales of various structures in the universe. Also shown are the dependences of these scales on a and ag 


in units of the proton mass and the size of a hydrogen atom. 


because physics predicts that the lifetime of a star is around 
ag’ ~ 10% times the time t) = h/m,c? ~ 10-* s required 
for light to traverse the proton. One can infer that the 
ratio of the size of the universe to the size of an atom 
must be comparable with the ratio of a to ag. Thus the 
anthropic principle explains why these two ratios must 
have the same huge value of 10°. One can also infer 
a simple expression for the number of protons in the 
universe. This is because the big bang model implies 
that the mass of the observable universe is ~pyc*t3? where 
Po is its present density. Since the model also requires 
po ~ 1/Gt2, this mass is c°9/G ~ amp, so the number 
of protons in the universe is of order aq” ~ 10°. (Note 
that the number of stars in the observable universe must 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


then be around aa? 2 ~ 1029, a result we invoke later.) 
The existence of these ‘large-number’ coincidences has 
been appreciated for some time but, without resort to the 
anthropic principle, or alternatively the sort of variable-G 
model invoked by Dirac (1937), they have to be regarded 
as fortuitous. 

Dicke’s argument helps us to understand why the 
above ‘large-number’ coincidences prevail but it does not 
tell us why Ge has its particular immense value. His 
argument is therefore an example of what is termed the 
weak anthropic principle. This accepts the constants of 
nature as given and then shows that our existence imposes 
a selection effect on when we observe the universe. As 
such it is no more than a logical necessity: saying that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anthropic Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


we have to exist at a certain time is no more surprising 
than saying we have to exist in a certain place (e.g. close 
to a star). It might be surprising to find what the selection 
effects are but their existence is not surprising in principle. 
In fact, most physicists would agree with the weak version 
of the anthropic principle. 

The problem comes when we consider whether the 
constants of nature such as G are themselves determined 
by the requirement that life should arise, a notion which is 
sometimes referred to as the ‘strong anthropic principle’. 
(Rather confusingly, this phrase is also used to describe 
the rather different notion that the universe must have 
properties such that life can arise (Barrow and Tipler 
1986).) That the weak principle may not be the whole 
story is also suggested by the fact that all the scales shown 
in figure 1 are relative. If the fine structure constants 
differed from what we observe them to be, all the scales 
would change but the basic relationships between them 
would be the same. For example, one could envisage 
a hypothetical universe in which all microphysical laws 
were unchanged, but G was (say) 10° times stronger. 
Planetary and stellar masses (~ag”! = would then be 
lowered by 10° but hydrogen-burning main-sequence stars 
would still exist, albeit with lifetimes (~ag') of 10* yr 
rather than 10!° yr. Moreover, Dicke’s argument would 
still apply: a hypothetical observer looking at the universe 
when f) ~ tus would find the number of particles in the 
universe 10” times lower than in ours but they would still 
find the ‘large-number’ coincidences described above. If 
one fixed ag but allowed to change, the effects would be 
less extreme, but still very noticeable. 

What are the arguments against the ‘cognizability’ 
of this kind of small-scale speeded-up universe? One 
rather loose constraint on a comes from biological 
considerations. We have seen that the number of stars 
in the observable universe is of order ag” 2 Tf we 
regard stars—or at least their associated solar systems— 
as potential sites for life, this is also the number of places 
where life may have arisen. Of course, this is not a 
sufficient condition for life because there are a whole set of 
extra conditions, each of which may be very improbable. 
For example, we need the star to have a planet, we need the 
planet to be at a suitable distance from the star, it needs to 
have a suitable atmosphere and chemistry, and there must 
be the appropriate conditions for the first self-replicating 
cells to arise. Clearly therefore the overall probability (P) 
of life arising at any particular site must be very small. 
Now if we want to insist that there is life somewhere in 
the universe, we need the number of sites for life times 
the probability P to exceed 1. This implies that a must 
be less than P?. For example, if P were 10-'°, one would 
need ag < 107%. 

This is not a very precise argument but it does give 
a qualitative reason why ac needs to be small. There 
are, however, more specific anthropic arguments that pin 
down ag more narrowly. The first example of such an 
argument was given by Brandon Carter and relates to the 
existence of stars with convective envelopes (Carter 1974). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Such a star arises if the heat generated in its core by nuclear 
reactions is transported to the surface primarily by way 
of large-scale motions of the stellar material itself. This 
tends to be the case for small-enough stars (red dwarfs). 
By contrast, larger stars (blue giants) tend to be ‘radiative’ 
in the sense that the heat gets out primarily via the flow 
of radiation. The dividing line between the two types 
is some critical mass which can be shown to be around 


aga my. This critical mass happens to lie in the mass 


range ~ag”! “mp in which stars actually exist only because 
of the remarkable coincidence ag ~ a7’. Were G (and 
hence ag) slightly larger, all stars would be blue giants; 
were it slightly smaller, all stars would be red dwarfs. The 
convective condition does not pin down the actual values 
of a and ag but it does specify a scaling law between them 
and it explains why ac is so much smaller than a. 

Carter ascribed anthropic significance to this relation- 
ship on the basis that the formation of planetary systems 
may be associated with convective stars. This suggestion 
was based on the observational feature that red dwarfs 
have much less angular momentum than blue giants and 
a loss of angular momentum could be a consequence of 
planet formation. This argument is no longer compelling 
because there are other ways of losing angular momentum. 
A better argument might be that only convective stars gen- 
erate winds in their early phase intense enough to blow 
away the gaseous envelope of nearby planets, thereby fa- 
cilitating the formation of solid planets with non-hydrogen 
atmospheres. In any case, Carter infers that no planets, 
and hence no life, would form if a were much larger that 
«9. If it were much smaller, all stars would be chemically 
homogeneous owing to convective mixing and one would 
not get the ‘onion-skin’ shell structure which characterizes 
pre-supernova models. 


The weak and strong forces 

On scales smaller than atoms two more fundamental 
forces of nature come into play: the strong and the weak 
force. Like gravity and electromagnetism, the strength 
of these forces can be described by dimensionless fine 
structure constants. The weak force has a coupling 
constant aw = (gm2c/h°) ~ 10-'° where g ~ 10-® erg cm> 
is the Fermi constant. Thus its interaction strength is 
midway between those of gravity and electricity. The 
dimensionless constant describing the strong force is 
denoted by as and has a value of order 10. Although 
the strong and weak forces are many orders of magnitude 
stronger than the gravitational force, they are both short 
range, becoming negligible at distances of 10-8 cm and 
10-'° cm, respectively. For this reason they do not play 
an important role in determining the structure of objects 
larger than atoms. 

It turns out (Barrow and Tipler 1986) that many 
features of chemistry are sensitive to the value of as. For 
example, if as were increased by 2%, all the protons in 
the universe would combine at big bang nucleosynthesis 
into diprotons (nuclei consisting of two protons). In this 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anthropic Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


case, there would be no hydrogen and hence no hydrogen- 
burning stars. Since stars would then have a much 
reduced main-sequence time, there might not be time for 
life to arise. If ws were increased by 10%, the situation 
would be even worse because everything would go into 
nuclei of unlimited size and there would be no interesting 
chemistry. The lack of chemistry would also apply if as 
was decreased by 5% because all deuterons would then be 
unbound and one could only have hydrogen. 

The most sensitive constraint on the value of as is 
associated with what is called the ‘triple-alpha’ reaction. 
The way a star makes carbon is by first combining two 
alpha particles to make a beryllium nucleus and then 
adding another alpha particle to form a carbon nucleus 
(*He + *He > *Be, °Be + *He > C). The trouble is 
that beryllium is unstable (otherwise the ‘helium flash’ in 
giants would lead to a catastrophic explosion) and it used 
to be thought that it would decay before the extra alpha 
particle could combine with it. For many years, therefore, 
it was difficult to understand why there is any carbon in 
the universe. Then Fred HoYLe (Hoyle 1953) realized that 
there must be a resonance (i.e. an enhanced interaction 
rate) in the second step which allows the carbon to form 
before the beryllium disappears, i.e. '*C must have a state 
with energy just above the sum of the energies of *Be 
and ‘He. There is, however, no similar favourably placed 
resonance in !°O; otherwise almost all the carbon would be 
transmuted into oxygen. Once the suggestion was made, 
the resonance was looked for in the laboratory and rapidly 
found, so this might be regarded as the first confirmed 
anthropic prediction. Indeed, the fine tuning required is 
so precise that Hoyle concluded that the universe has to 
be a ‘put-up job’. 

The value of aw is also involved in an interesting 
anthropic constraint involving supernovae (Carr and Rees 
1979). We have seen that supernovae are essential for 
life because they spread heavy elements throughout the 
universe. However, it is still uncertain why a star explodes 
after burning its nuclear fuel. One explanation is that the 
core of the star becomes very hot when it collapses and 
this generates a lot of neutrinos which then blow off the 
envelope as a result of weak interactions. For this model 
to work, one requires the timescale on which neutrinos 
interact with nuclei in the envelope to be comparable 
with the dynamical timescale. If it were much longer, 
the envelope would be essentially transparent to the 
neutrinos; if it were much shorter, the neutrinos would be 
trapped in the core, and could not escape to deposit their 
momentum in the less tightly bound surrounding layers. 
The two timescales are comparable provided that ag ~ ay. 
We know that this relationship holds numerically but the 
anthropic principle explains why it must hold. So if we 
accept that wg is determined anthropically, we must also 
accept that aw is so determined. 

Rather remarkably the relation ag ~ ay also plays 
a crucial role in big bang nucleosynthesis calculations. 
The prediction that 24% of the mass of the universe is 
turned into helium when it was just a few minutes old 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is one of the great triumphs of the big bang picture. 
However, the helium production depends sensitively on 
the neutron-to-proton ratio when the weak interactions 
become slower than the cosmological expansion rate at 
a temperature of 10!° K and the only reason one obtains 
an interesting helium yield is because the ‘freeze-out’ 
temperature is comparable with the neutron—proton mass 
difference. It turns out that the condition for this is ag ~ 
ay, precisely the condition required for supernovae. It is 
not clear to what extent this coincidence can be interpreted 
anthropically. If aw were slightly smaller than ad e the 
entire universe would have burned to helium and the 
lifetime of a helium star might not be long enough to 
permit the evolution of life. If aw were slightly larger 
than ad - there would have been no helium production 
at all, although it is not clear that this has any anthropic 
significance. 


Cosmological anthropic constraints 

Several more qualitative anthropic constraints derive 
from cosmological considerations. For example, one can 
presumably exclude a universe with zero matter density 
(i.e. pure radiation) since there would then be no baryonic 
content at all. There are also simple anthropic reasons for 
why the total density parameter Q lies within an order of 
magnitude of 1. (This is the density in units of the critical 
value which divides models which expand forever from 
those which recollapse.) If 2 were much larger than 1, the 
universe would recollapse on a timescale much less than 
the main-sequence time of a star. On the other hand, if 
Q were much smaller than 1, density fluctuations would 
stop growing before galaxies could bind. This argument 
requires that Q be in the range 0.01-100. 

It is sometimes claimed that the inflationary scenario 
requires that 2 equals 1 to much greater precision than this, 
in which case the anthropic explanation may no longer 
seem relevant. However, even the inflationary scenario 
only works if one chooses the vacuum potential so that one 
has a sufficient number of expansion e-folds and density 
fluctuations of the right amplitude. The form of this 
potential may therefore itself be constrained by anthropic 
arguments. In fact, some theorists now advocate ‘open 
inflationary’ scenarios with Q < 1. In this case, in order 
to specify the present value of Q, one needs to invoke 
what Alex Vilenkin terms the ‘mediocrity principle’ (the 
idea that we are most likely to live in a universe with the 
largest number of galaxies) (Vilenkin 1995). However, this 
is really just the anthropic principle by another name. 

Another important cosmological parameter is the 
amplitude of the primordial density fluctuations required 
to explain the currently observed large-scale structure. 
When these fluctuations came inside the horizon, they 
must have had an amplitude ¢ of order 10-°. In this 
case, galaxies formed when the universe was 10° yr old, 
while clusters of galaxies are separating out at the present 
epoch. What would happen if the value of ¢ were different 
for some reason? If « were below 10~°, baryons would 
condense only at very late times when they would be very 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anthropic Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


diffuse. Cooling would then be ineffective, so gas would 
never condense into stars. On the other hand, if « were 
substantially larger than 10~°, baryons would condense 
early into tightly bound systems that would trap radiation 
and collapse to supermassive black holes. The evolution 
in such a universe would be hard to compute but certainly 
it would contain nothing like galaxies. The anthropically 
allowed range of ¢ therefore seems to lie between 10-3 and 
10~° (Tegmark and Rees 1998). 

A third important cosmological parameter is the 
photon-to-baryon ratio S ~ 10° (i.e. the ratio of photon 
density in the microwave background to the average 
proton density). In the standard big bang model, 
the background radiation dominated the density of the 
universe until a time ~104 yr and the formation of galaxies 
cannot occur until after this. However, for a general value 
of S this time would be ~S2ag/ he and the age of the 
universe given by the Dicke argument would then only 
exceed this for S < ag V4 Thus we have an upper limit on S 
of about 10’°. A lower limit on S is obtained if one requires 
that the universe be radiation dominated at cosmological 
nucleosynthesis, else all the hydrogen would go into 
helium, and this implies $ > (m,/m,)*?(@%,/ag)'/° ~ 104. 
Thus anthropic arguments require S to lie in the range 
10*-10"°. Of course, in the standard picture the value 
of S results from a small fractional excess of particles 
over antiparticles imprinted at around ~10™ s after the 
big bang because of violation of baryon conservation 
occurring at the grand unified epoch. However, in most 
GRAND UNIFIED THEORY (GUT) models S is predicted to be 
of the form a~” where n is an integer, so the anthropic 
constraint S$ < ag” ° merely translates into the constraint 
ag < a”. Ifn = 5, this just gives the convective star 
condition (Carr 1991). 

Finally we must consider anthropic constraints on the 
value of the cosmological constant A. This is often taken to 
be zero but this is neither theoretically nor observationally 
inevitable. The effect of a positive A is to cause the 
universe to embark on exponential expansion when the 
density of ordinary matter has dropped sufficiently low. 
The growth of density perturbations is then quenched, so 
bound systems which have not formed by then never will. 
For a given value of ¢, anthropic considerations therefore 
set an upper limit to A (Efstathiou 1995). Interestingly, this 
limit is only a factor of 10 higher than value of A which 
some cosmologists favor for our present universe. In the 
perspective of the 120 powers of 10 uncertainty in the 
vacuum energy density which particle theorists predict, 
this is a very severe constraint. Of course, if more precise 
cosmological observations show that the vacuum energy 
density is much less than critical density, then one might 
suspect that A is very small, perhaps exactly zero, for some 
fundamental physical reason. 


Interpretations of the anthropic principle 

Whether one regards anthropic arguments as coming 
under the heading of physics or metaphysics depends on 
how one interprets them. Various sorts of explanation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


have been suggested and these are illustrated in figure 2. 
The first possibility is that the anthropic coincidences 
reflect the existence of a ‘beneficent being’ who created 
the universe with the specific intention of producing us 
(figure 2(a)). Such an interpretation is logically possible 
and may have appeal to theologians, but it is probably 
unpalatable to most physicists. 

Another possibility, proposed by John Wheeler 
(Wheeler 1977), is that the universe does not properly exist 
until consciousness has arisen. This is based on the notion 
that the universe is described by a quantum mechanical 
wavefunction and that consciousness is required to 
collapse this wavefunction. Once the universe has evolved 
consciousness, one might think of it as reflecting back 
on its big bang origin, thereby forming a closed circuit 
which brings the world into existence (figure 2(b)). Even 
if consciousness really does collapse the wavefunction 
(which is far from certain), this explanation would also 
have to be regarded as metaphysical. 

The third possibility is that there is not just one 
universe but lots of them, all with different randomly 
distributed coupling constants. In this case, we necessarily 
reside in one of the small fractions which satisfy the 
anthropic constraints. With this interpretation, the fact 
that the constants have the values required for life just 
becomes an aspect of the weak anthropic principle, for 
conscious observers need not only be at special points in 
time and space but also in special universes. Invoking 
lots of extra universes might seem rather uneconomical 
but there are several physical contexts in which it makes 
sense. 

One possibility is connected with the ‘Many Worlds’ 
interpretation of quantum mechanics originated by Hugh 
Everett (Everett 1957). The idea here is that the universe 
splits every time the wavefunction collapses as a result 
of an observation. This means that the universe is 
continuously branching into a huge number of parallel 
worlds and this gives rise to the famous Schrédinger cat 
paradox. David Deutsch argues that all these worlds are 
‘real’ in some sense (Deutsch 1991). However, they all have 
the same coupling constants in the Everett picture, so it is 
a considerable extrapolation to argue that there are also 
worlds in which the constants differ. 

A more plausible context for the ‘many universes’ 
scenario arises if the universe is closed. In this case, 
one could envisage it undergoing cycles of expansion and 
recollapse, with new values of the coupling constants 
being generated at every bounce (figure 2(c)). During 
most cycles the constants would not allow life to arise 
but occasionally the appropriate values would occur and 
so the universe would become aware of itself. However 
unlikely the constants are to have the correct values, 
with an infinite number of cycles it is bound to happen 
sometimes. 

Another ‘many universes’ scenario arises in the 
context of the inflationary picture. This proposes that at 
very early times quantum fluctuations cause tiny regions 
to undergo an exponential expansion phase (see INFLATION). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anthropic Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nae, 


7ii\® 


(©) 


CONSCIOUSNESS BIG BANG 


UNIVERSE 


Figure 2. Different interpretations of the anthropic principle. (a) God creates the universe; (b) consciousness creates the universe; 


(c) cyclic universe; (d) inflationary universe. 


Each region becomes a ‘bubble’ and our entire visible 
universe is then contained within one of these. In 
principle, as stressed by Andrei Linde (Linde 1985), there 
could be different values for the coupling constants within 
each bubble (figure 2(d)). In this case, only a small fraction 
of them would develop consciousness but our universe 
would necessarily be among that fraction. Both the cyclic 
and the inflationary models invoke a large—and possibly 
infinite—number of universes. The only difference is that 
the first invokes an infinity in time, while the second 
invokes an infinity in space. 


Concluding assessment 
The possibility of life as we know it evolving in the 
universe is contingent on the values of a few basic physical 
constants—and is in some respects remarkably sensitive 
to their numerical values. On the other hand, from a 
physical point of view, the anthropic ‘explanation’ of 
the various coincidences in nature can be criticized on 
a number of grounds. (1) The anthropic arguments are 
mainly post hoc—apart from the triple-alpha resonance, 
nobody has ever based a successful prediction on the 
anthropic principle. (2) The anthropic arguments may 
be unduly anthropocentric in that we have assumed 
conditions which are specifically associated with human- 
type life. (3) The anthropic principle does not predict 
exact values for the constants but only order-of-magnitude 
relationships between them, so it is not a complete 
explanation. 

The last two objections might be met within the ‘many 
universes’ interpretation if one envisages the universes as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


occupying an abstract multidimensional space of coupling 
constants (with one dimension for each a). The anthropic 
principle could then be interpreted as saying that life can 
only exist in small regions of that space. Lifeforms similar 
to our own will be possible in some regions; other lifeforms 
may be possible elsewhere, but life will not be possible 
everywhere (see also EXOBIOLOGY, LIFE ON OTHER WORLDS). One 
may not have the same anthropic relation in every life- 
supporting region of the space but one will have some 
relation. 

The other attraction of the ‘many universes’ explana- 
tion, as we have seen, is that it may be possible to give it a 
reasonable physical basis (Leslie 1989). Of course, it is not 
clear that these physical ideas will ever be testable. For ex- 
ample, we will probably never know whether the universe 
can undergo cycles; even if we can prove that it will recol- 
lapse, we cannot be certain that it will bounce into another 
expansion phase. In the inflation picture the situation is 
no better because we will never be able to contact the other 
bubbles. Both pictures are therefore untestable and, in this 
sense, one might still regard the anthropic principle as be- 
ing metaphysical. 

Perhaps the least radical explanation of the anthropic 
coincidences is that they may turn out to be a consequence 
of some unified theory of particle physics. Such theories 
do, after all, set out to relate the different coupling 
constants, so it is not inconceivable that they would predict 
the sort of connections between the different a’s discussed 
above. However, as far as we know, the relationships 
discussed above are not predicted by any unified theory. 
Even if they were, it would still be remarkable that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Anthropic Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


theory should yield exactly the coincidences required for 
life. 

Finally it should be cautioned that many of the 
anthropic arguments merely relate to the presence of 
complexity—the anthropic coincidences could be equally 
regarded as prerequisites for inanimate objects such as 
motor cars—so the emphasis on life may be misplaced. In 
this context, Lee Smolin has conjectured that the constants 
governing our universe are determined not by anthropic 
considerations but by a kind of ‘natural selection’ among 
universes (Smolin 1992). He postulates that new universes 
sprout whenever black holes form and that the new 
constants, while differing slightly from their values in the 
parent universe, retain some memory of their parentage. 
This idea is exceedingly speculative and involves physics 
far beyond anything we can be confident of. However, 
Smolin’s idea at least has the virtue of being testable: 
it predicts that the properties of our universe should be 
optimal for black hole formation, so that any tinkering 
with the constants would reduce the propensity of black 
holes to form. Conventional astrophysics can at least start 
to address this question. 


Bibliography 

Barrow J D and Tipler F J 1986 The Anthropic Cosmological 
Principle (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Carr BJ 1991 J. Brit. Interplan. Soc. 44 63 

Carr B J and Rees M J 1979 Nature 278 605 

Carter B 1974 Confrontation of Cosmological Models with 
Observations ed MS Longair (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 291 

Deutsch D 1991 Phys. Rev. D 44 3197 

Dicke R H 1961 Nature 192 440 

Dirac P AM 1937 Nature 139 323 

Dyson F 1979 Rev. Mod. Phys. 51 447 

Efstathiou G 1995 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 274 L73 

Everett H 1957 Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 454 

Hoyle F 1953 Astrophys. J. 118 513 

Leslie J 1989 Universes (London: Routledge) 

Linde A 1985 Rep. Prog. Phys. 47 925 

Smolin L 1992 Class. Quantum Grav. 9 173 

Tegmark M and Rees M J 1998 Astrophys. J. 499 526 

Vilenkin A 1995 Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 846 

Wheeler J 1977 Foundational Problems in the Special Sciences 
ed Butts and Hintikka (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 3 


Bernard Carr 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Antimatter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Antimatter 


Matter composed of elementary particles that have the 
same masses as their ordinary matter equivalents but 
which have opposite, or ‘mirror image’, values of other 
quantities, such as charge. For example, an anti-electron 
(or ‘positron’) has the same mass as an electron but has 
positive, rather than negative, charge; an anti-proton has 
the same mass as a proton but has a negative, rather than 
a positive, charge. 

Antiparticles are found naturally among cosmic rays 
and can be produced in high-energy particle accelerators. 
Because of the equivalence of mass and energy, high- 
energy gamma-ray photons can transform into particle— 
antiparticle pairs (for example, an electron and a 
positron), the simultaneous production of a particle and 
an antiparticle being required to satisfy conservation laws, 
such as the conservation of charge (because a photon has 
zero charge, it has to transform, for example, into a positive 
positron and a negative electron, so ensuring that the net 
charge remains zero). When a particle and its antiparticle 
collide, they annihilate each other, transforming their mass 
into energy, normally in the form of gamma-ray photons. 

Any antiparticles that are produced in our locality 
are quickly annihilated through colliding with particles 
of ordinary matter. While in principle it is possible for 
antimatter to exist in bulk (for example, stars composed 
of atoms that consist of anti-protons, anti-neutrons and 
positrons), and the possibility cannot be excluded, there is 
no evidence to suggest that this is so. All the bulk matter 
in our part of the universe is composed of conventional 
matter, and it is widely believed that the universe itself is 
dominated by matter rather than antimatter. 


See also: cosmic rays, electron, elementary particles, 
matter, photon, proton, positron, quark, subatomic 
particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Antlia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Antlia 


(the Air Pump; abbrev. Ant, gen. Antliae; area 239 sq. deg.) 
Asouthern constellation that lies between Hydra and Vela, 
and culminates at midnight in late February. It was named 
Antlia Pneumatica by the French astronomer Nicholas Lde 
Lacaille (1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751-2. 
The IAU adopted the shortened form in 1922. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, overshadowed 
by its neighbors Centaurus and Vela, the brightest star in 
Antlia is of magnitude 4.3. Interesting objects include ¢ 
Antliae, a wide double star with pale yellow (A9 and A1) 
components, magnitudes 5.9 and 6.2, the latter of which 
is itself double, having a pale yellow (A1) component, 
magnitude 7.0, separation 8”, S Antliae, an eclipsing binary 
(range 6.4-6.9, period 0.65 day), and NGC 2997, a tenth- 
magnitude spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Antoniadi, Eugenios (1870-1944) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Antoniadi, Eugenios (1870-1944) 


Turkish-born astronomer. Starting with an interest in 
historical astronomy, he met CAMILLE FLAMMARION who 
inspired him to observe the planets. He worked in France 
at the Juvisy and Meudon observatories and made the best 
maps of Mars before the Space Age. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Apache Point Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apache Point Observatory 


The principal projects at Apache Point Observatory at 
Sunspot, New Mexico, USA, are the 3.5 m telescope, the 
Sloan Digital Sky Survey and New Mexico State Univer- 
sity’s 1.0 m telescope. The 3.5 m telescope construction 
incorporates many innovations: compact and lightweight 
design, thermal control, multiple instruments and remote 
observing. The SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY is generating a 
three-dimensional map of a large volume of the northern 
night sky using an array of sensitive instruments coupled 
to a 2.5 m telescope. 

The Observatory is owned by the Astrophysical 
Research Consortium consisting of the University of 
Chicago, Institute for Advanced Study, Johns Hopkins 
University, New Mexico State University, Princeton 
University, University of Washington and Washington 
State University. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey is a joint 
project of the University of Chicago, Fermilab, the Institute 
for Advanced Study, the Japan Participation Group, the 
Johns Hopkins University, the Max Planck Institute for 
Astronomy, Princeton University, the United States Naval 
Observatory and the University of Washington. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.apo.nmsu.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Apastron ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apastron 


The farthest point in the relative orbit of one component 
of a binary system from the other component. The term is 
also used for the most distant position of a planet orbiting 
a star other than the Sun. 


See also: aphelion, binary system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aperture ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aperture 


The clear diameter of the objective of a refracting telescope 
or the primary mirror of a reflecting telescope. A telescope 
is characterized by its aperture; for example, a telescope 
with an aperture of 2m would be referred to as a ‘2 m’ 
telescope. 


See also: light-gathering power, mirror, objective lens, 
resolving power, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aperture Synthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aperture Synthesis 


A technique, also known as Earth-rotation synthesis, that 
enables the outputs of two or more radio telescopes to be 
combined to give the same resolution as a single radio dish 
of aperture equivalent to the maximum separation of the 
dishes. 

A single observation with a conventional radio 
interferometer produces high resolution only ina direction 
parallel to the line joining the two antennae, or dishes. 
If two radio telescopes (A and B) are set up at opposite 
ends of a track and continue to observe a particular radio 
source for 12 h then, during that time, the rotation of the 
Earth will change the orientation of the baseline relative 
to the source. In particular, if the radio telescopes were 
located at the north pole, the Earth’s rotation would cause 
A to trace out a semicircle around B, so effectively tracing 
out a half-ring strip of a ‘dish’ centered on B. The data 
received by the dishes are stored and the other half of the 
ring can be constructed mathematically. Dish A is then 
moved a little closer to B to enable another ‘ring’ to be 
filled in and the process repeated until the entire ‘dish’ has 
been synthesized. The mass of accumulated data is then 
converted into an image of the source equivalent to that 
which would be obtained by a single dish of aperture equal 
to the maximum separation of the two dishes. In practice, 
the resolution achieved along one diameter of the ‘dish’ 
(north-south, say) will be the same as that at right angles 
to this direction (east-west) only if the declination of the 
source is 90°; resolution along the north-south direction 
decreases for sources closer to the celestial equator. 

A synthesis array with only two dishes would take 
a very long time to build up the effect of a single large 
dish. The process may be speeded up by using more 
than two dishes, some of which may be fixed and others 
movable and, in some cases, the dishes making up the 
array can be set out along more than one track. The largest 
complete Earth-rotation synthesis system is the Very Large 
Array (VLA), located in the New Mexican desert close to 
Socorro. The VLA, which comprises 27 dishes, each 25 m 
in diameter, set out along a Y-shaped track, can simulate 
a single dish 36 km in diameter. Usually, the outputs 
from the various dishes are linked together by cables, but 
the Multi-Element Radio-Linked Interferometer Network 
(MERLIN), in the UK, uses radio links to connect dishes 
separated by distances of up to 230 km. Because it links 
a number of widely separated individual dishes it cannot 
simulate, and attain the sensitivity of, a complete dish. 
Nevertheless, it can detect details as small as 0.01 arcsec at 
its shortest operating wavelengths. 


See also: radio interferometer, radio telescope, resolving 
power. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Apex 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apex 


The direction of motion of the Sun relative to the stars in 
the local part of the Galaxy is known as the solar apex, or 
the apex of the Sun’s way. Observations of the proper 
motions of stars indicate that they show a tendency to 
diverge from a point in the constellation Hercules, and 
to converge towards a point in the constellation Columba. 
These observations indicate that the Sun is moving at a 
velocity of about 19.5 km s~!, towards a point at right 
ascension (RA) 18 h and declination (dec) +30° in Hercules 
and away froma point at RA 6 hand dec —30° in Columba 
(the solar antapex). 

Apex can also refer to the point on the celestial sphere 
towards which the Earth appears to be moving as a result 
of its orbital motion around the Sun. 


See also: antapex. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aphelion ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aphelion 


The point in the elliptical orbit of a planet or other object 
around the Sun at which it is farthest from the Sun. The 
Earth, for example, reaches aphelion in July, when it is just 
over 152 million km from the Sun. 


Compare: perihelion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aphrodite Terra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aphrodite Terra 


The largest of the three main upland regions of Venus (the 
other two being Ishtar Terra and Lada Terra), extending 
almost halfway around the planet’s equator and centered 
at 5.8 °N, 104.8 °E. Its overall length is 9999 km. It takes its 
name from the Greek goddess of love. The western end 
of Aphrodite is formed by two distinct units of elevated 
terrain: Ovda Regio at the far west, and Thetis Regio to its 
east, both rising to about 4 km about the planet’s mean 
surface level. At the eastern end lies a similar region, 
Alta Regio, and beyond it the less elevated Ulfrun Regio. 
Like Ishtar and Lada Terrae, these regiones in Aphrodite 
are characterized by the type of terrain termed tesserae— 
areas of intersecting troughs and ridges. Between Thetis 
and Alta is a major complex canyon system, the most 
prominent parts of which are named Diana Chasma and 
Dali Chasma. These chasmata are steep-sided with rims 
raised above their surrounds, with a maximum difference, 
in the case of Dali Chasma, of 6 km between rim and 
canyon floor. Another, almost circular canyon, Artemis 
Chasma, lies to the south of Thetis; Ganis Chasma extends 
northward from Alta. In Alta Regio are situated a number 
of prominent volcanic peaks, the highest of which, Maat 
Mons, is over 8 km high. A global analysis of wrinkle 
ridges—compressive-stress features common on Venus’s 
plains—shows that they tend to be radially aligned on 
Aphrodite Terra, suggesting a common origin in the event 
that uplifted Aphrodite. 


Seealso: Venus: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Apian [Bienewitz or Bennewitz], Peter (1495-1552) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apian [Bienewitz or Bennewitz], Peter 
(1495-1552) 


Cartographer, born in Leisnig, Saxony, became professor 
of mathematics at Ingolstadt, where he founded a 
press that published maps. He made astronomical 
instruments, including sundials, quadrants and armillary 
spheres, and other instruments that would solve spherical 
trigonometry. His world map is the oldest that uses the 
name America. His major work (1540), the Astronomicum 
Caesareum, is a sumptuous atlas of the skies with revolving 
paper models for computation. Apian made clear JOHANN 
WERNER’S proposal for the use of the Moon’s position to 
determine longitude, so that sailors could understand 
its potential, and thus influenced the establishment of 
the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, and the Paris 
Observatory. Observed five comets, including Halley’s, 
and noticed that their tails all pointed away from the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Apoapsis ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apoapsis 


The point in an elliptical orbit at which the orbiting body 
is closest to the body it is orbiting. The prefix ‘apo-’ or ‘ap-’ 
may be attached to various words or roots depending on 
the body being orbited: for example, apastron for an orbit 
round a star; apojove for an orbit around Jupiter. 


See also: aphelion, apogee. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Apogee ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apogee 


The point in its orbit around the Earth at which the Moon 
or an orbiting spacecraft is farthest from the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Apollo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apollo 


US programme to land men on the moon. Included 
11 manned missions, October 1968—December 1972, with 
three missions restricted to a lunar flyby or orbital survey 
(Apollos 8, 10 and 13), and six landings (Apollos 11, 12, 
14, 15, 16 and 17). Returned 385 kg of lunar soil and 
rock samples which provided evidence that the Moon 
was about the same age as the Earth and probably 
originated from material derived from Earth during a 
gigantic impact event. Astronauts deployed a wide 
variety of surface experiments including seismometers, 
laser reflectors for refining the Earth-Moon distance, heat 
flow experiments, magnetometers, ion detectors and solar 
wind spectrometers. Orbital surveys were conducted 
from the command modules, most notably on Apollos 
15-17, which carried mapping and panoramic cameras, 
and various spectrometers. Data on the distribution of 
lunar gravity variations were obtained by studies of two 
subsatellites deployed from Apollos 15 and 16. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Apollonius [Apollonios] of Perga (200-100 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apollonius [Apollonios] of Perga 
(200-100 Bc) 


Greek geometer from Perga, now in Turkey, who proposed 
that the planets revolved around the Sun, and the 
Sun revolves around the Earth. Apollonius left no 
astronomical works but is believed to be the inventor of 
the geometric system of epicycles and eccentric circles, 
by which perfect circular motions were combined into 
the actual elliptical orbits of the planets. His work was 
developed by nipparcuus and pTo.emy. Apollonius, known 
as “The Great Geometer’, also wrote a monumental treatise 
on conic sections entitled On Conics in which the terms 
parabola, ellipse and hyperbola were first used. In a book 
of optics called On the Burning Mirror, he showed that 
spherical mirrors do not focus parallel rays of light and 
discussed instead the use of parabolic mirrors. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Apparent Solar Time 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apparent Solar Time 


Time reckoned by the apparent position of the Sun in the 
sky. The local apparent solar time (or local apparent time) 
is defined to be the local hour angle of the Sun (the angle 
between the observer’s meridian and the Sun, measured 
westwards from the meridian) plus 12 hours. Thus, when 
the Sun is crossing the meridian at noon, its hour angle is 
zero, and the local apparent solar time is 0h + 12h = 12 
hours; when the hour angle of the Sun has increased to 6 
hours, the local apparent solar time is 6h+12h = 18h, and 
so on. Apparent solar time is the time that is displayed on 
a sundial. Compared to another, regular clock such as a 
pendulum, it is fast or slow by up to 15 min. 


See also: day, hour angle, mean solar time, meridian, 
sidereal time, Universal Time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Apparition ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apparition 


The appearance of a celestial body at a time when it is 
well placed for observation. The term is used especially 
for objects in the solar system whose orbits are such 
that they are unobservable for periods of time: for the 
planets Mercury and Venus, whose morning and evening 
apparitions occur when they are at greatest elongation 
(their maximum angular separation from the Sun), and 
for long-period comets when their orbits bring them into 
the inner solar system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Appleton, Edward Victor (1892-1965) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Appleton, Edward Victor (1892-1965) 


Radiophysicist, born in Bradford, Yorkshire, England, 
Nobel prizewinner 1947, professor at London, Cambridge 
and Edinburgh. Discovered the existence of a layer of 
electrically charged particles about 200 km high in the 
upper atmosphere (named the Appleton layer after him) 
which, with the Heaviside layer, channels propagating 
radio waves between distant stations. The layer is affected 
by the position of the Sun, the sunspot cycle and the solar— 
terrestrial ‘weather’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Appulse ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Appulse 


An apparently close approach between two objects as seen 
on the celestial sphere, as their motions bring them close 
to the same line of sight of an observer on the Earth. 
Examples are when the Moon or a planet narrowly misses 
occulting a star. 


See also: occultation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Apus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apus 


(the Bird of Paradise; abbrev. Aps, gen. Apodis; area 
206 sq. deg.) A southern constellation that lies between 
Triangulum Australis and the south celestial pole, and 
culminates at midnight in late May. It was first shown on 
Petrus Planicus’s celestial globe of c. 1598 as Apis Indica 
(the Indian Bird), though it is usually attributed to the 
Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known 
as Petrus Theodorus) and Frederick de Houtman, who 
charted that part of the southern sky in 1595-7. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Apus are a Apodis, magnitude 3.8, and £ apodis, 
magnitude 3.9. There are no other stars brighter than 
fourth magnitude. Interesting objects include 5 Apodis, 
a wide double star with red (M5) and orange (K3) 
components, magnitudes 4.7 and 5.3, separation 103”, and 
NGC 6101, a ninth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aquarius 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aquarius 


(the Water-bearer; abbrev. Aqr, gen. Aquarii; area 
980 sq. deg.) A southern zodiacal constellation that lies 
between Pegasus and Piscis Austrinus, and culminates 
at midnight in late August. Its origin dates back to 
Babylonian times and it is said to represent Ganymede 
in Greek mythology, who was snatched up by Aquila (the 
eagle) on Zeus’s behest, to become cup-bearer to the gods. 
Its brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100- 
175) in the Almagest and he included a Piscis Austrini 
(Fomalhaut) in the constellation. 

A large but rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Aquarius are w Aquarii (Sadalmelik) and 
6 Aquarii (Sadalsuud), both magnitude 2.9. All other stars 
are of the third magnitude or fainter. Interesting stars 
in Aquarius include several doubles, notably ¢ Aquarii, 
a close binary with yellow (F3 and F6) components, 
magnitudes 4.4. and 4.6, separation 2”, period 856 years, 
and the Mira-type variable R Aquarii (range 5.8-12.4, 
period about 387 days). Other interesting objects include 
M2 (NGC 7089), a seventh-magnitude globular cluster, 
and two planetary nebulae, NGC 7293 (the Helix Nebula), 
also seventh magnitude and one of the closest planetary 
nebulae, with an apparent size of 12.8’, and NGC 7009 (the 
Saturn Nebula), which is eighth magnitude. 

Three major meteor showers appear to radiate from 
the constellation: the Eta Aquarids, Delta Aquarids and 
Iota Aquarids. 


See also: Delta Aquarids, Eta Aquarids, Helix Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aquila 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aquila 


(the Eagle; abbrev. Aql, gen. Aquilae; area 652 sq. deg.) 
An equatorial constellation that lies between Sagitta and 
Sagittarius, and culminates at midnight in mid-July. Its 
origin dates back to Babylonian times and it is said to 
represent the eagle of Zeus in Greek mythology, which 
carried the thunderbolts that Zeus hurled at his enemies 
and which snatched up Ganymede to become cup-bearer 
to the gods. Its brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy 
(c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest and he placed the southern 
ones in the now obsolete constellation of Antinous. 

The brightest star in Aquila, a Aquilae (Altair), 
magnitude 0.8, is one of the stars that, together with 
a Lyrae (Vega) and a Cygni (Deneb), makes up the 
asterism of the Summer Triangle. Two fainter stars, 
y Aquilae (Tarazed), magnitude 2.7, and 6 Aquilae 
(Alshain), magnitude 3.7, lie about 2° north-west and 2.5° 
south-east respectively of Altair, and together with it form 
an unmistakable configuration. There are seven other 
stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter, including n Aquilae, 
one of the brightest Cepheid variables (range 3.5-4.4, 
period 7.18 days). Another bright variable is the Mira- 
type star R Aquilae (range 5.5-12.0, period about 284 days). 
The constellation also contains Van Biesbroeck’s star, an 
eighteenth-magnitude red dwarf which, with an absolute 
magnitude of 19.3, is one of the intrinsically faintest stars 
known. 

The Milky Way passes through Aquila and the 
constellation contains a number of star clusters and 
planetary nebulae, the brightest of which is NGC 6709, an 
open cluster of about 40 stars fainter than ninth magnitude. 


Seealso: Altair 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ara 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ara 


(the Altar; abbrev. Ara, gen. Arae; area 237 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation that lies between Scorpius and 
Apus, and culminates at midnight in early June. It is said 
to represent the altar upon which in Greek mythology 
the gods swore allegiance before their battle against the 
Titans, and that upon which Chiron, the centaur, is about 
to sacrifice Lupus, the wolf (which was a neighboring 
constellation before the introduction of Norma in the mid- 
eighteenth century). Its brightest stars were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A small, rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Ara are a and f Arae, both magnitude 2.8. 
There are five other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. 
The Milky Way passes through Ara and the constellation 
contains a number of star clusters, including NGC 6193, 
a fifth-magnitude open cluster, and NGC 6397, one of 
the closest globular clusters, which is just visible to the 
unaided eye as a faint misty patch. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Arago, Dominique Francois Jean (1786-1853) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Arago, Dominique Francois Jean 
(1786-1853) 


Scientist and statesman, born in Estagel, France. Director 
of the Paris Observatory, where he invited URBAIN LE VERRIER 
to determine why Uranus was deviating from its predicted 
orbit, a study which led to the discovery of Neptune. 
His scientific achievements were mainly in the fields of 
astronomy, magnetism and optics. He showed that the 
light changes polarization when passing through quartz 
and performed experiments that failed to detect the motion 
of the Earth with respect to the ether. He took part in 
the July Revolution (1830), and in 1848 was a member of 
the provisional government, and was effectively the Head 
of State for 46 days (perhaps only the second astronomer 
who has had this distinction, counting ALFONSO x as the 
first). Working with JEAN-BAPTISTE BIOT, Arago defined the 
meridian of Paris, used by French sailors until supplanted 
by the ‘prime’ meridian of Greenwich in 1884. He made 
measurements along it of the circumference of the Earth as 
a preliminary to the determination of the meter, in order 
to standardize the unit of length. A ‘virtual monument’ 
to Arago by the Dutch sculptor Jan Dibbets runs through 
Paris in the form of 135 brass circles engraved with his 
name and located along the meridian line. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aratus [Aratos] (c. 315—c. 245 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aratus [Aratos] (c. 315—c. 245 Bc) 


Greek poet and naturalist, author of The Phenomena, an 
account of the constellations and their positions, and 
of weather signs in heavenly bodies and other natural 
phenomena. Itis based on work by the astronomer EUDOXUS 
and on a lost treatise of the fourth century BC, perhaps 
by Theophrastus. Aratus’ work is the earliest surviving 
account of the constellations still in use at the present day. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory 


The Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory, a government 
research institute founded in 1972, is located close to the 
villa where Galileo spent the last 11 years of his life. Under 
the directorship of Giorgio Abetti (1921-53) it became 
the growth point of Italian astrophysics with emphasis 
on solar physics; a tradition continued by his successor 
Guglielmo Righini (1953-78). Since 1978 the activities have 
also included: interstellar medium and star formation, 
extragalatic and high-energy astrophysics, astrophysical 
techniques and large telescopes. 

The Observatory collaborates with the National 
Research Council in the operation of the 0.5 m Infrared 
Telescope on the Gornergrat (Swiss Alps) and is the Italian 
focal point in the collaboration between institutions in 
Germany, Italy and the United States for the construction 
of a 2 x 8.4 m binocular telescope on Mount Graham 
(Arizona). 

Arcetri’s staff includes about 45 tenured astronomers 
and a large number of visiting scientists. 

For further information see 
http://www.arcetri.astro.it/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Archelaus (fifth century Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Archelaus (fifth century Bc) 


Greek philosopher and cosmologist. Pupil of ANAXAGORAS 
and teacher of Socrates, Archelaus believed that air is the 
primitive substance, which formed water at the center of 
the universe. Part condensed to Earth, pieces of which 
broke off to become the stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Archimedes of Syracuse (287-212 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Archimedes of Syracuse (287-212 Bc) 


Greek scientists and mathematician, born in Syracuse. 
Remembered for Archimedes’ screw, used for raising water, 
and his cry of eureka (‘Ihave found it’) when he discovered, 
according to legend while in the bath, the principle of 
the hydrostatic upthrust on a floating body (Archimedes’ 
principle). Discovered formulae for the areas and volumes 
of spheres, cylinders and a variety of figures. Most of his 
original astronomical work is lost. In a curious book he 
attempted to calculate an upper limit to the number of 
grains of sand which would fill the universe. He was 
killed, ridiculously, at the siege of Syracuse by a Roman 
soldier whose challenge he ignored while immersed in a 
mathematical problem drawn in the sand. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Arcturus ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Arcturus 


The star a Bootis, a golden yellow giant star (spectral type 
K2IIIp), with an apparent magnitude of —0.05 it is the 
fourth brightest star in the sky. Its distance is currently 37 
light-years (parallax 0.089”), but it has been calculated that 
its high velocity through space will carry it past the solar 
system in a few thousand years. It will be a spectacular 
visitor, being about 21 times the Sun’s diameter and 98 
times its luminosity, having an absolute magnitude of 
—0.3. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Arecibo Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Arecibo Observatory 


Located in the limestone hills of northwestern Puerto 
Rico, Arecibo Observatory is operated by the National 
Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, managed by Cornell 
University for the National Science Foundation. 

Conceived by William E Gordon, a professor of 
electrical engineering at Cornell University, the radio- 
radar telescope was completed in 1963. With its 305 m 
(1000 ft) diameter dish, which was built into a hillside, 
Arecibo has the largest collecting area (8 hectares or 
18 acres) of any radio antenna in the world. 

The Arecibo system operates at frequencies between 
50 MHz and 10 GHz (wavelengths between 6 m and 3 cm). 
With the aid of highly sensitive receivers which are cooled 
to about 20 K it is able to study extremely weak radio- 
emitting objects. 

Arecibo’s spherical reflector requires a 29 m (96 ft) line 
feed to collect the partially focused radiation. A Gregorian 
feed system, which uses two mirrors to focus radio waves 
toa point, was installed in 1997. Atthe same time, a ground 
screen and powerful new radar transmitter were installed. 

A number of major discoveries have been made 
with the telescope. They include the first discovery of 
planets around a pulsar (B1257+12); the first discovery 
of a pulsar in a binary system; and the discovery of 
millisecond pulsars. During the 1980s it was used to map 
the distribution of galaxies in the universe. 

Since the first radar transmitter was installed in 
1974, Arecibo has been used for solar system exploration, 
including detailed mapping of the surfaces of the Moon, 
Venus and a handful of near-Earth asteroids. In the 1960s 
it enabled astronomers to determine the rotational period 
of Mercury, and more recently it has been used to search 
for ice in polar craters on both Mercury and the Moon. The 
Arecibo radar is also the world’s most sensitive instrument 
for detecting meteors. 

During the dedication of a major upgrade to the 
telescope on 16 November 1974, Arecibo sent the first radio 
message to extraterrestrials. The transmission contained 
representations of the fundamental chemicals of life, the 
formula for DNA, a crude diagram of our solar system 
and simple pictures of a human being and the Arecibo 
telescope. 

The telescope is still used for SETI research today. 
One project, known as Phoenix, aims the telescope at 
specific stars. Another, called Serendip, collects data 
on certain likely frequencies during all the telescope’s 
other operations, and distributes the data to thousands 
of volunteers for processing on personal computers. 

For further information see 
http://www.naic.edu/open.htm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Argelander, Friedrich Wilhelm August (1799-1875) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Argelander, Friedrich Wilhelm August 
(1799-1875) 


Astronomer, born in Memel, East Prussia. Director of the 
Bonn Observatory, where he organized a survey of the 
position of all 324198 stars of the northern hemisphere 
above the ninth magnitude, published as the star charts 
and catalogs of the Bonner Durchmusterung (BD). His 
assistant, Eduard Schonfeld (1828-91), made the extension 
(BDE) into the southern sky. It is staggering to think about 
this pre-information technology project to observe half a 
million stars twice each by eye, their brightnesses and 
positions calculated, charted and printed by hand. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Argo Navis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Argo Navis 


(the Ship) a large southern constellation representing the 
ship Argo of Jason and the Argonauts in Greek mythology 
whose brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. AD 
100-175) in the Almagest. It was divided up by the French 
astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted 
the southern sky in 1751-2, into the constellations Carina 
(the Keel), Vela (the Sails), Puppis (the Poop or Stern) and 
Pyxis (the Compass), the stars of which all share a single 
series of Bayer letters. The brightest star of Argo Navis is 
now a Carinae (Canopus or Suhel), magnitude —1.9. 


See also: Carina, Puppis, Pyxis, Stellar nomenclature, 
Vela. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ariel 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ariel 


A mid-sized satellite of Uranus, discovered by William 
Lassell in 1851. Its diameter is 1160 km and it orbits 
at a distance of 191000 km. Of Uranus’s five mid- 
sized satellites, Ariel has the brightest surface, and has 
been the most geologically active (Miranda excepted). 
An older cratered surface is criss-crossed by spectacular 
deep, steep-sided canyons whose broad floors themselves 
show signs of further activity, with volcanic flooding 
and sinuous, winding troughs reminiscent of the Moon’s 
sinuous rilles. (Such low-temperature ‘cryovolcanism’ is 
possible because a water-ammonia eutectic mixture can 
behave as a viscous lava.) The longest of these canyons 
is the 622 km long system known as Kachina Chasmata. 
Such activity must have been caused by tidal heating. At 
present Ariel lacks any orbital resonance with neighboring 
satellites that could cause tidal heating, but this may have 
been different in the past. When the molten icy interior 
eventually solidified, it would have expanded, splitting 
the crust to form the canyons. 


See also: Uranus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ariel ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ariel 


Series of six UK-led scientific satellites launched 1962-79. 
The first four studied the ionosphere, while the last two 
were x-ray astronomy satellites. Ariel 3 was the first all- 
British satellite. The UK-US Ariel 5, launched in October 
1974, operated for more than five years and discovered 
dozens of new x-ray sources, including a number of 
transient sources such as Cygnus X-1. Ariel 6 suffered 
technical problems and produced few results. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aries 


(the Ram; abbrev. Ari, gen. Arietis; area 441 sq. deg.) A 
northern zodiacal constellation that lies between Taurus 
and Pisces, and culminates at midnight in late October. 
It represents the ram in Greek mythology whose golden 
fleece was the quest of Jason and the Argonauts. Its 
brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) 
in the Almagest. In Ptolemy’s day the Sun was in Aries 
at the vernal (spring) equinox and although as a result 
of precession this position now lies in the neighboring 
constellation of Pisces, it is still sometimes called the first 
point of Aries. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Aries are a Arietis (Hamal), magnitude 2.0, and 
B (Sheratan), magnitude 2.6. y Arietis (Mesarthim) is a 
fine visual binary with white (B9) and pale yellow (A1) 
components, both of magnitude 4.6, separation 8”. It was 
one of the first double stars to be discovered, being found 
serendipitously by the English physicist Robert Hooke 
(1635-1703) while observing the comet of 1664. a, 6 and 
y Arietis form a narrow triangle, which is the most easily 
recognized part of the constellation. 

Variable stars in Aries include the Mira-type stars 
U Arietis (range 7.2-15.2, period about 371 days) and 
R Arietis (range 7.4-13.7, period about 187 days). The 
brightest galaxy is NGC 772, a tenth-magnitude spiral. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aristarchus of Samos (310-230 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aristarchus of Samos (310-230 Bc) 


Greek philosopher, born on the island of Samos. 
According to ARCHIMEDES, Aristarchus hypothesized that 
the fixed stars are stationary, and that the Earth orbits 
the Sun, which is at the center of the universe. Since the 
stars did not show motions that reflected the motion of the 
Earth, the stars must be at great distances. The Babylonian 
astronomer SELEUCUS was the only astronomer who took up 
this concept until CopERNicus in 1543, who knew something 
of Aristarchus’ theory (see THOMAS KUHN). Aristarchus also 
used geometric methods to measure the size of the Sun, 
Moon and Earth. His methods were correct in principle 
and inaccurate only by an unprecedentedly small one 
order of magnitude, due to failures in the instruments 
and assumptions rather than the reasoning. According 
to Plutarch, Aristarchus’s contemporaries rejected ‘with 
abhorrence the view of those who have brought to rest the 
things which move and set in motion the things which by 
their nature and position are unmoved, such a supposition 
being contrary to the hypotheses of mathematics’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aristillus (c. 200 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aristillus (c. 200 Bc) 


Greek philosopher who worked in the Library at 
Alexandria and who with Tmocnaris, prepared the first 
star catalog. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Aristotle of Stagira (384-322 BC) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aristotle of Stagira (384-322 Bc) 


Aristotle was a Greek philosopher and scientist, born in 
Stagira. Aristotle’s lectures were compiled into 150 
volumes, including Physics, Metaphysics and De Caelo 
et Mundo (On the Heavens and Earth), in which he 
accepted the heavenly spheres of EUDOXUS, thought the 
Earth to be spherical and imagined a perfectly spherical, 
unchanging universe of spheres centred on the Earth and 
carrying the planets. Aristotle followed Eudoxus in 
suggesting that there were four elements: earth (solid), 
fire (energy), water (liquid) and air (gas). Each element 
could be hot, wet, dry or cold. Aristotle added a fifth 
element called ether, which he believed to be the main 
constituent of the celestial bodies. This divine element, 
he believed, is uncompounded, ungenerated, eternal, 
unalterable and neither heavy nor light. It can be found in 
its purest form in the celestial regions, but becomes 
adulterated in the area below the Moon. Aristotle’s view 
of the universe was hierarchical, and he made a sharp 
distinction between the eternal and immutable heavens 
and the sublunar, imperfect world of change (hence the 
subsidiary meaning of the word ‘sublunary’). The motion 
of celestial objects was therefore always natural, circular 
and continuous. In medieval times, Aristotle’s cosmology 
was codified and systematized to become the dominant 
world view (see MEDIEVAL COSMOLOGY). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Armagh Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Armagh Observatory 


The Armagh Observatory is a modern astronomical 
research institute with a rich heritage. Founded in 1790 by 
Archbishop Richard Robinson, its mission is to advance 
the knowledge and understanding of astronomy and 
related sciences. Around 20 astronomers carry out multi- 
disciplinary research on problems concerning the Sun 
and other stars, star formation, comets and asteroids, 
extra-solar planetary systems and solar system-—terrestrial 
relationships. 

The Observatory is supported by the Department of 
Education Northern Ireland and the UK partICLE PHYSICS 
AND ASTRONOMY RESEARCH COUNCIL. It is situated close to the 
center of the city of Armagh in Northern Ireland in grounds 
that include the Armagh Planetarium and the Armagh 
Astropark. 

For further information see 
http://www.arm.ac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Armillary Sphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Armillary Sphere 


A device of ancient origin that was used to measure or 
describe celestial positions. In essence, it is a model of 
the celestial sphere consisting of a set of rings, each of 
which represents a great circle such as the celestial equator 
or ecliptic, that revolves within a framework of fixed 
circles that represent, for example, the observer’s horizon 
and meridian. When used for observation, it included 
a pivoted ring on which open sights were mounted, the 
position of the object of interest being read off from 
graduated scales on the various rings. 

Armillary spheres were used for positional measure- 
ments in ancient and medieval times by observers such as 
Hipparchus, Ptolemy and Tycho Brahe and were widely 
used from the Middle Ages onwards for the teaching of 
astronomy. 


See also: celestial sphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Armstrong, Neil Alden (1930-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Armstrong, Neil Alden (1930-) 


Astronaut, born in Auglaize County, OH, trained as a 
pilot (Korean War). He flew on Gemini 8 and in 1969, 
with Michael Collins and EDWIN ALDRIN, took Apollo 11 to 
the Moon. On 21 July 1969, at 02:56 GMT, Armstrong 
became the first man to walk on the Moon, with the famous 
statement, ‘That’s one small step for a man, one giant leap 
for mankind’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Arrhenius, Svante August (1859-1927) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Arrhenius, Svante August (1859-1927) 


Swedish chemist, Nobel prizewinner (1903). In Worlds 
in the Making (1908), he suggested that life on Earth had 
begun when space-traveling spores reached Earth on a 
meteorite—the panspermia hypothesis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Art and Literature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Art and Literature 


The mind-expanding properties of astronomy affect 
writers and artists as much as (or possibly more than) 
people in general, and there is a long tradition of the use 
of astronomical references in literature and art. 


Astronomy and art 

Among the intents of fine art (painting, sculpture and 
objects which are made to be admired, rather than to be 
useful) is to comment by metaphor or analogy on human 
activities. Such activities may be set against or associated 
with astronomical phenomena, either for their own 
interest or as a comment. 

In paintings of the crucifixion, for example, are often 
shown images of eclipses. These are literal 
representations of the sudden darkness that the scriptures 
say occurred at the death of Jesus. They are also 
metaphors for the extinguishing of an important person, 
and examples of the ‘pathetic fallacy’ in which the 
natural world is identified as reacting to the human 
activities which happen in it. 

Likewise, the Florentine painter Giotto de Bondonel 
was commissioned in 1303 to decorate the interior of a 
chapel belonging to a wealthy Paduan merchant, Enrico 
Scrovegni, and he painted 38 religious scenes, one of 
which was The Adoration of the Magi (see also 
http://www.mystudios.com/gallery/giotto/17a.html). The 
worship of the infant Jesus in a stable was set under the 
Star of Bethlehem, a symbol of change and a portentous 
celestial mark of the birth. Giotto depicted it as a blazing 
comet. He was inspired by Halley’s Comet, which had 
returned to perihelion in 1301 and which the painter had 
undoubtedly seen. It was fitting that the spacecraft sent 
into the nucleus of Halley’s Comet during the return of 
1986 should have been named GIOTTO. 

On a more individual level, Vincent van Gogh 
painted Starry Night (1889, Museum of Modern Art, 
New York City; see also http://sunsite.org.uk/cgfa/gogh/ 
gogh3.htm). It shows a Provengal village with a church 
and houses with lit windows in a landscape of hills, olive 
and cypress trees, shown at night below a starry sky, with 
crescent moon and swirling Milky Way. It appears that 
the skyscape is a free rendering of the night sky at the 
time of its painting. Whatever its natural realism, the 
cosmic background of dizzying lights, overarching the 
human landscape below, represents a disturbing cosmic 
background to the smaller human events below, 
including, one must suppose, Vincent’s developing 
madness, culminating in his suicide the following year. 

The same Milky Way runs across the night sky in 
Albrecht Altdorfer’s Flight into Egypt (1609, in the 
Pinakothek at Munich). Again, it is a cosmic background 
to the events, shown small, that are taking place on Earth 
below as the Holy Family travels on donkey, fleeing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from the massacre of the infants by Herod. Altdorfer’s is 
the first representation of the Milky Way as a mass of 
individual stars. 

Astronomical instruments are often shown in 
portraits. They are interesting decorations that reflect the 
interests, attainments and education of the sitter(s) and 
may or may not be directly associated with the subject. 
The Ambassadors (1533, National Gallery, London; see 
http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/collection/w_wing/ind 
ex.html) is a full-length portrait of two wealthy, educated 
and powerful young men, Jean de Dinteville, the French 
Ambassador to England, and Georges de Selve, Bishop 
of Lavaur. The artist, Hans Holbein the Younger 
(1497/8—1543), has depicted the two men standing either 
side of a table bearing a collection of globes, books and 
astronomical and musical instruments. A sundial on the 
table is identical to that featured in Holbein’s portrait of 
the astronomer Nicholas Kratzer of 1528 (Musée du 
Louvre, Paris; see 
img/photos/collec/peint/grande/inc 1343.jpg). The 
plausible guess is that the sundial was designed or made 
by Kratzer, and its image was re-used and incorporated 
by Holbein into The Ambassadors as flattery. 

Astronomical references in the illustrated books of 
the English romantic poet William Blake are not 
favorable to science. God as an Architect, an illustration 
from The Ancient of Days, depicts God as an old man, 
kneeling on stormy clouds against a fiery sun, coldly 
measuring the cosmos with dividers (see 
http://sunsite.org.uk/cgfa/blake/index.html). Blake 
depicted Newton (see _http://www.cube.icestorm.net/ 
peirson/phil/blake/blake2.html) as a misguided Greek- 
god-like hero whose gaze was directed only downwards 
at sterile geometrical diagrams that he also measures with 
dividers. It is curious that this scornful depiction of 
Newton is often seen displayed as a poster on the walls of 
university physics departments. 

By contrast to Blake’s pessimism, his contemporary 
and countryman, Samuel Palmer, shows bucolic scenes in 
an idealized England (e.g. worshippers Coming from 
Evening Church, 1830, A Hilly Scene circa 1826-1828, 
Tate Gallery, London; see _http://www.tate.org.uk/ 
coll/echtm/n03697_c.htm and__http://www.tate.org.uk/ 
coll/cchtm/n05805_c.htm) under a benign, evening sky 
with glowing moons, and the planet Venus. 


Astronomy and literature 

Just as artists have used astronomical themes as a 
backdrop to human affairs, so too have writers. 
Astronomical references abound in the writings of 
William Shakespeare (1564-1616). His plays contain 
numerous speeches for and against astrology, views 
against being expressed mostly by the more pushy, 
rebellious characters. Shakespeare was born after 
Copernicus published his theory of the solar system in 
1543 and was a contemporary of enthusiastic English 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK] 


Art and Literature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


proponents of the new view of the Universe, such as 
THOMAS DIGGES (died 1595), WILLIAM GILBERT (1540-— 
1603) and JOHN DEE (1527-1608). Nevertheless, no trace 
of this controversy is found in Shakespeare’s works, save 
in disputes about the validity of astrology. 

Thomas Hardy (1840-1928) was a poet and prolific 
novelist of the Wessex countryside. He described his 
novel Two on a Tower as a ‘slightly-built romance’ that 
“was the outcome of a wish to set the emotional history 
of two infinitesimal lives against the stupendous 
background of the stellar universe, and to impart to 
readers the sentiment that of these contrasting 
magnitudes the smaller might be the greater to them as 
men’ (preface of edition of 1895). Peter Ackroyd (1949- 
), an English novelist, known for his handling of the 
relativity of time in his work, also set his novel First 
Light in a west-country landscape which shows a 
palimpsest of time in its tumuli, folk memories and 
modern observatory. 

It is possible in literature to make explicit comment 
on quite abstract astronomical ideas. The size of the 
universe is one of astronomy’s imaginative pulls, and the 
very word ‘astronomical’ has gathered a subsidiary 
meaning of ‘immense’ because the quantities in 
astronomy involved are so vast. Sometimes the reaction 
to the distances of stars is awe and fear, as in Pensées by 
Blaise Pascal (1623-1962): 


The eternal silence of those infinite spaces strikes me 
with terror. 


Because of the long times for the travel of light from 
a star to us, the image of the sky that we perceive at this 
moment originated long ago and may show the memory 
of a star that has since reached the end of its life and no 
longer exists. The Ode to Charles Sumner by Henry 
Longfellow (1807-1882) (1979 Complete Works 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) p 326) illustrates this 
idea: 


Were a star quenched on high, 

For ages would its light, 

Still travelling downward from the sky, 
Shine on our mortal sight. 


So when a great man dies, 

For years beyond our ken 

The light he leaves behind him lies 
Upon the paths of man. 


American poet Robert Frost (1874-1963) had a lifetime 
interest in astronomy, which started from the age of 15 
when he installed in the upper room of his parents’ house 
a small telescope, bought with money from selling 
magazine subscriptions. In a speech two months before 
his death, he gave his philosophical reaction to 
astronomy: ‘How stirring it is, the Sun and everything. 
Take a telescope and look as far as you will. How much 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the universe was wasted just to produce puny us. It’s 
wonderful ... fine’. In A Star in a Stone Boat (Frost R 
1962 (Harmondsworth: Penguin) p 116) he described 
how celestial material was part of the fabric of the Earth 
and its contents. 


Never tell me that not one star of all 
That slip from heaven at night and softly fall 
Has been picked up with stones to build a wall. 


Primo Levi (1919-1987) was an Italian Jewish poet and 
writer. Trained as an industrial chemist, he had a 
dramatic life as a Piedmont partisan, and was a witness, 
participant and survivor from the concentration camp at 
Auschwitz. He committed suicide, apparently in despair 
at the human condition. His poetry In the Beginning from 
1998 Collected Poems: Shema transl R Feldman and B 
Swann (London: Faber and Faber) p 27) describes the 
same thought as Frost, in relation to the big bang: 


From that one spasm everything was born: 
The same abyss that enfolds and challenges us, 
The same time that spawns and defeats us, 
Everything anyone has ever thought, 

The eyes of a woman we have loved, 

Suns by the thousands 

And this hand that writes. 


However again, just as in fine art, not all references in 
literature to astronomy are favorable, and Newton is in 
the firing line. At a drunken dinner on 28 December 
1817, attended by four literati—Benjamin Haydon, 
William Wordsworth, Charles Lamb and John Keats— 
Lamb abused Haydon for putting a bust of mathematical 
scientist Isaac Newton into a picture that he had just 
painted. Lamb derided Newton as ‘a fellow who believed 
in nothing unless it was as clear as three sides of a 
triangle’. Lamb proposed a toast to ‘Newton’s health and 
confusion to mathematics’. Keats agreed, and, with 
Wordsworth, lamented the destruction of beauty by 
science. This derision of science appears in Keats’ and 
Wordsworth’s poetry. No scientist would agree with the 
sentiment expressed by Keats (Lamia Part IT lines 229- 
38 in Garrod H W (ed) 1956 The Poetical Works of John 
Keats (Oxford: University Press) p 176): 


Do not all charms fly 

At the mere touch of cold philosophy? 
There was an awful rainbow once in heaven: 
We know her woof, her texture; she is given 
In the dull catalogue of common things. 
Philosophy will clip an Angel’s wings, 
Conquer all mysteries by rule and line, 
Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine— 
Unweave a rainbow... 


Science fiction 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK2 


Art and Literature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomy is associated with a distinct literary genre, 
namely science fiction. “Science fiction is that class of 
prose narrative treating of a situation that could not arise 
in the world we know, but which is hypothesised on the 
basis of some innovation in science or technology, or 
pseudo-technology, whether human or extra-terrestrial in 
origin’ (Amis 1960). 

Science fiction has a long and honorable history. It 
goes back to the 2nd century AD, since the first true novel 
about an expedition to the Moon was written at that time 
by a Greek satirist, Lucian of Samosata. He called it the 
True History, because it was made up of nothing but lies 
from beginning to end. It describes things that he had 
‘neither seen nor suffered nor learned from another, 
things which are not and never could have been; 
therefore my readers should by no means believe them’. 
Lucian combined a cool brain with a gift for fluent, easy 
writing, and he possessed a strong sense of humor. 

His travelers are sailors, who were caught up in a 
water spout as they passed through the Pillars of Hercules 
(our Straits of Gibraltar), and were hurled upward so 
violently that after seven days and seven nights they 
landed on the Moon. They were arrested by lunar 
warriors and imprisoned by the King of the Moon. 
Associating the Aristotelian perception of celestial bodies 
as more perfect than the Earth with the Moon, Lucian 
described the Moon-men as far more advanced than the 
people of Earth were. Anything unclean or impure was 
abhorrent to them. Sex was either unknown or ignored, 
and when a Moon-man died he merely dissolved into 
smoke, so that no remains should be left for burial. This 
convention that celestial beings are more pure than we 
are survives to this day in beliefs about extraterrestrial 
visitors in UFOs. 

Johann KEPLER’s Somnium (Dream) was very 
different. In 1593, as a 22 yr old student at the University 
of Tibingen, Kepler wrote a dissertation, from a 
Copernican standpoint, on how the heavens would appear 
to an observer on the surface of the Moon. Debate on this 
radical thesis was suppressed. Somnium, written by 1609 
and published in 1634, expands the thesis into a work of 
imagination. It was, and was meant to be, educational as 
well as entertaining. There were 223 notes explaining its 
references. In its emphasis on what to Kepler was science 
rather than on the adventure story, the work was the first 
science fiction story (hard core, in which the science is 
the most important feature, as opposed to science 
fantasy). Kepler’s hero, an Icelander named Duracotus, is 
carried to the Moon by a demon. Kepler knew that the 
Earth’s atmosphere does not extend all the way to the 
Moon, and that there must be a neutral point where the 
gravitational pulls of the Earth and Moon balance. Kepler 
also knew that the Moon always keeps the same face 
turned toward the Earth, and explains that conditions on 
the two hemispheres are quite different. He describes a 
lunar eclipse as seen from the Moon (i.e. an eclipse of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sun by the Earth) and what a solar eclipse looks like to a 
moon-dweller (i.e. the transit of the umbral shadow 
across the face of the Earth). 

Jules Verne’s From the Earth to the Moon appeared 
in 1865 and was followed later by the sequel, Round the 
Moon. Verne made a conscious effort to keep to the facts 
as he knew them, and on the whole he succeeded 
remarkably well, even though his basic method of travel 
was wrong. His travelers were fired to the Moon from the 
barrel of a huge cannon, and set off at a speed of 7 
miles”'. Numerically Verne was correct; 7 miles s” is the 
Earth’s escape velocity, and a projectile launched at this 
speed would never return. Unfortunately, the projectile 
would at once be destroyed by friction against the 
atmosphere, and in any case the shock of departure 
would certainly reduce any travelers to jelly, but at least 
Verne made it all sound plausible. His description of the 
Moon was based on the best information available, and 
his plot is ingenious; the projectile encounters a minor 
satellite of the Earth, and its path is changed so that 
instead of reaching the Moon the travelers are 
boomeranged back to the Earth. 

H G Wells’ The War of the Worlds (1898) describes 
how Earth is invaded by grotesque monsters from Mars, 
fleeing the desiccation of their planet. They cause 
devastation until they are destroyed by terrestrial 
bacteria, against which they have no immunity. In 1938 a 
radio broadcast of the novel, produced by Orson Welles, 
caused widespread panic in parts of the USA, listeners 
mistaking it for a real news bulletin. 

A novel of very different kind was written by 
KONSTANTIN EDUARDOVICH TSIOLKOVSKY, born in 1857 
in jevsk, a remote village in Russia. He realized that the 
only practicable method for space travel is the rocket, 
which depends on the principle of reaction and can work 
in the vacuum of space. His only novel, Beyond the 
Planet Earth, was probably complete by 1895, although 
it did not appear in print until 1920 and its English 
translation was delayed until 1960. As a story, and as a 
literary effort, it can only be described as atrocious, but 
as a scientific forecast it was years ahead of its time. In 
his novel, the travelers used a liquid-fuel rocket motor 
instead of solids such as gunpowder; he described the 
‘step’ principle of mounting one rocket on top of another 
(what we would call a multistage rocket). He also gave a 
perfectly accurate description of the causes and effects of 
weightlessness, or zero gravity. He was equally aware of 
the many problems involved in long space journeys, and 
he proposed to take along various types of green plants to 
remove excess carbon dioxide from the atmosphere 
inside the space-craft and replace it with free oxygen. 

During the 1930s large numbers of low-cost science 
fiction (and detective story) magazines appeared. This 
generated the name ‘pulp fiction’, now a synonym for 
story-telling without sophistication. Nevertheless, some 
young and now established writers started in this market. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK3 


Art and Literature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


By contrast to the bulk of pulp fiction, among the recent 
authors whose books contain a great deal of sound 
science, are the space travel visionary Sir ARTHUR C 
CLARKE, author of 2001: a Space Odyssey, filmed by 
Stanley Kubrick. The astronomer FRED HOYLE is also an 
established writer, whose first and best known work of 
science fiction, The Black Cloud, includes mathematical 
formulae. 


‘Space art’ 

Like science fiction, ‘space art’ is intended mostly to 
convey thoughts about space and astronomy, rather than 
demonstrate the finer points of an art-form standing in its 
own right. Space art is a form of scientific illustration, 
akin to botanical illustration. Since the subject matter is 
not readily seen directly, space artists extrapolate what is 
known about a subject into an illustration, much as an 
illustrator would do when reconstructing a dinosaur from 
fossils or a historical site from an archaeological dig. 
Space artists might show what a far-off planet, double- 
star system or galaxy would look like if we were there in 
person, or how an activity in space might be 
implemented, such as mining an asteroid or colonizing 
Mars. 

Space art may also incorporate fantasy elements into 
its genre, placing fish, flowers, etc, into a space scene for 
dramatic effect. An early example of this form of space 
art was The Sower of Systems (1902, The Watts Gallery, 
Compton; see also _http://www.webmagick.co.uk/ 
prcoll/artists/watts/index.html), a representation of the 
chaos prior to the formation of planets by George 
Frederick Watts (1817-1904). An expressionist image of 
the Laplace nebular hypothesis is combined with the 
vague form of a striding, grey-cloaked figure, as if 
sowing a field. 

The pioneer space artist in the modern school was 
CHESLEY BONESTELL, who illustrated books by space- 
travel experts such as WERNHER VON BRAUN and Willy 
Ley. Modern space art is distinguished by a naturalistic 
method of illustration, creating detailed landscapes 
reminiscent of those of the American Romantic 
landscape painters. The subject matter and the material 
available both favor digital methods of work, but more 
traditional techniques are also common. About 120 space 
artists form the International Association of 
Astronomical Artists (http://www.iaaa.org/), founded in 
1982. See also http://www.spaceart.org/index.html. 
Modern practitioners include David Hardy and Paul 
Doherty (UK), Lynette Cooke (USA), and cosmonauts 
Vladmir Dzhanibekov and Alexei Leonov, with Georgii 
Poplavski and Andrei Sokolov (Russia). 

There is endless scope for space art. In the future it 
will be fascinating to look back at some of the 
speculations of the 20th century; for example, will a 
lunar base really be like the graceful, domed structure 
visualized by Bonestell? We wait and see. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Allen R H 1963 Star Names and their Meanings (New York: 
Dover) 

Bush D 1950 Science and English Poetry (New York: Oxford 
University Press) 
Byard M M 1977 Poetic responses to the Copernican revolution 
in Sci. Am. 236(6) 120 
Clark C 1921 Astronomy in 
Sydenham & Co) 

Fauvel J, Flood R, Shortland M and Wilson R (ed) 1988 Let 
Newton Be! (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Heath-Stubbs Jean and Salman P (ed) 1984 Poems of Science 
(Harmondsworth: Penguin) 

Knuijt J K 1989 Poetry of the Heavens (Hortonville: Mira) 

Long C H 1963 The Myths of Creation (New York: Collier) 

Maclagan D 1977 Creation Myths (London: Thames and 
Hudson) 

Marschall A 1983 Modern poetry and astronomy Mercury 
(March/April) p 41 

Meadows A J 1969 The High Firmament (Leicester: Leicester 
University Press) 

Nicolson M 1956 Science and the Imagination (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press) 

Rothenberg J (ed) 1969 Technicians of the Sacred (New York: 
Doubleday Anchor) 

Tomlinson G and Trainque D 1984 Anthology of Astronomical 
Poetry (TIPS Booklet 12) (Great Lakes: Planetarium 
Association) 


the Poets (Bournemouth: 


Astronomy (comets) and art: 
Olson R M 1985 Fire and Ice (New York: Walker) 
Space art: 


The Guild of Natural Science Illustrators 2000 The Guild 
Handbook of Scientific Illustration 2nd edn (New York: 
Wiley) 


Science fiction: 


Amis K 1960 New Maps of Hell (London: Gollanz) 

Lear J 1965 Kepler’s Dream (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press) (with the text and notes of Somnium, Sive 
Astronomia Lunaris, trans] P F Kirkwood) 


Paul Murdin 


Patrick Moore 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK4 


Artificial Satellite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Artificial Satellite 


A man-made object placed in orbit round the Earth or 
some other celestial body. The first artificial Earth satellite 
was Sputnik 1, launched by the then Soviet Union, on 
4 October 1957. Spherical in shape, and with a mass of 
84 kg, it entered an orbit with a perigee altitude of 229 km, 
an apogee altitude of 947 km and a period of 96 min. 
Artificial satellites are used for a wide variety of roles, 
including astronomical observation, study of the Earth’s 
magnetosphere and space environment, monitoring the 
atmosphere, weather, oceans and surface of the Earth, 
geodesy (study of the shape and gravitational field of the 
Earth), communications and military reconnaissance. 

All satellites follow elliptical (or circular) orbits 
around their parent body. The shape and orientation 
(i.e. the orbital elements) of a satellite’s orbit undergo 
changes under the action of various perturbing forces. 
For example, the tenuous outermost layers of the Earth’s 
atmosphere exert a small but finite frictional drag on 
the motion of a satellite that causes its perigee altitude 
to decrease (so tending to make the orbit more nearly 
circular) and lead eventually to its spiralling inwards and 
burning up in the denser atmospheric layers. Drag forces 
of this kind caused Sputnik 1 to re-enter the atmosphere 
and burn up 92 days after it had been launched. 
Gravitational perturbations exerted, for example, by the 
Earth’s equatorial bulge, or by the Moon and Sun, cause the 
planes of satellite orbits to precess (slowly rotate around 
the Earth). If the orbital inclination (the tilt of the orbital 
plane relative to the Earth’s equator) is carefully chosen, 
the orbit can be made to precess at a rate that ensures that 
its orientation relative to direction of the Sun remains the 
same while the Earth revolves around the Sun. An orbit 
of this kind is called Sun-synchronous. If a satellite is 
placed in a circular orbit at an altitude of just less than 
36000 km above the Earth’s equator, its orbital period 
will be exactly equal to the rotation period of the Earth. 
Because the satellite then remains continuously above the 
same point on the equator (and remains stationary in the 
sky when viewed from the Earth’s surface), it is said to be 
geostationary. The geostationary orbit is extensively used 
by communications and meteorological satellites. 


See also: apogee, magnetosphere of Earth, orbit, orbital 
elements, perigee. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ASCA (Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics/Astro-D) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ASCA (Advanced Satellite for 
Cosmology and 
Astrophysics/Astro-D) 


Japanese-US x-ray satellite, launched February 1993, 
reentered over the Pacific Ocean on 2 March 2001. 
During its eight-year lifetime, it provided broad-band 
imaging over the 1-12 keV energy range. It carried four 
US conical grazing telescopes and the first two CCD- 
based imaging spectrometers to be used on an x-ray 
observatory. ASCA found evidence for the creation of 
cosmic rays during supernovae, and played a major role 
in studies of x-ray binaries and gamma ray bursters. Also 
known as Asuka, which means ‘flying bird’. (See also 
ASTRO.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ashen Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ashen Light 


An apparent slight brightening of the night side of Venus 
occasionally seen when the planet is observed as a thin 
crescent, near inferior conjunction, when it is nearest the 
Earth. The ashen light may first have been observed by 
Giambattista Riccioli in 1643, though it is not absolutely 
clear from his description that this is what he recorded 
as having seen; the first unequivocal description was by 
William Derham in 1715. The ashen light, like other 
observational phenomena on Venus long reported by 
amateur observers, such as cusp caps and the Schroter 
effect, has been a controversial subject: it has never been 
satisfactorily imaged, for example. It has been likened 
in appearance to earthshine (in which the portion of the 
crescent Moon’s disk in shadow is illuminated by sunlight 
reflected off the Earth), though it is much more feeble, and 
of course it cannot have a comparable cause. 

There are two possible physical explanations for the 
ashen light. First, it may be similar to the Earth’s airglow, 
a faint but persistent illumination of the Earth’s upper 
atmosphere. This is caused by the recombination of atoms 
and molecules that have been ionized by solar ultraviolet 
radiation (the atoms and molecules recombine with the 
electrons that were knocked off them in the ionization 
process). On recombination, the atoms and molecules emit 
a weak radiation at optical wavelengths. If the process is 
operating in Venus’s upper atmosphere it may give rise to 
a stronger airglow, as the flux of solar radiation is stronger 
closer to the Sun. Alternatively, the ashen light may be 
the result of the refraction of sunlight in Venus’s thick 
atmosphere. In theory, the atmosphere is so dense that 
‘super-refraction’ can occur: light could be refracted all the 
way round the planet. There are those who maintain that 
it is a wholly subjective phenomenon, that the observer 
‘sees’ the whole disk as illuminated when only the crescent 
is visible, particularly when cusp caps (brightenings of the 
cusps, the tips of the crescent) are pronounced. 


See also: airglow, Venus: atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Association of Universities for 
Research in Astronomy 


The Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, 
Inc. (AURA) is a consortium of educational and other non- 
profit institutions that operates world-class astronomical 
observatories. Its members are 29 US institutions 
and five international affiliates. For the National 
Science Foundation, the AURA manage the National 
Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO) and THE GEMINI 
OBSERVATORY. For NASA, they manage the sPACE TELESCOPE 
SCIENCE INSTITUTE (Baltimore, MD). 

NOAO operates ground-based observatories for 
night-time astronomy at KITT PEAK NATIONAL OBSERVATORY 
(Arizona) and CERRO TOLOLO INTER-AMERICAN OBSERVATORY 
(Chile); and for solar research, at the NATIONAL SOLAR 
OBSERVATORY (New Mexico) and at Kitt Peak. 

Gemini is an international project among the US, UK, 
Canada, Chile, Australia, Brazil and Argentina to provide 
two 8 m telescopes (Hawaii and Chile). 

STScI carries out the scientific mission of the Hubble 
Space Telescope—the most powerful optical/ultraviolet 
observatory in space. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.aura-astronomy.org. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Asterism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Asterism 


A readily recognizable group or arrangement of (usually 
bright) stars, which are not necessarily members of a single 
constellation. Well-known examples are the Plough (part 
of the constellation Ursa Major), and the False Cross, the 
Summer Triangle and the Square of Pegasus, all of which 
comprise stars from more than one constellation. The term 
is also occasionally used to denote a close group of faint 
stars which appear to be, but are not, members of a cluster. 


Seealso: False Cross, Plough, Square of Pegasus, Summer 
Triangle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Asteroid Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Asteroid Belt 


The region of the solar system, between the orbits of 
Mars and Jupiter, where the greatest numbers of aster- 
oids are found, is known as the main belt. Asteroids that 
orbit in this region are known as main-belt asteroids. The 
belt does not have well-defined limits. In terms of the 
semi-major axes of asteroid orbits, by far the greatest 
concentration lies between about 2.1 and 3.25 AU. These 
two distances correspond to two of the main Kirkwood 
gaps, respectively those defined by 4:1 and 2:1 orbital 
resonances with Jupiter. Orbiting within the 4:1 gap are 
the Hungaria group, in orbits peaking at around 1.95 AU, 
into which asteroids of various types have been gravita- 
tionally perturbed. The inner margin of this group is 
sometimes taken to define the main belt’s inner edge, 
which is not circular but defined by the markedly eccen- 
tric orbit of Mars. Outside the 2:1 resonance are found the 
Cybele group, spread out as far as the 5:3 resonance and 
peaking at 3.4 AU, and the Hilda group, clustered 
around the 3:2 resonance at 4 AU. The main belt’s outer 
edge is sometimes said to be marked by lone (279) Thule, 
named after the remote northern land of Norse legend, 
which orbits at 4.27 AU, a distance corresponding almost 
exactly to the 4:3 resonance. Within the main belt proper 
are several Hirayama families of asteroids, most notably 
the Flora, Phocaea, Koronis, Eos and Themis groups, sep- 
arated by other Kirkwood gaps. These gaps are less 
favored regions rather than true gaps; the main ones cor- 
respond to resonances of 7:2, 3:1, 5:2 and 7:3. 

In 2002, the existence of a new family of asteroids 
was confirmed. It is believed to be the youngest at under 
6 million years old. David Nesvorny and co-workers at 
the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, 
recognized the 39 or so asteroids as belonging to the 
same family by studying their orbits. Projecting the cur- 
rent orbits backward in time, the researchers found that 
they converge about 5.8 million years ago—so this must 
be when they formed from the break-up of a larger body. 
Of the 39, two are big asteroids. One, called (832) Karin, 
after which the whole cluster is named, is about 19 km 
across; the other, called (4507) 1990, measures about 14 
km. The team estimates that the parent body was at least 
24.5 km across. The size of the parent body and of the 
fragments it produced can provide a test of theoretical 
models of how impacts shatter rocky bodies. The rela- 
tively fresh surfaces of the two larger fragments can also 
reveal what asteroids are made of, and how rapidly 
weathering in space pockmarks them with small craters. 
The Karin collision might also have been responsible for 
a recently discovered band of asteroidal dust. 

See also: HIRAYAMA FAMILY, KIRKWOOD GAPS. 


Bibliography 

Nesvorny D, Bottke, W F Jr, Dones L and Levison H F 
2002 The recent breakup of an asteroid in the main- 
belt region Nature 417 720-722 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Asteroid Discovery in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Asteroid Discovery in History 


The discovery of five of the major planets (other than 
Earth) in the solar system is lost to antiquity. With the 
acceptance of Copernicus’ heliocentric model for the 
solar system an apparent anomaly in the spacing of the 
planets was noted. JOHANNES KEPLER believed that the 
gap between Mars and Jupiter was too large in proportion 
to the gaps between other pairs of neighboring planets. 
He concluded that an unknown planet orbited the Sun 
between Mars and Jupiter. 

In 1766 an empirical formula for the distances of the 
planets from the sun was developed by Titius von 
Wittenburg. The formula was popularized by Johann 
Bode and is known today as BODE’S LAW or the Titius— 
Bode law. The formula is of the form: 


A=0.44+0.3 x 2” 


where A is the distance from the sun (in units of the 
Earth’s distance) and n = —00, 0, 1, 2, .... The values of A 
determined by this formula, the corresponding planet and 
actual distances are shown in table 1. 

Titius attributed the gap at n = 3 to undiscovered 
moons of Mars. Like Kepler, Bode argued that this gap 
was occupied by a major planet. The discovery of Uranus 
in 1781 at a distance corresponding very closely to the n 
= 6 case bolstered the belief in a missing planet. (It 
should be noted that Neptune is a very poor fit for the n = 
7 case and that the ‘Law’ appears to be nothing more 
than a numerical curiosity.) 


Table 1. The Titius—Bode law. 


n A Planet Actual A 
00 0.4 Mercury 0.39 
0 0.7 Venus 0.72 

1 1.0 Earth 1.00 
2 1.6 Mars 1.52 

3 2.8 

4 5.2 Jupiter 5.20 

5 10.0 Saturn 9.54 
(6 19.6 Uranus 19.18) 
(7 38.8 Neptune 30.06) 


The celestial police 

One of the proponents of Bode’s law was BARON FRANZ 
VON ZACH, who went as far as predicting orbital elements 
for the ‘missing planet’ and undertook a solo search to 
find it. After several years of fruitless searching he gave 
up. In September 1800, von Zach held a meeting at 
JOHANN SHROTER’s observatory in Lilienthal to organize 
a concerted search for the presumed planet. The search 
was to be conducted within about 4° of the ecliptic, 
which was divided up into 24 sections, each section to be 
searched by a different astronomer. On | January 1801, 
before these celestial police could get to work, a Sicilian 
monk, Father GUISEPPE PIAZZI, discovered a moving 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stellar object in the course of constructing a star catalog. 
Piazzi observed the object for 6 weeks before being 
interrupted by illness. Although Piazzi wrote letters to 
various astronomers, including Bode, announcing the 
discovery, by the time the letters were received the new 
object was no longer observable. Using Piazzi’s 
observations, various orbit computers attempted to 
predict where the object would be the following year, but 
the predictions covered 5° of sky. Prompted by Piazzi’s 
discovery, the German mathematician CARL FRIEDRICH 
GAUSS developed a new method of general orbit 
computation. Gauss’ work enabled the new object, which 
received the name Ceres Ferdinandea (later thankfully 
shortened to just CERES), to be recovered within 0.5° of 
his prediction independently by von Zach and HEINRICH 
OLBERS. 


The visual era 

On 28 March 1802 Olbers was checking positions of 
stars in the vicinity of Ceres when he discovered PALLAS. 
On 1 September 1804, KARL HARDING discovered the 
third asteroid, JUNO. Olbers noted that Juno had been 
discovered near to one of intersection points of the orbits 
of Ceres and Pallas and, believing that the asteroids were 
the fragments of a single object, concentrated his 
searching near these points. On 29 March 1807 his 
diligence paid off with the discovery of VESTA. 

In 1845, Karl Hencke, a German postmaster, 
discovered the fifth asteroid, Astraea, reportedly after 
searching for 15 years. Hencke discovered Hebe in 1847 
and other astronomers quickly began their own searches. 
Various observing techniques were used. Brighter 
asteroids could be detected by their absence on published 
star charts. For asteroids fainter than were shown on 
charts, observers had to resort to drawing their own 
charts and comparing drawings of the same star field at 
different times. By 1850 13 asteroids had been 
discovered. The tradition quickly developed that newly 
discovered objects were named immediately on (or very 
soon after) announcement of the discovery. The early 
discoveries were also allocated symbols, though this 
practice died out by 1855. Numbers, assigned in the order 
of discovery, were introduced in 1851. 

The fact that numbers and names were assigned 
immediately on publication of the discovery 
announcement often led to confusion. The rapid growth 
in the number of discoveries (100 by 1868, 200 by 1879 
and 300 by 1890) overwhelmed the capabilities of the 
orbit computers trying to keep track of all the objects, 
and as a result many objects were lost. In 1856 Hermann 
Goldschmidt discovered (41) Daphne. The object was 
followed for only four days. Goldschmidt thought he had 
recovered (41) the following year, but it turned out to be 
a new object, which became (56) Melete. This latter 
object was observed for only two weeks and was lost 
until Goldschmidt made an exhaustive search for it in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Asteroid Discovery in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1861. Karl Luther accidentally found (41) again in 1862 
but it was mistaken for a new object and for a while was 
numbered (74). 

As more asteroids were discovered, it became clear 
that the majority of the objects were to be found in a belt, 
the Main Belt, that stretched from 2.2 to 3.28 AU from 
the Sun (see ASTEROID BELT). The first object discovered 
lying outside the Main Belt was (65) Cybele in 1861. In 
1875, (153) Hilda was found at a mean distance of almost 
4 AU. This was the prototype of the Hildas, objects that 
are in the 3:2 mean-motion resonance with Jupiter and 
are protected from having close approaches to that planet 
despite their orbits approaching quite closely. 


The photographic era 

Until 1892 all observing had been performed visually, 
using transit circles or micrometers. The introduction of 
photographic searches in late 1891 by MAX WOLF in 
Heidelberg, Germany, and shortly thereafter by Auguste 
Charlois in Nice, France, meant not only that observers 
could detect fainter objects than could be observed 
visually but that the photographic plate was a permanent 
record of an observation. Visual discoveries had been 
made by noting changes in star fields over the course of 
several hours as objects moved through the field. With 
long-exposure photographs, taken with the telescope 
tracked at sidereal rate, moving objects would betray 
their presence by producing short trails on the plate. The 
problem with photographic observation was that, at least 
initially, accurate positions for objects on the plates were 
often not measured, primarily because this was a time- 
consuming process requiring specialized measuring 
equipment. In general, approximate positions, which 
could be derived quickly, were obtained. Accurate 
follow-up observations would then be obtained by visual 
observers using micrometers. However, the visual 
observers had difficulty following the fainter 
photographic discoveries, and an increasing number of 
newly discovered objects were quickly lost. 

To cope with this growing problem provisional 
designations were introduced. Newly discovered objects 
would first receive a provisional designation, a 
permanent number being assigned only when it was felt 
that the orbit of the new object was secure. Intially, the 
provisional designation consisted of the year and a single 
letter. Thus the first object so designated was 1892 A, the 
second 1892 B, etc. The letter I was omitted so this 
scheme could cope with 25 discoveries per year. The 
year 1892 ended with 1892 V. The letter sequence was 
started afresh in 1893, but the designation 1893 Z was 
reached in May of that year. A new series of double 
letters, beginning with AA, AB, ... , AZ, BA, BB, etc, 
was instituted. This double-letter sequence was not 
started afresh each year; the last object discovered in 
1893 was 1893 AP, the first in 1894 was 1894 AQ. The 
double-letter sequence was exhausted with 1907 ZZ. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Rather than start a triple-letter sequence, the double-letter 
sequence was simply restarted with 1907 AA. The 
sequence was again exhausted with 1916 ZZ and a fresh 
start was made with 1916 AA. In 1925 a new system for 
provisional designations was introduced. This used a 
double-letter sequence and was tied to the calendar date 
of discovery. The first letter reflected the half-month of 
the discovery of the object: A represented discoveries 
made between | and 15 January, B between 16 and 31 
January, C between | and 15 February, ... , I was 
omitted, ... , Y between 16 and 31 December. The 
second letter indicated the order within each half month 
(again I was omitted). If there were more than 25 
discoveries in a half month the second letter sequence 
was recycled and a number was added to the designation. 
Thus the sequence of designations for objects discovered 
in the first half of January 1998 would be 1998 AA, 1998 
AB, ... , 1998 AZ, 1998 AA,, 1998 AB,, &hellip; , 1998 
AZ,, 1998 AAb, etc. 

A substantial search program had been undertaken at 
Heidelberg since 1891 and the primarily visual program 
of Johann Palisa at Vienna had been operating since 
1881. Between 1874 and 1880 Palisa discovered 28 
asteroids at Pola, which was then in Austria. After 
moving to Vienna he discovered a further 55 before he 
abandoned his searching in order to dedicate himself to 
follow-up of other people’s discoveries. He resumed his 
searching for new objects in 1905 and discovered a 
further 38 by 1923. Further substantial programs were 
begun at Johannesburg and Simeis in 1911, Uccle 
(Belgium) in 1925, Flagstaff (USA) in 1929 (a search 
that produced the discovery of Pluto) and Turku 
(Finland) in 1935. 

New classes of asteroid continued to be discovered: 
1898, (433) EROS, the first object with a perihelion 
distances less than 1.3 AU; 1903, (588) ACHILLES, the 
first object in 1:1 resonance with a major planet (Jupiter 
Trojans); 1920, (944) Hidalgo, an asteroidal object with a 
cometary orbit; 1932, (1862) Apollo, the first asteroid 
with a perihelion distance less than 1 AU (see NEAR- 
EARTH ASTEROIDS). 

The task of cataloging the asteroids had been 
undertaken in Germany. The principal journal for 
publishing discovery, positional and orbital information 
was the Astronomische Nachrichten (AN). The 
Astronomishes Rechen-Institut, Berlin-Dahlem, began 
publishing a series of rapid-alert circulars, the RI 
Circulars, in 1926. Annual collections of minor planet 
ephemerides were published, first in the Jahrbuch of the 
Rechen-Institut, then from 1917 separately as the Kleine 
Planeten. However, the operation of these entities was 
severely compromised by World War II. 

In 1947 the International Astronomical Union 
divided up the task of cataloging the minor planets. The 
responsibility for publishing annual volumes of 
ephemerides for the numbered objects was assigned to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Asteroid Discovery in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the Institute of Theoretical Astronomy in Leningrad, 
USSR (now St Petersburg, Russia). The Minor Planet 
Center, set up at the University of Cincinnati, was 
charged with tracking newly discovered objects and 
assigning provisional and permanent designations. The 
Center began publication of the Minor Planet Circulars, 
a replacement for the defunct RJ Circulars. An early 
priority was the rediscovery of those numbered objects 
that had become lost. Of the 1564 numbered objects in 
1945, the orbits of some 20% were considered to be in 
bad shape. New survey programs at Indiana’s Goethe 
Link Observatory, the McDonald Observatory and the 
Crimean Astrophysical Observatory addressed the 
problem of the lost objects and helped to recover many 
objects. On the computational front, Paul Herget, first 
director of the Minor Planet Center, used the recently 
developed electronic computer to perform orbit 
computations and improvements. 

Prior to 1973, all the known near-Earth objects 
(NEOs) had been discovered as byproducts of other 
astronomical programs. Two such objects had been found 
in 1948 in the course of the Lick Proper Motion Survey 
and five were found at Palomar between 1949 and 1954 
during the Palomar Sky Survey. In 1973, Eleanor Helin 
and Eugene Shoemaker began the Palomar Planet- 
Crossing Asteroid Survey, the first survey whose primary 
goal was the discovery of NEOs. 

More new classes of asteroid were found: 1976, 
(2062) Aten, the first asteroid with an orbit smaller than 
the Earth’s orbit; 1977, (2060) CHIRON, the first Centaur 
with an orbit between the orbits of the Jovian planets. In 
1978, when the Minor Planet Center moved from 
Cincinnati to the Smithsonian Astrophysical Obervatory 
in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 4390 Minor Planet 
Circulars had been issued and there were 2060 numbered 
objects, of which 20 or so were considered lost. 


The CCD era 

Just as with the change from visual to photographic 
observation, the change from photographic to CCD 
observing has meant that observers can reach fainter 
objects more rapidly than was possible before. One 
drawback that has only recently been addressed is that a 
CCD’s field of view is much smaller than the coverage 
afforded by a photographic plate. A plate taken with a 
large Schmidt typically covers an area 6° by 6°, whereas 
early CCDs might cover only 6 arcmin by 6 arcmin. 
Modern large-format CCDs and CCD arrays are 
alleviating this coverage problem. 

The first systematic application of a CCD to asteroid 
searching was by the Spacewatch project in 1981. Using 
the venerable 0.91 m reflector at the Steward 
Observatory, Kitt Peak, Spacewatch has discovered over 
180 NEOs and 25 000 Main-Belt asteroids. Most of the 
current professional CCD searches for asteroids are 
optimized for discovering NEOs but sweep up many 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


routine objects in the course of their searches. The 
LINEAR program (Lincoln Laboratory Near-Earth 
Asteroid Research team) has discovered 153 NEOs and 
more than 19 000 Main-Belt asteroids. Other active 
programs include NEAT (Near-Earth Asteroid Tracking), 
LONEOS (Lowell Observatory Near-Earth Object 
Search) and ODAS (OCA-DLR Asteroid Survey). Other 
professional programs, such as the Czech programs at 
Klet and Ondrejov, concentrate on follow-up. 

New classes of asteroid continue to be discovered. 
The first TRANS-NEPTUNIAN OBJECTS, after Pluto, were 
discovered in 1992 and 1993. Some of these objects have 
orbits that lie well beyond the orbit of Neptune and are 
essentially circular, while others have orbits that are in 
mean-motion resonances with Neptune (principally the 
2:3 resonance, as for Pluto). Although the orbits of these 
latter objects cross the orbit of Neptune, the resonance 
prevents close encounters with Neptune. The extreme 
faintness of the majority of these objects has made 
follow-up difficult and many of the objects discovered 
must already be classed as lost. 

The availability of affordable CCD cameras to the 
amateur market in the early 1990s led to a resurgence of 
amateur activity in the field of asteroid discovery. 
Previously many amateurs, although possessing suitable 
telescopes, had been unable to observe asteroids 
astrometrically because they did not have the facilities 
for measuring photographic plates or films. CCDs and 
the emergence of computer programs to process CCD 
images have made it feasible for many amateurs to 
observe and discover asteroids. Other amateurs have 
become dedicated follow-up observers, diligently 
tracking down discoveries of potential NEOs by the 
professional surveys. Japanese amateurs have been very 
active since the 1970s, first photographically and then 
using CCDs. Major amateur activity is also found in 
Italy, Australia and the US. 

At time of writing there are 10 986 numbered 
asteroids, over 164 000 provisional designations have 
been assigned and over 35 000 Minor Planet Circulars 
have been issued. Only one numbered asteroid remains 
lost. There are over 12 000 unnumbered objects with 
good orbits that will be eligible for numbering in the near 
future. More than 25 000 other objects, observed only in 
their discovery apparition, have orbits of varying quality 
and await recovery or rediscovery. 


Bibliography 

Carusi A, Gehrels T, Helin E F, Marsden B G, Russell K S, 
Shoemaker C S, Shoemaker E M and Steel D I 1994 Near- 
earth objects: present search programs Hazards Due to 
Comets and Asteroids ed T Gehrels (Tucso, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 127-47 

Cunningham C J 1988 Introduction to Asteroids (Richmond, 
VA: Willmann-Bell) 

Marsden B G 1980 The Minor Planet Center Celestial Mech. 
22 63-71 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Asteroid Discovery in History ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Marsden B G 1994 Asteroid and comet surveys Astronomy 
from Wide-Field Imaging ed H T MacGillivray, E B 
Thomson, B M Lasker, I N Reid, D F Malin, R M West 
and H Lorenz (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 385—400 


Minor Planet Center 
http://cfa-www.harvard.edu/iau/mpc.html and the links therein 


Gareth V Williams 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Asteroids 


Asteroids are small bodies which orbit around the Sun 
and which show no cometary activity nor have the 
potential for it. The word ‘small’ is intended to exclude 
planets from the definition. All known asteroids have 
diameters less than 1000 km down to a few centimeters 
(METEOROIDS). The largest known asteroid is 1 CERES, dis- 
covered on the 1 January 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi in 
Palermo, Italy with a diameter of 950 km. Asteroids are 
also called minor planets. The newly discovered minor 
body known as 2001 KX76, whose diameter makes it 
the largest-known minor body in the solar system (its 
diameter, which is not very well determined, lies in the 
region of 1200 km, possibly even 1400 km) is a TRANS- 
NEPTUNIAN OBJECT (TNO). Most asteroids orbit within a 
confined region between Mars and Jupiter, called the 
main ASTEROID BELT. 

Out of about 30000 known objects, only 8500 aster- 
oids have precisely determined orbits. Each of these 
asteroids has a definitive identification, consisting of a 
number that indicates its order of entry and a name pro- 
posed by the discoverer (e.g. ‘3752 Camillo’ identifies the 
3752nd asteroid discovered). Only preliminary orbits are 
available for the other 21500; each is marked by its year 
of discovery and two letters indicating the date of first 
observation as temporary identification (e.g. ‘1998 BC’ 
identifies the third asteroid (C) discovered during the 
second half of January (B) 1998). A thousand asteroids 
have been detected by the INFRARED ASTRONOMY SATELLITE 
(IRAS) which provided a radiometric diameter and the 
albedo determination of most of them. About 700 aster- 
oids have the rotational period determined. Less than 
1000 asteroids are larger than 30 km across, and of these, 
about 200 asteroids are larger than 100 km. Extrapolating 
the asteroid size distribution down to 1 km, an estima- 
tion of about one million asteroids whose diameter is 
larger than or equal to 1 km is obtained. The global mass 
of the population has been estimated to be of the order of 
one-thousandth of the Earth’s mass. 

Asteroids were considered as uninteresting ‘vermin 
of the skies’ until it was understood that they store a rich 
variety of information. In fact, asteroids are believed to 
be the remnants, either fragments or ‘survivors’ of the 
swarm of PLANETESIMALS from which the terrestrial plan- 
ets were formed: the records of primordial chemical and 
physical processes can still be found frozen in the actual 
characters of asteroids. The study of these objects pro- 
vides information on the nature of these primordial 
swarms even if differentiation and/or internal activity 
affected in a different way their evolution. Ground-based 
and in situ observations of asteroids show a population 
of solid bodies exhibiting a wide variety of chemical and 
physical properties: one of the most interesting charac- 
teristics of asteroids is this variety. Understanding the 
origin of the diversities requires the study of a large 
number of bodies. The information collected in situ on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


the various space mission target asteroids represents a 
powerful test to calibrate the techniques used in deter- 
mining the chemical and physical properties of asteroids 
from the ground-based observations which are and will 
remain the main source of asteroid data. 

The current knowledge on the asteroid population 
has been obtained mainly from the ground-based obser- 
vations. Recent observations taken by the 10 m Keck II 
telescope on Mauna Kea, for example, reveal the pres- 
ence of a small satellite orbiting around asteroid 87 
Sylvia. The projected separation between primary and 
secondary was 0.59" in H-band images obtained on 18 
February 2001 using the adaptive optics system on the 10 
m W. M. Keck II telescope. Little relative motion was 
apparent in images obtained an hour apart (upper limit 
0.02"). The brightness ratio was measured to be 420+70, 
implying about a 1:20 ratio of sizes. This implies that the 
satellite is around 7 km wide, in contrast to Sylvia, which 
is around 130 km wide. 

Few large asteroids are included in the observation- 
al programme of the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) and 
the first results concerning 4 VESTA are of high interest. 
The Infrared Satellite Observatory (ISO) observed a few 
tens of asteroids, allowing astronomers to obtain spectral 
data up to 45 um. The National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) GALILLEO MISSION approached for 
the first time two asteroids, 951 GASPRA (October 1992) 
and 243 Iba (August 1993), offering to the planetary sci- 
ence community the opportunity to have a close look at 
two S-type main-belt asteroids. The 253 Mathilde flyby 
(June 1997, Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mis- 
sion) provided us with the first in situ data for a C-type 
asteroid. 


Main-belt asteroids 

The asteroid main belt occupies a doughnut-like region 
around the Sun which contains the orbits of most aster- 
oids, characterized by semimajor axes (a) ranging 
between 2.1 AU and 3.3 AU, eccentricities (e) ranging 
between 0.01 and 0.3 and inclinations (i) with respect to 
the plane of the Earth’s orbit (the ecliptic) between 0° and 
35° (with an average value of 10°). 

The structure of the asteroid belt is determined by 
gravitational interactions with both Mars and Jupiter. 
Because of its larger mass, Jupiter’s effects are dominant 
and cause a depletion of objects in correspondence to the 
resonances, i.e. the regions where the orbital period of a 
body would be some exact integer ratio of Jupiter’s 
orbital period (an asteroid 2.5 AU from the Sun is said to 
be at the 3:1 ‘resonance’: that is, the body would com- 
plete exactly three orbits around the Sun for every one 
that Jupiter completes). Those breaks in the uniformity of 
the asteroid belt are called KIRKwooD Gaps from the name 
of the American astronomer who identified them. 

Removing the effects of secular planetary perturba- 
tions it is possible to obtain the description of an asteroid 
orbit in terms of its proper elements. Some main-belt 
asteroids have very close proper semimajor axes, proper 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


eccentricities and proper inclinations: they form clusters 
in the space of proper elements, and generally all the 
members of a cluster belong to the same compositional 
type. In 1918, the Japanese astronomer Hirayama called 
these clusters ‘asteroid families’ (see HIRAYAMA FAMILY). 
Analysing the 950 known asteroids, Hirayama named 
the identified families from the largest family member: 
Themis, Eos, Koronis and Flora. Since then, several other 
families and clans (a cluster of asteroids is called ‘clan’ 
when unequivocal family member definition and/or 
separation from other background objects is impossible) 
have been identified. Asteroid families are interpreted as 
the result of the catastrophic disruption of a parent body 
due to a collision with another smaller asteroid. If so, 
asteroid families represent a natural laboratory where 
high velocity (v~5 km s-!) impacts were produced at a 
scale which is impossible to reproduce in our laborato- 
ries. The size distribution of family members (fragments 
of the parent body) is a picture of the outcomes of a col- 
lision; the chemical composition of the fragments gives 
an indication of the internal structure and composition of 
the parent body. The study of asteroid families provides 
information on the collisional history of the asteroid pop- 
ulation since its formation. 

The discovery of a new family of asteroids was con- 
firmed in 2002. It is believed to be the youngest at under 
6 million years old. David Nesvorny and co-workers at 
the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, 
recognized the 39 or so asteroids as belonging to the 
same family by studying their orbits. Projecting the cur- 
rent orbits backward in time, the researchers found that 
they converge about 5.8 million years ago—so this must 
be when they formed from the break-up of a larger body. 
Of the 39, two are big asteroids. One, called (832) Karin, 
after which the whole cluster is named, is about 19 km 
across; the other, called (4507) 1990, measures about 14 
km. The team estimates that the parent body was at least 
24.5 km across. The size of the parent body and of the 
fragments it produced can provide a test of theoretical 
models of how impacts shatter rocky bodies. The rela- 
tively fresh surfaces of the two larger fragments can also 
reveal what asteroids are made of, and how rapidly 
weathering in space pockmarks them with small craters. 
The Karin collision might also have been responsible for 
a recently discovered band of asteroidal dust. 

The rotation rate versus diameter distribution of the 
main-belt asteroids shows that the objects with a diame- 
ter of about 100 km have rotation periods longer than 
those of both larger and smaller asteroids. In the hypoth- 
esis of a collisional evolution of the asteroids from a plan- 
etesimal swarm, this diameter value has been interpreted 
as the size where the separation between primordial larg- 
er asteroids and their smaller collisional products occurs. 
The spin rate distribution of asteroids with diameter 
larger than 50 km is unimodal and reflects the rotational 
behavior acquired during the primordial phases of the 
asteroid accretion process, while the distribution of the 
asteroids with D<50 km is the superimposition of three 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


components, the ‘primordial’, one of fast rotators and 
one of very slow rotators. Disruptive collisions allow 
small fragments to gain angular momentum forming the 
fast rotator group, while a slow-down mechanism which 
originated the slow rotators, including 253 Mathilde, has 
to be further investigated. 

The shapes of 50 extensively observed large aster- 
oids have been evaluated with the Fourier analysis of the 
complete set of light curves and radar measurements 
have been used to determine the shapes of small objects. 
These data indicate that larger asteroids are more regular 
than the smaller ones. This result indicates again that the 
larger bodies are the remnants of the original population, 
which preserved in their shape the equilibrium figures, 
while the smaller generally irregular objects are the 
records of disruptive collisions. 

The direction of the spin axis (pole orientation) has 
been determined (within an accuracy of 15% at the best) 
for 50 asteroids. Even if the available sample is too small 
to draw firm conclusions, the distribution of these pole 
directions seems bimodal: again a possible indication of 
the superimposition of two different groups of asteroids. 
The precise determination of the pole direction of a sig- 
nificative number of asteroids will lead to a better under- 
standing of the history of the population. In fact, even 
though most of the spin axis inclinations of the primor- 
dial asteroids were distributed around a single value as a 
consequence of the accretion process, the collisions will 
reorient randomly the spin axes, whose distribution will 
be spread and flattened. 

The asteroid population spreads between the orbits 
of Mars and Jupiter. In this zone lies the boundary sepa- 
rating the inner solar system (where the water in the pro- 
tosolar nebula vaporized) from the outer regions (where 
water condensation occurred). This zone, spanning 
between 2.6 AU and 3.1 AU, is known as the aqueous 
alteration zone where spectral signatures of electron 
transitions, possible only in presence of liquid water, 
have been detected in numerous C-type asteroid spectra. 
This is strong evidence for the presence, sometimes in the 
past, of liquid water on these asteroids. The amount of 
water present in an asteroid is questioned but its detec- 
tion would be relevant to understanding the relation- 
ships between asteroids and COMETS. 


Asteroid composition 

Chemical composition and mineralogy of asteroid sur- 
faces can be determined by spectroscopy or, even if with 
lower precision, by multifilter spectrophotometry. 
Analysing with sophisticated clustering codes all the 
available asteroid spectra a taxonomic system has been 
obtained. The principal recognized classes are designat- 
ed, in order of their observed relative abundance, by 
the letters: S, C, M, D, EF, P, V, G, E, B, A (initials of the 
words used to roughly describe an asteroid or its spec- 
trum, i.e. stony, carbonaceous, metallic, ...). Most of the 
asteroids belong to the low-albedo C-type, characterized 
by relatively neutral spectra, exhibiting an absorption in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the ultraviolet wavelengths and sometimes the signa- 
tures of aqueous alteration. Their spectra match the 
spectra of the carbonaceous chondritic meteorites, a 
strong indication of similar composition (see CHON- 
DRITES). A few asteroids (B-, G- and F-type) show C-like 
spectra with minor differences at the shorter wave- 
lengths, which may reflect degrees of metamorphism of 
C-like material. D-type asteroids, characterizing the 
Trojan group, have low albedo and are redder than the 
C-type ones. The low-albedo P-type asteroids, predomi- 
nant at 3.6 AU<a<4.9 AU, represent a transition group 
between C-type and D-type asteroids, their spectra are 
redder than C’s spectra but flatter than D’s spectra. The 
inner-belt asteroids belong to the higher-albedo S-type, 
whose reddish spectra are characterized in the ultravio- 
let by a deep absorption charge transfer band, and in the 
near-infrared side by the absorption band(s) of pyroxene 
and olivine (magnesium- and/or iron-bearing minerals: 
[Mg, Fe],SiO,). These asteroids, which belong to the 
most abundant asteroid type, have no spectral analog in 
the METEORITES, even if their bulk mineralogical compo- 
sition seems to fit the mineralogy of both the stony iron 
and the ordinary chondritic meteorites, which are the 
most common meteorites in the natural museum collec- 
tions. One possible answer to this puzzle (known as the 
ordinary chondrites conundrum) may be ‘space weath- 
ering’. Catastrophic collisions, solar radiation and 
micrometeoroid impacts could have changed an ordi- 
nary chondrite asteroid’s surface enough to alter its 
spectral characteristics. This hypothesis seems to be con- 
firmed by a spectroscopic study of several near-Earth 
asteroids which shows a continuous trend from the ordi- 
nary chondrite-type spectrum to the common S-type 
spectrum. This behavior can also explain the slight dif- 
ferences within the spectra of S-type asteroids. Some 
moderate-albedo asteroids have slightly reddish spectra 
and very high radar reflectivity; they are almost certain- 
ly made out of pure metal, probably the nickel-iron 
alloy which characterizes the metallic meteorites. A 
small number of high-albedo asteroids exhibit spectra 
typical of highly differentiated mineral assemblages: the 
surface of A-type asteroids probably contains rocks and 
regolith (regular lithology, indicating the dusty surface 
layer) formed by pure olivine; the V-type asteroids are 
probably all members of the Vesta family, they represent 
crust fragments of 4 Vesta, which is the only known 
intact differentiated asteroid having a basaltic lava sur- 
face. Some very-high-albedo objects have a neutral spec- 
tra resembling those of enstatite meteorites (E-type 
asteroids). 

One of the most significant results of the asteroid 
taxonomy is that it reveals a distinct structure in the com- 
position of asteroids, which vary with distance from the 
Sun. E-type objects are present at the inner edge of the 
belt and S-type asteroids populate the inner one-third of 
the main belt, while the C-type fill the rest of the belt. P- 
type predominate in the outer regions and D-type char- 
acterize the asteroids in Jupiter’s orbit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Interpreting the variation of the asteroid taxonomic 
types (somehow indicative of their composition) across 
the belt in terms of the formation processes, a few possi- 
ble evolutive physical-chemical trends of the asteroid 
population can be sketched. All planetesimals were 
formed by the solid component of the PROTOPLANETARY 
NEBULA accreting to form a material similar to the one 
characterizing the D-type asteroids. This pristine materi- 
al is still present in the outer belt and among the Trojans, 
and produced different end members (C and B, M and E, 
V and A-types) characterized by the variation (in space 
and in time) of environmental conditions in the nebula, 
by the internal differentiation and/or by the collisions. In 
figure 1, four evolutionary trends are outlined by the 
arrows. A first trend links the D objects to the B ones 
including the C-type asteroids. This sequence can be 
interpreted in terms of diminishing volatile content 
(from D to B): these asteroids seem to be composed of 
mineral assemblages accreted from material condensed 
at low temperature which experienced different thermal 
heating owing to the differing heliocentric distance 
(increasing from B to D). A second trend, connecting the 
primitive D-type asteroids to the G, M and E objects, can 
be interpreted as a progressive evolution of the pristine 
materials (D) toward the enstatite achondrites (E), pass- 
ing through an ultraprimitive, high-carbon, low meta- 
morphic grade C-type mineral assemblage (G) and a 
reduction silicate similar to the enstatite chondrites (M). 


low volatile 
pristine materials 


* merely, Prenene 


oivine-rich 


Olivine-rich 


¥ p 


Figure 1. The asteroid compositional classes have been defined 
on the basis of their reflectance spectra and albedo. In this 
ternary diagram, the variables are grouped so that at each point 
o+Bty=1. The vertices of the ternary diagram are characterized 
as follows: a represents the shorter wavelength (U, B, V) regions 
of the asteroid reflectance spectra, § represents the longer wave- 
length (I, IR) regions of the asteroid reflectance spectra, and y 
accounts for the asteroid albedo. The principal compositional 
classes are shown in the ternary diagram. Four asteroid evolu- 
tive trends are outlined by the arrows: from the ‘primitive’ D 
asteroids each trend goes towards an end member. The arrows 
indicate a decrease in heliocentric distance too. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The E-type asteroids may be composed by minerals 
formed when M-type bodies are differentiated. This 
trend describes the evolution of asteroids whose materi- 
al appears to be a higher-temperature agglomeration of 
nebular condensate. The third and fourth trends ending 
at V-type and A-type respectively seem to represent lines 
of increasing differentiation, starting from the pristine D- 
type material and including the S-type objects. The 
metal-rich silicate surface material, characterizing these 
trends, may be the result of magmatic differentiation pro- 
duced inside a large body (e.g. Vesta) or due to succes- 
sive heating events such as large impacts. The differences 
of these evolution trends toward pyroxene-olivine 
basalts (V) and pure olivine (A) end members can take 
into account different collisional histories of the asteroids 
with respect to their hypothetical differentiation 
sequence. 


The distant asteroids 

Outside the main belt, toward the external region of the 
solar system, a few groups of asteroids behave in a com- 
pletely different way to the main-belt ones: in fact, they 
reside within the main resonances with Jupiter. At 3.9 AU 
(resonance 3:2) there is the group of Hilda; the asteroid 
Thule falls in the 4:3 resonance (at 4.3 AU). 

An especially interesting group, called the TROJAN 
ASTEROIDS, resides at the 1:1 resonance. These asteroids 
have the same heliocentric distance and orbital period as 
Jupiter does: they orbit near the two equilibrium posi- 
tion, known as Jupiter Lagrange points, that lie about 60° 
east and west of Jupiter within its orbital plane. About 
200 Trojans are currently known; several thousand, larg- 
er than 15 km, are supposed to exist. While classified as 
asteroids on the basis of their lack of cometary activity, 
the physical nature of Trojans is uncertain: their optical 
spectra show red continua with no evidence of absorp- 
tion or emission features (taxonomic type D): their albe- 
dos are very low (2-3%). Both of these characteristics are 
comparable with those of the few observed cometary 
nuclei and may be evidence for common organic com- 
pounds on the two classes of objects. As in the case of 
comets, the dark reddish surfaces of the Trojans could be 
thin rubble mantles, shielding buried ice whose sublima- 
tion rate (if exposed, e.g. by a collision) is too small to 
sustain an observable coma. 

The Jupiter orbit marks the limit between the rocky 
worlds (Earth-like planets, asteroids, dust) and the ice 
worlds (the giant planets’ satellite systems, comets, 
rings); in these regions it would be possible to find the 
transition element between asteroid and comets, which 
are probably the opposite end members of the same pop- 
ulation of primeval planetesimals. In fact, a few large 
objects, called CENTAURS, have been recently discovered 
in orbits crossing the orbits of gas-giant planets. 2060 
CHIRON, first Centaur discovered, is the only member of 
this group to display cometary activity (its comet desig- 
nation is P/Koval). The Centaurs are probably a vast 
population of unstable, outer-planet-crossing bodies; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


their total number has been estimated to be 105-106 
objects down to km size. All the known Centaurs are 
dynamically similar, but their surfaces show dramatic 
spectral differences: some have a completely neutral 
spectrum (solar like), while other exhibit the reddest 
spectra of solar system bodies. Are they bald comets, as 
well as TRANS-NEPTUNIAN OBJECTS? 


The near-Earth asteroids 

The NEAR-EARTH ASTEROIDS (NEAs) belong to three differ- 
ent groups of generally small objects residing within the 
inner solar system. About 500 NEAs are known and their 
discovery rate is continuously increasing. Of the NEAs, 
5.8% belong to the Atens group characterized by a semi- 
major axis a<1 AU and an aphelion distance Q>0.983 AU, 
48.5% belong to the Apollo group (a21 AU and a perihe- 
lion distance g£1.017 AU) and 45.7% belong to the Amor 
group (1.017 AU<q£1.3 AU). 

The study of the physical and the dynamical prop- 
erties of these objects is necessary for understanding 
their histories and relations with comets, main-belt aster- 
oids and meteorites. 

Understanding the dynamical evolution of NEAs is 
important because (i) they can have close approaches 
with Earth, representing a long-term danger for the bios- 
phere and the human species, (ii) they represent the larg- 
er members of meteoroids and small interplanetary 
objects and (iii) physical remote-sensing observations of 
them have recently revealed a number of surprising fea- 
tures, such as high metal abundance, binary structures 
and tumbling rotational states which could be related to 
their asteroidal or cometary origin. 

The general idea on NEA origin is that these objects 
are efficiently removed from other regions of the solar sys- 
tem by collisions and subsequent gravitational interac- 
tions with the planets on time scales of 10°-108 yr. Since the 
NEAs have unstable orbits, a continuous supply of new 
objects is needed. Two main mechanisms have been com- 
monly proposed for supplying the Earth-approaching 
population: the first assumes that NEAs are asteroidal 
fragments coming from the main belt, while the second 
supposes that a possible source for NEAs are dormant or 
extinct comet nuclei. NEAs of both asteroidal and 
cometary origin are widely believed to be continuously 
injected into Earth-crossing orbits through a few different 
resonant channels, which collect fragments randomly 
ejected from main-belt asteroids as a consequence of ener- 
getic mutual asteroid collisions. These objects undergo a 
fairly complex orbital evolution process, driven by mean 
motion and secular resonances, by non-resonant secular 
perturbations and by a sequence of close encounters with 
planets. Eventually, they mostly fall into the Sun or are 
ejected from the solar system after a Jovian encounter; 
only a few per cent collide with terrestrial planets. To 
maintain the balance between the mean rate of asteroid 
loss in Earth-approaching orbits and the rate of their 
replenishment, source rates must yield a few hundreds of 
new objects larger than 1 km in diameter per 106 yr. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


So far relatively few spectroscopic observations of 
NEAs have been obtained because of their small sizes, 
faint apparent magnitudes and limited intervals of visi- 
bility. Our current knowledge of the nature of NEAs sug- 
gests that this population is characterized by a variety of 
surface mineralogies and includes almost all taxonomic 
types found in the main belt. Even if our sampling of 
NEAs for physical observations is strongly biased, no 
correlation seems to exist between taxonomic type and 
dimension or rotational period: both the largest and the 
smallest NEAs are S-type asteroids; the few C-types span 
a considerable range in diameter while the rare taxo- 
nomic types have a range of rotation rates as do the 
abundant S-types. On the basis of these data it seems that 
the NEA population has approximately the same propor- 
tion of S-type and C-type asteroids as the main belt. This 
similarity raises the question about where the dead 
comets, which are not expected to be a major component 
of the main belt, are. Several NEAs classified as C-types 
are apparently formed by primitive material similar to 
hydrous CI and CM carbonaceous chondrite meteorites. 
A spectroscopic survey of NEAs in the 0.45-0.9 um range 
found that out of 35 objects six have spectra similar to 
those of ordinary chondrite meteorites, while 29 have 
spectral properties spanning the range between the 
domains of ordinary chondrite meteorites and the most 
common S-type main-belt asteroids. This range could 
arise through a diversity of mineralogies and regolith 
particle sizes, as well as through a time-dependent sur- 
face weathering process. In this case, if a time-dependent 
weathering process is active (as proposed to explain the 
surface variations measured in Galileo spacecraft images 
of 243 Ida), asteroids closely resembling ordinary chon- 
drite meteorites would be those with the youngest sur- 
faces. 

Observations have suggested binary asteroids are 
common in Earth-crossing orbits. Using the world’s two 
most powerful astronomical radar telescopes, 
astronomers estimate that about 16% of near-Earth aster- 
oids larger than 200 meters (219 yards) across are likely 
to be binary systems. Near-Earth asteroids may become 
binaries when the planets’ much larger gravities pull on 
them, distorting and sometimes breaking off a satellite. 
Theoretical and modelling results show that binary aster- 
oids most likely form when the asteroids make a close 
encounter with the inner planets Earth or Mars, some- 
times just 10 000 miles from a planet's surface. 

Two asteroids made the news during 2002 because 
of their predicted close approach to the Earth. On 9 July 
2002, MIT astronomers discovered 2002 NT7, a 2 km- 
wide space rock in a curious orbit. Unlike most asteroids, 
which circle the Sun in the plane of the planets, 2002 NT7 
follows a path that is tilted 42 degrees. It spends most of 
its time far above or below the rest of the solar system. 
Every 2.29 years, however, the asteroid plunges through 
the inner solar system not far from Earth’s orbit. After a 
week of follow-up observations, researchers did some 
calculations. There was a chance, they concluded, that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


2002 NT7 might hit our planet on 1 February 2019. This 
made headline news, worrying some members of the 
public. What was not reported was that the odds of 
impact are 1-in-250 000. On 14 July astronomers discov- 
ered 2002 NY40. This asteroid measures about 800 meters 
across, and follows an orbit that ranges from the asteroid 
belt to the inner solar system. Its closest approach was on 
18 August 2002, passing only 1.3 times farther away than 
the Moon, and being visible through binoculars. 


Asteroid flyby 

The Galileo mission on its way toward Jupiter explored 
the asteroids 951 Gaspra and 243 Ida, discovering around 
the latter the first asteroid satellite, named Dactyl; all 
these three are small S-type objects. 243 Ida is a member 
of the Koronis family. The Galileo flybys have provided 
images of these asteroids with a spatial resolution never 
obtained in Earth-based observations. The observations 
have shown that both 951 Gaspra and 243 Ida are of elon- 
gated shape and quite irregular, while Dactyl has a rather 
smooth, regular shape, which contrasts with the angular- 
ity of other known small bodies (951 Gaspra, 243 Ida, 
comet P/Halley nucleus, 4179 Toutatis and 4769 
Castalia), but presents some aspects with comparable 
limb roughness with the Martian moons (PHOBOS AND 
DEIMOS). One prominent surface feature concerns the sys- 
tem of linear striae (depressions of uniform width as long 
as few km and few hundred meters in width with depths 
of probably no more than few tens of meters), which are 
similar to the grooves observed on Phobos and could be 
the signature of their origin due to a near- catastrophic 
collision. The most significant results were the determi- 
nation of the crater size distribution on the object sur- 
faces. From the crater frequency distribution, the age of 
243 Ida was determined to be about 1 billion yr while 
that of 951 Gaspra was only 200 million yr. Both asteroids 
are covered by a layer of regolith with significant albedo 
and color variations. 

The sequence of images where Dactyl is visible 
allowed us to determine its orbit as a function of 243 
Ida’s mass. The combination of this value with the esti- 
mation of 243 Ida’s volume yields a bulk density of 2.6 + 
0.5 g cm for 243 Ida, which is consistent with a bulk 
chondritic composition. 

On June 27, 1997, NEAR passed close (about 1200 
km) to the main-belt asteroid 253 Mathilde, providing 
the first flyby of a C-type asteroid. 

Several ground-based reconnaissance studies were 
performed to characterize 253 Mathilde. A rotational 
period of 17.4 days has been determined: 253 Mathilde is 
an exceptionally slow and tumbling rotator. Spectral 
observations of 253 Mathilde showed its neutral reflec- 
tive properties to be highly homogeneous over all the 
explored surface and its spectrum results comparable 
with those of carbonaceous and black ordinary chon- 
drites. Whole-disk NEAR color observations between 
400 and 1100 nm agree closely with these telescopic spec- 
tral results. NEAR found 253 Mathilde to be uniformly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


bland in both albedo and color (more bland in color vari- 
ations than Phobos). 253 Mathilde has a geometric albe- 
do of 0.041 + 0.003 at 0.55 um. NEAR discovered five 
craters of diameter 19-33 km, comparable with the 26.5 
km mean radius. The flyby yielded also a direct determi- 
nation of the mass and a density estimate of 1.3 + 0.2 g 
cm. Comparison of this density with that of carbona- 
ceous chondrites suggests a porosity of ~50% for 253 
Mathilde. 

In February 2000 the main goal of the mission, the 
rendezvous with the highly elongated S-type Amor 
group asteroid 433 EROS, was reached by means of a 
series of rendezvous maneuvers that slowed the space- 
craft to a velocity relative to the asteroid of only 5m s1 
before the insertion into orbit. 

A set of detailed and precise data on three members 
of the S-type (951 Gaspra, 243 Ida and Dactyl), the second 
most abundant asteroid compositional type, is already 
available and within the next year new information on 
another peculiar S-type asteroid (433 Eros) will be 
obtained. On the basis of the analysis of these data it will 
be probably possible to determine whether S asteroids 
are primitive mineral assemblages, little changed since 
they first formed like the ordinary condrites, or material 
like basaltic and stony-iron meteorites that have under- 
gone extensive melting and evolution. The first flyby of a 
C-type (253 Mathilde) gave an indication of a very low 
density of this body and of a highly homogeneous sur- 
face color. The collisions on 253 Mathilde have strongly 
affected its surface morphology. Are these characters 
common to the whole C-class? 

On Friday 2 November 2002, NASA’s Stardust 
spacecraft was tested in a flyby of asteroid Annefrank, 
discovering that the asteroid is about twice the size antic- 
ipated, but with a dimmer surface. Stardust flew within 
about 3300 km (2050 mi) of the asteroid as a rehearsal for 
the spacecraft’s encounter with its primary target, comet 
Wild 2, in January 2004. The camera’s resolution was suf- 
ficient to show that Annefrank is about 8 km (5 mi) in 
length, twice the predicted size from Earth-based obser- 
vations. The surface reflects about 0.1 to 0.2 percent of 
sunlight, slightly less than anticipated. A few craters that 
are hundreds of meters across can be seen. The straight 
edge in the right side of the image may be an artifact of 
processing (figure 2). 


Collisional evolution 
After the formation of Jupiter and Mars, the planetesimal 
swarms orbiting between these two planets experienced 
strong perturbations and were widely depleted and the 
remnants were ‘frozen’ in much more stable orbits. Long- 
term perturbations could have produced mutual colli- 
sions, which, together with the space weathering, have 
been the only processes modifying the original planetes- 
imal population. 

Although the volume of space where asteroids orbit 
is large, and the asteroidal cross sections are small, the 
probability that asteroid collisions do occur in a time 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Figure 2. Asteroid Annefrank imaged by Stardust. Credit: 
NASA/JPL. 


frame compatible with the solar system age is quite high 
(of the order of one collision per billion yr). Moreover, the 
fact that the rotation periods of asteroids follow a 
Maxwellian distribution may be taken as an indication 
that collisions were sufficiently frequent within the aster- 
oid population to produce a collisionally relaxed state 
from a more massive primordial population. Many other 
observable characters of asteroids are presumably the 
effects of collisional evolution: the shape and the size dis- 
tributions, the physical and chemical characteristics of 
families, the rotational properties. 

Unfortunately the outcomes of a collision between 
two asteroids, depending mainly on their sizes and the 
relative velocity, are poorly known. Laboratory simula- 
tion of high-velocity (few km s-!, of the order of the 
sound speed in rocky materials) impacts of a small pro- 
jectile (~10-3 kg) on a larger target (~10 kg) cannot take 
into account the gravitational regime which dominates 
the asteroid collisions, even if scale laws are applied. 
What is the proportion of catastrophic disrupting colli- 
sions (where the majority of the mass of a body is 
dispersed) to the fragmenting ones (where the body is 
broken up, but the fragments re-accumulate in a rubble 
pile configuration)? How does the formation of an 
impact crater affect the chemistry of an original popula- 
tion asteroid? What are the effects of a collision on a rub- 
ble pile object? What is the mass loss (ejection out of the 
solar system or insertion in planet- or Sun-crossing 
orbits) induced by the collisional evolution process? The 
answers to these questions will allow us to understand 
the role of mutual collisions in shaping the present aster- 
oid population. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


On the basis of what we believe today and of the 
information provided by the observations, we can only 
draw a preliminary scenario for the processes which gov- 
erned the formation and the evolution of planetesimal 
swarms located between 2.3 AU and 5 AU from the Sun. 

The break-up of very large bodies, such as Ceres, 
PALLAS and Vesta, seems to have been an improbable 
event and the fact that some of them preserve most of 
their ancient crust suggests that even large impacts had 
limited modifying effects on the larger asteroids. These 
considerations imply that, if the mass of the original 
asteroid population was larger, the potential impactors 
belonged to the rather small bodies. The smallest rem- 
nants in the actual asteroid population are probably frag- 
ments of larger bodies. The intermediate-size asteroids 
may have undergone repeated collisions, able to partial- 
ly modify their composition (formation of shock mineral 
assemblages, thermal processing, etc) and/or their phys- 
ical properties (rubble piles, rotation period, spin axis 
orientation, etc), but still retaining some primordial char- 
acter. 

If collisions have been rare events, the scenario 
depicted by the observations is still the primitive one, 
and we are looking at a relatively pristine remnant of the 
primordial planetesimals. If collisions affected the origi- 
nal swarm all along the solar system lifetime, only the 
larger asteroids may preserve intact some original char- 
acters, while most asteroids reflect the effects of a thor- 
ough reprocessing, and the search for the tracks of the 
original imprints will have to be much more careful. 


Bibliography 
Margot J L, et al. 2002 Binary Asteroids in the Near-Earth 
Object Population Science 296 (5572) 1445-1448 
Nesvorny D, Bottke W F Jr, Dones L and Levison H F 
2002 The recent breakup of an asteroid in the main- 
belt region Nature 720-722 
Marcello Fulchignoni 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astigmatism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astigmatism 


An optical aberration whereby a lens (or mirror) has 
different focal lengths in planes that are perpendicular to 
each other. In general, if light rays from a point source 
enter a lens at an angle to its optical axis (the line passing 
perpendicularly through the center of the lens), the focal 
length for rays that lie in the plane defined by the direction 
of the source and the optical axis (the ‘tangential’ plane) 
will differ from the focal length for rays that lie in the 
plane perpendicular to this (the ‘sagittal’ plane). Moving 
outwards from the focus for tangential rays to the focus 
for sagittal rays, the shape of the image varies from a short 
line perpendicular to the tangential plane, through a circle 
(the circle of least confusion and position of best focus), to 
a short line perpendicular to the sagittal plane. 

An optical system that is configured to remove 
astigmatism completely will suffer from field curvature 
(it will form sharply focused images on a surface that is 
curved rather than flat). 


See also: focal length, focus, spherical aberration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrid ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrid 


Two Swedish microsatellites designed to investigate the 
near-Earth plasma environment. Astrid-1 was launched 
in January 1995 and carried a neutral particle imager, an 
electron spectrometer and a miniature ultraviolet imaging 
system. It ceased to operate in March 1995. Astrid-2 
was launched in December 1998 to measure particle 
distribution, electric and magnetic field variations in the 
auroral region. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astro ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astro 


Set of three ultraviolet telescopes flown on the Space 
Shuttle in December 1990 (STS-35) and March 1995 
(STS-67). Included the 0.5 m Wisconsin ultraviolet photo- 
polarimeter experiment, a 38 cm ultraviolet imaging 
telescope and the 90 cm Hopkins ultraviolet telescope. 
Astro-1 also carried a broad-band x-ray telescope. Astro- 
1 observed some 135 targets, including Comet Austin. 
Astro-2 discovered helium gas in the intergalactic medium 
by observing a distant quasar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astro ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astro 


Series of Japanese high-energy astronomy satellites. They 
include TENMA (Astro-B), GINGA (Astro-C), asca (Astro-D), 
Astro-E and iris (Astro-F). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astro Space Center, Moscow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astro Space Center, Moscow 


Established in 1967 as part of the Institute for Space 
Research of the Russian Academy of Sciences. The 
Astro Space Center conducts fundamental research 
in astrophysics including cosmology, structure and 
evolution of astronomical objects, and the interstellar and 
interplanetary medium. 

The center is particularly involved with develop- 
ments in radioastronomy. It operates the Pushschino 
radioastronomy station and has an agreement to build a 
70 m radio telescope on the Suffa Plateau in Uzbekistan. 

The center is also developing the RadioAstron 
satellite, a 10 m radio telescope which will be inserted into 
a high elliptical orbit in order to make VLBI observations 
in conjunction with radio telescopes on the ground. It is 
part of the Spectrum series of spacecraft. 

The center’s Submillimetron project is under study 
as an astronomical payload on the Russian segment of 
the International Space Station. It would use a cryogenic 
telescope for studies at submillimeter and far-infrared 
wavelengths. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.asc.rssi.ru/default.asp. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrochemistry ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrochemistry 


The study of the chemistry of, and chemical processes 
operating in, astronomical sources and phenomena. As far 
as interstellar material is concerned much of the chemistry 
involved is organic chemistry of light molecules (i.e. 
molecules containing one or more carbon atoms, possible 
other atoms, and in total less than, say, 50). 


See also: cosmic abundance of elements, heavy elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astrodynamics ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrodynamics 


The study of the motion of bodies in gravitational fields, 
with particular reference to the motions of artificial 
satellites and space probes. 


See also: celestial mechanics, rotation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astrolabe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrolabe 


The astrolabe (more exactly, the planispheric astrolabe, 
to distinguish it from less important variants) was an 
observing and calculating instrument that had its roots 
in antiquity and reached maturity in the Islamic world. 
Christian monasteries on the slopes of the Pyrenees made 
early contact with ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY, and late in the tenth 
century Gerbert of Aurillac (later Pope Sylvester II) may 
have brought an understanding of the astrolabe from 
Spain to the cathedral school of Rheims. Certainly the 
instrument itself had appeared in the West by about 1025. 
Its subsequent availability in the Latin Middle Ages (see 
DIVIDED INSTRUMENTS) did much to encourage a quantitative 
science of astronomy. 

The basis of the instrument is a heavy disk of brass that 
can be suspended from a ring so as to hang vertically. On 
the back of the instrument is an observing bar that pivots 
about a central pin; the observer measures the altitude 
of a celestial body by sighting along the bar and reading 
the altitude from a scale in degrees engraved around the 
circumference. 

The front of the instrument is for calculation. To 
allow the instrument to be used at different latitudes, 
a set of alternative disks was supplied, and the user 
arranged them so that the most suitable latitude disk was 
face up within the recess provided. On this disk were 
engraved circles associated with a plane representation of 
the celestial sphere. If the celestial sphere is imagined as 
projected from the South Celestial Pole onto the plane of 
the equator (represented by the latitude disk), then the 
circle that is the celestial equator projects into itself, and 
the North Celestial Pole into the center of this circle. Points 
on the northern hemisphere project into points of the plane 
that are internal to the celestial equator, and those on the 
southern to points external. Because the brass astrolabe 
was necessarily of finite size and northern observers had 
little interest in skies south of the Tropic of Capricorn, the 
projection of this tropic was made the perimeter of the 
latitude disk. 

The observer’s zenith projected into a point, and 
circles of equal altitude in the sky as seen from his position 
projected into circles enclosing (but not centered on) this 
point, while arcs of equal azimuth projected into arcs 
passing through this point. 

Thus far the projection incorporated the principal 
fixed circles in the sky and the coordinate circles or arcs 
associated with observations by the observer. To represent 
the rotating heavens, and in particular the ecliptic path 
of the Sun and the positions of the stars, the instrument 
maker provided a further disk (the rete) superimposed on 
the latitude disk and rotating about the central pivot (thus 
matching the rotation of the sky about the North Celestial 
Pole). To avoid obscuring the latitude disk, the maker cut 
away as much of the rete as possible, leaving little more 
than a network of labelled star-pointers together with a 
circle that represented the ecliptic. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The sky rotates with one degree of freedom, and 
therefore a single observation (the ambiguity between 
rising and setting presenting little difficulty in practice) 
is sufficient to determine the correct position of the rete 
at any given time. So, for example, the observer might 
first observe the altitude of Sirius, and then, having 
retreated to the warmth of his study, he would rotate 
the rete until the point representing Sirius was correctly 
positioned above the relevant circle of altitude. All the 
other stars would then be correctly positioned likewise, 
and he could determine, for example, which were now 
above the horizon and which below. 

On Western astrolabes the back of the instrument 
contained not only the circular scale in degrees for 
measuring altitudes, but a second circular scale with the 
days of the year, placed so that the appropriate position of 
the Sun on the ecliptic was aligned with the calendar date. 
Knowing in this way the current position of the Sun on the 
ecliptic, the user could imagine an appropriate mark on the 
representation of the ecliptic. A brass bar located on top of 
the rete and also rotating about the central pivot could then 
be placed across this mark, so as to indicate the time on a 
24 hscale located outside the perimeter of the latitude disk, 
and in this way the instrument became a clock that told the 
time both night and day. Thus the night-time observation 
of Sirius that had allowed the rete to be correctly positioned 
also gave the position of the Sun and hence the time of the 
observation. In the daytime, observation of the Sun itself 
gave the same information. Similarly, by rotating the rete 
the user could establish at what time a particular event— 
the rising of Sirius, for example—would occur. 

As an observing instrument accurate to a small 
number of degrees, the astrolabe could also be used to 
measure the altitudes of the planets, and this fostered a 
revival of planetary astronomy in the Latin Middle Ages 
that was to culminate in the De Revolutionibus of COPERNICUS. 
However, its primary use was in astrology, especially as a 
guide to medical treatment. 


Bibliography 

Evans J 1998 The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy 
(New York: Oxford University Press) pp 141-61 

Hoskin M (ed) 1997 The Cambridge Illustrated History 
of Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 64-7 

North J D 1974 ‘The astrolabe’ Sci. Am. 230 96-106 


Michael Hoskin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrology 


Astrology is the theory that the planets, the Sun and 
the Moon, as well as the 12 ‘zodiacal signs’, combine in 
various, ever-changing configurations with respect to each 
other and the local horizon to influence ‘sublunar’ events. 

In astrology, as in classical astronomy before the 
acceptance of the Copernican hypothesis, it was assumed. 
that the Earth was positioned in the center of a finite 
universe, and that the Earth’s center was the center of the 
spheres of the celestial bodies—in upward order from the 
Earth, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, 
Saturn, the ‘fixed’ stars, the ecliptic and, often, the ‘prime 
mover’. The motion of these 10 spheres was, according 
to ARISTOTLE, circular and uniform in accordance with the 
nature of the element, ether, of which they consisted. The 
motions of the four elements that constitute the sublunar 
world were linear with respect to the center of the Earth, 
the elements earth and water moving ‘down’ towards the 
center, and the elements air and fire moving ‘up’ away 
from the center. The circular motions of the celestial 
spheres disturb the linear motions of the four sublunar 
elements, thereby causing change in and on the Earth 
and in the surrounding layers of water, air and fire. 
The resulting combinations of elements form the basic 
materials out of which terrestrial and atmospheric bodies 
are shaped, which are then continuously further affected 
by the motions of the celestial bodies and by subsidiary 
interactions of sublunar bodies. Thus the UNIVERSE is a 
vast but finite machine powered by the natural motions 
of its five constituent elements, among which the ETHER 
with its regular circular motion has the major effect, and 
astrology is the science that investigates the operations of 
this universal machine. 


Celestial omens 

In ancient Mesopotamia and in the many cultures 
influenced by it many celestial phenomena—eclipses, 
conjunctions of the Moon and the planets with each other 
and with the stars, a large number of phenomena due to 
the distortion of light as it passes through the atmosphere, 
and other appearances—were regarded as messages sent 
by the gods to warn the rulers of men or collective 
groups of men of impending disaster or good fortune. 
The interpretation of these celestial omens was also a 
science by which men of great learning strove to provide 
useful advice to kings and other government officials. 
The experience of these learned readers of omens led to 
the recognition of the periodic behavior of the Sun, the 
Moon and the planets, and ultimately to the development 
of mathematical methods of predicting the phenomena 
themselves (which, because of their predictability, should 
then have been, but were not, no longer regarded as 
messages sent by angry or well-pleased gods). It also led 
to the development of some techniques of interpretation 
of celestial omens that were carried over into astrology, 
including that of predicting the fate of a person from the 
positions of the planets at his or her birth or computed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


conception. In practice, these protohoroscopes of the last 
four centuries BC were not a part of astrology since the 
phenomena were ominous rather than effective and since 
the elaborate geometry used in astrology was not a factor 
in their interpretation. 


The thema or horoscope 

The basic tool used to interpret the influences of the 
celestial bodies at any given moment—say, that of a 
native’s birth—was the diagram called the thema or 
horoscope. This diagram represents the EcuiPtic, divided 
into 12 zodiacal signs of 30° each, as a circle or a 
quadrilateral with the four cardinal points marked on it— 
the ascendant on the eastern horizon, the descendant on 
the western horizon, the midheaven to the south at a point 
computed by using the local oblique ascensions, and the 
antimidheaven 180° opposite it to the north. Between and 
at these cardinal points are located the cusps of the 12 
astrological places. The zodiacal signs are divided into 
various subdivisions: decans of 10° each, twelfths of 2°30’ 
each, and terms of varying length, usually five to a zodiacal 
sign. The longitudes of the planets are noted in the thema, 
which locations reveal their configurations (aspects) with 
each other—conjunction, sextile (to 60°), quartile (to 90°), 
trine (to 120°) and opposition (to 180°)—which may be 
computed by various mathematical formulae so as to 
be measured in oblique or right ascensions or so as to 
accommodate the planets’ latitudes. Moreover, various 
lots (defined as the distance between two real or imaginary 
celestial bodies measured off from a third) and the 
prorogator (computed in various ways) are noted on the 
thema, as may also be such fixed points as the exaltations 
(points of maximum effectiveness) of the planets and the 
four triplicities (Aries, Leo, Sagittarius; Taurus, Virgo, 
Capricorn; Gemini, Libra, Aquarius; Cancer, Scorpion, 
Pisces). 


Domains of influence 

Each zodiacal sign is classified according to numerous 
categories: masculine-feminine; odd-even; animal- 
human; village-forest; etc. Moreover, there are zodiacal 
melothesias, assigning different parts of the human body 
to the zodiacal signs; topothesias, doing the same with 
types of terrain on the surface of the Earth; lists of the 
animals, the professions, the metals, the jewels, the colors, 
etc of the zodiacal signs. Each of the signs has especial 
influence over the categories assigned to it. The triplicities, 
being four in number, are each associated with a cardinal 
direction and an element. 

The 12 astrological places each have dominion over a 
certain aspect of the native’s life (bodily form; inherited 
wealth; siblings; parents; children; illnesses; marriage; 
manner of death; travels; profession; gain; loss) or of 
an enterprise undertaken. They are influential in their 
domains in accordance with the zodiacal signs they 
overlap and the presence within them or aspects to them 
of the planets and the lots. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The seven planets also (nine in India, where the 
ascending and descending nodes of the Moon are 
included) have each their own domains among physical 
types of humans and animals as well as psychological 
types, and each is related to types of terrain, of animals, of 
plants, of minerals, etc, and to an element and its humors 
(fire-hot and dry; water-cold and humid; air—hot and 
humid; earth-cold and dry). They are also classified as 
male or female, and as benefic, malefic or neuter. As the 
seven planets revolve through the zodiacal signs, and they 
in turn revolve about the stationary Earth, the influences 
they project into the sublunar sphere are constantly 
changing, creating ever-new events and transformations 
on Earth. These can, according to astrological theory, all 
be predicted on the assumption (alleged to possess some 
empirical foundations) that the accepted domains of the 
celestial bodies’ influences are indeed correct. Historically, 
the system did not remain static; it was simply not complex 
enough to differentiate between the apparently limitless 
variations of human experience. In order to accommodate 
these variations, astrologers—especially those of India 
and Islam, who were duly followed in medieval Europe 
and in Byzantium—devised many more subdivisions of 
zodiacal signs in order to multiply the potential number 
of the effects of a planet, invented elaborate methods for 
assigning a numerical weight to the influence of each 
planet and expanded the number of effective bodies by 
introducing new lots. 


Types of astrology 

The paradigmatic type of astrology is genethlialogy, the 
science of interpreting the themata of nativities or of 
computed times of conception, probably invented in the 
1st century BC in Ptolemaic Egypt. Such predictions can 
be and were also applied to animals and even plants. 
Although in theory the predictions are unique for each 
moment at a given locality, many astrologers wisely 
advised neophytes to learn something about the social and 
economic status of the native’s family before attempting to 
describe his or her future life. A branch of genethlialogy 
is continuous horoscopy, which allows for a life-long 
usefulness of the astrologer. Since the planets and the 
ecliptic do not cease their revolutions, one can find their 
changing influence on the original life-pattern determined 
from the birth horoscope by casting a new horoscope for 
every anniversary of the birth, or for the beginning of 
every month or even day of the native’s life, and one 
can also compute the time when each planet transits to 
another zodiacal sign or astrological place, thereby altering 
its effects, and one can watch the imaginary motion, in 
oblique ascensions, of the prorogator through different 
planets’ terms and past different planets’ bodies and 
aspects. 

Catarchic astrology, invented simultaneously with 
the genethlialogical version, allows one to predict the 
course of some human undertaking from the horoscope 
of the moment of its inception. There are two major 
subdivisions of catarchic astrology, relating to marriage 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and to warfare. Some aspects of medical astrology are also 
catarchic, although other aspects depend on genethlialogy. 

These two basic forms of astrology were transmitted 
from Greco-Roman Egypt to India in the 2nd century 
AD. In India interogational astrology was developed from 
catarchic astrology. In this form the astrologer answers 
specific questions posed by his client on the basis of 
the thema of the moment the question was asked. This 
clearly raises serious questions about the general theory 
of astrology; for either the client is exercising free will in 
determining when he or she will ask the question, so that 
there ceases to be a purely physical connection between 
the celestial bodies and the terrestrial event, or else his or 
her choice is determined by the stars and therefore could, 
in theory, be predicted by astrology and answered without 
recourse to anew thema. 

These three types of astrology were transmitted from 
India to Sasanian Iran in the 3rd—5th centuries AD, as were 
the first two from the Roman Empire. The Sasanians added 
to them a fourth major type, historical astrology, which 
uses forms of continuous horoscopy (e.g. the horoscopes 
of the commencements of all or of selected years) as well 
as conjunctions of the two furthest of the then known 
planets, Saturn and Jupiter, or conjunctions of the two 
malefic planets, Saturn and Mars, in Cancer. Practitioners 
of historical astrology also cast the horoscopes of the 
coronations of kings and other historical beginnings, in 
these cases following the rules of catarchic astrology. 


The question of astrology’s validity 

Clearly, whatever claims were made for an empirical basis, 
this whole theory is founded on arbitrary assumptions 
concerning the relationships between the individual 
zodiacal signs and planets and the physical parts and 
psychological aspects of sublunar objects and beings, 
as well as on a subsequently disproved theory of the 
cosmos. In antiquity the arguments against astrology’s 
validity were largely based on practical problems: how 
to explain the often great differences between the physical 
and mental attributes of twins and their separate lives; 
how to explain the simultaneous deaths of large numbers 
of people of different ages in a battle or natural catastrophe; 
how to be sure of the exact moment of birth and of the 
local ascendant at that moment. The Christian Church, 
and later Islam, frequently condemned astrology because 
it denies man or woman free will and so deprives him or 
her of the capacity to gain salvation through his or her own 
efforts and because it makes God irrelevant to the universe, 
which is an eternal and automatic machine. None of these 
arguments seriously damaged the credibility of astrology 
among many, nor has the collapse of the geocentric theory, 
although that has discouraged many scientifically minded 
persons from granting it any credence. Like several other 
current sciences that in fact continuously demonstrate 
their inability to predict the future accurately, astrology 
is still able to attract and to retain the patronage of 
innumerable clients. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrology ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Bouché-Leclercq A 1899 L’astrologie Grecque (Paris) 

Koch-Westenholz U 1995 Mesopotamian Astrology (Copen- 
hagen) 

Pingree D 1978 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja 2 vols 
(Cambridge) 

Pingree D 1997 From Astral Omens to Astrology, From 
Babylon to Bikaner (Rome) 


David Pingree 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrometric Surveys 


The meaning of astrometric surveys 

Applied to astronomy, a survey has been defined as ‘an 
examination for purposes of ascertaining the quality or 
quantity of something. Depending on the nature of the 
survey, this may mean looking at a large number of 
objects in an attempt to discover those meeting specific 
criteria.’ (Warren 1992). 

What is not specified in the above definition is 
whether the survey of objects meeting the established cri- 
teria must be the result of an observational program or a 
search in the literature. Although the term survey in 
astronomy is quite often applied to observational pro- 
grams, some recent astrometric surveys have made use 
of the material published in the available literature. What 
is more, the new generation of astrometric surveys may 
even be carried out over the web (see ‘The new millenni- 
um’, below). Therefore, when speaking about surveys, 
we may refer to observational astrometric surveys, bibli- 
ographic astrometric surveys and the coming computer 
astrometric surveys. 

When can a survey be called astrometric? In other 
words, what are the main characteristics of an astromet- 
ric survey? To answer these questions, the first point to 
consider is what is astrometry? Astrometry is that part of 
astronomy dealing with the positions (absolute or rela- 
tive), motions and trigonometric distances of celestial 
objects (see also ASTRONOMY: TELESCOPES AND TECHNIQUES). 
Each of these parameters has its own importance in the 
study of our stellar environment. 

What should be the accuracy of a given astrometric 
parameter? It is important to define the level of accuracy 
because that value will, to some extent, determine the 
quality of the survey. For example, no one would attempt 
to carry out an astrometric survey today with the accura- 
cy level of the Durchmusterungs (Bonner, Cérdoba or 
Cape) since such a level would be extremely low for 
today’s standards; however, the importance of these sur- 
veys at the time they were published is undeniable. 

What is an astrometric survey? Putting all the above 
considerations together, an astrometric survey can be 
defined as a search oriented to find those celestial objects 
meeting a given accuracy in their absolute or relative 
positions, motions, or trigonometric distances. Some of 
these surveys have been or are being conducted with 
ground-based meridian circles, ASTROLABES or astro- 
graphic telescopes, while others—already completed or 
planned for the future—have used or will be using 
space-based instruments. 


Brief historical account of astrometric surveys 

The compilation of catalogs including positions and 
PROPER MOTIONS is among the best-known activities in 
astrometry. In the early beginnings of astronomy, provid- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


ing positions of celestial bodies was a real necessity for 
many of the ancient cultures. With roots dating back to 
the pre-Greek civilization, astrometry provided the infor- 
mation for computing solar and lunar eclipses and, more 
importantly, for the determination of time. 

Thanks to the positions obtained by his predecessors 
and his own observations, HIPPARCHUS was able to identi- 
fy the precession of the Earth’s axis of rotation. It was 
also thanks to old and new astrometric catalogs that 
Edmund HALLEY introduced—in 1718—the proper 
motion of the stars. Some years later, in 1802, HERSCHEL 
noted the relative orbital motion for the two components 
of Castor, marking the beginning of double-star astrome- 
try. The next landmark appeared in 1838, when Friedrich 
Wilhelm BESSEL was able to determine the PARALLAX of 61 
Cygni. The history of astrometric catalogs—taking the 
detector used in the observational process as a parame- 
ter—could be divided in three different periods: visual 
(with or without an instrument), photographic and CCD 
based (Earth- or space-based instruments). With regard 
to the epochs in which the different detectors were 
employed, it could be said that, in general, the unaided 
human eye was used as a detector from the very begin- 
ning of astronomy until the year 1610, when GALILEO 
GALILEI started to use the telescope during his observa- 
tions. After 1610, meridian circles or some other types of 
optical instruments were used to aid the human eye in 
most of the astrometric surveys. This approach lasted for 
over 300 years. 

One of the first catalogs ever compiled was prepared 
by Hipparchus. It was completed around 129 BC (there 
has been a debate concerning the number of objects list- 
ed by Hipparchus: some historians have agreed that 
there were 1080 stars while others consider that there 
were only 850 stars). Hipparchus’ catalog was included 
in Ptolemy’s Almagest, the biggest compendium of 
astronomy of that time, which was in use for about 14 
centuries. Previous compilations by Greek and Chinese 
astronomers date back to roughly 300 BC and even to 360 
BC (Eichhorn 1992). During the Middle Ages the most 
important compilation worth mentioning—although it 
may not be considered a catalog in the current sense—is 
called the Alfonsine Tables, compiled under the reign of 
Alfonso the Wise and first published—probably—after 
1277. Actually, the real purpose of the Tables was to offer 
a means to calculate the positions of the planets; one of 
the main users of the Alfonsine Tables was Copernicus 
(Gingerich 1992). Another catalog compiled in the first 
half of the 15th century was that of ULEGH BEG. 

TYCHO BRAHE is among the first astronomers who— 
using his mural quadrant—started to make accurate sys- 
tematic observations during the pre-telescope years. His 
observations include the supernova of 1572, the comet of 
1577 and a large collection of positions for Mars. After 
Brahe’s death in 1601, these positions were used by his 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


assistant JOHANNES KEPLER and were a key element in the 
derivations of Kepler’s laws. 

With the introduction of the telescope as an astro- 
nomical instrument, many zone (independent) catalogs 
started to be observed by means of meridian circles. Most 
of the observational surveys of the early to mid-1800s 
were limited to some specific areas and there was no 
agreement on the ‘system’ that should be used (the con- 
venience of having a system in the modern sense of the 
term to which positions have to be referred was pro- 
posed in the late 1800s). One of the first attempts to carry 
out a comprehensive survey was started by ARGELANDER 
with the observation of the zone from +80° to —2°. The 
zones from —2° to the south pole were added later. This 
first survey—known as the Durchmusterungs—was 
made in three parts: the Bonner Durchmusterung, the 
Cérdoba Durchmusterung and the Cape Photographic 
Durchmusterung. 

The most important work of the early years of the 
20th century was the General Catalogue (GC) (Boss 
1937), a preliminary version of which was published by 
Lewis Boss in 1910. This version was called the 
Preliminary General Catalogue (PGC), and it was later 
completed with the publication of the GC in 1937, which 
included over 33000 stars. What is important to highlight 
about the PCG/GC project is Lewis Boss’ ultimate aim: 
the construction of a fundamental system. This goal was 
finally accomplished by his son, Benjamin Boss. In this 
sense, the N30 catalog compiled by Morgan (1952) is also 
worth mentioning. 

For a detailed historical account of astrometric cata- 
logs see Eichhorn (1974, pp 101-278). Also see Jaschek 
(1989) for a discussion of the different types of catalogs. 

When the photographic plate was finally accepted 
by the astronomical community as a detector (around 
1880), the photographic astrometric surveys started to 
develop. Curiously, the first observing program with the 
newly introduced astrographic telescope (the accompa- 
nying instrument to the photographic plate) was the 
observation of the biggest international project of the last 
years of the 19th century: the Astrographic Catalogue 
(AC). This program received a grat deal of criticism, as 
many considered that it was too early in the develop- 
ment of astrographic telescopes and photographic plates 
to undertake such a large project using a rather small 
(2° x 2°) field of view. However, from a current-day per- 
spective, the launch of the AC can be regarded as a posi- 
tive initiative. Thanks to that decision, astrometry now 
has a marvellous set of over four million first-epoch posi- 
tions (nowadays 100 years old) for high-accuracy proper 
motion determinations. 

Although the AC—in itself—should be considered 
an observational survey, it was never used as such until 
very recently. In this sense, two major catalogs have been 
produced using the published coordinates of the AC: the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


4 Million Catalogue (Gulyaev and Nesterov 1992) and 
the AC2000 (Urban et al 1998). The former combined the 
AC with the Hubble Space Telescope Guide Star 
Catalogue (GSC) in order to compute proper motions; 
both sets of positions (AC and GSC) were reduced into 
the PPM system. In addition to positions and proper 
motions, the 4 Million Catalogue also provides cross 
identifications with other surveys such as_ the 
Durchmusterungs, PPM, SAO and VARIABLE STARS. The 
AC2000 contains over four and a half million positions 
(and magnitudes) with an average epoch of 1907. In 
order to reduce the published x, y coordinates of the AC, 
Corbin and Urban (1990) first compiled the ACRS to be 
used as the reference frame. The positions of the AC2000 
are on the Hipparcos/ICRS system. A more recent re- 
analysis of the AC2000 has yielded the AC2000.2 (Urban 
et al 2001). 

Apart from the 4 Million and the AC2000, there are 
some other surveys that have made use of the AC. Of 
these, the PPM was the first. 

For a detailed and enthralling history of the 
Astrographic Catalogue see Eichhorn (1974, pp 279-323). 

While the observation of the AC was underway, 
other photographic—zonal—surveys were also in 
progress: the Yale zones and the AGK2 (the AGK1 was 
observed with meridian circles). In total, Yale published 
30 catalogs with epochs ranging from 1928 to 1942. The 
first volume of the Yale zones to appear included over 
5000 equatorial stars (Schlesinger et al 1926); the last one 
(the zone from —60° to -70°) suffered a number of delays 
and it was not published until 1983 (Fallon and Hoffleit 
1983). The last one of the AGK series was the AGK3 
(Dieckvoss 1971). Because of the development of artificial 
satellites and the urgent necessity of tracking them, by 
the mid-1960s, the need was felt to have a general com- 
prehensive compilation embracing the existing catalogs 
into a single one. The realization of such a project was 
undertaken by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Obser- 
vatory, and in 1966 the ‘Star Catalogue’ subtitled 
‘Positions and Proper Motions of 257,997 Stars for the 
Epoch and Equinox of 1950’ became available to the 
astronomical community. The catalog, known as SAO 
(see Haramundanis 1966 for details of the construction of 
the catalog), covers from +90° to -90° and it was for 
many years the standard reference frame for the reduc- 
tion of most of the photographic plates. Thousands of 
positions of asteroids, comets, major planets and natural 
satellites were obtained using the SAO as a primary ref- 
erence catalog for stellar positions and proper motions. 
However, as is well known, time—through the proper 
motions—is always responsible for the degradation of 
any astrometric catalog. The SAO was no exception, and, 
after being in use for over 25 years, it was replaced by the 
PPM (Roeser and Bastian 1993). The PPM—also covering 
the entire sky—lists over 375000 positions and proper 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


motions in the J2000/FK5 system. Typical values of the 
r.m.s. errors in the northern hemisphere are 0.27 arcsec in 
the positions at epoch 1990 and 0.42 arsec century-! in 
the proper motions, while the corresponding figures in 
the southern sky are much better (Roeser et al 1994). The 
main improvement of the PPM over the SAO was made 
through the inclusion of the century-old AC data. After 
its publication, the PPM replaced the SAO as the refer- 
ence frame for most of the photographic astrometry pro- 
grams. Because of the discontinuation of photographic 
plates and the advent of CCD detectors, the PPM has 
now been replaced by catalogs of much higher density. 

While some astronomers were engaged in the obser- 
vation and reduction of large catalogs of positions, others 
focused their attention on the search of stars with high 
proper motions. According to Luyten (1963), this type of 
project benefited greatly from the introduction of the 
blink microscope. Several surveys for stars with large 
proper motions were carried out by Luyten (1970), result- 
ing in the detection of a large number of objects. Subsets 
of these surveys and/or a revision or reorganization of 
them were published as the Luyten Half Second (LHS), 
Luyten Two Tenths (LTT) and the New Luyten Two 
Tenths (NLTT) surveys. Most of the results were pub- 
lished by the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 
(USA). Among the large proper motions surveys, the 
Lowell Proper Motion Survey (Giclas et al 1971) is one of 
the most important, as it includes finding charts for each 
star. 

In order to present a more complete historical 
account of astrometric surveys, a reference should be 
made to the Hipparcos mission. The Hipparcos satel- 
lite—funded and operated by ESA—was the first space 
experiment dedicated to astrometry. Its primary goal was 
the determination of accurate positions, proper motions 
and parallaxes of 118218 stars. The accuracies of the 
astrometric parameters are roughly 1 mas for the posi- 
tions and parallaxes and 1 mas yr! for the proper 
motions for stars as faint as magnitude 10. The positions 
and proper motions of the Hipparcos Catalogue (ESA 
1997a) are the optical realization of the ICRS and they 
constitute the most accurate large astrometric catalog 
ever observed. The importance of Hipparcos is that it has 
for the first time enabled astronomers to calibrate accu- 
rately the luminosities and masses of many nearby stars 
and to study the kinematic structure of the Galaxy in the 
solar neighborhood. The impact that Hipparcos has had 
in astronomy can be appreciated in the proceedings of 
the Hipparcos Venice ’97 meeting (ESA 1997b) which 
contains nearly 200 research papers based on Hipparcos’ 
data. 

As part of the Hipparcos mission, the ‘stars map- 
pers’ of the satellite were used for the construction of a 
less accurate catalog: the Tycho Catalogue. A re-analysis 
of the original data of this experiment yielded the Tycho- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


2 Catalogue (Heg et al 2000) which has become one of the 
standard compilations in the astrometric reduction of the 
CCD frames (mainly in the meridian circle observations). 
More details about HIPPARCOS and the HIPPARCOS AND 
TYCHO CATALOGS are given in other articles. 

In the last 14 years, the history of astrometry can be 
said to have been signaled by two main events: the first 
one was the launch of the above-mentioned Hipparcos 
mission in 1989; the second one was the establishment— 
on 1 January 1998—of the International Celestial 
Reference System (ICRS) as the new reference system, 
thus bringing to an end the regime of the FK series. With 
this major change, and for the first time, astrometry’s ref- 
erence frame—the International Celestial Reference 
Frame (ICRF)—to which positions have to be referred, is 
based on 212 extragalactic RADIO SOURCES observed with 
very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) techniques (see 
Maet al 1998). An important review concerning the adop- 
tion and implications of this change has been made by 
Feissel and Mignard (1998). 

Today, after significant achievements through its his- 
tory and thanks to the use of a new generation of 
extremely high-quality Earth- and space-based instru- 
ments, astrometry is undergoing new and profound 
changes. From the multiple-fiber-fed instruments on 
Earth to the most advanced and sophisticated satellites, 
there is a common need for better positions of celestial 
objects and astrometry, once again, has to provide accu- 
rate positions, proper motions and stellar parallaxes. The 
fact that some of the coming space missions need to rely 
on ground-based astrometric observations for their suc- 
cess illustrates the importance of the new astrometry. 

In order to meet the requirements imposed by 
today’s astronomy, new astrometric surveys oriented to 
providing the classical parameters are underway. 
Because of the increasing power in both computer and 
detector development, the current projects are growing 
in size (more than 500 million entries in general) and 
accuracy (a few mas). Some of these new surveys are 
based on new observations, while many others are mak- 
ing use of the extensive material provided by the data- 
bases, thus bringing up a new way of doing astronomy 
in general: the virtual observatories (see also ASTROMETRY: 
HISTORY). 


Major achievements 

Over the last few years there has been outstanding 
progress in most of the astrometric projects. These can be 
summarized as follows. 


Positions and proper motions 

Since the CCDs became the standard detectors in almost 
every astronomy project, there has been a real need for 
catalogs of positions (and, ideally, proper motions as 
well) containing a large number of stars. In some sense it 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


could be said that astronomy is—again—experiencing a 
similar situation to the one that occurred in the mid- 
1960s when the SAO was published (then replaced by the 
PPM). Because of the low number of objects they include 
(by today’s standard), these two catalogs are now inap- 
propriate for the astrometric reduction of most CCD 
frames. 

In order to overcome the problem of having too few 
stars per square arcminute, it was necessary to compile 
much larger catalogs. The first step in this sense was 
taken by the Hubble Space Telescope Guide Star 
Catalogue (GSC) by Lasker et al (1990), which now has 
been superseded by the GSC II in both quantity and 
quality. 

Another major compilation worth mentioning is the 
USNO-A2.0 (Monet et al 1998), which is the standard—at 
least for the moment—for the astrometric reduction of 
most of the CCD frames. A subset—called USNO- 
SA2.0—containing about fifty million stars is mostly 
used in the reduction of minor planet and comet CCD 
frames. 

As usual, after a catalog is published, its contents are 
analysed and externally compared with other compila- 
tions for a final evaluation of quality. The USNO-A2.0, as 
well as the GSC IL, is no exception. A very detailed analy- 
sis of the USNO-A2.0 has been performed by Assafin et al 
(2001). In this paper, the authors have compared some of 
the positions of USNO A2.0 against the ones observed 
with the Valinhos CCD Meridian Circle (Viateau et al 
1999). An extension of the USNO-A2.0 catalog, the 
USNO-B, is currently in progress (see Monet 2000). It will 
include proper motions and star/ galaxy classifications. 

One step above the USNO-A2.0 (at least from the 
quantity point of view) is the GSC II. When finished it 
will have close to 109 entries with a typical error of 0.3 
arcsec (the worst case is between 0.35 and 0.65 arcsec for 
stars fainter than 16th magnitude near the edge of the 
plate). A preliminary version of this compilation, known 
as the GSC 2.2, is ready for use, listing more than 430 mil- 
lion stars. The positions of the GSC IL, as well as the GSC 
2.2, are in the system of the ICRF. The mail goal of the 
GSC 2.2 is to support the opration of both GEMINI and 
VLT telescopes. 

Momany ef al (2001) have performed an external 
comparison of the GSC 2.2. As part of the ESO Imaging 
Survey (EIS) these authors have compared the positions 
of GSC 2.2 with those reported by others in the area of 
some open clusters. 

Probably the most recent project to have accom- 
plished part of its goals is the USNO CCD Astrograph 
Catalogue (UCA). A preliminary catalog—the UCACI— 
in the ICRS contains over 27 million stars with a posi- 
tional precision of less than 20 mas for objects in the mag- 
nitude range 9-14. Preliminary proper motions from a 
variety of sources are also given. The UCAC1 will be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


superseded by the UCAC2—covering from -90° to 
+30°—which will be available by mid-2002. When fin- 
ished, the UCA project will provide the first astrometric 
catalog entirely observed with an Earth-based telescope 
using a CCD as a detector. 

In order to improve the quality of the proper 
motions to be included in the UCAC project, the AGK2 
plates (more than 70 years old at this moment) are being 
re-measured at USNO and will then be combined with 
modern positions (see Winter and Holdenried 2001). 
Various progress reports on the UCAC project can be 
found in Zacharias et al (2000a, b, 2001). 

Among the projects oriented towards the determi- 
nation of absolute proper motions, two programs have 
provided a large number of data: the Northern Proper 
Motion Program (NPM) developed at Lick Observatory 
(Klemola et al 1987) and the Southern Proper Motion 
Program (SPM), which is being developed by a Yale 
University (USA)-National University of San Juan 
(Argentina) consortium. The first batch of the NPM— 
called NPM1—was released in 1993. It contains posi- 
tions, proper motions and two-color photometry for 
149000 stars outside the Milky Way. The NPM2 (Jones et 
al 2000), the second batch of the series, will contain 
around 300000 stars located in the Milky Way. Since ref- 
erence galaxies are ‘absent’ in the Milky Way sky, the 
Hipparcos Catalogue is being used to link the NPM2 
proper motions to the (absolute) system defined by 
NPM1. The NPM2 will be released in 2003. 

The first-epoch observations of the SPM were start- 
ed in 1965 and lasted until 1974. The second epoch, using 
photographic plates, began in 1987 and was stopped in 
1993 owing to the lack of photographic plates. Now the 
observation of the second epoch will be resumed by 
using two CCD cameras (van Altena 2002). Two major 
results from the SPM have been released: the SPM 1.0 
(Platais et al 1998) and the SPM 2.0 (for a detailed analy- 
sis of the SPM 2.0 proper motion system and its relation 
with Hipparcos see Zhu 2001). Also, as part of the SPM 
project, a catalog of positions for approximately 30 mil- 
lion stars has been announced (Platais et al 2001b). 

Results from another major digitization process of 
photographic plates have recently been published. The 
astrometric properties of the SuperCOSMOS survey 
have been analysed by Hambly et al (2001). By compar- 
ing the first release of data—the south galactic polar 
cap—with external data sets, they have concluded that 
the positions (in the ICRF via the Tycho 2) are accurate to 
better than +0.2 arcsec at magnitudes J, R ~ 19, 18 while 
the proper motion measurements are shown to be accu- 
rate to typically +10 mas yr -! at the same magnitude 
level. 

Open-cluster astrometry has also received very close 
attention. A number of articles on the subject have been 
published in the past few years. Some of them have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


made use of the extensive databases available while oth- 
ers have relied on new observations. In both cases—data- 
base analysis or new observations—the outcome has 
been the determination of positions, proper motions and 
magnitudes for a large number of stars. An important 
survey, which is being conducted with the WIYN tele- 
scope, is the WIYN Open Cluster Study (WOCS). Results 
from this survey have been published by Platais et al 
(2001a, c). 

There is a significant number of contributions to the 
open-cluster studies that have used databases and high- 
ly accurate astrometric catalogs. Among them are 
Baumgardt et al (2000); Dias et al (2001), Sanner and 
Geffert (2001) and Masden et al (2002). 

WEBDA is an updated collection of open-cluster 
data maintained by Jean-Claude Mermilliod at the 
Institute of Astronomy of the University of Lausanne 
(Switzerland). The database has very simple features that 
ensure easy retrieval of data and offers astrometric, pho- 
tometric and spectroscopic information. Miscellaneous 
data (such as membership probabilities) and biblio- 
graphic references are also included. 


Double stars 

The most important compilation of DOUBLE STARS is the 
Washington Double Star (WDS) catalog. The main 
advantage of the compilation is that it is updated on a 
daily basis. A series of four CDs has been recently pub- 
lished by the US Naval Observatory. Volume I (Mason et 
al 2001) contains the basic astrometric data (coordinates 
for J2000, position angle, separation, etc,) for over 84000 
systems. The second volume (Hartkopf et al 2001) is a col- 
lection of 1465 orbits. Volume III (Hartkopf et al 2001) is 
actually the Third Catalogue of Interferometric 
Measurements of Binary Stars. Volume IV (Worley et al 
2001)—the last of the series—is a collection of magnitude 
differences for over 10000 systems. 

Since the early 1980s, CHARA has been the leading 
survey group using speckle techniques to measure the 
separation and position angles of double stars (basic 
information for stellar mass determinations). To date, 19 
catalogs with position angles and separations for approx- 
imately 10000 stars have been published (Mason et al 
1998). The group has finished the construction of an 
interferometric array of six 1 m telescopes to resolve 
binaries with angular separations down to 0.2 mas. The 
CHARA array will be fully operational sometime in 2002. 
Progress reports on this array can be found in McAlister 
(2001), Turner et al (2001), Sturmann et al (2001) and ten 
Brummelaar et al (2001). 

Other important surveys—using speckle tech- 
niques—have continued the observation of double stars. 
Recent reports of the Rochester Institute of Technology 
(RIT) survey can be found in Horch et al (2000) and 
Horch et al (2001b). Another important result from this 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


group is related with the magnitude differences for about 
130 pairs (Horch et al 2001a). A summary of the last 4 
years of activity has been presented by Robinson et al 
(2001) while the new camera—called RYTSI—designed 
by the group is described in Horch et al (2001c). Results 
from the Pic du Midi observatory group, obtained with 
the Pupil Interferometry Speckle and Coronograph 
(PISCO) system (Prieur et al 1998), have been published 
by Scardia et al (2000) and Prieur et al (2001). On the other 
hand, angular separations, position angles as well as 
magnitude differences for 606 systems—using a ‘regular’ 
CCD camera—have been reported by Gili and Bonneau 
(2001) and by Lampens e¢ al (2001). 

Mason ef al (2000) have re-analysed the information 
contained in Tycho-2 in attempt to provide basic data for 
double stars. Another revision and re-reduction of the 
Tycho-2 by Fabricius et al (2002) has resulted in the dis- 
covery of over 13000 new doubles mostly with separa- 
tion between 0.3 and 1 arcsec. A proper combination with 
WDS data has permitted the compilation of the Tycho 
Double Star Catalogue (TDSC) which has more than 
100000 entries. The TDSC is available from the CDS. 


Parallaxes 

Within the astrometry context, the word parallax is 
almost always associated with trigonometric parallaxes; 
that is, a direct way of determing stellar distances. The 
method is limited to distances less than 100 pc. 

The history of the parallax determinations—like that 
of the astrometric catalogs—is very rich. It is said, for 
example, that the first attempt to get the parallax of a star 
was made by Tycho Brahe. Since he could not get any 
reasonable value he concluded that either (a) the Earth 
was at rest in the center of the universe or (b) the stars 
were too far away to make it possible to measure their 
parallaxes. Since Brahe did not believe the stars could 
possible be so far away, he chose the first option. This 
result allowed him to confirm that Copernicus was 
absolutely wrong in his heliocentric theory of the solar 
system. 

As already mentioned, it was Bessel who—in 1838— 
detemined the first triginometric parallax of 61 Cygni. By 
1890 there were about 30 stars whose parallaxes were 
known to an accuracy of +0.05 arcsec (Hoffleit 1992). 

By the end of the 19th century—with the adoption of 
the photographic plate as a detector— the determination 
of trigonometric parallaxes became a standard research 
program at some of the most important observatories. In 
this sense, in 1903, Frank Schlesinger—known as ‘the 
father of modern astrometry’ (Hoffleit 1992)—started at 
the Yerkes Observatory one of the outstanding projects of 
those days (see Schlesinger 1910). Other institutions such 
as McCormick, Allegheny, Sproul, Greenwich, Cape, 
Boschha and Stockholm soon initiated similar projects 
while Lick Observatory and the USNO Flagstaff Station 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


started later using their reflecting telescope, and both 
extended the determinations to fainter stars. 

Most of the work on the determination of trigono- 
metric parallaxes during the photographic era was sum- 
marized in the different editions of the General 
Catalogue of Trigonometric Parallaxes—better known as 
the Yale Parallax Catalogue (YPC). The first edition of the 
series was prepared by Schlesinger (1924) and 
Schlesinger and Jenkins (1935). The third edition was 
published by Jenkins (1952), followed by her 1963 sup- 
plement. The fourth edition of the YPC, the last one of 
the series, was prepared by van Altena et al (1995). It lists 
trigonometric parallaxes for 8112 stars including photo- 
graphic as well as CCD determinations. 

Once the CCD became available for scientific use, 
different programs aimed at the determination of 
trigonometric parallaxes were started. Two of the first 
reports using CCD techniques are those by Monet (1981) 
and Monet and Dahn (1983). Fortunately, trigonometric 
parallax determinations were also made in the southern 
hemisphere during the early stage of the CCD technique 
era (see Anguita and Ruiz 1988). 

Today, because of the current need of astronomy in 
surveying and cataloging the solar neighborhood, near- 
by stars have gained a new interest and so new distances 
are being determined. From detailed studies of single 
stars to hemispheric surveys, new results are published 
almost every year. Among the single-star results we can 
mention new insights about Proxima Centauri (our near- 
est neighbor, discovered by R. Innes in 1915) and 
Barnard’s Star by Benedict et al (1999); even some evi- 
dence for a companion to Proxima Centauri has been 
mentioned (see Schultz et al 1998). Also in the single-star 
category, it is worth mentioning that a field star that may 
be the nearest M9 dwarf to the Sun has been identified 
(Deacon and Hambl 2001). Probably one of the most 
important results (mainly for the consequences it will 
have) is the determination of the absolute parallax and 
relative proper motion of RR Lyrae, a distance scale cali- 
brator, by Benedict et al (2002). 

The different searches for nearby stars have also 
reported new results. Among them a survey aimed at the 
identification of brown dwarfs within 8 pc of the Sun 
(Hinz et al 2002) has revealed no new stellar companions 
at wide separations; this program is making use of 
already existing first-epoch images which are combined 
with new J-band observations. 

A search oriented to finding the youngest and near- 
est (d<60 pc) stars to Earth (using x-ray information as 
well as astrometric data from Hipparcos and Tycho) is 
under way by Song et al (2001). The final goal of the pro- 
ject is the detection of giant planets. The observations 
are being carried out from Lick observatory for the 
northen targets and from Siding Spring Observatory in 
the south. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


A detailed analysis of the Automatic Plate 
Measuring (APM) measurements of the UK Schmidt 
Telescope plates by Scholz et al (2002) has resulted in the 
discovery of previously unknown bright (12<R<15) high 
proper motion stars; among them, there are some nearby 
(d<25 pc) stars. 

In the southern hemisphere the Research 
Consortium on Nearby Stars (RECONS) is engaged in 
the discovery of new solar neighbors. A large parallax 
determination program being carried out at CTIO (CTIO 
Parallax Investigation, CTIOPI) has revealed several 
nearby stars; one of them is located at 5.5 pe (see Henry 
et al 2001, Jao et al 2001). An astrometric survey of com- 
panions to nearby stars, with observing telescopes to be 
located in both hemispheres, is under consideration 
(Kaplan et al 2001). 

While in the past most of the parallaxes were deter- 
mined by ground-based telescopes, the largest number of 
today’s parallaxes are being determined by space satel- 
lites. Hipparcos provided almost 120000 determinations 
at the accuracy level of 1 mas and SIM and GAIA are 
expected to furnish a much larger body of data (includ- 
ing parallaxes). In this sense, GAIA for instance will pro- 
vide astrometric data at the 10 mas level accuracy at 
V=15 (Torra et al 2001) and accurate positions and radial 
velocities for as much as 1% of the stellar population of 
the Galaxy (Perryman et al 2001). It is obvious that the 
future of stellar parallaxes—and astrometry in general— 
looks very promising. 


Other projects 

Now that CCDs have became the standard detectors for 
astronomy, it is probably time to change the old classifi- 
cation of astronomical instruments. The most striking 
case is with meridian circles (MCs). From their first use 
in astronomy until some years ago, stars were observed 
by eye (one at a time) when they crossed the meridian. 
The next step in the development of observing tech- 
niques was to replace the human eye by photomultiplier 
tubes. Now that CCDs have been attached to most of the 
MCs around the world, the observing procedure has 
been replaced by the drift scanning mode. This approach 
allows one to obtain strips from a few minutes up to 
some hours long in right ascension (Muifios 2002) by 
some 10-20 arcmin (depending on the size and type of 
CCD chip) in declination. This data set could easily be 
compared with that from a normal astrographic tele- 
scope. The observations are then reduced using any ref- 
erence catalog. 

Also, some MCs have been engaged in the observa- 
tion of objects that were traditionally observed by astro- 
graph-type telescopes: minor planets (probably this could 
be interpreted as a ‘return to the roots’ since Ceres was 
discovered by Piazzi observing with an MC). Among 
these observations we can mention the ones included in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the different Carlsberg Meridian Circle Catalogues or 
those observed by the San Fernando Automatic Meridian 
Circle—located in San Juan, Argentina, since 1996. 
Probably the most comprehensive report in this sense is 
the one by Stone (2000) which includes more than 56 000 
positions (in the ICRF) for 1940 asteroids. 

The Bordeaux Automated Meridian Circle has just 
released the M2000 catalog (Rapaport et al 2001), which 
lists over two million stars down to the magnitude limit 
16.3. The declination band observed is coincident with 
the Carte du Ciel observed at Bordeaux. The median 
internal standard error in position is on the order of 35 
mas, while an external comparison with Hipparcos and 
Tycho-2 catalogs yields an estimate better than 40 mas. 

The San Fernando Automated Meridian Circle 
(equipped with a CCD since December 1999) is engaged 
in the observation of part of the southern sky to a limit 
around 16th V magnitude. The project is to observe from 
+3° to -60°. Until now approximately 30% has been com- 
pleted. The strips (ranging from 20 min up to 3 h long in 
right ascension by 18 arcmin in declination) are being 
reduced using Tycho-2 as a reference frame (Muifios and 
Mallamaci 2002). The observations are expected to be fin- 
ished sometime during 2005. 

The MC of the Abrahéo de Moraes Observatory 
(near Valinhos, Brazil) has been involved in miscella- 
neous projects. Among them, it is important to mention 
the extension of the ICRF down to the 15th V magnitude 
(Camargo et al 2001). This project includes more than 
44000 stars located around some extragalactic radio 
sources. This instrument has also been used in the deter- 
mination of positions for proper motion determination in 
southern star-forming regions (Teixeira et al 2000). 

Another important catalog completed during 2000 
was prepared at the Nikolaev Astronomical Observatory. 
The observations were made with the axial meridian cir- 
cle (AMC). The catalog—available from the web—lists 
over 14000 stars and was reduced using USNO-A2.0 as a 
reference frame. The AMC was put in operation in 1995 
(see Pinigin et al 1995) and since then it has been involved 
in observations for different projects (see Kovalchuk et al 
1997, and Tang et al 2000). 

Astrolabes have also taken part in many surveys. 
Over the last 20-25 years a number of improvements in 
the instruments have been introduced, one example 
being the Photoelectric Astrolabe II (PA II) developed in 
China (Luo and Li 1986). Recent results obtained with 
this new instrument have been published by Manrique et 
al (1999). Other smaller astrometric compilations—using 
photoelectric astrolabes—have been reported by Hui and 
Rui (2002) and Martin et al (1999). Other surveys, 
although astrometric in their scope, were actually 
designed and oriented to improve astrometric parame- 
ters of astrophysical objects. Lépez and Girard (1990), for 
example, improved the positions of over 1000 variable 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


stars. For this project, the authors measured the first- 
epoch plates of the SPM. 

Another project aimed at the improvement of posi- 
tions and proper motions for variable stars is the 
Astrometric Catalogue of Variable Stars (ACVS) by 
Gulyaev and Ashimbaeva (1997). For this study, the 
authors took the stars listed in the GCVS and the NSV 
and checked them against those in the 4 Million 
Catalogue (Gulyaev and Nesterov 1992). Using the find- 
ing charts recommended by the GCVS and NSV approx- 
imately 21500 positive cross-identifications were made. 

The SDSS (Gunn et al 1998) is a large-scale project 
designed to produce optical photometry and positions 
for stars down to magnitude 22 in approximately one- 
quarter of the sky centered on the north galactic cap. In 
addition, spectra of about one million galaxies, 100 000 
quasars and 50 000 stars will be obtained. This ‘non- 
astrometric’ survey should produce an enormous quan- 
tity of high-quality positions, which, when compared 
with the first epoch of the POSS, will also result in prop- 
er motions. Observations for this project started in 1999 
and are projected to last for 5 years. 

Besides the optical wavelength projects mentioned 
in the previous paragraph, some radio-wavelength- 
based proposals are also making an important contribu- 
tion to astrometry. Among them, one such proposal, very 
important because of its global scope, is VERA (VLBI 
Exploration of Radio Astrometry), which is sponsored by 
the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan and a 
group of Japanese universities. The project is aimed at 
the determination of positions, parallaxes and proper 
motions of maser sources in the whole Galaxy (see 
Honma et al 2000). 


The new millennium 

Astronomy in general and astrometry in particular are 
being favored with the large databases currently in use 
and those to come in the very near future. This new way 
of doing astrometry or extracting data for re-analysis 
includes the use of facilities such as Aladin Sky Atlas 
(CDS), Astrovirtel, Astrogrid (the UK _ Virtual 
Observatory), the SuperCOSMOS Sky Survey or the 
announced Astrophysical Virtual Observatory (AVO) 
and the National Virtual Observatory (NVO), among 
others. The enormous power of these tools—when fully 
available for public and general use—will allow the han- 
dling of different very large databases. Some of the facil- 
ities—such as VizieR or SIMBAD—also permit the visu- 
alization of all the data (coordinates, magnitude, proper 
motion, etc.) stored for a given object. 

A number of sources will drastically change the way 
the new astrometric surveys will be performed in the 
years to come. Among them are the already existing 
means to extract images (frames) from the digitization of 
the major photographic surveys (POSS I, POSS II, etc.)— 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


known as Digitized Sky Survey (DSS)—added to the new 
“bank of images’ such as EIS, the MISAO project, or the 
Maria Mitchel Observatory (MMO). Another alternative 
place for images obtained from the digitization of major 
photographic surveys is the USNO Flagstaff Station (see 
Levine and Monet 2000). With all this material at the 
reach of our fingertips, through the web, it will not 
always be necessary really to have telescopes (big or 
small) to undertake outstanding astrometrically-oriented 
research programs. A number of projects, making use of 
these new possibilities, are currently underway. 

Today the DSS has proved to be one of the most 
extensive bank of images in use. From the confirmation 
of supernovas (Evans ef al 2001) to the identification of 
millions of galaxies (Paturel et al 2000), the DSS allows 
one to undertake almost any project. As an astrometric 
example of this possibility, we can mention the improve- 
ment of positions of ICRF sources (Da Silva Neto ef al 
2000) and almost three thousand objects listed in the 
Second Byurakan Survey of Blue Compact Galaxies 
(Bicay et al 2000). Also, the combination of DSS frames of 
different epochs or the blinking between DSS images 
with those from other surveys (such as the ones available 
in the MISAO image bank or those from SkyMorph) 
allows the identification of high proper motion stars (see 
Scholz et al 2001). Another possible way of locating ‘miss- 
ing’ high proper motion stars is the combination of dif- 
ferent surveys; a project using this approach is being 
developed by Gould and Salim (2001). 

However, not only stellar objects can be included in 
the search of database compilations; non-stellar objects— 
such as minor planets and comets—are also being con- 
sidered and a number of precovery positions have been 
submitted to the MPC, thus improving the determination 
of orbital parameters (for a detailed project in this sense 
see Boattini et al 2001). In addition, those frames obtained 
by some of the most important minor planets (NEOs in 
particular) searches, such as LINEAR, NEAT and 
LONEOS, are also appropriate for use in, for example, 
proper motion determinations. These frames are easily 
accessible through the SkyMorph facilities. 

There are also a number of research programs mak- 
ing use of the already existing high-quality astrometric 
catalogs mainly Hipparcos and Tycho-2. These databases 
have been used in—among other projects—the study of 
proper motions of open clusters (Dias et al 2001) and ina 
star-forming complex (Belikov et al 2002). In some other 
cases, the high accuracy of these compilations (mainly 
Tycho-2) has allowed the determination of ‘astrometric 
radial velocities’ for stellar members of open clusters (see 
Masden et al 2002). The articles, as well as the web 
addresses, mentioned in this section are only a small (and 
far from complete) example of what could be done by 
using the material available in the major data centers. 
However, the potentialities of these new tools have not 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


yet been exploited in all of their capabilities; once this 
happens, there will be a big impact in the way astrometry 
will carry out the new astrometric surveys from that 
moment on. 

These new possibilities, plus the even larger body of 
data to be furnished by the coming space missions 
(GAIA, SIM, etc.) planned for the years ahead, will 
change the way the astrometric surveys of the near 
future will be done. They will be much easier and—at the 
same time—much more complicated to develop: easy 
because simply with the access to the web it will be pos- 
sible to extract many megabytes of information; compli- 
cated, because it will require not only larger computer 
facilities to handle that amount of data properly but also 
(and probably more important), new concepts in com- 
puter technology (see Longo et al 2001). When this hap- 
pens, astrometry will have the opportunity to grow and 
to expand into new and unexpected domains. 

However, of course, not only astrometry will 
change; in fact, the most significant change will be in the 
way we see and understand the universe around us. 


Appendix 

Summary of Acronyms 

A large number of acronyms are currently being used to 
refer to the astrometric surveys, instruments and institu- 
tions engaged in astrometric projects. Below is a summa- 
ry of acronyms mentioned in the present work, and oth- 
ers found elsewhere in the current relevant literature. 


2MASS Two-Micron All Sky Survey 

AC Astrographic Catalogue 

ACRS Astrographic Catalogue Reference Stars 

ACT Astrographic Catalogue and Tycho 

ACVS Astrometric Catalogue of Variable Stars 

AGK Astronomisches Gesselschaft Katalog 

APS Automated Plate Scanner 

AVO Astrophysical Virtual Observatory 

BD Bonner Durchmusterung 

CAMC Carlsberg Automatic Meridian Circle 

CCD Charge-coupled device 

CDS Centre de données astronomiques de 
Strasbourg 

CHARA Center for High Angular Resolution 
Astronomy 

CoD Cérdoba Durchmusterung 

CPC2 Second Cape Photographic Catalogue 

CPD Cape Photographic 

CTIO Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory 

CTIOPI CTIO Parallax Investigation 

DENIS Deep Near-Infrared Survey 

DSS Digitized Sky Survey 

EIS ESO Imaging Survey 

ESA European Space Agency 

ESO Europen Southern Observatory 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


FAME Full-Sky Astrometric Mapping Explorer 
FK Fundamental Katalogs 


FOCAT-S Photographic Catalogue—South 

GAIA Global Astrometric Interferometer for 
Astrophysics 

GC General Catalogue 

GCVS General Catalogue of Variable Stars 

GSC Guide Star Catalogue 

HDEC Henry Draper Extension Charts 

HDF Hubble Deep Field 

HIPPARCOS High Precision Parallax Collecting 
Satellite 

HST Hubble Space Telescope 

IAU International Astronomical Union 

ICRF International Celestial Reference Frame 

ICRS International Celestial Reference System 

LHS Luyten Half Second 

LINEAR Lincoln Near Earth Asteroid Research 

LONEOS Lowell Observatory NEO Search 


LTT Luyten Two Tenths 


MISAO Multitudinous Image-Based Sky-Survey 
and Accumulative Observations 

NASA National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration 

NEA Near-Earth asteroid 

NEAT Near-Earth asteroid tracking 

NEO Near-Earth object 

NLIT New Luyten Two Tenths 

NOAO National Optical Astronomical 
Observatories 

NPM Northern Proper Motion Survey 

NSV New Catalogue of Suspected Variable Stars 

NTT New Technology Telescope 

NVO National Virtual Observatory 

OAFA Observatorio Astronémico Félix Aguilar 

PGC Preliminary General Catalogue 

PISCO Pupil Interferometry Speckle and 
Coronograph 

POSS Palomar Observatory Sky Survey 

PPM Positions and proper motions 

RECONS Research Consortium on Nearby Stars 

RIT Rochester Institute of Technology 

ROA Real Instituto y Observatorio de la 
Armada 

SAOC Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 
Catalogue 

SDSS Sloan Digital Sky Survey 

SIM Space Interferometry Mission 

SIMBAD Set of Identifications, Measurements 
Bibliography for Astronomical Data 

SPM Southern Proper Motion Survey 

SRS Southern Reference System 

TAC Twin Astrograph Catalogue 

TPMC Tokyo Photoelectric Meridian Circle 

TRC Tycho Reference Catalogue 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


UCAC-S United States Naval Observatory CCD 
Astrograph Catalogue—South 

UKST United Kingdom Schmidt Telescope 

USNO United States Naval Observatory 

VERA VLBI Exploration of Radio Astrometry 

VLBI very-long-baseline-interferometry 


VLT very large telescope 


WEBDA WEB Database of Open Clusters 
WDS Washington Double Star Catalogue 
WIYN Wisconsin Indiana Yale NOAO 
wocs WIYN Open Cluster Studies 

YPC Yale Parallax Catalogue 
Bibliography 


Anguita C and Ruiz M T 1988 Southern CCD Parallax 
Program Astron. Soc. Pac. Conf. Ser. 1 344-5 

Assafin M, et al 2001 Investigation of USNO-A2.0 
Catalogue positions Astrophys. J. 552 380-5 

Baumgardt H, Dettbarn C and Wielen R 2000 Absolute 
proper motions of open clusters. I. Observational 
data Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 146 251-8 

Belikov AN, et al 2002 Study of the Per OB2 star-forming 
complex. I. The Compiled Catalogue of kinematic 
and photometric data Astron. Astrophys. 348 145-54 

Benedict G EF et al 1999 Interferometric astrometry of 
Proxima Centauri and Barnard’s Star using Hubble 
Space Telescope Fine Guidance Sensor 3: detection 
limits for substellar companions Astron. J. 118 
1086-100 

— 2002 Astrometry with the Hubble Space Telescope: 
a parallax of the fundamental distance calibrator RR 
Lyrae Astron. J. 123 474-84 

Bicay M D, et al 2000 Accurate optical positions for 2978 
objects from the Second Byurakan Survey (SBS) 
with the Digitized Sky Survey Astron. Astrophys. 
Suppl. Ser. 147 169-73 

Boattini A, et al 2001 The Arcetri NEO Precovery 
Program Astron. Astrophys. 375 293-307 

Boss B 1937 General Catalogue of 33342 Stars for the Epoch 
1950 (Carnegie Institution of Washington Publ. 486) 

Camargo J, et al 2001 Extension of the ICRF for selected 
areas down to the 15th magnitude Astron. Astrophys. 
375 308-18 

Corbin T and Urban S 1990 Faint reference stars IAU 
Symposium 141, Inertial Coordinate System on the Sky 
ed J Lieske and V Abalakin (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 
433-42 

Da Silva Neto D, et al 2000 Optical positions for a sample 
of ICRF sources Astron. J. 119 1470-79 

Deacon N and Hambl N 2001 The trigonometric parallax 
of DENIS-P J104814.7-395606.1 Astron. Astrophys. 
380 148-50 

Dias W, Lépine J and Alesi B 2001 Proper motions of 
open clusters within 1 kpc based on the TYCHO2 
Catalogue Astron. Astrophys. 367 441-7 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dieckvoss W 1971 The AGK3, a basis for general (north- 
ern) reference catalog of positions and proper 
motions Conference of Photographic Astrometric 
Technique ed H Eichhorn (Washington, DC: NASA) 
pp 161-7 

Eichhorn H 1974 Astronomy of Star Positions (New York: 
Ungar) 

—— 1992 Star catalogs, historic The Astronomy and 
Astrophysics Encyclopedia ed S P Maran (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 661-3 

ESA 1997a The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues SP-1200 

—— 1997b Hipparcos Venice '97 SP-402 

Evans R, et al 2001 Supernova 2001du in NGC 1365 IAU 
Circular 7690 

Fabricius C, et al 2002 The Tycho double star catalog 
Astron. Astrophys. 384 180-9 

Fallon F and Hoffleit D 1983 Catalogue of the positions 
and proper-motions of stars between declinations 
—60° and —70° Trans. Yale Univ. Obs. 32 (2) 

Feissel M and Mignard F 1998 The adoption of ICRS on 1 
January 1998: meaning and consequences Astron. 
Astrophys. 331 L33-6 

Giclas H, Burham R Jr and Thomas N 1971 Lowell Proper 
Motion Survey (Northern Hemisphere). The G Numbered 
Stars (Flagstaff, AZ: Lowell Observatory) pp 1-175 

Gili R and Bonneau D 2001 CCD measurements of visu- 
al double stars made with the 74 cm and 50 cm 
refractors of the Nice Observatory (2nd series) 
Astron. Astrophys. 378 954-7 

Gingerich O 1992 The Great Copernicus Chase and Other 
Adventures in Astronomical History (Massachusetts: 
Sky Publishing Corporation and Cambridge 
University Press) pp 57-62 

Gould A and Salim S 2001 Luyten High Proper Motion 
Stars in 2MASS and SDSS Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 
1494 

Gulyaev A and Ashimbaeva N 1997 ACVS: an astromet- 
ric catalog of variable stars Astron. Rep. 41 215-8 

Gulyaev A and Nesterov V 1992 On the 4 Million Star 
Catalogue (in Russian) (Moscow: Moscow 
University Press) pp 1-7 

Gunn J, et al 1998 The Sloan Digital Sky Survey 
Photometric Camera Astron. J. 116 3040-81 

Hambly N C, et al 2001 The SuperCOSMOS Sky 
Survey—III. Astrometry Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
346 1315-27 

Haramundanis K 1966 Experience of the Smithsonian 
Astrophysical Observatory in the construction and 
use of star catalogues Astron. J. 72 588-96 

Hartkopf W, Mason B and Worley C 2001a The 2001 US 
Naval Observatory Double Star CD-ROM. II. The 
Fifth Catalogue of Orbits of Visual Binary Stars 
Astron. J. 122 3472-9 

Hartkopf W, McAlister H and Mason B 2001b The 2001 
US Naval Observatory Double Star CD-ROM. III. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The Third Catalogue of Interferometric Measure- 
ments of Binary Stars Astron. J. 122 3480-1 

Henry T J, et al 2001 RECONS discoveries of new nearby 
stars Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 1495 

Hinz J L, et al 2002 A near-infrared, wide-field, proper- 
motion search for brown dwarfs Astron. J. 123 
2027-32 

Hoffleit D 1992 Astronomy at Yale 1701-1968 Mem. 
Connecticut Acad. Arts Sci. 32 115 

Hog E et al 2000 The Tycho-2 catalogue of the 2.5 million 
brightest stars Astron. Astrophys. 355 L27-30 

Honma M, Kawaguchi N and Sasao T 2000 Science with 
VERA: VLBI exploration of radio astrometry Proc. 
SPIE 4015 624-31 

Horch E, Franz O and Ninkov Z 2000 CCD speckle obser- 
vations of binary stars from the southern hemi- 
sphere. II. Measures from the Lowell-Tololo 
Telescope during 1999 Astron. J. 120 2638-48 

Horch E, Ninkov Z and Franz O 2001la CCD speckle 
observations of binary stars from the southern 
hemisphere. III. Differential photometry Astron. J. 
121 1583-96 

Horch E, et al 2001b Speckle interferometry of southern 
stars. II. Measures from the CASLEO 2.15 meter 
telescope, 1995 1996 Astron. J. 121 1597-606 

—— 2001c RYTSI: a new way to do speckle imaging Bull. 
Am. Astron. Soc. 33 790-1 

Hui H and Rui W 2002 Optical positions of 55 radio stars 
from astrolabe observations from the Yunnan 
Observatory Astron. Astrophys. 383 1062-6 

Jaschek C 1989 Data in Astronomy (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 52-4 

Jao W et al 2001 The RECONS effort to characterize the 
highest proper motion stars Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 
1494 

Jenkins L 1952 General Catalogue of Trigonometric Stellar 
Parallaxes (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Observatory) 

Jones B, Hanson R and Klemola A 2000 Lick Northern 
Proper Motion Program: NPM2 Bull. Am. Astron. 
Soc. 32 759 

Kaplan I, Koerner D and Henry T 2001 An astrometric 
survey of companions to nearby stars Bull. Am. 
Astron. Soc. 33 1495 

Klemola A, Jones B and Hanson R 1987 Lick Northern 
Proper Motions Program. I. Goals, organizations, 
and methods Astron. J. 94 501-15 

Kovalchuk A, et al 1997 First steps to re-observation of 
the HIPPARCOS/TYCHO star by ground-based 
automatic AMCs ESA SP 402 pp 139-41 

Lampens P et al 2001 CCD photometry and astrometry 
for visual double and multiple stars of the HIPPAR- 
COS catalogue III. CCD photometry and differential 
astrometry for 253 southern ‘intermediate’ systems 
Astron. Astrophys. 374 132-50 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lasker B, et al 1990 The Guide Star Catalogue. I. 
Astronomical Foundation and Image Processing 
Astron. J. 99 2019-58 

Levine S and Monet D 2000 The USNO PMM Integrated 
Image and Catalogue Arch. Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 32 
1596 

Longo G, et al 2001 Advanced data mining tools for 
exploring large astronomical databases Proc. SPIE 
4477 61-75 

Lopez C and Girard T 1990 Improved positions of vari- 
able and suspected variable stars south of -67 
degrees Publ. Astron. Soc Pac. 102 1018-38 

Luo D and Li D 1986 Photoelectric astrolabe and astro- 
labe star catalogues [AU Symposium 109, Astrometric 
Techniques ed H Eichhorn and R_ Leacock 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) pp 375-7 

Luyten W 1963 Proper motion surveys Basic Astronomical 
Data ed K. Aa. Strand (Chicago, IL: Chicago 
University Press) pp 46-54 

—— 1970 The Bruce and Palomar Schmidt Proper 
Morions Survey IAU Colloquium 7, Proper Motions ed 
W Luyten (Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota) pp 59-63 

Ma C, et al 1998 The international celestial reference 

frame as realized by very long baseline interferom- 

etry Astron. J. 116 516-46 

Manrique W, et al 1999 Second San Juan Photoelectric 

Astrolabe Catalogue Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 

136 1-5 

Martin V, et al 1999 Absolute declinations with the pho- 

toelectric astrolabe at Calern Observatory (OCA) 

Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 137 269-72 

Masden S, Dravins D and Lindegren L 2002 Astrometric 
radial velocities. II]. Hipparcos measurements of 
nearby star clusters and associations Astron. 
Astrophys. 381 446-63 

Mason B, et al 1998 ICCD Speckle observations of binary 

stars. XIX. An astrometric/spectroscopic survey of 

O stars Astron. J. 115 821-47 

Mason B, et al 2000 Double stars in the Tycho-2 Catalogue 

Astron. J. 120 3244-9 

Mason B, et al 2001 The 2001 US Naval Observatory 

Double Star CD-ROM. I. The Washington Double 

Star Catalogue Astron. J. 122 3466-71 

McAlister H 2001 Science with the CHARA array Bull. 

Am. Astron. Soc. 33 859 

Momany Y, et al 2001 ESO imaging survey Pre-FLAMES 

survey: observations of selected stellar fields Astron. 

Astrophys. 379 436-52 

Monet D 1981 Precision astrometry and the Kitt 
Peak National Observatory KPNO 4-m charge- 
coupled device CCD parallax program Proc. SPIE 
290 208-14 

Monet D G 2000 Progress report on the USNO-B 
Catalogue Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 32 1596 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Monet D and Dahn C 1983 CCD astrometry. I—prelimi- 

nary results from the KPNO 4-m CCD parallax pro- 

gram Astron. ]. 88 1489-507 

Monet, D G et al 1998 USNO-A2.0 (Washington, DC: US 

Naval Observatory) 

Morgan H R 1952 Catalogue of 5268 standard stars, 

based on the normal system N30. Astron. Pap. Am. 

Ephemer. and Naut. Alm. 13 (3) 190-231 

Muifios J L 2002 Private communication 

Muifios J L and Mallamaci C C 2002 Private communica- 
tion 

Paturel G, et al 2000 An image database. II. Automatic 
extraction for millions of galaxies Astron. Astrophys. 
146 19-29 

Perryman M A, et al 2001 GAIA: composition, formation 
and evolution of the Galaxy Astron. Astrophys. 369 
339-63 

Platais I, et al 1998 The Southern Proper Motion Program. 
II. A catalog at the south galactic pole Astron. J. 116 
2556-64 

Platais I, Kozhurina-Platais V and Girard T 2001la WIYN 
Open Cluster Study: astrometric membership of the 
a Car open cluster Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 1387 

Platais I, et al 2001b Preliminary SPM catalog of positions in 
the southern hemisphere Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 1189 

—— 2001c WIYN Open Cluster Study. VII. NGC 2451A 
and the Hipparcos distance scale Astron. J. 122 
1486-99 

Pinigin G, et al 1995 The axial meridian circle of the 
Nikolaev Astronomical Observatory Astron. 
Astrophys. Trans. 8 161-3. 

Prieur J.-L, et al 1998 The ‘Pisco’ speckle camera at Pic du 
Midi Observatory Exp. Astron. 8 297-315 

—— 2001 Speckle observations of binary systems mea- 
sured by Hipparcos Astron. Astrophys. 367 865-75 

Rapaport M, et al 2001 M2000: an astrometric catalog in 
the Bordeaux Carte du Ciel zone +11degr <= delta 
<= +18degr Astron. Astrophys. 376 325-32 

Robinson §, et al 2001 Four years of speckle observing 
at the WIYN observatory Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 
849 

Roeser S and Bastian U 1993 The final PPM Star 
Catalogue for both hemispheres Bull. Inform. CDS 
421-16 

Roeser S, Bastian U and Kuzmin A 1994 PPM Star 
Catalogue: the 90,000 Stars Supplement Astron. 
Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 105 301-3 

Sanner J and Geffert M 2001 The IMF of open star clus- 
ters with Tycho-2 Astron. Astrophys. 370 87-99 

Scardia M, et al 2000 Speckle observations of double stars 
with PISCO at Pic du Midi: measurements in 1998 
Astron. Astrophys. 131 561-9 

Schlesinger F 1910 Photographic determinations of stel- 

lar parallax made with the Yerkes Refractor 

Astrophys. J. 32 372-87 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


11 


Astrometric Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


—— 1924 General Catalogue of Stellar Parallaxes (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Observatory) 

Schlesinger F and Jenkins L 1935 General Catalogue of 
Stellar Parallaxes, 2nd ed (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Observatory) 

Schlesinger F, et al 1926 Catalogue of 5833 stars —2° to +1° 
Trans. Yale Univ. Obs. 5 

Scholz R-D, Meusinger H and Jahreiss H 2001 Search for 
nearby stars among proper motion stars selected by 
optical-to-infrared photometry. I. Discovery of LHS 
2090 at spectroscopy distance of d ~ 6 pc. Astron. 
Astrophys. 374 L12-5 

Scholz R-D, et al 2002 New nearby stars among bright 
APM high proper motion stars Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 329 109-14 

Schultz A B, et al 1998 A possible companion to Proxima 
Centauri Astron. J. 115 345 

Song I, et al 2001 Searching for young nearby stars Bull. 
Am. Astron. Soc. 33 914 

Stone R C 2000 Accurate FASTT positions and magni- 
tudes of asteroids: 1997-1999 observations Astron. J. 
120 2708-20 

Sturmann L, ef al 2001 Testing the telescopes of the 
CHARA array Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 876 

Tang Z, et al 2000 Determination of optical positions for 
extragalactic radio sources under the collaboration 
between SHAO and NAO Proc. IAU Colloquium 180 
(Washington, DC) pp 57-60 

Teixeira R, et al 2000 Proper motions of pre-main 
sequence stars in southern star-forming regions 
Astron. Astrophys. 361 1143-51 

ten Brummelaar T et al 2001 Commissioning observations 
for the CHARA Array Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 877 

Torra J, et al 2001 The GAIA mission: a stereoscopic and 
kinematic census of our Galaxy ESA SP-459 pp 
645-8 

Turner N H, et al 2001 The CHARA array control system 
Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 876 

Urban S, Corbin T and Wycoff G 1998 The ACT Reference 
Catalogue Astron. J. 115 2161-66 

Urban S, et al 2001 Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 1494 

van Altena W 2002 Private communication 

van Altena W, Lee J and Hoffleit D 1995 The General 
Catalogue of Trogonometric Parallaxes 4th ed (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Observatory) 

Viateau B, et al 1999 The Bordeaux and Valinhos CCD 
meridian circles Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 134 
173-186 

Warren W 1992 Star catalogs and surveys The Astronomy 
and Astrophysics Encyclopedia ed S P Maran 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 655-61 

Winter L and Holdenried E 2001 Measuring the AGK2 
Survey with the Modified StarScan measuring 
machine at the USNO Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 32 
1596 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Worley C, Mason B and Wycoff G 2001 The 2001 US 
Naval Observatory Double Star CD-ROM. IV. The 
Photometric Magnitude Difference Catalogue 
Astron. J. 122 3482-4 

Zacharias N, et al 2000a Comparing Tycho-2 astrometry 
with UCACI Astron. J. 120 1148-52 

— 2000b The First US Naval Observatory CCD 
Astrograph Catalogue Astron. J. 120 2131-47 

—2001 UCAC2: a new high precision catalog of posi- 
tions and proper motions Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 33 
1495 

Zhu Z 2001 Hipparcos proper-motion system with 
respect to SPM 2.0 Publ. Astron. Soc. Jpn. 53 L33-6 


See the appendix for a list of the most common acronyms 
used in the astrometry related projects 


http:/ /www.eso.org /eis / 

http:/ /www.astro.yale.edu/spm/spm2cat/spm2.html 

http:/ /obswww.unige.ch/webda/ 

http: / /ad-usno.navy.mil/wds/ 

http: / /www.chara.gsu.edu /CHARA/ index.html 

http:/ /cdsweb.u-strasbg. fr / cgi-bin / 
qcat?J / A+A/384/180 

http:/ /mypage.goplay.com /noam/amclb.zip 

http:/ /veraserver.mtk.nao.ac.jp/index.html 

http:/ /aladin.u-strasbg.fr 

http:/ /www:stecf.org / astrovirtel / 

http:/ /www.astrogrid.ac.uk/ 

http:/ /www.roe.ac.uk/cosmos/scosmos.html 

http:/ /www.eso.org/ projects /avo/intro.html 

http:/ /wwwssrl.caltech.edu/nvo/ 

http:/ /vizier.u-strasbg.fr/ 

http:/ /simbad.u-strasbg. fr / Simbad 

http: / /stdatu.stsci.edu/dss/ 

http:/ /www.aerith.net/ misao /index.html 

http:/ / www.mmo.org 

http:/ /www.nofs.navy.mil/data/ fchpix / 

http:/ /skys.gsfc.nasa.gov /skymorph/skymorph.html 

http:/ /www.|Lmit.edu/LINEAR/ 

http:/ /neat.jpl.nasa.gov/ 

http:/ /www.lowell.edu/ users /elgb/loneos_disc.html 


According to J McDowell 2002 (Sky Teles. 103 (5), 28), 
NASA managers have recently cancelled the FAME mis- 
sion. 

Carlos E. Lopez 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


12 


Astrometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrometry 


The branch of astronomy dealing with the precise mea- 
surement of the position of astronomical bodies. Many 
problems of astronomy require accurate observations of 
stellar positions. Positions of the brighter stars can be mea- 
sured very accurately in the equatorial system. Fainter 
stars are measured using photographic plates or some 
other imaging device (e.g. a charge-coupled device, or 
CCD) with respect to the brighter stars. The entire stel- 
lar group can then be referred to the positions of known 
external galaxies, which are far enough away to define an 
essentially fixed system. Over relatively short periods of 
time both the bright and faint stars are affected by galactic 
rotation and by their own motions through the Galaxy. The 
most precise stellar positions to date have been obtained 
by the Hippacos satellite. 


See also: astronomy, astrophysics, Hipparcos, universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrometry with Hubble Space 
Telescope 


In 1990 NASA launched the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. In 
addition to cameras and spectrographs usable from the far 
ultraviolet to the near-infrared, the observatory contains 
three white-light INTERFEROMETERS. As part of engineering 
and science support their primary task was telescope 
guiding; to position and hold science targets within the 
science instrument apertures with tolerances approaching 
0.1", equivalent to 100 milliseconds of arc (100 mas). 
Pointing and tracking requires two such fine guidance 
sensors (FGS), leaving the third free for ASTROMETRY. 

The design goal for astrometry with an FGS was 3 mas 
precision over the entire field of regard. When designed 
and built in the early 1980s, The FGS represented an order 
of magnitude improvement over existing ground-based 
techniques. HST launch delays provided sufficient time 
for ground-based techniques to equal and surpass this 
goal. Thus, the post-launch goal was redefined. This goal, 
1 mas precision small-field astrometry, has been achieved, 
but not without significant challenges. 

An HST FGS will remain a competitive astrometric 
tool for faint targets in crowded fields and for faint small- 
separation binaries, until the advent of large-aperture 
ground-based and longer-baseline space-based interfer- 
ometers (see also ASTROMETRY: TELESCOPES AND TECHNIQUES). 

This article describes the science that can be done 
with the FGS and presents some recent science results. 
We outline how these data are modeled, acquired and 
calibrated. We next show how the astrometer, FGS 3, 
works as an interferometer. Finally, we present a guide 
to the literature that provides additional detail for each 
item discussed in this article. 

Astrometry with 1 mas precision is obtainable with 
the HST wide field planetary camera. The techniques are 
similar to those used in ground-based CCD astrometry and 
should be discussed separately. 


The choice of science targets 

The choice of HST astrometry science targets is rightly 
determined by what can be done from the ground. The 
unique capabilities of HST must remain reserved for 
projects demanding them. In this section we summarize 
the strengths of HST astrometry, pointing out a few 
examples of the kinds of objects for which HST and the FGS 
are ideally suited. Since the FGS interferometer offers two 
observational modes, fringe scanning and fringe tracking, 
we divide the remainder of this article by mode at each 
step. 


Fringe scanning: using HST for binary star astrometry 

Four characteristics of a high-resolution (<1”) observing 
technique must be considered when attempting to 
resolve a target BINARY STAR: the source brightness limit, 
the resolving capability, the astrometric accuracy and 
the magnitude difference between the components that 
can be observed. Although all four parameters are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


File : OzTeX: to-from cfgauss, abridged:PandBASTAJ Paper:PROXforAJ Pickles 4.05, by James Mi 
V1: Ra: 14h 31m 22.731s Dee: -62° 36' 44.060" Roll: -0.43° Orient: 160.44° Veh.Roll: 19.56° 

AntiSun: 125° Moon: 52° Plate Roll: 0° Tobs: 96/10/16.979 Tcat: 00/01/01.500 Now: 99/1/25 14:03:17 

T T 


Ta 


sun 54° 
moon 52° 


E 


Figure 1. Field of regard of FGS 3 on the sky at the location of 
the planet search target, Proxima Centauri, on 16 October 1996. 
The position of Proxima Centauri at two epochs is plotted. Also 
shown are the reference stars, relative to which parallax and 
proper motion are obtained. Tick marks are separated by 

1 arcminute. 


interdependent, we provide current limits for each 
characteristic separately in order to illustrate the efficacy 
of HST FGS 3 as an astrometric instrument. 

For binary stars HST FGS 3 observations provide 
results currently unachievable with ground-based tech- 
niques. HST FGS 3 is accurate to 1-3 mas at a resolution 
limit of 15 mas for magnitude differences less than 2 mag. 
It can effectively observe targets to at least V ~ 15. At 
component separations greater than 200 mas, it can bridge 
brightness differences of at least AV = 4 mag, as demon- 
strated by the detection of Gliese 623B. 

Future developments in ground-based interferome- 
ters (See INTERFEROMETRY: GROUND) should improve the accu- 
racy of astrometric measurements and provide better res- 
olution, but will still be limited to relatively bright targets 
and moderate magnitude differences. HST FGS 3 is the 
only high-resolution instrument currently available that 
(a) can provide high-precision astrometry for very close 
binaries, (b) allows relatively faint targets to be observed, 
and (c) can bridge at least moderately large magnitude 
differences between the components in a binary system. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fringe tracking: using HST to obtain parallaxes 

In the absence of distance, astrophysics lacks precision. 
Our demonstrated measurement precision for PARALLAXES 
is 0.5 mas or better, given six epochs of observation 
at maximum parallax factor. Often a parallax target 
is unmeasurable because reference stars are not located 
within the field of view of the measuring device; this is 
especially true for small-format (typically several square 
arcmin) CCD cameras. An FGS provides a large field of 
regard (figure 1), shaped somewhat like a pickle. This 
shape comes from the the pick-off mirror (figure 5) in 
the HST focal plane. Parallax observations are generally 
spaced by six months, during which time, due to HST solar 
array illumination constraints, the FGS field of view rotates 
by 180°. The lens-shaped region (figure 6) in common to 
the two extreme orientations provides a relatively large 
field with short axis = 3.5’ and long axis = 14’. 

FGS 3 has a large dynamic range, able to obtain fringe 
tracking position measures for stars in the magnitude 
range 4 < V < 17. This large dynamic range is provided 
by a neutral density filter that reduces the magnitude of 
bright stars by 5 mag. The unfiltered range is 8.5 < V < 17. 

HST can obtain precise parallaxes for binaries whose 
components are separated 0.03” < p < 1.0". Nearly 
simultaneous fringe scanning and tracking measurements 
provide the component positions relative to reference 
stars, essential in determining the center of mass of a 
system, and thus individual component masses. 

Lastly there is timeliness of result. One no longer need 
wait three to six years for the parallax of astrophysically 
interesting objects. The distance to a_ sufficiently 
interesting and important object can be obtained on the 
same time scale as other astrophysical information. If an 
object or class of objects is interesting now, a theory can be 
tested now. 


Science results 
Science targets have included nearby stars used as probes 
for an extrasolar planet search; stars whose astrophysics 
would be greatly aided by accurate distances; low-mass 
binary stars to define the mass—luminosity relation for the 
lower main sequence; members of the Hyades cluster, key 
to the distance scale; extragalactic objects (QSO) to provide 
an inertial reference frame for Hipparcos; and the epitome 
of crowded fields, an extragalactic cluster, R136 in the 
Large Magellanic Cloud. 

Once again we divide by technique, discussing 
representative results from first fringe scanning then fringe 
tracking. 


Fringe scanning and binary stars 

Fringe scanning science depends on deconvolution and 
the assumption that all objects in the field are point sources. 
For a recent science result we turn to the low-mass binary 
Wolf 1062 = Gl 748, observed in support of a lower 
main sequence mass-—luminosity project. Figure 2 presents 
fringe scans of this binary along the two orthogonal axes of 
FGS 3. Since each observed fringe is a linear superposition 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of two fringes (one for each component star in the binary), 
it is modeled with two identical single star fringes. Their 
placement along the axis and relative amplitudes provide 
separation and brightness differences. Relative separation 
along the two axes provides position angle information. 
Figure 3 shows all the measured separations and position 
angles on the best-fit orbit. The mean absolute difference 
between the observed and computed separations is only 
1.1 mas, and only 0.77° in the position angle. Residual 
vectors for all data points are drawn, but are smaller than 
the points. Perhaps it is even more impressive to realize 
that the box illustrated is only 0.6” in size, so that good 
seeing from the ground would result in a stellar image the 
size of the entire figure. 

Acombination of fringe scanning and fringe tracking 
observations for the low-mass binary L722-22, has yielded 
a relative parallax 7 = 0.1656” + 0.0008” and component 
masses of 0.179 and 0.112 Ms with formal random errors 
for the mass as low as 1.5%. 


Fringe tracking: positions in a reference frame 

Fringe tracking science is primarily that of relating the 
position of a target to positions of stars defining a reference 
frame. Here we discuss a Hyades parallax program and a 
fundamental astrometry project involving HIPPARCOS. 

Trigonometric parallax observations were obtained 
for seven Hyades members in six fields of view. These 
have been analysed along with their proper motions to 
determine the distance to the cluster. Formal uncertainties 
on individual parallaxes average 1 mas. This relatively 
large error is due both to poor spatial distribution and the 
small number of reference stars in each field. Knowledge 
of the convergent point and mean proper motion of the 
Hyades is critical to the derivation of the distance to the 
center of the cluster. Depending on the choice of the 
proper-motion system, the derived cluster center distance 
varies by 9%. Therefore, a full utilization of the HST FGS 
parallaxes awaits the establishment of an accurate and 
consistent proper-motion system. 

Observations of separations of Hipparcos stars from 
extragalactic objects have been made to determine the 
rotation of the Hipparcos instrumental system with respect 
to the ICRS-VLBI reference frame. A determination from 
78 observations yields accuracies of the order of 2 mas rms 
in the coordinate rotational offsets near the mean epoch of 
the HST observations and 2 mas yr! in the coordinate 
rotation rates. The main contributing sources of error 
are HST measurement errors and proper motion errors 
introduced by the three year time difference between the 
mean Hipparcos and HST observational epochs. 


Data modeling 


Our two examples are a binary star for fringe scanning and 
a parallax field for fringe tracking. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Transfer Function 


Residual 
(o) 


-.4 -.2 0 2 
arcsec 


-.4 -.2 0 2 A 
arcsec 


Figure 2. Analysis of the 1995.5712 observation of Wolf 1062. The computed (smoothed full) curves in X (left) and Y (right) represent 
best-fitting linear superpositions of two single-star fringes (dashed curves). The relative displacements of the single-star curves are 
0.0329” + 0.0003” and 0.0862” + 0.0002” along FGS X and Y respectively. They yield separation and position angle, while the relative 
amplitudes of the single-star curves yield a magnitude difference for the binary components. The systematic trends in the curve-fitting 
residuals (bottom panels) are due to imperfect single-star calibrations. Their effect upon the astrometry and photometry of the Wolf 


1062 components is negligible. 


Fringe scanning 
We consider a binary star as the simplest object requiring 
fringe scanning. 

We assume that the fringe produced by a binary star 
is a linear superposition of the fringes produced by two 
single stars. The interferometer response to an actual 
binary star is shown in figure 2. If F(x) is the fringe 
produced by a single star on the x-axis, a binary star should 
be described by 


D(x) =AxX F(x+zy)+ BX F(x +z 4+ Sx) (1) 


where A and B are the relative intensities of the two 
components (constraining A+ B = 1). The zero point 
offset, z., and a component separation, S,, complete 
the model, there being a similar expression for the 
fringe produced along the y-axis. S, and S, yield the 
binary separation, and, once transformed to equatorial 
coordinates, the position angle. We obtain the magnitude 
difference from 


Am = —2.5 x log(A/B). (2) 


If a binary is observed in fringe tracking mode, the 
FGS will lock on an erroneous zero-crossing position 
which is generated by two closely overlapping s-curves. A 
fringe scanning mode observation gives relative positions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the two components. One can determine the relative 
positions with an accuracy and precision of 1 mas, once 
the fringes from the two stars are deconvolved. 


Fringe tracking 

We consider a typical parallax target and associated 
reference stars as an example of fringe tracking. The 
primary science target is ideally surrounded by five to ten 
other stars used as a reference frame relative to which we 
determine position and motion. 

Fringe tracking astrometry is generally a two-step 
process. We first determine the characteristics of the 
reference frame. One of the epochs of observation is 
chosen as the constraint plate. From these data we 
determine the scale and rotation relative to the constraint 
plate for each observation set within a single orbit. Since 
for many of our targets the observation sets span over two 
years, we also include the effects of reference star parallax 
(x) and proper motion (1) 


E=axtby+c— (Py xa t+ py *F) (3) 


n=dxteyt f—(Py*¥m+ py *ft). (4) 


The orientation relative to the celestial sphere is 
obtained from ground-based astrometry. Uncertainties in 
the field orientations are generally 0.03° < € < 0.09°. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ml 
oO 
ae J 
- Tp=1995.86 
oO 
iF 1995.57 5 
px 2 
OOf + 7 
oO 
169) 
O 1996.22 
ee) 
On 
<b cP = 
N 
aa ‘| 
1994.50 i-* (E) 
Ny) 
! l l l l ! 
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 -~0.0 0.1 0.2 


Aacosé (arcsec) 


Figure 3. HST FGS3 measurements of Wolf 1062AB and the orbital path predicted by the derived elements are shown. Three epochs of 
observation and the time of periastron are labelled. Residual vectors for all data points are plotted, but are smaller than the points 


themselves. 


We obtain the parallax factors P, and P, from a JPL Earth 
orbit predictor. Finally, for a rich-enough reference field 
(n > four stars) we constrain Hy = 0 and Xz = 0 for the 
entire reference frame. 

The second step consists of applying the plate 
constants to the measurements of the science target. Plate 
coefficients a, b,..., f are applied as constants, while we 
solve for the science target z and yu in the above equations. 


The astrometer 


The design 

FGS 3 is an interferometer. Interference takes place in 
a prism that has been sliced in half, had a quarter-wave 
retarding coating applied, and then reassembled. Figure 4 
shows one of these Koester prisms. Most of the FGS 
consists of supporting optics used to feed the Koester 
prisms (figure 5). In particular the star selectors walk the 5” 
instantaneous field of view throughout the interferometer 
field of regard shown in figure 1. The output of each face 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(face A and face B) is measured by a PMT. These signals 
are combined ‘en 
~ A+B ©) 
to form a signal, S, that is zero for waves exactly vertically 
incident on the Koester prism’s front face. Tilting the 
wavefront back and forth (equivalent to pointing the 
telescope slightly off, then on target, then slightly off to the 
other side) generates the fringe pattern seen in figure 2. A 
perfect instrument would generate a perfectly symmetric 
fringe pattern. The significant spherical aberration of the 
as-built HST primary mirror, in the presence of internal 
FGS misalignments, produces a signature in the fringe 
which mimics coma. Coma causes decreased modulation 
and multiple peaks and valleys ina fringe. FGS3 produces 
the least complicated fringes over the widest area within 
the field of regard. 
A replacement FGS installed in 1997 contains an 
articulated fold-flat mirror that removes most of the 
internal misalignments. This FGS (FGS ir) produces 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Koesters Prism: Constructive and Destructive Interference 


Incoming 


Wavefront 


Transmitted c”’ 
+ reflected a’ 


Dielectric Interface 


Transmitted a’”’ 
+ reflected c’ 


reflected and transmitted rays depe 


of the emerging beams will depend 
incident wavefront). 


Transmitted rays a" and c" are retarded by 1/4 wavelengths. Reflected 
rays a’ and c’ suffer no retardation by the dielectric interface. 


The difference in the optical path length, and hence the phase of the 


the incident wavefront and determine the degree to which these rays 
constructively or destructively interfere. Thus the relative intensities 


nd upon the inclination angle ‘a’ of 


upon ‘a’ (also called the "tilt" of the 


Figure 4. The heart of the FGS interferometer, the Koester prism. 


nearly perfect fringes and should at a minimum yield 
superior binary star results. FGS 3 will remain in service 
until FGS 1r is fully calibrated in 2000. 


FGS operating modes 
We discuss strategies for obtaining the highest quality 
data possible. Our goal, 1 mas precision small-field 
astrometry, has been achieved, but not without significant 
challenges. These included a mechanically noisy on- 
orbit environment, the self-calibration of FGS 3, and 
significant temporal changes in our instrument. Solutions 
include a denser set of drift check stars for each science 
observation, fine-tuning exposure times, overlapping field 
observations and analyses for calibration, and a continuing 
series of trend-monitoring observations. 

The single greatest contributor to data quality is to 
treat all data aquired in the same orbit as a unit observation, 
e.g. a ‘plate’. 


Fringe scanning 

The target is placed in the center of the ‘pickle’ and the 
star selectors are commanded to move the instantaneous 
field of view across the target star image. This action 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


produces a fringe. In practice 10-30 scans are obtained 
in a reciprocating pattern forwards and back across the 
star. The final fringe results from a reversal, shift and add 
process. We have evidence that over the span of an orbit 
the positions reported by FGS 1 and FGS 2 for the guide 
stars change. This results in a drift-like motion of FGS 
3, the astrometer. Drift can exceed 30 mas over the span 
of 36 min. The x and y drift rates are generally dissimilar 
and the drift is not of constant rate. However, since a single 
scan across a science target requires about 1 min, the drift 
per scan is reduced to less than 1 mas. The reciprocating 
data acquisition strategy is very nearly self-compensating 
for drift. 


Fringe tracking 

For fringe tracking, onboard electronics locate the zero 
crossing between the highest positive and lowest negative 
fringe peak (see figure 2). The position of this zero crossing 
is determined at a 40 Hz rate during an observation time 
ranging between 10 < t < 300s. The median of >2400 
zero crossings provides a robust position estimate. The 
star selectors are used to move the instantaneous field of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aspheric Collimating Mirror 


by 


Star Selector A 
Assembly 


Star Selector B 
Assembly 


Interferometer Assembly 


Positive Doublet 


X-axis Koesters Prism 


Fold Mirror 


PMT Y, 


Beamsplitter 


Y-axis Koesters Prism 


FF3 Articulating 


10 


Fold Mirror 


SON Mirror Assembly (AMA) 


Filter Wheel 


HST Optical Telescope Assembly (OTA) 


( 


Pickoff Mirror 


a 


Secondary Mirror 


Primary Mirror 


—_ 


Figure 5. The optical layout of a fine guidance sensor. 


view from one star to the next in the FGS field of regard 
shown in figure 1. 

Drift is correctable, but imposes additional overhead, 
reducing the time available within an orbit to observe 
the science target. An astrometric observation set must 
contain visits to one or more reference stars, multiple times 
during each observation sequence. Presuming no motion 
intrinsic to all reference and science target stars over a span 
of 40 min, one determines drift and corrects the reference 
frame and target star for this drift. As a result we reduce 
the error budget contribution from drift to less than 1 mas. 
In figure 1, the science target might be observed three 
times during an observing session (single orbit) and each 
reference star twice. 


Astrometric calibration 
The calibration of the fringe scanning mode has as its 
goal the determination of separation and magnitude 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


differences between components of binary stars. As 
discussed earlier, all fringe scanning targets are observed 
near the pickle center. In contrast fringe tracking 
takes place over the entire field of regard. Calibration 
requirements for these two modes of operation are quite 
different. 


Fringe scanning calibration 

The most fundamental calibration for any astrometric 
instrument is to determine the scale in units of the celestial 
sphere. The FGS scale comes from measurements of 
several calibration binary stars frequently observed by 
speckle interferometry with 4 m class telescopes. On 
the basis of these speckle measures, extremely well- 
determined orbital elements have been obtained. These 
binary star orbits yield, for any date of HST FGS 
observation, accurate angular separations of the binary, 
and hence the scale. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1000 
900 
800 
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 


Y (arcsec) 


-600 


-800 -400 -200 


0 200 400 600 800 


X (arcsec) 


Figure 6. The fringe tracking self-calibration of FGS 3. Stars in the cluster M35 were observed at 19 different pointings and rolls of 
HST. The pickle-shaped regions denote the total FGS field of regard. The black dots are stars within the cluster M35. The lens-shaped 


area in the middle shows the field of view for parallax studies. 


Secondary calibration consists of the development 
of a library of suitable single star fringe templates. 
This library is required since fringe morphology weakly 
depends on star color. From a library of templates the 
required number (one for each component of a binary or 
multiple star system) are chosen and fitted to the binary 
star fringe using the least-squares algorithm, GaussFit, 
that allows for errors in both independent and dependent 
variables. 


Fringe tracking calibration 
The optical telescope assembly (OTA) of the HST is 
an aplanatic CASSEGRAIN TELESCOPE of Ritchey—Chrétien 
design. Our initial problem included mapping and 
removing optical distortions whose effect on measured 
positions exceeded 0.5”. There was no existing star field 
with cataloged 1 mas precision astrometry, our desired 
performance goal, to use as a fiducial grid. Our solution 
was to use FGS 3 to calibrate itself. As a result of this 
activity distortions are reduced to better than 2 mas over 
much of the FGS 3 field of regard (figure 1). This model is 
called the optical field angle distortion (OFAD) calibration. 
To describe these distortions we have adopted a 
pre-launch functional form originally developed by the 
instrument builder, the Perkin-Elmer Corporation. These 
distortions can be described (and modeled to the level of 
one millisecond of arc) by the two-dimensional fifth-order 
polynomials 


x! = 9 + GyoxX + ALY + Gy9X7 + dgny? + ayxXY + A3gx (x7 + y?) 
+ ay x(x* — y*) + arpy(y? — x7) + ao3y(? + x”) 

+ asox(x* + y?)° + agry(y> + x7)” + agyx(x* — y") 
+ do3y(y* — x4) + ayax (a? — y?)? + agsy(y? — x7)? 


y= boo + biox + boy + box? + bony? + byxy 


+ b3ox(x? + y?) + baix(x? — y?) + bpy((y* — x”) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


+ bosy (9 +x7) + dDsox(x? + yy? + bay (9” +x)? 
+ b3ox((x* — y*) + bos y(y* — x") + byax(x? — yy? 
ah bosy(y* — x’) (6) 


where x, y are the observed positions within the FGS 
field of view, x’, y’ are the corrected positions, and 
the numerical values of the coefficients a;; and b;; are 
determined by calibration. Ray-traces were used for the 
initial estimation of the OFAD. Gravity release, outgassing 
of graphite-epoxy structures within the FGS, and post- 
launch adjustment of the HST secondary mirror required 
that the final determination of the OFAD coefficients aj; 
and b;; be made by an on-orbit calibration. 

M35 was chosen as the calibration field. Since the 
ground-based positions of our target calibration stars were 
known only to 23 milliseconds of arc, the positions of the 
stars were estimated simultaneously with the distortion 
parameters. This was accomplished during a marathon 
calibration, executed on 10 January 1993 in FGS 3. The 
entire 19 orbit sequence is shown in figure 6. GaussFit was 
used to simultaneously estimate the relative star positions, 
the pointing and roll of the telescope during each orbit (by 
quaternions), the magnification of the telescope, the OFAD 
polynomial coefficients, and four parameters that describe 
the star selector optics inside the FGS. 


Other fringe tracking calibrations 

Because each FGS contains refractive elements (Bradley et 
al 1991), it is possible that the position measured for a star 
could depend on its intrinsic color. Changes in position 
would depend on star color, but the direction of shift is 
expected to be constant, relative to the FGS axes. This 
lateral color shift would be unimportant, as long as target 
and reference stars have similar color. However, this is 
certainly not the case for many of the science targets (e.g. 
very red stars such as Proxima Centauri and Barnard’s 
star). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finally, to provide the large dynamic range, a neutral- 
density filter can be placed in front of the Koester prism. 
As aconsequence there will be a small but calibratable shift 
in position (due to the filter wedge) when comparing the 
positions of the bright star to the faint reference frame. The 
shift is constant in direction (relative to FGS 3) and size, 
since the filter does not rotate within its holder. 


Maintaining the fringe tracking calibration 

The FGS 3 graphite-epoxy optical bench was predicted to 
outgas for a period of time after the launch of HST. The 
outgassing was predicted to change the relative positions 
of optical components on the optical bench. The result of 
whatever changes were taking place was a change in scale. 
The amount of scale change was far too large to be due to 
true magnification changes in the HST optical assembly. 
Two of the parameters that descibe the star selector optics 
cause a scale-like change, if they are allowed to vary with 
time. 

The solution was to revisit the M35 calibration field 
periodically to monitor these scale-like changes and other 
slowly varying nonlinearities. Revisits will be required as 
long as it is desirable to do 1 mas precision astrometry with 
any FGS. The result of this activity judges the validity of 
the current OFAD coefficients and provides warning for 
the need for recalibration. With these data we remove 
the slowly varying component of the OFAD, so that 
uncorrected distortions remain below 2 mas for center 
of FGS 3. The character of these changes is generally 
monotonic with abrupt jumps in conjunction with HST 
servicing missions. 


Bibliography 

Here are pointers to a number of key papers in the 
development of HST interferometric astrometry, and to 
some recent results. 


A detailed description of the FGS interferometer can 
be found in: 


Bradley A, Abramowicz-Reed L, Story D, Benedict G and 
Jefferys W 1991 The flight hardware and ground 
system for Hubble Space Telescope astrometry Publ. 
Astron. Soc. Pacific 103 317 

Lupie O and Nelan E P 1998 FGS Instrument Handbook 
version 7 (STScI) 


Our choice of astrometer (there being three from 
which to choose) is documented in: 


Benedict G F et al 1992 Astrometric performance 
characteristics of the Hubble Space Telescope fine 
guidance sensors Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 104 958 


Our primary calibration tool is GaussFit, a least- 
squares and robust estimation algorithm described in: 


Jefferys W, Fitzpatrick J and McArthur B 1988 Celest. Mech. 
41 39 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Calibration and observing strategies for fringe 
scanning are discussed in: 


Franz O G et al 1991 Binary star observations with the 
Hubble Space Telescope Fine Guidance Sensors. I - 
ADS 11300 Astrophys. J. 377 L17 

Hershey J L 1992 A deconvolution technique for Hubble 
Space Telescope FGS fringe analysis Publ. Astron. Soc. 
Pacific 104 592 


Introductions to deriving and maintaining the fringe 
tracking calibration and observing strategies include: 


Benedict G F et al 1994 Astrometry with Hubble Space 
Telescope Fine Guidance Sensor number 3: Position- 
mode stability and precision Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 
106 327 

Benedict G F et al 1998 Working with a space-based optical 
interferometer: HST Fine Guidance Sensor 3 small- 
field astrometry Proc. SPIE 3350 229 

McArthur B, Benedict G F, Jefferys W H and Nelan E 1997 
Maintaining the FGS3 Optical Field Angle Distortion 
Calibration The 1997 HST Calibration Workshop with 
a New Generation of Instruments ed S Casertano, 
R Jedrzejewski, C D Keyes and Mark Stevens 
(Baltimore, MD: Space Telescope Science Institute) 
p 472 


Recent astrometric results naturally divide into fringe 
scanning and fringe tracking. For fringe scanning: 


Franz O et al 1994 Astrometric Companions Detected at 
Visible Wavelengths with the Hubble Space Telescope 
Fine Guidance Sensors American Astronomical Soc. 
Meeting 185 85.24 


discusses the first results for large Am. 

The first definitive binary orbit determined with the 
Hubble Space Telescope Fine Guidance Sensors was for 
Wolf 1062 = Gliese 748 


Franz O G et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 116 1432 


From the beginning, stellar interferometers have 
explored stellar diameters. The FGS has determined 
interferometric angular diameters of Mira variables: 


Lattanzi M G, Munari U, Whitelock P A and Feast M W 
1997 Astrophys. J. 485 328 


FGS fringe scanning has contributed to the optical 
mass—luminosity relation at the lower main sequence (0.08 
to 0.20 Mo), discussed in: 


Henry T J, Franz O G, Wasserman L H, Benedict G F, 
Shelus P J, Janna P A, Kirkpatrick J D and McCarthy 
DW 1999 Astrophys. J. 512 864 


Recent fringe tracking results include a report on the 
search for planets around Proxima Centauri 


Benedict G F et al 1999 Astron. J. 118 1086 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry with Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Parallaxes of two high-velocity stars: 


Macconnell D J, Osborn W H and Miller R J 1997 Astron. J. 
114 1268 


And the distance to the Hyades Cluster based on FGS 
parallaxes: 


Van Altena W F et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 486 L123 


An FGS program to link the Hipparcos reference 
frame to an extragalactic reference system is detailed in: 


Hemenway et al 1997 Astron. J. 114 2796 


Finally a combination of fringe tracking and scanning 
yielded a parallax and component masses for the low-mass 
binary L722-22: 


Hershey J L and Taff L G 1998 Astron. J. 116 1440 


A snapshot, circa 1994, of the scientific capabilities of 
the FGS can be found in: 


Hog E and Seidelmann P K (eds) 1995 Astronomical and 
Astrophysical Objectives of sub-milliarcsecond optical 
astrometry (Proc. 166th Symp. of the International 
Astronomical Union) (Drodrecht: Kluwer) 


Papers include: 


Benedict G F et al Hubble Space Telescope: a generator of 
submilliarcsecond precision parallaxes p 89 

Lattanzi M G et al Fringe interferometry in space: the 
fine structure of R136A with the astrometer guidance 
sensor aboard HST p 95 


George F Benedict 

, McArthur B, Chappell D W, Nelan E, Jefferys W H, 

Van Altena W, Lee J, Cornell D, Shelus P J, Hemenway P 

D, Franz O G, Wasserman L H, Duncombe R L, Story D, 
Whipple A and Fredrick L W 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrometry: History 


Although the term ‘astrometry’ was not coined until the 
19th century, the business of measuring the position and 
angular separation of the stars and planets constitutes one 
of the most ancient occupations of the astronomer. By the 
time of HIPPARCHUS (f7 126 BC) in classical Greece, the 
measurement of astronomical positions with relation to 
the 360° circle was already established, while the ancient 
Babylonians of 1750 Bc left non-instrumental 
observations of the western and eastern elongations of 
Venus with relation to the Sun, which might be correctly 
considered as astrometric. From Greek times to the 
present day, astronomers involved in astrometric work 
have used instruments employing the 360° scale, and one 
can follow this technical instrumental development in the 
article DIVIDED INSTRUMENTS. 

By its very nature, astrometry entails establishing 
and refining physical coordinates in the sky, against 
which the movements of bodies can be quantified. 
Hipparchus, Claudius PTOLEMY and other Greeks 
recognized that the ecliptic provided a natural and fairly 
obvious fundamental astronomical coordinate system, as 
the mid-summer and mid-winter altitudes of the Sun 
produced the solstices, equinoxes and zodiac poles. 
These zodiac coordinates, moreover, could be related to a 
different set of coordinates, based on the terrestrial 
equator (or equatorial) and terrestrial poles; in the time of 
Ptolemy these were 23° 51' 20" apart and are now 23° 26' 
21". The geometrical points in the sky where the ecliptic 
and the equatorial planes intersect, the equinoxes, form a 
coordinate of natural origin, and the spring intersection in 
March was used by Ptolemy and other classical 
astronomers to delineate the beginning of the stellar day. 
Over two millennia ago, this point resided in the 
constellation Aries, giving rise to the term ‘FIRST POINT 
OF ARIES’, which is still used today as the zero point in 
celestial longitude (or right ascension) on astronomical 
charts. Even in antiquity, however, it was recognized that 
this first point is not fixed (as, indeed, are few points in 
the sky, given enough time), but moves back upon itself, 
or ‘precesses’. Ptolemy quantified this precession as 1° 
every century, although he obtained this amount by 
rounding up the figures for the first point, which he 
derived from observations covering about 400 yr up to 
AD 150. Employing greatly superior instruments, and 
using them to constantly refine and re-define his figure 
between 1675 and 1715, JOHN FLAMSTEED in England 
obtained 1° every 72 yr, or 50" yr! for the precessional 
constant, which compares very favorably with the 50.290 
966" yr | accepted today. 

The establishment of the first point of Aries, and the 
quantification of its albeit errant motion around the sky, 
is one of the fundamental achievements of astrometry, 
and still lies at the heart of stellar positional 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


measurement, requiring charts and tables to be 
constructed to a particular ‘epoch’ in the precessional 
cycle, such as AD 1900 or AD 2000. 

The practical measurement of the exact position of 
this slowly moving piece of empty space in the sky has 
been a test of ingenuity over the centuries, for inevitably 
it is occupied by no specific star. In the 2nd century AD 
Ptolemy in his Almagest described a_ technique 
employing the new moon as an intermediary. On or 
around the day of the spring equinox, in such years as 
there was a convenient new moon at the equinox, 
Ptolemy measured the angular distance of the setting Sun 
from the Moon. Once the Sun was below the horizon, he 
recommended that the position of the Moon be measured 
from the adjacent stars when they became visible. From 
these star positions, it was possible to establish the 
position of the Sun and determine thereby (from a 
knowledge of the stars in that region of the sky gained 
some months before) which bright star was closest to the 
first point of Aries. 

Recognizing that the motion of the Moon could itself 
be a source of error, during the hour or so that the Sun 
was declining below the horizon, TYCHO BRAHE in 
Denmark from 1582 repeated Ptolemy’s technique using 
the much _ slower-moving planet Venus as an 
intermediary, and computed for that epoch that the first 
point of Aries stood 26° 0" 30" removed from the star a 
Arietis, which was within 15" of the same value 
calculated for 1585 by Dreyer in the 1890s. The success 
of Tycho’s astrometric work, and the superior accuracies 
he achieved when compared with the medieval Arabs 
such as Ulugh Beigh and Al Sufi, and the ancient Greek 
astronomers who had been observing a millennium 
earlier, depended on improvements in technique. These 
included fundamental innovations in instrument design, 
sophisticated cross-checking procedures and a growing 
awareness of atmospheric refraction. 

The massive strides that astrometry has made over 
the last four centuries have followed on from an 
increasing awareness of the factors recognized as 
important by Tycho: instrument innovation, refined 
techniques, and an alertness to potential sources of error. 
However, astrometry’s meteoric development since 1580 
has only been in response to the intellectual problems 
posed in astronomy and cosmology, the first of which 
was the Copernican hypothesis. It was recognized in the 
16th century that if the Earth did indeed move in space, 
then the angular sizes of the constellation figures should 
display a slight seasonal variation, as the earth-based 
observer approached or receded from the June and 
December positions. Tycho himself attempted to detect 
such seasonal variations. With the development of the 
concept of the infinite universe in the 17th century, 
however, this Copernican stellar parallax was seen as 
most likely to be detected in the six-monthly angular 
displacement of first-magnitude stars, such as Sirius, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


working on the assumption that, if all stars were of 
similar intrinsic brightness, those of the first magnitude 
were the closest to Earth, and hence should display the 
largest parallaxes. 

The development in the 17th and 18th centuries of 
superior scale graduations on astronomical quadrants, 
telescopic sights, micrometers and verniers, and of 
similar instrumental techniques, was strongly driven by 
the urge of astronomers to detect this elusive stellar 
parallax. As the astrometric capacity of the age increased 
from Tycho Brahe’s |' to Hevelius’s 25", and then to 
Flamsteed’s 10", and still no parallax was found, 
astronomers across Europe realized two things: firstly, 
the three-dimensional stellar universe must be 
unbelievably vast and, secondly, any hope of successfully 
fathoming it must reside in an ongoing improvement in 
the construction of precision instruments, combined with 
a parallel development in the refined techniques of their 
usage. This recognition, moreover, has been the creed of 
the astrometer for the last four centuries from Tycho’s 
Uraniborg to the European Space Agency’s Hipparcos 
space satellite. 

The search for a_ stellar parallax, while not 
successfully accomplished until 1838, created such an 
urgency and an inspiration to astronomers that numerous 
other discoveries and lines of inquiry were born out of it 
on the way. It was CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS’s recognition in 
the 1650s that graduated scales were insufficiently 
refined to detect a parallax, indeed, that led to the 
beginning of stellar photometry. By attempting to 
compare the brightness of Sirius with the light emitted 
from a pinhole-sized area of the solar surface (assuming 
that the Sun, Sirius and all stars possessed the same 
intrinsic luminosity), Huygens calculated that Sirius was 
27 664 astronomical units distant from the solar system. 
Huygens’s technique encouraged the photo-astrometric 
studies of Sir John Herschel in 1836, where he calculated 
that Vega was 40 times brighter than the Sun, and 
Arcturus 200, and hence correspondingly remote from 
the solar system. Then in the wake of the successful 
application of spectroscopy and photography to 
astrometry in the 1860s, photometry began its 
independent development as a fundamental tool of 
astrophysics. 

The quest for the stellar parallax was also to lead 
ROBERT HOOKE (1669), John Flamsteed (1698-1702) and 
especially JAMES BRADLEY (1727-1728) to the invention 
and development of the zenith sector (a long-focus 
telescope hung to point exactly at the zenith) as a way 
whereby the stellar parallax, now recognised as being no 
more than a few seconds of arc in extent, might be 
detected in the atmospheric-refraction-free sky of the 
zenith. Both Hooke and Flamsteed came up with 
suspiciously large parallaxes: Hooke made that of the star 
y Draconis to be around 27" and Flamsteed that of Polaris 
40", although the superior instrumentation and observing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


procedures of Bradley led to his recognition in 1728 that 
a ‘New Found Motion’ of the fixed stars, which was 
itself the product of the Earth’s rotation about the Sun, 
had an annual displacement of 20.00"—20.25". This was 
the aberration. Its detection and quantification were a 
triumph of the refined astrometry of the 18th century and, 
while still not revealing a parallax, none the less it 
provided physical proof of the Earth’s motion in space. 
Bradley claimed that his zenith sector was capable of 
detecting an angle of 0.5", and in 1748 he used the tiny 
nodding motion of y Draconis to detect a small periodic 
change in the inclination of the earth’s axis of rotation 
with regard to the ecliptic. 

One of the assumptions implicit within the concept 
of the infinite universe was the possible independent 
motion of the stars themselves, especially in the wake of 
Sir ISAAC NEWTON’s theory of universal gravitation after 
1687. From time immemorial it had been assumed that 
the stars were fixed in their places, although in 1718 
EDMOND HALLEY published a paper which showed that 
the first-magnitude stars Aldebaran (Palilicium), Sirius, 
and Arcturus had displayed an independent or ‘proper 
motion’ vis-d-vis their adjacent, dimmer stars. This had 
been the product of an ingenious historical investigation, 
in which Halley had detected a systematic displacement 
in latitude of these stars, as recorded by Hipparchus, 
Ptolemy, Tycho and contemporary astronomers. Indeed, 
he calculated that Sirius had changed its longitudinal 
position by 2' in the 120 yr since Tycho. The implication 
was not only that these stars might be moving in space 
but that our observing position in the solar system might 
be moving as well. William Herschel in 1783 was the 
first to use proper motions to derive the solar apex, the 
point in the sky towards which the solar system is 
moving (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). 

It says something about the rapid advances in 
astrometry and its instrumentation that no fewer than 
three stellar parallaxes were found between 1838 and 
1840, by astronomers using three different techniques of 
observation. None of these parallaxes, moreover, would 
have been measured but for the discovery and 
increasingly accurate quantification of stellar proper 
motions, for it was the large proper motions displayed by 
61 Cygni (5".2 yr™') and a Centauri (3".7) that suggested 
their relative closeness to the solar system and hence 
their suitability for parallax measurement. Although 
displaying a much smaller (yet clear) proper motion, 
Vega (a Lyrae) was also considered as a suitable 
candidate for parallax measurement. These stars were 
measured respectively by FRIEDRICH WILHELM BESSEL at 
K6nigsburg, using a heliometer, by THOMAS HENDERSON 
at the Cape of Good Hope, using a mural circle, and by 
Friedrich Georg WILHELM STRUVE at Dorpat, with a filar 
micrometer on the 24 cm Fraunhofer refractor. Although 
their figures were revised somewhat by later observers, 
using larger runs of observations, their parallaxes remain 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


substantially correct: 61 Cygni, 0".3483; ao Centauri, 
0".913; Vega, 0".261. In many respects, these parallaxes 
represented a high-water mark in astrometry, whereby a 
long-standing astronomical question had been answered 
by the combined application of higher mathematical 
theory and superlatively accurate observations made with 
a new breed of instrument. 

The early and middle decades of the 19th century 
saw the coming of age of manual astrometry (in which 
the astronomer worked with eyes, hands and ears, 
without any electromagnetic or photographic aids). This 
astronomy was directed not only to the definitive 
establishment of a series of astronomical constants but to 
the provision of a continuously updated and refined body 
of data from which original investigations in celestial 
mechanics could proceed. They came to depend, 
moreover, on the integrated use of Anglo-German 
techniques in instrumentation and French mathematical 
analysis. 

The study of binary and triple stars, which had been 
largely pioneered by William Herschel in 1802, showed a 
way in which Newtonian gravitation, which hitherto had 
only been shown to operate in the solar system, was 
manifestly universal. Bessel, Struve, Sir James South and 
others across northern Europe had tried to quantify the 
orbital elements of a binary system, as a way of 
extracting the gravitational elements of € Ursae Majoris 
and other star systems, and it was Felix Savary, Johann 
Encke and John Herschel in 1830-1832 who succeeded. 
Binary star work demanded the highest levels of 
instrumental accuracy, as  equatorially mounted 
refractors, with achromatic optics by Josef Fraunhofer, 
Robert Aglaé Cauchoix and others, incorporating 
micrometer or heliometer functions of the greatest 
delicacy, made reliable astrometric data available by 
1830 that would have been unimaginable in 1780. By 
1833, John Herschel was publishing the orbital axial 
components of six double stars, to four decimal places of 
a single second of arc, and while many of the hundredths 
and thousandths of second of arc were subsequently 
modified, their tenths, as originally measured, rarely 
needed correction. The refined astrometric investigations 
of the mid-19th century revealed the presence of many 
systematic stellar irregularities from which a rich harvest 
of physical discoveries emerged. 

By 1840, all the great observatories of Europe— 
K6nigsburg, Dorpat, Berlin, Bonn, Greenwich and 
others—were primarily concerned with astrometric work, 
which by that date represented the supreme pinnacle of 
astronomical achievement. On the one hand, their 
energies were devoted to the equatorial-refractor-based 
work of binary star astronomy, although the mural and 
transit circle also facilitated the routine measurement of 
meridian positions to within a fraction of a single second 
of arc. As it was becoming de rigueur, in the wake of the 
examples of Bessel, Struve, Encke, Friedrich Wilhelm 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Augustus Argelander and George Biddell Airy, for an 
observatory to publish its work as quickly as possible, a 
vast body of superlative astrometric data was rapidly 
becoming available across Europe and America. 

It was from this published astrometric archive of 
meridional data that both John Couch Adams and Jean 
Joseph Urbain Le Verrier made their spectacular 
independent discoveries of Neptune in 1846. It was also 
from relatively long runs of high-quality astrometric data 
that Bessel was able to quantify a periodic wobble in the 
position of Sirtus from which he was able to compute the 
presence of Sirius B in 1844. Moreover, both of these 
discoveries, extracted from existing astrometric data, 
were followed by telescopic confirmation, when Johann 
Galle and Heinrich d’Arrest observed Neptune from 
Berlin on 23 September 1846 and when Alvan Clark saw 
Sirius B with a new 18 in object glass in Boston in 1862. 

The invention of photography in 1839 opened up 
enormous potential for astrometry. In addition to its 
capacity for much greater accuracy, it liberated the 
astronomer from the eyepiece of a telescope, to permit 


the more comfortable, relaxed measurement of 
astrometrical positions from photographic _ plates. 
However, it was not until after 1881, with the 


establishment of the Carte du Ciel, that photographic 
astrometry really showed what it could do. 

As astrophysics has come to dominate astronomy in 
the 20th century, however, the fundamental role of 
astrometry within the science has declined, but the 
development of radio interferometry in the 1950s 
introduced a new and important form of astrometry, as 
radio dishes many miles or even continents apart were 
used to locate the exact positions of radio sources in the 
sky to within seconds of arc. 

The development of the European Space Agency’s 
HIPPARCOS project in 1989, however, has brought optical 
astrometry back to a central role once again. The 
Hipparcos space satellite has enabled the production of 
excellent astrometric measurements down to 0.002" on a 
virtually industrial basis without any of the atmospheric 
problems associated with ground-based observatories. 
Although astrophysics still contributes much of the 
driving force of modern astronomical research, critically 
accurate astrometric data of the kind made possible by 
Hipparcos are essential, especially as a way of 
understanding the physical processes going on within our 
own star system. 

Satellite astrometry, indeed, is clearly seen as the 
way forward when it comes to the most critical 
accuracies. The forthcoming NASA, FAME (Full Sky 
Astrometric Mapping Explorer), due to be launched 
around 2004, will map an incredible 40 million star 
positions, with an increase in accuracy by a factor of two 
to ten (depending on magnitude) on previous satellites, 
during its expected 5 yr of operation. The ESA GAIA 
(European Space Agency Global  Astrometric 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interferometer for Astrophysics), moreover, will also 
have a 5-yr operational life, in which it is expected that it 
will map 500 times more objects than Hipparcos, 100 
times more accurately. 

It could be argued, moreover, that astrometry in its 
photographic, photo-electric, radio and _ satellite 
departments still lies at the heart of astronomical 
research, for astrophysics itself hinges upon the precise 
measurement and interpretation of various forms of 
energy from space. For it is the very act of using 
instruments to measure and quantify the energy that 
reaches the Earth from space that makes astronomy by 
far the oldest of the exact sciences. 


Bibliography 

Chapman A 1995 Dividing the Circle: A History of Critical 
Angular Measurement in Astronomy, 1500-1850 2nd edn 
(Chichester: Praxis-Wiley) 

Grant R 1852 History of Physical Astronomy (London: Bohn) 

Herschel J F W 1833 A Treatise on Astronomy (London: 
Longmans) 

Herschel J F W 1849 Outlines of Astronomy (London: 
Longmans) 

Hoskin M (ed) 1997 The Cambridge Illustrated History of 
Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

King H C 1955 The History of the Telescope (London) (a 
modern reprint edition is available) 

North J D 1994 Fontana History of Astronomy (London: 
Fontana) 

Pannekoek A 1961 A History of Astronomy (London: Allen & 
Unwin) 


Allan Chapman 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrometry: Telescopes and 
Techniques 


The goal of astrometry is to determine positions and 
motions of celestial objects such as stars and planets, as 
well as artificial satellites. Astrometry is the oldest 
branch of astronomy and until the 19th century all of 
professional astronomy was astrometry (see 
ASTROMETRY: HISTORY). One of the main astrometric 
objectives is to measure angular separations of stars and 
other celestial objects relative to reference stars which 
have known positions. This can be achieved by taking 
images through a telescope, similar to a camera, be it on 
photographic emulsion (see DETECTORS: PHOTOGRAPHY) 
or using electronic detectors such as a CHARGE-COUPLED 
DEVICE (CCD) as used in most cameras today. Reference 
star positions are established with methods of absolute 
astrometry . A catalog of such positions and motions 
defines a_ reference system. Most astrometric 
measurements are made in two dimensions, on the 
celestial sphere, similar to geographic latitude and 
longitude. The third dimension, the distance of celestial 
objects in space, is much harder to measure and one of 
the biggest astronomical challenges. Only distances 
within our solar system can be measured with great 
precision using radar and laser ranging techniques. 

Very precise angular measurements on the order of 
1 milliarcsecond (mas) can be achieved today by ground- 
based optical telescopes, astrometric satellites and radio 
telescopes. An angle of 1 mas is the 1000th part of an 
arcsecond, which in turn is the 3600th part of a degree. 
The Moon in the sky measures about half a degree or 
1800 arcsec across. A pair of candles 10 cm apart are 
separated by 1 mas when seen from a distance of 
20 000 km. 

Not only the Sun, Moon and planets are moving in 
the sky. If you look closely enough, the ‘fixed’ stars 
move as well, slowly circling the center of our Galaxy, 
the Milky Way. Even galaxies move within clusters of 
galaxies. Thus precise astrometric positions are time 
dependent. Without knowing the motions, no good 
prediction of positions for the future can be made. 

A dramatic increase in precision has been achieved 
in the last two decades, after centuries of slow 
improvements. In 1980 an absolute position good to 100 
mas was state of the art, since 1995 it has been about 1 
mas and space missions currently being designed promise 
0.05—0.005 mas. This amazing progress is technology 
driven, taking advantage of new techniques and 
hardware. 


Astrographs and the tangential plane 


concept 

One of the basic astrometric techniques is the use of a 
camera (astrograph) to map a section of the celestial 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sphere onto an image surface. A camera here can also be 
a telephoto lens, a dedicated lens telescope (refractor) or 
mirror telescope (reflector). The image surface is ideally 
a plane, orthogonal to the optical axis of the camera, 
tangential to the sphere. The camera (figure 1) is aimed at 
the position A in the sky and a star at S is mapped onto S' 
in the tangential plane. The focal length, f, determines the 
scale of this mapping: 


scale (arcsec mm™~') = 206 265/[f (mm)]. 


The basic idea is to measure rectangular x, y coordinates 
in the tangential plane, then use the known position of 
some reference stars in the field to determine the 
mapping parameters and finally to calculate the spherical 
coordinates of the other measured field stars. Technical 
details are explained below. 


Wide field 

A telescope with a high-quality, wide FIELD OF VIEW of 
several degrees requires a complex optical design, which 
cannot be achieved with a two-lens refractor or a two- 
mirror telescope. Multilens astrographs are the classical 
telescopes in this category, similar to telephoto lenses. 
For larger apertures (about 0.7 m or more), catadioptic 
systems are often used, which are reflecting telescopes 
with additional lenses. Examples are the SCHMIDT 
TELESCOPE and large reflectors with ‘field correctors’. 


5 A 


celestial 
sphere 


camera lens 


tangential 
plane 


Figure 1. The tangential plane concept. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


These wide-field telescopes are used in astrometry 
mainly to densify existing reference systems. The 
positions of many fainter stars are determined with 
respect to a few bright reference stars with known 
positions. The large field of view allows for simultaneous 
observation of a sufficiently large number of reference 
stars in any given field. The most important examples of 
astrographs are the Astrographic Catalog (AC) 
astrographs, built around 1900 with 3.7 m focal length, 
the Astronomische Gesellschaft Katalog (AGK) series 2 
and 3 instruments of 2 m focal length, the five-lens 1975 
design of the Hamburg astrograph, the US NAVAL 
OBSERVATORY (USNO) twin astrograph with its 1990 
designed red-lens, and the Lick and Yale 0.5 m aperture 
astrographs. 

The Lick and Yale astrographs use distant galaxies 
as fixed benchmarks and a set of exposures taken about 
20-30 yr apart (epoch difference) to determine absolute 
PROPER MOTIONS of stars in the Northern and Southern 
Proper Motion (NPM, SPM) programs respectively. The 
NPM is complete, while second-epoch observations of 
SPM in Argentina are in progress. 

The USNO CCD Astrograph Catalog (UCAC) 
project started in 1998 at CERRO TOLOLO INTER- 
AMERICAN OBSERVATORY and will eventually cover all 
sky to about 16th magnitude. Positions of stars in the 10— 
14 mag range are accurate to about 20 mas. Proper 
motions will be obtained by utilizing new measures of 
the early-epoch NPM and SPM data. 


Narrow field 

Long focal length (~ 10-15 m) refractors and large 
reflectors provide a field of view of several arcminutes to 
1° at high magnification to resolve tiny displacements of 
stellar images. These telescopes are mainly used in 
astrometry for the determination of trigonometric 
PARALLAXES, which is the most direct, fundamental 
technique to determine distances outside the solar 
system. Small shifts of position of a relatively nearby 
target star are measured relative to distant stars, which 
are selected by spectral and photometric properties. The 
tangential plane concept is used here as well; however, 
no precise (absolute) reference star positions are needed. 
Observations of a given field are obtained over several 
years and then mapped onto each other, assuming the 
mean of the background stars fixed. 

Figure 2 explains the principle of trigonometric 
parallax observations. While the Earth circles the Sun the 
position of a nearby star changes slightly (order 0.5 
arcsec or less). The largest shifts are observed from 
positions | and 2, about half a year apart. On the focal 
plane the positions of a nearby target star and some 
distant background stars are plotted over the course of a 
year (neglecting proper motions). A major problem is to 
estimate the distances (parallaxes) of the background 
stars. Ideally they should be infinitely far away, thus 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


being at a fixed position, the center of the ellipses shown 
in figure 2. In that case the observed position change of 
the target star with respect to the background stars would 
directly give its true, absolute parallax. In reality, the 
measurement reveals the relative parallax with respect to 
the mean parallax of the background stars. 

Examples are the refractors of the YERKES 
OBSERVATORY and ALLEGHENY OBSERVATORY as well as 
the US Naval Observatory 1.55 m Strand reflector, the 
most precise and productive instrument in this category. 
Results of all significant trigonometric parallax and 
associated proper motion observations are compiled in 
catalogs issued by the Yale University. 

In order to obtain high-precision positions of faint 
objects such as compact, extragalactic radio reference 
frame sources, a multistep procedure is adopted. A wide- 


background reference stars 


oD a) 


Z ae I nearby star 


aa 


focal plane 


reflex mation in the sky 


Earth in orbit 


Figure 2. Principle of trigonometric parallaxes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


field telescope is used to obtain positions of secondary 
reference stars in the system of primary reference stars. 
Long-focus instruments continue towards fainter limiting 
magnitudes and densify the net of reference stars. 


Detectors 

There are mainly three types of detectors important in 
optical astrometric programs today: the CCD, the grid 
modulation photometer and photographic emulsions. 

A CCD detector at a telescope is the most important 
detector, widely used in astronomical data acquisitions. 
The high quantum efficiency and geometric stability 
make it a very suitable device for astrometry. The only 
major problem with a CCD is its relatively small size as 
compared with a photographic plate. A typical CCD 
today measures 30-50 mm on a side, while a typical 
photographic plate can be 100 times larger in area. A 
mosaic of CCDs can cover a large area in a focal plane; 
however, gaps remain between chips and, more 
importantly for precise astrometry, additional parameters 
in the mapping model are needed for each single CCD 
chip. This can be a serious problem when the reference 
star density is low. 

The grid modulation technique is applied in the 
Multichannel Astrometric Photometer (MAP) of the 
Allegheny Observatory. It measures relative positions of 
stars in the focal plane with the help of a moving ronchi 
ruling. This instrument is very precise (3 mas precision 
per night on a bright target); however, only one target 
source at a time can be measured with respect to several 
reference stars. The grid modulation principle is also 
used in the HIPPARCOS space mission and is explained in 
figure 3. Photometric measurements with high temporal 
resolution are made behind a grid in the focal plane. Stars 
(or the grid) are moving and the phase difference 
between the signals from two stars gives their precise 
relative position in fractions of the grid constant. A priori 
knowledge is required for the integer number of grid 
steps the stars are separated. 

Photographic emulsions, on either film or glass 
plates, require a measuring machine to extract the x, y 
information of stellar image positions. Photographic 
emulsions are no longer used in any major current 
astrometric program. However, the data stored in plate 
archives are still valuable and their extraction is by no 
means completed yet. 


Measuring machines 

In the past humans manually operated one- and two-axis 
plate measuring machines, centering stellar images on 
microscope cross-hairs and reading circles. Image 
dissector techniques can automatically center a stellar 
image utilizing the symmetry property of the image 
profile. A complete digitization (scanning) of 
photographic plates is performed on modern machines. In 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stars A and B move across a grid 


Ta star A 


time 


Ip 
star B 


time 
phase difference in intensity registration 


Figure 3. Principle of the grid modulation technique. 


this case a photometric measurement (transparency or 
density) is recorded as a function of the x, y position of 
the scanning detector. This can be achieved by using a 
microdensitometer, a CCD or a line-scanning device. In 
all cases an exact measure of the location of the detector 
with respect to the plate along two axes is critical and 
most machines use laser metrology or high-precision 
encoders providing a repeatability of about 0.1 um. The 
accuracy is limited by systematic errors in the measuring 
process and the geometric stability of the photographic 
media which is on the order of 0.4—1.0 um, depending on 
the type of emulsion. 

Examples are PDS microdensitometer machines, 
which were commercially available, the GALAXY 
machine of the former ROYAL OBSERVATORY, 
GREENWICH the APM at Cambridge, UK, the APS at 
Minneapolis, the MAMA at OBSERVATOIRE DE PARIS, the 
PMM of the US Naval Observatory, the HAMI at 
Hamburger Sternwarte and the SuperCosmos of the 
ROYAL OBSERVATORY, EDINBURGH. 


Transit circle and absolute astrometry 

A transit circle (TC) is a telescope mounted on a fixed 
east-west axis, so it can move only along the local 
meridian. The meridian is the great circle through the 
celestial poles and the zenith, perpendicular to the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


horizon (figure 4). The TC makes two independent 
observations: the time when a target object crosses the 
meridian (transit) and an angle, the zenith distance, 
which is read off circles attached to the east-west axis of 
the telescope. The zenith direction is determined in 
practice by looking in the opposite direction (nadir), 
down into a mercury mirror surface which represents the 
local horizon plane due to the Earth’s gravity. Collimated 
fiducial marks located some distance towards the north 
and south are observed to check on the stability of the 
instrumental azimuth. 

In past centuries transit observations were made by 
the ‘eye and ear’ method, watching a star crossing the 
micrometer wire through the eyepiece of the telescope 
and listening to time signals to estimate the fraction of a 
second. Modern instruments use photoelectric detectors 
and follow the star for some time in the focal plane to 
obtain multiple measures for a single transit. 

A TC can perform relative observations; however, it 
is also capable of absolute (fundamental) astrometry, 
meaning that it can determine positions of celestial 
objects without a priori knowledge of other star 
positions. Thus TC telescopes provided the primary 
reference star catalogs (fundamental catalogs) throughout 
centuries. The most important are the FK3, FK4 and FK5 
series of this century, published by the Astronomisches 
Recheninstitut in Heidelberg, Germany. Recently, 
fundamental work with TC telescopes has been 
superseded by more accurate techniques such as the 
Hipparcos space mission and radio VLBI observations 
(see below). 

TC observations are affected by a variety of issues. 
Instrumental imperfections such as flexure of the 
telescope tube can be determined by appropriate 
modelling of a series of observations. Critical is the 
stability of the instrument to repeatably follow the same 
pattern over a given interval of time. Polar motion, the 
wandering of the Earth’s axis with respect to the surface 
of the Earth, and other changes of the local coordinate 
system enter TC observations and need to be resolved. 
Furthermore, the rotation axis of the Earth is not fixed in 
inertial space. A coordinate system related to the equator 
of the Earth is moving with respect to the stars 
(precession and nutation). The finite speed of light causes 
astronomical aberration, an angular shift of the observed 
trajectory with respect to the true position. All those 
effects enter absolute TC observations to the full extent, 
while differential (relative) observations have to deal 
only with variations of those effects over the field of 
view. 

Of particular concern for TC observations is the 
refraction in the Earth’s atmosphere. Observations of 
both the lower and upper transit of stars near the pole 
help to determine a refraction model. Nevertheless, 
refraction is changing with atmospheric conditions such 
as temperature. The turbulence of the atmosphere 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ultimately limits absolute TC observations by unmodeled 
systematic contributions and random noise. Examples of 
TC instruments are the CARLSBERG MERIDIAN TELESCOPE 
and the meridian circle at the OBSERVATOIRE DES 
SCIENCES DE L’UNIVERS DE BORDEAUX and the 6 and 7 in 
telescopes of the US Naval Observatory. 


Scanning TDI technique 

A recent innovation in astrometry is the use of CCDs in 
the focal plane of TC-type telescopes. The CCD can be 
operated in a time-delayed integration (TDI) mode, 
where the charge transfer for the CCD readout is 
synchronized with the motion of the star across the chip. 
However, this works well only for stars moving along a 
great circle (equator) and for a small width of a strip 
being scanned. In all other cases stars in different 
locations on the CCD move along significantly non- 
linear paths, resulting in image smearing. 

A pioneering instrument of that type is the Flagstaff 
Astrometric Scanning Transit Telescope (FASTT). The 
Carlsberg Meridian Telescope (CMC, La Palma and 
Cambridge, UK) and the Bordeaux TC have utilized the 
TDI scanning technique for zonal catalogs. The imaging 
part of the SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY (SDSS) project 
also uses the same technique. However, the SDSS 
telescope can follow arbitrary great circles on the sky by 
actively steering the telescope and rotating the detector 
plane at the same time. 


Pole 


Meridian 


local 
Honzon 


North 
Celestial 
Pole 


Earth 


Figure 4. Celestial sphere for an observer on Earth. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrolabe 
An ASTROLABE is an example of an equal altitude 
instrument, measuring the time of transit of a star through 
a small circle of fixed altitude or zenith distance (often 
30° or 45°). This is achieved by a mirror—prism 
configuration in front of a horizontally mounted 
telescope. Direct and reflected images of a target star are 
mapped into the focal plane. The apparent motions of 
both images are in opposite direction, and they cross each 
other when the star reaches the fixed zenith distance the 
instrument is designed for. Star positions can be deduced 
from observations of crossings toward the east and west. 
There are two main advantages of an astrolabe over a 
TC. All stars are observed at a fixed zenith distance, 
simplifying the corrections for refraction, and the 
instrumental setup is more stable, avoiding flexure 
problems. The main disadvantage of an astrolabe is its 
restricted sky coverage in declination, 5, of 6-z<6< 
d+ z, with » being the geographical latitude and z the 
fixed zenith distance of the instrument. As with the TC, 
the astrolabe’s capability to produce a fundamental 
catalog and monitor the Earth’s rotation is now only of 
historical interest owing to superior accuracies from 
VLBI and space astrometric techniques. 


Photographic zenith telescope (PZT) 

A PZT is a vertically mounted telescope with a lens on a 
rotary stage on top and a mirror at the bottom. With a 
PZT the relative position of the local zenith with respect 
to the stars is observed. For decades the PZT was utilized 
for Earth orientation determination. Since VLBI 
techniques are now much more accurate, the PZTs are 
obsolete. 


Interferometry 

Interferometry is the most accurate astrometric technique 
currently known, utilizing the wave nature of coherent 
light (or electromagnetic radiation in general) for angular 
measurements. Widely used is the Michelson 
interferometer. Its basic principle is illustrated in figure 
5. Two fixed telescopes (sidereostats) A and B observe 
the same star. The beam from at least one of the 
telescopes needs to pass through a delay line of variable 
length, in order to observe the same incoming wave front 
simultaneously (coherent) and thus obtain an interference 
pattern (fringes) at the beam combiner. Depending on the 
position of the star relative to the baseline (angle y), the 
delay (d) varies and has to be adjusted accordingly. The 
basic interferometric measurement is the delay length as 
a function of time, while keeping the fringe contrast 
(visibility) at a maximum (see INTERFEROMETRY): 


cosy = d/b. 


With the known baseline b this gives a measure of y. 
Observing several stars many times in a night allows us 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to solve for the positions of the stars and Earth 
orientation parameters. A priori information on the 
approximate star positions is required to steer the delay 
line and to obtain fringes. The interferometer then 
determines d to a fraction of the wavelength, while the 
baseline length is monitored with additional metrology. 
An accuracy of a few mas can be obtained with this 
technique globally and relative measures (double stars, 
stellar limb darkening) are at least 10 times more 
accurate. As with transit circles, the properties of the 
atmosphere are currently limiting the accuracy. 

The Mark I (MOUNT WILSON OBSERVATORY) was the 
first phase-coherent stellar interferometer, followed by 
Mark II and Mark III (around 1990). Examples of 
operational optical interferometers are the COAST 
(Cambridge, UK), SUSI (Australia), GI2T (France), PTI 
(PALOMAR OBSERVATORY) and the Navy Prototype 
Optical Interferometer (NPOI). Only COAST and NPOI 
have three or more sidereostats and regularly can perform 
imaging. The CHARA instrument has started operation 
on Mt Wilson. The SPACE INTERFEROMETRY MISSION 
(SIM) project (approved by NASA for launch in 2009) is 
based on the same technique. 

Similar techniques are used at radio frequencies. The 
signals 7, and Jg from two radio telescopes are fed into a 
correlator. The correlator product, C, 


c= [nitro 


is at maximum when t = d/c with c being the speed of 
light and d the delay as in figure 5. 


incoming 


piane parallel 
wavefront 


beam 
combiner 


Figure 5. Principle of a Michelson interferometer. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) is the 
most accurate radio astrometric technique. Here the 
individual telescopes are usually far apart on different 
continents and no longer directly connected. Instead, the 
signal at each station is modulated with a very precise 
frequency standard (atomic clock, maser), digitized and 
written to special tapes. The tapes from all stations are 
later processed at a correlator center and delays and delay 
rates are extracted as basic information. 

The resolving power, R, of an interferometer no 
longer equals the resolving power of its individual 
apertures; instead the Rayleigh criterion 


R (rad) = 1.222./b 


holds for the separation of two linked telescopes with a 
baseline length 5. This is particularly important at radio 
wavelengths, i, which are very long (millimeter to meter) 
as compared with optical wavelengths. 

Optical interferometers as well as VLBI have the 
capability for absolute astrometry. VLBI currently has 
the highest accuracy of all wide-field astrometric 
techniques. Earth orientation parameters are being 
routinely obtained on the sub-mas level and the 
International Celestial Reference System (ICRS) is 
defined by the positions of 212 extragalactic, compact 
radio sources observed with VLBI. 


Speckle interferometry 

Speckle interferometry is a technique to overcome the 
seeing limitation of ground-based, optical-IR telescopes 
in very small field applications such as double-star 
observations. If the aperture of a telescope is large as 
compared with the Fried parameter (7) ~ 0.15 m, see 
ADAPTIVE OPTICS), a large number of individual speckles 
are seen within the seeing disk when a star is imaged at 
high magnification. Taking individual images with short 
integration times (&ap;1/30 s) allows one to resolve the 
speckles. The size of the speckles is determined by the 
aperture of the telescope. The autocorrelation, A, 


Atm) = / Tix +u)i(x) dx 


over the image area reveals the separation and orientation 
angle (with a 180° ambiguity) of a double star with a 
resolution similar to the theoretical resolving power of 
the telescope without the influence of the atmosphere. A 
more complex structure in the object can be analyzed 
with Fourier transformation techniques. Speckle 
interferometry works only within the isoplanatic patch 
and thus is limited to a field of view of about 5 arcsec. 


Space astrometry 
The HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) has_ two 
instruments for astrometric observations, the Fine 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Guidance Sensors (FGS) and the Wide Field and 
Planetary Camera (WFPC). The FGS allow a two- 
dimensional relative position determination of objects 
within a ~13' by 4' annular field of view, observing one 
target at a time (see ASTROMETRY WITH HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE). 

The second Wide Field and Planetary Camera 
(WFPC2) of HST uses four CCD detectors for direct 
imaging in bandpasses from UV to IR. Astrometric 
information can be obtained following the tangential 
plane concept as described in the first section. Optical 
field angle distortions have been determined with dense 
calibration fields (globular cluster), reducing the number 
of parameters required in the mapping model for user 
applications. The field of view is only about 75" on the 
three Wide Field CCD chips and about 34" on the 
Planetary Camera CCD. Correcting optics is integrated in 
the second WFPC2, which was installed in December 
1993. The instrument is suitable for astrometry of very 
faint sources (to ~26 mag); however, the images are 
undersampled and dithering techniques are used for high- 
precision centering. 

Hipparcos, the High Precision Parallax Collecting 
Satellite, was the first space mission dedicated to 
astrometry (see HIPPARCOS). Launched in 1989, it 
observed the entire sky for 3.5 yr, producing a catalog of 
118 000 stars with absolute positions, proper motions and 
trigonometric parallaxes on the 1 mas accuracy level. 
With a split mirror, two fields in the sky separated by 
=58° were mapped into the same focal plane. The satellite 
continuously rotated and light from stars crossing the 
fields was modulated by a well calibrated grid. Using an 
input catalog, selected spots in the focal plane were 
picked up by the photoelectric detector. The raw data 
comprise a steady stream of light intensity measures as a 
function of time. Only one dimension (along the scan) 
was observed with high precision. The rotation axis of 
the satellite slowly precessed to allow for a global 
coverage of the sky. Each point in the sky was scanned 
about 120 times with a variety of scan directions in order 
to resolve both coordinates. Abscissa data, angles 
measured along the scan direction, of all great circle 
scans were later combined in a single large reduction 
(sphere reconstruction) in order to simultaneously 
determine the astrometric parameters of stars as well as 
instrumental parameters. As a result, a rigid, self— 
consistent, instrumental coordinate system was 
established. 

The external orientation of the axes (three position 
and three proper motion parameters) were provided in 
combination with ground-based observations, linking the 
Hipparcos frame to the ICRS. All stars to about 7th 
magnitude were observed in two bandpasses, similar to B 
and V, as well as most stars to magnitude 8.5 and some 
selected to 12.5 mag. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The star mapper data of the Hipparcos mission were 
utilized to survey all stars to about 11th magnitude in the 
Tycho project. A re-evaluation of the Tycho data, 
completed in 1999, produced the Tycho-2 catalog of 2.5 
million stars (photometry and position), supplemented by 
proper motions in connection with ground-based 
catalogs. The accuracy of the Tycho positions is on the 
order of 10-70 mas depending on magnitude (see TYCHO 
STAR CATALOGS). 

In 1999, NASA selected the Full-Sky Astrometric 
Mapping Explorer (FAME) space mission for a 
scheduled launch in 2004. Similar to Hipparcos, this 
satellite will scan the entire sky in a 5 yr mission to 
obtain positions, proper motions and parallaxes of 40 
million stars with an accuracy of 0.5 mas—S0O uas, 
depending on magnitude. In contrast to Hipparcos, 
FAME utilizes an array of CCDs in scanning TDI mode 
(see above). 


A global view of astrometric techniques 

More than in many other disciplines of physics and 
astronomy, a thorough investigation of measuring errors 
is an essential part of astrometry. The precision of an 
observation is an internal, formal error, often derived 
from random error statistics of repeated observations. 
The accuracy of an observation refers by definition to its 
true error, which is almost never known precisely. The 
accuracy is often estimated from external comparisons 
with results obtained with an independent set of data or 
technique. The differences between the values of 
precision and accuracy estimates are caused by 
systematic errors, and a large fraction of all astrometric 
effort is to detect and reduce systematic errors. 

This starts with the design of astrometric telescopes. 
One common theme in many astrometric instruments is 
the built-in feature of reversal. A TC can be lifted out of 
its mount and put in reversed. An astrograph usually can 
be shifted from the east side of the pier to the west, in 
order to take the same field in the sky ‘upside down’. A 
plate measuring machine can measure plates in several 
orientations. Another feature of astrometric importance is 
cross-connection and redundancy. Individual TC 
programs largely overlap in the sky coverage with each 
other. Hipparcos observed two fields of view widely 
separated simultaneously, and VLBI uses multiple 
telescopes and baselines for simultaneous observations of 
the same source. Combined with appropriate reduction 
methods this allows one to detect and correct some 
systematic errors caused by part of the instrumentation. 

However, this can only be achieved with stable 
instruments. Properties of an astrometric instrument must 
not change with time or they must be monitored and 
accounted for. Often a non-astrometric telescope such as 
the Schmidt telescope is used to obtain astrometric 
results, which then become compromised. Often this is 
the only available method to obtain some results at all, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e.g. positions of very faint stars all over the sky. Because 
of the revolution in computer technology, it is nowadays 
cheaper to control and correct instrumental defects 
afterwards than to start with a rigid nicely behaving 
instrument in the first place. Examples are the point 
spread function (PSF) and geometric mapping properties 
of modern telescope designs, from ground-based wide- 
field survey telescopes to the Next Generation Space 
Telescope (NGST) as compared with the PSF of an 
astrograph. 

For an astrometric instrument usually its resolution 
(Rayleigh criterion) is not the limit of precision. A stellar 
image profile of about | arcsec diameter might very well 
be centered to 1/100 arcsec precision or better. 


Space- versus ground-based techniques 

Basically there are three things different in space 

astrometry as compared with ground based. 

1. Atmosphere. The lack of the Earth’s atmosphere 
allows for sharper images, not disturbed by a 
turbulent medium. The higher resolving power 
directly leads to a better signal-to-noise ratio and to 
fainter limiting magnitudes. The lack of turbulence 
also means a significant reduction in random noise 
for the measurement of angular separations. The 
atmospheric random error is roughly 


iter ae kr7? Fe (cos zy) 


with exposure time ¢ in seconds, field of view F in 
arcminutes, zenith distance z and the parameter & in 
the range 10-70 mas, depending on atmospheric 
conditions. The availability of a larger frequency 
spectrum (including UV and IR) for space-based 
observations so far has not been of significant 
importance to astrometry. 

2. Gravity. Near-zero. gravity for space-based 
instruments directly leads to greater stability and 
independence of some errors from the pointing 
direction. However, thermal effects (satellite in 
sunlight versus shadow) cause other problems and 
temperature control to 1/100 K levels is often a 
requirement for astrometric space missions. The 
gravitational gradient of Earth-based instruments 
provides a convenient method to define one axis of 
a coordinate system. This is no longer available with 
space missions. 

3. Orientation. Independence of the Earth means no 
problems with Earth rotation and irregularities of 
local terrestial coordinate systems. It also means no 
accessible definition of north or a similar external 
orientation. The equator has no meaning for space 
missions and the plane of the ecliptic only weakly 
enters in light aberration terms. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tangential plane reduction technique 

Refering back to figure 1, let & n be the rectangular 
Cartesian coordinates defined as zero point at the 
intersection of the optical axis with the tangential plane 
(A'), € pointing towards east and n north. A gnomonic 
projection gives the tangential coordinates as 


cos ésin(a — a) 


sin éo sin é + cos dg cos dcos(a — ag) 
cos dp sin é — sind, cos 6 cosia@ — ap) 
n=O 
sind, sin 6 + cos é5 cos dcosia — ap) 


with a, 6 being the right ascension and the declination of 
S and do, 59 those of A. The unit for &, 1 is radians at this 
point. 

Measured coordinates x, y if exactly parallel to & n 
are then 


x=f& yv=fn 


with f being the focal length and x, y in the same units as 
f, e.g. millimeters. Equation (8) actually is the simplest 
physical model between the purely mathematical € 1 and 
the real-world observables x, y. An example of a more 
realistic plate model is 


E&= Pix t Poy t+ Py t+ Pax + Poy t+ Pox7 + Psxv+ Paxr? 
n= —Pox+ Pvt P+ Bex — Boyt Pexv+ Bet yr 


with P; to Py being parameters to be estimated in an 
adjustment process using reference stars with known 
positions (€, ), and 7° = x’ + y*. Parameters 1 to 4 
represent an orthogonal model, which is usually the 
simplest practical model. It allows for a zero point, scale 
and rotation (alignment) between the x, y and € n. 
Including the Ps; and P¢ terms gives a full linear model. 
Parameters 7 and 8 represent a tilt of the focal plane with 
respect to the ideal tangential plane, and Po is the third- 
order optical distortion term, significant in most real 
telescopes. Once the parameters are estimated, a model 
function such as equation (9) gives € 1 coordinates from 
measured x, y of any star with previously unknown 
position. Its spherical coordinates, a, 5 are then obtained 
by solving 


oo ne 
sin dp + COS dy 
cos d; — 7 sin dy 


cot é sinfa — a) = 


cot 6 cosia — a) = — 
Sin dg + 7) cos dy 


Advanced topics and reduction methods 
Systematic errors in positions depending on magnitude 
(called the magnitude equation) are a common problem 
in many traditional astrometric techniques, particularly in 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


photographic astrometry. Except for external 
comparisons these systematic errors can be determined 
by observing images of the same star with different 
exposure levels. Obviously this can be achieved by 
taking the same fields with different exposure times. 
Another option is to use a DIFFRACTION GRATING in front 
of the aperture (near the entrance pupil). Besides the 
zero-order central image, the grating produces much 
fainter, higher order images spaced symmetrically around 
the central image. Those images are spectra in principle; 
however, depending on the grating constant and bandpass 
they can be made almost circular. Instrumental 
magnitude equations can also be reduced by combining 
data taken with the instrument in normal and reversed 
positions. However, guiding error induced magnitude 
equations cannot be reduced with this technique. With 
linear detectors such as CCDs, magnitude equations in 
principle are no longer expected. Nevertheless, with non- 
perfect charge transfer efficiencies a coma-like 
systematic error can be significant in CCD data. 

Block adjustment (BA) techniques in astrograph- 
type observing can achieve wide-angle (up to global) 
astrometric results using only differential narrow-field 
observations. Overlapping fields are required. Instead of 
solving for each individual field separately, a reduction 
scheme is used to solve for all plate parameters and all 
star positions simultaneously utilizing the fact that a 
given star has a unique position on all photographs or 
CCD frames it is on. 

This technique was introduced in astronomy in 1960; 
however, it was not exploited until the 1970s because of 
a lack of computer power. The method is very sensitive 
to any systematic errors not modeled in the data and if 
not applied properly can produce worse results than a 
traditional reduction. 

The sphere reconstruction process of the Hipparcos 
project actually is very similar to the BA. Because of the 
larger number of observations per star and the 
simultaneous observation of two widely separated fields 
the Hipparcos data are better conditioned for a global 
solution than overlapping plates. 


State of the art accuracies and limitations 
Currently the most accurate positions are obtained from 
VLBI radio observations for a couple of hundred 
compact, extragalactic sources. Positions for some 
sources are believed to be accurate to 0.1 mas. Source 
structure is a serious problem as well as atmospheric and 
ionospheric properties and the stability of ground-based 
stations (modeling of short-period effects). VLBI is also 
a very expensive technique to maintain and mainly is 
supported for Earth orientation work and geodesy, good 
astrometry being obtained as an aside. 

Interferometric techniques in principle have a better 
potential for the highest positional accuracy than other 
methods. However, observing is slow, one object at a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrometry: Telescopes and Techniques 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


time. The highest angular resolutions and most accurate 
astrometry of close double stars are obtained by optical 
interferometers (NPOI, 70 pas). 

Parallaxes on the 0.5 mas level are achieved for 
well-observed stars by traditional ground-based long- 
focus telescopes equipped with CCDs, perfoming as well 
as the best space-based instruments, with the FGS of 
HST (0.4 mas). However, the ground-based technique is 
at its theoretical limit set by the atmosphere and next- 
generation space missions are likely to improve on this 
by a factor of 10. 

The Hipparcos catalog is currently the most accurate 
realization of an optical reference frame, giving positions 
of 118 000 stars on the 1 mas level. With a proper motion 
error of about | mas yr! and a mean epoch of 1991.25 
the position errors for epoch 2000 already are of the 
order of 10 mas. The most accurate positions for the 
majority of the 9-12 mag stars are currently provided by 
the Tycho-2 catalog (20-70 mas). Ground-based wide- 
field astrographs are already capable of improving on 
this, getting 20 mas down to 14th magnitude (UCAC 
project). The limit here again is the atmosphere in 
combination with the available integration time owing to 
scheduled project duration and the limited field of view. 
A successful FAME space mission is likely to make 
future astrograph-type astrometric surveys obsolete, 
down to its limiting magnitude of 15. Going to fainter 
magnitudes will remain the domain of ground-based 
astrometric telescopes for at least a decade owing to their 
cost efficiency. The USNO A2.0 and the GSC-2 (Space 
Telescope Science Institute) are currently providing the 
only all-sky positions (approximately 0.2 arcsec) of faint 
stars down to 20th magnitude. These are derived from 
Schmidt survey plates, measured with the PMM. For 
even fainter stars only small selected areas have so far 
been observed. 

Space-based interferometers such as SIM will push 
the astrometrical accuracy into the few microarcsecond 
range; however, only for few selected sources. Ultimately 
the achievable positional accuracy will depend on the 
signal-to-noise ratio, and thus the number of collected 
photons, and the success in controlling systematic errors, 
which will remain the most important technical challenge 
for astrometric projects. 

Obtaining high-precision proper motions is 
problematic right now and utilizing decade- or century- 
old photographic data to their full capacity is an active 
task in current astrometry. This is likely to change in the 
future, when all magnitudes of old-epoch data will be 
covered by a successful next-generation astrometric 
space mission. 


Bibliography 

Good starting points for literature on astrometry are the 
following articles in the Annual Review of Astronomy and 
Astrophysics 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Johnston K J and de Vegt Chr 1999 Reference frames in 
astronomy Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 37 pp 97-125 
Monet D 1988 Recent advances in optical astrometry Ann. Rev. 

Astron. Astrophys. 26 pp 413-40 
van Altena W F 1983 Astrometry Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
21 131-64 


For a recent, comprehensive overview textbook see 
Kovalevsky J 1995 Modern Astrometry (New York: Springer) 


Rigorous definitions of astrometric concepts and a detailed 
account of photographic astrometry and star catalogs in general 
can be found in 


Eichhorn H 1974 Astronomy of Star Positions (New York: 
Ungar) 


For a detailed account of classical instruments (TC, astrolabe, 
PZT) see 


Mueller I I 1977 Spherical and Practical Astronomy as Applied 
to Geodesy (New York: Ungar) 


For trigonometric parallaxes see 


van Altena W F, Lee T J and Hoffleit E D 1995 The General 
Catalogue of Trigonometric Parallaxes 4th edn (Yale, CT: 
Yale University Observatory) 


A comprehensive account on astrometric techniques is given in 


Eichhorn H K and Leacock R J (ed) 1986 Proc. IAU Symp. 109 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) pp 1-838 


A summary of the state of the art in the mid-1990s is given in 


Hoeg E and Seidelmann K P (ed) 1995 Proc. IAU Symp. 166 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) 


For the most recent progress in astrometry see 


Johnston K et al 2000 Towards models and constants for sub- 
microarcsecond astrometry (Proc. [AU Collog. 180) edited 
by K J Johnston, D D McCarthy, B J Luzum and G H 
Kaplan US Naval Observatory, Washington DC 

Cox A N (ed) 2000 Allen’s Astrophysical Quantitities 4th edn 
(New York: Springer) pp 677-87 


For links to many project websites see 


http://ad.usno.navy.mil/ucac/ 


Norbert Zacharias 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astron ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astron 


French-Soviet ultraviolet astronomy satellite, launched 
March 1983. Carried an 80 cm telescope which operated 
in the range 150-350 nm. Placed in a highly elliptical 
orbit (1950 x 201000 km) which limited observations to 
5-6 hours per day. Observed many sources, including 
supernova 1987A. Ceased operations 1989. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astronomical Institute of Athens 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Institute of Athens 


The Astronomical Institute of Athens is the oldest research 
institute of modern Greece (it faces the Parthenon). The 
Astronomical Institute (AI) of the National Observatory of 
Athens (NOA) started its observational projects in 1847. 
The modern computer and research center are housed 
at the Penteli Astronomical Station with major projects 
and international collaborations focused on extragalactic 
astronomy. 

Currently the 1.2 m telescope at Kryoneri (Pelopon- 
nese) is the observational facility of the AI. The AI’s most 
prominent recent project is Aristarchos, the new 2.3 m 
Ritchey—Chrétien telescope build by Zeiss to be installed 
at Roania (2340 m altitude). 

For further information see 
http: / /www.astro.noa.gr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Observing Notebooks for Amateurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Observing Notebooks 
for Amateurs 


An observational astronomer must, above all, be 
systematic. A faulty observation is worse than useless, 
it may easily confuse any subsequent analyses. Keeping 
careful, accurate records is essential. A story may here 
be relevant, although it may be apocryphal; it has been 
quoted time and time again. In 1781 William Herschel 
discovered the planet Uranus, and looking back on old 
records it was found that Uranus had been seen on several 
occasions, although it had always been mistaken as a star. 
According to the story, the French astronomer Le Monnier 
(see LE MONNIER) saw it no less than six times, and had he 
compared his observations he could hardly have failed 
to make the discovery even though Uranus was at that 
time near one of its stationary points. Le Monnier failed 
to check, and one of his observations was subsequently 
found scrawled on the back of a paper bag which had once 
contained hair perfume. 

In any observation—visual, photographic or elec- 
tronic—a few necessary notes must be attached. If any 
of these is omitted, the observation promptly loses much 
or the whole of its value. Basically, the main requirements 
are 


name of observer 

date 

time, GMT (never use variants such as summer time in 
Britain, or time zones in other countries) 

equipment used (for a telescope, type, aperture, magnifi- 
cation; for a camera, type, film, exposure time) 

seeing conditions 

plus any other data which seem to be relevant. 


Of course, the type of notebook used depends entirely on 
the nature of the observations which are being made. The 
‘old-fashioned’ planetary observer would keep a separate 
book for each object—one for Jupiter, one for Mars and 
so on. When making a sketch of a planet, or a lunar 
feature, much depends on the artistic skill of the observer. 
Some are able to make ‘finished’ drawings when actually 
at the telescope; others make preliminary sketches, go to 
a desk in order to make final copies and then re-check 
at the telescope. There can sometimes be a temptation 
to postpone making the final copies until the next day. 
This must always be resisted; errors are virtually certain 
to creep in. 

Planetary observers often use a scale of seeing devised 
by EMANTONIADI long ago. There are five grades, from 
1 (perfect conditions of clarity and steadiness) down to 
5 (conditions so poor that there would be no point in 
observing at all except to follow some phenomenon which 
will not recur). In practice, Antoniadi 1 is very seldom 
found, at least from countries such as Britain. When 
making a drawing of Jupiter or Mars, it is helpful to use 
a prepared disk to allow for the flattening in the case of 
Jupiter, or the phase in the case of Mars; this is not so easy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with Saturn, where freehand sketching is really the only 
answer. 

Photographs should be very carefully filed, with dates 
and times added as well as other necessary data. The 
same applies to electronic records. Many amateurs now 
hunt systematically for novae, comets, supernovae in 
external galaxies (see AMATEUR-PROFESSIONAL COLLABORATION 
IN ASTRONOMY), and with these records it is the time which is 
all-important, particularly if a discovery is made and the 
observer is anxious to claim priority. 

All in all, the method of keeping an astronomical 
notebook is a matter of common sense. Never record 
anything of which you are not absolutely certain; if there 
is a trace of doubt, note it by the side of the observation. 
Remember, too, that it is only too easy to ‘see’ what one 
half expects to see. This was shown very clearly with 
observations of Mars before and after the first images were 
sent back by the space probes. Until then, many perfectly 
honest observers had shown an intricate network of canals. 
As soonas it became clear that the canals did not exist, they 
vanished from the observers’ notebooks. 

One extra point is worth making here. No observation 
is of much real use if it is left lying fallow in a notebook; 
if needed for analysis, it must be sent away to an 
organization such as the BRITISH ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION 
or the AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF VARIABLE STAR OBSERVERS. 
However, to send away one’s original notebook is the 
height of folly; it will probably be mislaid somewhere or 
other, and perhaps lost in the post. Before sending away 
an observation, either a drawing or a written record, make 
absolutely certain that you have a perfect copy. True, this 
takes time, but it is well worth while. 


Patrick Moore 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Photography by Amateurs with Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Photography by 
Amateurs with Telescopes 


The modern amateur astronomer is capable of taking 
beautiful pictures of the night sky, often with surprisingly 
humble equipment. One of the best ways to get started is 
to place a single-lens reflex (SLR) camera on a sturdy tri- 
pod, open the lens aperture as wide as possible and take a 
10 min exposure (See WIDE-FIELD ASTROPHOTOGRAPHY). This 
will record the stars as trails, because of the rotation of the 
Earth, and is a good way to show the different colors of the 
stars. Shorter exposures (typically 1-2 min) will record the 
stars as points and are a good way of showing the differ- 
ent constellations. Transient events such as aurorae and 
bright comets can also be photographed in this way. 

Unfortunately, modern SLR cameras are not really 
suitable for astrophotography as they rely on batteries to 
keep the shutter open. Astrophotographic exposures can 
be quite long (up to 1 h) and these will drain the camera’s 
batteries very quickly. The best type of camera for this 
work is those which were manufactured in the late 1970s, 
such as Nikon, Pentax and Canon. These are rugged, 
manual cameras and can be purchased for reasonable 
prices from most second-hand camera shops. 

The choice of lenses is also important. Wide-angle to 
standard lenses are excellent for producing constellation 
and Milky Way pictures. Small telephoto lenses (135 mm) 
are good for pictures of larger star clusters and deep sky 
objects as are long focal length telephotos (200-500 mm), 
but the latter can be used for eclipses and comets. 

For long exposures it is necessary to place the cam- 
era on a driven equatorial mount. In this way the 
camera can track the motion of the sky and produce pin- 
point images of the stars. Once the mount is accurately 
polar aligned it is possible to take exposures up to 30 
min without having to make any drive corrections. A 
useful piece of equipment for this type of astrophotog- 
raphy is a ‘ball-and-socket’ joint that fits between the 
camera and mount and allows the camera to point in vir- 
tually any direction. Another piece of very useful equip- 
ment is a locking cable release to hold the shutter open 
for extended periods. Closing down the lens aperture by 
one f/stop (ie. f/2 to f/2.8) dramatically improves the 
quality of star images, particularly around the edges of 
the frame. 

Attaching the camera to a modern telescope allows 
detailed photography but means that the drive system 
has to be more accurate. The camera is usually attached 
by placing an adapter between the rear cell of the tele- 
scope focuser and the camera body. Good photographic 
targets include the Moon (see MOON, MOON Maps) and this 
is probably the easiest form of telescopic photography as, 
because of the Moon’s brightness, exposure times can be 
quite short. Capturing a sequence of the Moon’s chang- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


ing phases can be rewarding as can the eerie spectacle of 
a total lunar eclipse. 

For all types of astronomical photography it is a 
good idea to bracket the exposures. This means that a 
series of varying exposure times around the likely correct 
exposure time are used. By doing this, a correct exposure 
will usually be attained, and, by noting the exposure 
time that gives the best result, a more educated guess can 
be made the next time a similar object is photographed 
under similar conditions. 

The Sun (see SOHO (SOLAR AND HELIOSPHERIC OBSERVA- 
TORY) is also a good photographic target but great care 
must be taken when observing the Sun as even glancing 
at the Sun in the sky can damage the eyes. Care must also 
be taken with equipment as the heat from the Sun can 
damage lenses if they are pointed directly at the Sun for 
too long. The easiest and safest method of solar photo- 
graphy is to project an image of the Sun onto a piece of 
white card and photograph the image directly on the 
card. In this way it is possible to photograph sunspots on 
a daily basis. Full-aperture and off-axis solar filters give 
good views of sunspots. Advanced amateurs also use 
hydrogen alpha filters to photograph the Sun at a very 
specific wavelength, chosen to show the dramatic promi- 
nences that are visible around the edge of the Sun. 
Although expensive, these filters produce stunning 
results, especially when the Sun is in an active phase. The 
large amount of light given off by the Sun means that 
photographic exposures can be kept short. 

To photograph the planets, which have very small 
angular diameters, an option is to use eyepiece projec- 
tion. This involves placing an eyepiece between the tele- 
scope and camera to project a highly magnified image of 
the planet onto the film. Although capable of producing 
good results it is usually quite difficult because of the 
unsteadiness of the Earth’ s atmosphere (poor seeing) 
and the difficulty of focusing on such a faint image. 

Deep sky photography of galaxies and nebulae (see 
figures 1 and 2) is rewarding but requires very good 
tracking from a polar-aligned equatorial drive. Although 
most modern telescopes are equipped with accurate dri- 
ves during longer exposures it is necessary to make 
minor corrections to the tracking of the telescope. 
Traditionally, this has been done in one of two ways. A 
separate telescope can be attached to the mount and used 
as a guidescope to monitor any deviations from perfect 
tracking performance. This method works well as bright 
stars which are suitable for guiding are usually easy to 
find. The guidescope needs to be fixed rigidly otherwise 
flexure can occur which will degrade the guiding. The 
second method involves the use of an off-axis guider, 
attached between the telescope and camera, which 
diverts the light from a guidestar using a small prism or 
mirror. These work well as the guiding is carried out 
through the main optics of the telescope, so no flexure 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Photography by Amateurs with Telescopes ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the best films to emerge for this kind of photography is 
Kodak EliteChrome 200 ISO slide film. Several character- 
istics, such as fine grain and good red sensitivity, make it 
an excellent performer. Also, the digital manipulation of 
astrophotographs is very popular among modern 
astrophotographers. Film can be scanned and digitally 
enhanced to remove light pollution, aircraft and satellite 
trails, as well as contrast and color enhanced in what is 
effectively a digital darkroom. 

Nik Szymanek 


Figure 1. The Pleiades, a young star cluster surrounded by a 
reflection nebula, photographed by Nik Szymanek. 


Figure 2. The Lagoon Nebula, M8, a diffuse emission nebula in 
Sagittarius, photographed by Nik Szymanek. 


occurs, but can be difficult in practice as the choice of 
suitable guidestars is severely limited. A modern option 
is to use a charge-coupled device autoguider (see CCDs, 
FILTERS AND CCD PHOTOMETRY FOR AMATEURS) with the 
guidescope as this will deliver the best tracking of all and 
alleviates the need for an observer to peer through a 
guiding telescope during long exposures. 

Focusing on deep sky objects is quite demanding 
and is best achieved by using a moderately bright star 
and racking the focus back and forth until good focus is 
attained. If the camera used has the facility to change the 
focusing screen, a good option is to install a high-trans- 
mission screen such as those manufactured by Beattie. 
These feature very bright views and minimal clutter as 
no ‘daytime’ focusing aids (split image) are necessary. 

Traditionally, fast films have been used for deep sky 
astrophotography (generally 400-1600 ISO), but one of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 2 


Astronomical Societies and Publications 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Societies and 
Publications 


The first publicly sponsored, modern observatories came 
into being to serve the needs of navigation and time- 
keeping, and their first publications were, correspondingly, 
in the form of almanacs, ephemerides and the like. Early 
arrivals on the scene included La Connoissance des Temps 
(Paris Observatory, 1679) and Nautical Almanacs 
(Greenwich Observatory, 1767; San Fernando Observatory 
(Spain), 1792; US Naval Observatory, 1855). Producing 
calendric and navigational data appropriate to specific 
locations and languages was also a major function of the far 
more numerous observatories of the 19th century. 

Professional societies (and publications) serve to 
validate a scientific community and its shared store of 
knowledge, customs and experiences. The first scientific 
society, however—the Royal Society of London, founded in 
1660—was largely amateur. Its Philosophical Transactions, 
begun in 1665, for the first time facilitated the rapid 
dissemination of new scientific discoveries as well as 
providing a forum for their critique. 

The first specifically astronomical society was the 
Astronomical Society of London (soon to become the 
ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY (RAS)), founded in 1820 
by John Herschel and others (see HERSCHEL FAMILY) to 
supply a need that was not being satisfied by the Royal 
Society. Jewish names appear in the early membership lists, 
long before Jews were admitted to English universities, and 
a woman, Caroline Herschel, received a medal in 1828; the 
second was Vera Rubin, in 1996. Publication of the 
Society’s Memoirs began in 1821, and they at first consisted 
of papers that had been presented in brief form at the 
monthly meetings. Soon it was necessary for the editors to 
point out that thanking a speaker for his presentation did not 
necessarily reflect unqualified approval or guarantee space 
in the Memoirs. A small committee reviewed contributions 
from time to time and recommended to the Council of the 
Society which ones should be published. Thus the Memoirs 
can claim to be both the first specifically astronomical 
publication and the first such publication to be refereed. 

Memoirs, however, made no provision for less 
substantial items such as advance notices of meetings, short 
notes on astronomical phenomena and reports from 
observatories, and so in 1827 the Society instituted its 
Monthly Notices. This developed and eventually increased 
its frequency; it now appears thrice monthly and is a leading 
journal in the field. Memoirs became a vehicle for the 
publication of very long papers and compilations of data, 
and in 1977 it self-destructed in favor of microfiches in 
Monthly Notices. Early issues of both journals had 
occasional items in French but were monoglot for most of 
their histories. 

The other astronomical publication to appear in the 
1820s, Astronomische Nachrichten, was the fruit of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


enthusiasm of a single man, Heinrich Christian Schumacher, 
director of the observatory at Altona from 1823 until his 
death in 1850. Astronomische Nachrichten continued to be 
edited at Altona, first by C A Peterson and then, from 1855, 
by CA F Peters. In 1872 the Altona observatory was moved 
to Kiel, and the journal was edited from there until the 
1930s, when it was moved to Berlin. Schumacher offered to 
publish articles in ‘any European language’; contributions in 
French and English were common from the start, and today 
nearly all the articles are in English. 

Another publication that was the creation of a single 
person appeared in the USA: Astronomical Journal, 
founded by BENJAMIN APTHORP GOULD in 1849 in deliberate 
imitation of the German periodical. Its pages were open to 
professionals and amateurs alike, worldwide. Publication 
was interrupted by the Civil War, but Gould resumed it in 
1886. Astronomical Journal is now published by the 
AMERICAN ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY. 

An oddity among astronomical publications is The 
Observatory, founded in 1877 and to this day owned 
collectively by its current editors. In addition to short 
research papers, it carries meeting reports, reviews and light- 
hearted items. 

France produced a wide range of journals, beginning in 
1884 with Bulletin Astronomique, published at the Paris 
Observatory but not limited to work done there. The Société 
Astronomique de France, and its Bulletin, were founded in 
1887 (see SOCIETE FRANCAISE D’ASTRONOMIE ET 
D’ ASTROPHYSIQUE), and the Journal des Observateurs was 
founded in 1915. In 1969 this and the Bulletin Astronomique 
were merged into Astronomy and Astrophysics, together 
with Annales d’Astrophysique, Zeitschrift fiir Astrophysik, 
and the Bulletin of the Astronomical Institute of the 
Netherlands, which had been founded in 1921 by five Dutch 
observatories and institutes that had previously produced 
their own publication s 

In 1863, German astronomers founded a society, 
ASTRONOMISCHE GESELLSCHAFT, in the context of the 
gradual unification of the country; it began its own 
publications soon after, and late in the century assumed 
responsibility for Astronomische Nachrichten. Other 
national societies founded in the 19th century were Societa 
Astronomica Italiana (whose Memorie appeared from 
1872), Société Royale Belge d’Astronomie (Ciel et Terre 
from 1880, Bulletin from 1895), the Royal Astronomical 
Society of Canada (founded in 1868) and the American 
Astronomical Society (1899). 


Periodical literature in the late 19th and 20th 


centuries 

The rise of ‘astrophysics’ in the later decades of the 19th 
century led to the involvement in the ‘new’ astronomy of 
scientists from a wide range of disciplines, and this 
sometimes led to strain between them and the ‘old’ 
(positional) astronomers. In Britain the RAS and its 
publications managed to absorb the new topics. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Societies and Publications 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


American community partially fractured with the 
founding of the Astrophysical Journal (ApJ) in 1895 by 
George Ellery Hale and his associates. At first it mostly 
published spectroscopic results from Yerkes and, soon 
after, Mount Wilson Observatories, with some resistance 
from astronomers at other locations. It eventually spread 
over the entire country (and later the world) and 
embraced all aspects of astronomy, although there have 
been times when the editors thought it necessary to say 
explicitly that they would welcome papers in radio 
astronomy and astronomical instrumentation, invitations 
that not all found convincing. ApJ, originally owned by 
Yerkes Observatory, is now published by University of 
Chicago Press, but with management provided by the 
American Astronomical Society. It has been absolutely 
monoglot from the beginning. 

The German and French communities also 
fragmented as they grew, with the founding of Zeitschrift 
fiir Astrophysik in 1930 and Annales d’Astrophysique in 
1938, both originally monoglot but with numerous papers 
in English by the time they were absorbed into 
Astronomy and Astrophysics in 1969. No other national 
communities seem to have been large enough to support 
two professional publications, and astrophysicists 
elsewhere turned to academy proceedings and journals of 
physics in their home countries or, increasingly, to the 
ApJ. 

Further fragmentation of the astronomical literature 
is a relatively late development, except for specialized 
publication in meteoritics (from 1935 onward in the USA 
and 1941 in the USSR) and selenography, both tied to 
specialized societies. Publications focusing on the Sun 
and solar system, and parallel divisions of the American 
Astronomical Society and some other professional 
societies, appeared after the Second World War. 

In the second half of the 20th century there have 
been two main drivers of the establishment of new 
societies and publications. In the more advanced of the 
developing countries, and in those resulting from the 
dissolution of the USSR, Yugoslavia and 
Czechoslovakia, astronomers have often started their 
own, typically quite small, societies. Countries with still 
smaller populations of professional astronomers usually 
adhere to the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION via 
a national committee under the auspices of the national 
academy of sciences. 

New journals have come largely from commercial 
publishers, sometimes with encouragement from 
members of the astronomical community who felt 
inadequately served by the older publications. None of 
these is currently a serious competitor, in the sense of 
being both large and highly regarded. In fact, as we shall 
see, the dominant trend has been towards a further 
concentration of important papers into the largest 
refereed journals, all of which are now published almost 
exclusively in English. The extent to which electronic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


publishing will modify current patterns remains to be 
seen. 

Already in the 19th century, some astronomers 
perceived that the literature was becoming too 
voluminous for everyone to scan it all. An attempt at a 
Bibliographica Astronomica lasted only a year or two 
(around 1895). More successful was the Astronomischer 
Jahresbericht, begun by the Astronomische Gesellschaft 
in 1899, with the abstracts initially all in German (but 
article titles normally in the original language). It 
survived both world wars (although with incomplete 
coverage of the literature during the second) and in 1969 
was transferred to a commercial publisher and English 
language text, as Astronomy and Astrophysics Abstracts. 


Amateurs in astronomy 

From its foundation, the Royal Astronomical Society 
welcomed both full-time and part-time, paid and 
volunteer, professional and amateur astronomers. 
However, as its activities and publications focused 
increasingly on the interests and products of the full-time, 
paid, professional sector, amateur astronomical societies 
inevitably came into being. Of those that survive, Leeds 
(1859) was the first and Liverpool (1881) the second, 
followed by the broader-based British Astronomical 
Association in 1890. The Association’s Journal began 
publication the same year and still flourishes. 

In the USA, amateur societies came first, Chicago 
(1863) and Baltimore (1881) pre-dating the founding in 
1899 of the American Astronomical Society. The 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific and its Publications 
date from 1889. A ‘pro/am’ organization from its 
foundation (in connection with the coordination of 
observations of a solar eclipse visible from California), it 
has remained so, although eventually separate publication 
series became necessary, the Publications serving the 
paid professional and a series of Leaflets (1925-71) and, 
more recently, the journal Mercury being targeted at 
amateurs. 

The AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF VARIABLE STAR 
OBSERVERS, founded in 1911, is an amateur-dominated 
joint organization whose contributions to astronomical 
research are approached only by the somewhat similar 
Association Francaise des Observateurs d’Etoiles 
Variables (1921) and, in its day, by the Observing 
Corporation of the Society of Amateur Astronomers of 
Moscow, whose Bulletin (1925-1937) was later 
incorporated as one of the publications of the Academy 
of Sciences of the USSR. 


International collaboration 

International collaboration in astronomy began in the 
18th century with cooperation over expeditions to 
observe transits of Venus, and in 1800 at Lilienthal there 
was organized a corps of 24 ‘celestial police’ to monitor 
the ecliptic in search of a planet between Mars and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Societies and Publications 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter as predicted by Bode’s law. The projects that 
resulted in the massive Bonner Durchmusterung (of 
stars), begun in 1859, and its southern extension, the 
Cordoba Durchmusterung, were largely parochial, but 
led to an agreement among 17 observatories to provide 
very accurate positions for the Durchmusterung stars 
down to ninth magnitude. However, work proceeded 
slowly and was overtaken by the advent of dry-emulsion 
photographic plates. 

Successful photography of astronomical objects at 
many observatories led the director at Paris, Admiral E B 
Mouchez, with support from David Gill at the Cape of 
Good Hope, to attempt from 1885 the coordination of an 
international Carte du Ciel, a photographically based 
map of the sky and accompanying catalog of positions 
and magnitudes down to 11”. The Permanent 
International Committee and its Bulletin (1892-1915) 
lasted until the onset of the First World War, holding 
regular conferences, encouraging progress among the 20 
or so observatories and arranging for publication of 
portions of the Carte as material became available. The 
work was actually completed only in 1964, but the earlier 
plates are a valuable resource for determining proper 
motions over a long period. 

Initially successful, but also a victim of the First 
World War, was the International Union for Co-operation 
in Solar Research (Transactions published from 1906 to 
1914), whose prime mover was Hale. The Union 
attempted, for example, the standardization of 
measurements of solar rotation, so that real variations 
with latitude and with time could be identified. Last on 
the pre-war scene was Jacobus Kapteyn’s scheme for 
Selected Areas (so that measurements of stellar 
brightness, color, proper motion, radial velocity and so 
forth could be concentrated in parts of the sky that would 
best reveal the large-scale structure of the Galaxy). 

In 1919 representatives of 16 of the victorious 
nations met in Brussels to form the International 
Research Council (now International Council of 
Scientific Unions or ICSU), for which the cooperation of 
neutral nations was invited. The organizational meeting 
for the International Astronomical Union took place at 
the same time. An additional 16 nations were declared 
eligible for IRC membership over the next few years, an 
important constraint on the IAU, since no country could 
join it (or, initially, even send people to its meetings) 
without acquiring IRC membership first. The first official 
General Assembly of the [AU was held in Rome in 1922 
and nine countries (Belgium, Canada, France, Great 
Britain, Greece, Italy, Japan, Mexico and the United 
States) participated. By the second Assembly the number 
had grown to 22. China and the Soviet Union were 
important additions between the world wars, but 
Germany, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey were 
still unwelcome until after 1945. The IAU eventually 
assumed responsibility for both the Carte du Ciel and the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Selected Areas, although with some difficulty, since both 
had considerable German involvement. After the Second 
World War it took charge of the collection and 
dissemination (via telegram and, more recently, e-mail) 
of rapidly breaking astronomical news. 

The IAU membership of some 150 astronomers at its 
foundation has now grown to about 8000 in 81 countries. 
From its beginning the IAU had its own series of 
publications, at first simply the reports of the triennial 
General Assemblies, but now including the proceedings 
of the specialized symposia and colloquia sponsored or 
endorsed by the IAU. The Union has _ become 
increasingly active in promoting astronomical education 
and research in developing countries, and it remains 
unique among the international scientific unions in 
having individual members as well as adhering countries. 


Patterns of publication 

A leading 19th century astronomer might well publish 
half or more of his papers in non-astronomical journals, 
and nearly all produced books recording their more 
extended efforts. A century later the astronomer or 
astrophysicist is likely to publish all his or her non- 
conference papers in one or another of the very few 
specialized, prestigious journals, and to produce 
monographs only of the textbook or trade book variety, if 
at all. 

Changes over the first half of the 20th century are 
revealed by an analysis of the volumes of the 
Astronomischer Jahresbericht for 1900, 1925 and 1955 
(these last dates being chosen to avoid distortion by the 
world wars). The first and most obvious trend is the 
growth of the field: not only do the numbers of papers 
increase, but their mean length has grown enormously. 
The second is the gradual shift between observation and 
theory, a shift that has doubtless continued in recent 
decades, although many of today’s ‘observations’ (like 
the abundance of an element in a star derived from its 
spectrum) would have counted as theory in 1925 (and 
witchcraft in 1900). Third, the heyday of observatory 
publications came between the wars, when more than 200 
existed, and they contained about one-sixth of the papers, 
compared with one-tenth in 1900 and in 1955; that 
fraction has now fallen much lower. The fourth trend is 
in the changes in the balance between nations, most 
notably in the increase in the contributions from the 
United States. Finally, and still more obviously if one 
looks at more recent times, is the gradual concentration 
of ‘publishing power’ in a few editorial hands. In 1997, 
5272 pages appeared in the Astronomical Journal, 9136 
in Monthly Notices, 17 141 in Astronomy and Astro- 
physics and its Supplement series and 22 948 in Astro- 
physical Journal, its Letters and Supplements. Nothing 
else (except perhaps conference proceedings and 
abstracts) remotely competes in size and level of quality 
as perceived by the astronomical community. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Societies and Publications 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
Blaauw A 1994 History of the International Astronomical 
Union (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
DeVorkin D H (ed) 1999 The First Century of the American 
Astronomical Society (New York: Institute of Physics) 
Dreyer J L E and Turner H H (ed) 1923 History of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 1820-1920 (London: Royal 
Astronomical Society) 

Heck A 2001 StarGuides (Dordrecht: Kluwer); see also 
http://cdsweb.u-strasbg. fr/~heck/sgpres.htm 

Lola Bausch J A 1983 1994 Union List of Astronomy Serials 
(Yerkes Observatory) (later editions in electronic form) 


Virginia Trimble 
Michael Hoskin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Society of Australia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Society of Australia 


The Astronomical Society of Australia (ASA) was formed 
in 1966. It has a membership of professional astronomers 
and has as its objectives ‘the promotion and extension of 
knowledge of Astronomy and related branches of science’. 
The business of the ASA is conducted by an elected 
Council. It is represented on a number of astronomical 
bodies such as the National Committee for Astronomy. 
The Society publishes an international journal, Publications 
of the Astronomical Society of Australia, and it holds an 
annual four day scientific meeting. 
For further information see 

http://www.atnf.csiro.au/asa_ www/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Society of the Pacific 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Society of the Pacific 


The Astronomical Society of the Pacific (ASP) has worked 
since 1890 to advance astronomy, and to explain the 
universe to students, teachers and the public. It is 
the world’s largest general astronomy organization. Its 
annual meetings bring together professional and amateur 
astronomers, historians, teachers, students and the public. 
It publishes a respected professional journal Publications 
of the ASP, the ASP Conference Series containing the 
proceedings of over 200 astronomy conferences, and the 
non-technical magazine Mercury. It is also the publisher 
for the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION. Its quarterly 
teachers’ newsletter The Universe in the Classroom reaches 
thousands of classrooms, and is translated into a dozen 
languages. It also produces a wide range of high- 
quality, low-cost teaching resources, including books and 
slides. It co-manages the education and public outreach 
program for Nasa’s SOFIA airborne observatory. Its 
exemplary Project ASTRO develops productive long-term 
partnerships between astronomers and teachers across 
North America. 
For further information see 
http://www.aspsky.org. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


As a passive science, astronomy extracts most of its 
information from the incoming RADIATION out of the 
heavens. Such an analysis would be all too simple were 
it not for the quantum nature of matter and radiation. 
Electrons are bound in quantized orbits around their nuclei 
and must emit radiation at discrete wavelengths which 
are defined precisely by the transitions between discrete 
energy states. The resulting spectral lines are extremely 
important tools for identifying and characterizing the 
emitting source. 


Spectral signatures 

The first concept of spectroscopy can be traced to Newton, 
who first noted that the dispersion of sunlight into its 
different colors by a prism reflected the properties of 
sunlight itself. It is furthermore remarkable that some 
200 yr later, in the late 1800s, when Balmer recognized 
the hydrogen series in the absorption lines of the solar 
spectrum first seen by Fraunhofer, it pre-dated the 
discovery of the electron, the quantum theory or the Bohr 
atom. This hint from the heavens, that matter will absorb 
light in a very well-behaved manner, with a SPECTRUM 
which can be modeled as the hydrogen series and which 
can be applied to other atomic species, motivated the 
development of modern physics. Today, we know of 
course that the quantized energy states of an electron 
orbiting an atom depend on the mass of the nucleus and 
the nuclear charge. Each isotope of each atomic species 
therefore has a distinctive set of electronic levels. Hence 
the resulting transitions form a unique and unambiguous 
signature for identification. 


Measuring large-scale motions 

Perhaps the most important feature of the atomic spectra 
is the rest frequency or wavelength of the transitions. 
These are very precisely known, either through quantum 
mechanical calculations or laboratory measurements, to 
typical accuracies of better than one part in a billion. 
This high accuracy allows the measurement of any 
shift in the rest wavelength due to the motion of the 
emitting source. The Doppler shifts, measured through 
precise spectroscopy, have been the cornerstone of modern 
astronomy. Such diverse phenomena as binary stellar 
orbital motions, rotation curves of galaxies and radial 
motions around massive black holes represent a few 
examples of the important kinematic motions revealed 
through spectroscopy. Perhaps the most important 
measurement of all was the recognition of the Hubble 
flow of galaxies. The systematic REDSHIFT of the spectra of 
galaxies, the recognition of their cosmological nature and 
the ever-increasing magnitude of motions with distance 
are the foundation of the model of the expanding universe. 
This result has the enormous implication that the light 
which we observe at different redshifts comes from 
different distances. Because of the finite speed of light, this 
means that we have the means to examine the history of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


universe as a function of time, by sampling only inour own 
epoch. In the past decade, the redshifted Doppler motions 
of galaxies have been used to map the spatial distribution 
of matter on very large scales, suggesting the formation of 
structures in the very early universe. The study of galaxies 
and quasars at very high redshifts has become one of the 
fundamental problems of modern astrophysics. 


Measuring local motions 

Because of the discrete nature of the electronic energy 
states, the ensuing transitions not only have precisely 
determined transition frequency but also intrinsically 
narrow line widths, typically dominated by Doppler 
motions within the emitting systems. When spectrometers 
became powerful enough and the detectors became 
sensitive enough, line profiles began to be resolved. The 
measured spectral profiles were found to carry important 
information on the local kinematics. For example, 
extraordinarily broad line profiles seen toward SEYFERT 
GALAXIES Were interpreted as outflowing material from the 
nuclear regions, since from the magnitude of the motions 
they do not appear to be gravitationally bound. P Cygni 
line profiles in stellar envelopes, with redshifted emission 
and blueshifted absorption, were taken to be evidence 
of outflowing winds. This is because of the idea that 
the material in front of the star can be identified by its 
absorption against the star while its spectra can be seen 
to be blueshifted by its outflowing motions towards us. 
By the same argument, inverse P Cygni profiles, where 
the motions of the emission and absorption spectra are 
reversed, have been interpreted as contraction. In yet 
other sources, asymmetric line profiles with substantial 
enhancements of one side of the line profile were kinematic 
evidence for shocked gas. This became even more 
convincing when combined with excitation arguments. 
In nearby systems, the observed Doppler motions in 
the radial direction have been found to be consistent 
with detectable PROPER MOTIONS across the line of sight. 
This is consistent with our expectation that the Earth is 
not an unique vantage point. After systematic motions 
are removed, the spectra often still exhibit nonthermal 
motions. That is to say, the line profiles are broader than 
can be explained by thermal motions alone. This has led 
to the studies of turbulence, especially with regard to the 
role of magnetic fields. 


Measuring excitation 

The various energy levels within the atom will be 
populated according to the ambient conditions such as 
temperature, particle density and radiation field. By 
sampling an appropriate set of transitions, we can 
construct the population distribution and thereby measure 
the excitation of the emitting source. In particular, it 
is easy to see that successively higher ionization states 
will require higher excitation, since the electrons will 
see a less shielded nucleus (see EXCITATION AND IONIZATION). 
Hence, if the detected radiation is dominated by lines from 
highly ionized atoms, we can deduce that the emitting 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


region must be ionized by energetic photons. The relative 
strengths of the various atomic lines are therefore a means 
to identify the spectral type of a star, in addition to 
its colors (see also CLASSIFICATION OF STELLAR SPECTRA). The 
relative line intensities also determine the hardness of the 
radiation. This has allowed us to distinguish between 
normal galactic nuclei, whose ionization can be easily 
explained by the radiation from young stars, and LINERS 
and Seyferts whose radiation field must be progressively 
harder. Another example of the power of spectroscopy 
was the identification of HERBIG-HARO objects as regions 
of shock excitation. Whereas these sources were once 
thought to be sites of young stars, spectroscopy showed 
otherwise. Together with proper motions and Doppler 
velocity measurements and line profiles, the relative 
intensities of the various ionized lines were consistent with 
shock models. 


Measuring abundances 

The detection of numerous atomic transitions allows the 
assessment of the abundances of the elements. With 
improved sensitivity, the abundances can be measured 
not only in the Sun and other stars but also in clouds 
and in external galaxies. Such data are crucial for 
checking NUCLEOSYNTHESIS models, for understanding the 
metal abundances as a function of time and as a gauge 
on evolution. For example, POPULATION I and POPULATION 
m stars can be distinguished based on their metallicity. 
Whether HIGH-VELOcITY cLoups in the Galaxy are primordial 
in nature or recycled from the disk of the Galaxy can also 
be determined by measuring the relative abundances of 
metals. Detailed measurements of the various elements 
in SUPERNOVA ejecta can also be used to classify the type 
of supernova event and also to check on elemental 
production mechanisms. 


Important atomic lines 

There are a number of atomic lines which are of particular 
interest. These include the Balmer lines in the optical, the 
Brackett lines in the near infrared, the radio recombination 
lines, the 21 cm atomic hydrogen line and the ionized 
carbon line in the far infrared. In general, the spectral 
lines from ionized hydrogen are important for tracing HII 
REGIONS. In particular, the infrared and radio lines are useful 
for studying deeply embedded sources. 


Optical lines 

The Lyman series of hydrogen, which consists of the 
recombination lines which end in then = 1 state (where n is 
the total quantum number for Bohr-Sommerfeld orbits), 
is found at ultraviolet wavelengths. The Balmer series, 
the lines of which end in the n = 2 state, is found in 
the optical. The hydrogen lines together with lines from 
other elements have been used to classify the spectral 
types of stars. The temperature in the photosphere, 
as inferred from the type of lines which are excited, 
is an important part of the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM 
for stellar evolution. The He line at 6563 A, which is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the n = 3-2 Balmer line, has been one of the most 
useful lines in optical work, tracing regions which have 
been photoionized by a nearby star. This is particularly 
important in external galaxies because the nuclear regions 
are often highly ionized by a concentration of massive 
stars or an active nucleus powered by a BLACK HOLE. The 
bright nuclear emission in the Ha line can be used to 
measure the ionizing luminosity, the absolute motion of 
the gas from its redshift, which in turn yields a distance 
via the Hubble relation, and perhaps most importantly 
the nature of the nucleus from the observed line widths. 
The advent of spEcTROGRAPHS with high resolving power 
allows the astronomer to distinguish between narrow 
line widths consistent with galactic rotation and much 
wider line widths which may represent outflowing winds 
from the nuclear region. In the case of active nuclei 
powered by nonthermal processes, the radiation has a 
harder spectrum than ordinary starlight. Hence, lines 
from higher excitation states of hydrogen or rarer elements 
become detectable and even stronger sometimes. In the 
past decade, optical spectroscopy has made great progress 
because of the construction of large-aperture instruments 
such as the Keck telescopes and the launch of the Hubble 
telescope. The larger collecting area has meant that ever 
higher-redshift systems are being detected. The Hubble 
telescope with its superb imaging capability above the 
atmosphere has meant that spectroscopy can be done at 
under 0”.1 resolution. Some of the best evidence for the 
existence of massive black holes in the nuclei of galaxies 
has come from the Hubble measurements of very large 
rotational motions in the central few tenths of an arcsecond 
(see figure 1). For stellar work, one of the most important 
advances has been the development of spectrographs with 
tremendous resolving powers. Eschelle spectrographs are 
now able to resolve a line with a resolution of better than 
100000. By fitting many spectral lines at once, Doppler 
motions on the order of a few meters per second can 
be detected. This has allowed the development of the 
study of extrasolar planets, where planets in orbit around 
nearby stars are inferred from the reciprocal motions of the 
stars due to the gravitational pull from a secondary body. 
Some 20 planets have now been inferred from the Doppler 
motions of these wobbling stars (see EXOPLANETS). 


Ultraviolet lines 

Because the Lyman series lies in the ultraviolet, little 
progress was made until space-borne telescopes became 
available. With the Goddard High-Resolution Spectro- 
graph on the Hubble Telescope, absorption lines can be 
measured for many atomic and molecular species. This 
has allowed the measurement of elemental abundances 
towards Galactic and extragalactic sources. In particular, 
metal abundances are important for identifying whether 
material is primordial in nature or has already been pro- 
cessed through star formation. Elemental abundances in 
interstellar clouds as measured in the gas phase can be 
compared with cosmic abundances in order to deduce the 
fraction of various elements which are locked up in dust 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Approaching 


Receding 


Figure 1. An image of the ionized disk surrounding the nucleus of M87 from the Hubble Space Telescope. Shown are two spectra of 
the O III emission line at 0.25 offset on either side of the nucleus. The two spectra are redshifted and blueshifted by about 500 km s~! 
over a size scale of about 35 pc. The implied enclosed binding mass is about 2 billion solar masses. Such motions, if bound, constitute 
some of the best evidence for massive black holes in the centers of galaxies. 


grains. The measurement of the Lyman lines from deu- 
terium can be compared with the corresponding hydro- 
gen lines in order to estimate the deuterium fraction. This 
is of course a check on the synthesis of elements in the 
early universe since deuterium is not made through stel- 
lar nucleosynthesis. The deuterium fraction depends on 
the primordial baryon density during the first few minutes 
of the big bang. A higher baryon density would drive a 
faster rate for the formation of helium 4, which would tend 
to deplete the deuterium. The Ly a lines are also studied 
in absorption against quasars. Since there is a lot of inter- 
vening hydrogen gas on the way to distant quasars, all the 
Lyman absorption lines form a band of absorption on the 
blue side of the Lyman line which is intrinsic to the quasar 
system. This so-called LYMAN ALPHA FOREST has become an 
important tool to probe the intergalactic medium. 


Infrared lines 

While the Ha line and other optical lines have been very 
useful, they are susceptible to dust extinction effects. 
This is particularly bothersome for cores of molecular 
clouds where young stars are deeply embedded or for 
edge-on nuclear disks where the line-of-sight extinction 
can be many magnitudes in the optical wavelengths. 
One could compare the Ha and Hf line intensities to 
estimate extinction effects. However, in practice, this 
is unreliable if both lines are suffering heavy extinction. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Moreover, if the extinction is high enough, the Ha line 
may not be detectable at all. In the near infrared, the 
extinction due to dust is much reduced. As a result, 
the Brackett lines of hydrogen at 2 wm and 4 wm have 
been very useful for studying embedded sources both in 
the Galaxy and in external systems. In the mid-infrared, 
there are also fine-structure lines due to the spin-orbit 
interactions of the electrons, where there is an energy 
difference depending on whether the spin of the electron 
is aligned with the orbital angular momentum vector of 
the electron. For example, a particularly useful transition 
is due to the *P3,.—P1,2 line for Ne II at 12.8 wm. This 
line has been successfully used to study H II regions, 
planetary nebulae, extragalactic nuclei and most famously 
the ionized gas streamers around the Galactic Center (see 
figure 2). Not only is the ionized gas detected to be in 
the form of streamers which orbit the Galactic Center but 
the kinematics is determined from the Ne II line profiles. 
Orbits fitted to the motions of the ionized gas suggest 
a central massive object with about three million solar 
masses. 

With the development of more and more sensitive 
detectors as well as space-borne telescopes, the near- 
infrared window is becoming a very important diagnostic 
for external galaxies. The Infrared Space Observatory was 
able to detect and measure many atomic lines in the near 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-28°58'45” 


-28°59'00" 
B : 
= 18 
4 
Ss 
2 
3 —28°59'30" 
4s” 
-29°00'00" 
17"42™34? 30° 2 28° 
Right Ascension (1950) 


Flux Density (Jy x 10") 


200 -100 9 200 
LSR Valealty (tum 8° 


Figure 2. The left image is a picture of the ionized streamers detected in radio continuum toward the Galactic Center region. Overlaid 
are the positions where the Ne II 12.8 ym fine structure line emission has been measured. A number of ionized gas streamers can be 
seen to be in orbit around the central object known as SgrA*, a point-like radio continuum source. The right image is a display of the 
spectral profiles measured in the northern ionized arm. The kinematics of the Ne II emission has been fitted to orbital motions around 
SerA*. This resulted in an estimate of 3 x 10°Mo for the central mass if the motions are bound. These results are some of the best 


evidence for a massive black hole in the center of the Galaxy. 


and mid-infrared toward many systems. These provide 
information on the chemical abundances and excitation 
(see figure 3) as well as on motions for these galaxies. 
Such information has been very useful for understanding 
whether the infrared-luminous galaxies can be driven by 
star formation processes alone. 


Neutral atomic hydrogen 

As 90% of the universe is in the form of hydrogen, it 
is clearly the most important atom. While the original 
identification of the Balmer series was necessarily in the 
optical, the Lyman series is in the ultraviolet, while the 
Paschen, Brackett and later series are in the infrared. All 
of these lines require a good deal of energy to excite, 
making them good tracers in stellar environments and 
in surrounding ionized regions. For the lower excitation 
regions, there is the 21 cm spin-flip line. This line 
originates in the interaction between the spins of the 
electron and the proton. The hydrogen atom has slightly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


more energy when the spins are parallel versus anti- 
parallel. The resulting photon on de-excitation comes 
out at a wavelength of 21 cm. The required excitation 
is so small that this line can be detected throughout the 
Galaxy and easily in external galaxies. Moreover, unlike 
optical lines, the 21 cm line is impervious to extinction 
effects. Hence the kinematic information from the line 
profiles can be traced throughout the entire Galaxy even 
though we are viewing the system edge on and within the 
disk. One of the first 21 cm results was the identification 
of a number of sPIRAL ARMS within the Galaxy, heretofore 
unseen. This 21 cm line has become a most important 
tool for studying galactic dynamics, interacting galaxies, 
cluster environment and redshifts in the nearby universe. 
One of the important features of the hydrogen line is that 
it can exist where stellar matter does not. Hence far out 
in the Galaxy, where matter is no longer dense enough 
to make stars, we can still trace the INTERSTELLAR MATTER. 
Studies at 21 cm have shown that often galaxies are several 
times larger in atomic hydrogen than their optical extents. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Circinus Galaxy 


[ SWSO1 
me 100E a 
ha E RR 
sa =z 

& [ 
‘a 
a r 
2 zl 

101 o> 
a oe ee) 
= C 


[arti] 


T T 4 T T 
a 6B | 
& Bw 
— = 
= 5 
=F 4 
Be3eR F- 
22232 z 
22222 4 


H, S(3) 
[SIV] 


10 20 40 


Wavelength [um] 


Figure 3. An infrared spectrum of the Circinus galaxy from the Infrared Space Observatory. A number of spectral features from atomic 
ions can be seen. The comparison of the relative intensities of these ionic features tells us the excitation state of the gas. 


Oo 


Figure 4. The left panel shows an optical picture of the M81-M82-NGC2077 group. The right panel shows an atomic hydrogen 21 cm 
line image of the same group of galaxies. The atomic hydrogen clearly shows a lot of material which is not seen in the optical and in 
particular shows that interactions among the three members of the group have resulted in tidal distortion of the gaseous disks of these 


galaxies. 


There are two tremendously important effects which have 
been found. First, in sPIRAL GALAXIES, where we can see the 
rotational motions of the stars and the gas, it has been 
found that the rotation curve of the galaxy, when traced in 
atomic hydrogen, appears to be flat as far out as we can 
detect the hydrogen. The implication is that there is a lot 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of matter which is enclosed in the outer parts of the galaxy. 
Otherwise, the rotation curve will fall with increasing 
radius because of the decreasing gravitational effects of 
the enclosed mass with increasing distance. This is one 
of the key results suggesting the existence of DARK MATTER. 
If sufficient dark matter is there, it may have implications 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


for the question of whether the universe is open or closed, 
i.e. whether there is enough matter to bound the Hubble 
expansion of the universe. The second important result 
has been the detection of peculiar motions and structures 
in the outer parts of galaxies which can be attributed to 
interactions with nearby systems (see figure 4). Such 
interactions are typically not seen in the optical which 
traces the inner parts of the galaxy. This has implications 
for the dynamic nature of galaxy formation and evolution, 
as well as for the formation and fueling of massive black 
holes especially in interacting systems. 


Radio and far-infrared lines 

For hydrogen, the higher recombination lines, those 
ending in the higher n states, occur in the radio 
wavelengths. The main advantage of these lines is the 
absence of dust extinction at radio wavelengths, making 
the intensity of these lines a very accurate measure 
of the total ionizing luminosity. The main drawback 
for radio studies, the coarse angular resolution, was 
overcome by the development of RADIO INTERFEROMETERS. 
While the recombination lines at centimeter wavelengths 
can suffer from nonthermal excitation effects, the lines in 
the millimeter wavelengths in general are free from such 
effects and have line strengths nearly equal to the radio 
continuum emission from the H II regions. In the far 
infrared, there are a number of important lines. One of 
the interesting lines is the C II *P3,.—P1,2 fine-structure 
line at 158 wm. This line is excited by collisions with H I 
and electrons in photodissociation and photon-dominated 
regions. It is an important coolant and has been estimated 
to carry as much as 0.5% of the total infrared luminosity of 
a galaxy. This C II line can therefore be an important tool 
for studying high-redshift systems where other lines may 
be too faint to detect. 


Molecular lines 


While a few molecules such as CN were detected via 
optical absorption lines, the floodgates to molecular 
astronomy did not open until the late 1960s. This was 
partially due to the necessary wait for the development 
of detector technology. However, there was also great 
skepticism that molecules could exist at all in the 
interstellar medium. This pessimism was based in part on 
the low gas density seen associated with atomic hydrogen 
clouds which implied that molecules would be dissociated 
by the ambient radiation fields. In hindsight, we can 
now assert that since stars form from gas, the gas must 
pass through a dense phase which is substantially denser 
than the atomic phase. Such a dense phase would of 
course provide shielding against interstellar radiation and 
would allow the formation of molecules. However, back 
in the 1960s, none of the theoretical underpinnings on STAR 
FORMATION, INTERSTELLAR CHEMISTRY OF INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR 
cLOuD evolution was in place. Persistence by a few radio 
astronomers led to the discovery of OH, H2O, NH3, CO 
and many other molecules. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Molecules 

While atomic transitions typically fall within the optical 
wavelengths or the near infrared, molecular transitions are 
typically at much longer wavelengths. This is due to the 
fact that, for molecules, rotational and vibrational motions 
of the atoms within the molecule are also possible. These 
provide new sets of quantized energy states. Transitions 
between rotational states typically fall into the radio 
wavelengths, and vibrational transitions are typically in 
the infrared. While atomic transitions are characterized 
by temperatures on the order of thousands of kelvins, 
molecular transitions require temperatures of tens to 
hundreds of kelvins. The molecules are therefore good 
probes for the bulk of the universe which is cool with 
temperatures near 10 K. Since the early detection of the 
key molecules of HzO and NHz in the late 1960s, and 
of CO in the early 1970s, over 110 molecular species 
have now been identified in the interstellar medium. 
The availability of molecular transitions with different 
excitation requirements allows the study of the interstellar 
medium under a wide combination of temperatures and 
densities. In particular, transitions with high dipole 
moments have been used successfully to study the very 
dense regions of molecular clouds which are forming stars. 
With the tremendous improvement of detector technology 
at radio wavelengths, and the construction of large- 
aperture telescopes, molecules are now easily detected in 
external galaxies. Perhaps the most important results have 
been the discovery and realization that molecular clouds 
are a dominant constituent of the interstellar medium, that 
molecular lines along with dust are important coolants for 
the gas phase and that molecules can trace the mass, the 
temperature, the density and the motions of the interstellar 
medium. 


Instrumentation developments 

Progress in the field of spectroscopy of atoms and 
molecules in astronomy has come about through a number 
of technological innovations. Grating spectroscopy with 
finer and finer resolution has been developed. Whereas 
long-slit spectroscopy can obtain spectra for a slice of the 
sky, the trend today is towards multifiber spectroscopy. 
In this scheme, hundreds of optical fibers are positioned 
at once on predetermined target sources in the focal 
plane. The fibers are then fed to a spectrometer in 
order to measure the spectra for hundreds of sources 
simultaneously. At radio wavelengths, interferometry 
with spectroscopy is even more powerful in that the 
entire primary beam of one of the telescope elements of 
the array is imaged at once. With the development of 
powerful digital CorRELAToRS, large spectral bandwidths 
can be analyzed for every pixel in the primary beam. 
Compensation for atmospheric effects is also making 
good progress. Space-borne platforms and high-flying 
aircraft and balloons have opened up new spectral 
windows. ADAPTIVE OPTICS at optical wavelengths and 
self-calibration techniques at radio wavelengths have 
successfully compensated for atmospheric SEEING effects. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Spectroscopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This has meant that spectroscopy of fainter sources is 
possible. Of course, detector technology has improved 
for all the wavelengths, while larger and larger telescopes 
are being built. These efforts have made tremendous 
improvements in sensitivity. 


Bibliography 

To obtain a deeper level of details on this topic, the 
readers are referred to the Annual Review of Astronomy and 
Astrophysics. Some articles of interest are 


Savage B D and Semback K R 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 34 279 


on interstellar abundances and 
Rauch M 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 267 


on the Lyman a forest in QSOs. There are many books on 
atomic spectroscopy: 


White H E 1934 Introduction to Atomic Spectra (New York: 
McGraw-Hill) 


Paul Ho 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomical Unit 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical Unit 


The semi-major axis of the elliptical orbit of the Earth. The 
astronomical unit (abbreviation: AU), is also described as 
the ‘mean’ distance between the Earth and the Sun, where 
‘mean’ in this context refers to the average of the maximum 
(aphelion) and minimum (perihelion) distances between 
the Earth and the Sun. The currently accepted value for 
the astronomical unit is 149 597 870 km. 

An alternative definition is the radius of the circular 
orbit in which a body of negligible mass, if free of 
perturbations, would revolve round the Sun ina period of 
22/k days, where k is the Gaussian gravitational constant 
(=0.017 202 098 95). 


See also: ellipse, orbit, orbital elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomische Gesellschaft 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomische Gesellschaft 


The AG was founded in 1863 in Leipzig as an international 
society dedicated to the ‘advancement of science by 
means of supporting projects which require systematic 
cooperations of many people’. 

The primary activities of the AG are the organization 
of scientific meetings and conferences, the promotion 
of young astronomers, awarding of medals and prizes 
in recognition of outstanding scientific works, awarding 
of honorary membership, the publication of scientific 
literature, the fostering of public relations, and the 
promotion of astronomical education at schools and of the 
general public. 

At present the AG has more than 800 members. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.astro.uni-jena.de/Astron_ Ges/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomische Nederlands Saitelliet (ANS) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomische Nederlands Satelliet 
(ANS) 


First Dutch satellite, launched in August 1974. Operated 
until 1977. Carried x-ray and ultraviolet instruments. 
Discovered x-rays from cool dwarf (UV Ceti) stars and the 
first x-ray burster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astronomisches Institut der Universitat Wurzburg ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomisches Institut der 
Universitat Wurzburg 


Part of the ancient university of Wtirzburg in Bavaria, 
southern Germany. It specialized in stellar dynamics, star 
formation studies and solar physics. It is in the process of 
reorganization. 

For further information see 
http://www.astro.uni-wuerzburg.de/homepage.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomy 


The science of the universe, its constituent bodies and 
phenomena. Arguably the oldest of the sciences, its 
beginnings go back to the dawn of recorded history, to 
the time when mankind first began seriously to study 
the apparent motions of the Sun, Moon and planets 
and to identify patterns and cycles in their behavior. 
Astronomy found practical application in providing the 
basis for calendars, timekeeping and navigation, but is 
now essentially a pure science. 

Astronomy is primarily an observational science 
rather than an experimental one. Whereas in physics or 
chemistry, for example, it is possible to set up experiments 
under controlled conditions, to change those conditions 
and measure the outcomes, in astronomy, apart from 
using satellites and spacecraft to explore our immediate 
locality, it is not possible to carry out experiments on 
stars and galaxies. Instead, astronomers mainly rely 
on collecting and interpreting information that arrives 
from astronomical sources in the form of electromagnetic 
radiation and particles in order to formulate and test 
hypotheses and theories. Ground-based astronomy is 
hampered by the atmosphere, which—even under ideal 
conditions—transmits to ground level only a small fraction 
of the complete range of electromagnetic radiations (the 
electromagnetic spectrum). Until the middle of the 
twentieth century, astronomy was carried out almost 
exclusively at visible (optical) wavelengths. Since 
then, ground-based astronomers have extended their 
observations into the radio and infrared regions of the 
spectrum (only limited quantities of infrared radiation 
reach ground level) and to the detection of particle 
radiations (neutrinos and cosmic rays). During the past 
four decades or so, with advances in space technology, 
astronomers have been able to explore planets and the 
interplanetary medium directly with the aid of spacecraft 
and, most significantly, to place instruments in orbit above 
the atmosphere, thereby gaining access to virtually the 
entire electromagnetic spectrum from gamma rays to radio 
waves. 

In a few cases, astronomers can handle samples 
of cosmic material—neutrinos, meteorites, interstellar 
particles, Moon material, soon (possibly) dark matter 
astroparticles. Gravitational waves are also in the future 
of astronomy. 

The fundamental types of observation that astronomers 
can carry out include astrometry (the measurement of po- 
sitions and motions), photometry (the measurement of 
brightness and brightness changes), imaging and spec- 
troscopy (the detailed analysis of the spectrum of radiation 
arriving from an astronomical source). 


See also: astrology, astrometry, astrophysics, electromag- 
netic radiation, electromagnetic spectrum, gamma-ray as- 
tronomy, infrared astronomy, optical astronomy, neutrino 
astronomy, radioastronomy, ultraviolet astronomy, x-ray 
astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astronomy and Astrophysics in India 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomy and Astrophysics in 
India 


Jayant Narlikar 
The growth in astronomy and astrophysics (A&A) in 
India has been mostly since the country achieved 
independence in 1947. The present work is carried out in 
a few select research institutes and in some university 
departments. The Astronomical Society of India has 
around 300 working A&A scientists as members, with 
another 50-60 graduate students. 


Facilities 

In the institutional sector, the major facilities include the 
Vainu Bappu Optical Telescope of 2.3 m diameter and a 
1 m telescope at Kavalur in South India, under the 
management of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA) 
at Bangalore, a 1 m telescope at the Uttar Pradesh State 
Observatory (UPSO) at Naini Tal in the foothills of the 
Himalayas and a | m infrared telescope at Gurushikhar in 
southern Rajasthan under the management of the 
Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), Ahmedabad. Solar 
telescopes exist in Kodaikanal in southern India, at the 
UPSO in Naini Tal and in Udaipur, the first being 
managed by the IIA and the third by PRL. 

In the 1960s radio astronomy entered in a big way 
with a 550 m parabolic cylindrical antenna being set up 
on a north-south hill slope near the southern hill resort at 
Ooty, the axis of the cylinder being parallel to that of the 
Earth. This telescope is operated by the TATA INSTITUTE 
OF FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH (TIFR), in Mumbai, which 
now has just completed an even more ambitious project 
known as the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope 
(GMRT) at Khodad, about 90 km from Pune. Controlled 
and operated by its NATIONAL CENTRE FOR RADIO 
ASTROPHYSICS (NCRA) at Pune, this system has 30 
antennas, each of 45 m diameter, spread over a Y- shaped 
array of arms about 14 km long. It works optimally at 
meter wavelengths. At lower frequencies (34.5 MHz), 
there is a T-shaped radio array at Gauribidnur near 
Bangalore operated jointly by the ITA and the Raman 
Research Institute (RRID, Bangalore. Indian astronomers 
have erected a similar array in the island of Mauritius. 
The RRI also has a 10 m dish for millimeter wave 
astronomy at its headquarters in Bangalore. 

Space astronomy in India began with cosmic ray 
research under H J Bhabha at TIFR and later under V A 
Sarabhai at PRL. A_ national balloon facility at 
Hyderabad caters to the various balloon borne 
experiments. This activity blossomed into a fully fledged 
space program which now routinely launches satellites 
and prepares payloads of a commercial as well as a 
scientific nature. Its headquarters are at the Indian Space 
Research Organization at Bangalore. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In the university sector, the only significant working 
facility is the 1.2 m telescope at the Japal Rangapur 
Observatory under the control of Osmania University, 
Hyderabad. A major resource facility for the universities 
was, however, set up in 1988 by the University Grants 
Commission (UGC), New Delhi, at Pune. Known as the 
Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics 
(IUCAA), this center provides an excellent resource 
library in A&A, an advanced computer centre with 
A&A-related software, a data centre and an 
instrumentation laboratory. These facilities can be used 
by visiting academics and students from universities with 
their travel funding met by grants provided by the UGC 
at IUCAA. The IUCAA also assists university academics 
in using observing facilities in India and abroad under the 
various guest observing programs. 

There are three new optical telescopes under various 
stages of construction. The IUCAA will have a 2 m 
telescope near Giravali, about 70 km from Pune, whereas 
the ITA has recently built a 2 m telescope at Han Le, at a 
height of 4000 m near Ladakh in the northern Himalayas. 
The UPSO and TIFR are jointly planning to set up a 3 m 
telescope in Devasthal, near Naini Tal. 


Research areas 

INDIAN ASTRONOMY has traditionally been working in 
stellar astronomy and spectroscopy, solar and planetary 
astronomy. However, in the last three decades of the 20th 
century it has expanded its range to include solar physics 
including solar oscillations, pulsar astronomy and 
modelling, problems in cosmic ray and high-energy 
astrophysics, gravitational lensing, extragalactic 
astronomy and cosmology. The Ooty Telescope was 
responsible for a major survey of angular sizes of radio 
sources through the lunar occultation method. Theoretical 
cosmology has ranged from abstract mathetical models in 
general relativity (for India has always had a strong 
school in general relativity) to fitting models to 
observations of discrete extragalactic source populations. 
Thanks to a less rigid outlook towards alternatives to 
mainstream ideas, these have flourished in India more 
than they have in the West. 

Indian astronomy has made its presence felt 
internationally. The late Vainu BAPPU was President of 
the International Astronomical Union, while several 
Indian astronomers have occupied positions of Presidents 
of various [AU Commissions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysical Bounds on Particle Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrophysical Bounds on Particle 
Properties 


Ever since NEWTON proposed that the Moon on its orbit 
follows the same laws of motion as an apple falling 
from a tree, the heavens have been a favorite laboratory 
for testing the fundamental laws of physics, notably 
Newton’s and EINSTEIN’s theories of gravity. More recently, 
astrophysics and cosmology have become crucial testing 
grounds for the microcosm of elementary particles. This 
area of scientific inquiry is part of a discipline often called 
astroparticle physics or particle astrophysics. There are 
a few important cases where unexplained astrophysical 
phenomena can be attributed to new elementary particles 
or new properties of known particles; the solar neutrino 
deficit and the dark matter problem are cases in point. 
Here, another widespread method will be discussed, 
where one uses established properties of stars or even 
the universe at large to constrain possible modifications 
caused by novel properties of elementary particles. 


Neutrino masses 

One of the earliest astrophysical particle limits is the 
cosmological bound on the masses of the three known 
NEUTRINOS, the electron, muon and tau neutrino ve, v, and 
v,. The main idea is that these particles, in spite of their 
weak interactions, must have been thermally produced 
in the hot and dense early universe and thus form a 
‘cosmic neutrino sea’, much like the 3 K cosmic microwave 
background radiation. A detailed calculation reveals a 
present-day density of neutrinos plus antineutrinos of 
about 113 cm~? for each of the three ‘flavors’ v., v, and v,, 
to be compared with about 400 cm~? microwave photons. 
All of the neutrino masses must obey m, < 40 eV or 
else their gravitational effect would have slowed down 
the expansion of the universe below its observed rate. 
It was the discovery of v, in 1962, together with the 
1963 discovery of the cosmic microwave background, that 
inspired S S Gershtein and Ya B ZELDOVICH to advance this 
argument in 1966. 

The direct experimental m, limits are much less 
restrictive than the cosmological bound except for ve 
(figure 1), and it is not known if neutrinos have 
masses at all. However, much evidence for ‘neutrino 
flavor oscillations’ has accrued from measurements of 
atmospheric and solar neutrinos, implying that they do 
have masses, and that the mass differences between them 
are extremely tiny, smaller than about 0.1 eV. In any case, 
neutrino masses appear to be much smaller than those of 
the other fundamental fermions, the electron and its two 
heavier brothers (muon and tau) as well as the six quarks 
(figure 1). The origin of this mass spectrum remains a 
mystery of elementary particle physics. 

The cosmological m, limit represents a standard 
argument to constrain the properties of any theoretically 
proposed new particles such as monopoles, axions or 
supersymmetric particles. Their contribution to the 
cosmic mass density must be compatible with the age 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Mass A 
Neutrinos u—Quarks 
Charged d—Quarks 
1TeV Leptons 
100 a 
10 ‘ 
E i = 3°¢ Family 
1GeV a ae ere 
(66,E- / ‘ ; 2>d Family 
E i: i M s 
10— fuiq' _- si" Family 
E | d 
1MeV : ae 
= 1 / e 
100 —- } 1 ' 
7 Mv 
10 = ' 
= 1 
LkeV & ' 
100 E ; 
= _- Cosmological Upper Limit 
10 —& ' for all Neutrinos 
E Vv 
tev 


Figure 1. Mass spectrum of the elementary fermions. The 
vertical box size for the quarks indicates the mass uncertainty. 
For the neutrinos, the experimental upper limits are shown as 
well as the cosmological bound. 


and expansion rate of the present-day universe. Usually, 
their relic density, the particle density surviving from 
the early universe, is more complicated to evaluate than 
for neutrinos where it simply scales with the density of 
cosmic microwave photons. In general, one has to worry 
about the detailed primordial production mechanism and 
annihilation rate of the new particles. 

A completely different astrophysical method to 
constrain neutrino masses relies on the time-of-flight from 
a pulsed source. Neutrinos of mass m, which are emitted 
froma source at distance D at time t = 0, but with different 
energies E,,, arrive at 


cJ1— (m,c?/E,)* 


where E, > m,c? is the total energy including the rest mass 
and c is the speed of light. They are delayed because they 
move slower than c. Measuring their arrival times and 
energies allows one, in principle, to extract m,. A type II 
supernova (SN), the collapse of a massive star, produces 
a huge neutrino burst, lasting for a few seconds. Such an 
event has been measured once on 23 February 1987 when 
the electron antineutrinos from SN 1987A in the LARGE 
MAGELLANIC CLOUD (D * 50 kpc = 163000 light years) were 
registered in three neutrino detectors that were operational 
at that time (figure 2). The signal is compatible with the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysical Bounds on Particle Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


50 
40 
30 


LE 
Kamiokande 


Energy [MeV] 

Se wo 
oo°80 
cé 

— 

eo 
—-s 
Le 
Tull 


Energy [MeV] 
20 
ro) 
—~— 
—e 
Lhbi ti 


on 

° 
™ 
ima 


iN 
[o) 
TT 


20 t 
10 ! 


0 those dori tortie titi ti 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 


Time after first event [s] 


Energy [MeV] 


~o 
eo 
bitty 


— 


4 


Figure 2. Neutrino signal from supernova 1987A at the 
Kamiokande, IMB and Baksan detectors. The clocks have 
unknown relative offsets; in each case the first event was shifted 
to t = 0. The Kamiokande event marked with an open circle is 
attributed to background. 


expected intrinsic burst duration, with no evidence for 
time-of-flight dispersion, leading to a limit m,, < 20 eV. 

Supernovas in or near our own galaxy are rare, 
perhaps a few per century. However, if one were lucky to 
observe another neutrino burst with one of the much larger 
detectors available today, one could improve the m, limits, 
even on v, and v, which are more difficult to detect. With 
the upcoming large ‘neutrino telescopes’ one may be able 
to measure neutrino pulses from more speculative sources 
such as gamma-ray bursts, with a potentially much better 
m, sensitivity. 


Big-bang nucleosynthesis 

Another standard cosmological argument is based on 
the expansion rate of the early universe at the epoch 
of primordial NUCLEOSYNTHESIS, about 3 min after the big 
bang. The radiation density at that time determines the 
expansion rate, which in turn influences the abundance 
of primordial helium which is observed to be 22- 
25% by mass, the remainder being hydrogen and 
traces of deuterium, helium-3 and lithium-7. Within 
their uncertainties, the observed primordial light-element 
abundances imply a radiation density corresponding to 
two to four families of neutrinos, nicely bracketing the 
three known flavors ve, v, and v,;. These are the 
only possible families because additional ones would 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


contribute to the decay width of the Z° gauge boson, which 
has been precisely measured since about 1990. 

However, the big-bang nucleosynthesis method of 
counting neutrino families can be applied to more exotic 
particles that are not covered by the Zz decay-width 
argument. Any form of radiation which has been 
thermally excited in the early universe contributes to the 
expansion rate. Therefore, the interaction strength and 
masses of any proposed new particles must pass the test 
that they do not lead to excessive cosmic mass-energy 
density at the nucleosynthesis epoch. 


Photon mass 

In contrast with neutrinos which are expected to have 
masses, photons should be strictly massless, a theoretical 
expectation that requires experimental verification. Time- 
of-flight limits from the radio signal of pulsars are not 
much better than about 107" eV, the plasma frequency 
of the interstellar medium which mimics a photon 
mass. Laboratory tests of Coulomb’s law give m, < 
10-4 eV; a non-vanishing m, would modify the inverse- 
square behavior. Likewise, the spatial variation of 
higher-multipole terms of large-scale magnetic fields give 
0.6 x 10-% eV and 0.8 x 107 eV from Jupiter’s and 
Earth’s magnetic fields respectively. The most restrictive 
limit of 10-7” eV is based on the magneto-gravitational 
equilibrium of the gas in the SMALLMAGELLANIC CLOUD which 
requires that the range of the interaction exceeds the 
characteristic field scale of about 3 kpc. This limit is 
surprisingly close to 10-°° eV where the photon Compton 
wavelength would exceed the radius of the observable 
universe and thus would cease to have any observable 
consequences. 


Stellar energy loss 

A particularly successful astrophysical argument to 
constrain the properties of low-mass, weakly interacting 
particles, notably neutrinos, goes back to J Bernstein, 
M Ruderman and G Feinberg (1963). They argued that 
a putative neutrino magnetic dipole moment would lead 
to an unacceptably large energy loss of stars by virtue 
of the plasma process y — vv which is kinematically 
allowed because the plasma frequency in the interior of 
a star gives photons effectively a mass. This energy-loss 
channel would add to the emission of neutrinos from the 
interior of stars by standard processes. 

A non-standard energy-loss channel, caused by the 
emission of neutrinos with non-standard couplings or 
the emission of hypothetical particles such as axions, 
could cause a variety of observable effects. Stellar 
remnants (WHITE DWARFS, NEUTRON STARS) would cool faster. 
Normal stars would consume their nuclear fuel faster and 
thus burn out earlier. The helium-burning lifetime of 
horizontal-branch stars as measured by number counts in 
globular clusters has been a particularly precise measure of 
novel energy-loss channels. Likewise, a possible delay of 
helium ignition by particle cooling of red-giant cores can be 
well constrained by the observed brightness limit of the tip 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysical Bounds on Particle Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the red-giant branch in globular clusters. Even our Sun 
provides interesting constraints. An increased burning 
rate would make it more evolved than corresponds to its 
age, causing observable shifts of its precisely measured p- 
mode oscillation frequencies, a field of research known as 
helioseismology. 

Arguments of this sort have been applied to a great 
variety of cases; perhaps the most useful limit is the 
constraint 4, < 3 x 107g ona magnetic dipole moment 
of any neutrino. Here, 3 = eh/2me, with e the electron 
charge and m, the electron mass, is the Bohr magneton, 
corresponding to the electron’s magnetic moment, which 
is usually employed as a measure for possible neutrino 
magnetic moments. Laboratory experiments give much 
weaker limits. 

Likewise, one can derive a limit on a hypothetical 
neutrino electric charge, e, < 2 x 10~e, applicable to 
all flavors. For the measured electron antineutrinos from 
SN 1987A, the galactic magnetic field would have caused 
an energy-dependent deflection and thus a time-of-flight 
signal dispersion; the resulting limit is e,, < 3 x 10-"e. A 
laboratory limit, based on charge conservation in f decay, 
ise,, <3 x 10-e. 

If neutrinos have masses they may decay; one possible 
channel is by the emission of a photon. The absence of 
anomalous x- or gamma-ray fluxes from the Sun or in 
conjunction with the SN 1987A neutrino burst as well as 
limits ona spectral deformation of the black-body nature of 
the cosmic microwave background constrain this radiative 
decay channel. However, the matrix element of this 
process depends on an electromagnetic transition moment 
which is subject to the above stellar energy-loss constraint; 
it is more restrictive for m, < 1 eV than the direct limits on 
decay photons. 


Supernova 1987A 

The SUPERNOVA 1987A neutrino signal (figure 2) allowed for 
a particularly useful application of the stellar-energy loss 
argument. The nascent neutron star that has formed after 
collapse cools by neutrino emission over several seconds, 
a time scale which is set by the neutrino diffusion rate; a 
proto neutron star is so hot and dense that even neutrinos 
cannot freely escape. A competing cooling channel by 
more weakly interacting particles which are not trapped 
would shorten and weaken the neutrino signal because the 
total amount of energy, the gravitational binding energy 
of the neutron star, is fixed. 

This simple argument has been applied to many cases, 
but perhaps the most interesting one is that of axions, 
hypothetical low-mass particles that were originally 
proposed in the context of quantum chromodynamics, the 
theory of the strong interaction among quarks. It was later 
recognized that axions are also a good particle candidate 
for the dark matter of the universe. Axion models are 
essentially characterized by one free parameter which can 
be chosen to be their mass m,. The requirement that 
axions do not carry away the bulk of the SN 1987A energy 
translates into a limit m, < 10~? eV. On the other hand, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


requirement that their cosmic mass density is not too large 
leads to ma > 10~° eV, in contrast with the above case of 
neutrinos where cosmology provides an upper mass limit. 
In the remaining mass range, axions could well exist and 
provide most or all of the cosmic dark matter. 


Strange stars 

The fundamental constituents of nuclear matter are 
quarks, not protons and neutrons, and one may well 
wonder if neutron stars do not undergo a phase transition 
to a medium consisting of free quarks. Even the strange 
quark is relatively light (figure 1) so that one may speculate 
that ‘neutron stars’, the remnants of massive stars after 
a type II supernova collapse, are actually ‘strange stars’, 
consisting of a strongly interacting medium of up (wu), 
down (d) and strange (s) quarks. It is surprisingly difficult 
to distinguish the two cases observationally. It is thought 
that strange stars can rotate faster before breaking apart so 
that sub-millisecond pulsars, if they were ever detected, 
could perhaps resolve the question of the ground state of 
nuclear matter. 

In summary, astrophysics and cosmology provide 
important constraints on the properties and interactions 
of elementary particles which are often complementary to 
what can be measured in laboratory experiments. 


Bibliography 

Caso C et al 1998 Review of Particle Physics Euro. Phys. J. 
C3 1 http://pdg.lbl.gov/ 

Kolb E W and Turner M S 1990 The Early Universe 
(Redwood City, CA: Addison Wesley) 

Raffelt G G 1996 Stars as Laboratories for Fundamental 
Physics: The Astrophysics of Neutrinos, Axions, 
and Other Weakly Interacting Particles (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press) 

Raffelt G G 1999 Particle physics from stars Ann. Rev. Nuc. 
Particle Phys. 49 

Will C M 1993 Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics 
revised edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Georg G Raffelt 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysical Institute, Potsdam 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrophysical Institute, Potsdam 


Built upon a tradition of almost 300 years, the Astrophys- 
ical Institute Potsdam (AIP) is in an historical sense the 
successor of one of the oldest astronomical observatories 
in Germany. It is the first institute in the world which 
incorporated the term ‘astrophysical’ in its name, and 
is connected with distinguished scientists such as Karl 
Schwarzschild and Albert Einstein. The AIP constitutes 
one of the four centers of astrophysical research in Ger- 
many and is the largest astronomical institute in the new 
states of Germany. The cooperation with the University of 
Potsdam is of utmost importance. 

The bodies responsible for AIP are the Ministry for 
Science, Research and Culture of the State of Brandenburg 
and the Federal Ministry for Education, Science, Research 
and Technology. The AIP is an institute of the 
‘Wissenschaftsgemeinschaft Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’. 

The AIP concentrates its efforts on two main avenues 
of research: cosmic magnetic fields, solar and stellar 
activity (Bereich I); and extragalactic astrophysics and 
cosmology (Bereich II). 

Within a German consortium the AIP is part of the 
international ‘LARGE BINOCULAR TELESCOPE’ (LBT) to be built 
in Arizona by 2004 and contributes to the operation of the 
German solar telescopes on Tenerife. 

The main site of the institute is the Sternwarte 
Babelsberg. The Solar Observatory Einstein Tower at the 
Telegrafenberg in Potsdam and the Observatory for Solar 
Radio Astronomy in Tremsdorf near Potsdam are branches 
of the institute. 

For further information see 
http://www.aip.de/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysical Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrophysical Jets 


There are many circumstances in astronomy when gas 
is found to circulate around a central gravitating mass. 
This happens in BINARY STARS, Where one component is a 
compact object—white dwarf, neutron star or black hole— 
and mass is transferred from the normal stellar companion. 
It happens in the nuclei of galaxies, where the gravitating 
object is a massive black hole and it also happens during 
the earliest phases of evolution of a protostar. These gas 
flows are called ACCRETION Disks and they are frequently 
accompanied by rapid outflows, launched in antiparallel 
directions, roughly perpendicular to the disks. The 
outflows are usually called jets and this article describes 
some of what we know about them. 

The first example of an astrophysical jet was 
discovered by HEBER CuRTIS in 1918 using the Lick 
Observatory in California. He observed the galaxy known 
as M87 in the Virgo cluster of galaxies and, when he 
inspected the nucleus, he found a ‘curious straight ray. .. 
apparently connected with the nucleus by a thin line 
of matter’. This was a remarkable observation (by a 
remarkable astronomer), and the jet in M87 is still one of 
the most carefully studied of this class of objects (figure 1). 

What we observe directly in M87 is a fairly straight 
feature, some 2 kpcin length. It can be seen from long radio 
wavelengths to high-energy x-rays and is found to exhibit 
about eight regions of high intensity, known as ‘knots’, 
along its length. The jet can be traced down to a scale size 
of order 0.01 pe which is smaller than 10-> times its total 
length and less than 100 times the radius of the black hole 
that has been found to lie in the nucleus of M87, and whose 
mass is measured to be about 3 billion solar masses (see 
M87: THE NUCLEUS AND JET. 

We know that the gas is flowing away from the 
black hole in M87 because we can use very long baseline 
interferometry to measure its speed. What is found is 
that some parts of the jet appear to be moving outward 
with a speed that appears to be as much as six times faster 
than the speed of light. This is actually quite a common 
phenomenon called superluminal expansion. It does not 
violate the special theory of relativity (which stipulates 
that all material motion occurs slower than the speed 
of light). Instead, superluminal expansion is an illusion 
which only requires that the gas in the jet moves towards 
us with a speed close to that of light. For this reason, jets 
like that in M87 are often styled relativistic jets. It is quite 
natural that these jets move with speeds close to that of 
light; after all this is the escape velocity from the central 
black hole. 

The jet in M87 exhibits another common property of 
these objects in that its antiparallel counter jet, which is 
expected to be present, has not yet been detected. This is an 
illustration of an effect called ABERRATION. When a source of 
radiation moves at near light speed, it will appear to beam 
its emission along its direction of motion. Consequently, 
if the source happens to be approaching us, then it will 
appear to be very bright, whereas, if the source moves 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. HH 111. Protostellar jets emerging from a young 
star—one member of a triple system observed using Hubble 
Space Telescope. The jets are over 10 light years in length. The 
bright knots are probably associated with shock waves formed 
when faster moving gas runs into slower gas. 


away from us, it will appear to be faint. This explains 
why we are only able to detect one jet in M87 and why a 
high proportion of the brightest sources that we see exhibit 
SUPERLUMINAL MOTION. 

Let us now turn to the knots. These are believed 
to be shock waves formed in the outflowing jets when, 
for example, the jet speed at the source increases by an 
amount greater than the speed of sound in the jet and 
therefore faster than the speed with which information 
can be transmitted by the moving jet fluid. A strong 
shock discontinuity must eventually form in the flow and 
this turns out to be an excellent site for accelerating high- 
energy, relativistic electrons with energies up to 100 TeV. 
These electrons radiate by spiralling in the magnetic field 
that permeates the jet—a process known as SYNCHROTRON 
RADIATION—and this is thought to be responsible for the 
entire radio through x-ray emission. 

M§87’s jet is relatively weak. We know so much about 
it because it is so close. In the past, it was almost surely 
supplied with gaseous fuel at a far higher rate than at 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysical Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy M87 


4000 light years 


0.1 light years 


HST - WFPC2 
Visible 


NASA, NRAO and J. Biretta (STScl) * STScl-PRC99-43 


Figure 1. Radio and optical maps of the jet observed emerging from the nucleus of the nearby elliptical galaxy M87. The jet can be 
traced down to a distance smaller than 100 times the size of the central black hole. 


present. It would then have been classified as a QUASAR. 
Quasars are the hyperactive nuclei of very distant galaxies 
that can outshine their stellar hosts at optical wavelengths. 
They emit prodigiously throughout the electromagnetic 
spectrum. Quasars often exhibit giant, double, radio 
sources—two ‘lobes’ of intense radio emission located on 
opposite sides of the galaxy. Historically, this was the way 
in which quasars were originally identified. For a long 
while there was a mystery as to how these radio lobes could 
be formed and sustained. With the discovery of relativistic 
jets, the mystery was solved. The source of their power is 
the central black hole and the accretion disk that surrounds 
it. This creates relativistic particles and magnetic field 
which flow outward, along two antiparallel directions to 
replenish the radio lobes and to propel them away from 
the galaxy, rather like the exhausts that are associated with 
automobiles and jet aircraft. In some sense, the jets carry 
away the waste products of accretion onto a black hole. We 
know of thousands of these double radio sources and have 
documented their properties so that we are beginning to 
understand how they fit into an evolutionary sequence. 
The most powerful relativistic jets, that are beamed 
almost directly at us, are sometimes called BLAzARS and 
these are commonly observed as y-ray sources. Photons, 
with energies as high as several GeV, are formed when 
an x-ray photon is scattered by a relativistic electron— 
a process known as inverse Compton scattering. (In a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


few local examples, it has been possible to detect very- 
high-energy y-rays with TeV energies that are probably 
produced close to the central black hole.) The surprisingly 
large intensity of these y-ray jets tells us that, in many 
instances, they are transporting away a large fraction of the 
total power generated by the central black hole engines. 

Not all jets are associated with distant galaxies. There 
are many stellar-sized black holes that have been found in 
our Galaxy and in nearby galaxies. When these have stellar 
companions that can lose gas, the gas will be attracted by 
the black hole and can also form an accretion disk. An 
early example was the source ss433 where two precessing 
antiparallel jets moving with speed just over a quarter the 
speed of light have been found. In some instances, these 
sources also produce relativistic jets, small-scale versions 
of the extragalactic radio sources. They exhibit giant 
outbursts, superluminal expansion and beaming and, as 
a result, are sometimes called ‘microquasars’. These 
are particularly good to study because astronomers can 
observe many cycles of variation in the time it takes a 
quasar to change. 

Jets have also been found associated with newly 
formed stars. Here, again there is an orbiting disk 
made of the gas that has not yet settled onto the star 
(or condensed into planets), These ‘YOUNG STELLAR OBJECTS’ 
are observed primarily in optical and infrared emission 
lines and the jet moves with speeds of several hundred 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysical Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


km per second which is comparable with the escape 
velocity from the central protostar. These jets sometimes 
also exhibit moving shock waves known as Herbig—Haro 
objects (figure 2), which propagate along the length of the 
jets. (As the jet speeds are much less than the speed of 
light, there is neither superluminal motion nor aberration 
in this case.) It is almost likely that similar basic physical 
processes are at work here too. These ‘protostellar jets’ are 
particularly good to study because the flow velocities can 
be measured accurately using spectral lines. 

The nature of the mechanism for the formation 
and collimation of jets is still a matter of controversy. 
Many astronomers believe that strong magnetic fields 
are generated in the accretion disk and that these are 
responsible for launching and focusing the outflow. Most 
of the jet power probably derives from close to the 
central object, black hole, neutron star, white dwarf or 
protostar, also through the agency of magnetic field. 
Computer simulations of magnetized gas flows around 
central gravitating bodies are starting to give some insight 
into how and why jets are such a frequent companion to 
accretion disks. 


R D Blandford 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrophysics 


That branch of astronomy concerned with the physics 
of, and physical processes operating in, stars and other 
celestial bodies. It may be argued that the subject 
of astrophysics really began with the development 
of spectroscopy in the nineteenth century. Today 
astrophysics has transformed cosmology, the study of 
the evolution of the universe, from an almost purely 
speculative activity to a modern science capable of 
predictions that can be tested. 


See also: astrometry, astronomy, universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysics to 1900 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrophysics to 1900 


In practice, there is no clear dividing line between 
astrophysics and astronomy. The former is usually defined 
as the study of the physical properties of celestial objects, 
whereas the latter is concerned with their positions and 
motions. However, the two types of measurement are 
often linked. For example, stellar mass—a physical 
property—is typically measured by observing the orbits 
of two stars round each other. However, it was 
evident from the start that the equipment used and 
knowledge required for the two types of activity were 
different. During the latter part of the 19th century, as 
the subject began to develop rapidly, it was therefore 
recognized as a distinct field of study, although it took 
some time before ‘astrophysics’ became the accepted 
name. At the time, astrophysical measurements were 
as often described in terms of ‘celestial chemistry’ as 
‘celestial physics’. Because such observations differed 
from traditional positional measurements, astrophysics 
was also, on occasion, called the ‘new astronomy’. (To 
add to the confusion, studies of motion were sometimes 
referred to as ‘physical astronomy’.) These contemporary 
terms will be ignored here: relevant work will simply be 
called ‘astrophysical’. 


Early astrophysical observations 
Some physical properties of celestial bodies can be 
determined by direct observation through a telescope. 
From this viewpoint, observations of astrophysical 
significance date back to the invention of the telescope 
in the early 17th century. Prior to this there had 
been speculation—for example, that stars were bodies 
like the Sun—but little by way of firm evidence. 
Several of GALILEO’s observations in 1610, with his 
newly invented astronomical telescope, proved to have 
physical implications. One was his discovery that lunar 
topography bears some resemblance to the Earth’s (the 
first step towards the lunar geology of the space age). 
The most important of his observations for subsequent 
astrophysics was his discovery of sunspots. Apart from 
recording the complex, changing nature of sunspots, 
Galileo also used them to show that the Sun, like the 
Earth, was rotating on its axis. Later in the 17th century, 
another of Galileo’s discoveries—the moons of Jupiter (see 
JUPITER: SATELLITES)—led_ to the first determination of the 
velocity of light. RomER, working at the newly established 
Paris Observatory, found that the times at which the 
moons appeared and disappeared behind Jupiter seemed 
to vary systematically. He attributed this to changes in 
the Earth—-Jupiter distance, together with a finite speed of 
light. Romer’s measurements provide an early example 
of the fact that, although the study of astrophysics mostly 
entails astronomers relying on developments in physics, 
they have sometimes been able to contribute something in 
return. 

In the latter part of the 17th century, NEWTON examined 
the way in which sunlight, after passing through a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


prism, was spread out into its constituent colours. 
Such spectroscopic observation was to become the most 
significant part of astrophysics, but only after some 
delay. In 1800, W Herschel in England repeated Newton's 
experiment (see HERSCHEL FAMILY), but with the new aim 
of measuring the heating power of different parts of the 
solar spectrum. The thermometer he used recorded the 
existence of considerable heating beyond the red end of 
the visible spectrum. This was the first identification 
of infrared radiation (although, as is often the case with 
important advances, Herschel interpreted it differently). It 
was paralleled in the following year by the first detection 
of ultraviolet radiation. Ritter in Germany, inspired 
by Herschel’s work, investigated the action of the solar 
spectrum on silver chloride. He found that maximum 
breakdown of the chemical occurred beyond the violet end 
of the visible spectrum. (This was an early step on the way 
to photography.) A year later still, in 1802, Wollaston, who 
was also studying the solar spectrum back in England, 
found that it was crossed by a few dark lines. He thought 
that these simply represented demarcation points where 
the various spectral colours began and ended. It was left to 
Fraunhofer in Germany, a decade later, to discover that the 
whole of the solar spectrum was intersected by dark lines. 
He detected nearly 600 of these; so, hardly surprisingly, 
they came to be referred to as ‘FRAUNHOFER’ LINES. 


The solar spectrum 

As this rush of discoveries suggests, it was an interest 
in the Sun, and, more especially, in the solar spectrum, 
that primarily triggered the 19th century growth of 
astrophysics. There were various reasons for this interest. 
One was that the Sun was an excellent light source. As 
compared with other light sources, whether celestial or in 
the laboratory, the Sun produced copious amounts of light. 
Consequently, even highly inefficient optical equipment 
could yield results. Another reason was the particular 
interest that early 19th century scientists had in color 
phenomena. The solar spectrum provided the easiest way 
of studying these. 

Laboratory investigations showed that different 
substances produced different sets of spectral lines. So 
there was a tendency from early on to suppose that the 
Fraunhofer lines could be related to chemical substances 
on the Earth. However, this supposition was not fully 
confirmed until the second half of the 19th century. There 
were many problems to resolve first. For example, it 
was found that some Fraunhofer lines did not originate 
on the Sun at all, but were impressed on the sunlight 
during its passage through the Earth’s atmosphere. More 
fundamentally, laboratory spectra consisted of bright, 
not dark, lines. How were the two connected? In 
1849, roucauLr finally managed to show the identity 
of lines appearing in emission and absorption. To do 
this, he experimented with the pair of lines in the solar 
spectrum that Fraunhofer had labeled ‘D’, because they 
were particularly intense. However, these same lines 
were also responsible for retarding attempts to interpret 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysics to 1900 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spectra. The difficulty was that the D lines appeared to 
be ubiquitous in the laboratory. Whatever substance was 
being studied, they always seemed to appear. It was 
only in the 1850s that the widespread contamination of 
laboratory chemicals by salt—leading to the appearance 
of the sodium D lines—was fully recognized. 

All this clearing of the ground had to occur before the 
solar spectrum could be properly interpreted. The final 
step in this process can be seen as the key event in the 
foundation of astrophysics. It was taken by KIRCHHOFF, 
working in conjunction with his Heidelberg colleague, 
Bunsen, in the period around 1860. Their studies actually 
began in the laboratory with the invention of the Bunsen 
burner. Bunsen intended to apply the non-luminous flame 
this produced to studying the colours emitted by different 
elements when they were burnt. For this purpose, he 
proposed to use a set of color filters. Kirchhoff suggested 
Bunsen should use a prism instead, and this led to a 
comparison with the solar spectrum. 

Kirchhoff established two basic principles for the 
analysis of spectra. The first was that incandescent solids 
or liquids give continuous spectra, but gases produce lines 
or bands (the positions of which depend on the particular 
gas present). The second was that, when a source of 
continuous spectrum is viewed through a cooler gas, the 
wavelengths at which absorption occurs correspond to 
those at which emission occurs when the gas is heated. 
The immediate implications for the Sun were similarly 
twofold. Firstly, the body of the Sun must consist of 
hot dense material to produce the observed continuous 
spectrum. Secondly, the absorption lines produced in the 
cooler solar atmosphere can be used to study the chemical 
composition of the Sun. 

Although it was a study of the atmospheric lines 
that dominated subsequent 19th century astrophysics, 
Kirchhoff’s conclusion regarding the body of the Sun had 
an immediate impact on contemporary thought. The 
picture of the Sun widely held in the first half of the 19th 
century saw the sunspots as holes in a luminous cloud, 
through which a colder interior could be viewed. Indeed, 
W Herschel speculated that the solar interior, visualized 
as having a solid surface, might even be inhabited. 
Kirchhoff’s spectrum analysis showed that such a picture 
was impossible. 


Other solar studies 

By this time, another problem concerning the Sun had 
arisen. The first half of the 19th century saw the 
first significant attempts to measure the amount of heat 
reaching us from the Sun. Such measurements of 
what came to be called the ‘soLaR CONSTANT’ provided a 
quantitative estimate of the vast amount of energy being 
emitted by the Sun. At about the same time, the idea of 
the conservation of energy began to establish itself. So the 
question arose—where does the Sun obtain its energy? It 
was clear that chemical sources would only keep the Sun 
burning for a very short time, so some physical source 
was necessary. The solution that came to be widely 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


accepted during the second half of the 19th century was 
put forward by HELMHOLTz in 1854. He suggested that the 
Sun gained its heat from gravitational contraction. The 
rate required was well below the observational limit, and 
the process was capable of sustaining the Sun’s output 
for several million years. This lifetime seemed reasonable 
to physical scientists, but it came under increasing attack 
from geologists and biologists. They thought—correctly, 
as it turned out—that the evolution of the Earth’s surface 
and its inhabitants required a much longer span of time. 

One further characteristic of the Sun became the focus 
of attention in the mid-19th century. This was its changing 
activity. In the early 1840s, scHwaBE, a German amateur 
astronomer, found from his counts of sunspots that the 
number visible on the Sun’s disc varied periodically with 
time. His conclusion was publicized a few years later 
by HUMBOLDT, at a time when a number of studies were 
being made of fluctuations in the Earth’s magnetic field. 
In 1852, sABINE in England pointed out that these magnetic 
fluctuations varied with a period that coincided with the 
sunspot cycle. This conclusion was soon confirmed and 
extended by others and led to a continuing interest in 
solar—terrestrial relations throughout the second half of the 
19th century. 

The major features of the Sun’s atmosphere had 
already been discerned before Kirchhoff became interested 
in the solar spectrum. Since the solar atmosphere was 
too faint to be seen in the presence of full sunlight, 
its characteristics had had to be examined during solar 
ECLIPSES. Expeditions to eclipses in 1842 and 1851 had 
shown that the Sun’s surface was surmounted by a 
CHROMOSPHERE (so called because of its red color). Above 
this stretched a much thinner corona. Extending into 
this from the chromosphere were large ‘flames’ (later 
called ‘prominences’). Kirchhoff’s explanation of the 
solar spectrum now opened the way for a more detailed 
examination of the atmospheric structure. 

The first astrophysical advance was made in 1868. 
In that year, a solar eclipse was visible from India, and 
one of the observers—the Frenchman, JANsSsEN—looked 
at the spectra of prominences. He and others found 
bright lines, showing that prominences were clouds of 
gas. Janssen concluded that the lines were so bright that 
they should be visible out of eclipse. He subsequently 
scanned the solar limb and showed that this was, indeed, 
the case. At the same time, LOCKYER in England made 
spectroscopic observations of the Sun and observed the 
same lines. This meant that both the chromosphere and the 
prominences could be mapped at the solar limb, without 
requiring an eclipse. Because the cornona was so faint, it 
continued to be observable only at eclipses throughout the 
19th century. At the 1869 eclipse, the first bright coronal 
line was found. It was now evident that the emission 
lines of both the chromosphere and the corona differed 
significantly from the absorption spectrum of the Sun. 
From Kirchhoff’s work, this meant that neither could be 
the source of the Fraunhofer lines. At the 1870 eclipse, the 
American astronomer, YOUNG, showed that the absorption 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysics to 1900 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lines were actually produced in a restricted region— 
which was labeled the ‘reversing layer’—between the 
chromosphere and the apparent surface of the Sun. 

The explanation of the bright solar surface also 
developed further in the 1860s. At the end of that decade, 
Andrews in England showed that gases at a high enough 
temperature could not be liquified. This confirmed what 
was already suspected: that the body of the Sun must 
consist of gas under high pressure, rather than of liquid 
as Kirchhoff had supposed. This raised a new question— 
why did the Sun appear to have a clearly defined surface 
(labeled the photosphere) at all? It was generally agreed 
that the photosphere must represent the level in the Sun 
where the gases became sufficiently cool for refractory 
materials to condense out. The renewed belief in a 
cloudy solar surface remained in vogue until the early 20th 
century. 

Thus, within the space of a few years, spectroscopic 
observations had provided a reasonably clear picture 
of the Sun’s atmosphere. The next few decades were 
spent in sorting out some of the uncertainties in this 
picture. One related to chemical composition. Following 
Kirchhoff, a number of observers compared terrestrial 
spectra with the solar spectrum in an attempt to determine 
the chemical composition of the Sun. It was found that 
almost all the elements that could be detected were metals 
(although hydrogen was noted early on). However, it 
proved impossible to identify one very bright line in the 
chromospheric spectrum. Lockyer suggested that this was 
produced by anew element, consequently called ‘helium’, 
which had not yet been found on Earth. This suggestion 
was strongly contested, but Lockyer was vindicated in the 
1890s when Ramsay discovered the gas, via its spectrum, 
in terrestrial rocks. It was similarly found to be impossible 
to identify the coronal lines. The parallel suggestion was 
therefore made that they were due to a new element, 
labeled ‘coronium’. In this case, no corresponding element 
was ever found. (It was not until near the middle of the 
20th century that the coronal lines were shown to be due 
to known elements in highly ionized states.) 


Stellar astrophysics 

In the early days of astrophysics, the Sun was such a 
popular target for observation that the whole subject 
was sometimes simply called ‘solar physics’. This 
overlooked the fact that Kirchhoff’s findings were also 
immediately applied to observations of stellar spectra. It 
was soon apparent that stellar spectra could differ greatly 
from each other. So, together with investigating stellar 
chemical composition, it was also necessary to explore 
the possibility of classifying stars into groups. This was 
pursued in the 1860s primarily by the Jesuit astronomer, 
seccHI. After examining a few thousand stars, he came 
to the conclusion that they could all be placed into four 
groups, depending on the appearance of their spectra. It 
was noted that these spectral types were correlated with 
the colors of the stars—white, yellow or red. During the 
same period, HUGGINS in England used higher-dispersion 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


spectra to look for chemical constituents. Despite the 
differences between the spectra, he found that many lines 
could be identified with elements found on the Earth and 
the Sun. 

In these early days, stellar spectra—like the solar 
spectrum—were observed visually. Whereas the Sun 
produced adequate light, this was not true of stars. The 
obvious answer was to use photography, but the ‘wet 
plate’ process in vogue in the 1860s was insufficiently 
sensitive. It was not until the end of the 1870s, when the 
‘dry plate’ process became available, that the photography 
of stellar spectra became feasible. New discoveries then 
followed quickly. An important one derived from the 
fact that the photographic plates were more sensitive than 
the human eye in the ultraviolet, with the result that a 
number of new lines were detected in that region. Huggins 
in England and voce, in Germany found lines there 
which they believed extended the sequence of hydrogen 
lines found in the visible. A study of the wavelengths 
of these lines led the Swiss, BALMER, to announce the 
numerical formula for the wavelengths of hydrogen lines 
now called after him. His success encouraged the idea that 
spectral lines are produced by related sequences of atomic 
vibrations. Photographic recording of stellar spectra also 
allowed the first reasonably accurate radial velocities to 
be measured. This led to the discovery of spectroscopic 
binaries: the first found—Mizar—was detected by Miss 
Maury at Harvard towards the end of the 1880s. 


Stars and nebulae 

Photography also ultimately helped with another type of 
astrophysical measurement—stellar brightness. During 
the 1880s, E C PICKERING at Harvard and Pritchard at 
Oxford produced photometric catalogs of the brighter 
stars in the Northern hemisphere based on visual 
estimates of brightness. They were extended to Southern 
hemisphere stars in the early 1890s by Bailey observing 
in Peru. It was generally believed by this time that 
photographic photometry would be the way forward 
in the future. Unfortunately, it proved difficult to 
reach agreement on how to reduce the photographic 
images to equivalent magnitudes (and it was only 
slowly realized that photographic and visual magnitudes 
could differ considerably, depending on the color of the 
star). Consequently, photographic photometry had only 
contributed to a minor extent by the end of the 19th 
century. 

By the latter years of the century, photography— 
particularly the Harvard survey work—was proving a 
valuable way of picking up variable stars. Interest in 
the visual observation of variables, originally stressed by 
Argelander in Germany, had grown from the mid-century 
onwards. The system of designating variable stars via 
letters of the alphabet was already in use by the 1880s, 
and exemplars of the main types of variable were under 
investigation by the end of the century. The ones that 
attracted most attention were the NOVAE (supernovae were 
not distinguished as a separate category until the 20th 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysics to 1900 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


century). Huggins, in 1866, was the first to examine the 
spectrum of a nova. He found that it consisted of an 
ordinary stellar absorption spectrum with superimposed 
bright lines. Both this and later novae spectra were 
therefore interpreted as indicating the explosion of a cloud 
of gas from a stellar body. 

During the 1860s, Huggins undertook a survey of the 
spectra of bright nebulae. (In the 19th century, a ‘nebula’ 
meant any extended patch of light, as compared with 
stars, which were point sources.) Ever since W Herschel’s 
time, there had been a debate concerning the nature of 
nebulae. Were they some kind of fluid, or stars clustered 
so close together that they could not be resolved? The 
first object Huggins examined was a PLANETARY NEBULA. It 
showed a bright line spectrum, which was immediately 
interpreted as meaning that nebulae were gas clouds. The 
problem was that some of the spectral lines could not be 
linked to any known terrestrial elements. It was therefore 
suggested, by analogy with helium, that a new element— 
‘nebulium’—was present. Although the idea remained in 
play for the rest of the century, nebulium, like coronium, 
ultimately proved to be spurious. The bright lines were 
shown in the 20th century to be due to oxygen ina rarified 
state. 

As more spectra of nebulae were observed, the 
initial conclusion concerning their nature became more 
questionable. Planetary nebulae and what were called 
‘irregular’ nebulae (of which the Orion nebula was a prime 
example) always gave emission lines. However, other 
nebulae (a key example being the Andromeda nebula) 
gave spectra that appeared to be continuous, without 
either dark or bright lines. The interpretation of this kind 
of spectrum was a matter of dispute for the rest of the 
century. The first hint of the way forward did not come 
until 1899, when scHEINER in Germany found faint traces 
of absorption lines on a long-exposure photograph of the 
spectrum of the Andromeda nebula. Direct photography 
had by this time provided some further information on this 
latter type of nebula. Lord Rossz, observing in Ireland in the 
1840s, had discerned visually that a few nebulae seemed 
to have a spiral structure. When sensitive photographic 
plates became available towards the end of the century, it 
was shown—particularly by KEELER in the United States— 
that many more spiral nebulae existed. It was natural to 
suppose that the unusual spectrum and the unusual shape 
of such nebulae were linked. 

At the end of the 18th century, the French 
mathematician, LAPLACE, had suggested a way in which 
the solar system might have formed. He envisaged a 
contracting nebula, which spun more rapidly as it shrank. 
The spin rate finally reached a point where material 
was ejected in rings round the equator. This material 
subsequently condensed into planets, with the final central 
condensation forming the Sun. The picture painted by 
this ‘nebular hypothesis’ suggested that the contracting 
material would look very like a spiral nebula. So it 
came to be thought that such nebulae were simply nearby 
planetary systems in the process of forming. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In 1885, the confusion was added to by the appearance 
of a new star—actually a supernova—in the Andromeda 
nebula. This was naturally equated to other new stars— 
ordinary novae—observed in the Milky Way during the 
19th century. The corresponding misestimate of distance 
suggested that the Andromeda nebula was part of our own 
Galaxy. Another contributory factor was the distribution 
of the spiral nebulae. It became apparent that these did 
not occur near the plane of the Milky Way (the so-called 
‘zone of avoidance’). Although the cause was not known 
(subsequently found to be due to obscuring dust in the 
Milky Way), this distribution suggested that the nebulae 
were linked to our Galaxy. At the beginning of the century, 
the idea that many nebulae were clusters of stars, some 
equal to our own Milky Way in extent, had been widely 
debated. By the end of the century, most believed the 
universe to be dominated by the Milky Way. 


Stellar evolution 


By this time, a lively interest was developing in stellar 
evolution. It was inevitable, once different categories 
of stars had been established, to ask how the groupings 
related to each other. The contemporary concern with 
evolution in geology and biology naturally encouraged a 
search for relationships that were evolutionary in nature. 
The first widely held view, developed particularly by 
Zoéllner and Vogel in Germany, was that stars formed a 
single evolutionary sequence. They were born hot and 
white in color. As they dissipated their heat, they became 
successively yellow and then red. There was a problem 
here. The only physical mechanism known to drive change 
was contraction. Both Lane in the USA and Ritter in 
Germany showed that a contracting sphere would actually 
heat up, rather than cool. However, their results assumed 
that a star was a sphere of perfect gas. No-one at the time 
thought that such a model could represent a real star. 

By the end of the century, evidence was beginning 
to accumulate that stars of the same color could differ 
appreciably in other characteristics, such as size. The 
most radical revision to the 19th century picture of stellar 
evolution—Lockyer’s ‘meteoritic hypothesis’, proposed 
in the 1880s—assumed that this was the case. Lockyer 
suggested that stars formed from nebulae that consisted 
of clouds of meteorites (popular objects of study in the 
latter part of the century). Contraction of the nebula led 
to an increased rate of collision between its constituent 
meteorites, and so raised its temperature. The nebula, 
now visible as a star, gradually changed its color from red, 
through yellow, to white. By the time this latter point 
had been reached, all the meteorites had been vaporized. 
The white star therefore now cooled down, becoming 
smaller as it went back through the sequence from yellow 
to red. Unlike other schemes, Lockyer’s hypothesis thus 
supposed that red stars fell into two categories—either 
very large, or very small. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysics to 1900 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interpreting spectra 

Lockyer based his arguments on a comparison of the 
spectra of meteorites in the laboratory with spectra from 
a wide range of stars. Some of this work came under 
attack, and his hypothesis was not widely supported. 
Nevertheless, detailed studies of stellar spectra became 
increasingly a topic of interest. In the mid-1880s, E C 
Pickering at Harvard initiated a large-scale investigation 
of stellar spectroscopy and photometry. The first 
results appeared in the 1890s as the Draper memorial 
catalog of stellar spectra. (Draper was a pioneering 
US astrophysicist, whose family provided money for the 
project subsequent to his death.) The catalog introduced 
the alphabetical classification of stellar spectra still in use 
today. The spectra used for classification purposes at 
Harvard were too small scale for detailed study, but Miss 
Maury examined a subset of the stars in greater detail. 
She found that stars of the same color could still have 
subtle differences in the appearance of their spectra. She 
speculated that these might have implications for stellar 
evolution. (Indeed, her work led onto Hertzsprung’s 
distinction between giant and dwarf stars in the early years 
of the 20th century.) 

The basic problem was that the theoretical under- 
standing of spectra remained fairly primitive throughout 
the 19th century. The difficulty was that, not only were 
the spectra often complex in themselves, but, even worse, 
they could change according to the light source. For ex- 
ample, the laboratory spectrum of an element produced 
with an electric arc could have some lines different from 
a spectrum of the same element produced with an elec- 
tric spark. One proposed explanation was that elements 
could be broken down to an extent that varied according 
to the conditions to which they were subjected. This sug- 
gestion met considerable opposition, not least because it 
had been a basic tenet of 19th century science that atoms 
were indestructible. 

Unfortunately, Lockyer, who was the strongest 
supporter of this argument, initially held a mistaken idea 
of what was happening. It had been noted early on that 
laboratory spectra from different elements often had some 
lines coincident in position. Locker called them ‘basic’ 
lines and believed that they revealed the presence of a 
common breakdown product from the initial elements. 
As higher-dispersion spectroscopes became available, it 
was found that these basic lines were simply close to each 
other in position, rather than coincident. Consequently, 
they possessed no fundamental significance. Towards 
the end of the century, Lockyer was influenced by his 
assistant, A FOWLER, to alter his ideas about the breakdown 
of elements. Attention was now called to another group 
of lines—labeled ‘enhanced’ lines—which varied from 
source to source. These lines were, indeed, associated 
with what would now be called ionized atoms. However, 
Lockyer’s contemporaries were mostly so confused by his 
reinterpretation that the new idea received little initial 
attention. By this time—the end of the century—evidence 
was beginning to accumulate that atoms could be broken 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


down. JJ Thomson’s work on the electron is a key example 
of this. Detailed understanding of astronomical spectra 
had to await the development of quantum theory in the 
20th century. 

In trying to interpret spectra, the Sun remained the 
prime source of comparison data throughout the 19th 
century. For example, the spectra of sunspots were found 
to have bands similar to those found in the spectra of 
red stars. Since sunspots were believed to be cooler than 
the Sun as a whole, this fitted in well with expectations 
regarding stellar temperatures. The problem lay in 
actually putting a figure to the temperatures involved. A 
white star might be hotter than a red star, but how much 
hotter? Again, it was hoped to answer this question first 
for the Sun. Ways of linking the temperature of a body 
to the radiation it emitted were limited in the mid-19th 
century. They mostly depended either on Newton’s law or 
on Dulong and Petit’s law, but these gave widely differing 
results. For example, one estimate in 1860 suggested the 
solar surface was at some 7 000 000 °C, whereas another in 
1872 suggested 1400 °C. Of the various proposed revisions, 
the one that ultimately proved most useful was put 
forward by Stefan in 1879. His suggestion of a dependence 
on the fourth power of the temperature had no theoretical 
backing until the development of quantum theory. It was 
therefore treated with some reserve in the 19th century. 


The development of astrophysics 

In 1859, a solar FLARE was observed for the first time. It was 
intense enough to be visible in white light against the Sun’s 
disc and was accompanied by a major magnetic storm and 
widespread auRoRAE on Earth. The difficulty was that such 
events were normally invisible, since instrumental limita- 
tions meant that most solar observing was done at limb. 
This changed in the 1890s, when HALE in the USA (and also 
DESLANDRES in France) introduced the idea of viewing the 
entire Sun in the light of a single line, so allowing solar ac- 
tivity to be scanned across the disc. This development well 
illustrates the continuing link between new astrophysical 
research and better instrumentation. By the end of the cen- 
tury, not only was an increasing diversity of equipment 
being hung on the end of telescopes: the telescopes, them- 
selves, were undergoing change. Thus, the fact that pho- 
tographic plates were sensitive to a different region of the 
spectrum from the human eye meant that refracting tele- 
scopes for photographic use had to be specially designed 
and adjusted. Furthermore, the need for the maximum 
possible light grasp led to a growing interest in the use of 
reflecting telescopes for astrophysical research. 

In its early years, many astronomers regarded astro- 
physics as an inferior adjunct to classical astronomy. It was 
less rigorous, not requiring the grounding in mathematics 
essential for classical astronomy. Despite attempts to link 
solar activity with terrestrial weather, it had less practical 
outcome than classical astronomy, which was the tradi- 
tional basis for terrestrial measurement of time and posi- 
tion. Above all, it had no satisfactory theory to integrate 
it all together. Hardly surprisingly, many of the pioneer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Astrophysics to 1900 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


astrophysicists were amateurs, or came from other disci- 
plines. Yet, within a few decades, astrophysics had become 
a subject in its own right: by the 1890s a major journal— 
the Astrophysical Journal—was already devoted to it (see 
ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES AND PUBLICATIONS). Significantly, this 
was launched in the United States. North America had 
played only a minor role in the development of classical 
astronomy. As the new century dawned, it was widely 
accepted in the astronomical world that it would play a 
much greater part in the development of astrophysics. 


Bibliography 

Gingerich O (ed) 1984 Astrophysics and Twentieth-Century 
Astronomy to 1950 (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press) 

Hearnshaw J B 1986 The Analysis of Starlight (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Jones B Z and Boyd L G 1971 The Harvard College 
Observatory (Cambridge, MA: Belkap) 

Meadows AJ 1970 Early Solar Physics (Oxford: Pergamon) 

Meadows A J 1972 Science and Controversy (London: 
Macmillan) p 13 


Jack Meadows 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Atacama Large Millimeter Array 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Atacama Large Millimeter Array 


The Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) will 
be the largest aperture synthesis telescope, operating 
at millimeter and submillimeter wavelengths, ever 
constructed. It is to be built on the plateau close 
to Cerro Chajnantor in the eastern Atacama desert of 
northern Chile, at an altitude of 5000 m. The project is 
being developed by an international consortium, which 
currently includes the US and nine European countries, 
and should be ready for scientific use in 2009. 

The project is the natural successor to existing 
millimeter-wave interferometers at IRAM, OVRO, BIMA 
and Nobeyama. It will have 64 12 m diameter antennas, 
and will operate at wavelengths from 5-0.35 mm, allowing 
it to map at high resolution the molecular gas and dust in 
nearby star-forming regions, and star-forming galaxies at 
high redshift. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.mrao.cam.ac.uk/~jsr/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Atmospheric Pressure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Atmospheric Pressure 


The pressure (i.e. the force per unit area) exerted on the 
surface of a planet by the weight of gas contained in a 
column extending vertically upwards to the limit of the 
atmosphere. At the surface of the Earth, the average 
value of atmospheric pressure, in SI units, is 1.013 x 10° 
pascal (Pa), where one pascal is equivalent to a force of 
one newton per square meter (N m7’). A further unit 
of pressure is the bar, which is equivalent to 10° pascal, 
a common submultiple of which is the millibar (mb); 
1 millibar = 0.001 bar. A pressure of 1.013 x 10° Pa is 
equivalent to 1.103 bar, or 1013 millibars. The average 
value of atmospheric pressure at the surface of the Earth 
(1013 mbar) is also referred to as 1 atmosphere. By 
way of comparison, the atmospheric pressures at the 
surfaces of Venus and Mars are, respectively, 90 and 0.006 
atmospheres. 


See also: density, kinetic theory of gases. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Atmospheric refraction 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Atmospheric refraction 


Rays of light entering the Earth’s atmosphere (i.e. passing 
from the vacuum of space to the medium of air) are bent, 
or refracted. As a result of this, the apparent positions 
of the stars are displaced by a small amount towards 
the zenith. In other words, the effect of atmospheric 
refraction is to increase the apparent altitudes of stars. 
At relatively small values of zenith distance, the effect 
is small, and is proportional to the tangent of the zenith 
distance. However, at large zenith distances, the effects are 
quite appreciable. At the horizon (zenith distance = 90°) 
refraction increases apparent altitudes by about 35 arc 
minutes. This means, for example, that at the moment that 
the lower edge of the Sun appears to touch the horizon at 
sunset, the whole disk of the Sun is actually below the 
horizon. 


See also: aberration, scintillation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Atom 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Atom 


The smallest particle of a chemical element that retains 
the properties of that element. Each atom consists of a 
compact nucleus, in which all but a tiny fraction of its 
total mass resides, surrounded by a cloud of electrons— 
lightweight particles with negative electrical charge. A 
typical atomic nucleus has a radius of about 107!* m; the 
overall radius of an atom (i.e. the radius of its cloud of 
electrons) is about 10000 times larger (about 107!° m). 
The nucleus consists of a number of protons (massive 
particles with positive electrical charge) together with 
a number of neutrons (particles of similar mass to the 
proton but with zero electrical charge), all of these particles 
being bound together by the strong nuclear interaction. 
The surrounding cloud of negatively charged electrons 
is held around the positively charged nucleus by the 
electromagnetic force. A complete (neutral) atom contains 
the same number of protons as electrons and, because it 
has equal numbers of positively and negatively charged 
particles, has zero net charge. An atom that has lost one 
or more of its electrons and which, therefore, has a net 
positive charge, is called a positive ion. An atom that has 
acquired one or more extra electrons and which, therefore, 
has a net negative charge, is called a negative ion. 

Each element is assigned a chemical symbol that takes 
the form of a letter or a pair of letters; for example, 
hydrogen is denoted by H, helium by He, and so on. 
An atom is characterized by its atomic number (denoted 
by the symbol Z), which is the number of protons in its 
nucleus, and by its mass number (A), which is the total 
number of protons and neutrons contained in its nucleus. 
Conventionally, an element is denoted by its chemical 
symbol, preceded by mass number as a superscript and 
its atomic number as a subscript. Thus, an element, X, 
with atomic number Z and mass number A, would be 
written as 7X. For example, a normal hydrogen atom 
with one proton and no neutrons in its nucleus (Z = 1; 
A = 1) would be denoted by {H; a helium nucleus with 
two protons (Z = 2) and two neutrons (A = 2+2 = 4) 
would be denoted by 3He, and so on. Atomic number 
defines the chemical element of which a particular atom is 
an example. Thus, for example, every hydrogen atom has 
Z = 1, every helium atom has Z = 2, and so on. Nuclei 
of the same chemical element may, however, contain 
different numbers of neutrons. Atoms that have the same 
number of protons but different numbers of neutrons, in 
their nuclei, and which, therefore, have the same atomic 
number but different mass numbers, are called isotopes. 
For example, ‘heavy hydrogen’, or deuterium, denoted 
by 7H (or 7D) is an isotope of hydrogen that has one 
proton and one neutron, rather than just a single proton, 
in its nucleus. Helium exists in two forms, helium-4 (}He) 
and helium-3 (3He), a lighter isotope with two protons 
but only one neutron in its nucleus. The average of 
the various naturally occurring isotopes of a particular 
element, weighted according to their relative abundances, 
is the atomic weight of that element. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Although quantum mechanics has shown that 
electrons in atoms cannot be regarded strictly as points 
localized in space and that the electron clouds surrounding 
a nucleus represent regions where the probability of 
finding electrons is highest, the Bohr model of the 
hydrogen atom, which was proposed in 1913 by the Danish 
physicist Neils Bohr (1885-1962), continues to provide 
a good basis for describing the way in which atoms 
emit and absorb radiation. According to this model, a 
hydrogen atom consists of a single proton around which 
a single electron travels in one of a number of permitted 
orbits, each of which corresponds to a different energy 
level. If the electron drops down from a higher level to 
a lower one (makes a ‘downwards transition’), it emits 
a photon (a quantity of radiant energy) with an energy 
equal to the difference in energy between the upper and 
lower levels. The wavelength of the emitted radiation is 
inversely proportional to the energy of the photon (the 
greater the difference in energy levels, the shorter the 
wavelength of the emitted radiation). Conversely, if an 
electron absorbs a quantity of energy equal in magnitude 
to the energy difference between a lower and a higher level, 
it will jump up to the higher level (makes an ‘upward 
transition’). The emission and absorption of radiation 
that occurs when electrons make downward and upward 
transitions between the various energy levels of hydrogen 
atoms gives rise to the series of emission or absorption 
lines that constitutes the hydrogen spectrum. With more 
massive atoms, which have numerous electrons arranged 
in concentric shells, the set of energy levels and permitted 
transitions is more complex, but the same general principle 
applies: downward transitions give rise to the emission of 
radiation and upward transitions occur when energy is 
absorbed. 


See also: absorption spectrum, electron, elementary par- 
ticle, emission spectrum, fundamental forces, hydrogen 
spectrum, ion, isotope, molecule, neutron, Pauli exclusion 
principle, photon, proton, quantum mechanics, subatomic 
particles, wave—particle duality. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aureole ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aureole 


Two Soviet-French satellites launched from Plesetsk in 
1971 and 1973 to study Earth’s upper atmosphere and 
auroras. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Auriga 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Auriga 


(the Charioteer; abbrev. Aur, gen. Aurigae; area 
657 sq. deg.) A northern constellation that lies between 
Perseus and Gemini, and culminates at midnight in early 
December. It is usually said to represent Erichthonius, leg- 
endary king of Athens and inventor of the four-horse char- 
iot who was raised by the goddess Athene, and is shown 
on early celestial charts as a charioteer supporting a goat 
and its two kids on his left arm. Its brightest star, a Au- 
rigae (Capella), is known as the ‘little she-goat’, and two 
of its other naked-eye stars, 7 Aurigae and ¢ Aurigae, as 
‘the kids’. The brighter stars of Auriga were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A large, conspicuous constellation, Auriga is easily 
recognized by virtue of Capella, which at magnitude 0.1 
is the sixth brightest star in the sky and from northern 
temperate latitudes is almost immediately overhead on 
winter evenings. Other bright stars include 6 Aurigae 
(Menkalinan), an eclipsing binary (range 1.9-2.0, period 
3.96 days), e Aurigae, a remarkable eclipsing binary (range 
3.0-3.8, period 27.1 years—the longest of any such star) 
and ¢ Aurigae, yet another eclipsing binary (range 3.7-4.0, 
period 972 days). There are six other stars of magnitude 4.0 
or brighter. The star Elnath, magnitude 1.7, was originally 
designated y Aurigae, but has been reallocated to the 
neighboring constellation of Taurus (as 6 Tauri). 

The Milky Way passes through the south-western 
part of Auriga and the constellation contains several open 
star clusters, including M36 (NGC 1960), which contains 
about 60 stars between ninth and fourteenth magnitude, 
M37 (NGC 2099), which contains about 150 stars between 
magnitudes 9 and 12.5, and M38 (NGC 1912), which has 
more than 100 stars fainter than eighth magnitude. 


See also: Capella; Epsilon Aurigae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aurora 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aurora 


An aurora is an extended source of light of different forms 
and colors observable at high latitudes and sometimes at 
mid-latitudes. Their brightness may reach the intensity 
of the full moonlight. The auroral oval (one in each 
hemisphere) is the location where most of the auroras 
are observable. It is a belt surrounding each of Earth’s 
magnetic poles with a maximum latitudinal extent at 
magnetic midnight. The polar cap auroras (inside the oval) 
and daytime auroras are usually weak and diffuse while in 
the oval, they are more intense and variable in time. Inboth 
cases, auroras are generated by particles of solar origin 
interacting with the atoms and molecules of the Earth’s 
upper atmosphere through direct collisions and chemical 
processes. However, in the case of the auroral oval, the 
particles are accelerated by some complex magnetospheric 
processes leading to phenomena of brighter intensity, 
of various forms, both characters being highly time 
dependent. The auroras are usually observed between 80 
and 300 km high depending on the characteristics of the 
precipitating particles (electron and proton energies) and 
atmospheric composition, leading to an auroral spectrum 
made of many lines from atomic and molecular neutral 
or ionized species. The occurrence and intensity of 
auroras follow the solar activity; for example the typical 
11-year solar cycle is found in the observations. The 
aurora’s characteristics represent the last stage in a series 
of processes starting in the solar atmosphere and taking 
into account the Earth’s magnetosphere and atmospheric 
physics. 


Brief historical background 

When observing our environment, different phenomena 
are revealed. There are regular phenomena such as sunrise 
and sunset, movements of stars and planets. There are also 
irregularly occurring phenomena, either of astronomical 
or geophysical nature, such as rainbows, comets, halos and 
auroras. Before becoming predictable, their occurrence 
was associated with some important events. This is why 
these phenomena were recorded for divinatory purposes 
and also likely for curiosity. 

In the first few centuries AD some auroras were 
recorded by the Chinese, Greek and Romans. However, 
people living in the high-latitude regions were more 
accustomed to their occurrence and they named them the 
Northern Lights. 

The first modern observations of auroras started 
in the second half of the sixteenth century with Tycho 
Brahe from his observatory at Uraniborg. Sometime later 
the occurrence of auroras decreased, especially at mid- 
latitudes. P Gassendi described several auroras, observed 
in the early seventeenth century, and suggested the name 
‘aurora borealis’. 

After the discovery of sunspots in 1609, the Sun was 
regularly observed. Sunspot occurrence experienced a 
significant decrease from 1645 to 1715, the ‘Maunder 
minimum’, during which few auroras occurred. Solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


activity resumed in the early eighteenth century and some 
intense auroras were observed at mid-latitudes (1716 and 
1726). E Halley and later J J Dortou de Mairan were asked 
to study their origin by the Royal Society (London) and 
the Académie Royale des Sciences (Paris) respectively. 

Various hypotheses had previously been made to 
explain the occurrence of auroras. Mairan suggested 
in 1733 that the auroral light was generated by a solar 
fluid impinging upon the EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE. Even though 
approximate, this was the first hypothesis based on a 
relationship between the Sun and the Earth. In the second 
edition of his report, Mairan felt there was a link between 
sunspots and auroras as well as their variations in seasonal 
occurrence. The relationship between the occurrence of 
auroras and magnetic perturbations was experimentally 
demonstrated by P Hiorter in 1741 by observing the tiny 
perturbations experienced by a compass needle (provided 
by A Celsius) at the same time. Mairan suspected 
that auroras could occurr in the southern hemisphere 
and addressed a note to Don Ulloa, a Spanish naval 
officer, who confirmed observations of a polar light when 
rounding Cape Horn in 1745. J Cook exploring the high 
southern latitudes confirmed the occurrence of the ‘aurora 
australis’ in 1770. In the second half of the eighteenth 
century, W Wargentin (1717-83) concluded from various 
observations that auroras are observable from different 
places at the same time and extend horizontally as a belt 
surrounding the North Pole. 

After the discovery of the electron, K Birkeland 
proposed in 1896 that auroras were produced by electrons 
ejected from the Sun and guided by the Earth’s magnetic 
field to the high-latitude regions. He supported this idea 
by laboratory experiments. However, due to electrostatic 
repulsion, it was necessary to consider a PLASMA ejected 
by the Sun rather than electrons alone. S Chapman and 
V Ferraro showed that a moving plasma will interact with 
the Earth’s magnetic field, confining it in a cavity. This 
was the birth of magnetospheric physics. 

Several expeditions at the end of the nineteenth 
century localized the auroral zone with accuracy. Auroras 
were the subject of many observations (forms, spectrum, 
etc) and theoretical developments. 


Main properties 

The modern means of auroral observations are spectrom- 
eters which analyse their spectrum, photometers which 
study the behavior of one or several emissions lines, cam- 
eras which record the aurora forms as a function of time, 
and radar. These instruments can be used on the ground or 
from orbiting platforms where they provide a global sur- 
vey of auroras. However, before the instrumental study 
of auroras, observations were made visually. In order to 
allow comparisons of observations made by different au- 
thors, a nomenclature to describe auroral characteristics 
(intensity, form and color) was adopted internationally. It 
is still in use. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aurora 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Intensity 

The line of the greatest intensity is due to the emission 
of atomic oxygen at 557.7 nm frequently referred to in the 
scientific literature as the ‘green line’. Auroral brightness is 
scaled to the green line intensity through the International 
Brightness Coefficient (IBC) as shown in table 1. 


Table 1. The unit used is the rayleigh (R) which corresponds to 
10° photons emitted in 47 steradians and received per cm* and 
per second. This scale was proposed by Seaton in 1954 and 
formalized by Hunten in 1955. 


IBC Intensity (kR) Equivalent source 


I 1 Milky Way 

I 10 Thin moonlit cirrus clouds 
Il 100 Moonlit cumulus clouds 
IV 1000 Full moonlight 


For the purpose of comparison, equivalent brightness 
sources are indicated. For the modern measurements, 
auroral emission intensities are given in rayleigh. 
However, when using old records for long-term studies, 
the reference to the equivalent source intensity is useful 
despite its relative inaccuracy. 


Forms and colors 

Visual observations and images recorded by cameras 
reveal several typical forms as shown for example in 
figure 1. They are accurately described as arcs, bands, 
rayed or not, diffuse or pulsating surface, corona and 
flaming. The description of auroral forms is based on an 
international nomenclature shown in table 2. 

Auroral colors are usually green, red or blue 
depending on the atmospheric species involved in the 
excitation processes. Auroras of intensity IBC I or II appear 
colorless. Yellow auroras are due to the blending of red and 
green auroras. 

Auroral intensity is a function of time. The change 
may be either slow, as for a pulsating surface (0.1 Hz), or 
reach 10 Hz for certain homogeneous forms. Changes in 
time may be due to traveling forms as for the flaming- 
type auroras which appear to move upwards. Apparent 
horizontal movements are found in arc or band auroras 
with velocities as great as 100 km sl. This apparent 
velocity generally increases with the amplitude of the 
magnetic storm. When making visual observations of such 
events, the rapidity of the changes with time is certainly 
the most striking and spectacular feature of the auroral 
phenomenon. 

Auroral events are due to precipitations of particles in 
the Earth’s upper atmosphere. Their patterns are complex 
and this is why the description of an aurora needs to be 
accurately defined. Based on that, it has been possible to 
classify the auroral events and to obtain information about 
their generation processes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Location 
When observations are made on the ground as a function 
of latitude, a mean frequency of occurrence can be 
determined. It allows definition of the region of maximum 
occurrence now known as the ‘auroral zone’. The auroral 
zone and auroral oval are two different concepts which 
will be explained later. Pictures of the auroral oval were 
obtained from orbit by the DYNAMICS EXPLORER 1 spacecraft 
(figure 2). The auroral oval center is shifted by about 3° 
from the geomagnetic pole towards the dark hemisphere. 
Its thickness is a maximum at magnetic midnight. The 
auroral oval lies around 70° magnetic latitude and has a 
mean width of about 5° in quiet conditions. When auroras 
are observed at the same time from two magnetically 
conjugate locations (one in the northern and the other in 
the southern auroral ovals), they develop similar patterns. 

The occurrence of auroras is greater in the auroral 
oval than in its central part. This latter region is named 
the POLAR cap and auroras have a weaker intensity and 
a smaller rate of change with time than in the auroral 
oval. Sometimes extraordinary auroral displays may be 
seen inside. For example, an arc observed near the zenith 
remains co-aligned with the Sun’s direction. This was 
discovered by D Mawson in 1913 at the Dumont d’Urville 
station (Antarctica). This arc may extend up to both inner 
edges of the auroral oval. It was named the theta aurora 
as it looks like the Greek letter 0. 

The above auroras are observed at night. Another 
type of aurora is observable in the daytime. They are 
usually weak and diffuse. 


Height and spatial extent 

Heights were first measured using parallactic methods 
from the ground. Today, measurements from rockets and 
spacecraft are commonly used. Most auroral occurrence 
takes place in the altitude range 80 to 120 km. However, 
the lower border of very intense auroras may decrease to 
70 km. Their vertical extent depends on the generation 
processes and may reach an altitude of 300 km for certain 
aurora. The intensity distribution is not homogeneous 
along the vertical; its vertical structure is made of 
elements having a thickness of hundreds of meters to some 
kilometers. 

Auroras remain in a latitude strip, the thickness of 
which is function of the magnetic time (defined as the 
solar local time, but counted from the meridian containing 
the magnetic and geographic poles) as seen in figure 2. 
Within the auroral oval, the quiet arcs are mostly oriented 
in longitude along the oval and may be 500 km long. 


Occurrence periodicity 

For a given ground-based station within the auroral zone, 
the yearly mean occurrence follows the 11-year SOLARCYCLE, 
with, however, a time lag of one to two years. 

When using several years of data sorted by monthly 
mean, a semi-annual variation is shown with maximum 
auroral occurrence near the equinoxes. Similarly, the 27 
day solar rotation can be pointed out. The occurrence 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aurora 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Auroral display observed at Dumont d’Urville (Antarctica). An all-sky camera of the Cassegrain type is also shown. 


Table 2. Common auroral forms from Vallance-Jones (1974). 


Homogeneous arc (HA) 
Homogeneous band (HB) 
Rays arc or band (RA or RB) 
Diffuse surface (DS) 
Pulsating surface (PS) 
Pulsating arc (PA) 

Corona (C) 

Flaming (F) 


of polar cap and daytime auroras does not strictly follow 
these rules, especially for the most intense events. 


Relationship with magnetic activity 

The Sun is a variable star. It experiences changes more or 
less cyclically, with some others of a more chaotic nature. 
Its variable activity induces fluctuations in the SOLAR 
WIND characteristics (velocity, density, ion and electron 
temperatures and magnetic field) of greater or lesser 
importance. It results in small fluctuations in the Earth’s 
magnetic field which are detected by magnetometers 
on the ground. Their amplitudes are used to define 
indices of magnetic activity. These events are called 
magnetic storms. Auroral occurrence and intensity have 
been studied as a function of magnetic disturbance and 
the corresponding auroral oval has been determined. 
From a typical shape (figure 2), with increasing magnetic 
activity, the oval shifts slightly equatorward and extends 
polarward and equatorward. This explains why some 
auroras may be observable at mid-latitudes. 

Magnetic activity follows the 11-year solar cycle 
pattern. However, given the chaotic nature of the Sun, 
strong magnetic events may occur even during low solar 
activity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Regular form in height, direction and intensity 

Similar to HA, but variable along length 

Narrow with luminosity quasi vertically structured 
Uniform emitting area 

As DS, with intensity variable in time (several seconds) 
As PS for an arc 

Ray system viewed parallel to the magnetic field lines 
Forms of variable intensity moving towards zenith 


Electron and proton auroras 

Auroras result mainly from collisions between atmo- 
spheric species and particles, electrons or protons. Most 
of the properties discussed above are those of electron au- 
roras. 

Differences between electron and proton auroras arise 
from their different mode of propagation in the upper 
atmosphere. Due to the proton mass, its radius of 
gyration is much greater (200 m) than the electron one. 
Furthermore, protons moving around the magnetic field 
may collide with some species and capture an electron. 
This results in an atom of hydrogen which moves in 
a straight line, free from the influence of the Earth’s 
magnetic field. Another collision may later restore the 
initial proton. Consequently, proton auroras are of weak 
intensity (maximum IBC I) and diffuse. The height of 
occurrence is around 100 km. The proton auroral oval 
is shifted slightly equatorward with respect to the electron 
auroral oval. 


The auroral spectrum and emission mechanisms 

Most of the auroral displays are green due to the O('S) 
emission line at 557.7 nm. However, many other lines 
from either atoms or molecular or ionized species exist. 
Figure 3 shows a spectrum between 450 and 750 nm. It 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aurora 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The auroral oval observed by the Dynamics Explorer 1 satellite (Frank et al 1982). 


is a superposition of many lines from: O and N; O;, 
Nz, NO and OH; Ot, N*; and O3, N3. The blue color 
originates from the N35 band at 391.4 nm. Figure 3 
also shows the Balmer lines emitted during the proton 
events. The auroral spectrum arises from collisions 
between electrons/protons with the species in the Earth’s 
atmosphere, and photochemical reactions: 


(a) Collisions with electrons. Primary electrons from the 
magnetosphere are impinging upon the atoms (A) 
and molecules (M) of the terrestrial atmosphere and 
set these species in metastable states (*), such as 


A+e—> A*+e 
M+e—>M*+e 


with similar reactions leading to ions. The electrons 
on the left-hand side are the primary electrons and 
those on the right-hand side are the secondary 
electrons which are also able to collide with other 
species and to generate excited molecular and atomic 
states until they are fully thermalized. The excited 
states (*) are deactivated either by radiating photons 
or by collisions with other species before light 
emission (quenching). As the density of the neutral 
species is increasing downward, quenching explains 
why no auroras are observed at low altitude (typically 
below 70 km). 

(b) Indirect excitation mechanisms. 
important mechanisms are: 


The two most 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(1) Dissociative recombination; a typical example is 
Of +e > OCD or'S) +O. 


(2) Energy transfer and quenching; 
example is 


a_ typical 


OCD) + No > OCP) + Not. 


The symbol + denotes either an excited state 
or the ground state. For the first case there 
is an energy transfer, and for the second case 
there is a collisional deactivation. The efficiency 
of the quenching is a function of altitude and 
the lifetime of the excited state of the colliding 
species. 

(c) Collisions with protons. Reactions involve protons 
and neutral hydrogen colliding with molecules. 
During these collisions, neutral hydrogen may lose its 
electron, ionize the molecule or transfer its energy to 
it. As for the proton, it may also ionize the molecule, 
transfer its energy or capture an electron. 


To calculate the various emission line intensities, it 
is necessary to dispose of the energy spectrum of the 
primary electrons. This is generally measured at high 
altitudes (typically 300 km). The calculation of the auroral 
spectrum is based on the energy spectrum of the primary 
electrons, the cross section of the atoms and molecules, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aurora 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


> 

& 

wo 

Zz 

Ww 

= 

Zz 

W 

= 

E 

s 

Ww 

c 

450 

ai r 

B| 

lu 

= 

< NI28 

Ww 

= T ND27 
E Nol] 

ry f 0122 110 
a | | 


600 


650 


eh 


oli 
| 


O20 on 2F 
1, 1 


WAVELENGTH (NM) 


Figure 3. An auroral spectrum from 450 to 740 nm at 1 nm resolution. The observations (solid curve) are compared with the synthetic 
spectrum of Gattinger and Vallance Jones (1974). The green line intensity is in the range of an IBC II to III. 


and the processes occurring as the electrons penetrate 
the atmosphere in a cascade of successive collisions. 
The problem is rather difficult and also suffers from the 
uncertainties affecting the cross sections. 

Visual observations, as well as instruments on board 
rockets and spacecraft, have shown the dependence of the 
line emission intensity on altitude. Let us consider the case 
of the atomic oxygen emission at 630 nm. The mechanism 
of emission (dissociative recombination and excitation by 
collision), the vertical distribution of the neutral species 
and the energy spectrum of the precipitating electrons 
allow us to calculate the production rate of the excited 
state ('D) as a function of altitude. Taking into account 
the deactivation of the excited oxygen atoms by collisions 
provides the emission rate profile with altitude. In the case 
of this emission, the 110 s lifetime of the 'D excited state 
suppresses all emission at low altitude. This is why the 
aurora observed at 630 nm will be found around an altitude 
of 250 km. The same process allows us to calculate the 
altitude profile of the green line atomic oxygen 1S excited 
state. Its lifetime, being 0.7 s, avoids the low-altitude 
deactivation and this emission will observable as low as 
80 km depending on the intensity of electron precipitation. 

For a given emission line, the stronger the electron 
precipitation is, the lower the aurora will be. 


Aurora and the Earth’s magnetosphere and other 
related phenomena 

It is suggested that the reader consults the sections 
dedicated to the Earth’s magnetosphere in order to have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in mind its representation as well as the terminology (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH articles). 

As the Sun is a variable star, the solar wind presents 
different regimes which affect the state of the Earth’s 
magnetosphere. The interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) 
experiences changes with time. In the quiet condition, 
the IMF has a northward component (i.e. parallel to the 
terrestrial magnetic field) which turns southward during 
magnetic storms. 

To investigate the mechanism of auroral emission, the 
spectrum of the precipitating particles has been measured 
during auroral display. For daytime and polar cap 
auroras, it was found to be of the order of the energy 
of the solar wind. Consequently, daytime auroras are 
believed to be generated by solar wind particles entering 
the upper atmosphere via the northern and southern 
dayside cusps where a neutral point exists in magnetically 
quiet conditions (northward IMF). Polar cap auroras are 
generated by solar wind particles from the magnetotail. 

Within the auroral oval, particle energy is of a factor 
of 50 or more greater than in the solar wind. Consequently, 
the fundamental question is the acceleration mechanism of 
the particles. This is still being debated and cannot yet be 
considered as fully understood. However, reconnection 
between the Earth’s magnetic field and the IMF is the 
most probable mechanism. A reconnection occurs when 
the IMF has a southward component (antiparallel to the 
terrestrial magnetic field). In this case, it generates a 
neutral sheath where the plasma jets are injected upstream 
and downstream from that region. It results in a thinning 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aurora 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the plasma sheet and an inward movement of the 
particles. The shrinking of the plasma sheet leads to an 
increase in the energy of the particles. Several processes 
are proposed. The most likely is based on adiabatic 
compression of a certain quantity of plasma being confined 
in a compressed magnetic flux tube as it is convected 
forward until it is finally precipitated into the Earth’s 
upper atmosphere just as the system becomes unstable. 

The auroral oval is then the intersection of the plasma 
sheet with the upper atmosphere in the 100-200 km 
altitude range. The auroral oval is fixed with respect to 
the Sun, but a ground-based station at auroral latitudes 
rotates below, around the geographic pole. Asa function of 
time, it may be in the polar cap, inside or outside the oval, 
experiencing different auroral occurrence regimes. Their 
mean defines the auroral zone as seen from the ground. 

When the magnetosphere is moderately disturbed 
due to small IMF changes, the corresponding events are 
called magnetic substorms, which are made up of four 
distinct phases (quiet, growth, expansion and recovery) 
having specific characteristics such as typical changes in 
the Earth’s magnetic field. Major solar events such as 
FLARES generate magnetic storms which are analysed as a 
series of successive substorms. 

During a magnetic storm, the moving particles 
generate a magnetic field which combines with that of 
the Earth. The variable characteristics of the precipitating 
particles (velocity, direction and number density) and the 
collisions with the Earth’s atmospheric species are the 
cause of the complexity of the magnetic field disturbance. 
Consequently, auroras constitute a visual illustration of 
the perturbations of the Earth’s magnetic field. In certain 
cases, the field pattern is simple, as for example the rays 
which appear as nearly vertical columns of light showing 
the high inclination of the field line at the latitude of the 
auroral zone. 

Associated with auroras are many other phenomena 
such as the auroral electrojet circulating in the E-region 
(around 100 km altitude) which is heated by Joule 
dissipation and a ring current at low latitudes. Also, x- 
rays and radio waves are generated in the range of 40 
to 500 MHz. During auroras, electric fields are created, 
acting on the movement of the electrons, protons and 
ions. Furthermore, all these species are moving in a 
neutral atmosphere which is driven by collisions with the 
ions. Consequently, dynamics are strongly involved in the 
auroral events as illustrated by the development of vertical 
neutral winds during the substorms. 


The use of auroral observations 

The link between auroral occurrence and solar activity has 
been statistically established from observations. This is 
why the occurrence of auroras has been used to reconstruct 
the solar activity before the first instrumental observations. 
The long periods in the solar activity found in the “C 
variations were confirmed by the occurrence of auroras. 
More directly, auroral occurrence represents the ultimate 
stage in the various phenomena taking place from the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


solar wind up to the Earth’s atmosphere. Understanding 
the detailed auroral characteristics (occurrence, forms, 
spectrum) ensures that the entire physical process is 
understood. The same applies to auroras observed in the 
atmosphere of Jupiter and Saturn. 

Auroral data show how important in science are a 
long series of carefully made observations. 


Bibliography 

Bone N 1997 The Aurora (New York: Wiley) 

Brekke A 1997 Physics of the Upper Polar Atmosphere (New 
York: Wiley) 

Brekke A and Egeland A 1983 The Northern Light (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Eather R H 1980 Majestic Lights (Washington, DC: 
American Geophysical Union) 

Frank L, Craven J D, Burch J L and Wimingham J D 1982 
Polar views of the Earth’s aurora with Dynamics 
Explorer Geophys. Res. Lett. 9 1001-4 

Gattinger R L and Vallance Jones A 1974 Quantitative 
spectroscopy of the aurora. II : The spectrum of 
medium intensity aurora between 4500 and 8900 A 
Can. J. Phys. 52 2343-56 

Vallance Jones A 1974 Aurora (Dordrecht: Reidel) 


Gérard Thuillier 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Aurorae: Observing by Amateurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Aurorae: Observing by Amateurs 


Amateur scientists have had a long interest in the sky, so 
there has been an amateur involvement with observing 
the aurora for as far back as records exist. In the modern 
era, amateurs have been credited with making significant 
contributions to investigations of the aurora since 
advancements in many sciences began to escalate during 
the 18th century. Because the aurora is a large-scale, glob- 
al phenomenon, the value of international collaborations 
involving both professionals and amateurs was recog- 
nized early. One of the most successful demonstrations of 
such cooperation occurred during the International 
Geophysical Year (1957/58). 

With the advent of the space age, investigators have 
come to rely more on satellites and sophisticated ground- 
based observatory equipment to monitor the aurora, but 
some value is still placed on visual reports to supplement 
these. An important purpose of the visual observation is 
in continuing the written records of auroral activity that 
have been preserved by several civilizations since Greek 
times. 

A minimum of equipment is required to make useful 
visual observations of the aurora, and the only optical 
instrument needed is the unaided eye. To a certain extent, 
it is possible to forecast the occurrence of auroral displays 
based on recent events on the Sun, so that observing 
efforts can be planned to coincide with the nights when a 
display is likeliest to occur. Magnetometers and _short- 
wave radios can also be helpful in alerting the observer to 
the presence of auroral activity (although there is not 
always a visual counterpart). You will see auroral dis- 
plays most often, however, if you persevere with making 
regular visual inspections of the poleward sky through- 
out the night, between sunset and dawn, whenever 
weather and moonlight permit. 


Amateur observers living in cities or where there is 
frequent cloud cover may not be able to observe the auro- 
ra visually very often, but they can nonetheless submit an 
observation that auroral activity was detected by a mag- 
netometer or short-wave radio. In this case, the observa- 
tion is not confined to the night-time hours as for the 
purely visual observer. 

No special equipment is needed for basic aurual 
observations. It can be useful, however, to have an instru- 
ment, such as a simple theodolite or alidade, to accurate- 
ly determine the bearings and heights of features in the 
aurora. As an adjunct to the visual record, amateur 
observers sometimes detect subvisual details in auroral 
displays with photography or CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE 
(CCD) imaging. 

Photography is a popular way of recording an auro- 
ra and is the ideal means by which to share the spectacle 
of a display after the event (figures 1 and 2). All that is 
needed is any camera that can make time exposures of a 
few seconds to a few minutes, with the lens open to its 
widest aperture—many photographers choose fast color 
film (such as ISO 400), and a fast, wide-angle lens (such as 
f/3 focal ratio and 28 mm focal length). Photographs also 
make a permanent record of the position and structure of 
a display, which may be useful for triangulation work. 
For those interested in applying other techniques to 
expand on their observations, videography, CCD imaging 
and spectroscopy may also be employed. 

As a means of identifying the presence of, or fore- 
casting the likelihood of, auroral activity, observers with 
an interest in electronics may use magnetometers or 
short-wave radios to detect disturbances in the geomag- 
netic field or the ionosphere. 

Contributors are encouraged to submit observations 
of aurorae in a format recommended by international 
agreement, which increases the value of a sighting and 
also the observer’s appreciation of the phenomenon. A 
record includes the observer’s location and observing 


Figure 1. An aurora seen over Hobart, Tasmania, on 23 October 
1981. Photographed by Martin George, Launceston Planetarium, 
Tasmania. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 2. An aurora seen over northern Tasmania on 31 March 
2001. Photographed by Karenne Barnes, Astronomical Society of 
Tasmania Inc. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Aurorae: Observing by Amateurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


conditions, the date and time that a display was seen, 
plus details about brightness, color, form, activity, direc- 
tions and elevations of features, and changes that occur. 
This information can be recorded as notes or diagrams, 
reported to varying degrees of detail according to the 
individual observer’s preference or experience. 

Any photographs or other types of observation of the 
aurora should also be accompanied by a record of at least 
location, date and time, plus relevant technical informa- 
tion, to give them scientific value. This also increases the 
interest and usefulness of the record to other observers. 

To make the best use of observations, results can be 
contributed to one of several well-established organiza- 
tions that collect, analyse and archive the reports for 
future use. 

Initial analysis of reports usually includes a compar- 
ison with the forecasts and a correlation of the auroral 
event with activity on the Sun and in the Earth’s geomag- 
netic field. For the longer term, it is interesting to deter- 
mine the frequency of displays seen from particular loca- 
tions and their frequency under certain conditions or at 
particular times of the year or the sunspot cycle. 

An aurora reported by a number of observers from 
different locations allows that aurora’s shape, size, posi- 
tion, development and duration to be described. Results 
shared between regional and international organizations 
make it possible to chart an entire auroral event, across 
the daylight boundaries and between hemispheres, so 
that the global pattern of auroral activity can be studied. 
The visual observations can ultimately be compared with 
images and other data about the auroral oval obtained 
from satellites and professional observatories. 

The British Astronomical Association (BAA) collects 
observations of the aurora through its Aurora Section and 
has a network of observers who include members of the 
BAA or other astronomical societies, individual 
observers, professional meteorologists and ships’ officers 
at sea. The BAA collects and publishes observations, 
mainly of the mid-latitude storm aurora, from the British 
Isles, Europe, Iceland, Canada and the United States of 
America; they are also published by the British 
Meteorological Office. In the southern hemisphere obser- 
vations are coordinated by the Royal Astronomical 
Society of New Zealand (RASNZ), which receives and 
publishes observations from New Zealand and Australia. 
There is close cooperation and exchange between the 
BAA and the RASNZ. 

Reports coordinated by the BAA and the RASNZ are 
then archived at Aberdeen University, Scotland, where 
they are available to researchers. There are similar 
archives in such countries as China, Korea and Japan. 

Radio observations of the aurora are coordinated by 
the Radio Society of Great Britain and the American 
Radio Relay League in the USA. 

Professionals draw on the data contributed by ama- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


teurs; for example, amateurs’ results have helped to 
reveal processes in the thermosphere. Amateur observers 
are also important contributors to ongoing investigations 
into the complex correlation between the aurora and noc- 
tilucent clouds. 

Auroral processes and the complex interactions that 
cause them are not yet fully understood, so the aurora is 
still under vigorous investigation. Since scientists no 
longer record the visual aurora, the only source of such 
observations is the amateur astronomical community. 
Records of the visual aurora have been kept for hundreds 
of years, and in the past they have provided valuable 
insights into solar activity and the Earth’s upper atmos- 
phere—there are extensive archives yet to be exploited 
that may be of similar importance in new studies in the 
future. Some of the areas that may make use of records of 
the visual aurora include geomagnetism, solar and inter- 
planetary magnetism, terrestrial weather, the upper 
atmosphere and space weather. 

See also: RADIO ASTRONOMY FOR AMATEURS and AMA- 
TEUR OBSERVATIONS OF THE SUN. 


Bibliography 

Bone N 1996 The Aurora: Sun—Earth Interactions 2nd ed 
(New York: Wiley) 

Davis N 1992 The Aurora Watcher’s Handbook (University 
of Alaska) 


Further information is available at 


American Radio Relay League webpage 
http: / /www.arrLorg / 


British Astronomical Association Aurora Section webpage 
http: / /www.baa-aurora.fsnet.co.uk 


Radio Society of Great Britain ‘Auroral propagation’ on 
the The Radio Propagation Page webpage 
http: / /www.keele.ac.uk/depts/por/psc.htm#au 


Royal Astronomical Society of New Zealand Aurora and 
Solar Section webpage 
http: / /homepages.ihug.co.nz /~Sbevans / 
Aurora_Sun/aursun.htm 
Karenne Barnes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Auroral Kilometric Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Auroral Kilometric Radiation 


The Earth is a powerful natural radio source that emits 
a bright emission at kilometric wavelengths: the auroral 
kilometric radiation (AKR). As indicated by its name, 
the source regions of the AKR are at high latitudes, at 
altitudes ranging from typically 0.5 to 2 Earth radii. Its 
maximum frequency (of the order of 700 kHz) is smaller 
than the ionospheric cut-off frequency and therefore this 
radiation cannot be observed from the ground. It was thus 
discovered and studied after the beginning of the space era 
(Benedictov et al 1965). 

The AKR is organized in radio storms lasting a few 
10 min and having power as strong as a few megawatt. 
This sporadic activity is correlated with periods of intense 
auroral particle precipitations during which energetic 
electrons with typical energies of a few keV are observed 
flowing down along the auroral magnetic field lines 
and forming the aurora borealis (see AURORA). These 
precipitating electron populations result from a complex 
chain of physical processes linked to the major disruptions 
of the magnetospheric tail known as magnetospheric 
substorms (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). The 
AKR is thus directly related to the global magnetospheric 
activity and can even be considered as an indicator of this 
activity. Concerning its intrinsic properties, the AKR is 
characterized by its extreme brightness temperature (up 
to 10” K) which is completely unexplainable by classical 
radiating mechanisms (as gyrosynchrotron radiation). 
Coherent processes, related to the development of plasma 
microinstabilities, must then be invoked for explaining its 
generation. In addition to this extreme brightness, a good 
theory of the AKR must also describe the polarization 
of the emission and its strong temporal and spectral 
organization. 

The AKR is not by itself a particularly powerful 
phenomenon. It is even neglectable in the global 
energy budget of magnetospheric activity. However, 
it presents some astrophysical interest since it belongs 
to the wide class of radio emissions directly related 
to the development of acceleration mechanisms in the 
collisionless plasmas that surround most astrophysical 
objects (See COLLISIONAL PROCESSES IN ASTROPHYSICAL PLASMAS). 
Radio emissions presenting characteristics comparable 
with the AKR have indeed been observed coming from 
astrophysical objects as different as the other magnetized 
planets of the solar system, the Sun, some stars and 
binary systems (See MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, RADIO EMISSIONS, 
RADIO EMISSION FROM BINARY STARS). As its sources can be 
directly explored by spacecraft, the AKR thus constitutes 
a very interesting case of an astrophysical phenomenon 
for which theoretical models can be checked using in 
situ measurements. Most of the above-mentioned radio 
emissions probably originate from the very site of particle 
acceleration and their analysis can serve as a diagnostic 
tool for the study of the energy release in plasma 
environments. In this context, the understanding of 
the generation mechanism of the AKR is crucial. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observations reported below concern this particularly 
important aspect of the problem. 


Physical conditions within the sources of AKR 

An example of the precise wave observations performed 
near and inside the source of the AKR is given in figure 1. 
These measurements have been obtained by a Swedish 
spacecraft—Viking—specially designed for the analysis of 
the acceleration and radiating mechanisms taking place 
in the auroral zones of the MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH. When 
it made this observation, Viking was at an altitude of 
the order of 10000 km, at a magnetic latitude close to 
70° North, around midnight local time, and crossed a 
region magnetically connected to a discrete auroral arc. 
In the figure, a time-frequency diagram of the electric 
component of the electromagnetic waves is presented. 
The intensity is given by a color code (from blue to 
red and white as the intensity increases from less than 
10-8 V m7! Hz~!/? to more than 107° V m7! Hz-!/?). The 
frequency range is 10 kHz-500 kHz and 20 min of data are 
shown. A white line indicates the electron gyrofrequency 
(fee) measured by the spacecraft. The AKR is observed 
above this characteristic frequency (here around 150 kHz), 
forming V-shaped emissions. Its lower frequencies which 
correspond to a clear cut-off has a minimum around 
22.39 UT. At that time, the AKR frequencies extend down to 
fee. This region of minimum frequencies is also the region 
of maximum level of the waves (white intensity code). This 
is the source of the AKR. The V shape of the AKR dynamic 
spectra is easily understood if one assumes that the waves 
are generated at fi. (thus at increasing frequencies as 
the altitude decreases) in a source elongated along the 
magnetic field, at oblique angles from the magnetic field 
lines and in the upward direction. Far from the source 
(for example at 22.35 or 22.45), only waves generated 
well below the spacecraft (thus at high frequencies) are 
detected. As the spacecraft approaches the source, waves 
generated closer and closer to the spacecraft and thus 
with lower and lower frequencies are detected, until 
the spacecraft crosses the source which corresponds to 
a maximum intensity and minimum frequencies. On 
this spectrogram, one can also observe a systematic 
modulation of the AKR, in the whole frequency range, at 
a period of 20s. This modulation is linked to the spin 
of the spacecraft (the electric antenna are then alternately 
parallel and perpendicular to the magnetic field) and is 
an indication of the strong polarization of the waves. 
This can be used to identify the mode of propagation of 
the AKR. One finds that it is the so-called X mode, an 
electromagnetic supraluminous mode that has a right- 
handed circular polarization (the electric component of 
the waves rotates in a plane perpendicular to the magnetic 
field in the same sense that the electrons). 

In the lowermost part of the spectogram, a broadband 
emission (the auroral hiss) is observed. The upper- 
frequency cut-off of this emission (yellow to green 
transition on the spectrogram) is the local plasma 
frequency. It is of the order of 30 kHz indicating that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Auroral Kilometric Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Frequency (kHz) 
200 300 400 500 


100 


10 


Wave Electric Component — Viking V4H Experiment 


22.35 22.40 


22.45 


Time (UT) 


Figure 1. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate ??. 


plasma density is typically about 10 cm~°. Just around 
22.39, during the crossing of the AKR source, this cut-off 
disappears. It is in fact below the frequency bandwidth 
of the analyser (10 kHz). The source of AKR is then a 
region of significant plasma depletion, the typical density 
varying from typically 10 cm to less than 2 cm~? over a 
short distance (a few km). The sources can then be seen 
as ‘curtains’ of depleted plasma, with rather large vertical 
and East-West extensions but very thin (less than 50 km) 
in the North-South direction. 

Particle measurements are important for an under- 
standing of the generation mechanism. In figure 2, time- 
energy spectrograms for the electrons (upper panel) and 
the ions (lower panel) are presented. The energy goes from 
40 eV to 40 keV and the intensity of the flux is given by a 
color code. Because of the spin of the spacecraft, the par- 
ticle fluxes are measured at variable angles with respect 
to the magnetic field (sawtooth below the proton fluxes). 
0° corresponds to the direction parallel to the magnetic 
field, oriented towards the Earth (precipitating particles). 
For the data presented in figure 2, we know from wave 
measurements (not shown here) that a source of AKR has 
been crossed between the two arrows. This time interval 
corresponds to the detection of ion beams that propagate 
upward with typical energies of the order of 4 keV. Simul- 
taneously, the maximum energy of the electrons decreases 
from 8-10 keV (before the first arrow and after the sec- 
ond one) to typically 4 keV (between arrows). The most 
simple explanation of these observations is that, when en- 
tering the AKR source, the spacecraft also enters a region 
of particle accelerations that corresponds to the existence 
of a potential drop along the magnetic field. Just before 
or after the source crossing, this potential drop is entirely 
above the spacecraft so that precipitating electrons of max- 
imum energy are detected. Inside the source, a part of the 
potential drop is now below the spacecraft; the energy of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Particle Flux — Viking V3 Experiment 


2 5 
$ F 
8 73) 
> 

Vv 

a | 

7 FF 

5 5 
& § 
i & 
& 

Pitch Angle (0° to 180°) 
06.28 06.30 
Time (UT) 
Figure 2. 


the electrons decreases but energized ions coming from be- 
low are observed. This constitutes one of the fundamental 
observations concerning the AKR: the sources of this radi- 
ation are also the sites of the particle acceleration (Louarn 
et al 1990). This was recently confirmed by observations 
of the Fast spacecraft (Ergun ef al 1998). 

Amore precise study of the fluxes of particles can help 
us to understand the type of distribution functions that are 
responsible for the wave generation. These distributions 
are characterized by expanded loss cones (large gap in the 
flux of upward electrons) and an accumulation of electrons 
at rather large perpendicular and small parallel velocities. 
The formation of such distributions can be explained 
by the creation of the parallel electric field responsible 
for the particle acceleration. This also corresponds to 
the evacuation of the low-energy plasma and to the 
formation of the region of density depletion. These two 
characteristics of the distribution functions, accumulation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Auroral Kilometric Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of electrons at high perpendicular velocities and low 
densities, are of fundamental importance for the most 
plausible generation mechanism of the AKR: the cyclotron 
maser instability. 


The cyclotron maser theory 

Many theories have been proposed in the past to explain 
the generation of the AKR (linear mode conversion of 
electrostatic upper hybrid waves, non-linear beating of 
electrostatic waves, radiation from collapsing cavitons). 
It is now widely accepted that a particular microscopic 
instability—the cyclotron maser instability (CMI; first 
proposed by Wu and Lee (1979))—adequately describes 
the phenomenon. This theory is based on a resonant 
interaction between the electric field of the waves and 
the gyrating electrons and describes a transfer of angular 
momentum from the electron population to the wave 
electromagnetic field. The success of this theory is 
explained by the fact that it takes into account some of 
the most important experimental results presented before. 
The angular momentum transfer is particularly important 
if the electric field follows the electron motion, i.e. if 
the waves present a right-handed circular polarization 
(which is the case of the X-mode waves). Moreover, this 
transfer is to the advantage of the waves if the plasma 
presents an excess of angular momentum with respect to 
the thermal equilibrium. Such an excess can correspond to 
the existence of positive df/0 P, slopes in some region of 
the momentum phase space (where P, is the component 
of the particle momentum perpendicular to the magnetic 
field) which is precisely what is observed inside the source 
regions of the AKR. This mechanism of generation is then 
just a particular example of wave excitation by an out- 
of-equilibrium plasma characterized by an inversion of 
population in ‘perpendicular’ energy. 

This mechanism can be described in a more 
mathematical way using the Maxwell—Vlassov system 
of equations. If one retains only the most important 
interaction between the waves and the electrons (pure 
cyclotronic motion and interaction with a homogeneous 
electric field that rotates in the right sense at a frequency 
close to the electron gyrofrequency), the system can be 
written as 


OF, J; 

ot £0 
dW 9 e -i0 +0, OF0 A fo 
+ — E + E,_ e")—— + eE,; —. 
(2 a) hi Tria Oo gp, + eB ap, 
(1) 


Here fo is the background distribution function, F1, Ji, fi 
are the perturbed electric field, current and distribution 
function, respectively, the subscripts +, — and || refer 
to left-, right-handed and parallel components, 6 is the 
Larmor angle of the electrons, [ their Lorentz factor 
((1—v"/c*)~'/?) and @, the electronic gyrofrequency. From 
a temporal Fourier transform of equation (1), a simplified 
dispersion equation is obtained: 


gaia’ if dP, P?dP, 1 afo . (2) 
. r @—,/T dP, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The growth rate of the waves is then easily calculated. It 
is proportional to to integral of dfo/0 P, along the resonant 
curve defined by 'w = «,. This means that the maximum 
transfer of momentum occurs if the wave frequency 
exactly matches the gyrofrequency of the electrons. A 
slightly more complex calculation gives the exact resonant 
condition: w — kv) — a./T = 0. For dfo/aP, > 0 along 
the resonant curve, the absorption coefficients can become 
negative, thus leading to an instability: the so-called CMI. 
The exact and complete calculation makes the dispersion 
equation more complex but does not change its physical 
meaning. 

Two physical processes could be responsible for 
the formation of dfo/dP, non-thermal features in the 
distribution function: (1) the ionospheric absorption of 
the electrons which produces loss cone distributions 
functions and (2) the adiabatic evolution of electron 
populations accelerated downward along the magnetic 
field lines. Because of the mirror force, their perpendicular 
energy indeed gradually increases at the expense of their 
parallel energy such that a local excess in perpendicular 
momentum canbe formed. The presence of anaccelerating 
electric field also favors the occurrence of the maser 
instability in another way: it evacuates the cold electrons, a 
plasma component that always contributes to stabilize the 
CMI. For the X modes to be unstable, it is indeed necessary 
that, roughly speaking, (@p./@.)? = W/2mc?, where w,, is 
the cold plasma frequency and W the typical energy of the 
electrons—with rest mass m—for which 0 fo/dP, (Melrose 
1986). 

Although in situ observations provide strong evi- 
dence that the AKR is generated by the CMI, the growth 
rates directly determined with the measured distribution 
functions are not necessarily very meaningful. This is 
because of the sensitivity of the instability to the vari- 
ous inhomogeneities existing in the plasma and/or its fast 
saturation by non-linear processes. Among the various 
gradients present in the magnetospheric medium, two of 
them probably affect the AKR generation: (1) the inhomo- 
geneity of the magnetic field that induces slight modifica- 
tions of the gyrofrequency with the altitude such that the 
resonant condition cannot be fulfilled over a very large dis- 
tance and (2) the perpendicular inhomogeneity linked to 
the existence of the sharp density gradients that limit the 
AKR sources (Le Quéau et al 1985, Louarn and Le Quéau, 
1996). These effects could have some importance in the de- 
termination of the macroscopic properties of the radiation 
(shape of the emitting lobes, in particular). Concerning 
the non-linear effects, the growth of the waves can satu- 
rate either by quasilinear relaxation or by a trapping-type 
saturation process, which is still a matter of debate. The 
non-linear saturation and the inhomogeneity effects could 
be important for explaining the formation of some of the 
fine structures observed in the AKR dynamic spectra. 


Conclusion 
The AKR can be considered as a relatively well-understood 
magnetospheric phenomena. The sources of this radiation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Auroral Kilometric Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


have been explored and a theory—the CMI—gives a good 
qualitative explanation of its generation. However, there 
is no complete theory that can explain some quantitative 
aspects of the radiations. For example, starting with a 
given unstable distribution function, the prediction of 
the final intensity of the waves and of their spectral 
characteristics is still an open question. This is an 
important issue since it is only with solutions to this type 
of problem that radio waves could be used as precise 
diagnostic tools. 


Bibliography 

Benedictov F A, Getmansev G G, Sazonov T A and Trosov 
AF 1965 Kosm. Issled. 3 614 

Ergun et al 1998 FAST satellite wave observations in the 
AKR source region J. Geophys. Res. 

Le Quéau D, Pellat R and Roux A 1985 The maser syn- 
chrotron instability in an inhomogeneous medium: 
application to the generation of the auroral kilomet- 
ric radiation Ann. Geophys. 3 273-92 

Louarn P, Roux A, de Feraudy H, Le Quéau D, André M 
and Matson L 1990 Trapped electrons as a free energy 
source for the auroral kilometric radiation J. Geophys. 
Res. 95 (A5) 5983-95 

Louarn P and Le Quéau D 1996 Generation of the 
auroral kilometric radiation in plasma cavities: II. 
The cyclotron maser instability in small size sources 
Planet. Space Sci. 44 211-24 

Melrose D B 1986 Instabilities in Space and Laboratory Plasmas 
(Cambrige: Cambridge University Press) pp 194-203 

Wu CS and Lee LS 1979 A theory of terrestrial kilometric 
radiation Astrophys. J. 230 621 


Dominique Le Quéau and Philippe Louarn 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Australia Telescope National Facility 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Australia Telescope National Facility 


The Australia Telescope National Facility (ATNF), created 
in 1989, operates the Australia Telescope Compact Array, 
the only radiosynthesis array in the southern hemisphere. 
The array, opened in 1988, consists of six 22 m diameter 
antennas, which together simulate a single antenna 6 km 
in diameter. It is located near the town of Narrabri, about 
580 km northwest of Sydney. The array has high resolving 
power, wide bandwidth, good spectral-line capability and 
the ability to accurately measure polarization to low levels. 
New techniques employed with the instrument include the 
‘mosaicing’ of large fields and ‘pulsar gating’. It has been 
used to make the first three-dimensional image of Jupiter’s 
magnetic field, and has followed the radio evolution of 
the remnant of Supernova 1987A, the most important 
supernova of modern times. 

The ATNF also operates the 64 m diameter Parkes 
radio telescope (opened in 1961). The premier instrument 
is a cooled 21 cm multibeam receiver which is located at 
the prime focus of the telescope. This instrument was 
installed in 1997, and allows deep observations to be made 
of large areas of sky. The feed cluster is an arrangement 
of 13 beams placed on a hexagonal grid. This receiver 
has been used recently to find hundreds of new galaxies, 
previously hidden by obscuration by galactic dust, and 
to find hundreds of new pulsars in the Milky Way. It is 
also being used to conduct the H I Parkes All-Sky Survey 
(HIPASS), the first wide-angle ‘blind’ survey aimed at 
surveying the nearby universe in the 21 cm transition of 
neutral hydrogen. 

The ATNPF’s third telescope is a 22 m diameter antenna 
used for millimeter-wave observing. It is located near the 
town of Coonabarabran, half-way between the other two 
observatories. 

Antennas from all three observatories are used 
together and with those of other institutions for very long 
baseline interferometry experiments. 

Part of CSIRO, Australia’s largest national research 
organization, the ATNF has 135 staff and an annual 
operating budget of A$13 million, most of which is direct 
funding from CSIRO. 

The objectives of the ATNF are to: operate and 
develop the Australia Telescope as a national research 
facility for use by Australian and international researchers; 
to exploit the telescope’s unique southern location and 
technological advantages to maintain its position as a 
world-class radioastronomy observatory; and to further 
the advancement of knowledge. 

For further information see 
http://www.atnf.csiro.au. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Australian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Australian Astronomy 


Astronomy has been one of the principal sciences in 
Australia since the first European settlement over 200 yr 
ago. Inthe modern era, the access to the rich southern skies 
and a tradition of innovation in instrumentation sustain an 
active and diverse research program. 


Early history 

The main objective of Captain James Cook’s voyage in 
1769, during which he discovered and charted the east 
coast of Australia, was to observe the transit of Venus from 
the South Seas. The exact time at which Venus transited 
the disk of the Sun provided a more accurate value of the 
distance from the Earth to the Sun, and indeed the size 
of the entire solar system, as first suggested by Kepler. 
When the first European settlement was made at Sydney 
Cove in 1788, the importance of navigation, surveying and 
time-keeping was the reason for setting up an observatory. 
Later, official State observatories were founded, the first 
being Sydney Observatory in 1855. It provided a time 
service for ships in Sydney Harbor and contributed to 
the astronomical research of the day, particularly stellar 
positional astronomy. It finally produced 53 volumes of 
the Cart du Ciel (International Astrographic Catalogue) 
project. 

State observatories were also set up in Perth and 
Melbourne—the latter becoming well known because of 
its acquisition of the Great Melbourne Telescope. This was 
a 48 in (1.2 m) telescope and at its erection in 1869 was the 
largest fully steerable telescope in the world. Some of its 
early photographs of the Moon were hailed as the best to 
date, and visual observations of southern nebulae were 
made which greatly improved on those made by Sir John 
Herschel in his pioneering work from the Cape of Good 
Hope (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). Nevertheless, problems with 
the speculum mirror and wind-shake due to the use of a 
roll-off building, among other things, led to the telescope 
falling into disuse by the end of the century. The problems 
with the Great Melbourne Telescope set back the building 
of large telescopes by many years, and the next one was 
the Mount Wilson 60 in (1.5 m) built in California in 1908 
and arguably the first of the modern telescopes. The 
Great Melbourne Telescope was sold to Mount Stromlo 
Observatory and in recent years (with new optics) has been 
used in the MACHO search for gravitational lensing by 
stars. Today, of the former colonial observatories, only 
Perth Observatory retains a research role. 


Post-war development 

The modern era of astronomy in Australia began 
immediately after World War II. The impact of wartime 
technical developments was most noticeable in the new 
field of RADIO ASTRONOMY, Where the expertise in radar 
systems and the surplus equipment available formed an 
ideal base. In Australia the work was carried out at 
the Radiophysics Laboratory of the CSIR (Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research, later CSIRO). At this 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


time little was known about radio emission from outside 
the Earth: Karl Jansky had discovered radio waves from 
the Milky Way Galaxy in 1932 while working on sources 
of noise in radio transmissions, and another American, 
Grote Reber, had built a 31 ft dish antenna in his own 
backyard and made the first broad-scale maps of the 
Galactic emission. Finally, a wartime investigation of 
suspected radar jamming had been traced to unusually 
intense radio emission from the Sun. 

It was in this climate that the radio astronomy 
groups in the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and 
Australia began their work. The radiophysics work was 
carried out at a number of field stations in the Sydney 
area, and discoveries came quickly: for example the 
correlation of solar emission with sunspot number and 
the demonstration of an effective temperature of about one 
million kelvins, far above the optical surface temperature 
of about 6000 K. Perhaps the best-known work was carried 
out with a cliff-top INTERFEROMETER, Which was used to 
discover a number of isolated radio sources and to show 
that they had very small angular size. The identification 
of several of these sources with known optical objects, 
including the Crab Nebula and external galaxies in the 
constellations of Virgo and Centaurus, showed that radio 
astronomy would have much to teach us about distant 
objects. Development of interferometry continued, as a 
way to overcome the coarse angular resolution of early 
radio telescopes. The early ‘radio star’ theory of the 
nature of the discrete radio sources was shown to be 
incorrect because the majority of radio sources away 
from the plane of the Milky Way Galaxy had angular 
sizes greater than 1 arcmin. They became known as 
RADIO GALAXIES, in recognition of a radio power output 
thousands or even millions of times greater than that 
of a normal galaxy. Surveys of such sources showed 
an excess of faint sources, but less pronounced than in 
the early surveys carried out at Cambridge, which were 
shown to be affected by ‘confusion’ of multiple sources 
within the instrumental beamwidth. Later counts of these 
distant extragalactic sources, from both Cambridge and 
Sydney, were in agreement and played a pivotal role in 
cosmological controversies, in particular the demise of the 
STEADY-STATE THEORY. 

Wartime developments also had an impact on OPTICAL 
ASTRONOMY, although this was already one of the oldest- 
established sciences overseas. The Commonwealth 
Solar Observatory at Mount Stromlo near Canberra 
had been established in 1924 and expanded during 
the war to manufacture gunsights and other optical 
munitions. After the war the research field was changed 
to stellar astronomy, and the name was changed to the 
Commonwealth Observatory and later to Mount Stromlo 
Observatory. Modernization of the instrumentation, for 
example the introduction of photoelectric techniques, 
proceeded in parallel with numerous research programs. 
The MAGELLANIC CLouDS have long been much studied 
from Mount Stromlo: these near-neighbor galaxies have 
the great advantage of being at a known distance, yet 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Australian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


being close enough that star clusters and the brighter 
stars can be discerned individually. In 1955 the 74 in 
(1.88 m) telescope was commissioned at Mount Stromlo 
and, together with a similar telescope in Pretoria, was the 
largest optical instrument in the southern hemisphere for 
some 20 yr. Prompted by the growth of the nearby city of 
Canberra, a site at Siding Spring Mountain near the town 
of Coonabarabran in New South Wales was selected for 
future telescopes, and the name changed to MOUNT STROMLO 
AND SIDING SPRING OBSERVATORIES (MSSSO). The observatory 
has been part of the Australian National University for 
many years, and is now the Research School of Astronomy 
and Astrophysics. 

The era of the CSIRO radiophysics fieldstations drew 
to a close in the early 1960s, with the decision that the 
increasing sophistication of radio astronomy required the 
resources to be concentrated into a much smaller number 
of major instruments. These were the 210 ft (64 m) 
fully steerable paraboloid at Parkes and the Culgoora 
Radioheliograph. The Parkes telescope was completed 
in 1961, when the only other large dish telescope was 
the Jodrell Bank (UK) 250 ft (76 m). A notable early 
result from the Parkes telescope was the lunar occultation 
observation which pinpointed the position of 3C 273, 
allowing identification with the star-like object which 
first revealed the great optical redshifts of quasars. The 
telescope was soon well known for its high-frequency 
radio surveys, which resulted in the discovery of many 
quasars, and also for its support during the 1960s and 
1970s of the NASA Apollo missions to the Moon. Many 
other projects have occupied the telescope over the years, 
covering both spectral line and continuum, Galactic 
(including pulsars) and extragalactic sources, polarization 
studies etc. 

The Culgoora Radioheliograph consisted of 96 simple 
dishes of 13 m diameter, arranged in a circle of diameter 
3 km on a site near Narrabri, New South Wales. It 
was completed in 1967. In this era before the use of 
computers to create images from raw data, ingenious 
hardware was used to enable a two-dimensional image of 
the Sun to be synthesized every second. Separate images in 
the two polarizations revealed further information about 
plasma emission processes on and above the Sun’s disk. 
The original operating frequency of 80 MHz was later 
augmented with capabilities at 43, 160 and 327 MHz. The 
radioheliograph was closed down in 1984, and the site 
used for the Australia Telescope Compact Array. 

The 1960s also saw the construction of the 1 mile 
Molonglo Mills Cross radio telescope, a transit instrument 
designed for rapidly surveying the sky at 408 MHz. 
Operated by the University of Sydney, it enjoyed early 
success in finding many pulsars, soon after this class of 
object was discovered at Cambridge. The Molonglo Cross 
went on to produce a survey of the southern sky, as well 
as numerous studies of particular classes of object. In 
1978 operation as a cross was halted, and the east-west 
arm was converted to aperture synthesis at 843 MHz, as 
the MOLONGLO OBSERVATORY SYNTHESIS TELESCOPE (MOST). In 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


this form it has improved sensitivity and image-forming 
capability. The field of view has since been further 
enlarged to nearly 2°, and the telescope is carrying out 
the ‘SUMSS’ survey of the entire southern sky with a 
resolution and sensitivity similar to those of the NVSS 
northern (and equatorial) survey. Another radio telescope 
project of the 1960s was the Fleurs Synthesis Telescope, 
converted from an earlier CSIRO grating cross instrument 
to aperture synthesis operation by the University of 
Sydney. It provided the highest angular resolution radio 
imaging in the south for many years, but was superseded 
by the Australia Telescope and has since been closed down. 
A novel instrument of the 1960s was the Narrabri 
Stellar Intensity Interferometer (NSII). The principle of 
intensity interferometry had been developed and tested 
in the context of radio astronomy, and had the advantage 
of being unaffected by observation through a turbulent 
medium. Applied to optical observations, this enabled 
the NSII to observe the angular diameters of stars 
down to 0.0004 seconds of arc. The instrument was 
operated by the University of Sydney and comprised 
two large (6.5 m) REFLECTORS on a circular rail track 
of diameter 188 m. It successfully observed the sizes 
of the 32 stars within its sensitivity limit, thereby 
defining a true temperature scale for hot stars. The 
instrument was then closed down and work commenced 
on the Sydney University Stellar Interferometer (SUSI), a 
‘modern Michelson’ instrument using interference of two 
beams of light from widely separated siderostats instead 
of correlating the radiofrequency fluctuations as in the 
NSII. SUSI is located on the same site as the Australia 
Telescope Compact Array and when fully commissioned 
will have baselines up to 640 m, giving the highest angular 
resolution of any of the current optical interferometer 
projects. As well as extending stellar diameter and 
hence effective temperature measurements to a very much 
greater range of stars, a key program will be to observe 
directly the radial pulsation of Cepheid variables, thereby 
improving the use of these stars as distance indicators. 


The National Facility instruments 

It was clear by the 1960s that a larger general-purpose 
optical telescope was needed, both to extend the existing 
stellar and galactic work and to pursue the optical 
identification of radio sources. Astronomers in the UK 
also felt the need for a larger instrument, and an agreement 
was reached between the Australian and UK governments 
which resulted in the construction of the 150 in (3.9 m) 
Anglo-Australian Telescope (AAT) on the existing Siding 
Springs site. Completed in 1974, the AAT incorporated 
innovations in servo drive systems, mirror support and 
especially notably in computer control. The resulting 
pointing precision of a few arcseconds was unprecedented 
at the time and allowed any observer to readily locate 
even faint objects. The AAT is operated by the ANGLO- 
AUSTRALIAN OBSERVATORY (AAO), an organization which was 
set up for this purpose. An early success with the AAT was 
the detection of optical pulses from the Vela pulsar, at the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Australian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


time the faintest object ever recorded (24th magnitude). 
Although the Siding Spring site is not as good as the 
best in Hawaii or Chile, the AAT is a highly productive 
telescope, largely because of the strong technical support 
and continued investment in new instrumentation. In the 
current era of 8-10 m class telescopes, the AAT continues to 
offer general-purpose imaging and spectroscopy but has 
been moved towards wide-field survey science. Especially 
notable is the major two-degree field (2dF) instrument, 
which provides simultaneous fiber-based spectroscopy of 
400 objects over a 2° field size. The major program for 
this instrument is a redshift survey of 250000 galaxies, to 
greatly improve the knowledge of large-scale structure. 

By the late 1970s it was clear that Australia needed 
increased capability for high-angular-resolution high 
sensitivity radio imaging and spectroscopy. This need was 
met by the construction of the Australia Telescope (AT) 
array, opened in 1988. The main component is the AT 
Compact Array at Culgoora. It is an aperture synthesis 
telescope of six 22 m antennas, movable to different 
stations along a 6 km east—west baseline. The array 
is at present being upgraded to operate at wavelengths 
as short as 3 mm, by the addition of new receivers, 
improved antenna surfaces, and a north spur track. The 
AT is operated as a national facility by the AusTRALIA 
TELESCOPE NATIONAL FACILITY (ATNF), a division of CSIRO 
which was split from the parent radiophysics division for 
this purpose. There is also a similar 22 m antenna at Mopra 
near Coonabarabran, used for VLBI or for stand-alone 
programs. Australian industry gained a valuable spin-off 
from the AT project: the company which constructed the 
antennas has gone on to win contracts for satellite ground 
station antennas in Australia and South-East Asia. A well- 
known earlier spin-off, also from radio astronomy, was the 
Interscan aircraft microwave landing system. 

The ATNF also operates the Parkes 64 m dish 
telescope, which has been upgraded over the years in order 
to remain competitive. Recently, a multibeam system with 
13 simultaneous feeds at 21 cm has commenced operation 
and is being used for an H I survey of the entire southern 
sky out to a radial velocity of 12700 km s™!. 


Astronomy at diverse institutions 

Other radio astronomy facilities include the University 
of Tasmania’s 26 m paraboloid located at Mt Pleasant 
near Hobart and ex-Telstra 30 m antenna at Ceduna in 
South Australia. Both antennas are used primarily for 
VLBI, in combination with the AT Compact Array and 
the telescopes at Parkes and Mopra. This university 
also operates several optical and cosmic ray telescopes. 
A number of other university groups are active in 
astronomy, either using national facilities (e.g. Universities 
of Melbourne and Western Sydney and Macquarie 
University) or with their own instruments (e.g. the 
University of Adelaide work on high-energy cosmic rays, 
the University of Western Australia’s development of 
gravitational wave detectors and the Australian Defense 
Force Academy’s balloon-borne telescopes). Australian 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


astronomers also make considerable use of overseas 
facilities and satellite observatories including the HST, and 
strong international collaboration sees some 350 overseas 
astronomers visiting Australia each year. 

The major new optical telescope of the 1980s is the 
2.3 m telescope built by MSSSO at the Siding Spring 
site. Like virtually all modern large telescopes, it uses an 
alt-az mounting to reduce the expense of the enclosure 
building. An early notable result obtained with this 
telescope was the demonstration that the Small Magellanic 
Cloud is split along the line of sight into two fragments, 
probably as a result of a collision with the Large Magellanic 
Cloud some 300 million yr ago. Another major facility at 
Siding Spring Mountain is the 1.2 m Schmidt telescope, 
originally a purely UK operation, but merged with the 
AAO since 1988. This telescope is well known for its 
high-quality photographic surveys of the southern sky. As 
well as continuing large surveys and smaller photographic 
projects, the telescope is also being used for multifiber 
spectroscopy within the 6° field. 


Future opportunities 

Australian astronomers have recognized the need for 
access to an 8 m class optical-INFRARED TELESCOPE in order 
to remain competitive in the current environment. As a 
result Australia has joined the international Gemini project 
as a partner at the 5% level. This will give Australian 
observers access to both the northern and southern 
hemispheres, with a variety of high-quality optical and IR 
instrumentation. However, with an allocation equivalent 
to 10% of a single telescope, as compared with 50% of the 
AAT during the era in which 4 m class telescopes led the 
field, access to 8 m time will be severely limited. Thus 
it will be vital that the AAT be maintained with a high 
standard of competitive instrumentation. 

Several other development initiatives are worthy 
of note. Australian astronomers are active in the 
development of Antarctica as an observing site. The low 
temperatures and minimal atmospheric water vapor give 
exceptionally good conditions for infrared observations, 
including wavelengths that are not normally observable 
from the ground. There is also the possibility that the high 
Antarctic plateau may have the best SEEING of any ground- 
based site. The Joint Australian Center for Astrophysical 
Research in Antarctica (JACARA), based at the University 
of New South Wales, is already operating a 60 cm infrared 
telescope at the South Pole. It is planned to move the 
telescope at a later date to one of the probably superior 
(but less accessible) sites on the high plateau. 

In radio astronomy, Australia is actively participating 
in the planning and development of the square kilometer 
array, an international project aimed at a cm wavelength 
radio telescope with sensitivity 1-2 orders of magnitude 
beyond any current instrument. One of the primary 
astrophysical goals would be the detection and study of the 
21 cm emission from neutral hydrogen at high redshifts, 
in protogalaxies and star formation regions. Subsections 
of the array would extend over hundreds of km, and one 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Australian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the best prospects for an interference-free site of the 
required size is in the western desert areas of Australia. 


Organization 

In 1989 a report into astronomy in Australia noted a 
weakness in theoretical astrophysics. This area was 
strengthened at the start of the 1990s by the establishment 
of the Research Center for Theoretical Astrophysics 
(RCfTA) at the University of Sydney, and later the 
Australian National University Astrophysical Theory 
Center in Canberra. Both groups are able to take 
advantage of the mutual benefits derived from having 
theoreticians working in close contact with observers. The 
RCfTA has been created with the financial support of 
the Australian Research Council (ARC), which disburses 
government funds in a wide range of scientific and 
technological areas. Through its grant schemes the ARC 
also supports much of the observational research work 
carried out in Australian universities. 

The professional astronomical community in Aus- 
tralia consists of some 200 positions, with about 30 of 
those being fixed-term appointments. There are about 75 
PhD students in the various universities nationwide, with 
about 15 graduating each year. The main association for 
professional and student astronomers is the ASTRONOMICAL 
SOCIETY OF AUSTRALIA (ASA), with around 300 members. The 
principal activities of the ASA comprise organization of an- 
nual scientific meetings, management of the publications 
of the ASA and representation of astronomers’ interests to 
government and the community at large. Official liaison 
with government is provided by the National Committee 
for Astronomy (NCA), which operates under the auspices 
of the Australian Academy of Science. The NCA manages 
Australia’s relations with the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL 
UNION (IAU), and Australia currently has 190 IAU mem- 
bers. 


Bibliography 

Bhathal R and White G 1991 Under the Southern Cross: 
A Brief History of Astronomy in Australia (Sydney: 
Kangaroo) 

Gascoigne S C B, Proust K M and Robins M O 
1990 The Creation of the Anglo-Australian Observatory 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Haynes R F, Haynes R, Malin D F and McGee R X 
1996 Explorers of the Southern Sky: A History 
of Australian Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Morganti R and Couch W J (ed) 1999 Looking Deep in the 
Southern Sky (Berlin: Springer) 

Robertson P 1992 Beyond Southern Skies: Radio Astronomy 
and the Parkes Telescope (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


J Gordon Robertson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Auzout, Adrien (1622-91) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Auzout, Adrien (1622-91) 


French astronomer, independently invented the microme- 
ter. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Axis (pl: axes) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Axis (pl: axes) 


Areference line in space or drawn through a body. Usually 
this is a line about which a body has some degree of 
symmetry, for example, a line passing through the center 
of a sphere or which runs centrally through the length of 
a cylinder. For an ellipse the major axis is a line passing 
through the center and crossing the greatest diameter of 
the figure. 

The axis of rotation is a real or imaginary line passing 
through a body, around which that body rotates. 

The axial period is the period of time taken for a body 
to complete one rotation on its axis. The period is usually 
referred to rotation relative to the stars, in other words, the 
sidereal rotation period. Thus the axial period of the Earth 
is 23 h 56 m, although the mean solar day consists of 24 h. 


See also: astrodynamics, orbit, revolution, rotation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Azimuth 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Azimuth 


The angle, measured parallel to the horizon in a clockwise 
direction from north, between the meridian and a celestial 
body. Itis the angle between the north point of the horizon 
and a point on the horizon vertically below the celestial 
body. 

Azimuth may take any value between 0° and 360°. 
In some textbooks, azimuth is defined as being measured 
clockwise from north from 0° to 180° if the object is east 
of the meridian, and anticlockwise from north from 0° to 
180° if the object is west of the meridian. Together with 
a value of altitude, this specifies the position in the sky 
of a celestial body as seen at a particular instant from a 
particular point on the Earth’s surface. 

For non-astronomical purposes, azimuth (or bearing) 
is generally measured clockwise from due north. 


Seealso: altitude, culmination, horizon, meridian, zenith 
distance. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Baade, Wilhelm Heinrich Walter (1893-1960) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Baade, Wilhelm Heinrich Walter 
(1893-1960) 


Astronomer, born in Westphalia, Germany, worked at the 
Hamburg Observatory and moved to California in 1931. 
He and Fritz zwicky proposed in 1934 that supernovae 
could produce cosmic rays and neutron stars. Identifying 
it as the supernova of 1054, Baade made extensive studies 
of the Crab Nebula. He studied its polarization (which led 
to identification of the light from the nebula as synchrotron 
radiation), its filaments (the out-rushing body of the 
exploding star) and the nebula’s central star, now known 
to be the pulsar remnant of the supernova explosion. 
During the Second World War blackouts of the Los Angeles 
area, Baade, confined as an alien to the astronomer’s 
paradise of an otherwise little used Mount Wilson, used 
the 100 in telescope to resolve stars in the central region of 
the Andromeda Galaxy for the first time. This led to his 
definition of two stellar populations (Populations I and 
II), to the realization that there were two kinds of Cepheid 
variable stars, and from there to a doubling of the assumed 
scale of the universe. With RUDOLPH MINKOWSKI, identified 
and took spectra of optical counterparts of many of the 
first-discovered radio sources, including Cygnus A and 
Cassiopeia A. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Babbage, Charles (1792-1871) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Babbage, Charles (1792-1871) 


Polymath, eleventh Lucasian Professor at Cambridge. 
Known not only for work on astronomy but also in 
cryptanalysis, probability, geophysics, altimetry, ophthal- 
moscopy, statistical linguistics, meteorology, actuarial sci- 
ence, lighthouse technology, the use of tree rings as his- 
toric climatic records, magnetism, biology, geology, reli- 
gion, submarines, politics, economics and mathematics. 
Most important for astronomy, he developed calculating 
engines (the precursors of modern computers), for the de- 
velopment of which he was unable to obtain funding from 
the government after Airy’s assessment that they would 
be worthless. One of the founders of the [Royal] Astro- 
nomical Society in 1820 and awarded its first Gold Medal. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Babcock, Harold Delos (1882-1968) and Babcock, 
Horace Welcome (1912-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Babcock, Harold Delos (1882-1968) 
and Babcock, Horace Welcome 
(1912-) 


Harold was a physicist, born in Edgerton, WI. Became 
one of the first staff members of the Mount Wilson 
Observatory, working on precise laboratory studies of 
atomic spectra, improved the precision of the wavelengths 
of some 22000 lines in the solar spectrum, and with 
Horace, measured the distribution of magnetic fields over 
the solar surface. He measured the magnetic field of the 
star 78 Virginis, invented the solar magnetograph, and 
ruled excellent large gratings, including those used in 
the coudé spectrographs of the 100 and 200 in telescopes. 
His son Horace, born in California, also became a staff 
member of the Mount Wilson Observatory. He not only 
worked with his father on observational astronomy but 
also built astronomical instruments, including a ruling 
engine that produced excellent diffraction gratings, the 
solar magnetograph, and microphotometers, automatic 
guiders and exposure meters for the 100 and 200 in 
telescopes. By combining his polarizing analyser with the 
spectrograph he discovered magnetic fields in other stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Babylonian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Babylonian Astronomy 


The civilizations of Mesopotamia nurtured a rich 
astronomical tradition for about two thousand years, from 
the early 2nd millennium BC—if not before—until the 1st 
century AD. Incited by the belief that events seen in the 
sky were portents signifying future mundane conditions, 
Babylonians and Assyrians evolved an intricate practice of 
omen watching, from which they learned the varieties of 
celestial phenomena and devised rules for predicting their 
occurrence. From the 7th century BC on, records were kept 
at Babylon of observations of the Moon, the five visible 
planets and the Sun. The Babylonians discovered not 
only the periodic nature of many of the phenomena that 
they observed, but also that certain phenomena involved 
several periodic components, which they succeeded in 
isolating, measuring and finally mimicking by means 
of arithmetical sequences. Thus arose a mathematical 
astronomy that operated on quite different principles from 
the geometrical models of Greek and MEDIEVAL ASTRONOMY. 
Notwithstanding this disparity of methods, the influence 
of Babylonian astronomy on its Greek counterpart was 
deep, and some elements of Babylonian origin persisted 
in living astronomical traditions across Eurasia through 
the Middle Ages and into modern times. 


Sources 

Almost all that we know about Babylonian astronomy 
is derived from contemporary documents written in 
the Akkadian language and cuneiform script on clay 
tablets. Cuneiform tablets were recovered in abundance in 
excavations in the mid-19th century, and the decipherment 
of the script followed soon after. The texts that have to 
do with astronomy number in the thousands. A large 
and growing fraction of them are available in editions 
and translations into modern languages, but there are 
still numerous unpublished tablets, especially among the 
omen texts and observational records. 

The tablets held in modern museums and other 
collections were only in part obtained by scientific 
excavations that provided a record of their provenance, the 
rest having been purchased from dealers. Nevertheless, 
most of the astronomical tablets can be traced to three 
sites: the royal library and archive of the Assyrian capital 
Nineveh, the most important source for texts pertaining 
to celestial omens, chiefly dating to the first half of the 7th 
century BC, tablets from uncertain locations in Babylon, 
almost the sole source for observational records, and also 
rich in mathematical astronomy, and a temple archive from 
the southern Babylonian city Uruk, which is the source for 
the remainder of the mathematical texts. 

Before the modern decipherment of cuneiform, prac- 
tically the only information available about astronomy in 
Mesopotamia consisted of scattered statements in classical 
Greek and Latin authors. These range from patently ab- 
surd claims of thousands of years of observations to spe- 
cific technical data that have been triumphantly confirmed 
from the Babylonian tablets. The diffusion of Babylonian 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


methods and concepts can now be traced more fully in 
Greek and Egyptian astronomical papyrus fragments from 
Roman Egypt and in certain Indian astronomical texts. 


Astronomy in Mesopotamian omen lore 

Celestial omens constituted a large part of the vast 
repertoire of events regarded by the Mesopotamians as 
ominous. The belief in omens was essentially religious: 
the gods, it was supposed, gave humans notice of their 
mood and intentions through visible signs, which it was 
the business of expert diviners to interpret. Omen texts, 
typically expressed as conditional sentences linking a 
portent to a predicted outcome (e.g. ‘If the moon at its 
appearance glides through clouds: the flood will come’), 
were collected in compendia such as the series of celestial 
omens Eniima Anu Enlil (‘when the gods Anu and Enlil’, 
from the opening words), which comprised some 70 
tablets. Eniima Anu Enlil survives in fragmentary copies 
from the 7th century BC and later, but some celestial 
omens both contained in this collection and preserved 
outside it date from the first half of the 2nd millennium 
BC, and a small number refer to historical events of the 
3rd millennium. 

The omens of Enaima Anu Enlil are, in the 
broadest sense, ‘sky omens’, encompassing meteorological 
phenomena as well as sightings of the Moon, the Sun, 
the five planets and fixed stars. Even in the observation 
of a heavenly body, color and brightness, halos and 
attendant weather are treated on an equal basis with times, 
dates and positions. It would be misleading to call the 
observational component of this divination astronomy, but 
much astronomy is latent in it. Thus the aspects of a lunar 
eclipse that helped to determine its ominous import— 
generally the death of a king—included the date and rough 
time of day, the directions from which the Moon’s disk 
was obscured at the beginning and end of the eclipse and 
occasionally also the constellation within which the eclipse 
took place. 

The archives of the Assyrian kings at Nineveh, now 
in the British Museum, preserved numerous letters and 
reports addressed to the kings Esarhaddon (680-669 BC) 
and Ashurbanipal (668-627 BC) by a network of omen 
watchers in Nineveh and other Assyrian and Babylonian 
cities. In this fascinating correspondence we can see that a 
vigilant watch on the Moon, Sun and planets was a matter 
of the highest political importance, affecting decisions 
concerned with all the king’s actions. The scholars on 
whom the king depended had the best motives for seeking 
to know in advance when ominous phenomena could be 
expected or ruled out: colleagues were always at the ready 
to point out to the king a mistaken or late sighting. 

Forecasts, which are frequent in the royal correspon- 
dence, chiefly concern lunar and solar EcLIPsEs and the first 
visibilities of planets. Typical forecasts are either confi- 
dently negative (‘an eclipse will not occur this month’, or 
‘a specific planet’s appearance is not imminent’) or condi- 
tionally affirmative (‘if an eclipse will occur this month, we 
should watch for it at a particular time of day or night’). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Babylonian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In addition to divinatory methods, which can hardly have 
been reliable, the omen watchers seem to have depended 
on knowledge of the approximate possible intervals be- 
tween eclipses and between successive appearances and 
disappearances of the planets. Whether they also made 
use of longer periodicities is not known. 

MUL.APIN (‘Plough Star’) is the most important of a 
handful of texts from the 2nd and early 1st millennium BC 
that are concerned primarily with genuine astronomical 
topics. The longest part of this compilation consists of lists 
of constellations and stars, bearing more or less pictorial 
names such as the ‘wagon’, the ‘frond of Eru’ and the 
‘hired man’. Stars that rise and set are grouped in three 
‘paths’, apparently according to the parts of the eastern 
horizon that they rise within, but no further attempt 
is made to describe their arrangements or locations. 
Astronomical tests are given for determining when an 
intercalary month should be inserted in the lunar calendar 
to keep it in line with the seasons. MUL.APIN contains 
little lunar astronomy, and its treatment of the planets is 
limited to rough estimates of the intervals of time between 
appearances and disappearances. 

A second text of great interest is the fourteenth 
tablet of Eniima Anu Enlil, which, unlike the rest of the 
compilation, is not a collection of omen texts, but a set 
of tables of numbers. One of these tables represents the 
varying duration of nocturnal lunar visibility through 
the course of a synodic month on the assumption that 
the length of night is at its maximum, i.e. close to 
winter SOLSTICE, and a second table represents, month by 
month through a schematic solar year, the daily change 
in the duration of nocturnal lunar visibility. Except 
at the beginning and end of the first table, where a 
curious pattern of constant second differences is used, the 
numbers increase to a maximum and thereafter decrease 
again by constant differences, a kind of sequence that 
is called by modern authors (from its appearance when 
graphed) a linear zigzag function. Simple zigzag functions 
consisting of small whole numbers are an obvious means 
of describing a periodically varying quantity, and the 
oldest known example is a crude table representing the 
varying length of daylight through the year in a second 
millennium BC papyrus from Egypt, a land not noted for 
its mathematical astronomy. What is remarkable here is 
that by about 1000 BC, Mesopotamian astronomers were 
attempting to isolate, and present mathematical models 
for, two independent periodic elements in a phenomenon 
that oscillates in a complex way. 


Diaries and Goal Year Texts 

The extent to which omen watchers maintained records 
of what they saw in the heavens is not known. In at 
least one city, Babylon, a group of scribes who may or 
may not have been omen watchers had already begun 
by the middle of the 7th century to record a remarkable 
variety of dated phenomena in tablets that we now call 
Diaries. Many hundreds of fragments of Diary tablets 
from Babylon survive, pertaining to years ranging from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


652 to 61 BC, with the bulk of them coming from the last 
three centuries BC. Typically a Diary tablet covered half 
a lunar year, that is, six or seven lunar months. For each 
month, night by night and day by day, the Diary records 
observations of the heavenly bodies and weather, and each 
month ends with records of commodity prices, the level of 
the Euphrates River, and current events. 

The most conspicuous object in the Diaries is the 
Moon. Every month, six time intervals (the ‘Lunar Six’) 
were measured in units called us or ‘time-degrees’, such 
that 360 time-degrees equal one (mean) day from sunset 
to sunset: 


. sunset to moonset on the evening of first lunar visibility; 
. moonset to sunrise on the morning before full Moon; 

. moonrise to sunset on the evening before full Moon; 

. sunrise to moonset on the morning after full Moon; 

. sunset to moonrise on the evening after full Moon; 

. moonrise to sunrise on the morning of last lunar 
visibility. 


DoPwWne 


This is an extension of the interest in lunar nocturnal 
visibility evinced in Eniima Anu Enlil tablet 14. Also 
recorded with great frequency in the Diaries are the 
Moon’s passages by about 30 bright stars close to the 
ECLIPTIC, known as Normal Stars. The circumstances of 
lunar and solar eclipses are given in detail. 

For the planets, the Diaries record passages by the 
Normal Stars and close approaches to each other, and 
also certain events in their synodic cycles (see SYNODIC 
PERIOD. The reported synodic phenomena of Saturn, Jupiter 
and Mars are their first visibilities and disappearances, 
stations, and acronychal (sunset) risings. First visibilities 
and disappearances as morning and evening star are 
reported for Venus and Mercury. The locations of the 
planets at their synodic phenomena are specified, if at 
all, only roughly in relation to a constellation, or, in later 
Diaries, by the zodiacal sign occupied by the planet. The 
transition from constellations to conventional zodiacal 
signs covering equal twelfths of the ecliptic seems to have 
taken place about the middle of the 5th century BC. 

Many entries in the Diaries are not observations. 
Predicted or corrected data are recorded where weather 
delayed or obstructed observation, often accompanied by 
the remark, ‘I did not watch’. The sources of many of these 
predictions have not been established beyond dispute. 
One important method of forecasting planetary and lunar 
phenomena was certainly the application of the ‘Goal Year 
periods’. These were periodicities ranging from as few as 
8 yr for Venus to as many as 83 yr for Jupiter, after which an 
approximate repetition of phenomena (synodic events or 
Normal Star passages) takes place. The planetary periods 
are all whole numbers of solar years. The important 
periodicity for the moon was the so-called ‘saros’, an 
eclipse period comprising 223 synodic months (about 
18 yr) that also contains close to a whole number of periods 
of lunar anomaly and lunar latitude. In tablets called 
Goal Year Texts, observation reports extracted from the 
Diaries one Goal Year back are collected to provide the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Babylonian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


90° 
80° 
70° 
8 60° 5 
8 50° 5 
B aoe 
a 40° 4 - 
n 30° | inttihts patel pe “x 
—e— System A 
20° 4 ---x---modern theory 
¢ accumulated error | 
10° 5 a po a pees gw er? 
 ee® i er Suge ye 
0° +———§£ T T ro. 
0 ) 10 15 20 
Synodic Cycle Number 


Figure 1. Predictions of longitudes of Mars’ first stationary point by system A. 


330 
300 
270 
240 
210 
8 180 
Be yoo 
3 120 4 —e—GHJ | 
F 905 ---x---Modern Theory ! 
60 4 eee) Sao 
30 4 a 
A ae OTE 
-30 4 Og 
-60 4 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ll 12 13 
Syzygy Number 


Figure 2. Predictions of lengths of synodic months by system B. 


basis for predictions for an approaching year. To make the 
actual predictions, corrections would have to be applied 
to take account of the inexactness of the periodicities. 
Tablets known as Almanacs and Normal Star Almanacs, 
containing predictions of certain categories of Diary-type 
phenomena for a specific year, are likely to be the products 
of this process. 


Mathematical astronomy 

The primary goal of Babylonian mathematical astronomy 
was to calculate certain of the phenomena that the Diaries 
recorded. These included the dates and longitudes of the 
synodic phenomena of the planets, the ‘Lunar Six’ time 
intervals and eclipses. The predictions were achieved by 
means of sequences of numbers generated arithmetically 
according to rules such that each sequence would repeat 
with exactly the periodicity required for a particular 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


component of the motion of a heavenly body. The 
predictive models fall into two categories. Models in 
which linear zigzag functions are prominent among the 
sequences are referred to as system B models. Those 
in which the numbers follow ‘step functions’ depending 
numerically on the location of the heavenly body within 
partitions of the ecliptic are called system A models. 
System A and system B models were used concurrently 
at both Babylon and Uruk. 

The planetary models work with ‘synodic arcs’, the 
numbers of degrees by which a planet progresses through 
the ecliptic from one occurrence of a synodic phenomenon 
to the next occurrence of the same phenomenon, and 
‘synodic times’, the numbers of months and days from one 
event to the next. The actual longitudes (degrees within 
zodiacal signs) and dates of phenomena are obtained as 
the running total of the synodic arcs and times, which are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Babylonian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


generated as periodic sequences. The periodicity can be 
expressed by the equation 


II occurrences = Z revolutions of the ecliptic = Y yr 


where I, Z and Y are whole numbers, and I and Z are 
relatively prime. Thus in a table of planetary phenomena 
predicted according to a Babylonian model, after II lines 
the longitude will return exactly to its original value. 

System A planetary models employ rules equivalent 
to the following assumptions: (1) the ecliptic is divided 
into two or more zones with fixed boundaries, (2) the 
II occurrences of a phenomenon within a full period of 
Y yr are distributed along the ecliptic such that they are 
spaced at equal intervals inside each of the zones and 
(3) the progress from one occurrence to the next is Z 
intervals. The Babylonian base 60 place-value notation 
for numbers introduces some nonastronomical restrictions 
on the model, since one always wants the calculations to 
lead to numbers that terminate after a small number of 
fractional places, usually two. Nevertheless, the sequence 
of synodic arcs can be shaped by a suitable choice of 
parameters so as to reproduce successfully the actual 
behavior of a planet, as is illustrated by figure 1, in whicha 
run of synodic arcs between first stationary points of Mars 
calculated by the system A model is compared with the 
same intervals computed by modern theory. System B, 
according to which the synodic arcs and times are zigzag 
functions, is a more restrictive model, and less successful 
in reproducing the phenomena. 

Acomplete table of computed phenomena fora planet 
might contain columns giving the dates and longitudes 
of the full cycle of synodic phenomena, for example 
Mars’ first visibility, first station acronychal rising, second 
station, and disappearance. Longitudes on intermediate 
dates could be obtained by extrapolation from or 
interpolation between the tabulated date-longitude pairs. 

The Babylonian lunar models are a more remarkable 
achievement than the planetary models. Eclipses and 
lunar visibility times are affected by several independent 
periodic components, which it cannot have been easy to 
isolate and measure. In the system A and system B models, 
at least four periodicities are present: the year (apparently 
no distinction was drawn between sidereal, tropical, and 
anomalistic years), the synodic month and the periods 
of lunar anomaly and latitude. The calculation of the 
precise time of conjunction may serve to illustrate the 
approach. The interval between the preceding and current 
conjunction is assumed to be 29 days plus two variable 
components (expressed in time-degrees), called J and G. 
G varies with the Moon’s anomalistic period. In system B 
itis a linear zigzag function, while in system A it is a zigzag 
function ‘snubbed’ into a sinusoidal shape at its extrema by 
second-order arithmetical sequences. J has the solar year 
for its period. It is modelled in system A by a step function 
dependent on the Sun’s longitude, whereas in system B it is 
asmooth sinusoidal sequence obtained as the running total 
of a linear zigzag function. Figure 2 shows a run of values 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of G, J and their sum from a system B tablet. The errors in 
the calculated times, which can be as large as 2 h, are due 
partly to the use of fairly simple arithmetical functions and 
partly to the inherent inaccuracy of representing the true 
synodic month as the sum of two independent periodic 
functions. The periodicities, especially those of the system 
B lunar theory, are very accurate. 

The last tablets of Mesopotamian astronomy are 
almanacs from the AD 70s. By that date, however, 
the methods of Babylonian mathematical astronomy had 
spread to the Greek-speaking world, where they provided 
the computational foundation for Greco-Roman AsTROLOGY 
until they were superseded by Ptolemy’s tables in late 
antiquity. HIPPARCHUS and PTOLEMY used Babylonian 
observation reports and the periodicities of the system B 
lunar theory, and their work may have been influenced 
less directly by other aspects of the mathematical models. 


Bibliography 

Neugebauer O 1955 Astronomical Cuneiform Texts (London: 
Lund Humphries) 

Neugebauer O 1975 A History of Ancient Mathematical 
Astronomy (Berlin: Springer) 

Rochberg F 1998 Babylonian Horoscopes (Philadelphia, PA: 
American Philosophical Society) 

Sachs A and Hunger H 1988ff Astronomical Diaries and 
Related Texts from Babylonia (Vienna: Osterreichische 
Akademie der Wissenschaften) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


1987ff State Archives of Assyria (Helsinki: Helsinki 
University Press) 

Alexander Jones 

4 


Backlund, Jons Oskar (1846-1916) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Backlund, Jons Oskar (1846-1916) 


Born in Sweden, worked in Russia, at the Dorpat 
(now Tartu) Observatory, became director of Pulkovo 
Observatory, and the Imperial Academy of Sciences in 
Petrograd. He employed a large staff to compute the 
orbit of Comet Encke, eventually concluding that the 
comet’s motion was affected by non-gravitational forces 
(now known to be light pressure and magnetic forces from 
the Sun). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Baffin, William (c 1584-1622) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Baffin, William (c 1584-1622) 


Navigator, probably born in London, pilot on several 
expeditions in search of the Northwest Passage. He seems 
to have been the first person to determine a degree of 
longitude at sea by lunar observation. Baffin Island is 
named after him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bailey, Solon Irving (1854-1931) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bailey, Solon Irving (1854-1931) 


American astronomer, born New Hampshire. Discovered 
the variable stars in globular clusters now known as RR 
Lyrae variables, and divided them into classes a, b and c, 
according to the shapes of their light curves, now known 
to be an indication whether the star is pulsating in the 
fundamental mode or an overtone. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Baillaud, Edouard Benjamin (1848-1934) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Baillaud, Edouard Benjamin 
(1848-1934) 


French astronomer, became director of Toulouse Observa- 
tory and Paris Observatory. He worked in celestial me- 
chanics, especially on the motions of the satellites of Sat- 
urn, and inaugurated the telegraphy of time signals from 
the Paris Observatory via the Eiffel Tower. First president 
of the International Astronomical Union. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bailly, Jean Sylvain (1736-93) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bailly, Jean Sylvain (1736-93) 


Astronomer and politician, born in Paris, studied Halley’s 
comet and the satellites of Jupiter, wrote Histoire de 
l’Astronomie. Guillotined as the result of an incident when, 
as Mayor of Paris during the Revolution in 1789, he let the 
National Guard fire on republican crowds. Unfortunately 
not the only astronomer to be executed—see ARCHIMEDES, 
GIORDANO BRUNO, HYPATIA OF ALEXANDRIA, ULUGH BEG, who 
represent nearly 1% of the astronomers whose biographies 
are in this encyclopedia; perhaps astronomy is a riskier 
profession than one would think! 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Baily, Francis (1774-1844) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Baily, Francis (1774-1844) 


Stockbroker and astronomer, born in Newbury, Berkshire, 
England. During an eclipse of the Sun in 1836, he identified 
the phenomenon known as Baily’s beads, due to sunlight at 
the edge of the Sun shining down lunar valleys. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Baily’s Beads ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Baily’s Beads 


Brilliant points of light seen at the edge of the Moon’s 
disk during a total eclipse of the Sun, just at the onset and 
termination of totality. They are due to sunlight passing 
through valleys and indentations at the edge of the Moon’s 
visible disk. The English astronomer Francis Baily (1774— 
1844) drew attention to the phenomenon during the solar 
eclipse of 1836. 


See also: eclipse. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ball, Sir Robert Stawell (1840-1913) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ball, Sir Robert Stawell (1840-1913) 


Irish astronomer, Astronomer Royal for Ireland, popular- 
izer of astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Balmer, Johann Jakob (1825-98) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Balmer, Johann Jakob (1825-98) 


German phyicist, explained the optical emission of the 
visible hydrogen lines with the Balmer formula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Banneker, Benjamin (1731-1806) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Banneker, Benjamin (1731-1806) 


The ‘Sable Astronomer’, first black American scientist, 
born in Ellicott’s Mills, MD of a family of former 
slaves. As a young man, Banneker borrowed a 
pocket watch, took it apart, made a drawing of each 
component, and reassembled it; after which he made 
out of wood a working, enlarged replica which lasted 
over 50 years. At age 58, he began the study of 
astronomy and was soon predicting eclipses. He compiled 
this information, including other astronomical and tide 
calculations, weather predictions, proverbs, poems and 
essays contributed by himself and others into Benjamin 
Banneker’s Almanac (1792-1802). This almanac was cited 
by opponents of slavery (including Thomas Jefferson) as 
evidence of African-Americans’ abilities. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bappu, Manali Kallat Vainu (1927-82) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bappu, Manali Kallat Vainu (1927-82) 


Born in Hyderabad, India, of an astronomer father, 
and became director of the Kodaikanal Observatory. 
Following a chance meeting with sIR HAROLD SPENCER 
JONES and HARLOW SHAPLEY, enrolled in Harvard, was co- 
discoverer of comet Bappu-Bok—Newkirk. Working with 
OLIN WILSON at the Mount Wilson Observatory, Bappu 
discovered that for stars of spectral types later than GO 
there is a relationship between their luminosities and 
the characteristics of the H and K emission lying in the 
absorption lines of singly ionized calcium. The reason 
was that the emission is characteristic of the surrounding 
atmosphere of the star, which is related to its size and 
thus to its luminosity. This phenomenon, is known as 
the Wilson—Bappu effect, and is a method to determine 
the absolute magnitudes, and therefore the distances, of 
late-type stars. He returned to India where he set up 
a modern astronomical observatory at Nain Tal in Uttar 
Pradesh. The Vainu Bappu Observatory is the main optical 
observatory of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics, located 
in the state of Tamil Nadu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Barlow Lens 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barlow Lens 


An additional lens that increases the effective focal length 
and magnification of a telescope. It is a negative diverging 
lens (either concave on both sides or, more usually, ‘plano- 
concave’—flat on one side and concave on the other) that 
is placed in the converging cone of light a short distance 
in front of the focal plane of the objective or primary 
mirror. By decreasing the angle at which the light rays 
are converging, it increases the effective focal length of 
the telescope, so enabling a given eyepiece to achieve a 
higher magnification. The amplification factor (the ratio 
of the effective focal length of the objective with the Barlow 
lens in place to the focal length of the objective alone) of a 
Barlow lens of focal length f,, placed a distance d inside 
the focal plane of an objective, is f,/( fp — d). For example, 
if a Barlow lens with a focal length of 100 mm is placed 
50 mm inside the focus of the objective, the effective focal 
length will be increased by a factor of 100/(100 — 50) = 
100/50 = 2. 


See also: focal length, focal ratio, focus, magnification, 
mirror, objective lens. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Barlow, Peter (1776-1862) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barlow, Peter (1776-1862) 


Nautical engineer, born in Norwich, Norfolk, England, 
professor of mathematics in the Royal Military Academy, 
Woolwich, where he worked on the strength of ships’ 
timbers, tidal engineering and ships’ magnetism. His best 
known publication is New Mathematical Tables, giving the 
factors, squares, cubes, square and cube roots, reciprocals 
and hyperbolic logarithms of all numbers from 1 to 10 000, 
together with the powers of numbers up to 1000. The 
tables were widely used for navigation and astronomy. 
His optical experiments began about 1827, and with 
George Dollond he invented the Barlow lens, a concave 
achromatic lens used to magnify the image produced by 
a telescope, and employed first to measure close double 
stars (also used in photography). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Barnard, Edward Emerson (1857-1923) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barnard, Edward Emerson 
(1857-1923) 


Astronomer, born in Nashville, Tennessee. As a poor 
photographer’s assistant he made his own telescope and 
discovered several comets. During this time, a wealthy 
patron of astronomy awarded $200 each time a new comet 
was found, and Barnard’s eight comets earned enough 
to build a house for his bride and led to his gaining an 
education at Vanderbilt University and joining the initial 
staff of the Lick Observatory. In 1895 he moved to the 
new Yerkes Observatory. He discovered Barnard’s Star 
(the star with the largest proper motion, and one of the 
nearest stars), Jupiter’s satellite Amalthea, and, by wide- 
field photography, dark clouds and globules in the Milky 
Way, including Barnard’s Loop around Orion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Barnard’s Loop (Sh2-276) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barnard’s Loop (Sh2-276) 


A large emission nebula in the constellation Orion in the 
form of an arc centered on the Sword of Orion; the mid- 
point of the arc is at approximately RA 05 56™, dec. —02°. 
The emission is thought to be caused by radiation pressure 
from the hot stars in the Sword region ionizing interstellar 
matter. It was discovered by E E Barnard. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Barnard’s Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barnard’s Star 


A noteworthy star in the inconspicuous constellation 
Ophiuchus, it lies about 34° south of Vega and 28° west 
of Altair. It is identified only by a catalog designation, e.g. 
BD+4°3561. Despite being very faint, apparent magnitude 
9.54 and hence visible only with powerful binoculars or a 
small telescope, it has several claims upon our interest. 
With a parallax of 0.549”, at a distance of 5.9 light-years, 
only the triple system of Alpha Centauri is closer to 
us. Discovered in 1916 by the great American observer 
Edward Barnard (1857-1923), it soon became clear that 
this star has the largest known proper motion, 10.36” per 
annum. This so-called ‘fixed star’ is moving across the 
sky through a distance equivalent to the Moon’s diameter 
every 174 years. 

It is a red subdwarf star, spectral type sdM4, of 
very low intrinsic luminosity (absolute magnitude 13.2). 
A study of its observed motion by Peter van de Kamp 
(b. 1901) suggested that it is subject to regular, small 
fluctuations in both right ascension and declination, 
suggesting that its motion is perturbed by the presence 
of a binary companion too faint to be separately observed. 
Van de Kamp estimated that this companion might well 
be a non-luminous body of mass about 1.6 times that of 
Jupiter, i.e. a planet. This was the first well-documented 
case of this kind but has not been confirmed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Barred Spiral Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barred Spiral Galaxy 


A galaxy in which the spiral arms emerge from the ends 
of a bar or elongated ellipsoid of stars that straddles 
the nucleus rather than from the nucleus itself. Barred 
spiral galaxies, denoted by ‘SB’ in the Hubble classification 
scheme, are classified according to the size of the central 
bulge, the tightness of the spiral pattern and the degree of 
clumpiness in the arms. 

The central bulge of our own galaxy, the Milky Way, 
appears to be an elongated ellipsoid that is seen almost 
end-on from the present location of the Sun. Consequently, 
there are grounds for classifying it as a barred spiral. 


Seealso: galaxy, Hubble classification, Milky Way Galaxy, 
spiral arms, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Barringer, Daniel Moreau (1860-1929) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barringer, Daniel Moreau (1860-1929) 


A Philadelphia mining engineer who, in 1903-5, inves- 
tigated the ‘Coon Butte’ crater in Arizona, in pursuit of 
the theory that it was of meteoritic origin. Before he re- 
alized that the impact was oblique and the meteor was 
off-center, he unsuccessfully searched for a buried mass of 
nickel and rare-earths by drilling in the crater bottom. He 
collected meteoric iron fragments, which he noticed were 
intermixed with terrestrial rock fragments, and used this 
as evidence of his theory that the crater had been made 
by a meteor impact. He identified geological evidence of 
the shock that had excavated the crater, such as pulverized 
silica and a type of quartz glass, later called lechatelierite. 
Barringer’s scientific conclusion about the origin of the 
crater was eventually shown by FOREST RAY MOULTON, HENRY 
NORRIS RUSSELL and HARLOW SHAPLEY to be correct. However, 
as a result of his theory being proved, it was concluded that 
what he had thought was a valuable lode of nickel was not 
only off-center, but smaller than he had at first estimated 
and would have vaporized on impact. The directors of 
the mining company which supported his work withdrew 
funding and Barringer died of a heart attack within weeks. 
The crater is now referred to as the Barringer Meteor Crater, 
the first terrestrial crater recognized to be of meteoritic ori- 


gin. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Barycenter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Barycenter 


The center of mass of the Earth-Moon system or any 
other set of bodies (e.g. the solar system). If two bodies 
move under the influence of their mutual gravitational 
attractions, they will describe orbits around a point 
between them, the center of mass of the two bodies. The 
relative distances of the two bodies from this point will be 
inversely proportional to their masses. Thus, for example, 
if one body is twice the mass of the other, the center of mass 
will lie one-third of the way from the more massive body 
to the less massive one (i.e. their distances are in ratio 1:2). 

In the case of the Earth and Moon, the ratio of masses 
is approximately 81:1. The barycenter is therefore located 
at a distance from the Earth’s center equal to 1/82 of the 
distance from the Earth to the Moon, and on the line 
joining the centers of Earth and Moon, in other words at 
a distance of about 4700 km from the center of the Earth. 
The point is, in fact, located within the Earth. The distance 
between the centers of the Earth and the Moon varies 
rather widely due to the combined gravity of the Earth, the 
Sun and the planets. For example, during the period 1969- 
2000, apogee (the greatest distance) varies from 404063 
to 406711 km. Perigee (the least distance) varies from 
356 517 to 370354 km. This has a proportionate effect on 
the distances of the centers of the Earth and the Moon from 
the barycenter. 


See also: anomaly. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Baryogenesis (baryon genesis or matier/antimatter 
asymmetry) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Baryogenesis (baryon genesis or 
matter/antimatter asymmetry) 


Associated with every type of particle there is an 
ANTIMATTER particle with the opposite quantum numbers. 
For example, the positron (charge +1) is the antiparticle 
of the electron (charge —1), and the antiproton (charge —1, 
baryon number —1) is the antiparticle of the proton (charge 
+1, baryon number +1). Particles can annihilate with their 
antiparticles into radiation, and particle—antiparticle pairs 
can be created from the vacuum. 

Observations seem to suggest that the universe 
consists of matter, with no appreciable amounts of 
antimatter. Domains of antimatter galaxies and antimatter 
galaxy clusters, if they exist, must be widely separated. 
The simplest explanation is that there is an antimatter 
asymmetry in the universe: today the universe consists 
solely of particles with no large antimatter systems. 

The matter/antimatter asymmetry is usually ex- 
pressed in terms of a dimensionless number known as 
the ‘baryon number of the universe’. If a baryon num- 
ber of +1 is assigned to BARYONS (neutrons, protons and the 
more massive baryon resonances) and a baryon number of 
—1 assigned to antibaryons, then because of the absence 
of large amounts of antimatter, the present baryon num- 
ber density (baryon number density minus the antibaryon 
number density) can be expressed in terms of the total 
mass density of the universe. The baryon number is the 
ratio of the baryon number density to the entropy density 
of the universe. With an uncertainty of a factor of three to 
five, the baryon number of the universe is about 107". 

So long as baryon number is conserved in every 
individual reaction and the expansion of the universe is 
isentropic (entropy conserving), the baryon number of the 
universe is conserved over the history of the universe. 

Although there is no antimatter in the universe today, 
if the temperature of the universe was ever larger than 
about 10’ K, and thus its thermal energy exceeded the rest- 
energy of the proton, then antimatter would have existed 
in great abundance. Earlier than about a millisecond after 
the Bic BANG the universe should have been hot enough 
for the radiation to create particle-antiparticle pairs. If 
the baryon number is conserved, then at sufficiently high 
temperature a baryon number of 10~!° implies that there 
were roughly equal numbers of baryons and antibaryons 
in the universe, but for every 10 billion antibaryons 
there were 10 billion and one baryons. As the universe 
cooled below the temperature required to produce proton— 
antiproton pairs from the radiation, all of the antibaryons 
annihilated, leaving behind the excess baryon number of 
1 part in 10 billion. While such a tiny asymmetry between 
the number of baryons and the number of antibaryons 
might seem insignificant, without the asymmetry all of 
the baryons and antibaryons would have annihilated, 
resulting in a universe without the matter (or antimatter) 
required to form galaxies, stars and planets. 

While the present baryon number of the universe may 
simply reflect an initial condition of the big bang, it seems 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


more natural that a universe with zero baryon number, 
as would result if the universe underwent a period of 
‘INFLATION’, evolved into a universe with a small baryon 
number. 

In 1967, the Russian physicist Andrei Sakharov 
outlined the three ‘ingredients’ necessary to generate a 
baryon asymmetry from initially symmetric conditions. 
The first requirement is that some particle reactions 
must violate baryon number. The second condition is 
a violation of CP symmetry (charge conjugation times 
parity). Finally, baryogenesis requires a departure from 
local thermodynamic equilibrium. 

These three Sakharov ingredients may have been 
present in the early universe. The expansion of the 
universe can lead to nonequilibrium conditions. CP 
violation was discovered in 1964 by James Cronin and 
Val Fitch in reactions involving particles known as 
kaons. While violation of baryon number has never been 
observed, it is predicted to occur in several theories. The 
different possibilities for baryon-number violation have 
resulted in the development of different scenarios for 
baryogenesis. 

In theories of the unification of the strong weak, and 
electromagnetic interactions into a GRAND UNIFIED THEORY 
(GUT), baryon number is predicted to be violated by the 
decay of supermassive particles of mass as large as 101° 
times the mass of the proton. In the simplest versions 
of GUT baryogenesis, the supermassive particles were 
present in the thermal radiation, and as the temperature 
of the universe fell below the equivalent mass of the 
supermassive particle, they decayed preferentially into 
baryons. Inthe GUT scenario, baryogenesis occurred 10-* 
seconds after the bang. 

Unification of the electromagnetic and weak inter- 
actions involve a breaking of the electroweak symme- 
try where the Higgs field acquires a vacuum expectation 
value. Although broken today, at sufficiently high temper- 
atures the symmetry should be restored. A phase transi- 
tion associated with the breaking of electroweak symmetry 
is expected as the temperature of the universe fell below 
about 10° K. Nonperturbative baryon-number violating 
processes are predicted to operate above the phase transi- 
tion. A scenario of electroweak baryogenesis has been de- 
veloped where the baryon asymmetry is generated around 
the time of the electroweak phase transition, around 10-? 
seconds after the bang. 

SUPERSYMMETRY theories have bosonic partners for 
the quarks and leptons. These particles, known as 
squarks and sleptons, are bosons, and may develop 
vacuum expectation values. Any change in the vacuum 
expectation value of a squark field results in a violation 
of baryon number. The age of the universe during 
baryogenesis is not specified in this scenario. 

Other baryogenesis scenarios involve variations or 
combinations of the three scenarios above. Although the 
exact mechanism of baryogenesis is still a matter of intense 
speculation, the three Sakharov ingredients are expected 
to be present in the early big bang: CP violation has been 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Baryogenesis (baryon genesis or matier/antimatter 
asymmetry) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observed in nature, the expansion of the universe naturally 
leads to departures from equilibrium, and baryon-number 
violation is expected to occur in a variety of ways. 
Although the details of baryogenesis are unknown, 
laboratory experiments may help to unravel the mystery. 
Study of CP violation involving bottom quarks may 
lead to a deeper understanding of this ingredient. 
Knowledge of the electroweak Higgs mass is important 
for electroweak baryogenesis. Discovery of low-energy 
supersymmetry would have important implications for 
electroweak baryogenesis, as well as scenarios involving 
squark expectation values. Finally, observation of proton 
decay, or other direct evidence for grand unification, 
would be important for GUT baryogenesis scenarios. 


Edward Kolb 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Baryons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Baryons 


Subatomic particles that are composed of three quarks and 
which are acted on by the strong nuclear force. This class 
of particle includes the nucleons (protons and neutrons), 
which are the constituents of atomic nuclei, and a variety 
of heavier, but short-lived, particles called hyperons. 

Because the mass of a nucleon is nearly 2000 times 
greater than the mass of an electron, and all atoms and 
molecules contain at least as many nucleons as electrons, 
baryons account for more than 99.5% of the total mass of 
all the chemical elements in the universe. Matter that is 
composed of baryons is known as ‘baryonic matter’. If the 
mean density of the universe is sufficiently high to ensure 
that it is ‘closed’ (a closed universe eventually ceases to 
expand and then collapses) or ‘flat’ (a flat universe is just, 
but only just, capable of expanding forever), at least 90% 
of it must exist in the form of dark, non-baryonic, matter, 
the nature of which is not yet known. 


See also: atom, electron, fundamental forces, hadrons, 
neutron, proton, quark, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bayer, Johann (1572-1625) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bayer, Johann (1572-1625) 


Lawyer and astronomer, born in Rhain, Germany. His 
catalog and atlas Uranometria (1603) depicts the positions 
of double the thousand stars in Tycho Brahe’s catalog on 
which it is based, designating the brighter stars by the 
letters of the Greek alphabet, usually in brightness order, 
followed by Latin letters. This was instead of Arabic 
proper names or by AL-surl’s awkward descriptions relative 
to the constellation figures, such as ‘the star at the tip 
of the lesser bear’s tail’. Bayer’s lettering system is still 
used. Bayer included 12 new southern asterisms to fill 
in the region of the sky unseen by classical astronomers 
like proLemy. They were: Apus, Chamaeleon, Dorado, 
Grus, Hydrus, Indus, Musca (Bayer called it Apis), Pavo, 
Phoenix, Triangulum Australe, Tucana and Volans, all still 
in use. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Be Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Be Stars 


A Be star (pronounced ‘bee-ee’ star) is a non-supergiant B- 
type star whose spectrum displays or has displayed one or 
more Balmer lines in emission and Be is the notation for the 
spectral classification of such a star (see also CLASSIFICATION 
OF STELLAR SPECTRA). ‘Classical’ Be stars are believed to have 
acquired the circumstellar (CS) material that produces 
the Balmer emission through ejection of matter from 
their photospheres instead of from mass ACCRETION, and 
therefore are regarded as a separate subgroup distinct from 
the Herbig Be objects and interacting Binary stars. For the 
early B stars in our region of the galaxy, the fraction of 
Be/B stars is about 20%. This ratio drops to about 10- 
15% for late B stars and early B stars in the interior of our 
galaxy. The percentage of Be stars appears to be larger 
in the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS (25-45%). As a group Be stars 
are rapidly rotating. Spectral analysis, and more recently 
interferometric imaging, suggests that the CS material is 
in the form of a disk positioned about the equator of 
the star (figure 1). The Be-shell stars are classical Be 
stars that also exhibit narrow absorption lines, usually 
from moderately ionized species such as Fe II, as well as 
central narrow components to the Balmer emission lines 
that extend below the continuum. The current consensus 
is that the Be-shell stars are classical Be stars viewed nearly 
equator on. 

The first Be star to be discovered was y Cas in 1866 
by A. Secchi, although this object has not endured as 
a prototype of the class. Based on the tendency of Be 
stars to display diffuse, rotationally broadened lines, in 
1931 O Struve hypothesized that Be stars are rotating 
just short of their critical, or break-up, velocities, thus 
making it favorable for material at the star’s equator to 
slowly dribble off into a CS disk. Although the disk 
geometry prevails, this model is no longer believed as 
there is no evidence that any Be star rotates faster than 
0.85Vait- Rapid rotation may play some role in the mass 
loss process, however. Spectroscopic observations of Be 
stars since 1980 have revealed that material is ejected 
from the photosphere, sometimes in a violent manner. 
An individual star can indeed oscillate between showing 
Balmer emission and apparently a pure photospheric 
spectrum. It is now clear that one must consider the star 
and disk as a whole in order to gain an understanding of 
what is called the ‘Be phenomenon’. 


The disk 

The hallmark of a Be star is its CS disk that produces the 
strong Balmer line emission. A simple model for a Be disk 
is shown in figure 1. In first order, it is the kinematical 
motion of the CS gas in the disk that broadens the emission 
lines and gives the generic double-peaked line profile 
shown in figure 1. The arrows in the disk show the motion 
of the material and the gray tones map into the emission 
line profile. Material in the inner disk, where the radial 
motions toward-away from us are the largest, contribute 
most of the flux in the wings of the emission profile. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A generic representation of a Be star. A typical Balmer 
emission feature that the disk would produce is shown above 
the star. Illustration courtesy of S Owocki. 


INTERFEROMETRY and IR photometry (see STELLAR 
PHOTOMETRY) suggest that the radial extent of the disk is 
>20R, and that the material displays Keplerian motion. 
The vertical extent of the inner disk is calculated from 
observation and theory in which the disk is assumed to 
be in hydrostatic balance (justified as disks can be stable 
for long periods of time). The inner disk appears to have 
a vertical height of ~1R, (Be-shell stars can show deep 
shell lines that have residual intensities of <10%), but at 
large radii the disk can flare to several stellar radii (not 
shown in figure 1). It is currently unknown whether there 
is a gap between the disk and the star as depicted in 
figure 1. Fitting of theoretical disk models to Balmer and 
Paschen emission lines suggests that the density, No, at 
the inner edge of the disk varies from 10” to 104 cm™3 
for optically thin/thick disks. The density distribution 
in the disk is usually assumed to follow the formula: 
N, = No(r/R.)~" exp[—3(z/h)*], where z and h are the 
vertical distance above the disk plane and the scale height, 
and 2 < m < 3.5. Temperatures in the equatorial regions 
of BO-Bb5e stars range from 8000 to 5000 K and are 2-3 times 
higher at the upper—lower edges of the disk. 

The profiles of emission lines in Be stars assume 
a variety of shapes both symmetric and asymmetric. 
When a star shows symmetrical emission lines spectral 
variablity is minimal, but long-term cyclical variability is 
commonplace in stars that display asymmetrical emission 
features. The star’s inclination, i, to our line of sight has 
the greatest influence on the line profile, but the optical 
depth, t, in the disk and the overall kinematic motion of the 
disk material are also important. This allows one to probe 
the density structure and kinematics in the disk by fitting 
theoretical profiles to observations of emission lines from 
ions of widely different abundances (e.g. Balmer and Fe II 
lines). Some representative Ha profiles of Be stars viewed 
at pole-on, intermediate and equator-on inclinations are 
shown in figure 2. The term pole on usually refers to 
objects with i < 30°; for equator-on stars i > 80°. 
Keplerian motion dominates the broadening of the line 
profile. The kinematical velocity width of the emission 
line depends on the projected Keplerian velocity, vx (~400- 
500 km s~!), of the material at the inner edge of the disk, 
Avyin = Ux sini. High-resolution spectra of Be stars seen 
at low-intermediate inclinations often reveal inflections, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Be Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3 HR 2825 
iL (B3 Ve) 
ze) 
oO 
IN 6560 6562 6564 
= V sin i< 40 km/s 
5 1999 Nov 20 
Zz 
6540 6560 6580 
a ¢ Tau 
iL ( B1 IVe-sh) 
xe) 
Ng V sin i~ 
ar 275 km/s 
€ 
— 
{e) 
Zz 


6540 
Wavelength (A) 


6560 6580 


66 Oph 
(B2 IV-Ve) 


V sin i= 
240 km/s 


1994 Apr 01 


6540 6560 6580 


¢ Tau 
(B1 |Ve-sh) 


6540 6560 6580 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. Representative Ha profiles observed in Be stars. These CCD spectra are from the Coudé Feed Telescope at Kitt Peak National 


Observatory. 


or shoulders to the Ha or Hf emission lines (cf. inset to 
the profile in the upper-left corner of figure 2). This so- 
called winebottle appearance is a result of non-coherent 
scattering in an optically thick disk. Photons scattered 
into the wings of the line deep in the disk readily escape 
from the star. In the wings of an optically thick emission 
line one is seeing radiation from deeper in the disk where 
the source function is larger. For Be stars seen at large 
inclination angles, suchas the Be-shell stars, the absorption 
of the stars’s light as it passes through the disk material 
produces a deep central reversal in the emission feature. 

The Balmer emission lines seen in Be-shell stars 
frequently undergo long-term (~2-10 yr) periodic or 
quasi-periodic oscillations in the relative intensities of 
the violet-shifted (Jy) and red-shifted (Jz) components 
to the line. These are termed V/R variations, where V 
and R refer to the emission above the local continuum: 
V = 1y — [cont and R = Ig — Icon It is currently thought 
that the V/R oscillations are caused from the precession 
of a density enhancement or wave in a quasi-Keplerian 
disk. These global disk oscillations are believed to also 
cause the long-term profile variations seen in the Be stars 
with asymmetrical emission lines. A typical example of a 
long-term V/R variation in Ha in a Be-shell star is shown 
in figure 2. Variability in the peak intensity of the emission 
from cycle to cycle is typical. 


The wind 

The mass flux from the stellar winds in Be stars is generally 
larger than innon-emission B stars; however, there appears 
to be a prominent dependence on the inclination of the 
star to our line of sight. Information on the winds is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


obtained from observations of the UV resonance lines (e.g. 
NVA 1238.8, 1242.8, CIV A 1548.2, 1550.8, Si IV A 1393.8, 
1402.8, Si III 4 1206.5, and Al III 4 1854.7, 1862.8). N V 
tends to be observed in only the earliest Be stars. The 
wind absorption seen in stars viewed equator on or at 
intermediate inclinations is typically strong and frequently 
contains discrete absorption components (DACs), while 
pole-on objects usually show either no or very weak 
wind features. DACs are discernible absorption features 
superimposed upon apparently smooth underlying wind 
lines. These relatively narrow (usually AV < 200 km s~') 
features are thought to be formed as a result of shocks in 
the wind. Some typical C IV wind features are displayed 
in figures 3 and 4. The maximum velocity of the wind 
absorption is in the range (0.4-2.0V.s-) and appears to 
increase toward earlier spectral types. 

Although the UV wind features are very prominent, 
they are actually formed ina region of much lower density 
than the optical-IR emission lines. The mass loss rates 
(~10-!°M. yr-') computed from the UV wind lines are 
about 50-100 times smaller than those determined from 
IR photometry and fitting of the optical-IR emission lines. 
It is currently believed that the high-velocity, low-density 
stellar wind flows out of the equatorial plane toward 
intermediate latitudes and has very little influence on the 
more massive Keplerian disk. 

Variability is commonplace in the winds of Be stars, 
both short and long term. Examples are shown in figure 3 
and figure 4 for winds with and without DACs. The upper 
panel in each figure shows a Be star that displays daily, 
cyclical wind variations, while the lower panel illustrates 
typical long-term (yearly) quasi-cyclical variations. Most 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Be Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


—— Oct. 7 16:16 UT 
Oct. 8 5:50 UT 


Flux (107° erg cm* s" A") 


1542 1544 1546 1548 1550 1552 


—— 1987 Nov. 6 
—— 1988 Mar. 20 


Flux (107° erg cm* s" A") 


1540 1542 1544 1546 1548 1550 1552 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 3. Typical wind variability in Be stars that do not show 
highly structured winds. Upper panel: a Be star that displays 
short-term daily cyclic variability. Lower panel: an object in 
which the wind varies on a time scale of ~year. 


of the wind variability (especially long term) is usually 
in the DACs that are probably caused by fast-moving 
localized flows colliding with the exterior wind material. 
Since short-term variability patterns (red—blue movement) 
often resemble those observed in O star winds, the 
DACs may be formed in co-rotating interaction regions. 
Long-term variability, however, frequently involves DACs 
moving from blue to red as the wind strengthens. 


The photosphere 

The current consensus is that the material in the CS 
disk of a classical Be star originates on the photosphere. 
Observation of jz Cen, a Be star that has recently been in 
the process of re-building its CS disk that it lost in the late 
1970s, suggests that mass is lost from a localized site of 
unknown size and the mass loss mechanism must produce 
a rapid injection of material into the disk. Initially the 
CS material resides on one hemisphere of the star, but it 
circularizes into a Keplerian disk in just a few days. Two 
hypotheses that are currently being discussed are mass loss 
induced by non-radial pulsations ( NRPs) (see NON-RADIAL 
STELLAR PULSATIONS) and localized magnetic fields. 

Since 1980, spectroscopic data of high resolution and 
S/N from electronic detectors have revealed evidence 
for NRPs as well as transient micro-emission activity 
associated with mass ejection from the photosphere. 
Evidence for NRP comes from observations of weak (~1- 
2% Icont) absorption components, often called ‘bumps’, 
that slowly move from blue to red across the photospheric 
line profile cyclically, usually with a period less than 
the star’s expected rotation period of ~1 day. An 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1995 
Feb. 2 22:57 UT 
—— Feb. 3 18:49 UT 
+ Feb.4 4:34 UT 


Flux (10° erg cm? s" A") 


1542 1544 1546 1548 1550 1552 


——— April 10 (Wind Minimum) 
June 16 (Wind Emergence) 
June 28 (wind reestablished) 


Flux (10° erg cm? s* A") 


1542 1544 1546 1548 1550 1552 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 4. As in figure 3 but for Be stars that display prominent 
DACs in the wind. 


example of this behavior is shown in figure 5. The 
photospheric velocity field is given by V(r,0,¢) = 
A(1, k 4/86, k/sin@ 0/06)Y;" (6, ¢) e'”’, where k is the ratio 
of horizontal to vertical velocity amplitude, Y/" is a 
spherical harmonic function and o is the NRP frequency 
in the co-rotating frame. / and m are the pulsation 
modes. There are m meridians passing through the poles 
perpendicular to the equator. / is the total number of 
meridians on the surface and / — |m| is the number of 
nodes between the poles. Be stars typically show low- 
order modes with/ = |m|, or sectorial modes that resemble 
the sections of an orange. Usually the wave motion is 
retrograde and beats backwards against the star’s rotation 
with a period of mPopsa- For these low-order (g) modes, 
horizontal motions dominate, as k ~ o~?, and the wave 
crests are hotter than the troughs. The patches on the star 
containing the crests will contribute more to the integrated 
line profile than will the trough regions. Consider an/ = 2 
mode in which there are two crests and troughs. The star 
should be brightest as the absorption ‘bump’ crosses the 
center of the line. When the crest is near the stellar limb 
the star will be fainter and the line should show its greatest 
distortion. Both effects are observed in many Be stars. 
Several types of transient behavior associated with 
apparently localized mass ejection have been identified in 
Be stars. These transients are most often observed in the 
He I lines of Be stars with meager CS disks. Emission flares 
can abruptly appear and wane in <1 h. Sometimes 2-3 
emission components at discrete velocities display ordered 
variations over the course of a few hours. Weak, central 
absorption features flanked by weak emission can appear— 
disappear in <1 h. Transient, high-velocity absorption 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Be Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


AE (HID 2,447,102+) 


INTENSITY 
° 
o 


0.8 1 
[essdee teih gts aan Sige Hie thc ethene 


4920 4940 


4880 4900 
WAVELENGTH (A) 


Figure 5. Example of blue-red traveling ‘bumps’ in 
photospheric line profiles that suggest the presence of NRPs in a 
low-order mode. The series of profiles in the upper panel are 
differences from the mean Hf and He I 4 4922 profiles displayed 
in the lower panel. Illustration courtesy of D Gies. 


components can appear on the violet side of the line in 
less than 15 min and fade in 1-2 days. All these short-term 
phenomena could result from magnetic fields, but so far 
no magnetic field has been detected in a classical Be star. 
NRP could be the cause of the transient activity. Some of 
the most exciting research on Be stars to come will focus 
on the details of the mass ejection from the photosphere, 
the process of building the disk and the behavior of the 
disk as it receives material from a localized site on the star. 


Bibliography 
Information on contemporary research on Be stars can be 
found in the proceedings from IAU Symposium No 162 


Balona L, Henrichs H F and Le Contel M (ed) 1994 
Pulsation, Rotation, and Mass Loss in Early-Type Stars 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


and IAU Colloquium No. 175, 


Smith M A, Henrichs H F and Fabregat J (eds) 2000 The Be 
Phenomenon in Early-Type Stars (San Francisco, CA: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 


A good collection of Ha and Fe II emission line 
profiles and summary of important physical processes that 
produce them is 


Hanuschik R W, Hummel W, Sutorius E, Dietle O and 
Thimm G 1996 Atlas of high-resolution emission and 
shell lines in be stars—line profiles and short-term 
variability Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 116 309-58 


A good treatise on wind parameters is 


Prinja R K 1989 Ultraviolet observations of stellar winds 
in be and ‘normal’ B non-supergiant stars Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 241 721-52 


An excellent summary of the modeling of NRP is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Gies D R 1991 Nonradial pulsation and line profile 
variability in early-type stars Rapid Variability of 
OB-Stars: Nature and Diagnostic Value ed D Baade 
(Garching bei Miinchen: ESO) pp 229-43 


Geraldine J Peters 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Becklin—Neugebauer Object (BN Object) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Becklin—Neugebauer Object (BN 
Object) 


One of the most powerful infrared sources known, located 
in the Kleinmann—Low Nebula behind the Orion Nebula, 
and discovered by Eric Becklin and Gerry Neugebauer in 
1967. Its position is RA 05' 35.2 ™, dec. —05° 22’. It is 
thought to be a very young and massive B star embedded 
in a dense expanding dust envelope which absorbs the 
star’s visible light and re-emits it in the infrared. 


See also: Kleinmann—Low Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Beer, Wilhelm (1797-1850) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Beer, Wilhelm (1797-1850) 


Berlin banker and amateur astronomer, collaborated with 
JOHANN MADLER in a map of the Moon, in its organization 
following closely the plan laid out by the less well known 
selenographer w G LOHRMANN. Suggested with Madler in 
1837 the advantages of an observatory on the Moon 
(continuous observation over a 14 day lunar night, for 
example: they did not know that there is no lunar 
atmosphere so that stars are visible during the lunar day 
too). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Beijing Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Beijing Astronomical Observatory 


The Beijing Astronomical Observatory (BAO) is primarily 
engaged in astrophysical research. The modern Beijing 
Observatory was built by the Chinese Academy of Sciences 
in 1958. Its headquarters are located in Beijing, and there 
are five observing sites: the Xinglong, Miyun, Huairou, 
Shahe and Tianjin stations. 

Instruments include a 2.16 m (84 in) optical telescope, 
the largest in the Far East; a multichannel solar 
magnetic telescope; a meter-wave aperture synthesis radio 
telescope; and a 1.26 m (50 in) infrared telescope. BAO is 
also constructing a Large Area Multi-Object Spectroscopic 
Telescope. In 1991, an observing site in the southern 
hemisphere was set up in collaboration with the San Juan 
University of Argentina. 

The main research programs include stellar physics, 
extragalactic studies, solar physics, radioastronomy, 
an atomic time and frequency service, solar activity 
prediction, artificial satellite observation and the history 
of astronomy. A number of discoveries have been made 
during searches for supernovae, quasars, active galactic 
nuclei and near-Earth asteroids. 

For further information see 
http://www.bao.ac.cn/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bell, Susan Jocelyn [name following her marriage 
Burnell, or Bell-Burnell] (1943-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bell, Susan Jocelyn [name following 
her marriage Burnell, or Bell-Burnell] 
(1943-) 


Radioastronomer, born in York, England. She studied 
at Glasgow and Cambridge, where in 1967 she was 
a research student working with ANTHONY HEWISH on a 
radioastronomy project on interplanetary scintillation. 
She noticed an unusually regular signal, shown to be 
bursts of radio energy at a constant interval of just over a 
second—the first pulsar. Hewish was awarded the Nobel 
prize for this discovery, circumstances which led to Bell’s 
adoption as a feminist icon. Bell became professor at the 
Open University. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bennett, Willard Harrison (1903-87) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bennett, Willard Harrison (1903-87) 


Physicist, inventor, born in Findlay, OH, invented the 
radiofrequency mass spectrometer, a device that measures 
the mass of ions. This instrument has been much used 
by space scientists to identify the composition of distant 
places in the solar system, ever since it first went into space 
in 1957 aboard the Russian satellite Sputnik. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


BeppoSAxX (Satellite for X-ray Astronomy) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BeppoSAxX (Satellite for X-ray 
Astronomy) 


Italian—Dutch gamma ray and x-ray astronomy satellite 
launched in April 1996. Named in honour of Italian 
physicist Giuseppe Occhialini, whose nickname was 
‘Beppo’. Used for spectroscopic and time variability 
studies of x-ray sources in the energy band 1-200 keV, 
including an all-sky monitoring investigation of 
transients in the 2-30 keV energy range. In 1997, played 
a major role in identification of gamma ray bursters by 
pinpointing x-ray emissions from these events, so 
enabling confirmation of their cosmological distances. 
The board of administrators of the Italian Space Agency 
has approved the continuation of BeppoSAX operations 
until at least 30 April 2002. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bessel, Friedrich Wilhelm (1784-1846) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bessel, Friedrich Wilhelm (1784-1846) 


Astronomer, geodesist, mathematician, born in Minden, 
Westphalia, Germany. At the age of 26, became director 
of Frederick William III of Prussia’s new Konigsberg 
Observatory, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
Published (1838) the first recognizedly accurate stellar 
parallax (of 61 Cygni), the earliest accurate method 
for measuring stellar distances (10 light years for 61 
Cygni) (but see WILHELM STRUVE’S and THOMAS HENDERSON’S 
claims to priority). Discovered the orbital deflections 
of Sirius and Procyon due to their then unseen white 
dwarf companions. These were results of a monumental 
astrometric program to determine the positions and 
proper motions of stars—it could be called the beginning 
of modern astrometry. Bessel functions, originally 
encountered by Daniel Bernoulli, were systematically 
investigated by Bessel and named for him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Beta Pictoris 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Beta Pictoris 


A white-dwarf star of apparent magnitude 3.85, found 
by the IRAS survey in 1983 to be a very strong emitter 
of infrared radiation. Following this discovery, extensive 
studies with large optical telescopes revealed the presence 
of a disk of dust surrounding the star—possible raw 
material for the formation of a planetary system. This is 
particularly interesting as it is a star similar in size to the 
Sun (1.4 solar diameters), although rather hotter (spectral 
type A3V). Its luminosity (absolute magnitude 2.4) is about 
eight times that of the Sun. It is 63 light-years distant, its 
parallax is 0.052”. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Beta Regio 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Beta Regio 


A prominent upland region of Venus, situated to the north 
of the planet’s equator and centered at 25.3°N, 77.2°W. In 
its greatest dimension it measures 2869 km. It is one of 
only a handful of Venusian features not to bear a female 
name. The first features that showed up in early radar 
surveys of the planet were given the names of letters of 
the Greek alphabet. When the convention of assigning 
female names was adopted, a few names that had become 
well established were allowed to survive. Beta Regio is 
dominated by three features: two large volcanic calderas, 
Rhea Mons, and, to its south, Theia Mons, and a prominent 
rift known as Devana Chasma. This rift passes through 
both calderas and continues southwards, with a total 
length of 1616 km. The whole region is considered to be 
one of the youngest features of the planet, and probably 
sits atop a local upwelling of the underlying mantle. The 
lava flows here are some of the most recent on Venus, and 
it may be that the region is currently volcanically active. 


See also: Venus: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Betelgeuse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Betelgeuse 


The star a Orionis, marking the right shoulder of the 
Hunter in the ancient constellation figure. It is a 
red giant of spectral type M2Ib, apparent magnitude 
0.45. Ata distance of 427 light-years (parallax 0.008”), 
its apparent brightness arises from its high intrinsic 
luminosity (absolute magnitude (5.1) which is about 14 000 
times that of the Sun. It was the first star to have its 
diameter reliably determined, by A A Michelson (1852- 
1931) at the Mount Wilson Observatory, using a 20 foot 
beam interferometer attached to the 100 inch Hooker 
reflector. The observed angular diameter of 0.047” is 
equivalent to an actual diameter more than double the size 
of the orbit of Mars. This implies a volume 160 million 
times that of the Sun, yet its mass is estimated at only 20 
solar masses: it is thus a star of exceptionally low density. 

Betelgeuse is a semi-regular pulsating variable, its 
magnitude varying by +0.15 over a period averaging 
about 6.4 years. It is also a radio source and an 
emitter of strong infrared radiation. Observations by the 
Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) indicated that three 
concentric shells, ejected from the surface of the star in 
the past, are the sources of the long-wavelength radiation. 
There are several very faint optical companions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bethe, Hans Albrecht (1906-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bethe, Hans Albrecht (1906—) 


Physicist, born in Strasburg, Germany (present-day 
France), Nobel prizewinner (1967). As professor of physics 
at Cornell University he worked out the nuclear reactions 
occurring in the Sun. He worked on the development 
of the atomic bomb in the Manhatten project, and, after 
the second World War, pursued again research on stellar 
nuclear energy sources and the origin of the chemical 
elements in the alpha-beta-gamma theory (Bethe’s is the 
second Greek letter of the theory’s name, see RALPH ALPHER, 
GEORGE GAMOW). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bevis, John (1695-1771) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bevis, John (1695-1771) 


Doctor and amateur astronomer, born in Old Sarum, 
Wiltshire, England. Bevis was the only person ever to 
have telescopically observed (through patchy cloud from 
Greenwich) the occultation of one planet by another, 
namely the occultation of Mercury by Venus on 28 May 
1737 (the next chance, in theory, is an occultation of 
Neptune by Mercury in 2067). URBAIN LEVERRIER used 
Bevis’s observations to check his calculations of the 
motions of the two planets. Bevis erected an observatory 
in Stoke Newington with which he observed star positions 
and created a star atlas called Uranographia Britannica. It 
was completed in 1750, but the printer went bankrupt and 
the printing was never distributed. Less than 20 proof 
copies survive, and the complementary catalog was never 
published. Bevis discovered the Crab Nebula, apparently 
in 1731, and illustrated it on the atlas. Messier had access 
to a copy of this atlas, referring to it as the English Atlas 
several times, e.g. in the descriptions for the objects M1 (the 
Crab Nebula, which Messier independently discovered 
but acknowledging the earlier discovery by Bevis), M11, 
M13, M22, M31 and M35. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Biela, Wilhelm von (1782-1856) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Biela, Wilhelm von (1782-1856) 


Austrian army officer, astronomer. Observed in 1826 
the periodic comet named after him, and realized that it 
was identical to the comet seen in 1772 and 1805. The 
comet broke up in the 1850s and was not seen after the 
1852 apparition. Its debris became responsible for the 
Andromedid (or Bielid) shower of meteors seen annually 
in November in the second half of the nineteenth century, 
until their orbit shifted out of the annual path of the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bielids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bielids 


A periodic meteor shower that produced November 
meteor storms after the break-up of Comet 3D/Biela in 
the 1850s. The shower, also known as the Andromedids, 
had its radiant in the constellation Andromeda. The 
comet, which had a period of 6.6 years, was last seen 
in 1852. In 1872, when it should have made a favorable 
return, there occurred instead a meteor storm peaking at 
6000 per hour. The shower returned again in 1885 with 
a spectacular display touching 75000 meteors per hour. 
Weaker activity was seen in 1899 and 1904, after which 
gravitational perturbations by Jupiter shifted the Bielid 
stream away from the Earth’s orbit. It may return again 
early in the twenty-second century. 


See also: Comet Biela. 


Andromedids _ see Bielids 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Biermann, Ludwig Franz Benedikt (1907-86) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Biermann, Ludwig Franz Benedikt 
(1907-86) 


German astrophysicist, became director of the astro- 
physics section of the Max-Planck-Institut fiir Physik und 
Astrophysik, first at Gottingen and later in Munich. Bier- 
mann applied atomic physics and plasma hydrodynamics 
to problems in stellar interiors, the solar chromosphere 
and corona, the Galaxy, the solar system and comet tails 
(which led him to predict the solar wind). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Big Bang Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Big Bang Theory 


The theory which asserts that the universe originated a 
finite time ago by expanding from an infinitely compressed 
state. According to this model, space, time and matter 
originated together, and the universe has been expanding 
ever since. Key stages in the history of the Big Bang 
universe are summarized below. 

According to the standard Big Bang model, the 
very early universe consisted of an extremely high- 
temperature mixture of radiation (photons) and particles. 
In accordance with the equivalence of mass and energy 
inherent in Einstein’s special theory of relativity, collisions 
between high-energy photons would have transformed 
radiation energy into particles of matter. To be consistent 
with the conservation laws of particle physics, a collision 
between sufficiently energetic photons creates a particle— 
antiparticle pair (e.g. an electron and a positron, or a 
quark and an antiquark). Conversely, a collision between 
a particle and its antiparticle results in the annihilation 
of the particle-antiparticle pair and their conversion into 
photons. 

As the universe expanded and cooled, photon 
energies quickly declined below the thresholds at which 
they could continue to create particle—antiparticle pairs. 
Thereafter, particles and antiparticles rapidly collided and 
annihilated each other. Baryons and antibaryons (particles 
such as protons, neutrons and the quarks of which they 
are composed) underwent mutual annihilation about one 
millionth of a second after the initial event, when the 
temperature dropped below 10’° K. Less-massive electrons 
and positrons experienced a similar event a few seconds 
later, when the temperature had dropped to about 5x 10° K. 
Had there been an exact equality between the numbers 
of particles and antiparticles, virtually no matter would 
have remained to form stars and galaxies. Because the 
destruction of each particle-antiparticle pair produced a 
pair of photons, and the ratio of photons to baryons in the 
present-day universe is nearly a billion to one, it follows 
that the excess of particles over antiparticles in the early 
universe must also have been about one in a billion. 

About 100 seconds after the beginning of time, 
when the temperature had dropped below 10° K, nuclear 
reactions combined some of the protons and virtually all 
the neutrons into nuclei of helium, together with small 
quantities of other light elements and isotopes such as 
deuterium, helium-3 and lithium. At the end of this phase 
there were about 11 hydrogen nuclei (protons) for every 
helium nucleus. Because helium nuclei are four times 
heavier than hydrogen nuclei, this corresponds to a ratio, 
by mass, of hydrogen to helium of about 73:27. The 
observed relative abundances of the lightest elements very 
closely matches the predictions of the Big Bang theory. 

Thereafter, the expanding universe consisted of a 
mixture of atomic nuclei, electrons and photons in thermal 
equilibrium (frequent collisions between photons and 
particles ensured that matter and radiation shared a 
common temperature). A few hundred thousand years 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


after the initial event, when the temperature everywhere 
had declined to a few thousand kelvin, nuclei were able 
to capture electrons to form complete neutral atoms. 
This process mopped up the free electrons that had been 
responsible for scattering photons and, thereby, making 
space opaque to electromagnetic radiation. The close 
connection between matter and radiation was broken (this 
event is called the ‘decoupling’ of matter and radiation), 
space became essentially transparent, and the primordial 
radiation content of the universe was free thereafter to 
spread ever more thinly through the expanding volume 
of space. The dilute, redshifted remnant of the primordial 
radiation is detectable today as the cosmic microwave 
background radiation. 

Some time later, probably within the first billion 
years after the decoupling, clumps of matter aggregated 
together to form galaxies, clusters, superclusters and the 
other large-scale features of the universe. How, when, and 
in what order these various structures appeared is a matter 
of debate. 

The Big Bang theory is consistent with the observed 
expansion of the universe (provided that the age of 
the universe exceeds that of the oldest stars), the 
relative abundance of the lighter chemical elements, and 
the existence and properties of the cosmic microwave 
background radiation. Nevertheless, although certain 
other issues have been addressed by the ‘inflationary’ 
hypothesis, many questions remain unresolved. 


See also: cosmic microwave background, cosmological 
model, cosmology, expanding universe, inflationary 
universe, primeval fireball. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Big Bear Solar Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Big Bear Solar Observatory 


Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO) is located at the end of 
a causeway in a mountain lake more than 2 km above sea 
level. The site has more than 300 sunny days a year and a 
natural inversion caused by the lake which makes for very 
clean images. BBSO is the only university observatory in 
the US making high-resolution observations of the Sun. Its 
daily images are posted at http://www.bbso.njit.edu. It 
specializes in the study of the Sun’s magnetic fields and 
their evolving nature. The BBSO uses daily images to 
forecast solar magnetic storms which can impact satellites, 
communication and the power grid. BBSO is operated by 
New Jersey Institute of Technology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Big Dipper ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Big Dipper 
Alternative name, used particularly in the USA, for the 


asterism in Ursa Major more usually known as the Plough. 


See also: Plough. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Binary Stars in Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binary Stars in Globular Clusters 


Globular clusters have long been known to be among 
the richest stellar groupings within our Galaxy, but for 
many years they were believed to be largely devoid of 
the most minimal stellar group: binary stars (see BINARY 
STARS: OVERVIEW). For many years, the only evidence that any 
binaries existed in these clusters came from the presence 
of BLUE STRAGGLERS—Stars that appear to be significantly 
younger than the vast majority of the cluster stars. The 
nature of blue stragglers remains somewhat unclear, but an 
early and persistent explanation for their existence is that 
mass transfer between stars in binary systems prolonged 
the lifetimes of the mass-gaining stars. Other mechanisms 
involving single stars can also conceivably explain the 
existence of blue stragglers, so for many years they offered 
only weak circumstantial evidence that binary stars reside 
in globular clusters. 

From the early 1950s, when blue stragglers were first 
discovered, until the late 1980s, more direct evidence for 
the existence of binaries in globular clusters remained 
elusive. For example, some of the earliest comprehensive 
studies of the RADIAL VELociTIES of the RED GIANT STARS in 
clusters, in the 1970s, revealed that very few if any of these 
stars showed the long-term velocity variations expected 
for SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY STARS. By the mid 1980s it was 
generally accepted that the binary frequency—the fraction 
of stars that appear single but that are actually binary 
stars—of globular clusters was probably under 10%, and 
certainly much lower than the 50% frequency observed 
among stars near the Sun. 

The lack of binaries in globular clusters seemed 
consistent with some expectations of that time. Since the 
stars in globular clusters are closely packed together, they 
frequently pass quite close to one another. Simple models 
of the interactions of binaries and single stars in these 
environments suggested that binaries with initially wide 
separations (e.g. similar to the Earth-Sun separation or 
larger) would be disrupted. It was also believed that the 
low abundance of heavy elements in most globular clusters 
might somehow inhibit the formation of binary stars. 

However, from the standpoint of the stability of 
globular clusters, the complete lack of binaries became 
an increasingly perplexing problem. The gravitational 
interactions of stars within clusters tends to drain energy 
systematically from the cluster core, leading ultimately to 
a core collapse to an infinite mass density in a finite time. 
Since no clusters show convincing evidence of having 
collapsed in such a dramatic manner, it became clear that 
something must eventually stop the core collapse process. 
The easiest way to do so would be to form binary stars 
in the cluster cores during the late stages of the collapse. 
The formation of even a few ‘hard’ binaries—binary stars 
with very short orbital periods—could entirely halt core 
collapse in even the most massive clusters. The problem 
was finding evidence that these binaries actually existed. 

When the first x-RAY TELESCOPES Were lofted into Earth 
orbit, one surprising result was the discovery of bright 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. A color plot of the collision of two binary stars in a 
globular cluster. The lines show the trajectories of the four stars. 
Initially, two binaries enter the region, one from the upper left 
(denoted by the red and yellow lines spiraling around one 
another) and the other from the lower right (as shown by the 
dark and light blue lines). As the binaries collide, the stars 
interact strongly. The first effect is that the star denoted by the 
red line is rapidly ejected into the surrounding cluster as it 
shoots off the picture to the left. Left behind is a triple system 
comprised of the stars traced by the yellow, dark blue and light 
blue lines. However, this triple is not entirely stable as it swaps 
stars between an inner tight binary system with a more loosely 
bound star traveling in a larger orbit. In many cases, one of the 
stars of the triple is eventually lost from the system, leaving one 
short-period binary and two free stars where there had originally 
been two intermediate-period binary stars. Such collisions are 
common in globular clusters, and may provide a way to form 
contact binaries even in low-density clusters. The details of any 
given binary-binary collision depend sensitively on the initial 
configuration of the binaries, so it is still impossible to model any 
specific interaction within an actual globular cluster. However, 
the statistical effects of collisions such as the one shown here can 
be estimated and applied to clusters. (Courtesy E S Phinney and 
S Sigurdsson.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 5. 


sources seemingly associated with globular clusters. With 
time, it became clear that these x-ray sources represent 
short-period binary systems in which mass is transferred 
from a normal star onto a companion NEUTRON sTAR. The 
frequency of such x-ray binaries is much higher in globular 
clusters than in the rest of the Galaxy, so they form 
preferentially in the clusters, perhaps as a result of core 
collapse. However, many clusters that should have gone 
through core collapse do not contain x-ray binaries, so 
other types of binaries must exist in these objects to have 
halted their collapse. 

One of the more unusual types of binaries in globular 
clusters was discovered with radio telescopes. In 1987, 
the first PULSAR within a globular cluster (Messier 28, or 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars in Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Weprr ryt yt rryttTy71 


<a 
ie 


V Magnitude 


ar 
bo 
fon) 
prtrTy tty. 


V1 
P=0.34890d 


rortiritiii ly 
-.2 0 2 4 6 8 1 1. 


oa 
o 


De} 


V Magnitude 
© 
De) 


19.4 | 
V3 7 
19.6 P=0.37387d il 
a 
2 0 2 A 6 8 1 1.2 
9 ea a a 0 a a a a 
178 


(3) § a 
2 zi 
2 L 
S L J 
G L q 
= 18.2 — = 
> By 4 
18.4 V5 4 
b P=0.40450d 7 
18.6 Chose tire lori tipi tee tii ta 
-.2 ie} 2 4 6 8 1 1.2 


Phase 


i 


[ego | 


ie V2 pais 
# P=0.36719d # 


' 
i) 
° 
i) 
aS 
ron) 
© 
a 
aa 
i) 


= 
3 


ee ie 


A 


al 


He oH, 


TP TTTyTrry tir y 
i rea, Peterlee Ha 


P=0.55616d 


L | ft | ae | ot | } J | is | | {J | {1 
"2 0 2 4 6 8 1 
Phase 


= 
ie) 


Figure 1. Light curves for five eclipsing binary stars in the globular cluster M 71. Four of these light curves indicate that the binary 
stars are contact systems in which the two stellar components are in physical contact as they orbit about their center of mass. The star 
labeled V4 exhibits nearly flat portions in its light curve between the obvious eclipses. This indicates that the binary is a detached 
system in which the stars are physically separated. All of these binaries have orbital periods of less than one day, while the individual 


stars are comparable in size to the Sun. 


simply M28) was discovered. These rotating neutron stars 
exhibit ultra-regular brightness variations on time-scales 
ranging from 0.002-10 s. Because these natural clocks 
are so precise, the modulation of their periods can reveal 
clearly when pulsars are part of a binary system. At least 
11 such binary pulsars with normal stellar companions 
are now known to exist in globular clusters, generally 
with orbital periods of less than 3 days. The existence of 
very short pulsation periods of many single pulsars found 
in clusters offers additional indirect evidence of binaries: 
mass transfer within close binary systems can effectively 
‘spin up’ the pulsars to their observed ultra-fast rotation 
rates. Subsequent interactions with other single or binary 
stars in the clusters can disrupt the binaries, leaving the 
single, short-period pulsar behind. In fact, this seems to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be the only viable way to produce short-period pulsars 
in globular clusters. The natural tendency for isolated 
pulsars to spin more slowly with time would suggest that 
no short-period pulsars should exist among the ancient 
stars of a globular clusters. 

Some of the first searches in the optical centered on 
the detection of cataclysmic binaries (CBs) in globular 
clusters (See CATACLYSMIC BINARIES: CLASSICAL AND RECURRENT 
NOvAE). CBs are closely related to the bright x-ray sources, 
except that the compact companion is a WHITE DwakF rather 
than a neutron star. NovAE—CBs that undergo particularly 
violent eruptions on timescales of many years—had been 
observed near the cores of two globular clusters, but the 
initial searches for less luminous CBs were frustratingly 
inconclusive. Only in recent years have ground- and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars in Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


space-based observations successfully identified normal 
CBs in many clusters using optical and x-ray telescopes. 

Prior to the discovery of numerous CBs in clusters, 
examples of more mundane binaries began to reveal 
themselves in globular clusters. Spectroscopic surveys of 
red giants started to identify stars that appeared to vary 
in a way that would be expected for normal binary stars. 
These spectroscopic binaries have orbital periods ranging 
from many months to 10 years or longer and demonstrated 
that relatively wide binaries could survive in many cluster 
environments. Studies of the changes in the brightness of 
stars in globular clusters also revealed that some of these 
are ECLIPSING BINARY STARS. Such systems contain stars in 
close proximity that, because of the fortuitous alignment of 
their orbital plane with the Earth, exhibit periodic eclipses 
as the stars alternately pass in front of one another. Light 
curves for five such binaries in the metal-rich globular 
cluster M 71 are shown in figure 1. Both spectroscopic 
and eclipsing binaries provide indisputable evidence that 
binary stars do exist in globular clusters. Surprisingly, the 
numbers of both spectroscopic and eclipsing binaries in 
clusters imply that, rather than being deficient of binaries, 
globular clusters may have binary frequencies in the range 
25-60%. Such values would be considered nearly normal 
for stars located in the vicinity of the Sun. 

The most recent surveys of many clusters have 
largely confirmed this result. Indeed, no clusters 
studied sufficiently carefully have failed to reveal either 
spectroscopic or eclipsing binaries or blue stragglers. 
Though the latter may form via stellar collisions or as a 
result of complex interactions between wide binary stars, 
these observations have strongly confirmed that binary 
stars are not rare in globular clusters, simply hard to find! 

Blue stragglers re-entered the subject of cluster binary 
stars as it became clear that 5-10% of these stars are 
eclipsing systems. Many of these binary blue stragglers 
turn out to be contact binaries, systems in which the two 
orbiting stars are in physical contact. Because the stars 
significantly distort each other, they are not spherical in 
shape and are always either entering or leaving eclipse; 
thus, their light curves are never constant (four of the 
five stars whose light curves are shown in figure 1 are 
contact binaries). The components of such contact binaries 
cannot avoid a future fate in which the two stars coalesce 
into a single, more massive star. The resulting merged 
object would become a blue straggler. Especially in the 
lower-density globular clusters, this appears to be the 
most likely way to form blue stragglers (though see below 
for another possible mechanism that may operate in low- 
density clusters). 

Now that binary stars are routinely detected in 
globular clusters, new questions have been raised. 
For example, is the mixture of binary star types and 
orbital periods similar to that observed near the Sun? 
Certainly, clusters contain far more x-ray binaries and 
a large proportion of short-period binary pulsars than 
among field stars throughout the Galaxy. It is also 
clear that the longest-period binaries in clusters are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


preferentially destroyed. Short-period systems can be 
created preferentially in dense clusters, either through 
star-star captures (this is rare except in the densest 
environments) or via ‘collisions’ of wide binaries (more 
common; see figure 2 for an example of what this may 
look like). Different clusters appear to affect their binary 
star populations in different ways, but we lack a good 
understanding of why this is the case or even if the 
binary star populations depend on global globular cluster 
properties such as total mass, or chemical abundance. The 
origin(s) of cluster binaries is still also under debate. There 
is clear evidence that some binaries are ‘primordial’— 
that is, they were formed when the cluster itself was 
formed. But dynamical processes in some clusters— 
particularly the densest clusters—clearly can form binaries 
via a variety of mechanisms that have only begun to be 
explored in detail. 


Bibliography 

Bailyn C 1995 Blue stragglers and other stellar anomalies: 
implications for the dynamics of globular clusters 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 33 133 

Milone E F and Mermilliod J-C (ed) 1996 The Origins, 
Evolution, and Destinies of Binary Stars in Clusters 
(Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. Ser. 90) (contains a variety 
of technical articles on cluster binaries) 


Mario L Mateo 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars in Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binary Stars in Planetary Nebulae 


The classical view of PLANETARY NEBULAE (PNe) is that they 
are ejected from all single stars of low to intermediate 
mass at the end of the asymptotic-giant-branch stage. 
However, observations made over the past two decades 
have made it increasingly clear that binary stars actually 
play a significant, and possibly dominant, role in the PN 
ejection process. 


Common envelopes and UU Sagittae 

Two key events in this subject occurred almost simultane- 
ously in the mid-1970s, and provide a beautiful example 
of the interplay of theory and observation in astrophysics. 

One of these events was an apparent theoretical 
resolution of the puzzle of the origin of extremely close 
binaries containing WHITE-DWARF (WD) components. These 
systems include the short-period cataclysmic binaries and 
close but detached ‘pre-cataclysmic’ main-sequence-WD 
pairs such as V471 Tauri (an eclipsing binary in the Hyades 
cluster, containing a hot WD and a K-type main-sequence 
companion, with an orbital period of only 12.5 h). WDs 
are the cores of REDGIANTSTARS, yet for these extremely close 
binaries the entire system is much smaller than the red- 
giant progenitor of the WD. It was realized that, in fact, the 
companion main-sequence star must recently have been 
inside the red giant. This insight led to the concept of 
‘common-envelope’ (CE) interactions during the evolution 
of binary stars. 

The CE scenario starts with a binary that is wide 
enough for the more massive component to grow to 
red-giant dimensions before any interaction with its 
companion occurs. Only then does the red giant swallow 
its companion, which encounters frictional drag as it orbits 
within the low-density envelope of the red giant. The 
orbit spirals down, transferring its energy to the CE. 
Eventually, the CE is ejected, leaving a much closer binary 
containing the main-sequence star and the remnant core 
of the red giant. The core then evolves to high surface 
temperature, pouring out ultraviolet radiation that ionizes 
the ejected envelope and making it visible as a PN. Next, 
after the PN has dissipated into space, the core enters the 
WD cooling sequence, producing a V471-Tau-like binary. 
Eventually, as the orbit contracts owing to gravitational 
radiation or other mechanisms, the main-sequence star 
will start transferring mass to the WD, transforming the 
system into a cataclysmic or nova-like variable. It is 
now generally believed that the CE mechanism is the 
dominant way in which cataclysmic binaries are made. 
Moreover, the system may eventually undergo a second 
CE interaction, when the main-sequence star attempts to 
become a red giant itself, leading to a very close, double 
WD binary. Such systems may be the progenitors of type Ia 
supernovae. 

This theoretical scenario predicts the existence of very 
close binaries inside PNe, which indeed would be the 
‘smoking gun’ showing that the CE interaction actually 
does occur in the real universe. The second important 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


event in the 1970s was the discovery of a close-binary 
PN nucleus (PNN), found in the same year that the first 
theoretical papers predicting its existence were published. 
This was UU Sagittae, the central star of the planetary 
nebula Abell 63. It is an eclipsing binary, first identified 
in 1932, although the realization that it is the nucleus of a 
faint PN did not occur until 1975. The orbital period was 
found in 1976 to be an astonishingly short 11.2 h, implying 
that the hot nucleus orbits only about one stellar diameter 
away from its main-sequence companion. 


Known close-binary nuclei 
The discovery of UU Sge sparked systematic surveys of 
PNNi in order to search for binarity. Most of the searches 
have been done photometrically, i.e. by seeking periodic 
light variations of the central stars. Four PNNi—UU Sge, 
V477 Lyr, BE UMa, and the nucleus of SuWt 2—have been 
found to be eclipsing binaries, with periods of about half 
a day up to 2.4 days. Eight additional systems do not 
eclipse, but are still variable in light because of the strong 
heating effects that arise on one hemisphere of a cool main- 
sequence star that orbits closely around an extremely hot 
companion. The orbital periods of these systems range 
froma remarkable 2.7 h (one of the shortest periods known 
for a detached binary) to 2.9 days. In addition, the central 
star of NGC 2346 is a 16 day spectroscopic binary, and there 
are three known ‘Abell 35-type’ PNNi whose composite 
spectra clearly show that two stars—a hot nucleus, and a 
cool, rapidly rotating companion—must be present. 
These known binary PNNi constitute roughly 10% of 
randomly selected central stars. If we take into account the 
fact that the main discovery technique for these binaries— 
photometric variability—is ineffective for binaries with 
periods of more than several days (since then the heating 
effects do not occur), we see that the true fraction of 
binaries among PN central stars could be much higher, 
if there is a significant population of binaries with longer 
periods. 


Morphologies of nebulae with binary nuclei 
It is generally found that PNe known to have been ejected 
from close binaries are axisymmetric, showing either 
elliptical or more pronounced butterfly or bipolar shapes. 
These non-spherical morphologies appear consistent with 
the CE scenario, if one imagines that the CE interaction 
will eject matter predominantly into the orbital plane 
of the binary. Later on, when the hot component of 
the nucleus develops a fast, spherical, low-density wind 
(typical of all hot stars), the wind will attempt to plow 
out into the slower-moving ejected envelope. Along the 
polar directions, the wind will break out first, producing 
balloon-shaped bubbles; however, in the orbital plane, 
where the previously ejected envelope is much denser, the 
fast wind will be decelerated in a ‘snowplow’ fashion. 
There is space here only for a few images of PNe 
known to have binary nuclei. Figure 1 shows a ground- 
based image of Abell 41. It indeed has the general 
morphology predicted above: the blobs on either side of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars in Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Ground-based CCD image of Abell 41, a planetary 
nebula whose central star is an extremely close binary with a 
period of 2.7 h. The image is the sum of [O III] and Ha, obtained 
with the Cerro Tololo 0.9 m telescope. Note the axisymmetric 
structure, with blobs marking the orbital plane of the binary, and 
wind-blown balloons at the poles. 


the central star mark the orbital plane of the binary, where 
the gas density of the ejected CE is high and the subsequent 
fast wind has been unable to escape. Perpendicular to 
the orbital plane, however, the fast wind has succeeded in 
inflating two ‘bubbles’, because the density of the ejected 
envelope is much lower there. 

Figure 2 shows an extreme case of a ‘butterfly’ PN, 
NGC 2346, obtained with the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. Here 
again the binary PNN is surrounded by a dense ring, 
ejected as a consequence of the CE interaction; note the 
pinched waist around the central star. The fast wind has 
broken out perpendicularly to the orbital plane, producing 
the spectacular bipolar shape. 

In some cases, only the equatorial ring is seen. 
Figure 3 is an example, showing an almost edge-on ring 
around the central star of SuWt 2, a 2.45 day eclipsing 
binary. This ‘wedding-ring’ PN has an extremely high 
‘density contrast’ between its equatorial and polar regions. 
In fact, if one is in a poetic mood, one can think of the 
wedding ring as symbolizing the mystical union of the 
two stars. . until one realizes that cataclysmic events and 
an eventual blow-up loom in the future for this couple. 


Are most planetary nebulae ejected from binaries? 
As described above, PNe known to contain close-binary 
nuclei are virtually all axisymmetric, with varying degrees 
of density contrasts between orbital plane and poles. It 
is at present an unsolved question whether the opposite 
is true, ie. whether all non-spherical PNe are ejected 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Hubble Space Telescope image of NGC 2346, whose 
nucleus is a 16 day binary. This is a classical ‘butterfly’-shaped 
planetary nebula, with a dense equatorial ring and wind-blown 
bubbles perpendicular to the orbital plane. NASA/STScI Hubble 
Heritage image. 


from binaries. This is a crucial issue, since the large 
majority of PNe are in fact observed to be highly non- 
spherical, leading to the suggestion that most PNe are 
ejected from binary stars. There may be other mechanisms 
(e.g. rotation of the red-giant progenitor, magnetic fields, 
pulsation, convection) that could produce a non-spherical 
ejection from a single, spherical star. However, on 
closer examination, the presence of a reservoir of angular 
momentum generally seems to be required (for example, 
to spin up the star to sufficient rotational velocity to make 
the PN ejection non-spherical or to generate a sufficient 
magnetic field to influence the ejection magnetically), and 
a companion object is the most obvious such reservoir. 

Moreover, it may be that a companion of only modest 
mass (such as a brown dwarf or evena massive planet) may 
be sufficient to cause a non-spherical PN ejection, either 
through the CE interaction or through tidal forces without 
needing the actual stellar cannibalism. 

If we combine the above considerations with the 
already high fraction of directly detected binary central 
stars, which were found using an observational technique 
that is only sensitive to the shorter-period binaries, we 
are tempted to conclude that binary interactions have a 
major, and possibly dominant, influence on the ejection 
and shaping of planetary nebulae. 

This conclusion, however, has not yet been tested with 
direct observations (e.g. a large-scale search for radial- 
velocity variations on timescales of weeks to months). At 
present we are left with the words of the poet Robert Frost: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars in Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Ground-based [O III]+Ha image of SuWt 2, obtained 
with the Cerro Tololo 0.9 m telescope. This PN appears to be a 

ring with a very low ratio of height to radius. It is viewed close 
to edge on, and the central star is an eclipsing binary, showing 

that the ring was ejected into the orbital plane. 


We dance ‘round in a ring and suppose, 
But the Secret sits in the middle and knows. 


Bibliography 
A review article on CE interactions is 


Iben I and Livio M 1993 Common envelopes in binary star 
evolution Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 105 1373-406 


A comprehensive theoretical study of the evolution of 
binary planetary nuclei is given by 


Iben I and Tutukov A V 1993 Formation and evolution 
of binary planetary nebula nuclei and related objects 
Astrophys. J. 418 343-67 


Theoretical predictions of the orbital periods of binary 
PNNi have been made by 


Yungelson L R, Tutukov A V and Livio M 1993 The 
formation of binary and single nuclei of planetary 
nebulae Astrophys. J. 418 794-803 


The discovery and early studies of UU Sagittae are 
recounted by 


Bond H E, Liller W and Mannery E J 1978 UU Sagittae: 
eclipsing nucleus of the planetary nebula Abell 63 
Astrophys. J. 223 252-9 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Key articles on planetary nebulae ejected from close 
binaries include 


Bond H E and Livio M 1990 Morphologies of planetary 
nebulae ejected by close-binary nuclei Astrophys. J. 
355 568-76 

Pollacco D Land BellS A 1997 Imaging and spectroscopy of 
ejected common envelopes Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
284 32-44 

Soker N 1998 Binary progenitor models for bipolar 
planetary nebulae Astrophys. J. 496 833-41 


Howard E Bond 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Detached 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binary Stars: Detached 


Detached binaries are binary star systems where both stars 
are smaller than their ROCHE LOBES. These systems are useful 
in determining the basic properties of stars such as mass 
and radius since in most cases there has been no large-scale 
mass transfer between the two stars. 


Basic stellar data 

If a detached system is a double-lined spectroscopic binary 
with the orbit oriented nearly edge-on so that eclipses 
occur, then the fundamental properties of the two stars 
can be determined through careful analysis of the radial 
velocities and light curve in one or more photometric 
passbands (see also ECLIPSING BINARY STARS). Although it is 
possible in principle to measure the mass of a single star 
via the gravitational REDSHIFT, the effect in non-degenerate 
stars is so small as to be immeasurable. Thus practically all 
of our knowledge of stellar masses has come from studies 
of binary stars, and particularly detached binaries for stars 
of solar mass and above. 

The radius of a single star can be measured directly 
using interferometric techniques, but to date this has only 
been possible for a handful of nearby supergiants such as 
BETELGEUSE. If the distance to a star is known, then the radius 
(R) can also be determined indirectly with the Boltzmann 
equation since the luminosity (L) can be estimated: 


L=4nR?oT* 


where the effective temperature (JT) of the star is 
determined from the spectrum and o is the Stefan— 
Boltzmann constant. This method is limited by its 
requirement for an accurate distance to the star and by 
the numerous assumptions and calibrations involved. 
Therefore the majority of our knowledge about stellar 
radii has come from the analysis of observations of binary 
stars. Detached binaries whose components are much 
smaller than their Roche lobes are good approximations 
to single stars because there is little physical interaction 
between the stars and they are not subject to the 
evolutionary complications arising from mass transfer as 
in the semidetached systems like ALGOL. 

Double-lined spectroscopic binaries that eclipse 
provide masses and radii directly. The spectroscopic data 
provide the mass information, although in the absence 
of eclipses the information is incomplete. Because the 
orbital inclination and the semi-major axis of the orbit 
are perfectly correlated, only the minimum masses can 
be determined. If the system has eclipses, the inclination 
can be determined and thus the masses can be directly 
measured. 


Data compilations 

Popper (1980) compiled the then available data on 
the masses, luminosities and radii of stars based on 
observations of mostly detached systems. Popper noted 
the paucity of data on stars of spectral type B5 and earlier. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Hilditch and Bell (1987) published data on 31 such systems 
with 16 of them being detached binaries. Harmanec 
(1988) collected observations published since 1980 and 
also provided approximation formulae for the basic stellar 
parameters based on the observations. 


Bibliography 

Harmanec P 1988 Stellar masses and radii based on 
modern binary data Bull. Astron. Inst. Czech. 39 329-45 

Hilditch R W and Bell S A 1987 On OB-type close binary 
stars Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 229 529-38 

Popper D 1980 Stellar masses Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
18 115-64 


Dirk Terrell 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binary Stars: Overview 


Binary stars are pairs of stars in a gravitationally bound, 
periodic orbit around their common center of mass. Half 
or more of all stars are parts of binary systems, and this 
can reach 90% where the census is very complete. In 
most cases, the two stars of a binary formed together, out 
of a single gas cloud, and so have the same age and the 
same initial chemical composition. A few systems arise 
from gravitational capture processes between previously 
single stars or via star exchange between a pair and a 
single star or two pairs, most often in environments like 
the centers of GLOBULAR CLUSTERS, where stars are very 
close together. 

Binary stars are of interest and importance for 
several reasons. They provide the only accurate 
measurements of stellar masses, and the mass of a star 
turns out to be the primary determinant of its life cycle 
(see STELLAR EVOLUTION). Second, a variety of 
astronomical processes and phenomena occur only in 
binary systems, especially ones where the stars interact at 
some time in their lives (called close binaries; the 
opposite is ‘wide’). Third, possible orbits for stable, 
habitable planets around a star are greatly restricted when 
the star is part of a binary (see THREE-BODY PROBLEM). 
About one binary in five is gravitationally bound to one 
or more additional stars in a MULTIPLE STAR system. 
Generally, the third and additional stars are far enough 
from a close binary that they do not affect its evolution 
very much. 


Classification 

Binary systems can be classified in terms of (a) how they 
were discovered and studied, (b) their current physical 
state or (c) their status within an evolutionary scenario. A 
given system can normally be classified in all three ways. 


Classification by method of discovery 
The classes by methods of discovery or study are: 


(a) Common proper motion (CPM) pairs (where the 
stars are seen as separate dots of light and move 
across the sky together, but the orbit period is too 
long for orbital motion to have been seen). 

(b) VISUAL BINARIES (where two dots of light are 
resolved and seen to orbit each other). 

(c) Astrometric binaries (where a single image is seen, 
but it is elongated and the orientation changes with 
the orbit period, or a single image moves 
periodically in the sky). 

(d) Spectrum binaries (where the spectrogram of a single 
image shows two sets of lines characteristic of two 
stars of different spectral types). 

(e) SPECTROSCOPIC BINARIES (SBs, where the spectro- 
gram of a single image shows one or two sets of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lines whose radial velocity varies periodically; these 
are called single-lined and double-lined SBs 
respectively). 

(f) ECLIPSING BINARIES (where one star passes in front 
of the other from our vantage point, so that the total 
light we see coming from the system is temporarily 
dimmed; where the two stars are very close together, 
gravitational distortions of their shapes or 
illumination of one by the other can mimic eclipses; 
these are called ellipsoidal binaries). 


Many systems can be studied by more than one of 
these methods. ALGOL, for instance, is both a 
spectroscopic and an eclipsing binary with a period of 
about 3 days, while 70 Ophiuchi is both a visual and a 
spectroscopic binary, with a period of 88 years. 

On average, eclipsing and spectroscopic binaries will 
have the shortest orbit periods and the smallest orbit sizes 
(semi-major axes), while visual binaries and CPM pairs 
have the longest periods and widest separations between 
the components. The ranges (when both stars are normal 
main sequence stars) is from several hours up to several 
million years in period and from twice the radius of the 
Sun up to about 0.1 PARSEC in separation. Binaries with 
WHITE DWARF, NEUTRON STAR or BLACK HOLE 
components can have still shorter periods, down to a few 
minutes, though the systems will be short-lived. Widely 
separated pairs, where the stars never interact or 
influence each other’s evolution are also called DOUBLE 
STARS. 

Two objects of masses M, and M;, bound together 
by gravity can be described by a modification of 
KEPLER’S THIRD LAW of motion, which says 


(M+ MP? = a3 


where M, and M) are measured in solar masses (1Mo = 
2x10°° kg), P is the orbit period in years, and a is the 
semi-major axis of the relative orbit in ASTRONOMICAL 
UNITS. Thus, we can find the sum of the masses for any 
pair where P and a are measurable, and the individual 
masses as well whenever the ratio can be obtained from 
the ratio of the stars’ distances from their common center 
of mass, or the ratio of their speeds around it. 


Classification by current physical state 

Binaries are also classified in terms of the masses and 
evolutionary states of the two stars and the extent to 
which each fills its Roche lobe (see figure 1). Detached 
systems are ones where neither star fills its lobe; semi- 
detached systems have one lobe-filling star (often a RED 
GIANT), and material spilling through the point ZL, onto 
the other star or into a disk orbiting around it. In contact 
binaries, both stars fill their Roche lobes (also called the 
inner Lagrangian surface). If material has overflowed the 
lobes and surrounds both stars, we speak of a common 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


envelope binary. Gas that reaches the point L, is free to 
leave the system completely, often carrying large 
ANGULAR MOMENTUM with it, so that the stars spiral 
together. Material can be transferred from one star to the 
other even in a detached system if one has a strong stellar 
wind. 

These classes are somewhat correlated with those of 
the previous subsection. A contact system, for instance, 
will almost certainly be seen to eclipse, while a detached 
system with two main sequence stars is unlikely to, and a 
detached system with two white dwarfs almost certainly 
will not. 

Binary systems can include stars of all possible 
masses from 0.085 to 100 or more solar masses and stars 
at all evolutionary stages, from PRE-MAIN-SEQUENCE 
STARS, through the main sequence, red giants and 
supergiants, and later phases, up to white dwarfs, neutron 
stars and black holes. Not all combinations are, however, 


possible. For instance a 30Mo star will have completed 


its main sequence lifetime before a 1Mo star has begun 
core hydrogen burning, so you will never see a pair 


consisting of 30 + 1Mo with both stars on the main 
sequence. Pairs where both stars are in the same, short- 
lived evolutionary phase (like binary Cepheid variables) 
are naturally rather rare. 


Figure 1. The Roche geometry, showing equipotential surfaces 
in a coordinate system that rotates with the orbiting star pair. 
When neither M, nor M, fills the innermost contour shown 
(Roche lobe), the system is non-interacting. When one star has 
evolved and expanded enough to fill its Roche lobe, material 
flows through L, (the first Lagrangian point) onto the other star. 
When both lobes are filled, the contact system is likely to 
merge. Common envelope binaries over-fill both lobes, and 
material that reaches are far out as L, can leave the system, 
typically carrying more then its fair share of angular 
momentum. (From Webbink R F 1991 The Astronomy and 
Astrophysics Encyclopedia ed S P Maran (New York: van 
Nostrand) p 81.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Classification by evolutionary phase. 

Assigning binary systems to their place in a scenario for 
how systems evolve is the most uncertain of the methods, 
but also the one that provides the most physical 
understanding. These classes are often named for a 
prototype, for instance Beta Lyrae stars (in which mass 
transfer from the more massive, lobe-filling star to its 
companion has just started and is happening rapidly), 
Algol variables (in which material is being transferred 
more slowly from a depleted red giant to its now more- 
massive companion) and V 471 Tauri stars (detached 
pairs of white dwarf + red dwarf, expected to evolve into 
cataclysmic variables). 

Quite often, the prototype is not very typical of its 
class. This is not really surprising. The first example of a 
class to be found is likely to be unusually bright or 
otherwise conspicuous. Algol, for instance, is part of a 
triple system; and V 471 Tauri probably has a bit of mass 
transfer going on (so it is bright for its type). At least 50 
classes of this sort have been named in the astronomical 
literature, but many would be recognized only by a few 
specialists. 


History 

Relatively close star pairs, resolvable with the naked eye 
like Castor and Pollux, were known to the ancients. Most 
of these are optical doubles, that is, stars at different 
distances from us, seen by chance in about the same 
direction, and not physically bound together. With the 
advent of the telescope, pairs closer than the naked eye 
separation limit (about 30") began turning up, starting 
with Mizar (the middle star in the handle of the Big 
Dipper) observed by the Italian astronomer Benedetto 
Castelli in 1617. 

William Herschel (see HERSCHEL FAMILY) began 
systematic cataloguing of double stars in about 1775 and 
identified about 700 over the next decade. The 1827 
catalog of WILHELM STRUVE include 3110 pairs. Most 
astronomers of the time thought that all these were 
optical doubles because they believed that all stars had 
about the same intrinsic brightness and, therefore, that a 
pair with very different apparent brightnesses must be at 
different distances. The English polymath, John Michell, 
had, as early as 1767, suggested on statistical grounds 
that many of them must be physically bound pairs, 
because there were too many to be just change 
alignments. 

This hypothesis was confirmed in 1804 by William 
Herschel, who had been attempting to use the 5" pair 
Castor A and B to get the PARALLAX of the brighter, and 
so presumably closer, star. He found, instead, orbital 
motion and described himself as like Saul, who went out 
to seek his father’s asses and found a kingdom. That the 
orbits are elliptical, as required by Newtonian gravity, 
was established for Xi Ursae Majoris by Felix Savary in 
1827 (figure 2). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


oo 0c: ao 26 of fs 
SCALE 


Figure 2. The orbit of Xi Ursae Majoris, the first system for 
which ellipticity of the orbit was established, by F Savary in 
1827. The stars are now back in the same relative position as 
they had in about 1880. (From Russell H N, Dugan R S and 

Stewart J Q 1926 Astronomy (Boston: Ginn) p 682.) 


Herschel’s son John continued the cataloguing of 
double stars, bringing the total to more than 10 000. The 
modern inventory exceeds 100 000, but only about 1000 
of these have had their orbits fully observed, and the 
number with accurate enough orbital elements for the 
measured masses to be useful is only a few hundred. It is 
necessary to know the distance to a visual system as well 
as the orbit parameters to get meaningful masses. 

The first astrometric binaries were Sirius and 
Procyon, whose sinusoidal motion through the sky was 
traced out by Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel in the decade 
leading up to 1844. He described them as having 
invisible companions of roughly their own mass. They 
became visual binaries with the discovery of their faint 
(white dwarf) companions by Alvan G Clark in 1862 and 
Schaeberle in 1895. Many other astrometric binaries have 
since been promoted to visual systems, when improved 
observing techniques have allowed the resolution of 
smaller separations and fainter stars, often by methods of 
OPTICAL INTERFEROMETRY. 

Algol is the eye of Medusa in the constellation 
Perseus, and the name means ‘the ghoul’ or ‘the demon’. 
This suggests that its variable brightness was known to 
the medieval Arab astronomers who assigned the name. 
But the first documented report of its occasional fadings 
came from Montanari in 1669. John Goodricke 
established in 1783 that the variation is periodic, with the 
star declining to about one-third of its normal brightness 
and recovering during about 10 h out of its 68 h period. 
He suggested the cause might be dark spots on a rotating 
surface (like SUNSPOTS, but much bigger and darker) or 
partial eclipse of the star by another body. At the time 
only eclipses of the Sun, Moon and satellites of Jupiter 
had been seen, and the idea did not catch on. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The first spectroscopic binary was, again, Mizar (the 
brighter component of the pair resolved by Castelli). 
Antonia C Maury of Harvard College Observatory 
recognized that one of its absorption lines, the K feature 
of ionized calcium, was sometimes split into two 
components, with variable separation. This was 
announced in 1889 by the observatory director, William 
C Pickering, who correctly interpreted the changing 
wavelengths of the line as a Doppler shift due to the 
velocities of two stars of about the same brightness and 
temperature orbiting each other with a period of 665 
days. 

H C Vogel, in the same year, reported periodic 
wavelength shifts in the spectrum of Algol, showing it to 
be a single-lined spectroscopic binary. The cooler, red 
giant star that causes the eclipses is faint enough that the 
techniques of the time could not detect its absorption 
lines in the combined spectrum. In light of these results 
for Mizar and Algol, the existence of eclipsing binaries 
was quickly also recognized by the astronomical 
community. 

Well over 1000 spectroscopic binaries (the majority 
SBls, though this is partly a matter of how hard you 
work) have been studied at some level. Because the 
Doppler shifts we see are projections of the real orbital 
velocity along our line of sight, the orientation of the 
system must be known in order to get the stellar masses. 
Eclipsing systems are, of necessity, seen nearly edge-on, 
and the details of their light curves reveal the precise 
orientation. Thus binaries seen as both spectroscopic 
(SB2) and eclipsing systems are our main source of 
masses for systems that are too far away from us to be 
resolved as visual binaries and to have accurate distance 
determinations. 

Progress in understanding the evolution of binary 
systems necessarily awaited an adequate theory of stellar 
evolution for single stars. This was achieved in the 
decade following 1939, when it became generally 
recognized that red giants represent an evolved phase, in 
which fuel for hydrogen fusion has been exhausted at the 
center of the star. The main sequence lifetime of a star 
then has to be proportional to its fuel supply (mass) 
divided by its consumption rate (luminosity), leading to 


an approximate relation, lifetime = 10'? yr (M/Mo)~° 
(because massive stars are much brighter than little ones). 
From this soon arose the so-called Algol paradox. 
Codified by Otto Struve in 1953, the paradox 
consisted in the fact that we see large numbers of binary 
systems, mostly eclipsing ones, like Algol, in which the 
more evolved (red giant) star is the less massive one. The 
seeds of a solution were already present in a 1941 paper 
by Gerard P Kuiper, in which he pointed out the 
possibility for mass transfer between stars inherent in the 
Roche geometry. John Crawford, in 1955, suggested that 
such transfer could result in reversing the initial mass 
ratio of a close binary, so that the original secondary 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


could become the more massive star while it was still on 
the main sequence and receiving contributions from the 
original primary, evolved to a red giant configuration. 
More quantitative study appeared in the 1960 PhD 
dissertation of Donald C Morton, followed by a 
flowering of relevant work in three groups centered 
around Miroslav Plave¢ (Prague), Rudolph Kippenhahn 
(Munich) and Bohdan Paczynski (Warsaw). 

More recently, mass transfer in close binaries has 
been used to account for a wide variety of other 
unexpected combinations of properties, including BLUE 
STRAGGLERS, barium stars without technetium and 
gamma-ray bursters. 


Binary statistics 

Numbers, especially stellar masses, derived from study of 
individual binary systems help to guide our theories of 
stellar structure and evolution. In contrast, statistical 
information on binary populations can provide light on 
the processes of STAR FORMATION and the evolution of 
the binary systems themselves. 

Gerard Kuiper, the first to publish on statistical 
issues in 1935, had data on a few dozen visual binaries 
and CPM pairs and a double handful of spectroscopic, 
eclipsing systems, with a large gap in orbit period (or 
semi-major axis) between the two groups. He 
nevertheless bravely drew a dotted line between the two 
peaks and suggested that the real distribution in period or 
separation was fairly flat, meaning roughly equal 
numbers of systems per logarithmic interval, over the 
entire possible range, from the sum of the radii of the two 
stars to about 0.1 pc, beyond which the stars will be 
pulled apart by the tidal force of the galaxy and of other 
passing stars. Subsequent work has, in general, validated 
his monumental extrapolation (figure 3). 

Astrometric binaries and optical interferometry have 
done a great deal to bridge Kuiper’s period gap. Not 
surprisingly, the harder you look, the more companions 
you find, both very faint ones and ones at awkward 
separations. The period distribution in modern data is 
very broad, with a gentle peak at a few years, and wings 
extending to a few hours on one side and a few million 
years on the other. Naturally, small separations and 
periods disappear when the primary becomes a red giant, 
and large separations and long orbit periods cannot 
survive in dense clusters of stars. 

Kuiper also looked at the distribution of binary mass 
ratios, N(M>/M;), in the hope of deciding how the 
systems formed. He expected that formation by the 
fission of a single, rotating cloud would lead to 
components of nearly equal mass (M,/M, close to 1), 
while separate formation followed by capture would lead 
to the average primary having a companion a good deal 
less massive than itself, since low-mass stars are much 
commoner than high-mass stars. He focused primarily on 
single-lined spectroscopic binaries, on the grounds that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


SB2s and visual systems could be detected only when the 
stars were of nearly equal luminosity, hence nearly equal 
mass, and so were biased samples. He found a 
distribution M(M,/M,) that indeed rose toward small 
values. But his sample was clearly biased in the opposite 
sense, against systems with mass ratio near unity. 

Modern data say that the mass distribution for 
primaries of close binaries that have not yet experienced 
any mass transfer is essentially the normal initial mass 
function (IMF). The situation is less clear for the 
secondaries, there being still no large truly unbiased 
samples. Some samples show M(WM2/M;) _ rising 
monotonically to the smallest values to which the data 
are complete; others show a second peak near M/M, = 1. 
In any case the processes that might compete to form 
close binaries now include several additional 
mechanisms (fragmentation, hierarchical clustering, 
photodisintegration etc). Thus the functional form of the 
mass ratio distribution is no longer a clean test between 
two possible scenarios. 

Are the distributions of binary period and mass ratio 
different in different STELLAR POPULATIONS, and is the 
total fraction of binaries among the stars also variable? 
Probably, but our data are very limited. The faint, low- 
mass systems that make up most of the local sample are 
difficult to study at large distances and in crowded 
regions of the sky. It was thought at one time that there 


Pre-Main Sequence 


Main Sequence 


Binary Frequency 


log Period (days} 


~2 2 4 
log Sernimajor axis (AU) 


Figure 3. Distributions of semi-major axes and periods for 
solar-type main-sequence binaries (broken line) and pre-main 
sequence systems (full line—the regimes of log P = 2—3.5 and 
greater than 7.5 have not yet been properly surveyed). The 
distributions are very broad, ranging from less than a day 
(contact systems) to millions of years (systems at risk of tidal 
disruption), and peak at periods of several years to decades and 
separations of 10—100 astronomical units, the regime best 
explored with speckle interferometry and not available to 
Kuiper. (From Mathieu R D 1994 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophysics 32 469.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


were almost no binaries among the old, POPULATION II 
stars that make up the halo and globular clusters of our 
Milky Way. This was due to two kinds of selection 
effects. First, short-lived systems are long since gone, 
and, second, longer-lived ones are exceedingly difficult 
to detect. With modern photometry, one finds that the 
incidence of, for instance, W Ursae Majoris (low-mass, 
contact) binaries is about the same in many globular 
clusters as it is in the solar neighborhood, one for every 
couple of hundred main sequence stars. 

Statistics of evolved systems test our understanding 
of the processes of mass and angular momentum transfer 
and loss from the systems and the lifetimes of the 
survivors. Interesting issues include (a) the cause of the 
gap in the distribution of periods of cataclysmic variables 
between the 2 and 3 h, (b) the relative frequency of single 
and binary WOLF-RAYET STARS, (c) the numbers of 
binary and millisecond PULSARS relative to the number of 
low-mass X-RAY BINARIES that are supposed to be their 
ancestors, and (d) the numbers of x-ray binaries with 
black hole versus neutron star primaries. 

The vast majority of both visual and spectroscopic 
eclipsing binaries with well-determined orbits contain 
very ordinary kinds of stars, mostly main sequence and 
slightly evolved ones with masses between about 0.5 and 


5Mo. We badly need: 


(a) Good masses for very faint (low-mass) stars of both 
high and low metallicity, to trace out the boundary 
between true stars and brown dwarfs. 


(b) More data on stars of more than about 30M. to find 
out the maximum possible mass for a stable star 
under various conditions and how fast mass is lost 
early in the life of the star. 

(c) Good orbits for systems containing stars in short- 
lived, but interesting, evolutionary phases, like 
LUMINOUS BLUE VARIABLES, Wolf—Rayet stars, 
Cepheid variables, RR LYRAE STARS, blue stragglers 
and many others. 


Even then, serious thought and detailed modeling 
will be required, because in many cases we cannot be 
sure that the examples in binaries with periods short 
enough to be well observed are physically the same as 
seemingly similar stars seen in other contexts. In some 
cases, we are sure they are not, because the presence of a 
companion is likely to enhance mass loss, drive 
rotationally induced mixing, and make other changes 
over the life of any stars. 

Data on binary populations in other galaxies are 
quite limited, but are generally consistent with these 
being similar to the Milky Way population. For instance, 
x-ray binaries have been found in all the larger galaxies 
of the LOCAL GROUP, and novae have been identified in 
galaxies as far away as the VIRGO CLUSTER, both in 
roughly the expected numbers. Good orbits for 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


extragalactic binaries will require both the sensitivity of 
very large telescopes and the angular resolution possible 
only with adaptive optics or interferometry or from 
space. 


Inventories 

Many phenomena of stellar astronomy can be categorized 
by whether they occur only in interacting binary systems, 
preferentially in binaries, or reluctantly in binaries, and 
why. Most of the star types categorized this way below 
can be found in these volumes: 


(a) Type I: Found only 

evolutionary sequence). 
stars with well-determined masses; 
W Ursae Majoris variables; 
Beta Lyrae, W Serpentis and Algol variables; 
Zeta Aurigae stars; 
RS Canum Venaticorum stars; 
cataclysmic variables (including V 471 Tauri 
stars, novae, dwarf novae of several types, 
recurrent novae, symbiotic stars, nova-like 
variables and the magnetic DQ Herculis and AM 
Herculis variables); 
AM Canum Venaticorum stars; 
accretion-induced collapse (of white dwarfs to 
neutron stars or of neutron stars to black holes); 
x-ray sources (bright, compact, and not 
associated with rotation-powered pulsars; 
accretors can be neutron stars or black holes, 
donors of high or low mass). 

(b) Type II: Types for which some or all of the 
promising models invoke binary systems, but where 
duplicity cannot always be demonstrated 
observationally. 

blue stragglers; 

barium stars (type stars with no technetium); 
dwarf carbon stars; 

anomalous (dwarf) Cepheid stars and SX 
Phoenices stars; 

millisecond pulsars with weak magnetic fields 
(some are definitely binaries with white dwarf 
or neutron star companions); 

type Ia supernovae; 

Thorne—Zytkow objects (red giants with neutron 
star cores; none actually known); 

type Ib and Ic supernovae (apparently from 
massive progenitors, but with their hydrogen- 
rich envelopes entirely stripped off); 

gamma-ray bursters. 

(c) Type II: Favored in close binaries through effects of 

mass and angular momentum loss. 
Wolf-Rayet stars; 
Of and OBN stars; 
R Coronae Borealis and FG Sagittae stars (most 
are not known to have companions). 


in binaries (roughly in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(d) Type IV: Inhibited in close binaries by gravitational 
effects. 
habitable planets; 
OBC stars; 
extended envelopes of massive stars needed for 
standard type II supernovae. 

(e) Type V: Favored or inhibited in close binaries 
through the effects of synchronization of rotation to 
orbit period. 

BY Draconis and UV Ceti type flare stars; 
dynamo magnetic fields, stellar chromospheres 
and coronae, x-ray and radio emission star spots, 
and other indicators of stellar activity; 

Be stars; 

Delta Scuti stars; 

OB star winds; 

surface chemical peculiarities (due to diffusion) 
of types Am, Ap, Bp etc; 

surface chemical peculiarities (due to mixing 
and meridional circulation). 


Update (24 December 2001) 


Formation and statistical issues 

Fragmentation continues to be regarded as the most 
important process in the formation of close binaries. An 
important observational discovery is that, among the very 
youngest stellar populations, triples are just about as 
common as binaries. The fate of a large fraction of these 
is to lose the smallest component (which then becomes 
an isolated BROWN DWARF or EXOPLANET), leaving the 
other two stars as a somewhat closer pair than they were 
before. 

The number of binary and millisecond PULSARS, 
supposedly recycled in X-RAY BINARIES, continues to be 
much larger than the suggested progenitors can account 
for. Accretion-induced collapse, in which a white dwarf 
component is driven above the Chandrasekhar limit and 
so collapses to a NEUTRON STAR with rapid rotation and 
weak magnetic field without ever going through an X-ray 
binary phase, appears to be the most likely solution to 
this statistical mismatch. 


Evolutionary issues 

Early calculations of the evolution of close binaries were 
normally carried out under the assumption that the total 
mass and angular momentum of the system remained 
constant throughout. It has been clear for some time that 
this could not be true during late evolutionary phases 
(when single stars shed both gas and rotation in any 
case). More careful comparisons of observed properties 
of stars in binaries with such calculations show that the 
assumption of constant mass and angular momentum 
(‘conservative’ evolution) has failed even by the Algol 
phase. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The composition of the surface of the main sequence 
component of the black hole X-ray binary GRO 1655-40 
shows evidence of accretion of material processed in 
nuclear reactions in the evolution and explosion of the 
progenitor star of the black hole. This shows that core- 
collapse type SUPERNOVAE can leave BLACK HOLES, as 
well as neutron stars, as their remnants. 


Inventory issues 

At least two kinds of binary star systems are now 
suspected of being the immediate progenitors of Type Ia 
supernovae. First are pairs consisting of a WHITE DWARF 
plus a hot subdwarf, with total mass exceeding the 
Chadrasekhar limit and with orbital periods short enough 
that the stars can spiral together in less than the age of the 
universe. One of these has now been found. The other is 
the class of recurrent novae, the subset of CATACLYSMIC 
VARIABLES whose white dwarf components have masses 
just a little smaller than the Chandrasekhar limit. It has 
been shown that the explosions in these, which we see as 
novae, do not expel as much material as was accreted to 
cause the explosion. Thus the mass of the white dwarf 
increases until the star begins to collapse and then burns 
most of its mass of carbon and oxygen violently to make 
the supernova. 

The progenitors of the gamma ray bursters similarly 
now seem to include two sorts of object. One is binary 
pairs of neutron star + neutron star or neutron star + black 
hole. These probably make the bursts of gamma rays that 
last at most a few seconds. The other progenitor class is 
massive, very rapidly rotating (and perhaps binary) stars, 
whose cores collapse to rapidly rotating black holes with 
strong magnetic fields attached to their horizons or disks 
around them. These probably make the bursts that last 
many seconds to minutes, which are the sort for which X- 
ray, optical, and radio counterparts have now been found. 


Bibliography 
Appenzeller I (ed) 1997 Report of Commission 42, close 
binaries JAU Trans. 23A 


(and the corresponding reports in earlier and later volumes of 
TAU Trans. A) 


Batten H 1973 Binary and Multiple Systems of Stars (Oxford: 
Pergamon) 

Eggleton P P and Pringle J E (eds) 1983 Interacting Binaries 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Kopal Z 1959 Close Binary Systems (New York: Wiley) 

Paczynski B 1971 Evolution in close binary systems Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 10 183 

Sahade J, McCluskey G and Kondo Y (eds) 1993 The Realm of 
Interacting Binaries (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Trimble V 1983 A field guide to the close binaries Nature 303 
137 

Trimble V and Aschenbach N 2000 Astrophysics in 1999 Pub. 
Astron. Soc. Pacific 112 434-503 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binary Stars: Overview ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Trimble V and Aschenbach N 2001 Astrophysics in 2000 Pub. 
Astron. Soc. Pacific 113 1025-1114 

Trimble V and Aschenbach N 2000 Astrophysics in 2002 Pub. 
Astron. Soc. Pacific 114 in press 


Virginia Trimble 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 7 


Binary System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binary System 


As the name implies, a binary system normally consists of 
two stars, which are close together and therefore bound by 
a common gravitational field. Many binary systems have 
three or more components, however, and are often termed 
multiple stars. In many such cases there are two main 
components, additional members of the system being 
much smaller and often at considerable distance from the 
main pair. The majority of double stars are believed to be 
binaries, but observation over a period of years is needed 
to confirm their binary nature. A system whose orbital 
movement can be observed telescopically is termed a visual 
binary. 

The stars comprising a binary system are each in 
orbital motion around their common centre of mass. 
Their orbits are similar in form but different in size, that 
of the less massive component being the larger. It is 
convenient for observational purposes, however, to study 
the apparent motion of the fainter star around the brighter; 
this is termed the ‘relative orbit’. It is similar in shape to 
the actual orbits of both stars but larger than either, its 
major axis being equal to the sum of the major axes of the 
component orbits. 

The orbital periods of visual binaries are very long 
(typically between 20 and 700 years), so determination 
of their relative orbits is a slow process requiring careful 
observation of the separation and position angle of the pair, 
repeated over many decades. A few binaries of very short 
period are known, for example the stars BD 8° 4352 (1.7 
years) and 5 Equulei (5.7 years), and some of exceptionally 
long period nevertheless have well-determined orbital 
elements, for example ¢ Sculptoris (period 1192 years) and 
38 Geminorum (3190 years). 

Close binary pairs, whose separation may be as little 
as one diameter of the primary star, cannot be observed 
by visual methods but their nature can be detected by 
other means. Spectroscopic binaries reveal their nature 
by periodic fluctuations in the Doppler shift of lines in 
their spectra; from these the varying radial velocity of the 
system can be determined and, over a period of time, the 
relative masses and orbit deduced. The first spectroscopic 
binary to be identified was the brighter component of the 
visual binary Mizar, which was shown from studies of 
line-doubling in its spectrum to be itself a binary of 20.5 
days period, by Anna Maury (1866-1952) at the Harvard 
College Observatory in 1889. 

Eclipsing binaries are close binary systems for which 
the Earth happens to lie in or close to the orbital plane 
of the system. The overall brightness of the system 
varies in a very regular manner, due to the components 
periodically eclipsing each other. The form of the light 
curve repeats very accurately, but its exact shape is specific 
to the particular star system; the relative size, mass and 
brightness, and the separation of the components, can be 
deduced from it. A well-known example is Algol, which 
has a period of 2.87 days. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Astrometric binaries are very close binary systems, 
usually comprising a fairly bright star with a much fainter 
companion. The existence of the latter is revealed only 
by a slight ‘wave’ in the proper motion of the bright star, 
determined from long-term astrometric measurements. 
The first to be discovered and best-known example is Sirius 
(apparent magnitude —1.44), whose eighth magnitude 
companion was discovered by Alvan Graham Clark (1832- 
1897) in 1862. It has a period of 50.09 years. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binocular Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binocular Astronomy 


It is often supposed that anyone who means to take a 
serious interest in astronomy must acquire a large and 
expensive telescope. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. A great deal can be done with the naked eye alone, 
as is described in NAKED-EYE ASTRONOMY. It is true that a 
telescope costs a considerable amount of money, and the 
small, cheap telescopes on sale in camera shops are most 
unsatisfactory; the most that can be said for them is that 
they are slightly better than nothing at all. Luckily there 
is an alternative: obtain binoculars. 

A pair of binoculars is essentially nothing more than 
two small refracting telescopes joined together. The main 
advantage is that the observer can use both eyes instead 
of only one. The FIELD oF view will be much wider than 
that of a small astronomical telescope, and binoculars are 
handier, as they can easily be carried around. Moreover 
they give an erect image, which means they can equally 
well be used for activities such as bird-watching or looking 
at ships out to sea. The main disadvantage is that they 
have comparatively low magnification. Zoom binoculars 
can be obtained, but in general they are not satisfactory 
for astronomical observing, and in any case the maximum 
magnification is not likely to be much more than x20. 

Binoculars are classified according to their magnifica- 
tions and the diameters of their objective lenses (always 
given in millimeters). Thus 7 x 50 indicates a magnifica- 
tion of 7 with each objective lens 50 mm across; 12 x 50 
gives a magnification of 12, again with 50 mm objective 
lens, and so on. At the outset, it is very important to make 
a careful decision about just which type is to be bought. 

As with telescopes, the larger the aperture the greater 
the light-grasp, but there are hazards here. With increased 
power, the field of view becomes smaller, and the 
binoculars become heavier. If only one pair is to be 
obtained, then something around 7 x 50 is a good choice. 
The magnification is adequate, the field is pleasingly 
large, and the binoculars are light enough to be hand- 
held without any awkward shake. Once the magnification 
exceeds around x12, hand-holding is a major problem, 
and the only solution is to use some form of mounting. 

The following notes may be useful as a general guide: 


3 x 20: These binoculars are very light and can be slipped 
into one’s pocket. They have their uses, but the low 
magnification means that they are decidedly limited, 
and unless they can be bought very cheaply, they are 
probably not to be recommended. 


7x50: Binoculars of this kind are very common. They will 
show considerable detail on the Moon, for example, 
and almost endless superb star fields. For looking 
at some types of object, such as loose STAR CLUSTERS of 
the Pleiades type, they are ideal because of their large 
field of view. 


8.5 x 50: Also very suitable. The light grasp is adequate, 
and the binoculars can be comfortably hand-held. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The increased power means that more detail becomes 
available, though the field of view is noticeably 
reduced. 


11x 80: These too are common, though they are not cheap. 
The field of view is reasonably large, and the light 
grasp is excellent, though they are rather too heavy 
to be held steadily. 


12 x 50: We are now reaching the limit of comfortable 
hand-holding. One solution is to sit down and jam 
one’s elbows into one’s body. This works fairly well, 
but it is not ideal. 


With a magnification of over 12, a mounting is 
really essential. The obvious solution is a tripod. Most 
photographic shops sell binocular mounts which can be 
screwed into the top of an ordinary camera tripod, and 
this works well, though it is often necessary to perch the 
tripod on top of a platform or a solid table; otherwise you 
will have to be something of a contortionist when trying 
to observe an object high in the sky (incidentally, the same 
is true of small REFRACTING TELESCOPES, unless a right-angle 
prism is used). 

Making a mount for a pair of binoculars is fairly 
simple for anyone who is reasonably good at carpentry, 
but the main essential, steadiness, must always be borne 
in mind. What is needed is the faculty of moving the 
binoculars freely in any direction, in ALTITUDE and in 
AZIMUTH. Another solution is to buy or make a ‘neck 
mounting’, in the form of a harness which can be attached 
to the observer’s chest. This is effective, and if well made 
is not nearly so uncomfortable as might be thought. 

It is of course possible to be more ambitious, and use 
a really powerful pair of binoculars. Some observers of 
VARIABLE STARS and COMET hunters often have binoculars 
with objective lenses up to six inches across. The cost 
is very high indeed, and the mounting is all important, 
so that binoculars with objective lenses of this kind will 
certainly not be found except in the hands of very serious 
researchers. 

In short: if only one pair of binoculars is to be 
obtained, it is wise to choose a magnification of between 7 
and 10, with an aperture of around 40-60 mm. 

Selection is the first essential. One advantage of 
binoculars is that they can be tested on the spot. Check to 
make sure that both of the telescopes can be brought into 
sharp focus to produce a clear-cut image; if this cannot be 
done, reject the binoculars immediately. Check also for any 
trace of false color; this will indicate poor lens quality, and 
again the binoculars should be rejected. If possible, test 
upon a bright star, and ensure that the star can be reduced 
to a colorless pin-point of light (assuming, of course, that 
the star is a white one!). One more point is worth making 
here, though it ought to be obvious enough. As soon as 
you take the binoculars, loop the safety cord around your 
neck. If you fail to do so, then it will only bea matter of time 
before the binoculars are dropped, and a rapid descent to 
the ground will be no good to them at all. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binocular Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Next, a word of warning: never use binoculars to 
look directly at the Sun, even with a dark filter over the 
eyepiece. If you do so, then you will focus the light and 
heat on your eyes, with tragic results. It is true that Mylar 
filters over the objective lenses can be used, and it is also 
possible to project the Sun’s image onto a screen in the 
same way as is done for an ordinary telescope, but the 
results are never good, and in principle it is fair to say that 
the Sun should be avoided completely with binoculars (see 
also SUN: SAFE OBSERVATION). 

The MOON is a different matter, because it sends us 
virtually no heat. With a low power and a full moon 
you may dazzle yourself, but that is all. In any case, full 
moon is the very worst time to observe, because there are 
virtually no shadows on the lunar surface—the sunlight 
is coming straight down, so to speak, and little can be 
seen apart from the broad, dark plains still known as 
seas. The best views are obtained when the Moon is in 
the crescent, half or cious (three-quarter) stage. Look 
along the TERMINATOR—that is to say the boundary between 
the sunlit and the night hemispheres—and the craters and 
mountains will be beautifully displayed. The view alters 
from night to night, or even from hour to hour, as the angle 
of illumination changes. Acrater whichis prominent when 
on the terminator, with its floor wholly or partially filled 
with shadow, may be hard to identify when the Sun is 
high above it. Near full, the scene is dominated by the 
bright streaks or rays which are associated with a few of 
the craters, notably TYCHO (CRATER) in the Moon’s southern 
uplands. It does not take long to learn one’s way around 
the lunar surface, and binoculars are ideal for this purpose. 

The situation is not so good from the point of view 
of the planetary enthusiast because of the relatively low 
magnification. MARS, for example, will appear as nothing 
more than a small, red disk. vENUSs, which is closer to the 
Sun than we are, shows phases similar to those of the 
Moon, and during the crescent stage, either in the west 
after sunset, or in the east before dawn, the changing phase 
is easy to follow even with a magnification of no more than 
7. Venus is so bright that it can often be seen even when 
the Sun is well above the horizon; remember, however, 
not to sweep around for it—you might look at the Sun 
by mistake. Similar restrictions apply when searching for 
the elusive planet Mercury. Binoculars often show it, either 
soon after sunset or soon before sunrise. Again, never 
sweep for it with binoculars unless the Sun is completely 
below the horizon. 

JUPITER is more interesting, because binoculars will 
show all four of the large satellites: 10, EUROPA, GANYMEDE 
and caL.isto. They look like small stars close to Jupiter, 
and their movements from night to night are easy to follow. 
Saturn’s rings (see SATURN: RINGS) are below binocular range, 
though with a magnification of 10 or more it is possible 
to make out that there is something unusual about the 
planet’s shape. The two other planets, URANUS and NEPTUNE 
are available to binoculars, but they look like stars, and you 
will need a star map in order to locate them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Then of course, there are comets. I have already 
referred to those serious comet hunters who scout the 
skies regularly and have made many discoveries. A really 
sound knowledge of star patterns is essential for this (real 
experts can memorize the positions and magnitudes of 
many thousands of stars so that a newcomer—either a 
comet or a nova—can be recognized at once). A bright 
comet is an ideal binocular object, and in recent years we 
have seen two: COMET HYAKUTAKE in 1996 and COMET HALE- 
Bopp in 1997. These were both superb, with long tails and 
gleaming heads. We cannot tell when the next brilliant 
comet will appear, but there are plenty of faint ones, and 
the binocular owner armed with a good star map will be 
able to identify them. 

It is wrong to say that all stars look white. Some of 
them are colorless, but others are blue, yellow orange or 
red. Only really brilliant stars show obvious color as seen 
with the naked eye and these are mainly orange or red; 
for instance nobody can overlook the lovely warm glow 
of BETELGEUSE in ORION which contrasts so sharply with the 
pure white of Bigel in the Hunter’s foot. With fainter stars 
the colors do not show up, and it is here that binoculars 
come into their own. Consider jzCephei, in the far north of 
the sky, not too far from the Pole Star. It is so dim that it is 
very difficult to see without optical aid; turn binoculars 
toward it, however, and you will see why it has been 
nick-named the ‘Garnet star’—it has even been likened 
to a glowing coal. This is only one of the many cases of 
stars which reveal their vivid hues when observed with 
binoculars. 

Binary stars are also on view (see BINARY STARS— 
OVERVIEW). One of the best examples is ALBIREO, in Cygnus 
(the Swan). With the naked eye it looks commonplace 
enough, but binoculars show a golden yellow primary 
together with a vivid blue companion. Many binary stars 
are within binocular range, and there are also variable 
stars, many of which are orange or red. These are 
stars which fluctuate in brightness over short periods; 
binoculars make it possible to estimate their magnitudes, 
and to make really useful observations. 

Star clusters are glorious; look for example in the 
Pleiades (or Seven Sisters) in Taurus, "The Beehive’ in the 
Crab and (from the southern part of the world) the Jewel 
Box cluster in the Southern Cross. Binoculars show that the 
Milky Way (see MILKY way GALAXY), Which stretches across 
the sky from horizon to horizon, is made up of myriads of 
faint stars which appear so close together that they might 
be thought to be in danger of collision—though in fact we 
are dealing with nothing more than a line of sight effect, 
and stellar collisions very seldom occur. 

GASEOUS NEBULAE, in which stars are being formed, are 
also to be seen; look at the Great Nebulae in Orion, close to 
the three stars of the Hunter’s belt. Powerful binoculars 
even show the four stars of the Trapezium’, which are 
silhouetted against the nebulosity and are responsible for 
making it shine. Then there are a few galaxies, vast 
external star systems so remote that light takes millions 
of years to reach us. The Great Spiral in ANDROMEDA, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Binocular Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nearest of the really large galaxies, is an easy binocular 
object, though it is true that photographs taken with 
adequate telescopes are needed to bring out its spiral form. 

Binoculars are comparatively cheap, they are portable 
and they are easy to use. They can provide endless 
enjoyment, and can be also be used for serious scientific 
research. There can be absolutely no doubt that a pair of 
binoculars is much more valuable astronomically than a 
very small telescope. 


Bibliography 
Robinson L 1990 ‘Outdoor Optics’ (Lyons and Burford) 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Biot, Jean-Baptiste (1774-1862) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Biot, Jean-Baptiste (1774-1862) 


Physicist and astronomer, born in Paris, France, professor 
at the Collége de France. His most important work was on 
the polarization of light (which he correctly suggested was 
due to asymmetric molecules). With Joseph Louis Gay- 
Lussac he made in 1804 an ascent in a balloon to study 
a variety of phenomena at high altitude. Biot headed a 
commission from the Academy of Sciences to study the 
meteor shower at L’Aigle in 1803, from which two or three 
thousand pieces were recovered. In a turning point, the 
Academy, for many years stubbornly ridiculing the idea 
that meteorites fell from space, accepted Biot’s report that 
the L’Aigle shower was extraterrestrial. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Birkeland, Kristian (1868-1917) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Birkeland, Kristian (1868-1917) 


Birkeland was a Norwegian physicist, born in Oslo. In 
1900, he identified and then simulated the charged elec- 
tron—magnetic flux tube connection between the Sun and 
Earth that produces the aurora. He studied the zodiacal 
light during expeditions to the Sudan and Egypt. 
Birkeland committed suicide in a depression associated 
with the rejection of his auroral theories by his contem- 
porary established scientists, but was later fully recog- 
nized as a founder of auroral studies (his portrait is on a 
Norwegian banknote). Birkeland currents are electric cur- 
rents linking the Earth’s ionosphere with more distant 
regions, flowing along magnetic field lines. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


BiSON Network 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BiSON Network 


The telescopes of the Birmingham Solar Oscillation 
Network (BiSON) are located in East and West Australia, 
South Africa, Chile, California and Tenerife. They permit 
continuous monitoring of the radial oscillations of the Sun 
using very narrow absorption lines of potassium in the 
solar atmosphere. Absorption cells of potassium vapor 
are used in the optical path of the telescopes to measure 
the precise wavelength of solar features and from this the 
Doppler motion of the Sun’s surface can be detected to 
a precision of 1 cm s-!. These velocities are analysed to 
detect oscillations in the Sun which give quantative clues 
to the temperature and density of the Sun’s interior. 
For further information see 

http://bison.ph.bham.ac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BL Lacertae 


BL Lacertae (BL Lac or S4 2200+420) was known to be 
variable in the optical from as early as 1929, and because 
of its stellar appearance it was originally thought to be 
a VARIABLE STAR. It is located in the constellation Lacerta, 
the lizard (RA (J2000) = 22h 02’ 43.29”, DEC (J2000) = 
+42° 16’ 39.98”). Observations in the late 1960s showed it 
to have highly variable radio emission as well. 

BL Lac was found to be an extragalactic object with 
the measurement of its redshift (z = 0.069, based on the 
detection of very weak emission lines) in the early 1970s. 
During the same period it was also understood to be an 
unusual type of ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS (AGN). Thus, BL 
Lacertae is the prototype of the class of AGN known as 
BL LACERTAE OBJECTS (also called BL Lacs). Collectively with 
some quasars such as 3C273 and 3C279, they are known 
as ‘BLAZARS’. These objects are characterized as having 
bright nuclei with strongly polarized optical emission and 
large variability at all wavelengths. Their nonthermal 
radio-gamma-ray continua are thought to be emitted by 
a relativistic jet oriented close to the line of sight. BL Lac 
objects make up a small subset of AGNs, with about 350 
known at present. 

BL Lac is an important member of the class because it 
is relatively nearby, such that details can be well studied. 
The galaxy surrounding the active nucleus, or host galaxy, 
is a giant ELLIPTICAL GALAXY, typical of the host galaxies 
around other BL Lac objects. 

Radio observations show BL Lac to exhibit suPEr- 
LUMINAL MOTION, indicative of material being ejected 
at relativistic velocities from the nucleus. Recently, 
observations by the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory 
showed BL Lac to be a strong gamma-ray source, together 
with many other blazars. The rapid variability timescales 
and high luminosities observed at these energies indicate 
that the gamma-rays are produced in a very compact 
region of the jet. 

The nuclear emission in BL Lac is nonthermal 
and produces a continuum spectrum consisting of 
two components. The radio-to-ultraviolet spectrum is 
produced by synchrotron emission with peak power in 
the infrared—optical region while the x-ray-to-gamma- 
ray spectrum is produced by inverse Compton emission. 
(However, there are other possible explanations for this 
emission which are a subject of current debate.) These 
two components are present in all BL Lac objects. 

BL Lac objects, as a class, are characterized by optical 
spectra which are featureless or which have extremely 
weak lines (less than 5 A equivalent width). This property 
makes the determination of their distances difficult. BL 
Lac itself is no exception. Recently, however, strong, 
broad and variable emission lines (e.g. H-alpha, equivalent 
width = 7.3A, luminosity ~2x 10" ergcm~?s~!) appeared 
in the spectrum of BL Lac. Current thinking is that the 
lines appear when the variable continuum emission is low. 
Furthermore, the presence of emission lines indicates the 
presence of a radiation field external to the jet, which may 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


play an important role in the jet energetics (providing seed 
photons for the inverse Compton emission responsible for 
the gamma-rays). 


Bibliography 

Catanese M et al 1997 Detection of gamma rays with 
E > 100 MeV from BL Lacertae Astrophys. J. 480 562-7 

Pesce J E, Falomo R and Treves A 1995 Environmental 
properties of BL Lac objects Astron. J. 110 1554-63 

Sambruna R M, Ghisellini G, Hooper E, Kollgaard 
R I, Pesce J E and Urry C M 1999 ASCA and 
contemporaneous ground-based observations of the 
BL Lacertae objects 1749+096 and 2200+420 (BL Lac) 
Astrophys. J. 515 140-52 

Urry C M and Padovani P 1995 Unified schemes for radio- 
loud active galactic nuclei Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 107 
803-45 

Vermeulen R C, Ogle P M, Tran H D, Browne IW A, Cohen 
MH, Readhead ACS, Taylor G B and Goodrich R W 
1995 When is BL Lac not a BL Lac? Astrophys. J. Lett. 
452 L5-8 


Joseph E Pesce 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BL Lacertae Objects 


BL Lacertae objects are an enigmatic group of ACTIVE 
GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGN) characterized by compact, flat- 
spectrum radio sources, nearly featureless and polarized 
optical continua, very luminous high-energy radiation 
(e.g. some BL Lacs are the only celestial detections at TeV 
energies; Macomb et al 1995) and rapid variability in all 
observed wavebands. In recent years, BL Lacs have been 
grouped with some quasars into the ‘BLAzaAr’ class, which 
includes BL Lacs, flat-spectrum radio quasars, highly 
polarized quasars and optically, violently variable quasars. 
It is the absence of high equivalent width (typically W, < 
5 A) emission lines which separates BL Lacs from the 
other blazar subclasses. A significant dilution of stellar 
absorption lines by a non-thermal continuum (typically a 
reduction of the Ca II 4000 A ‘break’ by a factor of >1.5) 
separates BL Lacs from other low-power radio galaxies. 

The absence of high-contrast emission and/or 
absorption lines also means that some BL Lacs have 
unknown REDSHIFTS, causing large uncertainties in their 
intrinsic properties. In fact, complete redshifts are not 
yet available for any flux-limited sample of these objects. 
Adding to the enigma of BL Lacs is that the class is often 
defined using operational ‘negatives’; e.g., a BL Lac is 
an AGN which lacks strong emission or absorption lines. 
Defining membership in the BL Lac class using the absence 
of spectral lines can make membership dependent on 
the quality of the observational material in hand so that 
some quasars have been misidentified as BL Lacs on the 
basis of either poor-quality optical spectra or inadequate 
wavelength coverage (Antonucci and Ulvestad 1985). 
Also, relative variability between continuum and line- 
emitting regions can mean that an object might meet the 
‘featureless’ criterion required for BL Lacs at one time but 
not at others (e.g. PKS 0521-365 and BL Lac itself, both 
of which have had high equivalent-width Ha emission 
appear in their spectra on some occasions; Stickel and 
Kuhr 1993; Vermeulen et al 1995). This leads to additional 
uncertainty in defining samples of BL Lacs for statistical 
studies. 

This class of AGN is named for the first known 
example, BL LACERTAE, Which, as the naming convention 
indicates, was discovered originally as a variable star. BL 
Lac was recognized to be a luminous radio source by 
Schmitt (1968), shown to have faint ‘fuzz’ surrounding its 
point source consistent with an ELLIPTICAL GALAXY at low 
redshift by Adams (1974) and proven to be extragalactic 
from the redshift of its ‘fuzz’ by Oke and Gunn (1974). 
Although one other ‘variable star’ was shown to be a 
BL Lac object (AP Libra), the early years of BL Lac 
research were dominated by studies of objects discovered 
as compact, flat-spectrum and time-variable radio sources. 


Radio-loud BL Lacs (RBLs) 

Approximately 75 BL Lacs have been discovered owing 
to their radio emission, including 37 in the 1 Jy sample of 
the radio-brightest BL Lacs in the sky (Stickel et al 1991). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


New large-angle sky surveys conducted with the very 
LARGE ARRAY are likely to contain several hundred more BL 
Lacs. No radio-quiet BL Lac Object has yet been discovered 
(Stocke et al 1990). Very-long-baseline interferometry of 
radio-selected BL Lacs (RBLs) has discovered that a large 
fraction (11 of 12 BL Lacs investigated by 1994; Gabuzda 
et al 1994) exhibit apparent SUPERLUMINAL MOTION, although 
at systematically lower velocities than for superluminal 
quasars (Cohen 1989). That superluminal motion should 
be observed in at least a few BL Lac objects is a 
natural prediction of the Blandford and Rees (1978) 
‘beaming model’ for BL Lacs, in which the highly variable 
continuum emission from a relativistically moving ‘jet’ 
of particles ejected from an AGN (Begelman et al 1984) 
is ‘beamed’ in the direction of jet motion owing to the 
relativistic aberration of starlight effect. Lorentz factors 
y as high as 40 have been inferred from this superluminal 
motion (see figure 1), although more typical values are 
y ~ 5-10 (Gabuzda et al 1994). 

The combination of aberration and Doppler effect due 
to relativistically moving emission regions can brighten 
the observed jet luminosity Lo; = 5’Lo enormously, 
where 

5=[y( - Bcosé)]". (1) 


6 is termed the ‘Doppler factor’, 6 is the ‘viewing angle’, 
the angle between the line of sight and the direction of 
emitting-particle motion, Lo is the unbeamed, intrinsic 
jet luminosity, 8 = v/c and y = (1 — f?)"/?. The 
exponent p is, in most cases, >1 but its exact value 
depends on the physical structure of the emitting region 
(see appendix B of Urry and Padovani, 1995 for details); 
typically p = 2+ or3+<a in the cases of a continuous jet 
or discrete emitting blobs respectively, whose rest frame 
emission is isotropic with a power-law spectrum of the 
form f(v) ~ v~*. The Doppler factor is a strong function 
of viewing angle, especially for y > 5 (see figure 2), so that, 
for typical values of the exponent p, relativistic beaming 
can boost the source output by a factor of several hundred. 
Doppler factors for BL Lacs have been inferred both from 
the observed luminosity functions and from details of 
the radio structure of BL Lacs compared with the same 
quantities for Fanaroff and Riley (1974) type 1 (FR-1) radio 
galaxies, the suspected ‘parent population’ of BL Lacs 
(see ‘Parent populations’ below). Typical values obtained 
are y ~ 5-10, although much larger values cannot be 
conclusively ruled out in some cases. 

Thus, an AGN viewed from a direction nearly along 
the extension of its jet will have a spectral energy 
distribution (SED) dominated by this ‘beamed’ continuum 
radiation. There is overwhelming evidence that the 
emission mechanism in jets is incoherent synchrotron 
emission at lower energies and inverse-Compton emission 
at higher energies (the exact demarcation between 
emission mechanisms varies from object to object but 
is typically 0.1-10 keV; see Urry and Padovani 1995; 
Ulrich et al 1997; figure 5). Also, because this emission 
emerges from a very tiny region whose viewing angle can 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. The properties of subclasses of BL Lacertae objects. 


I. X-ray loud BL Lacs (XBLs) 
e Low redshifts (< 0.6) and luminosities 


e FR-1 (Fanaroff & Riley type 1) radio morphologies and power levels 


e Weak optical absorption lines 


e Weakly variable optically (6m < 1 mag) 


e Weakly optically polarized (< 5%) 


(V/Vmax) < 0.5 
Most XBLs are HBLs (see below) 


II. Radio loud BL Lacs (RBLs) 


e Many have ‘preferred’ position angles of polarization 
Relatively weak high energy (inverse-Compton) emission 


e Mixture of high and low-redshift and luminosity objects 
e Mixture of FR-1 AND FR-2 (‘classical doubles’) radio morphologies and power levels 
e Many possess weak optical emission lines 


e Some highly variable optically (5m > 1 mag) 
e Some possess high (> 10%) and highly variable optical polarization 
e Relatively strong inverse-Compton emission 


e (V/Vmax) > 0.5 
e Most RBLs are LBLs (see below) 


III. Low-energy peaked BL Lacs (LBLs) 


e Spectral energy distribution peaks in the IR 


IV. High-energy peaked BL Lacs (HBLs) 


e Spectral energy distribution peaks in the UV/x-ray 


Papparent 


Viewing angle, 0 


Figure 1. The apparent velocity relative to the speed of light Bapp versus angle to the line of sight 6 for an object approaching at 
relativistic speed. Different curves correspond to different Lorentz factors y. Note that Bapp is essentially independent of y at large 
angles. From Urry and Padovani (1995), copyright Astronomical Society of the Pacific, reproduced with permission from the authors. 


change rapidly, the BL Lac SED can be highly variable on 
short timescales («1 day; Doxsey et al 1983; Moore et al 
1985), highly polarized owing to a small-scale ordering of 
magnetic fields (see compilation in Angel and Stockman 
1980) as well as overwhelm any isotropic radiation from 
the AGN nuclear or near-nuclear region (e.g. broad or 
narrow emission line clouds in the optical—-UV, accretion 
disk emission in the UV or high-energy coronal emission in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the hard x-ray). Thus, in the ‘beaming model’, the BL Lac 
SED is dominated in all observed wavebands by beamed 
jet emission. 

The very rapid variability of BL Lac (and other blazar) 
radio emission sets a maximum size based on light- 
travel arguments (i.e. a size smaller than the distance 
traversed by light during the variability timescale) and 
thus a minimum photon density for the synchrotron- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


C pe te Tee. Tl 4 

30 y= 15 4 

susie mane y = 10 a 

2 nnn nnn y=5 4 

© E 4 

i i caches yae 4 

M a Ex 

° 20 a 

© [3 te le 4 

aoa) Le. 4 

us 15 rf + 

as L _ 4 

2, + a 

4 | L | 

° 10 4 

a c BE 4 

5 |L i =a 

E 0 n 4 

E 7 5 a 

ec 2 ties = fae tae taal 

0) 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Viewing angle, 0 


Figure 2. The dependence of the Doppler factor 5 on the angle to the line of sight 6. Different curves correspond to different Lorentz 
factors y. The expanded scale on the inset shows the angles for which 6=1. From Urry and Padovani (1995), copyright Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific, reproduced with permission from the authors. 


emitting region which would create far more x-ray photons 
by the inverse-Compton process than is observed. This 
‘Compton catastrophe’ (Hoyle et al 1966) leads to the 
conclusion that the blazar emission regions must be 
moving relativistically so the light we observe is not 
emitted isotropically and the variabililty timescales appear 
shortened. The ratio of predicted to observed inverse- 
Compton emission sets a lower limit on the Doppler factor, 
6 (cf equation (1)), which can explain this deficiency (Jones 
et al 1974). A similar argument based on y-ray variability 
of blazars leads to 6 > 6 (Maraschi et al 1994), while 
the Compton catastrophe requires similar or even larger 
values of y. Multiwavelength monitoring of BL Lac objects 
and blazars has been instrumental in proving that the 
high-energy (MeV to TeV) emission mechanism is inverse- 
Compton scattering within a relativistically moving jet 
although the location of the seed photons for this process is 
still debatable (Ulrich et al 1997). This type of observation 
has the potential of probing jet physics not decipherable 
otherwise. 


X-ray loud BL Lacs (XBLs) 

Because of the advent of satellite x-ray observatories, 
~200 new BL Lacs have been discovered owing to their 
substantial high-energy luminosities, including 43 BL Lacs 
discovered in the Einstein Extended Medium Sensitivity 
Survey (EMSS; Morris et al 1991; Rector et al 2000). The 
vast RosaT databases (all-sky survey and multitude of 
pointed observations) contain several hundred more BL 
Lacs that are just starting to become identified (e.g. Bade 
et al 1998). These new samples are beginning to show 
that the XBLs and RBLs are probably the extremes of a 
single population of BL Lacs (e.g. Laurent-Muelheisen et 
al 1998). However, there is also considerable evidence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


against this unification because, while XBLs share many 
of the qualities of RBLs described above, there are also 
significant differences between these two types including 
the following (see table 1 summary). 


(1) Significantly higher redshifts have been measured 
for RBLs (e.g. (z) * 0.6 for the 1 Jy sample; Rector and 
Stocke 2000; (z) ~ 0.3 for the EMSS; Rector et al 2000). 
Not suprisingly, many high radio power objects are found 
in RBL samples but none is found among XBLs. Also, 
for complete samples, (V / Vmax) = 0.61 + 0.05 for RBLs (1 
Jy sample; Stickel et al 1991) and (V/Vmax) = 0.40 + 0.05 
for XBLs (EMSS sample; Rector et al 2000). Because the 
(V/ Vmax) test allows a simple assessment of cosmological 
evolution using complete samples, the inference from 
these mean values is that RBLs were numerous and/or 
more luminous in the past than now and XBLs less so. For 
reference, (V/Vimax) = 0.5 + (12N)~'? is the expectation 
value for a complete, flux-limited sample of objects that 
shows no evolution (where N is the number of objects in 
the sample). 

(2) Most BL Lacs show compact, distorted radio mor- 
phologies consistent with a highly beamed object. How- 
ever, some RBLs exhibit extended radio morphologies of 
high-power ‘classical doubles’ (Fanaroff and Riley 1974 
type 2 sources; FR-2s), commensurate with the radio 
power of their extended (and so presumably ‘unbeamed’) 
radio power levels (Kollgaard et al 1992; Rector and Stocke 
2000). In contrast, XBLs show extended radio morpholo- 
gies and power levels of low-power (FR-1) radio sources. 
Figure 3 shows examples of RBL and XBL radio structure. 

(3) The optical spectra of RBLs and XBLs are 
systematically different in detail. While both are nearly 
‘featureless’, XBLs often show weak absorption lines 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MS 1051.7+4946 IPOL 1425.000 MHZ B-Array 


I I I I 
49 31 00P- 0 4 
Q Oo 
30 45}— 4 
30/- 4 
e 
§ 15|— ¢ 5 ; 4 
F3 ° 
— 00}— 4 
4 
z 
5 
So 2945+ -| 
a 
30/- 4 
15}— oO 
3 
o0/- 4 
Qo 9 fa) 
i) 
og ase! l l l Qa Le | 
10 53 50 48 38 


46 44 42 40 
RIGHT ASCENSION (J2000) 


0048-097 IPOL 1425.000 MHZ 
-09 28 50[— I l 4 


55);— 


29 00/— 


DECLINATION (J2000) 


20% 7 
| | | | 
00 50 42.0 40.5 


41.5 41.0 
RIGHT ASCENSION (J2000) 


Peak flux = 5.3849E-01 JY/BEAM 
Levs = 5.3849E-02 *( 0.005, 0.010, 0.020, 
0.050, 0.100, 0.200, 0.500, 1.000, 2.000, 
5.000, 10.00) 


Figure 3. VLA radio maps for representative BL Lac objects. MS 1051.7+4946 (an XBL shown at left; Rector et al 1999) has an extended 
radio power (1074 W Hz7!) and morphology typical of FR-1s (in this case the morphology of a head-tail radio galaxy). In contrast, 
some RBLs have extended structures which are much too luminous to be FR-1s and extended radio morphologies which resemble bent 
classical doubles (e.g. the RBL 1 Jy 0048-097, shown at right, has an extended radio power of 107°? W Hz71; Rector and Stocke 2000). 


in their spectra (Morris et al 1991) consistent with an 
underlying older population of stars, as expected from 
deep optical imaging which reveals giant elliptical galaxies 
surrounding the BL Lac nucleus (Wurtz et al 1996; Urry et 
al 1999). While the closer RBLs are also in giant ellipticals 
(Wurtz et al 1996), the nature of the host galaxies of z > 0.7 
RBLs is not known. It is the spectra of these more distant 
RBLs that often show weak emission lines in their spectra, 
unlike the XBLs. As with item (2), the weak emission 
lines in RBLs suggest a closer relationship between some 
RBLs and other blazar classes (e.g. the flat spectrum radio 
quasars) than do the XBLs and lower-z RBLs. Examples 
of high signal-to-noise ratio optical spectra of BL Lacs are 
shown in figure 4. 

(4) While almost all BL Lac objects have overall 
SEDs which are very simple compared with quasars in 
exhibiting an overall parabolic shape with no signs of 
dust or accretion disk emission, some BL Lacs have SEDs 
which peak in the infrared (so-called ‘low-energy-peaked’ 
BL Lacs or LBLs) while others peak in the UV and x-ray 
(‘high-energy-peaked’ BL Lacs or HBLs; Sambruna et al 
1996; Padovani and Giommi 1995). Most RBLs are LBLs 
and most XBLs are HBLs. Further, RBLs exhibit broadband 
SEDs which more closely match other blazar classes than 
XBLs (e.g. Brinkmann et al 1996). Examples of LBL and 
HBL SEDs are shown in figure 5. 

(5) While RBLs have polarized flux fractions as high as 
other blazars, XBLs are more modestly polarized (Jannuzi 
et al 1994). Moreover, RBL polarizations vary considerably 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in both percentage and position angle, sometimes on 
very short timescales (<1 day; Moore et al 1985). Quite 
surprisingly, many XBL polarization vectors are quasi- 
stationary over long time periods (months to years; 
Jannuzi et al 1994). 


The above similarities and differences between these 
types of BL Lacs are not easily explicable by means 
of a single, easily understood model. Several items, 
particularly the XBL trait of stable polarization position 
angles, strongly suggest a viewing-angle difference 
wherein XBLs are viewed further off the jet outflow axis 
than RBLs. However, the difference between the SED 
peaks of HBLs and LBLs is much too large to be determined 
by viewing angle differences alone if y ~ 3-5 for BL 
Lacs. Further, since the emission line and extended 
radio luminosities, redshift distributions and evolutionary 
trends for these objects should be independent of viewing 
angle, differences in these observables between RBLs and 
XBLs are not easily explained with a simple viewing-angle 
hypothesis either. 

For these and other reasons, models modifying the 
viewing-angle hypothesis have been proposed. Padovani 
and Giommi (1995) have suggested that XBLs simply 
possess a different high-energy cutoff in their electron 
energy distributions to RBLs. However, this model 
ignores orientation, which, as discussed above, is clearly 
important in BL Lac objects. | Georganopolous and 
Marscher (1998) have devised a two-parameter model in 
which the observed properties of BL Lacs can be explained 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MS 0737.9+7441 
z = 0.314 


rr 
Ww 
yyy Wid 


Vaal ly 


Ca IL 
G band 


oO 
TT 


3x10 
| ss 
25x10 ° © x 
t °o © 
L N g 
| ® i 
ee © 
246 ® 
2x10 = = 
i io} 
L Ac 3 
2 16 | 
1.5x10 
| a f\ \ As, 
HN) af eM a) Vasa attuned «aca 
VATE MV eth mA A Par, 4 
7 | | \ f (ie WTe WY “ined rad , 
o” 
17 
5x10 - 
Oni : : fag c 
3500 4000 4500 5000 


Jaye 


Q bed 
3500 4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500 7000 


1 1 
Palomar 5m 


foaig 


boi 


an 

Lt, Vad Oe 

‘a! Www J} bp . 
PY nny 
| Va 


potiriritiris 


wnatey 
tol 


area 


@ | 


Mg b 
Na D 
iti 


wit 


Fa On 
7500 8000 8500 9000 


T r T r = 
S4 1823+568 
MMTO J 
+t J 
Xe} 
S J 
fo} fel 
iL J 
N 
8 pes | 
° J 
Ha aay un, A Pg abled delve ay el 
! "\w Ny Ii fa iy eam Wy roar Ay ny \ Why 
6 | ane 
~ 8 
n n L n L 4 | 
5500 6000 6500 7000 7500 


Figure 4. Representative optical spectra of BL Lac objects from the Multiple Mirror Telescope Observatory (MMTO) and from the 
Palomar 5 m. The spectrum of the XBL MS 0737.9+7441 (shown at top; Morris et al 1991) has only weak absorption features, diluted by 
a luminous nonthermal continuum. The spectrum of the RBL $4 1823+568 (shown at bottom; Rector and Stocke 2000) exhibits weak 
but moderately luminous emission lines. A few XBL and RBL spectra remain completely featureless despite heroic efforts to detect 


either emission or absorption lines. 


by both the orientation and the electron kinetic luminosity 
of the jet. Their model can fit much of the data described 
above; however, it too is not without problems (e.g. 
Giommi et al 1999). 


‘Parent populations’ 

Given that BL Lac objects are thought to be dominated 
by relativistically-beamed and Doppler-boosted radiation 
from an outwardly moving jet seen nearly on axis, one 
might ask, ‘what would such an object look like well away 
from the jet outflow axis, where the effects of beaming are 
negligible?’ Such objects are termed the BL Lac ‘parent 
population’. Clues concerning the parent population of 
BLLacs primarily come from emission thought be isotropic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(i.e. extended optical light from the ‘host’ galaxy, emission- 
line regions or extended radio emission) or from the BL Lac 
space density and redshift evolution. 

The first identification of the ‘parents’ of BL Lacs came 
from the observed local space density of BL Lacs (Schwartz 
and Ku 1983). BL Lacs are simply too numerous in the 
local universe to be any other type of AGN than ‘beamed’ 
low-power radio galaxies (FR-1s). That is, BL Lacs at 
Ly > 10“ erg s~' have space densities of 10~-? Gpc™? 
(Morris et al 1991) while FR-1 radio galaxies have space 
densities of 10-° Gpc~, easily providing enough ‘parents’ 
for BL Lacs. Higher power FR-2 radio sources and 
Seyfert galaxies are actually less numerous than BL Lacs 
in the nearby Universe, ruling them out as parents. Urry 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T ] T ] T T ] T 
48 
Is we eecce a 
5 46 }- Seen = 
V2) = = 
ot) L . J 
3 L é ss | 
—— 
% 44 }— ba o oD om * ooooo00 om 
pom go o 
Z | a 
= | a 
xo) L J 
42 4 
Fa © 0537-441 (LBL) 
[fa Sa o Mrk 421 (HBL) | 
40 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 
10 15 20 25 
log v [Hz] 


Figure 5. The SEDs of a typical RBL (PKS 0537-441) and a typical XBL (Mrk 421). RBL SEDs peak in the infrared—optical region (and 
are so-called ‘low-energy-peaked’ BL Lacs or LBL~!) with extremely luminous inverse-Compton emission at high energy while XBL 
SEDs peak in the UV-x-ray region (and are ‘high-energy-peaked’ BL Lacs or HBLs) and have relatively weaker inverse-Compton 
emission. From Urry & Padovani (1995), copyright Astronomical Society of the Pacific, reproduced with permission from the authors. 


and Shafer (1984) extended these studies significantly by 
constructing theoretical luminosity functions for ‘beamed’ 
objects, which showed that the luminosity function of 
a beamed population is flatter than that of the parent 
population. Subsequent papers by Urry and collaborators 
(see summary in Urry and Padovani 1995) used these 
theoretical luminosity functions to build a plausibility 
argument that BL Lacs are beamed FR-1 radio galaxies. 
Their work also suggests that only modest values of y ~ 3- 
5 are required to ‘boost’ the luminosity function of FR-1s 
into the observed BL Lac luminosity function. 

Very similar ranges of y are also obtained from studies 
of BL Lac radio emission from ‘core dominance’ values 
(defined as the ratio of core to extended flux). BL Lacs 
are observed to have much higher core dominance values 
than FR-1s (1-30 for BL Lacs compared with 0.01—1 for FR- 
1s; see Wardle et al 1984, who first applied this method), 
which implies a Doppler factor 6 ~ 30 and thus viewing 
angles of a few degrees for Lorentz factors of y ~ 5- 
10. However, some high-z RBLs have much higher core 
dominance values (>>1000; Rector and Stocke 2000) and 
so are not easily accommodated by this picture. Further, 
while all XBLs have extended, and thus unbeamed, radio 
power levels consistent with being FR-1s, only half of the 1 
Jy RBLsample are even plausibly FR-1s on the basis of their 
extended radio power levels; the other 50% of RBLs are 
too luminous to be FR-1s (Kollgaard et al 1992; Rector and 
Stocke 2000). Since FR-1 radio galaxies also lack luminous 
emission lines in their optical spectra, a combination of 
extended radio power levels and emission line properties 
suggests that only half (primarily the lower-z half) of the 1 
Jy RBLs are plausibly FR-1s. Also, (V/ Vmax) = 0.42 + 0.05 
for FR-1s (Urry and Padovani 1995) matches XBLs but not 
RBLs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Optical imaging of host galaxies of BL Lacs (e.g. Wurtz 
et al 1996; Urry et al 1999) show convincingly that almost 
all BL Lacs have giant elliptical galaxies as ‘hosts’, which 
is generally consistent with the beamed FR-1 hypothesis. 
However, these BL Lac hosts may be a bit too faint as a class 
(Wurtz et al 1996) and in environments too poor (Wurtz et 
al. 1997) to match FR-1s precisely (FR-1s are often found 
in very rich clusters whereas BL Lacs are not). This slight 
inconsistency might be remedied if, for some reason, BL 
Lacs that are associated with the brightest cluster galaxies 
in rich clusters were being overlooked (i.e. misclassified as 
something else). 

In summary, XBLs have characteristics entirely 
consistent with being beamed FR-1s, but only about half 
of all RBLs are consistent with being beamed FR-1s. The 
remaining, primarily high-z, RBLs are more consistent 
with being beamed FR-2s. 


Are some BL Lacs gravitationally lensed quasars? 
A continuing annoyance, and a contentious topic, of BL 
Lac research is whether or not gravitational ‘MICROLENSING’ 
plays a part in the appearance of some BL Lac objects. 
Microlensing is caused by GRAVITATIONAL LENSING of a 
background source by a foreground star or group of 
stars, creating multiple images that are microarcseconds in 
separation. As such, microlensing preferentially amplifies 
the brightness of smaller regions (down to the size of 
the lens itself) compared with more extended regions. 
Microlensing is suspected in the case of several BL Lac 
objects (see, e.g., Schneider et al 1992, p 433) because it 
can create one of the basic observational signatures of 
BL Lac objects: the very-low-contrast emission lines. In 
this scenario, the non-thermal continuum emission region 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of a relatively normal background quasar is microlensed 
and amplified by foreground stars (e.g. in an intervening 
galaxy), thereby ‘swamping’ the emission lines and 
creating the appearance of a BL Lac. 

It is now generally accepted that most, if not all, 
BL Lacs, are not microlensed background quasars (a 
hypothesis proposed by Ostriker and Vietri 1985, 1990). 
Still, over the years there have been several individual 
cases identified that are suspicious in this regard, of which 
AO 0235+164 is a famous example. This BL Lac is unusual 
in having two foreground Mg II absorption lines in its 
spectrum which match the redshifts of galaxies close on 
the sky to the BL Lac (e.g. Yanny et al 1989). The fast time 
variability of the HI 21 cm absorption line associated with 
one of these Mg II absorbers (Wolfe et al 1978) has not been 
explained satisfactorily using standard interpretations 
but is explicable using gravitational lensing scenarios. 
Currently there is only one confirmed case of a lensed BL 
Lac, the ‘smallest Einstein ring’ source B2 0218+357, which 
shows a compact ring from macrolensing. However, to 
this date no individual BL Lac has been proven to be due to 
a microlensing event. However, circumstantial evidence 
continues to arise; e.g., as Stocke and Rector (1997) recently 
noted, the 1 Jy RBL sample has a large excess of large 
equivalent width foreground Mg II absorbers as compared 
with quasars, a correlation which, if real, can be accounted 
for easily only in a microlensing scenario. 


Conclusions 

While BL Lacertae objects represent a small fraction of all 
AGN known, they are the only class of AGN that appear 
to have emission that is dominated at all wavebands by 
relativistically beamed jet emission. Therefore, BL Lacs 
routinely exhibit several unusual properties that are not 
common among AGN in general, including luminous 
emission at all wavelengths (from radio to y-ray), 
apparent superluminal motion, high and rapidly variable 
continuum polarization, rapid time variability (especially 
at radio, x-ray and y-ray frequencies), and nearly 
featureless UV, optical and near-IR spectra. Relativistic 
beaming is an essential ingredient in explaining the 
observed properties of BL Lacs. However, it has also 
become clear that a relativistically beamed jet viewed at 
different angles is insufficient by itself to explain both 
the diversity of BL Lac properties and the differences 
between BL Lacs and any proposed ‘parent population’. 
Therefore, BL Lacs remain a fascinating area for future 
astrophysical research, not only because these AGN offer a 
unique opportunity to scrutinize our understandings of jet 
physics, but also because they remain the most enigmatic 
class of AGN over 25 yr after their discovery. 


Bibliograhy 

Adams T F 1974 Astrophys. J. 188 463 

Angel J R P and Stockman H S 1980 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 8 321 

Antonucci R J and Ulvestad J S 1985 Astrophys. J. 294 158 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bade N, Beckmann V, Douglass NG, Barthel P D, Engels D, 
Cordis L, Nass P and Voges W 1998 Astron. Astrophys. 
334 459 

Begelman M C, Blandford R D and Rees MJ 1984 Rev. Mod. 
Phys. 56 255 

Blandford R D and Rees M J 1978 Pittsburgh Conf. on BL 
Lacs ed A M Wolfe (Pittsburgh, PA: University of 
Pittsburgh) p 328 

Brinkmann W, Siebert J, Kollgaard R I and Thomas H-C 
1996 Astron. Astrophys. 313 356 

Cohen M H 1989 BL Lac Objects ed L Maraschi, T Maccacaro 
and M-H Ulrich (Heidelberg: Springer) p 13 

Doxsey R et al 1983 Astrophys. J. Lett. 264 L43 

Fanaroff B L and Riley J M 1974 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
167 31P 

Gabuzda D C, Mullan C M, Cawthorne T V, Wardle J F C 
and Roberts D H 1994 Astrophys. J. 435 140 

Georganopolous M and Marscher A P 1998 Astrophys. J. 
506 621 

Giommi P, Menna M T and Padovani P 1999 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 310 465 

Hoyle F RJ, Burbidge G R and Sargent W L W 1966 Nature 
209 751 

Jannuzi B T, Smith P S and Elston R 1994 Astrophys. J. 428 
130 

Jones T W, O’Dell S Land Stein W A 1974 Astrophys. J. 188 
353 

Kollgaard R I, Wardle J F C, Roberts D H and Gabuzda D 
C 1992 Astron. J. 104 1687 

Laurent-Mueheisen S A et al 1998 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 118 
127 

Macomb D J, Akerlof C W and Aller H D 1995 Astrophys. 
J. 449 L99 

Maraschi L et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 435 L91 

Moore R Let al 1985 Astrophys. J. 260 415 

Morris S L et al 1991 Astrophys. J. 380 49 

Oke J B and Gunn J E 1974 Astrophys. J. Lett. 189 L5 

Ostriker J P and Vietri M 1985 Nature 318 446 

Ostriker J P and Vietri M 1990 Nature 344 45 

Padovani P and Giommi P 1995 Astrophys. J. 444 567 

Rector T A and Stocke J T 2000 Astron. J. submitted 

Rector T A, Stocke J T and Perlman ES 1999 Astrophys. J. 
516 145 

Rector T A, Stocke J T, Perlman E S, Morris S L and Gioia I 
M 2000 Astron. J. at press 

Sambruna R, Maraschi L and Urry C M 1996 Astrophys. J. 
463 444 

Schmitt J 1968 Nature 218 663 

Schneider P, Ehlers J and Falco E E 1992 Gravitational Lenses 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Schwartz D A and Ku W H-M 1983 Astrophys. J. 266 459 

Stickel M and Kuhr H 1993 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 97 483 

Stickel M et al 1991 Astrophys. J. 374 431 

Stocke J T and Rector T A 1997 Astrophys. J. Lett. 489 L17 

Stocke J T et al 1990 Astrophys. J. 348 141 

Ulrich M-H, Maraschi L and Urry C M 1997 Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 35 445 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


BL Lacertae Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Urry C M, Falomo R, Scarpa R, Pesce J E, Treves A and 
Giovalisco M 1999 Astrophys. J. 512 88 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Urry C M and Padovani P 1995 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 107 
803 

Urry C M and Shafer R A 1984 Astrophys. J. 280 569 

Vermeulen R C et al 1995 Astrophys. J. Lett. 452 L5 

Wardle J F C, Moore R Land Angel J R P 1984 Astrophys. J. 
279 93 

Wolfe A M et al 1978 Astrophys. J. 222 752 

Wurtz R, Stocke J T, Ellingson E and Yee H K C 1997 
Astrophys. J. 480 547 

Wurtz R, Stocke J T and Yee H K C 1996 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 
103 109 

Yanny B, York D G and Gallagher J S 1989 Astrophys. J. 338 
735 


John T Stocke and Travis A Rector 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blaauw, Adriaan (1914— ) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Blaauw, Adriaan (1914— ) 


Dutch astronomer, worked at Leiden, Yerkes and 
Groningen, where he built up the Kapteyn Astronomical 
Laboratory to concentrate on galactic structure. He 
himself studied the motions of star clusters and 
associations, runaway stars’ (ejected from a close double 
star when one of them explodes as a supernova), star 
formation and the cosmic distance scale. Blaauw led the 
foundation of the European Southern Observatory, of 
which he was Director General in the years 1970-1974. 
He was President of the International Astronomical 
Union in the years 1976-1979. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black Drop 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Black Drop 


An optical phenomenon observed at the beginning and 
end of transits of Venus across the Sun’s disk in which the 
dark silhouette of Venus, having just wholly passed onto 
the Sun’s disk at one limb, or being just about to make 
contact with the opposite limb, is seen to be ‘connected’ 
to the limb by a narrow dark ‘bridge’. This bridge is the 
so-called black drop. It was probably first observed at 
the transit of 1761; Mikhail Lomonsov concluded that it 
signified the presence of an atmosphere, and it is indeed 
caused by the refraction of sunlight through Venus’s 
atmosphere. It has to be allowed for when timings are 
made of transits. Failure to appreciate this reduced the 
accuracy of early measurements of the solar parallax (from 
which the Earth—Sun distance is derived) made by timing 
transits of Venus from different locations on the Earth’s 
surface. However, there may be a subjective aspect to the 
appearance of the black drop, for it has occasionally been 
reported at transits of Mercury, which has only the most 
tenuous of atmospheres. 


See also: transit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black Eye Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Black Eye Galaxy 


Popular name for the spiral galaxy, M64, in the 
constellation of Coma Berenices. It has unusually smooth 
spiral arms and a very prominent dark lane of dust outside 
its nucleus, its name deriving from the presence of this 
conspicuous dark patch. Designated as an Sb galaxy in 
the Hubble classification scheme, it lies at a distance of 
about 12 million light-years, and has a diameter of about 
65 000 light-years. 


See also: Hubble classification, interstellar absorption 
lines, Messier Catalog, spiral arms, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black Hole 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Black Hole 


A region of space into which matter has fallen and from 
which no material object, light or signal of any kind can 
escape. In other words, within this region of space, the 
gravitational field is too powerful to let anything escape. 

The basic concept is not new and, in a sense, dates 
back to the suggestion made in 1783 by John Michell and 
in 1798 by Pierre Laplace that there might exist in the 
universe massive bodies which would be quite invisible 
because the force of gravity at their surfaces would be 
too great to allow light to escape. At the surface of such a 
body the escape velocity would be greater than the speed 
of light. Current models of black holes are based on the 
general theory of relativity, from which it can be shown 
that if any given amount of matter is compressed 
sufficiently, so that it is contained within a critical radius 
known as the Schwarzschild radius, no signal can ever 
escape from it. 

A black hole would arise if a quantity of matter were 
compressed inside its Schwarzschild radius, and the 
boundary of the black hole (known as the event horizon) 
would be a sphere having this radius. Nothing that falls 
inside can ever escape again. It is important to note that a 
black hole is not a solid body. It is a region of space 
whose radius depends only on the amount of matter that 
has fallen inside. What happens to that matter thereafter 
has no bearing on the hole’s size, and any matter which 
subsequently falls in only serves to increase the radius of 
the hole. 

The Schwarzschild radius is normally very small. 
For the Sun, it is only 3 km, and if, in some way, the 
Earth could be compressed within its Schwarzschild 
radius, the resulting black hole would be only the size of 
a marble. 

Black holes will probably have been formed as a 
result of the collapse of the most massive stars as they 
run out of fuel at the end of their life cycles. Most stars 
collapse to form dense compact objects, but the most 
massive stars will continue to collapse until, in principle, 
all their matter is compressed into a point of infinite 
density known as a singularity. Before this happens, the 
shrinking star will have passed inside its Schwarzschild 
radius, giving rise to a black hole, and disappearing 
forever from view. 

Black holes are important energy sources, as matter 
falling in towards a black hole, before crossing the event 
horizon, may release considerable amounts of 
gravitational potential energy. A rotating black hole 
(essentially similar to the simple stationary one described 
above) is even more efficient in this respect. Not 
surprisingly, black holes have been canvassed as possible 
‘explanations’ of hitherto unexplained energy sources in 
the universe. 

The most hopeful way in which black holes may be 
detected is by looking for their effects on matter in their 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


vicinity. For example, if a black hole is a member of a 
binary system, then the visible star will be seen to follow 
an orbit round an invisible object. Again, if material is 
falling into a black hole, it will become excessively 
heated and will emit x-rays. There are a number of 
possible candidates under investigation, the first 
identified being Cygnus X-1, which is an x-ray source 
retaining a massive invisible object. The case of V404 
Cygni is even more convincing. 

Some black holes appear to have non-stellar origins. 
Large volumes of interstellar gas or large numbers of 
stars could collect and collapse into supermassive black 
holes at the centers of quasars and galactic systems that 
appear to be exploding. The enormous energy output of 
such objects could be accounted for by the collapse of 
billions of solar masses into a large black hole. In 1994, 
the Hubble Space Telescope provided evidence for the 
existence of such a supermassive black hole at the center 
of the galaxy M87. It has a mass of two or three billion 
Suns but is no larger than the solar system. In 1999, the 
Japanese x-ray satellite ASCA identified general 
relativistic effects in the supermassive black hole MCG- 
6-30-15, recording speeds up to c/3 in material orbiting 6 
Schwarzchild radii from the black hole. This was the first 
time that general relativistic effects had been directly 
connected to a black hole candidate. In 2001, high- 
quality infrared spectra of the nucleus of Centaurus A 
obtained with the ISAAC instrument at the European 
Southern Observatory (ESO) Very Large Telescope 
(VLT) showed that there is a 200 million solar mass 
black hole at its center. The infrared spectra showed the 
characteristic shape of a rotating disk. High-speed 
motions of the gas in this disk were detected; this is the 
hallmark of a black hole. An analysis of the rotational 
speed of the disk leads to a determination of the total 
mass of the material inside the disk as more than 200 
million solar masses—too much to be due to normal 
stars. 

Another kind of non-stellar black hole has been 
proposed by the British astrophysicist Stephen Hawking. 
According to the theory, numerous tiny primordial black 
holes with masses less than an asteroid could have been 
created at the time of the Big Bang. These mini black 
holes lose mass over time and disappear. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black-Body Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Black-Body Radiation 


An ideal emitter or absorber of radiation is called a black 
body. A perfect black body will absorb all radiation that 
falls on it, and will emit radiation that has a continuous 
spectrum determined only by the temperature of the 
black body. The distribution of energy radiated against 
wavelength follows a curve known as a black-body (or 
Planck) spectrum and, for a given temperature, there is 
a particular wavelength at which the maximum emission 
takes place. 

According to the Wien displacement law, the 
wavelength at which a black body emits its maximum 
quantity of radiation is inversely proportional to its 
absolute temperature. This law may be used to give 
the approximate wavelength, Amax, at which a star of 
effective temperature T, has its peak emission; expressing 
wavelength in nanometers (nm): 


Amax = 2.89 x 10°/T. 


where T, is expressed in kelvin. 

Stars and hot solid bodies are not perfect black bodies, 
but their radiation can be described in terms of black-body 
properties. 


See also: absolute zero, temperature scales. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black-Hole Candidates in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Black-Hole Candidates in X-ray 
Binaries 


X-ray binaries are short-period (hours to days) interacting 
binaries in which one component is an (almost) normal star 
transferring material onto its compact companion via an 
ACCRETION DISK around the compact object. Matter spirals 
in the intense gravitational field, eventually falling onto 
the surface of the compact companion, which can be a 
white dwarf, neutron star or black hole. However, the 
x-ray luminosities generated in this accretion process are 
so high (sometimes >10° erg s~!) that a white dwarf can 
(usually) be excluded. Also while the presence of regular 
pulsations (usually ~ seconds) indicates that the compact 
object must be a neutron star (a PULSAR), the absence of this 
signature does not automatically mean it must be a black 
hole. Only direct measurement of the compact object mass 
(from the normal star’s orbital motion around the unseen 
compact object) can determine this. By simple application 
of Kepler’s laws it is possible, with minimal assumptions, 
to infer the minimum mass of the compact object. If it 
exceeds a certain value (theory suggests this maximum 
to be 3.2M5, while observationally no confirmed neutron 
star exceeds 2M.) then it is declared to be a black-hole 
candidate on the grounds that a neutron star cannot then 
support itself without collapsing. Also if general relativity 
(GR) is the correct physical description of gravity, then 
such an object can only be a BLACK HOLE (see also GENERAL 
RELATIVITY TESTS: BINARY PULSARS). Determining the maximum 
mass of a neutron star accurately therefore has important 
repercussions for the nature of matter at nuclear densities. 

If the mass-losing star is significantly less massive than 
the compact object (the so-called low-mass x-ray binaries 
or LMXBs), then these mass estimates provide a firm 
lower limit to the compact object’s mass which is of great 
importance. Effectively the companion is being used as a 
test particle in orbit about the compact object, analogous 
to the (extremely low mass) planets orbiting our Sun. All- 
sky monitors on space-borne x-ray observatories have led 
to the discovery of soft x-ray transients (SXTs, so called 
because of their low x-ray temperatures), a class of object 
which produces rare, dramatic x-ray outbursts (typically 
separated by decades), followed by an extended period 
of x-ray inactivity (see also X-RAY BINARY STARS). It is only 
during this time that their mass-losing companions are 
visible, making them virtually the only class of LMXB for 
which dynamical mass studies are possible. More than 
two dozen SXTs are known, of which ~10 have produced 
accurate mass determinations, the heaviest of which (V404 
Cyg) is 12Mo. 


Dynamical mass measurements 

A detailed knowledge of binary parameters for many 
of the high-mass x-ray binaries (HMXBs) (which have 
easily identified early-type, massive companions) is due 
to their pulsating neutron star compact objects. They are 
effectively double-lined spectroscopic binaries, in which each 
component produces a radial velocity curve (the neutron 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


star pulsation period is also modulated by the Doppler 
effect). The amplitudes of these curves are Ky and K> (for 
the compact object and secondary star respectively), the 
ratio of which is their mass ratio, g. With an orbital period 
of P then Kepler’s third law allows f (M), the mass function, 
to be determined for each component: 


PK3 M8 sin? i 
My) = Ss 1 
DOD Fae MaMa @) 
PK: M8 sin? i 
f (M2) = —* 2 (2) 


2G (My + Mz? 


where i is the orbital inclination. If the systems are 
eclipsing (which constrains i) then My and M, can be 
determined. Such work has produced the detailed 
dynamical mass measurements of neutron stars that 
are summarized in figure 1 together with the mass 
measurements from binary radio pulsars. All these masses 
are consistent with a mass of (1.35 + 0.04)Mo. 

However, when HMXBs are suspected of harboring 
black holes (as in Cyg X-1 and LMC X-3), the mass 
measurement process is less straightforward. By 
definition, there will be no dynamic features (such as 
pulsations) observable from the compact object, and so 
these are single-lined spectroscopic binaries with only K2, 
and hence f(Mx), being measurable. Also, since M2 > 
Mx, then My cannot be accurately determined without 
constraints on the value of Mj. Unfortunately, there is 
usually a wide range of uncertainty in Mz (~12-20 Mo for 
Cyg X-1) because of the (necessarily) unusual evolutionary 
history of the binary. Nevertheless the compact object in 
Cyg X-1 almost certainly is a black hole, since the available 
data constrain it to be >3.8Mg, which is just above the 
canonical maximum mass of a neutron star. 


Low-mass x-ray binaries 


However, when the mass-losing star is of low mass (the 
LMXBs), then the situation is very different. Such short- 
period x-ray binaries will have very faint companion stars, 
which leads to the major observational problem that the 
observed optical light will be dominated by reprocessed 
x-radiation from the accretion disk (or heated face of the 
companion star). This is why the optical spectra of LMXBs 
are hot, blue continua (U-B typically —1) with superposed 
(usually weak) broad hydrogen and helium emission lines, 
the velocities of which indicate that they largely arise in the 
inner disk region. This normally prevents the observation 
of any useful dynamical information associated with either 
component in the binary. Hence, the evidence for the 
nature of the compact object in most LMXBs has come 
indirectly, usually from the detection of x-ray bursts 
(as few are x-ray pulsars; see X-RAY BURSTERS) or the fast 
flickering first seen in Cyg X-1 (and hence frequently used 
as a black-hole ‘indicator’, although it too is also seen in 
NEUTRON STAR systems). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black-Hole Candidates in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neutron Stars 
1.4 M 


PSR2127+11C (C) 
PSR2127+11C (P) 
PSR2302+46 (C) 
PSR2302+46 (P) 
PSR1802-07 (P) 
PSR1855+09 (P) 
PSR1534+12 (C) 
PSR1534+12 (P) 
PSR1913+16 (C) 
PSR1913+16 (P) 
4U1700-—37 
4U1538-52 

Her X-1 

Vela X-1 

SMC X-1 

LMC X-1 

Cen X-3 

Cen X-4 


10°! 10° 


Black Holes 


10 M, 


J0422+32 
J1655—40 
H1705-25 
GS1124-68 
V404 Cyg 
GS2000+25 
A0620-00 
Cyg X-1 


10! 10? 


Compact object mass (Mj) 


Figure 1. The distribution of neutron star and black-hole masses in binary systems. 


Soft x-ray transients 


It is therefore necessary to find sources where the x-ray 
emission switches off for some reason, so that the 
companion star can become visible. This is the basis of 
the new field of study of the SXTs (sometimes referred 
to as x-ray novae), which contain a remarkably high 
fraction (~75%) of black-hole candidates. Only six SXTs 
are confirmed neutron star systems in that they display 
type I x-ray bursts. The observed properties of SXTs are 
summarized as follows. 


e =. X-ray transient outbursts, reaching a typical peak x-ray 
luminosity of ~10°”-erg s~'. Erratic variability 
on short timescales is often present. Several new 
transients are found each year. 

e = Fast-rise, exponential decay light curves, with timescales 
~few days and ~30 days respectively, recurring 
typically every 10-50 yr. However, linear decays are 
possible, especially for lower peak luminosities. 

e Variable optical counterpart that brightens by ~4-7™ 
depending on orbital period (a longer period implies 
a larger and hence brighter secondary star which 
correspondingly reduces the observed outburst 
amplitude). Such a large brightness increase at 
outburst shows that the SXTs are LMXBs, and are not 
similar to Cyg X-1 or the harder Be x-ray transients. 

e Lithium has been detected in absorption in five SXTs, 
and may be created by spallation processes during 
the intense x-ray outbursts. 

e Mini-outbursts sometimes occur within ~1 yr of the 
main outburst. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e Superluminal radio jets analogous to those seen in 
QSOs and other AGN have been seen. 

e Residual accretion disks seen in quiescence through 
the presence of strong, broad Ha emission. Usually 
exhibiting a double-peaked profile, this implies a 
disk size ~0.4-0.7 of the primary ROCHE LoBE. Velocity 
studies of the emission lines have revealed small 
phase offsets with respect to that expected if the lines 
are only associated dynamically with the compact 
object. 

e = Galactic distribution of SXTs is consistent with that 
of population I objects, suggesting that they evolved 
from massive progenitor stars. There are estimated 
to be ~500 in our galaxy. 


Black-hole diagnostics? 

X-ray spectrum 

X-ray properties similar to those of Cyg X-1 are, not 
surprisingly, frequently used as diagnostics that lead to 
black-hole candidacy. In addition to a (very stable) power- 
law component extending to very high energies (~MeV) 
which is usually attributed to Comptonization, Cyg X-1 
also (occasionally) exhibits a high, soft state which has 
an additional (multicolor or ‘disk’) black-body spectrum 
at a temperature of kT ~ 1 keV. Assuming that the 
inner accretion disk can be represented as a set of rings 
of decreasing temperature with increasing radius, x-ray 
spectra suggest that sources suspected (on other grounds) 
of being black-hole candidates had inner disk radii of 
~ 3rs, appropriate for stellar mass black holes (where rs 
is the Schwarzschild radius, and ~ 3rs is the location of 
the last stable orbit for matter in its vicinity). While the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black-Hole Candidates in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


continuum spectrum is unaffected by including the effects 
of GR, they are important for the profiles of spectral lines 
formed in the inner disk. Only x-ray lines can be formed at 
such high temperatures, and the effects of GR are believed 
to have been seen in certain AGN spectra, but not yet in 
x-ray binaries. 

The low-temperature black-body (‘soft’) component 
in SXTs has widely varying properties from source to 
source. Indeed, even though they are classified as SXTs, 
the two transients GS2023 + 338 and GRO J0422 +32 do not 
show such components in their bright state (and nor do 
Cyg X-1 and GX339-4 when in their hard (low) states). At 
the other extreme, GRO J1655-40 and GRS1915+10 have the 
highest temperature and most luminous soft component, 
and are also the only SXTs to display superluminal radio 
ejections (see the section below on population size and 
distribution). This has led to the speculative suggestion 
that the soft component is related to the spin of the black 
hole, as this property is considered to be important in 
extragalactic radio jets. 


Temporal behavior 
Asimultaneous analysis of the x-ray spectral and temporal 
variability is necessary in order to map out these source 
‘states’. Building on the two-state behavior of Cyg X-1, 
interesting correlations between their x-ray spectra and 
temporal variability have been found in the black-hole x- 
ray binaries. The presence of quasi-periodic oscillations 
(QPOs, as seen in neutron star systems) also reinforces 
their interpretation as a property of the inner accretion 
disk rather than the compact object. The SXT outbursts, 
when studied from peak to quiescence, cover a very large 
range in accretion rate onto the compact object, and the 
x-ray spectral and temporal behavior appears related to 
the mass accretion rate (table 1). 

Furthermore, even faster QPOs (67 Hz, 184 Hz, 
300 Hz) have been seen during bright phases of the 
transients GRS1915 + 105, XTE J1550-564 and GRO J1655- 
40 respectively. Such short-timescale variability must be 
associated with the region close to the last stable orbit of the 
inner accretion disk, and hence has potential importance as 
a property that arises very close to the black-hole primary. 
Various models have been proposed to account for the 
details of this behavior, and all include effects of GR which 
relate to the mass and spin of the black hole. 


Quiescent flux levels 

Quiescent SXT x-ray fluxes are much lower than those 
expected from the mass transfer rate implied by the 
continuing strong Ha emission, and in particular are lower 
than in corresponding neutron star systems. This may be 
due to advection-dominated accretion flows (ADAFs) in 
which, at low mass transfer rates, the high temperature 
and low density of gas in the inner disk region combine to 
produce a cooling time for the gas that exceeds the time to 
fall onto the compact object. Hence the thermal energy of 
the gas would be advected into the black hole and ‘lost’. 
While similar flows would occur in neutron star systems, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the thermal energy would eventually have to be radiated 
from the neutron star’s solid surface, hence producing an 
apparently much higher x-ray flux from the same amount 
of accreted matter. 


Mass measurements 

Radial velocity curves 

Once they reach quiescence SXTs become valuable 
resources for research into the nature of LMXBs. Optically 
fainter now by a factor of 100 or more, (they have 
quiescent magnitudes in the range 17-23), their emission 
is dominated by the companion star and, while technically 
challenging, their spectral type, period and radial velocity 
curve (whose amplitude is the K velocity) can be 
determined. From the latter two the mass function 
(equation (1)) can be calculated (table 2), and these 
represent the absolute minimum values for My, since (for 
all of them) i < 90° and M2 > 0. Changing either of these 
parameters serves only to increase the implied value of My. 
However, to determine the actual value of Mx, additional 
constraints must be applied, so as to infer values for M, 
and i. 


Rotational broadening 

In short-period interacting binaries the secondary must be 
corotating (at velocity v,,.,) with the primary, and since its 
size R2 is given by 


Ry/a = 0.46(1 + q)-¥8 (3) 
then 


mt Ro +q)? 


Vror SINT = sini = K> x 0.46 


(4) 


from which q can be derived if v,o; is measurable. Typical 
values are in the range 40-100 km s7!. 

Figure 2 shows the summed spectrum of V404 Cyg 
(Doppler corrected into the secondary’s rest frame) and 
that of a template star, which clearly has much narrower 
absorption lines. A range of broadening velocities 
(together with the effects of limb-darkening) are applied 
to the template for comparison with the target, yielding 
Vo SiNi = 3941 km s7!, from which g = 16.7 + 
1.4. Note also that, while the accretion disk around the 
compact object might be expected to provide some velocity 
information, the breadth of the Ha line (> 1000 km s~!) 
makes this extremely difficult as the compact object’s 
motion in such high-q systems will be very small (typically 
< 30 kms™!). Nevertheless such motions have been seen, 
but their interpretation is not straightforward as there is a 
small phase offset relative to the motion of the companion 
star. 

Having determined q, the only remaining unknown 
is the orbital inclination i. To date, none of the SXTs 
is eclipsing (although GRO J1655-40 shows evidence for 
a grazing eclipse), and so it is the determination of i 
that leads to the greatest uncertainty in the final mass 
measurement. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black-Hole Candidates in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. X-ray spectral and temporal properties of SXTs. 


Source state X-ray spectrum 


Temporal characteristics 


Power-law PDS, substantial variability 
Lorentzian noise 
Very little variability 


Low (LS) No ultrasoft (US) component 
Intermediate (IS) | US + steeper power law at high E 
High (HS) US dominates (MCD model), 

very weak power-law component 
Very high (VHS) Strong US + PL component 


Strong QPOs at ~10 Hz, Lorentzian noise 


Table 2. Derived parameters and dynamical mass measurements of SXTs. 


f(M) q i Mx M2 
Source (Mo) (=Mx/Mz) (deg) = (Mo) (Mo) 
V404Cyg  6.0840.06 17+ 5544 1242 0.6 
G2000+25 5.0140.12 24+10 56415 10+4 0.5 
NOph77 = 4.8640.13 >19 60410 642 0.3 
NMus91 = 3.0140.15 842 54a tS 0.8 
A0620-00 2.91+0.08 1541 3745 1045 0.6 
J0422+32 1.2140.06 >12 20-40 10+ 0.3 
J1655-40 3.24+0.14 3.640.9 6743 6.941 2.1 
4U1543-47, -0.2240.02  — 20-40 5.0425 2.5 
Cen X-4 0.2140.08 541 43411 13406 04 
rod I a I | 
fy Maan hilly (ul [pay 
ron ny [ 
1.5 — — 
wn merry Myf OY 
io 
i ly vi fw 
| | | | | | | | | : | | 
6400 6420 6440 6460 6480 6500 6520 6540 6560 6580 6600 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. Determining the rotational broadening in V404 Cyg. From bottom to top: a KOIV template star; the same spectrum 
broadened by 39 km s~!; Doppler-corrected sum of V404 Cyg (dominated by intense Ha emission from the disk); residual spectrum 


after subtraction of the broadened template. 


Ellipsoidal modulation 

The distorted shape of the secondary (the Roche 
lobe) produces a so-called ellipsoidal modulation as the 
projected area of the secondary varies around the orbit 
(figure 3). The form of the Roche lobe is theoretically 
well determined, and so the observed light curve 
depends on only two parameters, q and i (note that 
the modulation will disappear if i=0). Usually q is 
already determined (previous section), but in practice the 
ellipsoidal modulation is largely insensitive to q for g >5. 
This assumes that the secondary is actually filling the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Roche lobe, which is reasonable given that mass loss from 
the secondary is observed via Doppler tomography even 
during quiescence. Results for i determined in this way 
are given in table 2 (and the masses in figure 1). 
However, the principal uncertainty in this final 
stage is the problem of any other contaminating light 
sources, especially the accretion disk, as this will lead 
to i being underestimated and the compact object mass 
being overestimated. The disk component has already 
been measured in the optical (figure 2) and is typically 
< 10%. To further reduce this effect, ellipsoidal studies 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Black-Hole Candidates in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vega (km/s) 
0 
= 


—250 


17 


| fl fl f fl | f fl fl fl | 
0 0.5 1 


V (mag) 


Orbital Phase 


Figure 3. Schematic of the SXT (center) as a function of binary 
orbital phase, together with (upper) the observed radial velocity 
of the secondary, and (lower) the ellipsoidal light curve resulting 
from the distorted (Roche-lobe) shape of the secondary which 
produces a double-humped modulation. 


are performed in the infrared whenever possible (as the 
disk should be blue in color). Application of this method 
to the neutron star SXT Cen X-4 yields a value of 1.3Mo, in 
excellent accord with that expected. 


The superluminal transients 

The discovery, in 1994, of GRS1915 + 105 and GRO J1655- 
40 brought an entirely new type of behavior to this field. 
Although other transients were strong radio sources, VLA 
and vis! observations showed that these new objects 
exhibited ejection events that were ‘superluminal’, the 
first time that such phenomena had been observed within 
the Galaxy. Furthermore, both these objects displayed 
continuing and extremely variable x-ray activity that is 
totally unlike any of the ‘classical’ SXTs. Combined with 
the extremely high interstellar extinction (Ay ~ 26) to 
GRS1915 + 105, dynamical studies of its variable, K ~ 14 
IR counterpart are currently not possible. 

GRO J1655-40 (N Sco 1994) is optically the brightest 
in quiescence of all the SXTs, with one of the earliest 
spectral types (mid-F). It also exhibits a high y velocity 
which suggests that it might have been formed from a 
neutron star that had suffered accretion-induced collapse. 
A subsequent optical rebrightening was found to have 
begun ~6 days before the x-rays, indicating an ‘outside- 
in’ outburst of the accretion disk. This substantial delay is 
explained by the inner disk needing to be re-filled before 
accretion onto the compact object can take place. 

The brightness of GRO J1655-40 allows high-quality 
photometric light curves to be obtained, from which the 
orbital system parameters can be derived. With such 
an early spectral type, it has a low mass ratio (¢ ~ 3) 
which means that the ellipsoidal modulation is sensitive 
to both qg and i (the latter being constrained by the 
observed grazing eclipse). The normal star appears to 
be crossing the Hertzsprung gap and about to ascend the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


giant branch, hence driving the much higher mass transfer 
rate. Temporary drops in M then return it to the transient 
domain. 


Population size and distribution 

The locations of ~90% of SXTs within a galactic longitude 
range of +80° implies that they lie within 8 kpc of the 
galactic centre. However, distance estimates for the 
current sample suggest they are all < 5 kpc away, and 
so only ~10% of the transients occuring in our Galaxy 
are being detected (owing to a combination of interstellar 
absorption and sensitivity). Hence the total number of 
SXTs is ~200-1000 for a recurrence time range of 10-50 yr. 
The narrower dispersion in z of the SXTs, compared with 
neutron star LMXBs, implies that their black holes are not 
formed by accretion-induced collapse of a neutron star 
(except possibly GRO J1655-40), but more likely as the end- 
product of evolution of a very massive progenitor. 


Nature of the compact object 

With the secure observation of compact objects with 
masses > 10Mo, their interpretation as black holes 
depends on a knowledge of the maximum mass of a 
neutron star. This is usually quoted as 3.2Mo, but this is 
based on an assumption of causality (i.e. the sound speed 
is <c) and a knowledge of the density up to which the 
equation of state is well understood. Relaxing these can 
increase the limit. 

Alternative suggestions for the nature of compact 
objects include Q stars, where the strong force confines 
neutrons and protons at densities below nuclear density, 
leading to a very different equation of state (in which 
the Q stands for conserved quantity, the baryon number). 
They can be very compact and hence consistent with the 
properties of neutron stars. However, the mass of V404 
Cyg shows that it cannot be a Q star as it would be 
inconsistent with current experimental results. In which 
case, it must be concluded that V404 Cyg and related 
objects contain black holes. 


Bibliography 

Charles P 1998 Black holes in our galaxy: observations 
Theory of Black Hole Accretion Disks ed Abramowicz, 
Bjornsson and Pringle (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) p 1 

McClintock J E 1991 Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 647 495 

Mirabel I F and Rodriguez L F 1994 Nature 371 46 

Tanaka Y and Shibazaki N 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
34 607 

Van Paradijs J and McClintock J E 1995, X-Ray Binaries 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 58 


Philip A Charles 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blazar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Blazar 


The most variable class of active galaxy. This class of 
active galaxy includes BL Lac objects and some of the most 
violently variable quasars, the name ‘blazar’ deriving from 
an amalgamation of ‘BL Lac’ and ‘quasar’. According to 
the unified model for active galaxies, blazar activity is 
caused by jets of energetic particles flowing out from an 
active galactic nucleus directly along, or very close to, the 
observer’s line of sight. 


Seealso: active galactic nucleus, active galaxy, astrophys- 
ical jets, BL Lacertae objects, quasar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blink Comparator 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Blink Comparator 


A device, also known as a blink microscope, that enables 
two photographs or images of a region of sky, obtained 
at different times, to be compared in such a way that 
any differences between them are highlighted. The light 
paths from the two images are arranged so that, when 
viewed through an eyepiece, they coincide exactly. The 
two images are then illuminated alternately, switching 
from one to the other at a frequency of once or twice per 
second. While features that are identical on both images 
appear constant and unchanging during the alternating 
illumination, any features that are present on one plate 
only appear to blink on and off. Objects that have 
changed in brightness fluctuate in size, while objects that 
have changed position appear to jump to and fro in the 
alternating illumination. The blink comparator, therefore, 
greatly facilitates the discovery and identification of 
objects such as variable stars, novae, supernovae, asteroids 
and comets. Virtual blink comparators are used in digital 
image analysis systems for CCD data. 


See also: stereo comparator 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blinking Planetary (NGC 6826) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Blinking Planetary (NGC 6826) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Cygnus, position 
RA 19" 44.8™, dec. +50° 31’. It is L in diameter and of 
eighth magnitude, with a tenth-magnitude central star. 
It gets its name because it tends to vanish when looked 
at directly through a small telescope, when light from 
the central star swamps the nebula, and reappears when 


viewed with averted vision. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bliss, Nathaniel (1700-64) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bliss, Nathaniel (1700-64) 


Born Bisley, Gloucestershire, England, fourth Astronomer 
Royal. Bliss directed the Royal Observatory at Greenwich 
for only two years and had little impact. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Blue Stars at High Galactic Latitudes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Blue Stars at High Galactic Latitudes 


When you look up into the sky at night, most of the 
blue stars you see are hot main-sequence stars associated 
with the Milky Way, which have rather recently formed 
from the thin layer of dust and gas in the plane of our 
Galaxy. Because these stars evolve rapidly, we do not 
see them at high galactic latitudes, where there is no 
interstellar material from which they can form. Hence 
blue stars at high galactic latitudes are rare and must have 
some other explanation. It was this rareness of the blue 
stars at high galactic latitude and the lack of a theoretical 
explanation for them which led Fritz Zwicky to undertake 
the first survey for such stars, the HZ survey, with the 
0.46 m Schmidt telescope on Mt Palomar in 1938. This 
telescope (and its big brother, the 1.2 m Schmidt) were in 
fact built to carry out surveys like this one, in order to 
find objects which were sufficiently interesting to deserve 
further study with the 5 m Hale reflector. 

This and subsequent surveys for blue stars at high 
galactic latitudes have paid off handsomely, because these 
stars turn out to tell us not about the early stages of 
stellar evolution but about the final white dwarf state and 
the rapid phases of stellar evolution which immediately 
precede it. In 1965, a new chapter in the story of blue stars 
at high galactic latitudes was started by Allan Sandage, 
who predicted that most of the high-latitude blue stars 
fainter than apparent magnitude 16 in existing surveys 
were not stars at all but (radio quiet) quasars, the most 
luminous known objects in the universe. Although later 
studies showed that this did not actually happen until 
apparent magnitude 18, the fact remains that the faintest 
blue ‘stars’ at high galactic latitudes are one of our most 
important sources of information on the structure and 
evolution of the universe. It is also ironic that our primary 
source of information on the faintest blue stars in our own 
Galaxy is currently a byproduct of extragalactic research. 

In this article we will discuss past and current surveys 
of blue stars at high galactic latitudes. Deep quasar 
surveys, which have been recently reviewed by Hartwick 
and Schade (1990 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 28 
437), are not included unless it was felt that they have 
contributed significantly to the study of faint blue stars. 
What we have learned from further study of the objects 
discovered in these surveys may be found in the articles on 
WHITE DWARES, PG1159 STARS, LARGE HOT SUBDWARFS AND EXTREME 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS, PLANETARY NEBULAE, RED GIANT STARS, 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS, RR LYRAE STARS, BLUE STRAGGLERS and. 
LUMINOUS BLUE VARIABLES. 


The earliest surveys for blue stars at high galactic 
latitudes 

The Humason Zwicky (HZ) Survey 

The HZ survey was carried out using four sets of 
photographs taken with the 46 cm Palomar Schmidt which 
covered the Hyades star cluster and a region of about 150 
square degrees near the North Galactic Pole. These were 
taken using emulsion-filter combinations which isolated 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the spectral regions 3500-5400 A, 4900-7000 A, 3500-5200A 
and 3500-3900 A. The yellow and violet exposures were 
used to select 48 blue (color index from 0.3 to —0.1), 
decidedly blue (color index from —0.1 to —0.3), and very 
blue (color index from —0.3 to —0.6) stars down to apparent 
photographic magnitude 15. The blue exposures were 
used to eliminate variable stars. Follow-up spectroscopy 
at resolutions of 4-8 A was done by ML Humason with the 
Mt Wilson 2.5 m reflector, and the results were published 
by Humason and Zwicky in 1947 (Astrophys. J. 105 85). 


The Luyten blue (LB) survey 

The search for faint blue stars at high galactic latitudes was 
greatly extended by Willem J Luyten and his collaborators 
between 1951 and 1969 using photographic techniques 
similar to those of the HZ survey. A variety of instruments, 
including the 1.2 m Palomar Schmidt, was used to search 
fields all over the sky (most at high galactic latitude), 
resulting in the discovery of 11444 stars brighter than 
apparent magnitude B = 18 and bluer than color index 
u-V = —0.2. Unfortunately, finding charts were not 
published for many of the fainter stars, and the published 
coordinates are only accurate to 1 minute of arc, so that 
much of this material is of statistical interest only. Luyten 
speeded up the discovery process considerably through 
the use of a blink microscope, a device which allowed 
him to view the photographic plates taken in red and 
blue light in rapid succession through the same eyepiece. 
Haro’s three-image method, which is described in the next 
section, was also used. The results were published by the 
Observatory of the University of Minnesota as a series 
of 52 contributions and monographs by Luyten and his 
collaborators. Proper motions for many of the blue stars at 
high galactic latitude have also been published by Luyten. 


The Feige survey 

This survey was initiated by Jacques Feige in 1956. Red 
and blue plates taken with the 1.2 m Palomar Schmidt 
for the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey were blinked 
for 3600 square degrees at galactic latitudes higher than 
+55° and for 2400 square degrees for galactic latitudes 
below —45° and north of declination —15°. 114 stars with 
apparent photographic magnitude brighter than 14 and 
color indices less than B-V = 0.2 were identified. This 
survey, like the HZ survey, proved to be very important 
in determining the nature of the faint blue stars at high 
galactic latitude, because the stars were bright enough for 
follow-up observations to be made with the 5 m and other 
telescopes (Astrophys. J. 128 267, Astrophys. J. 129 600). 


Surveys using Haro’s multiple-image technique 
The Palomar Haro Luyten (PHL) survey 

This survey was carried out in 1958 by G Haro and W J 
Luyten with the 1.2 m Palomar Schmidt and used a triple 
exposure through three different filters and a slight offset 
of the telescope between the exposures to produce a triple 
image of each star in ultraviolet, blue and visual light on 
a single photographic plate. 8746 stars bluer than color 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stars at High Galactic Latitudes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


index U-V = 0.1 and brighter than apparent photographic 
magnitude 19 were identified in a 2400 square degree 
region near the South Galactic Pole (SGP). Unfortunately, 
as with the LB survey, the published coordinates are only 
given to 1 minute of arc, and finding charts were not 
published, so that much of this material is of statistical 
use only. 


The Tonantzintla (Ton) survey 

This survey was carried out at the same time as the PHL 
survey using the Schmidt telescope at the Tonantzintla 
Observatory. Areas of 1860 square degrees in the North 
Galactic Polar Cap and 1050 square degrees in the 
South Galactic Polar Cap were searched by B Iriarte and 
E Chavira using the technique described in the previous 
section. The survey resulted in the detection of 2008 blue 
stars brighter than photographic magnitude 17 (Iriarte B 
and Chavira E 1957 Bol. Obs. Tonantzintla Tacubaya (16), 
(17) and (18)). 


The Jaidee-Lynga (JL) survey 

This was based on dual-image (U and B) plates taken with 
the 50/65/175 cm Schmidt at Mt Stromlo (Australia). The 
catalog contains 296 stars in 540 square degrees at high 
galactic latitudes with U-B < —0.6 and B < 18 (1969 Ark. 
Astron. 5 345). 


The PB (Palomar Berger) survey 

This was an extension of the PHL survey described above 
in 2000 square degrees near the SGP (4495 stars) and 450 
square degrees near the NGP (4515 stars) (Berger J and 
Fringant A-M 1984 AASS 58 565). 


The KUV (Kiso Ultraviolet) survey 

This was based on three-image UGR (ultraviolet, green, 
red) plates taken with the 105 cm Schmidt at the Kiso 
Observatory (Japan) (Noguchi et al 1980 Ann. Tokyo Astron. 
Obs. Ser. 2 18 55, Kondo et al 1984 Ann. Tokyo Astron. 
Obs. Ser. 2 20 130). A total of 1186 stars with ultraviolet 
excesses and 10.0 < G < 18.5 were identified in a 4000 
square degree area, mostly along a belt between the NGP 
and SGP centered on galactic longitude 180°. Follow-u 
spectroscopy at a resolution of 12 A (4500-8200 A) or 7A 
(4100-7200 A) is being obtained with the 2.4 and 1.3 m 
telescopes at the Michigan—Dartmouth-MIT Observatory 
on Kitt Peak (see Darling G W and Wegner G 1994 Astron. 
J. 108 2025. 


The Usher (US) Survey 

This survey is based on Palomar 1.2 m Schmidt plates of 
206 square degrees of the sky with galactic latitude greater 
than 30°. The plates were taken in ultraviolet, blue and 
visual spectral regions and have isolated 3987 blue stellar 
objects which are brighter than B = 18.8 and bluer than F 
and G subdwarfs in B-V or U-B. Aspectroscopic follow-up 
is being done between 3500 and 7000 Aat 14 A resolution 
with the Kitt Peak 2.1 m spectrograph. The results to date 
include the detection of 67 white dwarfs, 36 hot subdwarfs 
and 30 B-8 and early A-type stars (Usher P D and Mitchell 
KJ 1990 Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 74 885). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The Survey of Rubin, Moore and Bertiau 

This survey (Rubin, Moore and Bertiau 1967 Astron. J. 72 
59) yielded 233 objects with apparent magnitudes between 
15 and 19 and U-V bluer than a star of spectral type AO- 
A5 in a 36 square degree region of the Virgo cluster of 
galaxies. It is based on a single triple-image plate taken 
with the Palomar 1.2 m Schmidt. 


KPD (Kitt Peak-Downes) survey 

This was based on U and B plates taken with the 0.6 m 
Schmidt at Kitt Peak (Arizona) and covering 1000 square 
degrees of the Milky Way down to B = 15.3. Although this 
survey was not done at high galactic latitudes, it has been 
included because the stars selected were similar to those 
found in the high-latitude surveys and because it contains 
references to earlier color surveys at low galactic latitudes. 
The selection of ~700 objects with U-B < —0.5 was done 
from visual inspection of overlapping contact films made 
from the plates. Spectra with 15 A resolution covering 
the range 4000-6800 A were obtained with the Mount 
Lemmon (Arizona) UCSD-Minnesota 1.5 m telescope (see 
Downes R A 1986 Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 61 569). 


The PG Survey and its southern counterparts 

The Palomar Green (PG) survey 

This survey was published by R F Green, M Schmidt and 
J Liebert in 1986 (Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 61 305) and 
is based on ultraviolet and blue plates obtained with the 
46 cm Palomar Schmidt. The plates covered an area of 10 
714 square degrees above galactic latitude +30° and 2000.0 
declination —10°. The plates were scanned and digitized, 
and the magnitudes, colors and positions of some 4 million 
objects then determined by computer. Comparison with 
photoelectric magnitudes and colors then allowed 1874 
objects bluer than color index U-B = —0.46 and brighter 
than apparent magnitude B = 17 to be identified. The 
positions of all of these objects were published along with 
timing charts and the results of follow-up photometry and 
spectroscopy. The latter showed that 6% of the stars were 
blue horizontal-branch stars, 53% hot subdwarfs, 26% 
white dwarfs, 5% cataclysmic variables or other binaries 
and 9% extragalactic. 


The Edinburgh—Cape (EC) survey 

This is one of two Southern counterparts of the PG survey 
which are still in progress, and which will cover the 10 
000 square degrees of the southern sky with |b] > 30°. 
Ultraviolet and blue photographic plates obtained with 
the 1.2 m UK Schmidt telescope in Australia are being 
analyzed by methods similar to those utilized in the PG 
survey, and the survey is complete to at least the limits 
of the PG survey, B = 17 and U-B = —0.4. Follow-up 
spectroscopy and photometry are being done at the South 
African Astronomical Observatory. The results obtained to 
date (zone 1) include the detection of 101 white dwarfs, 303 
hot subwarfs, 75 blue horizontal-branch stars, 62 normal 
Band A stars, 55 extragalactic, 71 composite and 8 other. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stars at High Galactic Latitudes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Montreal Cambridge (MC) survey 

This is the other counterpart of the PG survey which is still 
in progress, and it is very similar to the EC survey. It is 
based on doubly-exposed (U and B) photographic plates 
taken with the Curtis Schmidt telescope at Cerro Tololo 
(Chile), and should be complete to B = 16.5 and U-B = 
—0.4 for the 6750 square degrees south of galactic latitude 
—30° which were not covered by the PG survey (Demers 
et al 1986 Astron. J. 92 878). Follow-up spectroscopy for 
251 objects with U-B < —0.5 and brighter than B = 16.5 
in an 840 square degree region at the pole produced the 
following results: 54 white dwarfs, 72 hot subdwarfs, 4 
cataclysmic variables, 6 blue horizontal branch stars, 16 
normal B and A stars, 31 extragalactic objects and 3 other 
emission-line objects. 


Other color surveys 


The survey of Braccesi et al 

This survey (Braccesi et al 1970 Astron. Astrophys. 5 264) is 
based on u, b, v and i plates taken with the Palomar 1.2 m 
Schmidt. The catalog contains 175 objects with u-b < —0.3 
and b < 20 ina 42 square degree field centered at 13h 
right ascension and +36° declination. Corrected values 
for the equatorial coordinates are given in Astronomy and 
Astrophysics (1973 Astron. Astrophys. 23 159). This survey 
yielded the only published list of optically selected quasars 
for almost 10 yr. It was extended by Formiggini et al (1980 
Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 39 129) using u, b and v plates of 
the central 1.72 square degrees of this region. The second 
catalog contains 298 objects with u-b < —0.1 or u-v < +0.4 
and 18.0 < b < 20.2. 


The Survey of van den Bergh 

This survey (van den Bergh 1966 Astrophys. J. 144 866) 
yielded 31 objects with 17.5 < B < 20.5 and U-B < —0.5 
in a 4 square degree field in Andromeda. These objects 
were identified by blinking a well-matched pair of U and 
B plates taken with the 1.3 m Schmidt telescope of the Karl 
Schwarzschild Observatory (Germany). 


The CCD/Transit Instrument (CTI) blue object survey 

This was based on CCD photometry done with the 1.8 m 
transit instrument at Kitt Peak. This instrument is able to 
do UBVRI photometry of stars brighter than V = 20 in 
a 8.26 minutes of arc strip at declination +28°. Follow-up 
spectroscopy for 110 objects is reported by Kirkpatrick and 
McGraw 1998 Proc. IAU Colloq. 114. 


AAT (Anglo-Australian Telescope) survey 

This survey (Boyle B J et al 1990 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 243 1) used UK Schmidt U and J plates for 34 0.35 
square degree fields at high galactic latitude. The catalog 
contains 1400 stars with 16.9 < B < 20.9 and U-B < —0.35 
and differs from its forerunners in that 12-15 A resolution 
spectroscopy has been obtained with the AAT for all of the 
stars, and the results are included in the catalog. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Cerro El Roble (CT) survey 

This survey is based on ultraviolet and blue photographic 
plates taken with the 0.7/1.0 m Maksutov telescope at 
Cerro El Roble (Chile). Blinking of these plates has 
produced a catalog of 373 stellar objects with U-B < —0.5 
down to B = 20ina 44 square degree region near the south 
galactic pole (Campusano LE and Torres C 1983 Astron. J. 
88 1304). 


HBQS (Homogeneous Bright QSO) survey 

In this survey (Cristiani ef al 1995 Astron. Astrophys. 
Suppl. Ser. 112 347) objects with ultraviolet excesses 
and B < 19 were identified on ESO and UK Schmidt 
UBVRI plates in 153 square degrees near the SGP. 285 
QSOs and a comparable number of blue stellar objects 
were then identified from 10-30 A resolution ESO spectra 
of the objects with ultraviolet excesses. This survey is to 
be extended to entire south galactic polar cap (b < —60°), 
and has been used to make a new determination of the 
luminosity function of hot white dwarfs. 


Objective-prism surveys 

The survey of Slettebak and Stock 

This was done with the Hamburg 80 cm Schmidt and 
covered roughly 750 square degrees centered at the NGP. 
The spectroscopic dispersion was 590 A mm! at H 
gamma, and the limiting magnitude was between B = 12 
and 14. The survey yielded 601 stars of spectral type F2 
and earlier (1959 Astron. Abh. Hamburg Sternwarte 5 (5)). 


The Slettebak and Brundage (SB) survey 

This was done with the Schmidt telescope at Cerro Tololo 
(Chile) and covered 840 square degrees centered at the 
SGP. The spectroscopic dispersion was 580 A mm~! at H 
gamma, and the limiting magnitude was between B = 14 
and 15. The survey yielded 957 stars of spectral type FO 
and earlier, and the results are given in the Astronomical 
Journal (1971 Astron. J. 76 338). 


AG D Philip and collaborators 

These researchers have identified 1108 stars of spectral 
type A7 and earlier on objective-prism plates of various 
regions at high galactic latitudes taken with the Schmidt 
telescopes at Tonantzintla (Mexico), Cerro Tololo (Chile) 
and the Warner and Swasey Observatory (Ohio). The 
spectra cover the blue region at dispersions ranging from 
280 to 580 A mm! at H gamma down to B = 13. The 
results are published in the Boletin de los Observatorios 
Tonantzintla y Tacubaya. 


The FHB surveys 

These high-latitude surveys were carried out with the 
Schmidt telescopes at Cerro Tololo (Chile) and Kitt Peak 
(Arizona). They employed an ingenious technique which 
allowed early-type stars to be identified to apparent 
magnitude B = 15 at a dispersion of 280 A mm! at 
H gamma. This technique employed a blocking filter 
which allowed only light of the 150 A spectral region 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stars at High Galactic Latitudes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


centered on Ca II H and K lines to reach the photographic 
plate, thus eliminating 85% of the sky background, which 
limits the exposures. Stars with the Ca II K line missing 
(FHB/AB) have effective temperatures greater than 10 
000 K, and those where it is weak (FHB/A) are primarily 
blue horizontal branch stars at high galactic latitudes. 
More than 11 500 FHB/A stars have been identified to date 
by visual scanning of the plates (Beers et al 1992 Astron. J. 
103 267). 


The LS (Luminous Stars) surveys 

These were objective-prism surveys (Stephenson C B and 
Sanduleak N 1970 Publ. Warner Swasey Obs. 11, Drilling JS 
and Bergeron L E 1995 Proc. Astron. Soc. Pac. 107 
846) carried out with Schmidt telescopes at Hamburg, 
Cleveland and Cerro Tololo, at 280-580 A mm~! at H 
gamma. These surveys cover the entire Milky Way plus 
|b] < 30° for 300° < 1 < 60°. These surveys have 
been included because follow-up spectroscopy has yielded 
many of the same kinds of objects found at high latitudes 
and because they contain references to earlier low-latitude 
objective-prism surveys. 


The Case Low-Dispersion Northern Sky survey 

This is an objective-prism survey in progress which will 
cover the 8000 square degrees of the northern sky with 
b > 30 using the Case 61 cm Schmidt at Kitt Peak. The 
photographic spectra have a dispersion of 1360 Amm at 
H gamma and cover the spectral region from 3300 to 5350 A 
down to photographic magnitude B = 15-18. Visual 
scanning of the plates has turned up 1579 blue or emission 
line galaxies, 1136 unresolved blue or emission line objects, 
465 known or suspected blue stars, 1110 A and F stars, and 
132 faint carbon and suspected late M halo giants at the 
time of this writing, as well as a number of probable H II 
regions in other galaxies. The results are being published 
in the Astrophysical Journal Supplement. 


The Hamburg Quasar Survey (HQS) 

This is similar to the Case survey, but using the Hamburg 
80 cm Schmidt telescope at Calar Alto (Spain). The 
entire northern sky will be covered for |b] > 19° down 
to B = 18.5. The spectra cover the wavelength range 
3400 to 5400 A and have a dispersion of 1390 Amm! at 
H gamma. The plates are being scanned and analyzed 
digitally, and this is the first objective-prism survey to 
utilize an automatic selection of objects rather than visual 
scanning (Hagen ef al 1995 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 
111 195). 


The Hamburg/ESO survey (HES) 

This is the southern counterpart of the HQS survey 
described in the previous section, based on objective-prism 
plates taken with the ESO 1 m Schmidt at a dispersion of 
450 Amm-! at H gamma, which reach down to B = 17.5. 
Results for the first 1000 square degrees of coverage are 
reported by Wisotzki et al (1996 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 
Ser. 115 227). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The First Byurakan survey 

This survey was begun by B E Markarian to search for 
active galactic nuclei. More than 2000 objective-prism 
plates were taken with the 1 m Schmidt telescope of 
the Byurakan Observatory (Armenia), covering the entire 
northern sky and that part of the southern sky with 
declination > —15° and b > 15°. The spectra cover the 
range from 3400 to 6900 A (with a gap near 5300 A) at 
a dispersion of 1800 Amm! atH gamma. Scanning of 
438 of these plates by H V Abrahamian, A M Mickaelian 
and others has yielded 1103 blue stellar objects. Follow-up 
spectroscopy with the Byurakan 2.6 m telescope indicates 
the following composition for the sample: 56% hot 
subdwarfs, 16% white dwarfs, 8% main sequence OB and 
HBB stars, 3% cataclysmic variables and other binaries, 4% 
extragalactic and 13% other. 


The survey of Rodgers, Roberts, and Walker 

In this survey (Rodgers, Roberts and Walker 1993 Astron. 
J. 106 591) objective-prism plates were obtained in two 
70 square degree regions at / = 90° and 270°, b = —45° 
with the Anglo-Australian Schmidt. The spectra have a 
dispersion of 600 Amm! atH gamma and 436 stars with 
spectral type F and earlier and V < 16 were classified and 
cataloged. 


The future of surveys for blue stars at high 
galactic latitudes 


The era of color surveys for blue stars at high galactic 
latitudes is probably nearing an end. The SLOAN DIGITAL 
SKY SURVEY (SDSS) is a good example of what lies in the 
future. The SDSS will employ a 2.5 m telescope and 
CCD detectors to obtain accurate five-color broad-band 
photometry covering the entire visible and near-infrared 
spectrum for all stars brighter than apparent magnitude 
g’ = 23ina10 000 square degree area centered on the NGP. 
Photometric and positional information for both the stars 
and extended sources will be stored in a gigantic database 
which astronomers will be able to access remotely. Each 
astronomer will therefore be able to make his or her own 
survey by computer, using the SDSS database rather than 
the real sky. It is, in fact, already possible to do this using 
one of the three existing independent digitizations of the 
original Palomar Observatory Sky Survey. The catalog 
obtained by scanning and digitizing the original plates 
of the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey with |b] > 19° 
and 6 > —31° using the automatic plate scanner at the 
University of Minnesota is available over the internet at 
http: //isis.spa.umn.edu. 

Objective prism surveys are a different story, but the 
scanning and digitization of objective prism plates have 
already been successfully used in the Hamburg quasar 
surveys to make at least an initial classification of objective- 
prism spectra, and it is probably just a matter of time before 
large-scale objective-prism surveys are done with digital 
detectors. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stars at High Galactic Latitudes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Adelman S J, Upgren A R and Adelman C J (eds) 1994 
Hot Stars in the Galactic Halo (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Capaccioli M (ed) 1983 Astronomy with Schmidt-Type 
Telescopes (Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Chapman J, Cannon R, Harrison S and Hidayat B (eds) 
1983 The Future Utilization of Schmidt Telescopes (San 
Francisco, CA: Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 

Luyten W J (ed) 1965 Ist Conf. on Faint Blue Stars 
(Observatory of the University of Minnesota) 

MacGillivray H T, Thompson E B, Lasker B M, Reid I N, 
Malin D FE West R M and Lorenz H (eds) 
1994 Astronomy from Wide-Field Imaging (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

McLean BJ, Golombek DA, Hayes JJ Eand Payne H E (eds) 
1998 New Horizons from Multi-Wavelength Sky Surveys 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Philip A G D, Hayes D S and Liebert J W (eds) 1987 2nd 
Conf. on Faint Blue Stars (Schenectady, NY: Davis) 

Philip A G D, Liebert J W and Saffer R A (eds) 1994 3rd 
Conf. on Faint Blue Stars (Schenectady, NY: Davis) 

Soifer B T (ed) 1993 Sky Surveys: Protostars to Protogalaxies 
(San Francisco, CA: Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific) 


John S Drilling 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stragglers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Blue Stragglers 


The most flagrant blue stragglers are stars that cannot 
be older than one or two billion years, lurking in the 
cores of 13 billion year-old GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. The origin(s) 
and evolution of these puzzling objects are the central 
challenges confronting researchers in this field. 

ALLAN SANDAGE was the first to note the existence of 
blue straggler stars (BSS) when he constructed a deep 
color-magnitude diagram for the globular cluster M3 as 
part of his PhD thesis in 1952. This classic diagram 
(reproduced in figure 1) demonstrated beyond doubt that 
at least two dozen stars in the cluster lie near the hydrogen- 
burning main sequence, but that they are hotter and 
more luminous than stars at the main sequence turnoff. 
Only two explanations seemed possible: either these stars 
were considerably younger and more massive than all 
other cluster stars, or the theory of STELLAR EVOLUTION was 
seriously in error. As many lines of evidence strongly 
supported stellar evolution theory (then and now), the 
question that emerged was: how can ancient STAR CLUSTERS, 
devoid of star-forming gas, construct new stars billions of 
years after STAR FORMATION in the cluster ceased? 


Ages of stars in clusters 

The ages of star clusters containing hundreds to millions 
of members can be gauged with an accuracy approaching 
15%. This is because individual stars change two of 
their observable properties, color and brightness, in a 
very predictable fashion (correlated with age) as they 
finish fusing their core hydrogen into helium. Such 
turnoff stars rapidly become redder and brighter as they 
swell in size, eventually ballooning to become red giants. 
Determining the age of a star cluster is thus quite simple: 
it’s just the age of the most luminous star in the cluster 
which is still at the turnoff point on the hydrogen-fusing 
main sequence. Comparing the intrinsic brightnesses 
and colors of computer models of turnoff stars with 
direct measurements of those same quantities for real 
cluster stars directly yields stellar and cluster ages. This 
methodology leads to an age of about 13 billion years for 
the globular cluster M3 (and all the other Galactic globular 
clusters); and an upper limit of about two billion years for 
the brightest cluster BSS. 


BSS in color-magnitude diagrams 

Catalogs of BSS in clusters now contain over a thousand 
members. It is clear that BSS do not simply lie along the 
extensions of cluster main sequences, but are also found 
considerably redward of the zero-age main sequence. This 
is an important observational constraint that must be 
explained by any viable BSS theory. 


Location 

Prior to the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope, BSS 
were known to exist in only a handful of globular clusters. 
Every globular cluster whose core has been searched by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


160 


18.01.” 


20,0) 


-8 tI -4 ° +4 +8 +12 +16 


Figure 1. Reproduction of the color-magnitude diagram of M3 
presented by A Sandage in 1953 Astron. J. 58 61. The blue 
stragglers are the stars near 0 < CI < 0.3and 17 <m < 19. 


Nig4,- U 


Figure 2. Color-magnitude diagram of M80 from Ferraro et al 
1999 Astrophys. J. 522 983. ‘BSS’ marks the blue stragglers in the 
left hand panel—they are the heavy dots in the magnified 
section on the right. 


Hubble in the past decade displays tens to hundreds of 
BSS (figure 2). 

These stars are invariably more strongly centrally 
concentrated than cluster RED GIANTS OF HORIZONTAL-BRANCH 
stars (figure 3), while being virtually absent from the 
peripheries of almost all clusters (M3 is a notable 
exception). 

The ubiquitous central concentration of BSS in 
globular clusters is probably due to equipartition of energy 
amongst the cluster stars. In this process the kinetic energy 
of all stars ( 5 Mv’) is equalized by gravitational interactions 
between stars in the cluster. 

The more massive stars (larger M) thus acquire 
smaller velocities v and tend to sink towards cluster 
centers. The centrally concentrated BSS are thus expected 
to be significantly more massive than any other population 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stragglers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Log r (arcsec) 


Figure 3. Cumulative radial distribution of BSS (heavy solid 
line) and horizontal branch and red giant branch stars (dashed 
line). As presented in Ferraro et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 522 983. 


of cluster stars. 

This is consistent with BSS’s relatively high luminosi- 
ties and blue colors. Strong observational confirmation has 
come from direct spectrographic measurement of the ra- 
dius and surface gravity of the second-brightest BSS in the 
globular cluster 47 Tucanae. This measurement yielded a 
mass 1.7 times that of the Sun, or twice the mass of stars at 
the cluster turnoff. Other mass estimates (from an eclips- 
ing system and from pulsation masses) are consistent with 
masses greater than the turnoff, but are not yet precise 
enough to be considered definitive. 

BSS are also commonly observed in open clusters 
(figure 4), in the field as early-type high velocity stars, in 
the dwarf spheroidal galaxy companions to the Milky Way 
(figure 5) and in globular clusters of the Magellanic Clouds 
(figure 6). 


Rotation 

If BSS are produced by stellar mergers (including off-center 
collisions), they should be rapidly rotating, at least initially. 
Observations of a handful of BSS in old open clusters have 
shown most to be moderate rotators (typically 50 km s~'). 
It has been suggested that newly formed BSS might be 
swollen, with large convective envelopes able to carry 
away angular momentum. While this may occur, much 
larger observational samples are needed before the oft- 
quoted observational result of slow cluster BSS rotation 
should be taken as seriously as it is now. In contrast, the 
direct measurement of v sini = 155 kms“ for the second 
brightest BSS in the core of 47 Tuc emphasizes that at least 
some cluster BSS are rapid rotators. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


38904 -— 60754 


Figure 4. Color-magnitude diagram of M67. BSS are large dots 
in the box on the left. As presented in Deng et al 1999 Astrophys. 
J. 524 824. 


Nei es ea a ae ae Ba ae I Ea es Ga DD 
18} a) Selection b) Intermediate Age y 
Regions Population? 


18 | c) Foreground + 4d) Model with “| 
Object? Binaries 


Py 


Figure 5. Color-magnitude diagrams of the inner and outer 
regions of the Sculptor dwarf spheroidal galaxy showing the 
presence of BSS. As presented in Hurley-Keller et al 1999 
Astrophys. J. Lett. 523 L25. 


Lithium abundances 

Lithium is a fragile nucleus, destroyed by proton capture 
at temperatures exceeding 2 million degrees. Large- 
scale mixing destroys surface lithium, so its presence (or 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stragglers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


16.0 T 


170 L  @BSS (42) 


eg 


18.0 | ; : oes 5 
19.0 | 
20.0 f 
21.0 F 
22.0 |: 
23.0 |. 


24.0 - 


Figure 6. Color-magnitude diagram of the Small Magellanic 
Cloud cluster NGC 121. BSS are marked with the larger 
symbols. As presented in Shara et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 508 570. 


absence) in the spectrum of a star is a sensitive indicator 
of the temperature history of surface material. 

Seven blue stragglers in the old open cluster M67 
have been found to be depleted of lithium with respect to 
normal field main sequence stars of similar spectral types 
by at least a factor of 30. This is consistent with extensive 
mixing of internal material to the stellar surface during the 
production of those cluster BSS. Anumber of high velocity, 
but Population I abundance stars were also found to have 
low Li abundance, suggesting that they, too, are BSS. 


Pulsating BSS 

The low luminosity extension of the Cepheid instability 
strip overlaps the location of BSS in globular clusters. 
These stars obey period—luminosity-color relations analo- 
gous to those of classical Cepheids. The mass of a pulsating 
variable can be determined from the relation 


O7L1> 
~ “p276 


where Q is the star’s pulsation constant (for a given 
mode), P is the pulsation period for that mode, L is 
the star’s luminosity and T is its effective temperature. 
There is, unfortunately, no way known to unambiguously 
determine the pulsation mode for most pulsating 
variables. The strong sensitivity to adopted values of 
luminosity, and especially to effective temperature, can 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lead to significant uncertainties in the calculated masses. 
This can be somewhat improved by calculating the mass 
ratios of pulsating BSS to those of RRLYRAESTARS in the same 
clusters. Uncertainties in the cluster distances remain, but 
the resulting BSS masses are typically twice those of RR 
Lyrae stars. It is something of a puzzle that many BSS in 
the instability strip do not pulsate. Rapid rotation inhibits 
pulsation, so non-pulsating BSS may be rapid rotators. 


BSS in contact binaries 

Contact binaries (CB) have been suggested as the 
progenitors of at least some BSS. CB are, by far, the 
most common type of short-period eclipsing systems in 
the solar neighborhood. The components of these short- 
period binaries are in physical contact with their Roche 
equipotential lobes. The components are also in physical 
contact near the inner Lagrangian point located between 
the stars. 

CB are the most common ECLIPSING BINARIES in open 
and globular clusters, where the advent of CCD detectors 
has led to the discovery of significant numbers of these 
stars. Surveys are still far from complete because the 
discovery probability plummets for systems with orbital 
periods longer than a day or two. 

If CB give rise to BSS then one would expect the ratio 
of the number of BSS that are CB to the total number of 
BSS in a cluster to simply equal the ratio of the CB and BSS 
lifetimes. Unfortunately the lifetimes of CB are not well 
determined, so this elegantly simple comparison cannot 
be made with confidence. 

This brief summary of the observed properties of BSS 
forms a set of constraints on BSS theories. Models that 
seek to explain the origin and nature of BSS must explain 
the range of environments in which they are found, their 
high masses, low lithium abundances, and (possibly) high 
rotation rates. 


Blue straggler models and predictions 

Ten models (and at least as many variants) have been 
proposed to explain the origin of blue stragglers; six 
involve single stars while four can operate only in 
binaries. Only the binary mechanisms (see below) are now 
considered viable. These have been summarized by Mario 
Livio as: 


S1 Multiple bursts of star formation 
$2 Prolonged lifetime due to internal mixing 
S3 Main sequence stars managing to avoid mass loss 


S4 Stars that accreted gas from the ISM or the intracluster 
medium 


S5 Evolved stars that returned to the main sequence 
S6 Young field stars captured by clusters 


B1 Mass increase as a result of mass transfer in a close 
binary 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stragglers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


B2 Coalesced contact binaries 
B3 Coalesced common envelope binaries 
B4 Mergers as a result of physical stellar collisions. 


Observations (especially the low lithium abundance) 
and theory are able to rule out the single-star mechanisms 
with a high degree of confidence. The binary mechanisms 
are all much harder to discount, and workers in the 
field now suggest that all four scenarios may be at work, 
though at different rates in different places. The thorniest 
problems facing the binary hypotheses (B1) and (B2) are 
as follows. 

B1. If mass transfer in binaries produces all BSS then 
all BSS should be in binaries. Radial velocity studies show 
that while some BSS are in binaries, intensive monitoring 
over periods of years conclusively shows that others are 
not in binaries close enough to lead to mass transfer. 

B2. Coalescence of a contact binary to form a BSS 
is potentially problematic because of the existence of BSS 
with masses larger than twice the host cluster turnoff mass. 
This might be a preferred formation route in low density 
clusters where no other viable mechanism (collisions in 
particular) works. 

Common envelope evolution (B3) might be able 
to generate the most massive BSS by permitting the 
swallowing of a more distant companion or companions 
during the expanded envelope phase. 

Long thought to be so rare that they could be ignored, 
physical collisions (B4) (and very close passages) are now 
known to be commonplace and very important in dense 
star clusters. Hundreds of physical collisions must occur 
in the cores of most globular clusters during a Hubble time. 
This is mostly due to the effect of gravitational focusing. 
Stars move with velocities (v) of at most 10-20 km s7! in 
globular clusters, much less than the escape speed of a 
main sequence star. The effective cross section o,, of two 
cluster stars of masses m,; and m2 and radii r; and rp is 

Oss = (11 +12)" (1 + Zu Vt) as >) 
(r +r 2) v2 


which can be 10 000 times larger than the geometrical cross 
sections because of the slow passages of two stars by each 
other. This magnification is even more remarkable for 
binaries. The effective cross section of a binary passing 
close to a single star (or another binary) is approximately 
the square of the semimajor axis; this can be millions of 
times the stars’ geometrical cross sections. 

Mutually induced gravitational distortions can lead 
to dissipation of orbital energy and capture of an initially 
parabolic pair of single or binary stars into a highly 
elliptical orbit. Subsequent periastron passages can 
dissipate more energy, leading eventually to very close 
binaries and/or physical collisions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(b) 


(c) 


Figure 7. Example of a simulation of an off-axis collision 
between two main sequence stars of different mass. From J E 
Barnes’ website 

http://www.ifa.hawaii.edu/faculty /barnes/stars.html 


Physical collisions 
Even in the cores of the most dense Galactic globular 
clusters the interval between physical stellar collisions 
must be at least 10° years (otherwise every star near the 
cluster center would already have experienced a collision). 
It is very unlikely that the tools needed to directly image a 
stellar collision (far outside the Galaxy) will be developed 
during the next two or three decades (though gravity wave 
detectors might detect them indirectly in just a few years). 
For the present, studies of stellar collisions are of necessity 
confined to numerical simulations on computers. 

When main sequence stars undergoing a nearly head- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stragglers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on collision are of comparable density and size the initially 
spherical masses increasingly overlap as they compress 
and distort each other into nearly half-moon shapes. 
Temperatures and densities never become high enough 
to ignite significant thermonuclear burning outside the 
stellar cores. A few per cent of the total mass of two 
colliding main sequence stars is ejected perpendicular to 
the direction of stellar motion, but then mixing and overlap 
take over. Within a few dynamical times (hours) the two 
incoming stars are merged together into a single, new star 
almost as massive as the sum of its progenitors’ masses. 

Real collisions will almost always be off-center, 
involving rotating stars of unequal mass. The predicted 
degree of mixing that ensues in any collision is quite 
dependent on the density profiles, impact parameter and 
initial relative velocities of the colliding stars, but at least 
some surface mixing seems hard to avoid. Very rapidly 
spinning stars surrounded by massive disks have been 
suggested by some simulations. Other models predict that 
the denser of two colliding stars’ cores can penetrate to the 
core of the less dense (and more massive) star (see figure 7). 
This is the fundamental reason why the apparent age (from 
its position in a cluster color-magnitude diagram) of a 
coalesced star is predicted to not be synchronized with the 
ages of all the non-coalesced stars in a cluster core. Mixing 
of surface and core layers during a collision may produce 
a coalesced star having a higher central hydrogen content 
than either of the stars which formed it. 

In effect, the core-hydrogen-rich coalesced star has 
had its clock reset by the collision. Despite the 
uncertainties and approximations used, the detailed 
numerical simulations of stellar coalescence through 
collisions give this process a credence that the other binary 
mechanisms are hard pressed to match. 


Cluster models with collisions 

Two very recent theoretical approaches have greatly 
increased the realism of coalescing star simulations. In 
one work, simple representations of dense star cluster 
dynamics and detailed binary-single star encounter 
simulations were combined to produce cross sections and 
rates for a variety of collisions. The collision outcomes 
were calculated with smoothed-particle hydrodynamics 
(SPH) simulations of realistic star models, then followed 
in detail with a stellar evolution code. Some of 
the predicted distributions in theoretical cluster color— 
magnitude diagrams mimic observed distributions with 
remarkable fidelity (figure 8). 

The study tested the sensitivity of the predicted color— 
magnitude distributions to the stellar evolution tracks, 
binary mass function, binary period distribution and 
current mass function. The first two parameters are much 
more important than the latter two. Fully mixed stars 
produce BSS distributions that start on and always remain 
close to the Zero Age Main Sequence. Partially mixed 
configurations (in accord with the SPH simulations noted 
above) produce color-magnitude distributions that are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sistisritisiil 


F255wW 


F255W 


-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
F255W-F336W 


Figure 8. Theoretical color-magnitude diagrams comparing the 
effects of using different evolutionary tracks for the blue 
stragglers. As presented by Sills A and Bailyn C 1999 Astrophys. 
J. 513 428. 


more spread out in color than the fully mixed distributions, 
in much better accord with the observations. 

Binary star cross sections are much larger than those of 
single stars, so binary-single collisions overwhelm single— 
single collisions for even a modest binary frequency. 
The future inclusion of binary—-binary collisions and 
coalescences may explain the few, most luminous BSS not 
reasonably explained by the simulations. 

Asecond approach uses detailed N-body simulations 
coupled with simple prescriptions for stellar evolution and 
physical collisions. The initial conditions were chosen to 
mimic R136, the massive and compact star cluster at the 
center of the 30 Doradus complex in the Large Magellanic 
Cloud. Simulations show that the dynamical evolution of 
the cluster is tightly linked to the evolution of the most 
massive stars. A single very massive star (>100Mq) is 
found to grow steadily through mergers with other stars in 
less than 3-4 Myr. This object is usually found in a binary 
system very close to the cluster center, and it is rejuvenated 
by each successive collision. It should appear as a BSS in 
the cluster color-magnitude diagram. Strong stellar winds 
slow the runaway process, but even large mass loss rates 
do not prevent the growth of very massive BSS. 

The two approaches described above clearly must be 
merged to eventually produce a realistic scenario capable 
of being tested in detail against observed BSS in star 
clusters. Spurred largely by the Hubble Space Telescope, 
BSS research is now a rapidly developing field driven by 
the synergy between theory, simulations and observations. 


Bibliography 

Half a century ago the infant field of stellar evolution, 
coupled with state-of-the-art observations of globular 
clusters, was used to demonstrate the extraordinarily 
ancient nature of these objects. Allan Sandage was then 
a PhD student at Caltech, and his beautiful dataset on 
the cluster M3 clearly showed, for the first time, blue 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Blue Stragglers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stragglers. This discovery paper (Sandage AR 1953 Astron. 
J. 58 61) reads as well today as then. 

A monograph entitled Blue Stragglers (ASP Con- 
ference Series 53: ed R Saffer 1992) contains a 
dozen excellent overviews of all aspects of the sub- 
ject, as do two more recent reviews (Stryker L 1993 
Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 105 1081, Bailyn C 1994 
Science 263 44). A beautiful computer simulation 
movie of a stellar collision may be viewed online at 
http://www.ifa.hawaii.edu/faculty/barnes/stars.html 

Recent sophisticated treatments of N-body simula- 
tions, including the effects of mergers, are reported in 
Portegies Zwart S et al 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 348 117. Sim- 
ulations of the detailed evolution of merged stars appear 
in Sills A and Bailyn C 1999 Astrophys. J. 513 428. These 
complementary approaches provide the most convincing 
explanations of mergers and BSS in dense star clusters to 
date. 


Mike Shara 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bootes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bootes 


(the Herdsman; abbrev. Boo, gen. Bodtis; area 907 
sq. deg.) A northern constellation that lies between 
Canes Venatici and Serpens Caput, and culminates at 
midnight in late April. The origin of the constellation 
figure is uncertain, though it dates back at least to ancient 
Greece, where it was identified with Arcas, who was 
conceived when his mother, Callisto, fell victim to Zeus’s 
passion and whom Zeus placed alongside Callisto (who 
is represented by the neighboring constellation of Ursa 
Major) in the sky. The name Bodtes may come from a 
Greek word meaning ‘clamorous’ or ‘noisy’, possibly from 
the herdsman’s shouts to his dogs (now represented by 
the neighboring constellation of Canes Venatici). In some 
early celestial charts Bootes is shown in pursuit of a bear 
(the constellation of Ursa Major). The brightest stars of 
BoGtes were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the 
Almagest. 

A large constellation, Bootes is easily found by virtue 
of a Boodtis (Arcturus), which at magnitude —0.1 is the 
fourth brightest star in the sky and lies on a continuation 
of the line joining the stars ¢, ¢ and n Ursa Majoris, in the tail 
of the Great Bear. Other bright stars include ¢ Bodtis (Izar 
or Pulcherrima), a close binary with yellow (KO) and blue 
(A2) components, magnitudes 2.7 and 4.8, separation 3”, 7 
Boétis (Muphrid), magnitude 2.7, and y Bodtis (Seginus), 
magnitude 3.1. There are five other stars of magnitude 4.0 
or brighter. Another interesting binary is € Bodtis, which 
has yellow (G8) and orange (K4) components, magnitudes 
4.8 and 7.1, separation 7”. 

There are no bright star clusters, nebulae or galaxies 
in Bootes. 

The Quadrantid meteor shower appears to radiate 
from the northern part of Bodtes, which contains the 
former constellation of Quadrans Muralis, after which it is 
named. 


See also: Arcturus, Quadrantids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bode, Johann Elert (1747-1826) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bode, Johann Elert (1747-1826) 


Astronomer, born in Hamburg, Germany, director of the 
Berlin Observatory. He drew attention to a relation among 
the distances of the planets from the Sun that had been 
discovered by JOHANN TiTIUS. The law is sometimes known 
as the Titius—Bode law, but usually just as Bode’s law. The 
law starts with the sequence 0, 3, 6, 12, 24..., adds 4 and 
divides by 10 to obtain 0.4, 0.7, 1.0, 1.6. 2.8..., which is a 
good approximation for the distances from the Sun of all 
the planets in units of the astronomical unit. The law has 
entries for the then undiscovered asteroids and Uranus, 
but fails at Neptune. The explanation for the law (if there 
is one) remains unknown. Bode discovered M81 (known 
as Bode’s nebula), M82, M53, M92 and M64, and published 
in 1779 A Complete Catalogue of Hitherto Observed Nebulous 
Stars and Star Clusters, which, unfortunately, contains in 
its 75 entries many non-existent objects and uninteresting 
asterisms. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bode’s Law 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bode’s Law 


A numerical sequence which is roughly in proportion to 
the distances of the major planets from the Sun. Itisnamed 
after Johann Bode, who announced it in 1772; it is more 
properly referred to as the Titius—Bode law, as it was first 
put forward by Johann Titius six years previously. The 
sequence is formed by taking 0 and 3, doubling 3 to give 
6, doubling 6 to give 12, and so on, then adding 4 to each 
term to give 4, 7, 10, 16, ..., and finally dividing each term 
by 10. The formula 4(2" — 1) +4,n = 0,1,2,... yields 
each term. The correspondence with the distances of the 
planets (to the nearest 0.1 AU) is given in the table. 


Bode’s law Actual 
Planet distance (AU) distance (AU) 


Mercury 0.4 0.4 
Venus 0.7 0.7 
Earth 1.0 1.0 
Mars 1.6 1.5 
Ceres 2.8 2.8 
Jupiter 5.2 5.2 
Saturn 10.0 9.5 
Uranus 19.6 19.2 
Neptune 38.8 30.1 
Pluto 77.2 39.5 


Bode made his announcement before the asteroids 
or the planets beyond Saturn had been discovered. The 
relationship remained something of a curiosity until the 
discovery of Uranus in 1781. Once the new planet’s 
distance from the Sun was established and seen to fit the 
numerical pattern, astronomers considered more seriously 
the apparent gap between Mars and Jupiter, and were 
prompted to begin searching for a missing planet. The 
first asteroid to be discovered, Ceres, in 1801, was by no 
means a major planet, but it did orbit at the predicted 
distance from the Sun. This predictive power gave the 
Titius—Bode relationship the status of a ‘law’, though it was 
transgressed by the subsequent discoveries of Neptune 
and Pluto at distances that broke the pattern. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bok, Bart Jan (1906-83) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bok, Bart Jan (1906-83) 


Dutch astronomer, worked at Harvard and directed the 
Mount Stromlo Observatory (near Canberra, Australia). 
Studied the structure and evolution of star clusters and 
the Galaxy, mapping the spiral arms of the Milky Way, 
especially the Carina region, and the Magellanic Clouds. 
Bok realized that the sky quality at Mount Stromlo was 
deteriorating with the growth of Canberra and chose 
Siding Spring Mountain near Coonabarabran as the 
new station for the Australia’s main optical observatory, 
eventually the site for the Anglo-Australian 150 in 
telescope. Bok initiated radioastronomy at Harvard and 
promoted it elsewhere. His investigations of interstellar 
gas and dust led to studies of star formation, and he 
became known for his work on small dark nebulae now 
called Bok globules. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bolide 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bolide 


A bright meteor—a fireball—that produces audible 
sounds. Sonic effects are generated once the incoming 
meteoroid has penetrated to an altitude of around 30 km, 
and so will be heard some minutes after the fireball 
is seen. An initial sonic boom indicates that the 
meteoroid has exploded. If large enough, the resulting 
fragments will create their own sonic booms, and an object 
that undergoes multiple fragmentation may generate a 
continuous, thunder-like rumbling. The fragments of a 
meteoroid that produces a bolide may well survive their 
atmospheric passage to fall as meteorites. The Allende 
meteorite, which underwent multiple fragmentation, was 
preceded by a bolide. 


Seealso: Allende meteorite. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bond, William Cranch (1789-1859) and Bond, George 
Phillips (1825-65) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bond, William Cranch (1789-1859) 
and Bond, George Phillips (1825-65) 


Instrument-maker and astronomer, born in Portland, ME. 
Massachusetts businessman, first (unpaid) director of 
the Harvard College Observatory, with its magnificent 
15 in telescope. He identified Saturn’s innermost Crépe 
Ring. Independently of William Lassell, he discovered the 
seventh satellite of Saturn, Hyperion, with his son George 
Bond (the observatory’s second director). George correctly 
realized that Saturn’s rings could not be solid, as shown 
by JAMES CLERK MAXWELL. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bondi, Hermann (1919-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bondi, Hermann (1919-) 


Mathematical physicist and astronomer, born in Vienna, 
Austria, made his career in Britain as a mathematician. 
Best known as one of the originators of the steady- 
state theory of the universe, director-general of the 
European Space Research Organization, and as a scientific 
administrator. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bonesiell, Chesley (1888-1986) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bonestell, Chesley (1888-1986) 


American architect (Golden Gate Bridge, and the Chrysler 
Tower) and astronomical illustrator, including for such 
motion pictures as War of the Worlds, When Worlds Collide, 
and Destination Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


BOOMERANG 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BOOMERANG 


This is an acronym for ‘Balloon Observations of 
Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics’, an 
experiment which produced an image of the farthest 
region of the universe observable today. This region is 
about 15 billion light-years away, and the structures visi- 
ble in the image existed about 15 billion yr ago. They rep- 
resent the first stage of the process of formation of the 
large-scale structures in our universe. They are visible 
because their presence slightly modifies the otherwise 
isotropic COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND (CMB). This 
radiation, produced in the very early universe, is observ- 
able today in the microwaves as a blackbody with a tem- 
perature of 2.73 K. The photons of the CMB, generated 
soon after the big bang (see BIG BANG THEORY), were con- 
tinuously scattered by free electrons until the expanding 
universe cooled below 3000 K. 

At that point, called ‘recombination’, about 300000 
yr after the big bang and about 15 billion yr ago, the uni- 
verse became neutral (hydrogen atoms formed from free 
electrons and protons) and transparent. Since then, the 
CMB photons have been free to propagate without inter- 
acting with matter anymore. They thus arrive at our tele- 
scopes carrying the imprint of all the protostructures pre- 
sent at the recombination epoch. Very sensitive tele- 
scopes are needed to detect the small (10-100 parts per 
million, ppm) perturbations in the CMB, usually called 
‘anisotropies’, produced by these protostructures. The 
BOOMERANG experiment (figure 1) was flown by 
means of a stratospheric balloon, at an altitude of 37 km, 
in order to observe above the bulk of the Earth’s 
microwave-absorbing atmosphere. It was launched from 
Antarctica, and remained at float from 29 December 1998 
to 8 January 1999. It observed about 4% of the sky, ina 


to the balloan Azimuth Pivot (ACS) 


4 ae Flywheel 


Whey > Dewar 


Ss 


(ACS) 


Sun Shields 
wo shields 


Solar Panels 


Inner Frame 


Figure 1. The BOOMERANG payload is a remotely operated 
microwave telescope. Its mass is about 1.5 tons and it is lifted to 
37 km of altitude by a 1 million m3 helium-filled stratospheric 
balloon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


high Galactic latitude region centered at RA=7.5h, dec=- 
45°. The experiment had 16 independent measurement 
channels sensitive to four wavelengths: 3.0, 2.0, 0.12 and 
0.73 mm. 

The detectors were ‘spider web’ semiconductor 
bolometers, cooled by a 3He cryogenic system at 0.3 K to 
reduce their noise. The experiment used an off-axis tele- 
scope with an aluminum primary mirror, 1.3 m in diam- 
eter. The angular resolution obtained in this way was 18, 
10, 14 and 13 arcmin respectively for the four bands. A 
subsection of the map produced at the wavelength of 2 
mm is visible in figure 2. The false colors (from black to 
yellow) represent anisotropies of the brightness of the 
CMB (from -100 ppm to + 100 ppm respectively). The 
spots visible in the image have a typical size of 1°. This 
characteristic size of the fluctuations corresponds to the 
dimensions of the sound horizon (i.e. the distance sound 
waves have travelled in the ionized universe since the 
big bang) at the recombination. In fact, only perturba- 
tions smaller than the sound horizon at that epoch can 
oscillate like sound waves, thus producing significant 
anisotropies in the CMB. 

The size of the horizon can be computed with good 
accuracy and compared with the angular dimension 
observed in the image, thus carrying out a sensitive ‘angu- 
lar-size versus distance’ test. From the comparison it is 
inferred that the curvature of the universe is close to zero. 
According to the general relativistic cosmological models 
(see GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY and COSMOLOGICAL 
MODEL), the curvature of the universe is determined by its 
average mass-energy density. A density larger than the 
critical density produces a positive curvature, a density 
equal to the critical one produces a flat (zero curvature) 
Euclidean geometry, while a density smaller that the criti- 
cal one produces a negative curvature. If the curvature 


Figure 2. Map of a remote region of the universe obtained by the 
BOOMERANG experiment at 2 mm of wavelength. The size of 
this map is about 40° x 50°. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


BOOMERANG 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T 
6000 + | 
ceca —| 3 
i ---- weak ,,,=1 2 
| J —— weak 0,,=1 & LSS | 
~h o DMR 

r f ‘\ e B98 7 
a i : 
4000 + rN _ 
eS 

+) : | 
& ! ) 
a rots Ht F 
Ss Lf : 
= a 
: j Ces 
= 2000P BY ae ef 

L J Wy? er, 

(0) fe a SS SS SS GS eS 
L 1 L | 1 1 1 | 1 1 1 | 1 1 ' | L u 1 | 
0 200 400 600 800 ~—-1000 


t 

Figure 3. Angular power spectrum of the CMB measured by the 
BOOMERANG experiment. The quantity plotted is the intensi- 
ty of the CMB temperature fluctuations for different angular 
scales, identified by the multipole number. A multipole 200 cor- 
responds to an angular scale of abot 1°. A multipole 1000 corre- 
sponds to an angular scale of about 0.2°. The crosses represent 
the measured data with their statistical errors; the lines repre- 
sent different adiabatic inflationary models fitting the data. 


was positive, the spots would appear larger than 
observed, while if it was negative the spots would appear 
smaller than observed. Measuring a curvature close to 
zero, BOOMERANG has demonstrated that the 
mass-energy density of the universe is close to the critical 
density (Q = 0.98 + 0.05). The details of the size distribu- 
tion of the hot and cold spots in the image (i.e. the angular 
power spectrum of the CMB; see figure 3) have been com- 
pared with accurate theory predictions in the framework 
of the adiabatic inflationary cosmology with a Hubble 
parameter h=0.71+0.08. In this way the values of several 
other cosmological parameters, such as the physical den- 
sity of baryons (Q,/), the tilt of the power spectrum of pri- 
mordial density perturbations (m) and the energy in the 
form of the cosmological constant (Qa) have been mea- 
sured: Qph? = 0.021 + 0.004; n=0.94 + 0.09, Qa=0.62 + 0.15. 

For further information see http://www.physics. 
ucsb.edu/~boomerang/ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Borelli, Giovanni Alfonso (1608-79) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Borelli, Giovanni Alfonso (1608-79) 


Italian mathematician and physiologist, born in Naples, 
taught at Pisa and Messina. Suggested that comets travel 
in parabolic orbits. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Boscovich, Ruggero Giuseppe (1711-87) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Boscovich, Ruggero Giuseppe 
(1711-87) 


Mathematician, born in Ragusa, Dalmatia, Venetian 
territory (now Dubrovnik, Croatia), professor at the 
Collegium Romanum in Rome and Pavia, and director 
of the Brera Observatory. Using NEWTON’s gravitational 
theories, Boscovich was the first to give a procedure to 
compute a planet’s orbit from three observations of its 
position, a solution that was elaborated by CARL GAuss, 
LEGENDRE and other mathematicians. He studied optics, 
astronomy, gravitation, meteorology and trigonometry. 
He wrote in 1753 a crisp and elegant little book on reasons 
to think that the Moon has no atmosphere, and he led an 
expedition to California in 1769 to observe the transit of 
Venus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bouguer, Pierre (1698-1758) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bouguer, Pierre (1698-1758) 


Mathematician and physicist, born in Le Croisic, France, 
he was the first to measure the density of the Earth using 
the deflection of a plumb line due to the attraction of 
a mountain in Peru, as more successfully done by the 
Astronomer Royal, NEVIL MASKELYNE. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Boulliau, Ismael (1605-94) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Boulliau, Ismael (1605-94) 


Mathematician, librarian, priest, born in Loudun, France. 
In 1645 he published Astronomia Philolaica which, on the 
basis of elliptical orbits for planets and Kepler’s laws, 
suggested that the force which attracted planets to the 
Sun should vary inversely as the square of the distance 
(JOHANNES KEPLER had claimed inversely as the first power). 
This was the most significant advance in the theory 
of gravitation between Kepler and Isaac NEWTON. It was 
acknowledged by Newton in his Principia. (See also ROBERT 
HOOKE.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bouvard, Alexis (1767-1843) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bouvard, Alexis (1767-1843) 


French astronomer, born a shepherd boy in Chamonix, 
became assistant to Laplace and eventually director of the 
Paris Observatory. Attempted to produce an accurate orbit 
of Uranus, calculating the perturbations of other planets 
according to corrected tables of planetary positions by JEAN 
DELAMBRE, published in 1792. Bouvard still could not make 
all the observations fit. He published his new orbit of 
Uranus in 1821 but noted: ‘I leave to the future the task of 
discovering whether the difficulty of reconciling [the data] 
is connected with the ancient observations, or whether it 
depends on some foreign and unperceived cause which 
may have been acting upon the planet’. URBAIN LEVERRIER 
and JOHN ADAMS showed that the latter, Neptune, was the 
reason. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bowditch, Nathaniel (1773-1838) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bowditch, Nathaniel (1773-1838) 


Insurance actuary, astronomer, mathematician, born in 
Salem, MA. Self-taught, by age 15 he had compiled an 
astronomical almanac. Based on practical experience 
at sea, he wrote the New American Practical Navigator; 
published papers on comets and meteors, and translated 
PIERRE LAPLACE’S Mécanique Ceéleste. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bowen, Edward George [‘Taffy’] (1911-91) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bowen, Edward George [‘Taffy’] 
(1911-91) 


Radioastronomer, born in Cockett near Swansea, Wales. 
After war-time research on the development of radar, 
Bowen went to Australia where he made rain through 
cloud-seeding, discovered still-disputed correlations be- 
tween the dates of meteor showers and the lunar phase and 
rainfall (which he attributed to lunar modulation of mete- 
oritic material) and became a radioastronomer. Inspired 
by the Jodrell Bank reflector, he organized the construc- 
tion of the Parkes Radio Telescope to design principles by 
Barnes Wallis (later Sir Barnes Wallis), the famous airship 
and aircraft designer, and played the key role in organizing 
the construction of the Anglo-Australian Telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bowen, Ira Sprague [‘Ike’] (1898-1973) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bowen, Ira Sprague [‘Ike’] (1898-1973) 


American astronomer, worked with ROBERT A MILLIKAN, 
at the California Institute of Technology. In 1927 his 
investigation of the ultraviolet spectra of highly ionized 
atoms led to his identification of mysterious spectral 
lines of gaseous nebulae, not as an unknown element 
prematurely called nebulium, but as forbidden lines of 
ionized oxygen and nitrogen. Director of the Mount 
Wilson and Palomar Observatories, oversaw completion 
of the 200 in Hale and 48 in Schmidt telescopes, designing 
many of their instruments, including a novel spectrograph. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Boyle, Willard S (1924-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Boyle, Willard S (1924-) 


Canadian physicist, born in Amherst, Nova Scotia, co- 
inventor of the charge coupled device (CCD), the heart 
of all modern instrumentation for optical telescopes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Boys, Charles Vernon (1855-1944) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Boys, Charles Vernon (1855-1944) 


Physicist born in Wing, Rutland, England, invented the 
radio-micrometer, to measure heat radiation from the 
Moon and planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bradley, James (1693-1762) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bradley, James (1693-1762) 


Astronomer, born in Sherborne, Gloucestershire, England. 
From 1742 third Astronomer Royal. With SAMUEL MOLYNEUX 
discovered the ‘aberration of light’ (a very large and 
unsuspected apparent motion of the stars that was, up to 
that time, an uncontrolled error in star observations). The 
explanation for the discovery (the addition of the Earth’s 
orbital velocity to the velocity of the light incoming from 
the star being measured) provided the first observational 
proof of the Copernican hypothesis that the Earth moved 
round the Sun, and showed that the speed of light was a 
constant of physics. The discovery showed as a by-product 
that the parallax of stars is very small, i.e. their distances 
are immense—in the case of Gamma Draconis, the star 
measured, more than 400 000 times the distance of the Sun. 
Bradley also discovered that the inclination of the Earth’s 
axis to the ecliptic is not constant (‘nutation’). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Brahmagupta (c 598-c 665) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brahmagupta (c 598—c 665) 


Hindu astronomer born (possibly) in Ujjain, India, where 
he headed the observatory, applied advanced (for the time) 
algebraic methods to astronomical problem such as solar 
and lunar eclipses, planetary conjunctions and positions 
of the planets, and wrote Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta (The 
Opening of the Universe) and Khandakhadyaka. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Brashear, John Alfred (1840-1920) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brashear, John Alfred (1840-1920) 


Telescope maker, born in Brownsville, PA. His company 
became the Contraves Corp. Brashear’s remains and those 
of his wife are interned beneath the Keeler Telescope at 
Allegheny Observatory in Pittsburgh (which he directed), 
under the words ‘We have loved the stars too fondly to be 
fearful of the night’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Brattle, Thomas (1658-1713) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brattle, Thomas (1658-1713) 


Prominent Boston merchant, tutor at Harvard University, 
became its treasurer. Observed the comet of 1680 with 
Harvard’s first telescope of 3.5 feet focal length—the 
observations were mentioned by ISAAC NEWTON in Principia. 
One of the first astronomers in America, Brattle’s unique 
claim to a place in history is that he persuaded colonial 
Governor William Phips to order that reliance on spectral 
and intangible evidence no longer be allowed in legal 
processes, thus suspending the witchcraft trials. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Braun, Wernher von (1912-77) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Braun, Wernher von (1912-77) 


Rocket scientist, born in Wirsitz, Germany, enthusiast of 
space travel from an early age, designer of the V-2 rocket 
used during the second World War. With 120 associates 
from Peenemunde, went to the United States and directed 
firings of captured V-2 rockets at White Sands Missile 
Range in New Mexico, following which he used a Jupiter- 
C (Juno I) to put America’s first satellite, Explorer 1, into 
orbit in 1958. Von Braun and his team transferred to NASA 
when it was formed in that year, and he became Director 
of the Marshall Center, where he developed the Saturn V, 
used to put a man on the moon in 1969. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Breccia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Breccia 


A type of rock composed of small, shattered and crushed 
(and sometimes melted) angular fragments cemented 
together in a finer-grained material. Breccias are produced 
by impacts. The shock from the impact of even a meter- 
sized body on a planetary surface may be sufficient to 
compact and weld surface material into breccias. Lunar 
highland rock sampled by the crews of Apollo missions 
proved to consist of breccias, which are expected to make 
up the surfaces of all rocky bodies which have not been 
subsequently modified by volcanic or other geological 
activity. The fact that many chondritic and achondritic 
meteorites are breccias shows that they were once part of 
larger bodies that suffered impacts. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Briggs, Henry (1561-1630) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Briggs, Henry (1561-1630) 


Mathematician, born in Worley Wood, Yorkshire, England. 
Professor at Cambridge, London (Gresham College) 
and Oxford. By pointing out how much more useful 
logarithms would be if (unlike JOHN NapiER’s original 
invention) they were to base 10, he was responsible for 
improving astronomers’ ability to calculate. Published 
mathematical tables (logarithms, sines, tangents, secants) 
as an aid to such calculations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bright Quasar 3C 273 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bright Quasar 3C 273 


QUASARS are the most luminous objects we know in the 
universe. 3C 273 is among the brightest quasars; it also 
happens to be one of the closest to the Earth. It is therefore 
bright in the night sky and hence has been the object of 
intense studies since its discovery in 1963. 

Quasars are found in the center of some galaxies 
(collections of some hundred billion stars; the MILKY 
way is the galaxy in which our solar system is 
embedded). Quasars are very peculiar celestial objects, 
they outshine the galaxy that hosts them, although 
they are barely as large as our solar system (which 
is extremely small compared with the galaxy). They 
emit electromagnetic radiation that covers all the bands 
accessible to astronomical observations on the Earth and 
in orbit, from radio waves to gamma rays. Their energy 
radiation can vary in an important manner on time scales 
that may be as short as hundreds of seconds. The matter 
close to the most central region of quasars moves at 
speeds of several thousand kilometers per second. These 
properties are most likely due to the presence in the center 
of quasars of a black hole that may be as massive as many 
tens of millions of suns. This paradigm is the only one that 
gives some hope of understanding the general properties 
of these objects. 


The discovery 

Quasars were discovered in 1963 when it became possible 
to localize with precision RADIO sourRcES in the sky. 3C 273 
played a major role in the discovery of quasars. 3C 273 
is a bright radio source, it bears the number 273 in 
the third Cambridge catalog of radio sources (hence the 
name). It was the second source that was identified 
with a very peculiar ‘star’, a source of light that was not 
resolved as extended on photographic plates. The ‘star’, 
or better the source of optical light that was coincident 
with the radio source 3C 273, was soon seen to have 
peculiar emission lines. These are the signature of the 
presence of atoms that are excited and emit light at well 
defined wavelengths. Stars normally don’t have emission 
lines, and more surprisingly it was at first impossible to 
recognize the type of atoms that were responsible for the 
emission lines in 3C 273, as the wavelengths at which the 
lines were observed were not among those emitted by 
known atoms. These very peculiar properties of the light 
source led to the name quasi stellar radio source that then 
became QSO for quasi stellar object or quasar for quasi 
star. 

The mystery of the emission lines was solved when it 
was noted that one could indeed recognize the wavelength 
of the emission lines if one admitted that the lines are 
observed not at the wavelength Aj typical of laboratory 
measurements of the atoms but at longer wavelengths 
A = do(1 + z), where z is known as the redshift, equal to 
0.158 for 3C 273. Many galaxies showing the same effect 
were already known in 1963, but with redshifts much less 
than that of 3C 273. In the universe this effect is a sign that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the objects are moving apart from one another (expansion) 
and thus are at very large distances. At a redshift of 0.158 
3C 273 is thus found to be some 3 billion light years away. 
In 1963 3C 273 was the most distant object known (see also 
HIGH-REDSHIFT QUASARS). 

Being so far away and still easy to find on 
photographic plates, 3C 273 is an object of 13th magnitude; 
3C 273 is clearly a very luminous object indeed. Its light 
output corresponds to 10" times that of the Sun. 

Most quasars do not radiate substantially in the radio 
part of the electromagnetic spectrum, and are called radio 
quiet quasars. A small fraction, of which 3C 273 is a 
member, do, however. These quasars are called radio 
bright quasars. They can be discovered as described above 
using radio data. Radio quiet objects are found by looking 
for redshifted emission lines in the light of ‘stars’. 

It was also soon discovered that 3C 273 varies in 
intensity on time scales much less than 1 year. Since light 
sources cannot vary on times scales much less than the time 
the light needs to cross the source (this is due to a causality 
argument: in order to significantly change the brightness 
of an object a signal must reach all the parts of the object to 
convey the instruction), it was also very quickly clear that 
3C 273 must be much smaller than 1 light year, a distance 
already much less than that separating us from the closest 
star in our Galaxy. 

The very unusual properties of 3C 273 spurred a 
large set of observations using not only optical and radio 
telescopes but also other instruments, both on the ground 
and on Earth orbiting satellites. It became clear that this 
(and other) quasar was the source not only of visual light 
and radio waves, but also of infrared radiation, ultraviolet 
light, x-rays and gamma rays. 

Deep radio, optical and x-ray images in subsequent 
years showed that the object is not really ‘star-like’ but 
that a cigar shaped extension is associated with the main 
source (see figure 1 of QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: OVERVIEW). This 
‘jet’ extends from very small distances to some 20” from 
the ‘core’. It is most prominent in the radio images. Very 
surprisingly, the features making up the jet (often called 
blobs, thus expressing our lack of understanding of these 
features) were seen to travel away from the core of the 
object at speeds seemingly larger than the speed of light 
(superluminal motion). This superluminal motion is in 
fact due to an aberration that takes place when objects 
are moving in a direction close to the line of sight at 
velocities close to (but not larger than) the speed of light. 
This showed that in addition to the already very unusual 
observed properties of quasars one had to add the presence 
of radio wave emitting matter moving at very high speeds 
along a well defined direction, close to the line of sight. 


The source of energy 

The only way known to us through which large quantities 
of energy can be released by matter in a very small volume, 
clearly necessary properties to understand the nature of 
quasars, is to consider that the matter falls into a very deep 
gravitational potential well created by a very massive and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bright Quasar 3C 273 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


visible 
radio mm IR vuUV X-rays y—rays 
T I mr T 
103 il TIT] TT] TT MTAY UL T | TOM] TOT THM TTT T Ta] TTI TUT TUT TOTTT T TOT TTY TTT] 
S05 
= SOROS a 
> ee) 
a 0, 
ae me Compton 
a = > 
a 4 0-3 
Be ae 
a SS 0065 
B 10-8 synchrotron a 
co} (eo) 
(e} 
* >_> 
& 0-9 thermal & 
ie} 
fo} 
ates 
n E 299 O 4 
= 10-10 & 0 a ae °, 4 
E E ofP00 °0 90 re 
(3) Cc q 
Ss 10-11 E o 4 
a E £ 7 
23 10718 = & 4 
a F o° q 
jem Bi eye) 4 
10-18 & _ 
> FulCooul Luu Luu fmm Luu Luu Luu Luu Luu Luu Luu mm cul Luu Luu Luu uw 
10° 10!2 1016 1018 10?! 1074 


Frequency [ Hz ] 


Figure 1. The observed energy per unit area per unit time and per unit frequency (flux density) from quasar 3C 273 is given in the top 
panel. The emission mechanisms responsible for the emission are mentioned. The bottom panel expresses the same observations per 
log frequency interval. This shows that we observe roughly the same energy in all regions of the electromagnetic spectrum over 10 


decades of frequency. 


compact object. It is thus now accepted that quasars host 
very massive BLACK HOLES into which matter is falling at a 
high rate. One can estimate the mass of the black hole in 
the center of 3C 273 by remembering that light exerts a 
pressure on matter. The gravitational pull must be larger 
than this pressure for the matter to fall and its gravitational 
energy to be released. For 3C 273, the mass of the central 
black hole that is implied by this reasoning is about one 
billion solar masses. 

The mass of the black hole provides a measure of its 
size; in the case of 3C 373 this size is of the order of 102 m. 
The corresponding light crossing time is 10000 s or a few 
hours. This is well compatible with the fact that quasars 
(and in particular 3C 273) vary very rapidly. 

It is also possible to estimate how much matter must 
fall into the black hole to explain the observed luminosity 
by noting that the energy released by the fall is a fraction of 
the in-falling mass multiplied by the square of the velocity 
of light. This fraction is of the order of 10%. Again in the 
case of 3C 273, one finds that the rate of mass in-fall is 
about the mass of the Sun per year. 

Going beyond these simple estimates to understand 
the true nature of quasars has proved a very difficult 
endeavor, that is still nowhere close to being finished. 
This is due to the very unusual properties of the objects 
compared with the better known celestial bodies and to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


very complex geometry of the sources. The latter property 
prevents one approximating quasars by spherical objects, 
the properties of which are identical when viewed from 
different directions. In quasars it appears that the observed 
properties strongly depend on the direction from which 
they are viewed. 


The radiation of quasars 

The energy radiated by quasars is gained from the 
gravitational binding energy of the matter that falls into 
the black hole. This energy is radiated by elecrons through 
several emission mechanisms. Electrons moving along 
bent paths radiate part of their energy as electromagnetic 
radiation. In quasars there are many ways through which 
the paths of electrons are bent; there are correspondingly 
many emission mechanisms. Magnetic fields are one 
way of bending electron paths. The radiation emitted by 
these electrons is called SYNCHROTRON RADIATION. With the 
parameters typical of quasars this energy appears as radio 
and millimetre waves. Hot electrons also move along 
complex paths in the thermal medium. These therefore 
also radiate what is called thermal radiation. In quasars 
thermal radiation is observed from heated dust in the 
infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum and, most 
probably, by material heated in the process of the fall 
towards the black hole. This radiation appears in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bright Quasar 3C 273 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Line Emitting Clouds 
° 


Black Hole 
— —— 


Figure 2. A popular view of the different elements making a quasar like 3C 273. The matter falls into the black hole on spiral paths in 
the accretion disk. The jet originates at the center of the disk. The line emitting clouds orbit the black hole. 


visible and ultraviolet parts of the spectrum. A further way 
of bending the paths of electrons is through interaction 
with ambient light. These interactions are called Compton 
processes. Depending on the energy of the electrons the 
resulting emission appears in the x-ray or in the gamma 
ray parts of the spectrum. 

We give in figure 1 the energy flux received at the 
Earth from the quasar 3C 273 and show which parts 
of this flux are caused by the mechanisms sketched 
above. We also give in the same figure the flux per 
logarithmic frequency interval (vF,). This representation 
gives the quantity of energy we receive in each region 
of the electromagnetic spectrum, i.e. as radio, millimeter, 
infrared, visible, ultraviolet, x-ray or gamma rays. It is 
striking to note that we observe roughly the same quantity 
of energy in all these regions of the spectrum. This is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


described here for 3C 273; it is true in the same way 
for other radio bright quasars and with the exception of 
the radio emission for the radio quiet quasars. This is 
undoubtedly due to the interactions that exist between the 
different building blocks of the quasar. 

Understanding these interactions is a question of 
intense research. The approach that is being mostly used is 
based on repeated observations of the quasar in as many 
parts as possible of the electromagnetic spectrum. One 
then uses the variations observed in different parts of 
the spectrum to see which variations lead others in time. 
One thus expects to slowly understand what are the more 
fundamental phenomena and what are the components 
that are secondary. One also hopes to understand the 
relative organization of the regions emitting through the 
components described above. This will hopefully lead to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bright Quasar 3C 273 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a description of the geometry of the quasar. 

One possible geometry is based on the presence of 
an ACCRETION DISK around the black hole. In this disk the 
material is sowed down by viscous forces and thus slowly 
falls towards the black hole, releasing its gravitational 
energy. These disks are called accretion disks; they are 
known to exist around much less massive compact objects 
within our galaxy. Their presence is rather naturally 
expected also around the much more massive black holes 
in the center of external galaxies. The jet is then ejected 
perpendicular to the disk, at its center. The emission lines 
are emitted by small clouds that orbit the system. This 
geometry is illustrated in figure 2. It should be noted that 
this is a possible way of understanding the organization 
of matter in quasars and is not yet firmly established. 


The future 

Quasar 3C 273 was the first in which the very peculiar 
nature of these objects was recognized. It has been the 
object of intense studies in the 30 years since its discovery. 
Many of the observations have led to new insights and 
to more surprises. 3C 273 is certainly the best observed 
quasar and thus the best known. All the phenomena that 
are associated with quasars are seen in 3C 273, whether this 
makes it the archetype of a quasar or an exceptional object 
remains to be seen. What is certain is that understanding 
the physics of 3C 273 is still a challenge. 


Bibliography 
Courvoisier T J-L 1998 The bright quasar 3C 273 Astron. 


Astrophys. Rev. 9 1-32 
Robson E 1 1996 Active Galactic Nuclei (New York: Wiley) 


Thierry J-L Courvoisier 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Brisbane, Thomas Makdougall (1773-1860) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brisbane, Thomas Makdougall 
(1773-1860) 


Soldier and astronomer, born in Largs, North Ayrshire, 
Scotland. After a distinguished army career, he became 
Governor of New South Wales (1821), initiating largely 
unsuccessful experiments to introduce tobacco, coffee, 
cotton and flax to Australia. He had built only the second 
observatory in Scotland at the family home of Brisbane 
House in 1808, and built an observatory at Parramatta 
in New South Wales, making the first observations of 
7385 stars in the southern hemisphere since NICHOLAS 
LACAILLE’S in 1752. On return to Scotland, built an 
observatory at Makerstoun and became president of the 
Edinburgh Astronomical Institution. He is possibly the 
only astronomer to have a major city named after him 
(Brisbane, the capital of Queensland). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


British Astronomical Association 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


British Astronomical Association 


The British Astronomical Association was founded in 1890 
and has 3000 members. It is open to anyone interested 
in astronomy and it aims to bring together like-minded 
amateur astronomers, to collect their observations and 
organize their observational efforts under the guidance 
of experienced Section Directors. Papers and current 
astronomical observations/information are circulated by 
way of a journal, web page, handbook, circulars, memoirs, 
section publications and library. It hopes to encourage 
a popular interest in astronomy. Meetings are held in 
London and major cities throughout Great Britain. The 
registered office of the Association is at Burlington House, 
Piccadilly, London W1V 9AG. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.ast.cam.ac.uk/~baa. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


British Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


British Astronomy 


There has been a unified culture of astronomy in Britain, 
extending over the whole of the British Isles, ever since 
prehistoric times. 


Prehistoric astronomy 
The earliest surviving evidence of an interest in astronomy 
by the inhabitants of the British Isles lies in the alignments 
of megalithic monuments. Stonehenge in Wessex 
(2700 BC-) has alignments over the Heel Stone towards 
midsummer sunrise and could be, in principle, used to 
predict eclipses. The Temple Wood circle in Argyllshire 
(2nd millennium BC) appears to be a lunar observatory. 
The Newgrange barrow in the Boyne valley contains a 
unique ‘roof-box’ which admits the rays of the rising Sun 
at the midwinter solstice into the grave passage. Thus, in 
prehistoric times, it appears that there was a priestly clan 
in England, Scotland and Ireland, culturally connected in 
technology and intellectual knowledge, which included 
astronomical observation and possibly even prediction. 
Archaeological evidence shows that the Roman 
occupation of Britain (55 BC-c AD 400) brought a 
knowledge of practical astronomy, including timekeeping 
and calendrical calculations. This knowledge was 
maintained, pretty much with its original theoretical bases 
but elaborated into sophisticated formulae, for example 
the calculation of Easter by Bede (672-735), a monk in 
Jarrow. 


Medieval astronomy 

Islamic astronomy came to Britain in the medieval period. 
JOHN OF HOLYWOOD, known as Sacrobosco (1195-1256), learnt 
astronomy in Britain and moved to Paris where he 
provided his students with a textbook on astronomy, 
The Sphere. A watered-down version of John of Seville’s 
translation of The Elements by Al-Farghani, it was the 
long-term, best-selling, standard textbook in astronomy 
until the 17th century (it was published in 200 editions 
in the age of printing), even if it was barely adequate. 
Educated people, farmers and sailors, had knowledge 
of the practicalities of astronomical observations. The 
poet Geoffrey Chaucer (c 1343-1400) was author of 
the Canterbury Tales, which shows his familiarity with 
astrological matters, and wrote A Treatise on the Astrolabe, 
the oldest known ‘technical manual’ in the English 
language. 


Renaissance astronomy 

In the 16th century, Britain was, during the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth I, expanding its trade links overseas, taking the 
first steps to create an Empire. Astronomy concentrated on 
the practical matter of navigation, including timekeeping. 
It seemed less important what model of the solar system 
was correct than what model gave adequate predictions, 
so it is no surprise that William Shakespeare showed such 
a little interest in cosmology, although his knowledge of 
astronomical phenomena was detailed. His plays show 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


no knowledge of Copernicus. They do show a (somewhat 
skeptical) knowledge of astrology. The astrologer JOHN DEE 
(1527-1608) cast horoscopes for Elizabeth, receiving the 
title Royal Astrologer. He claimed to have put a hex on 
the Spanish Armada and to have caused the bad weather 
that wrecked the fleet. 

Up to the 17th century the teachers of astronomy 
in Britain were, in the main, clerics with an interest 
in proclaiming the glory of God and teaching the 
‘quadrivium’ (the four classical subjects of arithmetic, 
harmony, geometry and astronomy, knowledge of which 
made a man educated in science). Copernicus’ and 
Kepler’s knowledge of the motions of the planets and 
Galileo’s theory of dynamics were taken up by amateurs, 
like the group that formed around WILLIAM CRABTREE 
(1610-1644), a Lancashire instrument maker, and JEREMIAH 
HORROCKS (1619-1641), a schoolmaster. With his own 
theory of celestial dynamics, related to Kepler’s, Horrocks 
predicted a transit of Venus, which he and Crabtree 
observed. 

Astronomy in Britain became a cultural pursuit as 
well as a practical one and was a talking point in 
educated society. John Donne’s poetry covers issues 
such as the appearance of the supernova of 1604 and 
the new astronomy of Galileo, which put all in doubt, 
canceling out the old Ptolemaic certainties. Astronomy 
in the universities (which meant Oxford and Cambridge) 
turned from the teaching of Aristotelian and Ptolemaic 
philosophy and astronomy to the empirical observation 
of new phenomena. Astronomers formulated scientific 
laws by induction, often expressed them geometrically 
and increasingly expressed mathematically. 

In the 18th century the Government began to take 
a structural interest in astronomy. King Charles II was 
persuaded to found the ROYAL OBSERVATORY, GREENWICH in 
1675, in order to provide astronomical predictions for the 
purposes of navigation, for the benefit of the Royal Navy. 
The predictions were based by JOHN FLAMSTEED (1646-1719), 
the Royal Observatory’s first director, on careful and 
precise observations, from which increasingly accurate 
investigations could be made of astronomical phenomena. 
At the same time, from the universities, Sir Isaac NEWTON 
(1643-1727) formulated mathematical theories of motion 
and gravitation, presented in an equivalent of calculus (but 
expressed in traditional geometric terms). EDMOND HALLEY 
(1656-1742) used Newton’s theory of gravity to predict the 
return of the comet that bears his name. 

Newton and Flamsteed clashed over the running 
of the Royal Observatory. Flamsteed wanted the 
observations to be the best possible, sought grants to 
make the best equipment and took time to develop the 
observing techniques. Newton wanted observations too, 
but quickly in order to test his gravitational theory of the 
planets and the Moon. They quarreled. This fight between 
the institutes and the academics recurred in 20th century 
Britain. 

Flamsteed as director of the Royal Observatory had 
taken the title Astronomer Royal as a sign of the state 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


British Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


position of astronomy as practiced in Greenwich but 
the British royal court also continued its more personal 
interests in astronomy, maintaining court astronomers. 
Sir William Herschel (1738-1822) and his sister Caroline 
Herschel (1750-1848), at first supporting themselves 
through musical performances and teaching, constructed 
telescopes with which they made significant discoveries— 
comets, nebulae, double stars, even a new planet—and 
both were rewarded with royal pensions (see HERSCHEL 
FAMILY). William was given a stipend and the title of Royal 
Astronomer, getting King George’s telescope ready on 
fine nights to show discoveries to the royal court. The 
Queen and her ladies took a personal interest in Caroline’s 
comet, the first discovered by a woman, although the male 
courtiers belittled it as a small one. 


The 19th century 
Three groups of astronomers had established themselves 
in the 19th century: amateurs, Government astronomers 
and university astronomers. The amateurs included 
the independently wealthy, for example Lord Rosse 
(1800-1867) and Sir John Herschel (1792-1871). They 
included businessmen, for example William Lassell (1799- 
1880), a Liverpool brewer, and James Nasmyth (1808- 
1890), a mechanical engineer. Both men built telescopes, 
and Lassell’s, erected under the clear skies of Malta, 
foreshadowed the overseas observatories of modern times. 
The amateurs also included pensioners such as retired 
servicemen (Admiral W H Smyth (1788-1865)). The 
amateurs concentrated on visual observations of planets, 
nebulae and double stars but also used talent, time 
and their own resources to construct large, ingenious 
or novel instrumentation (such as Sir William Huggins’ 
application of spectroscopy and Common’s application 
of photography to astronomy). Rosse built in Ireland 
(then part of Great Britain) the then-largest telescope in the 
world, the 6 ft (1.8 m) aperture ‘Leviathan of Parsonstown’. 
The university astronomers, particularly at Oxford 
and Cambridge, but later in London, Durham, Manch- 
ester, etc, concentrated on the high intellectual content 
areas of astronomy, typically theoretical mathematical as- 
tronomy (at first celestial mechanics, later astrophysics). 
The Government astronomers were principally at Green- 
wich (for example Sir George Airy (1801-1892)) and later 
also at the ROYAL OBSERVATORY, EDINBURGH. Their work could 
be characterized as systematic observations by teams of 
astronomers and ‘calculators’ in programs principally of 
positional astronomy. They carried on a tradition started 
in the 18th century by Halley and Cook of overseas travel to 
observe astronomical phenomena not visible from Britain, 
such as hidden constellations, transits and eclipses, and 
founded the Royal Observatory at the Cape in 1825. 
CHARLES PIAZZI SMYTH of Edinburgh site tested the mountain 
of El Teide on Tenerife in the Canary Islands, setting the 
scene for the establishment of the La Palma observatory. 
In 1820 the ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY was founded. 
Some members met at a gentlemen’s dining club to 
discuss the latest developments. The wider society 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of astronomers met monthly in open session with a 
formal program of presentations, which were announced 
and summarized in the Society’s Monthly Notices. This 
journal continues as the principal means of publication 
of professional astronomical research in Britain (with 
a substantial content from overseas), in modern times 
among the trio of the world’s most important astronomical 
journals (see ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES AND PUBLICATIONS). It 
retains the historical name, although it is neither monthly 
nor collections of notices. Reflecting its 19th century 
origins, the Royal Astronomical Society remains a society 
of both professional and amateur astronomers, numbering 
about 3000, but there are additional exclusively amateur 
astronomy societies such as the BRITISH ASTRONOMICAL 
ASSOCIATION. 


Modern astronomy in Britain 
In the 20th century astrophysics became more important 
in Britain than positional astronomy, and the thrust of the 
universities in astrophysics began to challenge astrometry 
at the royal observatories. Theoretical astronomy, espe- 
cially cosmology, became very strong—this is the period 
of Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington (1882-1944), E A Milne 
(1896-1950) and Sir James Jeans (1877-1946). This area of 
strength continues, for example in gravitational physics 
around Steven Hawking. In mid-century a generation 
of young radar scientists (for example Sir Bernard Lovell 
(1913-), Sir Martin Ryle (1918-1984, Nobel Prize 1974)) re- 
turned to the universities (Manchester and Cambridge) 
from which, as young men, they had been recruited to 
work in the Second World War, and established radio as- 
tronomy. The radio interferometers at Cambridge made 
all-sky surveys, establishing the evolutionary big bang 
theory of the universe, demolishing the steady-state the- 
ory produced by Sir Fred Hoyle and his associates and 
discovering pulsars (Anthony Hewish, Nobel Prize 1974). 
Jodrell Bank’s Lovell Telescope was for a time the largest 
fully steerable dish for radio astronomy. JODRELL BANK OB- 
SERVATORY is now the center of the MERLIN interferome- 
ter spread across England. Meanwhile, space astronomy 
groups established themselves in the universities of Lon- 
don, Leicester and Birmingham, developing x-ray astron- 
omy, solar astronomy and magnetospheric physics. The 
number of astronomical knighthoods signifies continuing 
public, establishment and royal support for astronomy. 
The Royal Observatory moved out of London to less 
smoky, less light-polluted skies over Herstmonceux in 
the south of England, keeping its link with Greenwich 
in its new name. As celestial navigation became less 
important for ships, the Royal Greenwich Observatory 
shifted its emphasis towards scientific research. In 1965 
it was transferred from the control of the Royal Navy 
to one of the new British Government bodies set up 
to fund scientific research, the Science Research Council 
(later the Science and Engineering Research Council, still 
later the PARTICLE PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY RESEARCH COUNCIL, 
which is the currently operating UK funding agency for 
astronomy). The Government-funded research councils 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


British Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


were given university-oriented mission statements and 
controlled by governing bodies with members from the 
universities, whose number, power and influence were 
growing with the increase of tertiary education in Britain. 

The optical astronomers proposed a large 2.5 m 
aperture telescope. Because of its established position 
of power, it was the Royal Greenwich Observatory, 
under Sir Richard van der Riet Woolley, which built the 
Isaac Newton Telescope (1967). It did not satisfy the 
universities’ needs. During study overseas, university 
astronomers had used telescopes in good climates such 
as California and did not like sitting under cloudy skies at 
night in Sussex. Also they did not easily relate to the civil 
service style of operation of the telescope. 

Asouthern hemisphere facility had become important 
to the space astronomers with their all-sky capability. 
They pressed for the establishment of the ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN 
OBSERVATORY in Coonabarabran (1974). The EUROPEAN SPACE 
AGENCY was formed in 1975 and its Science Program to 
launch astronomical telescopes and to explore geospace 
and the planets has become Britain’s main space 
astronomy program. The UK takes a high profile and 
active interest in ESA and its Science Program. 

Infrared astronomers sought out a_ high site, 
Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for the UNITED KINGDOM INFRARED TELE- 
scorE (1979), operated by the Royal Observatory, Edin- 
burgh. Later, the JAMES CLERK MAXWELL TELESCOPE for mil- 
limeter astronomy was established there. The radio as- 
tronomers pressed for an optical ‘northern hemisphere ob- 
servatory’ to follow up their radio observations made from 
Britain. It was created by the move in 1984 of the Isaac 
Newton Telescope to La Palma in the Canary Islands. The 
main telescope at the observatory was completed in 1986, 
the 4.2 m William Herschel Telescope. 

The Royal Greenwich Observatory continued to 
operate the telescopes in La Palma but, having lost its 
main telescope to an overseas site, it was moved for a 
second time in 1991, to the university environment of 
Cambridge. There was competition for resources between 
the two Royal Observatories (Greenwich and Edinburgh) 
and the universities. This led in 1998 to the closure of the 
Royal Observatories in Cambridge and Edinburgh and the 
establishment in Edinburgh of a combined UK Astronomy 
Technology Center to make astronomical instruments at 
the site still called the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. In 
1999 the first of the two 8 m Gemini Telescopes was opened 
on Mauna Kea, with the second soon to be established in 
Chile. 

All Britain’s current large telescopes (save MERLIN 
and UKIRT) are multinational, with Britain partnering 
Australia, Canada, the Netherlands, Spain, the USA and 
other countries. The UK is not however currently a 
member of ESO, having declined to join on grounds of 
expense at its foundation, and presently rueful about 
missing out on participation in the VLT. 

In Britain today there are about 6000 amateur 
astronomers (judging by membership of the amateur 
societies, allowing for overlaps). By contrast with many 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


continental European countries, professional astronomy 
has become dispersed into the universities, no longer 
concentrated into special institutes. There are 50 
universities that teach astronomy at an undergraduate 
level (see EDUCATION). About half of these have significant 
astronomy research groups. British astronomers produce 
about 10% of the world’s output of astronomy (about a 
quarter that of the USA, to whom the UK lies in second 
place, and about the same as France and Germany). There 
are some 300 permanent university astronomers, 400 post- 
doctoral researchers with fixed-term positions and some 
450 PhD students, many of whom are independently 
financed. About 25% of the PhD students remain in 
astronomy after a decade—most transfer their skills to 
industry. The number of university teachers shows a 
steady increase, financed by the universities in response 
to an increasing student demand. Public interest in 
astronomy as a high-profile, flagship science remains 
strong and increasing and there is virtually daily coverage 
of astronomy in the UK’s newspapers and broadcast 
MEDIA. However, the Government funding for astronomy 
is flat (at £95 m p.a. in 1999). Indeed there has 
been small but steady reduction in Government-provided 
purchasing power for astronomy for 15 yr, a dramatic 
fall in the number of astronomers employed by the 
Government institutes and a recent decrease in the 
number of doctoral and post-doctoral researchers. In 
spite of this, perhaps because of the competitive nature 
of the university environment, British astronomers are 
international, dynamic and flexible and, at the present 
time, in spite of chronic financial stress, remain successful 
in continuing Britain’s 4000 yr old attempt to understand 
the universe. 


Paul Murdin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Brorsen, Theodore (1819-95) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brorsen, Theodore (1819-95) 


Danish astronomer, observed the gegenschein. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Brouwer, Dirk (1902-66) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brouwer, Dirk (1902-66) 


Celestial mechanician, born in and educated in The 
Netherlands, director of the Yale University Observatory. 
He determined the mass of Titan from its influence on other 
Saturnian moons, and developed methods for finding 
orbits of comets, asteroids and planets, redetermining 
the astronomical constants. He was one of the first to 
use electronic computers for astronomical computations, 
computing the orbits of the first artificial satellites, 
obtaining increased knowledge of the figure of the Earth. 
He was editor of the Astronomical Journal. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Brown, Ernest William (1866-1938) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brown, Ernest William (1866-1938) 


Celestial mechanician, born in England, taught mathemat- 
ics at Haverford College in Pennsylvania and at Yale Uni- 
versity. Devoted his life to calculations of the Moon’s mo- 
tion. His theory, which was a set of equations with an 
astounding 1500 terms, took account of ‘the gravitational 
action of every particle of matter that can have a sensible 
effect on the Moon’s motion’. He computed the constants 
of the terms by analysing 150 years of Greenwich observa- 
tions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Brown, Robert Hanbury (1916-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Brown, Robert Hanbury (1916—) 


Physicist, astronomer. Educated in London, after war- 
time service became radioastronomer at Jodrell Bank, 
where he discovered that M31 is a radio source; professor 
at University of Sydney. Despite being assured, by 
colleagues who understood less quantum mechanics than 
he did, that it was impossible, he invented the Intensity 
Interferometer, which created wave-like interference in 
optical sensors after the incoming light had been detected. 
Used the interferometer, constructed at Narrabri in 
Australia, to determine the angular diameters of the 
brighter stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bruno, Giordano (1548-1600) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bruno, Giordano (1548-1600) 


Philosopher, born in Nola, near Naples, Italy as 
Filippo, took the name Giordano upon becoming a 
Dominican. Was taught Aristotelian philosophy in the 
Dominican monastery in Naples, but became attracted 
to Plato and Hermes Trismegistus and came to the 
unwelcome attention of the Inquisition, a situation 
possibly exacerbated by his intemperate, disputative style. 
Self-exiled to France and England. Published Cena de le 
Ceneri (The Ash Wednesday Supper) in which he defended 
the heliocentric theory of Copernicus, and De I'Infinito, 
Universo e Mondi (On Infinity, the Universe and its Worlds) 
in which he argued that the universe was infinite, that it 
contained an infinite number of worlds, and that these are 
all inhabited by intelligent beings. Unwisely returning to 
Italy (Venice and Rome) he was arrested by the Inquisition, 
imprisoned and tried. In the end, he refused to recant, was 
declared a heretic and burned at the stake. The precise 
grounds for his execution are not known because his file 
has not been seen, but it is often maintained that Bruno 
was executed because of his Copernicanism and his belief 
in the infinity of inhabited worlds. Bruno was the first 
Renaissance scientist to adopt the atomist philosophy of 
Democritus and Lucretius. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bubble Nebula (NGC 7635) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bubble Nebula (NGC 7635) 


A faint diffuse nebula in the constellation Cassiopeia, 
position RA 23 20.7™, dec. + 61° 12’, appearing as a 3’ 
diameter bubble surrounding a seventh-magnitude star. 
The bubble is a spherical shell of gas apparently shed by 
the central star, although it does not appear to have the 
characteristics of either a planetary nebula or a supernova 
remnant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc Comite de (1707-88) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc Comte 
de (1707-88) 


French naturalist. Discovered the binomial theorem and 
worked on probability theory. In astronomy he suggested 
that the Earth might have been created by the collision of 
a comet with the Sun. Based on the cooling rate of iron, 
he calculated in Théorie de la Terre that the age of the Earth 
was 75000 years. This estimate, so much larger than the 
official 6000 years, was condemned by the Catholic Church 
in France, which burned Buffon’s books. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Astron- 
omy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 
Institute of Astronomy 


The Institute of Astronomy of the Bulgarian Academy 
of Sciences (IABG, BAS) is located in Sofia. Its 
activities include fundamental research in astronomy and 
astrophysics and teaching. The Institute was established 
in 1995 as a successor of the Section of Astronomy (SA) 
and National Astronomical Observatory ‘Rozhen’ (NAO). 
Professor Nikola Bonev was the founder (in 1958) and the 
first director of SA. In 1995, the first director of the newly 
established IABG was Professor Vladimir Shkodrov. Its 
total staff is 90 including 42 scientists and 34 PhD holders. 
Two modern observatories for optical studies belong to the 
IABG: the National Astronomical Observatory ‘Rozhen’ 
(long: —1 h 38 m 52 s; lat: +41 deg 43’; altitude: 1750 m) 
and the Observatory in Belogradchik (long: —1h30m 42s; 
lat: +43 deg 38’; altitude: 630). 

The main telescope of NAO is a2 m Ritchey—Chrétien 
Coudé made by Carl Zeiss Jena and equipped with a 
1024 x 1024 Photometrics CCD camera. The Coudé 
spectrograph provides dispersions of 4 A, 9 A and 18 A. 
At present, it is the biggest optical telescope in SE 
Europe. The other telescopes of the NAO are: 60 cm 
Cassegrain with a UBV photometer, 50/70 cm Schmidt 
(5 x 5 deg) and an 18 cm photoheliograph refractor for 
solar studies. The BO is equipped with a 60 cm Cassegrain 
photometric telescope. Research departments of the 
IABG include: Sun, solar system, non-stationary stars, 
stellar atmospheres and envelopes, chemically peculiar 
stars, stellar clusters and galaxies. The budget for 1999 
was 400000 DM (from the state) and 7000 DM (from 
the National Science Foundation). Several international 
organizations participate: International Astronomical 
Union, European Astronomical Union, The New York 
Academy of Sciences, etc. International agreements cover 
joint research projects with the astronomical institutes of 
Germany, France, Poland, Russia, Italy, etc. 

For further information see 
http://www.astro.bas.bg. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Burbidge, Eleanor Margaret Peachey (1919-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Burbidge, Eleanor Margaret Peachey 
(1919-) 


Astrophysicist, born in Devonport, Devon, England, 
worked in London, Yerkes Observatory, Cambridge, the 
California Institute of Technology, the Royal Greenwich 
Observatory and University of California at San Diego. 
Married and collaborated with Geoffrey Burbidge, a 
theoretical physicist. It is said that in the days when 
women were not permitted to observe in their own right 
with the 200 in telescope, it was Geoffrey who signed 
Margaret’s applications to use it, and read astronomical 
journals and dozed in its control room while she worked 
through the night. She collaborated with her husband, 
FRED HOYLE, and WILLIAM FOWLER in a paper, universally 
known from its authors’ initials as B*FH, on the synthesis 
of the chemical elements beyond helium in stars. She used 
the spectra of galaxies to determine their rotations, masses 
and chemical composition, and elucidate the properties of 
their peculiarities and central cores (quasars). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Buridan [Buridano], John (fl. fourteenth century) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Buridan [Buridano], John (fl. 
fourteenth century) 


Teacher at the University of Paris between about 1328 
and 1358, influential, critical commentator on Aristotelian 
philosophy, his books were still used in universities as late 
as the seventeenth century. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Burnham, Sherburne Wesley (1838-1921) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Burnham, Sherburne Wesley 
(1838-1921) 


Court reporter and astronomer, born in Thetford, VT. Took 
up astronomy as a soldier in the American Civil War. 
Double star observer at Yerkes Observatory. His General 
Catalogue of Double Stars (1906) listed all 13 665 double stars 
in the northern hemisphere, including over 1000 which he 
had discovered and observed himself. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Byurakan Astrophysical Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Byurakan Astrophysical Observatory 


Located 40 km north of Yerevan in the former Soviet 
Republic of Armenia. Founded in 1946 through the 
initiative of astronomer Victor Ambartsumian, itis now the 
home of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Armenian 
Academy of Sciences. By late 1999, the only telescope still 
functioning was the main 2.6 m reflecting telescope. 
For further information see 
http://bao.sci.am/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Caelum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Caelum 


(the Chisel; abbrev. Cae, gen. Caeli; area 125 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation that lies between Eridanus and 
Columba, and culminates at midnight in late November. It 
was named Caela Sculptoris (the Sculptor’s Chisels) by the 
French astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who 
charted the southern sky in 1751-2. The shortened form 
was adopted by the IAU in 1922. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Caelum is of magnitude 4.4. Interesting objects 
include y' Caeli, a binary with orange (K2) and white 
components, magnitudes 4.7 and 8.5, separation 3”, and 
R Caeli, a Mira-type variable star (range 6.7-13.7, period 
about 391 days). There are no bright star clusters, nebulae 
or galaxies in Caelum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cagliari Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cagliari Astronomical Observatory 


The Cagliari Astronomical Observatory was established 
in 1899 as the International Latitude Astronomical Station 
of Carloforte, a small town on the Sardinian island of 
San Pietro. For about 80 years it has been one of five 
international stations devoted to the study of Earth’s 
rotation and polar motion. 

Observations with its zenithal telescope were only 
interrupted during the Second World War. Since 1978, its 
headquarters have been at Punta Sa Menta, a site 15 km 
(9 miles) from Cagliari, which has the same latitude as the 
Carloforte station. 

Astrophysical research is mainly devoted to the study 
of the Diffuse Interstellar Bands in the interstellar medium, 
using the Coude Echelle Spectrograph at the EUROPEAN 
SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY in Chile. It is also the site of a satellite 
laser ranging station. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.ca.astro.it/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Calar Alto Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Calar Alto Observatory 


The Calar Alto Observatory, or ‘Centro Astronomico 
Hispano-Aleman’, is located at an altitude of 2168 m 
in the ‘Sierra de los Filabres’, in southern Spain. _ Its 
construction on Calar Alto mountain began in 1973. It is 
operated jointly by the MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT FUR ASTRONOMIE 
in Heidelberg (MPIA), Germany, and the ‘Comision 
Nacional de Astronomia’. The MPIA provides four 
telescopes of diameters 3.5 m, 2.2 m, 1.23 m and a 
0.8 m Schmidt telescope. The ‘Observatorio Astronomico 
Nacional’ (OAN) independently runs a 1.5 m telescope. 

Telescope time is awarded semi-annually through 
peer-reviewed proposals. Typical time allocation for the 
MPIA telescopes is 40% for MPIA, 50% for other German 
institutes and 10% for the Spanish community. Calar Alto 
facilities may also be used by guest observers from any 
other country. 

Instrumentation is state of the art and provides 
competitive and complementary facilities. It includes 
an adaptive optics system (ALFA) which employs a 
sodium artificial laser guide star system, various near- 
infrared cameras (OMEGA Prime, OMEGA Cass, Magic) 
with spectroscopic and polarimetric capabilities, a fiber- 
fed echelle spectrograph (FOCES) and focal reducers 
providing multi-object spectroscopy (CAFOS, MOSCA), 
among others. 

For further information see 
http: / /www.caha.es. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Calendar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Calendar 


A calendar is a system of organizing units of time for 
the purpose of reckoning time over extended periods. 
The pay is the smallest calendrical unit of time; the 
measurement of fractions of a day is timekeeping. Some 
calendars replicate astronomical cycles according to fixed 
rules, others are regulated by astronomical observations. 
Commonly, calendars take the form of reckoning time with 
reference to the beginning, length and divisions of the YEAR. 
They are presented as a tabular arrangement of the days 
of each MONTH and week in a year. 

The periods of the motions of the Sun and Moon 
and the daily rotations of the Earth have been the natural 
bases for development of calendars. However, some 
civilizations have based calendars on other solar system 
bodies, such as the Mayan use of Venus. Unfortunately, 
none of the natural resulting periods (year, lunation or day) 
are exact multiples of the other. Thus, calendars based 
on lunar months require adjustments to remain close to 
the year based on the apparent motion of the Sun. The 
exact period of the Earth’s motion around the Sun is not 
an integral number of days, so it requires adjustments 
to keep the seasons, or more significantly the religious 
holidays, at the same times in the calendar. The seasons 
and some religious holidays are derived from natural body 
motions. Some are defined in terms of the vernal EQUINOX, 
which strictly follows the motion of the Earth. There is an 
ecclesiastical equinox defined to permit the determination 
of Easter without variations due to the true motion. 

The tropical year is defined as the mean interval 
between vernal equinoxes. The current mean value of 
the tropical year is 365.242 190 days. The value decreases 
due to tidal braking by six millionths of a day per century. 
The true interval from a particular vernal equinox to the 
next may vary from this mean by several minutes. The 
exact length of the tropical year is dependent on the 
general planetary theory or numerical integration used to 
determine the orbital elements. 

The current calendar used internationally is the 
Gregorian calendar. This was introduced by Pope Gregory 
in 1582 in some countries and as late as 1927 for others. The 
Gregorian calendar has 365 days per year except for leap 
years of 366 days. Leap years are years evenly divisible 
by 4, except for years that are exactly divisible by 100; 
these centural years are leap years only if they are exactly 
divisible by 400. Thus, 1800, 1900, 2100 and 2200 are not 
leap years, but 2000 is a leap year. 

The Gregorian calendar year is 365.2425 days long 
compared with the current tropical year of 365.242 190 
days, a difference of 0.000 310 days, or 1 day per 3000 years. 
The INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION (IAU) has adopted 
the Julian year of 365.25 days as a time unit for many 
computations such as precession and orbital elements, to 
avoid the variability and uncertainty of the value of the 
tropical year. There have been unconfirmed statements of 
modifications of the Gregorian calendar by some countries 
to correct for this remaining discrepancy. However, there 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are no known corrections for long-term discrepancies, and 
improved ephemerides may change the magnitude of the 
discrepancy. 

Also there are frequent radical proposals for simpli- 
fying, standardizing or improving the Gregorian calendar. 
The current total international use of the Gregorian calen- 
dar will require that any change must offer a worldwide 
benefit that justifies the change. 

In many cases calendars have been based on the lunar 
cycle. The synodic month, the mean interval between 
conjunctions of the Moon and the Sun, corresponds to 
the cycle of lunar phases. The mean value of the synodic 
month is 29.530 589 days and increases due to tidal effects 
by two millionths of a day per century. Any lunar phase 
cycle can deviate from the mean by up to 7 h. 

Some lunar calendars (e.g. Islamic) begin a new 
month based on observations of the lunar crescent after 
a new moon. In these cases the beginning of the month 
depends on weather conditions, atmospheric clarity, eye 
acuity and the location on Earth, since the Moon can 
generally only be observed about 15 h after new moon 
and about two degrees above the horizon. These 
conditions can generally be accurately predicted with 
about a 30 degree uncertainty in Earth longitude for actual 
observability. In some cases, predictions are not accepted 
and observations are required for the determination of the 
beginning of the month. 

Since there are not an integral number of lunar 
months in a solar year, some calendars (e.g. Hebrew) have 
introduced intercalated months to adjust the months such 
that religious holidays occur in the same season each year 
(see also CALENDAR IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND EUROPE). 

There are non-astronomical features to calendars, 
such as the seven day week. The origin of the seven 
day week is uncertain, with explanations ranging from 
weather cycles to Biblical and Talmudic texts. There is 
also an unproven assumption that the cyclic continuity of 
the week has been maintained without interruption from 
its origin in Biblical times. 


Bibliography 

Seidelmann P K 1991 (ed) The Explanatory Supplement to 
the Astronomical Almanac (Mill Valley, CA: University 
Science Books) 


P Kenneth Seidelmann 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Calendar in the Middle East and Europe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Calendar in the Middle East and 
Europe 


Calendars are the means for marking the passage of 
time. Their use can be civil, for the ordering of daily 
life, or religious, for the marking of observance days, 
or as a means for noting the rhythm of the seasons for 
agricultural purposes. Much of calendrical structure is 
purely arbitrary, such as the length of hours, hours in 
a day, days in a week and the year within an era. Yet 
most calendars reflect natural astronomical cycles—the 
apparent motions of the Sun and Moon and the daily 
rotation of the Earth. Crude calendars may have been 
used in neolithic times (see PREHISTORIC ASTRONOMY), but 
here we consider the development, in historical times, of 
calendrical ideas of the Middle East and Europe, which 
culminated in a system used today throughout the world. 

Calendars in the Western tradition are rooted in the 
cyclical motions of the Sun, the Moon or both. The 
sidereal year measures the time required for the Sun 
to return to the same place in the sky with respect to 
the fixed stars. The tropical year is the time from one 
vernal EQUINOX to the next. The latter is slightly shorter 
because PRECESSION shifts the equinoctial points westward 
each year. The key lunar cycle is the synodic period, 
the passage of the Moon through its phases. When the 
two are combined as a lunisolar calendar, coordination 
is more complex. As neither solar nor lunar periods are 
precise multiples of days, early astronomers were forced 
to introduce intercalary days at intervals to bring the 
cycles into line. Otherwise, the months (or years) would 
slowly slide backwards through the seasons. Because the 
lunar and solar cycles are incommensurable, no number 
of synodic months will equal a given number of tropical 
years, even over very long periods. Nonetheless, they can 
be equated closely enough to produce a workable calendar. 


Ancient calendars 
To regulate religious practices, the early Egyptians devised 
a lunar calendar, inaugurated each year by the heliacal 
rising of Sirius, ie. when Sirius appeared briefly in the 
morning twilight for the first time. For administrative 
use, they introduced a solar calendar early in the 3rd 
millennium BC. This system became the basis of our 
modern one. Assuming a year to have 365 days, they 
divided it into 12 equal months of 30 days, followed by 
5 days at the end. Each month had three 10 day weeks. 
Being about a quarter-day short of the tropical year, the 
calendar’s initial day slowly slipped backwards, with the 
new year arriving a day earlier in about 4 yr, but the 
discrepancy was ignored. The Egyptians also introduced 
the 24 h day, although the 12 night hours, 10 day hours 
and 2 dawn-dusk hours were of unequal length. Unequal, 
seasonal hours remained common throughout the West 
until the astronomers’ equal-hour system spread during 
the 14th century along with mechanical clocks. 
Mesopotamian civilizations developed a lunisolar 
calendar based on a 7 day week. This length may have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


symbolized the seven ‘planets’ (Sun, Moon and five naked- 
eye planets). Although Mesopotamian astronomers 
intercalated extra lunar months earlier, it was not until 
the 4th century BC that the systematic intercalation of 
seven lunar months over a 19 yr period appeared. This 
scheme, proposed by the Athenian astronomer METOS about 
the same time, was later known as the Metonic cycle. 
Observations showed that, in 19 tropical years, almost 
exactly 235 lunations occurred. For calculating the dates 
of new moons, one employed alternating months of 30 
and 29 days. After 12 lunations, the total of 354 days was 
short of the solar year by about 11.25 days. However, these 
accumulated to more than 33 days after 3 yr, and an extra 
lunation would be inserted. Thus, 12 yr of 12 lunations, 
together with 7 yr of 13 lunations, would result in the 
cycle being brought back to the beginning. The Persian 
Empire standardized the system, with intercalation in the 
third, sixth, eighth, eleventh, fourteenth, seventeenth and 
nineteenth years of a cycle. The Jews and other Middle- 
Eastern peoples adopted this scheme. 

Greek city-states employed a less accurate interca- 
lation scheme, the octaéteris, devised in perhaps the 8th 
century BC. It assumed that eight tropical years are equal 
to 96 regular plus 3 intercalated lunations averaging 29.5 
days. However, having no political unity, Greek cities 
maintained individual lunisolar calendars, with different 
start dates and times for intercalating months. Metos, in 
the 5th century, noted that the tropical year is about 365.25 
days. His 19 yr cycle was spread further afield during the 
Hellenistic period. Hiprarcuus, in the 2nd century BC, rec- 
ognized precession and determined very accurate values 
for both the tropical year and the synodic period. 

The Roman republican calendar was less sophisti- 
cated than the Babylonian (see BABYLONIAN ASTRONOMY). 
Based on an older lunar calendar, it had 12 months, some 
named (Ianuarius, Februarius, Martius, Aprilis, Maius, Iu- 
nius) and some numbered (Quintilis, Sextilis, September, Oc- 
tober, November, December). As the year began in March, 
Ianuarius and Februarius were months 11 and 12, respec- 
tively. This civil calendar was a day longer than the tropi- 
cal year and suffered from unsystematic intercalations. By 
the Ist century BC, the new year fell almost 2 months after 
the vernal equinox. An 8 day week was fixed by mar- 
ket days, although the 7 day Jewish week became more 
common in subject territories. Unlike other Mediterranean 
peoples, the Romans began the day at midnight. 


The Julian reform and medieval calendars 

Julius Caesar, during his sojourn in Egypt, saw the value of 
adopting the Egyptian solar calendar and, on the advice of 
the Alexandrine astronomer Sosigenes, promulgated what 
is now called the Julian calendar in 46 BC. In this entirely 
solar calendar, a year was set at 365.25 days. Instead of 
tacking the five extra days on the end of the year, the 
Julian calendar distributed the extra days across the year 
by alternating 31 and 30 day months. The year commenced 
in January, which had 31 days. Such a distribution would 
produce a year of 366 days, so one day was removed from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Calendar in the Middle East and Europe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


February, which now became 29 days long. To account 
for the accumulation of an extra day every 4 yr, February 
was given 30 days during the leap year, the intercalated 
day usually being inserted after the 24th of the month. 
Only minor changes were made thereafter: in 44 BC, the 
month Quintilis was re-named Iulius, after the assassinated 
Caesar, and, in8 BC, Augustus named Sextilis after himself, 
providing it with 31 days. This changed the order of 
alternation of month lengths, and robbed February of its 
29th day. The Augustan adjustments to month lengths 
survive in modern usage. Augustus, realizing that priests 
had made every year a leap year since Caesar’s time, 
suppressed all leap years until AD 8. 

The Julian calendar, like its Egyptian model, had the 
value of simplicity. The difference between the Julian and 
tropical years was sufficiently small that the difference 
accumulated slowly. As the official calendar of the Roman 
Empire, the Julian scheme was in force from the Middle 
East to Scotland; when the Christian church became 
the dominant religion within the empire, the calendar’s 
survival was assured. 

The pre-exilic Jewish calendar was lunar, although 
little is known about it. After the Babylonian conquest of 
Israel, the Jewish calendar, like other Semitic calendars, 
became lunisolar, each year having 12 alternating months 
of 29 and 30 days. After changes in the 2nd and 
3rd centuries AD, it followed the Metonic cycle, with 
intercalations made according to the Babylonian order. 
The year began with the autumnal equinox—before the 
Babylonian exile it began with the vernal equinox—with 
7 day weeks, beginning at sundown on Friday. Months 
commenced with the first sighting of the new crescent 
Moon, in practice the astronomically calculated time had 
been used by some Jewish communities from the 3rd 
century. Days began at sundown, although officially 
they begin at 6.00 pm in modern practice, with the week 
commencing on the Sabbath (Friday evening). Following 
Babylonian tradition, each of the 24 hours in a day is 
divided into 1080 units based on sexagesimal reckoning. 
Years are counted from the beginning of the world (anno 
mundi, or 3761 BC). 

The Islamic calendar had a common origin with the 
Jewish and Christian calendars except that it dropped 
the link to the tropical year. Twelve lunar months 
of 29 and 30 days alternate. Being strictly lunar (not 
lunisolar), there are no intercalated months—although an 
intercalated day may be added to a given year—so that 
religious observances, such as Ramadan, fall in different 
seasons over the years, cycling through all the seasons in 
about 33 years. Like the Jewish, the Islamic calendar has 
7 days, each beginning at sundown. The actual visual 
observation of the new crescent Moon was the start of 
each lunar month. During the later middle ages, Islamic 
astronomers developed methods and tables to define the 
time of the new moon for different locations and when the 
Moon was obscured by cloud (see also ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY). 
For civil purposes, the Ottoman Empire adopted the Julian 
calendar in the 17th century, with Turkey moving to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Gregorian system in the 20th. Most Islamic countries now 
use the Gregorian calendar for civil purposes, but also 
employ the era dating from Mohammed’s flight to Medina 
(AD 622). 

While the Romans even before the Julian reform 
began their year at 1 January, only the western part of 
the empire followed suit. The Byzantine empire moved 
to 1 September. Early medieval Christians of the West 
could not agree on an inaugural date. In England and 
France, Christmas day was the new year; in other areas, 
25 March, or even Easter (which was a movable date) took 
precedence. By the late middle ages, 1 January regained 
its status. 

The Jewish 7 day week, adopted by early Christians, 
did not become legally binding in the Roman Empire 
until the time of Constantine (AD 321). Although 
the Church attempted to suppress the Roman month 
names—replacing dies Saturni with sabbata and dies soli 
with domenicus, for example—older names persisted 
in northern Europe. In the counting of days of the 
month, there was also confusion. The Roman republican 
method of beginning a month with the kalends, followed 
several days later by nones and ides and numbering days 
backwards in relation to these three fixed days, survived 
in some areas until the 15th century, when successive 
numbering of days became general. 

Because the Julian calendar employed a longer 
tropical year than actually occurs, the date of the vernal 
equinox slowly moved backwards. For the Christian 
Church, this created a problem in setting the date for 
Easter. Being tied to the Jewish Passover, itself based on 
the lunisolar calendar, Easter was difficult to fix. The 
Council of Nicaea (AD 325) set 21 March as the date 
of the vernal equinox, and adopted the Metonic cycle. 
Dionysius Exiguus, in the 6th century, provided a rule 
for setting Easter: it would occur on the first Sunday 
following the first full moon after the vernal equinox. 
Should the full moon fall on a Sunday, Easter was deferred 
to the following week. These complications gave rise a 
calendrical literature, the computus, to which Bede, in the 
early 8th century, was a notable earlier contributor. 

The common scheme was to intercalate 30 day leap 
months into a 19 yr cycle using the same scheme as 
the Jewish calendar. Over a 19 yr period, the Julian 
calendar accumulated 6939 days 18 h, while the lunar 
cycle accumulated 6940 days 18 h. To bring the two into 
synchronicity, a day was dropped (the saltus Iunae), usually 
in the last month of the cycle. Ensuring that Easter fell on 
a Sunday and to know when it would occur were more 
complex. Bede and others introduced a perpetual calendar 
based on compound cycles, golden numbers and epacts. 
With such a scheme, tables could be drawn up well in 
advance to calculate Easter dates. 

Agreement on an era for dating was longer in coming. 
Many ancient countries based their eras on regnal years or 
years of high officials’ tenure. Some Greek cities followed 
olympiads. In imperial times, the Romans utilized both 
regnal years and the year since the foundation of Rome 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Calendar in the Middle East and Europe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(ab urbe condita). The foundation of the Christian era 
(anno Domini) was suggested by Dionysius Exiguus in 
the 6th century. Trying to solve the Easter-reckoning 
issue, Dionysius adopted the Victorian period (devised 
by Victorinus of Aquitaine in the 5th century), which 
multiplied the 19 yr Metonic cycle by a 28 yr solar cycle to 
obtain a 532 yr cycle. He then calculated Christ’s birth year, 
from which the first 532 yr cycle would commence. This he 
believed to be 753 AUC. The English, under the influence of 
Bede, adopted the Christian era for ecclesiastical purposes 
in the 7th century, but it was not generally accepted in 
Europe until the 11th century. 


Calendar reform 

By the time of Roger Bacon in the 13th century, it was clear 
that paschal full moons did not fall on their computed 
dates. Once precession was widely understood, and better 
tables, particularly the Alfonsine tables of the later 13th 
century, were available, the pressure for calendar reform 
grew. Despite a variety of proposals, it was only in 
the papal reign of Gregory XIII that a revised system, 
devised by Aloisio Lilio, was promulgated in 1582. The 
Alfonsine length of the tropical year, being just more than 
10.5 min shorter than the Julian year, meant that one would 
need to drop a day every 134 yr. The papal commission 
recommended following the Julian leap-year arrangement 
but suppressing leap years in century years (such as 1900) 
that are not divisible by 400. The Gregorian reform also 
adjusted the system for Easter reckoning. As the date of 
the vernal equinox had slid backwards some 10 days from 
21 March over the intervening centuries, Gregory decreed 
that 5 October 1582 would be followed by 15 October. 
Catholic countries adopted the system within the first 5 yr; 
it was accepted in most Protestant nations by the 18th 
century, such as Britain in 1752. As the Eastern Orthodox 
Church has never accepted the reform, eastern European 
countries delayed adoption until the 20th century, such as 
Revolutionary Russia in 1918 and Greece in 1923. Some 
Asian and Muslim countries also adopted the system in 
the late 19th and early 20th centuries. 

For a brief period (1793-1805), revolutionary France 
instituted a calendar based upon the ancient Egyptian 
solar calendar to remove any religious connotations. 
Twelve 30 day months were followed by five days of 
holidays, inserted into early July; a revised leap-year 
scheme was modified from the Gregorian. Like the 
Egyptian calendar, three 10 day weeks made up each 
month. Months themselves were renamed to reflect 
seasonal weather and activities. As the beginning dates 
of the months were out of step with the rest of Europe, 
problems multiplied and Napoleon I returned the country 
to the Gregorian system. 

Since the 19th century, a variety of calendar reform 
proposals have been made, particularly to solve the 
problem of months of unequal days. The International 
Fixed Calendar would provide 13 months of 28 days each, 
plus one unnamed day to equal 365; a leap-year day would 
be added each fourth year. The advantage to this scheme 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is that all months begin on Sunday and end on Saturday. 
An alternative, the World Calendar, would have four 91 
day quarters, each beginning on a Sunday, with months 
following a 31,30 and 30 day pattern. A world day would 
be added after 30 December, plus an additional world day 
for leap years. Both have advantages, but neither they nor 
others have elicited much official enthusiasm. 

While many cultures over the past few thousand 
years have devised calendars based on astronomical 
phenomena, the hybrid formed from the Babylonian— 
Jewish tradition and the Egyptian—Roman tradition 
has become the dominant calendrical system world 
wide. While it cannot be precisely accurate, given 
the incommensurability of lunar and solar periods, it 
is entirely sufficient for political and economic needs. 
Calendar reform, if it does occur, is most likely to be 
a rationalization of the existing system rather than a 
wholesale change in structure. 


Bibliography 

Coyne G V, Hoskin M A and Pedersen O (eds) 1983 
Gregorian Reform of the Calendar: Proc. Vatican Conf. to 
Commemorate its 400th Anniversary 1582-1982 (Vatican 
City: Pontificia Academia Scientiarum) 

Rickards E G 1999 Mapping Time: The Calender and its 
History (New York: Oxford University Press) 


Richard A Jarrell 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


California Nebula (NGC 1499) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


California Nebula (NGC 1499) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Perseus, position 
RA 4? 00.7™, dec. +36° 37’, whose shape resembles the US 
state of California. The nebula is large (about 21° by 2°), 
but of low surface brightness. It is illuminated by the star 
& Persei. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Callippus of Cyzicus (c. 370-c. 310 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Callippus of Cyzicus (c. 370—c. 310 Bc) 


Greek philosopher, born in Cyzicus, Asia Minor (now 
Turkey), a younger contemporary of EUDoxUs, who added 
more spheres to Eudoxus’ nests of spheres to account better 
for the non-uniformities of planetary motion. The Sun, 
Moon, Mercury, Venus and Mars each had five spheres 
while Jupiter and Saturn had four and the stars had 
one. This increased the accuracy of the theory while 
preserving the belief that the heavenly bodies moved in 
circles. Worked with aristotLe. Determined the lengths of 
the seasons. Constructed a 76 year cycle (the Callippic 
period) as a more accurate version (four cycles) of the 19 
year Metonic cycle, the length of time in which the lunar 
and solar calendars come back into the same synchronism 
and by which lunar eclipses can be predicted. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Callisto 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Callisto 


Callisto, the outermost of the Galilean satellites (see 
JUPITER: SATELLITES), is approximately 38% larger in 
diameter than Earth’s Moon (Callisto’s radius is 2410 km 
and the radius of the Moon is 1738 km). However, 
Callisto’s lower mass, surface gravity and higher albedo 
reflect its ice-rock composition. Callisto’s surface is 
thought to consist of a mixture of ice and dust or rocky 
materials. Callisto’s cratered terrain can be divided into 
irregularly shaped subunits based on ALBEDO, which vary 
by a factor of two between units. Several subunits are 
seen to be relatively smooth and lack impact craters at 
VOYAGER resolutions; these areas have been interpreted 
to be regions of possible volcanic resurfacing. However, 
GALILEO MISSION data which have targeted these regions 
show that the smoothness is due to surface degradation 
rather than icy volcanism. Early global tectonism has 
been suggested to explain the presence of parallel and 
radial sets of lineaments. Whether or not Callisto is 
differentiated could not be determined from Voyager 
data. Galileo images of Callisto’s surface do not provide 
clear evidence of DIFFERENTIATION or the presence of a 
subsurface liquid water ocean. There is a lack of clear 
geological evidence of any endogenic modification of 
Callisto’s surface. 

Prior to the Galileo mission scientists believed that 
the surface of Callisto would be heavily cratered at all 
scales. However, the surface of Callisto is seen in 
moderate- to high-resolution Galileo images to be smooth 
and slightly undulate, containing a low spatial density of 
small (<10 km/pixel) impact CRATERS (see figure 1). The 
wide spatial distribution of this smooth texture suggests 
that the smoothing process(es) are global in extent. The 
dark non-ice material that appears to blanket the surface 
may become concentrated by the loss of volatile 
materials during impact events, magnetospheric 
bombardment and/or via sublimation. This material may 
also be distributed by impact events and micrometeorite 
bombardment resulting in the infilling of low-lying 
topography. Electrostatic levitation or other mechanisms 
might further contribute to the mobilization of Callisto’s 
dark material. 

Impact craters on Callisto exhibit a range of size and 
degradation states, from fresh with clearly defined ejecta 
blankets to craters that are barely distinguishable. Mass 
wasting of crater walls appears to be a predominant 
process in this degradation. Deposits within craters that 
appear to be the result of inward debris slides are 
prevalent. Several of these debris flows originate on the 
west-facing walls of geologically recent craters. This 
may indicate a steepening of the crater wall, perhaps by 
sublimation, that results in a reduction of its stability. 
Subsequent collapse may be triggered by seismic energy 
from a nearby impact, or eventual oversteepening of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 1. Callisto. 


wall leading to gravitational collapse. This ongoing 
sublimation erosion and mass wasting best explains the 
preferential sun-facing rim retreat and crater-wall erosion 
seen in Galileo images, contributing to the progressive 
infilling of craters on Callisto’s surface. 

Voyager images show that Callisto’s surface lacks 
significant topography and is_ heavily cratered. 
Deficiencies in large (greater than 60 km diameter) 
impact craters compared with the Moon and terrestrial 
planets have been identified in Voyager data. However, 
additional large impact structures that are highly 
degraded have been identified in Galileo images. 

Moderate resolution (0.4-1.1 km/pixel) Galileo 
images show more detailed structural features within 
three of Callisto’s multiring systems (interpreted to be 
large impact features) than seen in Voyager data. The 
youngest, Valhalla, is characterized by bright central 
plains surrounded by discontinuous, concentric, arcuate 
structures (troughs and outward-facing scarps). The 
Asgard multiring system consists of a bright central 
plains unit surrounded by several discontinuous rings 
consisting of troughs, but lacks outward-facing scarps. 
The brightness of Asgard’s central plains is enhanced by 
the presence of a more recent impact crater, Doh, which 
excavated icier (brighter) subsurface materials. High- 
resolution images of Asgard reveal fractures within and 
adjacent to the innermost ring. These fractures are 
probably the result of the impact-related rifting of 
Callisto’s brittle outer layer. The proximity of these 
fractures (seen in the innermost ring only) to the impact 
crater Doh may indicate that these fractures were 
reactivated by the more recent impact event. The well- 
preserved outer troughs associated with Asgard have a 
lower albedo than the surrounding cratered plains. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Callisto 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Adlinda, the oldest of these three multiring structures, 
lacks a bright central plains unit. However, low-albedo 
concentric rings, which are more resistant to degradation, 
are visible. The detailed morphology of Adlinda is 
obscured by numerous impacts, as well as ejecta from 
Lofn, a nearby impact crater. 

The Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (NIMS) on 
the Galileo spacecraft provided up to 408-channel spectra 
of Callisto’s surface, from 0.7 to 5.2 wm at spatial 
resolutions ranging from one to hundreds of kilometers 
per picture element. Regions with strong water-ice 
absorption features in NIMS spectra usually correspond 
to bright features (e.g. fresh impact crater deposits) in 
clear-filter Galileo images. Weak absorption features 
near 3.88, 4.05, 4.25 and 4.57 um are interpreted to be 
due to the presence of an S—H bond, SO2, CO, and 
organic compounds (e.g. tholins) respectively. In general, 
correlations between these compounds and surficial 
geology are complex and poorly understood at present. 
Globally, the 4.25 um absorption is stronger on Callisto’s 
trailing hemisphere, while the 4.05 and 4.57 um 
absorptions are stronger on the leading hemisphere. In 
addition to providing insights into surface-material 
compositions and their distributions, analysis of NIMS 
data has revealed the presence of a tenuous (surface = 
7.5 x 10° bar) carbon dioxide atmosphere extending 
approximately 100 km above the surface. Based on 
models of CO, removal rates, the estimated lifetime of 
Callisto’s atmosphere is about 4 years. Consequently, 
either this atmosphere is a transient phenomenon, or 
some process(es) is currently supplying carbon dioxide to 
the atmosphere. 

Like GANYMEDE, Callisto is known as an icy satellite 
because its relatively low mean density (1836 kg m™°) 
requires that it is made of about equal amounts, by mass, 
of ice and rock-metal. Callisto is only slightly smaller 
than Ganymede, but differs from it in a number of 
striking ways. Though the mean density of Callisto and 
Ganymede are similar, Callisto has a larger normalized 
axial moment of inertia C/((MR*)(C/(MR’) = 0.359+0.005, 
C is the axial moment of inertia, M is the satellite’s mass 
and R is the moon’s radius, known from radio Doppler 
measurements by the Galileo spacecraft), implying a very 
different interior structure for Callisto compared with the 
interior of Ganymede. Unlike Ganymede, Callisto is only 
partially differentiated and consists of a water-ice—liquid 
shell less than 350 km thick surrounding an essentially 
undifferentiated ice-rock—metal core. The rock and ice in 
Callisto are not completely separated and Callisto may 
not have a central metallic core. The gravitational data 
obtained by the Galileo spacecraft in a flyby past Callisto 
do not rule out the existence of a small metallic core in 
Callisto with a radius less than about 25% of the 
satellite’s radius. However, geophysical arguments and 
other properties of Callisto make the existence of a small 
metallic core in the moon unlikely. Consistent with the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


absence of a metallic core, Callisto does not have an 
intrinsic magnetic field. The lack of evidence of any 
endogenic modification of Callisto’s surface is consistent 
with the partial differentiation of only the outer few 
hundred kilometers of Callisto. 

Though Callisto lacks its own magnetic field, the 
Galileo spacecraft has detected the magnetic perturbation 
associated with electromagnetic induction in Callisto. 
Induction occurs when the satellite experiences time 
periodic changes in the ambient magnetic field of the 
Jovian magnetosphere due to its orbital motion around 
Jupiter, the rotation of Jupiter, and the tilt of the Jovian 
magnetic field (see JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE). The 
magnitude of the electromagnetic induction signal 
requires that there be a global layer of high electrical 
conductivity in close proximity to Callisto’s surface. The 
only explanation for such a layer is that it is a subsurface 
liquid water ocean with a salinity similar to that of 
terrestrial seawater. Unlike the surface of EUROPA, 
Callisto’s surface provides no hint that a liquid water 
ocean might hide beneath. The induction signal is the 
only indirect evidence that Callisto might have a 
subsurface liquid water ocean. The existence of such an 
internal ocean in Callisto is difficult to reconcile with the 
lack of endogenic modification of its surface. 

Callisto is not part of the orbital dynamical Laplace 
resonance of the inner three Galilean satellites (10, 
Europa and Ganymede) and it is therefore not tidally 
heated. Without such a heat source it is difficult to 
understand how a subsurface liquid water ocean in 
Callisto could be prevented from freezing solid over 
geological time. Subsolidus convection controlled by the 
viscosity of ice is expected to efficiently cool Callisto’s 
interior. At least in the case of Europa, for which there is 
geological evidence of an internal liquid water ocean in 
the past or at present, tidal dissipation is a possible source 
of heat to maintain a subsurface water layer in a liquid 
state. Tidal heating in the distant past may also explain 
why Ganymede is completely internally differentiated 
while Callisto is only partially differentiated. After all, 
both these moons are comparable in size and mass, have 
similar amounts of radiogenic heat sources and 
experienced similar amounts of accretional heating on 
formation. 


Breaking news update (30 April 2002) 

A recent image from NASA’s Galileo spacecraft adds 
evidence to a theory that Callisto may hold an 
underground ocean. The image shows a part of Callisto’s 
surface directly opposite from the Valhalla basin where 
Callisto was punched by a major collision. The 
opposition point shows no effect from the impact. Points 
opposite major impact features on some similar-size 
worlds, such as Mercury and Earth’s Moon, show lumpy 
terrain attributed to seismic shocks from the distant 
impacts. The new image is consistent with a 1990s’ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Callisto 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


model proposing that a liquid layer could be acting as a 
shock absorber inside Callisto. 


Bibliography 

Anderson J D, Schubert G, Jacobsen R A, Lau E L, Moore W B 
and Sjogren W L 1998 Distribution of rock, metals, and 
ices in Callisto Science 280 1573-6 

Khurana K K, Kivelson M G, Stevenson D J, Schubert G, 
Russell C T, Walker, R J, Joy S and Polanskey C 1998 
Induced magnetic fields as evidence for subsurface oceans 
in Europa and Callisto Nature 395 777-80 

Schubert G 1997 Inside the solid planets and moons Phys. 
World 10 45-9 


G Schubert 


J Klemaszewski 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Caloris Basin 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Caloris Basin 


Alarge multiringed impact structure on Mercury, centered 
at 30.5°N, 170.2°E. Its official name is Caloris Planitia, 
which means ‘plain of heat’—it was in this region that 
the highest surface temperatures were recorded by the 
Mariner 10 probe, which imaged about half of the 
structure, the other half being in shadow. 

Based on the observed half, the Caloris Basin has an 
estimated diameter of 1340 km. The outer ring is marked 
by the Caloris Mountains (Montes Caloris), a formation 
about 100-150 km wide consisting of smooth blocky units 
1 or 2 km high and up to 50 km long. Within this ring 
the floor of the basin is covered with wrinkle ridges and 
fractures, many of which follow approximately the lines 
of concentric arcs. Other features are associated with 
the impact that formed the basin. The mountain ring is 
punctuated by small plains and secondary craters formed 
by the fallback of ejecta and impact melt. To the northeast 
of the basin lies the Van Eyck formation, containing a series 
of radial features extending for some 1000 km and believed 
to have been formed by ejecta. At the antipodal point of 
the impact (the point diametrically opposite, on the other 
side of Mercury) lies a terrain not seen anywhere else in the 
solar system: a jumbled, fractured landscape consisting of 
hills up to 2 km high and 10 km across, and depressions 
that criss-cross older features. The impact sent seismic 
surface waves around the planet and compression waves 
through its core. Where these waves came to a focus at the 
antipodal point, the crustal rock is calculated to have been 
shock-fractured and forced 1 km upwards. The present 
landscape was formed when the upheaval subsided. 

The Caloris Basin is estimated to have been formed by 
the impact of a 150 km object about 3.85 billion years ago, 
at the end of the period known as late heavy bombardment 
which marks the last major episode of impact cratering in 
the early solar system. That it was the last major impact 
on Mercuty is testified by the below average crater density 
on the basin’s floor. 


See also: Mercury. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Caltech Submillimeter Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Caltech Submillimeter Observatory 


The Caltech Submillimeter Observatory (CSO) operates 
a Leighton 10.4 m diameter telescope on the summit 
of Mauna Kea, Hawaii at an elevation of 4200 m. 
Construction and operations funding is from National 
Science Foundation grants to the California Institute 
of Technology. In partnership with the University of 
Texas and the University of Hawaii, CSO provides the 
international astronomical community with a state-of-the- 
art observing facility at submillimeter wavelengths (300- 
1000 microns), mainly for studies of molecular and atomic 
lines, and continuum emission from dust in star forming 
regions in the interstellar medium of the Milky Way and 
distant galaxies. 
For further information see 

http://www.cso.caltech.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Camelopardalis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Camelopardalis 


(formerly sometimes spelled Camelopardus; the Giraffe; 
abbrev. Cam, gen. Camelopardalis; area 757 sq. deg.) A 
northern constellation which lies between Auriga and 
the north celestial pole, and culminates at midnight in 
late December. It represents the animal upon which 
Rebecca rode in Canaan to become the wife of Isaac, and 
was introduced by the Dutch theologian and geographer 
Petrus Plancius, who included it on a celestial globe in 
1613. 

An inconspicuous constellation, the brightest star 
in Camelopardalis is 6 Camelopardalis, a wide double 
star with yellow (GO) and bluish-white (A5) components, 
magnitudes 4.0 and 7.4, separation 81”. Other interesting 
objects include the U Geminorum star Z Camelopardalis 
(range 10.0-14.5, mean period about 22 days) and NGC 
1502, an open cluster of about 45 stars fainter than seventh 
magnitude. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cameras 


Readers of this article are using a natural camera, the 
human eye. It has a simple lens but phenomenal signal 
processing which is a study in itself and is not the subject 
of this article. More relevant examples of cameras are those 
using photographic film as the detector. Other examples 
are video cameras that have a CHARGE COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
as the detector. 

A telescope is a big camera, but the larger telescopes 
use a concave mirror for the first optical element instead 
of a convex lens. Whether a mirror or a lens, this optical 
element is called the objective. If it is a mirror, it is also 
called the primary mirror. A telescope system is a series of 
cameras, the last of which has a detector at its focus. It is 
sometimes only the last camera that is called the camera. 

Figure 1 shows the basic optical design of all telescope 
systems, in its simplest form consisting of three singlet 
lenses. Each of these lenses functions as a major 
component of a telescope system, which on a modern 
telescope would be more complex than a singlet spherical 
lens. 


Optical aberrations and reflection losses 

The rays shown in figure 1 are accurately traced, but the 
layout is drawn with a larger scale in Y than in X to show 
the separation of rays more clearly. Obviously, the rays 
do not come to a sharp focus. SPHERICAL ABERRATION, SA 
on the drawing, is apparent at the axial focus. The outer 
rays focus first and are already diverging where other rays 
come to focus. coma is also apparent on the drawing in 
the off-axis image. The ray that passes through the center 
of the entrance APERTURE, Called the chief ray, is laterally 
displaced from the focal point of the outer rays. The 
image has the appearance of a comet with the chief ray 
at its head. It is also apparent that the two foci are not 
in the same plane, which is an ABERRATION called Petzval 
curvature. Another aberration is ASTIGMATISM where outer 
rays perpendicular to the plane of the drawing focus 
further from the lens, but those rays are not shown. A 
tutorial on aberrations can be found in the Melles Griot 
catalog: http://www.mellesgriot.com. 

For a given FOCAL LENGTH, spherical aberration is 
proportional to the cube of the diameter of the aperture. 
Coma is proportional to the square of the aperture and 
directly proportional to the field angle. Astigmatism 
is proportional to the square of the field angle and is 
directly proportional to the aperture. Axial color is directly 
proportional to the aperture, whereas lateral color is 
independent of the aperture and is directly proportional 
to the field angle. 

For a singlet lens, spherical aberration is less if the 
glass has a high index of refraction, N, because less 
curvature is needed for a given focal length. However, 
higher-index glasses usually have a higher dispersion that 
increases the CHROMATIC ABERRATION. 

A single-layer antireflection coating on a lens made 
of high-index glass has less residual reflectivity at one 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wavelength, but more average loss than for a low-index 
glass over a wide wavelength band. Thus a high-index 
singlet lens is optimum for monochromatic performance, 
but a low-index, low-dispersion glass is better for a wide 
spectral region. Another consideration in choice of a glass 
is radiation darkening and fluorescence. 


Optical layout 

The first element in figure 1 is labeled the objective. It 
is shown as a singlet lens, even though such a simple 
objective has not been used since 1733. The objective is 
shown focusing beams of light from two stars, each beam 
consisting of parallel rays, onto the first focal surface. It is 
said to have positive power because it changes a cylindrical 
beam of light into a converging cone of light. The rays 
cross at this first focus, thus the converging cone becomes 
a diverging cone which is intercepted by a collimator lens 
which changes the diverging beam back into a parallel, 
collimated beam. This lens also has positive power but its 
function is the reverse of the OBJECTIVE LENS. The collimator 
lens has a shorter focal length than the objective, thus 
the collimated beam is smaller in diameter than the beam 
incident onto the objective lens. This lens also produces 
an image of the entrance aperture (which in figure 1 is at 
the objective lens). This image is called a pupil. It is also 
called an aperture stop, or a Lyot stop, if a black plate is 
located there with a hole equal to the diameter of the beam, 
to transmit the beam but block unwanted, stray light. The 
camera lens in figure 1 re-converges the beam to focus onto 
the detector at the same rate of convergence as at the first 
focus; thus it has unit magnification. If the focal length of 
the camera lens were tripled, the magnification, M, would 
be three times, thus M = 3. 

The portion of the enormous parallel beam from a star 
that can enter the telescope is limited by the diameter of 
the entrance aperture stop, which in figure 1 is at the front 
surface of the objective lens. This stop is not shown; it is 
the mechanical structure around the lens. The ray from 
each star, or object point, that passes through the center of 
the aperture stop is called the chief ray from that object. 
Thus, the chief ray also passes through any image of the 
entrance aperture, such as the pupil between the second 
and third lenses. Rays that pass though the edges of a lens 
are called marginal rays. 

In figure 1 a marginal ray from the edge of the field 
intersects the collimator lens far from its center resulting in 
sucha large blur of the pupil and of the final image that is it 
noticeable on the drawing. If a positive lens were located 
at the first focus it would move the rays closer to the center 
of the collimator lens and would move the pupil closer to 
the collimator lens, but would not change the location of 
the final focus. Such a lens at an intermediate focus is 
called a field lens. 

It is mostly what is inserted between the second 
and third lens elements in figure 1 that distinguishes one 
instrument from another. The inserted device is called a 
processor. It is sometimes coincident with the pupil but 
not necessarily. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


OBJECTIVE 


COLLIMATOR CAMERA 


FINAL FOCUS 


SA 


COMA 


| & AVA 


X:440.00 MM 
Y:110.00 MM 


Figure 1. Basic optical layout of all telescope systems. 


There are many options for the optical processor, 
each option producing a different telescope system. Some 
systems have two or more instruments in series, such 
aS an ADAPTIVE optics module followed by an imaging 
SPECTROGRAPH. 


Some processor options 
If the processor is a human eye inserted at the location of 
the pupil, the camera lens is not needed. 

If the processor is a high-quality very flat, thin pair 
of windows that cause waves of light to add or subtract, 
the instrument is an INTERFEROMETER. If the processor is 
a polarizer, such as the N-shaped Wollaston prism, that 
causes the light waves to oscillate in a single plane, the 
instrument is a polarimeter (See POLARIMETRY). 

If the processor is two N-shaped prisms which can 
be counter-rotated to increase or decrease the amount of 
DISPERSION to match that of the atmosphere, the processor 
is an atmospheric dispersion compensator, ADC. 

Often, the processor is a DIFFRACTION GRATING, which 
changes the direction of the light by a deviation angle, 
and also disperses the light more or less than the mean 
deviation angle depending on the wavelength. Because 
of the deviation, the camera lens must be moved around 
to intercept the center of the turned beam. If the grating 
is on a mirror, called a reflectance grating, it would 
reflect the light back towards the collimator. If reflected 
straight back onto the collimator, that lens would also 
serve as the camera lens in an arrangement called a Littrow 
spectrograph. Usually, the tilt of the grating is chosen so 
that the reflected beam lies beside the collimator. The 
camera lens would be rotated around and positioned at 
that location for this instrument. Also, a field stop would 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be placed at the first focus in the form of a single, long slit, 
for a single-slit spectrograph, or by an array of short slits, 
one on each stellar image, for a multi-object spectrograph, 
MOS. 

If a deformable mirror, a DM, is used instead of 
a reflectance grating, the system is an adaptive optics 
module, AOM. Some systems have an AOM and a 
spectrograph in series, thus there would be a second 
collimator and camera in the light path, in which case the 
final focus is the third focus. 

If the processor is a simple inverted triangle-shaped 
prism the beam is turned through a deviation angle but 
the dispersion is less than from a transmission grating. 
Therefore, if a transmission grating is bonded to the prism 
such that the deviation angles cancel, then the beam is not 
deviated but it is still dispersed. Thus the camera lens 
does not need to be moved. Such a combination is called 
a grism, which is usually located before the first focus; 
thus there can be no slit, the system being called slitless 
spectroscopy. The surface of the prism that is not bonded 
to the grating can be curved, and can thus act as a lens, 
which in the case of the Canada France Hawaii Telescope 
(CFHT), is part of the prime focus corrector lens near the 
focus of the primary mirror. This device is sometimes 
called a grens. 

If instead of placing a slit at the location of each stellar 
image, a fiber is positioned there and bent around to have 
its exit on the long slit at that focus the result is a fiber- 
fed multi-object spectrograph. An alternative is to locate 
an array of small, microlenses or mirrors at the first focus 
which segments a portion of the field and refocuses each 
segment along the long slit; sucha device is called animage 
slicer. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


More complex objectives 

The achromatic lens was invented in 1733 by Chester Moor 
Hall who used it in a telescope with a 3.5 cm aperture. A 
positive achromat combines two types of glass in the lens: 
a convex lens of crown glass combined with a concave lens 
of flint glass. Flint glass has a higher dispersion than crown 
glass. A weak flint lens with a concave surface, thus with 
negative optical power, combined with a convex crown 
lens with an equal but opposite amount of chromatic 
aberration, results in a net positive power but with the 
same focal length at two different wavelengths. 

The biconvex and meniscus shapes of the elements 
serve to reduce spherical aberration to less than that of a 
singlet lens. (Warning: to have low spherical aberration 
the achromat must be mounted in the correct orientation 
with object and image distances close to those for which 
the lens was optimized.) 

Achromatic lenses suffer from secondary chromatic 
aberration because the focal length at intermediate 
wavelengths differs from that at pairs of wavelengths 
where it is the same. The apochromat is a lens with three 
different glass types. It can have the same focal length at 
three different wavelengths. It suffers from less secondary 
(or residual) chromatic aberration than an achromat but it 
is still noticeable with a large lens. 

If in figure 1 a negative lens, which is concave, were 
added in front of the first focus by a distance equal to its 
focal length, a collimated beam would be produced, thus 
this lens would act as an eyepiece. This is the arrangement 
used in the first telescope by Galileo in 1662. The image 
quality was very poor. 

If the negative lens were moved closer to the focus to 
one-half of its focal length, the beam exiting from it would 
no longer be collimated but would converge to focus 
beyond the first focus by a distance equal to one-half the 
focal length of the lens. Therefore, the F-number would 
be doubled thus the magnification would be two times in 
this example. However, the distance from the objective 
lens would not be doubled but the effective focal length, 
EFL, which is the F-number at the focus multiplied by the 
diameter of the objective lens, would be doubled. Such 
an arrangement is called a telephoto lens. Its advantage is 
that it is more compact than if the objective were simply 
given the longer focal length. 


Reflective objectives and space telescopes 
Major advantages of using MIRRORS in a telescope are that 
they are free of chromatic aberrations and need to be 
optically polished on only one side of the blank. 

The telephoto equivalent in a reflecting telescope is to 
have a convex secondary mirror located before the prime 
focus of the larger concave primary mirror. Such a two- 
mirror system is called a classical CASSEGRAIN TELESCOPE if 
the primary mirror is parabolic, or a Ritchey—Chretien if 
the primary mirror is hyperbolic. Most large telescopes 
are of this type. 

However, the planned Next Generation Space 
Telescope, NGST (figure 2) will have a third mirror added 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


following the first focus which forms an image of the 
pupil in a converging beam which then comes to focus 
with exceptionally sharp images over a field of view of 
6 arcminutes. In order for the beam from the secondary 
to the tertiary to have clearance to one side of the pupil, 
the field of view used is restricted to one side of the 
axis, thus a larger maximum field angle is needed. This 
increases aberrations, but the three-mirror telescope still 
has sharper images than a two-mirror telescope (Ritchey— 
Chretien) and also less field distortion and less curvature 
of the focal surface. The optical layout of the NGST is 
shown in figure 2. Compared with a two-mirror telescope, 
which has a distant exit pupil above the secondary mirror, 
the NGST has its final pupil much closer to the focus 
and is thus less telecentric than most telescopes. The 
purpose of the deformable mirror, DM, on NGST is to 
compensate for residual imperfections in the figure of 
the active primary mirror (See SPACE INSTRUMENTATION: NEXT 
GENERATION SPACE TELESCOPE). 

If a space telescope is diffraction limited, then the 
cameras in the instruments can be smaller and have longer 
focal lengths than the equivalent on a large ground-based 
telescope whose resolution is limited by atmospheric 
turbulence, called szEINc. A spectrograph designed for a 
small ground-based telescope will work well with a large 
space-based telescope. 


Back-surface mirrors 

Large mirrors in telescopes are front-surface mirrors, but 
for smaller mirrors there are advantages to back-surface 
mirrors. Acommon example is a right-angle prism. In that 
case no metal coating is required because the reflection at 
the diagonal is by total internal reflection. If the angle of 
incidence of the light is lower than the critical angle it is 
necessary to have a reflective coating on the outside of the 
back surface, such as in a bathroom mirror. This reflective 
surface can be well protected against corrosion and dust. 
If the mirror is curved with a shorter radius on the front 
than on the back, it is called a Mangin mirror. The spherical 
aberration caused when light passes through the front is 
balanced by that caused by reflection at the spherical back. 
It is used as a primary mirror in some small telescopes. 

If the glass is made thick and nearly flat but 
aspherized, the result is called a solid Schmidt camera. 

An array of small back-surface mirrors is used in 
the image position sensor for the adaptive optics system 
for the WIYN telescope on Kitt Peak. It is described at 
http://claret.kpno.noao.edu/wiyn/wttm.html. 

Also, an image-slicer design option for NGST uses 
arrays of back-surface micromirrors. An advantage is that 
a change of temperature changes both the curvatures of 
the mirrors and their separations so they stay in focus. 


Eyepieces 

The EYEPIECE is a reversed camera lens but in detail it has 
a very different task from that of the objective or of a 
commercial camera lens because of the location of the 
pupil. In the case of the eyepiece, the pupil must be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Secondary mirror 


Primary mirror 


= Tertiary 


First 


1785.71 MM 


Figure 2. NGST: primary, secondary, tertiary and deformable mirrors. 


external to the lens, because it must be on the eye of the 
beholder, which with eyelashes is 10 to 15 mm from the 
lens, or 18 to 20 mm if the person wears spectacles. This 
distance is called EYE RELIEF. Also, the diameter of the EXIT 
pupiL should be small enough for all of the beam of light to 
enter the human eye, whose iris ranges in diameter from 
2 to 5 or 8 mm depending on age. Another complication 
in the optical design of an eyepiece is the increased FIELD 
OF view that is in inverse proportion to the diameter of 
the pupil. If the diameter of the telescope is 1 m and if 
it has a one-third degree field of view, the field of view 
of the eyepiece with a 5 mm pupil must be 200 times 
greater, thus 67°, requiring a complicated design with 
several elements. The required focal length of the eyepiece 
is directly proportional to the F-number of the focus being 
viewed, thus is twice as long at an F-20 focus as at an F-10 
focus. 

Modern computer designed eyepieces have up to 
eight elements of several glass types and up to an 
82° field of view which is more than the eye can 
take in at once, and gives the impression of being in 
space. An example of a modern eyepiece, the Erfle, 
which has five elements, is in figure 3. A description 
of eyepiece designs is at the Australian web site; 
http://www.users.bigpond.com/PJIFL/INDEX.html. 


Fiber feed 

Fibers have the advantage in multi-object spectroscopy 
of selecting objects from anywhere in the field of view 
of the telescope and aligning them along the slit of 
a spectrograph. However, fibers suffer from focal 
ratio degradation, FRD. This disadvantage is greater on 
telescopes that produce sharp images, such as space 
telescopes. FRD is less of a disadvantage on ground-based 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


telescopes where the image quality is already degraded by 
turbulence in the Earth’s atmosphere, or seeing. 


Telescope location: Earth or space 

Because of atmospheric turbulence, called seeing, the 
image of a star at the focus of a ground-based telescope 
system is enlarged, thus a shorter EFL is required to 
match the sharpness of the image to the resolution of 
the detector. Thus a faster (smaller) F-number is needed 
than if the telescope were in space. For a large ground- 
based telescope, the optical elements are not only very 
big but also the camera is more complicated, requiring 
more elements to correct the optical aberrations. Figure 4 
shows an outstanding spectrograph camera lens designed 
by Harland Epps for the Keck 10 m telescope. It has 
nine elements: a liquid-coupled doublet, a singlet, a 
liquid-coupled triplet, a doublet and finally a singlet field 
flattener lens near the focus. Also shown are a filter and 
a dewar window. The largest element has a diameter of 
36 cm and is made of calcium fluoride. 

By comparison, if a telescope is in space the minimum 
size of a stellar image can be limited only by diffraction, 
and thus is the same size at the focus on the detector 
whatever the diameter of the telescope, for a given F- 
number. Thus, for example, a simple spectrograph camera 
designed for a 1 m telescope would operate at its full 
efficiency if used with an 8 m space telescope. This makes 
more feasible the use of efficient spectrographs on giant 
space telescopes of the future, such as perhaps a 100 m 
liquid mirror telescope on the Moon. 


Diffraction limit 
The diffraction limit expressed as the full diameter, ¢ of the 
AIRY DISK, which is the diameter of the first dark diffraction 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Location of eye 


\ 


Locatiion of focus of telescope 


Figure 3. Erfle eyepiece, 5 mm pupil, 60° field, EFL = 25 mm. 


Location of grating 
Doublet 


Singlet 
Triplet 
Doublet 


Singlet 


: 


a 


md 
ilter ==f 


Fil 


125.00 MM 


Figure 4. EPPS spectrograph camera lens for the Keck telescope. 


ring, in seconds of arc, is 


for 4 in microns and D in meters. For the 8 m NGST, at 
A = 2 wm (near infrared) @ = 0.25 arcsec. The Rayleigh 
limit is one-half of this amount, 0.125 arcsec, which is the 
half-width of the Airy disk. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Adaptive and active optics 

An active optic cell can bend the mirror it supports to 
correct for imperfections in the shape of the mirror, such 
as the primary mirror. By comparison an adaptive optic 
is a deformable mirror, DM, located closer to (but not 
at) the focus where the beam is much smaller than at 
the primary mirror. The DM is rapidly deformable to 
correct aberrations caused by turbulence in the Earth’s 
atmosphere, and it also corrects wavefront errors caused 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by imperfections in the primary mirror. The first non- 
military adaptive optics system, called Come-on, started 
operation at the European Southern Observatory in 1989 
on the 3.6 m telescope. The newest, improved system 
is called Adonis. In 1996 the adaptive optics Bonnette, 
or PUEO, was commissioned on the Canada France 
Hawaii Telescope, CFHT. These systems are described in 
http:/ /www.ls.eso.org /lasilla/ Telescopes /360cat / 
adonis/html/aosystem.html#optic and 

http: / /cdsweb.u-strasbg.fr:2001 /Instruments /Imaging/ 
AOB/performance.html. 

An adaptive optics system, like a spectrograph, has a 
collimator followed by a camera, usually off-axis mirrors 
to avoid obstruction. Instead of a grating or prism, there 
is a deformable mirror, DM, between the collimator and 
the camera. In most systems the collimator and camera 
mirrors are parabolic, one for the collimator and one for the 
camera. With only two powered mirrors, the focal surface 
is curved, but not sufficiently to significantly degrade the 
resolution of a field diameter of a few arcminutes. Because 
the beam between the two paraboloids is collimated, the 
image at the focus on the axis at the center of the field is 
perfect, whatever the focal lengths of the two paraboloids 
and whatever the distance at which they cut off the axis 
of the parent mirrors. The focal surfaces are tilted with 
respect to the axis of the paraboloids but are not tilted 
with respect to the axis of the telescope. Thus it is not 
necessary to tilt the detector when the adaptive optics 
system is inserted. 

It is often required that the camera should have a 
longer focal length than the collimator to magnify the 
sharpened images to match the resolution of the detector. 
In that case, field aberrations (of the center of the field of 
view) are minimized if the distance of the camera mirror 
from the axis of the parent mirror surface is increased in 
proportion to the square of the magnification. 

The Gemini adaptive optics system is unusual in 
that the module available for the adaptive optics system 
(on a de-rotator needed because the telescope has an alt- 
azimuth mounting) is further from the focus than the F- 
number multiplied by the diameter of the DM, thus the 
camera must be in the form of a reverse telephoto—it 
must increase the diameter of the beam from the DM 
before convergence. Thus the Gemini system, called Altair, 
has two mirrors in the camera, convex then concave, in 
addition to the collimator mirror, thus it is a type of three- 
mirror anastigmat, TMA. An advantage of having three 
mirrors instead of two is that the focal surface is flat, thus 
the images are sharper on a flat detector. It is described at 
http:/ /www.dao.ntrc.ca/ facilities / gemini / 
altair /altair.html. 

The wavefront from a natural guide star is analysed to 
generate the signal to deform the DM. A sodium laser star 
in the Earth’s atmosphere will also be analysed. Because 
it is out of focus where the natural star is in focus within 
the central shadow (of the secondary mirror) in the laser 
beam, a pinhole mirror permits very efficient separation 
of the two beams in the Gemini design. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A system at Mount Wilson is the first to use an 
ultraviolet laser guide star, described at 
http://www.astro.uiuc.edu/projects/unisis /. 

The simplest adaptive optics systems, such as for the 
WIYN telescope on Kitt Peak, corrects only for jitter of the 
image, called tip-tilt. Surprisingly, the NGST will have a 
simple adaptive optics system to correct for jitter of the 
satellite which is expected to be as much as +2.7 arcsec. 


Glass catalogs 

When a ray of light is incident in air upon a flat piece of 
glass, the direction of the ray is changed inside the glass. 
If the angle of incidence, measured with respect to the 
normal (perpendicular) to the glass surface is a, and the 
angle after refraction is 6, the index of refraction, N, is 


defined as . 
sina 


~ sin B’ 
The index of refraction, N, is inversely proportional to the 
speed of light in the glass compared with the speed in a 
vacuum. However, itis measured with respect to the speed 
in air, thus a small correction is needed to the indices listed 
in glass catalogs if the material is used in a vacuum. 

Catalogs list about 250 different types of glass. The 
oldest manufacturer is Schott in Germany. A more recent 
supplier is Ohara in Japan 
(http:/ /www.oharacorp.com/index.html). 

Glasses from both manufacturers are used in 
telescopes. Hoya is another major supplier. Glasses are 
identified by their index of refraction Nu, at the yellow 
helium spectral line whose wavelength is 587 nm, and by 
the difference in N between that of the blue hydrogen line, 
N; at 486 nm and the red hydrogen line, N, at 656 nm, 
listed as Ne — N, in the catalogs. A third, very important 
identification is the Abbe value, which combines both the 
index of refraction and the dispersion, 


Na—1 
Vg = ——_.. 

Ni; — Ne 
Thus a low dispersion glass has a high Va number. Each 
glass type has a six digit code number: the first three digits 
of Na — 1, followed by the first three digits of Vy. Each 
glass type is also given a name which differs depending on 
the manufacturer. For example, the common borosilicate 
crown (low dispersion) optical glass 517642 is Schott BK7, 
Ohara S-BSL& and Hoya BSC7. The common flint glass 
620364 is Schott F2, Ohara PBM2 and Hoya EF2. 

A diagram plotting Nqa versus Vg, listed as an Na/Va 
diagram, for catalog glasses is available on the web at 
http://www.schottglasstech.com/. The transmission of 
catalog glasses depends on type. It is listed for the 
wavelength region from 0.28 to 2.4 wm, but most of the 
glasses transmit over only a fraction of that region. 

Special materials that transmit further into the 
ultraviolet and infrared are not included in these catalogs 
because they are not conventional glasses. Calcium 
fluoride which is now available in large pieces, transmits 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


)Window 
Filter 


ist 


CCD 


60.98 MM 
——— XZ 


Figure 5. Four-element corrector lens for the Hickson 6 m LMT. 


over a much wider wavelength region, from 0.23 to 7.8 wm. 
It has a very low index of refraction and dispersion: Na = 
1.4, Va = 96. Zinc selenide has a very high index of 
refraction: Ng = 2.6, V4 = 8. 


Correctors for liquid mirror telescopes 

By rotating a thin film of mercury a parabolic surface of 
optical quality is formed serving as the primary mirror of 
a liquid mirror telescope, LMT. Because of the naturally 
parabolic shape, images at the center of the field of view 
are sharp. Several LMTs with diameters ranging from 
2.4 to 3 m are operating in North America and a 6 m 
LMT is being constructed in Canada. Ermanno Borra 
at Laval, Paul Hickson at UBC and Mark Mulrooney at 
Cloudcroft Observatory, New Mexico, are instrumental in 
the development of LMTs. 

The 6 m LMT being built at the University of British 
Columbia will have a very short focal length: 9 m 
thus F'/1.5. This fast focal number is achieved without 
additional cost for the mirror simply by designing its 
mounting for a higher rate of rotation, and thus permitting 
a smaller enclosure. However, the short focus increases 
the difficulty of correcting the coma and astigmatism. The 
well known corrector lens of the type originated by Ray 
Wilson in Germany and by the late Charles Wynne in 
England consists of three lenses: a positive meniscus lens 
followed by a negative lens and ending with a positive 
lens near the focus. Referred to as a prime focus corrector 
lens, they are used on many telescopes. They have a flat 
focal surface but have considerable pincushion distortion 
that was not found to be objectionable in the days of 
photographic detectors. After the development of the 
CCD permitting much fainter star fields to be imaged 
it became advantageous to minimize field distortion to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


simplify the subtraction of background light from the sky. 
Such correctors have four elements instead of three. 

A survey of LMTs around the world is given 
at http://www.astro.ubc.ca/Imt. These inexpensive 
telescopes are used for tracking space debris, for aeronomy 
and for astronomy. 

For an LMT there is an additional need to control 
distortion because the time exposure of moving images on 
the CCD detector is achieved by time delay integration, 
TDI, also called drift scanning. With conventional CCDs 
the electronic readout is at constant rate along each column 
of pixels, thus the images should move at a constant speed 
and in straight lines which requires zero field distortion 
when observing space debris or satellites. However, when 
observing stars with an LMT that is not located on the 
equator of the Earth, the rotation of the Earth causes the 
images to move ina curved path and ata rate that depends 
on the declination of the object. Fortunately, this sidereal 
distortion can be removed by an asymmetrical distortion 
of the corrector achieved by deliberately decentering and 
tilting the elements of the corrector lens. The layout 
of such a lens is shown in figure 5 where the elements 
are positioned for a declination of 49°. For observation 
of satellites zero distortion is restored by removing the 
decentering and tilts of the elements. If the telescope were 
moved to Cloudcroft Observatory at a latitude of 31° the 
reduced sidereal distortion for that site could be achieved 
by appropriate repositioning of the elements. 

An advantage of drift scanning is that variations 
in pixel-to-pixel sensitivity of the detector are reduced 
because the response is averaged over all CCD pixels ina 
column. Steerable telescopes are sometimes used for drift 
scanning by tracking along a great circle at a non-sidereal 
rate and rotating the detector. In this case, nonlinear 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cameras ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


effects are minimized without requiring an asymmetrical 
corrector. However, because of the physical motion 
required of the camera the length of the great-circle track 
is limited. The observations would need to be interrupted 
while the camera position is set to follow different great- 
circle paths. By comparison, the LMT, or any telescope 
stopped at the zenith, can integrate continuously with a 
stationary detector. 


E Harvey Richardson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Campanella, Tommaso [Giovan Domenico] (1568- 
1639) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Campanella, Tommaso [Giovan 
Domenico] (1568-1639) 


Born in Stilo, Calabria, Italy. A Dominican, he wrote 
on Telesian philosophy and astrology, and cast flattering 
horoscopes for the influential. A great admirer of Galileo, 
in 1622 he published his Apologia pro Galileo (‘Defense 
of Galileo’), defending the Copernican system and the 
separate paths of scripture and nature to knowledge of 
the Creator. He adopted an animistic, yet empirical, 
interpretation of the world, which influenced a number of 
followers. Denounced to the Inquisition, he spent nearly 
half his life in prison in Naples and Rome, sometimes 
leniently, with a salary and freedom to write, but also 
under the worst conditions, with torture. In 1634 the 
Inquisition discovered yet another plot and Campanella 
was implicated. He fled Rome before he could be arrested, 
was well received in France, but soon died in Paris. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Campani, Giuseppe (1635-1715) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Campani, Giuseppe (1635-1715) 


Italian instrument and clock maker, born in Castel San 
Felice (near Spoleto), Italy, fl. Rome, best known for his 
optical instruments, primarily telescopes (for which he 
made the best composite eyepieces available and lenses of 
longer focal length than any other optician—up to 40 m), 
but also for microscopes. All JEAN CAssINI’s discoveries 
were made with Campani telescopes, with which Cassini 
exclusively equipped the Observatory in Paris. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Campanus of Novara [Campano, Giovanni] (1220-96) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Campanus of Novara [Campano, 
Giovanni] (1220-96) 


Astronomer, mathematician, born in Novara, Italy, 
chaplain to Pope Urban IV. Wrote Theorica Planetarum 
which describes the construction of a planetarium, the 
first to be described by a European. The work matches 
detailed calculations of the positions of the planets to the 
description of the motion of the mechanism. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Campbell, William Wallace (1862-1938) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Campbell, William Wallace 
(1862-1938) 


Astronomer, born in Hancock County, OH. Trained as an 
engineer, became director of Lick Observatory, measured 
stellar radial velocities with the Mills photographic 
spectrograph (which he designed) and published them 
(with Joseph Moore) in a catalog (1928). From studies 
of the Martian atmosphere, he deduced that it could 
not support life. Founded the Lick southern station in 
Chile, discovered numerous (339) spectroscopic binaries 
(including Capella), and determined the motion of the 
solar system with respect to surrounding stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canada—France—Hawaii Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Canada—France—Hawaii Telescope 


The Canada—France-Hawaii Telescope (CFHT) is a 3.6 m 
optical-infrared telescope located on the summit of 
Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii. On 20 June 
1974, representatives from the National Research Council 
of Canada (NRC), the Centre National de la Reserche 
Scientifique of France (CNRS) and the University of 
Hawaii (UH) signed the Tripartite Agreement that 
culminated in the dedication of the facility on 28 
September 1979. Time is allocated to the partners in 
proportion to their financial support, with Canada and 
France each receiving 42.5% of the time. The Observatory 
headquarters is located in the town of Waimea and houses 
approximately 50 people. 

The telescope has interchangeable top-ends support- 
ing prime-focus (f/4), Cassegrain (f/8 and f/35 IR) and 
Coudé foci with a large complement of imaging and spec- 
troscopic instruments. 

The CFHT has pioneered much of the methodol- 
ogy used to enhance image quality on ground-based tele- 
scopes. This began with dome environment control, 
through to the first operational tip-tilt wave-front correc- 
tion system (1988), and the deployment of a facility adap- 
tive optics system in 1996. More recently, CFHT has imple- 
mented a wide-field imaging plan. It operates CFH12K, 
the largest close-packed CCD mosiac camera in the world 
and will deploy a full square-degree CCD camera in mid- 
2001. 

For further information see 
http://www.cfht.hawaii.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canadian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Canadian Astronomy 


Canada is big (second only to Russia in area) and 
sparsely populated (30 million). These facts, as trite as 
they are, do explain a lot about the country, even its 
scientific endeavors. Almost all astronomy carried out 
in Canada during centuries of exploration prior to 1900 
was connected with surveying and time-keeping. Even 
the efforts by Sandford Fleming to introduce worldwide 
time zones in the 1880s seem appropriate in a country 
which spans nearly 90° in longitude. Some 20th century 
examples are C S Beals’ identification of dozens of ancient 
meteorite craters in the Precambrian Canadian shield, 
the launching of the communications satellite Alouette I 
in 1962 (Canada was the third country in the world to 
build a satellite) and the pioneering work in long-baseline 
radio astronomy whereby two Canadian radio telescopes 
separated by thousands of kilometers were linked in 1967. 

Another cliché of life in Canada is the cultural and 
economic dominance of its giant neighbor, the United 
States. Some of America’s best-known astronomers of 
the 19th century, including simon NEWcoms, were born in 
Canada but went south to the land of opportunity. The 
‘brain drain’ is still a concern today. In fact the Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the 
government-supported granting agency, has programs to 
encourage bright young scientists to study and work in 
Canada. 

Finally, it should be recognized that Canada is 
officially bilingual. This means that all federal services 
are available in both French and English. It also 
explains why some acronyms such as CASCA (Canadian 
Astronomical Society/Société canadienne d’astronomie) 
reflect this dual character. In practice, among institutions 
where astronomy is taught, the Universités de Montréal 
and Laval in Québec operate in French, the Universities of 
Moncton in New Brunswick and Laurentian in Ontario use 
both official languages and the rest are English language 
based. 


Early history 

Very little has been written about aboriginal astronomical 
traditions in Canada except for a recent book, The Arctic 
Sky, by John MacDonald, which explores the knowledge 
of the Inuit people of the far north. It was also in the 
Arctic that European astronomy first touched Canadian 
shores. English explorers intent on a northwest passage 
to the orient looked to the Sun, Moon and stars to fix their 
latitude and longitude. The best pre-telescopic results 
were achieved by Thomas James who wintered in 1632 
in the bay which now bears his name. However, it 
was the Jesuit missionaries from France, who often spent 
the best part of their lives here, who really introduced 
astronomy in Canada. They too were concerned with 
geographic position and to that end observed eclipses. The 
most accurate of these was a lunar eclipse observation on 
30 January 1646, made by Father Joseph Bressani using 
a small telescope at a remote mission near present-day 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Midland, Ontario. The missionaries at Quebec recorded 
positions of the bright comets of the 1660s and about 
the same time they, along with some lay teachers, began 
teaching surveying, navigation and hydrography. 

The tradition of practical astronomy as the basis of 
mapping continued after the capture of Quebec by the 
British in 1759 both in the Atlantic region and in the 
vast western territories of the Hudson’s Bay Company. 
Scientifically significant were the transit of Venus in 
1761, observed in Newfoundland by John Winthrop from 
Massachusetts, and the 1769 transit observed by surveyor 
Samuel Holland and his assistant at two locations in 
Quebec and on behalf of the Royal Society by William 
Wales at Fort Churchill on the shores of Hudson Bay. 
On Wales’ advice, the Company appointed its first 
surveyor, Philip Turnor, who mapped much of western 
Canada along with two younger men, Thompson and 
Fidler, to whom he taught the procedures of practical 
astronomy while they were stationed at Cumberland 
House, Saskatchewan. 

Eastern Canada became more settled following the 
arrival of Loyalists from the newly independent United 
States. In 1789, they founded the first English-speaking 
institution of higher learning at Windsor, Nova Scotia, 
naming it King’s College. Although several other 
universities have their origin in the early 19th century, 
the first to be equipped with an observatory and to offer 
lectures in astronomy was at Fredericton, New Brunswick, 
in the 1850s. Other early observatories include the Toronto 
Observatory (originally a magnetic observatory, opened 
in 1840), Charles Smallwood’s private observatory near 
Montreal, equipped with a 18 cm Fraunhofer refractor in 
the late 1840s, and observatories with 15 cm refractors at 
Quebec and Kingston established in the 1850s. 

By 1867, when four colonies formed the new 
Dominion of Canada, some interest in ‘pure’ astronomy 
had begun to emerge, although preoccupation with 
the very real needs of surveying and time-keeping 
continued. Reverend Bolduc at the Quebec Seminary 
taught astronomy and had at his disposal a 40 cm Foucault 
reflector, and astronomy was part of the curriculum at 
Queen’s University, Kingston, and at King’s College, 
Windsor, Nova Scotia. E H Ashe, of the Quebec 
Observatory, traveled to Iowa to study and photograph 
the solar eclipse of August 1869. Smallwood, in Montreal, 
wrote on lunar and solar phenomena. One event which 
ultimately had lasting significance was the formation 
of the Toronto Astronomical Club in 1868 by a little 
group of amateurs. In the 1880s, one of their number 
was observing spectra of the Sun and stars, some were 
taking photographs of the Sun and Moon and others 
still were observing and sketching surface features on the 
planets. By 1890, they had incorporated as a Society and 
began publishing transactions which were distributed to 
universities and observatories around the world. This 
group evolved into the ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY OF 
CANADA (RASC), whose Journal still remains the only 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canadian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


national publication for Canadian astronomical research 
and news. 

One of the members of this group in the 1890s was a 
young physics professor at the University of Toronto (U of 
T), CA Chant, who had the foresight to ally astronomy at 
the university with physics. W F King, who had worked 
on the 49th parallel boundary survey in the 1870s and who 
rose to the position of Canada’s first ‘Chief Astronomer’ in 
1890, also recognized that research was expanding beyond 
the traditional fields of time and position. So it came about 
in the early years of the 20th century that a substantial 
government observatory was founded in the nation’s 
capital, Ottawa, and a separate Astronomy Department 
was established at U of T. Although positional astronomy 
and geophysics were the backbone of the program at the 
Dominion Observatory (DO) when it opened in 1905, its 
main instrument was a 38 cm Brashear refractor and its 
staff for many years were mostly graduates of the U of T. 


The growth of the profession 1905-1970 
Astrophysical research at a national observatory was 
unusual and might not have occurred at Ottawa if there 
had been any universities in the country with suitable 
facilities. However, there were not, and it was recognized 
that the Observatory would provide a stimulus to science 
throughout the Dominion. It is a role which government 
still plays in Canadian astronomy since many smaller 
institutions cannot on their own afford the facilities 
necessary for modern research. 

Solar studies and stellar spectroscopy were the main 
areas of research in astrophysics at the DO but it soon 
became apparent that the scope of a 38 cm instrument 
in a less-than-desirable environment was limited. The 
main push for improved facilities came from JS PLASKETT, 
who had graduated as a mature student from Toronto 
and had joined the staff of the DO even before it opened. 
By 1910 he realized ‘that our output in radial velocities 
observations of spectroscopic binaries is likely to diminish 
materially. ... The only remedy is an increase of telescope 
aperture’. It is a tribute to his organizational and 
political genius that, in spite of the First World War, the 
DOMINION ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY (DAO) equipped with 
a 1.8 m reflector opened near Victoria, British Columbia, 
in April 1918. At the time, it was the largest operating 
telescope in the world since the Mount Wilson 2.5 m 
was was still undergoing modifications. The DAO is 
still going strong—a second telescope, a 1.2 m with a 
Coudé spectrograph, was added in 1961 and detection 
equipment in both instruments has been continuously 
updated. Spectroscopy has always been the cornerstone of 
the DAO programs, with some highlights being Plaskett’s 
work on the rotation of the Galaxy using radial velocities 
of O- and B-type stars, McKellar’s work on interstellar 
absorption, Petrie’s calibration of the absolute magnitudes 
of B stars and Batten’s catalogues of spectroscopic binary 
orbits. 

An even larger reflecting telescope (1.9 m) began 
operations in 1935 thanks to the persistence of Dr Chant 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


at the U of T and the very generous private donation of 
the DAVID DUNLAP OBSERVATORY (DDO). It was the only major 
astronomical facility at a Canadian university for many 
years, and U of T was the only place in the country where 
a student could get specialized training in astronomy until 
the 1950s. Spectroscopy and photometry have been the 
basis of most of the research carried out there with HELEN 
Hocc’s lifelong work on variable stars in globular clusters 
and Bolton’s convincing 1972 research on Cygnus X-1 as a 
black hole being especially memorable. 

After the Second World War, radio astronomy opened 
up. In Canada it was an offshoot of radar work carried 
out by A E Covington at the NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL 
(NRC). He recognized the potential of some of the 
equipment for solar research and in 1945 began a program 
of monitoring the Sun at a wavelength of 10.7 cm—a 
program which still continues. Two large steerable radio 
telescopes were inaugurated in the 1960s—one being the 
45 m at the ALGONQUIN RADIO OBSERVATORY (now used for 
geodetic measurements) and the other a 26 m dish at 
the DOMINION RADIO ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY (DRAQ) at 
Penticton, British Columbia. These instruments proved 
very versatile in studying the interstellar medium and in 
identifying some of the largest molecules in space. By 1966, 
the DRAO also had installed two large interferometric 
arrays used for high-resolution imaging of discrete sources 
and mapping of the galactic plane. 

Because of the postwar baby boom and the cold war 
space competition, the 1960s saw a tremendous surge 
in the founding of universities, some with astronomy 
departments or parts of departments. In fact a third of all 
Canadian universities were established in the 1960s. The 
first astronomy PhD was earned in Canada in 1953 at the 
U of T; 20 yr later, there were 12 awarded at seven different 
universities. During this period, the dissertations covered 
a wide range of topics but there was a preference for stellar 
structure and evolution as well as radial velocities applied 
to studies of intrinsic variables and space motions of stars 
in the Galaxy. 


Recent developments, present status and plans 
for the future 
By 1970, the old Dominion Observatory had outlived 
its usefulness, so it was closed and all government 
astronomical research programs were placed under the 
aegis of NRC. At the time this meant some programs 
like meteor studies which had been the life work of Peter 
Millman continued in Ottawa, but most of the astronomy 
was centered in British Columbia at the DAO and DRAO. 
In 1971, one of NRC’s distinguished staff scientists, 
GERHARD HERZBERG, won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 
‘his contributions to the knowledge of electronic structure 
and geometry of molecules, particularly free radicals’. 
NRC formed the HERZBERG INSTITUTE OF ASTROPHYSICS (HIA) 
in his honor in 1975. 

It was not only in government that a reorganization 
occurred. With a larger scientific community to draw on, 
the professional society, CASCA, was formed in 1971 and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canadian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. The main Canadian universities with research programs and PhD programs in astronomy and astrophysics. 


Approximate 
number 

Name (and city in of PhDs Telescopes >0.5 m 

order east to west) in last 10 yr (type or observatory name) Some areas of research 

Laval (Quebec) 11 1.6 m Mont Mégantic Cosmology, galaxies, interstellar medium, white 
dwarfs, massive stars 

Montréal 21 1.6 m Mont Mégantic 

Queen’s (Kingston) 11 Solar system dynamics, star formation, interstellar 
medium, star clusters, galaxy structure and 
formation, neutrino and particle astrophysics, 
cosmology and general relativity 

Toronto 37 0.6, 1.9m at DDO Stellar astrophysics, contact binary systems, 

David Dunlap observatory variables, nebulae, interstellar matter, cosmology, 
0.6 m HS Hogg? galaxy clusters and evolution 

York (Toronto) 6 0.6m Dynamics of solar system and star clusters, plan- 
etary atmospheres, nebular, supernova remnants, 
pulsars, active galactic nuclei 

McMaster (Hamilton) 10 Stellar populations, globular cluster systems, star- 
forming regions, theoretical astrophysics 

Waterloo/Guelph 9 Bakos Observatory Molecular astronomy, interstellar medium, star 


Western Ontario (London) 5 


Alberta (Edmonton) 11 0.5 m Devon Observatory 
Calgary 11 0.5 m Rothney Observatory 

1.8 m Honeycomb 
British Columbia 19 2.7 m liquid mirror 
(Vancouver) 
Victoria 15 0.5 m Climenhaga Observatory 


* Helen Sawyer Hogg Telescope is located in Argentina. 


by its first annual meeting had 145 members. Currently 
there are 381 members, 281 of whom are located in Canada. 
The fact that more than a quarter of the members live 
abroad is mainly due to emigration. 

Multi-user scientific facilities and international coop- 
eration became the only way that Canada could afford 
to participate in large projects at the forefront of current 
research. The MEGANTIC ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY, opened 
in 1978, is jointly run by the Université de Montréal and 
Université Laval. HIA is responsible for Canada’s share 
in three international ventures—the 3.8 m CANADA-FRANCE- 
HAWAII TELESCOPE (CFHT) which opened in 1979 and in 
which Canada has a 42.5% interest and more recently the 
15 m JAMES CLERK MAXWELL TELESCOPE (25%) also in Hawaii 
and the 8 m GEMINI OBSERVATORY telescopes (14%) in Hawaii 
and Chile. All three facilities have permanent staff em- 
ployed by HIA but time allocation is made widely avail- 
able. In addition, HIA continues its responsibility for the 
two Canadian observatories already alluded to—DRAO, 
now a major collaborator in the Canadian Galactic Plane 
Survey (see figure 1) and DAO, which now is home to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1.2 m Elginfield Observatory 


formation, galactic structure, cosmology, gravita- 
tion, laboratory astronomy, instrumentation 
Stellar rotation, atmospheres, magnetic fields, 
surface features, interstellar matter and nebulae, 
star clusters, quasars 

Photometry and spectroscopy of binaries and 
variables, supernova remnants, cosmology 
Monitors asteroids and variable stars; planetary 
transit searches, optical and infrared photometry 
and spectroscopy, continuous monitoring of 
circumpolar objects 

Low-mass stars, substellar companions, astroseis- 
mology, atmospheres of hot stars, galaxy interac- 
tions 

Formation, structure and evolution of solar 
system objects, stars, galaxies, galaxy clusters, 
quasars and large-scale structure 


Canadian Astronomy Data Center, a distribution center 
for data from the Hubble Space Telescope and an archival 
center for data from CFHT. Two other recent Canadian 
multi-user projects are the Canadian Institute for Theo- 
retical Astrophysics (CITA), located at the University of 
Toronto, and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO), 
a collaborative project of several Canadian and American 
universities. 

From 1984 onwards, financial cutbacks were the order 
of the day. Science budgets and astronomy funding 
in particular declined at the same time as international 
cooperative ventures used up larger proportions of what 
was available. Throughout the 1990s, research grants 
provided by NSERC in space and astronomy amounted 
to only about $4 million per year. 

There are now about 35 Canadian institutions of 
higher learning where some astronomy is taught; in about 
half of these research is done and doctoral degrees are 
offered in astronomy or closely related fields (the main 
ones are listed in table 1). Approximately 20 PhDs 
are awarded each year, the most prevalent topics being 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canadian Astronomy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Images from the Canadian Galactic Plane Survey of a 
6.8° x 9.7° region in Cassiopeia. Left: 21 cm continuum; right: 
21 cm line. 


theoretical astrophysics, structure and evolution of normal 
galaxies, clusters of galaxies, cosmology, interstellar 
matter and the stellar environment. Greater participation 
in theoretical work ranging from cosmology to planetary 
system dynamics in recent years is partly a reflection of 
the establishment of CITA. 

Building on technical expertise that Canadians 
already have in such areas as instrument and software 
design, a partnership among NRC, NSERC and CASCA 
is developing a long-range plan for astronomy in Canada 
until 2015. At the present time this panel is considering 
a wide variety of issues, including maintenance of 
present programs and facilities along with participation 
in the Next Generation Space Telescope, the Atacama 
Large Millimeter Array and the Square Kilometer Array 
operating at cm and dm wavelengths. A small Canadian 
satellite to study microvariability and oscillations of stars 
(MOST) is also in the works, with a possible launch date 
in 2001. Balancing various demands and aspirations is a 
challenging task in an environment where future funding 
for research is uncertain. Fortunately, economic conditions 
are good at present and there seems to be a political 
awareness that Canada’s future in science and technology 
requires greater government support. 


Bibliography 

Aikman C G http://www.seameadow.com/canast.html 
has links to most Canadian astronomical web sites 

Jarrell RA 1988 The Cold Light of Dawn: a History of Canadian 
Astronomy (Toronto: University of Toronto Press) 


Peter Broughton 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Canals (Martian) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Canals (Martian) 


Elusive linear features on Mars claimed to exist by some 
observers from the late nineteenth century until well 
into the twentieth. Although isolated streaks had been 
reported by earlier observers, it was Giovanni Schiaparelli 
who first gave linear markings prominence on a map of 
Mars he drew in 1877. He gave them the Italian name 
canali, which can mean ‘channels’ or ‘canals’, but was 
translated as the latter in English reports. The connotation 
of artificial construction thus became attached to them, 
though this was not what Schiaparelli had intended— 
indeed, he disapproved of the term. In the 1880s the 
canals remained a controversial topic, several respected 
astronomers claiming to have observed them, but others— 
notably Asaph Hall—failing to see them. 

From the time of his first claimed sightings of canals 
in 1894, Percival Lowell began to frame the classic scenario 
of the canals as artificial waterways built by Martians 
in a last-ditch attempt to irrigate a planet whose water 
resources were dwindling. This idea, propounded by 
Lowell in books such as Mars and Its Canals, and depicted 
by him in maps of Mars showing an extensive and intricate 
canal network, fired the public imagination and infused 
literature, inspiring such stories as H G Wells’s War of 
the Worlds. The power of the popular vision persisted, 
surviving Eugéne Antoniadi’s demonstration that the 
canals were illusory—a result of the observer struggling 
to resolve elusive detail. When the brain thinks it knows 
what the eye should see, the eye sees it. Images returned 
by spacecraft from the late 1960s showed no canals. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cancer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cancer 


(the Crab; abbrev. Cnc, genitive Cancri; area 506 sq. deg.) A 
northern zodiacal constellation which lies between Gemini 
and Leo, and culminates at midnight in late January. It 
represents the crab that, in Greek mythology, Hercules 
crushed underfoot during his fight with the multi-headed 
Hydra. The name of a Cancri, its brightest star, is Acubens, 
which comes from the Arabic word meaning ‘the claw’. 
The brightest stars of Cancer were cataloged by Ptolemy 
(c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

An inconspicuous constellation, the brightest stars in 
Cancer are 6 Cancri, magnitude 3.5, 6 Cancri (Asellus 
Australis), magnitude 3.9, and « Cancri, a wide double 
star with yellow (G8) and bluish-white (A3) components, 
magnitudes 4.0 and 6.6, separation 30”. Another 
interesting star is ¢ Cancri (Tegmine), a quadruple 
system consisting of two yellow (F8 and G5) components, 
magnitudes 5.4 and 6.0, separation 0.6”, period 59.7 years, 
with a third component, also yellow (F9), magnitude 6.2, 
separation 6.2”, which revolves around the others in about 
1150 years, and a fourth, unseen component which is 
thought to revolve around the third in about 17.6 years. 
The constellation also contains the Mira-type variable star 
R Cancri (range 6.1-11.8, period about 362 days). 

Midway between and slightly to the west of y and 
6 Cancri is Praesepe (the Beehive or Manger; M44, NGC 
2632), one of the most magnificent open star clusters in the 
sky, which, at a distance of about 160 pc, is just visible to 
the unadied eye as a faint misty patch. Another interesting 
open cluster is M67 (NGC 2682), which contains about 200 
stars between eighth and fourteenth magnitude. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Candy, Michael Philip (1928-94) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Candy, Michael Philip (1928-94) 


Celestial mechanician, born in Bath, England. While at the 
Royal Greenwich Observatory became the first astronomer 
both to discover a comet and to calculate its orbit (Comet 
Candy 1960), became director of the Perth Observatory, 
which he supervised into measurements of minor planets 
and comets, including a vast number of positions for 
Halley’s Comet in 1986. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Canes Venatici 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Canes Venatici 


(the Hunting Dogs; abbrev. CVn, gen. Canum Venatico- 
rum; area 465 sq. deg.) A northern constellation which 
lies between Ursa Major and Bootes, and culminates at 
midnight in early April. It was named by the astronomer 
Johannes Hevelius (1611-87) of Danzig (Gdansk), who in- 
cluded it in his atlas Firmamentum Sobiescianum sive Ura- 
nographia though the celestial figure had been shown in 
earlier charts dating back to 1533. Previously its stars had 
been included in Ursa Major. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Canes Venatici is a Canum Venaticorum (Cor 
Caroli), a wide binary with bluish-white (AO) and white 
(FO) components, magnitudes, 2.9 and 5.6, separation 
19.4”, the former of which is the prototype of a class of 
magnetic spectrum variable stars. There are no other 
stars brighter than fourth magnitude. Another interesting 
variable is the Mira-type star RCanum Venaticorum (range 
6.5-12.9, period about 329 days). 

Towards the boundary of Canes Venatici, rather more 
than halfway between a Canum Venaticorum and a 
Bo6tis (Arcturus), lies M3 (NGC 5272), a sixth-magnitude 
globular cluster. Also towards the boundary of Canes 
Venatici, but this time about 4° south-east of the star 7 
Ursa Majoris (the last of the bright stars in the tail of the 
Great Bear) lies the eighth-magnitude Whirlpool Galaxy 
(M51, NGC 5194), so-called because of its noticeable spiral 
structure, first observed by Lord Rosse with his 1.8 m (72 
in.) reflector in 1845. Three other bright galaxies in Canes 
Venatici are M94 (NGC 4736—eighth magnitude), M106 
(NGC 4258—eighth magnitude) and M63 (NGC 5055— 
ninth magnitude). 


See also: Cor Caroli, Whirlpool Galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canis Major 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Canis Major 


(the Greater Dog; abbrev. CMa, gen. Canis Majoris; area 
380 sq. deg.) A southern constellation which lies between 
Lepus and Puppis, and culminates at midnight in early 
January. It represents one of the two dogs of Orion (the 
Hunter), which dominates the sky to the north-west (the 
other dog being represented by Canis Minor). Its brightest 
star, a Canis Majoris (Sirius), is known as the ‘dog star’. 
The brightest stars of Canis Major were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A small constellation, Canis Major is easily found by 
virtue of Sirius, which at magnitude —1.4 is the brightest 
star in the sky and lies on a continuation of a downward 
line joining the stars 6, ¢ and ¢ Orionis, in Orion’s belt. 
Sirius is also the brighter component of a close binary, its 
companion (Sirius B) being a white dwarf, magnitude 8.4, 
separation 4.6", period 50 years. Other bright stars include 
é Canis Majoris (Adhara), a double star with bluish-white 
(B2) and yellow components, magnitudes 1.5 and 7.9, 
separation 7.5”, 5 Canis Majoris (Wezen), magnitude 1.8, 
and 6 Canis Majoris (Mirzam), magnitude 2.0. There are 
eight other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. 

Other interesting objects in Canis Major include the 
Algol-type variable star R Canis Majoris (range 5.7-6.3, 
period 1.14 days), the eclipsing binary UW Canis Majoris 
(range 4.8-5.3, period 4.39 days) and two open clusters, 
M41 (NGC 2287), which consists of about 100 stars fainter 
than seventh magnitude and is just visible to the unaided 
eye about 4° south of Sirius, and NGC 2362, which consists 
of about 40 stars fainter than magnitude 7.5 surrounding 
t Canis Majoris (magnitude 4.4). 


See also: Sirius. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canis Minor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Canis Minor 


(the Lesser Dog; abbrev. CMi, gen. Canis Minoris; area 
183 sq. deg.) A northern constellation which lies between 
Gemini and Monoceros, and culminates at midnight in 
mid-January. It represents one of the two dogs of Orion 
(the Hunter), which dominates the sky to the west (the 
other dog being represented by Canis Major). Its brightest 
stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) in the 
Almagest. 

A small constellation, the brightest stars in Canis 
Minor are w Canis Minoris (Procyon), which at magnitude 
0.4 is the eighth brightest star in the sky, and 6 Canis 
Minoris (Gomeisa), magnitude 2.9. There are no other 
stars brighter than fourth magnitude. Procyon, like a 
Canis Majoris (Sirius) to the south-west, has a white dwarf 
companion (Procyon B), magnitude 11.3, separation 5”, 
period 41 years. There are no bright star clusters, nebulae 
or galaxies in Canis Minor. 


See also: Procyon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cannon, Annie Jump (1863-1941) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cannon, Annie Jump (1863-1941) 


Astronomer, born in Dover, DE. Taught astronomy by her 
mother and at Wellesley. In 1896, she joined ‘Pickering’s 
Women,’ at Harvard College Observatory to reduce data 
and carry out astronomical calculations. EC PICKERING had 
conceived a long-term project to obtain and classify stellar 
spectra. Begun in 1886 by Nettie Farrar and WILLIAMINA 
FLEMING, the first stage was to examine the spectra of 
more than 10 000 stars and develop a classification system 
containing 22 classes, modified by Antonia Maury. Annie 
Cannon used her own examination of bright southern 
hemisphere stars to divide them into spectral classes O, 
B, A, F,G, K, Mand so on, and reclassified the previously 
classified stars. The resultant Henry Draper Catalog listed 
the spectral classes of nearly 400000 stars. Cannon also 
published catalogs of variable stars (including 300 she 
herself discovered). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Canopus ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Canopus 


The star w Carinae, named for the chief pilot of the fleet of 
Menelaos, who died in Egypt c. 1193 Bc on the return from 
the Trojan War, the star being prominent at the time. It is 
the second brightest star, having an apparent magnitude of 
—0.62. Itisa cream giant, spectral type FOIb, at a distance of 
326 light-years; its parallax is 0.010", and it has an absolute 
magnitude of —5.6. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cape York Meteorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cape York Meteorite 


An iron meteorite that fell at Cape York in northern 
Greenland. Its fragments total 58 tonnes, making it the 
second largest meteorite known. The largest fragment 
(30.9 tonnes), known to the local people as Ahnighito, 
had been used by them as a source of iron before the 
explorer Robert Peary visited the region. He shipped 
Ahnighito, together with two other fragments—‘the 
Woman’ (3 tonnes) and ‘the Dog’ (400 kg)—to New York. 
Ahnighito, currently kept at the Hayden Planetarium, is 
the world’s largest meteorite on public display. Two 
other fragments known by their native names (Savik 1, 
3.4 tonnes, and Agpalilik, 20 tonnes) were removed to 
Denmark in the twentieth century. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Capella 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Capella 


Capella—the ‘Goat Star’ in the constellation Auriga, the 
‘Charioteer’—is the sixth brightest star in the sky, third in 
the Northern hemisphere. It is a well-known spectroscopic 
binary of yellow giants, appears to form a physical system 
with Capella HL, an outlying pair of RED Dwarrs, and is 
a member of the extended Hyades Movinc croup (coeval 
with the nuclear region of the nearby young cluster). The 
giants of Capella are nearly twins, but differ just enough 
in mass to fall in distinctly separate evolutionary phases: 
the secondary is a lithium-rich fast-rotating Hertzsprung 
gap star, while the more advanced primary is a lithium- 
depleted, slowly rotating ‘clump’ giant. Capella is a 
linchpin of the stellar mass scale, and long has been a 
testbed for interferometric techniques and evolutionary 
models. Capella displays substantial x-ray and _far- 
ultraviolet emissions—perhaps an exaggerated form of 
solar magnetic activity—making it a popular target for 
a long succession of space observatories. The origin 
of the prominent high-energy phenomena of the system 
and the curious differences between the two very well- 
characterized G-type giants continue to provoke lively 
debate in the stellar community. 


Background 

Capella (wa Aurigae; HD 34029; BS 1708; GI 194) is a 
nearby (d = 12.9 pc) bright (V = 0.08) multiple-star 
system consisting of a pair of nearly identical yellow giants 
(G8 III (Aa) + G1 IIT (Ab)) in a tight 0.7 AU, 104 day low- 
eccentricity orbit, circled at a great distance (~10* AU) by 
a looser 50 AU, ~ 300 yr binary of red dwarf stars (Capella 
HL; Gl 195; dM2 (H), dM5 (L)). The system shares the 
space motion of the Hyades open cluster, and O J Eggen 
has deemed it a member of the Hyades Moving Group (or 
‘Supercluster’). The spectroscopically determined masses 
(2.6Mo for the primary, 2.5Mo for the secondary) indicate 
an evolutionary age of 600 million yr, similar to the cluster 
turn-off time of the Hyades nucleus. Figure 1 depicts the 
spatial arrangement of the system. 

The main pair of yellow giants form a SPECTROSCOPIC 
BINARY STAR with radial velocity amplitudes of 26 km s“! 
and 27 km s~! (for Aa and Ab, respectively), on top 
of a recessional velocity of 29 km st. The 0/056 
separation of the two giants has been cleanly resolved 
by a variety of interferometric techniques, beginning with 
Anderson’s pioneering work at Mt Wilson in 1919, and 
extending more recently to the first true spatial maps 
in 1995 by the Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis 
Telescope (COAST). Spectroscopic monitoring of the radial 
velocity swings of the companions, accurate UV-optical— 
IR photometry, interferometric measurements of the 
orbital dimensions, narrow-band speckle reconstructions 
of the relative brightnesses and a highly precise PARALLAX 
from Hipparcos allow refinement of the stellar parameters 
to a degree rarely matched in binary-star astronomy. The 
physical dimensions of the Capella giants, and their orbit, 
are contrasted in figure 2 with the Sun, the solar system 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and the nearby dwarf-star binary a Centauri (G2 V + K1 V). 
a Cen shares superficial similarities with Capella, in that 
it is a multiple system consisting of a relatively tightly 
bound double (the G and K dwarfs) with a distant lighter 
companion (in this case the dM star Proxima Centauri). 
a Cen is, however, only one-third the total mass of the 
Capella system. 


The puzzling visual spectrum 

The visual spectrum of Capella was recorded by numerous 
observers at the close of the 19th century. W W Campbell, 
and independently H F Newall, discovered the periodic 
Doppler shifts (see DOPPLER EFFECT) that pointed to the 
binary nature of the star. The overall spectrum was 
puzzling, however: the absorption lines of one component 
were sharp and distinct, but those of the other were 
barely recognizable. At the same time, interferometric 
work in the 1920s indicated that the two stars were 
comparable in brightness. In the 1950s, O Struve and S 
M Kung, and later K O Wright, succeeded in measuring 
the secondary spectrum. Wright—who applied a cleverly 
designed mechanical subtraction technique to isolate the 
secondary spectrum from the composite—described the 
secondary’s as ‘diffuse’, leading to a ‘veiling’ (or dilution) 
of the primary spectrum. The washed-out appearance of 
the secondary spectrum was attributed, at the time, to 
enhanced atmospheric turbulence or fast rotation. 

In the 1960s, G Wallerstein called attention to the 
lithium absorption spectrum—a signature of evolutionary 
‘youth’, completely dominated by the secondary star— 
and demonstrated that the fast-rotation hypothesis was 
correct. In the early 1970s, AM Boesgaard detected a weak 
Li I absorption in the primary, leading to the evolutionary 
scenario devised by I Iben (illustrated in the lower right 
portion of figure 2). Both of the Capella stars began their 
lives on the upper main sequence (MS) as late-B dwarfs. 
The slightly more massive primary evolved away from the 
MS first, as a hydrogen shell source, ascended the giant 
branch, ignited its helium core and then returned to the 
base of the red giant branch as a core helium burning star, 
losing its lithium by deep convective mixing along the way. 
The helium burning phase is relatively long lived, perhaps 
20% of the MS lifetime; thus evolved stars tend to collect 
in that part of color-magnitude diagrams, leading to a 
‘clump.’ Meanwhile, the slightly less massive secondary 
has only recently evolved away from the MS, at present is 
in the hydrogen shell burning ‘first-crossing’ phase, and 
the lithium dilution episode lies in its future. Because 
the horizontal portion of the shell-burning trajectory is 
traversed very rapidly, in perhaps only 0.1% of the MS 
lifetime, few stars are found there in color-magnitude 
diagrams, and the region has come to be called the 
‘Hertzsprung gap’. Thus while the Capella giants fall close 
to one another in the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram (i.e. 
in surface temperature and luminosity), the primary has 
covered considerably more evolutionary ‘distance’ than 
the secondary to arrive at its present position; subsidiary 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Capella 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HYADES SUPER CLUSTER 
Capella 


G8 Ill 
G1 II 


dM2 
dM5 


age ~ 600 million yr. 


Figure 1. Cartoon of Capella: its constituent stars and relationship to the coeval Hyades cluster and the Sun. (The Sun is much older 
than the Hyades, and only coincidentally finds itself moving through the outskirts of the cluster.) 


properties such as rotation, lithium abundance and CNO 
isotopic ratios tell the tale. 

In the 1980s, F C Fekel and collaborators obtained 
high-precision rotational velocities for both components: 
vaasini = 6 km st; vapsini = 36 km s"l. 
From that time to the present, there has been steady 
refinement of the orbital dimensions of the Capella system 
using interferometry, and further improvements in the 
spectroscopic orbit. Very recently, the new Hipparcos 
parallax for Capella yields a distance (12.9 pc) about 3% 
closer than the previous trigonometric estimates, implying 
luminosities about 6% less. The radius of the primary 
is 13Ro; that of the secondary is 9Ro. The effective 
temperatures are 4940 K and 5700 K, respectively. 

Figure 3 illustrates (simulated) visible and ultraviolet 
spectra of Capella at orbital phase @ = 0.25 (the quadrature 
when Aa is receding at its maximum velocity and Ab is 
approaching at its maximum), and half a cycle later at 
@ = 0.75 (Aa approaching; Ab receding). The visible 
spectrum of each component (middle curve, top panels) 
was obtained by rotationally smoothing a solar trace by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the appropriate v sini; the absorption feature near 6339 A 
is an unresolved close blend. The vertical dotted line 
marks the rest position of the center sharp absorption. 
For clarity, the primary spectrum was assumed to be 
10% brighter than the secondary at this red wavelength 
(corresponding to AV ~ 0.1 mag); the secondary spectrum 
is shaded. Note the washed-out appearance of the 
latter. When the two spectra are combined to yield the 
composite at the top of each panel, the sharp lines of 
the primary are diluted in relative flux by a factor of ~2 
and fall on the undulating background provided by the 
rotationally smeared secondary. No wonder it was so 
difficult to isolate the secondary contribution in historical 
noisy photographic spectra. 


High-energy measurements 

Capella was the first ‘normal’ extra-solar star detected in 
x-rays (serendipitously during a sounding rocket flight), 
and is a bright far-ultraviolet emission-line source. The 
high ‘activity’ of the system has made it a popular target 
for spacecraft observatories, beginning with Copernicus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Capella 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a Aur Aa 
G8 III 
TA Lo 
2.6 Mo 


a Aur Ab 
G1 III 
73 Lo 
2.5 Mo 


7 a Centauri 


LUMINOSITY (Lo) 


7000 6000 5000 


TEMPERATURE (K) 


4000 


Figure 2. Dimensions of the Capella stars and their orbit, and evolutionary status. (Note: points representing the stars and planets in 


upper portion of the diagram are not to scale.) 


in the mid-1970s, and extending in the modern era to 
the Japanese x-ray spectroscopy satellite ASCA and the 
Italian—Dutch high-energy observatory BeppoSAX. 

In the early Copernicus work, A K Dupree found 
strongly blueshifted high-excitation O VI 11032 in Capella, 
relative to the expected velocity of the primary star at 
the particular orbital phase observed. She interpreted the 
shifts as evidence for a massive T ~ 10° K wind emanating 
from the primary star. Later with the all-sky survey by 
HEAO-1, Capella was found to share high x-ray levels with 
the short-period (P ~ few day) tidally locked RS Canum 
Venaticorum binaries, and was designated a long-period 
member of the class. Subsequent studies by T R Ayres and 
J LLinsky with the far-ultraviolet echelle spectrometer on 
the International Ultraviolet Explorer, beginning shortly 
after its launch in 1978, discovered unexpectedly that the 
fast-rotating G1 III secondary star was responsible for 
virtually all of the high-excitation emissions of the system 
(from species such as SiIV 11393 and CIV 41548, forming 
at T ~ 6 x 104-10° K, conditions characteristic in the 
Sun of the subcoronal TRANSITION REGION). Only a small 
contribution was detected from the slowly rotating G8 III 
primary. (In hindsight, the earlier Copernicus result for 
O VI could be reinterpreted as slightly redshifted emission 
from the secondary star at the particular orbital phase.) 

The bottom panels of figure 3 illustrate the effect for 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the C IV doublet based on line widths, relative shifts 
and continuum intensities measured in Hubble Space 
Telescope spectra (GHRS instrument) by B E Wood and 
collaborators. The vertical dotted line marks the rest 
position of C IV 41548. Contrary to the visible region, 
the G1 secondary star completely dominates the far- 
ultraviolet line and (weak) continuum emission, while the 
G8 primary is only a small perturbation. Note also the 
enormous widths (~150 kms“! full width at half-intensity) 
of the CIV components in the secondary star (considering 
that the velocity scale in this depiction is ‘compressed’ 
by a factor of 4 in the lower panels compared with the 
visible spectra owing to the shorter wavelength but same 
10 A interval). More difficult to see in this rendition are 
the systematic redshifts of the C IV lines (in both stars) 
relative to the velocities expected at each orbital phase. 
Such shifts are recorded commonly in ultraviolet spectra 
of the Sun, in lines arising from the 10° K transition zone, 
and are thought to be caused by mass motions of material 
in a complex circulation system within coronal magnetic 
loops (See CORONAL LOOPS). 

In the early 1980s, fast rotation was viewed as the key 
link between the coronal hyperactivity of the short-period 
RS CVns and long-period Capella. (Tidal synchronization 
in the semi-detached RS CVn binaries causes each of the 
component stars to rotate at the orbital period, and thus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Capella 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


o = 0.25 
7 eS 
0.8 V V 
0.6 
{> \ 

0.4 
0.2 
0.0 

6334 6338 6342 6334 


RELATIVE FLUX 


| ee 


6338 6342 


a 


1546 


1550 


1554 


1546 
WAVELENGTH (A) 


1550 1554 


Figure 3. Simulated spectra in visible (top panels) and far-ultraviolet (bottom panels) at opposite orbital quadratures (maximum radial 


velocity separation). 


rapidly since Po» is short.) In reality, Capella is ‘half 
an RS CVn’, because just one of the stars rotates rapidly. 
The connection between fast spin and enhanced coronal 
activity arguably is through strong surface magnetic fields, 
produced in the stellar convective envelope by rotation- 
catalyzed ‘dynamo’ action. 

The dichotomy between the rotation rates of the two 
nearly identical coeval giants was attributed to the large 
evolutionary separation that can develop from even a 
small mass difference (as described previously in Iben’s 
scenario). Indeed, there is an apparent sharp decrease 
in the spins of stars just past G1 III. The cause of the 
rapid braking episode currently is a subject of debate 
(leading contenders are evolutionary redistribution of 
angular momentum in the stellar interior, and shedding 
of angular momentum by a strong stellar wind), but there 
is little doubt that many of the curious ultraviolet (and 
visual) properties of Capella can be understood if the G8 
star already has passed through the rapid braking stage, 
while the G1 star is poised at the brink. 


Current research 

Recent investigations have focused on high-spectral 
resolution ultraviolet measurements of Capella at critical 
orbital phases, particularly dynamical processes revealed 
in global redshifts of the high-temperature lines, and the 
mysterious ‘broad components’ (extended high-velocity 
wings on the emission line profiles) identified by BE Wood 
which might be signatures of the stellar analogs of solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


‘transition zone explosive events’. Another area of interest 
is the recognition that despite its strong far-UV emissions, 
the G1 secondary star (and other fast-rotating Hertzsprung 
gap giants) is relatively deficient in its coronal x-ray 
luminosity. In fact, the G1 star probably has about the 
same x-ray brightness as the G8 primary, despite a 10-fold 
advantage at C IV 11548. The paradox is seen clearly in 
UV measurements by HST of the coronal forbidden line 
Fe XXI 41354, which is detected in both of the giants at 
about equal strengths. The primary star, itself, falls in 
a distinct class of active clump giants, the prototype of 
which is 6 Ceti (KO III) and which includes two of the four 
Hyades red giants (evolutionary cousins of the Capella 
stars). Another curiosity of Capella is that, despite the 
substantial coronal emissions (of both components), and 
intense scrutiny by historical and contemporary x-ray and 
ultraviolet missions, there are surprisingly few reports of 
variability and a remarkable absence of FLARES. In contrast, 
dramatic x-ray variability and flare activity (including 
nonthermal emission at radio frequencies) are trademarks 
of the classical RS CVn binaries. 


Summary 

As anearby bright spectroscopic binary of yellow giants— 
one of them a rare Hertzsprung gap star—and trailing 
emissary of the young Hyades open cluster, Capella 
has drawn the attention of spectroscopists for more 
than a century. Astronomers have tested interferometric 
techniques on the ‘subvisual’ orbit for nearly as long. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Capella 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


About 30 yr ago, the nature of the somewhat mysterious 
secondary star was unraveled, and explained in the 
context of a compelling evolutionary scenario. With the 
development of space observatories in the mid-1970s, 
Capella again found itself in the astronomical spotlight, 
often a prominent entry in the commissioning target list 
of anew mission. Interest in the system—and its message 
concerning the role of stellar structure on the evolution of 
coronal magnetic activity—remains unabated today. 


Bibliography 

Ayres T R and Linsky J L 1980 Outer atmospheres of cool 
stars. V—IUE observations of Capella—the rotation— 
activity connection Astrophys. J. 241 279-99 

Ayres T R, Schiffer F H and Linsky J L 1983 Outer 
atmospheres of cool stars. XI[J—Capella at critical 
phases Astrophys. J. 272 223-33 

Barlow D J, Fekel F C and Scarfe C D 1993 A three- 
dimensional solution for the orbit of Capella Publ. 
Astron. Soc. Pacific 105 476-86 

Burnham R Jr 1978 Burnham's Celestial Handbook (New 
York: Dover) 

Linsky J L, Wood B E, Judge P, Brown A, Andrulis C 
and Ayres T R 1995 The transition regions of Capella 
Astrophys. J. 442 381-400 


T R Ayres 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Capra, Baldassar [Baldassarre] (1580-1626) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Capra, Baldassar [Baldassarre] 
(1580-1626) 


Italian astronomer, born in Milan, studied in Padua. He 
attacked GALILEO over his three public lectures, delivered at 
the University of Padua on the new star which appeared in 
1604, and crossed swords with him in an incident in which 
Capra plagiarized Galileo’s work on the proportional 
compass. Galileo replied with a devastating defense, and 
Capra was expelled from the university. See SIMON MARIUS. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Capricornus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Capricornus 


(the Sea Goat; abbrev. Cap, gen. Capricorni; area 
414 sq. deg.) A southern zodiacal constellation which 
lies between Sagittarius and Aquarius, and culminates 
at midnight in early August. The origin of the unusual 
constellation figure, which comprises the head and 
forelimbs of a goat and tail of a fish, dates back to 
Babylonian times and has also been associated in Greek 
mythology with Pan, who had the horns, legs and ears 
of a goat and turned the lower half of his body into that 
of a fish as he plunged into the Nile to escape the monster 
Typhon. The brightest stars of Capricornus were cataloged 
by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Capricornus are 6 Capricorni, (Deneb Algedi), 
magnitude 2.9, and 6 Capricorni (Dabih), a multiple 
system consisting of two main components, a yellow 
(F8, combined) primary, magnitude 3.1, which is 
a spectroscopic triple star, and a bluish-white (B9) 
secondary, magnitude 6.1, which has a magnitude 10.2 
companion, separation 0.85”. There are three other 
stars brighter than fourth magnitude, including a 
Capricorni (Secunda Algedi or Secunda Giedi), yellow 
(G8), magnitude 3.6, a naked-eye double with unrelated 
a! (Prima Algedi or Prima Giedi), yellow (G3), magnitude 
4.3, separation 378”, both stars having fainter companions. 
Another interesting object is M30 (NGC 7099), an eighth- 
magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carbon Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carbon Stars 


The intrinsic properties of carbon stars 

In 1868 ANGELO SECCHI , S.J., announced that he had found 
a fourth type of stellar spectrum. His first three types, 
designated by Roman numerals of course, were stars with 
hydrogen lines (now A and B stars), stars with metallic 
lines (now types F, G and K) and stars with absorption 
bands that diminished toward longer wavelengths (now 
types M and S). Secchi’s type IV showed bands tailing 
toward shorter wavelengths. By inserting a carbon arc in 
his visual spectroscope he immediately recognized that the 
new bands were due to C; and other C compounds, now 
known to be largely CN. The difference between the oxide 
bands of Secchi’s type III and the C bands of type IV was 
recognized by Fujita to be controlled by the chemistry of 
the very stable molecule CO. If the abundance of O exceeds 
that of C the remaining O, after forming CO, is available 
to form the oxide molecules seen in spectra of types M and 
S. However, in stars with C > O the O is used up in CO 
and the remaining C is available to form carbon molecules 
such as Cy, CN and CH. 

The modern system of classification of carbon stars 
was established by Keenan (1993), who subdivided them 
into three sequences C-R, C-N and C-H corresponding to 
the old RN and CH star classifications. A numeral follows 
to indicate the temperature sequence, e.g. from C-N1 to C- 
N9. Keenan’s full description of the spectra includes the 
strengths of the C,, CN and Merrill-Sanford bands as well 
as the *C/'8C ratio and the Li line strength. An index of 
the s-process enhancement would be useful, but is difficult 
to observe except at high spectral resolutions. 

The intrinsic luminosities of carbon stars can be 
derived either from HIPPARCOS PARALLAXES or by association 
of the carbon star with a stellar system whose distance has 
been determined. In addition, photometry from the visual 
to the K band (2.2 zm) is necessary. By limiting the sample 
to stars with parallaxes at least three times their probable 
error and errors less than 1.5 marcsec a list of 33 objects 
was assembled by Wallerstein and Knapp (1998). Most of 
the stars are of type C-N with only a few C-H, C-R and 
Mira stars represented. If the criteria for acceptance into 
the sample are lowered one runs into a statistical quagmire 
and the apparent spread in My and Mx increases rapidly. 

There are many carbon stars in other galaxies such as 
the MAGELLANIC CLoubs, where extensive surveys have been 
conducted. Since the distances to the clouds are now fairly 
well known, the luminosities of the carbon stars may be 
calculated. Mx values as bright as —9 are present, while the 
Hipparcos sample of stars mentioned above included only 
four stars brighter than Mx = —8 and none brighter than 
Mx = —8.8. The C-R stars show My ~ —5 and My ~ +1.0, 
significantly fainter than the C-N stars. 

The calculation of effective temperature, Tor, depends 
only on measuring the star’s total radiative flux and 
angular diameter. The latter can be done either by lunar 
occultation or by interferometry. As of 1998, 26 C-N stars 
have had their Tom values estimated in this way. The range 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of values lies from 2000 to about 3300 K. The C-R and C-H 
stars are considerably warmer with To values from 4000- 
5000 K, as determined by analysis of their spectral lines. 

Carbon star masses are known only by indirect 
inference. Stellar models that lead to atmospheric 
carbonization by helium shell flashes and mixing can be 
followed for stars of roughly 1-3M >. The upper limit 
may be as large as 5 or 6M, but the mass-function for 
main sequence stars ensures that such objects should 
be relatively rare. The spectroscopic orbits of C-H 
stars indicate masses near 0.8M, but the C-H primaries 
appear to have obtained their carbon-rich atmospheres 
by transfer from their current white dwarf companions, 
whose original masses are unknown, but probably were 
limited to the numbers suggested above. The C-H stars in 
the Large Magellanic Cloud, however, are very luminous 
and their origins are uncertain. 

The evolution of carbon stars has intrigued stellar 
astronomers for some 50 years; i.e., ever since the 
significance of the 34He — ¥C reaction was pointed out 
independently by Opik and Salpeter respectively in 1951 
and 1952. Temperatures above about 10° K are needed 
for the triple-alpha reaction to take place, while the excess 
carbon eventually appears in the stellar atmosphere where 
the temperature ranges from 2-5 x 10° K. In addition, 
detailed abundance ratios such as the *C/18C ratio and the 
enhancement of many heavy elements must be accounted 
for. In stars of less than about 2.0M, the triple-alpha 
reaction ignites at the tip of the red giant branch in a ‘core- 
flash’ (because its rate increases exponentially at first) but 
the resulting helium produced by the flash and subsequent 
quiescent burning seem to be confined to the stellar core. 
In more massive stars He burns quiescently, building up 
a C core with some extension to '°O as C captures an 
additional *He nucleus. Eventually, low mass stars with C 
cores and helium envelopes can ignite their He at the C-He 
boundary in a ‘shell-flash’. By a series of events involving 
sudden convective mixing the '?C reacts with protons to 
produce 8C which, in turn, can react with helium nuclei to 
produce oxygen and free neutrons. The capture of the free 
neutrons by iron and other heavy elements then produces 
many of the heavy elements from rubidium to lead with 
specially conspicuous elements such as Sr, Y, Zr, Ba and 
the light rare earths. Even the unstable element Tc, with 
a half-life of 2 x 10° yr, is produced and convected to the 
stellar surface, where it is observed in some carbon stars 
and many S-type stars. 

How much of this is observed on the surfaces of 
carbon stars? The observation of carbon stars with high 
spectral resolution from 400 to 2400 nm is not difficult. 
However, the analysis of the observed spectra is extremely 
complicated and uncertain due to the huge number of 
atomic lines and molecular bands in the spectra of carbon 
stars. While complete analyses are difficult, restricted 
analyses can be successfully carried out. For example, the 
ratio of C/'C can be determined accurately and ranges 
from about 100 to near 4 in carbon stars, thus showing the 
heterogeneity of evolutionary histories. Most of the C-N 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carbon Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars show #C/18C ratios above 30 while only a few show 
ratios near 4. The C/O ratios range from 1.01 to 1.76 with 
a mean of 1.15 + 0.03. Nitrogen is almost never enhanced 
even in stars with low #C/C, which is surprising. In fact, 
the sum of C+N+O is rarely enhanced in C-N stars despite 
the necessity of an enhancement of carbon for the star to 
be a carbon star. 

The C-R stars are easier to analyse because of their 
higher Ter values, from 4200 to 5000 K, but they are 
rare and few are bright. They all show enhanced °C 
with the ?C/C ratio ranging from 4 to 9. Nitrogen 
is also enhanced, showing systematic CNO cycling after 
”®C enhancement. None of them show heavy element 
enhancments. Two Cepheids with early R-type spectra 
have been analysed and show similar properties to the 
nonvariable R stars. 

The C-H stars are the easiest to analyse because they 
are relatively hot and substantially metal-poor, so the 
degree of blending is greatly reduced. As mentioned 
above, they seem to have inherited their atmospheres from 
their now defunct companions. Their '*C/'%C ratios are 
either less than 8 or more than 25. Some of the latter group 
may be 100 or more. All of them are metal-poor by factors 
of 3-50. Carbon and nitrogen are enhanced by about a 
factor of 10, oxygen is normal, and hence C+N+O turns 
out to be enhanced by a factor of 2-5. Apparently their 
low initial abundances of everything from C to Fe have 
made their nucleosynthesis processes more evident. The 
greatest enhancements are shown by s-process elements, 
ie., Sr, Y, Zr, Ba and rare earths. The neutron source is 
probably the '°C(a, n)'®O reaction. 


Circumstellar envelopes 
In addition to being of intrinsic interest from the STELLAR 
EVOLUTION viewpoint carbon stars are important for the 
evolution of the interstellar medium and hence the Galaxy 
as a whole. Near-infrared observations out to 2.2 wm of 
RED GIANTS were first made in the 1960s and soon revealed 
many stars whose radiation beyond about 1.0 ym greatly 
exceeds what was expected from model atmospheres. It 
was soon recognized that the infrared excess had to be 
due to relatively cool gas and dust while its intensity 
could only be understood if the circumstellar matter 
filled a volume that was much larger than that of the 
star itself. Earlier observations of some red giants and 
supergiants had shown spectral lines of NaI and Ca II with 
Doppler shifts corresponding to material departing from 
the stellar surface at up to 20 km s-!. Over the subsequent 
decades observations of circumstellar envelopes were 
extended to the middle infrared (5-30 jm), far infrared 
(30-200 ym), submillimeter (0.2-1.0 mm), millimeter (1- 
10 mm) and radio (10 mm and longer) spectral regions. 
Many instruments have contributed to our knowledge 
of circumstellar envelopes but the IRAS survey and very 
recently the ISO satellite have been responsible for major 
advances. 

Circumstellar dust radiates in the near and mid- 
infrared wavelengths. The dust absorbs the starlight and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is heated to temperatures in the range 1000-100 K near the 
star, diminishing at larger distances. The infrared spectra 
of M and C stars differ because of the different properties 
of silicate and carbon-compound dust. Carbon dust is 
opaque at visual wavelengths, hence greatly reducing 
the visible flux, while silicates are partially transparent 
(soot is black, while glass is transparent). The gas comes 
into thermal equilibrium with the dust by collisions, thus 
heating the gas. This provides sufficient excitation for 
many molecules to radiate at wavelengths corresponding 
to rotational transitions. The most common radiating 
molecule is CO, of course, where the (1-0), (2-1), (3-2) 
etc. transitions are often detected. 

The envelopes around carbon stars provide a 
laboratory for organic, and even some _ inorganic, 
chemistry that cannot be realized on the earth. Near the 
star the high density together with temperatures as high 
as 1500 K ensure equilibrium chemistry but in the outer 
layers the reaction rates must be carefully considered. The 
star IRC+10216 seems to show the richest chemistry with a 
vast number of organic compounds present and evensome 
chlorides and fluorides showing up in the inner envelope. 
Further out photochemical reactions become important as 
the interstellar radiation field with photon energies up to 
10 eV penetrates the envelope; some ions are present so 
ion—molecule chemistry becomes important. 

Infrared surveys such as IRAS have revealed that all 
C-N stars have infrared excesses indicating mass loss. The 
C-R and C-H stars do not show evidence of mass loss. 
Mass loss rates can be calculated from the equation of 
continuity: M = 4r?p(r)V, where the density, p, at the 
distance r must be estimated from a model and V,,, the 
velocity of the moving envelope, can be estimated from the 
width or separation of emission lines of CO in the mm and 
submm regions. Mass loss can be detected readily down to 
10~” Mo yr! and ina few cases to almost 10-8. At the other 
end of the scale mass loss rates as large as 10-5 or evena 
few times 10-° Mo yr“! have been calculated. Carbon stars 
with such high mass loss rates are virtually invisible in 
the visual region but are particularly important because of 
their rapid evolution and their contribution of a vast array 
of molecules to the interstellar medium. 

Mass loss by carbon and other asymptotic giant 
branch stars presumably ceases when the outer hydrogen 
envelope has been completely ejected. The remaining 
core of the star then shrinks and its effective temperature 
rises. The last phases of mass loss may involve a much 
higher velocity than the usual 10-20 km s-! of the gentle 
wind from the carbon star. This so-called ‘superwind’ can 
reach 1-200 kms~! and can sweep up the material that 
was ejected earlier. A shock will form where the winds 
interact, causing the shocked gas to be greatly heated. In 
addition, the evolving star will shrink until its temperature 
reaches 1-2 x 10° K. The radiation from such a star will 
ionize the surrounding gas and the resulting configuration 
will constitute a PLANETARY NEBULA. Hence the final stages 
of a mass-losing carbon star may be described as ‘Death 
and Transfiguration’, the title used by G R Knapp at a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carbon Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


conference held in 1989 celebrating the 50th anniversary 
of the dedication of the McDonald observatory. 


Bibliography 
An extensive list of references on recent literature on 
carbon stars is provided by: 


Wallerstein G and Knapp G R 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 36 369 
Keenan P C 1993 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 105 905 


George Wallerstein 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Carbonaceous Chondrite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carbonaceous Chondrite 


A meteorite having a higher carbon content than other 
classes of meteorite. Carbonaceous chondrites account for 
about 3% of all known chondrites. They are classified 
according to the proportion and size of the chondrules 
(millimeter-sized grains) they contain. One very rare 
subclass lacks chondrules, and so are actually achondrites. 
They are very similar in composition to the Sun (with the 
exception of volatiles), and the material from which they 
are formed is believed to have condensed from the solar 
nebula very early in the history of the solar system, making 
them vital pieces of evidence in the study of cosmogony. 
The carbon content is in the form of organic compounds, 
including amino acids—important biological precursors. 
They may therefore hold clues to the origin of life. The 
Allende meteorite is the largest known example, with an 
estimated total mass before fragmentation of 2 tonnes. 


Seealso: Allende meteorite, chondrites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cardan [Cardano; Cardanus], Jerome [Geronimo; 
Hieronymus; Girolamo] (1501-76) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cardan [Cardano; Cardanus], Jerome 
[Geronimo; Hieronymus; Girolamo] 
(1501-76) 


Lawyer, mathematician and physician, born in Pavia, 
Milan, Italy. Lived a life of family and professional 
drama worthy of a novel and fully documented in an 
autobiography. Became professor of mathematics at 
Padua, and of medicine at Pavia and Bologna. Prolific 
author (200 works) of which his greatest work was Ars 
Magna (1545, Great Art) which gave the first algebraic 
solution of cubic equations. In 1570 he was imprisoned for 
afew months by the Inquisition. He was accused of heresy, 
particularly for the book De Astorum Iudiciis in which he 
cast the horoscope of Christ, attributing events of His life 
to astrological influences. As a result he was barred from 
teaching. Correctly predicted through astrology the exact 
date of his own death but may have cheated by committing 
suicide (see ABU’L-HASAN IBN YUNUS). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carina 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carina 


(the Keel; abbrev. Car, gen. Carinae; area 494 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Vela and 
Chamaeleon, and culminates at midnight in late January. 
It was introduced by the French astronomer Nicolas L de 
Lacaille (1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751- 
2, from stars that formed part of the ancient constellation 
of Argo Navis (the Ship), which had been included by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A conspicuous constellation, the brightest stars in 
Carina are a Carinae (Canopus or Suhel), which at 
magnitude —0.6 is the second brightest star in the sky, B 
Carinae (Miaplacidus), magnitude 1.7, ¢ Carinae (Avior), 
magnitude 1.9, and . Carinae (Aspidiske), magnitude 2.2. 
There are 14 other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. 
i and e Carinae together with 6 and « Velorum make 
up an asterism called the False Cross, as it is sometimes 
confused with the constellation Crux (the (Southern) 
Cross). Variable stars in Carina include 7 Carinae, an 
eruptive, high-luminosity star (observed range —0.8 to 
7.9) surrounded by a shell of nebulosity (the Homunculus 
Nebula) expelled in the nineteenth century, and the Mira- 
type variables R Carinae (range 3.9-10.5, period about 309 
days) and S Carinae (range 4.59.9, period about 149 days). 

The Milky Way cuts across the north-eastern part 
of Carina and the constellation contains a number of 
interesting star clusters and nebulae, including NGC 3532, 
a large (60’ x 30’), spectacular open cluster of about 150 
stars between eighth and twelfth magnitude, NGC 2808, a 
sixth-magnitude globular cluster, and NGC 3372 (the Eta 
Carinae Nebula), a large (>4 sq. deg.), bright emission 
nebula centred on 7 Carinae. 


See also: Canopus, Eta Carinae, False Cross. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carlsberg Meridian Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carlsberg Meridian Telescope 


A 7 in (17.8 cm) diameter refractor, formerly known as 
the Carlsberg Automatic Meridian Circle. It is part of 
the OBSERVATORIO DEL ROQUE DE LOS MUCHACHOS on La Palma 
and is dedicated to carrying out high-precision optical 
astrometry. 

It is operated jointly by the Copenhagen University 
Observatory, the Institute of Astronomy, Cambridge and 
the Real Instituto y Observatorio de la Armada en San 
Fernando. 

When it was first moved to La Palma in 1984, it was 
one of the first fully automatic telescopes in the world. 
Since 1997, the telescope has been operated remotely via 
the Internet from Britain, Denmark or Spain. 

Recent upgrades include installation of a CCD which 
can observe about 70000 stars a night down to visual 
magnitude 17. It is being used to map the northern sky 
between —3° and +30° in declination. 

For further information see 
http://www.ast.cam.ac.uk/~dwe/SRF/camc.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carnegie Observatories 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carnegie Observatories 


The Carnegie Observatories were founded in 1902 
by George Ellery Hale. Their first facility was the 
MOUNT WILSON OBSERVATORY, located in the San Gabriel 
Mountains above Pasadena, California. Originally a 
solar observatory, it moved into stellar, galactic and 
extragalactic research with the construction of the 60 in 
(1.5m), and 100 in (2.5 m) telescopes, each of which was the 
largest in the world at the time of its construction. From the 
1940s through the 1970s Carnegie, in partnership with the 
California Institute of Technology, ran the Mount Wilson 
and PALOMAR OBSERVATORIES. 

Today, the offices of the Observatories remain in 
Pasadena, but their main observational facility is the LAs 
CAMPANAS OBSERVATORY located in the southern fringes of 
Chile’s Atacama Desert. There, Carnegie operates the 1 m 
Swope and 2.5 m du Pont Telescopes. The twin 6.5 m 
Magellan Telescopes, built in partnership with Harvard, 
MIT, and the Universities of Michigan and Arizona, will 
be completed in 2002. 

Carnegie Observatories have played a central role 
in the history of twentieth century astronomy. Major 
contributions of Carnegie astronomers include Shapley’s 
use of globular clusters to establish the structure of 
the galaxy, Hubble’s discovery of the expansion of 
the universe, Baade’s work on stellar populations, and 
Sandage’s pursuit of the Hubble Constant. Today, the staff 
of about twenty astronomers works on stellar populations, 
the structure and evolution of galaxies, and cosmology. 
The Observatories are one of five departments of the 
Carnegie Institution of Washington, a private, non-profit 
organization devoted to scientific research. 

For further information see 
http://www.ociw.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carrington, Richard Christopher (1826-75) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carrington, Richard Christopher 
(1826-75) 


English amateur astronomer, first person to observe (1859) 
a solar flare, ‘two patches of intensely bright and white 
light’, confirmed by R Hodgson and by the correlated 
appearance of auroras, seen as far south as Cuba, and 
magnetic disturbances, observed at the Kew Observatory. 
Carrington noted the connections, but cautioned that ‘one 
swallow does not make a summer’. Only about 50 flares 
have been observed in the white light spectral range, as 
used by Carrington’s visual observations with a 4.5 in 
refractor. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Carter National Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carter National Observatory 


The Carter National Observatory is situated in the Botanic 
Gardens in Wellington, New Zealand. Opened in 1941, the 
observatory is equipped with a 41 cm Boller and Chivens, 
an historic 23 cm Cooke photo-visual refractor and a 36 
seat Zeiss planetarium. The staff are involved in research, 
school and tertiary education programs. 

The observatory currently has eight full time 
members. Research programs are run in collaboration 
with a consortium of New Zealand and Japanese 
universities and involve micro-lensing and the search for 
dark matter. 

For further information see 
http://www.vuw.ac.nz/~carter/carter.html 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cartwheel Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cartwheel Galaxy 


A peculiar galaxy in the constellation of Sculptor that 
derives its name from its wheel-like appearance. The 
Cartwheel has a ring-shaped ‘rim’, 150000 light-years in 
diameter, that contains billions of recently formed stars 
and which is dominated by massive clusters of bright blue 
stars and HII regions. The nucleus, or ‘hub’ of the galaxy 
contains a predominantly older population of stars and 
is surrounded by faint arms, or ‘spokes’ that stretch out 
towards the ring. Its striking appearance is the result of 
a galactic collision. A few hundred million years ago, a 
smaller galaxy plunged straight through the Cartwheel, 
which at that time is presumed to have been a normal spiral 
galaxy. The resulting shock spread out through its gaseous 
disk like a ripple on a pond, pushing gas and dust before it 
and compressing it into a ring. The compressed gas clouds 
collapsed and fragmented, thereby initiating the dramatic 
burst of star formation that is evident today in the ring. 
Located at a distance of some 500 million light-years, the 
Cartwheel is an example of a starburst galaxy (one that is 
undergoing a major bout of star formation). 


See also: galactic nucleus, HII regions, interacting 
galaxies, spiral arms, spiral galaxy, starburst galaxies, star 
formation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cassegrain Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassegrain Telescope 


A type of reflecting telescope based on a design that 
was produced in 1672 by the Frenchman Guillaume 
Cassegrain. It utilizes a concave paraboloidal primary 
mirror and a convex ellipsoidal secondary mirror that is 
located a short distance inside the focus of the primary. The 
converging cone of light from the primary is reflected by 
the secondary, back down the telescope tube and througha 
hole in the center of the primary to the eyepiece. Because 
the curved surface of the secondary causes rays of light 
to converge at a narrower angle than the rays reflected 
directly from the primary, it increases the effective focal 
length of the instrument, so enabling an instrument of long 
effective focal length to be contained within a relatively 
short tube. Although the focal ratio of a Cassegrain 
primary mirror is typically in the region of f:3 to f:4, the 
effect of the secondary mirror enables these instruments 
to operate at focal ratios in the region of f:10 to f:30. 

The standard Cassegrain design produces sharply 
focused images only in the central parts of its field of 
view, images away from the center (‘off-axis images’) being 
subject to various distortions, or aberrations, such as coma. 
Good quality images, over fields of view several tens of 
minutes of arc in diameter, can be obtained with telescopes 
of the Ritchey-Chrétien design in which the primary 
is a concave hyperboloid (rather than a paraboloid) 
and the secondary has a steeper hyperbolic curve than 
that of a conventional Cassegrain secondary. Another 
variant on the Cassegrain design is the Dall-Kirkham, 
which uses a concave ellipsoidal primary and a spherical 
convex secondary, curves which are easier to make 
than the paraboloids and hyperboloids of conventional 
Cassegrains. However, the field of view of a Dall-Kirkham 
is typically only about one-third of that of a normal 
Cassegrain. 

Most large modern telescopes are based on the 
Cassegrain design or one of its variants. 


See also: field of view, focal length, focal ratio, focus, 
Gregorian telescope, mirror, reflector, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cassegrain, Laurent (c. 1629-93) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassegrain, Laurent (c. 1629-93) 


French teacher and priest, inventor (1672) of the Cassegrain 
telescope configuration, the most widely used reflecting 
telescope in astronomy. It consists of a concave primary 
mirror and a convex secondary, in which the compact 
arrangement of mirrors can be chosen so that aberrations 
on each mirror cancel each other. Little is known of the 
life of this shadowy figure, who lived and worked near 
Chartres and Chaudon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cassini Dynasty ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassini Dynasty 


Cassini, Gian Domenico [Cassini I] (1625-1712); Cassini, 
Jacques [Cassini II] (1677-1756) son of Gian; Cassini, 
César-Francois [Cassini II] (1714-84), second son of 
Jacques; Cassini, Jean-Dominique [Cassini IV] (1748- 
1845), son of César-Francois. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cassini, César-Francois (1714-84) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassini, César-Francois [Cassini de 
Thury, known as Cassini Ill] (1714-84) 


Second son of JACQUES CASSINI, born in Thury, Oise, 
France. Director of the Paris Observatory (1771), where 
he concentrated on geodesy and made the first modern 
map of France which, for navigational purposes, would 
accurately place the French ports relative to Paris. To 
everyone’s surprise, France was some 20% smaller than 
previously believed, and the King commented that France 
had lost more territory to the astronomers than to its 
enemies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cassini, Gian Domenico [Giovanni Domenico; Jean 
Dominique; known as Cassini I] (1625-1712) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassini, Gian Domenico [Giovanni 
Domenico; Jean Dominique; known 
as Cassini I] (1625-1712) 


Italian-born French astronomer, born in Perinaldo, near 
Naples. Attracted to astrology in his youth, became 
Professor at Bologna, during which time he conducted 
hydrological studies for the Pope to mitigate flooding 
of the River Po. In 1669 Cassini moved to France 
and set up the Paris Observatory, remaining director 
for the rest of his career. He pushed continually for 
the observatory to acquire the latest technology and 
make improvements, winning substantial funding. His 
powerful new telescopes were used to make important 
findings about the solar system. He saw spots on Mars and 
measured the planet’s rotation period. He also measured 
the rotation of Jupiter and mapped its spots, bands and 
flattening at the poles. He timed the revolution of Jupiter’s 
satellites, which allowed the Danish astronomer OLE ROMER 
to compute the speed of light while he was working 
in Paris. He made the best map of the Moon until 
the invention of photography. He observed comets and 
wrote about planetary and satellite orbits. Although 
the phenomenon had long been known, possibly from 
classical times, certainly since the Middle Ages, Cassini 
was the first to record (1683) scientific observations of 
the zodiacal light. In 1684 he discovered Iapetus, Rhea, 
Tethys and Dione, four satellites of Saturn in addition 
to those previously discovered by HuycEns. In 1675, he 
discovered that Saturn’s rings are split largely into two 
parts by anarrow gap—known since as the Cassini division. 
Cassini elaborated on the first major theory of atmospheric 
refraction, founded on the sine law but opposed the 
theory of universal gravitation, bequeathing the battle 
against Newtonianism to his son, Jacques, by whom (and 
by his grandson and great-grandson) he was succeeded 
as director of the observatory. The Cassini spacecraft, 
launched 1987 and scheduled to arrive at Saturn in 2004 
to begin exploration of the planet and its moons, is named 
for him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cassini, Jacques [known as Cassini II] (1677-1756) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassini, Jacques [known as Cassini 
Il] (1677-1756) 


Astronomer, born in Paris (probably at the Observatory 
itself), son of JEAN-DOMINIQUE CASSINI, whom he at first 
assisted, then replaced in official functions as Cassini 
became blind, and then succeeded as director of the 
Paris Observatory. Measured proper motion of Arcturus. 
Cassini IT fought continually and unsuccessfully to defend 
the work of his father and to reconcile observations with 
the Cartesian theory of vortices. In 1740, understanding 
the uselessness of his opposition to the new ideas 
he progressively abandoned his scientific work and 
handed over the work of the Observatory to his son, 
César-Francois. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cassini, Jean-Dominique [known as Cassini IV] (1748- 
1845) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassini, Jean-Dominique [known as 
Cassini IV] (1748-1845) 


Astronomer, born at the Paris Observatory, great-grandson 
of the first director, grandson of the second, son of the 
third and himself the fourth, assuming the responsibilities 
of the directorship during the decline of his father, and 
the directorship itself in 1784. Persuaded King Louis 
XVI to restore the observatory, but the French Revolution 
occurred and Cassini, a monarchist, bitterly opposed the 
involvement of the new revolutionary government in 
observatory affairs and lost his position in 1793. Cassini IV 
spent his old age in his chateau, writing polemics justifying 
his own position and defending the scientific reputation of 
the family. The Paris Observatory had been in the charge 
of the Cassini dynasty for 120 years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


The Cassini/Huygens mission is a planetary mission 
designed to explore in detail the Saturnian system. The 
mission is a joint undertaking between the United States 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
and the EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY (ESA). It was successful- 
ly launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on 15 October 
1997 (figure 1) for a 7 yr interplanetary journey. The 
Cassini/Huygens spacecraft comprises the main craft, 
the Saturn Orbiter, and the Titan Probe, Huygens. The 
aim of the mission is to carry out a detailed study of the 
planet SATURN, its rings, satellites and magnetosphere. 
TITAN, Saturn’s largest moon, is a prime target of the mis- 
sion. A prime goal of the mission is also to study the rela- 
tionships between the rings and the satellites, the inter- 
actions between the magnetospheric plasma and the 
satellites, the rings and the atmosphere of Titan. Cassini 
will study not only each part of the Saturnian system but 
also the system as a whole. The mission carries 26 scien- 
tific investigations, which include 18 instrument investi- 
gations, and eight interdisciplinary investigations that 
will rely on the data obtained by more than one instru- 
ment. The Saturn Orbiter carries onboard 12 scientific 
instruments while six instruments have been packed into 
the Huygens Probe. 

Cassini/Huygens is an international undertaking. 
The planning for the Cassini/Huygens mission was 


Figure 1. The launch of the Cassini/ Huygens spacecraft on 15 
October 1997 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


started in 1984 when a joint ESA—NASA study was initi- 
ated. It required more than 6 yr of intensive studies and 
careful planning to allow both agencies to embark in 
1990 on what is the most ambitious outer planet mission 
that has been undertaken so far. All together, 18 nations 
were involved during the hardware development phase. 
The ITALIAN SPACE AGENCY (ASI, Agencia Spatiale Italiana) 
has provided major elements of the Orbiter through a bi- 
lateral cooperation programme established with NASA 
in 1992. The 4 m High Gain Antenna is one of the ele- 
ments contributed by ASI. 

The journey to Saturn takes 7 yr. Although 
Cassini/Huygens was launched by the most powerful 
rocket (Titan IVB/Centaur) that existed at that time, the 
5.6 t spacecraft was too heavy to be launched on a direct 
trajectory to Saturn. The path of its journey includes sev- 
eral planetary encounters that are used for gravity-assist 
maneuvers to accelerate the spacecraft towards the next 
planet. The first three planetary encounters took place at 
Venus on 27 April 1998 and 24 June 1999 and at Earth on 
17 August 1999. The last planetary encounter before 
Saturn will occur in late December 2000 at Jupiter. The 
Cassini/Huygens spacecraft will arrive at Saturn in July 
2004. The nominal mission in the Saturnian system will 
last 4 yr. The Cassini/ Huygens spacecraft will be placed 
in orbit around Saturn on 1 July 2004, when the Saturn 
Orbit Insertion (SOI) maneuver will take place. Five 
months after SOIL, the Huygens Probe will be targeted 
and released from the Orbiter for its encounter with Titan 
3 weeks later. In late November 2004, Huygens will enter 
and descend by parachute through the thick hazy atmos- 
phere of Titan until it reaches the surface. Following the 
Huygens mission, the Cassini Saturn Orbiter will under- 
take its own mission of exploration of the Saturnian sys- 
tem in the course of 75 orbits around the planet. Forty- 
four of the orbits will include a close flyby of Titan at alti- 
tudes as low as 850 km above the surface, both for the 
purpose of making observations and for gravity-assist 
maneuvers. At the end of the mission, Titan will hold the 
record as the planetary body most used for gravity assist 
manoeuvres. 

The mission is named in honor of the French-Italian 
astronomer JEAN-DOMINIQUE CASSINI. In the period 
1671-85 he discovered four of Saturn’s satellites as well 
as the large gap in the ring (the Cassini division) which 
is named after him. The Probe is named in honour of the 
Dutch astronomer CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS, who discovered 
Titan in 1655 while he was observing Saturn’s rings. 
Huygens was also the first to explain the true nature of 
the rings. 


The scientific objectives and the payload 

The Cassini/ Huygens mission will build on the discover- 
ies made by the highly successful VOYAGER missions and 
will allow a quantum leap in the understanding of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturnian system, the formation and evolution of a plan- 
etary system and the origin and evolution of the solar sys- 
tem as a whole. Titan, the largest moon of Saturn, and the 
second largest moon in the solar system after Jupiter’s 


Instruments 


¢ Optical remote-sensing instruments 
Composite Infrared Spectrometer (CIRS) 


Imaging Science Subsystem (ISS) 


Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrograph 
(UVIS) 


Visible and Infrared Mapping 
Spectrometer (VIMS) 


¢ Radio remote-sensing instruments 
RADAR 


Radio Science Subsystem (RSS) 


Table 1. Orbiter instruments. 


Participating 
countries 


USA, Austria, 
France, Germany, 
Italy, UK 

USA, France, 
Germany, UK 


USA, France, 
Germany 


USA, France, 
Germany, Italy 


USA, France, 
Italy, UK 


USA, Italy 


Measurements 


High-resolution infrared spectra, 
10-1400 cm? 

Photometric images through 
filters, 0.2-1.1 mm 


Spectral images, 55-190 nm, 
occultation photometry, 2 ms; H 
and D spectroscopy, 0.0004 nm 
resolution 

Spectral images, 0.35-1.05 um 
(0.073 um resolution), 0.85-5.1 um 
(0.166 um resolution); occultation 
photometry 


Ku-band RADAR images (13 777.5 
MHz); radiometry, <0.5 K 
resolution 

Ka-, S- and X-bands; frequency, 
phase, timing and amplitude 


e Particle remote-sensing and in situ measurement instrument 


Magnetospheric Imaging Instrument 


(MIMI) 


e In situ measurement instruments 


Cassini Plasma Spectrometer (CAPS) 


Cosmic Dust Analyzer (CDA) 


Dual Technique Magnetometer (MAG) 


Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer 
(INMS) 


USA, France, 
Germany 


USA, Finland, 
France, Hungary, 
Norway, UK 


Germany, Czech 
Republic, France, 
Norway, UK, 
USA, ESA/SSD 
UK, Germany, 
Italy, USA 


USA, Germany 


Radio and Plasma Wave Science (RPWS) USA, Austria, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


France, Sweden, 
UK, ESA/SSD 


(1) Image energetic neutrals and 
ions <10 keV-8 MeV nucleon; 
composition 

(2) 10-265 keV/e ions; charge state; 
composition; directional flux 

(3) 20 keV-130 MeV ions; 15 keV to 
>11 MeV electrons; directional flux 


Particle energy / charge: 


(1) 0.7-30 000 eV/e 

(2) 1-50 000 eV/e 

(3) 1-50 000 eV/e 

Directional flux and mass of dust 
particles in range 10-16-10-6 g 


B: dc to 4 Hz up to 256 nT; scalar 
field dc to 20 Hz up to 44 000 nT 


Fluxes of positive ions and neutrals 
in mass range of 2-66 amu 

E: 10 Hz-2 MHz 

B: 1 Hz-20 kHz 

Plasma density and temperature 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ganymede, is a special target of the mission. Titan is a 
unique type of object in the solar system. It is shrouded by 
a thick methane-rich, hazy, nitrogen atmosphere. The sur- 
face pressure and temperature are 1.5 bar (1.5 times that 


Techniques 


Spectroscopy using 3 
interferometric spectrometers 
Imaging with CCD detectors; 1 
wide angle camera (61.2 mrad 
field of view); 1 narrow angle 
camera (6.1 mrad field of view) 
Imaging spectroscopy, 2 
spectrometers 
Hydrogen-deuterium absorption 
cell 

Imaging spectroscopy, 2 
spectrometers 


Synthetic aperture radar; 
radiometry with a microwave 
receiver 

X- and Ka-band transmissions to 
Cassini; Ka-, S- and X-band 
transmissions to the Earth 


(1) Particle detection and imaging. 
Ion-neutral camera (time of flight, 
total energy detector) 

(2) Charge-energy—mass 
spectrometer 

(3) Solid state detectors with 
magnetic focusing telescope, and 
aperture controlled ~45A° field of 
view 


Particle detection and 
spectroscopy: 

(1) Electron spectrometer 

(2) Ion mass spectrometer 

(3) Ion beam spectrometer 
Impact-induced plasma cloud 
currents measurements 


Magnetic field measurement; flux 
gate magnetometer; vector—scalar 
magnetometer 


Mass spectrometry 


Radio frequency receivers; 

3 electric dipole antennas; 

3 magnetic search coils; Langmuir 
probe 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Huygens instruments. 


Instruments 


Huygens Atmospheric Structure 
Instrument (HASI) 


Gas Chromatograph and Mass 
Spectrometer (GCMS) 


Aerosol Collector and Pyrolyzer (ACP) 


Descent Imager and Spectral 
Radiometer (DISR) 


Doppler Wind Experiment (DWE) 


Surface Science Package (SSP) 


Participating 
countries 

Italy, Austria, 
Germany, Finland, 
France, Norway, 
Spain, USA, UK, 
ESA-SSD 


USA, Austria, 
France 


France, Austria, 
USA 


USA, Germany, 
France 


Germany, Italy, 
USA 


UK, Italy, USA, 
ESA-SSD 


Measurements 


Temperature: 50-300 K 

Pressure: 0-2000 mbar 

Electrical conductivity: 10-15 Q m1 
to 2% 

Acceleration: 1 ug—20 mg 

Relative permittivity: 1 to 2 
Acoustic: 0-5 kHz, 90 dB at 5 mPa 


Mass range: 2-146 amu 
Dynamic range: >108 
Sensitivity: 10-1? mixing ratio 
Mass resolution: 10-6 at 60 amu 


2 samples: 150-45 km, 30-15 km 
altitude 


Upward and downward spectra: 
480-960 nm, 0.87—-1.7 um, 
resolution 2.4-6.3 nm; downward- 
and side-looking images, 0.66-1 
uum; solar aureole photometry, 
550 nm, 939 nm; surface spectral 
reflectance 

(Allan variance)!/2: 10-4 (in 1 s), 
5-10-12 (in 10 s), 10-12 (in 100 s), 
corresponding to wind velocities 
of 2-200 m s-!, probe spin 
Acceleration: 0-100¢ 

Tilt: 60° 

Temperature: 65-110 K 

Thermal conductivity: 0-400 m 
Wm'!K1 

Speed of sound: 150-2000 m s-! 
Liquid density: 400-700 kg m-3 
Refractive index: 1.25-1.45 


Techniques 


AC E field: 0-10 kHz, 80 dB at 2 uV 
m1! Hz-05 

DC E field: 50 dB at 40 mV m! 
Meteorology sensors: pressure 
and temperature; accelerometry 
measurements. E field receiver; 
mutual impedance probe; 
microphone; radar surface echo 
processing 

Chromotography and mass 
spectrometry: 3 parallel 
chromatographic columns; 
quadrupole mass filter; 5 electron 
impact sources 

3-step pyrolysis: 20 °C, 250 °C, 
650 °C 

Spectrophotometry, imaging, 
photometry, and surface 
illumination by lamp 


Doppler shift of Huygens 
telemetry signal, signal 
attenuation 


Direct measurements using 
‘laboratory’ methods: impact 
acceleration; acoustic sounding, 
liquid relative permittivity, 
density and index of refraction 


on Earth) and 95 K (-178 °C). The tropopause tempera- 
ture is 70 K at an altitude of 40-45 km. In the upper 
stratosphere the temperature rises up to 160-200 K. The 
1 mbar level is reached in the altitude range 180-200 km. 
The photochemistry resulting from the photodissociation 
of methane and nitrogen in the atmosphere makes Titan a 
very fascinating body to explore. It may harbor complex 
organic molecules that are thought to be similar to the 
ones that were making the chemical soup of the young 
Earth before the appearance of life. The cold environment 
of Titan has frozen this pre-biological soup in an early 
state of its development. The exploration of Titan will 
allow us to investigate the complex chemistry at work in 
an environment similar to the one that may have pre- 
vailed on Earth after the end of the heavy bombardment, 
3.8 billion years ago, before the appearance of life. 

The scientific objectives of the Cassini/Huygens 
mission are categorized by the main mission targets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


With regard to the moon Titan: 
to determine atmospheric composition, investigate 
energy sources for atmospheric chemistry, study 
aerosol properties and cloud physics; measure winds 
and global temperatures; determine properties of the 
surface and infer internal structure; investigate the 
upper atmosphere and ionosphere. 


With regard to Saturn: 
to determine global temperature and wind fields, 
cloud properties and atmospheric composition and 
infer properties of the deep atmosphere; study proper- 
ties of ionosphere; provide observational constraints 
on scenarios of Saturn’s formation and evolution. 


With regard to the ring system: 
to study the configuration of the rings and the dynam- 
ical processes responsible for their structure; map ring 
composition and particle size distribution; study 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


interactions between the rings and Saturn’s magne- 
tosphere, ionosphere, atmosphere and satellites. 


With regard to the icy satellites: 
to investigate the composition and distribution of sur- 
face materials and define mechanisms of crustal and 
surface modifications; determine the general charac- 
teristics of the satellites, including placing constraints 
on bulk composition and internal structures; investi- 
gate interactions with the magnetosphere. 


With regard to Saturn’s magnetosphere: 
to determine the configuration of the magnetic field; 
determine properties, including sources and sinks of 
magnetospheric charged particles; investigate the 
interaction of the magnetosphere with the solar wind 
and with Titan’s atmosphere and ionosphere. 


The Orbiter and the Probe payloads are listed in 
tables 1 and 2 respectively, in which we also give a brief 
description of the measurements that will be made and 
what will be studied. Interdisciplinary investigations 
that will require data from more than one instrument to 
be conducted are listed in table 3. An overview of the 
observations that are planned in the Saturnian system is 
described below. 


The planned observations 

Titan 

The moon Titan is a prime target of the Cassini/ Huygens 
mission. With a diameter of 5150 km, Titan is the second- 


Table 3. Interdisciplinary investigations. 


Participating 


IDS investigation country Brief objectives 

Magnetosphere and France Study of plasma 

plasma circulation and 
magnetosphere— 
ionosphere coupling 

Rings and dust USA Study of rings and dust 
within the Saturnian 
system 

Magnetosphere and USA Study of the plasma 

plasma environment in Saturn’s 
magnetosphere 

Atmospheres USA Study of the atmospheres 
of Titan and Saturn 

Satellites USA Study of the satellites of 


Saturn 


Aeronomy and solar USA 
wind interaction 


Study of aeronomy in the 
Titanian and Saturnian 


atmospheres 

Titan atmosphere— USA Study of Titan’s 

surface interactions atmosphere-surface 
interaction 

Titan aeronomy France Study of Titan’s 
aeronomy 

Titan organic France Study of Titan’s organic 


chemistry chemistry 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


largest satellite of the solar system after Jupiter’s 
Ganymede (5262 km). It is larger than the planets 
Mercury (4878 km) and Pluto (2300 km) and the Earth’s 
moon (3476 km). Titan has a thick, hazy atmosphere 
which obscures the surface at visible wavelengths. The 
Huygens Probe will measure the physical properties and 
determine the composition profile of the atmosphere of 
Titan. Huygens will also make images of the surface and 
measure its composition along the descent track. The res- 
olution of the images will improve as the Probe 
approaches the surface. Near the surface, details of 
less than 1 m, perhaps even less that 10 cm, should be 
observable. A radar altimeter will measure the surface 
topography below the Probe. The wind profile will also 
be measured. The Cassini Saturn Orbiter and the 
Huygens Probe will explore Titan with a complementary 
approach. Each time the Orbiter flies by Titan, it will per- 
form a set of atmosphere and surface remote-sensing 
observations. The surface of Titan will be mapped by the 
Orbiter’s Titan radar mapper and possibly optical instru- 
ments that may be able to see the surface through ‘atmos- 
pheric windows’ in the 0.8-2 um range. The Orbiter 
observations will be designed to provide global coverage 
of Titan’s atmosphere properties and of the surface; they 
will also include re-observations of the atmosphere and 
surface along the flight path of the Probe. 


Planet Saturn 

Cassini will measure the physical properties of the atmos- 
phere of Saturn and determine its composition all around 
the globe as a function of altitude. The properties of the 
ever-changing clouds will be investigated and the global 
circulation of the atmosphere will be studied. The fast 
rotation of the planet (10 h 12 min) will allow us to study 
repeatedly the diurnal variations of atmospheric proper- 
ties. Because of the alignment of the planet’s dipolar axis 
with its rotation axis, Saturn’s magnetic field is different 
from that of the Earth, Jupiter, Uranus and Neptune. The 
generation mechanism of Saturn’s magnetic field is a 
prime topic for study (see also SATURN: MAGNETOSPHERE). 
The detailed study of Saturn’s magnetism will allow us to 
probe the interior of the planet and to understand better 
how the dynamo effect works inside planet Earth. The 
interior of the planet will also be probed by gravity mea- 
surement techniques based on the precise measurement 
of the spacecraft’s trajectory above the planet. This will 
allow us to place constraints on the interior of the planet. 


Rings 

Saturn’s famous rings will be imaged under all solar 
phase angles and from different geometrical perspectives. 
The configuration of the rings will be observed and the 
composition and the dynamical processes responsible for 
the ring structure will be inferred from images and occul- 
tations at optical and radio wavelengths. The rings are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


thought to be composed mainly of water ice particles. The 
compositional variation of the rings is thought to be due 
to different types of impurities in the ice. The size distrib- 
ution and the chemical composition of the ring particles 
will be obtained. Direct, in situ measurements of the dust 
and meteoroid particles within the rings will be obtained 
by Cosmic Dust Analyzer. An objective of Cassini is also 
to search for new moonlets within the rings and to study 
the interrelation between the rings and satellites, includ- 
ing the imbedded satellites. (See also SATURN: RINGS.) 


Icy satellites 

The icy satellites offer many new worlds to explore. 
Saturn has 18 known moons. Cassini will image and map 
their surfaces over the course of the orbital tour. This will 
allow us to obtain the composition and distribution of 
surface material. A major goal of the mission is to study 
the geological history of the satellites and to study the 
mechanisms responsible for the modification of their sur- 
faces. Detection of the internal magnetic fields of the 
satellites is also an important objective of Cassini as 
Galileo at Jupiter has shown that surprises are to be 
expected. Radio measurements of the spacecraft’s trajec- 
tory during each satellite flyby will allow us to infer their 
bulk compositions and to place constraints on their inter- 
nal structures. Cassini will search for organic material on 
the satellite surfaces. One major goal of Cassini is to 
study the relationship between the icy satellites and the 
rings. Similarities in composition between the satellites 
and the rings will be searched for. Cassini will also search 
for and, if found, characterize the tenuous atmospheres 
around Saturn’s moons. (See also SATURN: SATELLITES.) 

Although the full operational capabilities of the 
Cassini/ Huygens spacecraft and of the ground system 
will only be available 2 yr prior to arrival at Saturn, some 
cruise science and observations during each planet flyby 
(Venus, Earth-Moon, Jupiter) were carried out. 

A specific science objective has been included in the 
Cassini/ Huygens mission that will take advantage of the 
inclusion of both X-band and Ka-band uplink and down- 
link capabilities of the telecommunication subsystem. It 
will allow the search for gravitational waves to be sup- 
ported. The gravitational wave experiments will be con- 
ducted for periods of at least 40 days duration; they have 
been scheduled during the three oppositions after the 
Jupiter flyby in December 2001, December 2002 and 
January 2004. 


The Cassini/Huygens spacecraft 

The Cassini/ Huygens spacecraft (figure 2) is the largest 
and most complex outer planetary spacecraft ever built. 
It is twice the size of the Galileo spacecraft, which is 
currently exploring the Jovian system; it is 6.8 m tall 
and 4 m wide. Its launch mass, including Huygens, was 
5650 kg. More than half of its launch mass was propellant 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Magnetometer  High-gain Antenna Low-gain Antenna 
Boom (1 of 2) 

(11 meters/ 

36.6 feet long) 


Computers 


ee Structure 


Cosmic Dust Analyzer —Te , 


= 


f Imaging 
Instrument 


Cameras 


Huygens 
Probe 
Orientation 
Power Supply. Main Engine and Thrusters 
(1 of 3) Spare (1 of 4) 


Figure 2. The Cassini / Huygens spacecraft. 


(3130 kg). 


The Saturn Orbiter 

The Orbiter is a three-axis-stabilized spacecraft. The main 
body is formed by a stack consisting of the lower equip- 
ment module, the propulsion module, the upper equip- 
ment module and the High-Gain Antenna (HGA). 
Attached to this stack are the remote-sensing pallet, 
which carries the optical payload instruments, the fields- 
and-particles pallet, which carries most of the plasma par- 
ticle and the dust instruments, and the Huygens Probe, 
attached sideways to the propulsion module. Electronic 
equipment of the radar is attached to the upper equip- 
ment module. The long electric antenna (shown in the 
deployed configuration) and the magnetic antennas of 
the Radio and Plasma Wave Subsystem (RPWS) are 
attached to the bottom part of the upper equipment mod- 
ule. The magnetometer boom canister is attached on the 
upper part of the upper equipment module, below the 
HGA. The 11 m long magnetometer boom is shown in its 
deployed configuration in the figure. The electrical power 
is provided by three Radioisotope Thermoelectric 
Generators (RTGs) which deliver more than 700 W of 
electrical power. The spacecraft electronics bus and sever- 
al instrument electronics subsystems are housed in the 
upper equipment module which is thermally regulated to 
provide a benign (~10-20 °C) environment. While in the 
inner solar system, the spacecraft flies with its HGA 
pointed at the Sun, using it as a sunshade. At Saturn, 
using its 20 W X-band transmitter and its 4 m HGA, the 
spacecraft will be able to communicate with NASA’s 
Deep Space Network at data rates up _ to 
166 kbit s-. Two Low-Gain Antennas (LGAs) transmit, 
at a low rate (minimum 40 bit s-!) data and receive 
telecommands when the HGA cannot be pointed at Earth. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


For propulsion and maneuvers, on its way to Saturn and 
during the Saturn orbital phase, the Orbiter uses one of 
the two redundant 445 N engines and 16 smaller 0.5 N 
thrusters clustered in groups of four in redundant pairs. 
The gimbal mechanisms of the main engines allow their 
thrust to be directed through the spacecraft’s center of 
gravity. The main engines use the helium-pressurized 
hypergolic combination of monomethyl hydrazine 
(N2H3CH3) fuel and nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) oxidizer. 
The thrusters use hydrazine (NjH,). The main engines 
are covered by a retractable cover when not in use. 

The Orbiter Command and Data Subsystem (CDS) 
receives ground commands via the Radio Frequency 
Subsystem (RFS). The CDS distributes the commands to 
the other subsystems, to the Orbiter payload instrument 
or to the Probe (when attached to the Orbiter). In turn, 
the CDS collects data from other subsystems, the Orbiter 
payload or the orbiter-mounted Probe Support 
Equipment and transfers them to one of the two redun- 
dant 1.8 Gbit Solid State Recorders (SSRs). The CDS sub- 
sequently retrieves those data from the SSR, formats and 
delivers them to the RFS for transmission to Earth via 
either the HGA or one of the two LGAs. 

Dynamic control of the orientation of Cassini is pro- 
vided by the Attitude and Articulation Control 
Subsystem (AACS). When high spacecraft stability is 
required, the spacecraft rotation is controlled by Reaction 
Wheel Assemblies (RWAs). The thrusters are used when 
fast rotation or acceleration rates are required. The AACS 
uses two redundant Inertial Reference Units (IRUs), two 
redundant Stellar Reference Units (SRUs) and a Sun 
Sensor Assembly (SSA). The AACS is capable of sup- 
porting a pointing accuracy of 1 mrad (3.4 arcmin) with 
a stability of 8 urad (0.2 arcsec) and rotation rates of 
0.02°-1° s-1. 

Thermal control of the Orbiter is accomplished by 
several means, the most visible being the black-and-gold 
Multi-Layer Insulation (MLI). In addition, the thermal 
control uses louvers positioned on the 12-bay electronics 
bus, electric heaters and Radio-isotope Heater Units 
(RHUs) and heat radiators. The infrared instruments 
(VIMS and CIRS) are thermally insulated from the space- 
craft bus and they provide their own thermal control as 
an integral part of the instrument. 


The Huygens Probe 

The Huygens Probe is an entry probe. It has a mass of 330 
kg. It comprises two main elements: the entry protection 
system and the descent module that is enclosed in it. The 
main elements of the Huygens Probe are shown in figure 
3. The probe is attached sideways to the Saturn Orbiter 
(see figure 2). The Probe separates from the Orbiter with 
a relative velocity of 0.3 m s-! and a spin rate of 7 rev 
min-!, which provides stability during the 22 day coast 
to Titan and during the atmospheric entry. The entry sub- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 3. The Huygens Probe during final integration in Europe 
before it was shipped to NASA’s Kennedy Space Center for the 
integration activities with the Cassini Saturn Orbiter. 


system consists of the front heat shield, which has a 
diameter of 2.75 m, and the after cover, both covered 
with silicate-based thermal-protection material for pro- 
tecting the entry module from the radiative and convec- 
tive heat fluxes (up to 1 MW m-) generated during the 
entry phase in the altitude range 350-220 km, where the 
Probe decelerates from about 6000 m s~! down to 400 m 
s-l (Mach 1.5) in less than 2 min. At Mach 1.5, at an alti- 
tude of about 170 km, the parachute-deployment 
sequence is initiated by a pyrotechnic device which pulls 
out the 2.59 m diameter pilot chute to pull the back cover 
away from the rest of the assembly. As it goes, the back 
cover pulls the 8.3 m diameter main parachute from its 
container. This canopy inflates during the supersonic 
phase to decelerate and stabilize the Probe through the 
transonic regime. The front shield is released at about 
Mach 0.6, 30 s after inflation of the main parachute. In 
fact the main parachute is sized to provide sufficient 
deceleration to guarantee a positive separation of the 
front shield from the descent module. 


Cassini/Huygens mission overview 

The Cassini/ Huygens spacecraft was launched at 08:43 
GMT on 15 October 1997 by a Titan IVB/ Centaur rocket 
from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The 5.6 
t spacecraft was too heavy to be injected directly into a 
Saturn-approach trajectory; it requires several planetary 
boosts to reach its destination. The interplanetary trajec- 
tory (figure 4) includes gravity assists from Venus (26 
April 1998 and 24 June 1999), Earth (18 August 1999) and 
Jupiter (30 December 2000). 

Arrival at Saturn of the Cassini/Huygens space- 
craft is planned to take place on 1 July 2004. At this 
point, a major maneuver will be executed while the 
spacecraft crosses the ring plane. The main engine will 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SATURN ARRIVAL 
12004 ~~, 


VENUS 1 FLYBY 
26 APR 1998 


VENUS 2 FLYBY 
24 JUN 1989 


DEEP-SPACE 
id MANEUVER 
DEC 1998 


JUPITER FLYBY 
LAUNCH 30 DEC 2000 


15 OCT 1997 “ 


EARTH FLYBY 
18 AUG 1999 


Figure 4. The interplanetary trajectory of the Cassini/Huygens 
spacecraft. 


burn for about 90 min to slow down the spacecraft so 
that it will be captured in orbit around Saturn. The 
Probe is to be released from the Saturn Orbiter at the 
end of the initial orbit around Saturn, nominally 22 
days before Titan encounter. Prior to releasing the 
Probe, the Orbiter is targeted on a collision trajectory 
with Titan as the Probe has no maneuvering capability 
by itself. Shortly after Probe release, the Orbiter will 
perform a deflection maneuver, so as not to enter the 
atmosphere of Titan. This maneuver will also set up the 
radio communication geometry between the Probe and 
the Orbiter for use during the Probe descent. It will will 
also set up the initial conditions for the subsequent 
satellite tour which starts after completion of the Probe 


mission. 


1270 km 
above surface Mach 1.5 Ty+ 32.58 
¢ 150-180 km = 445-170 km 
= 3 95 mis 
een 4 Ty+ 15 min 
b: SS y © T+ 42s 105-125 km 
300-260km << f y oe 
< << I YP. 
Ty+ 2.58 WF soci 
- s. A 7, 
. ij 5-6 m/s 
_ Tp = Ty 150 min 
maximum} 
% Vv (i jum) 
~ } 
Entry Pilot-chute Front-shield Main-parachute jettison “"" 
deployment separation Stabiliser-parachute — 
deployment 
Peak deceleration Back-cover release Instrument Sufface-mission 
Heat-flux peak Main-parachute configuration ase 


deployment for descer i duration >3 min 


Figure 5. The Huygens entry and descent scenario. 


Huygens’ entry into the Titan atmosphere is 
planned for 27 November 2004. The descent under para- 
chute will take a maximum of 2%h. On the way down, 
Huygens will measure the physical and the chemical 
properties of the atmosphere and take images of the sur- 
face underneath the Probe. During its descent and possi- 
bly for a short period on the surface, the Probe will radio 
the data acquired to the Cassini Saturn Orbiter, which 
will receive them via its HGA pointed at Titan. The 
Orbiter will in turn send the data back to Earth after the 
Huygens mission is over, also using its HGA, then point- 
ed at Earth. The Huygens entry and descent scenario is 
illustrated in figure 5. 

After completion of the Probe mission, the Saturn 
Orbiter will start its 4 yr tour of the Saturnian system, the 
so-called satellite tour. In the current mission scenario, it 
consists of more than 70 Saturn-centered orbits, connected 


Figure 6. Baseline satellite tour in the Saturnian system; on the left side the projection of the trajectory is shown in the equatorial (X—Y) 
plane of Saturn, while on the right side the projection perpendicular to the equatorial (X—Z) plane is shown. Dimensions in X, Y, Z are 
indicated in Saturn radii (1 Saturn radius (Rs) = 60 330 km). Note that the apoapsis of the first orbit lies at ~170Rc, beyond the limit of 


the figure. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cassini/Huygens Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by Titan gravity-assist flybys or propulsive maneuvers. 
The size of these orbits, their orientation to the Sun-Saturn 
line and their inclination to Saturn’s equator are dictated 
by the various scientific requirements, which include Titan 
ground-track coverage, icy-satellite flybys, Saturn, Titan 
or ring occultations, magnetosphere coverage, orbit incli- 
nations and ring-plane crossings. The geometry of the tour 
is illustrated in figure 6. 


The flight operations 

The flight operations of the Cassini/Huygens mission 
operations are carried out at the JET PROPULSION LABORA- 
TORY (JPL) in Pasadena, California. The uplink and the 
downlink operations are carried out from the Mission 
Control Center at JPL. The data are collected via NASA's 
deep space network and stored on computers at JPL, 
where the spacecraft’s health and status are routinely 
assessed. The Cassini/ Huygens operations are based on 
a distributed operations concept. In this concept, the 
instrument teams analyse their instrument data and pre- 
pare instrument operation sequences from their home 
institutes and transmit them to JPL for uplink. During 
the main mission, from the start of the Saturn encounter 
until the end of the mission, the Orbiter instrument 
teams will interact daily with the spacecraft operations 
team at JPL. The flight operations of the Huygens Probe 
are carried out from ESA’s Operations Center at ESOC in 
Darmstadt, Germany, where the Huygens Probe 
Operations Center (HPOC) has been established. All 
Huygens-related mission activities (periodic in-flight 
checkouts and Probe mission phase) are carried out from 
the HPOC. The Huygens telemetry data are routed to the 
HPOC, where they are processed and distributed to the 
Huygens investigators. 


Jupiter flyby 
The Cassini spacecraft has made a successful flyby of 
Jupiter during a gravity-assisted swing toward Saturn 
and in addition has been used to try out some of its 
instrumentation, making important scientific observa- 
tions of Jupiter and its moons. The Cassini observations 
were made in conjunction with observations by the 
Galileo spacecraft, also orbiting Jupiter. The observations 
by the two spacecraft were complemented by nearly 
simultaneous images from the Earth-orbiting Hubble 
Space Telescope and Chandra x-ray Observatory. 
Earth—based radio and optical telescopes were also used. 
The Galileo spacecraft has been in orbit around 
Jupiter since December 1995 while Cassini observed 
Jupiter from 1 October, 2000 to 31 March 2001. Cassini 
made its closest approach on 30 December 2000, at a dis- 
tance of about 9.7 million kilometers (6 million miles). 
This gave Cassini a boost from Jupiter’s gravity that 
accelerated the spacecraft by about 2 km s-! (about 4500 
miles per hour) and will enable it to reach its ultimate 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


destination, Saturn, in July 2004 for the planned four- 
year study. 

A higher-than-normal drag that was detected on 
one of Cassini’s reaction wheels did not reappear. The 
reaction wheels are used to rotate the spacecraft in dif- 
ferent directions, and the problem led to suspension from 
19 December to 28 December of scientific observations 
that would have required pointing the spacecraft, such as 
for taking pictures. Only two experiments, the Ion and 
Neutral Mass Spectrometer and Radio Science, and the 
Huygens probe for studying Saturn’s moon Titan, did 
not take data during the study of Jupiter. 

Observational results include revealing new data on 
the dynamics of Jupiter’s magnetosphere, its radiation 
belts, aurorae and its interactions with the solar wind. 
See JUPITER, JUPITER: SATELLITES, JUPITER: RADIO EMISSIONS, 
JUPITER ATMOSPHERE, IO: PLASMA TORUS. 


Web update (31 October 2002) 

During July 2002, NASA’s Cassini spacecraft took test 
images of a star that reveals successful results from an 
extended warming treatment to remove haze that col- 
lected on a camera lens during 2001. The quality of the 
new images is virtually the same as star images taken 
before the haze appeared. In the most recent treatment, 
the camera had been warmed to 4 degrees Celsius (39° F) 
for four weeks ending 9 July. Four previous treatments at 
that temperature for varying lengths of time had already 
removed most of the haze. The camera usually operates 
at -90° C (-130° F). 


Bibliography 

Hill T W 2002 Magnetic moments at Jupiter Nature 415 
965-966 

2001 First Results from Cassini: Venus and Earth swing- 
bys (11 articles) Journal of Geophysical Research 106 
A12 

ESA 1997 ESA Bulletin No 92, November (contains five 
articles describing several aspects of the 
Cassini/ Huygens mission) 

NASA 1997 Passage to a Ringed World; the 
Cassini-Huygens Mission to Saturn and Titan 
NASA SP 533 

Russell C (ed) 2000 The Cassini/ Huygens Mission Space 
Sci. Rev. in preparation 

Wilson A (ed) 1997 Huygens, Science Payload and 
Mission ESA SP 1177 

ESA Huygens website http: / /sci.esa.int/huygens 

JPL Cassini website http:/ / wwwjpLnasa.gov/cassini 


Jean-Pierre Lebreton and Dennis L Matson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cassiopeia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassiopeia 


(abbrev. Cas, gen. Cassiopeiae; area 598 sq. deg.) 
A northern constellation which lies between Cepheus and 
Andromeda, and culminates at midnight in early October. 
It is named after Queen Cassiopeia, wife of King Cepheus 
and mother of Andromeda in Greek mythology, and is 
usually shown on early celestial charts as a seated figure. 
Its brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. AD 100- 
175) in the Almagest. 

A conspicuous constellation, Cassiopeia is easily 
recognized by the characteristic letter ‘W’ (or ‘M’) formed 
by its five brightest stars: ¢ (mag. 3.4), 5 (Ruchbah, mag. 
2.7), y (mag. 2.2), a (Shedar, mag. 2.2) and 6 (Caph, mag. 
2.3). There are three other stars of magnitude 4.0 or 
brighter. y Cassiopeiae, the central star of the ‘W’, is a 
rapidly rotating irregular variable, which spasmodically 
throws off a shell of material from its equatorial zone and 
simultaneously fades by up to 1.4 magnitudes. Other 
interesting variables are R Cassiopeiae, a Mira-type star 
(range 4.7-13.5, period about 430 days), and RZ Cas, 
an eclipsing binary (range 6.2-7.7, period 1.2 days). 7 
Cassiopeiae is a fine binary with yellow (GO) and red (M0) 
components, magnitudes 3.5 and 7.4, separation 12.5”. 

The Milky Way passes through Cassiopeia and the 
constellation contains a number of open star clusters, 
including M52 (NGC 7654), which contains more than 100 
stars between ninth and twelfth magnitude, M103 (NGC 
581), which contains about 40 stars between magnitudes 
8 and 12, and NGC 225, which has about 20 stars fainter 
than ninth magnitude. Cassiopeia is also the ‘graveyard’ 
of the supernova represented by the powerful radio 
source Cassiopeia A and of that observed by the Danish 
astronomer Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) in 1572. 


See also: Cassiopeia A, Tycho’s star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cassiopeia A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassiopeia A 


The brightest radio source in the constellation of 
Cassiopeia and the brightest cosmic radio source in the 
entire sky. It is a supernova remnant, an expanding cloud 
of gas that was ejected in a catastrophic stellar explosion. 
From the present size and rate of expansion of the cloud, 
the explosion that created it must have occurred around 
the year 1660. Cassiopeia A lies at a distance of about 
10000 light-years. At that distance, a typical supernova 
should attain a peak brightness greater than that of the 
brightest naked-eye star and perhaps comparable to the 
planet Venus, but no bright ‘new star’ was recorded in 
Cassiopeia at around that time. For whatever reason, the 
supernova that produced Cassiopeia A must have been of 
unusually low optical luminosity. 

Although not conspicuous in visible light (only a few 
faint wisps of nebulosity can be seen) Cassiopeia A radiates 
across the electromagnetic spectrum from x-ray to radio 
wavelengths. Its intensity, or flux density, at a wavelength 
of 20 cm in the radio region, is 2477 janskys, and its angular 
diameter is about 5 arc minutes. 


See also: flux density, radioastronomy, supernovae, 
supernova remnant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Casielli, Benedetto (1578-1643) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Castelli, Benedetto (1578-1643) 


Mathematician, born in Brescia, Italy, Benedictine monk, 
professor at Padua. GALILEO’s closest scientific collaborator, 
he defended, and edited Galileo, he helped his sunspot 
research, inventing the method of projection so as to 
view safely the Sun’s image with a telescope. His 
book on hydraulics, Della Misura dell’Acque Correnti, or 
On the Measurement of Running Waters, founded modern 
hydrodynamics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Castor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Castor 


The star a Geminorum, apparent magnitude 1.58. This is 
in facta very complex multiple star system. Observed with 
a moderately powerful telescope it is seen to be double. 
The components of this binary system are a pair of white 
stars, a Gem A (apparent magnitude 1.9, spectral type 
A1V), and a Gem B (3.0 and A2V). Their current separation 
is 3.1” at position angle 76°; the period is 420 years. Each of 
these component stars is itself a spectroscopic binary, their 
periods being 2.9 days (a Gem A) and 9.2 days (a Gem B). 

The system has another more distant component, a 
Gem C (the variable star YY Geminorum), 72.5” distant 
at position angle 164°. This is an eclipsing binary, its 
components being a pair of red dwarfs of spectral type 
M1, their combined magnitude varying between 9.2 and 
9.6 in a period of 19.6 h. Although part of the gravitational 
system, this component is so far from the main pair—about 
1000 astronomical units—that its orbital period must be of 
the order of a million years. 

This sextuple star system is situated 52 light-years 
away, and has a parallax of 0.063”; the combined absolute 
magnitude of the principal components is 0.6. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cat’s Eye Nebula (NGC 6543) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cat’s Eye Nebula (NGC 6543) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Draco, position RA 
17" 58.6™, dec. +66° 38.0’, named for its oval shape and 
greenish color. It is about 20” in diameter, and of ninth 
magnitude; the central star is tenth magnitude. William 
Huggins’ spectroscopic observation of the Cat’s Eye in 
1864, revealing a spectrum consisting of three bright lines, 
provided proof that not all ‘nebulae’ consist of stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cataclysmic Binaries: Classical and Recurrent Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cataclysmic Binaries: Classical and 
Recurrent Novae 


The Latin word nova, meaning ‘new’, was applied 
historically to the sudden appearance of a bright star, not 
previously recorded. Such novae stellae appear in Eastern 
records from about 1500 BC and in European records 
in the past three centuries (many, however, are ancient 
SUPERNOVAE). The discovery of a different kind of nova, 
dwarf novae, in the mid-nineteenth century, led to the 
use of classical nova for the original type. Until 1887, 
when fainter novae began to be discovered by wide-field 
photography, only six novae had been found in the post- 
telescopic era. The brightest of these were Nova Vulpecula 
1670 (magnitude 2.6 at maximum), Nova Ophiuchi 1848 
(mag. 4.2) and Nova Cygni 1876 (mag 3.0). 

Post-outburst observations of Nova Oph showed that 
after a few years it faded to magnitude 13.5, which 
demonstrated that whatever the cause of the dramatic 
nova explosion, it had not destroyed the star altogether. 
The realization that some novae have repeated eruptions 
(e.g. Nova Corona Borealis in 1866 and 1946) underlined 
the fact that the process is cataclysmic, rather than 
catastrophic. With current understanding of the cause 
of eruptions (see below) it is believed that all novae 
must be recurrent, and that all types of cataclysmic 
variable must regularly become novae, but the intervals 
between eruptions are in general much greater than the 
few centuries of recorded history. 

At their brightest, novae typically reach absolute 
magnitude M, ~ —9, which would make them easily 
detectable throughout our Galaxy were it not that novae 
are concentrated towards the Galactic Plane and Galactic 
Center, which causes strong interstellar extinction of the 
light from the most distant novae. As a result, although 
there may be as many as ~80 novae per year erupting in the 
Galaxy, on average only about three per year are detected. 
In the Magellanic Clouds and the Andromeda Galaxy (M 
31) novae are readily discovered (at maximum being at 
apparent magnitudes m, ~ 10 and ~15 respectively) and 
with large ground-based telescopes and CCD detectors 
novae can be studied even in the Virgo cluster of galaxies, 
at brightest magnitude my ~ 23. 

A list of novae that reached apparent magnitude 3.0 
or brighter is given in table 1. Variable star designations 
are used in table 1; for example, Nova Herculis 1934 is also 
known as DQ HERCULIS. 


Light curves of novae 

The variation of apparent visual brightness during a nova 
eruption is the most straightforward of measurements 
to make. Although it is rare to discover a nova much 
before its maximum brightness, the rise can sometimes be 
delineated through the chance appearance of the nova on 
wide-field photographic survey plates. There is a wide 
range of speeds with which novae pass through their 
eruption behavior, but all can be approximately described 
by the schematic curves shown in figure 1. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The initial rise of typically 6-13 magnitudes occurs 
in one or two days, often with a temporary halt lasting 
a few hours for fast novae to a few days for slow novae, 
before a less steep final rise of ~2 mag to maximum. The 
early decline is smooth for all but the slowest novae, where 
irregular variations are seen. The speed class of a nova 
is defined by the rate at which the early decline takes 
place. This is measured as the time # or f3 taken to fall 
2 or 3 magnitudes respectively; the definitions are listed in 
table 2. 


Table 2. Speed classes of novae. 


Speed class ty (days) 
Very fast <10 

Fast 11-25 
Moderately fast 26-80 
Slow 81-150 
Very slow 151-250 


Starting about 3 magnitudes below maximum visual 
luminosity, through a ~2.5 magnitude drop known as 
the transition region, novae show a variety of behaviors. 
Some, particularly the faster novae, continue to decline 
smoothly. Others pass through a deep minimum, as deep 
as 7-10 mag, lasting 2 to 3 months, after which the smooth 
decline continues. Others show quasi-periodic brightness 
variations with amplitudes 1-1.5 mag and quasi-periods 
typically in the range 5-25 days. 

The final decline to the post-nova is usually smooth, 
but in a few cases dwarf nova outbursts can begin late 
in the decline (e.g. Nova Per 1901, which commenced 
2-3 mag outbursts in 1950, with intervals of ~2 years). 

Absolute magnitudes of novae at maximum bright- 
ness, M,,(max), can be found if the distances and interstel- 
lar extinctions can be determined. The expansion paral- 
lax (see below) for some individual novae, supplemented 
with maximum brightnesses of novae in the Magellanic 
Clouds and M31, show that there is a strong correlation 
between fz and M,(max) or Mpg(max) (for blue region pho- 
tographic magnitudes) known as the ‘absolute magnitude 
versus rate of decline relationship’. This may be expressed 
by the equation Mp,(max) = 3.35 log tf -12.2. Application 
of this relationship gives a valuable method of finding the 
distances to extragalactic systems in which novae occur. 
Another technique uses the fact that all novae, almost in- 
dependent of speed class, reach My ~ —5.5 15 days after 
maximum light. 

Satellite observations of the ultraviolet brightnesses of 
novae show that the peaks of the flux distributions move 
steadily to shorter wavelengths after maximum light. The 
early decline in visual luminosity is due almost entirely to 
this redistribution of flux towards ultraviolet wavelengths. 

Infrared light curves of novae behave very differently 
from visual light curves. The infrared flux grows slowly 
during the initial decline and increases greatly if there is 
a deep minimum during the transition region. The flux 
distribution of the IR component is typical of emission 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cataclysmic Binaries: Classical and Recurrent Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Bright novae. 


Eruption Magnitude 
Star date at maximum 
V603 Aql 1918 -1.1 
QCyg 1876 3.0 
V476 Cyg 1920 2.0 
V1500Cyg = 1975 22 
DQ Her 1934 1.3 
V446 Her 1960 3.0 
V553 Her 1963 3.0 
CP Lac 1936 2.1 
GK Per 1901 0.2 
RR Pic 1925 1.0 
CP Pup 1942 0.5 
V630 Sgr 1936 1.6 
CK Vul 1670 2.6 


ST EETTTTTa 1 LES EEEE EERE n 
athags tt Bere 
_ fPRE-MAX-HALT 
35 MAGS 
6 MAGS 


INITIAL 
RISE 


9 MAGS 


Magnitude tp v 
atminimum (days) (kms7!) 
12.0 4 1700 
15.6 5 
17.2 7 790 
16.3 2.9 1180 
14.5 67 350 
15.0 5 1380 
15.0 16 580 
16.6 5 2400 
13.0 6 1300 
11.9 80 475 
15.0 5 710 
19 4 2120 
>21 40 


POST NOVA 


Figure 1. 


from dust grains with temperatures ~1000 K, and is 
interpreted as absorption of short-wavelength radiation as 
dust grains grow in expanding and cooling gas ejected by 
the nova explosion. In extreme cases the dust becomes 
optically thick in the visible, causing the deep visual 
minimum. 


Adding the visual, ultraviolet and IR fluxes shows 
that the visual light curve of a nova is very misleading: the 
total luminosity of anova in fact remains almost constant at 
least until well into the transition region. These ‘plateau’ 
luminosities of novae during the early phases lie in the 
range (2-4) x 10* Lo. These are roughly the Eddington 
luminosities for stars of about one solar mass. The short- 
lived peak luminosity can be a few times higher still, 
especially for fast novae. These observations show that 
radiation pressure is probably the motivating force for the 
ejection of gas during a nova explosion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spectra of novae 


On the final rise to maximum light the spectrum of a 
nova resembles that of a supergiant; the spectral class is 
of early B type, moving to later type and reaching about 
A5 at maximum. The lines are very broad and there is a 
shortward Doppler shift of the wavelengths; both the shifts 
and the widths are (1-2) x 10° km s“!, indicating a rapidly 
expanding optically thick shell. P Cygni line profiles are 
often seen, again pointing to an expanding shell. After 
maximum light the changes in spectrum are quite complex, 
indicative of several expanding envelopes with different 
velocities. On the initial decline a set of absorption lines 
resembling an A or F type supergiant, with a blueshift 
greater than that of the pre-maximum spectrum, develops. 
This is known as the principal spectrum; its velocity 
displacement is strongly correlated with speed class, with 
velocities up to 4000 km s“! for the very fast novae and 
as low as 100 km s~! for the slowest. The absorption 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cataclysmic Binaries: Classical and Recurrent Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lines often show multiple structure, indicative of many 
subshells or blobs of gas being present in the expanding 
shell. 

Soon after maximum light the strongest lines develop 
P Cyg profiles and large numbers of emission lines appear, 
chiefly of H, Ca II, Na I and Fe II in the visible. Later, 
the principal spectrum (identified by its velocity shift) 
weakens and forbidden lines of [O I], [O II] and [N II] 
appear—these are characteristic of gas at low densities. 

Another distinct suite of absorption lines—the diffuse 
enhanced spectrum—appears soon after the principal 
spectrum has become clear, but blueshifted at about twice 
that of the latter. Yet another system—the Orion spectrum— 
appears one to two magnitudes down from maximum, 
and is characterized by single components, displaced 
blueward at least as much as the diffuse enhanced system. 

At a late stage in the nova eruption, a nebular 
spectrum develops, at first merely being strengthening of 
the principal spectrum’s forbidden emission lines, but 
with the ultimate appearance of [O III], [Ne III], giving the 
nova spectrum an appearance similar to that of a PLANETARY 
NEBULA. In the highest energy novae successively higher 
stages of ionization are seen, up to ions typical of coronal 
conditions: e.g. lines from [Fe X] and [Fe XIV]. 

The evolution of a nova spectrum is generally un- 
derstood as being generated by an expanding, inhomoge- 
neous shell, ionized by an intense source of high-energy 
radiation (temperature 10°-10° K) at its center. The latter 
must be the central star, heated by the explosion. 

The spectra of novae can be used to determine the 
physical conditions and the chemical composition of the 
expanding shell. Novae typically show abundances of C, 
N, O, Ne, Mg and some heavier elements considerably 
enhanced compared with those of the Sun and other 
normal stars. The relative abundances differ among the 
novae; typical enhancements are factors of 10 to 100. The 
helium-to-hydrogen ratio is also often different from that 
in the Sun, being higher by up to a factor of 1.5 or lower by 
as much as a factor of 5. The higher abundance of carbon 
probably helps the formation of obscuring dust in some of 
the nova shells. 

Many novae show greatly enhanced abundances of 
neon—sufficient for a class of neon novae to have been 
defined. Most neon novae are fast or very fast, but at least 
one (Nova Ophiuichi 1988) was a slow nova. 


Nova shells 

Evidence for ejection of a shell comes not only from the 
spectroscopically detected expansion, but also from direct 
imaging. The Hubble Space Telescope was able to resolve 
the shell of Nova Cygni 1992 467 days after eruption when 
the angular radius of the shell was only 0.13. Radio 
emission from nova shells (in the 2-100 GHz frequency 
region) enables very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) 
also to image shells with angular resolutions down to 
0”.1. Eventually, at least for relatively nearby novae, the 
shell may expand sufficiently that it can be seen directly in 
images made from the ground. Figure 2 shows the present 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. 


appearance of Nova Persei 1901; the inhomogeneous 
structure is confirmed by such images. Many nova shells 
(e.g. Nova Herculis 1934) have more regular outlines, 
often elliptical in profile, showing that average ejection 
velocities vary systematically with direction. This is in 
accord with some spectroscopic analyses which detect 
‘equatorial’ bands and ‘polar’ plumes ejected at different 
rates. 

The angular rate of expansion directly measured by 
VLBI, or from the observed radius of the shell measured 
on photographs taken a known time (~ decades) after the 
nova eruption, can be combined with the spectroscopic 
expansion velocity to determine the distance of a nova. 
From simple geometry, the expansion parallax, or its 
reciprocal, the distance d in parsecs, is given by d = 
0.20v/(d6/dt) pc, where v is the expansion velocity in 
km s“! and dé /dr is the rate of increase of angular radius, 
measured in seconds of arc per year. From this relationship 
we see that a nova at a distance of 1 kpc and expansion 
velocity 1000 km s~! should show a shell of radius ~4” 20 
years after eruption. However, with cooling of the central 
star, expansion away from this central exciting source, and 
decreasing surface brightness as the shell increases in area, 
most nova shells in fact cannot be imaged on the sky. 

Analysis of the spectra of nova shells can provide 
estimates of the electron and ion densities in the regions 
where the emission lines are formed. If the total volume 
of the shell is known, this can give the total mass of the 
shell. However, the inhomogeneity of the shell leads to 
considerable uncertainty in how much of the apparent 
volume is actually filled with hot gas. Masses obtained 
spectroscopically lie in the range (1-30) x 10°M>. A 
possibly more reliable determination is obtained from 
the radio emission at a time when the shell has become 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cataclysmic Binaries: Classical and Recurrent Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


optically thin at radio wavelengths. Then all of the 
shell material contributes to the radio emission, and this 
arises from thermal (free-free) emission in the ionized 
shell. Shell masses determined this way are in the range 
(5-40) x 107° Mo. 

These ejected masses are compatible with the earlier 
statement that nova eruptions can occur many times in the 
life of a cataclysmic variable star: if the exploding star has 
a mass ~1Mo, it can undergo hundreds or thousands of 
eruptions before depleting its mass significantly. 

Before leaving nova shells, one other effect that may 
be directly imaged should be mentioned. For eight 
months after the eruption of Nova Persei 1901 nebulous 
patches were observed, apparently receding from the 
nova at ~20 arcmin per year. At the distance of that 
nova, this angular velocity corresponds to a linear velocity 
comparable to that of light. It was therefore concluded 
that the burst of light caused by the nova explosion was 
illuminating an interstellar dust layer in the vicinity of the 
nova. Such a phenomenon is known as a light echo, but has 
been seen for only two novae. 


The physics of nova eruptions 

As with all cataclysmic variables, novae are CLOSE BINARY 
sTARS in which mass is being transferred from a star of 
normal dimensions (i.e. a main sequence star, or more 
rarely a giant), known as the secondary, onto a WHITE DWARF 
primary. At the time it was formed the white dwarf would 
have had no hydrogen in its interior, which would contain 
helium or carbon, oxygen or neon, magnesium, according 
to its mass. It is the continued accumulation of hydrogen- 
rich gas on the surface of the white dwarf that leads to the 
explosion that we recognize as a nova eruption. 

Apart from an outer layer of about 10-4Mo5, the 
interior of a white dwarf is degenerate. The essential 
physics of a nova explosion is contained in a comparison 
of the equation of state for degenerate matter, P « p’, 
with that for a perfect gas, P « pT, where P, p and 
T are respectively the pressure, density and temperature 
of the gas and y is a constant. Suppose a region of the 
gas is heated slightly, then the pressure in a perfect gas 
increases and the gas can expand, thereby absorbing the 
heat. But the pressure in degenerate gas is independent 
of temperature, so no mechanical change takes place. 
If the temperature rises sufficiently, however, the Fermi 
temperature will be reached, above which the gas ceases 
to be degenerate—it becomes a perfect gas and its pressure 
will rapidly increase to match the density and temperature 
required by the change in equation of state. 

Accumulation of hydrogen on the surface of the white 
dwarf builds a layer, the base of which becomes hotter and 
denser as it is compressed and is pushed deeper towards 
the hot interior. Nuclear reactions (at first the proton— 
proton chain, and later the CNO cycle) begin, which heat 
the gas. The mass Meny of the overlying layer sufficient 
to cause these nuclear reactions at its base depends quite 
sensitively on the mass of the white dwarf: it decreases 
from ~1 x 10-*Mo at 0.6Me to ~8 x 10-7 Mo at 1.4Mo. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This basal layer lies in a region of partial degeneracy, 
so the heating caused by nuclear reactions increases the 
temperature without expanding the layer. The increased 
temperature enhances the rate of energy production and 
a thermonuclear runaway ensues (as in a hydrogen bomb) 
until the Fermi temperature is reached and then the whole 
of the outer layer is blown into space. In many cases, a 
small part of the outer region of the degenerate core may be 
carried off in the explosion, creating the overabundances 
of C, O, Mg and Ne that are seen in some novae. Another 
cause of exceptional C, N or O abundances is that the 
explosion is so rapid that the CNO cycle does not reach 
the equilibrium that has produced the abundances of these 
elements present in normal stars. 

If the rate at which mass is transferred from the 
companion star onto the white dwarf is dM/dt, then the 
time between eruptions will be Meny divided by dM/dt. 
Average mass transfer rates in cataclysmic variables are 
estimated to be ~5 x 10-°Mo yr7', so the values of Meny 
given above imply intervals of ~2x 10? yr fora 0.6M. white 
dwarf and ~160 yr at 1.4M.. We deduce that the observed 
recurrent novae occur probably at the high-mass end of a 
spread of white dwarf masses. 

Computations of the evolution of a nova shell, using 
hydrodynamic computer codes, incorporate the initial 
expansion as the basal layer exceeds its Fermi temperature, 
plus the effects of the shock wave that occurs in the 
most energetic explosions, and the effect of radiation 
pressure. The resulting models match the observed 
range of nova behaviour quite well (e.g. the constant 
Eddington luminosity plateau of a nova eruption was 
predicted before it was observed). The models also show 
super-Eddington luminosities before the plateau. Early 
models failed to reproduce the duration of eruption and 
the decline branch of the eruption light curve, but these 
are now explained by interaction of the revolution of 
the secondary star in orbit: this transfers energy and 
angular momentum to the expanding shell (which forms 
a common envelope around the central binary) and leads 
first to a sustained wind phase and then to rapid shut 
down. 

The diffuse enhanced and Orion absorption line 
systems seen in spectra of erupting novae have been 
interpreted as evidence for continued ejection of gas after 
the initial explosive phase. This also is present in the 
models: the high luminosity of the heated white dwarf 
produces a RADIATIVELY DRIVEN STELLAR WIND. 

As the expanding envelope reduces in density and 
becomes more transparent it is possible to see further into 
it, allowing progressively hotter regions to be detected. 
This is the reason why the peak of the flux distribution 
moves into the ultraviolet in the early phases of a nova 
eruption. The freshly revealed surface of the white dwarf 
can have a temperature ~10° K; a 1.25Mo white dwarf will 
then cool to 50 000 K in about 300 years. 

The origin of the quasi-periodic oscillations that occur 
in some novae during the transition region (figure 1) is not 
certain; they may be radial pulsations of the envelope that 
surrounds the central binary star. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cataclysmic Binaries: Classical and Recurrent Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 3. Recurrent novae. 


Star Dates Magnitude atmaximum Magnitude atminimum 2 (days) 
TCrB 1866, 1946 2.0 11.3 3.8 
V394CrA = 1949, 1987 7.0 18.8 3.3 

RS Oph 1898, 1933, 1958, 1967,1985 = 4.3 12.5 4 

T Pyx 1890, 1902, 1920,1944,1966 6.5 15.4 62 
V3890 Sgr 1962, 1990 8.4 17.2 9 

U Sco 1863, 1906, 1936, 1979, 1987 8.8 18.5 2.0 
V745 Sco —- 1937, 1989 9.7 21 6.6 
LMC-RN 1968, 1990 10.9 20 3 


Recurrent novae 

Only eight novae are currently known to be recurrent 
(a few other stars were once thought to belong to this 
class, but have proved either to be large-amplitude, long- 
recurrence interval dwarf novae, or are novae which later 
had dwarf nova outbursts). These are listed in table 3. One 
of these is in the Large Magellanic Cloud. 

There are three subclasses of recurrent novae. The 
first, comprising T CrB, RS Oph, V3890 Sgr and V745 Sco, 
all have giant secondaries of M spectral type and hence 
orbital periods greater than 100 days (an M giant could 
not fit in a binary of shorter period). From the brevity of 
eruptions it is possible that some of their eruptions this 
century have been overlooked. The T CrB stars obey the 
M,(max)-t2 relationship. Their short recurrence times are 
partly due to the high rate at which giant companions 
transfer mass to their white dwarf companions, thereby 
rapidly building up the critical mass Meny that leads to 
explosion. 

The second class of recurrent novae is that typified 
by U Sco and including V394 CrA and LMC-RN. These 
are among the fastest novae known; they also obey the 
M,(max)-t) relationship. Again, some of their eruptions 
may have been missed because of their brevity. The 
declining parts of their light curves vary from eruption 
to eruption. All have orbital periods of about 1 day. Their 
spectra are dominated by helium lines in the post-nova 
stage. 

The final star, T Pyx, is unique. It rises slowly 
to maximum, taking about 7 days for the initial rise 
and a further 20 to 30 days to maximum, followed by 
a slow decline. Its distance is very uncertain, so it is 
not known whether it obeys the M,(max)-f relationship. 
Photographs show a double shell, perhaps the ejecta from 
the 1944 and 1966 eruptions. It is suspected that in its 
quiescent state T Pyx may be steadily burning some of its 
hydrogen through nuclear reactions in its envelope. 


Symbiotic stars 

Among the syMBIOTIC STARS are about a dozen that are 
classified as symbiotic novae. These are related to the 
T CrB type of recurrent novae: they probably all have 
long orbital periods (the known ones are from 200 to 
1000 days) and some have had more than one eruption. 
However, the rise to maximum is very slow, in the range 
of 2 months to 16 years, and the duration of eruption is very 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


long—from years to greater than a century. It is currently 
thought that the eruptions of symbiotic novae are the result 
of thermonuclear runaways on white dwarf primaries of 
lower mass than in the T CrB type. 


Novae at minimum light 

During the long intervals between eruptions, and after 
they have fully recovered from their latest eruptions, 
novae spend at least part of their time as non-outbursting, 
relatively inconspicuous stellar objects. A good example 
is DQ Herculis, which had not drawn attention to itself 
prior to its 1934 eruption, and which remained relatively 
unstudied in its post-novae state for 20 years before 
M F Walker discovered it to be an eclipsing binary with an 
orbital period of 4h 39 min. This was the first cataclysmic 
variable star to be recognized as a short-period binary, 
though UX UMa and AE Aqr were previously known as 
spectroscopic binaries, but only retrospectively classified 
as nova-like variables. 

Most novae eventually return to their pre-nova 
brightness (as found on archival photographic plates) and 
become indistinguishable from nova-like variables. For 
the brightest novae (table 1) the quiescent magnitude is 
quite bright. This implies that the currently known nova- 
likes probably include novae that erupted unnoticed in 
past centuries—and also that some of the nova-likes are 
‘pre-novae’, in the sense that they will become novae in 
the future. 

As mentioned earlier, some novae pass through a 
stage as dwarf novae during their post-nova decline. Afew 
novae (Nova Her 1960, Nova Sgr 1919 and recurrent Nova 
Sgr 1962) showed dwarf nova outbursts prior to eruption; 
the first two of these started outbursts again in their post- 
nova phases. 

There is evidence that at least some novae fade 
to very faint magnitudes (implying a large reduction 
in mass transfer from their secondary stars) centuries 
after their eruptions. Nova Vul 1670 (table 1) is an 
example, but more significant is that none of the naked 
eye novae recorded in Eastern records (and which would 
be expected to have post-nova apparent magnitudes in 
the range 10-14) have been recovered in modern surveys 
for nova-likes. The reason for the low state may be 
because heating of the secondary star by radiation from 
the hot post-nova white dwarf causes excessive mass 
transfer, and the secondary later adjusts to a slightly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cataclysmic Binaries: Classical and Recurrent Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


smaller radius, reducing mass transfer for many centuries, 
which maintains the long-term average rate of transfer 
determined by orbital evolution. 

From the existence of the M,(max)-t) relationship 
described above, and if nova remnants all had the same 
absolute brightness M,(min) at minimum, it would be 
expected that the range AM, = M,(min)-M,(max) would 
be well correlated with rate of decline, . (Note that 
the range in apparent magnitude Am, = m,(min)— 
m,(max) = AM,, and this is independent of interstellar 
extinction, since the extinction is applicable to both 
my(min) and m,(max).) This is indeed the case, but there 
is a large spread in the relationship, which results from 
the dominance of the accretion disc at minimum light. At 
maximum of eruption, a nova would look approximately 
the same brightness independent of the direction from 
which it is observed. The minimum brightness, however, 
depends very strongly on the inclination of the binary 
orbit: if the system is seen at low inclination, i.e. the disc 
is seen nearly face-on, it is relatively bright. Seen at high 
inclination, however, the disc is edge-on and quite faint. 
The result is an unusually large Am, for eclipsing systems 
like DQ Herculis. The average M,(min) for novae in 
quiescence is about +4, but the range is 2 S M,(min) < 9, 
correlated with orbital inclination. 

Rare exceptions to this range of minimum magnitude 
can occur if the white dwarf primary has a strong magnetic 
field, preventing the formation of an accretion disc. An 
example is V1500 Cyg, which erupted from a minimum 
magnitude fainter than 21st (the magnitude listed in table 
1 is the post-eruption outburst, probably representing a 
much higher rate of mass transfer than before eruption). 


Bibliography 

Bode M Fand Evans A (ed) 1989 Classical Novae (New York: 
Wiley) 

Gallagher J Sand Starrfield S 1978 Theory and observations 
of classical novae Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 16 
171-214 

Gehrz R D 1988 The infrared temporal development of 
classical novae Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 377-417 

Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Brian Warner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cataclysmic Variables: the Magnetic Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cataclysmic Variables: the Magnetic 
Systems 


Cataclysmic variables (CVs) are CLOSE BINARY STARS in 
which the most massive component is a WHITE DWARF 
(WD) and the companion is usually a more normal star— 
commonly a main sequence star but occasionally a giant. 
The majority of CVs steadily transfer mass from the com- 
panion to the WD through an ACCRETION DISK surround- 
ing the WD, but, just as about 5% of isolated WDs have 
detectable magnetic fields, so do about 25% of the WDs 
that occur in CVs. If the magnetic field is strong (greater 
than about 10 MG = 10x10° G) it prevents the formation 
of an accretion disk, and the result is that the gas leaving 
the companion is magnetically channeled direct to the 
surface of the WD. The WD itself rotates on its axis at the 
same rate as the revolution of the binary—it is locked to 
the secondary by the interaction of their magnetic fields. 
The prototype of this kind of object is AM HERCULIS, lead- 
ing to the description of this class as AM Her stars, or (as 
the infalling gas radiates its energy in the strong magnet- 
ic field of the WD and this radiation is therefore cyclotron 
emission, which is strongly polarized), as polars. The 
strongest field so far measured in a polar is 230 MG in AR 
UMa; AM Her itself has one of the lowest fields found in 
a polar, 14 MG. 

If the WD has a weaker magnetic field (less than a 
few million gauss) its interaction with the (intrinsic or 
induced) field of the companion is insufficient to force 
co-rotation, with the result that the WD has a different, 
usually much shorter, rotation period than the binary 
period. Furthermore, the field can only prevent forma- 
tion of a disk quite close to the WD, with the result that 
an accretion disk does form, but the central part is miss- 
ing—where the energy density in the field is greater than 
that of the kinetic inflow of gas and can therefore deter- 
mine the accretion flow. The prototype of this kind of 
object is DQ HERCULIS. The group as a whole is usually 
known as intermediate polars (IPs) (being intermediate 
between strongly magnetic and non-magnetic), with DQ 
Her stars preferably kept as a description of the subset of 
most rapidly rotating WD primaries (e.g. DQ Her itself 
with 71 s rotation period)—although some authors use 
DQ Her stars as the general type. The majority of IPs 
have primaries rotating with periods of tens of minutes. 
Polarized radiation, modulated at the spin period of the 
WD, has been detected in only three IPs, presumably 
those with the strongest fields. Because of the large 
amount of unpolarized radiation from the (truncated) 
accretion disk, polarized radiation in IPs is very much 
diluted; furthermore, the weaker fields result in the 
cyclotron emission peaking in the infrared, where it is 
more difficult to detect. 

The process of accreting matter onto the WD also 
transfers angular momentum. However, the result is not 
straightforward—not only is there a material torque on 
the WD, due to direct (but non-radial) impact of the gas, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


there are also torques resulting from the interaction of the 
magnetic field lines connecting the WD with the accre- 
tion disk, part of which is rotating faster than the WD 
and part is rotating slower. These torques can balance, 
with the result that the WD rotation period reaches an 
equilibrium state. However, in general the rotation rates 
are found to be increasing in some and decreasing in oth- 
ers—at typically only a few seconds per century—as they 
seek the equilibrium. 

The magnetic field strengths in isolated WDs extend 
down to the current limit of detection—about 50000 G, 
so it is to be expected that the same would be true of the 
WDs in CVs. Such fields are too weak to detect directly 
in CVs (i.e. by the ZEEMAN EFFECT or by the presence of 
polarization), but there is indirect evidence of the pres- 
ence of such weak fields in some CVs through the 
appearance of dwarf nova oscillations (DNOs) during 
the outburst of some dwarf novae (also known as U GEM 
STARS) and intermittently in some nova-like variables 
(which are rather like dwarf novae stuck permanently in 
outburst). The DNOs are periodic brightness variations 
with periods typically in the range 5-40 s and are cur- 
rently interpreted as magnetic channeling of accreting 
gas in the very inner region of the accretion disk, just 
above the surface of the WD. One difference from the IPs 
is that, whereas IPs have very stable brightness modula- 
tions, the DNOs vary rapidly in period—sometimes 
changing by a factor of 2 within a day. An explanation for 
this is that the intrinsic fields of the WDs are too small to 
prevent the accreting gas from slipping around the equa- 
tor. Whereas in polars and IPs the accreting gas is cou- 
pled to the whole body of the WD, in the DNOs we see 
the effect of an equatorial belt spinning up in response to 
accreted angular momentum, carrying its (probably self- 
generated) magnetic field around with it. The existence 
of long-lived rapidly spinning equatorial belts after 
dwarf nova outbursts has recently been established 
through spectra obtained with the HUBBLE SPACE TELE- 
scope. Not all dwarf novae or nova-like variables show 
DNOs, presumably because there are some CVs that 
have magnetic fields too small to effect any magnetic 
channeling at all of the accretion flow—in such cases the 
accretion disk would reach down to the surface of the 
WD. This may happen also in those dwarf novae where 
DNOs are seen to cease near the maximum of outburst; 
at such times the accretion flow is probably crushing the 
magnetosphere of the WD down to the WD surface. 

In all of the classes of magnetic CV, modulated x-ray 
and EUV emission is seen—at the orbital period in polars, 
at the WD rotation period in IPs and at the DNO period 
in outbursts of dwarf novae. Such energetic radiation is 
emitted from the strongly shock-heated region as the 
channeled accretion flow impacts the surface of the WD, 
producing a very high x-ray luminosity (indeed, many of 
the polars and IPs were first discovered during x-ray 
surveys of the sky). Some of the radiation leaving such 
heated spots on the surface of the WD may intercept the 
surface of the truncated accretion disks in IPs and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cataclysmic Variables: the Magnetic Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


weakly magnetic CVs. In effect, a rotating beam sweeps 
across the surface of the disk—and also the side of the 
companion star pointing towards the WD. This radiation 
is partly processed (degraded) into the optical region of 
the spectrum, enabling us to detect indirectly the rotating 
beam. Two optical modulations with different periods 
can be produced—one through reprocessing from the 
disk and one from reprocessing on the companion star. In 
successive sweeps the companion has moved round a lit- 
tle in its orbit, so the signal from the companion has a 
longer period (this is like the difference between SIDEREAL 
PERIOD and SYNODIC PERIOD for planets), and this some- 
times is the only optical period detectable. In the x-ray 
region we see the direct beam from the WD. As a result, 
in some IPs the period (sidereal) of the x-rays and the 
period (synodic) in the optical differ (their difference in 
frequency is exactly equal to the orbital frequency— 
which is how this model for IPs was established in the 
first instance). 

In DQ Her and some outbursting dwarf novae and 
nova-like variables, observations of the changes in the 
rapid brightness modulations during eclipse by the com- 
panion star show phase changes which again point to a 
rotating beam emitted from the WD (see DQ HERCULIS). 

The accumulation of hydrogen-rich material from 
the companion onto the surface of a WD leads eventual- 
ly to anova explosion (see NOVAE). The magnetic systems 
are no exception: Nova Cygni 1975 (also known as 
V1500 Cyg), one of the fastest and brightest novae of the 
20th century, was found after it had settled back to its 
quiescent state to be a polar—or almost so. Its orbital 
period (determined spectroscopically and photometrical- 
ly) is 0.1396129 d and its WD rotation period (deter- 
mined from the period of the polarization modulation) is 
0.137 154 d. The slight difference was caused by the 
effects of the nova explosion in 1975, during which the 
outer layers that were ejected from the WD exchanged 
some mass and angular momentum with the companion. 
The rotation period of the WD in V1500 Cyg is observed 
to be changing at such a rate that synchrony with the 
orbital period will be regained after about 180 yr. Three 
other desynchronized polars are known, which must 
have been undetected novae in recent centuries. There 
are two IPs among the known novae (Nova Persei 1901 
and Nova Puppis 1963). 


Bibliography 

Hellier C 2001 Cataclysmic Variable Stars: How and Why 
They Vary (Praxis) 

Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Wickramasinghe D T and Ferrario L 2000 Publ. Astron. 
Soc. Pac. 112 873 


Brian Warner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cavendish, Henry (1731-1810) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cavendish, Henry (1731-1810) 


English chemist and physicist. Cavendish used a sensitive 
torsion balance (the Cavendish balance), which was made to 
oscillate under the gravitational force of attraction of large 
masses, to measure the value of the gravitational constant, 
G, and used his value to determine the mass of the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Celestial Coordinates 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Coordinates 


Celestial coordinates are the means of specifying the 
location of a celestial object within some reference frame. 
In astronomy, it is necessary and convenient to represent 
the position of an object, suchas a star ora planet, in several 
different coordinate systems according to the context in 
which the position is to be used. Coordinates of an object 
correspond to a particular way of expressing the position 
of a point with respect to a coordinate frame, suchas a set of 
rectangular axes. In general, each position is represented 
by aset of three coordinates. In many cases, the distance of 
the object is not known, so two coordinates are sufficient 
to represent the direction to the object, although three 
direction cosines may be used. With the availability of 
more distance estimates in astronomy, the use of three 
space coordinates is becoming more common. 

Many different coordinate systems are used to specify 
the positions of celestial objects. Each system depends on 
the choice of coordinate frame and on the way of specifying 
coordinates with respect to the frame. The term celestial 
coordinate frame is used here for a coordinate frame that 
does not rotate with the Earth (or other planet), so that the 
coordinates of stars, for example, change only slowly with 
time (See CELESTIAL COORDINATE SYSTEMS). 

In general, an object is moving with respect to the 
coordinate frame, and the coordinate frame is moving 
and rotating in ‘space’. Therefore, it is necessary to 
specify the time to which the three spatial coordinates refer 
and the time for which the coordinate frame is defined. 
These two times may be the same, but are often different. 
Also, positions may be of several kinds, according to 
whether or not allowances have been made for aberration, 
diurnal rotation, refraction and other factors that affect 
the direction in which an object is observed. These are 
referred to as mean, true and apparent places. EPHEMERIDES 
and catalogs that represent high-precision positions and 
properties of astronomical objects at given times must 
always be accompanied by a precise statement that 
specifies all of these various factors, if the numbers are 
to be used properly to their full precision. 

The vector r from an origin to the object may be 
represented by rectangular coordinates (x, y, z); that is, 
by the projections of the distance r on the three axes. It 
can also be represented by spherical coordinates, in which 
direction is usually specified by the longitudinal angle (A) 
in the x—y-reference plane and the latitudinal angle (6) 
from the reference plane. Less frequently the polar angle 
(90° — B), or complement of the latitudinal angle, is used. 
The longitudinal and latitudinal angles are given different 
names and symbols in different coordinate frames. 

The geometric transformations of positions between 
different coordinate systems, and the allowances for 
physical effects, may be carried out using the techniques 
of spherical trigonometry or those of vector and matrix 
algebra. The concept of the celestial sphere may be 
used for purposes of explanation, with the arcs on the 
sphere representing angles between directions. The center 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the sphere can be located in many different places, 
but in most cases the sphere will be used to illustrate a 
particular reference frame with a specific origin. It must be 
remembered that when an object represented on the sphere 
is changing radial distances from the center along with 
transverse motion, these changes must be incorporated 
into the mathematics of the computation. 

The designations used to indicate the principal origins 
of celestial coordinate frames are as follows. 


(1) Topocentric: viewed or measured from the place of 
observation on the surface of the Earth. 

(2) Geocentric: viewed or measured from the center of 
the Earth. 

(3) Selenocentric: viewed or measured from the center 
of the Moon. 

(4) Planetocentric: viewed or measured from the center 
of a planet (with corresponding designations for 
individual planets). 

(5) Heliocentric: viewed or measured from the center of 
the Sun. 

(6) Barycentric: viewed or measured from the center of 
the mass of the solar system. 


The principal celestial reference planes through the 
appropriate origins are as follows. 


(1) Horizon: the plane that is normal to the local vertical 
(or apparent direction of gravity) and passes through 
the observer. 

(2) Local meridian: the plane that contains the local 
vertical and the direction of the axis of rotation of 
the Earth. 

(3) Celestial equator: the plane that is normal to the axis 
of rotation of the Earth and passes through the Earth’s 
center. 

(4) Ecliptic: the mean plane (ie. ignoring periodic 
perturbations) of the orbit of the Earth around the 
Sun. 

(5) Planet’s meridian: a plane that contains the axis of 
rotation of the planet and passes through a surface 
feature. 

(6) Planet’s equator: the plane that is normal to the axis of 
rotation of the planet and passes through the planet’s 
center. 

(7) Orbital plane: the plane of the orbit of a body 
around another (e.g. of a planet around the Sun or 
barycenter). 

(8) Invariable plane or Laplacian plane: the plane that is 
normal to the axis of angular momentum of a system 
and passes through its center. 

(9) Galactic equator: the plane through the central line 
of the local Galaxy (Milky Way). 


The line of intersection of the mean plane of the 
celestial equator and the ecliptic defines the direction of 
the equinox (Y). Using the projection of this direction as 
the origin, the right ascension (@) is measured in the plane 
of the equator and celestial (or ecliptic) longitude (A) is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Coordinates 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


zi Pole of plane O,, y,, equator 


Pole of ecliptic 


Equator of 2; 


Figure 1. Equatorial and ecliptic reference planes. 


North celestial 
pole 


Plane of Earth's equator 


Figure 2. Topocentric coordinates. 


measured in the plane of the ecliptic (see figure 1). Right 
ascension is usually expressed in time measure from 0 h to 
24 h, and both right ascension and longitude are measured 
in the positive (or right-handed) sense. The complement 
of right ascension with respect to 24 his known as sidereal 
hour angle (SHA); in navigational publications it is usually 
expressed in degrees. Declination is measured from the 
equatorial plane, positive to the north, from 0° to 90°. 
Celestial latitude is measured from the ecliptic plane, 
positive to the north, from 0° to 90°. 

The equinox is at the ascending node of the ecliptic 
on the equator; this is the direction at which the Sun, in 
its annual apparent path around the Earth, crosses the 
equator from south to north. It is also referred to as ‘the 
first point of Aries’, and it is the vernal (spring) equinox 
for the northern hemisphere (see figure 1). The inclination 
of the plane of the ecliptic to the plane of the equator is 
known as the OBLIQUITY OF THE ECLIPTIC (€). 

The equator and ecliptic are moving because of the 
effects of perturbing forces on the rotation and motion of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Earth. Hence, the equinox and obliquity change as a 
function of time, so these celestial coordinate frames must 
be carefully defined in such a way that they can be related 
toa standard frame that may be regarded as being fixed in 
space. 

The lines of intersection of the plane of the meridian 
with the planes of the horizon and equator define the 
directions from which azimutH (A) and local HOUR ANGLE 
(h) are measured. Azimuth is measured in the plane of 
the horizon from the north, increasing in positive value 
toward the east. Local hour angle is measured in units of 
time: 1 h for each 15°, positive to the west with respect to 
the local meridian. 

The latitudinal angles with respect to the horizon 
and equator are known as ALTITUDE (a) and DECLINATION 
(5). Altitude is measured positively toward the zenith; 
in astronomy the zenith distance, angle from local vertical 
(z = 90° — a), is more generally used. Declination (6) is, 
measured from the equator, positive toward the north pole 
of rotation. The ZENITH DISTANCE of the north pole, which 
is the same as the codeclination of the local vertical (or 
zenith), is equal to the geographic colatitude of the point 
of observation. 

There are two main topocentric coordinate frames. 
One is based on the direction of the local vertical, which 
defines the plane of the horizon; the other is based on the 
direction of the Earth’s axis of rotation, which defines the 
plane of the celestial equator. The local meridian, which 
contains the direction of the local vertical and the direction 
of the axis of rotation, is common to both frames. 

The angular coordinates in the topocentric coordinate 
frame of the horizon and local meridian are known as 
azimuth and altitude. Azimuth (A) is measured from 
0° to 360° from north in the direction of east; that is, 
in the negative sense with respect to the direction of 
the zenith. (In some circumstances azimuth may be 
measured from the south, and so the convention that 
is used should be stated to avoid ambiguity.) Altitude 
(a) is measured positively from the horizon toward the 
zenith. Both the altitude and the azimuth of any celestial 
object change rapidly as the Earth rotates and therefore for 
many purposes it is more convenient to use the topocentric 
frame of the celestial equator and the local meridian. The 
direction of the north celestial pole is parallel to the Earth’s 
axis of rotation, and the altitude of the pole is equal to the 
geographic latitude of the point of observation. This is 
illustrated in figure 2, which shows the Earth as a sphere. 

In this topocentric equatorial frame, the angular 
coordinates are known as local hour angle (LHA, or h) 
and declination (6). LHA is measured from 0° to 360°, or 
from 0h to 24h, from south in the direction of west (i.e. in 
the negative sense with respect to the direction of the north 
celestial pole), and the LHA of a celestial object increases 
by about 15°, or 1h, for every hour of time. Declination is 
measured from the equator to the celestial pole, positive 
toward the north. The declination of a celestial object is 
not changed by the diurnal rotation of the Earth. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Coordinates ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Seidelman P K (ed) 1991 The Explanatory Supplement to 
the Astronomical Almanac (Mill Valley, CA: University 
Science Books) 


P K Seidelman 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Celestial Equator 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Equator 


The great circle on the celestial sphere obtained by the 
intersection with the sphere of the plane of the Earth’s 
equator. When the Sun lies in plane, day and night are 
everywhere of equal length. Known as equinox, this 
occurs twice each year, when the Sun is at one of the 
two points at which the celestial equator and the ecliptic 
intersect. 


See also: celestial latitude, celestial longitude, celestial 
poles, celestial sphere, ecliptic, equinox, obliquity of the 
ecliptic. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Latitude ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Latitude 


The angular distance between the ecliptic and a celestial 
body measured in a direction perpendicular to the ecliptic, 
and taking values between 0 and 90°. The position of 
a celestial body may be expressed in terms of celestial 
latitude (denoted by £) and celestial longitude. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial longitude, celestial 
poles, celestial sphere, ecliptic, equinox. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Celestial Longitude 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Longitude 


The angle between the great circle passing through the 
poles of the ecliptic and the vernal equinox, and the great 
circle passing through these poles and a celestial object, 
measured in an anticlockwise (i.e. eastward) direction 
from the vernal equinox. In other words, it is the angular 
distance measured along the ecliptic between the vernal 
equinox and the point on the ecliptic such that the angle 
between the vernal equinox, this point, and a star is a 
right angle. Planetary positions are sometimes expressed 
in terms of celestial longitude (denoted 2) and celestial 
latitude. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial latitude, celestial 
poles, celestial sphere, ecliptic, equinox. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Mechanics 


Celestial mechanics is the study of objects in the universe 
moving under the influence of a variety of forces. 
Nowadays the term is generally taken to mean the theory 
of motion of objects in the solar system, although it 
can still be applied to the dynamics of stars involved in 
multiple systems; the gravitational dynamics of stellar 
clusters and galaxies are usually treated as separate 
areas of investigation because they make use of different 
techniques. Celestial mechanics is primarily concerned 
with the dynamical consequences of the force of gravity 
between objects but additional forces can operate. These 
range from the tidal interactions of planets and satellites to 
the effects of electromagnetic radiation on small particles. 
Once considered to be a somewhat archaic branch of 
astronomy, there has been a renewed interest in celestial 
mechanics in recent years with the realization that its 
deterministic equations of motion can give rise to chaotic 
solutions. This has led to numerous applications in the 
solar system and an improved understanding of long-term 
dynamical evolution. 


Orbital theory 

In the 17th century KEPLER derived his three laws of 
planetary motion empirically based on observations (see 
KEPLER’S LAWS). Later in the same century NEWTON showed 
that Kepler’s laws were the consequence of a simple 
inverse square law of force whereby the magnitude of the 
force of gravitational attraction between two masses, m 
and mz, separated by a distance d, is given by 


mm 


F=G—, 


where G = 6.672 x 10-" m° kg! s-? is the universal 
gravitational constant. Newton showed that the orbit 
of one mass with respect to the other would describe a 
CONIC SECTION (i.e. circle, ellipse, parabola or hyperbola) 
where values of the position and velocity vectors (r and 
v, respectively) at a particular instant determine the type 
of path followed. Because the angular momentum of 
the system is a constant, the relative orbit of the two 
masses defines a plane—the orbit plane—and so plane 
polar coordinates fully describe the relative motion. In 
the case of elliptical orbits the polar equation giving the 
radial distance, r, as a function of the true longitude, 6, is 


_ a(1 — e*) 
we 1+ecos(@-—@w) 


where a is the semimajor axis of the ellipse and e is its 
eccentricity (figure 1). The angle w gives the orientation 
of the ellipse with respect to a fixed reference line at 
6 = 0. For the gravitational interaction of two masses 
the quantities a, e and @ are all constant while @ increases 
non-linearly with time. Elliptical orbits are bounded with 
r oscillating between between finite limits; consequently 
they are periodic in nature. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The geometrical properties of planar elliptical motion 
with semimajor axis a, eccentricity e, semiminor axis 

b =a(1—e?)!/2 and longitude of pericenter w@. The mass mz has 
radial distance r from m1, true anomaly f, and true longitude 

6 = f + aw. The unit vector in the @ direction is taken along the 
major axis of the ellipse directed towards the point of closest 
approach (the pericenter); the y direction is perpendicular to this 
line in the plane of the orbit. The mass my is at one focus of the 
ellipse. 


The polar equation of the ellipse does not provide 
a means of calculating the position of an object at a 
given time. However, this can be done using Kepler’s 
equation which relates the eccentric anomaly, FE, to the 
mean anomaly, M. The components of the position vector 
with respect to the -y frame can be written as r cos f = 
a(cos E — e) andrsinf = a(1 — e*)'*sin E. Kepler’s 
equation can be written as 


M=E-—esinE 


where E and M are measured in radians. The mean 
anomaly has the useful property that it increases with time 
at a fixed rate given by the mean motion, n = [G(m, + 
mz)/a>]'/? with the time needed to complete one orbit 
(one orbital period) given by T = 2x[a?/[G(m, + mz)]'”. 
Knowing the time at which the mass mz is at a particular 
longitude (usually taken to be the time of pericenter 
passage, T) it is possible to calculate the location of the 
mass my at any subsequent time in the context of the two- 
body problem. However, because Kepler’s equation is 
transcendental in E it is usually necessary to undertake 
a numerical solution. 

In the case of motion in three dimensions it is 
necessary to define two additional angles: the orbital 
inclination, J, and the longitude of ascending node, Q 
(figure 2). Furthermore, the argument of pericenter, w, 
is used to denote the angle between the ascending node 
and the pericenter and the longitude of pericenter is now 
taken to be wo = w+ Q where o and Q are in different 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The geometrical properties of three-dimensional 
elliptical motion along an orbit (thick curve) inclined by an angle 
I with respect to the X-Y reference plane. The points labeled 
AN and P denote the ascending node and pericenter, 
respectively. The ascending node has a longitude Q with respect 
to the reference (X) direction; the pericenter makes an angle 
with respect to the line to the ascending node. The longitude of 
pericenter is now defined to be w = w+ Q. 


planes. Note that even though this motion is viewed in 
a coordinate system inclined relative to the orbital plane, 
the fundamental properties of the Keplerian orbit remain 
unchanged. 

The motion of two bodies under their mutual Newto- 
nian gravitational attraction (the two-body problem) is one 
of the few integrable problems in celestial mechanics. It 
has the property that the orbiting mass returns to the same 
value of r after f has completed an azimuthal cycle of ex- 
actly 27. The addition of only one more body destroys 
this symmetry. The problem becomes non-integrable in 
the sense that no practical mathematical solution is pos- 
sible although some analytical results can still be derived 
(See THREE-BODY PROBLEM). 

Lunar theory is a branch of celestial mechanics 
devoted to the study of the Moon’s motion. This problem 
is relatively simple if itis confined to predicting the Moon’s 
path around a spherical Earth. However, the reality is that 
solar perturbations are also significant and there are more 
subtle, long-term effects to consider such as modifications 
to the Earth’s spherical shape caused by tides and rotation. 

The solar system has a hierarchic structure of several 
subsystems, each consisting of a central mass with one or 
more orbiting smaller masses at each level. For example, 
the planets orbit the Sun but most also have their own small 
natural satellites. Therefore, when considering the motion 
of a satellite orbiting close to a planet the perturbations 
from the Sun can usually be ignored. This does not 
mean that the orbit is a simple, fixed ellipse; the planet’s 
non-sphericity causes short- and long-term changes in 
some of the orbital elements. Planetary orbits themselves 
are not fixed because all planets perturb one another. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Therefore, although at any given instant the planet is 
always following an elliptical path determined by its 
instantaneous position and velocity (this is referred to as its 
osculating orbit), the shape and orientation of that ellipse 
are continually changing owing to perturbations from the 
other planets. Such changes are small but detectable over 
time. 

In general the smallest objects, such as PLANETARY 
RING particles and METEOROIDS, are subjected to the widest 
variety of additional perturbations in the form of non- 
gravitational forces. Their size means that the effect of 
incident electromagnetic radiation can affect their orbits. 
For example, the POYNTING-ROBERTSON EFFECT is caused by the 
non-isotropic re-emission of radiation and is important for 
particles whose size is comparable with the wavelength of 
the radiation. It results in damping of the eccentricity and 
inclination and a decrease in the semimajor axis regardless 
of whether the particle is in a heliocentric or planetocentric 
orbit. This effect is thought to be responsible for the large- 
scale transport of collisional dust from the asteroid belt 
through to the inner solar system (see INTERPLANETARY DUST). 

In the years following Newton’s pioneering work 
(See CELESTIAL MECHANICS IN THE EIGHTEENTH AND NINETEENTH 
CENTURIES) considerable effort was devoted to quantifying 
and then predicting the motions of the objects that make 
up the solar system. One of the outstanding successes 
of celestial mechanics was the independent explanations 
by John Couch apams and LEVERRIER for the observed 
anomalies in the motion of the outer planets. This led 
directly to the discovery of the planet Neptune by GALLE 
in 1847. The improvement in the precision with which 
planetary orbits could be understood led to an even more 
momentous discovery in the 20th century. EINSTEIN showed 
that a small discrepancy of 0.43” yr7! in the motion of 
Mercury’s longitude of perihelion was due to the fact 
that Newton’s theory of gravity was incorrect and that 
his own general theory of relativity could account for the 
observations (See GENERAL RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION). 

Celestial mechanics gained importance as a practical 
science with the advent of the space age in the 1960s. 
The increased number of artificial satellites in Earth orbit 
meant that the gravitational field of the Earth could be 
studied in great detail by monitoring satellite orbits and 
how they changed with time. The need to send spacecraft 
to other planets led to the use of celestial mechanics in the 
design of complicated orbital tours (see the GALILEO and 
CASSINI MISSIONS). The gravity assist technique, whereby a 
spacecraft changes its orbital energy by means of a close 
flyby of a planet or satellite, has become the mainstay of 
the robotic exploration of the outer solar system. Although 
ground-based observations can be used to estimate the 
masses of planets and satellites, the careful monitoring 
of spacecraft trajectories for small deviations has resulted 
in direct measurements of the gravitational field of many 
solar system objects. 


Gravitational perturbations 
Historically perturbation theory in celestial mechanics has 
been divided into what are called general and special 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


perturbations. General perturbation theory consists of 
studying the evolution of a perturbed orbit by considering 
the analytical solution of the differential equations 
describing the variation of the object’s orbital elements 
or its coordinates. In contrast special perturbation 
theory consists of analyzing the orbit using a numerical 
or seminumerical solution of the equations. Although 
greater insight is gained from an analytical solution, this 
is frequently impossible in celestial mechanics for all but 
the simplest of systems. A numerical solution can offer 
insight into the problem and the availability of fast digital 
computers allows large numbers of starting conditions to 
be considered so that some understanding can be achieved. 

Consider a central mass m, and two orbiting masses, 
m and m’, with position vectors r and r’ with respect to 
m,. The motion of m can be described by the solution to 
the vector equation 


F=V(U+R) 
where 
pases +m 
m' ’ rer 
er = r| ail re 


Here U represents the potential that gives rise to the 
two-body Keplerian motion of m around m, and R 
represents the perturbing potential or disturbing function 
experienced by m due to m’. There are similar expressions 
for the effect of m on m’. Note that traditionally in 
celestial mechanics the potential is taken to be a positive 
quantity. While it is relatively trivial to express R in terms 
of Cartesian coordinates, it is more difficult to express it 
in terms of the orbital elements of m and m'. Nowadays 
this can easily be accomplished using computer algebra to 
undertake the necessary series manipulation. 

The expansion of R has the general form 


G 


m' Pd / / 
R= a »Staa',e,e', 1,1) cose 
j 


where j is an integer and ¢ is a combination of longitudes 
(i.e. angles referred to a fixed direction) that can be written 
as 
Q=z jin’ + jor + po’ + jaw + jsX' + JoQ 

where the j; are all integers and’ = M+o@ = a(t — 
t) + w is the mean longitude. Each cosine argument, 
gy, satisfies the d’Alembert relation whereby yo ji = 0. 
Another important property is that the absolute value of 
the coefficient of a’, w, Q' and Q (i.e. | j3|, | jal, |js| and 
| jel) is equal to the lowest power of e’, e, s’ = sin i] ‘and 
s = sin SI , respectively, that occurs in the accompanying 
term. All the arguments can be classified according to the 
absolute value of the sum of the coefficients of the mean 
longitudes, i’ and A in the cosine argument. Therefore an 
expansion that includes Nth-order arguments will involve 
Nth-order powers of the eccentricities and inclinations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The disturbing function is used in conjunction with 
LAGRANGE’S equations to give equations for the variations 
of the orbital elements. To lowest order in e and J these 
can be written as 


da 2 A(R) 
dt na da 
de 1 a(R) 
dt nate da 
da _ 1 a(R) 
dt —s nae de 
di 1 a(R) 
dt nazsinI dQ 
dQ 1 a(R) 
dt —s na? sinI al 


where (R) contains the required terms in the disturbing 
function expansion for an external perturber. 

To use Lagrange’s equations in some applications 
in celestial mechanics involves the identification of those 
terms in the expansion of F that are likely to be important 
for the particular problem of interest with the assumption 
that all the non-important, short-period terms will have 
zero time-averaged effect. The key orbital elements in this 
process are the semimajor axes, a and a’. 

In the unperturbed problem the mean longitudes, i’ 
and i, increase linearly at rates n’ and n, respectively, 
whereas all the other angles in a general argument ¢ are 
constant. In the perturbed system 4’ and 2 are still rapidly 
varying quantities, but the other angles are slowly varying. 
Therefore, any arguments which do not involve mean 
longitudes are slowly varying. These give rise to long- 
period or secular terms. Under certain assumptions it is 
possible to derive a secular theory for planetary orbits. 
The resulting coupled equations of motion can be solved 
analytically to give approximate orbital elements (except 
mean longitudes) as a function of time. 

Consider a general argument, g = j,\’ + jo4 where 
a and a’ are such that jin’ + jon © O and g varies with 
a period longer than either of the two orbital periods. 
This occurs when there is a simple numerical relationship 
between the two mean motions or orbital periods. These 
arguments give rise to resonant terms in the expansion (see 
RESONANCE). In terms of the semimajor axes the equivalent 
condition is a © (|jil/|j2|)?/2a’. The solar system contains 
more pairs of objects in resonance than would be expected 
to occur by chance. This is probably due to the effects of 
tidal torques (see TIDES) causing satellite orbits to expand 
at differing rates over the age of the solar system. 

Resonant terms are localized in semimajor axes. 
While a particular combination of angles may be slowly 
varying at one semimajor axis of the perturbed body, the 
same combination could be varying rapidly at another. In 
contrast the secular terms can be considered as global. 
Any argument which is neither secular nor resonant is 
considered to give rise to a short-period term. 

Natural satellites such as the Moon raise tides on their 
parent planets; the planet itself may also be rotationally 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


distorted. In each case it is possible to derive an equivalent 
disturbing function to represent the potential experienced 
by the orbiting mass and apply Lagrange’s equations. 
For example, it can be shown that an elliptical orbit of 
semimajor axis a about an oblate planet of radius Rp would 
precess ata rate wo © 3nJo(Rp /a)? where n is the mean 
motion and J> is the second zonal harmonic coefficient of 
the planet. 

One of the major theoretical advances in celestial 
mechanics in recent years has been the derivation of 
algebraic mappings to allow perturbed orbits to be 
followed numerically for extended periods. These 
mappings (or maps) can be classified into three broad 


types: 


e resonance maps, where the disturbing function at a 
particular resonant location is derived—the secular part 
is integrable and the resonant part can be replaced by a 
sequence of Dirac 6-functions applied as impulses; 


e encounter maps, where the orbit is considered as simple 
Keplerian motion until a conjunction or close approach 
to the perturbing body takes place—the perturbation is 
applied as an impulse. 


e N-body maps, where the Cartesian equations of 
motion are re-formulated in a special coordinate system 
that isolates the two-body Keplerian part from the 
interaction part—use is made of Dirac 5-functions to 
treat the interaction part as impulses. 


Ithas now become commonplace to use N-body maps 
to carry out numerical investigations of long-term stability 
in the solar system. 


Chaotic motion 

The fact that motion in the solar system arises from a 
simple mathematical law led to the belief that discovering 
the laws that governed the universe was equivalent to 
being able to predict its past and future state. This opinion 
was exemplified by LAPLACE’s view of the universe as an 
entirely deterministic system. However, at the end of the 
19th century Poincart’s study of the three-body problem 
gave the first indication that deterministic systems could 
admit unpredictable solutions. 

In the solar system chaos has been invoked to 
explain such diverse phenomena as the KIRKWOOD GAPS 
in the asteroid belt and the unusual rotation of the 
Saturnian satellite HYPERION. It is now recognized that chaos 
has played an important role in shaping the dynamical 
structure of the solar system. 

One of the key problems of celestial mechanics is 
the stability of the solar system. Modern numerical 
simulations show that the planetary orbits, especially 
those of the inner planets, are technically chaotic in the 
sense that an error as small as 0.01 m ina planet's position 
today propagates exponentially and it becomes impossible 
to predict its location in ~10’-108 yr. Nevertheless, the 
orbits remain close to their current configurations over 
timescales comparable with the age of the solar system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The one exception is Mercury where some studies have 
revealed genuine orbital instability (e > 1) in ~10'° yr. 
The exact mechanism that gives rise to such chaotic 
behavior is still unknown although secular interactions 
between planets are thought to be responsible. With the 
discovery of other planetary systems it is clear that our 
understanding of these processes can be tested in order 
to discover which distributions of planetary masses and 
orbits give rise to configurations that are stable over the 
lifetime of a star. 


Bibliography 

Brouwer D and Clemence G M 1961 Methods of Celestial 
Mechanics (New York: Academic) 

Murray C D and Dermott S F 1999 Solar System Dynamics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Roy AE 1988 Orbital Motion (Bristol: Hilger) 

Wisdom J 1987 Urey Prize Lecture: chaotic dynamics in 
the solar system Icarus 72 241-75 


Carl D Murray 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth 
Centuries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Mechanics in the Eighteenth 
and Nineteenth Centuries 


CELESTIAL MECHANICS (so named by Laplace in 1798) before 
the twentieth century consisted in the application to the 
solar system of Isaac NEWTON’S law of universal gravitation. 
By this law, a single body orbiting about a larger body 
moves in a conic section; the presence of a third body 
perturbs the motion. Celestial mechanics is concerned 
with the perturbations thus produced. 

Newton’s treatment of this problem was fundamen- 
tally qualitative. In an approximative formulation, he 
showed that all the known inequalities of the Moon fol- 
lowed qualitatively from the law of gravitation. In his 
Theory of the Moon’s Motion (1702), and in the second edi- 
tion of the Principia (Scholium to Proposition III.25), he 
quantified his theory by fitting it to observations, and 
adding several quantitative terms without explaining their 
derivation. 

The THREE-BODY PROBLEM was re-formulated in the 1740s 
as aset of differential equations. This formulation could be 
rigorous, containing implicitly all the inequalities implied 
by universal gravitation. (A solution, it turned out, 
could be pursued only by successive approximations.) 
That such a formulation was not achieved earlier is 
attributable to the lack, among mathematicians within 
the Leibnizian tradition, of a worked-out calculus of 
trigonometric functions. It was LEONHARD EULER (1707-83) 
in 1739 who first gave systematic algorithmic rules for the 
differentiation and integration of trigonometric functions. 
By 1744 Euler had derived inequalities of the Moon by 
solving differential equations, but only his results were 
published. 

In 1746 the Paris Academy of Sciences announced as 
its prize problem for the year 1748 the formulation of a 
‘theory of Jupiter and Saturn explicating the inequalities 
that these planets appear to cause in each other’s motions’. 
The prize-winning essay was Euler’s; published in 1749, 
it provided the first generally accessible account of an 
analytic resolution of the three-body problem. Meanwhile, 
from 1746, two members of the Paris Academy’s prize 
commission, ALEXIS-CLAUDE CLAIRAUT (1713-65) and JEAN LE 
ROND D’ALEMBERT (1717-83), separately set about resolving 
the problem, and therewith deriving the inequalities of 
the Moon. Clairaut’s lunar theory was published in 1752, 
d’Alembert’s in 1754. 


Euler and Clairaut on the equations of motion 
Euler wrote equations in polar coordinates for Saturn’s 
motion, with the plane of Jupiter’s orbit as the r, ¢ plane 


Pdr 
ade = (E.1) 
dr? 
dr db tree en (E.2) 
5 Rdt? 
p= - =. (E.3) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Here P, Q and R are accelerative forces tending to diminish 
r, @ and z; the factor 1/2 arises from Euler’s choice of the 
unit of acceleration. 

Clairaut wrote equations similar to (E.1) and (E.2) for 
r and ¢, assuming initially the perturbed body’s motion 
to be confined to a plane 


M 
rdg? — dr = (5 i. P) di? (C.1) 
r 


rd’ + 2dr d@ = QO dr. (C.2) 
Here M is the sum of the masses of the central and 
perturbed body, P is the added radial acceleration from 
perturbation and Q is the transverse acceleration. 

To resolve (E.1) and (E.2), Euler replaced di?/2 by 
a®(dM’)*, where a’ is Jupiter’s mean solar distance and 
M’ its mean motion, and substituted for P and Q the 
accelerative forces involved when Saturn’s motion was 
referred to an immobile Sun. He then took up successively 
three different approximative assumptions, in which 
Jupiter’s orbit and Saturn’s unperturbed orbit were taken 
either as circles, or one as a circle and the other as an ellipse. 
Under each hypothesis, he transformed (E.1) and (E.2) into 
differential equations for the small departures of r and @ 
from their unperturbed values. (Here trigonometric series 
were necessary; see the next section.) The equations were 
resolved by the method of undetermined coefficients. 

Clairaut obtained an expression for df in terms of r 
and ¢ by integrating (C.2) twice, and with this eliminated 
t from (C.1). A double integration of the transformed (C.1) 
then gave him 


Ai 
Mr 


=1-gsing coos +sing | 2coso de 
—cose | Qsing ap (C.3) 


where f, g,c are constants of integration and 


_ (Pr?/M) + (Qr/M)(dr/d@) — 2p 
~ 1+29 


Q 


p being 


a 
a | Orde, 


To evaluate the integrals in (C.3), it was necessary to 
replace r in Q by an approximate function of ¢; Clairaut 
used 


« = 1-—ecosmd (C.4) 
i 


the equation of a precessing ellipse, in which k, e, m are 
undetermined constants. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth 
Centuries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The introduction of trigonometric series 
The lunar and planetary versions of the three-body 
problem differ because v, the distance between the 
perturbing and perturbed bodies, is in the lunar case 
subject only to small variations, expressible by a few terms 
of a Taylor series, whereas in the planetary case it varies 
hugely. In the differential equations v occurs as v~>, which 
fluctuates yet more wildly. What is needed is an expression 
for v-? permitting formal integration. 

Euler resolved this problem by inventing trigonomet- 
ric series. To a first approximation, he showed 


v? = (a? +a”) *(A + Bcosé + C cos26 + Dcos36 +---) 

(E.4) 
where a, a’ are the mean solar distances of Saturn and 
Jupiter, and @ is the heliocentric angle between the 
two radius vectors; the coefficients C, D, E, etc, are 
functions of A and B, while A and B are computable 
by numerical integration. An improved approximation 
required taking orbital eccentricities into account, and 
computing coefficients in the series for v~°, v~’, etc. Euler 
carried the approximation to the order of the first power 
of the eccentricities. 

In 1767 JOSEPH LOUIS LAGRANGE (1736-1813) introduced 
an efficient new method for determining the series 
coefficients on the basis of DeMoivre’s theorem. Later 
theorists carried the approximations to higher powers of 
the eccentricities. 


The method of variation of orbital elements 
Euler in treating the perturbed planet’s motion in the 
z-direction replaced (E.3) by two first-order equations, one 
for the orbital inclination and the other for the longitude 
of the ascending node. In unperturbed motion these 
quantities are constant; perturbation makes them variable. 
Euler’s approximate expressions for their variations under 
perturbation showed the inclination subject only to minor 
oscillations, while the node retrogressed on the orbital 
plane of the perturbing planet. This was the first analytic 
determination of the variation of an ORBITAL ELEMENT. 
Euler derived the variations of other orbital param- 
eters in later memoirs, but it was Lagrange who chiefly 
developed the method. In an essay of 1766 Lagrange 
showed that the ordinary way of computing perturbations 
by successive approximations inevitably produces terms 
proportional to the time, as well as nth-order terms in the 
(n + 1)th-order approximation. The method of varying or- 
bital parameters avoids this difficulty. In his further work 
on planetary perturbations, Lagrange used this method 
exclusively. 


The motion of the Moon’s apse 
Newton published no derivation of the Moon’s apsidal 
motion. In the Principia’s first edition he cited results of 
an attempted derivation; its method, we now know, was 
flawed. In later editions he deleted all reference to it. 

The first analytical derivations by Euler, Clairaut 
and d’Alembert in the 1740s yielded only about half the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observed apsidal motion. Clairaut in November 1747 
proposed that the inverse-square law be augmented by an 
inverse-fourth-power term, whence the remaining apsidal 
motion could be obtained. Then in May 1749 he retracted 
the proposal. He had discovered that, if he proceeded 
to the second-order approximation with respect to the 
perturbing forces (that is, substituting the terms found in 
the first approximation, with undetermined coefficients, 
back into the differential equations, and solving again), he 
obtained nearly the entire observed apsidal motion. No 
doubt he had expected the second-order approximation 
to yield only minor modification of the first-order result, 
and was surprised that two small terms proportional to 
the transverse perturbing force could produce so large 
a difference. Euler, by his own very different route, 
confirmed Clairaut’s result. ‘Only since this discovery’, 
he wrote to Clairaut, ‘can one regard the inverse-square 
law of attraction as solidly established. ..’. 


Secular variations, real and supposed, to 1785 
Secular variations are usually understood as monotonic 
changes tending to alter an orbital element unidirection- 
ally. EDMOND HALLEY in the 1690s had detected a secular ac- 
celeration in the Moon’s mean motion since ancient times; 
later investigators confirmed it. Halley also assigned a 
secular acceleration to Jupiter and a secular deceleration 
to Saturn, to accommodate ancient and modern observa- 
tions (Tabulae astronomicae, 1749). Such secular changes, 
continued indefinitely, would lead to dissolution of the 
Earth—Moon and planetary systems. 

The first major memoir of PIERRE-SIMON LAPLACE (1749— 
1827), completed in 1773, demonstrated that, to the order 
of the squares of the eccentricities, the mean motions of 
the planets are immune to secular variation from planetary 
perturbation. To the order mentioned, the coefficient of the 
term proportional to 7? in the expression of the longitude 
was identically zero. The apparent secular changes in 
Jupiter’s and Saturn’s rates of mean motion, Laplace 
conjectured, might be due to cometary perturbation. 

In a memoir sent to the Paris Academy in October 
1774, Lagrange derived differential equations for those 
perturbations in the orbital inclinations and nodes of the 
planets that depend on the orientations and sizes of the 
orbits, but not on where the planets are in them. To do this, 
he replaced the tangent of the orbital inclination (@) and the 
longitude of the ascending node (w) by new variables, u = 
@sinw, s = 6cosw. The resulting differential equations 
were linear and of the first order, and had a solution of the 
form 


S, = A; sin(at + a) + By sin(bt + 6B) + Cy sin(ct+y)+--- 
uy, = Ai cos(at +a) + By cos(bt + B) + Ci cos(ct + y)+--:- 


So = A)sin(at +a) + By) sin(bt + 8) + Cysin(ct+y)+--- 


etc. 

(G.1) 
Here the constants a, b,c, ... are the roots of an nth-degree 
equation, and the remaining constants are determinable 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth 
Centuries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


from the empirical values of s), “1, 52, etc, at a given epoch. 
Lagrange did not solve the entire system (G.1) for all six 
known planets—an enormous task—but by treating the 
two large ones, Jupiter and Saturn, as a system apart, 
obtained four simpler equations. Their solution showed 
that the nodes and orbital inclinations of these planets 
oscillated between fixed limits with a period of 51150 
years. Lagrange called these variations secular: they 
were periodic, to be sure, but their periods were orders 
of magnitude longer than the periods of ordinary periodic 
variations, which depend on the positions of the planets 
in their orbits. 

Laplace read Lagrange’s memoir of October 1774 on 
its arrival in Paris, and saw at once (as had Lagrange) that 
a similar procedure would apply to the eccentricities and 
aphelia. Thus, introducing the new variables h = esin L, 
k = ecos L, where e is the eccentricity and L the longitude 
of the aphelion, he derived linear, first-order differential 
equations for dh/dt and dk/dt. The solution was similar 
in form to (G.1). This analysis was published in 1775. 

Laplace now abandoned the problem of planetary 
perturbations for a decade. The masses of Mercury, Venus 
and Mars were unknown, and he was uncertain as to the 
extent of cometary influence on planets. 

Lagrange forged ahead. In 1776 he presented a new 
demonstration of the immunity of the mean motions to 
secular variation; it contained a classic formulation of 
the variation of orbital elements, and introduced ‘the 
perturbing function’, a potential function from which the 
perturbative forces in different directions could be derived 
by partial differentiation. In 1777 he used the perturbing 
function in the first systematic derivation of all the known 
integrals of motion for n bodies attracting each other 
according to the inverse-square law. In 1781 and 1782 
he completed the two parts of a major treatise deriving 
the secular inequalities of all the planets by the method 
of variation of orbital parameters. In 1783 he applied the 
same method to the derivation of the zeroth-order periodic 
inequalities (inequalities independent of the eccentricities 
and inclinations). 

At this point Lagrange realized that his earlier proof 
of the immunity of the mean motions to secular variation 
needed qualification: the mean motions could appear 
to vary secularly owing to the secular variation of other 
orbital elements. Let the part of the apparent variation in 
the mean motion that is correlated with a change in mean 
solar distance, and is thus immune to secular variation, be 
dp; this part is periodic and dependent on the positions of 
the planets. The other part, dX, depends on the variations 
in other orbital elements, and is ‘secular’ (independent of 
planetary positions) when these other variations are. The 
variation dx, Lagrange proposed, should be regarded as 
a variation in the sixth orbital element, the epoch. 

dz proved to contain secular terms only when the 
approximation was carried to the second and higher 
powers of the eccentricities and inclinations. To mitigate 
the labor of such calculations, Lagrange proposed taking 
account only of terms that would be greatly augmented 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by integration. These were terms containing a cosine 
or sine of an angle a such that dt = Adp, where 
A is very small; for in the double integration such a 
term is multiplied by the large factor A. But w isa 
linear combination of the mean motions for the several 
planets, and a particular examination of these linear 
combinations will show which ones lead to small i. 
Lagrange found no secular variation in dX that would 
account for Halley’s secular accelerations. Laplace would 
shortly apply Lagrange’s calculational proposal not to dZ 
but to dp. 


Laplace’s resolution of major anomalies, 1785-7 


On 23 November 1785 Laplace announced the resolution 
of the anomaly in the mean motions of Jupiter and Saturn. 
J HLambert had discovered that since the mid-seventeenth 
century the rate of Jupiter’s acceleration, and the rate 
of Saturn’s deceleration, were decreasing: the inequality 
could be periodic. Starting from the conservation of 
forces vives, Laplace now found that the secular variations 
Halley had proposed for these planets were in the ratio 
that their gravitational interaction would imply. As was 
well known, two periods of Saturn were nearly equal 
to five periods of Jupiter; the mean motions ny and 
ng therefore gave a linear combination, 2n; — 5ngs, that 
was very small. It followed that the periodic inequality 
proportional to sin[(2ny; — 5ns)t] could be sizable. On the 
other hand, its coefficient (which would consist of several 
terms) would be of the third dimension in the powers 
and products of the eccentricities and inclinations, and 
hence could be negligible. Only a complete calculation 
could decide the question. What Laplace found was the 
largest perturbation in the solar system, with a coefficient 
for Saturn of —49’, and for Jupiter of 20’; the period was 
some 900 years. His new, augmented, theories for the two 
planets were in agreement with both ancient and modern 
observations. 

Laplace’s memoir of November 1785 included an 
explanation for a resonance Lagrange had discovered in 
the motions of the first three Galilean satellites of Jupiter, 
and also an attempted proof that the orbital eccentricities 
and inclinations of the planets must remain small. The 
latter proof, as LeVerrier later pointed out, tacitly assumed 
that all the planetary masses were of the same order of 
magnitude; it was therefore inconclusive. 

By December 1787 Laplace had an explanation for the 
apparent secular acceleration of the Moon. The average 
radial component of the Sun’s perturbing force is negative, 
subtracting from the Earth’s attraction. The Earth’s orbital 
eccentricity, owing to a secular but cyclical variation, is at 
present diminishing, causing a slight decrease in the Sun’s 
average perturbing force. Hence the Moon is falling into a 
lower orbit and increasing its angular speed. Laplace’s 
value for the increment, about 10" per century, agreed 
with the accepted empirical value. (This analysis was 
inadequate; see below.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth 
Centuries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Laplace’s Mécanique Céleste 

The first four volumes of Laplace’s Mécanique Céleste, 
which appeared between 1798 and 1805, contained not 
only an extended exposition of perturbation theory, but 
its detailed application to the planets and the Moon. 
For decades these volumes would serve as the textbook 
par excellence for mathematical astronomers. A strict 
accounting for all the detectable inequalities in the solar 
system appeared within reach. The masses of Mercury, 
Venus and Mars could be determined from perturbations. 
Evidently comets did not perturb the planets detectably. 

Laplace achieved his successes by a mixture of 
methods, choosing one or another as it offered a swifter 
approach to a particular goal. His procedure for planetary 
inequalities proportional to the zeroth and first power of 
the eccentricities and masses was guaranteed to make a full 
sweep. To obtain the higher-order periodic inequalities, 
he proceeded by a kind of sharpshooting, which left 
uncertain whether all terms to a given order of smallness 
had been accounted for. He added the very long-term 
periodic inequalities to the mean motions, and used the 
thus modified mean motions in determining the short- 
term inequalities. The secular variations were determined 
by yet another procedure. This diversity of methods 
prompted the question: could not a single, demonstrably 
self-consistent procedure be adopted for the determining 
of all inequalities? 

Meanwhile, workers in the Laplacian tradition 
had a clear enough task. The development of the 
perturbing function must be carried to higher orders 
of approximation, and the deduction of higher-order 
inequalities rendered more systematic. The Baron 
de Damoiseau and Giovanni Plana pursued these 
imperatives in their lunar theories. The planetary theories 
formulated by URBAIN J J LEVERRIER (1811-77) and, after 
him, by sIMON NEWCoMB (1835-1909), were descended from 
the same tradition, their distinction lying in their larger 
observational basis and greater precision. 


The discovery of Neptune 

The seventh planet, Uranus, was discovered by William 
Herschel in 1781. In 1821 Alexis Bouvard, in constructing 
a theory of Uranus, found he could not represent 
the observations with the expected accuracy of a few 
arcseconds. After 1821 the discrepancies grew, reaching 
nearly two arcminutes in the early 1840s. Was an unknown 
perturbing planet responsible? 

In the mid-1840s JOHN COUCH ADAMS (1819-92) in Eng- 
land and LeVerrier in France independently undertook to 
respond to this question. They took the perturbing planet’s 
orbit to lie in the ecliptic, Uranus’s latitudes being mi- 
nuscule. They accepted the Titius-Bode law, a numeri- 
cal rule giving approximately the solar distances of the 
known planets, and implying that the next planet would 
have a mean solar distance of 38 astronomical units. Val- 
ues for the orbital eccentricity and perihelion, epoch and 
mass of the unknown planet had then to be assigned so as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to produce the perturbations that would bring Uranus’s 
predicted motions into agreement with observation. 

Both researchers succeeded. Adams, on presenting 
his results to GEORGE BIDDEL AIRY, the Astronomer Royal, in 
late 1845, met with rebuff: Airy distrusted the Titius-Bode 
law. LeVerrier sent his prediction to Johan Gottfried Galle 
of the Berlin Observatory, and on 23 September 1846 Galle 
turned his telescope to the indicated region of the sky, 
but failed to find the planetary disk he was seeking. His 
assistant, Heinrich Louis d’Arrest, suggested consulting 
the Berlin Academy’s new Star Atlas. Comparing sky and 
chart, Galle located an eighth magnitude star not in the 
chart, 52’ from the position given by LeVerrier. On the 
24th it had moved: it was the sought-for planet. 

This discovery of Neptune by pure calculation was 
hailed as a triumph. The planet’s orbit could now be 
calculated from observations. The mean solar distance 
proved to be 30.1 astronomical units: the Titius-Bode 
law was wrong. The orbital eccentricity was one-tenth 
as large as Adams and LeVerrier had supposed, and the 
perihelion over 100° distant from where they had put it. 
With the discovery of Neptune’s satellite Triton in late 
1846, Neptune’s mass could be accurately determined; 
Adams’s and LeVerrier’s values were too large by factors 
of 2.65 and 1.88 respectively. Yet for the period from about 
1800 to 1850, embracing the conjunction of 1821 between 
Uranus and Neptune when the perturbations were largest, 
Adams’s and LeVerrier’s hypothesized orbits were close to 
the actual orbit, gave very nearly the correct perturbations 
in this time-span, and permitted a correct pinpointing of 
Neptune’s position. 


The Lagrange—Poisson legacy: Hansen, Hamilton, 
Jacobi, Delaunay 


In 1808 and 1809 Siméon-Denis Poisson (1781-1840) 
presented to the Paris Academy two memoirs utilizing 
and developing the Lagrangian method of variation 
of arbitrary constants. They stimulated Lagrange to 
further innovation. The Lagrange—Poisson theory was 
expounded in Lagrange’s Mécanique Analytique, second 
edition (vol I, 1811; vol II, 1815). 

Poisson introduced the concept of a ‘conjugate 
momentum’, p;, for each coordinate g;. If gj = dqi/dt, 
and T is the kinetic energy, then p; = dT /0qg;. He showed 
that if a, b are two integrals of the system, the ‘Poisson 


bracket’ 
“ da ab da ob 
«=> (er) 
iz1 \OPi °4i qi CPi 


(LP.1) 
is independent of the time. He further showed that if a; 
are the constants of integration that become variable under 
perturbation, then 


da <4 32 
= aj, a) (LP.2) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth 
Centuries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where Q is the perturbing function. Poisson proposed and 
Lagrange proved that 


da; AQ db; _ dQ 


dt —sab;’ dt— 9a; 


(LP.3) 


where the a; can be the values of the g;, and the b; the 
values of the p;, at t = 0. Equations of the form of (LP.3) 
would later be termed ‘canonical’. 

P A Hansen (1795-1874), director of the Seeberg 
Observatory from 1825 until his death, was a self-taught 
celestial mechanician. Because Laplace’s formulae for 
perturbed coordinates held only to the first power of 
the perturbing forces, he soon turned to the method of 
variation of orbital parameters. This, however, had its own 
drawbacks: the perturbations of six elements had to be 
determined to find the perturbations of three coordinates, 
and the latter perturbations were often much smaller 
than the former, so that very small quantities had to be 
calculated from the differences of large quantities. Hansen 
sought to obtain a direct computation of the coordinates by 
rigorous derivation from the Lagrange—Poisson formulae. 

The coordinates were functions of the orbital elements 
and the time; the orbital elements were functions of 
the time by (LP.2). Using the chain rule for partial 
derivatives, Hansen developed a two-part procedure. 
First he obtained the perturbed values of the longitude and 
radius vector in an instantaneous plane by substituting a 
‘perturbed time’—the time altered so as to incorporate the 
perturbative effects—into the standard elliptical formulae. 
Then he determined the position of the instantaneous 
plane relative to a plane of reference by means of the 
variations of two conjugated variables p and q. 

Hansen first applied this procedure in a memoir 
on the mutual perturbations of Jupiter and Saturn; it 
won the prize of the Berlin Academy in 1831. (G W 
Hill in his more thorough computation of the Jovian 
and Saturnian perturbations in the 1880s would follow 
Hansen’s procedure.) Hansen then turned to the lunar 
problem; his lunar tables, published in 1857, were 
adopted as the basis for the British and French national 
ephemerides from 1862 to 1922. The mathematician 
Arthur Cayley in the 1850s praised Hansen’s procedure 
as the only rigorous treatment then available. Hansen’s 
processes, however, were complicated; few astronomers 
understood them. 

In two papers published in 1834 and 1835 in the 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 
the Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton laid 
a new foundation for dynamics. He introduced the 
‘principal function’ S, defined as 


t 
s=f Ldt 
0 


where L = T — V is the ‘Lagrangian’, V being the potential 
energy. S, being evaluated along a solution curve of the 
differential equations of motion, must have an extremum 


(H.1) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


value, so that 5S = 0. The partial differential equation of 
the problem, it followed, was 


aS as aS\ _ 
at ORE yeas oe = 


(H.2) 


where H is the ‘Hamiltonian’, or total energy, T + V. To 
the equations of motion Hamilton gave the canonical form 


dt dp; dt agi 


(H.3) 


The German mathematician C G Jacobi (1804-51) 
generalized Hamilton’s theory, showing that it was 
applicable to non-conservative systems, and that a 
solution of the dynamical equations of motion was 
obtainable from a complete solution of (H.2). He 
also formulated a condition for transforming one set of 
canonical variables (obeying (H.3)) into another. 

Independently of the work of Hamilton and Jacobi, 
CHARLES DELAUNAY (1816-72) in 1846 proposed determining 
the lunar perturbations from the initial equations 


dL dR dG _ dR dH _ OR 


dt al’ dt dag’ dt = dh 
di aR dg aR dh aR 
dt aL’ dt aG’ dt oH (DD) 


Here (L,/), (G, g), (H,h) are six specially chosen orbital 
elements, conjugated in pairs in the manner of (LP.3), and 
R is the perturbing function. ((D.1) was a modification of 
a similar set proposed by M J Binet in 1841.) Delaunay 
developed R as a series of cosines of multiples of the 
relevant angles, to the seventh order of small quantities. 
His strategy in solving (D.1) was to separate R into two 
parts, R; and R — R,, where R; is the largest term in R. He 
then solved (D.1) with R; substituted for R, obtaining new 
values of L,/, G, g, H,h, which he then substituted into 
R — R,. Next, R — R; was to be separated into two parts, 
and the whole process repeated. At each stage, all the 
detectable effects due to the part of R under consideration 
were determined once for all—a major advantage over 
other methods, in which perturbational terms combined 
to produce new perturbational terms. 

Delaunay’s completed lunar theory appeared in two 
large volumes in 1860 and 1867. Like the earlier theories 
of Plana and P G D De Pontécoulant (1795-1874), it was 
a literal theory, giving the coefficients of perturbational 
terms in algebraic form rather than just numerically. Its 
chief disadvantage lay in the slow convergence of series. 


The secular acceleration of the Moon revisited 

In 1853 J C Adams showed that Laplace in his derivation 
of the Moon’s secular acceleration had failed to take 
proper account of the tangential component of the Sun’s 
perturbing force, and that when this was done, the 
overall effect deducible from the diminution in the Sun’s 
perturbing force was only 6” per century. Adams’s 
result was confirmed by Delaunay in 1859. Astronomers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Mechanics in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth 
Centuries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


defending the Laplacian value were unable to demonstrate 
error in the Adams—Delaunay analysis. In 1865 Delaunay 
explained how the ocean tides raised by the Moon could 
slow the Earth’s diurnal rotation: the tidal protuberances, 
being carried eastward of the Moon by the Earth’s diurnal 
rotation, are attracted backward by the Moon, and friction 
between the tidal water and the solid Earth then tends to 
slow the Earth’s rotation. Result: the Moon appears to 
accelerate. 

The issue was settled in the twentieth century on the 
basis of ancient eclipses. The retardation in the Earth’s 
diurnal rotation causes an apparent acceleration in the 
Moon of 20” per century; this added to the Adams-— 
Delaunay value gives a total acceleration of 26” per 
century. The observed value is about 11”; the difference, 
15”, is attributable to the reaction of the tides on the Moon, 
which raises the Moon into a higher orbit where its angular 
motion is less. Thus the Earth-Moon system evolves. 


The lunar theory of G W Hill 

The foundations for the century’s most innovative lunar 
theory were laid by the American celestial mechanician 
GEORGE WILLIAM HILL (1838-1914) in two papers, ‘Researches 
in the Lunar Theory’ (1878) and ‘On the Part of the Motion 
of the Lunar Perigee which is a Function of the Mean 
Motions of the Sun and the Moon’ (1877). 

Accuracy in earlier lunar theories was chiefly limited 
by slow convergence in the series giving the coefficients 
of perturbational terms; the culprit was the parameter m, 
the ratio of the sidereal month to the sidereal year. Hill’s 
idea was to isolate the role of m and account for it fully at 
the start, by adopting a new first approximation, not the 
standard elliptical solution of the two-body problem, but 
a special solution of a ‘restricted’ three-body problem, in 
which the Moon is attracted but does not attract. Thus he 
set the solar eccentricity and parallax, the lunar eccentricity 
and inclination, all equal to zero, and used a rotating 
coordinate frame with origin at the Earth’s center, x—y 
plane in the ecliptic, and x-axis constantly directed to the 
Sun. The resulting differential equations admitted of the 
particular periodic solution 


—— Soa; cos(2i + 1)t 


y=) asinQi + 1)t (Hi.1) 
L 

where t = v(t — fo), t) being the time at which the 
Moon crosses the positive x-axis and v the frequency 
of its periodic motion about the Earth; the summations 
are extended to all integral values of i. By successive 
approximations, Hill determined the values of the a; in 
rapidly converging series in the parameter m’ = m/(1—m); 
the error in these values, when m’ was given the value 
it has for the Earth’s Moon, did not exceed two units in 
the fifteenth decimal. (Hi.1) gives what Hill calls ‘the 
variational orbit’, since it embodies the principal part of 
the lunar inequality known as the variation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


To obtain an eccentric orbit like that of the real Moon, 
Hill in the second paper mentioned above introduced free 
oscillations about the radius vector of the variational orbit, 
and at right angles thereto. The oscillation 5p along the 
radius vector is given by 


2. 


6 
7" P + dp(qo + 2g; cos 2t + 2q2 cos4t +---)=0 
T 


(Hi.2) 


an instance of what is now called Hill’s equation. To obtain 
a particular solution in which t does not appear outside 
the arguments of the cosines, a constant c must be inserted 
into the first approximation: 
dp = Acos(ct./qo + €) (Hi.3) 

where c is the solution of an infinite but converging 
determinant. Hill obtained a value for c good to nearly the 
fifteenth decimal; it gives the motion of the lunar perigee as 
0.008 572 573 004 864 x 360°. In contrast, Delaunay’s series 
for this constant, though carried to the term in m, yields 
a value accurate only to three significant figures. 

With the superiority of Hill’s method evident, 
EW Brown commenced in 1888 the process of developing a 
complete lunar theory by means of it. The resulting tables 
were published in 1919, and became the basis of the British 
and American ephemerides in 1923. 


The work of Poincaré 

The culminating theoretical achievement of nineteenth- 
century celestial mechanics was Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la 
Mécanique Céleste by HENRIPOINCARE (1854-1912), published 
in three volumes from 1892 to 1899. Using Hamilton— 
Jacobi theory, Poincaré explored topologically the range 
of solutions to the three-body problem, starting (as had 
Hill) from periodic solutions. The topological approach 
was new. Issues raised by this work, in particular the 
convergence of series used in celestial mechanics, and 
the strange behavior of Poincaré’s doubly asymptotic 
solutions, have resurfaced in the second half of the 
twentieth century in Kolmogorov—Arnold—Moser theory 
and in chaos theory. 


Bibliography 

Barrow-Green J 1997 Poincaré and the Three Body Problem 
(Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society) 

Gutzwiller M C 1998 Moon-Earth-Sun: the oldest three- 
body problem Rev. Mod. Phys. 70 589-639 

Taton R and Wilson C (eds) 1995 Planetary Astronomy 
from the Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics, Part B: 
The Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) chs 20-22, 28 


Curtis Wilson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Poles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Poles 


The points on the celestial sphere at which the projected 
axis of the Earth intersects the sphere. The north celestial 
pole is thus vertically above the terrestrial north pole, 
and the south celestial pole vertically above the south 
terrestrial pole. The altitude of the north celestial pole is 
equal to the latitude of an observer on the Earth’s surface, 
and since there is a star (Polaris, the Pole Star) close to 
the north celestial pole, it is possible for an observer in 
the northern hemisphere to obtain a rough estimate of his 
latitude simply by measuring the altitude of the Pole Star. 
Due to the rotation of the Earth, stars appear to move in 
circles centered on the celestial poles. Due to precession 
the direction of the Earth’s axis changes and the position 
of the celestial poles changes as a result. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial latitude, celestial 
longitude, celestial sphere, ecliptic, equinox. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Celestial Sphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celestial Sphere 


An imaginary sphere of very large radius, centered on the 
Earth, and to which the stars are considered to be fixed for 
the purposes of position measurement. Due to the rotation 
of the Earth on its axis, the celestial sphere appears to rotate 
around the Earth oncea day, and itis convenient to imagine 
that itis the Earth which is stationary, and the sphere which 
rotates. The sphere is therefore considered to rotate about 
an axis joining north and south celestial poles in an east to 
west direction (i.e. clockwise) at a rate of 15° per hour (of 
sidereal time). The plane of the Earth’s equator, extended 
outwards to the sphere, marks the celestial equator. At 
any instant, an observer at a particular point on the Earth’s 
surface can see only one half of the sphere. If he is located 
at one of the poles, one hemisphere is permanently below 
the horizon, while at the opposite extreme, if he is located 
at the equator, then each part of the sphere is visible at 
some time. 

In ancient times, and up to the seventeenth century, it 
was widely accepted that the stars really were attached to 
such a sphere, which rotated round the Earth. Although 
we know that the stars lie at very different distances and 
that the celestial sphere has no real existence, it is still 
convenient to retain the concept of positional astronomy. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial latitude, celestial 
longitude, celestial poles, ecliptic, equinox. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cellarius, Andreas (f!. seventeenth century) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cellarius, Andreas (fl. seventeenth 
century) 


Biographical details are unknown for Cellarius, who 
produced finest celestial atlas of the seventeenth century, 
the Atlas Coelestis, 1660, couched in terms both of the 
Ptolemaic and Copernican theories of the universe, for 
example a Ptolemaic view of the Earth as if seen through 
the starry sphere from an external distant point in space. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Celsius, Anders (1701-44) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Celsius, Anders (1701-44) 


Mathematician and astronomer, born in Uppsala, Sweden. 
As professor of astronomy at Uppsala he participated in 
MAUPERTUIS’ expedition in 1736 to the most northern part 
of Sweden to measure the length of a degree of latitude 
along a meridian, close to the pole, and compare the result 
with measurements near the equator. The expeditions 
confirmed NEWTON’s opinion that the shape of the Earth 
is an ellipsoid flattened at the poles. Founded the modern 
observatory in Uppsala in 1741, and made geographical 
measures, meteorological and astronomical observations. 
Realized that auroras have magnetic causes through 
correlation of the dip-angle of a compass needle with 
auroral activity. Published catalogs of the brightnesses 
of 300 stars using a photometer that attenuated a star’s 
light until its extinction by a number of glass plates. 
For his meteorological observations he constructed the 
eponymous Celsius thermometer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Centaurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Centaurs 


A group of objects in the outer solar system whose 
orbits cross those of the giant planets and are mostly 
confined between the orbits of Jupiter and Neptune. The 
first to be discovered was Chiron, in 1977, which was 
originally given the asteroidal designation (2060) Chiron. 
In 1989, seven years before perihelion, it was found to 
have developed a coma and was also given the cometary 
designation 95P/Chiron. Another object, (5145) Pholus, 
was found in 1992, and by April 2000 the total had reached 
16. It may well be that the Centaurs are objects that have 
been perturbed inward from the Kuiper Belt, in a sense 
mirroring the relationship of the near-Earth asteroids to 
the main asteroid belt. Centaur orbits are unstable, and 
the fate of some of them may be further perturbation into 
the inner solar system as ‘supercomets’. Their origin in 
the Kuiper Belt is supported by their reflectance spectra, 
which show them to be mostly dark red objects, and by 
their estimated sizes, which have a distribution consistent 
with that of Kuiper Belt objects. The largest may be (10199) 
Chariklo, with an estimated diameter of 300 km. 


See also: Chiron, Kuiper Belt. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Centaurus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Centaurus 


(the Centaur; abbrev. Cen, gen. Centauri; area 1060 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Vela and Lu- 
pus, and surrounds Crux on three sides. It culminates 
at midnight in early April. Its origin dates back at least 
to ancient Greece, where it was identified with Chiron in 
Greek mythology. The brightest stars of Centaurus were 
cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A large, conspicuous constellation, Centaurus is 
easily found. Its brightest star is a Centauri (Rigel 
Kentaurus, Toliman or Bungula), which at magnitude —0.3 
is the third brightest star in the sky. It is actually a triple 
system consisting of a yellow (G2) primary, magnitude 0.0, 
an orange (K1) secondary, magnitude 1.4, separation 19.1”, 
period 81.2 years, anda third (M5) component, magnitude, 
11.0, separation 2.2°, known as Proxima Centauri, which, 
at a distance of 4.2 light-years, is the closest star to the 
Sun. Other bright stars include 6 Centauri (Hadar or 
Agena), a close binary with components of magnitudes 0.6 
and 3.9, separation 1.3”, @ Centauri (Menkent), magnitude 
2.1, and y Centauri (Muhlifain), another close binary with 
components both of magnitude 2.9 (combined magnitude 
2.2), separation 1.2”, period 84.5 years. There are 18 
other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. Variable stars in 
Centaurus include the Mira-type stars R Centauri (range 
5.3-11.8, period about 546 days) and T Centauri (range 
5.5-9.0, period about 90 days). 

Among several bright star clusters in Centaurus is 
w Centauri (NGC 5139), a magnificent globular cluster, 
visible to the unaided eye as a fuzzy fourth-magnitude 
star. Other interesting objects include two open clusters, 
NGC 3766, which contains more than 60 stars between 
eighth and thirteenth magnitude, and NGC 5460, which 
has about 40 stars fainter than eighth magnitude, NGC 
3918 (the Blue Planetary), an eighth magnitude planetary 
nebula described by John Herschel as ‘very like Uranus, 
only half as large again’, and NGC 5128 (Centaurus A), 
a seventh-magnitude elliptical galaxy and strong radio 
source, bisected by a dark dust lane. Centaurus also 
contains the x-ray binary Centaurus X-3. 


See also: Alpha Centauri. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Center for Astrophysical Research in Antarctica 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Center for Astrophysical Research in 
Antarctica 


The Center for Astrophysical Research in Antarctica 
(CARA) is operated by the US National Science Founda- 
tion Science and Technology Center and has its headqua- 
rters at the University of Chicago. The astrophysical obser- 
vatory is located at the South Pole and is used to investigate 
the origin of structure in the universe. 

Instruments deployed there take advantage of the 
cold, dry and stable conditions which make the Antarctic 
Plateau the best site on Earth for observations at infrared 
and submillimeter wavelengths. They allow small 
telescopes at the South Pole to outperform much larger 
telescopes at temperate sites. 

Observations are made at microwave, submillimeter 
and infrared wavelengths. Instruments used to study 
the cosmic microwave background radiation include 
the Degree Angular Scale Interferometer and the Viper 
Telescope. 

The 1.7 m Antarctic Submillimeter Telescope and 
Remote Observatory is used to observe molecular clouds, 
and the Submillimeter Polarimeter for Antarctic Remote 
Observing maps interstellar magnetic fields. 

The 60 cm South Pole Infrared Explorer telescope and 
the Abu infrared camera demonstrate the site’s potential 
for deep, wide-field, thermal infrared (2-5 wm) imaging of 
sources in the southern hemisphere. 

For further information see 
http:/ /astro.uchicago.edu/cara/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Center for High Angular Resolution 
Astronomy 


Georgia State University’s Center for High Angular 
Resolution Astronomy (CHARA) operates the CHARA 
Array on Mount Wilson, California. This optical/IR 
interferometric array consists of six 1 m aperture telescopes 
configured in a Y shape with a maximum baseline of 
350 m. Its limiting resolution of 200 microarcsec makes 
the instrument a powerful tool for studying fundamental 
properties and surface features of stars. 
For further information see 
http:/ /chara.gsu.edu/CHARA/chara.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales 


The Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) draws up, 
proposes and conducts France’s space policy. Its role is to 
develop the uses of space, to meet the civilian and military 
needs of public bodies and of the scientific community, 
and to foster the development and dissemination of new 
applications, designed to create wealth and jobs. 

CNES conducts French space policy by participating 
in the programs of the EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY (ESA). In 
1998, France’s contribution to ESA represented 58% of the 
investment subsidy allotted to CNES and nearly 33% of 
all contributions made to ESA, placing France first among 
the Agency’s contributors. France also plays a crucial role 
of proposal and training in the evolution of the ESA’s 
objectives and the implementation of its programs. A 
national program is conducted which supplements the 
ESA’s programs. 

CNES has many different partners: space users, for 
whom it identifies and develops the space techniques and 
applications best suited to their needs; French industry, 
to which it gradually transfers its know-how in order 
to make it more competitive worldwide; laboratories of 
major scientific organizations with which it works on 
numerous research programs; defense agencies, alongside 
which it works to develop a defense program, thus 
creating synergy between civil and military programs; 
space agencies of other countries with which it cooperates, 
chiefly in scientific areas; and developing countries, whose 
involvement in the use of space technology for teaching, 
economic growth and resource management is backed by 
CNES. 

The areas in which space policy is implemented are 
those which involve the major strategic and economic 
challenges: access to space, with the Ariane program— 
an ESA program whose launch services are marketed 
by Arianespace—and the creation of a launch base 
in French Guiana (Centre Spatial Guyanais, CGS); 
commercial applications such as Earth observation (Spot, 
ERS, Meteosat, IASI), and telecommunications (Télécom 
2, Stentor, GNSS, Skybridge); scientific programs in 
conjunction with research institutions, based on European 
and international cooperation (Topex-Poseidon, Envisat, 
Jason, Polder, Scarab, Oersted, Cluster, Cassini-Huygens, 
Soho, Rosetta, Mars Express, Mars Sample Return); 
activities related to microgravity research and man in 
space (Perseus with Alice 2, Fertile and Castor, Pégase) 
and the preparation of experiments designed for the 
International Space Station; and defense related activities 
(Helios). 

To conduct its operations, CNES has various centers, 
each featuring specific expertise and assignments: the 
Paris headquarters; the Launch Vehicle Directorate at Evry, 
responsible for the Ariane program; the Toulouse center, 
Centre Spatial de Toulouse, (CST), in charge of preparing 
and developing space projects for satellites and planetary 
vehicles, and for running operation facilities and large- 
scale infrastructures; the Guiana Space Center (CSG) in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Kourou, French Guiana, a launch and test center; and 
balloon launch center (CLBA) at Aire-sur-l’Adour, in the 
Landes department of southwest France. CNES has 2500 
employees spread over these sites. 

The CNES budget stands at 13169 million French 
Francs, including a state subsidy of 9115 million French 
Francs and its own resources of 4104 million French 
Francs. For nearly 20 years, CNES has formed commercial 
subsidiaries to sell the products and services turned out by 
space technology. These 20 companies directly employ a 
workforce of nearly 1000 people. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cepheid Period—Luminosity Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cepheid Period—Luminosity Relation 


The empirical correlation between the luminosity of a 
Cepheid variable and its period has been known to 
astronomers, and used by them as a powerful distance 
determination method, for the better part of the 20th 
century. Individually, Cepheids have distinctive light 
curves, rising rapidly in brightness to a maximum, and 
then falling more gradually to minimum light. This cycle 
consistently repeats with individual periods ranging from 
a few days to many hundreds of days, depending on the 
intrinsic brightness of the star. Collectively, the timescales 
over which this periodic cycling occurs for Cepheids are 
tightly coupled to the average luminosities of the stars. 
The reason for this empirical correlation is extremely well 
understood, and the applications of the period—luminosity 
relation are numerous. The implications, specifically 
for the extragalactic distance scale, are of importance in 
cosmology. 

The period—luminosity relation for Cepheids was first 
discovered by the Harvard astronomer, Henrietta LEAVITT. 
She was analyzing the periods and apparent magnitudes 
of a selection of Cepheid variables all at acommon distance 
in two of the (now known to be) nearby satellite galaxies 
to the Milky Way, the LARGE and SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. 
What Ms Leavitt found was to set in motion one of the 
most important and long-lasting astronomical activities of 
the 20th century—the calibration of the size scale of the 
universe. This was closely followed by the discovery of the 
expansion of the universe by Carnegie astronomer Edwin 
HUBBLE (See EXPANDING UNIVERSE), Which, when combined, 
gave rise to a determination of the timescale to the creation 
of the universe, described by the ‘hot big bang’ model of 
modern COSMOLOGY. 

Cepheids are supergiant stars, and as such they are 
among the most luminous objects in those galaxies that 
are today producing new populations of stars. The 
immediate precursors to Cepheids, according to stellar 
evolution theory, are the massive, young O- and B- 
type stars. These hot (blue) main sequence stars have 
been recently formed but, because of their high mass 
and prodigious energy output, they soon evolve away 
from the hydrogen-core-burning region to cooler surface 
temperatures and redder colors. In doing so, these 
enormous stars briefly pass through a zone in which 
their outer atmospheres are unstable to periodic radial 
oscillations. This narrow range of temperature triggering 
the atmospheric instability defines the so-called ‘instability 
strip’, where Cepheid pulsation can be observed. High- 
mass stars pass through the strip at higher luminosity 
(and slightly cooler temperatures) than lower-mass stars, 
which pass through the strip somewhat sooner at higher 
temperatures and at demonstrably lower luminosities. In 
the color-magnitude diagram the Cepheid instability strip 
slants upwards and across to the red. 

Stated another way, these simple considerations from 
STELLAR EVOLUTION predict that a mass—luminosity relation 
exists for Cepheids. Indeed, it is also ensures that there 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is a radius—luminosity relation for these stars, since the 
most basic laws of physics demand that the only way for 
two stars of the same temperature (color) to have different 
luminosities is for the total surface areas (controlled 
directly by the radii) to be different. Since temperature 
implicitly controls surface brightness (through Stefan’s 
law of emissivity, oT*), and radius explicitly controls the 
surface area (through geometry, 47 R”), the combination of 
these two factors gives the total luminosity. 

The interrelation between luminosity L, effective 
temperature 7.4 and radius R is easily quantified by the 
following equation based on the physical arguments given 
above: 

LS ark oT. 


Given that the temperature at which these stars are 
unstable to oscillation covers a relatively small range 
(~300 K), luminosity then is primarily a function of 
the mean radius of the star in the instability strip. 
Unfortunately, neither the mass nor the radius of any 
star is an easily observed property, so the relation as 
written above cannot be used in any practical application 
for distance determinations (i.e. predicting intrinsic 
luminosities). If, however, some other (more directly 
observable) quantity were a function of the mass and/or 
the radius, one in principle could predict the luminosity 
using that quantity as a proxy for radius. With empirical 
hindsight we already know that there is a solution—the 
one found by Ms Leavitt—the period—luminosity relation. 
Theory easily explains this empirical relation. 

Periods of oscillation at the surface of the Cepheid are 
intrinsic to the star and are obviously independent of the 
distance of the observer, but knowledge of an empirical 
period—luminosity relation immediately suggests that the 
observed period can be used to predict luminosity. From 
the physical arguments above, it must then be true that the 
period of oscillation can stand in for either mass or radius 
or some combination thereof. Indeed, this is the case. 

However, nature provides us with even more; there is 
also an intrinsic period—color relation for Cepheids. Since 
both period (P) and color (C) are independent of distance, 
the P-C relation (once calibrated) is a means of detecting 
interstellar reddening in a sample of Cepheids in an 
external galaxy. Individually Cepheids can become redder 
and fainter owing to intrinsic temperature differences or 
redder and fainter because of line-of-sight extinction. For 
a collection of Cepheids, the intrinsic color differences 
will tend to average out. However, since extinction is a 
systematic effect, it will tend to move the entire population 
to redder and fainter levels. Compared with the intrinsic 
P-C relation the average deviation of the ensemble can 
be fairly interpreted as being due to interstellar extinction, 
and the inferred distance corrected for this absorption. 

Explicitly correcting for systematic effects such as 
the dimming by interstellar dust (see INTERSTELLAR MATTER) 
is best accomplished by observing Cepheids at two or 
more wavelengths and using the period—color relations to 
predict statistical corrections for ensemble averages. An 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cepheid Period—Luminosity Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


alternative approach is to observe the Cepheids at long 
wavelengths where the effects of interstellar extinction are 
progressively diminished. For instance, by observing a 
Cepheid at 2 wm in the near-infrared, as opposed to the 
4500 A (blue) region of the spectrum, the effect of extinction 
drops by nearly a factor of 10. 

For all freely oscillating systems, be they bells 
ringing, pendulum clocks swinging, planets orbiting, 
Cepheids pulsating, galaxies rotating, or even the entire 
universe expanding (or contracting), the primary physical 
determinant of the timescale (or oscillation period, P) is 
the mean density of the system (p). Density is, by its 
very definition, solely a function of mass and radius. The 
mathematical expression of this law of nature is captured 
in the equation 


Pp’? = Q. 


At its most basic level, this equation is formally equivalent 
to the conservation of energy. Kepler’s third law 
of planetary motion, linking the periods of planetary 
revolution about the Sun with their measured semimajor 
orbital axes, is another expression of this same formula (see 
KEPLER’SLAWS). Also, the relation between the expansion rate 
of the universe as characterized by the HUBBLECONSTANT and 
the mean density of the universe compared with its critical 
density is the same formula in a cosmological setting. 

The story behind setting a reliable zero point to 
the Cepheid P-L relation reads like a microcosm of the 
parallel quest to set a size scale to the entire universe. 
Indeed, these two tasks, disparate in scale, are often one 
and the same problem, recurrently interwined. In many 
contexts the Cepheid distance scale is the extragalactic 
distance scale. For instance, the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE 
(HST) was, in large measure, designed around the 
expected use of Cepheids to reach galaxies and measure 
their distances as far out as the Virgo cluster some 10 
or 20 times more distant than the most distant galaxies 
measured by Cepheids from the ground. 

Measuring a Cepheid distance to Virgo was once 
hoped to be the Holy Grail of the distance scale, but 
this did not turn out to be the case. In the intervening 
years between the design of HST and its eventual launch 
and subsequent refurbishment, our view of the universe 
changed in a fundamental way: large-scale flows are now 
known to accompany the large-scale structures that fill the 
nearby universe. In other words, the velocities measured 
as redshifts for galaxies are not simply composed of 
a single Hubble expansion component, but they have 
superimposed flow velocities due to the gravitational 
perturbations of nearby matter in the form of nearby 
galaxies, groups and clusters. 

The Key Project on the Extragalactic Distance Scale 
was premised on using Cepheids as distance indicators. 
Using traditional methods to discover extragalactic 
Cepheids by imaging in the optical (where the Cepheid 
amplitudes are large compared with redder wavelengths), 
the Hubble Space Telescope has been used by several 
groups including the Key Project to determine distances 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


I magnitude (arbitrary scale) 


1 1.5 2 2.9 
log (period) 


Figure 1. I-band period—luminosity relations for a sample of 
nearby galaxies (period in days). 


to more than two dozen galaxies out to beyond the 
Virgo and Fornax clusters, nearly an order of magnitude 
further away than was previously possible using ground- 
based telescopes. The Cepheid distances to galaxies are 
then used to calibrate a number of secondary distance 
indicators for galaxies extending much further into the 
Hubble flow. With red (I-band) observations (see figure 1) 
the second color needed for extinction corrections was 
also obtained and true distances were derived. Follow- 
up studies of selected objects were also made at 1.6 wm 
with HST, using a near-infrared camera (NICMOS), to 
confirm the reddenings and strengthen the distance 
determinations based ona wavelength that is insensitive to 
both extinction and metallicity. The chemical composition, 
or metallicity, poses another plausible complication that 
needs to be addressed in evaluating the uncertainty 
associated with Cepheid distances. No significant 
differences were detected between the optically corrected 
true distance moduli and those bolstered by the near 
infrared data. 

At the conclusion of the Key Project many secondary 
distance indicators were calibrated using Cepheid vari- 
ables. Each of these methods yielded returned values of 
the expansion rate of the universe, the Hubble constant, 
falling between 68 and 78 km s~' Mpc~!. However, the 
distances (and velocities) to galaxies in and around the 
major clusters were also determined. Corrected for the 
perturbing effects of the clusters, these field galaxies also 
show a velocity—distance relation that can be identified 
with the expansion of the universe. From Cepheid dis- 
tances alone one then can derive the strength of the re- 
lation between velocity and distance, and so locally it is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cepheid Period—Luminosity Relation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


found to be 73 kms“! Mpc7!. This value of Ho, whether it 
is derived exclusively from Cepheids in galaxies nearby or 
from galaxies tied into the Cepheid distance scale but par- 
ticipating in the flow at 10 000 km s“!, consistently suggest 
an age of 12 billion years for a low-density universe. 


Barry F Madore and Wendy L Freedman 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Cepheus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cepheus 


(abbrev. Cep, gen. Cephei; area 588 sq. deg.) A northern 
constellation which lies between Draco and Cassiopeia, 
and culminates at midnight in late August. It is named 
after King Cepheus, husband of Queen Cassiopeia and 
father of Andromeda in Greek mythology. Its brightest 
stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) in the 
Almagest. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Cepheus is a Cephei (Alderamin), magnitude 2.5. 
There are six other stars brighter than fourth magnitude, 
including three notable pulsating variable stars: 6 Cephei 
(Alfirk; range 3.16-3.27, period 0.19 day), a bluish-white 
(B2) star, which has a fainter, magnitude 7.8, companion, 
also bluish-white (A3), separation 13.3”; 5 Cephei (the 
prototype Cepheid variable; range 3.48-4.37, period 5.37 
days), a yellow (F5-G2) star, which has a bluish-white (B7) 
companion, magnitude 6.3, separation 41”; and 4 Cephei 
(the Garnet Star—so called because of its intense red color; 
range 3.43-5.1, average period about 730 days). 

Other interesting double stars in Cepheus include 
€ Cephei (Kurhah), which has bluish-white (A3) and 
pale yellow (F7) components, magnitudes 4.3 and 6.4, 
separation 7.9”, and Kriiger 60 , one of the nearest visual 
binaries (distance about 13 light-years), which has red (M3 
and M4, dwarf) components, magnitudes 9.8 and 11.4, 
separation 3”, period 44 years, the fainter component of 
which (Kriiger 60B or DO Cephei) is a flare star (max. 
10.3). A bright Mira-type variable star is T Cephei (range 
7.4-12.9, period about 487 days). 

Open clusters in Cepheus include NGC 7160, which 
contains a couple of dozen stars fainter than seventh 
magnitude, and NGC 188, which has more than 150 stars 
between tenth and eighteenth magnitude and is one of 
the oldest galactic clusters known (estimated age around 
9000 million years). There are no bright nebulae or galaxies 
in the constellation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ceres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ceres 


The first asteroid to be discovered, by Giuseppe Piazzi on 
1 January 1801, and so designated (1) Ceres. The 
discovery resulted from a search prompted by Bode’s 
law, a numerical relationship between the known major 
planets which suggested a ‘missing planet’ between the 
orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Ceres is by far the largest of 
the asteroids, with a diameter of 933 km, and accounts 
for over one-quarter of the mass of the entire main-belt 
asteroid population. It orbits the Sun at a mean distance 
of 2.77 AU (414 million km) in a period of 4.60 years; 
the orbital inclination is 11°, and the eccentricity 0.08. 
Ceres rotates in 9.08 h, and has a density of 2.7 g cm”. It 
is a G-type asteroid, with a reflectance spectrum similar 
to that of carbonaceous chondrites, and an albedo of 0.11. 
See also: BODE’S LAW. 


Web update 

Recent observations at the European Southern 
Observatory with the world’s first operational virtual 
telescope ‘Astrovirtel’ have determined that the newly 
discovered distant asteroid 2001 KX76 is significantly 
larger than Ceres. Ceres, the first asteroid (minor planet) 
to be discovered in the Solar System, has held the record 
as the largest known object of its kind for two centuries 
with a diameter about 950 km. Asteroid 2001 KX76 has 
been found to have a diameter of 1200 km, possibly even 
1400 km. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


CERN 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CERN 


CERN—the acronym comes from the original French 
name ‘Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire— 
the European Laboratory for Particle Physics, is one of 
the world’s most prestigious research centers. Its 
business is fundamental physics, i.e. finding out what 
makes our universe work, where it came from, and where 
it is going. At CERN, some of the world’s biggest and 
most complex machines are used to study nature’s tiniest 
building blocks. By colliding these minute particles of 
matter, physicists unravel the basic laws of nature. 
Amongst other areas of applicability, CERN’s research is 
used in astroparticle physics, with relevance to studies of 
dark matter, the Big Bang, etc. This research is purely 
scientific and the results are freely available. 

CERN’s machines are particle accelerators and 
detectors. The laboratory’s accelerator complex is built 
around three principal inter-dependent accelerators. The 
oldest, the Proton Synchrotron (PS), was built in the 
1950s and was briefly the world’s highest energy 
accelerator. The Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS), built in 
the 1970s, was the scene of CERN’s first Nobel prize in 
the 1980s. 

Ground-breaking research was performed at the 
Large Electron Positron collider (LEP) throughout the 
1990s. The extraordinary quantity of high-precision 
results from LEP highlighted the possibility of exciting 
future discoveries, such as finding the Higgs particle, 
postulated to confer mass on the particles of matter, and 
supersymmetry, a profound extension to the relationship 
between particles of matter and particles carrying the 
fundamental forces between them. 

Fundamental research is CERN’s reason for being, 
but the laboratory also plays a vital role in developing the 
technologies of tomorrow. From materials science to 
computing, particle physics demands the ultimate in 
performance, making CERN an important test-bed for 
industry. The quality of the technology developed by the 
laboratory is becoming more and more _ widely 
recognized. Today everyone knows the World Wide 
Web, but not many know that it was invented at CERN, 
conceived to give particle physicists easy access to their 
data wherever they happened to be on the planet. The 
World Wide Web, medical imaging, or advanced 
techniques for using electronic chips, are just a few of the 
many recent spin-offs from the fundamental research 
carried out at CERN. 

The next stage in Europe’s strategy for particle 
physics is the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). CERN 
Council’s decision on 16 December 1994 to build the 
LHC, which has the potential to make some of the most 
important scientific discoveries of our era, was a 
milestone in the history of particle physics and of CERN. 
The LHC is a_ technologically challenging, 
superconducting accelerator which will bring protons 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


into head-on collision at higher energies than ever 
achieved before. It will be installed in the 27 kilometer 
tunnel that at present houses the LEP collider. 
Preparations for the LHC are moving ahead at full speed, 
with several thousand physicists worldwide actively 
preparing for its arrival, expected in 2006. The 
tremendous technological challenges facing those who 
are building the LHC and its detectors are an important 
driving force for innovation in European industry. 

The laboratory sits astride the Franco-Swiss border, 
west of Geneva, at the foot of the Jura mountains, and 
was founded in 1954 as one of Europe’s first joint 
ventures. Since then it has become a shining example of 
international collaboration. From the original twelve 
signatories of the CERN convention, membership has 
grown to twenty member states: Austria, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. In 2001 
these countries contributed to an annual budget of 1050 
million Swiss francs in amounts proportional to their net 
national income. 

For further 
http://www.cern.ch/Public/. 


information see 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cerro Tololo Inter-American 
Observatory (CTIO) 


CTIO is operated by the ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITIES FOR 
RESEARCH IN ASTRONOMY Inc. (AURA), under a cooperative 
agreement with the National Science Foundation as part 
of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories. 

The Observatory is about 2200 m above sea level, and 
500 km north of Santiago in Chile. Its headquarters are 
located at La Serena. 

On site are six optical telescopes and one radio 
telescope. The largest instrument is the 4 m Victor M 
Blanco Reflecting Telescope, whose twin is located at KITT 
PEAK OBSERVATORY in Arizona. This telescope has been in 
operation since the early 1970s. 

Other instruments at the site include a 1.5 m Ritchey— 
Chrétien telescope, the YALO 1 m Ritchey—Chrétien 
telescope, a 92 cm reflector, a 0.6/0.9 m Curtis /Schmidt 
telescope, the 60 cm Lowell Telescope and ‘El Enano’ (The 
Dwarf), the smallest telescope on Tololo. 

The 1.2 m radio telescope of the Universidad do Chile 
is also at the site. 

For further information see 
http://www.ctio.noao.edu/ctio.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cetus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cetus 


(the Sea Monster or Whale; abbrev. Cet, gen. Ceti; area 
1231 sq. deg.) An equatorial constellation which lies 
between Aquarius and Taurus, and culminates at midnight 
in October. It is named after the sea monster from which 
Perseus rescued Andromeda in Greek mythology, though 
it is sometimes identified as a whale. Its brightest stars 
were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

Although the fourth largest constellation, Cetus is 
rather inconspicuous, its brightest stars being 6 (Diphda), 
magnitude 2.0, and a (Menkar), magnitude 2.5. There are 
seven other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. Interesting 
stars in Cetus include the prototype long-period variable 
o Ceti (Mira; range 2.0-10.1, period about 332 days), the 
flare star UV Ceti (rest magnitude 12.9, max. 6.8) and 
t Ceti, magnitude 3.5, one of the two closest Sun-like 
stars (distance about 11.8 light-years—the other being ¢ 
Eridani). 

Another interesting object in Cetus is M77 (NGC 
1068), a ninth-magnitude spiral galaxy (the brightest 
Seyfert galaxy). 


Seealso: Mira. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


CH Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CH Cygni 


CH Cygni (CH Cyg) is one of the most enigmatic SYMBIOTIC 
sTARS. Once known as a short-period semiregular variable 
and standard for the M6 III spectral type, the system began 
an unusual series of eruptions in 1964. The appearance of 
a blue continuum and modest H I emission lines led to 
its reclassification as a symbiotic star despite its lack of 
the strong higher ionization lines characteristic of most 
symbiotics. Some of these lines were later discovered 
with higher-quality spectra acquired in the 1970s and 
1980s. Even so, the erratic behavior of the system during 
quiescence and eruption clearly distinguishes CH Cyg 
from most symbiotic stars. 

CH Cyg has properties in common with o Ceti (mira) 
and the symbiotic star R Aqr, two M6-M7 type giants with 
a white dwarf companion. All are relatively nearby, with 
distances of 100-300 pc compared with the 1 kpc distance 
of the typical symbiotic binary. The systems contain 
pulsating RED GIANTS with periods of ~100 days in CH Cyg 
and ~1 year in Mira and R Aqr; all have orbital periods 
of decades to centuries. The combination of a late-type 
giant and a long orbital period in a nearby binary produces 
interesting behavior not observed in other symbiotic stars, 
such as Z ANDROMEDAE. Studying this evolution has been 
very popular; understanding it has proved elusive. 


Basic properties 

CH Cyg displays a bewildering array of photometric 
variations. Short-timescale fluctuations are observed at 
optical and x-ray wavelengths. The optical variations are 
coherent, with a period of 2500-3000 s and an amplitude 
that increases from ~0.02 mag at 7000 A up to ~0.3 mag 
at 3600 A. X-ray observations indicate a non-variable, soft 
component with kT ~ 0.4 keV and a variable component 
withkT ~ 7 keV. The x-ray variability occurs on timescales 
as short as 300 s but is not coherent. 

Longer timescale variations are also present (figure 1). 
Semicoherent variations with periods of ~100 days, 
~770 days, ~1300 days and ~32 years appear in the optical 
and near-infrared light curves. The typical amplitude of 
these changes is ~0.5 mag in the optical and ~0.25 mag 
in the near-infrared. The amplitudes and phases of these 
variations change from one decade to the next. Several 
studies have proposed an additional period of 5700 days 
produced by eclipses of the emission line source by the 
red giant star. The optical colors of the system are usually 
redder during the eclipse. 

There is good evidence for RADIAL VELOCITY variations 
phased with several of the photometric periods. Velocities 
derived from red giant absorption features indicate 
periods of ~760 days and ~5500 days. The shorter period 
is similar to the orbital periods of other symbiotic stars. 
The derived mass function is also comparable with that of 
other symbiotics if the velocity variations are due to orbital 
motion. Unlike most symbiotics, however, this period 
is not always present in the light curve. Irregular light 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1977. 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 


Visual Magnitude 


1988 


1990 1992 1994 


Year 


1996 1998 


Figure 1. Recent optical light curve of CH Cyg using 10 day 
means of observations from the AFOEV and VSNET databases. 
Jet ejection began during the step-like drop in brightness 
bracketing 1985 in the right corner of the upper panel. 


and velocity variations are often observed in single late- 
type giants, so this period might be a pulsation period or 
(much less probably) a rotation period. The longer period 
has more support as the true orbital period of the system. 
Orbital conjunctions coincide with minima in the emission 
line intensities. The jet ejection events described below 
also seem phased with this period. The velocity amplitude 
leads to reasonable masses for the red giant, 1-3 Mo, and 
for the hot component, 0.5-1.0 Mo. 

The spectroscopic variations of CH Cyg are fortu- 
nately more tame than the photometric variations. The 
spectrum always shows evidence for an M-type giant, with 
a strong red continuum and deep TiO absorption bands. 
The spectral type of this component varies between M5 
and M7. The hot component has three states: (i) an in- 
active state where the blue continuum and emission lines 
are absent or barely detectable; (ii) a low state where the 
blue continuum and HI emission lines are relatively weak; 
(iii) a high state where the blue continuum is strong and 
resembles the spectrum of an F-type supergiant (figure 2). 
Modest H I and Fe II emission lines accompany the F-type 
continuum in the high state. Some high ionization lines, 
such as [O III] in the optical and C IV in the ultraviolet, 
are present during the high and low states. These lines are 
usually stronger during the low state than the high state, 
as in other symbiotic stars. However, the emission lines 
always appear to be weaker relative to the UV or optical 
continuum than in other symbiotic stars. The origin of this 
difference is unknown. 

The emission line profiles of CH Cyg are complicated 
and highly variable. Most lines indicate mass motions 
with velocities of 100-200 km s~!. These lines are usually 
symmetric about the systemic velocity, but sometimes 
display extra emission with positive or negative velocity. 
When the H I lines are strong, they often have broad 
profiles with deep central absorption reversals. These 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


CH Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


log Relative Flux 


4000 5000 6000 #7000 


Wavelength (A) 


8000 


Figure 2. Spectra of CH Cyg in the low state (lower curve) and 
the high state (upper curve). The low-state spectrum resembles 
that of a normal M6 giant with weak H I emission lines and a 
variable blue continuum. In the high state, the blue continuum 
rises by more than a factor of 10 and resembles that of an F-type 
supergiant with modest H I emission lines. The right half of the 
high-state spectrum has been omitted for clarity; it blends 
smoothly into the low-state spectrum at roughly 7000 A. 


profiles resemble emission lines observed in dwarf NOVAE 
and other cataclysmic variables. However, the lines often 
become single peaked, which is not typical of dwarf novae. 
The variability of the H I lines may be associated with the 
complex photometric variations, but the available data are 
not extensive enough to make a clear association with any 
of the photometric periods. 

Surprisingly, some of the most interesting activity 
of CH Cyg occurs during low states. In 1984, the 
hot component began to eject material at high velocities 
shortly after a 2-3 mag drop in the optical brightness. As 
the F-type continuum and several emission lines faded 
during this decline, the star developed strong [O III] 
emission lines indicating material moving at velocities of 
~500 km s~!. The intensity of 1-10 cm radio continuum 
emission increased by a factor of 3 in roughly 1 month. 
Nearly all of this radio emission was confined to two knots 
of gas moving away from the central star at a projected 
velocity of ~1000(d/200 pc) kms™'. This ejection is similar 
to the bipolar jets observed in ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI and 
PRE-MAIN-SEQUENCE STARS. Spatially resolved optical spectra 
clearly associated the [O III] emission with the radio knots. 
The radio emission declined as the knots moved away 
from the central source and then rose slightly as the source 
ejected a second, smaller set of knots moving at the same 
velocity. This event began ~200 days after the first ejection 
and was accompanied by a factor of 2 decline in the optical 
brightness. A third small ejection began ~200 days later 
but was not associated with a drop in brightness. All of 
these knots faded over several years, when the system 
resumed its ‘normal’ low-state spectrum. 

Jet formation associated with a significant drop in 
the optical brightness began again in 1997-1998. Several 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


optical emission lines simultaneously developed broad 
features indicating mass motions with velocities of 500- 
1000 km s~!. The system recovered quickly, rising by 
1.5 mag in the ultraviolet during May-July 1998. The 14 yr 
interval between the two radio outbursts is 1-2 yr shorter 
than one of the proposed orbital periods. 


Interpretation 
The origin of CH Cyg’s bizarre behavior is unclear. Three 
emission states—inactive, low and high—are unusual: 
most symbiotics have low and high states. Multiple strong 
periodicities in the light curve are also rare. The weak 
emission line spectrum is atypical, although Mira and a 
few other symbiotics have similar emission line spectra. 

The current picture for the CH Cyg system begins 
with an interacting binary composed of an M-type giant 
and a hot wHitTE pwarr. The white dwarf accretes material 
lost by the giant. Energy generated by ACCRETION powers 
the observed activity. Irregular pulsations of the giant 
modulate the accretion rate onto the white dwarf, which 
varies the activity level. It is unlikely that the white dwarf 
generates much energy by thermonuclear burning of the 
accreted mass: the luminosity at maximum, ~100Lo, is 
small for a white dwarf with a nuclear burning shell. 

Adding finer details to this picture has been difficult. 
Two variants have been proposed. The first envisions 
a wide binary with an orbital period of ~5500 days. A 
pulsating red giant is responsible for the ~100 day and the 
~700 day periods. A magnetic white dwarf—similar to 
the white dwarf in Z And—rotates with a period of 2500- 
3000 s. Accretion onto the magnetic poles of this white 
dwarf produces the short-timescale variations. Inactive 
states occur near apastron, when the white dwarf is far 
away from the red giant and the accretion rate is low. These 
states are long lived, because the binary spends most of its 
time at apastron. Active states occur near PERIASTRON, when 
the accretion rate is high. In this model, cycling between 
the low and high states results from an imbalance between 
the magnetic pressure of the rotating white dwarf and 
the ram pressure of material in the red giant wind. High 
states occur when the ram pressure exceeds the magnetic 
pressure. Accretion onto the white dwarf then produces 
the F-type continuum, although the physical mechanism 
producing this continuum is unclear. Low states occur 
when the magnetic pressure exceeds the ram pressure and 
prevents accretion onto the white dwarf. This ‘propeller’ 
mechanism also drives the bipolar jets by a process which 
is poorly understood at best. 

Asecond concept considers CH Cyg asa triple system. 
In this model, the red giant and white dwarf inhabit a 
close binary with a 760 day period. A mundane G dwarf 
orbits this binary with a 5500 day period. Variants of this 
picture replace the G dwarf with another M giant, but 
spectroscopic evidence for two red giants in the system 
is not compelling. A triple system provides a natural 
explanation for two persistent modulations of the system, 
760 days and 5500 days. Red giant pulsations are still 
necessary for other long periods; a magnetic white dwarf 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


CH Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is still responsible for the 2500-3000 s optical pulsation. 
An advantage of this model is that the close inner binary 
is similar in structure to a typical symbiotic star. The 
enhanced mass transfer possible in a closer binary could 
power the unusual activity of the hot component. A 
propeller model could still give rise to cycling between 
high and low states, but the origin of the inactive state 
is unclear. Other symbiotics stars with ~700 day orbital 
periods are never inactive. Short periods of apparent 
inactivity in some symbiotics occur when the red giant 
occults the hot component. The most popular version of 
the triple-star model proposes that both red giants eclipse 
the hot component to produce inactive periods. This 
geometry is a priori unlikely and may not produce long 
enough inactive periods. Explaining the jet activity in 
the low state is also a challenge, because almost all other 
symbiotics eject more material in high states than low 
states. 

Most analyses of CH Cyg have concentrated on 
photometric data. Detailed models of spectroscopic data 
will be needed to understand the energetics of the hot 
component and the dynamics of the NEBULA. Neither 
proposed model for CH Cyg makes many predictions for 
future behavior of the system; further work may point to 
better tests of the models and allow a definitive choice to 
be made between them. 


Bibliography 

Hinkle K H, Fekel F C, Johnson D S and Scharlach W W G 
1993 The triple symbiotic system CH Cygni Astron. J. 
105 1074 

Karovska M and Mattei J A 1992 Longterm AAVSO 
observations of the symbiotic system CH Cygni 
J. AAVSO 21 23 

Kenyon S J 1986 The Symbiotic Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Mikotajewski M, Mikotajewska J, Tomov T, Kulesza B and 
Szczerba R 1990 Symbiotic binaries III. Flickering 
activity of CH Cygni: magnetic rotator model Acta 
Astron. 40 129 

Munari U, Yudin B F, Kolotilov E A and Tomov T V 1996 
UBV-JHKLM photometry of CH Cyg over 1978-1995: 
dust properties and doubts on the triple star model 
Astron. Astrophys. 311 484 

Skopal A, Bode M F, Lloyd H Mand Tamura S 1996 Eclipses 
in the symbiotic system CH Cygni Astron. Astrophys. 
308 L9 


Scott Kenyon 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


CH Stars and Barium Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CH Stars and Barium Stars 


The classical barium (or ‘Ba II’) stars are RED GIANT STARS 
whose spectra show strong absorption lines of barium, 
strontium and certain other heavy elements, as well as 
strong features due to carbon molecules. Together with 
the related class of CH stars, the Ba II stars were crucial 
in establishing the existence of neutron-capture reactions 
in stellar interiors that are responsible for the synthesis of 
heavy elements. More recently, the Ba II and CH stars 
have provided strong evidence for mass transfer in binary 
systems that drastically alters the surface composition of 
a companion star. 


Barium stars 

Ba II stars were first recognized by W P Bidelman and 
P C Keenan in 1951. They are G-K giants whose spectra 
show an unusually strong absorption line of Ba I] at 4554 A, 
along with enhanced lines of Sr II and molecular bands of 
the CH, C; and CN molecules. The prototype is the third- 
magnitude star ¢ Capricorni. During the ensuing decade, 
studies of the spectra at high dispersion revealed that the 
abundances of numerous heavy elements are enhanced, 
notably the elements Sr, Y and Zr; rare earths such as La, 
Ce, Nd and Sm; and of course Ba. It was soon realized that 
these are exactly the elements expected to be synthesized 
when ‘seed’ nuclei in the iron group are exposed to a 
flux of neutrons and are thus built up to higher atomic 
weights, on a timescale that is slow compared to the beta- 
decay timescale. This so-called ‘s-process’ leads to high 
abundances of those chemical elements with low neutron- 
capture cross sections (these being the ‘bottlenecks’ in the 
neutron-capture chain), which are exactly the elements in 
the atomic-weight peaks around Sr and Ba. 


CH stars 
The CH stars are a closely related class, actually first 
recognized even earlier than the Ba II stars by P C Keenan 
in 1942. They are essentially the Population II counterparts 
of barium stars, having similar enhancements of s-process 
elements and very strong bands of the CH molecule (see 
also POPULATION IISTARS). However, CH stars have weak lines 
of the ordinary metals such as iron, since these stars belong 
to the old, metal-deficient population of our Galaxy. 

CH stars are found both in the Galactic halo and in 
several globular clusters. The cluster w Centauri contains 
the richest population of CH stars, about half a dozen. 


The luminosity problem 

By the early 1970s, the nucleosynthetic origin of the 
enhanced chemical elements in the Ba IJ and CH stars was 
reasonably well understood: they arise in stellar interiors 
when a flux of neutrons irradiates iron-group seed nuclei. 
This can happen, for example, during mixing associated 
with helium thermal pulses which brings together °C 
nuclei and alpha particles; each reaction releases a !©O 
nucleus and a free neutron. Carbon is synthesized during 
helium burning in the cores of red giants. Subsequently, a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mixing process causes the products of these reactions to be 
exposed at the stellar surface. In the mid-1970s, however, 
detailed calculations of stellar evolution revealed a severe 
evolutionary problem: the sort of mixing required (called 
the ‘third dredge-up’) only occurs in highly evolved, 
luminous asymptotic-giant-branch (AGB) stars. Yet the 
Ba II and CH stars were known to have only the 
luminosities of ordinary red giants, far too faint for any 
dredge-up to occur. 

The problem was exacerbated by the discovery in 
1974 by H E Bond of what he called ‘subgiant CH stars,’ 
which are F- and G-type stars of even lower luminosities, 
extending in some cases down to the main sequence, 
and showing similar patterns of enhanced heavy elements 
and carbon. Subsequent work has suggested that ‘dwarf 
barium stars’ would be a better name for most of the 
members of this class, since most of them are not extremely 
iron-deficient. Even further down the main sequence, 
at spectral type K, a class of ‘dwarf carbon stars’ was 
discovered in the late 1970s. All of these objects are far too 
faint to have synthesized s-process elements and carbon in 
their own interiors, let alone to be mixing them up to the 
stellar surface. 

Moreover, none of these objects appear to be particu- 
larly rare stars; for example, large-scale spectroscopic sur- 
veys show that about 1% of red giants are members of the 
Ba II class, and a similar fraction of F-G dwarfs are barium 
dwarfs or subgiant CH stars. 


The solution 

The solution to the luminosity problem came in the early 
1980s, when R D McClure and his collaborators established 
that virtually all Ba II and CH stars are spectroscopic 
binaries, with fairly long periods and typical orbital 
separations of the order of 2 AU. This led to the realization 
that the binary system once contained an AGB star that 
mixed carbon and s-process elements to its surface, and 
then transferred this ‘polluted’ material to a companion 
star. In many cases the companion would have been on 
or near the main sequence, and it is now seen as a dwarf 
barium star, dwarf carbon star or subgiant CH star. When 
the contaminated main-sequence star evolves to become 
a red giant (or if the mass transfer is from the AGB star 
directly to a red-giant companion), it will be seen as a 
classical red-giant Ba II star (or as a CH star if the binary 
is a metal-poor member of Population II). 


The solution confirmed 

Adirect test of the binary scenario would be to find a white- 
dwarf companion of a barium star. The above scenario in 
fact demands that all of the companions be white dwarfs, 
i.e., the remnants of the former AGB star. 

In a stunning confirmation of the scenario, E Bohm- 
Vitense showed in 1980 that ¢ Cap has a hot white- 
dwarf companion, revealed in the ultraviolet by the 
INTERNATIONAL ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER Satellite. Subsequent 
UV observations with IUE, and more recently by Bohm- 
Vitense and her collaborators with the HUBBLE SPACE 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


CH Stars and Barium Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TELESCOPE, have revealed several more examples of Ba II 
stars with white-dwarf companions. In many cases, 
however, the white dwarf has faded to below detectability, 
and its presence shows up only in the variable radial 
velocity of the peculiar optical star. 


The pollution mechanism 

Recent work on the Ba II and related stars has focused 
on the precise mechanism by which the AGB. star 
contaminates its innocent companion. The two main 
possibilities are (a) that the AGB star evolves to fill its 
Roche lobe, and then spills substantial amounts of its 
envelope material onto the companion; and (b) that the 
AGB star pollutes the companion only through a stellar 
wind. In scenario (a), the outcome would usually be a 
common-envelope interaction, with a spiralling down of 
the orbit to a much smaller separation, so that the binary 
emerges as a cataclysmic variable rather than a barium 
star. However, some authors have argued that stable 
Roche-lobe overflow is possible, thus avoiding the spiral- 
down. Scenario (b) is probably more likely at least for 
most barium stars, both because of their still large orbital 
separations and because many of them have somewhat 
eccentric orbits, which would not be the case following 
Roche-lobe overflow. 


Bibliography 
Ba II stars were discovered by 


Bidelman W P, and Keenan P C 1951 The Ba II stars 
Astrophys. J. 114 473-6 


Acomprehensive review article covering work through the 
early 1980s, including the first demonstration that most or 
all Ba II stars are spectroscopic binaries, was written by 


McClure R D 1984 The barium stars Pub. Astron. Soc. Pacific 
96 117-27 


CH stars were first recognized by 


Keenan P C 1942 The spectra of CH stars Astrophys. J. 96 
101-5 


Subgiant CH stars were defined by 


Bond H E 1974 The subgiant CH stars Astrophys. J. 194 
95-107 


The first dwarf carbon star was discovered by 


Dahn C Cet al 1997 G 77-61: A dwarf carbon star Astrophys. 
J. 216 757-66 


Details of the formation of Ba II and CH stars have 
been discussed by 


Han Z, Eggleton P P, Podsiadlowski P and Tout C A 1995 
The formation of barium and CH stars and related 
objects Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 277 1443-62 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A modern review of Ba II and CH stars can be found in 


Jorissen A, Van Eck S, Mayor M and Udry S 1998 Insights 
into the formation of barium and Tc-poor S stars 
from an extended sample of orbital elements Astron. 
Astrophys. 332 877-903 


A comprehensive review of all aspects of carbon stars and 
related objects is 


Wallerstein G and Knapp G R 1998 Carbon stars Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 36 369-433 


Howard E Bond and Edward M Sion 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Challis, James (1803-82) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Challis, James (1803-82) 


British astronomer, born in Braintree, Essex, England, 
became Plumian professor and Director of the Observatory 
at Cambridge. Was persuaded by Apams to search for 
Neptune, but had no up to date chart and had to 
laboriously observe all the stars in the area twice to find 
one that moved. Observed Neptune, but only once, in 
July 1846, and was not re-observing the field of stars with 
any urgency, so lost priority to JG GALLE and HLD‘ARREST in 
Berlin. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Chamaeleon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chamaeleon 


(the Chameleon; abbrev. Cha, gen. Chamaeleontis; area 
132 sq. deg.) A southern constellation which lies between 
Carina and the south celestial pole, and culminates at 
midnight in early March. It was first shown on Petrus 
Plancius’ celestial globe of c. 1598, though it is usually 
attributed to the Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser 
(also known as Petrus Theodorus) and Frederick de 
Houtman, who charted that part of the southern sky in 
1595-7. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Chamaeleon are a and y Chamaeleontis, 
both magnitude 4.1. Interesting objects include 6 
Chamaeleontis, a wide double star with bluish-white 
(B2.5) and orange (KO) components, magnitudes 4.5 and 
5.5, separation about 6’, the fainter of which (5!) has a 
fainter companion, and NGC 3195, a twelfth-magnitude 
planetary nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chamberlin, Thomas Chrowder (1843-1928) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chamberlin, Thomas Chrowder 
(1843-1928) 


Geologist, born in Mattoon, IL, head of the geology 
department at the University of Chicago; researched on 
the origin of the Earth and the solar system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Chandra X-ray Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chandra X-ray Observatory 


Launched on 23 July 1999 on board the Space Shuttle 
Columbia from Cape Canaveral, the Chandra X-ray 
Observatory is the first x-ray astronomy telescope to 
match the 1/2 arcsecond imaging power and the 0.1% 
spectral resolving power of optical telescopes. Chandra 
is named after Subramanian Chandrasekhar, known as 
Chandra, and author of the Chandrasekhar limit. 
Chandra has been extremely successful and productive 
so far. (See http:/ /chandra-harvard.edu for many exam- 
ples.) 

Any experiment that is 10 or 100 times better than its 
predecessors is virtually certain to make revolutionary 
discoveries and CHANDRA is demonstrating this truism 
dramatically. Examples include settling decade-old 
debates with a single observation: yes cometary x-rays 
are due to charge exchange; no, most elliptical galaxies 
do not have much hot gas in their interstellar medium, 
but they do have their quota of compact binaries; no, 
cooling flows in clusters of galaxies only cool so far 
(down to 2x107K); and yes, the COSMIC X-RAY BACKGROUND 
is made up of the light from many quasars—about 1000 
in each area of sky the size of the Moon. 

Other examples are of completely new discoveries 
still to be checked out with further studies: a type of 
quasar that, perversely, is obscured in x-rays, but shines 
through clearly in optical light; spectral absorption lines 
that seem to come from a bath of hot gas that our Milky 
Way galaxy, and the whole of our Local Group of galax- 
ies, is lying in. (There appears to be so much of this 
‘Warm Hot Intergalactic Medium’ or ‘WHIM’ that it 
could even be the ‘missing mass’ that binds the Local 
Group galaxies together); the relativistically moving jets 
from quasars shine brightly in Chandra images, as long 
as clusters of galaxies are across, and brighter when they 
are further away, thanks to the higher temperature and 
intensity of the Cosmic Microwave Background, so there 
are more of these photons to be scattered off the fast 
moving electrons of the jet, so gaining enough energy to 
become the x-rays we see. Then there are the nests of 
super-bright x-ray binaries in starburst galaxies that 
appear to exceed the EDDINGTON LIMIT of luminosity if 
they have a normal 10 solar mass black hole in them. 
Could they imply a new and predicted-not-to-exist pop- 
ulation of intermediate mass (100-10(4) solar masses) 
black holes? The spectra of a neutron star (i.e. one not in 
a binary or a supernova remnant) shows a black body 
spectrum with a well determined temperature, together 
with its distance gives the luminosity and so combining 
them the area of the NEUTRON STAR. This could be the first 
example of a new type of star and a new type of matter, 
a QUARK STAR. 

Chandra’s resolution leads to 100 times more sensi- 
tivity over earlier x-ray missions because background 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


light is imaged away allowing much fainter sources to be 
seen, and also creates the good spectral resolution. 
Chandra’s resolution stems from its unprecedented x-ray 
mirror. The x-rays that Chandra images span 0.1-10 keV 
(12-0.12 nm). X-ray optics only reflect x-rays if they strike 
glancingly, at about 1°. So x-ray mirrors only bend light 
slightly, giving x-ray telescopes large f ratios, 8.3 for 
Chandra. So Chandra’s 1.2 m diameter mirror has to 
have a focal length of 10.070 m. To increase Chandra’s 
area four sets of almost cylindrical mirror shells are nest- 
ed within one another, giving a total of 800 cm2. To 
improve their reflectivity they are coated with iridium, a 
high-Z, high-density element. Since two reflections are 
needed to make an image, Wolter type 1 parabolas/ 
hyperbolas are used. With photon wavelengths of only a 
few nm the mirror surfaces must be smoother than this 
(<0.04 nm for Chandra), else photons would be scattered 
to large angles, blurring the image. 

To disperse the x-ray spectrum, Chandra has three 
sets of transmission diffraction gratings, optimized for 
low (LETG), medium (MEG) and high (HEG) energies. 
They all have line densities of about 1000 mm-!, and are 
constructed using semiconductor technology. The grat- 
ings behave like objective prisms, making an image of 
the source for each wavelength. Since a star makes a 
small image in Chandra, different wavelengths are well 
separated. 

Chandra has two types of detectors: ‘ACIS’ is made 
from charge-coupled devices (CCDs), cousins of video 
cameras CCDs; ‘HRC’ is made from microchannel plates, 
used in night vision goggles. HRC can time the arrival of 
x-ray photons to 16 ms, has the smallest pixels (0.4 arc- 
sec) and has a large (30 arcmin x 30 arcmin) field of view. 
The HRC has sensitivity to low-energy photons (to 
E~0.05 keV), and so is used to image the spectra from 
LETG. ACIS has better efficiency and energy resolution. 
ACIS uses two types of CCD chips: ‘frontside illuminat- 
ed’ (FI) which detect higher energy (E>1 keV) x-rays 
have low background, while ‘backside illuminated’ (BI) 
work well (QE>0.5) down to 0.5 keV. X-ray CCDs deter- 
mine the energy of each x-ray from the number of elec- 
trons it produces. An accidental exposure of the main 16 
arcmin x 16 arcmin array of four FI CCDs to energetic 
(100 keV) protons in the solar wind just after launch 
degraded their energy resolution. Much of this resolu- 
tion has been regained by cooling the chips and by spe- 
cial software. The smaller 8 arcmin x 8 arcmin BI chip 
was unaffected. 

Because every photon is recorded individually, x-ray 
images have four dimensions: position (x,y), energy and 
time. So, unlike the Hubble Space Telescope, Chandra 
does not have to be held immobile while exposing an 
image. Any blur is removed by repositioning each 
photon in software (using star positions from an 11.2 cm 
diameter optical telescope) at the Chandra X-ray Center 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Chandra X-ray Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which operates Chandra for NASA from Cambridge, 
Massachusetts (USA). The ability to slice x-ray images 
at will is invaluable for analysis, e.g. to extract 
the spectrum of whatever looks interesting, without 
having to decide in advance. (The ‘Proposers’ 
Observatory Guide’ has technical details on Chandra at 
http: / /asc.harvard.edu/.) 

Chandra is in a high (10000 km x 140000 km) orbit. 
This makes any part of the sky observable without con- 
tinual blocking by the Earth, increasing available observ- 
ing time and allowing long uninterrupted observations 
for studying variable sources. Chandra cannot be 
reached with the Space Shuttle, so its survival depends 
on no critical system breaking or running out of supplies. 
Everything on board is set to last 15 yr or more. No plans 
exist to build another x-ray telescope with comparable 
resolution. Fortunately, NASA plans to operate Chandra 
for at least 10 yr. 

Martin Elvis 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1910-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan 
(1910-95) 


Theoretical astrophysicist, born in Lahore, India, Nobel 
prizewinner (1983) ‘for his theoretical studies of the 
physical processes of importance to the structure and 
evolution of the stars’. At Cambridge and Copenhagen he 
developed the theory of white dwarf stars, showing that 
quantum mechanical degeneracy pressure cannot stabilize 
a massive star, and that white dwarfs have a maximum 
mass (the Chandrasekhar limit). At the University 
of Chicago and Yerkes Observatory he investigated 
and wrote books on stellar structure and evolution, 
the dynamical properties of star clusters and galaxies, 
radiative transfer, hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic 
stability, the stability of ellipsoidal figures of equilibrium, 
and the mathematical theory of black holes. Like sir 
JAMES JEANS, his work was characterized by an intense and 
protracted investigation of a certain area that appealed to 
him, which he then in retrospect presented in a definitive 
coherent book with order, form and structure. He edited 
the Astrophysical Journal for nearly 20 years. NASA’s 
advanced x-ray astronomy facility satellite, AXAF, has 
been renamed Chandra. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Charge-coupled Device 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. A 4096 x 4096 pixel CCD with 15 micron pixels 
packaged for use in a large astronomical spectrograph. 


Charge-coupled Device 


Charge-coupled devices (CCDs) are silicon-based optical 
detectors used in most near-UV, visible and near-IR 
imaging and spectroscopic astronomical instruments. 
They range in format from television resolution (340 x 
512 pixels) to 10000 x 10000 pixels. Modern CCDs 
have intrinsic noise of just a few electrons, dynamic 
range of 100000 and quantum efficiency of over 90% 
throughout most of their useful operating wavelengths. 
These characteristics make CCDs the detector of choice 
for most visible astronomical detection requirements. 


History and fundamentals 

Boyle and Smith invented the CCD at Bell Labs in 1969. 
While originally intended as a memory device, CCDs 
have been most widely used as imaging detectors (see 
e.g. INFRARED ARRAYS, INFRARED IMAGERS, WIDEFIELD CCD IMAGERS). 
They were first used in astronomy in the late 1970s 
and rapidly replaced photographic film (see CAMERAS), 
photodiode arrays and photocathode-based detectors. A 
large format CCD is shown in figure 1. 

The CCD basically consists of a one- or two- 
dimensional array of metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) 
capacitors in which the gate (‘metal’) of each capacitor 
is connected to buses to which external voltages are 
applied. These gates are actually made of polysilicon 
rather than metal to allow better light transmission 
through the frontside structure. Potential well minima 
are formed in the silicon under the CCD gates with 
the most positive applied voltage. Electrons are created 
from incident photons via the photoelectric effect and 
these photogenerated electrons are collected in the nearest 
potential well. 

CCDs are sensitive to all wavelengths shorter than 
the cut-off wavelength A cutog at which an incident photon’s 
energy E is the same as the detection material’s bandgap 
energy. All photons of shorter wavelength can excite an 
electron from the detector’s valance band to its conduction 
band. For silicon, the most commonly used CCD 
fabrication material, Epandgap = 1.12 eV, 80 Acutote = 1.1 wm. 

All gates that are electrically tied together are referred 
to as a phase. The majority of CCDs used in astronomy are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


three-phase devices, meaning that three electrical voltages 
must be applied to shift charge across the CCD. The 
distance from one phase to the next on the same bus defines 
the resolution of the detector, and is called a pixel. Typical 
CCD pixel sizes are 5-30 ym. 

The most commonly used CCD in astronomy consists 
of a two-dimensional array of pixels. The image section of 
such a device can be viewed as an array of columns and 
rows of pixels with a single serial shift register at the end 
of the columns. Charge is shifted (or charge-coupled) one 
row at a time in all columns at once, shifting the last row 
into the serial register. The columns are defined by channel 
stops of highly doped material which confine charge from 
spreading between adjacent columns. In this manner 
no gates are required to define pixels on the horizontal 
direction in the imaging area. The serial register is itself 
clocked to sequentially shift charge to an output amplifier 
located at its end. External electronics and a computer are 
used to convert this analog output sequence of voltages 
into an image. 


Architecture and operation 
The operation of a CCD can be divided into three modes: 
clearing, integration, and readout. 

Clearing is required to remove unwanted charge 
acquired by the device prior to making an integration. One 
method of clearing a device is to shift the charge from every 
pixel out of the device without recording the resultant data. 

During integration, positive voltages are set on some 
phases to define potential minima where photoelectrons 
are collected. The positive voltage is applied to one or two 
of the three phases. At least one phase of each pixel must 
be more negative to create a barrier to charge spreading, 
without which the image would smear. It is possible for 
this barrier to be created by a fixed implant rather than an 
applied voltage. During integration, photoelectrons are 
collected but no shifting occurs. 

ACCD must be cooled if the integration time is more 
than a few seconds to avoid the silicon’s self-generated 
dark signal filling the potential wells. Most astronomical 
CCDs are cooled to about —100°C in a liquid nitrogen 
dewar. Many smaller CCDs which are used for telescope 
guiding applications (where exposure times are just a few 
seconds) rely on thermoelectric coolers operating at about 
—40°C to reduce dark signal. 

After the integration time has expired, the CCD enters 
the readout phase. The location of each charge packet 
created during integration is shifted towards the output 
when a specific voltage sequence is applied to the buses, 
as shown in figure 2. Depending on architecture, split 
parallel clocks can be used to shift half the pixels toward 
one serial register and the other half toward another serial 
register, allowing readout in half the time. The serial 
register can also be split so that charge can be shifted 
toward amplifiers at each end, also decreasing readout 
time. 

There are several common architectures of scientific 
CCDs. The entire area of a full frame device is used to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Charge-coupled Device 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


{ 
ri] e2|  P3 | Pl| P2| P| 
H I I H I 
L H | 4H L HH 


Ww 


L i H I L H 


eS vc // 


Figure 2. The pixel structure of a typical three-phase CCD 
showing the applied voltages, potentials, and charge packet 
locations at three separate times. The times are represented by 
t1, t2, and t3. Applied voltage is indicated by L (low) or H 
(high). The three-phases are represented as P1, P2, and P3. 


collect images and is the most widely used in astronomy. 
A full frame CCD requires a shutter to open during 
integration (or exposure) and close during readout to 
avoid streaking from the light source while charge is 
shifted. In a frame transfer CCD, half of the imaging area 
is covered by an opaque frame-store mask. The unmasked 
section collects charge during integration. When the 
exposure is complete, the charge is very rapidly (10~° 
to 10~* s) shifted to the frame-store region where slower 
readout can take place while the next integration occurs 
in the image section. This eliminates the need for a 
mechanical shutter at the expense of losing half the 
detector’s area for imaging. An interline transfer CCD is 
similar to a frame transfer device in that it has an opaque 
bus along each column into which charge can be rapidly 
shifted after each integration. Interline transfer devices are 
the most commonly used CCDs for high-light applications 
(such as TV video) but are seldom used in astronomical 
applications. 


Amplifiers 
When electrons are shifted to the end of a serial register 
they are next detected by the output amplifier. The gate 
of a transistor (usually a field effect transistor, or FET) 
is connected to a sense node onto which the charge is 
shifted from the last serial pixel. The charge appears as 
a voltage on the gate of the FET due to the capacitance of 
the node. The conversion factor is typically 1 to 10 wV 
per electron for modern amplifiers. The output voltage is 
buffered by the FET to create a measurable voltage across a 
load resistor located off-chip. This output voltage is easily 
amplified in the controller electronics and converted to a 
digital signal by an analog-to-digital converter. The node 
must be reset before sensing each pixel so that charge does 
not accumulate from pixel to pixel. 

Read noise is a measure of the uncertainty in the 
output of the CCD and is often the dominant noise 
source for low-light-level imaging applications. Double 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


correlated sampling (DCS) reduces the uncertainty in the 
absolute charge level of the node at each reset. Before 
shifting each pixel, the node is reset with an on-chip Reset 
FET. The output voltage is sampled and recorded, the 
pixel to be measured is then shifted onto the node, the 
node is sampled again, and the difference between the 
two samples is calculated and recorded as the actual pixel 
value. By using DCS and low-noise output FETs, read 
noise of less than two electrons can be achieved. 


Quantum efficiency 
The quantum efficiency (QE;) of a CCD is given by 


OE, = qd = R,) exp(—a,,/t) 


where R, is the reflectivity of the incident detector surface, 
a, is the absorption length of photons at the specified 
wavelength and t is the effective device thickness. Front 
illuminated CCDs have photons incident on the gate 
structure which absorbs almost all blue and UV light. 
These devices are therefore not useful for A < 400 nm. 
In back illuminated (or thinned) CCDs, photons are 
incident on the backside of the device, opposite the gate 
structure. These devices must be very thin (<20 ym) 
for photoelectrons to be collected under the potential 
minima near the frontside gates. The thinning process is 
difficult and expensive, but QE is limited only by reflection 
at the back surface and the ability of silicon to absorb 
photons. Back illuminated devices can be antireflection 
coated to obtain peak QE of greater than 95% at specific 
wavelengths. The QE of CCDs drops significantly toward 
the near-IR because silicon’s absorption length increases 
dramatically from 100 Ain the UV to 100 jum in the near- 
IR. 


Bibliography 
Excellent references on CCDs and optical detector 
technology are: 


Theuwissen A J P 1995 Solid-State Imaging with Charge- 
Coupled Devices (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Dereniak E L and Crowe D G 1984 Optical Radiation 
Detectors (New York: Wiley) 


Many important papers on CCD technology can be 
found in the various Proceedings of the SPIE. 


Michael Lesser 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Charlier, Carl Vilhelm Ludwig (1862-1934) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Charlier, Carl Vilhelm Ludwig 
(1862-1934) 


Swedish astronomer, became director of the Lund observa- 
tory. Worked in celestial mechanics, instrumentation and 
statistics, studying the distribution and motions of stars in 
the solar neighborhood. He showed that the hotter stars 
and galactic clusters form a flattened system. He proposed 
a hierarchical model of galaxies in the universe, extending 
to infinity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Chaucer, Geoffrey (c. 1343-1400) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chaucer, Geoffrey (c. 1343-1400) 


Poet, probably born in London, England. Author of 
the Canterbury Tales, which show his familiarity with 
astrological matters, and A Treatise on the Astrolabe, once 
believed to have been written for a son of Chaucer’s, but 
now thought to be for the son of a friend, Lewis Clifford. 
The text is the oldest known ‘technical manual’ in the 
English language. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


In 1835, in a famously inaccurate forecast, the French 
philosopher Auguste Comte wrote of stars that, “We 
understand the possibility of determining their shapes, 
their distances, their sizes and their movements; whereas 
we would never know how to study by any means 
their chemical composition...’. At the close of the 20th 
century the accurate measurement of the abundances of 
the chemical elements in the visible surface layers of 
stars of all classes has become a relatively straightforward 
astrophysical procedure. This is the result of several 
important developments: (1) a physically realistic 
theory of the structure of stellar atmospheres; (2) high- 
powered computer workstations which can efficiently 
integrate the equation of radiative transfer through a 
model stellar atmosphere; (3) advanced theoretical codes 
dealing with physically complex situations, such as 
departures from local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE); 
(4) improvements in the basic atomic data needed to 
calculate the opacities which produce spectral absorption 
lines; (5) high-resolution spectrographs equipped with 
sensitive and linear electronic detectors; (6) access to the 
full range of wavelengths at which stars emit their light, 
including ultraviolet wavelengths observed from above 
the Earth’s atmosphere. 

The abundances of the chemical elements are a thread 
that ties together much of what we know about the 
evolution of stars, galaxies and the universe as a whole. 
The origin of the universe in the big bang yielded the 
most abundant of the elements, hydrogen (1H) and helium 
(He), as well as small quantities of the isotopes 7H 
(deuterium), *He and 7Li. All the remaining elements 
and isotopes found in nature have been produced by the 
nuclear reactions that power the stars during the normal 
course of their evolution, or by rapid NUCLEOSYNTHESIS 
during the final cataclysmic explosions of certain stars as 
SUPERNOVAE or, for a few elements, by the spallation of 
heavier nuclei by cosmic ray particles in the interstellar 
medium. Some of the products of nuclear reactions 
occurring within a star are injected back into the interstellar 
medium as the star casts off most of its mass during the 
brief final stages of its evolution. There they provide the 
raw material for the formation of later generations of stars, 
planets and ultimately life itself. 

This scenario for the origin of the elements leads to a 
profound consequence. The relative abundances of the 
elements are not necessarily constant in time or space. 
The initial chemical composition of a star is that of the 
interstellar cloud of gas and dust from which the star 
formed (see also INTERSTELLAR CHEMISTRY; COSMIC ABUNDANCE 
OF ELEMENTS). It is a function of the locality of the star’s birth 
in the galaxy and of the age and state of evolution of the 
galaxy at the time the star formed. The composition of the 
observable surface layers of a star may be modified over 
time by processes occurring within the STELLAR INTERIOR. 
For example, nuclides created by reactions in the star’s 
central core, or in shells surrounding the core, may be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dredged up and intermixed with unprocessed material 
at the star’s surface during the course of its evolution. 
Alternatively, the outer layers of an evolving star may be 
stripped away by mass loss, leaving its nuclear- processed 
interior exposed to view. Even in a young unevolved star 
atoms or ions of individual elements may settle below the 
observable surface under the pull of gravity or may be 
driven upward by radiation pressure and achieve high 
concentrations within the surface layers, if the atmosphere 
and envelope of the star are highly stable. Finally, a star 
may accrete processed material from a binary companion 
undergoing mass loss. 

Overall, this is a wonderful complexity. It allows 
us to use the observed chemical compositions of stars as 
tracers of the record of evolution of our own and perhaps 
of other galaxies. It allows us to observe the outcome 
of processes occurring in the interiors of stars normally 
hidden from our view. Moreover, at least an approximate 
knowledge of the chemical composition of a star is needed 
to deduce the opacity and the mean molecular weight 
of its material, which are essential input parameters for 
the computation of theoretical models of its atmospheric 
and interior structure. Such models are used in turn to 
perform detailed compositional analyses and to predict 
other observed stellar properties. The consistency of 
these theoretical models with the observables they are 
used to predict—stellar luminosity and color, the detailed 
distribution of stellar flux with wavelength, spectral line 
strengths and shapes—gives confidence in or sometimes 
raises questions about our physical understanding. 


How the chemical composition of a star is 
measured 

Only the surface layers of a star are directly observable 
with an astronomical spectrograph mounted on a tele- 
scope. Therefore, the abundances of the chemical elements 
derived from spectroscopically dispersed starlight reveal 
only the composition of the star’s atmosphere. 

Our ability to measure a star’s surface composition 
is enabled by the quantum structure of atoms and ions. 
Transitions of electrostatically bound electrons between 
quantum energy states, and the associated absorption or 
emission of photons, imprint on the stellar spectrum a 
pattern of discrete lines with wavelengths and relative 
strengths that are unique for every ionization state of every 
element in the periodic table. Accurate measurements of 
the wavelengths and relative strengths of spectral lines 
allow the identification of which chemical species are 
present. The measured absolute strengths of the lines— 
the amount of flux they have removed from or added to 
the background continuum of light emitted by the star— 
yield the abundances of those species. The atmospheres of 
cool stars also contain molecules (see STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: 
COOL sTars). The quantum structure of their electronic 
and vibrational energy states produces bands of closely 
spaced, discrete absorption or emission lines from which 
abundances can be measured. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


While it is possible to measure abundances from 
emission lines (lines brighter than the continuum) 
produced in the hot, tenuous chromosphere or corona of 
a cool star such as the Sun, the simplest and most accurate 
determinations are obtained from the absorption lines 
arising in the denser stellar photosphere (the Fraunhofer 
spectrum). The reason lies in a set of simplifying 
assumptions which characterize the physical conditions 
within the photospheres of many stars rather well, 
enabling accurate computations of their structures and 
emitted spectra. These include (1) LTE (the local radiation 
field is coupled to the local gas kinetic temperature), 
(2) plane parallel geometry (the photosphere is very 
thin, compared with the radius of the star), (3) radiative 
equilibrium (energy is transported primarily by radiation) 
and (4) hydrostatic equilibrium (the photosphere is 
essentially motionless). In principle, violations of any of 
these assumptions can be treated with physically more 
complex theoretical computations. However, these will 
not necessarily be of greater reliability, if input physical 
parameters are inaccurate. 

The observed depth of an absorption line centered at 
wavelength i, at a position in the line’s profile 4 + Ad, is 
a direct measure of the opacity of the stellar atmosphere 
produced by discrete electronic transitions within atoms 
or ions of the element in question, as they absorb photons 
of wavelength 4 + AA. The chemical abundance of the 
element is derived by comparing the observed strengths 
and shapes of its spectral lines with a theoretical model 
of the emergent flux from the star, calculated by solving 
the equation of RADIATIVE TRANSFER through a model stellar 
atmosphere in the presence of this line opacity. 

A theoretical model stellar atmosphere appropriate 
to a particular star provides a tabulation of the gas kinetic 
temperature, pressure and electron density at any depth 
x below the nominal ‘surface’ of the star. It is calculated 
with assumed abundances of hydrogen and helium and at 
least an approximate estimate of the abundances of heavier 
elements. From this information the total continuous 
opacity «, at any wavelength, produced at depth x by 
the ionization of atoms or ions (bound-free electronic 
transitions), by molecular dissociation and by electron 
scattering can be derived. Radiation emerging from the 
star at all wavelengths is attenuated by these continuous 
opacity sources and both line and continuous opacity 
at any wavelength must be included in the calculation 
of emergent flux. In the absence of spectral lines, 
that flux is set entirely by the continuous opacity, and 
thus spectroscopists sometimes refer to the ‘line-free 
continuum’ as a reference flux level against which to 
measure the strength of a spectral line. 

The line opacity is expressed in terms of a line 
absorption coefficient (units cm? g~!) 


1,(x, AA) = const x [Metrs(0)/Nei](Ne/ Nu) Nu fb, (x, AA) 
x (1 eT) (1) 


The factor Ne/Nu, the ratio of the total number of atoms 
and ions of the element per gram of stellar material to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


number of atoms and ions of hydrogen per gram, is the key 
abundance parameter we seek to measure. It is allowed to 
vary freely in the calculations until they produce a good 
match to the observations. All other factors in equation (1) 
must be evaluated with care lest they corrupt the accuracy 
of the abundance measurement. 

The factor nel,,s(x)/Ne is the population fraction of 
the element that lies in the excitation state s of ionization 
state r from which the line arises. In LTE this fraction is 
given by the combined Boltzmann and Saha equations. 
The assumption of LTE is a reasonable approximation of 
physical conditions in the deeper, denser layers of a stellar 
atmosphere where many weak and moderately strong 
spectral lines are formed. However, a more rigorous 
treatment of departures of energy level populations and 
ionization equilibria from their LTE values is sometimes 
required. The number of hydrogen atoms and ions per 
gram of stellar material, Ny in equation (1), follows directly 
from the abundance mix of hydrogen, helium and metals 
assumed in the original model atmosphere calculation. 

The factor f is the transition probability, the 
likelihood that the atom will absorb or emit a photon 
between two particular energy states. It can be determined 
in the laboratory, for example by measuring the lifetime of 
the upper level of the transition, selectively populated by 
laser-induced excitation. This value is then combined with 
the measured fraction of downward transitions from the 
upper level that end up in the lower excitation state of 
the line in question (the branching fraction) to obtain the 
transition probability. The f value can also be calculated 
with semi-empirical codes that use the measured energy 
levels of the atom or from ab initio theoretical computations 
of the structure of the atom, using complex quantum 
mechanical programs. Systematic errors in f values 
are notorious as a major cause of errors in abundance 
measurements. Moreover, the lack of a comprehensive 
and accurate database of f values can thwart even the most 
sophisticated non-LTE computations of level populations. 

The factor 1 — e”/**" in equation (1) corrects for 
radiatively stimulated emission of photons in the line. 
Here h is the Planck constant, k is Boltzmann’s constant, 
c is the velocity of light and T is the local gas kinetic 
temperature. 

The function (x, AA) in equation (1) describes 
the microscopic mechanisms which give the spectral 
line its finite width and shape under the conditions of 
temperature and density at depth x. These can affect 
the observed strength of the line (owing to saturation 
of the radiation available to be absorbed at wavelength 
A + Ad). Line broadening arises from a number of 
processes: (1) Doppler shifts resulting from thermal 
motion and small-scale turbulence of the gas; (2) the 
finite energy spread of the upper and lower states of 
the transition (a result of the Heisenberg uncertainty 
principle); (3) perturbations of the energy states due to 
the electrostatic fields of particles in the surrounding gas 
(Stark and van der Waals broadening); (4) shifting or 
splitting of the energy levels by magnetic fields (Zeeman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


effect) or by nuclear effects (hyperfine splitting and isotope 
shifts). Macroscopic mechanisms which also alter the 
width and shape of the line, but without changing its total 
strength, include large-scale mass motions (turbulence, 
convection and mass loss) and stellar rotation. When 
spectral lines become very strong (highly saturated or 
black at their centers), they become less sensitive to 
abundance variations (curve-of-growth effect) and more 
sensitive in their strength to the function (x, Ad). 
Thus, strong lines present significant challenges to the 
determination of accurate abundances. 

Light emitted at depth x at an angle @ to the surface 
normal of the stellar atmosphere is attenuated along its 
path to the surface by a factor exp(—t,,/ cos 8), where the 
dimensionless optical depth 1, is given by 


= i “(h, + p(x) dx (2) 
0 


and p(x) is the density of stellar material at depth x. The 
radiation emerges from a unit area of the stellar surface 
with intensity 


L(x = 0,0) =) Si(yje/S% dr,/cos@. (3) 
0 


The function S$, is called the ‘source function’ and is 
defined as the ratio of energy emitted per unit mass, time, 
wavelength and solid angle (the emission coefficient) at 
optical depth 1, to the total absorption coefficient J, + «,. 
Qualitatively, equation (3) simply states that radiation 
emitted from greater depths in the atmosphere undergoes 
greater attenuation before it emerges at the star’s surface. 
In LTE the source function is simply the Planck function 
describing black body emission at temperature T, 


S, = By(T) = (he? rye — 1), (4) 


The Sun is the only star whose surface is seen as an 
extended disk which can be spectroscopically observed 
over the range of angles 6 from its center (9 = 0°) to its 
limb (@ = 90°). Thus, equation (3) is directly applicable in 
modeling the observed intensity of sunlight at a particular 
point on the solar disk. For all other stars the relevant 
quantity is the integrated intensity over the hemisphere 
of the star facing toward Earth. What is observed at 
wavelength A, in the spectrum of a star of radius R at 
distance d from the Earth, is the flux 


fy. = 2m (R?/d*) fe 1,(0, 0) cos @ sin 6 dé. (5) 
0 


The quantity 27 R*/d? may be treated as a scaling factor, 
which is a byproduct of fitting the observed flux to 
the integrated emitted intensity computed from a model 
stellar atmosphere. 

Figure 1 gives an example of the process outlined 
above. Here, we have fitted the observed absorption line 
spectrum of a chemically peculiar B-type main-sequence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


star with a theoretically modeled synthetic spectrum in 
order to derive the abundance of the very heavy element 
thallium (atomic number 81). In this case the best fit to the 
spectrum is obtained assuming that thallium is in the form 
of isotopically pure 7T1, with an abundance of 4.66. By 
convention chemical abundances are expressed relative to 
hydrogen on a logarithmic scale, log(Ne/Nu) + 12. In this 
star’s atmosphere the abundance of thallium exceeds that 
in the sun by 3.76 in these logarithmic units, i.e. by a factor 
of 10°76 = 5700. 


The Sun as a reference standard for chemical 
abundances 

The abundances of the elements in the Sun and 
surrounding solar system are more extensively and 
reliably known than in any other star. Spectra of the 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE are observed with very high spectral 
resolution and signal-to-noise ratio because of the great 
brightness of the source, allowing the profiles of a 
multitude of weak or blended absorption lines to be 
accurately measured. Moreover, the structure and 
physical processes of the solar photosphere are well 
understood not only from theoretical models but also from 
empirical observations (e.g. the observed variations in the 
intensity of sunlight from the center to the limb of the 
solar disk). Photospheric SOLAR ABUNDANCES have been 
measured for approximately 60 chemical elements, and 
of these 43 are accurate to 25% or better—a small error bar, 
considering that the range of abundances spans 12 orders 
of magnitude. 

For the Sun to serve as a useful baseline against 
which the photospheric abundances of other stars may 
be compared, it is important to establish (1) that the 
Sun’s surface composition is essentially the same as 
the composition of the interstellar gas and dust from 
which it formed (i.e. that it has not been altered by 
processes endemic to the Sun itself) and (2) that the 
Sun’s photospheric abundances are, at least on average, 
representative of other stars formed at about the same time 
in the same region of the Galaxy. 

The composition of the solar photosphere is in 
close agreement with the composition of a rare class of 
meteorites, type CI carbonaceous CHONDRITES, for those 
elements for which accurate abundances have been 
measured in both, as summarized in table 1. The 
primary exceptions are Li, Be and B which are transported 
by convection into the solar interior and depleted by 
nuclear burning at relatively low temperatures. The 
meteoritic abundances can be measured accurately in 
the laboratory, providing an important calibration of the 
accuracy of astrophysical abundance measurements. For 
the small number of heavy elements for which substantial 
discrepancies exist between meteoritic and photospheric 
measurements, it is the photospheric abundances that are 
highly uncertain. 

Radiometric dating of chondritic meteorites indicates 
that they are as old as the solar system itself (4.55 Gyr). 
The carbonaceous chondrites contain a relatively high 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ov wt ee 
Ge sc) Rie > 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 


-2 


Flux (10°'° ergs cm 


—Till 


/ 


1908.0 1908.2 1908.4 1908.6 1908.8 1909.0 1909.2 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 1. A small portion of the ultraviolet spectrum of the chemically peculiar star y Lupi, observed with the Goddard High 
Resolution Spectrograph on board the Hubble Space Telescope (solid curve). Superimposed (dashed curve) is a theoretical spectrum in 
which the abundance of the thallium isotope 7T1 has been adjusted to fit the two observed absorption lines of singly ionized thallium 


(Tl I) marked with arrows. 


proportion of volatile elements and are believed to have 
been formed at great distance from the Sun. The close 
agreement between the composition of CI meteorites and 
the solar photosphere is strong evidence that the chemical 
composition of the Sun is (with a few exceptions) the same 
as that of the pre-solar nebula. 

Precise measurements of the chemical compositions 
of main-sequence stars that bracket the Sun in spectral type 
(the Sun is type G2 V) indicate that the solar composition 
is typical for stars similar to the Sun in age, ‘metallicity’ 
(as indicated by their iron abundance) and distance of 
formation from the Galactic center. This is true at least 
for the dozen or so elements whose abundances have been 
measured from optical spectra in large statistical surveys. 

The abundances of the elements in the solar system 
are often characterized as ‘cosmic abundances’ or ‘normal 
abundances’. These terms are overly simplified. However, 
the solar system does provide a representative sampling of 
the abundances for a particular time and place in Galactic 
history, which with few exceptions remain unaltered by 
processes at work in the Sun itself. 


Variations of abundances in time and space 

The Galaxy is heavily populated with low-mass stars like 
the Sun. The theoretical lifetimes of such stars, from 
the zero-age main sequence to the tip of the red-giant 
branch, range from about 4.5 Gyr for an F5 dwarf of 
solar composition (1.3 solar masses) to about 29 Gyr for 
a KO dwarf (0.8 solar masses). The Sun’s lifetime is 
approximately 12 Gyr. Consequently, the ages of stars 
in this large and widely distributed population span the 
entire history of the Galaxy. Collectively their surface 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


chemical compositions are an encyclopedia of Galactic 
evolution. In contrast the more massive O-, B- and A- 
type stars (>3 solar masses), which are hotter and shine 
more brightly, have short main-sequence lifetimes ~ 10°— 
108 years. These young stars portray the present-day 
composition and state of evolution of Galactic material. 

The composition of an individual star is dictated by 
the environment in which the star formed. This in turn is 
set by the history of stellar nucleosynthesis up to that time, 
by the processes which lead to the ejection of nuclides into 
the interstellar medium, by the relative amounts of time 
required for those processes to occur and by the dynamics 
of the Galaxy, which mixes and homogenizes interstellar 
material. Although a large variety of nuclear reaction 
chains occur in stellar interiors, there are only a few that 
ultimately lead to significant chemical enrichment of the 
interstellar medium. 

There now exist plausible scenarios to explain the 
astrophysical production of essentially all the chemical 
elements, thanks to major advances in stellar evolution 
theory coupled with a large body of modern observational 
stellar spectroscopy. These are described in the following 
summary. It is a large step, however, from a plausible 
scenario to conclusive observational proof, and in some 
cases considerable work remains to be done. 

The most abundant isotopes of elements heavier than 
boron are thought to be produced primarily in one or 
more of the following sites: (1) type II supernovae (SNII), 
(2) type Ia supernovae (SNIa) and (3) highly evolved low- 
and intermediate-mass stars (1-7 solar masses). Type II 
supernovae are massive stars (>7—8 solar masses) that end 
their lives in titanic explosions. Type Ia supernovae are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Measured abundances in the Sun and in meteorites. 


Photosphere Photosphere 
Element Photosphere Meteorites | —meteorites Element Photosphere Meteorites —meteorites 
01H 12.00 44 Ru 1.84 + 0.07 1.83+ 0.04 +0.01 
02 He [10.99 + 0.035] 45 Rh 1.12 + 0.12 1.10+ 0.08 +0.02 
03 Li 1.16 + 0.10 3.3140.04 —2.15 46 Pd 1.69 + 0.04 1.70+ 0.04 —0.01 
04 Be 1.15 +0.10 1.42+0.04 —0.27 47 Ag (0.94+0.25) 1.24+0.04 (—0.30) 
05B (2.6 + 0.3) 2.79 + 0.05 (—0.19) 48 Cd 1.77+0.11 1.76+ 0.04 +0.01 
06C 8.55 + 0.05 49 In (1.66+0.15) 0.82+ 0.04 (+0.84) 
07 N 7.97 + 0.07 50 Sn 2.0 + (0.3) 2.14+0.04 —0.14 
08 O 8.87 + 0.07 51 Sb 1.0 + (0.3) 1.03 + 0.04 —0.03 
09 F [4.56 + 0.3] 448+ 0.06 +0.08 52 Te 2.24 + 0.04 
10 Ne [8.08 + 0.06] 531 1.51 + 0.08 
11 Na 6.33 + 0.03 6.32+0.02 +0.01 54 Xe 2.23 + 0.08 
12 Mg 7.58 + 0.05 7.58+0.01 0.00 55 Cs 1.13 + 0.02 
13 Al 6.47 + 0.07 6.49+0.01 —0.02 56 Ba 2.13 + 0.05 2.22+0.02 —0.09 
14 Si 7.55 + 0.05 7.56+0.01 —0.01 57 La 1.17 + 0.07 1.22+ 0.02 —0.05 
15P 5.45 + (0.04) 5.53 40.04 —0.08 58 Ce 1.58 + 0.09 1.63 + 0.02 —0.05 
16S 7.33 + 0.11 7.20+0.04 +0.13 59 Pr 0.71 + 0.08 0.80 + 0.04 —0.09 
17Cl [5.5 + 0.3] 5.28+0.06 +0.22 60 Nd 1.50 + 0.06 1.49+ 0.02 +0.01 
18 Ar [6.52 + 0.10] 62 Sm 1.01 + 0.06 0.98+ 0.02 +0.03 
19K 5.12 + 0.13 5.13 40.02 —0.01 63 Eu 0.51 + 0.08 0.55+0.02 —0.04 
20 Ca 6.36 + 0.02 6.35+0.01 +0.01 64 Gd 1.12 + 0.04 1.09 + 0.02 +0.03 
21 Sc 3.17 + 0.10 3.10+0.01 +0.07 65 Tb (-—0.140.3)  0.35+ 0.04 (—0.45) 
22 Ti 5.02 + 0.06 4.94+ 0.02 +0.08 66 Dy 1.14 + 0.08 1.17+0.02 —0.03 
23.V 4.00 + 0.02 4.02 + 0.02 —0.02 67 Ho (0.26+0.16) 0.51+ 0.04 (—0.25) 
24 Cr 5.67 + 0.03 5.69 +0.01 —0.02 68 Er 0.93 + 0.06 0.97 + 0.02 —0.04 
25 Mn 5.39 + 0.03 5.53+0.01 —0.14 69 Tm (0.00+ 0.15) 0.15+ 0.04 (—0.15) 
26 Fe 7.50 + 0.04 7.50+0.01 0.00 70 Yb 1.08+ (0.15) 0.96+0.02 +0.12 
27 Co 4.92 + 0.04 4.91+0.01 +0.01 71 Lu (0.76+0.30) 0.13+40.02 (+0.63) 
28 Ni 6.25 + 0.01 6.25+0.01 0.00 72 Hf 0.88 + (0.08) 0.75+0.02 +0.13 
29 Cu 4.21 + 0.04 4.29+ 0.04 —0.08 73 Ta —0.13 + 0.04 
30 Zn 4.60 + 0.08 4.67 +0.04 —0.07 74W (1.1140.15) 0.694 0.03 (+0.42) 
31 Ga 2.88 + (0.10) 3.13 40.02 —0.25 75 Re 0.28 + 0.03 
32 Ge 3.41 + 0.14 3.63 + 0.04 —0.22 76 Os 1.45 + 0.10 1.39+0.02 +0.06 
33 As 2.37 + 0.02 77 Ir 1.35+ (0.10) 1.37+40.01 —0.02 
34 Se 3.38 + 0.02 78 Pt 1840.3 1.69+0.04 +0.11 
35 Br 2.63 + 0.04 79 Au (1.014+0.15) 0.87+40.02 (+0.14) 
36 Kr 3.23 + 0.07 80 Hg 1.17 + 0.08 
37 Rb 2.60 + (0.15) 2.41+0.02 +0.19 81 Tl (0.9 + 0.2) 0.83 + 0.04 (+0.07) 
38 Sr 2.97 + 0.07 2.92+0.02 +0.05 82 Pb 1.95 + 0.08 2.06+0.04 —0.11 
39 Y 2.24 + 0.03 2.234 0.02 +0.01 83 Bi 0.71 + 0.06 
40 Zr 2.60 + 0.02 2.61+ 0.02 —0.01 90 Th 0.09 + 0.02 
41 Nb 1.42 + 0.06 1.40+0.02 +0.02 92U (< — 0.47) —0.50 + 0.04 
42 Mo 1.92 + 0.05 1.97+0.02 —0.05 
Abundances are in the form log(Ne/NuH) + 12.00, where Nj is the abundance by number of atoms per gram of material. 


Values in square brackets are best estimates from non-photospheric data (e.g. solar wind or corona). Values in 
parentheses are uncertain. Taken from Grevesse N, Noels A and Sauval A J 1996 Standard abundances Cosmic 
Abundances (ASP Conf. Ser. 99) pp 117-26, reproduced courtesy of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference 


Series. 


carbon-oxygen (CO) white dwarfs in close binary systems 
that explode in nuclear deflagration of carbon following 
mass transfer from or merger with the binary companion. 
The envelopes of low- and intermediate-mass stars are 
chemically enriched by an orderly sequence of interior 
nuclear processing during their lifetimes. These envelopes 
are shed as stellar winds and planetary nebulae as the stars 
evolve off the asymptotic giant branch (AGB). 

The more massive AGB stars are believed to yield 
most of the carbon and nitrogen in the Galaxy. Oxygen 
and the ‘a elements’, whose most abundant isotopes are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


integral multiples of the helium nucleus (Mg, Si, S, Ar, Ca 
and Ti), are produced predominately by SNII. The ‘odd- 
Z’ light elements, Na and Al, evidently originate in the 
more massive and metal-rich SNII. Elements of the ‘iron 
peak’ (V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) come from both types of 
supernovae, but SNIa give a substantially higher yield of 
these elements. 

Elements heavier than the iron peak arise from the 
successive capture of neutrons. In NUCLEAR PROCESSING 
during helium-shell thermal pulses in the interiors of 
low-mass (1-3 solar mass) AGB stars, neutron captures 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


occur steadily but infrequently, allowing time for beta 
decay of the neutron to occur before subsequent neutron 
captures. This is the ‘s- (slow) process’. S-process 
elements, whose most abundant isotopes are created by 
this process, include Sr, Y, Zr, Nb, Ba, La, Ce and Nd. 

Explosive events such as supernovae are character- 
ized by high neutron fluxes. ‘R- (rapid) process’ elements 
are created in such environments when the capture of neu- 
trons occurs so rapidly that beta decay cannot take place 
prior to subsequent neutron captures. The sudden termi- 
nation of neutron captures at the completion of the explo- 
sive event yields a pattern of abundances in the ejected ma- 
terial rich in beta-unstable high-neutron-number isotopes, 
which subsequently decay to more stable nuclides. As 
measured in the solar system, approximately 2/3 of the 49 
stable elements heavier than Ge consist purely or predom- 
inantly of r-process isotopes. However, these are very- 
low-abundance, trace constituents of solar material. The 
pattern of relative abundances among the solar r-process 
elements appears nearly identical to that observed in very 
old, metal-poor stars in the halo of the Galaxy. This sug- 
gests that all r-process nuclides originate from a single site, 
most probably from SNII. 

Figure 2 provides an example of how stellar chemical 
abundances are used to probe Galactic evolution. By 
convention, an abundance ratio given in square brackets 
is the logarithmic abundance value relative to the 
abundance in the solar system, [A/B] = log (Na/Ns)star — 
log (Na/Np)sun- Between metallicity [Fe/H] = —1 and 
—4, corresponding to old stars in the Galactic halo, the 
measured abundance of a elements relative to iron exceeds 
the solar value on average by about +0.4 dex. There is 
a large star-to-star scatter which is partly real and partly 
measurement error. However, for the generally younger 
disk-population stars with metallicity [Fe/H] = —1 to 0 
or higher, [w/Fe] drops steadily toward the solar value 
as metallicity increases. This pattern is interpreted as 
resulting from the time lag between the rapid evolution 
(<0.02 Gyr) of massive stars to become SNII and the much 
slower evolution (0.1-10 Gyr) of the progenitors of CO 
white dwarfs to become SNIa. The SNII produce high 
yields of the a elements and small amounts of iron. A 
burst of massive star formation early in the Galaxy’s life 
would result soon thereafter in the ejection by SNIIs of 
material relatively rich in a elements into the interstellar 
medium, providing the raw material for the formation 
of low-metallicity, enhanced-a stars. In roughly a few 
hundred million years the first SNIa would have evolved 
from their 7-8 solar mass progenitors, yielding protostellar 
material significantly enriched in iron-peak elements, but 
with little additional production of the a elements. At this 
point the [a/Fe] ratio would begin to decrease, and this 
trend would continue as progressively lower-mass SNIa 
progenitors reached the endpoint of their evolution. This 
scenario is supported by stellar abundance measurements, 
such as those plotted in figure 2. The r-process elements 
follow a trend with [Fe/H] somewhat similar to the a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


elements. It is this evidence that suggests that SNII may 
also be responsible for their production. 

In the innermost 7 kpc of the Galactic disk the oldest, 
most metal-deficient stars ([Fe/H] = —1 to —0.5) have 
larger enhancements of [w/H] than do their counterparts 
at larger distances from the Galactic center. Also, the 
enhancement of «-element abundances persists to higher 
values of metallicity in the stars closer to the Galactic 
center. This suggests that STAR FORMATION, particularly of 
massive stars that become SNII, probably began earlier 
and has proceeded at a greater rate in the inner part of the 
Galactic disk. 

There is considerable evidence that the chemical 
composition of the Galactic disk has not evolved 
homogeneously. For example, it is very difficult to discern 
a clear relationship between [Fe/H] and stellar age in the 
solar neighborhood, although such a relationship would 
be expected from simple models of Galactic evolution. 
The youngest stars have [Fe/H] ~ 0 and the oldest have 
[Fe/H] ~ —1. However, there is a large and real scatter in 
metallicity at all ages in between. The natural variation in 
iron abundances among stars of the same age is estimated 
to be about +25-50% (10). The causes of this dispersion 
are not fully understood. It is clear that metal enrichment 
of the interstellar medium from which stars form is 
not only a function of time but of location. Important 
factors may include (1) local variations in initial mass 
function and star formation rates, (2) episodic infall of low- 
metallicity material (which can dilute the interstellar gas) 
onto localized regions of the disk and (3) the rate at which 
the Galactic disk becomes well mixed with gas recycled 
through stellar nucleosynthesis. 

The stars of the Galactic halo are metal deficient, 
averaging about —1.6 in [Fe/H]. The current record for 
the most metal deficient star observed is held by the 
halo giant CD —38 245 with [Fe/H] = —4.01. Intensive 
searches for zero-metallicity stars in the Galaxy have been 
unsuccessful. This suggests that the earliest epoch of 
nucleosynthesis may have occurred prior to the formation 
of the Galaxy itself, in protogalactic substructures. 

The halo stars contain a significantly higher propor- 
tion of r-process elements than the Sun. For very old stars 
with low metallicity, [Fe/H] < —2.5, the dispersion from 
star to star in the abundances of r-process elements is much 
larger than for the presumably younger stars of higher 
metallicity. It is likely that the early chemical evolution 
of the halo was dominated by a relatively small number 
of SNIIs, with a wide range of yields of heavy elements. 
The composition of the halo interstellar material was very 
inhomogeneous early in the life of the Galaxy but became 
less so as time progressed and the ejecta of discrete SNII 
events became more thoroughly mixed. 


Surface abundances as a window into the stellar 
interior 

Stars spend most of their lives on the hydrogen-burning 
main sequence. In this phase the chemical composition 
of their surfaces, with few exceptions, offers no hint of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.8 


0.7 


0.6 


0.5 


0.4 


0.3 


0.2 


[<Mg,Ca,Ti>/Fe] 


[Fe/H] 


Figure 2. Each point represents, for an individual star, the average measured abundance of three ‘a elements’ (magnesium, calcium 
and titanium) relative to iron, plotted as a function of the measured abundance of iron itself. All abundances are in logarithmic units, 
relative to the Sun—the coordinates (0,0) correspond to solar abundances. Stars with [Fe/H] < —1 are found in the Galactic halo and 
those with [Fe/H] « —1 are extremely old. Stars with [Fe/H] > —1 are found in the disk of the Galaxy. The inflection near [Fe/H] = —1 
is thought to represent the onset of major iron production in type Ia supernovae. (Data are taken from Nissen P E et al 1994 Astron. 
Astrophys. 285 440-50, Edvardsson B et al 1993 Astron. Astrophys. 275 101-52, Norris J E, Peterson R C and Beers T C 1993 Astrophys. J. 
415 797-810, Magain P 1989 Astron. Astrophys. 209 211-25 and Gratton R G and Sneden C 1988 Astron. Astrophys. 204 193-218.) 


the nuclear transmutations taking place deep within their 
interiors. However, when a star exhausts the supply of 
hydrogen in its central core it undergoes relatively rapid 
and dynamic readjustments of its structure associated with 
the various phases of post-main-sequence evolution. The 
products of nuclear burning may then be dredged to the 
surface by convection (possibly assisted by rotationally 
induced circulation) or exposed to view by copious mass 
loss or both. Thus, the observed surface compositions of 
evolved stars provide important empirical underpinnings 
for the theory of STELLAR EVOLUTION. 

Modifications of surface composition in this manner 
can take several forms: (1) changes in the relative 
abundances of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen and the 
carbon isotopes which mark the burning of H into He 
by the CNO cycle; (2) enhancements of the absolute 
abundance of carbon produced as a product of the ‘triple- 
alpha’ reaction which converts He to C; (3) enhancements 
of s-process elements created by the capture of neutrons 
released, for example, during the conversion by the ‘alpha 
process’ of '*N into *Mg and of '%C into 'O; (4) depletion 
of hydrogen and enrichment of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen 
and s-process elements as mass loss strips away the 
hydrogen-rich stellar envelope. In a binary system mass 
transfer from a highly evolved star to a lower-mass 
companion can result in similar abundance modifications 
of the latter’s atmosphere, which then displays abundance 
anomalies apparently at odds with its less-evolved state. 

The terminology of spectral classification of evolved 
stars with ‘anomalous’ surface abundances (e.g. stars of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


types C, R, S, N, Ba, CH, HdC, RCrB, OBN, OBC, WN, 
WC, WO) is rooted in the history of observational stellar 
spectroscopy going back more than a century. It conveys 
no information about the progression of stellar evolution, 
as itis understood today, which has as its logical byproduct 
the development of these abundance ‘anomalies’. This 
modern framework is well illustrated by the projected 
future course of evolution of the Sun. In broad outline the 
evolutionary scenario for the sun is similar to that of all 
stars up to about 7-8 solar masses. The major distinction 
among stars in this mass range relates to the manner in 
which they begin to burn helium into carbon in their 
central cores late in life—explosively in the case of stars 
less than about 2.5 solar masses, quiescently for the more 
massive stars. 

After exhaustion of the Sun’s central hydrogen fuel 
supply, its helium core will contract, hydrogen shell 
burning will commence, envelope expansion will occur 
and the Sun will evolve away from the main sequence 
and up the red-giant branch (RGB). In the initial stages 
of evolution up the RGB the Sun’s convective envelope 
will extend deeply into the interior and, in this ‘first 
dredge-up phase’, will bring to the surface the products 
of CN nuclear processing which occurred while the Sun 
was on the main sequence. The solar photosphere will 
become enhanced in nitrogen and reduced in carbon, with 
a decrease of the '7C/1°C ratio. Such changes are observed 
on the surfaces of metal-rich field stars like the Sun as they 
begin their ascent up the RGB in good agreement with the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


predictions of standard stellar evolution theory. Farther 
up the RGB, however, the Sun may exhibit additional 
abundance modifications of the same type, indicating 
dredge-up of CN-processed material from deep layers 
near the hydrogen-burning shell. Bright metal-poor RGB 
stars in GLOBULAR CLUSTERS can also show the products 
of ON-processing and proton-capture reactions at the 
stellar surface. Enhanced nitrogen, depleted oxygen, very 
low *C/*#C values (3-4), and abnormal abundances of 
sodium, aluminum and magnesium are all observed. For 
both metal-rich field RGB stars and bright metal-poor 
globular cluster RGB stars this extra mixing with deep 
interior regions is not predicted by basic theoretical models 
of the stellar interior. Standard models for these more 
evolved RGB stars contain an extended radiative region 
between the hydrogen-burning shell and the convective 
envelope that prevents the two from coming into contact. 
The resolution of this quandary is believed to reside in 
the influence of stellar rotation, which creates circulation 
currents capable of transporting CN- and ON-processed 
material upward to the base of the convection zone (see 
also STELLAR ROTATION ON THE MAIN SEQUENCE). This is a good 
example of the insight surface abundances can provide 
into otherwise undetectable processes hidden from view 
within the stellar interior. In general the observed surface 
abundances of RGB stars appear to depend in a complex 
(and often puzzling) manner on whether the stars are 
metal rich or metal poor, and whether they are found in 
globular clusters or in the field. ‘Environmental pollution’ 
from the ejecta of highly evolved stars in the near vicinity, 
particularly in the crowded stellar neighborhoods within 
globular clusters, is another process that is sometimes 
evoked to explain such complexities. 

At the tip of the RGB, the Sun will achieve a 
high temperature in its degenerate central core, inducing 
‘helium-flash’ ignition of the triple-alpha reaction that 
converts helium to carbon. The helium-burning core 
will join the outward-moving hydrogen-burning shell as 
the sources of the Sun’s luminosity on the ‘zero-age’ 
horizontal branch. Subsequently, as the fuel supply of 
the helium core is depleted, the Sun will advance into a 
phase characterized by nuclear burning alternately within 
a helium shell and a hydrogen shell. During this ‘two- 
shell’ period its envelope will once again expand as it 
evolves up the AGB. Periodic thermal flashes associated 
with ignition of the helium shell will produce a plentiful 
supply of carbon and also of s-process elements, which 
will be dredged upward through the convective envelope 
to the surface. The Sun may first become an S star, 
with atmospheric enhancements primarily of s-process 
elements. At this stage its spectrum may even reveal 
technetium (Tc), a radioactive s-process element with 
sucha short half-life (2 x 10° yr) that its presence essentially 
proves that nuclear-processed material has been dredged 
up from the deep interior very recently. In due course, 
farther up the AGB, the Sun will become a classical carbon 
or N-type star, whose spectrum is characterized by strong 
bands of CH, CN, C2 and C3. Ultimately, much of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sun’s hydrogen-rich envelope will be ejected as a PLANETARY 
NEBULA, leaving behind a WHITE DWARF core composed of 
carbon and oxygen, probably overlaid with thin surface 
strata of hydrogen on top of helium, segregated by 
gravitational settling. If the Sun had a less massive binary 
companion, its atmosphere could be polluted by the Sun’s 
ejected envelope and acquire the anomalous abundances 
associated, for example, with barium (Ba) stars. 

For stars more massive than about 7-8 solar masses, 
evolution induces surface abundance changes primarily 
as a result of large-scale mass loss in strong stellar winds. 
The wo.r-rAyeT (WR) stars are good examples. They are 
classified as a spectroscopic sequence: WN stars with 
enhanced nitrogen and helium, WC stars enhanced in 
carbon and WO stars enriched in oxygen. This ordering 
reflects progressively deeper exposure of the stellar core 
by mass loss, revealing the products first of hydrogen 
burning, then of helium burning and finally of carbon 
burning. 


Atmospheric abundance anomalies in 
main-sequence stars 
For a century stellar spectroscopists have been intrigued 
and bemused by the main-sequence stars classified as 
Ap (‘p’ denotes ‘peculiar’), Bp, Am (‘m’ stands for 
‘metallic line’), Si, SrEuCr, HgMn or more generally 
CP (for ‘chemically peculiar’). The atmospheres of 
these stars display astounding departures from solar 
abundances in many elements, including enhancements 
of heavy elements such as Hg by factors ranging up 
to 10°-10°. Large anomalies in the isotopic mixture 
of some elements are also occasionally observed (see, 
e.g., figure 1). There are no known nuclear processes 
capable of explaining these anomalies. The most 
important clue to their interpretation is the location of 
these stars in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM. Collectively, 
they constitute 10-20% of all main-sequence stars with 
effective temperatures between approximately 9000 K and 
16000 K. Stars in this temperature range are too hot to 
possess extensive convective envelopes (the thin hydrogen 
convection zone dies out completely around 10000 K) 
and too cool to have significant stellar winds. Many 
of them possess strong dipolar or quadrupolar magnetic 
fields. Both magnetic and non-magnetic CP stars tend to 
be intrinsically slow rotators. This combination of factors 
implies that the CP stars must possess hydrodynamically 
very stable atmospheres and envelopes. In such a 
quiescent environment atoms and ions are susceptible 
to gravitational settling and radiatively driven diffusion. 
The competition between gravity and radiation results 
in some ions drifting downward out of view below 
the photosphere, while others are being driven upward 
into the photosphere by radiation pressure transmitted 
through strong spectral lines or continua at wavelengths 
at which the star strongly emits flux. 

This scenario is qualitatively supported by the 
observations. For example, the largest abundance 
enhancements often occur in elements that were originally 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chemical Compositions of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


very low in abundance in the material from which the star 
formed (i.e. virtually all elements heavier than the iron 
peak), while the initially abundant elements (e.g. He, C, 
N) tend to be somewhat depleted. The abundant elements 
saturate the radiation field in their strongest spectral lines 
so that they absorb relatively little radiation pressure and 
(in the absence of any other material circulation or mixing) 
tend to sink. The converse is true of initially trace elements. 
Some ions (e.g. B II, Zn II) can absorb so much radiation 
pressure that they are blown entirely away from the star, 
presaging the onset of the stronger stellar winds at higher 
effective temperatures. Magnetic field lines also serve to 
guide the migration of ions under gravity and radiation 
pressure, producing surface abundance inhomogeneities 
or ‘star spots’ on the magnetic CP stars. 

Radiatively driven diffusion and gravitational set- 
tling of atoms and ions have significance beyond the 
bizarre abundance patterns of CP stars. Theoretical diffu- 
sion models suggest that helium, second only to hydrogen 
in abundance, has been reduced in the Sun’s photosphere 
by about 10% owing to gravitational settling. These pro- 
cesses may be at work deeper in the interiors of stars in 
regions of radiative equilibrium, modifying the opacity 
and mean molecular weight of stellar material. 

The only other example of main-sequence stars 
which exhibit abundance anomalies in their atmospheres 
(excepting binaries that have accreted material from an 
evolved companion) is the very massive stars classified 
as OBN. There is evidence of CNO processing of material 
seen at the surface of these stars, i.e. enhanced nitrogen 
and reduced carbon abundances. Since these stars 
possess radiative envelopes, the most likely mechanism 
for transport of CNO-processed material from the deep 
interior is meridional circulation, which is a natural 
consequence of their normal, rapid rotation. 


Bibliography 

Cox P A 1989 The Elements: Their Origin, Abundance and 
Distribution (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Holt S S and Sonneborn G (ed) 1996 Cosmic Abundances 
(ASP Conf. Ser. 99) (San Francisco, CA: Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific) 

McWilliam A 1997 Abundance ratios and galactic chemical 
evolution Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 503-56 
Michaud G and Tutukov A (ed) 1990 Evolution of Stars: 
the Photospheric Abundance Connection (IAU Symp. 

No.145) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Mihalas D 1978 Stellar Atmospheres 2nd edn (San Francisco, 
CA: Freeman) 

Smith K C 1996 Chemically peculiar hot stars Astrophys. 
Space Sci. 237 77-105 


David Leckrone 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chicxulub Basin 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chicxulub Basin 


A terrestrial impact feature about 170 km in diameter 
centered near the coastal town of Puerto Chicxulub on 
the northern coast of Mexico’s Yucatén Peninsula. The 
structure is well preserved but not apparent on the surface, 
being buried beneath about a kilometer of sediments. Its 
presence was suspected when arc-like formations showed 
up in plots of surface-gravity variations. Supporting 
evidence came in the form of microtektites (microscopic 
glass beads formed from impact-melted surface material) 
found in Haiti. Confirmation was provided by offshore 
drilling carried out in a search for new oilfields. The 
age of the Chicxulub basin is 65 million years, and its 
size is consistent with the impact of a 10 km diameter 
asteroid. Such an impact would have had catastrophic 
consequences for life and the environment. It seems likely 
that this was the event responsible for the mass extinctions 
that occurred at the end of the Cretaceous period 65 million 
years ago, leaving its mark as a sedimentary layer enriched 
in iridium at what is known to stratigraphists as the K/T 
boundary. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chinese Astronomical Society ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chinese Astronomical Society 


The Chinese Astronomical Society (CAS), founded in 1922, 
now has eleven professional commissions and six working 
committees. The total membership of the CAS is 1651, 
including 272 IAU members. The secretariat is located at 
the Purple Mountain Observatory. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.bao.ac.cn/cas/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Chinese Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chinese Astronomy 


Astronomy has been a subject of interest to Chinese people 
since ancient times. As early as the sixteenth century 
BC, a supernova was recorded on an animal bone used 
in divination. In ancient China, the main mission for 
astronomers was to determine the farming seasons and 
to predict important events for the future according to 
the phenomena that appeared in the sky. In the minds of 
rulers in ancient times astronomy had been given special 
status among the disciplines of natural sciences because 
of the belief that it helps predict the future, and fate. Asa 
result, astronomers had been appointed as royal officials 
since the twenty-fourth centre Bc. A royal observatory was 
established in the West Zhou Dynasty (eleventh century 
Bc-771 Bc) and continued its existence into the beginning 
of the twentieth century. 

Because in ancient times astronomy was serving the 
needs of rulers, it was treated as ASTROLOGY to some extent. 
for divination purposes, observation and predictions of 
solar and lunar eclipses were given special attention. The 
conjunctions of bright planets as well as appearances of 
comets, meteors and new stars were considered to have 
divinatory value. Therefore the movements of the Sun, 
Moon and planets, and rare astronomical phenomena were 
carefully and systematically observed. Thus a huge body 
of astronomical phenomena were recorded. The unique 
status of astronomy in ancient China guaranteed a separate 
astronomical chapter in the historical chronicle and more 
than 10000 individual records of solar and lunar eclipses, 
sunspots, auroras, meteors and meteorites, comets, novae 
and supernovae, the occultation of planets by the moon 
and other phenomena were saved. An account of comets 
in the eleventh century Bc and a record of sunspots in 
28 Bc are considered as the earliest recorded observations of 
these phenomena in astronomical history. China’s records 
of historical supernovae are the most complete in the 
world. Among them, the recording of the 1054 supernova 
has been used to determine the age of the Crab pulsar. 
The records of eclipses have been applied to calculate the 
secular acceleration of the Earth’s rotation (see also CHINESE 
ASTRONOMY IN HISTORY). 

Astronomy enjoyed great development as a very 
important tool for making calendars and keeping time. 
Since the twenty-fourth century Bc, a lunisolar calendar 
system, combining the lunar and solar calendars, was 
established and this system continues to exist even today 
in China. The length of a year is determined by the period 
of apparent motion of the Sun. The length of a month is 
determined by the synodic period of the Moon. The two 
calendar systems are coordinated by seven leap months in 
19 years. 

Since the seventh century Bc gnomons were made 
to determine the time of the summer solstice and winter 
solstice, so as to determine the length of a year. The length 
of a year was taken to be 365.25 days in the calendar in use 
in the fifth century sc. In 1277, Guo Shoujing, a well known 
astronomer in the Yuan Dynasty, used a horizontal rod to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


replace the tablet in the gnomon and added a pinhole- 
imaging device to increase the sharpness of the shadow. 
The precision acquired by using the improved device 
resulted in an error of only about several arcseconds of 
the latitude of the Sun. The precise calculation of length of 
a year was recorded in a calendar book in 1199. According 
to this calendar, a year has exactly 365.2425 days. This 
calculation was confirmed by Guo Shoujing’s observation 
in 1281. This is very close to today’s value of the tropical 
year. 

To keep time, a clepsydra (a water clock) was 
commonly used since the eighth century sc. A water- 
powered globe was built to show the revolution of celestial 
sphere by ZHANG HENG, the famous astronomer in the 
Han dynasty, in the third century. The water globe was 
improved by Yi Xing and Liang Lingzhan in the year 
723, in which the escape wheel was invented. Yi Xing 
also deduced from his observations that the difference of 
altitude of the polar star was constant in a fixed distance 
along the terrestrial meridian. This knowledge was used 
by him to measure the size of the territory of the country. 

From the second century Bc to the thirteenth century 
AD, observatory instruments and observations improved 
dramatically. To determine the positions of stars and 
planets, an ARMILLARY SPHERE (an equatorial mounted 
instrument) was built in the first century Bc. This 
instrument consisted of a polar axis, a sighting tube and, 
equatorial and horizontal circles with a scale of 365.25 
degrees. In the fourth century Bc, coordinates of 121 stars 
were listed in Shi Shen’s star catalog. A more detailed 
catalog that included 283 constellations and 1464 stars had 
been compiled in the third century ap by Chen Zuo with 
China’s own special constellations and naming system. 
However, even more remarkable was a star atlas that was 
stored in Dunhuang grottos, in which 1350 stars and 283 
constellations were recorded early in the eighth century. 
Besides, as a result of detailed observations some laws 
were discovered. One of them was the discovery of 
precession by Yu Xi in 330. Careful observations in the 
fourth century also led to the discovery that comets’ tails 
always point away from the Sun and that comets always 
reflect the Sun’s rays. 

Between the eighth century sc and the third century 
Ab, different hypotheses regarding the definition and 
concept of the universe were actively debated and 
recorded. Among them, one hypothesis suggested that the 
Earth and stars float in an unlimited space. Theoretical 
thought—for instance, discussions on the structure of 
the universe—was considered to be useless to life and 
neglected in the Tang dynasty (618-906). Furthermore, 
people outside the royal observatory were forbidden 
to study astronomy from the Tang dynasty onwards. 
Unfortunately, therefore, the imperial management of 
astronomy restrained the free development of studies of 
astronomy in ancient China. Precise measurements of the 
position and movements of planets were not emphasized 
enough, except their synodic periods, and this absence of 
precision and the dominance of astrology in ancient China 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chinese Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


resulted in much slower development of the theory of 
planetary motion than in Europe. Despite an abundance 
of many great astronomical discoveries, studies of those 
observations were not systematic and did not lead to 
many breakthroughs in astronomical theories. From 
the fourteenth to fifteenth centuries, the development of 
astronomy in China slowed down. 

At the beginning of the seventeenth century, Math- 
oeus Ricci and other missionaries came to China from 
Europe and worked in cooperation with Chinese as- 
tronomers. They introduced modern western astronomy 
to China including the Copernican theory, telescopes and 
spherical astronomy. 


Modern astronomy in China 

In 1911, with the ending of China’s last dynasty, the Qing 
Dynasty, the royal observatory was closed. The Chinese 
Republic later established the Central Observatory in 
Beijing. In 1958, BEIJING ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY Was 
rebuilt. Zo-Se Observatory was built near Shanghai in 
1900, where a 40 cm refractor, the first large telescope 
used in astronomical study in China, was installed. 
Zi-Ka-Wei observatory, built in 1872, began to broadcast 
the time signal in 1914. These two observatories were 
combined to become the present SHANGHAI ASTRONOMICAL 
OBSERVATORY. In 1935, the PURPLE MOUNTAIN OBSERVATORY 
(PMO) was established as an institute of the Academy. 
Telescopes were installed one after another. In 1975, 
Yunnan Astronomical Observatory was separated from 
PMO to become an independent observatory. Shaanxi 
Observatory was built as the time service center of China in 
1966. The majority of astronomers and instruments work 
in the five observatories managed by the Chinese Academy 
of Sciences. 

The Beijing Astronomical Observatory (BAO) is en- 
gaged in astrophysical research including the abundance 
of the elements, short period ceiphids, supernova surveys 
and AGNs;, starburst galaxies, optical identification of x- 
ray sources, large-scale structure of galaxies, narrow-band 
surveys, radio astronomy and solar physics. The optical, 
radio and solar observing sites are separately located in 
Xinglong, Miyun and Huairou along the Great Wall. The 
BAO manages the Beijing Regional Warning Center of the 
International Space Environment Service. The solar mag- 
netic field of active regions and solar radio eruptions are 
monitored. Predictions of events of solar activity are pro- 
vided. A 2.16 m telescope, solar magnetic field telescope, 
1.26 m infrared telescope, and meter-wave radio synthesis 
telescope are installed in BAO. World Data Center-D for 
Astronomy is also located at the BAO. 

The Shanghai Astronomical Observatory (SAO) 
focuses more on studies of astro-geodynamics and 
astrometry. VLBI measurements, satellite and lunar laser 
ranging are used to determine Earth rotation parameters. 
The variability of the baseline is being interferometrically 
measured in cooperation with Japanese, German and 
American observatories. They are also beginning to 
develop some astrophysical studies in SAO. Open cluster 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


variables in spherical clusters and N-body simulations are 
the main areas of interest in astrophysical research. Two 
25 m radio dishes have been installed in Shanghai and 
Urumdi stations and are working as VLBI units of EVN. 
A 1.56 m reflector is operated in SAO. The Eastern Asia— 
Pacific Space Geodynamics Network was established in 
SAO in 1994, in which more than 20 VLBI, GPS and SLR 
stations of about 10 countries participate. 

Scientists at the Purple Mountain Observatory 
(PMO) conduct research on the solar system, molecular 
astronomy and satellite dynamics. Minor planets, 
planetary physics, artificial satellite dynamics and 
astronomical almanacs are traditional research fields. 
Researches and techniques in millimeter wave astronomy 
have made tremendous progress in recent years. A 13.6 m 
mm-wave telescope has been installed in the Qinghai 
plateau. 

The fine structure of the Sun, rotation of stars, close 
binaries, stellar structure and BL Lac objects are the main 
fields of research in Yunnan Astronomical Observatory. 
Scientists here are conducting research into artificial 
satellite dynamics, astrometry and solar radio eruption. 
A 1m telescope and several small telescopes are in use in 
Kunming, the capital of Yunnan province. 

Institutions providing astronomical education report 
to the Ministry of Education. These institutions include: 
the Department of Astronomy of Nanjing University, the 
Department of Astronomy of Beijing Normal University 
and the Department of Astrophysics of Peking University. 
Though no observation facilities are available in these 
universities, scientists and faculties from these universities 
can use telescopes and observations from different 
observatories based on the quality of the applications. 

The High Energy Astrophysics Center of the Institute 
for High Energy Physics, the Center for Astrophysics of 
China Science and Technology University, astrophysics 
groups in Nanjing Normal University, Jiaotong University 
and Huazhong Normal University are active in researches 
on high-energy astrophysics and plasma astrophysics. 

In Teipei, the Institute for Astrophysics of the 
Academia Sinica was built in 1990. This institute adds two 
dishes to the Sub-Millimeter Array (SMA) and supports 
and shares 10% of BIMA to cooperate with astronomers 
in the US. The Institute for Astronomy was established 
in the Central University at Zhongli, a town south of 
Teipei; its 70 cm telescope was installed in Mount Yu. A 
solar oscillation net with five detectors installed in Big 
Bear, the Canary Islands, Tashkent, Beijing and Teipei 
has operated in Tsinghua University since 1991. In Hong 
Kong, astrophysics research groups are actively working 
in Hong Kong University, Hong Kong Chinese University 
and Hong Kong Science and Technology University. 

The Beijing Planetarium was established as a center 
for popular astronomy in 1957. The Astronomical 
Museum in Taipei was built in 1996, in which the exhibition 
area covered 50000 m*. Hong Kong Planetarium was built 
in 1980. More than 50 small planetaria are scattered across 
the country. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chinese Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The CHINESE ASTRONOMICAL socieTy (CAS) is a non- 
government organization for astronomers and scientists. 
The CAS is an affiliate of the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL 
UNION (IAU). The Astronomical Association, located in 
Teipei, is an affiliate of the IAU. The Hong Kong 
Astrophysics Society was established in 1997. 

Most of the telescopes used in the observatories 
of the mainland are made by the Center for Research 
and Manufacture of Astronomical Instruments in Nanjing 
in cooperation with the observatories. New initiatives 
for future astronomical instruments in China have 
been scheduled. The Large Multi-Object Spectroscopy 
Telescope (LAMOST) was approved as a national project 
in the 1990s. LAMOST is an alt-azimuthally mounted 
reflecting Schmidt telescope. The optical system consists 
of a 6 x 6.7 m spherical mirror fixed on the foundation 
and facing north. An aspheric reflecting mirror lies at the 
center of the sphere 40 m away. Spherical aberration will 
be eliminated in real time with the help of active optics. 
The effective aperture is 4m. The focal length is 20 m. The 
field of view is about 5° giving a linear diameter 1.75 m. 
Due to the large FOV, about 4000 fibers can be attached 
to the focal surface so the spectra of 4000 objects can be 
simultaneously observed. The LAMOST project will be 
completed in 2004. 

Financial support for astronomy in China comes 
mainly from CAS, the Ministry of Education, the 
Ministry of Science and Technology, the National 
Natural Sciences Foundation (NNSF) and the National 
Planning Committee. The CAS and the Ministry 
of Education provide operational expenses for their 
affiliate observatories and departments, which amount to 
US$10 million per year approximately. NNSF supports 
individuals and groups as well as moderate and small 
programs of about US$1 million per year. The National 
Planning Committee supports large projects involving the 
construction of large scientific instruments. The budget of 
LAMOST is US$30 million. The Ministry of Sciences and 
Technology funds the larger research projects, which have 
budgets of about US$1 million a year. 


Qibin Li 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chinese Astronomy in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chinese Astronomy in History 


This article outlines knowledge of the sky and the celestial 
motions that originated in Chinese culture from earliest 
times to 1912, when the use of traditional techniques ended 
along with the Chinese empire. 

The Chinese experience of astronomy for the past two 
thousand years repays study because, unlike Europe, the 
level of knowledge and practice remained high without 
interruption for more than two thousand years and 
because it was based on styles of work quite different from 
those prevalent in the West. 


Setting 

All of the great historical civilizations have exchanged 
ideas and artifacts since the New Stone Age. China was 
so isolated from Europe, the Middle East and India that 
outside scientific influence remained controllable until the 
mid-19th century. It remained a centrally ruled empire 
larger than all of Europe for more than 2000 yr. Even in 
brief periods of division, the continuity of its high culture, 
unlike that of Europe for much of the Middle Ages, was 
never interrupted. 

Despite China’s enormous extent and local diversity, 
its literate elite, because of their classical educations, 
shared not only a language but values and patterns 
of thought. Among these values was overwhelming 
prestige for the civil service. One generation of talented 
astronomers after another sought the only employer 
ready to provide large, long-term investment in scientific 
research and development. 

The government supported large-scale astronomical 
projects, from the 2nd century BC on, because of the 
ideology that justified its power. It claimed that the 
imperial house was chosen by Heaven (that is, the 
divine order of nature) to shape society in its image. 
The monarch’s personal virtue and charisma, not his 
managerial skills, kept him in touch with the cosmic order 
and enabled him to keep the state in harmony with it. 

This doctrine included the notion of the Mandate of 
Heaven. Heaven chose an exceptionally virtuous family 
to rule. When eventually its descendants no longer 
maintained that virtue, Heaven transferred the mandate 
to a worthier family. The conquest that ended a dynasty 
and began anew one was thus nota crime—if it succeeded. 

There was an early warning system. Certain 
anomalous phenomena in the sky (or, less often, on Earth) 
signaled that the ruler must reform or be dethroned. 
Auspicious omens acknowledged a sage reign—or, in 
different circumstances, encouraged a sage rebel. 

Prompt notification was essential. As a result, 
the imperial court included an amply staffed Bureau 
of Astronomy. Its responsibilities for astRoLocy and 
mathematical astronomy were intimately related. Its 
officials scrutinized the sky for omens, recorded them, 
determined their meaning from the Bureau’s archives and 
reported them so that the emperor and his officials could 
determine how to respond. Accounts of this process 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


suggest that astrology was important not as a source of 
objective predictions, right or wrong, but as a ritual form 
for the open discussion of policy. 

Equally important was moving as many phenomena 
as possible from the realm of the ominous to that of the 
predictable, an effort that improved computation. For 
instance, by the late 3rd century AD new moons on the 
last day of the month had ceased to be omens. Because it 
was impossible to consistently forecast solar EcLIPsES that 
would be visible from a given observatory, unpredicted 
eclipses remained the chief concern of rulers. 

The emperor symbolically expressed his control over 
time as well as space by issuing the annual CALENDAR 
(actually an ephemeris or almanac that included eclipses 
and planetary phenomena). He expected the Bureau to 
incorporate in it the most accurate predictions possible, 
particularly those of eclipses. 

As a result of this ongoing state sponsorship, 
the published historical record offers unbroken, dated 
records of most important celestial phenomena, and 
detailed accounts of the evolving methods used to make 
EPHEMERIDES, for more than two millennia. 


Beginnings 

Records written on bone in the 15th century BC include 
observations of phenomena in the sky. Because these 
documents come from royal archives, eclipse sightings are 
prominent and figure as portents. They are dated using a 
cycle of 60 days, uninterrupted until modern times. 

In the 4th and 3rd centuries the warring states used 
a variety of discrepant calendars. All were based on the 
tropical year and the lunation. They were generated by 
counting from an epoch chosen as the beginning of a year, 
month, 60 day cycle and day. The astronomical year began 
at the winter solstice, the month at the new Moon—not 
an observable event—and the day at midnight. Thus 
the epoch of the Triple Concordance system of 7 BC was 
exactly set at midnight of sexagenary day 1, 143127 yr 
before the winter solstice of 24 December 105 BC. 

Since the civil year needed an integral number of days 
per month and months per year, months of 29 or 30 days 
roughly alternated, so that a civil year of 12 months would 
be 354 or 355 days long. Chinese adopted intercalation, 
at first using what is known in the West as the METONIC 
cycle. They added 7 extra months every 19 yr. That schema 
spaced intercalary years of 383 or 384 days equally to 
yield a long-term average of 3654 days per year. Over 
the centuries, more elaborate schemes of intercalation, 
and then computation of true lunations, yielded a mean 
tropical year that by the 13th century AD was 365.2425 
days. 


Observations 

The first clearly instrumental observations measured the 
shadow cast by an upright gnomon higher than a human. 
They cannot be dated certainly before the 4th century BC. 
The longest shadow of the day determined the moment 
of noon and the north-south direction. Once astronomers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chinese Astronomy in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


noticed that the noon shadow varied in length from day 
to day, it became possible to define the beginning of the 
year as the day of the longest noon shadow, the winter 
solstice. At night, sighting along a north-south line on 
stars passing the gnomon yielded their meridian transits, 
which were important before the invention of graduated 
instruments. 

The development of graduated armillary instruments 
with a sighting tube is a vexed topic. The earliest known 
document that requires the use of a simple dioptra is the 
Gan Shi xing jing (Star canons of Gan De and Shi Shen), the 
data in which have been dated by error analysis at ca 70 
BC. Geng Shouchang used a simple equatorial armillary 
in 52 BC; an ecliptic ring was added by AD 84 and horizon 
and meridian rings by 125. 

Chinese degree measurement was not derived from 
the Babylonian sexagesimal system. It was based on 
the du, originally a measure of time intervals between 
meridian transits, but after about AD 180 redefined as 
the distance of one day’s mean solar travel. There were 
initially 3654 du in a circle, and the number changed with 
the value for year length. The precision of the first star 
catalogue was 1/8 du; this increased to 0.05 du by AD 1279. 

The coordinates of observation, as in modern 
astronomy but unlike those of Europe before the 
Renaissance, were equatorial, measured from the winter 
solstice point rather than from the Sun’s position at the 
spring equinox. There is little to choose between the two 
systems, since the Sun, Moon and planets orbit close to 
the ecliptic, and the stars rotate parallel to the equator. It 
was necessary in either case to convert positions along one 
to positions along the other. Early Chinese accomplished 
this with simple numerical methods; by the reform of 1279, 
gradual moves in the direction of spherical trigonometry 
greatly increased accuracy. 

The time of observations was generally measured 
by water clocks, of which several examples survive from 
the last two centuries BC. The precision of records was 
at first ca 1/2 h. Despite great elaboration over the 
centuries, typical precision by 1300 was perhaps 0.4 h, and 
significantly better for solar eclipse data. 

Coordinates of celestial objects were, as in Europe, 
measured from markpoints spaced closely enough that 
observers without instruments could estimate with fair 
accuracy the distance of objects from them in du. Unlike 
the 12 houses of the zodiac, the Chinese xiu (lunar lodges) 
were a set of 28 unequally spaced stars in prominent 
constellations. This was similar to the coordinates 
used in India and called nakshatra and those of the 
Islamic world called al-manazil (see INDIAN ASTRONOMY, 
ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY). The lunar lodges were in principle 
as satisfactory as the zodiac, but occasional unintended 
changes in their determinative stars affected accuracy 
when new predictive methods were tested against ancient 
observational records. 

Endless polemics have failed to settle where and when 
the lodges originated. Their 28 names first appear together 
ona lacquer box buried in 433 BC. Only in sources of the 4th 
or 3rd century do they record coordinates of observations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Calendar reforms 

The first unification of China, in 221 BC, led to a single 
calendar, but after a century the system was regularly a day 
off in predicting new moons. After a reform of the calendar 
in 104 BC, in 7 BC astronomers expanded the calendar- 
making techniques into an astronomical system (Ji) that 
included all predictable phenomena, including eclipses 
and planetary motions. This expansion was motivated 
as much by two emperors’ desire to renew their political 
order along lines determined by cosmic religion as by a 
drive toward technical innovation. 

The Triple Concordance system of 7 BC was not 
revised piecemeal but replaced by a complete new 
computational system in AD 85. Because integral 
replacement became the norm, and imperial prestige 
depended on accurate prediction, 101 systems were 
proposed before 1912, of which 41 saw official use. 

Like Ptolemy’s Almagest, this Triple Concordance 
system set out step-by-step procedures for generating 
the complete ephemeris mentioned above. A clerk with 
only basic arithmetical skills could carry out the entire 
process, consulting a built-in table that obviated a complex 
computation. 

Chinese computational methods differed from those 
of the Greeks in their numerical or algorithmic, rather 
than geometric, approach. Predicting solar eclipses, which 
amounts to finding the intersection of a shadow cone with 
a spherical Sun, is difficult without geometry. That is why 
it remained a central problem. 

Chinese began by counting off mean solar and lunar 
cycles to find when the two bodies intersected. The 
results were so poor that astronomers apparently counted 
off 135 months from an observed eclipse to predict 
another one, a more successful technique. However, 
the point of mathematical astronomy was predicting 
without having to look at the sky. Yang Wei in AD 
237 did away with reliance on prior observations by 
introducing the concept of eclipse limit (in modern terms, 
the distance of the conjunction from the intersection of 
the orbits). Techniques for computing apparent rather 
than mean lunar (AD 223) and solar (ca. 604) motions, 
and their combination in predicting lunations (619), 
were extremely important. Elaborate linear interpolation 
algorithms (fifth order by 1064) and prototrigonometric 
methods (beginning at about the same time) increasingly 
approximated the results of geometric analysis. 


Development 

The bureaucratic character of astronomy did not change 
markedly over the centuries. Because appointments 
tended to be sinecures, often hereditary, innovation often 
came from outsiders—amateur astronomers who had 
access to information about previous systems published 
in the dynastic histories. The originator of a new system, 
after it was thoroughly tested, was often appointed to 
the Bureau. Some security-minded dynasties forbade 
the private study of astronomy, cutting off this source 
of new methods. However, other administrations tested 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chinese Astronomy in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Abridged armillary of ca 1270, now at Purple 
Mountain Observatory, Nanjing. 


officials to raise the level of practice or included technical 
questions on the general civil service examination to 
motivate widespread study of astronomy. 

Since the government valued astronomical knowl- 
edge, and remained the only source of massive support 
for research, its large projects took the science in several 
new directions. These included the following 


e Observatories were built with a large array of 
instruments. The huge observational ARMILLARY 
SPHERE Of 1442, reproducing a design of 1074, and the 
‘abridged armillary’ (equatorial torquetrum, jianyi), 
the design of which goes back at least to ca 1270, 
survive (figure 1). 

e Elaborate demonstrational instruments, such as 
a series of water-driven, escapement-controlled 
astronomical clocks were constructed. Their high 
point was the enormous clock that Su Song built ca 
1090 (figure 2). 

e Large-scale surveys of longitude and latitude were 
carried out to increase accuracy of data recording and 
to investigate such matters as the differing visibility 
of eclipses. That of 1279 covered 6000 miles north— 
south and 2000 miles east-west. 

e Fixed stars were repeatedly catalogued, especially to 
fix the determinative stars of the lunar lodges. Ten 
such surveys became the basis of official astronomy 
between 964 and 1106 (figure 3). 


Despite the conservatism inherent in the official focus 
and stereotyped form of astronomy, the government 
facilitated improvements in every aspect of the ephemeris. 
A few important ones not already noted are (in order of 
the date at which official use began, or otherwise that of 
writing): 


e _ Precession (literally ‘annual difference’, sui cha, 330), 
defined as the time difference between the tropical 
and sidereal year. This constant corresponded to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. The great astronomical clock of 1089, from the 
contemporary Xin yixiang fa yao. 


a shift of the winter solstice point 1 du per 50 yr. 
Chinese did not see it as a rotation of the equatorial 
about the ecliptic pole. 

e Exact times of new moons were determined from 
observations of lunar eclipses (384). 

e Sustained investigation of apparent planetary mo- 
tions was carried out (roughly 729 on). Originally 
the emphasis on eclipse prediction led to neglect of 
this problem. 

e Anapproximation to spherical trigonometry applied 
to the celestial sphere (1279) was combined with 
a cluster of other changes, such as substituting 
decimal parts for mixed fractions and discarding the 
traditional dependence on counting off cycles from 
an early epoch. 


After the revolution of 1911, the traditional approach 
was discarded, not because of its particular shortcomings 
but because of a blanket move toward modernization. 
After over a century of imperialism and incessant war, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chinese Astronomy in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


4 
K 


4 ine 
. 
a 
. yy 
ae 
+. ¥eto--—_— Ro 


. 
ol 


path. > 


Sree 


\ 
ae 
(a4 
= 


ou 
To 


0 Feat 


TN ese 
“Nok 
EWS 
z - y: & 
me a 
a RE al 4 
ist r aes 
BS 
gaa 
Ae 8 
| Ba 
Nye. 
“TNS & wees 
m™ (| we 


Figure 3. Part of a star map of the late 11th century, from Xin 
yixiang fa yao. 


China was too poor to invest massively in modern 
astronomy at something approaching the world level until 
after 1975 (see CHINESE ASTRONOMY). 


International influence 


Since China was the predominant culture in East Asia, the 
institutions and methods of its official astronomy provided 
a foundation for counterparts (always with local character) 
in Korea, Japan and Vietnam. 

The desire for accurate prediction of solar eclipses 
motivated Chinese to hire experts in the geometric 
methods of the Greek tradition. They employed Indians 
from 665 on, Muslims during the Mongol occupation 
(1279-1367) and Jesuit missionaries in the 17th and 
18th centuries. The latter, in fact, by offering the 
Manchu invaders their skills at casting cannon and 
computing the mandatory imperial ephemerides, took 
control of the Astronomical Bureau. Even when the 
Jesuits introduced European techniques, they remolded 
them into the traditional form of the li. Although they 
mentioned Copernicus and other important European 
figures in their Chinese writings, the constraints of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Counter-Reformation prevented them from describing 
revolutionary changes in cosmology. 


Applications in modern astronomy 

Although narrow-minded positivists ignore the history 
of astrology, in China the main legacy of traditional 
to modern science has come not from computational 
techniques but from detailed astrological records of 
observations, unequalled elsewhere. The fullest ancient 
supernova data that have been correlated with pulsar 
phenomena are generally Chinese. Information on the 
time, magnitude, and duration of large numbers of solar 
and lunar eclipses has cast light on the secular acceleration 
of the Moon and Earth. Dates of every return of 
Halley’s comet for over 2000 yr have clarified its motion. 
Records, some multiple, on 147 distinct appearances of 
sunspots and of about twice that many auroras have 
proved valuable for investigating the relations between 
the two phenomena and testing hypotheses about sunspot 
minima. 


Bibliography 

Chen Z 1980-1984 Zhongguo tianwenxue shi (History of 
Chinese Astronomy) 3 vols (Shanghai: Shanghai 
Renmin) (the most comprehensive history) 

Chuang W and Wang L 1988 Zhongguo gudai tian xiang jilu 
zong ji (Ancient Chinese Records of Celestial Phenomena: 
General) (Nanjing: Jiangsu Kexue Jishu) (detailed 
compilation of data from a broad range of primary 
sources) 

Needham J and Wang L 1954 Science and Civilisation 
in China (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
(vol 3 [1959] is the only comprehensive history in a 
Western language, but use with care) 

Sivin N 1995 Science in Ancient China (Aldershot: Vari- 
orum) (includes five studies of Chinese astronomy, 
and an annotated, selected bibliography of Western- 
language sources) 

Stephenson F R and Clark D H 1978 Applications of 
Early Astronomical Records (Bristol: Hilger) (this and 
Stephenson’s other publications draw on Chinese 
materials) 


Nathan Sivin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chiron 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chiron 


Chiron is among the present-day population of minor 
planets called cENTAURS, whose orbits cross those of the 
giant outer planets Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. Chiron 
was the first Centaur discovered, and perhaps is the 
most unusual due to its cometary activity and other 
characteristics. Centaurs are probably former residents of 
the KUIPER BELT, and so Chiron may be considered our first 
and most accessible emissary from the far reaches of the 
outer solar system. Studies of Chiron and other Centaurs 
and Kuiper Belt objects allow us to probe the formation 
and evolutionary history of the solar system. 

Chiron orbits the Sun between Saturn and Uranus ona 
50-year orbit, ranging in heliocentric distance from 8.5 AU 
to just under 19 AU (an AU, or astronomical unit, is the 
distance between the Earth and the Sun, and is roughly 
equal to 1.5 x 10'% cm). The specific orbital properties of 
Chiron are given in table 1. Chiron passed perihelion on 
14 February 1996, and was the focus of an international 
observation campaign at that time. 


Table 1. Orbital properties of Chiron. 


Period 50.2 years 
Eccentricity 0.38 
Inclination 6.94° 
Perihelion distance 8.443 AU 
Aphelion distance 18.765 AU 
Semimajor axis 13.633 AU 
Argument of perihelion 339.1° 
Longitude of ascending node —__209.4° 


Chiron’s diameter is about 180 km; the range of recent 
measurements taken at various wavelengths is about 150 
to 370 km, though occultation and IR observations support 
the value near 180 km. Chiron has an absolute magnitude 
of H = 6.5 mag; over the range of its orbit, its apparent 
magnitude varies from 16 to 20 mag. The visible lightcurve 
is comparable to that in the ultraviolet, with a period of 
5.9 h and a peak-to-peak variation of about 0.1 mag. 

Measurements at visible wavelengths have shown 
that Chiron typically has a comparatively neutral, or gray, 
color (meaning that it does not preferentially reflect or 
absorb particular wavelengths of light that illuminate it). 
This gray color is independent of rotational phase, though 
there have been observations showing some color changes 
possibly connected to its cometary activity. For example, 
ultraviolet observations show a similar neutral color 
during quiescent periods, though during an outburst, 
Chiron exhibited a possible blue color slope and the ALBEDO 
(reflectivity) increased. 

Some key physical properties of Chiron are given in 
table 2. The significant digits given in these values are 
roughly indicative of their uncertainties. 

The discovery of Chiron follows an_ historical 
progression of discovering new classes of minor planets in 
regions of the solar system previously thought to be empty. 
The first asteroid, CERES, was discovered by Piazzi in 1801, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 2. Physical properties of Chiron. 


Diameter ~180 km 
Synodic rotation period 5.91783 h 
Lightcurve amplitude 7-10% 
Absolute magnitude 6.5 

B — V color 0.70 
Asteroid spectral type Cc 

Visual geometric albedo 0.05 


Ultraviolet geometric albedo —_0.08 
Magnitude slope parameter 0.15 


and was soon followed by discoveries of PALLAS, JUNO and 
VESTA over the next six years. As telescopes, detectors 
and techniques improved, the observational limits of the 
asteroidal bodies progressed with time from the main belt, 
moving both outward (through the Cybele, Hilda and 
TROJAN ASTEROID groups) and inward (through Amor, Apollo 
and Aten groups). 

In 1977 the horizon of the small bodies in our solar 
system was extended to orbits as distant as Uranus, 
with the discovery by Charles Kowal of object 1977 UB, 
later designated as asteroid number 2060, and named 
Chiron. Chiron implied a new class of small bodies called 
Centaurs—outer planet crossers. A total of 17 Centaurs 
had been discovered as of the end of 1999. Fifteen years 
after the discovery of Chiron, our view of the solar system 
was expanded further by the first discovery of a Kuiper 
Belt object, 1992 QB,, by David Jewitt and Jane Luu. 
This was the first of hundreds of such objects that now 
have been found to have orbits beyond Neptune. These 
observational discoveries convincingly established that 
the vast outer planet and trans-Neptunian regions are, 
indeed, teeming with small bodies. 


Chiron’s connection to the rest of the solar system 
Chiron is believed to be an escapee from the Kuiper Belt, 
a reservoir of comets and larger PLANETESIMALS postulated 
by Edgeworth and Kuiper in the 1940s and 1950s. One 
primary line of evidence for this origin of Chiron is 
dynamical. Studies by Shio Oikawa and Edgar Everhart, 
and more recently by Luke Dones, Harold Levison 
and Martin Duncan, have shown that Chiron’s orbit is 
unstable due to perturbations by the giant planets on 
timescales of <10° years. This, and Chiron’s comet-like 
activity (discussed in the next section), provide strong, yet 
circumstantial, evidence that Chiron is a recent addition to 
the planetary region. 

Around the same time as the dynamical instability 
of Chiron’s orbit was discovered, orbital evolution 
simulations first began to provide convincing support 
for the idea that orbits for most of the short-period 
comets could not be derived from a distant, spherical 
oorT cLouD. As discussed by Martin Duncan, Thomas 
Quinn and Scott Tremaine in papers in 1988 and 1990, a 
postulated disk source in the outer solar system (the as-of- 
yet undiscovered Kuiper Belt) must be the source of such 
objects. Dynamical simulations have shown that objects in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chiron 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the Kuiper Belt between 30 and 50 AU exhibit dynamically 
chaotic orbits due to gravitational perturbations by the 
giant planets. As such perturbations occur, the perihelion 
distances of an object in this region can rapidly decrease 
so that the object’s orbit eventually crosses Neptune’s 
orbit. Once this occurs, the object will almost certainly 
experience a close encounter with Neptune, which then 
can throw the object into either a much larger or much 
smaller orbit. Those objects that are thrown into smaller 
orbits can then be influenced by strong perturbations by 
the other giant planets. In this way, objects in the Kuiper 
Belt can successively evolve into orbits like those of the 
short-period comets and of the Centaurs, like Chiron. 

Additional evidence that Chiron came from the 
Kuiper Belt is physical. Chiron’s diameter of approxi- 
mately 180 km, its color and the indications of volatiles on 
its surface are consistent with the size estimates, observed 
colors and expected surface chemistry for some types of 
Kuiper Belt objects. 

Given the dynamical instabilities of Centaur orbits, 
the plausible method for moving Kuiper Belt objects into 
the solar system, and the physical similarities between 
Centaurs and Kuiper Belt objects, it is therefore likely 
that Chiron and the other Centaurs are unique transition 
objects, connecting the outer solar system’s Kuiper Belt 
and inner solar system objects such as Jupiter family 
comets. 


Observations: comet or minor planet? 

As alluded to above, one of Chiron’s unique features 
among the currently known Centaurs is that it has 
displayed a transient coma, which has shown levels 
of activity that can be as high at aphelion as at 
perihelion. Indicative of its unusual nature, Chiron 
has two accepted designations, ‘(2060) Chiron’ and 
‘95P/Chiron’, depending on whether one considers it as a 
minor planet or as a comet. However, Chiron is about 50 
times larger than a typical comet. 

Unusual activity was first detected by Dave Tholen, 
William Hartmann and Dale Cruikshank in 1988 when 
Chiron’s brightness doubled while it was still at a distance 
of 12 AU from the Sun. Soon thereafter, a coma with a 
size of roughly 10° km around Chiron was observed by 
Karen Meech and Michael Belton. An image of Chiron 
and its coma is shown in figure 1. One explanation for 
this coma is that it comprises submicron dust particles 
that are escaping (entrained in volatile outgassing) from a 
low atmosphere. Marc Buie, James Elliot, Schelte Bus and 
more than a dozen collaborators observed Chiron during 
a stellar occultation in 1993, and their data show evidence 
of jet-like features, a common property in comets and 
inferred from models and other observations of Chiron. 
These jets imply that the coma is formed from a few active 
regions rather than a more pervasive sublimation over the 
surface. 

The first ultraviolet spectrum of Chiron was obtained 
in 1995 by Noah Brosch with the long-wavelength 
spectrometer of the INTERNATIONAL ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. An R-band filter CCD image of Chiron obtained by 
Karen Meech and Graham Knopp with the University of 
Hawaii's 2.2 m telescope on 20 February 1993. Chiron was 
9.31 AU from the Sun and 8.35 AU from the Earth, and had an 


apparent visual magnitude of 16.1 mag. North is towards the 


top and east is to the left of this 1.8 x 1.8 arcmin? image. 


Evidence of a coma can be seen as the haze surrounding Chiron; 
the dust extends about 15 arcsec (9 x 104 km) to the northwest. 
To correct for Chiron’s motion against the background stars, this 
image is a composite made from 33 1 min exposures that 
subsequently were shifted to align with Chiron, and then added 
together to create an image with an effective exposure time of 
33 min. Because of this ‘shift-and-add’ procedure, the stars 
appear as trails. 


satellite in low-resolution (6 A) mode. One year later, 
the Faint Object Spectrograph on the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE 
made ultraviolet observations at 2 A resolution of Chiron 
during one of its outbursts. This ‘outburst’ consisted 
of a large (about 60%) increase in Chiron’s flux, but 
curiously there was no evidence of an extended coma 
as one might expect in such a case. The source of 
this significant increase is unknown, and the analysis 
by Joel Parker, Alan Stern, Michel Festou and Michael 
A‘Hearn suggests it may be tantalizing evidence of a highly 
unusual phase function, recoating of the surface from an 
unobserved outburst or a cold, persistent, near-surface 
‘fog’ (small-scale-height atmosphere) that experienced a 
peculiar, unresolved outburst. Also, there is evidence 
that Chiron’s color changed from gray to slightly blue 
during this outburst. The coincidence of this apparent 
color change with the flux increase may be the signature 
of small Rayleigh-scattering grains in Chiron’s coma or on 
its surface associated with the higher albedo. 

Chiron has exhibited activity at all points of its orbit, 
and there is a wide range in both the amplitude (from a 
few per cent to more than a factor of two) and the duration 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chiron 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(from weeks to months) of these outbursts. In fact, Chiron 
was more active at its aphelion in 1970 than it was in 
following decades when it was closer to the Sun. Such 
an analysis (done by Schelte Bus, Edward Bowell, Alan 
Stern and Michael A’Hearn) of Chiron’s activity was made 
possible by examining historical photographic plates from 
observatory archives. 

The source of Chiron’s activity is still an open 
question. Since Chiron is active at such large distances— 
e.g. beyond Saturn—its activity cannot be driven by 
sublimation of water-ice, which is not volatile at 
this distance (water-ice was first detected on Chiron 
by Michael Foster, Simon Green, Neil McBride and 
John Davies in 1998, and has been seen on other 
Centaurs by Robert Brown, Dale Cruikshank, and their 
collaborators). However, model calculations performed 
by Diana Prialnik, Noah Brosch and Drora Ianovici show 
that Chiron’s observed activity pattern could be due to 
CO that is initially trapped in amorphous water-ice but 
then released when the ice is crystallized. Chiron’s 
activity must be driven by ices that are volatile at these 
distances, and possible candidate species include CO, 
which is a common source of activity in comets, Np, 
which is common on Pluto and Neptune’s moon Triton, or 
CHg. The variability of Chiron’s outbursts, the apparent 
lack of a correlation between activity and distance from 
the Sun, and the observations of jet-like features imply 
that Chiron’s surface may be unevenly covered with inert 
material. 

Knowledge of the species driving Chiron’s activity is 
the key to understanding its connection to other objects 
and regions of the solar system. In 1995, Maria Womack 
and Alan Stern made millimeter observations of Chiron 
when it was at a heliocentric distance of 8.5 AU. They 
detected carbon monoxide with a column density of 
N(CO) = 9 x 10” cm™, implying a production rate of 
Q(CO) = 2 x 10° s“! if CO comes directly from the 
nucleus. This is comparable to the CO production rate of 
comet Hale—Bopp at heliocentric distances of 3.8 AU. The 
Hubble Space Telescope ultraviolet spectra provide the 
best upper limits to date for a number of other species. The 
data showed no evidence of coma emissions in CS 1.2576, 
OH 13085 or any other coma species, and they determined 
column abundance upper limits of N(CS) < 4.3 x 10'3 cm? 
and N(OH) <1.5 x 10 cm™, corresponding to parent 
molecule production rates of Q(H,O) < 4 x 10% s“! and 
Q(CS») < 4 x 10” s~!, respectively. 


Chiron’s future 

It is still beyond the capability of modern instruments to 
make regular and detailed observations of the member 
objects of the Kuiper belt, so Chiron, due to its 
relative proximity, provides astronomers with the best 
opportunity to examine the properties of an object that 
was recently in the Kuiper Belt. Observations must 
continue to be made of its sporadic outbursts to discern the 
underlying mechanisms of its activity and the source of its 
coma. A significant step would be to make unambiguous 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


detections and abundance measurements of the species 
comprising the coma gases. By the time Chiron returns for 
its next perihelion pass on 3 August 2046, our astronomical 
instrumentation and our understanding of Centaurs will 
hopefully have advanced to the point where we will be able 
to make detailed observations and analyses of its physical 
properties with respect to the Kuiper Belt. Perhaps we will 
even take advantage of Chiron’s semi-centennial passage 
to launch a space mission to rendezvous with this unique 
emissary from the outer limits of our solar system. 


Bibliography 

Altenhoff W J and Stumpff P 1995 Size estimate of ‘asteroid’ 
2060 Chiron from 250 GHz measurements Astron. 
Astrophys. 293 L41-L42 

Brosch N 1995 The first UV spectrum of 2060 Chiron Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 276 1185-90 

Bus SJ et al 1996 Stellar occultation by 2060 Chiron Icarus 
123 478-90 

Bus S J, Bowell E, Stern S A and A’Hearn M F 1991 Chiron: 
evidence for historic cometary activity The Int. Conf. 
on Asteroids, Comets, Meteors (Houston: Lunar and 
Planetary Institute) p 34 

Campins H, Telesco C M, Osip D J, Rieke G H, Rieke M J 
and Schulz B 1994 The color temperature of (2060) 
Chiron: awarmand small nucleus Astron. J. 108 2318- 
22, 

Dones L, Levison H F and Duncan M 1996 On 
the dynamical lifetimes of planet-crossing objects 
Completing the Inventory of the Solar System (ASP Conf. 
Ser. 107) (San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific) ed T W Rettig and J M Hahn pp 233-244 

Duncan M, Quinn T and Tremaine S 1988 The origin of 
short-period comets Astrophys. J. Lett. 328 L69-L73 

Edgeworth K E 1949 The origin and evolution of the solar 
system Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 109 600-9 

Elliot J L et al 1995 Jet-like features near the nucleus of 
Chiron Nature 373 46-8 

Fanale F P and Salvail J R 1997 The cometary activity of 
Chiron: a stratigraphic model Icarus 125 397-405 

Foster M J, Green S F, McBride N and Davies J K 1999 
Detection of water ice on 2060 Chiron Icarus 141 408-— 
10 

Fulle M 1994 Spin axis orientation of 2060 Chiron from 
dust coma modeling Astron. Astrophys. 282 980-8 

Hartmann W K 1990 The changing face of Chiron 
Astronomy 18 44-8 

Hartmann W K, Tholen D J, Meech K J and Cruikshank 
D P 1990 2060 Chiron—colorimetry and cometary 
behavior Icarus 83 1-15 

Jewitt D and Luu J 1992 Submillimeter continuum 
observations of 2060 Chiron Astron. J. 104 398-404 

Kowal C T and Gehrels T 1977 Slow-moving object Kowal 
IAU Circular 3129 1 

Kuiper G P 1951 On the origin of the solar system 
Astrophysics: A Topical Symposium ed J A Hynek (New 
York: McGraw Hill) pp 357-424 

Lebofsky L A, Tholen D J, Rieke G H and Lebofsky 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chiron 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M J 1984 2060 Chiron—visual and thermal infrared 
observations Icarus 60 532-7 

Luu J X 1993 Cometary activity in distant comets—Chiron 
Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 105 946-50 

Meech K J and Belton M J S 1990 The atmosphere of 2060 
Chiron Astron. J. 100 1323-38 

Meech K J, Buie M W, Samarasinha N H, Mueller BE A and 
Belton M J S 1997 observations of structures in the 
inner coma of Chiron with the HST planetary camera 
Astron. J. 113 844-62 

Oikawa S and Everhart E 1979 Past and future orbit of 
1977 UB, object Chiron Astron. J. 84 134-9 

Parker J Wm, Stern S A, Festou M C and A’Hearn M F 
1997 Ultraviolet observations of Chiron with the 
HST/FOS: examining a Centaur’s gray matter Astron. 
J. 113 1899-1908 

Prialnik D, Brosch N and Ianovici D 1995 Modelling the 
activity of 2060 Chiron, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 276 
1148-54 

Stern S A and Campins H 1996 Chiron and the Centaurs: 
escapees from the Kuiper belt Nature 382 507-10 

Sykes M V and Walker R G 1991 Constraints on the 
diameter and albedo of 2060 Chiron Science 251 777- 
80 

Tholen DJ, Hartmann W K and Cruikshank D P 1988 (2060) 
Chiron IAU Circ. 4554 2 

Womack M and Stern S A 1997 Observations of carbon 
monoxide in (2060) Chiron 28th Ann. Lunar and 
Planetary Sci. Conf. (Houston: Lunar and Planetary 
Institute) p 1575 


Joel Wm Parker 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chladni, Ernst Florens Friedrich (1756-1827) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chladni, Ernst Florens Friedrich 
(1756-1827) 


German physicist (acoustics). He collected meteorites. 
He claimed on the basis of a comprehensive catalog 
of accounts of finds and falls that he compiled that 
they fell from the sky. This view was comprehensively 
rubbished by the scientific establishment, especially the 
French Academy of Sciences, until convinced otherwise 
by Bior’s investigation of the fall of meteorites at L’Aigle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Chondrites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chondrites 


The chondrites are the most common type of METEORITE 
falling to Earth from space. They acquire their name 
because most of them contain ‘chondrules’ (from the 
Greek, ‘chondros’, a grain) which are silicate beads 
sometimes found in large numbers. The chondrules 
have always fascinated scientists. The inventor of the 
petrographic microscope, H C Sorby, described them as 
droplets of fiery rain. They are essentially glassy beads 
made by a violent but brief heating event that caused dust 
grains to form millimeter-sized melt droplets. However, 
the cause of the heating remains a mystery. The most 
important feature of the chondrites is that, with the 
exception of a few highly volatile elements, they have the 
same composition as the Sun. They are also extremely 
ancient rocks, having formation ages comparable with 
the age of the solar system (4600 million years). Finally, 
they have unique textures suggestive of accumulation of 
diverse components with little or no subsequent alteration. 
In contrast, the ACHONDRITES are meteorites that have 
distinctly non-solar composition and are igneous rocks 
that formed by various types of volcanism. 

The largest chondrite seen to fall from space is the 
4000 kg Jilin, while the largest whose fall was not observed 
but for which the meteorite found on the surface of the 
Earth is the Tsarev chondrite that was found in Russia in 
1968. The most famous chondrite is probably the ALLENDE 
METEORITE, Which fell in Mexico in 1969. About 2 t were 
recovered strewn across farmland in Chihuahua province. 
The Allende chondrite is famous for the large number 
of white silicate aggregates with extraordinary chemical 
and isotopic properties. The 691 g Semarkona chondrite, 
which fell in India in 1940, is scientifically well known 
because it is the member of the largest chondrite class that 
most closely resembles original solar system matter. 

Meteorites usually produce spectacular effects as 
they fall through the atmosphere, fireballs, many sonic 
booms and even smells are produced, and the surfaces 
of the surviving stones are blackened where a thin skin 
of material melted during atmospheric passage. The 
meteorites usually break into many pieces that are strewn 
over an ellipse on the Earth with the heaviest pieces 
travelling furthest. The Pultusk meteorite produced 
100 000 fragments. About 850 chondrites have been seen to 
fall and placed in the world’s museums, and nearly 20 000 
fragments have been found on the Earth, mainly in North 
America, north Africa, central and western Australia and, 
especially, Antarctica. 

This article describes the classification and basic 
properties of chondrites, their physical history as 
determined from isotopic studies, radiometric dating and 
petrology, and some current ideas for their origin. 


Classification and basic properties of chondrites 

The chondrite classes are indicated in table 1, along with 
information on their major properties. Also included 
are two classes of ‘primitive achondrites’. These have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


traditionally been regarded as achondrites because of their 
igneous textures, but their composition is solar and it is 
now assumed that they are chondrites that melted without 
changing composition. 

Although chondrites have the same proportions of 
most elements as the Sun, two volatile elements that are 
not present in solar proportions are sulfur and oxygen. The 
abundance of these elements, oxygen in particular, varies 
significantly among the chondrites. This has important 
implications for the minerals present. In the EL and EH 
chondrites (collectively termed ‘enstatite chondrites’), iron 
is in the metal and sulfide form, but little or none is in the 
silicate form. The dominant silicate mineral is enstatite, 
MgSiO3, after which the class is named. The H, L and 
LL chondrites (collectively termed ‘ordinary chondrites’) 
contain more oxygen than the enstatite chondrites. Thus 
while some of the iron exists as metal and sulfide, much 
is in the silicate form as the stony (silicate) minerals 
olivine and pyroxene. (Olivine is a solid state solution 
of Mg2SiO. and FezSiOu4, the Fa term in table 1 referring 
to the percentage of Fe,SiO, present, while pyroxene is 
a solid solution of MgSiO3 and FeSiO3, the Fs term in 
table 1 referring to the percentage of FeSiO3 present.) 
The CI, CM, CV and CO chondrites (collectively termed 
‘carbonaceous chondrites’) contain more oxygen than the 
other chondrites and in some the iron no longer exists in 
the metal form but is entirely replaced with magnetite 
and similar minerals. The CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITES also 
contain higher amounts of volatile constituents than the 
other chondrites, the CI chondrites being 20% water and 
therefore best considered as rather hard balls of mud. 

These properties can conveniently be displayed by a 
plot of iron in the metal form against iron in the sulfide 
and silicate form (figure 1(a)). On such a plot, first used 
by Nobel laureate Harold Urey and his colleague Harmon 
Craig, the chondrites will lie on a diagonal with oxygen- 
poor meteorites on the top left and oxygen-rich meteorites 
on the bottom. The diagonal will be the ‘solar total iron’ 
line if the ratio of iron to silicon is equal to the solar 
value. However, the chondrites move away from the solar 
diagonal, indicating that, in addition to the differences 
in the amount of oxygen they contain, some chondrites 
contain different amounts of total iron. 

Other properties seem to vary with these chondrite 
classes, such as the abundance of highly refractory 
(non-volatile) elements that show small but significant 
decreases from solar as we go from carbonaceous to 
ordinary to enstatite chondrites. Similarly, the relative 
abundance of the three isotopes of oxygen in the different 
chondrite classes is highly characteristic. Carbonaceous 
chondrites (CI chondrites excepted) contain a greater 
proportion of the major oxygen isotope ('°O) than 
rocks from the Earth and Moon, whereas enstatite 
chondrites and CI chondrites have similar proportions 
to the Earth and Moon and ordinary chondrites have a 
lower proportion of 16O, The biggest effects in oxygen 
isotopes are displayed by the CV chondrites and appear 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chondrites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Classes of chondrites and some of their properties. 


Statistics Texture Composition 

Falls Finds Chondrule Chondrite Metal Metal Fe/Si Mg/Si  Fa,Fs s’70b  5l8OP 
Class (number) (number)* = (vol%) (ug) (vol%) (ug) (a/r) (a/r) (mol%) (%o) (%o) 
Carbonaceous chondrite 
Cl 5 0 0 - 0 - 0.86 1.05 nd,nd 9.23 16.84 
CM 13 4 (156) 5-15 270 <0.1 - 0.80 1.05 15,2 3.0 10.9 
CO 5 37 (81) 40 150 3.6 nd 0.77 1.05 143,40 —3.0 —2.6 
CV 6 11 (81) 40 1000 2.3 nd 0.78 1.03 844.00 -154 —-113 
CK 1 7 (73) 15 700 0 - 0.78 1.09 30.9,26.9 —1.8 —5.8 
CR 3 12 (76) 55 700 10.7 nd 0.82 1.05 4.73.4 2.29 6.25 
Ordinary chondrites 
H 311 974 (6881) 70 380 8.4 190 0.81 0.96 19.3,16.8 2.9 4.1 
L 425 855 (6332) 70 620 4.1 160 0.57 0.93 25.2,20.9 3.5 4.6 
LL 73 114 (960) 70 750 2.0 140 0.52 0.94 31.3,25.2 3.9 4.9 
R 1 4 (10) 12-40 380 <0.1 - 0.60 0.94 38,0-32 5.52 5.07 
Enstatite chondrites 
EH 8 4 (63) 20 280 10.1 41 0.95 0.68 0.4,0.3 3.0 5.6 
EL 7 8 (30) 20 480 10.2 78 0.62 0.81 0.4,0.3 2.7 5.3 
Primitive achondrites 
Bra‘ 4 (6) - - nd nd 0.65 1.16 33,18 1.61 3.48 
Aco 1 2 (12) - - 2 nd 0.70 1.06 11.9,12.6 3.73 1.00 


* Non-Antarctic finds, with all finds in parentheses. 


> The 6 symbol refers to the difference in parts per thousand of the !70/16O and !80/1°O ratios between the sample and a standard 


sample of ocean water. 
© Brachinites. 

4 Acopulcoites. 

(a/r) = atomic ratio 


to be related to the white silicate aggregates that are 
characteristic of this class. 

The main questions posed by the chondrite classes is 
that, given that chondrites are ancient and that they are 
essentially solar in composition, how did these variations 
in iron chemistry, amount of iron and the other properties 
come about? What do they tell us about conditions in the 
early solar system? 

One clue to the nature of the process that gives rise 
to these properties is the nature and abundance of the 
chondrules and the relative sizes of the chondrules and 
metal grains (figure 1(b)). The abundance of chondrules 
falls from about 75 vol% in the ordinary chondrites to 
35 vol% in enstatite and CV and CO chondrites to less 
than 10 vol% in CM and essentially zero in CI chondrites. 
Chondrules are highly diverse, some containing iron-rich 
silicates and being relatively rich in volatile elements and 
some containing iron-poor silicates are being depleted in 
volatile elements. Thus it is at least arguable that some 
of the oxygen and refractory element trends in figure 1(a) 
reflect the abundance and proportion of the different types 
of chondrules. Metal grain size also varies considerably 
from class to class. Enstatite chondrites have the smallest 
and ordinary chondrites the largest metal grains, while 
carbonaceous chondrites generally have little or no metal. 


History of chondrites 


If one looks at a series from the same class under the 
microscope there is often a wide range of textures, with the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


chondrules being distinct in some chondrites and blurred 
in others. The chondrules are essentially grains of olivine 
and pyroxene surrounded by a material that is glassy in 
some chondrules, translucent in others and crystalline in 
yet others. Similarly, the matrix between the chondrules 
and metal grains is fine grained in some chondrites and 
coarse grained in others. In addition to these physical 
trends, the composition of mineral grains and phases 
becomes more uniform as textures become blurred. These 
effects are all attributed to heating of the rock after its 
assembly. The effect is known as metamorphism, and 
it is described by a numbering system from 3 to 6 with 
unmetamorphosed type 3 and heavily metamorphosed 
meteorites being type 6. From detailed studies of the 
chemistry of phases in chemical equilibrium we can 
estimate that types 3, 4, 5 and 6 correspond approximately 
to temperatures of 400-600 °C, 600-700 °C, 700-750 °C and 
750-950 °C, respectively. Types 1 and 2 refer to chondrites 
metamorphosed in the presence of considerable amounts 
of water (~50 vol%), the type 1 at 100-150°C and 
type 2 at <20°C. From compositional profiles in the 
metal of ordinary chondrites, caused by incomplete 
equilibration, we can estimate that cooling rates following 
metamorphism were typically 10-100 K Myr. 

Another process that most if not all the chondrites 
have suffered is reflected in the naked-eye appearance 
of the chondrites. They often appear to be made 
up of fragments of previously existing rocks. The 
Fayetteville meteorite (figure 2(a)) is an excellent example 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chondrites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a , Solar total iron 


Iron in the metal 
2° ° ° 
- o>] fer} 


° 
ip 


02 04 08 O8 a 
Iron in the sulfides and silicates 


S 
to) 


LL chondrites 


ad 
on 


L chondrites 


od 
a 


EL chondrites 


H chondrite: 


eo 8 9 
yb © F 


EH chondrites 


Chondrule diameter (mm) 
° 


0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 020 0.24 
Metal grain size (mm) 


Figure 1. The basic properties of chondrites are summarized in 
these two plots. (a) Iron exists in three forms, as metal, sulfide 
and silicates. Plotting iron in the metal form (as ratio of iron 
atoms to silicon atoms) against iron the sulfides and metal 
produces several different fields, each representing a different 
chondrite class. How the classes relate in terms of adding or 
removing iron, sulfur and oxygen are indicated by the large 
arrows. (b) Physically, the chondrite classes are characterized by 
the size of their chondrules and metal grains. The carbonaceous 
chondrite classes are not shown because they contain little or no 
metal, but they do contain very large amounts of fine-grained 
silicate matrix. 


of this texture. Technically, the process is referred to as 
“brecciation’ and the rocks are referred to as ‘BRECCIAS’. 
Fragments of perfectly normal chondrite are sometimes 
surrounded by a darker ‘soil’ made of crushed chondrites 
and being rich in inert gases, carbon and crystals that have 
been damaged by radiation. These meteorites are referred 
to as ‘gas-rich regolith breccias’. They were the surface 
debris of some airless body exposed to solar wind and 
energetic solar radiations. The Apollo astronauts found 
similar rocks on the Moon. 

In addition to metamorphsim and brecciation, many 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. (a) A cut face of the chondrite that fell at Fayetteville, 
Arkansas, on 26 December 1934. The black fusion crust 
produced during atmospheric passage can be seen around the 
edge. The interior consists of light fragments of normal H 
chondrite embedded in a darker ‘matrix’ of crushed H chondrite 
material mixture that is physically similar to the ‘soil’ on the 
Moon. Fayetteville is a chondrite that is described as a gas-rich 
regolith breccia fron the surface of an airless body. The cut face 
is 9 cm in its longest dimension. (Johnson Space Center 
photograph S84-32404.) (b) A slice from the Indarch EH3 
chondrite cut so thin that light can pass through and reveal its 
internal texture. The sulfide and metal grains are opaque and 
appear black, while the many chondrules appear as light gray 
circular objects typically 0.5 mm in diameter. The longest 
dimension of the thin section is 1.4 cm. (Smithsonian Institution 
photograph M-1249.) 


meteorites show evidence for sudden excursions to high 
temperatures followed by very rapid cooling. Crystals are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chondrites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


cracked and deformed, and metal and sulfide minerals are 
melted and forced down cracks, and sometimes minerals 
acquire unusual textures. These effects can be reproduced 
in the laboratory by exposing the chondrites to shock 
waves produced by plastic explosives or large guns. The 
effects are classified as a series of levels, S1, S2, $3, S4, 
S5 and S6, that refer to shock pressures of <5 GPa, 5- 
10 GPa, 10-20 GPa, 20-30 GPa, 30-50 GPa and >50 GPa, 
respectively (1 Gpa, or gigapascal, is equal to about 
10000 atm). The source of the shock wave experienced 
by the chondrites is almost certainly impact between two 
ASTEROIDS in space. 

Some of the best information we have on the 
history of chondrites is provided by various dating 
methods (figure 3). As soon as the meteorite is removed 
from its original parent body, and acquires meter-sized 
dimensions, COSMIC RAYS bombard the stone and create 
isotopes not otherwise present. From these isotopes 
it is possible to calculate the duration of exposure to 
cosmic rays. It is frequently found that large numbers of 
chondrites of a given class were exposed at the same time, 
and this is strong evidence that all or most of the chondrites 
were released from the same parent object at that time. 
The best example is the H chondrite class, most of whose 
members became exposed to cosmic rays 8 million years 
ago. Several other chondrite classes display similar peaks 
in their exposure age distributions. 

A different dating method leads to the same 
conclusion for the other major chondrite class, the L 
chondrites. The ‘Ar—Ar age’ is based on the radioactive 
decay of “"K to “’Ar; the potassium is measured in the 
laboratory from the abundance of another experimentally 
produced isotope, **Ar. Most of the L chondrites have Ar- 
Ar ages of about 500 million years, and many of these are 
intensely shock heated. It thus seems that 500 million years 
ago all these separate L chondrites experienced a common 
heating event that caused a loss of the “’Ar gas and a 
resetting of the Ar—Ar clock. They must also have been 
part of the same parent object at that time. The exposure 
and Ar—Ar ages are evidence that members of the large 
chondrite classes came from one or two objects in space. 


Origin of chondrites 
So what were the objects from which the chondrites are 
coming? A handful of meteorites, mostly chondrites, were 
observed sufficiently well during fall that their orbits could 
be determined. The orbits resemble those of the NEAR- 
EARTH ASTEROIDS, coming within about 0.9 AU of the Sun 
and going out to the main ASTEROID BELT at about 2.5 AU 
(1 AU, the ‘astronomical unit’, is the distance of the Earth 
from the Sun, 150 million kilometers). The relationship 
between comets and asteroids is unclear, and as many as 
half the near-Earth asteroids could be extinct comet nuclei, 
but many could have come from the main asteroid belt. 
The spectrum of the sunlight reflected from the 
surface of asteroids provides clues to their surface 
composition. Over 2000 asteroids have now been sorted 
into classes in this way, and many appear to resemble 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


H chondrites 


Number of cases 


1 23 5 10 20 30 50 100 
Exposure age (Ma) 


E| Ea Hchonartes 
HL choncrttes 
Ky LL chondrites 


Number of cases 
°o 


Qn A ®D @ 


010305 07 0941. 
Ar-Ar age (Ga) 


Number of cases 


{ i Plateau age E Intercept age 


004 08 1216 2 24 28 32 36 40 44 


Ar-Ar age (Ga) 


Figure 3. Two kinds of ages provide important insights into the 
history of the chondrite meteorites. (a) The duration of exposure 
to cosmic rays, calculated from the abundance of isotopes 
produced by cosmic ray bombardment of the meteorite. The 
peak in the histogram at 8 million years indicates that many or 
most of the individual meteorites falling to Earth were exposed 
to cosmic rays at the same moment and must have been part of 
the same single object prior to that break-up event. The data 
shown are for the H chondrites but other classes often show 
similar tendencies towards preferred cosmic ray exposure ages. 
(b) The Ar—Ar age essentially measures the time during which 
the “°Ar accumulated in the meteorite as a result of radioactive 
decay of “°K. The peak in the histogram at 500 million years 
shown mainly by the L chondrites indicates that at this time a 
large number of L chondrites had the Ar—Ar ‘clock’ reset to zero 
by loss of previously accumulated *°Ar. Thus, most members of 
this class also experienced a common heating event at one time, 
indicating that they too were part of the same object at the time 
of that event. ‘Plateau’ and‘intercept’ ages refer to different 
ways to handle the data. 


meteorites (table 2). However, asteroids with spectra 
resembling those of the ordinary chondrites, the chondrite 
class that dominates the Earth’s meteorite flux, are very 
rare among the asteroids. Perfect matches are found for 
less that 1% of asteroids, and even if one assumes that 
some form of space weathering is affecting the asteroid 
surfaces, then less than 11% of the asteroids could be the 
source of the Earth’s major chondrite classes. There are 
essentially two factors that determine which meteorites 
reach the Earth besides the abundance of their parent 
asteroids in the asteroid belt. These are the orbital 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chondrites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mechanism for transferring objects from the asteroid belt 
to Earth and the Earth’s atmosphere. Passage through the 
Earth’s atmosphere destroys most of the fragile CI and 
CM meteorites but leaves unscathed the tough ordinary 
chondrites. Nearly one-half of the classified asteroids in 
the main belt have spectra resembling those of CI or CM 
chondrites while only a few per cent of meteorites reaching 
the surface of the Earth are members of these classes. 


Table 2. The asteroid classes, their relative abundance and 
meteorite matches. 


Abundance Meteorite 
Class (%) match? 
D 6.2 IDP 
P 43 IDP 
Cc 22.8 CLCM 
T 1.3 Sulfur-rich irons 
B+G+F 91 CLCM 
Q 0.41 H,L,LL 
Vv 0.41 HED 
R 0.10 ? 
S (IV) 11.0 Lod, Win, OC, irons 
S (others) 25.9 Pal, Ure, Bra, Lod, 
Mes, Win, Ste 
A 0.71 Pal, 
M 4.3 Irons, EC 
E 13 Aub 


* Meteorite classes most closely resembling the asteroid class. 
The chondrite classes are H, L, LL (ordinary chondrites, OC), CI, 
CM, CV, CR, CO, EH and EL (enstatite chondrites, EC); 

Win, winonites; EC, enstatite (EH and EL) chondrites; 

Bra, brachinites. Other classes: Ste, Steinbach; 

Mes, mesosiderites; HED, howardites—eucrites—diogenites; 

Aub, aubrites; Ure, ureilites; Pal, pallasites; Lod, lodranites; 

IDP, interplanetary dust particles. 


We think that most of the ordinary chondrite classes 
are coming from single parent bodies, and spectral data 
show these objects to be rare in the asteroid belt. Recently 
it has been suggested that the H chondrites are coming 
from asteroid 6 Hebe, the ‘6’ indicating that it was the 
sixth asteroid discovered. This 200 km object not only has 
a surface spectrum similar to that of H chondrites, mixed 
with some related IRON METEORITES, but also is located in 
space where both Saturn and Jupiter exert a strong periodic 
gravitational influence that could send meteorites from 
Hebe to Earth. 

If we assume, as seems likely, that the various 
chondrite classes are coming from different asteroids, then 
how did the different classes originate? How did their 
parent asteroids have different surfaces? This is equivalent 
to asking how the chondrules in the meteorites formed 
and how the metal and silicate proportions came to differ 
from class to class. Most scientists argue that chondrite 
formation and metal-silicate separation occurred in the 
NEBULA, that lightning or other pulses of energy shot 
through the nebula dust to produce chondrules and that 
the metal and silicate grains swirling around in the nebula 
became separated, perhaps by aerodynamic sorting by 
the gas or perhaps by some other process. However, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the present writer has suggested that both chondrule 
formation and metal-silicate separation occurred on the 
surfaces of asteroids. I have suggested that chondrules 
formed by impact and that metal and silicate grains 
became separated as gases from the interior of the asteroid, 
mainly water, passed through the dry surface layers, size- 
and gravity-sorting chondrules and metal, and adjusting 
their relative proportions, as they escaped to space. 

So the origin of meteorites is essentially the same as 
the origin of asteroids. The nebula from which the Sun 
formed fragmented from the larger interstellar cloud and 
underwent gravitational collapse to produce the proto- 
Sun and a number of rings of material that quickly 
coalesced into planets. At the location of the asteroid 
belt, 2-3 AU from the Sun, the gravitational forces from 
the major planets (Jupiter and Saturn) were so strong that 
coalescence was prevented and a large number of tiny 
PLANETESIMALS formed. Some of these grew by ACCRETION 
but most fragmented by impact to form the asteroid belt 
much as we observe it today. 

Many of the asteroids contained enough of the 
radioactive isotope of aluminum, 7°Al, that large amounts 
of heat were generated and they melted to produce the 
many igneous classes of meteorite. The daughter product 
of 7°Al decay, **Mg, has been found in aluminum-rich 
phases of certain meteorites. However, some chondrites 
were heated without melting, and many were not heated 
at all. Chondrites are very clearly primitive early solar 
system materials. Just to underscore this point grains 
of diamond, graphite, silicon carbide and aluminum 
oxide have been found in chondrites that have isotopic 
properties indicating that they were not produced in 
our own solar system but were ejected from the outer 
atmospheres of a variety of stars. They are presolar, 
INTERSTELLAR GRAINS. Thus, while chondrites are widely 
regarded as heralds bringing us information on the early 
solar system, in a very real sense they are a connection 
between our laboratories and processes occurring in 
interstellar space and distant stars 


Bibliography 

Kerridge J F and Matthews M S (ed) 1988 Meteorites and the 
Earth Solar System (Tuscon, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 

Hewins RH, Jones R H and Scott ER D (ed) 1996 Chondrules 
and the Photoplanetary Disk (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Huang Shaoxing, Akridge D G and Sears D W G 1996 
Metal-silicate fractionation in the surface dust layers 
of accreting planetesimals: implications for the 
formation of ordinary chondrites and the nature of 
asteroid surfaces J. Geophys. Res. 101 375-85 

Symes SJ K, Sears D W G, Akridge D G, Huang Shaoxing 
and Benoit P H 1998 The crystalline lunar spherules: 
their formation and implications for the origin of 
meteoritic chondrules Meteoritics Planetary Sci. 33 
13-29 


Derek Sears 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Christiansen, Wilbur Norman (1913-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Christiansen, Wilbur Norman (1913-) 


Australian radioastronomer, built a radioastronomy 
interferometer array, consisting of 32 antennas in an 
east-west line. It was built to investigate the Sun, and 
expanded with a north-south array (in what was called, 
after Christiansen, the Chris-cross) to produce true images. 
This radio-interferometer was used to make the first purely 
Earth rotation synthesis maps. The Fourier transforms, 
however, had to be done by hand, so a single contour 
map took half a year of hand computations to produce. 
Also carried out a preliminary 21 cm survey of interstellar 
hydrogen and detected two of the Milky Way’s spiral arms. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Christie, Sir William Henry Mahoney (1845-1922) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Christie, Sir William Henry Mahoney 
(1845-1922) 


British astronomer, worked at the Royal Observatory, 
Greenwich, as Chief Assistant (assistant director) before 
succeeding Airy as Astronomer Royal (director) in 1881. 
Turned the Royal Observatory towards astrophysics (as 
opposed to positional astronomy). He installed large 
collecting area telescopes (e.g. the 28 in refractor, still in 
operation, used originally for double star observations). 
He brought the status of the Prime Meridian of the world’s 
international time zone system back for Greenwich from 
the Washington Conference of 1884. He expeditiously 
executed the work of measuring the positions of all the 
stars in the large Greenwich Zone (northern region) of 
the Astrographic Catalog. Founded and first edited The 
Observatory magazine, which still preserves a human face 
for British astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromatic Aberration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromatic Aberration 


An optical defect whereby light rays of different 
wavelengths are focused at different points along the 
optical axis of a lens. Because the refractive index of 
glass is a function of wavelength, shorter-wavelength light 
is refracted (deflected) to a greater extent than longer- 
wavelength light. Consequently, shorter-wavelength light 
(for example, blue light) is brought to a focus closer to 
the lens than longer-wavelength light (for example, red). 
Since white light consists of a mixture of wavelengths, 
the image of a star, formed by a simple lens, consists, in 
effect, of a series of different-colored images spread out 
along the optical axis. The image formed at the blue 
focus, for example, consists of a blue dot surrounded 
by a halo of false color consisting of blurred images of 
varying sizes in the light of other wavelengths. Similarly, 
the image formed at the red focus consists of a red dot, 
surrounded by a blurred halo of colors. Between these 
two foci, there is a plane at which the smallest blurred 
image occurs, this image being called the circle of least 
confusion. Since this coincides approximately with the 
focus for light in the yellow-green part of the spectrum, 
to which the human eye is most sensitive, the best visual 
image is normally obtained when the eyepiece is adjusted 
to put this wavelength region into sharpest focus. 

The spread of foci along the optical axis is called 
longitudinal chromatic aberration, and the spread in the 
plane containing the circle of least confusion is called 
transverse chromatic aberration. The degree to which the 
refractive index of an optical material, such as glass, varies 
with wavelength, is called the dispersion. 

The effects of chromatic aberration can be consider- 
ably reduced by means of compound objective lenses that 
consist of two or more appropriately shaped components, 
each made of glass with different dispersions. An achro- 
matic lens (or achromatic doublet), which has two compo- 
nents, can bring two wavelengths to the same focus and re- 
duce the spread in focal lengths for the other wavelengths 
by about a factor of ten. A three-element apochromat re- 
duces the spread even further. 

Because the laws of reflection are independent of 
wavelength, chromatic aberration does not affect the 
mirrors that are used in reflecting telescopes. 


See also: focal length, objective lens, refractor, spherical 
aberration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere 


The chromosphere (Greek x pwjia, color) is a gaseous shell 
atmosphere surrounding the Sun, and more generally 
stars, with a typical thickness of 2000 km, lying above the 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE and containing mainly hydrogen and 
helium gas. 


Historical introduction 

The total eclipse of 1860 may be regarded as marking 
the first serious study of the chromosphere. During 
eclipses the moon appears surrounded by a colored 
circle with some protruding structures, called PROMINENCES, 
which extend through the external corona and finer 
structures like ‘poils’ in French that would be the 
spicules. During the eclipse of 1970 C A Young used a 
spectrograph and a tangential slit. When the moment 
of totality arrived he was rewarded by the sudden 
appearance of numerous emission lines called a flash 
spectrum. This phenomenon lasted only a few seconds 
since the Moon rapidly covered the lowest layers of the 
chromosphere. In 1901] Evershed published the spectrum 
of the chromosphere and discussed the similarities to 
and differences from the photospheric spectrum (table 1). 
During the latter part of the 19th century a new kind 
of instrument, the spectroheliograph, was developed at Mt 
Wilson by G E Hale and at Meudon by H Deslandres (see 
SPECTROHELIOGRAPH/SPECTROHELIOSCOPE). Observing in the H 
and K lines of ionized calcium (Ca II), they were successful 
and discovered the regular pattern of the chromosphere 
called the chromospheric network (see CHROMOSPHERE: 
NETWORK). The interpretation of these lines in emission 
above the limb was puzzling and nobody had in mind 
at that time that the chromospheric temperature could be 
higher than the photospheric one. We had to wait until 
1942 for the discovery of the hot corona surrounding the 
Sun. A new instrumental development helped to give 
a better understanding into the chromosphere. In 1933 
B Lyot published a report on birefringent filters with a 
narrow bandwidth which allowed the spicules at the limb 
to be seen. These filters became quite widely distributed 
and used in the 1950s and the fine structure of the 
chromosphere has been systematically studied, using the 
Ha line, as bushes of fine bright and dark structures tied in 
the network. These structures are called mottles. Outside 
of an eclipse the chromosphere can be observed with 
CORONAGRAPHS. This kind of instrument was first developed 
by B Lyot. The principle is based on the introduction of an 
artificial moon occulting the photospheric disk. 

The principal characteristics of the chromosphere 
are its thickness of 2000 km and its basic temperature 
and pressure. Beyond the solar limb the chromospheric 
spectrum is characterized by emission lines. On the disk 
these lines appear as dark lines in the solar spectrum. They 
correspond to absorbed radiation at discrete wavelengths 
by elements of the chromosphere. The principal lines in 
the visible spectrum have been identified and are called the 
Fraunhofer lines (table 1). The intensity of the lines reflects 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. The strongest lines in the chromospheric spectrum 
(3200-9100 A) classified by their intensity. 


Wavelength (A) Element Name of the line 
6562.82 HI Ha 
4861.33 HI Hg 
3933.66 Ca I K 
3968.47 Ca I H 
5975.65 Hel D3 
4340.47 HI Hy 
8542.09 Ca I 

4101.74 HI Hd 
8662.14 Ca I 

3999.65 HI Hg 
3970.07 HI He 


the physical conditions of the plasma which absorbs or 
emits the radiation and is a good diagnostic of the plasma 
temperature. Above the photosphere, the temperature 
continues firstly to decrease to a minimum of 4200 K and 
then increases again. 


Morphology and dynamics of the quiet 
chromosphere 
The aspect of the chromosphere depends strongly on the 
line used for the observations, and more precisely on the 
wavelength in which the image is obtained, e.g. Ca II Hand 
K, Ha, He II 304 A. The solar disk observed in Fraunhofer 
lines has a diameter slighter larger than the photospheric 
disk and is covered by a pattern very different from the 
granular pattern of the photosphere. In the H and K lines 
of Ca II the images of the chromosphere show a bright 
network surrounding more or less large cells which have 
a diameter of the order of 30000 km (figure 1). This 
cell pattern overlies the photospheric supergranulation 
which is a manifestation of large-scale solar convection, 
an important mechanism for magnetic flux transport. 
The H and K lines have a special profile with 
extremely broad absorption wings and a central emission. 
The central emission of the K line is called K3, the two 
adjacent maxima are called K2 (K2v violet wing and K2r 
red wing) and far in the wings it is called K1. Similar 
definitions are valid for the H line. The spectroheliograms 
in K1 show the photospheric pattern with granulation and 
sunspots. In K3 there is a mesh-like brightness pattern 
over the entire solar surface, which represents the network 
and the supergranules or the intranetwork, also called 
the internetwork. The network is more prominent in two 
symmetric zones north and south of the equator, located 
at tropical latitudes. In K2 very small bright points are 
visible over all the solar surface. 


Network 

The chromospheric network is directly related to the mag- 
netic field. It appears brighter than the mean chromo- 
sphere owing to pressure and temperature variations and 
possibly heating in the magnetized atmosphere. The 
strength of the central part of the K line as measured in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Call K3 


Figure 1. The chromosphere observed in the lines Ha of 
hydrogen and Ca K3 of ionized calcium in spectroheliograms 
obtained at Meudon (Courtesy of the Observatoire de Paris). 


a 1A band is used as an index (K index) to define the local 
magnetic flux density in the underlying photosphere and 
is used for stars to define the degree of magnetism of the 
star. In the quiet Sun the K index increases linearly with 
the magnetic flux density. 

However, this law is not true in magnetized regions 
(exceeding 400 G), where the power law decreases with 
an exponent lower than unity. This form is called the 
canopy effect (see CHROMOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY). The 
most conspicuous examples of canopy phenomena are 
associated with sunspots. The field forms a canopy over 
a non-magnetized region between 600 and 1000 km in the 
chromosphere (figure 2). The network is the site of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


anchorage of coronal loops extending to coronal altitudes. 
The Ha spectroheliogram (figure 1) has some 
similarities to the K3 spectroheliogram with two bright 
zones parallel to the equator. The network contrast is 
nevertheless weaker than in K3. 
In the Lyman line (La) the network is much more 
enhanced than in Ha and is filamentary in appearance. 


Bright grains 

In K2 of the Ca II line, and better in UV lines, the network 
and the internetwork are grainier. The grains have a high 
contrast at wavelengths representative of the temperature 
minimum, e.g. in the continuum at 4 ~ 1600 A. The space 
imager of the TRACE satellite shows such grain patterns 
at high resolution. The continuum UV bright grains 
are observed everywhere as bright points. They have a 
characteristic size of 1000 km and a brightness temperature 
excess of 30-360 K. 

In the network the bright points are generally 
associated with magnetic elements which collide. Most 
of the time they have opposite polarities and the bright 
points are due to heating of the plasma after reconnection. 
Magnetic flux is transformed to heat. 

In the intranetwork, in high-resolution spectroheli- 
ograms obtained in the K2 or H2 wings of Ca II lines, bright 
grains (Ca II bright grain) are again well observed. For 
many years it was believed that they were due to the pres- 
ence of small magnetic tubes like network bright points. 
The relationship of these bright grains to small magnetic 
elements has been subject to a long debate because the 
coalignment was not conclusive. It has been now proved 
that the bright grains are due to the behavior of chromo- 
spheric oscillations which produce shock waves (figure 2). 


Fine structures 

The Ha spectroheliograms (figure 1) show the chromo- 
spheric network but more distinctively the existence of 
very tiny small elongated structures. Gathered around 
sunspots are structures called fibrils (CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS). 
Thicker and longer structures in active regions or between 
active regions are called filaments. Tiny structures visi- 
ble in emission above the limb are spicules. The small 
bushes of fine structures anchored in the network are mot- 
tles. These fine structures are controlled by the magnetic 
field which confines the plasma. The magnetic field plays 
an important role in the chromosphere (see below the def- 
inition of the plasma ). 


Mottles 

The mottles are irregular threads of large brightness 
contrast which link together to form quasi-regular pattern 
around and above supergranules in the photosphere. The 
mottles appear differently at different wavelengths in the 
Ha line. At the center of the line bright mottles are low 
lying (700-3000 km above the photosphere), while the dark 
mottles form a coarse fragmentation, but the admixture of 
bright and dark features makes the large-scale pattern less 
distinct than in the Ca II H and K lines in the quiet Sun. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Not to scale 


Network 


spenicenscieiicirinene 
SE 


serene 


sean 


aeons 
SEERA 
SEs 


OE 
see 
OS 


se 
Se 


%. 


% 


x 
a 


os 
MOONS 


OS 


SES 


Enhanced EUV emission 


SOCIO ISOC 
ene 


neces 
xu 


2Mm 


2 

o 

= ees, 

2 Shocks 
E "Field Free, 

rs} Internetwork" region 

: | Se ee S 
(3) 

6 Granulation (2Mm), p-modes 
9 

re) <= - 

x 30Mm Supergranulation 


Figure 2. Diagram of the chromosphere (courtesy of P Judge). 


Sometimes the fine structures take specific arrangements 
suchas rosettes which have alternately bright and dark fine 
mottles radiating outward from a common bright center 
(figure 3). The bright core corresponds to a magnetic 
element of the network. The visibility of bright Ha mottles 
fades quickly as the observing wavelength is shifted from 
the center of the line. At 0.6 A towards the blue wings of 
the K line only dark elongated mottles are found. Their 
intermittent clusters outline the supergranule cells. Seen 
near the limb at this wavelength position on either blue 
or red wings, the dark mottles retain their narrow shapes 
and often form in clusters or bushes. 

In radio wavelengths (at 6 cm) the fine-scale network 
is resolved. All bright 6 cm features overlie bright Ca II K 
mottles. 

The typical lifetime of mottles is 12-20 min. They are 
the sites of upward and downward motions with shorter 
lifetimes. A quasi-periodicity of 5-10 min is observed. 
Downward motions are well observed at the base of the 
mottles. They are evidently responsible for some bright 
grains owing to the compression of the plasma or an 
increase of the magnetic field strength. These downflows 
explained the common redshift observed in the network. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The mottles can be regarded as cylinders of thickness 
D = 500-1000 km and of temperature T = 8000-15 000 K. 
The pressure is about 0.5 dyn cm~ and velocities are 
between 5 and 10 km s~!. The difference between dark 
and bright mottles may be explained as due to an increase 
in gas pressure. 


Spicules 

At the limb, jet-like structures called spicules are observed 
extending to the hot corona (figure 4). Spicules have 
a temperature of 10000 K and density of 107 g cm°°. 
They rise to a maximum height of about 10000 km with 
a velocity of about 20 km s~’. Between 5000 and 30000 
spicules are present on the disk at any one time. The 
large number of spicules combined with their measured 
velocities implies an upward mass flux two orders of 
magnitude larger than that of the solar wind. This mass 
flux is large enough to fill the corona completely in 3 h. 
How does the mass flow come back to the chromosphere? 
It is tempting to try to find an answer in the downflow 
measured in the network and strongly visible at the basis 
of the mottles. Are mottles of the same nature as spicules? 
This has also been a subject of long debate and is still a 
matter of controversy. Nevertheless, spicules have been 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Observations of chromospheric mottles arranged as a rosette observed in the Ha line with the Multi-channel Subtractive 
Double Pass (Mspp) sPECTROGRAPH (Pic du Midi, Turret Dome). From left to right, the maps are obtained from near the line center to the 


far wings (Ha 


0.25 A, +0.5 A, +0.75 A). The upper panels display intensity maps of a zone of dimensions 38 500 km x30000 km. The 


lower panels display Doppler-shift maps: dark regions represent downflows, bright regions upflows. 


identified in filtergrams obtained for the disk in the far 
blue wing of the Ha line; which implies the existence of 
strong upward motions in these structures. 


Physical conditions of the quiet chromosphere 


The exploration of physical phenomena in the solar 
atmosphere by means of numerical simulations of 
atmospheric structure and spectral line formations is an 
essential complement to high-resolution observational 
study of the Sun. The principal goal of modeling efforts 
is to develop diagnostics of physical conditions and 
processes in the solar plasma. However, it is difficult to 
achieve this goal because of the variety of velocity fields, 
the thermal inhomogeneities, the small-scale geometry 
and the limit of computing resources. 

It is universally agreed that the chromosphere 
is variable and inhomogeneous. Moderate spatial 
resolution observations in a wide variety of wavelength 
regions are combined into histograms which indicate the 
relative frequency of occurrence of different brightness 
levels. Semi-empirical model atmospheres have then 
been constructed to match the wavelength behavior 
of each brightness level. | Fully three-dimensional 
model 
demanding to be practical, but simpler models in one 
dimension seem to give useful results. 
dimensional atmospheric models are derived for the quiet 
Sun, the sunspots and other structures. Using these 
models interpretation of the line profiles is possible and 
leads to knowledge of the physical parameters of the 
plasma where the line is formed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Semiempirical models 

To derive quantitative information about the physical 
parameters from the observed radiation, we have to 
understand the different processes concerning absorption 
of the incident radiation and emission by the atoms of the 
atmosphere. 

of the plasma. We need to solve the equations of radiative 
transfer in an atmosphere where the assumption of local 
thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) is not always satisfied. 
As a first step in the modeling the plasma is assumed 
to be static and the magnetic field is neglected. The 
non-LTE assumption involves detailed calculation of the 
statistical equilibrium of each atom (mainly hydrogen, the 
most important species) with as many atomic levels as 
necessary. For the basic model of the chromosphere a 
plane atmosphere is assumed as a simple geometry. A 
mean 1D semi-infinite atmospheric model is described by 
the variation in height of the temperature: the temperature 
minimum is 4300 K at around 500 km; it then rises to a 
plateau of 6000-10000 K between 1000 and 2100 km. In 
the same height range (500-2100 km) the electron density 
decreases from 2.5 x 10" to 2.5 x 10!° cm~°, the gas pressure 
from 1.3 x 10° to 1.5 x 107! dyn cm and the density drops 
from 5 x 107° to5 x 10-4 g cm. 

To fit the various types of rattiatitatiobskrved from 
different regions of the chromosphere different 1D models 
have been computed, e.g. models for intranetwork, 
network, SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC PLAGE regions and flares. 
The brightness observed in Ha flares is explained by a 
rapid increase of the gas temperature in the chromosphere 
to nearly coronal temperatures. The brightness of plages 
is also due to higher temperatures, but for these structures 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Spicules observed in the Ha line of hydrogen at Sacramento Peak (upper panels, from left to right in the red and blue wings, 
lower panels the sum and difference of intensities of the wings). The difference represents the velocity. (Courtesy of Skoutchmy.) 


the magnetic field plays an important role and cannot be 
neglected. 


Bifurcated models 


Another view of the chromosphere is obtained from ob- 
servations in the CO bands (band of carbon monoxide). 
These bands are optically thick at the base of the temper- 
ature inversion. The core of the strongest CO lines is not 
centrally reversed, contrary to predictions of the semiem- 
pirical models. Instead, the CO features exhibit a cool 
core which indicates the presence of a low temperature 
(T < 4000 K) above the temperature minimum height. 
Bifurcated models have been constructed to explain the 
formation of CO. It is admitted that a part of the chromo- 
sphere could be cold enough (see CHROMOSPHERE: THERMAL 
BIFURCATION). 

Such a cool model (TJ ~ 4000 K until 1500 km 
height) has also been newly proposed in the simulation of 
intranetwork bright grains (chromospheric oscillations). 
The semiempirical models may not necessarily reflect an 
average chromosphere. This is an open question. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Formation of the lines 


Semiempirical models nevertheless allow one to explain 
the central reversal of the H and K Ca II lines. The shape 
of the line profiles depends strongly on the profile of the 
temperature through the chromosphere and their regime 
of formation (by collisions or by radiation). If the line is 
controlled by collisions, as for example the K line of Ca 
II, the ratio between absorption and emission (the source 
function) increases in the chromosphere and the core of the 
line is self-reversed. If the line is controlled by radiation, as 
for example the Ha line, the source function is decreasing 
everywhere and the core of the line is in absorption without 
reversal. 


UV lines are in emission because their source 
functions are higher than the chromospheric continuum 
intensity. For the Lyman lines the wings are formed in the 
chromosphere with the core in the transition zone at still 
higher temperatures. 

At radio wavelengths (millimeter and centimeter), 
however, the radiation is nearly that of a black body at 
chromospheric temperatures. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetized atmosphere and fine structures 

While the photosphere is dominated by convection owing 
to its high gas pressure, the chromosphere is well 
structured by the magnetic field. The plasma is frozen 
in the magnetic field lines and so outlines the magnetic 
field structures. This property is useful to visualize the 
structures. Magnetic flux tubes, as they emerge because 
of magnetic buoyancy are pushed and concentrated into 
flux elements of a few hundred km in diameter, as 
a result of convective motions seen as granules and 
supergranules and of the so-called convective collapse. 
This concentration of flux leads to the formation of the 
chromospheric network, e.g. pores, faculae and sunspots. 
Photospheric motions and magnetic buoyancy may be 
the origin of the continued modifications of the coronal 
magnetic field and the dynamical events observed, i.e. ona 
small scale reconnection and on the large scale expansion. 
In the chromosphere the ratio between the gas pressure 
and the magnetic pressure 8 (6 = 87p/B’) is already less 
than unity in most places, which implies that the magnetic 
pressure dominates. Flux tubes play an important role in 
the upward transport of energy and mass into the corona. 
The chromospheric velocity amplitudes are larger than 
the photospheric ones and can reach a mean value of 
1-1.5kms-~!. This confirms the validity of the continuity 
equation (pVA = constant) in flux tubes with p the density, 
A the tube cross-section and V the velocity of the plasma. 

Fine structures overlie the mean chromosphere. A 
discontinuity in the gradient of physical parameters 
of the atmosphere does exist and semi-infinite models 
are no longer valid; cloud-model techniques are more 
appropriate. In the classical case the structure is supposed 
to be a relatively thin cloud over a uniform atmosphere, 
and both of them contribute to the observed profiles. Since 
the first proposal of such a technique in 1964 by J Beckers, 
many investigations using such models have been carried 
out for mottles, waves and filaments. 

Using the cloud-model method to analyse spectro- 
scopic data, velocities as large as those of the spicules 
have been detected in mottles. Spicules should be mottles 
observed under certain physical conditions such as high 
speeds. The dynamics in the fine structures is various and 
large. Many models are proposed to explain the flows in 
such structures: they are based either on pressure-gradient 
pulses at the base of the structures or on siphon flows, or 
are a manifestation of wave motions in flux tubes. 


Waves and heating 

Oscillations in the chromosphere have been detected quite 
recently, with significant differences in both power and 
phase spectra between the intranetwork and network. 
Oscillations of around 3 min exist mainly in the 
intranetwork. 


Three minute oscillations 

The pattern of the intranetwork oscillations is well 
correlated with the pattern of p-mode oscillations in the 
photosphere. However, the slow network oscillations are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


not. They correspond to interferences with shock waves 
from the 5 min photospheric oscillations and 180 s period 
pervasive standing oscillations. The latter oscillations 
have an 80 Mm horizontal wavelength. They are not 
associated with magnetic flux tubes. The identification of 
the interiors of network cells with the basal chromosphere 
has revived interest in the origin of grains which are 
observed in Ca II H2v and K2v and intermittently 
present in C I. The 3 min oscillation could be associated 
with spatially unresolved ‘clusters’ of grains. Recent 
simulations of the generation of Ca II K2v bright grains by 
shocks of waves have been performed quite successfully 
by M Carlsson. The trigger mechanism of these waves is 
not yet fully understood. 


Low-frequency oscillations 

The network power is dominated by low-frequency 
oscillations with periods larger than 5 min (8-20 min). In 
bright network regions, at the boundaries of cells, random 
motions on scales of 2-10 arcsec have been detected. More 
recently, slow oscillations of 6-7 min have been identified 
by using the Lyman lines observed with the spectrometer 
SUMER aboard the space mission sono. These waves seem 
to propagate upwards and they are not spatially coherent. 
One possibility is that these oscillations are related to the 
pseudo-periodic behavior of mottles, or spicules, since 
they can produce such wave-trains. The bright features 
strong in the Ha far wing or in Ca II would correspond to 
the base of mottles and would be therefore of a magnetic 
nature. 


Heating 

Many oscillations are observed in the chromosphere. Are 
these waves heating the chromosphere? When acoustic 
waves travel upwards through the solar atmosphere, 
the density gradient results in an increase of the wave 
amplitude (V), so that the product pV? remains roughly 
constant. Taking into account the observed velocities at 
low levels, it is possible to infer the height at which the 
amplitude reaches the sound velocity and thereby leads 
to a shock-wave formation. Shock waves can dissipate 
mechanical energy into heat by non-linear processes. 
Extensive calculations have been performed to explore the 
efficiency of such processes. It has been shown that heating 
by shock waves can be efficient in the low chromosphere, 
but at higher levels the acoustic waves should become 
evanescent and the available energy becomes too small 
to compensate for the radiative losses which are deduced 
from the observed spectrum. The recent discovery of 
bright grains has been explained in terms of the simulation 
of waves traveling in the chromosphere. 


The active chromosphere 

The active chromosphere involves all the manifestations of 
the solar activity observed in chromospheric lines (table 1). 
The solar activity is directly related to the magnetic activity 
and is manifested by the existence of active centers and 
newly emerging magnetic flux. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Chromospheric fibrils observed around sunspots and 
arch filament system in a active center (Pic du Midi, Turret 
Dome). 


Active center 

An image obtained in the Ha line at Pic du Midi 
(figure 5) shows the fibril pattern surrounding a sunspot. 
These structures are tied into the penumbra of the 
spot. They can be radially oriented or turning either 
clockwise or counterclockwise. It was recently discovered 
that the fibril pattern follows a clockwise orientation in 
the southern hemisphere and counterclockwise in the 
northern hemisphere. This helicity law seems to be 
important in the global view of the Sun’s activity. 

Some dark structures emerge with large velocities 
from the sunspot. They were discovered by Ellerman 
and are called Ellerman bombs (see SOLAR CHROMOSPHERE: 
ELLERMAN BOMBS). They are characterized by very broad 
emission profiles in the Ha line. 

In an active center bright regions are observed, 
the so-called plages, or faculae. In old groups the 
sunspots disappear first and only faculae remain, which 
subsequently disperse and vanish. 


Relation to the solar cycle 

The normalized distribution of areas of active regions, 
using Ca II K plages or magnetic flux, varies with the phase 
of the solar cycle. The proportion attributed to plages and 
strong network in the total magnetic flux change varies by 
different amounts across the cycle, e.g. by a factor of 8 
for plages, a factor of 40 for strong network regions and a 
factor of 10 for an activity complex. 

The total enhanced network and plage signal is larger 
during active periods. The active network accounts 
for a large part of the total solar irradiance variation. 
This apparent solar cycle variation of enhanced intensity 
contrast is, nevertheless, only 2% for the network and 9% 
for plages. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Newly emerging magnetic flux 

New magnetic flux emerges continuously and the full 
magnetic pattern of the Sun is renewed within 40 h. The 
emergence of flux has different consequences in the upper 
atmosphere and different signatures according the place 
where it appears. When new flux emerges at the center 
of supergranules it moves toward the edges and interact 
with the network magnetic flux. In the chromosphere 
the signature of an emerging dipole is an arch filament 
system. These arch-shaped tubes rise, reach an altitude 
of around 5000 km, bringing up denser material than in 
the surrounding atmosphere. At both ends of the arches 
the material falls owing to gravity with velocities of about 
20 km s~! which cannot be, nevertheless, considered as 
free-fall motions. In Ha the dense material appears as 
absorption features but in UV (SOHO) or in soft x-ray 
(YOHKOH the Japanese satellite) it appears in emission and 
brighter than the surrounding material. 

Otherwise, the dynamic phenomena discussed above 
are related to solar activity. Twisting and shearing of flux 
tubes may set up currents along the field lines. On large 
scales differential rotation will induce an extended current 
system which increases continuously, leading to an outer 
expansion of magnetic field lines, which is visible with 
Yohkoh. The effective electrical conductivity of the solar 
corona is so high that the field structures resulting from 
flux emergence cannot immediately relax to a current-free 
state. The presence of currents can lead to the formation 
of different structures such as prominences, with any 
disruptions leading to eruptions such as SOLAR CORONAL 
MASS EJECTIONS OF FLARES. 


Bibliography 

Bray RJ and Loughhead R E 1974 The Solar Chromosphere 
(London: Chapman & Hall) 

Lites B.W 1984 Chromospheric Diagnostics and Modelling 
(NSO Observatory Publishing) 

Rutten R J and Schrijver R J 1994 Solar Surface Magnetism 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Schmieder B 1997 Flows through the magnetized 
structured solar atmosphere Lecture Notes in Physics 
ed G Simnett, C Alissandrakis and L Vlahos (Berlin: 
Springer) p 139 

Tsiropoula G, Alissandrakis C E and Schmieder B 1993 
The fine structure of a chromospheric rosette Astron. 
Astrophys. 271 574 

Vernazza J E, Avrett E H and Loeser R 1981 Structure of 
the solar chromosphere Astrophys. J. 45 635-725 


Brigitte Schmieder 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Emerging Flux Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere: Emerging Flux 
Regions 


A description of the emergence of large concentrations 
of magnetic fields (active regions) at the solar surface is 
presented. The dark structures known as SUNSPOTS are a 
consequence of this process. 

The emergence of an active region on the solar 
surface is one of the most prominent processes that can be 
followed by looking at the Sun on a daily basis. Regions 
that before emergence had the normal bubble convective 
appearance (GRANULATION) will in a few days develop dark 
sunspots and suNsPOT Pores and bright FACULAE. At visible 
wavelengths (very often in the core and wings of the 
red Ha line) we can observe active region emergence in 
the deepest observable layers, the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE and 
CHROMOSPHERE. Nowadays, we can also follow this process 
in the UV and x-ray spectral range from space, where we 
track active region emergence in the outermost layer of the 
Sun, the corona. Itis in the chromosphere and in the corona 
where all the energetic processes relating to flux emergence 
can be followed more easily. The interaction of the newly 
emerging flux and preexisting field lines usually triggers 
a large number of FLARES (the sudden, transient release of 
energy probably related to magnetic reconnection). The 
dynamics observed in all these wavelength ranges clearly 
shows that active region emergence should be understood 
as the result of buoyancy rise of a magnetic structure from 
deeper layers in the Sun. 

The magnetic field lines that form an active region 
are thought to be generated by some kind of DYNAMO 
mechanism (like almost all cosmic magnetic phenomena). 
The exact location of this dynamo within the Sun is not 
clearly established, but helioseismic studies suggest that 
the generation and storage of the dynamo fields take place 
close to the base of the convection zone (See SOLAR INTERIOR: 
CONVECTION ZONE). On the solar surface, the emergence of 
localized, vast amounts of magnetic fields suggest that, at 
the bottom of the convection zone, the field is organized 
into isolated magnetic flux tubes or ropes. These magnetic 
flux tubes are thought to be formed as toroidal loops in the 
interior of the Sun (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX 
TuBES). Their stability there remains controversial but it is 
clear that they develop a strong tendency to rise (at least, in 
part) towards the surface. This buoyancy comes from the 
extra pressure exerted by the magnetic field that reduces 
the gas pressure inside the loop (pressure equilibrium is 
a very efficient mechanism which can be assumed for 
these tubes). The lower gas pressure can be achieved 
only through lower temperatures and/or gas densities 
inside them. Thus, we are led to consider magnetic 
tubes, which, having lower densities, will develop some 
uncompensated buoyancy and rise (similar to bubbles in 
water, but with other physical agents playing an important 
role). The irruption of these magnetic bubbles into the 
solar atmosphere represents the emergence of an active 
region. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Pa 
Ww 
v 


~ 
Pra 
al ee td 


4 
1 i \ 
1 n 1 
’ ! ‘ 
1 ot 4 
\ ! 1 
J 4 1 
t 


Figure 1. Illustration of the structure of an emerged Q loop on 
the solar surface. The arrows indicate the proper motion of the 
field lines. The pores at the footpoints (black ellipses) separate 
from the central emerging region, where new horizontal flux is 
emerging. The dashed curves represent previously emerged 
field lines and already fill the coronal volume (from Zwaan 
1992). 


An active region usually has a clear dividing line 
between the two polarities (by polarities we mean here 
magnetic fields with their vectors pointing out of the Sun 
and fields pointing into the Sun). After emergence, the two 
polarities are seen at the surface separated in longitude. 
Magnetic field lines start at one polarity (figure 1, right), 
arch above the solar surface filling the solar corona (as seen 
from spacecraft such as Yohkoh and SOHO) and end at the 
other polarity (figure 1, left). In the deep (unobservable) 
layers, the field lines of both polarities dive down and 
connect with the system of toroidal flux tubes. This 
configuration of the field lines after emergence is called 
the Q-shaped loop configuration by solar astronomers. An 
idealized sketch is shown in figure 1. 


Observational description of emerging flux 
regions 

The emergence of active regions in the solar atmosphere is 
a relatively easy phenomenon to spot in any of the spectral 
bands used to monitor the Sun. This is particularly true 
if we compare it with the more elusive reverse process 
of active region disappearance. Already in the late 1960s 
Bruzek (1967) presented a classical description of the 
emergence process as seen in the core of Ha (i.e. in the 
chromosphere). He coined the term arch filament system 
(AFS) to describe the system of parallel loops that connect 
the footpoints of an emerging flux region (EFR). These 
arching loops have since then been taken as the signature 
of the birth of an active region (see figure 2; a description 
of this EFR can be found in Strous (1994)). As seen in 
the chromosphere, the central portion of the AFS shows 
ascending velocities of up to 10 km git, reflecting the 
upward buoyancy-driven motion of the magnetic system. 
Closer to the footpoints of the EFR, the loops show 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Emerging Flux Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ha Line Center 


Megameters 


0 20 40 60 80 


Megameters 


0 20 40 60 80 
Megameters 


Figure 2. An EFR seen in the Ha line center (left) and white light (right) The footpoints of the EFR correspond to the two almost vertical 
alignments of pores. In between can be seen elongated intergranular lanes in the white-light image and the AFS in the Ha picture (the 
light and dark structures arching from one footpoint to the other). The images were taken at the Swedish Vacuum Solar Telescope on 

La Palma (Canary Islands, Spain). Image courtesy of L Strous/Swedish Vacuum Solar Telescope, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. 


receding velocities of several tens of km s~! produced by 
matter falling back along the magnetic field lines. During 
the process of emergence, the footpoints separate at a rate 
of a few km s~' while new flux appears in between. The 
loops composing the AFS are in constant change (lifetimes 
of individual filaments ~30 min) while they interact with 
new field lines rising from below. After a few hours, 
the flux system at the footpoints is organized into several 
pores, dark structures seen in white light where the normal 
granular appearance of the photosphere is absent. The 
magnetic field in these structures is able to impede the 
normal heat transport by convection (i.e. the granulation) 
and the reduced temperature of the gas makes them 
appear dark in contrast to the surrounding atmosphere. 
In the course of the days following the first sighting of 
the AFS, several bursts of magnetic flux emergence can 
occur and, quite often, it is in these later bursts where 
the bulk of the magnetic flux makes its way through the 
photosphere. The pores formed from all the different 
emergence episodes can eventually coalesce to give rise 
to a sunspot. This process is driven by the subsurface 
topology of the flux loop more than by any flow that may 
prevail there. This usually occurs in the leading (with 
respect to solar rotation) footpoint of the EFR and a stable 
round sunspot is observed. In the following footpoint, if a 
sunspot forms at all, it usually corresponds to a less stable 
(shorter-lived) structure with an irregular shape. This 
difference between the leading and following footpoints 
is very well documented but its origins are far from being 
fully understood. The AFS is seen while new flux emerges 
from below. This usually takes no more than 4—5 days. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Flux emergence as described above is consistent 
with the idea of an Q-shaped magnetic loop that 
is rising through the solar convection zone (Zwaan 
1992). During this rise, the loop passes through a 
highly stratified external atmosphere and interacts with 
convective motions. All this probably leads to the break 
up of the single initial loop into several loops (as depicted 
in figure 1). At the surface, each of them produces an 
emergence episode. The fact that different episodes can 
later give rise to pores that merge into a single sunspot 
indicates that deeper down the flux system has retained 
its identity. 

Observations of EFR were first made in the 
chromosphere owing to the accessibility of the process 
as seen in Ha. Nowadays, the EFRs have also been 
followed in the photospheric layers, where we find 
dark alignments between the footpoints with elongated 
granules showing how the magnetic field perturbs the 
normal granulation seen elsewhere (see the white-light 
image in figure 2). Spectropolarimetric observations in 
photospheric lines have revealed downflows of up to 
2 km s“! close to the footpoints. These downflows 
are photospheric counterparts of the much stronger 
chromospheric downdrafts (due to the lower densities) 
mentioned above. In the photosphere, upflowing 
velocities of the central parts of the EFR have been detected 
that reach values of 1 km s7!. It is clear that the field lines 
speed up as they rise through these layers to reach even 
higher upward velocities in the chromosphere. 

Recent photospheric observations made with the 
Advanced Stokes Polarimeter (ASP; Lites et al 1998) have 
clarified several issues that had remained unanswered 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Emerging Flux Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


before the use of high-sensitivity full Stokes polarimetry. 
This instrument allows reliable estimates of the mean 
vector magnetic field within the resolution element and 
the area fraction occupied by the field. These observations 
have clearly detected the horizontal (transverse) field lines 
as they pass through the photosphere, representing the 
signature of the top part of the emerging loops. The 
intrinsic field strength measured at the locations of the 
horizontal field lines is in the range 200-600 G, ie. at 
or below equipartition with the kinetic energy of the 
granular motions. This result was expected from the 
fact that these fields are able to disturb the granulation 
pattern (Zwaan 1992). Fields in the range of 1200 G, or 
higher, are seen only in the vertical footpoints, in the form 
of either faculae or pores. It has been argued that the 
stronger fields found in the footpoints are achieved after 
the convective collapse process driven by the ubiquitous 
downflow found there. While this may well be the 
case, ASP observations have shown that the downflow 
is seen over regions that are already in the kilogauss 
regime; thus the downflow itself cannot be taken as the 
signature of convective collapse. The only way to ascertain 
whether this process is responsible for the high (twice 
equipartition) fields found in the vertical footpoints is 
by identifying a region of vertical weak field strength 
where a downflow develops and, after a short time interval 
(minutes), develops kilogauss strengths. This has not yet 
been observed and it represents an important challenge of 
modern spectropolarimeters in the present solar cycle. 


Complex patterns of emergence 

The Q-shaped loop configuration of an active region 
described so far represents a simple bipolar system that 
describes most of the emergence cases observed on the 
Sun. This configuration fits in a natural way with 
Hale’s polarity law. This law states that in a given solar 
hemisphere, during one solar cycle, the polarity of most 
of the active regions is oriented such that the positive 
polarity (field lines pointing out of the Sun) precedes the 
negative polarity (field lines pointing into the Sun). The 
reverse order would be found in the other hemisphere. 
The bipolar character of the Q-shaped structures in each 
hemisphere will give rise to Hale’s law. However, a small 
percentage of the emergence cases (around 1%) cannot 
be described by this bipolar configuration. Some active 
regions develop what is called a 6 configuration, in which 
a single spot (the 6 spot) contains within its penumbrae 
two umbral cores that have opposite polarities. The order 
of the two polarities is generally opposite to that predicted 
by Hale’s law (in the above example the negative-polarity 
umbral core will precede the positive one). This 6-spot 
configuration, although rare, is very important because it 
represents the most flare-productive regions observed at 
the surface. 5 groups are responsible for almost all great 
flares. The existence of complex neutral lines (where the 
polarity changes sign) seems to favor the occurrence of 
very energetic processes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


We have recently started to understand (Linton et al 
1999) that this complex configuration may result from the 
evolution of toroidal loops as they pass through the solar 
convective zone. Some configurations of the magnetic 
field in these loops are liable to develop a twist of more 
than 90° in the top part of the Q loop, thus inverting the 
polarity order. This kink instability develops during the 
rise of the loop. It will thus take place only if the timescale 
of the instability is shorter than the rise time. The inverted 
portion of the loop can turn into a compact sunspot 
displaying the two polarities at the surface. In some cases, 
the evolution can be complex enough (through field-line 
reconnection) to generate closed magnetic systems that 
ascend through the solar surface (Lites et al 1994). 


Bibliography 

Bruzek A 1967 On arch-filament systems in spotgroups Sol. 
Phys. 2 451-61 

Linton M G, Fisher G H, Dahburg R B and Fan Y 1999 
Relationship of the multimode kink instability to 5- 
spot formation Astrophys. J. 522 1190-205 

Lites B, Low BC, Martinez Pillet V, Seagraves P, Skumanich 
A, Zoe F, Shine D and Tsuneta S 1994 The possible 
ascent of a closed magnetic system through the 
photosphere. Astrophys. J. 446 877-94 

Lites B, Skumanich A and Martinez Pillet V 1998 Vector 
magnetic fields of emerging solar flux I. properties at 
the site of emergence Astron. Astrophys. 333 1053-68 

Strous L 1994 Dynamics in solar active regions: patterns 
in magnetic-flux emergence PhD Thesis Utrecht 
University 

Zwaan C 1992 The evolution of sunspots Sunspots: Theory 
and Observations (NATO ASI Series vol 375) ed J 
Thomas and N O Weiss, pp 75-100 


V Martinez Pillet 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Fibrils 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere: Fibrils 


Fibrils are dark, elongated, curvilinear patterns in the 
CHROMOSPHERE as seen through a filter that isolates the 
Ha spectral absorption line of hydrogen. Well-developed 
fibrils occur in and around SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS (figure 1) 
and SOLAR FILAMENT CHANNELS. 

Like much of the traditional nomenclature used to 
describe the solar atmosphere, the term fibril is derived 
from Latin (‘little fiber’) and originates from the rich but 
limited view afforded by Ha images. Modern research 
on fibrils aims to relate their appearance to physical 
properties of structures in the atmosphere. An important 
component of this goal is to understand the relationship 
between fibrils and the fine structure of the quiet 
chromosphere. As seen in Ha, the quiet chromosphere 
is dominated by bright and dark mottles, structures 
which, although often elongated, are characteristically 
shorter in length, shorter-lived and show less large-scale 
organization than fibrils. 

The prevailing hypothesis is that the magnetic field 
is the most important determinant of chromospheric fine 
structure. The difference in Ha appearance between quiet 
and active regions should therefore reflect differences 
in the organization of the field. There is considerable 
indirect evidence to support this hypothesis and none that 
contradicts it; but there are still few direct measurements 
of the magnetic field in the chromosphere. 


Appearance 

Traditionally fibrils are identified with dark features; but, 
as is apparent from figure 1, brighter and darker Ha 
features are closely associated. Even when the orientation 
of fibrils in a particular area is clear, it is often difficult 
to follow an individual dark feature for more than a 
few thousand kilometers. Large fibrils extend as far 
as 30000 km; these are sometimes called chromospheric 
threads. The apparent width of fibrils ranges from 2000- 
3000 km down to the limit of resolution of ground-based 
images, about 300 km. Fibrils probably have structure or 
substructure on even finer scales, as the best images hint. 
The apparent aspect ratio (length to width) of fibrils ranges 
from about 3-4 (a less elongated feature would probably 
not be called a fibril) to as high as 30-40. 

When an active region is born as an emerging 
flux region, the short fibrils that appear are called 
arch filaments (see CHROMOSPHERE: EMERGING FLUX REGIONS). 
The dark fibrils are intermixed with features that are 
distinctly brighter than the background chromosphere. 
Since emerging flux regions are always magnetically 
bipolar, and the opposite ends of an arch filament point 
to the opposite polarities, arch filaments support in a 
simple geometry the general hypothesis that fibrils follow 
magnetic lines of force. As the active region develops, the 
single arch filament system is replaced by a growing welter 
of fibrils that reflects the increasing size and magnetic 
complexity of the region. Sizable suNspots are surrounded 
by fibrils that begin in the white-light penumbra but often 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


extend, in a superpenumbra, well beyond the penumbral 
boundary (See SUNSPOT PENUMBRA: STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITY). 
Superpenumbral fibrils in a complex active region are 
often strongly curved and non-radial. This is to be 
expected if fibrils follow the magnetic field. When the 
photospheric magnetic field is complex, even a potential 
field above the photosphere may be curved and non- 
radial around flux concentrations; when the photospheric 
field is highly non-potential, as it is often measured to 
be, strong curvature and ‘S’ shapes are expected. Thus, 
simple fibril patterns leading from one sunspot to another 
are the exception rather than the rule. Moreover, there are 
typically multiple episodes of flux emergence as the region 
grows. The fibril pattern fragments as magnetic field lines 
from newly emerged flux reconnect with existing flux. 

A filament or filament channel may form within or on 
the boundary of the active region. Fibrils are indistinct 
within the channel; to either side, fibrils are aligned 
with the long axis of the channel. Measurements of the 
horizontal magnetic field within filaments indicate that 
the field runs predominantly along the axis of the filament, 
although the filament separates areas of opposite magnetic 
polarity at the photospheric level. 

Long fibrils may form around the boundary of an 
active region, particularly in the directions of adjacent 
active regions, suggesting again that the fibrils follow 
magnetic connections. 

A decaying active region is often dominated by a 
single large and regular sunspot. Close to the spot, 
its fibrils extend nearly radially outward. Distinct 
superpenumbral fibrils may extend twice as far as the 
penumbral boundary and occasionally exhibit a vortical 
pattern due to interaction with the solar rotation. 

A large fibril often appears to obscure brighter 
structures, suggesting that the fibril is higher in the 
solar atmosphere. In this respect fibrils are analogous 
to dark mottles in quiet regions. It is difficult to give 
a range of heights for fibrils. Height is difficult to 
measure in individual cases, varies along a fibril, and 
varies between superpenumbral fibrils, short fibrils in 
magnetically complex areas, and long fibrils that could 
as well be called active-region loops. The appearance of 
fibril systems seen in perspective near the limb suggests 
that fibrils are elevated by 3000 km or more above the 
background chromosphere. Arch filament systems are 
seen to extend to heights of 10 000-15 000 km. 


Dynamics 
An arch filament system lasts for 1-3 days. An individual 
arch filament has a shorter lifetime, about 10-30 min. The 
top of an arch filament system rises with an apparent 
velocity v < 20 km s“!, consistent with its identification 
with emerging magnetic flux. Material appears to flow 
downward along the arches with v ~ 30-50 km ae 

The general fibril pattern of a well-developed region 
evolves gradually, over a period of hours, and can remain 
recognizable for days. In this respect fibrils are more 
stable than dark mottles in quiet regions. The natural 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Fibrils 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


interpretation is that the overall magnetic structure of 
an active region is determined by large and relatively 
long-lived concentrations of magnetic flux, whereas 
dark mottles surround small flux concentrations, usually 
associated with the CHROMOSPHERE NETWORK, that change 
on timescales of minutes to hours. However, individual 
fibrils have a shorter lifetime than their geometrical 
pattern, ranging from about 1 min for the smallest fibrils 
to 20 min for the largest. 

The superpenumbral fibril pattern of an isolated 
sunspot changes even more slowly than the fibril pattern 
of a mature active region. The lifetime of an individual 
superpenumbral fibril is about 3-40 min, somewhat longer 
than the lifetime of a fibril in a younger active region but 
still much shorter than the lifetime of the pattern. The most 
characteristic dynamic feature of superpenumbral fibrils is 
a material flow along their length, inward and downward, 
of 5-20 km s7!. 

This inverse Evershed effect in the chromosphere 
contrasts with a slower outward flow in the penumbra 
at the level of the photosphere (see SUNSPOTS: EVERSHED 
EFFECT). Chromospheric outflow also occurs in a minority 
of superpenumbral fibrils. 

It is difficult, using ground-based observations 
disturbed by atmospheric turbulence, to decide whether 
there is a one-to-one correspondence between the flow 
field and Ha brightness. Some high-quality observations 
suggest that flow channels usually coincide with fibrils, 
but not precisely or always. Like fibrils, individual flows 
often change beyond recognition in a matter of minutes, 
whereas a flow pattern can persist for hours. Active- 
region chromospheric flows not associated with sunspots 
have been studied less thoroughly than penumbral and 
superpenumbral flows. 


Interpretation 

Why are fibrils dark? How high are they in the solar 
atmosphere? How hot and how dense are they? What 
is the direction and strength of the magnetic field within 
them? How do these physical quantities compare with 
their values outside a fibril at the same height? 

Fibrils have been recognized and studied for many 
years, yet the answers to these questions are surprisingly 
tentative for two main reasons: because fibrils are defined 
by their appearance in Ha, and it is easier to acquire high- 
quality images in this absorption line than it is to interpret 
them; and because it is difficult to measure magnetic fields 
in the chromosphere. 

The quantitative interpretation of Ha images can be 
framed in terms of a contrast profile, C(A) = (UI — Ip)/Ib, 
where /(A) is the Ha intensity profile in the fibril and 
Ip(A) is a reference profile representing the inter-fibril 
chromosphere. Although the contrast profile is not a 
necessary construct in the task of reproducing / (A), it is 
conceptually useful for two reasons. First, it captures a 
defining characteristic of a fibril: that it be dark relative 
to its surroundings in the core of Ha. Second, if fibrils 
are indeed higher in the atmosphere than inter-fibril 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


regions, it may be possible to approximate the fibril as 
a cloud-like feature that is illuminated from below by 
a background radiation field that is close to that of the 
average chromosphere. Most analyses of Ha contrast 
profiles employ (or critique) some variant of the cloud 
model described below. 

Several observational considerations apply to con- 
trast profiles. First, the wavelength resolution should 
be a small fraction of the width of the Ha line, which 
is about 1.5 A (full width at half depth). Spectrographs 
and the best narrowband filters routinely achieve 100- 
125 mA (full width at half maximum transmission), but 
many Ha images are acquired with filters that have a 
bandpass of 0.25-0.5 A. A theoretical contrast profile must 
be convolved with the filter bandpass before comparison 
with such images. Second, filtergrams should be acquired 
at more than one wavelength; otherwise it will not be pos- 
sible to separate changes in the shape of the line profile 
from wavelength shifts due to the Doppler effect. The im- 
ages at different wavelengths should not be separated in 
time by more than a minute or so, lest the fibril undergo 
significant evolution during the sequence. Third, the com- 
parison between theoretical and observed contrast profiles 
should, ideally, take the effects of atmospheric seeing and 
instrumental stray light into account—but this is difficult. 
Finally, the concept of a background profile is only a first 
approximation. The inter-fibril atmosphere is not neces- 
sarily like the ‘quiet’ photosphere, nor constant from place 
to place. 

The basic cloud model (attributed to J Beckers) follows 
the transfer of spectral line radiation through a discrete 
feature: 


I= new +f Se‘ dt 
0 


where Jj(A) and J(A) are the intensities entering and 
leaving the feature, S(A) is the line source function, and 
T(A) is optical depth. Detailed nonlocal thermodynamic 
equilibrium (NLTE) analysis of the formation of the solar 
Ha line has established that, within 2-3 Doppler widths 
of line center: (a) the absorption coefficient has a Gaussian 
(Doppler) profile; and (b) the source function is nearly 
independent of wavelength, reflecting the dominance of 
non-coherent scattering. The first result, together with 
an assumption that the Doppler width of the absorption 
coefficient is constant along the line of sight, means that 
the optical depth will also have a Gaussian form 


T(A) = to exp[—(A — Ady)*/AA5] 


where A is measured from the center of the reference profile 
Ip, AXp is the Doppler width, and Ad, is the line-of-sight 
velocity of the feature with respect to the reference. The 
second result, together with an assumption that the source 
function is constant along the line of sight through the 
cloud, allows the transfer equation to be integrated to yield 


= s = — eat) 
cw=(—5 i)a ety, (1) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Fibrils 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Chromospheric fibrils in a solar active region. Seen through a filter that isolates the core of the Ha absorption line, fibrils 
appear as thin, elongated dark features up to 30000 km long, intermixed with brighter features (the area shown is about 200000 km on 
a side). The largest and darkest features, above and below the sunspot, are called active prominences or filaments rather than fibrils. 
Image from Big Bear Solar Observatory. 


The model is applied by adjusting the parameters S, tT, 
Adp and Ad, through nonlinear least-squares fitting to 
achieve best agreement between equation (1) and the 
observed contrast profile. 

Anumber of questions naturally arise concerning the 
applicability of the cloud model. Can it produce contrast 
profiles that agree with observations? Is it physically 
consistent? Is it realistic? What is learned from the fitted 
parameters? 

Figure 2 illustrates the variety of contrast profiles 
that the cloud model yields for various reasonable 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


combinations of the parameters. The contrast depends 
on wavelength in the line and can be negative (dark) or 
positive (bright). The profile is asymmetric if the cloud 
has a non-zero line-of-sight velocity. 

The cloud model has been more extensively applied 
to structures in the quiet Sun (bright and dark mottles) 
than to fibrils and loops in active regions. The majority 
of observed contrast profiles of mottles can be adequately 
fitted by the model. Figure 3 gives an example of the model 
fitted to observations of an active-region loop. 

The form of equation (1) does place two simple 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Fibrils 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


“T C(SA) 


9 


Figure 2. Theoretical contrast profiles from the cloud model. Each panel shows the effect of varying one parameter while holding the 
others constant. A: varying S/Jo. B: varying to. C: varying Ad,. D: varying Ad p. From Grossman-Doerth U and von Uexkiill M 1971 


Solar Phys. 20 31-46. 


restrictions on the theoretical contrast profile. First, if 
S < 1I9(0), then S < J,(A) for all A, because the reference 
profile has its minimum intensity at A = 0. Thus, if a 
feature is dark at unshifted line center, then it must be 
dark everywhere in the line. For fibrils, this seems to be 
true within the observational uncertainties. Second, since 


C(+a) — 1-e 


C(-a) 1-e 


and the right-hand side is always positive, the contrast 
at equal wavelength displacements from unshifted line 
center must have the same sign. This condition is 
automatically satisfied for features that are dark at all 
wavelengths; it is sometimes observed to be violated for 
other types of features. 

In short, a cloud model can be reasonably fitted to 
most dark features in Ha. However, this does not ensure 
that the model is physically meaningful. A basic objection 
is that, for any particular geometry of the absorbing 
structure with respect to the underlying atmosphere, 
the source function is determined by the optical depth, 
Doppler absorption width and bulk velocity of the gas in 
the structure. Thus, it is not physically consistent to fit 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the parameters of the cloud model independently. When 
the cloud model is compared with treatments in which the 
source function is derived from NLTE theory, it is found 
that the results agree fairly well for ‘high’ clouds—those 
that subtend an angle much less than one radian as seen 
from the base of the background chromosphere. For ‘low’ 
clouds, the cloud model is unreliable: it may not fit at all, 
and even when it does, the values of the fitted parameters 
need not correspond to their physical values. A low cloud 
violates a basic assumption of the model, that the clouds 
have no back-reaction on the underlying chromosphere. 

Other assumptions of the cloud model (constancy 
of the source function, Doppler width and bulk velocity 
along each line of sight, and global invariance of the 
reference line profile) are not as fundamental and can be 
relaxed in the form of multi-cloud or differential cloud 
models. 

Whatever model is fitted to the observations, the 
goal is to estimate the values of physically interesting 
parameters. From Ha observations, the gas density and 
pressure can be estimated fairly well, but the kinetic 
temperature is poorly constrained. 

The profile-integrated absorption coefficient in the Ha 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Fibrils 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-1.0 -0.6 -0.25 0 0.25 0.6 1.0 


C(AA) 


gel je be he he 
e 

-0.2 Pa 

-0.4 — 


ANA) 


0.1 
Fi.0 


-0.6 -0.25 0 0.25 0.6 1.0 


AMA) 


Figure 3. Observed contrast profiles (points) and fitted cloud models (curves) for an active-region loop. (From Bray R and 


Loughhead R 1983 Solar Phys. 85 131-140.) 


line (neglecting stimulated emission) is given by 


where e and m are the charge and mass of the electron, 
favs is the absorption oscillator strength, and N2 is the 
density of absorbers (here, the second level of hydrogen). 
If this absorption is distributed over a Doppler profile, the 
absorption coefficient at the center of the profile is 


qi2e2 32 


Ko => > 
mc2 Arp 


Fabs No. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Within the cloud approximation, t) = kal, where L is 
the thickness of the structure along the line of sight, and, 
inserting numerical values 


Nz = 7.3 x 10’mAAp/L cm. (2) 


A cloud model gives t and Adp. The thickness L is 
estimated from the observed transverse dimension of the 
fibril (atmospheric seeing and substructure along the line 
of sight can both contribute to an estimate higher than 
the true value). Equation (2) than leads to a typical range 
Nz, = (1-5) x 10* cm“ for a variety of dark features 
including fibrils. NLTE models of gas slabs irradiated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Fibrils 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by photospheric and chromospheric radiation consistently 
yield an approximate relationship between Nz and Ne, 
the electron density: Ne = 3.2 x 108N;/ oF Applying 
this relationship to the range just given for N2 yields a 
range N. = (3-7) x 10!° cm™’. The total number density 
of hydrogen (neutral plus ionized), Ny, can be derived 
if the ionization fraction x = N./Ny is known. NLTE 
models yield values of x as small as 0.4 for thin (L ~ 
500 km), cool (T ~ 7000 K) slabs to essentially complete 
ionization for temperatures much above 10* K, leading 
to a derived range Ny = (0.3-2) x 10" cm-°. As the 
ambient density at heights greater than a few thousand 
kilometers is Ny ~ 10° cm~%, fibrils are typically much 
denser than their surroundings. The derived gas pressure, 
Pz = N-kT(1 + 1.085/x), has a smaller range because 
of the opposing effects of temperature and ionization, 
Pz = 0.1-0.3 dyn cm. All these ranges should be treated 
cautiously, as encompassing the majority, but certainly not 
all, structures that could be called fibrils. 

It is not surprising that the temperature within fibrils 
is poorly constrained by Ha observations because the 
source function is dominated by photoionization due 
to the external radiation field rather than by internal 
collisions. NLTE slab models set an upper limit of 
about 2 x 104 K; at higher temperatures, the contrast is 
positive at line center for all reasonable values of the other 
parameters. The typical range AAp = 0.4-0.6 A yields a 
consistent but also weak constraint from the relationship 
Ahp = (A/c)(€2 + 2kT/m)'/?: T = (7-40) x 10° K for a 
microturbulent velocity in the range € = 10-20 kms". 
As the ambient temperature at heights greater than a few 
thousand kilometers is T ~ 10° K, fibrils are typically 
much cooler than their surroundings. 

The strength of the magnetic field within fibrils is 
not known with any confidence from direct measurement. 
Limited measurements of the direction of the field using 
chromospheric lines are consistent with the hypothesis 
that fibrils follow magnetic lines of force. This is also 
consistent with the fact that a field of 10 G corresponds to 
a magnetic pressure Pmag = B*/82 = 4dyncm7~, an order 
of magnitude greater than the gas pressures estimated 
above. The field is expected to exceed 10 G throughout 
the high chromosphere and low corona of an active region 
and may often exceed 100 G, so 6 = Peas /Pmag « 1 should 
apply within a fibril. The dynamic pressure pv?/2 of gas 
flowing at 30 km s~! is comparable to Pmag for B = 10G. 

The line-of-sight velocity of the material at some 
point along a fibril is sometimes estimated either from the 
Doppler shift of the line (the wavelength displacement of 
the bisector of a chord at a chosen depth in the line profile) 
or by noting the wavelength at which that material appears 
darkest (has the highest absolute value of contrast). 
Velocities estimated by the naive contrast method are 
almost uncorrelated with velocities inferred from the cloud 
model and should not be used. Velocities estimated 
from the Doppler shift typically agree in sign with cloud 
velocities but are several times smaller in absolute value. 
Velocities derived from the cloud model should be more 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


accurate than either of the simpler methods. Velocities 
so derived for arch filament systems and large fibrils are 
often supersonic at some points along the structure for any 
allowable value of the gas temperature. 


Future research 

Although fibrils are defined by their appearance in Ha, 
the analysis of Ha spectra reveals physical substance 
behind the definition: fibrils are dynamic structures that 
follow magnetic field lines but are denser and cooler than 
their surroundings. They are important elements of the 
active chromosphere. Future research on fibrils should 
therefore transcend the narrow objective of observing and 
explaining their appearance in Ha and bring to bear a 
full range of diagnostics. Particularly helpful would be: 
bi-dimensional (imaging) spectroscopy in temperature- 
sensitive visible lines, as well as Ha; UV/EUV imaging 
spectra from spacecraft; and magnetic measurements in 
chromospheric lines such as Hf and He I 1083 nm. 
As many of these measurements as possible should be 
simultaneous. Such a range of observations would help 
to pin down not only the physical conditions within fibrils 
but the dynamic relationship of the fibril to the structure 
of the magnetic field and the coronal plasma in an active 
region. 


Bibliography 

Alissandrakis C E, Tsiropoula G and Mein P 1990 Physical 
parameters of solar Ha absorption features derived 
with the cloud model Astron. Astrophys. 230 200-12 

Bray RJ and Loughhead R E 1974 The Solar Chromosphere 
(London: Chapman and Hall) 

Cram L E 1986 Interpretation of Ha contrast profiles of 
active region loops Astrophys. J. 300 830-5 

Foukal P 1971 Morphological relationships in the 
chromospheric Ha fine structure Solar Phys. 19 59- 
71 

Tsiropoula G and Schmieder B 1997 Determination 
of physical parameters in dark mottles Astron. 
Astrophys. 324 1183-9 


Douglas Rabin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Heating Mechanisms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere: Heating Mechanisms 
Mechanical heating 


Chromospheres (and coronae) exist because of mechanical 
heating. Mechanical heating comprises all processes 
which convert nonradiative hydrodynamic or magnetic 
energy into thermal energy, that is, into microscopic 
random thermal motion. The physics of chromospheres 
(and coronae) is different from the physics of STELLAR 
ATMOSPHERES and interior layers, where the energy input 
is exclusively due to radiation, convection and thermal 
conduction. As observations show that the chromospheric 
emission depends strongly on the magnetic field, one 
subdivides the chromospheric heating processes into pure 
hydrodynamic mechanisms and magnetic mechanisms. 
Both types of mechanisms can be subdivided further into 
fast and slow processes. For the magnetic mechanisms the 
fast or wave mechanisms are called ac (alternate current) 
mechanisms and the slow mechanisms dc (direct current) 
mechanisms. 

A mechanical heating mechanism consists of three 
processes, the generation of the energy carrier, the transport 
of this mechanical energy and its dissipation. Ultimately the 
mechanical energy comes from the nuclear processes in the 
stellar core. The energy generated there is transported in 
the form of radiation and convection to the stellar surface, 
where in the surface convection zone the mechanical 
energy is generated. The mechanical energy generation 
is due to the gas motions of the convection zone, which 
are largest in the regions of smallest density near the 
top boundary of that zone. Consequently the mechanical 
energy is generated in a narrow surface layer. 

As current observations cannot tell with certainty 
whether a solar surface region is devoid of small-scale 
magnetic fields or not and because heating in current 
channels with diameters of meters cannot be resolved at 
the present time, it is difficult to identify a specific heating 
mechanism from the list of proposed processes. For an 
extensive list of proposed heating mechanisms see Narain 
and Ulmschneider (1996) and also the article on CORONAL 
HEATING MECHANISMS. Usually several mechanisms act at 
the same time. Surprisingly only by stellar observations 
(where the chromospheres are reduced to point sources) 
was one able to definitively identify acoustic waves as 
the important basic mechanism for stellar chromospheres. 
The reason for this is that for stars the effective temperature 
Tete can be changed by 1 order of magnitude, the gravity g 
by 4, the metallicity by 3 and the rotation rate by 2 orders of 
magnitude. This greatly enlarges the range of theoretical 
predictions and thus permits crucial observations. 

In the following subsections the necessity of mechani- 
cal heating, the zoo of mechanisms, the mechanical energy 
generation calculations, the observed mechanical heating 
rates and the possible total chromospheric heating picture 
are discussed in greater detail. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Necessity of mechanical heating 

Consider a gas element in the chromosphere where flows 
introduced by the solar wind can be neglected. The 
total heating rate, that is, the amount of net heat per 
s, y (erg cm s~'), flowing into the element across its 
boundaries, is given by 


Oy = Og + OF + Oc+ OGY + Oy =0 


as in dynamical equilibrium the chromosphere does 
not show time dependence. The terms on the right- 
hand side stand for radiative, Joule, thermal conductive, 
viscous and mechanical heating. A typical empirical 
chromospheric cooling rate from the standard solar model 
is —®g = 10°' erg cm s!. Consider a typical 
acoustic or magnetohydrodynamic disturbance in the 
solar chromosphere with characteristic values, size L = 
200 km, temperature AT = 1000 K, velocity Av = 
3 km s! and magnetic field perturbation AB = 10 G. 
Using appropriate values for the thermal conductivity kn, 
viscosity nyi; and electrical conductivity 4. one finds (in 
erg cm? 57!) 


d dT Kh AT _7 
Cc dz ae 72 x 
dv\’ Nvis Av? i 
Py = Nis a ages 1x 10 
2: ay AB?2 
o;= — = x BY & 7x 105 
1672 A¢1 1677) L2 


where c;, is the light velocity. It is seen that in the 
chromosphere ®c, Py and 4%; can be neglected relative 
to ®p and that the main energy balance is between 
radiative cooling and mechanical heating. If mechanical 
heating were switched off then one would obtain radiative 
equilibrium, ®g = 4a«(J — S) = 0. That is, in a radiative 
relaxation time scale of about a fraction of an hour radiative 
equilibrium would be reached. Here k is the opacity, J the 
mean intensity and S the source function. 

However, the heating rates ®c, Py and 4; can 
become much bigger if the length scale L becomes 
very small. For acoustic waves as well as slow-mode 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC (MHD) and longitudinal MHD 
tube waves, this is accomplished by shock formation; 
for magnetic cases, by the formation of current sheets. 
Heating terms of the small L type are collected in the 
mechanical heating term ®y. Mechanical heating thus 
occurs when small scales form naturally. 


The zoo of heating mechanisms 

The hydrodynamic mechanisms consist of pulsational waves 
with periods larger than the acoustic cut-off period, 
P > Px = 4mcs/yg (where cs is the sound speed 
and y = 5/3 the ratio of specific heats), and acoustic 
waves where P < Pa. These hydrodynamic mechanisms 
dissipate via shocks. The magnetic mechanisms are the 
acoustic-like slow-mode MHD waves and longitudinal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Heating Mechanisms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(erg /cm2s) 


log Fa 


pei ee aera rc Li er NON eT Ns Se 


41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 
log Teft (K) 


Figure 1. Acoustic wave energy fluxes (drawn). 


tube waves as well as the transverse and torsional Alfvén 
waves. The latter two wave types are difficult to 
dissipate in the chromosphere and numerous dissipation 
mechanisms, mode coupling, resonance heating, turbulent 
heating, have been studied. In addition magnetoacoustic 
surface waves are present which dissipate via mode 
coupling, resonant absorption and phase mixing. The dc 
mechanisms associated with magnetic field reconnection 
very likely operate at heights above the chromosphere. 
The so-called turbulent and explosive events seen in the 
CIV transition layer line are thought to be caused by such 
reconnection processes. For more details see Narain and 
Ulmschneider (1996). 


Mechanical energy generation 

Mechanical energy is generated by the turbulent gas 
motions in the convection zone. Numerical convection 
studies and observations indicate that the turbulent flows 
can be described by a Kolmogorov-type energy spectrum. 
Using such a spectrum where the rms turbulent velocity is 
provided from convection zone models (which depend on 
Tete, g and the mixing-length parameter a, where a = 2 
agrees well with observations), acoustic wave energy 
fluxes for the Sun and a large number of stars have been 
computed using the Lighthill-Stein theory (Ulmschneider 
et al 1996). Lighthill’s theory of quadrupole sound 
generation is in excellent agreement with observations in 
terrestrial applications. Acoustic fluxes thus obtained are 
shown in figure 1. The Lighthill-Stein theory also provides 
acoustic frequency spectra which extend from the cut-off 
period P, to about a factor 100 smaller with a maximum 
roughly at period Py = Pa/5. For the Sun one finds 
typical values of the total acoustic wave energy flux of 
1.7 x 108 erg cm~ s“' and period Pq = 60 s, using a 
mixing-length parameter a = 2.0. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The fluxes of longitudinal and transverse waves in 
magnetic tubes have been computed for the Sun by 
squeezing and shaking a tube model by external time- 
dependent turbulent flows at a given excitation height. 
Figure 2 shows the instantaneous and averaged generated 
longitudinal (top) and transverse (bottom) tube wave 
fluxes as function of time. The figure shows the very 
stochastic nature of the generation process. The wave 
energy generation occurs in spurts which is in good 
agreement with observations. The spurts are caused by 
sudden enhancements in the flow velocity. In figure 2 
the same time-dependent turbulent velocity fluctuations 
were applied. For the Sun a typical average longitudinal 
wave flux of 1.5 x 10° erg cm~ s~! and for the transverse 
flux a value about 30 times higher were found with a flat 
maximum extending from Py = 90s to larger periods. In 
view of the same acoustic wave flux inside and outside the 
tube one should realize that the gas density inside the tube 
is roughly by a factor of 6 smaller than the external density. 
Relative to this low density, the wave flux inside the tube 
is large, leading to rapid shock formation, but also to 
severe NLTE effects (departure from the thermodynamic 
equilibrium) which strongly modify the radiative losses. 


Empirical mechanical heating rates 

Standard empirical solar chromosphere models indicate 
that active regions (where magnetic fields dominate) need 
mechanical fluxes of Fy = 1.3 x 10° erg cm~ s~!, while 
quiet regions 1.4 x 10’ erg cm? s"!. These values have 
been multiplied by a factor of 2.3 to account for the line 
losses by Fe II. 

Direct measurements of velocity fluctuations have 
been used to estimate the acoustic flux in the solar 
chromosphere. Because velocity fluctuations are observed 
as Doppler shift fluctuations of the cores of spectral lines, 
one must be careful to correct for seeing and for the effects 
of the line contribution function. Deubner (1988) finds 
Fy = 2 x 10’, 1.2 x 10°, 4.5 x 10° erg cm~ s7! at the 
heights 300, 800, 1500 km, respectively. 

The emission cores of the Ca IIT H and K and of the Mg 
II h and k lines are reliable indicators of chromospheres. 
Plotting for many stars the empirical core emission fluxes 
in these lines versus Te one finds that the fluxes show 
a well-defined lower limit which extends e.g. for Ca II 
from Fca = 1 x 10’ erg cm™ s~' for early F stars to 
2x10* erg cm~ s“! for late M stars. This limit is called basal 
flux line. Ithas been shown recently that this basal emission 
can be reproduced by acoustic heating (Buchholz et al 
1998). However, one finds that stars with the same Tog and 
gravity g show different chromospheric emission and that 
this emission is larger when the stars rotate more rapidly. 
As rapidly rotating stars with a surface convection zone 
generate more magnetic fields via the dynamo mechanism 
it is clear that the excess heating is caused by magnetic 
heating mechanisms. A rapidly rotating star has more than 
an order of magnitude more chromospheric emission than 
the basal emission. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Heating Mechanisms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3.5E9 


3.0E9 4 


2.5E9 1 


2.0E9 ‘i 


1.5E9 


1.0E9 


5.0E8 


Wave Energy Flux (erg/cm? s) 


0.0E0 


-5.0E8 


0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000 
Time (s 


_ 2.0E10 
‘, 1.810 
N 
E 1.6E10 
@ 14610 
& 1.2510 
% 1.0610 
Tis 
% 8.0E09 
§ 6.0E09 
® 4.0E09 | | 
i= f i Hitt i Hi 
5 0.0E00 
FE hie tae ath 
-2,0E09 
) 1000 2000 ond 4000 5000 
Time (s)} 


Figure 2. Instantaneous and average longitudinal (top) and 
transverse (bottom) MHD wave energy flux. 


The total chromospheric heating picture 

The successful reproduction of the basal flux line 
by acoustic wave heating models clarified that the 
fundamental heating process in chromospheres are 
acoustic waves. This mechanism operates independently 
of rotation. The faster a star rotates the more it is 
covered by magnetic fields which at photospheric and 
subphotospheric heights appear in the form of magnetic 
flux tubes. The fluctuating gas flows in the turbulent 
convection zone outside the tubes excite longitudinal, 
transverse and torsional MHD tube waves. By shock 
formation the longitudinal waves in the lower and middle 
chromosphere heat the flux tubes which explains the 
excess emission in the magnetic regions. With more 
tubes on the star, more tube wave energy is generated. 
The much more efficiently produced transverse waves 
have two problems: they suffer severely from leakage 
of the wave energy away from the tube and they are 
difficult to dissipate. Very likely they are responsible for 
the heating of the high chromosphere and the transition 
layer. Here stellar observations of the C IV line (Wood 
et al 1996) indicate that, in addition to wave heating, dc 
heating by microflares generated by reconnection events 
augments the Alfvén wave heating. These reconnection 
events are the result of slow horizontal convective motions 
(called foot-point motions) which lead to twisting and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


braiding of the magnetic flux tubes. Thus the convection 
zone is the source not only of ac heating but also of dc 
heating. The probably less efficiently generated torsional 
waves very likely traverse the chromosphere without 
dissipation and become important in the corona and in 
the stellar wind. An efficient three-dimensional simulation 
of the magnetohydrodynamics in stellar convection zones 
should in the future be able to completely explain the 
chromosphere phenomenon which, in absence of any 
input from interstellar space must, after all, be completely 
dependent on the interior of the star. 


Bibliography 

Buchholz B, Ulmschneider P and Cuntz M 1998 
Basal heating in main-sequence stars and giants: 
results from monochromatic acoustic wave models 
Astrophys. J. 494 700-14 

Deubner F-L 1988 Observations of solar oscillations 
Pulsation and Mass Loss in Stars ed R Stalio and LA 
Willson (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 163-79 

Narain U and Ulmschneider P 1996 Chromospheric and 
coronal heating mechanisms II Space Sci. Rev. 75 453— 
509 

Ulmschneider P, Theurer J and Musielak Z E 1996 
Acoustic wave energy fluxes for late-type stars 
Astron. Astrophys. 315 212-21 

Wood B E, Linsky J L and Ayres T R 1996 Evaluating 
possible heating mechanisms using the transition 
region line profiles of late-type stars Astrophys. J. 478 
745-65 


P Ulmschneider 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Magnetic Canopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere: Magnetic Canopy 


The magnetic canopy is a layer of magnetic field which 
is directed parallel to the solar surface and located in the 
low CHROMOSPHERE, overlying a field-free region of the SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE. It has a field strength of the order of 0.01 T 
and covers a large area fraction of the solar surface. The 
magnetic canopy can be compared with the canopy of the 
rain forest: the tree-trunks correspond to the MAGNETIC 
FLUX TUBES that rise in the vertical direction from the 
photospheric level, while the spreading branchy foliage 
compares with the horizontally spreading magnetic field. 
As in the case of the rain-forest canopy, the magnetic 
canopy has its own life and is not readily accessible to 
observation. 

The magnetic canopy can be observationally inferred 
from magnetograms taken in chromospheric spectral lines 
or, theoretically, from a magnetohydrostatic extrapolation 
of the easily observable photospheric magnetic field. 


Observational evidences of the magnetic canopy 
At the beginning of the 1980s R G Giovanelli and H 
P Jones extensively studied the magnetic canopy, based 
on earlier suggestions and observational data by W C 
Livingston. They used magnetograms of the network 
field near the solar limb (see CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK), taken 
in chromospheric spectral lines within the infrared and 
the visible wavelength range, e.g. the 854.2 nm triplet 
line of Ca II and the Mg I by line at 517.3 nm. These 
magnetograms typically show a polarity inversion across 
a line that coincides with the limbward edge of a unipolar 
magnetic network field. (The magnetic network is seen in 
photospheric magnetograms, outlining the supergranule 
boundaries.) Towards disk center from the polarity- 
inversion line a diffuse field (dark area in figure 1(a)) 
extends well over a region which shows no magnetic field 
at the photospheric level and which has the same (normal) 
polarity as the magnetic network. On the limbward side 
this patch of normal polarity shows a fringe of opposite 
polarity. The polarity inversion and fringe pattern is a 
very common feature of chromospheric magnetograms of 
the network field near the limb. It also occurs in active 
regions and sunspots. 

Figure 1(b) shows the magnetic structure that most 
naturally explains such a magnetogram. It shows the 
front elevation of the section indicated in figure 1(a). The 
normal to the solar surface (the height level at which 
the continuum optical depth at 4 = 500 nm is unity 
(ts00 = 1)) is inclined by an angle 6 with respect to the line 
of sight, corresponding to an observation near the solar 
limb. Although the magnetic network field is fragmented 
and consists of many small-scale magnetic flux tubes, in 
figure 1(b), for clarity, it is represented by a single vertically 
oriented flux tube. At the network boundary the field is 
free to spread in the horizontal direction, thereby forming 
the magnetic canopy which, overlies the field-free region 
ff. The magnetic polarity inversion of the chromospheric 
magnetogram can now be readily understood as due to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


4 4 


limb 


Figure 1. (a) Sketch of a chromospheric magnetogram near the 
solar limb and (b) the corresponding magnetic configuration. 
The base of the magnetic canopy is located at a height z, above 
the solar surface. 


the canopy field in the following way. Lines of sight 
passing through the network field receive a magnetic field 
component toward the observer and so do lines of sight 
passing through the canopy field to the left (disk center) 
side of the network (dashed line of sight), explaining the 
extended diffuse network field. The canopy field to the 
right (limbward) side of the network, however, gives rise 
to a line of sight component of opposite direction (solid 
line of sight), which causes the fringe of opposite polarity. 
Note that the corresponding magnetogram of the magnetic 
network at the photospheric level would be of exclusively 
positive polarity. Towards the limb, the network fields 
apparently move closer together with increasing line of 
sight aspect angle 6, giving rise to an ever narrower fringe 
pattern of alternating polarity in the magnetogram. 

By using a standard solar model atmosphere, the 
radiation transfer equation for polarized light is inte- 
grated along a line of sight that passes through the 
canopy field like the solid one indicated in figure 1(b). 
Assuming the atmosphere to be field free up to a height 
z- and the canopy to consist of a homogeneous layer of 
magnetic field of strength B,, the canopy height z, can be 
derived from a comparison of the thus computed with the 
observed magnetogram signal. Since only the magnetic 
field close to the canopy base contributes substantially to 
the magnetogram signal (because of the rapid decrease of 
density and field strength with height), the assumption 
of a homogeneous, purely horizontally directed canopy 
field is a justifiable approximation. Such calculations 
have resulted in canopy heights of 600-1000 km above the 
solar surface (corresponding to the lower chromosphere) 
in quiet-Sun regions and as low as 200 km in ACTIVEREGIONS. 
Contrary to this, simple flux-tube models of the magnetic 
network show the canopy field to form in the upper 
chromosphere and the corona. Only models that allow 
for substantial differences between the atmosphere within 
the flux tube (internal atmosphere) and outside it (external 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Magnetic Canopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


atmosphere) are capable of producing a low-lying canopy 
field. sunspots are also observed to produce a low-lying 
canopy field, which extends over a large distance beyond 
the penumbra (superpenumbra; see SUNSPOT PENUMBRA) 
with a canopy height of one hundred to several hundred 
kilometers. In this case, unlike to the network canopy, 
magnetic tension forces play a dominant role in keeping 
the canopy at low altitude. 


The flux-tube model of the magnetic canopy 
Given the magnetic field strength of the network field at 
the solar surface (ts599 = 1), Bo, and the surface fraction 
occupied by this field, the magnetic filling factor fo, the 
simplest model that can be constructed consists of an 
ensemble of static, rotationally symmetric, vertical flux 
tubes that are evenly distributed at the tsp) = 1 level. It 
is usually assumed that at this level the field strength of 
the vertical component is constant across the flux tube, 
B.(r) = Bo = const., and that the internal and external 
atmospheres are both plane parallel (no variation in lateral 
but only in the vertical direction). Given additionally the 
gas pressure pz as function of height for the internal and 
external atmospheres, the magnetic field configuration can 
be computed for all heights, including the canopy and 
chromospheric region, by solving the magnetohydrostatic 
equation (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS). 

A representative example of such a flux tube is shown 
in figure 2, indicating magnetic field-lines separating equal 
amounts of magnetic flux ®. The flux-tube surface is 
distinguished by a discontinuity (in the case of an ideal 
plasma) in physical variables in such a way that the 
magnetic pressure, Pmag = B? /2, exerted by the flux-tube 
surface field equals the difference in gas pressure between 
external and internal atmosphere, i.e. 


BP (2 \eastoce = Pgext — Pgint (1) 


where xp = 4x x 10-7 Vs A! m'! is the magnetic 
permeability taken as that of free space. This equation 
is an immediate consequence of Ampére’s law and is still 
valid in the presence of magnetic curvature forces. In the 
extreme case of a totally evacuated flux tube, pein. = 0, 
and we obtain Bmax(z) = [2M Pgext(z)]”?, which amounts 
to about 0.17 T at the solar surface level and to about 0.02 T 
at a height of 500 km. Because of the exponential decrease 
of the external gas pressure pg ext with height, the magnetic 
flux tube expands, while keeping the total magnetic flux 
® constant. 

It can be seen from figure 2 that the magnetic field 
in the outer parts of the tube becomes horizontal at 
some critical height, thereby forming the canopy field. 
This horizontally spreading field merges with the equal- 
polarity field of neighboring flux tubes, in which case 
it bends back and outward into the vertical direction 
again, or it connects with opposite-polarity neighboring 
tubes to form a loop-like structure. The first case is 
shown in figure 2, where the canopy field merges with 
the neighboring field of the same polarity at a height of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2100 Try T | | ene Pe eer 
| | I | | 


1800 


1200 


Figure 2. Magnetic flux tube. The field lines spread into a 
horizontally extending canopy field at a height of approximately 
800 km and merge with the field of neighboring flux tubes of 
equal polarity at a radius of 1400 km. 


900 km. The horizontal distance over which the canopy 
field stretches depends on the local filling factor, which 
varies between ~0.2 (PLAGE regions) to 5 x 10~* (quiet Sun). 
Thus, a canopy field may cover a large area of field-free 
photosphere of the quiet Sun. In figure 2 it stretches over 
only a moderate horizontal span (from 700 to 1400 km ina 
height region from 800 to 1100 km) owing to a filling factor 
of 5 x 10-3 that is ten times larger than that of a quiet-Sun 
region. 

The height at which the canopy field sets in, the 
canopy height z,, critically depends on the combination 
of external and internal atmosphere. A canopy field 
with a base height in accordance with observations 
ensues only when the flux-tube atmosphere shows a 
chromospheric temperature rise while the temperature 
in the external atmosphere continues to fall beyond the 
height of the temperature minimum of the flux-tube 
atmosphere. Under these circumstances, the gas pressure 
within the flux tube rapidly approaches the surrounding 
gas pressure at a critical point above the height of the 
temperature minimum. According to equation (1), this 
forces the flux-tube surface to spread in the horizontal 
direction because the finite surface field cannot reach 
beyond the critical height where pget — Pgine = 0, 
irrespective of field strength or filling factor. 

Is it possible that the external atmosphere remains 
cool up to the canopy base? An analysis of the solar 
spectral lines of the carbon monoxide molecule as well 
as radiative equilibrium models that include the effect 
of the CO molecule show that over a large fraction of 
the solar surface the temperature must strongly drop 
below the classical temperature minimum, so that the 
atmosphere bifurcates into a hot and a cool component near 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Magnetic Canopy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the height of the classical temperature minimum, which is 
at about 500 km above the solar surface (see CHROMOSPHERE: 
THERMAL BIFURCATION). It is very likely that the hot and the 
cool component represent the internal and external flux- 
tube atmospheres, respectively. Thus, the occurrence of 
the canopy field seems to be tightly connected with the 
thermal bifurcation of the solar atmosphere. 


Consequences of the magnetic canopy 

As a consequence of the thermal bifurcation, the 
atmosphere immediately below the canopy base is 
relatively cool (<4000 K) while the canopy itself may be 
already at chromospheric temperature, depending on the 
balance of heating and cooling. Hence, the canopy base 
represents a thermal boundary layer, which has important 
consequences for the formation of spectral lines in the 
lower chromosphere, such as the central emission core of 
Call H and K or MgII h and k. The formation of these 
emission cores is suppressed by the cool atmosphere below 
the canopy base. On the other hand, since the flux-tube 
atmosphere shows a chromospheric temperature rise, the 
emission cores fully develop along the flux-tube axis and in 
its vicinity, the size of which depends on the expansion rate 
of the flux tube. This is in accordance with the observed 
enhanced chromospheric emission in network regions and 
the absence of it (with the exception of sporadic bright 
grains) in intranetwork regions (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
INTRANETWORK AND TURBULENT MAGNETIC FIELDS). The model 
thus shows emission lines in the low chromosphere to 
be spatially intermittent on scales of about 1 arcsec and 
to be strongly correlated with the intense magnetic field 
at the photospheric level, both predictions being in good 
agreement with observation. The resonance lines of Mg II 
form slightly higher in the atmosphere than those of Ca II, 
probably mostly above the canopy base. Correspondingly, 
these lines show emission cores also in the intranetwork 
region. 

Acanopy field in conjunction with a spatially separate 
mass motion beneath the canopy (e.g. convective motion) 
may strongly influence the shape of Zeeman sensitive 
spectral lines when observed in polarized light (SOLAR 
MAGNETIC FIELD: MEASUREMENT and POLARIMETRY). The Stokes 
V profile of a spectral line (the difference between right- 
hand and left-hand circularly polarized light as a function 
of wavelength), which is anti-symmetric under normal 
conditions, may assume an extreme asymmetric shape 
depending on the velocity and the canopy height. 

The magnetic canopy probably bears consequences 
for the formation and strength of acoustic shocks 
that result from upward traveling waves generated at 
photospheric and convection zone levels. These waves 
preferentially shock at around a height of 1 Mm, thus near 
the canopy base, giving rise to the Ca IIT Hay and Koy bright 
grains (See SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC OSCILLATIONS). The precise 
emission properties of these grains are also expected to be 
modified by the presence of the magnetic canopy. 

As another consequence of the magnetic canopy, the 
frequencies of solar acoustic p-mode oscillations of high 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


modal degree are shifted to larger values. For a given 
mode, this FREQUENCY shift is proportional to the square 
of the canopy field strength, which is approximately 
proportional to the photospheric filling factor, fy. This is a 
possible explanation for the variation of the frequencies 
of p-mode oscillations over the SOLAR cycle and their 
correlation with magnetic activity. 


Bibliography 

Evans J E and Roberts B 1992 Interpretation of solar-cycle 
variability in high-degree p-mode frequencies Nature 
355 230-2 

Giovanelli R G 1980 An exploratory two-dimensional 
study of the coarse structure of network magnetic 
fields Sol. Phys. 68 49-69 

Jones H P and Giovanelli R G 1982 Magnetic canopies in 
unipolar regions Sol. Phys. 87 37-42 

Solanki S K, Livingston W and Ayres T 1994 New light 
on the heart of darkness of the solar chromosphere 
Science 263 64-6 

Steiner O 1994 Theoretical models of magnetic flux tubes: 
structure and dynamics Infrared Solar Physics (IAU 
Symposium 154) ed D M Rabin (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
pp 407-21 


Oskar Steiner 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Network 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere: Network 


The chromospheric network on the Sun was discovered by 
HALE in 1892 with his newly invented spectroheliograph. 
It is a patchy pattern (Hale called it a ‘reticuled structure’) 
covering the solar disk outside active regions that appears 
when the Sun is imaged in spectral diagnostics formed in 
the CHROMOSPHERE (figure 1). 

The network pattern has a honeycomb appearance at 
characteristic cell sizes of 10-40 arcsec and consists of small 
magnetic patches which outline, although incompletely, 
the borders of the supergranulation cells in the underlying 
photosphere (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: SUPERGRANULATION). Each 
magnetic patch measures a few arcsec and consists 
probably of a cluster of flux tubes that are either 
already physically merged at chromospheric heights 
(1000-5000 km above the photosphere) or appear merged 
due to radiation scattering (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC 
FLUX TUBES: OBSERVATIONS). 

The chromospheric network is to high precision 
co-spatial with the magnetic network observed with 
magnetographs in the photosphere. The reason for the co- 
spatiality is the kilogauss field strength of the photospheric 
flux tubes. Such high field strength goes together with 
near-evacuation, therefore large buoyancy, and therefore 
radial (upright) orientation (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE). 

The network patches appear bright in chromospheric 
lines (the Ca II H and K resonance lines at 4 = 396 nm 
and 393 nm, the inner wings of the hydrogen Balmer 
series Ha line at 656.3 nm, and many emission lines in 
the mid-ultraviolet). The observed brightness increases 
with the apparent magnetic flux density in the underlying 
photosphere, effectively measuring the spatial flux tube 
density. The intensity enhancement is presumably due to 
magnetism-related heating, but the precise mechanism has 
not been identified (CHROMOSPHERE: HEATING MECHANISMS). 

The network pattern is dynamic on timescales of 
hours. Its evolution is governed by the continuous 
appearance of new magnetic field within supergranulation 
cells, the subsequent field migration to the cell boundaries 
imposed by the supergranular flows, further migration 
along the supergranular boundaries, and _ eventual 
field disappearance through dispersion, reconnection, 
subduction or rise into the upper atmosphere. 


Composition 

The magnetic flux tubes that make up the magnetic 
network are seen individually in the highest-resolution 
pictures of the photosphere. In particular, they are 
most sharply imaged in the Fraunhofer G-band around 
A = 430.5 nm. This band is made up of molecular 
CH lines that brighten considerably, in not-understood 
fashion, at locations where strong-field flux tubes in 
intergranular lanes are dynamically interacting with the 
surrounding convective flows. The flux tubes show up 
on G-band filtergrams as tiny bright points with 0.1- 
0.2 arcsec diameter—just at the diffraction limit of the best 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


telescopes (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FILIGREE; SOLAR TELESCOPES AND 
INSTRUMENTS: GROUND). 

The patches in the overlying chromosphere appear 
more diffuse, with grainy structure at 1-2 arcsec scale. 
In ground-based observations they are best seen when 
imaging the solar chromosphere in the cores of the Ca II 
H and K lines. These are the strongest spectral lines of 
the optically accessible part of the solar spectrum because 
calcium is an abundant element and most calcium particles 
reside in the singly-ionized ground state throughout the 
photosphere and low chromosphere. In addition, the 
network patches are well visible in the ultraviolet lines 
from the lower ionization stages of abundant elements 
such as CI and CII in the mid-ultraviolet. They remain 
visible in ultraviolet lines from higher ionization stages 
up to formation temperature 10° K, and are also evident 
in Lymana at A = 121.5 nm (the strongest line in the solar 
spectrum). 

More complex morphology is seen in Ha than in 
Ca II K because Ha has additional contributions from 
much higher layers, due to its high excitation energy. 
Only at high temperature and relatively high density 
does it become sufficiently opaque. When observed at 
Ha line center the network has dark extensions called 
mottles or, when they are longer than a few arcsec, fibrils 
(CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS). These extend into spicules when 
seen at the limb (CHROMOSPHERE: SPICULES). Such filamentary 
structures undoubtedly portray magnetic field topology 
and they may represent the lower parts of coronal loops 
(CORONAL Loops), but their behavior is very dynamic and 
clearly more complex than static loop models would 
predict. Static models of flux tube expansion with height 
(SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES: THEORY) predict 
that at much lower levels the magnetic field should 
already funnel out to nearly homogeneous space filling 
(CHROMOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY). The observed mottle, 
fibril and spicule flows map the more vertical field lines 
since the gas moves freely only along the field. The more 
inclined flows do not reach as high. 

The spatial coincidence with the magnetic network in 
the photosphere can be used to determine the magnetic 
polarity of the chromospheric network. It tends to be 
mixed-polarity over large areas in the quiet Sun and to 
become unipolar near active regions or to remain unipolar 
in the remains of previous active regions. Large unipolar 
areas also occur near the solar poles. 


Topology and pattern evolution 

The cellular appearance of the chromospheric network 
is incomplete, in contrast to the supergranulation cell 
boundaries observed on photospheric Dopplergrams. On 
low-resolution Ca II K spectroheliograms the cells are more 
easily outlined than on high-resolution Ca II K filtergrams, 
illustrating that the supergranulation flows do not produce 
field filling of the cell boundaries everywhere. In addition, 
there are mobile, small patches of field concentration 
within the supergranulation cells that haven’t yet made 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Network 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


400 


300 


200 


100 


400 


300 


200 


100 


40 
E—W position fm) 


600 


Se ee ee 


Figure 1. Chromospheric network. Upper panel: solar image in the Ca II K line taken on 21 December 1994 from Antarctica. Dashed 
line: solar equator. Upper bright patch: small active region with sunspot (blanked out). Lower bright patch: active network. 
Remainder of the field: quiet network. Lower panel: corresponding photospheric magnetogram taken at the same time from Kitt 
Peak. Black and white: apparent longitudinal magnetic flux density in both polarities. 


it to a cell boundary. It is likely that many of these mobile 
patches have recently emerged from below the surface. 
The cell sizes of the chromospheric network are 
larger (32 Mm diameter) when determined with classical 
autocorrelation methods than when topological methods 
are used that identify cells from gradient diagnostics 
(13-18 Mm diameter). There seems to be no direct 
relation between cell size and magnetic content, although 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in non-quiet plage areas the field-free cells seem to 
be much smaller. The spatial cell characteristics are 
dominated by the spatial density of the upflow centers, 
as is also the case for the smaller-scale granulation (SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION). Indeed, both granulation and 
supergranulation appear to formas bubbles starting froma 
‘seed’ location, i.e. a center of outflow, and both are surface 
filling. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Network 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetic patches originally emerge in bipolar 
ephemeral regions inside supergranular cells, and are 
subsequently transported to the supergranulation cell 
boundaries, where they stay confined. The motion of the 
magnetic concentrations can be described by a random 
walk in response to the continually evolving convective 
motions. On the granulation scale the granular buffeting 
makes magnetic concentrations move in a random walk 
with typical step lengths equal to a granular radius (R ~ 
0.5 Mm) and time steps equal to a granular lifetime (T ~ 
10 min). The flow patterns across supergranulation cells 
survive longer than the individual small-scale granular 
flows so that the patches are eventually collected in the 
supergranular boundaries by the supergranular outflows. 
They subsequently move along these boundaries and 
so outline the supergranular boundaries. This can be 
observed both for the chromospheric network on Ca II K 
filtergrams and high-resolution ultraviolet images, and on 
photospheric magnetograms. 

Along the supergranular boundaries, the magnetic 
field appears concentrated in patches with an average 
magnetic flux content of 2.5 x 10'8 Mx (Mx, Maxwell = 
10-8 Weber; 1 G = 1 Mx cm”) varying from well 
below 10'® Mx to more than 15 x 10'8 Mx per patch and 
with an exponential drop-off in frequency of occurrence. 
The observed Ca II K excess brightness Jk above the 
non-magnetic background (‘basal flux’) increases with 
the apparent magnetic flux density ¢ in the underlying 
photosphere according to the power law Ix « |@|°® (but 
with considerable scatter around this relation). Note that 
the apparent flux density is often confused with intrinsic 
solar magnetic field strength; it is primarily a measure of 
the spatial density of unresolved flux tubes with intrinsic 
field strength |B| ~ 1400 G over the angular resolution 
element of the telescope. 

On the supergranulation scale the cell pattern 
evolution causes another random walk with typical step 
lengths equal to a supergranular cell radius (R ~ 6 — 
9 Mm) and typical time steps equal to the characteristic 
supergranular lifetime (T ~ 24h). 

While diffusing along supergranular boundaries, the 
flux patches may interact with one another. When field 
concentrations of opposite polarity meet, they may cancel 
against each other, i.e. vanish from sight. This may be 
due to actual field reconnection, but may also indicate that 
magnetic fields move upwards or downwards through the 
observed layer, in the form of small vertical loops with 
their apex pointed downward or upward respectively. 
When patches of the same polarity meet, flux merging may 
be observed. The reverse process, fragmentation, is also 
seen. 

The overall exponential flux distribution function can 
be described by a ‘magnetochemistry’ model that de- 
scribes the emergence of new concentrations, fragmenta- 
tion into pieces, and disapperance through cancellation or 
merging. Taking the frequencies of these processes into ac- 
count, the maximum lifetime of an individual field concen- 
tration is estimated to be no more than about 40 h. Thus, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the fine structure of the quiet network cannot be recog- 
nized after a longer time span. 


Dynamical properties 

The precise co-spatiality between the chromospheric net- 
work and the photospheric magnetic field and the power- 
law relation between network brightness and apparent 
flux density (primarily measuring spatial flux tube den- 
sity) strongly suggest that a magnetically dominated heat- 
ing mechanism operates in or along the kilogauss flux 
tubes that make up the network (CHROMOSPHERE: HEATING 
MECHANISMS). However, many attempts have failed to find 
wave modes that would betray kinetic energy transfer 
from the photosphere where the flux tubes are buffeted 
by the granular flows up to the chromospheric heights 
where wave dissipation might contribute the heating that 
is required to explain the observed brightness. So far, 
all network oscillation studies have only identified rather 
slow periodicities, 5 min or longer. This result is in stark 
contrast with the roughly 4 to 2 min acoustic waves that 
are ubiquitously present in the internetwork regions. It 
is not even clear whether the observed slow modulations 
describe wave modes (such as breaking internal gravity 
waves) or just random motions enforced by the foot-point 
swaying. Thus, the actual mechanism through which the 
network patches are bright, while undoubtedly due to dy- 
namical flux tube physics, is yet to be identified. 


Bibliography 

Lites B W, Rutten R J and Kalkofen W 1993 Dynamics 
of the solar chromosphere I. Long-period network 
oscillations Astrophys. J. 414 345-56 

Schrijver C J 1995 Basal heating in the atmospheres of cool 
stars. Observational evidence and theoretical support 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 6 181-223 

Schrijver C J, Title A M, van Ballegooijen A A, 
Hagenaar H J and Shine R A 1997 Sustaining 
the quiet photospheric network: the balance 
of flux emergence, fragmentation, merging, and 
cancellation Astrophys. J. 487 424-36 

Zirin H 1988 Astrophysics of the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Robert J Rutten and Hermance J] Hagenaar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Spicules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere: Spicules 


As early as 1877 Father Secchi described the jet like, 
elongated structures in the solar chromospheres which 
were named spicules by Walter Orr Roberts in 1945. They 
are observed in the optical chromospheric emission lines of 
hydrogen (especially the 656 nm Ha line), ionized calcium 
(especially the 393 nm and 397 nm H and K lines) and 
helium lines (especially the 588 nm and 1083 nm neutral 
helium lines). Figure 1 shows a series of images of the 
CHROMOSPHERE taken at different wavelengths in the Ha 
line showing the spicular structures. Except for the lowest 
heights above the solar limb, up to 1500 km, the spicules 
are clearly visible. Typical spicule properties are: width 
900 km, average height 8000 km, lifetime 15 min apparent 
velocities 25 km s7!. 

From images like the one in figure 1 one derives the 
spatial properties of the chromosphere and its structure. 
Most or all of the chromospheric emission in these 
lines appears to come from spicules, so that it is fair 
to say that the solar chromosphere, at least at heights 
exceeding 1500 km above the photosphere, consists of 
spicular material. The decrease of average chromospheric 
brightness with height is the result of the decrease of 
the individual spicule brightness and of the number of 
spicules with height. When observed in the Ha line, 
the line most used, we observe an average height of 
spicules of 8000 km, somewhat less near the solar equator, 
more at the poles. It should be noted, however, that 
their upper boundary is not well defined, so that the 
observed height depends on the observing conditions. 
Individual spicules can extend significantly higher with 
heights above 10000 km being observed. In the literature 
one finds references to so-called ‘super-spicules’ especially 
in the discussion of solar limb observations made in far- 
ultraviolet lines like the ionized helium line at 30.4 nm. 
Super-spicules are significantly larger than spicules; they 
are structures which in their properties lie between 
spicules and transient solar prominences (suRcES). Not 
included in the present context, they will be briefly 
discussed at the end of this section. The width of spicules 
is observed to average 900 km, which is probably an upper 
limit since it is uncorrected for the imaging effects of the 
Earth’s atmosphere (SEEING). 


Dynamics 

The dynamics of spicules is most interesting. In their 
initial appearance they appear ‘geyser-like’ in the sense 
that there is an upward surge of material with velocities 
reaching 25 kms“! lasting for some 5 min, but with a path 
which is frequently slanted with respect to the local vertical 
direction. After reaching a typical maximum height of 
9000 km in 5 min, the ejection stops. It is followed by a 
fading of the spicule brightness or a return of the emitting 
material to the photosphere. On balance many more 
spicules appear to go up than come down. The total life 
cycle for those that descend is about 15 min. Since the 
spicular material is largely ionized, motions tend to follow 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the direction of the magnetic field lines. The spicular 
orientations and motions are therefore a good proxy for 
the magnetic field structure pattern in this part of the solar 
atmosphere. Direct measurements of the magnetic field 
strengths by means of the Zeeman, or possibly Hanle effect 
are not available yet (see SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND 
HANLE EFFECTS). Although there are significant temporal and 
local spatial variations in the orientations, there are clear 
changes in the average orientations of spicule directions, 
and hence magnetic fields, with solar latitude. Near the 
solar equator the orientations, although on the average 
vertical, vary greatly from spicule to spicule. Near the 
poles the orientations are more uniform, mostly close to 
vertical, but sometimes inclined systematically. In polar 
regions the inclination appears to follow the orientations of 
coronal plumes. Because of the systematic group behavior 
of spicules there, the patterns are sometimes referred to as 
‘porcupine’ or ‘wheat field’ configurations. 

Astronomers are always concerned that the apparent 
motions seen in motion pictures like those of the Ha 
chromosphere might not correspond to real motions. 
Apparent motions can result from other effects, like 
temporal changes in atomic excitation conditions. The 
only way of checking the reality of the motions is by 
means of observations of the Doppler shift of the spectral 
line. This is a tricky thing to do, however, since the 
apparent, ‘proper motions’ occur in the plane of the 
sky whereas the Doppler shift correspond to line-of- 
sight motions. The comparison therefore is statistical, 
and requires knowledge of the varying tilts of spicules. 
Observations to date, taking these considerations into 
account, have indeed shown the apparent motions to be 
actual material motions. Doppler shifts appear to vary 
across spicules resulting in a tilt of the spectrum emission 
lines. These variations are often interpreted in terms of a 
rotation of spicules. 


Physical properties 

In addition to telling us about velocities, spectral analysis 
of the spicular emission provides important information 
about the physical conditions in spicules. Spectral 
observations are available in a number of different lines: 
the hydrogen Balmer lines (Ha through He), neutral 
helium lines (D3 line at 588 nm, 1083 nm line), and the 
ionized calcium lines at 393, 397, 850 and 854 nm). The 
observed emission of these lines indicate temperatures in 
the vicinity of 15000 K, probably lower (<10000 K) at 
heights below 2000 km, and electron densities decreasing 
from 1.5 x 10" em=$ ath = 2000 km to 3 x 10!° cm~3 ath = 
10000 km. At the lower heights spicules are embedded 
in the what is normally referred to as the chromosphere— 
corona transition region. At the greater heights they are 
embedded in the million degree corona itself, but there 
must be a local transition region between each spicule 
and this corona. Nothing is known about these local 
transition regions. Future high-resolution observations 
from space of higher temperature emission lines in the 
ultraviolet (for example the CIV lines at 155 nm and the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Spicules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


° 
Bo 


Figure 1. Images of the chromospheric spicule patterns as seen 
through a 0.025 nm wide Lyot filter at different wavelengths in 
the chromospheric Ha emission line. (Courtesy R B Dunn, 
National Solar Observatory at Sacramento Peak.) 


helium Lya line at 30.4 nm) can be expected to clarify that. 
The electron pressure in spicules at a height of 8000 km 
equals 0.09 dyn cm~™ as compared to 0.02 dyn cm” in the 
surrounding corona. The difference is large enough that it 
may be real, indicating possibly a significant overpressure 
in the chromospheric spicules. In addition one derives 
from the width of the spectral lines in spicules a non- 
thermal broadening of about 20 km $1, part of which may 
result in a turbulent pressure. An isolated magnetic field 
of only 1 G results in a dyn cm~? magnetic pressure of 
0.04 dyn cm~?, a variation of 1 G in an average field of, 
for example, 12 G in a variation of 1 dyn cm. Except 
for channeling the spicular motion, for which the field 
has to be significantly larger than 1 G, the magnetic field 
variations between spicule and the surrounding corona 
have to be less than 1 G, with the magnetic field strength 
variation, if any, being less in spicules. 

This sensitivity in the pressure balance to small 
changes in the magnetic field strengths also points out 
large effects that the magnetic field can have on the 
dynamics of spicules. Quite a large number of theoretical 
models exist for the origin of spicules, all involving 
magnetic field effects. Because of the similarity in their 
dimension to that of the solar convection cells which are 
observed at the solar surface as GRANULATION, and because 
of the similarity in birth rates of spicules and granules 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


within the higher magnetic field concentrations seen at the 
solar supergranule boundaries (see later in this section) 
it has been suggested that spicules are the result of the 
convection—magnetic field interactions. What is clearly 
needed are improved observations of spicule spectra and 
images, including higher spatial resolution observations 
of their velocities and, if possible, magnetic fields. Also, 
observations of spicules as observed in projection against 
the solar disk are invaluable. That is the main topic of the 
following discussion. 


Appearance against solar disk 
When observing structures like PROMINENCES or spicules 
in the higher solar atmosphere against the solar disk 
one might see those structures either as dark features 
in absorption or as bright structures in emission. Such 
structures are dark when the amount of background 
radiation from the solar disk that is absorbed is larger 
than the amount emitted by the structure itself. The ratio 
of the emission to absorption coefficient in the structure 
is referred to as the ‘source function’ of the structure, 
or in short S.A structure is bright when S exceeds 
the background intensity J, dark when it is less. The 
contrast depends on the optical thickness t, so that the 
intensity difference AJ from the background equals: AJ = 
(i — S)\(1 —e*). This simple model of the visibility 
of structures overlying the bright solar background is 
frequently referred to as the ‘cloud model’. The same 
model actually holds for terrestrial clouds and for any 
other similar configuration anywhere. For the conditions 
existing in the solar atmosphere the source function S 
can be taken as wavelength and direction independent. 
The background intensity is a function of wavelength (Ha 
is a strong Fraunhofer absorption line) and of position 
on the solar disk (solar limb darkening). It is therefore 
quite likely that the sign of the contrast of spicules when 
seen in projection against the solar disk changes with 
position in the Fraunhofer line and with disk position. 
With the physical conditions in spicules described earlier, 
one might expect spicules to be dark when seen in the 
line wings for most of the solar disk. Near the core of 
the H line and at the extreme limb one expects bright 
contrast structures. Right at the solar limb, where the 
disk brightness falls off rapidly and actually vanishes 
outside the limb, the expected behavior of spicule contrast 
is very complex. It is therefore very difficult to trace the 
spicules from outside the limb back onto the solar disk in 
order to unambiguously directly identify disk structures 
with spicules. It is, however, generally accepted that the 
dark, narrow, elongated ‘mottles’ seen in monochromatic 
images in the wings of the Ha line (see figure 2) are to 
be identified with chromospheric spicules in projection on 
the solar disk. The (1 — e~*) term in the cloud model is 
also wavelength dependent because the optical thickness 
t is. It does not affect the sign of the contrast, only its 
magnitude. 

Given this identification of spicules as seen against the 
solar disk, one can determine a number of other important 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Spicules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Monochromatic image of the Sun in the wing of the 
hydrogen Balmer « line of a region near the solar limb. The 
lower half of the image shows a small active region. Closer to 
the solar limb in the upper half of the image one recognizes the 
patterns of dark elongated mottles which are commonly 
identified with the chromospheric spicules as observed outside 
the solar limb. Note that they are arranged in ‘hedgerow’ or 
‘porcupine’ like patterns which form the so-called 
chromospheric network. This network, foreshortened when 
seen near the solar limb, surrounds the supergranulation 
convection cells described elsewhere. (Courtesy R B Dunn, 
National Solar Observatory at Sacramento Peak.) 


parameters. It is clear from images like those shown 
in figure 2 that spicules are not uniformly distributed 
across the solar disk. They are located in the so-called 
chromospheric network which borders the photospheric 
granulation cells (see CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK). Although 
it is estimated that there are about 10 times fewer 
spicules than granules on the Sun, the number density 
of granules and spicules, as well as their birth rate, 
within these network areas are comparable. This suggests 
a physical relation between the granulation structure 
and spicule occurrence in these regions, with the well 
known local solar magnetic field enhancement in these 
network elements of about 100 G almost certainly playing 
an important role. However, attempts at establishing 
observationally such a connection have so far failed. The 
suspicion is that limited spatial resolution and possibly 
spicules originating well above the photosphere may be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the cause of these failed attempts. But it may be, of course, 
that there is no such connection either with the granules 
themselves or with the intergranular lanes. 


Role of spicules 

What role do spicules play in relation to other solar 
aspects? From the physical parameters it is easy to 
estimate the kinetic energy flux and mass flux in the 
combined spicules. In the upward moving spicules the 
kinetic energy flux is negligible compared with other 
energy transfers to and from the corona. It is a factor of 
100 less than, for example, the conductive energy losses 
downward from the solar corona. The mass flux is a totally 
different matter. In the upward moving phase the spicule 
mass flux exceeds the mass loss of the solar corona through 
the SOLAR WIND by two orders of magnitude. In that sense 
spicules may be of broader interest rather than being a 
phenomenon of only parochial interest. 

No generally accepted magnetohydrodynamical 
model exists for spicules. A number of models have 
been proposed using a variety of physical mechanisms in- 
cluding different kinds of wave phenomena, instabilities, 
magnetic reconnection, etc based on velocity and magnetic 
fields associated for example with granules and super- 
granules. They all claim to explain many of the observed 
spicule properties. Improved observations of spicules will 
be needed to distinguish between these models. New tools 
like solar adaptive optics and high-resolution UV observa- 
tions which are likely to be available in the near future are 
likely to clarify the situation. 

There are larger structures visible especially well in 
ultraviolet lines like the He* Lyw line at 30.4 nm which 
are similar in behavior to spicules. They are referred to as 
‘super-spicules’ and are mostly seen at high solar latitudes. 
Attempts to relate these structures to Ha images of the 
chromosphere and prominences have failed. Occasionally 
exceptionally long spicules in Ha are also seen in the solar 
polar regions. They have been called ‘macro-spicules’. 
Little is known about the behavior and origin of either 
of these larger structures. 


J] M Beckers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Thermal Bifurcation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chromosphere: Thermal Bifurcation 


Thermal bifurcation refers to the existence of ‘cool clouds’ 
of gas (T < 3500 K) at high altitudes in the solar 
atmosphere, within what was thought to be a uniformly 
hot (T ~ 7000 K) cHRomosPHERE. It also refers to a cooling 
instability, promoted by carbon monoxide molecules, 
which operates in places where the chromospheric 
mechanical heating is weak. The cool clouds were 
discovered through the anomalous darkening of strong 
4.7 um CO absorption lines near the extreme limb; first 
recognized in the early 1970s, and more recently confirmed 
in the surprising off-limb emissions of the infrared CO 
bands. Because carbon monoxide is both the principal 
diagnostic of the cool gas and a possible contributor to 
its formation, the low-temperature protrusions into the 
chromosphere have been deemed the ‘COmosphere’. The 
underlying cause of the cool gas and how much of the 
volume of the low chromosphere it might occupy remain 
controversial. 


Background 

In the early 1970s, R W Noyes and D N B Hall reported 
curiously depressed brightness temperatures of carbon 
monoxide absorptions in infrared (4.7 xm) spectra taken 
close to the edge of the solar disk. The ‘cool cores’ of 
the CO lines—as low as 3700 K—were surprising because 
they were as cool as the coldest temperatures thought to 
occur in suNsPoTS, arguably the chilliest features of the solar 
atmosphere. Noyes and Hall also noted striking intensity 
fluctuations of the infrared CO lines, presumably in step 
with high-altitude compressions and rarefactions caused 
by the global p-mode oscillations. 

At the time, a controversy had developed whether the 
minimum temperature at the base of the chromospheric 
temperature inversion was as hot as the 4400-4500 K 
indicated by Ca II 393 nm and Mg II 279 nm or instead 
the 4200 K suggested by continuum intensities in both 
the far-ultraviolet and submillimeter regions. During 
the Tmin debate, the curious discovery by Noyes and 
Hall was dismissed as an unimportant oddity. The 
authors themselves had attributed the dark cores of the 
strong CO lines to an effect connected with the narrow, 
cool subduction lanes of the photospheric granulation 
pattern. In many minds, the anomalous CO temperatures 
thus were associated with a small-scale phenomenon of 
the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE, of questionable relevance to the 
global atmosphere, and certainly not to the overlying 
chromosphere. 

In the late-1970s, a powerful new optical-infrared 
instrument—the 1 m Fourier transform spectrometer 
(FTS)—was commissioned at Kitt Peak. The Tin debate 
had rekindled interest in alternative ways to trace the 
thermal stratification of the outer photosphere. T R Ayres 
(a proponent of the ‘hot’ Tin) and L Testerman revisited 
the anomalous extreme-limb behavior of the CO lines, 
confident that the high-precision FTS measurements 
would bring the CO Av = 1 bands into agreement with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


other Tmin proxies. However, not only did Ayres and 
Testerman confirm the earlier result of Noyes and Hall, 
but also they concluded that the CO anomaly could be 
explained most naturally by adding a new layer to the solar 
atmosphere; a pervasive cold component overlapping the 
lower reaches of the traditional hot chromosphere. 

In parallel, Ayres offered an explanation for the 
out-of-character cool high-altitude gas. His ‘thermal 
bifurcation’ mechanism was an elaboration of the key role 
of CO surface radiative cooling—something like a reverse 
greenhouse effect—originally described independently by 
T Tsuji and H R Johnson in the context of the photospheres 
of red giant stars. The idea is as follows. The vibration— 
rotation transitions of CO very efficiently convert gas 
collisional energy into infrared photons. Those photons 
that escape the region carry away thermal energy and 
thus cool the gas. When there is little or no mechanical 
heating in the outer layers of the photosphere, the 
strong surface cooling in the 4.7 ~m CO bands drives 
the gas to a low-temperature state, balancing the mild 
heating in the H~ continuum (optically thin absorption of 
mainly visible photons from the background photospheric 
radiation field). If a small amount of mechanical heating 
is introduced on top of the slight radiative component, 
however, the gas will warm and the CO molecules will 
begin to dissociate. The loss of CO reduces the cooling, 
leading to additional warming and further dissociation. 
The ensuing thermal runaway (‘heating catastrophe’) 
halts only above about 6000 K, where partial ionization 
of hydrogen liberates enough electrons to collisionally 
energize high-temperature cooling species such as Ca* 
and Mg*. If the mechanical heating then is removed, 
the gas first cools down to the H~ boundary temperature 
(~4900 K), at which point CO begins to form, which cools 
the gas further; more CO forms, and so forth, leading to 
a ‘cooling catastrophe’ that returns the region to the low- 
temperature branch of the ‘bifurcated’ energy balance. 

In this view, the outer atmosphere of the Sun can exist 
in two rather different thermal states—one cold, the other 
hot—depending on the amount of mechanical energy 
deposited locally. The thermal bifurcation mechanism 
naturally operates only at high altitudes; once the CO 
Av = 1 bands become optically thick, the infrared photons 
are trapped in the source region and the radiative cooling 
is strongly suppressed. 

In the thermal bifurcation picture, the classical 
hot chromosphere is confined to small-scale overheated 
structures bathed in a pervasive cool high-altitude layer 
close to radiative equilibrium. Figure 1 is a cartoon 
contrasting the historical and new views of the solar outer 
atmosphere. 


Photosphere-chromosphere interface 

The classical picture, illustrated in the left-hand panel, is a 
plane-parallel stratification; a hierarchy of distinct layers, 
controlled by different energy budgets, but through which 
the temperature runs smoothly. The layered atmosphere 
represents the idealized response of a hydrostatically 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Thermal Bifurcation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


height 
10* km 


Layers 


Corona (T ~ 10° K) 


2000 km Transition Zone (1 10°-K) 


500 km ‘Temperature minimum (T~ 4500k) 


Photosphere (T ~ 6000 k) 


0 km 


Structures 


flux tube 


Figure 1. Classical and modern views of solar atmosphere. Height ‘0’ is at t500 nm = 1. 


stratified gas in which the mechanical heating is uniform 
horizontally and varies slowly with height. The key layers 
and their interrelationships are described elsewhere in this 
volume. 

The new paradigm—structures—is illustrated on the 
right-hand side of figure 1. It is not particularly new at all, 
but has been around in one form or another ever since the 
first high spatial resolution pictures of the chromosphere 
and corona were taken decades ago. 

Ajumble of magnetic fields—organized into a hierar- 
chy of loop-like features—constitutes the CoRONA. Its un- 
derside terminates in a canopy, occupying what previously 
would have been called the upper chromosphere (see CHRO- 
MOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY). The canopy itself is further 
rooted mainly in the supergranulation network by slender 
funnel-shaped flux tubes. These penetrate down through 
the photosphere into the convection zone, ultimately con- 
necting to the deep source region of the magnetic flux 
(see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). Interactions 
between the tangled fields in and above the canopy give 
rise to localized explosive events traced by high-velocity 
jets in far-ultraviolet lines (see TRANSITION REGION: EXPLOSIVE 
EVENTS). 

Much of the ‘chromospheric’ emission forms in the 
canopy, threaded by warm gas with large horizontal 
density contrasts. Additional contributions come from the 
downward extensions of the flux tubes, which evidently 
are hotter than the surrounding ‘quiet’ medium into 
at least the middle photosphere. A third component 
arises from cell flashes at the base of the canopy. These 
transient events are seen commonly in the interiors of the 
supergranulation cells. They are thought to be caused by 
outward-running acoustic disturbances that steepen and 
form shocks at high altitudes. 

The canopy is ubiquitous and its density striations can 
be traced in He filtergrams. The cell flash and low-altitude 
flux tube components are compact, giving rise to transient 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and persistent bright points, respectively, in Ca K 393 nm 
spectroheliograms. 

Between the upper photosphere (i ~ 500 km) and the 
base of the canopy (h ~ 1000 km) lies the COmosphere, the 
cool zone mentioned earlier, replacing what historically 
was designated the low chromosphere. 

The essential aspects of the thermal bifurcation 
phenomenon were verified in the late 1980s in a series of ab 
initio model solar atmospheres constructed by L Anderson 
and R G Athay. The authors found that very low 
temperatures (T < 3000 K) are possible at high altitudes 
(dominated there by CO cooling); the CO-cooled zone can 
persist in the face of low-level mechanical heating but it 
disappears abruptly once the heating exceeds a critical 
level. At the same time, 2D radiation—hydrodynamic 
simulations of convection, with high-altitude CO cooling, 
by M Steffen and D Muchmore also demonstrated that the 
strong surface emission in the Av = 1 bands can maintain 
a cold (T < 3000 K), horizontally uniform layer above 
the classical Tin in the face of the fluctuating granular 
radiation field and overshooting. 

Beyond the Sun, the thermal bifurcation mechanism 
was recognized as one facet of the more general phe- 
nomenon of autocatalytic ‘molecular cooling catastro- 
phes’. These operate in a diversity of cosmic environ- 
ments; for example driving the fragmentation and collapse 
of molecular clouds, or forging silicate grains in the bloated 
outer envelopes of red supergiants. 


Current research 

In 1992, inspired by the growing interest in infrared solar 
physics—not only the CO controversy but also the major 
benefits for magnetic field studies—the National Solar 
Observatory (NSO) installed a large infrared grating in 
the 13.8 m main spectrograph of the 1.5 m McMath-— 
Pierce telescope. The mosaic grating, one of the largest in 
the world, was salvaged from the mothballed horizontal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Thermal Bifurcation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


infrared spectrograph where Noyes and Hall had carried 
out their pioneering observations of the CO 4.7 wm bands 
two decades earlier. 


Off-limb emissions 

In April 1993, on a day of particularly good seeing during 
engineering tests on the newly refurbished spectrograph, 
W Livingston of the NSO staff discovered the remarkable 
off-limb emissions of the CO lines. 

The limb corresponds to the point on the projected 
disk of the Sun where the line of sight becomes transparent 
in the continuum; thus the background intensity falls 
away. The CO lines can be in emission beyond the 
continuum ‘edge’ if they still are optically thick along the 
raypath: the thermally radiating—albeit cool—CO lines 
shine against essentially dark sky. (On the disk, the glare 
of the hot continuum radiation causes the cool CO cores to 
appear in ‘absorption’.) The observation showed directly 
that molecular gas must exist well above the altitude 
where conventional models place the chromospheric 
temperature inversion; simulations suggest that cool gas 
is present up to perhaps 1000 km. 

Figure 2 depicts the off-limb emissions in the 4.67 wm 
region. The observations were obtained during the 
morning of 9 May 1996, under clear skies with moderately 
good seeing. They were acquired with a long-slit 
cryogenic camera system that superseded the single- 
channel scanner used by Livingston. The spectrograph 
slit was placed across the north limb, perpendicular to it. 
The figure represents the coaddition of the five sharpest 
spectrograms from a run of 1000 short exposures. The 
coadded frame was divided by an average on-disk spectral 
trace to normalize the intensities and suppress absorptions 
from the Earth’s atmosphere. 

The CO lines are the mounds of emission, extending 
beyond the bright continuum edge, in figure 2 (top); 
each ‘bump’ corresponds to an individual CO transition, 
all observed simultaneously, at the same point on the 
limb. Figure 2 (bottom) depicts the translimb extensions, 
measured bin by bin across the spectrum; ‘0’ refers to 
the apparent continuum edge. Although the maximum 
displacements in the cores of the strongest CO lines 
(~0.7”) are only about half the effective instrumental 
resolution (because of seeing, diffraction and scattering), 
they can be measured accurately relative to the continuum. 
(In the same way that tiny parallaxes—hundredths of 
an arcsecond—can be measured on plates with spatial 
resolution no better than 1 arcsec.) 

The off-limb CO emissions are built up along an 
enormous pathlength through the low chromosphere. 
They tell us directly that there is some cool gas present 
somewhere along the sightline, but not where or how 
much. The key question is how widespread the cool gas 
truly is. 


Surface maps of temperature and velocity 


By sequentially stepping the McMath—Pierce telescope, 
the new long-slit camera system allows one to build up 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


strip-maps of key CO line parameters: central absorption 
intensity (related to surface temperature), Doppler shift 
(a measure of line-of-sight velocity) and line broadening 
(tracing local turbulence). The spatial scanning can be 
done repetitively to make ‘movies’. 

First use of the new system for spectral imaging 
of CO was in October 1993 by H Uitenbroek, R Noyes 
and D Rabin. Additional CO thermal and velocity 
mapping was conducted by T Ayres and D Rabin the 
following spring. Both studies concluded that the evident 
patchwork quilt of spatial variations in the CO brightness 
is associated mostly with the oscillation interference 
pattern, particularly at high altitudes (i.e. in strong CO 
lines). Occasional persistent CO ‘bright points’ were 
seen, coincident with Ca K network fragments (regions 
of strong magnetic field arrayed along the stagnation 
points of the large-scale horizontal flow pattern of the 
supergranulation). There was no evidence in either 
study for a significant population of very dark points. 
That absence constrains alternative explanations for the 
anomalous limb-darkening of the CO bands. 


How pervasive is the cool gas? 

To reproduce the extreme-limb darkening and off-limb 
emissions of the CO line cores requires either (1) cool 
material with a high filling factor (say, ~80%) at high 
altitudes or (2) a smaller covering fraction (say, ~20%) 
of much colder structures. In the first case, the intensity 
behavior is controlled everywhere by the pervasive cool 
component, and an image looking straight down on 
the solar surface should appear relatively bland and 
featureless, apart from the relatively small fluctuations due 
to the p-mode pattern. In the second case, the isolated cold, 
but transversely opaque, ‘pillars’ dominate only near the 
limb where they effectively ‘shadow’ any hot structures 
(the latter naturally are transparent in CO). At disk center, 
however, the cold regions (with AT ~1000 K) should show 
up as small-scale ‘dark spots’ with the ~20% filling factor. 
So far—within the sustained few-arcsecond resolution 
encountered under good conditions at Kitt Peak— 
nothing remotely like the expected sprinkling of dark 
points has been seen. The opposite scenario—pervasive 
COmosphere—thus appears to be more promising. 


Dynamical COmosphere? 

Analternative view of the COmosphere has been proposed 
by M Carlsson and R F Stein. One-dimensional radiation— 
hydrodynamics simulations suggest that the 500-1000 km 
altitude range might be in a continually evolving thermal 
state owing to the passage of steepening acoustic wave- 
trains from below. At those low densities, the CO chemical 
formation timescales are long. The molecular population 
cannot respond to the instantaneous temperature pertur- 
bations, but instead attains an equilibrium based on the 
time-average thermal profile (rather cool in the Carlsson 
and Stein model). Such a steady-state background of CO, 
existing in a fluctuating thermal environment, might be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Thermal Bifurcation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


9 May 1996 


. 
> 


C 


OFF—LIMB EXTENSION (arcsec) 


4.6650 4.6660 


4.6670 


WAVELENGTH (ym) 


Figure 2. Off-limb emissions of CO lines. 


capable of explaining the off-limb emissions and extreme- 
limb darkening of the infrared Av = 1 lines. At the same 
time one would record significant time-averaged ultravio- 
let signatures from the same spatial volume (mostly from 
the high-temperature peaks, owing to the exponential sen- 
sitivity of the thermal emission (planck function) at short 
wavelengths). 

A second dynamical explanation has been offered 
by H Uitenbroek and R Noyes. They suggest that the 
COmosphere is a byproduct of the expansive cooling of 
convective granules overshooting into the stable layers of 
the high photosphere. 

The observational consequences of these proposals 
should be pursued further. In addition, the CO chemistry 
(and cooling) should be incorporated in the dynamical 
simulations. 


Implications 

In the final analysis, the COmosphere very likely is a 
relatively passive zone of the outer atmosphere, really just 
an outward extension of the photosphere. Its importance 
comes in how one attributes the radiative activity of 
different levels of the atmosphere in a global assessment 
of the energy budget. The gas density is large in the 
500-900 km range compared with the higher-lying canopy 
zone. Because the radiative cooling depends on ~n?, 
the intermediate altitude range plays a strategic role in 
the energy budget. One can imagine that a calculation 
of total radiative losses (which must balance the input 
heating, and therefore are a proxy for it) will yield very 
different answers if there is a temperature rise in those 
layers (classical chromosphere) versus a temperature drop 
(COmosphere). If the thermal model is biased, gross errors 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the inferred mechanical energy input are possible. (The 
source of the chromospheric heating is a longstanding 
mystery in solar—stellar physics.) 

Finally, it should be mentioned that thermal 
bifurcation effects are relatively weak in G-type stars like 
the Sun and probably absent among the even warmer F 
types. That is because at a critical Taf, a few hundred 
kelvins hotter than solar, the H~ boundary temperature 
becomes too warm for a seed population of CO molecules 
to form and trigger a cooling cascade. Conversely, the 
mechanism becomes increasingly important toward the 
later spectral classes, especially prominent among the cool, 
low-gravity red giants. 


Summary 


The stratification of the solar atmosphere once was thought 
to be well understood, based on a wealth of ultraviolet 
and optical diagnostics. Over the past two decades, 
however, studies of infrared molecular spectra have 
unearthed troubling anomalies. Strong lines of the 4.7 4m 
fundamental bands of carbon monoxide display very cool 
brightness temperatures at the extreme limb and curious 
off-limb emissions protruding hundreds of kilometers into 
the supposedly hot chromosphere. A straightforward— 
but controversial—proposal is that the low chromosphere 
is not hot at all, but instead is permeated by CO-cooled 
‘clouds’, a COmosphere, if you will. 


Bibliography 

Anderson L S and Athay R G 1989 Model solar 
chromosphere with prescribed heating Astrophys. J. 
346 1010-18 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Chromosphere: Thermal Bifurcation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ayres T R 1981 Thermal bifurcation in the solar outer 
atmosphere Astrophys. J. 244 1064-71 

Ayres T R and Rabin D 1996 Observations of solar carbon 
monoxide with an imaging infrared spectrograph I 
thermal bifurcation revisited Astrophys. J. 460 1042- 
63 

Carlsson M and Stein R F 1995 Does a nonmagnetic solar 
chromosphere exist? Astrophys. J. 440 L29-L32 


T R Ayres 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Cidenas (f1. fourth century Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cidenas (fl. fourth century Bc) 


Babylonian astronomer, flourished at Sippra, discovered 
the precession of the equinoxes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Circinus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Circinus 


(the Compasses; abbrev. Cir, gen. Cirini; area 93 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Centaurus 
and Triangulum Australe, and culminates at midnight in 
early May. It was introduced by the French astronomer 
Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted the southern 
sky in 1751-2. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Circinus are a Cirini, a binary with white (F1) 
and orange (K5) components, magnitudes 3.2 and 8.6, 
separation 15.7”, and 6 Cirini, magnitude 4.1. Other 
interesting objects include NGC 5315, a tenth-magnitude 
planetary nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Circumpolar Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Circumpolar Stars 


Stars that never set as seen from a particular location. 
The requirement for this to happen is that the star’s polar 
distance is less than the observer’s latitude—thus from 
a location in latitude 52° North, stars of NPD less than 
52° (i.e. with declinations of between 0° and +38°) are 
circumpolar and will be seen to circle around the north 
celestial pole. In practice it is difficult to observe objects 
very close to the horizon, so a more realistic requirement 
would be for the star’s polar distance to be at least 5° less 
than the latitude. Observed from the Earth’s geographical 
poles all stars are circumpolar, whereas from the Equator 
none are circumpolar. Circumpolar stars transit the 
meridian twice a day, at upper and lower culmination 
alternately. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clairaut, Alexis Claude (1713-65) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clairaut, Alexis Claude (1713-65) 


French mathematician, infant prodigy, wrote Théorie de 
la Figure de la Terre, a treatise dealing with the shape of 
rotating solid bodies, calculated the effect that Saturn and 
Jupiter would have on the 1759 appearance of HALLEY’s 
Comet and predicted its return to within a month. He 
recalculated NEwTon’s theory of the motion of the Moon, 
wrote Théorie de la Lune. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Clark, Alvan (1804-87), Clark, George Bassett (1827- 
91), and Clark, Alvan Graham (1832-97) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clark, Alvan (1804-87), Clark, George 
Bassett (1827-91), and Clark, Alvan 
Graham (1832-97) 


Alvan was an astronomer, telescope maker, born in 
Ashfield, MA. Founded, with his sons George (born in 
Lowell, MA) and Alvan Graham (born in Fall River, 
MA), Alvan Clark & Sons, makers of optical lenses 
for telescopes, first significant American contribution to 
astronomical instrument-making. On testing a lens on 
a newly manufactured telescope in 1862 Alvan Graham 
Clark discovered the white dwarf companion of Sirius, 
Sirius-B. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clarke, Arthur C (1917-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clarke, Arthur C (1917-) 


Science fiction writer and space visionary, born in 
Minehead, Somerset, England. Worked during the 
second World War on radar ground controlled approach 
equipment, became president of the British Interplanetary 
Society. In 1945 he wrote a paper ‘Extra-terrestrial relays’ 
which described the principle of satellites in geostationary 
orbits. The geostationary orbit at 42000 kilometers 
has been named the Clarke orbit by the International 
Astronomical Union. Clarke inspired satellite applications 
for weather forecasting. He developed the concept of the 
rotating space station, pictured by Stanley Kubrick in the 
movie 2001: A Space Odyssey, scripted by Clarke. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


How does a scientist approach the problem of trying to 
understand countless billions of objects? One of the first 
steps is to organize the data and set up a classification 
scheme which can provide the best insights into the 
nature of the objects. Perception and insight are the main 
purposes of classification. In astronomy, where there are 
‘billions and billions’ of stars, classification is an ongoing 
process, with new discoveries either being incorporated 
into the classification scheme or remaining isolated as 
peculiarities worthy of further study. With new telescopes 
and new detectors opening fresh windows to the universe, 
the need for classification is likely to persist as an essential 
ingredient of astronomical progress. 

If we were able to travel quickly among the 
stars, we would notice their size, color and surface 
brightness first. Being earthbound, we can see only 
the Sun in detail, but there are many different criteria 
which we can use to classify stars and other objects: 
position, brightness, polarization, color, spectrum, surface 
brightness, movement and variability. Of these, the 
spectrum yields the most information about the nature of 
the star. 

Astronomy is not an experimental science, stories of 
alien abductions notwithstanding. Unlike most scientists, 
astronomers are limited to observations from a distance. 
Stars and galaxies cannot be heated over a Bunsen burner; 
chemicals cannot be added to a star in order to learn 
from the reaction. Cosmic experiments do occur, but the 
timing is serendipitous, so the observer must be patient 
and watch, with no choice over the parameters of the event. 
To maximize the chances of catching a cosmic experiment, 
large surveys of stars and galaxies have been and will be 
conducted. 

Because of this need to organize large sets of observa- 
tional data, a sophisticated classification philosophy was 
developed by W W Morgan at the Yerkes Observatory of 
the University of Chicago, and was given the title ‘The 
MK process’. Interestingly, the astronomical development 
anticipated the thinking of the Bavarian philosopher, Lud- 
wig Wittgenstein, on the subject of the use of specimens in 
classification (Wittgenstein 1953). 

The most important function of a classification system 
is to provide a general reference frame into which most 
objects to be studied can be fitted. Statistics based on 
the classification scheme can provide powerful insights 
into the nature of the objects under consideration. Trends 
can be observed among the normal objects and rare or 
pathological objects can be identified easily. Isolating 
peculiarities is also important in astronomy, because the 
detailed study of peculiar stars often provides new insight 
into the nature and behavior of normal stars. Classification 
is the root of our understanding of stars and STELLAR 
EVOLUTION. 

In addition to the development of a general 
reference frame and the discrimination of peculiar spectra, 
classification techniques can be used very successfully 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for the determination of distances to stars. Although 
the method is referred to as ‘spectroscopic parallax’, 
the name is misleading because the technique does 
not use actual trigonometric PARALLAXES directly. It is 
based on the assumption that stars with similar spectra 
have similar fundamental parameters. This assumption 
allows astronomers to use nearby stars with good 
trigonometric parallaxes to provide a calibration which 
can then be applied to distant stars with similar spectra. 
Until recently, moderately hot or large stars, which are 
among the apparently brightest stars because of their 
intrinsic luminosity, but which are actually much more 
rare per unit volume than stars like the Sun, had no 
counterparts near enough in distance for the technique of 
trigonometric parallax to be effective, so indirect methods 
were developed. The indirect methods include the use 
of DOUBLE STARS and STAR CLUSTERS for bootstrapping from 
common stars with known distances to the uncommon 
hot, HIGH-LUMINOSITY STARS by assuming the same distances 
for the members of a cluster. Using data from the 
astrometric satellite HIPPARCOS, it is now possible to extend 
the distance calibrations by a factor of 10, which allows 
direct calibrations of red and yellow giant stars as well 
as many of the stars hotter than the Sun; however, the 
supergiants and the hottest stars are still beyond the 
reach of high-quality trigonometric parallaxes. For the 
luminosity calibration of these rare but luminous stars, 
binary and cluster-fitting techniques are still used. 

The process used for classification is comparison 
of the unknown spectrum with the known spectra of 
well-studied standard stars (specimens), using pattern- 
recognition techniques involving all the features ina stellar 
spectrum. When good-quality spectra are used, and the 
unknown star is carefully compared with a good set of 
standard stars, it is possible to obtain very reliable and 
informative results. Poor results are usually due to an 
inadequate or inappropriate grid of standard-star spectra. 


The history of classification of stellar spectra 
Father ANGELO SECCHI (1818-78), a Jesuit astronomer 
working in the 1860s at the Vatican Observatory, was the 
first to provide a general classification scheme for stellar 
spectra. He looked at thousands of stars with a visual 
spectroscope and small telescopes (15-25 cm aperture), 
but his observations were not photographic, so the blue— 
violet region of the spectrum was not prominent, mainly 
because the human eye is not very sensitive to deep blue 
wavelengths. The coolest stars dominate his classification 
scheme, forming two of his four classes, partly because 
they are among the apparently brightest stars in the visual 
region of the spectrum, and partly because of the striking 
appearance of their molecular bands. In modern terms, 
his four classes are 


I. stars hotter than the Sun, 

II. stars like the Sun, 

III. stars cooler than the Sun with titanium oxide 
absorption bands in the yellow and red regions of 
the spectrum, and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


IV. stars cooler than the Sun with carbon molecular 
absorption bands in the yellow and red regions of 
the spectrum. 


The class IV stars are easily distinguished from class III 
by their redder color, by the positions of the bands and 
by the appearance of the carbon bands, which fade in the 
opposite direction from those of titanium oxide. 

By the end of the 19th century, Edward C Pickering 
and others realized the importance of photographic 
spectra and objective-prism telescopes for classifying very 
large numbers of stars using a uniform scheme with 
consistent criteria. The ‘HD’ project at Harvard College 
Observatory was sponsored by Henry Draper and carried 
out primarily by ANNIE JUMP CANNON, who by the mid- 
1920s had classified more than a quarter of a million 
stars on a homogeneous, one-dimensional system. The 
HD system, which now corresponds more or less to the 
temperature scale of modern astronomy, originally was 
based chiefly on the strength of the hydrogen lines and 
types were assigned in alphabetical order: A, B, C,.... 
Later, when it was discovered that the hydrogen lines 
reach a maximum strength (A-type stars) at temperatures 
lower than those of B-type stars and O-type stars, and that 
some of the letters are redundant, the sequence of letters 
was changed to the order used today for the temperature 
reference frame: OBAFGKM(SRN). The SRN types are in 
parentheses because their temperatures are parallel to the 
GKM stars, the spectra differing in chemical composition 
rather than temperature. 

There are various mnemonics devised for (and by) 
students to help remember the sequence, but the most 
common is ‘Oh, Be A Fine Girl (Guy), Kiss Me Sweetly 
Right Now’. Dr Nancy Houk, at the University of 
Michigan, is reclassifying all of the HD catalogue stars on 
the two-dimensional MK system. The results of her work 
in the first four of six volumes are shown in figure 1. 

Also at Harvard, Antonia Maury isolated a class of 
peculiar stars which she classified with a lowercase ‘c’ 
placed in front of the temperature class. Her important 
insight formed the basis of the second dimension, which 
corresponds to surface gravity and is related to the 
luminosities of stars. 

Many other systems have been proposed, but most 
of them are intended for the classification of stars in 
particular regions of the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM and 
are used to advantage only in that part of the HR diagram. 
The BCD system of Barbier, Chalonge and Divan, which 
measures the Balmer jump directly, is a good example; it 
is powerful for its purpose, but is not good as a general 
reference frame. Others for a variety of reasons have 
not achieved wide acceptance. The Mount Wilson system 
developed by Adams in the 1930s is another example; in 
that case the calibration was used for the classification, 
so the parameters changed whenever a new model was 
introduced. Adams’ system became very cumbersome 
and inefficient. For further historical examples, see the 
article by Kurtz in The MK Process (Garrison 1984) and the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


HR DIAGRAM, VOLS. 1-4 (93,000 STARS) 
rm Pn ese Pe) 
-2.5b Rte: (a 4 
o% 
-5.0F roo 
-2.5- il 4 
w 
Qa 
P| 
a 
= 
2 o.0F 111] 
foal 
c 
s 
a 
> 
wy 2S 4 
ws 
3 IV 
o 
no 
@ 
5.0b 4 
(')- 5000 STARS © 
1.5h os , | 
CG) = 1000 stars 
10.0 ® = 100 STARS ; 4 
+ = 10 STARS 
Liiilririt ii EUs esl ids 
) B A F G K M 


Figure 1. Hertzsprung—Russell (HR) diagram for all the stars 
contained in the first four of six volumes of the Michigan 
Spectral Catalog, a massive undertaking by Nancy Houk. It is an 
illustration of how MK spectral types can be used as a general 
reference frame to study the characteristics of stellar populations. 


excellent history of spectroscopy by Hearnshaw 1986: The 
Analysis of Starlight. 

At the University of Chicago’s Yerkes Observatory in 
1943, W W Morgan, P C Keenan and E Kellman proposed 
a system of classification of stellar spectra known as the 
‘MKK system’. The ‘MK system’ (revised by Morgan and 
Keenan in 1953 from the MKK) is virtually the only one in 
wide use today as a general reference frame. Its success 
is due in large part to the philosophy of classification 
developed by W W Morgan—the MK process, of which 
the MK system is a subset. The general reference frame 
for the MK system is illustrated in figures 2 and 3. 


The MK system 


Classification systems are created for a reason. In using 
a particular system, it is important to be aware of why 
it was created, how it was constructed, what its useful 
limits are, how it has evolved and what credibility it has 
achieved. Collectively these correspond to the mandate of 
the system. The mandate of the MK system is to describe 
the blue—violet region of the spectrum of a star in terms of 
a set of standard stars, without reference to photometry, 
theory or other information. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


> 
a 
<<< S@<_ € eee e <2 SS. <—< 


Figure 2. Montage of photographic spectra of standard stars 
illustrating the temperature classes for stars along the main 
sequence of the HR diagram. The sense of the sequence is that 
the O-type stars are hot and the K-type stars are cool. Notice that 
there are considerable differences in pattern along the sequence. 
Temperature is the primary variable in stellar spectra. 


The value of the separation of the MK system 
from photometry and theory initially is that, at the 
interface between any two independent systems, there 
is information which is lost if one system is allowed 
to influence another. It is much more productive 
to compare two autonomous systems, assuming that 
both are carefully done, than to declare one or the 
other superior. For example, there is not a one-to-one 
relationship between the photometry and the spectrum, 
although, in general, the systems are correlated and can 
be used for a calibration. Another example is theory, 
which involves many simplifying assumptions and is 
continuously evolving (as it should). In this case, the 
derived parameters change with new advances in the 
models, so it is best not to mix the theory and the 
classification a priori. 

The use of line-strength ratios helps with the 
comparison of spectra and enables a high level of 
discrimination of spectral types and luminosity classes. 
The MK system uses the following nomenclature. 


(a) The Harvard sequence (OBAFGKMSRN) is retained 
for the major divisions of the temperature axis (figure 
2), in order to preserve some continuity with the great 
work of the Henry Draper Catalog. O-type stars are 
the hottest and most massive, whereas M stars are 
the coolest. We know now that the carbon (R and N) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


K2 V 
HI 


Figure 3. Montage of photographic spectra of standard stars 
illustrating the luminosity class sequences (V, III, I) for key 
spectral types (BO, AO, FO, GO, KO). The sense of the luminosity 
class sequence is that class I is brightest and class V is faintest for 
a given spectral type. Notice that the differences among the 
luminosity classes are somewhat more subtle than those for the 
temperature types, but are still quite easy to distinguish. 


stars are approximately the same temperature as the 
G, K and M stars except that the ratio of carbon to 
oxygen is reversed and that the S stars have similar 
temperatures to the M stars except that they show 
ZrO absorption bands. 

(b) Each letter is followed by subdivisions 0-9, except for 
the O-type stars for which O3 is the hottest type. 

(c) A luminosity-related class is added, representing 
indirectly the absolute brightness of the star, as 
indicated by features sensitive to surface gravity 
and microturbulence. Roman numerals are used to 
represent the luminosity class, with the sense that 
supergiants are I, giants are II] and main sequence 
stars (called dwarfs, although they are similar to the 
Sun) are V (figure 3). Sometimes the subdivisions 
a, ab and b are used to refine the luminosity 
classification in the sense that ab is the middle of the 
box and a is among the brightest stars in the box. 

(d) There is no single third dimension representing 
abundance because, in peculiar stars, elements can be 
individually affected. Thus the peculiarity is noted 
by the element’s symbol (Fe, Ba, C, CH, CN, etc), 
followed by a number 1-5, which is positive for 
overabundance and negative for underabundance. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(e) When there are enough specimens in a peculiar 
class, the definition of ‘normal’ may be expanded 
to include them. This happened with supergiants, 
rapid rotators, emission-line stars and others. Thus, 
there are several additional symbols used in the 
classifications. A few examples will illustrate the 
principles. Rapid rotators are designated by the 
letters n or nn, depending on the rotation rate. Stars 
with hydrogen lines in emission are labeled with the 
letter e, which signals a detailed description of the 
star’s spectrum in the notes; since emission lines are 
usually variable on time scales of years, the details 
are not given in the general spectral type but rather in 
the notes, accompanied by the date. Hot, O-type stars 
with helium, carbon, nitrogen or oxygen in emission 
are marked with the letter f. Very hot stars losing 
mass at a prodigious rate are classified as WOLF-RAYET 
(WR) stars. 

(f) Ifastar does not fit into the system at all, itis given the 
designation of the standard specimen which matches 
it most closely and the letter p is attached, indicating 
a peculiar (and probably especially interesting) star. 
The peculiarity is then described in a note. 

(g) Typical examples of classifications are as follows: 
G2 V (the Sun’s classification), indicating a star of 
moderate temperature and mass which is in the stable 
hydrogen-fusing stage of its life; M6 IIe, indicating 
a cool giant star with hydrogen emission which is 
probably fusing helium into carbon for energy, and 
BO Ib (close to the classification of the star which later 
became supernova 1987A), representing a very hot, 
large, very massive star which is evolving rapidly 
(astronomically speaking); KO IIb Fe2, CH1, CN—2 
signifying a moderately cool giant star, slightly less 
luminous than most giants, with strong metals (Fe2), 
somewhat strong G-band (CH1) as well as weak CN; 
A5p (Cr, Eu) describing a moderately hot star with 
strong lines of chromium and europium. 


The MK process 

The success of the MK system is due mainly to ‘the 
MK process’, an Aristotelian, inductive approach to 
classification in general, which is based on particular 
specimens (standard stars in the case of stellar spectra) and 
is independent of calibrations from theory or photometry. 
It is not based on theoretical models or averages as in a 
Platonic approach, but it is autonomous and is based on 
existing objects. The classification of a stellar spectrum is 
a description in terms of the set of standard stars, so the 
actual classification remains the same when the calibration 
changes owing to advances in photometric techniques, 
the theory of stellar atmospheres or other methods of 
determining temperature, surface gravity, atmospheric 
structure or chemical composition. Each classification box 
is represented by one or more specimens rather than by 
its physical parameters. For example, the standard star 
a PsA = HD216956 represents the box A3 V in the MK 
system. The spectrum of an unclassified star is compared 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


carefully with that of the standard star and determined to 
be like or not like w PsA. If it is like a PsA, it is given the 
classification A3 V; if it is not like a PsA, it is compared 
with another standard star and the process continues until 
a match is found. This is not as tedious as it seems, 
because a quick perusal of the spectrum of the unknown 
star will tell the experienced observer (or a computer 
program) which group of standard stars is most likely 
to match. A current calibration of the box, based on 
the calibration of the standard stars, is then applied to 
determine the physical parameters for the unknown star. 
With the large number of stars which have been classified, 
it would be a nightmare to have to redo the work every 
time new physical data become available. The value of an 
autonomous classification methodology is that, when the 
calibration changes from year to year or person to person, 
the classification does not have to be redetermined. 

The MK process methodology outlines a way to 
extend the MK system beyond its wavelength definitions 
and standards. New autonomous systems, independent of 
the MK system and of each other, can be created to cover 
new categories of objects in and beyond the Milky Way 
Galaxy. 


New wavelength regions: extending the 
classification 

The general reference frame for MK types is the blue—violet 
region of the spectrum, which was dictated originally by 
a combination of the old prism spectrographs which cut 
off the ultraviolet (UV) and the relative insensitivity of 
yellow, red and infrared (IR) emulsions in the 1930s. Even 
today, with satellites, high-UV-throughput instruments 
and CCDs which are very sensitive in the red and IR, the 
blue-violet remains the best choice for a general reference 
frame, because it contains many lines and bands with 
a wide range of excitation. For particular classification 
problems in particular parts of the HR diagram, however, 
it is often a great advantage to use other wavelengths. 

The energy distribution for the hottest stars peaks 
in the UV where there are strong lines suitable for 
classification of O- and B-type stars. Classification criteria 
and atlases have been published by NASA astronomers 
Janet Rountree and Nolan Walborn. The UV spectra are 
influenced strongly by stellar mass loss (winds) and the 
assumption is made that mass loss is correlated with 
the luminosity of the star, which is not always strictly 
true; there are exceptions. Also, cool stars do not have 
much light in the UV, and their UV spectra are dominated 
by chromospheric lines. Thus, the UV can be used 
advantageously for particular projects involving hot stars 
but is not good as a general reference frame. 

The energy distribution for the coolest stars peaks in 
the IR and falls off rapidly toward the blue—violet. The 
IR is the best region for molecular bands, which are the 
most useful criteria for cool stars. This is an advantage 
for classifying the temperatures of cool stars, but there are 
very few atomic lines in the IR and lines from the terrestrial 
atmosphere interfere strongly. Blue spectra are needed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HOT STARS------------------' COOL STARS 
2 B A F G K M 
FAR UV 
NEAR UV 
VISIBLE 
NEAR IR 
FAR IR 0 -------- CIRCUMSTELLAR 8S HELL 8-------- 


Figure 4. Table summarizing the choices of wavelength regions, 
as well as some of the general advantages and disadvantages for 
the various types of stars. 


OI ae are re 
BO 
B2 


BS 


ooo 


AO 
AS 


FO 
FS 


GO 
GS 


KO 


mies es 


M4 


| a ne 


4400 4500 


1 L 


4 i 4 1 —t 1 
3900 4000 4100 4200 4300 
Wavelength (Angstroms) 


Figure 5. Similar to figure 2, but digital data have been used. 
The digital spectra cover a comparable wavelength region and 
have signal-to-noise ratios equivalent to those of the 
photographic spectra. The sequence of standard stars is an 
illustration of the spectral variations due to temperatures, for 
stars on the main sequence. 


to properly determine the metallicities because there is 
much more variety of atomic lines of various excitations. 
Hot stars have less energy in the IR and the spectra are 
influenced strongly by circumstellar matter. Thus, the 
IR can be used advantageously for particular problems 
involving cool stars but is not good as a general reference 
frame. See figure 4 for a summary. 


The digital dialect 

Most pre-1980 classification atlases were photographic, 
but most of the work since then has been digital. CCDs 
are now used universally. There are some differences in 
use of the two media; however, the problems unique to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the digital revolution have been worked out. Whereas 
photographic spectra are logarithmic (density) and two 
dimensional, digital spectra are linear and are usually 
represented as one-dimensional tracings (figure 5). In 
pattern recognition, the eye prefers to look at surfaces 
rather than line tracings. Digital detectors are much 
more efficient than photographic emulsions, although 
observers often underestimate the overall photographic 
signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) in determining equivalent 
digital S/N. The best widened photographic spectra 
used for classification have S/N of approximately 200-300, 
so the digital equivalent of the best photographic work 
should be similar. Many observers work with much less, 
and the accuracy of their results suffers. However, when 
working with extremely faint objects, it is necessary to 
compromise. Good digital classifications are possible with 
S/N = 50 and mediocre ones with S/N = 35, but below 
that the results are likely to be unreliable. 

Another difference in approach is in the process of 
comparison with standard stars. Because of the non- 
linearity of the photographic process, the exposures (i.e. 
S/N) for the standards had to be similar. However, 
with linear digital data, it is advisable to take the bright 
standards at very high S/N (several hundred) even if it is 
only possible to take the unknown at very low S/N. 

With digital data, care must be taken to prevent loss of 
information or introduction of false information during the 
reduction process, especially during rectification. Also, 
when comparing tracings, it is important to use ratios of 
close lines and to look at the line strength rather than the 
sharp bottoms of the lines, because, for strong lines, the 
bottom of the line is at lower S/N and the wings of the 
lines are far more reliable and important. Thus, digital 
data, while much more efficient, versatile and easy to work 
with than photography, must be used with care to give 
superior results. 


Automating the classification process 

The tradition in MK spectral classification involves 
comparing visually the entire blue—violet spectrum of a 
star to find a match with one of the standard stars. Humans 
are very good at pattern-recognition, which is difficult 
for computers. However, powerful computer techniques 
have been developed for automation by simulating the 
pattern-recognition process. (For a review, see the article 
by Kurtz in Garrison (1984).) The most successful 
methodologies, which allow computers to do as well as 
or better than humans on normal stars, are the minimum 
metric distance (MMD) and neural net (NN) approaches. 
Each has advantages and each has been tested on large 
data sets. Automation techniques can be applied to great 
advantage when dealing with data sets of millions of stars. 
In such cases, when new types of peculiarities are found, 
they are flagged for human consideration. This means not 
only that very large numbers of stars can be classified but 
that human experts still will be needed to interpret the 
results. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Natural groups 

The MK system was set up to be used with spectra of 
high enough resolution to permit detection of the most 
important peculiarities, yet low enough to reach stars as 
faint as possible. This compromise is satisfied in the range 
of resolution 0.1-0.3 nm. There are situations, however, 
when it would be useful to have some information for stars 
as faint as possible, which would mean extending the MK 
process to lower resolutions. W W Morgan developed the 
concept of natural groups, which uses the strongest, most 
outstanding features of the spectrum to identify uniquely 
particular types of stars, even at extremely low resolutions. 
Examples are the AO V stars, whose hydrogen lines are 
stronger than in any other normal type of star and can 
be detected at resolutions as low as 2-3 nm. Thus if 
the hydrogen lines are still visible when a spectrum’s 
resolution is degraded to this amount, the star must be 
approximately AO V. At very low (e.g. 3 nm) resolution the 
G8-K2 III stars are uniquely outstanding, because their 
temperatures and surface gravities are optimum for peak 
visibility of the broad CN bands. Similarly the coolest stars 
can be classified uniquely and easily at very low resolution 
by use of their TiO and VO bands in the red region of 
the spectrum and their CO bands in the IR domain. The 
powerful techniques of natural groups can thus be used as 
an initial filter to define a set of objects for further study 
but are not good for definitive types for individual stars 
because the three regions mentioned happen to be also 
the locations of many peculiar and interesting stars whose 
peculiarities are not visible at such low resolutions. 


Integrated spectra: binaries, clusters and galaxies 
The concept of natural groups also can be used to 
disentangle the complexities of integrated spectra of 
binary stars, globular star clusters and galaxies. If, 
for example, the CN bands are strong in the integrated 
spectrum of a galaxy nucleus, there must be a substantial 
contribution to the light by G8-K2 giant stars. MgH is a 
molecular band that is prominent only in cool dwarfs; if it 
is not visible in the integrated spectrum, the cool dwarfs 
must not be present in enough numbers to counteract the 
light from the giants, which, while much rarer, are also 
much more luminous. W W Morgan and his associates 
carried the idea to the limit, using extremely low resolution 
(1000 nm mm-'), which produced spectra that resembled 
tadpoles. The Cyg OB6 Association was discovered using 
the tadpoles to reveal highly reddened, very faint, massive, 
hot stars, which were distinct from cool stars with similar 
colors. These natural-group techniques have not been 
fully exploited in the interpretation of the stellar content 
of clusters and galaxies. 


Objective prisms, multiobject spectrographs and 
surveys 

Taking individual spectra for large surveys is very time 
consuming. One way to improve efficiency is to use a 
wide-field scHMIDT TELESCOPE fitted with a thin prism across 
the aperture, thus producing spectra of all the stars in a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


large area. In the early 1900s, Annie Jump Cannon used 
objective-prism spectra for assigning spectral types on the 
Harvard system to more than a quarter of a million stars 
over the entire sky. Dr Nancy Houk’s reclassification of 
all the Henry Draper stars on the two-dimensional MK 
system is also based on objective-prism spectra. 

Fiber optics are being used to obtain many spectra 
of faint objects simultaneously. Modern multiobject 
spectrographs can be used to take low-dispersion spectra 
of hundreds of stars or galaxies at a time, yielding 
thousands of spectra per night. Automated classification 
techniques could be used to great advantage by providing 
preliminary, on-line spectral types for the stars and 
signaling the observer when unusual spectra are detected 
(e.g. a supernova in a distant galaxy), but this idea has not 
been explored effectively yet. 


Calibration: effective temperature, logarithm of 
gravity and abundances 


The MK process is inductive. The classifications are based 
on a set of standard stars only and are independent of the 
results of theory, photometry, all other external influences. 
After the classifications have been performed, it is useful to 
calibrate the system, to tie it into the other methods as well 
as the fundamental parameters of Ter, log g and [Fe/H]. 

An autonomous approach such as the MK process is 
useful because there is information in the interface which 
would be lost if the methods were not a priori independent. 
With the new data from satellites such as HIPPARCOS, it 
is then possible to calibrate the luminosities for nearby 
stars and thus to obtain distances for all stars with similar 
spectra. The theory of STELLAR ATMOSPHERES can be used to 
calibrate spectral types, luminosity classes and abundance 
indicators in terms of the fundamental parameters of Tore, 
log g and abundances of key elements. 


The principle of complementarity 


When comparing the results of various approaches to the 
interpretation of stellar spectra in terms of the fundamental 
parameters such as Tog, log g and [Fe/H], it is most 
productive to think of the methods as complementary, 
with important information in the interface. For example, 
while there is general agreement between the carefully 
measured colors of a star and its spectrum, there is not 
a one-to-one correlation between photometry and the 
spectrum, mainly because they refer to different parts of 
the stellar atmosphere. The photometry refers primarily 
to the bottom of the photosphere, whereas the spectrum 
arises from several layers of the photosphere. Different 
results from the two techniques might indicate a peculiar 
structure in the atmosphere. If both techniques have 
been used carefully, there is usually a good reason for 
the difference and many types of peculiar stars have been 
discovered through the disagreement between their colors 
and their spectra. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Classification of Stellar Spectra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Summary 

An inductive process of classifying stellar spectra has 
been outlined. With careful attention to comparison with 
standard specimens, a high level of discrimination can 
be achieved. The MK process is a powerful tool for 
astrophysical insight. W W Morgan, creator of the MK 
system of spectral classification, has written ‘It could be 
said, with some truth, that the spectral forms have helped 
to classify themselves, by showing where they are most 
comfortable’. 


Bibliography 

Corbally C J, Gray R O and Garrison R F 1994 The MK 
Process at 50 Years: A Powerful Tool for Astrophysical 
Insight (Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conf. Ser. vol 
60) (San Francisco, CA: Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific) 

Garrison R F 1984 The MK Process and Stellar Classification 
(Toronto: David Dunlap Observatory) 

Garrison R F 1988 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 100 1036 

Hearnshaw J 1986 The Analysis of Starlight (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Keenan P C and McNeil R C 1976 An Atlas of Spectra of the 
Cooler Stars: Types G, K, M, S, and C (Columbus, OH: 
Ohio State University Press) 

Morgan W W and Keenan P C 1973 Spectral classification 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 11 29 

Morgan W W, Abt H A and Tapscott J 1978 Revised MK 
Spectral Atlas for Stars Earlier than the Sun (Chicago, 
IL: Yerkes Observatory) 

Morgan W W, Keenan P C and Kellman E 1943 An Atlas 
of Stellar Spectra (Chicago, IL: Yerkes Observatory, 
University of Chicago Press) 

Wittgenstein L 1953 Philosophical Investigations (New York: 
Macmillan) 


R F Garrison 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clavius, Christoph (1538-1612) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clavius, Christoph (1538-1612) 


Mathematician, born in Bamberg, Germany. Became 
a Jesuit in Rome, and wrote a number of textbooks, 
including a version of Euclid’s Elements, a commentary 
on the Sphere of Sacrobosco, and books on algebra, the 
astrolabe, and practical arithmetic and geometry. He 
participated in the commission for the reform of the 
calendar that led, in 1582, to the institution of the 
Gregorian calendar. In his astronomical books, he opposed 
the Copernican system on both physical and scriptural 
grounds, but at the end of his life he was faced with 
telescopic observations by GALILEO, which he was able to 
repeat, of the phases of Venus and the satellites of Jupiter. 
He certified what Galileo had seen as real and called on 
astronomers to consider how the celestial orbs may be 
arranged in order to save these phenomena but could not 
bring himself to abandon the Ptolemaic view. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clementine 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clementine 


Joint project between the US Strategic Defense Initiative 
Organization and NASA, launched in January 1994. De- 
signed to test military sensors and spacecraft components 
in the space environment. Also intended to make scientific 
observations of the Moon and near-Earth asteroid 1620 Ge- 
ographos. Obtained global ultraviolet and infrared imag- 
ing, laser ranging altimetry coverage from 60° S to 60° N, 
and charged particle measurements. Obtained the first 
data to indicate the presence of water ice inside perma- 
nently shaded craters at the lunar poles. Failed before it 
could reach Geographos. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Climate 


Earth’s climate may be defined as the global physical 
condition, averaged over some period of time (typically 
decades or longer), of the EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE, OCEAN 
and ice sheets. It is the presence of a relatively 
dense atmosphere—third among the solid bodies of the 
solar system—that makes Earth habitable. Without the 
blanketing of infrared energy radiated from Earth’s surface 
and lower atmosphere, conditions would be well below 
freezing almost everywhere around the globe. While the 
atmosphere is the most immediate and palpable part of the 
Earth’s climate system, at least to land-based life, the ocean 
plays a crucial role. The ocean and atmosphere exchange 
heat and water vapor (as well as carbon dioxide and other 
gases). The much greater mass of the ocean compared 
with the atmosphere provides a damping effect on the 
climate system, but paradoxically might also drive it from 
one particular state to another (for example from glacial 
to interglacial climate). This dual role of the ocean is a 
consequence of the presence of ocean currents, which in 
turn depend on the distribution of heat and salt (salinity) 
with location and depth. Absent our deep oceans, Earth’s 
climatic regime would be drastically different from the 
present state and past states recorded in the geologic 
record. Ice sheets also play a role in strongly reflecting the 
Sun’s energy and in storing fresh water that when melted 
changes the ocean’s salinity and global sea levels. 

The primary energy source for the climate is the 
Sun. Rotation of the Earth, seasonal variation of the 
polar orientation and long-term orbit changes all serve 
to modulate the amount of solar energy received from 
place to place and on various timescales. Despite 
rather dramatic variations in climate through history, 
a remarkable fact derived from the geologic record is 
the essential stability of liquid water over large parts 
of the Earth’s surface at least back through 4 billion yr 
ago. The mass and energy exchanges between the 
various components of the climate system, and indeed 
their interactions with the crust of the Earth, must have 
maintained this essential stability in the face of large 
progressive changes in the energy output of the Sun 
implied by stellar evolution theory. The habitability of 
the Earth is therefore far more complex than simply its 
favorable position some 150 million km from the Sun. 

Worldwide monitoring of the climate has been possi- 
ble only in the last few decades owing to improvements in 
transportation, instrumentation and information-transfer 
technologies. Direct measurements, i.e. in situ, represent 
the first kind of climate data to be collected, and include 
pressure, temperature, water content (humidity), wind 
speed, salt content (at oceanic sites), cloud and precipi- 
tation conditions. Surface stations grew in number from 
about 60 in 1875 (which were primarily in the United States 
and Western Europe) to about 7000 stations reporting daily 
today. Upper-atmosphere data are more difficult to collect, 
but by the late 1980s about 800 stations (mostly near air- 
ports) launched balloon-borne packages (‘rawinsondes’ or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


‘radiosondes’) twice daily to measure meteorological pa- 
rameters at altitudes up to 30 km. 

Satellite monitoring began with the launch of 
TIROS 1, the first satellite designed specifically for 
weather observations, in 1960. In the ensuing four 
decades monitoring of cloud and precipitation patterns 
by orbiting satellites has become an established part 
of weather and climate studies and has expanded to 
include remote observations of atmospheric chemistry, 
atmospheric energy balance, sea state and many other 
parameters. Much of this information is now publicly 
available, essentially instantaneously, via the world wide 
web (interested readers can most easily obtain access 
through the web site of their particular nation’s weather 
service). 

Examination of the climates of the three other 
large solid bodies in our solar system with substantial 
atmospheres—Venus, Mars and Titan—reveals very 
different climate regimes. Venus exhibits a massive CO) 
atmosphere that stands as a stunning example of the 
effect of greenhouse warming. Mars’ thin atmosphere of 
CO, is driven by a combination of processes familiar to 
terrestrial climatologists but with significant differences 
in the seasonal cycling of CO, into and out of the Martian 
polar regions, and the occurrence of occasional global 
dust storms. In addition to the deep atmospheres of 
the outer planets, the thick atmosphere of Saturn’s moon 
Titan supports a modest greenhouse and a temperature 
profile with a shape very similar to the Earth’s, although 
hundreds of degrees Celsius colder. By studying the 
climates of these other solid worlds it is possible to 
gain some insight into the conditions required in other 
planetary systems for habitable planets to exist (see also 
MARS: ATMOSPHERE, VENUS: ATMOSPHERE, TITAN). 

Humanity is changing the chemistry and energy 
balance of the Earth’s atmosphere by introducing 
large amounts of carbon dioxide, chlorofluorocarbons 
(CFCs) and other products of our industrial—agricultural 
civilization into the air and water. The CFCs reduce the 
thickness of the Earth’s high-altitude ozone layer, which 
protects exposed organisms from lethal ultraviolet energy 
from the Sun. Carbon dioxide and other gases enhance 
the infrared blanketing effect in the atmosphere, hence 
warming the planet as well as changing the behavior of 
the climate system on a timescale of decades. Informed 
decisions regarding controls on emission of greenhouse 
and ozone-destroying gases require a deep understanding 
of how the climate system works, an understanding that is 
being gleaned from new generations of surface, airborne 
and spaceborne instrumentation (see also GREENHOUSE 
EFFECT, OZONE HOLE). 


Components of the Earth’s climate system 
Atmosphere 

The atmosphere is what we most associated with climate, 
and it plays host to the short-term and spatially localized 
variability termed weather. Earth’s atmosphere is mostly 
molecular nitrogen (Nz), constituting 78% of the air 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by number. Approximately 21% of the atmosphere is 
molecular oxygen (O2), a product of plant and microbial 
photosynthesis that reacts with common minerals and 
would disappear in less than 10 million years in the 
absence of these processes. Water vapor, because it 
condenses to form clouds, and is connected through 
condensation and evaporation to the Earth’s oceans 
and land, is highly variable from place to place and 
with altitude (see WATER CYCLE). On a global average 
its mixing ratio near the base of the atmosphere is 
1%. Carbon dioxide (CO) is the primary supply of 
carbon to the plant and bacterial photosynthetic cycle and 
currently constitutes 330 parts per million (0.00033) of 
the atmosphere. The total mass of Earth’s atmosphere 
is estimated to be 5 x 10'® kg, determined through the 
atmospheric density—altitude structure. 

The atmosphere can actually be thought of as 
concentric layers of gas each of which is distinguished 
by particular mechanisms of energy transport and hence 
temperature profile. The troposphere is characterized by 
falling temperature with altitude (except near the surface, 
where locally temperature can rise with altitude in a 
thin inversion layer). In the troposphere, convection 
and radiation carry heat upward from the surface which 
is warmed by visible solar radiation. It is here that 
nearly all clouds form and weather occurs, land-sea—air 
exchange of gases takes place and the biosphere exists. 
The troposphere ends at the tropopause, about 8 km above 
in the surface in the polar regions and 13 km in the tropics 
(with substantial seasonal variations as well). Here the 
temperature profile reverses direction, and temperature 
begins to increase with altitude in the stratosphere. The 
stratosphere is warmed by absorption of solar ultraviolet 
and infrared radiation, largely by ozone (Os) as part of its 
photochemical cycle of creation and destruction. As ozone 
declines, cooling by emission of radiation to space by CO, 
leads to a halt in the rising temperature at the stratopause 
roughly 50 km above the surface; above the temperature 
falls with height in the mesosphere. Beyond 100 km 
altitude photolysis (breaking of a molecule by absorption 
of photons) of Oz and ionization increase the temperature 
steeply with altitude in the thermosphere, where conduction 
replaces radiation as the key energy transport process. In 
the ensuing discussion of climate only the stratosphere and 
troposphere are considered, within which lies over 90% of 
the total atmospheric mass. 

The Earth’s rotation and differential solar heating as 
a function of latitude and time of year drive atmospheric 
circulation patterns. Solar heating is greatest at the equator 
and least at the poles; hence the atmosphere must transport 
heat from equator to pole. It does so through the so- 
called Hadley circulation, in which warm air rises and 
is transported to higher latitudes, cools and sinks. The 
Hadley circulation does not consist of a single cell in the 
case of the Earth; instead three cells in each hemisphere 
move heat poleward. As seen in figure 1 rising air at the cell 
boundaries diverges, leading to belts of low-pressure air, 
whereas sinking air converges at cell boundaries yielding 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


zones of higher pressure. Since the Earth rotates this 
pattern of high and low belts is accompanied by the 
prevailing zonal wind pattern also shown in figure 1. 
The westerlies increase in speed with altitude, reaching a 
maximum just below the stratosphere as the narrow jet 
streams, which are responsible for the movement of mid- 
latitude storm systems. The trade winds, blowing from 
the east, are a primary driver of the oceanic Gulf Stream 
through frictional stresses on the sea surface. 

Superimposed on the primary circulation pattern 
described above is a series of secondary high- and low- 
pressure systems associated with perturbations in the basic 
flow. The Earth’s rotation creates an effective Coriolis 
force that acts at right-angles to the direction of the wind: 
to the right in the northern hemisphere and left in the 
southern. At latitudes higher than 10°, and altitudes 
above the frictional boundary layer of the atmosphere, 
the Coriolis force is sufficiently strong that it nearly fully 
balances the pressure gradient force between high- and 
low-pressure centers. This geostrophic balance causes 
areas of high pressure to spin in a clockwise direction 
and low-pressure areas to spin in a counterclockwise 
direction, in the northern hemisphere—and in the opposite 
sense in the southern. Low-pressure areas are thus 
cyclonic (in the northern hemisphere) regions where rising 
air forms clouds and precipitation systems if enough 
moisture is available. Anticyclonic high-pressure areas 
are characterized by subsidence, evaporation and hence 
drying; they are generally fair-weather features (again 
the direction of circulation is reversed in the southern 
hemisphere). Some high- and low-pressure systems are 
persistent features, either seasonally or annually, but may 
fluctuate in strength and position from year to year. Others 
are spatially and temporally variable, such as mid-latitude 
storm systems and hurricanes. 

Mid-latitude and tropical cyclonic systems exist 
because of perturbations in the flow that grow with 
time. Baroclinic instabilities are triggered by the existence 
of a meridional (north-south) temperature gradient in 
a geostrophic atmosphere and hence are responsible for 
storm systems at mid-latitudes (where the Coriolis effect 
is strong). Barotropic instabilities, on the other hand, operate 
at equatorial latitudes, and are a class of instability in 
which only kinetic (not thermal) energy is transferred 
from the background rotation of the atmosphere to the 
growing perturbation. Barotropic instabilities are thought 
to produce tropical depressions, which in some cases 
become tropical storms or hurricanes, in the equatorial 
belt of low pressure called the intertropical convergence zone 
(ITCZ). 

In contrast to the geostrophic balance of the terrestrial 
and Martian atmospheres, on Venus and Saturn’s moon 
Titan stratospheric winds are more rapid than the 
planetary rotation. The resulting strong centrifugal force 
dominates over the Coriolis force, leading to so-called 
cyclostrophic balance. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


c — we High 
H 


a Polar Front 
Horse Latitudes 
/ aa fol 7 /. 
H 


(ace 


“ 
—— 


Hadley Cells 


Bo 


~=_o? Equator 
+ Equatorial 
Intertropical 


Convergence Zone 
30 deg. 


Figure 1. Persistent features of the Earth’s atmospheric circulation. Shown is the pattern of permanent high- and low-pressure belts 
and the Hadley cells that move heat from equator to pole in each hemisphere. The doldrums are the equatorial regime of very calm air; 
horse latitudes refer to the narrow belts of high pressure over the oceans at about 30-35° latitude. Labeled also is the pattern of 
atmospheric winds corresponding to the pressure belts; the mid-latitude and higher winds in the southern hemisphere mirror those in 
the north and are not indicated. 


wes YZ Wr Ie fi 


(Gree Oe orth ‘Atlant antic 


¢ 
(os) 


North Equatorial. } 


a ee = Equatorial ogee 
r Se = = Countercurrent 


me hw South Equatorial— \ 
East ee tafir 3 <= \ 
WAI C Ce 
“aS NON \ sD IE 
Se 


aS ( 
+ detonate 2 
oS 


IY spit 


eN 


O77 
R ( stale 
— VME 
<a — 
“_“Antaretic 


Ze 


eee 


Figure 2. Ocean circulation patterns. Primary surface currents during wintertime are shown, after Peixoto and Oort (1992). 


Hydrosphere 

The Earth is unique among the solar system’s planets 
in having a massive layer of liquid water, our ocean. 
In addition to oceanic water, fresh water systems are 
distributed over the Earth’s surface in the form of rivers 
and lakes. There is also a substantial amount of water 
circulating through the upper crustal layer of the Earth’s 
interior. This water mixes with the deep ocean on a 
wide range of timescales, from very short to geological 
(i.e. millions of years). The liquid water system as a 
whole is referred to as the hydrosphere, and has a mass 
estimated at 1.7 x 107! kg, the vast majority of which is 
in the ocean. Thus the amount of water in contact with the 
atmosphere on timescales much shorter than geological 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


amounts to 200 times the mass of the Earth’s atmosphere, 
and strongly modifies the response of the climate to 
changes in external conditions, as well as creating forcing 
functions of its own. The oceans effectively store large 
amounts of thermal energy (originally sunlight) that is 
later released as sensible or latent heat. The temperature 
of the ocean has a direct effect on the amount of water 
vapor, the principal greenhouse gas, released into the 
atmosphere; the oceans also store large amounts of CO; 
(the other primary greenhouse gas) in a temperature- 
dependent fashion. The average depth of the ocean is 
4 km; some of the deepest portions mix with the upper 
layers or the atmosphere only occasionally, while the 
uppermost part of the ocean exchanges gases and heat with 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the atmosphere very rapidly and continuously. The ocean 
moves heat from equator to pole in amounts comparable 
with what is transported by the atmosphere. 

In contrast to the atmosphere there is a large-scale 
day-to-day uniformity of temperature near the surface 
of the ocean and a slow seasonal shift. Like a large 
indoor swimming pool the ocean damps out temperature 
variations in the atmosphere and controls the lower 
atmospheric humidity (water vapor content) over large 
areas of the Earth. The ocean exhibits circulation patterns 
that bring warm currents of water to high latitudes 
and cold water to equatorial regions (figure 2). These 
reduce the north-south gradient of temperature in the 
atmosphere. The Atlantic Gulf Stream is the best known 
example of the former. The southward Pacific current off 
the California coast is a familiar example of the latter, 
making summer ocean water very cold as far south 
as Los Angeles. Surface currents are driven by wind 
stresses, and convergence or divergence of flows leads to 
vertical motions (downwelling or upwelling) below the 
surface. This is not, however, the whole story. The oceans 
contain about 3 parts per thousand dissolved salts, which 
both lower the freezing temperature of the water and 
change its density. The former effect allows annual mean 
temperatures at high latitudes to be nearly 2°C below 
freezing. The density effect is such as to make waters of 
increasing salinity denser. 

The deep circulation patterns in the ocean are poorly 
known, because of a dearth of observations. Thermal and 
saline (thermohaline) density effects, compressibility of the 
ocean water (actually quite important at large depths) and 
mass conservation associated with return flow of water 
from surface currents drive overall ocean circulation. 
Because of compressibility and thermal effects, very cold, 
deep, ocean water may not exchange with the near surface 
more frequently than hundreds of years. The positions of 
the continents play a key role in the circulation, and in 
particular may affect the efficiency of north-south heat 
transport. The role of wind in driving ocean currents 
and the effect of currents in redistributing heat available 
to the atmosphere results in a complex, coupled ocean— 
atmosphere climate system. 

The premier example (and possibly the most 
important in determining global climate state; see below) 
is the Gulf Stream to North Pacific conveyor belt. The 
Gulf Stream current is powered by the stress of trade 
winds exerted on the ocean surface in the tropics, and of 
the westerlies at mid-latitudes. The current moves warm 
waters northeastward, along the United States east coast. 
Evaporation increases the current’s salinity; exchange of 
heat with the atmosphere along the route leads to a net 
cooling of the water and warming of the atmosphere. The 
resulting progressive, northward densification reaches a 
critical stage near Iceland, where the Gulf water becomes 
denser than the surroundings and sinks. The overturn is 
aided by winds which blow colder surface waters aside, 
allowing deeper parts of the current to rise, release heat, 
and cool rapidly. The now-bottom water flows southward, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


around Africa and then northward to the colder North 
Pacific. There it rises to the surface and the divergence 
pushes ambient waters aside, some moving southward 
toward the start of the Gulf Stream. The most important 
consequence of this circulation is to transport significant 
amount of equatorial heat to the North Atlantic region, 
strongly moderating the climate of Europe and hence 
preventing the buildup of massive ice sheets. 


Cryosphere 

The cryosphere comprises the Earth’s permanent and 
seasonal ice sheets and snow, as well as permafrost, which 
together account for 80% of the planet's fresh water supply. 
The major components are the ice sheets of Antarctica, 
Greenland, permafrost in North America and Asia, sea 
ice, mountain glacier systems and seasonal snowfields. 
Although only about 2% of the Earth’s water is frozen, the 
cryosphere has a profound effect on present-day climate 
and on the glacial—interglacial oscillations of the past 2 
million years. The very high reflectivity of water ice 
(which is sensitive to particle size and hence formation 
conditions and age, as well as to impurities) rejects by 
reflection solar radiation in the visible and near-UV parts 
of the spectrum. In the thermal infrared, water ice is 
quite dark, and hence acts as a very efficient nighttime 
radiator of terrestrial thermal radiation. The large latent 
heat of melting of water ice also acts as a strong heat sink, 
particularly during colder epochs in which more massive 
glaciation exists than at present. 

The cryosphere amplifies the effect on climate of the 
northern-southern hemisphere dichotomy in distribution 
of continents and oceans. Because the northern 
hemisphere has far more land area than does the southern, 
development of massive continental glaciation to mid- 
latitudes, a feature of glacial epochs, is predominantly 
a northern hemisphere effect. This in turn may tie the 
timing of onset of glaciations to configurations of the 
Earth’s orbital and spin parameters that produce minima 
in annually averaged northern hemisphere insolation. On 
much shorter (seasonal) timescales, however, the presence 
of a large polar continent in the south and polar ocean in 
the north affects the relative responses of the poles to the 
decreased wintertime insolation. 


Greenhouse warming 

The suitability of Earth for life is in large measure a 
result of the stability of liquid water at the surface; the 
annually averaged global mean ocean surface temperature 
is 288 K. Yet simply equating the annually averaged 
amount of solar radiation absorbed by Earth’s surface to 
the outgoing bolometric thermal radiation produces an 
effective temperature of 255 K, well below the freezing 
point of water (even with salts). The high surface 
temperature of the Earth, and hence the stability of 
liquid water, is a consequence of the higher mean opacity 
of the atmosphere in infrared (where thermal radiation 
is released toward space) than in optical wavelengths 
(where the peak of the solar spectrum occurs). The term 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


greenhouse effect is indelibly affixed to this basic property 
of the terrestrial atmosphere, despite that fact that in a 
greenhouse thermally driven convection plays essentially 
no role at all, while it is important in regulating the lower 
temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere. 

The wavelength distribution of photons streaming 
from the Sun, approximated as a blackbody at 6000 K, 
peaks at about 0.6 wm wavelength (see BLACK-BODY 
RADIATION), Where atmospheric gases have almost no 
absorption (with the exception of the so-called ozone 
Chappuis bands). Thus in a cloudless atmosphere sunlight 
would be virtually free to reach the surface (although 
Rayleigh scattering by molecules of the air preferentially 
diffuses shorter wavelengths out of the solar beam, leading 
to the familiar blue sky). Clouds reflect about 20% of 
the incoming sunlight, while the surface reflects less than 
10% on average. About 2/3 of the sunlight incident on 
Earth is absorbed by the ground or lower atmosphere 
and converted to photons with a spectral distribution 
that, if approximated by a blackbody, corresponds to 
a temperature of 255 K (absent the greenhouse effect; 
288 K with the greenhouse warming). The peak of the 
spectral distribution of these thermalized photons is in 
the mid-infrared part of the spectrum, at about 15-20 wm 
wavelength, and the atmosphere is very opaque there. 
Absorption bands of water vapor and CO, dominate, with 
holes in the absorption spectrum filled in by CHg, O2, Os, 
nitrous oxides and even man-made CFC’s. 

At ground level the atmosphere is highly opaque 
beyond 5 4m wavelength, but the absorptions decrease 
with altitude as atmosphere column abundance (from a 
given level to space) and pressure decline. By 10 km the 
atmosphere is largely transparent again. Thermal photons 
streaming upward from the ground have mean free paths 
much shorter than the inbound solar radiation whose 
energy flux they must balance. Absorption and reradiation 
of the thermal photons redirect a portion of the flux back 
downward; the downward-directed flux decreases with 
altitude as the atmospheric transparency increases. As 
a result of this inefficiency in outward thermal transport 
relative to inbound solar visible radiation, the surface 
temperature must rise above the effective temperature to 
ensure a balance between ingoing and outgoing energy 
flux. Altitudes above the surface also must experience 
elevated temperatures, but progressively less so as one 
moves outward. Thus the temperature increases between 
the altitude at which infrared photons are free to stream 
outward, the mean radiating level, and the surface. 

The steepness of the temperature increase is modified 
from the greenhouse value by a number of other energy 
transport processes. Most important is convection. When 
the temperature gradient steepens to exceed the idealized, 
adiabatic lapse rate, the air becomes unstable and bulk 
vertical motions (convection) transport the heat upward 
at the adiabatic lapse rate. In the absence of water the 
relevant adiabatic lapse rate is the so-called dry value of 
10 K km“. Water condensation during cloud formation 
releases latent heat which allows for moist (sometimes, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wet) convective transport of heat at temperature gradients 
well below the dry adiabat. To a first approximation 
the observed mean temperature gradient in the Earth’s 
atmosphere is the moist adiabatic lapse rate. Further 
modification of the temperature profile occurs as winds 
advectively transport heat from one location to another, 
and storm systems move both moisture and heat in 
horizontal and vertical directions. Figure 3 summarizes 
the various mechanisms for upward and downward 
energy transport. 

The essential point about the greenhouse effect should 
not be obscured by the complexity of multiple transport 
processes. Inbound energy flux must be balanced by 
outgoing, and if the atmosphere is less transparent to 
outgoing (thermal) radiation than to incoming (solar) 
radiation, the surface temperature is elevated until the 
balance is achieved. However, the response of the Earth’s 
climate to the increase in greenhouse gases is difficult to 
predict because of the large number of degrees of freedom. 
Modifications to cloud formation, precipitation, surface 
ice coverage, ocean circulation, temperature and CO, 
solubility all represent responses to increased greenhouse 
gases that can provide positive or negative feedbacks. The 
effect of an incremental increase in greenhouse gases can 
be predicted (incrementally higher surface temperature), 
but discrete changes (particularly large ones) can simply 
push the Earth’s climate into a different state. 

An extreme example of the greenhouse effect is 
available for study on Venus, where the surface pressure 
is 92 bar and the atmosphere is 96% carbon dioxide. 
Because a layer of reflective sulfuric acid and water clouds 
covers the globe, the surface of Venus receives only a 
few per cent of the sunlight incident on the top of the 
atmosphere—less than the Earth receives at its surface 
despite the latter being 40% more distant from the Sun. 
Yet the surface temperature of Venus is 730 K, a value that 
reflects the extreme infrared blanketing afforded by the 
high CO, surface pressure, as well as contributions from 
minor species such as water vapor (roughly 100 parts per 
million of the atmosphere). As with the Earth outward 
energy transport is largely by convection, but on Venus it 
is entirely dry convection. 

Mars’ thin atmosphere has a mean surface pressure 
of only 7.5 mbar and is almost devoid of water. Therefore 
even though it is 95% carbon dioxide (which yields a CO, 
partial pressure larger than on Earth), absorption bands 
of carbon dioxide are very narrow in frequency, lacking 
the broadening afforded by a high pressure of nitrogen; in 
addition water absorption bands are almost nonexistent. 
Thus there is only a very small greenhouse effect of 5 K. 
Solar heating of the surface drives convection and hence 
produces a troposphere extending to 40 km. However, 
the lapse rate is much less than dry adiabatic because of 
a suspension of dust particles in the atmosphere, which 
absorb sunlight at all altitudes through the troposphere. In 
some years global dust storms load the atmosphere with 
so much dust that the ambient atmospheric temperature 
profile is strongly perturbed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reflected 
Solar 
Radiation 


Reflected by Clouds, 
Aerosol, and 


NA 


\ Reflected by 
Surface 
30 


Absorbed by Surface 


Eyapotranspiration 
Thermals 


Outgoing 
Infrared 
Radiation 


Atmospheric 
40 Spectral 
Window 


| 


Emitted by 
Atmosphere 
165 


324 
Back 
Radiation 


324 


Re-radiati 
prcome Absorbed by Surface 


Figure 3. Contributions to sources and sinks of energy in the Earth’s atmosphere. Left half of the figure is fate of sunlight (mostly 
optical), right half the history of reradiated thermal energy, and non-radiative processes are sketched in the center. Energy fluxes in 


watts per square meter. Redrawn from Trenberth et al (1996). 


General circulation models: ocean and 
atmosphere 

The fundamental theoretical tool both for weather 
forecasting and for climate change studies is the numerical 
general circulation model, or GCM. The Earth is divided 
into a grid with cell sizes as small as practical for the 
available computational resources. In each grid the 
following equations are applied: (a) horizontal equations 
of motion; (b) hydrostatic law; (c) continuity equations; 
(d) energy balance (first law of thermodynamics); 
(e) equation of state for moist and dry air; (f) balance 
equation for water vapor. These form a closed system 
with boundary conditions specified by meteorological 
measurements or (for paleoclimate models) geological 
data and assumptions. With high-speed computers 
atmospheric motions can be coupled to those of the 
oceans, leading to ocean—atmosphere GCMs. For the 
ocean component similar equations to (a)—(f) apply, except 
that (e) is replaced by the equation of state for ocean 
water and (f) is replaced by a balance equation for 
salinity. Over vegetated areas vapor and energy transfer 
from and to plants by evapotranspiration must also be 
included. Equations are integrated to track the time 
evolution, in three dimensions, of atmospheric circulation, 
intensity and position of high- and low-pressure centers, 
temperature, heat and mass transfer between atmosphere 
and ocean, and other parameters. 

Because of the vast difference in timescales between 
atmosphere and ocean some simplification of the ocean 
model (for example a shallow ocean representing the 
uppermost well-mixed layer), or averaging of the 
atmospheric processes, must be made. Increasingly full- 
up simulations coupling the two are being accomplished 
as computational power increases. However, significant 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


limitations remain. In the atmospheric case, processes 
occurring on scales below the grid size can have significant 
effect. For example, orographic lifting of air masses 
by localized or topographically complex mountains, 
small-scale variations in land use patterns or intricate 
geographical relationships between dry land and bays 
or seas often cannot be handled well by GCMs. The 
formation of precipitation is highly sensitive to subscale 
processes, and hence GCMs are less successful at tracking 
this process in detail. As we shall see below, variations 
in precipitation patterns over land and sea may have 
served as the trigger for profound flips in climate state, 
and it possible that GCM simulations, particularly if time 
averaged to track decadal or longer changes, may miss 
these. 

Sufficient observations of the Martian atmosphere 
have been made to enable application of GCMs of 
considerable sophistication. The total absence of a global 
ocean on Mars means that there is no large-scale heat 
sink to dampen climate variations on seasonal or longer 
timescales and no source of water vapor to modify 
atmospheric lapse rates and serve as a source of massive 
cloud formations. Instead the Martian climate is driven 
mostly by seasonal cycles of CO) and dust. The polar 
regions become so cold during the winter (150 K) that 
the primary atmospheric constituent, COz, condenses out 
to form an extended cap in the winter hemisphere. The 
annual cycling of CO, from one winter hemisphere to 
the other modulates the bulk atmospheric pressure by 
30%. This phenomenon, with no analogue on the Earth 
or Venus, has been measured directly by the vikinc and 
MARS PATHFINDER landers. Among other effects, it drives 
substantial variation in the nature of the equatorial to mid- 
latitude Hadley circulation, which comprises one Hadley 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


cell at the solstices and two at the equinoxes. At higher 
latitudes in winter and spring, traveling disturbances exist 
that are akin to terrestrial storm systems; these are absent 
in summer. Such systems are detected both by lander 
meteorological stations and by very tenuous traces of 
water clouds seen in global imagery. 


Climate events: ENSO and the Asiatic monsoon 
The El Nifio-Southern Oscillation is a climatic phe- 
nomenon whose existence and worldwide connections 
have been recognized only in the past few decades. It 
provides an excellent example of atmosphere—ocean inter- 
actions and the ability of regional ocean-driven perturba- 
tions to cause worldwide changes in weather patterns. On 
intervals of roughly 2-10 yr an unusually strong ocean cur- 
rent pushes warm, low-salinity surface waters against the 
west coast of South America, where it then moves south- 
ward. This phenomenon is referred to as El Nifio, a co- 
option of a traditional term used by Peruvian fisherman to 
describe the annual warming of offshore waters right after 
Christmas. 

Accompanying the warming of eastern Pacific waters 
is an associated rise of air temperatures. Strong El Nifios 
may persist for more than a year, and perturbations to 
Pacific ocean currents are generated over many thousands 
of miles to the west of South America. The atmospheric 
disturbance accompanying the oceanic changes is even 
more widespread. During El Nifio years, drought 
conditions occur in Australia, Indonesia, southeastern 
Africa and northeastern South America, while unusually 
heavy rains may occur in Ecuador, northern Peru, eastern 
equatorial Africa and areas south of India. The alteration 
in weather patterns had traditionally been considered 
a separate phenomenon involving shifts in positions of 
seasonal high- and low-pressure patterns, known as the 
Southern Oscillation. It was not until the 1960s that the 
causal link between it and El Nifio was established. 

The mechanics of the oceanic perturbation involve 
waves generated in the Pacific which push warm water 
toward the east, raising sea level there slightly and 
depleting the amount of warm water in the western 
Pacific. The onset and dissipation of this event involve a 
complex, poorly understood series of interactions between 
the changed sea surface temperature distribution and 
the atmospheric temperature pattern. What is not 
understood at all is the origin of the ENSO phenomenon 
in its entirety. Proposals range from the idea that the 
ocean circulation pattern itself drives the oscillation, all 
the way to the unlikely notion that undersea eruptions 
contribute heat to the deep ocean and stimulate the effect. 
Also poorly understood is whether ocean—atmosphere 
oscillations other than in the equatorial Pacific might 
exist. Finally, the speculation has been made that ENSO is 
symptomatic of an increasingly warm climate on the edge 
of instability, and that cooler times during the Holocene 
did not experience such oscillations. 

The substantial summer rains in the Indian subconti- 
nent and surrounding parts of Asia are a part of the sea- 
sonal shift of wind pattern called the Asian monsoon. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


annual 


200-500 million years 


~ 14 days 


=~ 

8 
| 2 ry 
5) 2 e S 3 
S| & g 3 FS 
o| = 8 id EI 
Milo a S34 3 
2 g oe 
3 =| Sgn ¢ a = 3 
— E “eS 8 8 s E 
= AS > oO e 

S a > PA 5g A=} 
oO S29 Fa us] 
r S$ =) 3 = 

< [—) SN a S §$ wy 2) oy 
= o“ S N Y OA 2» & s| & 
wl oc + So Fo a6 Csi oO 
o| = Sana ss? aan) 
S| 5 Be lcs, es a 
o| 2 aaa 
aay Ss iss 
vo o 
=| 2 
Ss} < 
Ss 
= 
o 
4 


10° 10* 107 10? 10 1 107 107 10% 


Period in Years 


Figure 4. Temporal climate scales. Variance as a function of 
timescale in climate based on direct observations and proxy 
indicators from the climate record. After Peixoto and Oort 
(1992). 


great mass of the Tibetan plateau, the large land area of 
the Asian continent with its concomitant extreme seasonal 
temperature contrasts and the location of the ITCZ all play 
a role in defining the monsoon climate regime. Most dra- 
matic is the seasonal shift in winds in the spring, during 
which mid-level winds change from westerly to easterly, 
and extremely hot and dry conditions in late spring give 
way to moist onshore flow as summer commences. A 
complex continental airflow is initiated leading to large 
amounts of rainfall in places such as India. The amount 
of rain delivered both locally and over the whole region 
varies dramatically from one year to the next and appears 
to be correlated with the strength of El Nifio. Since In- 
dia and some other Asian nations depend on the monsoon 
for significant parts of their agricultural water supply, the 
predictability of monsoon variability and its connection to 
worldwide phenomena such as ENSO represent climate 
issues of great human importance. 


Climate change in the past 
Information on climate variations comes, on the longest 
timescales (billions to hundreds of millions of years), from 
oxygen isotopes in cherts, and geologic evidence including 
geographical distribution of fossil species and signatures 
of glaciation. On intermediate timescales (millions to 
tens of millions of years), isotopic abundances in seafloor 
sediments (carbon and hydrogen) provide a more detailed 
climate record. Finally, on shorter timescales a variety of 
climate proxies are available, from isotopic data in seafloor 
sediments throughout the Pleistocene, to ice core data 
(isotopic temperature proxies, carbon dioxide content, etc) 
and on to tree-ring cores, streamflow data and historical 
records for the current Holocene stage. 

Figure 4 is a power spectrum of atmospheric 
temperature variations on timescales ranging from 
geologic to diurnal. The origin of the various peaks, from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the longest to shortest timescales, is as follows. Isotopic 
data suggest an overall decline in surface temperature 
from the time of the earliest sediments, possibly due 
to declining levels of CO, in the Earth’s atmosphere. 
The abundance of this gas is thought to be regulated by 
complicated interactions between weathering of silicates 
(leading to trapping of CO, as carbonates on the seafloor) 
and volcanic extrusion of CO) associated largely with 
plate tectonic recycling of oceanic crust and sediments. 
Geomorphological and isotopic data hint at one and 
maybe two periods of deep, nearly global ice ages prior 
to 500 million years ago, as well as (with fossil data) 
climate variation on hundred million year timescales. 
Such variations probably reflect the changing positions 
of the continents, which affect oceanic circulation and 
hence transport of heat, along with associated changes 
in seafloor spreading rates, volcanism and mountain 
building activity, all of which affect the atmospheric CO, 
abundance. The weak variation seen on 10 million year 
timespans might be volcanically or tectonically driven, but 
could reflect as well stochastic effects such as oscillations 
in solar luminosity, and even passage of the solar system 
in and out of galactic molecular clouds. 

The strong signals of climate variation on 10000- 
100000 yr timescales are almost certainly a result of 
variations in the Earth’s axial tilt, orbital eccentricity and 
phasing of various orbital parameters. These Milankovich 
cycles are a natural consequence of the gravitational 
effect of the Moon and other planets on Earth, and 
lead to complex cyclical modulations of the seasonal 
and annually averaged absorption of solar radiation 
by the Earth. The variance is strong because the 
modulations led to oscillations of the Earth, over the last 
2 million years, between states of significant northern 
hemisphere glaciation with duration of order 100000 yr 
and warm interglacial periods typically 1/10 the glacial 
duration. The weak signature of climate fluctuations on 
the thousand-year scale is related to the mid-Holocene 
climate optimum and subsequent cooling. On historical 
timescales, the peculiar Little Ice Age which began several 
centuries ago and ended in the 19th century can be seen 
as a strong variance, as well as ENSO-type oscillations on 
decadal and semi-annual scales. Earth’s orbital motion, 
axial tilt and spin (in their current relative orientations) 
provide strong fluctuations on annual, seasonal and 
diurnal timescales. 

Two particular well-studied examples of climate 
conditions in the past have relevance to our understanding 
of human-induced climate change. Isotopic data and 
geological evidence in the form of fossil distributions and 
geomorphology argue that the Earth during the time of 
the Cretaceous (65-100 million years ago) was free of 
permanent ice sheets. To explain the data the equator- 
to-pole temperature difference must have been 1/2-1/4 
what it is at present, with an equator not much warmer 
than at present but poles 20-40°C warmer. Simply 
doubling or quadrupling the atmospheric CO) level does 
not explain Cretaceous climate, because it raises equatorial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


temperatures too much. Instead, enhanced oceanic 
transport of heat from equator to pole is invoked in GCMs 
that fit the geologic and isotopic data. The origin of such 
enhanced oceanic heat transport is not well understood; 
possibly the difference in continental configuration during 
the Cretaceous could have played a role. 

The Younger Dryas episode some 11000 yr ago, 
during the transition from cold glacial to warmer Holocene 
conditions, is especially noteworthy. It was a cold snap 
in continental areas around the North Atlantic that lasted 
no more than a century, during which glaciers reversed 
their retreat. The origin of the Younger Dryas episode 
paradoxically lay in the melting of the glaciers themselves. 
Glacial meltwater accumulated in parts of eastern Canada 
and flowed down the Mississippi with volume rivaling the 
present Amazon river. Glaciers blocking this massive flow 
of freshwater from entering the North Atlantic retreated 
sufficiently by about 11 000 yr ago that the meltwater began 
flowing eastward. The supposition is that this influx of 
freshwater to the North Atlantic diluted the saline Gulf 
Stream sufficiently to prevent its sinking near Iceland, and 
hence reduced or shut off the associated release of heat. 
The Gulf circulation stopped, replaced by a stable upper 
layer of very cold water that chilled Northern Europe and 
Canada and reinitiated the buildup of glaciers through 
expanded annual snowfalls and reduced snowmelt. As 
the freshwater flow subsided the Gulf current returned 
and warming began again. Very recent ice core data reveal 
many other rapid episodes of climate fluctuation in glacial 
and interglacial epochs of the Pleistocene, some on the 
scale of decades or less. 

The above interpretation of the Younger Dryas 
episode has led to speculation that a similar reversal 
triggered in the North Atlantic could be in store if human 
activities accelerate global warming (see below). GCMs 
predict enhanced rainfall at high latitudes as CO) levels 
increase in the coming century. Sufficient rainfall could 
decrease the salinity of North Atlantic waters to such 
an extent that the subsidence of water off Iceland is 
interrupted as in the Younger Dryas. The resulting shift in 
climate is hard to predict using GCMs, but conceivably 
could be in the direction of increased glaciation with 
positive feedback afforded by the high reflectivity of water 
ice. The specifics of this putative response to global 
warming is less important than the general lesson of the 
Younger Dryas that perturbations associated with climate 
change in one direction can cause the climate system to 
flip into a mode that evolves in a quite different direction. 


Human induced global warming 

Beginning in the mid-19th century CO, levels in 
the atmosphere began to increase as a result of 
human activities, including burning of fossil fuels and 
deforestation. The present CO, abundance is 30% higher 
than the base level before the increase. In addition, human 
activities are enhancing the abundances of CH, and CFCs 
in the atmosphere which add to the infrared absorption 
along with CO . Increasing the greenhouse gas content of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Climate 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the atmosphere forces the mean radiating level to move 
upward; in response the mean surface temperature must 
increase to balance incoming solar flux. However, the 
complexity of the various effects associated with such a 
change, including cloud and precipitation shifts as well 
as the role of the ocean in storing and releasing heat and 
carbon dioxide require use of a GCM to predict in detail 
the resulting climate changes. 

Direct temperature records over the past hundred 
years as well as proxy temperature indicators available 
throughout the Holocene suggest that the last decade 
was exceedingly warm, perhaps the warmest of the 
past 1000 yr. Much political debate surrounds the 
interpretation of the data (natural fluctuation or human- 
induced global warming?) and the utility of GCMs in 
predicting local or regional impacts. The climate may 
respond linearly to increasing greenhouse gas content, at 
least for a while. However, the Younger Dryas and other 
evidence of rapid climate shifts in the geologic record 
serve as a warning that human activities, in perturbing 
the composition of the atmosphere, will force us to deal 
with substantial and probably undesirable rapid shifts in 
climate. 


The future of climate studies 

The future of climate studies will depend, as over the 
last half-century, on cooperative international programs of 
monitoring climate and evaluating climate data. Special 
programs, often time limited and sometimes motivated by 
political as well as scientific imperatives, benefit the field of 
climate studies through additional funding and attracting 
talented students to the field. The International Polar Years 
in 1882-3 and 1932-3 were early examples focused on data 
collection in the arctic. The International Geophysical 
Year from 1957 to 1958 demonstrated the feasibility of 
much broader-scale, if not global, coordination of data 
collection on a range of Earth studies including climate. 
More recently the World Meteorological Organization and 
the United Nations Environmental Program established 
the International Panel on Climate Change, which has 
produced several major published assessments of the state 
and near-term future of the Earth’s climate. 

Spacefaring nations coordinate satellite observations 
and, in the case of the United States and Europe, are in 
the process of implementing major space-based systems 
to monitor Earth’s climate with a level of accuracy 
and breadth of coverage far exceeding previous efforts. 
These satellite systems represent current investments of 
billions of dollars and euros and will grow in the future. 
Impressive increases in computational capability will 
benefit study of climate in two ways, allowing more 
elaborate and higher-fidelity climate models and enabling 
collection and processing of very large data sets on Earth’s 
climate. New computational approaches to processing the 
information and the availability of the world wide web 
make climate data more understandable and accessible 
to researchers and policymakers alike. The gradual 
accumulation of spacecraft data on Mars, Venus and Titan 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


has permitted GCMs to be applied to these other three 
solid planetary bodies with substantial atmospheres. Such 
efforts test our understanding of the physics of climate 
in regimes very different from that of Earth itself. As 
our experience with the Earth’s climate grows in detail 
alongside the exploration of other planetary climates our 
understanding of the processes involved will deepen 
dramatically. 


Bibliography 

Broecker W S 1997 Thermohaline circulation, the Achilles 
heel of our climate system: will man-made CO) upset 
the current balance? Science 278 1588-92 

Houghton J T 1986 The Physics of Atmospheres (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Mitchell J F B 1989 The ‘greenhouse’ effect and climate 
change Rev. Geophys. 27 115-39 

Peixoto J Pand Oort AH 1992 Physics of Climate (New York: 
AIP Press) 

Taylor K 1999 Rapid climate change Am. Sci. 87 320-7 

Trenberth K E, Houghton J T and Meira Fliho LG 1996 The 
climate system: an overview Climate Change 1995: 
the Science of Climate Change ed J T Houghton, L G 
Meira Filho, B A Callender, N Harris, A Kattenberg 
and K Maskell (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 51-65 


Jonathan I Lunine 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Close Binary Stars 


Often a star is found to have a companion star which 
is very close to it. Often also the two stars would 
fit comfortably inside our solar system, whose radius 
is about a ten-thousandth of the distance to the next 
nearest star. Sometimes the two stars are so close together 
as to be virtually touching. In a few cases they are 
genuinely touching, and even overlapping, so that we 
may havea single figure-of-eight-shaped entity (a ‘contact’ 
binary) consisting of two stellar cores within a single thin 
envelope. 

Most close binaries (CBs) are discovered by one of two 
techniques: (i) they may show a periodic Doppler shift 
due to motion in a Keplerian orbit (SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY 
sTARS, or SBs) or (ii) they may show periodic eclipses as 
one star passes in front of the other (ECLIPSING BINARIES, OF 
EBs). SBs and EBs have periods ranging from ~30 yr down 
to a few days, and even a few minutes. Specifically, we set 
a period of 30 yr as an upper limit for ‘close’. This implies 
separations, by Kepler’s third law, of less than the orbit of 
Saturn, approximately. 

There are other ways of recognizing some classes of 
CB. For instance, eruptions of the Nova and dwarf nova 
category are indicative of binarity, and so (often, but 
not always) is the production of x-rays. However, the 
binarity of such objects is only known because a very high 
proportion of them are found on close inspection to be 
either SBs or EBs (or both). The statistical distribution 
of periods in CBs is not yet well determined. Although 
several thousand SBs and EBs are known, their detection 
is subject to many selection effects. For example, short 
periods are usually easier to recognize than long periods. 
The most systematic studies tend to show that longer 
periods, say 3-30 yr, are more common than short, say 
3-30 days, but only by a modest factor, perhaps a factor 
of 5. Among stars similar to the Sun, probably about 
20% are CBs as defined above, while among massive stars 
of spectral type O the proportion must be much higher 
because about 25% have periods of up to only about 
30 days. Longer-period spectroscopic orbits among O- 
type stars are hard to recognize, because such hot and 
massive stars tend to have an intrinsic spectral ‘jitter’ 
which can conceal the orbital motion. 

If two solar-type stars are in orbit about each other 
(strictly, about their center of gravity) with a period of 
about 10 yr, they would be about as far apart as Jupiter 
from the Sun. We might not think of this as close, because 
their separation would be almost a thousand times as large 
as their radii. However, as stars evolve they become larger, 
ultimately by a factor of several hundred in radius and 
perhaps even a thousand (see STELLAR EVOLUTION). Clearly 
when one star is almost as large as the orbit in which it 
finds itself, something rather drastic must happen. There 
is much observational evidence for this, some direct and 
some indirect. Directly, we observe a number of binaries 
in which a stream of gas is flowing from one star to the 
other. Indirectly, we see a number of CBs containing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


compact stellar remnants: WHITE DwARFS (WDs), NEUTRON 
stars (NSs) and even BLACK HOLES (BHs). These remnants 
may appear fairly far apart in their present binaries but 
must be descendants of stars which were once much larger. 
They may be in binaries that are too close at present ever 
to have contained normal stars, so that some interaction 
must have taken place in the past. 

CBs are of interest for at least three very different 
reasons. Firstly, careful measurement of the orbit, 
especially in systems which are both SB and EB, can 
lead to determination of the masses and radii of stars. 
This is in fact the only reliable way of determining such 
fundamental parameters. Secondly, they show a wide 
range of physical processes that are not to be seen in single 
stars, for instance gas streams that may be torn off one 
component and accreted by the other. Thirdly, they allow 
us the opportunity to test conclusions about the evolution 
of stars. This article will concentrate mainly on the third 
aspect. 

A star of given initial mass begins the major part 
of its life at a modest radius, comparable with the 
Sun’s, when nuclear fusion (the burning of hydrogen to 
helium) becomes established in its central core. It is a 
‘main sequence’ (MS) star, and remains so, expanding 
slowly by a factor of about 2.5 in radius until it has 
exhausted the hydrogen fuel in its center. Then it evolves 
more rapidly to a large radius, high luminosity and low 
surface temperature: it becomes a RED GIANT (RG). The 
central energy-producing core by contrast becomes more 
compact. The lifetime as an RG is typically ~10—30% of the 
lifetime in the MS band. Finally either (a) it reaches sucha 
high luminosity that it is able to blow off most of its outer 
layers through a strong stellar wind or (b) in more massive 
stars the core becomes so compact that gravity causes it to 
implode, and the sudden release of gravitational energy in 
the core blows the envelope off in a supernova explosion. 
The remnant in either case is a compact inert object, a WD 
in case (a) and an NS or a BH in case (b). The lifetime of 
this remnant is extremely long, but at the same time the 
object is very faint and therefore inconspicuous. 

It appears to be a rather fundamental property of the 
evolution of stars that, as they age, their cores become 
smaller and their envelopes become larger. The present 
Sun has about 50% of its mass in the inner 50% of its 
radius. However, the Sun will become an RG in about 
5 Gyr, and at a late stage in this process the inner 50% 
of mass will have shrunk into a core (effectively a WD) 
of one-twentieth of its present radius while the remaining 
50% will have expanded into an envelope about 300 times 
its present radius. At the same time its luminosity will 
have increased to several thousand times its present value. 
More massive stars go through rather similar stages, but 
more rapidly the greater the mass. 

Evidently, such expansion must somehow be modi- 
fied if the Sun had a binary star companion in, say, an orbit 
like the Earth’s. This orbit has a radius about 200 times that 
of the Sun. In fact when the Sun has reached a radius of 
only about 80 times its present value, the presence of this 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) 


Figure 1. Critical surfaces for two stars in a CB. (a) The two stars 
both underfill their critical surfaces, forming a stable detached 
(D) pair. (b) One star fills its critical surface, to form an unstable 
semidetached (S) pair. (c) Both stars overfill their critical surface 
by the same amount, to form a stable contact (C) pair. 


hypothetical companion in the Earth’s orbit would cause 
the Sun’s envelope to become unstable. The critical size 
is determined by its ‘ROCHE Lose’ (figure 1). For any pair 
of masses, and any orbital separation, there is a critical 
figure-of-eight-shaped surface which has one component 
at the centre of each lobe. If the star’s volume grows to 
exceed the volume of its Roche lobe, the star becomes un- 
stable. Its material should pour out of its lobe through the 
crossover point, and into the other lobe. 

Several stars are observed to be doing just this. For 
instance, in Algol (6 Per), the first EB to be discovered 
(by Goodricke, in 1783), the radius of one component is 
closely equal to its lobe radius, and the presence of a gas 
stream in the system has long been recognized by the 
presence of emission lines. In an apparent paradox, the 
star which fills its lobe is less massive than the companion, 
contradicting the theoretical expectation that the more 
massive star should be the one to become unstable first. 
The answer to this is that the star which was originally 
more massive did indeed become unstable first, but then 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lost so much of its outer layers because of its instability 
that it is now the less massive by a large margin. Most, 
but probably not all, of the mass lost was accreted by the 
companion, increasing the margin even more. 

Four aspects of stellar evolution are particularly 
important in shaping our expectations about binary stars. 


(i) Stars tend to increase in size with age, at least as 
long as the star still has nuclear fuel to burn. They preserve 
their initial mass for most of their life, but at a late stage of 
high radius and high luminosity they eject a considerable 
fraction of their mass into space, leaving a compact, fuel- 
exhausted remnant. 

(ii) The rate of evolution increases strongly with the 
degree of evolution; an extreme RG is evolving a hundred 
times or more faster than on the MS. 

(iii) The rate of evolution is very sensitive to the initial 
mass of the star: if one component of a binary is say 20% 
more massive than the other, it can be expected to run 
through its entire life and become a compact remnant, 
while the other remains little changed on the MS. Stars 
whose initial masses are less than the Sun cannot evolve 
significantly at all, in the lifetime (believed to be ~10- 
15 Gyr) of the universe. 

(iv) The nature of the remnant (WD, NS or BH) 
probably depends mainly on the initial mass of the star, 
although with a great deal less certainty than the three 
previous propositions. WDs appear to come from stars no 
more than 6 or 7 times as massive as the Sun, BHs arguably 
from stars more than 30-50 times as massive as the Sun 
and NSs from intermediate masses. There may be some 
substantial overlap, however, perhaps depending on some 
apparently minor properties of a star such as its rotation 
rate, or the strength of its magnetic field. 


The preliminary expectation is that, just as the 
evolution of a single star is mainly dependent on a single 
quantity, its initial mass, so the evolution of a binary will 
mainly depend on three quantities, the two initial masses 
and the orbital period (or equivalently, separation) (see 
CLOSE BINARY STARS: FORMATION AND EVOLUTION). The last of 
these will determine how far in its evolution the star of 
larger initial mass can proceed before it becomes unstable 
by filling its Roche lobe and transferring mass to its 
companion. Beyond this point, the evolution of both stars 
can become markedly different from what it would have 
been if they were not in the binary. 

The three quantities referred to above, two masses 
and a period, determine (by Newton’s law of gravity) not 
only the separation but also the angular momentum. It is 
a cardinal principle of physics that in an isolated system 
angular momentum is conserved. The transfer of mass 
between the stars, once one fills its Roche lobe, will alter 
the period and separation of the two stars, but should not 
(one might suppose) alter its angular momentum. This 
principle allows us to predict what the future evolution 
would be after the onset of mass transfer (usually referred 
to as Roche-lobe overflow). On this basis, we expect 
roughly the following: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) the loser continues to lose mass until it is stripped 
down to its compact (WD) core, the orbit becoming 
substantially wider in the process; 

(b) the gainer, which is probably still an MS star unless its 
initial mass was rather closely equal to the gainer’s, 
will start to evolve faster, and will in turn become 
large until it fills its own Roche lobe. 


In practice, however, the situation appears more 
complicated. The likely explanation is that stars, especially 
in binaries, lose mass, not just to each other but to (in 
effect) infinity, so that the system is not isolated. The 
mass lost to infinity can carry angular momentum. If this 
mass is relatively rich in angular momentum, compared 
with the original binary, the loss can make the binary 
smaller. If it is relatively poor, it can make the binary 
wider, even (somewhat surprisingly) so wide that it 
becomes unbound, the two components themselves going 
to infinity in different directions. 

Two rather extreme examples may illustrate this. The 
star 0957 — 66 (see table 1) is a binary of two WDs, both 
with masses about one-third of solar. The orbital period 
is less than 1.5 h. Even the total mass is too low for there 
to have been any evolution, and so the system must have 
lost at least a third of its original mass; more realistically, 
at least 60%. Also, the angular momentum is too low, 
by an even larger factor, for the system to have once 
contained two MS stars capable of significant evolution. 
The system must have lost at least 85-90% of its original 
angular momentum. 

At the other extreme, we noted above that a high 
proportion of massive (O-type) MS stars are in CBs. O-type 
stars can be expected to evolve into NSs, and yet NSs are 
observed to be overwhelmingly single; only about 5% of 
radio pulsars are found in binaries. This suggests that the 
supernova explosion that accompanied the collapse of the 
core to NS size removed a good deal of mass, easily more 
than 50% of the system’s original mass, while removing 
disproportionately little of the angular momentum. Such 
a process can disrupt the binary entirely, giving one and 
in the longer term two isolated NSs. A variant of this is 
that the supernova explosion has a degree of asymmetry 
to it, so that the remnant of the explosion receives a ‘kick’ 
which can be strong enough to eject it from the system. 

In understanding the evolution of CBs we must 
therefore pay attention to possible processes causing mass 
loss or angular momentum loss, in addition to any Roche- 
lobe overflow that is to be expected. A few processes are 
listed here. 


(a) Gravitational radiation is bound to cause angular 
momentum loss, though normally on a very slow 
timescale. However, the WD pair mentioned above should 
spiral into each other in less than 1 Gyr. 

(b) Magnetic activity can cause mass loss. This 
activity is believed to be the driving force in the solar wind. 
Such wind is much stronger in evolved RGs than in MS 
stars, especially the relatively rapidly rotating RGs that 
are often found in CBs. The magnetic field, linking the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


star to the wind, can cause ‘magnetic braking’, a possibly 
efficient angular momentum loss process. A 0.1% loss 
of mass might be accompanied by a 10% loss of angular 
momentum. 

(c) Even single stars lose much mass, perhaps 50-80% 
of the initial mass, because of much stronger ‘superwinds’ 
in their highly luminous latest stages. Some of this may be 
accreted by the companion even if neither star ever fills its 
Roche lobe. This mass loss will probably not cause much 
angular momentum loss, and the final binary might be 
about as close as the initial binary, or even slightly wider. 

(d) Roche-lobe overflow can cause a catastrophic 
runaway if either the mass ratio (loser/gainer) is large 
or the loser has a deeply convective envelope such as is 
expected in an RG. The mass shed by the loser, instead of 
accumulating on the gainer, may accumulate in a ‘common 
envelope’ around the system and ultimately be expelled, 
carrying not only a large amount of mass but also a 
disproportionately large amount of angular momentum, 
so that the final binary may be a great deal smaller than 
the initial one. This process may even lead to coalescence, 
the remaining object being a rapidly rotating single star. 

(e) As indicated above, a supernova explosion may 
remove much mass, and either increase or decrease the 
angular momentum in the remaining mass. A well-aimed 
‘kick’ may even cause coalescence, the NS remnant hitting 
the MS companion and sinking to its centre. 


Many observed binaries appear to have been 
modified by one or more of these processes, possibly in 
addition to Roche-lobe overflow. 

Table 1 lists a number of binaries and their astrophys- 
ical parameters such as period, masses, eccentricity, sepa- 
ration and radii (where known). They demonstrate a wide 
range of evolutionary states, for each component. As well 
as the states MS, RG, WD, NS, BH we include two more, 
pre-main-sequence (PM) and hot remnant, which we de- 
scribe below. A state such as ‘RG + MS; S’ means that there 
is an RG and an MS star in a ‘semidetached’ (S) state— 
figure 1(b)—where the larger star fills its Roche lobe. D 
refers to a ‘detached’ state—figure 1(a)—and C to a ‘con- 
tact’ state—figure 1(c). 

TY CrA is an apparently very young binary, where 
the less massive star is still shrinking towards the MS; 
hydrogen fusion has not yet achieved equilibrium. When 
it does, the system will somewhat resemble GG Lup, where 
the less massive star is also the smaller. a Vir (Spica), 
GG Lup, RT And, a Aur (Capella) and V2291 Oph are 
all normal systems, some very close and some wider, in 
which no Roche-lobe overflow has yet occurred. In each 
case the more massive star will fill its Roche lobe in due 
course. In a Aur we see that both stars are giants: in 
comformity with point (iii) above they have nearly equal 
masses. V2291 Oph has quite a long period (~1 yr). If 
it were 220 times longer still, the RG might well evolve 
without Roche-lobe overflow, but with a final superwind 
episode—process (c) above—that would turn it into a WD 
without much effect on either the period or the other star. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Some close binaries, and their probable evolutionary states. 


Name State P e a M, M> Ry Ro 
TY CrA MS + PM; D 2.89 145 3.16 1.64 1.80 2.08 
a Vir MS + MS; D 4.01 0.13 28 11 7 8.1 4 
GG Lup MS + MS; D 1.85 0.15 12 4.12 2.51 2.38 1.73 
RT And MS + MS; D 0.63 3.7 1.24 0.91 1.26 0.90 
a Aur RG+RG;D 104 161 2.61 2.49 11.4 8.8 
V2291 Oph RG+MS; D 385 0.31 424 3.86 2.95 32.9 2.73 
a CMa WD + MS; D 50yr 0.59 4300 0.95 2.2 0.008 1.7 
EG52 WD+WD;D 20yr 0.18 

¢ Cap WD + RG; D 2380 0.28 

CI Cyg RG+MS; D 855 0.15 500: 1.7: 0.6: 

BF Cyg HR+RG; D 756.8 0.3: 400: 0.5: le 0.5: 75: 
UU Sge (Abell 63) HR+MS;D 0.465 2.5 0.63 0.29 0.33 0.29 
DQ Her WD + MS;S 0.194 1.4 0.60 0.40 0.49 
A Tau MS +MS;S 3.95 22 1.9 7.2 5.3 6.4 
B Per RG+MS;S 2.87 14 0.8 3.7 3.2 3.1 
V1379 Aql HR+RG;D 20.7 0.09 44 0.30 2.27 0.05 9.0 
0957 — 66 WD+WD;D _ 0.061 0.6 0.32 0.37 

AM CVn WD+WD;S 0.012 

Z Her RG+MS; D 3.99 15 1.31 1.61 2.7 1.85 
RT Lac RG+RG;S 5.07 16 0.63 1.57 4.6 43 
eCrA MS+MS;C 0.591 3.5 1.5 0.15 22 0.7 
o Per HR + MS; D 127 230 1.14 9.3 

CV Ser HR + MS; D 29.7 125 6 23 

QV Nor NS + MS; D 3.73 0.08 28 1.3 20 17 
Cyg X-1 BH + MS; D 5.60 

1913 + 16 NS + NS; D 0.323 0.62 2.8 1.442 1.386 

V404 Cyg BH+RG;S 6.47 >6 

1855 + 09 NS + WD; D 12.33 0.00002 


Period (P) in days, unless specified; eccentricity (e) is zero unless stated; semimajor axis (a) in 
solar radii; masses (M) and radii (R) in solar units. A colon indicates substantial uncertainty. 


Evolutionary ‘state’ is explained in the text. 


This would leave it like a CMa (Sirius), where the WD has 
only half its companion’s mass but was presumably once 
the more massive component. Further evolution of the 
second star in V2291 Oph would be similar (still supposing 
that the period were longer) and leave a wide pair of WDs 
like EG52. 

However, ¢ Cap shows that some significant 
interaction can take place with orbital periods of a few 
years. Here one star, presumably the more massive 
originally, is a WD, but the companion RG has a spectrum 
unusually rich in barium (Ba)—and also some other 
elements. These elements are expected to be formed 
by nuclear fusion only at a very late stage in evolution, 
shortly before the superwind stage. They must have been 
produced by the first star, ejected in its superwind, and 
accreted by the second star where it now shows up in the 
spectrum. 

BF Cyg is possibly ina state that ¢ Cap will evolve to, 
when its giant component is even larger. This ‘symbiotic’ 
system shows a combination of a cool, very large star 
and a small hot object, possibly a hot remnant of an RG 
that has lost its envelope but is not yet a WD. The hot 
remnant seems to be interacting with a wind from the 
current RG component, that perhaps half-fills its Roche 
lobe. When it does fill its Roche lobe, the interaction may 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be quite dramatic—case (d) above—leading to a common- 
envelope phase and leaving a WD + WD pair, probably 
intermediate in period between 0957 — 66 and EG52. 

CI Cyg is another symbiotic system, but here the hot 
object is arguably an MS star, heated by accretion from the 
RG wind, rather than a WD. It is therefore less rather than 
more evolved than ¢ Cap (and probably of substantially 
less mass). A common-envelope episode looks rather 
likely, because the future loser, the RG, is perhaps three 
times as massive as the gainer. The mass expelled in the 
common envelope may briefly shine as a planetary nebula 
in the UV light from the exposed RG core (a hot remnant), 
and if the period is severely decreased by the common- 
envelope phase, as expected, we may get an object like UU 
Sge, which is surrounded by the planetary nebula Abell 
63. Anumber of other planetary nebulae have CB central 
stars, which are most easily understood as remnants of 
a common-envelope phase (see BINARY STARS IN PLANETARY 
NEBULAE). 

In UU Sge the hot remnant might be expected to 
cool off quite soon to a WD, and then the system might 
not change further because the other star has too little 
mass to evolve—point (v). However, angular momentum 
loss by process (b) might well operate, since cool rapidly 
rotating MS dwarfs are well known to be magnetically 
active. This would shrink the binary until it might become 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


like DQ Her, where the cool dwarf fills its Roche lobe. Such 
binaries are ‘cataclysmic’ variables, which show episodic 
outbursts. These are due to a combination of instability in 
the accreting gas flow (dwarf novae) and thermonuclear 
instability in the gas recently accreted on the surface of the 
WD component (classical novae) (See CATACLYSMIC BINARIES: 
CLASSICAL AND RECURRENT NOVAE). DQ Her had a classical 
nova outburst in 1934. 

Systems of short period initially, such as GG Lup, a 
Vir and RT And, should reach Roche-lobe overflow much 
sooner than say CI Cyg, perhaps even before making the 
transition from MS to RG. 4 Tau and £ Per (Algol) are 
two such binaries with ongoing Roche-lobe overflow. The 
first may be descended from a relatively massive system, 
intermediate between a Vir and GG Lup, the second from 
something intermediate between RT And and GG Lup. 
The loser in 6 Per is now an RG, but was probably MS 
when Roche-lobe overflow began. Unlike in the wider 
systems such as V2291 Oph or CI Cyg, there is no room 
for the RG, in the future, to evolve to large radius and a 
massive WD core. Instead the RG in £ Per is likely to lose 
all its envelope when the core is still a low-mass object. 
The product will be a system like V1379 Aql, where the 
hot remnant (not yet a WD) is only 10% of its companion’s 
mass, and is presumably the remnant of a former RG. 
The companion in V1379 Aql has itself evolved from the 
MS to become an RG, and soon will fill its own Roche 
lobe. The severe mass ratio will probably make this a 
common-envelope event—point (d)—and the next stage 
will be two low-mass WDs, in a very short-period orbit, 
presumably like 0957 — 66. Gravitational radiation—point 
(a)—will cause these WDs to spiral in towards each other, 
on quite a short timescale (about 10 million years), to give 
a third episode of Roche-lobe overflow. The system may 
resemble AM CVn, which appears (but with considerable 
uncertainty) to be an ultrashort-period binary of two WDs 
with the larger (and less massive) component overflowing 
its Roche lobe. 

Some binaries, such as Z Her, are wide enough for 
one component to become at least a small RG before 
Roche-lobe overflow. It is odd here that the more evolved 
component is slightly less massive than its companion. 
This may be because of point (b) above; magnetic 
activity may cause much faster than normal mass loss by 
stellar wind, shortly before Roche-lobe overflow begins. 
However, the companion is itself quite evolved, and may 
also be an RG when Roche-lobe overflow begins. We may 
therefore get a double-RG semidetached binary, like RT 
Lac. The later evolution may also take the system through 
stages like V1379 Aql, 0957 — 66 and AM CVn. 

In a system initially like RT And, where the two 
components are almost touching even though they are 
hardly evolved, we can expect that very shortly after 
Roche-lobe overflow the components actually come into 
contact (figure 1(c)). Both nuclear evolution and magnetic 
braking—point (b)—may work to make the system even 
smaller during this contact phase, but can do so only if the 
mass flow is on average reversed, so that the less massive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


star is gradually absorbed into the more massive. This 
may be the origin of a system like « CrA, which must 
be at quite an advanced stage since one component is 
10 times as massive as the other. An oddity in this and 
other contact binaries is that the two components are at 
roughly the same temperature and luminosity, whereas if 
they were separate the less massive component would be 
at least 1000 times fainter. This seems to indicate that when 
two stars are in contact the hotter one heats up the cooler 
one by sending energy through the narrow ‘neck’ joining 
them (figure 1(c)). Presumably mass flows slowly in the 
opposite direction, until the less massive star is entirely 
swallowed up, and what remains is a single star giving 
little indication of its former binary history. 

If one component is massive enough, it may be 
destined to end up as an NS or a BH, rather than a 
WD. a Vir may well produce two NSs in due course, A 
Tau probably only one NS and one WD. ¢ Per perhaps 
represents a late stage in the future evolution of @ Vir, 
when Roche-lobe overflow has stripped the initially more 
massive star down to a hot remnant that is probably not 
very far from a supernova explosion. The longer period 
in ¢ Per is not inconsistent with a much shorter initial 
period, since conservation of angular momentum should 
tend to make the period increase as Roche-lobe overflow 
progresses. CV Ser might be the comparably late stage 
of a substantially more massive binary still, and arguably 
the more evolved but less massive component could be 
heading for a BH rather than NS. Although we argued 
earlier that a supernova explosion is likely to disrupt a 
binary, blowing the two components apart into separate 
single stars, it evidently does not always do this, since 
binaries such as QV Nor and Cyg X-1 have an NS and a BH 
companion respectively. These ultracompact companions 
are identified by the fact that they are highly luminous in 
x-rays (see X-RAY BINARY STARS). The BH is inferred in Cyg 
X-1 because, although its mass is not well known, it must 
on any reasonable model be several times higher than the 
maximum possible mass of an NS. 

In both QV Nor and Cyg X-1 there is a normal star as 
well as a compact remnant. This normal component must 
itself grow with age, and lead toa second episode of Roche- 
lobe overflow. However, in these cases the mass ratio 
is very extreme, which by point (d) suggests a common- 
envelope phase with the likelihood that the orbit shrinks 
by a large factor. This may be the origin of a double-NS 
binary like 1913 + 16. No BH + NS binary has yet been 
recognized, but we can probably expect a small number of 
them in the Galaxy. 

A rather large initial mass ratio seems required to 
produce a system like V404 Cyg, where one component 
is a BH while the other is a quite modest RG. Perhaps 
this started with a period as long as several years, with 
one star of 40 solar masses and the other of only 2 or 3. 
We know of no such systems directly, but they would be 
very hard to recognize. The more massive star may have 
briefly become an extreme RG, filled its Roche lobe and 
then suffered massive envelope ejection and simultaneous 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


orbital shrinkage by the common-envelope mechanism. 
The remnant of the massive star then collapsed in a 
supernova explosion to produce a BH, but, perhaps rather 
flukily, not disrupting the new short-period binary. Then 
the low-mass component evolved and now suffers Roche- 
lobe overflow. The RG should lose all its envelope, and end 
up as a WD: the result would be somewhat like the binary 
1855 + 09, although with a BH rather than NS. To obtain 
1855 + 09 itself, we might need moderately less massive 
original stars, but the history might be similar. 

The science of understanding the evolutionary pro- 
cesses by which CB stars have reached the configurations 
in which they are observed is still in its infancy. By no 
means all of the small selection in table 1 fit comfortably 
with present understanding, and several much more dif- 
ficult systems are known. To add to uncertainty, several 
stars turn out on close enough inspection to be triple, and 
the third star may be capable of interacting with the first 
two to give an extra layer of complexity. 


Peter Eggleton 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and 
Evolution 


A binary system consists of two gravitationally bound 
stars that orbit their common center of gravity (COG). 
Observations indicate that the majority of stars are 
members of binary systems or even of multiple systems 
consisting of three, four or more stars. The multiple 
systems tend to be hierarchical, that is triples usually 
consist of a close pair with the third companion orbiting 
at much larger distance, etc. Single stars such as the Sun 
are less common. It is therefore impossible to develop 
a comprehensive theory of stellar evolution without 
including effects of binary evolution. 

We speak of CLOSE BINARY STARS when the two stars 
are so close that they influence each other’s evolution 
profoundly. Most commonly this is effectuated by the tidal 
forces (see below) by which the stars are deformed and, 
when one of the stars expands beyond a certain critical 
surrounding surface (ROCHE LOBE), cause mass exchange 
between the two stars. Since stars swell up considerably 
during their lifetime, often by several orders of magnitude, 
even binaries with orbital periods of decades can be close 
binaries. G P Kuiper (1941) was the first to recognize the 
importance of Roche lobes for binary stars. Close binaries 
can be classified into three broad classes: detached (D), 
semidetached (SD) and contact (C), depending on whether 
none (D), only one (SD) or both stars fill their critical Roche 
surface for mass exchange. 

The prototype semidetached close binary system 
is ALGOL (f Persei); its periodic (2.87 days) brightness 
variations were first discovered in 1667 but it was only 
in 1783 that John Goodricke explained these variations 
in terms of an eclipse of one star by the other in a 
close binary system. After the introduction of stellar 
spectroscopy at the end of the 19th century this idea 
was shown to be correct. However, with the advent 
of stellar evolution calculations on electronic computers 
around 1950 the Algol system appeared paradoxical: how 
can the less massive (0.8M,) subgiant component be 
further evolved than its more massive (3.7Mo) main- 
sequence companion? It was known that a more 
massive star always evolves faster owing to its higher 
central temperature and correspondingly faster rate of 
thermonuclear fusion. Furthermore, it was discovered 
that the subgiant components of Algol-type systems do 
not obey the usual mass-luminosity relation but that 
the luminosities and radii were significantly larger. In 
1955 J A Crawford came up with the solution of the 
‘Algol paradox’: initially the subgiant was the more 
massive component until it expanded beyond its Roche 
lobe and transferred a large fraction of its mass to the 
less evolved main-sequence companion. The currently 
observed peculiar subgiants in Algol-type systems are 
thus remnant stars that have lost most of their mass. 
Mass transfer between two stars is a basic feature of 
the evolution of close binary systems whereby very 
diverse systems can be formed. Obviously, the currently 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observed binary configuration depends on the binary’s 
evolutionary phase and on its initial conditions (mainly 
the initial masses, orbital period and orbital eccentricity), 
i.e. on the primordial binary system. Obviously, these 
initial conditions are determined by the binary formation 
process which is, however, still shrouded in mysteries. 
Observations of PRE-MAIN-SEQUENCE BINARIES indicate that 
binaries are formed as a byproduct of star formation, but 
the details remain obscure. 

In the past few decades, when satellite observations 
of cosmic UV and x-ray sources became available, much 
attention has been given to binaries which harbor compact 
stars. Large amounts of high energy are liberated 
by internal dissipation when the transferred mass falls 
into the deep potential well of a compact companion. 
Examples of such systems are the CATACLYSMIC BINARIES 
(white dwarf accretor) and X-RAY BINARIES (neutron star or 
black hole accretor). 


Tidal deformation of binary stars 

When the orbital separation D between two binary 
components is large compared with the dimension of the 
largest star, the dynamics of the two bound stars can be 
adequately described by a system of two point masses. 
However, when the size R of the largest star is not much 
smaller than the orbital separation D one has to take into 
account the internal structure of the star(s). The difference 
between the companion’s attractive gravitational force at 
the close and the far sides of the other star is governed 
by Newton’s inverse square law. The ratio between 
the companion’s gravitational force at the two extreme 
points of both stellar hemispheres of the larger star is thus 
[(D — R)/(D + R)]-?.. This ratio can differ significantly 
from unity if R/D is not much smaller than unity. Clearly 
the mutual gravitational attraction not only keeps the two 
stars together in their orbit but also squeezes the stars by 
pulling them apart along the line connecting the two stellar 
centers. This deformation is a manifestation of the ‘tidal 
force’, i.e. the difference of the gravitational force over 
the star. If the orbit is eccentric and/or the stellar spins 
are not synchronous with the orbital revolution the tidal 
deformation of the close binary components is obviously 
time dependent. The decrease of orbital energy through 
inevitable dissipation of these periodic tidal deformations 
generates tidal torques between the stars that tend to 
circularize (and shrink) the orbit and tend to synchronize 
the stellar spins with the orbital revolution. The time 
scale for this tidal relaxation process declines rapidly with 
increasing R/D, i.e. with increasing tidal squeezing of the 
binary components. For sufficiently close binaries the tidal 
deformation of the stars can become so severe that surface 
matter in one of the stars (or both) becomes unbound and 
starts flowing off to the companion, a phenomenon known 
as Roche lobe overflow (RLO). 


Principles of mass transfer in close binaries 
Let us adopt the so-called ‘Roche approximation’, i.e. 
we assume that the tidal torques have acted sufficiently 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


long for the binary orbit to have become circular (i.e. 
both stars describe circles about their common COG). We 
also assume that, as a result of tidal torques, the stars 
spin about their individual COG with the same angular 
speed as the orbit. Because the internal mass distribution 
of stars exhibits a strong concentration to the stellar 
center (generally increasing with age) we may, as a first 
approximation for the gravitational field in the rarefied 
outer layers, assume that all the mass is concentrated at 
the stellar center. Let us now consider a test particle 
(i.e. a point mass with negligible mass compared with the 
stellar masses M, and M2) drifting outside the two stars. 
Introducing a frame rotating with the same angular speed 
Q = [G(M, + Mz)/D°]!” as the orbital motion about the 
COG, we can express the acceleration experienced by this 
particle as: 


di GM. GM. 
= r r 
dt r ; r3 ? 


Qx (Qx7)-2Q xd 


where G is Newton’s gravitational constant, 7; and r, are 
the vectors from the two stellar masses to the test particle 
and r is the vector from the COG to the particle. The last 
two terms on the right describe the centrifugal and the 
Coriolis acceleration in our rotating frame. It canbe shown 
that the acceleration of a co-rotating test particle (with 


v = 0) can be expressed as the gradient of the effective 
gravitational potential (corrected for the centrifugal effect): 


GM GM. a 
U= : = 308 
ry 12 2 


where d is the particle’s distance to the orbital axis through 
the COG. 

Surfaces of equal VW are known as Roche equipotential 
surfaces; see figure 1. The cross sections with the orbital 
plane contain five special points, called Lagrangian points 
L1, Ly,..., L5, where the acceleration of the comoving 
particle vanishes, i.e. where the gravitational acceleration 
due to the two stars is precisely cancelled by the centrifugal 
acceleration away from the orbital axis. The equipotential 
surface through the inner Lagrangian point L, consists of 
two pear-shaped Roche lobes and forms the biggest closed 
surface around each of the two stars, merging at L;. It can 
be shown that the Roche equipotential surfaces inside the 
stars coincide with surfaces of equal pressure and density: 
the Roche equipotentials (approximately) give the shape of 
the two stars in the binary. What happens if one of the two 
stars expands and fills its Roche lobe? We have seen that 
a test particle at rest in L; experiences no net acceleration. 
However, inside the lobe-filling star acts another force due 
to the gradient of the thermal pressure in the stellar gas. If 
the star is detached this pressure force balances the inward 
pull of gravity of the star (corrected for the centrifugal force 
due to the stellar spin). But since the net gravitational force 
(corrected for rotation) is zero in L, the pressure force there 
is unbalanced and blows a jet of gas through the (saddle 
point) region around L; into the the companion’s Roche 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The cross section with the orbital plane of some special 
Roche equipotentials. The surface through the inner Lagrangian 
point L; forms the two Roche lobes around the stars. The cross 
denotes the binary’s center of mass. 


lobe. There it will be rapidly accelerated to supersonic 
speeds by the companion’s gravitational attraction. The 
transferred mass (or at least a fraction of it) will ultimately 
fall onto the companion. As the mass flow through L 
carries orbital angular momentum it cannot fall straight 
onto the companion and—if the latter is compact enough 
for the stream not to hit it directly—it will form an 
accretion disk around the companion in which part of the 
infall energy is dissipated and radiated away. The mass 
exchange profoundly alters the further evolution of both 
stars. 


Orbital evolution 

The process of mass exchange is a complicated hydrody- 
namic phenomenon the details of which are still poorly 
understood. The broad picture is as follows. Let us as- 
sume for simplicity that all the matter that flows into the 
companion’s Roche lobe is ultimately accreted by the com- 
panion and that the system’s orbital angular momentum 


GM?M2D\"” 
Jor = | ————_ 
M,+M) 


is conserved during the mass exchange. Part of the 
orbital angular momentum could be absorbed (through 
tidal torques) by the stellar spins but, except for extreme 
systems, this can usually be neglected. Because the 
amount of mass and angular momentum stored in the 
transferred, but not yet accreted, matter can be neglected 
relative to that of the two stars, the new orbital separation 
after exchange of a given amount of mass is given by the 
condition that Jo,p is constant. If we differentiate the above 
expression with respect to time (indicated by a dot) then 
the condition J, = 0 yields 


a 
= 2(1 “) ms 
M,) M, 


which shows that mass transfer from the more massive 
star (M,) to the less massive star (M; < 0) yields 
D < 0 and thus gives rise to a shrinking orbit. On 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the other hand, when M,; < Mp) mass transfer to M> 
widens the orbit. Observations of many binary systems 
confirm this basic picture, although many of the details 
are still poorly known. For example, observations of 
circumstellar matter around SD close binaries indicate that 
some of the transferred matter may escape accretion by 
the companion. However, except in extreme situations, 
the assumption of no mass loss from the system 
seems generally to yield at least a qualitatively correct 
picture. 


Response of mass-losing star 

Since the more massive star (primary) in the binary has 
the largest radius and evolves fastest it will be the first to 
expand to its Roche lobe in initially detached close binary 
systems. We have just seen that the orbital separation 
D decays in response to mass transfer to a less massive 
component. The size of the Roche lobe around the primary 
shrinks with D and it depends on the primary’s response 
to the loss of surface matter on what time scale the mass 
transfer is continued. This response depends on the 
stratification in the primary’s envelope: a deep convective 
envelope is characterized by a steep temperature gradient. 
When mass is lost at its surface, rapid adiabatic expansion 
of the newly exposed surface layers—to restore global 
hydrostatic equilibrium—then brings up relatively hot 
material, making the star initially bigger than its thermal 
equilibrium configuration. On the other hand, when 
the envelope is predominantly radiative, for which the 
temperature gradient is less steep, adiabatic expansion 
causes the star to be smaller than its thermal equilibrium 
size. Obviously, RLO from a deep convective envelope 
is intrinsically unstable because the larger the mass loss, 
the stronger the rapid adiabatic expansion and the larger 
the primary’s extension beyond the Roche lobe. Figure 2 
shows the schematic evolution of a binary undergoing 
Roche lobe overflow (RLO). We can distinguish three time 
scales for the mass transfer. 

Dynamical time scale mass exchange occurs when the 
primary’s quick adiabatic response to the mass loss brings 
the primary’s surface beyond the shrunken Roche surface. 
The primary cannot be kept inside its Roche lobe, so that 
its surface layers will be depleted by continuous expansion 
through L;. This situation occurs when the primary is 
a (super)giant and has a deep convective envelope. A 
similar unstable situation occurs when the (more massive) 
contact star is degenerate (a white dwarf) because such 
stars always expand when losing mass. 

Thermal time scale mass exchange occurs when 
after the quick adiabatic expansion that restores global 
hydrostatic equilibrium the primary remains inside its 
shrunken Roche lobe and no runaway mass exchange 
takes place. The mass transfer is then driven by 
the primary’s (slower) thermal relaxation: by restoring 
thermal equilibrium in its perturbed outer layers the star 
will re-expand beyond its Roche lobe. This type of Roche 
lobe overflow occurs in primary’s with (predominantly) 
radiative outer layers and is self-regulating because the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


M 1 
See MD 
DOs MOM 
ees ; 
(Ox@) 
‘ 7 be 
+ ¢ 
he 7 


“@s a MM, 
FG) 
I 
i 
! 
i 
\ 
’ 
' 
127, Sy 
4 N 
Pa \ c} M, <M, 
\ i ’ 
. é 
ten 
1 
i 
1 
Voec. 
¢ bre 
a 
v 1 ‘ 
/ GQ : M, <M, 
_— 1 ‘i 
x 7 
stl Pe 
Seed 


CENTER OF GRAVITY 


Figure 2. Subsequent stages of evolution of a close binary 
system in which the primary at the onset of RLO (in frame (a)) 
has a predominantly radiative envelope. In the upper frame the 
star expands on a nuclear time scale towards its Roche lobe. The 
phases (a) and (b) correspond to rapid thermal time scale mass 
transfer which terminates at (c). From then on the binary 
expands and mass transfer occurs on the intrinsic evolutionary 
expansion time of the now less massive contact star. 


thermal relaxation and consequent expansion compete 
with the shrinking due to rapid mass loss. 

Nuclear time scale mass exchange occurs when the 
contact star is less massive than the accretor and the 
binary separation and generally the Roche lobe widen. 
Under these circumstances mass exchange can only be 
sustained by the primary’s evolutionary expansion driven 
by thermonuclear fusion reactions in its interior. This 
situation occurs in the later phases of mass transfer after 
the mass ratio of the binary has been reversed and yields 
the slowest mode of mass exchange. 


Response of accreting companion 

Let us now consider what happens to the accreting 
secondary during incipient RLO. Being the less massive 
star in the system the accreting detached companion 
generally has a longer thermal time scale than the 
contact star. Therefore its thermal equilibrium becomes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


severely perturbed by the rapid accretion of the transferred 
material, especially because the accreted material carries 
significant kinetic energy after falling down from L;. This 
kinetic energy is mostly dissipated at or near the accretor’s 
surface, heating it considerably. The (generally) small 
fraction of the orbital angular momentum carried along 
by the accretion stream can bring the accretor in rapid 
rotation. It is likely that the accretor will swell up to 
or beyond its Roche lobe, especially during a dynamical 
time scale mass transfer phase, but possibly also during a 
thermal time scale exchange. In that case the binary soon 
evolves into a contact system with a common envelope 
around the two Roche lobes. The subsequent evolution of 
such contact systems is poorly understood. 


Cases A, B and C of mass exchange 

There exist three main evolutionary phases during which 
a star expands and may first fill its Roche lobe, namely 
the phase of core hydrogen burning (main sequence 
phase) and the phases of rapid core contraction towards 
helium ignition and towards carbon ignition. Kippenhahn 
and Weigert (in 1967) introduced the corresponding 
classification into respectively cases A, B and C of mass 
exchange. 


Case A. The primary fills up its Roche lobe while still 
on the main sequence. Once Roche lobe overflow begins 
the primary’s thermal equilibrium becomes increasingly 
perturbed and a rapid phase of thermal time scale mass 
exchange follows by which the mass ratio g is more 
than reversed. After that the evolution slows down to 
a nuclear time scale. The Roche lobe filling star has 
become an overluminous core hydrogen burning sub- 
giant. Many eclipsing variables of this type are known. 
Numerical simulations show that case A mass exchange 
almost always leads to a contact binary. 

Case B. The primary is a (sub)giant burning hydrogen 
in a shell when it reaches its Roche lobe. The initial rapid 
phase of mass transfer can either be on a dynamical time 
scale (when the primary has developed a deep convective 
envelope) or on a thermal time scale when the convection 
in the envelope is less developed. The subsequent 
slower phase of mass transfer to the now more massive 
companion proceeds either on the thermal time scale of 
the contracting helium core or on the nuclear time scale 
of the hydrogen shell source in the less massive primaries 
that have developed a compact electron degenerate helium 
core. 

For primaries originally more massive than ~3Mo 
the mass exchange terminates when the primary ignites 
helium in the core whereby the remnant of the primary 
(almost stripped of its hydrogen envelope) shrinks inside 
its Roche lobe. Case B in massive binaries thus produces 
almost pure helium stars (WOLF-RAYET STARS (WR stars)) in 
orbit with a main sequence companion. The more massive 
helium stars (roughly Mye > 2.5Mo) subsequently 
explode as a type II supernova: the remnant core collapses 
to a neutron star, or even a black hole. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Primaries originally less massive than 3M, terminate 
the rapid mass transfer phase when the stellar expansion 
slows down with the onset of electron degeneracy in the 
highly compressed helium core. The subsequent slow 
mass exchange produces binaries with mass ratios as small 
as 1/5 or 1/10. The main sequence secondary is now much 
brighter than its less massive (overluminous) subgiant 
contact companion. If the orbital inclination is favorable 
such a binary system shows eclipses and will be classified 
as an Algol-type binary. The mass transfer terminates 
when the contact star’s hydrogen envelope is depleted by 
both shell burning and mass loss. The remnant envelope 
shrinks within its Roche lobe and the primary evolves into 
a low-mass helium white dwarf. 

Case C. This corresponds to mass transfer from 
evolved stars with very extended envelopes and has been 
little studied partly in view of the difficulties in treating 
the extended cool outer layers of the contact star. 


Figure 3 shows the orbital period values that 
correspond to the three classes of mass exchange for a 
binary consisting of a 7Mo plus 3Me (or 5Mo) star. To 
compare the size of the Roche lobe with the usually 
spherical stellar models one determines the Roche radius: 
that is the radius of a sphere with the same volume as the 
Roche lobe. 


Non-conservative evolution of binaries 

We have already noted that part of the mass stream 
through L, insemidetached binaries may leave the system, 
but so far we have no means to quantify this reliably. 
However, there exist other ways by which mass may be 
lost from a binary. Observations show that many stars 
lose mass in the form of stellar winds, independent of a 
possible binary companion. The companion may in fact 
capture part of this ejected wind material, so that mass 
exchange can occur even in detached binaries. However, 
the transfer rates are generally much smaller than for RLO. 
In (super)giant stars and very massive early-type stars the 
stellar wind losses take away a significant fraction of the 
star’s mass. A fast isotropic wind which decouples from 
the star at its surface leaves the angular momentum of the 
remaining mass invariant and thus widens the binary orbit 
as the gravitating mass in the binary decreases. 

Stars with surface magnetic fields strong enough to 
couple to the ejected ionized wind material and enforce 
corotation out to several stellar radii from the surface are 
spun down by the magnetic torque. In SD binary systems 
effective tidal interaction tends to keep the stellar rotation 
synchronous with the orbit, so that the spin angular 
momentum carried off by the magnetically coupled wind 
must be compensated by the system’s orbital angular 
momentum. An effectively coupled wind can thus enforce 
a decrease of the orbital separation. If these wind losses 
can occur simultaneously with RLO the mass transfer rate 
is enhanced by the induced shrinking of the Roche lobe. It 
is commonly believed that such ‘magnetic braking’ occurs 
in systems with G- and K-type stars, e.g. in cataclysmic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


S 
S 
Carbon ign. 
Helium ign. 
s 
ee 
= M, = 7Mo 
a 
S 


0 2 4 6 8 
Time in 10” years 


Figure 3. The radius expansion of a 7Mo star defines the critical 
orbital periods for the three cases A, B and C of RLO. The size of 
the Roche lobe is determined by the mass ratio M;/M2 and the 
orbital period (separation). A binary with an orbital period as 
short as Pp would be semidetached from the very beginning of 
its main sequence phase. For a 3Mo (5Mo) companion the 
critical periods are (in days): Po = 0.52 (0.47), Py = 2.2 (2.0), 

Py = 247 (225) and P3 = 2137 (1951). For an initial period of say 
50 days the binary would evolve as case B: the primary would 
fill its Roche lobe after exhaustion of hydrogen in the core. 


variables (CVs). The observationally inferred spin-down 
of G stars with age gives us information about this 
magnetic braking although it is not at all certain that these 
values may be applied to rapidly rotating binary stars. 

Another non-conservative effects follows from Ein- 
stein’s general theory of relativity which predicts that a 
compact binary system emits gravitational radiation carry- 
ing off angular momentum. The resulting rate of orbital 
angular momentum loss is 


J 32 G Mi M> 7 
J. 50 Dt uae 


where c is the speed of light. In close binaries with orbital 
periods less than about half a day the induced orbital decay 
becomes significant. 


Common envelope binaries 

Little is known about the transfer of mass and energy 
between two stars in contact binaries and their evolution 
cannot be simulated reliably. The best known class of 
contact binaries are the W Ursae Majoris (W UMa) systems 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which consist of stars of spectral type G and K, with 
a typical mass ratio of 2. These stars have convective 
outer layers and thus a convective common envelope 
which is thought to engulf the Roche lobes of both stars 
and to lie inside the equipotential surface through L>. 
Contact binaries with massive early-type stars (which have 
radiative envelopes) are also observed. Furthermore there 
is observational evidence for contact binaries with cool 
supergiant components with deep convective envelopes. 


Spiral-in evolution 

It was suggested by B Paczynski (in 1976) and is now 
commonly believed that, under certain circumstances, 
the evolution of common envelope binaries can be very 
violent in contrast to the observed, apparently stable, 
systems mentioned above. A critical factor seems the 
binary’s mass ratio g = M,/Mp). If the contact star in a 
close binary is much more massive and bigger than its 
companion it will absorb a non-negligible fraction of the 
orbital angular momentum when tidal forces try to keep its 
spin synchronous with the speeding up of its companion’s 
narrowing orbital revolution. Even before the SD phase 
the natural expansion of the primary slows down its spin 
whereby tides become active to resynchronize the star. 
Because of the primary’s absorption of orbital angular 
momentum the companion must spiral slightly inward 
after which it revolves even faster in its orbit. In order 
to speed up the spin of the big star towards synchronism 
ever more angular momentum needs to be tapped from 
the orbit and for a sufficiently big primary the binary 
undergoes a catastrophic tidal instability (G H Darwin, 
1908) whereby the companion dives into the primary’s 
envelope. The companion then moves with supersonic 
speeds through the primary’s envelope whereby shock 
waves violently dissipate orbital energy, leading to even 
faster orbital decay. The details and precise outcome of this 
complicated phenomenon are unknown. In many cases 
the primary’s envelope may be expelled by the dissipated 
orbital energy, so that virtually only its core remains in 
a tight orbit with the perhaps ablated companion. The 
observed planetary nebulae with double cores (about 5- 
10% of the population) may be the result of such evolution. 
Another observational link exists, namely with the CVs, 
compact binaries with a white dwarf component which is 
surrounded by a luminous accretion disk. These systems 
show weak periodic outbursts (dwarf novae) or strong 
eruptions (novae). 


Formation and evolution of CVs 

CVs are thought to have evolved through a spiral-in phase 
because the WHITE DWARF component must be the remnant 
core of a former big giant star which can never have 
been accommodated in the currently observed tight CV 
binary systems with typical orbital periods less than 10 h. 
Presumably the unevolved main-sequence companion of 
the white dwarf, originally in a wide orbit, spiralled 
into the much bigger and heavier giant (white dwarf 
progenitor) owing to a tidal instability and evaporated the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


latter’s extended envelope, so that only the degenerate 
core (white dwarf) remained. For orbital separations 
(just after the spiral-in phase) larger than a critical value 
the binary evolves slowly to a wider system when the 
unevolved star expands to its Roche lobe and a slow 
nuclear time scale mass transfer sets in. In the narrower 
systems magnetic braking of the main-sequence star is 
thought to dominate, whereby the binary separation 
decays even when the main-sequence star fills up its Roche 
lobe and transfers matter to the more massive white dwarf. 
The enhanced mass transfer generates a hot, luminous 
accretion disk around the white dwarf and the binary has 
become a CV. 

The magnetic braking time scale being much shorter 
than the contact star’s nuclear time scale, the nuclear 
evolution of this star is effectively frozen and it evolves 
down the main sequence, remaining roughly in thermal 
equilibrium. However, when the orbital period has been 
decreased to about 3 h the continuing mass loss has 
mildly perturbed the contact star’s thermal equilibrium. 
Observations indicate that no CV binaries exist with a 
period between roughly 3 and 2h: the so-called period 
gap. The period gap is believed to be caused by the 
sudden termination of magnetic braking with consequent 
interruption of mass transfer as the star shrinks inside its 
Roche lobe as it restores thermal equilibrium. It is thought 
that magnetic braking terminates when the contact star 
has become fully convective—which occurs roughly at this 
stage of evolution in numerical simulations. By then the 
only angular momentum losses from the binary are due to 
gravitational radiation. 

Only when the orbit has decayed and the Roche lobe 
has tightened again around the low-mass star can the RLO 
continue. When continuing RLO has reduced the contact 
star’s mass to about 0.1Mo its thermal time scale becomes 
longer than the time scale for mass loss, i.e. longer than the 
time scale for gravitational radiation losses. Further mass 
loss perturbs its thermal equilibrium significantly and the 
star evolves away from the main sequence. At this time 
the nuclear fusion reactions in its interior begin to fade, 
whereby the electron gas becomes degenerate. After a 
while the contact star becomes so degenerate that its mass— 
radius relation reverses and it begins to expand in response 
to any mass loss. From then on the mass transfer rate is 
dictated by the condition that the Roche lobe, and thus the 
stellar separation, must increase. The binary system thus 
passes a minimum orbital period which, for hydrogen rich 
envelopes, turns out to be about 80 min. The observed 
absence of CV systems below P,,, ~ 80 min confirms that 
the mass transfer in these compact CVs is indeed driven 
by gravitational radiation. 


Formation and evolution of high-mass x-ray 
binaries (HMXBs) 

Massive x-ray binaries consist of a massive, early-type 
(OB) star in orbit with a NEUTRONSTAR which captures matter 
from the massive star’s stellar wind through gravitational 
focusing. The existence of a neutron star implies that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the binary survived a violent SUPERNOvA (SN) explosion by 
which the neutron star was formed after the collapse of the 
primary’s burnt out stellar core. It is believed that before 
the SN explosion the binary evolved through a case B 
mass transfer by which the mass ratio reversed, so that the 
helium star remnant of the primary had become the less 
massive component when it exploded as a SN (van den 
Heuvel and Heise, 1972). Had it been the more massive 
star that exploded the binary would have been dispersed, 
unless the explosion was asymmetric and happened to 
generate the right net kick in the direction opposite to the 
orbital motion so that the binary could survive. 

In the Bondi—Hoyle approximation the neutron star’s 
effective wind interception radius is Ry, ~ GM/V7, where 
V is the velocity of the (supersonic) wind material near the 
neutron star (in its rest frame). For typical wind speeds 
R, is larger than the neutron star’s geometric radius. The 
wind velocities are high, of order the escape speed from 
the primary’s stellar surface, so that the companion can 
accrete only a small fraction of the emitted wind. The 
wind matter heats up and emits x-rays when it collides 
with the neutron star, producing a bright x-ray source 
(e.g. Vela X-1); this corresponds to stage (e) in figure 4. 
In some cases (Cen X-3) incipient RLO may be responsible 
for the x-ray emission, although full-blown thermal time 
scale mass transfer from the massive star presumably leads 
to disappearance of the x-ray source by self-absorption 
and to a subsequent spiral-in of the neutron star and 
evaporation of the massive star’s envelope. The spiral- 
in may produce a new, but now much more compact, x- 
ray binary system like Cyg X-3 with an orbital period of 
only 4.8 h, corresponding to stage (¢) in figure 4. Infrared 
spectroscopy has shown that the companion of the neutron 
star is a nitrogen-type WR star. Such stars are helium stars 
with masses in excess of about 5Mo, so that the helium star 
in Cyg X-3 is probably the bare core remaining after spiral- 
in of the neutron star into the much more massive original 
secondary. When the second helium star has evolved to 
the SN phase the binary may be disrupted, leaving two 
single neutron stars in which the youngest, because of 
its rapid spin and strong magnetic field, acts as a radio 
pulsar. If circumstances are favorable (supernova kick) 
and the binary remains bound, we are left with a compact 
binary pulsar system, of which several are observed and 
in which the orbital decay by gravitational radiation can 
be accurately measured because of the accurate clock 
provided by a rapidly spinning neutron star (radio pulsar). 
Observations by J H Taylor (in 1986) beautifully confirmed 
the prediction from general relativity. 


Formation and evolution of low-mass x-ray 
binaries (LMXBs) 

Our Galaxy contains about 100 low-mass x-ray binaries 
in which the neutron star (or BLACK HOLE) receives mass 
from a low-mass contact star. Figure 5 shows a typical 
HMXB and LMXB system. Only for a minority of these 
systems has the orbital period been measured; most orbital 
periods turn out to be less than 20 h. However, from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Peed an \ 
,; Nad | \ 
2 x 1 } 
i 45.347 \ i i 
\.122.66 (- 
ba eee 
Mae TS 
compact star’ H * 
ory va ry 
a) ax Qi} 
Naan i 
\ '22.66/ 
e) 
f) 
9) 


Figure 4. Stages in the evolution of an HMXB. It is assumed that 
the SN explosion of the primary leaves a 2M neutron star: 

(a) t =0, P = 4.7 days; (b) t = 6.17 x 10° yr, P = 4.7 days, onset 
of RLO; (c) t = 6.20 x 10° yr, P = 10.86 days, end of RLO and 
beginning of WR phase; (d) t = 6.76 x 10° yt, P = 12.63 days, He 
star (WR star) has exploded as an SN; (e) t = 10.41 x 10° yr, 

P = 12.63 days, the normal star becomes a supergiant and its 
strong stellar wind powers a bright x-ray source; 

(f) t = 10.45 x 10° yr, P = 12.63 days, onset of second phase of 
RLO, x-ray source disappears owing to absorption, followed by 
a spiral-in of NS; (g) t ~ 10.47 x 10° yr, P = 4h, onset of second 
WR stage. Finally, at r ~ 11 x 10° yr, the second He star explodes 
as an SN; survival or disruption of binary pulsar depends on 
remnant mass and the possible kick from the SN explosion. 
(After van den Heuvel.) 


the existence of wide binaries consisting of a radio pulsar 
with a white dwarf companion one expects the existence 
of LMXBs in which the neutron star is powered by RLO 
from the expanding (sub)giant progenitor of the white 
dwarf, a phase during which the binary widens on the 
nuclear time scale of the (sub)giant. Few of these systems 
are observed but Cyg X-2 probably belongs to this class. 
Like in CVs, the observationally inferred mass transfer 
rates in compact LMXBs seem higher than can be driven by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


{LIGHT - SEC (30 LIGHT~SEC 
x 7 


MASSIVE 
(0900-403) 


LOW -MASS 
(1627-673) 


Figure 5. Comparison of the very different dimensions of a 
low-mass x-ray binary and a high-mass x-ray binary. The optical 
stars are depicted to fill their Roche lobes (hatched). The radial 
extent of the accretion disks (stippled) around the neutron stars 
is sketched nearly to scale. The dots and the crosses (+) mark the 
centers of mass of the individual stars and the system, 
respectively. (After Bradt and McClintock.) 


the slow nuclear expansion of the low-mass contact star. 
Apparently the mass transfer is enhanced by the angular 
momentum loss driven contraction of the binary, like in 
CVs. It appears there is a bifurcation into compact and wide 
LMXBs: short-period systems, in which magnetic braking 
and gravitational radiation driven angular momentum 
losses dominate, evolve to ever smaller size, while systems 
with periods beyond a critical initial period (of order 
1 day), beyond which these angular momentum losses 
become ineffective, evolve on the nuclear expansion time 
of the (sub)giant contact star and become very wide 
systems. A major difference between compact LMXBs 
and CVs is that accretion onto the neutron star in LMXBs 
liberates far more energy which may be partly intercepted 
by the (thus heated) contact star. The accreting matter can 
spin the neutron star up to millisecond spin periods. It 
has been suggested that the accreted rotational energy may 
ultimately evaporate the low-mass contact star in compact 
LMXBs. That would explain the apparent absence of 
the (orbital) period gap between about 3 and 2 h in 
LMXBs which is seen in the population of CVs. The idea 
is that after termination of magnetic braking (when the 
contact star becomes fully convective) the mass transfer is 
interrupted, so that the neutron star is suddenly unveiled 
and becomes a rapidly spinning radio pulsar whose high- 
energy emission may evaporate the companion before 
it refills its Roche lobe. This evaporation would also 
explain the observed existence of rapidly spinning single- 
millisecond radio pulsars. 

From the fact that our Galaxy contains a similar 
number of HMXBs (only 50% less than the number of 
LMXBs) whereas the lifetime of a HMXB must be orders of 
magnitude shorter than that of an LMXB, we can deduce 
that the formation of an LMXB is a much rarer event 
than the birth of an HMXB. Therefore it is no surprise 
that the formation of LMXBs is far less straightforward 
than that of HMXBs. One of the formation scenarios 
that have been suggested is accretion-induced collapse (AIC) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Close Binary Stars: Formation and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of a massive white dwarf, whereby the white dwarf is 
driven over the Chandrasekhar limiting mass and collapses 
to become a neutron star. This process requires precise 
fine tuning with mass transfer rates in a narrow range to 
a rare sort of massive white dwarf (consisting of O-Ne- 
Mg). Such white dwarfs can only be formed in binaries 
with a restricted range of primary masses and orbital 
periods. Mass transfer to more common intermediate- 
mass carbon—oxygen white dwarfs leads in most cases to 
explosive carbon burning by which the degenerate star is 
completely destroyed in a type Ia SN explosion. 

Some LMXBs have black hole companions (see BLACK 
HOLE CANDIDATES IN X-RAY BINARIES) and these cannot be 
produced by AIC, so that formation channels different 
from AIC must be active in producing LMXBs. In the 
special high star density environment of globular clusters 
LMXBs may be formed when a low-mass main-sequence 
star is captured by a passing compact star, but this cannot 
explain the occurrence of LMXBs in the rest of the Galaxy. 
Spiral-in evolution after an SN explosion of a massive 
helium star might explain the existence of neutron star or 
black hole components in compact LMXBs, but only under 
rather extreme conditions can the post-spiral-in systems 
evolve into LMXBs. 


Bibliography 
Reviews on close binary evolution are 


Paczynski B 1971 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 9 183 

Shu F and Lubow S H 1981 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 19 
277 

Thomas H-C 1977 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 15 127 


Reviews of the evolution of x-ray binary systems and 
of binary pulsar systems are 


Phinney E S and Kulkarni S R 1994 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 32 591 

van den Heuvel E P J 1992 Interacting Binaries (Lecture 
Notes Saas Fee Advanced Course 22) ed H Nussbaumer 
and A Orr (Berlin: Springer) (in the same course is a 
review on cataclysmic variables by M Livio) 

Verbunt F 1993 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 31 93 


A popular account of x-ray binaries can be found in 


van den Heuvel E P J and van Paradijs J 1993 Sci. Am. 
(November) 


Gerrit J Savonije 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


What are clouds? The answer to that question is both 
obvious and subtle. In the terrestrial atmosphere clouds 
are familiar as vast collections of small water drops or 
ice crystals suspended in the air. In the atmospheres of 
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn’s moon Titan, Uranus, 
Neptune, and possibly Pluto, they are composed of 
several other substances including sulfuric acid, ammonia, 
hydrogen sulfide, ammonium hydrosulfide, methane, and 
complex organic molecules. The study of clouds touches 
on many facets of atmospheric science. The chemistry 
of clouds is tied to the chemistry of the surrounding 
atmosphere. Clouds can be both a source and a sink 
for condensable molecules as they moisten or dry the 
air. Local cooling or heating and local differences in 
moisture content due to cloud formation change the 
buoyancy of air parcels which drives local dynamics 
(frontal systems, thunderstorms and hurricanes are a few 
familiar examples). Clouds influence the global climate 
by reflecting or absorbing solar radiation while trapping 
thermal radiation. The fate of life on Earth a few centuries 
from now may hinge on their uncertain role in mitigating 
the greenhouse effects of increased emission of carbon 
dioxide gas from biomass and fossil fuel burning. This 
article examines what we know about clouds in the 
atmospheres of the planets. 


Cloudy planetary atmospheres 

Saturn’s largest satellite Titan and all the planets 
except Mercury have cloudy atmospheres (see PLANETARY 
ATMOSPHERES). These can be categorized into three main 
groups. Water is the principal cloud constituent on the 
relatively thin atmospheres of Earth and Mars. Venus 
and Titan have thick cloud and haze layers which are 
influenced strongly by chemical reactions initiated by 
sunlight in the high atmosphere. The giant planets Jupiter, 
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune have reducing atmospheres 
dominated by hydrogen which combines with trace 
amounts of nitrogen, sulfur and carbon to form clouds 
of ammonia (NH3), ammonium hydrosulfide (NH,SH), 
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and (for Uranus and Neptune) 
methane (CH,). Methane clouds were inferred to be 
present in Pluto’s atmosphere although the interpretation 
of the data is ambiguous. 


The Earth 

We know most about the nature of clouds in the EARTH’S 
ATMOSPHERE and so it is instructive to begin a survey of 
planetary clouds with a review of terrestrial clouds. Water 
is by far the main constituent of terrestrial clouds but some 
other constituents (mainly sulfur and nitrogen) are often 
present. Water can exist as vapor, liquid drops, or frozen 
ice crystals. The amounts of water in these various forms 
depends on the complex history of each air parcel as it 
moves over land or water. Clouds take on characteristic 
forms which are controlled by the dynamical processes 
responsible for their formation. By looking at photos of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


clouds taken from space a sense of the dynamical regime 
can be revealed. 

Visual categorization of cloud types is a science 
that goes back many hundreds of years, and much of 
the terminology is Latin. Meteorologists in the present 
day group clouds into three main groups depending on 
the altitude (low, middle and high), with sub-categories 
within each group. In the lowest 2 km altitude are 
the cumulus, cumulonimbus, stratus, stratocumulus, and 
nimbostratus. Within the middle layer (2-8 km) are 
altostratus and altocumulus. At the highest level in 
the troposphere are cirrus, cirrostratus and cirrocumulus. 
At still higher altitudes in the stratosphere and at very 
low concentrations (except immediately after a volcanic 
eruption) are small sulfuric acid drops at many latitudes 
and ice particles which form the polar noctilucent clouds 
(thin clouds seen in the polar dawn and dusk). 

Cumulus clouds are relatively small (a few km in 
diameter), detached, puffy clouds whose tops and sides 
appear brilliant white in direct sunlight. In this form they 
would be impossible to see from space unless observed 
with a nearby camera with high spatial resolution. 
They can be seen as single clouds, in fields of many, 
and may develop into large towers of several grouped 
together. As moisture becomes more available from 
ground evaporation these clouds can grow and merge to 
form cumulonimbus which are heavy and dense, with a 
towering structure. These can be sites of precipitation and 
lightning. As seen from above they often show a flat top 
with a tail extending downwind. The morphology of the 
tail appears similar to a blacksmith’s anvil, and the word 
‘anvil’ is often applied to these features. The clouds are 
classified as low clouds because the base is within the 
lowest level, but in its entirety the cloud extends through 
all three levels, with the anvil providing a source of water 
downstream in the highest level. 

Stratus clouds form a fairly flat, uniform layer, dark 
gray blanket when seen from below. They often produce 
drizzle or snow. Stratocumulus appear much like stratus 
except that they show detail (patchiness, ragged edges) 
and are less dense in places, permitting more sunlight to 
penetrate and showing a lighter shade of gray. Seen from 
above, they appear clumpy and sometimes reveal periodic 
roll structures (cloud streets) which can extend for many 
kilometers. Motion within these clouds can occasionally 
produce cumulus-type structures. Large (~1000 km) 
banks of stratus and stratocumulus clouds can be seen 
in satellite photographs. Nimbostratus can be extremely 
deep with a top nearly at the top of the troposphere and 
usually produce precipitation. 

Altostratus clouds are distinguished from stratus 
mainly by the location of their base which is higher in 
the troposphere. A colored corona around the Sun can 
sometimes be seen. This is a consequence of the way ice 
crystals scatter light. Altocumulus also have their base 
higher in the atmosphere compared to cumulus. These 
clouds are usually thin and may take on a multitude of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


forms from thin and flat to detached clumps to castle- 
shaped morphology. 

Clouds in the high troposphere are composed almost 
entirely of ice particles. By analogy with the lower 
clouds, the clouds which are confined to the highest layers 
(cirrus, cirrostratus, and cirrocumulus) can range from 
broad flat sheets to clumpy, distinct elements. There are 
many sub-categories of cirrus which characterize the many 
ways these clouds can appear (smooth, stranded, with 
hooks, in cells, grainy or undular, resembling skeletal 
structures, etc). All of this morphological richness is rooted 
in the equally rich dynamic wind field and a complex 
interplay between the supply of vapor or crystals, and 
cloud microphysical processes (nucleation, condensation, 
growth, evaporation, aggregation, precipitation). Much 
of the cirrus owes its origin to water supplied by high 
altitude entrainment of air from upstream cumulonimbus 
anvils and nimbostratus cloud tops. Atmospheric halos 
and coronae are often seen within thin cirrus clouds, a 
result of sunlight scattered by large water ice crystals. 

How do we understand the complexity of the 
different cloud types and what do they tell us about 
the processes? This is an area of active research but 
already a great deal is known. The existence of a cloud 
points to a process where an air parcel containing water 
vapor (say, from evaporation over the ocean or over 
moist land surface) was transported to a location where 
the temperature is cooler—cool enough that the vapor 
pressure of water in the air is higher than the condensation 
vapor pressure at the air temperature. In the lowest 
12 km or so altitude (the troposphere) the temperature 
decreases with altitude, so a parcel of moist air which 
buoyantly rises from the ground will eventually reach a 
level where the temperature is cool enough to support 
condensation and cloud formation. Low-lying clouds 
have so much moisture that they need not rise very far for 
the temperature to reach the condensation temperature. 
Another way to cool the air and promote cloud formation 
is to mix warm moist air with cool dryer air as a polar 
cold front moves through. A third way is to lift air as it 
flows over a mountain. A cloud forms above or nearby 
a mountain when the air flowing over cools as it reaches 
a higher altitude. Clouds formed in this way are called 
orographic clouds because they remain fixed next to a 
topographic feature as the air flows past. The same process 
operates in the Martian atmosphere near the tops of the 
high volcanos and in Neptune’s atmosphere above a large 
vortex (the Great Dark Spot). 

Cumulus cloud formation is initiated by natural 
convection as sunlight warms a moist ground. As a warm, 
moist buoyant parcel of gas rises it reaches a condensation 
level where the temperature drops below the condensation 
temperature and the cumulus cloud forms at its base. 
An aid to convection in the terrestrial atmosphere is the 
density difference due to both the temperature difference 
(a warm parcel is less dense) and a compositional 
difference (a moist parcel is less dense than dry gas for 
the Earth’s atmosphere). In the giant planet atmospheres 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a moist parcel is more dense than dry gas which inhibits 
rather than promotes moist convection. A third factor 
which enhances moist convection is the additional heat 
released as latent heat of condensation when the vapor 
condenses in the cloud. In a quiescent situation where 
cumulus or stratus clouds form and dissipate at an equal 
rate there is an equilibrium between the supply of moist 
air from the ground and evaporation and precipitation in 
the cloud. If there is a great deal of moisture available 
from the ground and if the initial convective motion is 
quite vigorous an instability can grow, with the buoyancy 
carried by the moist convective parcels amplifying to the 
point that very large amounts of moisture are injected at 
very high altitudes (cumulonimbus towers and anvils). 
Stratus clouds result from a more sluggish dynamical 
regime where the air is more stable and where there is 
a stable and abundant supply of moisture to maintain the 
cloud against precipitation and evaporation. 

Space-based views of clouds on all the planets are 
dominated by the large-scale features. At large scales 
three types of cloud features are commonly seen in 
the Earth’s atmosphere. Each of them has an easily 
recognizable morphology and motion which are rooted to 
the dynamical regime forcing cloud formation. Mesoscale 
convective systems consist of fields of cumulonimbus 
clouds whose anvils merge into a single cloud shield with 
a horizontal extent much larger than the individual anvils. 
Mesoscale convective systems may be long (~100 km) and 
narrow (a few km) with extensive precipitation occurring 
over a large scale. Cumulus convection is driven by small- 
scale (100 km or less) convective cells. Small-scale cells 
can combine to form the much larger mesoscale convective 
systems seen in satellite images. 

Of special importance for the dynamics of the 
terrestrial atmosphere is the organized deep convection 
near the equator. Time-averaged maps of cloudiness 
reveal a band near the equator that moves in latitude with 
the seasons. This is the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone 
(ITCZ). Its existence is prompted by converging air mass 
at low altitude driven by large-scale Hadley circulation 
in both hemispheres. Abundant water vapor near the 
surface is available for a massive amount of latent heat 
transport. Moist convection within the ITCZ is vigorous 
and is responsible for a large amount of heat and moisture 
transferred to the upper atmosphere within the ITCZ. 

Atlantic hurricanes and Pacific typhoons are tropical 
cyclones which constitute another commonly observed 
large-scale cloud structure. They form over oceans and 
derive their energy from moist warm tropical ocean 
air. Cyclones rotate in the counterclockwise direction 
in the northern hemisphere with lifetimes of the order 
of 10 d. Hurricanes and typhoons have return flow in 
a narrow column at the core which is free of clouds. 
There remains some controversy about what special 
conditions are required to transform commonly occurring 
tropical cyclones into intense systems that occur relatively 
rarely. A common thread to the various models involves 
a very effective coupling between cumulus-scale moist 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The Solid State Imaging camera on the Galileo Orbiter 
captured this image of clouds over the southern Pacific ocean 
and Antarctica on 12 December, 1990 when the spacecraft was 
1.6 million km from Earth. Extensive cloud formation can be 
seen, with prominent curved cloudy frontal systems associated 
with extratropical cyclones. The dark ocean provides the 
contrast which makes the clouds easy to see in 
visible-wavelength images. Clouds and surface ice are difficult 
to distinguish due to lack of contrast. In broad-band visible 
wavelengths there is no way to get a sense of cloud altitude, and 
the cloud type categories developed from ground-based 
experience are not apparent. 


convection with the large-scale wind field via an instability 
called the conditional instability of the second kind, 
or CISK. According to most models the ocean surface 
temperature must be at least 26°C, which agrees with 
observation and leads to the conclusion that these intense 
storms will be more frequent and/or more intense should 
the sea surface warm in the future from global warming. 

A third commonly observed large-scale cloud struc- 
ture is the extratropical cyclone which produces extensive 
precipitation in the middle latitudes. Several of them can 
be seen in figure 1. They are familiar as weather fronts 
ahead of cold low-pressure regions . The clouds that form 
at these fronts do so by sloping convection (as opposed to 
cumulus convection described above). Sloping convec- 
tion occurs when one body of air overrides another, forc- 
ing moist air upward. Clouds of all types are associated 
with these large-scale features and also with the two others 
mentioned above. 

With that brief introduction to terrestrial clouds we 
are now in a position to explore clouds on other planets. 
The best place to begin is with the atmosphere of Mars 
which contains water ice clouds and displays many of the 
dynamical features familiar to terrestrial meteorology (see 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


MARS: ATMOSPHERE). 


Mars 

Our knowledge of the Martian atmosphere is based on 
images and spectra taken over many years from ground- 
based observatories as well as the Hubble Space Telescope, 
several Soviet and US flyby or orbiting satellites, and 
landers, most notably Mariners 4, 6, 7 and 9, Mars 2, 
3, 4 and 5, Viking 1 and 2, Phobos 1 and 2 and Mars 
Global Surveyor, with more on the way or planned. As 
of the beginning of 1999 three craft (vikiINc Landers 1 and 
2 and MARS PATHFINDER) have landed on the surface and 
sent back in situ information on atmospheric composition, 
temperature, pressure and cloud and dust opacity. Many 
more landers are planned for the next decades. 

The Martian atmosphere is made up almost entirely of 
carbon dioxide (CO) with trace amounts of water, argon 
and several other constituents. Mean surface pressure is 
8 mb (compared to a pressure near 1 b at sea level on 
Earth). Surface temperature varies between about 140 K 
and 250 K depending on latitude and season. Carbon 
dioxide condenses to form an extensive frost layer on 
the surface of Mars at high latitude when the surface 
temperature drops slightly below 150 K. Occasionally the 
temperature in the polar atmosphere several km above 
the surface drops low enough to form a CO, ice haze, 
but almost all the bright white clouds seen on Mars are 
composed of water ice. 

Water ice also condenses at high latitude during 
winter, and at lower latitudes as well during the cold 
night. The polar ice caps and the Martian soil serve 
as reservoirs of water which absorb or release water on 
diurnal and seasonal cycles as well as on much longer- 
term cycles tied to slow changes in the Martian orbit and 
tilt. Outflow channels on the surface are now dry but point 
to a much wetter Mars in the distant past. The present 
amount of water in the atmosphere amounts to only about 
10 precipitable micrometers on average, too little to be 
important as a source of buoyancy via latent heat release. 
Thus none of the terrestrial cloud types (cumulonimbus or 
stratonimbus on the small scale, hurricanes and mesoscale 
convective systems) which feed on latent heat release and 
an abundant supply of water are seen on Mars. 

The most fruitful approach to understanding water 
clouds on Mars is to note their similarity to cirrus 
clouds in the high, cold terrestrial atmosphere, with the 
addition of the effects of topography operative in the Mars 
atmosphere. Lee wave clouds are often seen on Mars 
downstream of high volcanic mountains and near craters 
at lower elevations. It is common to see lee wave clouds 
with many linear undulations extending for more than 
100 km downstream. Clouds form most often in the early 
morning and late afternoon when the temperatures are 
cool. They are abundant in northern summer in the Tharsis 
region, a high plateau home to several of the highest 
Martian volcanos. Figure 2 shows this, along with large- 
scale features that appear to trace planetary-scale Rossby 
waves at high latitude much as do extratropical cyclone 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The surface of Mars is dark at blue wavelengths and 
produces a good background for showing bright water ice 
clouds and north polar frost deposits seen in this image taken by 
the Hubble Space Telescope Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 
on 20 May, 1997. Features as small as 45 km can be seen. Ice 
clouds cover most of the Martian mid-latitudes and are 
especially prominent in the Tharsis Montes region to the left of 
the center of the planet. Four of the highest volcanic peaks can 
be seen poking though the clouds. The curved cloud contours in 
the upper left are suggestive of planetary-scale waves similar to 
those which drive large extratropical cyclones in the terrestrial 
atmosphere. (Photo courtesy of P. James, T. Clancy and S. Lee.) 


cloud bands on the Earth. At night the surface can radiate 
to space efficiently and cool dramatically, leading to the 
formation of low-lying ground fog which dissipates soon 
after sunrise. 

Although not classified as cloud, dust in the Martian 
atmosphere plays an important role in atmospheric 
dynamics and cloud formation. The Martian atmosphere 
usually contains enough dust to be a significant absorber 
of solar energy, heating the atmosphere during the day 
and promoting radiative cooling at night. Strong thermal 
contrasts at the edge of the polar frost deposit, coupled 
with the low density of the Martian atmosphere, can lead 
to high surface winds which pick up dust, sometimes 
progressing to a global dust storm that can blanket the 
planet, obscuring even the highest volcanos. After several 
months most of the dust sediments out and the atmosphere 
gradually returns to a cooler state more conducive to the 
formation of water ice clouds. 


Venus 

Venus and the Earth have similar size and mass but their 
atmospheres and cloud structures differ markedly (see 
VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). The Venus atmosphere is composed 
primarily of CO,. It is massive (90 bars at the surface) 
and hot (740 K) near the surface. Because of its great fluid 
mass, slow rotation and greenhouse effect there is little 
horizontal thermal contrast (at most a few K from equator 
to pole) and consequently the dynamical regime is quite 
different than on the Earth or Mars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. This image of the Venus nightside taken by the Galileo 
Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer instrument at a 
wavelength of 2.3 microns in the near-infrared is bright where 
infrared light emitted by the hot surface is less attenuated by 
overlying clouds which block the radiation in the darker 
regions. The contrasts are produced mostly by variations in the 
number of large particles in the deepest of the three main cloud 
layers. These variations are due to atmospheric motions which 
are most vigorous in the lower cloud region. 


Venus as seen through a telescope appears bright and 
almost featureless due to a ubiquitous thick layer of cloud. 
Subtle contrasts can be seen at violet and near-ultraviolet 
wavelengths. The material responsible for the contrast 
has not been identified with confidence but suggested 
candidates include elemental sulfur and the compound 
FeCl3. Sulfur dioxide gas (SO) has been detected at the 
cloud tops, and the visible clouds are composed of liquid 
sulfuric acid (H2SO,) drops. Atnear-infrared wavelengths 
there are several spectral intervals (windows) where the 
gas opacity is relatively low, permitting infrared light 
radiated by the hot surface to penetrate the clouds. There 
is considerable cloud opacity even at those wavelengths 
however, so the contrasts seen in the near-infrared tell 
us mostly about the patchiness of the lower cloud layers 
which are more turbulent than the upper layer we see 
at visible wavelengths. These contrasts can be seen in 
figure 3. 

Many spacecraft from the United States and the 
former Soviet Union have visited Venus. Several probes 
have descended into the atmosphere and measured 
pressure, temperature, gas composition, the internal 
radiation field and cloud particle number densities and 
sizes. The clouds extend over a very large vertical range. 
There are three main cloud layers at altitudes between 
about 45 and 70 km. Thin haze layers extend above and 
below those boundaries. Several experiments revealed the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


main cloud region to be composed of three layers. The 
top layer is concentrated between 59-66 km altitude. The 
middle layer lies between 49-57 km altitude and the lower 
layer is most dense in a 2 km region just below the 49 km 
boundary, at least as measured by the particle counter 
data on the Pioneer Venus large probe. Ground-based 
and Galileo near-infrared images (from the Near-Infrared 
Mapping Spectrometer—NIMS) later showed this layer to 
be highly variable in space and time (see figure 3). 

The composition of the cloud particles is dominated 
by sulfuric acid, but some evidence suggests that an 
additional constituent may be responsible for the largest 
particles in the lower cloud layer. In the top cloud and 
haze sunlight breaks up SO) molecules which combine 
with water to form sulfuric acid with a concentration near 
85% at the top, increasing at deeper levels. In the middle 
and lower clouds there is insufficient ultraviolet light 
to drive photochemistry and thermochemical processes 
become important in establishing chemical equilibrium. 
At the deepest levels the atmosphere and surface interact 
and the surface acts as a source and sink of sulfur 
and other constituents. The particle spectrometer on 
the Pioneer Venus large probe identified three sizes of 
particles. Mode 2 particles have radius close to 1 micron 
and dominate the top and middle clouds. Mode 1 particles 
are smaller (0.4 microns mean radius) and account for a 
few tenths of the optical depth in the upper cloud while 
mode 3 particles are larger (several microns or more) and 
provide much of the mass in the lower cloud. 

The dynamical regime under which these clouds form 
is mostly stable in the upper two layers (altitudes above 
49 km). These clouds are analogous to stratiform clouds 
in the terrestrial atmosphere. The subdued contrasts seen 
in the highest cloud move with the wind speed (about 
100 m s~') at the visible cloud tops (near 70 km altitude) 
while the contrasts seen in the near-infrared window 
regions (e.g. figure 3) move at a slower rate (50 m s"!, 
consistent with wind speeds measured by tracking entry 
probes). Estimates of the number of large particles in 
the lower cloud deck made by various entry probes 
varied by large factors. This observation supports the 
idea that the contrasts seen at near-infrared wavelengths 
are indicative of highly variable concentrations of large 
(several microns radius or larger) particles in the lower 
cloud deck. The lower cloud is a region of dynamical 
instability in the Venus atmosphere. The mechanism 
responsible for driving the Venus circulation remains 
unclear, although it seems likely that interactions between 
waves and the mean flow, initiated by absorption of 
sunlight in the cloud region, play a central role. 


Titan 

Like Venus, TITAN’s atmosphere is a massive one with 
a dense haze layer and slow rotation and may be 
driven by the same mechanism. But the chemistry of 
the Titanian and Venusian atmospheres could hardly 
be more different. Titan’s atmosphere is composed 
mainly of nitrogen with a few percent of methane and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


other hydrocarbons and nitriles (molecules with H, C, 
and N). Titan’s atmosphere is cold (about 94 K near 
the surface and 71 K at the temperature minimum 
near 40 km altitude). At those temperatures methane 
may condense near the temperature minimum but some 
infrared measurements from the Voyager IRIS experiment 
suggest that a methane cloud may not be present. If that 
is the case methane would be supersaturated near the 
temperature minimum. Supersaturation does not occur in 
the terrestrial atmosphere (with respect to water) but can 
be achieved in the laboratory under controlled conditions. 
It will be difficult to resolve this issue until the Huygen’s 
Probe descends into Titan’s atmosphere in 2004. 
Photolysis of methane in the high atmosphere leads 
to formation of ethane and other hydrocarbon and nitrile 
molecules. Processing of these molecules by long-term 
exposure to sunlight and charged-particle bombardment 
from space eventually produces a polymer haze which 
covers the satellite and blocks the surface from view at 
visible wavelengths. This haze is very dark at ultraviolet 
wavelengths and becomes bright, with little absorption at 
red wavelengths. It is composed of aggregates of small 
particles whose mean radius is close to 0.066 microns. 
Chemical models predict a number of haze and 
cloud layers deeper in the atmosphere, composed of more 
volatile hydrocarbons. Methane is the most volatile and 
may condense below the temperature minimum (altitude 
range 10-40 km). A little higher in the atmosphere 
ethane may form a condensation cloud. Less volatile 
hydrocarbons and nitriles are expected to form condensate 
layers at higher altitudes, including C.H2, C3Hy4, C3Hs, 
CyH2, HCN, C2.No, HC3N, CaN and many heavier 
hydrocarbons. Carbon dioxide and water ice particles 
are also possible. Of these, only HC3N and C,N> 
particles have been detected spectroscopically. Detection 
of many of them is made difficult by Titan’s obscuring 
photochemical haze at higher altitude. The spectral 
signature of CyN> (dicyanoacetylene) ice was seen by the 
Voyager infrared spectrometer only in the polar haze of 
Titan. Analysis of these observations reveals that (1) ice 
particle mean radius is near 5 xm, and (2) the ratio of 
condensate to vapor mole fraction as inferred from the 
data is about 100 times more than expected from steady- 
state equilibrium of the constituents, accounting for 
creation of the vapor at high altitudes from photochemical 
production, and depletion of the vapor and condensate 
at low altitudes due to condensation and sedimentation 
of particles. The large disequilibrium ratio is probably a 
result of seasonal variation of photochemical destruction 
of vapor at high altitude and high latitude working in 
conjunction with a significant thermal time lag deeper in 
the atmosphere due to long thermal time constants. 
There is almost no contrast on Titan at visible 
wavelengths apart from a hemispheric north/south 
reflectivity contrast which reverses over a several-year 
period as Titan responds to seasonal changes in insolation. 
There is a corresponding hemispheric difference in particle 
size in the upper haze which in turn is related to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


100 T TTTTIMT TT TTT T TTT TTT T TTT T TTT 
150 
41 
NH,SH — solid 
200f- ae 4a 
43 
250 44 
45 
46 
@ 300;- H20-NHg3 (aqueous solution) 48 
a i: @ 
2 i2 2 
% 350 2 
S 400 0.5 2 
€ Saturn 12 
Gy o 
450 
L 42 
NH,SH - solid 43 
200 
44 
46 
250 te 
H20—-NHg (aqueous solution) 10 
300 |- lis 
B5O Cc svelte ea eed 


108 105 104 103 102 107 10° 


Cloud Density (g/l) 


44 
100 CH,-ice Uranus +2 
; 45 
r HoS — ice io 
era NH,SH - solid ~| 20 
4-H, 0 ~ ice 
‘ = 50 
300 . 
ee eh eke ace {100 
[  (H»0-NH4~H,S) Re 
400 -—-———-—~-—-———— = -| 200 
S Pr 2 
pat a 
E a 
5s of 
z rene 500 ¢ 
S a ig 2 
£ 100 CH,-ice Neptune 7 2 @ 
® >. a 
F S 5 
NH3—-ice H2S—ice +10 
200 af 
NH,SH — solid 20 
ieee ae es! t= H,0 — ice 150 
300 Solution cloud Ae 
S13 G Rhy N 4 
\ 100 
400 (HzO-NH3-H2S) \ — 200 
\ 
\ 
a a a es a 
500 | l =| 500 


-7 -6 5 4 -3 -2 -1 10) 
Log Cloud Density (gr/cm®) 


Figure 4. Thermochemical equilibrium models for the giant planet atmospheres indicate the vertical regions and compositions of ices 
expected to form clouds. Within these vertical regions actual cloud locations and densities are determined largely by atmospheric 
dynamics and microphysical processes. (Figures for Jupiter and Saturn were constructed from models by S K Atreya and M Wong, 
based on S K Atreya and P N Romani (1985) Planetary Meteorology ed G E Hunt (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 17-68. 
Those for Uranus and Neptune were first published by I de Pater et al (1991) Icarus 91 220-233, © Academic Press.) 


a hemispheric-scale rising and sinking motion which 
responds to seasonal change. Atmospheric aerosols 
contribute significantly to the heat balance in the 
stratosphere through their strong absorption of sunlight 
and therefore are important to the energy balance and 
circulation. 


The giant planets 

All of the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and 
Neptune have deep atmospheres composed mainly of 
hydrogen and helium with trace amounts of cloud- 
forming molecules water, ammonia (NH3), ammonium 
hydrosulfide (NH4SH), hydrogen sulfide (HS) and 
methane (CH,). All of these except methane can 
condense in the atmospheres of Jupiter and Saturn. The 
atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune reach sufficiently 
cold temperatures near the temperature minimum at 0.1 b 
pressure to condense methane. Condensate clouds form 
in layers with the most volatile forming at higher altitudes 
where the temperatures are cooler. 

Our ideas about composition are based on a 
combination of observations from the ground and 
spacecraft together with models of chemical reactions at 
the temperature and composition of the atmosphere. So 
far all of our measurements, except those from the Galileo 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


probe which entered Jupiter’s atmosphere (see GALILEO 
MISSION TO JUPITER), are made remotely with instruments 
from the Earth or on spacecraft (see JUPITER: ATMOSPHERE). 
The Galileo probe sampled a part of Jupiter’s atmosphere 
that is thought to be depleted in condensable molecules, 
much like a desert region on the Earth, and so the probe 
measurements do not tell us about the global properties of 
clouds and cloud-forming constituents. 

As a starting point in understanding the vertical 
locations and compositions of clouds we rely on ther- 
mochemical equilibrium models which make predictions 
from measured or inferred chemical abundance in the deep 
atmosphere, the pressure and temperature as measured by 
a variety of instruments, and knowledge of the chemical 
thermodynamics of the available molecules. This exercise 
can tell us at what altitudes to expect clouds and what their 
composition should be but it is not adequate for predicting 
the number densities of cloud particles at a given location 
because other processes such as atmospheric dynamics 
and cloud particle microphysics determine those quanti- 
ties. 

The cloud forming molecules mentioned above are 
observe to be or are predicted to be a factor of two or more 
abundant than they would be for a mix of solar atmosphere 
material at the same temperature and pressure. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Jupiter’s Great Red Spot and environs as seen by the Galileo Solid State Imager in 1996. The Great Red Spot centered in the 
top panel rotates counterclockwise. The embedded images shown in the two bottom panels reveal small puffy clouds about 50 km in 
diameter, possibly analogous to large terrestrial cumulus clouds. The time difference between the two bottom panels is 70 min. 


enhancement of ‘solar’ abundance increases from Jupiter 
to Saturn to Uranus and Neptune, reflecting the fact that 
the larger planets were able to retain more of the light 
elements hydrogen and helium during their formation. An 
increase in the amount of available condensable molecule 
will result in cloud formation at a deeper level where the 
temperatures are warmer. 


Predicted cloud locations for the four giant planets are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


shown in figure 4. JUPITER and SATURN form one pair with 
similar cloud types, while URANUS and NEPTUNE, which are 
colder, form a second. A water-ammonia solution cloud 
is predicted to form at pressure levels starting near 8 b 
in Jupiter’s atmosphere and 15 b in Saturn’s atmosphere. 
At higher altitudes (lower pressure and temperature) are 
clouds of ammonium hydrosulfide and ammonia ices. The 
topmost cloud in both cases is ammonia ice. A spectral 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


signature for ammonia ice was mysteriously not seen 
until recently in near-infrared spectra from the European 
Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) and the Galileo NIMS 
instrument. Spectral signatures of ices in the other clouds 
have not been observed. One of the Galileo Probe 
experiments detected particles near the 1.6 b level in 
Jupiter’s atmosphere whose composition could be either 
ammonium hydrosulfide or water. It did not see a 
water cloud at the pressure levels where thermochemical 
equilibrium models predict, probably because water in the 
region it sampled is depleted due to a downwelling of dry 
air from the cold upper troposphere. It is not known how 
extensive a deep water cloud may be on any of the giant 
planets. 

Uranus and Neptune are cold enough to condense 
methane which forms the top cloud in those atmospheres 
(see URANUS AND NEPTUNE: ATMOSPHERES, IONOSPHERES AND 
MAGNETOSPHERES). The next-deeper cloud, at a few bars 
pressure, is probably H2S ice but may contain some 
ammonia as well. At deeper levels (10 to a few hundred 
bar pressure) are NH4SH and water clouds. 

The visibility of clouds varies markedly among the 
giant planets. Jupiter’s atmosphere is filled with white- 
yellow clouds and darker yellow-brown clouds with a 
few regions that are more red (the GREAT RED SPOT) or gray 
(the hot-spot regions where upwelling infrared radiation 
at 5 microns wavelength can be seen). Jupiter’s Great Red 
Spot is a large (about 3 times the size of the Earth) oval 
rotating in the anticyclonic sense (opposite to terrestrial 
storm systems). It has been observed for more than a 
century and probably owes its stability to the shear of the 
east—west zonal jets in which it is embedded. It is shown 
in figure 5. 

All of the ices mentioned above are white at visible 
wavelengths. If these were the only cloud constituents 
Jupiter would appear as a featureless white ball. The 
colors and contrasts are due to a coloring material 
whose origin and composition is uncertain. Candidate 
materials include compounds of hydrogen bonded to 
sulfur, nitrogen and carbon (hydrocarbons) created by 
photolysis in the upper troposphere or by bombardment 
from high-energy charged particles precipitating from the 
magnetosphere. The latter process is almost certainly 
responsible for the formation of polar stratospheric hazes 
in the stratospheres of Jupiter and Saturn. 

Cloud contrasts are subdued for Saturn and almost 
absent for Uranus. These planets as well as Neptune have 
deep cloud structures which reduce contrast and block 
upwelling thermal radiation. Contrasts are dominated 
by the jet structures, although there is not a one-to- 
one correspondence between cloud reflectivity and wind 
speed and direction. Saturn shows seasonal variations 
in cloud altitude. These result from solar heating of the 
upper atmosphere which influences the static stability and 
cloud altitude. These effects may well be occurring as well 
on Uranus and Neptune but seasonal changes for those 
planets occur on timescales long compared to our ability 
to observe them. Individual ovals and spots do form in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 6. A dark oval and many smaller features can be seen 
embedded in the bright-dark cloud bands which line up with 
the jet streams in Saturn’s atmosphere. A dark, kinked curve 
called the ribbon feature is centered in the bright band at 47° 
north latitude, the location of a high speed (150 m s~!) jet. Cloud 
contrasts serve as markers of the wind and of the jet instabilities. 
This image was obtained by the Voyager 2 Imaging Subsystem 
in 1981. 


the Saturn atmosphere. They can be seen most easily in 
contrast-enhanced images (figure 6). 

The VOYAGER spacecraft viewed Uranus at a time 
when only one hemisphere was illuminated by the 
Sun. Only a few low-contrast cloud features were seen 
against an almost uniform thick cloud cover. More 
recently the near-infrared camera on the Hubble Space 
Telescope photographed a number of clouds in the 
opposite hemisphere (figure 7). 

A number of cloud types were seen during the close 
Voyager flyby of Neptune in 1989. Several large ovals 
were seen. The largest of them was named the Great Dark 
Spot (figure 8). Like Jupiter, some coloring constituent of 
uncertain origin and composition is responsible for cloud 
contrast and color. These ovals move around and oscillate 
in longitude. The aspect ratio and tilt of the long and 
short axes of the ovals also oscillate. These oscillations 
can be understood with models that take into account the 
vorticity of the spot, its depth in the atmosphere, and the 
wind shear in which it is embedded. 

Other types of clouds were seen in the Neptune 
atmosphere which are reminiscent of cirrus clouds and 
lee-wave clouds seen high in the terrestrial and Martian 
atmospheres. They are striated, they evolve rapidly with 
time (too rapidly to use as tracers of wind) and some of 
them form clumps that are tied to and overlay the larger 
ovals. The White Companion to the Great Dark Spot is the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 7. Near-infrared images obtained by the NICMOS 
camera on the Hubble Space Telescope provide the best views of 
clouds in the Uranus atmosphere. The entire planet is covered 
by clouds but the south polar region is covered by a relatively 
high, thick cloud layer and appears bright in this view. Small 
clouds, newly discovered in this image taken in 1997, appear in 
northern low latitudes, just above the terminator. The rings and 
8 of the uranian satellites are also visible. 


prime example of this. It was seen even in ground-based 
images in one of the methane absorption bands sensitive 
to high clouds. It can be seen in figure 8. These clouds are 
probably composed of methane ice, with the underlying 
thick cloud bank being H)S ice. 


Cloud microphysics 
Cloud microphysics is the study of processes that 
govern cloud particle formation and evolution on the 
microscopic scale. It addresses such questions as ‘What 
conditions are required for clouds to form? How 
rapidly do particles grow? What controls the particle 
size distribution?’ The study of cloud microphysical 
processes goes beyond the microscopic. A broader 
goal is to understand the underlying processes which 
govern cloud structure and dynamics over large scales. 
A considerable amount of work has been invested in 
answering these questions for terrestrial clouds where 
in situ measurements can be made and coupled with 
laboratory and theoretical investigations. There has been 
some attempt to understand the microphysics of clouds on 
the other planets, although the observational constraints 
are much weaker. 

Condensate particles can form either by direct 
condensation from supersaturated vapor or by condensing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


on a pre-existing foreign particle (dust or sulfate aerosol, 
for example). These are called homogeneous and 
heterogeneous nucleation, respectively. Homogeneous 
nucleation begins when molecules in the vapor phase 
combine to form a small cluster which can serve as a seed 
nucleus. The cluster molecules may evaporate, or more 
molecules from the vapor may condense, depending on 
which outcome is favored by thermodynamics. 

The Gibbs free energy is the thermodynamic quantity 
which controls particle growth or evaporation. Gibbs free 
energy depends on two terms, particle surface area times 
surface tension plus particle volume times KT times the 
natural log of the vapor pressure divided by the saturation 
vapor pressure, or 


AG = 4na’o — éna°n) KT In(e/e). 


In the above equation AG is the change in Gibbs free 
energy associated with the formation of a particle of radius 
a, @ is the surface tension of the liquid, n; is the number 
density of molecules in the liquid, K is the Boltzmann 
constant, e is the vapor pressure and e, is the saturation 
vapor pressure at temperature T. 

A plot of AG as a function of radius a reveals that the 
Gibbs free energy for particle formation is always positive 
for vapor pressure less than or equal to the saturation 
vapor pressure. This is thermodynamically unfavorable 
and any particle which may exist initially will evaporate. 
When the vapor pressure is higher than the saturation 
vapor pressure the Gibbs free energy becomes negative at 
some particle radius. There is a critical radius, a., where 
condensation onto the particle surface reduces the Gibbs 
free energy and the particle will grow by condensation. 

Under normal circumstances in the terrestrial atmo- 
sphere it is extremely difficult to grow a particle up to the 
critical radius because the ratio of vapor pressure to sat- 
uration vapor pressure is never very high. A much more 
common initiation of the growth process depends on the 
existence of cloud condensation nucei (CCN) which may 
be composed of small dust or sulfate particles on Earth. A 
wide variety of CCN particle compositions may be present, 
but only a small fraction of them are conducive to growth. 
Particles whose surface structure is similar to that of water 
or ice (suchas silver iodide crystals used for cloud seeding) 
make good CCN. Another class of particles which make 
even better CCN are hygroscopic sulfates and nitrates. An 
abundance of small CCN leads to an abundance of small 
droplets. Conversely, in an environment with few CCN, 
few water droplets will form, but the ones that do will take 
advantage of the available vapor to grow to relatively large 
size. Images of the ocean surface under some conditions 
reveal ship tracks as trails of small cloud particles whose 
formation was initiated by an abundance of CCN in the 
exhaust plumes of the ships. 

Condensation alone is insufficient to grow particles 
in clouds to the point of precipitation over the coarse of 
a few hours. Another mechanism, growth by collision 
and merging of drops (coalescence) or sticking of ice 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 8. Neptune’s Great Dark Spot (GDS) is the large dark 
oval to the left of center in this 1989 image by the Voyager 
Imaging Subsystem camera. The Bright Companion cloud forms 
at higher altitudes at the southern edge of the GDS. Several 
other bright clouds downstream (to the right) of the GDS and 
another large oval are also visible. 


particles (coagulation), produces much more rapid growth 
when the particles become large enough (about 20 wm 
radius) that sedimentation velocities become important. 
The largest particles sediment faster than the smaller ones, 
and collide with other particles as they descend through 
the cloud. This behavior leads to a process which can 
rapidly grow large (up to about 2 mm) particles. Even 
larger particles can form in updrafts or parcels which cycle 
between updrafts and downdrafts. 

These ideas introduce the interplay between cloud 
microphysics and vertical and horizontal winds. Another 
coupling is between radiation and clouds. At the top of the 
cloud layer the cloud cools by emitting thermal radiation 
to space. This cooling in turn feeds a circulation pattern 
with sinking cool air replaced by rising warmer air from 
below and within the cloud. Thus the three major physical 
processes (cloud microphysics, atmospheric dynamics, 
and radiation) are all coupled, and this coupling must be 
taken into account in cloud formation/evolution models. 

Cirrus clouds form near the top of the troposphere 
where the temperatures are cold (some 40°C lower than 
the freezing temperature of water). Clouds are supplied 
with vapor from the tops of large convective systems 
carried horizontally by the wind shear. Both liquid and 
ice can exist, with the liquid supercooled by more than 
30°C. Ice crystals can grow to relatively large sizes (on the 
order of 100 wm) as they descend. Ice crystals forming at a 
variety of temperatures produce a wide variety of crystal 
habits, but the dominant forms are hexagonal. Typical 
crystal angles are 120° and 90°. These lead to halo features, 
the most common at a scattering angle of 22°. Flat plates 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


tend to orient in one direction as they fall due to their 
aerodynamical profile. Particle orientation leads to certain 
types of halos. 


Microphysical models of Venus, Mars, Titan, and 
the giant planets 

Venus 

Our knowledge of the Venus cloud structure is consid- 
erable, thanks to extensive measurements from multiple 
instruments on several probes which descended though 
the atmosphere, as well as remote spacecraft and ground- 
based instruments. Models of the cloud microphysics 
must take into account the coupled chemical composition 
of the particles and gas (both change with altitude), photo- 
chemical processes at the top of the atmosphere, the tem- 
perature profile of the atmosphere, and vertical transport 
due to eddy motions and particle sedimentation. 

Microphysical models attempt to reproduce the 
observed particle chemistry (sulfuric acid/water solution 
whose concentration varies with altitude as determined 
by temperature) and the size distribution and number 
density of the particles which also vary with altitude. 
Recalling that there are three principal cloud layers 
in the Venus atmosphere, the topmost is governed by 
photochemical processes which act on sulfur dioxide and 
water to produce a sulfuric acid cloud. The top cloud 
is close to steady state with little temporal variation. 
Particle growth matches loss by sedimentation. Particle 
growth is governed by the available sulfate produced by 
photochemistry. Sulfur dioxide is supplied by vertical 
transport from below the clouds. A bi-modal size 
distribution is observed in the top cloud with one mode 
having mode radius 0.3 um, and the other with mode 
radius 1 wm. 

The lower and middle clouds form by condensation 
from existing vapor rather than by photochemistry which 
drives particle formation in the top cloud. Two vapor 
constituents (H,SO, and HO) are present in varying 
amounts. Small particles are present below the base of the 
lower cloud and these can serve as condensation nuclei. 
Model simulations show that the two most important 
parameters of the model are the vertical transport, as 
characterized by an eddy diffusion profile which is a 
function of altitude (it reaches a peak at 54 km altitude 
in the model), and the nucleation mechanism. The 
nucleation mechanism is thought to be a combination 
of heterogeneous nucleation on insoluble cores and an 
activation mechanism on soluble (hygroscopic) cores. 
A numerical model accounts for the balance in vapor 
pressures of H,SO, and HO as a function of temperature, 
the supply of vapor via eddy diffusion, loss rates due to 
sedimentation, and continuity of particle mass as particles 
grow. The model reproduces the observed tri-modal 
particle size distribution. The smallest particles (less than 
0.6 wm) are the insoluble cores. The largest particles 
(typically 3-4 xm radius) are those which nucleate near 
the top of the cloud. As they fall they grow by collision 
and condensation, becoming larger at lower altitudes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars 

Water molecules condense on dust nuclei in the 
Martian atmosphere to form water ice clouds. The 
water abundance is not high and so ice condensation 
requires both cold temperatures and availability of dust 
condensation nuclei. At very cold temperatures carbon 
dioxide can condense on the water ice particles. 

Images from space and from the Viking and Mars 
Pathfinder landers have shown that ice cloud formation 
on Mars is highly variable. When Mars is farthest from 
the Sun the temperatures are colder and ice clouds are 
more extensive and more frequent. But even during the 
few weeks of the Mars Pathfinder mission cloud formation 
near the landing site was highly variable. 

There are several major differences between ice cloud 
formation on Mars and the Earth. The water abundance in 
the Martian atmosphere is much less than that for Earth. 
As a consequence there are so few particles the coagulation 
process can be ignored, leaving nucleation, condensation 
and sedimentation as the factors which determine cloud 
formation and particle size distribution. The smallest 
particles are the same size as the condensation nuclei. 
The ability of Martian dust particles to serve as nucleation 
sites is highly uncertain because not much is known about 
the mineralogy, which has a strong effect on nucleation. 
Clay minerals might be present, and they typically are 
efficient nucleators. Other mineral types are inefficient. 
One way to account for the uncertainty in modeling this 
process is to make the contact parameter a parameter of 
the microphysical model. The energy associated with ice 
particle formation is proportional to the factor (2 + m)(1 — 
m)* where m is the contact parameter. Values of m close to 
1 (e.g. for silver iodide, for example) reduce the energy of 
formation leading to rapid nucleation. Typical terrestrial 
soil particles have m near 0.4. 

Microphysical models which employ the temperature 
profile as determined by the Mars Pathfinder instruments 
find ice cloud formation in two layers. The highest is in 
the altitude range 30-50 km. A second layer forms at the 
temperature minimum near 10 km altitude. Competition 
between growth by nucleation and condensation and loss 
by sedimentation defines the size distribution. Particles in 
the upper layer have mean radius near 1.5 4m, whereas 
those in the lower layer have mean radius near 2.5 wm. 


Titan 

As is the case for the Earth, Venus, and the giant 
planets, clouds or haze in the stratosphere form as a 
result of photochemical processes, whereas those in the 
troposphere form from condensation. At the deepest level 
there should be methane clouds. Other condensate clouds, 
possibly with a variety of compositions, may form at 
intermediate levels. 

Methane cloud formation near the temperature 
minimum (below 40 km altitude) is highly uncertain. 
The Voyager infrared spectra have been interpreted by 
some to imply that methane is highly supersaturated 
near the temperature minimum. This cannot occur in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the presence of a substantial cloud, and so would imply 
that condensation occurs only rarely, forming large ice 
(or liquid in the lowest few km) particles which fall 
rapidly to the surface (rain without clouds). That scenario 
was proposed prior to the interpretation of high global 
supersaturation of methane. Titan and the Earth may 
differ significantly in terms of the number of condensation 
nuclei available to initiate particle formation. On the 
Earth there are numerous CCN mixed up from the surface. 
On Titan the only CCN available may come from slow 
sedimentation of the overlying photochemical haze and 
from other condensates. The number density from that 
source is thought to be quite low compared to that for the 
Earth. Low CCN density would lead to fewer particles, 
but those that form can grow by condensation to large size 
(radii greater than 50 ym) because their formation does 
little to deplete the available vapor. Both microphysical 
models and recent ground-based near-infrared spectra 
imply patchy and variable clouds of large methane ice or 
liquid particles which form at an altitude near 15 km. 

Titan’s stratospheric photochemical haze is composed 
of complex hydrocarbons and nitriles. The starting point 
for this process is the photolysis of methane and nitrogen 
high in the atmosphere (higher than 300 km altitude). 
Although the process is slow, over geologic time enough 
methane should have been processed to generate 100 m 
thick surface deposits of liquid ethane and solid organic 
material, provided a surface reservoir of methane has been 
available to replenish that which is destroyed over billions 
of years. The haze particles are undoubtedly complex 
organics and nitriles, although not enough is know to be 
more specific regarding the composition. 

Microphysical models for Titan’s stratospheric haze 
lump the chemical processes leading to formation of 
condensable organics into one adjustable parameter, the 
mass production rate of aerosol-forming molecules at the 
top of the haze layer. Nucleation is assumed to be initiated 
by formation of small clusters of molecules which grow 
through collisions. Models include particle charging by 
UV and cosmic ray events. Charge is a free parameter 
(number of electrons per unit particle radius) and serves to 
inhibit growth by coagulation. Traditional microphysical 
models assumed the particles remain spherical as they 
grow. This would be expected if the particles are 
liquid. More recent models incorporate laboratory results 
and theoretical predictions which favor solid particles. 
As solid particles collide they stick together to form 
aggregates. As the aggregates collide with each other 
they form larger aggregates which have a fractal nature. 
Cluster-cluster aggregates have fractal dimension close to 
2 (versus spheres which have fractal dimension 3). Near 
the top of the haze layer (~400 km) the growth process 
is via molecules which stick to individual particles. The 
individual particles grow to some size limit determined 
by the pressure. Both theory and observation indicate 
the individual particles, or monomers have radii near 
0.066 wm. Mutual collisions among the monomers give 
rise to clusters and to cluster—cluster aggregates as the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Clouds in Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


particles settle. The cluster aggregate idea can explain the 
combination of strong linear polarization in light scattered 
near 90° scattering angle and the strong scattering of light 
in the forward direction. 


Giant planets 

Microphysical studies of the condensate clouds in the 
tropospheres of the giant planets rely on the familiar 
principles which describe growth by condensation, 
coagulation, and coalescence and loss by evaporation 
and _ sedimentation. However, these models are 
extremely crude because the number and composition 
of potential cloud condensation nuclei are unknown. 
Furthermore cloud formation depends strongly on 
atmospheric dynamics which are not taken into account. 
There are no in situ measurements except for the Galileo 
probe which found few particles in its descent path 
through a volatile-depleted patch of Jovian atmosphere. 
Some microphysical models predict that the methane 
clouds on Uranus and Neptune are 10-100 times more 
massive than any clouds on Earth. However, the 
observations show very little methane cloud mass. 
Observational evidence for the water cloud is lacking, 
although higher clouds interfere. The ammonia cloud 
near the top of the troposphere on Jupiter and Saturn 
is predicted from microphysical models to be a weakly 
precipitating cloud similar to terrestrial cirrus, and 
observations are consistent with that idea. 

Coupled photochemical/cloud microphysical mod- 
els are able to account for the optical depth and size distri- 
bution of hydrocarbon haze particles in the stratospheres 
of Uranus and Neptune, provided the mass production 
rate and particle charge are adjustable parameters. The 
models account for particle sizes (all submicron) and ver- 
tical profiles as derived from Voyager data. Eddy diffu- 
sion transports methane to the upper atmosphere where 
photochemical processes lead to formation of diacetylene, 
acetylene, and ethane ice particles which condense near 
0.1 mb, 2.5 mb, and 14 mb, respectively. As the particles 
fall to pressures greater than 600 mb they evaporate as the 
temperature rises. Organic polymers can also form, prob- 
ably via solid-state photochemistry within the original ice 
particle during the settling lifetime. This process can ac- 
count for the weak absorption seen in reflected sunlight. 


Bibliography 

Grinspoon D H, Pollack J B, Sitton B R, Carlson R W, Kamp 
LW, Baines K H, Encrenaz Th. and Taylor F W 1993 
Probing Venus’s cloud structure with Galileo NIMS 
Planet. Space Sci. 41 515-42 

Houze R A 1993 Cloud Dynamics (New York: Academic) 

Kahn R 1984 The spatial and seasonal distribution of Mar- 
tian clouds and some meteorological implications 
J. Geophys. Res. 89 6671-88 

West R A, Strobel D F and Tomasko M G 1986 
Clouds, aerosols and photochemistry in the Jovian 
atmosphere Icarus 65 161-217 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


West R A, Baines K H and Pollack J B 1991 Atmospheric 
clouds and aerosols in the Uranian atmosphere 
Uranus ed J T Bergstralh, E D Miner and M S 
Mathews (Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona 
Press) pp 296-324 


Robert West 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Clown Face Nebula (NGC 2392) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clown Face Nebula (NGC 2392) 


A planetary nebula, also known as the Eskimo Nebula, 
in the constellation Gemini, position RA 074 29.2™, dec. 
+20°55’. It is bluish, 13” in diameter, and of ninth 
magnitude, with a tenth-magnitude central star. The blue- 
green nebula’s hazy outer regions are thought to resemble 
an Eskimo’s hood or clown’s ruff. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cluster 


Two European Space Agency missions to send four 
identical spacecraft to explore the interaction between 
Earth’s magnetosphere and the solar wind. sono and 
Cluster made up the first ESA ‘Cornerstone’. Cluster I 
was lost in the failed maiden launch of the Ariane 5 
rocket in 1996. Cluster II, which replicates the original 
mission, will be launched from Baikonur in summer 2000. 
Four spacecraft will provide the first three-dimensional 
measurements of large- and small-scale phenomena in the 
near-Earth environment. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cluster Membership 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cluster Membership 


Our Milky Way Galaxy contains numerous stellar 
systems, the members of which are thought to have a 
common origin and are gravitationally bound. The 
galactic GLOBULAR and GALACTIC OPEN CLUSTERS are the 
most important representatives of such systems. Less 
conspicuous are the low-density and gravitationally 
unbound stellar associations. There is a tight link 
between the open clusters, associations and the galactic 
disk which is readily visible on the starry sky. However, 
the galactic disk is very rich in stars, such that the open 
clusters and associations, projected against this 
background, start to blend with it. This blending, or in 
other words the cluster contamination by galactic disk 
stars, becomes severe at fainter magnitudes. Handling the 
cluster contamination is pretty much part of the problem 
of determination of cluster membership. The galactic 
globular clusters, on the other hand, are so rich in stars 
that a casual background star rarely is adopted as a 
cluster member. This may not be the case if the globular 
cluster is poorly populated and/or is located near the 
center of the Galaxy where the background star density 
reaches a maximum. 

Why do we need to identify the cluster members as 
confidently as possible? Observation of STAR CLUSTERS 
is important for comparison of the theories of STELLAR 
EVOLUTION and STELLAR FORMATION with observations. 
In fact, the stellar evolution theory for stars younger than 
a few Gyr almost entirely rests on observations of open 
star clusters and the Sun. If the observations of a star 
cluster are contaminated by background stars, it 
inevitably will affect the cluster’s HERTZSPRUNG— 
RUSSELL (HR) DIAGRAM and the derived mean properties 
of the cluster may be in error. In turn, stellar formation 
theory requires knowledge of the stellar initial mass 
function (IMF), which in principle can be deduced from 
the observations of star clusters. Again, the 
contamination together with completeness of cluster 
membership are the crucial issues in an attempt to derive 
the IMF. 

A prerequisite to a thorough study of any specific 
star cluster and association is a membership 
determination, which is valuable in its own right. 
Membership determination presents a _ paradoxical 
situation. On the one hand the concept is easy to grasp 
but on the other hand, the practical implementation has 
kept generations of astronomers busy and surely will in 
the future. This paradox is sometimes overlooked even 
by workers in the field and is not adequately 
acknowledged by others using cluster-study results. 

The following discussion has a passing connection to 
the group of statistical methods known as clustering 
techniques, which are often used in the analysis of galaxy 
distributions. In the case of star clusters, the underlying 
assumption is that their existence usually is well 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


established, whereas individual membership probabilities 
may not be known. 


Membership probability 

Since the star clusters are projected onto the Galactic star 
field, we always deal with a mix of two populations: the 
cluster (c) stars and field (f) stars. There is no readily 
available criterion which will give us a clear 
discrimination between these two populations. Thus, we 
can only estimate a star’s probability, p, of being a 
member of the cluster, which can be defined as follows: 


F., 


P= F+tk 


(1) 


where F, and F¢ are some distribution functions (often 
called the probability density functions, pdf) for the 
cluster and field respectively. These functions, in turn, 
are dependent on some physical quantities and their 
errors characterizing the cluster and field stars. 

In principle, any membership criterion based upon 
physical or other phenomena is useful, as long as it 
allows one to separate the cluster and field population to 
some degree. A true cluster star will probably pass all 
‘filters’ set by different approaches if the assumptions are 
correct and unbiased, whereas a field star is expected to 
fail on at least one of them. 

Usually, star clusters have been discovered as local, 
projected star-density enhancements on the sky. As a first 
cut, one can draw an imaginary circle on the sky around 
such enhancement and declare that every star within the 
circle is a cluster member. Unfortunately, at fainter 
magnitudes this approach leads to poor results. As an 
example, let us consider the case of a relatively nearby 
open cluster, Messier 39. Armed with a priori knowledge 
of true cluster members, it is possible to estimate the 
mean probability for each star to be a cluster member at 
different apparent magnitudes within a radius equal to 15 
arcmin around the cluster center. In table 1 a cluster 
membership probability of 75% means that 3/4 of those 
stars are cluster members, whereas 1/4 are field stars. 
Since this is a probability, we cannot tell which specific 
stars are the cluster members. Obviously, the lower the 
probability, the lower the chances of finding a cluster star 
in the sample. 

As seen from table 1, down to V ~11 mag the 
number of cluster stars is high enough to let us ignore the 
presence of field stars. However, at fainter magnitudes 
the cluster members virtually vanish into a sea of field 
stars. This is a very common picture in open cluster 
studies. 

Fortunately, there are a few features which are 
different for stars in clusters and those in the galactic 
field. For example, due to their common origin and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cluster Membership 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Membership probabilities. 
Radius (arcmin) 


15 55 
Visual magnitude, — Probability Proper motion 
V estimate (%) probability (%) 
8 75 96 
9 87 83 
10 83 86 
11 20 71 
12 7 66 
13 4 63 
14 2 30 


gravitational field the cluster stars are located within a 
limited volume rarely exceeding 20 pc in diameter. In the 
HR or the color-magnitude diagrams cluster stars are 
mainly located within a narrow band along the main 
sequence, with the exception of very young open clusters 
in which the less massive stars are scattered well above 
the so-called zero-age main sequence. On the other hand, 
the distribution of galactic field stars in the color— 
magnitude diagram merely forms a wide and diffuse 
cloud. This difference in appearance of color-magnitude 
diagrams is one frequently used method to delineate the 
cluster stars from the field. Although it never deals with 
calculation of membership probabilities, in essence it 
boosts membership probabilities en masse. However, 
moving down to fainter magnitudes, there always is a 
critical region of the color-magnitude diagram where 
field stars pollute the diagram beyond recognition. 
Ironically, at the moment this region occupied by the 
faintest members of star clusters, such as white and 
brown dwarfs is at the center of attention of many 
astronomers for very good reasons. These objects can 
provide an independent absolute age scale and may 
reveal some secrets of planet formation. Apparently, 
there is a need to derive real cluster membership 
probabilities, not just estimates. 

Any star’s motion can be divided into two 
measurable quantities—tangential velocity on the sky or 
the so-called proper motion, and radial velocity along the 
line of sight. These two velocities are heavily used in 
calculating the membership probabilities and certainly 
warrant a closer look. 

For a typical open cluster, the scatter of field-star 
motions is approximately up to a hundred times higher 
than the dispersion of internal motion velocities around 
the cluster center of mass. Essentially, this disparity is the 
key in determination of cluster membership using star 
motions. Of course, each cluster has its own systemic 
motion within the Milky Way. Membership 
determination is much easier if this motion is 
significantly different from the mean motion of field 
stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Proper motion as a tool for membership 
Although the existence of PROPER MOTION has been 
known since its discovery by Edmond Halley in 1718, it 
is not easy to measure a star’s proper motion. 

First, proper motions are very small. A typical unit 
for measuring the proper motion is a milliarcsecond per 
year (mas yr‘) and very few stars have motions 
exceeding 1000 mas yr’. In the cluster world, the 
Hyades cluster members possess the largest proper 
motion, around 100 mas yr'. Second, the standard 
ground-based technique for determination of proper 
motion requires a concerted long-term observational 
effort. Traditionally, the positions of stars are measured 
on two or more sets of photographic plates taken at 
different epochs spanning at least several decades. Then, 
all measured coordinates are reduced into a common 
coordinate system at a fixed epoch, allowing a linear 
time-dependent coordinate term for each star (a.k.a. 
proper motion) in addition to the conventional global 
polynomial terms. The reliability of a proper motion is 
characterized by the ratio of the proper motion to its 
standard error. The rule of thumb is, the longer the time 
span, the more precise the proper motion. It is relatively 
easy to obtain proper motions at the 1 mas yr | accuracy 
level, although sub-mas yr! accuracies are still a 
challenge. Moreover, for most of the open clusters there 
is virtually no early plate material available, and when it 
is, the plates frequently do not contain faint enough stars. 

The importance of proper motion in cluster 
membership determination was understood long ago, but 
a thorough exploitation of proper motion started only 
with the introduction of photography in astronomical 
observations during the last decades of the nineteenth 
century. Since then, about 100 out of 1200 known open 
clusters have at least one determination of proper motion 
using the photographic method, as opposed to about 500 
clusters having had photometric observations 
accomplished. 

A special place in cluster membership studies is 
occupied by the recent very successful HIPPARCOS 
mission and planned future space astrometry missions, 
such as SIM, FAME and GAIA. Hipparcos has made a 
significant impact on the nearby open cluster and 
association membership and census. Due to expected 
positional accuracies at the unprecedented micro-arc- 
second level, the future space missions, FAME and 
GAIA, will be in a position to provide excellent 
membership information for virtually all registered open 
clusters. These future missions are expected to 
revolutionize studies of the Milky Way, including the star 
clusters. 

As said before, membership determination using 
proper motion utilizes the fact of quite different 
dispersions in the velocities of cluster and field stars. In 
practise, however, each determination of proper motion 
has some error. In other words, the true proper motion is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cluster Membership 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


always somewhat blurred due to measuring and other 
errors. If these errors are comparable with the dispersion 
of field stars (usually around 5—10 mas yr ') and systemic 
motion of a cluster does not differ significantly from the 
mean motion of field stars, then cluster member 
segregation is impossible. 

Consider again the open cluster Messier 39, which 
has a rather large sample of stars having proper motions 
with accuracies slightly above 1 mas yr'. The working 
tool to analyse proper motion is the so-called vector- 
point diagram (VPD). In this diagram (figure 1) with 
axes usually oriented along right ascension and 
declination, each dot is the end of a proper motion vector. 
Two populations of dots can be noticed: a large 
concentration around (0,0) and a smaller one around (—6, 
-16) mas yr<figref id="EAA2854fig1">. The latter 
essentially represents the cluster stars. Since errors are 
the major source of cluster-star dispersion in VPDs, the 
distribution of cluster stars is very close to Gaussian. The 
dispersion of field stars is mainly caused by true motion 
of the galactic stars which, generally speaking, do not 
obey any simple distribution; however, superposition of 
many smaller distributions of a poorly known nature 
produces a distribution which appears Gaussian. This fact 
is used by astronomers to calculate the membership 
probabilities just from proper motions in the following 
manner. The cluster and field proper motion distribution 
functions, F, and F;, are expressed explicitly as two 
separate Gaussians with their own parameters. The sum 
of these distributions, F, + F;, essentially represents the 
distribution of vector points in the VPD. A number of 


-400 


-200 0 200 
#, (mas yr”) 


Figure 1. Vector-point diagram of proper motions in the region 
of open cluster Messier 39. Each dot is the end of a star’s 
proper-motion vector originating from the zero point. The 
cluster stars can be recognized as a small clump around (—6, 
—16) mas yr’. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


400 


mathematical techniques are devised to find the 
parameters of these distributions. Once they are known, it 
is trivial to calculate individual membership probabilities 
using equation (1). The second set of mean probabilities 
in table 1 shows how dramatically the mean membership 
probability increases at fainter magnitudes with respect to 
the would-be probabilities of a smaller central star 
sample. Despite the area of the sky under the survey 
being more than ten time larger, the proper-motion-based 
probabilities still are very reliable, and what is more 
important, such probability is provided for each star in 
the sample. These probabilities are totally independent of 
any astrophysical theory predictions, for instance how the 
cluster color-magnitude diagram should look. This 
provision is critical in the case of ‘weird’ stars, such as 
blue stragglers, variables, binaries and other exotic 
objects. Figure 2 shows the color-magnitude diagram for 
all stars in the region of Messier 39 (figure 2(a)). The 
cluster’s upper main sequence is barely visible; however, 
with the help of proper motion virtually all field stars are 
gone (figure 2(6)) and the main sequence is beautifully 
delineated. 

On the other hand, proper motion is not an absolute 
criterion in deciding the membership of a single star of 
particular interest. Even a high membership probability, 
by the very nature of probabilities, leaves a chance for a 
field star. Thus, if possible, another criterion, such as 
radial velocity, should be used. 


Radial velocities 

RADIAL VELOCITY determinations are made by measuring 
the Doppler shift in the spectra of stars, i.e. the 
displacement of spectral lines, AA, with respect to their 
wavelength at rest, 49, as determined from laboratory 
measurements. In the classical framework _ this 
displacement is proportional to the velocity along the line 
of sight 


(2) 


where c is speed of light. The radial velocities of open 
cluster stars, as measured from the solar system, rarely 
exceed 10-20 km s"', hence a required accuracy of radial 
velocities to +1 km s" or better necessitates that the 
wavelength displacement must be determined to a few 
parts in a million, which is a challenge even to modern 
spectroscopy. The most frequently used technique for 
radial velocity measurements is the cross-correlation of 
an observed spectrum with a high-quality template 
(optical or synthetic) of a reference spectrum. This way it 
can be done directly, while observing as in the 
CORAVEL _ spectrometer, or numerically, using the 
CCD spectrograms taken for one star at a time as in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cluster Membership 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0 1.0 2.0 
(B-¥) 


Figure 2. Color-magnitude diagram in the region of open cluster Messier 39: (a) all stars; (b) only probable cluster members. 


French/Swiss ELODIE and CORALIE designs and 
digital speedometers developed at the Harvard- 
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, USA, or for many 
stars simultaneously (cf the Hydra _ multi-object 
spectrograph on the WIYN telescope at Kitt Peak, USA). 
The most accurate radial velocities have been achieved 
by placing an absorption cell (HF or iodine) in front of 
the spectrograph, but this technique requires a high level 
of light flux and is mainly used in extra-solar planet 
hunting around bright stars. 

The spectra of late-type (F-G-K) stars contain a large 
number of small-width metal absorption lines which 
makes the application of cross-correlation techniques 
relatively easy. This explains why the vast majority of 
cluster stars having precise radial velocities are of late 
spectral type. Due to the scarcity of spectral features 
coupled with their strong dependence upon the physical 
conditions in STELLAR ATMOSPHERES, and often large 
rotational velocities of hot stars, it is much more difficult 
to measure radial velocities of early-type O, B and A 
stars which usually are the brightest in open clusters. 
Recent advances in modelling the stellar atmospheres and 
tuning these models to a star’s actual physical parameters 
promise to close this gap soon. 

Figure 3 shows the distribution of radial velocities in 
the open cluster NGC 188. In some sense it resembles the 
vector-point diagram, though just in one coordinate. In 
principle, it is possible to model the cluster and field star 
distributions, but for two stumbling blocks. First, the 
radial velocity measurements are telescope-time 
prohibitive and, hence, the star samples are always 
optimized to include a maximum number of potential 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0 1.0 2.0 
(B-Y) 


cluster members. In other words, such selection is greatly 
biased towards cluster members. This causes a severe 
under-representation of field stars and, consequently, 
undermines the statistical grounds for calculating the 
membership probabilities. Secondly, about half or even 
more of cluster members can be binaries (some are even 
triple systems), like those marked in grey in figure 3. The 
orbital motion will induce a time-dependent offset 
relative to the mean motion of the binary system. To 
detect such an offset motion, the observations must span 
a considerable part of the orbital period. If the offset goes 
undetected, then a star could be erroneously categorized 
as a field star. While this may appear annoying for the 
determination of cluster membership, most researchers 
thrive on binaries, since they provide such fundamental 
astronomical data as masses, radii and luminosities, and 
have a profound impact on star formation history and 
dynamical evolution of stellar systems (see also BINARY 
STARS IN GLOBULAR CLUSTERS). 

For these reasons, the determination of cluster 
membership from radial velocities is so far limited to a 
simple division of stars into cluster members and non- 
members, depending whether or not their radial velocities 
fall within the 30 window around the cluster’s mean 
radial velocity. Nevertheless, even such a rudimentary 
membership in combination with a membership from 
proper motions weeds out field stars quite effectively. To 
date, about 200 open clusters have some sort of radial 
velocity measurements, mainly for the giant-branch stars. 
Only a dozen of them, mainly the nearby clusters, have 
measurements for the main-sequence stars, but this is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cluster Membership 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


60 


of stars 
Aes 
oO 


20 


Number 


0 ._- Fs 


—60 —5Eé —50 


OV 


—45 


a 


—35 —30 —25 


—40 
Radial velocity (km sec‘) 


Figure 3. A histogram of radial-velocity distribution in the open cluster NGC 188. The grey area indicates the number of stars 
showing variable radial velocity. The central peak is the location of mainly the cluster stars. (Courtesy of R D Mathieu and C Dolan, 


University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.) 


rapidly improving with new advances in the multi-object 
spectrograph design and the availability of large 
telescopes. 


Membership in associations 

The stellar association membership presents a real 
challenge to anyone attempting to determine them. Most 
common are the so-called OB ASSOCIATIONS. These 
associations are gravitationally unbound star systems, 
recognizable by some excess density of O and B spectral 
type stars against the sky background and a small internal 
velocity dispersion. The latter does not exceed a few 
km s_ and, as a result, the association can be detected by 
common kinematics of its members, though in a less 
consistent manner than for the star clusters. Since the 
associations cover tens to hundreds of square degrees on 
the sky at extremely low density (a few stars per square 
degree), before the Hipparcos mission the membership 
information was limited to the bright stars and even it 
was not reliable. The Hipparcos measurements are 
ideally suited for membership determination in nearby 
OB associations out to the distance of ~650 pc. 

The large spatial extent of associations prompts 
researchers to use the so-called moving cluster technique. 
All association stars are moving so that a receding 
association approaches a location on the sky known as 
the covergence point. In the case of associations this is 
only partially true because the star motions are slightly 
diverging. Apparently, the velocity dispersion 
perpendicular to the direction of the association’s motion 
is just a combination of an intrinsic velocity dispersion 
convolved with the observational errors. The distribution 
of this velocity dispersion is used to calculate 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


membership probabilities for associations. With the 
advent of Hipparcos parallaxes and proper motions it is 
possible to derive an elliptical membership probability 
cylinder in 3D velocity space, which constitutes the so- 
called ‘spaghetti? method introduced by Dutch 
astronomers. Now a much better census of the stellar 
content in stellar associations is known to within 1 kpc of 
the Sun. 


Globular clusters 

The main thrust in globular cluster astrometry is towards 
the determination of absolute proper motions which 
allow one to calculate the orbits. The knowledge of orbits 
is crucial in understanding the content and properties of 
presumably a rather heterogeneous system of globular 
clusters, some possibly captured during galactic merger 
events (see GLOBULAR CLUSTER SYSTEMS IN 
INTERACTING GALAXIES). 

High-precision relative proper motions are required 
to identify potential field stars projecting onto the cluster. 
Thus, the Yerkes refractor plate material has produced 
clean samples of cluster stars in a dozen globular 
clusters. Since the globular clusters are rather distant 
objects, only upper parts of the cluster color-magnitude 
diagram are visible on old photographic plates. It is 
expected that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) 
archival CCD frames will be useful in producing deep 
membership studies in globular clusters. The positional 
accuracy on the HST CCD frames is sufficiently high to 
reach a sub-mas yr ' accuracy level for proper motions in 
a few years, a feat impossible from ground-based 
observations. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cluster Membership 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Embedded clusters 

This is a class of very young open clusters surrounded by 
thick clouds of molecular gas and dust, presumably 
leftovers from star formation. Usually these clouds block 
out most of the star light. However, in the near-infrared 
wavelengths the clouds become fairly transparent. With 
the advent of panoramic near-infrared wavelength 
detectors it is possible to sample the nearby (d < 1 kpc) 
embedded clusters down to and well below the hydrogen 
burning limit. Such clusters are ideal places to study the 
stellar initial mass function (IMF), since stellar evolution 
and dynamical effects have minimally changed the 
content and mass of embedded clusters. On the other 
hand, even at infrared wavelengths the extinction in the 
direction of cluster members can be non-uniform, which 
coupled with the emission due to the presence of 
circumstellar disks and other remnants of star formation 
make the mass determination rather difficult. 

For the handful of well-studied embedded clusters, 
cluster membership is still not available for a couple of 
reasons. First of all, the density of stars in these clusters 
is much higher than in the surrounding field, thus 
allowing one to apply a simple statistical field-star 
subtraction. Secondly, the time span between the first and 
second epoch imaging-array frames is currently too short 
to derive reliable proper motions. In addition, the whole 
field of INFRARED ASTRONOMY is rapidly evolving and 
the future instrumentation will most likely provide new 
means to find the cluster membership. 


Alternative membership method 

The faint end of cluster sequences in the HR diagram is 
invariably contaminated by field stars due to a couple of 
aggravating circumstances. First, the cluster luminosity 
function (in essence, the number of stars per unit 
magnitude) at around the solar luminosity and fainter is 
getting flat, mainly due to the effect of dynamical 
‘evaporation’ of cluster stars. On the other hand, the 
field-star luminosity function is steadily growing. In this 
situation, the observed ratio of cluster to field stars is 
plummeting and so are the membership probabilities. 
Second, at faint magnitudes membership is _ plainly 
lacking because of the shallow old-plate limiting 
magnitude and unacceptably low light-flux levels for 
radial velocity measurements. 

It turns out that the majority of young stars of 
spectral type A and later have considerable coronal 
activity, showing up in x-rays. The ROSAT x-ray 
satellite, operating from 1990-8, was the prime 
instrument to map out the ‘soft’ (0.1—2.4 KeV) x-ray sky. 
It was quickly realized that almost all nearby clusters of 
Pleiades age and younger should be visible on the 
ROSAT x-ray ‘sky’, and these positive identifications 
can be used as a valuable membership criterion. Using 
the ROSAT data, nearly a dozen open clusters have their 
membership lists enlarged substantially at the faint end. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Although, it is not entirely clear if all fainter cluster stars 
have such x-ray activity, it is nevertheless a powerful 
alternative membership determination technique to 
complement classical kinematical methods. Perhaps its 
potential somewhat diminishes in the areas of nearby OB 
associations where the fraction of x-ray bright field stars 
is higher. 


Future 

Despite the huge effort put into the determination of star 
cluster and association membership, there is still plenty 
of work ahead. Not a single cluster is known, for which 
we have discerned all cluster members. To make matters 
more complicated, the Hipparcos observations have 
revealed a number of cluster stars beyond the tidal radius 
for the nearest open clusters. The tidal radius is the 
distance beyond which the cluster loses its stars due to 
Galactic gravitational tidal forces. This means that the 
all-sky proper motion and parallax surveys, such as the 
planned GAIA mission, should be used to derive a 
decisive and complete cluster or association membership. 
The parallax will provide a hitherto missing positional 
coordinate—the distance. The cluster membership can be 
rigorously derived only with a full bundle of three 
positional coordinates and three velocity components in 
hand, which, compared with the potential energy of a 
cluster, ultimately defines whether or not the star is likely 
to be bound to a cluster. The instantaneous positional 
accuracy of the planned astrometric missions is so high 
that it would take only a couple of months to achieve the 
best ground-based proper motion accuracy, as opposed to 
the several decades needed before. 


Bibliography 

Baranne A, Mayor M and Poncet J L 1979 CORAVEL—a new 
tool for radial velocity measurements Vistas Astron. 23 
279-316 

Cabrera-Cafio J and Alfaro E J 1990 A_ non-parametric 
approach to the membership problem in open clusters 
Astron. Astrophys. 235 94-102 

Randich S, Schmitt J H M M, Prosser C F and Stauffer J R 
1996 The x-ray properties of the young open cluster 
around o Persei Astron. Astrophys. 305 785-805 

Vasilevskis S 1962 The proper motions of open clusters Astron. 
J. 67 699-706 

de Zeeuw P T, Hoogerwerf R, de Bruijne JH J, Brown AG A 
and Blaauw A 1999 A Hipparcos census of the nearby OB 
associations Astron. J. 117 354-99 


Imants Platais 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cluster of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cluster of Galaxies 


A collection of galaxies that is held together by gravity. 
Clusters may contain from a few to a few thousand 
member galaxies. Small clusters, with up to a few dozen 
members, are referred to as ‘groups’, the Milky Way 
Galaxy, for example, being a member of the Local Group, 
which contains at least 25 members. Most galaxies are 
members of groups or binary pairs. Larger clusters contain 
hundreds or thousands of members and, typically, have 
diameters of a few megaparsecs (about 10 million light- 
years). Rich (densely populated) clusters are divided into 
regular clusters and irregular clusters. 

Regular and great regular clusters are fairly sym- 
metrical spherical systems with a strong concentration of 
galaxies towards their centers. They frequently contain 
several thousand members, the great majority of which 
are elliptical or lenticular (SO) galaxies, and usually con- 
tain one or more giant elliptical (cD) galaxies at their cen- 
ters. It is believed that numerous collisions and mergers 
have taken place in clusters of this kind, and that giant 
galaxies have grown by absorbing smaller ones, a pro- 
cess that is sometimes called ‘galactic cannibalism’. The 
shortage or absence of gas-rich spirals within such clus- 
ters is believed to be the result of gas being stripped out 
of them, or converted rapidly into stars, during collisions 
and close encounters. Such clusters often contain substan- 
tial quantities of tenuous high-temperature gas (with tem- 
peratures of the order of 10° K), which radiates at x-ray 
wavelengths. Irregular clusters are more diffuse and less 
structured. They contain a mixture of all types of galaxy, 
including substantial numbers of spiral galaxies. Within 
clusters of this kind, close encounters and collisions are 
relatively rare. 

The nearest large cluster is the Virgo cluster, an 
irregular aggregation of more than a thousand galaxies 
that lies at a distance of about 50 million light-years. The 
nearest rich regular cluster is the Coma cluster, which 
lies at a distance of about 300 million light-years, and is 
estimated to contain up to ten thousand galaxies. 

Studies of the internal dynamics of clusters (the 
speeds at which the member galaxies move around within 
the cluster) imply that most clusters can hold themselves 
together by gravitational forces only if they contain at least 
ten (and in some cases up toa hundred) times as much dark 
matter as luminous matter. 


See also: Coma Cluster, dark matter, elliptical galaxies, 
Hubble classification, interacting galaxies, Local Group, 
spiral galaxy, superclusters and the Local Supercluster, 
Virgo Cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coalsack ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Coalsack 


A large and prominent dark nebula in the constellation 
Crux, encroaching into neighboring Centaurus and 
Musca, centered approximately on position RA 12 h5om 
dec. —63°. Itis easily visible against the bright background 
of the Milky Way, and measures nearly 7° by 5°. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Collimation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Collimation 


The process whereby the components of an optical system, 
such as a telescope, are positioned and aligned to give 
optimum performance. For a refractor, each lens should 
be centered on, and perpendicular to, the optical axis of 
the telescope. Cassegrain reflectors, and related types, are 
collimated by ensuring that the axis of the primary mirror 
passes through the center of the secondary mirror and that 
the centers of the eyepiece and the secondary mirror lie on 
this same axis. Where light from the primary is reflected 
through a right-angle (as in the Newtonian reflector), the 
system is collimated when the axis of the primary mirror 
and the axis of the eyepiece intersect at the center of the 
diagonal flat mirror and are inclined to its surface by the 
same angle. 

A collimated beam of light is one that consists of a 
bundle of parallel rays. A collimator is a device (lens 
or mirror) that produces a collimated beam. This may 
be achieved, in principle, by arranging for light to pass 
through a small aperture or pinhole placed at the focus of 
a lens; after passing through the lens, the emerging beam 
of light should consist of parallel rays. 


See also: Cassegrain telescope, eyepiece, focal length, 
mirror, Newtonian telescope, reflector, refractor, spectro- 
scope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Collisionless Processes in 
Astrophysical Plasmas 


Plasmas, also called the fourth state of matter to 
distinguish them from solids, fluids and electrically 
neutral gases, are ionized gases. This generally implies 
that their thermal energy exceeds the first ionization 
potential such that a considerable fraction of their atoms 
(or molecules) is ionized, although even at lower thermal 
energies substantial ionization in a gas may also be 
produced by other processes, for instance by external 
radiation. It also implies that plasmas consist of free 
charged particles, in general positively charged ions and 
negatively charged electrons. Exceptions from this general 
rule are ‘gravitational plasmas’ which are dilute inert gases 
exposed to a gravitational field or behaving under the 
action of their own gravitation and showing similarities to 
ordinary plasmas. Other exceptions are plasmas built of 
electrons and positrons, positively and negatively charged 
ions, dusty plasmas where the dust grains may carry any 
amount and any sign of charges, electroweak plasmas 
where the interaction is mediated by massive W and Z 
bosons instead of photons and, finally, chromodynamic 
plasmas which consist of asymptotically free quarks and 
gluons. 

All such ‘plasmas’ may be found in cosmic space 
at different locations and at different cosmological 
times depending on the available interaction or thermal 
energies. For instance, shortly after the big bang at 
about 10~!° s the plasma was in the electroweak state 
(see COSMOLOGY: STANDARD MODEL). With transition below 
100 GeV temperature in energy units at this time the W, 
Z bosons became photons. Similarly, before about 10-4 s 
the cosmological temperature was high enough to allow 
for the chromodynamic plasma state sometimes called 
the quark-gluon soup. When the temperature dropped 
below nuclear binding energies the nuclei froze out. At 
temperatures well below 0.5 MeV at several seconds the 
plasma became ordinary plasma. This is the state we are 
dealing with here. Ordinary plasmas have been abundant 
in the universe since then until the present. However, until 
about 300 000 yr after the big bang all the ordinary matter 
in the universe was in the plasma state. After decoupling 
of matter from light at about this time the plasma state 
is still found in many, though only in localized regions, 
and is no longer of cosmological origin. Therefore, today, 
the claim sometimes made that almost all matter in the 
universe would be in the plasma state must be taken with 
care. Much of it is, in particular most of the hot matter, 
but by far not all of it. This is even more true as we 
have little idea yet what the presumably largest amount 
of gravitating matter in the universe, the mysterious dark 
matter, is really made of (see DARK MATTER: ITS NATURE). 


Quasineutrality and screening 

Since ionization produces equal charges of opposite signs, 
real plasmas are quasineutral. This means that, looked at 
from the outside, the plasma carries zero total (electric) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


charge. Embedding the plasma in an external electric 
field or separating one of the charge components out 
turns the plasma into non-neutral plasma with entirely 
different behavior. Looked at from the inside, the plasma 
is by no means electrically neutral. This is due to the 
high mobility of the charge carriers of which it is built. 
Each particle, electron or ion, is in fast thermal motion. 
It represents a microscopic charge density element, a 
microscopic current element and because of its motion 
a microscopic radiating antenna element. It is thus the 
source of an electromagnetic field. Because of this the 
plasma is subject not only to moving charges but also 
to highly fluctuating electromagnetic fields on all time 
and spatial scales. These electromagnetic fields act on 
each of the charges in the plasma giving the plasma its 
characteristic properties that distinguish it from the other 
states of matter. 

Quasineutrality is an important property. It implies 
that the plasma volume, on average, carries equal numbers 
of opposite charges. However, because of their different 
masses, ions and electrons are usually in grossly different 
states of motion, with the ions nearly immobile and the 
electrons very fast moving. This implies that on average 
many electrons pass close to an ion thereby screening 
the electric field of the ion from the rest of the plasma. 
From Poisson’s equation for the charge density it then 
follows that the electric field of an ion charge +e, with 
the elementary charge e it carries, is not felt outside a 
distance Ap = v./@pe = (€okgTe/noe*)"* from the ion. 
The electric potential ¢(r) of the ion as function of radial 
distance r from the ion in the surrounding electron cloud 
assumes the dependence ¢(r) = (e/4meor) exp(—r/Ap). 
The 1/r dependence is the usual Coulomb law, while 
the exponential describes the screening. This screening 
distance Ap is the so-called Debye length. It can 
be written as the ratio of the electron thermal speed 
ve = (2kgT./m,.)' and the electron plasma frequency 
pe = (noe”/eom.)"* and thus depends on the electron 
temperature T, and average plasma density 1 (kg, me, €o 
are Boltzmann’s constant, electron mass, and free space 
dielectric constant, respectively). 


Classification 

Plasmas can be classified according to their number 
densities. The denser a plasma the higher is the probability 
that the particles collide with each other. Plasma processes 
under the condition of frequent collisions are called 
collisional. When the collisions are rare or practically 
absent they are called collision free. Sometimes this 
terminology is applied to the plasma itself, but it should be 
kept in mind that what is meant hereby is that the processes 
taking place are either slower or faster than the typical time 
between binary collisions in the plasma. In this spirit the 
degree of collisionality is defined relative to a given time 
scale. Hence it is not a strict definition. Because of the 
available long time scales, many astrophysical plasmas can 
be considered to be collisional. However, for a large class 
of sufficiently dilute plasmas even in astrophysics the time 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


scales are short enough for these plasmas to fall under the 
description of collisionless plasmas. Collisionless plasma 
processes take place in stellar winds and the interstellar 
medium, in the plasmas of molecular clouds, stellar 
atmospheres, the various magnetospheres of magnetized 
stars, jet plasmas and in some regions in accretion disks. 
Moreover, most of the processes leading to shock waves in 
astrophysics which are visible in either the optical or the 
x-ray emission belong to the class of collisionless processes 
or in short to collisionless plasmas. 

It is also believed that the environment of black holes 
contains largely plasmas that are collision free for the 
processes taking place there. The strict definition of a 
collisionless process in plasma is the following. Given the 
time scale t of the process under consideration and the 
typical frequency v. = 1/t. of binary collisions between 
the particles constituting the plasma, i.e. the inverse of the 
time t, between two such collisions, a plasma is called 
collisionless when tv, > 1. In order to determine the 
degree of collisionality of a plasma one thus needs to know 
both the Spitzer-Coulomb collision frequency v. and the 
typical time scale of the process. 


Relaxation time scales 

Impose an inhomogeneity or, otherwise, any deviation 
from thermal equilibrium onto a plasma. Because of the 
highly dynamical state of plasmas such deviations will 
readily relax, trying to get rid of the excess energy and 
tending to return to equilibrium conditions. Equilibria 
are determined by detailed force balance. In a plasma, in 
particular in a collisionless plasma, such a force balance is 
not trivially achieved. According to statistical mechanics, 
in thermodynamic equilibrium the distribution function 
should be of the canonical form of a Boltzmann energy 
distribution. In velocity space this distribution takes the 
form of a Maxwellian bell-shaped distribution function. 
Any deviation from this distribution will tend to be 
smeared out within a certain relaxation time until the 
distribution returns to a Boltzmannian. 

The characteristic relaxation times of the various 
possible relaxation processes can be calculated from a 
Fokker—Planck equation that describes the evolution of the 
non-equilibrium distribution function towards thermal 
equilibrium. The most important relaxation time is that 
of approaching the Maxwellian equilibrium distribution 
function. There is a typical relation between the times for 
electrons and ions to approach such an equilibrium that 


can be written as 
1/2 
m m 
Te > (“:) : (=) eel; (1) 
mM; mM; 


This shows that the electrons on their own, because of 
their high mobility, relax after a time t.. which is faster by 
the root of the electron-to-ion mass ratio than the time the 
ions need to relax to equilibrium. Similarly, the ions relax 
faster by the same ratio than the total plasma, composed 
of ions and electrons, needs to reach one common 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


temperature for ions and electrons. Because of this, 
electrons can often be described by isotropic Maxwellian 
distributions, while electrons and ions may have grossly 
different temperatures. This exchange of energy among 
the different components of the plasma depends on the 
number of collisions the particles experience. Because of 
the relatively long range of the Coulomb interaction in 
highly dilute and hot plasmas such as the astrophysical 
plasmas and because of the generally long astronomical 
time scales astrophysical plasmas on large spatial and 
temporal scales may sometimes not be really collisionless. 

The collision frequency is defined as v. = o-no{v), 
where o, is the collisional cross section and (v) is the 
average velocity of the particles. The problem is to find 
an expression for o,. In a dilute plasma where all particles 
interact only via Coulomb forces, the regime applicable 
to astrophysical plasmas, the collisional cross section is 
inversely proportional to the fourth power of the thermal 
velocity of the particles. Hence, the collision frequency 
becomes v, « no/T*/”. Thus the number of collisions per 
second decreases rapidly with increasing temperature T 
(usually the electron temperature which in many cases 
is the higher one of the two, electron 7. and ion T; 
temperatures) and with decreasing density. It is the hot 
dilute plasmas that tend to be collisionless. Hence, both 
the collisional relaxation time t, = v>! and the mean free 
path of the particles, Am = (v)/ve = (noo,)~! increase as 
73/2 with temperature. 

Similarly to the above collision time one can define a 
relaxation time for the energy exchange ty = W|dt/dW| 
where W is particle energy, a relaxation time ty for the 
return of a small deviation of the distribution function to 
the Maxwellian and a relaxation time t,., for electrons and 
ions to achieve temperature equilibrium. Typical values 
for the collision frequency and the relaxation time scales 
for various astrophysical plasmas are given in table 1. 
These are based on the above binary collision frequencies. 


Table 1. Collision frequencies and relaxation times. 


Symbol Expression = Conditions Description 

Tee 0.01T2?/n Ue > Vet e-e collisions* 

Tei 0.67; 2 /n U; > Vith i-e collisions* 
TWe 0.037,/?/ Energy relaxation 
Twi 1.38 ‘a 7 /n Energy relaxation 
TMe 0.027) /2 /n Isotropization 


@ Density in cm~3, temperature in K. 


In the presence of an electric field E the particles 
experience acceleration or deceleration. For very fast 
particles, as mentioned above, the friction term can no 
longer prevent the particles from running away in the 
electric field. Such electric fields exist in restricted spatial 
regions. The fraction of electrons that escape is given by 


An/n © 2.3 x 10° EpT,?/ exp (8Ep/E)'”” (2) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where Ep © 4 x 107!°Zn,T,! is the Dreicer electric field, 
another fundamental parameter of the plasma. For small 
electric fields no particles will run away, but the larger 
the electric field becomes the more particles will escape 
collisional confinement and leave the position to form 
beams or extended tails on the distribution function. 


Description of plasmas 

Plasmas without collisions must be treated within full 
kinetic theory. This implies that one has to solve 
the combined Vlasov—Maxwell system of equations for 
both electrons and ions. This system of equations 
is extraordinarily involved. The Vlasov equation is 
the collision-free one-particle Boltzmann equation which, 
given the Hamiltonian H(p, x,t) and defining the one- 
particle probability distribution function f(p, x, t), is 


0, f +{H, f} =0 (3) 


where the braces are Poisson brackets and p = my,v 
is the particle momentum, y, the relativistic y factor, v 
particle velocity and x position. The explicit version of 
this equation neglecting gravity becomes 


afte Vf + {tux B)- Vf =0 (4) 


where V, = 0/dv is the gradient in velocity space. The 
electric and magnetic fields appearing in equation (4) are 
related to the distribution function f via the expressions 


Py = va | Pv fi 6) 


i=e,i 


j= Daf Pvvs (6) 
for the electric space charge p, and current j densities. 
These enter the electrodynamic (Maxwell) equations 


VxB=mojtc?4E V-B=0 


VxE=-0B V-E=p,/6. (7) 


Solutions of this extremely complicated set of equations 
can be found only in the most simple cases. However, 
whenever one of the physical time scales is much longer 
than the relaxation times, the collisions are frequent 
enough to allow for a fluid description. In such a 
description the fluid variables (density n, bulk velocity 
u, pressure tensor P, etc) are defined as the ascending 
moments 


Me? =f Buu .. <i times) Vfi- (8) 


Under such conditions the plasma can be treated within 
the MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC (MHD) approach which is 
strictly valid only in the strongly collisional state. 
Collisionless MHD is, strictly speaking, a contradiction in 
itself when applied to plasmas even though it has found 
extensive application and led to many useful results. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A fluid description may also result for collision-free 
plasmas when some ordering process is at work that forces 
the particles to behave fluid like. Gyration around a 
strong magnetic field may have such an effect. This then 
leads, under certain conditions, to the so-called Chew- 
Goldberger-Low anisotropic MHD. Also, collisionless 
plasmas very frequently generate internal correlations, 
turbulent interactions and other effects that force the 
plasma particles to exert collective behavior. In such cases 
the ordinary binary collisions are replaced by so-called 
‘anomalous’ collisions that may also allow for a fluid 
description. Anomalous collisions are a consequence of 
plasma wave turbulence. 


Generalized Ohm’s law 

Because of the enormous mass differences between 
electrons and ions m,/m; = 1/1836 it is sometimes 
convenient to consider only the dynamics of the ions. 
This applies when considering processes that change on 
a much longer time scale t = w~' than the electron plasma 
oscillation time Ore or @ K Wye. In this case the electron 
dynamics partially decouples from that of the ions. The 
momentum equation for electrons can then be used as the 
definition equation for the electric field. Rearranging it in 
order to express E through the electron quantities one has 

m,. due 

en Yoke e dt (°) 
which is an extended form of Ohm’s law. Here wu is the 
bulk velocity and P the pressure tensor. Introducing the 
current density 7 = e(u; — u,), equation (9) assumes the 
ordinary form 


MeVe 1 
E+u.x B= (ue — Uj) 
e 


E+ B ; B 1 v-P 1 dj n m, du 
xB= x -P, ; 
“ a ia en €0Mpe dt =e: dit 
(10) 


Here u is to good approximation the center-of-mass 
velocity, 1 = v-/€ow*,, the resistivity and the second term 
on the right-hand side is the Hall term. In a collisionless 
plasma the first term disappears, and Ohm’s law is entirely 
governed by the Hall term, the electron pressure gradient 
and the electron inertia in the two last terms, while the left- 
hand side of equation (10) describes the frozen-in property 
(see below) widely used in MHD. The terms on the right 
of Ohm’s law modify this condition to a large extent in 
a real collisionless plasma. The Hall term introduces 
effects of non-coplanarity, helicity and anisotropy, while 
the pressure gradients and in particular the inertial terms 
may violate the frozen-in state. 


Properties of collisionless plasmas 

Neglecting collisions in the plasma implies that the plasma 
is ideally conducting. This should not be confused with 
the plasma being superconducting, however. On the 
contrary, ideal plasmas may contain magnetic fields, and 
these fields cannot be expelled from the plasma because 
they are frozen in into the plasma. In order to pull the 
magnetic field out, the frozen-in condition has to be broken 
at least locally by generation of anomalous resistivities that 
destroy the non-collisionality. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Frozen-in concept 

The frozen-in property follows from the universal validity 
of Faraday’s law V x E = —0B/dt even for the plasma, 
and from the (simplified) Ohm’s law E+ ux B = nj. 
The latter gives the proportionality between the electric 
field E and the current density 7. The coefficient is 
the resistivity 7 = m,v,/noe? which itself increases with 
collision frequency. The left-hand side of Ohm’s law is 
a simple consequence of the Lorentz transformation in 
moving media. Taken together these two equations lead 
to the fundamental induction equation for a conducting 
and moving medium such as a plasma: 


dB 
22 aN hux Ba Vs, (11) 
ot Lo 


This equation shows that for 7 — oo the magnetic field in 
the plasma moving with velocity v is zero which implies 
that in the moving frame the magnetic field does not 
change in time and hence, as argued above, is frozen in 
into the plasma. 


Gyration 

Physically this implies that in the moving frame the plasma 
particles themselves are tied to the magnetic field lines, 
gyrating around them in circles of radius rg = v_/Q and 
gyration period tg = 27/2. The gyration frequency is 
given by Q = eB/m and is proportional to the magnetic 
field. This gyration is simply imposed on the charges by 
the Lorentz force F,, = +evx B. Locally itis perpendicular 
to the magnetic field B and particle velocity v. It does 
not perform work on the particles. It therefore conserves 
particle energy and merely turns the component of the 
particle velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field into a 
circular orbit around B. 


Breaking the frozen-in condition 

In order to take the plasma particles away from the 
magnetic field in collisionless plasma one thus needs 
anomalous processes. They generate anomalous transport 
coefficients. Presumably, in all collisionless astrophysical 
plasmas such processes are at work. Otherwise, the 
frozen-in property can also be broken by extraordinarily 
steep gradients in density, temperature, composition 
or magnetic field in the plasma. Their length scales 
must be of the order of the gyroradii of the particles 
involved. Compared with all astrophysical scales, these 
are enormously small (see table 2). Gradients on these 
scales are thus not only unobservable but probably 
also unrealistic. The main mechanism which leads to 
anomalous transport in a collisionless plasma is the 
turbulence. 

Turbulence is generated via the excitation of plasma 
waves. Wave excitation proceeds via instabilities. There 
is an enormous number of possible instabilities in 
collisionless plasmas depending on the nature of the 
free-energy sources available, i.e. weak inhomogeneities, 
beams, jets, shear in field and velocity, electric currents, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


external forces exerted on the plasma and so on. Each 
of the instabilities excites a limited range of frequencies 
w and wavevectors k which are mutually related by the 
dispersion relation w = w(k). 


Plasma waves 

Because of its finite and relatively high temperature, the 
plasma is a thermally active medium. This means that the 
velocities of the particles constituting the plasma cover a 
wide range in velocity space, each of the particles being 
capable of absorbing or spending energy in interaction 
with an electric field fluctuation. In general, a particle 
that is moving at lower speed than the phase velocity of 
such fluctuations will be pushed by the wave and will 
absorb fluctuation energy. This leads to wave damping. 
On the other hand, a particle moving faster than the wave 
will push the wave and increase the fluctuation energy. 
Because of this nature it is clear that only a restricted 
number of wave modes can propagate in plasma. These 
are the modes that are very weakly absorbed by the plasma 
particles. The dispersion relations for the allowed waves 
can be found from an eigenvalue solution of the system 
of basic equations linearized around the equilibrium. 
Clearly, there will always be weak collisionless (or Landau) 
damping, for some of the particles will always be slow 
with respect to the wave and will absorb wave energy. 
However, in many cases this damping is so weak that it 
can be neglected. 

When speaking of such wave modes or fluctuations 
it is not meant that the waves are all electromagnetic 
in nature as in ordinary electrodynamics. The property 
of the plasma of being an active medium implies that 
entirely new wave modes can evolve in the plasma body 
or at its surface. These modes are unknown in free 
space, and most of them cannot leave the plasma but are 
confined to the plasma. The large variety of such possible 
modes reaches from sound waves and purely electrostatic 
fluctuations on the electron and ion scales to all kinds of 
electromagnetic fluctuations, purely magnetic fluctuations 
of long wavelengths, and mixed magnetoacoustic waves. 

The almost absolute invisibility of the majority of 
plasma waves looked at from a remote position as is 
common in astrophysics presents an enormous difficulty 
for astrophysics in inferring anything about the very 
nature of interactions in a collisionless astrophysical 
plasma. Any information must necessarily rely on 
secondary effects leading to the observation of radiation 
that can be detected on Earth. Since no in situ observations 
on any astrophysical object will ever be possible the true 
processes will forever be hidden to us. It is therefore 
of vital interest to infer information about the effects 
collisionless plasma processes may have on the radiation 
emitted from such objects. Unfortunately, very little is 
known about such effects at the current time. 


Radiation 
The most desirable effect is the direct emission of 
radiation in a certain wave band from that one may make 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Parameters of astrophysical plasmas. 


Region Density Temperature Magnetic Plasma Cyclotron 
or n field B frequency fpe frequency fee 
object (cm7°) (K) (G) (Hz) (Hz) 
Inter galactic <10-5 10°-10° <10-° <30 <2 
Inter stellar 10-3-10 102 >10~6 3 x (107-104) >3 
Pulsars 
surface 1012 - 108-1018 10! 10161018 
magnetosphere* <7 x 10!°(r/R)-> ~101° ~10 (r/R) 3 x 10!8(r/R)-9/2_ 3 x 10! (r/ R)-3 
White dwarfs (atmosphere) 10!” 107 10° 107° 3 x 1012 
HI 10-3 107 10-7 3 x 107 3x 107! 
HII 107-10 103-104 10-6 (1-3) x 10° 3 x 10° 
Planetary nebulae 10%-10° 103-104 10-4-10-3 3 x (10°-10°) 3 x (107-105) 
Magnetosphere (stars) 102 104-108 10%-10° 101° 3 x (10°-107) 
Sun 
Chromosphere 1012 2x 104 10° 101° (2-3) x 10° 
Corona 10°—10!2 10°-107 103-10! 108-1010 3 x (10°-107) 
Solar wind at 1 AU 10°-104 10*-10° 10~°-10-4 104-10° 3-300 
Earth 
Magnetosphere 10-?-104 104-108 10-5-10-! ——-10°--10° 3 x (10-109) 
Ionosphere 10°—-10° 107-4 x 10? ~— 1071 3 x 10°-107 3 x 10° 


4 R is the star radius. 


inferences about the emission mechanism and hence the 
state of the collisionless plasma at the source. Here 
we are not interested in the ordinary synchrotron or 
bremsstrahlung (free-free) emissions. The former is emitted 
by energetic charged particles that gyrate in a magnetic 
field configuration. It allows us to map the remote 
magnetic fields in direction and magnitude. The latter, 
being emitted from very hot weakly collisional plasmas, 
permits the determination of the hot temperature and 
density at the location of the emitting source. 

The important processes taking place in collisionless 
plasmas are without exception based on the assumption 
of instability, generation of plasma waves and interaction 
of these waves among themselves or with the particle 
constituents. There are only very few cases when these 
interactions directly lead to emission of radiation. Such 
cases are restricted mainly to two processes: the maser 
amplification of radiation in strongly magnetized very 
dilute plasmas containing a weakly relativistic trapped 
particle component, the so-called electron cyclotron maser 
mechanism, and radiation from fast electron beams 
passing through a dense, hot but otherwise relatively 
weakly magnetized plasma. Cyclotron maser emission is 
restricted to underdense plasmas satisfying the condition 
Wpe/Wce < 1, which is satisfied only in strong magnetic 
fields. Since large-scale magnetic fields are usually weak 
in astrophysics, this condition restricts it to the vicinity of 
strongly magnetized objects. Examples of such processes 
are found in interplanetary space in the non-thermal radio 
emissions from the Sun and the planets. In astrophysics 
similar processes are expected to take place in the very 
strongly magnetized pulsar magnetospheres, the coronae 
of magnetized stars and possibly also in radio or x-ray jets 
ejected from massive objects. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Collisionless plasma processes play a key role also 
in a number of other effects such as the acceleration of 
small groups of charged particles into energetic beams 
and possibly plasma jets, the formation of collisionless 
shock waves, the magnetic reconnection process and 
the generation of anomalous transport. In order to 
describe these phenomena a brief discussion of the plasma 
instability and turbulence mechanisms follows. 


Plasma instability and turbulence 

In particular cases when the particle distribution function 
deviates from the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the 
plasma undergoes instability. Because the plasma is 
thermally active, it contains a bath of spontaneously 
excited thermal noise of all wavelengths. At given 
temperature T the level of fluctuation never falls below 
this thermal level with the latter given by the Stefan— 
Boltzmann law. Decreasing the fluctuation level thus 
requires cooling of the plasma by means of adiabatic 
expansion or radiative losses in cases when the plasma 
is optically thin to the radiation or from its surface as in 
the case of thermal bremsstrahlung radiation. 


Linear wave growth 

The instability picks a particular range of wavelengths and 
frequencies out of the thermal noise and lets it grow in time 
and space. For one single mode of wavevector kp out of 
this range, the energy density of the thermal noise level is 
Wo = 5€0lEol? + 3|Bol?/10. Since the linear wave mode 
[E(t, x), B(t, x)] « exp(—iwt + ik - x), the energy density 
in the mode grows with time as 


W (ko, t) = Wo(Ko) exp[2y (ko)t] (12) 


where, for instability, the growth rate y (ko) is the positive 
imaginary part of the wave frequency. It is the main goal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lon/ion right-hand resonant 


Vv 
(o, + Q») /k 
] | lon/ion nonresonant 
Vv 

(0, - Q)) /k 

\ lon/ion left-hand resonant 

Vv 
(o, - Qn) /k 


Figure 1. Reduced ion distribution functions corresponding to 
three electromagnetic ion—ion beam instabilities and associated 
cyclotron resonant velocities (after Gary, 1993). 


of linear plasma theory to calculate y (ko). The growth rate 
itself is a function of the wave frequency, wavenumber and 
the properties of the free-energy source. The exponential 
growth of the wave given by the growth rate has a 
number of important effects. First, it readily depletes the 
energy of the free-energy source and transforms it into 
electromagnetic energy unless the source is continuously 
re-established. Second, the wave energy for exponential 
growth readily reaches a level that is comparable with 
the local kinetic energy level nokgT of the plasma itself. 
Once this happens, linearity is violated, unless the wave 
energy is transported away by some process such as wave 
propagation or convection on a time scale faster than the 
wave grows. The plasma then enters the non-linear state. 

An example of an electromagnetic instability occur- 
ring at collisionless shocks is the ion—ion beam instability. 
Whenever two ion components have a drift velocity vy 
greater than some threshold, the corresponding free en- 
ergy can lead to instability growth. Let us assume, for 
simplicity, that the two ion components, in the case of 
a shock the upstream plasma representing the core and 
the backstreaming ions representing the beam, are drifting 
Maxwellians. There are three electromagnetic instabilities 
that may arise from such a configuration: the right-hand 
resonant, the non-resonant and left-hand resonant ion—ion 
instabilities. Figure 1 shows schematically the ion distri- 
bution function (core and beam) corresponding to the three 
instabilities and the associated cyclotron resonant speeds. 
At low densities and low drift velocities the ion—ion right- 
hand resonant instability is the growing mode of lowest 
threshold. The waves propagate in the direction of the 
beam. In the limit of zero drift velocity this mode is the 
right-hand circularly polarized positive helicity mode on 
the magnetosonic whistler branch. In the case of large 
beam velocities and high beam densities a non-resonant 
instability is possible. When the beam has a large temper- 
ature, the left-hand instability is possible where the waves 
are resonant with those beam ions which have velocity (in 
the core frame) opposite to the beam velocity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Nonlinear effects 

In the non-linear state large-amplitude waves start de- 
caying into sidebands, thereby broadening the spectrum. 
They may interact with other waves transforming en- 
ergy into remote parts of k-space. They may exert radi- 
ation pressure on the plasma, causing modulation of their 
propagation properties. This introduces ripples into the 
plasma. The waves can be trapped, reflected and become 
modulated in wavelength. They also may interact with 
the particle component. Low-energy particles in the wave 
frame can become trapped in the potential wells of the 
wave and transported away, thereby becoming accelerated 
by the wave until they are injected from the wave into the 
plasma as beamlets. Particles can be reflected from the 
wave and become accelerated to moderate and high ener- 
gies in a kind of Fermi process. Some of these processes 
modify the properties of the collisionless plasma in such a 
way that anomalous collisions are caused. 

The plasma containing a high level of the kind 
of turbulence described above presents a large number 
of hurdles for a test particle that tries to pass across 
the plasma. The particles will be scattered at waves, 
become trapped, becoming untrapped after a certain time, 
energized or decelerated. All these processes modify the 
free-particle orbit and lead to scattering of the particle 
in energy, path and pitch angle. In a more macroscopic 
description this process can be described as anomalous 
transport. All active collisionless plasmas thus exhibit 
anomalous transport properties. In each single case it 
is, however, extremely difficult to determine the kind of 
anomalous transport that is realized in the plasma under 
the particular conditions. In fact, the whole problem 
of anomalous transport remains to be solved. It is 
therefore safe to say that we do not know what the 
transport properties of collisionless astrophysical plasmas 
really are. Only in a few simple limits, in particular 
the quasilinear one, have such collisionless ‘anomalous’ 
transport coefficients so far been derived. 

It should be added that on the long temporal and large 
spatial scales one encounters in astrophysical applications 
any plasma process will always have long reached the 
quasi-stationary and highly saturated non-linear state of 
fully developed turbulence. Since this is a natural fact one 
must be very cautious in applying linear plasma theory 
in astrophysics. Since a fully non-linear theory of plasma 
turbulence does not exist, this considerably obscures the 
astrophysical application of plasma physics. 


Anomalous transport 


The transport coefficients (resistivity, heat conductivity 
etc) entering the fluid description of plasmas have to be 
calculated within the fully developed turbulence theory. 
Within a first and lowest level approximation this is 
usually done for selected cases in the framework of 
quasilinear theory. The philosophy of this theory is 
straightforward. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fokker—Planck approach 

Consider an instability that excites linearly growing waves 
of frequency w(k) in a certain waveband of width Aw, Ak. 
The growth rate is y(w,k). Once these waves reach 
substantial amplitude their presence cannot be neglected 
any more energetically in comparison with other energy 
sources and in particular with the free energy driving 
the instability. In such a case the waves start reacting 
on the plasma and the free energy. The simplest effect 
is a quenching of the instability by the waves leading to 
saturation at a level that is determined by equation (12) 
with vanishing growth rate. The growth rate y[f(v, t)] 
itself depends functionally on the modified distribution 
function f(v, t) which for its part evolves according to the 
Fokker—Planck equation. Writing this as 


0, f a dy - D(W, Y; v) . Oy f (13) 


and knowing the explicit form of the velocity space 
diffusion coefficient D(W, y, v), the expressions for W, y, D 
together with the evolution equation (12) for W(t) and the 
Fokker—Planck equation (13) form a closed system from 
which f(t — oo) and W(t — oo) can be determined. 
Once the final wave energy density W(oo) is known, it 
determines the anomalous collision frequency. This can 
be seen from the fact that the classical Coulomb collision 
frequency 


Dope eae Dope Wo 
naj, nkgT 


(14) 


Ve X 


can be expressed in terms of the wave energy Wo in the 
thermal fluctuations. Replacing Wo with W(oc) gives the 
estimate (with a a numerical coefficient) 


W(co) 
Van = AWpe nksT (15) 


for the anomalous collisions. 


Non-magnetized case 

In non-magnetized plasmas (or in one-dimensional 
plasmas with the direction of current parallel to the 
magnetic field B) the dominant current instability is ion 
acoustic wave turbulence. In this case one finds the 
Sagdeev formula 


Va T. 


Vania = 0.019 (16) 
Here @,; = (m./m;)'/?@,. is the ion plasma frequency, 
Cia = (keT./m;)'? is the ion acoustic wave velocity and 
va = |j/en| is the current drift velocity. This formula 


demonstrates that the anomalous collision frequency can 
be large in dense plasmas of high plasma frequency 
carrying strong currents and containing hot electrons. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Magnetized case 

In magnetized plasmas a variety of other wave modes 
may contribute to the generation of anomalous collisions 
and transport. Within the quasilinear approach the 
most important are those instabilities which are caused 
by macroscopic gradients in density, magnetic field and 
temperature leading to so-called drift instabilities. Their 
typical oscillation frequency is mediated by a combined 
motion of ions and electrons, the lower-hybrid resonance 
On © (WceWei)!? = Wee(m,./m;)'/?, and the anomalous 
collision frequency becomes 


1/2 2 

A lei 
anh © | = — . 17 
Van, lh (5) (zi.) (17) 


Here, Ly is the relevant gradient scale, and r,; is the 
thermal ion gyroradius. These collision frequencies can 
become very large, of the order of a, itself. They can 
cause substantial plasma diffusion close to Bohm diffusion 
Dg = kgT./16eB. Microscopic plasma turbulence is thus 
capable of substantially changing the transport properties 
of a collisionless plasma. Quasilinear theory may in many 
cases be superseded by other strongly non-linear effects, 
such as particle trapping in large-amplitude wave fields, 
modulation of the plasma by the ‘radiation pressure’ of 
the large-amplitude waves, coherent interactions and non- 
linear wave-particle interactions that are not included 
in the above theory. Moreover, in relativistic plasma 
radiation cooling of the electrons may modify the 
conditions and induce high-ion-temperature instabilities. 
These lead to low-frequency electromagnetic turbulence 
that results in plasma vortices and mixing effects. 


Reconnection 

MAGNETIC RECONNECTION (figure 2) is among the most impor- 
tant applications of anomalous transport. Reconnection 
describes the merging of two oppositely directed magnetic 
fields across the current sheet that separates them in highly 
conducting plasma. This problem is of marked importance 
for astrophysical plasma physics. Reconnection has two 
effects: it changes the magnetic field topology and it leads 
to bulk plasma acceleration. 

In vacuum reconnection does not provide any 
difficulties as the magnetic flux can rearrange in arbitrary 
ways. However, in ideally conducting collisionless 
plasmas merging of two oppositely directed magnetic 
field configurations approaching each other is inhibited 
by the frozen-in condition. When the plasma is collisional, 
merging is made possible in some narrow region, the so- 
called diffusion region, by the diffusive (last right-hand) 
term in equation (11). The initially anti-parallel fields 
diffuse across the diffusion region and rearrange into an 
X-type configuration. The two formerly unconnected 
field lines become suddenly connected. What is much 
more important, however, is that plasmas to both sides 
of the current layer that before merging could not mix 
after reconnection find themselves on the same field line 
and will mix along the field even outside the diffusion 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The schematics of the sequential change in magnetic 
topology and plasma acceleration during reconnection. The 
dashed circle surrounds the diffusion region. Plasmas initially 
(time ¢ = t)) on two separate field lines (A and C, B and D) are 
found on the same field line after reconnection took place 

(t = f3). Field line stresses are released and converted into bulk 
plasma acceleration as indicated by the open arrows. 


region. In addition, the strong bending of the newly 
connected field lines in the current sheet causes magnetic 
stresses that tend to relax and accelerate the bulk plasma 
up to flow velocities of the order of the Alfvén velocity, 
Va = B/(jonm;)'/*. In the so-called Petschek model of 
reconnection two standing slow-mode waves extend from 
the diffusion region and define the wedge-shaped high- 
speed flow region. Most of the acceleration actually occurs 
in these slow-mode shocks. The Petschek model is based 
ona fluid (MHD) picture. Ina collisionless plasma it is not 
clear whether or not such slow-mode shocks actually form 
during the reconnection process. In the small diffusion 
region the Joule dissipation causes local heating of the 
plasma, and the electric field generated in the reconnection 
process further accelerates groups of particles up to high 
energies. 


In a collisionless plasma a deviation from non- 
ideality can support reconnection in the diffusion region. 
Such a non-ideality may be provided by anomalous 
resistivities based on anomalous collision frequencies. 
This requires strong currents and/or plasma gradients 
until the current instabilities exceed the threshold. 
However, collisionless reconnection can also proceed 
without anomalous resistivity. Within the region close to 
the X-line the ions can be considered to be unmagnetized. 
The frozen-in condition for the electrons can be broken 
by the electron inertia and/or by a non-gyrotropy of 
the electron particle distribution function in the X-line 
environment. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bow Shock 
(_— Parallel Shock 


Interstellar 


Medium \ _, VY Yee. Heliosphere 


A ee \ Termination 
a i Shock 


Heliopause 


Figure 3. The heliospheric bow shock resulting from interaction 
of the heliospheric system with the interstellar medium: an 
example of a collisionless shock. In the upper part of the figure 
the shock is quasiparallel (magnetic field lines normal to shock); 
in the lower part it is quasiperpendicular (field lines tangential 
to shock). Inside the heliosphere a termination shock appears: 
the termination shock of the solar wind. 


Collisionless shocks 

Another important field of application of collisionless 
plasma theory is the dissipation in collisionless shocks. 
An example of a collisionless shock system is shown in 
figure 3. It consists of the termination shock of the solar 
wind resulting from the interaction between the highly 
supersonic solar wind stream and the interstellar medium. 
In addition a bow shock is produced outside but in front of 
the heliopause by its motion through the interstellar cloud. 


Sub- and supercritical shocks 

In this case the anomalous transport processes are of 
lesser importance. In a collisional plasma the width 
of the shock transition is of the order of the collisional 
mean free path. This is too large by many orders 
of magnitude in collisionless plasma where the shock 
transition is typically a few ion inertial lengths, c/w,;. The 
physics of collisionless shocks depends on essentially three 
parameters, the upstream magnetosonic Mach number 
M = u/(vi, + c?,)'/?, the angle 6, between the upstream 
magnetic field and the shock normal, and the chemical 
composition of the plasma. According the the Mach 
number one distinguishes subcritical (M < M_,) and 
supercritical (M > M_.) shocks. The critical Mach 
number M, = wa/Ciaa is defined as the ratio of the 
downstream velocity to the ordinary downstream (index 
d) sound speed. With respect to 6g, one distinguishes 
quasiperpendicular (6;, > 45°) and quasiparallel (6g, < 
45°) shocks. For perpendicular shocks the critical Mach 
number is M, = 2.76. It decreases with increasing angle 
@gn. The chemical composition may lead to weakening of 
the shock profile. 

In subcritical shocks the anomalous collisional 
dissipation in the shock front caused by micro-instabilities 
generated there is roughly sufficient for the required 
increase in entropy, heating and generating the turbulent 
disorder behind the shock that leads to dissipation of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


excess upstream energy stored in the flow. In supercritical 
shocks the flow energy supply to the shock from upstream 
is too fast. The instabilities in the shock front do not have 
sufficient time to evolve to a level sufficiently high for 
effective dissipation. In this case the shock front acts like 
a mirror and starts reflecting ever more ions and electrons 
back upstream into the onstreaming flow. In this case it 
becomes vital to distinguish between quasiperpendicular 
and quasiparallel shocks. This is important because in 
collisionless plasma the particles are tied to the magnetic 
field and can only move along the magnetic field. This 
implies that in quasiperpendicular shocks the reflected 
particles stay at the shock front or are convected back 
into the downstream region. The upstream width of the 
region containing the reflected particles is of the order of 
the average gyroradius of the reflected particles. 


Quasi-perpendicular shocks 

The specularly reflected and subsequently gyrating 
particles cause a foot-like signature in any in situ recording 
of B. During this gyration the specularly reflected ions 
are accelerated in the v x B electric field to about twice 
the upstream bulk speed. Since these ions remain to 
be tied to the magnetic field, they become convected 
with the magnetic field into the downstream region. 
The region immediately behind the shock ramp contains 
the transmitted distribution plus the accelerated and 
transmitted specularly reflected ions. 

The transmitted specularly reflected ions gyrate 
in bunches around the magnetic field lines. Such 
distributions are unstable with respect to the generation of 
plasma waves. They excite waves that in the downstream 
region lead to dissipation and plasma heating. In high 
Mach number shocks, as well as in shocks of supernova 
remnants, the interaction of specularly reflected ions with 
background electrons in addition excites ion acoustic 
waves which may give rise to rapid anomalous heating 
of the electrons in the shock ramp. 


Quasi-parallel shocks 

In the case of a quasiparallel shock the situation is 
dramatically different. Here the reflected particles can 
move far upstream along the magnetic field into the 
onflowing stream. Since at the same time the field is 
convected downstream toward the shock, this is true for 
particles having velocities along B higher than the speed 
of the flow. 

Such fast particles form a counterstreaming beam 
in the flow and excite beam—beam instabilities in the 
otherwise undisturbed super-magnetosonic supercritical 
flow. These instabilities evolve into large-amplitude 
turbulence which is continuously convected towards the 
shock. The region filled with this turbulence is called 
foreshock. Since the foreshock is turbulent, energy is 
dissipated here, and the flow is slightly decelerated. Thus 
the foreshock effectively marks the grossly widened shock 
transition. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


When the low-frequency upstream waves are con- 
vected with the flow into the shock they interact with 
upstream energetic particles and steepen into large- 
amplitude pulsations. The shock itself can be viewed as a 
patchwork of such large-amplitude pulsations which pile 
up and determine the downstream plasma state. 

In the case of more parallel shocks the interaction of 
the upstream plasma with the hot downstream plasma 
in the region of overlap at the shock ramp also causes 
an ion-ion beam instability. The waves generated by 
this so-called interface instability are confined to the 
region downstream of the shock transition where they 
contribute to dissipation and heating. The wavelength 
of the interface waves increases with increasing shock 
Mach number. In the low to medium Mach number 
regime the interface waves have small wavelengths and 
are damped within a short distance downstream. At 
higher Mach number shocks the interface waves have large 
wavelengths and determine the downstream turbulence. 
In parallel shocks the downstream state is thus determined 
by the upstream turbulence. Quasiparallel shocks are 
thus highly non-stationary and oscillatory with the main 
dissipation provided by the shock interaction with the 
upstream waves in place of the microturbulence in the 
shock ramp itself. This shows that in collisionless plasmas 
the mechanism for shock formation is very different from 
that of collisional fluids. 


Particle acceleration 

An important field in collisionless plasma astrophysics 
is the mechanism of acceleration of particles to high 
energies. Collisionless shocks are among the main agents 
for accelerating ions as well as electrons to high energies 
whenever sufficient time is available. Particles reflected 
from the shock and from scattering centers behind the 
shock in the turbulent compressed region when coming 
back across the shock into the turbulent upstream region 
have a good chance to experience multiple scattering and 
acceleration by first-order Fermi acceleration. Second- 
order or stochastic Fermi acceleration in the broadband 
turbulence downstream of collisionless shocks will 
contribute to acceleration. In addition, ions may be 
trapped at perpendicular shocks. The trapping forces are 
provided by the electrostatic potential of the shock and 
the Lorentz force excerted on the particle by the magnetic 
and motional electric fields in the upstream region. With 
each reflection at the shock the particles gyrate parallel to 
the motional electric field, picking up energy and surfing 
along the shock surface. All these mechanisms are still 
under investigation, but there is evidence that shocks play 
a most important role in the acceleration of cosmic rays 
and other particles to very high energies. 

In addition to acceleration in shocks one expects that 
particles are also accelerated in the reconnection region. 
Despite the shocks, collisionless plasmas are capable of 
generating large potential differences along the magnetic 
field. These are known as double layers or electrostatic 
shocks. In most cases the potential will not consist of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a continuous drop but will compose itself of myriads of 
little microscale or mesoscale potential drops confined to 
cavitons, solitary wave structures or phase space holes 
generated in non-linear wave-—particle interaction. The 
plasma divides itself into several components which either 
support these structures or destroy them by transit time 
damping leading to acceleration. 


Concluding remarks 

There is no in situ information available from astrophysical 
plasmas. So one is forced to refer to indirect methods 
and analogies with accessible plasmas. Such plasmas are 
found only in near-Earth space. Actually, most of the 
ideas about and models of the behavior of astrophysical 
plasmas have been borrowed from space physics and 
have been rescaled to astrophysical scales. Measurements 
and models developed for the description of space 
plasmas often serve as paradigms for astrophysical 
plasmas. These models encompass stellar wind flows, 
pulsar magnetospheres, magnetospheres of magnetized 
stars and other planets including extra-solar planets, 
magnetospheres near black holes, the interaction of 
stellar winds with the surrounding INTERSTELLAR MATTER, 
expansion of SUPERNOVA REMNANTS, the whole domain of 
reconnection, collisionless shocks, plasma jets, and some 
non-thermal radiation mechanisms. 

However, the large spatial and long temporal scales 
in astrophysics and astrophysical observations do not 
allow for the resolution of the collisionless state of the 
plasmas. For instance, in the solar wind the collisional 
mean free path is of the order of a few AU. Looked at 
from the outside, the heliosphere (figure 3), the region 
which is affected by the solar wind, will thus be considered 
collision dominated over time scales longer than a typical 
propagation time from the Sun to Jupiter. On any of 
the smaller and shorter scales this is wrong, because 
collisionless processes govern the solar wind here. Similar 
arguments apply to stellar winds, molecular clouds, pulsar 
magnetospheres and the hot gas in clusters of galaxies. 
One should thus be aware of the mere fact of a lack of 
small-scale observations. Collisionless processes generate 
anomalous transport coefficients. This helps in deriving 
a more macroscopic description. However, small-scale 
genuinely collisionless processes are thereby hidden. This 
implies that it will be difficult, if not impossible, to 
infer anything about the real structure, for instance, of 
collisionless astrophysical shock waves. Similarly, the 
processes of non-thermal radiation and acceleration, and 
the kinetic behavior of the gas in clusters of galaxies, are 
only accessible by exploiting the analogy with accessible 
collisionless plasmas in the close environment of the 
Earth and the heliosphere. From a theoretical point of 
view, collisionless plasma processes require the solution 
of the collision-free Boltzmann equation (Vlasov equation) 
combined with the full set of Maxwell’s equations. This is 
a formidable task; it is often easier to perform particle- 
in-cell simulations of such processes where macro-ions 
and electrons are followed in time in the self-consistently 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


calculated magnetic and electric fields. If only low- 
frequency processes are studied, the electrons are often 
approximated as a fluid and only the ions are treated as 
particles (hybrid simulation method). 


Bibliography 

The literature about collisionless astrophysical plasmas is 
sparse. Sporadic information can be found in the following 
proceedings: 


Brinkmann W, Fabian A C and Giovanelli F (eds) 1990 
Physical Processes in Hot Cosmic Plasmas (NATO ASI 
Series C, vol 305) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Epstein R I and Feldman W C (eds) 1986 Magnetospheric 
Phenomena in Astrophysics (AIP Conf. Proc. 144) 
(New York: AIP) 

Falthammar C-G et al (ed) 1988 Plasma and the Universe 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Pallavicini R (ed) 1988 Hot Thin Plasmas in Astrophysics 
(NATO ASI Series C vol 249) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Sagdeev R Z (ed) 1993 Nonlinear Space Plasma Physics 
(New York: AIP) 

Watanabe T, Kosugi T and Sterling A C (eds) 1998 
Observational Plasma Astrophysics: Five Years of 
YOKOH and Beyond (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Zank G P and Gaisser T K (eds) 1992 Particle Acceleration in 
Cosmic Plasmas (AIP Conf. Proc. 264) (New York: AIP) 


More specialized monographs on plasma astrophysics 
deal with its radiational aspects, such as the books 


Benz A O 1995 Plasma Astrophysics (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
Melrose D B 1980 Plasma Astrophysics vols 1 and 2 
(New York: Gordon and Breach) 


An excellent monography on pulsar magnetospheres is 


Michel F C 1991 Theory of Neutron Star Magnetospheres 
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press) 


although the collisionless side of the coin is not treated 
explicitly there. Instead the particle and fluid pictures 
dominate. More about collisionless pulsar physics is 
contained in the controversial volume 


Beskin V S, Gurevich A V and Istomin Ya N 1993 Physics 
of the Pulsar Magnetosphere (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Reviews of collisionless space plasma physics are given by 


Baumjohann W and Treumann R A 1996 Basic Space Plasma 
Physics (London: Imperial College Press) 

Treumann R A and Baumjohann W 1997 Advanced Space 
Plasma Physics (London: Imperial College Press) 


Linear collisionless plasma instabilities are discussed in 


Gary S P 1993 Theory of Space Plasma Microinstabilities 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Collisionless Processes in Astrophysical Plasmas ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


An excellent presentation of the basic kinetic collisionless 
plasma theory is found in 


Montgomery D C and Tidman D A 1964 Plasma Kinetic 
Theory (New York: McGraw-Hill) 


Nonlinear theory is described in 
Davidson R C 1972 Methods in Nonlinear Plasma Theory 
(New York: Academic) 


Rudolf A Treumann and Manfred Scholer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 11 


Colombo, Guiseppe (‘Bepi’) (1920-84) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Colombo, Giuseppe (‘Bepi’) (1920-84) 


Colombo was a mathematician and engineer, born in 
Italy, professor at the University of Padua. He explained 
the peculiar rotation of Mercury. The planet turns three 
times during two revolutions around the Sun, in a previ- 
ously unsuspected resonance (see MERCURY). Using this 
feature, Colombo discovered the orbital maneuver that 
enabled Mariner 10 (see MARINER MISSIONS) to pass close 
to Mercury three times in 1974-75. He proposed this 
manoeuver to NASA, and tripled the value of the mis- 
sion. Colombo is also famous for his development of the 
concept of space tethers. While space-based tethers have 
been studied theoretically since early in the 20th century, 
Colombo invented the idea of using a long tether to 
support a satellite from an orbiting platform in a gravita- 
tionally stabilized system. He designed the tethered 
satellite system (TSS) to investigate plasma physics and 
the generation of electricity in the upper atmosphere. 
Two technology tests of a tether system, TSS-1 and TSS- 
1R, were carried out in July 1992 and February 1996 by 
Italy using the NASA Shuttle. In the more recent test, the 
tether deployed to 20 km but broke without useful result. 
The ESA mission to Mercury scheduled for 2009 is 
named Bepi Colombo in affectionate recognition of his 
contributions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Columba 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Columba 


(the Dove; abbrev. Col, gen. Columbae; area 270 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Lepus and 
Pictor, and culminates at midnight in mid-December. It 
represents Noah’s dove and was introduced by the Dutch 
theologian and geographer Petrus Plancius, who formed 
it from stars to the south of Canis Major and included it on 
a celestial chart in 1592. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Columba are a Columbae (Phact), magnitude 2.6, 
and 6 Columbae (Wazn), magnitude 3.1. There are three 
other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. Interesting objects 
include 4 Columbae, a famous ‘runaway star’, which is 
one of three stars (the other two being 53 Arietis and AE 
Aurigae) that are diverging at high velocity (~120 km s~) 
from a point in Orion from which they are thought to have 
been ejected as a result of a supernova explosion a few 
million years ago, and NGC 1851, a seventh-magnitude 
globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coma 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Coma 


The distortion of off-axis images produced by lenses or 
mirrors. Rays of light that enter a lens, or reflect from 
a mirror, at an angle to its optical axis (the line passing 
perpendicularly through the center of the lens or mirror), 
form pear-shaped images. The magnitude of the distortion 
increases with increasing distance from the optical axis. 
This particular optical aberration derives its name from 
the ‘comet-like’ appearance of such images. 

A spherical mirror does not suffer from coma but 
does suffer from spherical aberration. If the latter is 
corrected, by deepening the curve of the mirror’s surface 
to a paraboloid, coma is introduced. The effects of coma 
diminish in proportion to the square of the focal ratio and, 
for visual purposes, are of little consequence except close to 
the edge of the field of view in instruments with focal ratios 
of f:8 ormore. Unless coma is corrected, its effects are very 
obvious in instruments with substantially shorter focal 
ratios and, in such cases, acceptable-quality images are 
restricted to the central part of the field of view. A parabolic 
mirror may be corrected for coma by placing a suitably 
shaped lens, or lenses (or mirrors), in front of its reflecting 
surface. Coma may be reduced in a compound lens by an 
appropriate selection of curvatures for its various surfaces. 


See also: field of view, focal ratio, spherical aberration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coma Berenices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Coma Berenices 


(Berenice’s Hair; abbrev. Com, gen. Comae Berenices; area 
386 sq. deg.) A northern constellation which lies between 
Canes Venatici and Virgo, and culminates at midnight in 
early April. It is named after the lock of hair of Queen 
Berenice II of Egypt (c. 269-221 sc), which, according 
to legend, she gave to the gods for the safe return of 
her husband, Ptolemy III Euergetes, from battle. It was 
introduced by the Dutch cartographer Gerardus Mercator, 
who included it on a celestial globe in 1551. 

A small, rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest star in Coma Berenices is of magnitude 4.2. a 
Comae Berenices (Diadem) is an interesting close binary 
with pale yellow (F5) components, both of magnitude 
5.2, separation ~0-0.9", period 25.8 years, the orbit lying 
almost edge-on, so the motion is practically along a 
straight line. Other interesting objects include Melotte 111, 
a wide (5°) open cluster of about 40 stars between fifth and 
tenth magnitude, M53 (NGC 5024), an eighth-magnitude 
globular cluster, M64 (NGC 4826, the Black-Eye Galaxy), 
a ninth-magnitude spiral galaxy, and NGC 4565, a tenth- 
magnitude edge-on spiral galaxy. 

There are many galaxies in the southern part of Coma 
Berenices that belong to the great Virgo Cluster, and in 
the north-east of the constellation lies the distant Coma 
Cluster. The north galactic pole is also located in the 
constellation. 


See also: Black-Eye Galaxy, Coma Cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coma Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Coma Cluster 


Coma, with Virgo, is one of the best-studied GALAxy 
cLusTeRS. The cluster is located at right ascension 
12'59™48.78, declination +27°58'50” (J2000) and lies almost 
at the north Galactic pole, (/,b) = (58°, +88°). In the 
major catalog of galaxy clusters by Abell, its designation 
is Abell 1656 (see ABELL CLUSTERS). The mean redshift of the 
cluster is approximately 6900 km s~!, which puts it at a 
distance of 69h~' Mpc (where Hy = 100h km s~' Mpc™'). 
Coma is one of the richest nearby clusters, having 
650 confirmed member galaxies and, including dwarfs, 
probably as many as 2000 galaxies in total. It has two 
central, dominant galaxies and therefore is classified as a 
binary cluster. 

Coma has long been taken as the archetypal rich 
cluster. It appears regular and roughly spherical, with 
a strong central concentration. The spherical symmetry 
and general regularity meant that it was considered to be 
a good (if rare) example of a cluster that had achieved 
dynamical equilibrium and was therefore amenable to 
straightforward theoretical analysis. Work over the last 
two decades, however, has gradually revealed that Coma 
is far from relaxed, with many substructures. The 
complexity of the dynamical system reveals clues to the 
process of cluster formation. 

The total mass of Coma has been estimated from 
observations of its gravitational effects on the galaxies and 
hot x-ray gas in the cluster. Assuming that the cluster is in 
dynamical equilibrium, the total mass is found to be much 
greater than the observed mass in the galaxies and x-ray 
gas. This result, first obtained by zwicxy in 1933, remains 
one of the strongest pieces of evidence that the universe 
is predominantly composed of some form of unseen DARK 
MATTER. 


History 

William Herschel was the first to note the concentration 
of nebulae in the constellation COMA BERENICES in 1785 (see 
figure 1). The first catalog of 108 nebulae in Coma was 
given by Wolf in 1902 and expanded by Curtis to over 300 
objects in 1918. The recession velocities for a few members 
of the cluster were measured by Hubble and Humason in 
1931. 

The place of the Coma cluster as a touchstone of 
extragalactic astronomy and cosmology was established 
when Zwicky derived an estimate for the mass of the 
cluster in 1933 and found it to be at least 2 x 10h-1Mo, 
which was much greater than could be accounted for by 
the visible matter. This was the first evidence suggesting 
that some form of dark matter existed in the universe. 


Cluster galaxies 

Richness 

Coma has 276 member galaxies brighter than B = 18 
within 0.75h-! Mpc (0.67°) of the cluster center and 
approximately 900 members brighter than B = 20 out to 
1.5h71 Mpc (1.33°). The distance modulus for Coma is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


34.2—5 log h, so that B = 20 corresponds to Mg = —14.2; 
about half the members of the Local Group of galaxies are 
dwarf galaxies with absolute magnitudes fainter than this, 
so the total number of galaxies in Coma is about 2000. 


Luminosity function 

The number of galaxies as a function of luminosity has 
been determined in Coma at optical, infrared, ultraviolet 
and radio wavelengths. The optical and near-infrared 
luminosity function (LF) is not very well fitted by the 
standard Schechter functional form and appears to have 
three main regimes: the number of galaxies per unity 
luminosity increases rapidly between the brightest cluster 
member at B = 12.6 and B ¥ 16(L * 3 x 10°h7!Lo), and 
then levels off to B ~ 18 (L * 0.5 x 10°h-'!Lo), before 
increasing as a power law, N(L) « L*, for the dwarf 
galaxies at fainter magnitudes. The LF varies with position 
in the cluster. In the central regions the LF in fact has a peak 
at around B ~ 16.5 and a dip at B ~ 17.5 before rising 
steeply. This may be due to mass (luminosity) segregation 
as the cluster approaches equipartition of energy in the 
center, or due to increased merging in the cluster core 
or due to different evolutionary histories for the central 
galaxies. The steepness of the power law for dwarf 
galaxies also depends on position in the cluster, going from 
a * —1.3 in the core to w * —1.8 on the periphery. 


Morphologies 

As in most clusters, the galaxies in the core of Coma 
are mostly ellipticals and lenticulars, while the outskirts 
have a higher proportion of spirals. For the brightest 200 
galaxies in the cluster, the mix is approximately E:S0:Sp = 
30%:55%:15%. The variation in the morphological mix is 
reflected in the colors of the galaxies, with red galaxies 
dominating in the center and blue galaxies on the 
periphery. There is an excess of early-type galaxies in 
the region between the NGC4839 subcluster and the main 
cluster that show evidence of recent star formation, which 
may have been triggered by interaction with the tidal 
field of the cluster or the intracluster medium (ICM) as 
these objects fell into Coma. More generally, the E and S0 
galaxies in the cluster are strongly concentrated along a 
northeast-southwest axis while the spirals show a more 
diffuse and isotropic distribution. 


Dominant galaxies 

There are three dominant (D or cD) galaxies in the Coma 
cluster. Two of these (NGC4874 and NGC4889) lie in 
the cluster core and cause it to be classified as a binary 
cluster (Bautz—Morgan class II). NGC4874 (B = 12.8) 
is a cD galaxy with an extended halo and an absolute 
luminosity of 5.8 x 10'’°h~'Lo that is located close to 
the peak of the distributions of galaxies and x-ray gas. 
NGC4889, 0.12° east of NGC4874, is even brighter (B = 
12.6, 6.9 x 10!°h-! Lo), although it lacks an extended halo. 
Both NGC4874 and NGC4889 are estimated to have masses 
(within 80h7! kpc) of 1.4 10%h7!Mo. NGC4874 is a strong 
radio source but NGC4889 is not. The third dominant 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coma Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The visual appearance of the central region of the Coma cluster. This image, from the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey, is 
centered at 12459™15s + 27°55/00” (J2000) and covers 1.2° x 1.2°; north is at the top, east is at the left. It shows the core of the cluster 
around NGC4874 and NGC4889 and the southwestern group around NGC4839. (Credit: National Geographic Society, California 


Institute of Technology, Space Telescope Science Institute.) 


galaxy is NGC4839 (B = 13.5), which lies well outside 
the cluster core, 0.67° away to the southwest of NGC4874. 
It is another cD galaxy, with luminosity 3.0 x 10!°A7!Lo. 
It is also a head-tail radio source, with the tail pointing 
away from the cluster center. Each of the three dominant 
galaxies is the leading member of a subcluster within 
Coma (see below). 


Dynamics 

REDSHIFTS have been measured for 650 cluster members. 
The line-of-sight velocity distribution within the cluster 
can be resolved into two Maxwellian (Gaussian) distribu- 
tions. One of these is the main body of the cluster, with 
a mean velocity of 6900 km s7! and a one-dimensional 
velocity dispersion of 1100 km s~!. The second is the 
group of galaxies around NGC4839, with a mean veloc- 
ity of 7300 km s~! and a dispersion of 300 km s~'. The E 
and SO galaxies which dominate the main cluster have a 
Maxwellian velocity distribution, indicating that they are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


approximately in dynamical equilibrium. However, the 
spiral galaxies in the cluster have a broader and flatter 
velocity distribution, which suggests that they are freely 
falling onto the cluster. 


Intracluster medium 

Coma has long been known to be a strong source of x-ray 
emission. The total x-ray luminosity of the cluster is 
approximately 2.5 x 10“h~? erg s-!. The x-ray emission 
comes from the ICM, ahot (8 keV © 9 x 10” K) plasma with 
a mass at least as large as the mass in galaxies. Figure 2 
shows the deepest x-ray image of the whole Coma cluster, 
taken with the ROSAT satellite. The cluster appears fairly 
regular apart from the obvious second peak in the x-ray 
emission centered on NGC4839, which has a luminosity 
of 10%h~? erg s~!, typical of a bright group of galaxies. 
The temperature of this subcluster is higher than expected 
given its luminosity, suggesting that it has been shock- 
heated by its interaction with the cluster. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coma Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Coma Cluster 
0.5-2.0 keV 


Figure 2. An x-ray image of the Coma cluster obtained with the 
ROSAT satellite, showing both the main cluster and the 
NGC4839 group to the south-west. (Credit: S L Snowden, High 
Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center, NASA.) 


Detailed analysis of the x-ray gas distribution shows 
that there is a double core in the cluster, with peaks 
associated with NGC4874 and NGC4889, surrounded by 
a more symmetrical diffuse component. The luminosity 
and temperature of the gas in these peaks are more 
consistent with a rich group or poor cluster than with 
individual galaxies. Unlike many other clusters, Coma 
does not possess a central cooling flow. This presumably 
is due to the disruption of the central regions associated 
with the interaction between the NGC4874 and NGC4889 
subclusters. As well as the double core, there is also a 
distinct ‘tail’ of x-ray emission running outwards from the 
cluster center, passing through NGC4911 and ending near 
NGC4921. This feature has a luminosity of 10°h~ erg s7! 
and an estimated gas mass of a few times 10"h-!Mo. It 
may be associated either with another subcluster around 
NGC4911 or with the passage of the NGC4874 group 
through the cluster. 

The temperature of the cluster generally decreases 
out from the center but also shows hot and cool regions. 
Initial maps of the x-ray gas temperature show evidence 
for variations associated with the substructures in the 
cluster. Mapping the temperature of the cluster with 
future x-ray satellites such as AXAF will greatly improve 
our understanding of the conditions in the ICM and 
the dynamics of the cluster. Images of the cluster in 
the extreme ultraviolet obtained with the EUVE satellite 
indicate that there is also a substantial amount of sub-10° K 
gas in Coma. 

Coma is one of only 10 clusters possessing a diffuse 
radio halo (the ‘Coma C’ source); none of these clusters 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


has a COOLING FLOW. This halo is probably produced by 
the in situ acceleration of relativistic electrons by a large- 
scale magnetic field. The conditions required to create 
a persistent cluster-wide radio halo have probably been 
produced by the on-going merger between the NGC4874 
and NGC4889 subclusters, although the mechanism by 
which the kinetic energy of the merger is converted into 
radio emission remains unclear. 


Structure 

Detailed analysis of the distribution and dynamics of 
the galaxies and x-ray gas shows that there are at least 
four subclusters in Coma. The NGC4874 and NGC4889 
subclusters are in the final stages of a merger at the core of 
the cluster, while the NGC4839 subcluster is either entering 
Coma for the first time from the direction of the nearby 
cluster Abell 1367 or is returning from that direction having 
already made its first passage through the cluster core. The 
fact that NGC4839 has a radio ‘tail’ pointing away from 
the main cluster indicates that the subcluster is inward 
bound and moving through a fairly dense ICM. Another 
subcluster has been identified around NGC4911, and there 
is some evidence for other, lower-level, structures. 

There is a significant relation between structures on 
scales ranging from 10h~! kpc up to 100h~' Mpc. The 
major axes of the dominant galaxies and the distribution 
of E and SO cluster galaxies and the x-ray gas are all 
approximately aligned with the filamentary structure 
(the ‘GREAT WALL’) running through Coma southwest to 
Abell 1367 at cz = 6500 km s~! and northeast to Abell 
2197/2199 at cz = 9100 kms-~!. The inference is that the 
cluster has been built up predominantly of material, both 
subclusters and individual galaxies, which have fallen in 
along this filament. 


Mass and matter content 

Ignoring the substructure and treating Coma asa spherical 
system with both the galaxies and x-ray gas in hydrostatic 
equilibrium, the total mass of the cluster is estimated to 
be (3.1 £ 0.5) x 104h-1Mo inside 1h-! Mpc and (6.5 + 
2.5) x 10'4h-! Mo inside 3h~! Mpc. Even within the limited 
context of these assumptions this is a wide range. For 
determinations of cluster mass using galaxy dynamics, 
this is partly due to the unknown anisotropy in the 
galaxy orbits (whether, at a given radius, the galaxies 
are predominantly on isotropic, radial or circular orbits); 
for determinations based on x-ray observations, the 
uncertainty lies in the unknown temperature distribution. 
As well, there is the unknown distribution of the dark 
matter which dominates the total mass of the cluster. 

All current observations are consistent with a model 
in which ‘light traces mass’ (i.e. the dark matter has 
the same distribution as the visible matter), the galaxies 
are on isotropic orbits and the cluster has a uniform 
temperature. However, they are also consistent with 
models which depart significantly from this simplest case. 
The best-fitting models suggest that the ICM and galaxies 
have somewhat more extended distributions than the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coma Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


dark matter. The core assumption of all these models, 
namely that Coma is in hydrostatic equilibrium, is clearly 
violated at some level. The extent to which the observed 
substructure invalidates the conclusions of the equilibrium 
models is not yet clear, although early indications are that 
the mass estimates are reasonably accurate. 

Zwicky’s 1933 estimate of the V-band mass-to-light 
ratio (M/L) in the Coma cluster was about 100hMo/Lo; 
today’s mass estimates correspond to values in the 
range 300-400hM,/Lo. This exceeds M/L for individual 
galaxies by a factor of 10 or more, implying that there is 
of order 10 times as much mass in dark matter as there is 
in galaxies. However, the cluster M/L falls well short of 
the M/L of a critical-density (Q = 1) universe, for which 
M/L ® 1600hM,/Lo. The ratio of the luminous baryonic 
mass (i.e. the mass in galaxies and x-ray gas) to the total 
cluster mass is about 0.15 inside 1h7! Mpc and 0.2-0.4 
inside 3h-' Mpc. This is considerably higher than the 
baryon fraction Qgh* = 0.012 + 0.002 that is predicted by 
big bang nucleosynthesis for an Q = 1 universe (even for 
h = 0.5). Taken at face value, the mass-to-light ratio and 
baryon fraction of Coma both suggest a low-Q universe. 


Bibliography 

Comprehensive and up-to-date reviews on all aspects of 
the Coma cluster, with references to the literature, can be 
found in 


Mazure A, Casoli F, Durret F and Gerbal D (ed) 1998 
Untangling Coma Berenices: a New Vision of an Old 
Cluster (Singapore: World Scientific) 


The discovery of the Coma cluster is described in 
Herschel W 1785 Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 75 213 


The classic paper measuring the mass of the Coma cluster 
is 


Zwicky F 1933 Helv.Phys.Acta 6 110 


Matthew Colless 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Coma, Cometary 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Coma, Cometary 


The roughly spherical, temporary atmosphere of gas and 
dust expelled from a comet’s nucleus as a result of solar 
heating when the comet is sufficiently close to the Sun. 
The nucleus and coma are together known as the comet's 
head. The coma, which is typically drawn into a teardrop 
shape by the solar wind, contains neutral and ionized 
gas molecules which shine by fluorescence and reflected 
sunlight. The coma typically develops at 3-4 AU from the 
Sun and can grow to 10°-10° km, reaching its maximum 
extent just after the comet’s perihelion passage. 


See also: cometary atmospheres. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Combustion ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Combustion 


The process whereby a substance is combined with oxygen 
with the production of heat. Burning is a familiar example 
of this process. The energy required to propel chemical 
rockets is provided by the combustion of fuel with an 
oxidant at very high temperatures. A common oxidant 
is liquid oxygen (often denoted by LOX). Others include 
hydrogen peroxide and nitrogen tetroxide. 


See also: kinetic theory of gases. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Comet Arend-Roland (C/1956 R1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Arend-—Roland (C/1956 R1) 


A long-period comet discovered jointly by Sylvain Arend 
and Georges Roland in November 1956. It reached 
perihelion (0.32 AU) on 8 April 1957, and passed closest 
to Earth (0.57 AU) on 21 April. The comet attained a 
peak brightness of magnitude 0, and developed a dust tail 
that was 30° long at its greatest extent, but it was most 
notable for its antitail, which at best was half the length 
of the main tail and appeared as a pronounced spike 
extending from the head in the opposite direction to the 
tail. Anti-tails are an effect of perspective: when the 
Earth is close to the comet’s orbital plane and the comet 
is heading in the general direction of the Earth, the 
curvature of the dust tail makes the tail visible on either 
side of the head. The inclination was 120° and the 
eccentricity given as 1, making the aphelion distance and 
period indeterminately large. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Bennett (C/1969 Y1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Bennett (C/1969 Y1) 


A long-period comet discovered by Jack Bennett in 
December 1969. It passed closest to Earth on 26 March 
1970, having reached perihelion (0.54 AU) on 20 March, 
and was then at its brightest, at magnitude 0. The comet 
was best placed for observation in April, when its tail 
reached around 11°, some estimates putting it at 25°. Jets 
of material emitted by the nucleus spiraled out as the 
nucleus rotated. Bennett was one of the first comets for 
which a vast hydrogen cloud—surrounding the head at 
13 million km, around 10 times the Sun’s diameter—was 
detected, by ultraviolet observations made from Earth 
orbit. The eccentricity was 0.995, inclination 90°, period 
around 1700 years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Biela (3D/Biela) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Biela (3D/Biela) 


A periodic comet that disintegrated in the nineteenth 
century and gave rise to the briefly active Bielid meteor 
shower; the ‘D’ in the prefix indicates ‘defunct’. The 
comet was discovered in 1772 by Jacques Montaigne, and 
recovered by Jean-Louis Pons in 1805, but on neither 
occasion was it observed for long enough for an orbit 
to be computed. This was accomplished by Wilhelm 
von Biela when he recovered the comet in February 1826. 
He was able to follow it for 72 days, establishing its 
identity with the comets of 1772 and 1805, and it thus 
became the third known periodic comet. At its 1845/6 
return the comet was observed to have split into two 
nuclei, one brighter than the other, separated by around 
300 000 km. Both nuclei were seen to return separately in 
1852, differing more in brightness and now over 2 million 
km apart. That was the comet’s final apparition: there 
was no sign of either nucleus on what should have been 
the next favorable return in 1865/6, but in 1872 a meteor 
storm occurred, suggesting that the comet had completely 
disintegrated. There were further notable displays of what 
became known as the Bielid meteor shower at intervals 
corresponding to the comet’s period of just over 6.6 years. 
The comet’s disintegration into a meteor stream provided 
strong confirmation of the relationship between comets 
and meteors, first proposed by Giovanni Schiaparelli in 
1866. At their final appearance, the twin nuclei (designated 
3D-A and 3D-B) had inclination 13°, eccentricity 0.76 and 
period 6.62 years. 


Seealso: Bielids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet de Chéseaux (C/1743 X1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet de Chéseaux (C/1743 X1) 


A long-period comet discovered by Dirk Klinkenberg 
on 9 December 1743, and independently by Philippe 
de Chéseaux four days later. It was also known as 
Klinkenberg’s Comet, but it was de Chéseaux who 
computed its orbit and his name is now more commonly 
associated with it. This was one of the brightest comets 
of modern times, reaching an estimated magnitude —7 in 
February 1744. Its multiple tails—more than 10, according 
to some reports—formed a great fan that was visible in 
the pre-dawn sky before the comet itself rose. The comet 
reached perihelion (0.22 AU) on 1 March. Its inclination 
was 47°, and its eccentricity indistinguishable from 1. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Donati (C/1858 L1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Donati (C/1858 L1) 


A long-period comet discovered by Giovanni Donati in 
June 1858. It reached its greatest magnitude of —1 shortly 
before perihelion (0.58 AU) on 20 September, and was 
closest to Earth (0.5 AU) on 9 October. Its appearance was 
impressive, with a prominent curved dust tail stretching 
an estimated 60°, and two thin gas tails. Concentric, 
sharply defined shells of material ahead of the nucleus 
suggested that material was being ejected mainly from 
one vent when the rotation of the nucleus carried the 
vent round to the sunward side; the rotation period was 
estimated from the separation of the shells to be 4.6 h. The 
eccentricity was 0.996, the inclination 117°, and the period 
roughly 2000 years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Encke (2P/Encke) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Encke (2P/Encke) 


The short-period comet with the shortest known period 
at around 3.3 years. It was discovered independently by 
Pierre Méchain in 1786, by Caroline Herschel in 1795, and 
by Jean-Louis Pons in 1805 and again in 1818. In 1821 
Johann Encke calculated the orbit of Pons’s 1818 comet and 
predicted its return to perihelion in 1821 to an accuracy 
of one day. Two years later he established this comet's 
identity with those observed in 1786, 1795 and 1805, and 
Encke’s Comet, as it was known, thus became the second 
known periodic comet. Its early discovery and short 
period give it the record for the most observed returns 
to perihelion (0.33 AU), the 60th occurring in 2000. The 
comet seems to have been in a stable orbit for several 
thousand years, which poses the problem of why the 
historical record contains no sightings of it before 1786. 
The comet is now quite faint (sixth magnitude) and shows 
only a short tail, presumably having shed most of its dust 
and gas. However, at fourth magnitude it was a naked-eye 
object at several returns in the early nineteenth century. 
The orbit shows signs of slow decay, the present period 
being 3.28 years; its aphelion distance is 4.06 AU, the 
eccentricity is 0.85 and the inclination 12°. Debris from 
the comet forms a meteor stream which the Earth intersects 
twice a year, producing the Taurid shower in November 
and the daytime Beta Taurid shower in June. 


Seealso: ‘Taurids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Family 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Family 


A group of comets with broadly similar orbital elements. 
The distribution of aphelia of members of a comet group 
peaks at a value corresponding to the distance of a 
particular major planet from the Sun. Perturbations 
by that planet have been responsible for changing the 
diverse original orbits of the comets into those they now 
occupy. It was once thought that all the major planets 
possessed comet families. Only Jupiter’s comet family 
is now recognized as real, those of Saturn, Uranus and 
Neptune being explained in terms of orbital resonances 
with Jupiter. Jupiter’s comet family itself contains over 
two-thirds of all the comets officially designated as being 
of short period. An example of a comet recently captured 
by Jupiter into its family is 16P/Brooks 2, which in 1886 
passed just two Jupiter radii from the planet, an encounter 
that changed its period from about 30 years to 7 years. The 
orbits of Jupiter’s comet family are continually decaying, 
and members are eventually ejected from the solar system 
by a gravitational ‘slingshot’, or tidally disrupted. Fresh 
captures replenish the stock. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Giacobini—Zinner (21P/Giacobini—Zinner) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Giacobini—Zinner 
(21P/Giacobini—Zinner) 


A short-period comet discovered independently in 1900 
by Michel Giacobini and in 1913 by Ernst Zinner. With 
a period of 6.61 years it is, like the majority of short- 
period comets, a member of Jupiter’s comet family. It 
reached its greatest magnitude of 7 when it made its closest 
approach to Earth in 1946, passing at a distance of 0.26 AU. 
A brief outburst raised its magnitude to 6 for a few days, 
and similar short outbursts have been observed at other 
returns. These outbursts may be linked to storm-level 
activity in the comet’s associated meteor shower, known 
as the Giacobinids, as occurred in 1946. The perihelion 
distance is 1.03 AU, aphelion distance 5.99 AU, eccentricity 
0.71 and inclination 32°. In 1985 the comet became the 
first to be visited by a space probe when the International 
Cometary Explorer passed within 7800 km of its nucleus. 
A shock front was detected where the ionized species in 
the coma encountered the solar wind. 


Seealso: comet family, Giacobinids, International Comet- 
ary Explorer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Hale—Bopp (C/1995 O01) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Hale—Bopp (C/1995 O1) 


Comet C/1995 Ol (Hale-Bopp) was discovered 
simultaneously by the two American amateur 
astronomers Alan Hale and Thomas Bopp on 23 July 
1995. At that time, it was at 7.1 AU from the Sun and 
had already a total visual magnitude of 10, which is more 
than 100 times brighter than COMET HALLEY at the same 
distance. It passed perihelion on | April 1997, at 0.91 AU 
from the Sun. The orbit of comet Hale—Bopp is inclined 
by 89° over the ecliptic. Its orbital period was about 4200 
yr before entering the inner solar system and changed to 
2400 yr after gravitational perturbation by Jupiter. It is 
thus a long-period comet, presumably coming from the 
OORT CLOUD. 

As soon as comet Hale—Bopp was discovered and its 
orbit determined, it was clear that it would be a very 
bright object at perihelion, one of the brightest ever 
recorded comets. Indeed, it reached a total visual 
magnitude of —1 around perihelion. With favorable 
viewing conditions, it was a naked-eye object in the 
northern hemisphere for more than 2 months. At that 
moment, its gas production reached 10°' water 
molecules s' (about 300 ts’, 10 times the rate of comet 
Halley). It may thus be counted as one of the ‘Great 
comets’ of our epoch. 


The campaign of observations of comet 


Hale—Bopp 

The early discovery of comet Hale—Bopp gave ample 
time to organize world-wide observations with major 
instruments. Comets Hyakutake and Hale—Bopp were the 
first comets of exceptional brightness (surpassing the 
apparitions of comet West in 1976 and P/Halley in 1986) 
to be observed with the powerful means of astronomy at 
the end of the 20th century: the versatile imaging 
possibilities of CCDs, the new spectroscopic ground- 
based facilities in the infrared, millimetric and 
submillimetric domains, and space observatories such as 
the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO), the Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST) and x-ray satellites (see COMET 
HYAKUTAKE for a discussion of x-ray observations of 
comets). It is thus not a surprise that a wealth of new 
results followed. 


Coma dust patterns, nucleus rotation and 
size 

A complex pattern of dust jets (up to seven) was seen in 
the inner coma (see COMA, COMETARY). These jets 
showed either spirals or a radial pattern, depending on 
the viewing geometry of the moment. Close to 
perihelion, a pattern of expanding shells was conspicuous 
even for observers with modest-size instruments. This 
phenomenon traces the unequal activity of the nucleus 
surface: ‘active regions’ are periodically exposed to solar 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


heating as the comet nucleus is rotating. The observation 
of the time evolution of the jet (or shell) pattern allowed 
a period of 11.4 h for the rotation of the nucleus to be 
determined precisely and its axis to be assessed. 

A nucleus diameter of 40-80 km was determined 
from observations with the Hubble Space Telescope, the 
Infrared Space Observatory and ground-based radiometry 
at millimetric wavelengths. This is the largest COMETARY 
NUCLEUS among those for which the size could be 
assessed (comet P/Halley had an elongated nucleus of 
‘only’ 8 km x 8 km x 16 km). 


The sodium tail 

One of the highlights of the observations of comet Hale— 
Bopp was the detection of a third kind of COMETARY TAIL 
(in addition to the dust and ionic tails): a thin, straight tail 
revealed by the yellow D lines of atomic sodium at 589 
nm, which shows up at an angle from the other straight 
ionic tail and distinct from the broad, curved dust tail. 
Emission of the sodium lines had already been observed 
in a number of comets, with hints for a sodium tail 
suggested in a couple of them, but this was the first time 
that the presence of the sodium tail was so conspicuous. 
The sodium D lines are emitted through fluorescence: 
photons from the Sun are absorbed and re-emitted 
isotropically; a transfer of momentum results, 
accelerating the sodium atoms away from the Sun at 
velocities which could exceed 80 km s"'. The origin of 
the cometary sodium is ill understood. Decomposition of 
a gas-phase parent molecule seems to be ruled out. 
Sodium is rather released from cometary dust particles. 


Evolution with heliocentric distance 

The early detection of the comet allowed observers to 
study the evolution of this exceptional comet over a very 
large span of heliocentric distances and to see the 
‘turning on’ of the sublimation of various molecules from 
the nucleus ices as the comet approached the Sun. Just 
after discovery, at 7 AU, carbon monoxide (at radio 
wavelengths) and the CN radical (in the visible spectrum) 
were already identified. Water (traced by the OH radical 
observed in the near UV or at radio wavelengths) showed 
up at only 4.8 AU. Cometary activity, which is driven by 
water ice sublimation at short heliocentric distances, is 
governed by the sublimation of more volatile species, 
especially carbon monoxide, at long distances. As the 
comet approached closer to the Sun, the apparitions of 
methanol (CH;0H), hydrogen cyanide (HCN), hydrogen 
sulfide (H2S), formaldehyde (HCO) and methyl cyanide 
(CH3CN) were successively observed (see figure 5 of 
COMETARY ATMOSPHERES). 

The same pattern was observed in reverse order as 
the various molecules ‘turned off when the comet 
receded from the Sun. In 2001, at about 14 AU from the 
Sun, comet Hale-Bopp is still observed to be active. 
Images obtained at the MPG/ESO 2.2 m telescope at La 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Hale—Bopp (C/1995 O01) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Silla still show the prominent, curved jet-like structure in 
the coma that was observed earlier, with a total size of 
the coma of around 2 million km. Carbon monoxide is 
also. still strongly outgassed, as seen in radio 
spectroscopic observations at the SEST 15 m radio 
telescope, also at La Silla. 


New molecules 

An extensive spectroscopic investigation of comet Hale— 
Bopp at all wavelengths, using state-of-the art 
instruments, resulted in the detection of many new 
molecular species. Comet Hale—Bopp is thus now the 
comet for which the chemical composition is the best 
known (see COMETARY ATMOSPHERES). The list of 
cometary molecules is not closed, however, since many 
unidentified spectral features were observed. 

The composition of volatiles in comet Hale—Bopp is 
found to be strikingly similar to the chemical abundances 
of interstellar ices (as recently observed with ISO) and to 
those observed in interstellar hot molecular cores and 
bipolar outflows around protostars. 


Radio observations 
In addition to the already-known cometary parent 
molecules (H,0, CO, CO2, CH;0H, HCO, HCN, H,S) 
and to the ones just discovered in comet Hyakutake 
(NH3, HNCO, CH3CN, HNC, OCS), several molecules 
were identified by radio spectroscopy (see figure 4 of 
COMETARY ATMOPHERES): the relatively complex organic 
molecules formic acid (HCOOH), acetaldehyde 
(CH3;CHO), methyl formate (HCOOCH:3) and formamide 
(NH,CHO), the nitrile HC3N, thioformaldehyde (H,CS), 
all with abundances of the order of 10“ relative to water. 
The sulfur oxides SO and SO, were observed with 
abundances of about 0.3%, making them an important 
sulfur repository. The NS radical was discovered, the 
origin of which (from the nucleus ices or from an 
unknown parent molecule) is still a puzzle. 

Several ions were also observed for the first time by 
radio spectroscopy: CO", HCO’", H;0". 

Deuterated water (HDO) was observed from one of 
its submillimetric transitions, with a D/H ratio of 3 x 
10%, as in comets 1P/Halley and Hyakutake. The 
deuterated variety DCN of hydrogen cyanide was also 
observed with D/H of 2.5 x 10°. As discussed in COMET 
HYAKUTAKE, these values are intermediate between the 
cosmic D/H ratio and the ratios observed in interstellar 
molecules and provide a critical test for formation 
theories of the solar system. 


Infrared observations 

Ground-based spectroscopic observations in the infrared 
with the Cryogenic Echelle Spectrometer (CSHELL) on 
the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF) in the 2.8— 
4.8 um region allowed the observation of CO, CH4, C2Ho, 
CsH,, OCS, NH3, of several radicals through their 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fundamental bands of vibration and of water through 
‘hot’ bands which are not affected by telluric absorption. 
The apparition of comet Hale—Bopp also coincided with 
the operation of the Infrared Space Observatory which 
could, for the first time, secure a cometary spectrum in 
the infrared range from 2.5 to 190 um. The water 
molecule, which is so difficult to observe from the 
ground because of telluric absorption, could be observed 
in many details through its fundamental bands of 
vibration at 2.7 and 6.5 sm wavelengths and its rotational 
lines in the far infrared (180 pum). Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
was observed through its vibrational band at 4.25 um: 
this was the second comet in which this molecule (which 
cannot be investigated from the ground because of strong 
telluric absorption) was directly observed, after P/Halley 
where it was observed in situ with the infrared 
spectrometer aboard the VEGA probe. Its abundance was 
about 20% relative to water (at a distance of 2.9 AU from 
the Sun when the ISO observation was made), which 
makes it a major cometary volatile. 


Distributed sources of molecules 

Previous to observations of comet Hale—Bopp, it was 
already known that some ‘parent’ molecules were not 
coming from the sublimation of nucleus ices, but from a 
still ill-known ‘distributed source’ within the coma. This 
was demonstrated for CO and H2CO by, e.g. in situ 
observations of P/Halley by the Giotto space probe. 

Infrared long-slit spectroscopic observations of 
comet Hale—Bopp showed that CO was produced half 
from a distributed source and half from the nucleus when 
the comet was at less than 2 AU from the Sun. A 
distributed source for OCS was also found. The Institut 
de Radioastronomie Millimétrique (IRAM) 
interferometer on Plateau de Bure (France) and the 
Berkeley Illinois Maryland Array (BIMA) and the Owens 
Valley Radio Observatory (OVRO), both in California, 
could map at radio millimetric wavelengths the radio 
emission of some molecules, using a_ technique 
successfully applied before for comet Hyakutake. This 
allowed the space distributions of some species such as 
CO, HCO, SO, HNC, HCO" to be investigated and clues 
to their origin to be obtained. 

The exact nature of these ‘distributed sources’ of 
molecules is still an enigma. It seems likely that they 
could be the organic grains observed in situ by the space 
probes which explored comet Halley (the so-called 
‘CHON particles’), but the desorption mechanism of 
molecules from these grains is still to be elucidated. 

The HNC molecule (an unstable isomer of hydrogen 
cyanide HCN) was found to have an abundance ratio 
relative to HCN varying from 0.03 to more than 0.20 as 
the comet approached the Sun. This is not expected if 
HNC were well mixed with HCN in cometary ices. A 
possibility is that HCN is converted to HNC through 
charge-exchange chemical reactions within the coma, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Hale—Bopp (C/1995 01) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


reaction rates becoming more important when the density 
is higher, i.e. when the comet is more productive, closer 
to the Sun. Interferometric observations at IRAM indeed 
suggested that HNC has a distributed source. 


Characterization of cometary dust 

It was already known that cometary dust contained 
silicates from ground-based observations of their 
characteristic band around 10 wm and that part of them 
could be crystalline in some comets. The record of the 
full infrared spectrum of comet Hale-Bopp by ISO 
immediately revealed a series of additional spectral 
features at 16, 19.5, 23.5, 27.5 and 33.5 um which were 
identified to be magnesium-rich olivine (forsterite 
Mg)SiO,), a special kind of silicate (see figure 6 of 
COMETARY ATMOSPHERES). A more quantitative analysis 
of the ground-based and ISO spectra of comet Hale— 
Bopp showed that its dust was essentially composed of 
forsterite, pyroxenes (another class of silicates such as 
MgSiO3;), amorphous silicates and spectrally featureless 
material which could be the organic-coated grains 
previously observed by the space probes which explored 
comet Halley. 

The spectrum of comet Hale—Bopp in this spectral 
domain closely resembles that of the dust disks around 
some young or even evolved stars, such as that of HD 
100546, an intermediate star between B Pictoris or Vega- 
like objects and Herbig Ae—Be stars, which were also 
observed by ISO. Thus, the dust contained in such disks 
appears to be similar to cometary dust. 

In contrast, interstellar dust only shows silicates 
which are in the amorphous phase. Conversion of 
silicates from the amorphous to the crystalline phase, to 
our knowledge, can only occur through an annealing 
process at relatively high temperature (>1000 K). We still 
have to understand how comets such as Hale—Bopp could 
have incorporated apparently unprocessed interstellar 
volatiles on the one hand and evolved, crystalline 
silicates on the other hand. 


Bibliography 

A’Hearn M F, Boehnhardt H, Kidger M and West R M (eds) 
1999 Proc. Ist Int. Conf: on Comet Hale-Bopp, Earth 
Moon Planets 77-79 

West R M_ 1995-2000 Comet Hale—Bopp web _ pages 
http://www.eso.org/outreach/info-events/hale- 


bopp/index.html 


Jacques Crovisier 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Halley (1P/Halley) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Halley (1P/Halley) 


Comet Halley is probably the most famous comet on 
record. The reason is that it is the only bright comet, 
easily visible with the unaided eye, that comes back so 
often, namely with a periodicity that is never very 
different from 76 years. Since such a periodicity is 
roughly comparable to the duration of a human life, 
grandparents talk about it to their grandchildren and oral 
tradition has established its fame. 


The 1682 passage of comet Halley 

Until the 1682 passage of comet Halley, none of its 
previous passes had been identified as coming from the 
same object. At that time, no comet was known to be 
periodic, and the shape of the cometary trajectories was 
unknown. In particular, Johannes Kepler assumed them 
to be straight lines. However, a couple of years before the 
passage of comet Halley, Sir Isaac Newton established 
for the first time that a parabola fitted the observed 
trajectory of the Great Comet of 1680 much better than a 
straight line. A parabola was suggested as one of the 
possible solutions given by his new theory of universal 
gravitation. 

In 1703, Isaac Newton’s friend, EDMOND HALLEY, 
undertook to compute parabolic orbits for those 24 
historical comets for which enough accurate data were 
available. Among the 24 parabolas, three of them were 
not only of the same size, but they were superimposed 
upon each other in space. Their dates of passage were 
separated by 75 and 76 years. He concluded that the three 
parabolas were actually the extremity of an extremely 
elongated ellipse. The three anonymous comets were 
therefore the three passages of the same single comet 
coming back periodically. Halley, rightly proud of his 
results, wrote (in Latin): 


If, in agreement with our predictions, this comet comes 
back again in 1758, fair posterity will recognize that its 
return has been first predicted by an Englishman. 


The 1759 return 

The comet was found back at Christmas 1758 by a 
German amateur; it passed at perihelion in March 1759. 
Since the return predicted by Halley had been verified, 
the so far anonymous comet was called for the first time 
Halley’s comet or, by modern astronomers, comet 
Halley. Its 1758 passage played a pivotal role in 
continental Europe in convincing people that Newton’s 
law of universal gravitation was correct. The reason is 
that Alexis Clairaut, using the existence of planetary 
perturbations to correct the comet’s orbit for the first 
time, predicted the 1759 perihelion passage with an 
accuracy of one month. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The 1835 return 

By comet Halley’s 1835 return, improvements in optical 
instruments revealed for the first time the existence of 
physical phenomena taking place in the comet’s head. In 
particular, Friedrich Bessel’s drawings show jets, rays 
and fans that seem to be ejected sunwards before being 
repelled away from the Sun. Bessel interpreted his 
drawings by his now classical ‘fountain model’, already 
suggestive of vaporizing gases dragging dust away, 
sunwards off the nucleus. This looked like a confirmation 
of Laplace’s ideas, written in 1803, about the existence of 
a solid frozen nucleus. 


The 1910 return 

Photography and spectroscopy brought a very large 
amount of data for the first time. In 1931, Bobrovnikoff 
published a major monograph of the 1910 passage, in 
which he used 709 photographs and several scores of 
spectrograms. The radicals and ions that had been 
identified in the heads and tails of former comets 
originated from only three elements: carbon, nitrogen and 
oxygen. Comet Halley’s 1910 passage added hydrogen to 
this list (the Fortrat band of CH near 4300 A). 
Bobrovnikoff assumed that the four identified elements 
(H, C, N, O) came from three ‘parent’? molecules 
vaporizing from the nucleus, namely carbon dioxide COs, 
ammonia NH; and water H,O. 

Fragmentation and ionization of these three 
molecules were able to explain all the observed spectra: 
CN, Co, C3, CH, OH, NH, NH, and the ions CH’, OH", 
N., CO* and CO,° (including later identifications). 
These data are the baseline upon which Fred Whipple 
would build his icy conglomerate model of the 
COMETARY NUCLEUS in 1950. The need for more parent 
molecules only became apparent later, because the 
absence of molecular collisions in most cometary coma 
was not observed previously. 


The 1986 return: atomic abundances 

With the help of space missions, comet Halley’s 1986 
passage brought a wealth of new data, coordinated by the 
International Halley Watch and preserved on compact 
disks in the Comet Halley Archives. The mean ratios in 
numbers of atoms of the light elements found in the 
volatile fraction of comet Halley were: 


H/O = 1920.4 
C/O = 0.20 + 0.05 
N/O =0.102 0.05 
$/0 = 0.01 + 0.005. 


The dust-to-gas mass ratio was found to be M = 0.8+0.2 
for comet Halley. Its elemental abundances were found to 
be quasi-solar for the 17 elements measured, except for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Halley (1P/Halley) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hydrogen, which was depleted by a factor of about 500 in 
the comet with respect to the Sun. There was also a 
smaller discrepancy for Si, twice as abundant, and Fe, 
half as abundant in the comet as in the Sun, so that the 
ratio Fe/Si is four times smaller in comet Halley than in 
the Sun. 

This anomalous ratio recalls the same type of 
anomaly in carbonaceous chondrites, where the Fe/Si 
ratio varies from 25% to 75% solar. COMETS and 
CHONDRITES are believed to have a similar origin, 
although a slightly different thermal history (chondrites 
were heated more than comets). The composition of the 
terrestrial planets also suggests that a variable iron 
deficiency exists in the inner solar system with respect to 
the Sun. 


The 1986 return: molecular data 

All chemical species identified in previous comets, plus a 
few more, were identified in comet Halley during its 
1986 passage. They are listed in table 1. 

The mean chemical composition of dust in comet 
Halley has also been established in percentages by mass. 
Dust contains 33% organics and 67% inorganics. The 
organic fraction is half unsaturated hydrocarbons and half 
more complex molecules also containing oxygen, 
nitrogen and sulfur. The inorganic fraction is three 
quarters silicates, the rest being FeS, graphite and sulfur; 
both fractions also contain bound water, probably 
hydration water. 

The volatile fraction of comet Halley contained (in 
numbers of atoms) about 78.5% H,O, 4.5% HCO-OH, 
4.2% H2CO, 3.5% COs, 1.0% CO; 2.5% No, 1.0% HCN, 
0.8% NH3, 0.8 NoHy, 0.4% C4H4N>; 1.5% C2, 0.5% 
CHa, 0.2% C3H2; 0.1% H2S, 0.05% CS, and 0.05% So. 

The composition of individual grains of dust from 
comet Halley has revealed a large dispersion of elemental 
abundances from grain to grain, although it seems 
possible to classify them into four distinct families: 


Group A (carbon-rich) mean 54% C, 12% O, 10% metals 
(37 grains). 

Group B (oxygen-rich) mean 54% O, 10% C, 15% metals 
(18 grains). 

Group C (Mg-Si rich) mean 81% metals (but 5% Fe), 2% 
C, 2% O (10 grains). 

Group D (iron-rich) mean 33% Fe, but 9% Mg, 5% Si, 
8% C, 4% O (11 grains). 


These submicroscopic grains seem to represent 
interstellar dust grains from four different sources, 
coming initially from different stellar environments, and 
which have never been thermally processed before 
sedimenting together to the mid-plane of the protosolar 
nebula, before accreting into comets. 


Halo of vaporizing grains 

The existence of an extended halo of vaporizing icy 
particles has been detected around the nucleus of comet 
Halley, in particular by its production of CO, probably 
coming from the photodissociation by the solar light of 
the molecules of formic acid HCO-OH and 
formaldehyde HCO, which have both been detected in 
the organic grains dubbed CHON by astronomers. Other 
icy grain halos had been detected before in other comets. 


Isotopic ratios 

Before comet Halley’s 1986 passage, the only isotopic 
ratio measured in comets was the '°C/'°C ratio measured 
from spectra of the C, radical. The spectra were difficult 
to measure because of the blend of the C, band with NH). 
Approximate ratios from 70 to 140 were assumed to be 
consistent with the terrestrial ratio of 89, rather than with 
the interstellar ratio of 4344. However, the analysis of the 
'SCN spectral lines in comet Halley gave an isotopic ratio 
of 65+9 for carbon in the CN radical. This isotopic ratio 
depends on the molecule considered because it comes 
from different fractionation effects. The interstellar ratio 
also varies from 40 to 90 in different molecules. The fact 
that some dust grains in comet Halley had different 
isotopic ratios for carbon can be interpreted as being due 
to the different origins of these grains in interstellar 
space, confirming the interpretation of their large 
dispersion in elemental abundances mentioned 
previously. 

The D/H isotopic ratio has also been measured in 
comet Halley; first measurements had large error bars, 
but they have been considerably improved recently. 
Deuterium now yields 320 parts per million (ppm) in 
Halley’s water, that is about twice as large as the 
concentration of deuterlum in our oceans (about 
156 ppm). This large deutertum enrichment has been 
confirmed in two recent bright comets (Hyakutake and 


Table 1. Chemical species identified in comet Halley. 


(a) By spectroscopy: 


Organic molecules: C, C2, C3, CH; CN, HCN, CH3;CN; HCO, HCO, CO, 
Inorganic molecules: NH, NH», NH3, NH4; H, O, OH, HO; S, S, 
Tons: C*, CH*, CO*, CO,"; N>*; OH"; H)S*; Ca* 


(b) By mass spectrometer during spacecraft flyby: 
H30°, (H2CO)n", NH,’, NH;’, CHa 3 CH;", S.’, Cs’, CS", C3H3" 


HCO-OH and H,CO in dust grains 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Halley (1P/Halley) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hale—Bopp). Compared with the deuterium in the 
atmosphere of Jupiter, which represents a fair estimate of 
its content in the primeval nebular gas, the deuterium 
enrichment in the water molecules of comet Halley, as 
well as that in the two other bright comets, is by a factor 
of 16, whereas the enrichment in the water of our oceans 
is by a factor of eight. 


Comet Halley’s orbit 

The present orbit of comet Halley is an extremely 
elongated orbit of eccentricity e = 0.967. With its 76-year 
period, its perihelion distance of 0.587 astronomical units 
(AU) sets its aphelion at almost 35 AU. Its inclination to 
the ecliptic is 17.8° but, because it orbits in a retrograde 
direction, its inclination is usually said to be 162.2°. 

More than 30 of its previous passages have been 
computed backwards with an outstanding accuracy, 
which has allowed 30 passages to be retrieved 
unambiguously in historical documents. Its period has 
varied irregularly from 79.6 years (from 451 to 530 AD) 
to 74.4 years (from 1835 to 1910). The changes in its 
period come from the different positions of the giant 
planets, the attractions of which change its orbit slightly. 
In contrast, its orientation in space hardly changes. 


The fate of comet Halley 
All observed comets are short-lived because they come 
repeatedly into the inner solar system, where they decay 
in the solar heat; periodic comets usually disappear after 
two or three hundred passages. Comet Halley is no 
exception. Its frozen nucleus vaporizes gases that drag 
dust away; this produces those transient phenomena for 
which comets are so well known. Their heads and tails, 
constantly lost to space, are the best evidence of their 
decay. Such a decay often ends in a splitting of the 
nucleus. Eventually, all comets fade into invisibility. 
Minor fragments may remain forever along their orbits, 
or they may decay into finer and finer dust, if they do not 
eventually hit one of the planets. 

Since we still see comets billions of years after the 
formation of the solar system, there must be a permanent 
source of new comets. 


Sources of pristine comets 
Indeed, two reservoirs of pristine comets have been 
found, where a large number of comets have remained 
since the origin of the solar system. One of them is the 
KUIPER BELT, a ring of millions of comets on 
quasicircular orbits beyond the orbit of Neptune; the 
other is the OORT CLOUD, a gigantic sphere centered on 
the Sun, the diameter of which is one thousand times the 
size of the planetary system; it contains billions of 
comets. These two reservoirs keep the comets in their 
pristine state in the deep cold of space. 

The Kuiper Belt is somewhat perturbed by 
resonances with the orbit of Neptune; this produces the 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


SHORT-PERIOD COMETS (periods between 3 and 30 years) 
whereas Galactic tides and sometimes the action of a 
passing star nearby perturb the Oort Cloud and produce 
the LONG-PERIOD COMETS (periods more than 200 years). 

Comet Halley is a special case: with only a few other 
comets, its period lies in the gap between short- and long- 
period comets; for this reason, it should probably be 
called an ‘intermediate-period’ comet. Consequently, its 
origin is not completely certain. 


Origin of comet Halley 

The very fact that comet Halley is on a retrograde orbit 
makes it more probable that it was captured from the 
Oort Cloud. The reason is that all Kuiper Belt comets 
turn in the prograde direction, as do all the planets. A 
close encounter with a planet, which would have 
switched its direction drastically, is a highly improbable 
event. If comet Halley came from the Oort Cloud some 
millennia ago, then it shared a common origin with all 
the other comets of this cloud. The Oort Cloud was 
formed during the accretion of the giant planets. The 
growth of these very massive objects ejected a large 
fraction of the icy PLANETESIMALS that formed in their 
zones, into the Oort cloud. Uranus and Neptune were the 
most effective; Jupiter and Saturn became too massive 
and developed a gravitational field that ejected most of 
the icy bodies too far away into space to be kept by the 
Sun’s gravitation inside the Oort Cloud. 

So the ultimate origin of comet Halley lies probably 
among the icy planetesimals that accreted in the zones of 
Uranus and Neptune. The numerous isotopic anomalies 
mentioned before in the dust grains of comet Halley 
confirm that the interstellar grains that accreted into such 
an icy planetesimal had never been heated before; if it 
had been formed in the zone of Jupiter, the larger 
temperature of the PROTOPLANETARY DISK (near 220 K) 
would have induced neutral isotopic-exchange reactions 
with the nebular hydrogen, which would have also 
diminished the deuterium enrichment of its water, from 
16 down to 6. Since this was not the case, this seems to 
be the best proof of the ultimate origin of comet Halley. 
Its deuterium enrichment corresponds to unmodified 
interstellar conditions. In the outer solar system, it was 
too cold for neutral isotopic-exchange reactions to work. 


The nucleus of comet Halley 

Although very small, the cometary nucleus is the only 
permanent feature of a comet. Head and tail are transient 
phenomena that appear only near the Sun. They are 
remnants of the decay of the nucleus into dust and gas. It 
was known by indirect means that cometary nuclei were 
objects of a few to a few tens of kilometers, but the 
nucleus of comet Halley is the first nucleus that has been 
photographed from nearby (figure 1). This was done in 
1986 during the flyby of the GIOTTO spacecraft 
(European Space Agency). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Halley (1P/Halley) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Comet Halley’s nucleus, seen from a distance of 4000 
kilometers by the Giotto spacecraft during its close passage on 
13-14 March 1986. The nucleus is black and irregular; its vents 
eject gas and dust to the left. 


The pictures revealed that it was quite irregular in 
shape; 90% of its surface area is covered by a black crust 
that is assumed to be made of silicate grains glued with 
black organic material looking like soot and clearly 
containing a large amount of carbon. The loss of water 
ice and more volatile ices in the crust does not extend 
very deep; the crust is pierced with many openings that 
act as erupting craters or fountains from which the inside 
snows vaporize. What we see now is clearly the result of 
many passages close to the Sun, where the surface of the 
nucleus was heated enough to lose its volatiles and weld 
its grains together. However, the heat conduction of the 
crust allows the nearby layers of volatiles to vaporize 
during each passage to perihelion, and their pressure has 
to become large enough to keep open many ‘fountains’, 
which feed the coma and the tails, until the comet has 
cooled down enough by receding from the solar heat. The 
nucleus of comet Halley is an elongated body measuring 
about 8 by 15 km, which seems to have resulted from 
two roughly spherical icy planetesimals that stuck 
together. 

Comet Halley’s 1986 passage has played an 
important role in clarifying many features and properties 
of comets, including their origin. It now seems rather 
well established that cometary nuclei have been accreted 
from icy interstellar grains that had sedimented first into 
the mid-plane of the protosolar nebula. The still existing 
comets are more or less pristine remnants of the stuff 
which was not used to make the planets. 


Bibliography 
More information about the remarkable co-ordination between 
amateur and professional astronomers under the name of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


‘International Halley Watch’ (IHW), at the occasion of the 1986 
passage of Comet Halley can be found in the publication 
detailed below. This organization was sponsored by the 
International Astronomical Union and supported by NASA. 


Delsemme A H 1991 The 1986 passage of comet Halley The 
Comet Halley Archive Summary Volume ed Z Sekanina 
(Washington: NASA-JPL) pp 317-30 


An excellent book on the results known soon after Comet 
Halley’s 1986 passage can be found in: 


Mason J (ed.) 1990 Comet Halley, Investigations, Results, 
Interpretations (New York: Ellis Horwood) 


A more recent reference relevant to the space exploration of 
Comet Halley is: 


Eberhart P 1998 Composition of Comets: The Jn Situ View. 
Proc. IAU Collog. 168 ed M A Hearn Astron Soc. Pacific 
Conference Series (in press) 


Armand H Delsemme 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Hyakutake (C/1996 B2) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Hyakutake (C/1996 B2) 


Comet C/1996 B2 (Hyakutake) was discovered on 30 
January 1996 by the Japanese amateur astronomer Yuji 
Hyakutake. (It should not to be mistaken for another 
‘comet Hyakutake’ discovered by the same person 5 
weeks before, C/1995 Y1, which was much less 
spectacular.) It was soon found out that comet Hyakutake 
was to make a close approach to Earth on 25 March 
1996, at only 0.102 AU (15 300 000 km). It passed 
perihelion on 1 May 1996 at 0.230 AU from the Sun. 
This body is a long-period comet (about 9000 yr) with an 
orbital plane inclined by 125° over the ecliptic; it is 
presumably coming from the OORT CLOUD. 


Close approaches of comets to Earth 

Several COMETS are known to have passed peculiarly 
close to the Earth. Among those with well-known orbits, 
the closest approach was made by comet D/1770 L1 
(Lexell) in 1770: only 0.015 AU (i.e. 2 400 000 km, 
seven times the Moon-to-Earth distance). In the 20th 
century, 7P/Pons—Winnecke passed at 0.039 AU in 1927, 
73P/Schwassmann—Wachmann 3 at 0.062 AU in 1930 
and C/1983 H1 (IRAS—Araki—Alcock) at 0.031 AU and 
C/1983 Jl (Sugano—Saigusa—Fujikawa) at 0.063 AU in 
1983. The close approach of comet Hyakutake at 0.102 
AU is thus rare but not exceptional. This comet, 
however, was a relatively highly productive one, which 
expelled about 2 x 10°? water molecules s!' (about 
5ts_') when it was at about 1 AU from the Sun: this is 
no less than 1/5 of the production of COMET HALLEY at 
the same distance. This made the comet a very bright 
object at the end of March 1996, reaching a zero total 
visual magnitude when at its brightest. It was a 
conspicuous naked-eye object for several days with a tail 
extending up to 90°. 


The campaign of observation of comet 
Hyakutake 


A campaign of observation, mustering most large 
astronomical instruments, had to be organized at short 
notice. It collected many new results on cometary 
science, just before the equally successful observations of 
comet C/1995 O1 (Hale—Bopp). 


The nucleus, size and rotation 

A radar echo could be obtained from the comet using the 
70 m Goldstone antenna in California. Since the radar 
signal is proportional to A“ (A being the distance of the 
observer to the target), only comets at a close distance 
could be observed, and, until now, only a handful of them 
could be detected by radar techniques: 2P/Encke, 
26P/Grigg—Skjellerup, C/1983 H1 (IRAS—Araki-Alcock) 
and 1P/Halley. From these observations, the COMETARY 
NUCLEUS of comet Hyakutake was found to be 2—3 km in 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


diameter. Compared with the high level of activity of the 
comet, this small size indicates that most of the surface is 
covered with exposed, sublimating ice. Despite the small 
distance to the observers, the nucleus was too small to be 
resolved by optical means. 

The rotation period of the comet nucleus was 
determined to be about 6.3 h from near-nucleus imaging 
and from the comet’s light curve. 

Several secondary nuclei were observed from images 
taken just after the close approach to Earth of the comet. 
Each fragment was surrounded by its own coma. They 
receded in the anti-solar direction with a velocity of 
about 12 ms’ and progressively disappeared. Obviously, 
they were not due to a major break-up of the nucleus, 
such as those which occurred to comets C/1975 V1 
(West) or D/Shoemaker—Levy 9, but rather to fragments 
of the external crust of the nucleus torn off by cometary 
activity. It is probable that such a phenomenon is 
common among active comets but can only be observed 
at the favor of a close approach. 


New molecules 

Before the observations of comet Hyakutake, only a 
handful of parent molecules had been firmly identified in 
comets: H,O, CO, COs, CH;0H, H2CO, HCN, H2S. 
Spectroscopic observations, mainly in the radio and 
infrared domains, allowed the identification of many 
more species (see also COMETARY ATMOSPHERES. 

Ammonia (NH3), suspected to be the progenitor of 
the NH and NH), radicals, was observed through its 
centimetric lines with an abundance with respect to water 
of about 0.7%. This makes this molecule the main 
repository of cometary nitrogen. Other nitrogen 
compounds were observed as minor species by their 
millimetric radio lines: isocyanic acid (HNCO), methyl 
cyanide (CH3CN) and hydrogen isocyanide (HNC, an 
isomer of hydrogen cyanide HCN unstable in the 
conditions of terrestrial laboratories). A  sulfuretted 
molecule, carbonyl sulfide (OCS), was also detected by 
radio spectroscopy. 

Deuterated water (HDO) was observed by its radio 
line at 465 GHz. The corresponding [D]/[H] ratio is 3 x 
10%, a value close to that observed by the mass 
spectrometers of Giotto during their flyby of comet 
Halley. This value shows an enrichment of about a factor 
of 10 over the ‘cosmic’ abundance of deuterium in the 
primitive solar nebula ({[D]/[H] = 2.5 x 107), where 
deuterium was mainly contained in the HD molecule. It 
is not, however, as large as that observed in some 
interstellar molecules ([D]/[H] = several 107°). Deuterium 
enrichment can naturally result from cold-temperature 
chemical reactions, such as those which occur in the 
interstellar medium. The enrichment observed in comets 
suggests that deuterium was not re-equilibrated in 
cometary water and that cometary material retained, at 
least partly, the signature of interstellar matter. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Hyakutake (C/1996 B2) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The apparition of comet Hyakutake also gave the 
opportunity to make the first successful interferometric 
observations of a comet at millimetric wavelengths, soon 
assessed by further observations of COMET HALE—BOPP. 

Infrared observations used a new generation of high- 
resolution, sensitive spectrometers such as the Cryogenic 
Echelle Spectrometer (CSHELL) on the NASA Infrared 
Telescope Facility (IRTF). CO and HCN were observed 
for the first time in the infrared, and_ several 
hydrocarbons were revealed. Methane (CH,4), suspected 
for a long time to be the parent molecule responsible for 
the presence of the CH radical, but never yet firmly 
identified, was observed with an abundance of about 1% 
relative to water. Ethane (C,H.) was also observed with 
almost the same abundance, as well as acetylene (C2H)), 
which is an unsaturated hydrocarbon (see figure 3 of 
COMETARY ATMOSPHERES). The presence of both 
saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons shows that 
cometary molecules are not the result of equilibrium 
chemistry. Carbonyl sulfide (OCS) was also detected in 
the infrared. 

Ultraviolet observations with the Hubble Space 
Telescope revealed the S, molecule, seen for the second 
time in a comet, the first one being C/1983 Hl (IRAS-— 
Araki—Alcock) at its very close approach to Earth. 
Obviously, this molecule which has a very short lifetime 
can only be detected by high spatial resolution 
observations of close comets. How this molecule could 
be incorporated in cometary matter, or created by 
chemical processing of cometary ices or within the inner 
coma, is not yet understood. 


X-ray observations 

A totally unexpected result was the detection of x-ray 
emission from comet Hyakutake. This results from the 
use of three x-ray satellite observatories, initially 
dedicated to the observation of high-energy emissions 
from the Sun or galactic and extragalactic sources: the 
R6ntgen X-ray Satellite (ROSAT) which made the initial 
detection of the comet, the Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer 
(XTE) and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer satellite 
(EUVE; see figure 2(a) of X-RAY ASTRONOMY). This 
discovery was soon confirmed in comet Hale—Bopp, and 
the emission of several other comets could also be 
retrieved from the archive data of x-ray satellites. This 
phenomenon is therefore not rare and could be observed 
even in some faint comets. It opens quite a new prospect 
for cometary observations and its interpretation is a new 
challenge for cometary physics. 

High-energy radiation such as x-rays cannot be 
emitted by a comet on its own, which is an inert, cold 
body. Rather, this emission comes from the interaction of 
cometary matter with high-energy solar radiation or solar 
particles. The exact nature of this interaction has been 
elucidated recently by a reexamination of the EUVE data 
on comet Hyakutake and from independent observations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of comet C/1999 S4 (LINEAR) by the Chandra X-ray 
Observatory, which show emission lines of highly 
excited ions. Charge transfer from heavy ions in the solar 
wind to neutral atoms in the cometary atmosphere excites 
cometary atoms to high electronic levels, and their de- 
excitation results in x-ray emission. This rules out other 
proposed mechanisms such as scattering of solar x-ray 
emission by very small (attogram) cometary grains. 


Bibliography 
West R M_ 1966-2000 Comet Hyakutake web pages 
http://www.eso.org/outreach/info-event/hyakutake/ 


Jacques Crovisier 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Ikeya-Seki (C/1965 $1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Ikeya-Seki (C/1965 $1) 


Among the small bodies of the solar system, comet 
Ikeya-Seki—the Great Comet of 1965—is an outstanding 
object for more than one reason. It belongs to an 
exceptional class of comets, the Kreutz sungrazing group, 
an ensemble so called because its members have 
extremely small closest approach distances, thus brushing 
the Sun at perihelion (see COMETS: KREUTZ 
SUNGRAZING). Ikeya-Seki is one of the brightest 
members of the family, certainly the most brilliant and 
best observed in our epoch. In close proximity to the Sun, 
part of the refractory component of the cometary material 
(the ‘dust’) is vaporized owing to the very intense heat so 
that heavy, metallic elements, which are not seen at 
larger distances, are set free and can be detected. 
Numerous emissions due to such elements were indeed 
photographed and identified in detail for the first time in 
the optical spectra of Comet Ikeya-Seki. Similarly, it was 
on this comet that the first infrared multiband 
observations were made and used to derive some further 
information on the cometary dust. Ikeya-Seki will also be 
remembered as one of the most spectacular comets of this 
century, with one near the beginning (the Great Daylight 
Comet of January 1910) and another close to the end 
(Hale—Bopp, the Great Comet of 1997); these two latter 
comets were not Kreutz sungrazers, but they were quite 
intrinsically bright, especially COMET HALE-BOPP. 


Discovery: designations 
Comet Ikeya-Seki was discovered on 18 September 
1965, independently by two Japanese amateur 
astronomers, Kaoru Ikeya and Tsutomu Seki. Thus it 
bears the names of two very strenuous and successful 
‘comet hunters’ who systematically and patiently 
scrutinize the sky on every clear night in search of new 
fuzzy moving objects. To the name is added a year 
designation. Thus, this comet is known in the literature as 
Ikeya-Seki (1965f) or (1965 VIII). According to a new 
system adopted recently it is also designated as C/1965 
S1 (Ikeya-Seki). 

Our famous comet, it should be noted, must not be 
confused with another Ikeya-Seki discovered about two 
years later, 1967n=1968 I=C/1967 Y1. 


The orbit: a sign of parentage 

Only a few days after the discovery, it was realized that 
the comet would pass very near to the Sun and when, a 
little later, enough observations had been secured for a 
reliable trajectory to be determined, the orbital elements 
left no doubt: in fact, a new member of the sungrazer 
family was coming in. It was actually the eighth member 
to be rather well known at that time. All these objects 
approach the inner solar system from almost exactly the 
same direction in space and they follow very nearly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


identical paths, the principal difference being in the 
period of revolution (500-1100 years, for those that are 
known), hence in the timing of their appearance. 

The idea that some comets form a group or family means 
that a physical or genetic relationship is thought to exist 
among these individual objects. This concept as applied 
to a number of comets with very similar orbits and 
extraordinarily small perihelion distances dates back to 
the end of the nineteenth century. KIRKWOOD, and after 
him Kreutz, who first studied in great detail the orbits of 
sungrazing comets, contended that these comets were 
formed by the disintegration of an ancient, giant parent 
comet. The sungrazer family has been discussed further 
in the twentieth century, particularly by Marsden and by 
Opik, after the passage of Comet Ikeya-Seki. More 
recently, Bailey and his collaborators have proposed that 
long-term secular gravitational perturbations in the solar 
system produce gradual changes in the orbital elements 
of some comets, leading to sungrazing trajectories; they 
suggest that such transformations into a sungrazing phase 
are not infrequent in the dynamical evolution of long- 
period comets. Let us mention briefly here a special 
parental link between two members of the family: the 
orbital elements of comet Ikeya-Seki bear so close a 
resemblance to those of the Great September Comet of 
1882 (1882 II or C/1882 R1), for example their 
perihelion distances differ by only 0.000 04 AU (1 AU, 
one astronomical unit, is the mean distance from the 
Earth to the Sun), less than | &percnt; of the solar radius, 
that these comets were probably born together when their 
direct parent split at perihelion (this may be the Great 
Comet of 1106, as indicated by Marsden). Thus, 1882 II 
and 1965 VIII are twin sisters&mdash;not identical 
twins, however, since the former was appreciably bigger 
and brighter than the latter. 

The orbit of Ikeya-Seki itself is shown schematically 
in figure 1. It is an extremely elongated ellipse which 
takes the comet right through the solar corona at 
perihelion: it is then at a distance from the Sun’s surface 
of only two-thirds of the solar radius, that is a little less 
than 500 000 km, whereas at the other end of the orbit (at 
aphelion) it is about 30 billion kilometers away. A 
sungrazing comet typically pays us but a lightning visit 
and provides a striking example of Kepler’s second law, 
according to which the line between the Sun and the 
orbiting body (the radius vector) sweeps over equal areas 
in equal intervals of time (see KEPLER’S LAWS). Thus, 
Ikeya-Seki swung through one-half turn around the Sun 
in less than four hours (its velocity at perihelion was 
480 km s'), whereas it takes some 900 years for it to 
make a complete revolution! 

From the brightness of the comet at discovery and 
shortly thereafter, it was foreseen, and widely announced, 
that Ikeya-Seki would be an impressive sight when close 
to the Sun. Spectacular it was indeed (figure 2) reaching 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Ikeya-Seki (C/1965 S1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bieta 


Figure 1. Orbits of Comet Ikeya-Seki (1965 VIII or C/1965 S1) 
and some other famous comets represented in a simplified 
manner, in projection onto the plane of the ecliptic (orbital 
plane of the Earth); also shown for comparison, as dotted lines, 
are the orbits of a few planets (Earth, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn). 
The orbit of Ikeya-Seki is a highly eccentric (‘plunging’) 
ellipse, close to a parabola. At perihelion the comet truly skims 
over—‘grazes’—the Sun, flying at a distance from the center of 
the star of only 1.67 times its radius. This exceptionally small 
perihelion distance, less than one-hundredth of an astronomical 
unit (AU), could not be shown on the scale of the figure. On the 
other hand, the aphelion, almost 200 AU away, is out of scale, 
well outside the planetary system. On this scale again, the orbits 
of the other members of the sungrazer family to which Comet 
Ikeya-Seki belongs could not be distinguished from this 
comet’s trajectory. The orbit in space is tilted 38° to the ecliptic; 
the orbital element ‘inclination’ taken as 142° indicates that the 
orbit is retrograde, like that of Comet Halley, which means that 
the motion is clockwise as seen from the north celestial pole, as 
opposed to the prograde motion of the planets and of the other 
two comets. Because the major part of their orbit lies south of 
the ecliptic, the sungrazing comets are not easy objects for 
observers in northern latitudes. 


an astronomical magnitude of about —10 to —11 at its 
brightest (i.e. comparable in brightness to the Moon, 
somewhere between quarter-phase and full moon, or 
several hundred times brighter than Venus at greatest 
brillancy) and exhibiting a splendid tail (sometimes 30° 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Photograph of Comet Ikeya-Seki obtained two hours 
before its perihelion passage on 21 October 1965. North is up, 
east to the left. The Sun is occulted by a black disk surrounded 
here by scattered solar light (not due to the corona). The swift, 
accelerated (northeasterly) motion of the comet causes the tail 
particles to lag far behind the radius vector sun-comet. 
(Photograph obtained at the Norikura Corona Station of the 
Tokyo Astronomical Observatory. Reproduced from Hirayama 
T and Moriyama F 1966 Observations of comet Ikeya-Seki 
(1965f) Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 17 433-6.) 


long) for a few weeks around perihelion (figure 3). 
Unfortunately, however, the shape and orientation of the 
orbit of a sungrazer render its observation rather difficult. 
So, owing to the small angular distance of Comet Ikeya- 
Seki to the Sun and its position in the sky, always south 
of the celestial equator, the magnificent show it gave was 
reserved essentially for amateur and _ professional 
astronomers in privileged sites with very clear skies, at 
not too large geographical latitudes. It was well observed 
in Japan, Australia and New Zealand, South Africa, 
southern Europe, South America, Mexico and in the 
southwestern part of the United States. Like many other 
sungrazers, Ikeya-Seki faded away quite rapidly; it was 
observed for less than four months after perihelion. 


Physical characteristics: size, structure 

Fragmentation is a common occurrence amongst 
sungrazers. For example, comet 1882 II was observed to 
have broken up into more than five pieces near 
perihelion; similarly, several reports indicated that at 
least three subnuclei (one much brighter than the others) 
appeared right after Ikeya-Seki’s closest approach to the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Ikeya-Seki (C/1965 $1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. This picture was taken on 29 October 1965, when 
Comet Ikeya-Seki was 0.45 AU (67 million km) from the Sun 
and 1.05 AU (157 million km) from the Earth. The tail extends 
over a little more than 30°, corresponding to a total length of 
almost 90 million km (true length corrected for projection 
effect). Notice the presence of structure in the tail. The wavy or 
helicoidal pattern in the distant part of the tail may be due to the 
electromagnetic interaction of very small electrically charged 
cometary grains with the solar wind, as suggested by Horanyi 
and Mendis. (Photograph by E A Harlan, at the Lick 
Observatory, Mount Hamilton, California. Reproduced from 
Heck A 1985 Astronomes amateurs et observations cométaires 
Ciel et Terre, Bull. Soc. Roy. Belge d’Astron. 101 115-20.) 


Sun. Sungrazing objects are formed, we believe, by a 
multistep process which starts with the breaking apart of 
the progenitor, many centuries or millennia previously, 
followed by the disruption of the successive descendants 
when they return to the Sun’s neighborhood. This most 
probably produces a very large number of small 
sungrazers, a notion supported by the current discovery 
of more and more such ‘pygmy’ sungrazers (in J E 
Bortle’s phrase) with the coronagraphs aboard the Solar 
and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). 

The question which comes to mind when a 
sungrazing comet is seen before perihelion is indeed will 
it survive? In short, the answer is the bigger fellows will 
(even if fractured), the pygmies will not. Size and 
internal strength are the determining factors for avoiding 
breakup or complete dissipation. As they pass so close to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the solar furnace, these comets are subjected to very 
intense thermal stresses and a more or less important 
fraction of their mass will be vaporized. Besides, they 
experience another physical influence from the Sun, a 
tidal effect. Since the central gravitational attraction is 
inversely proportional to the square of the distance, the 
action of the Sun is stronger on the parts of a passing 
body closest to it than on the most distant parts. This 
difference may be significant if the solid body is larger 
than a certain critical limit and is in addition not 
sufficiently strongly structured, it will then not be able to 
resist the differential gravitational force and it will split 
or break up: this is called tidal disruption. 

On the basis of dynamical, evolutionary and 
Statistical arguments and using observational data 
pertaining to the best known sungrazers, Ikeya-Seki in 
particular, several astronomers have been able to draw 
inferences regarding the origin and the orbital stability of 
this class of comets, as well as on some of their physical 
properties. Consider, for instance, the differential 
velocities acquired by the fragments of a sungrazer after 
perihelion passage. If, as Opik did, we ascribe these 
differences to differences in the radial deceleration or 
‘rocket effect’ produced on the subnuclei of different 
sizes as they eject gases in a general sunward direction, 
we can estimate the dimensions of these various 
fragments. Applying this method to Ikeya-Seki and using 
the observed successive separations of the two main 
companions, one determines that the brighter of these had 
a diameter between 5 and 10 km, the fainter one being 
about twice as small. These dimensions are compatible 
with the lower limit obtained by Sekanina for the 
diameter of the parent nucleus (3—5 km) on the basis of a 
different assumption, namely that the relative motions of 
the subnuclei are attributable to the separation velocity 
imparted at breakup (this is identified with the equatorial 
rotational velocity of the parent comet, rotation also 
being a possible contributing cause to disruption). With 
an assumed density of 1 g cm’, the mass of Comet 
Ikeya-Seki may have been of the order of 10'* kg (some 
five times less than the mass of COMET HALLEY). The 
mass of the twin sister 1882 II was probably 100 times 
greater, that of the ‘gigantic’ ancestor of the sungrazers 
some two orders of magnitude higher still, i.e. a mass of 
say 10'* kg. This huge number must be put in an 
astronomical perspective: it represents but a mere one- 
ten-millionth or so of the Earth’s mass! 

Since cohesive strength and size are closely related 
in tidal breakup, knowledge of the latter (at a given 
distance from the central body) can be used to derive 
some information regarding the former. Even though the 
inferred values are approximate, they are rather 
instructive. By means of a simplified model (non- 
rotating, homogeneous, spherical nucleus), applied to the 
data available for Ikeya-Seki and some other members of 
its family, Opik showed that the forces of cohesion which 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Ikeya-Seki (C/1965 S1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hold these bodies together are much weaker than those of 
any known relevant materials (like terrestrial rocks or the 
parents of meteorites), except meteoric ‘dust balls’ 
(loosely bound assemblages of dust grains observed as 
meteors when they enter our atmosphere), which are 
characterized by crushing strengths of the order of 
10* dyn cm™~, about four (respectively five) orders of 
magnitude lower than the tensile (respectively 
compressive) strengths of rocks. These findings are 
generally consistent with WHIPPLE’s comet model which 
describes the nucleus as a loose, porous aggregate of icy 
and mineral matter. Low cohesive strength is also in 
accord with the fact that fragmentation of comets is often 
observed to occur even at large distance from a massive 
body like the Sun or Jupiter, hence in the absence of any 
tidal action. Finally, it is worth recalling that although 
rather fragile, cometary nuclei are nevertheless resistant 
enough to survive a grazing approach to the Sun, the 
larger ones in any case being observed in the form of 
several persistent components after their splitting 
experience. 


Clues on the nature and composition of 


cometary dust 

In spite of the great difficulties involved in observing an 
object located only a few degrees away from the Sun in 
the sky, considerable efforts were devoted to obtaining 
data on Comet Ikeya-Seki around perihelion, particularly 
spectroscopic data. The strong incentive arose from the 
fact that this sungrazer was offering a very rare—so far 
unique—opportunity to get direct evidence on the 
composition of cometary dust by remote observations. 
Our very limited knowledge of the relative abundances of 
the heavy elements in comets otherwise comes 
essentially from the study of meteoroids of cometary 
origin or from in situ measurements (possible only in 
Halley’s comet until now). Thus, quite a number of 
spectra of Ikeya-Seki were secured on 20 and 21 October 
1965, at several observatories (Ratcliffe, South Africa; 
Sacramento Peak, New Mexico; Lick, California; Kitt 
Peak, Arizona; Haute-Provence, France). 

The evaporation (or rather sublimation) of the non- 
volatile substances which constitute the cometary dust 
requires relatively high temperatures, above 
approximately 1000 K, reached only when a comet is 
sufficiently near to the Sun. Huebner has studied the 
sublimation of refractory components by the solar 
radiation and determined the vaporization rate and 
lifetime of dust particles as a function of their size, of the 
latent heat of their constituent materials and of the 
heliocentric distance (r). It is clear that the metallic 
elements which are chemically bound in the ‘rocky’ 
material, in the form of silicates or oxides can only be 
liberated when r is less than 0.1-0.2 AU. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Comet Ikeya- Seki 
(1965 VW) 


r=0.063a.u 


393 395 397 
t I 1 \ 


K Call H 


Figure 4. Sample portions of spectra obtained when Comet 
Ikeya-Seki was about 14 solar radii from the Sun’s center after 
perihelion, in broad daylight. The background is thus the 
daytime sky spectrum, where numerous Fraunhofer 
(absorption) lines are seen. On top of this appear (a) a narrow 
strip of solar radiation scattered by dust particles surrounding 
the comet’s nucleus, the ‘continuum’, and (b) a number of very 
short cometary emissions (in black on these negative 
reproductions) due to neutral copper, iron, cobalt, nickel. The 
sodium and ionized calcium (H and K) emissions are much 
longer. The spatial scale is indicated by vertical bars on the 
right, representing 10 000 km on the comet. The original 
spectral dispersion was 0.85 mm A". A total of approximately 
500 emission lines were recorded in the range covered by the 
series of spectra, 3300-6000 A; nearly 70% of these emissions 
belong to Fe I. It is noteworthy that the molecular emissions 
(not shown here) of CN and, although much weaker, of CH are 
still present so close to the Sun. (Spectra taken by Livingston 
and collaborators, Kitt Peak National Observatory, Arizona. 
Reproduced from Arpigny et al 1999 Atlas of Cometary Spectra 
Kluwer, Dordrecht.) 


A few sections from these extraordinary spectra of 
Comet Ikeya-Seki are illustrated in figures 4 and figures 
5. Numerous emission lines were observed due mainly to 
neutral atoms of the iron group, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni 
and Cu, but also to K, Ca and Ca’, in addition to Na 
which first appears near 1 AU from the Sun. This 
confirmed in particular the presence of a few lines of iron 
and nickel which had been reported by Copeland and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Ikeya-Seki (C/1965 S1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lohse after their observations of comet 1882 II with a 
visual spectroscope. This identification had been 
questioned in the meantime on the basis of an ill-founded 
criticism ignoring the peculiar physical conditions 
prevailing in a comet’s atmosphere, a low-density 
medium very far from the thermodynamic equilibrium 
generally found in laboratory experiments. The observed 
atomic emissions are produced, like the molecular 
emissions seen further away from the Sun, by 
resonance—fluorescence (absorption of solar radiations 
by the atoms or molecules, followed by the emission of 
the various possible transitions issued from the upper 
energy states excited in this way). Analysing a number of 
spectra of Ikeya-Seki, Arpigny used the measured line 
intensities to estimate the relative abundances of the 
various atoms. A notable result was that some elements, 
especially Al, Si, Ca and Ti, were found to be 
appreciably underabundant when referred to Fe and 
compared with the solar system abundances. Mg was a 
marginal case. Since these elements are the constituent 
atoms of high-temperature condensates (e.g. corundum, 
perovskite, melilite, spinal), a possible interpretation of 
the deficiencies is that the temperature in the coma of 
Ikeya-Seki was not high enough when the analysed 
spectra were taken (around 14 solar radii or 0.065 AU 
from the Sun) for such resisting materials to be 
decomposed to any significant degree. No actual 
measurements of the dust temperature, Ty, were 
performed at this heliocentric distance, nor any closer to 
perihelion, but indirect evidence suggests that Ty was 
probably in the range 1000-1500 K near 0.065 AU. It 
may be noted that Mg-rich olivines and pyroxenes, 
recently advocated to be important silicatic components 
of cometary dust grains, also contain some of the 
underabundant elements. More detailed quantitative 
values could not be derived because the available data 
were unfortunately not sufficient, but it seemed 
nevertheless safe to conclude that the elemental 
composition of the dust in the comet was similar to that 
of the Sun and of chondritic meteorites. 

On the other hand, the spatial extension of the Na D 
emission out to large distances from the center of the 
comet (see figure 5) despite the very short lifetime of 
sodium against ionization (of the order of 50 s at r = 0.04 
AU or 8.6 solar radii) indicates, as pointed out by 
Spinrad and Miner, and by Huebner, that the Na atoms 
must be embedded in a compound (or compounds) with a 
high latent heat of vaporization and thus be produced in a 
distributed source, not directly from the nucleus. From a 
study of the sodium velocity field it was also inferred that 
the precursor dust grains must have been fairly large, 
more than 20 «um in radius. At the same time, it appears 
that the cometary sodium seen near 0.5—1 AU necessarily 
originates from particles of a different nature, containing 
less refractory Na-rich substances. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Comet Ikeya - Seki (1965YMl) r=0.040 au 


$89.8 


Nal 


Figure 5. The sodium D lines in comet Ikeya-Seki at r = 8.5 
solar radii before perihelion (about 2° angular distance), at very 
high dispersion, 5 mm A”. This spectrum provides a nice 
illustration of the Doppler effect. Three doublets can be 
distinguished: (1) the cometary emissions, here displaced 


longward by the comet’s geocentric velocity (A =+118 km 
s!), (2) the D lines in absorption in the dust scattered solar 
radiation (the ‘continuum’), shifted toward shorter wavelengths 
according to the sum of the heliocentric and geocentric radial 


velocities (7 + A =-188 + 118 =-70 kms’), and (3) the 
same in the background sky spectrum (which gives the 
reference wavelength scale). (Spectra secured by Spinrad and 
collaborators, Kitt Peak National Observatory, Arizona. 
Reproduced from Arpigny et al 1999 the Atlas of Cometary 
Spectra Kluwer, Dordrecht.) 


Besides these spectroscopic observations, the first 
infrared observations of a comet were conducted on 
Ikeya-Seki by Becklin and Westphal who detected the 
thermal emission by the dust grains and followed its 
evolution as a function of 7, from 0.2 to 0.5 AU both 
before and after perihelion. From the energy distribution 
at 1.6, 2.0, 3.4 and 10 um, these authors found that the 
temperature of the grains was higher than the temperature 
that would be attained by a gray or black body in 
equilibrium with the solar radiation at the heliocentric 
distance of the comet; they also deduced some 
information on the wavelength dependence of the 
emissivity of the grain material, which was found to be 
much lower in the infrared than in the visible. These 
findings were confirmed in many comets thereafter. It 
has now been established that the particles responsible 
for the thermal emission are very small (submicron- to 
micron-sized) grains made of silicates mixed with 
absorbing (probably carbonaceous) materials. These tiny 
particles absorb efficiently the strong visible solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Ikeya-Seki (C/1965 $1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


radiation, but cannot radiate easily in the infrared; they 
are therefore overheated. Polarization measurements 
were made in the tail of the comet, revealing an abrupt 
variation in the degree of polarization, a reversal from 
+20% to —40%, which was interpreted as due to a 
segregation according to grain size along the tail, the 
grains being presumably composed of slightly absorbing 
silicates. Attempts were made to observe Comet Ikeya- 
Seki in the ultraviolet from rockets, as well as in radio 
wavelengths, but these failed for various reasons, 
unfortunately. 


Conclusion 

We started off by stating that Comet Ikeya-Seki was an 
exceptional object, which is true in some important 
respects, but at the same time we have reasons to believe 
that it bears definite similarity to other non-sungrazing 
comets. Besides the presence of very small, hot dust 
grains just mentioned and found in many comets, we also 
note, for instance, that beyond r = 0.4 AU, its spectrum 
showed the usual molecular emission bands due to CN, 
C3, CH, C2 etc. Hence some of its physical and chemical 
properties may be considered as typical of comets in 
general. To know these common features in much more 
detail, especially with regard to the heavy element 
abundances and the chemical composition of the dust, we 
await the appearance of another bright member of the 
Kreutz sungrazing group. We shall then be even better 
prepared, with present-day highly performing 
instruments, to study a sungrazer, in particular by 
multiwavelength, well calibrated measurements, 
observing the visitor in the ultraviolet, optical, infrared 
and radio ranges, when close to the Sun and at distance. 
It will be very important, for the near-perihelion phase, to 
plan rather tight time sequences and to be ready for the 
investigation of the spatial distributions of the various 
emissions: all these observations will have to be carried 
out in the space of a few hours! 


Bibliography 

Arpigny C 1979 Relative abundances of the heavy elements in 
comet Ikeya-Seki (1965 VIII) Les Eléments et leurs 
Isotopes dans Il’Univers (22nd Liége International 
Astrophys. Coll.) (Liege: Institut d’Astrophysique, 
Université de Liége) pp 191-7 

Bailey M E, Chambers J E and Hahn G 1992 Origin of 
sungrazers: a frequent cometary end-state Astron. 
Astrophys. 257 315-22 

Becklin E E and Westphal J A 1966 Infrared observations of 
comet 1965f Astrophys. J 145 445-53 

Huebner W F 1970 Dust from cometary nuclei Astron. 
Astrophys. 5 286-97 

Sky Telescope 1965, 1966 November, December, January 
(comprehensive description of the observations of comet 
Ikeya-Seki 1965 VII with many illustrations) 

Spinrad H and Miner E D 1968 Sodium velocity fields in comet 
1965f Astrophys. J 153 355-66 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Whipple F L 1985 The Mystery of Comets (Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Institution Press) 


Claude Arpigny 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet IRAS—Araki—Alcock (C/1983 H1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet IRAS—Araki—Alcock 
(C/1983 H1) 


A long-period comet discovered independently in 1983 
by the IRAS infrared satellite, Genichi Araki and George 
Alcock. At its closest to Earth, on 11 May, it was just 0.03 
AU (4.6 million km) away—the closest approach of any 
comet since Lexell’s Comet of 1770. At this time it was a 
large diffuse object of magnitude 2, moving rapidly across 
the sky. There was no discernible tail, just a diffuse coma 
2° or 3° across, and more extended on the sunward side 
of the nucleus. Radar observations showed the nucleus 
to have a diameter of 9.3 km. Perihelion (0.99 AU) was 
on 21 May. The period is approximately 1000 years; the 
eccentricity is 0.99, and the inclination 73°. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Kohoutek (C/1973 E1) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Kohoutek (C/1973 E1) 


A long-period comet discovered by LuboS Kohoutek in 
1973 March. At that time it was near the orbit of Jupiter, 
and very bright for a comet at that distance. This led 
to predictions that it would be exceptionally bright at 
perihelion (some estimates putting it as high as magnitude 
—12, rivaling the full Moon), which attracted great 
media interest. However, the comet failed to brighten 
significantly as it approached the Sun. Following its 
perihelion passage (0.14 AU) on 28 December, it appeared 
in the evening sky in January 1974 at magnitude 4 with a 
tail 25° long. In this respect Comet Kohoutek failed to live 
up to its promise. But because of the great expectations 
it was targeted more than any previous comet had been, 
and was the subject of an international effort that would 
be surpassed only by the 1986 International Halley Watch. 
Comet science was significantly advanced as a result. It 
is possible that Kohoutek was making its first visit from 
the Oort Cloud to the inner solar system. This would 
account for its brightness at the distance of Jupiter, as it 
would then have been a pristine object outgassing the most 
volatile of its constituents. The inclination is 14°, and the 
eccentricity is quoted as 1, meaning that its period and 
aphelion distance are almost indeterminately large. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet LINEAR (C/1999 S4) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet LINEAR (C/1999 S4) 


Comet C/1999 S4A (LINEAR) was found by the 
automatic minor planet search programme LINEAR 
based in New Mexico. In July 2000, the comet 
disintegrated completely as it made its closest approach 
to the Sun, at 71 million miles. At least 16 fragments, 
resembling ‘mini-comets’ with tails, were then imaged 
by the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. 

Results from observations of the debris include 
evidence that comet impacts may have played a 
significant role in the formation of LIFE ON EARTH by 
providing most of the water in the Earth’s oceans, as well 
as organic material. LINEAR is the first comet observed 
to have a composition that would allow it to carry the 
same type of water as found in oceans on Earth. 


Pam Spence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Swift-Tuttle (109P/Swift-Tuttle) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Swift—Tuttle (109P/Swift—Tuttle) 


A short-period comet discovered in 1862 independently 
by several observers, the first of which were Lewis 
Swift and Horace Tuttle. At its brightest it reached 
magnitude 2 and showed a tail over 25° long. Subsequent 
calculations indicated that the period was around 120 
years, but searches in the early 1980s failed to find it. 
The comet was not recovered until September 1992, as 
a ‘new’ comet reported by Tsuruhiko Kiuchi. At this 
apparition it reached fifth magnitude and developed a 
7° tail; perihelion (0.96 AU) was on 12 December. The 
nucleus showed one particularly active jet, observations of 
which indicated a rotation period of 2.9 days. This activity 
is thought to be responsible for non-gravitational forces 
which cause the period to vary froma value predicted from 
gravitational perturbations. The comet was subsequently 
identified with Kegler’s Comet of 1737, and with two 
comets recorded in Chinese annals from 68 Bc and AD 188. 
On its present orbit the comet has an estimated period of 
135 years; its eccentricity is 0.96 and its inclination 113°. 
Debris from the comet forms the Perseid meteor stream. 


Seealso: Perseids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Comet Tempel-Tuitle (55P/Tempel-Tuttle) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comet Tempel-Tuttle 
(55P/Tempel-—Tuttle) 


A short-period comet discovered independently by Ernst 
Tempel in December 1865 and by Horace Tuttle in January 
1866. It was determined to have a period of around 
33 years. Studies by Giovanni Schiaparelli showed a very 
close match between the orbital elements of the comet and 
those of the Leonid meteor stream, which had produced a 
spectacular meteor storm in November 1866; this was the 
first successful demonstration of a link between comets 
and meteors. The comet was not seen on its next two 
expected returns in 1899 and 1932 (and there were no 
Leonid meteor storms in those years). It was recovered in 
1965, but only as a distant sixteenth-magnitude object (and 
another spectacular Leonid storm followed in 1966). At the 
1998 apparition it reached fifth magnitude; as on previous 
occasions, it showed no tail. In 1366 it is calculated to have 
reached magnitude 3 and to have passed just 0.023 AU (3.4 
million km) from the Earth—the third-closest approach of 
any recorded comet. The perihelion distance is 0.98 AU; 
the eccentricity is 0.90, and the inclination 163°. 


See also: Leonids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmic Rays: Propagation in the Heliosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmic Rays: Propagation in the 
Heliosphere 


Cosmic rays consist predominantly of atomic nuclei 
stripped of their electrons, with a small admixture, of order 
1%, of electrons and positrons. Their energies range from 
a few MeV to more than 10” eV, but only cosmic rays 
with energies below a few 10s of GeV are significantly 
affected by heliospheric processes. Because all cosmic rays 
carry an electrical charge, propagation of cosmic rays in 
the heliosphere is controlled by their interaction with the 
interplanetary magnetic field. If there were no magnetic 
field, cosmic rays would pass through the solar system 
without hindrance. 

The processes that affect propagation of cosmic rays 
through the field are (1) gyration about the lines of force of 
the magnetic field, (2) scattering from irregularities in the 
field, (3) drift motions imposed by the large scale gradients 
and curvature of the field, and (4) adiabatic deceleration, 
which arises as a result of their coupling through the field 
to the expansion of the radially outflowing soLar WIND. 
The gyrational motion allows the particles to propagate 
easily along a field line, which corresponds to the so- 
called guiding center of the particle’s motion, but prevents 
significant flow perpendicular to the field. The scattering 
slows the motion along the fields but can also produce 
transport perpendicular to the field by changing the 
guiding center of the particle from one field line to an 
adjacent one. The drifts are determined by the global 
geometry of the interplanetary field and provide for 
organized, as opposed to diffusive, cross-field flows. The 
adiabatic deceleration changes the energy of particles in 
the solar wind and is the principal source for the flux 
of particles observed at energies below a few hundred 
MeV/nucleon in the inner heliosphere. Since particles 
with these low energies in the interstellar medium are 
excluded from the inner heliosphere by the solar wind 
and interplanetary magnetic field, the low-energy cosmic 
rays observed near Earth entered the heliosphere at higher 
energies and were decelerated to their observed energies. 
A cosmic ray may lose several hundred MeV to adiabatic 
deceleration during propagation from the boundary of the 
heliosphere in to the orbit of Earth, with a wide distribution 
of energy losses depending on the actual path taken by the 
individual particles. 

A comprehensive description of the present state of 
theory and observation of the propagation of cosmic rays 
in the heliosphere can be found in the book ‘Cosmic Rays in 
the Heliosphere’ (Fisk et al 1998). This brief article can only 
summarize the most important points. 

The interplanetary magnetic field, which controls 
the propagation, has its origin at the Sun and is carried 
outward by the electrically conducting plasma of the solar 
wind (see SOLAR WIND: MAGNETIC FIELD). Since the source of the 
heliospheric magnetic field is the solar field, the overall 
magnetic structure of the heliosphere is determined by 
the magnetic structure of the Sun. This structure is not 
static but undergoes dramatic changes in the course of an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


11 yr solar activity cycle. These changes strongly affect 
propagation of the cosmic rays. 

At solar minimum, the overall solar field is 
predominantly that of a dipole with a small tilt, of order 
10° or so, from the rotation axis of the Sun. As discussed 
in the article on the solar wind magnetic field, field lines 
from the open polar coronal holes expand near the Sun and 
are drawn out by the solar wind to fill each hemisphere of 
the heliosphere. Thus the interplanetary magnetic fields 
in the north and south hemispheres of the heliosphere 
have opposite magnetic polarity. The opposing polarities 
are separated by a thin near-equatorial current sheet. 
As a result of rotation of the Sun under the radially 
expanding solar wind, the individual field lines trace out 
Archimedean spirals in interplanetary space. The solar 
wind has typical velocities of ~400 km s-' near the equator 
and 800 km s~! at high latitudes. The rate of solar rotation 
Q about 13.8° day~' near the equator, and the solar wind 
velocity Vsw determine the angle ¢ of the spiral to the radial 
direction through the relation 


¢@ = tan !(r cos OQ/ Vew) (1) 


where r is the radius and 6 the latitude. Near the ecliptic 
this angle is about 45° at the orbit of Earth, and it increases 
to ~80° near the orbit of Jupiter. Since the heliosphere most 
likely has a radius of order 100 AU, the field is essentially 
tangential through most of the heliosphere. If cosmic rays 
were to follow the field their path lengths from the solar 
wind termination shock at about 100 AU to Earth at 1 AU 
could be as great as ~5000 AU. In actuality, the cosmic 
rays experience scattering from field irregularities during 
their propagation, and the effects of scattering and the 
continuing outward convection of the field by the solar 
wind result in a significant reduction in the cosmic ray 
intensity in the inner heliosphere compared with that in 
nearby interstellar space. This reduction in intensity is 
called solar modulation, and it is effective at all times, even 
at solar minimum. 

In the course of a SOLAR CYCLE, the effective tilt of the 
solar dipole field increases as solar activity increases, and 
large local fields associated with active regions begin to 
make significant contributions to the overall field, in effect 
increasing the importance of higher-order multipoles in 
the field. At solar maximum, the dipole component is 
no longer the dominant component, and the field at the 
Sun and, by extension, in interplanetary space, becomes 
very complicated. In addition, the increased solar activity 
results in increased generation of transient disturbances, 
such as SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS, in the solar wind, 
which further distort the magnetic field. In response to 
this increase in field complexity, the cosmic ray intensity 
throughout the heliosphere is reduced markedly from its 
solar minimum levels. 

As activity diminishes following solar maximum, the 
field begins to simplify and, as solar minimum approaches 
a new dipole component, with a sign opposite that of the 
previous solar minimum, becomes dominant. Thus the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmic Rays: Propagation in the Heliosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pioneer 10 Heliocentric Radius (AU) 


10 
' 


15 20 
' ’ 


Integral Intensity 
(Protons >~ 70 MeV) 


Intensity (counts/second) 


1975 1980 


30 
’ 


40 
' 


50 60 


1985 1990 1995 


Figure 1. 27 day average intensities of cosmic rays, primarily protons with energy >70 MeV, as measured by University of Chicago 
instruments on IMP-7 and 8 in Earth orbit and on Pioneer 10 to radii beyond 60 AU from the Sun. IMP intensities have been 
normalized to match the Pioneer intensities observed at launch in 1972 to correct for the different acceptance factors of the instruments. 
Effects of the 11 yr solar activity cycle on the cosmic ray intensity are evident, as is the outward propagation of changes in modulation. 


solar field, and the heliospheric field with it, reverse sign 
every 11 yr. For cosmic rays the result of this evolution 
is the observed 11 yr variation in the cosmic ray intensity, 
known as the solar cycle modulation (see cosmic RAys). As 
an example, figure 1 shows the effects of this modulation as 
measured at Earth and at PIONEER 10 to distances beyond 
60 AU from the Sun during two cycles of solar activity. 
The outward propagation of the changes in modulation, 
representing convection of the changed magnetic structure 
by the solar wind, is clearly visible, especially for the brief 
solar minimum of 1987 when the modulation at Earth 
began to increase even as it was still decreasing at Pioneer 
10. Since the average solar wind velocity near the ecliptic 
is about 400 km s“, or 0.23 AU day™!, changes observed 
at 1 AU may not be observed until many months later in 
the outer heliosphere. 

Also apparent in figure 1 is the gradually increasing 
flux measured at Pioneer 10 compared with that at IMP- 
8. This increase results from the radial gradient of the 
cosmic ray intensity, reflecting the fact that the cosmic 
rays in the outer heliosphere undergo less modulation 
than those in the inner heliosphere. The magnitude of 
the gradient is a few per cent per AU, depending on 
particle energy and species, and is largest in the inner 
heliosphere. The largest gradients observed, as large 
as 15-20% AU™! in the inner heliosphere, are for the 
low-energy anomalous components (see ANOMALOUS COSMIC 
RAYS) which are accelerated at the solar wind termination 
shock. Study of the solar cycle modulation provides some 
of our best information concerning the propagation of 
cosmic rays in the heliosphere. 

Other information that is of critical importance for 
determining the nature of transport of charged particles in 
the heliosphere comes from the study of solar energetic 
particle events, the so-called solar cosmic rays. This 
aspect has been thoroughly reviewed by Kunow et al 
(1990). During the onset of a solar particle event, the 
first-arriving particles typically arrive ina very anisotropic 
flow along the magnetic field direction. The time profile 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the arriving particles provides information concerning 
the scattering properties of the interplanetary magnetic 
field. Figure 2 shows a time—intensity profile for one of the 
largest solar energetic particle events ever recorded, which 
was observed by ground-based detectors of atmospheric 
radiation induced by cosmic rays in February 1956. This 
event has features typical of many solar particle events. 
The rapid onset implies that the particles injected in a burst 
at the Sun arrive with little scattering between the Sun and 
the Earth, suggesting a mean free path between scatterings 
of the order of 1 AU. The slower exponential decay implies 
the existence of significant scattering beyond the orbit of 
Earth, which acts to confine the particles in the heliosphere 
and delay their escape into the interstellar medium. The 
observations reproduced here in fact provided the first 
evidence for the existence of the heliosphere. At high 
energies, such as shown in figure 2, the time scale of a 
typical event is hours. At lower energies of a few MeV, 
which can be observed only from space, the time scale 
for an event from onset until return to normal quiet time 
intensities may be many days, even weeks for large events. 

Scattering of cosmic rays by the interplanetary 
magnetic field is a result of the interaction between 
the charged particles spiraling along the field lines 
and irregularities in the field. If the irregularities are 
represented by a spectrum of waves through a Fourier 
transform, the strongest scattering is produced by waves 
whose wavelength is resonant with the spiraling motion 
of the particles as they move along the field. Thus the 
scattering effect depends on the energy and the pitch angle 
(angle of the velocity vector with respect to the magnetic 
field) of the particles and on the mean field strength. The 
effect of the scattering is to modify the pitch angle and/or 
to displace the guiding center of the particle’s gyromotion 
normal to the field, by, on average, about one gyroradius. 

An extensive literature exists concerning attempts to 
derive the particle scattering properties of the field from 
observations of the spectrum of irregularities in the field. 
(For entry points, see Giacalone 1998, Burger and Hattingh 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmic Rays: Propagation in the Heliosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


8000 


7000 


5000 


4000 


3000 


3 


g 
Cee Tote hee ey) htop Pe) pee Ee Pao ee ee 


8 


NUCLEONIC COMPONENT INTENSITY FOR CHICAGO PILE €-3 — COUNTS PER MINUTE 


Solar Flare 
Location 74°W 23°N 
Optical Onset (Estimated) 0331 UT 
Radio Noise Burst 0335 UT 
Optical Maximum 0342 UT 


te; 
HOURS - UNIVERSAL TIME 


rs ys jn a 
0600 


0700 0800 9300 


Figure 2. Intensity of ground-level neutrons produced by protons with energies above about 1 GeV interacting in the atmosphere 
following the 23 February 1956 solar flare, one of the largest ever recorded. The prompt rise implies a long scattering mean free path 
between the Sun and the Earth, while the extended decay provided the first evidence for an extended scattering region beyond the 
Earth that we now know as the heliosphere. (Adapted from Meyer et al 1956.) 


1998). Unfortunately, the effort has still not been fully 
successful. 

In modeling the effects of scattering on modulation 
of cosmic rays, and of the propagation of solar energetic 
particles, it is usual to describe the scattering by 
introducing a diffusion coefficient, « which may be 
broken into components x, parallel to the field and x, 
perpendicular to the field. In particular, computational 
models for the modulation of cosmic rays typically use 
the radial diffusion coefficient 


Kr = ky Cos? b + K, sin? b (2) 


as a parameter, where ¢ is the spiral angle of the 
interplanetary field with respect to the radius vector from 
the Sun. Throughout most of the heliosphere, cos” ¢ is 
approximately zero so that the values of the diffusion 
coefficient reflect primarily diffusion across the mean 
field. Typical forms for the diffusion coefficient are k = 
AB P*(Bo/B) where £ is the particle velocity as a fraction 
of the speed of light, P is the particle magnetic rigidity, or 
momentum per unit charge, A is a constant and B is the 
magnetic field strength referred to a reference field By. The 
value of the exponent a is in the range 0-1, and the values 
of x, found to fit observations are typically a few times 
10” cm? s~! at the orbit of Earth for protons with energies 
of about 1 GeV. The values increase with radius as a result 
of the decline in B, which, when the field becomes nearly 
tangential, decreases as 1/r. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The deduced values of «,, pose a particular challenge 
for theories of the propagation since it has been difficult 
to achieve rapid enough transport across the mean 
field direction to match observations. For cross-field 
propagation due only to scattering, a rough upper limit 
on the perpendicular diffusion coefficient comes from 
assuming translation by one gyroradius in the period of 
one gyration about the field. For ~1 GeV particles near 
the orbit of Earth, this limit is about 107° cm? s“!, or less 
than 1% of the size of the diffusion coefficient deduced 
from observations. 

Direct observations also clearly require much more 
efficient transport. As an example of observations 
which require rapid latitudinal transport, figure 3 shows 
the persistence to heliospheric latitudes of ~70°-80° of 
variations in the cosmic ray intensity with the 26 day 
period of the solar rotation that were induced by solar 
wind stream interactions near the equator. As shown in 
the figure, fast solar wind overtaking slow wind produces 
a region of compressed field, which yields a reduced 
diffusion coefficient that locally increases the strength 
of the modulation of cosmic rays. In addition, shocks 
which accelerate particles to energies of a few MeV may 
form on the leading and trailing edges of the interaction 
region. Since the streams are rooted at the Sun, the 
whole structure rotates with the Sun, giving rise to the 
name corotating interaction regions (CIRs) (see SOLAR WIND: 
COROTATING INTERACTION REGIONS). Near solar minimum, the 
CIRs are confined primarily to the heliospheric equatorial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmic Rays: Propagation in the Heliosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(A) Ulysses Position 


Latitude (°) 


Heliographic _-—— 


_——" Heliocentric 5 
Radius 


(nv) snipey 


-90 Latitude 1 
a {B) 
2 
& 
Se Solar Wind Speed 
>” Ulysses SWOOPS 
is (C) Magnetic Field Strength 
ae | Ulysses VHM/FGM 
oA ; 
0 
10 
_ (D) 
2 Lahn 
as of f Ai A 
z 5 ~™~\ 
-10 Detrended Integral Intensity 
8 2) IE) 
% 0.9 
= Cosmic Ray Integral Intensity 
2 Protons >~90 MeV 
o 0.7 
> Ulysses COSPIN/HET 
5 0.5 A A A 
oO goes 0° = 80° N 
22) Heliographic Latitude 
= 03 ae 


92.5 93.0 93.5 


94.0 94.5 95.0 95.5 
Year 


Figure 3. (A) Ulysses position in heliocentric radius and heliographic latitude (B) 6 h average solar wind speeds and (C) daily average 
magnetic field strengths measured by the Ulysses SWOOPS (Bame et al 1992) and VHM/FGM (Balogh et al 1992) experiments, 
respectively; (D) daily average detrended integral intensity of cosmic rays derived by subtracting 27 day running average intensities 
from (E) the daily intensities measured by the COSPIN/HET experiment (Simpson et al 1992). The modest increase of the cosmic ray 
intensity towards high latitudes is clearly shown by the dip near the equator as Ulysses traveled rapidly from the south to the north 
polar regions in 1994-1995. The overall increase in intensity from 1992 through to 1995 is the result of decreasing modulation in the 


approach to solar minimum. (Adapted from Zhang 1997.) 


zone where the high-latitude fast wind and the equatorial 
slow wind can interact. Observation of the cosmic 
ray intensity variations caused by CIRs at high latitude 
requires that the cross-field transport take place in a time 
short compared with the 26 day rotation period of the 
Sun. Otherwise, the variations would be wiped out. This 
requires cross-field diffusion coefficients of order 10-20% 
of the size of diffusion coefficients parallel to the field, or 
more than a factor of 10 greater than can be explained 
by scattering theory. At lower energies of a few MeV, 
recurrent increases attributed to particles accelerated at the 
CIR shocks have also been seen at high latitudes, raising 
even greater difficulties for transport theory. For a full 
discussion of the observations see Simnett et al (1998). 
Transport across the mean field can be greatly 
enhanced by systematic motions of the field lines with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


respect to the mean field direction. Two mechanisms 
have been identified that may contribute significantly to 
propagation of energetic particles across the field. The 
first, first recognized by Jokipii and Parker (1969), is that 
the solar magnetic field is dragged around on the surface 
of the Sun by the large-scale convective motions that form 
the supergranulation network. Since the interplanetary 
field is rooted in the solar field, the transverse motions 
imposed by this convective turbulence are carried out into 
the interplanetary medium. Asa result, the interplanetary 
field lines themselves undergo a random walk in both 
longitude and latitude. This braiding of the interplanetary 
field lines then provides an efficient means of enhancing 
the effect of scattering in transporting particles across 
the mean field, since a single scattering may transfer a 
particle’s guiding center toa field line that diverges rapidly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmic Rays: Propagation in the Heliosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


from the original field line. 

A more ordered motion of the field lines has been 
suggested by Fisk (1996), who considered the implications 
for the field lines of the observations that (a) the magnetic 
axis of the Sun is inclined to the rotation axis and, in 
the corona, seems to rotate rigidly with the equatorial 
rotation rate of the Sun and (b) the photosphere, in 
which individual field lines are rooted, exhibits differential 
rotation, rotating significantly more slowly at polar 
latitudes than at the equator. The result is significant 
latitudinal mixing of field lines, providing direct magnetic 
connections between equatorial and polar regions of 
the heliosphere over a radial range of order 15 AU. 
Longitudinal mixing would also be expected, but the 
model was proposed, and has been most closely examined, 
as a means of explaining the rapid latitudinal transport of 
particles that seems to be required by Ulysses observations 
(See SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES). 

Despite many years of work, however, a convincing 
understanding of cross-field diffusive transport remains 
to be achieved. In particular, it is very difficult to derive 
experimental tests to isolate the effects of the field line 
random walk or the mixing driven by the differential 
rotation. All that is certain is that particles, while guided 
by the field lines, show surprising ability to diffuse in the 
direction perpendicular to the mean field as well. 

Amore systematic motion across the field is produced 
by the gradient and curvature drifts in the heliospheric 
magnetic field. The spiral nature of the average 
interplanetary field provides curvature on a global scale, 
and the progressive weakening of the field as the solar 
wind carries it outwards through the heliosphere provides 
a global gradient in the field. By the basic physics of 
charged particle motion in a non-uniform field, therefore, 
a globally organized drift of cosmic rays through the 
heliosphere is generated. The sense of the drift is such 
that when the north pole of the Sun is a positive magnetic 
pole, positively charged cosmic rays (nucleons) drift from 
the polar regions of the heliosphere toward the equator 
and then rapidly outward along the equatorial current 
sheet. Electrons, on the other hand, drift inwards along 
the current sheet and towards the poles above and below 
the current sheet. 11 yr later, when the magnetic poles 
of the Sun have the reverse polarity, the drift patterns are 
also reversed. The drift velocities can be substantial. For 
particles with magnetic rigidity P, charge g and velocity 
B, the drift velocity is given by 


Va = (BPc/3q)V x (B/B’) (3) 


where B is the vector interplanetary field. For 0.1 GeV 
protons near the orbit of Earth in an ideal Parker 
spiral field, this velocity is approximately 300 km s=t 
comparable with the solar wind velocity. At higher 
energies, the ideal drift velocity can substantially exceed 
the solar wind velocity through much of the heliosphere. 
However, these velocities are directed and not diffusive. 


Thus, since for the period shown in figure 3 the drift 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


velocities of protons were directed from the poles towards 
the equator, it would be difficult to invoke drifts to explain 
the observation of intensity variations at high latitudes 
impressed by CIRs at low latitudes. 

The effect of drifts is substantially diminished in the 
real field of the heliosphere by the irregularities in the field 
imposed both at the Sun and by the evolution of structures 
in the solar wind. CIRs, coronal mass ejections, shear flows 
in the solar wind, waves and turbulence in the solar wind 
flow, and many other non-uniformities distort the fields 
and interrupt the drift flow. At low latitudes, the variable 
tilt of the heliomagnetic equator translates into waviness 
of the heliospheric equatorial current sheet as the Sun 
rotates and the field is carried outwards. This waviness, 
which varies during the solar cycle, increases the length 
of the drift path along the sheet and also the probability 
of loss of particles from the current sheet region. At high 
latitudes, where from equation (1) one might expect nearly 
radial fields as cos@ approaches 0, the effect of small 
transverse fluctuations imposed by convective motions 
at the Sun destroys the field coherence necessary for the 
full effect of drifts. As first noted by Jokipii and Kota 
(1989), the fluctuations produce transverse components 
in the field that vary with radius as 1/r, whereas the 
radial components vary as 1/r?._ Thus beyond a few 
AU from the Sun transverse components dominate, and 
the field is essentially tangential. As a result, it is as 
difficult for cosmic rays to penetrate the polar regions of 
the heliosphere as it is in the equatorial regions. This has 
been confirmed by observations from the Ulysses mission, 
which show both the transverse fluctuations in the field 
and achange of less than a factor of 2 in cosmic ray intensity 
from the equator to the pole near solar minimum. 

Nevertheless, the effect of drifts, although reduced, 
has been demonstrated by the observation of variations 
in the modulation dependent on the sign of the particle 
charge, to which all major modulation processes except 
drifts are insensitive, and by confirmation of many 
predictions of drift models that are difficult to understand 
in the absence of drifts, such as the alternating broad 
and narrow shapes of the cosmic ray intensity profiles 
at successive solar minima (cf Figure 1), reflecting the 
alteration of the drift paths through the heliosphere 
imposed by the reversal of the solar dipole field. 

The present state of the understanding of the 
propagation of charged particles in the heliosphere is 
mixed. The important processes have been characterized 
in gross terms and models have been developed 
that, using a number of adjustable or observationally 
defined parameters, produce reasonable and consistent 
descriptions of the observed phenomena. However, 
detailed physical understanding of the characteristics of 
the propagation remains as work in progress. 


Bibliography 

Balogh A et al 1992 Astron. Astrophys. 92 221-36 

Bame S J et al 1992 Astron. Astrophys. 92 237-66 

Burger R A and Hattingh M 1998 Astophys. J. 505 244-51 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmic Rays: Propagation in the Heliosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fisk L F 1996 J. Geophys. Res. 101 15547-54 

Fisk L A, Jokipii J R, Simnett G M, von Steiger R 
and Wenzel K-P (ed) 1998 Cosmic Rays in the 
Heliosphere (Dordrecht: Kluwer) (Fisk L A, Jokipii J 
R, Simnett G M, von Steiger R and Wenzel K-P (ed) 
1998 Space Sci. Rev. 83) 

Giacalone J 1998 Space Sci. Rev. 83 351-63 

Jokipii J R and Kota J 1989 Geophys. Res. Lett. 16 1-4 

Jokipii J R and Parker E N 1969 Astrophys. J. 155 777-98 

Kunow H et al 1990 Physics of the Inner Heliosphere, 2: 
Particles, Waves and Turbulence ed R Schemm and 
E Marsch (Berlin: Springer) pp 243-342 

Meyer P, Parker E N and Simpson J A 1956 Phys. Rev. 104 
768-83 

Simnett G M et al 1998 Space Sci. Rev. 83 215-58 

Simpson J A et al 1992 Astron. Astrophys. 92 365-400 

Zhang M 1997 Astrophys. J. 488 841-53 


R Bruce McKibben 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmological Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmological Model 


An idealized picture of the overall structure of the universe 
and its evolution that may be tested by comparing 
its predictions with observational data. For simplicity, 
most cosmological models ignore individual galaxies 
and clusters, and treat the matter and radiation content 
of the universe as if it were smeared out into an 
idealized smooth distribution that is sometimes called 
‘the substratum’. Practically all cosmological models 
incorporate the cosmological principle (that the universe is 
homogeneous and isotropic) and assume the universality 
of physical laws (that the laws of nature are everywhere 
the same). If the universe is homogeneous (the same 
everywhere), then all fundamental observers (observers 
who are at rest relative to the substratum in their vicinity) 
see the same sequence of events in the history of the 
universe, this sequence of events defining a universal 
cosmic time. 

Most cosmological models are based on the general 
theory of relativity, in which gravititation is treated as 
a phenomenon arising from the curvature of space (or, 
strictly, four-dimensional spacetime) that is induced by the 
presence of massive bodies. Flat space has zero curvature 
(in flat space, the shortest distance between two points 
is a straight line and the sum of the angles in a triangle 
is 180°). Positive curvature corresponds to a universe 
of finite volume that is curved in an analogous way to 
the surface of a sphere (in such a space, ‘parallel’ lines 
eventually meet, and the angles in a triangle add up to 
more than 180°). Negative curvature is analogous to the 
shape of a saddle (in negatively curved space ‘parallel’ 
lines eventually diverge, and the sum of the angles in a 
triangle is less than 180°). 

Different model universes may be generated by 
selecting different values for fundamental quantities such 
as mean density and curvature, and by choosing zero or 
non-zero values for an additional term (the cosmological 
constant) that appears in Einstein’s equations. The 
standard cosmological models are developed from 
equations derived by Aleksandr Friedmann (1888-1925) in 
1922 and are known, therefore, as Friedmann models. If 
the cosmological term is assumed to be zero, there are three 
Friedmann models that equate to the Big Bang universe: 
the open model (in which space is negatively curved and 
infinite), the closed model (in which space is positively 
curved and finite) and the ‘flat’ model (zero curvature, 
infinite space). The open universe expands forever, the 
closed universe expands to a finite size then collapses, and 
the flat universe is just, but only just, capable of expanding 
forever. The flat model is also known as the Einstein—de 
Sitter universe. If a positive value for the cosmological 
constant is included, models can be constructed in which 
the expansion rate of the universe accelerates. 


See also: Big Bang theory, cosmological principle, critical 
density, general theory of relativity, inflationary universe, 
oscillating universe, steady-state theory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmological Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmological Principle 


A fundamental postulate of cosmology that states that, on 
the large scale, the universe is homogeneous (one large 
region of space is the same as any other large region of 
space) and isotropic (looks the same in every direction). 
This principle implies that our Galaxy is not located at any 
special or privileged position in the universe and that any 
observer on any galaxy will see the same general features 
of the universe as we do. The cosmological principle is 
sometimes called the Copernican principle after the Polish 
cleric who, in 1543, dethroned the Earth from its previously 
assumed central position in the cosmos. 

An extension of the cosmological principle, known as 
the perfect cosmological principle, postulates that, on the 
large scale, the universe looks the same everywhere, in all 
directions, at all times. If valid, the perfect cosmological 
principle would require that the large-scale appearance 
of the universe does not change with time and would 
preclude the Big Bang model of the universe. It was 
proposed in 1948 by Hermann Bondi and Thomas Gold 
as the basis of their formulation of the steady-state theory. 
Although the cosmological principle is widely assumed to 
be valid (although the degree to which it is true depends 
on the scale over which homogeneity and isotropy is 
averaged), the perfect cosmological principle is untenable 
in the light of modern observational evidence. 


See also: cosmological model, cosmology, steady-state 
theory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmology 


The study of the structure, origin and evolution of the 
universe as a whole. 

Observationally, luminous matter in the universe is 
distributed in a clumpy fashion, being aggregated together 
into individual galaxies, groups of galaxies, clusters and 
superclusters. On the very large scale, however, the 
universe appears to be homogeneous (i.e. is the same 
everywhere) and isotropic (i.e. looks the same in every 
direction). This implies that all observers will see the same 
large-scale view of the universe regardless of where they 
are located. No individual galaxy or observer occupies 
a privileged position, and the universe has no definable 
center or edge. 

During the 1920s, Edwin P Hubble (1889-1953) 
showed that all galaxies beyond our immediate local 
group have redshifts in their spectra and that the 
magnitude of the redshift is proportional to the distance 
of the galaxy. If the redshift is interpreted as a Doppler 
effect, Hubble’s observations implied that all galaxies are 
receding with speeds proportional to their distances, a 
relationship which is now known as the Hubble law. 
Subsequent observations have confirmed that the Hubble 
law holds good to very large distances. These observations 
imply that each galaxy (or, strictly, each cluster of galaxies), 
is receding from every other one and that the whole 
universe is expanding. 

The observed recession of the galaxies is consistent 
with the Big Bang theory, which implies that the 
universe originated a finite time ago (probably between 
10 and 15 billion years ago) by expanding from a hot 
dense initial state. The hot Big Bang theory provides 
a good explanation of many facets of the observed 
universe, including the recession of the galaxies, the 
relative abundance of the lightest chemical elements, and 
the existence and properties of the cosmic microwave 
background radiation (a dilute background of microwave 
radiation that permeates the universe). A more recent 
adjunct to the theory, the inflationary hypothesis, contends 
that at a very early stage in its history, the universe 
experienced a brief, but very dramatic, period of 
accelerating expansion. This hypothesis, if valid, provides 
an explanation for several features of the universe, 
including its homogeneity and isotropy, which cannot 
directly be explained by the standard Big Bang model. 
However, how, when, and in what order galaxies, clusters 
and superclusters were formed remains an unresolved 
question. 

Another major issue in modern cosmology is the 
question of whether or not the universe will continue to 
expand forever. In the absence of any other force, gravity 
is expected to be slowing the rate of expansion. If the mean 
density of the universe exceeds a particular value, called 
the critical density, the expansion will cease at some time 
in the future and the universe will then begin to contract, 
slowly at first and then ever more rapidly until all of its 
matter and radiation collides in a ‘big crunch’. A universe 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of this kind is called ‘closed’. If the mean density is less 
than critical, the universe will expand forever, and is called 
‘open’. The dividing line between these two alternatives 
is a universe where the mean density is exactly equal to 
the critical density and in which the speeds of recession 
of the galaxies slow down ever closer to zero but do not 
become zero until the infinite future. This case is called the 
‘flat’ universe (or the Einstein—de Sitter universe) because, 
in such a universe, space, on the large scale, has zero net 
curvature. 

Whether the universe is open, flat or closed may, 
in principle, be determined by measuring the rate at 
which the expansion is decelerating or by determining 
the mean density of matter and radiation in the universe. 
Although many theoretical cosmologists favor ‘flat’ or 
‘closed’ models, and the observational data are far from 
conclusive, the balance of recent evidence appears to favor 
the open model. 


See also: Big Bang theory, cosmological model, cosmo- 
logical principle, deceleration parameter, expanding uni- 
verse, Hubble constant, inflationary universe, redshift, 
steady-state theory. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmology Standard Model 


COSMOLOGY in the modern sense of quantitative study of 
the large-scale properties of the universe is a surprising- 
ly recent phenomenon. The first galaxy RADIAL VELOCITY 
(a blueshift, as it turned out) was only measured in 1912, 
by Slipher. It was not until 1924 that Hubble was able to 
prove that the ‘nebulae’ were indeed large systems of 
stars at vast distances, by which time it was clear that 
almost all galaxies had spectral lines displaced to longer 
wavelengths. Subsequent observations increasingly veri- 
fied Hubble’s (1929) linear relation between distance d 
and the recessional velocity inferred if redshift was inter- 
preted as a Doppler shift: 


u= Hd. 


The theoretical groundwork for describing the uni- 
verse via GENERAL RELATIVITY was already in place by 
the mid-1920s, so that it was not long before the basic 
observational fact of an expanding universe could be 
given a relatively standard interpretation. The main 
observational and theoretical uncertainties in this 
interpretation concern the matter and energy content of 
the universe. Different possibilities for this content 
generate very different COSMOLOGICAL MODELS. The pur- 
pose of this article is to outline the key concepts and 
practical formulae of importance in understanding 
these models, and to show how to apply them to astro- 
nomical observations. 


Isotropic spacetime 

Modern observational cosmology has demonstrated that 
the real universe is highly symmetric in its large-scale 
properties, but it would in any case make sense to start 
by considering the simplest possible mass distribution: 
one whose properties are homogeneous (uniform densi- 
ty) and isotropic (the same in all directions). The next 
step is to solve the gravitational field equations to find 
the corresponding metric. Many of the features of the 
metric can be deduced from symmetry alone—and 
indeed will apply even if Einstein’s equations are 
replaced by something more complicated. These general 
arguments were put forward independently by H P 
Robertson and A G Walker in 1936. 

Consider a set of ‘fundamental observers’, in differ- 
ent locations, all of whom are at rest with respect to the 
matter in their vicinity. We can envisage them as each sit- 
ting on a different galaxy, and so receding from each 
other with the general expansion (although real galaxies 
have in addition random velocities of order 100 km s-1 
and so are not strictly fundamental observers). A global 
time coordinate t is supplied by the time measured with 
the clocks of these observers—i.e. ¢ is the proper time 
measured by an observer at rest with respect to the local 
matter distribution. The coordinate is useful globally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


rather than locally because the clocks can be synchro- 
nized by the exchange of light signals between observers, 
who agree to set their clocks to a standard time when for 
example the universal homogeneous density reaches 
some given value. Using this time coordinate plus 
isotropy, we already have enough information to con- 
clude that the metric must take the following form: 


edraced? —-RafPmdr+e ir) dy). 


Here, we have used the equivalence principle to say that 

the proper time interval dt between two distant events 
would look locally like special relativity to a fundamen- 
tal observer on the spot: for them, c2 dt? = c2 dt? — dx2- 
dy2— dz2. Since we use the same time coordinate as they 
do, our only difficulty is in the spatial part of the metric: 
relating their dx etc to spatial coordinates centered on us. 

Distances have been decomposed into the product 
of a time-dependent scale factor R(t) and a time- 
independent comoving coordinate r. It is clear that this 
metric nicely incorporates the idea of a uniformly 
expanding model with no center. For small separations, 
where space is Euclidean, we have a simple scaling of 
vector separations: x(t): R(t) x(to). The same law applies 
irrespective of the origin we choose: x(t) — x(t): R(#) 
[x1(to) — Xo(to)], and so every observer deduces v = Hr 

Because of spherical symmetry, the spatial part of 
the metric can be decomposed into a radial and a trans- 
verse part (in spherical polars, the angle on the sky 
between two events is dy? = d@ + sin 20 d¢@). The func- 
tions f and g are arbitrary; however, we can choose our 
radial coordinate such that either f = 1 or g = r2, to make 
things look as much like Euclidean space as possible. 
Furthermore, the remaining function is determined by 
symmetry arguments. 

Consider first the simple case of the metric on the 
surface of a sphere. A balloon being inflated is a common 
popular analogy for the expanding universe, and it will 
serve as a two-dimensional example of a space of con- 
stant curvature. If we call the polar angle in spherical 
polars r instead of the more usual 6, then the element of 
length, do, on the surface of a sphere of radius R is 


do? = R* (dr? + sin’ r d¢*). 


It is possible to convert this to the metric for a 2-space of 
constant negative curvature by the device of considering 
an imaginary radius of curvature, RR. If we simulta- 
neously let rir, we obtain 


do? = R° (dr? + sinh’ r d¢*). 


These two forms can be combined by defining a new 
radial coordinate that makes the transverse part of the 
metric look Euclidean: 


3 3 d ; 3 3 
do? = RP} ( 7 4 r'd¢? 
1 —kr- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where k = +1 for positive curvature and k = -1 for nega- 
tive curvature. 

This is in fact the general form of the spatial part of 
the Robertson—-Walker metric. To prove this in 3D, con- 
sider a 3-sphere embedded in four-dimensional 
Euclidean space, which is defined via the coordinate 
relation x2 + y2 + 22+ w2= R2. Now define the equiva- 
lent of spherical polars and write w = R cos a, z = Rsin 
acos 6B, y=Rsin asin B cos y, x = R sin asin f sin y, 
where a, fB and y are three arbitrary angles. 
Differentiating with respect to the angles gives a four- 
dimensional vector (dx,dy,dz,dw), and it is a straight- 
forward exercise to show that the squared length of this 
vector 


\(dx,dy,dz,dw)|? = R°[da*+ sin? a(df? + sin’ £ dy*)] 


which is the Robertson—Walker metric for the case of pos- 
itive spatial curvature. 

This k = +1 metric describes a closed universe, in 
which a traveler who sets off along a trajectory of fixed 
B and y will eventually return to their starting point 
(when a@ = 22). In this respect, the positively curved 3D 
universe is identical to the case of the surface of a 
sphere: it is finite, but unbounded. By contrast, the k = 
-1 metric describes an open universe of infinite extent; 
as before, changing to negative spatial curvature 
replaces sin a with sinh a, and a can be made as large 
as we please without returning to the starting point. 
The k = 0 model describes a flat universe, which is also 
infinite in extent. This can be thought of as a limit of 
either of the k = +1 cases, where the curvature scale R 
tends to infinity. 

The Robertson—Walker metric may be written in a 
number of different ways. The most compact forms are 
those where the comoving coordinates are dimension- 
less. In terms of the function 


sinr (k =1) 


sinh r (k = -1) 
r (k =0) 


KO) = 


the metric can be written as 


edt =e dr — R@)[dr? + Sp(r) dy’). 


The most common alternative is to use a different defin- 
ition of comoving distance, S;,(r)—r, so that the metric 
becomes 
2a 2 _ 242 2 ( dr* 3 *) 
ec dt- =c- dr- — R(t) | ——~ +r dy]. 
1 —kr? 

There should of course be two different symbols for the 
different comoving radii, but each is often called r in the 
literature. Finally, a common alternative form of the scale 
factor is where its present value is set to t)\equiv 


a(t) = R(t)/Ro. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The redshift 

How does this discussion relate to HUBBLE’S LAW: v = Hr? 
Comoving coordinates are time independent, so the 
proper separation of two fundamental observers is just 
R(t) dr, and differentiation gives Hubble’s law, v = H(R 
dr), with 


H=—. 
R 

At small separations, the recessional velocity gives the 
Doppler shift (see DOPPLER EFFECT): 

Vern u 

SMH l4ez~14-. 

Vots c 
This defines the REDSHIFT z in terms of the shift of spectral 
lines. What is the equivalent of this relation at larger dis- 
tances? Since photons travel on null geodesics of zero 
proper time, we see directly from the metric that 


/ edt 

r= jf —. 

R@) 

The comoving distance is constant, whereas the 
domain of integration in time extends from temit tO tops; 
these are the times of emission and reception of a pho- 
ton. Photons that are emitted at later times will be 
received at later times, but these changes in fmt and 
tops Cannot alter the integral, since r is a comoving 
quantity. This requires the condition dtemit / tops = 
R(temit) / R(tops), which means that events on distant 
galaxies time dilate according to how much the uni- 
verse has expanded since the photons we see now were 
emitted. Clearly (think of events separated by one peri- 


od), this dilation also applies to frequency, and we 
therefore obtain 


Vemit - _ Rote) 


Vers ~~ R(Semit) 


In terms of the normalized scale factor a(t), a(t) = (1 + z)-1. 
Photon wavelengths therefore stretch with the universe, 
as is intuitively reasonable. 


The meaning of the redshift 

For small redshifts, the interpretation of the redshift as 
a Doppler shift (z = v/c) is quite clear. What is not so 
clear is what to do when the redshift becomes large. A 
common but incorrect approach is to use the special- 
relativistic Doppler formula and write 


i= l+ufe Me 
aes l-ufe} ~ 


This is wrong in general, but it is all too common to read 
of the latest high-redshift QUASAR as ‘receding at 95% of 
the speed of light’. The reason the redshift cannot be 
interpreted in this way is because a non-zero mass densi- 
ty must cause gravitational redshifts. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


However, although the redshift cannot be thought of 
as a global Doppler shift, it is correct to think of the effect 
as an accumulation of the infinitesimal Doppler shifts 
caused by photons passing between fundamental 
observers separated by a small distance: 

= Hie) 8) 

1+2z 
(where 6... is a radial increment of proper distance). This 
expression may be verified by substitution of the standard 
expressions for H(z) and d.../dz. The nice thing about this 
way of looking at the result is that it emphasizes that it is 
momentum that is redshifted; particle de Broglie wave- 
lengths thus scale with the expansion, a result that is inde- 
pendent of whether their rest mass is non-zero. 

An inability to see that the expansion is locally just 
kinematical also lies at the root of perhaps the worst mis- 
conception about the BIG BANG THEORY. Many semipopu- 
lar accounts of cosmology contain statements to the 
effect that ‘space itself is swelling up’ in causing the 
galaxies to separate. In fact, objects separate now only 
because they have done so in the past; a pair of massless 
objects set up at rest with respect to each other in a uni- 
form model will show no tendency to separate (in fact, 
the gravitational force of the mass lying between them 
will cause an inward relative acceleration). In the com- 
mon elementary demonstration of the expansion by 
means of inflating a balloon, galaxies should be repre- 
sented by glued-on coins, not ink drawings (which will 
spuriously expand with the universe). 


Dynamics of the expansion 
The equation of motion for the scale factor can be 
obtained in a quasi-Newtonian fashion. Consider a 
sphere about some arbitrary point, and let the radius be 
R(trr, where r is arbitrary. The motion of a point at the 
edge of the sphere will, in Newtonian gravity, be influ- 
enced only by the interior mass. We can therefore appar- 
ently write down immediately a differential equation 
(Friedmann’s equation) that expresses conservation of 
energy: (Rr)2/2-GM/Rr = constant. In fact, this equation 
really requires general relativity: the gravitation from 
mass shells at large distances is not Newtonian, because 
space is curved, and so we cannot employ the usual 
argument about their effect being zero. Nevertheless, the 
result that the gravitational field inside a uniform shell is 
zero does hold in general relativity, and is known as 
Birkhoff’s theorem. General relativity becomes even 
more vital in giving the constant of integration in 
Friedmann’s equation: 

Rr - aa R? = —ke’, 

3 

Note that this equation covers all contributions to p, i.e. 
those from matter, radiation and vacuum; it is indepen- 
dent of the equation of state. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


It is sometimes convenient to work with the time 
derivative of the Friedmann equation, for the same rea- 
son that acceleration arguments in dynamics are some- 
times more transparent than energy ones. Differentiating 
with respect to time requires a knowledge of £, but this 
can be eliminated by means of conservation of energy: 
d(pc2R3) = —p d(R3). We then obtain 


R= —4n GR(pc +3p)/3. 


Both this equation and the Friedmann equation in fact 
arise as independent equations from different compo- 
nents of Einstein’s equations for the Robertson—Walker 
metric. 

The Friedmann equation is so named because FRIED- 
MANN was the first to appreciate, in 1922, that Einstein’s 
equations admitted cosmological solutions containing 
matter only (although it was Lemaitre who in 1927 both 
obtained the solution and appreciated that it led to a lin- 
ear distance-redshift relation). The term Friedmann 
model is therefore often used to indicate a matter-only 
cosmology, even though his equation includes contribu- 
tions from all equations of state. A common shorthand 
for relativistic cosmological models, which are described 
by the Robertson—Walker metric and which obey the 
Friedmann equation, is to speak of FRW models. 


Density parameters etc 
According to the Friedmann equation, the ‘flat’ universe 
with k = 0 arises for a particular critical density. We are 
therefore led to define a density parameter as the ratio of 
density to critical density: 


p _ 8xGp 
a SH 


Since p and H change with time, this defines an epoch- 
dependent density parameter. The current value of the 
parameter should strictly be denoted by Qo. Because this 
is such a common symbol, it is normal to keep the for- 
mulae uncluttered by normally dropping the subscript; 
the density parameter at other epochs will be denoted by 
Q(z). If we now also define a dimensionless (current) 
Hubble parameter as 


Ho 


en | 
100 km s~! Mpc 


then the current density of the universe may be 
expressed as 


fo = 1.88 x 10-°62h? kg m73 
= 2.78 x 10" Qh? M5 Mpc7?. 


A powerful approximate model for the energy content of 
the universe is to divide it into pressureless matter 
(p:R-), radiation (9:R-4) and vacuum energy (p inde- 
pendent of time—i.e. there is a non-zero cosmological 
constant). The first two relations just say that the number 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


density of particles is diluted by the expansion, with 
photons also having their energy reduced by the redshift; 
the third relation applies for Einstein’s cosmological con- 
stant. In terms of observables, this means that the densi- 
ty is written as (where the normalized scale factor is 
a=R/Rpo). 


8nG , 
= = 2(Q, + Qma 3 + Qan4} 


In terms of the deceleration parameter, 


RR 


the R form of the Friedmann equation says that 
q = Qnf/2+ 2, — 2, 


Lastly, it is often necessary to know the present value of 
the scale factor, which may be read directly from the 
Friedmann equation: 


Ro = —[(2 — sa” 
Ho : 


The HUBBLE CONSTANT thus sets the curvature length, 
which becomes infinitely large as Q approaches unity 
from either direction. Only in the limit of zero density 
does this length become equal to the other common mea- 
sure of the size of the universe—the Hubble length, c/ Hp. 


Solutions to the Friedmann equation 
The Friedmann equation may be solved most simply in 
‘parametric’ form, by recasting it in terms of the confor- 
mal time dn = c dt/R (denoting derivatives with respect 
to 7 by primes): 

a 8xG 


Re = R*—kR, 
3c e 


Because Hp2Ro2 = kc2/(Q-1), the Friedmann equation 
becomes 


2 k 2 
a” = SIG + ma — (2 — Na? + Qa] 
which is straightforward to integrate provided that 
Q,, = 0. Solving the Friedmann equation for R(t) in this 
way is important for determining global quantities such 
as the present age of the universe, and explicit solutions 
for particular cases are considered below. However, from 
the point of view of observations, and in particular the 
distance—redshift relation, it is not necessary to proceed 
by the direct route of determining R(i). 

To the observer, the evolution of the scale factor is 
most directly characterized by the change with redshift 
of the Hubble parameter and the density parameter; the 
evolution of H(z) and Q(z) is given immediately by the 
Friedmann equation in the form H2 = 8aGp/3-kc?/R2. 
Inserting the model dependence of p on a gives 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


H? (a) = H5[Q. + Qna? + Qha* — (2 — 1)a77]. 
This is a crucial equation, which can be used to obtain the 
relation between redshift and comoving distance. The 


radial equation of motion for a photon is R dr =c dt =c 
dR/R=c dR/RH. With R = Ro/(1+z), this gives 


c 
dr = ——d 
a = AG) 


e -3 -4 24-172 
= Bet ene + 2,a7-" —(Q—la~]T dz. 


This relation is arguably the single most important equa- 
tion in cosmology, since it shows how to relate comoving 
distance to the observables of redshift, Hubble constant 
and density parameters. The comoving distance deter- 
mines the apparent brightness of distant objects, and the 
comoving volume element determines the numbers of 
objects that are observed. These aspects of observational 
cosmology are discussed in more detail below. 

Lastly, using the expression for H(z) with Q(a)-1 = 
kc2/ H2R2 gives the redshift dependence of the total den- 
sity parameter: 


&-1 


22.1. 7 
(2) 1—Q24+Q,a24 Q,a-'+ Qa 


This last equation is very important. It tells us that, at 
high redshift, all model universes apart from those with 
only vacuum energy will tend to look like the Q = 1 
model. This is not surprising given the form of the 
Friedmann equation: provided that pR2->« as R-0, the 
-kc2 curvature term will become negligible at early times. 
If Q#1, then in the distant past Q(z) must have differed 
from unity by a tiny amount: the density and rate of 
expansion needed to have been finely balanced for the 
universe to expand to the present. This tuning of the ini- 
tial conditions is called the flatness problem and is one of 
the motivations for the applications of quantum theory 
to the early universe. 


Matter-dominated universe 

From the observed temperature of the microwave back- 
ground (2.73 K) and the assumption of three species of 
neutrino at a slightly lower temperature, we deduce that 
the total relativistic density parameter is Q,)2~4.2-10-5, 
so at present it should be a good approximation to ignore 
radiation. However, the different redshift dependences 
of matter and radiation densities mean that this assump- 
tion fails at early times: p/p, : (1 + z)-!. One of the criti- 
cal epochs in cosmology is therefore the point at which 
these contributions were equal: the redshift of 
matter-radiation equality 


1+ %q ~ 23 9002". 


At redshifts higher than this, the universal dynamics was 
dominated by the relativistic-particle content. By an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


interesting coincidence, this epoch is close to another 
important event in cosmological history: recombination. 
Once the temperature falls below ~104 K, ionized mater- 
ial can form neutral hydrogen. Observational astronomy 
is only possible from this point on, since Thomson scat- 
tering from electrons in ionized material prevents photon 
propagation. In practice, this limits the maximum red- 
shift of observational interest to about 1100; unless Q is 
very low or vacuum energy is important, a matter-dom- 
inated model is therefore a good approximation to reali- 
ty. 

By conserving matter, we can introduce a character- 
istic mass Mx, and from this a characteristic radius Rx: 


4nG pat Qa — IP? _ GM, 


3c? Hy 2 ce 


=R, 


where we have used the expression for Ro in the first 
step. When only matter is present, the conformal-time 
version of the Friedmann equation is simple to integrate 
for R(n), and integration of dt = dn/R gives t(n): 


R=kR-O@)] 


c= KR — S(n))- 


The evolution of R(¢) in this solution is plotted in figure 
1. A particular point to note is that the behavior at early 
times is always the same: potential and kinetic energies 
greatly exceed total energy and we always have the k = 0 
form R:t2/3, 


Radiation-dominated universe 
At high enough redshifts, the R:t2/3 law will fail, because 
radiation pressure will become important. At these red- 


F147] T1177 TTT T1177 a A 


10 


scale factor R/R, 


0.1 


0.01 0.1 1 10 
time ct/2mR, 


Figure 1. The time dependence of the scale factor for open, 
closed and critical matter-dominated cosmological models. The 
logarithmic scale is designed to bring out the early-time behav- 
ior, although it obscures the fact that the closed model is a sym- 
metric cycloid on a linear plot of R against t. Reproduced from 
Cosmological Physics (Cambridge University Press). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


shifts, it is an excellent approximation to ignore the 
effects of spatial curvature, so that the Friedmann equa- 
tion for a matter—radiation mix is 


& = Hy(Qna~' + Qa). 


This may be integrated to give the time as a function of 
scale factor: 


2 


Hot = = 
a= See 


[(S; + Qa)? (Qa — 22.) + 2037] 


which goes to %a3/2 for a matter-only model and to a2/2 
for radiation only. At early times, the scale factor thus 
grows as R: 1/2, 

One further way of presenting the model’s depen- 
dence on time is via the density. Following the above, it 
is easy to show that 


1 1/2 
(& a) 


3 2 _ _ 
(5 in Gp ) (radiation domination). 


(matter domination) 


Models with vacuum energy 

The solution of the Friedmann equation becomes more 
complicated if we allow a significant contribution from 
vacuum energy—i.e. a non-zero cosmological constant. 
The Friedmann equation itself is independent of the 
equation of state, and just says H2R? = kc2/(Q-1), what- 
ever the form of the contributions to Q. In terms of the 
cosmological constant itself, we have 


82 Gpyac = Ac 

3H? 3H? 
The reason that the cosmological constant was first intro- 
duced by Einstein was not simply because there was no 
general reason to expect empty space to be of zero densi- 
ty, but because it allows a non-expanding cosmology to 
be constructed. This is perhaps not so obvious from some 
forms of the Friedmann equation, since now H = 0 and 
Q = ©; if we cast the equation in its original form without 
defining these parameters, then zero expansion implies 
= 3ke 
~ 8xGR™ 
Since A can have either sign, this appears not to constrain 
k. However, we also want to have zero acceleration for 
this model, and so need the time derivative of the 
Friedmann equation: R=—4aGR(p + 3p)/3. A further con- 
dition for a static model is therefore that 


Qyac = 


p 


p=—3p. 
Since p = -p for vacuum energy, and this is the only 
source of pressure if we ignore radiation, this tells us that 
p = 3pvac and hence that the mass density is twice the 
vacuum density. The total density is hence positive and 
k = 1; we have a closed model. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Notice that what this says is that a positive vacuum 
energy acts in a repulsive way, balancing the attraction of 
normal matter. This shows that the static model cannot 
be stable: if we perturb the scale factor by a small posi- 
tive amount, the vacuum repulsion is unchanged where- 
as the ‘normal’ gravitational attraction is reduced, so that 
the model will tend to expand further (or contract, if the 
initial perturbation was negative). 


de Sitter space 

The endpoint of an outwards perturbation of Einstein’s 
static model was first studied by DE SITTER. This universe 
is completely dominated by vacuum energy and is clear- 
ly the limit of the unstable expansion, since the density of 
matter redshifts to zero while the vacuum energy 
remains constant. Consider again the Friedmann equa- 
tion in its general form R-8aGpR2/3 = -kc?: since the 
density is constant and R will increase without limit, the 
two terms on the lhs must eventually become almost 
exactly equal and the curvature term on the rhs will be 
negligible. Thus, even if k#0, the universe will have a 
density that differs only infinitesimally from the critical, 
so that we can solve the equation by setting k = 0, in 
which case 


8 Gpvac 1/2 Acc 1/2 


An interesting interpretation of this behavior was pro- 
moted in the early days of cosmology by Eddington: the 
cosmological constant is what caused the expansion. In 
models without A, the expansion is merely an initial con- 
dition: anyone who asks why the universe expands at a 
given epoch is given the unsatisfactory reply that it does 
so because it was expanding at some earlier time. It 
would be more satisfying to have some mechanism that 
set the expansion into motion, and this is what is provid- 
ed by vacuum repulsion. This tendency of models with 
positive A to end up undergoing an exponential phase of 
expansion (and moreover one with Q = 1) is exactly what 
is used in inflationary cosmology to generate the initial 
conditions for the big bang. 


The steady-state model 

The behavior of de Sitter space is in some ways reminis- 
cent of the steady-state universe, which was popular in 
the 1960s. This STEADY-STATE THEORY drew its motivation 
from the philosophical problems of big-bang models— 
which begin in a singularity at t = 0, and for which ear- 
lier times have no meaning. Instead, Hoyle, Bondi and 
Gold suggested the perfect cosmological principle in 
which the universe is homogeneous not only in space 
but also in time: apart from local fluctuations, the uni- 
verse appears the same to all observers at all times. This 
tells us that the Hubble constant really is constant, and 
so the model necessarily has exponential expansion, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


R:exp (Hf), exactly as for de Sitter space. Indeed, de 
Sitter space is a steady-state universe: it contains a con- 
stant vacuum energy density and has an infinite age, 
lacking any big-bang singularity. However, de Sitter 
space is a rather uninteresting model because it contains 
no matter. Introducing matter into a steady-state uni- 
verse violates energy conservation, since matter does 
not have the p = -pc? equation of state that allows the 
density to remain constant. This is the most radical 
aspect of steady-state models: they require continuous 
creation of matter. The energy to accomplish this has to 
come from somewhere, and Einstein’s equations are 
modified by adding some ‘creation’ or ‘C-field’ term to 
the energy-momentum tensor: 


TH = TH 40K" fe. 

The effect of this extra term must be to cancel the matter 
density and pressure, leaving just the overall effective 
form of the vacuum tensor, which is required to produce 
de Sitter space and the exponential expansion. This ad hoc 
field and the lack of any physical motivation for it 
beyond the cosmological problem it was designed to 
solve was always the most unsatisfactory feature of the 
steady-state model, and may account for the strong reac- 
tions generated by the theory. 


Bouncing and loitering models 

Returning to the general case of models with a mixture 
of energy in the vacuum and normal components, we 
have to distinguish three cases. For models that start 
from a big bang (in which case radiation dominates 
completely at the earliest times), the universe will either 
recollapse or expand forever. The latter outcome 
becomes more likely for low densities of matter and 
radiation, but high vacuum density. It is, however, also 
possible to have models in which there is no big bang: 
the universe was collapsing in the distant past, but was 
slowed by the repulsion of a positive A term and under- 
went a ‘bounce’ to reach its present state of expansion. 
Working out the conditions for these different events is 
a matter of integrating the Friedmann equation. For the 
addition of A, this can only in general be done numeri- 
cally. However, we can find the conditions for the differ- 
ent behaviors described above analytically, at least if we 
simplify things by ignoring radiation. The equation in 
the form of the time-dependent Hubble parameter looks 
like 


2 


H- 


= 2,1 —a77) + &,,(@73 — a7) +a7 
7G (=a) (a~ -a~)+a 


and we are interested in the conditions under which the 
ths vanishes, defining a turning point in the expansion. 
Setting the rhs to zero yields a cubic equation, and it is 
possible to give the conditions under which this has a 
solution, which are as follows. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(1) First, negative A always implies recollapse, which is 
intuitively reasonable (either the mass causes recol- 
lapse before A dominates, or the density is low 
enough that A comes to dominate, which cannot 
lead to infinite expansion unless A is positive). 

(2) If A is positive and Q,,<1, the model always 
expands to infinity. 

(3) If Q,,>1, recollapse is only avoided if Q, exceeds a 
critical value 


Qy > 42m {cos[} cos”! (Q5' — 1) + Ex]. 


(4) If A is large enough, the stationary point of the 
expansion is at a<1 and we have a bounce cosmolo- 
gy. This critical value is 


Qy > 4Qm{ FEF" az! — DIF 


where the function f is cosh if Q,,<0.5, otherwise 
cos. If the universe lies exactly on the critical line, 
the bounce is at infinitely early times and we have a 
solution that is the result of a perturbation of the 
Einstein static model. 


In fact, bounce models can be ruled out quite strongly. 
The same cubic equations that define the critical condi- 
tions for a bounce also give an inequality for the maxi- 
mum redshift possible (that of the bounce): 


l+as < 2f[}f-'(Q5'- 11. 


A reasonable lower limit for Q,, of 0.1 then rules out a 
bounce once objects are seen at z>2. 

The main results of this section are summed up in 
figure 2. Since the radiation density is very small today, 
the main task of relativistic cosmology is to work out 
where on the Qmatter-Qvacuum Plane the real universe 
lies. The existence of high-redshift objects rules out the 
bounce models, so that the idea of a hot big bang cannot 
be evaded. 

At this point, we have reproduced one of the great 
conclusions of relativistic cosmology: the universe is of 
finite age, and had its origin in a mathematical singular- 
ity at which the scale factor went to zero, leading to a 
divergent spacetime curvature. Since zero scale factor 
also implies infinite density (and temperature), the 
inferred picture of the early universe is one of unimag- 
inable violence. The term big bang was coined by FRED 
HOYLE to describe this beginning, although it was intend- 
ed somewhat critically. The problem with the singulari- 
ty is that it marks the breakdown of the laws of physics; 
we cannot extrapolate the solution for R(t) to t<0, and so 
the origin of the expansion becomes an unexplained 
boundary condition. It was only after about 1980 that a 
consistent set of ideas became available for ways of 
avoiding this barrier, in the form of inflationary cosmol- 


ogy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


no big bang | a i 
OQ - 4 
Zp=1 
loitering 
P J 
3 
8 
2 expands forever 
ona annnnnnnRRAGATGREE EEE eee = 
recollapses 
L closed 4 
open 
nN 1 1 1 1 | 1 1 1 
'9 1 2 3 
Onnatter 


Figure 2. This plot shows the different possibilities for the cos- 
mological expansion as a function of matter density and vacu- 
um energy. Models with total Q>1 are always spatially closed 
(open for Q<1), although closed models can still expand to infin- 
ity if Q,=0. If the cosmological constant is negative, recollapse 
always occurs; recollapse is also possible with a positive Q, if 
Q,,>Q,. If Q,>1 and Q,, is small, there is the possibility of a ‘loi- 
tering’ solution with some maximum redshift and infinite age 
(top left); for even larger values of vacuum energy, there is no 
big-bang singularity. Reproduced from Cosmological Physics 
(Cambridge University Press). 


Flat universe 

The most important model in cosmological research is 
that with k = 0=Qiota = 1; when dominated by matter, 
this is often termed the Einstein-de Sitter model. 
Paradoxically, this importance arises because it is an 
unstable state: as we have seen earlier, the universe will 
evolve away from Q = 1, given a slight perturbation. For 
the universe to have expanded by so many e-foldings 
(factors of e expansion) and yet still have Qd1 implies 
that it was very close to being spatially flat at early times. 
Many workers have therefore conjectured that it would 
be contrived if this flatness was other than perfect. 

An alternative k = 0 model of greater observational 
interest has a significant cosmological constant, so that 
Qn + Qv = 1 (radiation being neglected for simplicity). 
This may seem contrived, but once k=0 has been estab- 
lished, it cannot change: individual contributions to Q 
must adjust to keep in balance. The advantage of this 
model is that it is the only way of retaining the theoreti- 
cal attractiveness of k = 0 while changing the age of the 
universe from the relation Hoty = 2/3, which character- 
izes the Einstein-de Sitter model. Since much observa- 
tional evidence indicates that Hofgz1, this model has 
received a good deal of interest in recent years. For this 
case, the Friedmann equation is 


& = H3[Qna7'+ (1 — Qn )a7] 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that the photons emitted by the source pass with a uni- 
form flux density through any sphere surrounding the 
source. We can now make a shift of origin, and consider 
the Robertson-Walker metric as being centered on the 
source; however, because of homogeneity, the comoving 
distance between the source and the observer is the same 
as we would calculate when we place the origin at our 
location. The photons from the source are therefore pass- 
ing through a sphere, on which we sit, of proper surface 
area 47[Ro5;(r)]2. However, redshift still affects the flux 
density in four further ways: photon energies and arrival 
rates are redshifted, reducing the flux density by a factor 
(1 + z)2; opposing this, the bandwidth dv is reduced by a 
factor 1 + z, so the energy flux per unit bandwidth goes 
down by one power of 1 + z; finally, the observed pho- 
tons at frequency vp were emitted at frequency vo(1+z), 
so the flux density is the luminosity at this frequency, 
divided by the total area, divided by 1 + z: 


ELC + 2) 0] 


Pr O9 Sa RESTON + 3 


A word about units: L, in this equation would be mea- 
sured in units of W Hz-1. Recognizing that emission is 
often not isotropic, it is common to consider instead the 
luminosity emitted into unit solid angle—in which case 
there would be no factor of 47, and the units of L,, would 
be W Hz! sr. 

The flux density received by a given observer can be 
expressed by definition as the product of the specific 
intensity I, (the flux density received from unit solid 
angle of the sky) and the solid angle subtended by the 
source: S, = 1, dQ. Combining the angular size and 
flux-density relations thus gives the relativistic version 
of surface-brightness conservation. This is independent 
of cosmology: 


_ BIA +2)v0] 
F.(u) = (+2) 


where B,, is surface brightness (luminosity emitted into 
unit solid angle per unit area of source). We can integrate 
over vo to obtain the corresponding total or bolometric 
formulae, which are needed for example for spectral-line 
emission: The form of these relations lead to 


Lot 
Ste = Sas 
An Ra Sz (7) 1 + 2 
Brot 
hae = ——.- 
= (L424 


the following definitions for particular kinds of dis- 
tances: angular-diameter distance is 


Da = (142)7' Ro (7) 


luminosity distance is 
Dy = (142) RoSs (7). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Angular-diameter distance versus redshift is illustrated 
in figure 4. 

The last element needed for the analysis of observa- 
tions is a relation between redshift and age for the object 
being studied. This brings in our earlier relation between 
time and comoving radius (consider a null geodesic tra- 
versed by a photon that arrives at the present): 


edt = Rodr/(1+z). 


So far, all this is completely general; to complete the 
toolkit, we need the crucial input of relativistic dynamics, 
which is to give the distance-redshift relation. 


Distance-redshift relation 
The general relation between comoving distance and 
redshift was given earlier as 
c 
Ro dr = —— dz 
H(2) 
ec =3 -4 =34-12 
= —[2. 4+ Qna + 2,a7" — (2 — a7] dz. 
Ho 


For a matter-dominated Friedmann model, this means 
that the distance of an object from which we receive pho- 
tons today is 


= d ‘ 
hea [ See 
Hy Jo (142) + 22)? 
Integrals of this form often arise when manipulating 


Friedmann models; they can usually be tackled by the 
substitution u2 = k(Q-1)/Q(1+z). This substitution pro- 


duces Mattig’s formula, which is one of the single most 
useful equations in cosmology as far as observers are 
concerned: 
an T T T T T T r T T T T T T T T T T T 
OL N=0 flat ___| 
S Se 
eo ue 
A of a 1 
7 L we Q=0 open | 
at 2 
< _..9=0.8 flat + 
vee N=0.3 open | 
Q=1 +] 
3 4 


redshift z 


Figure 4. A plot of dimensionless angular-diameter distance ver- 
sus redshift for various cosmologies. Solid curves show models 
with zero vacuum energy; dashed curves show flat models with 
Qn + Q, = 1. In both cases, results for Q,, = 1,0.3,0 are shown; 
higher density results in lower distance at high z, owing to grav- 
itational focusing of light rays. Reproduced from Cosmological 
Physics (Cambridge University Press). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


= 2¢ z+ (2 — 2)[(1 + Qz)'? -— 1] 
Roz) = & G64)  °«¢ 


There is no such compact expression if one wishes to 
allow for vacuum energy as well. The comoving dis- 
tance has to be obtained by numerical integration of the 
fundamental dr/dz, even in the k = 0 case. However, for 
all forms of contribution to the energy content of the 
universe, the second-order distance-redshift relation is 
identical, and depends only on the deceleration parame- 
ter: 


2 


The sizes and flux densities of objects at moderate red- 
shift therefore determine the geometry of the universe 
only once an equation of state is assumed, so that qg and 
Qo can be related. At larger redshifts, this degeneracy is 
broken, and accurate measurements of the distance— 
redshift relation can in principle determine the parame- 
ters Q,y, Q, etc independently. 


c 1+qo 5 
Rosin = (2 z). 


Recent observations 

NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) 
satellite has given astronomers a glimpse of the ghostly 
cobweb of helium gas left over from the Big Bang, which 
underlies the universe’s structure. The helium is not 
found in galaxies or stars but spread thinly through 
space. The observations help confirm theoretical models 
of how matter in the expanding universe condensed into 
a web-like structure pervading all the space between 
galaxies. The helium traces the architecture of the uni- 
verse back to very early times. This structure arose from 
small gravitational instabilities seeded in the chaos just 
after the Big Bang. 


Outstanding issues 

As outlined above, the basic isotropic models of rela- 
tivistic cosmology depend on four main parameters: the 
present rate of expansion and the present contributions 
to the total density of non-relativistic matter, ultrarela- 
tivistic matter and vacuum. The appearance of distant 
objects depends on these numbers, so in principle it is 
possible to determine these parameters, and also to 
investigate the weakest class of non-standard cosmolo- 
gies—in which there may exist additional contributions 
to the density, with more exotic equations of state. All 
such possibilities can be investigated empirically within 
the framework of FRW models. 

A deeper issue is to ask whether the basic assump- 
tion of isotropy and homogeneity is valid, and if so, why 
this should be. Studies of large-scale structure and 
anisotropies in the microwave background suggest that 
deviations from the Robertson—Walker metric are limited 
to fractional perturbations at about the 10-5 level, so the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


basic metric seems a good zero-order model. However, 
the existence of a particle horizon that is small at early 
times means that it is a major surprise to find the uni- 
verse to be nearly homogeneous over regions that have 
only recently come into causal contact. This is one of a 
number of peculiarities in the standard model that cry 
out for explanation: like the basic fact of expansion and 
the near-perfect flatness, these are puzzles of the initial 
conditions that require explanation by a more complete 
theory, such as INFLATION. 

Lastly, there are a number of peculiar features which 
relate to our status as observers. Unless 2 = 1, we live 
near a special time—at which the contributions to the 
Friedmann equation from spatial curvature or vacuum 
energy are comparable with that of non-relativistic mat- 
ter. There exists a body of ideas under the heading of the 
‘ANTHROPIC PRINCIPLE’ which attempt to quantify the 
selection effects imposed by the need for intelligent 
observers. In some cases, these arguments are relatively 
uncontroversial: we should not be surprised that the uni- 
verse is now roughly as old as a typical star, since stars 
are needed to make the heavy nuclei needed for interest- 
ing chemistry. Whether such reasoning explains all the 
features of the observed universe is likely to remain con- 
troversial. However, at a practical level, the standard 
isotropic cosmological models provide a context within 
which this difficult debate can at least be conducted with 
confidence. 


Web update (31 July 2002) 

A team of 27 astronomers led by Professor George 
Efstathiou of the University of Cambridge has published 
strong evidence for the existence of dark energy using 
the clustering pattern of 250000 galaxies in a large vol- 
ume of the universe surveyed with the Anglo-Australian 
Telescope at Siding Spring in New South Wales, 
Australia. By comparing the structure in the universe 
now, some 15 billion years after the Big Bang, with struc- 
ture observed in the cosmic microwave background radi- 
ation, which preserved information about what the uni- 
verse was like when it was only 300000 years old, the 
Anglo-Australian team could apply a simple geometri- 
cal test to elucidate the composition of the universe. 
Their results show that the universe is full of vacuum 
energy, completely consistent with the earlier super- 
novae results. 

Christopher Kochanek of the Harvard—Smithsonian 
Centre for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Massachusetts 
and Neal Dalal of the University of California, San Diego 
have used radio telescopes and gravitational lensing to 
search for cold dark matter. They have studied seven 
galaxies, each magnified by four nearer ones. Because 
each lensing galaxy is in a slightly different position, the 
researchers got four different images of each of the seven 
distant galaxies. The four images should have been 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Cosmology Standard Model 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


identical. But each is actually slightly different. The dif- 
ference was enough to have been caused by the kind of 
clumps of dark matter around lensing galaxies that 
mathematical models predict. 


Web Update references: 

Efstathiou G et al February 2002 Monthly Notices of the 
Royal Astronomical Society 330, No. 2 

Dalal N and Kochanek C S (in press) 2002 Direct detec- 
tion of CDM substructure. Astrophysical Journal 


Bibliography 

Kriss G A et al 2001 Science 293 1112-1116 

Carroll S, Press W H and Turner E L 1992 Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 30 499 

Peacock J A 1999 Cosmological Physics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Peebles P J E 1993 Principles of Physical Cosmology 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Weinberg S 1972 Gravitation and Cosmology (New York: 
iley) 

John Peacock 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


11 


Cosmology: A Brief History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmology: A Brief History 


Cosmology is the branch of astronomy that deals with 
studies of the large-scale structure of the universe. 
Observationally it requires data on the most remote 
objects while theoretically it demands the largest possible 
extrapolations of the basic laws of physics. Despite these 
severe constraints, cosmology has of late emerged as a 
very important branch of science where predictions can 
be made and tested. 

When did modern cosmology begin? Indeed, one 
should go back to Isaac Newton, and his correspondence 
with Richard Bentley from 10 December 1692, to 17 
January 1693 (see Whiteside 1976). It is interesting to 
read Newton’s attempts to construct the model of a 
homogeneous and isotropic but static universe and his 
realization that it is unstable. Later attempts within 
the Newtonian framework, before relativity came on the 
horizon, were by C Neumann and H Seeliger during 1895- 
1896. In 1934, W H McCrea and E A Milne demonstrated 
how Newtonian ideas of gravitation and dynamics can be 
suitably adapted to give standard models of relativity. 

The advent of the GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY in 1915 
offered a possible resolution of the conflicts which were 
beginning to surface between the Newtonian laws of 
dynamics and gravitation and SPECIAL RELATIVITY. General 
relativity linked the phenomenon of gravitation to the 
geometry of space and time. Only 2 years after he 
proposed the theory, ALBERT EINSTEIN made a bold attempt 
to apply it to construct a model of the entire universe. 

Like Newton, Einstein also found that a static model 
was not permitted by his 1915 equations of relativity and 
introduced the so-called COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT, A, Which 
implied (in the Newtonian approximation) a repulsive 
force that varied directly with distance. The static 
model that emerged required the universe to be closed. 
Einstein felt that the emergence of such a model was a 
demonstration of a unique and consistent relationship 
between spacetime geometry and the matter contents of 
the universe. 

However, a paper by w DE SITTER in the same year 
demonstrated that the model was not unique. de Sitter 
found a model universe which was empty but expanding. 
Although it was considered esoteric at the time, this model 
has played a key role in cosmology on a number of later 
occasions. 

In the second decade of this century, there was no 
systematic study of galaxies, although, by 1914, observers 
of diffuse nebulae, like V M Slipher, had reported nebular 
shifts, mostly redshifts, that indicated a radial recessional 
motion of these nebulae. However, despite these findings, 
the general belief in a static universe was quite strong 
and de Sitter’s solution was treated more as a curiosity. 
Indeed, in 1922-1924, A Friedmann and later in 1927 
(independently) Abbé Lemaitre obtained models of the 
expanding universe for which the cosmological constant 
was not required, but these were also ignored by Einstein 
and others. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Meanwhile, understanding of the universe on the 
observational front was also growing. In 1924 & P HUBBLE 
had established, through the use of Cepheid variable stars, 
that the Andromeda Nebula is so far away that it has to be 
extragalactic. Indeed in the next few years the existence of 
extragalactic nebulae as galaxies in their own right began 
to be established. 

However, it was the announcement of the velocity— 
distance relation of these nebulae by Hubble in 1929 
that turned the tide in favor of these models. For, after 
a careful analysis of data on nebular redshifts, Hubble 
arrived at what is today known as ‘HUBBLE’S LAW’, namely 
that the radial velocity of a typical galaxy away from us 
is proportional to its distance from us. More exactly, the 
data show that the redshift of a galaxy increases with its 
faintness. If the redshift is interpreted as Doppler shift and 
faintness as due to distance, then Hubble’s law follows. 
Although there might be other interpretations of the data, 
all cosmological models had to take cognizance of this 
basic fact about the universe. Indeed it was later realized 
that in his 1927 paper Lemaitre had predicted a linear 
velocity—distance relation of this kind. 

Thus, soon after Hubble’s law became accepted, 
Einstein saw that a static model was unrealistic and 
abandoned the cosmological constant as the ‘greatest 
blunder’ in his life. There were others, however, who 
thought otherwise and, even today, this constant continues 
to feature in cosmological literature. The reader interested 
in knowing who did what and when in those early days 
may wish to see the historical account by North (1965). 


The big bang models 


The assumption of homogeneity and isotropy allows the 
cosmologist to define a ‘cosmic time’. The spatial sections 
at a given cosmic time are supposed to be homogeneous 
and isotropic. H P Robertson in 1935 and A G Walker 
in 1936 independently worked out the most general line 
element describing such a spacetime. Taking any observer 
as the local origin of spherical polar coordinates (r, 6, ¢) 
and ¢ for the cosmic time, the Robertson—Walker line 
element is given by 


dr? 


1 — kr? 


ds* = c? di? — S?(t) | — r?(dé? + sin’ 6 ag] . (1) 
The function S(t) is the scale factor mentioned earlier: its 
increase with time signifies the expansion of the universe. 
The constant & in the above is a parameter specifying 
whether the space t = constant is of positive (k = +1), 
negative (k = —1) or zero (k = 0) curvature. 

The simplest FRIEDMANN model is the Einstein—de Sitter 
model jointly advocated by Einstein and de Sitter (1932) 
which has k = 0. For pressure-free matter (often called 
dust) this model has S « 1?/%. 

That the geometrical features of the model are linked 
to its physical matter contents is demonstrated by the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmology: A Brief History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


different behavior of these models for different matter 
density p. Thus we define the following quantities: 


H(t) = Ss oH 

mug = Brg 

as the HUBBLE CONSTANT and the critical density at epoch ¢. 

We will denote their values at the present epoch fy by suffix 
zero. The density parameter is defined by 


(2) 


ae (3) 
Pe 

Then for the Friedmann solutions we have the following 
result: the universe is closed for Q)9 > 1 and open 
otherwise (k = 0,—1). Actually the case k = 0 is the 
marginally open case with 29 = 1; if the density exceeds p, 
the universe is of the closed type. This is why the density 
f- is called the closure or critical density. 

In all models the scale factor was zero at some epoch 
in the past, commonly called the big bang epoch. At 
this epoch the curvature of spacetime was infinite and so 
was the density of matter and radiation in the universe. 
What about the future behavior of the universe? There 
the answer depends on the geometry of space. In the open 
models the universe expands for ever, with the scale factor 
going to infinity. In the closed models the scale factor 
attains a maximum value before decreasing back to zero. 

In the above argument it is assumed that the matter 
in the universe is in the form of dust. This is a reasonable 
approximation at present when pressures are small and 
matter density far exceeds the density of radiation. 
However, one can show that 


Pmatter & so Pradiation & s (4) 


so that, at a sufficiently early epoch when S was small 
enough, the radiation term dominated over the matter 
term. This of course does not alter the earlier conclusion 
about the existence of the big bang epoch; in fact we now 
conclude that the universe was infinitely hot at that epoch. 

In the Robertson—Walker spacetimes, the redshift is 
simply related to the scale factor. Calculation shows that a 
source with redshift z is being observed at an epoch when 
the scale factor of the universe was (1+z)~! times its present 
value. Observations at the present epoch indicate that 
matter density is at least ~10° times the radiation density. 
Thus we can estimate that the universe was radiation 
dominated at epochs prior to that of redshift ~10°. 

With the realization that the basic Friedmann models 
give an adequate description of the expanding universe, 
there have been many developments in cosmology in the 
last five decades that are based on these models. These 
developments may broadly be divided into investigations 
of (a) large-scale structure, through observations of 
discrete sources, (b) early history of the universe, through 
observations of relics, (c) evolution of the universe from 
particles to galaxies, (d) basic physical laws operating in 
the extreme conditions a few moments after the big bang, 
and (e) alternative cosmologies. We will briefly outline a 
few historical results. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Observations of discrete sources 

A relativistic cosmological model uses curved spacetime 
and as such there are effects of non-Euclidean geometries 
that may, in principle, be observable. This was 
the expectation which prompted optical and radio 
astronomers of the 1950s and 1960s to push their observing 
capabilities to the limit. By observing the distributions 
of discrete source populations (galaxies, quasars, radio 
sources, x-ray sources, etc) the cosmologist hoped to find 
which of the various theoretical models came closest to 
reality. 

The observational tests included (i) the measurement 
of Hubble’s constant, (ii) the extension of Hubble’s law to 
galaxies of large redshifts, (iii) the counts of galaxies and 
radio sources out to larger and larger distances, (iv) the 
angular diameter-redshift relation and (v) the relationship 
of surface brightness of a galaxy to its redshift. For details 
of these cosmological tests see recent textbooks and review 
articles, e.g. Sandage (1988) and Narlikar (1993). 

The trend of such studies has shifted, however, from 
determining the geometry of the universe to determining 
how the discrete sources evolve. These studies are 
expected to tell us about the evolution of the physical 
environment of the universe, but so far no clear picture has 
emerged amidst a series of parameter-fitting exercises. 

Akey measurement that continues to be controversial 
is that of Hubble’s constant. Hubble originally obtained 
the value of 530 km s"' Mpc7!, but in retrospect we 
find that there were several systematic errors in his 
measurements. Fora long time, as the value of the constant 
steadily came down, there was continuing controversy 
about its true value, which was believed to lie between 
50 and 100 km s~! Mpc"t. 

Even today there are several calibration problems. 
However, it is only now that a clear appreciation of various 
practical issues is emerging, and different approaches are 
beginning to converge to a value of Hy) somewhere between 
55 and 70 km s7! Mpc". 


Relics of the early universe 

The BIG BANG THEORY hinges on the fact that, at a time 
t = 0, the universe came into existence in a singular 
event. Thus no physical description of the original event 
is possible, although physical theories can examine the 
subsequent behavior of the universe. One of the early 
attempts to go close to the big bang epoch was made in 
the late 1940s by GEORGE GAMow, who appreciated the fact 
that the early universe was radiation dominated, that is, 
its contents were made up of photons and other particles 
which were mostly relativistic in their energies. Thus, 
one could approximate the equation of state by pressure 
p= ; p, both p and p being dependent on temperature as 
its fourth power, as for radiation in thermal equilibrium. 
Gamow and his collaborators Ralph Alpher and Robert 
Herman worked out the physics of the universe when 
it was around 1-200 s old. (A paper in 1948 by Alpher, 
H Bethe and Gamow on this topic led to it being called the 
‘a—B-y’ theory!) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmology: A Brief History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gamow had hoped to demonstrate that, in the high 
temperatures prevailing in this era, particles such as 
neutrons and protons would be synthesized into heavier 
nuclei, thereby determining the chemical composition of 
the universe. In the end, this work was partly successful 
in that light nuclei such as deuterium, helium, etc could be 
made in the primordial soup, but not the heavier ones such 
as carbon, oxygen and metals. Later it became clear from 
the important work of Burbidge, Burbidge, Fowler and 
Hoyle in 1957 (referred to as the B*FH theory) that these 
nuclei are made in stars. Nevertheless, the abundances of 
light nuclei worked out according to the modern version 
of Gamow’s pioneering attempt show a broad agreement 
with the observed ones. 

A further check on the early hot universe scenario 
was the discovery in 1965 of the COSMIC MICROWAVE 
BACKGROUND by Penzias and Wilson. Gamow, Alpher 
and Herman had predicted such a background as the 
relic of the early era, although the discoverers had 
been unaware of these results. In their 1948 paper 
Alpher and Herman had predicted a relic background 
with an estimated temperature of 5 K. Present big bang 
calculations, however, cannot estimate the temperature 
of the background: it has to be taken as a parameter 
prescribed by observations. It should be mentioned that 
in the early 1960s R H Dicke and his colleagues had 
independently arrived at the Gamow-—Alpher-Herman 
prediction of relic radiation and were setting up a detector 
for the radiation when they were anticipated by Penzias 
and Wilson. 

The most spectacular development of recent years 
has been the success of the COBE satellite in measuring 
the spectrum (in 1990) and small-scale anisotropy (in 
1994) of the microwave background. The background 
shows a black body temperature of 2.7 K and is highly 
homogeneous, with temperature fluctuations AT/T ~ 
6 x 107°. 

The abundances of light nuclei and the microwave 
background, its spectrum and anisotropy have provided 
strong prima facie support for the big bang scenario. There 
were constraints and challenges too. 


Evolution of structure in the universe 

A major challenge in cosmology has been to demonstrate 
how, in the standard big bang model, first nucleons and 
leptons evolved out of more primordial particles and from 
them eventually the large-scale structures in the universe 
formed; all this in a manner consistent with the radiation 
fluctuations found by COBE. 

Of particular interest in this work is the role of 
the inflationary phase first discussed independently by 
A Guth, K Sato and D Kazanas during 1980-1981. The 
basic idea is the following. The big bang universe was 
infinitely hot at t = 0, but its temperature dropped with 
time according to #~*. In this process, the matter in 
it underwent a phase transition and its effect was, for a 
very brief period, to inflate the universe at an exponential 
rate, much like the old de Sitter universe. The changes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the spacetime vacuum generate a force that simulates 
the cosmological constant first introduced by Einstein. 
This is the force that ‘drives’ the universe so fast with an 
exponential growth at a time scale of around 10-® s. 

Most theories of structure formation rely on initial 
fluctuations as they evolve through INFLATION and their 
subsequent growth. The latter takes place through 
gravitational interaction and clustering. Here cognizance 
must be taken of the interaction of the growing lumps of 
inhomogeneities not only with the visible matter but also 
with DARK MATTER. In particular, the results are sensitive to 
the type of dark matter, ‘cold’ or ‘hot’ or a mixture of both. 

Dark matter is the name given to matter that 
is not normally seen through any waveband of the 
electromagnetic radiation. It was FRITZ ZWICKY who in 1933, 
first pointed out the possible existence of the ‘missing 
mass’ in clusters of galaxies. However, it took nearly 
four decades for the astronomical community to catch up 
with him! In the 1970s, the studies of motions of clouds 
of neutral hydrogen showed that they were moving with 
near constant rotational speeds around a typical spiral 
galaxy, even if they were located at progressively larger 
distances beyond the visible mass of the galaxy. These flat 
rotation curves indicated that the mass M(R) of a galaxy 
up to a distance R from its centre increases approximately 
in proportion to R even if R vastly exceeds the visible 
boundary of the galaxy. 

Likewise, Zwicky’s expectations about hidden mass 
in clusters were also borne out with the findings that the 
galaxies in a typical cluster were moving with such high 
speeds that if one uses the virial theorem for a relaxed 
cluster 

2T + ® = constant (5) 


where T is the kinetic energy and ® the gravitational 
potential energy, then one needs a lot of hidden mass to 
make up for the latter. What is this dark matter made of 
and how much of it exists in the universe? This important 
question has been hotly debated but remains unanswered. 

The present cosmological model building has to 
take various constraints into account and, within the big 
bang framework, the need to resurrect the cosmological 
constant is being strongly felt. It is, however, correct to 
say that the model building exercise is yet to settle down 
to a well accepted set of parameters including the value of 
this constant. 


Alternative cosmologies 

From time to time there have been alternatives proposed 
to the big bang cosmology, although the majority of 
cosmologists have always believed in the validity of 
the latter. The sTeaDy STATE THEORY proposed in 1948 by 
H Bondi, T Gold and F Hoyle livened up the cosmological 
scenario by offering a clearly testable alternative. This 
cosmology had the spacetime geometry described by the 
model proposed by de Sitter in 1917, although the physical 
rationale was different. The discovery of the microwave 
background in 1965 robbed the theory of much of its 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmology: A Brief History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


credibility. Other major initiatives in the field were the 
Brans—Dicke cosmology proposed by C Brans and R H 
Dicke in 1961, as a theory with its origins in Mach’s 
principle, and the cosmology proposed by P A M Dirac 
in 1973, based on attempts to explain the very large 
dimensionless numbers that appear in cosmology and 
microphysics. 

Lately, in 1993, the steady state theory has been 
revived in the modified form called the quasi-steady state 
cosmology (QSSC), by F Hoyle, G Burbidge and J V 
Narlikar. 


Conclusions 
As the observational details about the universe become 
more and more focused, the big bang cosmology becomes 
more and more constrained. For example, one long 
standing discrepancy has not yet been resolved: the ages 
of stars in some very old globular clusters are in the range 
12-15 billion years, which is larger than the timespan of the 
standard model! This is another reason for reviving the 4 
term, for its inclusion can increase the age of the universe. 
In the last analysis, what cosmological theory 
survives would depend on how the observational 
challenges are met. Unlike the situation at the start of 
this century, when there were hardly any cosmological 
parameters to constrain the theory, we now suffer from the 
embarrassment of riches. Let the fittest theory survive. 


Bibliography 

Narlikar J V 1993, Introduction to Cosmology (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

NorthJ D 1965 The Measure of the Universe (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 

Sandage A 1988 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 561 

Whiteside T (ed) 1976 Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton 
vol 7 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
pp 233-8 


J] V Narlikar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cosmos ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmos 


Series of more than 2300 Russian/Soviet military, research 
and scientific satellites. Most operated for a few weeks or 
months and few details of their payloads or results were 
released. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cotes, Roger (1682-1716) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cotes, Roger (1682-1716) 


Mathematician, born in Burbage, Leicestershire, England. 
At the age of 26 he became the first Plumian Professor 
of Astronomy. He edited the second edition of NEWTON’s 
Principia, bringing out subtleties and clarifying issues in 
a correspondence with Newton which, while friendly at 
the start, cools towards the end, presumably under the 
burden of over-numerous, impatiently received editorial 
suggestions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cowling, Thomas George (1906-90) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cowling, Thomas George (1906-90) 


British mathematician, professor at Leeds. | Worked 
on stellar structure (energy transfer by convection and 
radiation), developed the theory of stellar and planetary 
magnetic fields. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Crab Nebula (M1, NGC 1952) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crab Nebula (M1, NGC 1952) 


A supernova remnant in the constellation Taurus, position 
RA05* 34.5™, dec. +22° 00’. The supernova of aD 1054 that 
produced the nebula reached a magnitude of —6, visible in 
daytime. The nebula was discovered in 1731 by John Bevis 
and independently in 1758 by Charles Messier, prompting 
him to start compiling his list of objects that might be 
confused with comets. It was named by Lord Rosse for 
its superficial resemblance to a crab. The Crab is 6’ by 
4’ in extent and of eighth magnitude. Its outer regions 
consist of twisting filaments of hydrogen expelled by the 
supernova, appearing red on photographs and traveling 
outward at over 1000 kms~!. The inner region glows with 
the pale yellow light of synchrotron radiation triggered 
by electrons emitted by the Crab Pulsar at the center, the 
core of the star that exploded as a supernova. This inner 
region makes the Crab Nebula the best-known example 
of a plerion—a supernova remnant with a ‘filled’ center. 
The Crab emits strongly in radio waves (and has the radio 
designation Taurus A) and x-rays (Taurus X-1). 


See also: Crab Pulsar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Crab Pulsar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crab Pulsar 


The pulsar PSR 0531 + 21 (previously known as NP 0532), 
situated at the heart of the Crab nebula in Taurus. One 
of the first pulsars to be discovered, in 1968, and the first 
to be positively identified with a visible object. Known 
since 1948 as the powerful radio source Taurus A, the Crab 
nebula had been discovered in 1964 to be a powerful source 
of x-rays as well—the first to be optically identified beyond 
the solar system. 

The discovery of the first pulsar (PSR 1919 + 21) by 
Jocelyn Bell (b. 1943) and Antony Hewish (b. 1924) at 
Cambridge in November 1967 was all the more remarkable 
because of its rapid pulse rate, with a period of only 
1.337 s, and the one part in a million consistency with 
which this period was maintained. As further pulsars were 
discovered (more than 20 within a year), some were found 
to have periods of even less than a second. Such rapidly 
rotating sources implied that the objects were of very small 
size, and hence were of unprecedentedly high density. 
This led to considerable effort by physicists to devise 
a theoretical model which would provide a satisfactory 
explanation. The concept of super-dense neutron stars 
had been proposed as early as 1934 by Walter Baade 
(1893-1960) and Fritz Zwicky (1898-1974); they had also 
suggested that they might be associated with supernova 
explosions. In 1939 Zwicky suggested that the vast energy 
released in a supernova explosion might arise from the 
creation of a neutron star, and with remarkable foresight 
suggested that the Crab Nebula might contain such an 
object. 

Foremost among the theorists considering the newly 
discovered pulsars was Thomas Gold (b. 1920) at Cornell 
University, New York, who published a paper in 1968 
suggesting that a spinning neutron star was indeed the 
only possible mechanism that could explain such a rapidly 
pulsating object. The theory was virtually confirmed 
by the discovery of the Crab pulsar a few months later, 
with its dramatically short period of only 33.3 ms. The 
south-westernmost of a pair of stars visible near the 
center of the Crab nebula had been identified in 1942 by 
Zwicky and Rudolph Minkowski (1895-1976) as the most 
likely supernova remnant. Observations made in January 
1969 at the Steward Observatory in Tucson, Arizona, 
confirmed that this sixteenth-magnitude star showed the 
same rapid fluctuations in brightness as the pulsar—the 
first optical identification of a radio pulsar. Only a few 
such optical/radio identifications are known, owing to 
their very low luminosity at optical wavelengths. 

Subsequent observations have shown the Crab 
pulsar’s rotation to be decelerating by 36.4 ns per day. 
This loss in rotational energy arises from its conversion 
into synchrotron radiation, which is emitted into the 
surrounding nebula along paths constrained by a strong 
dipolar magnetic field and gives rise to the lighthouse- 
like ‘flashes’ as the star rotates. Minkowski’s suggestion 
that the neutron star is the power source of the nebula 
has thus been triumphantly vindicated. Measurements 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the expansion of the nebula have confirmed its 
identification with a supernova explosion observed in aD 
1054, indicating that this is one of the youngest pulsars yet 
discovered—hence its very rapid rotation. 

As the most easily observable pulsar, and being active 
over much of the electromagnetic spectrum, the Crab 
pulsar has remained one of the most important targets of 
astrophysical research. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Crabtree, William (1610-44) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crabtree, William (1610—44) 


Instrument-maker and astronomer, born in Broughton, 
Lancashire, England, studied sunspots, made precise 
observations of the planets, including a transit of Venus. 
Crabtree collaborated with HorRocKs who predicted the 
transit. Horrocks described his friend Crabtree as ‘a man 
who has few superiors in mathematical learning’ and 
described how awestruck Crabtree had been on perceiving 
the little disc of Venus moving against the face of the 
Sun: ‘rapt in contemplation he stood, motionless, scarce 
trusting his senses through excess of joy’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cramér—Rao Limit (or minimum-variance bound) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crameér-Rao Limit (or 
minimum-variance bound) 


When it is difficult to calculate the variance (statistical 
error) of a parameter, the more readily calculated Cramér— 
Rao limit in statistics can be used as an estimate. The 
Cramér-Rao limit is in fact a lower bound to the variance 
but it is often about the same size. The reality of this 
assumption has to be investigated case by case, e.g. by 
Monte Carlo simulations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Crater Constellation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crater Constellation 


(the Cup; abbrev. Crt, gen. Crateris; area 282 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies to the south-west of 
Virgo, and culminates at midnight in mid-March. It 
represents the cup of the god Apollo in Greek mythology 
(see Corvus). Its brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy 
(c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A small, rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Crater are 5 Crateris, magnitude 3.6, 
and y Crateris and a Crateris (Alkes), both magnitude 
4.1, which form an isosceles triangle pointing away from 
Virgo. y is a binary, having a magnitude 9.5 companion, 
separation 5.2”. There are no bright star clusters, nebulae 
or galaxies in Crater. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Craters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Craters 


Craters are bowl-shaped cavities which have been formed 
by an explosion. On planetary bodies, the few examples of 
past or present volcanism (Mars, Venus, Io) are not of the 
explosive type. Therefore, nearly all craters on PLANETARY 
SURFACES result from the impact of a METEOROID at very 
high speeds (tens of km s~!). PLANETARY EXPLORATION has 
demonstrated that impact craters are ubiquitous features 
of the geology of solid solar system bodies. For most 
objects, internally driven evolution (tectonics, volcanism) 
has stopped after a few million to a few hundred million 
years. Impact cratering at all scales has therefore been a 
major factor for the evolution of planetary surfaces. 

First, a family portrait of craters throughout the 
SOLAR SYSTEM Will be drawn, with their striking similarities 
and intriguing differences. We will present the early 
controversies on lunar craters, the only such planetary 
features which can be seen with the naked eye, and the 
evidence from which lunar craters as well as nearly all 
other craters in the solar system are now recognized as 
impact features instead of volcanic craters. 

In a further section, the origin of impacting bodies 
will be discussed. The evolution of the impact rate with 
time is closely related to the formation process of the solar 
system (see SOLARSYSTEM: FORMATION). Our understanding of 
collision processes in the solar system has recently much 
improved with the advent of chaotic dynamical models. 

We will then discuss the physics of impact cratering. 
The formation of craters is ruled by relatively simple 
scaling laws over an extremely wide range of impacting 
masses. The evolution of large craters is strongly 
influenced by gravity. At the higher end of the size 
range, the relaxation of the planetary crust modifies the 
crater shape. Understanding these crater formation and 
evolution processes is essential when attempting to derive 
the ages of solar system surfaces from the cratering record. 

Finally, the consequences of crater formation at all 
scales on the evolution of a planetary surface will be 
examined. They range from the formation of major 
impact basins several thousand kilometers in diameter to 
thorough modifications of the mineralogy and texture of 
surface soils (or regoliths). Perhaps the most dramatic 
cratering event of all may have been the giant impact of a 
Mars-sized body on the Earth which is now considered to 
be at the origin of the formation of the Moon. 


Craters in the solar system 

The most direct evidence that high-velocity objects impact 
planetary bodies is the observation of a shooting star, 
which shines brightly due to its very high temperature 
upon atmospheric entry. The typical mass of these 
particles is a few milligrams. In the nineteenth century, 
METEORITES with masses of a few hundred grams to several 
tonnes were identified as extraterrestrial objects. The other 
line of evidence can be traced back to the observation 
by GALILEO of round features at all scales on the lunar 
surface, the lunar craters and basins (see Moon). Up to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Meteor Crater, near Flagstaff in northern Arizona, is 
the youngest and best preserved large impact crater on the 
Earth, with a size of 2 km. It was formed by the impact of an 
iron meteor a few tens of meters in diameter. The similarity with 
craters generated by explosions is striking, with a bowl shape 
and raised rim. 


the middle of the twentieth century the origin of these 
features was controversial, as they were attributed either 
to volcanic activity or to impact processes. The matter 
was finally laid to rest with the Apollo program. In the 
mean time, the best preserved terrestrial impact crater had 
been discovered in northern Arizona (of course, it was 
known for centuries by the Navajos): METEOR CRATER, with 
its diameter of 2 km and its depth of more than 300 m, is 
a very young feature formed 40000 years ago (figure 1). 
It shows a striking similarity with bomb craters, with 
its bowl shape and slightly raised rim. Indeed, impact 
and explosion cratering are closely related, and a lot has 
been learned about the physics of cratering from the near- 
surface nuclear tests of the 1950s and early 1960s. 

The extraordinary adventure of planetary exploration 
during the last 40 years has demonstrated the ubiquitous 
character of impact cratering in the solar system. Indeed, 
the first impression given by the first Mars fly-bys was that 
it was, somewhat disappointingly, just a larger version 
of the Moon. These observations happened to cover 
the older, southern hemisphere of the planet which is 
indeed dominated by impact craters. When the Mariner 
9 orbiter finally obtained a global coverage, it revealed 
the tremendous volcanoes and canyons which characterize 
the Tharsis region. The large cavities at the top of 
these volcanoes have been formed by collapse, not by an 
explosion, and are therefore calderas, not craters. The 
PIONEER and VOYAGER MISSIONS to the systems of outer planets 
have observed enormous impact features, such as the 
Valhalla basin on GANYMEDE (figure 2). At the other end 
of the solar system, MERCURY was revealed as a near twin 
to our Moon, its surface being pocked with craters of 
all sizes. Only 50% of the surface of Mercury has been 
imaged, so that surprises cannot be excluded once the 
other hemisphere is observed. More recently, close-range 
observations of ASTEROIDS showed craters with sizes up to 
30% of the diameter of the body (figure 3). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Craters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The Valhalla basin is an impact structure nearly 

2000 km in diameter on Callisto, the outer large satellite of 
Jupiter. The small vertical extent and concentric rings reveal the 
importance of relaxation processes in the icy lithosphere. This 
structure is pockmarked by later impacts which saturate the 
surface. 


Figure 3. This image of Ida, a 40 km sized asteroid in the main 
belt, was obtained by the Galileo spacecraft on its way to Jupiter. 
The global shape of the asteroid is indented by major impact 
craters, while smaller craters are ubiquitous on the surface. 


The wealth of observations from planetary missions 
has also shown that several planetary bodies exhibit much 
smaller densities of impact craters. This is the case for 
Venus, Io, Europa and icy satellites such as Enceladus 
(satellite of Saturn) or Miranda (satellite of Uranus). The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


example of the Earth suggests that this situation arises 
when resurfacing processes have erased all but the latest 
impact craters, i.e. when the surface is younger than a few 
hundred million years. The cratering record is therefore 
clearly linked with the age of the surface, which leads to a 
discussion of the origin of impacts in the solar system. 


The history and characteristics of impacts in the 
solar system 

Much of what we know about the time evolution of 
cratering comes from the study of lunar samples gathered 
by the Apollo and Luna programs in the early 1970s. The 
potassium—argon radioisotopic chronometer is reset by 
shock events, as the daughter product, argon, is a noble gas 
which is expelled under high pressures. These analyses 
provided the first absolute ages of major impact events on 
the Moon, such as that which formed the IMBRIUM BASIN, 3.8 
billion years ago. The age of lunar mare, which provided 
clean plates for registering impacts from 4 to 3 billion years 
ago could be determined from the rock formation ages 
of lunar basalts (uranium-lead and rubidium-strontium 
chronometers). Since 1970, the advent of chaotic dynamics 
has much improved our understanding of the evolution 
of protoplanetary swarms during the formation of the 
solar system. These theories also provided a satisfactory 
model of the transfer of asteroids or asteroidal fragments 
to the inner solar system by planetary perturbations. From 
these various sources of information, there is now a wide 
consensus on the following scenario: 


(a) The condensation of the solar nebula resulted in the 
formation of a very large number of small bodies, 
the planetesimals in the inner solar system and the 
cometesimals in the outer solar system. 

(b) The planetary embryos first grew by direct collisions, 
which resulted in a few million years of extremely 
heavy bombardment. 

(c) Once the direct feeding zones were cleaned up, grav- 
itational perturbations induced further collisions or 
near encounters between the surviving objects. The 
remaining primordial population of small bodies was 
then progressively cleaned up by collisions with plan- 
ets or ejection in the oorT cLoub. This phase, the ac- 
cretionary tail, lasted more than 500 million years ac- 
cording to the ages of lunar basins. It left three major 
reservoirs: the Oort cloud, corresponding to cometes- 
imals ejected at large distances by the giant planets, 
the main belt of asteroids, where the accretion of a 
planet was prevented by the proximity of the proto 
Jupiter, and the KUIPER BELT of cometesimals, where the 
density was too low to form a planet. 

(d) During the remaining 4 billion years, collisions in the 
main belt, planetary and stellar perturbations have 
resulted in a steady state flux of secondary objects, 
represented nowadays by near-Earth asteroids (from 
the main belt), short-period comets (from the Kuiper 
belt) and long-period comets (from the Oort cloud). 
The relative contribution of comets and asteroids to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Craters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the impact rate is highly uncertain. It is expected 
to depend on the distance to the Sun, with comets 
representing up to one-third of the impacts on the 
Earth and Moon. On the Moon, this constant impact 
rate corresponds to the formation of a kilometer sized 
crater every 30000 years. On the Earth, it is doubled 
as impactors are focused by the strong gravitational 
field, but this also makes the craters smaller. The 
2 km wide Meteor Crater, formed 40 000 years ago, is 
therefore quite typical taking into account the large 
surface fraction covered by oceans. 


The impact velocities depend strongly on the distance 
to the Sun and on the source region. As a simple rule, the 
relative velocity of an impactor with a planetary body is 
a major fraction of its orbital velocity, long-period comets 
having the largest impact velocity. For the Earth-Moon 
system, with its orbital velocity of 29.8 km s!, the typical 
impact velocity is20kms~!. For Mercury (50 kms“ orbital 
velocity) it is likely to be more than 30 km s~!. In the 
main belt, a major source region, the relative velocities 
are less than 10 km s“! for asteroidal fragments and 
more than 10 km s~! for comets, which have a much 
larger eccentricity. The planetocentric velocity of satellites 
(1kms7! for the Moon) only becomes a factor for the inner 
satellites of Jupiter (Io: 17 kms“). 

The mass distribution of impacting bodies is not 
modified by gravitational perturbations. It is therefore 
expected to be very similar for objects from the same 
source region throughout the solar system. As a simple 
approximation, the flux of objects above a given mass 
is inversely proportional to the mass, with a steeper 
dependence at small masses and a flatter dependence at 
large masses. The dependence of cometary and asteroidal 
contributions with heliocentric distance is still uncertain. 


The physics of impact cratering 

The impact cratering process is closely related to the 
formation of craters by explosions. This relationship can 
be inferred from the comparison between impact velocities 
(5 to 30 km s~') and the highest detonation speed of 
chemical explosives (7 km s~'). Therefore, an impactor 
delivers an energy per kilogram which is in the range of 
those dissipated by high-yield explosives. All non-grazing 
impacts are extremely inelastic, forming a bubble of gas 
with an initial temperature of several 10000 K. At these 
very high velocities, it is the expansion of this bubble of 
gas which results in the formation of the crater, once again 
quite similarly to a chemical or nuclear explosion. 

As the shock wave expands, it incorporates an 
increasing mass of material, which slows down its velocity. 
The initial expansion velocity is related to the impact 
velocity, hence is higher than the speed of sound. During 
this hypersonic phase, the shock wave is at the outer 
edge of the expanding cavity. Once the expansion has 
slowed below the speed of sound, the compression wave 
expands faster than the edge of the cavity. These P-waves 
eventually propagate far from the impacts. Impact events 
are therefore a source of low-magnitude seismic activity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


With a given impact velocity, the distance at which the 
specific energy per kilogram drops below a given value is 
proportional to the radius of the impactor. As an example, 
at 10 radii from the impact, the cavity corresponds to 500 
times the impacting volume, hence a mean distributed 
energy 1/500 the impact energy, irrespective of the scale. 
Assuming a simple equipartition between kinetic and 
thermal energies, the expanding and decelerating shock 
wave defines four major zones: 


(a) Very close to the impact, the energy per kilogram is 
higher than the vaporization energy of the material. 
The mass of gas formed is similar to the mass of the 
impactor at velocities of 20 km Sit 

(b) Farther out, the energy per kilogram is higher than 
the melt energy. The mass of liquid is typically 10 to 
20 times the mass of the impactor at 20 km sl. 

(c) Ata distance from the impact which is proportional 
to the size of the impactor and depends on the 
specific cohesive energy of the material, the shock 
wave becomes unable to fragment the material. This 
distance defines the radius Rs of the transient cavity, 
the so-called ‘strength crater’, within which the 
material is set loose from the substrate. 

(d) Outside the transient cavity, the propagating shock 
wave may generate non-destructive fractures and 
shock pressure effects. 


Atany stage of the expansion, the velocity of the ejecta 
is expected to be similar to that of the shock wave. The 
slowest ejecta, coming out from the edge of the transient 
cavity, are therefore expected to leave ata velocity Vs which 
is proportional to the square root of the cohesive energy of 
the material. This simple scaling law for ejecta velocities 
has been experimentally tested for materials as different as 
basalt and pumice sand. The parabolic trajectory of ejecta 
is then determined by the surface gravity of the impacted 
body. For the slowest ejecta, the travelled distance is V2/g, 
which defines the gravity radius Rg. If the strength radius 
Rs is smaller than R,, most ejecta end up far from the 
crater. Its final morphology is then that of the transient 
cavity. For such ‘strength craters’, the observed depth to 
diameter ratio is about 0.4, close to the 0.5 value which 
would correspond to our simplistic model of a spherically 
expanding shock wave (the difference results from the 
enhanced disruption of material near the free surface). 

The final shape of larger craters is dominated by 
gravity. When Rs is larger than Rg, ejecta are pulled 
back into the raised rims typical of large lunar craters and 
partially fill the impact cavity. Most of the energy is now 
expended as gravitational potential energy, so that the size 
of gravity craters does not depend on the cohesive strength 
of the material. The transition occurs at very small scales 
for non-cohesive material in a strong gravity field. As an 
example, R, is only 1 m for the lunar regolith. For a rocky 
substrate, or for low-gravity bodies such as asteroids, this 
transition is ona kilometer scale. As material falls back into 
the transient cavity, it is not surprising that gravity craters 
are much shallower than strength craters, with depth to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Craters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


diameter ratios as low as one to five. Furthermore, lateral 
transport of the loose rim material tends to flow back into 
the crater, so that gravity craters gradually fade out with 
a lifetime proportional to the square of their size. 

For the largest craters (more than 20 km in diameter on 
the Moon), the lithosphere cannot support the initial crater 
topography against gravitational forces. Partial collapses 
lead to the formation of complex craters, characterized by 
faults, stumped walls and terraces. Before these long-term 
relaxation processes, a rebound in the lithosphere forms a 
central peak. This is similar to the impact of a rain drop in 
a puddle, after which a small droplet is shot back. At scales 
of more than a few hundred kilometers, impact craters are 
named basins, around which the propagating shock wave 
generates concentric rings. The readjustments of the crust 
explain the relatively small vertical extent of very large 
impact structures (up to 10 km for lunar basins, even less 
for basins on icy satellites). The northern regions of MARS 
represent a very specific case, as there are large amounts of 
subsurface ice at increasing depths towards the south. The 
fluidized ejecta from craters in the right size range generate 
‘splash craters’ characterized by a sharp outer boundary 
of the lobate ejecta blanket. 

At the upper end of the size range, major cratering 
events can occur at a scale similar to the size of the 
impacted body itself. The propagation of the shock 
wave can no longer be considered in the infinite planar 
surface approximation, but must be analysed in three 
dimensions, taking into account possible reflections at the 
surface. Shock wave focusing may be responsible for the 
irregular terrains observed in regions antipodal to major 
impacts on several solar system bodies, such as Mercury. 
Experimental simulations have been done at a scale of less 
than 10 cm which showed that the maximum crater size 
beyond which complete fragmentation occurs is about 40% 
of the size of the impacted body. The cratering record 
in the solar system is a remarkable demonstration of the 
validity of scaling laws for impact cratering: subcritical 
craters have indeed been observed for a wide range of solar 
system bodies, in particular Phobos (25 km in size), the 
largest of the two satellites of Mars (see PHOBOS AND DEIMOS), 
with its large crater Stickney (9 km in diameter), but also 
asteroids such as Ida and Mathilde and icy satellites such 
as Mimas. In the case of Phobos, linear grooves originating 
from Stickney and propagating over the whole surface 
suggest that global fracturation has occurred, stopping just 
short of fragmentation. Models show that in the main 
belt of asteroids, all objects smaller than about 200 km 
have a lifetime shorter than the age of the solar system. 
Fragmentation does not necessarily means destruction: 
if the body is large and/or weak, its self-gravitational 
energy is much larger than its cohesive energy. In such 
a case, the fragments will reassemble in ‘rubble piles’ with 
an equilibrium ellipsoidal shape if the body is rotating. 
These objects are expected to represent a large fraction 
of asteroids of intermediate sizes. The most dramatic 
cratering event in the inner solar system was probably the 
giant impact of a Mars-sized body with the Earth which is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


now widely considered to be responsible for the formation 
of the Moon. 

The simple proportional scaling between the size 
of the impacting body and the size of the crater in the 
strength regime is very well substantiated by experiments. 
The dependence on the impacting velocity is much more 
complex. The analogy with explosion craters led to 
the hypothesis that the volume of the crater is simply 
proportional to the energy of the impact, hence the square 
of the impact velocity. This assumes correctly that the 
formation of the gas bubble can be considered as a 
point source when compared with the size of the crater. 
This ‘energy scaling’ assumption seemed consistent with 
the extreme inelastic character of the crater formation 
process. Experimental results in weakly cohesive material 
suggested a dependence on momentum, not energy, hence 
a volume which is proportional to the impact velocity. 
Recent results all lie in the range between these two 
models. The model dependent variation with velocity 
is a major problem when attempting to adapt the well 
calibrated lunar production curve to determine absolute 
crater production rates on other solar system bodies: as 
we have seen, impact velocities can be substantially higher 
(Mercury) or lower (asteroids, icy satellites) than on the 
Moon. 

Once formed on the surface of a solar system body, 
craters are not eternal. Geological processes and erosion 
can erase the cratering record. On the Earth, most of 
the surface is renewed on time scales of millions of 
years. On Mars, there is a striking difference in terms of 
cratering record between the old southern hemisphere and 
the northern hemisphere, which remained geologically 
active for more than 3 billion years. Even on inactive 
bodies devoid of atmosphere, such as the Moon or 
Mercury, two major external processes are at work: 
impact obliteration and impact erosion. Obliteration 
occurs when the formation of a new crater wipes out 
all or part of a pre-existing crater. The lifetime against 
obliteration increases for large craters, which survive 
all but the biggest local impacts. This process was 
dominant during the accretionary tail, when the flux of 
impactors was very large. Impact erosion results from 
the progressive modification of the shape of the crater by 
small impacts, which are very numerous (typically 1000 
times more frequent for a size which is 10 times smaller 
than the original impactor). Erosion processes are strongly 
dependent on gravity: in low-gravity environments, such 
as small satellites or asteroids, ejecta from small impacts 
will be removed from the vicinity of the crater, leading to 
a simple ‘sand-blasting’ erosion process. In a significant 
gravity field, such ejecta travel preferentially downslope, 
at a rate which is proportional to the slope angle and 
inversely proportional to the gravity. Highs (the rim) and 
lows (the bottom of the crater) tend to relax towards the 
horizontal quite similarly to the dissipation of a heat pulse, 
hence the lifetime is proportional to the square of the crater 
diameter. These old craters with subdued topography are 
visible close to the terminator, where they saturate the 
surface. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Craters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Three examples of small-scale impact processes in the lunar regolith: a millimeter-sized glassy agglutinate (a), a microcrater 
a few micrometers in diameter (b) and a glassy splash on a lunar dust grain (c). 


Craters as a chronometer of the surface of solar 
system bodies 

As small craters have shorter lifetimes, the crater size 
frequency distribution of a surface presents two domains: 
the saturation region, at small sizes, where craters are in 
a steady state, and the production region, characterized 
by a steeper dependence on size, corresponding to the 
large craters which have in general survived since their 
formation. Only the latter is of interest when attempting 
to use the cratering record for determining the age of a 
surface. The size distribution in the production region is 
roughly similar for surfaces throughout the solar system, 
from Mercury to the satellites of Jupiter (see JUPITER: 
SATELLITES). This is considered to be a consequence of 
the scattering of impactors across the solar system by 
gravitational perturbations, which do not modify the mass 
distribution of a population. 

There is no controversy if one sticks to relative ages: 
ona given body, a region with few large craters is younger 
than another region with a higher density of such features. 
If the age is younger than 4 billion years, in the steady-state 
domain of secondary impacting bodies, it is expected to 
be proportional to the density of large craters. Beyond 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that, the steep increase in flux means that age differences 
of a few 100 million years may result in very different 
crater densities. As the overall rate is different for each 
region of the solar system, the determination of absolute 
ages from the cratering record is to a large extent model 
dependent. As an example, the ages derived for old Mars 
terrains can differ by more than a billion years, and a 
similar controversy is building up for EuRopA, a satellite 
of Jupiter. Its highly spherical surface could be resurfaced 
over short time scales according to the proponents of a 
global ocean a few 10 km below the surface. 

The Moon represents up to now a unique situation: 
the samples obtained by the aroLLo and LUNA missions 
provide absolute ages for nine regions, two in highlands 
and seven in mare, which span more than 1.2 billion years. 
Thus, lunar samples provide a calibration for cratering 
ages to within a few 10 million years. The controversies 
on the age of surfaces for other planets will be resolved as 
soon as even a few samples are available. Asample return 
from Mars can be expected within the next 10 years. Even 
asingle absolute age determination will strongly constrain 
the ages of all surface units on the planet by calibrating the 
crater production curve. Alternately, one could consider 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Craters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Copernicus is one of the most spectacular ray craters 
on the lunar surface and has a diametre of 110 km. As it lies near 


the center of the nearside, it was one of the first craters to be 
studied extensively from the ground. Its rays extend over more 
than 1000 km. A smaller ray crater, Kepler, lies to the west of 
Copernicus. 


in situ determinations of radioisotopic ages, but this still 
represents a formidable challenge 


The large-scale effects of impact cratering 

Impact cratering is a major process for the evolution of the 
surfaces of solar system bodies. Its role can be discussed 
as a function of the age of the surface. Few bodies have 
retained a high level of internal activity until now. Apart 
from our Earth, only venus and Mars have had significant 
magmatic episodes during the last two billion years. Tidal 
heating still drives extensive internal processses for the 
two innermost Galilean satellites, 10 and Europa. Similar 
processes have occurred on DIONE and ENCELADUS, two 
satellites of Saturn, as well as MIRANDA, a Satellite of Uranus. 
On Ganymede, phase changes of the ice play a major 
role, and the surface of cometary nuclei is ablated by the 
sublimation of volatiles. Erosion can be a major factor for 
solid planetary bodies with an atmosphere (Earth, Mars, 
Venus and TITAN). For surfaces younger than a few hundred 
million years, cratering is a rare, catastrophic event which 
plays a minor role for the local topography. 

At the other end of the scale, the surfaces of asteroids, 
small icy satellites, cALLIsTo and the highlands of Mercury 
and the Moon are more than 4 billion years old. They 
have witnessed the high-flux period of the accretionary 
tail. Their trademark is a saturation with craters of all 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 6. Copley is a 30 km sized ray crater on Mercury. The 
relatively weak contrast between the rays and the underlying 
material when compared to Copernicus may be attributed to the 
efficient maturity processes on the closest planet to the Sun, 
where impact velocities and particle fluxes are highest. 


sizes. These very high fluxes have fractured the crust 
over several tens of kilometers. This fractured layer is 
called a megaregolith. For medium size asteroids, the 
megaregolith can extend to the center, resulting in a rubble 
pile structure. 

The fractures induced by the largest basins extend 
to the base of the planetary crust. A few hundred 
million years later, the heat from the decay of long-lived 
radionuclides triggers magmatic episodes in the mantle. 
The lava rises to the surface in the fractured regions and 
floods preferentially the large basins. This process is at the 
origin of mare on the Moon and Mercury. Recent advances 
in planetary astronomy (Hubble Space Telescope, adaptive 
optics) have made possible the identification of such 
basaltic regions on vesta. The same cycle has therefore 
occurred on differentiated asteroids, but ona much shorter 
time scale, given the much smaller size of these bodies. 
The heat source is still under debate. On the Earth, 
plate tectonics has completely erased the traces of early 
major impacts. Large-scale crustal weakening due to 
impacts may, however, have played a role in the very early 
stages of plate tectonics. Mars represents an interesting 
intermediate case: the southern hemisphere is lunar like, 
with the two large basins Hellas and Argyre, while the 
northern hemisphere (with a extension to the south over 
the Tharsis region) is dominated by tectonic and volcanic 
processes (see MARS: SURFACE). 

During the last 4 billion years, the impact rate 
was much lower, and the scale of cratering effects 
correspondingly smaller. Here and there, a few major 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Craters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


impacts still formed large craters (Copernicus and Tycho 
are the largest craters of this type on the Moon). The 
steady shower of small impacts resulted in the formation 
of a debris layers a few meters to a few tens of meters in 
thickness, the REGOLITH. Regoliths are ubiquitous features 
of the surfaces of atmosphereless bodies throughout the 
solar system. Remote sensing techniques which probe 
the uppermost layers do not give direct information on 
the bedrock, but on the overlying layer of dust and 
rocky fragments. Fortunately, in such a situation lateral 
transport can only be triggered by impacts, hence it has a 
very inefficient random walk behavior. The lateral mixing 
scale is a few hundred meters on large bodies such as 
Mercury, the Moon or large icy satellites. It is inversely 
proportional to the gravity, which explains the relative 
homogeneity of the surfaces of small asteroids observed 
by Galileo (Gaspra and Ida) and Near (Mathilde). 


The small-scale effects of impact cratering 


The remarkable self-similarity of impact cratering extends 
down to microscopic sizes. A tiny impact on a single 
rock or grain on a planetary surface creates a microcrater 
(figure 4(b)) which follows the same scaling rules as 
macroscopic strength craters in the bedrock. Above a 
diameter in the range of 40% of the size of the rock or 
grain, fragmentation occurs. Asa result, the size of regolith 
particles slowly decreases from the coarse fresh EJECTA to 
a very fine dust (typically 50 wm in size). This process 
should be quite similar on rocky and icy bodies, as ice has 
a mechanical behavior similar to a rock at the very low 
temperatures of the outer solar system. 

On rocky bodies, two impact related processes tend 
to increase particle size. Coating by liquid splashes 
(figure 4(c)) or vapor deposits plays a relatively minor 
role. The liquid fraction from centimeter-scale impacts 
can weld together grains, forming glassy agglutinates 
(figure 4(a)), or solidify in flight, forming glass spherules. 
The proportion of glassy particles increases as a function of 
the time of exposure to space of a sample, which is defined 
by the local history of meter-sized craters. The study of 
lunar samples shows that on the Moon, after a few ten 
million years within the uppermost centimeter, a steady 
state is reached in the evolution of the size distribution: 
agglutination exactly compensates fragmentation while 
the proportion of glassy particles continues to increase, 
reaching more than 50% in the most exposed lunar soils. 

This evolution of a soil sample from the coarse, 
crystalline fresh EyEcTA to a fine-grained, glass-rich soil is 
called maturity. It also involves exposure to solar wind 
particles and cosmic rays. Its most dramatic effect is 
the lowering of the albedo by more than 30%, as glassy 
particles are darker than the original crystalline grains. 
The fresh ejecta form bright rays extending radially from 
the younger large craters (figures 5 and 6). With the 
increase of maturity, these rays progressively fade into 
the background. Maturity is a balance between large- 
scale cratering, which controls the rate at which fresh 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


material is brought onto the surface, and sub-centimeter- 
sized impacts which control the formation rate of glassy 
particles. It is difficult to extrapolate the well known lunar 
situation to other rocky bodies. However, on Mercury the 
impact velocities are typically twice as large, generating 
more liquid material, and the regolith should be more 
mature than on the Moon. The situation on icy bodies 
is more difficult to assess. One may expect liquid water 
droplets formed during impacts to play a similar role in 
welding together ice grains into ‘icy agglutinates’ and 
solidifying in flight, forming ice spherules, but the time 
evolution of icy regoliths is still highly spectulative. 


Yves Langevin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Crescent ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crescent 


The phase of a body in the solar system when some but 
less than half of its sunlit side is visible. The only objects to 
show crescent phases to observers on the Earth are those 
that can pass between the Earth and the Sun: the inferior 
planets, Mercury and Venus, and the Moon. However, 
objects outside the Earth’s orbit have been imaged in the 
crescent phase by spacecraft. 


See also: phases of the Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Crimean Astrophysical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crimean Astrophysical Observatory 


The Crimean Astrophysical Observatory (CrAO) is one of 
the largest scientific centers in the Ukraine and former 
Soviet Union. CrAO was formed in June 1945 by 
the Academy of Sciences of the USSR from the Simeiz 
Department of the Pulkovo Observatory. Since 1991 CrAO 
has been controlled and financed by the Ministry of Science 
and Technology of Ukraine. 

The main part of the Observatory is located in 
Nauchny, about 12 km SE of Bakhchisaraj. The main 
telescopes are: the 2.6 m Shajn telescope, two 1.25 m 
telescopes; a ground-based gamma telescope (GT-48) with 
the mirrors covering an area of 54 m’, the 1.2 m Solar Tower 
telescope; as well as a few other smaller instruments. 

The Department of Radioastronomy, with its 22 m 
radio telescope (RI-22) for mm and cm radio waves, is 
located on the seashore, near Simeiz. RT—22 participates 
in international programs in the global VLBI network for 
geodynamical and astrophysical investigations. 

The Simeiz Station, founded in 1873, participates in 
the global network of Satellite Laser Ranging Stations 
for studies of Earth dynamics, and is located on Mount 
Koshka at an altitude of 346 m. 

CrAO possesses equipment for astrophysical obser- 
vations over a wide spectral range from gamma rays to 
radio waves of stars and galaxies, as well as the Sun and 
solar system. 

The main subjects of investigation are: solar activity, 
helioseismology, structure and chemical composition of 
stellar atmospheres, stellar and solar magnetic fields, 
variable stars, extragalactic astronomy, planets, asteroids 
and geodynamics. Currently, next-generation ground- 
based and space telescopes as well as astrophysical 
equipment are being designed and manufactured at CrAO. 

More than ten devices have been designed and 
manufactured by CrAO for space observation. In 1983- 
89 space observations were carried out with the station 
‘Astron’ launched into a high orbit and equipped with a 
0.8 m ultraviolet Ritchey—Cretien telescope, designed and 
manufactured at the CrAO. 

There are 350 employees at the CrAO including about 
100 scientists, 16 senior and 40 PhDs. 

For further information see 
http: / /www.crao.crimea.ua. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Critical Density 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Critical Density 


The mean density of a universe which is just capable of 
expanding forever. In such a universe (an Einstein—de 
Sitter universe) the rate of expansion is slowed by gravity 
and approaches ever closer to zero. If the mean density 
exceeds the critical value, the expansion will cease at a 
finite time in the future and the universe thereafter will 
begin to collapse. If the mean density is less than the 
critical value, the universe will continue to expand at a 
rate which decreases towards a constant value. 

The magnitude of the critical density is given by 
3He /8xG, where Hp is the present value of the Hubble 
constant and G the gravitational constant. Depending on 
the precise value of the Hubble constant, the value of the 
critical density is in the region of (5-20) x 10°?” kg m“°, 
with a probable value in the range (6-10) x 10-*” kg m~°. 
The latter figure is equivalent to an average of about 
3-6 hydrogen atoms per cubic meter of space. Many 
theoreticians believe that the universe should have a 
density equal to, or indistinguishably close to, the critical 
value, but the average density deduced from the amount 
of visible (luminous) matter is only of the order of 1% of 
the critical density. Observations of the rotation rates of 
galaxies and the dynamics of galaxy clusters indicate that 
there is at least ten times as much dark matter as luminous 
matter in the universe, but there are growing doubts as 
to whether there is enough dark matter to give a mean 
density as high as, or higher than, the critical value. 

The ratio of the actual mean density to the critical 
density (the density parameter) is denoted by the symbol 
Q (omega). Q > 1 if the actual density exceeds the critical 
value, Q = 1 if the actual density is equal to the critical 
density and Q < 1 if the actual density is less than the 
critical value. 


See also: cosmological constant, cosmological model, 
cosmology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Crust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crust 


The thin outer layer of a differentiated planetary body. 
Crusts consist of rock and/or ice—rock predominating 
in the inner solar system, ice in the outer—and have 
a different composition from the underlying mantle. 
Primary crust is the surface layer formed when the planet 
first differentiates. It preserves the cratering record from 
the early bombardment in the solar system’s history. 
Primary crust is found for example in the highlands of 
Mercury and the Moon, and many of the satellites in 
the outer solar system. Secondary crust is formed when 
the mantle melts and volcanism leads to the first phase 
of resurfacing; the floodplains of the lunar maria are 
secondary crust, as is the whole surface of Venus. Tertiary 
crust is produced on geologically active worlds by the 
recycling of primary and secondary crust material. On 
the Earth and Io, continuing volcanism produces tertiary 
crust; on the Earth plate tectonics is continually recycling 
the crust, which is also modified by processes such as 
sedimentation and erosion. 

Neutron stars are believed to have a crust consisting 
predominantly of iron. 


Seealso: differentiation, neutron stars, plate tectonics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Crux 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Crux 


(the (Southern) Cross; abbrev. Cru, gen. Crucis; area 
68 sq. deg.) Asouthern constellation which lies to the north 
of Musca and is surrounded on three sides by Centaurus. 
It culminates at midnight in late March. The brightest stars 
of Crux were included by the ancient Greeks in Centaurus 
and were cataloged as such by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) 
in the Almagest, but European navigators separated them 
out in the sixteenth century and they were included as a 
constellation in their own right on a celestial globe by the 
Dutch theologian and geographer Petrus Plancius in 1598. 

Crux is the smallest but also one of the most 
conspicuous of the 88 constellations and (together with 
Orion and the asterism of the Plough in Ursa Major) one 
of the best known. Its brightest star, a Crucis (Acrux) is 
a triple system consisting of two bluish-white (B0.5 and 
B1) components, magnitudes 1.3 and 1.6, separation 4.1”, 
and a third, unseen component which revolves around the 
former in 75.8 days. Other bright stars include £6 Crucis 
(Becrux or Mimosa), magnitude 1.3, y Crucis (Gacrux), 
magnitude 1.6, and 5 Crucis, magnitude 2.8. A line from 
y through a (along the longer axis of the cross) points 
roughly towards the south celestial pole, while a line from 
6 through £ (along the shorter axis) points roughly towards 
f Centauri. There is one other star brighter than fourth 
magnitude, ¢ Crucis, magnitude 3.6, which lies between 
and slightly offset from the line joining y and a, and rather 
spoils the symmetry of the cross—which, if anything, more 
closely resembles a kite. 

Interesting objects in Crux include jy Crucis, a 
wide binary star system with bluish-white (B2 and B5) 
components, magnitudes 4.0 and 5.1, separation, 35”, the 
Jewel Box (NGC 4755), a magnificent open star cluster 
centered on « Crucis, and the Coalsack, an area of dark 
nebulosity silhouetted against the Milky Way which runs 
through the constellation. 


See also: Coalsack. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cubewano ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cubewano 


Any of the main stream of Kuiper Belt objects, at 41- 
47 AU mean distance from the Sun, inclination of orbit 
ranging up to 30°, eccentricity up to 0.1. Named after the 
designation, 1992 QB1, of the first Kuiper Belt object, which 
was discovered by Dave Jewitt (University of Hawaii). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Culmination 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Culmination 


The passage of a celestial body across an observer’s 
meridian (also known as ‘transit’). Upper culmination 
(upper transit) is the passage of the body through the point 
at which its altitude above the horizon is greatest (and 
zenith distance is least). For example, the Sun reaches 
upper culmination at noon. Lower culmination (lower 
transit) is the crossing further from the zenith. If the body is 
circumpolar, the point of lower culmination will be above 
the horizon; otherwise, lower culmination occurs when 
the body is at its maximum angular distance below the 
observer’s horizon. 


See also: altitude, horizon, diurnal motion, meridian, 
transit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Culpeper, Nicholas (1616-54) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Culpeper, Nicholas (1616-54) 


Astrologer and herbalist, born in London. His tradition 
continues to the present day, with lotions and remedies on 
sale in his name. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Cunitz [Cunitia], Maria (1610-64) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cunitz [Cunitia], Maria (1610-64) 


Astronomer, translated the works of KEPLER, making his 
work accessible. Her abilities in astronomy were so 
outstanding that she was called Urania Propitia, i.e. ‘she 
who is closest to the muse of astronomy’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Curtis, Heber Doust (1872-1942) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Curtis, Heber Doust (1872-1942) 


Astronomer, born in Muskegon, MI, became director of the 
Allegheny Observatory of the University of Pittsburgh and 
professor of astronomy and director of the Astronomical 
Observatories of the University of Michigan. Surveyed 
nebulae with the Lick Observatory Crossley reflecting 
telescope, identified that some long thin-looking nebulae 
were identical with the spiral nebulae, but seen edge on 
with a band of obscuring matter like that seen centrally 
in the Milky Way. Interpreted the Zone of Avoidance, 
in which few or no spiral nebulae were seen near the 
Milky Way, as being due to the obscuration by the Milky 
Way’s obscuring matter, and concluded that spiral nebulae 
were Milky Way galaxies outside our Galaxy. Engaged 
in the ‘great debate’ with HARLOW SHAPLEY in Washington 
1920, arguing correctly against Shapley’s view that spiral 
nebulae were minor objects within an immensely bigger 
Milky Way structure. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cusp Cap 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cusp Cap 


A brightening at one or other of the tips—cusps—of the 
crescent phase of Venus, as seen from Earth. Cusp caps 
were first reported by the German amateur astronomer 
Baron Franz Paula von Gruithuisen in 1813, and have 
been recorded by telescopic observers ever since. They 
were named by analogy with the Earth’s polar caps; early 
observers fancied they were seeing glimpses of a possibly 
Earth-like surface through breaks in the Venusian cloud 
cover. Cusp caps take the form of bright patches at the 
horns of the crescent. On the side of a cusp cap away from 
the cusp itself there is often a darker band known as a cusp 
collar. Both caps and collars show short- and long-term 
variations in brightness and size. 

It was once thought that the cusp caps were contrast 
effects, but images from the Mariner 10 and Pioneer 
Venus spacecraft showed that the brightenings, along with 
other ‘deformities’ in the planet’s limb and terminator 
as observed from Earth, are real. They are related 
to the planet’s atmospheric circulation. On Venus the 
predominant pattern is a single Hadley cell in each 
hemisphere which circulates from the equator almost to 
the poles. The cusp collars are thought to represent 
the northern- and southernmost limits of the circulation 
pattern, and the variations in the caps and collars are 
thought to reflect short- and long-term variations in the 
Hadley-cell circulation. 


See also: Venus: atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cygnus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cygnus 


(the Swan; abbrev. Cyg, gen. Cygni; area 804 sq. deg.) 
A northern constellation which lies between Cepheus and 
Vulpecula, and culminates at midnight in late July. Its 
origin is uncertain, though it was known to the ancient 
Greeks, who identified it with one of the forms assumed 
by Zeus during his amorous pursuits, or with other 
mythological swans. Its brightest stars were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A large, conspicuous constellation, Cygnus is easily 
recognized by the cruciform configuration of its five 
brightest stars, which gives it its alternative name of the 
Northern Cross. Its brightest star, a Cygni (Deneb or 
Arided), magnitude 1.3, marks the tail of the swan and 
is one of the stars that, together with a Lyrae (Vega) 
and a Aquilae (Altair), makes up the asterism of the 
Summer Triangle. Other bright stars include y Cygni 
(Sadr), magnitude 2.2, e Cygni (Gienah), magnitude 2.5, 
6 Cygni, a close binary with bluish-white (B9.5) and white 
(F1) components, magnitudes 2.9 and 6.6, separation 2.5”, 
period about 800 years, and 6 Cygni (Albireo), in the head 
of the swan, a particularly fine visual binary with orange 
and bluish-white (K3 and B8) components, magnitudes, 
3.1 and 5.1, separation 34”, the former of which is itself a 
very close binary. There are ten other stars of magnitude 
4.0 or brighter. 

Other interesting double stars include o! Cygni, a 
triple system consisting of orange (K2) and bluish-white 
(A5) components, magnitudes 3.8 and 4.8, separation 338”, 
and a third, bluish-white (B5) component, magnitude 7.0, 
separation 107” from the latter, and 61 Cygni, a binary 
with orange (K5 and K7) components, magnitudes 5.2 and 
6.1, separation 30”, period about 650 years, the primary 
of which was the first star to have its trigonometrical 
parallax measured, in 1838. Interesting variable stars in 
Cygnus include the Mira-type variable x Cygni (range 
3.3-14.2, period about 409 days), the eruptive variable P 
Cygni (range 3-6, last outburst 1655) and the brightest 
U Germinorum star, SS Cygni (range 7.7-12.4, mean period 
49.5 days), which is also an x-ray binary. 

Cygnus lies in a particularly rich part of the northern 
Milky Way, which is at its brightest between y and £, 
and is divided to the east by the Great Rift (or Cygnus 
Rift), a band of dark, absorption nebulae that continues 
through Aquila and Serpens Cauda to Ophiuchus, where 
it broadens out. Among the many open star clusters 
and nebulae in Cygnus are M39 (NGC 7092), a fifth- 
magnitude open cluster which contains a couple of dozen 
stars between seventh and tenth magnitude, the Veil 
Nebula (NGC 6960, 6974, 6979 and 6992-5), which is the 
optical component of the Cygnus Loop, the remnant of 
a supernova that exploded about 30 000 years ago, and 
NGC 7000 (the North America Nebula), a large (2°) area 
of mixed nebulosity. 

Also in Cygnus are Cygnus X-1, an x-ray binary whose 
smaller component may be a black hole, and Cygnus A, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a powerful extragalactic radio source thought to be two 
galaxies in collision. 


See also: Albireo, Cygnus A, Cygnus X-1, Deneb, Great 
Rift, North America Nebula, 61 Cygni; SS Cygni. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cygnus A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cygnus A 


The brightest radio source in the constellation of Cygnus, 
and the second-brightest cosmic radio source in the sky. 
This radio source, which had been detected in 1944 by 
Grote Reber (1911-), was shown in 1951 to coincide in 
position with a remote galaxy of unusual appearance (the 
galaxy appeared double, but is now known to be a single 
galaxy crossed by a lane of dust). Cygnus A was the first 
radio source to be detected beyond the confines of our own 
galaxy and the first example of what is now called a radio 
galaxy. 

Cygnus A, which lies at a distance of about 750 
million light-years, has a radio output a million times more 
powerful than that of a conventional galaxy like the Milky 
Way. At radio frequencies, it has a classic double-lobed 
structure, the main body of radio emission emanating from 
two elongated clouds that extend to a distance of some 
200 000 light-years on either side of the center of the galaxy. 
The central radio source is linked to the outer lobes by 
two long, narrow filaments that are composed of energetic 
radio-emitting electrons that have been ejected from the 
core of the galaxy. The galaxy itself, which is exceptionally 
massive (about 10" solar masses), is also an x-ray source, 
the x-ray emission coming from a distribution of hot gas 
with a temperature in the region of 10° K. 

The intensity, or flux density, of Cygnus A at a 
wavelength of 20 cm in the radio region is about 1495 
janskys. 


See also: active galaxy, flux density, radio galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cygnus Loop 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cygnus Loop 


A large supernova remnant in the constellation Cygnus, 
measuring nearly 3° across. Some arcs of the Loop, known 
collectively as the Veil Nebula (or sometimes the Cirrus 
Nebula), are visible at optical wavelengths; radio, infrared 
and x-ray images reveal the complete Loop. The brightest 
part of the Veil is NGC 6992-5, to the east (centered on 
position RA 20 4 56.4™, dec. +31° 43’); the western section 
is NGC 6960 (RA 205 45.7™, dec. +30° 43’). Other sections 
are NGC 6974 (RA 20' 50.8™, dec. +31° 52’) and NGC 6979 
(RA 20 51.0™, dec. +32° 09’). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cygnus X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cygnus X-1 


Cygnus X-1 is one of the strongest x-ray sources. It 
is the first celestial object for which we had reasonably 
convincing evidence that it is a BLACK HOLE. Its x-ray 
properties include an ultra-soft spectrum, compared to 
massive x-ray binaries containing a neutron star, rapid 
(~ 1s) flickering, and high/low flux states with different 
spectral characteristics. In 1971, a RADIO SOURCE appeared 
at the time of a transition between the two flux states. 
This source is coincident with the O9.7lab supergiant 
HDE226868. This star was found to be a single-line 
spectroscopic binary and ellipsoidal variable with an 
orbital period of 5.6 days. 

Subsequent x-ray observations showed that the x-ray 
flux varies with the orbital period and another period 
found in the light curve, thereby confirming that Cygnus 
X-1 is a massive X-RAY BINARY. The radial velocities of H 
and He II emission lines in the optical spectra show that 
mass is flowing from HDE226868 toward Cygnus X-1. 
The emission line profiles suggest that mass is being 
transferred by a focused stellar wind. 

Since Cygnus X-1 is not an eclipsing binary, we cannot 
determine the mass of the x-ray source with precision. 
However, we can place strong limits on critical system 
parameters by using a light curve synthesis program to 
model the ellipsoidal light variations and absorption line 
widths of HDE22686. The models are further constrained 
by the effective temperature of the star, the absorption line 
radial velocity curve, and the distance estimated from the 
increase in various effects of the interstellar medium with 
distance determined by measuring stars in the field around 
HDE226868. Fortunately, results from the modelling are 
not sensitive to assumptions that must be made during the 
process. 

This analysis yields a strong lower limit on the mass of 
Cygnus X-1, M, > 7Mo. This is more than twice the upper 
limit for the mass of aneutron star, Mn, < 3.2Mo, according 
to the theory of GENERALRELATIVITY. Cygnus X-1 was the first 
object for which there was a convincing argument that 
it is a black hole. It was nearly a decade after the first 
recognition that Cygnus X-1 must be a black hole before 
another example was discovered. 


The x-ray source 

The strong x-ray source Cygnus X-1 was first discovered 
by a rocket-borne x-ray detector in 1964. It is one of the 
five strongest x-ray sources in the energy range 2-10 keV. It 
has two distinct x-ray ‘states’, originally labeled high and 
low. The x-ray spectrum is harder, that is, has a greater 
proportion of high-energy photons, in the low state, not 
only because of a decline in the low-energy x-ray flux, 
but also because the x-ray flux for energies greater than 
10 keV increases at the same time. Similarly, the high- 
energy flux declines when the low-energy flux rises. As a 
result, it is now common practice to label the ‘states’ soft 
and hard respectively. Long-term monitoring of Cygnus 
X-1 has shown that the different states can last for weeks 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to years. There are no characteristic time scales for the 
two states. Moreover, at least two other ‘states’ have been 
observed at least once. These states must reflect changes 
in the accretion rate or structure of the ACCRETION DISK, but 
as yet no one has offered a model that explains all of the 
observations. 

The x-ray flux variations are not confined to the state 
changes. In fact, the x-ray flux varies on time scales from 
~1 ms to at least the time scales associated with the state 
changes. These include flux variations that are modulated 
with the orbital period and a variable, longer period that 
may bea precession period of some structure in the system. 
These are superimposed ona background of shot noise and 
occasional flares. 

The 5.6 day x-ray flux variation is easiest to 
understand. The minima last for 27% of the orbital period 
and are centered precisely around the time of superior 
conjunction of the black hole with the O-star. The minima 
are deeper in the lower energy bands. The phasing and 
spectral shape of the minima indicate that the variation is 
due to photoelectric absorption by the focused stellar wind 
from the O-star. These variations are observed only during 
the hard state. The anticorrelation of the Ha emission line 
equivalent width with the soft x-ray flux during the 1996 
soft state lends support to this idea. 

Monitoring of the 3-12 keV flux of Cygnus X-1 from 
1969 to 1980 showed that the average flux varies with a 
period P = 294+4 days. The x-ray flux is at the maximum 
level for approximately 40% of the 294 day period. The 
decline to minimum flux, which is about 75% of maximum 
flux, takes half as long as the recovery back to maximum 
flux. From August 1996 to September 1998, during the 
hard state following the 1996 soft state, both the 2-10 keV 
and 20-100 keV flux varied with a period of 142 +7 days. 
The amplitude in the 2-10 keV band was nearly double 
that observed earlier and the shape of the flux curve was 
almost a mirror image of the the one for the 294 day period. 
It remains to be seen whether the curious relationship 
between the periods and light curves is anything more 
than a remarkable coincidence. 

The short-time-scale variations of the x-ray flux can 
be described by shot noise, a type of noise resulting from 
the superposition of a large number of disturbances (shots) 
that occur at random. The shots have a characteristic time 
scale of about 20 ms, but their characteristics vary in a 
complex fashion with energy and x-ray state. The shots 
all rise more slowly to peak intensity than they decline. 
The peaks of the shots in the higher energies are narrower 
and more asymmetric than those in the low energy bands. 
During the hard and transition states, the average hardness 
of the shots is lower than the steady emission. During 
the soft state, the average hardness of the shots is greater 
than the steady emission. The hard x-ray shots lag behind 
the soft x-ray shots by an amount that is a function of 
energy. This delay is smallest for the hard state, and 
slightly larger than the soft state, and much larger for 
the transition state. A separate study of the Fourier time 
lag, the time lag between the same phase in two different 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cygnus X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


time series, reached similar conclusions using x-ray hard 
state data. This implies that nearly all of the hard and 
soft flux variations occur simultaneously. At the same 
time, the time series in different energy channels show 
nearly complete coherence down to ~0.02 Hz, and after 
a slight loss of coherence near 10-2 Hz, recovered back to 
nearly unity at 0.005 Hz. This is difficult to understand 
if the hard and soft flux variations are produced nearly 
simultaneously, since the hard photons are scattered many 
more times than the soft photons. 

The hard state spectrum of Cygnus X-1 can be 
represented by the sum of a soft thermal component and 
a hard, non-thermal power-law component with a high- 
energy cut-off near 150 keV. The power-law spectrum is 
modified by reprocessing features, in particular a weak 
iron fluoresence line at 6.4 keV and possibly a Compton 
reflection hump near 30 keV. During a soft state, the soft 
thermal component increases by a factor of several while 
the hard non-thermal power-law component declines 
by 10-20%. All four spectral components are usually 
explained in the context of accretion disk corona models 
in which the thermal radiation originates in an accretion 
disk and is Comptonized in a hot plasma, the ‘accretion 
disk corona’. These models can successfully reproduce 
the spectral variations between the soft and hard states if 
the accretion disk extends inwards to the last stable orbit 
around the black hole and the central corona fills a small 
volume during the soft state, and the inner edge of the 
disk is much further from the black hole and the central 
corona much larger in the hard state. However, there is no 
generally accepted model for the geometry or dynamics of 
the accretion disk/accretion disk corona system. At this 
time, it is not clear that any of the models have succeeded 
in reproducing anything more than the x-ray spectrum. 
Attempts to explain the short-time-scale variability have 
had limited success, at best, and the precession has been 
treated qualitatively as a separate problem. 


The optical light curves 
In order to determine the masses of stars in a BINARY SYSTEM 
we need to determine its orbital inclination i, where i is 
the angle between the orbit plane and the plane of the 
sky. In principle, when there are no eclipses, and a binary 
system cannot be resolved, optical polarimetry is the best 
method to determine i. However, HDE226868 is so faint 
that the photometric errors render the polarimetric result, 
25° <i < 65°, essentially useless for determining i. 
Because of the nature of the mass transfer in the 
Cygnus X-1 system, we expect that HDE226868 comes very 
close to filling its ROCHELOBE. This means that the star will be 
strongly distorted into a roughly ellipsoidal shape with the 
long axis of the ellipsoid aligned with the line between the 
star and the black hole and the end of the ellipsoid directed 
toward the black hole drawn out into a point. Regions of 
the star that are farther from the center will have lower 
surface brightnesses than those that are close to the center. 
This is called gravity darkening or gravity brightening. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


If there are no other light sources and we view 
the tidally distorted star from the direction of the orbit 
plane, i.e. i = 90°, the light curve will have a shallower, 
rounded minimum at orbital phase ¢ = 0.0, superior 
conjuction of the black hole, a sharper, deeper minimum at 
¢ = 0.5, inferior conjunction of the black hole, and broad 
equal maximum between the minimum. The luminous 
flux is smaller at the conjunctions because the areas of 
the star projected on the sky are smaller, the surface 
brightnesses of those regions are lower because of the 
effects of gravity darkening. The depths of the minima 
depend on temperature. In this case, the depths will 
increase with decreasing wavelength because of the high 
effective temperature of HDE226868. 

In the more general case, the amplitude of the light 
variation depends on the mass ratio gq = Mx/Mop:, where 
My is the mass of the black hole, and Mop: is the mass of 
HDE226868, the fill-out factor p, the ratio of the volume 
radius of the star (i.e. the radius of a sphere with volume 
equivalent to that of the star) to the radius of a sphere 
with a volume equivalent to the volume of the Roche 
lobe, and orbital inclination angle i. Larger gq and p 
will increase the tidal distortion of the star and thereby 
increase the amplitude of the light curve. Asi is decreased 
from 90°, the amplitude of the light curve is reduced 
and the differences in amplitude and shape between the 
two minima gradually disappear. In addition, at low 
inclinations, the gravity darkening effects become so small 
that the amplitude of the light curves are independent of 
wavelength in the optical region at least. 

The optical light curves of HDE226868 observed dur- 
ing the hard state of the x-ray source look approximately 
like those expected for a low-inclination system. The am- 
plitudes of the U, B and V light curves are approximately 
0.025 mag. The light curve is phased as expected with 
respect to the radial velocity curve. If HDE226868 fills its 
Roche lobe, the semi-amplitude of the light curve is almost 
independent of the mass ratio, and it can be used to place 
a lower limit on the orbital inclination angle i > 27°. 

There are two problems that make it difficult to 
work with the light curves. First, the rms scatter about 
the light curve is 0.022 mag, almost half the amplitude 
of the intrinsic variability. This is comparable to the 
variability seen in photometry of single, luminous OB 
stars and is probably due to the same cause—either 
density inhomogeneities in their winds or multiperiodic 
non-radial pulsation. Unfortunately, this extra intrinsic 
variability means that we have to average observations 
over several years get reliable ellipsoidal light curves. 
Second, an additional component of scatter in the 
ellipsoidal light curves is due to periodic changes in the 
shape of the light curve. 

After the 5.6 day ellipsoidal light curves have been 
subtracted from the luminous fluxes in the U and B bands 
obtained in the during the x-ray hard state between 1972 
and 1983, they have light curves with P = 294 and 
the same shape and phasing as the x-ray flux in data 
taken between 1972 and 1983. The variation is largest, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cygnus X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.0061 + 0.0012 mag, in U, smaller in B, and statistically 
undetectable in the V band. Comparison of the 5.6 day 
light curves obtained during the x-ray bright and faint 
phases of the 294 day period show that when the x-ray 
source is brighter, the optical light curves are brighter at 
all phases except around the time of inferior conjunction 
of the x-ray source. The phasing and relative amplitude of 
the optical light curves suggests that the optical variations 
are due to a hot source between the x-ray source and 
HDE226868. No models have been proposed that explain 
why the optical and x-ray fluxes vary in phase. The orbital 
modulation of the optical light curves disappeared during 
the 1996 soft x-ray state, while the 142 day long-term 
modulation continued. The orbital modulation returned 
to normal when the x-ray source returned to the hard state. 

Clearly these results raise serious questions about the 
standard assumptions that are made in various schemes 
to derive the mass of the black hole in Cygnus X-1. A 
careful inspection of the many mean light curves is not 
encouraging. None of them is a good fit to a standard 
ellipsoidal light curve model. 


HDE226868: spectroscopic observations 

The optical spectrum of HDE226868 has been classified 
O9.7lab(p-var), where the peculiarity relates to weak, 
variable emission in the He II 1468.6 nm line. Weak 
variable emission is also present in the Ha, Hf and Hy 
lines. The absorption line spectrum is very similar to those 
of comparable supergiants, but the star’s atmosphere may 
be overabundant in He and C. RADIAL VELOCITIES measured 
from the absorption lines show that HDE226868 is a 
single-line spectroscopic binary with a orbital period P = 
5.5998 days and radial velocity semiamplitude Ko = 74.7 
km s~!. This yields a mass function 


My sin? i 


———_~ = 0.25 + 0.01. 
(Mopt + My)? rape 


f(M) = 


Measures of the radial velocities of the emission lines 
yield a velocity curve where the maximum velocity is 
shifted about 0.75P from maximum radial velocity of the 
absorption lines. This indicates that the emission lines 
are formed in gas that is lying on or near the line joining 
the two stars and is flowing from the visible star to the 
x-ray source. This shows that the visible star must fill, or 
nearly fill, its Roche lobe. Detailed analyses of the emission 
profiles show that they are blends of two components, a 
P Cygni profile! that follows the absorption line radial 
velocity curve and a broad, roughly symmetric, emission 
feature that is shifted 0.86 P with respect to the absorption 
line velocity curve. 

These analyses indicate that the emission lines form in 
a region less than 0.1 Ro» above the surface of HDE226868, 
where Rop; is the star’s radius. The average flow velocity 


1 A P Cygni profile consists of a blue shifted-absorption trough 
and a red-shifted emission line that joined at approximately the 
wavelength of the line in the reference frame of the star. They 
form in spherically symmetric outflows from a star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in this region is less than 100 km s-!. The width of the 
emission features, FWHM < 400 km s~! is consistent with 
the velocity gradient expected in a focused stellar wind. 
The flow velocity and velocity gradient in a gas stream are 
unlikely to be as large so close to the star. 

The emission from the outflow is not occulted. If the 
star fills 90% of its Roche lobe and we make a reasonable 
allowance for error in the position where the emission 
forms, this implies that i < 55°. The limit is reduced 
significantly if the star fills a larger fraction of its Roche 
lobe. 

The upper limit on the peak intensity of Ha emission 
from the accretion disk is 3% of the continuum flux from 
HDE226868. This is not surprising because the accretion 
disk is expected to be much fainter than HDE226868. 


The mass of the compact object 
The light and velocity curves of HDE22686 do not 
provide the information required to solve for the critical 
parameters of the binary system, especially the mass 
of the x-ray source. It is possible, however, to 
obtain significant limits on the important parameters by 
combining information derived from these curves with 
other data. If the spin and orbital angular momentum 
vectors are aligned, the ratio of the projected rotation 
velocity V sini to the absorption-line velocity curve semi- 
amplitude Ko; is independent of the orbital inclination 
angle 

V sini 

K 


= pQ2 (< + 1) (Q,q) 
opt q 
where & is the ratio of the star’s spin angular velocity to its 
orbital angular velocity, g is the mass ratio, and ®(Q, q) 
is the Roche lobe volume radius divided by the system 
separation. This relation can be used to derive q for a grid 
of p and Q. 

Theoretical calculations show that there will be 
catastrophic Roche lobe overflow that would smother the 
x-ray source if = 1. Moreover, theoretical calculations 
of emission line profiles for focused wind models show 
that for o < 0.9 the wind density is not high enough 
along the line joining the stars to produce the observed 
emission. The circularity of the orbit suggests that tidal 
forces will have had enough time to bring the star into 
near synchronous orbit, so it is reasonable to confine our 
grid to values of Q near unity. 

The amplitude of the light curve depends on gq, p, 
Q and i. The shape of the star is modeled with a 
potential that includes the effects of radiation pressure 
from both the star and x-ray source and asynchronous 
rotation, to first order. The modeling process is begun 
by guessing values of q and i, and these are used to obtain 
the component masses, the radius and surface gravity of 
the visible star. The V magnitude and extinction can be 
used to relate the visible star’s radius to its distance d 
in kpc, Ropp = (9.7 + 0.9)d. The distance can then be 
used to compute the luminosities of the visible star and 
x-ray source, which are required to estimate the ratio of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cygnus X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the radiative to gravitational acceleration that are required 
when including the effects of radiation in calculating the 
potentials. The fluxes and specific intensity profiles are 
calculated using a model atmosphere code. The specific 
intensity profiles are calculated for Taf = 27500 K and 
surface gravity that is appropriate for the parameters 
selected. 

These data are input into a light curve synthesis code, 
where they are integrated over the surface of the star while 
taking into account the effects of gravity darkening and 
limb darkening. If the FWHM of the flux line profile 
and the amplitude of the light curve do not match the 
observations, g and i are adjusted, and the process is 
repeated until a match is obtained. Since the amplitude 
of the light curve is most sensitive to i, and the FWHM 
depends entirely on g, the selection of adjustment is 
relatively easy and the process converges within a few 
iterations. The 1972 to 1983 V light curve was used for this 
purpose because it was the one that seemed least affected 
by the perturbations noted earlier. 

Fortunately, the results of this exercise are insensitive 
to the assumptions made during the calculations. These 
include the value of the macroturbulent velocity used 
in calculating the theoretical line profiles, the inclusion 
or omission of the effects of radiation pressure, and 
coalignment of the angular momentum vectors. For near 
synchronous rotation and a generous allowance for the 
uncertainties, Moy, = 3349 Mo and My = 16+5 Mo. 
These values are consistent with distance estimates based 
on the UV and optical colors of HDE226868 and studies 
of the interstellar absorption as a function of distance for 
stars in the surrounding field. The absolute lower limit 
on the distance based on these data is d > 1.7 kpc. This 
corresponds to Mop, = 20 Me and M, = 7 Mo. Analternate 
analysis based on unified atmosphere-wind models fitted 
to the spectra of HDE226868 obtained somewhat lower 
values, Moy: = 18 Mo and My, = 10Mo. This result 
also depends implicitly on the light curves to obtain the 
inclination, though less so than the first method, and no 
error estimates were given. If they had been, itis likely that 
the errors for the two methods would have overlapped. 


Bibliography 
The history of the observations and modeling of 
HDE226868 can be traced through the following papers: 


Bolton C T 1975 Orbital elements and an analysis of models 
for HDE226868 = Cygnus X-1 Astrophys. J. 200 269-77 

Gies D R and Bolton C T 1986 The optical spectrum of 
HDE226868 = Cygnus X-1: II spectrophotometry and 
mass estimates Astrophys. J. 304 371-88 

Sowers J W, Gies D R, Bagnuolo W G Jr, Shafter A W, 
Wiemker R and Wiggs M S 1998 Tomographic 
analysis of Ha profiles in HDE226868/Cygnus X-1 
Astrophys. J. 506 424-30 


A good summary of the x-ray properties of Cygnus X-1 
can be found in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Liang E P and Nolan P L 1984 Cygnus X-1 Revisited Space 
Sci. Rev. 38 353-84 


For a good review comparing Cygnus X-1 with other 
stellar systems that are believed to contain black holes see 


Cowley A P 1992 Evidence for black holes in stellar binary 
systems Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30 287-310 


C T Bolton 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Cysat, Johann Baptist [known as Cysatus] (1586- 
1657) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cysat, Johann Baptist [known as 
Cysatus] (1586-1657) 


Swiss Jesuit astronomer who used a telescope to discover 
the Orion Nebula in 1618. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


d’Alembert, Jean-Baptiste Le Rond (1717-83) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


d’Alembert, Jean-Baptiste Le Rond 
(1717-83) 


French mathematician, born in Paris. A foundling, he 
was named after the place where he was left, the church 
of St Jean Baptiste de Rond. He published d’Alembert’s 
principle (the principle that the action of a force produces 
an equal and opposite reaction in the mass that it is 
accelerating) in Traité de Dynamique (1743), which was 
a new interpretation of Newton’s dynamics. He used 
his new formulation of Newton’s laws to study physical 
astronomy and planetary motions. As scientific editor, he 
was one of the group of French intellectuals, the so-called 
Encyclopedists, including Diderot, Voltaire, Montesquieu 
and Rousseau, who composed the monumental 28 volume 
encyclopedia Dictionaire Raisonné des Sciences, des Arts et 
des Meétiers, expounding the philosophy of the French 
Enlightenment, including mathematics and astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


d’Arrest, Heinrich Louis (1822-75) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


d’Arrest, Heinrich Louis (1822-75) 


Born Berlin, Germany, worked at the Berlin Observatory 
and Copenhagen Observatory. At Berlin he participated 
with JOHANNGALLE in the discovery of Neptune. Discovered 
comets and asteroids and observed nebulae, including the 
variable nebula of JOHN HIND. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Danish Space Research Institute ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Danish Space Research Institute 


The Danish Space Research Institute (DSRI), was estab- 
lished in 1968. The present scientific staff is 18 physi- 
cists. DSRI is involved in providing scientific instru- 
ments for the Russian Spectrum-X-Gamma mission, the 
ESA Gamma-Ray Observatory Integral, the ESA Cosmic 
Background Radiation mission Planck Surveyor, and mag- 
netometers for several missions including the Argentinian 
SAC-C satellite. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.dsri.dk. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dante Alighieri (1265-1321) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dante Alighieri (1265-1321) 


Italian poet, born in Florence, Italy, author of The Divine 
Comedy, the story of the poet’s journey through Hell 
and Purgatory (guided by Virgil) and through Heaven 
(guided by Dante’s wife Beatrice, to whom the poem is a 
memorial). The poem brings together the whole medieval 
picture, integrating a religious and moral perspective 
with a geographical and astronomical one, depicting a 
changeless universe ordered by God. This is how the 
medieval world imagined the Ptolemaic system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dante, Egnatio [Egnazio, Ignazio] (1536-86) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dante, Egnatio [Egnazio, Ignazio] 
(1536-86) 


Astronomer, instrument-maker and cartographer. Born 
in Perugio, Italy, of a father who also apparently made 
astronomical instruments, he became a Dominican monk, 
and published works on Sacrobosco’s Sphere, and other 
astronomical and mathematical topics. He made maps 
under the patronage of Cosimo I de’ Medici, and a 
large terrestrial globe, which still exists. He was later 
professor of mathematics at Pisa and Bologna. In 1574 he 
determined by observation that the equinox was 11 days 
earlier than the calendar then in use. Dante continued to 
refine the observations to quantify this accumulated error, 
and, being appointed cosmographer and mathematician 
to Gregory XIII he was commissioned to map the papal 
states and to lead work to reform the calendar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dark Matter in Galaxies 


Dark matter in spiral galaxies 

SPIRAL GALAXIES are flat rotating systems. The stars and 
gas in the disk are moving in nearly circular orbits, with 
the gravitational field of the galaxy providing the inward 
acceleration required for the circular motion. The rotation 
of these galaxies is usually not like a solid body: the 
angular velocity of the rotation typically decreases with 
radius. To a fair approximation, assuming Newtonian 
gravity, the rotational velocity V(r) at radius r is related 
to the total mass M(r) within radius r by the equation 
V?(r) = GM(r)/r, where G is the gravitational constant. 

The radial variation of the rotational velocity (the 
rotation curve) is most readily measured from the gas 
in the disks. The emission lines of ionized gas in the 
inner regions are measured with optical spectrographs. 
With radio synthesis telescopes, rotation curves can be 
measured from the neutral hydrogen (H I) which emits 
a narrow spectral line at 1420 MHz (21 cm wavelength). 
The interest in measuring rotation curves of spiral galaxies 
is that they give a direct measure of the radial distribution 
of the total gravitating mass. 

Until the early 1970s, most of the rotation data for 
spirals came from optical observations which did not 
extend beyond the luminous inner regions. At that time, 
the optical rotation curves seemed consistent with the 
distribution of luminous matter. With the construction 
of RADIO TELESCOPES like the Westerbork Radio Synthesis 
Telescope in The Netherlands, it became possible to 
measure the distribution and rotation of the H I in spiral 
galaxies. It was soon discovered that the H I in many 
spirals extended far beyond the starlight, and that the 
HI rotation curves in such galaxies often showed nearly 
constant rotational velocity out to the radial limits of the 
data. 

This was unexpected, because a flat rotation curve 
means that the total mass of the spiral within some radius 
r increases linearly with r, while the total luminosity 
approaches a finite asymptotic limit as r increases. It soon 
became clear that a large amount of invisible gravitating 
mass (more than 90% of the total mass in some examples) 
is needed to explain these flat rotation curves. 

The problem is illustrated in figure 1. The rotation 
curve comes from H I observations of a well studied 
spiral, NGC 3198. The curve labelled disk is the rotation 
curve that would be expected if the surface mass density 
in this galaxy were proportional to the light distribution 
shown in the upper panel. In this analysis, the constant 
of proportionality (the ratio of mass to light) was made as 
large as possible, with the criterion that the total expected 
rotation curve should not exceed the observed rotation 
curve. The gas in the galaxy also contributes to the 
expected rotation curve, as shown by the curve labelled 
gas (see also GAS IN GALAXIES). The contributions to the 
expected rotation curve from stars and gas must be added 
in quadrature to derive the total expected rotation curve. 
From the curves in this figure, there is no way that the stars 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


<< oT rn T T 
i ] 


a } NGC 3198 | 
& 20 7 
g [ ; 
& * 
© 22+ % 2 
OD "6 
o r fe, 

E 24h . ; fl 
i r es 

26+ *. 7 
200 }—+—_-++—_+—_} + + 


100 


V. (km s_) 


10) 10 20 30 40 
Radius (kpc) 


Figure 1. The upper panel shows the R-band radial surface 
brightness distribution of the spiral galaxy NGC 3198. The 
lower panel shows its H I rotation curve (points). The curve 
labelled disk shows the expected rotation curve if the surface 
density distribution followed the surface brightness distribution 
in the upper panel. The curve labelled gas is the contribution to 
the rotation curve from the observed gas. Together, the gas and 
the disk cannot reproduce the observed flat rotation curve at 
large radius. An extra gravitating component, the dark halo, is 
needed. The curve labelled halo is the rotation curve of the 
adopted dark halo model: the three labelled rotation curves, 
when added in quadrature, produce the total rotation curve that 
passes through the observed points. (From Begeman K 1987 PhD 
Thesis University of Groningen.) 


and gas together can produce the flat observed rotation 
curve. An additional massive and extended distribution 
of dark matter is needed. The rotation contribution for a 
simple dark halo model is shown in the figure: the model 
is chosen so that the dark halo plus disk plus gas together 
give the rotation curve that passes through most of the 
observed points in the figure. At the radial limit of the data, 
the dark halo is providing most of the total gravitational 
field. 

The halo model in figure 1 is a minimum halo, in the 
sense that the contribution of the disk to the rotation curve 
was made as large as possible. If a lower mass-to-light 
(M/L) ratio had been adopted for the disk, then a more 
centrally concentrated halo would be needed to make up 
the larger discrepancy between the observed and expected 
rotation curves. It is difficult to measure the M/L ratio 
for disks independently of the rotation curve itself, and 
there is still a lot of controversy about the correctness of 
the maximum disk approach as shown in figure 1. 

The situation shown in figure 1 is typical of almost 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


all Disk GALAXIES that have extended H I distributions, 
including the small DWARF IRREGULAR GALAXIES that are also 
in rotational equilibrium. In almost every example, a 
massive dark halo that dominates the enclosed mass M(r) 
at large r is needed to explain the observed rotation curves. 
The nature of this dark matter remains unknown (see DARK 
MATTER: ITS NATURE), and is one of the great problems of 
modern astrophysics. 

For decompositions as shown in the figure, the dark 
halo is often modelled for simplicity as a spherical system 
with a radial volume density distribution of the form 
p(r) = p(0)/(1 + r*/a’), where a is a scale length and p(0) 
the central density. This particular distribution is chosen 
because it generates a flat rotation curve at large radius. 

The spherical shape is simply an assumption. It turns 
out to be very difficult to measure the shapes of dark 
halos. The thin neutral hydrogen layer in edge-on spirals 
is observed to flare beyond the edge of the stellar disk, 
where the vertical restoring force of the disk is reduced. 
The extent of this flaring can be used to estimate the 
flattening of the dark halo (a flat halo would lead to less 
flaring). Another idea is to study the POLAR RING GALAXIES, in 
which material is rotating in two orthogonal planes so the 
gravitational field in both planes can be measured. Both 
of these approaches have uncertainties, but they hint that 
dark halos may be significantly flattened. 

In figure 1, the gently rising rotation curves for the 
halo and for the gas are roughly similar in shape out to the 
radial limit of the observations. This is again typical for 
disk galaxies with extended H I distributions, and hints 
that the gas and the dark matter distributions are in some 
way closely related. Some authors have argued that the 
dark matter may be in the form of cold gas, but this remains 
contentious. 


Dark matter in our Galaxy 
Although our location in the disk of our Galaxy makes it 
difficult to measure its rotation curve out to large radius, 
other less secure mass estimators become possible in this 
situation. For example, the velocities of halo stars out 
to distances of 100 kpc from the Sun can be used to 
estimate the total galactic mass. Some halo stars pass 
through the solar neighborhood at velocities in excess of 
600 kms“. If these stars are bound to the Galaxy, then they 
provide another mass estimator. The ANDROMEDA GALAXY, 
at a distance of 770 kpc, is approaching the Milky Way 
at about 120 km s“!, which provides yet another mass 
estimator by assuming that the combined mass of the two 
galaxies is sufficient to turn around their initial expansion 
within the lifetime of the universe. All of these estimators 
together indicate that the enclosed mass of the Milky Way 
increases linearly with radius out to at least 150 kpc and 
that its total mass is about 15 x 10"M,. The luminous 
mass is unlikely to exceed 1.2 x 10'! Mo, so the mass of our 
Galaxy is probably more than 90% dark. 

If the dark matter is in the form of compact objects 
of stellar or substellar mass (e.g. jupiters, white or brown 
dwarfs, neutron stars), then dark halo objects passing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between the observer and a distant star cause the distant 
star to brighten as they pass, through GRAVITATIONALLENSING. 
The duration of the brightening depends on the mass and 
velocity of the lens and the geometry of the event. For 
stars in the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS, the typical duration of the 
brightening would be a few months for dark halo objects of 
solar mass. Several groups have attempted to detect dark 
objects in this way. The MACHO experiment monitored 
the brightnesses of several million stars in the LMC over a 
period of about 7 years, and has detected about 15 lensing 
events. If these lensing objects lie in the galactic halo, then 
they provide about half of the total dark matter and their 
individual masses are about 0.5M,>. This mass is typical 
of white dwarfs and suggests that these dark objects could 
be old wire pwarrs, perhaps remnants of a very early and 
very massive burst of star formation. There is no evidence 
for a significant population of luminous stars associated 
with the dark halo, so a rather special stellar mass function 
would be needed to produce large numbers of old white 
dwarfs without producing even larger numbers of old 
luminous stars. It remains possible that the lenses are not 
in the galactic halo. For example, if the LMC is sufficiently 
extended along the line of sight, the lenses could be objects 
in the LMC lensing other objects in the LMC. 


Dark matter in elliptical galaxies 


The evidence for dark matter in disk galaxies is secure 
because their dynamics is so simple. ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES 
are not supported by rotation, so rotation curves cannot be 
used to study their dark matter content. Other dynamical 
mass indicators are needed. Some of the largest ellipticals 
are embedded in an envelope of hot x-ray emitting gas. 
If the radial temperature distribution of this hot gas is 
known, its hydrostatic equilibrium can be used to measure 
the total mass of the parent elliptical. The motions of 
stars, globular clusters and planetary nebulae in the outer 
regions of elliptical galaxies can also be used to estimate 
their masses, although this requires some assumptions 
about the orbits of these tracer objects. The weak 
gravitational lensing of background galaxies provides an 
interesting and independent statistical way to measure the 
dark matter content of elliptical and disk galaxies. 

The evidence indicates that the largest elliptical 
galaxies contain substantial amounts of dark matter. We 
can use the mass-to-light ratio as a useful measure of the 
dark content of a galaxy. An old stellar population without 
dark matter has a mass-to-light (W/L) ratio of about 5 in 
solar units, depending onits metallicity. Disk and elliptical 
galaxies can have M/L ratios as high as ~80. Some 
of the smallest elliptical galaxies, the dwarf spheroidal 
companions of the Milky Way, show very high dark matter 
content, with M/L ratios ~100. For these systems, the 
masses are estimated from velocities measured for many 
individual stars. Again, some assumptions about the 
stellar orbits are needed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Formation of dark halos 
In the current picture of GALAXY FORMATION, clumps of dark 
matter mixed with baryons come together to form a galaxy. 
The nature of the dark matter is unknown, but it is believed 
to be non-dissipative. The dark halos then gradually build 
up into weakly flattened spheroidal structures while, in 
disk galaxies, the rotating baryons dissipate into flat disks 
in near-circular motion within their dark halos. There are 
now enough data on dark halos to determine how their 
properties change with the brightness of the visible galaxy. 
It turns out that the faintest galaxies have the densest dark 
halos, about 1000 times denser than the dark halos of the 
brightest galaxies. This indicates that the halos of lowest 
mass emerged first from the expanding universe, when 
the density of the universe was high, as expected from 
theoretical arguments. 

For more information on dark matter in the universe, 
see the article on GALAXY CLUSTERS. 


Bibliography 
For a useful recent overview of work on dark matter in 
galaxies see 


Persic M and Salucci P (ed) 1997 Dark and Visible Matter in 
Galaxies (ASP Conf. Ser. 117) (San Francisco: Astron. 
Soc. Pacific) 


Ken Freeman 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


What is the stuff that makes up most of the mass in the 
universe? The answer to this simple-sounding question 
is far from obvious, and actually presents one of the 
greatest unsolved mysteries of astrophysics, cosmology, 
and elementary particle physics. With conventional 
astronomical methods one can only see the ‘luminous 
matter’, notably in the form of stars, which reveals its 
presence by the emission of light. On the other hand, one 
can determine the gravitating mass of various systems 
such as spiral galaxies or galaxy clusters from their 
dynamical properties, and one finds a huge discrepancy 
relative to luminous matter. Assuming the usual law of 
gravity, one is led to conclude that there are large 
amounts of ‘dark matter’, a term first introduced by FRITZ 
ZWICKY in his seminal paper of 1933 where he studied the 
dynamics of GALAXY CLUSTERS. 

The physical properties of dark matter can be con- 
strained by several powerful astrophysical and cosmo- 
logical arguments which disfavor ‘baryonic matter’ as a 
main constituent. This term refers to hydrogen, helium, 
and the heavier elements which, besides electrons, con- 
sist of protons and neutrons, falling into the ‘baryon’ cat- 
egory of ELEMENTARY PARTICLES. But some new form of 
matter appears to hold galaxies and galaxy clusters grav- 
itationally together! The most popular explanation is that 
of ‘particle dark matter’ which goes back to Cowsik and 
McClelland who speculated in 1973 that neutrinos could 
play this role. However, while recent experiments indi- 
cate that neutrinos do have mass—which has been an 
open question for decades—it looks impossible to 
attribute all of the dark matter to these weakly interact- 
ing particles. 

One is thus led to postulate hitherto undetected 
elementary particles for the cosmological dark matter. 
On the other hand, there are already independent par- 
ticle-theory motivations for certain new particles 
which could well play this role. The dark-matter prob- 
lem thus provides one of several links between particle 
physics and cosmology; it is a key ingredient of 
‘astroparticle physics’, or alternatively ‘PARTICLE ASTRO- 
puysics’. The laws of the microcosm of elementary par- 
ticles and the macrocosm of the largest structures in the 
universe, inner space and outer space, are closely inter- 
twined! 

Perhaps the most remarkable development of the 
1990s is that the physics of dark matter has turned into a 
truly experimental science. If any of the popular specula- 
tions about the nature of dark matter are correct, this 
mysterious stuff may well turn up in one of the current 
or near-future direct search experiments. 

In the following, the astrophysical motivation for 
the reality of dark matter and the most important astro- 
physical constraints on its nature will be discussed. Well- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


140- 
| NGC 6503 
L 3 
on le aenes hal 
= 100-4, ayers as 
w Lh x‘ a 
! Mt 
& Lh *« 
x f FA ‘ 
re] J oe 
> ia 
50 | Ss 
H ~~~ disk 
i : oo gas 
Hi = 
% 10 20 


Radius (kpc) 


Figure 1. Rotation curve of the spiral galaxy NGC 6503 as estab- 
lished from radio observations of hydrogen gas in the disk (K 
Begeman et al Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 249 439 (1991)). The 
dashed curve shows the rotation curve expected from the disk 
material alone, the chain curve from the dark-matter halo alone. 


motivated candidates, current search strategies and 
preliminary results will then be reviewed. 


Dynamical evidence 

Rotation curves of spiral galaxies 

Why are astronomers so sure that there are large 
amounts of dark matter lurking everywhere in the uni- 
verse? The flat rotation curves of SPIRAL GALAXIES provide 
perhaps the most impressive evidence. These systems 
consist of a central bulge and a thin rotating disk. It is 
natural to measure its orbital velocity as a function of 
galactocentric radius by virtue of the Doppler shifts of 
spectral lines. Galaxy disks tend to contain neutral 
hydrogen which can be observed by its 21 cm line emis- 
sion, allowing one to measure the rotation curves to 
much larger radii than with optical tracers. 

The example of figure 1 illustrates the general 
behavior of the rotation curves. The orbital velocity rises 
from the center outward until it reaches a value of the 
order of 100 km s-l, where it stays constant out to the 
largest measured radii, a systematic trend already diag- 
nosed by Freeman in 1970. This behavior is entirely unex- 
pected because the surface luminosity of the disk falls off 
exponentially with radius, implying that the mass M of 
luminous matter, mostly stars, is concentrated around 
the galactic center. Thus one expects a Keplerian decline 
of the orbital speed, v,o4 = (GyM/r)1/2 (Newton’s con- 
stant Gy, radius r), in analogy to the planetary motions 
in the solar system—see the dashed line in figure 1. 

The difference between the expected and measured 
rotation curve is ascribed to the gravitational effect of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


dark matter. A number of arguments suggest that this 
material is not part of the galactic disk itself. First, in our 
galaxy the vertical distribution of stars together with 
their velocity dispersion reveals that there is no signifi- 
cant amount of disk dark matter. Second, a thin self- 
gravitating disk is dynamically unstable. Third, the 
hydrogen is vertically more extended than would be 
expected if all of the gravitating matter were in the disk, 
especially at large radii (‘hydrogen flaring’). 

An overall picture of spiral galaxies emerges where 
the bulge and disk are dynamically subdominant com- 
ponents immersed in a huge dark-matter halo. It is not 
crucial that this halo be strictly spherical; it may well be 
somewhat oblate or even triaxial. 

For the direct detection of dark matter, our own 
Milky Way is the most interesting galaxy. Its rotation 
curve conforms to the standard picture with an approxi- 
mate plateau value for the rotation velocity of 220 km s-!. 
The dark-matter density in the solar neighbourhood 
implied by models of the halo is 300MeVcm-3 within 
about a factor of two, ie. roughly the mass equivalent of 
a hydrogen atom per 3 cm3. (Note that the atomic mass 
unit corresponds to 931.5 MeV.) 


Cosmic density contribution 
The contribution p of a given matter component to the 
overall density of the universe is usually expressed in 
terms of the ‘omega parameter’ Q=p/ pg it Here, Perit = 
3H29/(82Gy) = h2 1.88A—10-29 g cm-3 is the critical densi- 
ty with Ho the present-day cosmic expansion parameter 
(‘Hubble constant’). It is usually written as Hp = h 100 km 
s-! Mpc-t, different measurements span the approximate 
range h = 0.5-0.8. In the framework of the usual 
Friedmann-—Lemaitre-Robertson—Walker cosmology the 
spatial geometry of the universe is Euclidean for Q = 1 
(‘flat universe’), the spatial curvature is negative for Q<1 
(‘open universe’), and positive for Q>1 (‘closed universe’). 
The cosmic density contribution of galaxies is relat- 
ed to the measured luminosity density of the universe, 
(1.7+0.6)-108 h Ly Mpc- in the visual spectral band (solar 
luminosity L,). Most of the light is produced by stars; 
thus multiplying with the mass-to-light ratio for a typical 
stellar population of a few M,/L, gives us the luminous 
matter density. One finds 


Qum’t = 0.002 — 0,006 


to be a consistent range. Therefore, luminous matter 
alone is far from the critical density. 

Typical mass-to-light ratios of galaxy halos are at 
least around 30 h as far as the measured rotation curves 
reach, providing a cosmic density of Qg)50.03-0.05. The 
rotation curves tend to stay flat out to the largest mea- 
sured radii and thus the true size of dark-matter halos is 
not known. Estimating their extent from galactic satellite 
dynamics yields Q,,)1 = 0.2-0.5. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 2. Hubble Space Telescope image of the galaxy cluster 
Abell 2218, showing a number of arcs and arclets around the 
two centers of the cluster. They are distorted images of back- 
ground galaxies, caused by the cluster’s gravitational lens effect. 
(NASA HST Archive.) 


Clusters of galaxies 

Galaxy clusters are the largest gravitationally bound sys- 
tems in the universe. Zwicky first noted in 1933 that the 
velocities of the member galaxies tend to be so large that 
huge amounts of dark matter are needed to bind them 
gravitationally. Taking a cluster mass-to-light ratio of 
around 300 M,/L, as representative for the universe 
leads to a cosmic matter density of ©), = 0.1-0.4. 

Recently it has become possible to measure cluster 
masses from the image distortion of background galaxies 
caused by the cluster’s gravitational light deflection 
(‘weak gravitational lensing’); an example is shown in 
figure 2. One uses the statistical distribution of these 
‘arclets’ to reconstruct the shear field of gravitational 
image distortions and from there one can derive cluster 
mass distributions. (see GRAVITATIONAL LENSISNG BY CLUS- 
TERS OF GALAXIES). They confirm the large mass-to-light 
ratios inferred by Zwicky’s method. 

When x-RAY TELESCOPES became available in the mid- 
1960s, galaxy clusters were found to be the most power- 
ful x-ray sources in the sky. The emission is extended 
over the entire cluster and thus reveals the presence of 
large amounts of hot gas (T = 107-108 K) where x-rays are 
produced by electron bremsstrahlung. The mass in this 
‘x-ray gas’ is typically 10-20% of the total, ie. clusters 
contain more mass in hot gas than in stars. Detailed stud- 
ies reveal a cluster baryon fraction of typically fgh3/2 = 
0.03-0.08. 


Large-scale flows 

On large scales the motion of galaxies is dominated by 
the overall cosmic expansion. Still, they exhibit ‘peculiar 
velocities’ relative to the overall cosmic flow; our group 
of galaxies moves at 627+22 km s-! relative to the refer- 
ence frame defined by the cosmic microwave back- 
ground radiation. These motions are attributed to the 
action of gravity over the age of the universe, caused by 
the inhomogeneities of the matter density. The observed 
large-scale velocity fields, together with the observed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


galaxy distributions, are then translated into a measure 
for the matter density required to explain the large-scale 
flows. One finds 


§2g, > 03 


and even larger values by related methods which are 
more model-dependent. 


Flat universe 

The critical value Qi, = 1 for the cosmic mass-energy den- 
sity, corresponding to an overall Euclidean (flat) spatial 
geometry, is favored to avoid fine-tuning the cosmic initial 
conditions. In an expanding universe, 2,,; quickly evolves 
away from 1 towards either 0 or ~ so that the near-flatness 
of the present-day universe suggests Q:o¢ = 1 as an exact 
identity. Moreover, ‘inflationary models’ of the early uni- 
verse generically produce a flat geometry even though one 
can construct specialized models which circumvent this 
outcome. The critical density exceeds the luminous mass 
by about two orders of magnitude so that the universe, if 
it is flat, contains more than 99% dark matter. 


Astrophysical constraints 

Big-bang nucleosynthesis 

The first question about the nature of dark matter is 
whether it could not consist of ordinary material in some 
non-luminous form, perhaps stellar remnants such as 
neutron stars or molecular hydrogen clouds which are 
difficult to observe. However, the overall baryon abun- 
dance is severely constrained by big-bang NUCLEOSYN- 
THESIS. 

When the universe was about three minutes old, the 
initial protons and neutrons formed helium at a mass 
fraction of about 22-25%, together with some traces of 
deuterium (D or 2H), 3He and 7Li. Within the standard 
big-bang picture, these primordial light-element abun- 
dances depend only on the cosmic baryon density (see 
BARYOGENESIS). 

The abundance most sensitive to Qph? is that of deu- 
terium. Its measurement in intergalactic hydrogen 
clouds has recently become possible by observing quasar 
absorption lines. While this novel approach holds much 
promise toward a precision determination of the primor- 
dial deuterium abundance, one currently finds both high 
and low values of D/H=2-10+ and 2-10-, respectively, 
which are mutually inconsistent unless the baryon distri- 
bution is vastly inhomogeneous on large scales. They 
span a range roughly corresponding to 


Sink” = 9.005 — 0.024 


which is consistent with the helium and lithium observa- 
tions. The more favored low deuterium value corre- 
sponds to a high baryon content. 

This range for Qg is depicted in figure 3 as a func- 
tion of the Hubble expansion parameter together with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


001 
40 60 BO 100 


Hy [km s7? Mpe™*] 


Figure 3. Cosmic matter components as a function of the 
assumed present-day Hubble expansion parameter. 


the luminous mass density of (1) and the lower dynam- 
ical mass limit of (2). The currently favored range for 
Ho is 50-80 km s-! Mpc-1, implying a gap between the 
cosmic baryon density and both the luminous and the 
dynamical matter density. Apparently there is a signif- 
icant fraction of ‘dark baryons’ which never made their 
way into galaxies and stars, and more importantly, lots 
of unidentified non-baryonic dark matter. The appar- 
ent gap between the baryons and the dynamical mass 
density corresponds well to the baryon fraction 
implied by the x-ray gas in galaxy clusters discussed 
earlier. 


Structure formation 

The standard theory of cosmic structure formation holds 
that at some early time the universe was almost perfect- 
ly homogeneous, apart from tiny density modulations, 
which were enhanced by the action of gravity as time 
went on, leading to the formation of galaxies, clusters, 
and large-scale coherent structures. It is often argued that 
the primordial density variations came from quantum 
fluctuations in the very early universe which were boost- 
ed to macroscopic scales during a phase of exponential 
expansion (‘INFLATIONARY UNIVERSE ). 

The amplitude of the density fluctuations at the 
epoch when the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND radia- 
tion decoupled from the ambient plasma has now been 
inferred from several experiments, notably the COBE 
satellite, which measured the temperature fluctuations 
across the sky. An amplitude of the fluctuation spectrum 
consistent with these measurements is too small to allow 
the observed structures to form if the medium consists 
only of baryons and radiation. Weakly interacting parti- 
cles fare better because they are not held up by photon 
pressure (‘dark-matter boost’). This is a generic argu- 
ment against baryonic dark matter even though there 
may be possibilities to circumvent it. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The matter which makes up the cosmic ‘fluid’ can 
diffuse, wiping out part of the initial density fluctuations. 
This effect is particularly important for weakly interact- 
ing particles which can diffuse far until their momentum 
has been sufficiently redshifted by the cosmic expansion; 
they erase the primordial fluctuation spectrum up to a 
scale which is larger for less massive particles. One 
speaks of ‘hot dark matter’ if the fluctuations are wiped 
out below scales which later correspond to galaxies, 
while ‘cold dark matter’ has this effect only on subgalac- 
tic scales. The dividing line (‘warm dark matter’) corre- 
sponds to a particle mass in the keV range. 

The consensus is now almost universal that some 
variant of a cold dark matter scenario is probably how 
our universe works, where structure forms by the 
gravitational instability mechanism from a nearly scale- 
invariant spectrum of primordial density fluctuations. It 
strongly disfavors both baryons and low-mass particles 
such as massive neutrinos as the main ingredients of the 
cosmic matter cocktail. 


Cosmic microwave background 

The cosmic microwave background radiation holds a 
wealth of cosmological information. Its very presence 
and its uncannily precise black-body nature are the most 
striking proofs of the hot big-bang cosmogony. The 
COBE satellite and more recent ground-based experi- 
ments have measured tiny angular temperature varia- 
tions with typically 10 uK amplitudes which already pro- 
vide tight constraints on theories of structure formation 
and thus on the nature of dark matter. 

The most important information is contained in the 
power spectrum of the temperature sky map. While there 
is still a lot of scatter in the data, they already seem to 
confirm the appearance of features known as ‘acoustic 
peaks’ or ‘Doppler peaks’. Their angular scale and ampli- 
tude provide invaluable information on the properties of 
the universe at radiation decoupling. 

There are two approved satellite missions, NASA’s 
Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP), to be launched in 
2001, and ESA’s PLANCK, to be launched around 2007, 
which will take full-sky temperature maps at fine angu- 
lar resolutions. It is thought that these experiments will 
ultimately be able to determine the most important cos- 
mological parameters on the 1% level, notably the bary- 
on fraction and total dark matter content. There remain 
degeneracies between different combinations of parame- 
ters, however, which will need to be broken by other 
methods. 


Candidates and searches 

Neutrinos 

The presence of large amounts of dark matter in the uni- 
verse is almost uncontroversial, and the case against 
baryons as a main component is quite compelling, leav- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


be 
5 2 
= 3 
q 
2 i. 
wv 
i FI 
& a 
2 7% 
A} °o 
3 


G/ dominant Dark Matter Ye 
= ree ae Re 


ce teil ial aad il i 
1 107 tot 108 108 10/9 


m, [eV] 


Figure 4. Cosmic mass density as a function of the assumed neu- 
trino mass (‘Lee—Weinberg curve’). The hatched band indicates 
the required range for Qh? of the dominant particle dark matter 
component. 


ing us with particle dark matter (PDM) as one possible 
solution. The candidate particles would have to be relics 
from the early universe where they would have been 
produced thermally in the hot and dense plasma, or by 
some non-equilibrium process. 

The minimum required relic density is QppyS0.2 if 
we use (2) and allow for a significant baryon fraction. 
The observed age of the universe together with the mea- 
sured expansion rate yields Qh2S0.4 so that 


Rema = 0.05 — 0.4: 


where hS0.5 has been used. 

Of the known particles, neutrinos are the only can- 
didates. Their relic density as a function of the assumed 
mass is shown in figure 4. There are crudely as many 
background neutrinos in the universe as there are 
microwave photons. Multiplying this number by m, 
explains the increasing branch of figure 4 and gives Q,2 
= ¥m,/93 eV, whence the required neutrino mass is 4-40 
eV. There is a second solution for a neutrino mass of a 
few GeV on the decreasing branch; the number of relic 
neutrinos is reduced by annihilations for m,S1 MeV, 
where they are still in thermal equilibrium when the cos- 
mic temperature falls below their mass. 

The laboratory limit of about 20 MeV for v, and 
much less for v, and v,, precludes the large-mass solu- 
tion among the known neutrino families. The low-mass 
solution, however, is problematic from the perspective of 
structure formation because they represent ‘hot dark 
matter’. In addition, there is a problem with neutrinos 
filling the dark-matter halos of galaxies as they cannot be 
arbitrarily densely packed in phase space. This 
‘Tremaine-Gunn argument’ requires m,S20 eV for typi- 
cal spiral galaxies, and a few 100 eV for dwarf galaxies so 
that neutrinos could not be the dark matter on all scales. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finally, the positive evidence for neutrino masses from 
recent oscillation experiments points to sub-eV mass dif- 
ferences between the three flavours so that their masses 
would have to be much larger than their differences 
(‘degenerate masses’) if they were to be dark matter. The 
largest cosmologically allowed mass of about 40 eV then 
distributes itself among the three families so that each of 
them must be lighter than about 13 eV, exacerbating the 
Tremaine-Gunn problem. 


Weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) 
Neutrinos on the decreasing branch in figure 4 would 
play the role of cold dark matter and are thus favored by 
cosmology, but in this mass range they do not exist. One 
thus postulates novel weakly interacting massive parti- 
cles (WIMPs; see WIMPS AND MACHOsS) to fill the gap. On 
the other hand, from a theoretical perspective one postu- 
lates a ‘SUPERSYMMETRY’ which predicts a new partner to 
every known particle. The lightest supersymmetric parti- 
cle in the form of a ‘neutralino’ could well play the 
WIMP role. Independently of the dark-matter problem, 
the search for supersymmetry is one of the main goals of 
the most ambitious particle accelerator ever, the Large 
Hadron Collider (LHC) which is currently under con- 
struction in Geneva at the CERN Laboratory. 

If the dark matter consists of some form of WIMPs, 
then our Milky Way galaxy should be filled with a ‘gas’ 
of these almost collisionless particles which would per- 


glee on 


auld nitrogen 


etter 


- Sanid belo 


—- @il.ing cheraber 


ola iniernai feac shietas 


-- emta Finger 


2 == FB Shiga iq 


Take 


Cu sreelditg 


-- thermal roniatior: ssields 


lhg rototyoe cetecte - 


vr: 


a o8 | 


Figure 5. Schematic view of the experimental setup of CRESST, 
located in the Gran Sasso underground laboratory near Rome 
(Italy), as an example for a cryogenic dark-matter experiment. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


meate everything, including our laboratories. The exper- 
imental search for galactic WIMPs has turned into an 
entire branch of non-accelerator particle physics, with 
numerous groups mounting more and more sensitive 
detectors. Usually one tries to measure the tiny energy 
depositions caused by a rare collision of a galactic WIMP 
with a nucleus in a crystal. In semiconductor crystals, 
especially germanium, one searches for the resulting 
electronic signal, in sodium iodide crystals for the scin- 
tillation light, or one may cool the crystal to very low 
temperatures and search for the minuscule heating 
caused by WIMP collisions; an example for such a cryo- 
genic setup is shown in figure 5. 

The main experimental problem is the extremely 
small expected signal rate. In detail, it depends on the 
assumed WIMP properties and target material, but a typ- 
ical number is below 1 event kg-! d-1. To reduce natural 
radioactive contaminations one must use extremely pure 
substances, and the cosmic-ray background requires 
locations deeply underground, for example in deep 
mines. 

There exist other ‘indirect’ search methods. For 
example, WIMPs traversing the Sun or Earth will occa- 
sionally collide with a nucleus there, lose enough energy 
to get trapped, and ultimately annihilate with other 
trapped WIMPs. The resulting high-energy neutrinos 
from the Sun and the center of the Earth may well show 
up in existing and future neutrino telescopes. 

While supersymmetric models are quite flexible in 
their predictions, the current round of experiments has 
reached the sensitivity where one can begin hoping to 
find these elusive dark-matter candidates. 


Axions 

A cold dark matter candidate sui generis is provided by 
axions, low-mass bosons which are postulated in the 
framework of quantum chromodynamics, the theory of 
the strong interaction among quarks. Other than neutri- 
nos and WIMPs, these particles would arise from a non- 
thermal process in the early universe, producing essen- 
tially a Bose condensate, ie. highly occupied, quasi-clas- 
sical oscillations of the axion field. The axion mass would 
lie in the 10 eV regime, corresponding to GHz oscilla- 
tion frequencies of the axion field. 

Axions would have tiny electromagnetic interac- 
tions, implying that galactic dark-matter axions would 
drive a microwave cavity, provided it is placed in a 
strong magnetic field. Two such experiments are now in 
operation, one in Livermore, California (US Axion 
Search), the other in Kyoto, Japan (CARRACK). Their 
sensitivity is enough to detect the feeble output of a 
microwave cavity, induced by galactic dark-matter 
axions. Again, within the next few years one has a realis- 
tic chance to detect dark matter if the underlying hypoth- 
esis of the existence of axions is correct. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dim stars (MACHOs) 

As long as particle dark matter has not been found, one 
may continue to speculate that the arguments against 
baryons are wrong and that galactic halos consist of ordi- 
nary matter in some non-luminous form. Obvious candi- 
dates are dim stars which have been termed massive 
astrophysical compact halo objects (MACHOs) as a 
deliberate pun on the WIMP hypothesis. 

The physical nature of MACHOs could be stars 
which are too small to shine brightly (brown dwarfs or M 
dwarfs) or burnt-out stellar remnants (WHITE DWARFS, 
NEUTRON STARS, BLACK HOLES). Of course, stellar remnants 
seem implausible, among other reasons because they 
would have to arise from a large population of normal 
stars, of which there is no trace in the halo. 

A practical search method involves the gravitational 
light deflection caused by a galactic MACHO which hap- 
pens to pass near the line of sight to a background star. 
While the effect is too weak to produce several resolved 
images of the target star, its apparent brightness will tem- 
porarily increase because the MACHO’s gravitational 
field effectively focuses more light into the telescope 
(‘gravitational microlensing’). Such events are rare so 
that one must monitor millions of stars simultaneously to 


WE a TT Ta en Per -~iintT 7 Ty a 1 7c iq 
' H 


tdi 


G.4 


Halo Mraciion 


io>) 
pate pai. Leas 


a 
mM 
1 


Oo oN 
igre 


a 


Fraclhioa 
ad 
Oo a 


O. 
0-1 


Halo 


co 
iN’ 


1) [res 
hO-P OF 10-8 
Mass (M.,) 


Figure 6. Upper limit to the Milky Way halo fraction that can be 
attributed to MACHOs as a function of their assumed mass 
from a combined analysis of the MACHO and EROS data. The 
different line styles correspond to different halo models; the 
upper panel shows those used by the EROS Collaboration, 
while the lower panel the ones of the MACHO Collaboration. In 
each case the solid curve represents a ‘standard halo’. (C Alcock 
et al Astrophys. J. 499 L9 (1998).) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


obtain a reasonable event rate. The Large and Small 
Magellanic Clouds as target regions have enough bright 
stars at a suitable distance and have been used since the 
early 1990s by the MACHO and EROS Collaborations in 
an attempt to find non-luminous stars making up the 
Milky Way halo. 

The duration of the temporary brightness excursion 
of a lensed star depends on the relative distances 
between observer, lens and target star, and on the lens 
mass. The non-observation of short-time events has 
allowed these experiments to exclude MACHOs over a 
wide mass range as a dominant halo component (figure 
6), but does not yet exclude brown dwarfs as a possibili- 
ty. 

On the other hand, about a dozen positive events 
have turned up which, if attributed to MACHOs, would 
point to a mass around 0.5 My, However, the early excite- 
ment about the apparent discovery of some or all of the 
galactic dark matter has given way to a more sceptical 
assessment—the apparent mass range of the observed 
events simply does not seem to make sense. Perhaps the 
least troubling interpretation is that one is not seeing 
MACHOs but normal stars as lenses, which is possible if 
there is an unrecognized population of stars between us 
and the Large Magellanic Cloud, or even by stars within 
the Magellanic Clouds themselves if their distribution is 
different from what had been thought. Thus, while the 
observed MICROLENSING events are no doubt real, the 
question of where and what the lenses are remains for 
now wide open. (See also DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES.) 


Primordial black holes 

While stellar remnants seem implausible, black holes 
which formed in the early universe cannot be excluded 
as dark-matter candidates. From a structure-formation 
perspective, they represent cold dark matter; from a 
search perspective, they could be MACHOs. The main 
objection is the lack of a plausible production mechanism 
in the early universe. Surely, as long as particle dark mat- 
ter remains undiscovered, and as long as the observed 
microlensing events remain unexplained, primordial 
black holes should not be brushed aside. 


Cosmological constant (vacuum energy) 

It is possible, and indeed implied by particle physics the- 
ory, that gravitating energy is associated with the ground 
state of quantum fields, i.e. with the vacuum. In the 
equations of general relativity it would play the role of a 
“COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT’, an optional term which is per- 
mitted by the symmetries of the equations, but which is 
not motivated by the Newtonian limit. Vacuum energy 
would form a perfectly homogeneous background and 
thus cannot explain galactic rotation curves or dark mat- 
ter in galaxy clusters. On the other hand, it could well 
explain the gap between dynamical measures of dark 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


matter and the critical density (figure 3). We could have 
a Euclidean universe even if ‘real matter’ contributes 
only a sub-critical mass density. 

The most counterintuitive property of vacuum ener- 
gy is that it is not diluted by the cosmic expansion but 
rather becomes more and more dominant relative to nor- 
mal matter as time goes on. It cannot be measured local- 
ly; a modification of the cosmological redshift-distance 
relationship is the main observable consequence. 

Type Ia SUPERNOVAE as standard candles at cosmo- 
logical distances have recently provided some exciting 
evidence for a cosmological constant. While being far 
from definitive, it suggests that the universe could be 
Euclidean with something like 70% of the critical density 
in vacuum energy and 30% in matter. This scenario 
accommodates effortlessly the absolute and relative 
amounts of baryonic and non-baryonic matter implied 
by big-bang nucleosynthesis, the x-ray gas in galaxy clus- 
ters, dynamical indicators for dark matter, and a flat 
geometry of the universe. 


Modified gravity 

The hypothesis of particle dark matter requires non-triv- 
ial and perhaps bewildering extensions of the standard 
model of particle physics. As long as the nature of dark 
matter has not been positively identified it may seem no 
more radical to modify general relativity such that there 
is no need for dark matter. It has sometimes been argued 
that the hypothesis of dark matter is just a parameteriza- 
tion of our ignorance of the physical laws which apply 
on large astrophysical scales where no independent tests 
of the validity of general relativity exist. 

In one phenomenological approach known as modi- 
fied Newtonian dynamics (MOND), gravitational accel- 
erations a below a certain limit ag are given by a2/ag = 
GnNM/r2 (Newton’s constant Gy). With ag=10-19 m s~ 
this approach is surprisingly successful at explaining a 
broad range of dark-matter phenomena related to dwarf 
galaxies, spiral galaxies and _ galaxy clusters. 
Unfortunately, MOND lacks a relativistic formulation so 
that it cannot be applied in a truly cosmological sense. 

Before modifications of general relativity can be taken 
seriously they must pass relativistic tests. An important 
case are galaxy clusters where large amounts of dark mat- 
ter are indicated by non-relativistic methods 4 la Zwicky 
(virial theorem) as well as by relativistic indicators (gravi- 
tational lensing). As virial and lensing masses seem to 
agree well in several cases, scalar-tensor extensions of gen- 
eral relativity are in big trouble, if not ruled out entirely. 

No serious attempt has been made to discuss truly 
cosmological phenomena such as structure formation 
and microwave background temperature fluctuations in 
the framework of alternative theories of gravity. At pre- 
sent no covariant theory of gravity is known that can 
explain the dark-matter problems on all scales. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Conclusion 

Over the past decade, the idea has become almost com- 
monplace that most of the stuff in the universe consists of 
non-baryonic matter, perhaps in the form of neutralinos 
or axions which are motivated in particle physics for 
independent reasons. Yet this remains a radical conjec- 
ture which has often been likened to the Copernican rev- 
olution when Earth and with it Man was moved from the 
center of creation to some unspectacular average posi- 
tion. Probably the next big step in this second 
Copernican revolution will be precise measurements of 
the angular temperature fluctuations of the cosmic 
microwave background, which are expected to confirm 
or refute the apparent discrepancy between the baryon 
content of the universe and its dynamical mass density. 
Even then, however, the second revolution will not be 
complete without a direct and positive identification of 
the dark-matter particles or objects. Until that happens, 
perhaps by one of the ongoing experimental searches, 
one should keep an open mind. The true solution of the 
dark-matter problem may not have been thought up yet. 


Web update (31 July 2002) 

A team of 27 astronomers led by Professor George 
Efstathiou of the University of Cambridge has published 
strong evidence for the existence of dark energy using 
the clustering pattern of 250000 galaxies in a large vol- 
ume of the universe surveyed with the Anglo-Australian 
Telescope at Siding Spring in New South Wales, 
Australia. By comparing the structure in the universe 
now, some 15 billion years after the Big Bang, with struc- 
ture observed in the cosmic microwave background radi- 
ation, which preserved information about what the uni- 
verse was like when it was only 300000 years old, the 
Anglo-Australian team could apply a simple geometri- 
cal test to elucidate the composition of the universe. 
Their results show that the universe is full of vacuum 
energy, completely consistent with the earlier super- 
novae results. 

Christopher Kochanek of the Harvard-Smithsonian 
Centre for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Massachusetts and 
Neal Dalal of the University of California, San Diego have 
used radio telescopes and gravitational lensing to search 
for cold dark matter. They have studied seven galaxies, 
each magnified by four nearer ones. Because each lensing 
galaxy is ina slightly different position, the researchers got 
four different images of each of the seven distant galaxies. 
The four images should have been identical. But each is 
actually slightly different. The difference was enough to 
have been caused by the kind of clumps of dark matter 
around lensing galaxies that mathematical models predict. 


Web Update references 
Efstathiou G et al February 2002 Monthly Notices of the 
Royal Astronomical Society 330, No. 2 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Matter: Its Nature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dalal N and Kochanek C S 2002 Direct detection of CDM 
substructure Astrophysical Journal (in press) 


Bibliography 

Borner G 1993 The Early Universe 3rd edn (New York: 
Springer) 

Carr B 1994 Baryonic dark matter Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 32 531-90 

Kolb E W and Turner M S 1990 The Early Universe 
(Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley) 

Tremaine S 1992 The dynamical evidence for dark matter 
Phys. Today February, pp 28-36 

Trimble V 1987 Existence and nature of dark matter in 
the universe Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 25 425-72 

Tyson A 1992 Mapping dark matter with gravitational 
lenses Phys. Today June, pp 24-32 

Georg G Raffelt 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dark Nebula 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dark Nebula 


An interstellar cloud of gas and dust which absorbs 
light from nearby sources, also known as an absorption 
nebula; the light is re-emitted as infrared radiation or 
scattered, making the nebula appear dark. At higher 
galactic latitudes, away from the Milky Way, dark nebulae 
appear merely as particularly star-poor regions of the 
sky, but near or against the Milky Way they show up 
strongly in contrast with the bright star fields around them. 
Prominent dark nebulae seen in silhouette against the 
Milky Way are the Cygnus Rift in the northern hemisphere 
and the Coalsack in the southern. A small but strikingly 
distinctive dark nebula is the famous Horsehead nebula 
in Orion. The smallest are known as globules. Dark 
nebulae consist predominantly of molecular hydrogen and 
are believed to be sites of star formation. The true nature 
of dark nebulae—that they are not simply voids—was 
first recognized by E E Barnard, who photographed and 
cataloged them; the results were published in 1927 in A 
Photographic Atlas of Selected Regions in the Milky Way. A 
more comprehensive catolog of dark nebulae by Beverly 
Lynds appeared in 1962. 


See also: Coalsack, Cygnus, globule, Horsehead nebula, 
interstellar molecular clouds. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Darwin, George Howard (1845-1912) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Darwin, George Howard (1845-1912) 


Mathematician and astronomer, born in Downe, Kent, 
England, a son of Charles Darwin, became Plumian 
professor of astronomy and experimental philosophy at 
Cambridge University. He applied mathematical theory to 
the dynamics of the Sun—Earth-Moon system. He added 
physical effects into gravitational theory, including the 
frictional effects of tidal action and the shapes which the 
Earth and Moon take up as they rotate. From his work, he 
proposed a theory of the origin of the Moon, namely that it 
was pulled from a molten Earth early in its history by tidal 
action of the Sun, the first time that the origin of a planet 
had been explained from its current dynamical state. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Davenport, William (1782-1823) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Davenport, William (1782-1823) 


Irish astronomer, born in Dublin, became the second 
director of the Armagh Observatory. During eight fruitless 
years of idleness and decline he contributed practically 
nothing to astronomy until he committed suicide with a 
shotgun in the study of the observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


David Dunlap Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


David Dunlap Observatory 


The David Dunlap Observatory (DDO) is located 25 km 
north of the center of Toronto, Canada, in the town 
of Richmond Hill at 79d 25’ 20’W and +43d 51” 46’N. 
Operated as a research and educational facility of the 
Department of Astronomy at the University of Toronto, 
DDO is the site of a 1.88 m reflecting telescope, the 
largest in Canada. Two smaller telescopes plus computer, 
library and support facilities are available for the use of 
astronomers. The observatory was made possible with 
a generous donation by the Dunlap family in June 1928 
through the efforts of the first director Clarence A Chant. 
First light for the 1.88 m telescope occurred on the night of 
31 May 1935. 

The telescope has remained in productive use to 
the present day contributing to research in several areas 
including: determining the radial velocities of stars in 
the solar neighborhood; pioneering work on Cygnus X- 
1, the first detected black hole candidate; cataloging of 
globular clusters; analyses of several classes of variable 
stars, especially Cepheid, RR Lyr-type and close-binary 
stars; and studies of the galactic interstellar medium. 
The 1.88 m telescope has been upgraded with computer 
controls and modern instrumentation and is dedicated to 
spectroscopic studies of mainly galactic objects. A variety 
of public programs, courses and school visits are also 
offered at DDO. 

For further information see 
http: / /ddo.astro.utoronto.ca/ddohome. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dawes, William Rutter (1799-1868) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dawes, William Rutter (1799-1868) 


English clergyman and keen-eyed amateur astronomer. 
Observed double stars, discovered Saturn’s Crépe Ring 
independently of WILLIAM BOND. Gave a useful empirical 
formula for the resolving power of a telescope known as 
Dawes limit: for a telescope of aperture d cm a double star 
of separation 11/d arcseconds or more can be resolved. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dawes’ Limit 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dawes’ Limit 


Anempirical measure of the resolving power of a telescope 
that was devised by William Rutter Dawes (1799-1868), 
a keen-eyed observer of double stars. According to the 
Dawes’ criterion, the resolving power of a telescope is 
given by R = 0.115/D, where R denotes resolving power 
expressed in seconds of arc and D denotes the aperture 
of the telescope (in meters). For example, the Dawes’ 
limit for a telescope of 0.1 m (100 mm) aperture would be 
0.115/0.1 = 1.15 arcsec. The Dawes’ limit gives resolving 
powers that are some 20% better that the theoretical values 
that are given by the Rayleigh limit. This reflects the 
fact that skilled observers, under ideal conditions, may 
be able to resolve double stars that are marginally closer 
together than the theoretical limit, a limit that is defined 
in a convenient, but to some extent arbitrary, fashion. 


See also: aperture, Rayleigh limit, resolving power. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Day 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Day 


Traditionally, the time taken for the Earth to rotate once 
around its axis, but conventionally taken to be 86400 SI 
seconds unless otherwise specified. There are several 
different definitions of the day. The sidereal day is the 
time interval between two successive upper transits of 
the vernal equinox; it is, in effect, the time taken for the 
Earth to rotate on its axis through an angle of 360° with 
respect to the background stars. The apparent solar day 
is the time interval between two successive noons (upper 
transits of the Sun across an observer’s meridian). Because 
(a) the Earth moves round the Sun in an elliptical orbit 
at a variable rate, and (b) the apparent annual path of 
the Sun relative to the stars (the ecliptic) is tilted at an 
angle to the celestial equator, the right ascension of the 
Sun changes at a non-uniform rate and the time interval 
between successive noons (and hence the duration of the 
apparent solar day) is not precisely constant. The mean 
solar day is the time interval between two successive 
upper transits of a hypothetical object called the mean sun, 
which moves along the celestial equator, relative to the 
background stars, at a uniform rate (equal to the average 
angular rate at which the real Sun appears to move along 
the ecliptic). On the assumption that the Earth rotates on 
its axis at a uniform rate (which is not strictly accurate), 
mean solar days are of equal duration. 

Because the Earth revolves round the Sun at an 
average angular rate of just under 1° per day, the Earth 
has to rotate through an angle of nearly 361° between 
successive upper transits of the Sun across an observer’s 
meridian. Consequently, the mean solar day is just under 
4 min longer than the sidereal day and the sidereal day is 
equal to 23 h 56 min 04 s of mean solar time. 


See also: apparent solar time, diurnal motion, Inter- 
national Atomic Time, mean solar time, sidereal time, 
Universal Time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


DB Pulsating Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


DB Pulsating Stars 


Pulsating WHITE DWARF stars with nearly pure helium 
atmospheres exist in a narrow temperature range near 
25000 K. At this writing, there are eight of these stars 
known. Collectively, they go by two names: the V777 
Her stars, named after the VARIABLE STAR designation of the 
first known star in the class, and the more informative 
name, the DBV stars. The name DBV follows the standard 
convention for white dwarf stars and tells us that they 
are of spectral type DB, indicating a nearly pure helium 
atmosphere, and the V suffix indicates they are variables 
of that spectroscopic class; this is how we will refer to them. 

The STELLAR PULSATIONS in the DBV stars are global 
in nature; their study provides a window into the deep 
interiors of these dense stars, and thereby a chance to 
learn about the physics of matter under extreme conditions 
of density and temperature inaccessible in terrestrial 
laboratories. 

Stars that begin their lives with total masses below 
about 10Mo5, or well over 90% of all stars, end their lives 
as white dwarf stars. Of these, roughly 30% will become 
DB white dwarf stars. Since the DBV stars are otherwise 
normal, anything we learn about their internal structure 
applies to other DB stars as well. Studies of the DBV stars 
thereby serve to constrain our understanding of one of 
the two most significant endpoints for STELLAR EVOLUTION. 
This is of increasing importance as we are learning to use 
calculations of the ages of the cool white dwarf stars as 
chronometers to measure the ages of the various STELLAR 
POPULATIONS in the galaxy. 

The DBV stars are particularly significant to the more 
than 300 yr old science of pulsating variable stars in 
that they are the first class of pulsating variable stars 
whose existence was predicted theoretically prior to their 
discovery. Recently, the pulsating subdwarf B stars joined 
the DBV stars in the distinction of being predicted in 
advance of their discovery. Together they indicate the 
rapid advances in our understanding of pulsating variable 
stars. 


What we know about the DB pulsators 
The DBV stars share a set of common observed properties 
with the other classes of pulsating white dwarf and pre- 
white-dwarf stars, the DOV (PG 1159-035, GW Vir) stars, 
the PNNV stars, and the DAV (ZZ Ceti) stars. The 
observed pulsations occur on timescales of 100-1000 s 
and are the result of modulations in the total intensity 
of the starlight. The amplitudes range from the limits 
of detectability at or near 1 part in 10000 up to 30%. 
Typical amplitudes of the peak-to-peak variations in the 
light curves are of order 10% and appear to be modulated 
on timescales of days to years. All objects are multiperiodic 
with complex light curves. The top panel in figure 1 is a 
portion of a typical light curve of the DBV prototype, GD 
358 (V777 Her). 

The similarities in observed properties of all of the 
pulsating white dwarf and pre-white-dwarf stars are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


T T * T 1] 
0.4- 4 
May 1994 
o2F ; 4 
[ & x + 
pa es % P # ax 
0 b> Na! Na Ned Sette Ne Neel A 
-0.25 4 
-0.4F 4 
f : +——_}—__+—_+—+—_} ++} | 
ee August 1996 a 
: 4 
v st 
a) LH 
E 
eda v4 
QWs T 7q 
& [ ; 
“gab 4 
r i + t i 
0.4fF 4 
[ September 1996 
o.2F 4 
[ BB a d * 5 R ed a 1 
0 tea see Sat ‘aenl Daven Ming J 
She 7 
-0.4 Lo ot 
L f 1 1 1 1 A 1 1 ‘ bo 
0) 2000 4000 6000 8000 


Time (sec) 


Figure 1. Portions of light curves of the DBV prototype GD 358 
(V777 Her). The top panel is a typical light curve from the 17 yr 
it has been observed. The middle panel is a portion of the light 
curve during a surprising event when one of the 
lower-amplitude pulsations completely dominated the light 
curve with a very large amplitude and a nearly perfectly 
sinusoidal pulse shape. The lower panel illustrates the return to 
more normal appearing light curve after this event. 


reflected in similarities of the theoretical interpretations. 
The largest-amplitude frequencies present in the light 
curves are the normal modes of oscillation of the star. 
The frequencies of the normal modes are consistent only 
with the class of non-radial pulsation modes known as g- 
modes. These modes have gravity as their restoring force 
and are characterized by fluid motions of the star primarily 
along gravitational equipotential surfaces. Modes with 
relatively small radial displacements are energetically 
more favorable for high-gravity objects such as white 
dwarf stars. The high gravity combined with relatively 
slow rotation rates, and the absence of strong magnetic 
fields, makes the stars almost completely spherical. 
Just as in all spherical potential problems in physics, 
such as the familiar quantum mechanical description of 
the atom, spherical harmonics provide an appropriate 
representation of the normal modes of oscillation in the 
white dwarf stars. 

In all of the non-radial pulsating stars, similarly to 
energy levels in the atom, the frequency of each observed 
mode is associated with three quantized numbers, k,/ and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


DB Pulsating Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


o= Ok lm 


The first of the quantized numbers, k, corresponds 
approximately to the number of radial nodes in the 
eigenfunction, the second to the degree (sometimes 
referred to as the order) of the spherical harmonic and 
the third is the azimuthal quantum number. For a 
completely spherical system, the frequencies of the modes 
are degenerate with respect to m. In a real star this 
degeneracy is likely to be broken by non-zero rotation or 
possibly a magnetic field. 

We can visualize the degree as the number of nodal 
circles passing around the star. At the photosphere this 
divides the star into alternating bright and dark regions 
which give rise to the observed light intensity variations. 
Because we are observing the whole disk, the alternating 
regions are averaged over the disk. This causes a geometric 
cancellation of the bright and dark regions making it 
difficult, or impossible, to observe intensity variations for 
1 > 5 with current detectors. We note that spectroscopic 
techniques of Doppler mapping used in other bright non- 
radial pulsators are not possible here because the white 
dwarfs are both fainter and broad lined. This is even more 
acute for the DBV stars because the helium lines do not 
have the sharp NLTE core we observe in the hydrogen lines 
in the DAV stars. See also NON-RADIAL STELLAR PULSATIONS. 

Theoretical calculations of the origin of the observed 
modes suggest that they are self-excited, or amplified 
from small perturbations always present in the star, and 
that the physical process responsible for the self-excitation 
is associated with the partial ionization of the helium 
in the surface layers. The nature of this excitation and 
its relation to the convection associated with the partial 
ionization are difficult problems currently being explored. 
Our understanding of this process is in its infancy. 


Asteroseismology of the DB white dwarf 
pulsators 

The theoretical calculation of the eigenfrequencies for 
models of the DBV stars, as for the other white dwarf 
and pre-white-dwarf pulsators, can be carried out to 
considerable accuracy in the adiabatic approximation. 
This neglects the change in energy of a mode and is for 
the most part independent of the detailed structure of 
the partial ionization zone and any dynamical processes 
taking place there. Because time is the quantity we 
can measure most accurately in science, frequencies are 
also the most reliable of the quantities we measure 
observationally for the pulsating variable stars. 

The accuracy in both the measurement and the calcu- 
lation of frequencies lends itself to their intercomparison 
as a way to learn about the internal structure and evolution 
of the stars. This process is called asteroseismology. 

Using the techniques of asteroseismology we have 
made significant progress in measuring the total mass, 
surface layer structure, rotation rate and law, magnetic 
field strength and the absolute luminosity of the DBV 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stars. This last gives us an important asteroseismological 
distance measure. 

Our expectation, based on the linear theory, is that 
for each degree, /, we should find a series of multiplets, 
corresponding to different radial overtones, each with 2/+1 
components. The separation between the different modes 
of the multiplets is related to the rotation rate of the star 
and is a weak function of /. This should give us an 
independent measure of the rotation rate of the star for 
each / observed. The spacing between the periods of the 
multiplets of different radial overtone is set, as you might 
expect from the nature of the restoring force for g-modes, 
by the buoyant frequency averaged over the star, weighted 
by the eigenfunctions. This spacing is roughly uniform 
in period, and the average value provides a sensitive 
determination of the mass of the star. 

Deviations in the spacing of consecutive modes 
from the average value are caused by the way that the 
eigenfunctions sample the star. This is strongly influenced 
by the compositional layering of the star that has resulted 
from its prior nuclear burning history augmented by 
chemical diffusion in the strong gravitational field. This 
stratification produces resonant mode trapping, which 
leaves its signature in periodic variations of the spacings 
of the modes from the global average. This pattern in the 
frequency distribution is called a trapping cycle and its 
determination makes possible an accurate measure of the 
surface layer chemical stratification. 

Asteroseismological analysis depends on accurate 
measurements of all of the frequencies present in the star. 
The more frequencies present the greater the potential 
scientific return. Fortunately most of the DBV stars are 
quite rich in observed frequencies; however, this richness 
exacts a price. In order to disentangle the many closely 
spaced frequencies it is necessary to observe with as few 
gaps in the data as possible for a period long enough to 
resolve the multiplets. 

To accomplish this task for pulsating white dwarf 
stars and related objects, the WHOLE EARTH TELESCOPE (WET) 
network was established in the late 1980s and is currently 
in operation. This network uses many optical facilities 
around the globe to provide essentially continuous 
coverage of a selected target. Telescope time allocation 
constraints and the phase of the Moon typically set the total 
length of these observing runs—new Moon is required 
because the white dwarf stars are typically quite faint. 
The concept is to defeat the encroachment of daylight at 
any one sight: a kind of an anti-British-Empire where 
we would say ‘The Sun never rises on the Whole Earth 
Telescope’. 

To date, the most extensively observed DBV star is 
the prototype star, GD 358 (V777 Her). Nearly 150 h 
of continuous WET observations made possible accurate 
determinations of the total stellar mass, surface He-layer 
mass, luminosity and the distance to GD 358. The best 
fitting values were (0.61 +0.3) Mo for the total stellar mass, 
—5.70 (+0.18 — 0.30) for the logarithm of the fractional 
He-layer mass, log(L/Lo) = —1.3 (+0.09 — 0.12) for the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


DB Pulsating Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


luminosity and a distance of 42+3 pc. For GD 358 we also 
have an observed parallax value of 36 + 4 pc. For now, 
we have these impressive results for only one DBV, but 
results based on observations of more DBV stars with the 
WET should follow in the next several years. 


Mysteries for the future 

With all the progress we have made in understanding the 
frequencies and their distributions in the DBV stars, we 
have made very little progress in understanding the pulse 
shapes in the light curves. All but one currently known has 
a pulse shape with sharp maxima and broad flat minima 
(see the top and bottom panels of figure 1 for an illustration 
of the shapes of the typical pulses). These pulses are very 
asymmetric about the mean light level as well as being 
non-sinusoidal. Many linear combination frequencies (for 
the most part first sums and differences with the sums 
having the highest amplitudes) are often present with 
much higher amplitude than the actual harmonics of the 
modes. The cause, if we can find it, holds a clue to the 
physics of the pulsations and in particular their excitation. 

We have also observed changes of an order of 
magnitude or more in the relative amplitudes of particular 
modes. Perhaps the most dramatic instance of this came 
during simultaneous Hubble Space Telescope and ground- 
base observations of GD 358, when a single mode rose to 
amplitude of 30% and assumed a completely sinusoidal 
pulse shape. Asample from this light curve is in the middle 
panel of figure 1. The timescale on which this occurred 
was of order a day, and the timescale to return to its more 
normal multiperiodic light curve was of the same order. A 
portion of the light curve after the more normal behavior 
resumed is shown in the bottom panel of figure 1. What is 
the cause of these dramatic changes? Are they periodic? 
We simply do not yet know, but the answer should prove 
to be exciting. 

One of the most vexing problems in the DBV stars 
is the role of convection in determining the pulsation 
properties. The convective turnover times near the top 
of the convection zone are estimated to be of order 1 s, 
very short compared with the pulsation timescales. Yet 
most theoretical investigations have assumed that the 
convective flux is frozen in during the pulsations. This 
difficult problem is currently being studied. 

One very interesting prospect is to try to identify 
frequencies that are very stable in both period and 
amplitude to try to measure evolutionary period changes 
by monitoring the rate of change of the phases of the 
pulsation. If this can be done, as seems possible so far in 
the DAV stars (which have been studied for nearly twice as 
long), we can measure the evolutionary timescales in these 
stars and calibrate the white dwarf cooling calculations 
necessary for using the white dwarf stars as galactic 
chronometers. 

Perhaps the greatest mystery of the DB white dwarf 
stars is their origin. How is a DB white dwarf progenitor 
different from one that will produce a DA white dwarf? 
This is especially puzzling given that the mean masses of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the DA and DB stars seem to be about the same. Further, 
along the white dwarf cooling track, the He-rich objects 
disappear around 40000 K and do not reappear until just 
above the temperature of the DBV stars near 30000 K. 
Understanding of these evolutionary questions will be 
dramatically improved if we have accurate measures of 
the surface layer mass for a significant number of DB white 
dwarfs, as well as the He-layer mass in the DA white dwarf 
stars. 

The tantalizing results for GD 358 illustrate the 
potential of asteroseismology for measuring the surface 
He-layer mass, but they also raise a puzzling question: 
why is the mass so thin? Standard evolutionary theory 
suggests the logarithm of the fractional layer mass should 
be closer to —2 or —3. One possible explanation is that 
the observed value is not a measure of the actual total He 
mass but the diffusion boundary as the He percolates up 
from below. It is also possible that this boundary is not 
the base of the He layer, but rather the boundary between 
the relatively lighter 3He and the heavier *He. If this is the 
case, then the total layer mass may be approximately the 
value expected from evolutionary theory. The intriguing 
possibility of this isotopic separation may have other 
astrophysical consequences as well. Perhaps it is possible 
that GD 358 is not typical of the other DB stars for some 
reason. Only extensive WET-style observations of more 
DBV stars will tell. 


Bibliography 
Some flavor of the excitement of the prediction and 
discovery of the DBV stars can be found in 


Winget D E, Robinson E L, Nather R E and Fontaine G 
1982 Photometric observations of GD 358—DB white 
dwarfs do pulsate Astrophys. J. 262 L11 


The DBV stars have been recently reviewed by 


Bradley P A 1995 The DBV stars: progress and problems 
Balt. Astron. 4 311-20 


A recent review of the asteroseismology of white dwarf 
stars can be found in 


Winget D E 1998 Asteroseismology of white dwarf stars 
J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 10 11 247-61 


An excellent discussion of the WET as an instrument can 
be found in 


Nather R E, Winget D E, Clemens J C, Hansen C J and 
Hine B P 1989 The Whole Earth Telescope—a new 
astronomical instrument Astrophys. J. 361 309 


The WET observations of the prototype of the class are 
presented in 


Winget D E et al 1994 Whole Earth Telescope observations 
of the DBV white dwarf GD 358 Astrophys. J. 430 839 


DE Winget 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


de Chéseaux, Philippe Loys (1718-51) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


de Chéseaux, Philippe Loys (1718-51) 


Swiss astronomer, observed several clusters and ‘nebulous 
stars’, and compiled a catalog of their positions, giving it to 
Reaumur, who presented it to the Académie des Sciences 
in 1746, but it was not otherwise published. Eight of the 
nebulae were original discoveries. De Chéseaux was the 
first to formulate OLBERS’ paradox, applied to the Milky 
Way. If the stars extended indefinitely in all directions 
every sight-line would end on a star’s surface and the 
Milky Way should be as bright as the surface of the Sun. 
De Chéseaux suggested that since this was not so there 
was some sort of attenuation in space, dimming the more 
distant stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


de Sitter, Willem (1872-1934) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


de Sitter, Willem (1872-1934) 


Cosmologist, born in Sneek, Netherlands, and started 
a rather traditional career in astronomy, observing with 
DAVID GILL at the Cape of Good Hope, determining the 
masses and orbits of the satellites of Jupiter, determining 
the variation of the rotation of the Earth, and studying 
the distribution and motions of stars. He became director 
of the Leiden Observatory, and turned to a range of 
problems in the theory of relativity. One fundamental 
tenet of special relativity is the constancy of the velocity 
of light, and in particular that c. does not depend on 
the velocity of its source. By analysing the velocity 
curves of binary star systems, de Sitter proved this. De 
Sitter created a mathematical theory of general relativity 
based on four-dimensional space-time and looked at the 
theory’s astronomical consequences. His work inspired 
ARTHUR STANLEY EDDINGTON’S expedition to measure the 
gravitational deflection of light rays passing near the Sun 
during the eclipse of 1919. De Sitter created a general 
relativistic theory of the Universe, and found solutions 
that describe an empty Universe, contrary to the principle 
formulated by ERNsT MACH. The solutions that he found 
described an expanding universe, a theoretical result 
spectacularly confirmed by EDWIN HUBBLE’s observations of 
the recession of galaxies. De Sitter worked with EINSTEIN 
on the Einstein-de Sitter model of the universe that is the 
simple basis for current more complex Big Bang models. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Deceleration Parameter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Deceleration Parameter 


A quantity, denoted by the symbol q, that describes the rate 
at which the expansion of the universe is slowing down. 
The value of the deceleration parameter at the present 
epoch in the history of the universe is denoted by qo. 

Different values, or ranges of values, of gy correspond 
to different cosmological models. For example, if qo is 
greater than 5 the universe is closed and will eventually 
collapse, whereas if go is less than Sr the universe is open, 
and will expand forever at a finite rate. The ‘flat’, or 
Einstein—de Sitter, universe corresponds to qo = i. The 
case qo = 0 corresponds to a universe that expands at 
a constant rate. A negative value of qo corresponds to a 
universe in which the expansion is accelerating. 

In principle, it should be possible to determine 
the value of gq observationally. For example, for a 
population of uniformly luminous sources (for example, 
a set of identical supernovae within remote galaxies) the 
relationship between apparent brightness and redshift is 
dependent on the value of the deceleration parameter. 
Although measurements of this kind are notoriously 
difficult to make and to interpret, recent observations tend 
to favor qo values of less than 5 and hence favor open 
universe models. 


See also: cosmological constant, cosmological model, 
Hubble diagram, redshift. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Declination 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Declination 


The angular distance of a celestial body north or south of 
the celestial equator. In other words, the angle between 
the celestial equator and a star, measured in a direction 
perpendicular to the celestial equator. Declination may 
take values between 0 and 90°, and is taken to be positive 
for an object north of the celestial equator, and negative 
for an object south of the celestial equator. Declination is 
often abbreviated to dec, or denoted by 6. The position 
of a star is normally expressed in terms of right ascension 
and declination. 


See also: celestial coordinates, celestial equator, great 
circle, right ascension. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dee, John (1527-1608) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dee, John (1527-1608) 


Navigator, mathematician, traveler, polymath, mystic, 
charlatan, astrologer, model for Shakespeare’s Prospero 
and King Lear, and court intriguer. Born in London, 
he became a navigation instructor, applying Euclidean 
geometry to navigation and building the instruments to 
do so. He advised expeditions seeking the Northwest 
passage to the Pacific via Canada. He cast horoscopes for 
Elizabeth I, receiving the title Royal Astrologer; he claimed 
to have put a hex on the Spanish Armada and caused 
the bad weather that wrecked the fleet. He published 
trigonometric theorems for determining parallax of the 
new star of 1572. He designed a large-radius astronomicus 
for THOMAS DIGGES to observe it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Deep Impact ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Deep Impact 


NASA Discovery mission scheduled for launch in 2004. 
Intended to send a 500 kg copper projectile into Comet 
Tempel 1 in July 2005. A camera and infrared spectrometer 
on the spacecraft will study the resulting icy debris and 
pristine interior material. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Deep Space (Space Technology) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Deep Space (Space Technology) 


Series of NASA technology demonstration missions 
under NASA’s New Millennium programme. DEEP 
SPACE | (launched October 1998) carries 12 advanced 
technologies, including autonomous navigation and ion 
propulsion. It may be directed to encounter near-Earth 
asteroid 1992 KD and two comets. Deep Space 2 
(launched January 1999) comprises two small surface 
penetrators, part of the failed Mars Polar Lander mission. 
Deep Space 3/Space Technology 3 will comprise two 
spacecraft for testing space interferometry. Launch is 
scheduled for 2003. Deep Space 4 was cancelled in June 
1999. 


Breaking news update (30 April 2002) 
NASA’s Deep Space | mission, which successfully 
tested 12 advanced space technologies and captured 
excellent images of a comet, came to an end on 
December 18, 2001. Engineers sent a final command 
turning off the ion engine, which has used up 90% of its 
xenon fuel. The spacecraft will remain in orbit around the 
Sun, operating on its own. Its radio receiver will be left 
turned on, in case future generations want to contact the 
spacecraft. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Deep Space 1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Deep Space 1 


Deep Space | (DS1) was launched in October 1998 as 
part of NASA’s New Millennium Program and 
completed its primary mission testing ion propulsion and 
11 other advanced, high-risk technologies in September 
1999. The DSI spacecraft flew past asteroid (9969) 
Braille at a distance of 26 km in July 1999. The asteroid 
is elongated and irregularly shaped, with a longest side 
estimated at 2.2 km and its shortest side | km. The 
spacecraft’s infrared spectrometer confirmed that the 
small asteroid is similar to Vesta. It may be ejecta from 
an impact on Vesta or a sibling with common origin. 

NASA extended the mission, taking advantage of the 
ion propulsion and other systems to undertake an 
encounter with Comet 19P/Borrelly. The comet was 
discovered in 1904 by Alphonse Borelly and has a 7 year 
period. The spacecraft’s closest approach to Comet 
Borrelly in September 2001 was at a distance of only 
2200 km (1400 mi). The encounter provided high 
(100 m) resolution pictures of the comet, sending back 
black-and-white photographs of the inner core of the 
10 km long (more than 6 mi long) nucleus. The pictures 
showed smooth, rolling plains with brighter regions 
which seem to be the source of dust jets seen in the 
comet’s coma. Rugged land was found at both ends of 
the comet’s nucleus with many high ridges. This rough 
terrain contains very dark patches that appear to be 
elevated compared with surrounding areas. 

DS1 also measured the types of gases and infrared 
waves around the comet and how the gases interacted 
with the solar wind. A very strong interaction occurs 
between the solar wind and the comet's coma. Near 
DS1’s closest approach to the nucleus, the solar wind 
picked up charged water molecules from the coma, 
slowing the wind sharply. The data show that the flow of 
ions around the comet’s rocky, icy nucleus is not 
centered on the comet’s nucleus. Ions in the turbulent 
flow are heated to about 106 K (2 x 10° °F). 


Breaking news update (30 April 2002) 
NASA’s Deep Space | mission, which successfully 
tested 12 advanced space technologies and captured 
excellent images of a comet, came to an end on 
December 18, 2001. Engineers sent a final command 
turning off the ion engine, which has used up 90% of its 
xenon fuel. The spacecraft will remain in orbit around the 
Sun, operating on its own. Its radio receiver will be left 
turned on, in case future generations want to contact the 
spacecraft. 


Bibliography 
Images of Comet Borelly are available on the web at 
http://nmp.jpl.nasa.gov/ds l/images.html 


Pam Spence 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Degenerate Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Degenerate Matter 


Highly compressed matter in which the normal atomic 
structure has broken down and which, because of 
quantum-mechanical effects, exerts a pressure that is 
independent of temperature. 

At the very high temperatures and pressures that 
exist inside stars, matter is almost completely ionized and 
forms a gas of nuclei and electrons (a plasma). When a 
star has consumed all its nuclear fuel, it shrinks under 
the action of its own gravity to form, in most cases, 
a compact white dwarf. As the star shrinks, and its 
constituent electrons are forced closer together, the volume 
of space available to each electron rapidly decreases. The 
Pauli exclusion principle implies that no more than two 
electrons (electrons with opposite spin) can have the same 
position and momentum within the limits imposed by the 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. As the electrons are 
pushed closer together, and their separations in position 
decrease, the differences in their momenta increase, so 
generating a pressure that, unlike the pressure in a 
conventional (ideal) gas, depends only on the density of 
the gas, not on its temperature. Matter in this state is said 
to be electron-degenerate, and the pressure exerted by the 
electrons is called electron-degeneracy pressure. Electron- 
degenerate matter has densities of around 10° kg m~?. At 
very much higher densities, a similar phenomenon, called 
baryon degeneracy, occurs for protons or neutrons. 

Provided its mass is not too great, electron degeneracy 
pressure prevents a white dwarf from contracting further 
under its own gravity. If the mass of a collapsed star 
exceeds about 1.4 solar masses (the Chandrasekhar limit), 
gravity will overwhelm electron degeneracy and further 
collapse willensue. During the ongoing collapse, electrons 
combine with protons to form neutrons, so producing a 
neutron star. Because neutrons, too, are subject to the Pauli 
exclusion principle, at high enough densities (around 
4x 107!” kg m~*) they form a neutron-degenerate gas that 
prevents further collapse of the star. The maximum inert 
mass that can be supported by baryon degeneracy pressure 
is given by the Oppenheimer—Volkov limit, a limit that 
is not precisely known but which is thought to be in the 
region of two to three solar masses. This gives an upper 
limit for the mass of a neutron star. If a collapsing star 
exceeds this mass it will form a black hole. 


See also: baryons, black hole, electron, uncertainty 
principle, ion, neutron stars, Pauli exclusion principle, 
quantum mechanics, quantum theory, white dwarfs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Delambre, Jean Baptiste Joseph (1749-1822) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Delambre, Jean Baptiste Joseph 
(1749-1822) 


Astronomer, born in Amiens, France. Produced tables 
of the location of planets and their satellites from 
observations made at his private observatory. Succeeded 
Méchain on the project to determine the size of the Earth, 
measuring the section from Dunkirk to Rodez. The 
detailed account of this project forms a three-volume book, 
and became the base of the metric system, defining the 
meter. Delambre himself made calculations of the orbit of 
Uranus, and in his later years wrote a monumental History 
of Astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Delaunay, Charles Eugene (1816-72) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Delaunay, Charles Eugene (1816-72) 


Celestial mechanician, born in Lusigny-sur-Barse, France, 
died at sea (near Cherbourg) after just two years as director 
of the Paris Observatory. Studied lunar theory and worked 
out formulae that gave the longitude, latitude and parallax 
of the Moon as infinite series. The work was accurate but 
impractical as the series converged slowly. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Delisle, Joseph-Nicolas (fl. eighteenth century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Delisle, Joseph-Nicolas (f1. 
eighteenth century) 


French astronomer, member of the Académie, hired 
CHARLES MESSIER aS a draftsman, and as a recorder of 
astronomical observations. Visited ISAAC NEWTON in 
London in 1724. Calculated the return path for HALLEY’s 
Comet in 1758-9 and published a map which guided the 
recovery search, showing the predicted path of return 
calculated at 10 day intervals. Messier, as his observing 
assistant, was set to observe the appropriate sectors, and 
succeeded as the first professional astronomer to see 
Halley’s Comet on its return on 21 January 1759. He 
had, however, been preceded on Christmas night, 1758, 
by a German farmer named Palitzsch living near Dresden. 
Delisle retired and Messier succeeded him as Astronomer 
of the Navy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Delphinus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Delphinus 


(the Dolphin; abbrev. Del, gen. Delphini; area 189 sq. 
deg.) Anorthern constellation which lies between Pegasus 
and Aquila, and culminates at midnight in late July. It 
represents either the messenger that the god Poseidon in 
Greek mythology sent to fetch the sea nymph Amphitrite 
to be his bride, or the dolphin that was said to have rescued 
Arion, a semilegendary poet and musician of Lesbos, who 
had thrown himself into the sea when threatened during a 
voyage to Corinth. The brightest stars of Delphinus were 
cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A small but conspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Delphinus are 6 Delphini (Rotanev), a close 
binary, integrated magnitude 3.6, with components of 
magnitudes 4.0 and 4.9, separation 0.2”, a Delphini 
(Sualocin), magnitude 3.8, and ¢ Delphini, magnitude 
4.0. Interesting objects include y Delphini, another binary, 
with orange (K1) and bluish-white (A2) components, 
magnitudes 4.3 and 5.2, separation 9.8”, and NGC 7006, an 
eleventh-magnitude globular cluster which, at a distance 
of about 115 light-years, is one of the most remote. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Delta Aquarids ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Delta Aquarids 


A meteor shower that takes place in late July and early 
August. There are two radiants in the constellation 
Aquarius, one at dec. —17° coming to maximum on 29 July, 
and the other, slightly weaker, at dec. —10° and coming 
to maximum around 6 August. The parent body of this 
shower is unknown. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Delta Cephei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Delta Cephei 


A variable star discovered in 1784 by John Goodricke 
(1764-86), a young deaf-mute astronomer from York who 
two years previously had explained the variability of 
Algol. The first discovered of an important class of variable 
stars which are now known as Cepheid variables, 5 Cephei 
and other Cepheids of relatively long period now form the 
subclass ‘classical Cepheids’. Cepheids are characterized 
by the regularity of their periods and the form of their 
light-curves, and provide a means of measuring distances 
by the application of the period—luminosity relation. This 
is especially valuable in the case of those Cepheids found 
in other galaxies. 

The apparent magnitude of a Cephei varies between 
3.48 and 4.37 in a period of 5.36634 days; the light curve 
showing a rise from minimum to maximum in about 1.8 
days, followed by a much slower fade to minimum in 3.6 
days. The spectral type is G2Ib. It is in fact a multiple 
star system, having two close companion stars of sixth and 
thirteenth magnitude. With a parallax of 0.003", the system 
is 980 light-years distant and is very luminous (absolute 
magnitude —3.32). 

Observations of classical Cepheids begun in the 
1890s revealed that their surface temperatures and radial 
velocities also vary, exactly in phase with their brightness; 
this indicates that they are actually expanding and 
contracting in diameter. This pulsation gives rise to the 
observed variations in temperature and luminosity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Democritus of Abdera (c. 470-c. 380 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Democritus of Abdera (c. 470—c. 380 
BC) 


Philosopher, born in Abdera, Thrace, Greece. Wrote many 
mathematical works, of which none survive. Suggested 
that the Milky Way was made up of crowded individual 
stars. Best known as an atomist philosopher, he claimed 
that the universe was a mechanical system obeying 
fixed laws, explaining its origin through atoms moving 
randomly and colliding to form larger bodies and worlds. 
In many ways Democritus was the first modern scientist. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Deneb ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Deneb 


The star a Cygni, ‘the Tail of the Swan’. One of the 
three bright stars which form the asterism of the Summer 
Triangle, with Altair and Vega. It is a white supergiant of 
spectral type A2Ia, apparent magnitude 1.25. It is a very 
distant star (approx. 3230 light-years, parallax 0.001”), and 
is the type-star of a class of pulsating variables, varying 
rather erratically over a range of +0.04 magnitudes. It is 
very luminous, its absolute magnitude being about —8.7. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Denning, William Frederick (1848-1931) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Denning, William Frederick 
(1848-1931) 


Possibly a journalist and certainly an amateur astronomer. 
Born in Redpost, Somerset, England. The spectacular 
meteor storm of 1866, and a fireball in 1869, focused his 
interest on meteor astronomy. In 1877 he demonstrated 
a steady night by night movement in the Perseid meteor 
radiant, which proved that meteors came from showers 
of dust distributed along the path of a comet. Had 
the distinction to be cited in H G Wells’ The War of the 
Worlds (published 1898): “Then came the night of the first 
falling star. It was seen early in the morning rushing 
over Winchester eastward, a line of flame, high in the 
atmosphere. Hundreds must have seen it, and described 
it as leaving a greenish streak behind it that glowed 
for some seconds. Denning, our greatest authority on 
meteorites stated that the height of its first appearance 
was about ninety or one hundred miles.’ Published the 
General Catalogue of the Radiant Points of Meteoric Showers 
and of Fireballs and Shooting Stars Observed at More Than 
One Station, discovered several comets and Nova Cygni 
1920. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Density 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Density 


The amount of mass contained within a unit volume of 
material. The mean density of an astronomical body, such 
as a star or a planet, is simply equal to its mass divided 
by its volume. In practice, however, the density of such a 
body increases towards the center. Thus, for example, the 
density of the surface rocks on the Earth is about half the 
mean density, while the central density is about 2.5 times 
the mean value. Astronomical bodies exhibit a wide range 
of densities. Examples are given below, taking the density 
of water (1000 kg per cubic meter) as unity. 


Mean Mean 

density density 
Object (water=1) (kgm7°) 
Neutron star (typical) 4x 104 4x 10!” 
White dwarf (typical) 106 10° 
Earth 5.5 5.5 x 10° 
Jupiter 1.3 1.3 x 108 
Sun 14 14 x 10° 
Red giant (typical) 10-4 10-1 
Red supergiant (typical) 1077 10-4 
Interstellar gas cloud 10-22 10-? 


See also: atmospheric pressure. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Descartes, René (1596-1650) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Descartes, René (1596-1650) 


Mathematician and philosopher, born in La Haye (now 
Descartes), Touraine, France, settled in Holland. His work, 
La Géométrie, formulated geometry in terms of algebra, 
from which comes the concept of Cartesian coordinates. 
Studied Aristotelian philosophy and was attracted to 
mathematics, and the purely logical analysis of practically 
everything. Wrote Discours de la Méthode pour bien Conduire 
sa Raison et Chercher la Vérité dans les Sciences, expressing 
optics, the weather and geometry in terms of mathematics. 
Wrote Principia Philosophiae and attempted to put the whole 
universe on a mathematical basis. Since he did not believe 
in action at a distance, he assumes that the universe is filled 
with matter that constitutes a system of vortices which 
carry the Sun, the stars, the planets and comets in their 
paths, which for unexplained reasons are ellipses. Despite 
the problems with the vortex theory it was championed in 
France for nearly 100 even after NEWTON showed it was 
impossible as a dynamical system, and it remains a boast 
in France about one’s logical prowess to call oneself a 
Cartesian. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Deslandres, Henri Alexandre (1853-1948) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Deslandres, Henri Alexandre 
(1853-1948) 


French astronomer, became director of the Paris and 
Meudon Observatories. Spectroscopist (molecular spec- 
tra). Measured radial velocities and rotations of planets 
and stars. Independently of George Hale, he invented 
the spectroheliograph and studied the solar chromosphere 
and solar activity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Detection of Faint Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Detection of Faint Objects 


In order to detect a faint object against the sky background, 
the object must have a signal level in contiguous pixels 
that is above a set threshold. Thus, the detection limit 
is set by a limiting isophotal threshold and a minimum 
object area. The area is typically that of the sEEING disk, 
ie. the area of a stellar image. The limiting isophote is 
typically 2 times the background fluctuations of single 
pixels. These parameters can be optimized by attempting 
to detect negative images, which will be entirely due to 
noise, and then adjusting the minimum area and limiting 
isophote until the number of noise images is reduced to an 
acceptable number. 


Sky background 

The determination of the sky background relies on 
the assumption that most of pixels in the image are 
measurements of the sky level, which varies only slowly 
across the image. The usual procedure is to subdivide the 
image into tiles, determine the value of the sky background 
in each tile and then smoothly interpolate the background 
value at each pixel in the image. The limiting isophote is 
referenced to this smooth background. 

The size chosen for the tiles is a compromise between 
using small tiles to follow the sky variations and using 
large tiles to ensure that most of the pixels in any tile 
are sky, not image, pixels. The sky intensity assigned to 
each tile should be the intensity value which occurs most 
frequently in that tile. 

Taking the average value of all the pixels in the tile 
would bias the background too high because of the high 
values of image pixels that would be included in the 
average. A much better estimate of the sky background 
than the average value is the median value obtained 
by sorting the pixels by intensity values and taking the 
intensity value from the pixel half way between the first 
and last after sorting. Typically the median value is used, 
although more computationally expensive methods for 
estimating the modal value, the intensity value which 
occurs most frequently, are sometimes used. These involve 
smoothing a histogram of pixel values and taking the 
intensity value corresponding to the peak of the smoothed 
histogram. The smoothing should be done by convolving 
the histogram with a Gaussian that has a width similar to 
that of the histogram. Using the peak of the unsmoothed 
histogram is too unstable. The histogram must resolve the 
distribution of intensities around the histogram peak. 


Signal-to-noise ratio 

The accuracy of the flux measurement of an individual 
detection is given quantitatively by the signal-to-noise 
ratio, R. The fractional error is 1/R. Let S be the 
detected PHOTON rate in counts per second from the object. 
The signal, s, is the number of photons detected in the 
integration time, t; thus s = St. The noise, n, is the 
fluctuation in the number of detected photons, estimated 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from Poisson statistics as n = s/?. Thus R = s/n = (St)¥/? 
for the case where the only noise source is the signal itself. 

Modern astronomical images are obtained with 
CCD cameras which have readout noise, N, equivalent 
to a noise signal N 2, associated with each pixel. 
Additional noise sources are the noise from the sky 
background in counts sl/ pixel, B, and the dark current 
in counts s-!/ pixel, D. If a is the number of pixels covered 
by the image, the total noise in the image is that from the 
sum of the source, the background, the dark current and 
readout noise, 


n = (St + Bta+ Dta+ N’a)'” (1) 
and the signal-to-noise ratio is given by 


ae St a 
“pn |1+a(B+D)/S+N2a/St| ~ 


(2) 


Thus, the integration time, t, required to obtain a given 
signal-to-noise ratio, R, is 


1/2 
R? B+D B+D\ 4N?2a2 
t= l+a + l+a + 


28 S R? 
(3) 


For example, consider the integration time required 
to detect a 22.0 magnitude galaxy in the V band, at a 
signal-to-noise ratio of 10, with a 48 in telescope using a 
thermoelectrically cooled back-illuminated CCD detector 
when the Moon is 7 days old. Assume that the pixel size 
is 1.1 arcsec x 1.1 arcsec, the galaxy image will be spread 
over 4 pixels and the cooler operates at —35 °C. 


Table 1. Sky brightness. 


Lunarage U B 4 R I 
(days) (mag arcsec~*) 
0 22.0 22.7 21.8 209 19.9 
3 215 224 21.7 208 19.9 
7 199 216 214 206 19.7 
10 18.5 20.7 20.7 203 19.5 


14 17.00 195 20.00 19.9 19.2 


Table 1 gives approximate sky brightness in various 
wavelength bands as a function of the age of the Moon. 
The sky background in the V band from a 7 day old Moon 
has a surface brightness of about 21.4 magnitudes arcsec”*. 
The area of a galaxy covering 4 pixels is a = 4 x 1.1 x 
1.1 = 4.84 arcsec”. Table 2 gives the response of the 
CCD in terms of detected photons per second from a 20.0 
magnitude star observed with a 1 m (39.4 in) telescope 
and the readout noise per pixel. From table 2, we have 
N = 7counts/pixel. For a 48 in telescope, the number of 
counts per second in table 2 must be increased by a factor 
of (48/39.4)* = 1.48. The signal from a V = 22.0 galaxy is 
given by S = 1.48 x 23 x 10~°42.0-20.0) — 5.39 counts s~!, 
and the sky background is given by aB = 4.84 x 1.48 x 
23 x 10-°4214-20.9) — 45.8 counts s~!. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detection of Faint Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. CCD response. 


Read noise U B V R I 
(counts /pixel) (counts s~!) 


7 3.5 20 23 26 12 


Table 3 gives the number of dark counts per pixel 
per second as a function of temperature for a thinned 
CCD operated in MPP mode, typically devices with 
46.0 pAcm ® at 293 K. For a cooler operated at —35 °C, and 
a galaxy covering 4 pixels, aD = 4x 2.14 = 8.56 counts sl. 


Table 3. Dark noise. 


Temperature Dark 


(°C) (counts s~! /pixel) 
—30 4.17 
—35 2.14 
—40 1.18 
—45 0.58 
—50 0.27 
—55 0.13 


Substituting the values into equation (3) gives t = 
209s to obtain a signal-to-noise ratio of R = 10 fora 
V = 22.0 magnitude galaxy. 


Bibliography 
A computer program for detecting and cataloging faint 
galaxies is described by 


Bertin E and Arnouts S 1996 Astron. Astrophys. 117 393 


The software may be downloaded via anonymous ftp 
from the URL ftp://ftp.iap.fr/pub/from_users/bertin/ 
sextractor/ 


Bruce A Peterson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Photography 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Detectors: Photography 


Photography has had a long and productive partnership 
with astronomy that is now drawing to a close. Although 
practical photography appeared in 1837, and _ solar 
photography was well established in the 1860s, it was to be 
almost 50 yr before the technology had advanced enough 
to be seriously applied to imaging the night sky. After the 
first demonstrations of its value as a detector of the unseen 
in 1882-3, by 1890 it had largely displaced the human 
eye as the main astronomical detector, certainly for objects 
beyond the solar system. This advance made possible the 
new science of astrophysics. By 1900 photography had 
revolutionized the way astronomy was done and within 
30 yr had completely changed the perception of our place 
in the universe. It also profoundly influenced the design 
of astronomical telescopes and instruments. 

It was not until the late 1870s that the long exposures 
necessary for deep astronomical photography became 
possible. Before that, photographic emulsions were either 
too insensitive to be useful or (in the case of wet collodion 
emulsions) dried out and became insensitive during the 
necessarily long exposure. The introduction of the ‘dry 
gelatine’ process changed that and, for the first time, 
photographic materials could be prepared well in advance 
of exposure. Processing could be similarly delayed, and 
the invention of the dry plate spawned an industry that 
removed the mystique and practical difficulty from the 
photographic process, making it widely available. It 
was in this context that it was found that long-exposure 
photography could reveal stars that were invisible to the 
human eye when applied to the same telescope. By 1890, 
photography was revealing an unseen universe of faint 
stars, nebulae and galaxies that allowed the burgeoning 
science of astrophysics to flourish. 


Photography as an astronomical detector 
In astronomy, photography combines the quite different 
roles of detector and recording medium. As a detector it 
remains useful because of its almost unlimited sensitive 
area, high resolution and signal to noise, excellent 
uniformity, ready availability and low cost. It is also a 
very efficient, stable and compact recording medium, with 
the advantage that the images can be examined easily 
with a simple light table. However, the detector is non- 
linear recorder, nor are the analogue records are easily 
searched, rendered quantitative or duplicated, and it is 
not easy to make the detector itself into a quantitative 
tool. Although now largely displaced by electronic image 
detection, photography still has an important role in 
modern astronomy, especially in survey and patrol work 
and in the detection of faint light from extended objects. 
The light-sensitive layer of all common photographic 
materials is a thin coating of gelatine on a suitable 
substrate, usually glass or transparent film in the case 
of negatives, paper or plastic for prints. Dispersed 
throughout the gelatine are minute crystals of silver 
halides, usually silver bromide or bromo-iodide for the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


emulsion types used in astronomy. These may be 
treated with dyestuffs during manufacture to extend the 
native blue-UV sensitivity of the silver salts to longer 
wavelengths or to enhance sensitivity to specific parts 
of the spectrum, such as the 656 nm hydrogen alpha 
line. Emulsions with useful (although low) sensitivity to 
wavelengths as long as 1.2 zm have been made. 

Astronomical photography is a very challenging 
situation for the photochemist. Because light levels are 
usually very low, the emulsion must be highly sensitive. 
However, if good sensitivity is achieved, the ever-present 
glow of the night sky masks the signals from faint celestial 
sources. The primary aim in the early days of astronomical 
photography was to have a detector as sensitive to faint 
light as possible, in other words, with a high quantum 
efficiency. 

This property was of interest to the commercial 
manufacturer as well as the astronomer, and astronomers 
were fortunate that C E Kenneth Mees, founding director 
of the Eastman Kodak research laboratories, had an 
interest in astronomy. This led to the introduction 
of the extremely sensitive Kodak ‘Spectroscopic Plates’ 
in the 1930s. These were materials designed to have 
high sensitivity to faint light, where exposure times 
were necessarily long. They were used for recording 
astronomical spectra as well as the direct imaging of faint 
light. Although it was eventually realized that these tasks 
were often quite different image recording problems, these 
fast, coarse-grained, low-resolution products were widely 
used in the astronomical community until about 1990. 

Although low resolution and high granularity were 
not too important with long-focus telescopes with large 
plate scales, it was not the ideal combination for recording 
faint, finely structured spectra in the absence of non- 
image background light, nor for recording any kind of 
image where the object of interest was fainter than natural 
night sky airglow. The introduction of fast, Schmidt-type 
telescopes in the 1930s, with their finely detailed images 
and small image scales, served to emphasize the poor 
imaging properties of the early materials. Eventually (in 
the late 1960s) the fast, grainy materials were displaced 
by new products designed for faint object detection, not 
high speed. It was gradually realized that the important 
factor in image detection was detective quantum efficiency 
(DQE), rather than simple quantum efficiency: 


“SNe 
cas (S/N)2, ° 


DQE is usually expressed as a percentage, where 


(S/N)oue = OBEY 
oD 
where y is the contrast, or slope of the characteristic 
(H&D) curve of the photographic material at the sky 
background density, and op is the rms diffuse density 
noise. Considered in this way, the older, highly sensitive 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Photography 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


emulsion types (e.g. Kodak Type 103a) had a DQE of about 
0.1% at best, while the Kodak IIa types that replaced them 
have DQEs of 3-5%. Amore recent development, Eastman 
Kodak’s Tech Pan, has an even higher DQE. 

The result of these considerations was for the 
manufacturers to make the emulsions more contrasty (to 
discriminate faint signals in noise) and finer grained (to 
improve the signal statistics). However, although finer 
grains give greatly improved imaging properties, they 
always yielded less sensitive emulsions. This nexus was 
broken in the early 1970s, when it was found that baking 
emulsions just before exposure gave much improved 
long-exposure performance, mainly by eliminating low- 
intensity reciprocity failure (LIRF). LIRF was reflection of 
the electronic inefficiencies in the light detection process 
which are important at the low photon arrival rates 
found in astronomy. The processes that counter these 
inefficiencies are generally known as ‘hypersensitization’ 
(hypering). They do little to improve the ‘snapshot’ or 
short-exposure sensitivity of the products concerned, but 
can improve the sensitivity for exposures of many minutes 
by a factor of 30 in some cases. 

Further advances, especially the use of hydrogen 
as a reduction sensitizer in 1974, and the exposure 
at the telescope of the hypersensitized material in an 
inert atmosphere, have enabled extremely fine-grain 
materials to be used on all telescopes with exposure 
times comparable with the earlier generation of coarse- 
grained emulsions. The fine-grained emulsions and use 
of hydrogen originated in the Eastman Kodak research 
laboratories, but many astronomical practitioners became 
skilled at the complex hypering processes, often gas 
treatments that made the use of the new materials a 
practical possibility. They also developed their own 
variations of these processes, skills that have been of 
particularly important with Schmidt-type instruments 
specializing in survey work. 


Practical considerations 

The high-contrast nature of modern photographic emul- 
sions has made them much more difficult to handle, a prob- 
lem compounded by hypering. In general, high contrast 
implies that the exposure latitude is very limited. More- 
over, itwas soon found that the level of exposure was much 
more critical with the contrasty emulsions than with their 
relatively low-contrast forebears. The ideal situation was 
to adjust the exposure so that the density produced by the 
night sky AIRGLOW was at a developed density of about 1.0 
above the chemical fog of the plate. This ensured that the 
minimum density on the plate was close to the maximum 
contrast of the emulsion, thus maximizing output signal 
to noise. However, this implied adjusting the effective 
exposure within a range of about 10%, a much tighter tol- 
erance than is usual in photography. This in turn implied 
a knowledge of the (variable) night sky brightness and 
of the effective sensitivity of the material, which had been 
greatly increased by hypering. The influence of these vari- 
ables is reduced by regular measurement of the night sky 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


brightness and an extensive program of testing the effects 
of hypersensitizing. 

A further difficulty with high-contrast emulsions was 
their extreme sensitivity to processing variations and to 
mishandling, especially after hypering. The overall effect 
of the newer emulsions was to force rapid improvements 
in photographic technique that are reflected in the quality 
of the recently completed sky surveys and which also 
positively benefited the last few years of photographic 
observing on large reflectors. 


Photography as a recording medium 

It is with Schmidt telescopes that the large sensitive 
area and high spatial resolution of modern photographic 
emulsions are best utilized, and it is no accident that 
Schmidt telescopes are still the main users of photography 
today. These instruments have fast focal ratios, typically 
between F'/1 and F/3 and cover wide angles of sky, often 
many degrees across. Their continued use of photography 
is not conservatism; rather it is a recognition that the high 
information content of the wide-field images captured by 
these telescopes is most efficiently recorded with modern, 
hypersensitized photographic emulsions. In addition, 
the world’s observatories have substantial photographic 
archives from larger telescopes and these are a valuable 
resource. 

The UK Schmidt Telescope at Siding Spring in 
Australia and its northern counterpart, the Oschin 
Schmidt at Mt Palomar in California, have focal planes 
measuring 356 mm square, covering 6.6° x 6.6° of sky 
(See MOUNT STROMLO AND SIDING SPRING OBSERVATORIES, PALOMAR 
OBSERVATORY). Equipped with hypersensitized Tech Pan film 
they have a detector with effectively 5 zm pixels operating 
at a DQE of much better than 5%. Although this is an order 
of magnitude less sensitive than a CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE 
(CCD), CCDs are still limited to much smaller fields and 
pixels that are effectively 2 or 3 times larger, so the total 
observing efficiency can still be higher with photography. 
This has not prevented the very effective use of CCDs in 
Schmidt telescopes. 

Although the basic solid-state mechanisms of pho- 
todetection in CCDs and photographic plates are similar, 
there the similarity ends. After exposure, the latent im- 
ages on photographic plates and film are developed by 
immersing the material in a sea of electrons, a chemical re- 
ducing agent (developer) that amplifies the photo-electric 
effect of the photons by a factor of a billion or so. After 
the removal of the unexposed silver halide (‘fixation’) the 
final result is matrix of metallic silver particles suspended 
in a thin, clear gelatine layer. This is the photographic 
negative, and in many applications this is the final pho- 
tographic stage. However, this negative can be copied to 
produce large numbers of identical-looking duplicates, or 
portions of it can be photographically enhanced in various 
ways to extract otherwise hidden information. The large 
fields are also useful for making color images of the sky. 

Much more often nowadays, the original negatives 
are digitized with specialized scanning machines to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Photography 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


convert the 10°-10° analogue images buried in the silver 
grains into digital form. This enables many plates of 
the same field to be digitally ‘stacked’, which effectively 
improves (S/N)our by a factor close to N'* where 
N is the number of plates. However, it should be 
noted that even the most modern current measuring 
machines such as SuperCOSMOS in Edinburgh, which 
scans in 10 ym steps, may not be able to extract all 
the useful information from an exposure which has an 
inherent resolution around 5 ym. Multiple exposures 
can also be combined photographically to great effect, 
and photographic imaging methods such as unsharp 
masking are also still useful with original plates, where 
the maximum photographic density in well-exposed areas 
may be well above the density that can be probed by 
digitizing machines. 

Nonetheless, from these databases, accurate posi- 
tions, parallaxes and and proper motions (transverse an- 
gular velocities) for stars can be derived, as well as in- 
formation about VARIABLE STARS. With extended objects, the 
position angles and counts of GALAxIES (for example) can be 
measured and the detection of faint, extremely extended 
galaxies that are normally undetectable by visual inspec- 
tion is simplified. More sophisticated manipulations on 
sets of plates, especially measurements of the color of ob- 
jects, lead to large catalogues of high-redshift Quasars and 
other unusual objects and recently the detection of a large 
galaxy in the process of merging with the Milky Way. 

It seems likely that the high sensitivity and excellent 
storage capacity of photographic plates will continue to 
be an economical and convenient way to gather and store 
data for some time to come, although those data will be 
increasingly analyzed and disseminated in digital form. 


Bibliography 

Eccles M J, Sim M E and Tritton K P 1983 Low Light 
Level Detectors in Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Malin D F 1988 The age of the specialist in astronomical 
photography Astrophotography ed S Marx (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Meaburn J 1976 Detection and Spectrometry of Faint Light 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Smith A G and Hoag A A 1979 Advances in photography 
at low light levels Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 17 43 


David Malin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Superconducting Tunnel Junction Devices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Detectors: Superconducting Tunnel 
Junction Devices 


The absorption of a photon of a wavelength 4 (nm) ina 
superconductor is followed by a series of fast processes 
which involve the breaking of Cooper pairs by energetic 
phonons created by the hot electrons produced as the 
atom relaxes after the initial photoabsorption. The result 
of this cascade essentially is that the photons’ energy is 
converted into a population of free charge carriers known 
as quasiparticles in excess of any thermal population. For 
typical transition metals this conversion process ranges 
from nanoseconds (niobium) to microseconds (hafnium). 
At sufficiently low temperatures (typically about an order 
of magnitude lower than the superconductor’s critical 
temperature 7.) the number density of thermal carriers is 
very small while the average number of excess carriers No 
created as a result of the photoabsorption process can be 
written as 


No(a) ~ 7 x 10°/A (nm) A(T/ Te). 


Here the wavelength is expressed in nm and the 
temperature-dependent energy gap A(T/T-) is in meV. 
Thus in a superconductor such as tantalum with T « T, 
(4.5 K) the initial mean number of free charge carriers 
created No(A) is ~10° eV-!. 

The variance on No(A) depends on the variance in the 
partition of the energy of the photons between productive 
phonons (phonons with an energy Q > 2A which can 
break Cooper pairs) and phonons which are essentially 
lost from the system (Q < 2A). The population of Q < 
2A phonons evolves with time as the average energy of 
the increasing quasiparticle population relaxes, through 
quasiparticle phonon emission, towards the bandgap. The 
variance (No) depends on the superconductor’s bandgap 
A and its Fano factor F such that 


(No) ~ 7 x 10“F/[A (am) A(T/T.)]. 


Expressing this variance in terms of the wavelength 
resolution we have 


dap (nm) ~ 2.8 x 10° a3?[FA(T/T.)]. 


It has been shown that F ~ 0.2 for elemental supercon- 
ductors such as niobium and tin (Kurakado 1982, Rando 
et al 1992). This therefore represents the fundamental Fano 
limited resolution of any superconductor. Thus a super- 
conductor such as tantalum with T < T, irradiated with 
photons of wavelengths covering the x-ray to the near in- 
frared . ~ 1,10, 100 and 1000 nm then ddr ~ 0.001, 0.033, 
1.07 and 34 nm respectively (Peacock et al 1997, 1998). 
The quasiparticles produced through photoabsorp- 
tion can be detected by applying a d.c. potential across 
two such films separated by a thin insulating barrier, form- 
ing a superconducting tunnel junction (STJ). This potential 
bias favors the transfer of quasiparticles from one film to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


i Niobium STJ 
0.1 8 


Resolution di (nm) 


Tantalum STJ 


0.01 & Molybdenum STJ q 
Hafnium STJ 
0.001 ; : 
0.1 1 10 100 1000 


Photon Wavelength (nm) 


Figure 1. The tunnel limited resolution of a number of elemental 
superconductors as a function of wavelength from the x-ray to 
the near infrared. The experimental data derived from niobium 
and tantalum ST]Js are also shown. 


the other through quantum mechanical tunneling across 
the barrier. The detector signal is therefore represented 
by the current developed by this tunnel process. After 
initial tunneling, a quasiparticle can tunnel back, there- 
fore contributing many times to the overall signal (Grey 
1978). On average each quasiparticle will contribute (n) 
times to the signal through an average of (n) tunnels be- 
fore it is lost from the system through traps etc (Poelaert et 
al 1999). Hence the mean number of effective charge carri- 
ers N = nNo. The multiple tunnel process leading to n the 
average number of tunnels per quasiparticle is of course 
subject also to statistical fluctuation (Goldie et al 1994). The 
fluctuations due to the Fano process and that arising from 
the tunnel process can be added in quadrature such that 
the overall limiting resolution for a perfectly symmetrical 
superconducting tunnel junction can be written as 


dar (nm) ~ 2.8 x 107743 A(T/T.)/7(F +14 1/n)¥? 


for the case when n >. 2. Figure 1 illustrates 
this tunnel junction limited resolution for a number 
of elemental superconductors based on the parameters 
summarized in table 1. Note this expression for the tunnel 
limited resolution day can be further generalized to any 
superconductor compound or proximized bilayer through 
the use of the approximate BCS relation in the weak 
coupling limit of 2A = 3.5kT., where k is Boltzmann’s 
constant. Deviations from this relation are small even for 
strongly coupled superconductors such as niobium and 
are also summarized in table 1. Thus in terms of the critical 
temperature we can write 
day (nm) ~ 1.1 x 10°98? 77(F +141/n)'? (n> 2). 

Typically n is of order 10-100 and depends on the size and 
nature of the STJ. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Superconducting Tunnel Junction Devices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Key properties of elemental superconductors used in the fabrication of STJs. 


Material T.(K) Qp(meV)t A(meV) Tgp (ns)t TQ (ns)t H(G)§ = 2A/kT, 
Niobium 9.20 23.7 1.550 0.149 (0.386) 0.004 (0.009) 1980 3.9 
Vanadium 5.30 32.7 0.800 5.3 (4.8) 0.013 (0.012) 1420 3.5 
Tantalum 4.48 20.7 0.664 1.8 (2.4) 0.023 (0.016) 830 3.4 
Aluminium 1.14 36.9 0.172 100 (453) 0.242 (0.246) 105 3.5 
Molybdenum 0.92 38.8 0.139 2077 (2963) 0.405 (0.579) 95 3.5 
Hafnium 0.13 21.7 0.021 ~(8000) (20) 13 3.9 

+ The Debye energy. 


t The quasiparticle (tgp) and phonon (tq) characteristic times taken from Kraft et al (1998). Data in 
brackets are based on recent data on the phonon related characteristics of these materials. 


§ The critical magnetic field. 


Astrophysical rationale 

Having established the limiting wavelength resolution dA 
of an STJ it is worth considering the applications of such a 
resolution within such fields as astrophysics. 


X-ray wavelengths 

Any PLASMA at a temperature above ~10° K radiates the 
bulk of its energy as x-rays from collisional excitation 
line emission and thermal bremsstrahlung continuum 
processes. At low temperatures (<10’ K) the bulk of this 
photon emission is in the form of emission lines radiated in 
the soft x-ray band (SXB) with 4 > 0.5 nm (~2 keV), while 
at higher temperatures continuum emission processes 
dominate. This only arises as a result of the fact that at 
higher temperatures the majority of ions with a low atomic 
number are completely stripped of their electrons while 
the remaining ions are hydrogenic or helium-like species 
of sulphur and iron. 

High-resolution x-ray spectroscopy (see X-RAY ASTRON- 
omy) provides the ability to determine the electron and ion 
temperatures the electron density and the relative abun- 
dance of the elements, as well as establishing the degree of 
thermal and ionization equilibrium. While the measure- 
ment of the intensity of the hydrogenic and helium-like 
lines from the same element is an important ion tempera- 
ture indicator, it is the ability to resolve the satellite lines, 
e.g. the resonance, forbidden and intercombination lines, 
from helium-like species which can determine the key 
characteristics of the x-ray emitting plasma in a model in- 
dependent manner. Table 2 summarizes these key transi- 
tion wavelengths for some of the most abundant elements 
expected to be present in an astrophysical plasma together 
with the tunnel limited resolution of a tantalum based STJ 
at these wavelengths. Clearly such an STJ, provided it can 
achieve a measured resolution close to day, should be ca- 
pable of resolving these key transitions. To illustrate this 
point figure 2 shows the response of a tantalum STJ to the 
large complex of lines (the Fe-L complex) around 1 nm, ex- 
pected to be radiated from an optically thin plasma having 
a temperature ~10’ K. In this example soLaR ABUNDANCES 
and ionization equilibrium were assumed, and for clarity 
the continuum emission has been suppressed. The ma- 
jority of lines are easily resolvable with such a tantalum 
STJ enabling the temperature to be uniquely determined 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


40 T T T T 


Tunnel limited Tantalum STJ Fe XxXIl 
Fe XXI 
30 F 4 
s 
s 
3 
Fe XXI 
3 aot ° | 
5 Fe XXI 
3 Fe XXIll 
= 
oa 
10+ Fe XXill 4 
Ne X 
Fe XXIV 
j Sill , | 
1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15 1.20 1.25 1.30 


Photon Wavelength (nm) 


Figure 2. The simulated response of a tantalum based ST] to the 
Fe-L complex of lines around 1 nm from a hot optically thin 
plasma at a temperature of 10” K. Practically all the lines are 
resolvable by such a detector. 


through the measurement of the relative intensity of the 
lines from the same ion. Also, through the relative inten- 
sity of lines from different elements such as Fe and Ne, 
the relative abundances can be established. Note that the 
intensity ratio of resonance lines from different ions of the 
same element together with line centroids allows one to 
deduce either the degree of ionization equilibrium or pos- 
sibly distance to the object, through the determination of 
the ReDsHiFT z. Needless to say, a high spectral resolution 
is required for such observations. This resolution can be 
achieved using a tunnel limited tantalum STJ but is com- 
pletely impossible with conventional solid state devices. 
To illustrate the high degree of sensitivity of 
various emission line strengths to plasma temperature 
figure 3(a, b) shows the simulated tantalum STJ response 
to emission line spectra from a hot solar abundant optically 
thin plasma in equilibrium over the wavelength region 
covered by the hydrogenic and helium-like oxygen lines 
~2 nm. Again for clarity the continuum has been 
suppressed. The ion temperature T was taken to be 
logT ~ 6.4 and 6.8 respectively. This temperature 
can be established directly from the line intensities 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Superconducting Tunnel Junction Devices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. The principal line transitions of the most abundant helium-like lines. 


Element 1s*-Is2p'P(R) 1s?-1s2p°P (I) RI(nm)_ 1s?-1s2p*P(F) I-F(nm) dar 

Iron 0.1850 0.1859 0.0009 0.1867 0.0008 0.0002 
Sulphur — 0.5039 0.5067 0.0028 0.5099 0.0032 0.0009 
Silicon (0.6650 0.6690 0.0040 0.6737 0.0047 0.0014 
Oxygen 2.1602 2.1804 0.0202 2.2100 0.0296 0.0083 


R = Resonance line, I = intercombination line and F = forbidden line transition. All line 
wavelengths are in nm. ddr (nm) the tantalum tunnel limited STJ resolution determined at the 


resonance line wavelength. 


without recourse to modeling the underlying continuum 
bremstrahlung spectrum which anyway provides only a 
measure of the free electron temperature. 


UV/optical wavelengths 
In optical and UV spectroscopy high resolution normally 
implies a resolving power 4/dd > 10*. From figure 1 it 
is clear that none of the classical superconductors forming 
the basis of current STJs under development (those based 
on Nb, Ta, Al, Mo or Hf) could achieve such a resolving 
power. In fact a superconducting critical temperature 
T. «< 100 yK is implied to achieve a resolving power 
of 10* leading to the development of STJs based on such 
elemental superconductors as rhodium. Of course things 
are not quite this simple, with the temporal characteristics 
associated with the production of the free excess charge 
carriers being a function of the critical temperature 
(see table 1) while the phonons with Q > 2A have 
wavelengths significantly larger than the thickness of the 
film. Thus such low-temperature superconductors may 
well be significantly slower in their overall in response. 
Given that the resolution of a typical STJ based 
on tantalum is not appropriate for high- or even 
medium-resolution spectroscopy what are the alternative 
key attributes which such a device can bring to the 
fields of OPTICAL/ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY? Two features are 
important: (a) The timing characteristics (<10 ws) coupled 
to the broadband spectral capability may make this the 
ideal spectrophotometer: objects such as pulsars and 
flare stars may be ideal objects with which to observe 
with narrow field small arrays. (b) The efficiency at UV 
wavelengths which, if coupled to a large format array 
(a panoramic detector), may allow for the development 
of an efficient broad band imaging spectrometer with 
which to determine the low-resolution spectra of very faint 
objects allowing for very deep field surveys. Such surveys 
could allow the determination in a single exposure of 
the broadband spectra and possibly therefore the redshift 
z (and therefore age) of all objects in the field through 
the measurement of the Lyman edge and the Lyman 
emission lines—the Lyman forest. Note that the observed 
wavelength, = Ar(z+1), where Ap is the rest wavelength. 
Thus the classical Lyman edge would appear at ~400 nm 
at z ~ 3. This is close to the optimum performance for a 
tantalum based STJ where it has an efficiency of ~70% 
and a resolution of ~20 nm. It is, however, clear that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


STJ devices based on lower-temperature superconductors 
such as hafnium would allow the clear evaluation of 
redshift. 


Current performance of STJs 

The key factors described in this section involve the basic 
performance of tantalum based STJs building on the earlier 
work in niobium. The validation of the basic equations 
discussed earlier relating to both No and dar with both 
tantalum and niobium devices give some confidence in 
the ultimate successful development of lower-temperature 
elemental superconducting tunnel junctions such as those 
based on hafnium (Kraft et al 1998). 


X-ray wavelengths 

The efficiency of any detector is an important parameter 
when considering practical applications. Figure 4 
illustrates the efficiency of a tantalum based STJ as a 
function of photon wavelength for the case when one 
film about 100 nm thick is used as the primary detection 
element. For comparison the efficiency of a hafnium 
film is also shown. Little difference exists between such 
films given their similar atomic numbers although their 
tunnel limited resolution should be very different. At 
a wavelength of 2 nm the efficiency is ~75%; however, 
the situation rapidly degrades at shorter wavelengths 
with an efficiency of only 5% at 0.2 nm. While the 
thickness of these films can undoubtedly be increased to 
200-300 nm, beyond this various loss mechanisms may 
become important such that the spectral resolution could 
be expected to degrade. Of course in practice the efficiency 
at the longer wavelengths will be lower than that indicated 
in figure 4 due to the fact that unlike in the optical/UV 
where back illumination is the mode of operation, at x-ray 
wavelengths the photon enters the detector through the 
front (front illumination). This means that some fraction 
of the x-rays at long wavelengths are absorbed in the top 
film oxide layer and also the top film, if the bottom film 
is used as the primary detection film, as well as the top 
contact. This latter point is important when considering 
arrays in which a significant amount of top contact wiring 
together with a SiOx insulation layer is required. 

While the resolution in the medium x-ray band 
(MXB ~ 0.1-0.5 nm) has not yet reached the tunnel 
limits indicated by figure 1, the situation in the soft x- 
ray band (SXB ~ 0.5-10 nm) is close. Figure 5 illustrates 
the measured spectra from a tantalum STJ forming part 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Superconducting Tunnel Junction Devices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ta STJ Soft X-ray Response to a hot (~107 K Plasma) 


200 


180 


160 


Photons/sec (au) 
3 


1.5 1.6 ae: 1.8 1.9 2.0 


2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 


Photon Wavelength (nm) 


Photons/sec (au) 


1.5 1.6 a4 1.8 1.9 2.0 


2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 


Photon Wavelength (nm) 


Figure 3. The simulated response of a tantalum based ST] to the helium and hydrogenic lines of oxygen at a temperature T of 
(a) log T = 6.4 and (b) log T = 6.8, from an hot optically thin plasma. Note the difference in scale between the two spectra as well as 
the radically different line ratios when the temperature has changed by only a factor of 2.5. 


of a 6 x 6 element array illuminated by monochromatic 
radiation of various wavelengths in the SXB (Rando et al 
1998). Each device was 25 x 25 wm and consisted of two 
films each 100 nm thick. Only those photons absorbed 
in the base film, which are separated from top film and 
substrate events by their distinct signal risetime are shown 
here. Typical resolutions dA ~ 0.015 nm (3.5 eV) at 
A ~ 2.4nm (~500 eV) were measured and are indicated in 
figure 1. While these data have not yet achieved the tunnel 
limited resolution (dA; ~ 0.01 at 4 ~ 2.4 nm) the cause is 
determined to be a spatial variation in the detector gain 
which provides an additional variance dependent on the 
square of the photons energy and which contributes to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


overall variance (Verhoeve et al 1998). 


UV/optical wavelengths 

At optical and UV wavelengths, where the photon 
energy is very small, spatial effects on the resolution are 
unimportant. Here it is rather that the signal is low 
such that the signal to noise ratio is the dominant factor 
governing the measured resolution. At these wavelengths 
the photons enter the detector through the substrate, 
which can either be sapphire or magnesium fluoride 
depending on the short-wavelength cut-off required 
(Peacock et al 1998). The theoretical efficiency of a tantalum 
device deposited on a sapphire substrate with this mode 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Superconducting Tunnel Junction Devices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Film Absorption Efficiency 


0.1 1 10 


Wavelength (nm) 


Figure 4. The efficiency of a tantalum and hafnium 100 nm film 
to the absorption of x-rays as a function of wavelength. Some 
key emission lines are indicated. 


of illumination is very high. All photons are absorbed in 
the high-quality epitaxial tantalum base film. Efficiencies 
of ~70% from 200-600 nm are expected limited at the short 
wavelength by the cut-off of the sapphire substrate. Such 
efficiencies have been experimentally confirmed. 

To illustrate the broad band response of this type of 
photon counting spectroscopic detector, figure 6 shows 
the charge spectrum from a single tantalum based 
device when illuminated with optical light via a grating 
monochromator. This grating response covers four orders 
from 296 nm to 1183 nm, i.e. from the UV to the NIR. 
Not only are the various orders well resolved but the 
charge output as a function of wavelength can be precisely 
determined leading to a wavelength linearity which is 
very high. These types of measurements allow the 
determination of the wavelength resolution across a broad 
waveband and are shown for both tantalum and niobium 
based devices in figure 1. 


Conclusion 


The STJ based currently on tantalum or niobium has now 
been developed to a stage where practical small format 
arrays (3 x 3 and 6 x 6 pixel) have been produced which 
provide similar performance to optimized single devices. 
Such arrays are already being developed into instruments 
for ground based optical astronomy (Rando et al). The 
performance of these arrays at UV and SXB wavelengths 
is such that practical instruments can now be considered 
for space based applications. The key specific points 
which have been experimentally demonstrated can be 
summarized as: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Counts/# 


) 5000 10000 15000 
Charge Output Q (ADC #) 


Counts/# 


() 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 
Charge Output Q (ADC #) 


Figure 5. The spectra from a single pixel of a 6 x 6 tantalum 
array illuminated by monochromatic soft x-rays. 


(a) Tunnel limited resolutions have been achieved at 
optical and UV wavelengths. 

(b) High efficiency has been shown at UV wavelengths. 

(c) Resolutions are within a factor of two of the tunnel 
resolution in the SXB. 

(d) High-speed photon counting has been realized 
(10 kHz). 


Areas where development of the basic tantalum 
device are still required can be summarized as: 


(a) Reduction of the spatial contribution to the resolution 
allowing for the demonstration of tunnel limited 
resolution in the MXB. 

(b) Improvement in the efficiency of the device in the 
MXB 

(c) Reduction in the various absorbing materials (con- 
tacts, SiOx etc) which reduce the efficiency in the SXB. 

(d) Production of very large format arrays. 

(e) Development of large format application specific 
readout electronics. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Detectors: Superconducting Tunnel Junction Devices ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10¢ 


10° 


10° 


Counts/# 


10! 


0 5 10 15 20 
Charge (adc x 10° #) 


Figure 6. The charge spectrum from irradiation of a tantalum 
ST] by photons of wavelength 1183 nm. The various orders from 
the grating monochromator are easily discernible and provide a 
excellent technique with which to establish the linearity of the 
device. 


Bibliography 

Goldie D et al 1994 Appl. Phys. Lett. 64 3169 

Grey K 1978 Appl. Phys. Lett. 32 392 

Kaplan S et al 1976 Phys. Rev. B 14 4854 

Kraft S et al 1998 Proc. SPIE 3445 226 

Kurakado M 1982 Nucl. Instrum. Methods 196 275 

Peacock A et al 1997 Astron. Astrophys. (suppl) 123 581 

Peacock A et al 1998 Astron. Astrophys. (suppl) 127 497 

Poelaert A, Kozorezov A, Peacock A and Wigmore K 1999 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 1257 

Rando N et al 1992 Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 313 173-85 

Rando N et al 1998 Proc. SPIE 3445 74. 

Verhoeve P et al 1998 Appl. Phys. Lett. 72 3359 


A Peacock 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 6 


Diamond Ring ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Diamond Ring 


Aneffect observed at the onset and end of the totality phase 
in a total eclipse of the Sun. Just as the extreme edge of 
the Sun’s disk is about to disappear behind (or emerge 
from behind) the Moon’s disk, a bright arc of sunlight is 
seen, giving the impression of a ring. In conjunction with 
Baily’s Beads-type bright points, the ring has highlights 
like a diamond ring. 


See also: eclipse. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dichotomy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dichotomy 


The phase of a body in the solar system when exactly half 
of its sunlit side is visible. The term is used in particular for 
the half-phases of the inferior planets, Mercury and Venus; 
in correct usage it is not applied to the Moon, for which 
the terms first quarter and last quarter are preferred. Other 
bodies in the solar system can be imaged at dichotomy only 
by spacecraft. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dicke, Robert Henry (1916-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dicke, Robert Henry (1916—) 


Physicist, born in St Louis, MO, professor at Princeton 
(1946-84). He did not believe EINSTEIN’s general theory 
of relativity and conducted numerous experiments to 
challenge its famous tests. He attempted to determine 
whether the Sun was oblate (squashed at the poles) 
and could thus cause alterations to the orbit of Mercury 
which had been interpreted in Einstein’s favor. He re- 
measured the gravitational deflection of starlight by the 
Sun. He measured the position of the Moon by laser beams 
reflected back to Earth. He determined the age of the 
oldest stars. All this was to look for effects that would 
provide evidence of his own theory. This was all in vain, 
and his challenge was unsuccessful. He was, however, a 
believer in the theory that the universe began with a Big 
Bang, and had identified the possibility that there would 
be a microwave remnant of that event. He was building a 
radiotelescope to look for it when ROBERT WILSON and ARNO 
PENZIAS found it while engaged on other studies. Some 
claimed that Dicke should have shared in the Nobel prize 
with them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Differential Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Differential Rotation 


The variation with latitude of the angular rotation rate of 
the Sun. From studies of the motion of sunspots across 
the solar disk, carried out between 1853 and 1861, English 
astronomer Richard Carrington (1826-75) showed that 
the angular rotation rate of the solar surface decreases, 
and the rotation period increases, with increasing latitude 
north or south of the solar equator. Although sunspots 
are seldom observed at latitudes much higher than about 
30°, measurements of rotation rates at a wide range of 
latitudes can be obtained by measuring Doppler shifts in 
the wavelengths of spectral lines at different points on the 
Sun. Recent observational data indicate that the sidereal 
rotation period of the photosphere increases from 24.8 days 
at the solar equator, to 26.1 days at latitude 30°, about 
31 days at latitude 60° and approximately 35 days at the 
poles. 

Helioseismology (a technique for studying the 
structure and motions of the solar interior) indicates that 
differential rotation extends down to the base of the 
convective zone, which is located at a depth equal to 29% of 
the Sun’s radius, but that below this level the solar interior 
has a near uniform rotation period of just under 27 days. 


Seealso: Doppler effect, helioseismology, sidereal period, 
sunspots. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Differentiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Differentiation 


The process by which a planetary body (a solid planet 
or major satellite) acquires a layered structure with dense 
materials at its center, in a core, and less dense materials in 
an overlying mantle and crust. A body that has formed by 
accretion has a homogeneous composition, with materials 
of different densities distributed uniformly throughout its 
volume. In order for its constituent materials to begin 
separating out, the interior of a body must begin to melt. 
The heat required for melting comes from a number 
of sources. They include gravitational compression 
(temperature increases with pressure, heating the center), 
the kinetic energy of further impacts (which is converted 
into heat energy, heating the surface), radiogenic heating 
(energy is released when radioactive elements decay, 
heating the whole body) and tidal forces (exerted by a 
planet on a satellite, deforming it and thus heating the 
interior). Once a body is at least partially molten, dense 
materials can start to gravitate toward the center, where 
they form a core, while less dense materials begin to float 
toward the surface, where they form a mantle and crust. 
Differentiation is thus driven by gravity, which also plays a 
partin the melting that makes it possible, so the process can 
take place only in bodies that have grown sufficiently large. 
The temperature at which melting can commence depends 
on the melting points of a body’s constituent materials. 

Differentiation of the terrestrial planets typically 
began with the formation of a core. Once molten at the 
center, dense material (in the Earth’s case, predominantly 
iron and nickel) would quite quickly segregate toward the 
center. The gravitational potential energy released by core 
formation would have been converted into enough heat 
to melt all of the overlying layers, forming a rocky mantle. 
After this initial phase, with the outer layers solidifying 
as heat was radiated into space, the other factors played a 
greater part. Radiogenic heating in the mantle produced 
partial melting, forming pockets of lighter magmas which 
rose to the surface, erupting as volcanoes, a process 
which continues on the Earth and, quite possibly, Venus. 
Impacts, particularly in the period known as late heavy 
bombardment which ended about 3.9 billion years ago, 
provided the energy to melt the entire surface, creating 
global magma oceans in which lighter material formed by 
chemical segregation floated to the surface (in much the 
same way as slag forms at the top of a blast furnace), to 
solidify as a crust. 

Larger satellites in the outer solar system are also 
believed to have undergone differentiation. For Jupiter’s 
Galilean satellites, tidal heating may well have been 
a contributory factor at some stage in their internal 
evolution. Io, Europa and Ganymede are thought to 
be fully differentiated, with predominantly iron cores 
surrounded by silicate mantles (molten in Io’s case) and 
ice crusts, Ganymede having in addition a substantial icy 
outer mantle. The most distant of the four, Callisto, is 
thought to have only a partially differentiated rock/ice 
interior. Mid-sized icy satellites of Saturn and Uranus may 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


well have experienced differentiation, mainly through 
radiogenic and tidal heating. This would have been 
possible through the formation of what is known as a 
eutectic melt of ammonia and water, which is molten at 
a temperature as low as 176 K, and behaves under the 
prevailing conditions rather as magma on the Earth. The 
strange surface of Miranda is thought to have resulted 
partly from an incomplete differentiation that affected 
some parts of the surface only. 

In the asteroid belt, Vesta is the only body for which 
there is good evidence for differentation having occurred, 
and which has survived intact the catastrophic collisions 
that completely disrupted other differentiated bodies to 
produce, for example, the M and R class asteroids, and ion 
meteorites. 


See also: accretion, core, crust, mantle. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Diffraction 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Diffraction 


The bending and spreading out of waves (for example 
light waves or water waves) that occurs when they pass 
by the edge of an opaque object or through a narrow slit 
or aperture. Light waves from a distant point-like source 
advance as a series of wavefronts (‘crests’ and ‘troughs’) 
that lie at right angles to the direction in which the light is 
propagating (like ocean waves rolling up onto a beach). 
Diffraction occurs because each point on an advancing 
wavefront acts as a tiny source of wavelets that spread 
out spherically. When the wavefronts from the source are 
interrupted, by encountering an opaque obstruction or by 
passing through a slit or aperture, secondary wavefronts 
spread out from the edges of the obstruction or aperture. 
This causes some of the light to pass into what ought 
(if light rays traveled purely in straight lines) to be the 
geometric shadow of the object, and causes the edges of 
shadows cast by opaque objects to be fuzzy rather than 
perfectly sharp. 

When a wavefront is imaged after passing through 
a slit-shaped aperture, the resulting image consists of a 
narrow central band of light together with, on either side, 
a number of successively fainter bands. This pattern, 
which is called a diffraction pattern, arises from the mutual 
interference of waves originating at different parts of 
the aperture. The paths along which these waves have 
traveled in order to reach the same point differ in length, 
so the waves arriving at a particular point are out of phase 
to a greater or lesser extent. Where the path difference 
is precisely half a wavelength (or an integral number of 
wavelengths plus half a wavelength) they will be 180 
degrees out of phase (a crest from one coinciding with 
a trough from the other) and will cancel out. Where 
the path difference is a whole number of wavelengths, 
they will be in phase (a crest coinciding with a crest) and 
will add together to produce a crest of larger amplitude. 
The central brightness maximum occurs where a large 
number of waves reinforce each other. The first minimum 
arises where the path difference from opposite sides of 
the aperture is half a wavelength, so the waves from one 
side cancel the waves from the other. The next maximum 
occurs where the path difference is a full wavelength, and 
so on. When light passes through a circular aperture, 
the resulting diffraction pattern consists of a central spot 
(which is called the ‘Airy disk’), into which most of the 
light is concentrated, surrounded by a series of concentric 
light and dark rings (or ‘fringes’). 

The magnitude of any diffraction effects depends on 
the wavelength of the light and the size of the aperture 
(the longer the wavelength, or the smaller the aperture, 
the larger the diffraction pattern). Diffraction affects the 
quality and sharpness of images produced by optical 
systems. In particular, the theoretical resolving power of 
a telescope is determined by the size of the Airy disk that 
is produced when a point-like source, such as a star, is 
imaged. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


See also: Airy disk, aperture, diffraction grating, resolv- 
ing power, wavelength. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Diffraction Grating 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Diffraction Grating 


A plate on which a large number of parallel grooves 
or slits have been cut and which spreads light into its 
constituent wavelengths, so producing a spectrum. When 
a collimated beam of light falls on the grating, light is 
diffracted by each of the grooves or slits and, in certain 
particular directions, waves of different wavelengths 
leaving the different parts of the grating interfere with 
each other to produce a spectrum. A diffraction grating 
that transmits light is called a transmission grating and a 
grating that works by reflecting light from the surfaces 
of the grooves is called a reflection grating. Most 
astronomical spectrographs employ reflection gratings. 

The resolving power of a grating (its ability to reveal 
fine detail in a spectrum) depends upon the total number 
of grooves that it contains. Gratings used for optical 
astronomical purposes typically have between 100 and 
1000 grooves per millimeter and contain between 1000 and 
50 000 grooves in all. 

A simple grating spreads the incoming light into a 
large number of spectra, the fraction of the light going 
into any one spectrum being relatively low. In order 
to overcome this problem, the reflecting surfaces of the 
grooves are orientated at a particular angle (the grating is 
said to be ‘blazed’) so as to concentrate most of the light 
(up to about 90%) into one of these spectra. 


Seealso: diffraction, interference, interferometer, spectro- 
scope/spectrograph, spectrum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Diffuse Interstellar Bands 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Diffuse Interstellar Bands 


In 1922 Berkeley/Lick Observatory graduate student 
Mary Lea Heger included two unidentified features in a 
published list of ‘stationary’ absorption lines seen in the 
spectra of distant binary stars. Spectral lines due to stars 
in a binary system shift back and forth in wavelength 
owing to the Doppler effect, while the mystery lines did 
not. Astronomers soon realized that ‘stationary’ lines are 
formed in interstellar space and thus do not share the 
motion of the stars in an orbiting system — but the two 
features found by Heger remained unidentified. More 
than a decade later Paul Merrill, who followed Heger as 
a graduate student at Berkeley/Lick, investigated the 
unknown features and found about 10 more. Merrill 
dubbed them diffuse interstellar bands (DIBs) owing to 
their great widths (as compared with interstellar spectral 
lines due to atoms and ions). 

Now, 80 years after Heger’s first notice of the 
DIBs, more than 200 of the features have been found 
(see figure 1) — and not even one has been identified. 
The behavior of the DIBs is consistent with an interstellar 
origin, in that they grow in strength with distance and 
total gas abundance, but their wavelengths and widths 
do not match the spectral features of any known atom, 
ion or molecule. 


Historical developments 
Almost immediately following Merrill’s initial work on 
the DIBs in the mid-1930s, several prominent astro- 
nomers suggested that molecules in space might be 
responsible, as this was about the same time when the 
first simple (two-atom) interstellar molecules were dis- 
covered. However, the unknown bands were very broad, 
not consisting of separate, sharp lines as would be 
expected from small molecules. A more difficult chal- 
lenge for the molecular hypothesis was that the density 
of gas in interstellar space is very low, seemingly too low 
to allow the formation of complex molecules. 

Astronomers turned their attention to another 
hypothesis: that the DIBs are formed by solid particles in 
space known as interstellar dust grains. Solid particles 
can absorb at specific wavelengths to create bands simi- 
lar to the DIBs, if the particles contain impurity atoms or 
attached atoms or molecules on their surfaces. For about 
three decades starting in the 1950s the dust grain hypoth- 
esis was favored by most researchers, but again no 
specific substances or particles could be identified with 
any of the DIBs. Furthermore, careful examination of 
specific DIBs failed to reveal some of the properties 
expected of solid-state absorbers, such as bandwidth and 
profile variations with varying grain size, or polarization 
within the bands. 

Thus the dust hypothesis was already in trouble 
when, starting in the 1970s, several factors began to point 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


back in the direction of a molecular origin for the DIBs. 
The first significant development was the discovery of 
many new and increasingly complex molecules in dark 
interstellar clouds, where molecules emit at radio wave- 
lengths, releasing energy gained in collisions with each 
other. It became apparent that molecules can form and 
survive in interstellar space, at least in the very densest 
clouds if not in the more diffuse regions where the DIBs 
arise. Then a series of papers published in the late 1970s 
showed how molecules, even relatively small ones, could 
form broad, featureless spectral bands similar to the 
DIBs. However, the strongest impetus for the molecular 
hypothesis came in 1984 with the discovery that large 
organic molecules are abundant in space, even in diffuse 
regions. In that year the French scientists Jean Puget 
and Alain Léger showed that certain interstellar features 
seen at infrared wavelengths can be attributed to large 
hydrocarbon molecules, specifically a class known as 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Almost imme- 
diately several astronomers suggested that PAHs, or 
more likely their ions (having lost one electron), could 
produce the DIBs. This hypothesis remains viable, as do 
other classes of molecules such as carbon chains, which 
are abundant in dense clouds. 

Since the mid-1980s progress has been rapid, for at 
least two reasons: (1) the availability of very accurate 
astronomical measurements of the DIBs, taking advan- 
tage of new technology in telescopes and light-detecting 


{ [ T T T T T T T T T T T T T | 
0.95 | 4 
> L 
= [ 
c L 
fo) 
= 09 
= L 
2 L 
QZ L 
g L 
5 0.85 C 7 
= i: 
0.8 — BD+63° 1964: 7 
| The Reference Target for DIBs | 
a 


4000 5000 6000 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 1. The diffuse interstellar bands in the spectrum of a dis- 
tant star. All of the dips in the graph shown here are DIBs in the 
spectrum of the star BD + 63 1964. The particles that create these 
spectral bands have not been identified, but are thought to be 
complex organic molecules in interstellar space (O’Tuairisg et al 
(2000), AGA Suppl. 142, 225-238). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Diffuse Interstellar Bands 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


devices such as charge-coupled devices; (2) the involve- 
ment in DIB research of scientists, such as chemists, from 
fields other than astronomy. 


Properties of the DIBs 

Today more than 200 DIBs have been found, and addi- 
tional weak ones appear almost every time a new level of 
sensitivity is reached in the observations. All of the DIBs 
correlate roughly with interstellar parameters such as 
total gas column density or the extinction of starlight due 
to interstellar dust — but none correlates perfectly with 
these quantities or with each other. Subgroups of DIBs 
have been found to correlate internally better than the 
bands as a whole, leading to the identification of ‘fami- 
lies’ that may have a common origin. In any event it has 
become clear that multiple carriers must be involved, 
given the sometimes widely disparate behavior of differ- 
ent DIBs. 

In general the DIBs are strongest in diffuse interstel- 
lar regions rather than the dark, dense clouds where 
radio-emitting molecules are observed. In fact the DIBs 
become weaker with increasing cloud density, suggest- 
ing that they may be formed by ionized species that 
become neutral and alter their spectra in denser environ- 
ments. 

The widths of the DIBs range from less than 0.1 nm 
to nearly 3 nm. Most lie between roughly 400 and 800 nm, 
with a greater concentration of features toward the 
longer wavelengths. Features appear in the near-infrared 
portion of the spectrum as well, although observations 
there become difficult owing to atmospheric interference. 
It is not known whether DIBs occur in the ultraviolet 
because of observational constraints making their detec- 
tion difficult. 

The wavelengths and profiles of the DIBs are, with- 
in observational limits, constant. Minor profile variations 
may be seen from one line of sight to another, but these 
are usually attributable to Doppler shifts in separate 
interstellar clouds that contribute to the absorption. A 
few of the narrower DIBs display substructure in their 
profiles which is usually interpreted as due to rotational— 
vibrational spectra of molecules, although other interpre- 
tations have been proposed, such as isotopic shifts. The 
broadest DIBs, which tend to lie toward shorter wave- 
lengths than most of the narrow ones, appear to lack any 
detectable fine structure. The widths and profiles of these 
bands have been attributed to natural broadening 
(damping) in molecules with very short-lived upper 
states. 

In a very few cases some of the DIBs have been seen 
in emission rather than absorption. The best-known 
region where such emission has been observed is a car- 
bon-rich reflection nebula called the Red Rectangle. In 
this nebula wavelength shifts in the DIB emission bands 
vary with distance from the exciting star in a manner that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


appears consistent with variations in rotational excita- 
tion of molecules. 

An order-of-magnitude estimate of the quantities of 
molecules needed to produce all the observed DIBs 
places constraints on the elements that may be responsi- 
ble. Only universally common species such as hydrogen, 
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and a few others are viable; 
other elements are too rare. Thus hydrocarbons or carbon 
chains, as well as other types of organic molecules, satisfy 
the abundance constraint and are therefore plausible on 
these grounds as well as the spectroscopic properties 
mentioned above. 


Current Status and Future Prospects 

Ultimately the goal is to create and measure, in the labo- 
ratory, the particles that produce the DIBs. Only when 
species are found whose spectra precisely match the 
observed interstellar bands (while not predicting fea- 
tures that should be seen in space but are not) will we be 
able to claim identification. Achieving this goal is a 
daunting task, given the enormous variety of viable 
species, each with its own unique spectrum, and given 
also the practical difficulties involved with laboratory 
studies of large molecules, especially molecular ions 
which are favored by many researchers as the most prob- 
able candidates for the DIB carriers. 

Despite the obstacles, several research groups 
around the world are pursuing the DIBs, in the laboratory 
and at the telescope. There have already been some near- 
misses, i.e. species displaying enough of the required 
properties to raise hopes, but so far all have fallen by the 
wayside. However, given the unprecedented current 
level of interest and intensity of effort in attacking the 
problem, there is reason for optimism that at least some of 
the DIBs may be identified soon. When that happens, 
astronomers will have a new tool for probing the physics 
and chemistry of interstellar space, probably gaining as 
well new information on the abundances and types of 
organic species that were present in space long before life 
formed on Earth. 


Bibliography 

Herbig G B 1995 The diffuse interstellar bands Anna. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 33 19-74 

Salama F, Bakes E L O, Allamandola L J and Tielens A G 
G M 1996 Assessment of the polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon-diffuse interstellar band proposal 
Astrophys. J. 458 621-636 

Salama F, Galazutdinov G A, Krelowski J, Allamandola L 
J and Musaev F A 1999 Polycyclic aromatic hydro- 
carbons and the diffuse interstellar bands: a survey 
Astrophys. J. 526 265-273 

Snow T P 2001 The unidentified diffuse interstellar bands 
as evidence for large organic molecules in the 
interstellar medium Spectrochim. Acta A 57 615-626 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Diffuse Interstellar Bands ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tielens A G G M and Snow T P 1995 The Diffuse 
Interstellar Bands (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Theodore P. Snow 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 3 


Digges, Leonard (c 1520—c 1559) and Digges, Thomas 
(1545/6-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Digges, Leonard (c 1520—c 1559) and 
Digges, Thomas (1545/6—-95) 


Both were English astronomers, opticians and military 
engineers. Thomas was born in Wotton, Kent, England, 
and incorporated his father’s work on optics and ballistics 
into his own publications. He was tutored by JOHN 
DEE. In 1573 Thomas Digges published Alae seu Scalae 
Mathematicae, a work on the position of the supernova 
of 1572, showing it had no parallax, i.e. was at a great 
distance, beyond the Moon, thus showing that changes 
took place in the stellar sphere. The observations 
demonstrate that Digges was the best observer of his time. 
Digges went on to translate COPERNICUS’ works and added 
his own ideas of an infinite universe with the stars at 
varying distances in space to his Perfit Description of the 
Caelestial Orbes in 1576. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dione 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dione 


Amid-sized icy satellite of Saturn, discovered by Giovanni 
Cassini in 1684. Its diameter is 1120 km, and it orbits 
at a distance of 377000 km. Its density of 1490 kg m°°, 
the highest of Saturn’s mid-sized satellites, indicates a 
composition of rock and ice. There are two basic terrain 
types on Dione: cratered terrain and cratered plains; 
the cratering on the plains indicates that the resurfacing 
process that created them took place long ago. The largest 
crater is the 231 km diameter Amata. The plains are 
crossed by troughs and fissures, the longest being the 
394 km Palatine Chasma, which is up to 8 km wide. There 
are also features that look like the Moon’s sinuous rilles 
(which are known to be collapsed lava tubes), and strange 
wispy patterns on the surface. A small satellite, Helene, is 
co-orbital with Dione. 


See also: co-orbital satellites, Saturn: satellites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Direct Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Direct Motion 


Angular motion in the prevailing direction, also known as 
prograde motion (as opposed to retrograde motion, in the 
opposite sense). Motion of a body in the solar system, 
either axial rotation or orbital revolution, is direct if it is in 
the same direction as that of the Sun’s rotation: counter- 
clockwise as viewed from the Sun’s north pole. The 
majority of solar system objects show direct motion, which 
is a relic of the motion of the rotating disk of material from 
which the Sun and the planets formed. Bodies in direct 
orbits have orbital inclinations of less than 90°; bodies 
with direct rotation have axial inclinations of less than 
90°. All the major planets, most planetary satellites, all 
but a handful of asteroids and the majority of comets have 
direct orbits. Of the major planets, Mercury, Earth, Mars, 
Jupiter, Saturn and Neptune rotate in the direct sense. 
Most satellites rotate directly; rotations for asteroids and 
comets are known only in a small number of cases. The 
term is also used for the regular movement of solar system 
bodies from west to east on the celestial sphere. 


Compare: retrograde motion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Disconnection Event 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Disconnection Event 


A discontinuity in the gas tail of a comet in which the tail 
appears to break off from the coma, and a new tail begins 
to grow. A disconnection event occurs when the comet 
crosses a sector boundary. Entrained within the solar wind 
is a magnetic field. As the Sun rotates, the field lines are 
wound into a spiral pattern. The magnetic field has regions 
of north and south polarity, and the sector boundary is the 
two-dimensional surface that separates these regions. It 
too is wound into a spiral, so a comet can undergo several 
disconnection events in a single apparition if it makes 
several crosses of sector boundary lines. For example, 
Halley’s Comet underwent 19 disconnection events at its 
return in 1986. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Disk Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Disk Galaxies 


Stellar disks are the main structural features of disk 
galaxies, which we divide into the spiral, SO, and irregu- 
lar morphological classes. The disks are highly flattened, 
with approximate circular symmetry. In spiral and irreg- 
ular galaxies, the disk contains gas as well as stars, and 
fine structure is common, including the spiral arms 
which define that class. Our nearest disk galaxy is our 
own MILKY way, a spiral galaxy; the Sun lies in the plane 
of the disk, about 8 kpc from its center. 

The stars and gas of a galaxy disk follow near-circu- 
lar orbits around the center, in the plane of the disk. The 
disk does not rotate rigidly like a turntable, but differen- 
tially: stars in the outer regions take longer to complete 
an orbit than those close to the center. The orbital motion 
of the stars and gas supports the disk against collapse 
under gravity. Organized rotation dominates all other 
motions; random velocities account for very little of the 
kinetic energy, so that disks are dynamically ‘cold’, or at 
least ‘cool’. In the Milky Way, disk stars near the Sun 
move at about 200 km s-!, taking about 250 Myr to com- 
plete an orbit, but their random motions are typically 
only 30 km s-!. Because the disks are cool, they tend to be 
unstable to forming internal substructures such as bars 
and spiral arms. 

Giant disk galaxies, with luminosities more than 
about 6109L, (our Milky Way is roughly three times 
brighter), are composite systems. The round inner 
bulge is much denser than the disk, and ‘hotter’; the 
stars have large random motions. Within the bulge is a 
yet denser star cluster, the galactic nucleus; some 
nuclei contain massive black holes at their centers. 
Giant galaxies follow a morphological sequence, 
named for its originator, Edwin Hubble; see GALAXIES: 
CLASSIFICATION. The SO galaxies have large central 
bulges or spheroids, and a smooth stellar disk; spiral 
arms, gas and star formation are normally absent. 
Along the sequence from Sa through Sb to Sc, the cen- 
tral bulge becomes smaller, while the prominence of 
the spiral arms increases, along with the fraction of gas 
and newly formed stars. 

Dwarf galaxies are smaller, less luminous, and less 
massive than the giants. They are also more diffuse, 
with reduced densities of stars and gas, and they lack 
the dense round central bulges. At the boundary 
between dwarfs and giants are the Sd galaxies, with 
very thin stellar disks, and only rudimentary spiral 
structure. The trend towards less organized optical 
structure continues through the Sm Magellanic irregu- 
lar class to the dwarf irregulars (dIrr), which are the 
least massive and least luminous, with blue luminosi- 
ties below 108 L, All of these classes of dwarf disk 
galaxies are rich in gas, and have relatively large contri- 
butions from young stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Structures of galaxy disks 

Stellar disks 

The Milky Way is the only galaxy where the three- 
dimensional structure is well known; elsewhere, we see 
only two-dimensional projections of the galaxies. By 
observing many galaxies, randomly distributed over all 
possible viewing angles, we deduce the average three- 
dimensional structures of the various classes. In disk 
galaxies that we view nearly face-on, perpendicular to 
the plane containing the disk, the projected brightness of 
starlight declines smoothly with radius. At a given wave- 
length A, the run of intensity [,(r) with radius r from the 
disk center, is roughly exponential: I, (r) = (0) e*//r. The 
radial scale length h, is the e-folding length for the starlight 
integrated vertically through the disk. In most spiral 
galaxies, h, is 1-5 kpc; dwarfs can have h,<1 kpc while in 
some peculiar giant galaxies h,>10 kpc. 

In most disk galaxies, near the center where r<h,, the 
luminosity rises above the inward extrapolation of the 
exponential law describing the main disk. We can define 
the disk central brightness 1,(0) by extending the disk 
model to r=0; the total luminosity of the disk is simply 
Lj=2,/1,21,(0). Measured values of the central disk bright- 
ness are commonly around 1,*(0)~;150 L, pce? in blue 
light; this is the Freeman peak. It is now recognized that 
the Freeman value reflects an approximate upper bound 
to disk surface brightness. While few galaxy disks have 
brighter centers, disks exist with lower surface bright- 
ness, ranging down to a few percent of the Freeman 
luminosity density. These are the low-surface-brightness 
galaxies. One caution: although it is usual to extrapolate 
the exponential law in this way, it is not clear if the stel- 
lar disks really extend into the central galaxy. 

We see our own galaxy, the Milky Way, as a lumi- 
nous path across the sky on a dark night; the Sun is near 
the mid-plane of our disk, so we observe the stellar disk 
in projection from within. The disks of other galaxies also 
appear as narrow bands of light when we see them edge- 
on. If an edge-on disk contains only stars, with no inter- 
stellar matter to block light, we can use brightness maps 
to derive the distribution of stellar density ‘above’ the 
mid-plane in the z-direction. 

Stellar disks have complicated vertical structures. In 
our own Milky Way, the youngest stars are concentrated 
near the disk mid-plane, with exponential scale heights 
h,<0.1-0.2 kpc (see GALACTIC THIN DISC). Older stars form 
a ‘thick disk’ (see GALACTIC THICK DISC) with a scale height 
h,~1 kpc. The vertical scale height of each component of 
a stellar disk depends on its velocity dispersion perpen- 
dicular to the disk; higher speeds yield thicker disks, 
since the stars can travel further from the midplane. 
Young stars are born from clouds of gas that are dynam- 
ically ‘cold’; they have little vertical kinetic energy, and 
are confined close to the mid-plane. As they orbit, stars 
feel the gravitational forces from large lumps of gas and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Disk Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


= : 
i] r 4 
” 60} . . °° 

E ° 

a 30 ° 

3 [ oe 4 
= a ”, 

| roe A eo J 
>" -30 | . 1 
D 

3 -60 | : oes 0 

2 [ > ¢ i 
" it | \ \ | 


stellar age (Gigayears) 


Figure 1. For nearby main-sequence F stars, velocity v,-v,,, per- 
pendicular to the Galactic plane, measured relative to the Sun. 
Open circles show stars with less than 1/4 of the Sun’s iron 
abundance. Older stars tend to be metal-poor and faster-mov- 
ing. Data from Edvardsson et al 1993 Astron. Astrophys. 275 101. 


stars that are present in the spiral arms. The repeated 
tugs ‘heat’ them, increasing their random motions both 
vertically and in the plane of the disk: see figure 1. 

In external galaxies, the vertical light distributions is 
often nearly exponential at large z, but flattens near the 
mid-plane. The average vertical scale heights derived 
from fits to the luminosity profiles of giant disks are 
smaller than the radial scale lengths, typically by factors 
of ~5-10. Some ‘superthin’ Sd galaxies have even larger 
ratios, while irregular galaxies are typically fluffy: see 
figure 2. When we observe a galaxy disk edge-on, there 
is the additional complication that we integrate the light 
over a range of radii. The projected light distribution 
along the mid-plane z = 0 is not proportional to the sur- 
face brightness I,(r) that we would measure if the galaxy 
was seen face-on. For example, the radial brightness pro- 


Figure 2. B-band images of two very different disk galaxies. 
Top: ‘superthin’ Sd UGC 7321, viewed $2° from edge-on. This 
is a small galaxy, with Lg~109 L,(L Matthews, WIYN telescope). 
Bottom: barred Magellanic or irregular NGC 55, about 10° from 
edge-on. Its linear size is about half that of UGC 7321, while it 
is twice as luminous. Note the fluffy disk, and off-center con- 
centration of light (A Ferguson). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 3. V-band image of Sa galaxy NGC 4594, the ‘Sombrero’. 
This is a luminous galaxy (Ly~8-10!° L;) with a very large bulge, 
and numerous globular star clusters around it (A Cole, WIYN 
telescope). 


file of an exponential disk that is edge-on will be fit by 
modified Bessel functions, which have a shallower drop- 
off with radius than the exponential distribution. 


Gas disks 

Except in the SO galaxies, the disk contains gas as well as 
stars. The interstellar medium of a disk galaxy like the 
Milky Way is richly varied. It includes phases ranging 
from molecular cloud complexes with densities of ~102 
particles cm-3, to diffuse highly ionized gas with densi- 
ties of ~10-2 cm-3 and temperatures >106 K. The gas is 
also threaded with energetically significant magnetic 
fields, and bathed in the cosmic rays trapped by the field. 
Interstellar matter is perhaps most readily seen as dark 
clouds or lanes, where dust grains associated with the 
gas block our view of the stars behind. In the southern 
and northern Milky Way, dust is apparent as individual 
dark clouds, such as the ‘coal sacks’, along the plane of 
the bright disk. In optical pictures of edge-on disk galax- 
ies such as figure 3, dust in the disk causes the character- 
istic dark band across the mid-plane. See also INTERSTEL- 
LAR MATTER. 

Interstellar dust grains (see INTERSTELLAR GRAINS) 
absorb and scatter starlight at wavelengths from the near 
infrared to soft x-rays. Interstellar dust grains are small— 
most have diameters between 0.001 um and 1 wm—and 
dust opacity rises rapidly with decreasing wavelength. 
We get our best views of the distribution of stars in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Disk Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spiral galaxies in the infrared spectral region at ,~2 um, 
the longest wavelengths where direct stellar radiation is 
still important. In the thermal infrared region, at wave- 
lengths 5-300 um, we see radiation from the dust grains 
themselves, warmed by the starlight that they have 
absorbed; most of the power is in the far infrared (FIR), 
at ,>50 um. Images of galaxies at FIR wavelengths show 
emission where there are stellar (or other) heating 
sources, and the dust absorbs their light efficiently. The 
most spectacular star-forming disk galaxies, the STAR- 
BURST GALAXIES such as M82, contain so much dusty gas 
that it blocks starlight even at infrared wavelengths. 
There, the distributions of young stars can only be 
mapped from the FIR emission, and the radio emission of 
ionized gas near massive stars, or of the young remnants 
of supernova explosions. 

A typical giant spiral galaxy has about 5-10x109 M, 
of cool interstellar gas. About half of this is clumped into 
dense regions, close to the midplane of the disk, where 
hydrogen is in molecular form (H2). Young stars are born 
in these cool molecular clouds. Since H is a symmetric 
molecule, it produces no strong emission, and its ultravi- 
olet absorption bands become difficult to observe in 
dense regions of the interstellar medium. The locations 
and amount of Hy) are usually derived from observations 
of tracer molecules which do produce radio frequency 
line emission, such as CO or HCN. Molecular gas is usu- 
ally concentrated in the inner galaxy, where it forms a 
very thin disk, with scale height h,<0.1-0.3 kpc. 

The remainder of the interstellar gas is more diffuse- 
ly distributed; most of it is neutral (H I) or ionized (H ID) 
hydrogen. The spatial distribution of the H I in disk 
galaxies is the most easily measured, through the hyper- 
fine 21 cm emission line. This component is usually quite 
thin with vertical scale height h,<1 kpc, and a radial dis- 
tribution that extends further from the center than the 
stellar disk. The outer regions of most galaxy disks 
appear to consist mainly of H I gas. Warm ionized gas, 
within 1-2 kpc of the midplane, is traced from the recom- 
bination emission lines of hydrogen. The disk is sur- 
rounded by a much hotter diffuse halo of gas at 105-106 
K; we detect it in x-ray emission, or by ultraviolet 
absorption spectroscopy of resonance lines produced by 
heavier elements within the hot gas. 

The first unambiguous evidence for a giant halo of 
hot gas around a nearby spiral galaxy much like our own 
Milky Way was found by astronomers using NASA’s 
CHANDRA X-RAY OBSERVATORY. Chandra found a diffuse 
halo of x-ray gas, radiating at a temperature of almost 3 
million degrees, around galaxy NGC 4631, approximate- 
ly 25 million light years from Earth. The Chandra image 
reveals a halo of hot gas that extends for approximately 
25 000 light years above the disk of the galaxy. One 
important feature of the x-ray emission from NGC 4631 
is that it closely resembles the overall size and shape seen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


in the radio emission from the galaxy. This indicates that 
there may be a close connection between the outflows of 
hot gas, seen in x-rays, and the galaxy’s magnetic field, 
revealed by radio emission. A Hubble image of NGC 
4631 shows filamentary, loop-like structures enclosing 
enhanced x-ray-emitting gas and emanating from 
regions of recent star formation in the galaxy’s disk. 
Together, these data clearly show that the hot gas is heat- 
ed by clusters of massive stars and is now expanding into 
the halo of the galaxy. 

The interplay between the gaseous and stellar com- 
ponents of disks is extremely complicated. A gaseous 
disk experiences dissipation, and can radiate away the 
energy associated with random motions, so that it tends 
to collapse in the vertical direction. However, energy and 
momentum are fed into the interstellar medium, by fast 
stellar winds, ionizing radiation, and supernova explo- 
sions from massive stars. These increase the internal 
energy of the gas, causing it to expand vertically; in 
extreme cases it can even escape as a galactic wind. Since 
stars are made from dense cool gas, star formation can be 


Figure 4. The barred galaxy NGC 1300, classified SBb or SBbc, 
with ‘grand design’ spiral arms. The arms trail; their tips point 
opposite to the galaxy’s sense of rotation. Note the dust lanes 
on the leading edge of the bar, and on the concave sides of the 
spiral arms (WIYN telescope). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Disk Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a self-regulating process. If many young stars are made, 
they can blow the gas away, or heat it so much as to pre- 
vent further starbirth. See also GAS IN GALAXIES. 


Spiral arms and bars 

The photogenic arms of spiral galaxies are the most strik- 
ing luminous structures in any galaxy atlas. In a minori- 
ty of giant galaxies, such as M81 or NGC 1300 (see figure 
4), we see a ‘grand design’ spiral: a pair of well-defined 
arms winds over azimuth angles of more than 90° and 
extends in radius over much of the optically visible stel- 
lar disk. More frequently, the spiral arms are broken up 
into shorter segments, and more than two arms are pre- 
sent. In ‘flocculent’ disks, the spiral consists of many 
small arm fragments; there is no organized spiral struc- 
ture on large scales. Gas seems to be essential to forming 
spiral arms; the SO galaxies lack both gas and spiral pat- 
tern. Strong spiral arms form most readily in the rapidly 
rotating massive disks of luminous galaxies. Lower lumi- 
nosity (and less massive) galaxies have messy spiral pat- 
terns, or none. The Sd systems often have ill-defined 
arms, while spiral arms are totally absent in the low mass 
dirr galaxies. The decline in spiral arm intensity and fre- 
quency with decreasing galaxy mass suggests that grav- 
ity is important in shaping the spiral structure. 

To the surprise of astronomers, the galaxy NGC 4622 
appears to be rotating in the opposite direction to what 
they expected. Astronomers are puzzled by the clock- 
wise rotation because of the direction the outer spiral 
arms are pointing. Most spiral galaxies have arms of gas 
and stars that trail behind as they turn. But this galaxy 
has two leading outer arms that point toward the direc- 
tion of the galaxy’s clockwise rotation. To add to the 
conundrum, NGC 4622 also has a trailing inner arm that 
is wrapped around the galaxy in the opposite direction it 
is rotating. Astronomers suspect that NGC 4622 interact- 
ed with another galaxy. Its two outer arms are lopsided, 
meaning that something disturbed it. The new Hubble 
image suggests that NGC 4622 consumed a small com- 
panion galaxy. The galaxy’s core provides new evidence 
for a merger between NGC 4622 and a smaller galaxy. 
This information could be the key to understanding the 
unusual leading arms. 

Spiral arms can be characterized by their pitch 
angle, the angle at which the arm cuts through a circle 
around the galaxy center. Arms in Sa galaxies are tightly 
wound, with small pitch angles, while those in later-type 
spirals are more open, with pitch angles of 10-30°. Spiral 
arms generally trail, with the tips of the arms pointing 
opposite to the direction of galactic rotation. In figure 4, 
we see dark dust lanes on the concave sides of the spiral 
arms; these show where the disk gas is compressed as it 
flows into the arms. Thus the spiral stands out when 
observed in H I, or tracers of molecular gas such as CO 
emission. The bright young stars which make the spiral 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


arms so prominent have been formed from this com- 
pressed gas. 

Massive stars have short lives; those hot enough to 
ionize the gas around them last less than 5 Myr, and 
lifetimes are generally <30 Myr. This is only about 
10-20% of a galactic rotation period. So the hot stars 
that we see in the grand-design spiral arms must have 
been born in or near them; if they were made elsewhere 
in the disk, they would die before they could be con- 
centrated into the spiral arms. A classic problem is 
whether spiral arms stimulate star formation, or simply 
act to organize it. In the former case, we would expect 
star formation to be more vigorous in galaxies with 
grand-design spiral patterns than in flocculent galaxies. 
But observational comparisons show no significant dif- 
ference in the rates; the arms seem to act more as star 
formation organizers. 

The young stars in spiral arms radiate 10-100 times 
as much power per unit mass as older stellar popula- 
tions, in which the most massive stars are no longer pre- 
sent. Even small fractions of young stars can have major 
observable consequences. These effects are most pro- 
nounced in blue and ultraviolet light, where these hot 
stars produce most of their luminosity. Young massive 
stars also photoionize the gas from which they were 
born, producing brilliant ionized nebulae, known as H II 
regions. The H II regions are excellent tracers of spiral 
structure, since they are easily observed in their bright 
atomic emission lines, from hydrogen recombination and 
collisionally excited lines of common elements such as 
nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur. 

About half of all disk galaxies show a central linear 
bar, containing up to a third of the total light. The ratio of 
the long to the short axis of the bar can be as extreme as 
1:5, as in figure 4. Gas is not required for a bar: the disks 
of SO galaxies are as likely to be barred as are the gas-rich 
spiral galaxies. In Hubble’s classification, ‘B’ is added to 
indicate a bar; NGC 1300 is of type SBb. Bars are the off- 
spring of stellar disks; they appear to be vertically thin, 
like the disk, and not round like the bulge. The main bars 
of giant galaxies typically extend to radii of a few kilo- 
parsecs. 


Bulges and nuclei 

In less luminous Sc and Sd galaxies, and some dwarfs, 
the approximately exponential disk extends to the center 
of the galaxy; for these pure disks, the central surface 
brightness is simply I,(0). Low-luminosity galaxies are 
often asymmetric, with no well-defined center; e.g. the 
brightest region may not lie at the kinematic center of the 
system. The Large Magellanic Cloud is a prime example 
of an off-center disk galaxy; here, the center of rotation is 
outside the bright stellar bar. The irregular galaxy NGC 
55, in figure 2, also shows an off-center concentration of 
light. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Disk Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


By contrast, most giant disk galaxies are reasonably 
symmetric. Extra light is also present in the inner few 
kiloparsecs, above that expected from the main disk. This 
is the central bulge: a spheroidal stellar system normally 
consisting of stars with ages 23 Gyr (see GALACTIC BULGE). 
Bulges typically contain little gas, except near their cen- 
ters. Spheroidal bulges are rotating, but the large random 
stellar motions allow them to be thicker in the z-direction, 
perpendicular to the disk midplane, than the surrounding 
stellar disk. The ‘Sombrero’, shown in figure 3, is an out- 
standing example of a disk embedded in an unusually 
large oblate stellar bulge. Smaller bulges, like those of the 
Milky Way or our neighbor Sb galaxy M31, are much 
more common. By contrast, some spirals have inner 
disks. Like bulges, these small disks have much higher 
surface brightness than the main stellar disk; but they are 
relatively flat, roughly axisymmetric, and dynamically 
‘cooler’ than spheroidal bulges. Inner disks often support 
star formation and have their own spiral structure. 

Images of the centers of disk galaxies taken at high 
angular resolution reveal a variety of structures. In 
some galaxies, small nuclear bars are present, often 
nested within a larger main bar; these have sizes of 
<1 kpc. The available evidence suggests the nuclear 
bars are independent entities, that do not rotate at the 
same rate as their main bars. At or near the very center 
is the nucleus, a tiny (r<10 pc) object containing the 
highest density of stars in the galaxy, up to 106 L, pc3 
(see GALACTIC NUCLEUS). Sometimes a massive black 
hole, with Mgy>10° M, is also present as well. When 
gas or stars are swallowed by the black hole, huge 
amounts of gravitational energy can be released, pro- 
ducing a luminous active galactic nucleus (AGN) that 
can compete with the power output of all of the stars in 
the galaxy. However, most nuclei are not AGNs, and 
derive much of their luminosities from the stars they 
contain. As a result they are relatively faint, with optical 
luminosities of 106-108 L,, 


Dynamics 

The stars of a galaxy move under gravity; other forces 
are rarely important. In the disk, stars are widely sepa- 
rated in space, so we have the additional simplification 
that close collisions between them are rare, and can be 
safely ignored. Thus their motions can be studied as a 
response to the galaxy’s mean gravitational field, which 
must be computed self-consistently from the mass dis- 
tribution; this is a challenge, since the system has ~10!1 
particles (see also STELLAR DYNAMICS). By contrast, gas 
responds both to gravity and to hydromagnetic forces. 
Since dense gas clouds do collide, they can dissipate the 
energy of random motions. Because of this, cool disk gas 
rapidly settles onto closed periodic orbits about the 
galaxy center; in an axisymmetric disk, these are the cir- 
cular orbits. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Rotation and mass distribution 

We can use Doppler-shifted emission lines from the gas 
to find the mass of a disk galaxy. If we measure the speed 
V(r) of gas in a circular orbit at radius r, we can use the 
radial-force equation V2(r)/r = GM(<r)/r2 (which is exact 
in a spherical system) to make a rough estimate of the 
mass M(<r) within that radius. In giant disk galaxies, 
V(r) climbs steeply over the inner kiloparsec or so, to a 
maximum that is typically at Vinax~150-300 km s-!, and 
then stays roughly constant. In dwarfs, the rise is more 
gradual and peak speeds are lower. 

We can compare the observed rotation curves of disk 
galaxies with what we would expect if their mass had 
been concentrated entirely in the stars and gas. Even 
when the assumed ratio of mass to light in the disk is 
adjusted so that gas and luminous stars account for as 
much of the galaxy’s rotation as possible, we would 
expect the rotation speed to fall beyond 2-3 times the 
scale length hr of the exponential stellar disk. Instead, we 
usually see that V(r) remains approximately constant to 
the edge of the gas disk, implying that M(<r) continues to 
rise; the outer parts of the galaxy contain much mass but 
emit little light. A spherical halo of dark matter is general- 
ly invoked to provide the required extra mass. Dark mat- 
ter usually accounts for between 50% and 90% of a disk 
galaxy’s total measured mass, with dwarf galaxies gen- 
erally having a higher proportion than giants. See also 
DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES. 

More luminous galaxies rotate faster on average, 
which tells us that they are more massive. The peak rota- 
tion speed Vinax increases with the galaxy’s luminosity L, 
roughly as L: Vinax% with a~4: this is the Tully—Fisher rela- 
tion. If galaxies contained no dark matter, we might be able 
to understand the TULLY-FISHER RELATION. But since the 
speed Vinax is set largely by the unseen material, while the 
luminosity comes mainly from the stellar disk, the link 
between them is puzzling. Nevertheless, the Tully—Fisher 
relation is very useful in finding distances to galaxies and 
galaxy groups, since we can estimate the true luminosity 
of a galaxy from its measured rotation speed. 


Disk stability 

Galaxy disks live on the edge of gravitational instabili- 
ty; galactic bars, and the spiral arms, are the conse- 
quences. The mutual gravitational attraction of disk 
stars and gas clouds tends to pull them together. On the 
other hand, since the period of an orbit around the 
galaxy center increases with radius, the disk’s rotation 
tries to shear any feature into a trailing spiral arm seg- 
ment. In a ‘cool’ disk, where the random motion of the 
stars is small enough that it does not take them outside 
the spiral arms, their gravity can reinforce a spiral pat- 
tern by attracting other stars into it, and so help the 
spiral to grow. But if the disk contains little mass, or its 
stars have large random motions, then gravity will be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Disk Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


insufficient to amplify a spiral, and no strong arms will 
develop. 

Locally, an axisymmetric disk is unstable, and a spi- 
ral will grow, if the Toomre ‘Q’ parameter Q= 
KOR/3.36GXS1. This criterion specifies that the disper- 
sion Op of stellar velocities in the radial direction must be 
small enough by comparison with the surface density = 
of mass in the disk; « is the epicyclic frequency with 
which a star oscillates radially about the nearest circular 
orbit, and G is the gravitational constant. Computer sim- 
ulations of a ‘cool’ axisymmetric disk of ‘stars’ attracting 
each other by gravity, and initially following nearly cir- 
cular orbits, show that a spiral pattern generally grows if 
Qs1. As it does so, the stars develop larger random 
motions, and Q rises; so we never expect to see a stellar 
disk with Q<1. Near the Sun, the density in the disk 2~50 
Mg pe, and «z35 km s-! kpc-!, while for stars about as 
old as the Sun, the velocity dispersion og~30 km s-1. 
Hence Q~1.4, which is safely greater than unity. 

The simulated disks generally grow a two-armed 
spiral, and often a straight central bar in addition. The 
‘stars’ stream through the spiral, slowing down and lin- 
gering in its gravitational potential well, and then pass 
on through it; the spiral is a density wave, a stellar traffic 
jam. We believe that the same is true in real galaxies. The 
pattern of the arms turns in the same sense as the disk’s 
rotation, at some angular rate Qy, which is set by the 
angular frequency of rotation Q(r) and the epicyclic fre- 
quency x(r) in the region where the spiral is strong. 

Why do the arms of a spiral galaxy trail, pointing 
against the direction of galactic rotation? When a trailing 
spiral is present, gravitational forces cause the inner 
parts of the disk to exert a torque on the outer disk, 
which transfers angular momentum outward and allows 
material at small radii to move inward. The spiral 
torques decrease the energy of the disk’s rotational 
motion, transferring it to increase the random speeds of 
the stars. As the disk ‘heats up’, the spiral eventually dis- 
appears. The disk of an SO galaxy, where no gas is pre- 
sent, would probably behave in the same way: any spiral 
pattern would be short lived. But in a gas-rich disk, stars 
freshly born from the cool gas have very small random 
speeds. Continued addition of these new stars is proba- 
bly important in prolonging the life of a spiral pattern, or 
in re-creating it periodically. 

The gravitational pull of the spiral arms affects gas 
even more strongly than the stellar disk, because the ran- 
dom speeds of gas clouds are only 5-10 km s~!, much 
lower than for the stars. Except immediately around the 
corotation radius, where the angular speed Q(r) of a cir- 
cular orbit is close to Qu, the linear speed 1[Q2(r)-Qy] with 
which gas moves into the spiral arm is supersonic. 
Shocks develop, compressing the gas enormously as it 
flows into the arm; we see dark dust lanes there. After 
about 10 Myr, young stars are born in the compressed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


gas and begin to shine; the Ha emission from gas ionized 
by these stars is not concentrated on top of the dust lane, 
but ‘downstream’ of it. Radiation from the hottest of 
these stars also splits some of the Hz molecules apart into 
atomic hydrogen, H I. 

Like spirals, the figure of a galactic bar is not static, 
but rotates with some pattern speed Q,. Unlike spiral 
arms, a bar truly captures its stars. Within the bar, stars 
and gas no longer follow near-circular paths, but are 
trapped near elongated orbits that close on themselves as 
seen by an observer moving with the bar’s rotation. Disk 
gas cannot flow in toward the galaxy center unless it can 
get rid of its angular momentum; the strongly asymmet- 
ric gravitational forces of a bar help it to do just that. The 
closed oval orbits converge on each other near the ends 
of the bar. As gas on the orbits approaches those regions, 
shocks form. The gas is compressed, and we see dark 
dust lanes, like those along the leading edge of the bar in 
figure 4. In the shock, the gas loses part of its energy of 
forward motion as heat, so it drops down onto more 
tightly bound orbits closer to the center of the galaxy. 
Bars may be important in feeding gas in towards the cen- 
tral galaxy. 


History 

Near the Sun, the oldest disk stars are about 10 Gyr old. 
By examining the number of stars of each mass that are 
present today, we can deduce that the Milky Way’s disk 
has been making new stars at a roughly constant rate 
over the last few gigayears. We live in an Sc (or Sbc) spi- 
ral galaxy; the disks of Sd galaxies, and the irregulars, are 
bluer than ours, implying a larger proportion of newly 
formed stars. Either their rates of star formation have 
increased recently, or they simply began their star-form- 
ing histories later. The redder colors of Sa and SO galax- 
ies tell us that star formation in their disks is decreasing; 
by now, most or all of their gas supply is used up. 

Near the Sun, figure 1 shows that younger stars con- 
tain a larger proportion of elements heavier than helium. 
The disk has formed successive generations of stars, each 
producing metals to contribute to the already enriched 
interstellar gas. In all but the lowest-luminosity disk 
galaxies, we see a color gradient; the centers are redder 
than the outer parts. This is because the inner parts con- 
tain both a larger proportion of old stars, and stars that 
are richer in heavy elements. The bulges and inner disks 
have already made many generations of stars, while the 
outer disks have lagged behind, producing their stars 
more slowly, and remaining gas-rich to the present day. 
See also GALAXY EVOLUTION. 


Galaxy formation: inside-out or outside-in? 

How might a galaxy like our own Milky Way come into 
being, out of the hydrogen and helium gas resulting from 
the Big Bang? Some would argue that giant disk galaxies 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Disk Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


have grown outward from their central parts (see GALAXY 
FORMATION). The dense inner bulge, with its low specific 
angular momentum, formed early on, from a denser- 
than-average lump of gas that collapsed under its own 
gravity; it rapidly used up all its gas in forming stars. The 
disk material, which has more angular momentum per 
unit mass, would have fallen in later, from greater dis- 
tances. It must have remained gaseous until almost all its 
random motion had been dissipated, allowing the mate- 
rial to move inwards and settle onto circular orbits in a 
thin disk. Only then could the oldest disk stars have been 
born. Perhaps the disks are still being assembled today, 
as clouds of cool gas fall in, renewing the supply of raw 
material to make new stars. The dark matter, unable to 
dissipate energy, could not fall inwards; hence the dark 
halo is less concentrated to the galaxy center than are the 
luminous stars and gas. 

Other astronomers point out that the stars of the 
bulge do not seem to predate the oldest disk stars near 
the Sun. They offer an alternative idea: the disk formed 
first, and the bulge grew within it. The disk gas would 
have flowed slowly inwards, perhaps coaxed towards 
the center by spiral arms or a galactic bar. When the inner 
part of the disk had reached a sufficient density, it would 
have become unstable and formed a bar, which then 
puffed up vertically into a bulge. This model has 
received some support from computer simulations. 
Also, in some bulges the gas is seen to follow oval orbits 
similar to those in galactic bars, as expected if these 
bulges are in fact thickened bars. The ‘inside-out’ enthu- 
siasts retort that the bulge of a galaxy like the Sombrero 
(figure 3) is much more luminous than the disk, and so is 
unlikely to be an outgrowth from it. There may be no sin- 
gle route to making a disk galaxy. 


Bibliography 
Binney J and Merrifield M 1998 Galactic Astronomy 3rd 
edn (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 
Sparke LS and Gallagher J S 2000 Galaxies in the Universe: 
an Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 
Jay Gallagher, Linda Sparke and Lynn Matthews 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Dispersion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dispersion 


In optics, the spreading of a mixture of wavelengths of light 
(colors) into its consituent wavelengths. The refractive 
index of a medium (e.g. glass), which determines the 
extent to which a ray of light is deflected when it enters 
that medium at any angle other than perpendicular to its 
surface, is the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the 
speed of light ina medium. Because different wavelengths 
of light travel at different speeds in a medium (they all 
travel at the same speed in a vacuum), the refractive index 
of a medium is wavelength dependent. Dispersion is a 
measure of the extent to which refractive index varies with 
wavelength. 

When white light (a mixture of wavelengths) passes 
through a glass prism, the different wavelengths are 
refracted by differing amounts and are spread out into a 
band of wavelengths (a ‘rainbow’ band of colors), which 
is called a spectrum. The dispersion of a spectrograph (a 
device for producing a spectrum) is a measure of the extent 
to which the various wavelengths are spread out at the 
focal plane of the instrument. For a particular operating 
wavelength, A, dispersion = 54/5x, where 6A is the change 
in wavelength over a distance 5x along the length of the 
spectrum. It is usually expressed in nanometers (nm) 
of wavelength per millimeter (mm) of length (ie. nm 
mm'). The dispersions of astronomical spectrographs 
usually lie in the range from about 200 nm mm‘! to about 
0.01 nm mm, the lower dispersions (more than a few 
tens of nanometers per millimeter) generally being useful 
only for survey work. 

The wavelength dependence of refractive index (i.e. 
dispersion) is also responsible for preventing a simple 
lens from focusing all wavelengths of light at the same 
point, the spread of focal points for different wavelengths 
being called chromatic aberration. Dispersion also arises 
in the phenomenon of diffraction (different wavelengths 
are diffracted by different amounts) and when light of 
different wavelengths is scattered from small particles 
(the shorter the wavelength, the greater the degree of 
scattering). 


See also: chromatic aberration, diffraction, diffraction 
grating, refractor, spectroscope / spectrograph, spectrum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distances (from Antiquity to 1900) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Distances (from Antiquity to 1900) 


Ancient views on the scale of the planetary system 
Before the dissemination of Greek culture in the 
‘Hellenistic’ period that followed the conquests of 
Alexander the Great in the late 4th century BC, notions of 
astronomical distances were purely speculative. Although 
ancient cultures developed accurate surveying methods, 
the mathematical techniques required for astronomical 
distance measurement came only with formal Euclidian 
geometry. 

For the Greeks, who believed the Earth to be spherical 
and at rest at the center of the cosmos, the baseline for 
distances within the planetary system was the Earth’s 
radius. ERATOSTHENES OF CYRENE (ca 276-195 BC) devised a 
method and made the first measurement of the Earth’s 
dimensions (see figure 1). He knew that at the summer 
solstice the Sun cast its rays directly down a well in the 
Egyptian town of Syene, while at Alexandria, further north 
and on roughly the same meridian, the sunlight falling on 
a gnomon cast a shadow of 1/50 of a circle. Assuming that 
Syene was 5000 stades south of Alexandria, and knowing 
that distance to be 1/50 of the Earth’s circumference, 
Eratosthenes calculated the circumference to be 250000 
stades. Depending on the length of a stade—there is 
uncertainty about which value he employed—he may 
have been within 8% or even better of the modern value. 

ARISTARCHUS OF SAMOS (ca 310-230 BC) provided two 
elegant geometric demonstrations concerning the scale of 
the cosmos; both would remain central to astronomical 
thought until the 17th century. First, Aristarchus 
recognized that the relationship between the Sun’s and 
Moon’s positions at quadrature provides a means to 
calculate their relative distances from Earth (see figure 2). 
For then the angle Sun—Moon-Earth is 90°, and so if the 
observer measures the angle Moon—Earth-Sun, then the 
shape of the triangle will be known, and this will give 
the ratio of the lengths of the Earth-Moon and Earth-Sun 
distances. 

Aristarchus adopted 87° for the second angle and 
concluded that the Sun was some 19 times more distant 
than the Moon. There are two practical problems with this 
method: it is extremely difficult to know the moment of 
quadrature by observing when the terminator is precisely 
at the half-way point on the Moon’s face and it is no easy 
task to observe the Moon—Earth-Sun angle at that time. In 
fact, Aristarchus’s value of 87° may have been to illustrate 
his method rather than the result of actual measurement. 

Aristarchus’s second demonstration used eclipse 
geometry to determine the absolute sizes of the Moon and 
Sun. During a total solar EcIPsE, Sun and Moon subtend 
the same angle, so the ratio of their apparent diameters is 
the same as the ratio of their distances, which he believed 
to be 19:1. To obtain absolute distances, he analyzed the 
situation during a total lunar eclipse, assuming the width 
of the shadow cone at the Moon’s distance to be twice 
the lunar diameter. From his analysis, he concluded, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to Sun 


Alexandria 


circumference 


Figure 1. 
ist 
Quarter Sun 
Moon 
a7” 
Earth 
Figure 2. 


in mean terms, the Moon’s diameter to be about one- 
third that of the Earth, and the Sun’s some 63 times 
the Earth’s. Curiously, Aristarchus does not calculate 
the absolute distances in his treatise, but, given a lunar 
apparent diameter of , and since this was two-thirds the 
radius of the Earth, its distance was some 80 Earth radii; 
the Sun’s distance (19 times greater than the Moon’s) was 
therefore about 1520 Earth radii. 

Hellenistic astronomers recognized the importance of 
the Sun’s PARALLAX, the angle subtended by the Earth’s 
radius as seen from the center of the Sun. Ideally, one 
could determine this by viewing the Sun from two distant 
locations at the same time, or by observing from the 
same location several hours apart. Since the Earth’s 
radius was known, the absolute distance to the Sun could 
be calculated if this angle were determined. However, 
measuring parallax by direct observation of the Sun is 
impossible, as the Sun’s atmosphere does not provide a 
distinct ‘edge’, and the angle is so small that naked-eye 
instruments would be useless. HiprpaRcHus of Rhodes (fl 
141-127 BC), the greatest influence on Ptolemy, developed 
alternative methods. Using solar eclipse observations 
taken from two locations, he calculated the lunar parallax, 
giving him minimum and maximum distances to the 
Moon in Earth radii. By asomewhat different employment 
of Aristarchus’s eclipse diagram, and assuming a solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distances (from Antiquity to 1900) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


parallax of 7 arcmin as the smallest parallactic angle that 
might be visible, he found a slightly smaller absolute lunar 
mean distance, just over 67 Earth radii. 

PTOLEMY (ff AD 127-141) knew of Hipparchus’s 
methods, but attacked the problem in a different way. 
Studying lunar eclipse data, he was able to obtain the lunar 
parallax and a (maximum) distance of a little more than 
64 Earth radii. By using the eclipse diagram, the solar 
parallax could then be calculated, which allowed the Sun’s 
absolute distance to be determined. This came to 1210 
Earth radii (giving a parallax of nearly 3 arcmin), very 
close to the 19 times the lunar distance that Aristarchus 
had calculated. This has suggested to some modern 
historians that Ptolemy chose his values carefully to obtain 
the required result. In any event, he could not have 
observed solar parallax directly, so while his lunar distance 
is reasonable, his solar distance is an order of magnitude 
too small. 


The order and sizes of the planets 


Greek astronomers were largely agreed on the order in 
which the planets lay in their heights above the Earth. 
The Moon, being so large and having the shortest SIDEREAL 
PERIOD, was the closest object. The Sun, although it 
subtended approximately the same visual angle, took a 
year to complete its circuit of the sky, so was further away. 
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn had increasingly longer sidereal 
periods, so it seemed reasonable to locate them beyond the 
Sun and in that order, while the stars lay on the outermost 
sphere. However, since Mercury, Venus and the Sun all 
have a sidereal period of 1 yr, there was no compelling 
reason to order them in any particular way. In Ptolemy’s 
Almagest the motion of each planet was represented by its 
own geometrical model, and so in this work Ptolemy did 
not need to commit himself to any particular order, but, in 
his later Hypotheses of the Planets, he argued for the order 
Moon-Mercury—Venus-—Sun. He also provided a physical 
picture of the universe similar to the concentric material 
spheres of Aristotle. Believing the cosmos to be a plenum 
(a space filled with matter as opposed to a void), he held 
that the outer surface of one planetary sphere coincided 
with the inner surface of the next sphere, so that the cosmos 
was a nesting set of such spheres. Thus he took the lunar 
apogee to be equal to the perigee of Mercury, and this 
distance was the radius of both the outer boundary of 
the lunar sphere and the inner boundary of the sphere 
of Mercury. Mercury’s apogee, similarly, was equal to the 
perigee of Venus, and so on. 

The ratio of the perigee to the apogee of any particular 
planet could be calculated from its geometrical model. 
Ptolemy’s nesting spheres therefore allowed him to derive 
absolute distances for every planet if he could calibrate 
his scheme by knowing the actual value of any one of the 
parameters. As he had already calculated that the Moon’s 
apogee distance was just over 64 Earth radii, the remaining 
distances followed. The Sun’s mean distance was 1210 
Earth radii, or a little less than 8 million kilometers using 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the modern value for the Earth’s radius. The outer 
boundary of Saturn’s sphere was 19 865 radii. 

Ptolemy similarly provided the angular and actual 
diameters of the Sun, Moon and planets, although the 
angular diameters of the planets were in fact subjective and 
based essentially on their perceived brightnesses. Saturn, 
for example, was said to have an angular diameter 1/18 
that of the Sun when the planet was at its mean distance. 
As this mean distance was known, it followed that Saturn’s 
actual diameter was about 4.3 times that of the Earth. 

Since the ‘fixed’ stars were immediately beyond the 
outer boundary of Saturn’s sphere, they were some 20 000 
Earth radii above the Earth. Ptolemy estimated the 
apparent diameters of the first-magnitude stars to be 1/20 
that of the Sun, and from this he calculated their volumes 
to be over 94 times that of the Earth. 

Islamic astronomers did little more than tinker with 
these values (see also ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY). Al-Farghani 
for example in the 9th century estimated the apparent 
diameters of stars of lesser magnitudes, and concluded 
that a sixth-magnitude star had a volume 18 times that of 
the Earth. 

Latin translations of Arabic versions of Ptolemy 
and his Muslim commentators became widely known in 
western Europe during the 12th and 13th centuries. While 
few European astronomers of the time could deal with the 
complexities of the Almagest, most educated people were 
aware of the nesting sphere arrangement and its distance 
scale. 


Distances in the Copernican system 

The heliocentric model of the planetary system, published 
in 1543 by NicoLAus CopERNicus (1473-1543) in his De 
revolutionibus orbium coelestium, established by elementary 
geometry not only a unique ordering of the planets but 
their (broadly correct) relative distances, in multiples of 
the Earth—Sun distance, later termed the astronomical unit. 
In Ptolemaic astronomy, the sphere of the Moon served to 
calibrate the entire system, but in Copernican astronomy 
lunar motion was now referred to the Earth, and was no 
longer part of the planetary order. However, Copernicus 
was Satisfied with the ancient value of the solar parallax, 
3 arcmin, and asa result the radius of orbit of the outermost 
planet, Saturn, was for him little more than half the size it 
had been for Ptolemy. 

There was no observational compulsion to prefer 
Copernicus over Ptolemy. On the contrary: if Copernicus 
was correct, then one should be able to detect annual 
or stellar parallax, the apparent movements of the stars 
that one would expect to see if they were being observed 
by astronomers located on an Earth that was moving 
in annual orbit, and this no one succeeded in doing. 
There were two possible inferences: either Copernicus 
was mistaken or the stars were far more distant than 
had previously been thought, so distant that existing 
instrumentation was insufficiently sensitive to detect this 
parallax. TYCHO BRAHE (1546-1601) was to carry pre- 
telescopic instrumentation to near its limits of accuracy, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distances (from Antiquity to 1900) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and he estimated that his failure to detect annual parallax 
meant that it would have to be less than 1 arcmin and 
so—if Copernicus was right—the stars would be at least 
700 times further than Saturn; this being so, even a third- 
magnitude star would have a volume 200 times that of 
the Sun. To have a universe at whose center was a solar 
system consisting of relatively tiny bodies, surrounded by 
an enormous and totally empty space before one came 
to stars of colossal size at its periphery, made no sense. 
Tycho’s own geoheliocentric system, by contrast, retained 
Copernicus’s relative geometry for the planets and the 
ancient value for solar parallax. It located the stars at a 
mere 14000 Earth radii, and he estimated their volumes at 
between 68 Earth volumes for a bright star and 1/3 for a 
faint one. 

In 1610 GaLiLeo (1564-1642) turned the telescope 
into an astronomical tool, although it was to be some 
decades before measuring instruments were supplied with 
telescopic sights. KEPLER’s third law made it possible 
for the relative distances of planets from the Sun to be 
determined, in astronomical units. If therefore a planetary 
distance could be measured directly by triangulation, 
the astronomical unit could be calculated. It was 
Kepler himself who suggested this approach, using Mars, 
Mercury and Venus as targets. Tycho had attempted to 
measure the parallax of Mars, but Kepler’s analysis of 
these data suggested a parallax no greater than 4 arcmin, 
which would reduce solar parallax to 2 arcmin. Taking into 
account corrections for refraction, Kepler later reduced this 
figure by half (see KEPLER’S LAWS). 

The possibility that planets might be seen to TRANSIT 
across the face of the Sun had been recognized since 
Ptolemy’s time, but was only now taken seriously. 
Kepler, whose own interest was primarily in planetary 
apparent diameters (as he believed planetary volumes 
were proportional to their distances from the Sun), 
correctly calculated that both Mercury and Venus would 
transit in 1631, on dates separated by 1 month. In the event 
Venus was not observed as it had already set for European 
locations, but three astronomers managed to obtain 
observations of Mercury. One successful observer, PIERRE 
GASSENDI (1592-1655), was surprised to find Mercury’s 
image so small, much smaller than Kepler and others had 
expected. This fuelled the debate over planetary sizes and 
their relationship to distance, but contributed nothing to 
the measurement of parallax. 

JEREMIAH HORROCKS (1618-1641), although a believer in 
Kepler’s elliptical orbits, realized that planetary distances 
and sizes based on harmonies were incompatible with 
Gassendi’s observation. In recomputing Venus’s orbit, 
Horrocks discovered that it would transit the Sun in 1639. 
His observations showed a disk of about 1 arcmin. By 
invoking a dubious proportionality argument, Horrocks 
claimed that, as seen from the Sun, all planetary disks 
(including the Earth’s) would appear to have an apparent 
diameter of 28 arcsec. This, he said, implied a solar 
parallax of 14 or 15 arcsec, which increased the Sun’s 
distance enormously. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Horrocks’s writings did not appear until many years 
after his death, and so had little impact, but several 
of his contemporaries were also of the opinion that the 
traditional value for the solar parallax was too large. c- 
B RICCIOLI (1598-1671), whose Almagestum novum of 1651 
was the last major geocentric work, provided better 
observational data on planetary diameters and refraction, 
and a smaller solar parallax. However, Riccioli and 
some of his correspondents were still trying to build 
a distance scale observing lunar dichotomy. Better 
telescopic observations were required, and these came 
only with the invention of the micrometer. Although 
discovered accidently in England around 1640, it was 
not generally known until the 1660s. CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS 
(1629-1695) employed a crude micrometer to improve on 
the observations of his predecessors, and the instrument 
was further developed by Adrien Auzout (1622-1691), 
Pierre Petit (ca 1596-1677) and others. JOHN FLAMSTEED 
(1646-1719), the first Astronomer Royal, used the screw 
micrometer to good effect. 

Now armed with telescopes superior in their ability to 
measure small angles, astronomers could attack planetary 
parallaxes anew. G-D CASSINI (1625-1712), when professor 
in Bologna, became interested in the question of how one 
finds the Sun’s position while correcting for both parallax 
and refraction. If the solar parallax were quite small, then 
refraction at various altitudes above the horizon should 
be fixed throughout the year, but if parallax were larger, 
then one required variable refraction to account for the 
observations. This had been a serious issue for Tycho who, 
through assuming a solar parallax of 3 arcmin, required 
several different refraction tables, although he thought 
refraction negligible at altitudes above 45°. When Cassini 
arrived in Paris in 1669, members of the Académie Royale 
des Sciences debated this issue keenly. Observations in 
the tropics, when compared with those in Europe, might 
be decisive. As Mars was to be in a favorable opposition 
in 1672, Cassini urged an expedition to the colony at 
Cayenne, close to the equator. Jean Richer (died 1696) was 
dispatched, while Cassini made observations in Paris. 

The results from Cayenne, while showing that 
refraction correction does indeed require only a single 
table, could not provide a parallax value that was 
unequivocal. Cassini found several values for Mars’ 
parallax around 24 arcsec. Flamsteed, in England, was 
able to make a single observation with a micrometer later 
that year; although giving several versions of his results, 
by 1673 he claimed a horizontal parallax for Mars of about 
25 arcsec, which implied a solar parallax of 10 arcsec. 
Instrumental errors were such that one could not rely on 
these measurements and the computed value for solar 
parallax, but it was now evident that solar parallax was 
truly small, less than 15 arcsec. 


Transits of Venus and solar parallax 

During the next half-century, English, French and Italian 
astronomers measured Mars’ parallax at oppositions, 
obtaining solar parallax values ranging from 9 to 15 arcsec. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distances (from Antiquity to 1900) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


EDMOND HALLEY (1656-1742) dismissed observations of 
Mars as unreliable and argued for making careful 
measurements of a transit of Venus. He had himself 
observed a transit of Mercury from St Helena in 1677, 
but, on comparing his results with the single European 
observation, obtained a solar parallax of 45 arcsec, clearly 
too large. After careful consideration of Venus’s orbit, 
Halley was able to calculate the dates of future transits 
of both Mercury and Venus, and these he announced in 
the Philosophical Transactions in 1691. The next pair of 
Venus transits would occur in June of both 1761 and 1769; 
another pair would follow in December of both 1874 and 
1882. Asecond paper by Halley, published in 1716, laid out 
the method for observation, with suggestions of locations 
where the transit might be observed in 1761. Observers 
should time the transit from ingress on the Sun’s limb 
to egress. One’s geographic location determined where 
Venus’s path would lie on the Sun’s face and how long the 
transit would take. 

Halley’s younger French contemporary, J-N DELISLE 
(1688-1768), championed the transit method and proposed 
an alternative technique for observers who were not in a 
position to time the entire transit: if one could measure 
accurately the time of either ingress or egress, one could 
compare results with another observer so long as the 
longitudes of both locations were known accurately. For 
the same event, the time difference between two stations 
was related to the length of Venus’s path across the Sun. 

Delisle also pressed his contemporaries to measure 
the transit of Mercury which occurred in 1753. The results 
were disappointing, but the practice was valuable. In the 
run-up to the 1761 transit of Venus, the French worked 
to improve orbital calculations, with Delisle publishing 
a map and times a year before the event. Both the 
French and the British despatched expeditions overseas 
but most observations were taken in Europe, in a number 
of countries. With such a wide variety of observers and 
their differing experience, the results were equivocal, with 
estimates of the solar parallax ranging from 8 to nearly 
11 arcsec. 

With improved planning and support, the 1769 transit 
was even better observed, with some 77 stations involved 
world-wide. Again, results varied, but not so widely as in 
1761. Part of the problem was lack of precise longitudes 
for distant stations. Atmospheric seeing, the quality of 
telescopes and observers’ experience were also important 
factors. Furthermore, it was very difficult to determine 
the precise moment of ingress or egress, because observers 
noted a luminous ring around Venus and because of the 
‘black-drop effect’, where a small, dark link seemed to 
join Venus’s outline with the Sun’s limb momentarily 
before or after contact. Nevertheless, Delisle’s value 
of 8.6 arcsec was widely accepted, although during the 
following century, with the emergence of better statistical 
methods and advances in celestial mechanics, the value 
was revised upwards slightly. 

A second pair of transits followed in 1874 and 1882 
and were the focus of major international efforts with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


better instrumentation, which now included photography. 
However, observational teams arrived at a range of values 
between 8.76 and 8.85 arcsec, a discrepancy equivalent 
to about 2 million kilometers. Armed with data from 
four transits and revised longitudes for observing stations, 
SIMON NEWCOMB (1835-1909) calculated several values for 
solar parallax, ranging between 8.79 and 8.85 arcsec. After 
further work on the speed of light with A 4 MICHELSON 
(1853-1931), Newcomb settled on 8.80 arcsec. In the late 
1870s, DaviD GILL (1843-1914) made another attempt at 
Mars’ parallax at opposition, obtaining a value for solar 
parallax of 8.78 arcsec, close to Newcomb’s early estimate. 

Even before the 1874 transit of Venus, JG GALLE (1812- 
1910) suggested that minor planets might be better targets, 
as they showed no visible disk. Measurements of three in 
the late 1880s allowed Gill to obtain a value of 8.80 arcsec, 
which within limits of error almost matched the revised 
value provided by Newcomb. In 1898, it was calculated 
that a newly discovered minor planet, ERos, would have 
a perihelion distance of only 0.27 astronomical units 
from Earth at its opposition in 1900. However, even 
then, visual and photographic observations yielded two 
different values for the solar parallax, 8.806 + 0.004 and 
8.807 + 0.003 arcsec, so placing the Sun at more than 140 
million kilometers from Earth at its mean distance. These 
values would stand for another 40 yr, until observations 
of Eros’s opposition in 1930 were reduced and published. 


Stellar distances 

When Galileo became converted to Copernicanism, he 
realized that the detection of annual parallax was a 
priority. Assuming the stars lay at differing distances 
and that the brightest were the nearest, he suggested 
that examination of DOUBLE STARS might avoid some of the 
practical difficulties involved in observations spread over 
many months and being made with instruments liable 
to warp with the passage of the seasons. If the fainter 
star of a double was much more distant than its brighter 
partner, then the fainter star could be regarded as a quasi- 
fixed reference point provided by a helpful Nature, and 
the astronomer might observe the motion of the brighter 
star relative to the fainter. However, as so often he 
contented himself with offering the suggestion for others 
to implement. 

After Kepler taught astronomers to think dynamically 
and to view the planetary system as composed of small 
bodies in orbit about a massive Sun, the detection of annual 
parallax ceased to be a test of Copernicus’s hypothesis and 
became instead the preferred method of determining the 
distances of the stars. The problems were practical, and 
not least among these was refraction, whose effects were 
poorly understood. ROBERT HOOKE (1635-1703) sought to 
avoid this difficulty by observations of the star GAMMA 
DRACONIS, which passed directly overhead his lodgings 
in London. To ensure that his instrumentation was not 
warped by the passage of the seasons, Hooke devised a 
zenith telescope which he incorporated into the fabric of 
his house. However, he made only four observations of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distances (from Antiquity to 1900) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the star, and other astronomers found his claim to have 
detected annual parallax unconvincing. 

The same technique was applied with much greater 
care in the 1720s by an amateur, SAMUEL MOLYNEUX (1689-— 
1728), and his friend JAMES BRADLEY (1693-1762), a future 
Astronomer Royal. Molyneux commissioned a zenith 
telescope from the maker George Graham; with it, he and 
Bradley found that there was indeed an annual movement 
in gamma Draconis, but that it was 3 months out of phase 
with the expected annual parallax. Bradley therefore 
commissioned another zenith telescope, with a wider field 
of view, and this enabled him to establish the pattern of 
this annual movement in a number of stars. Eventually 
he realized that the cause lay in the aberration of light, 
the influence of the Earth’s velocity on the direction from 
which starlight reaches the observer. It was proof of the 
motion of the Earth, but not the expected one. Bradley 
estimated from his failure to detect annual parallax that the 
distances of the stars must be at least 400 000 astronomical 
units. 

Meanwhile other investigators were attempting to 
estimate stellar distances on the assumption that the stars 
were physically similar, so that the apparent brightness of a 
star was inversely proportional to the square of its distance 
from the observer. The problem was, how in practice to 
make the comparison between the apparent brightness of 
the Sun and, say, sirtus. Huygens attempted to do this by 
making a hole in a screen, of a size such that the fraction 
of the solar surface visible through the hole was equal in 
brightness to Sirius. From this he estimated that Sirius lay 
at 27 664 astronomical units. 

A better method was proposed by JAMES GREGORY 
(1638-1675) in 1668. Assuming a knowledge of the 
dimensions of the solar system, Gregory replaced Sirius 
by a planet of equal brightness, and then calculated the 
ratio of the light that came directly from the Sun to 
the light that came from the Sun via the planet. Isaac 
NEWTON (1642-1727) repeated the calculation with better 
values for the distances within the solar system, and 
concluded that Sirius lay at about one million astronomical 
units. However, his estimate was known only to intimates 
until its posthumous publication, which occurred only a 
few months before Bradley’s announcement in 1729 of 
the aberration of light and its implications. These two 
results—Newton’s estimate of an actual distance for Sirius 
of one million astronomical units on the assumption of 
physical equality among the stars and Bradley’s estimate 
of a minimum stellar distance of 400000 astronomical 
units—established the scale of the stellar universe, and 
alerted astronomers to the exquisite delicacy involved in 
the measurement of annual parallax. 

There was an understandable loss of nerve, and 
only at the beginning of the 19th century did attempts 
to measure annual parallax resume. Telescopes had 
improved in quality, and it was becoming realized that 
large proper motion might be a better clue to nearness 
than apparent brightness. In particular, the discovery 
that 61 cycNi had a proper motion of no less than 5 arcsec 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


per annum suggested that this star might be among the 
nearest. 

The early decades of the 19th century saw a rash of 
mistaken claims to the detection of annual parallax, and 
sceptical astronomers would need convincing evidence 
before believing any future claim. Such evidence 
was provided by FRIEDRICH WILHELM BESSEL (1784-1864) of 
Konigsberg, where there was a fine 16 cm heliometer by 
Joseph Fraunhofer. In 1837 and 1838 he observed 61 Cygni 
an astonishing 16 times or more every clear night, and 
at the end of 1838 he announced the star had a parallax 
of about 1/3 of a second of arc. What carried conviction 
was the match between theory and the pattern of Bessel’s 
observations. 

Bessel had been encouraged by the preliminary 
results of Friedrich Georg WILHELM STRUVE (1793-1864) of 
Dorpat Observatory in Russia, who had been observing 
vecA with a Fraunhofer refractor of 24 cm, the largest in 
the world. Vega was bright and had a large proper motion. 
Struve observed the star from 1835 and derived a parallax 
of 1/8 of a second of arc, although he later doubled this 
value. A third determination was announced in January 
1839 by THOMASHENDERSON (1798-1844) following his return 
from the Cape of Good Hope, where the stars he had 
observed included ALPHA CENTAURI. This star was bright, 
was a double with wide angular separation and had a large 
proper motion, all recognized criteria for nearness. On 
reducing his observations Henderson derived a parallax 
of over 1 second of arc. 

For the remainder of the 19th century, measurements 
of annual parallax proved difficult and the results 
were often contradictory, even after the invention of 
photography. Furthermore, measurements of distances 
beyond the nearest stars were hardly to be expected, given 
that as late as 1900 the very existence of other galaxies 
was thought unlikely. However, William Herschel (1738- 
1822) had pioneered methods that would bear fruit in 
the 20th century, even if he had limited impact on his 
contemporaries and immediate successors (see HERSCHEL 
FAMILY). In 1785 he had published a diagram of a cross- 
section of the Galaxy, using the distance of Sirius as a 
yardstick. He had assumed that within the Galaxy the 
stars were distributed uniformly, and that his telescope 
could penetrate to the borders in all directions, so that 
the number of stars visible in any field of view was an 
index of the distance to the border of the Galaxy in that 
direction. Both assumptions he later abandoned, but his 
diagram had illustrated the potential power of hypotheses 
of uniformity when combined with stellar statistics. It was 
after reasoning along similar lines that he told the poet 
Thomas Campbell in 1813, ‘Ihave observed stars of which 
the light, it can be proved, must take two million years to 
reach the earth’ (Lubbock C A 1933 The Herschel Chronicle 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 336 


Bibliography 
Hoskin M 1982 Stellar Astronomy: Historical Studies 
(Chalfont St Giles: Science History Publications) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distances (from Antiquity to 1900) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Newcomb S 1895 The Elements of the Four Inner Planets and 
the Fundamental Constants of Astronomy (Washington, 
DC: US Government Printing Office) 

Van Helden A 1985 Measuring the Universe: Cosmic 
Dimensions from Aristarchus to Halley (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press) 

Woolf H 1959 The Transits of Venus (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press) 


Richard A Jarrell and Michael Hoskin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 6 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, 
and Superclusters 


The distribution of matter in space is the key to 
understanding the past, present, and future of the 
universe. If the average mass density on the largest scales 
exceeds a critical level, then the expansion of the 
universe will eventually cease and reverse, ultimately 
ending in a ‘Big Crunch’. Conversely, if the mean mass 
density in the universe is less than this critical value, the 
expansion of space will continue without end. The 
distribution of matter also reveals much about the cosmic 
history of the universe: matter was very smoothly 
distributed shortly after the Big Bang but is much less so 
now. When observations of how galaxies and CLUSTERS 
OF GALAXIES are spread throughout space are combined 
with observations of their spectroscopic and 
morphological properties, astrophysicists can place 
important constraints on how these systems formed, 
evolved, and, ultimately, elucidate the nature of the 
growth of structure in the universe. In particular, the 
relationship between the distribution of luminous matter 
(e.g., hot gas, stars, galaxies) and non-luminous matter 
(e.g., non-baryonic particles) is determined by the 
thermal properties of the non-baryonic ‘dark’ matter, the 
history of star formation, gravity, and the cosmological 
model. Hence, accurate predictions for the spatial 
distributions of galaxies and clusters as functions of time 
are fundamental requirements for any viable theory of 
how structure in the universe formed and evolves. 
Studying the distribution of galaxies and clusters over a 
range of distances and epochs has, consequently, been an 
area of much active research over the past 20 years. 
While there is still much that is unknown about the 
underlying mass distribution in the universe, substantial 
progress has been made owing to breakthroughs in 
astronomical instrumentation and detector technology, 
numerical simulation software and high-speed computer 
processors, and particle physics. What we do know is that 
the distributions of galaxies and clusters show a 
remarkable degree of inhomogeneity over distances 
spanning at least 150 megaparsecs (Mpc) and that the 
clustering properties of galaxies appear to depend on 
both the local environment the galaxy resides in and on 
the intrinsic properties of the galaxy. The precise nature 
of the DARK MATTER and the role of gas hydrodynamics 
(e.g., STAR FORMATION) in the evolution of structure, 
however, presently remain unsolved problems in 
astrophysics. 


The cosmological principle, dark matter, and 


the clustering hierarchy 

A guiding principle of cosmology has been that if one 
looks out to large enough distances, then the universe 
should be homogeneous and isotropic. This assumption is 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


often referred to as the “COSMOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE’. By 
isotropic, we mean that the global properties of the 
universe (and, therefore, the galaxy distribution) are not 
dependent the viewing direction. By homogeneous, we 
mean that observers in different parts of the universe will 
record the same basic picture of the universe at a given 
cosmic epoch. The gist of the cosmological principle is 
that there are no preferred directions or locations in the 
universe. Present observations suggest that the 
cosmological principle is valid but only on distance 
scales in excess of 150 Mpc or so. On smaller scales, we 
do see spatial variations in galaxy properties (and 
possibly even in certain cosmological parameters) which 
are presumably tied to substantial fluctuations in the 
underlying distribution of matter in space. 

Early maps of the galaxy distribution on large scales, 
generated prior to the 1980s, were two dimensional— 
reproducing the distribution of galaxies on the plane of 
the sky. The third dimension, distance from our Galaxy, 
was only available for a small fraction of those galaxies. 
Nonetheless, these maps showed the distribution of 
galaxies to be highly non-random: when one galaxy is 
found, the likelihood of finding a nearby companion 
galaxy is significantly higher than Poisson statistics 
would predict. 

Clustering in the universe is detected on many 
different scales. Our Milky Way Galaxy is a member of a 
group (named the LOCAL GROUP) of 24 galaxies spread 
over a region about 1 Mpc in radius. The Local Group 
contains a total mass in the range 3 x 10’ to 10° solar 
masses. Groups like this are relatively common: on 
average, there is approximately one group for each 1800 
cubic Mpc volume. Clusters of galaxies are 
approximately comparable in size, spanning 1-5 Mpc, 
but are considerably more massive and rarer than galaxy 
groups (figure 1). Clusters contain hundreds of galaxies 
in their central regions. The total cluster mass is usually 
at least 10'* solar masses and the richest systems can be 
50 times more massive than that. The mass density 
within a cluster is typically at least 100 times the 
universal closure density’. Clusters of galaxies are the 
largest systems known to have reached dynamic 
equilibrium, a state in which the cluster’s gravitational 
potential energy is twice its internal kinetic energy. 
Gravitationally bound structures may exist on larger 
scales still. Although quite rare, clusters of clusters 
(known as SUPERCLUSTERS) have been detected. These 
systems can contain in excess of 10'° solar masses, 
including up to 10 individual galaxy clusters spread 
across regions 10-30 Mpc in extent. Some superclusters 
are suspected of being bound systems but it is highly 


' The universal closure density is 1.88 x 10°? grams per cubic 
centimeter. This is the minimum mean mass density required to 
eventually halt the present expansion of the universe. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The galaxy cluster Abell 2218 as seen by the Hubble 
Space Telescope. The field of view spans a distance of about 
415 kpc. The curved, faint galaxies are actually distant galaxies 
lying well beyond the cluster whose appearances have been 
distorted by the effect of the cluster’s mass on the curvature of 
space. Such distortion, known as gravitational lensing, is one 
way the mass of a cluster can be estimated. 


unlikely they have had sufficient time to reach dynamical 
equilibrium. 

Structure on scales in excess of 100 Mpc was not 
discovered until wide-area, three-dimensional galaxy 
surveys were first undertaken in the early 1980s. Three- 
dimensional surveys are essential for discovering the true 
nature of the galaxy, cluster, and  supercluster 
distributions because projection effects hide substantial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. A map derived from digitized photographic sky 
survey plates showing the angular distribution of over 2 million 
galaxies in the southern galactic hemisphere. Blank regions in 
the map were skipped due to the presence of very bright stars. 


structures in two-dimensional maps like that in figure 2. 
Indeed, an amazing bubble-like network of voids and 
sheets of galaxies and clusters, extending for hundreds of 
Mpeg, is revealed in these spatial surveys. 

The clustering patterns that we see in the universe, 
from galactic scales and up, are believed to be governed 
by the gravitational potential of ubiquitous dark matter. 
The galaxies, which comprise less than 5% of all the 
matter in the universe, are simply tracers of the dark 
matter distribution. This remarkable realization is based 
on observations which infer the total mass in galaxies and 
in clusters of galaxies from the distribution of orbital 
velocities of the material inside these systems. The 
dynamical mass estimates derived in this way are 
typically 5—10 times larger than the masses estimated by 
summing up the luminous components (e.g., stars in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


case of galaxies; galaxies and hot gas in the case of 
clusters). The implication is that most of the matter in the 
universe has not yet been directly detected by 
conventional astronomical instrumentation. 

The nature of this dark matter is still not well 
understood. The hypothesis that dark matter consists 
solely of BARYONS (e.g., neutral gas, dilute plasma, 
massive planets, white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black 
holes) appears to be in conflict with observations of hot 
gas in clusters of galaxies (the gas comprises only about 
10-20% of the total cluster mass), the tendency for dying 
stars to eject a substantial fraction of their mass back into 
interstellar space (and, hence, locking baryonic matter in 
stellar remnants is a very inefficient process), and limits 
on the number of massive planets, brown dwarfs, and 
very low mass stars from both gravitational micro- 
lensing surveys and deep Hubble Space Telescope 
images (the space density of such objects is too low to 
account for a significant fraction of the inferred total 
mass density in the universe). 

The spatial distribution of galaxies and clusters can 
help constrain the nature of the dark matter because 
dramatically different configurations are predicted 
depending, for example, on whether or not the dark 
matter particles are highly relativistic (dubbed hot and 
cold dark matter, respectively). Candidates for non- 
baryonic dark matter include neutrinos, axions, and the 
weakly interacting massive particles predicted by 
supersymmetry models (photinos, higgsinos, zinos, and 
solar cosmions). Programs to detect the more exotic of 
these cosmological non-baryonic particles are underway. 


Voids, sheets, filaments, and spikes 

The frothy spatial distribution of about 10 000 galaxies in 
two nearly opposing directions is shown in figure 3. The 
data were obtained at observatories located in Arizona 
and Chile. In this figure, known as a cone diagram, each 
galaxy’s position is shown as a point. Our own galaxy is 
located at the point where the wedges meet. The distance 
represented by the length of each wedge is about 120 
Mpc. Several striking features are evident in this galaxy 
map (none of which were predicted by theory prior to the 
observations): large regions of very low galaxy density, 
somewhat misleadingly referred to as voids, extend for 
tens of Mpc. The voids are surrounded by a sheet-like 
network of galaxies often extending for several hundred 
Mpc. Indeed, one such coherent feature can be seen in 
figure 3 crossing from the mid-region of the northern 
cone diagram into and across the southern cone diagram. 
This feature has been dubbed the ‘GREAT WALL’. 

Clusters of galaxies can also be seen in the map as 
highly elongated clumps oriented towards the center of 
the diagram. This elongation is an artifact of the large, 
orbital velocities of galaxies about the cluster centers 
which can often approach 1000kms"'. These orbital 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. The spatial distribution of approximately 10 000 
galaxies extending out to a distance of 120 Mpc. Galaxies from 
a small portion of the northern galactic hemisphere are shown 
in the upper cone diagram and those from a comparable region 
in the southern galactic hemisphere are shown in the lower cone 
diagram. These data are from a large redshift survey 
coordinated by the Center for Astrophysics at Harvard 
University. 


velocities distort the spatial positions determined from 
the redshift measurements and result in the elongated 
appearance of clusters in such diagrams. If we could 
observe the cluster galaxies using a map based on 
distances not dependent on the REDSHIFT, such elongation 
would vanish. 

The structures in this map are clearly comparable with 
the depth of the survey and, thus, wider and deeper 
surveys were undertaken in the 1990s to assess just how 
large the largest structures in the universe are (see 
GALAXY REDSHIFT SURVEYS). One technological 
development which made very large redshift surveys 
feasible was the multi-object spectrograph (MOS). The 
10 000 redshifts above were measured one at a time on 
telescopes which had narrow fields of view ((1/7)th the 
area subtended by the full Moon). Multi-object 
spectrographs today allow up to 600 redshifts to be 
measured simultaneously from galaxies spread over an 
area of a few square degrees (roughly 15 times the area 
subtended by the full Moon). 

One of the first large MOS surveys to be 
completed, known as the Las Campanas Redshift Survey 
(LCRS), measured about 24 000 redshifts in two 
directions 132° apart. The distribution of galaxies from 
this survey is shown in figure 4. The depth of the LCRS 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


44°" a1" RA 


North 


11263 galaxies 


south 


12434 galaxies 


Figure 4. The spatial distribution of approximately 24 000 
galaxies extending out to a distance of 600 Mpc. These are the 
results from the Las Campanas Redshift Survey conducted by 
an international team of astronomers using a Chilean telescope 
equipped with a multi-object spectrograph. The 3 bands going 
across the top and bottom show the projected distribution of the 
galaxies on the sky. Although the depth of this survey is 
substantial, it only subtends 0.3% of the entire sky. 


was nearly 5 times greater than that in figure 3. Yet the 
structures found were comparable in size suggesting that 
perhaps there are no substantial inhomogeneities much 
larger than 120 Mpc. However, the LCRS only includes 
distances for a fraction of all the galaxies in this part of 
the sky due to time and telescope constraints. As a 
consequence, the structure in the LCRS map is not as 
clearly delineated as that in a survey which completely 
samples the galaxy distribution, such as the one in figure 
3. Any conclusions regarding the existence of structures 
on scales larger than 120 Mpc or so must therefore be 
tempered by the fact that the survey has only done a 
partial sampling of the galaxy and cluster distribution. 

The results of the most extensive redshift survey of 
clusters of galaxies is shown in figure 5. The radius of 
the survey is 240 Mpc and includes about 50% of the 
~1000 clusters actually residing in this volume. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


240/h Mpe 


Figure 5. Three views of the spatial distribution of the richest 
~480 clusters within a radius of 240 Mpc, centered on our 
Galaxy. Each dot represents a cluster and the dot size is 
proportional to the number of bright galaxies in the central 
region of the cluster. The empty wedges in the XZ and YZ 
projections are due to the blockage by the disk of our Galaxy. 


Quantifying clustering 

The constraints that the above surveys place on theories 
of structure formation and dark matter models come from 
a variety of statistical quantities which measure the 
degree to which the galaxy and cluster distributions differ 
from a purely random configuration. One of the most 
widely used of these statistics is the two-point correlation 
function, &(r). The two-point correlation function 
measures the probability of finding one galaxy separated 
by a distance r from another galaxy. The observations 
above reveal that €(r) is well represented by a power law 


of the form 
— fray’ 
g(r) =(~) 
(1) 


where ro is known as the correlation length. The 
correlation length is the distance scale at which there are 
twice as many pairs of objects than expected if the 
distribution of objects were completely random. For 
galaxies, the best-fit parameters for E(r) are rp = 5.5+1 
Mpc and y = 1.8+0.05. If the distribution of galaxies were 
random, one would expect €(r) = 0 at all scales. The 
constraints on €(r) mirror the visual impression given by 
the redshift surveys—the galaxy distribution is strongly 
clustered, not random. Remarkably, the correlation 
function of clusters of galaxies has a slope nearly 
identical to that for galaxies (y = 1.9+0.3) but the 


fa 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


correlation length is significantly larger, rg = 2048 Mpc. 
The agreement between the shape of €(r) for galaxies and 
clusters suggests that these two rather different types of 
stellar systems trace the same underlying mass 
distribution. An additional constraint from the redshift 
surveys of galaxies and clusters is that the power-law 
representation of €(r) appears to be valid on scales up to 
at least 40 Mpc and perhaps as high as 60 Mpc. 

The correlation function parameters above are mean 
values for large samples of galaxies and clusters. The 
values are not universal, however. There is a highly 
significant dependence of the correlation length on the 
luminosity of the galaxies being studied and on their 
morphology. For example, it has recently been 
established that the correlation function of the most 
optically luminous galaxies (Loy, = 5 = 10% erg s') have 
correlation lengths of ~16+2 Mpc, approaching that of 
clusters of galaxies, whereas the intrinsically faintest 
galaxies have correlation lengths as low as 4 Mpc. It has 
also been established that the likelihood of finding a 
neighbor galaxy within 1 Mpc from an elliptical is about 
twice as high as that for finding a companion within the 
same volume from a spiral galaxy. Thus, although all the 
distribution of all galaxies is determined by the 
underlying matter distribution, elliptical galaxies and/or 
luminous galaxies appear to be more efficient tracers of 
regions in space with the highest densities. The cluster 
correlation function parameters also appear to depend 
weakly on the cluster’s x-ray luminosity: the most 
luminous x-ray clusters (Lx > 1.4 x 10“ erg s') have ry = 
35+15 Mpc, compared to ro = 15+4 for the least rich (and 
least x-ray luminous) systems. 

The power spectrum, P(A), is the Fourier transform 
of &(r) and provides a complementary but important 
constraint on the clustering properties of galaxies and 
clusters: broad features in the correlation function are 
narrow in Fourier space and vice versa (see 
CORRELATION FUNCTION AND POWER SPECTRA _ IN 
COSMOLOGY). An analysis of the distribution of galaxies 
in the LCRS revealed there is a significant ‘spike’ in the 
power spectrum on scales near 100 Mpc. Deeper redshift 
surveys, known as ‘pencil beam’ surveys because they 
cover very small solid angles but probe great distances, 
also have detected excess clustering signatures on scales 
of up to 130 Mpc. Indeed, the results from the first pencil 
beam surveys showed there appeared to be quasi-periodic 
spikes in the radial distribution of galaxies, occurring 
every 120-130 Mpc. These features are surprising since 
it is not understood why there should be such a preferred 
size scale. One interpretation is that structures on large 
scales, like the network of walls and voids seen in the 
wide area redshift surveys, have characteristic sizes. But 
what determines these characteristic scales? Some of this 
excess power could be the lingering effects of the 
properties of the plasma that existed in the very early 
universe. But at present we do not really understand the 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


origins of these remarkable features in the galaxy 
distribution. Nonetheless, the global shape of the galaxy 
and cluster power spectra are similar, suggesting again 
that clusters and galaxies are tracing similar perturbations 
in the matter distribution. The amplitude of P(x) for the 
richest clusters is, on average, a factor of ~2—3 higher 
than that for poorer clusters, consistent with differences 
seen in their respective €(r). In turn, the rich cluster P(x) 
amplitude is about 12—16 times higher than that derived 
for galaxies in the LCRS. 


‘Biasing’ 

The above results demonstrate that not all extragalactic 
objects trace the underlying mass distribution in the same 
way. Indeed, this conclusion represents a substantially 
new paradigm in cosmology. Prior to the early 1980s it 
had usually been assumed that a one-to-one relation 
existed between fluctuations in the distribution of 
galaxies and fluctuations in the distribution of mass. We 
now realize that not only is the relationship not a direct 
one but it probably is not even a linear one and may 
depend on time and size scale, as well. Galaxies and 
clusters are thus deemed ‘biased’ tracers of the matter 
distribution and much research is now in progress to 
understand the physical mechanisms which can account 
for this more complex relation between the galaxy, 
cluster, and matter distributions. 

The dependence of the clustering properties, such as 
the correlation length, on the mass of the system have 
been explained in terms of the statistics of ‘rare peaks’ in 
a distribution. Fluctuations in the density of mass in the 
universe occur on many scales. Superposed on the largest 
fluctuations are smaller ones. If galaxies and clusters of 
galaxies form at sites which achieve some minimum 
density enhancement, then there will be a preference for 
the most massive and most luminous objects to form at 
those sites which already have elevated mass density 
levels by virtue of sitting atop the peak of a larger scale 
fluctuation. The highest density peaks in the mass 
distribution, however, occur less frequently—one has to 
search a larger volume to find a large density peak than a 
small peak. It has been proposed that a universal relation 
can be made between the mean separation between 
objects, d;, and their correlation length, 7, of the form 


Fo = (0.3 20.1)4,; 

(2) 
implying that objects with larger separations (which tend 
to be more massive systems) will exhibit stronger 
clustering’. Does the trend between clustering strength 
and mass extend to superclusters? The answer is unclear 
because there are too few superclusters known at present 
to perform robust computations. Surveys initiated in 


? The mean interobject separation is defined as d; = (n,)'? where 1; is 
the mean space density of the objects. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1998 may yield enough additional superclusters to 
address this question. 

Although early versions of structure formation 
theory based upon a universe dominated by cold dark 
matter (CDM) did predict a trend towards higher 
correlation lengths as the galaxy and cluster mass 
increased, these same models did not come close to 
predicting the actual observations in which the richest 
clusters are 10—20 times more strongly clustered than are 
galaxies. The resolution of this discrepancy was to 
postulate that galaxies and clusters are biased tracers of 
the mass. These biased CDM models are more successful 
at reproducing the actual galaxy distribution, but there 
remain other significant observations with which the 
models do not agree very well. This is probably because 
either the dark matter properties assumed are not accurate 
and/or the specific biasing model is not accurate. 

Statistics like €(r) and P(k) are not sufficient to 
unambiguously describe the galaxy and_ cluster 
distributions. Distributions that appear dramatically 
different to the eye can often have similar two-point 
correlation functions. This is because the eye is sensitive 
to high-order moments of the distribution (such as ‘wall’- 
like bands of galaxies surrounding large, underdense 
volumes). Statistics which measure the high-order 
moments of the distributions thus provide superior 
discrimination between cosmological models as well as 
some of the best constraints on the degree of biasing and, 
thus, on the reliability of galaxies and clusters as tracers 
of the mass. Current constraints on the higher moments 
(orders 3-6) of the galaxy and cluster distributions 
suggest that while galaxies and clusters are sampling the 
same underlying matter distribution the biasing between 
them is non-linear. 


Cosmic flows 

The above observations demonstrate both the power and 
limitations of mapping structure with redshift surveys. 
While such surveys succeed in revealing extensive and 
intricate structures on many scales, the physical 
interpretation of the structure is complicated by the fact 
that the tracers of the structure are biased. However, there 
is a complementary approach to mapping structure which 
takes advantage of the fact that all the matter in the 
universe is subject to its own mutual gravitational force. 
Inhomogeneities in the mass distribution can induce 
motions of galaxies and clusters (dubbed ‘peculiar’ 
velocity by astronomers) which are unrelated to the 
expansion of space. On scales larger than about 10 Mpc, 
a three-dimensional map of these motions can be used to 
infer the masses and probable locations of the responsible 
structures because the induced velocities are linearly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


proportional to the gradients in the gravitational field’. 
The beauty of such measurements is that they provide a 
more direct method for mapping the mass distribution 
and many of the concerns about biased tracers are moot. 
Peculiar velocity observations are, however, difficult to 
perform accurately. 

The observational study of large-scale cosmic 
velocity fields began in 1976, with the discovery that the 
temperature of the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND 
(CMB) is a few millidegrees warmer in one direction and 
equally cooler in the opposite direction. This signature 
was quickly interpreted as due to motion of our Galaxy 
relative to the CMB, motion that is assumed to be due to 
an imbalance in the gravitational tug of the various 
structures which surround our Galaxy. (If matter were 
uniformly distributed around us, the gravitational forces 
would cancel, on average, and no motion would be 
induced. However, as seen in the redshift surveys matter 
is very far from uniformly distributed.) Subsequent 
measurements of this anisotropy from the Cosmic 
Background Explorer (COBE) satellite have yielded a 
highly accurate measurements of this motion: 620 km s! 
towards the direction / = 270.8°, b = +29.1°, when 
measured with respect to the center of the Local Group. 
Since the CMB is the most distant reference frame 
possible (it originates at a redshift of ~1000, when the 
universe was only a few hundred thousand years old), it 
is quite reasonable to presume that the structures causing 
this motion are much closer. 

In order to measure the peculiar velocity of an 
extragalactic object, one needs to know both its redshift 
and its distance. In this case, the distance must be 
determined independently from the redshift. This is 
because the observed redshift contains contributions from 
both the expansion of the universe and from any 
gravitationally induced velocity. The contribution solely 
from the expansion (referred to as the recession velocity) 
can be determined directly from the redshift-independent 
distance via HUBBLE’S LAW. The peculiar velocity is then 
the difference between the observed redshift and the 
recession velocity. There are presently at least seven 
independent methods which can be used to determine 
distances to galaxies and clusters, albeit not all methods 
work on all galaxy systems nor do they all yield the same 
measurement accuracy. However, the common principle 
in all of these methods is that there exists some 
observable quantity (other than redshift) that can be used 
to estimate the distance. In many of these methods, the 
distance is inferred by comparing an estimate of the 
object’s intrinsic luminosity with its apparent (observed) 
luminosity. 


> On scales less than 5 Mpc, the relationship between induced velocity 
and mass becomes highly nonlinear making reconstruction of the 
underlying structure from peculiar velocities extremely difficult. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Using such techniques,  redshift-independent 
distances (and, hence, peculiar velocities) can be 
established for large samples of galaxies and clusters in 
different parts of the sky. From such datasets, the 
motions of galaxies can be charted and the presence of 
fluctuations in the matter distribution then inferred. The 
two largest galaxies in the Local Group, our Milky Way 
and the Andromeda galaxy, are separated from one 
another by about 700 kpc. Two massless particles sitting 
that far apart in our expanding universe would be 
traveling away from one another at more than 50 km s‘'. 
In fact, these two galaxies are moving towards one 
another at about 70 km s'. This observation has led to 
estimates of the combined mass of these two spiral 
galaxies. The entire Local Group itself is moving due, in 
part, to the gravitational pull of the VIRGO CLUSTER 
which lies about 16 Mpc away. But the Virgo cluster 
mass is sufficient to explain only about 40% of the CMB 
velocity. Additionally, the CMB velocity vector is 
misaligned with the position of the Virgo cluster by 47°. 
Additional structures at larger distances must, therefore, 
play a role. 

One of the first peculiar velocity surveys to detect 
these structures was conducted in the mid-1980s using 
distances to over 300 elliptical galaxies. A startling result 
was found: a vast number of galaxies within a sphere 
nearly 100 Mpc in diameter appear to share a common 
motion towards a massive aggregate of matter. Such a 
motion is referred to as a ‘bulk flow’ and since so many 
galaxies participate in it, the aggregate was dubbed the 
‘Great Attractor. The bulk flow vector was 
600+104 km s”' towards / = 312°, b = 6° (angular error is 
~+10°), close to the CMB velocity of 620 km s"' but 
about 45° from its apex. Subsequent surveys indicate that 
the ‘Great Attractor’ is a moderately rich supercluster 
lying between 40-50 Mpc from our Galaxy. The Great 
Attractor itself may be participating in a bulk flow 
suggesting that the origin of the flow is due, in part, to 
structure on scales larger than 50 Mpc. 

Do such bulk flows extend to scales of 100 Mpc or 
larger? If so, then the cosmological principle is not valid 
on scales even as large as 100 Mpc. With this key 
question as a driver, several groups set out to explore the 
velocity field on scales 4 times larger than the original 
‘Great Attractor’ survey. Initial results from some of 
these surveys suggest there is evidence for bulk flows of 
600-800 (+150-300) km s”' which extend out to scales 
of 100 Mpc or more. The different surveys have not all 
yielded consistent directions for these flows, however. 
There is some evidence to suggest that these very large- 
scale flows point to within +30° of the Shapley 
supercluster, a system with a mass of a few x 10'° solar 
masses located 150 Mpc from the Local Group and 
towards / = 312°, b = 30°. The results are controversial 
and this is presently a research area of much active 
observational work. One challenge of measuring bulk 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


flows on such large-scales is that the signal is small and 
often must be extracted from noisy data. If very large- 
scale bulk flows turn out to be a reality, then present 
models for structure formation in the universe will 
require substantial revision (if not outright rejection). 


The Hubble bubble? 

Gravitational attraction towards massive structures is not 
the only means available for generating a large bulk flow, 
however. If the expansion of the universe were dependent 
on one’s location, then flows could be a direct 
consequence. Another way to ask this question is: is the 
Hubble constant (Ho) really constant? The answer is no. 
A more accurate description of this term would be the 
Hubble parameter. The Hubble parameter does vary with 
cosmic age—the temporal dependence is a consequence 
of the deceleration of the expansion caused by the matter 
in the universe. The amplitude of the time dependence, 
however, only becomes significant when surveys span 
very large distances (and, hence, a large dynamic range 
in ‘look-back’ time). Variations in the value of Ho as a 
function of location, however, are also possible if the 
fluctuations in the mass distribution are sufficiently large. 
The expansion of space within a large underdense region 
will proceed at a faster rate than that in a large overdense 
region. The size of the voids and walls seen in the galaxy 
distribution are, in principle, large enough to yield 
measurable variations in the Hubble parameter on scales 
of 100-200 Mpc. As figure 3 shows, the region of space 
surrounding our Galaxy is underdense relative to, for 
example, the ‘Great Wall’ structure which lies about 70— 
100 Mpc away. One possible explanation, then, for a 
large peculiar velocity on the scale of 100-200 Mpc is 
that our Galaxy resides in a region of space where the 
local expansion rate is faster than that on much larger 
scales. To date, the observational constraints on the 
spatial variation of the Hubble parameter are less than 
5% on scales of 150 Mpc. Although small, this can still 
amount to a few hundred km s” and thus such effects 
may indeed be at work. 


Future observations and outstanding 


problems 

One key challenge posed by all these observations is to 
understand how the universe evolved from its highly 
homogeneous state shortly after creation to the present 
epoch where large inhomogeneities on scales of 100 
Mpe, or more, are relatively common. The models which 
appear most consistent with the majority of the 
observations are those which call for a CDM-dominated 
open universe and/or an open universe with CDM plus 
some hot dark matter component such as neutrinos. The 
observations may also be consistent with a non-zero 
cosmological constant (A). If the large-amplitude, large- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Distribution of Galaxies, Clusters, and Superclusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


scale bulk flows persist, however, some revisions to these 
models will be required. 

While much progress has been made in mapping the 
structures in the universe, we still have a ways to go. At 
present, the fraction of the local universe for which we 
have reliable maps of the galaxy and cluster distributions 
is amere 1%, akin to trying to infer the geography of the 
entire surface of the Earth from a map of the eastern half 
of the United States. Some fundamental astrophysical 
problems in the study of the distribution of galaxies, 
clusters, and superclusters still remain unsolved. Are 
there galaxian structures on scales beyond 300 Mpc? Are 
there bulk flows which indeed extend beyond 100 Mpc? 
Just how complex is the relationship between the galaxy 
distribution and the matter distribution? What structure 
existed when the universe was half or even one tenth its 
present age? What is the precise nature of the dark matter 
in the universe? 

Given the limited amount of telescope time available 
to conduct surveys of the galaxy and cluster distributions, 
astronomers have had to balance the desire to cover large 
areas of the sky (and hence sample many nearby regions 
of space) and the desire to probe the galaxy distribution 
at great distances (to study the evolution of structure). 
Fortunately, as multi-object spectrographs improve and 
more large-aperture telescopes are constructed, including 
a few observatories solely dedicated to spectroscopic 
surveys, the trade off between area and depth is 
becoming less of an issue. Facilities exist now which will 
enable astronomers to conduct surveys that both cover 
moderately large areas and extend to quite large distances 
(and, hence, probe farther back into time). Three- 
dimensional surveys of a million or more nearby 
galaxies, and of thousands of galaxy clusters, are 
underway. The study of large-scale structure at high 
redshift is also now becoming accessible. It is likely the 
next decade will see many breakthroughs in _ this 
particular area thanks to an array of large optical and 
near-infrared optimized telescopes being commissioned 
over the next several years. 

The COBE satellite provided constraints on the 
distribution of fluctuations in the matter distribution in 
the very young universe but only on extremely large 
scales (greater than 600 Mpc). CMB observatories in 
space to be launched early in the 21st century will yield 
exquisite constraints on the early matter distribution on 
scales comparable with those probed by existing redshift 
surveys and, thus, provide a direct point of comparison 
for evolutionary studies. Like the peculiar velocity 
surveys, the CMB studies are attractive because the 
fluctuations in the microwave background are direct, 
unbiased tracers of the underlying matter distribution. 

But our ability to observe the universe must be 
matched with an equal ability to interpret and understand 
the observations. Thanks to revolutions in computer 
processing power and data storage capacity, experiments 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to simulate large segments of the cosmos are now 
underway (see UNIVERSE: SIMULATIONS OF STRUCTURE 
AND GALAXY FORMATION). These simulations track the 
trajectories of a billion particles as they evolve over 
cosmic time to form structure. Such new tools will 
provide theoretical predictions at a level of detail and 
accuracy hitherto unavailable. And since the differences 
between some cosmological models are quite subtle, such 
a capability is indispensable. 


Bibliography 

Clark S Towards the Edge of the Universe: A Review of Modern 
Cosmology (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons and Praxis) 

Dressler A 1994 Voyage to the Great Attractor: Exploring 
Intergalactic Space (New York: Knopf) 

Fairall A Large Scale Structures in the Universe (Chichester: 
John Wiley & Sons and Praxis) 

Ferris T Coming of Age in the Milky Way (New York: 
Doubleday) 

Turok N (ed) Critical Dialogues in Cosmology (Singapore: 
World Scientific) 


Marc Postman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Diurnal Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Diurnal Motion 


The apparent daily motion of a celestial body across the 
sky from east to west caused by the axial rotation of the 
Earth. Diurnal motion causes stars to appear to trace out 
circles centered on the celestial poles. For an observer at 
the north or south pole of the Earth, the diurnal motion of 
stars is along circles parallel to the horizon, while, viewed 
from the equator, stars trace out paths that intersect the 
horizon at right angles. In general, the arcs along which 
stars appear to move intersect the horizon at an angle equal 
to 90° minus the observer’s latitude. 


See also: axis, celestial sphere, circumpolar stars, day, 
horizon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Divided Instruments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Divided Instruments 


Although the division of the zodiac into 360° probably 
derives from Egypt or Assyria around 2000 BC, there is no 
surviving evidence of Mesopotamian cultures embodying 
this division into a mathematical instrument. Almost 
certainly, however, it was from Babylonia that the Greek 
geometers learned of the 360° circle, and by c. 80 BC 
they had incorporated it into that remarkably elaborate 
device generally called the ‘Antikythera mechanism’. 
This mechanism, found in 1900 by sponge divers in the 
remains of a ship which sank around 180 BC off the 
Greek island of Antikythera, is a sophisticated geared 
instrument that could be used to compute the motions of 
the planets. It is ironic, therefore, that the earliest known 
graduated astronomical instrument should already be one 
of great complexity, pointing to both a highly developed 
astronomical geometry and a complementarily mature 
state of instrumental craftsmanship in classical Greece. 


Ptolemy’s influence 

Inhis encyclopaedic Mathematical Composition, or Almagest, 
of c. AD 150, Claudius protemy describes the uses of a 
variety of astronomical instruments capable of measuring 
the positions of the heavenly bodies from fixed coordinates 
by means of the 360° scale. These include the astrolabon 
and quadrant, as well as adaptations of the linear 
properties of the circle whereby angles could be measured 
using straight rods arranged in triangular configurations 
by means of sines and tangents. 

Ptolemy’s astrolabon is really a set of armillary 
rings, in brass or bronze, aligned with the main planes 
of the sky, such as the zodiac, celestial equator and 
meridian. Graduated into 360°, these rings could be used 
to track the motions of astronomical bodies across the 
sky, so that tables of observations could be compiled, 
from which theories could be generated. The two- 
dimensional ‘astrolabe’ was constructed by an ingenious 
flattening of these rings onto a series of plates to produce 
a stereographic projection of the sky in the form of a 
planisphere. It was the Arab astronomers of the 7th 
century AD who developed the astrolabe in the form in 
which it became familiar in the Latin West in the 12th 
century, turning it into a dual-function instrument that 
could be used both to observe the altitudes of bodies and to 
perform practical calculations in spherical trigonometry. 

The division of angles into ever-decreasing units of 
minutes and seconds, where the accuracy of each digit of 
division could be relied on geometrically and scientifically, 
became a concern to those cultures that placed a high 
premium on astronomical research. In the post-classical 
world, this meant the Arabs, who developed two classes 
of graduated astronomical instruments. The first of 
these were large instruments, often built in masonry, in 
which accuracy was achieved by the greatness of the 
radius employed. The 1424 observatory of ULUGH BEG of 
Samarkand with its 130 ft radius meridian sextant set in 
a drum-shaped building housed the most spectacular and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


successful instrument of this type, which was capable, in 
theory, of measuring the solar declination and stellar, lunar 
and planetary altitudes to within a few arcseconds. 

The second class of graduated instruments to come 
out of the medieval Islamic world were what might 
be called reckoning instruments. These included the 
astrolabe, hand quadrant and forms of cross-staves. 
They were not sufficiently accurate to re-define any 
astronomical constants, but were intended, with their 
scales divided to 1° or perhaps 30 arcmin, to measure 
solar or other data for the daily business of time-finding, 
navigation, surveying, religious liturgy or astrology. This 
class of instruments generated the world’s first trade 
in divided scientific artefacts of which a large number 
of individual examples, especially astrolabes, survive in 
museum collections around the world. 


The astrolabe 

The astrolabe came into Europe via Muslim contacts (see 
ASTROLABE). The astrolabe was not an instrument of original 
research but a reckoning instrument, whereby one could 
establish local time by Sun and stars, as well as compute 
a wide range of calendrical features. Each instrument 
carried two 360° scales, on the back and front of the main 
brass plate. The rear scale was used to make celestial 
observations by means of a sighting alidade, while the 
front, in conjunction with the stereographically projected 
sky of ‘climate’ plates, could be used to calculate the 
aforementioned horological and calendrical data. 

Studies in a range of surviving European astrolabes, 
made between c 1380 and 1650, indicate that several ge- 
ometrical configurations, employing scribing compasses 
and copy-templates, were used in various workshops to 
generate the 360° scales, and by 1500 there seem to have 
been established centers, such as Florence and Augsburg, 
for the manufacture of astrolabes, dials and similar math- 
ematical instruments. 


Tycho Brahe 

It was the Danish nobleman TYCHO BRAHE, between 1572 and 
1598, who became the first European to devise relatively 
large-radius graduated instruments intended for original 
research. These included a collection of ARMILLARY SPHERES 
(set in zodiac and equatorial coordinates), quadrants, 
sextants, rulers of parallax (or triqueta), globes and clocks 
with which he performed the first fundamental revision of 
the positions of the heavenly bodies since Ptolemy 1300 yr 
before. 

Unlike Ulugh Beg and other Muslim astronomers 
with whose observations he was familiar, Tycho aban- 
doned the idea of building very large radius instruments 
after a 14 cubit (19 ft) radius quadrant which he had built 
with Paul Hainzel of Augsburg showed signs of distort- 
ing under its own weight. Tycho went on to become the 
first person to analyze graduated instruments as engineer- 
ing structures, realizing that stability of the entire instru- 
ment was essential if the scale graduations were to remain 
true. Instead of making instruments of tens of feet radius, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Divided Instruments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


as a way of making the graduations bigger, he adopted 
and greatly improved the transversal or diagonal scale: 
a device going back to Richard Cantzlar and LEVI BEN GER- 
son. In the diagonal scale, the degree space is seen not 
simply as a line, but as a two-dimensional area extend- 
ing across part of the radius. A line, drawn diagonally 
across the area, and divided into 30 or 60 equal spaces, 
could then allow a degree to be read to a small fraction 
from an overall radius of only 6 ft or so. All of Tycho’s ma- 
ture instruments carried diagonals, as did those of most of 
his successors—Pierre GASSENDI, Giovanni CASSINI, Johannes 
HEVELIUS and John FLAMSTEED—over the next 130 yr. Ty- 
cho Brahe was proud to inherit the triquetum, or set of 
so-called ‘Ptolemy’s Rulers’, of NICOLAUS COPERNICUS pre- 
sented to him by Johannes Hannow, Canon of Ermeland. 
The Rulers consisted of three straight rods and read an an- 
gle by using the geometrical relationship of the tangent to 
the radius and circumference of a circle. The instrument’s 
advantage lay in the relative ease whereby one could di- 
vide a straight line into equal parts as opposed to a 90° 
arc, although, as Tycho found after exhaustive testing, the 
instrument was not suitable for critically accurate obser- 
vations. 

The ultimate quality of Tycho’s positional obser- 
vations—averaging 1 arcmin, as opposed to 10-15 arcmin 
for his predecessors—derived from his constant analysis, 
re-designing and increasing specialization of function of 
his observatory instruments. Tycho’s concern with error 
detection and correction when it came to both the geomet- 
rical and the engineering construction of his instruments 
constituted a landmark in instrument technology and con- 
vinced scientists that their observations, and the plausible 
theories that they could build on them, were only as good 
as the graduated scales at their disposal. 

Renaissance Europe saw an explosion of ingenuity 
in the devising of angle-measuring instruments, aimed 
at the specialist needs not just of astronomers, but 
also of navigators, surveyors, gunners and mathematical 
teachers. The principles implicit in Ptolemy’s Rulers, 
whereby straight rods were adapted to read angles, 
were made use of to produce the mariner’s cross-staff, 
the baculus and their variants. Indeed, even some 
astronomers of distinction did important angle-measuring 
work with straight instruments, the most outstanding 
of whom were Thomas HarriotT, Pierre Gassendi and 
Jeremiah HORROCKS. 


Intellectual pressures 

The intellectual pressures generated by the Copernican 
revolution, initially exemplified in the path beaten by 
Tycho Brahe, encouraged European astronomers to search 
for and quantify a stellar parallax by which the Earth’s 
motion could be physically demonstrated. Also, after 
1670, and especially after NEWTON’s Principia in 1687, critical 
measurements were seen as lying at the heart of the 
quantification of the solar system and the physical testing 
of gravitation theory. By 1680, therefore, the improvement 
of graduated instruments had become an ongoing concern, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


especially in England, where craftsmen such as Thomas 
TOMPION, George GRAHAM and Jesse RAMSDEN not only made 
considerable financial profits from pioneering innovation 
but also won Fellowships of the Royal Society and 
international academic recognition as well. 

The quadrant, which was the basic angle-measuring 
instrument of the period 1575-1790, had its divisions 
struck off on its limb using the canons of Euclidean 
geometry. The radius of any circle will naturally strike 
off six 60° arcs into the circumference of the same circle, or 
gol 5 times into a quadrant. A bisected radius—physically 
exemplified by the beam compass—then strikes off 30°, so 
that 60° + 30° produce a perfect quadrantal arc. Further 
bisections will divide the quadrant down to 15° spaces, 
after which a variety of geometrically ‘impure’ trisections 
and quinquesections will take one down to single degrees, 
and then to minutes. 


The micrometer, telescopic sight and clock 
Following Tycho Brahe’s lead in the construction of more 
compact instruments with geometrically complex scales, 
17th- and 18th-century instrument makers invented a 
number of systems whereby diagonals of various forms, 
combined with vernier scales and micrometers, enabled 
an instrument of 6 or 7 ft radius to perform much 
more accurately than a simple masonry quadrant of 
100 ft. Indeed, the period 1640-1670 saw an extraordinary 
increase in the sophistication and accuracy of graduated 
instruments used in astronomical observatories. The large 
private observatory of Johannes Hevelius, the instruments 
of which were described and illustrated in minute detail 
in his Machina coelestis (1673), both built on the Tychonic 
tradition and at the same time influenced Giovanni Cassini 
in Paris and John Flamsteed in Greenwich. Also, around 
1640, the Yorkshireman William GASCOIGNE invented the 
micrometer and developed the first workable telescopic 
sight. Between them these two inventions enabled an over 
40-fold increase in the practical sighting of astronomical 
instruments beyond what was possible with the naked 
eye. By exploiting the ancient properties of the tangent 
to the circle, and now made vastly more delicate as a 
result of precision screw-threads and optical reading, the 
micrometer made it possible to measure down to a single 
arcsecond. Neither the telescopic sight nor the micrometer 
became common, however, until brought to the attention 
of the wider world of learning by Robert HooKE in 
1667, and they had been only partly used by Hevelius. 
Also, when the oscillating pendulum was successfully 
harnessed to the going train of a clock by Christiaan 
HUYGENS in 1658, and was improved by Hooke’s and Joseph 
Clement’s development of the ‘seconds pendulum’ and 
anchor escapement around 1669, the new precision clock 
suddenly became a major angle-measuring instrument in 
its own right, whereby, in conjunction with a meridian 
quadrant, it could be used to divide up the sky into hours, 
minutes and seconds of right ascension. 

The ROYAL OBSERVATORY, GREENWICH, under John Flam- 
steed, the first Astronomer Royal, became the first place 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Divided Instruments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in Europe where these new optical, micrometric and horo- 
logical techniques of celestial angle measuring were used 
systematically and with spectacular success, between 1675 
and 1719, although valuable work was also done by 
Cassini and Jean PicarD in Paris, and by Ole Christensen 
ROMER in Copenhagen. 


Cross-checking 

During the 18th century, graduated instrument design and 
use were dominated not only by an ever-increasing pres- 
sure towards greater accuracy but also by the evolution 
of cross-checking and error-detecting techniques whereby 
both craftsman and astronomer could quantify the errors 
of their instruments. 

Fundamental in this line of development was the 
8 ft radius quadrant which George Graham FRS built for 
Edmond HALLEY at Greenwich in 1725. In addition to its 
90° scale, Graham equipped this instrument with a second 
scale of 96 equal parts, the whole of which could be drawn 
by ‘pure’ geometrical bisection: i.e. radius = 64 parts then 
bisected to 32:16:8:4:2:1, by beam compasses. 

These two scales, drawn 1 in apart from the same 
center, acted as cross-checks on each other, when read 
against their corresponding micrometers, to reach a 
new threshold of accuracy. Then, in 1750, John Bird 
completed a new quadrant for James BRADLEY, Halley’s 
Greenwich successor. Bird’s 8 ft quadrant carried a 
similar specification to Graham’s, although its 90° scale 
incorporated no trisections, for all of its degrees and 
minutes were struck off from a perfectly straight ‘scale 
of equal parts’ by means of beam compasses. Bird’s 
quadrant’s 1 arcsec accuracy was also achieved by an all- 
brass construction, which avoided bimetallic tensions, and 
by the fitting of superior micrometers. It was this quadrant 
that enabled Bradley to perform the most accurate angular 
measurements made to date, while a comparable 6 ft Bird 
quadrant made it possible for Tobias Mayer of Géttingen to 
compile the first set of lunar tables that were sufficiently 
accurate for the longitude at sea to be found. 


The circle 

By the 1770s, however, inventors such as Jesse Ramsden 
and John and Edward TROUGHTON, perhaps inspired by 
the published researches of Michel Ferdinand d’Albert 
d’Ailly, duc de Chaulnes, had come to realize that full- 
circular instruments were the only way forward when it 
came to achieving ever more critical accuracies, for an 
astronomical circle was capable of being checked and re- 
checked by means of reticule microscopes set at 180°, 90°, 
60° and 30° across its radius in a way that a quadrant was 
not. Ramsden’s 36 in theodolite for the early Ordnance 
Survey, 1787, and his 5 ft circle for Guiseppe PIazzi in 
Palermo, Sicily, in 1789, were the first circular instruments 
to demonstrate the spectacular accuracy breakthrough 
permitted by the full-circle design. Subsequent circles 
made by Edward Troughton for John Ponp, Stephen 
Groombridge and others up to 1806 all demonstrated that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the 1 arcsec ceiling of the quadrant could be surpassed to 
0.1 arcsec with the circle. 

All of these circles had to be meticulously hand- 
graduated, although in 1766 Jesse Ramsden had begun 
experiments whereby a 36 in diameter, finely denticulated 
wheel, acted on by a precision worm-wheel, could ‘mass 
produce’ nautical instruments, such as sextants, that had 
become so necessary in finding the longitude by lunars. 
By the 1840s, however, the vastly increased machine- 
tool skills of the industrial revolution enabled William 
Simms to engine-divide the 6 ft transit circle which the 
Astronomer Royal George Biddell amy had designed, and 
commissioned into the Royal Observatory, in 1850. When 
fully adjusted, the Airy Transit Circle, by Ransome & 
Simms, could measure meridian angles to 0.01 arcsec and 
was to remain in constant daily use until 1954. 

Between 1680 and 1850, it was British craftsmen who 
made most of the major innovations in graduated instru- 
ments, although by 1850 the firms of George Friedrich von 
Reichenbach and Traugott Lebrecht Ertel were producing 
superlative instruments for an increasingly international 
market. It was the advent of photography that funda- 
mentally altered the traditional uses of graduated instru- 
ments. Also, especially after the establishment of the Carte 
du Ciel, 1887, measurements taken from a photographic 
plate, rather than through a telescope eyepiece, showed 
the way forward when it came to measuring star positions. 

The European Space Agency’s ‘Hipparcos’ stellar 
photographic project now represents the state of the art 
in contemporary angle measuring, while even the Royal 
Greenwich Observatory’s last great circle, the Carlsberg 
Meridian Circle on La Palma in the Canary Islands, 
measures and records the meridian passage of stars under 
computer control. 


Bibliography 

Bennett J A 1987 The Divided Circle: a History of Instruments 
for Astronomy, Navigation and Surveying (Oxford: 
Phaidon-Christie) 

Chapman A 1995 Dividing the Circle: a History of Critical 
Angular Measurement in Astronomy, 1500-1850 2nd 
edn (Chichester: Praxis-Wiley) 


Allan Chapman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Divini, Eustachio (1610-85) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Divini, Eustachio (1610-85) 


Telescope-maker, born in San Severino (Ancona), Italy, 
he made telescopes, some as long as 16 m; he made 
astronomical observations with some of them, including a 
map of the Moon, and a work on Saturn. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dixon, Jeremiah (1733-79) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dixon, Jeremiah (1733-79) 


Surveyor and astronomer, born in Bishop Auckland, 
Durham, England. In 1760 the Royal Society chose CHARLES 
MASON for an expedition to observe the transit of Venus, and 
Mason chose Dixon as his assistant, successfully observing 
the transit at the Cape of Good Hope on 6 June 1761. 
In 1763 Mason and Dixon traveled to Pennsylvania and 
Maryland, to define the disputed boundary between the 
two states; this established the Mason—Dixon line, which 
became synonymous with the boundary between both the 
political and geographic north and south of America. In 
1769 Dixon observed the second transit of Venus of the 
eighteenth century. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dobson Unit ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dobson Unit 


The Dobson unit is a measure of atmospheric ozone 
content. The total amount of ozone in a column of air 
is expressed as the thickness of the layer of ozone formed 
on compressing the column to standard temperature and 
pressure conditions (1 atmosphere and 0 °C). A layer 
thickness of 0.01 mm corresponds to 1 Dobson unit (DU). 
300 DU is a typical global average. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dobsonian Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dobsonian Telescope 


A simple, cheap and portable form of Newtonian 
reflecting telescope mounted on an altazimuth mounting. 
Attached to a simple fork mounting that rotates in 
altitude (elevation) and azimuth (parallel to the horizon), 
with Teflon strips as the bearing surfaces, a Dobsonian 
telescope, provided it is well balanced, can be moved 
quickly and smoothly by hand to point towards any 
part of the sky. Because of its simple mode of 
construction, aperture for aperture, the Dobsonian is 
significantly cheaper to construct than other designs. 
Consequently this design enables amateur astronomers to 
acquire instruments of relatively large aperture and light- 
gathering power at relatively low cost. 


See also: altazimuth mounting, light-gathering power, 
Newtonian telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dollond, John (1706-61) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dollond, John (1706-61) 


Instrument-maker, born in London, Dollond was the first 
manufacturer to produce achromatic lenses commercially, 
starting in 1758. The achromat consisted of two lenses 
in different types of glass. The idea had been put 
forward by a London barrister, Chester Moor Hall (1703- 
71), but Dollond carried out the experimental work to 
realize the achromatic lens. One lens was made of 
relatively common crown glass, but the other glass, flint, 
was produced in small quantities. English glassmakers 
supplied English manufacturers with the best quality and 
sold rejects elsewhere. Dollond had first choice, and with 
the protection of his patent exploited his position. But 
British astronomers had access to excellent instruments 
and produced excellent science! When the patent expired, 
the price of achromatic telescopes halved. John Dollond’s 
work was continued by his sons, Peter and John, and by 
the latter’s nephew George Huggins (who, such was the 
Dollond family’s prestige, took the name George Dollond). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dome ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dome 


A circular, very shallow-sided hill on the surface of a 
planetary body. Lunar domes are found in the maria, and 
are typically 10-15 km across, with gradients of no more 
than a few degrees. They are volcanic in origin, and some 
have a small pit at their center; they may mark the tops of 
the volcanic vents through which the lava that formed the 
maria emerged. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dominion Astrophysical Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dominion Astrophysical Observatory 


The Dominion Astrophysical Observatory began operat- 
ing the 1.8 m telescope in 1918, added a 1.2 m telescope 
in 1962, and then joined the National Research Council of 
Canada in 1970. The site near Victoria, BC now contains 
the headquarters of the HERZBERG INSTITUTE OF ASTROPHYSICS, 
the Institute administration, groups supporting optical as- 
tronomy, submillimeter astronomy, instrumentation, and 
the Canadian Astronomy Data Center. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.hia.nrc.ca. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dominion Radio Astrophysical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dominion Radio Astrophysical 
Observatory 


The Dominion Radio Astrophysical Observatory began 
operating in 1959, and joined the NATIONALRESEARCH COUNCIL 
in 1970. It became part of the Herzberg Institute of 
Astrophysics in 1975. The site near Penticton, BC has a 
26 m radio telescope, a seven-antenna synthesis telescope 
on a 600 m baseline and two telescopes dedicated to 
monitoring the solar radio flux at 10.7 cm. This part of 
the Institute also supports the development of correlators 
and the design of future radio telescopes. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.hia.nrc.ca. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Donati, Giambattista [Giovanni Battista] (1826-73) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Donati, Giambattista [Giovanni 
Battista] (1826-73) 


Astronomer, born in Pisa, Italy. Director of the observatory 
at Florence, he discovered the brilliant comet (Donati’s 
Comet) of 1858. He was the first to observe a comet’s 
spectrum (Tempel’s Comet of 1864). Inspired the 
foundation of Acretri Observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Doppelmayr, Johann Gabriel (1671-1750) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Doppelmayr, Johann Gabriel 
(1671-1750) 


Born in Nuremberg, Germany. Widely traveled, he 
wrote on astronomy, spherical trigonometry, sundials 
and mathematical instruments, as well as biography and 
history. He made no discoveries himself, but successfully 
disseminated the work of others. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Doppler Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Doppler Effect 


The change in the observed frequency and wavelength of 
a source of radiation resulting from its motion towards, or 
away from, the observer. If a source is approaching, the 
frequency of the radiation is increased (more wavecrests 
per second reach the observer than would be the case 
if the source were stationary relative to that observer) 
and its observed wavelength decreased. If the source is 
receding, the frequency is decreased and the wavelength 
of the radiation is increased. 

The principle was suggested in 1842 by the German 
mathematician, Christian Doppler (1803-53). In 1848, the 
French physicist Hippolyte Fizeau (1819-96) showed that 
the wavelengths of spectral lines would be affected in 
the same way. Consequently, lines in the spectrum of a 
receding source would be displaced towards the longwave 
(red) end of the spectrum and those in the spectrum of 
an approaching source would be displaced towards the 
shortwave (blue) end. The term ‘redshift’ is applied to the 
former case and ‘blue shift’ to the latter. 

The observed wavelength, i’, differs from the rest- 
wavelength (the wavelength measured in a frame of 
reference in which the source is stationary), A, by an 
amount Ad, which depends upon the radial velocity 
(speed directly towards or away from the observer) of the 
source. For velocities, v, which are small compared with 
the speed of light, c, the wavelength shift is given by: 


AA N-A v 
A 2d c 


If the velocity of the source relative to the observer is an 
appreciable fraction of the speed of light, the relativistic 


expression: 
Ax ctv \? 1 
ho (: = *) 
must be used. 

The radial velocity of a light source may be 
determined by comparing the observed wavelengths of 
its spectral lines with the wavelengths that those lines 
would have if the source were stationary. The Doppler 
effect, therefore, provides the means by which the radial 


and rotational velocities of stars and galaxies may be 
determined. 


See also: redshift, spectrum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Doppler, Johann Christian Andreas (1803-53) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Doppler, Johann Christian Andreas 
(1803-53) 


Born in Salzburg, Austria, Doppler studied and taught 
mathematics in Vienna. On the verge, because of economic 
hardship, of emigrating to America, he was offered posts 
in Prague. Despite huge teaching loads, he was able 
to carry out some research of his own (in the face of 
complaints of neglect by his students). In 1842 read a 
paper to the Royal Bohemian Society ‘On the colored 
light of the double stars and certain other stars of the 
heavens’, articulating the Doppler principle which relates 
the frequency (or wavelength) of a source to its velocity 
relative to an observer. Doppler showed that there would 
be a change of frequency of both light and sound waves 
if the source were moving; the change of frequency (or 
wavelength) is called the Doppler shift. He tried to illustrate 
his theory with an application to the colors of double stars, 
but the effect is actually too small to produce a major 
shift of color. He foresaw that his effect ‘will in the not 
too distant future offer astronomers a welcome means to 
determine the movements and distances of distant stars’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dorado 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dorado 


(the Goldfish, or Swordfish—sometimes shown as Xiphias; 
abbrev. Dor, gen. Doradus; area 179 sq. deg.) A southern 
constellation which lies between Pictor and Reticulum, 
and culminates at midnight in early December. It was 
first shown on Petrus Plancius’ celestial globe of c. 1598, 
though it is usually attributed to the Dutch navigators 
Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known as Petrus Theodorus) 
and Frederick de Houtman, who charted that part of the 
southern sky in 1595-7. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Dorado are a Doradus, magnitude 3.3, and B 
Doradus, one of the brightest Cepheid variables (range 
3.5-4.1, period 9.84 days). There are no other stars brighter 
than fourth magnitude. The constellation contains most 
of the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC, which extends 
into the neighboring constellation of Mensa), in which 
interesting objects include S Doradus, an extremely 
luminous eruptive variable (range 8.6-11.5), and NGC 
2070 (the Tatantula Nebula), a large (40’) emission nebula 
centered on the star 30 Doradus. The part of the LMC in 
Dorado was also the location of Supernova 1987A. 


See also: Large Magellanic Cloud, Supernova 1987A, 
Tarantula Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Double Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Double Star 


The description ‘double star’ is given to any pair of stars 
that appear close together in the sky. Double stars fall 
into two distinct classes: those pairs that are actually close 
together in space and are therefore physically linked, and 
those that may be very far apart in space but happen to lie 
in almost the same direction. 

A pair of stars that really is close together has 
a common gravitational field and is termed a ‘binary 
system’. The term ‘physical double’ is also sometimes 
used. Although there are often two principal components, 
many systems have additional members and so constitute 
a ‘multiple star’ system. Stars that appear to be double 
only because they happen to lie in almost the same 
line of sight are termed ‘optical doubles’. There is no 
way of distinguishing between the two classes from a 
single observation, but while the relative position of 
the components of an optical double remains fixed, or 
changes by the straight-line relative proper motion vector, 
members of a binary system are in orbit around a common 
center of gravity and their accelerating orbital movements 
can be revealed by an extended series of observations. The 
orbital periods are usually very long, measured in decades 
or even centuries, so that these observations must be made 
over a correspondingly long period of time. 

Statistical analysis shows that a large majority of the 
closer double stars are physical binary systems rather 
than optical pairs, but many double stars are difficult to 
identify with certainty as close binary or multiple systems, 
unless they are included in a major program of observation 
which will require the use of a powerful telescope for 
extended periods every few years throughout much of 
its working life. Such lengthy programs can rarely be 
allowed to take precedence over work that offers more 
immediate results, unless the suspected double stars in 
question are of particular interest, for example as members 
of an important moving cluster of stars. 


See also: binary system, multiple star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Double Stars: Visual and Imaging Observations by Amateurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Double Stars: Visual and Imaging 
Observations by Amateurs 


Measurements of the position angle and separation with 
time of visual double stars allow the apparent orbit of the 
two stars to be calculated and hence the total mass of the 
two stars derived (figures 1 and 2). It is still one of the 
best ways of calculating stellar masses but the long peri- 
od of many visual binary systems (typically a few hun- 
dred years) means that the number of reliable orbits is 
still very small (currently about 50). 

Amateur observers have a long and distinguished 
record in the annals of double star observing. S W 
Burnham started out with a small refractor and later 
made it his life’s work, holding down a day job as a clerk 
in a Chicago court and at weekends observing at Yerkes 
Observatory. He later became a professional. In England, 
T HE C Espin discovered several thousand faint and 
wide pairs with his reflectors and significant contribu- 
tions were also made by W R Dawes (both, incidentally, 
clergymen). The greatest amateur was the Frenchman 
Paul Baize, by day a pediatrician, who made 24000 mea- 
surements and computed nearly 500 orbits and is tenth 
on the all-time list of observers. 

The filar micrometer (figure 3), invented in the 1640s 
and still in use today, is one of the chosen instruments for 
those who want to push their telescopes to the limit of 
resolution. The human eye is still the best detector 
for pairs which are close or unequal, and a good 35 cm 
telescope will allow pairs as close as 0.25 arcsec to be 
measured. Another effective instrument is the double- 
image (or Lyot) micrometer which is perhaps better than 


Figure 1. The multiple star HJ 684 located in the cluster 
NGC 1662 in Orion, imaged by Martin Nicholson. The bright 
close pair center right is CD—magnitudes 10.3 and 12.5, PA is 
308.72°, and separation 10.26 arcsec. These components were 
previously measured in 1910 and 1987 only. The field size is 
10 arcmin x 6 arcmin. North is to the top and east to the left. This 
is one of six 2 s exposures. Credit: Martin Nicholson, Daventry 
Observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


WDS11129+3206 


STF1523B 


et 
1 arcsec 


—€ Uma P = 59.878 yr 


Figure 2. The pair  UMa—observed by R W Argyle between 
1970 and 2002. The full curve shows the current orbit for this 
pair. The full dots represent means of five or more nights, the 
crosses one to five nights. The solitary single cross is an obser- 
vation made in 1970 and the motion is clockwise. The radius of 
the central circle is the angular resolution of the telescope—in 
this case 0".56. 


the filar for small separations but cannot match the range 
of separations that the filar can handle. 

While many bright pairs have orbits which require 
little further adjustment there are a large number of 
fainter pairs which require attention. In addition the 


Figure 3. The RETEL filar micrometer used by the writer. It uses 
parallel wires (one movable and one fixed) to measure separa- 
tion and a third wire at right angles to measure position angle. 
The whole field is illuminated by means of a variable-intensity 
red light-emitting diode. Credit: Richard Sword, Institute of 
Astronomy, Cambridge. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Double Stars: Visual and Imaging Observations by Amateurs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hipparcos satellite has discovered thousands of new 
pairs most of which have not yet been followed from the 
ground and all of which need to be. 

While the filar micrometer has been the mainstay of 
this work for centuries, the advent of charge-coupled 
device (CCD) cameras means that there is an opportuni- 
ty for amateurs equipped with small to medium aper- 
tures to make substantial contributions (see CCDs, FILTERS 
AND CCD PHOTOMETRY FOR AMATEURS). In particular there 
are many thousands of faint pairs on the various Schmidt 
sky surveys which are completely unrecorded and mea- 
sured. Using a 12 in Schmidt-Cassegrain and an SBIG 
CCD for instance, Martin Nicholson, working at 
Daventry near Northampton, has found many new pairs 
using the Guide Star Catalogue. Pairs as close as 5 arcsec 
and as faint as magnitude 15 can be imaged routinely 
with his 12 in Meade LX200 and SBIG ST7-E CCD. 
Reduction of the CCD frames is made using the IRAF 
suite of image-processing routines. 

Another advantage of the CCD camera is that, with 
the appropriate filters, it can be used to determine the 
colors of each component of resolved double stars. Many 
pairs in the Washington Double Star catalogue have not 
been observed photometrically and much remains to be 
done here. 

In the field of double star observing, there is much 
that modern amateurs can do. They can continue to mon- 
itor the longer-period pairs and lay down measures for 
future orbital determination. The United States Naval 
Observatory webpage points to all the data needed. The 
WDS catalogue is as inclusive as its maintainers can 
make it (it currently contains over 99 000 entries) and 
the Sixth Orbital catalogue lists all the orbits deemed 
worthy of printing. The quality of each orbit has been 
determined—grade 1 is definitive and grade 5 is indeter- 
minate. Any pairs with orbits of grade 2 or lower could 
usefully be observed. 

Amateurs with a large enough aperture (30 cm or 
more) could examine and measure the new double stars 
in the Hipparcos or Tycho catalogues. All are listed in the 
WDS catalogue which is available both on-line and as a 
CD-ROM which can be requested free of charge from 
USNO. 

In addition, the power of the modern Schmidt sur- 
veys can be utilized to measure and catalogue many faint 
pairs which have been ignored up until now. Finally, a 
CCD could be used to great effect on a photometric pro- 
gram of double stars. Many pairs have the magnitudes 
assigned to them by their discoverers—usually eye esti- 
mates. Little is known about the colors of these stars or 
how many are variable. With a double star there is a 
built-in comparison for photometry. 

Those intending to make a serious contribution 
must consider how to publish their measurements. These 
can be submitted to professional journals such as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Astronomy and Astrophysics while specialist amateur 
groups such as the Webb Society, the Iberoamerican 
League for Astronomy (LIADA) and the Société 
Astronomique de France also offer this service. 


Bibliography 

Iberoamerica League of Astronomy (LIADA), contact 
Francisco Rica, e-mail FRICA0@terra.es 

Lord C, website http://www.brayebrookobservatory 
.com (a good site containing a comprehensive 
description of the Lyot micrometer) 

Société Astronomique de France—Double Star Section, 
contact Dr Edgar Soulié, e-mail SOULIE@drecam 
.cea.fr (long-established French group) 

United States Naval Observatory website http://ad 
.usno.navy.mil (the best source for data pertaining 
to visual double stars) 

Webb Society website http:/ /www.webbsociety 
.freeserve.co.uk (encourages observation and pub- 
lishes measures on a regular basis) 

Robert Argyle 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Douglass, Andrew Ellicott (1867-1962) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Douglass, Andrew Ellicott 
(1867-1962) 


Astronomer, born in Windsor, VT, investigated the 
relationship between sunspots and climate by examining 
the growth rings of ancient Arizona pine and sequoia and 
coined the term ‘dendrochronology’ for the method by 
which archaeologists and historians could use tree-rings 
to date wooden remains. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


DQ Herculis 


DQ Herculis 


The old Nova DQ Herculis (Nova Herculis 1934) is the 
prototype of its CATACLYSMIC BINARY sub-class, distinguished 
by a rapidly rotating weak-field magnetic WHITE DWARF 
accreting primary. The magnetic moments in the DQ Her 
white dwarfs are weak enough (10°-10* G cm’) that the 
Keplerian-disk AccRETION flow is broken up only a few 
stellar radii above the white dwarf surface. The infall is 
still energetic enough that accretion columns (or curtains) 
emit significant soft x-ray/UV radiation. These rotating 
radiation sources illuminate and photoionize the disk 
surface as a sweeping beam. The subsequent electron— 
ion recombination yields a sweeping wave of Balmer 
emission from the disk surface, and this ‘reprocessed’ 
radiation can in certain geometries be observed as a 
periodic photometric signal. 


Table 1. DQ Her system parameters. 


Orbital period P (hr) 4.56 
Mass ratio M2/M, sq 0.66 
Primary mass M1/My 0.60 + 0.07 
Secondary mass M2/Mg 0.40 + 0.05 
Orbital separation a/Ro 1.41 + 0.05 


DQ Her itself is an ECLIPSING BINARY system with 
Pop = 4°39". Other observationally determined system 
parameters are given in table 1. In the late 1950s the system 
held for many years the record for the shortest photometric 
period in an astronomical source—the 71-s white dwarf 
spin period—which has an observed amplitude of roughly 
1%. What remains remarkable today is the system’s high 
inclination of i ~ 89.5°. The white dwarf primary is 
eclipsed by the edge-on ACCRETION DISK, and only a thin 
sliver of the back face of the the accretion disk contributes 
to the pulsed radiation received from DQ Her. Variations 
in the phase of the 71-s signal during eclipse ingress 
and egress—first detected in 1972—led to the rotating 
magnetic accretor model for DQ Her and related systems. 
Significant variations in phase observed outside eclipse 
result from the self-eclipse of anon-axisymmetric disk, and 
provide a means to probe the time-averaged structure of 
an accretion disk at high state, i.e. a disk that has a high 
mass-transfer rate and high viscosity. 


Eclipse-related phase variations 

Figure 1 shows schematically but approximately to scale 
aq = 0.67 system viewed from an inclination angle of 
i = 80°, and helps convey the origin of the eclipse-related 
phase shifts. In the figure, the mean opening angle and 
radius of the reprocessing region are indicated (see also 
figure 2), and the black wedge represents the soft x-ray 
beam sweeping in a prograde direction. If we assume for 
now that the disk has a constant radius and opening angle 
for all azimuthal angles, then out of eclipse the times of 
pulse maxima occur when the beam is centered on the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
i = 80° 


Om “Y 
= 0.91 o=<6.97 $ o= 0. 


Figure 1. A line drawing (approximately to scale) of DQ Her 
passing through eclipse, as viewed from an inclination angle of 
i = 80°. The EUV/x-ray beam is represented as a wedge on the 
disk surface, with the direction of rotation indicated with the 
arrow. The accreting white dwarf is located at the apex of the 
wedge. During ingress (egress) the reprocessed pulses will 
arrive earlier (later) than when out of eclipse. Note that the 
non-zero disk opening angle results in a front/back asymmetry 
in the visibility of the disk surface. For inclinations i > 86° only 
a thin strip at the top of the back rim is visible—the white dwarf 
is eclipsed by the disk. 


back face of the disk. As the disk reprocessing region is 
covered during eclipse ingress, the pulses appear to arrive 
progressively earlier as the latter portion of the pulses are 
eclipsed by the secondary, arriving one-quarter cycle early 
just before the total eclipse of the reprocessing region. 
During egress, the situation is reversed: the first pulse 
arrives one-quarter cycle late relative to the out-of-eclipse 
ephemeris, and pulses arrive progressively earlier as the 
reprocessing region is uncovered. 

If as in figure 1 the opening angle of the reprocessing 
region was constant, then the time center of the pulse 
would always correspond to the beam passing the back 
center of the disk, and the only out-of-eclipse phase 
variations would be those arising from the light travel 
time delay across the orbit. However, DQ Her exhibits 
significantly larger variations in the phase of the 71-s 
signal, and these must result from variations in the rim 
height of the reprocessing region. 


The time-averaged disk structure 


Numerical hydrodynamical simulations (smoothed parti- 
cle hydrodynamics, SPH) of a three-dimensional disk at 
equilibrium yield an estimate of the radial extent of the re- 
processing region and any dependence of the region’s rim 
height as a function of azimuthal angle. Figure 2 shows 
a top view (x—y projection) of 20 000 SPH simulation par- 
ticles, center of mass, the stellar surfaces, the orbit with 
Po = 71s, the radial extent of the reprocessing region, 
and the disk opening angle versus azimuthal angle re- 
sults. Also shown are the viewing angles at the beginning 
(end) of eclipse ingress (egress). These are consistent with 
the size of the reprocessing region determined by finding 
the disk inflection point beyond which surface elements 
are eclipsed from the primary by intervening disk mate- 
rial. The reprocessing region is found to be nearly circular, 
simplifying the analysis to modeling a cylinder of non- 
uniform height. The heavy solid line in the figure shows 
the opening angle of the reprocessing region (height of the 
cylinder) as a function of azimuthal angle. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


DQ Herculis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.25 
Phase ¢ 


Figure 2. The stellar surfaces and 20 000 SPH (x, y) positions are 
shown, in addition to the system center of mass ‘x’, the radius 
with orbital period of 71 s (dotted line), the radius of the 
reprocessing region, and the opening angle of the reprocessing 
region (heavy line). The angular scale shows units of phase 
centered on the primary, and viewing angles of ¢ = 0.91 and 
0.09 are shown. 


There are several features of note in this figure. First, 
most of the mass—evident from the surface density of 
points—flows in the non-circular outer streamlines in the 
disk. This is likely to be a general result for a disk in 
a permanent high state. Second, and also likely to be a 
general result, the reprocessing region is nearly circular 
with a radius roughly half the total radius of the disk. The 
opening angle of the reprocessing region is largest in the 
quadrants where the disk radius is smallest, and vice versa. 
This result is a consequence of the requirement that the 
angular mass flux must be constant for all azimuthal angles 
in an equilibrium disk. The double-sinusoid shape of the 
rim of the reprocessing region will affect the observed 
phase of the pulse produced by the sweeping beam of 
ionizing radiation. 


The O-C diagram 


The O-C phase diagram of the observed 71-s signal 
averaged over several orbits is obtained by fitting a 3-cycle 
sine curve ina window that shifts by one cycle between fits. 
Modeling the reprocessing region as a cylinder of variable 
height with geometry fixed in the co-rotating frame and 
determined by time-averaging the hydrodynamical results 
(figure 2), itis possible to calculate the expected O-C phase 
diagram by integrating over the visible surface of the back 
cylinder wall. 

The observational and numerical results are shown 
in figure 3—the agreement is remarkable. The best match 
occurs for the startlingly small range 89.5° < i < 89.7°. 
Note that if the mean opening angle (@) given by the 
numerical simulations is unphysically large, then the 
estimates of the system inclination would need to be even 
closer to 90° 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ce 2g 4 a aD eee a ] iS Trt | oe eee a | ] |S Seat ee 4 
© E 7 
Oo 0.2 EF Ss 
> E a 
2 “C0 4 
9 O2F 4 
o) pie 7 

0.4 E | | es AD | } jt | | LEK Cary vias | | L-- ff +k 4 


0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 
Orbital Phase 


Figure 3. The O-C diagram calculated from the SPH disk 
structure as a function of orbital phase and for inclination angles 
(i = 89.5, 89.6, and 89.7°. The match is excellent except near 
orbital phase ¢ = 0.6. 


Spectroscopy 
Hubble Space Telescope time-series spectral observations 
of the Vis/UV continuum and emission lines show that 
while the UV continuum source is completely eclipsed 
and the He 11 emission region nearly so, the N v and Si 
Iv eclipses are deep but not complete, and C rv lines show 
only a 75% drop. Stellar winds have been suggested as the 
source of the emission lines, but the behavior is also simply 
consistent with the geometry in figure 2 if the outer disk is 
a source of optically-thin emission. The figure shows that 
while the reprocessing region is completely eclipsed, the 
outer disk is not. 

The general model for DQ Herculis is now reasonably 
well in hand, but additional observations and simulations 
are required to understand completely this unique system. 


Bibliography 

Wood M A et al 2000 Baltic Astronomy in press 

Patterson J 1994 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 106 209 

Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) ch 9 


Matt A Wood 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Draco 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Draco 


(the Dragon; abbrev. Dra, gen. Draconis; area 1083 sq. deg.) 
A northern constellation which lies between Ursa Major 
and Cepheus, and encloses Ursa Minor on three sides. 
The center of the constellation culminates at midnight 
in May, though part of it is on the meridian from mid- 
February to late July. Draco represents the dragon Ladon 
in Greek mythology, which guarded the golden apple tree 
that was given by Mother Earth to the goddess Hera when 
she married Zeus, and which was killed by Hercules, 
who is usually shown in early celestial charts with a foot 
upon Draco’s head. Its brightest stars were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A large but inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Draco are y Draconis (Eltanin), magnitude 2.2, 
n Draconis, magnitude 2.7, and 6 Draconis (Rastaban 
or Alwaid), magnitude 2.8. There are ten other stars of 
magnitude 4.0 or brighter, including a Draconis (Thuban 
or Adib), magnitude 3.7, which was the northern pole star 
about 4800 years ago. Other interesting stars include the 
binaries v Draconis, which has bluish-white/white (A4 
and A6) components, both of magnitude 4.9, separation 
62”, one of which has an unseen companion, and ju 
Draconis, which has pale yellow (F7) components, both 
of magnitude 5.8, separation 2.2”, and a third component 
of magnitude 13. Another interesting object is NGC 6543, 
a ninth-magnitude planetary nebula, in which, in 1864, 
William Huggins first observed ‘nebular lines’ typical of a 
large mass of hot luminous gas. 

The meteor shower known as the Giacobinids 
(Draconids) appears to radiate from the constellation. 


See also: Gamma Draconis, Giacobinids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Drake, Frank Donald (1930-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Drake, Frank Donald (1930-) 


Born in Chicago, in 1958 he joined the newly founded 
National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) in Green 
Bank, West Virginia, and attempted the first search for 
extraterrestrial broadcasts, a two week observation of 
the stars Tau Ceti and Epsilon Eridani. Developed the 
Drake equation as a way to estimate how many intelligent, 
communicating civilizations there are in our galaxy. The 
Drake equation multiplies the number of stars in the 
Milky Way by the fraction which have orbiting planets, 
then by the number of planets per star that are capable 
of sustaining life, then by the fraction of these planets 
where life actually evolves, then by the fraction of these 
where the life is intelligent and communicates, and then 
by the fraction of the planet’s life during which the 
communicating civilizations live. This represents an 
estimate of the number of communicating civilizations in 
the Galaxy. The real value of the Drake equation is not 
in the answer itself, but the questions that are prompted 
when attempting to come up with an answer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Draper, Henry (1837-82) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Draper, Henry (1837-82) 


American pioneer of astronomical photography, born in 
Prince Edward County, VA. Made the first photograph of 
a stellar spectrum (Vega). His assistant WILLIAMINA FLEMING 
analysed the objective prism photographs of stellar spectra 
and formed the basis for the classification of stars, with the 
data eventually published by ANNIE CANNON as the Henry 
Draper Catalog of Stellar Spectra. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dreyer, John Louis Emil (1852-1926) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dreyer, John Louis Emil (1852-1926) 


Danish astronomer, born in Copenhagen, who, after 
working at Birr Castle in Ireland, became director of 
Armagh Observatory, studying the many nebulae he had 
previously observed at Birr. At a time when it was 
not clear whether spiral nebulae were inside our own 
Galaxy (the Milky Way) or were indeed, as was suspected, 
island universes outside, he established through careful 
measurements that they had no proper motion and were 
likely to be distant. Compiled the New General Catalogue 
of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars (known as NGC) which 
remains the principal catalog of nebulae and galaxies; 
it was based on observations by the Herschels (see 
HERSCHEL FAMILY) and by LORD ROssE, Dreyer and associates 
at Birr and Armagh. When government funds for 
observing were withdrawn from Armagh, as a result of 
the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland, Dreyer 
turned to astronomical history, publishing TYCHO BRAHE’S 
observations and The History of the Planetary System from 
Thales to Kepler. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dubhe ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dubhe 


The star wa Ursae Majoris, apparent magnitude 1.81, one 
of the leading pair of stars in the Plough known as ‘the 
Pointers’. The name comes from an abbreviation of the 
Arabic for ‘the Back of the Great Bear’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dudley Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dudley Observatory 


The Dudley Observatory, in Schenectady, New York, is 
a private foundation supporting research and education 
in astronomy, astrophysics and the history of astronomy. 
Chartered in 1852, it is the oldest organization in the 
US, outside academia and government, dedicated to the 
support of astronomical research. For more than a 
century it was a world leader in astrometry, with such 
achievements as publication in 1937 of the General Catalog 
of 33,342 Stars for the Epoch 1950. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dumbbell Nebula (M27, NGC 6853) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dumbbell Nebula (M27, NGC 6853) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Vulpecula, position 
RA 19 59.6™, dec. +22° 43’, and the first to be discovered, 
by Charles Messier in 1764. It measures 8’ by 4’ and is 
of eighth magnitude. The bipolar expulsion of material 
from the thirteenth-magnitude central star gives it its twin- 
lobed appearance; it was named by Thomas Webb, though 
it resembles a bow-tie more than a dumbbell. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Duneér, Nils Christoffel (1839-1914) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Duner, Nils Christoffel (1839-191 4) 


Swedish astronomer, confirmed Galileo’s measurement of 
the rotation of the Sun spectroscopically with the Doppler 
shift, and showed the solar rotation to be differential (faster 
at the equator). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dunlop, James (1793-1848) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dunlop, James (1793-1848) 


Of Scottish origin, Dunlop was Superintendent at the 
Parramatta Observatory, New South Wales and compiled 
the Catalogue of 7835 Stars from Observations made at the 
Observatory at Parramatta, for his catalog of 621 nebulae, 
for his list of double stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dunsink Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dunsink Observatory 


Designed by Henry Ussher, the first astronomy professor 
of Trinity College Dublin, Dunsink Observatory (1783) 
incorporated modern designs such as ventilation in 
the observation room and a free-standing telescope 
support column. Among the past directors were the 
mathematician W R Hamilton (1827-65) and _ stellar 
dynamicist H C Plummer (1912-21). The main remaining 
instrument is a Grubb 12 ft (3.66 m) refractor (1868). Part of 
the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies since 1947, the 
observatory currently concentrates on high-energy studies 
of extragalactic objects. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.dinsink.dias.ie/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dust Tail, Cometary 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dust Tail, Cometary 


The part of a comet consisting of dust grains, carried away 
from the nucleus by the outflow of gas from the coma 
during a close approach to the Sun, which are propelled 
away from the comet’s head by radiation pressure. Not 
all comets develop a dust tail (or a gas tail), but both types 
of tail always point away from the Sun. The combined 
effects of radiation pressure and the Sun’s gravity acting 
on the dust particles make dust tails curved, in contrast 
to gas tails, which are straight. Dust tails shine only by 
reflected sunlight, so their color is yellow. Their length is 
typically 10°-10’ km, and like gas tails they begin to form 
at around 2 AU from the Sun. Most of the particles in a 
dust tail are less than 1 »m across. Larger particles remain 
in the comet’s orbit and form meteor streams. 


See: cometary atmosphere, cometary tails, meteor 
stream, Poynting—Robertson effect. 


Compare: gas tail, cometary. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


What are circumstellar (CS) disks and why should we 
care about them? Disks appear at many scales in 
astronomy—from SPIRAL GALAXIES to PLANETARY 
RINGS. In the present article our concern is with rings or 
disks that contain particulate material and which orbit 
stars at various stages in their life cycles. For main 
sequence stars such as the Sun, the primary interest in 
such disks is that they could be related to the formation 
and/or existence of PLANETS and smaller objects like 
COMETS and ASTEROIDS. After stars have evolved beyond 
the main sequence orbiting disks are rare and often 
portend unusual, unexpected, and still unexplained 
phenomena. 

The discovery of dusty CS disks around stars was 
perhaps the most notable achievement of the INFRARED 
ASTRONOMY SATELLITE (IRAS) which flew in 1983. 
IRAS, a joint venture of the United States, the 
Netherlands and the United Kingdom, found that some 
bright nearby stars, including VEGA and FOMALHAUT, 
emit much more radiation at wavelengths between 25 and 
100 um than can be produced solely by the stellar 
photospheres. The spectral energy distribution of this 
excess infrared (IR) radiation is generally consistent with 
models wherein the emission arises from dust particles in 
circumstellar disks whose characteristic radii are a few 
tens or hundreds of astronomical units (AU). These 
grains absorb the optical and ultraviolet light from the 
central star and then radiate this energy away in the IR. 
Such stars have been dubbed ‘Vega-like’. 

At most stars, the particles emit most vigorously at 
wavelengths between 25 and 200 um which are difficult 
or impossible to study from the ground. So, observational 
progress has been slow in the years since IRAS flew. 
Indeed, for about 15 years, excepting one star (B 
PICTORIS), no one was able to image the distribution of 
dust particles around the Vega-like stars. 

Recently, there have been significant observational 
breakthroughs. From the ground, with very sensitive 
detectors on large telescopes, images have, at last, been 
obtained of disks that orbit a few of the Vega-like stars 
(including Vega itself). These observations have been of 
thermal emission from the grains at IR wavelengths 
between 10 and 25 um and, also, at much longer 
wavelengths in the radio band near 1 millimeter. In 
addition, the NICMOS camera on the HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE (HST) has imaged 1—2 um radiation scattered 
by grains orbiting in disks and rings around a few stars. 

Although most of the detected material in most of 
the disks consists of small particles, at a few stars modest 
amounts of gas have also been seen. If one is interested 
in the formation of comets, asteroids and planets, the dust 
particles that comprise the disks are relevant to all. On 
the other hand, the principal relevance of the gas is to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


formation of giant gassy planets such as Jupiter and 
Saturn. 

The present article is structured along the lines of 
STELLAR EVOLUTION. We pick up the story about 10 
million years after the formation of a star at the last 
stages of the pre-main sequence evolution. This is the 
time when massive disks that surround many T TAURI 
STARS have, by and large, dissipated and only relatively 
little gas and dust remain. The formation of larger 
bodies—‘PLANETESIMALS’ and planets—is either well 
along or it will not happen at all. We next consider disks 
around main sequence stars. These are either remnants of 
the star formation process or else the debris from 
destruction of larger objects like comets or asteroids. 
Evidence for the existence of dusty debris from ancient 
comets is seen in our own planetary system in the 
vicinity of the orbit of the Earth. 

Finally, we consider stars in post-main sequence 
stages of evolution—the RED GIANT STARS and WHITE 
DWARFS. Surprisingly, a small percentage of such stars 
appears to be surrounded by orbiting dusty disks. The 
origins of most of these disks are mysteries whose 
eventual understanding will, no doubt, reveal some 
interesting and important astronomical phenomena. 

We conclude with a brief discussion of some 
properties of circumstellar dust clouds, in particular, how 
one may estimate their masses from measured fluxes at 
submillimeter wavelengths. 


The evolution of stars and their 
circumstellar disks 


Pre-main sequence evolution 

When intermediate-mass stars form they are often 
surrounded by massive disks of dust and gas that 
astronomers can detect via strong IR dust emission and 
radio emission from carbon monoxide molecules (see 
YOUNG STELLAR OBJECTS). After a few million years the 
small particles in the disk that are responsible for the IR 
emission begin to disappear, either because they clump 
together or because they are lost from the system. The 
timescale for loss of small particles can be determined by 
measuring the amount of material as a function of the age 
of the young stellar objects. 

We want to know how long it takes for the dust 
particles to disappear because this constrains the time it 
takes to form planetesimals, i.e. bodies that look like 
present-day comets and asteroids. We want to know how 
long it takes the gas to dissipate because this will give an 
upper limit to the time available to form gas giant 
planets. 

Young stars were initially discovered to lie in or near 
dusty, interstellar molecular clouds. These stars usually 
have ages less than a few million years, often the ages are 
less than one million years. These are the T Tauri stars of 
about a solar mass or somewhat less and the Herbig Ae 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars that are a few times more massive than the Sun and 
which will evolve into A-type main sequence stars like 
Vega and Fomalhaut. It has not been easy to find 
somewhat older T Tauri stars, say in the 10-20 million 
year range, because such stars are hard to identify with 
infrared and optical techniques. Recently, all-sky surveys 
of x-ray emission, especially with the German ROSAT 
satellite, have enabled detection of many stars that appear 
to be old T Tauri stars. Such stars can be discovered 
because they emit x-rays strongly compared to older, 
main-sequence stars. 

Not only has the ROSAT satellite enabled detection 
of some oldish T Tauri stars in regions surrounding 
various dusty molecular clouds, but it has enabled the 
clear recognition of the nearest region of recent star 
formation—the TW Hydrae Association—named in 
honor of its first known member, the classical T Tauri 
star, TW Hya. Combination of ROSAT data, 
measurements of lithtum abundances from optical 
spectra, and distance determinations with the Hipparcos 
satellite, indicate that the TW Hya Association is about 
10 million years old and only about 50 pe from Earth. 
This is more than two times closer to Earth than any 
other known region of significant star formation. It is 
remarkable that this closest T Tauri Association has gone 
unrecognized for so long. The primary reason is that the 
massive molecular cloud from which the Association 
stars formed has dissipated; the only clouds that remain 
in the vicinity are those that orbit the stars, i.e. CS disks. 

Because of their proximity to Earth, disks around 
TW Hya Association stars can be studied with special 
clarity. One of the most interesting Association members 
is an A-type star, HR 4796. Initially, IRAS discovered 
that about 0.5% of the total energy from HR 4796 is 
emitted at infrared wavelengths—HR 4796 is the dustiest 
A-type star in the Bright Star Catalog. (The BSC lists 
various properties of nearly 10 000 of the brightest stars 
in the sky, most of which are bright enough to be seen 
with the naked eye.) By comparison, other relatively 
dusty A-type stars like Vega and Fomalhaut emit a 100 
times smaller percentage of their total energy at IR 
wavelengths. 

Recently, the 10-20 um thermal emission from dust 
heated by HR 4796 was imaged at telescopes in Hawaii 
and Chile. At about the same time, an image of a narrow 
ring of dust particles that scatter light at a wavelength of 
1.1 um was obtained with the NICMOS camera on the 
HST (see figure 1, top panel). The stable containment of 
the ring particles and the abrupt inner and outer 
truncation of the ring around this relatively young star 
implies dynamical constraints imposed by one or more 
related, but as yet unseen, bodies. How such bodies, 
presumably planets, could have formed so quickly at 
such large distances from the star presents an interesting 
challange to those who model planet formation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) 


(b) 


Figure 1. Images obtained at a wavelength of 1.1 um with the 
NICMOS infrared camera on the Hubble Space telescope in 
1998. The upper panel is HR 4796, a star of age about 10 
million years located 67 pe from Earth. The region near the star 
is unusable and is masked out. The diameter of the surrounding 
inclined dust ring which reflects 1.1 jm starlight toward the 
Earth is about 150 AU. The lower panel is HD 141569, a star 
about 100 pc from Earth whose age is probably less than 10 
million years. The diameter of the inclined dusty disk is about 
700 AU and there is an indication of a gap between the brightly 
reflecting dust close to the star and the fainter dust further out. 
Gaseous carbon monoxide molecules detected in orbit around 
HD 141569 with a radio telescope seem to be confined 
primarily to the region interior to the gap. See text for 
discussion of the structure of the dust at these two stars. 
(Images courtesy of G Schneider, A Weinberger and P 
Lowrance.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Another A-type star imaged by NICMOS is HD 
141569, seen in the lower panel of figure 1. This star is 
not a member of the TW Hya Association but it was 
chosen for NICMOS imaging because it has a lot of 
surrounding dust—about 1% of its energy is emitted at 
infrared wavelengths—and also surrounding molecular 
gas. The mass contained in hydrogen molecules orbiting 
HD 141569 is about 10 Earth masses or more. (No gas 
has been seen near HR 4796.) 

A potentially very exciting aspect of the 
NICMOS/HST image of HD 141569 is the apparent gap 
between inner and outer dusty regions. Such a gap would 
be anticipated if a substantial planet were forming there. 
HD 141569 is orbited by a companion star, possibly even 
two companion stars, a few disk diameters away that 
could also influence the dynamics of the dusty disk. 

The brightest molecular emission seen at a star of 
age about 10 million years is from TW Hya itself (see 
figure 2). Future observations of these molecules (and 
others yet to be detected) with sensitive interferometers 
that operate at millimeter wavelengths promise to help us 
to better understand the chemical conditions in a 
potential protoplanetary disk. The interferometers could 
reveal changes in chemistry as a function of distance 
from TW Hya. Such chemical data may be helpful to 
planetary scientists who try to understand the chemistry 
of our own forming planetary system 10 million years 
after the formation of the Sun. Chemistry in disks that 
surround other T Tauri stars can also be studied with 
future interferometers, but TW Hya should remain 
unique because it is the closest classical T Tauri star, so 
finer details can be resolved in its CS disk and, also, 
because it is the oldest known T Tauri star that still 
retains substantial quantities of surrounding molecular 
gas. 


The main sequence 

Closer to Earth than the TW Hya Association is the best 
studied of all the Vega-like stars—B Pictoris, a naked eye 
star located in the southern hemisphere. The age of this 
A-type star is uncertain; based on its position in a 
HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL diagram, it may be as young as 
about 10 million years and just arriving on the main 
sequence, but it could perhaps be as old as 100 million 
years. This range of plausible ages is narrowed 
significantly if B Pic formed at about the same time as 
two low mass (M-type) stars GL 799 and GL 803; 
because the three stars appear to be moving through 
space together, they probably did form together. The 
estimated age of the two M stars is 20+10 million years. 
Additional evidence in support of this young age is the 
fact that B Pic is the second dustiest A-type star in the 
Bright Star Catalog and it seems clear that the amount of 
dust around stars declines with age (see below). Proper 
interpretation of the various phenomena seen at B Pic, in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the context of the formation of planetary systems, depend 
on its age. 

The disk around B Pic was imaged at a wavelength 
of 9000 A with a camera with coronagraphic optics 
within a year after IRAS discovered the large amount of 
excess infrared emission. The image revealed that the 
Earth lies very nearly in the plane of the B Pic disk which 
extends many hundreds of AU from the star. The initial 
coronagraphic studies and many subsequent ones in the 
optical and infrared from the ground and with the HST 
have revealed many interesting aspects of the B Pic 
environment. For example, there is a diminution of dust 
density within a few tens of AU from the star compared 
to the dust abundance further out along the disk. This 
might be due to planet formation, but it could also be due 
to dust destruction or ejection. 


fs) 10 15 20 
Velocity (km/s) 


Figure 2. Molecular spectra observed toward TW Hya with the 
James Clerk Maxwell Telescope at the Mauna Kea 
Observatory. The abscissa is heliocentric radial velocity and the 
ordinate is the relative main beam brightness temperature (73). 
The two spectra labeled CO(2-1) are of the '?CO (solid curve) 
and '3CO (dashed curve) isotopomers (the CO spectrum has 
been expanded along the ordinate by a factor of two). The short 
dashed curve overlaying the CO(3-2) profile represents the best 
fit Gaussian function. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Optical spectra of ionized calcium lines show time- 
variable components. These have been interpreted as due 
to comet-like objects falling onto B Pic, sometimes as 
many as a few per week. Modest masses of carbon 
monoxide (CO) molecules and neutral carbon atoms have 
been detected in the ultraviolet spectrum of B Pic with 
HST. It is suggested that these gaseous species result 
from evaporation of comet-like bodies out to ~100 AU 
from B Pic. In spite of deep searches, radio astronomers 
have not yet been able to detect CO near f Pic. 

Precise optical images of the disk were interpreted 
initially as showing a warp, but recent coronagraphic 
images obtained with the HST suggest that the apparent 
warp may rather be the superposition of two disk-like 
components inclined with respect to each other by 4°. 
Such a structure might be produced by the gravitational 
influence of a giant planet in orbit around f Pic. 

Finally, images obtained at a wavelength of 850 um 
show the unexpected presence of an emission peak offset 
from B Pic by about 34 seconds of arc to the southwest 
(see figure 3(b)). It is not known if this emission is 
associated with the star or is, rather, a totally unrelated 
background galaxy located near the edge of the 
observable universe! If the emission is associated with B 
Pic, then it is about 650 AU from the star. It must be due 
to warm dust grains, since companion stars and planets 
would radiate too faintly at 850 um to be detected from 
Earth. The dust cannot be associated with a companion 
star, since such a star would easily be seen in the IR. 
Perhaps there is a brown dwarf or giant planet companion 
embedded in the dust (see EXTRASOLAR PLANETARY 
COMPANIONS AND BROWN DWARFS)? But, if so, then 
unless B Pic is quite young, it is hard to understand how 
so much dust could be retained for so long near the 
companion. Perhaps there is an asymmetrical ring that 
surrounds B Pic well outside of the inner, previously 
known disk. But, if so, then how did the outer ring get to 
be so asymmetric with so much dust toward the south- 
west and so relatively little toward the north-east? 

Observations in 2001 by the European Southern 
Observatory’s New Technology Telescope reveal dusty 
disks surrounding brown dwarfs in the Orion Nebula, 
suggesting that they are more star-like than planet-like 
and have the potential to form accompanying planetary 
systems. This finding is based on detailed observations 
with SOFI, a specialized infrared-sensitive instrument at 
the European Southern Observatory's (ESO) 3.5 m New 
Technology Telescope (NTT) at the La _ Silla 
Observatory. 

Moving along to older stars, 850 um images of three 
are displayed in figure 3. Vega and Fomalhaut are nearby 
A-type stars, whereas ¢ Eri (K-type) is even nearer but 
with mass only slightly less than that of our Sun. These 
stars were chosen for imaging because they are among 
the strongest of the excess IR emitters detected by IRAS. 
The images seen in figure 3 are the first ever of the dust 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


distribution around these three stars. The easiest to 
interpret is Fomalhaut which is consistent with a ring of 
material located about 80 AU from the star. As in the 
case of B Pic, we view Fomalhaut more or less in the 
plane of its dusty disk. The dust at ¢ Eri also is distributed 
in a ring-like manner, but here we view the disk face on; 
that is, the dust orbits the star at distance of about 60 AU 
and nearly in the plane of the sky. 

An obvious interpretation of the dust rings at ¢ Eri 
and at Fomalhaut is that we are seeing analogs of the so- 
called KUIPER BELT of comets that orbits the Sun just 
outside of the orbits of Pluto and Neptune. In the case of 
é Eri and Fomalhaut, we are not seeing comets directly, 
but rather millimeter-size dust particles that are produced 
by the (partial) destruction of comets, probably many 
more than exist in the Kuiper belt. Given that the ages of 
é Eri and Fomalhaut are estimated to be of the order of a 
few 100 million years, we may speculate that we are 
seeing structures that are now quite similar to what our 
own Kuiper belt must have been like billions of years 
ago. 

The regions of relatively low 850 um emission 
inside of the dust rings at ¢ Eri and Fomalhaut might be 
caused by the formation of planets. In the case of 
Fomalhaut, another conceivable explanation for the 
central cavity could be sublimation of icy dust particles 
during the lifetime of the disk. But such an explanation 
will not explain the region of relatively low dust 
abundance near ¢ Eri because the star is insufficiently 
luminous to vaporize icy grains. 

The image of ¢ Eri has a surprising feature—a peak 
of emission in the ring to the east and slightly south of 
the star. Assuming that this is a real non-uniformity in the 
ring structure, then it is not easily explained. Perhaps a 
planet or a ‘cosmic collision’ can produce structure in the 
distribution of dust particles. 

Finally, Vega presents yet another mystery. As may 
be seen in figure 3(c), the peak 850 um emission seems 
to lie off to one side of the star. As at B Pic, it is 
conceivable, albeit unlikely, that the emission peak is due 
to a distant background galaxy. But if the peak in 850 um 
emission is due to dust in orbit around Vega, then, as at ¢ 
Eri and B Pic, we do not understand the cause of the 
emission. In particular, since Vega is probably at least 
300 million years old it seems most unlikely that dust 
could be retained in orbit around a substellar companion 
for so long. 

Vega and Fomalhaut with probable ages of hundreds 
of millions of years are less dusty than HR 4796 and B 
Pic whose ages are ten to tens of millions of years. More 
generally, far IR observations of main sequence stars in 
nearby young clusters and in the field indicate that as 
stars age, on average, less and less dust is retained in 
their vicinity. And for stars older than about 20 million 
years there is little evidence for orbiting gas. Most 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) Fomalhaut (b) Beta Pictoris 
Flux (mJy/beam) Flux Omy beam) 
s 16 24 32 0 48 
—— 


( Beam size 
a 


) 


] Diameter of 
Solar System 


| Diameter of ry 


Pa | Solar System g 


fo \, Beam size 
C) 


Flux (my/beam 


\, Beam size 


Beam size 


Diameter of 
Solar System 


J€ 


Size of Pluto’s orbit 


Figure 3. Dust emission around Fomalhaut [(a), upper left], B Pictoris [(b), upper right], Vega [(c), lower left] and ¢ Eri [(d), lower 
right] at a wavelength of 850 tm. The images were obtained with the SCUBA bolometer array on the James Clerk Maxwell 
Telescope. North is up and east is to the left. In each map the star is located at the position of the ‘star’ symbol. In each panel the 
diameter of the JCMT beam at half power is shown by the circle. (Images courtesy of W Holland.) 


likely then, the preponderance of the gas and dust seen in 

CS disks around all but the very youngest main sequence _— First ascent giant stars 

stars is the product of destruction of comets, much as the The particulate matter in CS disks around main sequence 
dust component of the ZODIACAL LIGHT seen in the inner _ stars may be envisioned as a natural consequence of the 
parts of our solar system is a product of cometary debris. star formation process—leftover material that was not 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 5 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


incorporated into large objects or, alternatively, particles 
generated by (partial) destruction of the large objects. In 
either case, by the time an intermediate mass star evolves 
off the main sequence one expects very little dust to 
remain. So, the discovery by IRAS of quite large 
amounts of dust near a small but not insignificant 
percentage of ordinary first ascent G and K giant stars 
came as quite a surprise. 

Three models have been proposed to explain the 
presence of substantial dust near these giant stars: (1) 
mass ejection; (2) destruction of comets and particulate 
matter in a Kuiper-belt-like region as the central star 
increases its luminosity as it leaves the main sequence; 
and (3) stellar heating of dust in random interstellar 
clouds that, by chance, lie near some G and K giants. 
None of these models can be readily reconciled with all 
existing data. So, at this moment, we do not understand 
the origin and nature of the dust near G and K giant stars. 
In addition, gas has never been detected at any of these 
dusty systems. 


Asymptotic and post-asymptotic branch giant stars 
Space telescopes have detected strong mid- and far-IR 
emission from luminous, red giant stars with either 
carbon-rich or oxygen-rich photospheres. In most cases, 
the IR emission is produced by dust grains entrained in 
outflowing winds, i.e., not in a CS disk. But a few of 
these infrared-bright evolved stars have been found to 
possess peculiar characteristics of various sorts. For 
example, a handful of stars with carbon-rich 
photospheres heat nearby, associated silicate dust grains 
which formed in an oxygen-rich environment. When 
measured at such stars, the width of CO rotational lines 
are typically only one or two km s wide and much 
narrower than lines characteristic of outflowing winds. 
That is, the narrow linewidths indicate velocities 
characteristic of orbital motion of gas many hundreds of 
AU from the stars, rather than gas escaping from the 
stellar surface. 

A plausible, but not yet proven, model for most 
of these stars with unusual infrared and/or CO spectra is 
the following. The primary, giant star, is a member of a 
binary system. When the primary ejects large amounts of 
mass while it is on the asymptotic giant branch, the 
gravitational field of the secondary deflects some of this 
outflowing material into a circumbinary disk, diameter 
~1000 AU, which is gravitationally bound to the two 
stars. The companion star necessary in this scenario has 
already been detected near some, but not all, of the 
unusual giant stars. At least a few of the disks show 
evidence for large scale clumpiness, the nature of which 
is not now understood. 


White dwarfs 
A dusty CS disk in orbit around a white dwarf could be 
detected as excess IR emission. At this moment, in spite 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of searches at hundreds of white dwarfs, we know of only 
one, G29-38, that is surrounded by dust grains—these 
emit strongly at wavelengths between 2 and 20 um. The 
origin of the dust is a mystery. Perhaps G29-38 is 
embedded in a moderately dense interstellar cloud and 
dust from the cloud has been gravitationally drawn into a 
disk orbiting the star. Or perhaps there has been some 
kind of cosmic catastrophe near G29-38, say a collision 
of two moderately massive objects that has partially 
shattered them. Or perhaps G29-38 is pulling material off 
of a nearby but unseen companion. Or perhaps one of any 
number of other exotic hypotheses. 


Properties of the circumstellar dust 

Astronomers have expended substantial effort to 
understand the radiation charactertistics of small dust 
particles. Early work was on grains in interstellar 
clouds—such particles typically have submicron 
dimensions. Observed CS disks have higher densities 
than interstellar clouds and larger particles are present, 
either from the sticking together of small particles or 
from destruction of larger bodies. Perhaps the most 
interesting astrophysical aspects of the CS dust at a given 
star are its total mass and spatial distribution. Images 
such as figure 3 give a large scale picture but, since the 
dust is heated by the central star, the dust visibility 
depends on its temperature as well as its spatial location. 

For example, the sharp cutoff in 850 um emission outside 

of the bright ‘blobs’ seen to the north and south of 

Fomalhaut is due in part to diminishing dust temperature 

as well as dust density. 

At a given distance from a star the temperature of a 
dust particle depends on its size relative to the 
wavelength of the peak of its thermal infrared emission. 
If the particle is small with respect to the wavelength of 
its peak IR emission, then such a particle will radiate 
inefficiently and its temperature will rise above the 
temperature a large particle would have at the same 
location. Near this peak of emission, for large and small 
particles alike, the amount of emission depends 
sensitively on the dust temperature because of the 
exponential in the denominator of the Planck function. 

So, the appearance of the dust emission at a given 
wavelength results from a convolution of dust mass and 
temperature. To derive dust mass it is best to use 
submillimeter data (as in figure 3) because: 

(1) one is on the Rayleigh—Jeans portion of the Planck 
curve so that intensity is only linearly proportional to 
dust temperature; 

(2) optical depths are small so one is sensitive to all of 
the mass; and 

(3) one can see all of the dust, hot and cold and big and 
little, at least up to a point. 

Particles that are much larger than the wavelength 
under investigation have relatively low  surface-to- 
volume ratio and the opacity per gram of material 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


diminishes. Therefore, for measurements at, say, one 
millimeter wavelength, ‘dust grains’ larger than about 1 
cm in size contribute little to the emission compared to 
smaller particles, even if most of the mass is in the larger 
ones. 

Hence, submillimeter fluxes can provide only lower 
bounds to mass in orbit around stars—such observations 
will not reveal the presence of large objects like comets, 
asteroids and planets, at least not directly. The existence 
of such bodies can be deduced indirectly if it can be 
shown that the detected dust results from breakdown of 
larger objects. This is likely the case at stars as old as 
Vega and Fomalhaut. For younger stars like B Pic or the 
pre-main sequence stars discussed above, we still do not 
know if the detected dust is left over from the star 
formation process or is the debris from breakdown of 
larger objects or some combination of the two. 

As an_ illustrative example, consider the 
submillimeter flux (F',) measured at Earth that is emitted 
by an optically thin cloud or disk a distance R away. 


F, = 2 B,Ar a’ Ong V [4 R?. 

(1) 
Here 7B, is the surface emittance of a single grain per 
unit area, 4a’ is the emitting area of a grain of radius a, 
Ngy iS the number of grains per unit volume, and V is the 
total volume of the cloud. Q, is the efficiency with which 
the grains absorb and emit waves of frequency v. The 

total mass (M) of dust in the disk may be written 


M = pN4na‘/3 
(2) 
where N is the total number of grains in the cloud, and p 
is the density of a typical grain. Combining equations (1) 
and (2) yields 


M = F,.R*/Byky. 
(3) 
At submillimeter wavelengths, where hv < kT, the Planck 
function, B, can be written simply as 247/47. Thus, the 
calculated grain mass is not sensitively dependent on the 
grain temperature (which is often not well determined). 
In equation (3), k, is the opacity, that is, the 
absorption cross section per gram of material at 
frequency v. For typical grain materials, the absorption 
cross section can be much smaller than the total 
extinction cross section—that is, the grains often have 
large albedos at wavelengths near a millimeter. The 
opacity may be written as 


ky = (a"Q,)/ (4a p/3) = 30,/4ap. 
(4) 


This is the absorption per unit mass of dust, whose units 
are usually given in the literature as cm’ g'. Sometimes 
the opacity quoted in the literature is the absorption per 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


unit mass of dust and gas. To obtain this from 
submillimeter dust emission (which is the measured 
quantity) requires an assumption about the ratio of the 
mass contained in gas to that contained in the dust 
particles; this ratio is often taken to be 100, the value 
typical of the interstellar medium. However, in CS disks 
the gas-to-dust ratio is often much smaller than 100 and it 
is usually uncertain or unknown, so it is better to quote 
opacities in terms of dust mass only. 

For quite some time, k, at wavelengths near one 
millimeter was uncertain by at least an order of 
magnitude, resulting in corresponding uncertainty in dust 
masses. Recent laboratory and theoretical efforts have 
improved the situation so that now 4, is probably known 
to a factor of 3 or so. In any event, one cannot obtain 
total masses contained in CS disks because objects of 
dimensions much larger than a few cm are effectively 
invisible even if they carry most of the mass of the disk 
(because large objects have such small opacities per 
gram). 

That said, submillimeter fluxes from stars like B 
Pictoris and HR 4796 that are just arriving on the main 
sequence indicate total dust masses about 20 times the 
mass of our Moon. The most common particle sizes lie in 
the range between 10 um and a few mm. For older stars 
like Vega and Fomalhaut total dust masses are 10 times 
less. 


The future 

Until the past few years study of circumstellar disks from 
the ground, with but few exceptions, has not been very 
rewarding. Analysis of IRAS data obtained over 15 years 
ago has dominated the field. Recently, sensitive new 
array detectors at submillimeter wavelengths and in the 
mid-infrared (10-20 um) have finally enabled a suite of 
important ground-based discoveries. At about the same 
time, the NICMOS near-IR coronagraphic camera on the 
Hubble Space Telescope obtained stunning images of CS 
disks around a few young stars. 

The coming decade promises great advances in 
ground-based, airborne, and space-based studies of CS 
disks. On the ground, millimeter interferometer arrays at 
high, dry sites in Hawaii and Chile will produce 
unprecedently detailed pictures of the structure of CS 
disks. The SOFIA airborne observatory will measure the 
spatial extent and spectrum of dust emission throughout 
the far-IR where the CS disks around most Vega-like 
stars emit most intensely. And from space, the SPACE 
INFRARED TELESCOPE FACILITY (SIRTF) will enable 
detection of many new Vega-like systems that emitted 
too faintly for detection by IRAS. Many such systems 
may be discovered around stars of solar mass or less that 
were mostly out of the reach of IRAS. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dusty Circumstellar Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Artymowicz P 1997 Beta Pictoris: An early solar system? Ann. 
Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 25 175-219 

Hildebrand R 1983 The determination of cloud masses and dust 
characteristics from submillimeter thermal emission Q. J. 
R. Astron. Soc. 24 267-82 

Lagrange A-M, Backman D and Artymowicz P 2000 Planetary 
material around main sequence stars Protostars & Planets 
IV ed V Mannings, A P Boss and S S Russell (Tucson: 
University of Arizona Press) 

Pollack J B et al 1994 Composition and radiative properties of 
grains in molecular clouds and accretion disks Astrophys. 
J. 421 615-39 

Zuckerman B and Becklin E E 1993 Submillimeter studies of 
main-sequence stars Astrophys. J. 414 793-802 


Ben Zuckerman 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dutch Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dutch Astronomy 


The Netherlands has a strong international position 
in astronomical research, particularly in the fields of 
radioastronomy, the interstellar medium, structure and 
dynamics of the Milky Way and other galaxies, stellar 
and solar physics, and, more recently, high-energy 
astrophysics. The prominent position is strongly linked to 
the quality of the research education, to which traditionally 
much care is devoted. Many graduate students gain 
postdoctoral positions at premier institutions abroad, or 
obtain good research positions outside astronomy. As 
early as the 1930s many astronomers educated in the 
Netherlands were called to leading positions abroad. For 
example, between 1970 and 1993 the position of Director 
General of the European Southern Observatory (ESO) was 
filled by Dutchmen, Blaauw (1970-5), Woltjer (1976-87) 
and van der Laan (1988-92) respectively. 


Organizational structure 
External factors at both international and national levels 
have important influences on astronomical research in the 
Netherlands. Intergovernmental organizations like the 
EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY (ESA) and the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN 
OBSERVATORY (ESO) determine, in broad outline, the 
opportunities for research in the Netherlands, especially 
in the long-term. 

At a national level, the following three organizations 
determine the research strategy. 


The Netherlands Research School for Astronomy (NOVA) 

Traditionally, most of the research in the Netherlands is 
carried out at the astronomical institutes at the universi- 
ties of Amsterdam, Groningen, Leiden and Utrecht. These 
institutes are the Astronomical Institute Anton Pannekoek 
(Amsterdam), the KAPTEYN ASTRONOMICAL INSTITUTE (Gronin- 
gen), the Astronomical Institute Utrecht and LEIDEN OBSER- 
vaTory. The institutes in Leiden and Utrecht have long 
historic traditions, having been founded around the mid- 
dle of the seventeenth century. In 1992, the university 
institutes federated in the Netherlands Research School 
for Astronomy (Nederlandse Onderzoekschool Voor As- 
tronomie, NOVA). NOVA’s mission is to carry out front- 
line astronomical research in the Netherlands, and to train 
young astronomers at the highest international level. Since 
1992, all graduate astronomy education in the Netherlands 
has been concentrated in NOVA. In 1998 the Dutch govern- 
ment initiated a research program, the so-called ‘In Depth 
Strategy’, to identify and stimulate national focus points 
of excellent scientific research. To meet the selection cri- 
teria, such focus points were compared with the best for- 
eign institutes in their field of research. In addition they 
had to have the potential to develop even further and be- 
come centers of excellence of world-class reputation. The 
training of outstanding young scientists was also one of 
the main objectives of the program. Out of the 34 appli- 
cations covering all academic disciplines, six national re- 
search schools were selected by the Netherlands Organi- 
zation for Scientific Research (NWO). NOVA was highest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ranked among the selected research schools and received a 
significant grant for the period 1999-2005 to set up an inno- 
vative research program (see later for more information). 
Discoveries with large international telescopes are often 
made by groups, which have built a novel auxiliary in- 
strument, such as a special purpose spectrograph of anew 
detector system. In this respect, NOVA initiated Dutch 
involvement in several instrumentation programs for the 
ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT) and the VLT Interferom- 
eter. For more information the reader should visit the 
NOVA web site http: / /www.strw.LeidenUniv.nl/nova. 


The Netherlands Foundation for Research in Astronomy 
(NFRA) 

The NFRA was founded in 1949 by Professor JAN HENDRIK 
oort to detect radio emission from the Sun and the Milky 
Way. It was set up as an inter-university foundation 
under the umbrella of the Netherlands Organization for 
the Advancement of Pure Research (ZWO, now called 
NWO). It developed and operated the radio telescopes at 
Kootwijk in the early 1950s, the 25 m DWINGELOO OBSERVATORY 
Telescope, which came into operation in 1956, and the 
WESTERBORK SYNTHESIS RADIO TELESCOPE (WSRT), which was 
opened in 1970. The Kootwijk and Dwingeloo telescopes 
produced the first radio maps of the Milky Way in the 
radiation of the 21 cm line of atomic hydrogen. In the 
1970s, the WSRT (at that time consisting of 12 25 m 
antennas on a baseline of 1600 m, though now 14 antennas 
on a 3 km baseline) was the largest radio telescope in the 
world and produced many radio maps of external galaxies 
to study their kinematical and dynamical behavior. 

In the 1980s, NFRA significantly broadened its 
activities by joining the United Kingdom in developing 
and operating the IsAAc NEWION GROUP (ING) OF TELESCOPES 
on the Canary Island of La Palma, which became 
operational in 1985. At the same time, NFRA also 
joined the JAMES CLERK MAXWELL TELESCOPE (JCMT), a 15 m 
radio telescope in Hawaii dedicated to the observation 
of electromagnetic radiation in the (sub)millimeter 
wavelength range. The JCMT collaboration also involved 
the United Kingdom and Canada. The Netherlands has a 
20% share in the ING, as well as in the JCMT. The present 
arrangements are that the Netherlands will continue to 
participate in the ING and JCMT until 2009. For the 
optical instrumentation program, on a national level, 
the NFRA collaborated with the Kapteyn Sterrenwacht 
Werkgroep (KSW) in Roden. The KSW was a joint effort 
of the universities of Groningen and Leiden to focus 
their technical resources to achieve their contributions 
to develop and construct instrumentation for the ING. 
In 1996, the KSW merged with NFRA and moved to 
Dwingeloo to start an optical/infrared instrumentation 
group. Their first major project is a collaboration with 
a French group to build VISIR, the VLT Imager and 
Spectrometer for the mid-infrared. This instrument will 
be delivered at the ESO VLT in 2001. 

Early in the 1990s, NFRA refocused its activities 
on the WSRT to upgrade this facility with state-of-the- 
art multifrequency front-end receivers to improve the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dutch Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


sensitivity and the flexibility. The upgrade also included 
a new backend correlator to significantly increase the 
spectral bandwidth, a pulsar backend (PUMA, largely 
developed at Utrecht University), new observing modes 
for VLBI, and filters and software tools to reduce the 
interference by human communication (TV, radio and 
mobile phones). The upgraded WSRT was completed by 
the start of the 21st century. It will allow astronomers to 
make extensive studies of the formation and evolution of 
galaxies in the early universe by observing the redshifted 
21 cm line of atomic hydrogen in the range of redshifts up 
to z = 4 (or equivalently, back in time when the universe 
was only 10% of its present age). 

NERA has also been an active partner in the European 
VLBI Network (EVN). The EVN is a consortium of 
radioastronomy institutes in 12 European countries and 
China to jointly carry out radio observations at very 
high angular resolution (up to milliarcseconds) using very 
long baseline interferometry (VLBI) techniques. The EVN 
initiated and supervised the establishment of the JomnT 
INSTITUTE FOR VLBI IN EUROPE (JIVE). JIVE was set up in 1993 
to provide an advanced data processing facility for VLBI 
in Europe and to support EVN operations. NFRA is the 
host institute for JIVE. The astronomical operations of JIVE 
began in the fall of 1999. 

In 1995 NFRA started an initiative to seek for world- 
wide support to develop a next generation radio telescope 
with a detecting area of the order of 1 km? to study the 
evolution of the early universe and the epoch of the start 
of galaxy formation. This program is called the Square 
Kilometre Array (SKA). In order to make such a project 
financially feasible, one has to remove all moving parts 
from the telescope. Therefore, NFRA has chosen the 
technology of phased arrays to achieve flat antennas. All 
signal processing electronics will be integrated at chip 
level. This technique will enable the use of software 
methods for adaptive suppression of external interference. 
It will also allow for the use of multiple (up to 100 
or more) beams on the sky covering the entire visible 
sky. Current phased array antennas, mainly used in 
military applications, have narrow spectral bandwidth, 
while astronomers demand very wide-band systems to 
study the evolution of galaxies from the early universe to 
the present epoch. Other countries, like Australia, Canada, 
China, India and the US, also participate in the technology 
development for SKA. It is likely that it will take a decade 
or more to develop the SKA concept before construction 
will become feasible. 

For more information on the activities at NFRA the 
reader might visit the NFRA website at http: / / www.nfra.nl. 


Space Research Organization of the Netherlands (SRON) 

The scientific space research activities in the Netherlands 
are concentrated in SRON, a foundation within the 
framework of NWO. Its mission is to initiate, develop, 
build and use internationally outstanding instruments for 
scientific research in and from space. The major SRON 
responsibilities are to develop a national program for 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


scientific space research, to maintain the work program 
of the SRON institute, which incorporates laboratories 
in Utrecht and Groningen, and to provide advice with 
regard to Dutch participation in scientific projects within 
the framework of ESA. 

Many instruments for astrophysical research built 
by SRON (and its predecessor) in the past, found their 
place in national satellites, ESA satellites and NASA 
satellites. Initially, instruments were lifted above the 
atmosphere by means of sounding rockets and balloons. 
In 1968 the first Dutch experiment went into space 
on board an American satellite to measure electrons in 
cosmic radiation. In the 1970s, a Utrecht experiment did 
some pioneering work on measuring star spectra in the 
ultraviolet spectral range. The first completely Dutch 
satellite was ANS (ASTRONOMISCHE NEDERLANDSE SATELLIET), 
equipped for photometry in the ultraviolet spectral range 
and for the detection of x-ray sources. The launch of 
the European satellite COS-B, designed for a first survey 
of the Galaxy in gamma radiation, took place in August 
1975. Three years later NASA launched the Einstein 
satellite with a Utrecht x-ray reflection grating on board. 
It was followed by the Solar Maximum Mission in 1980, 
with the Utrecht HXIS instrument on board. The second 
(partial) Dutch satellite, IRAS, and the European EXOSAT 
(European X-ray Observatory Satellite) were launched in 
1983, both containing important scientific contributions 
from the Netherlands. The data from all these missions 
have formed a source of pioneering astronomical research 
for many years. 

On 17 November 1995 ESA’s Infrared Space Observa- 
tory (ISO) was launched. One of the four instruments on 
board the satellite was built under SRON responsibility: 
the Short Wavelength Spectrometer (SWS). During a very 
successful life of 28 months more than 9000 observations 
were done on stars, planets, galaxies, dust and nebulae. 
All SWS observations now reside in the Dutch ISO Data 
Analysis Centre. 

SRON provided major contributions to the following 
astrophysical instruments, which are still operational in 
space as of early 2000: 


e@ COMPTEL (1991), a gamma-ray detector-spectrometer 
on board the NASA observatory CGRO; 


e@ the Wide Field Camera for the Italian—Dutch x-ray 
satellite Beppo-SAX (April 1996); 


e@ the Low Energy Transmission Grating Spectrometer 
aboard Chandra (formerly called AXAF). Chandra was 
successfully launched in July 1999; 


@ the x-ray spectrometer for the ESA satellite XMM, which 
was successfully launched in December 1999. 


Dutch space research specializes in high-energy 
astrophysics (x-ray research) and low-energy astrophysics 
(infrared and submillimeter research). For the first decade 
of the 21st century, SRON has focused its astronomical 
program on harvesting the scientific data obtained with 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dutch Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


above-mentioned instruments and on the construction 
of HIFI, an important instrumental contribution to the 
submillimeter detection system for the ESA ‘cornerstone’ 
satellite FIRST/PLANCK. More information is available 
at the website http://www.sron.nl. 


Focus on three research areas in astronomy and 
astrophysics 

World-wide, one can identify a dozen or so main 
areas of astronomical and astrophysical research which 
will flourish in the next decade because of major 
breakthroughs, driven by the next generation of telescopes 
which cover the entire electromagnetic spectrum, by the 
jump in resolution provided by interferometry in the 
infrared and submillimeter regimes, and by the powerful 
new computational capabilities for data analysis and 
theoretical modeling. The Netherlands is very strong in 
three of these areas. Each area addresses deep questions 
and together they converge on NOVA’s main science 
theme for the coming decade: the life-cycle of stars and 
galaxies. These three areas are as follows. 


Formation and evolution of galaxies from the distant past to the 
present epoch 

Galaxies contain billions of stars, as well as interstellar gas 
and dust, and are embedded in dark halos of unknown 
constitution. Astronomers are able to look back in time 
by observing galaxies at ever-greater distances. Because 
light travels at finite velocity, distant objects are seen at a 
time when the universe was younger. The expansion of 
the universe causes light to be redshifted, so that the most 
distant galaxies are those with the highest redshift. How 
did galaxies form? What processes have occurred between 
high redshift and the present? Do evolved galaxies contain 
relics, which are clues to their formation? What are the 
influences of the environment, of nuclear activity, and of 
the original large-scale distribution of dark matter? What 
is the role of massive black holes in galactic nuclei? 

In the last few years rapid new developments in 
instrumentation have provided unique opportunities to 
find answers to these questions. The Hubble Space 
Telescope and the ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT) have 
reached their full potential. Optical telescopes with a 
diameter of eight or more meters have started to produce 
exciting data. Dutch astronomers have access to the 
equivalent of 30% of an 8 m telescope through their 
membership of ESO. Also, the upgraded WSRT and 
the JIVE VLBI data processor have led to new research 
opportunities. As a result, the distant and therefore early 
universe has now come within observing range. Fast 
progress is now being made in the study of proto-galaxies 
and in the large-scale structure of the universe at only one- 
tenth of its present age. 


Birth and death of stars: the life cycle of gas and dust 

New stars continue to be born deep inside molecular 
clouds in galaxies. The birth process leads to a 
circumstellar disk of gas and dust from which planets and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


comets may subsequently form. What are the physical 
processes that lead to these new solar systems, and how do 
they evolve? How is the chemical composition of the gas 
and dust involving the major biogenic elements modified 
during the collapse from the cold, tenuous interstellar 
medium to the dense protoplanetary material? During 
the late stages of their life, stars eject nucleosynthetically 
enriched material into the interstellar medium. How does 
this material drive the chemical evolution of a galaxy and 
of the newly formed stars therein? What drives the mass 
loss, and how does it influence stellar evolution? 

The availability of radio telescopes that are able 
to detect electromagnetic radiation at millimeter and 
submillimeter wavelengths (like the JCMT) and the 
success of ESA’s Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) have 
recently led to the possibility of penetrating far into the 
dusty areas around young and old stars. This is leading 
to new insights into the physical and chemical processes 
that occur at the birth and death of stars and into the 
formation of planets. In this extremely interdisciplinary 
area new laboratory simulations in the Raymond and 
Beverly Sackler Laboratory for Astrophysics at Leiden 
University as well as computer models further contribute 
to our understanding of the life cycle of gas and dust. 


Final stages of stellar evolution: physics of neutron stars and 
black holes 

At the end of its life, a massive star explodes and ejects its 
outer layers. The stellar core collapses to form a neutron 
star or a black hole. These are the densest objects that 
exist, and the ones with the strongest gravitational fields. 
What are the properties of matter at the extreme density in 
the interior of a neutron star? What are the observational 
signatures of black holes? Can we observationally verify 
the extraordinary predictions of general relativity for the 
properties of curved space-time near these objects? How 
do particles and radiation behave near these compact 
objects? What happens when two compact objects orbiting 
each other eventually merge? Is this the origin of the most 
powerful explosions we know, the enigmatic gamma-ray 
bursts? 

Rapid progress is being made in this field as a result 
of the availability of new satellite measurements with, 
among others, Dutch instruments, for example in GRO 
and Beppo-Sax. The significance of x-ray research in 
extragalactic objects is growing fast. A breakthrough 
made in mid 1997, to which Dutch researchers made an 
important contribution, is the insight that the well-known 
‘gamma-ray bursts’ originate in very distant galaxies; it 
is now certain that the phenomenon involves extremely 
high-energy acceleration processes, presumably related to 
the formation of compact objects (neutron stars and black 
holes) or the fusing of two such objects into a double 
star. Using the new x-ray observatories XMM (ESA) 
and Chandra (NASA), to which SRON has contributed 
important instrumentation, the study of high-energy 
processes will become possible in the surroundings of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dutch Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


compact objects with unparalleled sensitivity, and spatial 
and spectral resolution. 

There are many connections between the above areas 
of research. Stars form in galaxies from interstellar 
material, and at the end of their lives return chemically 
enriched material to the interstellar medium from which 
new generations of stars and planets form. The most 
massive and luminous stars evolve fastest, and leave 
neutron stars and black holes. This life cycle causes 
evolution in the stellar population of a galaxy as a whole. 
Recent technological advances have made it possible to 
observe this evolution all the way back to epochs when the 
universe was less than 10% of its present age. Unravelling 
the history of galaxy formation in the universe, and 
so understanding the life cycle of stars and galaxies, 
requires full knowledge of astrophysics and state-of-the- 
art observations, which are now within reach. 


Observing facilities available for Dutch 
astronomers 

Astronomers in the Netherlands have access to the 
telescopes of the European Southern Observatory (ESO) in 
Chile, to the UK/NL Isaac Newton Group on La Palma, to 
the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope (JCMT) on Mauna Kea, 
to the upgraded Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope 
(WSRT), and to the Joint Institute for VLBI in Europe 
(JIVE). Together these facilities cover the optical and 
submillimeter /centimeter wavelength windows. During 
2000, ESO’s Very Large Telescope, the world’s largest 
optical/infrared telescope, will be completed. ESO plans 
to combine the light of the four main 8 m telescopes with 
that of several smaller telescopes to form a near-infrared 
interferometer (VLTT), which will provide unprecedented 
spatial resolution. Furthermore, a joint European—US 
ATACAMA LARGE MILLIMETER ARRAY (ALMA) is planned in 
Chile, coordinated by ESO for the European side. Initial 
operations are expected around 2007. The Netherlands 
will make several major contributions to the VLT and 
the VLII. They are: VISIR (see earlier); OmegaCam, 
a wide field (1° x 1°) optical camera for the 2.5 m 
VLT Survey Telescope; MIDI, the first instrument on the 
VLTI to do imaging spectroscopy in the mid-infrared; 
SINFONI, a near-infrared integral field spectrograph 
with a large field of view making use of adaptive 
optics technology. All these projects are collaborations 
with other institutes elsewhere in Europe, mainly in 
Germany and France. Visit the NOVA website for further 
information. The Netherlands is also participating in 
two technology development studies for ALMA; the 
NOVA/SRON study for the receiver that will cover the 
atmospheric window in the 600-720 GHz range, and 
the NFRA participation in an international study on an 
advanced correlator. Furthermore, in order to develop 
knowledge of optical/infrared interferometry and its 
applications to future astronomy programs, NOVA and 
ESO initiated a VLTI Expertise Centre (NEVEC) at the 
Leiden Observatory in 1999. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dutch astronomers also have access to observing 
time on a variety of space observatories. The 
NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope, two major new 
high-energy satellites launched in 1999 (Chandra, XMM), 
and the Italian—Dutch x-ray satellite BeppoSAX. ESA’s 
submillimeter Cornerstone Observatory FIRST / PLANCK 
is scheduled for launch in 2007. Together this represents an 
investment by the world-wide space agencies on the order 
of US$ 15 billion. Furthermore, the databases obtained 
with ESA’s astrometric satellite Hipparcos and infrared 
satellite ISO will, at least for the next decade, contribute to 
exiting new results. 


Wilfried Boland 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dwarf Elliptical Galaxies 


DWARF SPHEROIDAL GALAXIES Were first identified by Shapley, 
who had noticed two very diffuse collections of stars on 
Harvard patrol plates. Although these systems had about 
as many stars as a GLOBULAR CLUSTER, they were of much 
lower density, and hence much larger radius, and thus 
were considered distinct galaxies. These two, named 
Fornax and Sculptor after the constellations in which they 
appear, are in fact satellites to the MILky way and are part of 
a family currently numbering nine that orbit the Galaxy. 
Studies by Baade and others showed that the stellar 
populations are old, based on the presence of RRLYRAE STARS 
and the apparent lack of star formation regions, prompting 
a question of link between these galaxies and the ELLIPTICAL 
GALAXIES. The galactic dwarf spheroidals are themselves 
part of a larger class of galaxy called dwarf ellipticals 
(dE), which extend in luminosity from that of the faintest 
dwarf spheroidals (My = —9) to around My = —17,a 
good example being NGC 205. These galaxies are referred 
to as ‘spheroidals’ by some authors. The basic isolating 
characteristics of the class are low surface brightness and 
smooth light distribution. The radial light distributions 
tend to be exponential, which they have in common with 
IRREGULAR and sPIRALGALAXIES and which distinguishes them 
from the ellipticals, which have more of a power-law 
light profile. Also, the surface brightness (either central 
or average value) decreases with decreasing luminosity, 
whereas for ellipticals surface brightness increases with 
decreasing luminosity. There is a range of luminosities 
for which both dwarf ellipticals and ellipticals exist—the 
difference in the types is then best demonstrated by the 
remarkable differences in structure between that of NGC 
147, a dwarf elliptical, and M32, an elliptical, both of which 
are companions to M31 and which have similar luminosities 
(figure 1). 

dEs are very common. In the LocaLcRovp, there are 19 
known (nine around M31, one unattached toa large galaxy, 
and the nine of the Milky Way already mentioned). The 
nearby group of M81 has 12 known. The largest collections 
of dEs, however, are found in the rich clusters. Virgo, for 
instance, has had over 400 dEs cataloged to the relatively 
bright luminosity of My = —13, although the dwarfs as a 
population contribute less than 10% of the total light of the 
cluster. There is some indication that the relative number 
of dEs to giant galaxies in a group goes up as the number 
of giants increases. The luminosity function of dEs was 
shown by Sandage, Binggeli and Tammann to have an 
exponential form, thus entailing the exponential part of 
the Schechter function which represents the luminosity 
function of all galaxies. The slope of this function in 
CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES shows significant variations among 
clusters studied, with the interesting result that clusters 
with large cD galaxies have proportionately fewer dE 
galaxies (slope a ~ —1) than do those clusters without 
such a dominant galaxy (-14 > a > —2.0). The 
conclusion here may be that cD halos are formed by the 
disruption of dwarfs, although the mechanism for doing so 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is unidentified, and it is as likely that the problem needing 
explaining is actually the preponderance of dEs in non- 
cD clusters. The three dimensional shapes of dEs appear 
not to be disks, despite their exponential light profiles; 
rather, the flattening distributions indicate spheroidal or 
ellipsoidal shapes because of the lack of very flat systems. 
The lack of nearly circular galaxies argues against the 
galaxies being oblate, and although prolate systems are 
permitted by the data, it is most likely that, as a group, 
these galaxies are triaxial. 

Because of the intrinsic faintness of these galaxies, 
there is not a surfeit of kinematic information about them, 
although what is known has proved to be crucial to the 
study of DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES. Studies of the velocities 
of individual stars in the galactic dwarf spheroidals have 
shown that the least luminous galaxies (UMi and Draco) 
have velocity dispersions around 10 km s-! similar to 
the dispersions found in the brightest galactic dwarf 
spheroidal, Fornax, which is nearly 100 times more 
luminous. The high dispersions result most simply in 
total M/L values of order 100 for the faint dwarfs, and 
since the stellar M/L values are order unity, there is thus 
strong evidence for unseen matter. Modeling attempts 
to explain the large velocity dispersions by interactions 
and disruptions with the Milky Way have largely been 
unsuccessful, because these interactions, while disturbing 
the structure of dwarfs galaxies, do not significantly 
alter the central velocity dispersions. More detailed 
structural models of the galaxies, in which dark matter 
halos are included along with the observed luminous 
matter distribution, have confirmed the large M/L ratios 
and also shown that the central densities of dark matter 
can be very high, near 1 My pc’, much larger than the 
density of visible stars. 

Spectral observations in integrated light of more 
distant galaxies have further shown that the dEs are 
slow rotators and are in general not rotationally flattened, 
thus placing them on common ground with the large 
ellipticals, and making them different from the low- 
luminosity ellipticals, which are rotationally flattened. 
The galactic dwarf spheroidal UMi, which is quite flat 
in projection (e = 0.6), has also been shown to have 
little rotation, the data coming from individual constituent 
stars in this case. The velocity dispersions obtained 
in integrated light of luminous dwarf ellipticals tend to 
indicate normal M/L ratios; i.e. the central areas are not 
dark matter dominated. 

A salient feature in nearly half of the luminous dEs 
is the presence of a distinct nucleus. The most widely 
known nucleus is surely that of NGC 205, although this 
nucleus is in fact quite different from those of most other 
galaxies in that it is a young star cluster, part of the star 
formation event first noticed by Baade. The nuclei in 
other dEs appear to be the same age as the surrounding 
galaxy. For a small nucleus, it can appear simply as a 
star cluster, occasionally miscentered in the host galaxy; 
in the cases where the nucleus is large, it tends to blend 
in with the structure of the surrounding galaxy rather 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. A comparison of an elliptical and a dwarf elliptical galaxy with similar luminosities but very different structures, both 
companions to M32. Left: M31. Right: NGC 147, a dwarf elliptical, shown at the same scale. 


than appear as an imposed star cluster. Their luminosities 
range upwards to My = —12, which is somewhat brighter 
than the brightest globular clusters known anywhere. The 
presence of a nucleus is weakly correlated with a number 
of other properties. They occur more frequently in more 
luminous galaxies. They occur more often in rounder 
galaxies. In clusters, the nucleated galaxies tend to be more 
concentrated as a group than do non-nucleated galaxies. 
Also, the nucleated galaxies tend to be redder than non- 
nucleated galaxies, although there is little color difference 
between the nucleus and the surrounding stars. None 
of these tendencies yet points to an origin of the nuclei, 
however, other than to support the obvious idea that the 
nuclei are secondary star formation events, where gaseous 
material fell to the center of a newly formed galaxy and 
built up a region of high stellar density. HST images of 
a nearby nucleus (which contains nearly 5% of the total 
galaxy luminosity) show a central density as high as that 
found in galactic globular clusters (figure 2). 

Like all types of galaxies, dEs contain globular 
clusters. The presence of them is directly related to the 
host galaxy luminosity, and the scaling factor appears to 
be more like the ellipticals with a relatively high number 
of clusters per unit luminosity (4 per unit My = —15), 
rather than like the spirals which are cluster poor. The 
faintest known galaxy with globular clusters is still Fornax, 
which has 5. Colors and metal abundance measures of dE 
globulars indicate that they are more metal poor than the 
surrounding halo in the mean; a similar situation is found 
in ellipticals. 

Ideas that the stellar populations are similar to those 
of globular clusters (ie. uniformly old) have had to 
be modified, first because of the indirect indicators of 
young age such as the presence of anomalous Cepheid 
variable stars, the second parameter problem (a red 
horizontal branch in a metal-poor system) and upper 
asymptotic giant branch stars, and later more directly by 
color-magnitude diagrams (particularly of Carina), which 
show multiple main sequence turnoffs, indicating several 
discrete epochs of STARFORMATION. Many of the Local Group 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


NGC 5206 
oO 
& 17 4 
£ 
oO 
g 
D 
oO 
& 
> 
& 
a 
(7p) 
22 + 4 
0 50 100 
R (arcsecs) 


Figure 2. Radial light profile of NGC 5206 


dwarf spheroidals show such evidence for star formation 
more recent than 10 Gyr. Direct evidence for current 
star formation among Local Group dEs is found only in 
NGC 185 and 205, however. More distant galaxies also 
show some signs of recent star formation, in that the 
integrated colors show large variations among galaxies 
of similar luminosity; some colors are bluer than can be 
explained by low metallicities. It is apparent that star 
formation in dEs is a more complex thing than in globular 
clusters. The acquisition of more star formation material 
can explain some cases, but others require self-regulation 
of star formation, via stellar winds perhaps. Galaxies 
such as the Phoenix dwarf and LGS3 are thought to be 
transition objects, in which star formation is about to end, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


18 por a a a ae 
20 + ek 4 
a A x 
nN 
ux 
322+ 4 
8 e 
z x 
i x & 
524 - aes ~ Oo ° J 
> . 5 
é : : 
e. 2 c ts) 
ee O 
26 - 4 
-7 -9 -11 -13 -15 -17 -19 
M 


Figure 3. Relation between luminosity and surface brightness 
for dwarf ellipticals. Open symbols are cluster galaxies; full 
symbols are Local Group and M81 galaxies. 


-0.5 T T T T T 
e 
224; le 4 
é 
e e 
_ e 
= 
3-155 e 1 
i 
e e 
e 
e 
2+ e 4 
e 
e 
e 
e 
25 fl f f f f 
-18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 
My, 


Figure 4. Relation between luminosity and metallicity for dwarf 
ellipticals. 


after which time the galaxy would take on the appearance 
of a dE. Studies of all the dwarfs in the Local Group 
(including the irregulars) show that dwarf elliptical star 
formation histories merge smoothly into those of DWARF 
IRREGULAR GALAXIES. A useful summary might be that stars 
began forming in dwarf ellipticals 15 Gyr ago, but that star 
formation may have ceased only a few Gyr ago. 

dEs as a class have a number of remarkable relations 
between observed properties. As mentioned above, the 
central or mean surface brightnesses are directly related to 
the total luminosity, over a range of about 8 magnitudes 
(figure 3). The central values used for this relation 
are extrapolated values, so that any nuclei present are 
ignored. This relation is not tight, however, and some have 
even doubted that it exists, noting that surface brightness 
selection effects in galaxy searches would tend to produce 
such a relation. The central surface brightnesses of these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


galaxies are of course well below that of the night sky. 
However, more recent deep searches, while finding the 
very interesting large (and hence luminous) low-surface- 
brightness galaxies, have not found them in the abundance 
that would fill the surface brightness-luminosity plane 
uniformly. Thus, it seems likely that while large deviations 
from a relation do exist, there is a preferred or dominant 
relation. (One has to be careful to distinguish large, 
low-surface-brightness dwarf elliptical galaxies, with My 
fainter than —18, from the large, low-surface brightness 
disk galaxies, such as Malin I.) A second relation is that 
of mean stellar metallicity (Z) and total luminosity (L) 
(figure 4). The metal abundances used in this relation are 
those found from color-magnitude relations, and thus the 
galaxies measured so far are all at least within the reach 
of HST. Over a range of 8 magnitudes, the metallicity 
changes by 1.4 dex (a factor of 25, Z « L*), and the 
relation is fairly tight. A question then arises: with 
two relations relating three parameters, L—-Z, and L-SB, 
one tight and one not so tight, is the relation between 
SB and Z tight or not? That is, is the true parameter 
that dictates mean metallicity during galaxy formation 
the galaxy luminosity (total mass), or rather the surface 
brightness (surface density)? Observations of one large 
low-surface-brightness galaxy in the M81 group provide 
the answer here. This galaxy lies well off of the main SB-L 
relation, and also lies well off of the main SB—Z relation. 
However, it does lie on the L—Z relation formed by Local 
Group galaxies. Thus it is luminosity that dictates the 
metallicity. It is interesting that in the faintest dwarfs, 
while the luminous matter is a small fraction of the total 
mass, it is the luminous matter that dictates the metallicity. 

The existence of the metallicity-luminosity relation 
and the surface brightness—luminosity relation as well as 
the complex star formation histories have provided an 
impetus for searches for theories of how these galaxies 
formed. Formation ideas are varied, from the detritus 
models wherein the small companion dE galaxies are the 
leftover material of large galaxy formation, to formation in 
tidal tails of interacting galaxies, to that of Babul and Rees 
which is a more ab initio scheme. Babul and Rees have 
shown that the collapse of weak density perturbations 
can be delayed because of the photoionizing effects of 
the intergalactic UV radiation field at redshifts greater 
than 1. Thus star formation in dwarf galaxies may have 
begun relatively late and may have resulted in that class of 
galaxies being excessively bright at intermediate redshifts, 
perhaps leading to the excess number of blue galaxies 
apparent at those redshifts. Larson showed that the more 
massive dwarf precursors were better able to retain gas 
(which otherwise would have been lost via supernova 
explosions) and hence had longer-lived star formation 
epochs, resulting in higher central densities and higher 
metallicities. Since gas loss in self-gravitating systems 
cannot explain both the observed form of the decline 
in metallicity and surface brightness with luminosity in 
dEs, Dekel and Silk developed a model which included 
the presence of dark matter, wherein mass loss from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


supernova winds becomes important at a threshold value 
of mass and allows both stated conditions to be met. Being 
derived from hierarchical scenarios, the dwarfs should 
also predominate in areas of low density (i.e. voids), 
something for which there is much counterevidence for. 

There are obvious connections between dEs and 
star-forming dwarfs (dIrrs)—low surface brightness, low 
metallicity, low luminosity and even similar flattening 
distributions. However, in detail there are problems with 
the idea that dEs are simply the extension of dIrrs—those 
galaxies that ran out of star forming gas first. As a class, 
dwarf ellipticals are smaller than dlrrs—there are many 
more large dIrrs than dEs. Thus it is hard to obtain all 
of the dEs by stopping the star formation and allowing 
the dIrrs to fade—the length scales would be wrong. (It 
would be possible to obtain some fraction of the dEs 
this way of course.) It has been difficult to compare the 
metallicities of dEs ([Fe/H] in general, from giant branch 
locations) with those of dIrrs ([O/H] in general, from 
ionized gas measures) to check the idea that at the same 
luminosity, corrected for fading for dIrrs, the two types 
have similar metallicities. Preliminary work does show 
that it is marginally possible for the observed L—Z relation 
of dEs to have come from that of dIrrs, but the amount of 
luminosity fading required is excessive. It is certainly true 
that dEs and dIrrs come from related progenitors, although 
the precise parameters separating those families is not yet 
known. 


Bibliography 

Babul A and Rees M 1992 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 255 346 

Dekel A and Silk J 1986 Astrophys. J. 303 39 

Ferguson H and Binggeli B 1994 Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 6 
67 

Larson R 1974 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 169 229 

Mateo M 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 435 


Nelson Caldwell 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dwarf Galaxy 


A small galaxy with a very low mass and luminosity. 
Dwarf galaxies may be elliptical or irregular in shape but, 
in either case, are usually sparsely populated with stars, 
have low surface brightnesses, low overall luminosities, 
and consequently are hard to detect. It is usually possible 
to look straight through a dwarf galaxy. Dwarf ellipticals 
are populated by old stars and contain little, if any, 
gas, whereas dwarf irregulars contain younger stars and 
substantial quantities of gas. Dwarf elliptical galaxies, 
which typically contain from a few hundred thousand to a 
few million stars, have diameters of a few thousand light- 
years and luminosities ranging from about 10° to about 
10’ solar luminosities, are probably the most abundant 
species of galaxy in the universe. They are denoted by 
‘dE’ in the Hubble classification scheme. Dwarf irregulars, 
which appear to be less abundant than dwarf ellipticals, 
contain from about 10° to 108 (or, exceptionally, up to about 
10°) stars. The smallest galaxy known is GR-8, a dwarf 
irregular with a diameter of 1000 light-years. 


See also: elliptical galaxies, galaxy, Hubble classification, 
irregular galaxy, Local Group, Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Irregular Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dwarf Irregular Galaxies 


Dwarf irregular galaxies at optical wavelengths are small, 
faint and appear to be unstructured and irregular in 
shape. They are typically gas-rich, metal-poor systems, 
with varying levels of STAR FORMATION occurring in a 
haphazard manner across the galaxy. Their structure does 
not normally include any distinctive features, such as 
spiral arms or nuclei, and their kinematics seems to be 
dominated by random motions or relatively slow solid- 
body rotation. There is not an extremely precise definition 
of what is a DWARF GALAXY and what is not, but the most 
typical demarcation between a dwarf galaxy and a larger 
(‘normal’) galaxy is that dwarfs are typically fainter than 
an absolute B-band magnitude Mg = —16. This is 
not a strict rule, as the Small Magellanic Cloud (with 
Mz = —17) is often considered to belong to the class 
of dwarf irregular galaxies. The lumpy irregularities 
in the optical morphology of dwarf irregular galaxies 
are due to randomly distributed star formation regions, 
which may be individually quite bright, but the overall 
surface brightness is typically extremely low (Xp ~ 23- 
25 mag arcsec*). Because this type of galaxy is so 
numerous and they can easily vary in brightness quite 
dramatically owing to increased star formation rates, there 
is strong evidence to suggest that they are cosmologically 
important population of galaxies. 

There are several classes of dwarf galaxy, not only 
dwarf irregular galaxies, and the difference between dwarf 
irregular galaxies and other classes of dwarf galaxy, suchas 
‘blue compact dwarf’ galaxies, ‘dwarf spheroidal’ galaxies 
and ‘dwarf elliptical’ galaxies, is often a question of 
semantics and has not always been precisely defined. 
These types of dwarf galaxy on average fall into the same 
low surface brightness class, but differ in their current 
rates of star formation. Blue compact dwarf galaxies have 
one or more compact, high star formation rate regions 
(e.g. NGC 1705, NGC 1569, VII Zw403). DWARF SPHEROIDAL 
GALAXIES, on the other hand, currently have no ongoing 
star formation, and no detectable gas, but they can show 
evidence of having had a complex star formation history, 
including one, or more, distinct episodes of star formation 
(e.g. Carina, Leo I, Sculptor). There are also a small 
number of what appear to be transition objects, which 
have extremely low rates of current star formation, but 
with evidence of more active star formation in the recent 
past (e.g. Pegasus, Phoenix, Antlia). The existence of 
these transition objects leads to the hypothesis that dwarf 
spheroidal, irregular and blue compact galaxies are all the 
same type of object, observed at different evolutionary 
phases. DWARF ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES (e.g. M32, NGC 147, 
NGC 185) usually have evidence only for a fairly old stellar 
population, and it is not entirely clear that they can fall into 
the same global scheme as the other types of dwarf galaxy 
suggested above. 

Dwarf irregular galaxies are the most common type 
of galaxy in the region surrounding our own Galaxy, 
the so called Locat Group. In a recent census, 22 out of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


41 galaxies within the Local Group can be classified as 
dwarf irregular type galaxies. Similar results, showing 
the dominance of dwarf irregular populations, can also be 
seen for other nearby groups of galaxies (or often called 
CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES), Such as Virgo and Fornax. There are 
also indications from redshift surveys that the universe as 
a whole is dominated by small irregular type galaxies. It 
is of historical interest to note that the first object to be 
‘,.. definitely assigned to the region outside the Galactic 
system...’ (i.e. to be extragalactic) by Edwin Hubble in 
1925 was NGC 6822, one of the nearest examples of a 
dwarf irregular galaxy. Pioneering work by Walter BAADE, 
starting in 1944, taking the first steps in understanding 
galaxy evolution, was based on studies of the resolved 
stellar populations in dwarf galaxies. Baade noted that 
the dwarf elliptical galaxies he looked at contained only 
red stars, namely old stars (which he called population 
II), and dwarf irregular galaxies contain red and blue 
stars, which indicate a younger population (which he 
called population I). He further noted that while an 
exclusively old population has been observed, a young 
population was never seen without an old underlying, 
fainter, population of red stars, which is called ‘Baade’s 
Sheet’. 

Because of their small size and low surface brightness 
dwarf irregular galaxies can be very hard to detect, even 
in the Local Group, and to the present day we are still 
finding new dwarf irregular galaxies (e.g. Antlia in 1997, 
by a group from Cambridge, England). The first major 
survey of these faint and often unregarded smudges 
on photographic plates was undertaken by the Swedish 
astronomer Holmberg, in 1950 in the M81 and M101 galaxy 
groups. A further extensive specific search for field dwarf 
galaxies was undertaken by van den Bergh in 1959 in 
Canada (the DDO catalogue). Of the present-day dwarf 
irregular members of the Local Group 50% have been 
found since 1971, and we cannot rule out that we will find 
many more extremely low surface brightness objects in the 
Local Group. 

The distribution of neutral hydrogen (H I) gas in 
dwarf irregular galaxies is very clumpy and irregularly 
distributed and is frequently much more extended than 
the optical emission. There have been very few cases 
in which molecular gas has been detected. Molecular 
gas, typically, means carbon monoxide, CO, which is 
relatively straightforward to detect and is considered to be 
a tracer for the presence of molecular hydrogen, H2, which 
is the most important constituent in the star-formation 
process. Given the importance of molecular gas to the 
star-formation process it must exist in these galaxies, as 
we see young stars. It is possible that the extremely low 
metallicity of dwarf irregular galaxies makes the molecular 
gas more difficult to detect, because the relative fraction of 
CO to Hp molecules is much smaller than in our Galaxy. 

Dwarf irregular galaxies are also so-called ‘metal- 
poor’ galaxies. This means that the abundance of ‘metals’, 
namely elements with atomic numbers greater than 2, 
relative to the abundance of hydrogen is much lower 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Irregular Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


than is observed in our Sun (the solar abundance). The 
metallicity of dwarf irregular galaxies ranges between 
2.3% of the solar value (e.g. Leo A) and around 10% of the 
solar value (e.g. IC 1613). The typical elements observed 
to determine the metallicity of nearby galaxies are carbon, 
oxygen and nitrogen, which are detectable in optical and 
UV emission lines in currently star-forming regions (so- 
called, H II regions), and iron has been measured in spectra 
of individual stars of various ages. The extremely low 
abundances of metals relative to hydrogen, typically in the 
range 2-15% of solar neighborhood values, can be taken 
as a sign either of youth or of a sporadic star formation 
history, or a combination of both. 

The star formation history, or luminosity and color 
evolution, of dwarf irregular galaxies shows evidence of 
not having been a smooth function of time. That is to say, 
they have been subject to sporadic increases in the average 
rate of star formation, so-called ‘bursts’ of star formation. 
These bursts may make a dwarf irregular galaxy look 
much more like a blue compact dwarf galaxy. Evidence for 
these bursts of star formation comes both from the direct 
observations of the resolved stars (the stellar population) 
in nearby dwarf irregular galaxies, a census of which 
gives information about the star formation history that has 
created the currently seen age and metallicity distribution, 
and also from studies of the luminosity and colors of 
much more distant, late-type galaxies seen at intermediate 
redshift (so-called faint blue galaxies). 

It is possible to derive very accurate star formation 
histories from resolved stellar populations going back to 
the oldest star formation episodes in a galaxy. Low- 
mass stars can live a very long time, and thus leave 
a longstanding fossil record which can be directly 
interpreted as the star formation history of a galaxy 
through the entire history of the universe. Current 
evidence shows that every dwarf galaxy in the Local 
Group has had a different star formation history from 
every other. Dwarf irregular galaxies typically appear to 
contain old populations, as seen from the red giant branch 
stars, but this has only been unequivocally proven from the 
detection of RRLYRAESTARS in one or two cases (e.g. IC1613). 
Dwarf irregular galaxies thus not only have irregular 
morphology but also have had irregular star formation 
histories, dominated by short ‘bursts’ of star formation, 
rather than a more or less constant rate of star formation 
with time (as for spirals) or an epoch of formation a long 
time ago (as for ellipticals). This is consistent with what 
we know about blue compacts and dwarf spheroidals as 
well. 

Nearby dwarf irregulars are currently forming stars 
at an extremely low rate, and although this low rate may 
be more or less a constant underlying rate, through time 
every so often this rate does increase. When this happens 
it is possible that a dwarf irregular galaxy would then be 
classified as blue compact dwarf galaxy, and if this rate 
ever goes to zero they would be dwarf spheroidals. 

The surveys to study the properties of the very distant, 
so-called ‘faint blue galaxies’ seen in all deep images of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the sky have come to the conclusion that the majority of 
these objects are at intermediate redshifts and are late-type 
STARBURST GALAXIES. An analysis of the number of faint blue 
galaxies in deep surveys, combined with their luminosity 
and color variations, gives an indication of how short and 
how intense these bursts of star formation must be for us 
to detect the number of faint blue galaxies that we do. 
This type of analysis suggests that they are quite small 
and undergo extremely short extremely intense bursts of 
star formation. Detailed imaging of these objects from 
the Hubble Space Telescope shows a large majority to be 
irregular in shape. Thus what is known about these very 
distant, very faint but very numerous faint blue galaxies 
is perfectly consistent with what we can assume about the 
present-day characteristics of the dwarf irregular galaxies 
we see and can study in great detail in the nearby universe 
and Local Group. Dwarf irregular galaxies are thus a very 
important link between the nearby universe, which we 
can study relatively easily, and the most distant objects in 
the universe, GALAXIES AT HIGH-REDSHIFT, Which we can never 
hope to be able to study in the same detail as Local Group 
galaxies. 


Bibliography 

Baade W 1968 Evolution of Stars and Galaxies (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press) 

Da Costa G S 1998 Dwarf galaxies Stellar Astrophysics for 
the Local Group (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 351-406 

Hodge P 1986 Galaxies (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press) 

Mateo M 1998 Dwarf galaxies in the Local Group Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 36 435 

Meylan G and Prugniel P 1994 Dwarf Galaxies (Garching: 
European Southern Observatory) 


Eline Tolstoy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies 


Our galaxy, the MILKy way, is surrounded by a swarm 
of dwarf galaxies each composed of 100000 to billions 
of stars. Many of these galaxies are easy to see; for 
example, the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS are visible to the naked 
eye for observers in the Southern Hemisphere. Many of 
the dwarfs are far more difficult to spot; some of these 
were discovered telescopically in the nineteenth century. 
One class of nearby dwarf galaxy eluded discovery for 
even longer. In the late 1930s, Harlow Shapley and Walter 
Baade reported the discovery of a new type of ‘star system’ 
in the constellation Sculptor (figure 1). Barely visible on 
their original plates, this new object was the first example 
of a dwarf spheroidal (dSph) galaxy ever found. It is now 
known to be one of nine such galaxies orbiting the Milky 
Way. 

By convention, the nearby dSph galaxies are usually 
named after the constellation in which they are located (see 
table 1). The nine dSph galaxies closest to the Milky Way 
are all very likely gravitationally bound to our Galaxy. The 
remaining dSph galaxies listed in the table reside within 
the LOCAL Group of galaxies, and all but one are satellites 
swarming around the nearby the ANDROMEDA GALAXY. In 
recent years dSph galaxies have been discovered in large 
numbers within other nearby GROUPS OF GALAXIES and GALAXY 
cLusTERS. When these numbers of known dSph galaxies 
are extrapolated to the universe as a whole, it becomes 
apparent that dSph galaxies are by far the single most 
common type of galaxy by number. 

If dSph galaxies are so common, how did they elude 
discovery for so long? Even in the darkest, most remote 
sites on Earth, the sky glows faintly with optical radiation. 
This light comes mostly from atomic and molecular 
emission from the upper parts of our own atmosphere, 
from sunlight reflected off dust scattered throughout 
the solar system and within our atmosphere, and from 
individually invisible, but very numerous faint galaxies 
and stars. Most galaxies have surface brightnesses 
comparable to that of the night sky; that is, the total light 
they emit over the total area of the galaxy as seen in the 
sky is comparable to the amount of light the sky itself 
emits. These high surface brightness galaxies—spirAL and 
ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES—are the ones most commonly pictured 
in popular astronomy books. They represent what 
most people think about when they imagine a ‘typical’ 
galaxy. In contrast, dSph galaxies have far lower surface 
brightnesses, glowing faintly with a surface brightness as 
low as only 1% that of the night sky. These galaxies are the 
closest examples of true LOW SURFACE BRIGHTNESS systems. 

Finding such ghostly objects would be similar to 
spotting a 40 W lightbulb in front of a large searchlight 
or discerning a 1 m rise in a 100 m tall plateau from 
far away. Sculptor was found in the 1930s only because 
it is one of the brightest nearby dSph galaxies, it is 
located in a particularly dark part of the sky, and many 
photographic plates were available by that time to confirm 
its discovery. Many of the most recently discovered 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


“Sculptor dSph te 


Figure 1. An negative image of the Sculptor dSph galaxy, a 
nearby satellite of our home Galaxy, the Milky Way. Sculptor is 
located about 220000 light-years away and the galaxy is clearly 
resolved into individual faint stars as seen in the picture. The 
bright stars in the image are most likely located in our Galaxy 
somewhere between us and Sculptor. Some of the fainter objects 
are background galaxies far behind Sculptor. For comparison, 
the full Moon would easily fit within the field of view shown in 
the figure. This picture is used by permission from the digitized 
Southern Sky Survey from Space Telescope Science Institute; the 
original plate was obtained at the Anglo-Australian Observatory 
with the UK Schmidt Telescope. 


dSph galaxies were not found by eye, but from sensitive 
electronic measurements of photographic images of large 
regions of the sky. Because they are so difficult to spot, 
it seems certain that many more nearby dSph galaxies 
remain to be discovered. 


Global properties of dwarf spheroidal galaxies 

As their name implies, dSph galaxies are among the 
smallest, least luminous galaxies known. Ursa Minor, 
for example, shines with a total luminosity of about 
300 000 times the luminosity of the Sun. By comparison, 
the Magellanic Clouds—dwarf companions of our Milky 
Way—emit as much light as 2 billion Suns. Even some of 
the Milky Way’s GLOBULAR CLUSTERS emit more light than 
the faintest dSph galaxies. Most dSph systems show 
a centrally concentrated structure with a core region of 
nearly constant, but extremely low, surface brightness. 
The outer parts of dSph galaxies slowly fade into the 
night sky; in many cases, no well-defined outer boundary 
can be measured. The central cores range from 1000- 
3000 LIGHT-YEARS in diameter, while the ill-defined outer 
boundaries typically extend 3-10 times further out; the 
dimensions of the Local Group dSph galaxies (see table 1) 
are representative. The ultra-low core surface brightnesses 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Dwarf spheroidal galaxies (after Mateo). 


Distance Luminosity Mass Core Outer 
Year of RA Declination (million (million (million diameter diameter 

Galaxy discovery 2000 2000 Parent* light-years) Suns) Suns) (light-years) (light-years) 
NGC 205 1864 0040.4 +4141 And 2.6 370 740 850 3500 
NGC 185 1864 0039.0 +4820 And 2.0 130 130 500 8000 
NGC 147 1864 0033.2 +4831 And 2.3 130 110 550 10000 
Sagittarius 1994 1855.1 -—3029 MW 0.08 18 100-1000 1800 30 000+ 
Fornax 1938 0240.0  -—3427 MW 0.45 16 68 1500 7700 
And VII 1998 2326.5 +5042 And 2.5 5.7 — 520 — 
Leo I 1955 1008.5 +1219 MW 0.81 4.8 22 700 2700 
And I 1972 0045.7. +3800 And 2.6 4.7 — 1200 10200 
And II 1972 0116.5 +3326 And 1.7 24 60 675 7100 
Sculptor 1938 0100.2 -—3343 MW 0.26 2.2 6.4 360 4750 
And VI 1998 2351.7 +2436 And 27 14 _— 380 — 
And II 1972 0035.3 +3631 And 2.5 11 _— 390 1900 
And V 1998 0110.3 +4738 And 2.6 1.0 — 500 — 
Tucana 1985 2241.8 -—6425 none 2.9 0.6 _ 425 2250 
Leo II 1950 1113.5 +2209 MW 0.66 0.6 9.7 525 1575 
Sextans 1990 1013.1 -—0137 MW 0.28 0.5 19 1100 10500 
Carina 1977 0641.6 —5058 MW 0.33 0.4 13 680 2230 
Ursa Minor 1955 1509.2 +6713 MW 0.21 0.3 23 650 2100 
Draco 1955 1720.3 +5755 MW 0.27 0.3 22 590 1850 


Notes:* Name of Galaxy about which the listed dwarf orbits. And = the Andromeda galaxy; MW = the Milky Way; none = indicates 
that the galaxy appears to be unbound to any identified parent galaxy. 


and small sizes are the features that principally distinguish 
dSph systems from all other classes of galaxies. 

Many dSph galaxies also exhibit well-defined central 
nuclei that are far more compact than the galactic cores. In 
many cases, the optical appearance of the nuclei resemble 
that of large globular clusters. Nuclei in dSph galaxies are 
most common in the more luminous systems, but, even 
among the brightest dSph systems, not all possess nuclei. 
Only one dSph galaxy in the Local Group unambiguously 
contains a nucleus: NGC 205, a companion of the 
Andromeda Galaxy. These galaxies range in shape on the 
sky from nearly circular to highly elliptical. In terms of 
the HUBBLE CLASSIFICATION system, they range from EO to E7. 
It is not unusual for the core of a given galaxy to exhibit 
a different elliptical shape and orientation than the outer 
region of the same system (see figure 3 of NGC 205 in the 
entry the Local Group). 

Most of the radiation from dSph galaxies is emitted 
in the form of starlight in the optical portion of the 
ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM. The lack of strong emission 
lines, infrared, or radio radiation suggests that these 
galaxies are generally devoid of an interstellar medium 
composed of gas or dust floating freely between the stars. 
Recent observations have revealed a possible, though 
complicated, relation between some nearby dSph galaxies 
and clouds of neutral hydrogen gas visible only at radio 
wavelengths. These galaxies also emit very little light that 
can be attributed to extremely young stars or star-forming 
regions. This suggests that dSph galaxies are currently 
dormant systems that formed most of their stars more than 
about 1 billion years ago. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Nearby dwarf spheroidal galaxies 

Because most distant dSph galaxies appear as featureless 
smudges of light, we must turn to the closest dSph satellite 
galaxies within the Local Group to try to understand 
the true nature of these little, but extremely common, 
systems. At the time of the initial discovery of Sculptor 
by Shapley and Baade, it was clear that dSph galaxies 
were composed of stars similar to those found in globular 
clusters. Moreover, dSph galaxies and globular clusters 
were the only sorts of objects known to inhabit the 
outermost regions of the halo of our Galaxy. These features 
and the simple structure of both types of star systems 
seemed to indicate that dSph galaxies were simply puffed 
up versions of otherwise normal globular clusters. 

This belief persisted for many years, but in time 
enough evidence accumulated to begin to suggest that 
something far more complicated was going on within 
dSph galaxies. The Ursa Minor galaxy, for example, 
appeared to be so extended that it could not possibly 
be gravitationally bound. The implication was that we 
were witnessing the disruption of this dwarf galaxy as it 
passes close by the Milky Way. The problem with this was 
that independent calculations of the tidal forces suggested 
that Ursa Minor was sufficiently far from the Milky Way 
that it should not yet be falling apart. As astronomers 
began to carry out detailed studies of the individual 
stars in the closest dSph systems, they confirmed that 
the stars in dSph galaxies are deficient in heavy elements 
compared with the Sun. Oddly, the global properties of 
the stars in color-magnitude diagrams of dSph galaxies 
did not confirm these low element abundances. This 
seemingly contradictory behavior is known as the second 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


parameter problem and it is present in nearly every dSph 
system. These dwarfs also contain luminous CARBON STARS 
and unusual VARIABLE stars that are not found in globular 
clusters. 

In the early 1980s the first studies of dSph galaxies 
employing modern electronic detectors and large-aperture 
telescopes revealed two unexpected features that helped 
explain these puzzles. The first was that the stars with 
individual dSph galaxies appear to be moving far too fast 
relative to one another to remain bound within such small 
galaxies. That is, if we estimate the mass of each galaxy 
based on the number of visible stars, we find that every 
one of these galaxies appears to be disintegrating before 
our very eyes, not just Ursa Minor! Because this seemed 
highly improbable, the assumption that we see all the 
mass in dSph galaxies was questioned. One alternative 
model is that the galaxies are much more massive than 
expected from their visible matter because they contain 
DARK MATTER. Dynamical models that include dark matter 
do adequately explain the internal motions of the stars 
in all dSph systems. In the most extreme cases, only 1% 
of the mass of the galaxy is visible. The rest of the mass 
is composed of dark matter whose nature, unfortunately, 
remains a complete mystery. If this is true, dSph galaxies 
have the largest proportion of dark mass of any known 
type of galaxy and can therefore claim to be the ‘darkest’ 
galaxies known. Curiously, dark matter models also 
suggest that no dSph galaxy has a mass less than about 
10 million times the mass of the Sun. 

The second revolutionary observation proved that, 
unlike globular clusters, dSph galaxies contain significant 
numbers of ‘intermediate-age stars’. Thus, these galaxies 
appear to have formed stars over a large fraction of the 
lifetime of the universe while globular clusters generally 
formed nearly all of their stars very soon after the 
universe first formed. Modern studies of nearly all the 
nearby dSph galaxies reveal evidence of a complicated 
star formation history, each galaxy being different from 
all the others much like the ages of children may differ 
greatly from family to family even within a small town or 
neighborhood. How and why individual dSph galaxies 
have been able to support extended and episodic star 
formation histories remains unclear. 


Dwarf spheroidal galaxies throughout the 
universe 

Every galactic group or cluster that has been adequately 
studied has revealed large numbers of dSph galaxies. Most 
of these galaxies appear to be quite similar to the ones 
found in the Local Group, but some interesting variations 
are also found. For example, the nearby msi group contains 
a few dSph galaxies that are considerably more extended 
and have even lower central surface brightnesses than 
the known local systems. Nearby galaxy clusters such 
as the VIRGO, FORNAX, CENTAURUS and COMA CLUSTERS contain 
hundreds to thousands of individual dSph galaxies 
(figure 2). Dwarfs with nuclei are particularly common 
in these environments, especially among the brighter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. A close-up of a small region of the nearby Centaurus 
galaxy cluster. Five dSph galaxies within the cluster are denoted 
with arrows, and a sixth uncertain case is identified with an 
arrow and a question mark. The galaxies denoted with an ‘E’ are 
normal dwarf elliptical galaxies in the cluster and the elongated 
galaxy denoted ‘Sp’ is a spiral galaxy of the cluster viewed at a 
nearly edge-on orientation. Note how extremely diffuse and 
faint the dSph galaxies are relative to the other galaxies and to 
the brightness of the night sky itself. These features uniquely 
distinguish these dwarfs from normal ellipticals. Clusters such 
as Centaurus appear to be typical: dSph galaxies are the most 
common single type of galaxy known in the present-day 
Universe. This negative image was obtained at the Las 
Campanas Observatory of the Carnegie Institution of 
Washington and was provided courtesy of Kristin Chiboucas. 


galaxies. In most cases, the nuclei appear to contain 
stars that are distinctly different—possibly older or with 
different elemental abundances—from the majority of 
stars in the parent dSph galaxies. 

Dwarf spheroidal galaxies appear to concentrate 
more towards the centers of galactic groups and clusters 
than any other type of galaxy, including spiral galaxies, 
large elliptical galaxies or the relatively dust-free SO Disk 
GALAXIES. This is also observed in the Local Group where 
the vast majority of all dwarf companions nearest the 
Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy are dSph systems. 
Astronomers speculate that proximity of dwarfs to larger 
galaxies or the centers of large clusters helps remove gas 
from the smaller systems as a result of tidal forces or 
perhaps from interactions with isolated gas clouds also 
orbiting the larger systems. Either process can truncate 
star formation in the affected systems, allowing them 
to fade to very low surface brightnesses and ultimately 
resulting in the formation of dSph galaxies. Alternatively, 
dwarf galaxies near larger companions or near the dense 
centers of clusters may accelerate their star formation due 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to interactions with their larger neighbors. Such galaxies 
would run out of gas and appear today to contain mostly 
middle-aged stars. 

Two observations do suggest that dSph galaxies may 
interact tidally with their massive parents. First, none 
of these galaxies are found extremely close to a large 
galaxy, implying that tidal forces destroy dSph systems 
that venture too near to their parents. In the case of 
the Milky Way, the limiting distance appears to be about 
150 000 light-years. Second, we actually see one example 
of the disruption occurring today. The Sagittarius dSph is 
unique among all known dSph galaxies in its enormous 
size and low density, both indicative of tidal disruption. 
This case really does appear to be one of a dSph galaxy 
in its final death throes. Models of its interaction with the 
Milky Way suggest that within about one billion years, 
Sagittarius will have dissolved away as a distinct galaxy, 
its stars scattered through the halo of our Galaxy. 

Beyond about 100 million light years, dSph galaxies 
appear too small and too faint to be identified easily. 
However, their presence may still be inferred indirectly. 
Deep counts of galaxies have revealed a population of so- 
called faint blue galaxies located at such great distances 
that we are seeing the systems as they appeared many 
billions of years ago. Some of these could conceivably 
be dSph galaxies caught during one of their many strong 
episodes of star formation. Such events make the galaxies 
brighter and much bluer and consistent with the properties 
of at least some of the faint blue galaxies observed. Faint 
IRREGULAR GALAXIES appear to have global properties similar 
to dSph galaxies, but with the addition of young stars and 
a significant interstellar medium. Perhaps these represent 
modern-day examples of galaxies that have undergone 
evolution from a young, blue phase and are changing 
into typical dSph galaxies. Because dSph galaxies are 
so common and because most popular models of GALAxy 
FORMATION in the early universe suggest that small galaxies 
formed first, it may even be possible that dSph galaxies 
represent the basic unit of galaxy formation. If so, the 
dSph systems we see today may represent fossils of objects 
similar to the very first galaxies ever formed. 


Bibliography 

van den Bergh S 2000 The galaxies of the Local Group 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) (A galaxy 
by galaxy description of the Local Group; many 
historical comments included. All of the local dSph 
galaxies are included.) 

Hodge P 2000 An Atlas of Local Group Galaxies (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) (An atlas of photos of all Local Group 
galaxies including all the nearby dSph systems.) 

Impey C and Bothun G 1997 Low surface brightness 
galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 267-307 (A 
technical review of low surface brightness galaxies 
that offers some insight into dSph in distant 
environments.) 

Mateo M 1998 Dwarf galaxies of the Local Group Ann. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 435-506 (A recent technical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


review of the Local Group including the dSph 


galaxies.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mario Mateo 


Dwingeloo Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dwingeloo Observatory 


The Dwingeloo 25 m Telescope in Dwingeloo, The 
Netherlands, was inaugurated in 1956 and was for a short 
period of time the largest telescope in the world. For many 
years the Dwingeloo Telescope was the bread-and-butter 
instrument of the Dutch radioastronomy community. Its 
main operating frequency band around 1400 MHz allowed 
studies of the distribution of neutral hydrogen in our 
Galaxy and other nearby galaxies. The all-sky survey 
of the 21 cm line radiation of neutral hydrogen and the 
discovery of an unknown galaxy behind the plane of the 
Galaxy show that the DWT was a viable instrument until 
the end of its active life. The Dwingeloo Telescope was 
closed for observations in 1998 after 42 years of service. 

The Dwingeloo Telescope was operated by the 
Netherlands Foundation for Research in Astronomy 
(NFRA), which is funded by the Netherlands Organization 
for Scientific Research (NWO). 

For further information see 
http://www.nfra.nl. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dyer Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dyer Observatory 


The Arthur J Dyer Observatory is the principal astronom- 
ical facility of Vanderbilt University. It is located about 
16 km south of Nashville near Brentwood, Tennessee at an 
elevation of 345 m above sea level. 

Built in 1953, the observatory houses a Seyfert 60 cm 
Cassegrain/reflector—corrector telescope and the DeWitt 
30 cm Cassegrain, which is equipped for photoelectric 
photometry and long-focus photography. The telescopes 
are sometimes opened to the public. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.dyer.vanderbilt.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dynamical Reference Frame 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dynamical Reference Frame 


The dynamical reference frame is a realization of a 
dynamical reference system which is based on the motions 
of the solar system (See SPACE AND TIME REFERENCES: CONCEPTS). 
It was the standard reference frame until it became possible 
to observe the positions of very distant radio sources with 
great accuracy. 

The principle of the definition of a dynamical system 
of coordinates is to set the condition that the motion of 
celestial bodies can be represented by a solution of a 
system of differential equations of motion written in a 
fixed triad. This is verified by the fact that there is no 
need of any additional acceleration to account for the 
motion. To do away with a linear acceleration, one sets 
the center of the coordinates on the barycenter of the solar 
system, assuming that one takes into account the Coriolis 
acceleration due to the motion around the center of the 
Galaxy. Stopping the rotation of the axes is the major 
problem in building a dynamical frame, because there are 
no materialized invariant directions and one is reduced 
to describe as precisely as possible the motions of fiducial 
points accessible to observations. 

Actually, there is a fixed reference plane defined by 
the solar system. It is the invariable, or Laplacian, plane. 
This is the plane normal to the axis of angular momentum 
and passing through the barycenter. This plane can be 
defined theoretically, but it is not observable. In addition, 
it is somewhat dependent upon the completeness of the 
bodies of the system included in its determination, and 
hence is unfit for practical use. 

So, in practice the choice for the definition of the 
dynamical reference frame is the mean equatorial plane, 
the ecliptic plane, which is the mean orbital plane of the 
Earth without planetary perturbations, and one of the 
intersections of these planes, the equinox, which is the 
fiducial point. 

The Earth, being our habitat and base for observa- 
tions, becomes a natural basis for most reference frames. 
The equatorial plane is the most obvious and necessary 
reference plane, since the motions of all observatories are 
with respect to that plane. It can be determined from ob- 
servational data either by determining the celestial pole or 
from diurnal motions of celestial sources. However, it is 
not fixed and moves due to gravitational forces by the Sun, 
Moon and planets on the bulge of the Earth and due to the 
dynamics of the many components of the interior, surface 
and exterior of the Earth. These motions are called preces- 
sion, nutation and polar motion (see EARTH’S ROTATION). 

Another natural plane of reference is the orbital plane 
of the Earth. This is subject to motions due to the 
perturbations of the planets and is changing continuously. 
The mean orbital plane of the Earth is called the Ecuirtic. 
As long as a general theory by Newcomb was used to 
determine the ephemeris of the Earth, the ecliptic was 
well defined by the mean elements. With a numerical 
integration for the ephemeris of the Earth, the time period 
required to define the mean orbit is uncertain. The plane 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is also dependent on the ephemerides used to determine 
it. 

The equinox is defined as the intersection of the 
eclipitic and the mean equator of the Earth. In determining 
this intersection from numerically integrated EPHEMERIDES, 
a distinction must be made. The equator can be taken as the 
instantaneous plane or as a uniformly moving plane. The 
historical determination was made based on the uniformly 
moving plane and that is the definition that has continued 
to be used. The difference between the two possible 
definitions of the equator is approximately a tenth of an 
arc second. For calendars, seasons, and holiday definitions 
the equinox is specified as the time when the Sun passes 
through either of the intersection points, ie. when the 
apparent longitude of the Sun is zero or 180°. 

Since both the equator and the ecliptic move due 
to solar, lunar and planetary gravitational forces on the 
shape of the Earth, and perturbations by the planets on the 
Earth’s motion, the equinox moves with time. Therefore, 
the dynamical reference frame had to be specified for 
a specific epoch and observations and predictions were 
transformed to and from standard epochs to the chosen 
times of observations. The dynamical reference frame 
served as the fundamental reference frame of astronomy 
until 1998, when it was replaced by the International 
Celestial Reference System (ICRS), based on extragalactic 
radio sources, and thus fixed in space (see EXTRAGALACTIC 
REFERENCE FRAMES). 

The new fiducial point does not have to revolve as the 
equinox did. The definition was arbitrary, but due to the 
inter-dependence of the definitions of time and coordinate 
systems, some optimum choices were possible. 

The realization of the dynamical reference frame has 
been based on fundamental catalogs determined from 
observations of bright stars. These catalogs contained 
positions and proper motions based on some value of 
precession for the motion of the equinox. The fundamental 
catalogs were of two series, the US and German series 
(Eichhorn 1974). The Fundamental Catalogues series 
(FK3, FK4, and FK5) were used until 1998. The FK3 
and FK4 were based on Newcomb’s value of precession 
and a dynamical theory of motion of the solar system. 
FK5, introduced in 1984, was based on a revised value 
of precession and Jet Propulsion Laboratory Development 
Ephemeris DE 200. The introduction of the FK5 was 
also the occasion for the introduction of a new theory of 
nutation, new astronomical constants, and new definitions 
of timescales. 

It was recognized that the FK5 defined a catalog 
equinox which was the origin of the right ascensions 
within the catalog. While this was attempted to 
be equivalent to the dynamical equinox defined by 
the solar system ephemerides, there was inevitably a 
difference between these two origins, called the catalog 
and dynamical equinoxes respectively, and this difference 
could be a function of time. The new ICRS defines 
a reference frame which is supposed to have its origin 
equivalent to the dynamical equinox of J2000.0, but again 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamical Reference Frame 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


there will inevitably be a difference between the equinox 
determined from the ephemerides and the ICRS origin. 
This difference will be dependent upon the ephemerides 
which will now be determined from observations reduced 
directly on the ICRS, 

The motion of the equatorial plane is due to the torque 
of the Sun, Moon and planets on the dynamical figure of 
the Earth, it has been divided into long and short period 
terms. The smooth long-period motion of the mean pole 
of the equator about the pole of the ecliptic with a period 
of about 26 000 yr is lunisolar precession. The short-period 
motion, determined from the NuTATION theory, is made 
up of many terms with periods less than 18.6 yr, with a 
maximum amplitude of about 9”.0 (see EARTH’S ROTATION: 
THEORY). 

The motion of the ecliptic is due to the gravitational 
action of the planets on the Earth’s orbit and makes a 
contribution to precession known as planetary PRECESSION. 
If the equator were fixed, this motion would cause a 
precession of the equinox of about 12” per century and 
a decrease in the obliquity of the ecliptic of about 47” 
per century. The combination of lunisolar and planetary 
precession is called general precession. The causes of 
precession and nutation are the same, only the periods are 
different. There is some consideration being given now to 
eliminating the distinction. 

At this time the officially adopted constant of general 
precession in longitude per Julian century at epoch J2000.0, 
p = 5029."0906, is known to be incorrect by about —0.”2957 
per century. The IAU 1980 Theory of Nutation is known 
to need improvement. The nutation theory for a rigid 
Earth has been improved and extended to smaller terms. 
However, the transformation from the rigid Earth model 
to the real non-rigid Earth model has not been determined 
to be consistent with observational data. Therefore, for 
accuracies of +1 mas the 1980 theory of nutation is 
satisfactory. For better accuracies, it is recommended that 
numerical values determined and distributed weekly by 
the International Earth Rotation Service (IERS) be used for 
both precession and nutation. 


Bibliography 

Eichhorn H 1974 Astronomy of Star Positions (New York: 
Frederick Unger) 

Seidelmann P K (ed) 1991 The Explanatory Supplement to 
the Astronomical Almanac (Mill Valley, CA: University 
Science Books) 


P Kenneth Seidelmann 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dynamics 


A galaxy is made up of stars in the same way thata crystal is 
made up of atoms, and the galaxy’s large-scale properties 
reflect the forces that act between its component stars in the 
same way that the structure of a crystal reflects the nature 
of interatomic forces. Galaxies and crystals have strongly 
contrasting large-scale properties because a galaxy is held 
together by a force that has very different properties from 
a typical interatomic force. 

For most purposes we may neglect the physical size of 
stars and consider them to be point particles that interact 
only through gravity. Gravity is a uniquely long-range 
force, so the net force on an individual star depends 
directly on the locations of every other star in the galaxy. 
By contrast, the net force on an atom in a crystal depends 
only on the location of up to a few dozen near neighbors. 

Given that there are in excess of 10"! stars ina galaxy 
such as our own Milky Way, progress in STELLAR DYNAMICS 
would be slow if we had to know the locations of every 
star before we could calculate the motion of a single star. 
Fortunately, the problem can be simplified by arguing 
that the net force on a star does not depend sensitively 
on the precise locations of the billions of stars that are 
rather distant from it, so an excellent estimate of the 
contribution these stars make to the net force can be 
obtained by mentally smearing the mass of these stars 
into a smooth continuum of density. Mathematically, if 
in some region there are v stars per unit volume, then 
we calculate the gravitational attraction from a smooth 
distribution of matter of density p = (m)v units of mass per 
unit volume, where (m) is the average mass of a star. The 
required gravitational attraction is easy to calculate if we 
first determine the gravitational potential that is generated 
by the density distribution p. 

Replacing individual stars by a smoothed-out 
distribution of mass yields an indifferent estimate of the 
part of the force on a star that arises from the star’s near 
neighbors. In particular, it completely neglects the fact 
that the star sometimes experiences short intense periods 
of acceleration when a neighboring star passes unusually 
close. This neglect of ‘collisions’ can be made good 
at a subsequent stage of the analysis, when collisional 
effects are added in to the ‘collisionless dynamics’ that 
are determined by approximating the system’s mass 
distribution by a smooth one. 

The longer a stellar system evolves, the more 
important collisional phenomena become. As a general 
rule, the time required for collisional effects to become 
important in a system of N stars is ~N/81n N times the 
mean time it takes a star to cross the system. This time is 
substantially larger than the age of the universe in the case 
of a typical galaxy but significantly shorter than its age in 
the case of a typical STAR CLUSTER. 

In this article we review the basic principles that 
govern the dynamics of galaxies and star clusters. 
More information on most topics will be found in the 
monograph [2], which will not be explicitly cited again. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A typical orbit in a spherical potential. 


Collisionless dynamics 

A stellar system is usefully thought of as a collection 
of orbits in the smoothed-out potential of the system, 
each of which is populated by a certain number of stars. 
Consequently, a primary task of stellar dynamics is to 
understand what orbits can arise in a given gravitational 
potential. 

The easiest case to consider is a spherical potential. 
Then every star moves in the plane perpendicular to the 
star’s ANGULAR-MOMENTUM Vector. Within this plane the star 
describes a rosette (figure 1). The orbit is best quantified 
by its angular momentum, L, and its ‘radial action’ J,, 
which quantifies the vigor of the star’s radial excursions: a 
circular orbit has zero radial action, J, = 0. The direction of 
the angular-momentum vector L defines the orbital plane, 
while the magnitude of the vector, L, controls the size and 
eccentricity of the orbit —if J,/L is small, the orbit is nearly 
circular, and the orbit is physically small if L is small and 
large if L is large. 

Few galaxies have spherical potentials, but many 
have potentials that are nearly axisymmetric. How do 
the orbits in a spherical potential change if we squash the 
potential along some axis, so that it remains axisymmetric 
about that axis? In a squashed potential, orbits are not 
confined to planes, but we can obtain a reasonably accurate 
picture of them by considering them to be confined to 
precessing planes. That is, the orbit is approximately 
confined to a plane that is inclined at some angle to the 
potential’s symmetry axis, and slowly rotates about this 
axis. On the plane the orbit remains a rosette. The shape 
of this rosette is controlled by J, and a number called /3 
in the same way that the shape of a rosette in a spherical 
potential was controlled by J, and L. The inclination of the 
precessing orbital plane to the potential’s symmetry axis 
is determined by the ratio /3/L, of J; to the star’s angular- 
momentum about the potential’s symmetry axis. 

The potentials of many galaxies deviate significantly 
from axisymmetry, so let us ask what happens if we squash 
an axisymmetric potential along an axis perpendicular to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


9; 


BES 
SKS SS 
INS SS 


tr 


Y* 
AY 


LAG 
is Li 
YA, Hy | 
if 
Uf 


Figure 2. Three orbits in a triaxial potential. The contours of 
constant gravitational potential are elongated horizontally with 
axis ratio 0.9. 


its symmetry axis. Figure 2 shows that the consequences 
of deforming a potential from axisymmetric to triaxial 
symmetry can be dramatic. While some orbits deform 
only slightly, others strongly amplify the deviation of the 
potential from axisymmetry. 

When the potential of a galaxy is triaxial, it will 
usually tumble around one of its principal axes. The 
orbits shown in figure 2 are in a potential whose axes are 
fixed rather than tumbling. Figure 3 shows one important 
consequence of letting the potential tumble. The rate at 
which the potential tumbles defines a characteristic radius, 
the corotation radius, rcr, at which a star that moves 
around with the potential moves on a circular orbit. At 
radii much smaller than rcr, the rotation of the potential’s 
figure is unimportant. At radii larger than about rcr/10 
the orbits are profoundly modified by the figure rotation, 
and at radii close to rcr a large fraction of the orbits are 
chaotic. Chaotic orbits such as that shown in figure 3 
look rather ragged and have a propensity to change their 
character suddenly and irreversibly. It is likely that the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Wel 
Sd 


Figure 3. A chaotic orbit in a rotating barred potential. The 
dashed curve shows the potential’s corotation radius. 


steady accumulation of such changes drives the evolution 
of some galaxies, for example LENTICULAR GALAXIES. 


Entropy and equilibrium 

In stellar dynamics we seek statistical information in the 
sense that we would like to know the probability of the 
occurrence of any given configuration—in which given 
numbers of stars are on each orbit. In ordinary statistical 
physics the probability P that a given quantum state 
occurs can usually be obtained from the Gibbs distribution, 
P x e®, where B = 1/kT is the inverse temperature and 
E is the energy of the state. Can this distribution be carried 
over into stellar dynamics? 

The answer to this question is ‘no’. In fact, the concept 
of thermodynamic equilibrium ultimately fails for any 
self-gravitating system, including every stellar system. 
The reason for this failure is very interesting and can 
be understood by considering a self-gravitating system 
of mass M and characteristic radius R. The energy of 
the system is then of order U = —GM?*/2R, and, by the 
‘virial theorem’, the mean-square random velocity of the 
system’s constituent particles (atoms or stars), (v”), is of 
order (v?) = GM/R. As in ordinary kinetic theory, we 
identify the system’s temperature as 


(m)(v?) _ GM(m) 2U 
3k  ——s BK R 3Nk 


T= 


where k is Boltzmann’s constant and N is the number of 
particles (atoms or stars) in the system. Now imagine 
putting the system into thermal contact with a slightly 
cooler reservoir of heat. Heat will flow out of the system 
into the reservoir. By conservation of energy, the system’s 
internal energy U will become more negative and, by the 
equation above, T will increase. This behavior is quite the 
reverse of what we observe in every-day life: when heat 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


flows out of a coffee cup, it cools down rather than heats 
up. 

We can show that this anomalous behavior of self- 
gravitating systems drives them away from thermal 
equilibrium by considering such a system to be made up of 
two parts: the core and the envelope. If the system is very 
centrally concentrated, the core is orders of magnitude 
denser than the envelope and the core’s equilibrium is 
very little affected by the presence of the envelope, so 
the relation between internal energy and temperature 
that we derived above can be applied to the core alone. 
The envelope is confined by a mixture of the ‘external’ 
gravitational field of the core and its own self-gravity, so 
its temperature and internal energy will be connected by a 
relation that lies somewhere between that derived above 
for a perfectly self-gravitating system and that appropriate 
for a classical gas, in which U is positive and T = £U /Nk. 
In general we may write T = aU/Nk, where —} < a < 3 
depending on the degree to which the envelope is self- 
gravitating. 

If initially the core and the envelope are in thermal 
equilibrium, they must have a common temperature T. 
Consider a thermal fluctuation that transfers a small 
quantity of heat, 5U, from core to envelope. This transfer 
causes the temperature of the core to rise by dT eore = 
25U/3Nk (because the energy of the core changes by —6U), 
while the temperature of the envelope will rise by 6Teny = 
a 6U/Nk. Since the envelope must be to some extent self- 
gravitating, a < 5 and 8Tcore > 5Tenv- Consequently, after 
the fluctuation, the core is hotter than the envelope, and the 
temperature gradient between core and envelope starts to 
drive a steady flow of heat from core to envelope. This 
flow increases the temperature difference between core 
and envelope, and a ‘gravithermal catastrophe’ ensues in 
which Tore rises inexorably. 

The sequence of events that we have just described 
prevents any classical self-gravitating system, whether it 
be a star or a galaxy, from achieving thermal equilibrium. 
None the less, the concept of thermal equilibrium is 
invaluable in understanding the structure of a star, because 
in a star there is usually a well-defined temperature at 
any given radius since individual atoms or photons do 
not stray far between collisions. In a stellar system, by 
contrast, stars move at constant energy through wide 
ranges in radius, and the distribution of stellar velocities 
at a given radius is not characteristic of any particular 
temperature. 

Although the analogy between the structure of a 
star and a stellar system is imperfect, the theory of 
STELLAR EVOLUTION does provide valuable insights into the 
dynamics of stellar systems. Stars start out in life relatively 
homogeneous. Gradually the gravithermal catastrophe 
causes the core to contract and heat up, and the envelope 
to expand and cool, with the observational consequence 
that the star becomes a RED GIANT. All stellar systems are 
at some point on this trek towards every greater central 
condensation. It is a journey without end because one can 
show that, no matter what its current configuration, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


entropy of a stellar system can be increased by a transfer of 
energy from the dense interior to the more rarefied exterior. 


Dynamics of star clusters 

What varies from system to system is the rate at which 
such transfers are proceeding and the physical processes 
responsible for them. The systems that evolve in closest 
analogy with a star are star clusters. In these systems, 
which contain from a few hundred to perhaps a hundred 
thousand stars, collisional processes are important in two 
contexts. First, they effect a transfer of heat from the 
contracting core to the expanding envelope. Second, they 
enable energy to be released in the core in much the same 
way that in a stellar core nuclear reactions release energy. 
The mechanism of this energy release is as follows. When 
a single star approaches a BINARY STAR closely, it exchanges 
energy with the binary and will often form a triple star 
in which all three stars are bound. Subsequently, two of 
the three stars will move towards one another, releasing 
energy which is used to eject the third star at speed. Hence, 
the net result of the formation of the triple star is the 
replacement of a relatively slow-moving free star by a 
much faster one. Over time, this faster star will tend to 
lose energy to stars that it encounters as it moves through 
the cluster. Binary stars, being more massive than most 
single stars, tend to sink to the core. Moreover, the rate at 
which any given binary star will suffer close encounters 
with single stars is highest in the dense environment of 
the core. So most of the energy that is liberated by binary— 
star encounters heats the core rather than the envelope. It 
follows that a star cluster resembles a star in that its core is 
heated and its envelope transmits a flux of thermal energy 
outwards. 

A star cluster’s core responds to heating by 
expanding, and thus reducing the rate at which binary— 
star encounters heat it. Consequently, oscillations in the 
density of the core can arise, in which expansion and 
decreased heating is followed by contraction and increased 
heating, and then the cycle repeats [6]. 


Dynamics of elliptical galaxies 

ELLIPTICALGALAXIES differ from GLOBULAR CLUSTERS principally 
in scale: whereas a globular cluster contains of order 
10° stars, a massive elliptical galaxy contains in excess 
of 10! stars. In addition to being much more massive 
than globular clusters, elliptical galaxies are physically 
larger too. In fact, a massive elliptical galaxy may have 
several thousand globular clusters bound to it, with ample 
space for them to move through the galaxy just like 
stars. The vast number of stars in an elliptical galaxy, 
and the huge volume within which they are distributed 
combine to render collisional effects entirely unimportant. 
So whereas collisional effects are constantly moving a 
globular cluster down a well-defined evolutionary path, 
an elliptical galaxy spends most of its time stuck in a 
particular configuration. What physical processes got it 
into the configuration in which it is now frozen? 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The answer to this question is not entirely clear, but 
undoubtedly two important processes are mergers and 
cannibalism. 

In the absence of collisional effects, an individual 
star can change the energy of its orbit only when 
the overall galactic gravitational potential is changing. 
This fact implies that the evolution of a collisionless 
galaxy is concentrated into brief episodes of violent 
change: revolution rather than evolution. During one 
of these episodes of change, rapid change in the overall 
gravitational potential causes individual stars to gain and 
lose energy fairly rapidly. This vigorous exchange of 
energy between stars in turn drives the rapid evolution 
of the overall potential. 

An episode of rapid change in the gravitational 
potential can be initiated by a close encounter with another 
galaxy. If the intruding galaxy comes close enough 
and moves slowly enough, the two galaxies become a 
binary galaxy within which the gravitational potential is 
constantly changing as the galaxies swing around each 
other while moving alternately closer together and further 
apart. 

As the gravitational potential changes, some stars 
gain energy and others lose it, but overall more energy is 
picked up than lost by stars. The net gain of energy by stars 
is mirrored by a net loss of energy from the relative orbit 
of the two galaxies. Hence the galaxies spiral together and 
eventually merge (see GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). 

The time required for the galaxies to merge 
completely depends on their relative initial masses. If the 
two galaxies are initially of comparable size, merging is 
complete by the time the galaxies have orbited around each 
other two or three times. If one galaxy is much less massive 
than the other, more orbits are required for merging—in 
order of magnitude, the number of orbits required is equal 
to the mass of the bigger galaxy divided by the mass of the 
smaller. When this ratio is large, the larger galaxy seems 
to eat the smaller, and one speaks of ‘cannibalism’. 

The configuration of the galaxy that emerges from a 
merging event depends significantly on the mass ratio of 
the merger. If the mass ratio is close to unity, the merger 
product tends to be triaxial in shape and at most slowly 
rotating. Larger mass ratios are more likely to produce 
axisymmetry and significantly rotating merger products 


[7]. 


Nuclear black holes 

It is likely that all substantial galaxies contain massive 
central BLACK HOLES—we know for certain that our own 
Milky Way has a black hole of mass ~2 x 10°Mo, and that 
our nearest giant neighbor, the ANDROMEDAGALAXY M31, has 
an even more massive nuclear black hole. The presence of 
nuclear black holes in galaxies that merge has important 
consequences for the dynamics of the merger remnant. 
First, and most conspicuously, the irregular and time- 
varying gravitational potential of the merging galaxies 
feeds a significant fraction of any gas in the system onto the 
black holes, which are then liable to become ultraluminous 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


as they accrete some of this abundant gas supply. In 
the final stage of the merger, when the nuclei of the two 
galaxies have spiralled very close together, the black holes 
can have a significant impact on the distribution of stars in 
their vicinity. Indeed, the merger leads to the formation of 
a binary black hole that initially moves through a centrally 
concentrated sea of background stars. One by one the stars 
gain energy from the binary black hole and move out to 
larger radii. Over time the density of the stellar sea ceases 
to be centrally concentrated. In consequence of losing 
energy to background stars, the orbit of the binary black 
hole shrinks and shortens in period until it begins to be 
relativistic in the sense that its period is not extremely long 
compared with the time light requires to cross it. When 
this stage is reached, the radiation of GRAVITATIONAL WAVES 
by the orbit becomes the dominant mechanism of energy 
loss. As the orbit shortens further in period, the intensity 
of the radiated gravitational waves and the rate of orbital 
decay rapidly accelerate. The merger of the holes must 
then ensue, surely one of the most awesome events the 
universe is ever called upon to witness. 

Over a long time-scale, the final, merged, black hole 
can profoundly modify the enveloping galaxy [5,8]. The 
galactic merger will frequently have left the latter triaxial. 
Its triaxiality is sustained by ‘box’ orbits like that shown 
in the top panel of figure 2. A star on such an orbit is 
liable to pass very close to the galactic center, where the 
black hole resides. If on some passage it comes very close 
to the black hole, it will be deflected through a large angle 
and emerge ona very different orbit, like that shown in the 
bottom panel of figure 2. Clearly, when a sufficient number 
of stars have been transferred in this way from elongated 
orbits to fat orbits, the galaxy will become less elongated 
overall. Moreover, this is liable to be a run-away process: 
transfers of stars from elongated to fat orbits make the 
overall galactic potential less elongated, and this reduction 
in the elongation of the potential reduces the elongation of 
the orbits of other stars, that have passed nowhere near 
the black hole. 

The details of these processes—the ejection of stars 
from galactic centers by binary black holes and the 
probably catastrophic erasure of triaxiality following 
scattering of high-energy stars by a merged black hole— 
have not been fully worked out [9], but it is likely 
they account for the observed fact that lower-luminosity 
elliptical galaxies have cuspy and probably axisymmetric 
centers, while more luminous systems have more nearly 
homogeneous and probably triaxial centers [1]. 


Dynamics of disk galaxies 

Many, perhaps essentially all, stars form in centrifugally 
supported disks of gas. Consequently, the dynamics of 
disks of gas and stars is of vital importance for galactic 
dynamics (see also DISK GALAXIES). 

Imagine a disk of stars in which every star is on a 
circular orbit. This is an equilibrium configuration, but it 
turns out to be a violently unstable one that will quickly 
break up into rings of enhanced density separated by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. In a suitably rotating frame of reference the rosette 
orbit of figure 1 closes. The filled point marks the centre of the 
potential. 


Figure 5. When elliptical orbits are arranged so that the 
orientation of each major axis changes smoothly with radius, 
spirals of enhanced density are generated. 


density depressions. To avoid rapid fragmentation, the 
stars of a disk must have random velocities in addition 
to rotating around the galactic center, and the higher the 
surface density of the disk, the larger the random velocities 
of stars need to be if fragmentation is to be avoided. 

Since the stars of a stable disk have random velocities, 
they have to be on non-circular orbits, so they must be 
on rosette-like orbits such as the one shown in figure 1. 
If we view such an orbit from a frame of reference that 
rotates at the right frequency, ,, the orbit looks closed 
as in figure 4. If we populate such an orbit with many 
stars uniformly distributed in phase around the orbit, we 
have an elliptical hoop of stars, whose long axis rotates 
steadily at the angular velocity w»—we say that the hoop 
‘precesses’ with frequency w,. Notice that the precession 
frequency wp, is entirely distinct from the frequency Q at 
which individual stars circulate around the hoop— is 
generally much greater than w,. Figure 5 shows what 
happens if we superimpose many hoops of stars, each with 
a slightly different radius and initial orientation of its long 
axis. Spiral arms of enhanced density appear. 

Figure 5 describes the essence of how the arms of 
SPIRAL GALAXIES are constructed. What makes the dynamics 
of these systems extremely complex is the fact that, 
in an axisymmetric potential, the precession frequency 
@p, varies with the radius of the hoop. In fact, the 
precession frequency of the innermost orbits in the figure 
will generally be higher than that of the outermost orbits 
shown, with the consequence that the spiral pattern will 
gradually wind up into an ever tighter spiral. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In reality, the spiral arms will contribute a signifi- 
cant non-axisymmetric component to the gravitational po- 
tential, and we need to ask how this component affects 
the precession frequencies of individual hoops. The non- 
axisymmetric component of the potential applies torques 
to each ring, and these torques can either increase or de- 
crease the hoop’s precession frequency. The idea behind 
the normal mode theory of spiral structure is to find a con- 
figuration of the hoops—essentially a rule, ¢o(a), for the 
initial orientation of a hoop’s major axis as a function of 
semimajor axis length, a—such that the torques speed up 
the slowest hoops and slow down the fastest ones, so that 
all hoops rotate at the same rate, and the spiral pattern that 
they form rotates like a rigid body. In these circumstances, 
@p is called the ‘pattern speed’ of the spiral arms. 

Determining the function ¢o(a) is a mathematically 
challenging problem and the theory of spiral structure has 
not often been approached by this direct route. The usual 
approach is to start from the insight that a self-gravitating 
disk of stars is a medium that is capable of supporting 
waves, in the same way that the surface of a pond is. If 
we disturb the stars at some radius, ro, we will change 
the way they contribute to the overall surface density near 
ro, and thus we will change the gravitational potential in 
which other, previously undisturbed stars move. Hence, 
the motion of these other stars will be disturbed, and they 
will in turn disturb yet other stars. In fact, our disturbance 
will spread from radius rp like a ripple over a pond. 

When waves move in a confined region, such as a 
teacup or a piano wire, resonant frequencies arise. Waves 
with these frequencies can travel from a source, and, after 
possibly multiple reflections from the boundaries, return 
to the point of origin with the same phase regardless 
of the number of times that they have been reflected. 
Because the waves always return with the same phase, 
they interfere constructively and achieve a significant net 
amplitude. The resonant frequencies of a simple system 
such as a piano wire can be exactly determined by finding 
the frequencies at which waves that are reflected numbers 
of times interfere constructively. The resonant frequencies 
of a teacup cannot be found exactly in this way, but good 
approximations to them can be found thus. 

The ‘density-wave’ theory of spiral structure inter- 
prets spiral structure as generated by resonant spiral 
waves and yields approximate values for the possible pat- 
tern speeds and shapes of spiral arms. A significant com- 
plication of the theory arises because a typical galactic disk 
does not have well-defined boundaries like those of a tea- 
cup or a piano wire. Boundaries of a sort emerge once 
one chooses a pattern speed w, for the desired spiral pat- 
tern. These boundaries are defined by radii at which a 
star moving on a nearly circular orbit in the undisturbed 
axisymmetric potential of the galaxy can resonate with a 
disturbance of frequency @,. The inner boundary is the ra- 
dius of the ‘inner Lindblad resonance’ (ILR). At this radius 
the star rotates faster than w,, so it regularly overtakes the 
spiral wave pattern, and the frequency at which it expe- 
riences the wave coincides with the frequency, ,, of its 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


natural oscillations in radius. The outer boundary is the 
edge of an annulus in which spiral disturbances cannot 
propagate. This annulus is centered on the ‘corotation res- 
onance’, which is the radius at which a star could move 
on a circular orbit at frequency wp). Spiral structure arises 
when leading spiral waves propagate out towards corota- 
tion and are reflected and amplified into trailing waves at 
the edge of the corotation annulus. The amplified trailing 
waves then propagate in towards the ILR, where they are 
refracted into leading waves that move back out to coro- 
tation, completing the cycle. 

A piano wire is not fundamentally changed by the 
passage along it of waves. A stellar disk, by contrast, 
is significantly modified by spiral waves. Such waves 
increase the random velocities of stars that are in resonance 
with them. This increase in random velocities is a 
reflection of the tendency of trailing spiral arms to 
transport angular momentum out from the ILR and thus 
to enable stars at the ILR to move inwards. In fact, spiral 
arms achieve for stellar disks something very similar to 
what mergers achieve for elliptical galaxies: an increase in 
the central concentration and entropy of the system. Since 
the ability of a disk to sustain spiral arms decreases as the 
random velocities of stars increase, spiral structure will 
eventually die away ina purely stellar disk. Spiral galaxies 
such as our own have sustained strong spiral structure for 
a Hubble time because they have star-formation rates that 
are fairly constant in time. Young stars have small random 
velocities and so enhance the disk’s ability to support 
spiral arms. 

If one releases from an axisymmetric equilibrium a 
disk in which stars have very small random velocities, 
the disk very quickly becomes strongly non-axisymmetric. 
The non-axisymmetry is not primarily due to spiral 
structure, however, but to a tumbling bar. The dynamics 
of a tumbling bar is analogous to that of the spiral arms 
shown in figure 5: large numbers of orbits are elongated 
with major axes that rotate at a common frequency, wp. A 
bar differs from a spiral disturbance in that (i) individual 
orbits tend to be much more strongly elongated in a bar, 
and (ii) in a bar the major axes are all aligned, irrespective 
of the radius of the orbit. A large proportion of spiral 
galaxies, including the Milky Way, have bars at their 
centers. In a strong bar, a significant fraction of all stars 
have a chance to pass arbitrarily close to the galactic 
nucleus, where a massive black hole is expected to lurk. 
In close analogy to what happens in a triaxial elliptical 
galaxy, deflection of stars by the gravitational potential of 
the black hole can lead to the dissolution of the bar [10]. 


Dynamics of the Milky Way 

We live far out in the disk of a BARRED SPIRAL GALAXY, 
and from this vantage point can study many of the 
physical processes described above [1]. Figure 6 is 
a plot of the random velocities of groups of solar- 
neighborhood stars versus the age t of the stellar group: 
the open circles show the group’s rms velocity o, in 
the direction to the Galactic center, and the full points 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


T T ] | T T ] 
60 i 8 =OpR A 
bi ae J 
40 - a ai 
I 7 J 
20 | a er ~T 

(6) | i i i | L L i i | L L | | | 
0 5 10 15 

T/Gyr 


Figure 6. Velocity dispersion versus age for stars in the solar 
neighborhood. Data from [11]. 


show the rms velocity o, perpendicular to the Galactic 
plane. The unambiguous increase in rms velocity with 
age demonstrates that, although collisional processes are 
unimportant for the Milky Way, the solar neighborhood 
is evolving dynamically. We believe that spiral waves 
drive the increase in o,. These waves cannot be directly 
responsible for the increase in o,, however. Clouds 
of molecular gas with masses in the region of 10°M5 
are thought to be responsible for this increase: the 
gravitational fields of these objects deflect stars that have 
picked up significant random motion within the plane 
into the direction perpendicular to the plane, so that they 
henceforth make significant excursions above and below 
the plane. 

Figure 6 shows that the random velocities of stars are 
highly anisotropic in the sense that the random velocity 
perpendicular to the plane is not much larger than a half 
of thatin the radial direction. The velocity dispersion in the 
tangential direction, oy, lies between these two extremes, 
and there is an interesting connection between the ratio 
04/0, and the way the speed of a circular orbit varies with 
galactocentric radius. 

Figure 7 shows the difference between the Sun’s 
velocity in the direction of Galactic rotation and the mean 
velocity in this direction of various stellar groups as a 
function of the random velocity, S?, of each stellar group. 
We see that the Sun is moving faster around the Galactic 
centre than any stellar group, and the amount by which a 
stellar group lags the rotation of the Sun tends to increase 
with the group’s random velocity. The physical origin of 
this observation is that the hotter a stellar disk is, the more 
slowly it needs to spin to be in centrifugal equilibrium 
in a given gravitational potential; a hot stellar disk has 
significant pressure support. Each stellar group forms an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


40 
30- 4 
i [ + ee 
E i see tee | 
E20; pee | 
a Ie a Ake ep q 
10+ ga aa a + 
(jet ee ion ete jin ye eae 4 pa ie Se ol 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 
S? [km s"!]? 


Figure 7. The velocity of the Sun in the direction of Galactic 
rotation relative to the mean velocity of different stellar groups. 
S* is the mean-square random velocity of each group. Data from 


[3]. 


independent disk, which spins at its own rate. The Sun 
happens to belong to one of the coolest, fastest-spinning 
disks, and within that disk happens just now to be one of 
the fastest-circulating stars (see also SUN AS ASTAR). 

When we look at stars that lie 1 or 2 kpc from the 
Sun, we see that the mean velocity of the stars at a given 
place varies from point to point around the Galaxy. This 
effect mainly reflects the fact that the Galactic disk is a 
swirling accretion disk, a sort of vortex, in which stars 
stream around the Galactic center at a speed that varies 
with radius. In fact, historically observations of this effect 
were a primary source of data from which the Galactic 
potential’s run of circular speed with radius was inferred. 
Unfortunately, the data are not easy to interpret, in part 
because, as we have just seen, the speed with which a 
population of stars circulates depends on the population’s 
velocity dispersion, and in part because, as we shall now 
see, the pattern of stellar flow within the Galaxy is in reality 
more complex than simple circular motion. 

If we identify a group of stars, we can measure its 
‘velocity-dispersion tensor’, which is the 3 x 3 matrix 
whose elements G;, are the averages (v;v;) of products of 
velocity components. The diagonal elements of this matrix 
are just the squares of the velocity dispersions that we 
have just been discussing: o7 = (a,)?. If the Galaxy were 
axisymmetric, the off-diagonal elements would vanish. In 
fact the component o;, is significantly non-zero for every 
group of solar-neighborhood stars. Responsibility for this 
observational result probably lies with two agents. For 
groups of stars that have small random velocities and 
therefore stay near the Sun, the non-zero values of o,, 
are probably caused by spiral structure. In the case of a 
group of stars with large (~50 km s~') velocities relative 
to the Sun, the non-zero value of 0,4, is probably caused 
by the bar at the Galactic center. The length of this bar is 
somewhat uncertain, but probably lies near 3 kpc, rather 
less than half the Sun’s distance from the Galactic center, 
Ro. Stars with larger velocities relative to the Sun travel on 
their orbits to sufficiently small Galactocentric radii that 
they are profoundly influenced by the non-axisymmetric 
potential of the bar. 

Figure 8 is a plot against radius r of the mass M(r) 
contained within a sphere of radius r around the Galactic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


| T TUTTI T TT TTT] T TTT] | 

[ ty 

107 b + J 

é aH | 
= it 4 sft * 
: 10° 4 
ea a oil oil Li iiul | 
0.01 0.1 1 10 


r/pe 


Figure 8. The mass M(r) contained in a sphere of radius r 
around the Galactic center. Data from [4]. 


center. This plot was made by studying the kinematics of 
gas clouds and stars that lie near the Galactic centre and 
then applying simple dynamical theory. For radii greater 
than about a parsec, M(r) decreases with r, but, at smaller 
r, M levels out at a value of order 2 x 10°Mo. The natural 
interpretation of this result is that a black hole of this mass 
sits at the Galactic center and that stars make a comparable 
contribution to M only at radii larger than about a parsec. 


Bibliography 
[1] Binney J and Merrifield M 1998 Galactic Astronomy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 
[2] Binney J and Tremaine S 1987 Galactic Dynamics 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 
[3] Dehnen W and Binney J J 1998 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 298 387 
[4] Genzel R, Eckart A, Ott T and Eisenhauer F 1997 Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 291 219 
[5] Gerhard O E and Binney J J 1985 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 216 467 
[6] Goodman J 1987 Astrophys. J. 313 576 
[7] Weil M and Hernquist L 1995 Astrophys. J. 431 L79 
[8] Norman C A, May A and van Albada T S 1985 
Astrophys. J 296 20 
[9] Rees MJ and Hut P 1992 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 259 
27 
[10] Sellwood J A and Moore E M 1999 Astrophys. J. 510 
125 
[11] Str6mgren B 1987 The Galaxy (NATO ASI) ed G 
Gilmore and R Carswell (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 229 


James Binney 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamics Explorer (Explorer 62 and 63) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dynamics Explorer (Explorer 62 and 
63) 


Two NASA satellites launched together in August 1981 to 
study Earth’s ionosphere, auroras and magnetosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Dynamo Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dynamo Theory 


Dynamo theory is that branch of MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS 
which is concerned with the self-excitation of magnetic 
fields in any large rotating mass of conducting fluid in 
motion (usually turbulent). Self-exciting dynamo action 
is believed to account for the very existence of magnetic 
fields in astrophysical systems, whether at the planetary, 
stellar, or galactic scale (see GEODYNAMO, DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND 
STELLAR). 

The process of self-excitation occurs when fluid 
motion across a magnetic field generates the current 
distribution which is itself the source of the ‘given’ 
magnetic field. This principle is most simply illustrated 
by the example of the ‘homopolar’ disk dynamo sketched 
in figure 1: a conducting disk rotates about its axis with 
angular velocity Q, and a current path between its rim 
and its axle is provided by the wire twisted as shown in 
a loop around the axle. Suppose that a current /(t) flows 
in the loop, the current circuit being closed through the 
axle of the disk and the disk itself. This current generates 
a magnetic flux ® across the disk, and, provided that the 
conductivity of the disk is not too high, this flux is given 
by ® = MI where M is the mutual inductance between 
the loop and the rim of the disk. Rotation of the disk 
induces an electromotive force E = Q@/2z which drives 
the current /; the equation for /(t) is then 


Peppa (1) 
dt ee 
where L and R are the self-inductance and resistance of the 
complete current circuit. The device is evidently unstable 
to the growth of J (and so of ®) from an infinitesimal level 
if 
Q > 2nR/M. (2) 


In this circumstance, the current grows exponentially, as 
does the retarding torque associated with the Lorentz force 
distribution in the disk. Ultimately, the disk angular 
velocity slows down to the critical level Qo = 27 R/M at 
which the driving torque G just balances this retarding 
torque, and the current can remain steady. In this 
equilibrium, the power supplied QoG is equal to the rate 
of Joule dissipation R/* (assuming that frictional torques 
are negligible). 

This simple system exhibits the dual property of 
any self-exciting dynamo: the current in the system 
generates the magnetic field (without the assistance of any 
‘external’ source), and motion of a conductor across the 
field generates the current that maintains it. Note the 
following properties of the system which re-emerge in 
the more general fluid context, and which appear to be 
more or less universal concomitants of dynamo action: (1) 
the system exhibits ‘differential rotation’ in that the disk 
rotates, while the wire is at rest (the gradient of angular 
velocity is here concentrated at the two sliding contacts); 
(2) in order for the system to act as a dynamo, the wire 
must be twisted in the same sense as the sense of angular 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


B B 
a 


Figure 1. The self-exciting homopolar disk dynamo. Note that 
the wire is twisted in the same sense as that of the rotation Q. 


velocity of the disk, ie. there is a definite ‘handedness’ 
in the system, a property which, in the fluid context, is 
generally encountered as a non-zero ‘helicity’ of the fluid 
flow (see MAGNETIC HELICITY). 

There is a further intriguing property of this simple 
system, however, which indicates the dangers of too 
simplistic an argument when dealing with a medium of 
very high conductivity. If the conductivity of the disk 
were infinite, then we know that the flux of magnetic field 
across its rim must remain constant by Alfvén’s theorem 
(magnetohydrodynamics) a result clearly incompatible 
with exponential growth of flux. What happens in this 
situation is that an additional current is induced round 
the rim of the disk which is just such as to maintain the 
constancy of the trapped flux. This perhaps indicates 
that, when we move to the much more difficult fluid 
context, great care will be needed in analysing the high- 
conductivity limit, which is of particular relevance in 
stellar and galactic contexts. 


The stretch-twist-fold dynamo 

Consider an initially circular magnetic flux tube of 
small cross-section embedded in a highly conducting 
incompressible fluid. We may easily imagine a doubling 
of the intensity of the magnetic field by a movement 
analogous to the doubling of an elastic band: first stretch 
the tube to double the radius, then twist and fold it in 
the manner indicated in figure 2. This process evidently 
doubles the net magnetic flux around the (now composite) 
tube; if the process is repeated over and over again, then 
a successive doubling, analogous to exponential growth, 
occurs. This is what is conventionally known as the 
stretch-twist-fold dynamo. It relies on the idea that, in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamo Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The stretch-twist—fold action applied to a magnetic 
flux tube; the reciprocal action on a linked material circuit is 
indicated by the dashed curve. 


a perfectly conducting fluid, ‘magnetic lines are frozen in 
the fluid’, so that, in a highly conducting fluid, a similar 
behavior is to be expected. Although the idea is physically 
plausible, it is difficult to establish the existence of this 
type of dynamo by rigorous mathematical argument. One 
difficulty is that the stretch-twist—fold action necessarily 
introduces a twist within the tube itself (as can be easily 
seen by applying the twist-fold action to a ribbon in the 
form of a circle). 

If we trace backwards in time the effect of the above 
distortion on a Lagrangian material circuit round the 
doubled flux tube (the dashed curve in figure 2), then 
it is easy to see that this curve must have started as a 
twisted curve embracing the circular tube twice. Hence 
the stretch-twist—fold action has the reverse effect on this 
Lagrangian circuit. An alternative magnetic flux tube, 
starting in the position of the dashed curve, would thus be 
diminished by the same distortion. Things are evidently 
not as simple as they might appear at first sight. 


Formal definition of dynamo action 
We start from the magnetic induction equation 


OF = VA (UAB) +1V7B (3) 
where B is the magnetic field, u the velocity field and 
the magnetic diffusivity of the fluid. B also satisfies the 
supplementary condition divB = 0. If the velocity field u 
is steady (i.e. u = u(ax)), then we may look for solutions of 
equation (3) in the form of ‘eigenmodes’, 


B(a, t) = Re B(w)e”. (4) 
The amplitude function B(a) then satisfies the equation 
pB=VA(urB+nv’B (5) 


which, when coupled with appropriate boundary condi- 
tions, defines an eigenvalue problem for the exponent p, 
the field B being then the corresponding eigenfunction. p 
may in principle be real or complex: p = p, +ip;. If p, > 0 
then the corresponding solution of equation (3) exhibits 
dynamo action: there is evidently a systematic increase 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in intensity of the magnetic field with growth rate p,. If 
pi = 0, the dynamo action is a simple exponential growth, 
while if p; is non-zero, then the field at any point oscillates 
with exponentially growing amplitude. 

Solution of the above eigenvalue problem evidently 
depends on the parameter n which appears in equation 
(5). Let us suppose that the velocity field is characterized 
by a length scale / and a velocity scale uo, so that the 
magnetic Reynolds number R,, = uol /n may be defined. In 
astrophysical contexts, we are usually concerned with the 
situation in which R,, is very large, and particular attention 
must therefore focus on the behavior of p and Bas Rn 
tends to infinity. This consideration has led to a formal 
distinction between ‘slow’ and ‘fast’ dynamos. Roughly 
speaking, the dynamo is fast if p, is proportional to uo// 
(i.e. independent of 7) in the limit R,, — oo. If, on the 
other hand, p,//up > 0 as R,, — oo, then the dynamo is 
slow. 

The stretch-twist-fold dynamo considered above is 
perhaps the best candidate for characterization as a fast 
dynamo; ina single period of the stretch-twist-fold cycle, 
it exhibits a doubling of flux, but at the cost of introducing a 
certain degree of ‘fine structure’ in the field. Actually, this 
appears to be a property of any fast dynamo. Equation 
(5) can be easily analyzed in the formal limit 7 = 0. It 
has been shown that a fast dynamo can exist only if the 
corresponding field B exhibits fine structure on scales of 
order R;"/?. In the limit n = 0, such fields become non- 
differentiable. 

Attempts have been made to circumvent this 
difficulty by widening the class of solutions of equation 
(3) to which the term ‘fast dynamo’ may be ascribed. The 
reader is referred to the book by Childress and Gilbert 
(1995) for an account of investigations, based largely on 
Lagrangian and associated mapping techniques, in this 
area. 

We may note that the homopolar disk dynamo is, for 
the reasons indicated in the introduction, definitely a slow 
dynamo, i.e. its growth rate tends to zero as the magnetic 
Reynolds number, based on disk angular velocity and 
conductivity, tends to infinity. 


Cowling’s theorem 

In planetary and stellar contexts, it was natural that early 
investigations should focus on axisymmetric systems. 
In 1934, cowLinc established that axisymmetric dynamo 
action is impossible, a result which, for many years, 
falsely led people to assume that all dynamo action 
was impossible (see Cowling 1957). It is important, 
nevertheless, to understand the basic nature of Cowling’s 
argument, if only to see how the associated difficulties may 
be circumvented. Consider an axisymmetric magnetic 
field generated by currents contained entirely within a 
sphere (figure 3). The ‘toroidal’ currents within the sphere 
(i.e. those in the ¢ direction in a system of cylindrical polar 
coordinates r, , z) act as the source of the ‘poloidal’ part 
of the magnetic field Bp (i.e. that part with components in 
the r and z direction). This poloidal field, being associated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamo Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Cowling’s theorem: induction cannot maintain current 
in the neighborhood of the circle Cy if the flow and field are 
axisymmetric. 


with a compact source, has at most a dipole structure at 
a great distance from the sphere. The Earth’s magnetic 
field of course provides an excellent example of this 
phenomenon. The lines of force of this dipole field must 
have at least one ‘O-type’ neutral point, and this neutral 
point must lie inside the sphere of conducting fluid. There 
is an associated circle Cy of neutral points around the 
axis of symmetry. The toroidal current distribution can be 
driven only by fluid motion across the poloidal magnetic 
field and this effect is absent on Cy where Bp = 0. 
Consequently any toroidal current on Cy must necessarily 
decay through normal Ohmic diffusion associated with 
finite conductivity (7 > 0). Thus, steady maintenance 
of an axisymmetric magnetic field in a finite volume of 
conducting fluid is impossible. 

This argument of course needs to be formalized, 
but this can be done, and indeed many extensions of 
Cowling’s theorem have been proved. Essentially, it is 
well established that, if a steady magnetic field is to be 
maintained in a finite region containing fluid of finite 
conductivity, then the field, and the motions that support 
it, must be non-axisymmetric. This theorem accounts for 
much of the mathematical difficulty of the subject and for 
the long period that elapsed following the proof of the 
theorem before explicit examples of dynamo action in a 
homogeneous fluid were discovered. 


The generation of toroidal field by differential 
rotation 

One mechanism, which is essentially axisymmetric in 
character, is nevertheless of great importance in the 
dynamo context. Let us suppose for the moment that 
a poloidal magnetic field is maintained by some (as yet 
unspecified) mechanism. Consider the action of a purely 
toroidal velocity field on this magnetic field. If the 
angular velocity is constant along every field line, then 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. Generation of toroidal field by differential rotation 
with a variation of angular velocity along each field line. 


these field lines are simply rotated around the axis of 
symmetry with the corresponding angular velocity (the 
law of ‘isorotation’). If, on the other hand, there is any 
gradient of angular velocity along a field line, then that 
field line will tend to be drawn out in the toroidal direction, 
an effect that will be limited only by diffusion effects 
(figure 4). If the magnetic Reynolds number is large, then 
the field line may be ‘cranked’ round the axis many times 
before this diffusion effect intervenes. Detailed analysis 
based on equation (3) indicates that the toroidal field that 
is generated increases until it is O(R,,) times the initial 
poloidal field. At this stage, in general, Ohmic diffusion 
establishes a steady state. 

This is evidently a powerful mechanism whereby 
toroidal fields may be generated from a pre-existing 
poloidal field. The great difficulty is to explain how it 
is that the poloidal field can be generated in the first place. 
For this purpose, it is absolutely necessary to consider non- 
axisymmetric effects. The greatest impetus to this subject 
has undoubtedly come from the assumption at the outset 
that the fluid motion is fully turbulent, an assumption 
that is of course utterly reasonable in stellar and galactic 
contexts. Even in the case of planetary interiors, although 
the fluid motions are extremely weak (of the order of 
fractions of a millimeter per second) it seems highly likely 
that these motions, while not necessarily fully turbulent, 
will nevertheless have a significant non-axisymmetric 
ingredient. 


Mean field electrodynamics 

The idea behind mean field electrodynamics is that we 
are generally concerned in dynamo theory with the 
development of a ‘large-scale’ magnetic field, i.e. with a 
field that is coherent over the global scale of the planet 
or star or galaxy under consideration. The turbulence, 
or other random motion, which plays a part in the 
dynamo process in general has a very much smaller 
characteristic length scale. There is therefore a significant 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamo Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


scale separation which can be exploited in the construction 
of a theory for the large-scale field. 

Let us first suppose that, in some region of fluid 
which contains many constituent eddies of the turbulence, 
the large-scale ingredient of the field may be treated as 
nearly uniform. The velocity u distorts the mean field 
Bo, generating a fluctuating component b. If we average 
equation (3) over the scale / of the turbulent fluctuations, 
then we obtain an equation for the mean field Bo, namely 


0B 

Fp = VANE +n Bo. (6) 
Here, a term appears resulting from the interaction 
between two fluctuating fields, namely 


E= (ud). (7) 


This is the ‘mean electromotive force’ associated with the 
fluid motion. We have assumed that the average of u itself 
and similarly the average of b are zero. Nevertheless, any 
correlation between u and b will result in a non-zero value 
for €. 

In order to proceed further, it is necessary to obtain 
an equation for the fluctuating field b. This is obtained by 
simply subtracting equation (6) from equation (3) to give 

db > 
ay = VA (uA Bo) + VA (udAb— (urb))+nV~°b. (8) 
This equation evidently establishes a linear relationship 
between b and Bo, and hence, via equation (7), between € 
and Bo. Since Bo is nearly uniform, this linear relationship 
may be expressed in the form 


Phy e ey as (9) 
Ox, 

where the coefficients o;;, j;,, and so on, do not depend on 
the field Bp but are determined (in principle) solely by the 
statistical properties of the turbulence u and the magnetic 
diffusivity n. 

The implications of equation (9) are most easily 
understood if itis assumed that the background turbulence 
is isotropic (i.e. there is no ‘preferred direction’), so that the 
tensor coefficients @;;, B;jx, etc. are also isotropic. In this 
case, we may write 

a= ad; j 


Bijk = Béijx (10) 

and the corresponding expression for € is then given by 
E=aB)-BVABot.... (11) 

The corresponding form of equation (6) then becomes 


B 
= =aV A Bo+(n+ B)V*Bo. (12) 


There is here a very important effect to notice, an effect 
first described in a seminal paper by Steenbeck, Krause 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and Radler in 1966 (see Krause and Radler 1980). Since € 
is a polar vector, whereas the magnetic field Bo is an axial 
vector, the coefficient w in equation (11) must be a pseudo- 
scalar, i.e. a quantity which changes sign under change 
from a right-handed to a left-handed frame of reference. 
By contrast, the coefficient 6 is a pure scalar, independent 
of frame of reference. It is evident from equation (12) that 6 
simply serves to augment the molecular diffusivity of the 
fluid, i.e. we can describe £ as a turbulent diffusivity. By 
contrast, the coefficient a is associated with a term of novel 
structure in the induction equation; moreover, for a field 
of very large length scale, it is this term that dominates the 
right-hand side. The effect, appropriately described as the 
‘a effect’, is crucial to an understanding of dynamo theory. 


Dynamo instability associated with the a effect 
To understand this effect in the simplest possible way, it is 
sufficient to consider a field structure By(x) satisfying the 
Beltrami condition 


VAB.= KB (13) 


where K is a constant (positive or negative). The ABC 
field 


CcosKz+ Asin Kx 
AcosKx+BsinKy 


BeosKy+Csin Kz 
» =( (14) 


provides an example of such a field, as may be easily 
verified, but there are many others (see FORCE-FREE MAGNETIC 
FIELDS). Since, for such a field, V7 By = —K*Bo, equation 
(11) simplifies to the form 


B 
* = aK By — (n+ B)K’Bo. (15) 


Hence Bo is proportional to e”’, where 
p =aK — (n+ B)K? (16) 


and dynamo instability occurs if p > 0, a condition that is 
always satisfied if aK > 0 and |K| is sufficiently small, 
i.e. provided that the scale L = 2z/|K| is sufficiently 
large. This condition is certainly consistent with the 
initial assumption that the scale of the mean field be large 
compared with the scale of the turbulence. Thus, in the 
presence of a non-zero a effect, the medium is always 
unstable to the growth of magnetic field perturbations on 
a sufficiently large length scale. 

This effect is one of the most remarkable discoveries 
of the last 50 years. It indicates how order, represented 
by the large-scale magnetic field, may emerge from chaos, 
represented by the small-scale turbulence in the medium. 


Evaluation of a 

It remains, however, to develop a convincing theory for the 
determination of the all-important parameter a in terms 
of the statistical properties of the background turbulence. 
We have already noted that w is a pseudo-scalar; it can 
therefore be non-zero only if the statistical properties of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamo Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


turbulence have a crucial property of ‘lack of reflectional 
symmetry’. The simplest measure of a lack of reflectional 
symmetry in a turbulent flow is its mean helicity 


H = (u- curl u) (17) 


the mean of the scalar product of the velocity field and 
the vorticity field curl u. This is analogous to magnetic 
helicity. The helicity is related to the topological structure 
of the vorticity field, which is conserved in the classical 
situation in which vortex lines are frozen in the fluid. It 
may be expected that, if this mean helicity is non-zero, then 
a will in general be non-zero also. 

It is indeed possible to calculate w explicitly in any 
circumstances in which the fluctuating ingredient of the 
magnetic field b is weak compared with the mean field. In 
such circumstances, it is found that 


: k2H(k, w) 
=-3n sf f aba el kao (18) 


where H(k, w) is the helicity spectrum of the turbulence, 
satisfying the defining relationship 


(w-curlu) = / / H(k, w) dk do. (19) 


Thus, a@ is linearly related to the helicity spectrum of 
the turbulence. In these integral expressions, k is a 
wavenumber magnitude and w a frequency. Note that, 
in the limit as 7 — 0, the expression (18) for a depends 
critically on the behavior of the helicity spectrum for 
small values of frequency w. Unfortunately, it is in this 
double limit (7 — 0, w — 0) that the theory yielding the 
expression (18) is at its least convincing. 


Physical mechanism of the dynamo process 
The dynamo process associated with the a effect may 
be represented schematically as in figure 5. Background 
turbulence with helicity provides an a effect, the dynamo 
parameter being related to the helicity through equation 
(18) (or some higher-order version of this equation). This 
a effect generates an electromotive force (EMF) € parallel 
to Bo (through the equation € = aBy +---) and this EMF 
drives amean current Jo parallel to By. The resulting mean 
field has non-zero magnetic helicity, and so the tubes of 
force of Bo are generally linked. The prototype linkage 
is shown in figure 5; the current driven round each tube 
provides (via Ampére’s theorem) the mean magnetic field 
in the other tube. 

Three vital conditions ensure the success of this 
process: 


the turbulence must have non-zero helicity; 
the fluid must have finite non-zero magnetic 
diffusivity; 

e the fluid domain must be large enough to provide 
space for the growth of the large-scale magnetic field. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Jo 


Figure 5. The dynamo cycle associated with the a effect. The 
current Jo is associated with the field Bo, and the current Jj with 
Bi 

0 


The a—w dynamo mechanism 

As we have seen above, the a effect in isolation can 
easily give rise to dynamo instability; we have shown 
this to be true in a medium of infinite extent; however, 
a similar mechanism certainly occurs in any sufficiently 
large spherical domain of conducting fluid in turbulent 
motion. 

If the fluid in such a domain is rotating with mean 
angular velocity Q, then turbulent convection within 
the domain in general leads to a state of ‘differential 
rotation’ in which the inner regions rotate more rapidly 
than the outer regions. As we have seen, differential 
rotation provides a powerful mechanism whereby toroidal 
field can be generated from poloidal field. The a effect 
provides the vital complementary mechanism whereby 
poloidal field can be regenerated from toroidal field. If the 
turbulence is isotropic, then the same a effect contributes 
to the regeneration of toroidal field from poloidal field, 
but the differential rotation effect is generally much more 
powerful. 


Differential 
ee aie rotation Se 
Br 


Figure 6. Field regeneration through the a—-w dynamo cycle. 


a-effect 


These considerations lead to consideration of dy- 
namos of ‘a-w type’ as indicated schematically in figure 6. 
Here, the dynamo cycle consists simply of two stages: gen- 
eration of toroidal from poloidal field by differential rota- 
tion and regeneration of poloidal from toroidal field by 
the a effect. Many numerical investigations of the result- 
ing mean field dynamo equations have demonstrated the 
efficiency of this type of self-exciting dynamo. 


Back-reaction of Lorentz forces 
The above outline description of the process of dynamo 
action is purely ‘kinematic’, in that it assumes that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamo Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


velocity field, or in the case of turbulent flow the statistics 
of the velocity field, is prescribed independently of the 
magnetic field. In circumstances in which dynamo 
action occurs, the amplitude of the magnetic field grows 
exponentially in time, and so therefore does the Lorentz 
force, which is quadratically related to the magnetic field. 
This Lorentz force reacts back upon the fluid motion so 
that the velocity field itself depends on the magnetic field 
that it generates. The dynamo process then enters a 
nonlinear regime, whose complexities can generally be 
unravelled only through numerical simulation of the full 
magnetohydrodynamic equations. 

It is also necessary to specify the nature of the forces 
that sustain the motion, and the associated dynamo, 
against dissipative effects which now include viscosity as 
well as Joule dissipation. This is equivalent to specifying 
the source of energy of the fluid motion; this source may be 
of thermal origin (as in the solar context); in the context of 
the terrestrial dynamo driven by fluid motion in the liquid 
core the source of energy is more likely to be associated 
with segregation of light material during the process of 
solidification of the inner core, a process that provides 
buoyancy forces of ‘compositional’ rather than thermal 
origin. Either way, the need to include consideration of 
the buoyancy field adds significantly to both the physical 
and the mathematical complexity of the problem. 

The study of fully non-linear dynamos, taking 
account of the diverse possible sources of energy, is an area 
of very vigorous current research, and great advances are 
to be expected over the next 10-20 yr. 


Bibliography 

Childress S and Gilbert A D 1995 Stretch, Twist, Fold: the 
Fast Dynamo (Berlin: Springer) 

Cowling T G 1957 Magnetohydrodynamics (New York: 
Interscience) 

Krause F and Radler K-H 1980 Mean Field Magnetohydro- 
dynamics and Dynamo Theory (Oxford: Pergamon) 

Moffatt H K 1978 Magnetic Field Generation in Electrically 
Conducting Fluids (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press) 

Parker E N 1979 Cosmical Magnetic Fields (Oxford: 
Clarendon) 

Zeldovich Ya B, Ruzmaikin A A and Sokoloff D D 1983 
Magnetic Fields in Astrophysics (London: Gordon 
and Breach) 


Keith Moffatt 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamos: Solar and Stellar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dynamos: Solar and Stellar 


The direct observation of magnetic fields on the surface 
of the Sun (see SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD), aS Well as on the 
surface of other stars (see MAGNETIC FIELDS IN STARS), directly 
raises the question of the origins of these magnetic fields. 
The simplest hypothesis is that these magnetic fields are 
simply the remnants of magnetic fields carried in by the 
accreting gas during the formation phase of such stars, 
but a number of observational facts make this explanation 
untenable for stars such as the Sun: the observed fields 
are globally relatively weak, but locally very strong, much 
stronger than would be expected of decaying remnant 
fields dating back to the formation of the Sun, and the 
global magnetic fields are observed to vary systematically 
in a roughly periodic fashion (in the Sun’s case, this 
periodicity is roughly 22 yr (see SOLAR ACTIVITY INDICES)). 
These observations instead argue for the presence of a 
process which is capable of re-generating the magnetic 
field of a star such as the Sun on a time scale of roughly 
11 yr; this is the process referred to in the following as a 
(stellar magnetic) dynamo (see DYNAMO THEORY). 

At the outset, it is important to distinguish between 
the large-scale (i.e. stellar-scale) and small-scale behavior 
of stellar magnetic fields, which can be drastically 
different. In the Sun’s case—the only case for which 
we have detailed, spatially resolved observations—it is 
the large-scale fields that show the cyclic, activity-related 
temporal variations; these large-scale fields are weak (1- 
10 G), in the sense that their energy density is substantially 
smaller than that associated with either the thermal energy 
content of the Sun’s surface layers or the kinetic energy 
density of these same layers. In contrast, the small-scale 
solar fields, ie. the fields on spatial scales comparable 
with the convective surface motions, can be strong (up 
to 3000 G), in the sense that their energy density can be 
of the order of, or even larger than, the kinetic energy 
density of the surface layers and is of the order of the 
plasma internal energy density of these layers. These 
locally strong fields show a much more complex temporal 
behavior, much of which is not directly tied to the cyclic 
behavior of the large-scale fields (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
INTRANETWORK AND TURBULENT MAGNETIC FIELDS). This temporal 
distinction between the behavior of large-scale and small- 
scale magnetic fields is a crucial argument supporting the 
current view that the origins of the large- and small-scale 
fields may be unrelated. 


Mean field solar dynamos 

As discussed elsewhere (see DYNAMO THEORY), the challenge 
for solar and stellar dynamo theory was originally 
to construct a physically plausible mechanism for re- 
generating both the poloidal and the toroidal components 
of the Sun’s relatively weak large-scale magnetic field. (It 
is important to note that the importance of small-scale solar 
magnetic fields was not appreciated at the time, primarily 
because direct measurements of these fields were not 
possible.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Since the 1940s, it has been recognized that differential 
rotation in the interior or surface layers of the Sun 
could generate toroidal magnetic flux from a pre-existing 
poloidal magnetic component; the missing link was 
a similar physical process re-generating the poloidal 
component from the toroidal one. This link was found in 
the mid-1950s by E N Parker. He showed that motions of 
conducting PLASMA associated with MAGNETIC BUOYANCY and 
convection, which carry (toroidal) magnetic flux radially 
outward, will be subjected to Coriolis forces if the star 
rotates; this rotation-dependent force twists the rising and 
falling plasma bubbles precisely the right way so that the 
trapped toroidal fields produce a poloidal component. 
With the addition of a phenomenological model for an 
enhanced eddy diffusivity, Parker was able to construct 
a solar magnetic dynamo model which reproduced all of 
the classical features of large-scale solar magnetic activity: 
the 22 yr periodic variation of the toroidal and poloidal 
fields, the butterfly diagram of magnetic field emergence, 
showing flux emergence closer and closer to the solar 
equator as one half of a magnetic cycle proceeds, and the 
Hale polarity law of local flux emergence, which states that 
the leading polarity of emerging bipolar fields always lies 
closer to the solar equator. 

In Parker’s original model, the differential rotation 
needed to re-generate the large-scale toroidal field 
was assumed to be the result of radial differential 
rotation, i.e. Parker assumed that the Sun rotates more 
quickly in its interior than in its surface layers; at 
that time, this differential rotation was unobserved, 
and therefore unconstrained. Later workers such as H 
Babcock produced variants of Parker’s model which took 
advantage of the observed (surface) DIFFERENTIAL ROTATION 
in latitude and were able to produce dynamo models 
which were similar in successfully describing the large- 
scale features of the Sun’s magnetic field. Additional 
work was carried out in studying the evolution of the 
emerged magnetic fields. Thus, R Leighton showed that 
the asymmetry of magnetic flux emergence associated 
with Hale’s polarity law, when combined with a simple 
random walk model of flux diffusion on the solar surface 
(consistent with Parker’s eddy diffusion model), naturally 
leads to a migration of surface magnetic fields to the solar 
poles in which the following polarity dominates at the 
poles. In this picture, the observed small-scale magnetic 
fields were viewed as detritus of the decaying large-scale 
fields and as the seeds for the next generation of large-scale 
poloidal fields. 

By the mid-1970s, magnetic dynamo models of 
the type first described by E N Parker were well 
understood from both the phenomenological and the 
formal, mathematical perspectives: the Potsdam group 
of dynamo theorists, as well as the work of K Moffatt 
and collaborators in the UK, and Parker and collaborators 
in the US, had firmly established the foundations of 
mean field theory in MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS. However, 
two advances in the 1970s and early 1980s led to a 
questioning of mean field theory. First, high spatial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamos: Solar and Stellar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


resolution observations of surface solar magnetic fields 
by J Stenflo, J Harvey and others began to raise serious 
questions about the applicability of mean field theory to 
the Sun—observations indicated that while the large-scale 
fields were indeed weak, this was not true of the small- 
scale fields. In mean field theory, it is assumed that the 
small-scale fields are weak, in the sense that they are 
not strong enough to react back on the fluid motions; in 
contrast, direct measurements showed that these small- 
scale fields were, in contradiction, strong enough to affect 
fluid motions. These back reactions were capable, in 
principle, of destroying the underpinnings of mean field 
theory; for example, it is by no means clear that the large 
eddy diffusion required by mean field theory can exist if 
the small-scale fields significantly affect small-scale fluid 
motions. In addition, computing advances in the early 
1980s had reached the stage that it became possible to solve 
the fully nonlinear magnetohydrodynamic equations for 
a convective spherical shell, albeit for very limited 
spatial resolution, and such simulations by P Gilman 
and collaborators showed that the large-scale behavior of 
the numerical solutions did not correspond very closely 
to either mean field theory or observations of the Sun’s 
magnetic cycle. 


Recent work 


Much of the recent work on solar and stellar dynamos has 
grown out of the concerns raised about mean field dynamo 
models, as well as new observational and computational 
tools. |For example, the realization that small-scale 
magnetic fields may play an important role in the solar 
dynamo led to the exploration of new classes of dynamo 
models for the large-scale magnetic fields by M Schtissler 
and collaborators. These models take as their starting 
point the notion that the magnetic field in the solar 
interior is in a highly filamentary, flux tube, form (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). The exploration 
of the consequences of such a dynamo model, including 
studies of the dynamics of rising magnetic flux tubes in 
the convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE), 
is a very active area of research today. 

The advent of solar seismology (HELIOSEISMOLOGY) (see 
HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS) allows us to focus on another 
aspect of solar dynamo theory, namely the interior rotation 
rate of the Sun, and the precise location of the dynamo. 
Concerns about the precise location of the solar dynamo 
were raised as early as the late 1970s, when it was 
suggested by N O Weiss, E Spiegel, R Rosner and others 
that the Sun’s toroidal fields might be plausibly produced 
in the subadiabatic undershoot layer lying beneath the 
solar convection zone, where these fields could be stably 
stored. This idea has received much recent attention 
because helioseismological observations have indicated 
that there is a layer of substantial differential rotation (the 
‘tachycline’) lying at the base of the solar convection zone 
(See SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION), i.e. precisely in the region 
where the earlier models had placed the toroidal field 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


production region. This area of research is also currently 
very active. 

In the early 1970s, S Vainshtein and Y Zel’dovich 
demonstrated the existence of a new class of dynamos— 
the so-called ‘fast dynamos’—whose properties did not 
depend on the molecular diffusivity in the limit of very 
large magnetic Reynolds numbers. This type of dynamo 
has the property that rotation is not essential to its 
existence, and it is thought that the maximal spatial 
scale of the magnetic fields produced by such a dynamo 
is comparable with the maximal spatial scale of the 
driving turbulent motions (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: 
MAGNETOCONVECTION). At the time, the connection between 
such dynamos and specific astrophysical magnetic fields 
was still unclear. Recent advances in computing power 
now allow direct numerical simulations of the fully 
nonlinear magnetohydrodynamic equations that have far 
greater spatial dynamic range than what could be done in 
the 1980s; as a result, it is now feasible to carry out detailed 
numerical experiments of fast dynamos. Using flows 
which are variously driven by specified external random 
‘stirring’ or by imposed thermal fluxes (thus driving 
thermal convective flows), F Cattaneo, D Hughes and 
collaborators have been able to show that magnetic fields 
which are locally in equipartition are readily produced 
by such flows. The volume filling factor of the strong 
fields depends on the precise mixing characteristics of 
the flows themselves; and the morphology of the surface 
flows and surface magnetic flux in the convectively driven 
calculations uncannily resembles recent observations of 
solar magnetic fields and surface convective motions 
obtained from the MDI instrument on board the soHo 
spacecraft. These calculations—which show that the 
magnetic field in chaotic flows has a highly fractal spatial 
structure—also call into question the existence of magnetic 
‘flux tubes’ as discrete, relatively long-lived entities. This 
area of research is also extremely active today. 


Stellar dynamo problems 

Quite aside from the precise mechanism by which stellar 
magnetic fields are produced, we also do not have a good 
understanding of a number of additional aspects of stellar 
magnetic activity. 


Magnetic activity at the end of the main sequence 

Surveys of the nearby stars have shown that stellar activity 
as measured by the x-ray to bolometric luminosity ratio 
does not change significantly as one proceeds down 
the main sequence to low-mass stars (See SOLAR-STELLAR 
CONNECTION and STELLAR ACTIVITY). However, surveys of very 
low mass stars (e.g. stars that may be, or are, classified as 
brown dwarfs) suggest that some of them may well be 
inactive (See EXTRASOLAR PLANETARY COMPANIONS AND BROWN 
pwarrs). Although the lack of evidence is not evidence for 
absence, it is known that some sort of transition from the 
above-described convection-driven activity should occur 
at sufficiently low mass: for example, we know that the 
observed activity of the giant gaseous planets in our solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dynamos: Solar and Stellar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


system is not solar like at all, but is instead the result of 
the interaction of planetary magnetospheres with the solar 
wind (see PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES); for gaseous planets, 
magnetic field ‘stirring’ at the planetary surfaces by surface 
flows is a negligible source for their activity, while such 
stirring by photospheric motions is precisely how we 
believe stellar chromospheres and coronae are energized. 
Thus, observations of both the Sun and stars, as well as 
planets in our solar system, allow us to conclude that 
rotating, self-gravitating objects (stars and giant gaseous 
planets) produce magnetic fields in their interior via a 
dynamo process, that these objects are all ‘active’ and 
that the underlying basic physics that drives the activity 
in these two cases is may be drastically different in its 
origins. However, exactly how this transition between 
solar-like behavior and planetary behavior occurs is not 
yet understood. 

A related issue revolves around the nature of 
convection, and the nature of the interior dynamo, as 
one proceeds to lower- and lower-mass objects. Classical 
stellar structure theory predicts that stars become fully 
convective at spectral type ~dM5 (see HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL 
DIAGRAM and STELLAR INTERIORS), and, based on recent ideas 
that the base of the convection zone should play a 
particularly important role in magnetic dynamos, one 
would expect to see a transition in activity behavior at 
~dM5—yet no such transition has been observed. How 
can we understand this? It may be possible that, in the 
presence of even relatively modest interior magnetic fields, 
low-mass stars never become fully convective, i.e. that 
magnetic fields stabilize the deep interior in the mean, but 
a definitive answer remains elusive at the time of writing. 


Magnetic A stars 

Observations of late spectral type B—A main sequence 
stars have established the existence of a subclass of such 
stars that show the presence of extremely strong surface 
magnetic fields, with reports of extreme examples of fields 
with strength in excess of 30 kG. Temporal variations of 
the polarized Zeeman signal from these stars show only 
variations related to stellar rotation; secular variations 
that might be interpreted as cycle-related changes have 
not been observed from these stars. The implication is 
either that these magnetic fields are primordial in origin 
or that the dynamo process responsible for these fields has 
a substantially longer characteristic time scale than stellar 
dynamos associated with the surface convection zone of 
late-type main sequence stars. 


Spot stars 

Observations of main sequence stars of spectral type K 
and M have shown that the more active stars of this type 
can display substantial bolometric luminosity variations 
that have been attributed to the presence of large ‘star 
spots’ on their surface (see RED DwarrF stars). While solar 
sunspots typically occupy areas of order 10-°-10-° of the 
visible solar disk, these starspots can occupy 30% or more 
of the visible surface of the active star. While there has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


been a revolution in the study of such stellar surface 
features with the introduction of Doppler imaging, little 
is understood theoretically about the formation of such 
spots. For example, the type of local fast dynamo process 
discussed earlier, which gives good account of the small- 
scale magnetic flux production on the solar surface, cannot 
be trivially extended to explain these enormous magnetic 
features. 


Bibliography 

Rosner R 2000 Magnetic fields of stars: using stars as tools 
for understanding the origins of cosmic magnetic 
fields Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 358 689-709 


Robert Rosner 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Dyson, Sir Frank Watson (1868-1939) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dyson, Sir Frank Watson (1868-1939) 


Astronomer, born in Measham, Leicestershire, England, 
Astronomer Royal for Scotland and afterwards for 
England. Directed (with sir ARTHUR STANLEY EDDINGTON) the 
1919 eclipse expedition which confirmed the deflection of 
starlight by the Sun’s gravity, as predicted by Einstein’s 
general theory of relativity. Directed measurements of 
terrestrial magnetism, latitude and time at the Royal 
Observatory and initiated the radio broadcast of time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Edtvos, Baron Lorand [Roland] von (1848-1919) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Edtvos, Baron Lorand [Roland] von 
(1848-1919) 


Hungarian physicist, born in Pest (now part of Budapest), 
became professor of experimental physics there. Worked 
on wide range of physical problems including gravitation, 
and invented the Eotvds balance, a torsion balance. With 
it, he tested (in what became known as the Eotvos 
experiment) the equivalence principle that gravitational 
mass and inertial mass are equivalent; he found that they 
were identical to less than five parts in a billion. The 
equivalence principle was originally due to GALILEO and 
given prominence by EINSTEIN in the theory of general 
relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eagle Nebula (IC 4703) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eagle Nebula (IC 4703) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Serpens, position 
RA 18" 18.8™, dec. —13° 47’. It measures about 30’ across 
and surrounds the open cluster M16 (NGC 6611); itis often 
mistakenly given the cluster’s designation. Its shape is 
vaguely reminiscent of an eagle in flight, though some dark 
nebulosity near its center bears a closer resemblance to an 
eagle. The nebula is the site of star formation, especially 
in huge twisting columns of dark nebulosity nicknamed 
‘elephant trunks’ or ‘the pillars of creation’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Earth: Space-based Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earth: Space-based Observations 


In the wake of World War II, the US Naval Research 
Laboratory began experimenting with German-designed 
V-2 rockets as well as smaller, lighter launch vehicles 
called ‘sounding rockets’. In order to monitor which way 
the rockets were pointing during their flights, scientists 
began putting aircraft gun cameras on them. During one 
of these flights, on 7 March 1947, the first space-based 
picture of Earth was taken at an altitude of 100 miles 
over New Mexico. In 1950, upon developing the film 
after another of these flights, scientist Otto Berg 
discovered a series of pictures of a huge tropical storm 
over Brownsville, Texas. He pieced the pictures together 
into a mosaic of the region enveloped by the storm, thus 
demonstrating the potential for space-based cameras to 
help us monitor our changing world (see also ROCKETS IN 
ASTRONOMY). 

Interest quickly grew among the international 
community of Earth scientists in using sounding rockets 
to study the Earth’s upper atmosphere. In 1952, the 
International Council of Scientific Unions proposed 
declaring 1957 the ‘International Geophysical Year’ 
(IGY) to satisfy a growing desire among scientists to 
expand the study of our home planet to include the whole 
Earth system and its surroundings. In 1954, the IGY 
committee challenged participating countries to launch a 
satellite as part of the IGY activities. On 29 July 1955, 
President Dwight Eisenhower announced that the United 
States would launch about six Earth satellites as a 
contribution to the IGY. On the following day, Premier 
Nikita Kruschev said the Soviet Union would also launch 
satellites during the IGY, and the race was on between 
the superpowers. 

In October 1957, the Soviet Union successfully 
launched Sputnik JI—a 22-inch spherical satellite 
weighing 175 pounds—into a low-Earth orbit. In January 
1958, the United States successfully launched Explorer I, 
followed by the launch of Vanguard I two months after 
that. But the Russians’ success and the United States’ 
initial failures spread a sense of crisis in the latter 
country. The Americans declared space exploration a 
national priority, and in 1958 President Eisenhower 
asked his Science Advisory Committee to write a policy 
on space. Later that year Congress signed the act creating 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA). Since then, NASA has played an international 
leadership role in developing and deploying satellite 
technologies for Earth observation. 


A space-based perspective 

The Soviet-American race to demonstrate technological 
superiority yielded a fortunate byproduct for Earth 
scientists—a newfound perspective from which to study 
our world. In 1959 the Russians, again followed closely 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


by the Americans, launched the first humans into space. 
Looking back, the cosmonauts and astronauts saw the 
Earth as a tiny oasis of life—unique, as far as we know— 
adrift in a seemingly lifeless sea. Against the cold, black 
backdrop of space, these space pioneers observed how 
beautiful, how warm and inviting, and yet how small and 
fragile our world seemed. Looking closer, they saw 
changes occurring, some rapidly and some slowly, all 
over the planet. EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE seemed to almost 
boil with activity as clouds formed and dissipated daily. 
Vortices of violent storms raged across the surface. 
Changes on land were evident as volcanic eruptions and 
large wildfires sent plumes of smoke high into the 
atmosphere. At night, the extensive spread of humanity 
could clearly be seen as clusters of city lights outlining 
the Earth’s habitable land masses. Outer space, scientists 
found, is an ideal perspective from which to observe and 
measure changes on our home planet as they happen. 

In April 1960, NASA launched the Television and 
Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS) into a mid- 
latitude orbit around the Earth. Followed later that same 
year by TIROS II, and by TIROS III a year later, these 
were the first satellites designed to study Earth’s rapidly 
changing weather patterns. They collected and beamed 
back to Earth thousands of images of cloud cover as well 
as images of hurricanes, tropical storms and weather 
fronts that might have otherwise gone undetected for 
days using conventional methods. 

Over the decades, the art and science of space-based 
observations of the Earth expanded and _ evolved. 
Scientists developed satellite ‘remote sensors’ that are 
sensitive to regions of the electromagnetic spectrum other 
than visible light, allowing us to observe things we would 
not ordinarily see. For instance, designing TIROS II and 
subsequent satellites to measure infrared light (basically 
heat) enabled scientists to produce ‘false color’ images of 
clouds at night. (‘False color’ images are made by 
assigning red, green and blue values to differing 
wavelengths of radiant energy.) In 1964, the TIROS 
design was succeeded by the more advanced Nimbus 
series of weather satellites, and NASA began to explore 
other orbit strategies for its spacecraft. The Nimbus 
satellites flew in near-polar, Sun-synchronous orbits, 
allowing scientists to piece their data together into 
mosaic images of the entire globe. Other satellites, such 
as the 1966 Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-1), 
flew in ‘geosynchronous’ orbits, where they had fixed 
views over roughly the same spots on Earth throughout 
their lifetimes. The ATS-1 provided images over the 
same areas progressively every 30 minutes, providing 
meteorologists with more updates of changes occurring 
in near-real time. In May 1974, NASA launched the first 
in the series of geostationary weather satellites, called 
SMS-1. In October 1975, NASA launched the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Association’s (NOAA) first 
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth: Space-based Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(GOES), each with a fixed and continuous view of the 
changing weather patterns beneath them. The GOES 8 
and 10 satellites are still in operation, providing many of 
the daily weather images over North America that 
meteorologists display in their television evening news 
shows today. 


Earth is a dynamic planet 

Change is perhaps the only constant in our planet’s 
history. Since the Earth’s beginning about 4.5 billion 
years ago, natural climate and environmental conditions 
on our planet have been in constant flux. Solar 
variability, volcanic eruptions, meteor impacts, the 
emergence of life, the formation of an atmosphere rich in 
oxygen and greenhouse gases, changing ocean circulation 
patterns, wildfires—over the millennia these and other 
geological forces shaped an intricately intertwined global 
climate system that we are only just beginning to 
understand. 

Fast forward to the late 1800s and witness the arrival 
of a new and profound force for change—humankind’s 
Industrial Revolution. The Industrial Revolution not only 
ushered in a new era of prosperity for many, it also gave 
us the tools to dramatically reshape our environment. But 
the impact we are having on our environment appears to 
have set the wheels of climate change in motion at a rate 
not seen on Earth for millions of years. Over the last 100 
years, the human population has tripled. In that time, we 
have consumed fossil fuels in increasing amounts to feed 
our rapidly  industrializing economies, raising 
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels by 25 per cent. We 
have burned away forests to make room for our cities and 
roads, releasing carbon dioxide as well as eliminating 
trees that would otherwise be re-absorbing some of the 
gas from the air during photosynthesis. Over the last 
three decades, humans have burned more than 750 000 
square kilometers of forestland every year. We 
introduced chlorofluorocarbons into the air, which 
destroy ozone in the stratosphere. Without its 
stratospheric ozone shield, the surface of our world 
would be exposed to the Sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays, 
and life as we know it could not exist. Due, at least in 
part, to the rising levels of carbon dioxide, the average 
global temperature has risen by 0.5 °C over the last 
century, and some computer models predict it could rise 
another 1 °C over the next century. Already we see the 
polar ice caps melting at an alarming rate, while an 
average of two to three glaciers disappear worldwide 
every week. Geologists speculate that the US Glacier 
National Park will contain no glaciers by the year 2050. 
(See also GREENHOUSE EFFECT.) 

What precisely are the causes of these changes? 
Which changes can be attributed to natural variability, 
and which are human-induced? How will these changes 
affect weather and climate patterns in the twenty-first 
century? How will climate and environmental change 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


impact the quality of life for our grandchildren, and 
theirs? To help answer these questions and more, NASA 
developed a new series of satellite remote sensors, 
beginning with the Earth Resources Technology Satellite 
(ERTS) launched in 1972 (and later renamed Landsat 1). 


From observing to measuring changes on 
Earth 

Altogether, NASA launched a total of seven Landsats, 
the most recent, Landsat 7, was launched in April 1999. 
It and Landsat 5 are the only two of that series currently 
in operation. Since the first Landsat mission, the series’ 
primary objective has been to measure changes on the 
land surface at high resolution. Whereas the first Landsat 
could collect images at about 65 m per pixel (at nadir), 
Landsat 7 can see the surface at resolutions as fine as 
15 m per pixel. Such detailed imagery allowed scientists 
to find geologic features such as meteor impact craters 
previously undiscovered. Additionally, because healthy 
green plants reflect and absorb infrared light differently 
from dry brown plants, scientists found they could use 
Landsat data to monitor the health of croplands and 
forestlands over large areas. Landsat also provides an 
excellent data set for gauging the rates of deforestation, 
drying inland water bodies, expanding desert regions and 
sprawling urban centers. Researchers around the world 
routinely use Landsat data for these and myriad other 
applications. 

In 1973, two researchers at the University of 
California, Irvine, published their theory that man-made 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) could damage the Earth’s 
stratospheric ozone shield. Two years later, Congress 
asked NASA to develop a ‘comprehensive program of 
research, technology, and monitoring of phenomena of 
the upper atmosphere’. In particular, Congress’ intent 
was to ascertain the ‘health’ of the ozone layer. In 1978, 
NASA launched the last of the Nimbus spacecraft series, 
Nimbus 7, carrying two new sensors called the Solar 
Backscatter Ultraviolet (SBUV) instrument and the Total 
Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS). Sensitive to 
radiant energy in the ultraviolet region of the 
electromagnetic spectrum, the Nimbus 7 sensors took 
advantage of the fact that molecules and aerosol particles 
reflect certain wavelengths of ultraviolet rays while 
ozone absorbs others at different levels in the 
atmosphere. By analyzing the amount of ultraviolet 
energy reflected back up to the spacecraft, researchers 
could produce profiles of how thick or thin the ozone was 
at different altitudes and locations. 

But, ironically, the ‘OZONE HOLE’ over Antarctica 
was not discovered until May 1985, when a British 
researcher using a _ ground-based Dobson ozone 
spectrophotometer, found that stratospheric ozone over 
Halley Bay was about 40 per cent less than what had 
been measured during the previous winter. Surprised, 
NASA researchers hastily reviewed their TOMS data and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth: Space-based Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


found that it too had detected a dramatic loss of ozone 
over all of Antarctica. Why had they not they discovered 
the phenomenon earlier? Unfortunately, the TOMS data 
analysis software had been programmed to flag and set 
aside data points that deviated greatly from expected 
measurements, and so the initial measurements that 
should have set off alarms, perhaps years earlier, were 
simply overlooked. In short, the TOMS team failed to 
detect the ozone hole because it was much more severe 
than scientists expected. 

In the years following the discovery of the ozone 
hole, NASA satellites recorded depleting ozone levels 
over Antarctica that grew worse with each passing year. 
In response, in 1987, 43 nations signed the ‘Montreal 
Protocol’ in which they agreed to reduce the use of CFCs 
by 50 per cent by 2000. In 1991, NASA’s Upper 
Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) mapped levels of 
chlorine monoxide in the stratosphere and quickly 
demonstrated that there is a direct link between the 
presence of chlorine, the formation of chlorine monoxide 
during winter in the Southern Hemisphere, and the 
destruction of ozone. Was a global disaster averted? Will 
levels of stratospheric ozone stabilize and return to 
normal in the coming years? We do not know yet, only 
time and more data will tell. 


Towards predicting climate change 

As we make the transition to the twenty-first century, the 
Earth’s environment will be the focus of many 
agricultural, industrial, societal and political decisions. 
We recognize that we need more and better data to help 
us understand how current environmental change trends 
may impact climate years or even decades in the future. 
To collect these data, in 1991, NASA established the 
Earth Observing System (EOS) program in response to a 
US presidential initiative to provide in-depth scientific 
understanding about the functioning of the Earth as a 
system. The EOS charter is to collect, at a minimum, a 
new 15-year data set on which to base a long-term and 
comprehensive examination of our planet’s climate 
system. EOS is a multinational endeavor comprising 
three parts: (1) a series of advanced satellite remote 
sensors; (2) a robust new computer network (called 
EOSDIS) for processing, storing and distributing EOS 
data; and (3) about 850 scientists working in many 
nations and in many Earth science disciplines who will 
use these new data in their research. 

Already, NASA has launched four EOS spacecraft in 
the 1990s, including Landsat 7, QuikScat, ACRIMSAT 
and the EOS flagship, Terra, that was launched in 
December 1999. There are 15 more EOS satellites 
scheduled to launch through to 2003. Rather than 
focusing on individual disciplines, the data from these 
EOS satellites will be integrated into a more wholistic 
study of the Earth that includes seven overarching 
themes: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


e radiation, clouds, water vapor, precipitation and 
atmospheric circulation; 

e ocean circulation, productivity and exchange with 

the atmosphere; 

tropospheric chemistry and greenhouse gases; 

land ecosystems and hydrology; 

snow, ice and glacier extent; 

ozone and stratospheric chemistry; 

volcanoes and climate effects of aerosol. 


With EOS, for the first time ever for a major Earth 
observation program, the goals include freely sharing the 
resulting data with both scientists and _ civilian 
organizations alike. This treatment of data contrasts 
sharply with previous satellite missions for which public 
access to data was quite costly. In fact, some EOS data 
are being directly broadcast to anyone anywhere who has 
a compatible receiving station and the capacity to process 
and store such a huge flow of information. As its name 
suggests, EOS is a large-scale, long-term collaborative 
mission involving scientists in government agencies, 
academia and industry from many nations. 


Conclusion 

Today, Earth scientists’ goals are to not only observe 
weather patterns around our world, but to determine the 
causes and effects of climate and environmental change. 
With increasingly sophisticated satellite remote sensors, 
we can measure a wide range of geophysical parameters 
(such as surface temperature, distribution of clouds and 
aerosol particles, the abundance of trace gases in the 
atmosphere, or the distribution and types of life on land 
and in the ocean) with unprecedented accuracy and 
resolution. Moreover, we can now measure how 
changing certain aspects of the climate system (such as 
cloud cover) can have a ‘ripple effect’ through other 
aspects of the climate system (such as_ surface 
temperature, precipitation, the radiation budget). 
Scientists are feeding these new satellite data, collected 
throughout the Earth’s climate system, into sophisticated 
new computer models that, ultimately, will enable them 
to predict climate changes months, years or even decades 
before they occur. If we are to become better stewards of 
our home planet—if we are to leave abundant natural 
resources to our grandchildren and to their grand- 
children—then we must continue monitoring our planet 
with satellite sensors ever improving our understanding 
of how the Earth system works. 


David D Herring 
Michael D King 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


Composition and physical conditions of the 
neutral atmosphere 

Our planet is surrounded by a thin envelope of gas, its 
atmosphere. This atmosphere, containing large amounts 
of molecular oxygen and therefore ozone, which protects 
us from the harmful solar UV radiation, and greenhouse 
gases like water vapor or carbon dioxide, maintaining 
mild climatic conditions, is unique in the solar system. 
It plays a crucial role in preserving at the surface of 
the Earth an environment suitable for the preservation 
and development of life, and must be considered as 
a key component of the Earth system. The average 
pressure at the ground level is 1013 mbar, with a 
column atmospheric mass of 1 kg cm™ and a density 
of 2.7 x 10”? molecules/cm’. The average temperature 
at the surface of the Earth is 288 K, or 15°C. The 
atmosphere is mainly composed of molecular nitrogen 
(78.1%), molecular oxygen (20.9%) and less than 1% of 
argon, with an average molecular mass of 29 atomic mass 
units (table 1). A few precipitable centimeters of water are 
also present in the atmosphere, either as vapor or in the 
form of water droplets, or ice particles, in the clouds. The 
volume mixing ratio of water vapor is highly variable, but 
is everywhere less than 1%. Carbon dioxide, despite its 
small relative abundance (0.04%), plays a crucial role in 
the radiative budget of the planet. Minor constituents of 
Earth’s atmosphere are listed in table 2. 

The chemical composition of the atmosphere was 
discovered by the French chemist Antoine-Laurent de 
Lavoisier in the second part of the eighteenth century 
from the study of oxidation reactions. Lavoisier, at 
the same time as the English scientist Joseph Priestley, 
came to the conclusion that a particular constituent of 
air (oxygen) has the property of combining with metals 
to form oxides from which it can be released by heating. 
The existence of a second constituent (nitrogen), which 
does not enter the formation of oxides, was also required 
by experimental results. At this time, instruments for 
measuring the most basic physical properties of the 
atmosphere (temperature, pressure, rain, wind, humidity) 
had already been invented and the first systematic 
measurements of temperature were just beginning to 
be performed, for example at the Royal Meteorological 
Institute of the Netherlands. The vertical exploration of 
the atmosphere, first illustrated by Pascal’s experiment on 
the Puy de Dome in 1647, was continuing with the help 
of kites and balloons: the first meteorological sounding, 
realized in 1783, reached an altitude of 3400 m. At the 
end of the nineteenth century, two French meteorologists, 
Hermitte and Besancon, performed systematic launches of 
balloons carrying pressure and temperature sensors. The 
stratosphere was discovered in 1899 by Léon Teisserec de 
Bort. During the twentieth century observations rapidly 
developed through the use of stratospheric balloons 
and airborne measurements, whereas in the most recent 
period, remote sensing from satellites has become the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


most powerful means of monitoring the global structure 
of Earth’s atmosphere. 

The vertical structure of the atmosphere is controlled 
by the law of hydrostatic equilibrium: density adjusts itself 
in such a way that the (downward) gravitational force is 
balanced by the (upward) force induced by the vertical 
pressure gradient. Assuming that air is a perfect gas, it 
can be shown that the atmospheric pressure decreases 
exponentially with altitude, with values of 100 mbar 
and 10 mbar at 15 km and 30 km altitude respectively. 
Considering its mass, Earth’s atmosphere is equivalent to 
a homogeneous layer of 8 km thickness. Up to 100 km 
altitude, the atmosphere is mainly composed of neutral 
species. Constituents are mixed by turbulent viscosity, 
resulting from wind and wave activity, and the vertical 
distribution of each constituent does not depend on its 
own molecular mass. To a first approximation, the species 
which are not affected by condensation or chemistry, 
like molecular nitrogen, molecular oxygen and argon, 
have the same vertical distribution and are therefore 
uniformly mixed. The region below 90 km altitude, 
where constituents are uniformly mixed, is called the 
‘homosphere’. 

Because the temperature decreases with altitude, as 
described later, and because the saturation pressure of 
water vapor is an increasing function of the temperature, 
the water vapor mixing ratio decreases with altitude and is 
only a few ppmv (part per million in volume) above 15 km. 
Another important example of a non-uniformly mixed 
constituent is ozone (O03), whose abundance is controlled 
by chemistry. Ozone results from the dissociation of 
molecular oxygen by solar ultraviolet photons, which 
yields oxygen atoms able to form ozone by reaction with 
molecular oxygen. This reaction occurs between 15 km 
and 50 km in the stratosphere. Although the ozone mixing 
ratio does not exceed 0.1 ppmvy, the ozone layer is quite an 
efficient shield against harmful solar ultraviolet radiation, 
because photons in the wavelength range 200-300 nm 
easily break down the ozone molecule. The quantity of 
ozone present in the stratosphere is equivalent to a 3 mm 
thick layer of pure ozone in STP conditions (standard 
pressure and temperature: 1013 mbar, 273 K). The 
presence of a well-marked stratosphere is an oustanding 
characteristic of Earth. The atmospheres of our two ‘sister’ 
planets, Mars and venus, which are not supplied with 
oxygen by photosynthesis, have no stratosphere. 

Historically, ozone was measured for the first time 
at the beginning of the 1950s, by using the method of 
solar OCCULTATION. The earliest ozone measurements were 
obtained by the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) using 
captured V2 rockets, which with their inertial stabilization 
offered an excellent platform. The occultation method 
consists of observing the Sun, or a star, setting or rising 
behind the limb of Earth. In this way, the absorption 
spectrum of the upper atmosphere can be observed as 
a function of altitude, yielding the vertical distribution 
of absorbing species. Accurate ozone measurements 
were obtained up to 70 km. The same method allowed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Principal constituents of the atmosphere. (From Banks and Kockarts (1973).) 


Molecular Atmospheric 

Molecular Molecular Composition concentration Atmospheric column 

mass mass by volume at STP thickness content 
Constituent (amu) (g x 1074) (%) (cm-9) (atm cm) (cm~*) 
N2 28.02 46.51 78.08 2.10 x 101° 6.24 x 10° 1.68 x 107 
Oo 32.01 53.12 20.95 5.63 x 1018 1.68 x 10° 4.50 x 1074 
Ar 39.96 66.33 0.93 2.51 x 10!” 7.47 x 108 2.01 x 1075 
CO 44.02 73.06 0.03, 8.87 x 1015 2.64 x 10? 7.09 x 107! 
Air 28.97 48.08 100.00 2.69 x 101° 8.00 x 10° 2.15 x 105 


Table 2. Minor molecular constituents of the atmosphere. (From Banks and Kockarts (1973).) 


Molecule Ratio by volume Remarks 

COz 3x 1074 Small variation 

H20 10-?-10-5 Variable, particularly in troposphere 

CHy 1.5 x 1076 Fairly constant, mixed in troposphere 

N20 2.5 x 1077 Approximately constant, mixed in troposphere 
Ho 5 x 1077 Probably mixed in troposphere 

O3 10-8-10-7 Maximum in stratosphere 

co 5 x 10-8-2 x 10-7 Variable 

NO 5x 1071-2 x 10-8 Variable, effect of NO 


measurement of O, absorption as high as 140 km, whereas 
it was firmly believed that this gas was totally absent above 
an altitude of 90-100 km. 

Above 90 km altitude, in the ‘heterosphere’, the 
different species separate from each other due to the 
effect of gravity. Viscous forces are no longer able to 
mix the constituents and each one distributes according 
to its own molecular mass. In this altitude range, 
the atmosphere is flooded with ultraviolet photons and 
energetic particles, and the atmospheric molecules are 
dissociated and ionized. Atoms, which are lighter than 
molecules, extend up to higher altitudes: atomic oxygen 
is the major constituent above 200 km altitude, whereas 
hydrogen, together with helium, dominates above 700 km. 
The average molecular mass of atmospheric molecules 
therefore decreases with altitude in the heterosphere. 
Ultimately, through their thermal kinetic energy, hydrogen 
atoms are able to escape from the terrestrial atmosphere in 
the upper regions where collisions are not frequent. 

The general structure of the vertical temperature 
profile is given in figure 1. It is based on the nomenclature 
first introduced by Sydney Chapman in the 1930s. In the 
lower part of the atmosphere, below 10-15 km, termed 
the ‘troposphere’, the temperature decreases with altitude 
with an average rate of 6.5°C km“, nearly equal to the 
humid adiabatic temperature lapse rate. The heat source is 
the surface, illuminated by the visible solar radiation. Heat 
is transferred to the troposphere through three different 
processes: evaporation of water and release of latent heat 
through the formation of clouds; infrared emission and 
absorption by greenhouse gases; and sensible heat flux. 
Vertical transport of water vapor and heat is ensured 
by convective motions. The transparency of Earth’s 
atmosphere in the visible range, which allows most solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


STRATOPAUSE 


140 
IONOSPHERE 
120 
THERMOSPHERE HETEROSPHERE 
100 t 
E MESOPAUSE 
we 
Q : 
=) ‘ 
= 
bs : 


40 ‘ 
HOMOSPHE 


m 


STRATOSPHERE 


20 EQUATORIAL TROPOPAUSE 
POLAR TROPOPAUSE 


iS achiad ain a Beacerepal SD 


100 iso 200 280 300 350 400 
TEMPERATURE K 


Figure 1. Thermal structure of Earth’s atmosphere. (From 
Brasseur and Solomon (1994).) 


photons to reach the ground, is a major determinant of 
the Earth’s climatic system. On Venus, for example, the 
very dense lower atmosphere of carbon dioxide, with a 
pressure at the ground level of ~ 90 bar, prevents the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1000 T T T T 


500 


og 
i=} 
= 
a : o< 
+ 
€ =] 2 fo) 
x « oa 
= 4 m v 
WwW . « 4 
3 o< = 3 * 
> a c=] au = oO 
e a OY sae 
= 
3 we 40 Zz 2 | 
“ | @B 3% z 
2 wa Ps a 
é 28 ~ { 
00 | >Z + 
1 oS % a 
eve 
rr) “ou 
~) 
S |! 


50 + 


10? 10? 104 10° 10® 
NUMBER DENSITY (cri?) 


Figure 2. Average daytime electron distribution with principal 
ions in the various layers of the atmosphere. (From Banks and 
Kockarts (1973).) 


solar visible radiation from reaching the ground, yielding 
a completely different behavior of the climatic system (see 
VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). Above 15 km, in the ‘stratosphere’, 
temperature increases from 220 K up to 270 K at 50 km 
altitude. The stratosphere is directly heated by the solar 
ultraviolet radiation, absorbed by ozone, whereas cooling 
occurs through infrared emission of carbon dixoxide, and 
to a lesser extent water vapor. Above 50 km altitude, 
in the ‘mesosphere’, the ozone concentration decreases 
and the temperature decreases regularly up to 90 km 
altitude, where it is less than 200 K. Above 90 km, in the 
‘thermosphere’, the enhanced ultraviolet radiation results 
in an increase of temperature with altitude, with a high 
diurnal and seasonal variability due to the low thermal 
inertia of the tenuous atmosphere. Heat absorbed in 
the thermosphere is transported downward by thermal 
conduction and radiated in the infrared at the top of the 
mesosphere. 


The ionized environment of Earth 

The ionized atmosphere, or ‘ionosphere’, is composed of 
several well marked layers. This layer structure is due 
to the variety of ionizing fluxes (UV and x-rays, energetic 
particles) and ionized species. Although a few ions are 
present in the 60-80 km range, ionization is substantial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


only above 80-90 km. The main ionospheric layers are 
denoted by D, E and F. They extend from the base of the 
D layer, at 60 km altitude, up to 400 km, above the peak 
of the F) region, as shown in figure 2. The most deeply 
penetrating energy fluxes are cosmic rays, x- and solar 
Ly-a photons, which are responsible for IONIZATION in the 
D layer and are very sensitive to solar activity. Soft x- 
rays (A = 1-10 nm) and long-wavelength UV radiation 
are the main ionization sources in the E layer. Major ions 
are atomic and molecular oxygen, together with nitrogen 
monoxide. Whereas O3 and N; are created by ionization 
of the corresponding molecules, which are the dominant 
species, according to the following reaction scheme 


On +hv > OF +e7 
NO* is formed through the charge-exchange reaction 
O* +Nz2 > NO* +N. 


The vertical distribution of ions is complex. O3 and NO* 
dominate in D, E and F, regions, whereas O* is the major 
ion in the F, region. Above 1000 km, light ions like 
H* and He* are dominant. Electron density peaks at 
300 km, with a maximum value of 10° cm~°. This value 
presents a strong diurnal variability, due to the lack of 
solar photons during the night. At night, the electrons 
completely disappear in the D layer and their abundance 
considerably decreases in E and F; layers. The behavior of 
the F, layer is more complex, because transport by vertical 
diffusion and winds plays an important role in the topside 
ionosphere. 

Historically, the role of the conductive ionized 
envelope of our planet in reflecting radio waves was 
discovered at the very beginning of the twentieth century. 
The first transcontinental radio communication was 
established by Marconi. At the end of the 1920s, Appleton 
in England and Tuve in the United States developed 
the first instrument dedicated to the teledetection of the 
ionosphere, the ‘ionosonde’, which dominated research on 
high atmospheric physics until the beginning of the space 
era. Modern ground-based observations of the physical 
parameters of the ionosphere (density, temperature, wind) 
use the technique of the ‘incoherent scattering radar’, 
which consists of illuminating the ionosphere by a radio 
wave beam and analysing the spectral characteristics of 
the scattered signal. 

At increasing altitudes, the role of the Earth’s 
intrinsic magnetic field becomes important. In the 
‘magnetosphere’, the motion of particles is mainly 
controlled by electromagnetic forces (see MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH). Because the magnetic field deflects the charged 
particles of the soLARWIND, which blows from the dayside to 
the nightside with a velocity of about 400 km s—!, it carves 
in the flow of the solar wind an elongated cavity. This 
cavity presents to a first approximation an axial symmetry 
around the Sun-Earth axis, contrary to the spherically 
symmetric low layers of the ionosphere. Its shape is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


approximately parabolic in the solar direction, where it 
extends up to about 12 Earth radii. In the downwind 
direction, the magnetosphere is almost cylindrical and 
forms a magnetic tail with a length of several AUs 
(1 AU = 1 Astronomical Unit, that is the Sun—Earth 
distance, or 1.5 x 10" m), which can be compared to 
cometary tails. The magnetosphere is composed of an 
extremely tenuous medium, with a typical density of one 
particle per cubic centimeter, where the collisions between 
particles play a negligible role. The inner boundary of 
the magnetosphere, the plasmapause, is located at about 4 
Earth radii from Earth center in the equatorial plane. The 
region inside the plasmapause, called the ‘plasmasphere’, 
is filled witha relatively cold (T < 10000K) and dense (n ~ 
100 particles/cm?) plasma originating in the ionosphere 
(See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMASPHERE). 

A few of the incident solar wind particles (about 1%) 
penetrate the magnetosphere. Some of them precipitate 
at high latitude along the lines of the magnetic field 
lines and reach the low atmospheric levels: an electron 
of typical energy 10 keV can penetrate down to 100 km 
altitude before being substantially dragged. Precipitating 
energetic particles (mainly electrons) produce, through 
ionization of species like atomic oxygen, followed by 
recombination and fluorescence, the well-known and 
visually stunning phenomenon of auroras. The luminosity 
pattern of an AuRoRA, which reflects the shape of Earth’s 
magnetic field lines, anchored in the deep Earth and 
disturbed at high altitude by the flow of precipitating 
particles, is extremely various, from quiescent, diffuse 
big auroras to the complex, beautiful patterns of auroral 
“bands’ and ‘arcs’. 

In a more detailed way, the primary electron is the 
source of many secondary electrons at altitude, through 
ionization reactions of the type 


Ate > A*+e +e. 
Ionized species recombine, either by ‘radiative’ 
A*tt+e o> A* > Athy 
or by ‘dissociative’ recombination 
XY +e7 > X*4+Y* > X4+Y+hv 


by emitting photons. The most frequently observed 
emissions are the green and red lines of atomic oxygen at 
558 nm and 630-636 nm respectively. A violet coloring, due 
to the N3 line at 391 nm, may sometimes be observed. The 
red line of oxygen is produced by radiative de-excitation 
of the first excited state O('D) of oxygen. Because the 
radiative lifetime of O('D) is long, about 2 mn, fluorescence 
in this line cannot occur in the lower ionosphere (z < 
200 km), where the excited state is deactivated by collisions 
with air molecules in a time smaller than the radiative 
emission time. For this reason, red auroras occur only 
at high ionospheric levels. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


SOLAR RADIATION 


2e (SP 4 
TOP OF THE ATMOSPHERE 


SEA LEVEL 


BLACK BODY AT 5900 K 


IRRADIANCE (Wet? nent?) 


fs) 400 800 1200 1600 2000 2400 2800 3200 
WAVELENGTH (nm) 


Figure 3. Spectrum of solar radiation outside Earth’s atmosphere 
and at sea level, including comparison with black body radiation 
at a temperature of 5800 K. (From Banks and Kockarts (1973).) 


Atmospheric absorption, scattering and 
scintillation 

The UV and visible radiation of the Sun is partially or 
totally absorbed by Earth’s atmosphere. At wavelengths 
of less than about 300 nm, stratospheric ozone molecules 
are easily dissociated by solar photons. At longer 
wavelengths, in the visible range where the solar radiation 
spectrum peaks, there is much less absorption, although 
some absorption occurs around 600 nm due to ozone. 
At wavelengths longer than 700 nm, absorption occurs 
mainly by excitation of vibrational (and rotational) levels 
of H2O and CO, molecules, as well as O2 in the forbidden 
band at 760 nm. As can be seen in figure 3, an extinction 
continuum is also present. It is due to the scattering of 
photons by air molecules, mainly Nz and O2, and cloud 
particles. The average reflectivity (or ‘albedo’) of Earth’s 
atmosphere and surface is 0.3. Only 70% of incoming solar 
photons are absorbed by Earth’s system, the remainder 
being scattered to space, principally by clouds which cover 
on average 50% of the planet. 

In the field of astronomical ground-based observa- 
tion, the phenomenon of ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION, in the 
presence of turbulent motions, is also of great significance. 
The troposphere and stratosphere of the Earth are highly 
turbulent because of winds and wave activity: the kinetic 
energy of large-scale atmospheric motions (typically kilo- 
metric) is progressively transferred to small scales (typi- 
cally millimetric), where dissipation occurs by viscous fric- 
tion. This process is accompanied by local fluctuations of 
the density, therefore of the refractive index. The planar 
wave front received from a star is distorted as the light 
passes through the atmosphere. Both intensity and prop- 
agation direction are randomly modified due to the varia- 
tions in the cross-sectional area and orientation of bundles 
of light rays. The fluctuations in the intensity are responsi- 
ble for the well known phenomenon of scINTILLATION which 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


results from traveling inhomogeneous air masses at alti- 
tude. The associated variations of the propagation direc- 
tion yield a loss of angular resolution, which depends on 
the turbulent scales and their vertical distribution, as well 
as of wind patterns. It is theoretically shown and exper- 
imentally verified that atmospheric turbulence results in 
an angular dispersion, or ‘SEEING’, in the range from 0.2 
to 1 arcsec, depending on the altitude of the observation 
site and local weather conditions. The seeing is therefore 
larger than the diffraction-limited resolution of a 1m class 
telescope. The only way to overcome this intrinsic limita- 
tion is to use adaptative optics, the principle of which is 
to monitor the phase and adjust the mirror’s shape in real 
time. 


Global radiative budget and dynamics 

Despite substantial atmospheric extinction, as previously 
described, Earth’s atmosphere is largely transparent to 
solar photons in the visible part of the spectrum. As 
a result, the visible radiation of the Sun is mainly 
absorbed by Earth’s surface. It causes heating of soil, 
water, vegetation and the adjacent air, resulting in the 
existence of a troposphere. The surface, which is heated, 
radiates at long wavelength, in the infrared portion of the 
spectrum, mainly from 7 wm up to 100 wm. Although 
the energy of the emitted infrared photons is not large 
enough to dissociate or ionize molecules, contrary to 
the solar ultraviolet radiation, it is able to increase the 
internal vibrational and rotational energy of absorbing 
molecules, principally HzO, COz and O3. That excess 
energy is transferred to the main atmospheric molecules 
as kinetic energy by molecular collisions. Conversely, 
cooling of the atmosphere occurs through emission of 
radiation, due to molecular state transitions between 
vibrational and rotational levels. Some of this radiation is 
directed towards Earth’s surface, resulting in a substantial 
GREENHOUSE EFFECT. In the absence of any atmosphere, the 
average surface temperature would be 255 K, well below 
the freezing point of water, and no life could exist. At 
ground level nearly as much radiation is received from the 
atmosphere, in the infrared, as from the Sun, in the visible. 
The very high temperature at the surface of Venus (470°C) 
is mainly due to the strong greenhouse effect of the massive 
carbon dioxide atmosphere; the black body temperature 
of Venus at the top of sulfuric acid clouds where thermal 
photons are released to space is about —40°C, lower than 
the black body temperature of Earth (—18°C) because of 
the high reflectivity of Venus’ clouds. 

The dynamics of the low atmosphere, thermally and 
dynamically coupled with the oceans, is controlled by the 
redistribution of heat from low-latitude regions, where it 
is preferentially deposited by solar visible radiation, to 
the whole planet. Indeed, the infrared cooling is more 
uniformly distributed at the surface of the planet than solar 
heating, with an excess downward flux of radiative energy 
in the intertropical region and the reverse situation at high 
latitudes. The Earth can be compared to a Carnot machine, 
with both a warm source (low-latitude regions) and a cold 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Polar 
Hadley 
ceils 


Jet stream 


ZY 30° 
_ Northeast trades Tropical 
~«—— Intertropical convergence «<—— 0° Hadley 
—— cells 


Southeast 


ea trades 
wrx 


Jet strea 


Polar 
Hadley 
cells 


Figure 4. Principal features of the atmospheric circulation. 
(From Graedel and Crutzen (1993).) 


source (high-latitude regions), which converts thermal 
energy into work. The mechanical energy produced is 
used for generating large-scale organized motions able to 
transport heat towards the poles. The efficiency of the 
machine is weak, much lower than the maximum value 
allowed by the laws of thermodynamics (~ 10%). For a 
flux received from the Sun of 340 W m7 in global, diurnal 
and latitudinal average, the mechanical power required to 
maintain the large-scale circulation is only 2.4 W m~?, that 
is an efficiency of only 0.7%. Despite this low efficiency, 
the terrestrial ‘wind machine’, which feeds the global 
hydrological cycle, is of prime importance for maintaining 
life at the surface of Earth. 

Because the heating of the Earth by the deposited 
solar light is greatest at the equator, the hot equatorial 
air expands and moves upward. Consequently, air at 
low altitudes and from higher latitudes moves toward 
the equator to take its place. This equatorward flow 
is balanced by a return flow at higher altitudes, as 
summarized in figure 4. This poleward moving air 
progressively cools by infrared radiation to space. At 
about 30° latitude, the cooled denser air moves downward, 
closing what is called the ‘Hadley circulation’ on both sides 
of the equator. The equatorial upwelling branch of the 
Hadley cell occurs in the ‘intertropical convergence zone’ 
(or ITCZ). This is characterized by heavy precipitation due 
to strong upward convective motions, yielding massive 
water condensation and subsequent rain, and relatively 
low surface pressures. Condensation plays an important 
role in controlling and enhancing the tropical Hadley 
circulation, through the release of large amounts of energy 
(the ‘latent heat of condensation’). On the other hand, 
the regions of subsiding air are much dryer and surface 
pressure relatively high. Due to the Coriolis force, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which is associated with the rotation of the Earth and 
results in a deflection to the right of the direction of 
motion in the northern hemisphere and to the left in 
the southern hemisphere, equatorward motions of air 
in the tropical latitudes result in ‘trade winds’, blowing 
from the northeast in the northern hemisphere and from 
the southeast in the southern hemisphere. The flows at 
mid and high latitudes are much less regularly ordered 
than in the tropics because of the strong influence of 
travelling high and low pressure systems. Because of the 
Coriolis force, the winds tend to rotate clockwise around 
high-pressure systems (called ‘anticyclonic circulation’) 
in the northern hemisphere and counterclockwise in the 
southern hemisphere. Circulation around low-pressure 
systems (‘cyclonic circulation’) occurs in the opposite 
direction. In the mid-latitude regions, poleward heat 
transfer is ensured through sporadic air mass exchanges 
across ‘warm fronts’ and ‘cold fronts’. This mechanism 
is due to the baroclinic instability, or literally ‘pressure 
sloping instability’, related to the horizontal temperature 
gradient, generating poleward motions of warm air and 
equatorward motions of cold air. Contrary to what 
happens in the tropical regions, the atmospheric flow at 
mid-latitudes is globally westerly (that is from the west). 
At higher altitudes, at the polar regions, heat transport is 
accomplished through the formation of cells rather similar 
to the tropical Hadley cells. It must be noted that about 
one-third of the poleward heat transfer takes place in the 
oceans. 

The Martian climate, although colder, may be 
compared with the terrestrial climate. Global circulation 
on Mars also consists of trade winds in the intertropical 
zone and cyclonic/anticyclonic systems at mid-latitudes. 
This is due to similarities in the way in which the 
atmosphere is heated from below, as well as in the 
inclination of the rotation axis (23.5° for Earth, 25.2° for 
Mars) or the duration of the day, which differs by only 
40 min (See MARS: ATMOSPHERE). Nevertheless, the absence 
of water oceans on Mars results in striking differences, 
like the development of a single Hadley cell with a wide 
rising branch over the summer hemisphere and a wide 
subsiding branch over the winter hemisphere, quickly 
reversing around the equinoxes. 

The dynamics of the atmosphere is intimately coupled 
with the dynamics of the ocean, able to transport heat 
over large distances. Surface waters are dragged off 
along with winds and, because of heat exchanges with the 
atmosphere, modify the atmospheric thermal and wind 
regimes. One example of such a surface oceanic current is 
the Gulf Stream. Westerlies at mid-latitudes push surface 
water to the east, whereas easterly trade winds in the 
ITCZ act in the opposite way. This results in a clockwise 
rotation of water bodies, with a northward warm current 
along the eastern coast of America. During winter, cold 
and dry continental air coming from the west is heated 
and loaded with moisture when passing over the Gulf 
Stream, which results in strong perturbations and snow 
falls. The dynamical interaction between the atmosphere 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Challenger Space Shuttle orbiter photo showing a 
system of cumulonimbus clouds. 


and the ocean at low latitudes may have dramatic 
consequences, mainly through the combined actions of 
evaporation and atmospheric convection, yielding the 
formation of vigorous cumulonimbus convective cells, or 
‘hot towers’ (figure 5), pumping air and moisture upward 
and associated with massive rainfalls, lightning (which is 
electrical discharges between the positively charged upper 
layers of clouds and negatively charge lower layers, or 
Earth’s surface) and winds. Such systems, associated 
with strong perturbations of the pressure field, sometime 
become hurricanes and tornados, rapidly rotating under 
the effect of the Coriolis force. 

One of the most important, planetary scale, phenom- 
ena resulting from the interaction between the ocean and 
the atmosphere is the El Nifio southern oscillation (ENSO). 
In normal conditions, trade winds push equatorial pacific 
waters from the Peruvian coasts to Indonesia. Surface wa- 
ters are progressively heated during their slow westward 
migration through the Pacific ocean and reach a temper- 
ature of 29°C near Indonesia, which results in a strong 
longitudinal thermal contrast. The ENSO phenomenon, 
which is still incompletely understood, is provoked by 
a weakening of trade winds, therefore thermal contrast, 
with a subsequent warm eastward countercurrent. This 
current, episodically appearing near Peruvian coasts right 
after Christmas (hence, the reference to ‘the child’), is well 
known by the fishermen of this area, and is associated with 
massive rains. In the 1920s, Sir Gilbert Walker, director of 
the Indian Meteorological Office, found evidence of an an- 
ticorrelation between the atmospheric pressure in Tahiti, 
in the central Pacific, and the pressure in Darwin, in Aus- 
tralia. In 1969, J Bjerkness established the link between the 
warm oceanic countercurrent and the associated meteoro- 
logical perturbations. Cumulus systems normally present 
over Indonesia are displaced several thousands of kilome- 
ters to the east, which tends toward amplifying, and some- 
times reversing, trade winds. This positive retroaction ef- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


fect yields dramatic consequences, with severe drought in 
Indonesia and heavy rains in Ecuador and northern Peru. 


Biochemical cycles of main atmospheric species 
From a chemical point of view, the atmosphere of the Earth 
is strongly coupled with Earth’s solid and liquid surfaces 
through a variety of biogeochemical cycles. Earth’s 
atmosphere is generally supposed, although this is still 
a controversial question, to have been outgassed from 
the interior, in a short episode of intense differentiation 
in the first 100 million years of Earth’s life, 4.5 billion 
years ago. The primitive Earth atmosphere contained 
mainly carbon dioxide and water vapor, with possibly 
some traces of methane and other reduced gases. It is 
thought that a substantial amount of water may have 
been brought by comets and meteorites over a rather 
long period of time after accretion (a few hundred million 
years) and it is not excluded that Earth’s atmosphere 
is partly of cometary and meteoritic origin. Oxygen 
at present contained in our atmosphere is the result of 
photosynthetic activity in the biosphere. It progressively 
accumulated in the atmosphere during the Precambrian 
era and reached its present level 300 million years ago, 
when the first land animals appeared. The atmospheric 
oxygen content is thought to be regulated by the action 
of marine photosynthetic activity, which removes a small 
fraction of carbon from the atmosphere through the 
formation of organic reduced carbon, a very small part 
of which precipitates downward through the ocean and 
is finally incorporated into sea-floor sediments. Oxygen 
atoms left behind by reduced carbon, which is trapped 
in sedimentary rocks for typical times of a few hundred 
million years (due to sea floor expansion), are responsible 
for the presence of a permanent oxygen atmosphere on 
Earth. Ultimately, reduced carbon is rejected by volcanoes 
or resurfaced metamorphic rocks above subduction zones 
and oxidized by the atmosphere, closing the cycle. 
Similarly, the ‘oceanic biological pump’ plays a crucial 
role in regulating the atmospheric content of carbon 
dioxide, through the so-called ‘carbonate-silicate’ cycle. 
Carbon dioxide is released by volcanism and metamorphic 
processes from the solid Earth to the atmosphere and 
ocean at a rate which is estimated to be large enough to 
double the amount of carbon in the ocean and atmosphere 
in a few hundred thousand years. It must be noted 
that the terrestrial ocean contains much more carbon 
dioxide than the atmosphere (40000 Gt versus 750 Gt; 
1 Gt = 10” kg). The carbon contained in carbonate rocks, 
if entirely released to the atmosphere, would represent 
~ 50-100 bar of CO:, which is similar to the present 
content of the Venusian atmosphere. Due to the rapid 
exchange of CO, between the atmosphere and the ocean, 
the residence time of a CO molecule in the atmosphere is 
less than 10 years (less than 1000 years in the ocean). For 
this reason, the ocean and the atmosphere must be treated 
as a single reservoir when studying their interaction with 
the solid planet, which acts over much longer time scales. 
Because carbon dioxide is released to the atmosphere, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


it must be returned to the solid Earth at an equal rate. 
The mechanism of this return is well known. It is the 
weathering of silicate minerals by rain water, containing 
dissolved carbon dioxide, followed by the deposition 
of carbonate minerals in sedimentary rocks. Cations 
produced by silicate weathering (Ca**, Mg?*) are carried 
by rivers to the oceans, where they react with carbonate 
ions (COZ) to precipitate as carbonate minerals. In this 
way, oxidized carbon is trapped in sea-floor sediments 
in the form of limestone. Because the rate of supply of 
cations by weathering strongly depends on humidity and 
temperature conditions, and because CO, is a greenhouse 
gas, it is thought that this cycle has a controling influence 
on the budget of carbon in the combined atmosphere— 
ocean system. 

In spite of the assumed stabilizing effect of the 
carbonate-silicate cycle over geological times, climatic 
conditions on Earth must be regarded as having evolved 
through a number of different stages over a long period 
of time. An example of global climatic instability is 
provided by the glacial—interglacial cycles which occurred 
during the Quaternary. The chemical composition and 
temperature of the ancient atmosphere may be retrieved 
from ice cores drilled on the Antarctic glacier. It is possible 
to trace back the Earth’s climatic history during the last few 
hundred thousand years. Periodicities of 100000, 41 000 
and 23 000 years are evidenced and, as primarily inferred 
by Milankovitch, they are the consequences of variations 
in the motion of Earth through space. Orbital variations 
may be described by three parameters: the degree of 
ellipticity, the angle of tilt between the axis of rotation of 
Earth relative to the Earth-Sun orbit and the orientation 
of the axis of rotation with respect to the orbital path, 
which varies because of the precession phenomenon. All 
these three parameters undergo predictable changes due to 
the gravitational attractions exerted by the Sun, the Moon 
and the planets. These long-term variations modify the 
spatial and seasonal sequences of solar energy deposition 
at the surface of our planet, resulting in variations of 
Earth’s climate. For example, at the end of the last glacial 
period, about 10000 years ago, the inclination of the 
Earth’s rotational axis relative to the ecliptic plane was 
about 24.5° (at present 23.5°) and the closest approach of 
the orbiting Earth to the Sun occurred in July (at present 
January). This past condition resulted in about 8% more 
solar radiation reaching the northern hemisphere in the 
summer and about 8% less in winter time. Although 
the astronomical effects are weak by themselves, they 
are relayed by strongly nonlinear feedback effects which 
result in large-amplitude climatic variations. Besides, the 
climate is also thought to exhibit large variations by itself, 
without any changes to astronomical effects. 


Effects of anthropogenic activities on climatic 
evolution and atmospheric composition 

It is thought that anthropogenic activities, responsible 
for a rapid increase in gas and particle emissions in the 
atmosphere, are potentially able to destabilize the global 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


October 1979 October 1930 


October 1983 October 1984 


October 1987 October 1983 


October 1981 October 1982 


October 1985 October 1986 


r ¢ 


October 1990 


October 1989 


Dobson Units 


Figure 6. Total column ozone concentrations (in Dobson units; 100 Dobson = 1 mm thick layer of pure ozone in STP conditions) over 
Antarctica as determined by TOMS (Total Ozone Monitoring Satellite) during October from 1979 to 1990. (From Graedel and Crutzen 


(1993).) 


climate of Earth. The carbon dioxide content of the 
atmosphere has increased from 275 ppmv at the end of 
the eighteenth century up to 350 ppmv at the present 
time. This increase is due to a variety of worldwide 
human activities. Until about 1950, the release of CO, 
was mainly due to the oxidation of organic matter in 
agricultural soils. Currently, the largest net source of 
CO) is fossil fuel combustion. Tropical deforestation also 
contributes to the atmospheric increase, although to a 
lesser degree. Because carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, 
this increase is expected to enhance the infrared opacity 
of the atmosphere, resulting in an increase of Earth’s 
surface temperature. In addition to this direct effect, 
related secondary effects could play an important role, 
like the expected increase in the water evaporation rate, 
yielding both an additional warming, because water vapor 
is a greenhouse gas, and a counteracting cooling due to 
the increase of cloud cover and therefore of the average 
planetary albedo. It is emphasized that H2O is the most 
important greenhouse gas, blocking the infrared radiation 
from Earth’s surface more efficiently than CO, does. The 
temperature record for the past century shows that about 
0.5°C of warming has occurred in the last 130 years and 
that the last two decades were the warmest during this 
period. Although some natural variability cannot be 
excluded, it is thought that this general warming is the 
consequence of the regular atmospheric CO) increase. 
Another consequence of anthropogenic gaseous 
emissions is the decrease of the stratospheric ozone 
content, due to the destructive action of chlorine contained 
in CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons). CFCs (mainly CFCl3 and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


CF,Cl,) are not broken down in the troposphere. Over a 
period of a few years, these very stable gases move from 
their release point at the surface up in the stratosphere, 
where the solar ultraviolet radiation is intense enough to 
break them and release active chlorine species (Cl, ClO), 
able to destroy ozone. Satellite observations, performed 
since the beginning of the 1980s, show that stratospheric 
ozone regularly decreases at a global scale, with a rate of 
a few per cent per decade. This decrease is attributed to 
the action of CFCs. It has been decided at the Montreal 
Conference of 1990 to stop the emission of CFCs, but 
the long characteristic time of this destructive process 
prevents any significant improvement being obtained 
before the middle of the next century. The most dramatic 
illustration of stratospheric ozone destruction is the 
Antarctic ‘OZONE HOLE’, a rapid and accelerating decrease 
in the ozone over the Antarctic each September and 
October. The decrease in total ozone content may reach 
a factor of three. As soon as it was discovered, in 1985, 
attention was focused on the possibility of an enhanced 
chlorine destruction cycle, which was rapidly confirmed 
by observations and experimental work. 

The strong decrease of stratospheric ozone over the 
Antarctic during the austral spring, which is illustrated in 
figure 6, is due to the very low temperatures occurring in 
the polar stratosphere of the southern hemisphere. During 
the polar winter, in the absence of solar radiation (from 
June to September), the temperature in the stratosphere 
can be as low as —85°C, because polar air is enclosed 
in the ‘polar vortex’, a very large whirlwind which 
develops during winter over the polar regions. These 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


very low temperatures are responsible for the formation 
of ‘polar stratospheric clouds’ (or PSCs). These clouds are 
composed of pure water or mixed water/nitric acid ice. 
The surfaces of the PSCs serve as reaction sites for chemical 
processes able to transform unreactive chlorine species 
to reactive ones. These catalytic processes take place 
during the four months of the polar night and produce, 
from inactive HCl and CIONO) species, large quantities 
of HOCI and Cl, (see later). The combined effects of 
denitrification, through freezing and sedimentation of 
HNO; crystals, and chlorine radicals released at sunrise 
(CI, ClO) from the photodissociation of HOC] and Cl, 
yield a massive destruction of ozone in the polar vortex. 
Incidently, other anthropogenic constituents, like bromine, 
play a similar, although less pronounced, role in the 
destruction of stratospheric ozone. 

At stratospheric levels, the photodissociation of 
molecular oxygen by ultraviolet radiation at wavelengths 
of less than 240 nm produces atomic oxygen, which further 
combines with molecular oxygen to produce ozone 


O,+hv>O0+0 
O0+0.+M—> 03+M. 


Ozone is rapidly photodissociated back to atomic oxygen 
by photons in the wavelength range 200-300 nm 


O3+hv > O2 +O. 


‘Odd oxygen’ species (O, O3) may recombine together 
according to the reactions 


O3 +O > 20, 
O0+0+M—> O.+M. 


The previous cycle, first identified by Sydney 
Chapman in the 1930s, must be completed by a set of other 
catalytic cycles evidenced in the last 20 years. A few minor 
constituents play a crucial role in destroying atmospheric 
ozone through catalytic cycles of the following type 


X +03 > XO +O, 

O3+hv >— 0O+O, 

O+X0O > X+O, 
net:203 +hv > 3 Or. 


Along this chain, the radicals X and XO catalyse the 
conversion of O3 into O,. The produced oxygen atom 
regenerates the catalyser X. The Chapman cycle is obtained 
for X = O. The hydroxyl radical, produced by the 
photodissociation of water vapor molecules, also plays a 
significant role (X = OH). Paul Crutzen found in 1970 that 
nitrogen oxides NO and NO, (X = NO), partly produced 
by agricultural activities and fossil fuel combustion, are 
quite efficient catalysers for ozone destruction. Mario 
Molina and Sherwood Rowland, who obtained together 
with P Crutzen the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1995, 
have exhibited the crucial role of chlorine contained in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


CFCs on the chemistry of stratospheric ozone. Cl and 
ClO released by CFCs in the stratosphere are found 
to be still more efficient than NO in destroying ozone, 
through the previously mentioned catalytic cycle (X = Cl). 
Numerical models of stratospheric chemistry have been 
constructed in order to examine the consequences of all 
cycles previously described on the long-term evolution 
of ozone. The decrease of stratospheric ozone measured 
during the last 15 years is globally well reproduced by 
these models. 


Bibliography 

Banks P M and Kockarts G 1973 Aeronomy (New York: 
Academic) 

Brasseur G and Solomon S 1994 Aeronomy of the Middle 
Atmosphere (Dordecht: Reidel)) 

Graedel T E and Crutzen P J 1993 Atmospheric Change, an 
Earth System Perspective (New York: Freeman) 

Holton J R 1979 An Introduction to Dynamic Meteorology 
(New York: Academic) 

Lewis J S and Prinn R G 1984 Planets and their Atmospheres 
(New York: Academic) 


Eric Chassefiére 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earth’s Interior 


The interior of the Earth can be most simply described 
as a series of concentrically nested spheres, the main 
ones being, from the outside in, the CRUST, MANTLE, and 
core. This gross structure, recognized by seismologists 
early in the twentieth century, appears to be analogous 
to that of most silicate bodies—planets, satellites and 
probably the asteroids or their parent bodies—except the 
very smallest. The process of DIFFERENTIATION, by which 
these zoned structures were developed, probably resulted 
from extensive melting very early in the history of the 
solar system. The discovery that solid bodies are grossly 
differentiated was one of the most important geological 
findings of twentieth century space exploration, beginning 
with the Apollo expeditions to the Moon. 

The Earth’s interior will be described from the outside 
in, which is also the order of decreasing knowledge. 
The crust is now rather well-understood, or at least well 
described; the mantle can be described within certain 
constraints; and the core is understood least of all. 
Knowledge of the interior comes from a wide range of 
sources. The exposed interior is roughly the province of 
geology; study of the hidden interior, obviously almost the 
entire volume of the Earth, is the province of geophysics. 
Geologists study what can be seen, geophysicists what 
cannot, although there is complete overlap between the 
two fields. 


Crust 

There are two main divisions to the Earth’s crust 
(figure 1), oceanic and continental. Continental crust 
can be summarized, simplistically, as old, thick and 
granitic. Oceanic crust can similarly be summarized 
as young, thin and basaltic. Furthermore, the oceanic 
crust is demonstrably mobile; as shown on the map, it 
is forming continuously by basaltic volcanism along mid- 
ocean ridges, and moving away from these ridges by the 
process of sea-floor spreading. 

The outline just given of the Earth’s crust is a subset, 
so to speak, of an even broader scheme, the now well- 
known theory of plate tectonics, which arose within about 
two years in the mid-1960s by the sudden coalescence 
of several lines of evidence. The Earth’s crust, or more 
correctly its lithosphere (whose definition will be given 
shortly), is now believed to consist of a number of plates. 
Plates are segments of the lithosphere, relatively inactive 
and rigid, bounded in the simplest examples (e.g. the 
Nazca Plate) by some combination of oceanic ridges (or 
spreading centers), transform faults and subduction zones. 
The salient aspect of plate tectonic theory is that these 
plates are considered to be mobile, moving horizontally 
more or less in the manner proposed by Alfred Wegener 
in his classic continental drift theory. Plate tectonics alone 
fills many books, but its main features can be understood 
with the aid of figure 1. To begin our descent into the 
interior of the Earth, let us examine the vertical structure 
of the continental crust (figure 2). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Continental crust is an infinitely complex collection of 
igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. However, 
the cross section in figure 2 is offered as representing 
the most important features of the oldest and most 
fundamental part of this crust, the granite-greenstone 
terrains of Precambrian (older than about 600 million 
years) areas such as the Canadian Shield. Relatively few 
people have more than glimpsed such terrain, and even 
most geologists have only a general acquaintance with 
it. The reason is basically that continental crust as a 
whole is largely blanketed with relatively young rocks, 
such as the sandstones, shales and limestones exposed 
in the walls of the Grand Canyon. Furthermore, even 
Precambrian shields are criss-crossed with Proterozoic 
(2.5 billion- to 600 million-year-old) mountain belts or roots 
thereof. However, underlying most such mountain belts 
is rock of the sort shown here. Granite is the familiar 
pink igneous rock found on building fronts, cemetery 
headstones and monuments. Greenstone, less familiar, 
is essentially a greenish assemblage of metamorphosed 
volcanic rocks, originally basalts and related types. 

The continental crust is thus underlain in most 
areas by rocks of the granite-greenstone type. From 
top to bottom, one will encounter successively belts 
of metamorphosed volcanics (greenstones), intruded by 
granitic rocks (many of which are not granites in the 
strict petrographic sense). At greater depths, these rocks 
are succeeded by what appear to be the metamorphic 
equivalents of granites, greenstones and sedimentary 
rocks, collectively termed granulites. These are dense, 
thoroughly recrystallized and highly deformed rocks. 

A recent discovery, from seismic reflection profiling, 
is that unlike upper crustal rocks, and obviously unlike 
the deformed rocks of mountain belts, the lower crust 
granulites are largely flat-lying or within 20 to 30 
degrees of the horizontal. These granulite layers were 
probably formed by a combination of deformation and 
recrystallization, acting on what were originally layers 
of sedimentary or volcanic rock. Readers in the United 
Kingdom can see (weather permitting) outstanding 
exposures of granulite along the northwest Scottish coast, 
around the village of Scourie. 

The base of the continental crust is the Mohorovitié 
discontinuity, discovered by the seismologist of that name 
early in the century. The Moho, as it is commonly called, 
typically occurs at depths of 40 kilometers, but in areas 
such as the Andes or the Tibetan Plateau the crust is 
much thicker and the Moho may be 70 km or more deep. 
It is generally believed to be a compositional boundary, 
marked by a sudden increase in density as indicated by 
the increasing velocity of seismic waves. However, there 
is much to learn about this widely known boundary. 

Oceanic crust differs from continental crust in almost 
every way. Its gross composition is basaltic, the basalt 
occurring, from the surface down, as lava flows, dikes 
(nearly vertical, sheet-like intrusive bodies), and near the 
base of the crust, the metamorphosed equivalents of these 
basaltic rocks. Newly formed oceanic crust can be seen 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


GLOBAL TECTONIC ACTIVITY MAP OF THE EARTH 
Tectonism and Volcanism of the Last One Million Years 


Paul D. Lowman Jr., Penny Masuoka, Brian C. Montgomery, 
Demetra O. Salisbury, and Jacob Yates 


NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center Robinson Projection 
Greenbelt, Maryland 20771 ©) Mainly oceanic crust 
October 1998 


LEGEND 
—_rL._ Actively-spreading ridges and transform taulis 


a Total spreading rate, Evy ser NUVEL-1 
14 


1 model 
(DeMets et al., Geophys. J. International, 101, 425, 1990) 


Major active fault or fault zone; dashed where nature, 
tion, or activity uncertain 


——~ <= Normal fault or rift; hachures on downthrown side 
Reverse fault (overthrust, subduction zones); generalized; 
“Ake ate on upthrown side 


+” Volcanic centers active within the last one million years: 
$ generalized, Minor basaltic centers and seamounts omitted 


Figure 1. Tectonic and volcanic activity map of the Earth, covering the last one million years. Modified from Lowman (1982). This 


figure is reproduced as Color Plate 24. 


in places like Iceland, located on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. 
The crust under ocean basins is typically much thinner 
than under continents, the Moho generally lying at depths 
of 5 to 10 kilometers. 

The origin of the oceanic crust is now, we believe, 
fairly well understood, an understanding that even 
skeptics will concede to be a major triumph for plate 
tectonic theory. In the context of this article, the dominant 
characteristic of oceanic crust is its youth and mobility. 
Because oceanic crust is eventually recycled through the 
mantle in subduction zones (figure 1), very little of it is 
more than about 200 million years old, in contrast to the 
4 billion year age of the oldest exposed continental rocks, 
the Acasta Gneiss in Canada. 


Mantle 

Let us begin our descent into the mantle by returning to 
the deferred definition of lithosphere. The term crust is 
both a compositional and mechanical one, referring to the 
boundary between the silica-rich rocks of the crust and the 
silica-poor, iron- and magnesium-rich, rocks of the mantle. 
The term lithosphere in contrast is essentially a mechanical 
one, referring to an outer layer of the Earth that is relatively 
strong, elastic and rigid. This lithosphere includes, and is 
much thicker than, the crust. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Under ocean basins it varies from nearly zero at mid- 
ocean ridges to, very roughly, 50 to 100 km near subduction 
zones (where the oldest crust descends). However, under 
the old and stable parts of continents, such as the Canadian 
Shield, the lithosphere is much thicker, at least 200 km 
and in some estimates considerably more. Although the 
essence of the definition is mechanical, the subcontinental 
lithosphere in particular may have formed by extraction 
of basaltic magmas through geologic time, thus having 
a compositional connotation. In plate tectonic theory, 
horizontal crustal motions such as sea floor spreading and 
continental drift are considered the expression of motions 
(geometrically, rotations on a sphere) of the lithosphere, 
the thinner included crust being carried along with this 
lithosphere. (The term plate, to remind the reader, refers 
to the lithosphere, not just the crust.) 

Below the lithosphere lies the asthenosphere. It is here 
that our ignorance of the Earth’s interior becomes acute, 
for the thickness and extent of the asthenosphere, and 
in fact its very definition, are controversial. Physically, 
the asthenosphere is defined as a weak zone, or shell, 
characterized by low rigidity and strength, expressed as 
a decrease in the velocity of seismic compressional (‘P’) 
waves. In classic geophysics, the asthenosphere was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


considered the zone of flowage responsible for the well- 
known post-glacial rebound of Scandinavia and northern 
Canada. In plate tectonic theory, it is thought to be 
the low-resistance layer on which plates move. Several 
lines of evidence indicate that the asthenosphere is largely 
a thermal feature, related to either partial melting or 
at least decreased shear strength expressing increasing 
temperature with depth. However, some geophysicists, 
partly because of the relationship of asthenospheric depth 
to oceanic crust age, define it on the basis of geochemical 
characteristics that will not be covered here. 

Our descent into the mantle will be guided by P J 
Wyllie’s comprehensive diagram (figure 3), showing the 
main inferred characteristics of the Earth’s interior all the 
way to the center some 6300 km down. 

The composition of the mantle has been very slowly 
uncovered by a century of work in several fields. Since 
it is exposed almost nowhere—and there only in limited, 
highly metamorphosed form—mantle composition has 
been an unusually difficult problem. Some volcanoes 
bring up samples from depths of perhaps 200 kilometers, 
diamonds being the celebrated example, but these are 
our only direct source of knowledge. Seismic properties 
have traditionally been the main basis for estimates of 
mantle composition, although they provide essentially 
only constraints on composition. Basaltic and related 
magmas are clearly of mantle derivation, and some 75 
years of theoretical and experimental petrology pioneered 
by N LBowen in the 1920s have, combined with other lines 
of evidence, led to fairly detailed profiles of the mantle, 
shown in figure 3. 

The upper mantle is believed to consist of iron- and 
magnesium-rich rocks similar to those found at the surface, 
with names unfamiliar even to many geologists, such 
as lherzolite. However, as shown in figure 3, pressure 
increases rapidly with depth; a thousand kilometers 
down, the pressure is roughly half a million times 
atmospheric pressure at the surface. With increasing 
pressure, minerals invert to a series of denser and denser 
polymorphs (i.e. same chemical composition, but different 
crystal structure), such as perovskite (an iron-magnesium 
silicate). They may dissociate to form new mineral 
assemblages, that is, new rocks of varieties never found 
at the Earth’s surface. 

These phase changes are the result of the increase 
in pressure and temperature. The melting point of most 
solids is raised by increasing pressure, in a complex 
way, and it is believed that the mantle is close to its 
melting curve below the asthenosphere. There are several 
seismically identified discontinuities in the mantle, of 
which the one 650 km down is the most prominent. This 
discontinuity, actually a zone some tens of kilometers 
thick, is thought by most petrologists to represent the 
transition from lherzolite to perovskite. Regardless 
of its actual nature, this discontinuity is geophysically 
important as the boundary between the upper and lower 
mantle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


One of the most controversial topics in geophysics 
is the nature of motion in the Earth’s mantle. It has 
been speculated for most of the century that despite its 
solid nature, the mantle is in slow continuous motion, 
specifically by thermally driven convection currents. The 
confirmation of crustal mobility in the form of sea- 
floor spreading, and other lines of evidence, has greatly 
strengthened the concept of mantle convection. However, 
it is by no means clear just what pattern or patterns such 
currents follow. It was originally proposed, in the 1930s, 
that the entire mantle was convecting, a view still held 
by many eminent geophysicists. However, the 650 km 
discontinuity is clearly a density barrier to whole-mantle 
convection. The pattern may consist of upper and lower 
mantle convection cells. 

Another complication is the possible existence of 
more localized mantle motions, plumes of hotter material 
rising slowly through the mantle, perhaps analogous 
to the popular ‘lava lamps’. There is good seismic 
evidence for at least some mantle plumes, for example 
under the volcanically active Yellowstone National Park. 
However, it is not known where such plumes originate; 
some workers consider them to begin at the core-mantle 
boundary, and to rise some 2900 km almost to the Earth’s 
surface. 

One of the longest-known and best-confirmed phe- 
nomena of plate tectonics is subduction, the downward 
movement of slabs of oceanic crust and lithosphere com- 
plementary to sea-floor spreading (where crust is created, 
as shown on figure 1). These slabs must sink to several 
hundred kilometers depth, inverting to denser phases as 
they go, and contributing to the heterogeneity of the man- 
tle. Subduction thus has the interesting implication that 
surficial geologic processes can influence the nature and 
behavior of the mantle at enormous depths. 


Core 

It has been known for centuries that the interior of the 
Earth must be much denser than the crust, since the 
specific gravity of the entire globe is about 5.5, in contrast 
to that of, for example, granite, which is about 2.8. 
Striking confirmation that the Earth could not be granite 
all the way through was provided by the discovery that 
RADIOACTIVITY Was a major source of heat in the Earth. But 
the radioactivity of granite in the crust alone was enough 
to account for observed heat flow, which would be enough 
to melt the interior if it were all granite. 

Seismologists Gutenberg and Weichert identified a 
major discontinuity about 2900 km down early in the 
twentieth century, which was rapidly recognized as the 
boundary of a discrete core. Its physical properties 
corresponded roughly to that of iron, and the existence of 
iron METEORITES demonstrated that iron could be segregated 
in the center of a planet. The core does not transmit 
shear waves, leading to the conclusion that it was liquid. 
However, further seismologic studies by I Lehmann in the 
1930s showed that the inner part of the core, below about 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


GRANITE - GREENSTONE TERRAIN 


Cross-Section, Present Time 


Greenstones Granitold 
Intrusive Diapirs 
Present Granite 
Surface 


Metasediments 


Mafic Intrusive 
Dikes : Granite 


Greenstones Granite 
Batholith 


LEGEND 


Py Greenstone Belt FS 


Metasediments 


Ca-rich 
ee Anorthosites 


S=—> Diapiric 
my fics 
ee Granitoids 
\ 


No Vertical Exaggeration 


2 a ___Intermediate 
me Granulites 


(TTG Suite) Mafic 
= Granulites 
Intrusive 


Granites Punter 


Peridotites 


Figure 2. Structure and composition of continental crust as represented by granite-greenstone terrains (e.g. Superior Province, 


Canadian Shield). From Lowman (1989). 


(a) (b) 


1000 


2000 
€ E 
not Mantle Rod 
= 3000 s 
o. a 
a a 


4000 


5000 


6000 


6 8 10 12 0 100 
Wave velocity (km/s) 


Temperature (°C) 


0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 
ca x 


Lherzolite 


Perovskite 59 
Solidus 
curves 
Fe-Ni-O alloy 10 
(estimated) 


Pressure (GPa) 


200 


300 


300 400 
Pressure (GPa) 


Figure 3. (Left) Seismic wave velocities (P-waves) in the interior of the Earth as a function of depth. (Right) Inferred phases in the 
interior of the Earth as function of depth, pressure, and temperature. From Wyllie (1992). 


5000 km depth, was solid, an iron (presumably) sphere 
roughly the size of the Moon. 

This general physical picture of the Earth’s core is 
agreed upon by most geophysicists. However, continuing 
progress in seismology and geomagnetism are refining 
it rapidly. The main geomagnetic field is now plausibly 
explained as the result of convection currents in the liquid 
outer core, which, cutting the lines of force of the Earth’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


field, constitute a self-regenerating dynamo mechanism. 
This is not perpetual motion; interested readers should 
consult the listed references. 

There is now evidence that the core-mantle boundary 
has considerable relief, on the order of a kilometer, perhaps 
related to the rise of mantle plumes if such do in fact exist. 
These irregularities may cause slight but real variations, 
over periods of years, in the EARTH'S ROTATION. It may be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


helpful to visualize the Earth not as a solid rotating sphere, 
but as two such spheres, the inner one being the Moon- 
sized solid core separated from the outer one (the solid 
mantle) by the liquid segment of the core. Complications 
in the motion of such a decoupled system can easily be 
imagined. 

Estimates of core compositions have been consider- 
ably refined; nickel is almost certainly a major alloying 
element, with traces of other siderophile elements such as 
platinum that are depleted in the Earth’s crust and upper 
mantle. There are also probably substantial amounts of a 
lighter alloying element in the core, probably oxygen or 
silicon. 


Summary 

Our knowledge of the interior of the Earth has increased 
enormously through the twentieth century. Furthermore, 
we now know something of the interiors of other planets, 
providing the basis for comparative studies (see PLANETARY 
INTERIORS). However, the interior below a few tens of 
kilometers will be inaccessible to direct study for centuries 
to come, perhaps forever, and study of the inside of the 
Earth will be a fruitful field for geophysical research for 
many years to come. 


Bibliography 

Anderson D L 1992 The Earth’s interior Understanding the 
Earth ed G C Brown et al (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) ch 3 

Anderson D L 1995 Lithosphere, asthenosphere, and 
perisphere Rev. Geophys. 33 125-49 

Brown G C, Hawkesworth C J and Wilson R C L (eds) 
1992 Understanding the Earth (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) p 551 

Dziewonski A M, Forte A M, Su W and Woodward R L 
1993 Seismic tomography and geodynamics Relating 
Geophysical Structures and Processes: the Jeffreys Volume 
(Geophysical Monograph 76, IUGG Volume 16) ed 
K Aki and R Dmowska (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) pp 67-105 

Hide R, Clayton R W, Hager B H, Spieth M A and 
Voorhies C V 1993 Topographic core—-mantle coupling 
and fluctuations in the Earth’s rotation Relating 
Geophysical Structures and Processes: the Jeffreys Volume 
(Geophysical Monograph 76, IUGG Volume 16) ed K 
Aki and R Dmowska (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) pp 107-20 

Jeanloz R 1993 Chemical reactions at the Earth’s core— 
mantle boundary: summary of evidence and ge- 
omagnetic implications Relating Geophysical Struc- 
tures and Processes: the Jeffreys Volume (Geophysical 
Monograph 76, IUGG Volume 16) ed K Aki and R 
Dmowska (Washington, DC: American Geophysical 
Union) pp 121-7 

Lowman P D Jr 1982 A more realistic view of global 
tectonism J. Geol. Ed. 30 97-107 

Lowman P D Jr 1984 Formation of the earliest continental 
crust: inferences from the Scourian Complex of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


northwest Scotland and geophysical models of the 
lower continental crust Precambrian Res. 24 199-215 

Lowman P D Jr 1989 Comparative planetology and the 
origin of continental crust Precambrian Res. 44 171-95 

Rudnick R L and Fountain D M 1995 Nature and 
composition of the continental crust: a lower crustal 
perspective Rev. Geophys. 33 267-309 

Wyllie P J 1992 Experimental petrology: Earth materials 
science Understanding the Earth ed G C Brown et al 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) ch 4 


Paul D Lowman Jr 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earth’s Rotation 


In the absence of internal or external perturbation, the 
Earth would rotate in space around its center of mass at 
a uniform angular velocity and around a fixed rotation 
axis lying at 23°26’ with respect to the ecliptic pole 
axis and directed approximately towards the northern 
star. The mean motion is a rotation in space every 23 h 
56 min 4.10 s but, in reality, the Earth being composed of 
various non-rigid parts and not being isolated in space, 
the rotation is perturbed by a wide variety of geophysical 
and astronomical processes. These perturbations can be 
investigated in terms of causes and effects and are subject 
to theoretical investigations (see also EARTH'S ROTATION: 
THEORY). 


Irregularities of the Earth’s rotation—historical 
perspective 

It is worthwhile to approach the Earth’s rotation from a 
historical perspective. The chronology of the discovery 
of the Earth’s rotational irregularities also reflects the 
progress of astrometric and geodetic techniques and time 
measurement. 


Precession 
The first irregularity discovered in the Earth’s rotation, and 
the largest one, does not concern the angular speed itself 
but the direction of the rotation axis with respect to the 
stars. In the Western world, as early as the 2nd century 
BC, the Greek astronomer HIPPARCHUS discovered that the 
vernal equinox, that is the direction of the Sun when it 
crosses over the equatorial plane towards the northern 
hemisphere, precesses with respect to the background 
stars. In other words, the equatorial plane turns clockwise 
at a fixed inclination of 23°26’ (obliquity) with respect to the 
ecliptic (figure 1(a)). The rate is of about 50” yr~' and thus 
the vernal equinox moves through all the constellations 
of the zodiac over the 25800 yr precession period. At 
present the vernal equinox is in the constellation Pisces and 
is slowly approaching Aquarius, as shown in figure 1(0). 
The diurnal rotation axis is perpendicular to the 
equatorial plane. Because of the PRECESSION, this axis 
describes clockwise a cone around the pole axes of the 
ecliptic, completing a turn in 25800 yr, as shown in 
figure 1(a). At present the Earth’s rotation axis points 
towards the Pole Star or North Star, but in 13000 yr the 
precession of the rotation axis will mean that the bright 
star Vega in the constellation Lyra will be approximately at 
the North Celestial Pole, while in another 25 800 yr Polaris 
will once again be the Pole Star. 


Nutation 

Other irregularities in the Earth’s rotation axis motion with 
respect to the stars are periodic oscillations of the rotation 
axis, called NUTATIONS, superimposed on the precession and 
predicted in the Principia Mathematica of Newton. These 
periodic oscillations are of much smaller amplitudes, no 
larger than 1’. Therefore they were not discovered until 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Pole of ecliptic Kg 


P North Celestial Pole 


<p 


= a 


precession of 
equinoxes 


ae +30° 


oO * 
fr aries 


+20° 
Pegas use 


e _ a 

. +10° 
cae A 
> i . e « 
Vernal 
Equinox f 


Equator 


\ aN aD \ > 
b. @ / 
‘ Cetus / ” 
o ae ¥ SS 
. Pd 4 
e ct * . * x -20 
s “e Capricovinus 
° ee 
Fi oN Pa 30° 
2h th Oh 23h 22h 


Figure 1. (a) Precession of the Earth’s rotation axis (P) around 
the ecliptic pole (K). (b) Precession of the vernal equinox through 
the constellations. 


the advent of astrometric techniques at the beginning of 
the 18th century (see ASTROMETRY: HISTORY). 

In 1748, the English astronomer Bradley first observed 
the most important term of the nutation, associated with 
the regression of the lunar orbit’s line of nodes, which 
has a period of 18.6 yr and an amplitude of the order of 
10”. Other terms, up to several thousand in most accurate 
models, are at least 10 times smaller. 


Polar motion 

EULER predicted in 1765 that the rotation axis would also 
show a motion with respect to an Earth-fixed reference 
frame if the axis of rotation is not coincident with the 
principal axis of inertia—even if the Earth is isolated 
and a rigid body. The American astronomer Chandler 
took that important step with the discovery, in 1891, 
of that motion from observations of the geographical 
latitude of astronomical observatories. However, the main 
component is a 433 day periodic term, differing from 
that predicted by Euler (305 days) based on the Earth’s 
ellipticity, because of the non-rigidity of the Earth. It has 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.0 T 


| towards Greenwich meridian 
North pole ~ 
-5.0 > 4 
g 
Oo 
3 -10.07 4 
£ 
-15.0 + et 
ee 
1991.5 7 
-20.0 1 1 1 
-10.0 -5.0 0.0 5.0 10.0 


meters 


Figure 2. Motion of the Earth’s rotation axis on the crust. Notice 
the long periodic polar motion composed of the annual term and 
the Chandler wobble, and the diurnal clockwise oscillations due 
to precession—nutation. 


a variable amplitude up to 0.3” (corresponding to 10 m 
on the surface of the Earth). As well as the Chandler 
wobble, an important annual term up to 0.1” exists and is 
interpreted as the effect of seasonal mass displacements. 
Moreover, the precession—nutation gives rise to a small 
retrograde diurnal polar motion of the rotation axis in 
the Earth, as shown in figure 2 (see also POLAR MOTION AND 
LENGTH OF DAY). 


Variations in length of day 


Earth’s diurnal rotation was humanity’s time keeper until 
the discovery by de Sitter (1927) and Spencer Jones 
(1939) of the secular deceleration of the Earth’s rotation 
speed and afterwards of its seasonal variations by Stoyko 
(1937) thanks to the improvement of precision clocks. 
Actually the rotation rate of the Earth’s crust exhibits 
complicated fluctuations in speed to several parts in 10-8 
(corresponding to a variation of a few milliseconds (ms) in 
the length of day, or LOD). These fluctuations are mostly 
seasonal (1 yr, halfa year cycle) and also exhibit oscillations 
of all sorts of longer and shorter periods, such as the so- 
called ‘decade fluctuations’. Moreover, analyses of solar 
eclipse observations recorded by Babylonians, Greeks, 
Arabs and Chinese indicate that the rotation rate decreases 
secularly, which causes an increase of the LOD of about 
2 ms century~!. 

All these variations are the consequences of the 
angular momentum balance. This involves changes in the 
Earth’s rotation due to the torques acting on the solid Earth 
as well as those due to changes in the mass distribution 
within the solid Earth, which modify its inertia tensor. This 
will be described in more detail in the section ‘Dynamical 
description’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Effect of the Earth’s rotation on science and 
everyday life 


As will be seen later, measuring the Earth’s rotation 
involves nowadays large-scale, expensive observing 
techniques. Before we describe the state of the art, it 
is necessary to stress the importance of knowledge of 
the Earth’s rotation by underlining its consequences in 
fundamental science, technology and everyday life. 


The Earth’s rotation and time 

The Earth’s rotation rules our whole life through the 
alternation of the days and nights. Therefore it constitutes 
the most natural unit for reckoning time. Inhabitants of the 
Earth are much more concerned about the diurnal cycle of 
the Sun than those of the star. From an Earth-bounded 
point of view, the Sun is moving slightly more slowly 
than a star, because the Sun is orbiting counterclockwise 
annually around the Earth whereas the diurnal sidereal 
rotation is clockwise. Hence the solar day is about 4 min 
longer than the sidereal day. Because of the variations of 
the Sun’s velocity (or equivalently of the orbital velocity 
of the Earth in a heliocentric reference frame) and because 
of the OBLIQUITY OF THE ECLIPTIC, the solar day is subject to 
small variations of up to 30 s during the year. A mean 
solar day has been defined and conventionally taken as 
86 400s or 24h. The diurnal cycle of the Sun constitutes the 
fundamental unit of the majority of calendars. Differences 
between CALENDARS concern the choice of greater cycle for 
reckoning the days (the month and the year), that is for 
establishing the dates. The Gregorian calendar, which 
constitutes nowadays the international reference, has 
been designed in order to keep the coincidence between 
the seasons and the occurrences of the equinoxes and 
solstices, of which the directions in space vary owing to 
the precession. As the tropical year is not a multiple of 
the number of days, the year of the Gregorian calendar 
contains an integer number of days but is subject to 
variations from one year to another (365 or 366 days), so 
that the mean year remains equal to the tropical year. 

The succession of the mean solar days enables us to 
define a time scale, the so-called UNIVERSAL TIME. Thanks to 
the advent of the atomic clock, the Earth’s rotation rate has 
been shown to be not uniform and consequently Universal 
Time has been given up as a time scale reference. The 
international time unit, the second of atomic time, has 
been chosen to be equal to the average of the second of 
the mean solar day for the epoch 1900. The INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC TIME scale, the Temps atomique international (TAI), 
is derived naturally with respect to the Universal Time 
(UT1) scale. In order to maintain the coherence between 
atomic time and universal time, an intermediary atomic 
time scale is maintained for civil use. This is the Coordinated 
Universal Time (UTC), which differs from the TAI by an 
integer number of seconds so that it never shifts from the 
UT1 by more than 0.9 s. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Earth’s rotation is crucial for physical theories 

The Earth’s rotation provides a validation of Newtonian 
dynamics. Newton asserts a distinction between inertial 
reference frames and non-inertial frames, undergoing 
acceleration with respect to the inertial frame, and in 
which the so-called non-inertial effects, such as centrifugal 
and Coriolis effects, appear. Assuming that a star-fixed 
reference frame is inertial, the rotating crust is a non- 
inertial frame. In turn the mass elements of the Earth 
should be subject to centrifugal effects, implying an 
equatorial bulge and a lower gravity at the equator than at 
the poles. This was shown in the 18th century by geodetic 
measurements and time pendulum recording at different 
latitudes and constituted a very important validation of 
Newtonian concepts. The second proof was obtained with 
the famous FOUCAULT'S PENDULUM designed by him in 1851, 
which exhibits an apparent turning of its oscillation plane 
under the Coriolis effect due to the Earth’s rotation. 


Geophysical effects of the Earth’s rotation 

The Earth’s rotation strongly influences the atmosphere. 
First of all, the succession of the day and night induces 
daily fluctuations of temperature, and in turn changes 
of the pressure, and wind fields. Secondly the air 
motions are ruled partly by the Coriolis effect. This 
allows understanding of the wind patterns, especially the 
direction of the predominant winds with latitude. 

The Earth’s rotational irregularities have a role in 
geophysical phenomena. As an example, the decreasing 
rate of the Earth’s rotation could induce a decrease of the 
Earth’s flattening because of the decreasing centrifugal 
effect. 


Geometric description—The Earth orientation 
parameters 

The above considerations focus on the Earth’s angular 
velocity vector. However, the astrometric or geodetic 
observations do not depend directly on this quantity but 
on the orientation of the ground-based stations and the 
celestial reference frame involved in the observations. 
Numerical methods, such as least-squares analyses, 
allow us to determine the orientation from the rough 
observations. In order to harmonize the determinations 
carried out around the world, the international scientific 
community has adopted a unique set of Earth orientation 
parameters (EOPs). The basic idea is to separate the 
modeled orientation changes from the unknown ones. The 
model provides the effect of mean diurnal rotation and of 
the precession—nutation. The difference between the real 
orientation and the model is described by five orientation 
parameters. 

Firstly, two celestial pole offsets compensate for the 
defect in the precession—nutation model of the polar 
geographic axis; they are constrained by convention to 
contain oscillations having periods greater than a few 
days. The precession—-nutation model and the celestial 
pole offsets define the spatial direction of an axis whose 
intersection with the celestial sphere is called the Celestial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ephemeris Pole. The word ‘ephemeris’ refers to the fact 
that the position of the pole in space is specified by 
the ephemeris provided by the conventional model for 
nutation. 

The third parameter, the universal time variations 
UT1 — UTC, integrates the irregularities of the Earth’s 
rotation speed. The Universal Time UT1 is the time scale 
built on the Earth’s rotation angle, assuming that the 
rotation angle is proportional to UT1. As seen previously, 
the Coordinated Universal Time UTC is an atomic time 
scale, evolving uniformly with respect to the international 
atomic time (TAI). 

Finally the two polar motion coordinates, x and 
y, provide the position of the Celestial Ephemeris Pole 
in the terrestrial frame, that is the shift between the 
Celestial Ephemeris Pole and the North Geographic Pole, 
but expressed in the terrestrial frame. It can be shown 
theoretically that the Celestial Ephemeris Pole represents 
as a first approximation the diurnal average of the Earth’s 
rotation axis. Therefore the polar motion of the Celestial 
Ephemeris Pole, restricted to its long periodic variations, 
represents the motion of the rotation axis on the crust. 

Actually three angles are sufficient to describe the 
defects in the a priori orientation of a terrestrial frame in a 
celestial frame. However, these angles include variations 
from several days or years (precession—nutation, long 
periodic polar motion) to 1 day and less. To estimate these 
parameters would require very intensive observations, 
which at present is not routinely achieved but will be soon 
as technology advances. 


Monitoring the Earth’s orientation 

Evolution of the techniques 

Astrometric and geodetic techniques provide the orienta- 
tion as a function of time of the terrestrial frame with re- 
spect to the celestial frame from which the EOPs, including 
UT1, polar motion and precession and nutation quantities, 
can be derived. International services, successively since 
1900 the International Service of Latitude (ILS), the Interna- 
tional Service of Polar Motion (IPMS) and the Bureau Inter- 
national de |’Heure (BIH), have been in charge of collect- 
ing and combining the measurements in order to provide 
the best estimates of polar motion on a regular basis. The 
parameter UT1 was provided on a regular basis by the 
BIH from 1967. All measurements were based on opti- 
cal observations done by Danjon astrolabe, or by transit, 
zenithal and circumzenithal instruments; they were pro- 
vided for a 5 day interval, but the atmosphere limited their 
precision to 0.01”. Since 1972, several space geodetic tech- 
niques have been used for this purpose by BIH, beginning 
with satellite Doppler tracking and lunar laser ranging 
(LLR) and then, in 1978, satellite laser ranging (SLR) and 
very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) on extragalactic ra- 
diosources. Other satellites techniques, such as the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) and DORIS, have been consid- 
ered in recent years. All these techniques provide time 
or frequency measurements. This is the primary informa- 
tion used by analysis centers for determining the EOPs. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


- Ze 
wae _ QUASARS 
en 
/) /} 
es } 
AXIS of Jif | 
ROTATION ae - 
4 


AXIS of 
FIGURE 


Figure 3. The techniques for observation of the Earth’s rotation: 
the beacons are stars for astrometry, quasars for VLBI, satellites 
for SLR and GPS, Moon for LLR. 


Today the astrometric methods have given way to the 
space geodetic techniques in routine Earth rotation mea- 
surements (see figure 3). 

Since 1988, the international service in charge of 
the EOPs and the corresponding reference frames is the 
International Earth Rotation Service (IERS) whose Central 
Bureau is at Paris Observatory. The present accuracy is of 
the order of 0.2 mas (1 cm) for daily EOP determinations 
and can reach 0.5 mas for interval of the order of hours 
thanks to intensive VLBI or GPS sessions. This has led 
to a dramatic improvement in the determination of the 
EOPs and consequently of the knowledge of the details of 
the Earth’s rotation and therefore of global geophysical 
parameters and geophysical processes influencing the 
Earth’s rotation. 


Modern geodetic techniques 

In VLBI the basic quantity is the delay in wave front 
arrival at two radio telescopes from distant quasars. In 
the ideal case, this delay would be only a function of 
the orthogonal projection of the baseline between the two 
telescopes on the direction of the radiosource. The real 
case is more complicated because this delay contains non- 
geometrical effects, mainly due to clock synchronization 
and bending of the wave front in the atmosphere. Anyway, 
information on the Earth’s orientation is contained in VLBI 
delays. Its modeling depends on many parameters which 
have to be estimated simultaneously. Until 1998 VLBI 
observation sessions have been carried out during 24h 
at a few days’ interval. They generally involved a set 
of baselines, observing consecutively several radiosources 
constituting the International Celestial Reference Frame. 
A distinction is established between arc parameters which 
are constant during the session (such as the coordinates of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the radiosources, the EOP) and the local parameters (such 
as the clock parameters, the atmospheric delay) which 
differ from one session to another. Wave front arrivals 
are recorded on magnetic tapes independently at each 
radio telescope. All tapes are shipped to a central facility 
where they are cross-correlated to determine the series of 
differences in arrival time (the delay) and the rate of change 
of the delay (the delay rate) on the VLBI baselines (see 
figure 4). 

Laser ranging techniques are currently used on 
satellites (satellite laser ranging or SLR) and the Moon 
(lunar laser ranging or LLR). This provides information 
on exactly how far the satellite is from the station at a 
particular time, which, in turn, can be used to determine 
the Earth’s orientation in space. A very short laser pulse 
is transmitted from a telescope in a ground station, and 
it is retroreflected by a corner cube reflector on a satellite 
or the Moon back to the station. The round trip time is 
measured, which is equivalent to measuring the distance. 
It is now possible to accurately measure this up to 50 ps or 
better, which is equivalent to an accuracy of 1 cm or less. 

GPS uses a constellation of satellites that broadcast 
signals to stations on the Earth. From the time delay 
of the broadcast signal and a precise determination of 
the satellites’ orbits, the position of the station can be 
determined. A network of approximately 30 permanent 
stations is operated in order to help to establish a terrestrial 
reference frame. This network can be used to detect 
changes in the rotation rate of the Earth (the excess LOD) 
and in the orientation of its axis of rotation (the polar 
motion). High-frequency variations in the length of day 
are determined daily and are precise to £20 ws day™!. 


Comparison of the techniques 

Table 1 provides a comparison of the performances 
techniques for monitoring the Earth’s rotation. It turns 
out that the VLBI technique is the most efficient because 
the celestial reference frames realized by VLBI analyses are 
the most stable, and in turn the long periodic oscillations in 
the Earth’s orientation, especially the precession—nutation 
and the several days’ fluctuations in the LOD, are well 
determined. The international celestial reference frame 
itself consists of a set of radiosource coordinates provided 
by VLBI analyses. Satellite techniques do not provide such 
a stable reference frame. Because of many non-modeled 
effects in satellite orbits, the corresponding reference frame 
is only suitable for monitoring short-period terms of 
the Earth’s orientation changes. Polar motion, which 
appears in a celestial reference frame as a quasi-diurnal 
counterclockwise oscillation of the geographic axis, is 
very well determined by satellite techniques, at the same 
accuracy level as VLBI. 

The satellite techniques must be connected to an 
absolute UT1 value provided by an independent technique 
such as VLBI. This is necessary because a uniform rotation 
of the satellite orbit nodes cannot be distinguished from the 
Earth’s rotation. However, because VLBI does not operate 
continuously, GPS can give better real-time LOD estimates 
to fill in the gaps. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ZE @ SE 


ecoracy SSS B 


2. elock — 


Be ee 


lesemarite delay 


es 
~ recorder 


= Nv atomic clock 


baseline 


STATION 1 


STATION 2 


Figure 4. Observation of a quasar by VLBI. 


Table 1. Potentialities of modern geodetic techniques according to the nature of the Earth’s orientation parameters. 


VLBI SLR LLR GPS 
Precession— Up to 20 yr Not currently Not currently Up to 13.6 day 
nutation terms: 0.2mas applicable applicable terms; VLBI necessary 
Universal time 0.01 ms 0.02 ms 0.2 ms 0.02 ms; VLBI necessary 
Polar motion 0.2 mas 0.2 mas Not applicable 0.2 mas 


Accuracy level of the determination is also reported. Unit for angles is milliarcsecond (mas), unit 


for UT1 is millisecond (ms). 


Dynamical description 
The dynamical causes of the Earth’s orientation changes 
can be classified in two kinds: astronomical ones and 
geophysical ones. The astronomical causes, at our present 
state of knowledge, are reduced to the torque produced 
by the tidal gravitational attraction of celestial bodies on 
the Earth. The geophysical causes are associated with 
mass displacements in the Earth’s layers (solid core, fluid 
core, mantle, oceans and atmosphere) or with interactions 
between the Earth’s layers of an electromagnetic and a 
mechanical nature (gravitation, pressure and viscosity). 
Let Hf be the Earth’s angular momentum and L the 
external torque acting upon the Earth. In the geocentric 
quasi-inertial frame I (its axes, centered at the geocenter, 
do not rotate in space), the angular momentum balance is 


written as 7 
dH > 
ee) eee 1 
( de ) 


Itis more convenient to consider a body-fixed frame K. Let 
@ be the Earth’s angular velocity vector; in K equation (1) 
provides the dynamic Euler equation: 


8 ee ee (2) 
di}. WX =L. 


The Earth’s angular velocity vector consists of the constant 
diurnal rotation of the figure axis, that is the vector 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(0, 0, 82) in the body-fixed system, and small perturbations 
(Qm, Qm2, Qm3), m, and mz being for polar motion and 
mz for the relative variations in the Earth’s rotation. 

Solving equation (2) for a rigid body without any 
external torque results in a rotational eigenmode, the 
Eulerian wobble. 

If one considers an elastic or inelastic body, we have 
to take into account the motion of each body element 
with respect to the system K. This causes variable 
increments of the moment of inertia c;; and an additional 
angular momentum vector with components (/1, h2, h3) 
in K. Expressing equation (2) as a function of the 
Earth’s rotation vector, the Earth’s inertia matrix, the 
additional angular momentum due to the non-rigidity 
of the Earth and the external torque and neglecting the 
cross-terms of the increments m;, c;;, h; provides the so- 
called Liouville equations. The changes in the Earth’s 
rotation and polar motion thus appear as the response 
of a differential system to a three-dimensional excitation 
vector. The excitation mechanisms result from a change in 
the Earth’s angular momentum due to the application of 
an external torque, from a change in the Earth’s inertia 
tensor and from internal redistribution of its angular 
momentum. Polar motion appears to be mainly excited 
by mass redistribution and LOD (i.e. m3) by mass motions. 
Because of its linearity, such a system enables us to 
uncouple the sources of perturbations such as the effects of 
mass redistribution within the different parts of the Earth 
and the astronomical torque. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The classical way to solve the equations of the Earth’s 
rotation involves two steps. Firstly the equations are 
solved for a rigid Earth model, only accounting for the 
astronomical forcing. Then one estimates to what extent 
this ‘rigid solution’ is modified by introducing the non- 
rigid structure of the Earth and geophysical effects such as 
air mass displacements. These two steps are described in 
more detail in the following. 


Astronomical forcing 

The Moon and to a lesser degree the Sun exert a 
gravitational tidal torque on Earth’s equatorial bulge. The 
Moon contributes more than twice as much as the Sun 
owing to its proximity, which compensates for its smaller 
mass. This torque, lying in the equatorial plane, exhibits 
in an inertial system spectral components ranging from 
half a day to several thousand years, according to the 
periodic variations in the orbital elements, causing in turn 
variations in the direction of the geographic polar axis and 
rotation axis. These variations are classically described by 
two Euler angles, a precession angle w in the ecliptic plane 
and an inclination angle 6 or obliquity, giving the offset 
between the Earth’s axis (geographic or rotation axis) and 
the axis of the ecliptic poles (see figure 1(a)). 

In the case of a rigid Earth model the problem of the 
precession-nutation is reduced to a purely astronomical 
problem. Solving the Liouville equations, we obtain 
the rigid Earth’s angular velocity vector (a ng ok as 
a function of the external torque and of the dynamical 
flattening of the Earth. By integration of kinematical 
relations linking the component of the angular velocity 
vector to the time derivative of the EOPs, the Euler angles 
of the geographic axes with respect to the axes of the quasi- 
inertial frame can be derived. They provide the variations 
in ecliptic longitude y and obliquity 6. 

The quasi-stationary torque component, that is the 
term turning clockwise with sidereal period for a terrestrial 
observer, induces secular variations of the Euler angles. 
The most important concerns the angle y and amounts to 
50.29” yr7!. This is the so-called astronomical precession. In 
turn the rotation axis describes, as a first approximation, a 
cone around the axis of the ecliptic poles in 25 800 yr. The 
periodic variations of the tidal torque, ruled by the motion 
of the Sun and the Moon in a geocentric reference frame, 
induce periodic variations in the rotation axis direction, the 
so-called astronomical nutation. At equal torque amplitudes 
the effect is more important for greater periods. Indeed the 
longer is the period the longer is the duration during which 
the periodic variation can take place. Mathematically 
the Euler angles results from the torque integration and 
hence from the division of any spectral component by 
its frequency. This explains why the biggest nutation 
terms are not necessarily induced by the largest torque 
components. As an example, the largest nutation term, 
in 18.6 yr, is a quasi-circular term of amplitude about 10”, 
which is more than 200 times the amplitude of the term 
in 13.6 days, induced by the strongest tidal component. 
Moreover, because of the planetary perturbations on the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Earth’s orbit (i.e. the ecliptic), the obliquity is decreasing 
at a rate of 0.46” yr! (i.e. the axis of rotation is less and 
less tilted). 

In the case of a rigid Earth model, the angular velocity 
is constant except for very small variations of diurnal and 
semidiurnal periods and amplitudes up to 2 x 10-° s in 
UTI, due to the effect of the non-zero component of the 
luni-solar tidal torque in the equatorial plane. 


Geophysical effects 
The case of a real Earth is more complicated than 
considered in the previous section. 

First, there are deformations under the influence of 
tidal gravitational forcing and centrifugal forcing which 
induce moment of inertia changes. The inertia changes 
of tidal origin are responsible for a modification of the 
amplitudes of nutations as well as for the zonal variations 
of the Earth’s rotation at the same periods as the nutations 
and amplitudes up to 1 ms in UT1, both effects being scaled 
by the elasticity factor (Love number k) of the mantle. The 
elastic deformations of centrifugal origin are responsible 
for the major part of the modification of the Chandler 
period as compared with the Euler period. 

Second, the fluid core and the mantle do not rotate 
rigidly; the fluid core naturally has a clockwise nearly 
diurnal wobble with respect to the crust, because its main 
inertia axis does not coincide with the mantle inertia axis 
and this causes by reaction a similar effect on the mantle. 
The period of this rotational free motion, also referred 
to as the free core nutation, is strongly dependent on 
the flattening of the core-mantle boundary and has been 
shown to influence the near-resonance tidal amplitudes. 
In a celestial frame, the free core nutation would appear 
as a clockwise oscillation. Theory predicts resulting 
perturbations of clockwise nutations of a rigid Earth, as 
confirmed by VLBI observations. Solving for the rotation 
of a non-rigid Earth model thus requires us to write 
Liouville equations for the mantle and the core separately 
and to solve both these equations simultaneously. Finally 
the angular velocity vector of the mantle (;)j=1,23, 
induced by the external forcing, is expressed as a function 


of the rigid solution (aya. Present models of 
precession-nutation, taking into account the rigid solution 
and non-rigid effects such as the presence of a fluid 
core inside the Earth with a flattening that deviates from 
hydrostatic equilibrium, agree with observations at the 
submilliarcsecond level. The value of the dynamical 
flattening of the Earth, which is a fundamental parameter 
of the models, is derived from the observed precession 
rate. 

In addition, we have to consider the displacement 
of masses inside the Earth’s superficial layer. These 
geophysical processes influence the Earth’s rotation as 
much as the Moon and the Sun, but their energy is 
mostly released in the long periodic range (several days) 
with respect to the crust, in contrast to the gravitational 
influence which is daily retrograde. Most of them 
are independent of the Earth’s rotational perturbation; 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


they are triggered by thermal, tidal and electromagnetic 
influences. However, the variation of the centrifugal forces 
associated with the wobble of the rotation axis induces 
a change of the water height in the oceans, called the 
‘pole tide’. This phenomenon plays a fundamental role 
in accounting for the period of the Chandler wobble. 

The changes of air and oceanic mass distribution 
involve variations of the Earth’s rotational speed as well 
as a long periodic displacement of the rotation axis with 
respect to the crust. Annual components up to 2 ms 
in the LOD and up to 200 mas in pole motion are 
induced by the atmospheric circulation. The observed 
subseasonal components (10-100 days) can be explained 
by the combined effect of the atmosphere and the oceans. 
The most common approach for computing the effects 
of the fluid layers is based on the angular momentum 
time series of these layers (quantities cj; and h;) and the 
Liouville equations. Meteorological centers provide us 
with atmospheric angular momentum (AAM) series from 
pressure and winds assimilation models. The oceanic 
data are much less common, so that the oceanic angular 
momentum results mostly from modeling. The correlation 
between LOD and AAM is so well established that 
forecasts of atmospheric angular momentum provided by 
the major centers are now being investigated for prediction 
of the Earth’s rotation. 

Some geophysical forcing of larger periods (more 
than several years) can be expected from the observations. 
This might involve the superficial layers (for instance the 
El Nifio cycle in the atmosphere and in the ocean) and 
the coupling between the core and the mantle. Such 
mechanisms can explain the decade-long fluctuations of 
the LOD. The major contribution to secular change in 
the LOD is attributed to tidal friction which transfers 
Earth’s spin angular momentum to the lunar orbit, the 
complementary contribution originating from the effect of 
the post-glacial rebound on the Earth’s principal moment 
of inertia. 

The observed secular motion of the pole with respect 
to the crust, called the ‘secular pole trend’, of about 0.3” 
century! in the direction about 70°W is mostly attributed 
to mass redistributions accompanying and following the 
termination of the Pleistocene glaciation 20000 yr ago. 
Other geophysical causes are also under consideration 
such as a global rise in sea level or trends in groundwater 
storage and recent glacial activity. 

It can be considered that variations in the Earth’s 
rotation (precession, nutation, polar motion and LOD) 
are now quite well explained by the various geophysical 
effects described above (mass redistributions, influence of 
the fluid core, forcing of the atmosphere and the oceans, 
etc), except for a very puzzling component, the Chandler 
motion of the pole. As seen above, this component has 
the period of a free rotational mode of the Earth, about 
433 days. The theory shows that, in the absence of any 
external torque, the rotation axis turns around the figure 
axis in the terrestrial frame with this period. As the Earth is 
nota perfect elastic body, this motion should be dissipated 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in thermal energy. However, no damping of the Chandler 
motion has been observed. Consequently it is excited by 
some mechanism, which is not yet elucidated. Neither 
the combined effect of the atmosphere and the oceans nor 
earthquakes seem to give the appropriate forcing. 


Recent progress 

Diurnal and subdiurnal determination of the polar motion and 
universal time 

Vast progress in astrometric and geodetic observing 
techniques has taken place in the last few decades, as 
seen below. The progress is not only restricted to the 
increasing accuracy of the EOPs. Since the 1990s the 
intensification of geodetic observations by VLBI and GPS 
has enabled the determination of subdaily variations of 
the polar motion and the Earth’s rotation speed. Since 
1999 VLBI observations have been done continuously 
and more intensively by different antenna networks 
working alternatively. New phenomena have been put 
forward, which are diurnal and semidiurnal changes in 
the polar motion and in the Earth’s rotation speed. These 
variations are mostly explained by the oceanic tides. Other 
components of non-tidal origin might be detected, but no 
firm statement can be made yet. 


Free core nutation 

Furthermore, the modeling of Earth’s orientation changes 
has been improved. Until the 1980s the conventional 
precession-nutation model was that of a rigid Earth. 
However, the non-rigidity effects are up to 100 mas, which 
are 1000 times the accuracy of the VLBI observational 
results. Since 1980 much interest has thus been focused 
on the refinement of the nutation model by taking into 
account the deformation of the mantle as well as the inter- 
action processes between the fluid core and the mantle. 
The parameters of sucha modelare of primary geophysical 
interest, such as the flattening of the fluid core. Models 
constrained by VLBI observation allow one to deduce 
these parameters. From the observed period of the free 
core nutation (430 days), it has been found that the fluid 
core has a flattening greater than that associated with a 
hydrostatic equilibrium, corresponding to a 500 m increase 
of its equatorial radius. Observation of geophysical 
processes, such as earthquakes, does not enable such a 
fundamental result to be obtained. 


Future 

New discoveries of Earth’s rotational irregularities can 
be expected from the increasing performance of modern 
geodetic techniques. Nevertheless, these techniques rely 
on very costly processings. The ring laser gyro based 
on the Sagnac effect and frequently used in navigation 
systems constitutes an interesting alternative, because it 
does not need any astrometric observations and allows 
one to do astronomy in situ. With this technique, 
still in development for monitoring the Earth’s rotation, 
oscillations at a time scale lower than 1 h could be detected. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Lambek K 1980 The Earth’s Variable Rotation (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Melchior P 1978 The Tides of the Planet Earth (Oxford: 
Pergamon) 

Morritz H and Mueller I I 1988 Earth Rotation (New York: 
Ungar) 

Munk W H and MacDonald G J F 1960 The Rotation 
of the Earth: a Geophysical Discussion (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Nicole Capitaine and Christian Bizouard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Earth’s Rotation: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earth’s Rotation: Theory 


The Earth’s rotation theory is devoted to explaining the 
variations of the Earth’s rotation. Additionally to the 
uniform rotation around an axis close to the geographic 
North pole, the Earth undergoes variations in rotation 
speed (including changes in the length of the day); 
furthermore, the orientation of the rotation axis changes 
with time, inside the Earth as well as with respect to inertial 
space. Ina terrestrial frame, the motion of the rotation axis 
around the mean geographic pole is called polar motion; 
in the celestial frame, the motion of the rotation axis in 
space is called PRECESSION / NUTATION. 


Variation of the Earth’s rotation rate, variation of 
the length of day 

The variation of the length of day (LOD), as measured 
by geodetic observations over recent decades, is at the 
level of several milliseconds for periods shorter than a few 
years (see the article on the EARTH'S ROTATION). These short- 
term variations are mainly induced by atmospheric and 
oceanic effects on the Earth. They can be computed from 
models constrained by meteorological data by considering 
(1) that the atmospheric pressure (or indirectly the ocean 
pressure) pushes on the Earth’s topography (e.g. on the 
mountains) thereby producing a torque which changes 
the Earth’s rotation, (2) that the density variations in 
the atmosphere give an additional torque (gravitational 
torque), and (3) that the winds also induce a friction 
torque on the Earth’s surface. Similar torques are also 
introduced by the ocean. Altogether these phenomena 
induce acceleration and deceleration of the Earth’s rotation 
at short time scales and, in turn, associated variations in the 
LOD. The Earth’s variation of the LOD can be computed 
and compared with the ANGULAR MOMENTUM of the EARTH’S 
ATMOSPHERE, aS done in figure 1. 

Besides these variations, there are decade variations 
of the LOD (see above and the remaining differences 
in figure 1 between the measured LOD variations and 
those computed from the atmosphere) which are usually 
attributed to an exchange of angular momentum with 
the core because of the correlation between the surface 
magnetic field variations and the variations of the LOD 
at these time scales. This angular momentum transfer is 
due to torques at the CORE-MANTLE boundary (CMB): (1) a 
topographic torque, due to the pressure of the fluxes acting 
on the CMB topography (bumps and valleys which can be 
as high as a few kilometers); (2) a viscous torque, related 
to the viscosity of the liquid core; (3) an electromagnetic 
torque, related to the Lorentz force induced at the CMB 
by the electromagnetic field; (4) a gravitational torque, 
related to the gravitational interaction between the core 
and the mantle of the Earth. The topographic torque 
and the electromagnetic torque are usually believed to be 
the most important ones at long time scales. Also, the 
gravitational torque has attracted a lot of attention recently. 
Because there are no direct observations of the core flows 
to lead to well-constrained models such as exist for the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ocean and atmosphere, only indirect calculations of the 
core angular momentum (and thereby of the torque acting 
on the CMB) can be obtained. Their variations can be 
calculated, if the motions in the core are characterized by 
rotation of fluid cylinders, from the flows at the top of 
the core derived from variations in the poloidal magnetic 
field observed at the surface. Further, these flows depend 
on poorly constrained additional assumptions to resolve 
formal non-uniqueness in the solution. Consequently, it 
is very speculative to give the associated changes of the 
Earth’s angular momentum or the torques acting on the 
inner core-outer core boundary (ICB) or CMB, without 
any other constraint. Nevertheless, the Earth’s rotation 
variations being well correlated with the magnetic field 
at decade time scale, data of variations of the LOD can 
be used to constrain the core angular momentum and the 
torques at decade time scale. 

There is also a very long-term trend in the variation 
of the LOD as observed from paleontological data (coral 
growth in time) and from eclipse data (lag between the 
date deduced from a uniform rotation and the date given 
in past records); this very long-term trend is related to 
the deceleration of the Earth’s rotation induced by tidal 
friction. Due to friction, the tidal bulge created by the 
classical tidal torque has a phase angle of about 5 degrees 
with respect to the Earth-Moon position. Because of this, 
the Moon exerts an additional torque which tends to break 
the Earth’s rotation. This induces a linear trend in the 
solar time corresponding to an LOD increase of about two 
milliseconds over one century (this would almost not be 
seen on figures showing time-dependent functions over 14 
years as presented here). This tidal friction is the reason 
why in the Devonian period, for instance, there were only 
22 hours in a day. 

Besides the tidal torque which is the predominant 
mechanism in reducing the Earth’s spin, there is another 
long-term component acting to decrease the LOD (by 
about half a millisecond per century) and related to 
the decrease of the Earth’s oblateness associated with 
deglaciation after the ice ages. 


Polar motion 

The polar motion in recent times is within a 20 m size 
square at the Earth’s surface around the North pole 
(See POLAR MOTION AND LENGTH OF DAY). There are two main 
components: (1) one which has an annual period and is 
believed to be due to the atmosphere, but might well be 
additionally caused by other seasonal phenomena such as 
groundwater changes, and (2) another which has a period 
of about 435 days and is related to a normal mode of the 
Earth called the Chandler Wobble (CW). The CW is related 
to the fact that the Earth has an equatorial bulge inducing 
an excess of mass at the equator with respect to the pole 
(the Earth is oblate and has an equatorial radius larger than 
the polar radius by 21 km). The excitation of the CW is not 
well established but is generally believed to be mainly due 
to the atmosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


[ms] 
4.05 


LOD pan 
LODieRs 


78 80 81 82 83 


Additionally to these two periods there is a long- 
term trend called polar wander which is explained by 
internal-mass redistributions over long periods such as 
that associated with post-glacial rebound and mantle 
convection. 


Precession/nutation 

The luni-solar attraction on the Earth’s equatorial bulge 
induces a torque which tends to rock the equator toward 
the ecliptic. The Earth responds to this as a gyroscope; 
its rotation axis undergoes a large motion around the 
perpendicular to the ecliptic of about 50 arcseconds per 
year. The opening of the associated cone is the angle 
between the equator and the ecliptic (23° 26’). The relative 
positions of the Moon, the Earth and the Sun being not 
fixed in space, in addition to this precessional motion, there 
exist periodic motions of which the periods are directly 
related to the periods involved in the relative positions of 
Moon, Earth and Sun: the nutations. The largest nutation 
amplitude corresponds to the period of the node of the 
Moon’s orbit around the Earth (18.6 years) on the ecliptic. 
Figure 2 shows schematically the precession and nutations. 

There are actually very precise models to compute 
the Earth’s orientation in space (for space navigation for 
instance). These models are based, on one hand, on 
computation of the Earth’s nutation for a rigid body and, 
on the other hand, on the transfer function for a non-rigid 
Earth. 

The rigid Earth nutation series are computed from 
CELESTIAL MECHANICS starting from EPHEMERIDES which give 
the relative positions of the Earth, Moon, and Sun (and 
to a minor extent the relative positions of the planets) 
as a function of the time variation of the fundamental 
argument (e.g. the longitude of the Moon). Present-day 
theories have an accuracy at a few microarcsecond (jas) 
level (1 as = 10-° mas, and 1 mas is the angle with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


84 85 


86 87 88 89 


90 91 


axis perpendicular 
to the equator 


\ fs / 
if 
(f- 


— 


axis perpendicular 
to the ecliptic 


Figure 2. Schematic representation of precession and nutations. 


which one would see a ping-pong ball on the top of the 
Empire State building in New York from Europe). This 
accuracy is better than the nutation observation accuracy. 
These theories do not only include the nutations related 
to the direct gravitational interaction between the Moon 
and the Earth, and between the Earth and the Sun, but 
also all the second-order effects such as the perturbation 
of the Sun on the Earth—Moon interaction, the perturbation 
of the Moon on the Earth—Sun interaction, the direct and 
indirect effects of the planets, the effect of the presence 
of the equatorial bulge of the Earth (J2-tilt effect) and the 
effects of the nutations on each other (coupling effect). 
The accuracy of non-rigid Earth nutation transfer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earth’s Rotation: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


functions is currently not as good as for the rigid Earth 
nutation series. The models used generally consider that 
there is (1) an inelastic, solid, deformable inner core, (2) a 
liquid outer core, and (3) an inelastic, deformable mantle. 
They take into account the non-hydrostatic equilibrium 
state of the Earth which is very close to the hydrostatic 
ellipsoid, but not exactly, because of the presence of 
mass heterogeneities inside the Earth (as seen from 
seismic mantle tomography or from the non-ellipsoidal 
contributions to the geoid). The global Earth dynamical 
flattening of the models corresponds to the observed 
value (derived from the observed precession), and the 
CMB topography accounts for the non-hydrostatic bumps 
related to the deformations induced by mantle convection. 
The nutations computed from the convolutions between 
the rigid Earth nutation series and the transfer function 
are influenced by resonances with free modes of the Earth, 
especially the free core nutation (FCN) which has a period 
of about 432 days in the celestial reference frame. The 
computed normal mode periods are very close to the 
observed values, particularly due to the consideration of 
non-hydrostatic equilibrium. Some very recent models 
account additionally for electromagnetic coupling at the 
CMB. These models are precise at the sub-milliarcsecond 
(< mas) level. 

Additionally to these computations of nutations in 
response to the luni-solar (and planetary) gravitational 
attractions, the atmosphere has a non-negligible influence 
at the vier observation precision level. The atmosphere 
exerts a pressure torque, a gravitational torque and a 
friction torque on the Earth at diurnal time scale in a frame 
tied to the Earth. The friction torque is believed to have a 
negligible contribution to nutation. The atmospheric one- 
solar-day effect on the Earth induces a perturbation on the 
prograde annual nutation at a level of a tenth of a mas. 
Similarly, the diurnal ocean tides induce perturbation in 
the principal nutations. The indirect effect of the ocean 
due to the atmospheric forcing must also be taken into 
account. The atmospheric and oceanic torques cause an 
angular momentum transfer, and consequently, the effects 
on nutations can also be computed from the angular 
momentum balance equation, instead of calculating the 
torques. The so-obtained perturbation of the nutation is at 
the level of the tenth of a mas for the atmosphere effects, 
and of a mas for the ocean tide effects. 


Veronique Dehant 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Earthshine 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earthshine 


A faint illumination of the Moon’s night side by sunlight 
reflected from the Earth. It is visible when the Moon 
shows a crescent phase, as a pale grayish ghostly glow 
over the remainder of the disk. Earthshine is traditionally 
known as ‘the old moon in the new moon’s arms’; seldom- 
used alternative names are earthlight and the ashen light. 
Earthshine is difficult to see less than a day after new moon 
because the Moon is then very low ina twilit sky. It is most 
noticeable about two days before or after new moon. At 
three or four days from new moon the illuminated portion 
of the disk is large enough to begin to swamp the pale 
earthshine. A lesser factor affecting the strength of visible 
earthshine is the phase of the Earth as would be seen from 
the Moon. At new moon the Earth is full, and reflects the 
most sunlight toward the Moon. Three or four days from 
full, the Earth would be gibbous and not nearly as bright. 
The intensity of earthshine also varies from one lunation 
to another, mainly as a result of changing levels of cloud 
cover over the hemisphere of the Earth presented to the 
Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eckert, Wallace John (1902-71) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eckert, Wallace John (1902-71) 


Computer scientist and astronomer. Born in Pittsburgh, 
PA, Eckert was a pioneer of the use of IBM punched card 
equipment for astronomical calculations. As director of 
the US Nautical Almanac Office he introduced computer 
methods to calculate and print tables instead of relying on 
human ‘computers’. When, later, he became director of 
the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia 
University he directed the construction of computers, 
tailor-made to calculate the positions of the planets and 
Moon. It is hard to imagine the world of astronomy today 
without the computers and methods that he pioneered. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eclipse 


An eclipse of the Sun is an OCCULTATION at which the 
Moon comes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking 
some or all of the sunlight from reaching an observer. 
Eclipses result from the fortuitous circumstance that the 
angular sizes of the Sun and the Moon as seen from Earth 
are the same to within about 10%, although in absolute 
diameter they differ by a factor of 400. 


Types of solar eclipses 

Solar eclipses can be total, annular or partial. At a total 
eclipse, the cone of lunar shadow is intercepted by the 
Earth’s surface. The intersection traces out a path that 
instantaneously is close to an ellipse but that over a 
period of hours traces out a path thousands of km long 
but only up to about 300 km wide. Observers in this 
umbra, from which the solar photosphere is entirely 
blocked, see a total eclipse, while observers in a much 
larger area ahead or behind or to the sides of the umbra 
are in the penumbra and see a partial eclipse. Only during 
the total phase of a total solar eclipse does the CORONA 
become visible, and so it is mainly these total eclipses 
that are scientifically valuable. Totality can last from 
fleeting instants up to about 7 min (figure 1). 

Because of the ellipticities of the orbits of the Moon 
around the Earth and the Earth around the Sun, mainly 
the former, the conical shadow of the Moon sometimes 
does not reach the Earth’s surface. At those times, 
observers on Earth see an annulus of photosphere 
surrounding the Moon, and the eclipse is said to be an 
annular eclipse. Since the photosphere is approximately a 
million times brighter than the full Moon, an annular 
eclipse with 10% or even only 1% of the photosphere 
showing allows so much sunlight to hit the Earth’s 
atmosphere that the sky remains blue and the corona is 
not visible. Annularity can last as long as 12 min. 

Total and annular eclipses are known as central 
eclipses. Occasionally, less than 10% of the time, the 
umbra reaches the earth for only part of a central eclipse, 
and an annular-total solar eclipse occurs. Sometimes the 
conical umbra of the Moon’s shadow is directed beyond 
the Earth’s poles, and no total or annular eclipse occurs 
on Earth. These eclipses are partial only. 

Although the mean semidiameters of the Sun and the 
Moon are 960" and 931" respectively, the ellipticities of 
0.055 and 0.017 for the Moon around the Earth and the 
Earth around the Sun, respectively, provide enough range 
in apparent sizes to account for annular and total eclipses. 
The Moon can appear as much as 10% smaller than the 
Sun or 8% larger. 

The umbra, if it were to hit the Earth vertically, 
could not exceed about 270 km in diameter, but the 
projection onto the globe can almost double this figure. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 1. (a) The total solar eclipse of 26 February 1998, with 
coronal streamers at equatorial latitudes and polar tufts nearer 
the poles. The image was processed from several individual 
photographs in order to show the corona over a wide dynamic 
range of intensities. © 1999 Jay M. Pasachoff and Wendy 
Carlos. All rights reserved. SOHO—Williams College 
collaboration with the support of the Committee for Research 
and Exploration of the National Geographic Society. 


(b) The corona of the eclipse on August 11. Processing by 
Wendy Carlos of eclipse photographs by Jay Pasachoff. © 2000 
by Wendy Carlos and Jay M. Pasachoff. 


Frequencies of solar eclipses 

The 20th century contained 224 solar eclipses, including 
147 central eclipses and 77 partial eclipses. There are 
between two and five solar eclipses in any given year, 
although only about every 18 months is there a total 
eclipse visible somewhere on Earth. An observer waiting 
at one location on Earth would see a total solar eclipse on 
average only once every 375 years, a rate that depends on 
latitude. However, observers willing to travel can observe 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


eclipses much more often. Even for a single country, 
statistics over a 3000 yr interval (Williams 1996) show 
that total eclipses are visible in England on average every 
44 yr. Over the same interval, eclipses are visible at 
London every 330 yr and at Edinburgh every 186 yr. The 
paths of the total eclipses of 21 June 2001 and 4 
December 2002 cross at the west coast of southern 
Africa, giving a region there two total eclipses within 18 
months. 

The umbral shadow moves across the Earth at about 
3400 km h''. Earth’s rotation allows surface points to 
diminish this relative velocity. The maximum rotation 
speed is about 1700 km h'' for a point at the equator, so 
the relative velocity of the umbra diminishes for a time to 
about 1700 km h™', a speed at which the supersonic 
Concorde once kept up with the 1973 eclipse for 74 min. 
Normal jets, however, extend totality only slightly. 
Orbiting satellites would travel through the umbra with 
an even greater mismatch of speeds, so natural eclipses 
are not observed from space. 


Predicting eclipses 

Eclipses are predicted with a method descended from that 
worked out by F Bessel in 1824. Eight Besselian 
elements are given in a frame of reference of the Moon’s 
shadow, as explained by Espenak (1987) and in the 
Explanatory Supplement to the American Ephemeris 
(1992). The Besselian elements of an eclipse are related 
to a fundamental plane that is perpendicular to the 
Moon’s shadow and that passes through the center of the 
Earth. The coordinates x, y and z are then oriented east, 
north and parallel to the axis of the lunar shadow, 
respectively. The Besselian elements are then x and y for 
the shadow, the radii of the penumbra and umbra on the 
fundamental plane, ZL; and L, respectively, the direction 
of the shadow’s axis on the celestial sphere, given by 
declination and hour angle d and u respectively, and the 
angles with which the penumbra and umbra, respectively, 
intersect the axis, f; and 4. These Besselian elements are 
tabulated or can be calculated by a variety of computer 
programs. 

F Espenak and J Anderson, for each total eclipse, 
produce a NASA Reference Publication with tables and 
maps, taking over a function that was formerly covered 
by US Naval Observatory Circulars. See 
http://umbra.nascom.nasa.gov/eclipse/. Programs are now 
available for even the amateur market that accurately 
predict eclipse paths. The CD-ROM RedShift is an 
example. The Scientific Astronomer package for 
Mathematica includes eclipse-prediction capabilities. 

Details of the calculations use a constant k for the 
fractional mean radius of the Moon—Earth, and this 
constant has been empirically adjusted to account for the 
observed average size of the Moon and Sun. Whether an 
eclipse is total depends, after all, on the complete 
coverage of the Sun by the lunar disk, while a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


phenomenon known as Baily’s beads result from the last 
bits of solar photosphere shining through the deepest 
valleys on the lunar limb. So depending on assumptions, 
different calculations result in slightly different numbers 
for the frequency of total eclipses. The IAU value (1982) 
is k= 0.272 507 6, but a smaller value of k = 0.272 281 is 
better used for computing totality. Calculations taking 
lunar librations into account must be made for individual 
eclipses. 

A solar eclipse is but an especially well-aligned new 
moon. The planes of the orbits of the Moon around the 
Earth and the Earth around the Moon are inclined by 5°. 
They intersect at only two points, known as the 
ascending node and the descending node. Only when 
both the Sun and the Moon are close to a node 
simultaneously can an eclipse occur. Because the Moon 
cannot move out of a node in a half-month interval, there 
is always a lunar eclipse 2 weeks before or after a solar 
eclipse, although most of these eclipses are not total. 
These eclipse seasons are separated by 173.3 days, giving 
an eclipse year of 346.6 days. In years that have three 
eclipse seasons, a total of five solar eclipses can occur, a 
circumstance that will not occur until 2206. 


The saros 

A coincidence in the cycles of the Sun and the Moon 
results in a repeat of eclipses with approximately the 
same characteristics every 18 yr 113; days, a period 
named the ‘SAROS’ by Edmond Halley. The period may 
have been discovered by the Babylonians. 

The coincidence is several, including the following: 
(a) 223 synodic months = 6585.32 days, where a synodic 
month is the period of the lunar phases; 242 nodical 
months = 6585.36 days, where a nodical month (also 
called a draconic month, after the mythical Chinese 
dragon who supposedly devoured the Sun at eclipses) is 
the interval at which the Moon passes successive nodes 
in its orbit; 239 anomalistic months = 6585.54 days, 
where an anomalistic month is the period over which the 
Earth—Moon distance varies; 19 eclipse years = 6585.78 
days, where an eclipse year is twice the interval between 
successive eclipse seasons, the 38 day period during 
which the Sun and Moon are sufficiently near the nodes 
that eclipses can occur. 

The coincidence of 223 synodic months = 242 
nodical months means that an eclipse occurs 65853 days 
= 18 yr 113 days after a previous eclipse. (Depending on 
how leap years fall, the interval can be 18 yr 103 days or 
18 yr 123 days.) The 1/3 day means that the path of the 
successive eclipse is 1/3 of the way around the globe 
with respect to the earlier one. The further coincidence of 
the anomalistic month means that total eclipses are 
followed by total eclipses and, in addition, that long ones 
are followed by long ones after the saros interval, and so 
on. For example, the saros series that includes the longest 
eclipses (with maximum durations of totality in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


parentheses) includes 30 June 1973 (7 min 4 s), 11 July 
1991 (6 min 53 s), 22 July 2009 (6 min 39 s), 2 August 
2027 (6 min 22 sec) and so on. Throughout this saros, the 
Moon’s diameter is 8% larger than the Sun’s. Successive 
eclipses drift in latitude, and the duration of the saros 
series now active range from 1244 yr to 1514 yr. 


Historical eclipses 

Records of eclipses can be found on cuneiform tablets 
from ancient Babylonia and on records from China, 
giving thousands of years of data. The earliest surviving 
Babylonian record is the eclipse of 731 BC. Shang 
dynasty Chinese sources range from ca 1350 BC, 
although reliable records date only to about 700 BC. 
Stephenson (1997) has analysed a range of such ancient 
eclipses to determine the rotation rate of the Earth, since 
whether an eclipse is total or not at a given point depends 
on this rate. Ancient documents can often be analysed to 
see whether the eclipse was total, since the difference 
between total eclipses and other solar eclipses is so 
dramatic. Stephenson continues his study through 
medieval European records and Arab chronicles, to 
provide a graph of the length of the day over time based 
on over 400 eclipse observations. He finds a difference in 
AT, the difference between mean solar time and 
ephemeris time, of approximately 20 000 s over a range 
of over 2700 yr. Much of the change in the rotation rate 
of the Earth derives from lunar and solar tides, but he 
also finds non-tidal contributions, perhaps resulting from 
post-glacial uplift affecting the terrestrial oblateness. A 
day was approximately 42 ms shorter in 500 BC than it is 
now, although the graph shows a periodic term in 
addition to a trend. 

Stephenson discusses in detail each of the ancient 
reports and assesses its reliability. For example, many of 
the supposed eclipse reports allow of alternative 
interpretations. Perhaps the most famous ancient eclipse 
is the one of 28 May 585 Bc, which Herodotus (died ca 
425 BC) related (as reported by Pliny in the Ist century 
AD) was predicted by Thales of Miletus and stopped a 
war between the Medes and the Lydians. Stephenson’s 
conclusion, however, is that Herodotus has exaggerated 
and that the eclipse was not actually predictable at that 
time. Stephenson states that ‘the first person to give the 
true explanation of eclipses was Anaxagoras (500- 
428 BC),’ but quotes Neugebauer as concluding that 
eclipses were not predictable for hundreds of years after 
that. 


Eclipse phenomena 

Eclipse calculations specify the times of the contacts. 
First contact is the first meeting of the disks of the Moon 
and Sun; it is noticeable to an observer looking through a 
filter with unaided eye within a few seconds. Second 
contact is the complete coverage of the solar photosphere 
by the Moon; it marks the beginning of totality. Third 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


contact is the first appearance of the solar photosphere 
after totality; it marks the end of totality. Fourth contact 
marks the departure of the lunar disk from the 
photosphere. It is little observed, since observers often 
lose interest after the excitement of totality. 

The interval between first and fourth contact is 
commonly 3 h and can be as long as 4 h. For most of the 
time between first and second contacts, the eclipse would 
not be noticeable to anyone who did not know that it was 
occurring. However, for the last 15 min or so before 
second contact, the sky color noticeably changes and 
shadows grow strangely sharper, since they are now 
being cast by a crescent instead of a sphere. During the 
last couple of minutes before totality, shadow bands, 
low-contrast ripples of light and dark, are often seen to 
move rapidly across the landscape. They are very 
difficult to photograph and are better observed 
photoelectrically. Since they are caused by phenomena in 
the Earth’s upper atmosphere, they are of little interest to 
solar physicists, but atmospheric physicists might 
similarly be more interested in them than in the solar 
phenomena that are soon to become visible. 

As the crescent narrows, within the last minute 
before second contact it begins to break up into 
individual beads, known as Baily’s beads. They are 
named after the English astronomer Francis Baily, who 
noted them at the eclipse of 1836, though they had earlier 
been commented on. Depending on the sky quality, the 
solar corona may or may not be visible during this 
period. The last Baily’s bead glows so brightly compared 
with the other solar phenomena  visible—the 
chromosphere and/or the innermost corona—that it looks 
like the diamond on a ring and is known as the diamond- 
ring effect. It often lasts only a few seconds but can last 
nearly a minute, depending on the depth of the deepest 
valley on the edge of the Moon that is aligned properly to 
transmit photospheric light. The glitter of a diamond is 
often matched in images by internal scattering in camera 
lenses. (See figure 2). 

As the diamond diminishes, a pinkish narrow rim on 
the Sun becomes visible. It got the name ‘chromosphere’ 
from its colorful appearance at eclipses. Depending on 
how much larger in angular size the Moon is than the 
Sun, you may be able to see the full chromosphere at one 
time or you might see only the leading edge at second 
contact and then the trailing edge at third contact. The 
pink color comes largely from Ha, and has an admixture 
of other chromospheric emission lines. Spectra taken 
over this interval show the photospheric absorption lines 
fading and chromospheric emission lines flashing into 
view (that is, appearing abruptly), the flash spectrum. 

As the diamond ring and chromosphere disappear, 
you have totality (figure 3). The shape of the corona 
becomes visible, with CORONAL STREAMERS obvious. 
The shape of the corona varies over the solar-activity 
cycle. At solar minimum, most of the streamers visible 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The diamond ring effect beginning totality at the 
2001 total solar eclipse imaged from Zambia by the Williams 
College Eclipse Expedition. 


Figure 3. The corona in the sky surrounding the dark disk of 
the Moon during the total solar eclipse in India of 1995. (Jay M 
Pasachoff; Williams College, with the support of the 
Committee for Research and Exploration of the National 
Geographic Society and of the US National Science 
Foundation.) 


are equatorial, and polar tufts show near the poles. 
Isophotes of the corona appear elongated. At solar 
maximum, streamers are visible at more latitudes and 
isophotes of the corona appear nearly round. 

SOLAR PROMINENCES have become visible during the 
diamond-ring effect and chromosphere period, and if 
sufficiently large may remain visible throughout totality. 

All too soon, within a period no longer than about 7 
min 30 sec and often much less, a brightening region of 
the corona becomes visible as the Moon progresses 
across the Sun, the pinkish chromosphere becomes 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


visible again and a second diamond ring appears to mark 
the end of totality. The rest of the eclipse phenomena, 
including Baily’s beads and final crescents and later 
partial phases, proceed in reverse order from the ingress. 


Eclipse safety 

The brightness of the solar corona during totality is 
approximately that of the full moon, and the corona 
during totality is equally safe to watch. However, staring 
at the crescent or other partial phases of the eclipse can 
be hazardous to eyesight, so warnings should be given to 
the populace about how to watch an eclipse safely (see 
SUN: SAFE OBSERVATION). All too often, the distinction 
between the hazards of the partial phases and the safe 
glory of totality is lost or not understood by reporters or 
by the public. One often runs across a popular belief that 
some special rays are emitted by the Sun during an 
eclipse that make it unsafe to watch or even to be 
outdoors. This belief is totally untrue, of course; there is 
less of everything during an eclipse, including less solar 
radiation. 

Next, we discuss viewing methods for the partial 
phases of an eclipse; it is important to note that the filters 
described are only for the partial or annular phases and 
must be removed to view totality. 

On a normal day, one is not tempted to stare at the 
Sun, and the eye-blink reflex normally prevents you from 
doing so. However, during the partial phase of an eclipse, 
people’s interest has been called to the Sun, and during 
the crescent phases the total intensity of sunlight may be 
inadequate to activate the eye-blink reflex even though 
the specific intensity of regions of the solar photosphere 
that is still visible remains high. Thus people should 
observe the Sun only through special filters. These filters 
cut out all but about 1/100 000 of the photospheric light, 
reducing the photosphere to a safe level for observation. 

The key factor in safe solar filters, aside from their 
absorbing or reflecting sufficient levels of solar intensity, 
is that they do so evenly across the spectrum—that is, 
they are of neutral density (ND). With each level of 
density given logarithmically, filters that pass only 
1/100 000 the light are NDS. Solar filters made of 
aluminized Mylar, a coated plastic, are very popular and 
are available inexpensively. As long as these Mylar 
filters are undamaged, without creases or pinholes, they 
are safe to look through. Unfortunately, they are now 
often distributed in the form of eyeglasses, which may 
tempt people to stare at the Sun through them, rather than 
as simple rectangles to hold up and look through. 
Although the solar intensity seen through them has been 
reduced to a safe level, it is still a good extra safety 
precaution never to stare at the Sun. 

For telescopic use, filters made of chromium 
deposited on glass pass the requisite amount of 
photospheric light to photograph and view the partial 
phases while giving images of excellent definition. A 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


very slight increase in transmission at the red end of the 
spectrum often gives a pleasing tint to the solar image. 
Welders’ glass of #14 or #15 is also safe for visual or 
photographic viewing, although the color is usually less 
pleasing. Photographic ‘ND filters’, such as Wratten 
filters, are not safe for use at eclipses, since they are 
transparent in the infrared rather than being ND across 
the spectrum. Similarly, crossed polarizers are also 
unsafe. 

A very safe way to view the partial phases is with a 
pinhole camera. Such a device is no more than a small 
hole, perhaps 2 mm—5 mm across, in a piece of cardboard 
or aluminum foil (perhaps taped in place over a larger 
hole in cardboard). This small hole is held 0.5 m—1 m or 
so above a piece of paper or cardboard, and one looks 
down at this second surface with the Sun over one’s 
back. The shape of the partial phase is visible on this 
second surface and is completely safe to look at. The 
interstices among the leaves of a tree often act as their 
own natural pinholes, and the ground or other surfaces 
under trees often show multiple pinhole images of the 
partial eclipse and its progression. 

An analogous method using an optical device is 
‘eyepiece projection’, where an eyepiece is cranked 
beyond its normal focal point and used to project an 
image of the partially eclipsed Sun on a paper, cardboard 
or other screen. One looks only down at the screen, never 
up through the telescope. 

Though the eye is not damaged by occasional 
unaided glances at the Sun, which often occur 
accidentally on normal days, it can be immediately and 
permanently damaged by the focused image of the Sun 
through a telescope or binocular. So if a telescope or 
binocular is used in a direct-view mode, a solar filter 
must be taped or otherwise secured very carefully to the 
front of the optical device so that it cannot blow off or 
fall off. Filters that go on the eyepiece end are always 
liable to crack or be otherwise damaged under the 
concentrated solar radiation, so are much less safe than 
filters above the objective lens. Viewing through a 
properly filtered telescope or using eyepiece projection 
has the advantage over pinhole cameras of showing 
sunspots, which do not normally show in pinhole images. 

Many people have heard of viewing the partial 
phases through smoked glass, achieved by holding glass 
in a flame. This method is undesirable because of the 
unevenness of the coating and the ease in its being 
damaged. A later traditional method is to use two or three 
layers of fogged and developed black-and-white film. As 
long as the film contains silver, which not all of the new 
black-and-white films do, and it is completely exposed to 
light and then is developed to full density, it should be 
safe for use, since the silver provides ND. Color film and 
slides are transparent in the infrared and must not be used 
as filters. Fogged and developed x-ray film works well, 
but one must be careful not to be misinterpreted when 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


giving instructions, because I have heard of someone 
using regular x-rays and looking through the light parts 
that show the bones. Similarly, some compact disks 
(CDs) work as solar filters, if they are coated sufficiently 
densely, but novices should be warned not to look 
through the hole. 

All too often, the need for instructions on how to 
observe safely is misinterpreted by school officials or by 
the press to mean that people should be warned not to 
look at the eclipse directly. Since so much of the glory of 
watching the eclipse comes from the rapid changes in 
ambient light and from the extreme contrasts of the 
eclipse phenomena themselves, much of that effect is lost 
in watching an eclipse on television. Stories of students 
being prevented from watching eclipses by school 
personnel abound and are most unfortunate since students 
can be inspired by observing such natural phenomena. 
Further, when teachers exaggerate the hazards when 
telling students about eclipses, students can soon learn 
the true situation and regret having missed seeing the 
phenomenon. Then they will lose trust in the teachers and 
may not take their advice on other matters, including 
health-related ones like taking drugs or smoking. 

The occasion of an eclipse is an excellent one for 
public information about science. It is important to give 
accurate information early on to the general public and to 
students. It is further important to distinguish between the 
partial (or annular) and total phases of an eclipse. Since 
the corona is approximately 1/1 000 000 the brightness of 
the photosphere, even if 99% of the photosphere is 
hidden, the remaining 1% is still 10 000 times brighter 
than the corona. So the general public should be 
informed that a so-called 99% eclipse is very far from 
totality, and that to see the exciting eclipse phenomena 
they must journey to the zone of totality. 


Eclipse science 

One of the main advantages of solar eclipses is that the 
solar corona can be observed with the latest instruments 
and with cognizance of the latest theoretical ideas. Thus 
the types of discoveries that have been and can be made 
at eclipses changes over time. 

Since only a few minutes at most of totality are 
available at eclipses, it is usually desirable to extend or 
continue observations at a forthcoming eclipse. Further, 
new ideas about the solar atmosphere may suggest new 
observations to be made. In addition, eclipses sample the 
solar-activity cycle, with different prominences and 
coronal features visible at each. 

Eclipse expeditions began in the 18th century and 
reached maturity during the 19th. The first coronal 
photograph was taken in Koenigsberg in 1851. 
Prominences were discovered to be intrinsic to the Sun 
rather than artifacts during the 1860 expedition to Spain. 
The diamond ring effect was first photographed at the 
1859 expedition, and photographs at the 1870 and 1871 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


expeditions were used to prove that the corona was 
intrinsic to the Sun by comparing photographs from 
widely separated locations. 

Perhaps the most famous eclipse discovery was 
made at the 1868 eclipse in India. A spectrograph 
revealed the brightest emission lines of the 
CHROMOSPHERE for the first time. At first a bright yellow 
line was thought to be the D line of sodium, but it was 
soon realized that it was displaced from the D,—D, 
sodium doublet, and was called D3. D3 was so bright that 
it was realized both from the eclipse results and 
independently elsewhere that it could be viewed outside 
of eclipse. The element that caused the D; line in the 
spectrum was called ‘helium’, from the Sun god Helios, 
since it was known to exist only in the Sun. Helium was 
not identified on Earth until 1895. The flash spectrum 
was discovered at the eclipse of 1870, when it was 
thought to reveal a ‘reversing layer’. 

Starting with the total eclipse of 1869, additional 
emission lines were discovered that came from the 
corona, and were said to come from ‘coronium’. The 
periodic table had not been completed at that time, so it 
was not obvious that ‘coronium’ was any less an element 
than ‘helium’. In slitless spectra, in which the brightness 
of the chromospheric and/or corona itself is used to 
define the part of the image that is to be dispersed, the 
chromospheric emission lines appear as arcs while the 
coronal lines appear as circles. The brightest coronal 
lines in the visible part of the spectrum, all that could 
then be studied, are the ‘green line’ at 530.3 nm and the 
‘red line’ at 637.4 nm. A dozen fainter coronal lines have 
also been identified in the visible. The source of these 
spectral lines was not identified until 1939 and following 
years, when they were shown to be from 13-times- 
ionized iron ([Fe XIV], where the neutral state is Fe I and 
the square brackets indicate that the lines are forbidden 
by the quantum-mechanical selection rules) and from 
nine-times-ionized iron ([Fe X]), respectively. This result 
was the proof, backing other lines of evidence that had 
not been generally accepted, that the corona is very hot, 
containing gas at millions of kelvins. 

The observations by Eddington and colleagues at the 
1919 eclipse expeditions that stars very near the Sun 
were deflected slightly, as predicted by Albert Einstein in 
his general theory of relativity, led to the acceptance of 
Einstein’s theory. The Sun was in the Hyades during the 
eclipse, giving an especially rich star background. 
Eclipse observations for the purpose of testing relativity 
have been repeated several times since, and the old data 
from 1919 and 1922 have been reanalysed, but there are 
better methods of now of verifying the same principles 
and this Einstein experiment is no longer a major part of 
eclipse research. 

Rocket missions are sometimes flown during 
eclipses. The Lyman-alpha corona was discovered during 
a rocket flight that took slitless spectra during the 1970 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


eclipse. The Lyman-alpha image was not expected 
because of the high temperature of the corona, but even 
at millions of kelvins sufficient hydrogen remains un- 
ionized to scatter enough photospheric light to be 
observed. This Lyman-alpha corona is now observed 
from telescopes on the space shuttle and on satellites. 
Other eclipse rockets are flown at the same time as 
eclipses but out of totality, for comparison with eclipse 
results. High-resolution x-ray images are obtained for 
this purpose, for example. 

The corona observed at eclipse comes from several 
different sources. The K-corona (from the German word 
Kontinuierlich) is caused by photospheric light scattering 
off coronal electrons. In the scattering process, Doppler 
effects broaden the photospheric absorption spectrum to 
oblivion, or nearly so, and polarize the light. The F-corona 
(from Fraunhofer) is the light from the photosphere that 
scatters off dust in interplanetary space. Although dust is 
vaporized very close to the Sun, by the orbit of Mercury 
there is sufficient dust to make an important contribution 
to the corona as viewed from Earth. This scattering 
preserves the Fraunhofer absorption spectrum and does not 
polarize the light, so spectra and polarization 
measurements are commonly used to ‘separate’ the F- and 
K-coronas. The emission lines of highly ionized species, 
like the coronal green and red lines, are measurable only 
very close to the solar disk, just above the lunar disk at 
eclipses. The relative contributions of these different parts 
of the corona are shown in figure 4. The dust itself can be 
measured in the infrared, and is sometimes called the T- 
corona (from thermal). The F-corona is the inner part of 
the zodiacal light. 


TS hes L 
- ees 
disk ga oS 


Sky during wtality 


log {relative intensity} [photnspherc=| | 


E. (variable) K(@ max} 


K@ min) 


5 | 15 2 25 3 38 4 


Distance (solar radii from center of Sun} 


Figure 4. The intensities of different parts of the corona. K is 
the continuous (spectrum) corona, F is the Fraunhofer 
(absorption line) corona and E is the set of emission lines. 
(From Golub L and Pasachoff J M 1997 The Solar Corona 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press); after van der Hulst 
H C 1953 The Sun ed G Kuiper (Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(b) 


Figure 5. (a) The total solar eclipse of 26 February 1998, with 
an image of the solar disk based on observations from the 
Extreme-ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (EIT) on the Solar and 
Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). The EIT central image 
shows the coronal temperature, and was computed as the ratio 
of two of their individual images that show the corona in 
different temperature ranges. © 1999 Jay M. Pasachoff and 
Wendy Carlos. All rights reserved. Central image from the 
EIT/SOHO team, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. SOHO-— 
Williams College collaboration with the support of the 
Committee for Research and Exploration of the National 
Geographic Society. 


(b) Composite image from August 11 total solar eclipse with 
SOHO EIT image of the solar disk superimposed on coronal 
features photographed by the Williams College Eclipse 
Expedition. SOHO EIT images courtesy of the EIT team at 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, combined by Wendy 
Carlos. 


Since the corona diminishes in intensity so rapidly 
with distance from the solar limb, a factor of about 1000 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


in the innermost solar radius above the limb, ordinary 
film or CCDs cannot capture the intensity of the whole 
corona on a single image. Accordingly, G Newkirk 
worked out a method in the 1960s, following earlier work 
by Laffineur and others, of making an eclipse camera 
with an ND filter that is radially graded in density so that 
it is densest near the limb and progressively less dense 
radially outward. Thus the coronal image that passes the 
filter is flatter in intensity than the original image, and 
can be captured on a single piece of film. Ten such 
images were taken, from 1966 through 1998. Radial 
filters have also been used by other observers. At present, 
computer techniques are allowing similar effects to be 
created using multiple images taken with varying 
exposure times, as was shown in figures 1 and 4. Such 
images show the shapes of coronal streamers especially 
well and thus reveal the SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD. 

Although the innermost corona has been observable 
from certain mountaintop observatories since the 
coronagraph was invented by Lyot in the 1930s, those 
observations were limited to regions closer to the limb 
than were visible at eclipses. The K-coronameter now at 
Mauna Loa Observatory and some other coronagraphs 
can now be used to observe the corona farther out, but 
are still limited in coronal observability. The brightness 
of the daytime sky, even at high altitude from such 
coronal sites as Mauna Loa or Haleakala, remains too 
high to carry out the full range of coronal studies. 

With solar satellites aloft viewing the corona every 
day, we have entered a new era in coronal eclipse 
research. There are still niches for which the Sun can be 
better studied from the ground than at an eclipse, and 
scientific work at eclipses must be pointed to those 
studies. For example, the spatial region within the limit 
of the occulting disk of the innermost coronagraph of 
SOHO can be observed at an eclipse. Cadences can be 
achieved at eclipses that are quicker than those available 
from SOHO, Yohkoh, or TRACE, which has the 
potential of solving the problem of CORONAL HEATING 
MECHANISMS. Further, regions of overlap can be analysed 
to the mutual benefit of eclipse and space researchers. 
For example, space instruments can be calibrated by 
comparison with eclipse results, or the forbidden lines 
visible from the ground can be compared with the 
permitted lines of the same ionic species observed from 
space. Eclipse coronal observations can extend the 
LASCO coronagraph observations into the solar limb, 
within LASCO’s 1.8 solar radius occulting disk (and 
even the 1.1 solar radius disk of a defunct component). 
The comparison of ground-based eclipse observations 
with space results can extend the value of either type of 
observation (figure 5). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Total Solar Eclipses: 1998 - 2020 


ae LO 
60°N | 7 ~ hose 
ps : , Us Aas 
a mgt SPR 2 
iT; peel fr <% 


Latitude 


2020 Dec 14 
- 


= 


F. Espenak, NASA/GSFC - 1998 Feb 


180°W 3 150°WSs120°Wss"WsC«iOPWWsOPW o 30°E 60°E 90°F 120E 150°E 180°E 
Longitude 


(a) 
Annular Solar Eclipses: 1998 - 2020 


2014 Apr 29 
2008 Fes 0 F, Espenak, NASA/GSFC - 1998 Feb 
1eo-wW =«150°W «120°W WCW 30° W o 3° E 8 60E 86099 E «6120°E «= 150°E «180° EE 
Longitude 
(b) 


Figure 6. (a) Total solar eclipses, 2000-2010. (Courtesy of Fred Espenak, NASA/GSFC). (6) Annular solar eclipses, 2000-2010. 
(Courtesy of Fred Espenak, NASA/GSFC). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Total solar eclipses, 2000-2010. 


Date Maximum duration _ Path of totality 

21 June 2001 4m57s Southern Africa (Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Madagascar) 

4 December 2002 2m4s Southern Africa (Angola, Zambia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, South Africa, 
Mozambique), Pacific Ocean, ending at Western Australia 

23 November 2003 1m57s Antarctica 

8 April 2005 Om42s Total only at maximum over the Pacific Ocean 

29 March 2006 4m7s West (Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Niger, Chad, Libya, Egypt), Turkey, 
Russia, top of Caspian Sea, Kazakhstan 

1 August 2008 4m27s Northern Canada, Greenland, Russia (Siberia), western Mongolia, China 

22 July 2009 6m39s India, Bangladesh, northernmost Myanmar, China 

11 July 2010 5m 20s Pacific Ocean, ending over southern Chile and Argentina 


Future eclipses 

Total eclipses occur about every 18 months (figure 6(a)), 
table 1 and annular eclipses occur with about the same 
frequency (figure 6(b)). The partial phases are visible for 
thousands of kilometers to the sides of the zones of 
totality or annularity. 


Bibliography 

Espenak F 1987 Fifty Year Canon of Solar Eclipses: 1986- 
2035 (NASA Reference Publication 1178) (Greenbelt, MD: 
NASA) 

Golub L and Pasachoff J 1997 The Solar Corona (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Golub L and Pasachoff J 2001 Nearest Star: The Exciting 
Science of Our Sun (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press) 

Mucke H and Meeus J 1992 Canon of Solar Eclipses —2003 to 
+2526 (Wien: Astronomische Biiro) 

Mouradian Z and Stavinschi M (ed) 1997 Observational and 
Theoretical Problems Pertaining to Solar Eclipses 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Stephenson F R 1997 Historical Eclipses and Earth’s Rotation 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Williams S 1996 UK Solar Eclipses Since the Year I (Leighton 
Buzzard: Clock Tower) 

Zirker J 1995 Total Eclipses of the Sun 2nd edn (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press) 


World Wide Web 
Working Group on Eclipses of the International Astronomical 
Union: http://www.williams.edu/astronomy/IAU eclipses 


Eclipse predictions: http://umbra.nascom.nasa.gov/eclipse/ 

Golub and Pasachoff, The Solar Corona: 
http://www. williams.edu/astronomy/corona 

Golub and Pasachoff, The Nearest Star: 
http://www. williams.edu/astronomy/neareststar 


Jay M Pasachoff 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


We have an eclipsing binary when the stars of an orbiting 
pair periodically pass in front of one another, thereby 
dimming light from the system. Bright eclipsing stars 
such as Algol and e Aur excite the interest of even casual 
observers, and many are within reach of binoculars. Both 
stars are eclipsed in most examples, although usually 
one of the alternating eclipses is much more prominent 
than the other, and eclipses of only one star are possible. 
The existence of eclipsing binaries is expected when one 
realizes that many stars occur in binaries!, although 
whether they are common or rare is a matter for further 
thought and observation. Historically, the discovery of 
eclipsing binaries was one of the first indications of binary 
nature. (See VARIABLESTARS for early history and BINARY STARS: 
overview.) Although initial mental images may be of simple 
spherical stars, a host of interactive phenomena includes 
tides, winds, impacting streams, magnetic starspots and 
transfer of energy, while results provide checks, insights, 
and discoveries for the fields of stellar structure and 
evolution. Classes are named after prototypes, such as the 
abundant RS CVn, Algol and W UMa binaries. Typically 
a class originates with its recognition in terms of common 
observational traits, followed by several false starts toward 
understanding. The class may reach mature status, as 
have the mentioned classes, when there is widespread 
agreement on its coherence and on the structure and 
evolution of its members—of course with surprises at all 
stages. The central thread that has led from classification 
to structure and evolution is the idea of limiting lobes 
and the natural morphological types built around them. 
Thus we have detached (see BINARY STARS: DETACHED), 
semidetached, overcontact and double-contact binaries— 
somewhat pictorial names with formal meanings that are 
developed below. The eclipsing binary concept has grown 
to include eclipses of and by circumstellar disks, eclipses 
of fluorescent circumstellar gas by one or both stars and 
eclipses of the stars by attenuating clouds of circumstellar 
material (See DUSTY CIRCUMSTELLAR DISKS). The best-known 
eclipsing binary results are accurate fundamental data 
on masses, luminosities and radii of stars (MLR data), 
while classical problems concern the origin, structure, 
evolution and general nature of binaries, with impact on 
our understanding of star clusters and galaxies. 


Information from eclipsing binaries 

Eclipsing binaries have primarily been discovered by 
photographic surveys, with a few turned up by accident 
in photoelectric work. They can be found at great 
distances and many are known in other galaxies, although 
limiting magnitudes and spatial resolution set practical 
limits. Larger light loss (eclipse depth) leads to 
greater likelihood of discovery and usually to greater 
astrophysical usefulness. The orbit is edge on to the 


1 Estimates range from somewhat over half to 90+% of stellar 
systems being binary or multiple. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observer for an inclination, i, of 90° and high sini 
obviously favors deep eclipses, as does a large ratio of 
star size to orbit size. Total eclipses (entire star covered) 
and annular eclipses (only a ring of surface not eclipsed) 
are favored by unequal star sizes and, of course, by high 
sin i. A complete eclipse is one that is either total or annular, 
while a partial eclipse is neither total nor annular. The 
deepest eclipses occur when a star with most of the system 
luminosity (in a given photometric bandpass) is totally 
eclipsed, as in RW Tau. Annular eclipses, partial eclipses 
and eclipses of stars with low relative luminosity are 
typically much less deep and may even be undetectable. 
Total eclipses detectable only in x-rays can occur when a 
normal star has a hot neutron star companion. For circular 
orbits, the star with higher average surface brightness over 
the eclipsed area, which ordinarily means the star of higher 
surface temperature, necessarily has the deeper eclipse. 
The situation is more complicated for an eccentric orbit 
binary where one eclipse may be near periastron and rather 
deep, with the other near apastron and quite shallow or 
absent. Decrease of sin i reduces eclipse durations and 
depths, but only slightly for inclinations near 90°. Larger 
reductions occur when sin i becomes too low for complete 
eclipses. 

Brightness is measured relative to a judiciously 
chosen constant comparison star, nearby on the sky, while 
Doppler shifts are relative to the spectrum of a stationary 
light source. Velocity curves for both stars are ordinarily 
required for full results on absolute dimensions. The 
roles of light and velocity curves can be envisioned via 
a motorized scale model with glowing stars. Place the 
model in the sky (surmounting practical difficulties) at a 
distance of a few kilometers and observe its light curve, 
which could be indistinguishable from that of a real 
binary. By applying knowledge of eclipses and other 
photometric effects we might find relative dimensions, 
but nothing in the light curve tells us the model’s tiny 
absolute dimensions. Radial velocity curves deal with 
real lengths and can testify to the model’s absolute size 
but will not provide a picture. We therefore need both 
light and velocity curves to derive both image information, 
including relative dimensions, and the absolute scale. 

Among phenomena that make light curves informa- 
tive are tidal and rotational distortions, mutual heating, 
gravity brightening, limb darkening, magnetic star spots 
and accretion hot spots. Brightness variations due to tides 
and heating are collectively known as proximity effects. 
They tend to be prominent in eclipsing light curves because 
the same characteristic that makes eclipses likely also en- 
hances tides and heating. Statistically, that characteristic 
is large star size relative to orbital separation, although tidal 
distortion is more directly dependent on star size relative 
to limiting lobe size. Prior to about 1970 proximity effects 
were mainly regarded as hindrances to eclipse analysis, 
while spots were not widely seen as real. With an evo- 
lution in thinking, all these effects are now recognized as 
valuable indicators of physical and geometrical binary star 
properties. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ellipsoidal variation is named for the approximately 
ellipsoidal figure of a tidally distorted star. It is 
periodic on the orbit period, being concave-downward 
between conjunctions and concave-upward around the 
conjunctions (figure 1). That is, tidally distorted stars 
appear brightest from the side and dimmest end on. 
In the rather extreme case of overcontact, the overall 
binary system is shaped somewhat like a dumbbell 
as in figure 1. The term ellipticity effect also is 
used, particularly when a distinction is made between 
variation due to shape (geometric ellipticity) and to the 
consequent surface brightness distribution (photometric 
ellipticity). | Photometric ellipticity arises because of 
gravity brightening, where local surface flux depends on 
effective gravity. Theory predicts that bolometric flux is 
proportional to effective gravity in the case of radiative 
energy transfer and roughly to the 0.3 power of gravity 
for convective transfer. The first prediction is from the 
theory of RADIATIVE TRANSFER, While the second comes from 
numerical models of convective stellar envelopes. The 
geometric and photometric brightness variations have 
roughly equal amplitudes (radiative case), with similar 
waveforms, and add to a total variation almost twice 
that from geometry alone (figure 1). In the convective 
case, total variation is only moderately greater than the 
pure geometric effect. Ellipsoidal variation is largest 
for overcontact binaries with strong tides and radiative 
envelopes such as TU Mus, where it can reach amplitudes 
of order 30% of mean system light. Amplitudes are quite 
noticeably smaller, although still important, for the very 
abundant W UMa type overcontact binaries with deep 
convective envelopes. Many binaries have sin i too low 
for eclipses but still show ellipsoidal variation, as does 
the bright star Spica, which thereby varies about 3%. 
Ellipsoidal variation also can ‘hide’ from observation by 
affecting only the dim member, as in ALGOL where the 
lower mass star has a very large tide but only 2% of 
the luminosity of its nearly spherical companion. The 
gravity effect not only brightens a system as seen from 
the side, but also reduces the inward-facing brightness 
of each star relative to its outward-facing side, so that it 
appears dimmer at superior than at inferior conjunction. 
Ellipsoidal amplitudes tend to be small for eccentric orbits 
because the stars are only briefly near periastron, where 
tides are strongest. Ellipsoidal waveforms become more 
complicated with increased orbital eccentricity because 
tides are then variable and at best quasi-static. A likely 
example of aperiodic dynamical tides is GP Vel, the site of 
x-ray source Vela X1. 

Radiative heating of each star by the other produces 
the reflection effect. Thermal re-emission from a reflection 
cap on the inward side causes a light curve elevation 
around superior conjunction as part of a periodic variation 
that can be described by a few Fourier terms. Note that this 
difference at the conjunctions is opposite in sign from the 
corresponding one for ellipticity. The typical overall result 
of the two reflection effects seen together is a hill around 
secondary eclipse (figure 2) and intereclipse variation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that is concave-upward. (The upward concavity is very 
subtle and usually is overpowered by any small ellipsoidal 
variation.) The enhancement near secondary eclipse arises 
from the separate reflection effects being a half-cycle out 
of phase and the cooler star having the larger effect. One 
might expect local energy conservation in incident versus 
re-emitted radiation, but theory and observation indicate 
that irradiated stars with deep convective envelopes 
conserve energy only globally and re-emit about half 
of incident energy locally. Thus the bolometric albedo 
parameter, (locally re-emitted energy) /(incident energy), 
is unity for radiative envelopes but only about 0.5 for 
convective envelopes, which have reduced reflection 
amplitudes. 

Limb darkening is a wavelength-dependent aspect 
phenomenon caused by the temperature gradient in a 
stellar atmosphere and made familiar by observations of 
the Sun. It alters eclipse shapes and depths in ways 
that are mainly subtle but can be obvious in annular 
eclipses. Light curves of RS CVn type, BY Dra type 
and some other categories show variable ‘maculation’ 
waves caused by heavily spotted areas (figure 3). In some 
binaries these magnetic starspots drift in longitude and 
their maculation waves accordingly migrate steadily in 
phase, perhaps superposed with ordinary ellipsoidal and 
reflection variation. 

While each light curve effect has something to 
tell, eclipses deserve their top billing, as even minimal 
eclipses greatly delimit possible configurations. That 
fact becomes apparent when one tries to understand a 
binary with several kinds of variation but no eclipses. 
Multibandpass observations are particularly useful when 
the star temperatures differ greatly, as short and long 
wavelengths respectively emphasize contributions from 
the hotter and cooler stars. Parameters derivable from 
eclipses are listed in table 1, with comments. Among these, 
P, e, w, M2/M, and a reference time are also derivable 
from radial velocities in suitable circumstances, while i 
appears in the velocity parameters a2 sini. Thus an i 
from light curves allows extraction of a; or az from single- 
lined velocities, or both from double-lined velocities, and 
thus contributes to establishing the absolute scale and 
absolute masses. 

There is much active research on unusual and bizarre 
binaries where information retrieval can be difficult but 
well worth the trouble, as it can point to new directions 
in stellar evolution. Quasi-periodic and _ irregular 
variations call attention to interesting characteristics and 
evolutionary histories. For example, Rs Cvn binaries were 
first noticed because of light curve waves due to magnetic 
starspots, but the evolutionary significance of RS CVns 
now runs far beyond that phenomenon. However, quite 
regular timewise behavior sometimes stimulates a flood 
of research when its implications are appreciated. The 
stars of aW UMa binary exchange thermal energy through 
a connecting neck, yet are remarkably stable and long 
lived. The issue of why they are stable has generated 
a large literature over many decades, so observationally 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


—_— —-t —b 


light 


ees ee 
@ONOoO- =hwo 


0.2 0.4 0.6 


orbital phase 


Figure 1. The effect of gravity brightening on the ellipsoidal variation of a tidally distorted binary is shown by the three curves in the 
lower panel. The largest amplitude is for the full effect, as expected for radiative energy transfer. The smallest amplitude shows the 
purely geometrical part of ellipsoidal variation. The in-between amplitude is for the reduced gravity brightening expected for 
convective energy transfer. The top panels are computer simulations of the binary at two places in its orbit. 


B light 
Oo oO © 
 & © 


> 
ho 
T 


-0.2 0 


0.2 0.4 0.6 


orbital phase 


Figure 2. The reflection effect is seen in this simulated blue light curve of Z Vulpeculae (lower panel). Notice the hill around secondary 
eclipse as the heated inward-facing side of the lower-temperature star turns toward the observer. The low-temperature star is the one 
with the large tide, as shown in the computer pictures of the top panels. It is nearly the same size as its hot companion, but far less 


massive and therefore much more distorted. 


simple binaries can be theoretically intricate. Nature 
makes many contenders for the title of strangest binary, 
but 6 Lyr and ¢ Aur have continued as leading candidates 
for most of a century. Subsets of their observations look 
deceptively simple, but straightforward interpretations 
lead quickly to contradictions. Binaries that break the 
rules make us re-examine our assumptions. Light curves 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


also differ in intricacy, apart from whether the behavior is 
understood. Certain red giants with small hot companions 
(SYMBIOTIC STARS, especially symbiotic novae) show eclipses 
of fluorescent stellar winds and chromospheres that 
exhibit great detail, especially in spectroscopy and 
multiwavelength photometry. Although the fundamental 
phenomenon seems to be understood, much is being 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


oe ot ‘ 
SRE se LA COI NO 2 
ene le 


a ee 
MW-ODAMONM 


B magnitude 


— 


AN RO 


7 Pica 


Ne nt oy 
i ae eae nee 5 


a ie ea ei a Se 
FM Sm ety, 
ey, 


0.2 
orbital phase 


0.4 


Figure 3. Here the RS CVn type binary AR Lacertae shows its spots. Of course, spot details are unknown, so the simulation shows two 
broad areas that represent heavily spotted regions, according to the approximate situations in 1977 (top left) and 1981 (top right). 
Changes from 1977 (upper curve) to 1981 can easily be seen in the machine-generated light curves of the lower panel. 


Table 1. Parameters determined from eclipsing binary light curves. 


Parameter 


Comment 


Orbital period, P 

Reference time, fo 

Orbital inclination, i 

Surface potentials, W1, wo 

Orbital eccentricity, e 

Argument of periastron, w 

Gravity brightening exponents, 61, 62 
Bolometric albedos, A1, A2 

Mean surface effective temperatures, 7), T> 
Mass ratio, M2/M, 

Bandpass luminosities, L1, L2 

Limb darkening coefficients, x1, x2, y1, yo 
Spot latitude, longitude, size, temperature 
Third light, /3 


learned by matching good models to observations. 


Star figures and system morphology 


dP/dt may also be a parameter 

Usually the time of a conjunction 

i = 0° in plane of sky 

Potentials specify surface dimensions (e.g. Ri, R2) 
e =(distance between foci) /(length of major axis) 
Angle between line of nodes and orbit’s major axis 
Symbols and definitions differ among authors 
Discussed in text 

Temperatures that would exist without reflection effect 
Determinable only in favorable circumstances 
Conventionally normalized to their sum 

Various approximate relations commonly used 
Spots are circular in most models 

Represents any third source—usually a star 


have important roles in light curve analysis as well as in 
binary star evolution. The configuration for co-rotation, 
where the entire system rotates with one angular velocity, 


Tidal dissipation has dragged many eclipsing binaries 
into SYNCHRONOUS ROTATION (for brevity, co-rotation), which 
for circular orbits means that axial rotation and orbital 
revolution have the same period. Their tidal distortions 
are static in a co-rotating frame, with stretching along 
the line of centers. Rotation produces polar flattening, 
so the combined tidal and rotational figure is egg like 
with the narrow end toward the companion and the polar 
dimension smaller than the side dimension. The shape can 
often be approximated by a triaxial ellipsoid (a geometrical 
model), although not in the more distorted cases. 

Today’s physical models are based on level surfaces of 
constant potential energy per unit mass that can be larger, 
smaller or accurately match certain critical surfaces that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is most easily viewed in the co-rotating frame. A null 
effective gravity point must exist on the line of centers 
between the stars where the opposing star gravities plus 
centrifugal force add to zero. It marks a saddle point 
in potential, with the downhill direction away from the 
null gravity point toward both stars. The inner critical 
surface passes through the null point and is the largest 
equipotential a star can fill without spilling gas onto its 
companion. It consists of a limiting lobe for each star, 
and the term contact in binary star morphology refers 
to contact of a star with its lobe rather than of one 
star with another. Ordinarily a star cannot be larger 
than its limiting lobe because it would then rapidly lose 
material, although stable overcontact configurations exist 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with both stars exceeding their limiting lobes, neither 
star being a willing receptacle for material from the 
other. If undercontact, accurate contact and overcontact 
are respectively symbolized U, A and O, then the binary 
combinations UO and AO are effectively ruled out except 
for extremely brief intervals. Otherwise pressurized 
layers would face onto a vacuum. The morphological 
categories that are ordinarily attainable are called detached 
(UU), semidetached (UA) and overcontact (OO). No known 
evolutionary process leads to the AA case in co-rotating 
binaries and any evolutionary size change would convert 
AA to UU, UA or OO. However, the AA case (double 
contact) probably occurs in non-synchronous binaries 
when evolutionary expansion causes one star to fill its lobe 
while fast rotation causes the other lobe to shrink onto its 
star. RZ Sct and U Cep may be examples. There also is an 
outer critical surface that marks the largest an overcontact 
binary can be without having catastrophic flow from a 
‘back’ null point of effective gravity. That point is behind 
the less massive star on the line of centers. All cases are 
illustrated in figure 4. 


Analysis 

A modest number of simple rules connect light curves 
with system characteristics. Assume the time scale to 
be in orbital phase (i.e. folded on the period) and the 
brightness scale to be in light (not stellar magnitude). Then 
for circular orbits the two eclipses have equal durations, 
while for eccentric orbits the eclipse that occurs nearer to 
apastron is the longer one. In the circular case for spherical 
stars, the sine of half the phase duration of either eclipse, 
sin @,, is a lower limit on the sum of relative radii, with 
direct application if i = 90°. Allowing for inclination, 
the relation is (R, + R)/a = (cos?i + sin’i sin? ©,)!/. 
An obvious point is that the ratio of light lost to light 
remaining at the bottom of a total eclipse is essentially 
the luminosity ratio of the smaller to the larger star, in a 
given observational bandpass. This rule becomes virtually 
exact in the absence of tides and mutual irradiation and 
allows exceptionally accurate determination of luminosity 
ratios. The ratio of radii is determined most strongly from 
a reasonably deep annular eclipse, combined with a total 
eclipse. Then the ratio of light loss in the annular eclipse 
to the light remaining in totality is nearly the square of the 
ratio of smaller to larger star radii, with small discrepancies 
due to limb darkening and other brightness distribution 
effects. For circular orbits, the eclipses are equally spaced, 
by half a cycle, while for eccentric orbits they are equally 
spaced only if we ‘look along the major axis’, with w = 90° 
or 270°. The argument of periastron w tells how the orbit is 
situated in angle within its own plane. If the orbit rotates 
(apsidal motion) then the eclipses have excursions about 
the 0.0 and 0.5 cycle points that are 180° out of phase (one 
goes ‘left’ while the other goes ‘right’). The position angle 
of the nodal line, Q, cannot be found from a light or radial 
velocity curve because neither is affected by a rotation of 
the binary about the line of sight. However, 2 can be found 
from polarimetric variation for a few binaries. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In a physical light curve model, the gravitational 
potential energies of the two stars, ordinarily considered as 
point masses, and centrifugal potential energy are added 
to form a total potential energy per unit mass, y, with 


vw =WV(R, 0,6, My, Mo, F,, D). (1) 


Here 6, @ are latitude and longitude and M;, Mz are 
the masses. One usually works with a dimensionless 
version whose length unit is the orbital semimajor axis, 
a, and in which mass ratio replaces the absolute masses. 
The rotation parameter F, and instantaneous separation 
D_ generalize y to non-synchronism and_ eccentric 
orbits at the cost of certain, usually inconsequential, 
approximations. To specify a star surface, the radial 
coordinate, R, is required to follow a surface of constant 
yw. Equation (1), or in practice the dimensionless form, 
is numerically inverted with fixed w,M2/Mj, F.,D to 
compute a relative radial coordinate, r = R/a, as a 
function of 6 and ¢ (i.e. to compute a grid of surface 
points). Thus equation (1) defines a family of surfaces in 
the parameter yy, one of which corresponds to the actual 
surface of a given star, with ~, yy replacing the mean star 
radii of geometrical models as star size parameters. The 
magnitude and direction of the potential gradient, vy, 
respectively determine local effective gravity and surface 
orientation. Many schemes have been published for 
integrating the light from these surfaces while accounting 
for eclipses and the various surface brightness effects. 
Such computations became practical with the machines 
of ca 1970. 

Morphology can be built into light curve analyses. 
For example, it might be reasonably certain that a binary 
is semidetached, although a discussion of reasons would 
exceed available space. If so, the contact star’s surface 
potential is not a free parameter but is the lobe potential 
and can be calculated from other parameters, most notably 
the mass ratio. The functional relation thus defined can 
be used to eliminate an entire dimension of incorrect 
solutions. The lobe filling condition can be exploited 
not only for general solution improvement but sometimes 
to determine particular parameters that otherwise would 
not be derivable. The prime example is the photometric 
mass ratio. Ordinarily a mass ratio estimate requires some 
means to find the relative location of the center of mass, 
which a light curve does not provide. However, light 
curves of semidetached and overcontact binaries do tell 
the location of the null point of effective gravity, which 
is determined by the mass ratio. Lobe size is fixed by 
the condition that the lobe contains the null point. Thus, 
in a semidetached binary, star size determines lobe size, 
which in turn determines mass ratio. For overcontact, 
the dumbbell’s overall shape (ratio of bulge sizes) is 
conditioned by the pinch of its waist around the null point, 
so essentially R2/R; determines mass ratio. A common 
misconception is that a photometric mass ratio mainly 
derives from ellipsoidal variation. However, the actual 
information sources are eclipses, particularly total-annular 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. All combinations of undercontact (U), accurate contact (A) and overcontact (O) are illustrated. Stars are shown with the 
larger dots and limiting lobes as ghostly surfaces (smaller dots). The well-known detached (UU), semidetached (UA) and overcontact 
(OO) cases are at top left, top right and lower right, respectively. The overcontact binary is surrounded by an outer contact surface that 
limits its maximum size. The newer category of double contact (AA) is at middle left, where the actual limiting lobe coincides with the 
star, and the ordinary (co-rotation) lobe also is shown for reference. Double contact binaries have one component limited in size by fast 
rotation. The OU (middle right) and OA (lower left) configurations are ordinarily unphysical, as discussed in the text. 


eclipses, that determine accurate relative star dimensions. 
A photometric mass ratio allows one to find all the 
mass and absolute dimension information that normally 
requires velocity observations of both components, even 
when velocities of only one component exist. 


Recent and future developments 
A new data source has appeared in spinoff from the 
several gravitational microlens surveys that automatically 
produce thousands of light curves. Although precision is 
not as good as for data gathered in the usual way and 
radial velocities are lacking, observers can sift through 
the survey light curves to find interesting binaries for 
more thorough observation. Extra-Galactic eclipsing 
binaries thus identified and subsequently observed with 
large telescopes can improve the HUBBLE CONSTANT. Stellar 
interferometry promises a new era of inroads into the 
domain dominated by eclipsing binaries. In principle, 
interferometric images could replace light curve analyses, 
although the baselines and general capabilities needed 
for typical distant examples seem beyond forseeable 
expectations. However, major instrumental advances are 
on the way. In the nearer term, advanced interferometry 
will forge connections between the fields of eclipsing and 
visual binaries. 

Although one naturally thinks of eclipses in the 
observational context of light curves, there are direct 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


links of eclipses to other observations. One link is 
spectral disentangling, a computationally intensive use 
of eclipses to isolate entangled binary spectra. Several 
distinct procedures exist and all achieve good separation 
of apparently hopelessly blended spectra, sometimes even 
when there is no phase without serious blending. The 
essential idea is that each eclipse modulates only one 
of a blended pair of spectra and does so in a known 
or determinable way. Disentangling schemes average 
over random noise very effectively because they not only 
fit entire spectral windows (as opposed to individual 
lines) but fit all spectra simultaneously. Another kind 
of simultaneous solution fits combinations of types of 
observations, such as light, velocity and polarimetry 
curves. The main advantage is reduced parameter 
count, as some parameters (e.g. eccentricity, mass ratio, 
inclination) are common to two or more data types. Still 
another development is rotation measurement from light 
curves rather than from spectral line broadening, which 
can sometimes be done because rotation affects star figures 
and surface brightness distributions and therefore affects 
eclipse circumstances. 

Omissions due to space limitation are covered 
by the bibliography and include background areas 
such as history, contributors, the role of computers, 
‘badly behaved’ binaries, famous classical problems, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eclipsing Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


interconnections with spectroscopic binaries and full 
descriptions of eclipsing binary categories. Also covered 
there are further ways to observe eclipses, such as by 
POLARIMETRY. Disks and other circumstellar structures as 
well as extended atmospheres and spots of various kinds 
are also mentioned in the bibliography. However, proper 
treatments of these items and of exotic new discoveries 
incorporating white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes 
are to be found only in the general literature. 


Bibliography 

Kallrath J and Milone E F 1999 Eclipsing Binary Stars, 
Modeling and Analysis (Berlin: Springer) 

Kopal Z 1959 Close Binary Systems (New York: Wiley) 

Kuiper G P and Johnson J R 1956 Dimensions of contact 
surfaces in close binaries Astrophys. J. 123 90 

Smith R C 1984 The theory of contact binaries Q. J. R. 
Astron. Soc. 25 405 

Wilson RE 1994 Binary star light curve models Publ. Astron. 
Soc. Pac. 106 921 


RE Wilson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ecliptic 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ecliptic 


A great circle on the celestial sphere which represents the 
apparent annual path of the Sun in its motion relative 
to the background stars. It is so called because eclipses 
can occur when the Moon crosses it. Due to the motion 
of the Earth around the Sun, the Sun appears to move 
across the celestial sphere, completing one full circuit in 
a year. The ecliptic, in fact, represents the intersection 
of the orbital plane of the Earth with the celestial sphere 
and, because the equator of the Earth is inclined by an 
angle of approximately 231° to the orbital plane, it follows 
that the ecliptic is inclined to the celestial equator by the 
same amount (the obliquity of the ecliptic). The ecliptic 
intersects the celestial equator at two points, the vernal 
equinox and the autumnal equinox. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial poles, celestial sphere, 
equinox, obliquity of the ecliptic. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ecosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ecosphere 


The shell-shaped region around a star within which 
the surface temperature of a suitable planetary body is 
conducive to the existence of life. Both the diameter and 
the thickness of the ecosphere depend on the type of star, in 
particular on its surface temperature. In the solar system 
the ecosphere extends from just outside the orbit of Venus 
to just within the orbit of Mars, making Earth the only 
suitable planet for life, by this definition. (Note that the 
Moon is in the Sun’s ecosphere, but does not possess the 
conditions to make it suitable for life.) In general, hotter 
stars have a larger and wider ecosphere; cooler stars a 
smaller and narrower one. A dwarf star, though, would 
have a much smaller and narrower ecosphere than a giant 
star with the same surface temperature. 

The traditional concept of an ecosphere as defined 
above was framed to apply to surface life (on land or in 
surface oceans) and to lifeforms similar to those familiar 
on the Earth. In the 1990s it became clear that ‘life’ in 
its broadest sense may cover a wider spectrum and may 
exist in more unusual environments. Micro-organisms 
known as extremophiles have been found which, as 
the name implies, thrive in extreme environments, in 
particular at temperatures much higher or lower than 
other organisms can tolerate. In addition, there are 
deep-ocean and subsurface organisms which do not rely 
on photosynthesis, and can withstand temperatures of 
1100°C and 1200°C, respectively, at depths of 5 km. It 
has been speculated that life may exist in the subsurface 
ocean of Jupiter’s satellite Europa, for example. If life 
does turn out to be possible in this and other ‘extreme’ 
environments, the standard definition of ecosphere will 
need to be rewritten. 


See also: life on other worlds 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eddington, Sir Arthur Stanley (1882-1944) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eddington, Sir Arthur Stanley 
(1882-1944) 


Astrophysicist, born in Kendal, Westmorland, England, 
became Plumian professor of astronomy and director of 
the Cambridge Observatory. Eddington’s work on the 
theory of relativity was described by EINSTEIN as ‘the finest 
presentation of the subject in any language’ and from 
Greenwich, he led one of the two 1919 solar eclipse 
expeditions which confirmed the predicted deflection of 
starlight by gravity. His lifetime’s work concerned the 
internal structure of stars. He discovered the mass— 
luminosity relationship, calculated the abundance of 
hydrogen and explained the pulsation of Cepheid variable 
stars and the very high densities of white dwarfs. He was 
one of the first to identify nuclear reactions as the source of 
power in stars. He studied the pressure of the transport of 
energy through a star by radiation, and showed that above 
a certain luminosity, the Eddington limit, a star cannot 
through the force of gravity maintain its equilibrium and 
will disrupt. In his later years he pointed out some 
surprising numerical coincidences between atomic and 
cosmological quantities, but his cosmological theory about 
the reasons why has not been accepted at all. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Edgeworth, Kenneth Essex (1880-1972) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Edgeworth, Kenneth Essex 
(1880-1972) 


Amateur astronomer, born in Streete, County Westmeathe, 
Ireland. His 1943 paper “The evolution of our planetary 
system’ is the first reference to a reservoir of comets beyond 
the planets, a theory which foreshadowed the concept of 
the KUIPER belt, sometimes referred to in Ireland and Britain 
as the Edgeworth—Kuiper belt. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Education 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Education 


In surveys of first-year undergraduate science students 
at British universities, astronomy and space stand out 
most prominently as the areas of science that attracted 
the students into science. There is something grand and 
inspiring about the Universe that motivates young people, 
and indeed the not-so-young, to study astronomy to a 
greater or lesser degree. 

Science is now taught in virtually all schools. In 
general astronomy is regarded as a minor part, but 
it is regarded as important to understand the basic 
astronomical facts such as that the Earth is spherical, that 
its rotation causes day and night, that it orbits the Sun and 
its tilt during the orbit produces the seasons, that we live 
in a galaxy of stars and that there are other galaxies in the 
Universe. 

Motivated school students can take astronomy as 
a separate examination subject in many countries; in 
Britain, for example, there is an annual paper in astronomy 
in the portfolio of tests (the GCSE) that are taken 
at about age 15. This encourages the candidate to 
undertake actual observational programs as well as 
learning from books. Significantly, however, only the most 
elementary mathematics is included in the British GCSE— 
and astronomy is above a mathematical subject. 

Local astronomical societies are invaluable in educa- 
tion, because many of them have observatories of their 
own (see AMATEUR ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES) and nearly all of 
them organise lecture programs with qualified speakers. 
The programmes may be informal or may be structured as 
an adult education course. 

Of course, public observatories are of immense 
importance, and in some countries are both common and 
highly successful—notably in the United States and Japan. 
In Britain they are rare, perhaps because there is the 
problem that during a ‘public night’, when the telescopes 
are made available, the skies are too often cloudy! A series 
of robot telescopes now exists for education, placed in 
good observing sites. In California the most advanced 
network is based at Mt Wilson Observatory and is called 
Telescopes in Education (http://tie.jpl.nasa.gov/). The 
UK is building on Hawaii the 2-metre telescope Faulkes 
Telescope for public access (http:/ /www.faulkes.com/). 

One very important development concerns the spread 
of planetaria. A PLANETARIUM provides an ‘artificial sky’; the 
viewer sits inside a large dome, and the celestial bodies are 
shown by means of a special projector. The effect can be 
amazingly realistic, and ina large planetarium it is hard to 
remember that you are not looking at the real sky. There are 
hundreds of planetaria world wide, see the International 
Planetarium Society at http: / /www.ips-planetarium.org/ 

One great advantage of a planetarium is that its sky 
can be made to show phenomena which the real sky 
cannot, except under special circumstances, for instance, 
a total eclipse of the Sun. The sky can be shown as it will 
be at any hour, and from any part of the world; time travel 
is easy—one can, for instance, see the sky as it was at the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


time of the Crucifixion. The movements of the planets can 
be speeded up, and even the proper motions of the stars 
can be shown, whereas the real stars are so far away that 
the constellation patterns remain sensibly unchanged for 
periods of many lifetimes. 

Planetaria have traditionally been based on opto- 
mechanical projection devices. Recent advances in com- 
puter technology are making possible digital projectors, 
controlled in almost infinite variety by software. The pos- 
sible shows are almost unrestricted in subject matter, and 
can range from the purely fun (simulated trips into a black 
hole for example) to the seriously technical (e.g., teaching 
navigation). 

Many universities cater for astronomy in one way 
or another, so that a degree can be taken either in ‘pure’ 
astronomy or in a modular form (physics and astronomy 
being a favorite) (see PROFESSION). About 50 UK universities 
teach astronomy modules in specialist science degrees (i.e. 
half of them). In the USA, where degree level studies have 
a higher diversification than in the UK, astronomy is often 
a popular choice for the science component of a liberal arts 
degree and for study as a special subject in science degrees. 

National astronomical societies (See ASTRONOMI- 
CAL SOCIETIES AND PUBLICATIONS) have education sub- 
sections, such as the American Astronomical So- 
ciety’s Working Group on Astronomical Education 
(http:/ /www.aas.org /~wgae/wegae_index.html) and the 
Royal Astronomical Society’s Education Committee. The 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific is targeted ex- 
plicitly towards the dissemination of information to 
the public including through educational programmes 
(http:/ /www.aspsky.org /education.html). 

The International Astronomical Union, through 
its Commission 46 on the Teaching of Astronomy 
(http:/ /physics.open.ac.uk/IAU46/) supports a travel- 
ling telescope and summer schools for students of astron- 
omy in the developing world, where there is increasing 
interest. In South Africa, the new African government 
supports astronomy education as a means to develop the 
aspirations of the South African people into its modern 
era. 

The US Association for Astronomy Education 
(http:/ /solar.physics.montana.edu/aae/), the UK Associ- 
ation for Astronomy Education (supported by the Royal 
Astronomical Society) and the European Association for 
Astronomy Education (based at the European Southern 
Observatory) offer events and teacher training in astron- 
omy (http://www.star.ucl.ac.uk/~aae/aaehomep.htm), 
with the avowed intent to modernise astronomy educa- 
tion in schools. 


Paul Murdin and Patrick Moore 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Effective Temperature Scale and Bolometric Correc- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Effective Temperature Scale and 
Bolometric Corrections 


The conversion from an observational quantity, such as 
the color index or the spectral type, to the effective 
temperature (To) of a star is known as the effective 
TEMPERATURE SCALE. Bolometric corrections are required in 
the calculation of the luminosity of a star if the flux from the 
star has not been observed over the entire ELECTROMAGNETIC 
SPECTRUM. 

The Tog of a star is defined to be the temperature 
of a BLACKBODY RADIATOR with the same radius and the 
same total energy output (i.e. luminosity) as the star. 
Practically speaking, the To corresponds quite closely to 
the temperature of the visible surface of a star. Knowledge 
of any two of the three variables, Teg, radius and 
luminosity, allows calculation of the third variable. Thus to 
calculate directly the Tor of a star, both the luminosity and 
the radius of a star must be known. These two quantities 
can be found for only a limited number of stars. The 
luminosity of a star requires knowledge of the bolometric 
flux of a star (which includes radiation across the entire 
electromagnetic spectrum) and thus requires observations 
from space, and is well known for only a few hundred 
stars. Fluxes are thus for the most part measured in 
only a limited region of the spectrum—usually the optical. 
To derive bolometric fluxes from these measurements, a 
correction, termed a bolometric correction, is required. 
The radius of a star requires knowledge of the angular 
diameter of a star and the distance to the star. Again, 
this quantity is known for only a limited number of stars. 
Thus, for most stars, the Tog cannot be determined in a 
fundamental way. Astronomers must therefore rely on 
other methods, including measuring a proxy for the Tot 
(for instance the color index or the spectral type), and then 
finding a way to convert from this proxy to the To. This 
conversion is called the effective temperature scale. 


The determination of the effective temperature 
The most straightforward way to derive the effective 
temperature scale, ie. the conversion between an 
observational quantity such as the B—V color index, or 
the spectral type of a star, and the Tog is to determine 
the T.¢ for as many stars as possible over a wide range of 
temperatures, and then relate these effective temperatures 
to the observed quantity. How does one determine the Tor 
of a star? 


Fundamental effective temperatures 
The fundamental way to derive the To of a star is to use 
the Stefan—Boltzmann law in the following form: 
L=4no RTS; (1) 
where L is the luminosity of the star, o is the Stefan— 
Boltzmann constant and R is the radius of the star. 
Unfortunately, neither the luminosity nor the radius can be 
measured directly. What can be measured from the Earth 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are the monochromatic flux, F,, which is the energy from 
the star incident on a unit area on the surface of the Earth 
per unit time per unit frequency interval, and the angular 
diameter (0p) of the star. These quantities can be related 
to the To in the following way: 

If F, represents the flux emitted from the stellar 
surface, and F, represents, as above, the flux from the star 
measured at the Earth, then it necessarily follows, from 
the conservation of energy (ignoring interstellar extinction 
and absorption by the atmosphere of the Earth), that 


Anr? F, = 40 R°F, 


where r is the distance to the star. Integrating the flux at 
the Earth over the entire electromagnetic spectrum yields 


oe) 
/ F, dv = Foot 


0 


where Fi, is the total or bolometric flux from the star, and 
[o.e) 
L= ark? | F, dv = 40 R°TS,. 
0 


Consequently 
Foot = (R/r)’o Tey. 


Now, the angular diameter of a star, measured from 
the Earth is 6p = 2(R/r). Thus, finally 


192 4 
Foot = ZO Tog. 


Angular diameters can be measured for nearby 
stars using a number of techniques, including optical 
phase-coherent or amplitude interferometry, intensity 
interferometry, speckle interferometry (See INTERFEROMETRY: 
GROUND) and lunar OcCULTATIONS. It is possible to determine 
actual radii of stars from the analysis of ECLIPSING BINARY 
STARS. To determine the bolometric flux of a star, its flux 
must be observed over a wide range of frequencies in 
the electromagnetic spectrum. For most stars (except 
for the very hottest stars), the majority of the flux 
from the star is concentrated in the wavelength range 
~100 nm (ultraviolet) to ~12 ym (infrared). This requires 
observations from spacecraft, as the ultraviolet and much 
of the infrared are strongly absorbed by the Earth’s 
atmosphere. Spacecraft which have been useful in 
this regard include the International Ultraviolet Explorer 
(IUE), the Sky Survey Telescope on the ESRO TD1 satelite, 
the Infra-Red Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), the Infrared 
Space Observatory (ISO) and the Hubble Space Telescope 
(HST). 


Bolometric corrections 

If the bolometric flux of a star has not been measured 
directly, it is still possible to estimate it from the stellar 
flux over a much more limited wavelength range using 
bolometric corrections. Bolometric corrections are usually 
defined in terms of magnitudes. Thus, if My represents 
the absolute magnitude of a star measured in the Johnson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Effective Temperature Scale and Bolometric Correc- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


photometric V-band, and My. the absolute bolometric 
magnitude calculated from the entire spectrum, then the 
bolometric correction (B.C.) is defined as 


B.C. = Myo — My. (2) 


Then the luminosity of the star can be calculated from the 
equation 


log (= ) = 0.4[My (©) — My (*) + B.C.(O) — B.C.(*)] (3) 
(o) 

where the © quantities refer to the Sun. If the radius of the 

star is known, then the Ti follows from equation (3) and 

equation (1). 

Tables of bolometric corrections may be calculated 
using stars for which complete flux distributions are 
available, or from theoretical stellar flux distributions. 
Equation (2) can be rewritten 


se F,S, dv 


B.C. = 2.51 
°8 i ae F,dv 


+C) 


where S,, is the photometer response for the wavelength 
band of interest (in equation (2), the Johnson V-band). C) is 
an arbitrary constant which is usually selected according to 
convention. The most commonly used convention selects 
C, so that the B.C.(Q) = —0.07. Another convention 
selects C,; so that the minimum B.C. is zero, and yet 
another sets C; so that the B.C.(©) = —0.19. Which 
convention is chosen (in light of equation (3), where the 
difference in the bolometric corrections of the Sun and 
the star is the relevant quantity) is not important, just 
so long as one is consistent. Bolometric corrections are 
usually tabulated against B—V or the spectral type. When 
tabulated against B-V the B.C. does not show a strong 
dependence on the luminosity type of the star. Table 1 
gives a recent tabulation of the bolometric correction 
versus B—V for dwarf and giant stars. Supergiants deviate 
slightly from the values given in this table. Table 2 
tabulates the bolometric correction versus spectral type. 
In this table separate scales for the different luminosity 
classes are given. In both tables the convention that 
B.C.(©) = —0.07 is adopted. Notice that for both cool 
and hot stars, the magnitude of the bolometric correction is 
quite large. This is because, for these stars, most of the flux 
is outside the optical region. For such stars, the bolometric 
correction is not very reliable. Instead of equation (2) for 
the definition of the bolometric correction some sources 
use the equation B.C. = My — Mpoi, in which case the 
bolometric corrections are the negatives of those given in 
tables 1 and 2. 


Other methods of determining the effective temperature 

Many stars are too far away for the measurement of 
their angular diameters, and/or many have not been 
adequately observed in the ultraviolet or in the infrared. 
For these stars other techniques are available to determine 
their effective temperatures, but not in a fundamental way. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Tes and bolometric corrections as functions of B-V. 


B-V B.C. Tege (K) 
—0.35 —4.72 56 700 
—0.30 —3.23 33 600 
—0.25 —2.18 22700 
—0.20 —1.53 17000 
—0.15 —1.01 13 700 
—0.10 —0.61 11700 
—0.05 —0.33 10 400 


0.00 —0.16 9530 
0.05 —0.05 8920 
0.10 0.00 8450 
0.15 0.02 8080 
0.20 0.03 7770 
0.25 0.04 7480 
0.30 0.03 7220 
0.35 0.03 6960 
0.40 0.02 6730 
0.45 0.01 6500 
0.50 —0.01 6280 
0.55 —0.04 6080 
0.60 —0.06 5890 
0.65 —0.09 5720 
0.70 —0.12 5560 
0.75 —0.16 5410 
0.80 —0.20 5280 
0.90 —0.29 5050 
1.00 —0.38 4840 
1.10 —0.49 4660 
1.20 —0.61 4480 
1.30 —0.75 4320 
1.40 —0.92 4150 
1.50 —1.15 3980 
1.60 —1.54 3770 
1.70 —2.46 3460 
1.80 —5.54 2940 


For all but the hottest stars the observed flux 
distribution (i.e. F, or F, versus wavelength) of a star 
may be compared with theoretical flux distributions from 
model STELLAR ATMOSPHERES. The best determinations of 
Terp using this method are for stars which have been 
observed over a wide wavelength range. Figure 1 shows 
an example of such a fit for the star 8 Leo, which has been 
observed in the ultraviolet (using the IUE satellite), and the 
optical and near-infrared using ground-based telescopes. 
Even if a star has not been observed outside the optical 
range, ground-based observations can be used to obtain 
an adequate fit with theoretical flux distributions. Because 
theoretical models are used, this method of determining 
the To cannot be regarded as fundamental; the derived 
effective temperatures are only as good as the models. 

For very hot stars (for example the early O-type stars), 
the Top is so great that the maximum of the continuum 
flux of these stars is in the extreme UV, and thus even 
space-based observations fall on the long-wavelength or 
Rayleigh—Jeans tail of the flux distributions of these stars, 
the slope of which is very insensitive to the To. For such 
stars, itis necessary to adopt anentirely different technique 
to estimate the effective temperature. This technique 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Effective Temperature Scale and Bolometric Correc- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.80 


0.60 


Bik 


0.40 


0.20 


Flux (10-9 erg s-1 cm-2 A-1) 


0.00 


N Teft = 8500K log(g) = 4.2 4 


1 1 
1000 2000 3000 


in 1 in 1 in 1 1 
4000 5000 6000 7000 


1 1 in 1 in 
8000 9000 10000 11000 


Wavelength (Angstroms) 


Figure 1. A model fit to the observed fluxes of the star 6 Leo. The full circles indicate ground-based spectrophotometry in the optical 
and near-infrared. The data marked IUE (extending from 1100 A to 3200 A) represent an ultraviolet spectrum of the star obtained with 


the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite, while the solid line extending from 1100 A to 11000 A (and partially obscured by 
the IUE data) represents the fitted model calculated with the model stellar atmospheres program atLass. The effective temperature of 


the star is determined to be 8500 K. 


involves fitting the spectral line profiles of lines of singly 
ionized helium (He II), neutral helium (He I) and hydrogen 
with theoretical line profiles. Such comparisons require 
the calculation of non-LTE stellar atmosphere models 
which include the effects of radiation scattered back from 
the stellar wind onto the photosphere, the so-called wind 
blanketing effect. Including the effects of wind blanketing 
can change the effective temperature by as much as 10%. 

Lacking an observed flux distribution, certain 
spectral features can be used to determine the effective 
temperature. For instance, in the B-type stars the size of the 
Balmer jump, a discontinuity near 3650 A in the stellar flux 
due to the photoionization of hydrogen, is temperature 
sensitive. In the F- and G-type stars, the profiles of the 
Balmer lines of hydrogen are quite sensitive to the Tog. 
In the late-type stars (G- and K-type stars), ratios of the 
line depth of lines due to neutral metals can be quite 
sensitive to the Tor if one of the lines has a low excitation 
potential while the other has a relatively high excitation 
potential. In such a case, the line with the low excitation 
potential grows rapidly in strength with decreasing Test, 
while the high excitation potential grows less rapidly or 
even declines in strength. Such techniques can yield a 
temperature precision on the order of 20 or 30 K, although 
the absolute temperature is more uncertain. 


The effective temperature scale 

Once the effective temperatures of a sufficient number of 
stars have been determined (preferably in a fundamental 
way), the relationship between an effective temperature 
proxy, such as the B-V index and the effective 
temperature, can be tabulated. This is known as the 
effective temperature scale. One recent tabulation is given 
in table 1. Notice the unsuitability of the B—V color index 
for this purpose for the very hot stars; a small change in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


B-V yields a large change in the To. Some improvement 
can be obtained by using the U-B index, but both are 
subject to the same fundamental limitation mentioned 
above: for the hottest stars, observations in the optical and 
even the near-UV lie too far out along the temperature- 
insensitive Rayleigh—Jeans tail of the flux distribution. As 
an alternative, tabulations of the Tag and the bolometric 
corrections are often made against the spectral type. Table 
2 contains such a tabulation derived from a number of 
recent sources. For the cool, luminous stars, effective 
temperatures are not yet well determined. In the B-, A-, 
and early F-type stars, the Te and bolometric corrections 
are not strongly dependent on the luminosity class. 


Applications of the effective temperature scale 
and future developments 
Arguably the most important diagram in stellar astronomy 
is the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL (HR) DIAGRAM. In its theoretical 
form, this diagram plots stars in the To, luminosity plane. 
In its most common observational form, also known as the 
color-magnitude diagram, stars are plotted in the color 
index (commonly B-V), absolute visual magnitude (My) 
plane. The HR diagram is the arena on which much of 
modern-day stellar astrophysics takes place. In particular, 
stellar evolutionary tracks and isochrones calculated from 
theoretical models are plotted on the HR diagram. To 
compare these theoretical calculations with observations 
of real stars and clusters of stars it is necessary to convert 
from the theoretical quantities of Teg and luminosity to 
B-V and My or other similar observed quantities. Indeed, 
one of the greatest barriers to the advancement of stellar 
evolutionary theory is the inaccuracy of our knowledge of 
the effective temperature scale. 

Determination of the To is often the first step to 
the derivation of other fundamental parameters of a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Effective Temperature Scale and Bolometric Correc- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. T.¢¢ and bolometric corrections as functions of spectral type. 


Luminosity Luminosity Luminosity 
Class V Class III Class I 

Spectral — Tete B.C. Tost B.C Tote B.C. 
type (K) (mag) (K) (mag) (K) (mag) 
O3.. 46400 —4.27 46500 —4.27 44500 —4.14 
O5.. 44300 —4.13 42300 —3.98 40300 —3.82 
O7.. 40100 —3.81 38100 —3.64 36100 —3.46 
O9.. 35900 —3.44 34000 —3.27 32000 —3.08 
BO. 29800 —2.87 28000 —2.70 27000 —2.60 
B2. 21380 —2.04 19000 —1.78 17000 —1.53 
B5.. 15000 —1.24 15000 —1.24 13500 —0.98 
AO. 10000 —0.25 10000 —0.25 10000 —0.25 
AS. 8200 0.02 8200 0.02 8200 0.02 
FO. 7250 0.04 7250 0.04 7250 0.04 
F5.. 6600 0.01 6500 ~=—<0.01 6400 0.00 
G0. . 5850 —0.07 5650 —0.10 5450 —0.15 
GD5.. 5570 —0.12 4980 —0.31 4750 —0.44 
KO. 5270 —0.21 4820 —0.39 4510 —0.59 
K5.. 4560 —0.56 3920 —1.25 3710 —1.68 
MO.. 4050 —1.05 3730 —1.63 
M2.. 3750 -—1.60 3610 —1.95 
M4.. 3120 —4.15 
Me.. 2590 


star. For instance, knowledge of the Tor, the luminosity 
(from My and bolometric corrections via equation (3)) 
and the surface gravity, which can be determined from 
spectral analysis, leads to the radius and mass of the star. 
Knowledge of the mass can then be used, in conjunction 
with stellar evolutionary theory, to determine the age of 
the star. 

The effective temperatures and bolometric corrections 
for the hottest and the coolest stars are still uncertain. 
The newly launched FAR ULTRAVIOLET SPECTROSCOPIC EXPLORER 
(FUSE) satellite (which has a spectral coverage of 905- 
1195 A) helps to sample more of the energy distributions of 
the hottest stars, and can thus help in the determination of 
the effective temperatures. This, plus continual advances 
in stellar atmosphere models for these stars, should lead 
to a significant improvement in our knowledge of the 
fundamental parameters of these stars in the near future. 
The determination of fundamental effective temperatures 
for the coolest stars, especially the HIGH-LUMINOSITY STARS, 
will likely continue to be problematical, as the very 
definition of the radius and the Tes in the very extended 
atmospheres of these stars is difficult. 


Bibliography 

Berriman G, Reid N and Leggett S K 1992 Effective 
temperatures of M Dwarfs Astrophys. J. 392 L31-3 

Fitzpatrick E L and Garmany C D 1990 The H-R diagram 
of the Large Magellanic Cloud and implications for 
stellar evolution Astrophys. J. 363 119-30 

Flower P J 1996 Transformations from theoretical 
Hertzsprung-—Russell diagrams to color-magnitude 
diagrams: effective temperatures, B—V colors and 
bolometric corrections Astrophys. J. 469 355-65 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Gray D F 1992 The Observation and Analysis of Stellar 
Photospheres 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Kurucz R L 1992 ATLAs9 Stellar Atmosphere Programs and 2 
km/s Grid CD-ROM 13 (Cambridge, MA: Smithsonian 
Astrophysical Observatory) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Effelsberg Radio Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Effelsberg Radio Telescope 


The 100 m diameter radio telescope has been operated by 
the MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT FUR RADIOASTRONOMIE since 1972 near 
Effelsberg, Germany. The telescope is fully steerable and 
its pioneering ‘homologous’ design minimizes elevation- 
dependent gravitational deformations, enabling routine 
observations to wavelengths as short as 6 mm. Scientific 
programs include high-sensitivity continuum surveys, 
extensive polarization studies of our own and external 
galaxies, pulsar research, and atomic and molecular line 
spectroscopy. The telescope frequently participates in 
VLBI observations. 
For further information see 

http://www.mpifr.bonn-mpg.de/index_ e.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Egg Nebula (CRL 2688) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Egg Nebula (CRL 2688) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Cygnus, position 
RA 21" 02.3™, dec. +36° 42’. It is young, possibly having 
left its red giant phase only a few hundred years ago. 
The central star, which is obscured by dust, is emitting 
powerful jets and has shed several shells of material. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Einstein Observatory (HEAO-2) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Einstein Observatory (HEAO-2) 


The second in the series of HIGH ENERGY ASTROPHYSICAL 

OBSERVATORIES was launched by an Atlas-Centaur 

rocket on 13 November 1978. Soon after its insertion into 
a 470 km circular orbit inclined at 23.5° to the equator, 
HEAO-2 was named the Einstein Observatory, in 
celebration of the centenary of Albert Einstein’s birth. 
This groundbreaking NASA X-ray mission 
revolutionized X-RAY ASTRONOMY. As the first satellite 
to be equipped with focusing X-ray mirrors, Einstein not 
only observed sources 10 000 times fainter than its 
predecessor, UHURU, but it was the first observatory to 
image X-ray sources. 

The four nested paraboloid—hyperboloid mirrors of 

the grazing-incidence telescope (the largest had a 

diameter of 58 cm) were able to focus incoming X-rays 

with energies in the range 0.25-4 keV (see GRAZING 

INCIDENCE OPTICS). The photons were then analyzed by 

four interchangeable instruments that could be rotated 

into the focal plane of the telescope. The field of view 
varied with the X-ray energy, but was typically about one 
square degree. 

Einstein carried five main instruments: 

(1) The High Resolution Imager (HRI) provided an 
imaging capability with a spatial resolution of 
approximately 2 arcsec, but had a field of view less 
than half a degree in diameter. 

(2) The Imaging Proportional Counter (IPC) had a 
greater sensitivity than the HRI and covered the 
entire field of view of the telescope, but it had a 
poorer spatial resolution (approximately 1 arcmin) 
and a very limited spectral capability. 

(3) The Solid State Spectrometer (SSS) had a moderate 
spectral resolution and a 6 arcmin diameter circular 
field of view. 

(4) The Focal Plane Crystal Spectrometer (FPCS) 
provided high spectral resolution in selected energy 
bands. 

(5) The Monitoring Proportional Counter (MPC) 
measured the 1-20 keV X-ray flux of the source(s) 
being observed simultaneously by the telescope. 


The leader of the project and the principal 
investigator for all five instruments was X-ray pioneer 
RICCARDO GIACCONI. 

The first object studied by Einstein was the BLACK 
HOLE candidate Cygnus X-1. More than 5000 X-ray 
sources were subsequently catalogued during the 
observatory’s 30-month operational life—including more 
than 100 hot, young stars in the ORION NEBULA alone. 
Einstein’s ability to detect faint sources meant that it was 
able to study objects such as SUPERNOVA REMNANTS, X- 
RAY BINARIES, GALAXY CLUSTERS, ACTIVE GALAXIES and 
QUASARS. Its high spatial resolution meant that many of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


these could be linked to optical counterparts for the first 
time. 

Einstein’s observations influenced stellar models by 
showing that the X-ray flux from many stars was 
thousands of times greater than predicted (see SOLAR— 
STELLAR CONNECTION). Complex shells of X-ray 
emitting gas were mapped around several supernova 
remnants, while ‘on-off? emissions from the spinning X- 
ray PULSAR at the heart of the CRAB NEBULA were also 
studied. Other supernova remnants were discovered in 
the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD. 

The observatory also confirmed the existence of X- 
ray sources in both the spiral arms and the nucleus of the 
ANDROMEDA GALAXY, those near the center being much 
more luminous. A powerful X-ray source was detected at 
the center of the radio galaxyCENTAURUS A, while 
additional X-ray emissions were aligned with its optical 
jet. Other studies revealed clouds of extremely hot gas 
surrounding some members of galaxy clusters and filling 
the space between them (see COOLING FLOWS). Formerly 
unseen emissions from distant quasars were also revealed 
by extended observations, indicating that the diffuse X- 
ray background may be caused by numerous faint 
sources. 

The mission ended in April 1981, when the satellite 
ran out of attitude control gas. It reentered the 
atmosphere on 25 March 1982. (see X-RAY TELESCOPES, 
NEUTRON STARS and NGC 4151) 


Peter Bond 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Einstein, Albert (1879-1955) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Einstein, Albert (1879-1955) 


Physicist born in Ulm, Wtirttemberg, Germany, described 
the photoelectric effect (for which he received the Nobel 
prize in 1921) and created the theory of special relativity 
in 1905 in his spare time, while an employee of the Swiss 
patent office. The theory of relativity was based on two 
hypotheses, that the laws of physics had to have the same 
form in any frame of reference and that the speed of 
light remained constant in all frames of reference. He 
deduced that mass and energy were equivalent. Sought 
to extend the special theory of relativity to phenomena 
involving acceleration using the principle of equivalence, 
in which gravitational acceleration was held to be 
indistinguishable from acceleration caused by mechanical 
forces. Gravitational mass was therefore ‘equivalent’ to 
inertial mass. While a professor in Prague he predicted 
the gravitational deflection of light, for example how 
light from a distant star, passing near the Sun, would 
appear to be bent slightly, shifting the star’s apparent 
position away from the Sun. This was proposed as the 
first experimental evidence in favour of Einstein’s theory 
and verified by EDDINGTON’s and Dyson’s observations at 
the solar eclipse of 1919. Developed the general theory 
of relativity while at Zurich and Berlin. The success of 
the 1919 test of relativity began Einstein’s establishment 
as a scientific icon, with the London Times headlining 
its account ‘Revolution in science—new theory of the 
universe—Newtonian ideas overthrown’. By contrast his 
work in Berlin was disrupted by demonstrations with an 
anti-Jewish taint, and eventually Einstein took up a post 
at Princeton as the Nazis took power. At Princeton he 
began his work to unify the laws of physics, an ambitious, 
possibly over-ambitious, task which physicists continue. 
Became active in the peace movement and took on the 
role of a wise and independent scientific counsellor to 
the world. His name is taken for many institutions 
etc, perhaps the most important astronomically being the 
Einstein x-ray astronomy satellite. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


EISCAT 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


EISCAT 


The EISCAT Scientific Association is an international re- 
search organization operating three geophysical research 
incoherent scatter radar systems, an ionospheric heater 
and a dynasonde in northern Scandinavia. It is funded 
and operated by the research councils of Norway, Sweden, 
Finland, Japan, France, the United Kingdom and Germany. 

Two of the VHF and UHF radar transmitters are 
located close to the city of Tromsg in Norway, while 
the third, which became operational in 1996, is located 
near Longyearbyen on the Arctic island of Spitzbergen. 
The radars measure plasma densities, temperatures and 
velocities in the polar and auroral ionosphere. 

For further information see 
http://www.eiscat.no/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ejecta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ejecta 


Material thrown out by an impact on the surface of a 
planetary body, particularly by a crater-forming event. 
Ejecta consists mostly of material excavated from the body 
that has been struck. It can form rays, extending radially 
from the crater; an ejecta blanket, a continuous deposit 
of ejecta surrounding the crater; or secondary craters, 
caused by larger fragments of ejected debris. Material that 
has been on a surface tends to darken with age through 
exposure to radiation, so ejecta, which consists of fresh 
subsurface material, is frequently bright by contrast. 


See also: craters, ray, secondary crater. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Electromagnetic Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Electromagnetic Radiation 


Radiation, consisting of an electric and a magnetic 
disturbance, which travels in a vacuum at a characteristic 
speed known as the velocity of light (approximately 
300000 km s~'). In other words, a light wave consists 
of periodically varying changes in electric and magnetic 
fields. 

Usually electromagnetic radiation is thought of as 
a wave motion, the distance between successive crests 
being the wavelength. Thus, for example, visible light 
has a wavelength of a few hundred nanometers (a 
nanometer = 10~° meters), compared with a radio wave 
with a wavelength of the order of meters. The number 
of wavecrests passing a fixed point in one second is the 
frequency. This equals the velocity of light divided by 
wavelength. Thus, short wavelength corresponds to high 
frequency. 

The full range of electromagnetic radiation is 
divided, in order of increasing frequency and decreasing 
wavelength into: radio waves, microwaves, infrared rays, 
visible light, ultraviolet light, x-rays and gamma rays. 

Electromagnetic radiation may also be described in 
terms of quanta or photons (‘packets’ or ‘particles’ of 
energy). The energy associated with electromagnetic 
radiation is inversely proportional to wavelength and 
directly proportional to frequency. Thus, the shorter the 
wavelength, the more energetic the photon. 

The human eye responds to different wavelengths of 
light by recognizing different colors (red light has a longer 
wavelength than blue light). 

Most of our information about the universe has been 
obtained by measurements of electromagnetic radiation of 
one kind or another reaching us from space. 


See also: electromagnetic spectrum, spectrum, syn- 
chrotron radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Electromagnetic Spectrum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Electromagnetic Spectrum 


The complete range of electromagnetic radiation, from 
the shortest to the longest wavelength. By convention, 
the electromagnetic spectrum is divided into a number 
of different wavebands. From the shortest to the longest 
wavelengths, the broad principal divisions are: gamma 
rays (wavelengths shorter than 0.01 nm), x-rays (0.01- 
10 nm), ultraviolet (10-390 nm), visible (390-700 nm), 
infrared (700 nm—1 mm), radio (1 mm upwards). Although 
human eyes are sensitive only to wavelengths in the range 
from about 390 nm to about 700 nm, the ‘optical’ region of 
the spectrum is generally taken to encompass the wider 
waveband from 310-1000 nm (310 nm-1 ym). Further 
subdivisions in common astronomical usage are: hard 
x-ray (0.01-0.1 nm), soft x-ray (0.1 nm-10 nm), extreme 
ultraviolet (EUV, or XUV: 10 nm-91 nm), near-infrared 
(1-4 wm), mid-infrared (4-40 ym), far-infrared (40 w~m- 
350 wm; i.e. 40 wm-0.35 mm), sub-millimeter (0.35-1 mm), 
millimeter-wave (1-10 mm), microwave (1 mm-0.3 m). 
Most incoming radiation is absorbed by the atmos- 
phere or reflected back into space, but radiation in the 
wavelength ranges 310 nm-1100 nm, and from about 
2 cm to about 30 m, can penetrate to ground level, these 
bands being known, respectively, as the optical and radio 
‘windows’. A few narrow bands of radiation in the near- 
and mid-infrared regions of the spectrum, and radiation 
in the sub-millimeter and millimeter-wave regions, can be 
studied from good, high-altitude, observing sites. 


See also: electromagnetic radiation, gamma-rays, in- 
frared astronomy, optical astronomy, radioastronomy, 
ultraviolet astronomy, wavelength, x-rays. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Electron 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Electron 


A stable elementary particle with a mass of 9.1091 x 
10-*! kg (equivalent, in energy terms, to 0.511 MeV) and a 
negative charge of 1.602 x 10 coulomb. The electron has 
a spin of 1/2 (in units of the Planck constant, h, divided 
by 277) and is a member of the lepton family. Electrons can 
exist either as free particles or as the negatively charged 
components of atoms. A complete atom contains equal 
numbers of negatively charged electrons and positively 
charged protons and is, therefore, electrically neutral. A 
flow of electrons (for example, along a wire, or in some 
other conducting medium) constitutes an electric current. 
For historical reasons, electrons are sometimes referred to 
as beta particles, and a stream of electrons as beta radiation. 

In the simplest model of the atom (the Bohr model), 
electrons are considered to travel around the atomic 
nucleus (which consists of protons and neutrons) in certain 
specific orbits, each of which corresponds to a particular 
energy level of the atom. If an electron absorbs a quantity 
of energy equal to the difference in energy between two 
levels, it will jump up to a higher (‘excited’) level. When an 
electron drops from a higher level to a lower one, energy 
is emitted in the form of a photon. In complex atoms, 
the constituent electrons are located in concentric shells, 
the maximum number of electrons in each shell being 
dictated by quantum mechanics and the Pauli exclusion 
principle. The maximum permitted number of electrons 
in the innermost shell is 2 (in this case, the two electrons 
must have opposite spins), in the second shell, 8, in the 
third, 18, and so on. When a shell contains the maximum 
number of electrons, it is said to be filled. The innermost 
shells usually fill up first, any remaining electrons being 
available to take part in chemical interactions with other 
atoms (these electrons are called valence electrons). Atoms 
with filled shells, such as helium (2 electrons) and neon 
(2+ 8 = 10 electrons), are particularly stable, more energy 
being needed to raise one of their electrons toa higher level, 
or to remove it altogether, than is the case with atoms that 
have partially filled outer shells. 

The magnitude of the charge on the electron (or 
‘electronic charge’), which is denoted by the symbol ‘e’, 
is used as the unit for describing the charges on subatomic 
particles and atomic nuclei. 


See also: atom, electronvolt, elementary particles, ioniza- 
tion, leptons, Pauli exclusion principle, photon, proton, 
quantum mechanics, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Electronvolt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Electronvolt 


A unit of energy that is used to describe the energies 
of subatomic particles and photons, or the energy levels 
of atoms. One electronvolt (symbol eV), which is the 
kinetic energy gained by an electron when it is accelerated 
through a potential difference of one volt, is equivalent to 
1.602 x 10-1? J. Commonly used multiples are keV (10° eV), 
MeV (10° eV), and GeV (10? eV). 


See also: atom, electron, energy, photon, subatomic 
particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Electroweak Force 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Electroweak Force 


The united force that encompasses the electromagnetic 
force and the weak nuclear force. The unification of 
these two forces is described by a theory that was devised 
during the 1960s by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg 
and Abdus Salam according to which, at high enough 
energies, the electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear 
interaction behave in exactly the same way. 

The electromagnetic force is conveyed between real 
particles by virtual photons (photons which come into 
existence in accordance with the Heisenberg uncertainty 
principle). According to Glashow, Weinberg, and 
Salam, the weak nuclear interaction, which gives rise to 
radioactive decay, is conveyed (or ‘mediated’) by very 
massive virtual particles, the Wt, W-, and Z° bosons. 
The range of a force is determined by the masses of its 
force-carrying particles (the higher the mass, the shorter 
the range). Because the electromagnetic force is conveyed 
by photons, which carry energy but have zero rest-mass, 
it is a long-range force (a virtual photon of zero energy 
can travel an infinite distance). Because the W and Z 
particles have masses in the range 88 to 100 times that 
of the proton, their range is very small (less than 107!” m). 
Electroweak theory predicts that at energies in excess of 
about 100 GeV, W and Z bosons are produced as frequently 
as photons and the two forces (electromagnetic and weak) 
behave as a unified force. The discovery of W and Z 
particles, in high-energy experiments carried out in 1983 
using the large proton synchrotron at CERN (the European 
particle physics laboratory near Geneva), provided strong 
confirmation of electroweak theory. 


See also: fundamental forces, gauge bosons, grand 
unified theory, uncertainty principle, photon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Element, Chemical 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Element, Chemical 


A substance composed of atoms, each of which has the 
same atomic number (i.e. contains the same number of 
protons in its nucleus), and which cannot be broken down 
by chemical processes into two or more other substances. 
The identity of a chemical element is determined by its 
atomic number, its chemical properties being determined 
by the arrangement of the electrons in the various shells 
that surround the nucleus (in a complete, neutral, atom, 
the number of orbiting electrons is equal to the number 
of protons in its nucleus). Although all atomic nuclei of 
the same element contain the same number of protons, 
they may contain differing numbers of neutrons and may, 
therefore, have different mass numbers (the mass number 
being the total number of protons and neutrons in the 
nucleus). Atoms of the same element with different mass 
numbers are called isotopes. 

Each chemical element is denoted by a chemical 
symbol. For example, hydrogen is denoted by H, helium 
by He, carbon by C, iron by Fe, and so on. The basic symbol 
is amplified by the addition of the mass number (A) as 
a superscript and the atomic number (Z) as a subscript. 
Thus, an element, X, would be denoted, symbolically, 
by 7X. For example, hydrogen (with one proton and no 
neutrons in its nucleus) is represented by {H, helium 
(with two protons and two neutrons, so that A = 4 and 
Z = 2), by 3He, iron (26 protons, 30 neutrons), by 3?Fe, 
and so on. Of the 92 ‘naturally occurring’ elements, the 
heaviest of which is uranium, 90 have been found on 
Earth. The remaining two (technetium and prometheum) 
have been synthesized experimentally and have also been 
identified in the spectra of certain stars. In addition, there 
are at least 15 transuranic (‘beyond uranium’) elements, 
elements with atomic numbers greater than 92, which 
have been synthesized by bombarding various isotopes 
with (usually) neutrons or alpha particles. A few of the 
transuranic elements, all of which are radioactive, have 
been found in nature in microscopic trace quantities. 


See also: atom, cosmic abundance of elements, electron, 
isotope, neutron, proton, radioactivity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elementary Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Elementary Particles 


Particles that at one time were thought to be the most 
basic, indivisible, building blocks of atoms and all forms 
of matter. This category of particle includes the stable 
leptons (i.e. electrons and neutrinos), the stable baryons 
(i.e. protons and neutrons) and photons. While electrons 
and neutrinos are still considered to be truly fundamental 
particles, which have no internal structure and cannot 
be broken down into smaller components, protons and 
neutrons are known to be composed of particles called 
quarks and are not, therefore, fundamental. 


See also: baryons, electron, fundamental particles, 
hadrons, leptons, neutrinos, neutron, photon, proton, 
quark, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ellipse 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ellipse 


The conic section obtained by cutting a right circular cone 
by a plane which makes an angle relative to the base of 
the cone less than the angle made by the side. It is an oval 
curve having within it two points or foci (singular: focus) 
such that the sum of the distances from each focus to any 
point on the curve is a constant. The greatest diameter of 
an ellipse is the major axis (half of this is the semi-major 
axis), and the least diameter the minor axis. The ellipse is 
symmetrical about both its axes. The curve when rotated 
about either axis forms the surface called the ellipsoid of 
revolution, or a spheroid. 

The foci are located on the major axis, one on either 
side of the center of the ellipse; the greater the separation 
of the foci, the more flattened the ellipse. A measure of 
the separation of the foci is given by the eccentricity, e, 
which can take values between 0 (the circle) and 1 (the 
case of the parabola). For an ellipse of semi-major axis 
a and eccentricity e, the distance from the center of the 
ellipse to either focus is ae. 

The path of a heavenly body moving around another 
ina closed orbit in accordance with Newton’s gravitational 
law is an ellipse. In the solar system one focus of such a 
path about the Sun is the Sun itself. 


See also: conic sections, hyperbola, orbital elements, 
parabola. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Elliptical Galaxies 


Elliptical galaxies are smooth, quiescent star-piles, devoid 
of any of the spectacular structures found in sPIRALGALAXIES. 
They have no disk, no spiral structure and only small 
amounts of the gas and dust. As a result there are no 
obvious symptoms of continuing star formation: no H II 
regions or young star clusters. They are the simplest 
galactic systems comprising just a single component, 
relatively bright in the center but fading rapidly with 
increasing radius. Elliptical galaxies are found mostly 
in the denser regions of the universe, from rich clusters 
to small groups; truely isolated ellipticals being relatively 
rare. Figure 1 shows the central region of the Coma cluster 
which is dominated by a population of ellipticals. The 
most luminous elliptical galaxies are amongst the brightest 
galaxies we know of and this, combined with their 
apparent simplicity, has made them targets of detailed 
study, not only so that we can understand their own 
evolution but also so that they can be used as standard 
candles to determine distances. 

The simple structure of elliptical galaxies is reflected 
in their place in HUBBLE’S CLASSIFICATION. They are character- 
ized by a single number, the ellipticity e = 10(1 — b/a), 
where b and a are the projected angular extent of the short 
and long axis of the galaxy on the sky. E5 galaxies have 
a long axis twice that of the short axis and are almost the 
flattest ellipticals. Some galaxies have been classified E6 
and E7 but these have almost always been found to har- 
bor stellar disks. Because the classification depends on 
the projected axial ratio it is not a physical classification. 
By making the simple assumption that ellipticals have the 
two long axes equal with the third axis shorter (i.e. they 
are oblate, like a tangerine) Hubble was able to invert the 
observed distribution of projected shapes to estimate the 
true distribution. He estimated that on average ellipticals 
have a short axis about 65% of the length of the long axis 
with a dispersion of about 15%. This picture remained cur- 
rent until the late 1970s but has been dramatically revised 
since then. In recent years attempts to produce a physical 
classification for ellipticals, and new ways of estimating 
their intrinsic shapes, have been developed (see later). 

In this article I will limit myself to a discussion of 
classical elliptical galaxies. These range from the brightest 
galaxies, which are about 40 times as bright as the Milky 
Way, to dwarf galaxies that are 100 times fainter than the 
Milky Way and that are typically found as companions 
to more massive galaxies (e.g. M32, the companion to 
the Andromeda nebula, M31). I will not include DWARF 
SPHEROIDAL GALAXIES Which are sometimes, erroneously, 
refered to as dwarf ellipticals. Luminous elliptical galaxies 
have roughly the same colors as K-giant stars giving them 
a yellow-orange hue; less luminous galaxies have slightly 
bluer colours. In appearance and spectral characteristics 
the bulges of spiral galaxies resemble low-luminosity 
elliptical galaxies and historically the bulge component of 
M31 was taken as typical of ellipticals. There are many 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The center of the Coma cluster of galaxies, dominated 
by the bright elliptical galaxy NGC 4874, which is surrounded 
by aswarm of fainter, featureless elliptical galaxies. (Image 
courtesy of the Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes, La Palma and. 
the SMAC (Streaming Motions of Abell Clusters) team.) 


parallels between ellipticals and bulges and I will compare 
and contrast them throughout this article. 

In the next section I will draw together the ways in 
which we have determined the distribution of light and 
mass as a function of radius within elliptical galaxies, 
including a discussion of attempts to refine our views 
of the intrinsic shapes of elliptical galaxies and attempts 
to detect their massive dark halos. I follow that with 
a discussion of the special properties of elliptical galaxy 
cores, where we often find separate components, even 
rotating in the opposite direction to the bulk of the galaxy, 
will be discussed. I also discuss the extensive searches 
for black holes in the centers of ellipticals. Then I describe 
how we learn about the evolution of the stars that make up 
ellipticals and how the large-scale properties of elliptical 
galaxies scale with each other: luminosity, mass, surface 
density, color, heavy element abundance and rotation. 
Finally I bring together all of the facets of elliptical galaxies 
and present the current thinking about how elliptical 
galaxies formed and evolved. 


Structure, size, luminosity and mass 
Elliptical galaxies are so called because the contours 
of constant intensity (called isophotes) are concentric 
ellipses. This is a very good description of most elliptical 
galaxies but there are small but significant variations from 
this simple form. High-quality images show (a) systematic 
changes in ellipticity with increasing radius, the most 
common form being a steady increase in the flattening 
and (b) that the position angle of the major axis of the 
isophotes changes with increasing radius. In most cases 
these changes are small (one or two ellipticity classes or a 
few degrees) but in a small minority they can be dramatic. 
The sizes of ellipticals are measured by fitting an 
analytic form to the fall in brightness (averaged in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


concentric circular annuli) with increasing radius: the 
luminosity profile. The most commonly used form was 
proposed by Gerard de Vaucouleurs in 1948 on the basis 
of images taken on photographic plates. He proposed 


1(R) = I, exp{—7.67[(R/R.)* — 1]} 
= 1,10'-3:331(R/Re)/4—1} 


where R,, the effective radius, is the radius that contains 
half the total light of the galaxy and J, is the surface 
brightness (the amount of light from a square arc second 
of the galaxy) at R.. This law can be integrated to give 
a finite total light of I, = 7.227 R,*I,.. de Vaucouleurs’ 
law, as it is known, fits remarkably well to many of 
the most accurately determined luminosity profiles of 
elliptical galaxies and provides a convenient measure of 
the size and total luminosity of galaxies. Effective radii 
range from ~20-30 kpc for giant galaxies to hundreds of 
pc for the smallest. Total blue luminosities range from 100 
billion solar luminosities (Wg ~ —24) to 25 million solar 
luminosities (Mz ~ —15). A generalization of this law, 
proposed by Sersic, which replaces the + power by another 
free parameter +, fits a wider range of galaxy luminosities 
and by allowing n = 1 even fits the luminosity profile of 
spiral galaxies well. Other laws have been proposed to 
describe the presence of a constant surface brightness core 
in some elliptical galaxies and to account for the extended 
low surface brightness haloes found in others. Details of 
these are given in Binney and Merrifield (1998) which is 
an excellent reference for further reading. 

As well as ellipticity changes and isophote twists, 
elliptical galaxy isophotes exhibit small deviations from 
pure ellipses that have become the basis for a more 
physical classification of elliptical galaxies. Accurate 
determinations of the boxy or disky nature of isophotes 
have been made consistently even though they arise from 
contributions to the light of at most a few per cent. 
Remarkably many properties of elliptical galaxies vary 
depending on the type and strength of these isophote 
distortions and recent work links the disky ellipticals in a 
sequence with lenticular galaxies leaving boxy ellipticals 
as a separate class. The kinematics, stellar populations, 
radio power and x-ray emission from elliptical galaxies all 
show a dependence on isophote shape and these global 
differences have led to sugestions that these two flavors 
of elliptical galaxy have different formation histories. 
Further clues to the formation history of elliptical galaxies 
are found in the faint, incomplete, shells that have been 
identified around many galaxies (see figure 2). These weak 
features may occur in as many as 30% of elliptical galaxies 
and are thought to be the remnant of a small disk galaxy 
that has fallen into an elliptical and been destroyed. 

Determining the luminosity profile is the first step to 
calculating the mass of elliptical galaxies. The simplest 
assumption is that the light traces the mass and so, for 
a given assumed intrinsic shape, the observed surface 
brightness (which is the integral along the line-of-sight of 
the luminosity density) is related to the projected surface 
mass density by a constant factor, the mass-to-light ratio 
(M/L) of the stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. The spectacular shell system surrounding the elliptical 
galaxy NGC3923. Careful photographic processing, known as 
unsharp masking, first revealed this extensive set of shells which 
continues into the central region of the galaxy. (Copyright 
Anglo-Australian Observatory, photograph by David Malin.) 


Kinematics and intrinsic shapes 

Measurements of the rotation and random motions of the 
stars in ellipticals are made from the shifts and width 
of absorption lines in the spectra of the galaxies along 
the major axis. The random motions are characterized 
by the value of the dispersion of the Gaussian that 
best fits the width of the absorption lines: the velocity 
dispersion, o. Early measurements revealed that more 
luminous galaxies have broader lines such that the total 
luminosity L « o*. This is known as the Faber-Jackson 
relation after the first people to draw attention to this 
in 1975. This discovery ignited an interest in using 
measurements of galaxy velocity dispersions to estimate 
the intrinsic luminosity of ellipticals and thus determine 
their distances. This possibility stimulated researchers to 
make surveys of galaxy dispersions and these produced a 
much better understanding of the relationships between 
their structure, dynamics and stellar populations that will 
be discussed under ‘Global properties’. 

Until the late 1970s it was assumed that the flattened 
figures of elliptical galaxies arose because the stars in the 
equatorial plane are supported by their rotation about 
the galaxy minor axis. However, as soon as the rotation 
velocities of the most luminous elliptical galaxies could 
be measured it was discovered that they are too small to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The maximum rotation velocity (Vm) normalized to the 
average velocity dispersion (o) plotted against apparent 
ellipticity (e) for a sample of luminous ellipticals (open circles), 
faint ellipticals (full circles) and the bulges of spiral galaxies 
(crosses). The curve represents the expected relation between 
rotation and flattening for oblate galaxies with isotropic velocity 
dispersions that are supported by rotation. The bulges and faint 
ellipticals appear to conform to this model but the luminous 
ellipticals have significantly lower rotation velocities. Note that 
when galaxies are viewed edge-on the ellipticity is greatest and 
they are expected to have the highest rotation velocities; as they 
are viewed closer to pole-on they are seen to be rounder and Vin 
is also reduced. Thus if a galaxy is viewed at a range of 
inclinations to the line-of-sight it is expected to remain roughly 
on the predicted line. (Figure from Davies R L et al 1983 
Astrophys. J. 266 41.) 


account for the observed flattened figures. Furthermore, 
when kinematic maps of ellipticals were made some 
dramatic examples of substantial rotation on the minor 
axis were found. This discovery led to a reassessment of 
the nature of elliptical galaxies. Figure 3 shows the rotation 
velocity, normalized to the central velocity dispersion, 
plotted against ellipticity for luminous elliptical galaxies, 
fainter ellipticals and the bulges of edge-on spiral galaxies. 
Also plotted is the expected relation for galaxies that are 
oblate and rotationally supported. Luminous elliptical 
galaxies are deficient in rotation by a large factor. Rotation 
is dynamically unimportant for luminous ellipticals; they 
are supported by the random motions of the stars. These 
random motions are not isotropic and this anisotropy 
produces the flattened figures observed. This discovery 
also challenged the assumption that ellipticals have oblate 
shapes and opened up the possibility that they could be 
prolate (two short axes equal, like a sausage) or even 
triaxial where all three axes have different lengths (like 
most potatoes). 

We now believe that most luminous elliptical galaxies 
are triaxial and that the observed isophote twisting 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


arises from the projection onto the sky of the changing 
intrinsic axial ratio with radius. This hypothesis also 
accounts for the rotation sometimes observed on the 
projected minor axis. This view has been established 
statistically from both the distribution of observed shapes 
of thousands of galaxies and from observations and 
models of the kinematics of many tens of galaxies. The 
average intrinsic shape for luminous elliptical galaxies is, 
however, poorly constrained. Most estimates are close to 
perfectly triaxial (where the intermediate length axis is the 
average of the long and short), e.g. a:b:c::1:0.85:0.7 with 
considerable scatter. These statistical studies suggest that 
intrinsically spherical galaxies are rare but, for example, 
cannot rule out a distribution of intrinsic shapes that is a 
mixture of oblate and prolate figures. The discovery that 
elliptical galaxies are not flattened by their rotation has 
important implications for our ideas about how they form. 
Models where isolated massive clouds of gas collapse 
dissipationally and form stars rapidly always produce 
galaxies which rotate faster than is observed. These results 
strengthened the view that elliptical galaxy formation 
proceeds through a sequence of mergers (of objects on 
misaligned orbits), to produce a galaxy with low total low 
angular momentum. 

Figure 3 also shows that the less luminous elliptical 
galaxies and the bulges of spiral galaxies fall on or near 
the line describing isotropic oblate galaxies, showing 
that these objects have substantial kinematic similarities 
and are both qualitatively different from their more 
luminous brethren. Whereas luminous elliptical galaxies 
have complex kinematic structures, figure 3 shows that 
low-luminosity elliptical galaxies and the bulges of 
spiral galaxies have isotropic velocity dispersions and 
oblate figures flattened by rotation. There are many 
other characteristics of elliptical galaxies that vary with 
luminosity and that I will discuss in the section on ‘Global 
properties’. 


Anisotropy and mass-to-light ratio 

Precise determination of the distribution of mass within 
elliptical galaxies requires detailed measurements of their 
luminosity profile and kinematics together with self- 
consistent dynamical models. Both analytic models based 
on the Jeans equations and models that construct galaxies 
by selecting orbits from a library (Schwarztschild’s 
method) have been successfully used (STELLAR DYNAMICS). 
For luminous ellipticals infering the distribution of mass 
within a galaxy on the basis of these data and models 
is complicated by the degeneracy between changes in 
M/L, and changes in the orbital anisotropy of the stars. 
Using only measurements of the rotation and dispersion 
we cannot distinguish between an increase in M/L and 
an increase in one component of the velocity dispersion at 
the expense of another. Techniques based on measuring 
the shape of absorption line profiles have been developed 
to break this degeneracy. The shape of absorption lines is 
determined by the luminosity distribution and the number 
of stars at each velocity along the line of sight. In the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


center of a galaxy an increase in dispersion may indicate 
an increase in M/L or an increase in the fraction of radial 
orbits. The latter will, however, produce a line profile that 
is less sharply peaked than a Gaussian. Thus by measuring 
deviations from a Gaussian profile as well as its width 
we can determine whether stars are predominantly on 
tangential or radial orbits. 

This ambiguity can be avoided altogether for low- 
luminosity ellipticals or spiral bulges as we believe them 
to have isotropic dispersions so determining the mass 
distributions in these systems is more straightforward. 
Similarly if galaxies possess disks of excited or ionized 
gas we can trace the mass distribution in the same way as 
for spiral galaxies. 

A review of the topics covered in this section can be 
found in de Zeeuw and Franx (1992). 


Dark haloes: mass at large radius 

Spiral galaxy rotation curves have been used to show that 
they are embedded in dark haloes that contain three to ten 
times as much mass as is visible in stars, gas and dust. Can 
dark haloes be detected in elliptical galaxies? The velocity 
dispersion in many galaxies remains roughly constant 
(outside the central region) to one or more effective radii. 
As galaxies get rapidly fainter away from the center does 
this mean we are detecting a dark halo or is the fraction of 
stars on circular orbits increasing with radius? In the outer 
parts of a galaxy, if there are more stars on circular orbits 
the absorption lines will be less peaked than a Gaussian 
and have truncated wings. In a few elliptical galaxies 
where the measurements extend to two to three effective 
radii the line of sight velocity profile has been used 
to eliminate the possibility of tangential anisotropy and 
indicate the presence of a dark halo. Similar conclusions 
are drawn from the velocities of GLOBULAR CLUSTERS and 
PLANETARY NEBULAE at large radii in elliptical galaxies. 

An important probe of the mass distribution at large 
radius is the hot x-ray emitting gas that has been detected 
out to five to ten effective radii in a large number of 
elliptical galaxies. This gas is enriched in heavy elements 
and is thought to originate from the stellar component of 
the galaxies through mass loss during the late stages of 
stellar evolution. By assuming that this gas is isothermal 
and in hydrostatic equilibrium it is possible to estimate 
the mass out to very large radii from the distribution of x- 
ray emission. These measurements have confirmed that 
elliptical galaxies reside in massive haloes qualitatively 
similar to those of spiral galaxies. With the advent of more 
capable x-ray satellites that can determine the temperature 
of the x-ray gas the simple assumptions required to 
estimate masses have been confirmed for a small number 
of galaxies. 

Amongst the most luminous elliptical galaxies are 
those that possess an extended (compared with a de 
Vaucouleurs law) low surface brightness halo, known 
as ‘D-type’ galaxies, often found in the centers of rich 
clusters when they are classified morphologically as ‘cD 
galaxies’. As well as high luminosity and extended halos 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


these galaxies often have more than one nucleus, that is 
several smaller galaxies are superimposed on the image 
of the galaxy center. cD galaxies appear to be the product 
of many interactions or mergers of cluster galaxies with 
the central dominant galaxy. Several attempts have been 
made to measure the stellar kinematics in these out to large 
radii to establish the M/L at large radii and determine 
whether the stars in the halo are moving in the cluster 
potential. In a few such galaxies we observe the velocity 
dispersion rising with increasing radius; however, they 
do not reach the cluster dispersion, nor do they reach the 
velocity dispersion expected on the basis of the velocities of 
the multiple nuclei, so the interpretation of these motions 
remains controversial. 


The centers of ellipticals 

The center of a galaxy is a unique environment. The 
potential well is deepest at the center and any material 
that dissipates energy in collisions, such as dust or gas, 
will fall to the center relatively rapidly. For a giant galaxy 
this will take at most a few hundred million years. Galaxies 
of all types exhibit special phenomena at their centers. 
The high-resolution Hubble Space Telescope surveys of 
the centers of ellipticals often reveal patches or disks of 
dust and central stellar disks. The centers sometimes host 
powerful radio sources (See ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI) or even 
star formation. We believe that radio galaxies are powered 
by massive black holes, and as a result the centers of 
elliptical galaxies have been identified as likely sites of 
black holes. 


Black hole searches 

Studies of quasars and galaxies at high redshift reveal 
that active nuclei were much more common at high 
redshift (z ~ 2), sufficiently common that we infer that 
most luminous present-day galaxies underwent an active 
phase and therefore should contain a massive central 
black hole. Searches for central black holes started in 
the late 1970s with observations of the luminous radio 
galaxy M87 (pictured in M87: THE MASSIVE GALAXY). From 
the rapidly increasing central velocity dispersion it was 
concluded that a black hole of 3 billion solar masses was 
present in the nucleus. The interpretation of these data 
was controversial because of the uncertainty introduced 
by the degeneracy between orbital anisotropy and mass 
distribution. These important observations stimulated 
a great deal of investigation of anisotropy and stability, 
new models were produced and more refined observations 
were made that increased our confidence in the case for a 
massive black hole in M87. In the 1990s measurements 
by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) of the velocity of 
the excited gas close to the nucleus revealed a gradient 
in velocity of +500 km s“! across the central 40 pc of the 
galaxy implying a mass of 2.4 x 10°Mo contained within 
a radius of 20 pc. This provided strong confirmation of 
the black hole hypothesis independent of the uncertainties 
concerning the mix of stellar orbits. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) has carried out 
extensive imaging surveys of galactic nuclei finding many 
galaxies that have stellar cusps (luminosity profiles that 
continue to increase in surface brightness to the limit of 
resolution of the telescope). Other galaxies have been 
found with resolved cores where the luminosity profile 
reaches a constant brightness at a finite radius. These 
measurements are important for evaluating the value of 
any central mass but a nuclear cusp alone cannot be used to 
conclude that a black hole is present. When combined with 
kinematic measurements, made mostly from the ground, 
we have been able to address the more general question of 
the frequency of black holes in elliptical galactic nuclei. 
More than 20 galaxies have been studied in detail. A 
general trend has emerged: more massive galaxies host 
more massive black holes. The black hole has roughly 0.2-— 
0.6% of the total galactic mass. This relationship is very 
uncertain and exhibits a factor of three scatter in the black 
hole mass, but if true it has wide-ranging implications (see 
ACTIVE GALAXIES: OBSERVATIONS). However, not all galaxies are 
required by the observations to host a black hole. 

A good review of the evidence for supermassive black 
holes in galaxies of all kinds can be found in Kormendy 
and Richstone (1995). 


Kinematically decoupled cores 

As measurements of rotation velocities and velocity 
dispersions were made with greater resolution and 
precision an increasingly large number of galaxies were 
found to have central kinematics that were decoupled 
from those of the bulk of the galaxy. The most dramatic 
examples have the central region (typically 0.1-0.3R,) 
rotating in the opposite direction from the rest of the 
galaxy, some have cores rotating about an axis less 
misaligned, in yet others the cores have very much higher 
rotation and lower velocity dispersion than the main 
galaxy. The latter suggests that there is a central disk 
embedded in the elliptical. These components often 
occur in the less luminous elliptical galaxies together with 
with disky isophotes and stellar cusps. In addition to 
these extended components the HST surveys of galactic 
cores have revealed many small (100 pc) disk components 
in ellipticals. Decoupled kinematics are not limited to 
ellipticals, one early-type DISK GALAXY has been found 
where two identical co-extensive disks rotate with the 
same velocity but in opposite directions! 

Although at first such decoupled systems were 
considered rare, taking account of projection effects and 
the difficulty of detecting small or weak components 
we now believe that between one- and two-thirds of all 
elliptical galaxies have extensive central components with 
decoupled kinematics (i.e. that are a kiloparsec or so across 
and have been discovered from the ground). The most 
likely origin for the decoupled central components in 
ellipticals would appear to be through the accretion of 
material with different specific angular momentum from 
that of the main body of the galaxy. The existence of 
decoupled cores has been widely cited as evidence that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


elliptical galaxies have experienced significant accretions 
in the past; however, the colors, metallicity and age of the 
stellar populations appear to be indistinguishable from 
those of the main galaxy itself. We will return to the 
possible origin of these components in the final section. 


Stellar populations 

In the Milky Way we have used the concept of STELLAR 
POPULATIONS aS an important tool in unraveling our 
Galaxy’s history. We would like to extend these ideas to 
external galaxies. The colors and absorption line strengths 
measured in the spectra of the integrated light of elliptical 
galaxies are rather similar to those of the bulge of the 
Milky Way. Such considerations led us to believe that 
elliptical galaxies are old, single stellar populations devoid 
of star formation, which are now largely quiescent. The 
oldest stars in the Milky Way are found in the globular 
cluster population. Elliptical galaxies possess globular 
cluster populations in proportion to their luminosity (see 
GLOBULAR CLUSTERS) and the colors of these populations 
suggest that a substantial fraction of them are as old as 
the globular clusters in the Milky Way, i.e. the oldest stars 
in elliptical galaxies are as old as the oldest stars in our 
galaxy. 

Even the nearest luminous elliptical galaxies cannot 
be resolved into individual stars from the ground, and 
only a handful can be resolved with HST so we are 
forced to try to unravel the integrated light from all the 
stars. By analysing the integrated spectrum we aim to 
discover what kind of stars constitute an elliptical galaxy. 
We approach this by using a library of stellar spectra or 
model stellar atmospheres covering a range of luminosity 
and effective temperature. We combine these using our 
knowledge of the relative numbers of stars in a population 
of a particular age and metallicity based on evolutionary 
models (See STELLAR EVOLUTION, STELLAR ATMOSPHERES). In this 
way we attempt to synthesize the observed integrated 
spectrum from known stellar components. In the optical 
(A = 0.5 wm) we find that about half the light arises 
from main sequence stars and half from giant stars but 
that ellipticals have an excess of light in the near infrared 
(A = 1-2 wm) and in the ultraviolet (A = 0.2 wm). The 
former can be attributed to stars with a higher metal 
content than the Sun, whereas the latter are likely to arise 
from extreme horizontal branch stars (see also HOT STELLAR 
POPULATIONS IN ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES). Both types are missing 
from the local stellar libraries. 

We would like to infer the star formation history of 
ellipticals from their integrated spectra, but assigning a 
unique age and metallicity to an elliptical galaxy using 
this technique has proved remarkably troublesome. The 
result of increasing the age of the stars in the models is very 
similar to that of increasing their metallicity; both make 
the spectra redder and increase the strength of absorption 
lines. In recent years techniques using the strength of 
the hydrogen Balmer lines as age indicators have enabled 
separate age and metallicities to be determined and the 
initial applications of these methods suggest that elliptical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


galaxies in rich clusters form a constant age sequence (say 
roughly 10 Gyr old) with metallicity varying from three 
times solar in the most luminous galaxies to one-third solar 
in those 100 times fainter. Samples of galaxies drawn from 
lower-density environments exhibit a much wider range 
in age, some having luminosity weighted ages as young 
as 2 Gyr! The symptoms of a young stellar population 
(<5 Gyr old) are easier to detect beacuse younger stars 
are much more luminous (per unit mass) than older 
stars so even a small mass fraction can significantly 
modify the integrated spectrum of an elliptical. These 
results suggest an environmental dependence on the star 
formation history of ellipticals such that galaxies in dense 
regions formed completely at early epochs whereas those 
in less dense environments have continued to experience 
star formation (perhaps involving only a small fraction of 
the total mass) until recent times. With the advent of HST 
and large ground-based telescopes it has become possible 
to observe galaxies at high redshift in sufficient detail 
to evaluate how they have changed over a considerable 
fraction of the age of the universe, and therefore measure 
galaxy evolution directly. I will discuss these powerful 
observations in the final section. 


Global properties 

Almost all the physical properties of elliptical galaxies 
vary smoothly with increasing luminosity. I have already 
discussed how the degree of rotational support decreases 
with increasing luminosity, a fundamental difference in 
the orbital make-up of faint and luminous ellipticals. 
This trend was only discovered through detailed study 
of the kinematics of tens of elliptical galaxies. While 
this work is becoming easier with the development of 
area spectrographs such as SAURON, many more galaxies 
have been characterized by single central spectra. These 
measurements have resulted in the discovery of a number 
of global relationships between properties that are easily 
measured for hundreds of galaxies. Remarkably there 
are tight correlations between parameters which are 
measured locally at the center of the galaxy, such as 
velocity dispersion, and global parameters such as size 
and brightness. I summarize these global relations here. 
They form much of the basis for our understanding of how 
elliptical galaxies formed and evolved. 


The color-magnitude relation 

The most luminous elliptical galaxies are slightly redder 
than the faintest ellipticals. This is a small effect but it has 
very small scatter (a few hundredths of a magnitude) and 
is well established in nearby clusters of galaxies. There has 
been a debate over the origin of this effect, is it due to a 
higher average metal content in the luminous galaxies or 
are they on average older? The color-magnitude relation 
has been observed as a tight correlation in clusters at 
redshifts in excess of 0.5 and this makes the interpretation 
in terms of age changes unlikely. This result is established 
in clusters, the simplest assumption to make is that the 
color-magnitude relation is universal, but this is not yet 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


proven. We believe that the color-magnitude effect arises 
because the deeper potential wells of luminous galaxies 
can retain the metals produced in supernova explosions 
more effectively. 


The Mg-o relation 

This correlation involves the strength of the magnesium 
absorption features at a wavelength of 0.52 wm and the 
stellar velocity dispersion 0. Galaxies with high-velocity 
dispersions have stronger magnesium absorption lines. 
(This is the best developed correlation but other absorption 
line strengths have also been used.) This relation also 
exhibits very little scatter, <0.02 magnitudes, and because 
it is a distance-independent correlation galaxies from a 
wider range of environments can be included. Once 
again the correlation could arise from changes in age or 
metallicity, but measurements in rich clusters out to z = 0.4 
are consistent with the local relation changed only through 
the stellar evolution that occurs in that time interval (about 
4 Gyr). This suggests that the correlation arises because 
high-o galaxies are metal rich. Tests of this relation in 
different galactic environments have failed to find any 
systematic differences. 


The Faber—Jackson relation and the Fundamental Plane 
Earlier I introduced the Faber—Jackson relation: the 
increase in central velocity dispersion with luminosity, 
L « o+. In the 1980s surveys of elliptical galaxies were 
made to measure the non-Hubble motions of galaxies. 
Using the high-quality data collected it became apparent 
that an extra parameter, the galaxy surface brightness, 
increased the precision of the L, o* relation as a distance 
indicator. Thus a new relationship, which has become 
known as ‘the Fundamental Plane’ superceded the L, ot 
relation. The Fundamental Plane relation is: 


log R. = 1.25logo + 0.33(SB,) + constant. 


where SB, is the effective surface brightness /, expressed 
in magnitudes and (5B,) is the average surface brightness 
within R, so that (SB.) = 3.61SB,. 

In the size, velocity dispersion, surface brightness 
space elliptical galaxies are not distributed uniformly, they 
fall on the above plane with relatively small intrinsic 
scatter of about 15% in R.. The Fundamental Plane (FP) 
is close to what would be expected on the basis of the 
virial theorem if all galaxies have the same M/L ratio. The 
difference with the observed relation can be used to restrict 
the possible range in M/L of ellipticals to a factor of three. 
Similarly, the width of the plane can be used to restrict the 
scatter in M/L at any point in the plane to be less than 12%. 

The scatter in the FP and the Mg-o relations are 
sensitive to the range in both the age and metallicity of 
the stellar population. However, the scatter in the FP is 
more sensitive to the range of ages, whereas the scatter 
in the Mg-o relation is more sensitive to the range of 
metallicities. Using these two together the range in the 
age and metallicity of ellipticals has been restricted to 30%, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


i.e. luminous ellipticals vary from say 10-13 billion years 
old and have metallicities in the range 3 + 1 times solar 
abundance. 


Structural properties 

Many structural properties vary smoothly with luminosity 
or central velocity dispersion. I have discussed 
most of them already but bring them together here. 
Statistically, large, luminous, high-velocity dispersion 
elliptical galaxies have higher x-ray luminosity, host 
more powerful radio sources, have triaxial figures and 
anisotropic velocity distributions and have boxy isophotes 
and flat central luminosity profiles. Alternatively the 
small, low-luminosity ellipticals and spiral bulges have 
lower x-ray and radio luminosities, have oblate figures and 
isotropic velocity distributions, and have disky isophotes 
and cuspy central luminosity profiles. These differences 
have been used to argue that luminous-boxy and faint- 
disky galaxies formed and evolved differently and should 
be part of separate morphological sequences. This 
hypothesis is attractive but has yet to address how two 
physically distinct classes obey the same color-magnitude, 
FP and Mg-o relations if indeed careful study proves that 
they do. 


The morphology—density relation 

Elliptical galaxies are gregarious, they are most often 
found in regions of high galaxy density. The mix 
of galactic morphological types is a strong function of 
environment, in rich clusters approximately 40% of the 
galaxies are ellipticals and another 50% are lenticulars with 
the remaining 10% being spiral galaxies. In less dense 
environments the fraction of ellipticals falls dramatically 
while the spiral fraction increases. In the lowest density 
environments less than 10% of galaxies are classified as 
elliptical with spiral and lenticular galaxies being found 
in roughly equal proportions. The same analysis has been 
carried out for clusters of galaxies at z ~ 0.4 imaged by the 
HST. The ellipticals still dominate the galaxy population 
in rich clusters at z ~ 0.4 but the fraction of lenticular 
galaxies has dropped to 20%, with spirals accounting for 
30% of the rich cluster population. It is clear that in rich 
clusters the elliptical galaxy population is already in place 
by z ~ 0.4 but that there are very many fewer early type 
galaxies with disks than we find in rich clusters today. 


How and when did elliptical galaxies form? 

We believe that the distribution of galaxies traces out the 
large-scale structure of dark matter and that the dark 
matter haloes of galaxies assemble hierarchically with the 
most massive haloes forming most recently. Only through 
understanding the behavior of the baryons within these 
haloes can we hope to understand how the luminous 
galaxies we observe evolve. 

The high central densities and relaxed structure 
of elliptical galaxies are taken as strong evidence that 
they underwent substantial gaseous dissipation during 
formation. Furthermore the small scatter observed in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


their global relations suggests that they are old (with 
a formation redshift greater than z = 2-3) and coeval. 
These considerations have led to models in which elliptical 
galaxies form through the dissipative collapse of a massive 
gas cloud resulting in a huge starburst which turns almost 
all the gas in a halo into stars simultaneously, say 10 
billion years ago. The most recent measurements at sub- 
millimeter wavelengths have detected galactic masses of 
cool dust at z = 2-3 that are forming stars at a very high 
rate. These sub-millimeter sources have been identified 
as the progenitors of the most luminous cluster ellipticals 
we see today. However, models show that the monolithic 
collapse of a massive gas cloud produces an unrealistically 
rapid rotation in the end product and furthermore the 
collapse of massive objects at high redshift appears to 
contradict the hierarchical assembly of galaxies. 

These drawbacks have led to alternative suggestions 
that ellipical galaxies formed through a sequence of 
galactic mergers. There is much empirical evidence for 
this: low rotation velocities, decoupled cores and shells 
are all a natural consequence of accretions and mergers. 
In the alternative model disk galaxies merge together to 
generate elliptical galaxies during the formation of groups 
and clusters of galaxies. Theoretical investigations of 
galaxy mergers using n-body techniques have successfully 
demonstrated that disk galaxies undergoing mergers 
will produce elliptical galaxies with de Vaucouleurs’ 
law luminosity profiles and low rotation velocities. In 
cosmological simulations the bulk of the stars that 
comprise present day ellipticals form in merger events 
that occur typically at z = 1-2. The galaxies continue 
to grow in mass and luminosity through mergers until 
they fall into massive clusters where the typical velocities 
of galaxies get so large that mergers are inhibited. This 
scenario accounts for why ellipticals are predominantly 
found in high-density regions and predicts that on average 
ellipticals in rich clusters will be older (in the sense of a 
luminosity weighted age) than those in less dense regions. 

These two formation mechanisms predict different 
age distributions of elliptical galaxies, particularly as a 
function of galactic environment. We would like to 
infer the star formation history of ellipticals from their 
integrated spectra, in particular to distinguish between the 
hypotheses that the stars formed in a single event at high 
redshift, z > 2 — 3 or that star formation was much more 
extended with perhaps some star formation occurring at 
z < 1. Such tests are under way. It has been suggested 
that the two flavors of elliptical galaxy, luminous-boxy and 
faint-disky, may have different evolutionary histories with 
luminous-boxy galaxies formed predominantly through 
a dissipationless merging sequence that produce triaxial 
anisotropic galaxies. The luminosity weighted ages of the 
two flavors of ellipticals have yet to be determined. 

The powerful telescopes at our disposal now, in 
particular the HST, have enabled us to study the evolution 
of elliptical galaxies directly. We have known for more 
than two decades that the fraction of blue galaxies in rich 
clusters at high redshift (z = 0.5) is much higher than 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


we find in local clusters. HST has revealed this blue 
excess as disk galaxies and has established that at z = 0.5 
elliptical galaxies have already assembled. It seems very 
likely that these massive cluster ellipticals did form rapidly 
and early at z > 3 and they ceased star formation before 
z = 1. Perhaps ellipticals in lower-density environments 
will be found to have experienced a more extended and 
recent series of mergers, giving them younger mean ages. 
Such a formation scenario takes ingredients from both the 
monolithic collapse and merger hypotheses for the origin 
of ellipticals but already faces apparent contradictions 
with the empirical measurements. 


Bibliography 
An excellent general text on the Milky Way and other 
galaxies is 


Binney J J and Merrifield M 1998 Galactic Astronomy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 


In particular chapters 4, 5 and 11 cover material on the 
morphology, stellar population and kinematics of elliptical 
galaxies. 

The dynamics of elliptical and bulges is reviewed 
comprehensively in 


de Zeeuw P T and Franx M 1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 29 239 


An excellent overview of the searches for black holes in 
galactic nuclei can be found in 


Kormendy J and Richstone D 1995 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 33 581 


A more advanced treatment of galaxy dynamics which 
includes many of the topics introduced here can be found 
in 


Binney J J and Tremaine S 1998 Galactic Dynamics 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 


Roger L Davies 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elongation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Elongation 


In general use, the angular separation between the Sun and 
a planet (or other body orbiting the Sun) or the Moon, i.e. 
the angle Sun—Earth—-object. A more accurate definition, 
which takes account of the fact that the orbits of bodies 
orbiting the Sun are inclined to the plane of the ecliptic 
(the Earth’s orbital plane), is that the elongation of a body 
is the difference between its celestial longitude and the 
Sun’s. Elongation is measured in degrees east or west of 
the Sun. If a body’s elongation is 0° it is at conjunction, 
if 90° it is at quadrature, and if 180° it is at opposition. 
The term is also used for the angular separation between a 
planet and one of its satellites, i.e. the angle planet—Earth— 
satellite, measured east or west of the planet. 

The elongations of the inferior planets, Mercury 
and Venus, are restricted between certain limits. These 
maximum angular separations from the Sun are termed 
greatest elongation east, when the planet sets at the latest 
time after the Sun at a particular apparition, and greatest 
elongation west, when it rises at the earliest time before the 
Sun at a particular apparition. In Mercury’s case, greatest 
elongation varies between 17° 50’ when the planet is at 
perihelion (closest physical distance to the Sun) and 27° 50’ 
when it is at aphelion (farthest from the Sun). For Venus, 
which has a much less eccentric orbit, greatest elongation 
varies between 45° and 47°. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Elsasser, Walter M (1904-91) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Elsasser, Walter M (1904-91) 


German-American physicist, suggested that the Earth’s 
rotation sets up eddy currents in the liquid core which 
generate the Earth’s observed magnetic field. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Emission Spectrum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Emission Spectrum 


A spectrum that consists of a number of bright emission 
lines, each line corresponding to the emission of light 
at a certain particular wavelength. An atom or ion 
will emit a photon of a particular energy (and hence 
of a particular wavelength) when one of its constituent 
electrons spontaneously drops down from one of its higher 
(‘excited’) permitted energy levels to a lower energy level 
(i.e. when the electron makes a ‘downward transition’). 
The various permitted transitions correspond to a series 
of lines of different wavelengths, the wavelength of 
each line being inversely proportional to the magnitude 
of the energy gap between the relevant energy levels. 
In addition to undergoing electronic transitions (like 
atoms and ions) molecules may also emit radiation at 
characteristic wavelengths through downward transitions 
in their vibrational and rotational states. 

In order to emit radiation through downward 
transitions, atoms, ions and molecules must first be 
excited to higher energy levels. This may occur through 
radiative excitation (absorbing incoming photons) or 
through energetic collisions between atoms, ions or 
molecules. Emission will also occur when an ion captures 
an electron (this process is usually called ‘recombination’). 
Usually, an electron will be captured into an excited level 
of the atom or ion and will then drop down to lower 
levels in a series of steps, each of which corresponds to 
the emission of light of one particular wavelength. When 
an electron is captured, the difference between the energy 
that it possessed before being captured, and its energy that 
is has when bound to the atom or ion, is radiated away. 
Depending on the range of energies of the free electrons 
that are available to be captured, the series of lines in an 
emission spectrum may end in an emission continuum 
(emission over a continuous range of wavelengths shorter 
than that of the shortest-wavelength individual line). 

An emission spectrum is characteristic of a high- 
temperature, low-density gas. Typical sources of emission 
spectra include fluorescent strip lights, the chromospheres 
and coronae of stars, luminous nebulae, active galactic 
nuclei and quasars. 


See also: absorption spectrum, atom, chromosphere, 
continuous spectrum, corona, electromagnetic radiation, 
element (chemical), energy, ion, ionization, molecule, 
photon, quantum theory, wavelength. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Empedocles of Akragas (c. 492-c. 432 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Empedocles of Akragas (c. 492—c. 432 
BC) 


Lived in Acragas (now Agrigento, Sicily), as the author of 
a physical-cosmological poem entitled On Nature, which 
developed the ideas of the Miletian philosophers like 
XENOPHANES who believed that the different forms of matter 
are manifestations of basic elements in different mixtures. 
Xenophanes suggested that everything was composed of 
two elements, water and earth, and Empedocles extended 
this to four: earth, water, air and fire. He believed that the 
Sun was a reflection of fire, and is credited as the originator 
of the concept that light has a finite velocity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Enceladus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Enceladus 


A mid-sized icy satellite of Saturn, discovered in 1789 by 
William Herschel. Its diameter is 500 km and it orbits 
Saturn at a distance of 238000 km. The part of Enceladus 
imaged in the Voyager mission has two distinct types of 
terrain: areas with a medium density of cratering, and 
almost crater-free plains with extensive fault features— 
straight and curved grooves and ridges, such as Daryabar 
Fossa and Samarkand Sulci. The satellite possesses an 
albedo of 1.0, the highest known, which suggests that its 
surface is very fresh. So, not only has Enceladus been 
geologically active in the past, it may still be so today. Its 
bulk density is 1120 kg m-°, indicating a largely water- 
ice composition. The activity is made possible by the 
formation of what is known as a eutectic melt of ammonia 
and water which is molten at a temperature as low as 
176 K. The energy for the activity could be supplied by 
tidal heating, produced by the satellite’s slightly elliptical 
orbit and a 2: 1 orbital resonance with Dione. Enceladus 
orbits at the center of Saturn’s tenuous E ring; meteoric 
debris from the satellite is believed to be the source of the 
ring’s small particles. 


See also: Saturn: satellites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Encke, Johann Franz (1791-1865) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Encke, Johann Franz (1791-1865) 


Astronomer, born in Hamburg, became professor and 
director of the observatory at Berlin. Discovered a comet 
in 1805, which he later found to be identical with a comet 
observed in 1818. Encke’s Comet has a period of 3.3 years 
(the shortest of any comet), and Encke predicted its return 
for 1822 (seen only in the southern hemisphere) and in 1825 
(which Encke observed from the Seeberg Observatory near 
Gotha). Presided at the Berlin Observatory over work on 
calculation of the orbits of asteroids, and the discovery of 
Neptune by GALLE with the help of star charts that Encke 
had edited. In 1838, discovered the gap between the A- 
and F-ring around the planet Saturn (now known as the 
Encke division). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Energy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Energy 


A physical quantity that, traditionally, is defined to be the 
ability to do work, where ‘work’ is the application of a force 
over a distance. The energy that a body possesses by virtue 
of its motion is called kinetic energy, the kinetic energy 
(KE) of a body of mass m traveling at velocity v being 
given by: KE = 1/2mv’. In order to change the velocity of 
a body, a force must be applied, the resultant change in the 
kinetic energy of the body being equal to the work done by 
the force. The energy that a body possesses by virtue of its 
location is called potential energy. When a body of mass m 
is raised to a height h the potential energy (PE) that it gains 
is given by: PE = mgh, where g is the acceleration due 
to gravity (this particular expression assumes a constant 
gravitational field; in practice, the gravitational attraction 
exerted on the body decreases with increasing height). 
Potential and kinetic energy are interchangeable. If the 
body is released from height h, it will accelerate towards 
the ground, so converting its potential energy into kinetic 
energy. 

Energy exists in a wide variety of forms. For exam- 
ple, heat is essentially the kinetic energy contained in the 
motions of atoms, molecules, or ions. Electromagnetic ra- 
diation is a form of energy, the energy of a photon (a ‘parti- 
cle’ of electromagnetic radiation) being inversely propor- 
tional to the wavelength of the radiation. According to the 
special theory of relativity, energy (E) and mass (m) are 
equivalent and interchangeable, the relationship between 
the two being given by E = mc?, where c denotes the 
speed of light. Because c is a large number, a small mass is 
equivalent to a very large quantity of energy. The conver- 
sion of mass to energy through nuclear reactions powers 
the stars. The law of conservation of mass-energy states 
that the total amount of mass-energy in an isolated system 
is constant (one form can change into the other, but the 
total sum of mass and energy remains the same). 

The SI unit of energy is the joule (J). A unit that is 
commonly used in particle physics is the electronvolt (eV). 


See also: electromagnetic radiation, electronvolt, kinetic 
theory of gases, mass, photon, special relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Environmental Threat to Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Environmental Threat to Astronomy 


Astronomy is fortunate in being one of those sciences cur- 
rently making important advances in understanding, well 
supported by superb, advanced, technology. Revolution- 
ary new data are being acquired which are radically im- 
pacting upon our cherished concepts from the solar system 
to the depths of the universe. Sadly, the state of astron- 
omy at the dawn of the twenty-first century is not one of 
unbounded optimism, for the very technology which has 
produced the current, unparalleled, scientific advances is 
also capable of inflicting catastrophic damage on observa- 
tional astronomy—the lifeblood of astronomical science. 

Observational astronomy is concerned with detecting 
extremely weak electromagnetic radiation emitted by 
cosmic objects. The limiting strength that can be 
observed is determined by the strength of the background 
noise against which the radiation is detected. Natural 
backgrounds are weak (except in the case of the infrared) 
and therefore small enhancements of natural background 
levels will significantly raise the level of detection of the 
faintest objects. Large backgrounds will be disastrous 
for all serious astronomical research. The activities 
of mankind produce large increases in astronomical 
backgrounds in many different ways. 


Electromagnetic pollution 

Electromagnetic pollution at radio wavelengths 

The average mobile telephone, if at the distance of the 
Moon, has sufficient power output to be among the 
brightest radio astronomical objects. RADIO TELESCOPES 
suffer a cascade of radio signals generated on the ground 
and in space. These signals come from as simple a thing 
as flicking an on/off switch, through electrical machinery 
in its myriad forms to telecommunications transmissions 
and signals from position-fixing satellites. Many of 
these signals are weak, but any form of communications 
transmission is powerful (multimegawatts). Because of 
the nature of radio telescopes, they can pick up signals 
originating from directions other than that at which the 
telescope is pointed because of side lobe responses. Such 
side lobe responses can swamp the observed cosmic 
signal. Radio observatories can be partially protected 
from transmissions generated terrestrially by retreat to 
remote valleys well protected by mountains, but there 
is no protection at all from aircraft transmissions or 
transmissions from orbiting satellites. The exploitation 
of space for telecommunications purposes is growing 
explosively with the launch of satellite clusters such 
as Iridium. Despite the careful regulation of radio- 
frequency space by the International Telecommunications 
Union, residual noise at significant levels enters the 
bands reserved for RADIO ASTRONOMY and other passive 
services (not-transmitting) from neighbouring bands used 
commercially, through insufficiently attenuated signal 
tails or signal harmonic frequencies or inadvertent (and 
sometimes deliberate) tuning through or into the reserved 
radio astronomy bands. Despite ingenious procedures 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Light pollution at Stonehenge. Light pollution looking 
north-east at Stonehenge (UK), 2 October 1996. Stonehenge is in 
a rural area! (Copyright D McNally.) 


developed by radio astronomers, such noise frequently 
degrades, and often swamps, the cosmic signals being 
observed 


Electromagnetic pollution at optical wavelengths 

Optical wavelength electromagnetic pollution is particu- 
larly simple to demonstrate. It is clearly visible (see figure 
1). The growth of outdoor lighting installations over the 
last 50 years has produced a high level of background il- 
lumination in cities, towns and urban areas which spills a 
considerably way into rural areas. The light spill from one 
urban area may overlap the light spill from neighboring 
urban areas. In the UK there are few areas left where the 
background is the naturally occurring night sky glow—the 
essential limiting factor for astronomical observation. The 
pollution results from the fact that most luminaires now 
in use have significant upward light spill. It is possible 
for modern luminaires to have no upward light spill and 
have sufficient sideways cut-off to put the light emitted 
where it is needed. The requirement to cut energy con- 
sumption to reduce release of CO, into the atmosphere 
is forcing the pace of outdoor lighting design. It is now 
possible to light motorways and roads, outdoor playing 
fields, items of architectural note etc in such a way that the 
luminaires emit no lights upwards and the illumination is 
confined laterally to the area required to be illuminated— 
the light spill from these high-grade schemes is confined to 
the light reflected from the surface of the ground and such 
light scattered by atmospheric particulates (see later). Un- 
happily such high-quality designs are the exception rather 
than the norm. 

Because outdoor lighting is so necessary to twenty- 
first-century lifestyles, outdoor lighting is globally 
distributed. This means that not only are observatories 
established more than 50 years ago engulfed in overly 
lit urban areas, but even the remoter prime observatory 
sites are seeing growth in local outdoor lighting. As 
telescope diameters increase and detectors become more 
sensitive, so more observation is directed towards 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Environmental Threat to Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


objects who faintness approaches the natural background. 
Astronomers have argued that outdoor lighting should 
not increases the background by more than 10% of the 
natural background. Even that excess is not acceptable 
to those studying contributions to the natural sky glow. 
Most urban backgrounds exceed the natural background 
by at least a factor 100 and in the centres of major cities by 
factors of in excess of a million. This has a serious effect 
on optical observational astronomy. 

Astronomers are also concerned about the spectral 
character of the lamps used in outdoor lighting. The 
low-pressure sodium lamp emits virtually all its output 
over a very narrow wavelength range—it is almost 
monochromatic. Clearly this lamp is preferred by the 
astronomical community. It is a highly energy efficient 
lamp. It is not universally liked as it gives poor rendering 
of color. However, addition of small amounts of white 
light at locations where color rendering is important 
can be very effective. Nevertheless there is pressure 
to use multispectral lamps (e.g. high-pressure sodium, 
halide) and the recent trend towards such lamps will 
progressively prevent astronomical use of some spectral 
ranges—whereas now only a very short spectral range 
occupied by low-pressure sodium lamps is unusable. 

While opticAL ASTRONOMY, unlike radio astronomy, has 
trends working to its benefit, there is no escaping the fact 
that the background at optical wavelengths is increasing 
as are projects near prime observatory sites which demand 
high-intensity outdoor lighting (e.g. a new prison project 
is planned on Hawaii near the prime observatory sites on 
Mauna Kea which houses, inter alia, the world’s two largest 
telescopes). 


Exploitation of space 
Exploitation of space has brought additional degradation 
of astronomical observing conditions over and above the 
effect on radio astronomy mentioned above. The use of 
space has meant the accumulation of space debris. There 
are now over 8200 pieces of trackable debris (size over 
10 cm in low Earth orbit) in space and substantially greater 
amounts of smaller debris which can cause significant 
damage to operational spacecraft. Debris is now posing 
a threat to all operational satellites including orbiting 
astronomical observatories like the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. 

The number of operational and spent satellites and 
large pieces of debris is so great that many astronomical 
deep sky images now carry trails caused by sunlight 
reflected by this subset of space debris. Fifty per cent 
of deep sky images carry at least one trail and 25% carry 
multiple trails. Such trailing also affects the very much 
smaller sized photometric fields of view. Since most of 
the trailing occurs within the 2 h after sunset, or before 
sunrise, the astronomical community lives with the image 
degradation or curtailment of the efficiency of operation 
that trailing causes. 

Of more concern are proposals to place solar reflectors 
in space to produce the appearance of objects up to the 
brightness of 100 times that of the full Moon. The Moon 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is sufficiently bright to suspend astronomical observation 
of the faintest celestial objects for two weeks out of every 
four. Currently tests of the Znamya2 and Znamyaz2.5 solar 
reflectors have been attempted, but the tests could not be 
fully implemented. Were this technology to be proved, 
the astronomical nightmare is, that despite being only 
operational in twilight, such reflectors might be used for 
commercial or other advertising. Thus far, proposals for 
advertising reflectors have been turned down by the space 
agencies. But one is prompted to ask, should advertising 
from space become acceptable, would not advertisers 
then want systems in space which could exploit dark 
time (indeed there has been a suggestion for advertising 
holograms to be generated in space in dark time)? Were 
that to become the case, optical astronomy would die. 

There is one proposal for the use of space reflectors 
which is of great concern—namely to use a system of 
such reflectors to collect enough solar energy to generate 
up to 50% of the world’s demand for electricity by 2050. 
Solar radiation would be converted in space to microwaves 
for transmission to Earth where the microwave energy 
would be converted to electricity. The efficiency of the 
process is said to be less than 10%. What happens to 
the remaining 90% lost in the process? It is admitted 
that such a proposal would have serious consequences for 
ground-based optical astronomy and would be disastrous 
for ground-based radio astronomy. Such extension of 
the exploitation of space is of very great concern to the 
astronomical community. 


Others areas of concern 

Atmospheric extinction. The atmosphere contains natu- 
rally occurring particulates and aerosols augmented by 
those generated by the activities of mankind through 
dumping of industrial effluent into the atmosphere, emis- 
sions from vehicles, creation of dust etc. As pointed out in 
earlier, atmospheric particulates increase the scattering of 
outdoor lighting. Atmospheric extinction also decreases 
the energy received from cosmic sources as well as red- 
dening that light. Increase in extinction is largely an ur- 
ban phenomenon and relatively local except in the case of 
aircraft contrails. Generation of extinction in the north- 
ern hemisphere seems not to be spreading in the south- 
ern hemisphere, as yet. This is a problem requiring vigi- 
lance and study in case a serious problem is developing— 
particularly in regard to the consequences of aircraft con- 
trails. 


Accumulation of heavy molecules in the stratosphere. In- 
frared observers have found that the accumulation of 
heavy molecules in the stratosphere is increasing the ex- 
tinction in the limited atmospheric windows available to 
ground-based infrared observatories. While some of these 
molecules are now banned (to prevent further damage to 
the ozone layer) it is not yet clear if replacement molecules 
will lead to any improvement for INFRARED ASTRONOMY. This 
is again an area for sustained vigilance. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Environmental Threat to Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Global warming and atmospheric heat dumping. It is agreed 
that the Earth’s atmosphere is in a warming phase (see 
GREENHOUSE EFFECT). A consequence of rising temperatures 
is enhanced cloudiness—a trend reinforced by contrail 
formation in the absence of rapid dispersal (see earlier). 
Global warming may lead to changes in weather patterns, 
one consequence of which could be climatic degradation 
at prime observatory sites. As a corollary, in urban areas 
there is atmospheric dumping of heat from industrial 
processes down to heat loss from buildings. One clear 
consequence of such local and largely urban, heating 
is enhanced atmospheric turbulence and consequent 
degrading of astronomical SEEING. 


Ground vibration. Industrial operations and other activ- 
ities of mankind produce vibration. Vibration is a local 
phenomenon, but low-amplitude vibrational effects can 
be felt at distances of up to 10 km from source. This can be 
a serious problem for astrometric observatories in particu- 
lar. Observatories free from vibration in the past may be- 
come susceptible because of new industrial development 
in the local neighborhood. 


Other concerns. The above listing of areas of concern is not 
exhaustive. New concerns will appear and old concerns 
develop unforeseen and more serious consequences. 
There are still concerns regarding space activities that 
could result in terrestrial pollution of the nearby solar 
system bodies—which may affect the integrity of future 
exploration of those bodies. There is concern about the 
consequences of HAPS (High Altitude Platform Systems) 
on both radio and optical astronomy. There is concern 
in optical astronomy about the consequences of using 
optical/IR laser beams (e.g. ESA’s SPOT4) for satellite 
communications. There will no doubt be many other 
concerns downstream. Astronomy is in consequence a 
highly beleagured science. 


Protection measures 

The science of astronomy has taken steps to protect itself. 
Despite many well equipped observatories on urban sites, 
the trend has always been for observatory sites to retreat 
ever further from centers of population (see OBSERVATORIES 
AND THEIR LOCATION). However, there is now no scope for 
further retreat except possibly through greater use of 
Antarctica. Space is not the user friendly, if costly, place 
it once seemed. Astronomers have therefore entered 
into local agreements to give special protection to prime 
observatory sites. So far these agreements have worked 
well, but it must be remembered that those living close 
to such sites may find these agreements overly restrictive 
in the future. Radio astronomers have been in detailed 
negotiation, nationally and internationally (through 
IUCAF, the InterUnion Committee on Allocation of 
Frequencies), with the International Telecommunications 
Union on allocation and defence of the radio astronomy 
bandwidth allocation. This has been extremely successful 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


but is becoming a highly demanding business given the 
hunger commercially for bandwidth. These activities 
deserve the strongest community backing. 

Astronomers have taken their concerns to the public. 
Light pollution is a topic which the public can readily 
appreciate and indeed emphathize with. Many people 
resent that they can no longer see the spectacle of a dark 
night sky. But it is hard to convey the dire situation faced 
by radio astronomy, though opposition to space reflectors 
seems to command global support. 

In July 1999, the astronomical community had an 
opportunity to present their concerns to the UN at a 
symposium at UNISPACE III. The UN have taken on 
board for consideration astronomical concerns above the 
impact of exploitation of space and the problem that 
telecommunications pose for radio astronomy. Such 
consideration must of its nature be long term. One 
consequence will be that the astronomical community 
will have to commit significant resources to quantitative 
assessment of its observing environment. This will be 
essential in obtaining any future international agreement 
to protect astronomical science. 

The astronomical community will also have to give 
greater attention to public information. Considerable 
effort is now expended and has demonstrably paid off. 
We still need to reach a wider audience since there is 
wide public interest in, and sympathy for, astronomical 
observation but it is coupled with widespread ignorance 
of how the activities of mankind impact upon astronomy. 
The outlook may well be bleak but it is not without 
considerable hope. 


Bibliography 
Awide ranging readable account of the basic situation can 
be found in 


McNally D (ed) 1994 The Vanishing Universe (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

McNally D 1996 Adverse environmental impacts on 
astronomy, Q. J. R. Astron. Soc. 37 129 


Three IAU conferences have been on this topic: 


Crawford D L (ed) 1991 Light Pollution, Radio Interference 
and Space debris (IAU Colloquium 112) 

Isobe S and Hirayama T (ed) 1998 Preserving the 
Astronomical Windows (IAU Joint Discussion Kyoto 
General Assembly) (Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific) 

Crawford D L, Cohen J and Sullivan W T (ed) 2000 
Preserving the Astronomical Sky (IAU Symposium 196) 
(Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific) at press 


Other resources: 


Committee on Radio Frequencies 1996 Handbook in Radio 
Astronomy 

Flury W (ed) ESA Conference Reports on Space Debris 
Assessment 

Kovalevsky J (ed) 1992 The Protection of Astronomical and 
Geographical Sites (Gif-sw-Yvette: Editions Frontieres) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Environmental Threat to Astronomy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


National Research Council 1995 Orbital Debris: a Technical 
Assessment (Washington, DC: National Acadamy 
Press) 

Simpson J A (ed) 1994 Preservation of New Earth Space 
for Future Generations (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


D McNally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Ephemerides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ephemerides 


In everyday language, ‘ephemeris’ indicates what occurs 
daily; the ephemeris of the day is the list of the remarkable 
events of this day. By extension, the astronomical 
ephemerides are tabular listings of the positions of a 
celestial body, allowing one to know its position fora given 
time. Today, ephemerides may have a new form in order 
to improve the accuracy of the positions deduced from 
them. Ephemerides provide representations of the motion 
of celestial bodies. 

The ephemerides of positions are thus the representa- 
tion of amotion. The most common ephemerides are those 
in the form of tables of numbers. But it is not the only pos- 
sible form and, nowadays, it is no longer the best form 
because there are much more powerful ways to describe 
a motion. The quality of an ephemeris for the representa- 
tion of a motion depends on two factors: the use of a small 
number of data (to avoid too large tables) and the possibil- 
ity of good precision (to give the weakest error compared 
to the ‘true’ position). 

Before discussing the various types of representation 
used for the ephemerides, let us see first of all how the 
motions of celestial bodies belonging to the solar system 
are described. One will see hereafter that the ephemeris 
itself depends on the nature of the motion which is to be 
described. 


Planetary theories and ephemerides 

History 

Ephemerides have been published since the fourteenth 
century. The first ephemerides intended for use in 
planetary dynamics appeared in the French Connaissance 
des Temps, first volume of which was published in Paris 
in 1679. This first volume provided a tool for reducing 
the observations of solar system bodies. It contained rise 
and set times for the Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, 
Jupiter and Saturn, their transits to the Paris meridian, 
their longitudes, their latitudes and their declinations. 
Later, Lalande compiled the tables of the Sun and the 
planets which were used as a basis for the ephemerides 
published in the Connaissance des Temps until 1808. In 
1767, an ephemeris of the same kind designed for the 
improvement of Astronomy, Geography and Navigation 
was published in London: the Nautical Almanac and 
Astronomical Ephemeris. 

During the years 1770-1825, Laplace studied the 
consequences of the application of Newton’s law of 
gravitation on the motion of the bodies of the solar 
system and solved several problems concerning planetary 
theories. The representation of these motions in the 
ephemerides evolved continuously, but until the end of the 
eighteenth century, the Connaissance des Temps presented 
the ephemerides month by month, the Sun day by day 
and the planets six days by six days. The time interval 
evolved (decreased) in order to improve the accuracy of the 
positions, day by day or more, depending on the motion 
of the body. From 1838, the ephemerides were published 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


body by body. They were daily for the Sun, three days 
by three days for Mercury, six days by six days for Venus 
and Mars, eight days by eight days for Jupiter, ten days 
by ten days for Saturn and fifteen days by fifteen days for 
Uranus. For the Moon, a smaller interval was necessary (cf 
table 1). In 1863, the ephemerides were provided daily for 
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn and four days 
by four days for Uranus and Neptune. 


Table 1. ; 
Année 1808. 


‘sunor 


—_—_—— 
A MIDI, | A MINUIT, 


Mmw bp -| 


6 
g 
9 


The development of celestial mechanics 

The nineteenth century was very rich in progress in 
celestial mechanics and the motion of the solar system’s 
bodies became well modeled (see CELESTIAL MECHANICS IN 
THE EIGHTEENTH AND NINETEENTH CENTURIES): it is even thanks 
to the defects noted on the ephemerides of Uranus 
that Neptune was discovered through calculations by Le 
Verrier and Adams. These defects did not result from a bad 
evaluation of the perturbations from Jupiter and Saturn: it 
was necessary to admit the existence of an additional body 
beyond Uranus. After the discovery of Neptune by Galle 
in Berlin, observations were realized and the elements of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ephemerides 
Table 2. 
LUNE 1978. 81 
ASCENSION DROITE, DECLINAISON, PARALLAXE, DEMJ-DIAMETRE. 
rua ABORNEION Yan. became pm. 
DES pou DSCLEyaIsON pour PARsLLaxa 
SPERuER, =e = i. aires 
Janvy. 
bo om» . oor ow " row “” 
© 0 | 10 41 1,597 | 1.99046 | » 8 :33°39,47 | — 914788] 55'37.29] 15° 9733 
S$ | 1046 59,975 | 1.99226] 5 4 58,69 9.5783 | 55 41,75 | 15 20,55 
§ | $0 52 $8.72 | roids | 4 98 7.58 9.6624 | 55 46.31 | 45 14579 
9 | 10 58 57.999 | 1.90705 | 4 7 0.50 $7461 | 55 50/98 | 45 13/07 
12 | 41 & 87,784 | a.onong | 3 37 99:06 3.8343 55 55,77 | 45 14.37 
15 | 11 10 58,037 | 2.002746 | 3 8 4,08 3. S¢ 0.65 | 45 15.70 
18 | 11 16 58,999 | a.co7dz | 2 88 16,46 aes 565.64] 45 17,06 
2 | 1193 0,692 | aortéo| 2 817,37 | 10.0249] 5610.73 | 15 18.45 
1 0 | 1129 9,196 | 2.0132] 198 7,88] 10,0800] 56 45,98 | 15 19,96 
3 1135 6,593 | 2,02050 1 7 48,89 To, 12gt 56 21,23 15 24,31 
6 11 41 10,963 | 2,0a715 O 37 21,68 1o,1720 | 36 26,68 15 22,78 
9 | 11 47 16,390 | 2.0385 | +0 6 47,30 | to.n087 | 56.92.12 | 15 24°97 
42 | 14 58 22/95 aol - 093 53,08 | 10.4388 | 5647.71 | 15 25/80 
15 | 14 59 30,754 | 2,04 0 54 98:32 | to,aax | 56 48/40 | 15 27.35 
18 | 12 5 39,862 | 9.0554: | 125 27.20] ro.ung3 | 86 49,48 | 415 22192 
21 | 12-44 60,268 | 2.06243 | 1 5648.80] 10.2893 | 36 58.08 | 15 30.52 
a 0 | 1248 2,360 | 2.07093 | 22710.97] 19,2022 } 57 0.99 | 15 32.44 
3 | 12 24 15.985 | a.o70m | 2 88 3.31 taaka | a7 7108 | 48 3898 
é | 12 36 31/150 | 2.089 328 54.21 | so,a7ea | 57 43,14 | 43 35.45 
9 | 19 86 48/423 | 2.09932 | 9 5942.32 | 10.2568 | 57 49/353 | 45 aT-4R 
12 12 49 6,989 | 2, 10975 4 30 26,24 10,2297 | 57 25,58 | 15 98,84 
15 | 12 49 27,659 | 2,120 | 45 1 4.56 10,1945 57 B19 | 15 40,56 
18 | 12 55 50,393 | 4.13208 | 5 21 95.81 | ao.adin | 57 88°30] 15 42°30 
24/13 215.219 | 2.78389 | 6 15850} inseggs | 57 44°94 | 15 44,06 
Table 3. 
LUNE 2000 DT =4 jours 


ASCENSION DROITE ET DECLINAISON APPARENTES, DISTANCE A LA TERRE 


Equinoxe et équateur vrais de la date 


du 0 janvier Oh au 4 janvier Oh du 4 janvier Oh au & janvier Oh 


asc. droite  déclinaison distance asc. droite  déclinaison distance 

13.6756914] —4.8834030 397117.928 16.81086050 —18.3268712 406 313.750 
O 15.2307302@ —12.1446656 402707316 0 18.48669579 =19.9552752 405017941 0 
1 156533038 —6,7630998  4560,555 1 168682882 -0.7244166 —15947.259 1 
2 0.01284192 05396324 995.952 2 0.00853347 0.9198146 622419 2 
3 0.00226653 00413874 17.794 $ -0,00263090 0.0121392 26.796 3 
4 =0,00025647 —0,0002820 4477 @ =0.00013399 -0.0038490 —2405 4 
5 —0,00001249 -0,0000216 —D439 5 0,00003899 ~—D,0001415 —0,147 5 
& 0000000270 ~0.0000221 —0002 6 9.000001 64 0,0000233 0.024 6 
7 0,00000012 0,0000000 0,001 7 000000033 0.0000016 0.001 7 
& o0.00000002 0.000000 1 0,000 8 -%,00000003 —0,0000002 0.000 8 

du 8 janvier Oh au 12 janvier Oh du 12 janvier Oh au 16 janvier Oh 

asc. droite déclinaison distance asc. droite  déclinaison distance 

2017933368 —19.7527078 402472.530 —O,5180498T —P7.S1472S2 389872.633 
O 2184165519 —14.33429T@ 396691208 0 1,13970432 1.68598¢7 380458.908 0 
1 1,85063452 61613134 —6298.789 1 167660271 9.299057) ~—9665.124 1 
2 +0.01139130 0.7035055 519483 2 0.025362 77 0,0294605 —182.489 2 
3 0.00067773 —0.0424738 -1.577 3 0.00457262 —-9.0735086 76,686 3 
4 0.00038210 —0,0019092 o74aa 4 0,.00002664 —0.0033364 7.460 4 
5 0.000004 22 0.0001533 0.419 § =0,00003438 —0.0002094 003s 6 
6 —0,00000209 —0,0000152 0.013 6 -0,00000201 0.000 0089 ~0.052 6 
7 0,00000019 —0,000D0016 =0.001 7 —0,00000027 0,000 0041 ~0,003 7 
8 0.00000000 0,0000002 0.000 B 0.00000000 0.0000003 0.000 8 


the motion of Neptune were then known enough so that 
precise ephemerides could be published. 

After such an achievement of celestial mechanics, Le 
Verrier undertook to completely rebuild the theories of 
the motion of the main planets. He derived the theories 
and the tables of these bodies. Gaillot, a collaborator of 
Le Verrier, then improved the theories of the four large 
planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. At the 
same time, the theoretical work of Hansen gave rise to the 
Russian astronomer Kowalski’s theory of Neptune and, 
especially, to Newcomb’s global theory of planets. 

The tables of Le Verrier and Gaillot were used in 
the ephemerides of the Connaissance des Temps until 1984 
but the tables of Kowalski and those of Newcomb were 
the sources of the ephemerides of Neptune published 
in the Connaissance des Temps from 1863 to 1883. For 
Uranus, the tables of Newcomb were used from 1877 
to 1883. The Nautical Almanac also used Le Verrier’s 
tables; the American Ephemeris used Hansen’s work and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Newcomb’s tables for the Sun and the planets, the tables 
of Hansen and Brown for the Moon, until 1983. In 1960, 
the British and the American ephemerides published the 
same tables, the name of which became The Astronomical 
Almanac in 1981. 

At the time of Le Verrier and Gaillot, the ephemerides 
published in the Connaissance des Temps acquired a form 
which was used continuously until 1979 (cf table 2). Note 
that in 1877 the rectangular coordinates of the Sun were 
introduced and the ephemerides of Uranus and Neptune 
were provided daily in the Connaissance des Temps. 


Ephemerides nowadays 

Significant transformations have been made to the 
ephemerides in the last few years. In 1980, the tabular 
presentation of the ephemerides of the Connaissance des 
Temps was replaced by a representation in Chebyshev 
polynomials (see later); much more compact and well 
adapted to the development of microcomputers (cf table 3). 
Tables 1, 2 and 3 show the progress in the representation 
of the ephemerides of the Moon. 

Since 1984, the Connaissance des Temps has used new 
analytical theories of the motions of the Sun, the Moon and 
the planets, elaborated at the Bureau des Longitudes and 
adjusted on the numerical integration of the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory (JPL) DE200. In 1984, the Astronomical Almanac 
changed the sources of its ephemerides and used the 
numerical integration DE200/LE200 of the JPL. JPLis now 
using an improved ephemeris DE405/LE405. Theories 
and numerical integration will be described further. 


Theories of the motions 


Since the beginnings of astronomy, modeling the motion 
of the bodies of the solar system has been a challenge. 
First, these motions were empirical extrapolations of the 
observations carried out; the first tables thus came from 
a purely kinematic analysis of the observed motions. The 
precision of these first tables was obviously poor and could 
be increased only with the improvement of the precision 
of the observations themselves. 

Then came calculations based on gravitational 
theories in which the parameters were deduced from 
observations. Since Newton, the dynamic laws were 
known and it was then important to include these in the 
equation and to take into account all the gravitational 
effects which have some influence on the bodies. 
Lagrange’s theoretical search relative to the planetary 
problem resulted in modeling the long-term evolution of 
the orbits by a linear differential system which coupled 
the eccentricities and the inclinations. This result is 
fundamental. 

Ephemerides may be made from theoretical equations 
by solving the equations into trigonometric series, which 
are time consuming to calculate without computers. 
Another way is the direct calculation through numerical 
integration. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ephemerides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Elements of celestial mechanics 

General remarks on planetary theories 

The motion of planets around the Sun is a particular case of 
the N-BoDY PROBLEM which has no exact solution for N larger 
than 2. All the bodies attract each other in accordance with 
the law of gravitation but it is considered that the planets 
have a small mass relative to the one of the central body 
(the Sun). Approximate solutions of the problem have to 
be made thanks to the theory of perturbations, where the 
coordinates are functions of the time t, of the masses of the 
involved bodies and of the constants of integration. One 
obtains these solutions by deriving analytical theories or 
by carrying out numerical integrations. 


Analytical theories 

The coordinates are obtained in the form of combinations 
of analytical algebraic and trigonometrical functions of the 
time t and the parameters of the problem, masses and 
constants of integration. The calculation of a position 
using these theories is long but simple since it is sufficient 
to substitute the time parameter in the series. 


Numerical integrations 

Numerical integrations give the numerical values of the 
coordinates and velocities for some values f, f9 +h, fo + 2h, 
etc, to being the initial time and h being the step of 
integration. The methods of numerical integration are 
well adapted to calculations by computer and they were 
especially used at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the 
USA. 


The time argument of the ephemerides 

It is advisable to now say some words on the ‘time’ 
argument of the ephemerides. Indeed, to know a 
position at a given moment, which moment to seek in the 
ephemerides? Until 1834, one used the real solar time of 
Paris in the Connaissance des Temps. Then, because of the 
existence of more reliable clocks, one used the mean time of 
Paris. In 1916, following an International Convention, one 
used the mean time of Greenwich. These time scales were 
all related to the rotation of the Earth known as uniform at 
that time. When irregularities were put into evidence in 
this rotation, astronomers introduced a new uniform time 
scale for use in the ephemerides, based on the rotation 
of the Earth around the Sun. Ephemeris Time compiled 
from Newcomb’s theory of the Sun, or, as it was in the 
Connaissance des Temps, Temps Uniforme compiled from 
Le Verrier’s theory of the Sun, were used. From 1984, 
Terrestrial Time, a uniform time scale derived from atomic 
clocks which were much more stable than celestial motions 
(See TIME SCALES: ATOMIC), was introduced. 


Reference systems 

Knowledge of the positions and the motions of celestial 
bodies requires a precise notion of the reference systems 
of space and temporal coordinates where one will locate 
the positions described by the ephemerides. We saw 
previously that the time argument of the ephemerides 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


could not be taken in any time scale. In the same way, 
we will see that the spatial coordinates to be used must 
be attached to a reference system through a reference 
frame. One can distinguish the celestial and the terrestrial 
reference systems. 

The celestial reference systems are either dynamical 
(based on the dynamical study of the motions of solar 
system’s bodies) or kinematical (based on the statistical 
study of the motions of far bodies such as stars, galaxies 
and quasars). The dynamical reference celestial systems, 
first built in Newtonian mechanics, are built today 
in relativistic mechanics which ties the time argument 
to the spatial variables (see REFERENCE FRAMES AND TIME 
SCALES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY). For the needs of the current 
ephemerides, the definitions given previously for the time 
argument are sufficient. To link the positions of the 
celestial bodies to an observer located on the Earth, one 
will need also to define a terrestrial reference system. 

The terrestrial reference system requires the know]- 
edge of a model of Earth, its form and its deformations 
depending on time. The determination of a topocentric 
position requires such a system to know the position of 
the observer relative to positions of celestial bodies that 
are commonly determined in a geocentric celestial refer- 
ence system. 


The celestial reference frames 

A reference system is a theoretical concept and the 
construction of ephemerides requires the knowledge of a 
reference frame which is the concrete materialization of 
a reference system. A celestial reference frame will thus 
be associated with dynamical theories, constants and star 
catalogs. 

A reference frame is defined by a plane of reference 
and a given direction. For the ephemerides currently 
published, the plane of reference is the equator of the 
Earth (equatorial reference frame) or the ecliptic plane of 
the orbit of the Earth around the Sun (ecliptic reference 
frame). The direction of reference is that of the equinox, 
ascending node of the ecliptic on the equator, intersection 
of the two planes. These planes and this direction are 
related to the Earth and we will define various reference 
frames depending on the theories and the constants used to 
build them. Then, for each reference frame thus built, we 
will fix the planes and the direction of reference to obtain 
a perfectly defined reference frame. 


Reference frames related to stars 

These reference frames are defined by the positions and 
the PROPER MOTIONS of stars. The star catalogs provide a 
value of the proper motions which makes it possible to 
obtain, by a simple calculation, the position of stars at a 
given date. However, the Astronomisches Rechen Institut 
of Heidelberg, Germany, has published each year since 
1960, following an international agreement, the apparent 
positions of the 1535 stars of the FK4 and FK5 catalogs in 
the Apparent Places of Fundamental Stars. New reference 
frames using stars of the HIPPARCOS catalogue and the very 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ephemerides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


far radiosources are under development to produce on 
international system of reference. 


Dynamical reference frames related to the solar system’s bodies 
The dynamical models of the bodies of the solar system 
adjusted on radar or laser observations are independent 
of the stars of the catalogs and define a plane and 
a direction of reference. Associated with a theory of 
PRECESSION-NUTATION, they define a reference frame. Let us 
quote the reference frame related to numerical integrations 
DE405/LE405 of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the one 
related to the analytical theories ELP2000/VSOP82 of the 
Moon and the planets of the Bureau des Longitudes. 


Coordinates systems 

Once given a reference frame, it is necessary to choose the 
coordinates to be used in order to provide the positions in 
the ephemerides. For any reference frame, a theory for the 
precession—nutation is associated and one defines: 


@ positions in the mean reference frame (the fundamental 
plane is a mean plane, i.e. affected only by precession). 
An epoch must be given to fix the reference frame; this 
epoch is conventional (for example 1950 for reference 
frame FK4 and 2000 for the FK5). 


@ positions in the true reference frame (the fundamental 
plane is affected by precession and nutation). The epoch 
of the reference frame is that to which one gives the 
positions: the reference frame is not fixed, but this 
reference frame is the only one directly accessible to the 
observer. 


In the reference frames thus defined, the coordinates 
may be: 


@ geometrical—they are the positions really occupied by 
the body at the date given, without taking into account 
the speed of the light; 


@ apparent—they are positions as seen by an observer 
being at the center of the reference frame. They are 
referred to a true reference frame of the date. The speed 
of the light and the annual aberration are taken into 
account. 


@ astrometrical or astrographic—these coordinates are 
directly comparable with the star catalogs. They may 
be deduced from the apparent coordinates by the 
transformation of precession—nutation to come back to 
a fixed reference frame (the one of the date of the 
star catalogs) and by the suppression of the annual 
aberration. The light time is still taken into account. 


The ephemerides of position 

Depending on the positions to be represented in the 
ephemerides, we have to choose a fundamental plane and 
some coordinates. For the ephemerides for the terrestrial 
observer, the fundamental plane will be the terrestrial 
equator and the coordinates to be provided will be the 
right ascension (angle counted towards the east starting 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from the equinox, along the terrestrial equator) and the 
declination (angle counted towards the north above the 
equatorial plane). The radius vector, the distance from the 
center of the reference frame to the considered body, may 
also be provided. This distance does not depend on the 
reference frame, except by taking into account the light 
time. 

The ephemerides of the Moon, the Sun and main 
planets give apparent coordinates mainly for the guidance 
of telescopes. For Pluto, the asteroids and the comets, they 
provide the astrometrical coordinates directly comparable 
with the star catalogs. In the case of natural satellites, 
differential coordinates relative to the planet ina tangential 
plane with the celestial sphere, directly comparable with 
the photographic exposures or images from CCD cameras, 
are provided. 

Let us quote the topocentric coordinates, centered 
on an observer situated on the Earth: these coordinates 
should be calculated for each observer, so, in order to 
transform the apparent coordinates into the topocentric 
ones, a small correction has to be added. 

Positions may also be given in non-spherical 
coordinates such as rectangular coordinates: the x-axis 
being directed towards the equinox of the reference frame 
and the z-axis towards the celestial North Pole of this 
reference frame. Such ephemerides are mainly provided 
for space navigation. 


Ephemerides concerning stars 

The proper motions of stars are not sufficiently important 
to justify the publication of an ephemeris daily. Only the 
ephemeris of the polar star is provided daily in several 
ALMANACS, since this allows the setting up of telescopes. 


Ephemerides for physical observations 

In order to observe from the Earth the surfaces of solar 
system’s bodies, it is necessary to define the parameters 
which will characterize the rotation of the body around 
its axis, to give some numerical values and to define a 
coordinate system in which the points on the surfaces 
may be located (planetographic or planetocentric reference 
frames). One then calculates the points of the body which 
are visible from the Earth at a given date. It is also useful to 
know quantities related to the illumination of the apparent 
disc. The definitions given hereafter were ratified by the 
International Astronomical Union. 


Definition of the parameters of the rotation 

The North Pole is, by definition, that of the two poles 
of the axis of rotation which is in the north side of the 
invariant plane of the solar system (near to the ecliptic). 
The parameters of the rotation of the solar system’s bodies 
are, for each body: 


@ the axis of rotation which is given by the right ascension 
and the declination in the system J2000 of the direction 
of its North Pole, depending on time; 


@ the position of the meridian line origin which is given 
by the angle which separates the ascending node of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ephemerides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


equator of the planet on its orbit from this meridian line 
origin, angle counted in the equator of the planet and 
depending on time. A constant at the origin of time 
will be added if the meridian line origin is linked to 
a perceptible detail characteristic on the surface of the 
body. 


Definition of the coordinates system 
Two different coordinates systems are necessary to locate 
a point on the surface of a body: 


@ the planetocentric coordinate system where the plane- 
tocentric latitude of a point is the angle made by the 
vector, joining the center of the body and the point, with 
the equatorial plane; and where the planetocentric lon- 
gitude is the dihedral angle between the meridian of 
the point and the meridian origin, counted positively 
towards the east on the body, independently of the ro- 
tation. This system is used for the study of the motion 
of a satellite over the body. 


@ the planetographic coordinate system used to chart the 
surface of the body. The planetographic latitude of a 
point of the surface is the angle made by the normal to 
the surface at this point with the equatorial plane. If 
the body is assimilated with an ellipsoid of equatorial 
radius a and of polar radius b (b < a), the planetocentric 
and planetographic latitudes g and ¢’ of a point of the 
ellipsoid are connected by 


tang’ = tang/(1— fy" 


where f is the flatness of the ellipsoid defined by f = 
(a — b)/a. 


The planetographic longitude is defined in a way 
similar to the planetocentric longitude. It is also counted 
starting from the meridian line origin but in the direction 
opposed to rotation. It results from this that, for a distant 
observer, the planetographic longitude of the center of the 
apparent disc always increases with time, whatever the 
direction of rotation of the body. In order to respect a 
historical tradition and to be able to continue to use old 
charts, this rule admits exceptions for example for the 
Earth, the Sun and the Moon whose rotations are direct. 


Accuracy of the ephemerides 

The accuracy of the ephemerides is the result of three 
cumulative precisions chosen for the compilation of the 
ephemerides. 


@ The internal precision of the dynamical theories used to 
model the motions depends on the importance of the 
terms of the series neglected and may be evaluated by 
comparison to a numerical integration. Note that the 
numerical integrations have their own internal accuracy 
depending on the algorithms and the computers used. 
The internal precision is generally the best. 


e The external precision of the theory depends on the 
accuracy of the observations used for the adjustment 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the constants of integration (the external precision is 
the one limiting the total precision of the ephemerides). 


e The precision of the representation is chosen when 
adjusting the number of coefficients and the length of 
the intervals of validity (this precision is chosen in order 
to avoid degrading the resulting accuracy). 


Representation of the ephemerides 

Ephemerides in tabular form 

The oldest form of the ephemerides is the publication in the 
form of tables of positions, the interval of which depends 
on the variation of the values of the positions. The faster 
this variation, the smaller the interval should be between 
two values. A simple reading of the table and a visual 
interpolation are sufficient to find the observed object in 
the sky. However, in order to get a higher precision, a 
nonlinear interpolation is necessary. This will need more 
complex calculations using the published data. For a 
higher precision, a solution is to decrease the length of the 
time interval between two values and therefore to increase 
the volume of data to be published. The Astronomical 
Ephemerides and the Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes, 
nowadays, and the Connaissance des Temps until 1979, 
contain tabulated ephemerides. Let us quote the motion 
of the Moon: in order to ensure an internal precision of 
a few units of 0.01 arcsecond, the ephemeris is tabulated 
with a3hinterval. For each coordinate, this representation 
with a step of 3 h requires 2920 values annually (table 3). 
Instead, with the tabulated ephemerides, 7440 values were 
necessary to reach the same accuracy, but with more 
computer calculations (table 2). Let us quote also the case 
of the Galilean satellites of Jupiter which have an extremely 
fast motion around Jupiter. A tabulated ephemeris would 
have required a step every 20 min which would have 
led to a volume of data too large to be published in a 
printed ephemeris. The solution was of two kinds. The 
first way was to provide formulae, complex and long, to 
be implemented which would provide a precision of one 
tenth of a second of degree. The second way was to offer 
the reader a graphical chart, the reading of which led to 
a precision of one second of degree. This last method is 
quite weak but is sufficient to identify the bodies at the 
time of an observation. 

The common widespread use of pocket calculators 
and microcomputers implies that the simplicity of the 
formulation is no longer fundamental in the compiling 
of the ephemerides. It is more important to preserve a 
good precision of representation over the period of time 
covered by the ephemeris. Thus, instead of evaluating 
a function f(t) as a table of computed values at short 
intervals of time, it is better to establish valid functions 
of approximation of f(t) on large intervals of time, with 
the concern to minimize the errors and the total volume of 
the data. 


Approximation of a function 
The goal of the ephemerides is thus to represent a function 
f (t), derived either by the result of anumerical integration 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ephemerides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


or by an analytical function of the time, which describes 
the motion of a body or the temporal evolution of a 
phenomenon. 

In the majority of the cases, the Chebyshev series are 
now used for the realization of the ephemerides. Why? In 
fact, any function can be approximated on a given interval 
of time by a polynomial, the degree and the number of 
terms of which increase as the interval of time increases. 
Such an approximation is not optimized and the volume 
of data to be published is significant. On the other hand 
its use is very simple since it is enough to substitute time 
in the polynomials thus built. Other representations are 
much better: let us try to explain why. 


Chebyshev approximation 

The functions to be approximated are always defined 
for all the values of the interval. The principle of 
the Lagrangian approximation is to adjust a polynomial 
of degree n on n+ 1 tabulated values. It would 
obviously be more desirable to take into account all the 
values of the function. For this reason, the Chebyshev 
approximation is chosen: the polynomials of Chebyshev 
have the interesting characteristic of having the error 
regularly distributed on the considered interval and being 
stable during evaluation. Moreover, among the various 
types of polynomial approximations, the approximation 
of Chebyshev is the one with the lower degree and the 
one on which the error does not exceed a given value. 
Another interesting fact is that the last retained terms offer 
an estimate of accuracy of the polynomial representation. 

The approximation function of the ephemerides will 
thus represent the true function by developments in 
Chebyshev polynomials defined on successive intervals 
of times. This method of representation makes it possible 
to compress the volume of data and to calculate the 
positions of the bodies quickly. For these reasons, it is 
very well adapted to the needs of astronomers (amateurs, 
professionals, theoreticians, astrometrists, etc). 

The Chebyshev ephemerides appear as a succession 
of coefficients dg, a1,...d, for a coordinate given on an 
interval [t,, 2]. The use of these ephemerides is as follows. 
The calculation of the value of the coordinate at the time t 
of the interval [t, ] is done by carrying out the change of 
variable: x = —1+ {2(t — t)}/{t, — i}. Therefore x belongs 
to the interval [—1, +1]. The Chebyshev polynomials of 
the first kind T,(x) are given by the relation: T,(x) = 
cos(n arccosx). One can also calculate them using the 
relation of recurrence: T,,(x). = 2x.T,_1(x) — T,-2(x) with 
To(x) = 1 and T;(x) = x. The position is then calculated 
through the following sum: ao.7o(x) + a1.T(x) +--+ + 
ay .T,(x) will provide the result. 


Approximation by mixed functions 

As we have seen, the polynomial approximation is not the 
only one. The introduction of mixed functions, makes it 
possible to take into account the quasi-periodical character 
of the functions appearing in the ephemerides. Indeed, a 
function of a quasi-periodical nature may be approximated 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


on a given interval by a development in polynomials of 
relatively low degree n, but the fact that the function is 
quasi-periodical on the interval, which is the case in the 
motion of the bodies of the solar system, is not taken into 
account. 

Let us see, through an example, how to benefit from 
the quasi-periodical nature of a function. Let the even 
function be f(x) = cosx + cos2x. It is much better 
represented with the base of functions 1, cosx, cos2x, 
cos3x... than with the polynomials 1, x?, x*, x°,... or 
with any other basis of even polynomials. 

However, an ephemeris is not so simple but it 
is possible, on a given interval of time, to make the 
approximation using several periodic functions, the 
period of which is suggested by the physical nature of 
the problem (for example the period of revolution of a 
celestial body), and also using some secular terms (or some 
polynomials of time) because of the not rigorously periodic 
nature of the described motion. 

The representation using mixed functions is partic- 
ularly well adapted to the motions of natural satellites of 
planets, and more generally for the motions of short period 
bodies, the motion of which is never far from a periodical 
motion. In the Connaissance des Temps, the differential coor- 
dinates of the natural planetary satellites are described by 
coefficients of mixed functions on intervals covering sev- 
eral revolutions of the satellites and are easy to calculate 
using the following formula: 


f@ =adaytatt+ bo sin(vt oh Qo) + bit sin(vt + (1) 
+ bot? sin(vt + g2) + co Sin(2vt + Wo) 


where 27:/v is a period close to the period of revolution of 
the body; a;, bj, and c;, are the amplitudes; y; and y; are 
the phases (j = 0, 1, 2). This formula rises from the choice 
of the selected basis. The mixed terms have the form: 
at‘ sin(pvt +p) (k and p: integers; a: amplitude; y: phase). 
The maximum values of k and p are adjusted according to 
the required precision. If the interval of representation is 
widened, it will be necessary to enrich the basis by mixed 
terms in power of time and multiple of the basic frequency. 
However, if the interval decreases, itis necessary to modify 
the basis in order to avoid the loss of precision (this is not 
the case with a polynomial representation, the precision of 
which increases when the interval decreases). 


The status of current research on ephemerides 

The first way to improve ephemerides (i.e. to improve the 
accuracy of the positions provided by the ephemerides) is 
to improve the theories used for the motions of the celestial 
bodies. At the present time, an effort has been made to 
take into account all the gravitational effects occurring 
in the solar system and to include the relativistic effects. 
Improved observations are needed and, for the inner 
planets (Mercury to Mars), the radar observational method 
has led to the abandonment of optical observations. For 
the giant planets, optical observations are still the only 
way to observe the positions of the planets together with 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ephemerides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the small number of positions sent by the space probes. 
The observation of planetary satellites is now preferable 
to the use of direct observations of the planets themselves. 
At last, the determination of the DYNAMICAL REFERENCE FRAME 
(a reference frame deduced from the motion of the Earth 
around the Sun) and the linkage to the independent stellar 
reference frame (no longer based on stars but on very 
far sources; see also EXTRAGALACTIC REFERENCE FRAMES) is the 
last step for the improvement of the ephemerides, solved 
by spatial observations from artificial satellites such as 
Hipparcos in the past and Fame or Gaia in the future. 
The second way to improve ephemerides is to use 
better representations of the motions. In fact, the 
problem is mainly in the reduction of the amount of data. 
Chebyshev approximation is still in use for that purpose. 


Various supports used for the publication of the 
ephemerides 

Printed ephemerides 

Although microcomputers are omnipresent for astronom- 
ical calculations, the printed ephemerides are still abun- 
dantly fused by professional and amateur astronomers. 
Why? First of all, the observer often needs a confirmation 
or a simple approximate position. Opening a book and 
directly reading a position is easy. One can also find: 


e hours of rising and setting of the Sun and the Moon (and 
also of principal planets); 


@ positions of the bodies of the solar system and bright 
stars for a terrestrial observer; 


@ ephemerides for the physical observations of these 
bodies. 


These ephemerides are in general of weak precision 
and a tabulated form is sufficient. 

Let us quote also some specialized ephemerides 
such as the Nautical Almanac or the Ephémérides Nautiques 
published for navigational use. However, not all 
the printed ephemerides provide tabulated positions. 
Graphical representations may be provided (essentially for 
the Galilean satellites of Jupiter) as well as coefficients for 
polynomials (in the case of high precision ephemerides) 
needing the use of a pocket calculator or a microcomputer. 
This is the case for the Connaissance des Temps since 1979 
which before then was used for the manual programming 
of telescopes or more simply for the tests and the checks 
of more complex software. 

The following isa list of the main printed ephemerides 
published nowadays: 


e@ by the Institut de Mécanique Céleste/Bureau des 
Longitudes, France: Connaissance des Temps, Annuaire 
du Bureau Des longitudes, Ephémérides Nautiques; 

e by HM Nautical Almanac Office of the former Royal 
Greenwich Observatory now at the Rutherford Apple- 
ton Laboratory, United Kingdom and by the Nautical Al- 
manac Office of the USNO, USA: Astronomical Almanac, 
Nautical Almanac: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e@ by the Institute of Applied Astronomy, St Petersburg, 
Russia: Ephemerides of Minor Planets; 


e@ by the Astronomisches Rechen Institut, Heidelberg, 
Germany: Apparent Places of Fundamental Stars. 


Electronic ephemerides 

The paper medium is traditional for the ephemerides 
which have existed for centuries. Nowadays, the use of 
the printed ephemerides is limited to specific help. The 
search for a body in the sky or the guidance of a telescope 
following a fast object of the solar system is now made in 
an automatic way by using electronic ephemerides. 

The first way is to have the printed ephemerides 
put on a medium (diskettes, CD-ROM) associated with 
a program of reading and of calculation of a position 
at a given date. It is obvious that the calculations of 
positions using the basic dynamical theories is not possible 
in real time because of the complexity of calculations 
and of the volume of data to be handled. The reading 
of tabulated values followed by their interpolation (not 
easy) or better, the reading of coefficients followed by 
precise calculations of the associated positions is today 
commonly used. For the calculations of positions not 
taking place in real time, it is also possible to carry out 
interactive calculations online using a specialized server. 
Web servers on the Internet allow these calculations now 
and ephemerides of high precision are thus available for 
all. The high precision ephemerides used by professional 
astronomers and by the space agencies are provided, of 
course, in an electronic form. The following is a list 
of addresses of the most interesting professional servers 
reachable on the Internet. 

Server of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, 
USA: http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/ 

Server of Institut de Mécanique Céleste/Bureau des 
Longitudes, Paris, France: http://www.bdl.fr/ 

Server of the US Naval Observatory, Washington, DC, 
USA: http://aa.usno.navy.mil/AA/ 

Server of the HM Nautical Almanac Office, United 
Kingdom: http://www.ast.cam.ac.uk/ 

Server of the Minor Planet Center, Cambridge, MA, 
USA: (ephemerides of asteroids and comets exclusively) 
http: //cfa-www.harvard.edu/iau/services/CS.html/ 


Bibliography 

Introduction aux Ephémérides Astronomiques (Bureau des 
Longitudes) Editions de Physique 

Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Ephemeris (US 
Naval Observatory / Royal Greenwich Observatory) 


Jean-Eudes Arlot 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Epicurus of Samos (341-270 sc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Epicurus of Samos (341-270 Bc) 


Greek philosopher, founded Epicurean philosophy in 
Athens, which divided the universe into ‘atoms’ and the 
‘void.’ Epicureans regarded happiness as the chief human 
good, attainable through freedom from anxiety and fear, 
and their materialism was despised in subsequent years 
as anti-Christian. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Epoch 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Epoch 


A particular instant of time used for reference purposes. 
In the context of the measurement of stellar positions, the 
epoch of observation is the date on which the observational 
data were obtained. A catalog for the epoch 2000.0, for 
example, would list positions, valid for that date. To obtain 
positions at some other epoch, the effects of proper motion 
must be calculated. Other effects such as nutation and 
aberration have also to be taken into account in order to 
obtain a precise position for an object on a particular date. 

Note that the epoch of observations of star positions 
does not have to be the same as the equinox to which 
the coordinate system is referred. The positions of a high 
proper motion star at epochs 1972.3, 1984.5, 1999.1 could 
be plotted in the coordinate frame of the equinox 1950.0, 
for example. 

In the context of planetary motion, the term ‘epoch’ 
may be used to describe the time of perihelion passage (the 
time at which the planet makes its closest approach to the 
Sun), this being one of the elements of the orbit. 


See also: equinox, precession, proper motion, nutation, 
aberration, orbital elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Epsilon Aurigae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Epsilon Aurigae 


This star, sometimes known as ‘Almaaz’ or ‘Al Anz’, is 
an eclipsing binary of the same type as Algol, but of 
exceptionally long period. It is a pale yellow supergiant 
of spectral type FOla, apparent magnitude 3.03v. It 
is intrinsically brilliant (absolute magnitude —6.0), its 
luminosity having been estimated as about 200000 times 
that of the Sun, but it is 2040 light-years away, with a 
parallax of 0.002”. The eclipses last for about a year, and 
occur at intervals of 27.1 years; the next eclipse is due in 
2010. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Epsilon Lyrae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Epsilon Lyrae 


Though not very bright, this is a favorite test object for 
powerful binoculars and small telescopes. Situated 1.6° 
north-east of Vega, it is known as ‘the Double Double’. 
The star can just be seen to be double with the unaided eye, 
under good conditions by observers with acute eyesight. 
With binoculars it is easily separated, the component stars 
being 3.5’ apart at a position angle of 173°. It is in fact 
a quadruple star system, each component being itself a 
binary. With a good 3 inch (7.5 cm) refractor both can be 
resolved. The system is 160 light-years distant (parallax 
0.020”). 

The first component system, el Lyr, which has a 
combined apparent magnitude of about 4.7, consists 
of two white stars separated by 2.5” at position angle 
353°, with an orbital period of about 1165 years. The 
apparent magnitude of g! Lyr A is 5.06, its spectral 
type A3V and absolute magnitude 1.6; ¢! Lyr B has 
an apparent magnitude of 6.19, spectral type F1V and 
absolute magnitude 2.7. 

The second system, ¢? Lyr, has a combined magnitude 
of about 4.6 and is very similar to the first pair. It 
again comprises two white stars, separated by 2.3° at 
position angle 87°, orbital period 585 years. The apparent 
magnitude of foe Lyrae C is 5.30, its spectral type A5V 
and absolute magnitude 1.8; «* Lyr D has an apparent 
magnitude of 5.51, spectral type FOVn and absolute 
magnitude 2.0. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Equation of Time 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Equation of Time 


An equation giving the difference between apparent solar 
time (or sundial time) and mean time. Thus: 


equation of time (£) 
= apparent solar time (AT) — mean time (MT). 


A positive value E means that apparent time is ahead of 
mean time. A negative value of E means that apparent 
time is lagging behind mean time. 

The difference arises for two reasons. First, since the 
Earth moves round the Sun in an elliptical orbit, when the 
Earth is near perihelion it moves faster than when it is 
near aphelion; consequently, the apparent motion of the 
Sun relative to the background stars is more rapid near 
perihelion than near aphelion. This variation in the Sun’s 
apparent motion affects the length of the apparent solar 
day. Second, although the real Sun’s apparent motion 
is along the ecliptic, the variation in the length of the 
apparent solar day depends upon the daily change in the 
right ascension of the Sun. This change in RA is equal to 
the projection of the Sun’s ecliptic motion onto the celestial 
equator, and is maximum near solstices and minimum 
near equinoxes. 

As a result of the combination of these two effects, 
mean time and apparent solar time can differ by up to 
16.3 min. Apparent time is ahead of mean time between 
about 16 April and about 15 June and, again, between 
about 2 September and about 26 December, the difference 
reaching maxima of about 3.75 and 16.3 min on 15 May 
and 4 November, respectively. Apparent time lags behind 
mean time during the rest of the year, the difference 
reaching maxima of 14.3 min and 6.3 min on 12 February 
and 27 July, respectively. 


See also: epoch, mean solar time, sidereal time, sundial. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Equatorial Mounting 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Equatorial Mounting 


A telescope mounting in which one axis of rotation (the 
polar axis) is aligned parallel to the Earth’s axis, and the 
other (the declination axis) is aligned at right angles to 
this axis, in the plane of the celestial equator. Rotation 
about the polar axis allows the telescope to be pointed 
towards celestial bodies with different right ascensions 
or hour angles, while rotation about the declination axis 
enables the telescope to be swivelled perpendicular to 
the celestial equator in the direction of increasing or 
decreasing declination. The advantage of the equatorial 
mounting is that the apparent diurnal motion of a celestial 
body can be followed by driving the telescope in the 
opposite direction to the Earth’s rotation (i.e. driving from 
east to west) at a rate of one revolution per sidereal 
day around the polar axis only. The disadvantages of 
the equatorial mounting are that it is more complex and 
expensive to construct than the altazimuth mounting, and 
gravitational loadings change in a complex way as the 
telescope moves, so making it difficult to compensate 
for structural flexure. Nevertheless, until comparatively 
recently, the overwhelming majority of large telescopes 
were set up on equatorial mountings. 

There are many varieties of equatorial mounting. 
Popular varieties include the German, cross-axis and fork 
mountings. In the German mounting, the declination 
axis sits across the top end of a short polar axis, with 
the telescope at one end and a counterbalancing weight 
at the other. In the cross-axis mount, a long polar axis 
is supported at top and bottom by two pillars, or piers, 
and the telescope is attached to a declination axis that 
crosses the polar axis roughly mid-way between its top 
and bottom ends. Once again, the weight of the telescope 
is counterbalanced by a weight placed at the opposite 
end of the declination axis. In the fork mounting, the 
telescope swings in declination about two pivots attached 
at opposite sides of the upper end of an open U-shaped 
fork, the bottom of which is attached to a short polar axis. 


See also: altazimuth mounting, celestial coordinates, 
celestial equator, declination, diurnal motion, hour angle, 
right ascension, sidereal time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Equator-S ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Equator-S 


Small German satellite launched in December 1998 to 
investigate Earth’s equatorial magnetosphere. Operations 
began in February 1999, but ceased after three months 
due to a system malfunction. The first satellite to receive 
positional information from GPS satellites while beyond 
geostationary orbit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Equinox 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Equinox 


An instant at which the Sun crosses the celestial equator; 
the Sun is then vertically overhead at the equator, and 
day and night have equal duration at every point on the 
Earth’s surface. The apparent annual path of the Sun on 
the celestial sphere is inclined to the celestial equator and 
intersects it at two points. The terms vernal equinox and 
autumnal equinox are applied to these points. 

Star positions are measured in celestial coordinates 
based ona particular vernal equinox, say the equinox of the 
year 2000. Thus, the word ‘equinox’ applied in the context 
of the position of a star defines the coordinate system being 
used. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial sphere, ecliptic, First 
Point of Aries, First Point of Libra, precession. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Equuleus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Equuleus 


(the Little Horse; abbrev. Equ, gen. Equulei; area 
72 sq. deg.) A northern constellation which lies between 
Delphinus and Pegasus, and culminates at midnight in 
early August. Its origin is uncertain, though its brightest 
stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) in the 
Almagest. 

Equuleus is the second smallest of the 88 constella- 
tions (and the smallest in the northern sky) with only one 
star, a Equulei (Kitalpha), magnitude 3.9, brighter than 
fourth magnitude. Interesting objects include ¢ (or 1) Equ- 
ulei, a quadruple star system consisting of two pale yellow 
(F5 and F7) components, magnitudes 6.1 and 6.4, separa- 
tion 0.9”, period 101 years, the former of which has an 
unseen companion which revolves around it in a period 
of 2.03 days, and a fourth, yellow (G0) component, mag- 
nitude 7.4, separation 10.3”. 

There are no bright star clusters, nebulae or galaxies 
in Equuleus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eratosthenes of Cyrene (c. 276—c. 196 BC) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eratosthenes of Cyrene (c. 276—c. 196 
BC) 


Astronomer, philosopher, geographer and geometrist 
(developed theorems in prime number theory), born 
in Cyrene (now Shahhat, Libya) became librarian in 
Alexandria. Eratosthenes made a surprisingly accurate 
measurement of the size of the Earth. Having heard that 
at the summer solstice the Sun illuminated the bottom of a 
well at Syene (now Aswan, south of Alexandria), and was 
therefore overhead, he observed the angle of the Sun off 
the zenith on the same day at Alexandria. He measured 
the distance between the two cities, allegedly by counting 
the rotations of the wheel of a carriage driven between 
them, and determined the circumference of the Earth as 
250000 stadia (47000 km, compared to the true value of 
40000 km). He also measured the tilt of the Earth’s axis 
with great accuracy obtaining the value of 23 degrees 51 
minutes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Erfle, Heinrich Valentin (1884-1923) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Erfle, Heinrich Valentin (1884—1923) 


Optician, born in Duerkheim, Germany, head of the 
telescope department for CARL ZEISS, Jena; the Erfle wide field 
eyepiece is named for him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Eridanus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eridanus 


(the River; abbrev. Eri, gen. Eridani; area 1138 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Cetus and 
Orion and extends from the celestial equator to within 32° 
of the south celestial pole. The center of the constellation 
culminates at midnight in mid-November, though its 
brightest star is on the meridian a month earlier. Eridanus 
has been associated with several different terrestrial rivers, 
notably the Nile, which also lies south—north, and the Po, 
into which, in Greek mythology, Phaéthon, son of the Sun- 
god Helios, was said to have fallen after Zeus struck him 
with a thunderbolt during his abortive ride of his father’s 
chariot. The brightest stars of Eridanus south to about 
dec. —40° were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) in the 
Almagest; the more southern ones (including its brightest 
star) were added in Renaissance times and are shown, for 
example, in Bayer’s Uranometria of 1603. 

A large but rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Eridanus are a Eridani (Achernar), 
which at magnitude 0.5 is the ninth brightest star in the 
sky, 6 Eridani (Cursa), magnitude 2.8, and y Eridani 
(Zaurak), magnitude 3.0. There are 14 other stars of 
magnitude 4.0 or brighter. Interesting stars include ¢ 
Eridani, which at magnitude 3.7 is one of the nearest 
naked-eye stars (distance 10.5 light-years) and a similar 
star to the Sun, 6 Eridani, a fine binary with bluish- 
white (A4 and A1) components, magnitudes 3.3 and 4.4, 
separation 8.3”, o” Eridani (Keid), a triple-star system with 
an orange (K1) primary, magnitude 4.4, a white dwarf 
secondary, magnitude 9.5, separation 93”, and a third, red 
dwarf (M4.5) component, magnitude 11.2, which orbits 
the latter, separation 9.0”, period about 248 years, and 
has a mass of only about 0.2 that of the Sun, and 32 
Eridani, another binary with yellow and bluish-white (G8 
and A2) components, magnitudes 4.8 and 6.1, separation 
6.5”. Other interesting objects include NGC 1535, a tenth- 
magnitude planetary nebula, and NGC 1291, a ninth- 
magnitude spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eros 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eros 


The first Amor asteroid to be discovered, independently 
by Gustav Witt and Auguste Charlois in 1898, designated 
(433) Eros. The asteroid orbits the Sun at a mean distance 
of 1.46 AU, or 218 million km (perihelion 1.13 AU, 
aphelion 1.78 AU), in a period of 1.76 years; inclination 
11°-, eccentricity 0.22. Its rotation period is 5.3 h. Eros 
is an S-type asteroid, with a reflection spectrum similar 
to that of ordinary chondrite and stony-iron meteorites. It 
was the prime target of the NEAR Shoemaker probe, 
which entered orbit around Eros on 14 February 2000. 
Images returned showed an irregular, elongated object 
measuring 33 x 13 km, with a 7 km diameter crater. The 
slight deviation to the probe’s trajectory revealed that 
Eros has a bulk density of about 2.5 g cm™. At 3:02:10 
EST on 12 February 2001, the NEAR Shoemaker 
spacecraft landed on the surface of Eros, the first 
spacecraft ever to land on an asteroid. It traveled its last 
mile by cruising down to the surface of Eros at a gentle 4 
mph (1.9 ms‘), finally coming to rest after its 2 million 
mile journey. The last image snapped by the spacecraft 
was a mere 394 ft (120 m) from the asteroid's surface and 
covered an area 20 ft (6 m) square. 
See also NEAR SHOEMAKER 


Bibliography 
Veverka J et al 2001 Nature 413 390-393 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Escape Velocity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Escape Velocity 


The minimum velocity required in order that an object 
can leave the surface of, or depart from any other point 
within the gravitational field of, a massive body and 
recede to a large distance. In principle, if atmospheric 
resistance is ignored, a projectile fired vertically from 
the surface of a massive body at its escape velocity will 
continue to move away with a speed which decreases with 
increasing distance but does not decline to zero until it 
has receded to an infinite distance. An object moving 
through the gravitational field of a massive body will, 
in general, follow a parabolic trajectory; for this reason, 
escape velocity is sometimes called parabolic velocity. 
The escape velocity at the surface of the Earth is about 
11.2 km s“! (6.96 miles). The velocity of escape from the 
less massive Moon is about 2.4 km s7! at its surface. A 
planet cannot long retain an atmosphere if the planet’s 
escape velocity is low enough to be near the average 
velocity of the gas molecules making up that atmosphere. 


See also: weight, zero gravity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eta Aquarids ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eta Aquarids 


A meteor shower that takes place in late April and May. 
The radiant lies in the constellation Aquarius. The Eta 
Aquarids occur when the Earth intersects the descending 
node of the meteor stream from Halley’s Comet; the 
Orionids in October are produced by the Earth’s passage 
through the ascending node. Because Halley’s orbit is 
retrograde, Eta Aquarid meteoroids impact the Earth at 
a high relative velocity and produce fast meteors. There 
are records of this shower dating back to 74 Bc. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Eta Carinae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eta Carinae 


One of the most enigmatic stars known. It is an S 
Doradus-type eruptive variable, situated at the heart of 
the bright diffuse nebula NGC 3373. It is obscured by 
the Homunculus Nebula, a bright cloud of gas and dust 
ejected by the star itself during a major outburst in 1843, 
when it reached an apparent magnitude of —0.8, becoming 
temporarily brighter than all other stars except Sirius. Its 
apparent magnitude is at present 6.2 but varies erratically 
over decades and it has been recorded as faint as 7.9. It is 
an extremely powerful source of infrared radiation, and is 
believed to be a highly luminous blue star much of whose 
visible radiation is absorbed by the nebula and re-emitted 
in the infrared. Because of the obscuration its spectral type, 
parallax and absolute magnitude cannot be determined 
with any certainty. 

Ithas been variously suggested that n Carinae is avery 
young star in its pre-main-sequence stage, or an extremely 
old star in the closing stages of its evolution, which is 
now believed more likely. The last phase of its existence 
could well result in one of the most spectacular supernova 
explosions ever witnessed, but there is no means of reliably 
predicting when this will occur. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eta Carinae Nebula ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eta Carinae Nebula 


A bright, diffuse nebula, NGC 3373, surrounding the 
star n Carinae. About 2° across and divided by a dark, 
V-shaped, obscuring dust-lane, it contains a number of 
interesting stars and star clusters, and also two major 
included nebulae—the bright Homunculus Nebula and 
the dark, absorbing Keyhole Nebula. Its distance has been 
estimated as about 8000 light-years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ether (or Aether) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ether (or Aether) 


A transparent, weightless medium which was imagined 
by nineteenth-century physicists to fill all space, and 
to provide the medium through which electromagnetic 
waves could propagate. Conventional physical ideas 
of the time did not admit of waves that could travel 
through ‘nothingness’. The concept of the ether came to 
be associated with the idea of absolute space, the ether 
providing a background to the universe against which all 
motion could be measured. 

Experiments were devised, notably the Michelson— 
Morley experiment, to try to measure the motion of the 
Earth through the ether, and these all failed to detect any 
such motion, however small. The null result of these 
experiments was explained by the theory of relativity, first 
published in 1905. The ether, being undetectable, became 
an unnecessary hypothesis, and has been abandoned 
(along with the Newtonian concept of absolute space). 


See also: Michelson—Morley experiment. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Eudoxus of Cnidus (c. 400-c. 347 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eudoxus of Cnidus (c. 400-c. 347 Bc) 


Greek astronomer, mathematician, born in Cnidus (on 
the Resadiye peninsula, now Turkey). First astronomer 
to produce a detailed description of the stars and 
constellations. His work is now lost but known through 
the extensive borrowing by aratus in his Phenomena. 
Proposed a geocentric system for the solar system in which 
the Sun, Moon and planets moved on spheres centered 
on the Earth. The model failed to account for variations 
in the observed diameter of the Moon or changes in the 
brightness of planets, which were correctly interpreted to 
indicate that their distances were changing. He noticed 
some of the discrepancies with observations and tried 
to adjust the model by postulating that each sphere had 
its poles set at an angle to the next sphere. His model 
contained no mechanical explanation and was only a 
mathematical description, but the spheres came later to 
be regarded as having a physical reality. Some of his 
mathematics became a foundation for parts of Euclid’s 
Elements, indeed may have been due to him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Euler, Leonhard (1707-83) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Euler, Leonhard (1707-83) 


Swiss mathematician, born in Basle. Developed theories 
of the planets, the Moon, and the tides. His formulated the 
concept of Eulerian angles in which to express dynamics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Euro-Asian Astronomical Society 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Euro-Asian Astronomical Society 


The Euro-Asian Astronomical Society (EAAS) was created 
in April 1990, and is active mainly in New Independent 
States (NIS), the former USSR territory. Its members 
include professional NIS astronomers, astronomical 
associations and institutions worldwide. 

Its purpose is to maintain and develop NIS astronomy 
and to reinforce scientific contacts between astronomers of 
NIS and the rest of the world. 

The society organizes astronomical meetings, astro- 
nomical education and related topics. It supports library 
programs and provides free of charge, or very cheap, 
subscriptions to Russian-language astronomical/space re- 
search journals and magazines for astronomical institu- 
tions of NIS and some Central European countries (except 
Russia). 

Its publications include a professional English 
Journal, Astronomical and Astrophysical Transactions, 
a popular Russian publication translated into English, 
Universe and Ourselves, and an electronic newsletter, in 
Russian but translated into English. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Europa 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Europa 


Europa is the smallest of the four large ‘Galilean’ satel- 
lites of JUPITER. Table 1 gives its basic parameters. Little 
known before 1979, when the VOYAGER spacecraft 
returned the first close-up images, it has recently been a 
prime target of the Jupiter-orbiting GALILEO MISSION, 
which has provided major advances in our understand- 
ing of Europa. Its icy surface and rocky interior, and 
strange surface topography of low-relief ridges and 
chaotic terrain, make Europa one of the most unusual 
objects in the solar system. Most intriguing is the possi- 
bility that this unusual surface overlies a liquid ocean, 
which might conceivably support life. 


Table 1. Properties of Europa. 


Radius 1561 km 

Density 3005 kg m3 

Mean distance from Jupiter 671 000 km 

Orbital eccentricity 0.0101 

Surface composition H,0O ice, hydrated minerals 
(perhaps salts or H,SO,); SO; O; 
COy; HO 


Interior composition Silicate rock; Fe/FeS; H,O 


Origin 

Europa was presumably formed at the same time as its 
three siblings, 10, GANYMEDE, and CALISTO, from the same 
cloud of material, the proto-Jovian nebula, that formed 
Jupiter itself. Temperatures in the proto-Jovian nebula 
would have been highest near Jupiter, with ice condens- 
ing only in the outer parts. Europa formed near the inner 
margin of the ice zone, and so acquired a little ice in addi- 
tion to rock and iron. The solid material in the nebula 
accumulated into ever-larger pieces which were drawn 
together by mutual gravitational attraction, until four 
large bodies, the nascent Galilean satellites, became large 
enough to sweep up the remaining debris. After forma- 
tion, the satellites were driven away from Jupiter by their 
tidal interaction with the planet. Eventually the inner 
three became locked by mutual gravitational perturba- 
tions into the present orbital resonance, in which Io orbits 
Jupiter twice for every orbit of Europa, and Europa orbits 
twice for every orbit of Ganymede, a circumstance that 
has profound consequences. 


Interior 

Europa’s mean density, 3000 kg m-3, is much greater than 
the density of water, 1000 kg m~%, but is significantly less 
than the density of around 3500 kg m-3 that would be 
expected if the interior were made entirely of silicate 
rocks. Its interior is strongly differentiated, with a proba- 
ble iron or iron sulfide core, a thick mantle of silicate 
rock, and an outer layer of water or ice. The DIFFERENTIA- 
TION of Europa indicates that at some time its interior has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


been hot and mobile enough for the heavier constituents 
to settle towards the center. Heating during its forma- 
tion, radioactive decay, or tidal heating may have been 
responsible. Unlike its neighbor Ganymede, Europa does 
not generate a significant internal magnetic field, though 
as the origin of Ganymede’s field is a mystery we are not 
yet sure what this means for Europa. However, Europa 
perturbs Jupiter’s magnetic field in a way that implies an 
electrically conducting layer, such as a liquid ocean, not 
far below Europa’s surface. The same appears to be true 
on Callisto, a geologically dead moon that otherwise 
looks very different from Europa. The orbital resonance 
with Io and Ganymede makes Europa’s orbit significant- 
ly non-circular, so although Europa rotates synchronous- 
ly, keeping the same face to Jupiter, the tidal bulge raised 
by Jupiter changes size and orientation slightly during 
the orbit as Europa’s distance from Jupiter varies. This 
continual distortion dissipates energy inside Europa, ina 
milder version of the tidal heating that produces Io’s vol- 
canos. Dissipation is greatest in the parts of the interior 
that deform the most during the orbit, but the amount of 
deformation of the ice or rock depends on its viscosity, 


Figure 1. Galileo image of a 215-280 km region of Europa’s sur- 
face, showing the wide variety of surface features. Examples are 
shown of ridged plains (R); chaos (C); lenticulae (L); a pull- 
apart band (P); and one ‘cusp’ of a cuspate ridge (Cu). Note the 
almost complete absence of impact craters. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Europa 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which depends on its temperature, which in turn 
depends on the amount of tidal heating, so there are 
complex feedback mechanisms that are difficult to 
model. However, it seems likely that most of the dissipa- 
tion occurs in the lower, warmer, part of the solid ice 
layer, and that the heating rate is roughly 0.05 W m~ or 
less. 


Surface geology 

Europa’s surface can be divided into several very distinct 
types of terrain (figure 1), each of which is described sep- 
arately below. 


Ridges 

Much of Europa’s surface is made up of innumerable 
overlapping ridges, tens to hundreds of meters high 
and up to thousands of km long. The more recent ridges 
tend to stand higher than the older ones, and are often 
flanked by diffuse regions of lower ALBEDO. Most fre- 
quently, the ridges are double, with a central trough, 
but some have multiple components. Some are remark- 
ably straight, while others have irregular, lobed, mar- 
gins, and others have strikingly regular ‘cuspate’ forms, 
like the path of a bouncing ball seen from the side. 
These are most likely formed from propagating frac- 
tures that spread in a direction that changes periodical- 
ly during each orbit of Europa because of changing 
stresses from Jupiter’s tides. The most extensive ridges 
are global in extent, and with their dark margins form 
the dark ‘fractures’ that are Europa’s most distinctive 
feature in global views. The double ridges seem to start 
life as simple fractures, which then somehow gradually 
develop ridges on either side. If the fracture opens fur- 
ther, additional ridges may appear within the central 
trough, producing complex sets of ridges. The ridges 
may develop by upwarp of the material on either side 
of the fractures by shallow intrusions along the frac- 
tures, or by accumulation of debris on either side of the 
fracture. The debris may accumulate either by ‘volcanic’ 
eruption along the fracture, or squeezing of material out 
of the fracture by its periodic opening and closing, per- 
haps by daily tides. 

The ridges form a global pattern that provides evi- 
dence that Europa’s outer shell is detached from its inte- 
rior, and due to Jupiter’s tides rotates very slightly faster 
than the interior, completing a full rotation relative to 
Jupiter over thousands or millions of years. The shell will 
be distorted and stressed as it rotates over the tidal bulge 
that always faces Jupiter, and the expected stresses from 
this process very nicely explain the global alignment of 
the ridges, and the apparent changes in their orientation 
with time. Rhythmic changes in the stress direction dur- 
ing each orbit of Jupiter may even explain the remarkable 
‘cuspate’ ridges, if each ‘bounce’ of the ridge forms dur- 
ing a single Europan day. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Pull-apart features 

In many areas, the ridges are broken by smoother, dark- 
er, bands where the surface has clearly been pulled apart: 
features on either side of the band match up perfectly, as 
in figure 1. The smooth material in the band is new mate- 
rial that has filled the gap as the surface on either side 
separated, much like sea-floor spreading on Earth. The 
global distribution and orientation of the pull-apart fea- 
tures suggests that they open in response to stress from 
the daily tides. Somewhere on Europa, there must have 
been compression of the surface to make room for the 
observed spreading, and it is odd that no unambiguous 
compressional features have yet been identified. 


Chaos and lenticulae 

Large areas of Europa’s surface have been fractured and 
broken up to form ‘chaos’. Large chaos regions may be 
more than 100 km across, while the smaller but similar 
lenticulae are typically 10 km in diameter. A possible 
evolutionary sequence for lenticulae can be inferred. In 
places the original surface is simply domed up; else- 
where the dome is fractured, frequently to the point 
where the original surface texture is unrecognizable. 
Chaos regions are similar but larger. The fractured blocks 
of original surface have often been moved horizontally, 
rotated, or even tilted: much of the nearby original sur- 
face must have been destroyed to make room for this 
motion. Chaos and lenticulae are generally darker than 
the original surface: the dark mottled terrain seen in 
global views is mostly chaos. Both types of terrain 
appear to have formed by disruption of the surface from 
below, probably due to enhanced local heating. 
However, whether the heating involved large-scale melt- 
ing, with the broken crustal fragments floating like ice- 
bergs, or simply the rising of warm, mobile, solid ice 
towards the surface, is not yet clear. Feedback between 
ice viscosity and tidal heating, discussed above, may pro- 
duce local thermal runaway and explain the patchy dis- 
tribution of the chaos regions. 


Impact features 

Europa’s surface is more lightly cratered than most PLAN- 
ETARY SURFACES, an indication of its relative youth. The 
largest craters seen so far, Tyre and Callanish, roughly 80 
km in diameter, are composed of many concentric circu- 
lar fractures surrounding a rough central region. The 
concentric fractures suggest that the impacts penetrated 
the rigid outer layer of Europa into a fluid layer below: 
the fractures would have formed as material rapidly 
flowed towards the center of the hole created by the 
impact. The Galileo spacecraft has shown craters larger 
than 25 km in diameter are extremely flat compared to 
similar sized craters on other bodies, and are also sur- 
rounded by multiple concentric rings. It is likely that 
these craters have penetrated the ice into the probable 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Europa 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Full-disk view of Europa from Galileo. The bright 
impact crater Pwyll is conspicuous. A cutaway shows a 
schematic of the interior structure: the cold, rigid outer icy crust 
(white), the possible liquid water ocean or warm ice layer (blue), 
the silicate layer (brown), and the central iron core (silver). This 
figure is reproduced as Color Plate 28. 


ocean below. Smaller impacts, such as the bright ray 
crater Pwyll (figure 2), 25 km in diameter, look superfi- 
cially like lunar craters, with a sharp rim and central 
peak, and thus probably did not penetrate to a fluid 
layer. Taken together, these constraints imply a thickness 
of 10-20 km, though the models are incomplete, and 
uncertainties remain for the rigid outer layer, They also 
do not prove that the underlying fluid layer is liquid 
water: very warm, mobile, ice is also possible. Pwyll- 
sized craters are extremely flat compared to lunar craters, 
showing that even the ‘rigid’ outer layer is soft enough 
below the surface to flow and fill in the original hole. 


Age of the surface 

The age of the geological features on Europa’s surface is 
difficult to determine precisely. No detectable changes 
occurred in the 17 years between the Voyager and Galileo 
images: if we assume that changes occur smoothly and 
uniformly over Europa’s surface, this implies an average 
surface age of at least 30 million years. The surface age 
can also be estimated from the abundance of impact 
CRATERS, combined with estimates of the rate at which 
impacts are expected to occur. Cratering rates can be 
determined, though not very accurately, from the num- 
ber of observed comets and asteroids near Jupiter. Our 
best estimates suggest that Europa’s surface age is some- 
where between 10 and 300 million years. If this age esti- 
mate is correct, it is very likely that geological activity on 
Europa continues today: the chance that activity would 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


have persisted for 95-99% of Europa’s history and then 
stopped just before humans appeared on the scene is 
small. This raises another mystery, however. Chaotic ter- 
rain on Europa is more recent than ridged plains in 
almost all areas of Europa so far surveyed. If Europa’s 
surface is young, why would geological activity have 
changed so dramatically so recently? One possibility is 
that activity on Europa is cyclic, driven by complex inter- 
actions between its interior and its orbit, and that at some 
future date the style of activity will change back from 
chaotic terrain formation to ridged plains formation. 


Interaction with Jupiter’s magnetosphere 

Europa is immersed in Jupiter’s enormous magnetos- 
phere, which rotates with Jupiter once every ten hours 
(see JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE), much faster than Europa’s 
3.5-day orbital period. The magnetosphere carries with it 
a dense plasma of energetic ions, dominated by sulfur 
and oxygen ions that have escaped from Io. Lacking a 
strong intrinsic magnetic field that could deflect the plas- 
ma, Europa’s surface, particularly the trailing hemi- 
sphere (the side that faces backwards as Europa orbits 
Jupiter), is thus continually bombarded by energetic 
ions. The bombardment has two main effects: implanta- 
tion and erosion. 

The strongest direct evidence for implantation is an 
absorption feature in Europa’s ultraviolet spectrum, due 
either to sulfur dioxide or sulfur-oxygen bonds in some 
other form. The feature is strongest on the trailing hemi- 
sphere, where bombardment is strongest. There is also a 
pervasive darkening of Europa’s trailing hemisphere at 
longer ultraviolet wavelengths. It is likely that some of 
the bombarding sulfur ions become embedded in the 
water ice of Europa’s surface, and combine with oxygen 
from the surrounding water to produce the UV absorp- 
tion feature. It is also possible that the UV feature is due 
to sulfur intrinsic to Europa, concentrated on the trailing 
side by sputtering away of water ice, as explained in the 
next paragraph. 

Each ion that collides with Europa’s water ice also 
ejects many water molecules, or fragments of water mol- 
ecules, from the surface—a process known as sputter- 
ing. Most of the material re-impacts Europa elsewhere 
on its surface, but a significant fraction is moving fast 
enough that it escapes into space. It is estimated that, on 
average, 5-20 cm of ice is lost from Europa every million 
years, and 20-80 cm is transported large distances across 
the surface. The fact that geological features on Europa 
as small as tens of meters in size have not been worn 
down to nothing by this process provides additional evi- 
dence that the surface is relatively young, less than 100 
million years old. Sputtering of the surface ice also sup- 
ports a tenuous oxygen atmosphere around Europa, 
which was detected by the Hubble Space Telescope. 
There is also a faint but detectable halo of sodium 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Europa 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


around Europa, perhaps also derived ultimately from Io. 

Recent images from the Hubble Space Telescope 
show a faint far—ultraviolet auroral ‘footprint’ on 
Jupiter’s upper atmosphere at the point where a Jovian 
magnetic field line connnects Europa to Jupiter. This 
shows that Europa is electrically conducting, probably 
through its tenuous ionosphere, and drives electrical cur- 
rents between itself and Jupiter as it moves through the 
Jovian magnetic field. lo and Ganymede show similar, 
but stronger, auroral footprints. 


Ocean? Life? 

The most intriguing question about Europa is whether 
there is an OCEAN of liquid water beneath the ice that 
might even support life. Many observations, including 
the pull-apart features, evidence for nonsynchronous 
rotation of the outer shell, the fractured and rotated 
blocks in the chaos regions, and the unusual appearance 
of Europa’s impact craters, point to the existence of a 
soft, mobile layer a few kilometers beneath a rigid outer 
crust. The big question is then whether this layer is warm 
ice not far below its melting point, or is actually liquid. 
The evidence for nonsynchronous rotation, and electro- 
magnetic evidence for a liquid layer beneath the surface, 
are perhaps the strongest evidence for an ocean rather 
than warm ice. Hybrid models, in which a ‘lithosphere’ 
of cold, rigid ice overlies warmer, convecting ice, which 
in turn overlies a liquid ocean, are also plausible. 

If an ocean has existed over most of Europa’s histo- 
ry, conditions there may be suitable for the development 
and sustenance of life. Organic (carbon-based) molecules 
that provide the raw material for life are common in the 
solar system, and while sunlight probably does not pen- 
etrate the outer ice shell, tidal heat may have supplied 
sufficient energy for the chemical reactions necessary for 
life. A commonly drawn analogy is with the living com- 
munities that exist independently of sunlight, sustained 
only by chemical and thermal energy from the EARTH'S 
INTERIOR, around the hydrothermal vents or ‘black smok- 
ers’ on the floors of the Earth’s oceans. Currently, how- 
ever, we have no direct evidence for life on Europa, and 
further exploration will be required to determine 
whether oceans or life really exist there (see also LIFE ON 
OTHER WORLDS). 


Future exploration 

Plans are being made for a Europa Orbiter mission that 
could be launched as early as 2003 and might enter 
Europa orbit around 2008, with the primary goal of 
establishing the existence (or otherwise) of a subsurface 
ocean. In addition to the usual cameras and spectro- 
graphs, the spacecraft would probably carry a radar to 
probe beneath the surface, with the possibility of detect- 
ing any ocean directly. A laser altimeter and gravity mea- 
surements would directly detect the distortion of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Europa’s surface as its distance from Jupiter changes—a 
thin ice shell over an ocean would distort more than a 
thick layer of solid ice. After the orbiter mission, landers 
that could sample the surface directly, and eventually 
probes that could drill through the ice to the ocean (if it 
exists) are being considered. The technical challenges of 
these missions, particularly the large quantity of fuel 
required to rendezvous with Europa, and the harsh radi- 
ation environment, are extreme, and overcoming them 
will be challenging. Europa will keep many of its secrets 
for a while longer. 


Bibliography 

Clarke J T et al February 2002 Ultraviolet emissions from 
the magnetic footprints of Ilo, Ganymede and 
Europa on Jupiter Nature 415 997-1000 

Turtle E P and B A Ivanov 2002 Numerical simulations of 
impact crater excavation and collapse on Europa: 
Implications for ice thickness. Lunar Planet. Sci. 
XXXII abstract 1431 


World Wide Web 
Galileo mission site: 
http:/ / www.jpLnasa.gov/ galileo /images / 
europa/eurimages.html 
John Spencer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Europa Orbiter ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Europa Orbiter 


Proposed mission to investigate Jupiter’s moon Europa. 
Part of NASA’s Outer Planets/Solar Probe Project. 
Possible launch in November 2003. May carry a radar 
sounder to measure the thickness of the surface ice and 
detect any underlying liquid ocean. Other instruments 
would reveal details of the satellite’s surface and interior 
processes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


European Astronomical Society ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


European Astronomical Society 


The European Astronomical Society was founded in 
1990 to ‘contribute to and promote the advancement of 
astronomy, in its broadest sense, in Europe by all suitable 
means’. It counts over 1500 members and has 18 affiliated 
societies. It publishes a newsletter and organizes every 
year a Joint European and National Astronomical Meeting 
JENAM). 
For further information see 

http://www.iap.fr/eas/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


European Southern Observatory (ESO) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


European Southern Observatory 
(ESO) 


ESO is an intergovernmental European organization with 
its headquarters, scientific and technical divisions in 
Garching near Munich. It was founded in 1962 to 
establish and operate an astronomical observatory in the 
southern hemisphere and to promote and organize 
cooperation in European astronomical research. Its 
member states are Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, 
Italy, The Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland. 

The original observatory at La Silla is located in one 
of the most arid areas in the world, the Chilean Atacama 
Desert, 600 km north of Santiago. Since the land was 
acquired in 1964, 14 optical telescopes have been built 
on La Silla mountain, 2400 m above sea level. 

The most recent addition (in 1989) was the 3.5 m 
New Technology Telescope (NTT), one of the world’s 
most advanced optical telescopes. The NTT operates 
with the SUSI camera and the multimode EMMI (visual) 
and SOFI (infrared) instruments. 

The largest instrument at La Silla is a 3.6 m 
telescope equipped with the ADONIS adaptive optics 
unit and a high-resolution spectrograph. An infrared 
instrument and a _ high-accuracy radial velocity 
spectrograph are also planned. 

Other facilities include the MPG/ESO 2.2 m wide- 
field instrument, the 1.52 m telescope with its new 
FEROS spectrograph, and the Danish 1.54 m telescope. 
The newly installed Swiss 1.2 m Leonard Euler telescope 
with the CORALIE echelle spectrograph is successfully 
‘hunting’ for planets around other stars. 

The 15 m Swedish-ESO submillimeter telescope 
(SEST) became operational in 1987. A new bolometric 
array will pave the way for the ATACAMA LARGE 
MILLIMETER ARRAY (ALMA). 

ESO is also completing the Very Large Telescope 
(VLT) on the 2635 m high Mount Paranal, 130 km south 
of Antofagasta in Chile. The VLT will comprise four 
8.2 m reflecting unit telescopes and several moving 1.8 m 
auxiliary telescopes. Their light beams will eventually be 
combined in the VLT interferometer (VLTI). When 
completed, the VLT will be the largest optical telescope 
in the world. On October 29, 2001, ANTU and 
MELIPAL, two of the four VLT 8.2 m Unit Telescopes 
were successfully linked. Light from the southern star 
Achernar (Alpha Eridani) was captured by the two 
telescopes and sent to a common focus in the 
observatory’s Interferometric Laboratory. Following 
careful adjustments of the optical paths, interferometric 
fringes were soon recorded, proving that the beams from 
the two telescopes had been successfully combined in 
phase. From an analysis of the observed pattern (the 
fringe contrast), the angular diameter of Achernar was 
determined to be 1.9 milli-arcsec. At the star’s distance 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


(145 Ly.), this corresponds to a size of 13 million km. 
The observation is equivalent to measuring the size of a 4 
m long car on the surface of the Moon. 

For further information see http://www.eso.org/ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


European Space Agency (ESA) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


European Space Agency (ESA) 


An international organization whose task is ‘to provide 
for and to promote, for exclusively peaceful purposes, 
cooperation among European states in space research and 
technology and their space applications’. 

ESA has 14 member states: Austria, Belgium, 
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Ireland, The 
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and 
the United Kingdom. Portugal became the fifteenth 
member in 2000. Canada takes part in some projects under 
a cooperation agreement. 

The agency was born in 1975 from the merging of 
two existing organizations: ESRO (the European Space 
Research Organization) which developed satellites, and 
ELDO (the European Launcher Development Organiza- 
tion) which was responsible for development of a Euro- 
pean launch vehicle. 

ESA's activities cover space science, Earth obser- 
vation, telecommunications, space segment technologies 
including orbital stations and platforms, ground infras- 
tructures and space transportation systems, as well as ba- 
sic research in microgravity. 

ESA’s headquarters are in Paris. Other ESA 
establishments include: the European Space Research 
and Technology Centre (ESTEC) in The Netherlands; the 
European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) in Germany; 
the European Space Research Institute (ESRIN) in Italy; 
the European Astronaut Centre (EAC) in Germany and a 
launch center at Kourou in French Guiana. 

The science program, in which all member states 
participate, is one of the agency’s mandatory activities. 
The program originated in the days of ESRO, which 
launched seven scientific satellites. ESA has played 
a leading role in an additional 13 scientific missions 
(including the Hubble Space Telescope) since the agency 
began operating on 31 May 1975. 

The ESA science program is based on a long-term 
plan, known as Horizons 2000, which was adopted in 1985. 
The most expensive and ambitious missions, which are 
called Cornerstones, include the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster II (combined as the 
Solar—Terrestrial Science Program), the X-ray Multi-Mirror 
(XMM) mission, the Rosetta comet mission and the Far 
Infrared Space Telescope (FIRST). 

Four missions are under study for the next three 
Cornerstones: the BepiColombo Mercury orbiter, the LISA 
gravitational wave observatory, the GAIA astrometric 
interferometer and the IRSI Infrared Space Interferometer 
mission. 

ESA has also launched anumber of small and medium 
class missions, including Hipparcos, Ulysses, the Infrared 
Space Observatory (ISO) and the Huygens probe to Titan. 
In addition, the International Gamma-ray Laboratory 
(INTEGRAL) is scheduled for launch in 2001. 

Medium missions have now been replaced by smaller, 
cheaper missions which offer faster development times 
and more frequent launch opportunities. These are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


divided into Flexible missions, which are purely scientific, 
and SMART (Small Missions for Advanced Research in 
Technology) missions, in which demonstration of new 
technologies takes precedence over science. The first 
example of a Flexible mission will be Mars Express, 
scheduled for launch in 2003. The main purpose of the 
SMART-1 mission to the Moon, due to launch in 2002, will 
be to demonstrate ion propulsion. 

Also under study are MiniSTEP, a 2003 mission in 
collaboration with NASA, to test the equivalence principle, 
and an ESA contribution to the Next Generation Space 
Telescope. 

For further information see 
http://www.esa.int/. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Evening Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Evening Star 


A name given to Venus when it is visible in the west after 
sunset. Ancient astronomers believed that morning and 
evening apparitions of Venus were of two different planets; 
the evening planet was given the name Hesperus. As the 
evening star, Venus is moving from superior conjunction 
(when it lies behind the Sun) to inferior conjunction (when 
it is between the Earth and the Sun), and is visible for 
longest when it reaches the position known as greatest 
elongation east, when its angular separation from the Sun 
is greatest. The name ‘evening star’ is sometimes given to 
evening apparitions of Mercury. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Evershed, John (1864—1956) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Evershed, John (1864-1956) 


English astronomer, discovered the Evershed effect, the 
radial motion of the gases in sunspots (see also GEORGIO 
ABETTI). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Excitation and lonization 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Excitation and Ionization 


Excitation: general properties 

The excitation of a region reflects the physical conditions 
taking place in the astrophysical environment. The state 
of excitation is generally determined from the observation 
of spectral lines arising from different excited levels 
of an atom, ion or molecule. The analysis of the 
emitted spectrum allows the determination of the column 
densities! of the emitting levels, provided that the RADIATIVE 
TRANSFER Of the emitted spectrum has been taken into 
account and that the fundamental atomic or molecular 
physics data are known. In some cases, absorption studies 
also allow the derivation of excitation conditions. This is 
currently performed in visible and UV absorption studies 
of a variety of atomic and molecular species towards 
diffuse and translucent clouds lying in front of a bright 
background star. 

An excitation temperature can be defined from the ratio 
of the column densities of two excited states expressed by 
Boltzmann’s law where the kinetic temperature is replaced 
by the excitation temperature Tox: 


N(J)/NJI a 1) = (g7/8s-1) exp(—AE7., 7-1/kTexc) 


where N(J) is the column density of a level labelled by 
the J quantum number, g, is the corresponding statistical 
weight, AE,_,;_; the difference of the level energies and 
k is Boltzmann’s constant. The ratio of the column 
densities is assessed to be the same as the ratio of the 
abundances. The physical significance of the temperature 
may be questioned but the value is useful as a clue to the 
excitation process. 

The comprehensive time variation of the atomic, ionic 
or molecular level populations is expressed as the balance 
of excitation and deexcitation processes and can be put to 
zero at steady state if the timescales involved are shorter 
than the evolution time of the astrophysical region. The 
general set of equations is expressed as: 


Ny (Sen + Ry) + 2 tv 


kAu k<u 


= (Sm. + Ryu) + ye Aaa] : 


uxk k>u 

Yk stands for the collision rate coefficient in cm? s~!, 
which induces the u to k transition due to a perturber 
of density n. For sake of simplicity, only one type of 
perturber has been written in the expression but several 
partners may be involved. In a hot ionized gas, electrons 
and protons are the most efficient perturbers, in atomic 
interstellar clouds, atomic hydrogen and helium are the 
exciting agents whereas in comets water molecules are the 


1 The column density is defined by the integration of the 
density of the species along the line of sight. If the medium is 
homogeneous, it is simply given by the product of the density by 


the length of emitting region. Its unit is cm~?. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


most abundant species. The excitation and deexcitation 
collision rate coefficients satisfy the so-called microscopic 
detailed balance equations: 


SuYu>k exp(—E,,/kT) = 8kVku exp(—E;/kT). 


The collision deexcitation rate coefficients depend 
generally smoothly on the temperature, and are often 
expressed as a power law of the temperature. A,—x 
represents the spontaneous emission probabilities in a 
The emitted lines can be of different kinds. Permitted 
lines are electric dipole transitions. Astrophysical 
environments are often favorable to forbidden line 
emission”, because they are far from equilibrium. <A 
famous example is the green nebular oxygen lines 
connecting the ground °P level to 'D level which is 
an electric quadrupole transition or the green coronal 
Fe!>* line connecting the two fine structure levels of the 
ground 2P state which is a magnetic dipole transition. 
Rx, tepresents photon stimulated processes. Radiative 
excitation is described by R,-_,,,, the absorption probability. 
Stimulated emission may also occur under specific 
conditions, for example when a population inversion is 
completed: maser emission is indeed observed in dense 
clouds associated with some embedded energy sources 
and is usually characterized both by variability and high 
polarization. Stimulated processes are proportional to 
the incident radiation field intensity, which depends on 
the astrophysical environment, and to the Einstein By.,, 
coefficient, which is a pure atomic or molecular property. 

If the radiation field involved in the radiative induced 
processes depends on the line itself, then on the level 
populations, the equations become nonlinear and the 
system has to be solved iteratively. This is the case 
in the envelopes of SUPERNOVAE as in SN 1987A or in 
molecular emission of abundant species such as CO in 
dense interstellar clouds. 

At thermal equilibrium, the collisions dominate and 
the excitation temperature is equal to the real (kinetic) 
temperature. A convenient concept is the critical density 
which is the lower limit above which thermodynamical 
equilibrium is satisfied. It is defined as the ratio 
between the radiative deexcitation probability and the 
collisional deexcitation rate coefficient connecting two 
levels. The populations of the different levels are 
only dependent on the equilibrium between collisional 
excitation and deexcitation. However, the astrophysical 
environments are most often far from thermal equilibrium 
and the excitation follows then from detailed microscopic 
processes. 


? A forbidden transition is characterized by a low emission 
probability since it arises from at least second-order perturbation 
terms in the matter-radiation interaction. In other words, 
forbidden lines result from non-electric dipole transitions, i.e. 
magnetic dipole or electric quadrupole. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Excitation and lonization 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sources of excitation 

Collisional excitation 

In GASEOUS NEBULAE, many common ions have low-lying 
energy levels with excitation potentials of order kT., where 
T. is the electron temperature. Then the electrons in the 
extended tail of the Maxwell distribution corresponding 
to about 10 000 K have sufficient energy (~2—4 eV) to excite 
the first spectral terms of O*, O?*, N*, St. Once these 
levels are excited, they radiate spontaneously back to the 
ground state via forbidden transitions. The emissivities 
of the corresponding lines are simply j, = N,Au—ehc/A, 
where A is the Einstein coefficient of the transition 
taking place at the wavelength 4. Studying intensity 
ratios of lines corresponding either to close or to very 
different excitation energies, one will probe the density 
or temperature conditions. It is important to recognize 
that these transitions not only are diagnostics of physical 
conditions, but represent also the path through which the 
kinetic energy of the incident particles is converted into 
photon energy, depicting in that way a cooling process. 
In the cooler interstellar mostly atomic environments, 
the fine structure line of C*, whose transition energy 
expressed in K is 92 K, is a major coolant of these regions 
at about 100 K. With a wavelength of 158 jm, in the far- 
infrared, this transition has been extensively studied by 
the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) satellite launched 
in November 1996 by the European Space Agency (see 
INFRARED SPACE MISSIONS). Also detected by ISO are the 
electric quadrupole lines of molecular hydrogen observed 
in dense warm shocked regions at about 500-1000 K. In 
dense cold molecular clouds, rotational transitions of CO 
and its isotopes as well as other molecular species become 
valuable probes of the medium and the main coolants. 


Radiative excitation 

It has been recognized earlier that other excitation 
mechanisms are involved. This is the case of the 
fluorescence, so-called Bowen, lines in the visible observed 
in the spectra of high excitation PLANETARY NEBULAE since 
1935. The important factor is the fluorescence efficiency 
defined as the ratio between the photon rate of fluorescent 
emission and the creation rate of pumping photons. In the 
equilibrium state, the rate of creation of pumping photons 
is equal to the total destruction rate including all loss 
processes. The incident pumping radiation is provided 
by the available He* Ly a photons whose wavelength at 
30.3780 nm is almost coincident with a resonance line 
of O7* at 30.3799 nm. The emission of vibrationally 
excited molecular hydrogen in REFLECTION NEBULAE is 
another manifestation of radiative excitation. The 
photons produced by nearby bright stars excite electronic 
transitions of molecular hydrogen which subsequently 
fluoresces and cascades inside the ground electronic state 
via vibrational infrared transitions. Finally, let us mention 
the excitation conditions derived from absorption studies 
of the CN molecule in diffuse and translucent clouds. It 
turns out that the rotational temperature of about 2.8 K 
reflects the excitation by the cosmic background radiation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


field with which the molecule is in quasi-equilibrium. This 
interpretation required more that twenty years. 


Ionization: general properties 

The IONIZATION of a medium is determined by the 
abundance of electrons. The number density of ions is 
then obtained by the requirement that the total charge 
is zero. The concomitant presence of electrons and ions 
could suggest that permanent electric fields be present. 
However, due to the inverse square law force applying 
between electric charges, the distance over which an 
appreciable electrostatic field can be created by a charged 
particle embedded ina plasma is determined by the Debye 
length L: 


1 e& 7 
L2 ~ EokT donozZ; 


usually very small compared to the cosmic scales involved. 
For fully ionized hydrogen L = 69(T/n)'/? in SI units. 
Electrostatic forces may however come in to play when 
large magnetic fields are also present over large distances. 

The ionization of a medium is of crucial importance 
for its large-scale properties. For selected ranges of the 
ionization rate, several phases may coexist in pressure 
equilibrium. Each stable phase is determined by the onset 
of a new cooling mechanism or the decline of a heating 
mechanism, all of which are highly dependent on the 
relevant microscopic atomic and molecular processes. 

Ionized species present in astrophysical regions 
involve a large variety of atomic positive ions, some with 
a very large nuclear charge due to extreme conditions of 
density and temperature. Molecular ions are also present 
in cold regions such as interstellar clouds and cometary 
environments. Negative ions are rarely considered 
due to their low stability against surrounding photons 
or collisions. The role of H~ is however undeniable 
and its presence in the atmospheres of cool stars is 
conspicuous from the continuum opacity arising in the 
photodetachment process. Large molecules such as 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) or hydrogenated 
amorphous carbons (HAC) which are invoked to explain 
the unidentified infrared emission lines at 3.3, 6.2 and 
12 wm, may be somewhat negatively charged due to their 
large attachment probabilities. Interstellar dust particles 
may also be partially ionized; their charge is positive in 
the outer edges of interstellar clouds and may be negative 
in the central parts of molecular clouds. 

In thermodynamic equilibrium, the ionic abundances 
are dependent on the temperature and the electronic 
density via the Saha equation. If we consider an atomic 
species A in two arbitrary states of ionization r and 
r +1, then the number densities of the corresponding 
populations are related by the following expression: 
NyraNe/Ny = frufelfr- fr» frsr and f. are the partition 
functions of the ions of charge r and r + 1 and of the 
electrons, respectively. If one keeps only the ground-state 
contribution, labelled by a superscript 0, in the partition 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Excitation and lonization 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


functions of the ions, the Saha equation has the more 
familiar expression: 


= ip 


n(A"!)ne _ oo, (2xm_ kT 
n(A’) ee 


3/2 
) exp(—®,/kT). 


g°, g°,, are the statistical weights of the ions in their ground 
level, and ®, is the ionization energy of the A’* ion. This 
approximation is often used to calculate the sources of 
opacity of bound—bound and bound-free transitions of the 
available elements in the stellar interiors for their various 
stages of ionization. 


Sources of ionization 

Photoionization 

In gaseous nebulae, ions result from the balance 
between photoionization of atoms followed by radiative 
recombination. Photoionization is induced by energetic 
photons emitted by central bright stars surrounded 
by mostly hydrogenic gas. The ejected electrons 
then recombine with the protons to give back atomic 
hydrogen. However, excited electronic levels are 
efficiently populated in the recombination process, which 
cascade subsequently by emitting radiative transitions in 
the radio, millimeter, visible and ultraviolet wavelength 
range. The beautiful blue or red colored shapes displayed 
in nebular observations are indeed coming from the 
Balmer a and Balmer 6 lines arising from recombination. 
Other minor elements are present in these regions showing 
up in emission spectra over the full range of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. In the radio range, emission 
occurs between Rydberg levels with large values of the 
principal quantum number (n ~ 100). The analysis of 
the recombination spectrum allows the determination of 
the electronic density and the temperature which is a few 
thousand K, much below the temperature corresponding 
to thermal ionization. In addition to discrete spectral lines, 
the interaction of the electrons with the ions gives rise 
to a weak continuous radiation which, in the radio and 
infrared regime, is dominated by free-free transitions due 
to bremsstrahlung. The corresponding photons delineate 
the distribution of the nebular gas and allow the derivation 
of the density of electrons via the so-called emission 
measure®. 

Photoionization is also the ionization agent in 
SUPERNOVAE REMNANTS where a compact galactic x-ray source 
illuminates the gas. Photoionization can then involve 
inner shell electrons and is often followed by the emission 
of one or more Auger electrons. These ionization processes 
are heating mechanisms of the gas whereas the subsequent 
emission of the gas is a cooling process. Other processes 
may contribute to the heating as, for example, direct 
Compton scattering on the electrons. The ionization 
and temperature of the gas may reach a stationary state 
depending on the gas pressure and the flux and spectrum 
of radiation. 


3 The emission measure is the integration along the line of sight 
of the square of the electron density. Its unit is usually cm~® pe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The ionization equilibrium can be modified by addi- 
tional processes when they compete efficiently with one of 
the basic mechanisms mentioned above. Charge transfer 
with atomic hydrogen may drive the equilibrium towards 
ionization stages which photoionization models, includ- 
ing radiative and dielectronic recombination processes, 
cannot account for. This occurs in planetary nebulae for 
several low and intermediate excitation lines in C?*, N*, 
O*, etc. This recognition has been the origin of a large 
number of theoretical studies on charge transfer collisions 
involving multiply charged ions. 


Collisional ionization 

In the absence of ionizing radiation, the local ionization 
state is mainly controlled by collisions of ions with 
thermal electrons as, for example, in the solar CORONA. 
Electron impact ionization is also taking place in the 
hot interstellar gas component which has been found 
thanks to O° absorption. The dominant processes are 
electron impact excitation and ionization followed by 
radiative recombination, dielectronic recombination and 
bremsstrahlung. Dielectronic recombination occurs at 
specific resonant energies corresponding to weakly bound 
autoionizing states leading to a much larger rate coefficient 
so that dielectronic recombination dominates radiative 
recombination in high temperature plasmas by factors 
of about a hundred. If ionization comes only from 
thermal electrons, the master equations describing the 
variation with time of the fraction f, of element X in 
each ionization stage involve the electron density in front 
of each term. So, at steady state where d/dt = 0, the 
electron density is removed so that the ionization balance 
of the ion fractions is only dependent on temperature. We 
should point out that this situation cannot be described 
by a state of thermodynamic equilibrium since it does 
not result from detailed balance of time-reverse processes 
(e.g. photoionization versus radiative recombination, 
electron impact versus three-body recombination). In 
dense molecular clouds, the ionization results from the 
interaction of the gas with cosmic rays, which are energetic 
particles such as protons and alpha particles probably 
produced during the explosion of supernovae. The 
ionization fraction of the medium is presumably small 
and cannot be determined directly since all ions present 
are not observable. Then, the ionization is deduced from 
millimeter observations of molecular ions (HCO*) and 
interpreted from chemical models. The OH radical is 
another tracer of cosmic rays in cold interstellar clouds 
since the first step of its chemistry involves the presence 
of protons or H3 ions. The inferred cosmic ionization rate 
is of the order of 10-1” s~!. 


Evelyn Roueff 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exit Pupil 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Exit Pupil 


The image of the objective formed by the eyepiece of a 
telescope. All of the rays collected by the objective pass 
through the exit pupil, which is where the pencil of rays 
emerging from the eyepiece has its smallest diameter and 
the illumination of the image is greatest. The exit pupil, 
therefore, is the best place at which to place the pupil of 
the eye when observing with a telescope. 

The diameter of the exit pupil (D.) is equal to the 
aperture of the telescope (D) divided by the magnification 
(M). For example, a telescope with an aperture of 200 mm 
and a magnifying power of 50 will produce an exit pupil 
with diameter D. = D/M = 200/50 = 4mm. The 
diameter of the exit pupil must be less than or equal 
to the diameter of the pupil of the eye if all the light 
collected by the telescope is to enter the observer’s eye. 
To meet this condition, the magnification must be greater 
than or equal to D/D,, where D, is the diameter of the 
pupil of the eye. Since the diameter of the dark-adapted 
pupil is about 7 mm, the minimum magnification that will 
ensure that exit pupil is smaller than the observer’s pupil 
is approximately D/7, where D is the aperture expressed 
in mm (D/0.007 if D is in meters). 


See also: aperture, eye relief, magnification, objective 
lens. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exobiology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Exobiology 


Exobiology (=bioastronomy, astrobiology) is the study of 
life in the universe. More precisely, it is the study of the 
origins, evolution and distribution of life in the universe 
and of the structures and processes associated with life 
itself (see also LIFE: ORIGINS AND POSSIBLE DISTRIBUTION IN THE 
UNIVERSE). 


Historical background 

From myths to the emergence of a new scientific field 

Is there life elsewhere? This is certainly one of the oldest 
question asked by humankind. Mentions of it have been 
found, for instance, in Epicurus’ ‘Letter to Herodotus’, 
300 BC. Since antiquity, all over the world, many authors 
have thought about, discussed and written their feelings 
about this fundamental problem. In the 13th century, the 
Chinese philosopher Teng Mu wrote ‘how unreasonable 
it would be to assume that apart from the Earth and the 
sky that we see, there are no other skies, nor other Earths’. 
Some have perished because of this idea. GIORDANO BRUNO 
(1548-1600) was burned by the Roman Catholic Church, 
because, as he wrote in his ‘Del’ infinito universo e mondi’, 
he thought that ‘There are countless suns and countless 
earths orbiting around their sun, exactly as our seven 
[sic] planets orbit around our Sun. Living beings inhabit 
those worlds.’ GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642) was promoting 
analogous ideas but, fortunately, he just escaped a similar 
destiny, by abjuring his ‘mistakes and heresies’ in front of 
the Court of the Supreme and Universal Inquisition. Later 
on, the question of life elsewhere was considered by many 
writers, philosophers and even scientists such as Kepler, 
Fontenelle, Kant, Goethe and Huygens. FLAMMARION, at 
the end of the 19th century was probably one of the first to 
ask ‘What to do to bring evidence of these other worlds?’. 
The long story of the detection of so-called canals on the 
Martian surface brought a false answer to the question 
of life on Mars until the beginning of the 20th century. 
Then the development of more and more powerful tools 
for exploring other worlds, by remote sensing, and more 
recently by in situ techniques, opened a large avenue in this 
area and marked the true emergence of this new scientific 
domain of exobiology (see also LIFE ON OTHER WORLDS). 


A new field is born 

When NASA started the Apollo program, with the project 
of sending men to the Moon and bringing lunar samples 
to the Earth, the question of the possible presence of 
(indigenous) life on our natural satellite arose logically. 
The problem was in fact double : if there were life forms 
on the Moon, it was essential to avoid any biological 
contamination of our satellite by terrestrial organisms, 
and—even more important—of the Earth by hypothetical 
lunar organisms present in the lunar samples carried back 
to our planet. Thus, in the 1960s, planetologists and 
microbiologists alike started to work together to tackle 
this question. This was the time when the recipient of 
the Nobel Prize Award (1958) in Medicine and Physiology, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


EXTRATERRESTRIAL ORIGINS _ 
‘co 


TERRESTRIAL ORIGINS 


Inorganic Origins 


Organic Origins 


Extraterrestrial 
Importation 


Autotrophic 


Figure 1. Diagram of theories of the origin of Life on Earth (from 
W L Davis and C P McKay). 


Joshua Lederberg, invented the word ‘Exobiology’. It then 
became a fully recognized scientific field, spanning many 
classical domains, including astrophysics, astronomy, 
planetology, physics, chemistry, biochemistry and biology, 
as well as human sciences and even mathematics. 


The various approaches 

Indeed, the approaches abound. The more logical and 
direct way is to search for life on extraterrestrial planetary 
objects. This can be done by remote sensing measurements 
or even, with the availability of space technologies, by in 
situ exploration. It can also be carried out by studies of 
extraterrestrial samples transferred to the Earth through 
natural processes (meteorites, micrometeorites, cosmic 
dust particles and cometary materials) or collected in 
space by robots or manned missions. Remote sensing 
techniques can even be applied to search for biological 
activity on extrasolar planets, when techniques become 
powerful enough to detect Earth-like objects and the 
presence of molecular oxygen and ozone in large amounts 
in their atmosphere (assuming that this is an unambiguous 
signature of life). The other approach is to assume 
that what happened on Earth is a common event in 
the universe and that there are numerous places in our 
Galaxy where life arose and evolved toward intelligent 
and technologically developed living systems. Then, by 
listening to the universe in the right direction and at 
the right frequency (presumably radiowaves) and at the 
right time, one should be able to detect signals from 
extraterrestrial civilizations. This is the SETI (search for 
extraterrestrial intelligence) approach mainly based on 
radio observations. There is a less direct approach but 
fully logical: the study of the terrestrial example, and, first 
of all, of the origin of life on Earth. By putting together the 
pieces of the puzzle of the origins of the first living system 
on our planet, one should be able to put some constraints 
in the conditions necessary for the emergence of life, in 
general, on a planetary body. Furthermore, the variety, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exobiology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


distribution and limits of life on Earth would yield the— 
so far—unique example of distribution and evolution of 
life in the universe. 


The terrestrial example 

What is life ? 

The only example we have—the terrestrial one—allows 
us to characterize life through a set of properties the 
simultaneous presence of which is specific to living 
systems. The most important are the properties of 
autoreproduction, of evolution and of mutation with a 
very high level of information included in the structures of 
the living systems, and with the property of autoregulation 
against the constraints induced by its environment. The 
terrestrial example shows that, starting from a simple 
unicellular living system, our last universal common 
ancestor (LUCA), a primitive prokaryotic cell, biological 
evolution has been able to induce a fantastic biological 
diversity. In spite of the many differences between the 
incredibly wide variety of species which live on Earth 
today, life on Earth shows a large unity. In fact these 
differences are seen mainly at the macroscopic level. As 
soon as we look at living systems with a microscope, 
we can observe that all are made of cells. From one 
in the unicellular, to billions in the pluricellular, the 
cell can be considered as the structural unit of life. 
Eukaryotes have cells with a clearly differentiated nucleus 
and prokaryotes are cells without a nucleus, but all cells 
have roughly the same structure and include the same 
kind of macromolecules, isolated from the outside by a 
membrane made of lipids. This selective frontier allows, 
through complex chemical mechanisms, the selection and 
concentration of all molecules necessary to the building of 
the cell, to its development and to its replication. The cell 
is the microscopic chemical plant for life , the place where 
all the life specific, chemical processes, are in progress, 
involving molecules also specific to life. 


The building blocks 
The unity of life is even clearer at molecular level. Allliving 
systems on Earth use the same type of molecules and, 
first of all, macromolecules: nucleic acids and proteins. 
In all (terrestrial) living systems cellular multiplication 
is programmed from the chromosomes, made of nucleic 
acids. These macromolecules include the genetic 
information which makes one living system different from 
another. The message is stored in deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA). It is transcribed and transferred to the ribosome 
(the cellular plant) where it is translated and converted, 
with the help of the genetic code, allowing the synthesis 
of proteins, the other macromolecules fundamental to 
life. Proteins play a crucial role in almost all biological 
processes. They can act as a very specific and powerful 
catalyst, with the protein enzymes, as a transport and 
storage molecule (e.g. hemoglobin transporting oxygen), 
or as a mechanical support, such as collagen, etc. 

Nucleic acids are made of a very large number of 
units, called nucleotides, constituted of a five-carbon 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sugar, ribose in RNA or deoxyribose in DNA, linked to 
a phosphate molecule and to a one- or two-ring organic 
molecule called a nucleotide base (such as adenine). The 
smallest DNA molecule uses several thousand nucleotides 
and the largest one several billions. However, all use 
only four different nucleotides, only differing by their 
nucleotide base. Similarly, all RNAs on Earth are made 
of only four different nucleotides, using the same kinds 
of bases as DNA. From this alphabet of only four letters, 
nature can make a very large number of words, by using 
many letters and by changing their sequence from one to 
another nucleic acid. 

The primary structure of proteins is based on the same 
principle, although their building blocks—called amino 
acids—are simpler than nucleotides. Among the very 
largenumber of different amino acids, proteins use only 20. 
This alphabet of 20 letters provides, again, a fantastically 
rich vocabulary, based on long words using a large variety 
of sequences. Furthermore, these molecules (with the 
exception of the simplest amino acid, glycine) possess 
an asymmetric carbon and consequently can exist under 
two different configurations, called enantiomers, and 
labelled ‘L’ and ‘D’, symmetric but not superimposable 
(this property is called ‘chirality’, and the molecules are 
said to be ‘chiral’). Only one is used by life: the ‘L’ 
configuration for amino acids and the ‘D’ for sugars, and 
consequently for nucleotides. 

To understand the origin of life it is essential to 
understand the origin of proteins and nucleic acids but 
also the origin of chirality in the living systems. 


The origins of life 

The study of the origins of life on Earth has probably 
been one of the most successful approaches in exobiology, 
even before the emergence of the field. Historically, the 
problem of the origin of life had for centuries almost only 
one answer: spontaneous generation. Although debated 
and discarded at least for macroscopic life, in the middle of 
the 19th century many still though that life could emerge 
spontaneously and suddenly from inert matter. With his— 
now historical—experiment on spontaneous generation 
Pasteur demonstrated in the 1860s that the observation 
of the spontaneous creation of microorganisms from non- 
living matter is only a false interpretation of observational 
data and can be explained by the biological contamination 
of the samples via the microorganisms present in the 
ambient air. Then, for more than 50 yr, the theory of 
the origin of life was mainly based on the concept of 
panspermia. It assumes that living germs are present 
everywhere in the universe and can travel in the cosmos, 
simply pushed by the pressure of radiation released 
by stars. They would have reached the solar system 
and seeded the Earth. The panspermia theory is not 
fully given up today; however, the generally accepted 
theory is based now on a thoroughly different concept 
of ‘chemical evolution’. Already emerging from several 
writings of the 19th century, in particular in Darwin’s 
letters, the concept of chemical evolution was first clearly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exobiology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


introduced and described by the Soviet biochemist Oparin, 
in 1924. The main idea is to assume that life arose on 
the Earth after a long evolution of organic (containing 
chemically reduced carbon, i.e. carbon in a non-oxidized 
form) but inert materials preceding Darwin’s biological 
evolution and allowing, by natural chemical processes 
of a now so-called ‘pre-biotic chemistry’, the formation 
of structures of increasing complexity, up to the first 
replicating system. For Oparin, our ancestor would have 
been a ‘heterotrophic’ (living system unable to synthesize 
itself the organic molecules it needs) microorganism, 
fed by the many organic compounds present on the 
primitive Earth, produced in the atmosphere and in the 
primordial oceans by abiotic (without the involvement of 
life) processes. This vision has now markedly changed 
and it seems more likely that the first living system was 
an ‘autotroph’ (living system able to synthesize itself the 
organic molecules it needs), feeding from the inorganic 
molecules, in particular carbon dioxide, present in its 
environment. In addition several scenarios are invoked 
to explain the origin of the simple organics which are 
involved in this prebiotic chemistry. However, the general 
concept of a chemical evolution from simple to complex 
organic compounds, and to the first bio-macromolecules 
capable of replication, remains the same. 


Table 1. Some key molecules of prebiotic chemistry. 


Name Formula _ Prebiotic role 
Hydrogen HCN Source of amino acids, 
cyanide of purine and 

pyrimidine bases 
Cyanoacetylene HC3N Source of 

pyrimidine bases 
Cyanogen NC-CN Condensing agent 
Liquid water H20 Fundamental solvent 
Formaldehyde HCHO Source of sugars 
Hydrogene H2S Source of S-containing 
sulfide compounds 
Phosphate PO}- Source of P-containing 

compounds 


The first experimental evidence of this theory was 
provided in 1953 by the publication of the now well-known 
experiment by Stanley Miller. By simulating in a reactor 
the evolution of a model of the primordial atmosphere 
of the Earth under energy deposition, in the presence 
of liquid water, Miller was able to obtain amino acids. 
This also opened the new field of prebiotic chemistry. 
Since 1953, hundreds of similar experiments have been 
carried out, using various conditions (energy sources, 
composition of the gas mixture, etc). They show that the 
production of organic molecules, including amino acids 
and nucleotide bases, can be obtained, but only if the 
starting atmosphere is chemically reducing. They also 
show the importance of several simple organic molecules, 
such as formaldehyde, HCHO, hydrogen cyanide, HCN, 
cyanoacetylene, HC3N and other nitriles, because of their 
chemistry in liquid water. Now, although we have no 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


direct information on the conditions on the primitive 
Earth, the current models are in favor of an oxidizing 
atmosphere. This drastically reduces the importance of 
atmospheric processes in the formation of organics on the 
primitive Earth. However, other sources can be envisaged. 
The deep-sea hydrothermal vents, which include many 
chemical ingredients able to induce prebiotic syntheses, 
are now considered to have been a possible place on the 
primitive Earth where chemical evolution to life started. 
Another possibility is to assume that a large part of the 
starting carbonaceous ingredients necessary to prebiotic 
chemistry was imported from space. Indeed, the Earth 
is continuously bombarded by extraterrestrial materials 
(meteorites, micrometeorites, interplanetary dusts and 
cometary matter) a noticeable fraction of which includes 
organics. It is likely that these bombardments were even 
more important on the primitive Earth and thus may have 
been a source of organics. 

Whatever the scenario is, it is well established today 
that life was largely present on the Earth 3.5 billion 
years ago, from the age of the oldest stromatolites (small 
geological structures resulting from the interaction of 
microorganisms with their environments). They also 
show that this was already a complex life, capable of 
photosynthesis. It is likely that the first living systems 
were simpler. The recent discovery of the catalytic 
properties of RNA and of an ‘RNA World’ suggests 
that these biomacromolecules may have been the first 
replicating system. However, many still doubt, because of 
the experimental difficulties in synthesizing prebiotically 
these molecules, and even their building blocks (the 
nucleotides). On the contrary, amino acids and their 
polymers are much easier to obtain. The question is still 
open. 

If there is life elsewhere, there is no reason to 
assume that it must have the same appearance as life we 
know on Earth, because of the variety and diversity of 
terrestrial life at the morphological level. However, at the 
molecular level, the terrestrial example may be a more 
general one. The importance of liquid water and of the 
chemistry of carbon in the prebiotic terrestrial processes is 
probably not restricted to the Earth: water is an abundant 
molecule and carbon an abundant element in the universe. 
The discovery of an active organic chemistry in the 
interstellar clouds clearly supports the idea that organic 
chemistry is universal. It is thus reasonable to assume 
that extraterrestrial life is also based on carbon chemistry 
and liquid water, even if the hypothetical extraterrestrial 
biochemistry may not necessarily be identical to the one 
we know. 


Exobiology in the solar system 

Many objects of the solar system are of exobiological 
interest: not only Earth, but also comets, Mars, Europa, 
and even the giant planets and some of their satellites, such 
as Titan and Triton, because of the very complex organic 
chemistry which is involved in their environments. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exobiology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Characteristics of exobiologically important planets and satellites of the solar system. 


; Atmosphere 
Planet Distance Mean surface Surface 
or Density tothesun temperature pressure Main Organic 
satellite (g cm?) (AU?) (°C) (bar) composition compounds 
Earth 4 1 22 1 No, O2 Many 
Mars 3.7 1.5 —50 to —70 0.007 CO, No None 
Jupiter 5 No surface Hz, He,CH, Several 
tropopause: —255 CHy4 hydrocarbons 
Europa 3 5 —150 to —180 Negligible No but possibility 
of subsurface 
liquid water 
Saturn 10 No surface H2, He,CH, Several 
tropopause: —190 hydrocarbons 
Titan 1.9 10 —180 1.5 No, CH4 Several hydrocarbons 
and nitriles 
Neptune No surface Hz, He,CH4 Several hydrocarbons, 
tropopause: —220 HCN 
Triton —235 14x 10- Np Methane 


@1UA © 150 x 10° km. 


Meteorites, micrometeorites and comets 

Until 1969, the only extraterrestrial samples available in 
our laboratory were METEORITES, in particular carbonaceous 
CHONDRITES. The detailed study of meteorites has not 
revealed the presence of extraterrestrial microorganisms 
in those objects. The recent story of the Martian 
meteorite ALH 84001 does not undermine this statement. 
However, it is now fully established from careful chemical 
analysis of carbonaceous chondrites that this class of 
meteorites is rich in organic compounds. The several 
per cents of carbonaceous matter includes molecules 
of biological interest, such as amino acids and even 
nucleotide bases. Furthermore, the recent re-analyses 
of some of these meteorites shows the presence of an 
excess of L enantiomers in the amino acid content of 
extraterrestrial origin. This should have a strong input 
on our understanding of the origin of chirality in the 
terrestrial living systems. COMETS may have also played a 
major role in the origin of life on Earth, by importing water 
and organics on primitive Earth. In any case, they are 
important objects for exobiology because of the cometary 
organic chemistry. Although the molecular composition of 
the cometary nucleus is still not known today, comets are 
assumed to be very rich in organics, made of C,H,O and 
N atoms. The future cometary missions, in particular the 
ESA Rosetta mission with in situ analysis of the cometary 
nucleus, should provide in the first decade of 2000 essential 
information on the cometary nucleus. 


Mars and Europa 
Thus far, two planetary objects seem to be the most 
promising for a direct search for extraterrestrial life in the 
solar system. The first is the planet Mars and the second is 
EUROPA, one of the Galilean satellites of Jupiter. 

In spite of its dimensions (about half of the Earth) and 
the absence—now—of a dense atmosphere and of liquid 
water, Mars is still considered as the best target. viKING has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


TITAN’S GEOFLUID 
a planetary laboratory for studying prebiotic chemistry 


GAS ee AEROSOL 
ORGANICS 
SURFACE 
Sd 
C,H, HCN co, 


+ other hydrocarbons + other nitriles + O-organics 


+ their oligomers 


Figure 2. The several couplings in Titan’s geofluid. 


not been able to detect the presence of microorganisms 
(autotrophs or heterotophs, see the definitions above) in 
the Martian soil. However, it has shown that the red 
planet was probably covered by liquid water and had a 
dense atmosphere at the time life had already emerged 
on Earth. Since, at that time, the Earth and Mars were 
very similar, it is logical to assume that what occurred 
on the Earth also occurred on Mars. Then both planets 
have evolved differently. Because of a tectonic activity too 
light to recycle carbon dioxide (essential for keeping the 
surface warm by the greenhouse effect), Mars lost most 
of its atmosphere and became colder and colder. It also 
lost its liquid surface water, which may now be trapped as 
a solid ‘permafrost’ in the Martian soil. Also, under such 
conditions, the atmosphere became strongly oxidizing; the 
oxidants, such as hydrogen peroxide, diffused in the soil, 
and all Martian life gradually disappeared from this hostile 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exobiology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


environment, at least on and near its surface. Although the 
presence of life as extant on Mars is not fully excluded, 
future missions to Mars will have to embark scientific 
instrumentation to search for traces of extinct life in the 
Martian soil, and deep enough (at least a few meters deep) 
to reach depths where the oxidation processes are held to 
be negligible. Such missions are in preparation now. 

The interest of exobiologists in Europa is more recent. 
VOYAGER data of the outer solar system have provided 
enough information to build models of the internal 
structure of many of the giant planets and their satellites. 
Among the three main models of Europa, one assumes 
that the icy surface of the Jovian satellite corresponds to 
a water ice crust several kilometers deep, covering an 
ocean of liquid water several tens of kilometers down. If 
such an ocean has hydrothermal activity, the presence of 
living organisms, prokaryotic microorganisms and even 
macroscopic eukaryotes, cannot be ruled out. However, 
the detection of such living systems will not be an easy 
task. 


Titan 

Another planetary object was examined by the Voyager 
mission and became, subsequently of prime interest for 
exobiology: TITAN. Voyager demonstrated that the largest 
satellite of Saturn, second by size in the solar system, 
has a dense atmosphere, mainly made of molecular 
nitrogen (more than 90%), with a noticeable concentration 
of methane (several per cent). Although Titan is much 
colder than the Earth, its atmospheric thermal profile is 
very similar to the terrestrial one, with a troposphere 
(95-74 K), a tropopause (74 K) and a stratosphere (74— 
170 K), owing to the presence of greenhouse gases (mainly 
methane and hydrogen) and antigreenhouse components 
(clouds and aerosols). Such a main chemical atmospheric 
composition is very favorable to organic syntheses. From 
laboratory experiments and theoretical modeling, one 
can expect many organics in Titan’s atmosphere, mainly 
hydrocarbons and nitriles. Indeed, several organic 
compounds have already been detected: they all belong 
to the two classes of organics. Furthermore, the most 
important nitriles of terrestrial prebiotic chemistry— 
hydrogen cyanide, cyanogen and cyanoacetylene—have 
been detected in Titan’s atmosphere. This environment is 
also very rich in aerosols and, probably, in clouds. Thus, 
it is also the only known satellite the surface of which is 
not visible from outside. Although the chemical nature of 
these aerosols has not been ascertained directly so far, it 
seems likely that they are mainly organic, with a nucleus 
of macromolecular nature. Furthermore, models of the 
surface and its interaction with the atmosphere strongly 
suggest that it is partly covered by seas and lakes of 
liquid methane and ethane (a necessary source and sink, 
respectively, of these two compounds on Titan). 

With the exception of liquid water, absent on this too 
cold a planetary object, because of its environment, very 
rich in organics, in the gas and aerosol phases, and the 
possible presence of liquid bodies on its surface, Titan 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


shows many similarities with primitive Earth. Studying 
Titan now should provide much key information on 
the possible couplings in the organic-related processes 
between the different parts of a planetary geofluid. 
Furthermore, study of Titan’s chemistry, owing to the 
absence of liquid water, could also provide crucial data 
on the role played by liquid water in exobiology. 

The Cassini-Huygens mission launched in October 
1997 will reach the Saturn system in 2004 (see CAssINI 
MISSION). Then the Cassini NASA spacecraft will become an 
artificial satellite of Saturn and will release the Huygens 
ESA probe which will enter Titan’s atmosphere. During 
2.5 h of descent, the six scientific instruments aboard 
the probe will perform a detailed physical and chemical 
analysis of Titan’s atmosphere (gas and aerosols) and 
surface. During the nominal duration of the mission (until 
2008), the 12 scientific instruments of the Cassini orbiter 
will also provide essential information of exobiological 
importance on Titan’s environment. 


Exobiology outside the solar system 

The interstellar medium 

Organic chemistry is specific neither to the Earth nor to 
the solar system. It seems to be widely present in the 
whole universe. One hundred and ten different molecules 
have already been detected in the interstellar medium: a 
large majority of those (87) are organic (and only seven 
include silicon atoms). A complex organic chemistry 
probably occurs in interstellar clouds, in the gas and in 
the solid phase of the interstellar dust. Such chemistry 
may have also been involved in the molecular cloud from 
which the presolar nebula, and then the solar system, 
arose. Studying this chemistry and its evolution during 
the accretion phase of the presolar and the solar system is 
of great exobiological importance. 


Extra-solar planets 

Since the first—now confirmed—detection of a planet 
around the star 51 Peg by the Swiss astronomers Mayor 
and Queloz in 1996, more than a 20 EXOPLANETS have been 
discovered around close-by stars. Because of our current 
technologies, such discoveries are limited to Jupiter-size 
planets. However, they already show a wide variety of 
planetary objects in the universe, since the detected giant 
planets are very different from the solar system’s ones, 
being much closer to their star and much warmer. There 
may be Titan-like satellites orbiting around these giant 
exoplanets having dense atmospheres, together, contrary 
to Titan, with liquid water. These planetary systems may 
also have Earth-like planets, which should be detectable 
with our future technologies. We should even be able 
to detect, by remote sensing, signatures of life on these 
hypothetical planets. Although this awaits confirmation, 
the presence of molecular oxygen in large abundance, and 
hence of ozone, ina planetary atmosphere may turn out to 
be a fair indication. Detection of intense infrared bands 
of ozone on an exoplanet should strongly suggest the 
presence of life on it. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exobiology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 3. The main ‘SETI’ experiments carried out up to now (from J Tarter). 


Year of the Duration 
experiment Observer(s) Site Target (h) 
1960 Drake (‘Ozma’) NRAO 2 stars 150 
1964-1965 Kardashev and Crimea 2 quasars 80 
Sholomitskii 
1970-1972 Slysh, Pashchenko, Nancay 5OHmasers 2 
Rudnitskii and Lekht 
1979-1982 ‘Serendip’ Team California Random 400 
1981-1988 Biraud and Tarter Nancay 343 stars ~600 
1990- Colomb ‘Meta II’ Argentina Whole sky Permanent 
visible from 
Argentina 
1992-1993 ‘HRMS’ NASA Team Arecibo 25 stars 200 
1992— Bowyer, Werthimer and _— Arecibo 30% of the 50 
Donnelly (‘Serendip III’) sky visible 
from Arecibo 
1995 Phoenix Project Australia 311 stars 2600 


SETI 

Another approach assumes that life has evolved, Earth 
like, toward intelligence and technologically advanced 
civilizations: we thus have to search for signals from 
such hypothetical extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI). As 
proposed by Cocconi and Morrison as early as in 1959, 
the radiowave domain seems to be the most appropriate 
for interstellar communications. Furthermore, there may 
be ‘magic’ wavelengths in the universe, corresponding 
to emission lines of very abundant compounds, such 
as the specific radio line of hydrogen at 21 cm. The 
first SETI experiment was carried out by Frank Drake 
in 1960 (see seTI INSTITUTE). With his project ‘Ozma’, he 
listened during several weeks to two nearby stars (Epsilon 
Eridani and Tau Ceti) at the magic wavelength of 21 cm. 
Since then, several tens of similar experiments have been 
performed, including recently, with a dedicated detector 
of several millions of channels. No clearly identified signal 
of extraterrestrial intelligence has been detected (yet). 
However, only a very small fraction of our universe has 
been explored thus far. Although we have not yet received 
any clear message from an extraterrestrial civilization, we 
have sent already several outward. The Pioneer X and 
XI spacecraft, launched in the early 1970s, which now 
travel outside the solar system, carry a metallic frame 
engraved with information on the solar system, the Earth 
and terrestrial life. Similarly, Voyager 1 and 2, launched 
in 1977, carry a videodisk about our planet. A message 
has also been sent from the Arecibo radiotelescope toward 
Messier 31. Of course, all these actions are only symbolic, 
but they clearly show that, today, the idea that there 
may be life elsewhere, including intelligent life, is largely 
accepted by the scientific community as well as the 
political community. 


Current studies and prospects 

Exobiology is present in every field and almost all 
exobiological approaches are effectively followed up to 
this day. A wide scientific community is working in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the field of life origins, as demonstrated by the size 
(about 500 members) of the International Society for the 
Study of the Origin of Life (ISSOL). In this field, the 
likely future privileged studies will probably be the search 
for replicating molecules simpler than RNA, prebiotic 
syntheses in the submarine hydrothermal vents (through 
theoretical modeling as well as laboratory experiments) 
and studies on prebiotic processes from micrometeorites. 
The 2000 millennium will see a large increase of the 
exobiological explorations of the solar system. Many 
missions to Mars are already planned in the 2000-2010 
period, with dedicated instrumentation to search for past 
and present life on the red planet. This period should 
also lead to important discoveries about comets, with 
the Rosetta missions, and about Titan, with Cassini— 
Huygens. We can even expect a mission to Europa, 
with a search for life in its hypothetical oceans. In the 
2010-2020 period, if not before, one could expect, with 
a technology similar to the one planned in the IRSI (ex- 
Darwin) mission, the detection of Earth-like extrasolar 
planets and of extraterrestrial biological activity through 
the discovery of ozone. Whatever these discoveries, 
it is clear that the new millennium should drastically 
encourage multidisciplinarity. Exobiology, as one of the 
largest multidisciplinary fields, should thus, placed in the 
foreground, be the field of the future. 


Bibliography 

Brack A (ed) 1998 The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling 
Pieces of the Puzzle (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press) 

Bylinsky G 1981 Life in Darwin’s Universe (New York: 
Doubleday) 

Carle G, Schwartz D and Huntington J (eds) 1992 
Exobiology in Solar System Exploration (NASA SP 512) 

Chela-Flores J and Raulin F (eds) 1998 Exobiology: Matter, 
Energy, and Information in the Origin and Evolution of 
Life (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exobiology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cosmovici C B, Bowyer S and Werthimer D (eds) 1997 
Astronomical and Biochemical Origins and Search for Life 
in the Universe (IAU Colloquium No 161) (Bologna: 
Editrice Compositori) 

Doyle L R (ed) 1996 Circumstellar Habitable Zones (Travis 
House) 

Hornek G 1995 Exobiology, the study of the origin, 
evolution and distribution of life within the context of 
cosmic evolution: a review Planet. Space Sci. 43 (1/2) 
189-217 

Horowitz N H 1986 To Utopia and Back, the Search for Life in 
the Solar System (New York: Freeman) 

Jakosby B 1998 The Search for Life on Other Planets 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Francois Raulin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Exosat (European X-ray Observatory Satellite) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Exosat (European X-ray Observatory 
Satellite) 


European Space Agency x-ray observatory launched in 
1983. Designed to locate and identify cosmic x-ray sources. 
A highly elliptical 356 km x 191 581 km Earth orbit allowed 
continuous observations for up to 72 hours. Payload 
consisted of three instruments to study the x-ray spectrum 
between 0.04 and 50 keV. Suffered a number of equipment 
failures but made important studies of binary stars and 
galaxies, including discovery of several new transient 
x-ray sources. Operations ended April 1986. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Expanding Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Expanding Universe 


A universe that expands with time. Although the 
possibility had been raised earlier through theoretical 
work carried out by Willem de Sitter (1872-1934), 
Aleksandr Friedmann (1888-1925), and the Abbé Georges 
Lemaitre (1894-1966), that our universe is expanding was 
first demonstrated observationally in 1929 by Edwin P 
Hubble (1889-1953), through his measurements of the 
redshifts in the spectra of galaxies. 

In our expanding universe, each galaxy (or cluster 
of galaxies) is receding from every other one, the speed 
of recession of one galaxy from another depending on 
the separation between them. If motions induced by 
local concentrations of mass are ignored, the galaxies and 
clusters behave as if they were at rest in an expanding 
space. A useful analogy is to consider the whole of 
three-dimensional space to be represented by the (two- 
dimensional) surface of a balloon and to represent galaxies 
and cluster by spots stuck to this surface. As the balloon 
expands, each ‘galaxy’ moves away from every other one 
but there is no unique center to this expansion (each dot is 
equivalent to every other one, and the surface of a balloon 
does not have a center). 


See also: Big Bang theory, cosmological model, cosmol- 
ogy, Hubble law, redshift. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Explorer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Explorer 


Series of small NASA experimental, scientific and research 
satellites. Explorer 1, launched in 1959, discovered 
Earth’s van Allen radiation belts. They included the 
Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms (10 satellites which 
investigated the Earth-Moon magnetic environment over 
a complete solar cycle), the Radio Astronomy Explorers 
(Explorers 38 and 49) and the Small Astronomy Satellites 
(Explorers 42, 48 and 53). In March 1999, Explorers 50 (IMP 
8) and 67-74 (EUVE, SAMPEX, RXTE, FAST, ACE, SNOE, TRACE and 
swas) were still operating. Of the 72 successful Explorer 
missions, five operated for 10 years or more. They include 
the ISEE 3/ICE spacecraft (14 years), the IUE spacecraft 
(19 years), and IMP 8 (still operational after 25 years). (See 
also INTERNATIONAL SUN-EARTH EXPLORER, DYNAMICS EXPLORER, 
UHURU.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extended Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Extended Atmospheres 


During a total EcLIrse of the Sun, when the Moon blocks 
out the intensely bright disk of the Sun, a faint white 
‘halo’ can be seen surrounding the Sun (see figure 1). 
This halo, officially called the Sun’s ‘corona’ (i.e. ‘crown’), 
exists mainly because there are electrons in the outer solar 
atmosphere: even though the disk of the Sun is hidden 
from direct view, the electrons scatter a fraction of the 
light from the disk towards our eyes. The fraction which 
is scattered towards us is small, typically no more than 
about 1 part per million of all the photons which emerge 
from the Sun. (Farther out from the Sun, there is also 
some scattering from dust particles.) The fraction of 1 
in a million has to be compared with the sky brightness 
near the Sun due to the molecules and dust in our own 
atmosphere: at the best mountain observing sites on Earth, 
the intensity of pure blue sky may be low enough that the 
innermost corona is just visible to the naked eye. More 
typically, the brightness of clear sky near sea level is a 
thousand times brighter than the corona. This explains 
why the corona is too faint to be seen by the eye outside of 
eclipse. But when the corona can be seen, it may be quite 
irregular in shape, extending in certain directions much 
more than in others. The minimum extent of the corona is 
over the North and South poles of the Sun, especially when 
the Sun is close to the minimum level of suNspor activity. 
The greatest extent of the corona occurs in features called 
‘streamers’, which can be seen to distances of as much as 
a solar radius or more beyond what is usually thought of 
as the ‘edge’ of the Sun. 

Also visible for a short period of time during certain 
phases of a total eclipse is a rose-colored aureole of light 
close to the Sun (see figure 2). This colored aureole, known 
as the ‘CHROMOSPHERE’ (i.e. ‘color sphere’), also extends out 
beyond the usual ‘edge’ of the Sun, although not as much 
as the corona. 

Together, the chromosphere and the corona constitute 
what may be called the ‘extended atmosphere’ of the Sun. 
Itis now known that such extended atmospheres also exist 
around other stars. 


The non-extended case 

In order to appreciate the significance of extended 
atmospheres in the Sun and other stars, it is instructive 
first to discuss atmospheres which can be referred to as 
‘non-extended’. This discussion will serve to highlight the 
conditions which must be satisfied in order that a star may 
develop an atmosphere which can be truly be referred to 
as ‘extended’. 

Two objects which are prominent features in the sky 
appear to have sharp edges: the Moon and the Sun. This 
seems like a trivial observation, but it tells us something 
informative. As far as the Moon is concerned, it is hardly 
surprising that we seea sharp edge atall times: after all, the 
Moon is made of solid material, solid enough that twelve 
men have walked on its surface. When we look at the 
edge of the Moon, we are viewing a region where the solid 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The solar corona: an irregular halo of light which can 
be seen by the naked eye during an eclipse of the Sun. The 
image was obtained by observers from the High Altitude 
Observatory and Rhodes College on 11 July 1991. 


Figure 2. The solar chromosphere: a narrow band of reddish 
light which can be seen briefly by the naked eye close to the edge 
of the eclipsed Sun. 


surface stops, and the vacuum of space begins. Since this 
is a discontinuous transition, it is no wonder that the edge 
appears sharp to us. But the Sun does not have a solid 
surface: it is composed of gas, which tends to diffuse out 
in all directions. Shouldn’t this cause the ‘edge’ of the 
Sun to appear fuzzy? And yet the Sun appears to have a 
sharp edge: when you watch the Sun setting, there comes a 
moment when the last sliver of the solar disk is just visible, 
and then, in an instant, it disappears from view. 

Why does the edge of the Sun seem sharp? The reason 
has to do with the fact that the light we see when we look 
at the Sun comes from gas which is not entirely free to 
diffuse wherever it wants to go: the force of gravity holds 
on to the gas. If gravity had its way, it would drag all of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extended Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the gas down into the center of attraction at the center of 
the Sun. But gravity does not have its way: the inward 
force of gravity is balanced by the pressure which the gas 
exerts. Gas pressure arises from the fact that the individual 
atoms are not bound tightly together, but are free to move 
in all directions. Because of this freedom of movement of 
its constituent particles, a gas has a natural tendency to 
want to diffuse away and fill all available space. 

Under some conditions, the opposing tendencies of 
gravity and pressure can come into balance with each 
other, and the gas can remain stationary. But it is 
sometimes impossible to find a balance between gravity 
and pressure: in such a case, the gas cannot be stationary. 
Both of these cases apply in different parts of the solar 
atmosphere, and they help us understand why the Sun has 
anon-extended atmosphere in one region and an extended 
atmosphere in another region. 


Hydrostatic equilibrium 

When the attractive force of gravity is in exact balance 
with the tendency of gas to diffuse, the gas is said to be 
in ‘hydrostatic equilibrium’ (HSE). The equation which 
describes HSE can be derived by requiring that when an 
extra parcel of gas is added to the atmosphere, the extra 
weight of that parcel must be balanced by extra pressure. 
The equation which describes this balance is 


dp 

dr 
where p is the gas pressure, r is the radial distance from 
the center of the Sun, g is the acceleration due to gravity 
and 9 is the gas density. 

Aparticularly simple solution of the HSE equation can 
be obtained if we consider the special case of a perfect gas at 
a uniform temperature. In sucha gas, the pressure exerted 
by the gas is related to the density of the gas according to 
Charles’ law: 


—gp (1) 


pe eiee. (2) 
UL 
Here, T is the temperature of the gas (on an absolute scale), 
Lis the mean molecular weight of the gas (ona scale where 
a hydrogen atom has a weight of unity), and R, is referred 
to as ‘the gas constant’. The value of R, is defined as the 
ratio of Boltzmann’s constant to the mass of a hydrogen 
atom: R, (¥8.3J mol | K~!) is a measure of the energy in 
the random (thermal) motions of 1 g of hydrogen atoms at 
a temperature of 1 K above absolute zero. 
Inserting equation (2) into equation (1), and assuming 
for the moment that g and y are also constant, we can solve 
for density p as a function of radius r: 


p = poexp[—(r — ro) /H]. (3) 


Here, fp is the density at the level in the atmosphere where 
the radial distance equals ro. The quantity H, which has 
the dimensions of length, is related to the parameters of 
the atmosphere by the expression 
pace (4) 
§U 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


To see the significance of the length H, note that when 
we measure the density of the gas at a height H above 
r = ro, equation (3) tells us that the local density is smaller 
than the density at r = ro by a factor e. Every time we 
move up by a linear distance H, the density falls off by 
a multiplicative factor e. Thus, if we move up to a height 
of 10H above ro, the local density will be smaller than at 
r = ro bya factor of e”, ie. by a factor of about 22 000. This 
means that, for every 22000 atoms at r = rp there is only 
about one atom at r = r9 + 10H. Another way of looking 
at this is to consider that, of 22000 atoms at r = 1, all of 
which havea tendency to diffuse outwards into space, only 
one has enough energy (i.e. fast enough speed) to climb up 
against gravity to heights of 10H above ro. The number of 
atoms which are able to climb up to even greater heights 
(say, 20H) is even smaller (by a further factor of 22 000). 
Clearly, the number density of atoms falls off very rapidly 
with increasing height in this example of HSE. 

The quantity H, which measures how rapidly the 
density falls off with height, is referred to as the ‘scale 
height’ of the atmosphere. Physically speaking, a 
significant role for the scale height has to do with the 
amount of gas in the atmosphere: if all the gas in an 
atmosphere were forced to have the same density, then 
the thickness of the atmosphere would be equal to H. 
That is, if I imagine that I am standing at a region in the 
atmosphere where the local number density of the gas is 
no, then the total number of particles lying in a column of 
area A above my head equals no times H times A. This 
result will be useful below when we estimate the number 
density of particles in the corona. 

Now that we have an expression for H, we can 
understand why the edge of the Sun is sharp: it has to 
do with the numerical value of H in the layers of the solar 
atmosphere that we can see with our eyes. 


The scale height in the solar photosphere 
The layers of the Sun which we can see are called the ‘SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE’ (literally, the ‘light-sphere’): these layers 
contain the atoms of gas which scattered the photons 
of light for the last time before the light started on its 
journey through the (relative) vacuum of interplanetary 
space towards our eyes. Gas in the photosphere has a 
temperature T of about 5000 K. Moreover, the gas consists 
of about 90% neutral hydrogen atoms and about 10% 
helium: this leads to «7 ~ 1.3. The acceleration due to 
gravity in the photosphere gpnor can be estimated from 
Newton’s formula gphot = GMo/R3, once we know the 
mass of the Sun My © 2 x 10°° kg and the radius of the 
photosphere Ro © 7 x 108 m. (G ¥ 6.67 x 107! N m? kg * 
is Newton’s constant of gravitation.) Inserting the above 
values, we find gphot © 270 m s~*. 

Now we are in a position to evaluate the scale height 
Ano in the photosphere: Hphot © 120 km. 


The ‘edge’ of the photosphere: how sharp is it? 
Suppose I point a telescope at the edge of the Sun and line 
up a cross-hair exactly with the photosphere. The density 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extended Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the gas there has a certain value, 9, and this is enough to 
scatter the photons from the Sun for the last time and make 
the photons come towards me. I measure the intensity of 
the light by counting how many photons come into my 
detector every second from this first pointing, P}. Now 
suppose I offset the pointing of the telescope to a second 
position: I set the cross-hairs on gas which lies 1200 km 
above the photosphere. The density of the gas at this new 
position, which is 10 Hpnot above the first position, is 22 000 
times less than at the first position. With sucha low density, 
there will be roughly 22 000 less scatterings occurring, and 
as a result, the number of photons I will count from this 
second pointing P will be less than P; by 22000. Since P, 
is so much less than P;, the gas at pointing 2 appears dark 
in comparison to the photosphere. Thus, in moving from 
P, to Pz, [have moved from bright sunlight into what is 
essentially darkness: by all definitions, I have moved past 
the ‘edge’ (or limb) of the Sun. 

Now in the context of how sharp the edge of the 
Sun appears to us, the question is: how far, in angular 
terms, did Ihave to offset the telescope to go from pointing 
1 to pointing 2? The answer depends on the distance 
to the Sun. This is known to be about 150 million km. 
At such a distance, in order to shift a telescope cross- 
hair a distance of 1200 km, I must move the telescope 
through an angle of between 1 and 2 arcseconds. The 
human eye cannot resolve such a small angle (as small 
as a golf ball seen from a distance of a few miles). As a 
result, when I look at the edge of the Sun, I see the Sun 
going from bright (photosphere) to dark (gas at a height 
of 10Apnot) within an angular distance that is so small 
that I cannot resolve it. The edge of the Sun therefore 
appears essentially discontinuous to me even though, in 
principle, the gas density actually falls off smoothly and 
continuously according to the predictions of HSE. 


The chromosphere 

During an eclipse, when the chromosphere appears above 
the edge of the Moon, the light comes mainly from spectral 
lines emitted by hydrogen (see HYDROGEN SPECTRUM). The 
strongest of these in the visible spectrum is referred to 
as Ha. The wavelength of Ha is 6563 A, which is in the 
red region of the spectrum. It is the predominance of this 
line that gives the chromosphere its reddish color. Careful 
measurements of the way in which the intensity of Ha and 
other spectral lines varies with height enable observers to 
determine a ‘scale height’ for each line: this is the height 
over which the intensity of the line falls off by a factor 
of e. Different lines yield somewhat different results, but 
average values are many hundreds of kilometers, or even 
1000 km. 

Although a model is required in order to interpret 
strictly the intensities of spectral lines in terms of local 
gas densities, the data indicate that scale heights in the 
chromosphere are certainly larger than Hpnot- Hydrostatic 
equilibrium, where H = R,T/g,isa good approximation 
for the chromosphere, and as a result, the chromosphere 
requires temperatures which are hotter than in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


photosphere. The excess temperature in the chromosphere 
compared to the photosphere is required to be a few 
thousand degrees. 


The corona: what are the temperatures? 

The image of the corona in figure 1 indicates that the corona 
extends in certain directions to an appreciable fraction of a 
solar radius before fading out. Measurements of the way 
in which the brightness fades out can be used to assign also 
a ‘scale height’ Hoo, to the density of the coronal material. 
Typical values of Ho, are one or two tenths of a solar radius, 
Le. Hoo, © 10° m. This is almost 1000 times larger than the 
scale height in the photosphere. 

This factor of almost 1000 indicates that the Sun 
truly does have an outer atmosphere which is ‘extended’ 
compared to what we see in the photosphere. 

Does hydrostatic equilibrium apply to the corona? 
The answer depends on what part of the corona one is 
discussing. First, let us discuss regions close to the Sun, 
within a few tenths of a solar radius of the photosphere. 
(We will return in the next section to regions farther out.) 
Close to the Sun, HSE is probably a good approximation. 
Therefore, in order to reproduce a coronal scale height Hor 
which is almost 1000 times larger than in the photosphere, 
we need to have a coronal temperature which is almost 
1000 times as large as in the photosphere. That is, the 
coronal temperatures must be a few million degrees. 

Can this be true? Can gas in the extended solar 
atmosphere really be almost 1000 times hotter than the gas 
in the photosphere? The answer is: yes! The surest proof 
that such hot gas is present is provided by instruments 
which detect x-rays from the Sun. An example is shown in 
figure 3. This image was constructed by the Soft X-ray 
Telescope (SXT) on board the YOHKOH spacecraft. SXT 
responds mainly to photons which are emitted by gas at 
temperatures of 2-3 million K. The SXT image shows that 
the corona does not emit uniformly: there are bright spots 
(where photon intensity is large) and dark spots (the so- 
called ‘coronal holes’) where photon intensity is so low 
that the detector records ‘nothing’. In the dark ‘coronal 
holes’ (e.g. near the bottom of the image in figure 3), we 
can see the circular outline of what our eyes see when we 
look at the Sun: the photosphere. Our eyes are sensitive 
to photons with wavelengths of a few thousand A, and 
in such wavelengths, the photosphere of the Sun (with 
its temperature of about 5000 K) is very intense. That is 
why the Sun (or more strictly, its photosphere) appears so 
bright to our eyes. But the detectors in SXT are looking for 
photons with wavelengths of a few A: the photosphere 
emits very few of these, and as result, SXT ‘sees’ the 
photosphere as a dark object. 

The brightest features in the SXT image are compact 
regions where a trained eye can see so-called ‘CORONAL 
Loops’: these appear as partial arcs of circles that start at one 
position on the surface of the Sun, loop upward toa certain 
height, and then return to the solar surface. When images 
of the Sun in x-rays are compared with magnetic field data, 
it is found that the x-ray loops are associated with regions 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extended Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The Sun as seen in x-rays: the image was obtained by 
the Soft X-ray Telescope on board the YOHKOH satellite in April 
1999. 


of strong magnetic field. Each loop rises out of a region 
where the magnetic field has one polarity (say northward), 
and returns to the Sun in a region of the opposite polarity. 

The discovery that magnetic fields serve to organize 
the structure of the solar corona was a key step in 
astronomers’ attempts to understand how the gas in the 
corona can be heated to temperatures of almost 1000 times 
the photospheric temperature. In the ‘CORONAL HOLES’ , 
magnetic field lines are open into interplanetary space: 
ionized gas is free to stream out along these open field 
lines. The essential difference between coronal regions 
which are dark in x-rays and those which are bright in x- 
rays has to do with the magnetic field topology: the fields 
are open or closed (respectively) in dark or bright regions 
of the corona. 

The corona does not have a unique temperature. In 
active regions, some material may reach temperatures Tmax 
as high as several million degrees. In the quiet sun, Tmax 
may be only 1-2 million degrees. In the flaring Sun, 
Tmax May be several tens of millions of degrees. But 
in all cases, there are also measurable quantities of gas 
with temperatures below Tmax: in fact, by observing the 
Sun in spectral lines which are formed at a variety of 
temperatures, one can determine how much gas is present 
at various temperatures. The distribution of material at 
various temperatures is called the differential emission 
measure (DEM). Typically, the shape of the DEM is a 
power law with positive slope between temperatures of 
the order of 10° K and Tmax. Below 10° K, the DEM has a 
negative slope. Detailed study of the shape of the DEM 
may eventually allow one to infer something about the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


physical nature of the mechanism which is responsible for 
heating the corona. 


The corona: what are the densities? 

Now that we know the scale height H,o, in the low corona 
(where HSE applies), we can use the observed brightness 
to estimate roughly the density of the material at the base 
of the corona, no, electrons m~3. To do this, let us imagine 
what happens to photons which emerge from 1 m? of the 
solar photosphere during an eclipse of the Sun. These 
photons stream away from the Sun, mostly along the radial 
direction, and by the time they have passed through the 
corona, the total number of electrons NV. which they have 
passed by in their 1 m? column is Noor X Heor © 108nteor- 
There is a finite probability p.s that, when a photon passes 
by an electron, the photon will be scattered: the quantity 
which determines p,s is the so-called Thomson cross- 
section, o, which is about 10-7 m2. (The value of o, a few 
times zr? where r, is the classical radius of the electron: 
re = e’/mc’. Here, e and m are the charge and mass of the 
electron, and c is the speed of light.) The probability that a 
photon will scatter after passing through N, electrons cm~* 
iS Pes © Ne X Oe. Inserting the above values, we find that 


Pes ~ 10 rissa (5) 


Now the observed intensity of the corona is about 10~° 
times the photospheric intensity. This indicates that p.; has 
an empirical value of order 10~°. Referring to equation (5) 
above, we see that nor, the electron number density in 
the low corona, must be of the order of 10’ m-3. Since 
the major constituent of the Sun is hydrogen, the most 
abundant element in the corona is also hydrogen. In the 
photosphere, hydrogen exists in a form which is almost 
entirely electrically neutral, with one electron bound to 
each proton. In the corona, the temperature is high enough 
to ionize the hydrogen essentially completely: for each free 
electron, therefore, there is also one free proton. 


Breakdown of hydrostatic equilibrium: 
’super-extended’ atmosphere 

We mentioned above that in the low-lying parts of the 
solar corona, hydrostatic equilibrium (HSE) is probably 
satisfied. But once we admit the existence of gas 
at temperatures of a million degrees of more, the 
assumptions of HSE eventually break down. To see why 
this is so, we return to equation (1). So far, we have 
treated the gravitational acceleration g as a constant: this 
is a good approximation as long as we are considering 
gas within a few scale heights of the photosphere. (The 
value of g at a radial distance of r = Ro + 10Apnot differs 
from that at r = Ro by only a few tenths of 1%.) But 
when we consider things on a larger scale, g can no longer 
be regarded as constant: at a radial distance r from the 
Sun, we need to use the local value of g, i.e. GMo/r?. 
This changes the solution of equation (1) in a fundamental 
way. Inserting the radially varying g into equation (1), and 
again assuming for simplicity that the gas has a unique 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extended Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


temperature, we find that the solution now takes on a 
strikingly different form: 


p= po ellA@o/r-D]) (6) 


Here, A = GMou/R,T rp is a measure of how effectively 
the thermal pool fills up the Sun’s gravitational well. 
Equation (6) describes how the density in the solar 
corona would behave if the corona were in hydrostatic 
equilibrium. A remarkable feature of the density 
distribution in equation (6) is that as we move farther and 
farther from the Sun, i.e. as r tends to infinity, the density 
of the coronal material does not fall to zero. Instead, the 
density approaches a constant value: p(co) > poe“. 

Inserting T = 10° K, and use the solar parameters 
mentioned above (except that w ~ 0.5 in fully ionized 
hydrogen), we find A ~ 12. Now, as we have seen, 
the gas at the base of the solar corona has a number 
density of some 10 protons m~3. At infinity, a corona 
in hydrostatic equilibrium would have a number density 
which is less than this by e"”, or 6 x 10-°. Thus, the 
number density of the solar corona at infinity would be 
about 6 x 10° protons m~3. Such a density is much larger 
than the density of gas in the interstellar medium (ISM): 
the latter contains typically 10° protons m~°. 

Because the ISM has a density (and pressure) which 
is many times smaller than the corona in hydrostatic 
equilibrium, it is impossible for the ISM to contain the 
corona: the latter has a pressure which is too high to be 
confined. 

What happens when HSE breaks down? To answer 
that, we note that the equation of HSE is itself only a special 
case of a more general equation which describes the law 
of conservation of momentum. For a gas of density p 
moving radially outward at speed v, the momentum per 
unit volume is pv. Conservation of momentum for this 
gas is described by the equation: 


poe =F pet F (7) 
where F is a general symbol for any other forces which 
may be present in the corona apart from pressure and 
gravity. (Magnetic fields can give rise to extra forces which 
are important for the corona.) In the case where F = 0, 
and HSE is satisfied (see equation (1) above), the right- 
hand side of equation (7) is exactly zero, and equation (7) 
can be satisfied by the solution in which the gas does 
not move, v = 0: the absence of motion justifies the 
term ‘static’ in ‘hydrostatic equilibrium’. But if pressure 
forces do not balance gravity, then the right-hand side of 
equation (7) is non-zero. As a result of the unbalanced 
forces, the gas begins to accelerate in response to Newton’s 
famous second law of motion. Instead of hydro-’static’ 
conditions, we now have to deal with unbalanced forces 
(i.e. dynamics). The onset of acceleration in the radial 
direction means that the corona must expand. This 
expansion of the coronal gas gives rise to a flow which 
is named the ‘SOLAR WIND’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


It is important to note that when we talk of the 
solar wind, we are not talking about evaporation, as if 
a small fraction of the coronal material were ‘boiling 
off’: there is nothing evaporative about the process 
described by equation (7). The solar wind involves a truly 
hydrodynamic expansion of the entire corona (see also SOLAR 
WIND: CORONAL ORIGINS). 

In the simplest case of steady flow, the velocity of 
outflow v does not depend on the time, but varies with 
radial distance. In this case, equation (7) can be written in 
the form 

dv 1dp 
Ody ~ pdr r 


M 
kl (8) 


The details of how rapidly the wind accelerates, i.e. the 
shape of v as a function of radial distance r, depend on the 
temperature (which controls the pressure) and especially 
on the nature of any extra forces F'. But regardless of the 
details of F, we expect that at great distances from the Sun, 
all terms on the right-hand side of equation (8) will become 
small. This means that du/dr — 0 at great distances 
from the Sun. In other words, v tends to a constant value 
(the terminal speed) far from the Sun. The value of the 
terminal speed depends on where on the Sun the wind 
originates: empirically, wind from the polar regions of the 
Sun is found to have the highest terminal speed, some 700- 
800 km s~'. The slowest observed wind speeds (about 
300 km s~') are found to originate in streamers which 
are more common near the Sun’s equatorial regions. The 
differences between winds from different locations on the 
Sun arise at least in part from differences in the forcing term 
F in equation (8). Over the polar coronal holes, waves on 
the magnetic field may help to provide momentum and 
energy to the wind. 

The solar wind extends far beyond the visible edge 
of the Sun, far beyond even what the eye sees during an 
eclipse: in fact the wind expands past the orbit of the Earth, 
and past the orbits of all of the known planets. No-one 
yet knows for sure how far out the wind expands. The 
most remote spacecraft which have been able to sample the 
wind (Voyagers 1 and 2), are at the time of writing (April 
1999) about 50% farther from the Sun than Pluto’s mean 
distance, and they still see the solar wind expanding. Some 
theories make predictions about where the solar wind will 
be stopped by running into the ISM: but the Voyagers have 
not yet reached such a point (See VOYAGER MISSION). 

The fact that the solar corona extends throughout 
the solar system gives a new twist to the definition of 
‘extended atmosphere’: it can come as a shock when 
one first realizes that the Earth on which we live is itself 
embedded in the Sun’s (super)-extended atmosphere. 


Mass flux carried by the solar wind 

How much mass does the solar wind carry away from 
the Sun? Spacecraft measurements of the solar wind as 
it passes Earth’s orbit indicate that the mean solar wind 
density is some 5-10 x 10° protons m~? while the mean 
velocity is 300-400 km s-!. These measurements indicate 
that the Sun loses mass at the rate of a few million tons per 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extended Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


second. This is comparable to the rate at which mass is lost 
in the core of the Sun due to thermonuclear reactions. If 
the Sun has lost mass at a constant rate during its evolution 
(lasting some 10” s so far), the wind has not caused any 
significant alteration to the mass of the Sun during its life: 
the change in mass is no more than 0.1%. 


Other stars 

The existence of chromospheres on stars of spectral 
classes G, K and M has been known for decades: the 
chromospheres reveal their existence in the form of 
emission lines of hydrogen and other elements in the 
spectrum. 

Since about 1980, when the first x-ray telescopes on 
spacecraft with enough sensitivity to detect stars became 
operational, it has been discovered that stars of almost 
all types emit x-rays. The strongest sources of x-rays 
among single stars occur in dwarfs of spectral class M: 
some M dwarfs emit almost 1% of their entire luminosity 
in the form of x-rays. Compared to the Sun (where 
the x-ray output amounts to only one part in 10° or 10° 
of the entire luminosity), M dwarfs are truly efficient 
generators of coronae. Moreover, the coronae in M dwarfs 
contain components which are much hotter than in the 
Sun: the x-rays from certain M dwarfs require source 
temperatures of several tens of millions of degrees. In 
the Sun, temperatures as high as this are achieved only 
temporarily in short-lived explosions (flares). On the basis 
of data from the ground, it has been known for decades 
that M dwarfs are sites of large flares and strong magnetic 
fields. It seems likely that the strong heating of their 
coronas is connected to magnetic activity. 

Cool giant stars exhibit evidence of chromospheric 
material, but not of coronal material. In such stars, there 
are, however, comparatively dense but comparatively 
slow winds, with mass loss rates which exceed the solar 
wind value by several orders of magnitude. These winds 
can be considered as extended atmospheres of such stars: 
although the photosphere of Betelgeuse (a red supergiant) 
has dimensions of a few hundred solar radii (i-e.a few AV), 
emission from the wind in certain lines can be traced out 
to distances of the order of 10000 AU. 


What heats an extended atmosphere? 

As we have seen, the presence of an extended atmosphere 
depends on excess temperatures. What causes this excess 
heating? Attempts to answer that question have attracted 
a lot of attention in the course of the past few decades. The 
quest for an answer comes down to identifying a source 
of mechanical energy which can do work on the gas. 

As far as chromospheric heating is concerned, a 
consensus seems to be emerging: acoustic waves from 
turbulent convection beneath the photosphere can heat 
at least the lower regions of the chromosphere. As these 
waves propagate upwards in the atmosphere, reaching gas 
of progressively lower density, the pressure fluctuations of 
the acoustic waves grow in intensity until shock waves 
are formed. The shocks cause localized heating of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gas, enough to reproduce many of the observed features 
of chromospheric emission. Dissipation of the waves is 
severe enough that in the Sun, almost no waves survive 
even as far as the upper chromosphere. In other stars, 
generation of acoustic waves by their convection may in 
some cases (especially M dwarfs) have properties which 
are more favorable to the survival of acoustic waves in the 
upper chromosphere: in such stars, the acoustic waves 
with longest periods may even help to provide some heat 
to the low corona. 

In the chromosphere, the deposition of mechanical 
energy is balanced by radiation in spectral lines of 
abundant elements in certain stages of ionization. As long 
as these lines remain available for radiation, deposition 
of energy does not necessarily result in severe local 
heating: the deposited energy may simply be radiated 
effectively by slight increases in temperature. As a 
result of this competition between gain of energy and 
loss by radiation, the chromosphere on average may 
contain one or more regions where the temperature 
remains almost constant with increasing height. These 
temperature ‘plateaus’ may occur between about 6000 K 
and 20000 K. The process of hydrogen ionization also 
serves to absorb mechanical energy without having the 
local temperature increase significantly: as a result, the 
average chromosphere in the Sun displays the remarkable 
property that the mean proton density remains essentially 
constant (within a factor of +2) over a range of altitudes 
where the mean hydrogen atom density falls off by 
a factor of 10*. But overall, there is on average an 
inexorable rise in temperature with increasing height, and 
each of the elements becomes progressively more ionized. 
Eventually, one reaches a height where the temperature is 
such (between 10* K and 10° K) that none of the abundant 
elements is in stages of ionization where strong spectral 
lines are available. In such conditions, addition of extra 
mechanical energy inevitably causes the temperature to 
climb rapidly to millions of degrees. This rapid transition 
to coronal temperatures occurs over a narrow range of 
altitudes. 

As regards coronal heating, magnetic effects must 
dominate in the source of mechanical energy. One widely 
discussed candidate is waves which propagate along the 
magnetic field: these waves can dissipate their energy 
in a variety of ways. For example, in active regions, 
a magnetic loop may act as a sort of resonant cavity 
which the wave can cause to ‘ring’ in such a way that 
the wave energy is deposited in the loop. And in coronal 
holes, waves on the magnetic field may dissipate and 
deposit both momentum and energy into the coronal gas. 
In active regions, miniature magnetic explosions (‘nano- 
flares’) may be occurring often enough that they can keep 
some closed magnetic loops hot. 

Data from the sono spacecraft may help to pin down 
the mechanism which cause coronal heating. For example, 
there is already evidence that in coronal holes the coronal 
heating mechanism heats protons more efficiently than 
it heats electrons. And heavy ions (such as oxygen) are 
heated even more than protons. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extended Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

The existence of the solar corona dates back to antiquity. 
But the first realization that coronal temperatures were 
indeed of order 1 million K came from 


Grotrian W 1939 Naturw. 27 214 
Edlen B 1941 Arkiv Mat. Astron. Fys. 28B (1) 1 


Reports on the scale heights of chromospheric 
emission lines, as well as a detailed study of the 
chromosphere using a non-LTE approach to radiative 
transfer in optically thick lines can be found in the book 


Thomas R N and Athay R G 1961 Physics of the Solar 
Chromosphere (New York: Interscience) 

The above book also discusses reasons to expect the 

presence of plateaus in the chromospheric temperature. 
For a discussion of the ‘thermostatic’ effects of 

hydrogen ionization in the chromosphere, see 

Athay R G 1981 The Sun as a Star ed S Jordan, NASA SP-450 
p85 
The physics of acoustic heating of the time- 

averaged chromosphere has been studied extensively by 

P Ulmschneider and colleagues at Hiedelberg. For an up- 

to-date summary of this work, see 

Ulmschneider P 1999 Solar and Stellar Activity: Similarities 
and Differences, Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. Ser. vol 158 
eds C J Butler and J G Doyle (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) p 260 

For an alternate point of view concerning acoustic heating 

of the quiet chromosphere, see 


Carlsson M and Stein R F 1995 Astrophys. J. 440 L29 


For a critical review of various mechanisms which 
have been proposed for coronal heating, see 


Zirker J B 1993 Solar Phys. 148 43 


For a summary of the heating of the active corona by 
resonant absorption of magnetic waves, see 


Davila J M 1991 Mechanism of Chromospheric and Coronal 
Heating eds P Ulmschneider et al (Berlin: Springer) 
p 464 


The concept of ‘nanoflare’ heating of closed magnetic loops 
in the solar corona was proposed in 


Parker E N 1987 Solar Phys 111 297 


The original work on the outflow of the solar wind 
can be found in 


Parker E N 1963 Interplanetary Dynamical Processes (New 
York: Interscience) 


For discussions of how specific dissipation mechanisms of 
waves on the magnetic field can be used not only to heat 
the coronal gas but also to drive the wind, see, e.g. 


Tu C Y and Marsch E 1997 Solar Phys. 171 363 
Cuseri I et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 514 989 


Dermott Mullan 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Astronomy c.1900-1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Extragalactic Astronomy c.1900-1950 


In 1931 the Dutch astronomer WILLEM DE SITTER (1872-1934) 
declared that ‘Never in all the history of science has 
there been a period when new theories and hypotheses 
arose, flourished, and were abandoned in so quick 
succession as in the last fifteen or twenty years’. de 
Sitter was looking back on a period of turmoil and 
upheaval in the physical sciences, in which perhaps most 
importantly for astronomers the long-standing debate on 
the nature of NEBULAE had been settled and in which 
the entirely unexpected expansion of the universe had 
been proposed and widely accepted. These two epoch- 
making developments were due mainly to astronomers 
who in the first three decades of the 20th century made 
observations with giant optical telescopes of a class of 
nebulae, the spiral nebulae, which, it would become 
generally accepted after the mid-1920s, were galaxies. In 
fact, in these three decades extragalactic astronomy, as 
astronomers later would understand it, was established. 
This new field was in many ways a distinctly American 
activity—in considerable part because it was in the United 
States that the most powerful telescopes and the best- 
equipped astrophysical observatories were to be found, 
together witha sizable body of well-trained astrophysicists 
interested in problems of the nebulae. 


Early history 

The 18th and 19th centuries had seen wide ranges of 
opinion on the nature of the nebulae, the two most extreme 
being that all nebulae are star systems external to our 
Galaxy, so-called ‘island universes’, or that all the nebulae 
are indeed truly nebulous. However, by the end of the 19th 
century it had become widely accepted that none of the 
visible nebulae was an external galaxy. External galaxies 
might exist, but if so they lay beyond the reach of even the 
most powerful telescopes. 

Three main pieces of evidence were reckoned by most 
astronomers to tell heavily against the island universe 
theory: (1) the distribution of the nebulae (it was generally 
agreed that the nebulae very largely avoid the plane of 
the Milky Way but, if the nebulae were truly independent 
galaxies, why should their position be correlated with 
our own Galaxy’s orientation?), (2) the well-established 
gaseous nature of some nebulae and (3) the ‘nova’ of 1885 
(now accepted to have been a supernova) that had flared in 
the heart of the Andromeda nebula. (The nova had reached 
a luminosity of about 1/10th of the entire nebula. How, 
astronomers asked, could a single star rival the brightness 
of a vast assembly of stars? Their answer was that it could 
not. The nebula was not a vast stellar assembly.) 

At the start of the 20th century, most astronomers 
also judged the vast majority of nebulae to be ‘spiral 
nebulae’, that is, to exhibit a spiral shape. Lord RossE 
and the Parsonstown observers in the middle of the 19th 
century had been the first to discern the spiral form 
of a number of nebulae, but in the late 1890s James 
E KEELER (1857-1900), while photographing nebulae and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


star clusters with the 36 in Crossley reflector at Lick 
Observatory in California, recorded vastly more spirals 
on his plates than he had expected; in fact, he reckoned, 
120 000 of them were within reach of his telescope. In 1899 
the German astrophysicist Julius Scheiner (1858-1913)— 
working at Potsdam, the leading German center for 
astrophysics—detected absorption lines in the spectrum of 
the largest, and so presumably one of the nearest, spirals, 
the Andromeda nebula. As it was well-known that the 
spectra of star clusters exhibited absorption lines, Scheiner 
contended that the Andromeda nebula itself was a star 
system that lay beyond the Galaxy. At first Scheiner’s 
arguments won few adherents since nearly all astronomers 
were convinced that spiral nebulae developed into either 
single stars or sparse clusters. However, around 1910 a 
few investigators started to challenge this position. Led 
by E A Fath at Lick and Max Wolf at Heidelberg, they 
extended Scheiner’s researches on the spectra of spirals 
and found that while some spirals displayed bright lines— 
well known by this time to be characteristic of gas clouds— 
most of those examined had spectra dominated by dark 
absorption lines. Perhaps, after all, some astronomers 
decided, the spirals are clusters of stars, maybe even 
distant galaxies. 

During the 1890s Keeler had measured the shifts of 
the spectral lines of a number of planetary nebulae and, 
interpreting the shifts as Doppler shifts, he had determined 
their radial, or line-of-sight, velocities. They had radial 
velocities, on the whole, a little higher than, but essentially 
similar to, those of the stars. The measurement of the radial 
velocity of a spiral proved a much more daunting problem 
because of the low surface brightness of the spirals, but 
in 1913, VM SLIPHER (1875-1969) of Lowell Observatory in 
Arizona argued that the Andromeda nebula was rushing 
towards the Sun at 300 km s“!, the highest speed then 
recorded for an astronomical body. Slipher’s find was 
so puzzling that a few suspected its correctness. Doubts 
were, however, swiftly dispelled when others confirmed 
Slipher’s result and Slipher himself obtained similar 
values for further spirals. 

The observations of the spectra of spirals had 
persuaded some astronomers that the spirals were, or 
might well be, external galaxies, and the measured radial 
velocities won still more to this view. The velocities were 
so much higher than those of the confirmed members of 
the Galaxy that some astronomers decided that the spirals 
could not be a part of the same dynamical system. One 
result was that, by the mid-1910s, the island universe 
theory, a theory that a decade or so earlier had been almost 
completely out of favor, had become a leading topic of 
debate. 

The shift of opinion about external galaxies had also 
been influenced by two other factors: (1) the wide-spread 
suspicion that the Galaxy itself has a spiral structure and 
(2) the ‘grandeur’ of the island universe theory. In 1911, for 
example, the brilliant English astrophysicist A$ EDDINGTON 
(1882-1944) had declared that the island universe theory 
‘opens up to our imagination a truly magnificent vista 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Astronomy c.1900-1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of system beyond system—of universe beyond universe’. 
The theory’s appeal to the scientific ‘taste’ of astronomers 
alone had, nevertheless, not been enough: the shift in 
opinion about external galaxies had also required the hard 
evidence of the spectrum and radial velocity observations 
of the spirals. 


Novae in spirals 

In 1917 astronomers found more evidence that bore on 
the debate about nebulae when Novae were detected 
serendipitously in a number of spirals. The first were 
found by HD curtis (1872-1942), an astronomer at the Lick 
Observatory, and a similar discovery was made shortly 
after by GwritcHEY at Mount Wilson Observatory, also in 
California. Astronomers now eagerly searched old plates 
of spirals for further novae. By late 1917 sufficientnumbers 
of novae had been located for Curtis to dismiss the 1885 
nova in the Andromeda nebula as abnormally bright, 
and thus not a reliable indicator of the nebula’s distance. 
Curtis now compared the brightness of the typical novae 
in spirals with the average brightness of novae within the 
Galaxy, and in so doing he estimated these spirals to be 
a hundred times more distant than the galactic novae, 
thereby, in the opinion of Curtis and other astronomers, 
providing yet more evidence for the island universe theory. 
Indeed, by the end of 1917 nearly all of the leading students 
of spiral nebulae judged it likely that they were external 
galaxies. 

A key issue here is that the Galaxy was also the 
measuring rod against which supposed galaxies were 
measured, and contemporary estimates of the dimensions 
of the Galaxy played a part in determining the status of 
the island universe theory. This point became particularly 
important when in late 1917 HARLOW SHAPLEY conceived and 
fashioned a bold new model of the Galaxy in which its 
diameter is roughly 300000 ly—roughly 10 times larger 
than the commonly accepted estimates—and in which the 
Sun is placed some tens of thousands of light-years from 
its center. Certainly Shapley came to be loathe to accept 
that the spirals were comparable with his gigantic stellar 
system and he suggested that they were truly nebulae, 
but he wavered on the status of the spirals and between 
1917 and 1920 he changed his mind three times on their 
relation to the Galaxy. Shapley’s writings on the spirals 
did nevertheless bring him an invitation to participate 
in what has become one of the best-known, but often 
misunderstood, events in 20th century astronomy: the so- 
called ‘Great Debate’. 


The ’Great Debate’ and internal motions 

In April 1920 Shapley and Curtis both delivered talks 
on ‘The scale of the universe’ to the National Academy 
of Sciences, one of America’s most prestigious scientific 
bodies. 

Shapley chose to speak at a very popular level (most 
likely his chief concern at the Debate was to appeal to 
the members of the audience concerned with selecting 
the next director of the Harvard College Observatory, a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


job Shapley coveted), and it was only after the Debate, 
with the published papers of Shapley and Curtis, that 
the protagonists actually came to grips with each other’s 
arguments. In his published paper Curtis maintained that 
the spirals were external galaxies, arguing chiefly on the 
basis of the by now familiar observations of their spectra, 
radial velocities and novae. Curtis also attacked Shapley’s 
estimate of the size of the Galaxy. Curtis and many 
others had advocated a comparable-galaxy theory (that is, 
a theory in which the spirals were not just external galaxies, 
but in addition were comparable in size with the Galaxy). 
He admitted that if the spirals were as large as Shapley 
insisted the Galactic system to be, then the spirals would 
be at such enormous distances that the novae within them 
would have to be impossibly bright, thereby undermining 
the case for the comparable—galaxy theory. 

During the late 1910s and early 1920s another class 
of observations came to play a leading role in the island 
universe debate: the measurements of the internal motions 
of the spirals. ADRIAAN VAN MAANEN (1884-1946), a Mount 
Wilson astronomer, began his investigations of this topic 
in 1915 when he scrutinized photographic plates, taken 
some years apart, of the giant spiral M101 (that is, number 
101 in Charles Messier’s catalog of nebulae). His goal 
was to detect and measure the size of any changes in 
appearance in the intervening years, and he decided that 
M101 did indeed exhibit a rotation, or, more likely in 
his view, motions along its spiral arms. At first the 
internal motions did not obviously conflict with the island 
universe theory. The English applied mathematician 
and theoretical astronomer J H JEANS (1877-1946) in fact 
exploited van Maanen’s measures to champion the island 
universe theory and to buttress his own theories on 
the origin and development of spiral nebulae. Jeans’ 
theories were very influential, especially among the Mount 
Wilson astronomers, and they were brought before a wide 
audience in his Problems of Cosmogony and Stellar Dynamics 
of 1919. 

In his ‘Great Debate’ paper Shapley wrote little on 
external galaxies and largely confined himself to arguing 
that their fate was inextricably bound to his theory of 
the Galaxy. However, Shapley did cite the measurements 
of the internal motions of spirals made by van Maanen, 
claiming that these could not fit into a scheme in which 
the spirals were galaxies 300000 ly in diameter—the size 
he claimed for our own Galaxy—as the sizes of the internal 
motions then implied velocities for the outlying regions 
greater than the velocity of light. This was, he judged, a 
clear reduction to absurdity of the island universe theory. 

In the early 1920s van Maanen measured several more 
spirals and found that his results agreed very well with his 
earlier ones for M101. Some astronomers harbored doubts 
about the internal motions nevertheless. The motions 
were almost the only evidence against the island universe 
theory of spirals; and if the spirals were not galaxies, 
what were they? In particular, how could one interpret 
the spectrum, radial velocity and nova observations? 
These considerations persuaded some astronomers that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Astronomy c.1900-1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


van Maanen’s scrutinies had not revealed real motions. 
Thus while the island universe theory lost some support, 
many judged it to be, on the whole, still much the best 
available explanation of the properties of spiral nebulae. 


Hubble and Cepheids 

The sudden, and unexpected, resolution of the debate on 
the existence of external galaxies was effected in late 1923 
and 1924 by a series of discoveries made by the Mount 
Wilson astronomer EDWIN P HUBBLE (1889-1953). 

Hubble had completed his doctoral dissertation on 
‘Photographic investigations of faint nebulae’ in 1917 at 
a time when the island universe theory was very much 
in fashion and he seems to have been inclined towards it 
from this date on. After a brief period in the US army, he 
joined the Mount Wilson staff in 1919. In 1923, he decided 
to obtain plates of the Andromeda nebula in the hope 
of recording novae flaring in the nebula. For someone 
anxious to establish an accurate distance to the nebula 
this program had much to recommend it. In particular, 
by observing more novae he would be able to determine 
with greater precision the mean apparent brightness of 
novae in the nebula and thus estimate their distance— 
and so the nebula’s—with more certainty than had been 
the case. He was also excellently placed to pursue such 
a program because he had access to the world’s most 
powerful telescope, the Mount Wilson 100 in, and the rich 
resources of the world’s leading astrophysical observatory. 

He indeed found novae in the nebula, but in early 
1924, to his surprise, he also decided that a star he had 
earlier identified as a nova was in fact a Cepheid variable. 
Hubble constructed a light curve for the Cepheid variable 
and rapidly secured its period. Then by assuming (as 
Shapley had done earlier in his studies of the Galaxy) 
that Cepheids of the same period have the same intrinsic 
luminosity wherever they are found, Hubble had been able 
to exploit the Cepheid period-luminosity relationship to 
calculate the nebula’s distance. His result of 900000 ly 
placed it far beyond the boundaries of even Shapley’s 
model of the Galaxy. Astronomers also quickly agreed 
that Hubble had resolved the outer parts of the nebula 
into swarms of stars. Moreover, he soon found more 
Cepheids in the Andromeda nebula and some other spirals 
that supported his early findings. The Cepheids were 
accepted by the opponents of the island universe theory 
to be accurate distance indicators to the spirals, and the 
Cepheids’ unambiguous message was that the spirals were 
indeed external galaxies, a message confirmed by almost 
all of the other evidence. The only discrepancy came with 
the internal motions, but soon nearly everyone rejected 
them as hopeless exaggerations of any real motions, 
and the case for their accuracy had collapsed under the 
weight of opposing evidence. Within a year or two of 
Hubble chancing upon the first Cepheid, the debate on 
the existence of island universes had effectively ended. 

Once Hubble had settled the question of galaxies, 
astronomers began to turn increasingly to other problems 
associated with the spirals. One was how to classify 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


apie? ee 


pone o ff. 
ao X a 

(@ * 

f sa 


ELLIPTICAL NEBULAE 


Figure 1. Hubble’s 1936 sequence of nebular types. 


them. In the 1910s Curtis had divided the nebulae into 
three main groups: diffuse nebulae, planetary nebulae and 
spirals. While Curtis’s decision to create one grouping 
of ‘spirals’ had drawn attention to them as possible 
external galaxies, by the mid-1920s this scheme seemed to 
some astronomers to be far too restrictive and alternative 
classifications were advanced. The most influential was 
Hubble’s, first proposed in 1922 and later elaborated by 
him (figure 1). Although Hubble claimed that the scheme 
was purely descriptive and independent of any theory, 
he was an enthusiastic advocate of Jeans’s theories on 
the origin and development of extragalactic nebulae and 
this revealed itself clearly in his scheme. By 1926 Jeans 
had rejected van Maanen’s measures as worthless, but 
in Hubble he had found another champion of his own 
theories. Hubble agreed with Jeans that there was one 
basic type of extragalactic nebula and that the various 
stages of development of this one type could explain 
the appearance of nearly all the observed extragalactic 
nebulae. Jeans placed the elliptical nebulae, which he 
believed to be enormous galaxy-sized clouds of dust and 
gas, at the beginning of the evolutionary sequence of these 
nebulae. He argued that the end of the elliptical stage is 
marked by the build up of spiral arms from the material of 
the nuclear regions. As this process continues, the nebula 
increases in size, until the arms are wide open and the 
nucleus inconspicuous. As a spiral ages its arms start 
to break up into condensations. These are proto-stars or 
proto-star clusters, and, as the spiral develops, the region 
of star formation moves inexorably inwards. 

The Jeans theory of nebular evolution was rejected 
by, among others, Shapley and the Swedish student 
of nebulae, Knut Lundmark (1889-1958), who asserted 
that even elliptical nebulae were star systems, and who 
both emphasized the importance of possible gravitational 
interactions with other galaxies for the evolution of an 
individual galaxy. For this reason Hubble always used 
the term ‘extragalactic nebulae’ while Shapley employed 
‘galaxies’, and these terms became shibboleths dividing 
East and West coast astronomers in the United States 
(indeed it was not until after Hubble’s death in 1953 
that ‘galaxies’ was universally adopted). Shapley and 
Lundmark both proposed hypotheses in which the Galaxy 
is composed of a number of smaller, interacting galaxies. 
They had done so in part because, despite the uncertainty 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Astronomy c.1900-1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


about the size of the Galaxy, by 1930 it seemed likely to 
the majority of astronomers that it was far larger than any 
other known star system. 


The expansion of the universe 

Shortly after he had turned seriously to the classification of 
nebulae, Hubble began to tackle another outstanding and 
perplexing problem in extragalactic research: whether or 
not there is a relationship between the distance of a galaxy 
and the size of its REDSHIFT. 

V MSlipher, as we saw earlier, was the first to measure 
the radial velocity of a spiral nebula, and by 1914 he had 
been able to announce the radial velocities of 15 spirals. 
To secure these exceptionally faint and elusive spectra he 
required lengthy exposure times, sometimes as long as 
80 h. Slipher’s progress was therefore slow, and others 
were usually content to leave these difficult and tedious 
labors to him. However, as Slipher doggedly measured 
more velocities, a curious pattern began to emerge: nearly 
all of them were shifts to the red end of the spectrum; that 
is, if the spectral shifts were interpreted as Doppler shifts, 
all but a few were velocities of recession. In addition, 
the radial velocities were generally very much larger than 
those of the stars or gaseous nebulae, and their very 
sizes prompted some to query the Doppler, or velocity, 
interpretation of the spectral shifts. 

Meanwhile, another development suggested that the 
radial velocities might be correlated with such distance- 
related variables as the diameters of the spirals. This 
possibility arose largely through a hypothesis advanced 
by the Dutch astronomer Willem de Sitter. In 1917 de 
Sitter had discovered an alternative solution to that found 
by ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879-1955) to the field equations of the 
general theory of relativity. de Sitter’s solution, moreover, 
predicted a relationship between redshift and distance 
for distant stars and galaxies. As astronomers usually 
understood it, this relationship was not just the result of a 
recession of far-off bodies. Rather, the intrinsic properties 
of space and time in de Sitter’s solution cause clocks to 
run more slowly the further they are from the observer. 
Hence, the atomic vibrations within a distant galaxy 
appear to slow down, the frequency of light decreases, 
the wavelength increases and a redshift is observed. de 
Sitter’s solution applies strictly to an empty universe, but 
de Sitter himself and a number of his contemporaries 
thought that, if the density of matter was sufficiently low, 
it might be applicable to the real universe. 

Even before the significance of de Sitter’s model had 
been realized, there were speculations about a redshift— 
distance relation. However, as general relativity became 
more widely discussed and the notion became established 
of developing theoretical models of the entire universe 
that could be compared with actual observations, so de 
Sitter’s model of the universe gained in plausibility, and 
in the 1920s it became generally agreed that, if de Sitter’s 
model approximated the actual properties of the universe, 
then a relationship between redshift and distance was to 
be expected. Although there was much debate over the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


exact form of the relationship, it became widely accepted 
that, the greater the distance of a body, the larger should 
be its redshift. 

Early attempts by C A Wirtz, Lundmark and others 
to establish a relation failed to gain support principally 
because the distances to the spirals were not known 
accurately, and these pioneers had been compelled to 
employ, for want of anything better, the very crude and, 
to other astronomers, unconvincing distance indicators 
of constant absolute magnitudes and constant absolute 
diameters. 

Hubble, however, with the aid of the Mount Wilson 
100 in reflector, was far better equipped than his 
competitors to investigate the redshifts and distances of 
extragalactic nebulae. He was also able to call on MILTON 
HUMASON (1891-1972), an outstanding observer, to make 
the demanding and time-consuming measurements of the 
redshifts. 

To determine the distances of galaxies, Hubble 
exploited a carefully constructed distance ‘ladder’ that 
used a series of interlocking distance indicators, the 
most important rung of which was the Cepheid period— 
luminosity relationship. By applying this ladder Hubble 
obtained the distances to 24 of the 46 extragalactic nebulae 
whose redshifts had been determined, almost all by 
Slipher. The other 22 nebulae were not used in his primary 
proof because he reckoned they were not in groups and 
average apparent magnitudes could not be taken. When 
Hubble plotted the redshifts of the 24 nebulae against their 
distances he judged that a linear redshift-distance relation 
was the simplest way of representing his data, indicating a 
systematic recession of the nebulae represented by V = kr 
(in which the k term is today known as Hubble’s constant 
H, V is the velocity and r the distance). Furthermore, 
when distances were calculated (by means of apparent 
magnitudes) to the remaining 22 nebulae whose redshifts 
had been measured, they too, in Hubble’s judgement, 
fitted the linear relation well. 

By 1929 such a relation was not unexpected; indeed, 
in 1930 Hubble himself told de Sitter that ‘the possibility of 
a velocity—distance relation among nebulae has been in the 
air for years—you, I believe, were the first to mention it’. 
The attempts of Wirtz, Lundmark and others to determine 
observationally the nature of the relation had failed to win 
general acceptance, but they had undoubtedly helped to 
prepare the way for Hubble’s researches. Hubble had 
worked within a well-defined problem area, using a well- 
defined method, and had expressed his argument with 
care, stressing the solid observational basis of the relation, 
particularly the reliability of his distance measurements. 
His achievement was to persuade his colleagues that 
there was indeed a linear relation, at least to a first 
approximation. 

The linear relation was swiftly incorporated into 
theoretical models of the universe. By early 1930 
mathematical cosmologists had become acutely aware 
of the inadequacies of the static solutions of the field 
equations of general relativity as representations of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Astronomy c.1900-1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Velocity 
in km/sec. 
——— 


20,000 


15,000 


10,000 


5000 


10 20 30 


Distance in millions of parsecs 


Figure 2. Hubble and Humason’s 1931 apparent 
velocity—distance diagram. The dark circles in the bottom left 
hand of the plot represent the data from Hubble’s 1929 paper on 
‘A relation between distance and radial velocity among 
extra-galactic nebulae’. 


universe, but at this point a paper by the Belgian 
cosmologist GEORGES LEMAITRE (1894-1966), ignored when 
first published in 1927, was ‘rediscovered’ and was now 
welcomed enthusiastically. The combination of Lemaitre’s 
theorizing and Hubble’s handling of the observations 
convinced many that the static solutions had failed because 
the universe is in fact expanding, and the redshift— 
distance relation a natural consequence of this expansion. 
Expanding models, widely neglected during the 1920s, 
were now eagerly explored and after 1930 accorded a 
central role in extragalactic astronomy and cosmology. 
Indeed, by this time a research enterprise had come into 
being that centered on the nature and evolution, as well as 
the relationships between different sorts, of galaxies and 
their place in an expanding universe. 

Hubble, however, preferred not to identify the 
redshifts definitely as Doppler shifts. Also, he regarded his 
1929 paper as a preliminary report and not the publication 
of a completed piece of research. He particularly wanted 
to test the linear relation against more distant nebulae, 
and in 1931 he and Humason announced their latest 
findings (figure 2). Now he calculated that the most remote 
extragalactic nebula lay at an estimated distance of 32 x 
10° pc, a large increase when compared with the furthest 
at 2 x 10° pc in the 1929 plot. There were, moreover, many 
more points on the 1931 diagram because 40 more redshifts 
were available, and Hubble judged the linear relation to 
be much clearer than in 1929. This rapid extension had 
been made possible by the combination of an extremely 
efficient spectrographic objective on the 100 in Mount 
Wilson telescope—at this time still the most powerful in 
the world—and Humason’s skill as an observer. In the 
1931 paper Hubble also sought to distinguish carefully 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between observation and interpretation. He emphasized 
that Humason had measured redshifts, and that they were 
not necessarily Doppler shifts. Although, as we have 
noted, many astronomers and mathematicians believed 
that the redshift—distance relation signified an expansion 
of the universe, others were incredulous at the size of the 
‘velocities’ Humason was finding: if the redshift of one 
nebula was a genuine radial velocity, then it was receding 
at a staggering 19 700 km s~!. Furthermore, if one simply 
extrapolated the present expansion back in time with no 
allowance for a possible acceleration in the expansion, the 
redshift—distance relation implied that there was a time 
about 2 x 10° yr ago when all the material in the universe 
had been packed together. For the numerous astronomers 
who accepted Jeans’s estimate of 10'° yr as the age of the 
Galaxy, this time was far too recent, especially as the time 
scale for stellar evolution was also expected to be of this 
order. How, they asked, could the age of the Galaxy and 
its stars be much greater than the age of the universe? In 
consequence, the time scale problem spawned several (but 
by general agreement unconvincing) attempts to invent an 
alternative mechanism to the Doppler effect that would 
explain the redshifts. 

While the debate on the nature of the redshifts has 
still not been finally settled, by the early 1950s the time 
scale problem had dissolved: astronomers had concluded 
that revisions of the cosmic distance scale meant that the 
present expansion rate did not conflict with estimates 
of the ages of the stars and galaxies. There were 
two main reasons for this change of opinion. First, 
astronomers now concluded that Hubble had mistaken H 
Il regions—clouds of ionized gas—for the brightest stars in 
extragalactic nebulae. Since these clouds are intrinsically 
more luminous than stars, it meant that the corresponding 
distances had been underestimated. Secondly, the 
period—luminosity relationship for the Cepheids had been 
dramatically revised by WALTER BAADE (1893-1960). 

Baade, a German-born astronomer, had joined the 
Mt Wilson staff in 1931. However, when the US entered 
World War II he was counted as an enemy alien. He 
did, nevertheless, receive special permission to use the 
Mt Wilson telescopes, and, with the aid of red-sensitive 
photographic plates and the war-time black-out of Los 
Angeles (the city was already a significant source of light 
pollution for the observatory), Baade managed to resolve 
into stars the central regions of the Andromeda nebula. 
Baade went on to argue that there are two distinct types 
of stars in spiral galaxies, population I (young blue stars 
found in dusty regions) and population II (old red stars 
found in dust-free regions). He later decided that there 
are two different period—luminosity relationships and the 
determining factor deciding which of the two a Cepheid 
belonged to was its population type. A major consequence 
of Baade’s findings was that the distances established by 
means of Cepheids of population I had to be increased by a 
factor of 2, one consequence of which was that astronomers 
decided to double the galactic distance scale. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Astronomy c.1900-1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clusters 
Until 1926 the studies of the arrangement of the nebulae 
had been largely restricted to their distribution on 
the sky, but in that year Hubble made the study 
three dimensional when he examined the frequency 
distribution of diameters and apparent magnitudes (both 
being approximate indicators of distance) of some 400 
extragalactic nebulae. He found that the numbers of 
nebulae to different limits (roughly, distance limits) were 
proportional to the volumes of space represented by the 
limits. Thus he argued there is an approximately uniform 
density of nebulae in all directions (with the exception 
of the Galaxy and the Virgo cluster of galaxies), given 
the assumption that the relative number of giant, normal 
and dwarf galaxies was the same in each of his samples. 
During the 1930s Hubble made further extensive studies 
of the space density of extragalactic nebulae as a function 
of the distance from our Galaxy. His method was to count 
extragalactic nebulae to various limiting magnitudes over 
widely spread areas of sky. Such counts confirmed his 
belief that, although nebulae are found singly, in groups 
and even occasionally in great clusters, when very large 
regions of space are compared the tendency to cluster 
averages out and one region is very much like any other. 
Shapley, however, argued that Hubble was mistaken. 
In 1932, he published the Shapley-Ames catalog of 
galaxies, which, he reckoned, was complete to magnitude 
12.9. To him, the catalog revealed a general lumpiness 
of distribution, with galaxies tending to form clusters 
and lumps, the most notable of which was the Virgo 
cluster. Shapley later extended the limits of his surveys 
to the 18th magnitude; again he reckoned clustering was a 
prominent feature. Indeed, by the early 1950s, clustering 
had become widely accepted as a major characteristic 
of the large-scale distribution of galaxies, and Hubble’s 
hypothesis of a general field occasionally disrupted by 
groups or clusters of galaxies had fallen from favor. In 
1952, G de Vaucoleurs, using the Shapley-Ames catalog 
and elaborating on a number of earlier speculations, 
also argued for the existence of clusters of clusters, or 
superclusters, to explain the distribution of bright galaxies 
on the sky. 


Concluding remarks 

At the start of the 20th century astronomers had believed 
that our Galaxy constituted the entire visible universe, 
but within 30 yr it had become accepted that space 
contains a multitude of visible galaxies. These galaxies, 
moreover, were found to display a redshift—distance 
relation, a relation that was generally taken to indicate 
that the universe is expanding. These triumphs convinced 
astronomers that future progress in cosmology would 
probably be dependent on the construction of ever more 
powerful optical telescopes. The giant 200 in reflector 
at Mount Palomar, completed in 1948, was in part a 
product of this belief. The redshift-distance relation 
and the models of an expanding universe had indeed 
produced an exchange between theory and data in studies 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the large-scale properties of the universe that had been 
undreamt of in the early years of the century. Yet it was 
to be the unexpected extension of observations beyond 
the narrow range of optical wavelengths, to radio waves 
with wavelengths greater than 10 m and y waves with 
wavelengths shorter than 107"? m, that was to do most to 
fashion the next stage in the development of extragalactic 
astronomy. 


Bibliography 

Berendzen R, Hart R and Seeley D 1976 Man Discovers the 
Galaxies (New York: Science History Publications) 

Hetherington N (ed) 1993 Encyclopedia of Cosmology (New 
York: Garland) 

Hoskin M 1982 Stellar Astronomy: Historical Studies 
(Chalfont St Giles: Science History Publications) 

Hubble E P 1936 The Realm of the Nebulae (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press) 

Smith R W 1982 The Expanding Universe: Astronomy’s 
‘Great Debate’ 1900-1931 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Smith R W 1990 Edwin P Hubble and the transformation 
of cosmology Phys. Today 43 52-60 


Robert W Smith 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Background Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Extragalactic Background Light 


Extragalactic background light (EBL) is the integrated 
flux from all extragalactic sources, including those which 
are not individually detected. In keeping with the 
COSMOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE—that the universe should appear 
homogeneous and isotropic to a typical observer—the EBL 
is expected to have a uniform mean level on large angular 
scales over the sky. 

The cosmological significance of the EBL was first 
recognized as early as the 1700s, when astronomers 
imagined the universe to be a static volume of space, 
uniformly filled with stars. In this cosmological picture, 
the number of stars at a distance, r, increases as r?, 
canceling the 1/r? fall-off in the apparent brightness of 
a single star and making the total flux from objects 
populating every shell of space a constant value. This 
view led HEINRICH WILHELM OLBERS and others to conclude 
that the nighttime sky should be as bright as the daytime 
sky. The dilemma presented by the fact that the sky is 
(relatively) dark at night became known as OLBERS’ PARADOX. 
This apparent conflict is now easily explained by the 
expansion of the universe, the finite speed of light and, 
most importantly, the finite lifetimes of stars. However, 
Olbers’ paradox stands as an excellent illustration of the 
power of background measurements to test our model of 
the universe. 

Ironically, while the night sky is far from dark, 
extragalactic sources contribute less than 1% of the sky 
brightness from the ultraviolet (UV) to the infrared 
(IR). Terrestrial, zodiacal and Galactic sources produce 
foreground emission which dominates the sky flux, 
making the diffuse EBL very difficult to measure, but also 
causing strong bias against the individual detection of faint 
or low surface brightness galaxies and intergalactic stars. 
Measurements of the diffuse EBL are immune to surface 
brightness selection effects. The EBL therefore provides 
a complete census of the energy density in the universe, 
making it a very powerful constraint on models of sTaR 
FORMATION and the baryonic content of the universe. 


Sources of the EBL 

The majority of the EBL at UV to IR wavelengths is 
produced by stars at all repsuiFTs since the first stars 
formed. In the far-UV (~1000-1600 A), Lyman continuum 
absorption by hydrogen in the intergalactic medium limits 
the objects contributing to the EBL to those at redshifts 
below z ~ 1600 A/912 A—1 ~ 0.8. In addition, the 
UV light from galaxies is produced by the hot, massive 
stars, which are also responsible for most of the nuclear 
processing of hydrogen into helium and heavier elements 
(generally called ‘metals’). The far-UV EBL thus traces the 
global star formation and metal production rate in the last 
half of a Hubble time. 

The sources of the EBL become more complicated at 
optical (3000 A-1 zm) and IR (1-1000 ~m) wavelengths 
because the light we detect in those bands originates from 
objects over a wider range of redshifts and, consequently, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


emitted wavelengths. The optical EBL includes the direct 
emission from STELLAR POPULATIONS out to redshifts of z ~ 
10. The energy density from stellar populations peaks at 
1-1.5 wm at most stellar ages, so that the optical EBL will 
include both older populations at low redshift and young 
populations at high redshift. 

Finally, much of the stellar emission in the universe 
will be contribute to the far-IR background, both because 
the light from the earliest generations of stars (most distant 
stars) will be redshifted to longer wavelengths and because 
UV-optical photons will be absorbed by dust grains in 
the emitting galaxy and re-radiated as thermal emission 
at infrared wavelengths (A = 10 wm). Dust attenuation of 
short-wavelength light is very efficient and may prevent 
more than 30% of the star formation in the universe from 
being directly detected at wavelengths shorter than 1 wm. 

Non-stellar emission, such as the gravitational 
potential energy from accreting black holes and emission 
from decaying particles, will also contribute to the EBL. Itis 
also possible that a significant fraction of the baryons in the 
universe might reside in a primordial INTERGALACTIC MEDIUM 
of ionized gas which might be identified by its contribution 
to the EBL. While hot gas at a temperature of T ~ 10° K 
would emit x-rays, and cool gas (T ~ 10* K) would 
produce dramatic absorption features in quasar spectra, 
gas at a temperature of T ~ 10° K would be detectable 
only by its contribution to the EBL through redshifted He II 
emission at 304 A and Lya at 1216 A. 


Measuring the EBL 

Figure 1 shows the surface brightnesses of the foreground 
sources as a function of wavelength along lines of sight 
where these sources are faintest—at Galactic latitudes 
greater than 65° and ecliptic latitudes greater than 30°. For 
comparison, EBL detections and upper limits are shown 
in figure 2, along with models of the expected EBL and 
lower limits derived by summing the flux from resolved 
extragalactic sources (i.e. detected galaxies) and models 
of the EBL. At all wavelengths, the cumulative flux from 
foreground sources is roughly 100 times that of the EBL. 


Ultraviolet (1000-2500 A) 

Because the atmosphere is opaque to photons with 
wavelengths shorter than about 3100 A, UV observations 
must be made from rockets or from space. Early efforts 
to detect the far-UV background were inspired by the 
fact that the only bright foreground source documented at 
the time—ZzopDIAcAL LIGHT—drops off sharply below 4000 A 
and becomes insignificant below 2000 A. However, the 
measurement was more difficult than expected and results 
varied by 3 orders of magnitude. With hindsight, it is clear 
that poor spatial resolution made subtraction of Galactic 
stars extremely difficult in these experiments and that the 
instrumental backgrounds were poorly understood. In 
addition, line emission from atoms and simple molecules 
(HI, O, and NO) at altitudes above 300 km and solar Lya 
photons contributed significant flux to the rocket-based 
measurements. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Background Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


100 1000 104 


Brightness, vI,(nW m-sr-!) 
10 


0.1 


Figure 1. The flux from foreground sources is shown for lines of 
sight at Galactic latitudes greater than 65° and ecliptic latitudes 
greater than 30°, where foregrounds are faintest. The curve 
marked by short dashes at 0.3-1 zm shows the airglow 
contribution to ground-based observations: below 0.3 wm, the 
atmosphere is opaque; above 1 wm, the atmosphere is too bright 
for background observations. The solid curve shows zodiacal 
light, with the scattered component peaking around 0.6 wm and 
the thermal component peaking around 10 wm. The short-long 
dashed curve shows thermal emission from interstellar (Galactic) 
dust, with strong emission features around 3, 6, 8 and 10 wm. 
Scattered light at UV to optical wavelengths from the same dust 
is marked by a dot—-dashed curve. The long dashed curve shows 
the Galactic UV contribution composed of atomic and molecular 
line emission and continuum emission from interstellar gas (see 
text). The dotted curve shows the flux from discrete Galactic 
stars fainter than V = 6.0 mag. The dot-short dashed curve 
shows the cosmic microwave background radiation (2.73 K). 


104 


go + 4 
=: , ii t E 
ictyyddvat Ly, | 
ys Vitis 4 
BY ua Wy 
i= q 
ea) a 

a. 1 puiiiiil 1 i pal 1 =e meek L rere 

2 1 10 100 1000 


Wavelength(um) 


Figure 2. Measurements of the surface brightness of the EBL 
from the UV to the IR are indicated by filled dots and by the 
dark, solid curve. Upper limits are indicated with downward 
arrows. Upward arrows indicate lower limits to the EBL from 
the integrated flux of detected sources (galaxy counts). The 
hatch-marked region shows the range predicted by various 
models based on UV-optical source detections when dust 
obscuration is included (see Dwek et al (1998) for details). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Rapid progress came around 1980, with the advent of 
UV detectors with better resolution and greater sensitivity. 
Results in the last few decades have consistently shown 
that the majority of the UV background originates within 
the Galaxy, with only a small component being isotropic 
and therefore possibly extragalactic. The majority 
of the Galactic contribution is diffuse, dust-scattered 
starlight. The scattered flux can be estimated based 
on the intensity of the thermal emission from the same 
dust, which identifies the column density of dust, and 
simple scattering models incorporating empirically and 
theoretically determined dust properties. The previously 
poor agreement between modeling efforts now seems well 
explained by evidence that interstellar dust is strongly 
forward scattering. The scattered UV flux therefore 
depends on the scattering angle between the line of sight 
and the incident starlight from the center and plane of the 
Galaxy. Line emission from [O III] 5007 A, CIV 1550A 
and O III] 1663 A has also been detected in correlation 
with the column density of neutral hydrogen, as have H 
fluorescence (1550-1650 A), two-photon, bound-free and 
free-free continuum emission, and Lya (1216 A) and Ha 
line emission, all from warm (T ~ 10° K), high-latitude 
gas. The intensity of these components is proportional to 
the cosecant of the Galactic latitude, which approximates 
the path length through smoothly distributed gas. 

Measurements and limits in the last 10 yr have con- 
verged towards EBL fluxes in the range 2-5 nW m™ sr“!, 
with a minimum estimate of 1 nW m~ sr~! from the cu- 
mulative flux in detected sources. Emission from galax- 
ies is apparently responsible for the majority of this flux, 
while quasars and active galactic nuclei are estimated to 
contribute less than 0.2 nW m~ sr“ and flux from any in- 
tergalactic medium is limited to less than 0.2 nW m~ sr7! 
between 912 and 1216 A. 


Optical (3000 A-1 jum) 

The Earth’s own atmosphere was the greatest impediment 
to early efforts at measuring the optical EBL. Atmospheric 
emission (AIRGLOW) is not only at least 100 times brighter 
than the EBL but also can vary by several per cent on 
timescales of minutes, as can atmospheric extinction. 
These effects make it nearly impossible to correct for 
atmospheric emission and extinction to the required 
accuracy. The only demonstratedly successful method for 
dealing with the atmosphere is to avoid it by conducting 
measurements of the EBL from space. The dominant 
foreground source contributing from beyond Earth’s 
atmosphere is sunlight scattering off of the large (>10 wm), 
rough, INTERPLANETARY DUST grains which concentrate in the 
ecliptic plane. This scattered zodiacal light is also at least 
100 times brighter than the flux of the EBL, even at ecliptic 
latitudes of |b| > 35°. As the solar system is harder to 
escape than the Earth’s atmosphere, it is fortunate that 
the scattering involved is well described by Mie scattering 
theory and is only weakly wavelength dependent, with 
scattering becoming more efficient by ~5% per 1000 A 
toward longer wavelengths. The mean zodiacal light flux 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Background Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


can therefore be measured using the strength of solar 
absorption features (FRAUNHOFER LINES) which are preserved 
in its spectrum. 

Optical CCD detectors typically have subarcsecond 
resolution, which makes resolution and subtraction of 
stars in our own Galaxy relatively easy. However, as in the 
UV, interstellar dust scatters incident starlight, producing 
diffuse Galactic light at optical wavelengths. Thermal 
emission from dust and the correlation of dust with neutral 
hydrogen can both be used to identify the lines of sight 
with the lowest dust column density, and simple scattering 
models can be used to estimate and subtract the low-level 
contribution which remains. The scattering properties 
of the dust are inferred from observations of the diffuse 
Galactic light at near-UV wavelengths where it dominates 
the sky and also from observations of a few neutral 
hydrogen (H I) clouds and planetary nebulae, where dust 
column densities are high. 

Ground-based efforts to measure the optical EBL 
started in the 1970s. Airglow was identified either by 
geometrical modeling or by beam switching between 
a clear line of sight and a ‘dark’ dust cloud at high 
Galactic latitude in order to isolate the foreground from 
background sources. In 1980, the Pioneer 10 Explorer 
obtained data not only from above the atmosphere but 
from beyond the zodiacal dust cloud at a distance of 3 AU 
from the Sun. While it avoided both airglow and zodiacal 
light, the Explorer’s poor resolution made the subtraction 
of even discrete Galactic sources (i.e. stars) very difficult. 
As in the UV, rapid progress has been made with the 
advent of high-resolution detectors above the atmosphere 
aboard the Hubble Space Telescope. Detections of the EBL at 
3000, 5500 and 8000 A have recently been reported based 
on coordinated HST imaging (see HUBBLE DEEP FIELDS) and 
ground-based spectroscopy. 


Infrared (1 4m-1000 jum) 

Any warm body emits thermal radiation, including 
telescopes, the Earth’s atmosphere and the Earth itself. 
Observations of the IR EBL must therefore be made from 
space with cryogenically cooled detectors. From space, 
thermal emission comes from dust trapped in the solar 
system and in the Galaxy. Subtraction of these foregrounds 
depends on spectral modeling using multiwavelength 
observations and geometrical modeling based on all- 
sky coverage. The most ambitious and successful IR 
measurement to date was undertaken with the Cosmic 
Background Explorer (COBE), launched in 1989. Prior 
to COBE, progress was made using short-lived, rocket- 
borne telescopes and satellites intended for observations of 
discrete sources, such as the Infrared Astronomical Satellite 
(IRAS). 

Zodiacal light from scattering dies off at a wavelength 
of a few microns, but thermal re-emission of absorbed 
sunlight from the same dust peaks around 10 wm. This 
thermal emission is recognizable from the motion of 
the Earth in its orbit through the zodiacal dust. The 
annual variation of the sky brightness in all directions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


can be modeled empirically and subtracted. Once the 
thermal zodiacal component is removed, some individual 
Galactic sources can be resolved and subtracted. Flux from 
unresolved, discrete Galactic sources can be determined 
at each wavelength based on detailed statistical models of 
galactic sources and their spatial distribution. The diffuse 
emission from interstellar dust is brightest at around 
100 wm. This component can be estimated and subtracted 
at wavelengths longer than 100 wm by scaling the zodiacal 
light-subtracted, 100 pm observations using a temperature 
model of the dust. 

The COBE observations produced 3o detections at 140 
and 240 xm and 20 upper limits at 100 wm and shorter. 


Testing the big picture 

The difference between the cumulative flux in optically 
detected sources and the detected optical EBL indicates 
that roughly 50% of the flux from individual sources 
is beyond the spectroscopic detection limit of current 
redshift surveys (see figure 2 and also GALAXY REDSHIFT 
suRVEYS). Recent results show that the difference may 
be partially explained by low surface brightness objects 
which are not included in standard catalogs and missed 
flux in low surface brightness regions of the objects which 
are catalogued. At longer wavelengths, however, the 
individual sources which produce the IR EBL have not 
been completely identified and may be powered by stellar 
or non-stellar sources. More generally, upper limits, lower 
limits and detections of the EBL all seem to indicate that 
the energy density in extragalactic sources is roughly 
constant over 4 orders of magnitude in wavelength (0.1- 
1000 xm). This spectral shape alone is a very interesting 
constraint on our models of the universe. The mean 
EBL at any wavelength is a complicated function of 
emission rates from stars, dust extinction, evolution of 
galaxies and the initial mass function and evolution 
of the stellar populations themselves. Meaningful 
interpretation of the EBL therefore requires modeling these 
variables as a function of redshift. Such models—which 
characterize our picture of the universe—are constructed 
from observations of resolved sources as a function of 
redshift. 

One method for modeling the EBL is based on 
measurements of the rest-frame UV emission of individual 
galaxies, which indicates the star formation rate as a 
function of redshift and subsequently the EBLas a function 
of wavelength. Uncertainties in the dust attenuation of UV 
and optical light in the emitting galaxies limit the accuracy 
of these models. Other uncertainties include the stellar 
initial mass function and spectral energy distributions, 
which together identify the number of stars forming 
with a given mass and the spectral output from those 
stars. Models of the EBL based on this method need 
to include significant (230%) dust obscuration and re- 
radiation in order to provide reasonable agreement with 
observations of the infrared EBL. This necessity indicates 
that star formation regions at all redshifts are largely dust 
enshrouded and optically dark. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Background Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The conversion rate of neutral hydrogen gas into 
stars as a function of redshift can be inferred from the 
statistics of absorption features in quasar spectra. This 
provides another method of modeling the EBL. As with the 
models based on UV rest-frame emission, the dominant 
uncertainty in these models is the fraction of optical light 
attenuated by dust and the characteristic temperature of 
the dust. As metals are produced through NUCLEOSYNTHESIS 
in the same hot, young stars whose output dominates the 
EBL, the mean EBL also can be predicted by the total 
metal mass density in the local universe. CLUSTERS OF 
GALAXIES are a convenient place to measure metal density, 
because any metals which may be ejected from galaxies 
will be trapped in the cluster potential. The rate of 
metal production can also be traced by absorption features 
caused by intervening systems in quasar spectra as a 
function of redshift. The total metal enrichment in the 
universe as identified by either method agrees with the 
total EBL energy density detected to date to within a factor 
of 2-5. 

After more than 25 yr of work in the field, 
measurements or well-quantified upper limits have been 
found for the EBL over the full wavelength range from 
the UV to the IR. To within the measurement and 
modeling uncertainties, the results at all wavelengths 
produce a generally self-consistent picture of the total star 
formation rate in the universe, the total metals produced 
in stars and the total energy output from nucleosynthesis. 
Additionally, at wavelengths shorter than 1 wm, the 
diffuse background can be accounted for by sources which 
are well understood and largely present in surveys of 
individually detected galaxies. Efforts to better quantify 
the EBL UV and mid-IR wavelengths are underway in the 
form of new satellite missions and programs to identify 
the sources of the IR background. 


Bibliography 

Bowyer S and Leinert Ch (ed) 1989 Galactic and 
Extragalactic Background Radiation (IAU Symposium 
139) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Calzetti D, Livio M and Madau P (ed) 1995 Extragalactic 
Background Radiations (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press) 

Dwek E et al 1998 The COBE diffuse infrared back- 
ground experiment search for the cosmic infrared 
background: IV. Cosmological implications Astro- 
phys. J. 508 106 

Harrison E 1987 Darkness at Night (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press) 

Leinert Ch et al 1998 The 1997 reference of diffuse night 
sky brightness Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 127 1 


Rebecca A Bernstein 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Reference Frames 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Extragalactic Reference Frames 


The conceptual basis of reference frames defined by 
extragalactic objects is straightforward: that the universe 
as a whole does not rotate so very distant objects cannot 
have an overall rotational motion. Experimentally, the 
global rotation of the universe is less than 10~? arcsec yr“ 
as inferred from the 3 K microwave background radiation. 
At the distance of 108 parsec, even if an object were moving 
transversely at the speed of light, its angular velocity 
would be less than 0.6 x 10-3 arcsec yr~!, while an object 
moving at a physically more reasonable speed comparable 
to the Sun would show a motion of 10~° arcsec yr, 
entirely undetectable by current technology. Since neither 
systematic universal motion nor random motion at such 
great distance is measurable, it is reasonable to construct a 
static celestial reference frame on the basis that such objects 
are fixed in the sky. 

The idea of using extragalactic objects to define 
the celestial reference frame is quite old, having been 
discussed by Herschel and Laplace some 200 years ago, 
even before there was proof that such objects existed. 
The discovery of external galaxies and their distances 
in the early twentieth century raised the possibility of 
their use as fiducial objects for the celestial reference 
frame. However, their fuzzy, faint optical images made 
it quite difficult, and AsTRomMeTRY continued to use bright 
stars despite the complications of significant random and 
systematic motions. Fortunately, observations in the radio 
frequencies in the 1960s revealed a class of objects that has 
proven to be suitable for astrometry of the highest order, 
albeit with some limitations. These are QUASARS, compact 
radio sources which are pointlike in the optical band but 
with large REDSHIFTS implying cosmological distances. 


Very long baseline interferometry 

The technique for measuring the positions of quasars and 
similar objects is vLBi (very long baseline interferometry). 
In this application, VLBI is a geometric technique 
that measures directions in space with great accuracy. 
Schematically, using a pair of distant antennas, the 
difference in the time of arrival at the two stations of signals 
emitted by a radio source is measured with a precision of 
a few picoseconds. For a typical baseline of 5000 km, this 
corresponds to a fraction of a milliarcsecond. This time 
difference (delay) and its first derivative (delay rate) are 
reconstructed by offline correlation of the signals (actually 
radio noise usually buried in the thermal noise of the 
electronics) recorded at the two ends of the baseline. A 
key piece of equipment at the stations is the clock used 
to time events. VLBI makes use of hydrogen masers with 
stability of one part in 10" for both time and frequency, 
and the raw data are recorded digitally at rates up to 
1 Gbit s-!. In current practice a network of up to 20 
stations observes 50-80 radio sources around the sky 
multiple times during a 24 h session. Since a delay and 
a delay rate are generated from each pair of stations for 
each time a source is observed, there can be upwards of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


20000 delay/delay rate data points from one observing 
session. VLBI observations suitable for high-precision 
astrometry began in the late 1970s with the development 
of dual-frequency receivers and the Mark III VLBI data 
acquisition system, and an active worldwide observing 
program continues. 

The analysis of VLBI data for astrometric and geodetic 
purposes requires the estimation of source positions, 
station positions, nutation corrections and parameters 
characterizing the behavior of the clock and atmosphere at 
each station as well as careful modeling of all geophysical 
and astronomical effects. Each separate session provides 
the relative positions of the observed sources with some 
uncertainty. On different days different sets of sources 
are observed. It is the overlap of some common sources 
from one day to another that connects all the positions 
together. From all the overlaps and directly measured 
positions come the complete set of relative positions. 
Repeated measurements, either directly in one day or 
indirectly from different days, improve the precision of 
the inferred positions. Having varied combinations of 
baselines and sets of observed sources strengthens the 
overall geometry and weakens the correlations between 
the source coordinates and the numerous phenomena 
modeled in the analysis. In particular, a mixture of north— 
south and east-west baselines is needed to determine both 
components of source position. Since VLBI measurements 
give relative positions, the orientation of the ensemble of 
positions, i.e. the pole and right ascension origin, must be 
determined from external information. This is a necessary 
step in assigning the numerical position values that define 
the reference frame. In practice the intermediate results are 
manipulated as the usual right ascension and declination 
values, but the fundamental VLBI measurements are of 
the arclengths between sources, the precision of which is 
contained in the full covariance matrix of the set of source 
positions. The earliest VLBI positions in 1971 were no 
better than a few arcseconds, but by the mid 1980s a few 
milliarcseconds had been achieved. 

Unlike stellar astrometry, which must rely on 
a conventional theory of PRECESSION and NUTATION to 
transform true date coordinates to mean coordinates 
of the standard epoch, VLBI astrometry is sensitive to 
the errors in the standard precession/nutation model, 
which amount to several milliarcseconds. To achieve 
the full accuracy inherent in the stability of extragalactic 
positions, it is necessary to allow for corrections to the 
precession/nutation theory. This can be accomplished in 
two ways, either by adjusting the precession constant and 
various nutation coefficients or by estimating the offset 
between the actual pole and the modeled pole for each 
day of observation. 


Foundation of the extragalactic reference frame 

The process of laying the conceptual foundation for the ex- 
tragalactic reference frame, identifying its fiducial objects 
and developing the fundamental catalog was begun at the 
Twentieth IAU General Assembly in Baltimore in 1988 by a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Reference Frames 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


resolution stating ‘The International Astronomical Union 
should adopt a celestial reference frame based upon a con- 
sistent set of coordinates for a sufficient number of extra- 
galactic objects when the required observational data have 
been successfully obtained and appropriately analyzed. 
. This reference frame is likely to be based, initially at 
least, exclusively upon radio astrometry.” The Working 
Group on Reference Systems headed by J Hughes was es- 
tablished with subgroups for time (B Guinot), coordinate 
frames and origins (J Kovalevsky), astronomical constants 
(T Fukushima), and the theory of nutation (D McCarthy). 
The fundamental concepts (see also SPACE AND TIME REFER- 
ENCES: CONCEPTS) Of what is now the ICRF (International Ce- 
lestial Reference Frame) were developed by the subgroups 
and extensively discussed at the IAU Colloquium 127 on 
Reference Systems held in Virginia Beach in 1990. The 
general theory of relativity for space and time, the use of 
extragalactic radio objects, and the continuity between the 
existing stellar and the anticipated extragalactic celestial 
reference frames were summarized in nine reeommenda- 
tions adopted as a resolution by the Twenty-first IAU Gen- 
eral Assembly in Buenos Aires in 1991. A working group 
under C de Vegt was formed to select the radio sources 
to be used with emphasis on the need to connect the ra- 
dio and optical frames. The Twenty-second IAU General 
Assembly in The Hague in 1994 adopted the list of some 
600 sources and established a new working group under 
L Morrison to define the positions. This work was done 
by a subgroup of VLBI and celestial reference system spe- 
cialists. The resulting ICRF catalog was adopted by the 
Twenty-third IAU General Assembly in Kyoto in 1997 and 
came into effect on 1 January 1998, replacing the FK5. A 
Working Group for the International Celestial Reference 
System (ICRS) under F Mignard was formed to carry on 
the ICRF work, to extend the frame to other objects and fre- 
quencies, and to elucidate the consequences of the ICRF. 


Definition of the ICRF extragalactic reference 
frame 

According to the new adopted rules, the fundamental 
directions of the celestial reference system will remain 
fixed in space; they will no longer be dependent on 
modeling the motion of solar system objects. The fiducial 
objects will be monitored. The adopted positions may 
be revised when improved information is available, but 
the coordinate axes will be maintained by implementing 
the statistical condition that the coordinates of selected 
defining sources show no global rotation from the old set 
of coordinates to the new realization. 

The data used to determine the ICRF radio source 
positions included 1.6 million pairs of dual-frequency 
delays and rates from 1979 to the middle of 1995. 
The data were contributed from several geodetic and 
astrometric observing programs, the vast majority of 
the observations coming from the former but most 
of the sources coming from the latter. The design of 
the analysis was intended to provide (1995) state of 
the art source positions, in particular to free the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


results from contamination from precession/nutation 
errors, anomalous source behavior, geodetic noise and 
systematic atmospheric effects. Simultaneous dual- 
frequency observations provided the calibration of 
ionospheric dispersion. Celestial pole offsets in obliquity 
and longitude were estimated for each day. Positions 
of sources with excessive scatter or apparent motion 
(as determined from test solutions) were estimated 
separately for each day as were station positions. An 
elevation limit of 6° was adopted to balance the need 
for maximum observing geometry against the difficulty 
in correctly modeling the atmosphere at low elevations. 
Atmospheric gradients were estimated to remove a 
significant systematic effect. Both delays and rates 
were used to maximize the information available and to 
decrease correlations. 

Because of the large number and high quality of 
observations, the formal errors for the positions were 
exceedingly small and not a meaningful measure of 
uncertainty. It was necessary to consider several other 
effects to assign realistic errors. One was the statistical 
validity of the formal errors. Another was the cumulative 
influence of all modeling errors and editing decisions. Yet 
another was the magnitude of specific, identifiable errors 
that could have distorted the results. A consideration 
of all known error sources indicated that a realistic error 
estimate could be made by inflating the formal errors by a 
factor of 1.5 followed by a root-sum-square increase of 0.25 
milliarcsecond. For the most frequently observed sources 
0.25 milliarcsecond was the dominant error. 

The sources from the ICRF solution were divided after 
the fact into three categories: 212 defining sources that met 
a series of quality criteria; 294 candidate sources that failed 
one or more of the quality criteria, e.g. too few observations 
or observing interval too short, and 102 ‘other’ sources 
(whose positions were estimated each day). While the 
distribution over the sky of the ICRF as a whole is quite 
uniform, the defining sources are sparser in the southern 
hemisphere because of a dearth of VLBI stations and 
limited observing programs. The ‘other’ sources include 
a number with relatively bright optical counterparts that 
could be used to connect the radio and stellar frames. 

The axes of the frame were aligned to the International 
Earth Rotation Service (IERS) realization of the ICRS with 
an error of ~0.020 milliarcsecond. The Hipparcos catalog, 
which is the optical realization of the celestial reference 
frame (see HIPPARCOS AND TYCHO CATALOGUES), was aligned to 
the ICRF, largely through VLBI observations of radio stars. 
The ICRF also provides the framework for various space 
geodetic techniques to measure the terrestrial positions 
and velocities that constitute the terrestrial reference frame 
and to monitor variations in the rotation of the Earth. 


Future improvements 

The two chief phenomena leading to random and 
systematic errors in the ICRF are the atmosphere and 
source structure. While the propagation delay at zenith 
from the dry atmosphere can be accurately calibrated from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extragalactic Reference Frames 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


local meteorological data, the dry delay in the line of sight 
to the observed source is subject to modeling error. The 
delay from water vapor cannot be calibrated accurately, 
and both delays are subject to random temporal and spatial 
fluctuations that must be estimated from the VLBI or other 
microwave data. 

Quasars are not point radiators. Source structure can 
cause their position to appear slightly different depending 
on baseline geometry, and changes in source structure 
can cause apparent movement. Detailed source maps 
show that intrinsic variations in structure can be quite 
extreme, ranging from relatively compact naked-core 
objects, to compact double sources, to complex core- 
jet objects. The situation is complicated by the fact 
that compact extragalactic RADIO SOURCES are known to 
have variable intensity and to have frequency- and time- 
dependent intrinsic structure. Consequently, unknown 
and unmodeled source structure effects may be introduced 
into the reference frame. The sources can be characterized 
after mapping by the degree to which the delay and delay 
rate are affected by the structure over the full range of 
possible baseline geometries, and the worst sources can 
be rejected for most astrometric purposes. 

As of the beginning of 1999, about 800000 more 
observations including about 50 new sources had been 
acquired by geodetic and astrometric programs since the 
ICRF was constructed in 1995. These were integrated 
with the data and analysis used for the ICRF to update 
the original catalog. The original ICRF analysis was 
not copied exactly to incorporate new data, but the new 
positions are consistent with the ICRF at its stated level 
of accuracy, about 0.25 milliarcsecond in overall source 
positions and about 0.020 milliarcsecond in orientation. 
Positions were determined for new sources, and updated 
positions and errors were found for candidate sources with 
additional observations. The positions and uncertainties 
of the defining sources were not changed since they are 
the actual realization of the ICRF, and the work to include 
more recent data does not lead directly to the replacement 
of the existing ICRF. The defining sources will be used in 
a no-net-rotation condition relative to the ICRF to ensure 
that positions from new analyses are aligned with the ICRF. 

There are several features that distinguish the ICRF 
from conventional stellar catalogs that formerly defined 
the celestial reference frame. First, the quasars are 
optically faint so connection to the stellar frame is 
complicated. Second, while the positional history of the 
radio sources is known, the results of future observations 
cannot be predicted. Consequently, new sources must be 
observed to replenish and expand the list of candidates. 
Third, as new observations accumulate, it should be 
possible to move candidate sources up or down the scale of 
usefulness in subsequent ICRF realizations. The problem 
of position changes related to source structure variation 
may be solved in the future if the application of source 
structure information permits the identification and use 
of truly kinematically static points in the sky. Since the 
original VLBI delay and delay rates are accessible, they 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


can always be reused in improved analysis. When models 
and estimation techniques are significantly improved and 
sufficient data are accumulated, a new ICRF can be 
constructed de novo. 


Bibliography 

Ma C, Arias E F, Eubanks T M, Fey A L, Gontier A-M, 
Jacobs C S, Sovers O J, Archinal B A and Charlot 
P 1998 The International Celestial Reference Frame 
realized by very long baseline interferometry Astron. 
J. 116 516-46 

Sovers O J, Fanselow J L and Jacobs C S 1998 Astrometry 
and geodesy with radio interferometry: experiments, 
models, results Rev. Mod. Phys. 70 1393-454 


Chopo Ma 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planetary Companions and Brown Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Extrasolar Planetary Companions 
and Brown Dwarfs 


The first convincing detection of both extrasolar planets 
(EXOPLANETS) and brown dwarfs came during the 
1990s'. The first planetary system found around another 
star is actually a very special case: the host is a 6.2 ms 
pulsar, a billion year old NEUTRON STAR which should 
formerly have erupted as a supernova. From precise 
timing of the radio pulses, A Wolszcan and D A Frail 
determined the orbits of three inferred terrestrial-mass 
companions in 1992. The leading model for the 
formation of pulsar planets involves post-supernova 
capture of a small amount of material from a preexisting 
companion into an ACCRETION DISK. The apparent 
existence of planets in such an exotic environment may 
tend to indicate that planet formation can take place 
under a wide variety of conditions, but we do not 
consider this case further here. 

The inferred existence of the first Jovian-mass 
extrasolar planet in a normal stellar environment was 
found by detection of periodic radial velocity variations 
in the optical spectrum of the Sun-like G star 51 Peg; the 
discovery of 51 Peg B was announced in 1995 by M 
Mayor and D Queloz of the University of Geneva. Over 
the next few years several groups utilized this the 
Doppler technique to report dozens of discoveries. 

In the same few-month period of 1995, the first bona 
fide brown dwarf—uinstantly recognizable as a substellar 
object—was reported by a group of Johns Hopkins 
University and California Institute of Technology 
scientists (see bibliography). In contrast to the first case, 
the latter was a direct detection of the brown dwarf as a 
resolved, distant companion to the nearby M dwarf 
Gliese 229. Since this object, called GL 229B, features 
methane (CH,) rather than carbon monoxide (CO) in its 
infrared spectrum, its surface temperature was inferred to 
be near 1000 K—1much too cool to be a star. Methane is 
also the dominant form of carbon in the atmosphere of 
Jupiter. In figure 1 we display a recently published 
infrared spectrum of GL 229B with the methane and 
water bands labelled. For comparison are shown spectra 
at similar wavelengths of the late M dwarf vB10 and the 
L dwarf GD 165B (see the final section). These 


' For this discussion, a brown dwarf is defined as a configuration 
incapable of sustained hydrogen fusion reactions, with a mass between 
about 0.01Mo and the stellar mass limit of (0.075—0.08)Mo. These 
values correspond very nearly to 10 and 75-80 Jupiter masses (M)), 
respectively. A giant planet is defined as having a mass less than about 
10M; and thus is incapable of even limited nuclear burning of 
deuterium. In addition, theoretical calculations tend to favor a lower 
mass limit for formation of isolated entities (brown dwarfs) of the order 
10M;. An upper limit to the mass of a Jovian planet can be inferred 
from the limited amount of gas in a circumstellar disk and its finite 
lifetime; this has been suggested to be not more than several Jovian 
masses. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


considerably warmer objects show HO and CO, but not 
CH4. 

In retrospect, as will be discussed, GL 229B may not 
have been the first brown dwarf to be discovered. Several 
different techniques have yielded candidate substellar- 
mass objects over the last 10 yr. In the next section we 
summarize the techniques that have been tried or are 
planned for the future. Then we summarize briefly some 
findings and their implications as of early 1999. In figure 
2, kindly made available by Dr Alan Boss, the 
distribution of most known extrasolar planets and brown 
dwarfs as of early 1999 is shown as a plot of mass (in M)) 
versus orbital semimajor axis (in AU). Other features of 
this plot will be discussed subsequently. 


Direct detection techniques 

The direct detection of GL 229B was made possible by 
its photospheric radiation. In a later section the 
discoveries of more luminous brown dwarf candidates in 
both young star clusters and the field will be discussed. It 
is obviously a much more difficult task to detect directly 
a cold planet. In the visible the reflected light from a 
Jupiter analog is typically ~10~° that of the primary star. 
In the thermal infrared (5 um and greater), this contrast 
may be as small as 10~* for an old planet. Direct imaging 
of a planetary or cold brown dwarf companion requires 
that the noise in the point spread function of the 
primary’s light profile be reduced accordingly. As of this 
writing, only a few brown dwarf companions (and no 
planets) have been detected directly in this way. For the 
future, ADAPTIVE OPTICS systems with a coronographic 
capability are being developed for the new generation of 
8-10 m telescopes. 

For example, in 2001, The ADONIS (Adaptive 
Optics Near Infrared System) instrument mounted at the 
European Southern Observatory (ESO) 3.6 m telescope 
at the La Silla Observatory has obtained an image of a 
dust disk around the star iota Horologii, already known to 
possess a planet at least twice as heavy as Jupiter in an 
Earth-like orbit. The dust disk around iota Horologii is 
quite extended; it is detected to a distance of about 65 
AU (10 000 million km) from the star. From the 
elongation, it appears that the inclination of the disk is 
about 42°. 

Also promising for direct detection of planets is 
ground-based interferometric imaging in the infrared (see 
also INTERFEROMETRY: GROUND). Direct imaging of 
Earth-like planets will require development of a space- 
borne interferometer with a baseline of ~100 m and 
perhaps 4 m apertures. 


Astrometric detection 

The astrometric signature of an orbiting planet is a 
periodic wobble proportional to both the planet’s mass 
and its orbital radius (see ASTROMETRY: TELESCOPES AND 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planetary Companions and Brown Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gliese 229B 


H,0 
| rs | 


a 


nS 


GD 1658 


Normalized f, + C 


Tia = 2600 K 


2 2.5 


» (uw) 


Figure 1. The near-IR spectrum of GL 229B compared with spectra of vB10 (M8 V) and GD 165B (L2 V, see the last section of this 
article). The great strengths of the CH, and H,O bands in GL 229B give it a blue J-K color. From Oppenheimer B R, Kulkarni S R, 


Matthews K and van Kerkwijk M H 1998 Astrophys. J. 502 932. 


TECHNIQUES). It is therefore nicely complementary to the 
Doppler radial velocity technique which is biased in 
favor of nearby companions; this technique is also 
insensitive to the viewed orbital inclination. A Jupiter at 
4 AU from a solar-type star 10 pc away would produce 
an astrometric amplitude of only 0.5 milliarcsec (mas). 
The sensitivity of an astrometric measurement to 1 mas is 
shown as the long-short dashed diagonal line in figure 2, 
from top left to bottom right. Objects falling to the right 
of the line are detectable by this method, if the orbital 
periods are not prohibitively long. Jupiter by itself would 
be a marginal detection in a solar system clone. In the 
future as astrometric precision is refined from 
milliarcseconds down to microarcseconds (from space), 
this technique can become very powerful. The reality of 
the astrometric companion alleged for Lalande 21185 
(figure 2) is now questionable. To date no definitive 
detection of a planetary companion has_ been 
accomplished by astrometry. 


Photometric detection 

Several ground and space programs and proposals are 
underway which will attempt to detect planets and brown 
dwarfs undergoing transits of a parent star. The Jovian 
planet will dim a G star primary by the order of 1% (the 
ratio of surface areas), a terrestrial planet by only 0.01%. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Another photometric signature to be exploited is 
gravitational MICROLENSING. With suitably high time- 
resolution sampling, the microlensing surveys can reveal 
the photometric signatures of foreground substellar 
objects in the light of background stars such as those 
observed in the crowded fields of the GALACTIC BULGE. 


Detection by periodic radial velocity 
variations 

As discussed in the introduction, it is the Doppler 
technique which has yielded bountiful discoveries of 
extrasolar planets in several years of work. The general 
expression for the semiamplitude, K, of the stellar radial 
velocity induced by an orbiting companion is 


2nG Mp sini 1 


Pls (M, + mp)! (1 — e2)¥2 . 


Newton’s refinement of Kepler’s third law then yields 
mp Sin i and the orbital radius a (See KEPLER’S LAWS)’. 


? Originally, it was also proposed that some mechanism other than 
orbital motion was responsible for the apparent periodic Doppler 
signature. However, subsequent research has shown that orbital motion 
is the only plausible interpretation, despite the unexpectedly short 
orbital periods implied for some of the planetary companions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planetary Companions and Brown Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


LOO: 
- Os 
hi: 
= 10 : 
roe 3: ED lg80:9 + 
a= o SI 8% 
oe eo etziod AE 
4 { . f a #2 rs a 
Yt es bee Cue [21° 
o : ne tae” 
! 
0] ] 1 


; 10 
separalion (Farlth sun distance) 


cM, TGtS) 


{b} 0 Dinery 


100 1000 10000 


Figure 2. Extrasolar planets and brown dwarfs known as of early 1999, masses (M)) versus separation (in AU). Arrows indicate that 
most mass estimates determined from the Doppler technique are lower limits. Filled, open circles and xs indicate circular, eccentric 
and unknown eccentricity orbits. Jupiter and Saturn are also plotted. Some field brown dwarfs are plotted arbitrarily in the upper 
right with rough mass estimates. To the left of the solid line orbits should be circularized owing to tides (51 Peg B objects). The 
dashed line gives sensitivity for Doppler amplitude of 30 m s“'. The nearly perpendicular long-short dash line gives complementary 


sensitivity for an astrometric wobble of | mas. 


The high accuracies to which K is now measured are 
due to the development of precise spectrographs designed 
for this purpose (see SPECTROGRAPHS: HIGH-RESOLUTION 
SPECTROGRAPHS). The Sun orbits the barycenter of the 
solar system with a typical velocity of only 13 ms'. A 
few groups have achieved measurement errors as low as 
3 ms'', accurate enough to detect the effects of Jupiter 
and Saturn at least marginally if they were to observe a 
solar system clone. Their various techniques involve 
superposing the wavelength calibration scale directly on 
the stellar spectrum, to remove even small effects of 
spectrograph flexure when the telescope moves. The 
accuracy of the Doppler technique in ferreting out 
periodic radial velocity variations in the spectra of solar- 
type stars is limited directly by the ‘noise’ due to motions 
in the stellar atmospheres. The dispersion of velocity 
measurements increases linearly with the stellar 
rotational velocity, which is known to correlate with 
general stellar activity. An active star may even display a 
Doppler-like velocity signature at the stellar rotation 
period. 

The dashed line approximately perpendicular to the 
astrometric line in figure 2 maps the sensitivity of a 
radial velocity amplitude of 30 m s'; this shows the 
complementary nature of these techniques. Since 
virtually all extrasolar planet discoveries were made 


using the Doppler technique, the known cases fall above 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and to the left of this line. The arrows indicate that the 
mass determinations are always lower limits, since the 
orbital inclination is generally unknown. Thus many 
possible brown dwarfs in the upper left may in reality be 
low-mass stars, the result of selection bias. In fact the 
evidence currently is that there are few brown dwarf 
companions found close to stars in the solar 
neighborhood. Some objects in the upper right include 
single brown dwarf candidates to be discussed later. 


Properties of extrasolar planets 

The preceding discussion indicates that the current list of 
known objects is biased by the selection constraints of 
the Doppler and astrometric methods. In particular the 
sensitivities to Jovian planets at the separations observed 
for those in our solar system are marginal, and the time 
baselines are still too short for even one orbital period to 
be fully sampled. That Jovian planets may be found 
inside of 1 AU separation is now obvious, and these of 
course are found most easily. Two distinct groups 
deserve special discussion. 

One group including the first object 51 Peg B lie in 
circular orbits of less than 0.1 AU separation. Objects 
falling to the left of the solid curve near 0.1 AU in figure 
2 lie so close to the parent star that the orbits must be 
circularized, as is observed to be the case. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planetary Companions and Brown Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Theoretical work on Jovian planet formation argues 
strongly that they could not accrete and grow to Jovian 
mass in the hot inner region of the circumstellar nebula. 
It is believed that they must have migrated inwards 
before the gaseous phase of the disk ended, since the 
dissipation of the orbital angular momentum depends on 
the presence of viscous gas. It is possible that some 
Jovian planets accrete onto the host star and may even 
enhance the surface abundance of some elements. 

A second peculiar group are the Jovian planets and 
possible brown dwarf companions in eccentric orbits. 
These lie to the right of the tidal circularization line, as 
they should. A planet with the most elongated orbit 
detected so far (September 2001) is HD 80606, which 
moves between 5 and 127 million km from the central 
star. Since the standard model of accretion in a gaseous 
disk to form a massive planet should circularize its orbit, 
it is likely that a dynamical interaction of two of these 
bodies occurred. It is also possible for a planet to be 
ejected from the system. 

The upsilon Andromedae solar system includes both 
types: there is a close >0.7M, planet of period 4.6 days in 
a circular orbit, a >2M; planet with a 241 day period in a 
mildly eccentric orbit and a >4.6M; planet in an eccentric 
orbit with a 3.5 yr period. In summary, the distribution of 
objects plotted in figure 2 is certainly biased heavily, but 
the discoveries nonetheless demonstrate how versatile the 
formation of solar systems can be. 


Brown dwarfs in young clusters and star- 
forming regions 

Young, nearby clusters have offered the opportunity to 
detect brown dwarfs when they are relatively luminous 
and at a predicted luminosity and age. Primarily on the 
basis of ground-based surveys at wavelengths of 0.8- 
2 um, dozens of brown dwarf candidates have been 
found in photometric surveys of several young CLUSTERS 
such as the Pleiades and star-forming regions in Orion 
and rho Ophiuchus. The systemic membership of the 
candidates may be confirmed by astrometric and radial 
velocity measurements, as well as the fact that the 
candidates fall on a sequence in a color—magnitude 
diagram predicted by models of gravitationally 
contracting, protostellar objects. In 2001, observations by 
the European Southern Observatory’s New Technology 
Telescope revealed dusty disks surrounding brown 
dwarfs in the Orion Nebula, suggesting that they are 
more star-like than planet-like and have the potential to 
form accompanying planetary systems. This finding is 
based on detailed observations with SOFI, a specialized 
infrared-sensitive instrument at the European Southern 
Observatory’s (ESO) 3.5 m New Technology Telescope 
(NTT) at the La Silla Observatory. 

The detection of lithium is another important 
constraint on the existence of objects below the stellar 
mass limit. In particular, lithium is believed to undergo 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


destructive fusion reactions at an interior temperature 
(~(2-3)x10° K) slightly below the limit for proton— 
proton fusion. Fortunately, calculations of the interior 
structures of very-low-mass stars and brown dwarfs 
predict that energy is transported primarily by convective 
motions from the centers to the very surfaces. This means 
that, if lithium is hot enough to be depleted at the center 
where the temperature is highest, it will eventually be 
depleted throughout the configuration. Therefore, if the 
resonance lines of Li are observed in stellar atmospheres 
(at the strength expected for the abundance at which the 
gaseous body should have formed), hydrogen is also not 
being fused in the deep interior—i.e. the configuration is 
a brown dwarf. Numerous such detections of the Li lines 
have been reported, and an Li luminosity boundary 
consistent with theory has been found in the Pleiades. 
This ‘lithium test’ thus enhances the likelihood that 
Pleiades substellar candidates Teide 1, Calar 3 and the 
Roque objects (figure 2, upper right) are part of the 
substellar extension of the Pleiades mass function as low 
as 30M). 


Brown dwarfs in the local Galactic disk 
Follow-up observations of ‘field’ point sources detected 
in the near-infrared sky surveys DENIS (Deep Near 
Infrared Survey) and 2MASS (Two Micron All Sky 
Survey) have shown that brown dwarfs exist in the field 
as single objects. 2MASS in particular has discovered 
~100 brown dwarf candidates (as of this writing). While 
warmer than GL 229B, these infrared-selected objects are 
cooler than the M dwarf stars, with Tog < 2000 K. 

In 2001, two examples have been discovered of 
small, cool stars that resemble brown dwarfs but are 
actually the remnants of ordinary stars that have been 
whittled down to cool Jupiter-sized bodies over billions 
of years by spilling material over to a white dwarf 
companion star. Using the UK Infrared Telescope 
(UKIRT) in Hawaii, the first direct evidence of such stars 
was obtained by taking infrared spectra with the CGS4 
instrument of two variable binary star systems: LL 
Andromedae and EF Eridani. The observers took 
advantage of periods when the flow of material between 
the two stars in these binary systems temporarily stops. 
At these quiescent times, UKIRT can distinguish the 
radiation coming from the cool donor star. In the case of 
LL Andromedae, the signature of methane was detected 
at a wavelength of 2.2 microns. This shows that the 
donor star’s temperature is around 1300 K, similar to a 
‘T-type’ methane brown dwarf. In EF Eridani, the donor 
star is a little warmer, at around 1650 K, similar to an’L- 
type’ brown dwarf. According to theory, the estimated 
mass of these cool stars is near four-hundredths the mass 
of the Sun, or 40 times the mass of the planet Jupiter, 
with estimated distances of between 100 and 130 light 
years. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planetary Companions and Brown Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


An assessment of a complete subsample of 2MASS 
L dwarfs suggests that substellar objects are comparable 
with or outnumber the stars in the solar neighborhood, 
though contributing only modestly to the mass of the 
local disk (see GALACTIC THIN DISK). It appears that only 
young brown dwarfs—or those relatively few likely to 
have masses just below the stellar mass limit—are 
observed in the L dwarf temperature range and are 
readily detectable by 2MASS and DENIS. This implies 
that the great majority have cooled to much lower 
temperatures. Indeed, field objects showing methane in 
the spectra and with temperatures closer to that of GL 
229B (~1000 K) have now also been found, by the Sloan 
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and by 2MASS. It may well 
turn out that the majority of the Sun’s  substellar 
neighbors have cooled to temperatures of several hundred 
kelvin, cooler even than GL 229B. 


Breaking news update (31 January 2002) 
Observations by NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope of the 
gas-giant planet orbiting the yellow, Sun-like star 
HD209458, 150 ly. from Earth have revealed the 
presence of sodium in light filtered through the planet’s 
atmosphere when it passed in front of its star as seen 
from Earth. The planet was discovered in 1999 by its 
subtle gravitational pull on the star. The planet is 70% the 
mass of Jupiter. Its orbit is tilted nearly edge-on to Earth, 
which allows repeated transit observations. The planet is 
only about 6 million km (4 million mi) from the star. At 
this distance the planet’s atmosphere is heated to around 
1000 K. 

At the time of this update 66 extrasolar planetary 
systems are confirmed, consisting of 74 planets and 7 
multiple planets systems. See 
http://www.obspm.ft/encycl/catalog.html. Among recent 
discoveries are three Jupiter-sized planets travelling in 
circular orbits similar to that of Earth and Mars in our 
own solar system. 


Bibliography 
A thorough review of the discovery of extrasolar planets and 
the implications as of about 1997 is given by 


Marcy G W and Butler R P 1998 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
36 57 


parts of this article borrow from the format and content of that 
review. An excellent theoretical review of the formation of 
protostellar disks and the diversity of possible planets is 


Lissauer J J 1995 Icarus 114 217 


A review of prospects for space-based interferometric imaging 
of terrestrial planets is given by 


Woolf N and Angel J R P 1998 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
36 507 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The discovery of the first extrasolar Jovian planet was reported 
in 


Mayor M and Queloz D 1995 Nature 378 355 
The discovery of GL 229B is published in 


Nakajima T, Oppenheimer B R, Kulkarni S R, Golimbowski D 
A, Matthews K and Durrance S T 1995 Nature 378 463 


and in 


Oppenheimer B R, Kulkarni S R, Matthews K and van 
Kerkwijk M H 1995 Science 270 1478 


The first isolated or ‘field’ methane dwarf, SDSS1624 + 0029, 
is published in 


Strauss et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 522 L61 
James W Liebert 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Extrasolar Planets 


The discovery of the first planets around a PULSAR (1992) 
and around a main sequence star different from our Sun 
(1995) has opened, after centuries of speculation, a new 
era in astronomy. The motivations for the search for 
‘other worlds’ are presented. A comparative review is 
given of different techniques for their detection. Special 
attention is paid to the planetary parameters which can be 
derived in each method. The first discoveries and their 
astrophysical consequences are presented. A review of 
new questions and future projects beyond these first 
discoveries is given. 


Introduction 

The search for ‘other worlds’ is one of the oldest well- 
formulated scientific questions. It was raised for the first 
time in ‘modern’ terms by the Greeks (Democritus, 
Epicurus). Since then, it has inspired many thinkers 
(Giordano Bruno, Fontenelle, Goethe, Kant, ...), but it 
was pure speculation. There had been a first attempt in 
the 17th century by HUYGENS (1698), who tried to see 
planets around other stars. He quickly realized that this 
observation was far beyond the capabilities of his modest 
telescope. After that, for centuries, seeing such planets 
could only be a dream. A new hope appeared in the early 
20th century after the astrometric and spectroscopic 
detection (explained further in this article) of ‘unseen’ 
companions to stars (i.e. very faint stars). However, the 
expected planetary masses were to small to be reached by 
these methods. Astronomers had to become patient again. 
A slim hope was raised by the Dutch astronomer P VAN 
DE KAMP in the 1950s: he thought that he had detected a 
planet around BARNARD’S STAR (one of our closest stellar 
neighbors), but it was later proven to be an artefact. The 
first important step was made by Frail and Wolszczan 
when they detected the first planets around a pulsar. It 
was a great encouragement for planet hunters, although 
the star itself (a neutron star) was too odd to resemble our 
Sun. The good news was heard in October 1995, when 
the Swiss astronomers Mayor and Queloz claimed the 
detection, thanks to the RADIAL VELOCITY method using a 
telescope at the Haute Provence Observatory (south of 
France), of a planet around the star 51 Peg, similar to the 
Sun. Understandably enough, there was some skepticism 
after decades of mistakes, but only for a few weeks. This 
great discovery makes us live in a very special epoch, 
where progress on the 23-century-old question ‘Are we 
alone in the universe?’ has made a major step and the 
question can be investigated scientifically. 

This first discovery was followed by many others; 
since then, more and more planets have been discovered 
(by radial velocity measurements of the parent star) each 
year and there are at present (September 2001) 66 of 
them (see also EXTRASOLAR PLANETARY COMPANIONS 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


AND BROWN DWARFS). Table | gives the current list 
(updated frequently on the internet (Schneider 1999)). 
Furthermore, for one of the stars (upsilon Andromedae), 
three planets have been detected. For another star, one 
could measure the radius of the planet (30% larger than 
Jupiter); this observation is a definite proof that the 
stellar wobble is indeed due to a giant, gaseous, planet. 

In 2001, a two-planet system was detected (around the 
star HD 82943) in which one orbital period is nearly 
exactly twice as long as the other. HD 74156 is another 
two-planet system with a Jupiter-like planet and a more 
massive planet farther out. A giant planet moving in an 
orbit around a Sun-like central star (HD 168443) already 
known to possess a planet has been detected, as well as a 
planet with the most elongated orbit detected so far (HD 
80606), moving between 5 and 127 million kilometers 
from the central star. 

In one of the systems, 55 Cnc, a dust disk has been 
found around the star, first as an IR excess by ISO 
(Dominik et al 1998), and subsequently as an image at 
the IRTF (Trilling and Brown 1998). The inclination of 
the disk as deduced from the image shape is ~25°. 

After this turning point it is possible to go further, 
and astronomers are now willing to address several 
questions. 


1. How frequent are other planetary systems? 

Are they like ours (number, masses, radii, albedos of 
the planets; radii, eccentricities, inclinations of their 
orbits)? 

3. What types of environments (atmospheres, 
magnetospheres, rings etc) do they have and what 
are their properties? 

4. What are the other physical properties of planets 

(rotation period, atmospheric circulation, presence of 

oceans, ...)? 

How do they form and evolve? 

6. How do these features vary with the type of the 
central star (mass, spectral type, chemical 
composition, age, binarity etc)? 


Nn 


In addition to these purely astrophysical questions, there 
is a related query, shared by every human: ‘is there life 
elsewhere in the universe?’ This question raises the 
problem of the different forms of life we can expect 
outside the solar system and the problem of the definition 
of life. The convential view is that life can develop on 
Earth-like planets in the ‘habitable zone’ (where the 
temperature is about 300 K) around stars. Beyond the 
detection of these planets, it is even possible to search for 
spectroscopic signatures of life on these ‘habitats’. 


The detection methods for extrasolar planets 
To investigate these planetary systems, astronomers use 
several methods of detection and observation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Extrasolar planets. 


Star Monin (Jupiter masses) Period (days) | Semimajor axis (AU) 
HD 83443 0.35 2.9861 0.038 
HD46375 0.25 3.024 0.041 
HD 187123 0.54 3.097 0.042 
Tau Boo 4.14 3.313 0.047 
BD-10 3166 0.48 3.487 0.046 
HD 75289 0.46 3.508 0.048 
HD 209458 0.63 3.524 0.046 
51 Peg 0.46 4.231 0.052 
Ups And b 0.68 4.617 0.059 
Ups And c 2.05 241.3 0.828 
Ups And d 4.29 1308.5 2.56 
HD 168746 0.24 6.409 0.066 
HD 217107 1.29 7.130 0.072 
HD 130322 1.15 10.72 0.092 
HD 108147 0.34 10.881 0.098 
55 Cne 0.93 14.66 0.118 
GJ 86 4.23 15.80 0.117 
HD 195019 3.55 18.20 0.136 
HD 192263 0.81 24.35 0.152 
Rho CrB 0.99 39.81 0.224 
HD 168443 8.13 58.10 0.303 
GJ 876 2.07 60.90 0.207 
HD 16141 0.22 75.80 0.351 
HD 114762 10.96 84.03 0.351 
70 Vir 7.42 116.7 0.482 
HD 52265 1.13 118.96 0.49 
HD 1237 3.45 133.8 0.505 
HD 37124 1.13 154.8 0.547 
HD 89744 717 256.0 0.883 
HD 134987 1.58 260.0 0.810 
HD 169830 2.96 230.4 0.823 
HD 12661 2.83 264.5 0.825 
Iota Hor 2.98 320.0 0.970 
HD 177830 1.24 391.0 1.10 
HD 210277 1.29 436.6 1.12 
HD 82943 2.24 442.6 1.16 
HD 222582 5.18 576.0 1.35 
16 CygB 1.68 796.7 1.69 
HD 10697 6.08 1074.0 2.12 
47 UMa 2.60 1084.0 2.09 
14 Her 5.44 1700.0 2.84 
Confirmed pulsar planets 
PSR 1257+12 0.015 Me 25.34 0.19 
3.4 Me 66.54 0.36 
2.8 Me 98.22 0.47 
~100 Me ~170 ~40 
PSR B1620-26 12<M<6.7 61.8-389 10-64 


Extrasolar planets can be detected by either direct or 
indirect methods. Each detection method is characterized 
by some observables which are related to the instrinsic 
physical parameters of the planet. These parameters are 
their mass Mp, radius Rp, temperature Tp, distance a from 
the parent star, orbital period P, brightness Lp and 
distance D from the solar system. The potential success 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of a given method depends naturally on its instrumental 
limitations. 


Direct imaging 

The most natural gesture to detect a planet is trying to 
‘see’ it. However, planets have generally no intrinsic 
emission, at least in the optical wavelength range. One 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


can only detect their illumination by the parent star. 
However, one then faces a severe problem: the light 
reflected by the planet is extremely faint and, at the same 
time, the planet is extremely close to its star, so that it is 
very difficult to separate them. Indeed, for a planet 
orbiting at a distance a from a star with a brightness Ls, 
the stellar light is dispersed over the whole area 4a’ of 
the sphere of radius a on which the planet is located. The 
planet receives only a small fraction of this light, 
proportional to the surface mRp of the planetary disk 
seen by the observer. The planet thus acquires by 
reflection a brightness Lp given by 


planetary disk area 
HE “area of the sphere at the planet's distance 
L, R 
4a 


Because the planetary radius is much smaller than its 
distance to the star, the brightness ratio Lp/L« is very 
small: it is 2.5 x 10~° for a Jupiter. 

On the other hand, the planet is seen by the observer 
at an angular distance a = a/D from the star, i.e. very 
close to it (fractions of arcseconds). The planet, in 
addition to being very faint, is then embedded in the light 
halo of the star owing to the telescope’s diffraction. The 
addition of the planet’s faintness and its closeness to the 
star makes its detection very difficult. To circumvent this 
difficulty, several tricks have been invented: ‘nulling 
imaging’, ‘dark speckle imaging’, ‘phase mask 
coronography’, ‘hyper-telescope’, .... All of them are 
intended to extinguish the star as much as possible 
(without extinguishing the planet). They use the wavelike 
properties of light by making the star interfere 
destructively with itself, without affecting the nearby 
planet. For observations from the ground, there is an 
additional source of degradation of images: the 
atmospheric turbulence. One can, in that case, increase 
the sharpness of images by ‘adaptive optics’, a technique 
which counterbalances the deformation of images by the 
atmosphere by deforming slightly, in real time, the 
telescope mirror (see INSTRUMENTATION: ADAPTIVE 
OPTICS). 

The ADONIS (Adaptive Optics Near Infrared 
System) instrument mounted at the European Southern 
Observatory (ESO) 3.6 m telescope at the La Silla 
Observatory has obtained an image of a dust disk around 
the star iota Horologii, already known to possess a planet 
at least twice as heavy as Jupiter in an Earth-like orbit. 
The dust disc around iota Horologii is quite extended; it 
is detected to a distance of about 65 AU (10 000 million 
km) from the star. From the elongation, it appears that 
the inclination of the disk is about 42°. 

Despite the difficulties presented by this direct 
detection, astronomers put much effort into it because it 
is the only way to access several properties of the planet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


As an example, the careful study of the time evolution of 
the planet’s reflection, in different colors, can reveal its 
diurnal rotation period, its seasonal variation, the relative 
amount of water at the surface (oceans) etc. 


Dynamical perturbation of the star by the planet 
Instead of seeing the planet directly, one can search for 
its effects on the parent star. The first of these effects is 
the gravitational perturbation of the star’s position by the 
planet. When the planet makes a revolution around its 
parent star, in fact both objects are in orbit around their 
common center of mass. Thus the star makes a small 
circular orbit with a radius ax = aMp/M:s and a period 
naturally equal to the planetary orbital period P (see 
figure 1 by G Marry). 

For the observer, this small orbit results in 
perturbations of three of the star’s observables: its radial 
velocity Vp (the velocity in the direction of the star’s line 
of sight), its position a on the sky with respect to a fixed 
star and the time of arrival of signals regularly emitted by 
the star. These three observables are perturbed with a 
period equal to the planet’s orbital period and with an 
amplitude proportional to the planet’s mass. The 
measurement of this amplitude therefore gives a 
determination of the planet’s mass. In fact, for radial 
velocity measurement and time-of-arrival measurements 
a slight complication arises: if the inclination of the 
planetary orbit is not known, the method gives only a 
minimum value of the mass. The best example of 
regularly spaced signals is the periodic emission of 
pulsars. The first planets (in fact three and perhaps four) 
were discovered by this method by Wolzsczan and Frail 
around the pulsar PSR 1257+12. The amplitude of the 
radial velocity variation is 13 ms‘ for a Jupiter at 5 AU 
from its parent star. Figure 2 shows the periodic variation 
of the radial velocity of the star 51 Peg as a function of 
time (@ = | corresponds to ¢ = 4.23 days) measured by 
Mayor and Queloz. It was the first planet ever detected 
around a Sun-like star. After this first discovery, an 
interesting new step was the detection, by the same 
method, of three planets around the star upsilon 
Andromedae. 

The precision in radial velocity measurements is at 
present 3 m s'. Thus it becomes possible to detect 
Saturns by radial velocity measurements. However, there 
is no hope of detecting an Earth since the radial velocity 


perturbation produced by such a planet is only 10 cms". 


Planetary transits 

The planet can produce a drop in the star’s light during 
transits of the star’s disk by the planet. The detection of a 
TRANSIT in the star’s lightcurve requires two conditions 
to be satisfied. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Doppler Shift due to 
Stellar Wobble 


Unseen planct_», 
a. ae 


¥ T T T T re T r T r T T T 
100 
ei 
50 
| M| | 
U 
I iy I 
- 4 | 
& O FRc recrerrerenene t setrirseseresesecerseara eA rsrscicsesesesesasasaeaieres 
> ‘ 
-50 
-100 
poo | 4 4 4 4 po a 
tt) 0.8 1 
$ 


Figure 2. The variation of the radial velocity of 51 Peg (from 
Mayor M and Queloz D 1995 Nature 178 355). 


1. The orbital plane of the planet must be correctly 
oriented: for random orientations, the geometric 
probability p is p = Rs/a. For a Jupiter (an Earth) 


around a 1Ro star, this probability is 10° 
(respectively 0.5%). 
2. The precision of the star’s photometry must be 


better than the depth AF/F = (Rp/R+)° of the transit. 


For a 1 Ry (1Re) planet the drop is 1% (respectively 
10“). In ground-based observations, the 
photometric precision is at best 0.1%. In space, it 
can reach a few 10°. Thus, while Jupiter-size 
planets can be detected in this way from the ground, 
one can detect Earth-sized planets from space. In 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fact, it is at present the only method capable of 
detecting and investigating further Earth-like 
extrasolar planets. 


Late in 1999, the first planetary transit was detected from 
the ground (around the star HD 209458), leading to the 
first determination of the radius of an extrasolar planet; 
this transit was confirmed by an inspection of the 
photometric archives of the Hipparcos satellite. 


Gravitational lensing 

The planet can produce a gravitational amplification Ag 
of the light of background stars, increasing with the 
planet’s mass and its distance to the observer. This 
amplification can reach factors up to 100 when the planet 
lies at several kiloparsecs, i.e. as far as the Galactic 
center. The GRAVITATIONAL LENSING method is thus 
suitable only for very distant planets, difficult to observe 
afterwards by any other method. Furthermore, a lensing 
event is seen only once and it is not possible to 
investigate a planet at 4 kpc any further by any other 
method. This makes the lensing method less attractive. 
Nevertheless, astronomers have recently shown by this 
method that less than 25% of stars have Jupiter-mass 
companions at distances larger than 3 AU. 


First lessons from present findings 

As often happens in science, what has been found was 
largely unexpected. The first discoveries of extrasolar 
planets have managed to produce great surprises and a 
few conclusions can already be drawn. There are three 
main lessons from these discoveries, all equally 
important. 

First, the global result is that about 5% of main 
sequence stars have a giant planet at a distance less than 
2 AU. Before 1995, astronomers had no idea whether 
planetary systems were very rare or not. There could, for 
instance, have been less than one planetary system for 
1000 stars. By itself this knowledge is very precious for 
planetary formation theory. The theoreticians now have 
to explain this proportion. Also, it immediately raises a 
new, important question. This proportion being valid for 
giant planets, does it hold for telluric (i.e. small solid) 
planets? The latter could indeed a priori be very different 
as their formation and evolution mechanisms are 
significantly different. This question is of course 
important for future searches for life on Earth-like 
planets. 

A second conceptually important consequence 
comes from the discovery of the first transitory planet 
HD 209458. Since a transitory body has been observed 
and its radius has been measured (giving a value 30% 
larger than Jupiter), it constitutes the first proof that the 
stellar wobble is due to a planet and not to other causes 
(such as stellar oscillation, small companion black 
hole,...). It also rules out an a priori possibility: that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


planet is a heavy (0.6 Jupiter mass) planet entirely made 
of solid rock instead of gas. In that case, its radius would 
have been ~0.3, instead of 1.3, Jupiter radii. Thus, from 
transits we can learn much about the planet constitution. 

The third lesson is that these discoveries have given 
unexpected results. 


1. While astronomers were expecting to find planets 
around main sequence stars, the first planets were 
discovered around stars where they were not 
expected, namely around pulsars. It is not clear how 
these planet-mass objects can be formed: have they 
survived the supernova explosion or have they 
condensed in the supernova remnant? If they were 
planets from the pulsar progenitor, they should have 
very eccentric orbits, while for PSR 1257+12 the 
eccentricity is almost 0. Indeed, because of the 
conservation of their angular momentum J = 
[Msap(1 - ay and total energy Epyot + Exin after the 
mass loss Ms; — Ms during the supernova 
explosion, they acquire an eccentricity given by | — 
e= Ms\(2Mx - Me)/Me,’. Furthermore, the orbit 
remains bound only if M+ > M:+)/2. 

2. The first giant planets were found 100 times closer 
to their parent star than expected. Indeed, for main 


sequence stars with masses from 0.1Mo to 1Mo, the 
planets were expected to form at a distance from 4 
to 5 AU. This is the distance at which the 
equilibrium temperature is below 160 K, to allow 
for the formation of icy cores of giant planets. It was 
thus an incomprehensible surprise to find planets as 
close as 0.05 AU to their parent star. In fact the 
solution to this problem seems to lie in the notion of 
‘orbital migration’ introduced 10 yr before the 
planets were discovered. When a planetary core has 
started to grow up to a mass M> in a protoplanetary 
disk, it creates, by gravitational attraction of the 
surrounding gas and dust, a gap with a radius Ry ~ 
ap(M, plM.)"" >; this is the radius of the ‘Hill sphere’ 
inside which the gravitational attraction of the 
planetary core is larger than the attraction of the 
parent star. There are then tidal forces between the 
core and the inner and outer edges of the gap, whose 
imbalance depends on the difference in density 
between the edges. The imbalance can be such that 
these tidal forces pull the orbit toward the star. 

3. Some of the planets have orbits with unexpectedly 
large eccentricities. This makes it unlikely that they 
were formed in a protoplanetary dust disk, since the 
internal dissipation circularizes the orbits of the dust 
grains. They were thus more likely to have formed 
in a way similar to very-low-mass stars, i.e. by 
gravitational condensation of the gas, with no solid 
core. For 16 Cyg B, the eccentricity comes perhaps 
from the perturbation by the companion star 16 Cyg 
A. Eccentricity of orbits can also be the result of 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


migration: during their migration (at different rates) 
one planet can expel another from the system; from 
angular moment conservation, it then results that the 
resulting orbits must be very eccentric. 


Future perspectives 

These first discoveries have encouraged astronomers to 
accelerate their searches and many projects are at present 
ongoing or under study. 


Future ground-based and space-based facilities 
Radial velocity searches. ESO will make radial velocity 
searches in a dedicated program (to start in 2001) with 
the 3.6 m telescope at La Silla with a precision of 1- 
2ms_'. There is also a Swiss program, monitoring 800 
stars on a dedicated 1.5 m telescope, that started in 1998, 
at La Silla. At the 10 m Keck telescope, Marcy et al have 
started to monitor 400 stars with a precision of 3 ms. 
Several other groups conduct such radial velocity 
searches, or plan to do so, with more moderate 
precisions. 


Astrometric search. The FAME astrometric mission, to 
be launched by NASA in 2004, is intended to measure 
during a few years the positions of millions of stars with 
a precision of 50 parcsec (as). It should detect up to a 
few hundred Jupiters. The Space Interferometric Mission 
(SIM) is a NASA project, devoted mainly to astrometry 
and, secondarily, to imaging. The nominal goal for 
astrometric precision is 4 pas. As far as extrasolar planets 
are concerned, this would give SIM the ability to detect 
Saturn-mass (Earth-mass) planets at up to 15 pc 
(respectively 5 pc). The GAIA project, if selected by 
ESA in the future, would measure the positions of 10° 
stars in the Galaxy with a precision of | pas (10 pas) for 
stars with V = 5 (respectively V = 15). For solar-type 
stars, it could detect ‘big Earths’ (with 10 Earth masses) 
around ~100 stars at up to 10 pe and Jupiter-mass planets 
at up to 200 pe around about 5 x 10° stars. In the latter 
case, if the proportion of ~5% of stars having planetary 
systems holds, one can estimate that GAIA would detect 
~25 000 extrasolar Jupiters. 


Imaging On the ground, large telescopes such as the 
Keck telescope, the VLT and the Large Binocular 
telescope will try to search for planets by imaging in the 
future, by different interferometric techniques. However, 
their imaging performances are yet not well known. 

In space, the projects are more clearly identified 
(although the situation could change with new plans). 

The NASA NGST Project (Next Generation Space 
Telescope), to be launched after 2007 if approved, is a 
large (~8 m) telescope. Its orbit is not definitely chosen; 
perhaps around the Earth-Sun Lagrange point L2. If a 
coronographic mode were to be implemented, it could 
detect Jupiters around nearby stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Other space projects, based on interferometric 
nulling, were initially motivated by  exobiologic 
purposes. They did lead to the DARWIN project, 
presented in 1993 as an ESA cornerstone candidate, 
quickly followed by the NASA Terrestrial Planets Finder 
(TPF). DARWIN is, in its initial configuration, a free- 
flyer mission made of five 1.5 m telescopes separated by 
20-100 m, while TPF is initially based on a rigid linear 
structure. The main difficulty encountered by these 
projects is that, in order to detect planets at 10 um, it is 
necessary to avoid the IR thermal emission of the solar 
system’s zodiacal dust; the only solution found to 
circumvent this difficulty is to send the mission to 5 AU 
from the Sun. A complete unknown is also the level of 
zodiacal IR thermal emission of other planetary systems. 
Extrasolar IR zodiacal light similar to the solar system’s 
zodiacal light gives a background 300 times larger than 
the planet’s emission. The example of 55 Cnc points out 
the danger that such backgrounds can even be 10 times 
larger than the solar system’s zodiacal light. Another 
project, in the visible, has recently been suggested: the 
Epicurus project proposed by A Labeyrie to ESA. In the 
visible and near-IR range, the zodiacal light problem is 
avoided. A much more ambitious project is under study 
to make multipixel images of an extrasolar Earth-sized 
planet: the Planet Imager project, a multikilometer space 
interferometer which could be built around 2030 (do not 
forget that from now to 2030 there is the same time span 
as that from 1970 to today). 


Transits. Programmes from space are under way, with 

different statuses. 

e The Hubble Space Telescope carried out 
photometric monitoring in July 1999, continuously 
over 9 days, of 20 000 stars in the globular cluster 
47 Tuc. It should have detected a few tens of 
Jupiters in close orbits. Preliminary results show 
that zero planets are detected; this may be due to the 
submetallicity of the cluster’s stars. 

e COROT is an ESA/CNES mission (to be launched in 
2004) dedicated half to asteroseismology and half to 
planetary transits. It is in fact the only currently 
approved space mission largely dedicated to the 
search for extrasolar planets. With its 25 cm 
aperture, it should detect, during its two and a half 
years of operation, tens of planets with radii down to 


~2Re at orbital distances up to ~0.5 AU from their 
parent star. For M stars, some of these planets should 
fall in the ‘habitable zone’ of the star (defined as the 
distance at which the planet’s temperature allows for 
liquid water). 

e The KEPLER project is entirely devoted to the 
search for planetary transits. It is much more 
ambitious than COROT but is not yet approved. 
With its 1 m aperture and its 100 deg? field of veiw, 
it should be able to detect, after 5 yr of operation, a 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


few hundred Earth-like planets in the habitable zones 
of stars. 

e There is also a similar ESA project under study: 
Eddington. 


Extrasolar planetary environments and comets. Given 
the extreme difficulty of detecting extrasolar planets, it 
seems premature to detect their surroundings such as 
PLANETARY RINGS etc and _ extrasolar COMETS. 
Surprisingly, most of these surroundings are detectable, 
some of them even more easily than planets themselves. 

Rings. Rings of extrasolar planets have such a low 
mass (less than an Earth mass) that they have no 
observable dynamical effect on the star’s motion. 
However, as shown by the example of Saturn’s ring, they 
can be significantly more extended than giant planets 
(their surface being 4 times the projected surface of giant 
planets). They are thus obviously easier to observe by 
methods sensitive to the surface of objects to be detected, 
namely direct imaging and transits. 

Satellites. Giant satellites of planets are, at least in 
the solar system, at most as large as telluric planets. 
Since to detect them by imaging it is necessary to 
separate them from the parent planet, the required 
separation power needs kilometric baselines in space. 

The transit method is more promising and can be 
exploited in two different ways. 


e Detection of the transit made by the satellite itself is 
marginally possible for giant (Titan-like) satellites in 
front of a low-radius (M or K) star monitored with a 
photometric precision of 10~ or better (as is the case 
for the COROT mission and the Kepler project). 

e Even if the satellite transit itself is not detected 
because of lack of photometric precision, it disturbs 
the timing of the transit of the giant planet by an 
amount AT; ~ 15 min (very easy to detect) for an 
Earth-mass satellite in orbit around a Saturn-like 
planet. 


Magnetospheres. At least one planet in the solar 
system has a radio decametric emission stronger than that 
of the (quiet) Sun. This is probably due to a strong quasi- 
dipolar magnetic field of internal origin, producing an 
extended PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERE in which particle 
acceleration takes place, inducing strong non-thermal 
radio emission. 

These emissions would be detectable at 15 pe with 
the best receptors (Jupiter itself would be detectable at 
0.5 pc). Planetary magnetic fields are usually attributed 
to turbulent rotation—convection motion of conducting 
material inside the core. Scaling laws predict a magnetic 
field of a few gauss for the already discovered extrasolar 
planets. Further in the future, a radio telescope on the 
dark side of the Moon would be free of anthropogenic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


parasites and of ionospheric absorption. It would allow 
for radio detection below 10 MHz. 

Comets. In the star B Pictoris, intense spectroscopic 
monitoring shows rapidly (on time-scales of days) 
varying absorption lines. One can interpret them in terms 
of absorption by infalling evaporating comets at a rate of 
about one infall per day. If this interpretation is correct, 
this method could succeed for this particular star because 
it is surrounded by an exceptional reservoir of small 
bodies, as shown by the presence of a dust disk. For 
random stars, it is easier to detect comets by the transit of 
their dust tail, in a way similar to the detection of planets. 
For an amount of comets equivalent to that of our solar 
system, the detection rate by this method is about one 
comet per month. 


Search for life on extrasolar planets 

Habitable zones. What could be called ‘life’ is the 
subject of an immense debate (Schneider 1998; see also 
LIFE ON OTHER WORLDS). Let us restrict ourselves here to 
the standard conservative choice of carbon-based organic 
chemistry on a solid planet with liquid water. The planet 
must be sufficiently massive to retain its atmosphere, but 
not so massive as to retain its hydrogen, which would be 
lethal for standard life. Its mass must then be between 


0.1Mz and 10Mz. With pressure conditions given by this 
mass range, liquid water can be present if the planet 
temperature is about 300 K. 

A planet orbiting at a distance a around a star with a 
radius R« and a temperature 7+ acquires by heating an 
equilibrium temperature Tp given by 


1— A)" (R,\" 
ee a 


af a 


where A is the mean ‘albedo’ (reflectance) of the planet 
surface. From equation (2), a planet having a temperature 


~300 + 20 K must be located at a distance a from the star 
given by (for A = 0.55) a = 0.7R+(T+/300). Depending on 


the type of the central star, this distance runs from ~0.1 


AU for cool (T+ = 3000 K) dwarf stars to ~2 AU for hot 
(T+ = 6500 K) larger stars. For hotter stars the habitable 
zone is larger than 2 AU, but they evolve too rapidly to 
have stable temperature conditions over the billions of 
years required for the development of life (unless one 
invokes less conservative scenarios). 


Remote detection of signatures of life. Suppose that an 
Earth-like planet is discovered in the habitable zone of its 
parent star. Is it possible to detect the presence of life on 
it? The answer is that it is possible to detect 
spectroscopic signatures of what is perhaps due to 
complex organic chemistry. One can think of two types 
of signatures. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1. Search for oxygen. The first type of approach rests 
on the observation that on Earth all the molecular oxygen 
and ozone in the atmosphere are of biogenic origin. To 
then separate the planet from its parent star, an 
interferometer in space with a baseline of at least 20 m is 
required (the DARWIN project). 

However, this method suffers from at least one 
artefact due to the photodissociation of water under some 
conditions (such as the continuous supply of water by a 
large quantity of infalling comets). 

In addition, oxygen delivery is a secondary 
consequence of Earth-type photosynthesis and we do not 
know to which extent it is accidental or universal. For 
instance, there are many photosynthetic bacterial species 
on Earth which do not deliver oxygen as a byproduct of 
their photosynthetic activity (producing sulfur instead). 

2. Search for chlorophyll. A more general signature 
rests on the remark that, whatever the details of an 
extrasolar biochemistry might be, it must make use of a 
molecular converter which absorbs the stellar light in the 
intense part of its spectrum to transform it into chemical 
energy. On Earth, this converter is chlorophyll, but it 
could be other molecules on other planets. On Earth, the 
chlorophyll absorbs up to 80% of light in the band 400- 
700 nm. It would be seen as an absorption band of a few 
per cent in the planetary spectrum at wavelengths where 
the star is the brightest. To minimize the risk of 
confusion with artefacts (for instance absorption bands of 
silicates), the amount of absorption can be correlated 
with the planet’s seasons. 


Conclusion 
For the first time we have a clear answer to a 2300 yr old 
question: ‘are there somewhere [i.e. around other stars] 
other worlds like ours?’ (EPICURUS 300 BC). The first 
discoveries have been full of surprises and we should be 
prepared for the unexpected. 

In this new era of astronomy, one can already design 
a plan for the long-term future with well-identified steps 
in a clear global strategy for the entire coming century, 
with even a tentative agenda: 


(a) first images of extrasolar planets (around 2005); 

(b) detection of Earth-like planets (2005); 

(c) search for spectral signatures of life (2010-15); 

(d) multipixel imaging of extrasolar planets (+2025); 

(e) multipixel spectroscopy of extrasolar planets 
(>2030). 


In the second half of the century, when the most 
interesting planets (possibly with signs of biological 
activity) will have been identified, the pressure will 
become strong to design a mission to go there (in one 
way or another). Let us not forget that future astronomers 
born today will most likely experience these times 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extrasolar Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


around 2100. A prospective view beyond that would be 
pure speculation. 


Web update (15 August 2001) 

A second planet has been found orbiting the star 47 
Ursae Majoris located in the asterism the Plough or Big 
Dipper in the constellation of Ursa Major. The new 
planet is at least three-fourths the mass of Jupiter and 
orbits the star at a distance that, in our Solar System, 
would place it beyond Mars but within the orbit of 


Jupiter. 
In addition, new’ observations from the 
Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) 


provide the first evidence that extra-solar planetary 
systems contain water, a molecule that is an essential 
ingredient for known forms of life. From its vantage 
point in orbit above the absorbing effects of water in 
Earth's atmosphere, SWAS is capable of detecting the 
distinctive radiation emitted by water vapor in space. 

An aging giant star designated by astronomers as 
IRC+10216, also known as CW Leonis, located 500 
light-years (almost 3000 trillion miles) from Earth in the 
direction of the constellation Leo, is apparently 
vaporizing a surrounding swarm of comets, releasing a 
huge cloud of water vapor. The observations of water 
vapor around IRC+10216 suggest that other stars may be 
surrounded by planetary systems similar to our own. 
Over the past decade, more than 50 stars have been 
shown to have large planets in orbit around them, but 
little is known about the composition of those planets. 


Breaking news update (31 January 2002) 
Observations by NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope of the 
gas-giant planet orbiting the yellow, Sun-like star 
HD209458, 150 ly. from Earth have revealed the 
presence of sodium in light filtered through the planet’s 
atmosphere when it passed in front of its star as seen 
from Earth. The planet was discovered in 1999 by its 
subtle gravitational pull on the star. The planet is 70% the 
mass of Jupiter. Its orbit is tilted nearly edge-on to Earth, 
which allows repeated transit observations. The planet is 
only about 6 million km (4 million mi) from the star. At 
this distance the planet’s atmosphere is heated to around 
1000 K. 

At the time of this update 66 extrasolar planetary 
systems are confirmed, consisting of 74 planets and 7 
multiple planets systems. See 
http://www.obspm.ft/encycl/catalog.html. Among recent 
discoveries are three Jupiter-sized planets travelling in 
circular orbits similar to that of Earth and Mars in our 
own solar system. 


Bibliography 
Angel R and Woolf N 1998a Searches for Earth-like planets 


around stars Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Angel R and Woolf N 1998b Searching for life in other solar 
systems Sci. Am. 9(1) 22 

Boss A 1998 Looking for Earths (New York: Wiley) 

Clark S 1998 Extrasolar Planets. The Search for New Worlds 
(Wiley-Praxis series in Astronomy and Astrophysics) 
(New York: Wiley) 

Dominik C, Laureijs R, Jourdain de Mouizan M and Habing H 
1998 A Vega-like disk associated with the planetary 
system of p'Cne Astron. Astrophys. 329 L53 

Epicurus 1957 Letter to Herodotus The Stoic and Epicurian 
Philosophers ed W J Oates pp 3-15:5 

Huygens C 1698 The Celestial Worlds Discover’d facsimile 
edition 1968 (Cass) 

Marcy G, Cochran W and Mayor M 2000 Extrasolar planets 
around main sequence stars Protostars and Planets IV ed 
Mannings, Boss and Russell (University of Arizona Press) 
in press 

Mayor M and Queloz D 1995 A Jupiter-mass companion to a 
solar-type star Nature 378 355 

Perryman M 2000 Extra-solar planets Rep. Prog. Phys. 63 1209 


Schneider J 1998 The search for life outside the solar system 
Exobiology: Matter, Energy and Information in the Origin 
and Evolution of Life in the Universe ed Chela-Flores and 
Raulin (Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 319 

Schneider J 2000 The Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia 
http://www.obspm.fr/planets 

Wolszczan A and Frail D 1992 A planetary system around the 
millisecond pulsar PSR1257+12 Nature 255 145 


Jean Schneider 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) 


NASA spacecraft launched on July 7, 1992 to carry out a 
full-sky survey in the extreme ultraviolet range of the 
spectrum. It carried three EUV telescopes, each sensitive 
to a different wavelength band. A fourth telescope per- 
formed a high sensitivity search of a limited sample of 
the sky in a single EUV band. 

EUVE re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere at approxi- 
mately 23:59 UTC on January 31 2001. According to cal- 
culations made by the United States Space Command 
Space Control Center, EUVE re-entered the atmosphere 
over central Egypt. The object was not designed to sur- 
vive re-entry intact and was expected to break apart and 
mostly burn up in the atmosphere. U.S. Space Command 
cannot confirm if any pieces survived re-entry. Science 
operations ended in December 2000. During its eight 
years in orbit, EUVE was the first astrophysics mission to 
explore the extreme ultraviolet and helped to bridge the 
gap in our understanding of this previously unknown 
spectrum. EUVE observed more than 1,000 nearby 
sources, including more than three dozen objects outside 
the Galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Eye Relief ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eye Relief 


The distance between eyepiece and the exit pupil. In the 
case of a compound eyepiece consisting of two or more 
lenses, the eye relief is the distance from the final lens to 
the exit pupil. For comfortable visual observing, the eye 
relief should be in the region of six to ten millimeters. 


Seealso: exit pupil, eyepiece, field of view, magnification. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Eyepiece 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eyepiece 


A magnifying lens used to view and enlarge the 
image produced at the focus of a telescope. For any 
given telescope, the magnification achieved is inversely 
proportional to the focal length of the eyepiece. A telescope 
used for visual work will normally have a range of 
eyepieces of, for example, 40 mm, 25 mm, 12 mm and 
6 mm focal lengths. Used with a telescope of focal length 
1200 mm, these eyepieces would produce magnifications 
of x30, x48, x100 and 200 respectively. 

The eyepiece is normally mounted in a short tube 
(the drawtube) that can be slid in and out to enable 
the sharpest focus to be achieved. For visual use, the 
eyepiece is normally placed beyond the focal plane of the 
telescope at a distance such that the rays emerging from the 
eyepiece from each part of the image enter the eye along 
parallel paths. The eye is then relaxed (as if looking at an 
infinitely distant object) and less likely to become tired. 
For an eyepiece consisting of a single lens, this condition 
is achieved when the distance between the focal plane of 
the telescope and the eyepiece is equal to the focal length 
of the eyepiece. 

The main parameters of an eyepiece are focal length, 
exit pupil, eye relief, and apparent angular field of view. 
Focal length determines the magnification achieved. The 
exit pupil is a circle through which all rays emerging from 
the eyepiece pass, and eye relief is the distance between 
the rear of the eyepiece to the exit pupil. For comfortable 
viewing this should normally be in the region of 6 to 
10 mm. The apparent angular field of view, or acceptance 
angle, is the angular diameter of the circle of vision that can 
be seen when the eye is placed at the exit pupil. Apparent 
fields of view for eyepieces range from about 30° to as 
much as 85°, depending on the design. The observed field 
of view (the angular diameter of the region of sky that is 
visible through the telescope) is equal to field of view of 
the eyepiece divided by the magnification. For example, 
if an eyepiece with an acceptance angle of 50° produces a 
magnification of x 100, the observed field of view will be 
0.5° (approximately equal to the apparent diameter of the 
Moon). 

There are many different types of eyepiece. Although 
the simplest is a single biconvex lens, an eyepiece of 
that kind suffers markedly from various aberrations, in 
particular chromatic and spherical aberration. In practice, 
eyepieces consist of at least two lenses, a field lens, 
which accepts rays of light from the telescope objective 
or mirror, and an eye lens, from which light emerges into 
the eye. Huygenian and Ramsden eyepieces consist of 
two plano-convex lenses (in the former case, the field lens 
is placed inside the focal plane of the telescope and the 
image is formed, inconveniently, between the two lenses). 
Although cheap to produce, they suffer from chromatic 
aberration and have modest fields of view (35°-45°). The 
Kellner is similar to the Ramsden, but uses as its eye lens 
an achromatic doublet, which greatly reduces chromatic 
aberration. Better correction for aberrations, good fields 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of view (about 50°) and good eye relief are provided by 
more complex eyepieces such as the orthoscopic (in which 
the field lens is a triplet and the eye lens plano-convex) 
and the Plossl (which consists of two identical achromatic 
doublets). For certain purposes (for example, observing 
star clusters or nebulae of large angular size), wide-field 
eyepieces such as the Erfle or Nagler are advantageous. 
Eyepieces of this kind, which consist of many elements 
(typically six or more), offer angular fields of view of up 
to 85° but are very expensive to produce. 


See also: chromatic aberration, exit pupil, eye relief, 
field of view, focal length, focus, magnification, spherical 
aberration, telescope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Faber—Jackson Relationship 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Faber—Jackson Relationship 


Acorrelation between the luminosity of an elliptical galaxy 
and the velocity dispersion (the spread in velocities) of the 
stars in its central regions that was established in 1976 by 
S M Faber and R E Jackson. The light that emerges from 
the central regions of an elliptical galaxy is the combined 
light of large numbers of stars, some of which (measured 
relative to the center of the galaxy) are approaching the 
observer and others receding. Consequently, the Doppler 
effect broadens the lines in the galaxy’s spectrum by an 
amount that depends on the spread of velocities among its 
constituent stars (lines in the spectra of approaching stars 
are blue-shifted to shorter wavelengths, lines in the spectra 
of receding stars are red-shifted to longer wavelengths, 
and the resulting lines in the spectrum of the galaxy are 
spread out over a range of wavelengths). The velocities 
of its constituent stars, and hence the velocity dispersion, 
depend on the mass of the galaxy (the higher the mass, the 
greater the velocities) and, as a general rule, the higher its 
mass, the more stars the galaxy contains. Consequently, 
it is logical that there should be a link between velocity 
dispersion and luminosity. 


See also: Doppler effect, elliptical galaxies, Tully—Fisher 
relationship. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fabri [Fabry], Honoré (1607-88) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fabri [Fabry], Honoré (1607-88) 


Born in Virieu-le-Grand, Dauphiné, France, a Jesuit, he 
held posts in a variety of cities in France and in Rome, 
where he was briefly imprisoned for unorthodoxy. He 
was an astronomer, physicist and mathematician and 
studied Saturn’s rings, disputing about their nature with 
HUYGENS for five years. Discovered the Andromeda nebula, 
developed a theory of tides which was based on the action 
of the Moon and pioneered calculus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fabricius, David (1564-1617) and Fabricius, Johannes 
(1587-1616) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fabricius, David (1564—1617) and 
Fabricius, Johannes (1587-1616) 


Lutheran pastor and astronomer in Osteel, East Frisia 
(northwest Germany), discoverer (1596) of the first known 
variable star, mira stella (‘wonderful star’), now simply 
Mira (Omicron Ceti). Fabricius observed the star at its 
brightest and thought it was a nova, after which Holwarda 
noticed that a star in Cetus cataloged by protemy and 
TYCHO was missing but then it reappeared. Eventually 
the long periodic cycle of Mira was recognized. In 1611, 
his son Johannes returned home from the Netherlands 
with a telescope. Johannes discovered spots on the disc 
of the rising Sun, which the father and son investigated, 
first by direct observation, then switching to a camera 
obscura because of the Sun’s brightness. They discovered 
how the spots rotated behind the Sun and back into view. 
Johannes wrote an un-influential tract on Sunspots, De 
Maculis in Sole Observatis, et Apparente earum cum Sole 
Conversione Narratio (‘Narration on Spots Observed on the 
Sun and their Apparent Rotation with the Sun’), which 
was overshadowed by scHEINER’s similar discoveries a year 
later. Johannes died young, and David was killed with a 
shovel a year later by an angry peasant, whom he had 
accused of stealing a goose. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fabry, Marie Paul Auguste Charles (1867-1945) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fabry, Marie Paul Auguste Charles 
(1867-1945) 


Physicist, born in Marseilles, France, became professor at 
Marseilles and Paris, co-inventor with Alfred Perot of the 
Fabry-Perot interferometer (two partially reflective plates, 
almost parallel, in an etalon), discoverer of the ozone layer 
in the upper atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Faculae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Faculae 


Patches of enhanced brightness in the solar photosphere 
that are often seen in white light images of the Sun. They 
can normally be observed only when located relatively 
close to the edge of the visible disk (the limb) where the 
background brightness of the photosphere is less intense 
than at the center of the disk. They form inside active 
regions where localized magnetic fields heat their material 
to temperatures several hundred kelvin higher than that 
of their surroundings. Although often associated with 
sunspot groups, they may also be seen before spots emerge 
and after they disappear. 


See also: active region, solar photosphere, sunspots. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fallows, Fearon (1789-1831) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fallows, Fearon (1789-1831) 


English astronomer, born in Cockermouth, Cumberland. 
Disenchanted with university life at Cambridge, he won 
the job of the first director of the Royal Observatory at the 
Cape, in South Africa, to provide navigational and time 
information for the ships of the Royal Navy that called 
into the harbor. He established the observatory at the 
base of Table Mountain, in what is now Observatory, a 
suburb of Cape Town, and began observing after a series of 
misfortunes and tribulations with the Admiralty, builders, 
staff, servants, his wife and relatives, accidents and snakes. 
His health suffered. He died aged 42 of the effects of scarlet 
fever, and is buried in the observatory grounds. A sad 
story. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


False Cross 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


False Cross 


The asterism formed by the four stars 6 and « Velorum, 
and « and Carinae, all of the second magnitude, which 
make up a cross of about 10° x 6°. It is so named because 
it is sometimes mistaken for the Southern Cross (Crux) 
by observers unfamiliar with the southern sky. There is a 
superficial resemblance, but Crux is more compact (about 
7° x 5°) and comprises rather brighter stars. The two 
crosses can in fact be quite easily distinguished, as the 
False Cross appears to recline, whereas the long axis of 
the Southern Cross runs almost exactly north-south, and 
the latter has the additional indicator of two bright stars 
(a and 6 Centauri) to the east of and in line with its short 
axis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Far-Infrared and Submillimetre Telescope (FIRST) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Far-Infrared and Submillimetre 
Telescope (FIRST) 


European Space Agency ‘Cornerstone’ mission to be 
launched in 2007. Carries a 3.5 metre diameter 
mirror, the largest ever used for an infrared space 
telescope. Its three instruments—two cameras and a 
high-resolution spectrometer—will observe far-infrared 
and submillimetre emissions from gas and dust heated 
by young stars, and should detect galaxies forming in the 
very early Universe. The instruments will be cooled close 
to absolute zero (—273°C) using liquid helium cryostat 
technology developed for the ISO mission. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Far-Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Far-Ultraviolet Spectroscopic 
Explorer (FUSE) 


The first large-scale space mission to be fully planned 
and operated by a US academic establishment—Johns 
Hopkins University in Maryland. Launched June 1999. 
Began as a NASA-managed project in the mid-1980s, but 
later restructured to reduce cost and development time. 
Designed for high resolution spectroscopic studies at far- 
ultraviolet wavelengths. It will examine hydrogen and 
deuterium gas clouds between stars in the Milky Way 
and nearby galaxies, giving new information about galaxy 
evolution and star formation. (See also EXPLORER.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


FAST (Fast Auroral Snapshot Explorer/Explorer 70) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


FAST (Fast Auroral Snapshot 
Explorer/Explorer 70) 


NASA Small Explorer mission to observe and measure 
rapidly changing electric and magnetic fields and particle 
flows in the acceleration region above Earth’s aurora. 
Launched in August 1996. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fermi, Enrico (1901-54) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fermi, Enrico (1901-54) 


Italian physicist, created the first controlled chain reaction, 
founded Argonne National Laboratory. His work on the 
properties of electrons (spin-half particles like electrons are 
called fermions after him, and the study of their properties 
is called Fermi—Dirac statistics) enabled the pressure source 
in white dwarf stars to be identified, and white dwarf star 
properties to be calculated by CHANDRASEKHAR. Articulated 
the Fermi paradox, suggesting that the time-scale for a 
space-faring race to colonize a galaxy was small compared 
to the life of a galaxy, and so in any given galaxy all suitable 
planets should have been occupied; but this seems not to 
have been the case for the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


FG Sagittae (FG Sge) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


FG Sagittae (FG Sge) 


FG Sge (a = 20°11/56”, 5 = +20°20'04", epoch = 2000) 
is a very peculiar giant star undergoing extremely rapid 
evolutionary changes and nucleosynthetic processing. It 
has evolved at a remarkable pace over the last century 
changing among other properties its appearance from 
a hot (O-type) star to a luminous, cool (K-type) giant 
today. FG Sge is classified as a ‘born-again giant’ currently 
experiencing its second stage as an asymptotic giant 
branch (AGB) star. The rapid and rare metamorphosis 
is likely the result of re-initiated nuclear burning when 
the star was approaching the domain of stellar embers 
aS a WHITE DWARF. The newly generated nuclear energy 
has ballooned the star back to giant dimensions and 
simultaneously caused the cooling of the stellar surface. 
As one of just a few such known stars, FG Sge provides 
astronomers with an unusual opportunity to study stellar 
evolution and nucleosynthesis in real time. Furthermore, 
it resembles the RCORONAE BOREALIS (R CrB) stars and thus 
may shed light on their unclear immediate ancestry. 


Born-again giants 

Normally stellar evolution proceeds on time-scales of 
millions or billions of years. Notable exceptions are 
SUPERNOVAE, for example, though such cataclysmic events 
only represent the ultimate end as normal stars. To 
witness stellar evolution without a simultaneous complete 
disruption of the star on a time-scale more appropriate 
to the lifetimes of humans is consequently exceptionally 
rare. ‘Born-again giants’, such as FG Sge, offer a unique 
opportunity to study stellar evolution and nucleosynthesis 
during the very act, which gives important information as 
to how the late stages of evolution for stars similar to the 
Sun may proceed. 

Towards the end of the AGB phase, stars of 
intermediate mass (a stellar mass on the main sequence 
of M, ~ 1-9Mj) successively experience relatively long 
periods of quiescent hydrogen burning and brief periodic 
outbursts of helium burning. The latter phenomenon 
is called thermal pulses or ‘He-shell flashes’, as the He 
burning is thermally unstable. The thermal pulses during 
the AGB are responsible for substantial mixing of the 
interior by the development of convective shells (dredge- 
up), which in turn leads to further nuclear processing. 
Such dredge-ups are believed to eventually turn the AGB 
star into a CARBONSTAR. The thermal pulses also extinguish 
the outer H-burning shell by pushing it outwards to lower 
temperatures. Once the He burning has died down, H 
burning is once again ignited and the story repeats itself 
after about 10*-10° years. 

Finally, however, due to the ever-decreasing envelope 
mass resulting from the intense mass loss and nuclear 
processing, the AGB stage is terminated. The dispersal of 
the cooler envelope allows the hotter core to be glimpsed, 
causing the star to evolve rapidly towards hotter surface 
temperatures in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL (HR) DIAGRAM. 
The still present nuclear energy production soon fizzles 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Tor 


Figure 1. A schematic Hertzsprung—Russell diagram showing 
the likely evolution of FG Sge in terms of surface temperature 
and luminosity. Rather than fading to become a white dwarf 
(WD) after having departed from the asymptotic giant branch 
(AGB) and passing through a planetary nebula (PN) phase, the 
star has experienced a final He-shell flash causing it to briefly 
return to the AGB regime for the second time. 


out, leaving the star to cool as it descends the white 
dwarf cooling track. Eventually it fades to oblivion when 
no nuclear energy is able to replace the thermal energy 
lost as an ever-more faint stellar ember. A schematic 
representation of a typical post-AGB evolution is shown 
in figure 1. 

Though the above scenario is the most likely chain 
of events, descending the white dwarf cooling track may 
not be a dead-end. Theoretical estimates suggest that 
in about 10% of the stars going through a PLANETARY 
NEBULA stage, the pre-white dwarf will experience one 
more He-shell flash, causing an additional loop in the 
HR diagram. Due to the heating of the interior during 
the gravitational contraction of the core, the temperature 
may rise sufficiently to again trigger He burning. The 
liberated nuclear energy is sufficient to expand the star 
back to its former glory as a cool, luminous giant. If 
the outer H-burning shell is still active, the final He-shell 
flash will only cause the star to swell up but not bring 
down the outer envelope gas to the high temperatures 
of the interior due to the entropy barrier posed by the 
H burning. However, if H burning has ceased, no such 
obstacle prevents an almost complete ingestion of the still 
H-rich envelope, which in turn triggers H burning as well 
as associated nucleosynthesis and mixing with the interior. 
In such a case one can expect large modifications of the 
surface chemical composition, in particular regarding the 
elements H, Li, C, N and the slow neutron capture (s- 
process) elements. 

The lifetime of such a rejuvenated giant is, however, 
short since quiescent He burning is never established. 
Within 100-1000 years—depending on the remaining 
envelope mass—the born-again giant will trace back its 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


FG Sagittae (FG Sge) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


former path when the stellar envelope will again be 
dispersed to finally become a white dwarf, this time 
a point of no return. The short lifetimes of born- 
again giants ensure that this phenomenon will be an 
observational rarity, in spite of the relatively many stars 
which are expected to undergo such a phase. Since the 
final thermal pulse may occur during a planetary nebula 
phase, this scenario can naturally explain the presence 
of nebulae surrounding some cool, luminous stars in the 
vicinity of the AGB, which otherwise would be difficult to 
understand. 


The evolution of FG Sge 

The rapid evolution of FGSge during the twentieth 
century can be understood as the result of a final He-shell 
flash in a post-AGB star, as illustrated in figure 1. The 
best evidence that FG Sge is indeed a born-again giant is 
its surrounding nebula Henize 1-5, which directly implies 
that FG Sge very recently must have been a hot planetary 
nebula nuclei (with a surface temperature Top > 50 000 K). 
It is not possible to conclude exactly when the thermal 
pulse occurred but it most likely happened towards the 
end of the nineteenth century. Since then the star has been 
evolving towards cooler surface temperatures as a result 
of the overall expansion. Due to the cooling, the star has 
steadily become visually brighter; the visual magnitude 
decreased from ~14™ in 1880 to ~9™ in 1990. As yet 
it is unclear whether it has also increased in bolometric 
luminosity since the lower temperatures have shifted most 
of the emergent flux to optical wavelengths. According to 
theoretical calculations, the evolution towards the AGB 
regime proceeds at essentially constant luminosity after 
an initial rapid fading and subsequent brightening (not 
observed in the case of FGSge). The evolutionary time- 
scale of about 100 years to reach the AGB again is consistent 
with the theoretical estimates for a current stellar mass of 
M, © 0.6Mo, (implying a mass on the main sequence of 
about 3Mo). 

Historical spectra revealed that FGSge was a hot 
star (~O3, with Teg *~ 43000 K) in 1880, from which 
it has continually evolved towards later spectral types 
(See CLASSIFICATION OF STELLAR SPECTRA). Today it is roughly 
a K2 giant, but exact classification is complicated by 
its extraordinary rich and peculiar stellar spectrum. To 
attribute a surface temperature of the star from say, 1980, 
until today is therefore rather uncertain, though various 
photometric and spectroscopic estimates suggest Top ~ 
5000-6000 K. Accompanying the changes in appearance, 
the pulsational period has increased from around 5 days 
in the 1930s to about 100 days during the early 1990s. 
This can be qualitatively understood as a consequence 
of the expansion of the star, probably from not much 
bigger than the Earth to a giant perhaps 100 times the size 
of the Sun. From a pulsational analysis, a stellar mass 
of M, ~ 0.8M, can be deduced but unfortunately such 
estimates for FG Sge are still hampered by uncertainties. 

It is not clear whether the final He-shell flash occurred 
before or after H burning had been terminated. Substantial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


modifications of the surface elemental abundances can 
only be expected in the latter case. There are indications 
that the amount of the s-process elements (e.g. Y, Zr, Ce 
and La) in the surface layers increased significantly by a 
factor of about ten within just a few years around 1970. 
Furthermore, during the 1980s FG Sge turned into a carbon 
star, as evidenced by the appearance of strong bands of 
molecular carbon (C;) in the spectrum. Only in one other 
star, the similar born-again giant SAKURAI'S OBJECT, has direct 
evidence for current nucleosynthesis and mixing been 
witnessed. These observed hints of mixing suggest that H 
burning had already ceased before the final thermal pulse, 
but the details are far from properly understood. 

Such surface abundance alterations are only predicted 
to occur at lower surface temperatures when the outer 
convection zone extends into layers in which nuclear 
processing has modified the chemical composition. It is 
also difficult to explain the surface enrichment of s-process 
elements prior to carbon, as theoretically one would expect 
the two to occur simultaneously. Furthermore, hydrogen 
is clearly still present in large amounts in the surface 
layers, while it is expected that during the ingestion of the 
envelope, a large portion of the present hydrogen should 
be burnt through CNO processing. There are indications 
that FGSge may be modestly H deficient, suggesting 
an incomplete ingestion of the H-rich envelope, but this 
remains to be convincingly verified. In the alternative 
scenario in which H burning was still active when the 
thermal pulse occurred, any modifications of the surface 
abundances are not possible to explain without invoking 
other, more speculative, processes. 

In August 1992 FG Sge suddenly experienced a drastic 
decline. Within a few weeks the star faded in the visual 
by more than four magnitudes. Closely thereafter an 
infrared excess, presumably related to circumstellar dust, 
was discovered which had not been present a few years 
earlier. The two events are therefore probably related: dust 
had started to condense around the star, which obscured 
the visual photosphere. The behavior has continued 
since 1992 to the present day with slow recoveries toward 
normal light interrupted by further rapid visual declines, 
as seen in figure 2. The star has, however, not yet fully 
returned to its initial brightness before the fadings were 
first observed. The variability suggests that the dust 
formation only occurs in localized patches rather than 
simultaneously around the whole star, and that fadings are 
only observed if the condensation happens to take place 
along the line of sight. This behavior closely resembles 
the visual variability of the R CrB stars, into which FG Sge 
may currently be evolving. The details behind the dust 
formation are poorly understood, both in FG Sge and the 
RCrB stars, but it is presumably related to stellar mass 
loss, as evidenced by the appearance of CO absorption 
from circumstellar gas in connection with the first fading 
of FG Sge. The apparent congruity between the timing of 
the onset of the declines and the pulsational phase of the 
star is suggestive of the existence of a causal connection, 
and further that the dust forms close to the stellar surface. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


FG Sagittae (FG Sge) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ual magnitude 


Ss 


rhiri tii tiiitivy 


Vi 


No 
ie) 
S 


Figure 2. Visual magnitude estimates of FG Sge from 1986 to the present showing the drastic R CrB-type visual variability which 
started in August 1992. The data have been kindly provided by the AAVSO international database based on observations of variable 
star observers worldwide. The measurements have been averaged over five-day periods for the sake of clarity. 


Related objects 

Though FG Sge is clearly a truly unusual object it is not 
unique. There are at least two other stars which have 
been observed to undergo a born-again giant phase, and 
there are others which are suspected to recently have 
experienced a similar evolutionary stage. Both V605 Aql 
(Nova Aql 1919) and the recently discovered Sakurai’s 
object have experienced a final He-shell flash during the 
twentieth century, and in fact evolved on an even shorter 
time-scale than FG Sge. 

V605 Aql was initially classified as a NovA when it 
brightened by more than four magnitudes between 1919 
and 1921, before it soon faded to obscurity again. The 
rapid unfolding of events unfortunately has prevented the 
outburst phase from being studied carefully with modern 
instrumentation. Today the star is surrounded by the 
planetary nebula Abell 58, which contains evidence that 
V605 Aql indeed was a born-again giant recently. The 
outer parts are H-rich but the central knots of Abell 58 are 
H-deficient, which suggests that V605 Aql actually became 
H-deficient in connection with the final He-shell flash. The 
significantly faster evolutionary time-scale of just a few 
years compared with FG Sge, indicates that the stellar mass 
is higher, perhaps as high as 1.0Mo. 

Another related object is Sakurai’s object, which 
promises to hold important clues to the understanding 
of the born-again giant phenomenon. It was discovered 
in 1996 but had probably experienced its final He-shell 
flash a couple of years earlier, unnoticed. It has already 
cooled down to similar temperatures as FGSge. More 
dramatically, it shows clear evidence of current mixing and 
nucleosynthesis which must have occurred subsequent to 
the thermal pulse. Since discovery, the surface abundance 
of hydrogen has decreased by a factor of ten while both 
the amount of lithium and s-process elements for example 
have increased by similar factors. These alterations 
are likely the result of H-burning, s-processing and Li- 
production through the Cameron—Fowler Be-transport 
mechanism. Furthermore, Sakurai’s object has recently 
started to show visual variability similar to the R CrB stars 
and the appearance of an infrared excess, like FG Sge. Its 
even faster rise-time in brightness suggests it has a higher 
mass, likely similar to V605 Aql. Sakurai’s object is also 
surrounded by a faint planetary nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Furthermore, FGSge seems to resemble the RCrB 
stars in terms of the visual variability with occasional 
drastic fadings. FG Sge has, however, not yet been shown 
to be H-deficient which is the other defining property of 
this group, though there are indications it may be. FG Sge 
may thus be evolving into an RCrB star. A study of its 
elemental abundance distribution is therefore expected to 
reveal whether it is in fact linked to these stars. Such 
an analysis is of great importance but is unfortunately 
encumbered by the complexity of the stellar spectrum. 
Further support for the hypothesis comes from Sakurai’s 
object which not only shows typical R CrB variability but 
also a very similar chemical composition, suggesting a 
common evolutionary background. 


Bibliography 

FG Sge has attracted a great number of studies due to 
its special significance in terms of stellar evolution. The 
historical evolution of FG Sge is discussed in the following 
recent articles: 


Blocker T and Schonberner D 1997 Stellar evolution of 
low and intermediate-mass stars: III an application of 
evolutionary post-AGB models: the variable central 
star FG Sagittae Astron. Astrophys. 324 991-7 

Gonzalez G, Lambert D L, Wallerstein G, Kameswara Rao 
N, Smith V V and McCarthy J K 1998 FGSge—a 
newborn RCrB star? Astrophys. J. Suppl. 114 133-49 

Kipper T 1996 The story of FG Sagittae Hydrogen-deficient 
Stars ed C S Jeffery and U Heber (San Fransisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) pp 329-40 

van Genderen A M and Gautschy A 1995 Deductions 
from the reconstructed evolutionary and pulsational 
history of FG Sagittae Astron. Astrophys. 294 453-68 


Van Genderen and Gautschy references to the earlier 
literature on the subject. One such reference, however, 
deserves to be mentioned here due to its importance: the 
changing chemical composition of FG Sge—the first time 
this has been observed in a star. This was first described 
in: 


Langer G E, Kraft R P and Anderson K S 1974 FG Sagittae: 
the s-process episode Astrophys. J. 189 509-21 


Martin Asplund 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Field of View 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Field of View 


The angular diameter of the area of sky that is visible 
through a telescope. When a telescope is used visually, 
this equates to the area of sky that can be seen when the 
eye is placed at the exit pupil of the eyepiece. The apparent 
angular field of an eyepiece is its acceptance angle: the 
apparent angular diameter of the circle of vision that can 
be seen when the eye is placed at the exit pupil. Typically 
this is about 40°, but, for wide-field eyepieces, can exceed 
70°. The field of view of the telescope (6) is related to the 
apparent field of the eyepiece (6’) as follows: 6 = 6'/M, 
where M is the magnification. 

For most telescopes, the field of view is less than one 
degree, a few tenths of a degree being typical. Schmidt 
telescopes, however, have fields of view of up to ten 
degrees. 


See also: exit pupil, eyepiece, magnification. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filament 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Filament 


A long, dark absorption feature seen against the solar 
disk in monochromatic light (light of one particular 
wavelength). Filaments are clouds of gas, with 
temperatures in the range 5000 K to 10000 K, and 
lengths ranging from tens of thousands to hundreds of 
thousands of kilometers, which are suspended above the 
chromosphere by magnetic fields. They are normally 
located along the boundary between regions of opposite 
magnetic polarity on the solar surface (the ‘neutral line’). 

Filaments appear dark because they absorb light from 
the background solar disk. Although they also emit light 
(they radiate an emission line spectrum) they are much 
fainter than the disk. For example, when viewed in the 
hydrogen alpha line (of wavelength 656 nm), a typical 
filament has no more than 10% of the brightness of the 
disk and appears dark by contrast with its surroundings. 
However, when solar rotation carries a filament across the 
edge of the solar disk, it then appears as a bright feature 
(a prominence) against a dark background. 

Most filaments have lifetimes of about a month, but 
larger ones survive for several months. Occasionally 
a filament will erupt outwards and disappear within 
a few hours, such an event being called a ‘sudden 
disappearance’. If the rising filament crosses the solar 
limb (the edge of the visible disk) it becomes visible as 
an eruptive prominence. 


See also: chromosphere, emission spectrum, prominence. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filar Micrometer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Filar Micrometer 


A device that is used for the accurate visual measurement 
of the angular separation and relative orientation of 
two neighboring astronomical objects, such as the two 
component stars of a visual binary. It consists of a fixed 
‘horizontal’ wire and two ‘vertical’ wires (i.e. orientated at 
right angles to the ‘horizontal’ wire), one of which is fixed 
and the other movable, the movable wire being adjusted in 
position by turning a finely threaded screw. The position 
of the movable wire is read off from a finely graduated 
drum that is rotated by the screw. The wires are positioned 
at the focal plane of the telescope and viewed by an 
eyepiece in which the wires and the astronomical objects 
are both sharply in focus. The entire micrometer assembly 
can be rotated around the optical axis of the telescope, its 
orientation being indicated on a finely graduated circular 
scale. 

To make a measurement of the separation between 
two stars, the micrometer is rotated until one of the fixed 
wires (the ‘horizontal’ one) lies along the line between 
the two stars. The telescope is then adjusted until one of 
the stars lies on the intersection of the two fixed wires. 
The reading on the scale is noted. The movable wire 
is then shifted along until it intersects the second star, 
and a second reading taken. The difference in readings 
gives the linear distance through which the wire has 
moved. If the focal length of the telescope is known, 
the angular separation that corresponds to the measured 
linear separation can then be calculated. The orientation 
(or position angle) of the line joining the two stars is read 
from the circular scale. 


See also: eyepiece, focus, position angle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filterbanks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Filterbanks 


Filterbanks are instruments which divide the signal from 
a radio telescope into a number of frequency channels 
and measure the power in each of the channels. The 
output of the filterbank is a stream of digital data sent 
to a computer for analysis. Filterbanks can take several 
forms including analog filterbanks, digital filterbanks, 
fast Fourier transform (FFT) machines and software 
filterbanks. These different types of backend use very 
different means to accomplish essentially the same signal 
processing goals. Correlators can also be used as 
filterbanks (see the articles on CORRELATORS and PULSAR 
BACKENDS for more information). 

Filterbanks are most commonly used to observe radio 
pulsars. A brief summary of the observational properties 
of pulsars will serve as an example of the use of filterbanks 
and also of how they work. For more information, see the 
article on PULSARS. 


Pulsars and dispersion 

Pulsars—highly magnetized rotating neutron stars—are 
observed as very regular pulses of broadband amplitude- 
modulated radio noise. These flashes of radio waves can 
be thought of as beams from a cosmic lighthouse sweeping 
through the Galaxy; when the beam intersects the Earth we 
see the pulsar’s flash, and then it disappears until the beam 
comes around again. A pulsar’s broadband non-thermal 
emission is characterized by a power-law radio spectrum 


Sav’ (1) 


where S is the flux density (power per unit area per unit 
frequency), v is the frequency and a (~2) is the spectral 
index. 

The pulses of radio waves are emitted nearly si- 
multaneously at all frequencies, but the interstellar 
medium (ISM) causes the different frequencies to prop- 
agate through space at different speeds (see INTERSTEL- 
LAR MATTER). Because of free electrons in the interstellar 
medium the signal at a lower frequency travels slower, 
and is therefore detected by telescopes later than that at a 
higher frequency. This dispersion is similar to the disper- 
sion of white light into a rainbow of colors when it passes 
through a prism, and is the result of a medium having a 
frequency-dependent index of refraction. The propaga- 
tion speed of the pulse (group velocity) as a function of 
frequency is given by 


2 \1/2 
p= e(1- pst ) (2) 


Mev" 


where c is the speed of light in a vacuum, n- is the density 
of free electrons (assumed small), and e and m, are the 
charge and mass of an electron respectively. 

Dispersion greatly complicates observations of radio 
pulsars. At two given frequencies, the noise pulses from 
a pulsar will arrive at different times, separated by an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


amount proportional to the dispersion measure (DM), 
which is the integrated electron column density along the 
line of sight to the pulsar (DM = c n(s) ds, expressed in 
units of pc cm~°). Over a narrow bandwidth Av, the time 
delay in seconds due to dispersion is given by 


At, ~ 8300DMA viz Yuin (3) 


where Avypz and vy, are the bandwidth and observing 
frequency measured in megahertz. Figure 1 illustrates 
dispersion; the pulse arrival time varies by about a quarter 
of the pulse period over the observed bandwidth. 

While dispersion complicates pulsar observations, it 
is not without benefit. By measuring the DM from the 
pulse time delay between different frequencies, we can 
estimate the distance to a pulsar based on our knowledge 
of the density of free electrons in the Galaxy in the direction 
of the pulsar. The density of electrons is higher in the 
Galactic disk, so generally speaking a given DM implies a 
shorter distance to a pulsar in the disk than to one at high 
Galactic latitude. Also, we observe a higher density of 
electrons toward the Galactic center than toward the outer 
Galaxy. 


Filterbanks 

The dispersive effects of the ISM discussed in the previous 
section demonstrate the need for pulsar filterbanks. The 
pulse profile (intensity as a function of time or pulse 
phase) observed in a bandwidth Av will be smeared in 
time by an amount At according to equation (3) (this 
smearing can be thought of as a convolution of the intrinsic 
pulse profile with a boxcar or top-hat function of width 
At). In order to resolve the details of the pulsar’s light 
curve, we would like to have At < P, where P is 
the pulse period; this restricts us to small bandwidths. 
However, the signal-to-noise ratio increases as the square 
root of the bandwidth, and pulsars are weak sources, 
so we desire large bandwidths. The solution to this 
problem is to observe the pulsar in a number, nghan, Of 
narrow channels, each with bandwidth Av. This gives 
the desired small At corresponding to a single channel 
bandwidth Av, in addition to the increased signal-to- 
noise ratio corresponding to a total bandwidth B = 
NchanAv. To correct for the dispersive delay between 
channels, an appropriate time offset is applied to each 
channel’s output before the various frequency channels 
are combined. This signal processing solution is known 
as incoherent dedispersion; information about individual 
frequency components inside a single channel is destroyed 
by this method. 

The number of channels in a filterbank is a primary 
factor in its complexity and cost, so Nehan is an important 
design parameter. The total bandwidth B is set by the 
telescope receiver, and it is generally desirable for the 
backend instrument to use all available bandwidth to 
maximize the signal-to-noise ratio. The maximum DM 
and At are set by science goals, with At being a small 
fraction of the minimum pulsar period a filterbank is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filterbanks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PSR BO0535+28 


- 
N 434 
4 
= 
~ 
> 
ce) 
¢ 
o 
= 
> 
° 
ra 426 


Pulse Phase (ms) 


143 


Figure 1. Dispersed pulse profile. The dispersed integrated pulse profile of PSR B0535 + 28, observed over an 8 MHz bandpass in 128 
separate frequency channels with the Penn State Pulsar Machine at the Arecibo Observatory. Darker grays represent higher flux levels. 


Note that the pulse arrives significantly later at lower frequencies. This pulsar has P = 143 ms and DM = 39.7 pc cm~”. 


designed to study. From equation (3) we can see that the 
required number of channels for a filterbank operating at 
a central frequency v is given by 


ByuzDM 


n ~ 8300 
chan Ak vem 


(4) 


A filterbank can be thought of as a set of nehan radio 
tuners working in parallel. Each tuner gets an identical 
input from the telescope (the antenna), and is tuned to 
a different frequency channel. If we imagine that these 
tuners are attached to power meters rather than speakers, 
we can watch the meters to continually monitor the 
power in each frequency channel. Now, if these power 
meters are connected to a computer which records the 
measurements, we have the basic workings of an analog 
filterbank. Note that this is different from the operation 
of most spectrum analysers, which sweep through the 
spectrum and measure the power in only one channel at 
a time; the analogy here would be to a single radio tuner 
which slowly sweeps across the bandwidth. 

An alternative signal processing approach is coherent 
dedispersion. This technique completely removes the 
linear transfer function imposed by the dispersive ISM, 
and eliminates all dispersive smearing from the pulse 
profile. Coherent dedispersion can be thought of as a 
filterbank with an arbitrarily large number of arbitrarily 
narrow channels. 


Analog filterbanks 

Analog filterbanks are probably the easiest class to 
understand. We will use a highly simplified four- 
channel filterbank, depicted schematically in figure 2, to 
illustrate the operation of this type of instrument. The 
filterbank’s input signal comes from the telescope feed; 
note that this signal is often mixed down (shifted to a 
lower frequency) from the frequency observed on the 
sky to simplify signal transmission and processing. An 
illustrative input spectrum (power per unit bandwidth 
as a function of frequency) is depicted in column (i) of 
the figure. This telescope feed signal is split four ways 
and passed directly to the input of each channel. From 
this point forward the signal is divided into four parallel 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


3 


channels, each processing a different part of the input 
spectrum. The input spectrum is filtered to select a smaller 
bandwidth for processing. Common filter types include 
LC and crystal filters, depending on the required passband 
characteristics. Columns (ii) and (iii) of the figure show the 
passband (transmission as a function of frequency) of each 
filter as well as the spectrum of the filtered signal, which 
is the multiplicative product of the input spectrum and 
the filter passband. At this point, we have simply divided 
the input spectrum up into several smaller sections. Next, 
in column (iv), the power in each channel is measured 
with a square-law detector. This detection is usually 
accomplished by passing the signal through a diode which 
is biased so that the output current is proportional to the 
square of its input voltage. This means that the current 
in the circuit at this point is proportional to the squared 
electric field of the signal received by the telescope, which 
is in turn proportional to the intensity of the observed 
source. This post-detection current is then integrated over 
an appropriate time interval with a simple RC circuit, 
analog-to-digital (A/D) converted to produce digital data, 
and finally sent to a computer for analysis. These data are 
proportional to the intensity of the source in the channel’s 
passband integrated over the sampling time interval. 

In order to receive all of the signal from a pulsar, 
both polarizations (either linear or circular) must be 
processed by the filterbank. This requires that all the 
steps described above prior to square-law detection be 
performed separately on each polarization. If polarization 
information is not required, the post-detection intensity 
signals can be combined to produce one data stream per 
frequency channel. 

An example of an analog filterbank is the Penn State 
Pulsar Machine (PSPM), which is used at the 305 m radio 
telescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. This filterbank divides 
its 8 MHz bandwidth into 128 frequency channels and can 
measure the power in each channel as often as every 12 jus. 
This instrument is used for searching for new pulsars as 
well as timing known pulsars. 

The number of channels in an analog filterbank can 
be effectively increased through the technique of Time 
Multiplexed Frequency Expansion (TMFE), as depicted in 
figure 3. Say we want to double the number of channels 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filterbanks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Input Signal Power Spectrum (i) Channel Passbands (ii) 


LL x 


100 MHz 140 MHz 


Power / Hz 
Filter Transmission 


Prt 


100 MHz 140 MHz 


Filtered Power Spectra (iii) 


ry 


Detect, Integrate, and A/D Convert (iv) 


ADC] —> 5.5 


ADC| —> 4.7 


Power / Hz 


Pree 


ADC| —> 3.5 


ADC| — > 2.5 


100 MHz 140 MHz 


Figure 2. Analog filterbank schematic. The input spectrum is filtered, detected, integrated and A/D converted. See text for a detailed 


explanation. 


in the filterbank in figure 2. Using TMFE, the input 
signal is first filtered into two channels, then each channel 
is digitized at baseband. The digitized data from both 
channels are stored in two sections of a single buffer; when 
this buffer is full the data are stored in a second buffer. 
At this point, a digital-to-analog (D/A) converter plays 
back the data from the low-frequency section of the first 
buffer, but at twice the original sample rate. This expands 
the bandwidth to 40 MHz—twice the original bandwidth 
of the channel, or the entire bandwidth of both channels. 
After mixing this signal up from baseband to the proper 
frequency for the filterbank input, the signal is fed into the 
filterbank. During this time, the four output channels of 
the filterbank contain data from only the lower half of the 
input bandwidth; thus we have now divided half of the 
bandwidth into four channels. These data are recorded 
for later analysis. Next, we follow the same playback 
procedure for the high-frequency section of the first buffer, 
and the filterbank divides this half of the bandwidth into 
four channels as well. So the output of the filterbank 
alternates, in this example, between four channels from 
an input passband of 100-120 MHz and four channels 
from an input passband of 120-140 MHz. Our effective 
channel bandwidths are now 5 MHz, as opposed to the 
10 MHz of the original filterbank without TMFE. Since 
the TMFE system plays back its data at twice the sample 
rate, both sections of the first buffer can be replayed in the 
time it takes to fill the second buffer, so there is no loss of 
observing efficiency. The data in the second buffer are now 
fed into the filterbank while the first buffer is filled with 
new data, and the process repeats. It is easy to see that we 
can increase the effective number of filterbank channels by 
a factor of N by using N TMFE filters, A/D converters and 
buffer subdivisions, and by running the D/A converters 
at N times the sample rate. A TMFE system with N = 4 is 
in operation at the Parkes 64 m telescope in Australia, in 
conjunction with a pre-existing analog filterbank. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Digital filterbanks 

The steps taken inside a digital filterbank are similar to 
those in the analog filterbank, but they are accomplished 
through different electronic means. In a digital filterbank, 
the input voltage signal from the telescope is sampled 
and digitized. This digitized signal is then subdivided 
into channels by digital filters, for instance finite impulse 
response (FIR) or infinite impulse response (IIR) filters. 
As an example, in the FIR case, the filter is programmed 
with coefficients of the discrete Fourier transform of the 
desired filter passband. The output of the filter for a given 
input data stream is then the convolution of a series of 
contiguous input data with the filter coefficients. This 
appears very different from the analog filtration process, 
but the Convolution Theorem guarantees that the result 
will be the same. As the filtered signals are already 
digital numbers, ‘square-law detection’ is accomplished 
by simply squaring the data, and integration by simply 
summing the desired number of samples. 

The Navy-Berkeley Pulsar Processor (NBPP) is a 
digital filterbank used at the Nancay Observatory in 
France. This instrument has 96 channels; its FIR filters 
can be programmed to cover a total bandwidth of up to 
168 MHz. It is designed to search for pulsars at observing 
frequencies above 1 GHz. 

Digital filters can also be used to accomplish coherent 
dedispersion, as in the Green Bank—Berkeley Pulsar 
Processor (GBPP), at the National Radio Astronomy 
Observatory in Green Bank, West Virginia. After the 
digital bandpass filtering described above, this instrument 
uses a series of high-performance FIR devices to counteract 
the dispersion in each channel. These custom-designed 
PULFIR chips convolve the data stream with up to 1024 
coefficients, which correspond to the dispersive transfer 
function for a given DM. 


Fast Fourier transform filterbanks 
Another way of producing what is effectively a filterbank 
involves no filters at all, but rather uses integrated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filterbanks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Channel Passbands 
5 : Baseband 
2 ADC | 
Input Signal 5 
100-140 MHz 8 ; 
a Baseband V 
f= ADC , 
ou 4 


100 MHz 140 MHz 


Buffer 1 
High Frequency }, 
Low Frequency ss 
; \ 2X ADC Output to 
Buffer 2 | Up-Mixing [>  Filterbank 
: : 100-140 MHz 
High Frequency 


Low Frequency 


Figure 3. TMFE schematic. The signal is filtered, digitized, buffered and D/A converted sequentially at, in this example, twice the 


sample frequency. See text for a detailed explanation. 


circuits optimized for performing fast Fourier transforms 
on digitized signals. As with the digital filterbank, the 
telescope signal is first digitized. However, rather than 
sending the digitized signal through a series of filters, one 
per channel, it is fed into an FFT chip. This dedicated 
computer calculates the discrete Fourier transform of a 
segment of the data stream, which is the discrete amplitude 
spectrum of the signal. To obtain the power spectrum of 
the signal, we need only to square the amplitude spectrum, 
multiplying by its complex conjugate. As this discrete 
power spectrum is nothing more than the power contained 
in individual frequency channels, we have effectively 
created a filterbank. These data can now be integrated 
by summing the output over a desired number of cycles, 
as with the digital filterbank. 

Since we can only calculate the FFT of a short segment 
of data at one time, the Fourier transform we compute will 
be the convolution of that intrinsic to our input signal and 
that of the window function which is applied to it. In 
the simplest case, this window function is unity for the 
samples that make up the short input data segment and 
zero for all earlier and later times. This simple window 
function has as its Fourier transform a sinc function. When 
convolved with the transform of the signal, the result is 
that a significant amount of the amplitude, and hence 
power, of each component of our intrinsic spectrum is lost 
in the sidelobes of this sinc function. We can minimize 
this loss of power into spectral sidelobes by Hanning 
smoothing the input data. This involves multiplying the 
input data set by a window function which tapers to zero at 
the ends. The Fourier transform of this window function 
has a broader main peak, but much smaller sidelobes, than 
in the previous case. This decreases our spectral resolution 
slightly, but the power scattered into the sidelobes is 
greatly reduced; the result is a much cleaner power 
spectrum. With Hanning smoothing, the data near the 
ends of our input segment are weighted much less heavily 
than those near the center of the segment. To compensate 
for this loss, the input segments are commonly overlapped, 
meaning that only perhaps half of the input segment is 
replaced for each new FFT. 

An example of an FFT filterbank is the Arecibo 
Observatory Fourier Transform Machine (AOFTM), which 
synthesizes 1024 channels covering a 10 MHz bandwidth 
and has 102 pus time resolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Software filterbanks 

One final way of creating a filterbank is to simulate one 
using computer software. In this system, the signal from 
the telescope is Nyquist sampled (with a sample frequency 
of at least 2B), digitized and recorded for later analysis. 
This method is the most computationally intensive and 
generates huge amounts of data, but the hardware is 
relatively simple and all of the information in the telescope 
signal is preserved. The data are later processed by a 
general purpose computer, which can be programmed to 
perform coherent dedispersion, or to simulate a digital 
filterbank with FIR or IIR filters, or an FFT machine. 
Software filterbanks will become more and more practical 
as computing power increases; at present they are limited 
to relatively small bandwidths compared with the other 
types of filterbanks. The computing power required to 
process each megahertz of bandwidth in real time is about 
50 million floating point operations per second (MFlops) 
for a simulated incoherent filterbank and 200 MFlops for 
coherent dedispersion. 

An example of this kind of instrument is the Caltech 
Baseband Recorder (CBR), used at Arecibo Observatory. 
This instrument covers a 10 MHz bandwidth, taking data 
at a rate of 20 MBs~!. The data are analysed off-line using 
supercomputers. 


Bibliography 
A summary of signal processing issues in the context of 
pulsar observations is given by: 


Hankins T H and Rickett B J 1975 Pulsar signal processing 
Methods in Computational Physics. Volume 14—Radio 
Astronomy ed B Alder, S Fernbach and M Rotenberg 
(New York: Academic) pp 55-129 


Amore detailed description of digital filterbanks can 
be found in: 


Backer D C, Dexter M R, Zepka A, Ng D, Werthimer D J, 
Ray PS and Foster RS 1997 A programmable 36 MHz 
digital filter bank for radio science Publ. Astron. Soc. 
Pacific 109 61 


Bryan A Jacoby and Stuart B Anderson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Filters 


Filters are used in astronomy for two main purposes, 
to either lower the overall intensity of the light or to 
restrict the wavelength range of the light that is being 
measured. When the eye was the only astronomical 
detector, filters were scarcely used, but astronomy has 
always adopted the new technologies of the day, be it 
photography, photomultiplier tubes, image tubes, CCDs 
or IR arrays. As the new detectors invariably have a 
wider wavelength response and/or improved sensitivity 
than previous detectors, filters became very important in 
order to match previously used bandpasses and to sample 
the flux of astronomical sources at different wavelengths 
thus providing some astrophysical information on the 
source’s temperature and other properties. Some filters 
work by selective absorption and transmittance: these 
are the colored glass filters. Others work by selective 
reflection and transmittance: these are usually referred to 
as interference filters. 

An interference filter comprises a multi-layer of thin 
films that selectively transmits or reflects light of particular 
wavelengths. They fall into two broad types, bandpass 
filters (usually narrow bands) and edge filters, that 
transmit above or below a certain wavelength; dichroic 
beamsplitters are edge filters. The Fabry-Perot tunable 
filter is a unique interference filter that can be used 
to spectacular effect on emission-line objects (see also 
TUNABLE IMAGING FILTERS). Finally, there are filters used 
for measuring polarized light and studying astronomical 
magnetic phenomena. 


Colored glass filters 

The first filters used in astronomy were colored glass 
(Schott or Corning) or colored gelatin (Kodak). These 
were used with photographic emulsions to define B, 
V, R and I bands. Colored glasses had been made 
for thousand of years for expensive glass vessels and 
ornaments. Nowadays, colored glasses are produced in 
one of two ways, either by ionic coloration or by absorption 
and scattering from a suspension of colloidal particles 
that are produced in the glass and controlled in size by 
heat treatment after an essentially colorless glass is made. 
Figure 1 shows some sample transmittance curves of these 
glass filters. 

The ionic glasses are made by dissolving particular 
salts (such as cobalt or nickel oxide) in glass. The ionic 
coloration of the UG (violet) and BG (blue) series of glasses 
produces a spectral transmittance curve resembling a bell- 
curve of half-width between 100 and 200 nm but most of 
these glasses also transmit red light beyond 700 nm as well, 
thus the violet glasses appear purple to the eye. 

The second type of colored filter glass are a series 
of sharp edge (or short-wave cut-off) filters, the WG, GG 
(sulphur and cadmium sulfide), OG (cadmium selenide) 
and RG (gold) series which absorb light blueward of a 
quite sharply defined wavelength. The filters are made 
with their short-wave cut-offs ranging from 400 to 800 nm 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1.00 


ie a a 


0.80 


0.60 


0.40 


Transmittance 


0.20 


AL fi 


300 400 500 600 700 800 900 
Wavelength nm 


0.00 


Figure 1. The transmittances of a sample of colored glass filters. 
The thick curves are for the ionic colored glasses UG1 (dots) and 
BG12. The medium thick curves with symbols are $8612 and 
KG3 used as red cut-off glasses. The thin curves are three of the 
family of short-wave cut-off glasses GG495, OG570 and RG9. 


insteps of 20nm. To the eye, the WG glasses are essentially 
colorless, the GG series go from colorless through light 
yellow to dark yellow, the OG are orange-red and the RG 
series are rose to ruby in color. 

Schott also make two special (nearly) colorless glasses 
(BG39/40 and the KG series) that can be used as long-wave 
cut-off filters; however, these glasses have long-wave cut- 
offs that fall more slowly (over about 250 nm) than the 
short-wave cut-offs rise (over about 50 nm) thus producing 
an asymmetrical spectral transmittance curve when used 
together to define a bandpass. Where a steeper cut-off 
is desirable, it is necessary to use an edge interference 
coating (see below) in combination with a Schott short- 
wave cut-off filter. An important use for the BG39/40 
and S8612 glasses is also as a ‘red-leak’ blocker, absorbing 
light beyond 700 nm where most of the Schott blue and 
violet glasses transmit. Polished copper sulfate crystals or 
a copper sulfate solution have also been used in astronomy 
as a UV transmitting blue filter to block red leaks, but the 
improved UV transmission of 58612 glass, although not 
as high as that of copper sulfate, has enabled it to replace 
copper sulfate for most imaging applications. 


Combination filters and bandpasses 

The ionic colored glasses define broad bell-shaped 
bandpasses in the violet, blue or green regions; however, 
the choice is restricted. Better definition has traditionally 
been obtained by combining one of those filters with one 
of the long-pass glass filters, or by using a long-pass 
glass filter and the red sensitivity cut-off of the detector, 
for instance the particular sensitization of a photographic 
emulsion (O, G, D, E, J, F, N) or the fall-off in the sensitivity 
of a photocathode (S5, S11, S20, GaAs). But with the 
use of wide wavelength response CCD detectors and the 
restriction of photographic emulsions to the broad band 
Tek Pan film, it is now necessary to have filter defined 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


bandpasses. This is also true in the IR and the UV, where 
in the past, the atmospheric windows were often partly 
used to define the edges of the bandpass resulting in the 
bandpass differing between seasons and with observing 
altitude. The standard U, B, V and R bandpasses can 
be defined using only glass filters but better R and I 
bandpasses can be made using interference edge filters 
for the red cut-offs. The bandpass filters for the SLOAN 
DIGITAL SKY SURVEY have been defined in this fashion, the 
short-wave cut-off coming from the Schott color filter and 
the long-wave cut-off from an interference edge filter. It 
is necessary to use BG39 with other BG glasses and S8612 
with UG glasses to eliminate the red leak of those glasses. 

Combination glass filters have been used successfully 
with CCD systems to match the standard UBVRI 
system (see MAGNITUDE SCALES AND PHOTOMETRIC SYSTEMS). The 
thicknesses of the glasses can be adjusted to tune the 
passband for better results with detectors having different 
wavelength responses. 


Practical consideration 

From a practical viewpoint, many of the BG and all the 
UG glasses are difficult to use. They are hard to polish, 
tarnish in air easily and the high concentration of ions in 
the available glasses often means that they are brittle and 
the required blue or violet color is produced with only a 
thin piece (1 mm or less) of the glass. This is unfortunate, as 
it means that it is difficult to produce good optical quality 
glass sandwiches in a large enough size to cover the focal 
plane of the large scHmIDT TELESCOPES where it is desirable to 
have sucha blue and ultraviolet filter for use with the new 
Tek Pan film. However, up to 25 cm square filters suitable 
for CCD arrays can readily be made. Large glass pieces 
are usually unavailable from stock and if ordered have to 
await a new melt. Some glasses, e.g. UG2 and BG37, are 
no longer made. 


Neutral density filters 

Although astronomical objects are generally very faint, it 
is sometimes necessary to attenuate light. The NG series 
of Schott filters provides a large range of attenuation and 
are especially useful when it is better to absorb the light 
rather than reflect it away. However, the attenuation is 
not especially constant with wavelength and the glasses 
absorb shortward of 400 nm. For astronomical objects 
therefore it is usually preferable to use filters made from 
fused silica that have been coated with a metallic alloy. 
This provides excellent attenuation that, although not 
identical for all wavelengths, is usually close enough to be 
easily calibrated. These coated fused silica filters can be 
used from the UV to 2 zm. For IR wavelengths germanium 
substrates are used. These filters are also made with a 
wedge or radial gradient of attenuation that is useful in 
non-quantitative situations. 


Interference filters 
Thin film coating technology has matured, and excellent 
interference filters are available from many manufactur- 
ers using computer designed coatings and computer con- 
trolled coating plants. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bandpass filters 

Bandpass interference filters are made by coating a glass 
or fused silica substrate with alternating layers of 4/4 
reflective and 4/2 transmitting dielectric materials to make 
a single or multiple Fabry-Perot interferometer. The 
spacings between the layers is designed to enhance the 
transmittance at the wavelength of interest. By varying 
the reflectivities, the number of layers and the number of 
Fabry-Perot cavities the shape and width of the bandpass 
can be altered. 

The more cavities, the squarer the bandpass is. Square 
bandpasses are desirable for emission line photometry so 
that the response is uniform across the field (changing 
angle) and for a range of RADIAL VELOcITIES. But for some 
astronomical purposes, such as broad band continuum 
photometry, square bandpasses are not desirable as they 
produce too great a response difference as a particular 
spectral feature moves in and out of the band due to radial 
velocity differences or chemical and physical differences 
between objects. Similarly, square bandpasses can also 
result in big differences when a filter is replaced by another 
whose bandpass is not precisely the same. For that reason, 
combination glass filters, or glass and interference edge 
filters, have been preferred for continuum photometry. 
However, rapid advances in coating technology, including 
rugate filter technology, now enable arbitrary shaped 
bandpasses with high throughput to be made. It is likely 
that interference filters in the future will increasingly 
replace most colored glass filters. 

Interference filters are produced as a glass sandwich, 
usually between two colored blocking glasses. Because of 
the hygroscopic nature of the coatings the edges are sealed 
with epoxy and encased in an aluminum cylinder. The 
filters are normally between 5 and 10 mm thick depending 
on the diameter and the manufacturer. 


Shifts in bandpass 
The bandpass of an interference filter shifts blueward as 
the incident angle deviates from the normal. This can be 
useful as it enables a blueward tuning of the filter to be 
done. Typically a5 degree tilt shifts the central wavelength 
of a 656 nm filter by about 0.7 nm while a 10 degree 
tilt shifts it by 2.7 nm. As most imaging is done with 
a converging beam the bandpass will broaden and shift 
blueward depending on the f/ratio of the telescope and 
position in the field. It is necessary to take this into account 
when designing narrow band imaging filters. 
Temperature will also shift the bandpass as the 
distance between the layers changes. ‘Typical optical 
interference filters at room temperatures show shifts of 
about 0.003% of the peak wavelength per °C. This is about 
10 times less than a typical glass edge filter, such as GG395 
or OG590. 


Edge filters 

Unlike bandpass filters, edge filters do not contain cavities. 
Generally they consist of quarter-wave and modified 
quarter-wave layers that produce an ‘edge’ in wavelength 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1.00 


0.80 


0.60 


0.40 


Transmittance 


‘ 
( 

\ 

{ 

_. 


0.20 


en eee oe \ 


400 500 600 700 800 900 
Wavelength nm 


Figure 2. The transmittances of typical multilayer (interference) 
edge filters. The thin curve is for the short-pass filter used for 
defining the red edge of a passband or as a heat reflecting 
dichroic filter. The thicker line is for a long-pass filter that could 
be used as a dichroic beamsplitter in a spectrograph, reflecting 
blue light and transmitting red light. 


space as the filter changes from reflection to transmission. 
Figure 2 shows examples of typical short-pass and long- 
pass filters. Short-pass edge filters are often used with 
long-pass glass filters to define astronomical photometric 
bandpasses. Dichroic mirrors are edge filters used at an 
angle of 45°. In optical spectroscopy they are normally 
used to reflect light blueward of some limit into one 
spectrograph and transmit the remainder into another. 
They are often also used to reflect IR light to an IR 
instrument and transmit the optical light to a guider. 


Fabry-Perot tunable filters 

A Fabry-Perot interferometer has been introduced at two 
observatories that has revolutionized the way in which 
high-efficiency intermediate to narrowband imaging can 
be carried out. Advances in coating techniques, precise 
spacing control of the interferometer plates and an 
innovative charge shuffling technique on the CCD detector 
have made this possible. More details can be found 
at (http://www.aao.gov.au/local/www/jbh/ttf/). The 
filter can be tuned between 370 and 1000 nm and 
the resolution chosen between 100 and 1000. At low 
resolutions (below 300), normal broad band BVRI filters 
can be used to block sidebands. At high resolution (1000) 
a set of intermediate interference filters are needed for 
sideband suppression. Unprecedented observations have 
been made with this new instrument. 


Rugate filters 

A rugate filter is an interference coating in which the 
refractive index of the coating varies continuously through 
its thickness. This provides greatly enhanced flexibility 
in filter design and extremely high levels of rejection. 
Multiple passbands can be produced, for instance to 
transmit two emission lines of interest, or to reject certain 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wavelengths, suchas the strongest night sky emission lines 
or intense laser lines for safety goggles. 


Antireflection coatings 

Typical glass surfaces reflect about 4% of the normally 
incident visible and near-IR light. Silicon and germanium 
reflect over 60%. To avoid light loss and problems 
associated with reflected stray light from bright stars 
and the sky, antireflection coatings are usually applied to 
all optics including the filters. Multilayer coatings can 
be designed to produce extremely low reflectivities over 
a wide wavelength range, but for filters, a single-layer 
coating designed for the central wavelength of the filter is 
usually adequate. The most effective single layer is a A/4 
thickness of material whose refractive index is the square 
root of that of the glass. 


Bibliography 

Information on glass filters can be obtained from 
Schott Filter Glasses (Schott: Jena Glaswerk Schott 
& Gen., Mainz); on optical interference filters from 
the Oriel Corporation (http://www.oriel.com), Melles 
Griot (http://www.mellesgriot.com) and Barr Associates 
(http://barrassociates.com) also for rugate filters; for 
infrared filters (http:/ /barr-associates-uk.com). 


Michael Bessell 


Table 1. Camera focal lengths and fields. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Name Focallength Fno. Aperture Scale Field 
Hasselblad 80mm 2.8 60mm 60 arcsec 30 arcdeg 
Nikon 400 4.5 90 12 6.8 
40 inch 8128 8 1016 0.6 0.3 

3 


Finé, Oronce (1494-1555) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finé, Oronce (1494-1555) 


Cartographer, mathematician and military scientist, born 
in Briancon, France, professor of mathematics at the 
Collége Royal in Paris, wrote on astronomical instruments 
and astronomy, suggested that eclipses of the Moon could 
be used to determine longitude. A map of the world that 
he produced in 1531 uses the name ‘Terra Australia’ for 
the first time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Finder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finder 


Asmall telescope of low magnification and relatively wide 
field of view that is attached to the main telescope and can 
be adjusted to be exactly parallel to the optical axis of the 
main instrument. Because its field of view is wider than 
that of the main telescope, it is much easier for the observer 
to locate the object of interest in the finder (provided it is 
bright enough to be seen or near something bright enough 
to be seen) than in the narrow field of the main instrument. 
Once the object has been identified, the telescope controls 
are adjusted to bring it to the center of the field of view of 
the finder (which may be marked by crosswires). It should 
then be readily visible within the field of view of the main 
telescope. 

Modern telescopes that are computer controlled can 
position themselves on a celestial object to arc-second 
accuracy and have little need for a finder telescope. 


See also: field of view, guide telescope, magnification, 
telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fireball 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fireball 


An exceptionally bright meteor, traditionally defined as 
one that exceeds the planets in brightness. Since Venus 
at greatest brilliancy reaches magnitude —4.7, a fireball 
is now generally taken to be a meteor with a magnitude 
of —5 or greater. About one meteor in every thousand 
recorded is a fireball. Some meteor showers, for example 
the Geminids, are particularly productive of fireballs. 
Among sporadic meteors, fireballs are most likely to occur 
in the spring. Fireballs are produced by larger than 
average meteoroids and are usually of asteroidal rather 
than cometary origin, and therefore denser. A sufficiently 
large object will not only produce a fireball but will be 
only partially consumed by its passage through the Earth’s 
atmosphere, and will fall to the surface as a meteorite. A 
fireball that generates a sonic boom is known as a bolide. 


See also: bolide. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


First Point of Aries ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


First Point of Aries 


An alternative term for vernal equinox. At one time (some 
2000 years ago) the vernal equinox lay in the constellation 
of Aries but, due to precession, this is no longer the case 
and the vernal equinox has moved into Pisces. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial sphere, ecliptic, 
equinox, First Point of Libra, precession, solstices. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


First Point of Libra ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


First Point of Libra 


An alternative term for autumnal equinox. Due to 
precession, this point no longer lies in the constellation 
of Libra but, instead, is located in Virgo. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial sphere, ecliptic, 
equinox, First Point of Aries, precession, solstices. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fisher, Sir Ronald Aylmer (1890-1962) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fisher, Sir Ronald Aylmer (1890-1962) 


Statistician, born in London, England. After studying 
astronomy using AiRY’s manual on the Theory of Errors he 
became interested in statistics, and laid the foundation 
of randomization in experimental design, the analysis of 
variance and the use of data in estimating the properties of 
the parent population from which it was drawn. Invented 
the maximum likelihood method for estimating from 
random data. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fission 


The breaking apart of a body into smaller fragments. In 
the context of nuclear physics the term, nuclear fission, 
refers to the splitting of a heavy atomic nucleus into two 
or more lighter nuclei with the release of energy. The mass 
of the nucleus prior to fission is greater than the combined 
masses of the fragments, the difference in mass, Am, being 
released as a quantity of energy, AF (AE = Amc?, where 
c denotes the speed of light). 

For example, the capture of a neutron by a uranium- 
235 nucleus causes that nucleus to break into two 
fragments (a nucleus of molybdenum-98 and a nucleus of 
xenon-136), together with two neutrons and a substantial 
quantity of energy (212 MeV). Because the reaction 
liberates additional neutrons, a chain reaction is possible 
ina mass of uranium. If the reaction is allowed to build up, 
unchecked, a nuclear explosion will take place (this is the 
basis of the atomic bomb), while if the rate of the reaction is 
controlled, by regulating the supply of neutrons, a steady 
output of energy can be achieved (this is the basis of the 
nuclear reactor). 


See also: atom, electronvolt, energy, fusion, mass, 
neutron. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fitzgerald [FitzGerald], George Francis (1851-1901) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fitzgerald [FitzGerald], George 
Francis (1851-1901) 


Irish physicist, born in Kill-o’-the Grange, Monkstown, 
Co. Dublin, became professor at Trinity College Dublin, 
identified the reason for the result of the Michelson— 
Morley experiment, as the shrinkage of a body due 
to motion at speeds close to that of light. LORENTZ 
independently came to the same conclusion, and the effect 
is called the FitzGerald—Lorentz contraction of relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Five College Radio Astronomy 
Observatory 


The Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory (FCRAO) 
is a research organization within the University of Mas- 
sachusetts which aims to conduct astronomical research, 
to develop state of the art microwave instrumentation, 
and to train both graduate and undergraduate students 
with support from the National Science Foundation and 
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 

FCRAO operates the 14 m telescope located in New 
Salem, Massachusetts for observations within the 3 mm 
wavelength band. Recent instrumentation highlights 
include the development of large format focal plane 
array receivers. FCRAO students, scientists and visiting 
observers have exploited the capabilities of the system 
to conduct unique, wide field imaging studies of the 
molecular interstellar medium in the Milky Way, detailed 
studies of star forming regions and the molecular gas 
content in external galaxies. 

FCRAO is a partner with the Instituto Nacional de 
Astrofisica, Optica y Electronica (INAOE) in Mexico to 
construct the Large Millimeter Telescope, a 50 m antenna 
on Cerro La Negra. This facility will be capable of 
efficient operations between 85 and 345 GHz to explore 
the early epoch of galaxy formation, the structure of nearby 
galaxies, and the physical and chemical processes within 
the molecular interstellar medium. 

For further information see 
http:/ /donald.phast.umass.edu/“fcrao/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fizeau, Armand (1819-96) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fizeau, Armand (1819-96) 


French physicist, first measured the speed of light by 
reflecting it over an 8 km distance through a rapidly 
rotating toothed disk known as the Fizeau wheel, which 
was used to measure the time of flight over that 
distance. Suggested using a twin-aperture interferometer 
to measure stellar diameters, calculating that interference 
fringes would vanish at a separation related to the size of 
the star’s disc. Idea followed successfully by MICHELSON. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Flagstaff Field Center ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flagstaff Field Center 


The US Geological Survey Flagstaff Field Center was 
established in 1963 to provide geologic information about 
the Moon and to help train astronauts. After Apollo, 
research expanded to support robotic exploration of the 
planets and the study of climate and human impacts on 
the natural environment. Future research (terrestrial and 
extraterrestrial) will reflect the increasingly global nature 
of society’s needs, quests and problems. 
For further information see 

http://wwwflag.wr.usgs.gov/usgsflag /space/space.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Flame Nebula (NGC 2024) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flame Nebula (NGC 2024) 


A bright nebula in the constellation Orion, position RA 


05" 41.9™, dec. —01° 51’. About , across, its illuminating 


source is hidden behind a patch of dark nebulosity that 
crosses its center. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Flammarion, Nicolas Camille (1842-1925) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flammarion, Nicolas Camille 
(1842-1925) 


French astronomer and geophysicist, born in Montigny- 
le-Roy, observed double stars, and planets from his 
observatory at Juvisy, south of Paris. Very well-known for 
his popularization of astronomy, including many lavishly 
illustrated books (for example L’Astronomie Populaire) and 
a journal L’Astronomie, still published. It was Flammarion 
who, as shown by Arthur Beer and Bruno Weber, drew, 
sometime before 1888, a much reproduced ‘German 
medieval woodcut’ showing the Ptolemaic uinverse with 
a pilgrim looking through a celestial sphere to the 
mechanism beyond. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Flamsteed, John (1646-1719) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flamsteed, John (1646-1719) 


Born in Denby, Derbyshire, England, the first Astronomer 
Royal, a term then synonymous with director of the 
Royal Observatory, Greenwich, whose creation he had 
proposed directly to King Charles II. The observatory was 
completed in 1675, and the King appointed Flamsteed 
at a salary from which he had to provide his own 
instruments. Flamsteed was a skilled observer, making 
the most accurate measurements of the positions of the 
stars and Moon then known, for the purpose of navigation 
(particularly for determining longitude). He was a 
perfectionist and when siR ISAAC NEWTON, on the Board of 
Visitors (governors) of the observatory, pressed Flamsteed 
to release preliminary data on the Moon, to test the law 
of gravitation, they clashed. HALLEY intervened on behalf 
of Newton and edited the observations for immediate 
publication, over Flamsteed’s objections. Flamsteed 
bought and burned 300 of the edition of 400, and the book 
is very rare. Flamsteed left his definitive observations to 
be published by his widow as Historia Coelestis Britannica. 
He introduced a system of letters and numerals for stars, 
in sequence by right ascension within a constellation, and 
known as Flamsteed numbers, e.g. 61 Cygni. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Flare 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flare 


A localized explosive release of energy, usually from a site 
located within a complex solar active region, in which up 
to 10° J can be liberated within a few thousand seconds. A 
typical flare reaches peak brightness within the first 5 min 
of the event and declines more slowly over the next 20 min. 
Some flares can last for up to three hours. 

Flares emit radiation over practically the entire 
electromagnetic spectrum from hard (short-wavelength) 
x-rays, or even gamma rays, to radio waves, the bulk 
of the energy being emitted at x- and extreme ultraviolet 
wavelengths. They eject streams of high-energy subatomic 
particles, including electrons (which in some cases are 
accelerated to speeds in excess of half the velocity of 
light), protons and small numbers of heavier nuclei, 
and expel bulk clouds of plasma through the corona 
into interplanetary space. As the high-speed particle 
streams and plasma clouds plow through the corona, they 
stimulate the emission of microwave and radio radiation 
across a wide range of frequencies. These dramatic events 
also send shock waves across the surface of the Sun and 
into its interior and trigger various kinds of prominence 
phenomena. 

Flares are believed to be caused by the sudden release 
of magnetic energy that had previously been stored in 
the twisted magnetic fields of complex sunspot groups 
or active regions by means of a process called magnetic 
reconnection. This occurs when oppositely directed field 
lines come into contact, sever, and join up to form new 
field structures—for example a closed loop with its ‘feet’ 
connected to the solar surface and an open U-shaped 
structure above. In the process, part of the energy 
contained in the magnetic field is converted into other 
forms of energy, such as thermal (heat) energy and the 
kinetic energy of particle streams. Localized heating at the 
site of the reconnection produces much of the soft (longer 
wavelength) x-ray and extreme ultraviolet radiation, while 
electrons accelerated down the loops produce bursts of 
hard x-rays and hydrogen-a (optical) radiation where 
they plow into the chromosphere. Hard x-rays are also 
produced above the site of the flare by shock waves 
that heat the coronal plasma to temperatures of around 
2 x 10° K. Like an elastic string, a magnetic field line 
has tension in it. Consequently, when a magnetic field 
structure severs and reconnects, it catapults bulk plasma 
outwards. 

Flares have a variety of effects on the Earth. High- 
speed particles from solar flares take about 30 min to 
travel to the Earth. Low-energy particles and disturbances 
produced in the solar wind by the flare take from a 
few hours to a couple of days to arrive. Charged 
particles plunging into the upper atmosphere give rise 
to auroral displays. Flare-generated x-ray and ultraviolet 
radiation disturbs the Earth’s ionosphere and can therefore 
disrupt terrestrial radio communications. Clouds of 
ejected plasma, and disturbances in the solar wind and 
interplanetary magnetic field, squeeze and stretch the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Earth’s magnetosphere, giving rise to magnetic storms and 
surges in power transmission lines. 


See also: active region, aurora, chromosphere, corona, 
geomagnetic storm, magnetosphere of Earth, prominence, 
solar wind. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Flash Spectrum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flash Spectrum 


The emission-line spectrum of the solar chromosphere. 
The name derives from the fact that when the Sun is 
observed with the aid of a spectroscope, during a total solar 
eclipse, the faint chromospheric emission lines suddenly 
flash into view at the instant when the much more brilliant 
light of the photosphere is blotted out completely by the 
disk of the Moon. American astronomer Charles Young 
first observed the flash spectrum in 1870. 

The visible spectrum of the chromosphere consists 
of a very weak continuum on which are superimposed 
thousands of emission lines. When the solar disk is viewed 
directly, these faint emission lines cannot be seen against 
the intensely luminous photosphere. Instead what is seen 
is the continuous spectrum of the photosphere together 
with the superimposed pattern of dark absorption lines 
that results from absorption of light as it moves out 
through the photosphere and chromosphere. When, 
as at a total eclipse, chromospheric gas can be seen 
at the limb (the edge of the solar disk) without the 
background photospheric light, the emission lines show 
up clearly. Because different lines become prominent at 
different temperatures, observations of the chromospheric 
spectrum made at different heights above the limb yield 
information about how the temperature of the solar 
atmosphere varies with altitude. During a total solar 
eclipse, the appearance of the flash spectrum changes 
rapidly as the Moon’s disk advances across the thin 
chromospheric layer at the solar limb, and therefore allows 
observers to receive light from different altitudes above the 
solar surface. 


See also: absorption spectrum, chromosphere, continu- 
ous spectrum, emission spectrum, photosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fleming, Williamina Paton Stevens (1857-1911) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fleming, Williamina Paton Stevens 
(1857-1911) 


Astronomer, born in Dundee, Scotland, emigrated to 
Boston with her parents and worked as a maid in the 
home of EDWARD PICKERING, the director of the Harvard 
Observatory. Unhappy with the work performed by 
his existing employees and declaring that his maid 
could do a better job, Pickering hired her for clerical 
work and mathematical calculations. Fleming devised 
a system of classifying stars according to their spectra, 
obtained by Pickering from images of the stars obtained 
by photographing the sky through a prism placed over 
a wide-field camera. This resulted in a catalog of the 
‘spectral types’ of 10000 stars, published in 1890 as the first 
Draper Catalog of Stellar Spectra and the basis of the several 
volumes (1918-24) of the definitive Henry Draper Catalog 
drawn up by ANNIE CANNON. Discovered 222 variable stars 
and 10 novae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fluid Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fluid Dynamics 


Fluid dynamics is a subfield of continuum mechanics 
which deals with the theory of motion of a fluid 
(hydrodynamics) or gas (gas dynamics). 

Fluid dynamics is studied theoretically, experimen- 
tally and by means of numerical simulations. The 
phenomena of fluid motion are governed by well known 
continuum laws of physics: the conservation of mass, mo- 
mentum and energy. Whether these continuum laws ac- 
curately describe a given physical system depends both 
on the mechanical and thermodynamic state of the sys- 
tem (i.e. its density, temperature, etc) and on the kind and 
strength of the interaction of its constituents (e.g. the scat- 
tering rate of gas particles). The matter of astrophysical 
objects (e.g. of a star or galaxy) can often be approximated 
as a gas or fluid, i.e. the equations of fluid dynamics are 
adequate to describe the astrophysical phenomena. Here- 
after, for simplification, the word fluid will be used as a 
synonym for both fluid and gas. 

The conservation laws describing the motion of a fluid 
can be formulated as set of nonlinear partial differential 
equations. Analytic solutions of this set of equations only 
exist for simplified highly symmetric flow problems, and 
the mathematical theory is often difficult. For this reason, 
observations of fluid motion in nature, in the laboratory 
and with computers are also essential for understanding 
the motion and behavior of fluids. 

In astrophysics the numerical tool is often the only 
one available to the researcher. Moreover, as most 
astrophysical conditions are inaccessible in the laboratory, 
and as astrophysical fluid motion may occur on time 
scales long compared with the lifespan of humans or 
deep inside astrophysical objects, numerical simulation 
is the only means to study such fluid motion. The 
study of astrophysical fluid flows is further complicated 
by the effects of self-gravity, which must be considered 
in many astrophysical flow problems, by the enormous 
range of length scales and time scales to be covered 
in the simulations, and by a variety of other physical 
effects which must be taken into account frequently. 
The latter include radiation transport (of photons and 
neutrinos), heat conduction, radiative cooling, ionization 
and recombination of atoms, magnetic fields, energy 
generation by thermonuclear reactions, flow velocities 
near the speed of light and in strong gravitational fields, 
and the properties of dense matter. 


Applicability of fluid dynamics 
Two requirements must be fulfilled in order for the 
continuum approximation of fluid dynamics to hold. 
Firstly, one has to assume that the microscopic 
behavior of single particles can be neglected. This requires 
that A « L, where 4 is the collisional mean free path 
of the particles and L is a characteristic macroscopic 
linear dimension of the system, or a scale over which 
the distribution function varies significantly. If the above 
equation holds, the concept of a fluid element can be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


introduced, the linear size of the fluid element being small 
compared with L but large compared with 4. This implies 
that the number of particles in the fluid element is large, 
and hence mean physical quantities, like, for example, the 
fluid density p or the fluid velocity v can be defined for 
the fluid element. The velocity of the individual particles 
is then given by u = v + w, ie. it possesses a random 
component w above the mean. Because 1 « L, however, 
the particles only perform a random walk about the mean 
motion v, and consequently the fluid element remains 
well defined during the evolution except for some small 
loss of particles near its surface, which, if necessary, can 
be well described by an additional diffusion term in the 
hydrodynamic equations. 

Secondly, the forces between particles must be 
saturating or ‘short range’, because otherwise collective 
effects must be taken into account. Formally this can 
be expressed by the requirement that the energy per 
particle E/N mustapproach some constant value when the 
number of particles tends to infinity. For a fluid element 
with volume V one can then define an energy density 
€ = E/V =n(E/N) wheren = N/V is thenumber density, 
and a pressure p = n(de/dn) — € exerted on the ‘walls’ 
confining the fluid element. Examples of non-saturating 
forces are gravity and electromagnetic forces which both 
scale as (~ r~?). Consequently, gravity must be included 
in the hydrodynamic equations as a macroscopic external 
force. Although electromagnetic forces are long range 
too, they saturate in electrically neutral systems due to 
screening. 


Equations of fluid dynamics 

The equations of fluid dynamics can be derived by a 
phenomenological approach or within the framework of 
the KINETIC THEORY. In the phenomenological approach one 
postulates certain relations between stress and rate of 
strain and between heat flux and temperature gradient and 
develops the fluid dynamic equations from the universal 
laws of conservation of mass, momentum and energy. 
The required constants of proportionality between stress 
and rate of strain and between heat flux and temperature 
gradient are called transport coefficients and must be 
determined experimentally. 

The equation that results from requiring the conserva- 
tion of mass in a fluid flow is called the continuity equation. 
The conservation of momentum law or Newton’s second 
law applied to a fluid yields a vector equation known as the 
Navier-Stokes equation. The First Law of Thermodynamics 
or the conservation of energy law imply a fluid dynamic 
equation which is called the energy equation. 

In the kinetic theory approach the fluid dynamic 
equations are derived from the Liouville equation by 
defining the transport coefficients in term of certain 
integral relations which involve the dynamics of colliding 
particles. The drawback to this approach is that the 
interparticle forces must be specified in order to evaluate 
the collision integrals. Both the phenomenological 
approach and the kinetic theory approach yield the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fluid Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


same fluid dynamic equations provided equivalent 
assumptions are made during their derivations. 

Mathematically speaking the five fluid dynamic 
equations form a set of coupled nonlinear partial 
differential equations which are of first order in time and 
of second order in space. They describe the evolution of 
mass density p, momentum density pv and (total) energy 
density e in time and space. In addition to the evolution 
equations, it is necessary to supply a relationship between 
fluid properties in order to close the system of equations. 
The equation of state is an example of such a relationship. 
It relates the thermodynamic variables pressure p, density 
p and temperature T or internal energy density «. 

In many astrophysical applications of fluid dynamics, 
additional equations and/or additional source terms have 
to be considered, which for example describe composition 
changes and energy generation due to nuclear reactions, 
the diffusive transport of matter or radiation (diffusion 
equation), magnetic fields and their coupling to matter 
(magnetohydrodynamics), the evolution of radiation 
fields and their interaction with matter (radiation 
hydrodynamics), and self-gravity. Moreover, in certain 
applications the conservation equations have to be 
formulated consistently with SPECIAL or GENERAL RELATIVITY. 


Form of the equations 

Here the equations of fluid dynamics are given without 
derivation. The various quantities appearing in the 
equations below are defined as follows: u = v + w is 
the particle velocity, v the average fluid velocity, w the 
statistical fluctuation around the mean flow, p is the fluid 
density, pv is the fluid momentum, and pe (erg cm~*) is 
the kinetic energy density about the mean motion (i.e. the 
internal energy), respectively. 

The continuity equation 


a 
a + div(pv) =0 


describes the conservation of mass, the Navier-Stokes 
equation of motion 


* (ov) + div(pv ® v) + divi = —pgrad® (1) 


describes the transport of (relative) momentum in the flow. 
The total energy equation (assuming that the particles have 
no internal degrees of freedom) 


d[P, > ‘ Pio 
($10 vo) an] (Sm «oe)s| 


+ divh + div(I1v) = —pugrad® 


finally describes the conservation of energy. I] = p(w@w) 
is the pressure tensor, from which one usually separates 
out the trace of the symmetric dyadic w @ w, i.e. one writes 


5 


= PI — 


lA 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where 
P = $p\|wl’) 


is the isotropic fluid (or gas) pressure 
m= p(}|wPL — w ®@ w) 


is the viscous stress tensor and J is the unit tensor. 


is the specific internal energy (erg g~'), and 
h = p(w}\wl’) 


is the conduction heat flux. The operator () denotes 
an average over the one-particle Boltzmann distribution 
function. 

In the absence of viscosity the Navier-Stokes equation 
reduces to the Euler equation 


= (ov) + div(pu ® v) + grad P = —pgrad®. 


For the special case of an adiabatic flow the total energy 
equation reduces to the simpler form 


+ div[(e + P)v] = —pugrad® 


where e = $p|v|*+pe is the total energy density (erg cm~*). 


Flow regimes 

Fluid flows can be uniquely classified into different flow 
regimes depending on the value of certain characteristic 
dimensionless flow parameters. Different flows having 
the same dimensionless flow parameters are called similar. 

Depending on the degree of compressibility of a fluid 
under forces acting on it, it can be treated as either being 
incompressible or compressible. In the former case the fluid 
dynamic equations can be simplified considerably. If the 
state of the fluid is independent of time at every point in 
space occupied by the fluid, the flow is called stationary. 
If the opposite is true, one has an unsteady flow. For 
stationary flows Bernoulli’s equation holds, which says that 
the sum of the specific kinetic energy (|v|?/2) and of the 
enthalpy of the fluid is constant along a streamline. A 
streamline is defined as a curve whose tangent vector at 
each point of the curve has the same direction as the 
velocity field of the flow at that point. 

If the fluid moves with a velocity smaller or larger 
than the sound speed, the flow is called subsonic and 
supersonic respectively. The Mach number Ma = |v|/c;, 
which is the ratio of the absolute value of the flow velocity 
v and the sound speed c,, is the parameter characterizing 
this aspect of a flow. Transonic flows have Ma ~ 1. 
Supersonic flows accessible in the laboratory have Mach 
numbers Ma < 10, while astrophysical flows can be 
extremely supersonic (Ma > 100). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fluid Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


When a flow accelerates (decelerates) from subsonic 
(supersonic) to supersonic (subsonic) speeds shock waves 
occur in the flow. A shock wave is a front across which 
there is a nearly discontinuous, finite jump in pressure, 
with corresponding jumps in temperature, density, and 
other fluid properties. Shocks are nonlinear waves whose 
behavior is much more complex than that of (linear) 
sound waves, which are periodic adiabatic pressure 
perturbations of the flow. Because of their nonlinear 
character linear superposition does not apply in shock 
wave interactions. Flows entering a shock at an oblique 
angle are deflected away from the normal direction. The 
deflection is due to a decrease of the normal component of 
the fluid velocity entering the wave. Hence kinetic energy 
is dissipated into heat in a shock wave, increasing the 
entropy of the fluid. Conservation of mass, momentum 
and energy must also hold across shock waves. This 
fact can be used to derive the Rankine-Hugoniot relations 
relating the fluid states on both sides of the shock wave. 

One further discriminates between viscous and 
inviscous or ideal flows depending on the amount of 
viscosity of the fluid. The viscosity of a fluid varies, 
in general, with the thermodynamic state of the fluid. 
Except for superfluids the viscosity of a fluid is never 
exactly zero, but it may be sufficiently small to consider 
the fluid for all practical purposes as being inviscous or 
ideal. Quantitatively the viscous character of a fluid is 
determined by comparing the size of the viscous drag 
acting on the fluid with its inertia. The relevant flow 
parameter is the Reynolds number Re = |v|l/v, where | 
is a characteristic linear dimension of the flow, and v is 
the kinematic viscosity of the fluid. Viscous flows have 
Re < 1. Most astrophysical flows have Re > 1 (Reynolds 
numbers larger than 10'° are not uncommon), because of 
the large size of the astrophysical objects. 

A common feature of terrestrial and in particular 
of astrophysical flows is their tendency to undergo a 
spontaneous transition from laminar (i.e. smooth, regular 
type of flow) to turbulent flow. This occurs if the Reynolds 
number of the flow exceeds a critical value Re.i¢ beyond 
which effects due to inertia dominate over friction by such 
an amount that the flow becomes unstable to turbulence. 
From laboratory experiments one finds critical Reynolds 
numbers for fully developed turbulence in the range 
1000 S Reait <S 2000. 

According to J O Hinze “Turbulent fluid motion is 
an irregular condition of flow in which the various fluid 
quantities show a random variation with time and space 
coordinates, so that statistically distinct average values 
can be discerned’. Turbulent motion is not irregular in 
either space or time alone, but both. Turbulence can be 
generated by friction at fixed walls (‘wall turbulence’) or 
by flow of layers of fluids with different velocities past 
or over one another (‘free turbulence’). In real viscous 
fluids, viscosity effects will result in the conversion of 
kinetic energy of flow into heat, i.e. turbulent flow is 
dissipative in nature. Hence, if there is no continuous 
input energy into the flow, the turbulent motion will decay. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


If the turbulence has quantitatively the same structure in 
all parts of the flow field, the turbulence is said to be 
homogeneous. If the statistical features have no preference 
for any direction, the turbulence is called isotropic. Ata 
given point in the turbulent domain a distinct pattern is 
repeated more or less regularly in time, and at a given 
instant a distinct pattern is repeated more or less regularly 
in space. Turbulent motions in which distinct patterns can 
be discerned are described quantitatively by introducing 
the notion of scale of turbulence: a certain scale in time and 
a certain scale in space. Turbulent motion, in addition to 
its scale, is characterized by the violence or intensity of 
the turbulence fluctuations, which is defined by the root- 
mean-square value w’ = Vw? of the random component w 
of the momentary value of the velocity u = v+w about the 
mean flow velocity v. Often the intensity of the turbulence 
is defined by the relative intensity w’' /|v|. 


Flow instabilities 

Fluid flows are subject to a variety of flow instabilities, the 
most common ones being the buoyancy driven Rayleigh- 
Taylor instability and the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability 
occurring in shear flows. 

Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities occur, for example, 
when two fluids of different densities are superposed 
one over the other or accelerated towards each other (see 
figure 1). According to a linear stability analysis the 
arrangement of two fluids is stable if the lighter fluid is 
on top of the heavier fluid. Otherwise the arrangement of 
fluids is unstable. 

Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities are ubiquitous in astro- 
physical flows. A particular example is Rayleigh-Taylor 
instabilities induced by the propagation of a shock wave 
through the envelope of a massive star which explodes as 
a (core collapse) SUPERNOVA (see figure 2). Since the energy 
given to the shock wave in a supernova explosion is much 
larger than the binding energy of the mass outside the col- 
lapsed core, gravity is dynamically unimportant for the 
propagation of the shock wave through the stellar enve- 
lope. In this case the Rayleigh-Taylor instability is driven 
by pressure and density gradients of opposite signs, the 
‘effective acceleration’ being the (negative) pressure gra- 
dient. 

Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities occur whenever the 
velocity field of the flow has a gradient perpendicular 
to the (local) flow direction, i.e. in the presence of shear 
flow. The Kelvin-Helmholtz instability gives rise to a roll- 
up of the shear layer. It is responsible for the formation 
of mushroom shaped flow structures seen, for example, 
in large atmospheric explosions, and in connection with 
Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities (see figures 1 and 2). In the 
latter case the rising bubbles and sinking spikes resulting 
from the Rayleigh-Taylor instability cause a shear flow 
with respect to the surrounding matter. 


Fluid dynamics and nuclear burning 
Much of our understanding of astronomy and astrophysics 
is inseparably connected to our understanding of fluid 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fluid Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


400 


300 


200 


100 


O 20 40 60 80 100 


Figure 1. Rayleigh-Taylor instability in a dense fluid (bright) 
supported against gravity (directed upward!) by a lighter fluid 
(dark). The horizontal interface between the two fluids (initially 
located at 200) has been perturbed by a small sinusoidal 
perturbation. The typical structure of a narrow, high-density 
finger penetrating into the low-density region and a broader, 
low-density bubble at the edge of the grid penetrating into the 
high-density region is clearly visible. The mushroom cap 
structure on the top of the high-density region, which is created 
by the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, is also apparent. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Simulation of Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities induced by 
the propagation of a shock wave through the envelope of a 
massive star which explodes as a (core collapse) supernova. The 
initially spherical helium shell (bright grey) of the progenitor 
star has been shredded by the instability. The snapshot is taken 
about 4 h after the onset of the explosion. 


dynamics and nuclear burning. Thermonuclear processes 
and gravitational binding are the two major sources of 
energy for astronomical flows. The release of energy in 
an astrophysical PLASMA gives rise to changing pressure 
gradients and so to fluid motion. Such fluid motion, in 
turn, will transport ashes and fuel to and from the flame 
zone. This gives rise to a subtle and difficult problem. 
The degree of difficulty of the problem is closely related 
to the nature of the coupling between the nuclear burning 
and the fluid flow. Special cases, in which this coupling 
is simpler, can be treated more reliably. First, nuclear 
reactions release energy in the form of radiation and kinetic 
energy of particles; at stellar densities this energy acts to 
heat the medium in which the reactions occur. The heating 
can modify the pressure, and thereby modify the flow. 
Second, nuclear reactions change the composition of the 
material, which in turn may modify its equation of state 
and its opacity, which in turn may modify the pressure 
and the heating, and again the flow. Conversely, the flow 
may remove ashes and bring fuel to the flame, countering 
the natural tendency of the flame to exhaust its fuel. 
Many different types of burning occur in astrophys- 
ical problems. Burning can range from quiet hydrostatic 
burning, such as occurs in the center of most stars, to the 
explosive burning which can occur, for example, in mod- 
els of thermonuclear supernova explosions. Burning can 
occur in laminar or turbulent flows, the fluid motion being 
produced either by external causes and/or by the burning 
itself. Hence, the interaction between burning and flow 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fluid Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


must be considered. 

Hydrostatic burning is the least violent form of 
burning and occurs in stars that are hydrostatic. In this 
case, the reaction rate is slow enough that energy can 
be transported from the burning region by radiation or 
conduction as rapidly as it is generated. A similar case 
is a subsonically convective flame region, in which heat 
and ashes are removed by slow convection, and new fuel 
brought in. 

Detonations are the most violent form of burning one 
encounters. Astrophysical detonations generally occur 
only under degenerate conditions. In its simplest form, 
detonation wave theory is easily understood. As a shock 
propagates into unburned fuel, it compresses and heats the 
material beyond the ignition point. Immediately behind 
the shock is the reaction zone, in which the fuel burns. 
In simple detonation theory the width of the reaction 
zone is neglected, and the detonation front is treated as 
a sharp discontinuity. In this case jump conditions can 
be derived for the change in the fluid variables across the 
front in much the same way as is done for a simple shock. 
Note, however, that in order to obtain the post-detonation 
state one must first choose a detonation velocity, because 
unlike the case for simple shocks, the front velocity is 
not determined from the jump conditions. The simple 
detonation theory assumes that the reaction rate is infinite 
and that the reaction zone has zero width. A slightly 
more complex treatment is used in the Zeldovich-von 
Neumann-—Doering model. This theory assumes that the 
shock, which is taken to be infinitely thin, is followed by a 
reaction zone of finite width. The final state obtained after 
the fuel is completely burned is exactly the same as for the 
simpler theory described above. 

Deflagrations represent a much less violent form of 
burning than detonations, but in many ways are more 
complex. They result when the burning is unable to 
produce sufficient overpressure to create a shock which 
is strong enough to ignite the fuel. The motion of the 
front is usually very subsonic. Burning is initiated by the 
diffusive transfer of heat from the hot ashes behind the 
front into the cold fuel. Although, for the case of a thin 
front, deflagrations must obey the same jump conditions 
as detonations, the propagation velocity now depends on 
the rate of heat transfer. Compared to detonations another 
major difference is that the pressure and density decrease 
behind the deflagration front, and in the reference frame 
in which the front is stationary, the velocity increases. In 
the simplest theory deflagrations are described as flow 
discontinuities, which propagate subsonically. If the flow 
is laminar, a physically more accurate description is that 
of a conductive or diffusive laminar flame, whose width 
and speed is determined by the rate of energy generation 
and the transport of energy and composition. In most 
situations, however, even this description is too simple, 
because deflagrations or subsonic flames are subject to a 
variety of instabilities, which can significantly influence 
their shape (wrinkling of the flame) and propagation 
speed. Moreover, because the propagation speed of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


flame is subsonic, flame and flow do interact. In particular, 
if burning occurs ina convective or turbulent environment, 
depending on the relevant length scales and time scales, 
physically quite different combustion regimes must be 
considered. 


Relativistic fluid dynamics 

Some astrophysical phenomena require a_ relativistic 
formulation of fluid dynamics. A special relativistic 
formulation must be used if the flow velocity reaches 
a significant fraction of the speed of light, or if the 
internal energy of the fluid becomes comparable to its 
rest mass. Such conditions occur in jets from quasars, 
active galactic nuclei and some galactic compact binaries, 
and in gamma-ray burst sources. General relativistic 
flows involving strong gravitational fields and relativistic 
speeds are encountered in accretion flows onto compact 
objects like neutron stars or black holes, in the formation 
or merging process of neutron stars and black holes, and 
are most likely at the heart of the processes leading to the 
formation of relativistic jets and gamma-ray bursts. 

An important difference between Newtonian and 
relativistic fluid dynamics is the presence of a maximum 
velocity, i.e. the speed of light ina vacuum in the latter case. 
A flow can be relativistic in two ways. In a kinematically 
relativistic jet the beam gas moves with relativistic velocity, 
while in a thermodynamically relativistic jet the specific 
internal energy of the beam gas is large compared with its 
rest mass energy. 

Special relativistic astrophysical flows are encoun- 
tered in extragalactic jets (see ASTROPHYSICALJETS). These are 
highly collimated supersonic outflows from ACTIVE GALAC- 
TIC NUCLEI. Extragalactic jets are thought to be formed as 
a consequence of mass accretion onto a central rotating 
super massive BLACK HOLE in an active galactic nucleus be- 
ing fed by interstellar gas and gas from tidally disrupted 
stars. Most models of the (initial) collimation and acceler- 
ation of astrophysical jets involve magnetohydrodynamic 
processes at or near the inner edge of a rotating magne- 
tized accretion disk with corona. The combined action of 
thermal and magnetic pressure gradients, of centrifugal 
force and of gravity drives an outflow, which does colli- 
mate itself. General relativistic effects seem to be crucial 
for a successful launch of the jet. A Newtonian treatment 
of extragalactic jets is justified only at distances larger than 
several kiloparsec from the central black hole. At smaller 
scales, and in particular at parsec scales, jets propagate 
at relativistic speeds. Hence, special relativistic hydrody- 
namic simulations must be used in order to describe their 
propagation correctly (see figures 3 and 4). 


Equations for ideal special relativistic flows 

The equations of special relativistic fluid dynamics for an 
ideal fluid are most conveniently expressed as a set of 
conservation equations 


aD 
— +div(Dv) =0 
ot 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fluid Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Color-coded contour plots of the logarithm of the 
proper rest-mass density (top) and pressure (bottom) of a hot, 
relativistic jet (vp = 0.99c, Ma = 1.72). The maximum values are 
coded in white. Decreasingly smaller values are coded in green, 
bright blue, dark blue, red and the minimum values are coded in 
black. The jet has a ‘naked’ beam and almost completely lacks 
internal structure. The beam is surrounded by lobes (near the jet 
head) instead of a cocoon and is in pressure equilibrium with the 
shocked ambient medium. This figure is reproduced as Color 
Plate 20. 


49 


Figure 4. Same as figure 3, but for a cold, relativistic jet 

(vp = 0.99c, Ma = 6.0). The jet has a beam with internal oblique 
shocks and an extended turbulent cocoon. This figure is 
reproduced as Color Plate 21. 


= + div(S'v) + (gradp)' = 0, 


i=1,2,3 


Cha 


re + div[(t + p)v] =0 


for the conserved rest-mass density D, momentum density 
S = (S', S?, S°) and energy density t, respectively. These 
variables, which are defined in a fixed frame, are related 
to quantities in the local rest frame of the fluid through 


D=pW 
S = phc*W-v 
T = phW* — p— De* 
where p, p, v, W,h and c are the proper rest-mass density, 
the pressure, the flow velocity, the flow Lorentz factor 


W = (1—v*/c’)"”, the specific enthalpy h = c* ++ p/p, 
and the speed of light in a vacuum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Numerical integration of the fluid dynamic 
equations 


In astrophysical applications one usually has to solve the 
hyperbolic set of the inviscous and compressible Euler 
equations instead of the parabolic set of the viscous and 
compressible Navier-Stokes equations, because (except 
in shock waves) viscosity and heat conduction due to 
physical processes are often negligibly small. However, 
because of truncation errors and because of finite spatial 
resolution, all numerical methods proposed for the 
solution of the Euler equations possess some finite intrinsic 
numerical viscosity, whose form and size depends on 
the numerical method, on the grid resolution, and to 
some extent of the flow problem itself. The effect of the 
numerical viscosity on the solution can only be quantified 
by resolution studies, i.e. by performing a series of 
simulations of the same flow problem using different grid 
resolution. Thus, when simulating astrophysical flow 
one is in the strange situation that one tries to solve the 
inviscous Euler equations, but instead solves some viscous 
variant, which is also different from the Navier-Stokes 
equations. 

The evolution equations are a set of coupled nonlinear 
first-order (in time) partial differential equations. One 
way of solving this set of equations is to discretize them 
in time and space. By this discretization the partial 
differential equations are transformed into a set of coupled 
nonlinear algebraic equations, which can be solved on a 
computer with appropriate numerical techniques. The 
algebraic equations are not uniquely determined, because 
a given differential equation can be discretized in different 
ways. Obviously, one tries to choose those algebraic 
systems which minimize the truncation errors, and which 
possess some additional properties, like being stable and 
consistent. This is at the heart of the ‘art of computing’. 

Guided by the conservation properties underlying 
the hydrodynamic equations applied mathematicians and 
physicists have been able to develop accurate and stable 
high-resolution finite volume schemes In finite volume 
schemes the (finite) computational domain is discretized 
into a finite number of zones or cells (typically 10? to 10° 
per spatial dimension). The hydrodynamic scalar fields 
(e.g. density) and the components of the vector fields (e.g. 
momentum) are approximated by a set of discrete values, 
which are the (approximate) cell averages of the respective 
variable. Time is discretized too, the evolution being 
approximated by a series of finite time steps (typically 10° 
to 10° per simulation). 

Besides finite volume schemes, another completely 
different method is widely used in astrophysics for 
integrating the hydrodynamic equations. This method is 
smoothed particle hydrodynamics, or SPH for short. In 
SPH the fluid or gas is described by a finite set of ‘particles’ 
(typically 10° to 10°), which move with the flow. SPH is 
a free-Lagrange method, in which spatial gradients are 
evaluated without the use of a grid. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fluid Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
The literature on fluid dynamics is extensive. Thus, the 
following references can only provide entry points into 
the field. 

The derivation of the fluid dynamic equations 
using the phenomenological approach can be found, for 
example, in the book by 


Shu F H 1991 The Physics of Astrophysics (Mill Valley, CA: 
University Science Books) 


The kinetic theory approach to the equations of fluid 
dynamics is described in detail by 


Hirschfelder J O, Curtiss C F and Bird R B 1964 Molecular 
Theory of Gases and Liquids (New York: Wiley) 


A general introduction to fluid dynamics can be found in 


Landau L D and Lifshitz E M 1982 Course of Theoretical 
Physics, Vol.VI, Fluid Mechanics (Oxford: Pergamon) 


For a modern description of numerical techniques for the 
solution of the equations of fluid dynamics one can consult, 


e.g. 


Laney C B 1998 Computational Gasdynamics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


or with special emphasis on astrophysical fluid flow 
including also various astrophysical applications 


LeVeque R J, Mihalas D, Dorfi E A and Miiller E 1998 
Computational Methods for Astrophysical Fluid Flow ed 
O Steiner and A Gautschy (Berlin: Springer) 


Ewald Miiller 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Flux Density 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flux Density 


A measure of the radiation arriving from a source at a 
particular frequency. The flux of radiant energy is the 
quantity of energy per second (watts) passing through 
unit surface area (1 meter squared) perpendicular to the 
direction of the source and expressed as W m7”. The flux 
density is the flux of radiant energy within a unit interval 
of frequency (a frequency band with a width of 1 hertz) 
and is expressed as W m~? Hz"!. 

The flux densities for most cosmic radio sources 
are extremely low. A unit of flux density used by 
radioastronomers is the jansky (Jy), where 1 Jy = 
10-76 W m~* Hz7!. 


See also: radioastronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Focal Length ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Focal Length 


The distance between the center of a lens, or the reflective 
surface of a mirror, and its focal point, or focus (the point at 
which rays of light from a point source, located effectively 
at an infinite distance, converge to form an image). 


See also: focal ratio, mirror, objective lens. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Focal Ratio 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Focal Ratio 


The ratio of the focal length of a lens or mirror to its 
aperture. For a lens or mirror of focal length, F, and 
aperture, D, the focal ratio, f, is given by f = F/D. For 
example, a lens of 10 m focal length and 2 m aperture 
would have a focal ratio of 10/2 = 5; this would be written 
as ‘f:5'. 

The focal ratio, or f-number, of a camera lens may be 
altered by means of an adjustable diaphragm that changes 
its aperture. For a lens or mirror of given focal length, 
increasing the aperture (and thereby reducing the focal 
ratio) increases the illumination of the image. Because, in 
general photography, this decreases the exposure time that 
is needed in order to record a particular image, the term 
‘focal ratio’ is synonymous with the ‘speed’ of an optical 
system (for example, an f:2 system is faster than an f:16 
system). 


See also: aperture, focal length. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Focus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Focus 


(1) In optics, the point at which parallel light rays from 
a distant point source are brought together by a lens or 
mirror to form an image. Light rays traveling parallel 
to the optical axis (the line that passes perpendicularly 
through the center of a lens or mirror) of an ideal convex 
lens or concave mirror converge to intersect at the focus, 
or focal point, of the lens or mirror. Rays arriving at an 
angle to the optical axis, from point sources or extended 
objects (sources of finite angular size), form images at the 
focal plane, a plane that passes through the focal point 
perpendicular to the optical axis. In practice, the focal 
plane may be slightly curved. 

In a conventional refractor, light is brought to a focus 
by the objective lens, the distance between the objective 
and the focus being the focal length. In a reflecting 
telescope, the focal point of light rays reflected from the 
primary mirror (the mirror that collects incoming light) 
is called the prime focus. Instrumentation, or even an 
observer, may be placed directly at the prime focus of 
a large reflector. Most reflecting telescopes use one or 
more additional mirrors to reflect the converging cone of 
light, and the focal point, to a different location. In the 
Newtonian reflector, a small flat mirror, set at an angle 
of 45° to the optical axis, reflects the converging cone of 
light to a focal point (the Newtonian focus) at the side 
of the telescope tube. In the Cassegrain system, a convex 
secondary mirror, located a short distance before the prime 
focus, changes the angle of convergence of the rays and 
reflects light back through a central hole in the primary to 
the Cassegrain focus. Because of the magnifying effect 
produced by their curved secondaries, Cassegrain and 
related systems have effective focal lengths that are several 
times longer than the focal length of their primary mirrors. 

In the Nasmyth system, which can be used with 
telescopes on altazimuth mountings, light reflected from 
a convex secondary passes back down the telescope tube 
and is then reflected from a flat tertiary (third), through a 
hollow altitude axis (the axis round which the telescope 
turns in elevation), to a focus (the Nasmyth focus) that 
remains in the horizontal plane no matter in what direction 
the telescope itself is pointing. In the coudé system, which 
may be used with equatorially mounted telescopes, light 
reflected from a convex secondary is then reflected from 
a plane tertiary mirror to a plane quadric (fourth) mirror 
which, in turn, reflects light down the polar axis of the 
mounting to a fixed focal position—the coudé focus. 


See also: altazimuth mounting, Cassegrain telescope, 
equatorial mounting, mirror, Newtonian telescope, objec- 
tive lens, reflector, refractor. 


(2) In an ellipse, a focus (plural: foci) is one of two points 
on the major axis such that the sum of the distances from 
each of the two foci to any point on the ellipse is a constant. 


See also: conic sections, ellipse. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fomalhaut 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fomalhaut 


The star a Piscis Austrinus, ‘the Mouth of the Fish’, 
apparent magnitude 1.17, spectral type A3V. Situated at 
a distance of 25.1 light-years (parallax 0.130"), the star has 
an absolute magnitude of 1.7. Although a white star, it 
often appears reddish to northern hemisphere observers, 
due to a combination of its low declination (—29.6°) 
and atmospheric pollution. It is notable for observers 
in the British Isles as the southernmost first-magnitude 
star visible to them, just above the southern horizon in 
September and October. From southern England it reaches 
a maximum meridian altitude of about 10° at the end of 
September. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fontenelle, Bernard le Bouyer de [Bernhard le Bovier 
de] (1657-1757) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fontenelle, Bernard le Bouyer de 
[Bernhard le Bovier de] (1657-1757) 


Born in Rouen, France, a Cartesian philosopher, wrote 
on the history of mathematics and the philosophy of 
mathematics and science; wrote Entretiens sur la Pluralité 
des Mondes (1686) in which he argued for the existence of 
other worlds—planets orbiting other stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Force-Free Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Force-Free Magnetic Fields 


In MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD), which describes the 
fluid behavior of pLasmas, the magnetic field B exerts a 
force, the Lorentz force, given by F = (1/c)J x B, in 
terms of the field and its electric current density J = 
(c/421)V x B, where c is the speed of light. In many 
circumstances, the electrical conductivity of the plasma 
is so large as to be taken infinite, in which case electric 
currents change only by the inductive effect of the flowing 
plasma, with negligible Ohmic decay. In the absence of 
plasma motion, electric currents, once set up, persist with 
no decay. A particular form of such an equilibrium state is 
one in which the current density is parallel to the magnetic 
field, as described by the equation 


Vx B=abB. (1) 


The Lorentz force vanishes in the plasma and the magnetic 
field is said to be force free. In equation (1), the 
proportionality factor w is allowed in general to vary in 
space, subject to the condition 


B-Va=0 (2) 


requiring a to be constant on a line of force, in order that 
Maxwell’s equation 


V-B=0 (3) 


is satisfied. 

Force-free fields are expected in the outer solar 
atmosphere where the plasma is electrically highly 
conducting but is so tenuous that its pressure and other 
body forces may be neglected compared with the typical 
strength of the Lorentz force that the magnetic field and 
its electric current are capable of producing. The Lorentz 
force F may be written as F = —V(B?/87) + (1/47) 
(B - V)B, in terms of a pressure force and a tension force, 
which mutually cancel when the magnetic field is force 
free. The magnetic pressure B?/82 is a measure of the 
magnitude of the Lorentz force the field is capable of 
exerting. Force-free magnetic fields are therefore expected 
when the ratio of the gas pressure to the magnetic pressure, 
denoted by £ in the plasma physics literature, is much 
smaller than unity. 

Equations (1) and (2) pose a nonlinear problem for the 
magnetic field except when the function a is a constant. 
In this exceptional case, equation (2) is trivially satisfied, 
and solving equation (1), for some constant value of a = 
ao, may be transformed to solving the vector Helmholtz 
equation 

V’B+a,B=0 (4) 


subject to suitable boundary conditions formulated for 
a physical problem. The astrophysical and plasma 
physics literature contains many works on the solutions 
to this linear problem. The general nonlinear problem 
is not readily treated, with few known solutions. In the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


following, we describe briefly some of the general physical 
properties of force-free magnetic fields. 

The nature of the Lorentz force is such that the 
magnetic pressure force may be balanced by the magnetic 
tension force only in some bounded region of space. 
The magnetic pressure has an outward exertion which 
cannot be globally confined by the magnetic tension force 
alone. This is a fundamental property expressed by 
Chandrasekhar’s virial relation: 

B? 1 

v 8a ai An 


i: | 58%r- ds -(B-nB-as)| (5) 
aV 2 


valid for any force-free field B in some volume V with 
boundary surface dV. If the force-free field is self- 
confining, we could take the volume V to be all space, 
in which case the surface integral in equation (5) would 
vanish since the field intensity would fall with distance 
as fast as a dipole magnetic field. A contradiction then 
arises from equation (5) unless B = 0. This classical result 
implies the impossibility of creating a magnetically self- 
confining plasma without rigid walls in the laboratory. In 
the astrophysical context, this property shows that force- 
free magnetic fields need to be anchored to regions where 
the magnetic field exerts nonzero Lorentz force on the 
embedding plasma. 

In the solar atmosphere, only the magnetic field in 
the thin layer called the photosphere can be measured 
with any useful spatial resolution. Equation (5) offers a 
means of estimating the energy of the magnetic field in the 
atmosphere above, taken in the force-free approximation, 
in terms of the measured vector field at the photosphere. 
In this popular model, the volume V is often taken to 
be the space above the photosphere treated as an infinite 
plane. A basic motivation of this modeling work is to 
demonstrate the amount of free energy that can be stored 
in the parallel electric currents of a force-free field. The 
stored energy is believed to be the origin of the enormous 
amount (~10°!~* erg) liberated in a large soLAR FLARE. The 
application of force-free fields to the solar atmosphere has 
served to illustrate observed magnetic structures and to 
illuminate basic physical points. Application with the 
use of measured photospheric vector fields as inputs is 
an involved and difficult numerical simulation effort, as 
a result of nonlinearity, difficulties associated with the 
proper posing of the boundary conditions and the ill-posed 
nature of the mathematical problem. 

Ina perfect electrical plasma conductor, the magnetic 
flux is frozen into the plasma so that the field topology 
cannot change in time. If a magnetic field, not 
necessarily in force equilibrium, is taken to be given and 
is then deformed by displacing the embedding perfectly 
conducting plasma to an extremum in its total magnetic 
energy, the result would be the force-free field as described 
by equations (1) and (2), where the scalar function a 
takes a distribution in space that renders the solution B 
topologically identical to the given initial field. 

The variational problem stated above is difficult 
to treat but has very interesting physical implications. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Force-Free Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The solution to the variational problem may not 
be unique, in which case the nonunique solutions 
may be distinguished between the force-free fields 
which are linearly stable and those which are linearly 
unstable (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC INSTABILITIES). Linear 
magnetohydrodynamic stability of force-free magnetic 
fields has been treated extensively in the literature, with 
the general result that the rigid anchoring of the force-free 
field lines to the base of an atmosphere provides some 
degree of stability so long the lines of force are not too 
lengthy within the atmosphere. Most of the force-free 
fields studied in linear stability analyses are one- or two- 
dimensional fields. Extension to non-trivial variation in 
three-dimensional space, except for the case of constant 
a fields, is limited although some simple examples 
have been found, including some with realistic geometry 
suggestive of observed solar magnetic structures. These 
examples were found to be linearly stable. 

More interesting is the possibility that an extremum 
in magnetic energy corresponds to a force-free field which 
necessarily contains magnetic tangential discontinuities 
in order to satisfy the requirement that the force-free 
field has a prescribed field topology. Mathematically, 
this is related to the fact that, in variational problems, 
the set of smooth minimizing functions to approach an 
extremum is not necessarily compact. If the extremum 
magnetic field must have a tangential discontinuity and 
is a minimum in energy, a magnetic field having the 
same magnetic topology may physically relax into such 
a state with the formation of the inevitable tangential 
discontinuity. Physical plasmas have large but finite 
electrical conductivities so that the formation of the 
tangential discontinuity in such a plasma would proceed 
until the thickness of the discontinuity is small enough 
for the electrical resistivity, however weak, to dissipate 
the sheet. This process is a consequence of high electrical 
conductivity, which, remarkably, creates the physical 
circumstance for inevitable dissipation of electric currents. 
The idea was proposed by ENPARKER as the origin of plasma 
heating under astrophysical conditions. 

The turbulent MHD relaxation of plasmas at large 
magnetic Reynolds’ numbers proceeds by the formation 
of magnetic tangential discontinuities which dissipate by 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION (see also MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION AND TURBULENCE). With resistive 
effects important only at these reconnection sites, the 
change in magnetic field topology proceeds in such a way 
that, as a measure of the complexity in the field topology, 
the MAGNETIC HELICITY is conserved in the global volume of 
the plasma, as opposed to the more stringent requirement 
of no change in field topology. This global conservation 
of magnetic helicity is a constraint that sets the extremum 
in the total magnetic energy to be one of a force-free field 
having a constant a = a, described by equation (4). The 
value of a is then fixed such that the linear force-free 
field has the conserved amount of total magnetic helicity. 
This provides a physical basis for singling out the linear 
force-free fields from the nonlinear ones. Application of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


this theory due to B Taylor to the laboratory plasmas has 
been very successful. Extending the application to solar 
and astrophysical magnetic fields is not straightforward 
because of the problem of gauge dependence of magnetic 
helicity in the case of magnetic fields which thread across 
the boundary of its physical domain. 


Bibliography 

Canfield R and Pevtsov A (ed) 1999 Magnetic Helicity 
in Space and Laboratory Plasmas (Washington, DC: 
American Geophysical Union) 

Low B C 1988 Astrophys. J. 330 992 

Parker E N 1994 Spontaneous Current Sheets in Magnetic 
Fields (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Priest E R 1982 Solar Magnetohydrodynamics (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) 


Boon Chye Low 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fornax 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fornax 


(the Furnace; abbrev. For, gen. Fornacis; area 398 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Sculptor and 
Eridanus, and culminates at midnight in early November. 
It was introduced as Fornax Chemica (the Chemical 
Furnace) by the French astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille 
(1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751-2. The 
shortened form was adopted by the IAU in 1922. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Fornax is a Fornacis, a binary with pale yellow 
and yellow (F6 and G7) components, magnitudes 3.8 and 
7.0, separation 4.5”, period 314 years (?). There are no 
other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. Interesting 
objects include the Fornax Dwarf Galaxy (ESO 365-Gé4, also 
called the Fornax System), a dwarf spheroidal galaxy in 
the Local Group, about 540000 light-years distant, NGC 
1365, a ninth-magnitude barred-spiral galaxy, and NGC 
1316, another ninth-magnitude spiral which is the optical 
counterpart of the strong radio source Fornax A. The last 
two are members of the conspicuous Fornax Cluster of 
galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Foucault, Jean Bernard Léon (1819-68) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Foucault, Jean Bernard Léon 
(1819-68) 


Physicist, born in Paris. Became professor at the Paris 
Observatory and member of the Longitude Institute. 
Collaborated with FIZEAU in the measurement of the 
velocity of light using the Fizeau wheel. After they 
quarrelled, independently of Fizeau he measured the 
speed of light in water, and found it to be slower than in 
air, as predicted by the wave theory of light, and against 
the corpuscular theory. First scientist (with Fizeau) to 
photograph the Sun (on a daguerreotype). Developed the 
Foucault pendulum, at first hanging a2 m long pendulum in 
his basement, and a 10 m one in the Paris Observatory, so 
watching the rotation of the pendulum’s oscillating path 
and confirming the rotation of the Earth. After this he 
carried out a demonstration with a very long pendulum 
(60 m) in the dome of the Pantheon, causing a public 
sensation. Showered with honours, and appointed to the 
staff of the Paris Observatory, he set about improving its 
telescopes, in the course of which he invented the knife- 
edge test for the figure of a mirror, the process of silvering 
glass mirrors (replacing the speculum metal mirror), and 
pneumatic mirror support systems. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Foucault’s Pendulum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Foucault’s Pendulum 


A freely swinging pendulum mounted in such a way as to 
reduce its physical contact with the Earth to an absolute 
minimum. An ideal pendulum of this type would, if 
set swinging in a particular plane at one of the Earth’s 
poles, continue to swing in that same plane relative to the 
‘fixed stars’, and the Earth would rotate underneath it. To 
the observer on the Earth’s surface, the pendulum would 
be seen to rotate its plane of swing through 360° each 
day. The period of rotation of the plane of the pendulum 
increases with decreasing latitude on the Earth’s surface. 
No rotation is observed for a pendulum at the equator. 
Observation of the behavior of such a pendulum is direct 
evidence of the fact that the Earth rotates on its axis. This 
type of pendulum is named after the French physicist, 
Léon Foucault (1819-68). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fowler, Alfred (1868-1940) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fowler, Alfred (1868-1940) 


Professor at the Imperial College of Science and 
Technology, in South Kensington, London, a master of 
spectroscopy, especially for solar phsyics. He identified 
titanium oxide in cool stars, magnesium hydride in 
sunspots, carbon monoxide in comets and ozone in the 
Earth’s upper atmosphere. When the Bohr theory of 
the atom appeared, he made contributions to atomic 
physics, identifying the spectrum of ionized helium and 
determining the value of the Rydberg constant and the 
proton-electron mass ratio. Organized, and became the 
first Secretary of, the International Astronomical Union. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fowler, William Alfred [‘Willy’] (1911-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fowler, William Alfred [‘Willy’] 
(1911-95) 


American nuclear physicist, born in Pittsburgh, PA, 
worked at CalTech. Nobel prizewinner (1983). While at 
the Kellogg Laboratory studied the nuclear reactions of 
protons with the isotopes of carbon and nitrogen, the very 
reactions in the CN cycle identified at that time by HANs 
BETHE as occurring in the stars. Established the science of 
nuclear astrophysics. Found that there was a gap in the 
sequence of stable nuclei at mass 8, as at mass 5. These 
mass gaps spelled doom for GEoRGE GAMow’s brilliant idea 
(the alpha-beta-gamma theory) that all nuclei heavier than 
helium (mass 4) could be built by neutron addition, one 
mass unit at a time, in the Big Bang. Measured the rates of 
nearly all nuclear reactions of astrophysical interest, and 
co-authored, with Margaret Burbidge, Geoffrey Burbidge 
and FRED HOYLE, the famous 1957 paper, ‘Synthesis of the 
elements in stars’, known as B*FH. They showed how 
the cosmic abundances of essentially all the nuclides from 
carbon to uranium could be explained as the result of 
nuclear reactions in stars, using hydrogen and helium 
produced in the Big Bang. After 1964 Fowler worked on 
theoretical problems involving supernovae, gravitational 
collapse and nucleo-cosmo-chronology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Franklin-Adams, John (1843-1912) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Franklin-Adams, John (1843-1912) 


English businessman and amateur astronomer; compiled 
the Franklin-Adams Photographic Atlas of Star Positions 
(1913). The Franklin-Adams camera was a 25 cm aperture, 
10 degree field telescope, later re-erected in Johannesburg. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fraunhofer Lines ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fraunhofer Lines 


Dark lines in the spectrum of the Sun, first studied by 
Joseph von Fraunhofer (1787-1826) in 1814. He labeled 
the most prominent of these by the letters A to K, ranging 
from the red end of the spectrum to the violet. Most are 
absorption lines due to the absorption of light by atoms in 
the outer regions of the Sun; for example, a prominent pair 
of close dark lines in the yellow part of the solar spectrum 
is the ‘D’ lines of the element sodium. A few Fraunhofer 
lines orignate in molecules in the Earth’s atmosphere. 


See also: solar spectroscopy, spectrum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fraunhofer, Joseph von (1787-1826) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fraunhofer, Joseph von (1787-1826) 


Instrument-maker, born in Straubing, Germany, began 
life as a wood turner then as a glazier, educated 
himself in optics. Joined the instrument workshop of 
Georg Reichenbach and Joseph Utzschneider making and 
developing lenses, and taking up optical glass making 
for the microscopes, opera glasses, loupes and the small 
and large astronomical telescopes and heliometers which 
the company built. Fraunhofer calculated, designed and 
tested every instrument, wrote the manuals and watched 
the disassembling and packaging process for the bigger 
telescopes, including the big refractor for the Russian 
observatory in Dorpat, used by srruvE to measure 3000 
double stars. This was the first telescope mounted 
equatorially and driven about the polar axis with a clock. 
Around 1813 Fraunhofer began to research the chromatic 
properties of different sorts of glass and rediscovered the 
dark lines in the Sun’s spectrum, as first seen by WILLIAM 
WOLLASTON and now known as Fraunhofer lines. Fraunhofer 
identified and measured the wavelengths of 574 lines, 
cataloging them with letters (A to Z for the strong ones, 
as for example the ‘sodium D-lines’, lower case letters for 
the weaker, e.g. the magnesium b-line), which are still used 
today. His motivation for the study seems to have been to 
provide wavelength standards to make refractive index 
measurements although his work is remembered as pure 
science. He followed up this work with studies of the 
spectra of the light of electric sparks, different light sources 
and stars. Fraunhofer sold his firm to Merz. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Freja ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Freja 


Swedish—German satellite, launched in October 1992. Car- 
ried instruments to study Earth’s aurora and associated 
wave and particle phenomena. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Frequency 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Frequency 


The rate at which specific events occur. In the context 
of electromagnetic radiation, the term is taken to mean 
the number of wavecrests per second passing a particular 
point. For light of wavelength i, since the speed of 
light = c, the frequency, f = c/A. 

The SI unit of frequency measurement is the hertz 
(Hz), measuring the number of waves passing a fixed point 
per second. Thus, 1 wave per second would correspond 
to a frequency of 1 Hz, 100000 waves per second to 
100 000 Hz, etc. Common multiples are kilohertz (kHz) = 
1000 Hz, megahertz (MHz) = 1000 000 Hz, and gigahertz 
(GHz) = 1000000000 Hz. An older unit of frequency is 
cycles per second (c/s); 1 Hz =1¢/s. 


See also: wavelength. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Freundlich, Erwin Finlay (1885-1964) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Freundlich, Erwin Finlay (1885-1964) 


Born in Biebrich, Germany, collaborator with EINSTEIN, 
making measurements (successfully) of Mercury’s orbit 
and the gravitational redshift (unsuccessfully) to confirm 
the general theory of relativity. Fled Nazi Germany 
to become the Napier Professor of Astronomy at the 
University of St Andrews in Scotland. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Friedman, Herbert (1916-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Friedman, Herbert (1916-) 


Astrophysicist, born in New York City, worked at the 
US Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, used 
rockets for astronomical observations, including solar 
x-ray astronomy using Geiger counters and detectors 
developed from them. Showed in 1964 that a celestial 
x-ray source coincided with the Crab Nebula supernova 
remnant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Friedmann [Fridman], Aleksandr [Alexander] Aleksan- 
drovich (1888-1925) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Friedmann [Fridman], Aleksandr 
[Alexander] Aleksandrovich 
(1888-1925) 


Mathematician, born in St Petersburg, Russia, where he 
studied and first worked. After exciting war-time and 
revolutionary experiences he returned to Petrograd (as it 
had been re-named, before becoming Leningrad and now 
St Petersburg again) where he taught mathematics and 
mechanics. Friedmann took up an interest in EINSTEIN'S 
general theory of relativity, and showed in a classic paper 
‘On the curvature of Space’ that the radius of curvature of 
the universe can be either increasing or a periodic function 
of time. Einstein and de Sitter had considered a stationary 
type of universe, and Einstein at first claimed that 
Friedmann’s solution does not satisfy the field equations, 
but conceded after further study that Friedmann was right. 
Friedmann’s solution foreshadowed the concept of the 
expanding universe. Just as COPERNICUS made the Earth 
orbit round the Sun, so Friedmann made the universe 
expand. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Frost, Robert (1874-1963) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Frost, Robert (1874-1963) 


American lyrical poet, born in San Francisco, amateur 
astronomer. His poetry contains numerous astronomical 
images, including the image of the farmer who, 
unknowingly, picked up a meteorite and built it into a 
prosaic stone wall. He had a telescope in his farmhouse 
in Derry, New Hampshire and each of his children was 
given the task of following one star (cf. his poem, Choose 
Something Like a Star). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fuertes Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fuertes Observatory 


Located on the North Campus of Cornell University, 
Ithaca, New York, it contains a 30 cm refractor. Earlier in 
the twentieth century, the observatory was used to tell the 
time by noting when certain stars passed overhead. Today 
it is used largely as a teaching facility for introductory 
astronomy classes. It is also used by the Cornell 
Astronomy Club. 
For further information see 
http:/ /astrosun.tn.cornell.edu/teach/fuertes.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fundamental Catalogs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fundamental Catalogs 


Catalogs that list stars whose positions and proper motions 
have been very accurately determined over many years 
by positional measurements relative to telescopes, rather 
than to other stars. A number of early catalogs are still of 
value because the determination of positions and proper 
motions is an on-going exercise in which old observations 
are combined with the latest measurements; a notable 
example is the General Catalog of 33 342 Stars (abbrev. GC) 
compiled by the American astronomer Benjamin Boss 
(1880-1970) and published in five volumes in 1936-7. 

The most important fundamental catalogs are the 
FK series, begun in Berlin in 1879. The third of these, 
the Dritter Fundamentalkatalog des Berliner Astronomischen 
Jahrbuchs (abbrev. FK3), published in 1934 contained the 
positions of 1535 stars with a limiting magnitude of about 
7.9, for the epoch 1950.0. It was adopted as the standard 
list of fundamental stars by the International Astronomical 
Union (IAU) in 1935, and a series of annual volumes of 
Apparent Places of Fundamental Stars was commenced in 
which the predicted positions of the fundamental stars are 
tabulated at 10 day intervals, using the FK data. 

Succeeding catalogs, the FK4 and FK5, were pub- 
lished in 1963 and 1988 respectively by the Astronomisches 
Rechen-Institut, Heidelberg, on behalf of the IAU. The cat- 
alog positions are calculated for a standard epoch, so that 
they provide a fundamental reference frame to which ob- 
servations of the positions of all other bodies may be re- 
ferred. Precise positional observations of the fundamen- 
tal stars made at many observatories around the world, 
mainly with transit circles (and, in more recent years, pho- 
tographic zenith tubes and prismatic astrolabes), are com- 
bined to update and improve the catalog positions and 
proper motions for this list of fundamental stars. 


See also: fundamental stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fundamental Forces 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fundamental Forces 


The forces that govern the various interactions between 
particles. The four fundamental forces, or interactions, are: 
gravitation, the electromagnetic force, the strong nuclear 
force, and the weak nuclear force. 

The gravitational force acts between all particles and 
is always attractive; it pulls matter together. Gravitation 
is the force that binds together the solar system, the 
galaxies, and clusters of galaxies. The electromagnetic 
force controls the behavior of electrically charged particles 
(particles of like charge repel, whereas opposite charges 
attract). The electromagnetic force is the binding force 
of atoms; the electromagnetic interaction between its 
positively charged nucleus and its surrounding cloud of 
negatively charged electrons holds an atom together. The 
electromagnetic force also controls the absorption and 
emission of electromagnetic radiation. The strong nuclear 
force binds together the nucleons (protons and neutrons) 
in an atomic nucleus and prevents the like-charged protons 
from flying apart. Particles that are acted on by the 
strong nuclear force (including protons and neutrons) 
are known collectively as hadrons. The strong nuclear 
interaction between individual hadrons is believed to be a 
remnant of a more powerful color force that acts between 
quarks inside hadrons. The weak nuclear force causes the 
radioactive decay of certain atomic nuclei. In particular, it 
governs the process called beta decay whereby a neutron 
breaks up into a proton, an electron and an antineutrino. 

The strong and weak nuclear interactions are short- 
range forces that are effective only within the nuclei 
of atoms, the range of the strong force being about 
10- m and that of the weak force about 107!” m. The 
electromagnetic and gravitational interactions are long- 
range forces, their strengths being inversely proportional 
to the square of distance (if the distance is doubled, 
the force is reduced to a quarter of its previous value). 
Thus, in principle, the gravitational attraction between two 
masses, or the electromagnetic force between two charged 
particles, does not decline to zero until the separation 
between them becomes infinite. Although in terms 
of interactions between individual particles, gravitation 
is far weaker than the electromagnetic force, because 
matter on the large scale tends to be electrically neutral, 
gravitation controls the overall dynamics of planets, stars, 
and galaxies. 

In the present-day universe, at everyday energy 
levels, the four forces are distinct from one another 
and have different strengths (in order of decreasing 
strength: strong nuclear, electromagnetic, weak nuclear, 
gravitation). At very high energies (particle energies in 
excess of about 10! eV) the weak and electromagnetic 
forces merge into a single ‘electroweak’ force. According to 
Grand Unified Theories (GUT), the strong and electroweak 
forces will lose their separate identities and behave as a 
single unified force at particle energies in excess of about 
10*4 eV (about 10” times higher than can be achieved in 
present-day particle accelerators). Although a complete 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


theory (a ‘theory of everything’) that embraces all four 
forces has not yet been achieved, it is widely believed 
that at still higher energies, gravitation will unite with 
the others into a single ‘superforce’. If this hypothesis is 
valid, the universe was dominated by the superforce in 
the first microscopic instant of the Big Bang. Thereafter, as 
the universe expanded and cooled (and particle energies 
decreased), the unified force broke up into the four 
separate forces. 

According to modern quantum theories, the various 
fundamental forces are conveyed between real particles 
by means of ‘virtual’ particles (particles that are permitted 
temporary existence by the Heisenberg uncertainty 
principle). The force-carrying particles, or ‘gauge bosons’, 
for each of the forces are as follows: electromagnetic force, 
photons; weak nuclear interaction, intermediate vector 
bosons; strong nuclear interaction between hadrons, pions 
(strong interaction, or ‘color force’, between quarks, 
gluons). The existence of the hypothesized force-carrying 
particle for gravitation (the graviton) remains unproven. 

According to Kaluza—Klein theory, which is named 
after physicists Theodore Kaluza and Oscar Klein, the 
universe began with more than four dimensions (current 
versions of this kind of theory require at least ten 
dimensions), of which only four expanded to form space 
(which has three dimensions—length, breadth, height) 
and time, the others remaining so tightly ‘curled up’ on 
themselves that they are not directly perceptible. Theories 
of this kind suggest that the fundamental forces are 
manifestations of these hidden dimensions. 


See also: electroweak force, gauge bosons, grand unified 
theory, hadrons, uncertainty principle, mesons, quantum 
theory, quark. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Fundamental Particles ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fundamental Particles 


Subatomic particles that cannot be divided into smaller 
components. The fundamental particles include leptons 
(electrons, muons, tau particles, and neutrinos), quarks 
and gauge bosons particles which, so far as is known at 
present, do not have an internal structure composed of 
other, more basic, particles. 


See also: elementary particles, gauge bosons, leptons, 
quark, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fundamental Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fundamental Stars 


A definitive list of 1535 stars, adopted by the International 
Astronomical Union in 1935, whose positions and proper 
motions have been very accurately determined over many 
years and are regularly updated by positional observations 
of very high precision. The data are regularly published 
in fundamental catalogs and provide a reference-frame 
for position- and motion-determining observations of all 
other bodies. 


See also: fundamental catalogs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Fusion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fusion 


The process in which two lighter atomic nuclei are 
combined to form a heavier atomic nucleus. Very high 
temperatures are normally required in order for atomic 
nuclei to collide with sufficient energy to overcome their 
mutual electrostatic repulsions (each atomic nucleus has a 
positive charge, the magnitude of which depends on the 
number of protons it contains). Fusion that occurs under 
high-temperature conditions is called thermonuclear 
fusion. 

Fusion reactions involving light elements release 
large amounts of energy. The mass of the resulting nucleus 
is less than the combined masses of the two original 
nuclei, the difference in mass, Am (which is known as the 
mass defect) being released as energy (£) in accordance 
with Einstein’s relationship, E = Amc*, where c denotes 
the speed of light. The fusion of elements up to iron 
(atomic mass 56) results in the release of energy. The 
fusion of elements heavier than iron requires an input of 
energy. Thermonuclear fusion provides the energy that 
powers stars. In main sequence stars, such as the Sun, 
fusion reactions (the proton—proton reaction or the carbon— 
nitrogen—oxygen cycle) convert hydrogen to helium. In 
red giants, helium is converted to carbon by a process 
called the triple-alpha reaction and, in highly evolved 
high-mass stars, fusion reactions synthesize a succession 
of elements up to iron. 


See also: atom, element (chemical), energy, fission, mass, 
nucleosynthesis, special relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gagarin, Yuri Alekseyevich (1934-1968) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gagarin, Yuri Alekseyevich 
(1934-1968) 


Russian cosmonaut, born in Gzhatsk, Russia (renamed 
Gagarin after its favourite son). Trained in the Soviet 
air force, in 1961 he became the first man to travel in 
space, completing an orbit around the Earth in the Vostok 
spacecraft. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Galactic Astronomy c. 1900-c. 1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Astronomy c. 1900-—c. 1950 


By the early years of the 20th century it was widely 
believed that the great majority of the objects in our stellar 
system were close to the Galaxy’s center, that the Sun was 
near its center, that the stars moved randomly in space 
and that the Galaxy included all the objects in the visible 
universe. There was, however, no general agreement on 
the Galactic system’s size and detailed shape. Also, while 
some astronomers were prepared to accept in principle 
that external galaxies existed, they placed these other 
galaxies beyond the reach of even the most powerful 
telescopes. 

Half a century later a very different conception of 
the Galaxy had been fashioned. In the early 1950s the 
orthodox view was that the Galaxy had a diameter of 
30 000 pe and was a disk-like system witha central bulge. It 
also possessed a spiral structure with the Sun placed about 
8500 pc from the center. All astronomers now accepted that 
the Galaxy rotated differentially and that it was only one 
of a multitude of galaxies. 


Galactic models in the early years of the century 
There were two principal models of the Galaxy in the first 
decade of the 20th century: the spiral and the ellipsoidal. 
The hypothesis that the stars in the Galaxy are arranged 
in a spiral pattern, which had first been proposed, in 
the middle of the nineteenth century, owed most to the 
Dutch astronomer Cornelis Easton (1864-1929). In 1900 he 
had described ‘A new theory of the Milky Way’ in which 
he had noted that the latest observations of nebulae had 
demonstrated the spiral to be a much commoner form 
than had previously been supposed. Might the spiral 
structure, Easton asked, be the plan on which the Galaxy 
was designed? 

A principal aim of some astronomers in the 19th 
century had been to discover the actual distribution of 
the stars in space and hence the size and structure of 
the Galaxy. To succeed they judged they would have to 
disentangle the two causes of a star’s apparent brightness: 
its distance and its luminosity. For want of anything better, 
these pioneers had sometimes been driven to employ 
the assumptions of constant absolute magnitudes and 
constant spatial densities for the stars, but both were 
by 1900 long accepted as grossly inadequate. At the 
end of the 19th century and in the early years of the 
20th, however, astronomers forged novel methodological 
and conceptual tools in their attempts to discern the 
nature of the Galaxy. These tools gave rise to ‘statistical 
astronomy’ which many hoped would eventually enable 
them to discover the true arrangement of the stars. As the 
astronomer-historian A Pannekoek expressed it, ‘here [is] 
anew kind of astronomy, which may be called “statistical 
astronomy”. It appears where we have to deal not with 
stars individually but, with hundreds or thousands or 
even millions of them. Then the nature of the problems 
has changed with the object; we do not ask which stars, 
but how many stars have certain characteristics (color, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


spectrum, duplicity) or certain values of the parameters 
(temperature, density, luminosity, magnitude). Counting 
supplies the measuring. The positions (in the sky or in 
space) do not matter, but the densities of distribution (over 
the sky or over space). Statistical laws of distribution are 
the objects and the working instruments of the astronomer 
who is dealing with thousands and millions of the 
heavenly host’. 

In the early years of the 20th century the three 
most notable exponents of, and innovators in, statistical 
astronomy were C V LCHARLIER (1862-1934) at Lund, Hugo 
von Seeliger (1849-1924) at Munich and J C KAPTEYN 
(1851-1922) at Groningen. Seeliger’s approach consisted 
basically of counting the total number of stars between 
successive magnitude limits. These counts and the 
mathematical analyses of the counts enabled him to 
estimate (1) the flattening of the stellar system toward 
the plane of the Milky Way, (2) the relative extent of 
the Galaxy and (3) the general distribution of stars as 
a function of magnitude and galactic latitude. Further, 
for his ‘Betrachtungen iiber die raumliche Vertheilung 
der Fixsterne’ of 1898, Seeliger constructed an ellipsoidal 
model of the Galaxy which had a diameter of about 3000 pe 
along the galactic plane and stretched for about 1300 pc 
at right-angles to the plane. However, to secure detailed 
information on the actual spatial density an astronomer 
needed information on the variations in the intrinsic 
brightness of stars and, in particular, the luminosity 
function—that is, the number of stars per unit volume of 
space in successive intervals of absolute magnitude. 

At the start of the 20th century so few trigonometric 
parallaxes of stars were known that an attempt to 
determine the luminosity law directly was out of the 
question. Kapteyn’s response to the paucity of parallax 
data was to develop various mathematical techniques 
to exploit the more easily obtained observations of 
magnitude and proper motion; of these the most valuable 
involved an empirical expression for the average parallax 
of a group of stars as a function of their magnitudes and 
proper motions. With the aid of these techniques, Kapteyn 
approximated the luminosity law and then calibrated the 
dependence on distance of the space density of the stars. 

An early product of Kapteyn’s scrutiny of the proper 
motions of the stars was his discovery, announced in 1904, 
that the stars tended to move in two distinct directions. 
Kapteyn supposed this phenomenon to be the result of 
two intermingled streams of stars moving relative to one 
another. While an explanation of Kapteyn’s find became 
one of the outstanding problems of galactic astronomy, the 
immediate and surprising message of the star streams was 
that the stars do not move randomly, as had been assumed, 
but that there is an order amidst the apparent jumble of 
stellar proper motions. 

Kapteyn was also anxious to secure within a 
reasonable time representative samples of the immense 
amount of data that he believed necessary to a proper 
study of the Galaxy. He therefore proposed in 1906 that 
astronomers should obtain as much information as they 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Astronomy c. 1900-c. 1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


could about 206 selected stellar areas uniformly spread 
over the sky. This plan was soon taken up by a number of 
observatories. 

Despite their hopes of achieving a greater under- 
standing of the structure of the Galaxy, statistical as- 
tronomers labored under a major handicap: the lack of 
firm knowledge about interstellar absorption. The possi- 
bility of the absorption of star light made it difficult to de- 
cide whether the observed thinning out of the stars with in- 
creasing distance was genuine or whether it was the result 
of absorption. Statistical astronomers were particularly 
uneasy because the observed change in density seemed 
to place the Sun in a nearly central, and apparently privi- 
leged, position in the Galaxy. 

In the late 19th century E E BARNARD (1857-1923), 
a renowned American observational astronomer, had 
noticed dark regions in his photographs of the Milky Way. 
Such regions had been known since the time of William 
Herschel and astronomers had pondered whether they 
were areas genuinely devoid of stars or whether dark 
obscuring clouds were blocking the light of the stars that 
lay beyond. Until the 1910s many astronomers accepted 
that the dark regions were indeed holes or rifts, but 
Barnard’s later photographs of the Milky Way were largely 
instrumental in convincing his colleagues that they were 
really clouds of obscuring material situated among the 
stars. 

By about 1916, however, astronomical opinion had 
moved toward the view that while localized obscuring 
clouds did exist, the general absorption of star light in 
space is insignificant. This shift was largely due to the 
examination by HARLOW SHAPLEY, then a young astronomer 
at Mount Wilson Observatory in California, of the color 
of the stars in globular clusters. Shapley had examined 
in detail the globular cluster M13 in Hercules. In 1915, 
he had estimated this cluster to be about 30000 pc away, 
a much larger distance than the contemporary estimates 
of the diameter of the Galaxy. If absorbing material had 
been present it would, Shapley asserted, have manifested 
itself by reddening the light from the stars of the Hercules 
cluster: the color indices of the stars would then have 
been more positive than for a sample of similar stars in 
the solar neighborhood. Yet this was not the case, and 
so Shapley claimed that the extinction and reddening of 
star light could effectively be ignored in researches of the 
Galaxy. These studies freed Kapteyn of any reservations 
he had over assigning a nearly central position to the Sun 
in the Galaxy. 


Shapley’s model of the Galaxy 

In his celebrated Stellar Movements and the Structure of the 
Universe of 1914, ASEDDINGTON (1882-1944) summarized the 
picture that modern researches had painted of the stellar 
system: ‘It is believed that the great mass of the stars. . .are 
arranged in the form of a lens- or bun-shaped system. That 
is to say, the system is considerably flattened towards one 
plane.... In this aggregation the Sun occupies a fairly 
central position.... The median plane of the lens is the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


same as the plane marked out in the sky by the Milky 
Way, so that when we look in any direction along the 
galactic plane (as the plane of the Milky Way is called), we 
are looking towards the perimeter of the lens where the 
boundary in most remote. ... The thickness of the system, 
though enormous compared with ordinary units, is not 
immeasurably great. No definite distance can be specified, 
because it is unlikely that there is a sharp boundary; there 
is only a gradual thinning out of stars. The facts would 
perhaps be best expressed by saying that the surfaces of 
equal density resemble oblate spheroids. To give a general 
idea of the scale of the system, it may be stated that in 
directions towards the galactic poles the density continues 
practically uniform up to a distance of about 100 parsecs; 
after that the falling off becomes noticeable so that at 300 
parsecs it is only a fraction (perhaps a fifth) of the density 
near the Sun. The extension in the galactic plane is at 
least three times greater. These figures are subject to large 
uncertainties’. 

Just a few years later, Shapley claimed that the Galaxy 
has a diameter of about 100000 pc, a staggering increase 
onthe commonly accepted size. Shapley, moreover, placed 
the Sun in an eccentric position thousands of parsecs from 
the Galactic center. 

All of the main components involved in Shapley’s 
invention of the big Galaxy were present by late 1917: 
his concern for the peculiar distribution of the globular 
clusters (they seemed to be almost all located in one part 
of the sky), a conviction that the Galaxy was much larger 
than his contemporaries conceded and a knowledge of the 
distances of the globular clusters. By early 1918, Shapley 
had decided that the globular clusters outlined the stellar 
system, and from their distances he had calculated that the 
Galaxy is about 100 000 pc in diameter and that the Sun is 
20000 pe from its center. Further, the globular clusters 
are symmetrically distributed throughout space on either 
side of the Galactic plane, and the center of the system of 
globular clusters defines the center of the Galactic system 
itself. The local group, which contains all of the stars 
ordinarily studied, is a few times larger than a globular 
cluster. 

Not all of the elements of this radical model were new, 
however. Shapley’s idea of the eccentric positioning of 
the Sun within the Galaxy was not the novelty he liked 
to suppose. The idea has an ancestry going back to the 
18th century and only 9 yr earlier, in 1909, Karl Bohlin, a 
noted Swedish astronomer, had even tied it to the proposal 
that the globular clusters are symmetrically placed about 
the center of the Galactic system. Bohlin’s hypothesis 
provoked little discussion, perhaps because of the strange 
version of the island universe theory that he had linked to 
his Galactic theory. In fact, in 1915 Shapley had explicitly 
rejected Bohlin’s scheme because the distances Shapley 
had derived to the globular clusters, together with his 
estimates of the dimensions of the Galaxy, at that time 
clearly ruled out a model in which the clusters surrounded 
the center of the Galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Astronomy c. 1900-c. 1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shapley’s model was nevertheless unexpected. As- 
tronomers had no inclination to demolish the contempo- 
rary notions of the structure and size of the Galaxy. Shap- 
ley was also arriving at his surprising conclusions on the 
basis of anew methodology. Instead of advancing metic- 
ulously outwards from the region of the solar neighbor- 
hood, as the statistical astronomers did, Shapley went to 
the other extreme of exploiting the remote globular clusters 
to advance into the Galaxy. Also, the two approaches did 
not seem to link up, and to many astronomers it seemed 
inherently unreasonable that the refined and familiar tools 
of statistical astronomy would give so bad a value for the 
dimensions of the Galaxy and such a poor answer for the 
location of the Sun. 

In the early 1920s, Kapteyn wrote two papers that 
capped his life’s work in Galactic astronomy and offered 
a vision of the Galaxy again very different from Shapley’s. 
The first was composed in 1920 in collaboration with P 
J van Rhijn. The authors argued that the Sun is close to 
the center of the Galaxy, and that the limits of the Galactic 
system, which they represented as a flattened ellipsoid, 
were reached at a distance of about 1250 pc at right-angles 
to the Galactic plane and at 9000 pc along the plane. Two 
years later Kapteyn wrote what he called a ‘First attempt 
at a theory of the arrangement and motion of the sidereal 
system’. He reckoned that the limits of the Galactic system, 
which he took to be where the star density sank to 1/100th 
of the density in the solar neighborhood, were found at 
roughly 1700 pc at right-angles to the plane and 8500 pc 
along the Galactic plane. Kapteyn thereby proposed 
dimensions for the Galaxy that, although small compared 
with Shapley’s, were far larger than the estimates of the 
mid-1910s, and so the ‘Kapteyn universe’, as this model 
became known, was itself a notable departure from the 
previously prevailing orthodoxy. 

Many astronomers reckoned there were weaknesses 
and flaws in Shapley’s model, especially in his scheme 
of distances. These he obtained with the aid of three 
interlocking methods. Some of the larger, and apparently 
closer, clusters contained stars that Shapley identified as 
Cepheid variables. Yet Shapley’s calibration of the period— 
luminosity relationship relied on a statistical analysis of 
the proper motions of only 11 stars. Furthermore, despite 
the advance in accuracy achieved in L Boss’s catalogue 
of proper motions, the proper motions of these eleven 
Cepheids were still very uncertain. 

To reach a cluster that contained no visible Cepheids, 
Shapley examined its 30 most luminous stars. He then 
discarded the five brightest in case they were field stars 
and not physically associated with the cluster. For 
the remaining 25 he calculated their mean luminosity. 
Shapley now derived the absolute mean magnitude for 
these 25 stars by following the same procedure for the 
clusters of known distance (that is, those containing visible 
Cepheids). He could now find the distances not only to 
those clusters in which he could detect Cepheids but to any 
in which he could distinguish the 30 brightest stars. For the 
very distant globular clusters that would not yield to either 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of these approaches, he employed their apparent angular 
diameters as distance indicators. To calibrate this final 
link in his chain of distance determinations he drew an 
‘apparent diameter versus distance’ curve for the globular 
clusters calibrated by clusters that had submitted to the 
previous techniques. 

It was to the initial Cepheid calibration that 
astronomers objected most strongly. If Shapley had 
erred at this point, then the claimed distances for the 
globular clusters, on which rested his theory of the Galaxy, 
would be undermined. To many astronomers it seemed 
imprudent to base a revolutionary conception of the 
Galaxy on a statistical analysis of a mere 11 stars. One 
of these astronomers was HD curtis of Lick Observatory in 
California. 

In 1920 Curtis and Shapley discussed ‘The scale of 
the Universe’ at a meeting of the National Academy 
of Sciences in Washington. This encounter—the so- 
called ‘Great Debate’—led in the following year to the 
publication of papers in a Bulletin of the National Research 
Council by Shapley and Curtis under the same title as 
their Washington addresses. The papers, however, were 
pitched at a much higher level than the Washington 
talks (Shapley, in fact, was most anxious in the ‘debate’ 
to impress those members of the audience concerned 
with selecting the next director of the Harvard College 
Observatory, a position he coveted), and a lengthy section 
of Curtis’s 1921 paper offered a critique of Shapley’s use 
of the Cepheids as distance indicators. In Curtis’s opinion 
the proper motion data on the Cepheids were meager, 
and he was far from convinced that a period—luminosity 
relationship existed for the Cepheids. 

Shapley appreciated that his calibration of the period— 
luminosity relationship was open to criticism and so, to 
counter Curtis’s attack on the Cepheids, he employed 
in his own paper the B stars as the principal distance 
indicators to the globular clusters. But Curtis, like many 
other astronomers, rejected Shapley’s claim that the B stars 
were reliable ‘standard candles’. 

It would, however, bea mistake to believe that around 
1920 astronomers were faced with a stark choice between 
the Galactic models of Kapteyn and Shapley. By no means 
every astronomer was prepared to side with either Shapley 
or Kapteyn. Certainly the spiral model had numerous 
adherents. One result, then, was that despite Shapley’s 
vigorous attempts to defend his model of the Galaxy, 
in the early 1920s it probably had more opponents than 
advocates. 


Support for Shapley’s models: Cepheids and 
Galactic rotation 

In 1923, R E Wilson, an established American astronomer, 
re-calibrated the period-luminosity relationship for the 
Cepheids. Although Wilson concluded that Shapley’s 
calibration probably needed altering by an amount that 
would decrease the distances derived from the Cepheids 
by a factor of around 1.3, his answer was sufficiently 
close to Shapley’s that Shapley’s model now gained in 
credibility. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Astronomy c. 1900-c. 1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In the next year, EDWIN HUBBLE, using the 100 in 
telescope at Mount Wilson, detected Cepheid variables 
in a number of spiral nebulae and soon demonstrated to 
the satisfaction of nearly all astronomers the extragalactic 
nature of the spirals (see EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRONOMY c. 1900-— 
1950). In so doing, Hubble further underlined the 
reliability of the Cepheids as distance indicators and 
thereby made Shapley’s model of the Galaxy still more 
plausible. 

In 1927, more evidence came from an unexpected 
source for the two central features of Shapley’s model of 
the Galaxy, the role of the globular clusters in outlining the 
Galaxy and the eccentric position of the Sun. This source 
was the rotation of the Galaxy. That the Galactic system 
rotated had long been suspected; indeed, its flattened 
form seemed to be the natural consequence of rotation. 
The spectroscopic measures in the 1910s and 1920s of the 
rotation of spiral nebulae had further strengthened the 
belief among astronomers that the Galaxy rotates. 

In 1926, }HOoRT (1900-92), a young Dutch astronomer 
based at Leiden Observatory, contended that our local 
system of stars is rotating around the center of the Galaxy. 
By so doing, he hoped to explain the well-known, but 
enigmatic, asymmetry of the motions of the high-velocity 
stars and globular clusters. The local system of stars, 
Oort argued, is moving more quickly than the high- 
velocity stars which are really a subsystem of stars rotating 
relatively slowly. In consequence, as the local system 
moves ‘through’ the high-velocity stars, these appear to 
drift asymmetrically with respect to the local system. 

The following year Oort announced that, as a result 
of his attempt to verify directly Lindblad’s theory of 
Galactic dynamics by an analysis of the motions of the 
globular clusters and high-velocity stars, he had secured 
firm evidence of a differential rotation of the Galaxy. In 
1924 BERTIL LINDBLAD (1895-1965), through his attempts 
to interpret the phenomenon of star streaming, had 
considered a possible rotation of the Galaxy. By 1925 he 
had decided that the motions of the constituents of the 
Galaxy were explicable on the hypothesis that the Galaxy 
is divided into a series of subsystems, each of which has 
rotational symmetry about acommon rotational axis. Each 
subsystem possesses a different speed of rotation, and 
hence a different degree of flattening, and he stressed that, 
while the high-velocity stars do not belong to the same 
dynamical system as those of low velocity, they must be 
related to the rest of the Galaxy since their motions are 
symmetrical with respect to the Galactic plane. Lindblad, 
as Oort was soon to do, calculated the dynamical center 
of the Galaxy to be very close in Galactic longitude to the 
center of the globular cluster system as defined by Shapley. 
However, there was at first a basic difference between 
Oort’s theory and that of Lindblad. As Oort recalled 
in 1971: ‘Lindblad had tentatively supposed that the 
principal part of the greater galactic system is formed by an 
ellipsoid of constant density, and that as a consequence its 
rotation is approximately the same as that of a solid body. 
The systematic effects I found in 1927 indicated that the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


actual motions were quite different, and that the angular 
velocity increased strongly toward the center of the galaxy, 
indicating a large concentration of mass in the central area’. 
The detection of Galactic rotation had been very much ‘in 
the air’ and Oort had presented what most astronomers 
saw as its observational verification. Support for Oort’s 
arguments, moreover, soon came from other investigators. 

The ‘discovery’ of Galactic rotation, astronomers 
quickly agreed, gave support to Shapley’s claims that the 
center of the Galaxy is defined by the system of globular 
clusters and that the Sun is eccentrically placed. There 
was, nonetheless, one point where the conclusions of Oort 
and Lindblad conflicted with Shapley’s model. Oort had 
reckoned that the distance to the dynamical center of the 
Galaxy was about 6000 pc, roughly one-third of Shapley’s 
estimate. Lindblad also thought that Shapley’s distance 
to the Galactic center needed revision, and he suggested 
that it be reduced by a factor of 0.6. These estimates were, 
nevertheless, soon to be modified and brought into close 
agreement. 


Trumpler’s investigations of open clusters 

The impression that the effects of a general interstellar 
absorption within the Galaxy were insignificant was 
rudely disturbed in 1930 by the publication of the results of 
RJ TRUMPLER’S study of the open Galactic clusters. Trumpler 
(1886-1956), an astronomer at the Lick Observatory, had 
assumed that the clusters of similar form have the same 
dimensions; by comparing the observed angular diameter 
of acluster with the assumed average linear diameter of the 
subclass to which the cluster belonged, he derived a value 
for the cluster’s distance. Trumpler had also examined 
the magnitude and spectral types of the stars within the 
clusters. Then, by constructing a Hertzsprung—Russell 
diagram for each cluster and comparing the observed 
diagram with a standard diagram, Trumpler secured 
another value for the cluster’s distance. He thereby 
calculated that the two distance indicators to the clusters 
gave systematically different answers: the more distant 
the cluster, the more the two distance values differed. 

The reason for this deviation, astronomers soon 
agreed, was that interstellar absorption diminished the 
brightness of the cluster stars but did not affect appreciably 
the measured diameters of the clusters. The effect of 
absorption, therefore, was to make the distance to a cluster 
obtained from its Hertzsprung—Russell diagram appear 
greater than it actually was. Although a number of 
earlier investigations can, with the benefit of hindsight, 
be seen to have pointed towards the existence of a general 
interstellar absorption, it was Trumpler’s analysis of the 
Galactic clusters—probably because it was more extensive 
and complete than previous researches—that convinced 
astronomers that absorbing matter is present throughout 
the Galaxy, not just in isolated clumps. 

The difference between Oort’s distance to the 
dynamical center of the Galaxy and Shapley’s estimate of 
the distance to the center of the system of globular clusters 
could now be simply explained: in his calculation of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Astronomy c. 1900-c. 1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


size of the Galactic system Shapley had not allowed for the 
dimming effect of a general interstellar absorption, and as 
a result he had overestimated the distance to the Galaxy’s 
center. 


The vindication of the spiral hypothesis 

By the mid-1930s, then, it was widely believed that the 
Sun is about 10000 pc from the galactic center, but there 
was still no consensus on the overall size or structure 
of the Galaxy. Js PLASKETT, director of the Dominion 
Astrophysical Observatory in Canada, argued in 1935 that 
all astronomers would probably agree that the Galaxy’s 
diameter is no greater than 40000 pc, although some 
would limit it to 30000 pc. In 1937 Bj Box, of Harvard 
Observatory and one of the leading students of the Galaxy, 
warned astronomers that the only well-established fact 
about the Galaxy’s structure was the eccentric location of 
the Sun. Bok did, however, propose a detailed working 
model of the Galaxy in which the Galactic center lay in the 
direction of Sagittarius and in which a spiral arm passes 
from Carina through the Sun towards Cygnus. Shapley’s 
model of the late 1910s, Bok asserted, had proved valuable 
for two decades, but now it needed replacing. 

The suggestion that the Galaxy has a spiral structure 
was, as Bok acknowledged, hardly novel. However, 
in the late 1920s it had gained in plausibility after 
Hubble had demonstrated the spiral nebulae to be external 
galaxies. It was not, however, until the mid-1950s that 
astronomers judged there was conclusive evidence of the 
Galaxy’s spiral structure. The new, and decisive, evidence 
did not come from the traditional statistical astronomy. 
Rather, it followed a shift in the way astronomers probed 
the Galaxy’s structure with the emphasis now on the 
scrutiny of particular sorts of Galactic objects, as well 
as comparisons with external galaxies. Because of the 
Sun’s eccentric position within the plane of the Milky 
Way, astronomers accepted they were surrounded by a 
confusing complexity of star and dust clouds, but by 
investigating the galaxies—star systems which seemed 
to contain the same kinds of objects as the Galaxy— 
astronomers judged they were better able to gain insights 
into the design of the Galaxy itself. 

In his studies in the 1940s with the 100 in telescope 
at Mount Wilson, WALTER BAADE (1893-1960) had noticed 
that the bright blue stars lay along the spiral arms of 
the Andromeda galaxy. Shortly afterwards, in 1951, a 
group of astronomers led by W W Morgan investigated the 
distances of the bright blue stars in our Galaxy and found 
that they too seemed to trace out spiral arms. In 1952 Bok 
listed nine ‘tracers’ for discerning the spiral arms. One of 
these tracers exploited a new tool for the examination of 
the remote regions of the Galaxy: the 21 cm radiation. 

For much of the Second World War the Netherlands 
had been under German occupation, but copies of the 
Astrophysical Journal still reached the Observatory at 
Leiden. Two papers by GROTE REBER, one of the pioneers 
of radio astronomy, appeared in the Journal in 1940 and 
1944, and the second paper included a crude radio map 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the Galaxy. Oort, the Director at Leiden, was prompted 
to suggest that if spectral lines could be observed in the 
radio region it would enable the kinematics and dynamics 
of the whole Galactic system to be analyzed since the radio 
region is unaffected by obscuring dust. 

In 1944 a celebrated seminar was held at Leiden 
to discuss Reber’s papers. At this seminar H C VAN DE 
HULST, following Oort’s proposals, predicted that atomic 
hydrogen in interstellar space might emit an observable 
radio line at a wavelength of 21 cm. It was, however, to 
be 6 yr before the line was detected and strong evidence 
secured for what had been a theoretical possibility. 

Although some astronomers were slow to appreciate 
the opportunities offered by the 21 cm radiation, its 
advocates claimed that it would help them investigate 
some fundamental problems concerning the Galaxy: 
the Galaxy’s spiral structure, the distribution of mass 
and velocity in the Galaxy, the distribution of neutral 
hydrogen in the plan of the Galaxy and the presence 
of neutral hydrogen associated with the large complexes 
of obscuring dust and gas clouds. For its proponents, 
the great advantage of the 21 cm radiation was that it 
could penetrate clouds of obscuring matter without being 
diminished in intensity. Indeed, the elucidation of the 
Galaxy’s fine structure would lie mainly with the infant 
science of radio astronomy. 


Stellar populations 

In 1921 Shapley and Curtis had spoken for most 
astronomers when they agreed that stars ‘in clusters and 
in distant parts of the Milky Way are not peculiar—that 
is, uniformity of conditions and of stellar phenomena 
naturally prevails throughout the galactic system’. The 
view that each region of the Galaxy contained the same 
sorts of stars as all other regions was finally to be 
undermined in the 1940s by Baade. 

Until 1943 all attempts to resolve the nucleus of the 
Andromeda galaxy into stars had, by general consent, 
failed. However, in 1943 Walter Baade equipped the 
100 in Mount Wilson telescope with photographic plates 
especially sensitive in the red region of the spectrum. 
He thereby succeeded in resolving the nucleus into a 
swarm of faint red stars. Baade further concluded that the 
brightest stars in the nucleus were about 100 times fainter 
than the blue stars in the spiral arms of the Andromeda 
galaxy. These red stars, moreover, were similar in type and 
luminosity to the brightest stars found in globular clusters. 

Astronomers had accepted since the 1910s that the 
outer regions of a number of spiral nebulae were much 
bluer than their nuclei. After his resolution of the nucleus 
of the Andromeda galaxy, Baade introduced the concept 
of ‘stellar populations’ to explain this apparent anomaly 
and to help interpret the structure of galaxies. Different 
populations of objects, he argued, have different spatial 
distributions. What he termed ‘population I’ objects were 
associated with the spiral arms of galaxies and included 
blue supergiant stars and galactic clusters. Baade linked 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Astronomy c. 1900-c. 1950 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


‘population II’ with elliptical galaxies, globular clusters 
and the nucleus of spiral galaxies. 

The concept of populations also led to a reinterpre- 
tation of the motions of the Galaxy’s stars. Even be- 
fore the term ‘stellar population’ had been coined, as- 
tronomers had noted a correlation between the astrophys- 
ical characteristics of stars and their kinematical behav- 
ior. When plotted on a Hertzsprung—Russell diagram the 
high-velocity stars produced an array similar to that of a 
globular cluster, but the equivalent diagram for the low- 
velocity stars resembled that for a galactic cluster. Now 
astronomers argued that the different diagrams could be 
explained in terms of populations: the low-velocity stars 
are population I objects while the high-velocity stars be- 
long to population II. 

In 1952 Baade announced another surprising discov- 
ery. There was, he asserted, an error in the calibration 
of the period—luminosity relationship. The estimated dis- 
tances to the external galaxies, which were based on this 
relationship, had therefore to be revised. Indeed, the dis- 
tances had to be approximately doubled (see also ExTRA- 
GALACTIC ASTRONOMY c. 1900-1950). The re-calibration of 
the period—luminosity relationship and the resulting dou- 
bling of the distances to the galaxies also meant that the 
estimates of the diameters of the galaxies had to be dou- 
bled: at last the lingering unease that the Galaxy might be 
truly exceptional, a continent amidst the islands of external 
galaxies, was dispelled. 


Bibliography 

Holmberg G 1999 Reaching for the Stars: Studies in the 
History of Swedish Stellar and Nebular Astronomy, 1860- 
1940 (Lund: Lund University) 

Hoskin M 1982 Stellar Astronomy: Historical Studies 
(Chalfont St Giles: Science History Publications) 

Paul E R 1993 The Milky Way Galaxy and Statistical Cos- 
mology 1890-1924 (New York: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Smith R W 1982 The Expanding Universe: Astronomy’s 
‘Great Debate’ 1900-1931 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Robert W Smith 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Bulge 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Bulge 


Bulges are the central visible spheroidal systems in Disk 
GALAXIES. The prominent bulges of early-type galaxies are 
exemplified by that of the somBRERO GALAXY, NGC 4594, 
shown in figure 1. The bulge of our own galaxy, which 
is of later type, is dominated by the disk, as is seen in 
figure 2. 

A bulge is essentially a STELLAR POPULATIONS concept, 
the key properties being the age, kinematics and chemical 
composition of the stars of the bulge. The kinematics of 
the stars yield a certain structure, which is the nominal 
defining property of a galactic bulge. The general 
properties of bulges are well reviewed by Wyse et al (1997). 
The history of the study of the galactic bulge is recounted 
by Frogel (1988). Here we deal in turn with the age, 
kinematics, structure and chemistry of the bulge of the 
MILKY WAY. 


Age 

Our preconceptions about the stellar population of the 
galactic bulge are that it is old, like the halo, and that, 
like elliptical galaxies, it has high density and must have 
formed early in the galaxy’s life, and perhaps in terms of 
cosmic time as well. But it is important to look at the data 
on the age of the bulge population. 

Holtzman et al (1993, 1998) used the wide field 
planetary cameras of the Hubble Space Telescope to 
image main sequence stars in Baade’s window (a 
relatively unobscured line of sight into the bulge at 
impact parameter 500 pc). They found a population 
of mixed age characteristics with stars younger than 
the Sun relatively deficient compared with the solar 
neighbourhood. Ortolaniet al (1995) studied the same field 
and concluded that the age and other characteristics were 
similar to that of metal-rich globular clusters. Frogel et al 
(1999) have mapped the inner bulge in the infrared, and 
conclude that there is a young component of the stellar 
population observed near the galactic centre, but that it 
declines in density much more quickly than the overall 
bulge population, and is undetectable beyond 1° from the 
galactic centre. 

While the main sequence provides a democratic 
census of stellar ages, VARIABLE STARS offer good tracers 
of stellar populations of certain ages. Oort and Plaut 
(1975) identified the RR LYRAE STARS in a number of similar 
windows. These are clearly old stars as a rule, the 
youngest simple stellar population with RR Lyrae stars 
being NGC 121 in the Small Magellanic Cloud, whose age 
is 11.5 Gyr according to Stryker et al (1985). Menzies and 
Whitelock (1985) found that the long-period variables in 
the bulge are of relatively short period (~200 days) by the 
standards of the galactic disk with bolometric luminosity 
approximately —4 mag. Asimilar luminosity was obtained 
for OH/IR stars (the terminal phase of asymptotic giant 
branch evolution) by Wood et al (1998). This also suggests 
a population from the age interval represented by NGC 
121 to 47 Tucanae, a metal-rich Galactic globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


We conclude that the stellar population of the bulge 
of the galaxy is indeed predominantly old. We may be 
witnessing bulge formation in real (or at least ‘lookback’) 
time in the very high star formation rates (10M, /year) at 
redshifts greater than 3 in Lyman dropout galaxies (Steidel 
et al 1996). 


Kinematics 

Our preconception of bulges from the stellar populations 
paradigm of Baade is that they are scaled down elliptical 
galaxies. The data, however, are more specific. Davies et 
al (1983) found that at every luminosity both ellipticals 
and bulges follow the isotropic rotator model. This 
model, described succinctly by Binney and Tremaine 
(1987), assumes an axisymmetric system that rotates about 
its symmetry axis. The model is flattened by rotation to 
an ellipticity e, which is uniquely (in a model in which the 
orbits of the stars are fully isotropic) a function of the ratio 
of the rotation velocity and the central velocity dispersion. 

Structurally, the bulge was traditionally difficult to 
get a quantitative fix on, although de Vaucouleurs and 
Pence (1978) were able to determine an effective radius, 
re = 2.5 kpc. The effective radius is the radius which 
contains half the light. Morrison et al (1990) found that this 
overpredicted the halo density in the solar neighbourhood. 
Terndrup (1988) found that standard spheroid models 
(the Bahcall and Soneira (1980) model, in particular) 
underpredicted the number of giant stars in the bulge. 
The K and M giants in the bulge fit a de Vaucouleurs law 
with re = 0.25 kpc, a full order of magnitude less than de 
Vaucouleurs and Pence found. Similar compactness was 
found for OH/IR stars by Habing (1986). It really seems 
that the bulge is a separate component from POPULATION II 
near the Sun. This would not be surprising if the bulge and 
halo were formed in different ways, for example the bulge 
by dissipative collapse at an early epoch and the halo by 
accretion subsequently (See HALO, GALACTIC). 

The infrared has proved the answer to determining 
structural parameters of the bulge. Binney et al (1997) find 
axis ratios of (1:0.6:0.4). Zhao et al (1994) show that the 
bulge is really structurally a bar. This is not consistent with 
the isotropic rotator model, and one is left wondering what 
fraction of bulges are bars (as the Milky Way’s apparently 
is), and what fraction resemble ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES. 


Chemistry 

Our preconception from spectroscopy is that the bulge 
is a super metal-rich stellar population (Whitford 1978), 
i.e. the metallicity is higher than the Sun’s. The data, 
however, show a broad distribution (Minniti et al 1995), 
from —1 to 0.5 in [Fe/H] in Baade’s window (McWilliam 
and Rich 1994), ie. from a tenth to three times solar 
abundance. Rich (1990) showed that this distribution 
fits the simple model of chemical enrichment (Pagel and 
Patchett 1975), where the bulge behaves like a closed 
system, in which gas steadily, without our specifying 
the timescale, and eventually completely, turns into stars, 
never being replenished at any time. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Bulge ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The Sombrero galaxy, NGC 4594. This is an Sa galaxy with a prominent bulge. (Picture from Siding Spring Observatory by 
courtesy of Michael Bessell.) 


Figure 2. The bulge of our own galaxy is much less prominent relative to the disk. The Milky Way’s generally attributed Hubble type 
(Sbc) reflects this. (Picture from Siding Spring Observatory by courtesy of Michael Bessell.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Galactic Bulge 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wood et al (1998) found that young stars in the 
bulge are between two and four times SOLAR ABUNDANCE. 
Jablonka et al (1996) studied a sample of bulges, finding 
a direct relationship between metallicity and luminosity 
and noting an enhancement of the element ratio Mg/Fe 
relative to the solar ratio. In principle, this means 
rapid initial enrichment in the bulge, relative to a more 
leisurely enrichment history in the disk’s interstellar 
medium, dominated by iron producing type Ia supernovae 
(Wheeler et al 1989, Gilmore et al 1989). 


Star clusters 

A separate population of bulge GLOBULAR CLUSTERS has been 
identified by Barbuy et al (1998). There is a prevalence 
of core collapsed clusters among them. Core collapsed 
clusters have power-law radial density distributions, as 
opposed to the classical (King model) flattened cores. 
Rich et al (1999) note the tendency of these clusters to 
blue horizontal branches and depletion of red giants, a 
phenomenon which may result from the high frequency of 
stellar collisions in the dense environments of the cluster 
centres. 


Formation 

A very plausible model of the formation of the galactic 
bulge has the majority of the stars form through the 
dissipative and violent collapse of protogalactic gas clouds 
in the first billion years of cosmic history. There is clear 
evidence, however, that the bulge has added to its stock 
of stars since that time. A number of processes, such as 
mergers of dwarf galaxies and disk instabilities, could be 
responsible for that extended population. 


Bibliography 

Barbuy B, Bica E and Ortolani S 1998 Astron. Astrophys. 333 
117 

Bahcall J and Soneira R 1980 Astrophys. J. (suppl) 44 73 

Binney J, Gerhard O and Spergel D 1997 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 288 365 

Binney J and Tremaine S 1987 Galactic Dynamics (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Davies R, Efstathiou G, Fall S, Illingworth G and Schechter 
P 1983 Astrophys. J. 266 41 

de Vaucouleurs G and Pence W 1978 Astrophys. J. 83 1163 

Frogel J 1988 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 51 

Frogel J, Tiede G and Kuchinski L 1999 Astrophys. J. 117 
2296 

Gilmore G, Wyse R and Kuijken K 1989 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 27 555 

Habing H et al 1985 Astron. Astrophys. 152 L1 

Holtzman J et al 1993 Astrophys. J. 106 1826 

Holtzman J et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 115 1946 

Jablonka P, Martin P and Arimoto N 1996 Astrophys. J. 112 
1415 

McWilliam A and Rich R 1994 Astrophys. J. (suppl) 91 749 

Menzies J and Whitelock P 1985 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
212 783 

Minniti D et al 1995 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 277 1293 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Morrison H, Freeman K and Flynn C 1990 Astrophys. J. 100 
1191 

Oort J and Plaut L 1975 Astron. Astrophys. 41 71 

Ortolani S et al 1995 Nature 377 701 

Pagel B and Patchett B 1975 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 172 
13 

Rich R 1990 Astrophys. J. 362 604 

Rich R et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 116 1295 

Steidel C et al 1996 Astron. Astrophys. Lett. 462 L17 

Stryker L et al 1985 Astrophys. J. 298 544 

Terndrup D 1988 Astrophys. J. 96 884 

Wheeler C, Sneden C and Truran J 1989 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 27 279 

Whitford A 1978 Astrophys. J. 226 777 

Wood P, Habing H and McGregor P 1998 Astron. Astrophys. 
336 925 

Wyse R, Gilmore G and Franx M 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 35 637 

Zhao H, Spergel D and Rich R 1994 Astrophys. J. 108 2154 


Jeremy Mould 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Latitude ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Latitude 


The angular distance between the galactic equator and 
celestial body, measured perpendicular to the galactic 
equator, and taking values between 0 and 90°. Itis denoted 
by b" to signify that the value of galactic latitude relates to 
the galactic equator defined in 1959 by the International 
Astronomical Union by reference to the centerline of 
the Milky Way defined by radio observations of neutral 
hydrogen. The previous system is denoted b!. 


See also: galactic longitude, galactic plane, galactic year. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Galactic Longitude 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Longitude 


The angular distance between the direction of the 
galactic center and the point on the galactic equator 
perpendicularly below (or above) a celestial body; it is 
measured in an anticlockwise direction, and takes values 
between 0 and 360°. Galactic longitude is denoted by /" to 
signify that it is referred to the position of zero longitude 
agreed in 1959 by the International Astronomical Union 
(and coinciding with the radio source Sagittarius A which 
is presumed to be the galactic center). The old system 
(denoted /') was referred to the point of intersection of the 
galactic equator and the celestial equator, and was offset 
from the galactic center by some 30°. 


See also: galactic latitude, galactic plane, galactic year. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


Most of the gas, stars and clusters in our Milky Way 
Galaxy are distributed in its rotating, metal-rich, gas-rich 
and flattened disk and in the more slowly rotating, metal- 
rich and gas-poor bulge. The Galaxy’s halo is roughly 
spheroidal in shape, and extends, with decreasing density, 
out to distances comparable with those of the Magellanic 
Clouds and the dwarf spheroidal galaxies that have been 
collected around the Galaxy. Aside from its roughly 
spheroidal distribution, the most salient general properties 
of the halo are its low metallicity relative to the bulk 
of the Galaxy’s stars, its lack of a gaseous counterpart, 
unlike the Galactic disk, and its great age. The kinematics 
of the stellar halo is closely coupled to the spheroidal 
distribution. Solar neighborhood disk stars move at a 
speed of about 220 km s-! toward a point in the plane 
and 90° from the Galactic center. Stars belonging to the 
spheroidal halo do not share such ordered motion, and 
thus appear to have ‘high velocities’ relative to the Sun. 
Their orbital energies are often comparable with those of 
the disk stars but they are directed differently, often on 
orbits that have a smaller component of rotation or angular 
momentum. Following the original description by Baade 
in 1944, the disk stars are often called POPULATION I while 
the metal-poor halo stars belong to POPULATION II. 
GLOBULAR CLUSTERS are the most readily identifiable 
component of the Galactic halo. Roughly 150 are known 
and most, but not all, occupy a spheroidal distribution, 
have radial velocities that are much larger than expected 
for disk-like rotation, and are metal poor. Figure 1 
shows the distributions of the metal abundances, [Fe/H] 
(= log[n(Fe)/n(H)]. — log[n(Fe)/n(H)]o). Figure 2 shows 
the distribution of clusters’ distances from the Galactic 
plane as a function of [Fe/H]. Two ‘populations’ of 
globular clusters exist: one belonging to the metal-weak 
halo, and a more metal-rich one that is a disk, possibly a 
‘thick disk’ population (See GALACTIC THICK Disk). Field stars 
show very similar behaviors in metallicity and kinematics. 
Globular cluster masses range from a few hundred 
M.s (AM-4) to several million Mo (@ Centauri = 
NGC 5139). Despite their large masses, globular clusters 
contribute only a small fraction (~2%) to the total mass 
of the metal-poor stellar halo. Field stars dominate the 
mass. The total mass of the metal-poor stellar halo may 
be estimated using the density of such field stars in the 
solar neighborhood (~0.2-0.5% of the disk stars) and the 
cumulative distribution of the mass in globular clusters 
as a function of Galactocentric distance. In field star and 
cluster stellar mass, the metal-poor halo amounts to only 
about 10? Mo, about 1% of the Galaxy’s total stellar mass. 
Despite its minor contribution to the Galaxy’s stellar 
mass budget, the halo has been studied extensively to 
answer a wide variety of questions. In 1918, Shapley 
exploited the positions and approximate distances to 
globular clusters to identify the direction of and distance 
to the Galactic center, Rgc. Globular clusters and the 
halo population ‘standard candle’ RR LYRAE VARIABLES are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


25 + 
iE 138 CLUSTERS 7 
20 - + 
15 =| 
oe i. 4 
& 
ia Mes 4 
= r 4 
=) + | 
TO 
5 = 
0 
eS 1 1 | 1 Ll | 1 1 17) 
—2 -1 0 
[Fe/H] 


Figure 1. The distribution of [Fe/H] values for globular clusters. 


still used to measure Rec. The recognizability of globular 
clusters and RR Lyraes and their large range in Rec provide 
good ‘test particles’ to map out the Galaxy’s gravitational 
potential and discern the distribution of both the stars 
and the DARK MATTER. Most work on the halo population, 
however, arises from our desire to understand the Galaxy’s 
formation process and its early history, and, in fact, to 
discern the chemical abundances produced by the Bic BANG 
since it appears that the first stars to be formed in our 
Galaxy lie in the Galactic halo. What were the abundances 
of those earliest stars? How did they change and how 
rapidly? How did the Galaxy form and evolve? 


Chemical abundances 

Figure 1 employs [Fe/H] as the measure of ‘metallicity’. 
For brighter field stars and the brightest stars in globular 
clusters, this may be determined by employing high- 
resolution, high-signal-to-noise spectroscopy to measure 
line strengths. In conjunction with atomic line parameters 
and an appropriate model stellar atmosphere, one may 
derive element-to-hydrogen abundance ratios such as 
[Fe/H]. The process is often iterative, involving tests 
to make certain that the derived abundances do not 
depend on the lower energy levels of the atomic 
transitions (to check the model’s effective temperature), 
on the line strengths (to assess the effects of turbulent 
line broadening) and on gravity-sensitive and gravity- 
insensitive lines. The technique is often referred to as a 
‘fine analysis’ or a ‘curve of growth’ analysis. 

Because of long exposure times, such analyses of 
field and cluster stars are not always employed to 
estimate [Fe/H] values. Instead, metallicity ‘indicators’ 
are calibrated using results available from such analyses 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


30 a + — 
t J 
A + tT T 88 

36 82 55 45 ; 
: 138 CLUSTERS 4 
20+ 4 
10 - ere 4 
oe - Pagc'e = J 
; raawy Se es oat : 1 
ma rea 2 ee el 

fe Se ot ape spe y= SL See Se ye og 


[Fe/H] 


Figure 2. The distance from the plane of globular clusters as a 
function of [Fe/H]. 


and then exploited to study larger and/or fainter samples 
of stars or clusters. Lower-dispersion spectra are easier 
and faster to obtain than high-dispersion spectra, and one 
technique that exploits this method is called AS since it 
employs a measured apparent difference in spectral type. 
In RR Lyrae variables, one measures the spectral type using 
the hydrogen lines and compares that with that defined 
from the 3933 A line of Ca II. The difference is an indicator 
of the calcium abundance. A similar method, called W’, 
exploits the three strong lines of Ca II at 8498, 8542 and 
8662 A and is used to estimate [Fe /H] (assuming a constant 
or at least monotonic relation between [Ca/H] and [Fe/H]]) 
for red giant stars in globular clusters. One may also 
employ photometric methods. As [Fe/H] increases, both 
the predicted and the observed colors of stars along the 
red giant branch become redder, and thus the red giant 
branch color is a good metallicity indicator. Quantitatively, 
one measures the dereddened B — V or V — 7 color 
indices at the magnitude level of a cluster’s horizontal 
branch. The resultant values, (B — V)o., and (V — /)o,g, are 
calibrated using [Fe/H] values available for a well-studied 
subsample of clusters. 

High-resolution spectroscopy of metal-poor halo 
stars is valuable for measuring the abundances of elements 
other than iron to study the chemical evolution in the early 
Galaxy and, in fact, those produced by the Big Bang. Five 
results are especially noteworthy. 

(1) Figure 1 shows two roughly Gaussian distribu- 
tions of [Fe/H]. Simple models may explain such behav- 
ior. In brief, a gaseous system with an initial metallicity, 
[Fe/H]init, produces stars, some of which explode as su- 
pernovae, and the metallicity of the gas rises. Low-mass, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


®@ Normal globular clusters 
4 Ru 106; Pal 12 


O w Centauri 


0.5 F + 


<a/Fe]> 
He 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ + 
eee 
qt 
Pie. 
4 + —@—_10: 
“st 
4 
oe 
+ 


+ Normal Field Stars 
© Unusual Field Stars 


[Fe/H] 


Figure 3. The behavior of Mg, Si and Ca abundances relative to 
iron as a function of [Fe/H] for field and cluster stars. 


long-lived stars then preserve the record of this enrich- 
ment process. The fraction of stars with higher metallici- 
ties rises until roughly 50% of the gas has been converted 
into stars or expelled from the system. At that point, the 
metallicity continues to rise, but the fraction of stars with 
higher metallicities diminishes owing to the decreasing gas 
supply, eventually reaching [Fe/H] nai when all the gas is 
gone. The low mean metallicity of the halo is thought to 
arise because most of the gas was expelled from the halo 
before significant supernova-induced enrichment could 
occur. This gas may have formed much of the Galaxy’s 
bulge. Figure 1 also suggests that two separate chemical 
evolution histories have been involved in the production of 
the metal-poor halo and the moderately metal-poor thick 
disk. 

(2) Globular clusters are fairly massive systems, yet 
only one, w Centauri, shows clear signs of metallicity 
variations that might be due to self-enrichment during 
the formation of the cluster. Since the colors of red giant 
branch stars depend on [Fe/H], the failure to detect spreads 
in colors of clusters’ red giant branch stars implies a lack 
of significant self-enrichment. Given the small total mass 
in any one globular cluster, this may not be surprising. 
Some primordial variations in selected elements have been 
claimed, however. 

(3) The abundances of the ‘a’ elements, oxygen, 
magnesium, silicon, calcium and titanium appear to be 
enhanced relative to iron by a factor of between 2 and 
3 in metal-poor stars and clusters. Figure 3 shows the 
behavior of elements other than oxygen in field and in 
clusters, from which it is clear that [‘a’/Fe] ~ +0.4 for 
[Fe/H] <—1.0. The cause is thought to be the dominance 
of type II supERNovAE, which are the explosive deaths of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


massive, and short-lived, stars. Models predict that such 
stars will produce all the elements, from helium to carbon 
and oxygen through the iron peak and beyond into the 
neutron capture domain. The decline in [‘a’ /Fe] is thought 
to arise from the later appearance of type IA supernovae, 
thought to be due to the deflagration—detonation of white 
dwarfs that exceed the Chrandrasekher mass limit owing 
to mass transfer. Their ejecta should be very rich in iron- 
peak elements and relatively deficient in lighter elements. 
Thus figure 3 may be the signature of the initial type II 
events, followed later (10? yr) by a mixture of type Ia and 
type II supernovae. Oxygen is the most abundant heavy 
element, but, unfortunately, disputes continue about the 
trend of [O/Fe] versus [Fe/H]. Analyses of OH lines in the 
ultraviolet suggest that [O/Fe] increases linearly as [Fe/H] 
declines, but analyses of O I in main sequence stars and of 
[O I] in red giants show the same behavior as in figure 3. 

(4) Neutron capture elements, including those 
manufactured in the S-process and the R-process, can 
reveal the relative importance of these processes and, 
hence, the relative contributions to nucleosynthesis in 
the young Galaxy by the stars responsible for these 
processes. The s-process may arise largely in the late 
evolutionary stages of intermediate-mass stars, while the 
r-process is thought to occur within type II supernovae. 
As in the case of the ‘a’ elements, changing ratios of 
s-process and r-process abundances indicate changing 
relative contributions by asymptotic giant branch stars 
and supernovae. If the models are correct, r-process 
production should dominate the first several hundred 
million years of chemical evolution. Further, some of the r- 
process elements, such as thorium, are radioactive and, in 
principle, may have their abundances measured in stars, 
enabling their ages to be determined. 

(5) The most metal-poor stars formed out of 
material enriched only slightly from stellar evolution and 
supernovae and a more easily detectable contribution from 
the big bang. Lithium, beryllium and boron are especially 
interesting since their production ratios are determined 
by the baryon density, its smoothness and the effects of 
cosmic rays. In almost all metal-poor stars that do not 
have deep convection zones that could carry lithium to 
deeper layers where it can be destroyed by proton capture, 
the lithium abundances appear to be constant, about a 
factor of 10 below the current interstellar medium value, 
and indicative of a low baryon density universe. There 
are, however, some puzzling exceptions, including a few 
metal-poor stars with little or no detectable lithium and a 
few others with enhanced lithium abundances. 


Distances and motions 

Radial velocities of stars in the field and in clusters may 
be measured directly using stellar spectroscopy and the 
Doppler effect. Tangential velocities may be determined 
only if a star’s PROPER MOTION and distance are both 
measured since vjan = 4.74 ud, where yz is the proper 
motion in arcsec per year and d is the distance in parsecs. 
If all these are known, one may determine velocities in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Galactic frame. In the solar neighborhood, these are called 
U, V and W, and are directed toward (¢ = 180°; b = 0°), 
(€ = 90°; b = 0°) and (b = 90°), respectively. With a model 
Galactic gravitational potential, Galactic orbits may be 
estimated, including apogalacticon, Rapo, perigalacticon, 
Rpeiy and maximum distance from the Galactic plane, 
Zmax- Stars and clusters at different Rgc may be handled 
similarly, but Il, © and Z replace U, V and W, retaining 
the same (local) vector orientations. Three-dimensional 
motions have been measured for over 30 globular clusters 
and over 1000 metal-poor field stars. 

The distance scale for metal-poor stars remains a 
controversial but crucial topic. Distances to stars help 
to determine their velocities as well as their absolute 
magnitudes. The former are necessary in studies 
of relations between kinematics versus chemistry that 
provide insight into the Galaxy’s dynamical history. The 
latter are vital because it is the luminosity of the main 
sequence turn-off that is used to estimate the relative and 
absolute ages of globular clusters. 

Trigonometric PARALLAXES have been measured for a 
significant number of metal-poor main sequence stars, 
and such data may be used to calibrate relations between 
absolute magnitude, color and metallicity. These may 
in turn be used to estimate distances to those globular 
clusters with high-precision photometry of their faint 
main sequence stars. Another ‘standard candle’ is the 
RR Lyrae variable. It appears that My (RR) = 0.20[Fe/H]+ 
0.8, although the zero point is uncertain by about 0.2 
mag. Measurement of horizontal branch magnitudes, 
corrected for reddening, thus enables measurement of 
cluster distances. In fact, using the relation for My(RR) 
and measuring the apparent V magnitude of the main 
sequence turn-off yields the My value for the turn-off, 
independent of reddening. 


Ages 

Two lines of evidence suggest that the most metal- 
poor stars and clusters with [Fe/H] <-—2.0 have the 
same age to the limit of our abilities to measure them. 
First, spectroscopic evidence indicates that the r-process 
dominates over the s-process in such systems, suggesting 
that intermediate-mass stars had not yet polluted the 
interstellar medium, and implying that the age differences 
probably do not exceed 10° yr. Figure 3 also suggests a 
similar timescale in that supernovae of type II dominated 
the production of iron. Second, evidence favoring 
common ages comes from color-magnitude diagrams. 
Recent ground-based and space-based observations have 
extended the comparisons to large distances, including 
NGC 2419 with Rec = 90 kpc. Figure 4 shows that this 
cluster is indistinguishable in age from M92, which lies 
only 9 kpc from the Galactic center, and is similar in age to 
several other low-metallicity ([Fe/H] <—2.0) clusters with 
Rcc values ranging from 6 to 9 kpc. Again, the maximum 
age spreads are roughly a billion years or less. Analyses of 
field star ages using Str6mgren photometry also show no 
sign of age differences among the most metal-poor stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


27 of a 
° 
° 
° oe 
°o of 
° i. | 
0 ° ot 
° 
pdot *° mee a ° 
o9* ° 
oe & 
° g 
Qe + 6 =| 


pe 
aE ef 
% 
Xj, 
6r om 4 
+ M92 eq, 
8 
© NGC 2419 7 50, 
g 
Br ai) 
| l l 
0 0.5 1 
(V-I)p 


Figure 4. Superposed color-magnitude diagrams of the middle 
halo globular cluster M92 and the distant cluster NGC 2419, 
taken from Harris et al (1997). 


The next important chronological questions are 
whether the metal-poor and metal-rich field stars and 
clusters differ in age and whether this difference is a 
function of their location in the Galaxy. The age differences 
imply the speed at which the metal-poor halo was 
chemically enriched, and differences in initial densities 
of the young Galaxy’s central, middle and outer halo 
may have produced differences in the rate at which stars 
and clusters formed and the rate at which the metallicity 
enrichment proceeded. At large Rgc(>80 kpc), it appears 
that intermediate-metallicity clusters, with [Fe/H] ~ —1.5, 
are of order 2 x 10° yr younger than comparable metallicity 
clusters with Rgc values of 6-12 kpc. The implication is 
that the metallicity enrichment proceeded more slowly in 
the outer halo. Thus the differences in gas density between 
the outer and middle halo may have been an important 
factor in the Galaxy’s evolutionary rates. We do not yet 
know whether these trends of equal ages at the lowest 
metallicities and smaller age spreads continue into the 
innermost halo (Rec < 3 kpc). 

The age spread among the intermediate-metallicity 
and relatively metal-rich ([Fe/H] ~ —1) clusters in the 
middle halo remains a matter of debate. Field stars appear 
to show age spread at such intermediate metallicities. 
There are clear examples of significant age differences 
among clusters, the pair NGC 288 and NGC 362 being 
one of the best examples. Another pair of unusually 
young clusters is Ruprecht 106 and Palomar 12, which 
appear to be several billion years younger than average. 
In fact, the [‘a’/Fe] ratios for these clusters are close to 
solar and, hence, very low for their [Fe/H] values, as 
shown in figure 3. Their behavior may be explained 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by very young ages (but then the question is why are 
they so metal poor?) or by an origin perhaps quite 
different from that of the bulk of the metal-poor globular 
clusters. In any case, there seems little doubt that some 
globular clusters are younger than average, but how 
many and by how much? To attempt to detect smaller 
age differences than possible from the main sequence 
regime, shown in figure 4, attention has turned to the 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS, identified in the figure as those 
stars with My ~ +0.5 mag. Theory predicts that, for 
intermediate-metallicity clusters, younger clusters might 
be distinguished from older clusters by the distribution 
of stars along the horizontal branch: redder indicates 
younger ages. NGC 362, with a red horizontal branch, 
is indeed younger than NGC 288, which has a very blue 
horizontal branch. The problem is actually quite complex, 
and this ‘second parameter’, the color of the horizontal 
branch compared with those of other clusters with similar 
[Fe/H] values (the ‘first parameter’), may also be affected 
by stellar interactions in dense environments. Indeed, 
some clusters, such as NGC 2808 and NGC 6229, show 
bimodal horizontal branches yet no signs of two epochs of 
star formation. What can be said is that some clusters with 
intermediate metallicities in the middle halo are younger 
than average. 

The absolute ages of the Galaxy’s oldest globular 
clusters are of great interest but two key problems remain. 
First, if star formation began first in the Galaxy’s central 
regions, the oldest clusters, those with low [Fe/H] values 
but lying close to the Galactic center, have not yet been 
studied. Of greater concern, however, is the dichotomy 
in results for My(RR) that has arisen from the Hipparcos 
satellite’s trigonometric parallaxes. Absolute magnitudes 
for field metal-metal main sequence stars have been 
used to estimate distances and main sequence turn-off 
luminosities for comparably metal-poor globular clusters. 
Ages range between 12 and 14 billion yr. However, the 
My(RR) values derived are brighter than those of field 
RR Lyrae variables obtained with Hipparcos. On the 
other hand, the detection of thorium (and other r-process 
elements) in the spectra of some metal-poor field stars, 
most notably CS22892-052, has enabled estimates of stellar 
ages from radioactive decay. Values near 14 billion yr 
appear favored. 


Formation and evolution of the halo 

Early work on the chemical abundances, velocities and 
ages of what we now call the metal-poor halo field stars 
and clusters culminated in a classic paper by Eggen et al 
(1962). They derived U, V and W velocities for 221 field 
dwarf stars selected from two catalogs: one of nearby stars 
and one of stars with large proper motions (hence a good 
source of high-velocity stars). They estimated metallicities 
from the ‘ultraviolet excess’, 5(U — B)9.¢, which in essence is 
an indicator of the degree of heavy element line blanketing 
in the near ultraviolet. The velocities were combined with 
a model Galactic gravitational potential to estimate the 
stars’ orbital eccentricities, and the most important result 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


was that the orbital eccentricity correlated well with the 
metallicity. The orbital eccentricities of the most metal- 
poor stars were found to be uniformly high, indicating 
that the stars were formed on plunging orbits. Assuming 
metallicity is a proxy for time, the conclusion was that the 
Galaxy began to form stars while it was still in a state of 
collapse. The large spherical halo could then be explained 
as the earliest stage of the Galaxy, following which it 
rapidly collapsed and settled into a disk configuration. 
The process was rapid because the plunging orbits implied 
a nearly free-fall timescale, of order 2 x 10° yr, and it was a 
coherent process since the study did not reveal stars with 
low metallicities (the oldest stars) with disk-like orbits or 
stars with high metallicities (the more recently formed 
stars) with high-velocity halo-like orbits. 

The first major challenge for the rapid—coherent 
collapse model was the study of Galactic globular clusters 
by Searle and Zinn (1978). One key point of the collapse 
model is that globular clusters should all have the same 
age, at least to within our abilities to measure them. 
Searle and Zinn noted that clusters with large Rec tend to 
have redder than average horizontal branch colors. If the 
‘second parameter’ is age (which appears to be true for the 
most distant clusters), then the process was not as rapid as 
originally believed. A slower, coherent contraction would 
still be a reasonable interpretation of the data, except that 
in such a case enough time would have passed to permit 
the remaining gas to be enriched by supernovae. As the 
gas contracted to form the disk, one would then expect the 
innermost stars and clusters to have higher metallicities 
since star formation should have continued longer. A 
radial gradient in metallicity would have been established, 
but Searle and Zinn failed to find any evidence of such a 
gradient for Rcc values larger than about 8 kpc. Based on 
their cluster data, they proposed that the halo was formed 
out of ‘protogalactic fragments’, each with an individual 
metallicity enrichment history. The assemblage of these 
fragments would then have resulted in a dynamically hot 
halo whose field stars and globular clusters have a range 
in ages yet no metallicity gradient owing to the random, 
‘incoherent’ nature of the process. Additional support for 
the ‘incoherent’ model came from studies of field stars. 
Kinematically biased studies of stars selected only from 
proper motion catalogs (the ‘Carney-Latham’ sample) and 
stars selected without kinematical bias by Norris revealed 
a lack of correlation between metallicity and kinematics, 
as shown in figures 5 and 6. 

An obvious argument favoring an accretion origin 
for some, perhaps most, of the halo was the discovery 
of the SAGITTARIUS DWARF GALAXY by Ibata et al (1994). This 
is a large dwarf galaxy on close approach to our Galaxy. 
In an astronomically short time, it will shed many stars, 
including its four globular clusters (M54, Terzan 7, Terzan 8 
and Arp 2), into the Galaxy’s halo. Several other signs 
point to the importance of accretion as a source of some of 
the halo’s stars and clusters. 

First, if the evolution of the halo into the disk was 
a coherent process, the halo should possess modest net 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Or O Norris (1986) al 


yet 


O Sandage & Fouts (1987) 


@® (Carney et al. 1994) 


2 
ro} 
T 

| 


<V> (km sec™') 
— 


-200 4 


<[Fe/H]> 


Figure 5. Average velocities V as a function of [Fe/H] using 
equal bin sizes from kinematically biased (Sandage and Fouts 
1987; Carney et al 1994) and unbiased (Norris 1986) samples of 
field stars. 


-200 


V (km sec-!) 


[m/H] 


Figure 6. The velocity V versus [m/H] from Carney et al (1994). 
The dashed line divides prograde and retrograde Galactic 
orbital motion. 


prograde rotation. Figures 5 and 6 show that if the local 
Galactic rotational velocity, @o, is 220 km s~|, then the net 
halo rotation is very small. Further, Majewski (and others) 
have found that stars 5 kpc or more from the plane may 
possess net retrograde rotation. This suggests that at least 
some fraction of the halo’s stars did not participate in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


coherent Galaxy formation process. Other studies have 
suggested that globular clusters with horizontal branch 
colors implying younger-than-average ages also show 
signs for retrograde rotation. The evidence is weak given 
the one-dimensional velocity information and the small 
sample sizes, however. 

Another possible signature of independent origin 
and evolution is chemistry. If two gas clouds produce 
stars at similar rates and with similar mass functions, the 
supernova enrichment history should be the same, and 
in consequence identical trends of [‘a’/Fe] versus [Fe/H] 
should result. However, if one cloud forms stars more 
slowly, the appearance of the effects from the type Ia 
supernovae should first appear when the mean metallicity 
is still ‘stuck’ at a lower value, perhaps much lower than 
seen in the Galaxy at [Fe/H] ~ —1. Ruprecht 106 and 
Palomar 12, identified in figure 3, could be explained by 
delayed star formation in a small ‘fragment’ or dwarf 
galaxy that was accreted by the Galaxy. A small number 
of field stars have also been found with unusually low 
[‘a’/Fe] ratios, the most extreme being BD+80245. An 
interesting additional feature of these stars is that they are 
generally very high velocity, with orbits that carry them 
out to Roc = 20-40 kpc. Ruprecht 106 and Palomar 12 
also lie at fairly large distances, Rgc = 17 and 14 kpc, 
respectively. On the other hand, not all stars with such 
large apogalacticon values or clusters with such large 
distances have unusual abundance ratios. Studies of such 
systems appear to more frequently find the enhanced 
[‘a’/Fe] values typical of middle halo stars and clusters. 

Another avenue to explore for signs of accretion is 
the idea that disintegrating satellite galaxies would leave 
behind a stream of stars (and gas, if they possess any). 
The MAGELLANIC STREAM is an example of a spoor that 
is apparently induced by the Galaxy’s tidal effects on 
the MAGELLANIC cLoupbs. (Note this also indicates that the 
Clouds are also doomed to merge with the Galaxy.) The 
Magellanic stream traces almost an entire great circle on 
the sky, and the stream also passes near the positions 
of the Draco and Ursa Minor dwarf spheroidal galaxies. 
Another such great circle includes the Fornax, Leo I, 
Leo II and Sculptor dwarf galaxies, as well as a number 
of Galactic globular clusters. Another search technique 
recognizes that each distant dwarf galaxy or globular 
cluster in orbit about the Galaxy has an orbital pole and 
that, in the absence of three-dimensional motions, the 
pole occupies a point along a great circle in the sky. 
Intersections of such great circles suggest common orbital 
poles and have been used to identify possible streams. 
However, until accurate proper motions become available 
for more globular clusters and the distant dwarf spheroidal 
galaxies, the reality of these common origins for some 
such systems must remain speculative. Finally, common 
origins for larger numbers of objects but with all three 
components of velocity known may show up in the form 
of velocity ‘substructure’. A dynamically hot population 
such as the halo should have stars well dispersed in 
velocity space. Observed ‘clumpings’ of stars at high 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


velocities indicate either that the halo is not well mixed 
kinematically or that these clumps arose because of tidal 
destruction of small stellar ensembles by the Galaxy’s tidal 
forces. 

Even if the evidence cited above supports accretion 
of proto-Galactic ‘fragments’ or dwarf galaxies, this does 
not necessarily rule out that many of the metal-poor, 
high-velocity stars were part of a coherent formation 
process, as outlined by Eggen et al. While some subsets 
of globular clusters may show net retrograde rotation, 
others show prograde rotation. While some globular 
clusters may be younger than average, many appear to 
be coeval with other clusters of similar metallicity. Some 
globular clusters and field stars, especially with large Rec 
or Rap. values, have unusual [‘a’/Fe] values, but most 
do not, even clusters like NGC 7006 (Rec *© 35 kpc) 
and numerous extreme-velocity field stars. Furthermore, 
metal-poor stars close to the Galactic plane show not only 
prograde rotation but signs of a radial metallicity gradient, 
as do subsets of globular clusters. Both processes, 
coherent evolution plus accretion, have almost certainly 
contributed to the formation of our Galaxy’s metal-poor 
halo, but a much larger and more complete census will be 
required to determine the relative numbers of natives and 
immigrants. 


Bibliography 

The original division of the local stellar neighborhood into 
‘high velocity’ and ‘low velocity’ was made by 

Oort 1926 Groningen Obs. Publ. 40 


This was followed much later by the recognition that some 
stars are extremely deficient in heavy element abundances: 


Aller 1960 Astron. J. 65 399 

Aller and Greenstein 1960 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 5 139 
Baschek 1959 Z. Astrophys. 48 95 

Chamberlain and Aller 1951 Astrophys. J. 114 52 


The AS calibration calibration may be found in 


Clementini et al 1995 Astron. J. 110 2319 
Fernley and Barnes 1996 Astron. Astrophys. 312 197 


W’ is discussed by 
Da Costa and Armandroff 1995 Astron. J. 109 2553 


An excellent discussion of chemical evolution models is 
provided in 


Pagel Nucleosynthesis and Chemical Evolution of Galaxies 
The halo—bulge connection is summarized by 

Wyse and Gilmore 1992 Astron. J. 104 144 

[‘a’/Fe] is discussed at length by 


Wheeler et al 1989 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 27 279 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Metal-Poor Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


while light element abundances reflective of the big bang 
are discussed by 


Boesgaard and Steigman 1985 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
23 319 


and the Type II versus Type Ia supernovae effects are 
illustrated by 


Wyse and Gilmore 1988 Astron. J. 95 1404 
Globular cluster space velocities may be found in 


Dinescu et al 1997 Astron. J. 114 1014 
Dinescu et al 1999 Astron. J. 117 277 
Odenkirchen et al 1997 New Astron. 2 477 


Good examples of the relative contributions of s-process 
versus r-process elements as a function of metallicity are 
presented by 


Gratton and Sneden 1994 Astron. Astrophys. 287 927 
Krishnaswamy-Gilroy et al 1988 Astrophys. ]. 327 298 


Ages of metal-poor field stars were derived by 


Marquez and Schuster 1994 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 108 
341 


The relative ages of the most metal-poor clusters are 
summarized well by 


Harris et al 1997 Astron. J. 114 1030 
Stetson et al 1996 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 108 560 


The distant intermediate metallicity clusters are discussed 
by 
Stetson et al 1999 Astron. J. 117 247 


The age difference between NGC 288 and NGC 362 is 
summarized by 


Sarajedini et al 1997 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 109 1321 


The ‘second parameter’ as a possible age indicator is 
presented by 


Lee et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 423 248 
Radioactive dating of field stars is described by 
Cowan et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 480 246 


Some of the key papers dealing with the origin of the halo 
are 


Eggen, Lynden-Bell and Sandage 1962 Astrophys. J. 136 762 
Searle and Zinn 1978 Astrophys. J. 225 357 


They lay out the basic arguments in favor of a rapid, 
coherent collapse of the halo prior to the formation 
of the disk (Eggen et al) and an alternative involving 
independent evolution of ‘proto-Galactic fragments’ 
during or following the formation of the Galaxy. Thorough 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


summaries of globular cluster kinematics, including early 
versions of figures 1 and 2, are in 


Da Costa and Armandroff 1995 Astron. J. 109 2533 
Zinn 1985 Astrophys. J. 293 424 


The latest results from the ‘Carney—Latham’ sample are 
discussed 


Carney et al 1996 Astron. J. 112 668 
while the work by Norris may be found in 
Norris 1986 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 61 667 


The possibility that stars far from the plane are on 
retrograde orbits was first raised by 


Majewski 1992 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 78 87 
The discovery paper of the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy is 
Ibata, Gilmore and Irwin 1994 Nature 370 194 


Good examples of searching for accretion patterns by 
lining up objects on great circles on the sky are summarized 


by 
Fusi Pecci et al 1995 Astron. J. 110 1664 


and the use of orbital poles is given by 


Lynden-Bell and Lynden-Bell 1995 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
275 429 


Velocity ‘substructure’ is discussed well by 


Majewski et al 1994 Astrophys. J. Lett. 427 L37 


Bruce W Carney 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Nucleus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Nucleus 


The central core of a galaxy. In elliptical galaxies and in the 
central bulges of spiral galaxies, the nucleus corresponds 
to the location at which the optical brightness reaches a 
maximum, and to the region within which stars are most 
densely concentrated. Irregular galaxies do not contain 
well-defined nuclei. Active galaxies, which comprise 
a few percent of the total number of galaxies, contain 
intensely bright, compact nuclei, called active galactic 
nuclei (or AGNs), that radiate strongly over a wide range 
of wavelengths (from x-ray to radio) and in many cases 
display substantial variability. 

The nucleus of our own Galaxy, the Milky Way, 
contains a compact source of radio emission, called 
Sagittarius A* (pronounced Sagittarius A-star), is less 
than 15 astronomical units in diameter and appears to 
coincide in position with a relatively weak source of 
x-radiation. Ionized gas clouds within a few light-years of 
the center are moving at speeds of up to several hundred 
kilometers per second under the gravitational influence 
of a central concentration of some 5 million solar masses, 
only about half of which appears to be contained in stars. 
These observations, taken together, are consistent with 
the hypothesis that the galactic nucleus contains a black 
hole of some 2.5 million solar masses surrounded by an 
accretion disk. The Milky Way Galaxy, therefore, appears 
to contain a miniature, and low-powered, version of an 
active galactic nucleus. Because the nuclei of some other 
‘normal’ galaxies display similar characteristics, it has 
been suggested that many, perhaps all, galaxies contain 
massive black holes at their centers. 

The Andromeda galaxy has a double nucleus, the 
brighter component of which may be the core of another 
galaxy that, following a galactic collision, has been 
absorbed by the larger system. 


Seealso: active galactic nucleus, elliptical galaxies, galaxy, 
interacting galaxies, Milky Way Galaxy, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Open Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Open Clusters 


Galactic open clusters are beautiful objects to view 
through telescopes, especially when blue and red 
supergiant stars are present in the cluster field. They are 
stellar systems containing from a few hundred to several 
thousand stars and are readily distinguished on sky 
photographs by a density of stars much larger than that in 
the surrounding field. About 1200 such objects have been 
catalogued so far and about half of them have been 
investigated at least once. Typical clusters are, by order 
of increasing age, the Orion nebula cluster, the Pleiades, 
Hyades and Messier 67. The brighter objects have been 
listed in the Messier catalogue, while most are recorded 
in the New General Catalogue (NGC) of Dreyer (1888). 
Open clusters are different from GLOBULAR CLUSTERS in 
many aspects. They are found mainly within or close to 
the Galactic plane and have ages ranging from a few 
million to ten billion years, while globular clusters 
populate the Galaxy halo and are as old as the universe. 
Consequently, open clusters may be used to describe the 
history and evolution of our Galaxy after the formation of 
the disk. 

The strong interest for open clusters results from 
their unique and fundamental properties: the stars in a 
cluster are at the same distance from the Sun, (the depth 
effect is negligible for open clusters at distances larger 
than about 300 pc), they have the same chemical 
composition (the cosmic scatter on the chemical 
composition is much smaller than the precision of the 
determination of element abundances) and the same age 
(the age spread at cluster formation amounts only to a 
few million years and appears to be important only for 
very young open clusters with ages less than 10 million 
years). The stars, however, differ by their mass: the most 
massive stars in the youngest open clusters have masses 
of about 80 solar masses, and the lower mass limit is 
below 0.08 solar masses, reaching the domain of brown 
dwarfs. 

Consequently, open clusters offer many 
opportunities of investigating the dependence of 
astrophysical phenomena on the stellar masses (by 
working in one cluster both the chemical composition 
and age are fixed) or on ages (by selecting stars of a 
given mass in several clusters of a given chemical 
composition). For example, the x-ray observations 
obtained by the ROSAT satellite for clusters of different 
ages have permitted the study of the decrease of the x-ray 
emissivity of solar-type stars with the increasing ages of 
the parent clusters. 

Open clusters seem to be really ideal tools, but there 
are a number of problems to solve before one can fully 
benefit from their diagnostic power. Like other (distant) 
objects, open clusters suffer from the effects of 
absorption of light by interstellar matter, which has to be 
first estimated. The CLUSTER MEMBERSHIP of the stars is 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the second important problem to solve. On photographs 
or CCD frames, cluster members and field stars are all 
projected on the same plane and there is no direct way to 
separate them. Additional observations are needed to 
separate the cluster members from the field stars. 

Fortunately, this can be achieved, at least for clusters 
not too far away, by using another property of open 
clusters: all member stars share the same spatial motion; 
if this were not the case, the group would rapidly 
dissolve. Therefore, by measuring their PROPER MOTIONS 
relative to the background stars or galaxies on 
photographic plates taken at a large epoch difference, 
which may now reach 100 yr, it is possible to compute 
the membership probability of each star and select the 
candidate members. The RADIAL VELOCITY provides also 
a powerful criterion to select the cluster members, but 
was a rather difficult and slow method to implement until 
recently, because the spectra used to be recorded on glass 
plates. New more efficient detectors and new specialized 
instruments have led to the increased use of this cluster- 
membership selection method. 

Basic cluster parameters are the amount of 
interstellar absorption (reddening), the distance, chemical 
composition and age. The last of these is not a quantity 
directly obtained from the observations but through the 
comparisons with theoretical models. When enough 
clusters have been observed and their parameters 
determined, then astrophysical and Galactic applications 
can be undertaken. We are facing a case of extreme 
information concentration: on CCD frames thousands of 
stars have to be measured to obtain a few parameters 
describing the open clusters. Also, for example, when 
enough ages have been obtained, one parameter, the 
slope of the age distribution, will summarize the data 
resulting from large observing efforts. 


The importance of open clusters 
Different astrophysical problems are investigated with 
open clusters of different ages. 

Very young open clusters, with ages less than a few 
million years, are the direct results of star formation 
processes and are still associated with the cloud from 
which they are born, which gives rise to spectacular 
bright nebulae, such as the Orion nebula. Some clusters 
are still embedded in clouds which are completely dark at 
visible wavelengths. They are only revealed by near- 
infrared imaging. An extensive description of very young 
open clusters is crucial to constrain the various scenarios 
of molecular-cloud fragmentation and STAR FORMATION. 
Ideally, one would wish to address the following topics: 


e the number of stars of various mass formed, 

e the percentage of binaries among stars of different 
mass, 

e the distribution of their orbital parameters, 

e the initial distribution of stellar rotation, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Open Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e the sequence of star formation and the importance of 
age spread, 

e the radial structure and the importance of initial mass 
segregation. 


Observations indicate that stars frequently form in 
clustered environments, either in rich clusters of many 
hundreds to many thousands of stars or in smaller groups 
and aggregates containing of order ten to a few tens of 
stars. It is only recently that properties of extremely 
young clusters are beginning to be well characterized. 

Young open clusters, covering the range from 10’s 
to 1000 million years, are especially interesting because 
of the variety of their stellar content. They contain 
several kinds of VARIABLE STARS and of ‘abnormal’ stars: 
emission-line stars and chemically peculiar stars. When 
the distance and age of the parent clusters are known, the 
intrinsic properties of these stars are determined more 
accurately than by any other means. 

Intermediate-age and old open clusters, older than 
1000 million years, have been mostly useful to 
understand the main trends and details of STELLAR 
EVOLUTION, because the evolutionary effects are more 
evident with a spectacular red giant branch. The best- 
observed old cluster, Messier 67 (NGC 2682), is a 
prototype for this kind of morphology and contains 
numerous RED GIANT STARS. Because cluster stars have 
the same age, each cluster defines an isochronous 
sequence in the photometric equivalents of the 
Hertzsprung—Russell (HR) diagram. Such sequences can 
be computed from grids of evolutionary models and 
compared with the observed data. 


Properties of open clusters 


The color-magnitude diagram 

The main tool used to study open clusters is the 
HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM in which the star’s 
luminosity is plotted as a function of the temperature. In 
such a diagram each point represents the observations 
obtained for one star. The original form of the HR 
diagram, based on the absolute magnitude and the 
spectral types, has been replaced by a photometric 
equivalent form which displays the apparent magnitude 
as a function of a color index. 

A color index represents the ratio of the fluxes 
measured through two filters: for example, the widely 
used B-V index results from the ratio of the fluxes 
emitted in the blue (B) and visible (V) parts of the stellar 
energy distribution. Several photometric color indices are 
closely related to the effective temperature. 

The apparent V magnitude differs from the absolute 
magnitude by a constant which is called the distance 
modulus of the cluster. This quantity, denoted by m — M, 
is related to the distance r, expressed in parsecs (pc), by 
the simple relation m — M = 5 log r—5 + Ay, where Ay 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


represents the correction for the interstellar absorption. 
The visual absorption Ay is itself proportional to the color 
excess: Ay = RE (B — V), where E (B — V) = (B- V) - 
(B-— V), is the difference between the star’s intrinsic 
color (B — V)o (not affected by interstellar absorption) 
and that observed. R is the ratio of total to selective 
absorption and must be determined observationally. 
Often a value of R of 3.2 (mag/mag) is assumed. These 
simple relations show that the determination of the 
amount of interstellar absorption is very important for the 
determination of the distance. 

Examples of typical color-magnitude diagrams are 
shown in figures 1, 2 and 3, based on data extracted from 
the WEBDA database described in the final section. In 
very young open clusters, such as the Orion trapezium 
cluster (figure 1), only the most massive stars have 
completed their formation and have reached the ZAMS, 
while the less massive stars are still in the phase of 
contraction toward the ZAMS. Membership of these PRE- 
MAIN-SEQUENCE STARS is difficult to determine from 
photometric criteria only and spectroscopic observations 
are needed to search, for example, for the presence of 
emission in the Balmer Ha hydrogen line or of lithium 
absorption lines, which are both signs of youth. When 
possible, proper motions and radial velocities are of 
course also used to confirm the membership. 


10 - 


15 - 


Figure 1. Color—magnitude diagram for the Orion nebula 
cluster. The star brighter than V= 10 have completed their 
formation, while the stars fainter than this limit are still 
contracting toward the zero age main sequence (ZAMS) 
(continuous line). Filled squares are for the stars with 
membership probability larger than 50%, open squares for stars 
with probability less than 50%, and crosses for stars without 
membership information. The nebulosity in the cluster region 
absorbs the light of some stars and alters their colors, making 
them redder. This is called differential reddening. Additional 
information is needed to separate the stars really belonging to 
the cluster from the field stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Open Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


B-V 
Figure 2. Color—magnitude diagram for NGC 2287 (M41). 
Symbols are related to the cluster membership of the stars 
(filled squares, more than 50% chance of being a member; open 
squares, less than 50%; crosses, no information). The 
continuous curve is a theoretical isochrone for 240 million 
years. The dashed curve is the same isochrone shifted by 0.75 
mag to mimic the binary boundary. Both curves delineate the 
main sequence band and reproduce quite well the observed 
morphology. 


B-V 


Figure 3. Color—-magnitude diagram for NGC 2682 (M67). In 
this characteristic diagram, the main sequence is well 
populated. The upper main sequence is bending toward the right 
(redder color) under the effect of stellar evolution. After a small 
gap, resulting from a rapid phase of evolution at the end of the 
hydrogen burning phase, the structure of the stars changes and 
the stars move toward the right of the diagram. They become 
red giants and start ascending the red giant branch. The helium 
burning phase lasts for a longer time and produces a small 
clump of stars with similar magnitudes and colors, located at V 
~10.5 and B — V~1.05. Blue stragglers are located to the left of 
the main sequence bending (B — V < 0.50), in a position where 
stars are not expected to remain according to the cluster age. 
The thickness of the main sequence is due to the presence of 
binary stars. Symbols are the same as those in figure 2. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


If all stars were single, the sequence observed in the 
color-magnitude diagrams would be very thin. However, 
even with the high-precision photometric data obtained 
with the Hubble Space Telescope, the main sequence 
presents a finite thickness. The major part of the scatter is 
produced by BINARY STARS. Obviously, unresolved 
double stars are brighter than single stars of similar 
temperature. Because the magnitude is on a logarithmic 
scale, the addition of the fluxes of two identical stars 
makes the binary system brighter by 0.75 mag. The main 
sequence band, defined as the zone between the ZAMS 
and the upper binary ridge, is then populated by binary 
stars which have mass ratios less than | (the mass ratio q 
= M3M,' is by definition always smaller than 1). The 
smaller the mass ratio, the closest the stars to the ZAMS. 
When the ratio of the luminosities (L4/Lg) reaches the 
value of 100, the presence of the secondary is no longer 
distinguishable. 

Stellar rotation and peculiarities also introduce 
scatter on the star position within the main sequence band 
by affecting the magnitude and/or the colors. 

However, the main characteristic visible in color— 
magnitude diagrams is the effect of the stellar evolution. 
At any age, the more massive stars are more evolved than 
low-mass stars, because the speed of evolution depends 
on the initial mass. This explains why the upper part of 
the main sequence is evolved away from the ZAMS and 
presents a characteristic shape for each cluster and age. 
The comparison of the observations with theoretical 
isochrones permits at the same time the determination of 
the ages of open clusters and the testing of evolutionary 
models. For 10 yr, models with larger cores, including 
the effects of convective-core overshooting, have been 
preferred to the so-called canonical ones, because they 
better reproduce the observed diagrams. 


Luminosity and mass functions 

Young open clusters are the direct products of the 
processes of star formation and therefore provide 
fundamental clues to the understanding of cloud 
fragmentation. Ideally, if we were able to count the 
number of stars of different masses, we should be able to 
describe the end-product of the formation processes, i.e. 
the initial mass function. What is observed in fact is the 
luminosity function, defined as the number of stars in 
magnitude bins, and masses are deduced from a mass— 
luminosity relation. As a rule, most clusters conform to 
the Salpeter law, although the universal character of this 
law has not yet been fully demonstrated. It is not a trivial 
task to decide whether the differences observed between 
the luminosity or mass functions in different open 
clusters are real or produced by biases and 
incompleteness. The complete description of the stellar 
population, although of fundamental importance, is quite 
difficult to derive because we face the problems of 
membership determination, stellar multiplicity detection 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Open Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and the completeness of the samples, because the radial 
extension and structure of the clusters are still poorly 
known. In addition, because of the possibilities for stars 
to escape from their parent clusters, the observed present- 
day mass function can be related to the cluster initial 
mass function only through a thorough knowledge of the 
dynamical evolution, which is difficult to achieve. 

For these reasons, for none of the clusters do we 
have complete information, although meaningful 
progress has been made in several areas. 


Radial and spatial structure 

The structure of open clusters has been for a long time 
mainly a topic for theoreticians and numerical 
simulation. All we knew was derived from models, 
because relevant observations were not available. As 
more proper motions and photometric studies became 
available, it was realized that open clusters were not 
limited to the bright central area which is prominent on 
photographs, but that they extend to much larger 
distances. The problem is, however, to identify the stars 
in the surroundings. The statistical approach consisting in 
counting stars at larger and larger distances from the 
center until one reaches the level of the sky background 
obviously fails when the density of cluster stars is lower 
than the fluctuation of the number of stars in the sky 
background. Therefore, there is no other solution but to 
identify the stars one by one in the cluster corona with 
the help of proper motions and radial velocities, which 
ensures that the stars are moving together with the same 
spatial motion, and of photometric information, which 
proves that the stars are at the same distance. 

The radial distributions of stars have confirmed the 
theoretical predictions: in most clusters the massive stars 
are found close to the cluster center, while less massive 
stars are more uniformly distributed over the cluster area. 
This mass segregation is caused by star interactions or 
collisions which redistribute the kinetic energy and make 
the massive stars fall toward the cluster center. The same 
phenomenon is also true for the binaries, for which the 
sum of the masses makes them heavier than single stars. 
However, recent observations show that the time 
evolution of mass segregation is not straightforward. As a 
cluster emerges from its parent cloud, it undergoes 
dynamical changes and the most massive stars are found 
at the cluster center. We are facing a dilemma: either the 
massive stars are formed at the cluster center and remain 
there or they are brought to the center by some forces, for 
example dynamical friction in the cloud. From this initial 
state, a fine mass segregation will develop by dynamical 
evolution of the cluster until the mass difference between 
the maximum and minimum masses becomes small and 
the star distribution becomes more uniform, when stars 
have more or less the same masses. 

Another prediction of the models is that open 
clusters lose stars by an evaporation process. During 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


encounters one star may acquire enough energy and 
speed and become able to leave the cluster, especially 
after the collision of a single star and a binary system, 
during which star exchange may happen, with the 
concomitant ejection of one component. This 
phenomenon has the consequence that open-cluster 
lifetimes are limited: if they are not massive enough to 
retain their stars, the cluster will dissolve within a few 
100 millions years. As recent observations of star 
forming regions have shown that stars predominantly 
form in clusters, the field stars are explained as 
resulting from the disruption of many clusters. The 
verification of this hypothesis requires numerous 
comparisons of the properties of field and cluster stars. 
Tidal interactions of clusters with molecular clouds in the 
Galactic disk also contribute efficiently to the disruption 
of the clusters. 


Rotation distribution 

Since the beginning of the 20th century and until 
recently, high-resolution spectra could be recorded on 
glass plates only for relatively bright stars. Therefore 
information on stellar rotation in open clusters was 
limited to the brighter stars on the upper main sequence. 
Furthermore, the quantity determined was not exactly the 
rotation speed, but the product of the equatorial velocity 
and the inclination angle i of the rotation axis, i.e. the 
quantity V sin i. Therefore it was not possible to easily 
know whether a star with a small V sin i measurement 
was rotating slowly or whether it was seen more or less 
pole on. The velocity is maximum if the star is observed 
equator on, i.e. if the angle is close to 90° (sini = 1). New 
instruments and larger telescopes have allowed the V sin i 
observations to be extended to solar-type stars and the 
distribution of projected rotation along the main sequence 
to be derived. 

For O- to middle F-type stars the maximum rotation 
shows a moderate decrease, but, because of the presence 
of the factor sin i, most values between O° and the 
maximum possible rotation are observed. However, at 
about 7000 K, the onset of convection in the stellar 
atmosphere rapidly brakes the rotation. The initial phase 
of braking is rather rapid, reducing the projected rotation 
to values of V sin i less than 10 km s”'. Subsequently the 
effect is not as marked and the rotation is more gradually 
reduced during the star main sequence lifetime. 

The observations of main sequence solar-type stars 
in open clusters of various ages, between 1 million 
and 1 billion years, have permitted us to understand how 
rotational braking develops. There seems to be no 
uniform law: each star is braked depending on its 
initial velocity and mass. The initial spread is thought to 
be linked to the time at which decoupling of the 
accretion disk surrounding the pre-main-sequence stars 
occurs. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Open Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binary frequency 

Stars are usually formed in binary or multiple systems, 
although the true frequency, which may vary between 
25% and 60%, is not exactly known, because we are not 
yet able to detect all possible binaries along the main 
sequence, down to the faintest stars. Frontier technology 
(SPECKLE IMAGING OF BINARY STARS, INTERFEROMETRY 
and ADAPTIVE OPTICS imaging) now allows the detection 
of binary systems with separations between 0”.05 and 
1”.0. Further progress in spectroscopic observations will 
be possible with new multifiber spectrographs which will 
be able to obtain the spectra of some 100 stars 
simultaneously. Systematic observations of 
representative clusters have already been undertaken, 
which will produce, in the next few years, a great 
development of our knowledge of the duplicity of stars in 
various open-cluster environments, ages and richness. 

The radial-velocity spectrometers, developed in the 
mid 1970s, have permitted the measurement of the radial 
velocities of solar-type stars in nearby clusters and the 
determination of the orbital parameters of most 
SPECTROSCOPIC BINARIES discovered. Main sequence 
binaries with periods smaller than 8 days have circular 
orbits, while all others have elliptical orbits, the mean 
eccentricity being around 0.3. This cut-off period results 
from the effects of tidal interaction between the two stars 
in binary systems, which are stronger during the pre- 
main-sequence phase because the stellar radii are larger 
and the atmospheric convection zone is more developed. 
The transition limit between circular and elliptical orbits 
is around 150 days for binaries with a red giant primary 
and 1500 days for supergiant stars. 

Comparison of the binary frequencies and separation 
distributions in various environments, namely from loose 
star forming regions, such as the Taurus—Auriga 
complex, to the dense cluster cores, as in Orion where the 
mass density reaches 10 000 solar masses pe~ in the 0.2 
pe central region, have shown that these characteristics 
are not the same. Do these differences originate from the 
formation processes themselves or do some dynamical 
interactions modify the original state? The answer is not 
known yet. 


Variable stars 

Various kinds of variable stars have been found in open 
clusters, as seems normal because intrinsic variability 
depends on the position in the HR diagram, as is the case 
for the 6 Cephei variables. However, their presence in 
open clusters permits us to establish or study the relations 
between their periods, luminosity and _ chemical 
composition. Comprehensive surveys have been 
performed to detect other types of variable stars, called 
B Cephei variables, among the B-type stars in the upper 
main sequence of young open clusters. Surveys have also 
been undertaken with bidimensional detectors (CCDs) to 
search for 6 Scuti stars, another kind of pulsating variable 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which presents often a combination of several periods of 
pulsation simultaneously. 

Apart from the intrinsic pulsating variables, there are 
additional kinds of variables in open clusters: the flare 
stars in very young clusters, ECLIPSING BINARY STARS 
and stars in which the variability is induced by rotational 
modulation. Continuous observations are required to 
perform an extensive detection of variable stars. 
However, at the time of photoelectric photometry, stars 
were observed one by one and therefore the number of 
observations obtained for each star was not sufficient to 
have a complete detection of variablity. The advent of 
CCD cameras now allows us to obtain large numbers of 
frames over various time intervals, which enables the 
determination of variability periods up to several tens of 
days. 

One kind of variable star discovered in open clusters 
in the beginning of the 1980s is related to the variability 
induced by the presence of spots on the star’s surface and 
the rotation of the stars. Because the spots are less 
luminous than the star surface, the presence of spots 
makes the stars a little less luminous, by a few 0.01 
magnitudes. The rotation produces a cyclic variation 
which is often quite stable over time intervals of months 
or years, depending on the lifetime of the spots. Such 
observations are at present very active because the 
derived periods are the direct rotation periods. If the 
equatorial diameters of the stars can be determined, the 
equatorial speed can be computed. 

Recent surveys in old open clusters have permitted 
the discovery of relatively large numbers of contact 
binaries (binary stars so close that they reach contact) all 
along the main sequence and even among the stars in 
position of blue stragglers. 


Blue stragglers 

BLUE STRAGGLERS form a population of stars which has 
been originally discovered in old open clusters. They 
remain in the color-magnitude diagrams beyond the 
observed turn-off, i.e. they are brighter and bluer than the 
normal end of the main sequence. According to the 
masses deduced from their luminosities, these stars 
should not be present at all in such a position, because 
they should have evolved away from the main sequence. 
Figure 3 (M67) illustrates the positions of these stars in a 
well-studied old open cluster. A variety of plausible 
explanations exist, from delayed star formation through 
binary mass transfer, or coalescence, to internal mixing. 
Probably, several mechanisms are needed to explain the 
variety of properties observed. 


Space observations 

The observation of open clusters with instruments on 
board satellites requires great sensitivity and high spatial 
resolution to resolve the sources and cross-identify them 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Open Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with cluster stars. Not all major satellites were able to be 
efficient in this respect. 


HIPPARCOS 

The HIPPARCOS satellite was not designed to do imaging 
and could observe only four stars per square degree. 
Therefore the main results were obtained on nearby open 
clusters which cover large areas of the sky. Hipparcos 
provides fundamental estimates of the cluster distances 
because the observations are independent of any a priori 
astrophysical assumption on the star structure or 
chemical composition. This is very important because the 
cosmic-distance scale, through the determination of the 
zero point of the CEPHEID PERIOD—LUMINOSITY 
RELATION, is mostly based on the distance of open 
clusters. 

The best observed cluster was the Hyades and 
Hipparcos’ trigonometric parallaxes and absolute proper 
motions permitted the distance of the cluster center to be 
determined with an unprecedented accuracy: 46.34+40.27 
pe, i.e. 151 ly. The precision of the individual parallaxes 
also allowed a three-dimensional view of the cluster to be 
built. Because of its proximity, the Hyades is the only 
cluster where the three-dimensional distribution of stars 
can be observed. 

Good distances have also been determined for nine 
further open clusters closer to the Sun than 300 pc, 
including the Pleiades, Praesepe and Coma Berenices 
clusters. The mean cluster parallaxes have not been 
obtained from the individual parallaxes, but a global 
solution, based on all measurements of all member stars 
in the cluster field, has been computed from the great- 
circle intermediate data. Results are in agreement with 
what was expected, except for the Pleiades, for which the 
distance obtained from the Hipparcos satellite is 10% 
shorter than that determined from the ground by classical 
techniques. So far (March 2000), the reason for this 
discrepancy has not been identified: some authors 
incriminate the satellite itself (but why in the Pleiades 
only?), others question the properties of Pleiades stars, 
especially the adopted chemical composition. As many as 
2158 transits for 54 stars in the Pleiades were used to 
compute the final solution. 


IUE 

The International Ultraviolet Explorer (TUE) satellite 
worked in a star by star mode and many observations 
were targeted at massive O-type stars in young open 
clusters, because they mostly emit ultraviolet radiation. 
The main goals were the study of the ultraviolet spectra 
of young stars of known ages but also the properties of 
the interstellar matter and especially the clouds from 
which the stars have been formed. The ultraviolet 
observations from the IVE satellite contributed to the 
determination of the absorption law in several clusters 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


still associated with reflection nebulae, such as NGC 
2244, NGC 2264 and NGC 6530. 


ROSAT 

Results from the Einstein x-ray satellite had shown that 
X-ray emission is a common property of solar-type stars 
and that most main sequence dwarf stars in the Hyades 
do emit x-rays. This result prompted the observation of 
several open clusters with the ROSAT x-ray observatory, 
covering an age range from a few million to more than a 
billion years. The resulting trend is very clear: the 
intensity of the x-ray emission is lower in older clusters. 
This can be understood because the x-ray emission 
depends on the star’s activity, which is itself related to 
the rotation rate and age. Studies of stellar rotation have 
shown that the rotation decreases with increasing age. 
The angular-momentum loss results from the interaction 
of the stellar winds and magnetic field. 

In clusters for which observations have been 
obtained over a long time, variability in x-rays has been 
observed. Flaring activity explains the large flux 
increase, but the data are not complete enough to provide 
information on the variations of x-ray activity during the 
whole stellar cycles. 

One interesting by-product of the ROSAT x-ray 
imaging is the discovery of faint member stars in nearby 
clusters, through their x-ray fluxes, as for example in the 
young southern open clusters IC 2391 and IC 2602. 
These two clusters are spread over large areas and 
photometric and astrometric surveys did not really 
succeed in identifying faint members among the several 
ten of thousands of stars measured on Schmidt plates 
(over such areas, CCDs are completely useless). 
However, because of the youth of these clusters, faint 
members were easily detected thanks to their x-ray 
emission. Ground-based follow-up _ observations 
confirmed the membership of most candidate stars. 


The Hubble Space Telescope 

The HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) produced beautiful 
images of very young open clusters still associated with 
nebulosity and of dense clusters which cannot be 
completely resolved with ground-based instruments. Two 
objects were more intensely observed: NGC 3603 and the 
Orion nebula cluster. 

NGC 3603 is a dense, rich and very young open 
cluster which is known as the densest concentration of 
early-type massive stars in our Galaxy, at a distance of 
about 7 kpc. It is in the core of the most massive visible 
giant H II region and is considered as a starburst and 
compared with the R136 cluster in the Tarantula nebula 
in the Large Magellanic Cloud. JHK photometry and 
spectral classification of the 14 brighter stars have 
revealed the presence of three Wolf—Rayet (WN) stars 
and a dozen very massive O-type stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Open Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Orion nebula cluster, also known as the 
Trapezium cluster, is one of the most studied star- 
forming regions. The color-magnitude diagram based on 
the HST near-infrared photometry shows that the star 
formation appears to be remarkably coeval: 80% of the 
stars have an inferred age less than | million years (Myr) 
and 15% have an age between 1 and 4 Myr. The age 
spread is therefore only a few million years. Several new 
binary stars were found with separation below | arcsec, a 
domain which is not easily accessible from ground-based 
imaging. However, the most impressive result is the 
direct discovery of accretion disks around pre-main- 
sequence stars which showed up very clearly on HST 
images as dark DUSTY CIRCUMSTELLAR DISKS. The 
exceptional resolution of the HST images has also 
permitted the discovery of a phenomenon which has been 
called proplyds: when the low-mass stars are close 
enough to the cluster center and hence subjected to the 
strong winds emitted by the massive stars of the 
Trapezium, the material on the side of the disk facing the 
massive stars is heated by the hot radiation. 


Prospects 

The number of faint stars in open clusters has, so far, 
been the main difficulty in the systematic collection of 
spectroscopic information for the low-mass stars on the 
lower main sequence. The advent of CCD cameras 
solved this problem and photometry is now currently 
done to very faint magnitudes, although the measurement 
precision is degraded for the fainter objects. The 
development of large (8-10 m) telescopes (Keck, VLT, 
Gemini, Subaru) and of multi-object spectrographs opens 
completely new areas for the observations of open 
clusters. For example, better resolution at the center of 
dense or remote clusters will be possible. Infrared 
capabilities of bi-dimensional detectors on _ large 
telescopes will produce a wealth of new observations on 
embedded clusters and star-forming regions that should 
provide a much better understanding of the process of 
star formation. With multi-object spectrographs, 
astronomers will be able to obtain spectra of about 100 
stars at the same time, greatly reducing the need for 
observing time, with an increased precision. These new 
facilities will greatly change our way of thinking and of 
working. We can therefore expect to have answers to the 
many basic questions, and among them the initial mass 
function, star multiplicity and chemical composition, 
simply because of the immense possibilities offered by 
the new telescopes and instruments, as well as future 
satellites. 

One potentially interesting domain, not yet really 
explored, is the study of stellar cycles, analogous to the 
solar cycle, but for many stars along the main sequence 
of open clusters differing in ages and chemical 
compositions. The required precision lies within the 
capability of modern instruments. Such a program would 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be a long-term project best adapted for institutes which 
have their own telescope and are not subject to regular 
telescope-time request. The ouput of such long-term 
systematic observations will undoubtedly provide many 
astrophysically fundamental results. 


Database 

Published data for stars in open clusters have been 
collected in a database developed at the Institute of 
Astronomy of the University of Lausanne by the author. 
It contains, in spring 2000, information for more than 
350 000 stars in about 600 open clusters covering the 
domains of astrometry, photometry, spectroscopy and 
bibliography. The database is publicly accessible on the 
world wide web, at the URL 
http://obswww.unige.ch/webda/. A powerful feature is 
the possibility of getting basic data for stars from scanned 
maps or plotted charts. It contains also a large archive of 
original data files. 


Bibliography 

Friel E 1995 The old open clusters of the Milky Way Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 33 381-414 

Gilmore G and Howell D (ed) 1998 The Stellar Initial Mass 
Function (Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference 
Series, vol 142) 

Janes K A (ed) 1991 The Formation and Evolution of Star 
Clusters (Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference 
Series, vol 13) 

Micela G, Pallavicini R and Sciortino S (eds) 1997 Cool stars in 
clusters and associations: magnetic activity and age 
indicators Memorie della Societa astronomica Italiane 68 
(4) (Firenze) 

Payne-Gaposchkin C 1979 Stars and Clusters (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press) 


Jean-Claude Mermilliod 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Plane 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Plane 


The plane of the disc of our Galaxy. It follows a line 
running more or less through the center of the Milky Way, 
and is inclined to the celestial equator by an angle of about 
62°. In the current system of galactic coordinates defined 
by the IAU in 1959, the galactic plane is defined by b™ = 0° 
and is the central line of the distribution, as determined by 
radioastronomers, of neutral hydrogen in the Milky Way. 


See also: galactic latitude, galactic longitude, galactic 
year. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thick Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Thick Disk 


The MILKy way (the Galaxy) possesses a number of different 
stellar components—often referred to as populations, 
following the pioneering work of WALTER BAADE in the 
1940s. Each of these components is described by a fairly 
well-defined set of observed distributions of kinematics, 
chemical abundance and age and has a distinctive spatial 
distribution. A comparison of these populations with the 
predictions of galactic formation theories and paradigms 
leads to insight into the manner in which the Galaxy 
formed and has evolved. Following Baade it was soon 
appreciated that there existed three critically important 
populations—the halo, the disk and the bulge, which 
have masses (1-3) x 10?Mo, 6 x 10M, and 10!°Mg, 
respectively’. (As the names suggest, the halo has a 
spheroidal distribution, the disk is a highly flattened 
rotating system, and the bulge comprises a well-defined 
central concentration. We note also that the disk and halo 
are often referred to as POPULATION I and 1, respectively.) It 
also became evident that intermediate components exist, 
and the thick disk is one of these. It is intermediate in its 
properties between those of the halo and the disk (now 
renamed the thin disk; see GALACTIC THIN DISK). Insofar as 
the halo is old (age ~12-15 Gyr) and believed to pre-date 
the thin disk (age <10 Gyr), interest in the thick disk is 
driven by the working hypothesis that an understanding 
of it will lead to a clearer picture of the early evolution 
of the Galaxy, giving insight perhaps into the transition 
phase from halo to disk, or alternatively into phenomena 
which thickened an already existing thin disk. 

The present discussion will proceed as follows. In 
the next section we shall trace the historical recognition 
of the Galaxy’s thick disk, after which a description will 
be given of our current understanding of its properties. A 
discussion is then given of the main competing ideas which 
have been put forward to explain the various observations, 
followed by a brief confrontation of the observations with 
these concepts. It will be clear that at the time of writing 
(1999) our understanding is incomplete. We conclude with 
a discussion of prospects for resolving the problem. 


Historical development 
As noted above, the need for a component intermediate 
between the basic disk and halo populations soon 
became evident. Of particular interest in the present 
context was the designation, at an important Vatican 
Conference in 1958, of intermediate population II, 
although its implications for Galactic formation and 
evolution remained unclear. This component would later 
become recognized as the thick disk. 

An important further clue came from studies of 
external DISK GALAXIES where it became clear that edge- 
on systems showed a variety of disk thicknesses. The 


1 The reader should distinguish the luminous halo, discussed 
here, from the ‘dark’ unseen halo, which is inferred from 
dynamical arguments, and contains ~50-90% of the Galaxy’s 
mass. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


4 . 
‘. ‘ 
ai? . o* 
< . 
e @°® e 


Figure 1. (Upper panel) The distribution of red light in the 
edge-on disk galaxy NGC 5907, which can be well represented 
in the vertical direction by a single exponential component. 
(Lower panel) The red light distribution in NGC 891. Here two 
exponential components (‘thick’ and ‘thin’) are required to 
explain the observations. The case has been made in the 
astronomical literature that the Milky Way seen edge on would 
look rather like NGC 891. (This diagram originates from the 
work of H L Morrison and her colleagues, and was kindly 
supplied by them.) 


upper panel of figure 1 shows the brightness distribution 
for the edge-on disk galaxy NGC 5907, from the recent 
work of Morrison and her colleagues, where the density 
distribution perpendicular to the disk can be well 
represented by an exponential, decreasing as exp(—z/Zo), 
where z is the vertical distance from the plane and Zp is 
called the scale height, and in this object has the value 
400 pe. Observations of other edge-on systems, however, 
revealed examples of a more complicated disk structure. 
Perhaps the most famous of these is NGC 891, which 
is shown in the lower panel of figure 1. This could be 
well explained in terms of two disk components having 
very different exponential scale heights—and astronomers 
were led to think, fairly naturally, in terms of ‘thin’ and 
‘thick’ components. In NGC 891 the thinner component 
has a vertical exponential scale height of 400-650 pc and 
is not unlike the situation one finds in the Galaxy. The 
second, thicker, component has an exponential scale height 
of 1500-2500 pc. (For reference in figure 1 the disk of NGC 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thick Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


South Galactic Pole 


Thin disk 4 
/ (2,=300p¢) 7 


/ 


rT 


Thick disk 5 
*~./(2,=1350p¢) 7 


ics 
~ 


logio(Space Density) 
| 
‘ 


poitirrppr tTinipitep rir tipi) 
1000 2000 3000 4000 
Distance from Galactic Plane (pc) 


Figure 2. The logarithm of the space density of stars towards the 
south Galactic pole, as a function of distance from the Galactic 
plane, from the work of Gilmore and Reid. An exponential 
falloff of a single component would be represented by a straight 
line in this diagram and would clearly not be an adequate 
representation of the data. The authors fitted a two-component 
model, which they identify as the thin disk (scale height 300 pc) 
and thick disk (scale height 1350 pc). 


891 extends some 35 kpc from end to end.) It is this second 
component, first given the name ‘thick disk’ in external 
systems, which is under discussion here for the Milky Way. 

In the Galactic context, the term ‘thick disk’ was 
introduced by Gilmore and Reid in 1983 to explain their 
observation that star counts towards the south galactic 
pole were not well fitted by a single exponential, but rather 
could be nicely represented by two such components—one 
with scale height 300 pc and the other with scale height 
1350 pe. The ratio of the density of the two components 
at the GALACTIC PLANE was 0.02. A representation of their 
seminal diagram is shown in figure 2. It is important to 
appreciate that the normalization of thick/thin = 0.02 at 
the Galactic plane is an order of magnitude larger than that 
of the halo population, which in the solar neighborhood is 
halo/thin ~ 0.001. That is, for every 1000 stars chosen at 
random in the solar neighborhood, one expects only one 
to be a member of the halo population, and 20 to belong 
to the thick disk. While the thick disk may be a minority 
component, in the solar neighborhood it far outweighs the 
halo. 

For those who like to follow the impact of new 
instrumentation on the subject, it is interesting to note 
that this new development followed the implementation 
of large (wide-field) scHmipr TELESCOPES and powerful 
measuring machines necessary for the analysis of the 
large photographic plates on each of which huge numbers 
(hundreds of thousands) of stellar images were recorded. 
In a similar vein, historians of science will note that the 
‘thick disk’ of Gilmore and Reid was also present in the 
reports of star counts towards the north Galactic pole by 
Yoshii in 1982. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2 deserves closer scrutiny. It is clear that 
two exponential components, ‘thick’ and ‘thin’ (shown by 
the straight lines), provide a sufficient explanation of the 
observations. However, are they a necessary requirement? 
It is trivial to demonstrate that a multicomponent or 
continuous distribution, based on existing observational 
data, can also be presented which very nicely fits the 
observations in figure 2. The reader should be aware 
that this is more than a semantic point. If, on the one 
hand, one accepts that the data are best represented by two 
components, ‘thick’ and ‘thin’, one will be led naturally 
to seek an explanation in terms of discrete phenomena. 
Indeed, it is probably fair to suggest that most workers 
have come to the view that the Galactic thick disk has 
resulted from the merger of a small satellite with the Milky 
Way. If, on the other hand, one accepts that the observed 
behavior in figure 2 represents a continuous, extended 
disk configuration, one will seek alternative explanations, 
involving perhaps dissipative collapse scenarios, multiple 
mergers or clumpy galactic collapse formation. What 
needs to be done, and which has not been systematically 
done to this point, is to compare the extensive and growing 
observational material with the predictions of both types 
of models—discrete and continuous. 


Properties of the thick disk 

Initial estimates 

Work by Gilmore and his coworkers in the early 1980s 
led to the suggestion that the thick disk had abundance 
and kinematic characteristics quite intermediate between 
those of the halo and thin disk populations. At that time 
the mean chemical abundances, [Fe/H]’, of the halo and 
thin disk were —1.6 and —0.2, respectively: that of the 
thick disk was —0.6. The stellar velocity dispersions in 
the direction perpendicular to the Galactic plane were 
~90 and ~15 km s“! for halo and thin disk: for the thick 
disk the value was 60 km s~!. Also, for the asymmetric 
drift—the velocity by which material lags behind the 
solar neighborhood in its rotation about the Galaxy—the 
halo and thin disk had values ~220 and ~15 km s71, 
respectively: that of the thick disk was 100 km s-!. This 
laid the ground for the suggestion that the thick disk 
was a discrete component, with origins quite different 
from those of the other populations. Later investigations 
would support the abundance result but lead to more 
moderate kinematics, closer to that of the thin disk, with 
vertical velocity dispersion 40 km s!, and asymmetric 
drift ~40 km s7!. 


Recent determination of thick disk parameterization 

Current estimates of the properties of the thick disk and the 
other Galactic disk and halo populations are presented in 
table 1. The situation has become much more complicated 
in the past two decades not only for the disk but also for 
the halo, leading to greater difficulty in understanding the 
manner in which the Galaxy formed and has evolved. 


2 [Fe/H] = log, 9[N (Fe)/N (H)]-log, )[N(Fe)/N(H)lo, where 
N(Fe) and N(H) are the number densities of iron and hydrogen, 
respectively. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thick Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Some population characteristics of disk and halo components in the solar neighborhood. 


Scale height ou,oy,ow* Viag 2 Age 
Component (pc) ({[Fe/H]) (kms~!) (kms!) (Gyr) p/ prot” 
Old thin disk 300 —0.3 30, 20, 15 15 <10 0.95-0.98 
Thick disk 800-1500 —0.6 65, 55, 40 40 12-15 0.02-0.05 
Metal-weak 1400: —1.2: Unknown 40 (12-15): — (0.0005-0.002): 
thick disk 
Flattened halo 1600-2000 —1.6:° 130:,100:,90:° 160 12:-15 0.0008: 
(also called old, low or 
collapsed halo) 
Spherical halo Spherical —1.6:° 130:,100:,90:° 270 a2: 0.0002: 


(also called younger, high or 
accreted halo) 


* oy, oy and ow are velocity dispersions in the directions away from the Galactic center, toward Galactic rotation 
and toward the north Galactic pole, respectively. Viag (=Vsolar nbd. — V) measures the asymmetric drift, the velocity 
by which the component lags the solar neighborhood in its systemic rotation. 

» Ratio of the density of the component to total density in the solar neighborhood. We assume Phalo/ Pdisk = 0.001. 

© Decomposition of the two halo components has not yet been achieved. The tabulated values are those determined 
for their admixture in the solar neighborhood. The values of the individual components are thus uncertain. 


Substructure in the halo 

To understand the disk one must also appreciate the 
situation with the halo. Although it comprises only a 
minuscule fraction of the mass of the Galaxy, it contains 
the oldest material and yields crucial clues to the earliest 
phases of the system. Current indications suggest that 
the halo is a multiple population, with components which 
originated during both an initial dissipative collapse 
(as described in 1962 in the seminal work of Eggen, 
Lynden-Bell and Sandage) and the later accretion of 
smaller fragments which had evolved independently of 
the central concentration, and later came into dynamical 
equilibrium with it (as advocated in the equally important 
work of Searle and Zinn in 1978). The recent discovery 
of the SAGITTARIUS DWARF SPHEROIDAL GALAXY, currently in 
catastrophic collision with and being destroyed by the 
Milky Way, attests indisputably to the operation at some 
level of the merger scenario. In table 1, the halo is 
represented by two components, described by different 
workers by various descriptors. This is no doubt a gross 
oversimplification, and current efforts are being directed 
to ascertaining how much discreteness remains evident in 
the accreted component. 


Substructure in the thick disk? 

The situation with the thick disk has also become more 
complicated. In table 1 one sees what one might call 
the ‘canonical’ thick disk first appreciated by Gilmore 
and Reid, with ([Fe/H]) ~ —0.6, and kinematics much 
closer to that of the old thin disk than originally claimed. 
Observational evidence now also exists to support the case 
for the existence of material with disklike kinematics and 
[Fe/H] <—1.0—called by some the ‘metal-weak thick disk’. 
The meager data available for this component are also 
presented in table 1. The case for the population remains to 
some extent controversial, but evidence continues to grow 
that some ~10-30% of material with —1.6 < [Fe/H] < 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


—1.0 has disklike kinematics. There are even GLOBULAR 
CLUSTERS in this abundance range (old, populous, star 
clusters previously believed surely to be members of the 
halo) with recent well-determined space velocities which 
are characteristic of the disk rather than the halo. 

The question which begs to be answered, if the metal- 
weak thick disk is real, is whether it is yet another discrete 
component of the disk created by merger or part of a more 
continuous structure, formed perhaps in a dissipative 
manner. Another tantalizing question provoked by table 1 
is the significance of the similarity in many respects of the 
metal-weak thick disk and the flattened halo component. 


Gradients in the thick disk? 
A critical consideration for an understanding of the 
thick disk is the existence or otherwise of abundance 
and kinematic gradients within it. Since most of the 
available data exist for material not too far from the 
solar neighborhood, and the thin disk far outweighs 
the thick disk close to the Galactic plane, one must 
always be concerned that leakage of the thin disk, due to 
observational errors, into putative thick disk samples will 
simulate the effect of vertical gradients. That said, most 
workers advocate that no vertical abundance gradient 
exists, or if it does it is small and currently at the limit 
of detection. Future insight into this question may come 
from analysis of external edge-on systems. Indeed, van 
der Kruit and Searle, in an early analysis of NGC 891 (see 
figure 1, lower panel), report a gradient in the photometric 
properties of the thick disk component of that system 
which is most easily interpreted as one in abundance. 
Concerning kinematics, and in particular the asym- 
metric drift, there are two schools of thought. The first 
contends that the drift is a function of height above the 
Galactic plane (and is given by Vig ~ 18z + 15 km st, 
where z is the vertical distance from the plane in kpc), while 
the second finds no such dependence and reports that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thick Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


drift is constant with height, with Viag = 40 km s-!, at least 
within ~3000 pc of the plane. 

Little information exists on the question of the 
dependence of kinematics on abundance in the thick disk 
population(s) or on gradients as a function of distance from 
the Galactic center. These are questions for the future. 

To a large extent, resolution of the nature of the thick 
disk and its implications for Galactic disk cosmogony will 
turn on the issue of these interdependences of position, 
abundance and kinematics. 


Age of the thick disk 

The thick disk is old. Indeed, it contains the relatively 
metal-rich, so-called disk globular clusters, such as the 
brilliant 47 Tucanae, the age of which lies in the vicinity of 
12 Gyr. Studies of thick disk field stars suggest that they 
too have ages similar to that of 47 Tuc. It is important to 
appreciate, however, that these estimates are accurate only 
to ~2-3 Gyr. With this in mind then, one should operate 
with care in seeking to answer the important cosmogonical 
question of whether the thick disk has the same age as 
the Galactic halo, for which estimates lie in the range 
12-15 Gyr. Some workers advocate that the thick disk is 
younger than the halo by ~2—4 Gyr. In the opinion of this 
reviewer, at least, the issue remains unresolved at the ~2— 
3 Gyr level. 


Models of thick disk formation 
Numerous mechanisms have been suggested for the 
thickening of galactic disks. Foremost among others, 
these include internal collisional heating of the thin disk, 
merger with external systems and dissipative collapse. 
The different mechanisms make different predictions 
concerning the abundance, kinematic and age profiles 
of the thick disk and, in principle, comparison between 
observation and theory should enable the relevant 
process(es) to be identified. For example, the dissipative 
models predict abundance and kinematic gradients, while 
the minor merger ones appear not to do so. One might 
also not be surprised to find discontinuities between those 
properties of the thick and thin disks if the merger scenario 
is relevant. A slow dissipative formation mechanism 
might lead toa range in ages in the thick disk, intermediate 
between that of the halo and the old thin disk, while the age 
profile in merger scenarios will be driven by the conditions 
which existed at the time of the merger. Collisional heating 
of the thin disk will produce a thick component with 
characteristics which are closely related to those of the thin 
disk, modulo the manner in which the heating occurred. 
One should always bear in mind that not one, but 
rather a combination of mechanisms may have contributed 
to the disk thickening. We briefly discuss the three 
mechanisms. 


Internal disk heating 

The disk of a galaxy will be heated by the scattering of 
its constituents by giant molecular clouds and transient 
density waves associated with spiral arms, and this is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


believed to be the origin of an observed dependence of 
velocity dispersion on age in thin disk material and to 
be responsible for vertical velocity dispersions less than 
20-30 km s“!. Only if one is prepared to accept the 
existence of massive objects such as black holes or clusters 
of Jupiters, of mass > 10° Mo, is one able to produce velocity 
dispersions similar to those found in the thick disk. 


Mergers 

Computer modeling of the mergers of minor satellites 
with disk galaxies show very nicely how disk thickening 
might occur, given favorable relative orbits (prograde 
approaches strongly preferred) and satellite density 
profiles (dense satellites preferred). Studies, such as those 
of Quinn, Hernquist and Fullagar, show how effectively 
this mechanism can operate. Some of their results are 
shown in figure 3, where the satellite has 0.1 times the 
mass of the disk. One sees that over a relatively short time 
of a few Gyr the satellite is shredded and becomes part 
of the disk which itself has been thickened. The model 
makes important predictions among which is the finding 
that there will be essentially no change in the asymmetric 
drift of the thickened disk from its initial value. No 
vertical abundance gradient is produced in this type of 
model, although an existing one would be preserved. A 
caveat of the mechanism is that its success hinges on the 
density profile of the incoming satellite, and it has been 
demonstrated by Huang and Carlberg that mergers with 
low-density satellites, of the kind one observes in the local 
neighborhood now, do not produce disk thickening, but 
rather lead to disk tilting as they are assimilated into the 
larger system. 

Since the thick disk is old, indeed as old as the halo 
of the Galaxy to within the observational uncertainty of 
2-3 Gyr, the model requires that the most recent merger of 
this kind occurred = 10 Gyr ago. 

Itis important to recall that the Searle—Zinn formation 
scenario for the halo of the Galaxy invokes the need for the 
merger of fragments in the forming system. Given that 
the age of the thick disk is commensurate with that of the 
halo, one should not be surprised to find that assimilation 
of fragments (not necessarily as large as those discussed 
in the above simulations) played a role in determining the 
thickness of the disk. 


Dissipative collapse formation 

In 1976, Larson modeled the dissipative collapse of a 
rotating system and produced galaxies with thick disks 
having an abundance gradient. Note that his work 
actually pre-dates the identification of this component 
in the Milky Way. A more recent variation of the 
model, which gives insight into the manner in which 
the thickening may have occurred, comes from the work 
of Noguchi, who simulated the collapse of clumpy star- 
forming galaxies in an effort to explain the peculiar 
morphology of high-redshift systems. The evolution of 
a typical galaxy is shown in figure 4. Beginning with a 
rotating ensemble of gaseous and dark matter particles, a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thick Disk ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY ANDA 


Galactic Thick Disk ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. The simulation of the collapse of a rotating proto-galaxy by Noguchi. In all panels the abscissa is the distance along the 
x-axis of the simulation and represents the distance from galactic center. Panels with y-axis labeled X-Y show the simulation projected 
onto the disk, while those labeled X-Z view the simulation edge on. The panels are labeled with time, where the unit is 7 x 10” yr. The 
stellar particles are color coded: blue is used for objects younger than 108 yr, yellow between this and 5 x 108 yr and red for older ones. 
(This diagram was kindly provided by M Noguchi.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 26. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 6 


Galactic Thick Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


disk system forms on a timescale of 1 Gyr. Its evolution 
is critically determined by the formation of distinctive 
clumps of mass 10°M 5. Dynamical friction causes these to 
spiral towards the galactic center, creating a bulge, while 
during the process stars and gas scatter off the clumps, 
thickening the disk. The scale height of the old stellar 
component in the model was 1.9 kpc, a little larger than 
that observed in the Milky Way, but not unlike the value 
observed for the thick disk of other galaxies (see also 
GALAXY EVOLUTION). 

It will not have escaped the reader that we may 
have just entered the region of semantics. Perhaps the 
clumps in this formalism and the small merger fragments 
discussed at the end of the previous section are not 
unrelated. Indeed, the relative importance of the accretion 
and dissipative collapse mechanisms may turn on the 
spectrum of structure sizes in the vicinity of a forming 
galaxy. 


Comparing the observations with model scenarios 
What then may one conclude concerning the nature of the 
thick disk and what it has to tell us about the manner in 
which the disk formed? It is probably not unreasonable 
to conclude that most workers are inclined to the view 
that it resulted from a minor merger some ~10-12 Gyr 
ago. One can certainly reproduce most of the observations 
in this manner, modulo, for example, the final word on 
the existence or otherwise (and their interpretation) of 
gradients, which are not predicted in this model. One 
might also be concerned by the necessity of mergers of 
the disk with ‘hard’ as opposed to ‘soft’ satellites noted in 
the previous section. 

Another challenge for this scenario is to explain the 
nature of the so-called ‘metal-weak thick disk’. Is it also 
discrete, and also produced by a merger? The critic 
might also well ask: is discreteness of the thick disk 
population(s) necessarily required by the observations, or 
are they really part of a continuous disk configuration? 
One will find in the bibliography below the challenge 
of Nemec and Nemec to all who would make claims on 
this matter: ‘In most models of the Galaxy the number 
of components is based on preconceived ideas or on a 
subjective assessment of the observational data ... More 
objective ... procedures for estimating the number of 
components and goodness-of-fits tests ... for comparing 
competing models are available.’ 

Problems also abound for those who would advocate 
the alternative world view of a dissipative origin of the 
thick disk. While models of dissipative Galactic collapse 
exist in the astronomical literature, too few details are 
available with which one may confront the observations, 
and no detailed comparison is possible at this time. 


Future prospects 

The most limiting factor in efforts to understand the 
population structure of the Galaxy has been our necessary 
reliance on solar neighborhood samples within a few 
hundred parsecs of the Sun, where the important halo 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and thick disk stars represent only very small fractions, 
~0.001 and ~0.02-0.05, respectively, of field stars. Ideally, 
one would like to observe samples well away from 
the Galactic plane, at distances of a few kpc, where 
the contaminating influence of the thin disk will be 
minimized. Fortunately, with the current advent of 
large multifiber spectrographs on 4 m class (and larger) 
telescopes which will permit the simultaneous observation 
of several hundred objects at these distances, this is now 
becoming possible. In principle, one may now obtain 
samples of several thousand stars (near main sequence 
turnoff dwarfs) in various critical directions (towards, 
for example, the Galactic poles, center and anticenter, 
and in directions of Galactic rotation) with a view to 
separating out the populations discussed above and to 
more strongly constraining the reality or otherwise of 
gradients, dependences of kinematics on abundance and 
substructure within components. 

Because of their different characteristics, the halo and 
disk will give different signatures in different directions 
in the Galaxy, and one will be able to disentangle thick 
disk and halo several kpc from the Galactic plane and to 
look for the distinctive features of dissipation and merger 
events. One will be able to determine whether there is any 
evidence for vertical and radial gradients in abundance 
and kinematics, together with the density and (systemic) 
rotational properties of the various subcomponents. 

When these data are available one will be in a sound 
position to confront the results of the various models of 
the manner in which the thick disk formed. 


Bibliography 

Croswell K 1995 The Alchemy of the Heavens: Searching for 
Meaning in the Milky Way (New York: Anchor) 

Gilmore G, Wyse R F G and Kuijken K 1989 Kinematics, 
chemistry, and structure of the Galaxy Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 27 555-627 

Majewski S R 1993 Galactic structure surveys and the 
evolution of the Milky Way Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 31 575-638 

Nemec J M and Nemec A F L 1991 Mixture models for 
studying stellar populations. I—Univariate mixture 
models, parameter estimation, and the number of 
discrete population components Publ. Astron. Soc. 
Pac. 103 95-121 

Norris J E 1996 The relationship between the halo and disk 
populations Formation of the Galactic Halo . . . Inside and 
Out ed H Morrison and A Sarajedini (San Francisco, 
CA: ASP) pp 14-23 


John E Norris 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thin Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Thin Disk 


Of the components of our MILKY Way GALAXY, the thin disk 
is the most prominent part to our eyes. It manifests itself 
as the band of faint light that we see encircling the whole 
sky. Except for the bulge in the direction of the center of 
our Galaxy, the stars that make up the Milky Way as we 
see it are part of the thin disk, just as our Sun is part of that 
same population of stars. A remarkable fact is that when 
we look at the Milky Way from the southern hemisphere 
in winter—when the center of the Galaxy is almost at the 
zenith at midnight—the appearance is strikingly similar 
to somewhat later Hubble class, edge-on galaxies such as 
NGC 891 (of Hubble type Sb). 


The young disk 

As we will see below, the thin disk is made up of stars 
of a large range of ages. The youngest have only just 
formed out of the interstellar medium; the gas and dust 
between the stars out of which stars are being formed is 
generally considered to be part of the young disk. The 
gas can be mapped easily using the 21 cm line of neutral 
hydrogen (H I) and this has been done extensively for 
our Galaxy since RADIOASTRONOMY Started to be practised 
in a systematic manner in the 1950s. It took until 
the 1970s, with the advent of aperture synthesis radio 
telescopes, until it could be done with sufficient angular 
resolution in external galaxies. The neutral hydrogen 
extends usually much further than the stellar disk, often 
exhibiting a deviation from the plane of the inner galaxy. 
This can be seen in edge-on galaxies as a curving upward 
on one side and a symmetric curving downward at 
the opposite. In moderately inclined galaxies there are 
kinematic signatures of these so-called warps. 

The measurements of the neutral gas have to be 
supplemented by observations of the distribution of the 
molecular gas, most abundant in molecular hydrogen 
H). This, however, cannot be observed directly and 
its distribution is inferred from radio measurements of 
spectral lines of carbon monoxide, CO. This is transferred 
into distributions of Hz by a still rather dubious ‘X 
factor’ which descibes the ratio of Hz versus CO. This X 
factor is predicted on theoretical grounds and the dubious 
assumption is made that it is the same from galaxy to 
galaxy and with galactocentric radius in spite of known 
variations in heavy-element abundance and radiation 
field (the latter being important for photodissociation (see 
PHOTODISSOCIATION REGIONS)). The molecular gas is found to 
be concentrated to a large extent in giant molecular clouds 
(GMCs) that contain masses up to 10°Mo (see INTERSTELLAR 
MOLECULAR CLOUDS). In these GMCs star formation appears 
to be occurring. 

The interstellar gas then is distributed in a very 
thin layer—much thinner than the older disk stars— 
with a thickness of order 100 pc. The molecular gas 
is more concentrated toward the galaxy’s center. The 
velocity distribution at any position in the disk is largely 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


isotropic with (one-dimensional) velocity dispersions of 
order 7 kms7!. 

STAR FORMATION occurs in groups. This is because for 
the conditions in the interstellar medium a gas cloud can 
only be unstable with respect to its own gravity if its mass 
exceeds about 10° or so Mo. This so-called Jeans’ mass 
can be derived crudely as follows. Consider a spherical 
region of radius R and density p, or mass M = sm R°p. 
The gravitational (potential) energy can be calculated to 
be 
3GM? 

5R 


The kinetic energy due to the random motions with 
dispersion (V7)'/? is roughly 


T=iM(V?). 


1 
2 
The virial theorem then tells us that this region will not 
contract under its own gravity as long as 2+ 2T is positive, 
or in other words as long as there is sufficient kinetic energy 
to overcome the gravitational force. This then translates 
into a maximum radius for stability that is called the Jeans’ 


length, 
5(V2) 1/2 
Rjeans = ( 4 ) 
mG 


and the mass contained within this radius is the Jeans’ 
mass. 

In the interstellar medium near the Sun the gas 
density is of order 1 H atom cm? and the velocity 
dispersion is about 7 km™!. Then Ryjeans ~ 400 pc. This 
is more than the thickness of the gas layer. A circular area 
of the disk with this radius contains about 10°Mo, in the 
form of gas. 

Clusters of newly formed stars are called associations. 
There are two types, depending on the kind of stars seen 
in them. The most prominent are the 0B ASSOCIATIONS; their 
brightest stars are heavy O and B stars and they are usually 
accompanied by HII REGIONS, where the interstellar gas is 
ionized by the UV radiation from these hot stars. The 
second type is called T associations; these are made up of 
T TAURI STARS, Which are stars of solar mass or somewhat 
less contracting on their way to the main sequence. The 
existence of these two types of associations is one basis for 
a proposed concept of bimodal star formation, in which 
massive and less massive stars are formed independently. 

The distribution of OB associations can be studied in 
much detail. In agreement with the fact that associations 
are formed out of the interstellar medium recently, they 
are also found in our Galaxy ina thin layer, comparable in 
thickness with that of the gas. The local system of OB stars 
deviates from that of the plane of the Galaxy; it is confined 
to a narrow, tilted layer; this is called GOULD’s BELT, since it 
is reflected in the distribution of OB stars on the sky and 
this is also generally along a great circle inclined to that 
of the Milky Way. The velocity distribution of OB stars 
also deviates from being isotropic, although the velocity 
dispersion is comparable with that of the gas. The long 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thin Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


axis of the velocity distribution does not point toward the 
Galactic center (has a so-called vertex deviation); this is 
probably the result of local disturbances in the smooth 
density distribution in the disk due to the spiral structure 
of the Galaxy. 


Open clusters 

Stars are being born in groups or clusters, each 
representing of the order of 10°Mo. Most clusters dissolve 
in the course of time as a result of the gravitational 
interactions with the surroundings. Irregularities, such 
as those associated with spiral structure, are believed to 
play a major role in this, but also condensations in the 
interstellar medium, such as the GMCs, are important. It 
is not known which stars belong to the same cluster in 
which the Sun was one of the stars being born. Finding 
out about this is almost certainly impossible. Yet, some 
clusters or at least their more solidly bound central parts 
survive, in some cases as long as the age of the disk. 

So, we havea whole range of clusters of varying ages. 
Their ages can be derived from their HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL 
DIAGRAMS. The youngest are the associations discussed 
above, the oldest—such as the cluster NGC 188—have 
ages up to about 10'° yr. Local examples are the Hyades 
(consisting of relatively bright stars over a fairly large 
area of sky and having an age of almost 10° yr) and the 
Pleiades (the brightest stars being visible to the naked eye 
and having an age of about 108 yr). 

Star clusters are entities that have been able to 
retain their structure and to form a relatively securely 
bound group of stars. Clusters that have dissolved by 
gravitational tidal effects still may survive as recognizable 
clusterings in phase space. Even if the prominent structure 
of clusters in coordinate space has disappeared, their 
signatures in velocity space may survive on a longer 
timescale. Structure in the distribution of space velocities 
of common stars in the neighborhood of the Sun does 
show clear records of the dynamical history of the disk 
in the form of the so-called moving groups: collections of 
stars that are isolated in phase space and appear to share 
other properties such as age and/or abundance of heavier 
chemical elements. 


The old disk 

The old disk contains most of the mass in stars in 
the disks of our and other galaxies. In spite of the 
prominence of spiral structure in pictures of DISK GALAXIES, 
the underlying smooth component contains most of the 
light (and mass). The fact that spiral structure is so 
evident in atlases of galaxies derives from the fact that 
photographic print emphasize the gradients (photography 
essentially being a logarithmic process). Digital surface 
photometry shows that even the bright H II regions in the 
SPIRAL ARMS and the dustlanes on the inside of the arms 
are only relatively minor disturbances on the underlying 
brightness distribution. In a vertical column through the 
disk of our Galaxy in the solar neighborhood, the OB stars 
contribute only a third or so to the integrated surface 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


brightness. For what follows we can take in external 
galaxies the surface brightness of the disk to be mainly 
representing the distribution of older disk stars, even at 
relatively blue optical wavelengths. The light from the 
older disk stars is of course dominated by their brightests 
members, i.e. the giant branch stars among them. 

From studies of the surface brightness distributions 
in spiral galaxies—starting with those by de Vaucouleurs 
in the 1940s and 1950s—it was found that the radial fall-off 
from the center onwards is exponential. That is to say, the 
surface brightness can be fitted to a function of the form 


R 
L(R) = Lo exp (-7) 


where h is called the scale length. The surface brightness 
L(R) is expressed here in Lo pc, but in practice is 
measured in magnitudes per arcsec? and indicated by yp. 
For the majority of the bright spiral galaxies, Freeman 
in 1970 found that the central surface brightness was 
remarkably constant at 21.6 B magnitudes arcsec~*. In 
the meantime, many galaxies with fainter central surface 
brightnesses have been found, but these are mostly small 
dwarf galaxies or a minority of so-called low-surface- 
brightness galaxies (constituting a small fraction of the 
mass in stars in the universe), but the result stands for 
the common disk galaxies such as our own. 

The cause of this exponential nature of the distri- 
bution of stars appears to be the distribution of angular 
momentum in the gas from which galaxies form. The an- 
gular momentum probably results from tidal interactions 
between protogalaxies in the early universe, when they 
were much closer together. Irregularities in their mass 
distribution made them susceptible to gravitational tidal 
fields from their neighbors, resulting in a spinning-up of 
these gas clouds. It is commonly accepted that this, when 
the protogalactic gas clouds detached themselves from 
their surroundings in the expanding universe, resulted in 
entities closely resembling a uniform-density, uniformly 
rotating sphere. That is to say, the more or less spherical 
density distribution had a roughly uniform density and 
rotated everywhere with the same angular velocity. If this 
distribution of angular momentum is conserved during 
the collapse of the gas (after some of it was taken away as 
the stars that form population II in the halo) into a disk, 
then a roughly exponential distribution as observed will 
follow. This assumes that the gravitational field is mostly 
determined by that of a dark halo with a density distribu- 
tion falling off as R~ as implied by the rotation curves of 
spiral galaxies. The exponential nature of the light (and 
presumably mass distributions in galaxy disks) seems to 
reflect the effect of how galaxies acquired their angular 
momentum in the early universe. 

The older disk stars form a system that is clearly 
thicker than that of the young population (see also 
GALACTIC THICK DISK). From the common stars in the solar 
neighborhood this follows both from counts that can be 
used to derive their spatial distribution as well as from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thin Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


their kinematics. The velocity dispersion of stars such as 
our Sun locally is of the order of 20 km s~! in the direction 
perpendicular to the Galactic plane. This is much higher 
than that of the young population and consequently the 
thickness of the thin disk of older stars must be much 
larger than that of the gas and very young stars. Since 
this system of old disk stars is almost certainly effectively 
self-gravitating (that is to say, these stars themselves 
provide essentially all of the gravitational force in the 
direction perpendicular to the plane; the z-direction) it can 
be expected that the spatial density distribution should 
approximate that of an isothermal sheet. This is a stratified 
layer in which the velocity dispersion is constant with 
distance from the plane. 

It is well known that such an isothermal, stratified 
distribution, where stars move under the collective 
gravitational force of themselves, can be written as 


p(z) = p(0) sech? (=) 
Z0 


where the vertical scale parameter zo is related to the 
velocity dispersion (V7) by 


Zz — 
° Go 
with o the surface density (integrated over a vertical 
column): 
o = 2p(0)z0. 


Comparison with the distribution of stars in the solar 
neighborhood and their kinematics shows that this is a 
remarkably good approximation to the actual situation. 
The inferred vertical density distribution at larger 
distances from the plane approximates an exponential: 


sech* (=) ~ 4exp (-22) : 
Z0 <0 


This has indeed been observed in the surface brightness 
distribution in external disk galaxies when seen edge on. 
What is more remarkable is that the scale parameter zo 
is to an excellent approximation independent of distance 
from the center. Using the exponential radial distribution 
mentioned above, it follows that the space distribution of 
old disk stars in a spiral galaxy can be described very well 


by 
p(R, z) = p(0, 0) exp (-7) sech” (2) ; 


Z0 


Dynamical heating 

When we look at more detail into the distribution of 
velocities of common stars in the solar neighborhood 
we find that their velocity dispersions increase with 
age. Apparently, stars are being born with the velocity 
distribution of the interstellar medium from which they 
form and subsequently gain velocity. Although the 
interstellar medium appears—as a result of collisions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between gas clouds—to be essentially isotropic, the 
process by which stars on average gain in space motion 
quickly makes their velocity distribution anisotropic. The 
gain in velocity is at first rather rapid, but then seems 
to level off when the age is a few billion years. In the 
radial direction the gain in velocity is largest, leveling off 
at about 40 km s~!, while in the vertical direction it reaches 
only about 20 km s~1. This difference is possible because 
the motion in the vertical direction is independent of the 
motion in the Galactic plane. The increase of space motion 
of disk stars with age is usually referred to as dynamical 
heating or as secular evolution. 

There are two processes that may be responsible for 
this dynamical heating. The first, proposed by Spitzer 
and Schwarzschild in the 1950s, is by scattering of stellar 
orbits by encounters with large mass concentrations in the 
interstellar medium in the disks; these were later identified 
with the GMCs mentioned above. This will statistically 
speed up the motions of the stars, but will quickly become 
less efficient and the space motions of the stars will level 
off as observed. This is so because, when the motions 
increase, stars will spend a larger fraction of the time out 
of the thin layer where the GMCs reside and the scattering 
will quickly become less effective. 

The second mechanism was proposed in the 1960s 
by Barbanis and Woltjer and is the scattering of the stars 
by encounters with spiral arms. These also constitute 
variations in the gravitational field. This mechanism is 
less effective in the vertical direction, because the period 
of vertical motion of stars is very different from that 
from encountering the spiral structure. In the radial 
direction there is much more of a resonance between 
these encounters and radial oscillations and the effect is 
more efficient. Theoretical studies indicate that the first 
mechanism would predict the ratio of the vertical to radial 
velocity dispersions to be larger than observed, so it is 
likely that (at least in our Galaxy in the neighborhood of 
the Sun) the second mechanism has been more effective. 
Still, at various positions in different galaxies the actual 
dynamical heating is probably accomplished by both 
processes in varying relative importance. 

Random motion of the old disk stars in galaxies is vital 
for matters of stability. If there were no relative motion of 
the stars, the disks of old stars would not be able to be 
as smooth as they are; any statistical density fluctuation 
would quickly result in gravitational collapse and the disks 
would break up in many dense concentrations. This is a 
dilemma that goes back to the days of Isaac Newton: if 
every star attracts every other one then why would they 
not have collapsed into a dense concentration? Newton’s 
incorrect answer was that stars are distributed evenly in 
space, such that every star is pulled equally in all directions 
by the other stars. We now know that the correct answer is 
that stability derives from the relative motions of the stars, 
providing in essence a kind of pressure that prevents these 
gravitational instabilities from occurring. 

Now return to galactic disks. We have seen that the 
random motions of the stars can stabilize any distribution 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Thin Disk 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


up to a certain radius. For flat disks we can rewrite this 
Jeans’ criterion as follows. In an infinitesimally thin disk 
we have a surface density o and a velocity dispersion 
(V*)!/?. Then the kinetic energy in a region with radius 
Ris 

T= $m Roa (V*) 
and the potential energy is roughly 


2 3 
oe Go? R, 


For this case of a very thin disk then the Jeans’ length is 


_ 3(V?) 
Jeans — n2Go 3 


For the old stellar disk in our Galaxy in the neighborhood 
of the Sun, the surface density is about 80M, pe? and 
the velocity dispersion roughly 40 km sl. Then this 
radius comes out as about 5 kpc. So we find that random 
stellar motions can stabilize the old stellar disk only up to 
moderate scales. 

So something else has to be responsible for stabilizing 
the disk over larger length scales. This stability can 
be provided by differential rotation, which means that 
the angular rotation velocity varies with galactocentric 
distance. Parts further out have a lower angular velocity 
and as a result of this, seen from any point in the disk, these 
parts lag behind in the motion around the center, while the 
parts further in go ahead. This appears for not too large 
distances as a rotation around this reference position, and 
the angular velocity at which this occurs is described by the 
so-called Oort constant B. If the rotation velocity around 
the center of the galaxy is V,o then 


B = “ft Viot + AV ot ; 
R dR 


This provides a centrifugal force that can counteract the 
gravity and in this manner can provide stability. Consider 
again a circular area in the disk with radius R and surface 
density o. For a particle at the edge this centrifigul force 
is B*R. On the other hand, the gravitational force from 
the matter within R is approximately that due to the mass 
M inside R, or GM/R* = nGo. Now, contrary to the 
Jeans’ stability mechanism there is a minimum radius for 
stability, because as R increases the centrifugal force due 
to differential rotation increases. This minimum radius 
occurs where this centrifugal force equals the attraction 
due to gravity and is 


mGo 
Ruin = —5- 
B2 
In our Galaxy in the solar neighborhood the Oort constant 
B ~—13kms! kpc7!. This then gives Rmin ~ 5 kpc. 
As Alar Toomre first described in 1964, a galactic disk 
is thus stable at all length scales, if this minimum radius 
is equal to or smaller than the Jeans’ length. From the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


numbers given, we see that the disk of our Galaxy is indeed 
stable, but only just. So, disks can be stabilized at small 
scales by random motions and at large scales by differential 
rotation. Putting the two together then gives for a disk 
with given surface density and differential rotation a 
minimum velocity dispersion required for stability: 


(ye = ea Go 

° 3 |B| 
Stars that have a small velocity with respect to the the 
general rotation will, in a coordinate system that rotates 
along with this general rotation, descibe a small elliptical 
orbit (an epicycle) in which it goes around in a period 27/k 


and 
Vrot 


Kk? = —4B . 
R 
k is the so-called epicyclic frequency. In actual galaxies the 
rotation velocity V,o. is constant with radius over most of 
the disk and then « = —2V/2B. 


Then we can rewrite the equation above as 


Go 
(V?)2 = 4.09—. 
K 
In a more detailed analysis and for arbitrary rotation 
curves, Toomre derived this minimum velocity dispersion 
actually as 


min 


(V2 = 3.3622, 
K 


Disks of spiral galaxies, including our own, do not 
appear to be violently unstable. However, there is spiral 
structure and star formation, so some instability must 
occur. As it turns out, as best as we can measure the disks 
are close to the border between stability and instability. 
This presumably is the cause of the fact that star formation 
is regulated as a moderately slow process, whereby the 
conversion of the interstellar gas into stars proceeds at a 
reasonable rate, as observed from the distribution of stellar 
ages in the solar neigborhood. As we can derive from 
the Toomre minimum velocity dispersion criterion above, 
the minimum dispersion decreases with galactocentric 
radius, the epicycle frequency decreasing as R“!, but the 
surface density o exponentially. This is indeed roughly as 
observed. Furthermore, it implies also a decrease in the 
velocity dispersion in the direction perpendicular to the 
plane in such a way that it roughly produces the constant 
thickness of the thin disk (the radial constancy of the scale 
height parameter Zo). 


Bibliography 
The material presented above (and many more related 
matters) is discussed in more detail in 


Gilmore G, King IR and van der Kruit P C 1990 The Milky 
Way as a Galaxy (University Science Books) 


Piet van der Kruit 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galactic Year ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Year 


Aterm that is sometimes used to describe the orbital period 
of the Sun around the galactic center, approximately 225 
million years. 


See also: galaxy, Milky Way Galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


Galaxies at high REDsHIFT are very distant galaxies and, 
since light propagates through space at a finite speed of 
approximately 300 000 km s~!, they appear to an observer 
on the Earth as they were in a very remote past, when 
the light departed them, carrying information on their 
properties at that time. Observations of objects with very 
high redshifts play a central role in cosmology because 
they provide insight into the epochs and the mechanisms 
of GALAXY FORMATION, if one can reach redshifts that are high 
enough to correspond to the cosmic epochs when galaxies 
were forming their first populations of stars and began to 
shine light throughout space. 

One fundamental prediction of the theory of the 
big bang, which has found empirical confirmation in 
the discovery of the cosmic background radiation, is 
that early in its evolution the universe consisted only 
of matter and radiation coupled in thermodynamical 
equilibrium and homogeneously distributed in space. No 
galaxies or stars or any other structure could exist in 
such physical conditions, except for minuscule primordial 
fluctuations of density, superimposed on the otherwise 
extraordinarily smooth distribution of matter and energy 
by quantum physical processes during the first instant 
of existence of the universe. Today, the universe is 
highly inhomogeneous, with the matter organized in a 
hierarchy of structures such as stars, galaxies, clusters and 
superclusters of galaxies. Understanding the mechanisms 
that led to the transition from the homogeneous early 
universe to the structured one observed at the present 
epoch is of central importance to cosmology and 
fundamental physics. Yet, they remain poorly understood 
and still defeat empirical investigation. 

Our current ideas attribute the formation of the 
cosmic structures to the action of gravity, which amplified 
the primordial density fluctuations until they collapsed 
under their own self-gravity and became bounded 
structures. According to this paradigm, the epoch 
of galaxy formation and the properties of the nascent 
galaxies were decided by the properties and the relative 
abundances of the matter and the energy that permeated 
the universe shortly after the big bang. Galaxies are the 
building blocks of the distribution of matter in space, and 
an important step to decipher the history of the cosmic 
evolution is to identify the first galaxies that formed 
in the universe and study their properties at the time 
of their formation. The search for ‘primeval galaxies’ 
has traditionally played a central role in observational 
cosmology for more than three decades and, even after 
the spectacular accomplishments of the last 5 yr or so, is 
still driving much of extragalactic research. 


The redshift and the expanding universe 

One of the most important scientific discoveries of this 
century is the expansion of the universe. This makes the 
galaxies and the other larger structures that populate the 
cosmic space recede away from each other with a velocity 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that is progressively higher for objects that are separated in 
space by larger distances. If the recession velocity between 
two objects is small compared with the speed of light, 
its value is directly proportional to the distance between 
them, namely 

Vy = Hod 


where the constant of proportionality Hy is called the 
‘HUBBLE CONSTANT’. For larger recession velocities this 
relation is replaced by a more general one calculated from 
the theory of general relativity. In each cases, the value 
of Hp provides the recession velocity of a pair of galaxies 
separated by unitary distance, and hence sets the rate of 
the expansion. Since if the universe has been expanding 
at a higher rate it has taken a shorter time to go from 
the size at the big bang (close to a mathematical point) 
to the current size, a higher value of the Hubble constant 
also means a younger universe. Recent measurements of 
the Hubble constant place its value in the range between 
60 and 70 km s"! Mpc™! (1 Mpc = 3.1 x 10” m). This 
corresponds to an age of the universe between 10 and 15 
Gyr (1 Gyr = 10? yr). 

Aresult of the cosmic expansion and of the finite speed 
of light is that the light emitted from any given galaxy 
is observed by a remote observer (i.e. one located on a 
different galaxy, for example the Milky Way) as having 
a longer wavelength than it had at the emission. This 
is because the cosmic expansion has caused the space 
between the two galaxies to increase during the lapse of 
time between emission and detection, and while the light 
was traveling from one galaxy to the other. This causes 
a ‘stretching’ of the wavelength of the light, namely a 
shift towards longer (therefore redder) wavelengths. The 
fractional change in the wavelength with respect to the 
one at emission as measured by the observer is called the 
‘redshift’. It follows that, the higher the redshift, the longer 
the stretch in wavelength, and hence the more distant the 
two galaxies. 

The redshift provides a measure of the distance to a 
galaxy as well as of the lapse of time between the instant 
of emission and that of observation. Thus, an observer 
can see the galaxy and study its properties as it was at the 
epoch of the emission. Galaxies located near ours have 
very small redshifts and are seen as they were a very 
short time ago compared with the age of the universe. 
In practice, local galaxies are contemporaries of our own, 
and hence the present cosmic time corresponds to redshift 
zero. The value of the redshift of objects seen at the time 
of the big bang is infinity. Figure 1 shows the relationship 
between redshift, distance and the corresponding age of 
the universe (i.e. the lapse of time from the big bang 
to that redshift) for two different assumptions for the 
cosmological parameters Q and Q,, namely the total 
density of matter and the energy density due to the 
cosmological constant, respectively. In both cases the 
Hubble constant has been assumed to be 65 km s~! Mpc"!. 

In practice, redshifts are measured from the spectra 
of the galaxies, namely diagrams that plot the intensity of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


5 7 
15 - 74 
A 
7 
r 7 
\ a3 ] 
1 td 
i 7 
\ Z _| 
li » 100 
a a 
a ¢ 
d 3. 
ice “ = 
= 
a z J 
wo 10 | \ / eS) 
a 1 7 Oo 
‘ ty ‘a oO 
So \ 7 we 
<t yy 7 Ras 
\ 7 
) \ / | o 
al \ va S) 
7 \ 4 a ts50 5 
2 | : as 
= \ “ B 
a Keon g 4 
3) \ 7 a 
\ \ 7 
\ Rn 7 
L  \ 
\ rf 
1 \ se 
a | 
Z 
7 a 
is ™ 
Loe SA hie ered 
\ pee tb \ 0 
0 2 4 6 8 10 


Redshift 


Figure 1. The relationship between redshift, cosmic age and 
distance for two different world models, both spatially flat (i.e. 
with Euclidean geometry). The Hubble constant is assumed to 
be Ho = 65 kms! Mpc"? in both cases. In one model only 
matter is present in space, namely 2 = 1.0 (continuous curves); 
in the other model the space is filled with both matter and the 
cosmological constant, with Q = 0.3 and Q, = 0.7 (dashed 
curves). The thin curves represent the cosmic age at the various 
redshifts. The cosmic age at the present epoch (redshift zero), is 
10 and 14.5 billion years in the two models, respectively. At the 
time of the big bang (infinite redshift) the cosmic age was zero. 
Within the accuracy of the plot, redshift z = 10 can already be 
identified as infinite. The thick curves represent the distance of a 
source as a function of its redshift, expressed as x 1000 Mpc. As a 
comparison, the Andromeda galaxy is at about 0.8 Mpc from the 
Milky Way and the Virgo cluster at about 18.5 Mpc. The most 
distant galaxies observed so far are located at a redshift z ~ 5.5. 


a galaxy’s light (also referred to as flux) as a function of 
its wavelength, by comparing the observed wavelengths 
of atomic and molecular features (either emission or 
absorption lines) with those of the same features observed 
in laboratories on Earth (i.e. at redshift zero). The top panel 
of figure 2 shows the model ultraviolet (UV) spectrum 
of a star-forming galaxy at redshift z = 3. Absorption 
lines can be observed as deep ‘dents’ in the spectrum. 
Another pronounced feature visible in the figure is the 
sudden dimming of the light at wavelengths shorter than 
the ‘Lyman limit’, as we shall discuss later. 


The search for galaxies at high redshift 

Because of their extreme distances, galaxies at high redshift 
necessarily appear to an observer as faint objects, even if 
their absolute luminosity is large. However, only a very 
small fraction of all the faint galaxies observed in a deep 
image of the sky are located at high redshifts. This is 
because galaxies have absolute luminosities that cover a 
wide range, extending over several orders of magnitude, 
and fainter galaxies are also much more abundant in 
space than brighter ones. As a result, deep images of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the sky are crowded by a myriad of relatively close but 
intrinsically faint galaxies, while intrinsically luminous 
galaxies at high redshift are comparatively very rare. This 
‘contamination’ by interlopers is in fact so severe that, 
without some criterion to cull them from the faint, nearby 
ones, it would be totally impractical to search for high- 
redshift galaxies by randomly measuring the redshifts of 
samples of faint galaxies until the very distant ones are 
found. Because of this elusiveness, high-redshift galaxies 
came to be regarded as the ‘holy grail’ of cosmological 
research. 

Theoretical expectations of the mechanism of forma- 
tion of the so-called spheroids, namely ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES 
and bulges of sPIRAL GALAXIES, provided a criterion to iden- 
tify high-redshift galaxies. The stars that constitute the 
spheroids are among the oldest observed in the local uni- 
verse, and currently there is no appreciable ongoing activ- 
ity of STAR FORMATION in these systems. These facts indicate 
that the spheroids formed their stars during a very early 
cosmic epoch in a relatively short period of time. Since 
this epoch marked the first significant episodes of star 
formation during the cosmic evolution (note that about 
~1/2 of all the stars of the present-day universe are found 
within spheroids), it has been traditionally identified with 
the epoch of galaxy formation, and the nascent spheroids 
themselves have been identified with the primeval galax- 
ies. 

The theoretical expectations predicted that the 
entire stellar content of a spheroid formed during the 
gravitational collapse of the proto-cloud of gas from which 
the structure originated. Simple physical arguments show 
that the duration of such a collapse is of the order of 
the time of free fall which, for a galaxy with the mass 
of the Milky Way, is about one hundred million years. 
If a whole galaxy’s worth of stars is to be formed in 
such a relatively short time, the rate of formation of the 
stars must have reached very high values, a condition 
known as a starburst. For example, a galaxy like the 
Milky Way has a stellar mass of about 10''Mo!, and if 
this assembled during a burst that lasted ~108 yr, the 
star formation rate must have been ~10°Mo yr7'. Asa 
comparison, the star formation rate of the Milky way today 
is about 1M, yr7!. A galaxy undergoing its first starburst 
is expected to emit intense UV radiation including, in 
particular, a very strong emission line at the wavelength 
hw = 1216 A called Lyman-qa. This feature is produced by 
the recombination of hydrogen atoms, a gas which is very 
abundant in young, star-forming galaxies, photoionized 
by the intense UV light of young, massive stars. 

Estimates of the age of the stellar populations of the 
spheroids place the epoch of the bursts in the redshift 
range 2 < z < 7. The UV spectrum of such galaxies 
would then be observed redshifted to optical and near- 
infrared wavelengths and be detectable by ground-based 
telescopes and electronic detectors. For example, the 


1 The mass of the Sun is represented by the symbol Mo, and it 
has been measured to be Mp = 1.98 x 10” kg. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lyman-a of a nascent spheroid at redshift z = 3.5 today 
is observed at Agbs = (1 + z)Ag ~ 5500 A, which is in the 
middle of the visible band. If at redshift z ~ 7 or larger the 
Lyman-a line is redshifted into the infrared portion of the 
spectrum. 

Large observational campaigns to identify primeval 
galaxies by means of their Lyman-a emission line started 
in the early 1980s, when solid-state electronic imaging 
detectors replaced the traditional photographic plates. 
The electronic detectors, also known as CHARGED-COUPLED 
DEVICES, overcame the characteristic limited sensitivity and 
difficulty of calibration of the plates, which had so far 
limited the study of very faint objects. In the early 1990s, 
electronic detectors sensitive to infrared radiation also 
became available, which made it possible to extend the 
searches for Lyman-a emitters to higher redshifts than 
those probed by optical detectors. These observations 
were designed to be sensitive to sources characterized by 
the presence of a strong emission line. Some consisted of 
narrow-band imaging, namely of images taken through 
narrow filters that can isolate the line emission, if its 
redshift is such as to place it at the wavelength of the filter. 
The presence of the emission line is detected from galaxy’s 
relatively brighter apparent luminosity in the narrow- 
band filter compared with that through a conventional 
filter. Other searches consisted of spectroscopy of regions 
of the sky and were designed to directly detect the emission 
line from the recorded spectra. 

Interestingly, except for a handful of objects, Lyman-a 
emitters at high redshifts were not found, while numerous 
detections of relatively bright objects were expected if a 
whole population of galaxies (i.e. the spheroids) formed 
through the mechanism of gravitational collapse. The 
lack of detections provided support for competing models 
for the formation of the spheroids. These predict that 
spheroids were assembled through hierarchical merging 
of smaller subgalactic structures. These small systems 
themselves have formed through a gravitational collapse 
before they merged into larger galaxies. However, because 
they would be significantly smaller than the present- 
day bright spheroids, they are predicted to have been 
correspondingly fainter than massive spheroids at the time 
of their formation, in this way eluding detection. 

Unfortunately, the lack of detections of bright Lyman- 
a emitters at high redshifts did not conclusively constrain 
the mechanism of formation of the spheroids. On the one 
hand it did not prove the merging scenario. On the other 
hand it did not disprove the monolithic collapse scenario, 
since other explanations can be put forward to explain 
the lack of Lyman-a emitters. The most important of 
these is the presence of dust, which can form in nascent 
galaxies in a relatively short time, of the order of the free- 
fall time, as a result of the high rate of supernova events 
that take place in these systems. Even relatively small 
amounts of dust can have large effects on the Lyman-a 
luminosity, because this emission line is resonant. This 
means that, contrary to non-resonant lines, whose photons 
can travel long distances within the interstellar gas before 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


interacting with other atoms, the Lyman-a photons are 
constantly being emitted, absorbed and re-emitted again 
by virtually all the hydrogen atoms that they encounter in 
their path. This greatly increases the geometrical path of 
the photons within the gas cloud before they can leave 
it. This, in turn, greatly increases the chances for the 
photons of being absorbed and destroyed by dust grains 
present in the cloud, resulting in a selective dimming of 
the luminosity of the galaxies at the Lyman-a wavelength. 

Very recently, thanks to the extraordinary sensitivity 
of telescopes of large aperture, such as the 10 m Keck, 
Lyman-a emitting galaxies at high redshift have been 
eventually identified (Hu et al 1998). Interestingly, when 
sufficient numbers of these galaxies were observed that 
their abundances in space as a function of the luminosity 
(the so-called ‘LUMINOSITY FUNCTION OF GALAXIES’) could be 
characterized with sufficient precision, it became clear that 
those luminous enough to be considered plausible proto- 
spheroids were too rare. By then, however, a massive 
population of star-forming galaxies at high redshift (with 
or without Lyman-a emission) had already been identified 
by means of another technique. While the properties of 
these galaxies provided an explanation for the paucity of 
Lyman-a emitters, they also provided plausible candidates 
for the present-day spheroids. 


The Lyman-break technique 

Acompletely different technique to search for star-forming 
galaxies at high redshift was proposed in the early 1990s. 
This technique exploits another major feature of the UV 
spectra of galaxies with ongoing star formation, namely 
the hydrogen ionization edge or Lyman limit. 

Star-forming galaxies are very luminous at UV 
wavelengths and have a characteristic ‘blue’ spectrum, 
ie. rich in radiation of short wavelengths, which is 
‘flat’, namely the intensity of the light does not depend 
on the wavelength. In a diagram that plots the light 
intensity as a function of wavelength such a spectrum 
looks approximately horizontal, as the top panel of 
figure 2 shows. However, ionizing radiation, namely light 
with wavelength shorter than 912 A, although copiously 
produced inside the galaxies, cannot escape them (and 
thus be observable), because it is entirely absorbed by the 
hydrogen gas, which is very abundant within and around 
star-forming galaxies. When a hydrogen atom is hit by a 
photon with wavelength shorter than 912 A, it becomes 
ionized, that is its electron is stripped from the proton at 
the expense of the energy of the photon itself, which is 
destroyed. 

As a result of this absorption of ionizing photons, 
the spectrum as recorded by an observer external to the 
galaxies has a very pronounced ‘dimming’ of more than 
an order of magnitude at wavelengths shorter than the 
Lyman limit. This is called the Lyman break (see figure 2, 
top panel). Additional absorption is also introduced 
by the intergalactic gas that the light from the galaxy 
travels through in its journey towards the observer. This 
increases the amplitude of the break even further (and also 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1.5 T T T T 


Model galaxy at z=3.0 


relative flux 


° 
a 

T 
redshifted Lyman limit 


unattenuated spectrum 


attenuated spectrum 


HST Filters 


606 Te14 


V, 


Uso0 Baso 


transmission 


2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 
observed wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. The UV spectrum of a star-forming galaxy observed at 
redshift z = 3, and the idea behind the Lyman-break technique. 
The top panel shows the spectrum redshifted at z = 3, namely 
with the intrinsic wavelengths increased by a factor 1+ z = 4. 
Notice the sharp decrease of the intensity of the light at 
wavelengths shorter than the Lyman limit. The ‘attenuated’ 
spectrum illustrates the absorption of UV light by intervening 
neutral hydrogen. The middle panel shows the transmission 
curves of the four filters used to observe the Hubble Deep Field 
(HDF) with HST. When observing through a given filter, only 
radiation with wavelengths within the filter curve can reach the 
detectors. The bottom panels reproduce the images of a real 
Lyman-break galaxy at z = 2.8 (the multiple object with a 
sausage-like morphology indicated by the arrow) through each 
filter. Notice how the galaxy ‘drops out’ of the U filter, since this 
samples the spectrum to the left of the Lyman limit. Three other 
galaxies can be observed which do not drop out from the U filter 
(they are actually detected in the filter), but rather progressively 
dim, indicating that they are at relatively modest redshifts. 


slightly attenuates the spectrum shortly before the break— 
see figure 2). 

The Lyman break abruptly interrupts the ‘flatness’ 
of the spectra of star-forming galaxies, and provides the 
telltale clue to identify them. For example, at redshifts 
around z ~ 3 the Lyman break is shifted from 912 Ain the 
rest frame to ~3700 A in the observer’s frame, well into the 
optical band, observable from the ground. When observed 
through a set of filters that straddle the Lyman break, star- 
forming galaxies at those redshifts appear relatively bright 
in those filters that probe the spectrum longward of the 
break (the I and V filters of figure 2), they dim a little just 
before the break (the B filter), and are extremely faint (or 
not visible at all) in those filters that probe shortward of 
the break (the U filter). Thus, by accurately measuring 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the light of galaxies in a carefully selected set of filters, 
it is possible to cull high-redshift galaxy candidates from 
the much more abundant galaxies of similar apparent 
luminosity placed at modest distances. This is illustrated 
in the middle and bottom panels of figure 2, which show 
the transmittance curves of filters used for this technique 
and one of the high-redshift galaxy candidates found 
in this way, respectively. These candidates are then 
followed up with spectroscopic measurements to confirm 
their redshifts. In practice, the selection of candidates 
is efficiently done with telescopes of middle size (e.g. 4— 
5m), while the spectroscopic measurements to confirm the 
redshifts require telescopes of the 8 m class or larger. The 
candidate shown in figure 2 has been confirmed to be at 
redshift z = 2.8. 

The wavelength of the filter bandpass is what 
determines the redshift range of the candidates. The filter 
suite shown in the figure is very sensitive in the redshift 
range 2 < z < 3.5. However, by excluding the U band and 
using the B band in lieu to probe shortward of the Lyman 
limit, together with the V and I bands to probe longward 
of it, one can target higher redshift intervals, which in this 
case 3.5 < z S 4.5. Other redder filters can be used for 
even higher redshift intervals. 

The ‘Lyman-break technique’ turned out to be very 
sensitive and efficient. Although the exact numbers 
depend on the targeted redshift range, the fraction of 
the candidates that are confirmed at high redshifts by 
the spectroscopic measures is very high. For example, 
galaxies in the range 2 S z < 3.5 are identified with 
essentially 100% efficiency. In the range 3.5 Sz < 4.5 
the efficiency is still ~50%. Two major surveys have 
been made using the Lyman-break technique. The largest 
one has been carried out by Steidel and collaborators 
(Steidel et al 1996, 1999) using ground-based telescopes for 
both the selection of the candidates and the spectroscopic 
confirmation. To date, this survey includes about 2000 
candidates at z ~ 3, of which ~1000 have spectroscopically 
measured redshifts, and another ~300 candidates at z ~ 4 
with ~60 spectroscopic redshifts. 

Another important survey has been made from space 
using the data collected by the Hubble Space Telescope 
during the observations of the HDF (HUBBLE DEEP FIELD) 
survey (Madau et al 1996). Although significantly smaller 
in size than the ground-based survey owing to the 
limited coverage of sky area, the HDF has allowed the 
identification of significantly fainter Lyman-break galaxies 
than possible from the ground, allowing researchers to 
study how the properties of these systems change with 
their luminosity. Because the archive is freely accessible to 
the world community, several groups have used the HDF 
data to identify high-redshift galaxies, and there have been 
reports of possible detection of galaxies with redshifts as 
high as z ~ 5.5 in the HDF. 


The nature of high-redshift galaxies 
The samples of high-redshift galaxies made available 
by the Lyman-break technique have eventually allowed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


researchers to carry out empirical studies of their 
properties, opening the distant universe to the entire 
investigation. These studies include both statistical 
analysis of the large samples themselves as well as 
follow-up observations, including high-angular resolution 
imaging with the Hubble Space Telescope and imaging 
and spectroscopy at near-infrared wavelengths (to study 
the rest-frame optical ones) from large ground-based 
facilities and again from HST. This work has allowed us 
to test our fundamental ideas on galaxy and structure 
formation on an empirical basis. 

One important thing must be kept in mind when 
interpreting the galaxies’ properties. The UV luminosity of 
star-forming galaxies (i.e. the intensity of the UV spectrum) 
is powered by the emission of young, massive stars, 
those approximately 20 times more massive than our Sun, 
while less massive stars are responsible for the optical 
and infrared luminosity. Massive stars are produced 
during star formation together with less massive ones, 
but, in contrast to the latter, which can live up to several 
billion years (depending on their mass), they only live 
about a million year or so, and then they explode as 
SUPERNOVAE. If the star formation continues in a galaxy at 
a steady rate, new massive stars constantly replace the 
dead ones, and the UV luminosity of the galaxy remains 
constant. The higher the star formation rate, namely the 
higher the number of massive stars formed in a given 
time, the larger the UV luminosity of the galaxy. At the 
same time low-mass stars keep piling up, increasing the 
optical luminosity of the galaxies. If star formation ceases, 
massive stars die off within a few 10° yr, and the UV 
luminosity fades away. The galaxy, however, remains 
visible at optical and infrared wavelengths because of the 
long-lived less-massive stars. The longer the duration of 
the star formation phase, the larger the amount of small- 
mass stars formed and the higher the optical and infrared 
luminosity. Thus, the UV luminosity of star-forming 
galaxies is a direct measure of their star formation rate, 
while the optical luminosity is linked to the amount of 
small stars that have been formed. 


The assembly of galaxy structures 

High-resolution images at optical wavelengths obtained 
with HST have revealed a variety of morphologies 
and sizes (Giavalisco et al 1996). Since at these high 
redshifts optical images probe the UV light, they provide 
information on the regions with active star formation. The 
images show that some galaxies are compact systems, with 
relatively smooth and regular morphology that bears a 
pronounced resemblance to the spheroids observed in the 
present-day universe. One example of such galaxies is 
shown in figure 3. Other galaxies are also regular, but 
they have more diffuse light profiles (i.e. the variation 
of the brightness from the center to the outer regions) 
and look more similar to present-day spirals, although 
familiar features of these systems such as the spiral arms 
have not been identified at high redshift. Still other 
galaxies are irregular and fragmented, often showing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Picture of a Lyman-break galaxy at redshift z = 2.96 
taken with the Hubble Space Telescope and the WFPC2 camera 
(the faint source to the upper left of the galaxy is unrelated). The 
image has been taken through the V filter F606W. The angular 
resolution is 0.05 arcsec, corresponding to a spatial scale of 

~0.5 kpc, and the size of the square image is 3.2 seconds of arc, 
or 27 kpc. The galaxy shows a regular morphology, and it is 
characterized by the same light profile commonly found in 
elliptical galaxies and bulges (the ‘spheroids’) of the present-day 
universe. The regular morphology of this galaxy contrasts with 
the fragmented structure found in the Lyman-break galaxy at 

Z = 2.81 shown at the bottom of figure 2 (the third image from 
left of this galaxy has also been taken with the V filter F606W). 


multiple compact nuclei embedded in diffuse nebulosity, 
and overall morphology that cannot be classified in terms 
of the traditional galaxy types. One example of this 
category is the galaxy at z = 2.81 shown in the bottom 
panel of figure 2. 

This diversity points to a variety of formation 
mechanisms. The compact, spheroidal galaxies can be 
explained if they formed as a result of a violent dynamical 
process, either a gravitational collapse of a proto-cloud or 
the merging of a number of discrete subunits, the more 
diffuse ones through the constant accretion of gas onto 
a rotationally supported disk, where it is converted into 
stars. In either case, the interesting fact is that the light 
profile of these galaxies strongly suggests that they are 
dynamically evolved and stable systems. At the observed 
rates of star formation and if left undisturbed in the 
course of evolution, they will have evolved into what 
are today elliptical and spiral galaxies of medium mass 
and luminosity, respectively. The fact that intense star 
formation seems to be occurring in these systems after the 
main dynamical event that gave origin to their structure 
(and most likely triggered the star formation activity) took 
place suggests that continued hierarchical merging after 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


redshift z ~ 3 is not necessary for the formation of some 
galaxies. One prediction in this case is that the mass of the 
regular Lyman-break galaxies is similar to that of present- 
day elliptical and spiral galaxies. 

On the other hand, the irregular and fragmented 
morphology of other Lyman-break galaxies suggests that 
intense star formation occurs during interactions and 
merging events. In this case the expectation is that 
the mass of the forming galaxies progressively increases 
during the evolution (i.e. at smaller redshifts) and hence 
Lyman-break galaxies at z ~ 3 should also include small, 
submassive systems. 

Direct measurements of the mass of distant galaxies 
are very difficult at the present, even with the most 
powerful of the current telescopes, whereas they will be 
routine with large-aperture space telescopes such as the 
proposed NASA 8 m Next Generation Space Telescope. 
Great progress in understanding the mechanisms of galaxy 
formation is expected with such a facility. 


The cosmic evolution of star formation 

One of the most important results that came out of the 
discovery of galaxies at high redshift is the possibility to 
reconstruct the evolution of the activity of star formation 
in the universe over a very large stretch of cosmic time. 
The temporal interval currently probed extends from the 
present epoch to when the universe was about 10% of its 
current age. 

The amount of stars being produced in the universe at 
any given epoch can be estimated from the abundance and 
UV luminosity of star-forming galaxies at that epoch. The 
abundance is measured by their volume density, namely 
the number of galaxies in a given volume of space, for 
example 1 Mpc? (2.9 x 10° m3), while the luminosity 
is directly obtained by the photometry of the sources 
detected in the images. The counts of Lyman-break 
galaxies down to the faintest available UV luminosity, 
therefore, can be used to derive a measure of the UV 
luminosity density. Recalling that the UV luminosity is 
proportional to the star formation rate, this can then be 
expressed as star formation density, namely the amount 
of stellar mass formed in a given volume of the universe at 
a given redshift. A practical unit of measure for the cosmic 
star formation density is expressed as solar mass per year 
per cubic megaparsec, or My yr-' Mpc". 

The diagram in figure 4 (top) shows the cosmic 
star formation density plotted (on a logarithmic scale) 
as a function of redshift. The different symbols indicate 
different surveys that have measured the cosmic star 
formation density in a variety of redshifts intervals, 
marked by the horizontal bars. Also shown are the 
uncertainties on the measurements, marked by the vertical 
bars. 

Taken at face value, the diagram suggests that 
cosmic star formation activity started sometime just before 
redshift z ~ 5, gradually increased towards smaller 
redshifts, reaching a peak at redshifts z ~ 1 (about 1/3 
of the cosmic age after the big bang) and then rapidly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


6) or T rr ee | ] roto T r fT 
-o5E No Extinction 4 
a) E 7 
a iz a 
= -1e S| 
ae 
iz I 1 | 
oa ; 1 
nm -1.55 ob rH 4 
g = + ai 
gp if 4 
2.5 a | fe aie pp fees p= Lt 
0 2 3 4 5 
Redshift 
0) TT a aan a | az 
—0.5 : Extinction Corrected : 
oe L : 1 
2 15 peg ee 
Biot @ a | 
a“ ac : 
© 
= see 4 
2.5 F111 jf eT CO bes 
0 1 2 3 4 5 


Redshift 


Figure 4. The history of cosmic star formation. Both plots show 
observations of the star formation density, namely the stellar 
mass produced every year in a cube of space 1 Mpc ona side, as 
a function of redshift. The y-axis is plotted on a logarithmic 
scale, and the mass is measured in units of the solar mass, i.e. 

2 x 10° g. The vertical bars for each data point represent the 
uncertainties on the measurements. The horizontal bars 
represent the redshift intervals covered by each data point. The 
top panel shows the data as observed; those in the bottom panel 
have been corrected for dust absorption, assuming that the 
properties of the dust do not change with redshift and are the 
same as observed in the local universe. Notice that the 
uncorrected data seem to suggest that the cosmic star formation 
began sometime prior to redshift z ~ 5, progressively increased 
until it reached a peak at z ~ 1 and then sharply decreased 
towards the present epoch, ie. z = 0. The corrected data, 
however, do not support this interpretation, suggesting instead 
that the epoch of the onset of star formation in the universe has 
not yet been observed by the current data, and must be searched 
for at redshifts higher than z ~ 5. 


decreased towards the present epoch (i.e. z = 0) to the 
same levels as at z ~ 5. If confirmed, this would be a very 
interesting result, because it would empirically support 
the idea that during its early evolution the universe 
experienced a time when it contained no stars (dark age). 

However, these measurements must be taken with 
great caution, since they can be subject to systematic errors 
that can bias the results. As should be clear, the measures 
of abundance are of a statistical nature, since they are 
based on galaxy counts, and therefore they rely on the 
assumption that the observed samples at high redshift 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are fair representations of the population of star forming 
galaxies at their epochs. This would not be the case, 
however, if the samples were too small, because in this case 
they could be subject to a statistical fluctuations (cosmic 
variance) and be either overpopulated or underpopulated 
in galaxies, depending whether an overdensity or 
underdensity region, respectively, has been (by statistical 
chance) targeted. 

Another more serious and insidious source of 
systematic error is that measures of UV luminosity can 
be affected by unknown amounts of dust obscuration. 
The interstellar medium of nascent galaxies becomes 
polluted by dust in short time scales, as this is produced 
in the supernova explosions that end the short lives of 
massive stars. Dust affects the observed luminosity of 
these sources, because it absorbs UV and optical radiation 
and converts it into infrared radiation. Moreover, the 
absorption is more severe for radiation with shorter 
wavelengths than with longer ones. As a result, the 
observed UV spectra are fainter and redder than they 
would be if dust were not present, and an observer would 
conclude from them that the galaxies are less luminous 
and hence forming stars at a lower rates than they actually 
are. 

Qualitatively, the presence of dust in the Lyman-break 
galaxies at z ~ 3 and ~4 has been revealed by a number of 
indicators. These include the observed UV spectra, which 
are systematically somewhat redder (richer in radiation 
with longer wavelengths) than those of known dust- 
free galaxies with similar properties. Another indicator 
is the intensity of the rest-frame optical emission lines 
(observed at near-IR wavelengths, because of the redshift) 
which are comparatively too strong for the observed 
UV luminosity, consistently indicating the presence of 
dust reddening. Quantitatively, however, it is extremely 
difficult to estimate the amount of obscuration suffered by 
the galaxies and, therefore, attempt a correction to recover 
the intrinsic luminosity and star formation rates. This is 
because the correction depends on the properties of the 
dust (the so-called ‘extinction curve’) and on the shape of 
the ‘unreddened’ spectra (i.e. those that would be observed 
without dust obscuration). Since these are not precisely 
known, the correction can only be computed after making 
some assumptions, and thus it will depend on them. 

The bottom panel of figure 4 shows the evolution of 
the cosmic star formation activity after corrections for dust 
obscuration have been made, assuming that the properties 
of the dust and the intrinsic spectra of the galaxies at high 
redshift are similar to those of starburst galaxies in the local 
universe. If these assumptions are realistic, the correction 
at z ~ 3 is about a factor of 5, implying that the amount 
of star formation at those cosmic epochs was actually 5 
times higher than what one would naively derive using 
the observed data without any dust correction. Changing 
the assumptions to cover all the known cases of dust 
properties and spectra of star-forming galaxies would 
change the correction, making it as small as a factor of 
2 or as large as a factor of 15. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Irrespective of the exact value of the correction, 
however, the important fact is that there is no obvious 
evidence for a decline of the cosmic star formation activity 
towards high redshifts (i.e. past z ~ 1) when some amount 
of dust correction is attempted. This means that, going 
toward the highest redshifts probed by the current galaxy 
surveys, namely z ~ 4.5 or ~10% of the cosmic age, 
really there is no evidence that the cosmic star formation 
activity is decreasing from the level reached at z ~ 1. In 
other words, there is no evidence from the current data 
that, going from large redshifts toward small ones, we 
are seeing the end of the dark era and the beginning of 
the epoch of star formation, namely the transition from 
the epoch when the universe did not contain stars in 
appreciable quantities to when it started to efficiently form 
them. It seems now very likely that to detect and study this 
transition we will have to identify galaxies at even higher 
redshifts than we currently are capable of doing. 


Are there more high-redshift galaxies? 

One interesting question to ask is whether the Lyman- 
break technique, i.e. the selection of distant galaxies 
from their UV emission, returns all the galaxies that are 
physically present at the targeted redshifts. Star-forming 
galaxies with a large amount of dust or old galaxies, 
namely with previously formed stellar populations and 
no star formation activity, have very little UV luminosity, 
if any at all, and cannot be found with the Lyman- 
break technique. Discovering such galaxies at very high 
redshifts (say, z > 3), if they exist, would have enormous 
consequences. On the one hand, if UV-dark star-forming 
galaxies are present in large numbers, this means that we 
have severely underestimated the amount of stars formed 
early in the universe. This implies that today there are 
many more stars and heavy elements? than we currently 
observe in the universe. On the other hand, if old galaxies 
are already present at very high redshifts, this would imply 
either that we have underestimated the age of the universe 
or that we do not understand very well the physical 
conditions of the early universe or time scale of STELLAR 
EVOLUTION. 

Recent imaging observations at sub-millimetric 
wavelengths (Lilly et al 1999) have unveiled a population 
of sources with properties consistent with star-forming 
galaxies at high redshift whose UV radiation is being either 
partially or completely absorbed by dust and re-emitted 
at far-infrared wavelengths (observed as submillimetric 
wavelengths because of the redshift). Interestingly, some 
of these sources have been identified as Lyman-break 
galaxies at z ~ 3 (Barger et al 1999) and, conversely, 
Lyman-break galaxies at z ~ 3 have been observed as 
submillimetric sources (Chapman et al 2000). Many 
others have eluded the efforts to identify them and assign 
them a redshift, and at present the redshift distribution 


? Elements heavier that helium are produced in large quantities 
only in the interior of stars and released into space when these 
explode as supernovae. Before the beginning of star formation 
the universe essentially consisted only of hydrogen and helium. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the submillimeter population is unknown. Of course, 
similarly unknown is the extent to which the Lyman-break 
galaxies and the submillimeter galaxies overlap, i.e. are 
the same objects. Assuming that the latter are placed at 
z > 2 and adding together all their luminosities yields 
a total energy output at infrared wavelengths that is a 
factor of several larger than that of the energy output at 
UV wavelengths by the Lyman-break galaxies. We have 
seen, however, that the UV luminosity of these sources is 
likely to be underestimated by a factor of several owing to 
dust obscuration, and, when a correction is included, the 
two contributions become comparable. This is consistent 
with the possibility that the two galaxy populations are 
the same one. In such a case the submillimetric emission 
would be powered by the UV light absorbed by dust and 
re-emitted at infrared wavelengths’. 

Unfortunately, with the current instrumentation it is 
not possible to identify the nature of the submillimetric 
sources with great confidence, and establish whether they 
have or do not have UV emission, which from high 
redshifts would be observed at optical wavelengths. This 
is largely because the angular resolution of the images 
is very coarse (about 15 seconds of arc) and many faint 
optical sources can be found within a circular region of the 
sky with such a large diameter, making the identification 
with optical galaxies very difficult. Future generations 
of submillimeter telescopes, such as the ALMA project 
that will be commissioned in Chile in 2007 as a joint 
collaborative project of the US, Europe and Japan, will 
have the sensitivity and resolving power to accurately 
image the sources and allow the identification with optical 
ones (or demonstrate that optical counterparts are very 
rare). It will be very interesting to see whether current UV 
survey have accounted for all the star formation activity 
in the young universe, whether most of it has actually 
been hidden by dust, or else if the universe was already 
populated by ‘old’ objects when it was only ~10% or less 
of its current age. 


Galaxy formation and dark matter 

Another fundamental avenue of research opened by the 
identification of forming galaxies at high redshift is the 
possibility of testing the idea that gravity has been the force 
responsible for galaxy and structure formation. 

If gravity has assembled the cosmic structures, then 
one prediction is that galaxies have formed in those regions 
of space where enough mass had condensed and produced 
the gravitational pull to confine the gas ina relatively small 
volume of space, promoting and facilitating its conversion 
into stars. 

What are these mass condensations that seeded 
galaxy and star formation? There is compelling evidence 
that the majority of the mass present in the universe (about 
90% of it) is not in the form of visible matter but is dark, 
either because it is cold or because it interacts very weakly 


3 The equality of the two terms is expected in this case from the 
principle of conservation of energy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Lyman—Break Galaxies, R<25.5 


sEnpeeapeeeeurane 


Figure 5. The angular correlation function of Lyman-break 
galaxies with apparent magnitude brighter than R = 25.5. This 
quantity measures the probability of finding a pair of galaxies in 
the sky separated by an angle 6 (measured in seconds of arc) as a 
function of the angle itself. The diagram shows that close galaxy 
pairs are much more likely to be found than loose ones, 
indicating the strong tendencies of Lyman-break galaxies to 
cluster in space. For clarity, the error bars have been plotted on 
the top of the figure. Filled and empty circles indicate two 
different estimators, used to test for the possible existence of 
systematic errors in the measurements. The continuous and 
dashed curves are the fits to the filled and empty circles (data 
points), respectively. The clustering and abundances of 
Lyman-break galaxies have been found to agree with the 
predictions of the theory of gravitational instability for dark 
matter halos, lending strong empirical support to the idea that 
galaxies have formed within halos that provided enough gravity 
to make gas condense and convert into stars. 


with the electromagnetic radiation. Its presence, however, 
is detected through the gravitational effects, such as 
motion, that it induces in other, visible objects. The nature 
of the dark matter is unknown. It has been proposed that it 
might consist of ordinary matter such as objects similar to 
planets or unborn stars (brown dwarfs), or of more exotic 
types of matter, such as subatomic particles (e.g. massive 
neutrinos), other species of particles predicted by quantum 
theories (e.g. axions, photinos, gravitinos) or even of such 
systems as primordial mini BLACK HOLES. It is beyond the 
scope of this article to discuss dark matter in detail (but 
see DARK MATTER: ITS NATURE), and in the following we shall 
refer to it as a ‘cosmological fluid’ that, together with the 
regular visible matter, fills the space in the universe, and 
consider only its gravitational effects. 

If gravity has assembled structures out of the cosmic 
fluid, then one specific prediction of the theory is that 
the spatial distribution of these structures (we shall refer 
to these structures as ‘the halos’) is not homogeneous, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies at High Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


but highly clustered. In other words, the halos are 
not expected to be distributed in space at random, but 
preferentially located next to each other, defining local 
concentrations that are also preferentially found next to 
other concentrations, and so on. Thus, if the visible part of 
galaxies (i.e. the stars) forms when gas condenses inside 
the dark matter halos, then the spatial distribution of 
forming galaxies must be the same as that expected for 
the halos themselves. 

One of the most remarkable properties of the Lyman- 
break galaxies is that their spatial distribution is, within 
the uncertainties of the measurements, the same as that 
expected for the dark matter halos (Giavalisco et al 1998; 
Adelberger et al 1998). Figure 5 illustrates the strong spatial 
clustering of the galaxies. It shows the probability of 
finding a pair of galaxies separated by an angle 6 in the 
sky as a function of the angle itself (measured in seconds 
of arc). This quantity is known as the angular correlation 
function and it is traditionally represented by the symbol 
w(6). The data show that pairs of Lyman-break galaxies 
separated by small angles in the sky are much more likely 
to be found than pairs with large separations. This means 
that the galaxies have a strong tendency to cluster in space, 
namely to be physically closer to each other than in a 
homogeneous (random) distribution. If the galaxies were 
randomly distributed in space, the function w(@) would 
have been flat, namely equal to a constant numerical value 
for any angular separation, indicating that pairs could 
have been found equally likely at all angular separations. 

Because the distances to the galaxies are known, it is 
possible to transform the angular separations in the sky 
into physical separations in space and derive the spatial 
scales over which Lyman-break galaxies are clustered. 
These scales turn out to be of the order of 3-5 Mpc, the 
exact values depending on the Hubble constant Hj and 
the cosmological parameters Q and Q,, which are not 
yet precisely known. These observed scales have been 
found to be the same as those predicted by the theory 
of gravitational instability. The theory also predicts the 
abundances of the galaxies (i.e. the number of galaxies in 
a given volume of space), and, remarkably, the observed 
numbers of galaxies also agree very well with the predicted 
ones. 

The predictions of the theory of gravitational 
instability concern structures that form out of the ‘cosmic 
fluid’ through the action of gravity. The simultaneous 
agreement of the observed clustering strength and 
spatial abundances of the Lyman-break galaxies with the 
analogous quantities predicted for the dark matter halos 
shows that the visible component of galaxies has the same 
properties predicted for the halos. This is consistent with 
the idea that visible galaxies and dark halos are physically 
associated and in fact are the same structures. This 
evidence provides strong empirical support for the notion 
that star formation takes place within the gravitational 
potential provided by the halos (recall that the dark 
matter accounts for ~90% of the mass), which would 
act as ‘condensation seeds’, making it possible for the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gas to condense and transform into stars. The observed 
clustering properties and abundances of Lyman-break 
galaxies represent a remarkable success for the theory 
and show that main ideas behind the paradigm of galaxy 
formation are generally robust. 


Bibliography 

Adelberger K L, Steidel C C, Giavalisco M, Dickinson M, 
Pettini M and Kellogg M 1998 Astrophys. J. 505 18 

Barger A J, Cowie L L, Smail I, Ivison R J, Blain A W and 
Kneib J-P 1999 Astron. J. 117 2656 

Chapman S et al 2000 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. at press 

Giavalisco M, Steidel C C, Adelberger K L, Dickinson M 
E, Pettini M and Kellogg M 1998 Astrophys. J. 503 543 

Giavalisco M, Steidel C C and Macchetto D 1996 Astrophys. 
J. 470 189 

Hu E, Cowie L L and McMahon R G 1998 Astrophys. J. 502 
99 

Lilly SJ et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 518 641 

Madau P, Ferguson H C, Dickinson M E, Giavaisco M, 
Steidel C C and Fruchter A 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 283 1388 

Steidel C C, Adelberger K L, Giavalisco M, Dickinson M E, 
Giavalisco M and Pettini M 1999 Astrophys. J. 519 1 

Steidel C C, Giavalisco M, Pettini M, Dickinson M and 
Adelberger K 1996 Astrophys. J. 462 17 


Mauro Giavalisco 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxies: Classification 


Galaxies are majestically beautiful objects, and anyone 
who has seen a galaxy through a telescope, or even our 
own Milky Way Galaxy with the unaided eye, cannot help 
but wonder at the nature of these remote star systems and 
what they have to say about our universe and ourselves. 
Much of what is known about galaxies began with a 
simple classification of their appearance as seen on direct 
photographs taken with large observatory telescopes. 
Galaxies present a wide variety of forms, or morphologies, 
and can be naturally divided into categories in much the 
same way as living organisms can be divided into genera 
and species. However, galaxy morphology presents 
problems for classification that would not be encountered 
in biological taxonomy and that make it difficult to classify 
them with the precision that is normally associated with 
living species. Still, visual galaxy classification continues 
to be useful at a time when galaxies have never been better 
understood. Classification provides order to the daunting 
variety of forms even if we do not yet know how the 
different forms came about. Classification also provides 
a framework for further studies and suggests a logical 
approach to studying galaxies. 


Factors influencing galaxy classification and 
morphology 

The main problem with classifying galaxies is that no 
galaxy can be brought into a laboratory so that it can 
be viewed from any particular direction or distance. 
Most galaxies have preferred planes of symmetry, and 
ideally for classification we would like to view them all 
from directly above their preferred planes of symmetry. 
However, these planes are oriented randomly to the line 
of sight, making the appearance of many galaxies very 
dependent on viewing geometry. Also, galaxies are spread 
over a wide range of distances, such that the farther they 
are away from us, the harder it is to see details of their 
morphology. 

The appearance of many galaxies also depends 
on the wavelength of light in which they are viewed. 
Photography and imaging of galaxies is usually done 
through filters which transmit a relatively small portion 
of their spectral energy distribution, which refers to the 
distribution of their light with wavelength. With some 
exceptions, spectral energy distributions of galaxies are 
dominated by starlight, with a small fraction of their light 
coming from glowing interstellar gas. Starlight tends 
to be mostly continuous thermal radiation (meaning all 
wavelengths are emitted) whose color is determined by 
the surface temperature of the star. Hot stars (surface 
temperatures of 20 000 K or more) emit most of their light as 
ultraviolet radiation and appear bluish in color, while cool 
stars (surface temperatures of 4000 K or less) emit most of 
their light as infrared radiation and appear reddish in color. 
When imaged in short-wavelength light, such as blue or 
ultraviolet, the appearance of galaxies tends to emphasize 
hot, blue and relatively young massive stars, but when 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


viewed in long-wavelength light, such as red or infrared, 
the appearance of galaxies tends to emphasize cooler and 
generally older less massive stars. Young stars tend to 
be less smoothly distributed and much less frequently 
present than old stars, so many galaxies appear more 
patchy and uneven in blue filters than in red filters. 

The presence of interstellar material known as 
dust also has a wavelength-dependent effect on the 
appearance of a galaxy. Dust consists of fine particles 
of heavy atoms and light elements that are thought to be 
produced by processes connected with the evolution of 
stars. In highly flattened galaxies, dust collects within 
a thin plane at the galaxy’s mid-section; in other, less 
flattened galaxies dust may be distributed more randomly. 
Since interstellar dust scatters short-wavelength light 
more effectively than long-wavelength light (by virtue 
of the small size of the particles compared with the 
wavelength of visible light), the effects of dust on galaxy 
morphology and classification are more serious on blue 
light images than on red light images. Dust also impacts 
the appearance of galaxies at far-infrared wavelengths, 
where thermal emission from dust can actually dominate 
over the contribution of starlight. At longer (radio) 
wavelengths, starlight from galaxies can be very weak, 
and the appearance of a galaxy can be determined mainly 
by SYNCHROTRON RADIATION (nonthermal electromagnetic 
radiation produced by relativisitic electrons spiraling in 
strong magnetic fields) or by emission from cold neutral 
atomic hydrogen at 21 cm wavelength. 

The expanding universe can affect the appearance 
of galaxies. The cosmological RepsHirt both shifts and 
stretches the spectral energy distribution of galaxies which 
would impact their appearance in any set of fixed standard 
filters. For example, the blue light appearance of a galaxy 
may be seen only in a red filter because the redshift has 
shifted that part of the spectrum into the red. Thus, 
galaxies at high redshift can be difficult to classify and 
compare with those observed at low redshift. 

The appearance of a galaxy is not expected to be 
perfectly fixed with time. Galaxies tend to rotate, new 
stars may be born and older stars may die, and interstellar 
gas may be consumed or replenished at rates dependent 
on both internal and external factors. Galaxies tend to 
be large compared with their typical separations, so that 
interactions may impact their structure over a long period 
of time. Because of the finite speed of light, very distant 
galaxies are seen as they were when the universe was much 
younger than it is now, and their appearance may have 
been influenced by the different conditions that existed at 
those times. 

Finally, the morphology of a galaxy is also seriously 
influenced by its total mass and its environment. Massive 
galaxies tend to be much more structured and well 
ordered, more luminous and of higher average surface 
brightness than low-mass galaxies, such that catalogs 
over-represent high-mass galaxies and under-represent 
low-mass galaxies. Because of this selection effect, the 
galaxy classification systems in use today apply mainly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to massive galaxies. There do not necessarily exist low- 
mass counterparts of all of the known types of high- 
mass galaxies. For this reason, statistics of galaxy types 
must take into account the luminosity dependence of 
morphology in order to get an accurate picture of the entire 
population of galaxies. There is also a well-established 
correlation between a given galaxy’s morphology and the 
density of surrounding galaxies (see GALAXY MORPHOLOGY- 
DENSITY RELATION). Certain types of galaxies are prevalent 
in high-density environments such as rich galaxy clusters, 
while others are prevalent in lower-density environments. 
This correlation is one of the primary observations that any 
theory of galaxy morphology and evolution would have 
to explain. 


Classification of nearby galaxies at optical 
wavelengths 

For historical reasons, the first classifications for galaxies 
were made at optical wavelengths and were entirely 
restricted to relatively nearby galaxies. From 1781 to 
1847, Sir William Herschel and his son, John (see HERSCHEL 
FAMILY), Searched the sky for ‘white nebulae’, objects which 
were later proved to be external galaxies. Through large 
telescopes, the Herschels were able to detect different 
degrees of central concentration, apparent flattening and 
mottling in these objects. More complex structure could 
be seen in a few of the brighter cases, but it was William 
Parsons, Third Earl of rossz, who, in 1845, added the 
attribute ‘spiral’ to some members of the Herschels’ ‘white 
nebulae’. This is when galaxy morphology began to get 
very interesting. Lord Rosse used a 72 in speculum metal 
reflector, the largest telescope in the world in his day. 

The main classes of galaxies were identified not from 
visual observations but from photography with large 
telescopes using plates with emulsions sensitive to the blue 
region of the spectrum. Photography became important 
in astronomy towards the end of the 19th century, and by 
1920 the main classes of bright galaxies were identified. 
After establishing the extragalactic nature of the ‘white 
nebulae’ in 1924, EDWIN HUBBLE developed a classification 
system for galaxies that, with some refinements, is still in 
use today. 


The Hubble classification system 

Aschematic of the HUBBLE CLASSIFICATION system as it is used 
today is shown in figure 1, and examples of each type are 
shown in figures 2,3 and 4. Initially, Hubble distinguished 
three main classes of galaxies: elliptical galaxies, which 
were smooth and largely featureless systems having a 
round or elliptical shape; spiral galaxies, which were 
highly flattened disk-shaped systems having spiral ‘arms’ 
in the disk; irregular galaxies, which showed a chaotic 
appearance. As with living species, subclasses can be 
distinguished within these main classes. For ELLIPTICAL 
GALAXIES, symbolized by the letter E, the only other criterion 
that Hubble was able to use for classification was the 
ellipticity of the isophotes. Hubble appended to the letter 
E a numerical index of ellipticity: n = 10(1 — b/a), where 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


b/a is the ratio of the minor axis dimension to the major 
axis dimension. EO galaxies are round while E6 galaxies 
are highly elongated. 

The uppermost panel of figure 2 shows two ellipticals, 
NGC 221 and Maffei 1. In many elliptical galaxies, the 
light declines smoothly with increasing distance r from 
the center as r!/*. Some 40% of ellipticals are known to 
have dust which breaks the characteristic smoothness of 
the light distribution. The dust may be scattered in patches 
or collected in planes of symmetry. The intrinsic shapes 
of ellipticals are nontrivial to deduce, but it is generally 
believed that many are triaxial, meaning that the semi-axis 
radii of isophotes (or contours of equal brightness) along 
three perpendicular symmetry planes are unequal. The 
projected index n in the classification En does not connect 
directly to a preferred intrinsic shape, and indeed n may 
have little intrinsic significance to an actual galaxy. This 
has led some authors recently to propose replacing the 
index n with a subclassification based on the deviations of 
the isophotes of ellipticals from a perfect elliptical shape. 
The range of shapes, from boxy to pointy or disky, can be 
tied to more meaningful physics than the index n. 

Among the nearest galaxies, the most common type 
iS DWARF ELLIPTICAL Of DWARF SPHEROIDAL GALAXIES. These 
galaxies tend to have much lower masses and surface 
brightnesses than the giant ellipticals. The nearest normal 
major elliptical to our Galaxy is Maffei 1, in the far northern 
sky. Although less than 10 million light-years distant, 
Maffei 1 is heavily obscured by foreground interstellar 
dust in our own Galaxy and is difficult to study at optical 
wavelengths. 

The symbol for spiral galaxies in the Hubble 
classification system was S, but these systems offered 
four criteria for subclassification. SPIRAL GALAXIES tend to 
be composite systems consisting of a smooth, relatively 
spherical bulge of old stars superposed within a highly 
flattened disk consisting of spiral arms and often young 
massive stars lining the arms. Spirals differ according 
to the presence or absence of a bar-shaped feature, the 
relative prominence of the bulge, the degree to which 
the arms are open or tightly wrapped and the degree to 
which the arms are lined by discrete, resolved objects. 
The last three aspects seem to correlate in that galaxies 
having large bulges also have smooth, tightly wrapped 
arms while those having little or no bulge have patchy, 
open spiral arms. These characteristics led to the Sa—Sb— 
Sc and SBa-SBb-SBc ‘tuning fork’ classification of spirals 
shown in figure 1, where the B stands for bar. In BARRED 
SPIRAL GALAXIES, the arms break from the ends of the bar, 
while in nonbarred spirals the arms break directly from the 
bulge region. Galaxies of types Sa and SBa are frequently 
referred to as ‘early-type’ spirals in astronomical literature 
while those of types Sc and SBc are frequently referred 
to as ‘late-type’ spirals, nomenclature which draws from 
terms used in stellar astronomy to connote an evolutionary 
sequence. Studies by H Shapley and G de Vaucouleurs led 
to the extension of the spiral sequence to types considered 
to be ‘later’ than Sc. At types Sd and SBd, the bulge is very 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sc Sd Sm Im 


SBc SBd SBm IBm 


Figure 1. The Hubble sequence of galaxy types modified with additional types. 


small or absent and the structure becomes increasingly 
open and highly resolved. The types Sm and SBm in 
figure 1 represent Magellanic-Cloud-type spirals. For a 
long time, the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS, two nearby galaxies seen 
in the far southern sky that are physical companions of 
our Galaxy, were regarded as IRREGULAR GALAXIES, but in 
the 1950s G de Vaucouleurs demonstrated that both have 
spiral structure with a characteristic asymmetry and no 
bulge component. 

The majority of the galaxies that are listed in galaxy 
catalogs tend to be spirals of relatively high luminosity. In 
the Sa galaxy shown in the upper left panel of figure 3, 
the arms are smooth, tightly wrapped around the center, 
and the bulge is large compared with the disk. In the 
SBa galaxy in the upper right panel of figure 3, the bright 
bulge is crossed by a luminous bar. The bars of galaxies in 
general are composed of rather old stars compared with 
spiral arms. 

The middle panels of figure 3 show typical examples 
of Sb and SBb galaxies, defined to be intermediate in 
bulge-to-disk strength, pitch of arms and resolution of 
arms compared with Sa,SBa and Sc,SBc galaxies. The Sb 
example, NGC 5985, shows a multi-armed spiral pattern. 
The SBb example, NGC 5850, shows a well-resolved spiral 
pattern of intermediate pitch angle. 

The two lowest panels of figure 3 show typical 
examples of Sc and SBc galaxies. These tend to have the 
most well-developed and open spiral arms with a high 
degree of knottiness or resolution of the arms. The bulges 
tend to be very small compared with the extended disks. 
The objects that dot the arms tend not to be individual 
stars but unresolved clusters or loose associations of 
massive young stars. Such stars have spectral classes 
of O and B, and hence the clusters are usually referred 
to as OB ASSOCIATIONS. In the Sc example NGC 5457, these 
associations are several hundred light years in diameter 
and include hundreds of such stars. 

The galaxies shown in the two upper panels of figure 4 
are examples of Sd (NGC 45) and SBd (NGC 2500) types. 
In NGC 45, the spiral arms are weak and the bulge is very 
small; the bulge can only contribute a few per cent or less to 
the total luminosity of the system in this case. This is also 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


true for NGC 2500, which has a clear bar. Note how both 
NGC 45 and NGC 2500 have many scattered ‘knots’, most 
of which are likely to be OB associations. The lower left 
panel of figure 4 shows a classic Magellanic barred spiral, 
NGC 4618, of type SBm. Although NGC 4618 has two 
clear arms, one arm is much brighter than the other and 
the center of the bar does not coincide with the center of 
symmetry of the outer disk light. These are characteristics 
of the SBm class. 

Irregulars were originally characterized as ‘nonde- 
script’ and lacking rotational symmetry. Although some 
are generally chaotic looking at relatively high surface 
brightness levels, at low light levels a faint, more sym- 
metric disk can often be seen. It is now known that many 
irregulars do rotate and have bar-like structures in their 
disks. The properties of irregulars are so varied, and the 
range in their total luminosities is so great, that they have 
been the subject of much recent research. Irregular galax- 
ies resembling the Magellanic Clouds but lacking any clear 
spiral structure are now referred to as Im or [Bm types. 
The middle right panel of figure 4 shows a Magellanic ir- 
regular, NGC 2366, type IBm. This galaxy has numerous 
bright OB associations but no clear spiral structure. Its 
highly elongated shape suggests that it might be highly 
inclined. 

In 1936, Hubble revised his classification system to 
include a fourth major galaxy class: SO galaxies, which 
were armless DISK GALAXIES representing the transition from 
ellipticals to fully developed spirals. Some authors believe 
that the addition of this class destroyed the simple beauty 
of Hubble’s original system. SO galaxies are still an 
enigma because their relationship to spirals and ellipticals 
is still very unclear. Some authors believe that SOs 
represent spirals that were stripped of their residual gas 
by interactions in a cluster environment. Thus, rather 
than being transition types they form a separate sequence 
parallel to the spiral sequences. Other SOs may indeed be 
true transition forms between spirals and ellipticals. Note 
that elliptical and SO galaxies are collectively referred to 
as ‘early-type’ galaxies, while irregulars are referred to as 
‘late-type’ galaxies. These bracket the ‘early-’ and ‘late- 
type’ spirals. Some SOs have clear bars and are referred to 
as the SBO type in figure 1. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 221 


NGC 4111 


SO (edgeon) 


NGC ,4553 * NGC 2983 


SBO/SBa 


Figure 2. Examples of elliptical, early SO and late SO galaxies. 


The morphology of SO galaxies is best revealed by the middle right panel of figure 2). However, while edge- 
edge-on examples. When edge on, an SO galaxy clearly on spirals reveal dark lanes of dust in their midplanes, the 


shows its highly flattened, disk shape (see NGC 4111 in best SO galaxies show no such midplane of dust, implying 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Galaxies: Classification ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ESO 28610 *NGC 6942°* 


Figure 3. Examples of early- and late-type spiral galaxies. 


the absence of much interstellar gas. This accounts for their At minimum, a true SO galaxy should have no spiral 
smooth appearance and relatively red colors compared arms, a clear bulge, and a clear disk or outer envelope 
with spirals. Some ‘late’ edge-on SOs do show a midplane of light. NGC 4138, shown in the middle left panel of 


of dust. figure 2, is a good example seen in an inclined but not 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 5 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 45% 


NGC 4618 


NGC 2500 


Figure 4. Examples of very-late-type and Magellanic spiral and irregular galaxies. 


an edge-on view. This galaxy includes a weak ring of 
light just outside the bulge, which has led some authors 
to consider the galaxy to be a late SO. Seen face-on, the 
earliest SOs can be misclassified as ellipticals on inadequate 
image material. Late SOs have clearer differentiation of 
structure. Two examples are shown in the bottom panels 
of figure 2. NGC 4553 is a late SO with a clear ring around 
the center. NGC 2983 is an SBO with a well-differentiated 
bar and extended disk component. Both galaxies have also 
been classified as early-type spirals, although any spiral 
structure is very weak in both cases. 

The relative luminosities of the bulges of SO galaxies 
to their disks is a question connected to how we should 
interpret them. If they tend to have large bulge-to-disk 
luminosity ratios, then their placement in the Hubble 
sequence between ellipticals and spirals is likely to be 
correct. However, if some SOs have a relatively small 
bulge-to-disk ratio, then they could be ‘stripped’ spirals 
and should be placed on a sequence parallel to spirals. 

The arrangement of ellipticals, SOs, spirals and 
irregulars along a sequence as shown in figure 1 is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


known as the Hubble sequence. The Hubble sequence is 
considered among the most important aspects of galaxies 
because certain properties of galaxies vary smoothly along 
the sequence. Interpreting what the sequence actually 
means is difficult because the mean luminosity of the 
galaxies is not the same at each type. The greatest spread in 
luminosity is found near the ends of the sequence, among 
the ellipticals and the late-type spirals and irregulars. 
An extremely important observation is how elliptical and 
S0 galaxies dominate the populations of rich and dense 
CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES, While spirals dominate looser clusters 
and the general field. This is the ‘morphology-density’ 
relation alluded to in the previous sections. 


Other approaches to galaxy classification 

Hubble’s classification system is easy to use because it 
focuses on gross characteristics of galaxies. All of the 
original Hubble classes are rather broad in the galaxies 
they cover, but greater attention to detail is possible and 
other authors have proposed somewhat different points 
of view for classification, building on Hubble’s idea. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ellipticals fenticutars 


spirals srreguiars 


——— 


a 


Figure 5. Illustration of the de Vaucouleurs revised Hubble classification system. In this system, SO galaxies are referred to as 
‘lenticulars’. The lower left and right circles illustrate the arrangement of families and varieties within a cross-section through the 


system. 


For example, rather than a two-pronged ‘tuning fork’ 
classification, G de Vaucouleurs proposed a classification 
volume whose main dimension is the basic Hubble type 
(i.e. E, SO, Sa, Sb, Sc, etc) and whose secondary dimensions 
are the family (presence or absence of a bar) and variety 
(presence or absence of a feature known as an inner ring; 
see figure 5). de Vaucouleurs’ classifications provide a 
better description of whata galaxy looks like without being 
too complicated. Still, there are more than 100 ‘cells’ in 
the de Vaucouleurs system compared with about 10 in 
Hubble’s original system. The de Vaucouleurs system is 
recognized mainly for the addition of spiral types later 
than Sc, called Sd and Sm, and for the notation SA, 
SAB and SB to denote continuity of the bar characteristic. 
SA galaxies are true nonbarred (ordinary) galaxies, SB 
galaxies are true barred galaxies, while SAB galaxies are 
intermediate in apparent bar strength. Galaxies having a 
ring-shaped pattern in the inner regions are denoted as 
being of the (r) variety while those having no ring are 
said to be pure spirals, or the (s) variety. Galaxies having 
weak or partial, broken rings are assigned a variety of 
(rs), meaning a pseudoring is present. Examples of all 
nine possible combinations of families and varieties are 
illustrated in figure 6. The galaxies shown all have types 
of Sa or Sb. Inner rings are fairly common among these 
types, but are very much rarer among Sc types and later 
and nonexistent among ellipticals and early SOs. 

In 1960, S van den Bergh demonstrated that galaxy 
morphology is influenced by the total luminosity or energy 
output of a galaxy. He assigned not only modified 
Hubble types to spiral and irregular galaxies, but also 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


luminosity classes symbolized in a manner similar to 
stellar luminosity classes. The most luminous spirals or 
irregulars are luminosity class I while the least luminous 
are luminous class V. Categories II, III and IV have 
intermediate luminosities between these extremes. Most 
galaxies of luminosity classes IV and V are irregulars 
or very late-type spirals (Sd or Sm types). Of the 
spiral galaxies illustrated in this article, NGC 210, NGC 
1300, NGC 1433, NGC 5457, NGC 5985 and NGC 7479 
are luminosity class I or I-II, NGC 45 and NGC 2500 
are luminosity class III, while NGC 2366 is luminosity 
class IV-V, as judged by A Sandage and G Tammann. 
Note how much more contrasted the spiral structure of 
the high luminosity class galaxies is compared with the 
intermediate or lower luminosity classes. 

Spiral galaxies may also be classified strictly accord- 
ing to the appearance of their arms. Some spiral galax- 
ies show a ‘grand-design’ spiral structure, consisting of 
two well-defined symmetric and long spiral arms. The 
first attempts to understand the nature of spiral structure 
in galaxies focused on grand-design spirals because they 
showed the best-defined spiral patterns. In other galax- 
ies, however, the spiral arms are only chaotic or fragmen- 
tary and do not appear to be global in nature; such spiral 
patterns are often called ‘flocculent’. The Hubble classi- 
fication system and its revisions do not distinguish be- 
tween these extremes in spiral arm morphology. D and 
B Elmegreen brought greater attention to these differences 
and proposed recognizing them with arm classes (ACs) 
ranging from 1 for the purely flocculent types to 12 for 
the best grand-design types. Intermediate-looking spirals 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ESO 111° To NGC 6935 


NGC 1300 


NGC 1433 


NGC 6902 


NGe 3081 


Figure 6. Examples of galaxies having different families and varieties in the de Vaucouleurs revised Hubble classification system. 


have intermediate arm classes. In this article, NGC 1300 is 
an example of an AC 12 spiral while NGC 45 and NGC 2500 
are examples of AC 1 systems. The distinction is worth rec- 
ognizing because the origin of spiral patterns may differ 
among the different arm classes. Recognizing them allows 
one to do statistics to identify environmental factors that 
may be relevant. 

W W Morgan proposed another classification system 
for galaxies in 1958 that tied galaxy morphology to the 
then-current ideas of STELLAR POPULATIONS in galaxies. The 
degree of central concentration of a galaxy was used to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


define a spectral classification system (population group) 
based on form alone. Galaxies with strong central 
concentration were known to be dominated by spectral 
class K giants (population group k) in their central 
areas, while those with little central concentration were 
dominated by spectral class A stars (population group a). 
The elliptical, SO and early-type spirals illustrated in this 
article are all population group k systems, while the 
late-type spirals (Sd, Sm) and irregulars (Im) tend to be 
population group a. Morgan also identified an extremely 
important rare type of galaxy knownasacD galaxy. These 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ESO 565-11 


nuclear ring 


outer ring 


IC °5240 


inner ring 


NGC 6782 


all three rings included 


Figure 7. Examples of ringed galaxies. 


are extremely large elliptical-like systems often found at 
the centers of rich galaxy clusters. They are characterized 
by a shallow light profile, low central concentration, and 
an extended envelope of light. The origin of such systems 
has been a topic of much research, and mergers of other 
galaxies is one possible interpretation. 


Other classes or aspects of galaxy morphology 
Ringed galaxies 

A ringed galaxy is a normal spiral or SO galaxy having a 
ring or ring-like pattern as part of the light distribution. In 
the jargon of normal galaxy morphology, there are three 
different types of rings: nuclear rings, which are small 
rings of active star formation often found in the centers 
of early-type barred galaxies, inner rings, which usually 
envelop the bars of barred spirals, and outer rings, which 
are large and faint structures having a diameter about 
twice that of the bar in barred galaxies. Of the three 
different types of rings, only inner rings are included as 
a major part of galaxy classification in the Hubble system, 
as noted in the previous section. The four panels of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


figure 7 show examples of all three ring types, one of which 
(IC 5240) is also included in figure 6. The classification 
symbols (nr), (r) and (R) are used for nuclear, inner and 
outer rings, respectively, and all three ring types may 
coexist in the same galaxy (see NGC 6782 in the lower 
right panel of figure 7). Inner rings and pseudorings can 
be identified in more than 50% of normal giant galaxies, 
and all three ring types are most frequent among early- 
type barred spirals. 


Of the many morphological features of galaxies 
we have so far discussed, rings are among the best 
understood. They are features that seem to be generated 
by the way a bar can redistribute residual gas in a galactic 
disk, collecting the gas into ringed-shaped patterns that 
eventually condense into stars. The patterns are tied to 
locations known as orbital resonances, places where gas 
clouds move in step with the rotation rate of a bar pattern. 
Thus, rings and bars are features which are intimately 
connected. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 1569 


Amoxphous irregular 


NGC 624Q 


Merge® system 


ESO 235-58 


Polar ring galaxy? 


ginteracting pair 


Figure 8. Examples of interacting galaxies and an amorphous irregular galaxy. 


Amorphous irregular galaxies 


Although classical irregular galaxies tend to be late- 
type systems with a considerable degree of patchiness 
and irregularity, another class of irregular galaxies has 
such amorphous characteristics that some astronomers 
considered them to belong near the transition between S0 
and spiral galaxies. An example, NGC 1569, is shown in 
the upper left panel of figure 8. These objects tend to have 
much smoother distributions of luminosity than classical 
Magellanic irregulars. The distinction has been recognized 
since 1950, when E Holmberg suggested the term ‘Irr I’ be 
applied to normal late-type irregulars and ‘Irr II’ to these 
amorphous irregulars. de Vaucouleurs applied the term 
‘IO’ to some of these objects, while Sandage prefers the 
general term ‘amorphous’ galaxies. The hallmark of the 
class is that the spectral character of the unresolved light 
is consistent with the presence of many young stars, unlike 
most other galaxies in the transition region between spirals 
and SOs. Interactions may play a role in the creation of 
these objects. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Interacting galaxies 

Some of the most complex morphologies seen in 
the galactic population form directly as a result of 
gravitational interactions with neighboring galaxies (see 
GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). Interactions can be 
mild and may do no serious damage to the symmetry of 
a galaxy; however, such interactions may help to generate 
the formation of bars or even grand design spiral structure. 
Stronger interactions can lead to asymmetry and peculiar 
structure, and possibly even features known as ‘tidal 
tails’. The strongest interactions can be so disruptive that 
the galaxies involved lose their individual identities and 
merge into a single, different type of object. It is currently 
thought that many giant elliptical galaxies formed as a 
result of the mergers of two spiral galaxies rather than 
naturally. Figure 8 shows a few cases of interacting 
systems. NGC 6240 in the lower left panel has been shown 
by numerous authors to be a remnant of a merger between 
two once separate galaxies; the system has not settled 
completely into a stable configuration and shows much 
peculiar structure. In the lower right panel, NGC 6621-2 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is a pair of clearly interacting galaxies. Interactions of this 
nature are not rare and many galaxies may go through a 
phase of interaction throughout their evolution. Gravity 
has drawn out material into the form of an apparent bridge 
between the two systems. 

Certain types of interactions can lead to very special 
and very rare galactic morphologies. For example, if 
a small galaxy plunges directly through the center of a 
larger disk-shaped galaxy, a collisional ring galaxy can 
result. These unusual systems can look like smoke rings in 
lacking a central nucleus. The ring in this case represents 
a shock wave moving outward, much like a water wave 
that results when a pebble is dropped in a pond. Another 
type of morphology can result when a small companion 
galaxy, usually a gas-rich irregular, passes close over the 
pole of a gas-poor SO disk galaxy. In this circumstance, 
the interaction can disrupt the companion and capture it 
into a polar orbit. Eventually, the material that made up 
the companion spreads along the whole orbit, producing 
@ POLAR RING GALAXY. The upper right panel of Figure 8 
shows a likely example of a polar ring galaxy in formation. 
Known as ESO 235-58, this object actually shows a 
midplane dust lane dividing the central disk. Although 
the central section looks like a bar, bars do not normally 
have dividing dust lanes crossing them from end to end. 
The central section of ESO 235-58 must be an edge-on disk 
galaxy, and the other material is orbiting out of the plane 
of that disk. 


Galaxy classification and morphology in the next 
decade 

The era of the orbiting HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) has 
added a new dimension to galaxy morphology and 
classification that could not be tapped from previous 
ground-based observations. HST can provide images of 
galaxies at large cosmological redshifts of the same quality 
and resolution used to define the main morphological 
classes on ground-based images. GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT 
are being seen as they were when the universe was much 
younger than it is now. As noted at the beginning of this 
article, we do not expect that galaxy morphology is fixed 
and unchanging, but that change must have occurred. 
Thus, by studying high-quality images of galaxies at 
high redshift, we can see what typical changes must 
have occurred. Current results suggest that interactions 
between galaxies were more frequent in the past and 
that some galaxies had not yet settled into well-organized 
shapes. Thus, morphology contains clues as to how 
galaxies evolve, and galaxy classification will continue to 
be refined and adjusted to account for new findings. 

The sheer numbers of galaxies available for classifi- 
cation will also have an impact on how astronomers will 
be classifying galaxies. A large survey can provide high- 
quality images of more than a million galaxies, and it is 
impractical to classify so many galaxies visually by one or 
more experts. Instead, the coming decade will see more 
and more the use of computers to objectively classify large 
numbers of galaxies for cosmological and other research. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Galaxies can also be classified in wavelength bands 
other than the blue-light band used to develop the Hubble 
classification system. The tendency for blue filters to 
emphasize hot, young, massive and relatively rare stars 
means that the classification system tends to overestimate 
the significance of these objects. In the next decade, 
galaxy classification will be revised in order to group 
galaxies according to their appearance in infrared light, 
which tends to emphasize the stars that dominate the 
mass distribution. This will be especially important for 
intermediate to late-type spirals. 


Bibliography 
Hubble’s original paper on galaxy classification was 
summarized in 


Hubble E 1926 Extra-galactic nebulae Astrophys. J. 64 321- 
69 


His revision to include SO galaxies is described in 


Hubble E 1936 The Realm of the Nebulae (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press) (reprinted 1958 New York: 
Dover) 


The de Vaucouleurs revised Hubble classification system, 
including Magellanic spirals and irregulars, is outlined in 


de Vaucouleurs G 1959 Classification and morphology of 
external galaxies Handb. Phys. 53 275 


Large atlases illustrating Hubble’s final revised classifica- 
tion system are found in 


Sandage A 1961 The Hubble Atlas of Galaxies Carnegie 
Institution of Washington Publ. no 618 

Sandage A and Bedke J 1994 The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies 
Carnegie Institution of Washington Publ. no 638 


van den Bergh luminosity classes of galaxies were first 
described and later further outlined in 


van den Bergh S 1960 A preliminary luminosity classifica- 
tion of late-type galaxies Astrophys. J. 131 215-23 

van den Bergh S 1960 A preliminary luminosity classifica- 
tion for galaxies of type Sb Astrophys. J. 131 558-73 

Sandage A and Tammann G 1987 A Revised Shapley— 
Ames Catalog of Bright Galaxies Carnegie Institution 
of Washington Publ. no 635 


The Morgan system of spectral form classifications of 

galaxies is given in 

Morgan W W 1958 A preliminary classification of the forms 
of galaxies according to their stellar population Publ. 
Astron. Soc. Pac. 70 364-91 


Arm classifications for galaxies are described in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Galaxies: Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Elmegreen D and Elmegreen B 1987 Arm classifications for 
spiral galaxies Astrophys. J. 314 3-9 


Ringed galaxies are reviewed by 


Buta R and Combes F 1996 Galactic rings Fund. Cosm. Phys. 
17 95-281 


Collisional ring galaxies are reviewed by 


Appleton P N and Struck-Marcell C 1996 Collisional ring 
galaxies Fund. Cosm. Phys. 16 111-220 


Polar ring galaxies are reviewed by 


Whitmore B C et al 1990 New observations and a 
photographic atlas of polar-ring galaxies Astron. J. 100 
1489-522 


An up-to-date review of the whole field of galaxy 
morphology and classification is provided by 


van den Bergh S 1998 Galaxy Morphology and Classification 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Image credits 

NGC 221, NGC 4618, NGC 5985, and NGC 7479 were 
obtained by S Odewahn and R Gal with a green filter and 
the Palomar 1.5 m telescope. NGC 45, NGC 2366, NGC 
2500, and NGC 5457 are blue light images obtained by 
D Elmegreen and coworkers with telescopes at the Kitt 
Peak National Observatory. NGC 4111 and NGC 4138 are 
near-infrared images from the Ohio State University bright 
galaxy survey, supported by a grant from the National 
Science Foundation. For these early-type galaxies, there 
is little difference between the appearance in the near- 
infrared and the appearance in a standard blue light 
filter. W C Keel provided the images of NGC 6240 and 
NGC 6621-2. The image of NGC 6240 was obtained in 
blue light at the European Southern Observatory while 
that of NGC 6621-2 was obtained in red light at the Kitt 
Peak National Observatory. The remaining images were 
obtained by the author and coworkers with telescopes at 
the Kitt Peak National Observatory and the Cerro Tololo 
Inter-American Observatory, and are in blue light only. 
All images are based on electronic detectors and are in 
logarithmic units. 


Ronald Buta 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


For much of the 20th century—once the vast distances 
to galaxies were known—galaxies were thought to be 
‘island universes’, forming and evolving in isolation with 
no contact between one another. In this picture, the 
processes which shape the galaxies we see today are 
uniquely determined by the initial conditions under which 
galaxies form and processes completely internal to the 
galaxies themselves. 

As galaxy catalogs began to grow, however, more and 
more examples of paired galaxies were found, as well as 
many PECULIAR GALAXIES With long, luminous ‘plumes’ and 
‘tails’ emanating from their bodies. These galaxies were 
found to have anomalously blue colors, arguing that their 
star-forming properties were quite different from normal 
galaxies. Examples were found of galaxy pairs so strongly 
perturbed that they were suggested as possible examples 
of actual merging encounters. Meanwhile, astronomers 
began to use computer simulation to study the effects of 
nearby companions on galaxies and found that many of 
the properties of these peculiar galaxies could be explained 
through gravitational interactions and mergers of galaxies. 

From these studies, an alternative picture of GALAXY 
EVOLUTION began to grow. Rather than evolving in isolation, 
galaxies are found in clusters and groups and can interact 
quite strongly with their nearby companions (see GALAXY 
CLUSTERS). These interactions can have a profound impact 
on the properties of galaxies, resulting in intense bursts of 
STAR FORMATION, the onset of QuasAr-like activity in galactic 
nuclei and perhaps even the complete transformation of 
SPIRALGALAXIES into ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES. Studies of galaxies in 
the early universe show a significant fraction of interacting 
and merging systems, and theories of cosmological 
structure formation indicate that most galaxies have had 
some form of strong interaction during their lifetime. 
Rather than being rare events, galaxy interactions may be 
the dominant process shaping the evolution of the galaxy 
population in general. 


Dynamics of Interacting Galaxies 

The evolution of interacting galaxies is governed largely 
by gravitational effects. That these interactions can have a 
profound effect on the participating galaxies is clear from 
the observational record. Morphologically, interacting 
galaxies are found to sport long bridges and tails, stellar 
bars and/or enhanced spiral structure and often severely 
distorted main bodies (see figure 1). At first, many 
astronomers believed the long streamers of stars and 
gas seen emanating from some interacting galaxies to be 
shaped by magnetic fields or nuclear jets—the thinness 
and linearity of these features made a gravitational origin 
seem unlikely. However, computer models of interacting 
galaxies in the early 1970s by Alar and Juri Toomre 
showed convincingly that these streamers were the simple 
consequence of gravitational tides acting on rotating disk 
galaxies, and these streamers were dubbed ‘tidal tails’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A montage of interacting and merging systems. 
Clockwise from upper left: Arp 295; NGC 4676 (The Mice); NGC 
520; NGC 7252; NGC 3921. Image from Hibbard and van 
Gorkom 1996 Astron. J. 111 655. 


To understand the development of tidal tails, recall 
that tidal forces—the differential gravitational forces from 
a nearby mass—act to stretch an object radially. In this 
manner, our own Moon raises bulges on the surface of the 
Earth which give rise to our oceanic TIDES. Similarly, when 
two galaxies experience a close encounter, their tidal fields 
stretch one another radially. This stretching, combined 
with the galaxies’ rotation, causes the stars and gas in the 
outskirts of each galaxy to ‘shear off’ from their parent 
galaxies. Material on the far side of each disk—away 
from the companion galaxy—is ejected into long, thin tidal 
tails, while material on the near side is drawn towards the 
companion. Depending on the encounter geometry, the 
nearside material may actually form a physical ‘bridge’ 
between the galaxies, along which material may flow from 
one galaxy to another. Because of the coupled effects of 
gravitational tides and galactic rotation, the development 
of tidal features depends strongly on resonances between 
the rotational and orbital motions of the galaxies. Prograde 
encounters, in which the galaxies’ sense of rotation and 
orbital motion are matched, are most effective at tail- 
building. The lack of spin-orbit resonances in retrograde 
encounters, on the other hand, acts to suppress the 
formation of tidal tails. 

The early computer models of Toomre and Toomre 
demonstrated these basics of building tidal tails and 
opened the door to the use of computer simulation to 
study the evolution of interacting galaxies. Because 
of the long timescales involved in galaxy interactions— 
hundreds of millions or billions of years—observations of 
interacting systems show only individual ‘snapshots’ of 
a complex evolutionary process. Piecing together these 
varying snapshots into a coherent sequence is a task 
made difficult by the unknown initial conditions of the 
different interactions. However, computer simulations 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


can be used to study a wide variety of well-defined 
galaxy interactions, and by studying the evolution of these 
models the observational snapshots can be more easily 
placed into a evolutionary context. 

Computer simulations employ a Lagrangian tech- 
nique known as N-body modeling, wherein galaxies are 
represented by N discrete particles whose initial positions 
and velocities sample the phase space distribution of a nor- 
mal disk galaxy. Current simulations employ 10°-10’ par- 
ticles, so that each particle represents 10*-10° stars (sim- 
ulating galaxies star by star is still well beyond current 
computational abilities). The N-body model is then ad- 
vanced forward in discrete time steps by calculating the 
net gravitational acceleration acting on each particle from 
the other particles and then advancing each particle for- 
ward in time given its position, velocity and acceleration 
(for the interstellar gas, hydrodynamic forces must also be 
considered; these are discussed in a later section). 

One example of such a computer model of colliding 
galaxies is shown in figure 2. In this model, two equal- 
mass spiral galaxies are placed on an initially parabolic 
orbit with a closest approach of 2.5h, where h is the 
exponential scale length of the disk stars. One disk is 
perfectly prograde while the second is inclined by 71° to 
the orbital plane. As the galaxies first collide, the tidal 
forces act to distort each disk, launching the tidal tails. 
Moving at parabolic velocity, the galaxies quickly pass one 
another and move apart, reaching maximum separation at 
T ~ 40 (unit time is roughly 10 million years). After this 
point, the galaxies reverse their motions and fall back on 
one another, merging together to form a ellipsoidal merger 
remnant around T ~ 60. 

After first passage, in addition to forming the 
extended tidal tails, the galaxies themselves develop a 
strong internal response to the interaction. The passage 
of a companion seeds an m = 2 gravitational perturbation 
in the disk of each galaxy; these perturbations can then 
be amplified into strong spiral arms or even dramatic 
central bars by the self-gravity of the disk. The detailed 
response of the galaxies depends crucially on their 
internal structure: if the stellar disk dominates the mass 
distribution in the inner portion of the galaxy, the disk self- 
gravity can easily amplify the perturbation into a strong 
bar. On the other hand, if the galaxy is bulge or dark 
matter dominated in its interior, the disk is more stable 
against growing m = 2 bar modes, and spiral structure is 
the more likely outcome. 

What causes the rapid merging of the two galaxies? 
Certainly there is a transfer of orbital energy to internal 
motions of the stars in each galaxy—it is this energy 
transfer that provides the energy necessary to launch 
the tidal tails. The amount of energy carried away by 
the tidal tails amounts to only a few per cent of the 
total orbital energy, however; if this was the sole energy 
sink, interacting galaxies would slowly spiral together 
over many orbital periods, rather than exhibit the rapid 
merging seen in figure 2. Indeed, early investigations into 
the collisions of galaxies argued that subsequent mergers 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


would be quite rare, unless the collision happened to be 
extremely penetrating. 

In fact the luminous portions of galaxies represent 
only a small fraction of the total galactic mass—galaxies 
are embedded in massive, extended ‘dark matter halos’. 
These dark matter halos extend to many tens or even 
hundreds of kiloparsecs, such that encounters where the 
luminous galaxies seem to pass by one another may in fact 
be penetrating encounters for the dark halos. When this 
happens, dynamical friction ensures rapid orbital decay. 
As the galaxies pass through each other’s dark halos, 
they set up a trailing wake in the halo mass distributions, 
creating a gravitational drag on the galaxies’ relative 
motion. As a result, energy and angular momentum are 
transferred from the binary orbit to the internal motions 
of the dark halo—the orbit decays and the halos are spun 
up. It is this ability for dark matter halos to absorb 
orbital energy and angular momentum that makes galaxy 
mergers possible; without halos, mergers would be rare 
indeed (see DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES). 


Starbursts and active nuclei in interacting galaxies 
With the launch of the infrared astronomy satellite (IRAS) 
in 1983, anew population of galaxies was identified which 
have extremely high, quasar-like luminosities (>10!* Lo) 
in the infrared (8-1000 um). This emission is believed to 
come from hot (T ~ 50-60 K) dust reradiating energy 
from a central starburst or active nucleus. The exact 
details of the energy generation—starburst versus AGN— 
remain controversial, and many ultraluminous infrared 
galaxies (ULIRGs) show evidence for both starburst and 
AGN activity. The difficulty of course lies in the fact that 
the nuclei of ULIRGs are, almost by definition, extremely 
dusty environments, and seeing into the central regions 
is a very difficult task. Evidence suggests that in some 
cases the nuclear dust is optically thick even at x-ray 
wavelengths; finding unequivocal evidence of an AGN in 
such systems will be very hard indeed. 

While the details of the energy source in ULIRGs 
remain elusive, the causal connection between ULIRG 
activity and galaxy interactions is clear. Nearly all ULIRGs 
show morphological evidence for strong interactions, 
through double nuclei, severely distorted isophotes or 
strong tidal features. Yet the converse is not true; that is, 
not all strongly interacting galaxies show ultraluminous 
activity. In fact, the most dramatic nearby mergers, 
such as the Antennae (NGC 4038/39) or NGC 7252, 
have experienced violent collisions, yet have infrared 
luminosities an order of magnitude less than the extreme 
ULIRGs. Clearly the detailed triggering mechanism for 
ultraluminous activity must depend ona variety of factors. 

How do mergers trigger ultraluminous activity? 
Regardless of whether the central engine is a starburst or 
an AGN, the first prerequisite is a large supply of fuel in 
the form of nuclear gas. If galaxy collisions can drive 
gas inwards from the galaxies’ disks into their nuclei, 
this nuclear inflow can feed the central engine. Once the 
gas reaches the inner kiloparsec, it can either fragment 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T=14.4 


T=24.0 . 


T=33.6 


Figure 2. An N-body model of two equal-mass merging disk galaxies. Time is shown in the upper left of each panel, where unit time is 
~10 million years. After first collision at T ~ 24, the galaxies pass by one another before turning around on their orbits and merging to 
form an elliptical-like object in the last panel. From Mihos and Hernquist 1996 Astrophys. J. 464 662. 


and form stars (at a rate of ~100Mo yr™' to provide the 
observed luminosity) or continue to flow inwards and fuel 
an AGN. 

The first step, then, is to drive gas inwards from 
the disk to the nucleus. Computer simulations have 
demonstrated the efficacy of interactions and mergers 
at driving these nuclear gas flows. These simulations 
must also describe the hydrodynamic evolution of the 
interstellar gas, and do so using a Langrangian technique 
known as ‘smoothed particle hydrodynamics’, in which 
the gas is represented by discrete fluid elements (particles) 
which carry the local thermodynamic and hydrodynamic 
properties of the fluid. These properties are updated 
according to hydrodynamic conservation laws, and 
artificial viscosity is included to model shocks. This 
technique is ideal for simulating gas flows in interacting 
galaxies, which lack the symmetry and geometry needed 
for efficient grid-based hydrodynamical algorithms. 

As an example, figure 3 shows the evolution of the 
interstellar gas in the merger model of figure 2. Shortly 
after the galaxies first collide, and the strong bars and 
spiral features form from the self-gravitating response of 
the disks, gas shocks and crowds along the leading edge of 
these features. Because of the offset between the stellar and 
gaseous density peaks, the gas feels a strong gravitational 
torque from the stars, losing angular momentum and 
flowing inwards towards the nucleus. How far inwards 
it can flow depends on the detailed response of the disk. 
If the disk develops a strong bar, the gas can flow into 
the central kiloparsec on a dynamical timescale; however, 
if the disk is stable against bar formation, the gas tends to 
‘hang up’ in the inner few kiloparsecs. In this case, once the 
galaxies ultimately merge a second phase of inflow occurs, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


as gas is driven further inwards to the nucleus owing to 
the strong hydrodynamic and gravitation torques at work. 

Because the inflow is tied to the (largely internal) 
gravitational response of the galaxies to the interaction, 
the triggering of inflow and nuclear activity depends 
on a variety of factors, such as the internal structure of 
the galaxies involved and the orbital geometry of the 
collision. Prograde collisions drive inflow and activity 
more rapidly than retrograde collisions, owing to the 
spin-orbital coupling of the encounter. If the encounter 
involves DISK GALAXIES with massive central bulges, the 
inflow should be delayed until the galaxies merge, owing 
to the disk stability provided by the central bulges. 
Conversely, without bulges, disk galaxies should be more 
prone to early bar formation, inflow and central activity. 
Similarly, galaxies in which the disk contributes little to the 
dynamical mass (e.g. low surface brightness disk galaxies) 
will also be more resistive to inflow, as the self-gravity of 
the disk is much weaker. Of course, in any case the galaxies 
themselves must have sufficient disk gas to drive inwards 
to begin with; collisions of gas-poor spirals will be less 
effective at fueling ultraluminous levels of activity. 

Once triggered, the ultraluminous infrared phase 
probably does not last long—less than ~108 yr. A variety 
of arguments support this claim. Stellar population 
synthesis models successfully explain the optical and 
infrared spectra of ULIRGs with a burst of star formation 
~107-108 years old. Similar numbers come from gas 
depletion arguments: if the luminous activity arises from 
star formation, the gas depletion time is given by Tyas ~ 
Mgas/M ~ 107-108 yr. Of course, if the luminosity comes 
from accretion onto an AGN, the same amount of gas can 
sustain ultraluminous activity for a much longer period 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T=14.4 


T=24.0 


T 


Figure 3. The evolution of the gas in the N-body model shown in figure 2. Time is shown in the upper left of each panel, where unit 
time is ~10 million years. After the first collision, gas shocks along spiral arms and flows inwards into the inner few kiloparsecs 
(T ~ 48) and then finally into the nucleus itself when the galaxies ultimately merge. From Mihos and Hernquist 1996 Astrophys. J. 464 


662. 


of time. However, the fact that nearly all ULIRG systems 
show strong dynamical evidence that they are in the late 
stages of a merger—evidence which fades rapidly once 
the merger is complete—argues that the ultraluminous 
phase cannot last much longer than a half-mass dynamical 
timescale, ~108 years. In the latter case of AGN accretion, 
the end of the ultraluminous IR phase may be marked by 
either an end to AGN fueling or else the destruction of 
the ‘dust shroud’ by the intense UV radiation field of the 
AGN. In this second scenario, rather than running out of 
gas, the ULIRG may simply evolve into a bona fide optical 
quasar. The detailed evolution of ULIRGs is a subject of 
intense current study. 


Merger remnants and elliptical galaxies 

Once a merger is complete, and the ULIRG phase (if any) is 
over, what is left behind? In 1977, Alar Toomre suggested 
that the remnants of disk mergers could account for the 
population of elliptical galaxies in the universe. Because of 
violent relaxation, the merging process would effectively 
‘scramble’ the stellar disks, giving the remnant the 
surface brightness profiles and large velocity dispersions 
characteristic of elliptical galaxies. Toomre argued that 
if the merging timescale is ~5 x 108 yr, extrapolating the 
number of nearby on-going mergers (~10) over the total 
age of the universe (assuming the merger rate scales like 
the 1°/° expected from a flat distribution of binding energy) 
yields a total of ~750 merger remnants, similar to the 
number of elliptical galaxies found in the nearby field. 
Furthermore, Toomre argued, if the remnants of these 
spiral mergers did not constitute the present-day elliptical 
galaxy population, where are they now? 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This ‘merger hypothesis’ for the formation of elliptical 
galaxies idea also had observational support from studies 
of the peculiar galaxy NGC 7252 (see figure 4) by Francois 
Schweizer. While this galaxy possesses two gas-rich tidal 
tails (indicating a merger of two late-type spirals), it also 
has the surface brightness profile expected for an elliptical 
galaxy. Schweizer argued that we were catching the 
elliptical formation process in the act and that NGC 7252 
would evolve into a normal elliptical galaxy given time. 

While the merger hypothesis could explain many of 
the qualitative properties of ellipticals, several detailed 
objections were raised. The central phase space density 
of spirals is lower than that of ellipticals; since violent 
relaxation preserves phase space density, merger remnants 
should have phase space densities too low to compare 
well with elliptical galaxies. Also, the specific frequency 
of GLOBULAR CLUSTERS (the number of globular clusters per 
unit luminosity) is much larger for ellipticals than spirals. 
Finally, because of the high relative velocity of galaxies 
in clusters, mergers should be less common in these 
environments, yet that is where the elliptical fraction is 
highest. How then could mergers of disk galaxies produce 
the present-day elliptical galaxy population? 

Recent developments have relieved some of these 
concerns. While it is true that stellar phase space density is 
preserved during mergers, this constraint does not apply 
to the interstellar gas, which can dissipate energy and 
flow inwards. Subsequent star formation can raise the 
central phase space density in the merger and in principle 
produce an elliptical-like nucleus. Interaction-induced 
star formation may also account for the differing globular 
cluster specific frequencies of spirals and ellipticals. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. The merger remnant NGC 7252. The image shows the optical light from NGC 7252, while the contours show the distribution 
of neutral hydrogen gas. Note the gas-rich tails, the loops of starlight surrounding the main body and the smooth, elliptical-like 
appearance of the inner regions. From Hibbard et al 1994 Astron. J. 107 67. 


Recent Hubble Space Telescope observations indicate that 
galaxy collisions can result in the formation of a large 
number of young, compact star clusters. If these clusters 
can survive the dynamical environment of tidal shocks 
and mass loss, perhaps they are the progenitors of the old 
globular clusters observed in elliptical galaxies. Finally, 
the problem of the high relative velocity of galaxies in 
clusters can be surmounted by realizing that structure 
forms hierarchically. Galaxy clusters are the last objects 
to form; galaxies first assemble into smaller groups which 
fall together to form a larger galaxy cluster. The galaxy 
mergers which produce the current cluster ellipticals 
may have occurred long ago in small groups (with low 
velocity dispersions), before the cluster formed as a single 
virialized structure. 

The merger hypothesis thus remains a viable 
mechanism for the formation of elliptical galaxies. We 
can now ask whether the merging process leaves behind 
any signatures which can be used to constrain the 
fraction of ellipticals which formed in this manner. The 
nuclear starbursts should result in the formation of a 
central population of stars which is distinct in a number 
of ways from the older stars in the original galaxies. 
This population may manifest itself through features 
(‘seams’) in the surface brightness profiles of ellipticals, 
through strong age and metallicity gradients, and through 
kinematically distinct nuclear kinematics. On larger 
scales, unless the starburst completely processes the 
interstellar gas into stars, a small but significant amount of 
cold gas may remain in the remnant. In the outer portions 
of the remnant, the relaxation timescale is long and low 
surface brightness tidal feature—‘shells’ and ‘loops’—can 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


survive for many billions of years, indicating a strong 
collision in the galaxy’s past. Observationally, a significant 
fraction of elliptical galaxies show kinematically distinct 
cores, residual gas and dust, and large-scale tidal features. 
Through studies such as these, it may be possible to 
constrain the fraction of ellipticals formed through disk 
mergers. 

Of course, in a universe where structure forms 
hierarchically, all objects form from the coalescence of 
smaller objects. From this point of view, it may be wiser 
not to ask ‘did mergers form ellipticals?’. but rather ‘what 
merged to form ellipticals?’. Observational studies have 
shown that cluster ellipticals must have formed very early, 
perhaps even before massive disk galaxies had formed. If 
so, the merging objects were probably very different from 
the types of galaxies we see involved in nearby mergers. 
Because the collapse time for structure is faster in high- 
density environments, cluster and field ellipticals have 
a different formation timescale, and (under the merger 
hypothesis) should have different progenitors. Cluster 
ellipticals may form from the rapid assembly of many 
small progenitors, while field ellipticals may form through 
the more classical merger hypothesis picture of two 
merging spiral galaxies. These different histories should 
manifest themselves through differences in the structural, 
chemical and stellar population mix between cluster and 
field samples. The observational data, however, do not 
show as strong an effect as that predicted by models of 
hierarchical structure formation. The question of whether 
most ellipticals were formed through major merger events 
remains open. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Minor mergers and satellite accretion 


So far we have focused on so-called ‘major mergers’— 
mergers of two large, roughly equal-mass disk galaxies. 
While these represent some of the most spectacular 
collisions we observe, they are far from the most common. 
Because of the shape of the galaxy luminosity function, 
which rises at fainter luminosities, encounters more 
commonly involve a galaxy interacting with a small 
satellite companion. However, it turns out that even 
these ‘minor mergers’ can have a dramatic impact on the 
evolution of galaxies. 

That minor mergers occur frequently can be seen from 
even a casual inspection of the environment of our own 
MILKY way. The Milky Way is surrounded by 14 known 
satellite galaxies, the largest and most massive being the 
LARGE and SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOuDs. At a galactocentric 
distance of 50 kpc, the Magellanic Clouds are believed to 
orbit our Galaxy once every few billion years. The effect 
of this interaction is clear: tidal forces from the Milky Way 
have torn a long stream of gas—the MAGELLANIC STREAM— 
from these companions, and it has been argued that some 
of the younger Milky Way globular clusters may have been 
tidally stripped from the Magellanic Clouds. Recently, the 
discovery of the SAGITTARIUS DWARFGALAXY plunging through 
the galactic disk on the far side of the Galaxy has given 
us an up-close view of the tidal destruction of a merging 
dwarf galaxy. A similar system of companions surrounds 
the nearby Andromeda Galaxy, including the bright dwarf 
elliptical galaxies NGC 205 and M32. Indeed, if models 
of structure formation in the universe are to be believed, 
all bright galaxies should have a large number of satellite 
companions. 

Unlike major mergers, where dynamical friction is 
so efficient that the galaxies merge after only a few 
perigalactic passages, the extreme mass ratio (>10:1) 
of minor mergers ensures that the orbital decay of the 
satellite’s orbit is slow. For example, it is estimated that 
the orbit of the Magellanic Clouds will decay in another 
~10 Gyr, giving the Clouds a total ‘survival time’ of ~10 
orbital periods. Rather than the sudden violence of a major 
merger, these minor mergers are more properly a relatively 
slow accretion event, and the dynamical evolution of these 
systems is markedly different. In particular, the tidal 
field of the host galaxy will act to gradually strip material 
from the orbiting companion, such that the merger may 
not play to completion—the companion may be totally 
destroyed before reaching the inner portion of the host 
galaxy. Since the tidal radius of a orbiting companion 
is roughly proportional to (p;/p¢)!/? where p, and pg 
are the average mass density of the satellite and host 
galaxy, respectively, it is the low-density, diffuse satellite 
companions which are preferentially destroyed as they 
orbit their host. Low-density DWARF IRREGULAR and DWARF 
SPHEROIDAL GALAXIES Will certainly be tidally disrupted at 
relatively large distances from their hosts, while compact 
companions (such as Andromeda’s M32) may survive the 
accretion process well into the host. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


As the satellite is stripped on its orbit, this stripped 
material can be incorporated into the luminous halo of the 
main galaxy. Over several orbits, this stripped material 
will gradually spread out along the satellite’s orbital path, 
making a kinematically distinct ‘tidal stream’ in the halo. 
In 1978, Leonard Searle and Robert Zinn proposed that, 
rather than forming in a single monolithic event, the halo 
of the Milky Way formed through continual accretion 
of material much like the infall of satellite galaxies. To 
reproduce the observed halo luminosity of the Milky Way 
(Lg ~ 10°L 9), the Milky Way must have accreted on 
the order of a few hundred small satellites during its 
lifetime to build the halo in this manner. Whether or not 
such an evolutionary picture is consistent with the Milky 
Way’s dynamically cold disk (see below) or with the long 
dynamical friction timescales involved remains unclear, 
buta variety of observations argue that some fraction of the 
Milky Way’s halo—and presumably those of other spirals 
as well—formed through satellite mergers. Observations 
of halo stars show the presence of substructure, moving 
groups and possible streams of globular clusters and dwarf 
galaxies in the halo. The presence of young A stars in the 
otherwise-old halo also argues for recent accretion events, 
while tidally stripped material from the Sagittarius dwarf 
extending out more than 30° from the core demonstrates 
explicitly how satellite accretion can feed the Galactic halo. 

If the satellite is sufficiently dense and massive, its 
accretion can do more than simply build up the stellar halo 
of a galaxy. Such satellites more readily survive into the 
inner galaxy; once there, they can strongly influence the 
dynamical evolution of the disk. An N-body simulation 
of such an accretion event is shown in figure 5, where a 
prograde satellite with mass 10% that of the disk merges 
with a larger disk galaxy. As this massive satellite plunges 
through the disk, it scatters disk stars off their orbits, 
heating and thickening the stellar disk. As the satellite 
galaxy falls to the plane of the disk through dynamical 
friction, conservation of total angular momentum dictates 
that the disk warp and tilt in response. The resulting 
warped, thickened disk is qualitatively similar to those 
seen in some nearby galaxies (such as NGC 3628) and 
inferred in our own Milky Way. 

As a massive satellite spirals into the inner disk, 
it can also induce strong spiral arms and bars through 
a resonant response in the disk. Interstellar gas can 
be compressed along these features and flow inwards 
towards the nucleus owing to gravitational torquing from 
the bar and arms, similar to, but at a more modest level 
than, the major-merger-induced nuclear inflows. Thus 
these minor mergers can also drive increased disk and 
nuclear star formation rates or activate a central engine. 
When the merger is complete, a significant fraction of 
the disk gas may have been swept from the disk and 
into the nucleus. The disk itself has been kinematically 
heated, and spiral structure destroyed, by the passage of 
the companion through the inner disk. The induced bar 
may buckle in three-dimensional space, scattering stars 
above and below the disk plane, in a pseudo-bulge. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxies: Interactions and Mergers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0. .: 20 


60 | 80 


Figure 5. An N-body model of a large disk galaxy accreting a small satellite companion. The companion is initially on a circular orbit 
around the primary, inclined 30° from the disk plane. Top row shows a face-on view of the accretion; bottom row shows an edge-on 
view. As the satellite falls into the inner regions of the host, it excites strong spiral arms and a central bar, and thickens and warps the 
disk. Note also the stripping of material from the companion as it is accreted. From Hernquist and Mihos 1995 Astrophys. J. 448 41. 


morphological, kinematic and star-forming properties of 
the disk have all been radically altered by this interaction, 
suggesting that even minor mergers can drive significant 
evolution in disk galaxies. 


Bibliography 

The subject of galaxy interactions covers such a wide range 
of topics that it is impossible to give a comprehensive 
literature review. Instead, I have attempted to outline 
some of the original material in the field, while also giving 
more recent reviews on the broader subjects. 


Recent reviews on the subject of galaxy interactions 
include 


Barnes J and Hernquist L 1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
30 705 

Kennicutt R C, Schweizer F and Barnes J E 1998 
Galaxies: Interactions and Induced Star Formation 
(Berlin: Springer) 


Some of the first detailed N-body calculations of 
interacting galaxies were done by 


Toomre A and Toomre J 1972 Astrophys. J. 178 623 
while more modern calculations can be found in 


Barnes J and Hernquist L 1996 Astrophys. J. 471 115 
Mihos J C and Hernquist L 1996 Astrophys. J. 464 662 


The detailed properties of ULIRG galaxies, and the 
connection between mergers, ULIRGs, and quasars was 
first described in 


Sanders D B et al 1988 Astrophys. J. 325 74 


and have been recently reviewed in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sanders D B and Mirabel I F 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 34 749 


The theoretical motivation behind the merger hypoth- 
esis for elliptical galaxy formation can be found in 


Toomre A 1977 The Evolution of Galaxies and Stellar 
Populations ed B M Tinsley and R B Larson (New 
Haven, CT: Yale Observatory Press) p 401 


while some of the first observational groundwork is in 
Schweizer F 1982 Astrophys. J. 252 455 


The accretion model for the galactic halo was 
originally proposed by 


Searle Land Zinn R 1978 Astrophys. J. 225 357 


while a recent review of observational and theoretical 
work on the structure and formation of the halo is given 
in 


Majewski S R 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 749 
Models of satellite infall can be found in 


Hernquist L and Mihos J C 1995 Astrophys. J. 448 41 
Johnston K V, Spergel D N and Hernquist L 1995 Astrophys. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


J. 451 598 
Walker IR, Mihos J C and Hernquist L 1996 Astrophys. J. 
460 121 
C Mihos 
7 


Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy 


A large assemblage of stars, gas and dust that is held 
together by the mutual gravitational interaction between 
its constituents. Galaxies contain between a few million 
and about ten trillion (10'°) stars together with differing 
proportions of interstellar material (gas and dust). 

Most galaxies can be categorized as normal galax- 
ies, but a few percent (those that exhibit unusual 
characteristics such as having a compact, variable nucleus, 
radiating predominantly non-stellar radiation, and having 
a disturbed appearance) belong to the category of active 
galaxies. Normal galaxies may be classified in a number 
of ways, the most common system being the Hubble classi- 
fication scheme, which divides galaxies into the following 
principal types: elliptical, spiral, barred spiral and irregu- 
lar. Elliptical galaxies are spherical or ellipsoidal in shape, 
are dominated by old red stars and contain very little in- 
terstellar gas. Spiral galaxies consist of a central nucleus of 
relatively closely packed stars surrounded by a flattened, 
disk-shaped distribution of stars, gas and dust, within 
which luminous gas clouds and the brightest, youngest, 
stars are gathered into spiral-shaped ‘arms’ that appear 
to spread out from the nuclear region. In barred spirals, 
the nucleus is elongated, or bar-shaped, and the spiral 
arms emanate from either end of the nuclear bar. Irregular 
galaxies display no obvious pattern or structure. Spirals 
and barred spirals contain a larger proportion (typically 
about 10%) of gas and dust than ellipticals. The gas con- 
tent of irregulars varies considerably, but is typically about 
20%. 

The masses of galaxies range from a few million 
solar masses, in the case of dwarf ellipticals, to a few 
trillion (105) solar masses, in the case of the most massive 
ellipticals. Their luminosities range from about 200 000 to 
a trillion (10'*) times that of the Sun and their diameters 
mostly range from a few thousand light-years to a few 
hundred thousand light-years. Although most of the 
ellipticals are relatively small, ‘giant’ ellipticals are found 
in the cores of clusters of galaxies, a subset of these, the 
‘supergiant’ (cD) galaxies, having diameters of up to five 
million light-years. 

Measurements of the rotation curves of spiral galaxies 
(graphs of the velocities at which stars and gas clouds 
revolve at different distances from the centers of galaxies) 
indicate that stars and gas clouds in the outer regions of 
galaxies are moving as fast as, or faster than, those that 
are located closer to their centers. These results imply 
that up to 90% of the mass of a galaxy consists of dark 
matter (matter that emits no detectable radiation but exerts 
a gravitational influence), much of which lies in its outer 
regions. 

The galaxy to which the Sun belongs is known as the 
Galaxy (with a capital ‘G’), or the Milky Way Galaxy. Itis a 
spiral or barred spiral system that contains more than 100 
billion stars and which has an overall diameter (measured 
across its disk) of about 100 000 light-years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


See also: active galaxy, barred spiral galaxy, cluster of 
galaxies, dark matter, dwarf galaxy, elliptical galaxies, 
galactic nucleus, Hubble classification, irregular galaxy, 
lenticular galaxy, Milky Way Galaxy, spiral galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy Clusters 


Galaxy clusters are the largest stable structures in the 
universe. Galaxy clusters have been key astrophysical 
objects in the development of our current understanding 
of a host of issues. 


e Dark matter was first detected in galaxy clusters. 


e Galaxy clusters contain gas at a temperature of about 
10° K and are very luminous x-ray sources. 


e The theory of gravitational instability, which is the 
current paradigm for the formation of all structure, was 
first developed to understand galaxy clusters. 


e Clusters contain a unique mixture of galaxy types, 
including the biggest and many of the oldest. 


Galaxy clusters were first tentatively recognized in the 
sky surveys of NEBULAE in the 19th century. The two most 
prominent in the northern sky are the viIRGO CLUSTER, which 
is the approximate center of the local supercluster at a 
distance of about 20 Mpc from the Milky Way, and the coma 
CLUSTER (figure 1), which is a spectacularly ‘rich’ cluster at 
REDSHIFT of about 6900 kms~!. The Virgo cluster lies near 
the north Galactic pole and provides us with a convenient 
local sample of a relatively low-richness cluster. Coma is 
also located in the north Galactic cap and stands out as an 
unusual structure in the whole northern extragalactic sky. 

When galaxy clusters were first noticed in the 1800s, 
the size and structure of our own Galaxy was not 
known, let alone the distinction between various types 
of nebulae in our Galaxy and the extragalactic nebulae, 
which turned out to be other galaxies. Hubble’s distance 
scale of the late 1920s was an essential underpinning to 
the physical investigation of galaxy clusters. The first 
step was momentous. ZwIcKy measured the velocities of 
individual galaxies in the Coma cluster. Then, making the 
somewhat bold assumption that the cluster was in a stable 
equilibrium, he derived its total mass. The ratio of the mass 
to the total luminosity of cluster galaxies is an astonishing 
value of about 200M. per Lo (adjusted to current-day 
values of the HUBBLE CONSTANT). The Sun itself has a mass- 
to-light ratio of unity, and mixes of stars in an average 
galaxy have M/L values ranging from about 1 to about 
10, depending on their Hubble type. Zwicky’s conclusion 
was that most of the mass was ‘missing’ from the census 
of visible light. This conclusion was controversial until 
the 1970s, the primary issue being the dynamical state 
of clusters which was unclear partly because there was 
no clear theory of how such massive objects could come 
together. In the late 1960s Peebles (1970) did one of the 
first n-body simulations to show how a cluster could form 
from small density fluctuations in an expanding universe. 
Then, with the first imaging x-ray telescopes in space it 
was conclusively established that large clusters of galaxies 
contained gas at a temperature of about 10° K. Such hot gas 
required that there be a large, deep potential well to keep it 
contained. X-ray observations of clusters have become one 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the major tools for first finding galaxy clusters and for 
investigating the structure of the DARK MATTER distribution. 

In the 1980s GRAVITATIONAL LENSING was discovered in 
galaxy clusters, more or less as predicted by Zwicky. 
This elegant technique is both simple and powerful. 
The data consist of nothing other than a picture of a 
cluster at a moderate redshift, say roughly 1/2, where 
the lensing effect has a reasonable ‘lever arm’; the picture 
will have a high density of background galaxies without 
too many foreground sources (which suffer no lensing 
effect). The gravitational field of the cluster causes the 
background galaxies to be slightly tangentially elongated 
(on the average), which directly measures the mean 
surface density of the cluster. Very deep images with 
exceptionally high angular resolution (such as from the 
Hubble Space Telescope) reveal more detail which can 
be used to investigate smaller-scale structure in the dark 
matter distribution. 

A famous theoretical paper of Sunyaev and Zeldovich 
(SZ) predicted that as COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND (CMB) 
radiation passes through a cluster its radiation would be 
affected in two ways. First, the very hot electrons in the 
cluster would Compton scatter the 3 K photons of the 
CMB, leading to a slight increase in the energy of each 
photon. If the cluster is moving with respect to the CMB, 
then there is an additional Doppler effect of light being 
red- or blueshifted by reflection from a moving mirror. 
By comparing the CMB radiation near to the cluster with 
that seen coming through the cluster the SUNYAEV-ZELDOVICH 
EFFECT can be used to map the distribution of hot gas 
in clusters. This technique is best done at fairly short 
wavelengths where the confusing effects of radio sources 
are minimized. Radio telescopes that operate efficiently 
for these measurements at very high frequencies are now 
being constructed. 

The galaxy content of clusters is unique. The GALAXY 
MORPHOLOGY-DENSITY RELATION (Dressler) states that the low- 
density field is dominated by spiral-type galaxies but as 
one moves to regions of ever higher density the fraction of 
spirals declines and elliptical and SO galaxies dominate in 
regions of very high galaxy density, such as the centers 
of galaxy clusters. Spirals are actively forming stars 
whereas E and SO galaxies have very low star formation 
rates. Understanding this relation is a key consideration in 
theories of GALAXY FORMATION. Although E and SO galaxies 
are fairly rare outside of clusters, they do provide about 
15% or so of the field galaxy mix. The cD galaxy 
type, a supergiant elliptical with an extended envelope, 
is unique to clusters. Relative to field galaxies, cluster 
galaxies are older and contain a larger fraction of their 
stars in a spheroidal component as opposed to a flat disk. 
One possible inference is that galaxy merging was more 
important in clusters than in the field. 


Finding galaxy clusters 

Clusters are rare objects, containing about 1% of all 
galaxies. Finding them efficiently with minimal biases 
remains a research problem. The problem is that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The color image of the central region of the Coma cluster was taken at KPNO with 0.9 m telescope and T2KA CCD in the B, R 
and I bands as part of Omar L6pez-Cruz’s PhD thesis. The field of view covers 23 arcmin x 23 arcmin. Preprocessing was done with 
IRAF by L6pez-Cruz and the color composition was done by Ian Shelton. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 22. 


method of finding the clusters can significantly influence 
the properties of the cluster sample. A trivial sampling bias 
is that practical samples are only complete to some limiting 
flux as measured in some waveband which usually, but 
not always, leads to a declining number of clusters with 
increasing redshift. 


The Abell catalog 

The Palomar Sky Survey of the 1950s provided the first 
nearly uniform optical coverage of the northern celestial 
sphere. Abell’s 1958 paper describing his use of this 
huge database remains a classic of experimental design 
which in many ways has served as a prototype for other 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


surveys for galaxy clusters. Abell’s opportunity at the 
time was exceptional; however, the fact that his catalog 
has remained the fundamental low-redshift sample even 
today is testament to the care which he approached this 
problem at a time when the nature of galaxy clusters was 
far from clear. Earlier work of Zwicky at Caltech and 
Neyman, Scott and Shane at Lick had made it clear that 
separating galaxies into cluster and field populations was 
an ambiguous process. On the other hand, prominent 
clusters such as Virgo and Coma were readily identifiable 
physical objects, of which there must be other examples 
scattered throughout the universe. Abell devised a 
set of approximately redshift-independent criteria for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


identifying galaxies. The technique makes the reasonable 
and verifiable assumption that the tenth-brightest member 
has a statistically constant luminosity. From the apparent 
brightness an approximate distance can then be deduced, 
allowing clusters at different redshifts to be considered on 
the same basis. Abell made the inspired choice of 1.5 Mpc 
(for Hy = 100) for the characteristic projected radius inside 
which he counted galaxies to measure the richness. For 
the range of cluster memberships he considers, from 50 to 
about 500, this is comparable with the ‘virialization’ radii 
of the clusters. The result is Abell’s exceptionally durable 
list of about 3000 clusters, culled from approximately 
10 000 square degrees of sky. From this catalog Abell draws 
the important conclusion that clusters are not randomly 
distributed (see ABELL CLUSTERS). 


X-ray cluster catalogs 

X-ray astronomy transformed the study of clusters. Since 
the Abell clusters have internal line-of-sight velocity 
dispersions ranging from about 500 to 1000 km st any gas 
within them is, in equilibrium, heated to a temperature 
of between 10’ and 10° K. Gas at these temperatures 
radiates primarily in the x-ray part of the spectrum, with 
characteristic energies of a few kiloelectronvolts (keV). 
The first x-ray satellites found that clusters were very 
bright, implying x-ray luminosities in the range from 10 
to 10 erg s~!. This x-ray luminosity is about 2-4 orders 
of magnitude less than the luminosity of all the visible 
galaxies. However, the galaxies are powered by nuclear 
energy whereas the x-ray gas ultimately derives most of 
its energy from its gravitational energy release as it falls 
into the cluster. 

Normal galaxies in the field produce little x-rays. 
Therefore at low redshifts clusters of galaxies are readily 
found, since the field is effectively ‘dark’. However, the 
x-ray sky is fairly ‘bright’, probably as a result of large 
numbers of x-ray-emitting galaxies and ACTIVE GALACTIC 
NucLEI (AGN) at high redshift. However, these distant 
sources effectively act to provide a uniform background, 
upon which the clusters are superposed. On the whole, the 
result of x-ray cluster finding at low redshift is to confirm 
the reality of most of Abell’s clusters. The x-ray data are 
not sensitive to the projection of unrelated field galaxies 
and so usually give a better indication of the overall size 
of the cluster. 

X-RAY TELESCOPES have not had very large apertures. 
Consequently it is difficult to do deep surveys over 
large sky areas. The Einstein Medium Sensitivity Survey 
(EMMS) and the Rosat Deep Cluster Survey (RDCS) are 
both ‘serendipitous’ surveys, which take advantage of 
deep x-ray exposures of unrelated objects, such as M stars. 
After imposing strict limits on any association, one sorts 
through the ‘other regions’ of the x-ray image of such an 
object. EMSS examined about 800 square degrees and 
RDCS about 100 square degrees, but to an x-ray flux limit 
about an order of magnitude fainter. The EMSS clusters 
extend from about redshift 0.05 to 0.55. The RDCS clusters 
extend nearly up to redshift 1. However, both of these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


samples contain only about a dozen sources at redshifts 
beyond about half of their highest redshift. 

The x-ray surveys helped to clarify the issue as to 
where galaxy clusters ‘end’. They have a characteristic 
radius of about 1 Mpc, inside of which the gas is hot and the 
galaxies are on approximately random orbits, as opposed 
to infalling nearly radial orbits outside the cluster. This 
distinction between cluster and field leads to the result 
that about 1% of all galaxies are in rich clusters. 

New x-ray satellites will probe to much higher 
redshifts. In particular there are plans for the XMM 
satellite to use x-rays to detect clusters to redshift 2, where 
most other techniques become unreliable and inefficient. 


New techniques 

The hot gas in galaxy clusters is also seen in projection 
against the 2.7 K CMB radiation. Zeldovich and Sunyaev 
(1969) pointed out that as the CMB photons traverse the 
cluster they will, on average, be heated slightly. Therefore 
the Planck spectrum of the CBR is boosted upward 
slightly in energy. The result in the Rayleigh—Jeans tail 
at low frequency is that the cluster appears to be ‘cool’ 
with respect to the surrounding sky. The temperature 
decrement is of order a few hundred microkelvin. The 
unique power of the technique is that the SZ effect has 
no redshift dependence and can in principle find clusters 
to very high redshift. In practice a serious limitation is 
the sensitivity and the sky coverage of existing mm-wave 
radio telescopes. Mapping even a single square degree 
is a considerable challenge today, but will become nearly 
routine with future facilities. 

Weak gravitation lensing directly ‘images’ the dark 
matter in the universe (Kaiser and Squires 1993) based on 
the gravitationally induced distortions of distant galaxies 
viewed along a line of sight that passes close to a mass 
concentration. This technique obviously depends on 
having observations that reach to high enough redshifts 
that large numbers of galaxies behind the clusters of 
interest are reached. There is the practical complication 
that galaxies are themselves non-circular so one must 
observe sufficient numbers so that the shear induced 
by a cluster, say of order 10% image distortion, can 
be confidently detected. As large-area CCD cameras 
become available this technique will probably become 
very important. 

The galaxy population of most clusters contains far 
more relatively red, ‘early-type’ galaxies than are present 
in the field. An imaging survey with color information 
(Yee et al 1999) therefore can seek out concentrations of 
these objects on the sky. Because the red sequence changes 
its color with redshift it also provides a redshift indicator. 
Large-area optical and infrared imaging surveys will make 
this technique feasible. 

There should be a dramatic change in the availability 
of carefully defined samples of galaxy clusters to redshifts 
well beyond 1 in about the year 2000. Up to the year 2000 
Abell’s sample has stood alone as the only really large one. 
X-ray selected samples have found objects slightly beyond 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


redshift 1, but the numbers beyond even redshift of 0.5 are 
only of order one dozen. These new samples will open up 
a huge new range of astrophysical investigations. 


Galaxies in clusters 

The properties and evolutionary scenarios of cluster 
galaxies are a large and significant subject in their own 
right. A fundamental observation is the morphology-— 
density relation (Dressler 1980) where it is noted that 
spheroid-dominated ‘early-type’ galaxies are much more 
frequent in clusters than the disk-dominated ‘late-type’ 
galaxies which predominate in the field. Quantitatively 
there is asmooth trend of fraction of early type as a function 
of the local environmental density. This relation is an 
important clue that the clustering environment plays a 
significant role in determining the properties of galaxies. 
This relation implies that most clusters have a radial 
gradient in their galaxy populations, with the central 
region largely composed of early-type galaxies and the 
outer regions beginning to resemble the field in the mix 
of galaxy types and colors. The red ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES 
in the centers of clusters are generally agreed to be the 
oldest normal galaxies in universe, as indicated by their 
exceptionally red colors in most photometric bands, which 
reflects the continuum light of the dominant stars of the red 
giant branch, and the strength of various lines which are 
fairly well calibrated against a similar mix of stars that have 
individual age dates within our own Galaxy. Of course the 
age of the stars does not necessarily tell when the galaxy 
was assembled into a single unit. Clusters contain many 
examples of the SO type of galaxy, which was originally 
suggested by Hubble as a hypothetical type needed to 
fill out his tuning fork diagram. The SOs resemble the 
larger bulge Disk GALAXIES, Sa and Sb, but have disks that are 
somewhat thicker and have essentially no spiral features. 

A second important observation is that clusters 
contain an increasing fraction of star-forming, late-type 
galaxies with increasing redshift (Butcher and Oemler 
1984). This is possibly related to the increasing numbers of 
blue galaxies in the field with increasing redshift, which, 
through infall, could mix in with the cluster galaxies. 
In both cases the detailed mechanisms leading to these 
observational effects need to be better understood, which 
has provided part of the motivation for building new 
telescopes. 

Clusters, by definition, have a brightest cluster galaxy 
(BCG). Besides being extremely luminous, the BCG is 
generally found at the center of the cluster, which is 
probably a consequence of dynamical friction on the large 
mass of the BCG. Generally the BCG is an elliptical- 
type galaxy, quite frequently of the unusual subtype ‘cD’ 
(cluster dominant), which is an elliptical with an extended 
envelope about the normal surface brightness profiles of 
elliptical galaxies, de Vaucouleurs’ r‘/* relation. These 
envelopes of extended stellar light are sufficiently faint 
that its detailed properties have not been studied in any 
detail. Two intriguing possibilities for the origin of the 
envelope are that it formed out of a ‘cooling flow’ in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


x-ray gas in an extended galaxy formation period and that 
it is composed of stars that were originally part of other 
cluster galaxies but subsequently tidally stripped from 
them by the strong gravitational field in the central region 
of the cluster. 


Dark matter in clusters 

The Coma cluster has been a Rosetta stone for understand- 
ing the contents of the universe, in particular as an indi- 
cator of the total mass and gas density in the universe. 
Zwicky (1933) obtained spectra of a number of galaxies 
in the cluster from which he deduced that the galaxies 
were probably moving at random in a virialized poten- 
tial with a line-of-sight velocity dispersion, 0), of about 
1000 km s-!. He estimated the virial radius to be some- 
what more than 1/h Mpc, leading to a virial mass estimate, 
My = 3G"'o?r,, of about 10°Mo. The sum of the lumi- 
nosities of the cluster galaxies was about 5 x 10!*Lo. These 
numbers indicate that the mean amount of mass per unit 
luminosity is about 200h~! Mo /Lo, whereas both observa- 
tion and modeling indicate that the stars themselves havea 
mean mass-to-light ratio of about 10Mo/Lo. The discrep- 
ancy is huge, highly significant and confirmed many times 
over in independent observations. One is led inexorably 
to the conclusion that the bulk of the mass of clusters is of 
some unknown ‘dark’ form. 

On the basis that clusters were large, massive systems 
whose physics is entirely dominated by gravity, Oort 
(1958) proposed that the mass-to-light ratios of galaxy 
clusters were representative of the universe as a whole. 
Arithmetic then indicates that the mean mass density of 
the universe is the luminosity density times the mass- 
to-light ratio. The Canadian Network for Observational 
Cosmology (CNOC) survey established that the virial 
mass was a reliable indicator of the total mass in a cluster 
and simultaneously measured the luminosity density of 
the field, finding that Q ~ 0.19 + 0.06 (Carlberg et al 1996, 
1997). The two interesting implications of this result are 
that the total mass of clusters is well beyond what could 
be formed by the baryons created in the big bang (Copi et 
al 1995) and furthermore that it is well below Q = 1, the 
value that a flat, matter-dominated universe would have 
and the simplest result of an inflationary cosmology. 

Dark matter has only been detected by its gravita- 
tional influence in astronomical observations. If general 
relativity were seriously in error then dark matter need 
not exist. However, we hastily add that general relativity 
has been both experimentally and theoretically scrutinized 
at length with no flaws having yet emerged. The physi- 
cal makeup of dark matter is completely unknown at this 
time, although there are a wide range of particle physics 
candidates for its possible constitution. 


Hot gas in clusters 

The discovery that clusters emitted prodigious amounts of 
fairly hard x-rays conclusively demonstrated that clusters 
were bound, substantially virialized structures. The x-ray 
emission is produced via thermal bremsstrahlung in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. An n-body simulation of a cluster ina CDM model universe, courtesy of Ben Moore (University of Durham), Tom Quinn, 
Joachim Stadel, George Lake (University of Washington). The picture is color coded with the local density of dark matter. As the dark 
matter halos fall into the cluster their outer envelopes are tidally stripped off to join a cluster background but the very dense cores 
remain intact and orbit within the cluster. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 23. 


hot gas. The temperatures of around 10 keV imply that the 
electrons are slightly relativistic, which becomes an issue 
for some precision measurements of the state of the gas, 
particularly in the SZ effect. A public access computer code 
allows anyone to do a detailed computation of the emitted 
spectrum from an optically thin astrophysical plasma 
(ftp:/ /heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov /software /plasma_codes /ra- 
ymond). One substantial result is that the x-ray tempera- 
ture is identical (within the current errors) to the thermal- 
ized mean motion of the galaxies, indicating that both are 
in the same equilibrium with respect to the dark matter. X- 
ray emission drops as the density squared, meaning that 
the x-rays rapidly become hard to measure towards the 
edge of the cluster. 

One of the most intriguing and controversial infer- 
ences from the x-ray data comes from the straightforward 
calculation of the cooling time of the cluster gas. In quite 
a few clusters the gas within the central few hundred kilo- 
parsecs will cool in less than a Hubble time, in the absence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of a heat source. The implied mass deposition onto the 
center of the cluster ranges up to as much as 1000Mo per 
year. Where does this mass go? It seems very unlikely to 
be completely dark, and, in spite of evidence that there is 
some residual star formation in the BCG, it is far below the 
massive amount in the cooling flow. The increasing sensi- 
tivity and angular resolution of x-ray satellites should help 
resolve this issue. 

As the CMB radiation with a Planck spectrum at 
2.7 K passes through a cluster Compton scattering boosts 
the mean energy of the photons slightly (Zeldovich and 
Sunyaev 1969; Sunyaev and Zeldovich 1980). Even at the 
center of a rich cluster the decrement is slightly short of 
1 mK. Of great value is that the thermal effect, which 
measures the electron pressure along the line of sight, 
f pe dl, has a frequency dependence that is different from 
the kinematic SZ effect, which depends on the peculiar 
velocity of the cluster with respect to the CMB. The result 
is that precision measurements of the flux difference from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the CMB as a function of frequency can provide a precise 
estimate of the cluster’s peculiar bulk flow velocity, which 
is of great interest for constraining the amount of large- 
scale clustering in the universe. 

Clusters also contain magnetic fields which become 
dynamically important near the centers of clusters (Kim 
et al 1990). The origin of this field is not known. If it is 
intrinsic to the cluster, as opposed to, say, being expelled 
from galaxies, it is quite puzzling. 


The clustering of clusters 

Abell noted that within his catalog of clusters the clusters 
had a tendency to lie near one another. Hauser and Peebles 
(1973) re-examined this and concluded that the clustering 
could be described with the two-point correlation function 
with a correlation length probably larger than that of 
galaxies, later refined by Bahcall and others. The strong 
clustering of clusters posed a puzzle, which ultimately 
helped inspire Kaiser’s (1984) theory of biasing. The idea 
is quite simple, just that clusters are much rarer than 
galaxies themselves. Within a Gaussian random field 
the rare objects, such as galaxy clusters, will be more 
correlated than more typical objects. The clustering data 
are in quite good accord with the theoretical expectation. 
The clustering data are then consistent with a hierarchical 
theory for the formation of clusters from an expanding 
dark matter distribution. Much more work remains to be 
done on larger samples to check the theory in much more 
detail. 


Formation and evolution of clusters 

Clusters are such massive aggregations of matter that in 
the absence of a theory for their formation it was argued 
that they were simply chance superpositions of unbound 
galaxies. The idea of gravitational instability led to a 
plausible solution. Atsome early stage in the universe very 
small amplitude density fluctuations are imposed upon 
the dark matter. With time these grow as a power law, 
eventually reaching an overdensity of about 5 times the 
critical value, after which they begin to collapse. Both the 
amplitude and the timescales for this process work out 
quite reasonably. 

In the early 1980s a particular fluctuation spectrum, 
the cold dark matter (CDM) spectrum, became a widely 
accepted basic description of many of the large-scale 
structural properties of the universe. The CDM spectrum 
flows from a consideration of how a scale-free spectrum 
created at some early time should be altered as the 
universe expands (see, for instance, Kolb and Turner 
1990). Clusters, because they fairly accurately reflect the 
dark matter properties of the universe, are often used to 
normalize the amplitude of the spectrum on scales where 
the spectrum is strongly non-linear. 

Beyond fairly simple analytic approaches such as the 
Press—Schechter theory (1974) for the numbers of clusters 
the most powerful approach to detailed predictions of 
the outcome of a CDM theory and clusters is to do a 
detailed n-body simulation (figure 2). Because clusters are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


relatively rare, one per 10°h-> Mpc?, one must simulate 
a large segment of the universe to find a single cluster 
(Colberg et al 1999) or doa specialized simulation of a small 
segment of the universe (Moore et al 1998). The agreement 
with the data is generally strikingly good, leading to an 
overall impression that the basic picture is in place and can 
serve as a powerful tool to test the cosmological model. 

Although the basic physics of the hot gas in clusters is 
in place its detailed simulation and how the galaxies form 
remains a very active field of research. The combination 
of new x-ray satellites, precision SZ measurements, 
increased computer power and increasing sophistication 
of simulation will lead to rapid progress over the next 
decade or so. 


Bibliography 

Abell G O 1958 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 3 211 

Butcher H and Oemler A 1984 Astrophys. J. 285 423 

Carlberg R G, Yee H KC, Ellingson E, Abraham R, Gravel 
P, Morris S Land Pritchet C J 1996 Astrophys. J. 462 32 

Carlberg R G, Yee H K C and Ellingson E 1997 Astrophys. 
J. 478 462 

Colberg J M, White S D M, Jenkins A and Pearce F R 1999 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 308 593 

Copi C J, Schramm D N and Turner M S 1995 Science 267 
192 

Dressler A 1980 Astrophys. J. 236 351 

Hauser M G and Peebles P J E 1973 Astrophys. J. 185 757 

Kaiser N 1984 Astrophys. J. 284 L9 

Kaiser N and Squires G 1993 Astrophys. J. 404 441 

Kim K-T, Kronberg P P, Dewdney P E and Landecker T L 
1990 Astrophys. J. 355 29 

Kolb E W and Turner MS 1990 The Early Universe (Frontiers 
in Physics) (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley) 

Moore B, Governato F, Quinn T, Stadel J and Lake G 1998 
Astrophys. J. 499 L5 

OortJ H 1958 La Structure et l’Evolution de lUnivers Onziéme 
Conseil de Physique ed R Stoops (Brussels: Solvay 
Institute) p 163 

Peebles P J E 1970 Astrophys. J. 75 13 

Press W H and Schechter P 1974 Astrophys. J. 187 425 

Suniaev R A and Zeldovich I B 1980 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 190 413 

Yee H K C, Gladders M D and Lopez-Cruz O 1999 
Photometric Redshifts (PASP Conf. Ser.) ed Storri- 
Lombardi and Weymann (astroph/9908001) 

Zeldovich Y B and Sunyaev R A 1969 Astrophys. Space Sci. 
4301 

Zwicky F 1933 Helv. Phys. Acta 6 110 


Raymond Carlberg 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy Evolution 


The galaxies that we observe in the universe at the present 
time exhibit a remarkable variety of properties, such as 
morphology, colors, luminosity and dynamics. There are 
galaxies which are one hundred times brighter than our 
own Milky Way and others that have one thousandth its 
luminosity. Some galaxies have very regular shapes, other 
are amorphous. There are galaxies with spheroidal shape 
that have little amount of rotation, and whose stars have 
large ‘thermal motions’ (like the molecules of a hot fluid), 
and galaxies that resembles rotating disks, where self- 
gravity and centrifugal force balance each other. There 
are galaxies with high amounts of gas (mostly hydrogen 
and helium) and dust, and a vigorous activity of STAR 
FORMATION. Other galaxies consist mostly of old, evolved 
stars, indicating that the activity of star formation in these 
systems ended in a remote past. 

Why do galaxies show such a variety of properties? 
How could they form and diversify in this way, and when 
did they do so? Is a given property an indication of a 
specific evolutionary phase in the life of a galaxy, or have 
galaxies with different properties formed and evolved 
in different ways? Which physical mechanism is each 
property the manifestation of? 

Such questions are among the most important in the 
study of cosmology, and yet they still elude a consistent 
and complete explanation. There was a time during 
the cosmic evolution that followed the BiG BANG when 
there were no galaxies, and the universe was filled with 
matter and radiation uniformly distributed throughout the 
space. Only very tenuous perturbations of the density 
of matter and radiation altered this otherwise almost 
perfect homogeneity. Then the universe underwent a 
transition from this phase to the highly structured one 
that characterizes the current epoch. GALAXY FORMATION and 
evolution are the results of a complex sequence of events 
that occurred during this transition. Their importance 
rests in the fact that the chronology and dynamics of these 
events are intimately linked to the global cosmological 
properties of the universe (i.e. the age of the universe, 
if it will expand for ever or if it will eventually collapse 
again in a Big Crunch, or if the expansion is an accelerated 
one or not) and to those of the matter that fills the cosmic 
space (e.g. the composition of the dark matter and its 
abundance relative to the ordinary, visible matter). The 
goal of galaxy evolution is to reconstruct back in time the 
physical mechanisms that led to the present-day galaxies 
and to explain them in terms of the properties of the matter 
and of the cosmology. 


The morphology, structure and luminosity of 
galaxies 

The galaxies in the present-day universe have been 
extensively studied for more than seventy years and, as 
a result, we have now a fairly accurate knowledge of their 
physical properties, such as the distribution of luminosity, 
abundances, morphology, age, chemical composition, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ellipticals 
EO E3 


Spirals 


Figure 1. The Hubble morphological classification. Elliptical 
galaxies are ordered from EO to E7, according to their ellipticity. 
The SO type essentially represents elliptical galaxies that also 
have a disk. Spiral galaxies are divided into normal and barred 
types, and are ordered from the ‘a’ to the ‘d’ sub-types 
(including mixed type such as ‘be’ and ‘cd’ not shown in the 
figure), according to the increasing importance of the disk 


component over the bulge. Irregular galaxies are not shown. 
(Photo credit: STScI OPO.) 


and internal kinematics. This knowledge forms the 
background against which observations of the properties 
of galaxies at earlier cosmic epochs are compared to test 
and quantify galaxy evolution. 


Galaxy morphology 
The morphology of the luminous component of galaxies, 
namely stars, gas and dust, is probably the most obvious 
manifestation of the diversity of galaxy properties. During 
the first half of the 19th century, EDWIN P HUBBLE Classified 
galaxy morphologies into the four principal types of 
ellipticals, lenticulars, spirals and irregulars. Figure 
1 shows the classical representation of the Hubble 
classification, also referred to as the Hubble sequence. 
Essentially, the HUBBLE CLASSIFICATION scheme is based 
on the relative proportions of the two major structural 
parts of the luminous component of galaxies, namely 
the bulge and the disk. The bulge is generally made of 
relatively old and evolved stars, which are characterized 
by red colors, and is shaped like an ellipsoid with various 
degrees of flattening and oblateness (ellipsoids with no 
flattening and oblateness are spheres). In general the 
bulge contains no appreciable amount of dust and gas, 
and therefore has no activity of star formation. The disk 
is composed by a mixture of old and young stars and by 
gas and dust, and it is frequently site of star formation 
activity. Its colors are generally bluer than those of the 
bulge. The most visually striking feature of the disk is the 
frequent presence of the ‘sPIRAL ARMs’, density waves that 
generate in the disk and which contain active regions of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


star formation. Other articles in this encyclopedia discuss 
galaxy morphology in greater detail. 

Bulge and disk do not only differ for the composition 
of their stellar populations and interstellar medium, but 
also for their dynamics. Galaxies are large concentrations 
of mass, and they would collapse under the effect of 
their own self-gravity if some opposing force were not 
there to keep them in dynamical equilibrium. Disks 
are kept in equilibrium by rotation, which provides the 
centrifugal force to oppose gravity. Bulges have modest 
or no rotation, and are sustained against gravity by the 
‘velocity dispersion’ of their stars, which is similar to the 
motions of molecules in a hot gas. These motions provide 
the pressure that contrasts gravity and keeps the structure 
in dynamical equilibrium. 

ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES consist only of the bulge compo- 
nent and have no disk. LENTICULAR GALAXIES are essentially 
ellipticals with a very thin, often almost invisible disk, 
which gives them the shape of a lentil. sprRALGALAxIES have 
both a bulge and a disk with spiral arms. Ifa bar is present, 
this contains the bulge at its center and has the spiral arms 
departing from its extremities. IRREGULAR GALAXIES tend to 
resemble spiral ones, except that the bulge, the disk and 
the spiral arms are not regularly defined. There are also 
amorphous galaxies, which have morphology that cannot 
be easily classified into any of the main types. 

Initially, it was believed that the Hubble sequence 
was the manifestation of an evolutionary process such 
that galaxies originated as ellipticals, which were therefore 
called the ‘early types’, and evolved to become spirals and 
irregulars, which were called the ‘late types’. Although it 
has been shown that such ideas were incorrect, nonetheless 
the nomenclature has remained, and today it is common, 
for example, to refer to ellipticals and lenticulars as ‘early- 
type galaxies’. 


The luminosity function 

One very powerful tool that describes in a quantitative 
way two of the most important properties of galaxies is 
a statistic called the luminosity function, which provides 
information on the relative frequency in space of galaxies 
with given luminosity. The reason to couple together 
luminosity and abundance is an important one. As will 
become clear later, the luminosity of galaxies is a measure 
of either their stellar content or of their current activity of 
star formation or of both (depending on the evolutionary 
phase of the galaxy). The stellar content, in turn, is 
generally correlated to the total mass of the galaxy, to its 
star formation history as well as to the history of merging 
with other galaxies. Finally, the current activity of star 
formation provides a measure of the rate at which the 
stellar content of galaxy is increasing. 

The abundance of galaxies in space (or volume 
density) reflects another set of important physical 
properties. Galaxies form within virialized structures, 
namely systems that have collapsed under the effect of 
their self-gravity and have decoupled their dynamical 
evolution from that of the cosmic mass distribution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(for example, they have stopped following the cosmic 
expansion). The theory of gravitational instability predicts 
that the number of virialized systems that have formed at 
any given time depends on their mass, with more massive 
systems being less abundant than less massive ones. It 
also predicts that, for a given mass, the number of systems 
depends on the density parameters Q and cosmological 
constant Q, and on the spectrum of the primordial density 
perturbations that emerged from the Big Bang}. However, 
only galaxies that have formed enough stars or that have 
enough star formation (and whose light is not obscured 
by dust) can be observed. Thus, by coupling together the 
information on the luminosity and abundances of galaxies, 
the luminosity function provides synthetic information 
on the formation and evolution of both the structural 
and visible components of galaxies as well as on the 
cosmological parameters. A more detailed discussion 
on the luminosity function can be found in the article 
LUMINOSITY FUNCTION OF GALAXIES. 

The luminosity function of local galaxies has been 
directly measured with good accuracy. It is found that 
fainter galaxies are much more common than brighter 
ones. For example, although galaxies with luminosity 
similar to that of the Milky Way or the Andromeda 
galaxy” are relatively common, fainter galaxies such as 
the Magellanic Clouds are much more frequent. Bright 
galaxies suchas the big ellipticals often found at the centers 
of clusters of galaxies are much rarer. Irregular galaxies are 
typically fainter and more abundant than galaxies with 
regular morphology. 


Star formation and merging: the engines of 
galaxy evolution 

Clearly, a morphological classification is useful only if 
it reflects some important physical property that can be 
directly linked to the origin and evolution of the galaxies. 
What are the physical properties of the Hubble sequence? 
We have seen that the age of the stellar populations and the 
dynamical state play an important role, but how do they 
relate to the history of star formation and how can we use 
them to reconstruct its evolution? How can we exploit the 
information contained in the luminosity function? 


Star formation 

Let us illustrate the role of star formation with an example. 
Let us consider the case of a spiral galaxy which contains 
10" stars similar to the Sun. This would be approximately 
the size of a galaxy like the Milky Way. Let us imagine that 


| The cosmological parameters Q and 2, measure the total mass 
content of the universe and the strength of the cosmological 
constant, a form of repulsive force that may cause the universe 
to keep expanding at an accelerated pace. Their combined value 
decides if the universe will expand for ever or it will collapse into 
a Big Crunch. Together with the Hubble constant, they determine 
the age of the universe 

? Such galaxies are commonly referred to as ‘L* galaxies’. The 
symbol L* is used to indicated the value of the blue luminosity 
of galaxies similar to the Milky Way. Its value is L* = 10'7Lo, 
where Lo denotes the luminosity of the Sun or 4 x 10° erg s~? 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


this galaxy is experiencing an episode of star formation, 
and that it is generating new stars at a rate of, say, 10 solar 
masses per year or Mg yr“! (this is the total stellar mass, 
not the number, of new stars). The sTELLAR MassEs of freshly 
produced stars are not all equal, but vary approximately 
between 100 solar masses to about one tenth of solar mass 
(ie. stars whose mass is between one hundred times and 
one tenth the mass of our Sun. The symbol that indicates 
the mass of the Sun is Mg). The relative proportions 
of stars of a given mass produced during an episode 
of star formation are, to first approximation, the same 
everywhere and are described by the so-called initial mass 
function (IMF). These proportions are such that for every 
star of mass M being produced, there are about 2.5 times as 
many stars with mass M /2 being also produced, implying 
that low-mass stars are formed much more frequently than 
high-mass stars. Another way to state this is that when a 
given total amount of stellar mass is being produced in a 
galaxy, this is distributed prevalently in low-mass stars. 

While low-mass stars carry the bulk of the new stellar 
mass produced during an episode of star formation, they 
contribute very little to the luminosity of the event. This 
is because high-mass stars are much more luminous than 
low-mass ones. A star of 100 Mo is about 1000 000 times 
brighter than the Sun. Even if there is only one star of 
100 Mo every 500 stars of 1 Mg, it alone outshines all 
of them, whose contribution to the total luminosity is 
negligible. After the first million years of continuously 
forming stars at a rate of 10 Mo per year, the galaxy of 
our example has put together a total stellar mass equal to 
10 x 1000 000 = 10’ Mo, about one ten-thousandth of its 
initial stellar mass. Of these, about 20 000 are massive 
stars. Because each of these massive stars is 1000 000 
times brighter than stars like the Sun, their total luminosity 
will approximately equal that of 2 x 10’° of these. Thus, 
during the star formation activity the galaxy increases its 
luminosity by ~ 20%. Its colors also become bluer, because 
the radiation emitted by massive stars is very rich of light at 
short wavelengths, which include the blue and ultraviolet 
ones. Had the galaxy initially been fainter, containing 
say 10'° Sun-like stars, the same episode of star formation 
would have trebled its initial luminosity. 

Although fainter, however, low-mass stars live much 
longer than high-mass ones. A star of 100 Mo lives about 
one million years, after which it explodes as supernova, 
while a star like the Sun keeps burning its hydrogen 
nuclear fuel for about 10 billion years, one hundred 
thousand times longer. Thus, about one million years or 
so after the end of the star formation, when all the massive 
stars have died out, the luminosity of the galaxy eventually 
becomes again dominated by low-mass stars, both the 
recently created new ones and the ones that existed before 
the episode of star formation. If star formation continued 
at the same rate for one million years, the galaxy of our 
example, which started with 10"! Sun-like stars, would 
create another 10’ of them, or only 0.1% of the original 
amount. Once the massive stars have died out, the 
luminosity of the galaxy in its post-starburst phase is again 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


powered by these stars and it returns to the original value. 
Of course, star formation of longer duration would result 
in a larger increase of final luminosity and stellar mass. 
The luminosity of the galaxy during the phase of star 
formation, however, depends only on the rate at which 
stars are being produced because this is what determines 
the amount of massive stars that can be observed ata given 
time. Also, after star formation ends, the colors of the 
galaxy also return to be dominated by the light of the low- 
mass stars, which is redder than that of the massive stars 
whose colors dominated the spectral energy distribution 
of the galaxy during the star-forming phase. 

Luminosity, stellar mass and color are not the only 
changes induced in a galaxy by star formation. Another 
fundamental product is the creation of the ‘metals’, 
namely of elements heavier than helium. The chemical 
composition of the universe as it emerged from the Big 
Bang practically consisted only of hydrogen and helium, in 
the proportion of about 80% and 20% by mass, respectively. 
Essentially all the heavier elements that we observe, 
both on Earth and elsewhere in the universe, have been 
synthesized in the interiors of stars by reactions of nuclear 
fusions at epochs subsequent to the Big Bang. The 
metals synthesized in the interiors of stars are released 
to interstellar space during sUPERNOvA explosions. Once 
the chemically enriched material has been dispersed, it 
becomes available to fuel further star formation and, with 
successive generations of star formation episodes, the 
general metal content of the galaxy (and of the universe 
as well) increases with time. 


Merging 

Another important mechanism that drives galaxy evolu- 
tion is merging, which can transform the morphology of 
galaxies and promote a substantial amount of star forma- 
tion over a short period of time. It also induces changes 
in the volume density and stellar content, and therefore 
affects the evolution of the luminosity function. Merging 
of galaxies is observed at all cosmological epochs where 
galaxies have been detected, and it is also predicted in all 
theories of galaxy evolution. See GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND 
MERGERS. 

When two or more galaxies merge, the final structure 
that forms may not bear any resemblance to the original 
components. The outcome of the process depends on the 
relative masses of the mergers and on their types. If two 
galaxies with approximately the same mass merge, the 
perturbation to the gravitational equilibrium of the two 
systems is very large and takes place on a relatively short 
time scale (of the order of the free-fall time scale, which 
is ~ 10’-108 years for a galaxy similar to the Milky Way). 
The gravitational potential of the forming system varies 
very rapidly throughout the whole structure during the 
event, a process known as violent relaxation, and when 
this happens the final equilibrium configuration of the 
system is a spheroid, similar to a bulge or an elliptical 
galaxy, supported against its self-gravity by the velocity 
dispersion. If the two merging systems were two spiral 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


galaxies, their disks would be destroyed during the event, 
and the gas contained in them transformed into stars on 
a time scale of the order of a few free-fall times, giving 
origin to a very powerful burst of star formation. In this 
case, depending on the gas content, the stellar mass of the 
final galaxy can increase to significantly larger values than 
the sum of the two mergers, and the luminosity during the 
event can reach prodigious values. 

If the merging systems have largely different masses, 
and consist of one massive galaxy and one or more sub- 
massive ones, the event is not as traumatic as above. 
Although the small galaxy is destroyed and loses its 
identity, it only causes a relatively minor perturbation 
to the structure of the massive galaxy, which in general 
retains its properties and morphology. If there is available 
gas, either in the large galaxy or in the accreting one, the 
perturbation can induce episodes of star formation that 
may significantly increase the luminosity of the galaxy, 
even if they do not in general appreciably change its stellar 
mass. 


Reconstructing the evolution from present to past 
The morphological and dynamical differences of present- 
day galaxies have been interpreted as evidence of different 
evolutionary history (Kennicutt 1998). The sTELLAR 
POPULATIONS of elliptical and lenticular galaxies as well as 
the bulges of spirals are very old, and hence the activity of 
star formation must have ended rather early during cosmic 
evolution. Direct estimates of the age of the stars place the 
epoch of their formation to when the universe was about 
~ 20% of its current age. For example, if the universe is 14 
billion years old, most ellipticals, lenticulars and bulges 
already assembled the bulk of the stars by the time the 
universe was about 3 billion years old. This means, for 
example, that to form a total stellar mass of ~ 10'!Mo in 
a few billion years, star formation rates must have been 
very high, of the order of 107/10? ~ 10? My yr!. Thus, 
the ‘spheroids’ must have have formed their stars during 
intense but relatively short bursts of star formation. 

In the disk of spiral galaxies star formation is observed 
to proceed at a relatively low pace but in a continuous 
fashion, and the age and composition of the stars suggest 
that this was the case in the past as well, although 
the rate of star formation was probably higher in the 
past. Luminosity and colors (the so-called spectral energy 
distribution) of Disk GALAXIES, therefore, largely reflect those 
of the forming stellar population. At the onset of the first 
episode of star formation, the spectral energy distribution 
closely resembled that of young massive stars, since only 
these objects populated the galaxy. At more advanced 
stages, when a significant older stellar population had 
built up, the spectral energy distribution became redder, 
reflecting the presence of the low-mass stars. For such 
a mechanism to take place on a time scale comparable 
to the age of the universe it requires a reservoir of gas 
to be continuously available to feed the activity of star 
formation. This gas is thought to accrete on the disk from 
the outer regions of the galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The morphological and dynamical properties of 
galaxies are decided when the body of the structure 
forms by gravitational collapse of a proto-cloud or of 
discrete sub-structures as in the case of merging. If the 
collapsing structure has enough angular momentum (in 
other words, enough rotation), it eventually settles on a 
final equilibrium configuration which has the shape of a 
disk, where the centrifugal force balances gravity. On the 
other hand, if the structure does not have enough angular 
momentum, there is no centrifugal force to oppose gravity, 
and the collapse continues until the velocity dispersion 
of the sub-components of the structure can halt it. The 
equilibrium configuration in this case is that of a spheroid, 
whose morphology is significantly more compact than that 
of a disk. 

This difference in the collapse dynamics have 
consequences in the star formation mechanisms as well. 
The violent collapse that gives origin to a spheroid 
deeply changes the gravitational potential of the forming 
structure in a short time scale (of the order of the free-fall 
time). This large perturbation can drive a violent burst of 
star formation throughout the structure that converts all 
the available gas into stars on a time scale of several free- 
fall times (i.e. 10°10? yr). When the burst ends because 
of gas exhaustion, no more significant star formation is 
possible if the galaxy does not accrete additional gas by 
interaction and merging with other galaxies. The stars, 
which are essentially coeval, then begin a phase of passive 
evolution. 


Observing the evolution from past to present 

Directly comparing the properties of earlier galaxies 
with the present-day ones is another powerful avenue 
of investigation which has been made possible by the 
technological advances in telescopes and instrumentation 
achieved over the last 30 years. Thanks to the travel time 
imposed by the finite speed of light, approximately 1.6 
billion miles per year, galaxies at earlier cosmic epochs 
can be studied simply by looking at distant galaxies. This 
is because a distant galaxy appears to an observer as it was 
in the past, at a look-back time equal to the travel time of 
the light from the galaxy to the observer. For very distant 
galaxies the look-back time is a large fraction of the entire 
age of the universe. Table 1 one shows the relationship 
between the luminosity distance*, redshift, cosmic age, 
look-back time, and fractional age of the universe. These 
quantities have been calculated assuming a universe with 
a Hubble constant equal to Hy) = 65 km7! Mpc™! and 
with density parameter and cosmological constant equal to 
Q = 0.3 and Q, = 0.7, respectively. It is common practice 
to use the redshift, rather then the distance, to provide a 
measure of the look-back time (for more information about 
the redshift see the article on GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT in 
this volume). Galaxies with redshift smaller than z ~ 0.1, 


3 This is the distance that enters in the inverse-square law, 
which states that the observed flux ¢ of the source is inversely 
proportional to the square of the distance d from the source to the 
observer, or ¢ = L/4 d*, where L is the luminosity of the source. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


or distance shorter than ~ 500 Mpc, are considered to be 
local systems observed in the present-day universe. Note 
that the epoch when the universe was half its present age 
(which is 14.5 billion years with the adopted cosmological 
parameters) corresponds to redshift z ~ 0.7, or to a 
distance of ~ 4600 Mpc, and that the bulk of the cosmic 
evolution, say ~ 80% of the cosmic age, took place from 
redshift z ~ 2 to the present time (redshift z = 0). Note also 
the little increment of look-back time at very high redshifts. 
Finally, we recall that the cosmic microwave background 
radiation originated at z ~ 1300. 


Table 1. Relationship between luminosity distance D in Mpc, 
redshift z, cosmic age (in billion years), look-back time (LBT) (in 
billion years) and fractional age as % of the present age. 

Ho = 65 kms7! Mpc7?; Q = 0.3; Qa = 0.7. 


D z Age LBT % 

0 0.0 14.51 0.00 100.00 

496 0.1 13.11 1.40 90.35 

1672 0.3 10.83 3.68 74.64 

3051 0.5 9.08 5.43 62.58 

4587 0.7 7.72 6.79 53.20 

7116 1.0 6.20 8.32 42.73 

11 749 1.5 4.53 9.99 31.22 

18 735 2.0 3.48 11.04 23.98 

21 965 2.5 2.77 11.74 19.09 

27 378 3.0 2.26 12.24 15.58 

32 935 3.5 1.91 12.60 13.16 

38 610 4.0 1.63 12.88 11.23 

50 240 5.0 1.24 13.27 8.55 

74 339 7.0 0.81 13.71 5.58 

111 830 10.0 0.50 14.01 3.45 

657 150 50.0 0.05 14.46 0.34 

1370 345 100.0 0.02 14.50 0.14 
19 222 400 1300.0 0.0004 14.51 0.003 


Faint blue galaxies 
Currently, the observations have studied relatively well 
galaxies at redshifts up to z ~ 1. From z ~ 1 up to 
z ~ 2.5 there is a gap of systematic observations due 
to the difficulty, with current technology, of measuring 
redshifts of faint sources in that range. At redshift higher 
than z ~ 2.5, and up to z ~ 5, star-forming galaxies 
have been observed and studied in large numbers (but 
not other types of galaxies, if they existed at those epochs) 
thanks to a special observing strategy called the ‘Lyman- 
break technique’ (see the article GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT 
in this volume), fine-tuned to be sensitive in that redsfhit 
range. More recently, there have been a few reports 
of identification of star forming galaxies with redshifts 
as high as z ~ 6.2, and also of candidates at redshifts 
z ~ 10. Great efforts are currently being put into the 
design and construction of very large telescopes, such as 
ground-based ones with mirrors of 30 meters or more, or 
the 8-meter space-based Next Generation Space Telescope 
(NGST), capable of detecting galaxies at z ~ 20, if they 
exist there. 

The first surveys of very faint galaxies were carried 
out in the late 1970s and early 1980s, following the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


advent of the first CCD detectors, and consisted mostly 
of deep imaging surveys (Tyson 1977). Although they 
did not provide direct information on the distance to 
the galaxies (and thus on the epoch at which they 
were observed), these observations found evidence that 
galaxies’ properties have changed over time. If the 
distribution of intrinsic luminosities and the abundances 
of galaxies did not evolve, then from the knowledge of the 
luminosity function at the present time one can accurately 
predict the numbers of distant (i.e. earlier) galaxies that 
have a specified distribution of apparent luminosities. 
This is due to the fact that the apparent luminosity 
of a galaxy is related to its intrinsic luminosity by the 
inverse-square law. Thus, under the assumption that the 
distribution and abundances of absolute luminosties (i.e. 
the luminosity function) is the same at any epoch, one 
can compute the distribution of apparent luminosities of 
galaxies expected in a deep survey simply by summing 
together the contribution of the luminosity function from 
each epoch. Very interestingly, the observations revealed 
that the number of faint galaxies is much higher than 
one would expect from such a calculation, with the 
excess increasing at fainter galaxies and being more 
pronounced at bluer wavelengths than at redder ones. 
Figure 2 shows this effect by plotting the number counts 
of galaxies per square degree observed in the sky at 
various wavelengths versus their apparent luminosity, 
expressed in magnitude? (bottom) or physical units (top). 
Plotted in the graph are the observed counts in the 
K, I, B and U bands, respectively, corresponding to 
wavelengths of 22 000 (near-infrared), 8000 (red end of 
visible radiation), 4000 (blue radiation) and 3600 A (violet 
end of visible radiation). The different symbols represent 
data from various observers, and provide an indication 
on the uncertainties of the observations. The curves are 
the theoretical predictions based on the local luminosity 
function. As can be seen, the excess in the counts over the 
predictions is very strong in the U and B bands, where it 
becomes noticeable already at around magnitude 22 and 
it sharply increases at fainter levels. The excess becomes 
progressively smaller towards redder wavelengths, and in 
the K band it is noticeable only at the faintest levels. 
While deep multi-band imaging showed that the 
number density and/or the luminosity of blue galaxies is 
rapidly evolving going towards earlier epochs, without an 
indication of the distance to these faint galaxies, however, 
it is not possible to understand from these data alone when 
such evolution took place and whether the evolution of the 
blue galaxies was synchronous or not with other types. 
The advent of more sensitive CCD detectors and 
advanced instumentation during the late 1980s and early 
1990s made it eventually possible to carry out large 
faint spectroscopic surveys and measure the redshifts of 


4 The magnitude m of a galaxy with apparent luminosity f is 
defined as m = —2.5 log(f) + c, where c is an arbitrary number 
that sets the zero point. Because of the negative sign, the scale of 
magnitude is such that brighter sources have smaller magnitudes 
and vice versa. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Log flux density (W m™® Hz‘) 
29 30 31 32 33 34 


e 
ie) 
~ 


e 
oO 
@ 


an 
oO 
a 
TIT 


ee 
jo) 
i 


Galaxies per square degree per magnitude 
° 
i.) 
i.) 


E | 

100 q 

| 

10 3 

; q 
0.1 

15 20 20 30 


AB Magnitude 


Figure 2. The excess of blue galaxies in the faint counts. The 
vertical axis reports the surface density of galaxies in the sky in 
units of galaxies per square degree per magnitude interval. The 
horizontal axis on the bottom reports the magnitude (faint is to 
the right, bright is to the left), the one on the top reports the 
luminosity in logarithmic scale expressed in physical units of 
Watts per square meter per Hertz. Counts in the K, 1, B and U 
bands are plotted. Different symbols denote different 
observations. The curves are the theoretical predictions of the 
counts assuming that the galaxies of the present-day universe 
have not evolved. The faint excess is very strong in the U and B 
band and becomes progressively weaker in the J and K bands. 
(From Ferguson 1998.) 


the galaxies, and hence their distance. This, in turn, 
made it possible to measure the intrinsic luminosity 
of the galaxies, and hence to derive their luminosity 
function at various cosmic epochs, mapping its evolution 
in time (Lilly et al 1995). These works showed that 
most of the faint blue galaxies observed in the imaging 
surveys are intrinsically relatively small systems located 
at moderate to intermediate redshifts, ie. z ~ 0.3 to 
z ~ 1, which are undergoing a robust activity of star 
formation. Their closest counterparts in the local universe 
are the irregular galaxies, similar to the Magellanic Clouds. 
Interestingly, the luminosity function of blue galaxies was 
found to evolve very rapidly from the present epoch up 
to the earliest epoch studied (z¢ ~ 1.3), implying that 
the luminosity (and hence the star formation rate) and 
abundance of these galaxies were progressively higher and 
higher in the past. 

The observations also showed that the luminosity 
function of galaxies that have the same intrinsic spectral 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


energy distribution as the ellipticals and spirals of the 
local universe, hence which are redder than the faint 
blue galaxies, is characterized by a much more modest 
evolution over the same cosmic epochs. This is shown 
in figure 3, which plots the measures of the luminosity 
function of red and blue galaxies in a number of reshift 
intervals, as specified in the labels (note that there are not 
red galaxies in the range z = 1.00 to z = 1.30). The vertical 
axes represent the number density in units of galaxies per 
cubic Mpc, the horizontal ones the luminosity expressed 
as absolute magnitudes (this is the apparent magnitude 
a source would appear to have if placed at a distance of 
10 pc from the observer). The circles show the data, the 
continuous line is the fit to the data, the dashed line is 
the fit to the data of the redshift bin z = 0.2 to z = 0.5 
(used to show the relative evolution), and the dotted line 
is the fit to the luminosity function of local galaxies. Thus, 
galaxies with colors similar to those of the Milky Way (or 
redder) were already formed and in place by redshift z ~ 1 
(namely for the last two-thirds of cosmic time) and have 
been evolving very modestly since then. Blue galaxies, on 
the other hand, have undergone a spectacular evolution 
over the same epoch, progressively diminishing their 
abundances and dimming their luminosity (i.e. reducing 
the star formation rate) towards the present time. 


Solving one piece of the puzzle 

With the repair of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in 1994 it 
eventually became possible to image distant galaxies with 
enough spatial resolution to classify their morphology and 
compare it to that of the local galaxies (Abraham et al 
1996). The unprecedented angular resolution of the HST 
imaging has shown that galaxies up to redshifts z ~ 1 
have morphologies that can still be classified according 
to the traditional types of ellipticals, lenticulars, spirals 
and irregulars (Glazebrook et al 1995). Consistently with 
what was found in the redshift surveys, the HST imaging 
surveys showed that elliptical and lenticular galaxies 
underwent essentially only passive evolution® during the 
last half of the universe lifetime (Schade et al 1999). Over 
the same period of time, the disks of spiral galaxies showed 
some moderate evolution induced by an overall increased 
of the activity of star formation, although their abundance 
was found to be comparable to that in the present-day 
universe (Lilly ef al 1999). In sharp contrast to the 
modest evolution of ellipticals and spirals, however, the 
HST images showed that irregulars galaxies underwent a 
spectacular amount of evolution, both in luminosity and 
abundance, over the same period of time (Ellis 1997). Thus, 
HST has clarified the nature of the faint blue galaxies by 
showing that they consist of irregular galaxies, and has 
provided an independent confirmation that these systems 
were much more abundant in the past than they are today, 
and that they were also forming stars at a higher pace. 
These galaxies, in effect, have been the drivers of the 


5 The expression ‘passive evolution’ denotes the evolution in 
luminosity of a galaxy induced by the natural evolution of its 
stars 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


RED BLUE 


a | ] TT 
0,05-0.20 (35) 


0,.20-0,50 (99) 


log @ (Mpe *) 


t 


+14 
075-4.00 (122) 


Figure 3. The evolution of the luminosity function of red and 
blue galaxies. Each panel contains measure of the luminosity 
function in the specified redshift range (data points) and a 
mathematical fit to the data point (continuous curve). Also 
shown is the luminosity function of local galaxies (dotted line) 
and the fit to the data of the redshift bin z = 0.20-z = 0.50 
(dashed line), useful to see the differential evolution. The 
vertical axes represent the volume density of galaxies in units of 
galaxies per cubic Mpc. The horizontal represents the intrinsic 
luminosity, expressd in absolute magnitudes in the B band. The 
absolute magnitude is the magnitude a source would appear to 
have if placed at a distance of 10 pc from the observer. (From 
Lilly et al 1995.) 


evolution of the overall luminosity function (i.e. that of all 
galaxies, regardless of their morphology or colors) and of 
the star formation history of the universe during the last 8 
billion years of cosmic age. Figure 4 shows four examples 
of faint blue galaxies imaged with HST. Note the highly 
irregular and fragmented morphologies, which consist of 
compact regions that host active star formation embedded 
in more diffuse structures composed by a mixture of new 
and older stars and of gas and dust. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. Four images of faint blue galaxies taken with the 
Hubble Space Telescope (Griffith et al 1998). Images like these 
helped understanding the nature of these population of galaxies, 
which underwent a spectacular evolution in luminosity and 
volume density over the last 8 billion years of the cosmic time. 
These galaxies are very similar to the Irregular types found in 
the present-day universe, however they were much more 
abundant in the past. Where the descedants of these rapidly 
evolving galaxies are at the present epoch is still precisely not 
known. (Photo credit: STScI OPO, R Griffiths (Carnegie Mellon 
University and NASA).) 


Looking at the big picture 

The study of galaxies over the last two-thirds of the cosmic 
age has shown clear patterns in the evolution of galaxies. 
What are today small galaxies seem to have undergone 
most of their evolution over this time. Although we do not 
yet know with certainty what and where the present-day 
counterparts of the faint blue galaxies are at the present 
epoch, there is mounting evidence that these systems 
have gradually merged with larger galaxies and have 
disappeared. As we have discussed earlier, the accretion of 
asmall system onto a large one does not alter the properties 
of the latter as when a major merging event between two 
similar systems takes place. Another possibility that has 
been proposed is that at least a fraction of them have faded 
beyond detectability of the present intrumentation, once 
the burst of star formation has ended. 

Over the same cosmic time, large galaxies such as 
ellipticals and spirals evolved much more modestly, being 
essentially already in place by redshift z ~ 1. This implies 
that they completed most of their formation at earlier 
epochs, and that to understand their evolution one must 
search at even earlier epochs. 

The search for the progenitors of the so-called ‘bright 
galaxies’ has traditionally occupied a central role in 
observational cosmology (see the article on GALAXIES AT HIGH 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Age of the Universe 


Today: 14 Billion Years 9 Billion Years 


Elliptical 


5 Billion Years 2 Billion Years 


Ca) ie 


Figure 5. Comparison between galaxies observed at various cosmic epochs (expressed as time after the Big Bang). The traditional 
morphological types can be recognized already at ~ 5 billion years. At earlier epochs the morphology seems to differ from that of later 
epochs, although galaxies do exhibit various degrees of compactness and irregularity in their morphologies, ranging from galaxies 
with light profiles similar to that of ellipticals and bulges to those with disk-like morphology, in resemblance to the Hubble types. 


(Photo credit: STScI OPO, M Dickinson, M Giavalisco and NASA.) 


REDSHIFT in this volume). One of the most important results 
of the extragalactic research of the last five years has been 
the identification of a massive population of star-forming 
galaxies at redshifts larger than z ~ 2.5, observed at a time 
when the universe was younger than 20% of its current age 
(Steidel et al 1996; Giavalisco et al 1996). These galaxies, 
also known as Lyman-break galaxies, are observed during 
an intense activity of star formation which has contributed 
a significant fraction of all the stars that we count in the 
present-day universe, between 20% and 50% according to 
current measures. Thus, the stars formed in these galaxies 
can account for a large fraction (if not all) of the stellar mass 
currently contained in spheroids since, having formed so 
early in the cosmic evolution, they must necessarily be 
very old today. These arguments strongly support the idea 
that the Lyman-break galaxies are the direct progenitors of 
the present-day spheroids, observed at a time when they 
were forming the bulk of their stars. 

Unfortunately, because of the gap in the observations 
between redshift z ~ 1 and z ~ 2.5, this association 
currently cannot be tested by directly following the 
evolution of the galaxies at progressively lower redshifts. 
Equally unknown is whether the Lyman-break galaxies 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


were the first to appear in the universe or if other galaxies 
preceded them in evolution. These will be major activities 
of research when instruments of improved sensitivity for 
ground-based telescopes and the Next Generation Space 
Telescope will come on line. 

Figure 5 shows a comparison between elliptical and 
spiral galaxies of the present-day universe (observed 
with ground-based telescopes) with their counterparts ob- 
served at progressively higher look-back times (observed 
with HST). The galaxies in the right panels are Lyman- 
break galaxies at redshift z ~ 3. Note that for these objects, 
a classification into morphological types is not really pos- 
sible. However, in resemblance to the Hubble sequence, 
these galaxies do show various degrees of compactness 
and irregularity in their morphologies, ranging from sys- 
tems with the light profile similar to that of ellipticals and 
bulges to systems with disk-like morphology. In the three 
panels on the right of figure 5 we have represented the 
cases of a galaxy with the same type of light profile as a 
present-day spheroid (top), of one with the same light pro- 
file as a disk (middle), and of one with an irregular profile 
(bottom). 

One possible evolutionary path is that the Lyman- 
break galaxies have formed the bulk of their stars in intense 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


bursts of star formation at high redshifts and then evolved 
mostly passiveley. In this scenario, the final outcome will 
be an elliptical galaxy when at the end of the collapse the 
progenitor has exhausted all the gas reservoir. Or it will be 
a spiral galaxy when the proto-bulge has still sufficient gas 
around it (or it is able to strip gas from another galaxy it 
happens to interact with), to give origin to a disk where star 
formation can occurr with low rate and over a prolonged 
period of time. 

Another possibility is that the Lyman-break galaxies 
have evolved into the present-day galaxies through 
successive generations of hierarchical merging. In such 
a scenario, elliptical galaxies and bulges are easily 
explained, since we have seen that the outcome of a major 
merging episode is a spheroid. In order to form lenticular 
and spiral galaxies, it is necessary that, following the 
merging episode that originated the bulge, the nascent 
galaxy has not only a sufficient gas reservoir but also the 
possibility to evolve undisturbed, with no further merging 
events, so that the disk can develop (disks are destroyed 
in a merging event). According to this scheme, elliptical 
galaxies would be spheroids that have not developed a 
disk, either because of the lack of gas or because they 
formed recently and simply did not have the time to do so. 
They would be, therefore, structurally ‘young’ systems, 
even if their stellar populations are old. Spirals, on the 
other hand, must have had the time to develop the disk, 
and thus they are ‘structurally’ old even if they contain 
a large fraction of young stars in the disk. Interestingly, 
while the data show that the occurrence of merging seems 
to be higher in distant galaxies, its relative importance 
in the evolution of galaxies of different types has not 
yet been quantified. Thus, it is not known, from an 
empirical point of view, for which galaxies merging has 
been instrumental for their formation, and for which it 
only provided a ‘perturbation’ in an otherwise structurally 
passive evolution. 

The picture that seems to emerge is that galaxy 
evolution proceeded along different paths, according to 
the different types of the galaxies, with massive galaxies 
forming first and smaller systems later. In other words, 
the mass seems to be the key parameter that decides 
the evolutionary destiny of galaxies. This is consistent 
with the paradigm that gravity has been the primary 
mechanism for the formation of structure at all scales in 
the universe, including galaxies. The paradigm states that 
the cosmic structures form as a result of the amplification 
and gravitational collapse of density perturbations in the 
mass distribution. Since perturbations grow as a result 
of their self-gravity, a prediction of the paradigm is that 
more massive perturbations grow faster than smaller ones, 
and hence they can virialize and begin the process of star 
formation sooner. 

The importance of this paradigm goes beyond 
explaining the formation of galaxies, since it forms the 
conceptual ground for our understanding of many of 
the observations in cosmology and, ultimately, of the 
evolution of the universe as a whole. Yet, despite its 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


importance, this paradigm has never be subject to a 
rigorous empirical test. Reconstructing the history of the 
evolution of galaxies from their earliest appearance in 
space to the present time will provide one the first and most 
important empirical constraints to the whole theoretical 
framework of cosmology. 


Bibliography 

Abraham R et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 107 1 

Kennicutt R 1988 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 189 

Ellis RS 1997 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 389 

Ferguson H C 1998 The Hubble Deep Field Proc. STScI May 
Symp. ed M Livio, S M Fall and P Madau p 181 

Giavalisco M, Steidel C C and Macchetto F D 1996 
Astrophys. J. 470 189 

Glazebrook K, Ellis R, Santiago B and Griffiths R 1995 Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 275 19 

Lilly SJ et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 500 75 

Lilly SJ et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 455 108 

Schade D et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 525 31 

Steidel C C, Giavalisco M, Pettini M, Dickinson M and 
Adelberger K 1996 Astrophys. J. 462 17 

Tyson J A 1988 Astrophys. J. 96 1 


Mauro Giavalisco 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy Formation 


A galaxy is the environment in which stars are born and 
die, and distant galaxies are the luminous beacons that 
enable us to probe the distant universe. Our galaxy, 
the Milky Way, is one of billions of such systems in the 
observable universe. How galaxies formed represents a 
central theme in modern cosmology. 

At first glance, the universe appears to contain 
two different types of galaxies: galaxies with disk-like 
morphologies and galaxies with spheroidal morphologies. 
This basic distinction breaks down, however, once 
individual disk and spheroidal galaxies are examined in 
detail, since most disk galaxies contain small spheroidal 
components at their centers and most spheroidal galaxies 
contain small disks at their centers. 

Disks in and of themselves contain a wide variety of 
features. Most DISK GALAXIES exhibit spiral arms witha large 
range of winding angles and contrast. Approximately 
half of all disk galaxies also contain a highly elongated 
bar structure near their center, the bars possessing a 
variety of axial ratios. Some disks also show moderate 
deviations from planarity toward their edges (warps) 
while other disks show significant lanes of dust across 
their observed profiles. Similarly, ELLIPTICALGALAxIES, While 
possessing relatively uniform profiles compared to disk 
galaxies, show a significant variety of substructure. At 
least half of ellipticals have detectable shell structure and 
others distinct cores. Finally, all galaxies, irrespective of 
type, show great variations in the amounts and spatial 
distribution of gas, dust, stars, and metal abundances 
as well as their basic surface brightnesses, luminosities, 
colours, and masses. 

Despite their considerable diversity, galaxies show a 
remarkable degree of uniformity as well. The profiles of 
disk and ellipticals are remarkably homologous, the global 
structural parameters of disk and spheroidal galaxies 
define a tight two-dimensional plane, and the colours 
and apparent star formation histories of both spiral 
and elliptical galaxies show a striking correlation with 
luminosity. Of great significance is that most galaxies 
are very slowly evolving structures, both chemically and 
dynamically. Their properties were acquired long ago, at 
or soon after the epoch of galaxy formation. 

Galaxies began as clouds of primordial gas, hydrogen 
and helium. Even before galaxies condensed into distinct 
clouds, infinitesimal density fluctuations were present 
in the EXPANDING UNIVERSE. These originated at very early 
epochs in an inflationary phase transition from a universe 
that initially was relatively uniform. Fluctuations grew 
in strength under the inexorable influence of self-gravity. 
Eventually, clouds developed that fragmented into stars. 
Much of the detailed physics in this schematic of GALAXY 
EVOLUTION is now understood. 

This review begins with a discussion of the 
cosmological world model in which galaxies form, 
discusses the processes by which the initial perturbations 
are established, presents the theory for the growth of these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


perturbations into collapsing and eventually virialized 
objects, illustrates the importance of gas cooling in the 
formation of galaxies, outlines the processes by which 
galaxies acquire angular momentum, and concludes by 
summarizing the basic observations and theory of disk 
and elliptical galaxy formation. 


World model 

We begin by providing some background on the standard 
world model and the primordial fluctuations out of which 
galaxies are believed to have grown. 

The apparent homogeneity and isotropy of the 
observable universe, both in terms of its large-scale 
structure and the cosmic infrared microwave background 
radiation—the almost constant 2.73 K blackbody radiation 
background in which the universe is immersed—motivate 
the assumption that the universe is both homogeneous and 
isotropic. By homogeneous, we mean that every point in 
space statistically resembles every other point in space. 
By isotropic, we mean there is no point in space where any 
direction differs statistically from any other direction in 
space. 

Assuming universal homogeneity and_ isotropy, 
Einstein’s theory of GENERAL RELATIVITY can be used to show 
that the evolution of the scale of the universe follows the 
two independent equations: 


@+k 8G 
= — 1 
2 3? (1) 
2a atk 
~ + =-81Gp (2) 
a a 


collectively known as Friedmann’s equations, where a is 

a measure of the size of the universe, p is the pressure, 

k is the curvature, p is the density, and G is Newton’s 

constant. Combined with the equation of state, these 

equations completely determine a(t), p(t), and p(t). 
These equations can be recast into the form: 


— = Hy [a0 — 201 +2)°/2] (3) 
a 
“ = MoE(2) 
a 
= Hoy/ 21 +28 + 2x01 +22+2a0 A) 


where Qo = 82 Gpo, Qro = 1/(HoapR), Qar.o = A/3HQ, Po 
is the matter density of the universe at the present epoch, 
A is the vacuum energy density or cosmological constant, 
and R isaconstant with units of length. Hubble’s constant, 
denoted by Hp, characterizes the rate at which the universe 
is expanding at the present epoch. It is the constant of 
proportionality relating an object’s distance D to its rate of 
recession v: 

v= H)D : (5) 


Note that QrRo =1- Qo — Qao- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


As the universe expands, the gravitational attraction 
of the mass inside it slows this expansion. This 
deceleration may or may not be enough to slow this 
expansion sufficiently so that the universe recollapses. 
The case where there is sufficient matter to cause such a 
recollapse corresponds to a universe where the universal 
geometry is closed, ie., k = +1. The case where there is 
not sufficient matter to force such a recollapse corresponds 
to two separate geometries: one in which the universal 
geometry is flat (k = 0) and one in which the universal 
geometry is open (k = —1). Auniverse witha flat geometry 
is known as Einstein-—de Sitter. 

The time evolution of the universal scale length a 
is amenable to the following simple analytic solution in 
the case of an Einstein—-de Sitter universe where ordinary 
matter dominates the energy density (p = 0; p « (1+z)~): 


a = ap(t/to)"” (6) 


where fy and ay are the current age and size of the universe, 
respectively. 

For an open universe, the solution is given in terms 
of the following parametric equations: 


Qo c 


“= = 25)? 2H 


(cosh © — 1) (7) 


XQ 1 
~ (1 = 20)3/2 2H 


while for a closed universe, the parametric equations are 


t (sinh © — ©) (8) 


Q. 0 c 


Og = TP? 2p 


(1 — cos @) (9) 


_ Qo 1 
~ (Qo — 1)3/2 2H 


The turn-around time ¢, for this universe occurs when 
© = 1, so from equation (10), we find 


t 


(© — sin @). (10) 


Qo a 


ee eee in 
fa (On = Dez 2B (1) 


for the turn-around time. 

Requiring that the curvature be identical everywhere 
in space-time, the most general way of expressing the 
concept of distance is the Friedmann—Robertson—Walker 
metric: 


di? = a’R* |dy? + f?(x)(de* + sin’ @d¢?)] (12) 


where 
sin x, k=+41 
fOO=4 % k=0 (13) 
sinhxy, k= -1. 


The two-dimensional analogue to the Friedmann— 
Robertson—Walker metric is 


di? = a [dx? + f?(x)d6"] (14) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The topology of space in a closed (k = +1) 
two-dimensional universe. The coordinates (x, 0) define the 
position of a point P in this universe. The angular width ¢ of an 
object of size d is illustrated. 


which is more amenable to our everyday intuition, 
especially in the case of a closed k = +1 universe where 


di? = a? [dx* + sin’ x do?]. (15) 


This is simply the expression for the distance on the surface 
of a sphere where 6 is the azimuthal coordinate and where 
x is the tangential coordinate (figure 1). 

The wavelengths of photons expand, or REDSHIFT, 
along with the universe. The redshift of an object is a 
measure of how much the universe and, therefore, the 
wavelength of that object’s photons have expanded until 
the present. A redshift of zero indicates the present. 
Quantitatively, we express the relationship between the 
size of the universe a and its redshift z as 


1 
4 16 
l+z (16) 

Using solutions to Friedmann equations, one may 
derive both the age of the universe and the effective 
distances to objects which existed at earlier epochs. By 
integrating up the infinitesimal times 

1 1 d 
dt = -~da= pds 
a aH E(z)1+z 
dz 


~ HoE(@)(1 +2) nA 


one can compute the age of the universe: 


1 oo, dz 
= Bh [ E@(+2) ee) 


Similarly, one may readily derive expressions for 
the distance though there is one subtlety. Two 
different measures of distance are standardly discussed in 
cosmology: the angular-size distance and the luminosity 
distance. Both distances are defined so that the standard 
expressions involving these quantities apply. The former, 
the angular-size distance, commonly denoted Dag, is 
defined in analogy with the expression 


d 


6 = — 
Da 


(19) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where d is an object’s intrinsic size and 6 is the angular size 
of the object on the sky in radians. Similarly, the latter, the 
luminosity distance, commonly denoted D,, is defined in 
analogy with the expression 


L 
where f is the observed flux and L is the intrinsic 
luminosity. 

We now provide a heuristic derivation of the above 
equations. Imagine that the light from some object with 
size d, redshift z.p;, and tangential coordinate x converges 
to x = Oandz = Oonpaths where dé = 0. Along this path, 
the expression for the metric reduces to dl* = a?R?dx?. 


The integrated coordinate distance x is then 


ne i dl af cdt 
a z=0 aR <0 aR 


‘Ii Zobs d 
/ at (21) 
ApaoR Jz=0 EZ) 


The object is observed at tangential coordinate x at some 
previous time, and the distance of this object (at x and Zops) 
from the z-axis (see figure 1) is 


1 aoR 
r(z)=a(z)Rsinx = ee 


sin x. (22) 


Clearly, the angle @ emanating from the top of the sphere 
intersecting our object of size d at some distance r from the 
z-axis is d/r, So 
d 
o=- 


r 


(23) 


Identifying Da in equation (19) with r(z) in equation (23) 
yields 


aoR 
Da=r(Z)= rE 


sin x 
Zz 
aR . 1 / <obs ¢ dz 
= sin : 24 
1+z ae 9 E(z) (24) 


z= 


A heuristic derivation of the luminosity distance is 
similarly possible. Imagine the light emitted from some 
object at redshift zp, and xy = 0 propagates to some 
x reaching it at z = 0. This light would have spread 
out over a ring of radius 27r(0), where r(0) is again the 
distance from the points at x and the z-axis. Hence, 
f = L/2nr(0). The obvious three-dimensional analogue is 
f = L/4ar(0)?. Multiplying the flux by a factor of 1/(1+z) 
to account for time dilation and 1/(1 +z) to account for the 
energy loss due to photon redshifting, one obtains 


L 


f= 4nr(0)2(1 +22. 


(25) 


Identifying r(0)(1 + z) in equation (25) with D, in 
equation (20) yields 


Dy = r(0)(1 +z) 


. 1 “obs ¢ dz 
= a)R(1+2z) sin] i. oI. (26) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


As in our derivation of the angular and luminosity 
distances, it is easy to see that the apparent surface 
brightness of objects decreases as (1 + z)~+, a factor of 
(1 + z)~! due to time dilation, a factor of (1 + z)~! due to 
a redshifting of the photons, and a factor of (1 + z)? to 
account for its larger angular size on the sky. 


Origin of fluctuations 

INFLATION is a popular scenario for producing the small 
matter overdensities, or seeds, on which mass accretes 
and galaxies later form. The popularity of inflation 
derives from the relatively natural explanation it provides 
for establishing the initial conditions from which our 
universe seems to have evolved. Not only does it explain 
the homogeneity of the universe on large scales, but 
it also solves the problem of the relative absence of 
objects like magnetic monopoles or other types of massive 
topological defects. It provides a natural explanation 
for the apparent flatness of the universe although the 
observational evidence for this still might be considered 
preliminary. 

Inflation is initiated at the temperature scale corre- 
sponding to the breaking of the symmetry of grand uni- 
fication (T ~ 10!6 GeV, at t ~ 10-* s) as the universe 
expands and cools through a brief period of supercooling. 
The associated release of scalar field energy results in an 
exponential increase in the scale factor, and corresponding 
reduction in temperature, and is followed by a period of re- 
heating when the associated field kinetic energy thermal- 
izes. This early epoch of exponential expansion is driven 
by the evolution of a scalar inflation field ¢ and potential 
V, the field evolving as 


. a dV(d) 
3- =0. 27 
Enea (7) 
The pressure and density are 
pe=P+V (28) 
py=P-V (29) 
where the inflation potential is such that V >> ¢, so 
p = —p = V as in the case of a non-zero cosmological 


constant. 

Zero point fluctuations of the scalar field are 
imprinted on the causal horizon scale, which increases 
exponentially. The causal horizon is greatly enlarged, to 
encompass all of the universe observed today, and the 
reheating process imprints a scale-invariant distribution 
of energy density fluctuations. A perturbative analysis 
of this scalar field’s evolution predicts a power spectrum 
with slope close to unity: P(k) « k, where k is the 
wavenumber defined via the Fourier transformation of 
the underlying Gaussian-distributed density field p(x, t) : 
dx = f p(x, t)e**d3x. This power spectrum is called 
the Harrison—Zeldovich scale-free power spectrum. The 
amplitude of the fluctuations is not predicted by the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


inflationary theory. However the prediction of scale- 
invariance is generic to many, although not all, inflationary 
models. Scale-independent curvature fluctuations are 
equivalent to density fluctuations on the horizon scale of 
fixed amplitude. On superhorizon scales, an invariant 
5 = GSM/Lc? = bp/p)(L/ct) = (p/p) L2smoving (4/1)? 
can be found which does not change with time. 

The energy density of photons and other massless 
particles scales as (1 + z)* while the energy density 
of nonrelativistic massive particles scales as (1 + zy. 
Consequently, there is an epoch of matter-radiation 
equality before which the energy density of the universe 
is dominated by radiation (massless particles), and after 
which the energy density of the universe is dominated by 
matter (massive particles). The redshift at this epoch is 


Pm _§ 3 x 10F QR (30) 


Pro 


1+ Zeq = 


where the matter density is Pm = Pm, (1+z)° and relativistic 
density is py = P)(1 + z)*. The horizon scale at this epoch 
1S Leg = 2 Cteg = 12 ho} Mpg, in comoving coordinates. 

During the radiation-dominated era, perturbations in 
the primordial power spectrum (6p/) grow in proportion 
to the square of the universal scale-factor a7. The 
growth of perturbations stalls once they get inside the 
horizon (Hubble radius) since the time scale for the 
growth of perturbations (« (PmatG) 1/7) is large compared 
to the expansion rate of the universe (« (ptotG)~'/”). 
However once the universe becomes matter-dominated, 
perturbations resume growth, but now in proportion to 
a, the universal scale-factor, instead of the square of this 
scale. 

The stalling of growth on small scales within the 
Hubble radius imprints itself on the power spectrum 
which survives the transition to a matter-dominated 
universe. Subhorizon density fluctuations have a 
distribution with scale 5/p & Loonoving & M~?/°, on scales 
S Leg, while on larger scales growth suppression implies 
that 60/p ~ constant. Mathematically, we include this 
effect by multiplying the primordial power spectrum P, 
for linearized fluctuations in a stochastic density field by 
the transfer function 


Pi(k) = T(k) Pp(k) (31) 


to obtain the final processed power spectrum P;. An 
approximate analytical fit of a transfer function calculated 
numerically is given by 
log(1 + 2.34q) 

(2.34q) 


x [1 +3.89q + (16.19)? + (5.46q)° + (6.71g)*] * (32) 


T(k) = 


where q = (k/Mpc/(h7)) (Peacock 1997, Bardeen et al 
1986) and h = Ay/(100kms7! Mpc’). Here we note 
that the above power spectrum results in a bottom-up 
sequence of evolution, smaller scale fluctuations reaching 
large amplitude before the large-scale fluctuations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dissipationless non-radiative matter, known other- 
wise as DARKMATTER, is now a standard part of the paradigm 
for galaxy formation. It is important in reconciling the 
power spectrum observed in the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACK- 
GROUND with the local power spectrum observed in galax- 
ies. Nonbaryonic dark matter makes this possible be- 
cause the growth of fluctuations is able to commence im- 
mediately after the era of matter-radiation equality. The 
growth of fluctuations in the baryonic component is, by 
contrast, suppressed because of its coupling to radiation 
background. Eventually, as the universe expands, it be- 
comes cool enough so that radiation decouples from the 
baryons, an event known as last scattering. At this point, 
the mass scale above which fluctuations can grow sud- 
denly drops from ~ 10'°M, to ~ 10°Mo, and so the fluctu- 
ations in the baryonic component are free to grow with the 
rest of the universe. Since the dark matter component is 
the densest portion of the universe, it controls the growth 
of fluctuations, and soon after decoupling, the baryonic 
component is boosted in amplitude by ~ (1+Zeq)/(1+zzs), 
zis being the redshift at last scattering. 

Remarkably, the acoustic modes set up in the baryonic 
component prior to last scattering are observable via their 
imprint on the cosmic microwave background radiation 
which provides a snapshot of fluctuations at last scattering. 
This may be seen as follows. The dispersion relation for 
fluctuation growth at rate e is 


w =k’Ve — 4nGo (33) 


(Vs being the sound speed) for time scales short compared 
to the expansion time, or equivalently for wavelengths 
2n/h < ct. Such wavelengths oscillate as sound waves 
with amplitude proportional to exp(ik Vst). Inflation 
specifies primordial curvature fluctuations which are time- 
invariant on superhorizon scales. The corresponding 
amplitude corresponds to the mode cos(k Vs t) which is 
finite as k — 0. At ts the maximum amplitude in 
6T/T is attained by fluctuations which have entered the 
horizon and satisfy kVst = an, with n = 1, 2,... 
Clearly the wave that crests on the horizon at tts and 
undergoes oscillations systematically experiences both 
Compton drag and diffusive damping. The net result is the 
amplitude is diminished and only the first three or so peaks 
are detectable. Doppler effects contribute 90 degrees out of 
phase to the gravitational potential induced 5T/T peaks, 
and the net result is a series of peaks corresponding to the 
maximum in 6T/T = |}5¢—r-v+ 46p/p|. The predicted 
enhancement of the first peak of wavelength 2 Vs ts is as 
large as a factor of three relative to the k — 0 or Sachs— 
Wolfe potential fluctuation limit that corresponds to the 
inflationary imprint of primordial, nearly scale-invariant 
curvature fluctuations. 

The observational situation is as follows. The 
COBE DMR experiment measured potential fluctuations 
on angular scales > 10°. The last scattering horizon 
is about 1°. Several experiments report evidence for 
the first acoustic peak on this scale, and definitive 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


measurements with large sky coverage that provide 
adequate foreground discrimination were performed in 
2000 by the Boomerang and Maxima balloon experiment 
collaborations (de Bernardis et al 2000, Hanany et al 2000). 
The situation is complicated by the contribution from 
the time-varying potential perturbations 57T/T ~ [ godt 
which arise in models with Q < 1 at curvature-dominated 
epochs, i.e. z S Q-!— 1 and are expected at angular scales 
= 1°. A final complication is the possible tensor mode 
contributions; this gravity wave background contributes 
to the energy density in the radiation-dominated era and 
only affects the low order multipoles corresponding to 
angular scales that are larger than the horizon angular scale 
at feq- 


Linear evolution of density fluctuations 
Gravitation magnifies the initial perturbations in the 
matter distribution, both dark and baryonic. While these 
perturbations initially grow linearly, eventually these 
perturbations stop expanding, break away from Hubble 
flow, and then collapse and virialize. Galaxies form from 
the gas which cools onto the center of these collapsed 
masses, called dark halos. 

An analysis of the growth of the initial matter power 
spectrum begins with the basic fluid equations in terms of 
the density p, the velocity u, the gravitational potential ®, 
the pressure p, and the time t: 


0p Du 

as +V-(pu)=0, p po Vp — pV®. (34) 
For convenience, we change variables to comoving 
coordinates x = r/a, to peculiar velocities v = adu/dt, to 
dimensionless overdensities 6 = p/p—1, and to conformal 
times t = t/a. Making these substitutions, the fluid 
equations become 


v=2 (35) 
6+V-[(1+5)v] =0 (36) 
1 V 
Jeg: Vee we Hove (37) 
a p 
while Poisson’s equation reads 
V*0 = 4nGpa’s. (38) 


The behavior of the modes can be obtained by taking the 
divergence of Euler’s equation, eliminating V -v = 0 by 
the continuity equation, taking ®, 5, and v to be small, and 
then linearizing the equations. One obtains 


» a. W 
§4 93 — Ps anG pars. (39) 
a p 


If we consider a pressure-free universe, this equation 
involves no spatial derivatives, so its solution can then 
be written as 


6(a@, tT) = A(x) fi(t) + B(x) fo(t). (40) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Using the fact that Q = 87 Gp/3H? = 82 Gpa*/3a”, we can 
rewrite equation (39) as 


ods 3. fa\? 
§+-8—=al(—) s=o0. (41) 
a 2 a 


For an Einstein-de Sitter universe (Q = 1), a x t? x 17/3 
and equation (41) becomes 


rae: 6 
§+2--6— =0. (42) 
T T 


For solutions, one obtains a growing mode 6 « D(t) « 
t? x 17/3 and a decaying mode 56 « D(t) « tt ax t-. 
D(t) is known as the linear growth factor. Given the small 
size of the perturbations at the era of matter—radiation 
equality, one ignores the decaying mode solution and 
simply considers the growing mode. For the more general 
case of a universe without a cosmological constant (i.e., 
Q, = 0), it can be shown (Peebles 1980) that 


3 30. +x)? 
D(t)=1+ x + — ae 


In [dd +x)? — x] (43) 
where x = Q-!-1l«a. 

Before finishing this discussion, we examine the 
evolution in position and velocity of a test particle 
because these quantities will prove useful later when we 
look at how galaxies acquire ANGULAR MOMENTUM. Since 
V*) = 42Gpa’é is a constant in the linear regime for 
an Einstein-de Sitter universe, the linearized version of 
Euler’s equation can be immediately integrated to give 


v=- (= / ar) V®po. (44) 


Integrating the peculiar velocity gives us: 


a= 2 — (/ 7 / bar) Vp. (45) 


Since the growth factor D(z) is asolution to the fluctuation 
growth equation (ad) = 42 Gpa%s (see equation (39)), it 
follows that 


D(t) 
= 2 — ——_, V® 4 
SS Ge (46) 
and . 
D 
Sj V7 Gy, 47 
4nGpa2 °° On 


This essentially Lagrangian view to the growth of 
perturbations is due to Zeldovich (1970). 


Mean square fluctuations 

It is useful to consider the evolution of the mean square 
mass fluctuations filtered on various spatial scales R 
because of the information it provides on the collapse 
of structure on these spatial scales. Due to the scale- 
free growth of initial perturbations, the power spectrum 
P(k,T) Z 


P(k,t) = | d3xd(a, t)e** (48) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


grows as D(t)* just as 5(a, t) does. 
Assuming that a section of the power spectrum can 
be written as 


P(k, t) « D(t)*k" (49) 


where n is the power spectrum index, we find that the 
mean square fluctuations filtered on a particular mass scale 
are 


o?(M) = ((dM/M)’) 
= [ eewurrra. T) 
x“ D(t)?>R>™ 


x D(t)>M~ 95 (50) 


where W(kR) is a window function that filters out spatial 
scales of R or smaller. The top hat filter of radius R 


3, 
Wk) = [ps SinkR —kRcoskR). (51) 


is one commonly used window function. Note that 
o(M,0) = (M/M,,)~-"*/° where M,; = 1 x 10%ogQh7!Mo 
corresponds to mass fluctuations of amplitude unity on 
8h-' Mpc radius spheres. The factor og is o(M, 0) at 8h7! 
Mpc for the mass density: galaxy count fluctuations have 
unit amplitude on this scale. 


Halo scaling relations 
The growth of fluctuations becomes nonlinear and start 
collapsing into virialized objects when 

((6M/M)’) = 1. (52) 
From equation (50), this implies that 


M « D(t)/S*, (53) 


The density p, size r, and temperature T of collapsed 
objects then scale as 


p«(1+z) (54) 

rx (M/p)'? « 1 +2)DH)"O" (55) 
T «V2 x OM x MPR p'8 

« (+z) Dos, (56) 


These scaling relationships will be useful in later 
discussions, particularly when we examine the cooling of 
gas in virialized structures. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spherical collapse model 

To understand the nonlinear growth of structure, it is 
convenient to consider the idealized spherical ‘top hat’ 
collapse model. Here, one supposes there to be spherically 
symmetric regions of radius R and of uniform overdensity 
6 in an otherwise uniform universe at some initial time #. 
At these early times, the universe will be approximately 
Einstein—de Sitter, so we can express this overdensity as 
the sum of the growing and decaying modes: 


1\28 1\7) 
s=a(Z) +a(2) . (57) 


We take the matter in this region to be expanding at the 
approximately the same rate as the universe, and therefore 
we require that the peculiar velocity be zero: 


25, (4) — 6(ti) =0. (58) 


Therefore, 5, = 28. According to Birkhoff’s theorem, in 

a spherically symmetric situation, matter external to the 

sphere will not influence its evolution, so it follows that 
d*R  -GM _ —4nG 


= p(1+4)R 
a2 R 3 P +8) (59) 


which is identical in form to the equation for the evolution 
of the cosmological scale factor a, 


@a -GM -—-4rG_ 


Therefore, the size of the region R evolves like the cosmic 
scale factor a but with an initial density parameter Q, (¢)) 
given by 
p(t))(1 + 8) 
Oye Se 61 

peti) Cz 
where p,(f;) is the critical density (3H?/87G at time 4). 
By analogy with the solutions for the universe, the region 
will collapse if 2, > 1. By analogy with equation (4), the 
expansion of the region evolves according to 


By 2 any a 
(=) = H; Eos +(1 


Eventually, the region stops expanding, turns around, and 
collapses. At the turn-around time tm, 4 = 0, implying that 
a/a, = Qp(t)/A — Qp(G)). The density at turn-around tp 
is then 


2 
95(0)) 5] . (62) 


Q5(t) -— 1 ° 

on | (63) 
2, (ti) 

By analogy with the solutions to the cosmological 

equations for closed universes (see equations (9)—(11)), we 


can determine tm as 


Pp (tm) = Pc(h) 2p (G) | 


, = Epi) st F pelts) 
ae 2H; [22,() _ 19/2 - 2H; Pp (tm) 
37 ME 
= ane | 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


For an Einstein-de Sitter universe, the density o(tm) of the 
universe at turn-around is simply 


P(tm) = 6nGE, (65) 
so that 
Pp (tm) (= 7. 
Oia) > Ne (62) 


Formally, after turn-around, the region will collapse to 
a point at tf = 2tm. Of course, before that happens, 
shell crossings will occur. From the virial theorem, 
dissipationless matter collapses to a radius that is one-half 
the turn-around radius. Since a « 17/9, the universe will 
expand by 27/3. Hence, the density of the region relative 
to the background universe at collapse ¢, is 


Pp (te) 


ra (27/3)8x = 180. (67) 


An extrapolation of the linear growth estimate at time ¢, 
yields 


3. (2tm\ 3 (3r\7% 
b4(t.) = 38 ; ) = 5 ( 5 ) = 1.68. (68) 


The assumption of a uniform spherical overdensity in 
an otherwise uniform universe is quite unrealistic; in 
fact, collapse typically proceeds toward the creation of a 
large number of two-dimensional pancakes. Nevertheless, 
numerical simulations show the basic scalings derived 
here to be roughly correct and useful for making simple 
analytic estimates. 


Form of collapsed structures 
For many years, the profiles of collapsed halos were taken 
to be that of a isothermal sphere: 


2 


V 
4a Gr ie?) 


pry= 


where r is the radius and V. is the circular velocity. 
Over the last few years, however, the detailed N-body 
simulations of Navarro et al (1997) have shown that the 
collapsed matter profile is better fitted by the double 
power-law profile: 


50 


(r/r,) +1r/rs)? mn 


P(r) = Perit 


where r; is the core radius where the slope of the power- 
law changes from —1 near the center to —3 at large radii 
and ro is the virial radius of the halo. More recent high 
resolution simulations find a somewhat steeper innermost 
slope to the density profile, possibly as steep as —1.5 (Jing 
and Suto 2000, Moore et al 1999). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Press—Schechter model 
A convenient and somewhat approximate description of 
the mass function of halos at particular redshifts is given 
by the Press—Schechter formalism derived heuristically by 
Press and Schechter (1974) using linear growth theory and 
the spherical ‘top hat’ model. The mass function of non- 
linear objects is computed with the aid of linear theory on 
the assumption that the probability distribution of density 
fluctuations at a given mass and redshift is Gaussian, 
centered on the mean o(M, z) = ((S/p)2)"". 

Since the set of initial perturbations is Gaussian- 
distributed and remains so under linear growth, we can 
write the distribution of mass fluctuations 54 as 


2 


5M ) ad (71) 


1 
P(6y)d5m = mame? (ss 


where o (M) is equal to the mean square mass fluctuations 
((SM/M)’) defined earlier. 

The fraction of points where the mean density inside 
a radius R exceeds 6, is 


Pas(M) = [ P(6m)ddm. (72) 
8¢ 


Press and Schechter (1974), using the spherical collapse 
model as a heuristic guide, took all regions where the 
mean density exceeded the critical value needed for linear 
collapse, i.e., 5. © 1.68, to be part of collapsed structures 
at least as massive as M = 47 pa? R°/3. 

Then, to distinguish the fraction of structures which 
have just collapsed to a mass M and those that are part of a 
bigger structure at least as massive as M + dM, we subtract 
PS 53.(M +dM) from P.5.(M). Notice that by doing this, we 
completely ignore the possibility that the mass scale just 
collapsing is contained within a larger mass that is just 
collapsing, a complication known as the ‘cloud-in-cloud’ 
problem. Another problem is that only half of the points 
are associated with an overdensity and therefore become 
part of any collapsed structure. Press and Schechter (1974) 
elected to solve this problem somewhat arbitrarily by 
multiplying the number of structures at a given mass scale 
by a factor of 2 with the vague understanding that this 
represents flow from underdense to overdense regions. 

The number of halos n(M) with masses between M 
and M +dM is 


n(M)MdM = 2pm[P.5.(M) — P.s.(M+dM)]dM, (73) 


Pm being the average density at the redshift in question 
and the mass term M on the left-hand-side accounting for 
the fact that more massive halos are associated with more 
points of reference. Rewriting this, we get 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


n(Myda = 2PM aS dM 
M dM 
_ 2om [APs] |40OD| yg 
mM | do(M) dM 
7 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finally, since the mean square fluctuations a*(M) evolve 
as D(t)? according to linear growth (see equation (50)), we 
can rewrite the expression as 


M? o(M) /270(M) 


8 eee 
x exp (555) dM 


n(M)dM = 


din M. (75) 


This is the Press-Schechter mass function at redshift z. 
Despite the extremely heuristic nature of this derivation 
and the many problems already discussed, it agrees 
remarkably well with numerical simulations, and thus 
has proven very useful in characterizing the growth of 
structure. 


Cooling processes 

Galaxies are much less massive than the mass scales (~ 
104M.) going nonlinear in the universe today, so clearly 
galaxies must be more than simply virialized structures. 
The key seems to be the process of cooling and the time 
scale for the settling of baryons into the centers of their dark 
matter halos. There are several cases to consider. Clearly, 
if the cooling time of a gas is larger than the Hubble time, 
the gas cannot have evolved much over the history of the 
universe. If the cooling time is smaller than the Hubble 
time but larger than the dynamical time, the gas will suffer 
slow quasistatic collapse into the center of the virialized 
halo. On the other hand, if the cooling time is smaller than 
the dynamical time, the ambient gas will undergo run- 
away cooling and collapse to the center of the virialized 
halo. It is this case, where the cooling time is much shorter 
than the dynamical time scales for ACCRETION or merging 
(Binney 1977, Rees and Ostriker 1977, Silk 1977) that is 
relevant for the formation of galaxies. 

There are four important processes by which gas 
in halos cools: Compton cooling, free-free emission 
(bremsstrahlung), recombination, and collision-induced 
de-excitation. 

We begin with a consideration of the Compton cooling 
process. When low-energy photons pass through a gas of 
non-relativistic electrons, they scatter off the electrons with 
the Thompson cross-section or: 


a= = ( es . (76) 


3 \mec? 


where me is the mass of the electron and e is the charge 
of the electron. Some photons are scattered up in energy 
and some are scattered down, but the net effect is to slow 
the electrons relative to the frame of the cosmic microwave 
background radiation. The mean shift in photon energy 
per collision is 

AkTo 


hAv = 
Mec? 


hv (77) 


where k is Boltzmann’s constant, h is Planck’s constant, v 
is the frequency of a photon, and T, is the temperature of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the electron gas. In a sea of photons with temperature T,,, 
the mean rate of energy loss per electron is 


dE AT. 5 
— = —~oraT. 78 
dt Mec? rae we) 
where a is the Stefan—Boltzmann constant. 
time foo) iS 


The cooling 


ies 3nkTe - 3mec? 
cool nes oraTs 8oraT} 
~ 2.1 x 10%(1 +z)“ yr. (79) 


High temperature (10°-10’ K) primordial gases are almost 
entirely ionized. Under these circumstances, the dominant 
cooling mechanism is due to the acceleration of electrons 
off the bare H* and He** nuclei. This results in a cooling 
rate per unit rate per unit volume: 


dE 
ar nenyT ”. (80) 


The cooling time fo.) here is approximately equal to 


2nkT \ ge 
teool = 7 yg— = 6.6 x 10°—8— yr (81) 
gE i 


where Ts = T/10°K and n_3 = n/10-3cm"3. 

On the other hand, low temperature (10*-10° K) 
primordial gases are only partially ionized. Here cooling 
is dominated by two processes: one where electrons 
recombine with ions resulting in the release of a photon 
(recombination) and one where electrons collide with 
partially ionized atoms, thereby exciting them to a state 
which they escape by the release of a photon. The total 
cooling rate can be expressed as 


dE 

ee Xx neny f(T). (82) 
The latter process is the dominant one, and for primordial 
abundances, the function f(T) can be approximated as 
2.5(T/10° K)~? erg cm s~!. The cooling time foo) is then 


nk 3/a 


toot = ee = 3.0 x 10°75 yr. (83) 
“an n_ 

We compare these cooling time scales with the 
dynamical time scales tay, ~ V1/Gp. We consider a 
uniform spherical cloud with mass M in virial equilibrium 
with f fraction of its mass in dissipative baryonic matter 
and the rest in dark, dissipationless matter, so the gas mass 
M, is equal to f M. For this mass configuration, 


1 1 
a as ALG: 10° fr/2n 1” vr. 4. 
lay | Gp | Gn/f 6.5 x 10° f’*n_,/ yr. (84) 


Now, we compare this dynamical time scale with the 
cooling times derived for each of the cooling processes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


discussed above. At early times, z > 10, the Compton 
cooling process dominates, and since 


n_3 = 2.3 x 107 f(1 4 8)(Qoh?)(1 + 2)° (85) 
the dynamical time scale goes as 
tayn ~ 3.0 x 10°(Qoh7)-17(1 +z)? yr (86) 


and the relative time scale t goes as 


p= Ol Gx 1 +2) PP. (87) 
Tayn 


Thus, Compton cooling will be important at z > 7 where 
t < 1. Notice that the relative time scale does not depend 
upon mass, temperature, or density. Therefore, if galaxies 
formed at early times, they would have no preferred scales. 
The relevant temperatures for lower mass halos (< 
10M.) are less than 10° K. In this case, line cooling 
dominates and the relative time scale t goes a8 foot /tayn & 
(T3/2/ pl?) o ((M?/3p/3)3/2/p2) « M. Therefore, the 
t = 1 line runs parallel to lines of constant mass. To 
determine the mass limit more precisely, we look at t: 


r= MO = 9.473 fey (88) 
tayn 


We can relate this to the mass of a spherical cloud model 
in virial equilibrium by using the following relation from 
the virial theorem: 
3kT _ 0.3GM 
Qu ~=—CORR 


‘ (89) 


where jz, the mean molecular weight, is roughly equal to 
half the proton mass m, since the medium is ionized. From 
this, it follows that T? « pM? « nf~'M? and then that 


M, = 1.2 x 1087)” f9?n=y Mo. (90) 
Hence, 


My M 
r= — j 
1.2x108f2M, 12x 108 fMo 


(91) 


This sets the mass limit below which gas can effectively 
cool to form structures. For f ~ 1, the mass limit is much 
larger than the typical limiting galaxy mass (~ 10’7Mo), 
but for smaller values consistent with constraints set by 
big-bang NUCLEOSYNTHESIS (f ~ 0.05 — 0.1), the mass limit 
is comparable to these limits. 

On the other hand, for higher mass halos (= 10'7Mo), 
the relevant temperatures are greater than 10°K. Here the 
dominant cooling mechanism is bremsstrahlung, and the 
relative time scale ratios t go aS feoot/tayn & (T/*/p'/?) x 
((M?/3 01/3)1/2 / 1/2) & R, so the t = 1 line runs parallel to 
lines of constant radius. To determine the limiting radius 
more precisely, we look at t 


Leool 1/2 ¢-1/2,,-1/2 
t= ane pra. (92) 
tayn 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Using the spherical cloud model again, we solve for R in 
terms of the other variables, 


3fkT 1/2, -1/2 
R | 0 8xw2Gns 610 f7T,'"n_;” kpe (93) 


R 
C= 7S aes 
610 f3/? kpc 


and so 
(94) 


Hence, for f ~ 0.1, massive gas clouds of radii greater 
than 20 kpc can efficiently cool. Since this length is smaller 
than the typical cluster size, cooling is not very efficient 
in clusters, and therefore the gas simply suffers slow 
quasistatic collapse. 


The galaxy cluster mass function 

In the previous section, we discussed two important 
different regimes for virialized masses, one in which the 
cooling time was longer than the dynamical time and one 
in which it was shorter than it. In the former regime, one 
obtains GALAXY CLUSTERS where most of the gas remains hot 
and in the latter regime one obtains galaxies where much of 
the halo gas has apparently cooled. In either case, one can 
use Press—Schechter theory to calculate the mass function, 
and with simple assumptions about the conversion of gas 
into stars or other luminous objects, one can convert this 
into a LUMINOSITY FUNCTION OF GALAXIES. 

Perhaps the most direct comparison with observa- 
tions is via the mass function of galaxy clusters. The 
shape, expected to be exponential plus a power law tail, fits 
the prediction remarkably well, to the extent that cluster 
masses are well determined. Three techniques are used to 
estimate cluster masses: galaxy velocity dispersion and 
distribution, hot gas temperature and distribution, and 
gravitational lensing maps. The first two methods assume 
virial equilibrium. All three methods give consistent re- 
sults, to within a factor of 2 in mass. One can compare 
the characteristic cluster mass, determined by the fitting 


function 
dN 


ao M~* exp (—(M/Myi)") , (95) 
with the predicted value of M,, taken from field galaxy 
counts and a bias factor that has to be empirically deduced. 
Indeed, M,, corresponds to a typical observed cluster 
mass. The normalization of the cluster mass function 
depends both on the mean density and o(M, Z), with 
an exponential sensitivity to o(M, Z). Only five percent 
of galaxies are in clusters, which can therefore account 
for perhaps one percent of the critical density. Clusters 
are therefore rare objects, typically 30 fluctuations. The 
number density of clusters is controlled by both the mean 
density and og, in the combination og 2° ~ 0.7+0.2. The 
scale 8h7! Mpc, corresponding to unit amplitude of the 
optical counts and the mass Mg of a typical cluster, is used 
for normalization, and o(M,0) = og(Ms/M)""*»/° where 
Mg = 42 (8h~'Mpc)3Qp. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The galaxy luminosity function 

The Press—Schechter formulation can also be used to derive 
the galaxy luminosity function, which is described by the 
Schechter function 


dN - 

an & L™ exp(—L/L.) (96) 
where L, ~ 10!°L,4 and a ~ 1 to 1.5 depending on the 
galaxy selection criterion. There are two ingredients that 
must be incorporated in connecting mass to luminosity 
in order to obtain a satisfactory comparison of theory 
and observation. A characteristic luminosity L, must 
be derived, and the formation of low mass objects into 
luminous objects must be inefficient, since the mass 
function tail has slope M -2 whereas the luminosity 
function is flatter. The characteristic luminosity follows 
from the fact that cooling is efficient only for masses up to 
~ 10Mo. Then, assuming a typical baryon fraction, an 
age of ~ 10! yr, and a standard mass function for stars, 
one derives a characteristic luminosity of ~ 10’°Lo. 


Angular momentum 
As structures grow and collapse in the early universe, 
they exert tidal torques on each other, and this provides 
each collapsing mass with some angular momentum. This 
angular momentum, in turn, is important in determining 
the final properties of the disk and elliptical galaxies which 
form inside these collapsed structures. 

The angular momentum of a collapsing halo can be 
expressed as 


J= / d?x pai (ax — ax) x v (97) 
Vv 


where x is the center of mass for the volume. Using 
equation (47), we express v as —abV®y where b(t) = 
D/4xGpa*. For convenience we expand V®p in a Taylor 
series around the point x: 


_. 07 Bo 
V@o la = VPole +(@— 2)- x? le 
= Vole + (a@—a@)-T (98) 


where Tj; = 0°®0/0x;0x). Rewriting this, we get 


Ji(t) = —abeijxT 1 i (1 — HO — Xx)pard’x (99) 
4 


or 


J(t)= —abejjn Til (100) 


where J; is the inertial tensor. 

We now estimate how J; scales. Since I, scales as 
a’ until collapse while 7;; continues to scale as V®/a? ~ 
(D/a)/a* ~ 1/a?, each structure effectively acquires 
angular momentum from its neighbors until collapse. 
Since the collapse of a structure occurs when 6 ~ 1, 
b ~ D(t)/4nGpa? ~ 1/42 Gpa? ~ 1/V?® from Poisson’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


equation and the relation D(t) « a, so Tj, scales as 
V7 ~ 1/b. I scales as MR? ~ M R*/a*. Hence, 


1 MR? 


Ji(t) OE abT Lx id aD 


Ape 2/3 
=p 7 M(M/) 
~ 996 8 (QH?)-23 M53 
By Q79-07 1/3 99/3. (101) 
It is standard to construct a dimensionless quantity which 
characterizes the angular momentum that each collapsed 
mass has acquired via tidal torques. This quantity is called 
the dimensionless angular momentum A, and it can be 
expressed as 
| J|E|'/? 
~ "GMa? * 


Noting that |E| ~ M?/R ~ M?(p/M)'? ~ M°8(QH)'8 ~ 
QY3 M931-7/3, we see that A ~ |JI|E//?2MO? ~ 
2-997 41/3 YB Q1/6 4-1/3 5/6 9/2 ~ 91. Therefore, the 
distribution of dimensionless angular momenta A is 
essentially independent of a halo’s mass, collapse time, 
or even the basic world model. N-body simulations 
(Warren et al 1992, Cole and Lacey 1996, Catelan and 
Theuns 1996) and analytical treatments (Steinmetz and 
Bartelmann 1995) find a distribution which is well fitted 
by the expression 


(102) 


PA= (103) 


1 no | da 
ex 
J 270, P 207 A 
where A = 0.05 and o, = 0.5. 


Disk formation 
Disk galaxies make up the dominant component of 
the local galaxy census. Disk galaxies are known to 
have exponential profiles (J(r) « exp(—r/rg)), to have 
significant fractions of dust and stars, to still be undergoing 
some STAR FORMATION, and to be rotationally supported. 
They are extremely flattened objects and can appear very 
elongated if viewed edge-on. They also frequently have 
long bars and spiral structures. It is because of this latter 
feature that these galaxies are often called spiRAL GALAXIES. 

Most of the global disk properties, e.g., mass, 
luminosity, size, and metallicity, define a two-dimensional 
manifold with little scatter about that manifold. It is more 
well-known in terms of its two-dimensional projections, 
in particular, the well-known TULLY-FISHER RELATION between 
luminosity and circular velocity. There are two main views 
on this tight relationship: one in which these processes 
as consequences of self-regulating mechanisms for star 
formation in disks (e.g. Silk 1997) and one in which this is 
simply the consequence of the cosmological equivalence 
of mass and circular velocity (e.g. Mo et al 1998). 

In the past, disk galaxies were thought to have 
surface brightnesses tightly distributed around 21.65 
by mag/arcsec? (Freeman 1970). Shortly after this claim 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


was made, arguments were made that there was a strong 
selection bias against low surface brightness galaxies and 
in reality the spread in surface brightness extended to 
much lower values (Disney 1976). Recently, there have 
been a large number of efforts to quantify the bivariate 
luminosity—surface brightness distribution (de Jong 1996, 
McGaugh 1996, Dalcanton et al 1997, Sprayberry et al 1997, 
de Jong and Lacey 1999). While the results are somewhat 
different in terms of their details, they suggest that the 
surface brightness distribution of galaxies peaks around 
22 bj mag/arcsec” with a spread of ~ 1 — 1.5mag/arcsec’. 
The luminosity function of spiral galaxies is also nicely 
described by the Schechter function. 

The typical values of the dimensionless angular 
momentum of collapsed halos (~ 0.05) are considerably 
smaller than that of the largely flattened centrifugally- 
supported disk galaxies we observe in our universe 
today (~ 0.4 — 0.5), so considerable dissipation must 
occur to produce these disks. Without the presence of 
dissipationless dark matter, the collapse would proceed 
in such a way that the total angular momentum J and 
the total mass m would be conserved, but the energy 
would scale as 1/R where R is the collapse factor, so that 
d « JEVM? « 1//R. The disk would then need 
to collapse by a factor of (0.5/0.05)? ~ 100 to obtain its 
observed dimensionless angular momenta, and this would 
take longer than the age of the universe for a 10-kpc disk! 
However, if the gas cloud collapses inside a dark matter 
halo, for which it represents only a fraction f of the mass, 
then the angular momentum J and mass M would scale 
by a factor f and the energy E would scale by a factor 
f?, so that A « JE'?M~? « 1/(f'/?R"). For a typical 
estimate of the baryon fraction, f ~ 0.1, the gas cloud 
would then only need to collapse by a factor of 10, easily 
accommodated in current theories. 

Despite the simplicity of this picture, a significant 
portion of the available gas cools to form GALAXIES AT HIGH 
REDSHIFT. Detailed simulations which follow the evolution 
and merging of these galaxies into larger and larger 
systems produce disks whose sizes are much smaller than 
those observed (Steinmetz and Navarro 1999) because of 
substantial angular momentum transfer from the baryons 
to their dissipationless halos. 


Feedback 
A nonnegligible fraction of stars end their lives as 
SUPERNOVAE, injecting much of this energy into the ambient 
gaseous medium. This energy serves to heat the gas, either 
expelling it from the star-forming environment or making 
it too hot to be conducive to star formation. Hence, the 
formation of stars serves to suppress further star formation 
and hereby regulates itself. This process is quite logically 
called feedback. The presence of feedback, particularly 
in disk galaxies, explains why the conversion of gas into 
stars frequently requires ten to hundreds of dynamical 
time scales (~ 10'° yr) instead of just several dynamical 
time scales (~ 108 yr). 

Feedback also provides the preferred explanation for 
the flattening of the luminosity function relative to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mass function at low masses (see the section above on 
galaxy luminosity function). DWARF GALAXY potential wells 
are shallow, and interstellar gas is readily energized above 
the escape velocity and therefore blown out in a galactic 
wind. Evidence for galactic winds is commonly found for 
STARBURST GALAXIES, Often of relatively low mass. 


Elliptical galaxy formation 
Ellipticals make up the other principal component of the 
local galaxy census. Ellipticals possess elliptical isophotes 
with projected ellipticities € = a/b (a being the major axis 
and b the minor) ranging from 0 to 0.7, the former being 
denoted an E0 and the latter an E7. Low redshift ellipticals 
possess an abundance of low-mass stars and are therefore 
very red. The lack of short-lived blue stars is generally 
taken as an indication that these galaxies are very old and 
have not formed stars for at least 5-10 Gyr. Like spirals, the 
luminosity function for ellipticals can also be described by 
a Schechter function, but with a much shallower faint-end 
slope (Bromley et al 1998, Folkes et al 1999). Unlike spirals, 
ellipticals are predominantly found in dense regions, i.e., 
galaxy clusters (Dressler 1980). 

Ellipticals are known to have approximately de 
Vaucouleurs surface brightness profiles: 


I(r) « exp(—7.67(r/re)!/*) (104) 
where r is the radius and r, is the half-light radius. To 
higher order, the surface brightness profiles of ellipticals 
show an important dichotomy. Some ellipticals, known 
as disky ellipticals, appear to have power-law profiles all 
the way into their center, and other ellipticals, known as 
boxy ellipticals, exhibit a sharp break from this power-law 
at some radius near the center. 

Like spirals, the global structural properties of 
ellipticals are known to populate a two-dimensional 
manifold, commonly known as the fundamental plane. 
These are known according to various names: the Faber-— 
Jackson (Faber and Jackson 1976) relationship (L « 
o*), the Kormendy luminosity—radius (Kormendy 1977) 
relationship, and the D,-o (Dressler et al 1987) relationship. 
It has largely been agreed that the fundamental plane 
is essentially a consequence of the virial theorem and 
a relatively homologous formation scenario where the 
mass-to-light ratio varies as a small power of the mass 
(M/L « M*®), 

There are two prevailing scenarios for the formation 
of elliptical galaxies: one in which ellipticals formed as 
the result of mergers from spiral galaxies and one in 
which ellipticals formed at high redshift from monolithic 
collapse. We begin by presenting the monolithic collapse 
scenario. 


Monolithic collapse 

One possible mechanism for the formation of elliptical 
galaxies is the early formation of stars from the gas 
collapsing onto the center of a dark halo. Early collapse 
and fragmentation into stars prior to the collapse of 
the halo can constitute the core of the elliptical while 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars formed from the secondary gas infall can constitute 
the shallower wings. An examination of the velocity- 
dispersion rotational-rate relationship demonstrates that 
ellipticals are essentially pressure-supported and that 
rotational flattening is not important in imparting 
ellipticity to these galaxies. In fact, detailed comparisons 
show that the dimensionless angular momenta of slow- 
rotating ellipticals seems to be no larger 0.05. In order to 
obtain the typical mass M (~ 10" Mo), radius R (~ 10 kpc), 
and angular momentum without recourse to dissipation, 
it would be necessary for the halo to collapse at redshifts 
beyond 10. On the other hand, with dissipation, one could 
easily obtain galaxies of the desired mass and radius, but 
the dimensional angular momentum would be too large 
(unless the initial angular momentum for the halo just 
happened to be particularly small), and the galaxy would 
resemble a disk. 


Merger-based origin 

Another mechanism for the formation of ellipticals 
is through the mergers of spiral galaxies. This 
mechanism provides a natural way of resolving the 
angular momentum problem, the crucial point being that 
since the spin angular momenta are randomly oriented 
with respect to each other, the resultant spin angular 
momentum for the formed elliptical can be considerably 
smaller than the spin angular momentum of the colliding 
disks. There are a number of other attractive features 
to this scenario. First, there are numerous examples of 
disk galaxies merging to form objects with de Vaucouleurs 
profiles in the local universe (Schweizer 1982, 1986), and 
it is quite conceivable that mergers were more frequent 
in the past. Secondly, nearly half of elliptical galaxies 
(Malin and Carter 1983, Schweizer and Ford 1984) possess 
features, such as shells or other sharp features, indicative 
of mergers or an otherwise violent formation. Thirdly, 
detailed N-body simulations of collisions between disk 
galaxies embedded in dark halos produce galaxies with 
de Vaucouleur profiles similar to those found in nearby 
ellipticals. _ Fourth, the GLOBULAR CLUSTER populations 
around ellipticals have bimodal metallicity distributions, 
indicative of a multi-stage formation scenario (Ashman 
and Zepf 1992, Zepf and Ashman 1993). All these features 
point toward the conclusion that at least some ellipticals 
formed by merging. 

Before discussing the relative merits of the two 
formation scenarios for ellipticals, it is interesting to 
look at several of the difficulties which only arise in 
the merging scenario because of the close relationship 
between ellipticals and their progenitors (spirals). First, 
the energy per particle and phase space density are higher 
at the centers of ellipticals than any observed spiral, and 
therefore the merging process must be accompanied by 
a great deal of gas dissipation and cooling both to form a 
much deeper central potential and to obtain the high phase 
space density observed there if we presume this scenario is 
correct. In fact, nuclear starbursts are frequently observed 
to accompany such mergers (Schweizer 1990). Second, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


number of globular clusters (~ 10*-10°M. compact star 
clusters) per unit luminosity for ellipticals is typically 4-10 
times larger than that for spirals (van den Bergh 1990), so 
disk-disk mergers must result in the formation of a large 
number of globular clusters if we presume this scenario 
is correct. Finally, while ellipticals might be expected to 
show relative alpha-to-iron abundances typical of spirals, 
ellipticals contain significantly larger abundances of alpha 
elements than iron elements, so a substantial fraction of the 
stars present in ellipticals must have formed in the merger 
events between two spiral galaxies. 


A comparative evaluation 

The principal observational differences between the 
monolithic collapse and merger scenarios for elliptical 
formation concern their predictions for the formation 
history of ellipticals. Monolithic scenarios tend to form 
elliptical galaxies at very high redshifts (z¢ > 3) while 
the elliptical population builds up more gradually in 
hierarchical scenarios. 

Consequently, the merger scenarios, with their more 
diverse and contemporary formation histories, show 
more scatter in both the colour-magnitude relationship 
and the fundamental plane than monolithic collapse 
scenarios. Observationally speaking, ellipticals show 
a high degree of uniformity both in their small color- 
magnitude scatter, ie. o(U — V) = 0.15 (Bower et al 
1992) and their tightness around the fundamental plane 
(Renzini and Ciotti 1993). This observed tightness about 
the fundamental plane extends to z ~ 1 (Aragon- 
Salamanca et al 1993, Stanford et al 1998). The observed 
tightness supports a monolithic collapse scenario where 
ellipticals form early and somewhat coevally. Of course, in 
hierarchical scenarios, most galaxies assemble quite early 
(z ~ 2) in the rich clusters, where the most compelling 
examples of tight fundamental planes are observed, so 
apparent difficulties with this scenario are not as strong 
as they first might seem (Kauffmann and Charlot 1998a). 

Due to the different formation times for ellipticals, 
these scenarios also yield remarkably different predictions 
for the evolution in the number density of early-type 
galaxies as a function of redshift. While there has been 
an increasing number of studies reporting a devolution in 
the number and luminosity of ellipticals at high redshift 
relative to that found in the local universe (Kauffmann and 
Charlot 1998b, Kauffmann et al 1996, Zepf 1997, Barger 
et al 1999, Menanteau et al 1999) as would be expected 
in a hierarchical scenario where their formation is more 
gradual, these results remain somewhat controversial 
(Broadhurst and Bouwens 1999, de Propris et al 2000). 

Another important difference between these scenar- 
ios is the star formation rates they predict at high red- 
shift. In the hierarchical scenario, galaxies start out small 
and slowly build up to the massive entities we observe in 
the universe today. Clearly, we do not expect large star 
formation rates here at early times except possibly when 
two galaxies merge. On the other hand, in the monolithic 
scenario, ellipticals need to undergo huge star formation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rates (~ 100 M./yr) to form the typical 10" Mo stars ob- 
served in nearby giant elliptical galaxies at high redshift 
since there is only a period of ~ 10° yr available. In fact, 
very few galaxies with these huge star formation rates 
(~ 100 M,/yr) have been found in either emission-line 
searches or Lyman-dropout searches at moderate redshifts 
(1 < z < 5), pointing to either a high redshift of formation 
or dust-enshrouding. Recently, however, SCUBA results 
and subsequent follow-up work have revealed a popu- 
lation of ultraluminous infrared galaxies at moderate red- 
shifts with high enough star formation rates (~ 100 Mg/yr) 
to match those needed in a monolithic collapse scenario. 
Nevertheless, the exact nature of this population, its num- 
ber density, and its relevance remain unclear. 


Bulges 

Many spiral galaxies feature a bulge, or a spheroid, at their 
centers. Spheroids resemble elliptical galaxies in many 
important respects including their overall appearance and 
placement in the fundamental plane. This suggests that 
bulges are nothing but elliptical galaxies upon which gas 
has later accreted. Note, however, that somewhat contrary 
to ellipticals, in particular ellipticals with boxy isophotes, 
is the presence of considerable rotational flattening in 
many bulges (Davies et al 1983, Davies 1987). This is in 
agreement with what one might expect from dissipational 
collapse and, in particular, from the formation of bulges 
via disk instabilities (van den Bosch 1998). 


Summary 

While there are many things we do not understand 
about galaxy formation, many pieces of the picture 
now seem to be clear. Galaxies seem to form in 
a homogeneous, isotropic universe that is expanding 
according to Friedmann’s equations. Inflation, though 
not unique, appears to be a relatively successful way of 
producing the scale-free spectrum of density fluctuations 
out of which galaxies have formed. Growth of the 
fluctuations can be followed initially with linear growth 
theory and later using a spherical collapse model. Press— 
Schechter theory provides a relatively successful way of 
putting these ingredients together to predict the mass 
spectrum of collapsed objects. The relative magnitudes 
of the cooling and dynamical time scales are important for 
determining the mass range of galaxies, galaxies forming 
when the cooling time is smaller than the dynamical time. 
Disk galaxies form from the cooling of gas onto the centers 
of collapsed halos, the gas settling into a disk supported 
by its angular momentum. Elliptical galaxies, on the 
other hand, seem to form by disk—disk mergers or by gas 
cooling within a halo of low intrinsic angular momentum 
(monolithic collapse). 

Many important questions remain. For example, 
what is the relative importance of different mechanisms for 
the formation of both ellipticals and bulges? How do the 
sizes, luminosities, star formation rates, number densities, 
and metallicities of various galaxy types evolve over the 
history of the universe? What mechanisms are responsible 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for the tight correlation between the global properties 

of ellipticals and spirals? While theoretical simulations 

are becoming increasingly sophisticated, the inherent 

nonlinearity of galaxy formation processes make the role 

of new observations tantamount. To give the reader a taste 

of the improvements we will see in the next ten years in 

probing galaxy formation in the most remote regions of the 

universe, in figure 2 we have included some simulations 

for a hierarchical merging model using two current 

generation instruments (WFPC2 and NICMOS) and two 

future generation instruments (ACS and NGST). The 

obvious increase in depth will clearly bring our already 

moderately mature understanding of galaxy formation 

further into focus. 

Bibliography 

Aragon-Salamanca A, Ellis R S, Couch W J and Carter D 
1993 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 262 764 

Ashman K M and Zepf S E 1992 Astrophys. J. 384 50 

Bardeen J M, Bond J R, Kaiser N and Szalay A S 1986 
Astrophys. J. 304 15 

Barger A J, Cowie L L, Trentham N, Fulton E, Hu E, 
Songaila A and Hall D 1999 Astron. J. 117 102 

Binney J 1977 Astrophys. J. 215 483 

Bower RG, Lucey J Rand Ellis RS 1992 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 254 601+ 

Broadhurst T and Bouwens R 2000 Astrophys. J. 530 53 

Bromley B C, Press W H, Lin H and Kirshner R P 1998 
Astrophys. J. 505 25 

Catelan P and Theuns T 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 282 
455 

Cole S and Lacey C 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 281 716+ 

Dalcanton J, Spergel D N, Gunn J E, Schmidt M and 
Schneider D P 1997 Astron. J. 114 2178+ 

Davies R 1987 Structure and Dynamics of Elliptical Galaxies 
IAU Symposium vol 127, ed T de Zeeuw (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) 

Davies R L, Efstathiou G, Fall S M, Illingworth F and 
Schechter P L 1983 Astrophys. J. 266 41 

de Bernadis P et al 2000 Nature 404 955 

de Jong R and Lacey C 1999 Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 269 569 

de Jong RS 1996 Astron. Astrophys. 313 45 

de Propris R, Sanford A, Eisenhardt P, Dickenson M and 
Elston R 1999 Astron. J. 118 719 

Disney M J 1976 Nature 263 573 

Dressler A 1980 Astrophys. J. 236 351 

Dressler A, Lynden-Bell D, Burstein D, Davies R L, Faber 
SM, Terlevich R and Wegner G 1987 Astrophys. J. 313 
42 

Faber S M and Jackson R E 1976 Astrophys. J. 204 668 

Folkes S, Ronen S, Price I, Lahav O, Colless M, Maddox S, 
Deeley K, Glazebrook K, Bland-Hawthorn J, Cannon 
R, Cole S, Collins C, Couch W, Driver S, Dalton G, 
Efstathiou G, Ellis R, Frenk C, Kaiser N, Lewis I, 
Lumsden S, Peacock J, Peterson B, Sutherland W and 
Taylor K 1999 preprint astro-ph/9903456 

Freeman K C 1970 Astrophys. J. 160 811+ 

Hanany S et al 2000 preprint astro-ph/0005123 

Jing Y P and Suto Y 2000 Astrophys. J 529 L69 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


13 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. A simulation of HDF-depth (~ 30 orbits) exposure over a7’ x 7’ field of view for WFPC2 (a), NICMOS (b), ACS (c) and NGST 
(d). WFPC2 and NICMOS are instruments currently on the Hubble Space Telescope. ACS is an instrument that will be placed on the 
Hubble Space Telescope in 2001, and NGST is a completely new space telescope, which will be launched in ~ 2007. A hierarchical 
merging model was used as the model inputs for the simulation (see Bouwens and Silk 1999 for details). 5 wm, 3 wm and 1 wm 
wavelengths are assumed for the RGB channels in the false-colour NGST image while for the NICMOS image, the K (2.2 wm), H 

(1.6 wm) and J (1.2 7m) bands are assumed. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 18. 


Kauffmann G and Charlot S 1998a Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
294 705+ 

Kauffmann G and Charlot S 1998b Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
297 L23 

Kauffmann G, Charlot S and White S D M 1996 Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 283 L117 

Kormendy J 1977 Astrophys. J. 218 333 

Malin D F and Carter D 1983 Astrophys. J. 274 534 

McGaugh S S 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 280 337 

Menanteau F, Ellis R, Abraham R, Barger A and Cowie L 

1999 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 309 208 

Mo HJ, Mao S and White S D M 1998 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 

Soc. 295 319 

Moore B, Quinn T, Governato F, Stadel J and Lake G 1999 

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 310 1147 

Navarro J F, Frenk CS and White S D M 1997 Astrophys. J. 
490 493+ 

Peacock J A 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 284 885 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Peebles P 1980 The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Press W H and Schechter P 1974 Astrophys. J. 187 425 

Rees M J and Ostriker J P 1977 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 179 
541 

Renzini A and Ciotti L 1993 Astrophys. J. 416 L49 

Schweizer F 1982 Astrophys. J. 252 455 

Schweizer F 1986 Science 231 227 

Schweizer F 1990 Dynamics and Interactions of Galaxies ed 
R Wielen (Berlin: Springer) 

Schweizer F and Ford W K 1984 Bull. Astron. Astrophys. 
Soc. 16 889+ 

Silk J 1977 Astrophys. J. 211 638 

Silk J 1997 Astrophys. J. 481 703+ 

Sprayberry D, Impey C D, Irwin MJ and Bothun G D 1997 
Astrophys. J. 482 104+ 

Stanford S A, Eisenhardt P R and Dickinson M 1998 
Astrophys. J. 492 461+ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


14 


Galaxy Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Steinmetz M and Bartelmann M 1995 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 272. 570 

Steinmetz M and Navarro J F 1999 Astrophys. J. 513 555 

van den Bergh S 1990 Dynamics and Interactions of Galaxies 
ed R Wielen (Berlin: Springer) 

van den Bosch F C 1998 Astrophys. J. 507 601 

Warren M S, Quinn P J, Salmon J K and Zurek W H 1992 
Astrophys. J. 399 405 

Zel'dovich Y B 1970 Astron. Astrophys. 5 84+ 

Zepf S E 1997 Nature 390 377+ 

Zepf S E and Ashman K M 1993 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
264 611+ 


Joseph Silk and Rychard Bouwens 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


15 


Galaxy Morphology—Density Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy Morphology—Density Relation 


The galaxy morphology-density relation describes the 
strong correlation that exists between the mix of the basic 
morphological types of galaxy—elliptical (E), spiral (Sp) 
and lenticular (S0)—in a given volume of space and the 
local density of galaxies within that volume. 


Morphological types of galaxy 

As was first recognized by Edwin Huss.e, galaxies fall 
into distinct morphological groups fundamental to which 
are two basic structural features: a more or less flat disk 
of stars and sometimes gas and dust, and a spheroidal 
component. ELLIPTICAL (E) GALAXIES are pure spheroidal 
systems and were named after the smooth, ellipsoidal 
shaped light distributions that they project onto the sky. 
SPIRAL (Sp) GALAXIES comprise both a disk and a spheroid 
and are distinguished by the conspicuous spiral arm 
structure in their disks. The LENTICULAR (SO) GALAXIES are, in 
comparison, somewhat of a transitional object, containing 
both a spheroid and a disk, but the latter exhibiting no 
spiral structure. 

As well as recognizing these basic morphological 
types and establishing a classification scheme for them— 
what is known as Hubble’s ‘tuning fork’ sequence— 
Hubble was also amongst the first to recognize that the 
morphological mix of galaxies, that is the relative numbers 
of E, SO and Sp types, changed considerably in different 
environments. The most conspicuous evidence for this 
came from contrasting the central regions of nearby rich 
clusters of galaxies—the densest galaxy environments 
known—with the lower-density regions outside clusters, 
commonly referred to as the ‘field’. The former were seen 
to be dominated by E and SO types, with Sp galaxies being 
almost absent, whereas the field was rich in spirals and 
E and SO types were in the minority. A variation also in 
the morphological mix within clusters has since been well 
established, with the Sp fraction found to rise and the E 
and SO fractions to decrease with increasing radius from 
the center of rich, regular clusters. 


Quantitative studies 

The first serious attempt to quantify these well perceived 
trends was made by Oemler in 1974. He morphologically 
classified the galaxy populations within 10 nearby rich 
clusters and derived the global fractions of E, SO and Sp 
galaxies in each. These fractions appeared to roughly 
segregate the clusters into three different classes which 
Oemler designated ‘cD’, ‘spiral poor’ and ‘spiral rich’. The 
cD clusters were those dominated by E and SO galaxies 
(making up ~35% and ~45% of the cluster population 
respectively) and corresponded to those with a central 
cD galaxy and a smooth, centrally concentrated galaxy 
distribution. In contrast, Sp galaxies constituted about 
60% of the population in spiral-rich clusters and these 
were systems which happened to be highly irregular in 
shape with little if any degree of central concentration. 
Spiral-poor clusters possessed intermediate properties 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


both in terms of their overall structure and morphological 
fractions (E = 15%, SO = 55%, Sp = 30%). Oemler 
suggested that these three different types of cluster 
represented successive stages in the cluster dynamical 
evolution process which in itself drove a change in the 
morphological mix. 

While this approach of measuring the global 
morphological fractions in clusters is useful in revealing 
the gross differences that exist between the different 
classes of cluster and also between clusters and the 
field, it falls far short of identifying the fundamental 
physical variable to which morphological mix is related. 
For one, radial gradients in the morphological mix 
are seen within clusters, suggesting that cluster-centric 
radius is important. On the other hand, this quantity 
is meaningless in irregular clusters where there is no 
obvious center and the distribution of galaxies is chaotic 
and lumpy. Motivated by these problems, Dressler 
used a sample of 55 rich clusters to further explore the 
variation of morphological mix and its dependencies. 
Noticing that the high-density galaxy clumps scattered 
within the irregular clusters in his sample had a similar 
morphological mix to the dense cores of the regular 
clusters, he investigated whether local galaxy density was 
a quantity more germane to the change of morphological 
mix with environment. This indeed proved to be the case, 
with strikingly well-behaved and monotonic relations 
found between morphological fraction and local projected 
galaxy density over five orders of magnitude in the 
latter. These are shown in figure 1 and, as Dressler 
emphasized, they provide very strong evidence that it is 
the environment local to a galaxy that is most fundamental 
in determining its morphology. It is the behavior 
encapsulated in this diagram that is commonly referred 
to as ‘the galaxy morphology-local density relation’. 

To construct figure 1, Dressler measured some 6000 
galaxies, mostly within 2.1 deg? fields centered on each 
of his 55 clusters (all of which were at z < 0.06), but 
also within 15 similarly sized ‘field’ regions. His imaging 
material consisted of photographic plates, the majority of 
which were taken on the 100 inch Du Pont telescope at Las 
CAMPANAS OBSERVATORY in Chile. These were used to visually 
assign each galaxy a morphological type (E, S0, Sp or Irr 
(irregular)) and to measure its position, the magnitude 
of its spheroid component and its ellipticity. To measure 
local density, the 10 nearest (projected) neighbors to each 
galaxy were identified and the area within which they 
were contained computed. This allowed the local surface 
density of galaxies (in galaxies Mpc~) to be calculated, 
after having first made a correction for field galaxy 
contamination. To account for the different redshifts 
of the clusters, this calculation of the local density was 
always made down to the same absolute magnitude (My = 
—20.4; Hy) = 50 km s~' Mpc") in each cluster. Marginal 
distributions were then formed for each morphological 
type (E, SO, Sp + Irr), giving the number of galaxies as 
a function of local galaxy density. In combination, these 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Morphology—Density Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


POPULATION VS. 
PROJECTED DENSITY 
(ALL CLUSTERS) 


FRACTION OF POPULATION 


1.0 1.5 2.0 


Figure 1. Dressler’s galaxy morphology-local density relation. Plotted are the fractions of E, SO and Sp + Irr galaxies as a function of 
the logarithm of the local projected galaxy density (see text for details). The upper histogram shows the numbers of galaxies 
contributing to each of the data points in the lower plot, with the exception of the left-most points which represent the field. The scale 
shown on the upper side of the horizontal axis indicates the logarithm of the true spatial density of galaxies (in galaxies Mpc~°). 


then provided the fractions of E, SO or Sp + Irr types at a 
given local density value. 

The fact that the morphology of a galaxy is closely 
related to the density of galaxies in its vicinity would also 
suggest that the local environment is of key importance 
in the formation and/or evolution of a galaxy (see also 
GALAXY EVOLUTION, GALAXY FOMATION). However, whether its 
influence is felt mainly at the time of formation, or as 
the galaxy subsequently evolves, or during both phases, 
remains an open question. The paucity of spirals (and the 
abundance of SO galaxies) in the cores of regular clusters 
has long been cited as evidence for the environment 
playing a large role in their evolution, their encounter with 
either the hot intracluster gas, other cluster galaxies, or the 
strong tidal field of the cluster leading to a termination 
of their star formation and a morphological conversion 
into SO galaxies. Dressler, on the other hand, argued 
that the local environment had its greatest influence 
at the formation stage, since his galaxy morphology-— 
local density relation showed the SO fraction to vary 
slowly with density to the extent that SOs still made 
up a significant proportion of the galaxy population in 
regions where the density was too low for gas removal 
and disruption mechanisms to be effective. Furthermore, 
the galaxy morphology-local density relation appears 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to be no different in irregular clusters than in regular 
clusters, despite the former being insufficiently evolved, 
dynamically, for these same processes to be in operation. 


The relation at high redshift 

The study of the galaxy morphology-local density relation 
at high redshift, and hence at a significantly earlier epoch, 
provides a direct means of discriminating between these 
‘formation’ and ‘evolutionary’ scenarios (see GALAXIES AT 
HIGHREDSHIFT). This became observationally possible for the 
first time in the early 1990s with the launch of the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) which, once repaired, provided the 
one-tenth of an arcsecond spatial resolution necessary 
to discern the morphologies of galaxies at cosmological 
distances. Images taken with HST’s Wide Field and 
Planetry Camera of rich clusters at redshifts of ~0.5, have 
allowed the galaxy morphology-local density relation to 
be viewed as it was some 6-8 billion years ago. This 
has yielded a number of major results. Firstly, the 
fraction of E galaxies seen in these distant clusters is, on 
average, no different to that seen in present-day clusters. 
This would imply that ellipticals are old systems which 
pre-date the clusters and the local environment is more 
important to their formation, with greater numbers being 
formed in regions of higher density. In contrast, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Morphology-—Density Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


proportion of SO galaxies in the distant clusters is two 
to three times smaller than that observed nearby, with a 
proportional increase in the Sp fraction. This confirms 
that certainly the cluster environment, at least, had a 
major influence on the evolution of spirals, converting 
them into SOs. It also verifies, morphologically, a well 
known effect seen in distant clusters both photometrically 
and spectroscopically, namely the presence of many more 
blue, star-forming galaxies in comparison to clusters at 
low redshift (named after its discoverers as the “Butcher- 
Oemler’ effect). As far as the galaxy morphology-— 
local density relation is concerned, gradients in the 
morphological mix with changing local density are 
only found in distant clusters which have a regular 
and centrally concentrated structure, whereas they are 
completely absent in irregular clusters. Thus the 
relationship appears to evolve in a hierarchical way, 
establishing itself first in the richer and denser galaxy 
systems and then slowly working its way down into the 
poorer and less dense clusters and groups. 


Remaining issues 

The final word on the local galaxy morphology-local 
density relation has not rested with Dressler’s original 
work. As part of the HST-based studies of the relation at 
higher redshift, Dressler’s original data set was reanalysed 
in order to incorporate better, morphologically dependent 
field galaxy corrections. This had a small but noticeable 
effect, reducing slightly the spiral fraction at the lowest 
projected densities. There has also been debate over 
whether the local projected galaxy density is the sole 
determinant of morphological mix. A key point in this 
regard is that if a relation based on projected density 
was universal, then that could not be the case for 
the relationship between morphological mix and three- 
dimensional space density, implying a dependence on 
some further property that varied from cluster to cluster. 
It is of note in this context that in Dressler’s original 
study, some marginal evidence was found for a shift in 
the population levels in clusters with the strongest x-ray 
emission and thus highest central concentration. 

A strong case has also been made for cluster-centric 
radius alone being the determinant of morphological 
mix in clusters on the basis that it gives much tighter 
correlations than local galaxy density or indeed any other 
cluster property. However, it is not quite this simple, since 
while the correlations with radius might be stronger, they 
show a very different behavior in regular and irregular 
clusters, with the gradients in population mix being much 
stronger in the former than in the latter. Furthermore, it 
remains hard to reconcile with the reality of sub-clustering 
within clusters which has concentrations of galaxies of 
very similar morphological mix located over a broad range 
of cluster-centric radius. 

These issues notwithstanding, the galaxy morph- 
ology-local density relation still remains one that is 
recognized as being fundamental to galaxies, their 
morphology and the relationship of this property to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


environment. The debate surrounding the relation serves 
as an important reminder that nature is not so simple that 
it can be described perfectly by a single relationship, but 
most likely there are secondary factors that come into play 
and that there are exceptions to the average behavior that 
this important relation represents. 


Bibliography 

Butcher H and Oemler A Jr 1978 Astrophys. J. 279 18 

Couch W J, Barger A J, Smail I, Ellis RS and Sharples RM 
1998 Astrophys. J. 497 188 

Couch W J, Ellis R S, Sharples R M and Smail I 1994 
Astrophys. J. 430 121 

Dressler A 1980 Astrophys. J. 236 351 

Dressler A 1984 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 22 185 

Dressler A, Oemler A Jr, Butcher H R and Gunn J E 1994 
Astrophys. J. 430 107 

Dressler A, Oemler A Jr, Couch W J, Smail I, Ellis R S, 
Barger A, Butcher H, Poggianti BM and Sharples RM 
1997 Astrophys. J]. 490 577 

Hubble E and Humason M L 1931 Astrophys. J. 74 43 

Oemler A Jr 1974 Astrophys. J. 1941 

Salvador-Sole E, Sanroma M and Jordana J J R 1989 
Astrophys. J. 337 636 

Whitmore B C, Gilmore D M and Jones C 1993 Astrophys. 
J. 407 489 

Zwicky F 1938 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 50 218 


Warrick Couch 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Redshift Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy Redshift Surveys 


The aim of galaxy redshift surveys is to map the three- 
dimensional distribution of many thousands of galaxies, 
in order to understand the properties of this distribution 
and what it implies about the contents and evolution of 
the universe. It has been known since observations by 
Hubble in the 1930s that galaxies are not distributed at 
random, but occur in structures of various sizes. For 
example, our own LOCALGROUP contains two large galaxies 
(our Galaxy and Andromeda) and some 20 medium to very 
small galaxies. The Local Group is located in the outskirts 
of the Local Supercluster (see SUPERCLUSTERS AND THE LOCAL 
SUPERCLUSTER), Which is a roughly disk-shaped structure 
containing around 1000 known galaxies and centered on 
the well-known VIRGO CLUSTER. 

In the 1970s, Peebles and coworkers carried out 
pioneering statistical measurements of galaxy clustering 
by analyzing the two-dimensional distribution of galaxies 
on the sky, notably from the Lick catalogue; it is possible 
to infer statistical information about the three-dimensional 
distribution from this, although individual structures 
cannot be mapped in detail as many structures are 
superposed in projection on the sky. To obtain the 
third dimension (i.e. distance) for each galaxy, the galaxy 
REDSHIFT is used as an approximate distance indicator. 
The recession of galaxies due to the expansion of the 
universe causes the observed atomic features in a galaxy 
spectrum to be Doppler shifted to longer wavelengths 
relative to their laboratory wavelengths. By Hubble’s law 
the recession velocity v of a galaxy is linearly proportional 
to its distance r, therefore v © Hor where Hp is the HUBBLE 
CONSTANT; the law is not exact as there is a small extra 
term due to the ‘peculiar velocity’ of the galaxy due to 
the gravitational attraction of the galaxy’s neighbors. 

Therefore, if we make a three-dimensional map of 
galaxies using their angular positions on the sky and 
redshift as the radial direction, this will be a fairly accurate 
map of the ‘true’ positions; the scale of our map will 
depend on the Hubble constant, and the galaxies will be 
slightly displaced radially from their ‘true’ positions by the 
unknown peculiar velocities, but the overall picture will 
be quite realistic. 


Redshift-distance relation 
Quantitatively, the redshift z is defined by the fractional 
wavelength shift: 


= Aobs _ Arest Aobs 
LS = 1 


Arest Arest 


where Adobs, Arest are observed and rest wavelengths. 
Typical wide-area galaxy surveys sample redshifts z < 
0.1, so the non-relativistic Doppler formula z ~ v/c is 
adequate, giving r © cz/Hp. For low redshifts, the redshift 
is often quoted for convenience as cz in units of km st 
rather than the dimensionless z, e.g. for the Coma cluster 
cz & 7000 km s~! or z * 0.0233. The distance is then 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


7000 km s~!/ Ho, whichis generally written in the literature 
as 70h~! Mpc where h = Ho/(100 km s~! Mpc’); i.e. the 
uncertainty in Ho is absorbed into the scale factor h ~ 0.7. 

Strictly speaking, the redshift is not a ‘true’ Doppler 
effect but really a general-relativistic effect arising from 
the overall expansion of the universe, whereby photon 
wavelengths are stretched proportionally to the scale 
factor of the universe: 


1l+z= Aobs/Aem = obs /Gem 


where dem, Aobs are the scale factors at the times of photon 
emission and observation, and thus dp;/dem is the ratio 
by which the universe has expanded over this interval. 
This leads to Hubble’s law at low z, while the distance— 
redshift relation becomes non-linear at z 2 0.2 and 
depends slightly on cosmological parameters, but the 
essential point of a monotonic redshift—distance relation 
still applies. 


Measurement of redshifts 

Galaxy redshifts are usually measured by standard optical 
spectroscopy (e.g. figure 1) since it is a good compromise 
between speed and accuracy. The galaxy’s spectrum 
having been taken, the redshift is obtained either by ‘cross- 
correlation’ with a template spectrum to obtain the relative 
shift in log(wavelength) or by directly identifying and 
fitting the positions of individual spectral features, e.g. 
emission lines. The typical precision is 50-100 km s“1, 
which is quite adequate since galaxy peculiar velocities 
are larger than this. Redshifts may also be measured 
with radio telescopes using the 21 cm hydrogen line, 
which gives very accurate redshifts but is somewhat more 
time-consuming and is generally only possible at lower 
redshifts. ‘Photometric’ redshift estimates can also be 
obtained from multiband photometry: these are useful 
for evolutionary studies, but their precision is not good 
enough for detailed mapping of structure. 


Density fluctuations 

The main reason for the great interest in mapping the 
distribution of galaxies is that on large scales it provides a 
clear ‘window’ back to conditions in the early universe. 
If the universe had started out perfectly smooth (apart 
from the random locations of atoms), it was long ago 
apparent that galaxies and clusters would not have formed 
by now; so there must have been some mechanism in the 
early universe causing the density to vary slightly from 
place to place. Gravity makes overdense regions pull 
in more matter from their surroundings, while matter is 
pulled out of underdense regions and they become more 
underdense, so the amplitude of these density fluctuations 
grows with time. On small scales, it is difficult to extract 
information about the initial fluctuations, because old stars 
in our Galaxy have made some 50 orbits in its lifetime, so 
any initial substructures have largely been smeared out 
over time. Likewise, a galaxy in a typical rich cluster 
has made around five orbits around the center of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Redshift Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


N 


Flux 
1 
i 
L 


4000 5000 6000 7000 


Wavelength (Angstroms) 


Figure 1. A typical (early-type) galaxy optical spectrum (upper 
line), with a spectrum of a similar galaxy at zero redshift (lower 
line). The redshift between spectral features is easily seen as the 
horizontal wavelength shift, in this case z = 0.058. 


cluster. However, over the scales of superclusters (tens 
of megaparsscs), galaxies have deviated from the pure 
Hubble expansion by only a fraction of a supercluster’s 
size, so the character of the initial fluctuations is preserved; 
therefore, mapping the large-scale distrubution of galaxies 
gives us a clear view of density fluctuations in the early 
universe. Around 1980, the theory of INFLATION led to some 
fairly specific predictions about the nature of the initial 
density fluctuations; the precise way these grow with time 
depends on the amount and type of dark matter in the 
universe, so it was realized that the observed pattern of 
galaxy clustering today provides information about these 
unknowns. 


Recent redshift surveys 

Also in about 1980, advances in detector technology meant 
that a single galaxy redshift could be measured with a 
moderate-aperture optical telescope in tens of minutes 
instead of the few hours required with photographic 
plates, so it became feasible to map the three-dimensional 
galaxy distribution with surveys of large numbers of 
galaxy redshifts, notably the first Center for Astrophysics 
(CfA) survey of Davis and Huchra in 1982. For 
quantitative measurements, it is necessary for a survey 
to have well-defined selection criteria such as surveying 
all galaxies (or a random subsample) to a given apparent 
magnitude limit over a chosen region of sky. The observed 
density of galaxies in the survey then falls with redshift, 
since nearby all but the faintest galaxies are included, while 
at large distances only rare intrinsically bright galaxies are 
included; but this ‘selection function’ may be corrected for 
in the analysis. 

Several important developments occurred from 
further surveys during the late 1980s, including the 
discovery that large vos up to 50 Mpc in diameter 
with a galaxy density below 10% of the mean were 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


quite common, and the discovery of substantial ‘bulk 
flows’ of galaxies towards a large supercluster in the 
constellations of Hydra—Centaurus, known as the Great 
Attractor. These surveys showed that superclustering is 
a ubiquitous phenomenon, and that the old picture of 
isolated clusters in a random ‘sea’ of field galaxies is not 
correct. Rather, the galaxy distribution has a sponge-like 
topology, with both high- and low-density regions forming 
an interconnected network, with high-density flattened 
‘walls’ separating the voids; clusters are commonly located 
at the intersections of the walls. 

The discovery of anisotropy in the COSMIC MICROWAVE 
BACKGROUND (CMB) by COBE in 1992 provided a 
major boost to the field, since the size of the COBE 
anisotropy was close to the predictions from theoretical 
models of structure formation ‘matched’ to the existing 
measurements of present-day galaxy clustering. 

At the present time, the largest existing galaxy redshift 
surveys are as follows: the CfA-2 survey of Huchra and 
Geller, containing about 15000 galaxies selected from 
photographic plates over most of the Northern hemisphere 
to a blue magnitude of about 15.5, giving a median depth 
around 90h7! Mpc. This survey discovered a structure 
known as the ‘Great Wall’ spanning approximately 
100h-1 Mpc across the northern sky, and containing the 
Coma cluster; an extension to the southern sky known as 
SSRS also showed wall-like structures. 

The largest current ‘all-sky’ survey is the IRAS PSCz 
survey, which contains about 15000 galaxies detected 
by the Infra-Red Astronomical Satellite (IRAS); this is 
a successor to earlier IRAS-based surveys such as the 
‘QDOT’ and ‘1.2 Jansky’ surveys. The PSCz survey 
consists of a sample of galaxies selected by far infrared 
brightness (above 0.6 J at 60 wm); these long wavelengths 
are almost immune to ‘extinction’ by dust in the plane 
of our Milky Way Galaxy, which limits the coverage of 
optical surveys. Also, the IRAS satellite scanned the 
whole sky, so the problem of matching ground-based 
northern and southern hemisphere catalogues does not 
arise. The downside is that IRAS preferentially selects 
star-forming late-type spiral galaxies; ellipticals contain 
little dust and so are intrinsically much fainter in the far 
infrared. The median depth of the PSCz survey is similar 
to CfA-2, but the average galaxy density is roughly 3x 
lower so it provides a wider but sparser map of the galaxy 
distribution. The PSCz survey covers 84% of the whole 
sky, and so is the main source at present for comparison 
of the ‘local’ galaxy density with bulk flow measurements 
and our Local Group motion with respect to the CMB; the 
predicted direction of motion calculated from PSCz agrees 
within 15° of the measured Local Group motion. 

The largest survey completed to date is the Las 
Campanas Redshift Survey: this contains 25000 galaxies 
to a greater depth (a median redshift z ~ 0.08), covering 
three long thin ‘slices’ (about 90° x 1.5°) in each of the 
north and south Galactic hemispheres. This survey made 
use of the new technology of fiber-fed spectrograph (see 
SPECTROGRAPHS: FIBER-FED SPECTROGRAPHS), Whereby spectra 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Redshift Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of many galaxies (in this case 128) can be obtained 
simultaneously by placing optical fibers at the known 
locations of galaxies in the focal plane of the telescope. The 
other ends of the fibers are then arranged ina line along the 
entrance slit of the spectrograph, and a two-dimensional 
detector is used (e.g. a CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD)) to 
record all the spectra simultaneously. A small number 
of fibers are placed on ‘blank’ regions of sky so that the 
night-sky spectrum can be subtracted from the measured 
(galaxy+sky) spectra. 


Statistics of galaxy clustering 

Among the simplest statistics describing galaxy clustering 
is the two-point correlation function &(r); given two small 
volumes of space dV,, dV. separated by distance r, the 
probability of finding galaxies in both is defined tobed P = 
[1 + &(r)]n? dV, dV2, where 77 is the mean galaxy density. 
Thus &(r) may be thought of as the excess probability 
(relative to random) of finding a second galaxy at distance 
r from a randomly-chosen first galaxy. Observationally, it 
is found that &(r) is well approximated by a power law 


r -18 
wo= (2) 
La) 


where rp © 5h7! Mpc is the correlation length. The 
fractional variance o7(r) of galaxy counts (above shot- 
noise) in a randomly placed volume V is given by 


1 
o(r) = aff & (riz) dVi dV2 
Ves dy 
this is found to be approximately unity for spheres of 


radius 8h! Mpc. The correlation function and the power 
spectrum P(k) form a Fourier-transform pair, i.e. 


Er= 


at : 7 
On i P(k) exp(ik - r) d°k 


assuming statistical isotropy leads to 


sin kr 
kr 


dk. 


(r) = : * BP) 
5) = oy J, 


The importance of P(k) is that if the initial density 
fluctuations formed a Gaussian random field (i.e. phases 
of different Fourier modes of the fluctuations were 
uncorrelated) as suggested by inflationary cosmologies, 
then P(k), or equivalently &(r), suffices to give a complete 
statistical description. 

Many other statistics have been investigated (e.g. 
three-point and higher correlations, topology, probability 
distributions of counts in cells etc); the evidence at present 
is consistent with initially Gaussian fluctuations. While 
the present-day fluctuations are definitely non-Gaussian 
on small scales, the amount of this is approximately 
consistent with non-linear gravitational evolution from 
Gaussian initial conditions, as estimated from e.g. large 
N-body simulations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In reality there are a number of complications to 
the above, notably biasing (i.e. the uncertain relationship 
between the distributions of galaxies and the underlying 
mass) and redshift-space distortions, whereby the galaxy 
peculiar velocities distort the mapping from real space 
to redshift space: clustering is smeared out by random 
motions on small scales, but on large scales it is enhanced 
because superclusters are expanding more slowly than the 
Hubble flow, so appear ‘squashed’ along the line-of-sight 
direction. The latter effect is marginally detected in current 
surveys, and can provide a measurement of the parameter 
B = Q°°/b where b is the bias parameter. 


Surveys in progress 
While the current surveys give us a good general picture 
of the galaxy distribution, they are still limited in statistical 
precision because they contain only a modest number 
(typically a few tens) of individual superclusters and 
voids. To obtain more precise statistical measurements, 
especially over the scales ~50 Mpc which are currently 
being probed by degree-scale CMB experiments, larger 
surveys are very desirable. At the present time, there 
are two much larger surveys in progress: the 2 degree 
field (2dF) Galaxy Redshift Survey at the Anglo-Australian 
Telescope, and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey using a 
special-purpose 2.5 m telescope in New Mexico. The 2dF 
instrument consists of several components: a set of large 
corrector lenses giving a 2° diameter field, two sets of 400 
optical fibers, and a robotic positioner. The positioner 
places the fibers with a positional accuracy of 30 1m using 
magnetic buttons on a metal plate, to correspond to the 
known positions of target galaxies, which are drawn from 
the APM Galaxy Survey based on scans of Schmidt plates. 
The positioner takes about 1 h to position a set of 400 fibers, 
so to avoid dead-time there are two sets of fibers, and the 
positioner is at work placing the ‘next’ set of fibers while 
the telescope is observing the ‘current’ set. Observations 
have been in progress since late 1997, and as of late 1999 
redshifts have been measured for 77 000 galaxies and 7000 
quasars (see figure 2); when complete at the end of 2001, 
the survey will contain redshifts of 250000 galaxies and 
20 000 quasars. 

The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), undertaken by 
a consortium of some 100 mainly US-based astronomers, 
aims to measure redshifts for 1 million galaxies and 100 000 
quasars using a dedicated 2.5 m telescope in New Mexico. 
A novel feature of this project is that it will be making an 
imaging survey using CCDs in five optical passbands from 
ultraviolet (350 nm) to near-infrared 850 nm, using a very 
large camera containing 30 CCD detectors; this will be the 
first CCD survey to cover a substantial fraction (~25%) 
of the entire sky. The target galaxies and quasars will be 
selected from this imaging survey and spectra taken using 
a fiber-optic spectrograph with 640 fibers over a 2.5° field of 
view. As of late 1999, the SDSS telescope and instruments 
are built and now starting a commissioning phase. It is 
planned to complete the survey in approximately 5 yr of 
observing. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Redshift Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


h 


1 oh 


LS 


Figure 2. The distribution of 16500 galaxies in a thin slice of the 
universe, comprising a mostly complete subregion of the 2dF 
Galaxy Redshift Survey. Our galaxy is located at the apex: the 
angular coordinate is right ascension, radial coordinate is 
redshift. This slice is 4° thick in the ‘out-of-paper’ (declination) 
direction. Numerous superclusters, sheets and voids are clearly 
visible. 


For the relatively local universe, a new full-sky survey 
is planned based on the ongoing 2 Micron All Sky Survey 
(2MASS) infrared imaging survey. This will use a number 
of small telescopes in both hemispheres to obtain redshifts 
for the brightest 100000 galaxies selected in the infrared 
K-band (2.2 wm). This K-band selection should combine 
the high sampling density of the optical surveys with the 
immunity to Galactic extinction of the IRAS surveys and 
will give a very detailed map of the local universe within 
100 Mpc. 

In addition, there are two surveys now planned 
which aim to study galaxy clustering when the universe 
was approximately half its present age: using multislit 
spectrographs on the new generation of 8 m telescopes, 
the VIRMOS survey on the ESO Very Large Telescope and 
the DEEP survey on the Keck telescope both aim to survey 
around 10000 galaxies at a redshift of z ~ 0.5-1, to study 
the growth of structure over time. 


Bibliography 
Several reviews giving both a theoretical and observa- 
tional perspective are contained in 


Dekel A and Ostriker J (eds) 1999 Formation of Structure 
in the Universe (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Another longer review is by 
Strauss M and Willick J 1995 Phys. Rep. 261 271 


Detailed treatments of the theory of density fluctuations 
are given by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Peebles P J E 1980 The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 


and by 


Peacock J A 1999 Cosmological Physics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Will Sutherland 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy Structure 


A very large body of information has been collected on 
the structure of the Galaxy. Here we can only concentrate 
on a small selection of the most recent and most 
important observational facts and theoretical findings. 
The MILKY WAY GALAXY belongs to the Local Group, a 
smaller group of three large and over 30 small galaxies, 
and is the second largest (after the Andromeda Galaxy 
M31) but perhaps the most massive member of this 
group. The Milky Way is most likely a BARRED SPIRAL 
GALAXY of Hubble type SBc. We are situated within the 
outer regions of its spiral disk, only about 14 ly above the 
equatorial symmetry plane but about 8 kpc or 26 400 ly 
from the Galactic Center (1 pe ~ 3.29 ly ~ 3 x 9.5 x 10” 
km). The Milky Way forms a luminous band spanning all 
around the sky. This symmetry plane is also called the 
‘Galactic Equator’. In addition to the luminous stars there 
is also a dark band due to the obscuration of stellar light 
via gas and dust within the GALACTIC PLANE. The center 
of the Galaxy lies in the direction of the constellation 
Sagittarius, close to the border of both neighbor 
constellations Scorpius and Ophiuchus. The coordinates 
of the center (Rogers et al 1994) are «(2000) = 17° 45™ 
40.045*40.010* and 5(2000) = —29° 00! 27.9"+0.2". 


Main structural components 
Since the Sun is located within the Milky Way disk it is 
exceedingly difficult to reliably determine its large-scale 
structure and dynamics, i.e. characteristics of the main 
components and the shape of the Galactic rotation curve. 
The reason for that difficulty is mainly distance 
ambiguities and the location of the Sun within the 
Galactic obscuring dust layer. In summary the main 
structural components are the disk including the barred 
bulge with a central cusp, and most likely four spiral 
arms, a halo as well as a more extended corona including 
the Magellanic clouds and at least seven nearby dwarf 
galaxies and a large number of globular star clusters (see 
figure 1). The total mass of this central section of the 
Galaxy is (with separations from the center of <5 kpc) 


about 2 x 10'' solar masses (Mo = 1.985 x 10°? g). Here 
the molecular gas and dust as well as the youngest 
brightest stars of POPULATION I are located in a flat disk 
structure. The older population I stars form a less 
flattened distribution. This part of the Galaxy is 
surrounded by a probably ellipsoidally shaped halo of 
POPULATION II stars out to a radius of about 20 kpc. 
Population II stars are also found in the barred bulge of 
the Galaxy. The mass of this system is comparable with 
the mass in the inner section of the Milky Way. Within 
the halo the mass of the Galaxy amounts to about 4 x 


10''Mo (Fich and Tremain 1991). The Galactic Halo may 
have been formed largely by accretion and_ tidal 
disruption of satellite systems. This is supported by 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


numerous observational facts: the discovery of a 
retrograde rotating stellar group, patchiness in the 
kinematics of halo stars (Majewski et al 1996), and the 
discovery of an elongated dwarf galaxy in Sagittarius 
(Ibata et al 1994). In addition most of the Milky Way 
satellites appear to be located near two great circles in the 
sky (Lynden-Bell 1976). The corona extends out to 
approximately 100 kpc and may account for as much as 


(3-6) x 10'*Mo (Fich and Tremaine 1991). It exceeds by 
far the mass contained in the spiral disk and bulge region. 


Main tracers of structure and dynamics 

The entire solar system is orbiting the Galactic Center at 
a distance of ~8 kpc, on a nearly circular orbit. It is 
moving at about 250 km s toward a = 21" 12”, 8 = +48° 
19". Figure 2 shows a rotation curve derived from 
observations and consistent with model calculations. At 
this velocity it takes about 220 million years to complete 
one orbit. The Sun has orbited the Galactic Center about 
20-21 times since its formation about 4.6 billion years 
ago. 

There is still a controversy on the shape of the 
rotation curve of the Galaxy in the deep halo. The 
rotation velocity may ultimately decay as in accord with 
the Keplerian law at a distance of 50 kpc. However, 
measurements indicate that the rotation curve of the 
Milky Way essentially stays flat. It actually may even 
still increase at the distance of the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS 
and the MAGELLANIC STREAM. Murai (1997) has 
clarified, on the basis of recent observational data on the 
spatial location of the LMC, SMC and the Magellanic 
Stream and their radial velocity distribution, that the halo 
of the Galaxy has a huge dark matter component that 
results in a flat rotation curve with a terminal velocity of 
the order of 250 km s'. However, for the spiral arms 
found outside the corotation of the bar, the dark halo may 
very well have some effect. In model calculations that 
include a halo component (e.g. Englmaier and Gerhard 
1999; see below) resulting in a flat rotation curve, the 
halo contribution to the radial force at the solar circle is 
23%. 

The main tracers of the Milky Way structure are the 
stars and the line emission of the molecular (mostly 
traced via the line emission of the '"CO J = 1-0 rotational 
transition at 2.6 mm) and atomic (traced via the 21 cm 
hyperfine-structure transition of atomic hydrogen—H I) 
gas in the disk. Through data from the Hipparcos 
astrometry satellite great progress has been made in 
understanding the stellar distribution and kinematics (e.g. 
Creze et al 1998; Bienaymé 1999). The stellar structure 
of the Milky Way can be investigated much better in the 
infrared light than in the optical, since the extinction is 
lower than in the visible light. The COBE satellite 
has provided an infrared image of the Milky Way’s 
central region. The near-infrared (NIR) is a particularly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


corona 
barred bulge 
‘ halo 
spiral disk 
Sun 15 kpc 


Figure 1. Main structural components of the Milky Way 
system. The Milky Way Galaxy in the center of the field is seen 
edge on from outside the corona that also contains the 
Magellanic Clouds, nearby dwarf galaxies and a large number 
of star clusters. 


400 
Sun 

2 300 
= 
A 
Pl 

200 

: 0 6 12 18 24 
R [kpc] 


Figure 2. Rotation curve for the Galaxy (after Fich and 
Tremaine 1991). The vertical bars indicate the approximate 
uncertainty. 


advantageous wavelength window for observing the 
distribution of old, evolved stars in the Galactic disk and 
bulge. These stars are important because they are tracers 
of the overall stellar mass distribution. At shorter 
wavelengths extinction is a serious problem, and at 
longer wavelengths the flux starts to be dominated by 
dust emission. As determined from NIR 2.4 um mapping 
of the stellar continuum emission (Kent et al 1991) the 
radial surface brightness profile of the disk has an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


exponential scale length of about 3.0 kpc. In the solar 
neighborhood, the scale height is about 250 pe and with 
increasing radius it decreases to about 160 pc at a 
distance of 5 kpc from the center. This is in agreement 
with star counts perpendicular to the Galactic plane. 


The bar 

In the last few years, independent evidence points to the 
existence of a bar in the inner Galaxy. This evidence 
results from NIR photometry (Blitz and Spergel 1991; 
Weiland et al 1994; Dwek et al 1995), from IRAS source 
counts (Nakada et al 1991; Whitelock and Catchpole 
1992; Nikolaev and Weinberg 1997; Stanek et al 1997), 
as well as from the large microlensing optical depth 
towards the bulge (Paczynski et al 1994; Zhao et al 
1996) and possibly also from stellar kinematics (Zhao et 
al 1994). This evidence is summarized in recent reviews, 
e.g. Gerhard (1996) and Kuijken (1996). 

The best current models for the distribution of old 
stars in the inner Galaxy are based on the NIR data from 
the DIRBE experiment on COBE. The gravitational 
potential of the stars can then be connected with the 
available gas and stellar kinematic observations in order 
to study the large-scale structure and dynamics of the 
Milky Way Galaxy. 

Since even at a wavelength of 2 um the extinction 
towards the Galactic nuclear bulge is important, the 
DIRBE data has to be corrected for the effects of 
extinction. Spergel et al (1996) use a three-dimensional 
model of the dust distribution to clean the data. These 
data have then been used by Binney et al (1997) to fit a 
non-parametric model of the NIR emission under the 
assumption of eight-fold (triaxial) symmetry with respect 
to three orthogonal planes. The best fits to the 
photometry are obtained when the Sun is assumed to lie 
~14+4 pce above the plane. For a fixed geometry the 
recovered emissivity is essentially unique (Binney and 
Gerhard 1996; Bissantz et al 1997). However, matching 
physical models are possible over the full range of likely 
bar orientation angles . This angle is defined as the 
angle in the Galactic plane between the major axis of the 
bar at / > 0° and the Sun-—center line. It covers a range 
from 15° to 35°. Using the most favored angle of o = 20°, 
the deprojected luminosity distribution shows an 
elongated bulge with axis ratios 10:6:4 and semimajor 
axis of ~2 kpc, surrounded by an elliptical disk extending 
up to ~3.5 kpc on the major axis and ~2 kpc on the minor 
axis. Figure 3 shows a comparison between the 3.4 um 
flux density distribution as measured by the COBE 
satellite (full contours) and a model (dashed contours; 
Binney et al 1997) that assumes a bar angle to the line of 
sight of » = 20°. The asymmetry of the highest contours 
is a clear indication for the presence of a bar as seen from 
the position of the Sun within the Galactic plane. The 
enhanced flux at positive Galactic longitudes indicates 
the location of the tip of the bar that is closest to us. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galactic Latitude b 


Galactic Longitude / 


Figure 3. A comparison between the dust-corrected 3.4 um flux density distribution as obtained by the COBE satellite (full 
contours, see also Arendt et al 1994) and a model (dashed contours; Binney et a/ 1997). In order to demonstrate that the Galaxy is 


not axisymmetric we filled in the top two contour lines. 


Scutum 


velocity [km/s] 


Norma 


Centaurus 


Figure 4. Galactic longitude velocity diagram of the '*CO line emission as a function of Galactic longitude and velocity integrated 
over latitudes between b = +2° (Dame et al 2000). The directions of some arm tangents have been indicated. Comparison with figure 


5 shows where the spiral arms are located within the Galactic disk. 


In all models there is a local density minimum 
~2.2 kpc down the minor axis. The subsequent maximum 
~3 kpc down the minor axis may be associated with the 
Lagrange point L,. The identification of this point as well 
as the length of the bar are consistent with a bar pattern 
speed of Q, ~ 60-70 km s™! kpc”! (Binney et al 1997). 
Model calculations assuming an eight-fold or four-fold 
symmetry for the disk spiral structure indicate that the 
deprojected intensity distributions recovered from the 
cleaned COBE data could reflect spiral structure within 
the Milky Way with density contrasts greater than >3 in 
the NIR. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The spiral structure 
The SPIRAL ARMS can be traced by the distribution of 
atomic and molecular gas as well as the distribution of 
young bright stars and the emission line nebulae. The 
corresponding directions and distances with respect to the 
Sun can then be used to map out the local spiral structure. 
Figure 4 shows the distribution of the '*CO line emission 
as a function of Galactic longitude and velocity 
integrated over latitudes between b = +2°. 

The spiral arms manifest themselves via an increase 
in projected density of brightness of the corresponding 
tracers especially when the line of sight is tangential to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the spiral arm. This technique was first applied to H I 
data (e.g. Kerr and Westerhout 1964) and has thereby led 
to a first picture of the distribution of atomic gas and a 
first indication of a spiral structure in the Galaxy. More 
recent modern H I surveys of the Galactic disk (e.g. Stark 
et al 1992; Burton 1985) primarily aim at high 
sensitivity, low contamination due to side lobes of the 
antenna beam and a large velocity coverage in order to 
trace the high-velocity H I gas located towards the center 
of the Galaxy and in individual clouds in and above the 
plane. Spiral arms are named after the constellations in 
which they are most prominent. The results indicate that 
the Sun lies near the inner edge of the so-called ORION 
ARM (see figure 5). The Perseus arm is located about 
2 kpc beyond the Sun and the Aquila and Carina arm 
sections are approximately located at a distance from the 
Sun of 2 kpc towards the Galactic Center (see figure 5). 
From the study of H II regions, molecular clouds and the 
Galactic magnetic field it appears that the Milky Way 
may have four main spiral arms (Georgelin and 
Georgelin 1976; Caswell and Heynes 1987; Sanders et al 
1985; Grabelsky et al 1988; Vallée 1995). 

Dame et al (1987, 1999) have combined large-scale 
surveys of the '*CO(1-0) integrated line intensity of the 
entire Galactic plane and specific nearby clouds to 
produce a panorama of the entire Milky Way in 
molecular gas at an angular resolution of 3°. Their 
compilation exhibits a sky coverage and resolution which 
are comparable with those of early 21 cm surveys. A 
comparison with other population I tracers demonstrates 
that the currently available CO surveys probably provide 
an almost complete inventory of nearby molecular 
clouds. The '*CO(1-0) line, however, traces in most 
cases the t = 1.0 surfaces of optically thick molecular 
gas. A much better census of the amount of molecular 
gas can be obtained via the optically thinner '*CO(1-0) 
line. Stark (1987) presents a Galactic survey of 47 000 
positions observed in the '*CO(1—0) line emission. The 
data show a clear presence of voids in the molecular gas 
disk of the Milky Way. These regions contain many 
times fewer giant molecular clouds (GMCs) than do 
adjacent regions of similar size. This is interpreted as a 
signature of a spiral structure. The difference between the 
arm and interarm regions in the inner Galaxy is only 
clearly visible in the distribution of GMCs. Small 
molecular gas clouds are present throughout the disk. It is 
possible that GMCs are formed as interstellar gas enters a 
spiral arm and that they break up into small molecular or 
atomic clouds when the gas leaves the arm. The 
molecular gas disk is flatter than the atomic gas disk. The 
Gaussian scale height (i.e. thickness perpendicular to the 
plane) at the solar circle within 1 kpc is ~74 pe (Dame et 
al 1987). The H I atomic gas scale height is ~100 pc at 3 
and ~220 pc at 9 kpc distance from the center (Malhotra 
1995). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


T Teg tee se aRee Oa 


=30 


~ Scutum 


y [kpc] 


TT WES Gaaeeee 


| 
on 


LPT 


aia eae 
Sun 0 
& x [kpc] 


@ 
Se 
Us» 


ak 5 


Figure 5. The gas flow in the Galactic disk under the influence 
of the barred bulge with a bar angle = 20°, corotation radius at 
~3.1 kpc as well as a dark halo component (Englmaier and 
Gerhard 1999). The location of the Sun is shown at x = —2.7 
kpc and y = —-7.5 kpc just outside the frame. The directions of 
some arm tangents and the corresponding approximate galactic 
longitudes have been indicated. The Orion arm is possibly a 
connection between the Aquila and Perseus arm in the vicinity 
of the Sun. The image is a result of hydrodynamical two- 
dimensional modeling using 20 000 particles in a smoothed 
particles hydrodynamics (SPH) code described in Englmaier 
and Gerhard (1997). The barred bulge has a size and orientation 
(4 x 2.4 kpc) which is almost identical to the central region void 
of particles. 


The currently best model of Englmaier and Gerhard 
(1997) provides a coherent interpretation of most of the 
observed gas dynamical features. The four-armed spiral 
structure outside corotation reproduces quantitatively the 
five main spiral arm tangents at / < 60° that are observed in 
several tracers. In this model the observed 3 kpc arm is 
part of a spiral arm structure that starts at the ends of the 
bar and extends into the corotation region. Orbits along the 
bar are called x1 orbits. They allow transitions to the inner 
x2 orbits perpendicular to the bar (Contopoulos and 
Papayannopoulos 1980). This model exhibits an inner gas 
disk with a cusped orbit shock transition to an x2 orbit disk 
of radius R ~ 150 pc (see inner portion of figure 5). The 
corotation radius of the bar is fairly well constrained at R ~ 
3.5+0.5 kpc. The Galactic terminal velocity curve from H I 
and CO observations out to H45° (~5 kpc) is 
approximately described by a maximal disk model with 
constant mass-to-light ratio for the NIR bulge and disk. 


The center of the Galaxy 
At a distance of only 8 kpc the Galactic Center is the 
closest nucleus of a galaxy, 100-1000 times closer than 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the nearest extragalactic systems. It is thus a unique 
laboratory in which physical processes that are also 
relevant for nuclei of other galaxies can be studied with 
the highest angular resolution possible. The gas and dust 
on the line of sight to the center, however, make it 
impossible to observe it at optical or UV wavelengths. It 
is only accessible in the radio, infrared and x-ray domain. 
The optical extinction amounts to 30 magnitudes (Ay = 
30") or an attenuation of visible light by a factor of 10°”. 
This corresponds in the NIR K band at a wavelength of 
2.2 um to an extinction of only 4x = 3.3™. 


The central stellar cluster 

Catchpole et al (1990) showed from NIR star counts that 
the density distribution of stars near the Galactic Center 
can be modeled as a power law 7?” with p ~ 2.2+40.2 for K 
= 6"-8™ stars. This is similar to the value of p ~ 2.0£0.2 
derived from the distribution of OH/IR stars near the 
center (Lindqvist et al 1992). Using radial velocities of 
the OH-IR stars and the assumption of isotropy, 
Lindqvist et al determined the mass distribution inside 
~100 pc. The corresponding mass density profile has p ~ 
1.5 between ~20 and ~100 pc and steepens inside ~20 pc. 
The overall slope is in approximate agreement with the 
value of p ~ 1.8 originally found by Becklin and 
Neugebauer (1968). Because of the limited resolution the 
central cusp cannot be recovered from the DIRBE NIR 
data and has to be re-introduced to model the dynamics. 
The total mass, however, is small compared with the 
mass of the barred bulge. Inside the central parsec of the 
Galaxy the stellar number density counts show that all 
the ~ 600 stars in the central stellar cluster brighter than 
16™ at 2.2 um can be described very well by the number 
density distribution expected for an isothermal stellar 
cluster with a core radius of approximately 0.2-0.3 pc 
(Eckart et al 1993, Eckart and Genzel 1996). 


Phenomena within the central few parsecs 

The central few parsecs of the Milky Way is a region full 
of interesting phenomena (figure 6). A circumnuclear 
disk or ring consisting of a system of orbiting molecular 
filaments at a distance of 1.5—-5 pc is connected to a 
dense central stellar cluster via several ridges, filaments 
and streamers of gas and dust that form the so-called 
‘mini spiral’ close to the central compact (see above) 
stellar cluster that connects on large-scale NIR images 
visually to the stellar bulge and disk population at 
approximately the radius of the circumnuclear ring. 

The circumnuclear disk is probably fed by gas infall 
from dense molecular clouds at distances larger than 
10 pe from the center. The mini spiral represents the 
brightest part of the thermal radio source Sgr A (West). 
The central 1.5 pc is comparatively devoid of interstellar 
matter and is referred to as the central cavity. Right at the 
center of the stellar cluster there is located a compact 
radio source Sagittarius A* (Sgr A*) with a radio 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Central 
Stellar 
Cluster 


10"/0.4 pe 


Figure 6. Schematic picture of the different structures in the 
Galactic Center. The ‘mini spiral’ arms—the eastern and 
northern arm as well as the ‘bar’—connect the central stellar 
cluster region with the circumnuclear gas ring (after Genzel et 
al 1994). The brightest star at 2 1m wavelength, IRS 7 (infrared 
source), has been labeled. The position of the compact radio 
source Sgr A* is also indicated as a cross. 


luminosity of ~2 x 10** erg s"', corresponding to a flux 
density of 1.1 Jy at} =2 cm, and a size of less than 2.4 x 
10° cm (Rogers et al 1994; Krichbaum et al 1994). This 
source is the most likely candidate for a possible massive 
black hole at the center of our Galaxy (e.g. Rees 1984, 
Genzel and Townes 1987; Lo 1989). Along the arms of 
the mini spiral gas and dust are orbiting about the center 
where they interact with the intense nuclear wind 
originating from the central cluster of very massive and 
luminous stars. Recent subarcsecond angular resolution 
line imaging (Eckart et al 1995; Tamblyn et al 1996) and 
integral field spectroscopy (Krabbe et al 1995; Genzel et 
al 1996) have shown that several of the brightest 
members of the central cluster—the so-called IRS16 
complex—are He I emission line stars. These objects 
show in their spectra prominent broad He I and H I 
recombination lines in emission. From non-LTE stellar 
atmosphere modeling of the observed emission 
characteristics of several of the He I stars Najarro et al 
(1994, 1997) have inferred that these objects are 
moderately hot (17 000-30 000 K), very luminous ((1- 


30) x 10°Lo) massive stars whose helium-rich surface 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


layers are expanding as powerful stellar winds with 
velocities of 200-800 km s' and mass loss rates of (1— 


70) x 10°Mo yr’. These stars have formed within the 
last few million years and provide the dominant fraction 
of the total luminosity of the central parsec. Imaging 
spectroscopy with the integral field imaging spectrometer 
shows that within the central 0.3-0.4 pc of the stellar 
cluster bright late-type stars (supergiants and the 
brightest AGB stars) are absent but that the core is 
surrounded by a ring of red supergiants-AGB stars 
showing strong CO band head absorptions in their NIR 
spectra (Genzel et al 1996; see also earlier work by 
Sellgren et al 1990; Haller et al 1996). 


The central black hole 

The gas and stellar velocities increase toward the position 
of Sgr A* indicating the presence of a large compact 
mass. The evidence for a dark central mass of (1-3) x 


10°Mo in the Galactic Center has been steadily growing 
over the last two decades from observations of RADIAL 
VELOCITIES of gas and stars (Lacy et al 1980; Serabyn 
and Lacy 1985; Genzel et al 1985; Sellgren et al 1990; 
Krabbe et al 1995; Haller et al 1996; Genzel et al 1996). 
A reliable estimate of the enclosed mass and _ its 
compactness, however, can only be made if the full 
velocity field (radial and transverse components) is 
known. Furthermore, stars as tracers of the velocity field 
are much more reliable than gas, since they are not 
influenced by magnetic pressure or frictional forces. 
Using stars as tracers of the gravitational potential 
therefore allows us to measure the mass content and mass 
concentration within the central parsec of our Galaxy. 
Recent review articles on the phenomena and physical 
properties of the Galactic Center are Genzel et al (1994), 
Blitz et al (1993), Mezger et al (1996) and Morris and 
Serabyn (1996). 

The stellar PROPER MOTION (Eckart and Genzel 
1996; Ghez et al 1998) and radial velocity dispersions 
(Genzel et al 1996) are in very good agreement, 
indicating that the stellar velocity field is on average 
close to isotropic. Comparing individual images from 
different observing epochs one finds within the central 
arcsecond (0.04 pc) several fast-moving stars with 
velocities in excess of 1000 km s‘! in the immediate 
vicinity (0.01 pc) of Sgr A*. From the stellar radial and 
proper motion data, one can infer that a dark mass of 


(2.61+0.35) x 10°Mo must reside within about a light 
week of the compact radio source. Its density must be 2.2 


x 10'"Mo pe © or greater. There is no stable configuration 
of normal stars, stellar remnants (neutron stars or stellar 
black holes) or substellar entities that can account for the 
combination of both the high mass and the high mass 
density. The combination of these data—especially the 
proper motion measurements of the stars in the central 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


arcsecond—now provides compelling evidence for a 
massive BLACK HOLE at the core of the Milky Way. 

In 2001 the Chandra X-ray telescope observed a 
flare of X-ray energy produced from where the lip of a 
supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way 
Galaxy should be. The flare dimmed and brightened over 
a period of ten minutes, the time taken for light to travel 
about 150 million kilometers, meaning that it originated 
from an object no larger in diameter than the distance of 
the Earth to the Sun. This implies that the mass at the 
center of our Galaxy (about 2.6 million times the mass of 
our Sun) is crammed into that space. According to the 
laws of general relativity, only a black hole can be that 
dense. 


Bibliography 

Arendt et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 425 L85 

Bally J, Stark A A, Wilson R W and Henkel C 1987 Astrophys. 
J. Suppl. 65 13 

Becklin E E and Neugebauer G 1968 Astrophys. J. 151 145 

Bienaymé O 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 341 86 

Binney J J and Gerhard O E 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 279 
1005 

Binney J J, Gerhard O E and Spergel D 1997 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 288 365 

Binney J J, Gerhard O E, Stark A A, Bally J and Uchida K I 
1991 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 252 210 

Bissantz N, Englmaier P, Binney J J and Gerhard O E 1997 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 289 651 

Blitz L, Binney J, Lo K Y, Bally J and Ho P T P 1993 Nature 
361 417 

Blitz L and Spergel D N 1991 Astrophys. J. 379 631 

Burton W B 1985 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 62 365 

Burton W B and Liszt H S 1978 Astrophys. J. 225 815 

Caswell J L and Haynes R F 1987 Astron. Astrophys. 171 261 

Catchpole R M, Whitelock P A and Glass I S 1990 Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 247 479 

Cohen R J and Few R W 1976 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 176 
495 

Contopoulos G and Papayannopoulos T 
Astrophys. 92 33 

Creze M, Chereul E, Bienaymé O and Pichon C 1998 Astron. 
Astrophys. 329 920 

Dame T M et al 1987 Astrophys. J. 322 706 

Dame T M et a/ 2000 in preparation 

Dwek E et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 445 716 

Eckart A and Genzel R 1996 Nature 383 415 

Eckart A, Genzel R, Hofmann R, Sams B J and Tacconi- 
Garman L E 1993 Astrophys. J. 407 L77 

Eckart A, Genzel R, Hofmann R, Sams B J and Tacconi- 
Garman L E 1995 Astrophys. J. 445 L26 

Englmaier P and Gerhard O E 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
287 57 

Englmaier P and Gerhard O E 1999 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
304 512 

Fich M and Trenaine S 1991 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 29 
409 

Genzel R, Crawford M K, Townes C H and Watson D M 1985 
Astrophys. J. 297 766 

Genzel R, Eckart A, Ott T and Eisenhauer F 1997 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 291 219 


1980 Astron. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galaxy Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Genzel R, Hollenbach D J and Townes C H 1994 Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 57 417 

Genzel R, Thatte N, Krabbe A, Kroker H and Tacconi-Garman 
LE 1996 Astrophys. J. 472 153 

Genzel R and Townes C H 1987 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
25 377 

Georgelin Y M and Georgelin Y P 1976 Astron. Astrophys. 49 
57 

Gerhard O E 1996 Proc. IAU Symp. 169 ed L Blitz and P 
Teuben 

Gerhard O E and Vietri M 1986 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 223 
377 

Ghez A M, Klein B L, Morris M and Becklin E E 1998 
Astrophys. J. 509 678 

Grabelsky D A, Cohen R S, Bronfman L and Thaddeus P 1988 
Astrophys. J. 331 181 

Haller J W, Rieke M J, Rieke G H, Tamblyn P, Close L and 
Melia F 1996 Astrophys. J. 456 194 

Ibata et al 1994 Nature 370 194 

Kent S M, Dame T M and Fazio G 1991 Astrophys. J. 378 131 

Kerr F J and Westerhout G 1964 Distribution of hydrogen in 
the Galaxy Galactic Structure vol 5, ed A Blaauw and M 
Schmidt (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press) 

Krabbe A et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 447 L95 

Krichbaum T P, Schalinski C J, Witzel A, Standke K J, Graham 
D A and Zensus J A 1994 The Nuclei of Normal Galaxies 
ed R Genzel and A I Harris (Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 411 

Kuijken K 1996 Barred Galaxies: Proc. IAU Collog. 157 ed R 
Buta, D A Crocker and B G Elmegreen (San Francisco, 
CA: Astronomical Society of the Pacific) p 504 

Lacy J H, Townes C H, Geballe T R and Hollenbach D J 1980 
Astrophys. J. 241 132 

Lindqvist M, Habing H J and Winnberg A 1992 Astron. 
Astrophys. 259 118 

Liszt H S and Burton W B 1980 Astrophys. J. 236 779 

Lo K Y 1989 Proc. 136 IAU Symp. ed M Morris, p 527 

Lynden-Bell 1976 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 174 695 

Malhotra S 1995 Astrophys. J. 448 138 

Majewski S R, Munn J A and Hawley S L 1996 Astrophys. J. 

459 L73 

Mezger P G, Duschl W J and Zylka R 1996 Astron. Astrophys. 

Rey. 7 289 

Morris M and Serabyn E 1996 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 

645 

Murai T 1997 Proc. IAU Symp. 186 14 

Mulder W A and Liem B T 1986 Astron. Astrophys. 157 148 

Najarro F, Hillier D J, Kudritzki R P, Krabbe A, Genzel R, Lutz 

D, Drapatz S and Geballe T R 1994 Astron. Astrophys. 285 

573 

Najarro F, Krabbe A, Genzel R, Lutz D, Kudritzki R P and 

Hillier D J 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 325 700 

Nakada Y, Onaka T, Yamamura I, Deguchi S, Hashimoto O, 

Izumiura H and Sekiguchi K 1991 Nature 353 140 

Nikolaev S and Weinberg M D 1997 Astrophys. J. 487 885 

Paczynski B, Stanek K Z, Udalski A, Szymanski M, Kaluzny J, 
Kubiak M, Mateo M and Krzeminski W 1994 Astrophys. 
J. 435 L113 

Peters W L 1975 Astrophys. J. 195 617 

Rees M 1984 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 22 471 

Rogers A E E et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 434 L59 

Sanders D B, Scoville N Z and Solomon P M 1985 Astrophys. 
J. 289 373 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sellgren K, McGinn M T, Becklin E E and Hall D N B 1990 
Astrophys. J. 359 112 

Serabyn E and Lacy J H 1985 Astrophys. J. 293 445 

Spergel D N, Malhotra S and Blitz L 1996 Spiral Galaxies in 
the Near-IR ed D Minniti and H-W Rix (Berlin: Springer) 
p 128 

Stanek K Z, Udalski A, Szymanski M, Kaluzny J, Kubiak M, 
Mateo M and Krzeminski W 1997 Astrophys. J. 477 163 

Stark A A 1987 Proc. IAU Symp. 115 495 

Stark A A, Gammie C F, Wilson R W, Bally J, Linke R A, 
Heiles C and Hurwitz M 1992 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 79 77 

Tamblyn P, Rieke G H, Hanson M M, Close L M, McCarthy D 
W and Rieke M J 1996 Astrophys. J. 456 206 

Vallée J P 1995 Astrophys. J. 454 119 

Wada K, Taniguchi Y, Habe A and Hasegawa T 1994 
Astrophys. J. 437 L123 

Weiland J L et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 425 81 

Whitelock P A and Catchpole R W 1992 L A U Symp. 149 
503W 

Zhao H-S, Rich R M and Spergel D N 1996 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 282 175 

Zhao H-S, Spergel D N and Rich R M 1994 Astron. J. 108 2154 


Andreas Eckart 


Peter Englmaier 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gale, Walter Frederick (1865-1945) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gale, Walter Frederick (1865-1945) 


Australian banker and financier, amateur astronomer, 
born in Paddington, NSW, discovered a number of comets 
and double stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Galilean Telescope ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galilean Telescope 


A refracting telescope that uses a long focal length 
converging lens and a short-focus diverging lens to 
produce a magnified image of a distant object. Named 
after the Italian scientist Galileo Galilei (1564-1642), who 
designed and built a telescope of this type in 1609, the 
Galilean refractor produces an upright image but suffers 
from having a very small field of view. This particular 
optical system is still used in opera glasses because the 
design is compact. 


See also: eyepiece, objective lens, refractor, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Galileo Galilei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galileo Galilei 


Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) is one of the most significant 
figures in the long history of astronomy. Within a short 
two years (1609-11), the telescopes he fashioned revealed 
details of the Sun, Moon and planets that announced 
the end of ancient astronomy and the direction of the 
new. The success of the telescope heralded a new era for 
natural philosophy generally, when it would no longer be 
constrained by the limitations of the human senses. 


Life and works 

Born near Pisa, Galileo enrolled in medicine at the 
University of Pisa in 1581. His interests soon turned to 
mathematics. When he left the university without a degree 
in 1585, he began an intense study of mathematics and 
natural philosophy to prepare himself for a university 
position. Appointed to the chair of mathematics in Pisa in 
1589, he composed a treatise (left unpublished), De motu, 
in which he questioned, on largely conceptual grounds, 
some of the most distinctive features of the Aristotelian 
account of motion. In 1592, he was appointed to the 
chair of mathematics at the University of Padua. There 
he lectured on, among other things, the application of 
spherical geometry to planetary astronomy, and busied 
himself with the design of instruments for practical use 
in surveying and gunnery, as well as for facilitating rapid 
numerical calculation. 

In a letter of thanks to KEPLER (1597) on receipt of the 
latter’s newly published Mysterium Cosmographicum, he 
associates himself with the Copernican views defended in 
this work, claiming that these views had already enabled 
him to explain ‘many physical effects’ (probably alluding 
to the tides) but that he had hesitated to publish for 
fear of public ridicule. Historians are still divided as to 
whether he really was committed to the COPERNICAN SYSTEM 
at so early a date. In 1604, a new star was observed in 
Sagittarius, challenging the Aristotelian doctrine of the 
unchangeability of the heavenly bodies. Already critical of 
Aristotelian views on motion, Galileo offered three public 
lectures on the Nova, his first venture in astronomy. He 
seems to have concentrated on explaining how the star’s 
lack of parallax implies its great distance from Earth and 
hence the changeability of the non-terrestrial region. His 
energies at this time were, however, mainly devoted to 
mechanics. 

In 1609, a chance event diverted him from his 
researches in mechanics for what would become a 25 
year interval. When he heard about a spyglass invented 
in Holland that made distant objects seem near, he 
immediately grasped its potentialities for the furtherance 
of his own career. How much about its mode of 
construction he learnt from others and how much he 
worked out for himself is not quite clear. What is clear, 
however, is that his tested skill in instrument-making 
gave him an advantage over his competitors and a lead 
in telescope-making that he maintained over the crucial 
two-year period (1609-11) within which all the major 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


astronomical discoveries within the reach of a telescope 
of this type were made by him (see GALILEAN TELESCOPE). 
By August 1609 he could present the Doge of Venice 
with a roughly 9x telescope. Impressed by the military 
and commercial potential of the ‘perspicillum’, a grateful 
Venetian Senate promised to double his salary. 

However, Galileo saw even greater potential for him- 
self elsewhere. By January 1610 he had constructed a 20x 
instrument and had discovered Earth-like irregularities on 
the Moon, four satellites orbiting Jupiter, and stars beyond 
numbering that were invisible to the naked eye. Later 
in 1610 came moving sunspots, the phases of Venus and 
the oddly changing shape of Saturn. Galileo rushed his 
first discoveries into print, dedicating the Sidereus Nuncius 
(Sidereal Messenger) to his former pupil, now Cosimo II, 
Grand Duke of Tuscany, and dubbing Jupiter’s moons the 
‘Medicean’ planets. These shrewd gestures gained him 
the position he had long coveted as Mathematician and 
Philosopher to the Grand Duke. His little book caused 
an instant sensation and made him Europe’s most famous 
astronomer. 

Other works quickly followed. His Discourse on 
Bodies in Water (1612) listed his newest astronomical 
discoveries, notably the periods of Jupiter’s satellites, his 
most considerable contribution to calculational astronomy. 
His Letters on Sunspots (1613) mocked the views of the 
Jesuit astronomer, Christopher Scheiner, who represented 
sunspots as clouds circling the (still unchanging) Sun. 
But trouble was brewing in another quarter. The new 
discoveries might refute the Aristotelian claim that the 
Earth is the immobile center of rotation of the planets. But 
what of the passages in Scripture that describe the Sun 
as in motion or the Earth as immovable? Aristotelians 
could and did call theological witness in their support. 
Galileo immediately grasped the challenge that this could 
offer to the Copernican system, of whose truth he was 
now convinced. In a letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) 
and a much longer treatise, the Letter to the Grand 
Duchess Christina (1615), formally addressed to his patron’s 
mother, he laid out in persuasive fashion the hermeneutic 
principles that ought to guide the interpretation of 
Scripture when a literal reading opposed a finding of 
‘sense or necessary demonstration’. But it was to no 
avail. In February 1616, the Roman Congregation of 
the Index banned Copernicus’ De Revolutionibus ‘until it 
be corrected’, declaring the Copernican theses regarding 
the Earth’s motion and the Sun’s rest to be ‘contrary 
to Scripture’. Cardinal Robert Bellarmine, the leading 
theologian of the Congregation of the Holy Office, was 
instructed to inform Galileo officially that the Copernican 
doctrine was not to be held or defended; if he proved 
resistant, he was to be givena personal injunction not even 
to discuss the forbidden view. Whether this injunction was 
delivered, and if so under what circumstances, has been a 
matter of debate since the Holy Office file on Galileo was 
made public more than a century ago. 

What motivated the Cardinal-members of the Holy 
Office was not the defence of an ancient and theologically 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Galilei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


comfortable Earth-centered cosmology. In their eyes, what 
was at stake was the authority of Scripture. This was, 
after all, the time when tensions between Reformers and 
the theologians of the Counter-Reformation were at their 
most intense. And the issue that most clearly divided the 
two sides was the proper interpretation of the Bible. Here 
was Galileo proposing his own non-literal interpretation 
of literal-sounding Scriptural passages, and unable to offer 
a demonstration for the conflicting Copernican claims, the 
only condition under which the Roman theologians would 
have been prepared to concede the propriety of a non- 
literal approach to the disputed passages. 

Their error, as we would see it today, was not 
primarily scientific. It was in the first instance theological, 
in that their principles of Scriptural interpretation were 
at fault; they would have done well to heed Galileo’s 
reminder of an older and more sophisticated set of 
principles going back to St Augustine. Their error was 
also philosophical in that they, and indeed Galileo himself, 
assumed that a claim about the natural world had to 
be demonstrated in order to count as properly scientific. 
Both errors are understandable in the theological and 
philosophical contexts of the day. But they were 
to have far-reaching consequences. What would be 
needed was a return to the more liberal canons of 
Scriptural interpretation favored by Augustine and a better 
understanding of the limits of theory-proof in natural 
science. Both would be slow in coming. 

Forced to abandon his plans for a Copernican treatise, 
Galileo turned in 1618 to the problem of the nature of 
comets. Three bright comets appeared in that year, setting 
off a flurry of speculation. TYCHO BRAHE had carefully 
tracked the comet of 1577 and had concluded that it lay 
far beyond the Moon, that it was orbiting the Sun not 
the Earth, and that its motion was either non-uniform 
and circular or else perhaps oval. Galileo published the 
Discourse on the Comets (1619) under the name of his 
friend, Mario Guiducci, claiming that Tycho’s parallax 
arguments would work only if the comet were a physical 
body, not if (as Galileo himself maintained) they were no 
more than reflections of sunlight from vapors of earthly 
origin lying beyond the moon. He criticizes Tycho for 
suggesting non-circular orbits and non-uniform motions, 
but has to admit that his own theory does not square with 
the mass of observational reports. Another target of the 
Discourse is Orazio Grassi, a Jesuit natural philosopher, 
who responded vigorously to the attack and to whom 
Galileo replied in devastating style with The Assayer (1623). 
The book was quickly recognized as a literary masterpiece. 
It is also significant for the exposition it gives of Galileo’s 
own natural philosophy: the Book of Nature is written in 
the language of mathematics, the qualitative properties of 
material objects are merely subjective products of human 
sensation, and matter is composed of minute corpuscles in 
motion. His treatment of comets, however, the topic that 
had occasioned the book in the first place, is sprinkled with 
inconsistencies, his least successful venture in astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In 1623, Cardinal Maffeo Barberini, an avowed 
admirer of Galileo’s work, was elected Pope, as Urban VIII. 
Galileo, encouraged, asked permission to resume work on 
his Copernican treatise. Urban allowed him to proceed, 
with the proviso that the treatment be hypothetical. The 
two men appear to have understood this restriction in 
very different ways. Galileo evidently took it to mean that 
he could make the best case possible for the Copernican 
hypothesis. Urban wanted to ensure that an explanation 
of observed effects in terms of causes not themselves 
observed would not be presented as demonstrative; to 
do so would, in his view, challenge Divine omnipotence. 
(This type of objection is traceable to the nominalist critics 
of Aristotle in the fourteenth century.) God could, after 
all, have brought about the same effects by means of other 
hidden causes. Urban may also have had in mind the 
status traditionally assigned to ‘mathematical’ astronomy, 
its goal merely to ‘save the phenomena’ (describe the 
observed planetary positions correctly), whereas for true 
causes one has to turn to ‘physical’ astronomy. 

Galileo’s Copernican treatise gradually took shape, 
delayed by his recurrent ill-health as well as by the 
complexity of the rhetorical task he faced. Urban’s 
directive meant that he could not claim to demonstrate the 
Earth’s motion, yet he could hardly forget that, according 
to the theologian-critics of Copernicanism in 1616, the 
literal interpretation of the debated passages in Scripture 
had to take priority if the ‘scientific’ claim fell short of 
demonstration. There were lengthy negotiations with 
the censors in Rome and Florence, but eventually the 
Dialogue on Two Chief World Systems made its appearance in 
1632. Almost immediately an outcry began among Roman 
theologians who had not forgotten the prohibition implicit 
in the 1616 decree: the Dialogue clearly did defend the 
proscribed view. But Urban’s reaction was more personal; 
in his eyes Galileo had betrayed the trust placed in him. A 
commission of inquiry referred the case to the Holy Office; 
Galileo was summoned to Rome and put on trial in early 
1632. 

Galileo could claim that his book had, after all, 
received the censors’ approval. But against this, the 
investigative judge could argue that the censors had not 
been told about the personal injunction given him in 
1616 not even to discuss Copernicanism. Against this in 
turn, Galileo could introduce in evidence a letter from 
Bellarmine that seemed to call in question whether in 
fact a personal injunction of that severity had in fact been 
given him. The depositions continued; Galileo argued, 
although implausibly, that his book did not really urge 
the superiority of the Copernican view. Finally, a plea- 
bargain was struck; Galileo agreed to abjure publicly the 
prohibited claims of the Earth’s motion and the Sun’s 
rest and was sentenced to prison, the sentence promptly 
commuted to house-arrest. 

Back finally at home, he returned to the long- 
interrupted manuscript on mechanics. In 1638, the Two 
New Sciences was published in Holland. Here he laid out 
the two laws of fall that were to become the foundation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Galilei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of modern mechanics, following a method that appealed 
to experience yet also sought the certainty of geometrical 
demonstration. It came as final affirmation for one who in 
his later years had known more than his share of tragedy. 


Telescopic discoveries 

Galileo’s contributions to astronomy were of two very 
different kinds. First were the stunning observational 
discoveries of 1609-11. These did not involve the 
calculational feats of his great predecessors, Ptolemy, 
Copernicus and Kepler. Galileo was fortunate to be the 
first to be enabled to see in the heavens what no one before 
him had seen; what made him a great astronomer was 
his ability to grasp the significance for cosmology of what 
he saw. Second was his furtherance of the case for the 
Copernican system. He did more than any other single 
person to bring about the displacement of the Earth from 
its privileged place at the cosmic center with the vast shift 
in world view that followed. 

His lunar observations, vividly chronicled in the 
Sidereus Nuncius, made the greatest impact, perhaps, on 
the general public. Patches of light and shadow could now 
be plausibly identified as Earth-like features. Prominent 
among them were what seemed to be lunar mountains, 
whose peaks could be seen as spots of light at lunar dawn 
while the lowlands below them remained in shadow. And 
the mountains’ own shadows shortened as the lunar noon 
approached, just as one would expect. Further, the faint 
illumination of the dark part of the Moon’s face could 
best be understood as ‘earthlight’, sunlight reflected from 
Earth, at its brightest when the Moon lies between Earth 
and Sun so that the ‘full Earth’ is shining on it; Earth and 
Moon thus reflect sunlight in the same way. 

The discovery that four satellites circled Jupiter 
showed that, contrary to ARISTOTLE’s doctrine of natural 
motion, there is more than one center of rotation in the 
planetary system. It also eliminated an objection to the 
Copernican claim that the Earth carried its Moon along 
as it circled the Sun. Galileo took a great deal of trouble 
with the difficult problem of computing the periods and 
the times of occultation by Jupiter of each of the four 
satellites (see JUPITER: SATELLITES). He hoped that it would 
allow the compilation of tables of occultation times at a 
reference base like Florence, constituting a celestial ‘clock’ 
sufficiently accurate for the calculation of longitude for 
ships at sea, a crucial need for navigators on the long sea 
voyages then becoming common. The practical difficulties 
involved in making the requisite observations while at sea 
defeated his plans, but this method of measuring longitude 
came to be relied on by mapmakers later in the century. 

The phases of veNus from crescent to full and back 
again became Galileo’s most potent argument against the 
older cosmology. If Venus and the Sun both orbit the 
Earth, with Venus below the Sun, Venus should always 
show a crescent shape to Earth, if illuminated by the Sun. 
If, however, Venus and Earth both orbit the Sun, Venus 
should run through the same sequence of phases as does 
our own moon. And this Galileo observed it to do, enough 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to undermine the Aristotelian—Ptolemaic world system 
irreparably. The appearances of Venus were, however, 
compatible with the TYCHONIC sysTEM which had the Sun 
orbit the unmoving Earth carrying the entire planetary 
system with it, a major reason why astronomers who were 
unwilling, for physical or theological reasons, to embrace 
the Copernican system, preferred the Tychonic alternative. 

Galileo saw the sunspots as something like terrestrial 
clouds, close to or on the Sun’s surface and constantly 
changing in shape. Their rotation testified to a solar 
rotation taking about a month. Here again, the warrant for 
his hypothesis, suggested by familiar terrestrial analogy, 
was the observable consequences that could be drawn 
from it. In the Dialogue, he made use of the observed 
shapes of the sunspot paths to argue that these shapes 
would follow naturally if the annual motion of the Earth 
be granted, whereas they would demand an implausible 
combination of four motions on the Sun’s part if the Earth’s 
motion be denied. 

These discoveries brought to the fore an issue for 
which the methodology of Aristotelian science was ill- 
prepared. How are the natures of distant and unfamiliar 
objects to be discovered? The intuitive grasp of necessary 
relations between essence and property on which 
Aristotle’s account depended required a direct familiarity 
with the natures themselves. But with sunspots, comets 
and the like, one had to resort, instead, to the imagination 
and test the resultant construct by the observable 
consequences drawn from it. Galileo’s treatment of the 
hypothetical analogy between the lunar and terrestrial 
surfaces offers a particularly elegant example of this sort of 
retroductive reasoning from effect to cause that relies for its 
warrant on explanatory success, rather than on deductive 
derivation from intuitively warranted principle. Galileo 
never explicitly acknowledged this shift, one with far- 
reaching consequences for later science. 


Arguing for the Copernican system 

The Dialogue on Two Chief World Systems is a masterpiece 
of intricately interlocking argument in support of the 
Copernican system. Galileo had to deal first with 
the Aristotelian arguments against the Earth’s motion. 
This would require a new mechanics; indeed, some 
have claimed that such a goal may have prompted his 
groundbreaking early work on motion. He had to 
challenge Aristotle’s way of distinguishing motions into 
natural and violent; the EARTH’s ROTATION could be neither. 
Against the objection that the motion of the Earth, if real, 
should be perceivable, he had to claim the imperceptibility 
of shared uniform motion (allowing circular motion to 
count as uniform). Against the strongest Aristotelian 
objection that on a rotating Earth objects would tend to 
fly off, he had to formulate a version of the principle of 
inertia. But surely if the Earth were to rotate fast enough, 
experience with spinning millstones showed that objects 
would fly off? Without an understanding of gravity, 
Galileo’s response to this objection was ingenious but 
finally unconvincing. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Galilei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Responding to objection was, of course, not going 
to be enough. Positive arguments in this domain, 
Galileo notes, are of two sorts, one based on astronomical 
observations, the other on terrestrial effects. And the 
first kind, based on shared celestial motions, can only 
afford ‘greater probability’, he admits. If we observe 
a diurnal motion shared by all the celestial bodies, is 
it not simpler to suppose that the motion is really that 
of the Earth? The argument here, Galileo emphasizes, 
is not just from economy. It is based on the ability to 
explain the motion. Whereas he can give an account of 
the Earth’s inertial rotation, his opponents have nothing 
to offer in regard to the complex causes required to keep 
so large and so complex a system revolving around a 
relatively small Earth. The carrier spheres are no longer 
believable (he does not mention Tycho’s role in banishing 
them), so how could the myriad stars (now multiplied 
enormously in number by telescopic testimony) retain 
their positional relationship with one another over the 
ages, as they are observed to do? What sorts of forces could 
bring this about? Galileo enumerates seven arguments of 
this general kind in favor of the Earth’s rotation. Though 
he does not say so, these arguments would also tell against 
the third ‘chief world system’, that of Tycho, which he 
studiously ignores throughout the Dialogue. 

The shared-motion argument for the annual motion 
of the Earth distinguishes between the planets and the 
fixed stars. It is a harder case to make since Galileo 
has no explanation to offer for this motion. Further, it 
leads to awkward questions about the absence of stellar 
parallax. Galileo conjectures in response that the stars 
must be at an enormous distance from us. Oddly, he 
makes no use of the ‘coincidence’ arguments proposed by 
Copernicus and Kepler: various features of the planetary 
motions (e.g. the fact that planets are brightest when 
in opposition) are ‘natural’ in the Copernican system, 
unexplained coincidence in its rival. 

He realized that to achieve the sort of proof that 
his critics, particularly his theological critics, demanded, 
he would have to produce a causal inference from 
some terrestrial phenomenon to the Earth’s motions as 
its only possible explanation, the classical Aristotelian 
requirement for demonstration. As early as the 1590s, 
he had speculated that the ocean tides might furnish 
the needed proof. He obviously meant this to be the 
culminating argument of the Dialogue; indeed, he had to be 
ordered not to work a reference to it into the book title. The 
double motion of the Earth, allied with the peculiarities of 
individual sea coasts, could, he labored to show, explain 
the general features of the T1bEs. Though some modern 
scholars are sympathetic to his tidal argument, his readers 
were (and still are) on the whole unconvinced. The tie 
between the tides and the lunar phases had been noted 
since antiquity and did not easily fit into Galileo’s scheme. 
(He rejected outright the possibility that lunar attraction 
might be responsible.) More seriously, in order to meet 
Aristotelian objections he had already asserted, on several 
grounds, the imperceptibility in principle of terrestrial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


effects of the Earth’s motions. How could he now turn 
around and rely on such terrestrial phenomena as the tides 
to provide demonstration of these motions? 

The cumulative effect of the Dialogue arguments was, 
thus, mixed. The arguments against the Aristotelian— 
Ptolemaic system were decisive; it had no serious support 
from astronomers from this time forward. The positive 
arguments for the Copernican alternative were much less 
decisive. The tidal argument did not convince. The 
shared-motion arguments had to bear the burden, and 
this they did, provided one settles for a high degree of 
probability. And this is just what the scientists of Galileo’s 
century were finding it very difficult to do. 


Bibliography 

Drake S 1978 Galileo At Work: His Scientific Biography 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 

McMullin E 1967 Galileo, man of science Galileo: Man of 
Science ed EMcMullin (New York: Basic Books) pp 3- 
51 

McMullin E 1978 The conception of science in Galileo’s 
work New Perspectives on Galileo ed R Butts and J Pitt 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) pp 209-57 

Shea W R 1972 Galileo's Intellectual Revolution (London: 
Macmillan) 

Shea W R 1990 Galileo Galilei: an astronomer at work 
Nature, Experiment, and the Sciences ed T H Levere and 
W R Shea pp 51-76 

Swerdlow N M 1998 Galileo’s discoveries with the 
telescope and their evidence for the Copernican 
theory The Cambridge Companion to Galileo ed 
P Machamer (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 244-70 

Van Helden A 1984 Galileo and the telescope Novita Celesti 
E Crisi Del Sapere ed P Galluzzi (Firenze: Barbéra) 
pp 149-58 

Van Helden A 1989 Galileo, telescopic astronomy, and 
the Copernican system Planetary Astronomy from the 
Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics ed R Taton and 
C Wilson (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
pp 81-105 

Wallace W A 1992 Galileo’s Logic of Discovery and Proof 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Ernan McMullin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Mission to Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galileo Mission to Jupiter 


The Galileo mission to JUPITER provided several historic 
firsts in planetary and solar system exploration: the first 
in situ sampling of an outer planet atmosphere, the first 
extended study of an outer planet, its satellites and 
magnetosphere from an orbiter, the first images of an 
asteroid, together with the first confirmation that 
asteroids can have gravitationally bound moonlets and, 
by an amazing set of circumstances, the only direct view 
of the impact of comet Shoemaker—Levy 9 with Jupiter. 

The spacecraft consisted of two main components: 
an atmospheric entry probe and a planetary orbiter. The 
Galileo probe was designed and built by Hughes Space 
and Communications Group under contract to NASA 
Ames Research Center. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
designed and built the Galileo orbiter and had overall 
responsibility for mission design and operations. The 
German government was a partner in the mission through 
its provision of the orbiter propulsion subsystem and two 
science experiments. Scientists from six nations 
participated in the mission. 

The principal scientific objectives of the mission 
were (1) to study the composition, structure and 
dynamics of the jovian atmosphere, to a depth having a 
pressure of at least 10 bar, (2) to study the composition, 
geology, surface morphology and interior structure of the 
planet-sized Galilean moons Io, Europa, Ganymede and 


Callisto and (3) to determine the structure of, and 
characterize the plasma physics in, the vast jovian 
magnetosphere. In spite of some serious spacecraft 
hardware problems which occurred on the way to Jupiter, 
the Galileo Mission met all these objectives, plus it 
produced some first-order science prior to arrival at 
Jupiter. The instrument suites aboard the probe and 
orbiter are given in table 1. All instruments functioned 
well. 

The Galileo spacecraft arrived at Jupiter on 7 
December 1995, after having been launched on 18 
October 1989 by the space shuttle Atlantis from Kennedy 
Space Center. The original launch date for the mission 
was to have been January 1982, but various delays, many 
not associated with the spacecraft, led to a target launch 
date of May 1986. However, the Challenger shuttle 
accident occurred in January 1986, delaying Galileo’s 
launch for yet another 3 yr. The launch delays meant that 
the trajectory to Jupiter had to be completely redesigned 
because of Shuttle payload, safety and launch limitations. 
The ingenious trajectory redesign resulted in a trajectory 
that included a close flyby of Venus (February 1990) and 
two close flybys of Earth (December 1990 and December 
1992) for gravity assists to gain sufficient energy to reach 
Jupiter. By serendipity this trajectory allowed the first- 
ever flyby reconnaissance of two asteroids and the direct 
viewing of the impacts with Jupiter of the kilometer- 
sized fragments of comet Shoemaker-Levy 9. 


Table 1. Galileo scientific payload. 


Investigation 


Purpose 


Probe 

Atmospheric Structure Instrument 
Energetic Particle Detector 
Lightning/Radio Emission Detector 
Helium Abundance Detector 
Nephelometer 

Net Flux Radiometer 

Neutral Mass Spectrometer 
Doppler Wind Experiment 

Radio Scintillation Experiment 
Ground Based Doppler Wind* 


Orbiter 

Solid-State Imager 

Near-Infrared Mapping Spectrometer 
Ultraviolet Spectrometer 
Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer 
Photopolarimeter/Radiometer 
Magnetometer 

Energetic Particle Detector 
Plasma Detector 

Heavy Ion Counter 

Plasma Wave Detector 

Dust Detector 

Radio Science 


Jovian atmosphere thermal structure 

Inner radiation belt parameters 

Jovian atmosphere optical—radio lightning properties 
Jovian atmosphere relative helium abundance 
Jovian atmosphere cloud parameters, location 
Solar—planetary radiative flux in jovian atmosphere 
Jovian atmosphere composition, 2-150 amu 

Zonal wind profile in jovian atmosphere 
Turbulence, signal absorption in jovian atmosphere 
Zonal wind profile in jovian atmosphere 


Image Galilean satellites, Jupiter circulation 

Jupiter and satellite composition, temperature 

Gases and aerosols in jovian atmosphere 

Ion, airglow emissions 

Characterize atmospheric aerosols, energy balance 
Magnetic field strength and direction 

High-energy ions and electrons 

Characteristics of low-energy particles 

Fluxes and composition of heavy ions 

Electric and magnetic waves, wave—particle interaction 
Properties of dust near Jupiter 

Celestial mechanics, gravity fields, atmospheric structure 


“Not an originally selected Galileo investigation, but endorsed by the Galileo Project Steering Group. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Mission to Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The probe was separated from the orbiter on 13 July 
1995. At this point both the orbiter and the probe were 
about 50 million miles from Jupiter and 5 months away 
from arrival. The probe plunged into the atmosphere of 
Jupiter on 7 December 1995, 14:04 PST, at a latitude of 
6.5°N, surviving the most difficult atmospheric entry ever 
attempted in terms of relative atmospheric entry speed, 
exceeding 47 km s'. The probe returned data for just 
over an hour, until it reached a pressure level in the 
atmosphere of 22 bar. On the same date, after having 
received and recorded the probe data, the orbiter was the 
first ever to be placed in orbit about an outer planet and 
returned data about the jovian system during a nominal 
mission lasting until December 1997. The orbiter is still 
functioning at the time of writing this article. The 
primary purpose of the extended mission beyond the 
nominal 2 yr is to reconnoiter the jovian moon Europa. 
Europa is of high interest because of the possible 
existence of a subsurface liquid water ocean, which 
conceivably could harbor biology. 

En route to Jupiter, the spacecraft suffered a major 
anomaly on 11 April 1991, when the high gain antenna 
(HGA) failed to deploy properly. Until this point, the 
HGA had been folded against a central mast and was 
protected by Sun shields so that heat loads on the HGA 
would be within tolerances. Despite repeated attempts to 
solve the problem, the HGA was not functional for the 
rest of the mission. Mission communications were 
carried out using the low-gain broad-beam antenna, with 
a subsequent reduction in communication rate by a factor 
of 1000. It is to the credit of all the mission teams that, in 
spite of this severe problem, Galileo met almost all its 
fundamental science objectives. The major impact to data 
return came in the total number of images returned, 
reduced from the expected approximately 100 000 during 
the nominal mission to less than 2000, with another 
approximately 2000 images to be returned during the 2 yr 
Galileo Europa portion of the mission. 


Science highlights en route to Jupiter 

Before reaching Jupiter the spacecraft took the first 
close-up pictures of two asteroids. On 29 October 1991 
the spacecraft flew by asteroid GASPRA at a closest 
approach of about 1600 km. The images returned 
revealed a cratered, complex and irregular body 
approximately 19 km by 12 km by 11 km, apparently 
covered by a thin regolith. On 28 August 1993 Galileo 
encountered the second asteroid, IDA, with a closest- 
approach distance of about 2400 km, and discovered that 
Ida had a small moon (about 1.5 km in diameter). Dactyl, 
as the moonlet was named, was the first confirmed moon 
of an asteroid and was estimated to be about 100 km 
from Ida’s centroid. Ida itself was considerably larger 
than Gaspra, being approximately 56 km by 24 km by 
21 km, and had a rotation period of 4.6 h about an offset 
axis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Twenty-one kilometer-sized fragments of comet 
Shoemaker—Levy 9 collided with Jupiter in July of 1994, 
at a time when the Galileo spacecraft was about 1.5 AU 
from Jupiter (see SHOEMAKER-LEVY 9-—JUPITER 
COLLISION). The set of collisions of the fragments of SL- 
9 with Jupiter was one of the most intensely observed 
events by astronomers in history, but, because of the 
geometry of its trajectory, Galileo was the only platform 
that had a direct view of the impact sites because they 
occurred on the side of Jupiter facing away from Earth. 
Galileo returned key data concerning the time history and 
light curves of several of the fragment impacts, 
information which otherwise would have been 
unobtainable. 

As Galileo passed close by VENUS and the Earth— 
Moon system on its way to Jupiter, unique sets of 
observations were accomplished. Among the 
measurements at Venus were high spatial and temporal 
resolution imaging of atmospheric motions at cloud 
levels and compositional measurements from the near- 
infrared mapping spectrometer. High spatial resolution 
images of both the Earth and the far side of the Moon 
were obtained, and a wonderful set of images of the 
entire Earth-Moon system produced a movie in which 
the Earth is seen rotating as the Moon orbits around it. 


Science highlights at Jupiter 


Jupiter 

One of the most important scientific objectives of Galileo 
was to determine the composition of the jovian 
atmosphere. Composition information is important in 
order to develop an understanding of solar system 
formation and evolution. Prior to Galileo, it was of 
course known that Jupiter was made mostly of hydrogen 
and helium, but the precise value of the relative 
abundance of helium was still uncertain to about 25%. 
Furthermore, although the jovian abundance of carbon 
was fairly well established, the jovian abundances of the 
next most abundant non-noble volatile elements in the 
solar system, oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur, were poorly 
constrained, if at all. Noble gases other than helium had 
not even been detected (see JUPITER: ATMOSPHERE). 

The Galileo probe made direct measurements of 
atmospheric composition between levels in the 
atmosphere corresponding to pressures from 0.4 bar to 
22 bar. Indirect measurements of the ammonia 
abundance profile with depth were made using the probe 
telemetry signal strength as received by the orbiter. The 
He/H, mass ratio was measured to be 0.24, somewhat 
higher than the value near 0.18 inferred from the earlier 
Voyager flybys of Jupiter and closer to the value thought 
to be appropriate for the proto-Sun, 0.275. Carbon (in the 
form CH,), nitrogen (in the form NH3) and sulfur (in the 
form HS) were all measured to have relative abundances 
to hydrogen about 3 times the respective solar values, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Mission to Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


although there is still some uncertainty as to the ammonia 
determination. Prior to Galileo, remote observations 
indicated an ammonia abundance less than twice solar. 
The Galileo ammonia measurements of 3—4 times solar 
imply that planetesimals which brought heavier elements 
to Jupiter originated from colder regions of the early 
solar system than previously thought. Another surprise 
was the relative abundance of oxygen (in the form H,O), 
which was found to be depleted with respect to the solar 
value, as was the noble gas neon. It is at present thought 
that the depletion in H,O does not represent the planet as 
a whole, but rather local or regional variation in the H,O 
abundance. To date, the Galileo orbiter has not detected 
solar amounts of water in Jupiter’s atmosphere either, but 
all data have not yet been analysed. 

Other surprising aspects of the Galileo probe data, 
which may be related to the region in which the probe 
descended, were the dependencies on depth of the mixing 
ratios of the condensibles NH3, HS and H,O. The probe 
entered an anomalously clear region of the jovian 
atmosphere in terms of cloud layers, known as a 5 um hot 
spot because emitted radiation from the deeper 
atmosphere is detected remotely in these relatively clear 
regions. Three cloud layers were expected, but only one 
tenuous cloud layer was clearly detected, corresponding 
most likely to the expected second cloud deck of 
ammonium hydrosulfide, NH4SH. The probe probably 
started measurements below the topmost cloud, expected 
to be NH; ice crystals, and did not encounter an expected 
water cloud. All the condensible abundances varied 
dramatically with depth, but the variations were not 
correlated with condensation levels or with each other. 
The typical profiles consisted of highly depleted mixing 
ratios at depths near 0.4 bar, increasing to mixing ratios a 
few times solar values at depths near and above 10 bar. 
The one exception was water, which reached a value 
about 30% solar at the deepest levels probed. Various 
possible explanations for these observations have 
appeared, but at the present time there is not a consensus 
as to the proper interpretations and _ scientific 
implications. 

The Galileo probe established that the dominant 
zonal (east-west) winds, which relate to the banded 
appearance of the planet and which have been observed 
ever since cloud motions could be followed with 
telescopes on Jupiter, extend to at least the depth 
penetrated by the probe. Zonal wind speeds increased 
from about 70ms™' at cloud levels near 0.4 bar to 
175ms' at a pressure level near 5 bar and then 
remained approximately constant to a depth 
corresponding to 22 bar. The fact that the winds extend to 
22 bar probably implies that the winds are driven from 
deep in the jovian atmosphere, conceivably very deep. 

The thermal structure of the atmosphere below the 1 
bar pressure level was measured to be close to that 
corresponding to a dry adiabat, as had been expected. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


However, in the upper atmosphere at heights above 
l bar, temperature rapidly increased with height, 
reaching a value (depending precisely on choice of 
temperature at the initial altitude of measurement) of 
900 K near 1000 km above the 1 bar level. Solar heating 
is too small to be the energy source for the upper 
atmosphere heating. Most probably the energy source is a 
combination of dissipation of atmospheric gravity waves 
propagating from the deeper atmosphere with heating of 
the atmosphere by energetic particle precipitation from 
the magnetosphere. 


Galilean satellites 

The Galilean satellites are of high scientific interest for 
several reasons. In conjunction with Jupiter, these large 
moons form a system that in certain ways is analogous to 
the solar system and hence a system that can reveal 
information regarding the physics of planet formation 
and evolution (see JUPITER: SATELLITES). Furthermore, 
these bodies are highly interesting in their own right. IO is 
the most volcanically active body in the solar system. 
EUROPA is of major interest because of the possibility, 
discussed below, of a subsurface water ocean which 
could harbor biology. GANYMEDE is the largest moon in 
the solar system, being the size of the planet Mercury. 
The outermost satellite, CALLISTO, is the same general 
size as Ganyemede, but appears rather different from the 
other three satellites in terms of geophysical history. 

A much more comprehensive knowledge of the 
Galilean satellites of Jupiter is now emerging from the 
Galileo orbiter data. The Galileo orbiter passed close 
enough to each of these satellites so that tracking of the 
spacecraft allowed measurement of the quadrupole 
moment of the gravitational field, from which it is 
possible to develop models of the satellite’s interior. At 
the same time, magnetic field measurements were made 
during the satellite flybys which could be used to assess 
whether the magnetic field perturbation measured was 
due to an induced field or to an intrinsic field of the 
satellite itself. Combining these sets of data, the 
following picture seems to emerge. The inner three 
satellites, Io, Europa and Ganymede, are strongly 
differentiated. The best model fit is a three-layer model 
consisting of a metallic core, rocky envelope and (except 
for Io) water ice outer shell. The magnetic signature of 
Ganymede implies an internally generated magnetic 
field, consistent with the existence of a metallic core. Io’s 
magnetic field has not yet been measured adequately to 
distinguish what type of magnetic field, if any, it has. The 
preferred explanation for Europa’s magnetic signature is 
an induced magnetic field driven by time-varying 
processes in Jupiter’s magnetosphere near Europa’s orbit. 
This implies induced currents in Europa flowing in a 
near-surface conducting layer, such as a salty subsurface 
ocean. However, an intrinsic field cannot yet be ruled 
out. Callisto, the outermost Galilean satellite, is partially 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Mission to Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


differentiated with an ice-rock mixture, such that the 
rock fraction is a slowly increasing function of depth. 
Callisto’s magnetic signature implies an induced field 
qualitatively similar to that of Europa, requiring a near- 
surface conducting layer. Such a near-surface conducting 
layer on Callisto is difficult to understand. Neither an icy 
crust nor a conducting ionosphere can explain the 
magnetic observations, and known sources of heating are 
not expected to be large enough to cause a near-surface 
liquid or slushy conducting layer. 

Spectra of the satellite surfaces imply that, besides 
water ice, the surfaces of Ganymede and Callisto could 
contain CH, CO», CN, SO, and perhaps an SH-radical- 
containing material. Sulfur-bearing minerals may also be 
possible constituents. Certain impact scars on Europa 
seem to contain saline hydrates mixed with the dominant 
constituent, water ice. Evaporite, hydrated minerals 
produce good spectral matches to various other features 
on Europa. The surface of Io of course does not contain 
water ice because of the active heat release by volcanism, 
but, besides silicate materials, SO, ice grains of size 
smaller than 500 um are almost everywhere. 

A current question of extreme scientific interest is 
whether Europa has a liquid water ocean which might 
harbor biology beneath the frozen surface. Theoretical 
models of Europa’s interior show that the same tidal 
heating mechanism that produces the volcanoes on Io 
may act to a lesser degree within Europa to maintain 
temperatures above the melting point of water ice at 
depths of a few tens of kilometers. At the present time, 
probably the most indicative evidence that a subsurface 
slushy or liquid layer exists consists of Galileo orbiter 
images, such as that of the Conamara region presented in 
figure 1. This image shows a chaotic surface terrain, in 
which it appears that a thin ice crust has been disrupted 


Figure 1. Image of an approximately 70 km x 30 km area of 
Europa in the Conamara region. The colours in the image have 
been enhanced for visibility. White and blue colours delineate 
regions which have been covered by fine dust particles ejected 
when the crater Pwyll was formed 1000 km to the south (north 
is to the top of the image, the Sun illuminates the surface from 
the right). Mineral contaminants are probably responsible for 
the reddish-brown colours. Crustal plates up to 13 km in size 
appear to have been created and then moved into new positions, 
indicating water or soft ice not too far beneath the surface at the 
time of crustal movement. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


and moved about in chunks, which resembles disruption 
of polar ice packs on the Earth during spring thaws. The 
size and geometry of the ‘chunks’ imply that a layer of 
liquid water or soft ice not too far below the surface 
could have driven the relative motions and rotations 
apparent in the image. The age of the surface has yet to 
be unambiguously determined. Depending on which 
model is used, crater counts imply either a young age of a 
few million years or less or, instead, a rather old surface 
of a few billion years. Currently, therefore, evidence 
exists that at least at some time in Europa’s history there 
existed a ‘slushy’ near-surface layer. The challenge now 
is to determine whether that is the present situation. 


Magnetosphere 

The magnetosphere of Jupiter is a vast system of plasma 
and magnetic fields that interacts in one way or another 
with every object in the jovian system (see JUPITER: 
MAGNETOSPHERE). The magnetic fields within the 
magnetosphere originate in Jupiter and the Galilean 
satellites and from plasma currents within the 
magnetosphere. The Galileo orbiter has provided key 
information about magnetospheric geometry which, when 
combined with previous spacecraft data, can be used to 
give an overall view of magetopause and bow shock shape 
and location. On the Sun side of Jupiter, the magnetic 
equatorial bow shock occurs at about 80R, (jovian radius), 
and the equatorial magnetopause is near 70 Rj, each value 
being somewhat time variable depending on solar wind 
conditions. Galileo measured magnetic perturbations near 
each of the Galilean satellites, as described above, 
indicating either internally generated magnetic fields or 
fields induced by magnetospheric plasma interactions with 
the satellites. New information obtained within Io’s plasma 
torus revealed a much stronger electromagnetic interaction 
with Io than had been expected (see IO: PLASMA TORUS). 
Europa has a tenuous neutral oxygen atmosphere that is 
both generated and removed by plasma _ sputtering 
processes that depend strongly on _ electrodynamic 
conditions near Europa. Comparison of modelling results 
with Galileo and other data implies an oxygen column 
density of about 5 x 10'8 mm”. 


Summary 
Galileo has been a pioneering mission in many ways. In 
spite of the early launch delays, the high gain antenna 
malfunction, and having to wait for many years to get to 
Jupiter, Galileo has provided a picture of the jovian 
system that is unprecedented. As with all great planetary 
missions, the results from Galileo form the basis for, and 
point the way to, further exploration of the jovian system. 
In 2001, the Galileo mission was given the go-ahead 
for a mission extension that includes five more fly-bys of 
the Jovian moons before a final plunge into the crushing 
pressure of the giant planet’s atmosphere. Galileo’s 
mission has previously been extended twice. On 25 May 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galileo Mission to Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2001, Galileo passed about 123 km (76 mi) above 
Callisto. in August 2001, the Galileo spacecraft flew past 
the north pole of Jupiter’s moon Io, passing through a 
swarm of sulfurous particles hurled into space by a 
previously unknown volcano. Scientists had not expected 
the spacecraft to encounter volcanic ‘ash’. A different 
volcano named Tvashtar had been lofting a plume seven 
months earlier, but Galileo saw no sign of that plume 
during its Io flyby in early August. Instead material was 
erupting from a previously unknown volcano just 600 km 
(370 mi) from Tvashtar. On October 1, 2001, at 0123 
UT, the Galileo spacecraft approached the closest yet to 
the surface of Io, to within 181 km (112 m1) of ground 
level near Io’s south pole. 

In 2002, having completed its imaging mission, 
Galileo will continue studies of Jupiter’s massive 
magnetic field with seven instruments. In November 
2002, it will swing closer to Jupiter than ever before, 
dipping within about 500 km (300 mi) of the moon 
Amalthea. Scientists will use Galileo measurements to 
determine the mass and density of Amalthea. They will 
also study dust particles as Galileo flies through Jupiter’s 
gossamer rings and seek new details of the magnetic 
forces and the densities of charged particles close to the 
planet. Galileo’s final orbit will take an elongated loop 
away from Jupiter. Then, in August 2003, the spacecraft 
will head back for a direct impact and burn up as it 
ploughs into Jupiter’s 60000 km-thick atmosphere. 


Breaking news update (30 April 2002) 
The Galileo spacecraft resumed gathering scientific 
information at about 4:00 Universal Time on January 18, 
2002, after commands radioed from Earth took the Jupiter 
orbiter out of the passive standby mode it entered on the 
previous day. On Thursday January 17 at about 13:41 
Universal Time, while making a close approach to 
Jupiter’s innermost Galilean moon, Io, the spacecraft 
detected a computer reset, which caused it to enter a ‘safe’ 
mode. In this mode, onboard fault protection software 
instructs the spacecraft cameras and science instruments to 
stop taking data and places them in a safe state awaiting 
further instructions from the ground. The reset was 
apparently caused by exposure to the intense radiation 
environment at Io’s distance from Jupiter. Since the 
spacecraft began orbiting Jupiter in 1995, it has endured a 
cumulative radiation exposure about three-and-a-half times 
what it was originally designed to withstand. After 
resuming operations, Galileo passed within about 102 km 
(63 mi) of Io. Planned observations for the remainder of 
the spacecraft’s current swing near Jupiter include a series 
of images of the planet’s atmosphere, a farewell color 
study of its icy moon Europa and navigational imaging of 
the small moon Amalthea. 

A recent image from NASA’s Galileo spacecraft adds 
evidence to a theory that Callisto may hold an 
underground ocean. The image shows a part of Callisto’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


surface directly opposite from the Valhalla basin where 
Callisto was punched by a major collision. The opposition 
point shows no effect from the impact. Points opposite 
major impact features on some similar-size worlds, such as 
Mercury and Earth’s Moon, show lumpy terrain attributed 
to seismic shocks from the distant impacts. The new image 
is consistent with a 1990s’ model proposing that a liquid 
layer could be acting as a shock absorber inside Callisto. 


Bibliography 

Detailed descriptions of the Galileo spacecraft, its trajectory to 
Jupiter, and the instruments on the probe and orbiter can be 
found in articles appearing in 


1992 Space Sci. Rev. 60 (1-4) 


Various observations conducted during the transit to Jupiter 
were reported in the following publications. Regarding the 
flyby of Venus, see articles in 


1991 Science 253 1457-612 
Regarding Earth-Moon, see 
Belton et al 1994 Science 264 1112-15 


Two special issues reporting the Galileo observations of 
asteroids Gaspra and Ida were, respectively 


1994 Icarus 107 1-97 
1996 Icarus 120 1-245 


Regarding Galileo observations of the impact of Shoemaker— 
Levy 9 with Jupiter, see 


Hord et al 1995 Geophys. Res. Lett. 22 1565-8 
Weismann et al 1995 Abstr. Lunar Planet. Sci. C. 26 1483 


Science results and parameters from the probe entry and 
descent into Jupiter’s atmosphere were first published in 


1996 Science 272 837-60 
Orbiter results at Jupiter were first published in 
1996 Science 274 377-403 


Subsequently many papers have appeared discussing Galileo 
observations. The reader is referred here to three special journal 
issues which should provide good starting points to pursue a 
particular question. Two special issues 


1998 J. Geophys. Res.-Planet 103 (E10) 
1998 J. Geophys. Res.-Planet 103 (E9) 


provide comprehensive analyses of probe and magnetospheric 
observations, respectively. Remote sensing results from the 
Galileo orbiter appear in 


1998 Icarus 135 (1) 


Richard Young 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Galle, Johann Gottfried (1812-1910) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galle, Johann Gottfried (1812-1910) 


Astronomer, born in Pabsthaus, Germany. In 1846, at 
the Berlin Observatory, he discovered the planet Neptune, 
whose position had been calculated by LEverRIER. Leverrier 
had written to Galle asking him to search for the ‘new 
planet’ at a predicted location. Galle, together with 
his assistant HEINRICH D’ARREST, began a search on the 
same night that they received the letter. At D’Arrest’s 
suggestion, Galle used the latest star chart that had only 
just been produced by Encke. In 30 minutes they had 
located a star not on the map, confirming that it was the 
new planet on the following night by its motion relative to 
the other stars. Galle wrote to Leverrier, saying, ‘Monsieur, 
the planet of which you indicated the position really 
exists’. Leverrier replied, ‘I thank you for the alacrity with 
which you applied my instructions. We are thereby, thanks 
to you, definitely in possession of a new world’. Galle 
also detected Saturn’s C-ring and observed minor planets, 
attempting to determine the solar distance through the 
observation of the close approach of one (see DAVID GILL, 
HAROLD SPENCER JONES). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma Draconis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gamma Draconis 


Sometimes known by its ancient name Eltanin (or Etamin), 
the ‘Head of the Dragon’, from its description in the 
revision of Ptolemy’s Syntaxis published by Ulugh Beigh in 
the fifteenth century. The star has an apparent magnitude 
of 2.24 and is of spectral type K5III. At a distance of 148 
light-years, it has a parallax of 0.022” and an absolute 
magnitude of —1.0. 

This second-magnitude star was, for nearly 300 years, 
of considerable importance to positional astronomers, 
especially those observing from the Royal Observatory 
at Greenwich. Due to its declination (51° 29.3’) being 
approximately equal to the latitude of Greenwich (51° 
28.6’), it transits there very close to the zenith: 4’ north 
of the zenith in the time of the first Astronomer Royal, 
John Flamsteed (1646-1719), and only 2’ north by the time 
of the seventh Astronomer Royal, G B Airy (1801-92), who 
described it as ‘the birth star of modern astronomy’. 

Transiting zenithally is very advantageous, for not 
only does it simplify the telescope mounting required, and 
hence improves stability, but the positional errors caused 
by the effects of atmospheric refraction are zero at the 
zenith. These advantages had long been realized. In 1669 
Robert Hooke (1635-1703) set up a vertical telescope at 
Gresham College in the City of London, in an attempt to 
measure the annual parallax of y Draconis and hence its 
distance. It was not then realized how distant the stars are, 
the parallax of 0.022” would in fact have been impossible 
to measure with the instruments of Hooke’s time. In 1677 
Flamsteed had a 90-foot well dug at Greenwich, to act as 
the ‘tube’ of a vertical refractor to observe the star, but 
observations made with it were fraught with difficulty and 
proved to be of little use. 

In 1725 James Bradley (1693-1762), Savilian Professor 
of Astronomy at Oxford, wished to observe y Draconis for 
the same purpose. He joined the wealthy English amateur 
astronomer Samuel Molyneux (1689-1728) at Kew, where 
they used Molyneux’s 24.5 foot zenith sector by George 
Graham (1675-1752). Like Hooke, they obtained varying 
results for the zenith distance of the star at transit, but 
these did not seem to be explained by an annual variation 
due to parallax. Intrigued by these discrepancies, Bradley 
commissioned an excellent new 12.5 foot zenith sector 
from Graham, and set it up at his home in Wanstead. 
After making many more observations of the star Bradley 
arrived at the explanation of the variations in its observed 
position—and announced the discovery of the aberration 
of light. Further work led to his discovery of nutation, 
announced in 1748. Following his appointment as the 
third Astronomer Royal in 1742, Bradley persuaded the 
Admiralty to purchase his zenith sector so that these 
observations could be continued at Greenwich. 

As the principal ‘zenith star’ y Draconis continued 
to be observed at Greenwich for a further two centuries. 
In 1851 Airy introduced a reflex zenith tube of his own 
design to continue the observation of this and other much 
fainter zenithal stars, and visual observations of greatly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


increased accuracy were made with this instrument over 
the next 60 years. From 1911 to 1950 it was superseded by 
the floating zenith tube previously used at Cambridge by 
Bryan Cookson (1874-1909). 

The success of Airy’s design for the reflex zenith 
tube led to the development of the first photographic 
zenith tube by F E Ross of the US Naval Observatory, 
Washington, in 1911. A much improved and fully 
automated version was designed and installed at the 
Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux in 1955, 
the first of a network of similar instruments set up at 
major observatories around the world. These proved to 
be the most accurate instruments ever constructed for 
the astronomical determination of time and latitude—a 
remarkable tribute to Airy’s design, a century earlier, of 
an instrument specifically to observe y Draconis. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gamma Rays 


The most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation. 
Gamma rays have wavelengths shorter than 0.01 nanome- 
ters (10-! m) and individual photon energies greater than 
about 10° electron volts (eV). Despite their high energies 
and penetrating power, gamma rays from cosmic sources 
are absorbed well above ground level by the atmosphere. 
Even the most energetic gamma rays so far detected, with 
wavelengths of around 10~° nm and energies in excess of 
10’* eV, are absorbed by the time they have penetrated 
down to about 10 km above ground level. 

The term ‘gamma rays’ may also be written as 
‘y-rays’, where y is the Greek letter ‘gamma’. 


Seealso: electromagnetic radiation, electromagnetic spec- 
trum, electronvolt, gamma-ray astronomy, Geminga. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


Gamma-ray photons are the most energetic ones of the 
whole electromagnetic spectrum. Like all photons with 
wavelengths shorter than 10 nm, they are absorbed by 
the Earth’s atmosphere. Detection of y-ray emission 
from space requires then the use of stratospheric balloons, 
rockets and satellites, which became feasible only with the 
advent of the space era. 

The borderline between the spectral regions of x-rays 
and y-rays is sometimes placed at an energy of E ~ 
30 keV (wavelength 4 ~ 4.13 x 10-° cm or a frequency 
of v ~ 7.2 x 10'8 Hz). At lower energies, radiation from 
astrophysical sources is dominated by thermal emission 
(i.e. resulting from radiation in equilibrium with matter, 
in optically thick media), while at higher energies non- 
thermal emission prevails. Alternatively, the x—y-ray 
borderline may be placed at 511 keV (the energy equivalent 
of the electron rest mass); above this ‘limit’ electrons 
behave relativistically. In any case, the use of large 
photon collectors becomes impossible above a few tens 
of keV: photons have wavelengths smaller than typical 
interatomic distances in solids and cannot be reflected by 
any kind of mirror (contrary to what happens at longer 
wavelengths). 

The y-ray domain extends over 12 decades in energy, 
as much as all other spectral regions put together. 
However, above a few tens of GeV, the number of photons 
received from even the brightest sources is so small 
that their observation during the limited lifetime of a 
satellite is no longer possible (see VERY-HIGH-ENERGY GAMMA- 
RAY SOURCES). Those very high energy (VHE) photons 
are detected through their interaction with the Earth’s 
atmosphere, producing cascades of secondary particles. 

Astronomy in the y-ray domain faces several serious 
handicaps. 


e The impossibility of using large collectors to focus the 
y-ray photons implies that the detector itself should be 
as large as possible. 


e A detector placed outside the Earth’s atmosphere is 
constantly bombarded by energetic cosmic ray particles, 
coming from the outer space or trapped in the Van Allen 
radiation belts. The interactions of these particles with 
the detector induces very high backgrounds, which are 
difficult to attenuate with passive or active shielding. As 
a result, the sensitivity of y-ray detectors increases only 
as the square root of their collecting area. 


e Astrophysical sources emit generally very small num- 
bers of y-ray photons. Statistically significant detec- 
tions then require very long exposures, which are not 
always compatible with the generally short lifetime (a 
few years) of an observatory in space. 


These difficulties explain why y-ray astronomy is 
the last window of the electromagnetic spectrum to be 
opened to our observation of the universe. However, it 
has undergone a spectacular development in the 1990s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and has grown to a mature astrophysical discipline. It 
offers information that is impossible to obtain in other 
wavelengths, allowing us to probe the close surroundings 
of a black hole or the interiors of a supernova, to identify 
nuclear isotopes and to obtain clues to the origin and 
acceleration of cosmic rays, either in our Galaxy or in the 
very active central regions of remote galaxies. 


A short history of y-ray astronomy 

The opening of the y-ray window was preceded by a 
relatively long period of theoretical studies concerning 
the y-emissivity of potential astrophysical sources. Most 
of these ideas were put forward by scientists working in 
fields other than astronomy (particle and nuclear physics 
and cosmic ray physics). Following the detection of 
atomic hydrogen in the Galaxy (through its characteristic 
21 cm line; see RADIOASTRONOMY) Hayakawa realized in 
1952 that the interaction of cosmic RAYS with the hydrogen 
atoms of the interstellar medium should give rise to y-ray 
emission. Six years later, Morisson suggested two known 
radiosources (the CRAB NEBULA and CYGNUS A) as possible 
y-ray emitters. Thus, theoreticians realized quite early 
that relativistic particles could generate photon emission 
in both extremes of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

Progress in observational y-ray astronomy has been 
too slow to test those ideas, because of the smallness of 
early detectors and underestimated background fluxes. 
The first y-ray emission of extraterrestrial origin was 
detected during the solar flare of March 1958. However, it 
was only 10 yr later that y-ray emitters outside our solar 
system were detected: the US satellite OSO-3 (launched 
in 1961) recorded a few hundred photons of energy 
>50 MeV from the inner Galaxy, while a balloon-borne 
experiment detected photons in the 100-300 keV range 
from the direction of the Crab nebula. A few months later, 
radioastronomers discovered the CRAB PULSAR; Subsequent 
analysis of the y-emission from the Crab revealed a 
periodicity similar to that in the radio band. During a 
solar flare in August 1972, a spectrometer aboard the US 
satellite OSO-7 recorded the first y-ray spectrum of the 
Sun, revealing several lines of nuclear origin, as well as 
the electron-positron annihilation line at 511 keV. Also, 
the following year a US team reported the detection 
of y-ray bursts of extraterrestrial origin by the military 
satellites of the Vela series (launched to monitor the Earth’s 
atmosphere for nuclear explosions). 

After these early discoveries, the y-ray sky was 
explored in some detail in the 1970s by the US SAS- 
2 and the European COS-B satellites, which provided 
the first high-energy images of the Milky Way, detailed 
observations of the first known y-ray pulsars and the 
first detection of extragalactic y-ray sources. Extrasolar 
y-ray spectroscopy started in the same period, with 
the discovery of the electron—positron annihilation line 
from the galactic centre direction by a balloon-borne 
spectrometer. This discovery was confirmed in the 
early 1980s by a y spectrometer aboard the US HEAO-3 
satellite, which discovered also the first extrasolar y-ray 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


line emission of nuclear origin, namely the 1.8 MeV line of 
the radioactive nucleus 7°Al. 

The pace of discoveries slowed down in the 1980s, as a 
result mainly of the lack of dedicated y-ray satellites. The 
explosion of the supernova SN1987A in the nearby galaxy 
of the Large Magellanic Cloud on February 23 1987 offered 
the y-ray community an unprecedented opportunity: the 
SMM (Solar Maximum Mission) satellite, as well as several 
balloon borne instruments, detected y-ray lines from 
the decay of radioactive Co (predicted long ago to be 
the source of power for the late optical light curves of 
supernovae). Finally, the early 1990s constitute the golden 
era of y-ray astronomy, thanks to the discoveries of the 
Soviet-French SIGMA mission (see GRANAT) and the US 
COMPTON GAMMA RAY OBSERVATORY (CGRO). 


Emission processes of y-ray photons 

Nature creates y-ray photons in a variety of ways. If the 
temperature of the environment is high enough (>10° K), 
y-photons are produced as thermal emission of the 
astrophysical pLasMa and they generally have a blackbody 
spectrum. The interiors of stars in their advanced 
evolutionary stages reach such high temperatures, but 
they cannot be observed, because the star’s dense material 
makes it opaque to photons of all wavelengths. 

The close neighborhood of a strongly gravitating 
body, such as a black hole accreting matter from a 
companion star, may also reach high temperatures, as the 
gravitational energy of accreted matter turns into heat. 
The detection of y-ray photons produced in this way is 
a unique tool for studying the interactions of compact 
objects with their environment as well as their energetics. 

However, astrophysical y-rays are mainly produced 
by various non-thermal processes, involving in general 
the interactions of high-energy particles. For instance, 
high-energy electrons radiate y-rays by interacting 
electromagnetically with nuclei, photons or intense 
magnetic fields; the corresponding processes are known 
as bremsstrahlung, inverse Compton emission and 
synchroton emission, respectively, and they can obviously 
take place also in a high-temperature plasma. In addition 
nuclear interactions of protons with energies higher than 
~1.2 GeV produce secondary unstable particles, pions and 
mesons; y-ray photons are produced by the decay of some 
of these particles, the most prolific producers being the ae 
pions. The resulting y-ray spectrum has a characteristic 
maximum around 70 MeV (corresponding to half the rest- 
mass energy of 7°). 

All these thermal and non-thermal processes give rise 
to the emission of y-rays with a continuous spectrum of 
energy. There are also processes producing y-rays with 
discrete energies, involving in general the de-excitation 
of atomic nuclei. Just as the more familiar optical lines 
are caused by the electron transitions in atoms, nuclear 
lines result from the much more energetic transitions 
(typically, in the MeV range) between energy levels of 
the atomic nuclei. This makes y-ray spectroscopy an 
invaluable diagnostic tool for nuclear astrophysics, since 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


it allows for an unambiguous identification of isotopic 
species (radiation originating from electrons enables one 
in general, to identify chemical elements, but not isotopes). 

The excited nuclear states are populated either 
through the decay of an unstable nucleus or through high- 
energy nuclear interactions. In the former case, we obtain 
information about the synthesis of radioactive nuclei in 
various sites (mostly explosive ones such as supernovae) 
and the physics of these sites. In the latter case, we 
learn about the nature of the energetic particles (e.g. 
their composition, spectrum, acceleration mechanism etc). 
y-ray lines from the de-excitation of nuclei are routinely 
observed in the Sun’s photosphere during solar eruptions; 
in some cases, the nuclei are produced through neutron 
captures, in a medium sufficiently dense to favor these 
reactions, but also sufficiently thin to allow y-rays to 
escape. 

Finally, the annihilation of an electron and a positron 
also gives rise to emission in the y-ray domain. Positrons 
may be produced in astrophysical sites through the decay 
of z* pions or through the 6* decay of radioactive 
nuclei. Depending on the conditions they may annihilate 
directly with electrons or combine first with them to form 
positronium. In the former case (at high temperatures, 
T>10° K) two y-ray photons of energy 0.511 MeV are 
produced. In the latter case, the resulting emission 
depends on the state of positronium: in 25% of the cases it 
is formed in the para (singlet, ' Sp) state and two photons of 
0.511 MeV are again emitted; in 75% of the cases it is formed 
in the ortho (triplet, °S,) state and a continuous spectrum 
of three photons, each with an energy of <0.511 MeV, is 
then produced. 


The y-ray sky 

The poor resolving power of current y-ray instruments is 
one of the main problems in y-ray astronomy (see GAMMA- 
RAY TELESCOPES). Observations in this energy range usually 
define ‘error boxes’, regions of the sky where the source 
most probably lies. Instruments launched in the 1990s 
provide error boxes of ~1 arc min at low energies (the 
SIGMA telescope) and ~5—10 arc min at higher energies 
(the EGRET instrument aboard CGRO), to be compared 
with, for instance, ~0.1 arc sec in the visible. Identifying 
a source in these conditions is much more difficult than 
at other wavelengths. In the case of a variable source, 
the time-scale of variability sets an upper limit to the 
dimensions of the source (which cannot be larger than the 
distance light travels during this time-scale). 

The sources of the y-ray sky are extremely varied: 
some of them appear as ‘points’ (i.e. with angular 
dimensions smaller than the resolution of y-detectors) and 
others as extended sources, both in our Galaxy and in the 
remote universe. 

Stars on the main sequence (i.e. burning hydrogen 
in their cores) do not, in principle, radiate y-rays and 
only the Sun has been observed to do so sporadically. 
During their advanced evolutionary stages, some stars 
may eject radioactive isotopes through their powerful 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stellar winds and become y-ray emitters (red giants, 
Wolf-Rayet stars). However, radioactivity is mostly 
produced during stellar explosions (supernovae and, to 
a lesser extent, novae). On the other hand, stellar 
remnants may produce copious amounts of y-rays in 
several cases: rotating neutron stars may converta fraction 
of their rotational energy into high-energy photons (y-ray 
pulsars), while accreting black holes convert the energy 
of accreted matter into low-energy y-rays in their vicinity 
and present a steady or variable emission. Some of these 
objects produce jets of high-energy particles which interact 
with their environment to produce y-rays. Finally, the 
emission mechanism of the mysterious y-ray bursts is not 
understood yet, although it—most probably—involves 
compact objects (neutron stars and black holes). 


The Sun 

Since the first detection of its y-ray emission, in 1958, 
the Sun has been regularly monitored by US, Soviet and 
Japanese satellites (OSO, HEAO, Prognoz, SMM, Hinotori, 
Yohkoh, CGRO). y-rays are emitted continuously, but 
particularly during a brief period of intense activity, 
associated with the 11 yr cycle of solar flares (see SOLAR 
FLARES: GAMMA RAYS). During this period the energy stored 
in unstable magnetic configurations of the solar surface 
layers is suddenly liberated; particles are accelerated to 
high energies and their interactions produce y-rays. The 
study of the y-ray emission provides information on 
the acceleration sites, their physical conditions and their 
composition. 

The low-energy part of the continuum y-ray 
spectrum of the Sun results from bremsstrahlung 
emission of accelerated electrons interacting with the solar 
atmosphere. At higher energies (100 MeV) part of the 
emission is due to the decay of 2°s produced by the 
interactions of high-energy accelerated protons. 

The de-excitation of atomic nuclei (excited by high- 
energy collisions) gives rise to prompt y-ray lines, which 
may be narrow (when ambient nuclei are excited by 
energetic protons and a particles) or broad (when fast 
nuclei are excited by ambient protons and a particles). 
The most intense narrow lines are those at 4.438 MeV 
and 6.129 MeV, resulting from the de-excitation of the 
abundant *C and 'O nuclei, respectively; the lines 
of several other nuclei (SN, Ne, “Mg, *Si and 
5°Fe) have also been detected (figure 1). The relative 
intensities of these lines provide information on the 
isotopic composition of the Sun’s surface. 

The most intense solar y-ray line, at an energy of 
2.223 MeV, results from the de-excitation of deuterium 
nuclei (D), produced by neutron captures on protons; since 
free neutrons are unstable (they decay to protons within 
10 min) the ones involved in the formation of deuterium 
are ejected by accelerated heavy nuclei. The ejected 
neutrons have to slow down to the thermal velocities of 
the ambient medium before being captured by the protons 
and thus they give rise to delayed y-ray line emission. 
The delay time (about 100 s) provides information on the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Photons MeV~! em~? 


3 4 § 6 
Energy (MeV) 


Figure 1. y-ray spectrum of a solar flare modeled by Murphy 
etal (1991). 


ambient density (~10’” particles cm~*) and the location of 
the emission site in the solar photosphere (at a depth of 
~300 km). 

The second most intense line observed in the 
solar y-ray spectrum results from the annihilation of 
positrons with electrons. Positrons are produced by 
B* decay of short-lived radioactive nuclei and of x* 
pions (both produced in high-energy interactions). Before 
annihilating, positrons have to slow down and their y-ray 
emission is delayed (as in the case of neutrons). 


Stellar explosions and remnants 

Radioactive nuclei are produced by thermonuclear 
reactions in high-density environments, which are opaque 
to y-rays. The photons of the radioactive decays interact 
with the ambient electrons and lose energy via Compton 
scattering; the medium is heated and the energy is 
ultimately radiated at longer wavelengths. Only in the 
case of a site violently expanding after an explosion 
(SUPERNOVAE, NOVAE) or suffering mass loss through a stellar 
wind (WOLF-RAYET STARS or stars in the asymptotic giant 
branch stage) can the y-ray photons escape, since the 
opacity decreases with decreasing density. 

The characteristic energy of escaping y-ray lines 
enables one to identify isotopic species, while their 
intensity provides information on the amounts that have 
been synthesized and on the physical conditions of the 
corresponding stellar zones. The shape of the lines may 
give information on the structure (velocity and density 
profiles) of the stellar ejecta. These properties make 
y-ray spectroscopy a unique tool for nuclear and stellar 
astrophysics. 

These theoretical ideas, put forward mostly by 
D D Clayton in the 1960s, were spectacularly confirmed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in 1987: the 0.847 MeV and 1.238 MeV lines of the decay 
of Co were observed in SUPERNOVA 19874, a Massive star 
(20M.) that exploded in the nearby galaxy of the Large 
Magellanic Cloud. Their detection confirmed that Fe, the 
most strongly bound stable nucleus in nature, is produced 
in the form of unstable °°Ni (through the decay chain *°Ni 
—> ®©Co —> Fe). It also confirmed that the observed late 
optical luminosity of supernovae (decreasing by a factor 
of ~2 every 75 days) is due to the energy released by the 
radioactive decay of *°Co (which has a half-life of 77 days). 
Finally, the appearance of the y-ray lines about 6 months 
earlier than expected from theoretical models suggested 
that some of the °°Ni nuclei, produced in the dense inner 
zones of the star, had been mixed into the outer layers. 

The extraordinary opportunity offered by SN1987A 
was due to its proximity; indeed, it was the first supernova 
visible to the naked eye in the past four centuries, 
since supernovae are mostly detected in distant galaxies. 
Moreover, theory suggests that exploding massive stars 
(characterized as supernovae of type II or SNII) produce 
moderate amounts of °*°Ni (~0.1M.) and remain opaque 
to y-rays for a long time (~1 yr, i.e. until the radioactivity 
of Co has dropped to low levels). Supernovae of 
another class, SNIa, are much brighter y-ray line emitters. 
They are white dwarfs in binary systems, undergoing 
a thermonuclear explosion, which is triggered by the 
accretion of mass from their companion star; they produce 
~10 times more °°Ni and become transparent to y-rays 
much earlier than SNII, because of their smaller envelope 
mass. Unfortunately, observations show that SNIa are 
less frequent than SNII and their occurrence in a closeby 
galaxy is unexpected, on statistical grounds. The first 
SNIa to be (marginally) detected in the light of the °°Co 
lines was SN1991T in the Virgo cluster of galaxies, at an 
estimated distance of 55 million light- years (by CGRO). 
Future y-ray line observations of extragalactic SNIa will 
provide important information on the physics of those 
poorly understood objects. 

Long-lived radioactive nuclei can emit characteristic 
y-ray lines hundreds or thousands of years after the 
supernova explosion, while they are evolving in an 
environment transparent to y-rays. The 1.156 line of “Ti 
(half-life 60 yr) has been detected by CGRO in the remnant 
of Cas-A, presumably a massive star that exploded about 
300 yr ago, at a distance of 7000 light-years from the 
Earth. The “Ti emission may help to reveal remnants 
of recent supernova explosions that are unobserved in 
other wavelengths, because of obscuration by surrounding 
material (i.e. dense molecular clouds or layers of dust). 

Finally, for tens of thousands of years after the 
explosion the SUPERNOVA REMNANT may radiate high-energy 
y-rays, produced by accelerated electrons and protons 
interacting with the ambient medium. The Crab remnant, 
observed since the late 1960s, as well as five other sources 
detected by CGRO, belongs to this class of y-ray emitters. 


y-ray pulsars 


PULSARS are rapidly rotating neutron stars, first detected in 
the late 1960s through their periodic radioemission. More 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


than 550 radio pulsars are known to day, with periods 
ranging from a few ms to several seconds. Before the 
launch of CGRO, only the Crab and VELA PULSARS were 
known to emit periodically in the y-ray domain. Since 
then five more objects have been added to the list and all 
of them (except Geminga) emit also in the radiofrequencies 
(figure 2). 

The fact that only a small fraction of the radio 
pulsars emits in y-rays suggests that a special environment 
is required for y-rays to be produced. The required 
energy is presumably provided by the rotational energy 
of the neutron star, which slows down in the process; 
however, the emission mechanism as well as the role 
of the magnetic field and of the pulsar environment are 
not well understood. A hint may lie in the fact that 
the younger pulsars are more active in the low-energy 
(~1 MeV) domain than the older ones, which have in 
general weaker magnetic fields and emit essentially in the 
>100 MeV range. 

GEMINGA is the only known pulsar with no detectable 
radio emission. Many years after its detection in y-rays 
(by SAS-2), it represented an enigma, since it had not a 
counterpart in any other wavelength. Its period (~0.237 s) 
was first measured in x-rays by the German satellite 
ROSAT and confirmed in y-rays by CGRO. Its distance, 
evaluated in the early 1990s to ~100 light-years, makes it 
the closest known neutron star. 


Accreting compact objects 
NEUTRON STARS and BLACK HOLES are the end products of 
the evolution of massive stars and they may be found in 
binary systems (as happens with about half of the stars we 
observe in the Galaxy). Matter from the companion star 
may then be accreted onto the compact object, forming 
around it an ACCRETION DISK. As matter spirals in, heat 
is generated at the expense of gravitational energy and 
the inner disk may reach high temperatures. According 
to theory, disks around neutron stars may never reach 
temperatures higher than T ~ 10° K (corresponding to 
thermal emission in the x-rays), whereas disks around 
black holes may become much hotter (T ~ 10° K) and 
radiate in the low-energy y-ray domain, up to a few 
hundreds of keV. y-ray observations would allow then 
neutron stars to be distinguished from stellar black holes. 

Observations with SIGMA and CGRO allowed a few 
black hole candidates in our Galaxy to be identified, on the 
basis of their y-ray signature. Some of the sources show 
steady emission, while others present a variable behaviour 
(presumably as a result of variation in the accretion rate or 
of instabilities developed in their accretion disk). A typical 
example of this class of transient sources (or y-ray novae) 
is the source GRS 1124-68, alias Nova Muscae. Detected 
in January 1991, it has been observed in radio, x-rays and 
y-rays, its luminosity in the last of these energy ranges 
exceeding that of the Crab (which is the strongest y-ray 
source in the sky). 

An extremely important manifestation of variable 
y-ray activity is the excess emission detected in the 300- 
600 keV range from the source 1E1740.7-2942, located 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


GAMMA-RAY PULSARS 


CRAB PULSAR PSR 1509-58 VELA PULSAR 


OPTICAL OPTICAL 


OPTICAL 


NO KNOWN PULSE 


w 
= 
Ee 
rs 
°o 
z 
2 
i 
o 
z 
P=) 
ve 
< 
5 
lu 
= 
= 


GAMMA RAY GAMMA RAY GAMMA RAY 


0 5 1.0 0 5 1,0 0 5 


PSR 1706-44 GEMINGA PSR 1055-52 


RADIO 


NO KNOWN PULSE 


OPTICAL 


NO KNOWS PULSE 


OPTICAL 


NO KNOWN PULSE 


OPTICAL 


NO KNOWN PULSE 


X-RAY 
NO KNOWN PULSE 


GAMMA RAY 


1.0 0 5 1.0 0 5 10 0 5 1.0 


PERIOD ~ 33 mSEC “PERIOD ~ 150 mSEC PERIOD ~ 89 mSEC PERIOD ~ 102 mSEC PERIOD ~ 237 MSEC PERIOD ~ 197 mSEC 


TIME IN FRACTIONS OF A PULSE PERIOD 


Figure 2. The folded light curves (intensity as a function of time) of various y-ray pulsars at different energies (from radiowaves to 
y-rays). A straight line means no known pulses. Explaining the variety of pulse shapes and energy dependences is a challenge to 


theorists. 


in the galactic center region; observed for 2 days in 
October 1990 by SIGMA, this ‘paroxysmic’ activity has 
been interpreted in terms of electron—positron annihilation 
in the vicinity of a stellar mass black hole. Follow up radio- 
observations of the source revealed radio-emitting jets, 
presumably due to synchrotron emission of accelerated 
electrons. This behaviour (compact ‘erupting’ y-ray 
source + radio jets moving at relativistic velocities) has also 
been observed in a few other sites in our Galaxy. These 
objects form the family of ‘micro-quasars’ (by analogy 
with the much more powerful and distant Quasars) and 
represent ideal laboratories for the study of gravitational 
and relativistic astrophysics. 


Diffuse y-ray emission in the galaxy 
Some of the ‘products’ of stellar activity may pervade 
the interstellar medium and give rise to diffuse y-ray 
emission. This is the case of cosmic rays (energetic 
particles, accelerated by supernova explosions), long-lived 
radionuclei (decaying away from their production sites) 
and positrons. 

Diffuse y-ray emission from the Galaxy was first 
detected in 1968 by OSO-7 and galactic maps were 
provided by COS-B and CGRO. The emission correlates, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in general, with features of the galaxy known from 
observations in other wavelengths: the molecular ‘ring’ 
at a galactocentric distance of 10000-15000 light-years, 
the spiral arms or a few molecular clouds, i.e. sites of 
rich gaseous content and active star formation. The 
analysis of the local y-ray spectrum shows that at low 
energies (1-30 MeV) it results mainly from bremsstrahlung 
radiation of cosmic ray electrons; at higher energies, the 
emission of 2r°s dominates. The LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD is 
the only other normal galaxy where y-ray emission of this 
type has been detected. 

During its million-year lifetime, radioactive *°Al 
from more than 10000 Wolf—Rayet stars and supernova 
explosions has been accumulated in the Galaxy’s disk. Its 
characteristic 1.8 MeV line has been detected by HEAO- 
3 in 1984 and mapped by CGRO as diffuse emission 
along the galactic plane (figure 3). The HEAO-3 detection 
revealed that stars continue to enrich the Galaxy with their 
nucleosynthesis products. The galactic 7°Al map reveals, 
better than any other tracer, where the sites of current 
nucleosynthesis lie in the Milky Way. 

Balloon-borne spectrometers detected in the 1970s the 
electron—positron annihilation line (at 0.511 MeV) from 
the Galactic center direction. For some time it was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


COMPTEL 1.8 MeV, 5 Years Observing Time 


\ \ Os in 
Ni} ©) 
\ 
\ . oe) 
\ a 
. ~ 


Uwe Oberlack 
PhD Thesis 1997 


>) J 
& 


/ oO bi tfe / 4 


Figure 3. Map of the Galaxy in 1.8 MeV (*°Al line). Data from COMPTEL on CGRO. 


thought that this emission was variable, but this variability 
was presumably due to the different properties of the 
instruments used. CGRO established the existence of 
diffuse (and steady) 0.511 MeV emission in the Milky 
Way, with ~80% coming from the galactic bulge and the 
remaining ~20% from the disk. Positrons produced by the 
B* decay of radionuclides, such as 7°Al, *°Co and “Sc, are 
(most probably) at the origin of this galactic emission. 


y-ray bursts 

Cosmic y-ray bursts (GRBs), discovered in the late 1960s 
by the Vela satellites, are flashes of high-energy radiation 
which appear at random times from random directions, 
briefly dominating the y-ray sky (from a few milliseconds 
to a few seconds) and then fading away. For more than a 
quarter of a century their nature remained a mystery: their 
non-thermal y-ray emission presented no regularities at 
all, they did not seem to radiate in other wavelengths and 
it was impossible to evaluate their distances or to associate 
any known object with them. 

The situation improved considerably in the 1990s. 
The BATSE instrument aboard CGRO detected about 1 
burst per day for several years and established that their 
distribution in the sky is isotropic (figure 4). Such a 
distribution is naturally obtained from sources located 
at cosmological distances (several 108-10? light-years); in 
that case, their observed frequency implies about one burst 
per galaxy per million years, i.e. they represent events 
much rarer than supernovae. The Italian—Dutch x-ray 
satellite BeppoSAX allowed for an accurate location of 
GRBs, and in several cases relatively long-lived emission 
(‘afterglow’) at x-ray, optical and radio wavelengths was 
detected. In at least one case the afterglow optical spectra 
showed redshifted absorption lines due to the presence of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


remote intervening gas clouds, supporting the idea that 
the GRB is at a cosmological distance. 

To be detectable at large distances, GRBs must radiate 
huge amounts of energy, about 10°8 erg on average. 
Collisions involving neutron stars and/or black holes may 
produce such energies, mainly in the form of neutrinos, 
but the exact mechanism of the energy conversion to 
y-rays is not elucidated yet. ‘Fireball’ models, involving 
material expanding at relativistic energies, seem the most 
promising at present. 


Active galactic nuclei and blazars 

The first detection of an extragalactic y-ray source, 
the BRIGHT QUASAR 3C 273, was reported in 1978 by a 
team working with the COS-B satellite. Several other 
objects were subsequently detected in the low-energy 
y-ray band (<1 MeV) and identified with the highly 
variable, moderately distant (redshift z < 0.05) AcTIVE 
GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGNs). In the 1990s, the EGRET 
instrument aboard CGRO detected high-energy y-ray 
emission (> 100 MeV) from several dozens of powerful and 
distant (z > 2) sources, a class of AGNs now known as 
BLAZARS; these objects radiate in their ‘active’ phase more 
energy in high-energy y-rays (10% erg s~! on average) than 
in all other wavelengths. 

The short time-scale of variability of AGNs (a few 
days to weeks for blazars), combined with their high 
y-luminosities, suggests that accretion onto a massive 
black hole ((10°-10°)Mo) is the most probable power 
source. This idea could explain, in a unified framework, 
both the low-energy y-emission of AGNs and the high- 
energy y-emission of blazars. In the former case, the 
y-rays are emitted from the hot inner regions of the 
accretion disk surrounding the black hole (as is the case 
with accreting stellar mass black holes in our Galaxy); in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2000 BATSE Gamma-—Ray Bursts 


Galactic Coordinates 


Figure 4. Isotropic distribution of GRBs in the sky. 


100 


a 
o 


E I, (keV em’s' sr) 


_ 


0,1 


2 3 4 5 


10 10 10 10 


E (keV) 


Figure 5. Diffuse extragalactic y-ray background. Data 
compiled by Paul and Laurent (1998). 


the latter case y-rays are emitted by relativistic particles 
moving in diametrically opposite highly collimated jets 
(the intensity of the emission being enhanced along the 
direction of motion). This unified scheme seems able to 
explain not only the y-ray properties of AGNs and blazars, 
but also their observed features in other wavelengths. 


Diffuse extragalactic background 

Since the early days of y-ray astronomy, observations 
established the presence of a uniform, diffuse, isotropic 
y-ray emission in the sky, most probably of extragalactic 
origin (figure 5). The most natural explanation for this 
diffuse y-ray background involves the contribution of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


numerous extragalactic high-energy sources, unresolved 
by current instruments. In the low-energy range 
(<300 keV), the observed y-ray background spectrum 
can be explained by the collective emission of Seyfert 
galaxies (a class of AGNs), while in the high-energy 
range (~100 MeV) it is the collective emission of blazars 
that prevails; indeed, in both cases, the observed spectra 
of resolved individual sources compare favourably with 
the observed diffuse spectrum. Finally, the CGRO 
found no excess diffuse emission in the intermediate 
range of ~1 MeV, contrary to all previous reports 
(obtained by instruments with underestimated and 
difficult to assess instrumental ‘noise’). Despite that, 
this intermediate spectral region is not satisfactorily 
explained by the combination of Seyferts and blazars and 
another source seems to be required; the superposition of 
redshifted nuclear y-ray lines from remote SNIa (mostly 
from the decay of Co) seems the most promising 
candidate. 


Bibliography 
Most of the results of y-ray astronomy in the 1990s can 
be found in the Proceedings of the CGRO and INTEGRAL 
symposia, held alternatively every two years. 

A good recent overview (in French!) is: 


Paul J and Laurent Ph 1998 Astronomie Gamma Spatiale 
(London: Gordon and Breach) 


Some other selected references are as follows. 


e The Sun: 
Murphy R, Ramaty R, Kozlovsky B and Reames D 1991 
Astrophys. J., 371 793 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e Accreting compact objects: 

Mandrou P et al 1994 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 92 343 

e GRBs: 

Fishman G and Meagan C 1995 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
33 415 

Meszaros P and Rees M 1993 Astrophys. J. 405 278 

e Radioactivity from stellar explosions: 

Diehl R and Timmes F 1998 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 110 
637 

e Diffuse y-ray line emission in the Galaxy: 

Prantzos N and Diehl R 1996 Phys. Rep. 2611 

e Diffuse y-ray continuum emission in the Galaxy: 

Strong A and Mattox J 1996 Astron. & Astrophys. 308 L21 

e AGNs: 

Dermer C 1995 The Gamma-Ray Sky with CGRO and SIGMA 
ed M Signore, P Salati and G Vedrenne (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) p 39 

e Diffuse extragalactic y-ray background: 

Zdziarski A 1996 Mon. Not. Royal Astron. Soc. 281 L9 


Nikos Prantzos 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gamma-Ray Bursts 


The serendipitous discovery of cosmic gamma-ray bursts 
(GRBs) was announced in 1973, based on the data of the 
military Vela spacecraft, whose purpose was to monitor 
the limited nuclear test ban treaty. However, it was not 
until the late 1990s that a clear idea of their origin was 
obtained. A GRB is a short-duration pulse of gamma 
radiation (<20 keV to energies up to tens of GeV). With 
instruments of sufficient sensitivity, about one burst per 
day can be observed. GRB durations range from 10 ms to 
1000 s or more, but an average is about 10 s. For this short 
time, they may be the brightest objects in the gamma-ray 
sky. An example is shown in figure 1. Each burst comes 
from a unique, random direction; no two events have 
ever been detected from exactly the same direction. The 
distribution of burst sources on the sky is completely 
isotropic (figure 2). These properties, which are quite 
unlike those of typical gamma-ray sources (see gamma- 
ray astronomy) explain, in part, why progress in under- 
standing the origin of bursts has been slow: Gamma-ray 
telescopes tend to have small fields of view and provide 
relatively coarse location information, making it imprac- 
tical to monitor the entire sky and provide precise direc- 
tional information with a single detector. The main detec- 
tion techniques to date have been interplanetary net- 
works and arrays of large-area detectors such as the 
Burst and Transient Source Experiment aboard the 
Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. However, the inher- 
ent delays in the former, and the relatively coarse local- 
izations provided by the latter, hampered efforts to 
detect burst sources at other wavelengths. 

A breakthrough was achieved in 1997 by the 
Italian—Dutch BeppoSAX spacecraft, which carried both a 
wide-field x-ray camera and narrow-field x-ray tele- 
scopes. The wide-field camera made it possible to detect 
and locate bursts in the 2-10 keV energy range with a pre- 
cision of several arcminutes. The spacecraft could then be 
slewed within hours to view the position of the burst 


COUNTS/SECOND 


SECONDS 


Figure 1. The time history of a particularly long, intense 
gamma-ray burst on 29 October 1996, as measured by the GRB 
detector aboard the Ulysses spacecraft. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


2512 BATSE Gamma-Ray Bursts 


Fluence, 50-300 keV (ergs cm”) 


Figure 2. Locations of gamma-ray bursts detected by the Burst 
and Transient Source Experiment aboard the Compton Gamma- 
Ray Observatory. A galactic coordinate system has been used, 
and the bursts have been color coded according to their intensi- 
ties. The precisions of the locations are typically several degrees. 
From www.batse.msfc.nasa.gov /batse/. 


source with the narrow-field telescopes. It was discovered 
that, long after the burst had disappeared in gamma-rays, 
a fading x-ray afterglow was present (figure 3). Rapid 
optical observations reveal similar afterglows at visible 
wavelengths, and radio observations show that slowly 
fading radio afterglows are also present. Deeper optical 
observations usually result in the detection of a faint host 
galaxy at the site of the burst with a typical redshift of 1 
(implying distances of billions of light-years); it is often 
the case that the optical afterglow outshines its host 
galaxy for at least several days. Figure 4 shows an exam- 
ple of an optical afterglow and its host galaxy. These 
observations have established that the distance scale of 
cosmic GRBs is cosmological. This explains their perfect- 
ly isotropic sky distribution, which had been a controver- 
sial clue to their origin for many years. About two dozen 
bursts now have well-established redshift measurements 
(the largest being z=4.5). 


28 Feb 1997 


GhO2MISs FHORMOOs GhOimazs Shoimws 


3 Mar 1997 


Sho2m36s GhO2mOds Shor 


=n +12°00'00" 


Figure 3. The first x-ray afterglow. The images show a 
fading 2-10 keV x-ray source, detected by the Narrow 
Field Instruments of the BeppoSAX spacecraft. From 
www.asdc.asi.it/bepposax /. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Hubble Space Telescope images of GRB990123. OT is the 
optical transient associated with the burst, A is the galaxy and Al 
is a bright knot of emission associated with the galaxy. From 
www.astro.caltech.edu / ~jsb /GRB / grb990123 / index.html. 


If GRB sources emitted their radiation isotropically, 
their total energy output would be well above 1053 erg 
and it would be difficult to find viable sources for the 
energy. However, it seems more likely, both from a theo- 
retical and from an observational viewpoint, that at least 
the gamma radiation is beamed into a relatively small 
cone, reducing the energy output by some two orders of 
magnitude. Two possible energy sources are collapsars 
(also known as hypernovae) and the merger of two com- 
pact objects in a binary system (such as two neutron 
stars). Observational evidence suggests that the former 
phenomenon is the one most likely to be responsible for 
the bursts whose optical counterparts and host galaxies 
have been studied. 

In the collapsar or hypernova scenario, a massive 
star (approximately 30 solar masses) exhausts its nuclear 
fuel supply and collapses, forming a black hole sur- 
rounded by an accretion disk. Matter from the disk falls 
into the black hole and an intense magnetic field helps to 
extract energy from the system. Shells of matter are dri- 
ven outwards at velocities very close to the speed of 
light. Collisions between these shells form shock waves 
which accelerate electrons to high energies and the elec- 
trons radiate the gamma-rays which constitute the GRB. 
As the shells continue to move outward, they eventually 
encounter a denser medium (either the interstellar medi- 
um or possibly a region filled with matter which was 
ejected from the progenitor star in earlier phases). Here 
they again form shock waves which accelerate electrons, 
and these electrons radiate the longer-lived radio, opti- 
cal, and x-ray afterglows. This model is often referred to 
as the ‘standard fireball model’. 

The light curve of the optical afterglow decays as a 
power law with time. However, in several cases, there is 
clear evidence for a temporary departure from a power 
law (a ‘bump’ in the light curve). In most of these cases, 
a possible explanation is the emergence of a supernova- 
like component in the light curve, which is initially 
obscured by the intense optical light immediately fol- 
lowing the burst. (In fact, in one instance, a gamma-ray 
burst was found to be spatially and temporally consis- 
tent with a known supernova, 1998bw.) Such a compo- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


nent might be expected in the hypernova scenario. In one 
case, however, an alternative explanation is gravitational 
lensing of the light by a foreground galaxy. 

For all the bursts whose optical afterglows and host 
galaxies have been detected, the burst source lies well 
within the galaxy, and it often appears to be located with- 
in the galaxy’s star-forming regions. The galaxies them- 
selves appear to be normal galaxies, indistinguishable 
from their neighbors at similar distances; there is no indi- 
cation that any are active galaxies. 

For almost all the bursts with x-ray follow-up mea- 
surements, fading x-ray counterparts have been detect- 
ed. However, only about 50% of the bursts display radio 
or optical counterparts, despite sensitive searches. The 
reasons for this are not well understood, but possible 
causes include heavily obscured sources, very high red- 
shift sources and sources which are outside of their host 
galaxies. The last explanation might be appropriate for 
the merging compact object model; these binary systems 
can be ejected from their host galaxies long before they 
merge and, lacking a surrounding interstellar medium, 
might not generate the shocks needed to produce long 
wavelength afterglows. 

Although some of the basic physics of GRBs is now 
understood, the field is in many respects in its infancy. 
Many more observations are needed to sort out the fol- 
lowing questions (among others): 1. Can GRBs be used to 
trace star formation in the early universe? 2. Can GRBs 
be detected at redshifts corresponding to the reionization 
epoch? 3. What is the relation between GRBs and super- 
novae? 4. Why do some bursts display no radio or opti- 
cal afterglows? A major GRB mission, Swift, will address 
these and other questions. Swift is a NASA Midex mis- 
sion scheduled for launch in October 2003. It comprises 
three instruments: a burst alert telescope, an x-ray tele- 
scope and a UV/optical telescope. The burst alert tele- 
scope will survey a wide field for GRBs, which it will 
localize with several arcminute accuracy. The spacecraft 
will then slew to the position of the burst to observe it 
with its x-ray and UV/optical cameras, providing infor- 
mation on the long-wavelength afterglows and on the 
source redshift. Swift is expected to detect over 100 
bursts per year and last for a minimum of 2 years. 


Web update (30 April 2003) 

On December 11, 2002, scientists obtained an image of an 
unusual type of GRB event one minute after the explo- 
sion. They captured a particularly fast-fading type of 
dark burst, which comprises about half of all GRBs. 
These dark bursts are so named because until this event, 
they have had no detectable optical afterglow. NASA’s 
High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE) discovered this 
burst on December 11, 2002. The burst originated six bil- 
lion light-years away, and HETE relayed its location to 
observatories worldwide in 22 seconds. The ground- 
based RAPTOR (RAPid Telescopes for Optical Response) 
optical telescope, operated by the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory in New Mexico, was the first on the scene, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observing the afterglow at 65 seconds. Other telescopes 
observed the event in the minutes that followed. 


Bibliography 

The discovery paper is 

Klebesadel R, Strong I and Olson R 1973 Observations of 
gamma ray bursts of cosmic origin Astrophysical 
Letters 182 L85 


The two ‘breakthrough’ papers are 

Costa E, Frontera F, Heise J et al. 1997 Discovery of an x- 
ray afterglow associated with the gamma-ray burst 
of 28 February 1997 Nature 387: 783 

van Paradijs J, Groot P, Galama T et al. 1997 Transient 
optical emission from the error box of the gamma- 
ray burst of 28 February 1997 Nature 386: 686 


Progress over the years has been reported at a series of 
biennial conferences, whose proceedings have been 
published in AIP Conference Proceedings (265, 307, 
384, 428 and 526), in Astrophysics and Space Science 
231 (1/2) (1995) and in the ESO Astrophysics 
Symposia Series ‘Gamma Ray Bursts in the Afterglow 
Era’ (2001) 

Kevin Hurley 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


Gamma-rays are the highest-energy photons in the 
ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM and their detection presents 
unique challenges. On one hand it is easy to detect y-rays. 
The interaction cross-sections are large and above a few 
MeV the pair production interaction, the dominant y-ray 
interaction with matter, is easily recognized. Gamma-ray 
detectors were far advanced when the concept of ‘y-ray 
astronomy’ was first raised in Phillip Morrison’s seminal 
paper in 1958. Indeed it was the expected ease of detection 
and the early promise of strong sources that led to the 
large concentration of effort in the field, even before the 
development of X-RAY ASTRONOMY. Today the number of 
known y-ray sources is well under a few hundred whereas 
there are hundreds of thousands of x-ray sources. What 
went wrong? 

The answer is simple: the detection of cosmic y-rays 
was not as easy as expected and the early predictions 
of fluxes were hopelessly optimistic. Below we consider 
the physical phenomenon whereby y-rays interact with 
matter, the basic detector configurations and the detectors 
which have provided the bulk of the observational results; 
we conclude with a description of the techniques now 
under development. 

First we provide a few definitions and a few caveats. 
The term ‘y-ray’ is a generic one and is used to describe 
photons of energy from 100 keV (10° eV) to >100 EeV 
(10*° eV). A range of 15 decades is more than all the rest of 
the known electromagnetic spectrum. A wide variety of 
detection techniques is therefore necessary to cover this 
huge range. We will concentrate on the telescopes in 
the somewhat restricted range from 1 MeV to 100 TeV. 
The lower definition comes from the knowledge that the 
lower energies are better covered by the techniques used 
to cover hard x-ray astronomy and that many authors 
would define the y-ray regime as starting at 0.51 MeV 
(the rest mass energy of the electron). There are no 
credible detections of y-rays at energies much beyond 
50 TeV and the ‘y-ray telescope’ techniques used beyond 
these energies are really the same as those used to study 
charged cosmic rays and hence are best discussed under 
that heading. We are left with some eight decades which 
we will, somewhat arbitrarily, define as the medium- 
energy (ME) range from 1 to 30 MeV, the high-energy 
(HE) range from 30 MeV to 100 GeV and the very-high- 
energy (VHE) range from 100 GeV to 100 TeV. These ranges 
are not defined by the physics of their production but 
by the interaction phenomena and techniques employed 
in their detection. Thus Compton scattering dominates 
the ME range necessitating the use of satellite-borne 
Compton telescopes. The HE and VHE ranges use the 
pair production interaction but in very different ways; 
HE telescopes identify the electron pair in balloon- or 
satellite-borne detectors, whereas VHE detectors detect 
the electromagnetic cascade that develops in the Earth’s 
atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY is still an observation-dominated 
discipline and the observations have been driven not so 
much by the astrophysical expectations (which have of- 
ten been wrong) as by the experimental techniques, which 
have permitted significant advances to be made in partic- 
ular energy ranges. Hence the most fruitful observations 
have come at energies of 100 MeV; these were originally in- 
spired by the prediction of the strong bump in the spectra 
expected from the decay of zs that are created in hadron 
interactions. This energy region was exploited primarily 
because the detection techniques were simpler and more 
sensitive. In contrast the ME region has the potential for 
very interesting astrophysics with the predicted existence 
of nuclear emission lines but the development of the field 
has been slow because the techniques are so difficult. 


Peculiarities of y-ray telescopes 

There are several peculiarities that uniquely pertain to 
astronomy in the y-ray energy regime. These factors make 
y-ray astronomy particularly difficult and have resulted in 
the slow development of the discipline. 

In every band of the electromagnetic spectrum 
astronomical telescopes make use of the fact that the 
cosmic rain of photons can be concentrated by reflection 
or refraction, so that the dimensions of the actual photon 
detector are a small fraction of the telescope aperture. 
How limited would have been our early knowledge of 
the universe if the optical astronomer had not been aided 
by the simple refracting telescope which so increased the 
sensitivity of the human eye. The radio astronomer, the 
infrared astronomer, even the x-ray astronomer, depends 
on the ability of a solid surface to reflect and, with suitable 
geometry, to concentrate the photon beam. 

Above a few MeV there is no efficient way of reflecting 
y-rays and hence the dimensions of the y-ray detector are 
effectively the dimensions of the y-ray telescope. (As we 
shall see in a later section this is not the case for ground- 
based VHE telescopes.) In practice to identify the y-ray 
events from the charged particle background it is necessary 
to use detectors whose efficiency is often quite low. Hence 
at any energy the effective aperture of a space-borne y- 
ray telescope is seldom greater than 1 m? and often only 
a few cm’, even though the physical size is much larger. 
For instance the COMPTON GAMMA RAY OBSERVATORY (CGRO) 
was one of the largest and heaviest scientific satellites 
ever launched; however, its ME and HE telescopes had 
effective apertures of 1600 cm? and 5 cm? respectively. 
Beam concentration is particularly important when the 
background scales with detector area. This is the case with 
y-ray detectors which must operate in an environment 
dominated by charged cosmic rays. 

The problem of a small aperture is compounded by 
the fact that the flux of cosmic y-rays is always small. At 
energies of 100 MeV the strongest source (the Vela pulsar) 
gives a flux of only 1 photon min~!. With weak sources 
long exposures are necessary and one is still dealing 
with the statistics of small numbers. It is small wonder 
that y-ray astronomers have been frequent pioneers in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the development of statistical methods and that y-ray 
conferences are often dominated by arguments over real 
statistical significance. 

As it is to photons in many bands of the electromag- 
netic spectrum the Earth’s atmosphere is opaque to all 
y-rays. The radiation length is 37.1 g cm~ and the to- 
tal vertical thickness at sea level is 1030 g cm~*. Even the 
highest mountain is many radiation lengths below the top 
of the atmosphere so that it is virtually impossible to con- 
sider the direct detection of cosmic y-rays without the use 
of aspace platform. Large balloons can carry the bulky de- 
tectors to near the top of the atmosphere and much of the 
pioneering work in the field was done in this way. How- 
ever, the charged cosmic rays constitute a significant back- 
ground and limit the sensitivity of such measurements. 

The background can take many forms. In deep 
space it is the primary cosmic radiation itself, mostly 
protons, heavier nuclei and electrons. This background 
can be accentuated by secondary interactions in the 
spacecraft itself. Careful design and shielding can 
reduce this effect, as can active anti-coincidence shields. 
However, at low energies induced radioactivity in the 
detector and its surrounds can be a serious problem. 
In balloons the secondary cosmic radiation from the 
cosmic ray interactions above the detector seriously limit 
the sensitivity and were the initial reason for the slow 
development of the field. Huge balloons that carry the 
telescopes to within a few grams of residual atmosphere 
are a partial solution, but it is still impossible to trust the 
measurement of absolute diffuse fluxes. 


Physics of y-ray interactions 

In the energy region above 1 keV there are basically 
three processes by which the y-rays can interact with the 
matter in the detector: these are the photoelectric effect, 
Compton scattering and pair production. The relative 
cross-sections, or, more practically, the mass absorption 
coefficients peak in different energy ranges. The cross- 
section has the same functional form for all materials, 
although the actual values and relative strengths of the 
three processes may differ somewhat. As the photoelectric 
effect, the interaction of the y-ray with bound electrons in 
atoms, is only important at low energies (<1 MeV), we 
shall not consider it here. 


Compton scattering 

This is the most complex of the three interactions, 
and hence detectors which depend on it are the most 
complicated and the most difficult to interpret. It is 
important primarily in the energy range from 100 keV to 
30 MeV and hence y-ray astronomy in this range has been 
the slowest to develop. 

In Compton scattering the electron is unbound and it 
alone must take up the energy and momentum of the y-ray. 
In practice the y-ray may undergo one or more Compton 
scatterings, losing energy to the electron in each case, until 
eventually it may undergo a photoelectric reaction. Ineach 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


scattering the electron will take up some of the energy as 
kinetic energy and the y-ray will change direction. 

The relationship between the incident energy of the 
y-ray, E, and the resultant energy, E’, where both are 
expressed in units of E., the rest mass of the electron, is 
given by 

E' = E/(1+ E[1 —cos@)] 


where 6 is the scattering angle of the y-ray. The maximum 
energy loss comes for backward scattering at which the 
scattered energy is 


EF’ = E/(1+2E). 


For E > 0.51 MeV, E’ is close to 0.5 (or 0.255 MeV) which 
is the typical energy loss per scattering, independent of E. 

At low energies the cross-section is given by the 
Thomson cross-section 


0. = oF = (8/3)e*/mec? = 0.665 barns 
and at high energies 
Oc = (3/8) E(In2E +1/2)or. 


Hence Compton scattering is almost independent of the 
incident energy so that the cross-section decreases only 
slowly with energy. 


Pair production 

In the pair production interaction, the y-ray is completely 
annihilated with its energy transferred to an electron— 
positron pair which is created, i.e. 


hv>ett+e. 


The interaction takes place in the electric field of a nucleus 
which takes up some of the momentum. Obviously the 
threshold for the interaction must be >1.02 MeV (i.e. 2m). 
The interaction can also occur in the field of an electron, 
but the cross-section is much less and the threshold is 
higher. The energy of the y-ray is taken up by the 
electron—positron pair as rest mass and kinetic energy. 
The positron will generally annihilate with an electron to 
produce two y-rays, which can Compton scatter or suffer 
photoelectric absorption. These secondary products at 
moderate energies can be totally absorbed in the detector; 
by measuring their energy plus the rest mass of the pair, 
the energy of the y-ray is estimated. 

The cross-section for pair production rises rapidly and 
becomes dominant above energies of about 30 MeV, after 
which it rises slowly to an asymptotic value. This value is 
given by 


Opp = 90Z [(28/9) log(183/Z'/°) — 2/27] cm?/atom 


where op = (1/137)e4/m2c*. 
The mean distance that a y-ray travels before it 
undergoes pair production is given by 


App = 1/Nopp 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where N is the number of target nuclei per unit volume. 
The mean free path for pair production is related to 
the radiation length, Xo: 


App = (9/7) Xo. 


Acritical factor is the degree to which the electron—positron 
pair retain the trajectory of the y-ray. The root mean square 
angle between the trajectory of the secondary electron of 
energy FE, and that of the primary y-ray of energy E),, is 
about 4° at E, = 30 MeV, 1.5° at E, = 100 MeV and 0.2° 
at E,, = 1 GeV. The value of observations at high energies 
is thus apparent. 

Unfortunately it is not possible to measure the 
electron trajectory precisely as it will inevitably undergo 
Coulomb scattering as it passes through the material of the 
detector. 

Measuring the energy of the y-ray is essentially 
measuring the energy of the electron—positron pair and 
their secondary products. This requires that the detector 
have sufficient mass to absorb all these products. In 
practice this usually calls for a calorimeter with as much 
absorber as the spacecraft can carry. 


ME and HE telescopes 

Compton telescopes 

The basic detector of y-rays in the difficult 100 keV- 
10 MeV energy range is the scintillation detector, which 
consists of a solid or liquid material, in which light is 
produced by charged secondary particles resulting from 
the photoelectric or Compton scattering y-ray interaction, 
and a phototube, in which light is converted into an 
electrical signal. A common material is thallium-activated 
sodium iodide, Nal(Tl). Charged particles are rejected 
by surrounding the detector by another plastic scintillator 
detector. If the outer detector is shaped like a well with 
small opening then it can serve as a collimator with crude 
angular resolution. Many of the early detectors worked 
on this principle. 

A more sophisticated detector is the Compton 
telescope in which two detectors are operated in series 
(figure 1). In the front detector a primary y-ray, which 
Compton scatters in the forward downward direction, 
is selected (based on the energy registered by the first 
detector from the recoil electron); the y-ray is then 
absorbed in another Compton scatter in the lower detector. 
The lower detector is surrounded by an anti-coincidence 
scintillator to veto charged particles coming up from 
below. Of necessity because of the wide range of angles 
that the scattering may have, the efficiency of these simple 
detectors is poor, typically less than 1%. However, the 
energy and angular resolutions are improved over the 
simple one-stage detector. 

The upper detector should have a large cross-section 
for Compton scattering over the desired energy range. In 
the 1-10 MeV region the best material is one with low 
Z; hence the detector should be a relatively thin liquid 
or plastic scintillator so that a single Compton scattering 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ae First Compton Scatter 


z Scattered 
S$ Gamma-ray 
z 
ca 
% 
e /? Second Compton Scatter 


Figure 1. Schematic of double Compton scatter. In the upper 
scintillator the primary y-ray Compton scatters in the 
downward direction; the y-ray is then absorbed in another 
Compton scatter in the lower detector. In each case the energy of 
the recoil electron is measured and thence the energy and arrival 
direction of the primary are determined. 


COMPTEL 


Light recorded. 


Figure 2. An example of a Compton telescope: COMPTEL. It is 
sensitive from 1 to 30 MeV. The angular resolution is 3-5°. 


occurs with good efficiency. The second, lower, detector 
should totally absorb the product of the second Compton 
scatter and hence should be thicker and composed of high- 
Z material. 

A double Compton scattering is also the basic 
principle used in the most sophisticated 1-30 MeV 
telescope flown to date, COMPTELon the CGRO (figure 2). 
The primary y-ray incident within +40° of the telescope 
axis first Compton scatters in the upper detector which is a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ANTI-COINCIDENCE 
SCINTILLATION 
DOME 


CLOSELY SPACED 
SPARK CHAMBERS 


WIDELY SPACED 
SPARK CHAMBERS 


TIME OF 

FLIGHT 
COINCIDENCE 

SYSTEM 


IN PRESSURE VESSEL 
Nal (TL) ENERGY 


— 
| *— ELECTRONICS 
MEASUREMENT = |. 


COUNTER | | 
() = (} GAS REPLENISHMENT 
SYSTEM 


Figure 3. Example of a spark chamber telescope: EGRET. The 
telescope is sensitive from 30 MeV to 30 GeV. The field of view 
+20° and the energy resolution is about 20%. 


S 


low-Z liquid scintillator; the second scattering takes place 
in the lower detector which is a high-Z Nal(T]) scintillator. 
Each detector actually consists of seven modules and the 
separation between the two layers is 1.5 m. Hence time of 
flight can be used to discriminate against upward-going 
particles. In addition, all of the detectors are surrounded 
by thin plastic anti-coincidence scintillators which respond 
to charged particles. If the energy deposited in the upper 
and lower modules is measured, then the direction of the 
incident y-ray can be determined to be within a narrow 
ring on the sky and its energy estimated to about 5-10%. 
A source then is apparent as the locus of intersections of a 
number of such rings. 


Pair production telescopes 
The spark chamber, long obsolete for HE physics 
experiments, has been the workhorse detector for y-ray 
astronomy in the energy range 30 MeV-10 GeV from the 
early 1960s through the end of the century. The three 
experiments, which provided almost all the results during 
this period, all used the spark chamber as their principal 
detector. These were the USA’s SAS-II (1973), Europe’s 
COS-B (1975-82) and the joint European— USA EGRET on 
the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (1991-). 
Although the basic principles of the pair production 
telescope are simple, the detailed design is complex 
and accounts for the fact that the effective collection 
area is far smaller than the geometrical cross-section of 
the telescope. This is illustrated by EGRET, the pair 
production telescope on the CGRO. As with most pair 
production spark chamber telescopes, this consists of four 
distinct components which are shown schematically in 
figure 3. 


(i) _Aspark chamber usually consists of a series of parallel 
metal plates in a closed container; the alternate 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


plates are connected together electrically with one set 
permanently connected to ground. On an indication 
that a charged particle has passed through the 
chamber, a high voltage is applied to the second set of 
plates. The chamber contains a gas at a pressure such 
that the ionization left behind by the passage of the 
charged particle causes an electric spark discharge 
between the plates. The gas is a mixture of neon and 
ethane. An electron—positron pair created by a y- 
ray interaction in one of the plates is then readily 
apparent as a pair of sets of sparks that delineate 
the path of the electron and positron. In practice the 
tracks are disjointed as the electrons suffer multiple 
scattering within the plates of the chamber. This 
limits the thickness of the plates (which should be 
as thick as possible to ensure that the y-rays interact 
effectively, but not so thick that the electrons undergo 
excessive Coulomb scattering in the plate material). 
Multiple plates ensure that the tracks are effectively 
mapped. The collection area and angular resolution 
of the telescope are determined by the spark chamber 
geometry. In EGRET the spark chamber ‘plates’ 
consist of 28 wire grids interleaved with interaction 
plates of 0.02 radiation lengths thickness in which 
the y-ray interacts. Each wire is threaded through a 
magnetic core memory, which is read out and reset 
after each event. 

(ii) At least one electron must emerge from the spark 
chamber to ensure that it initiates a trigger that 
causes the application of the high-voltage pulse 
to the second set of plates to activate the spark 
chamber. A permanent high-voltage difference 
cannot be maintained between the plates, as the spark 
discharges will take place spontaneously. EGRET 
is triggered by a coincidence between two thin 
sheets of plastic scintillator with a 60 cm separation 
(sufficient to recognize and reject upward-going 
charged particles). It is the need for this trigger 
which limits the lower-energy threshold of the spark 
chamber telescope. The trigger detection system 
effectively defines the field of view of the telescope. 

(iii) The electrons must be completely absorbed if their 
energy is to be measured; to achieve this there must 
be a calorimeter that is some radiation lengths thick. 
InEGRET, as in most spark chamber telescopes, this is 
an Nal(TI) crystal, whose sole function is to measure 
the total energy deposited. At the low end of the 
sensitivity range the energy of the electrons can also 
be determined by the amount of Coulomb scattering 
in the plates of the spark chamber. 

(iv) Finally the entire assembly is surrounded by an anti- 
coincidence detector which signals the arrival of a 
charged particle, but which has a small interaction 
cross-section for y-rays. This consists of a very 
thin outer shell of plastic scintillator viewed by 
photomultipliers. 


EGRET is the largest and most sensitive HE y-ray 
telescope flown to date; it is the flagship instrument on 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CGRO. Approximately the size of a compact car and with 
a total mass of 1900 kg, the telescope has an effective 
collection area of 1600 cm?. The characteristics of the 
telescope are listed in table 1. 

The telescope was designed for a5 yr lifetime. The gas 
which fills the chamber gradually becomes poisoned and 
must be replenished. It was expected that a filling would 
last 1 yr. Hence only four gas canisters were attached 
to the instrument for replenishment at yearly intervals. 
In practice the unprecedented and unexpected success of 
CGRO meant that the mission was extended as were the 
replenishment intervals so that, for a considerable fraction 
of the 9 yr lifetime of the mission, EGRET operated at less 
than optimum efficiency. 


VHE telescopes 

Air Cerenkov telescopes 

When an HE y-ray strikes the upper atmosphere, it 
produces an electron—positron pair (as it does in a spark 
chamber). However, if the energy of the y-ray, and 
hence of the electron—positron pair, is large enough, an 
electromagnetic cascade will result which will continue 
down through the atmosphere with secondary y-ray 
and electron production by bremsstrahlung and pair 
production. The cascade will continue along the axis of 
the trajectory of the original y-ray and the total energy of 
the secondary particles will be a good representation of its 
energy. 

For y-rays of energy 100 TeV and above, sufficient 
particles can reach ground level for the shower to be 
detected by arrays of particle detectors spread over areas 
of 0.1 km?. As the secondary particles all move at nearly 
the speed of light and retain the original trajectory of the 
primary y-ray, the shower front arrives as a disk which 
is only a meter thick. Differential timing between the 
detectors can then determine the arrival direction and 
hence the source of the y radiation. 

At lower energies the cascade will die out as the 
average energy of the secondary particles drops to 
the point that ionization losses become the major loss 
process (figure 4). For a primary y-ray of energy 
1 TeV, few secondary particles will reach even mountain 
altitude. However, as the relativistic particles traverse 
the atmosphere, they excite the atmosphere to radiate 
Cerenkov light with high efficiency. Although the fraction 
of energy that goes into this mode is small (less than 10~° 
of the primary energy), it permits a very easy way to 
detect the cascade and thence the y-ray. A simple light 
detector (mirror, plus phototube, plus fast pulse counting 
electronics) provides an easy way of detecting the cascade. 
Early telescopes consisted of ex-World War II searchlight 
mirrors with phototubes at their foci, coupled to fast pulse 
counting electronics. 

The observations are best made from a dark mountain 
top observatory. Since the Cerenkov angle in air is about 
1° and the amount of light is proportional to the number 
of particles in the cascade (and hence to the energy of 
the y-ray), the measurement of the atmospheric Cerenkov 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


——~Gamma Ray) Top of “Atmosphere — 


Electromagnetic Cascade 


Cherenkov light cone 


Cherenkov Light “\ 
Telescope NS 
aa 


Figure 4. Schematic of atmospheric air shower detection. The 
y-ray interacts with an air molecule high in the atmosphere and 
produces an electron-positron pair. These electrons 
subsequently interact and produce an electromagnetic cascade. 
The passage of relativistic particles through the atmosphere 
causes the emission of Cerenkov light which reaches ground 
level as a disk of diameter 200 m and thickness 1 m. The light 
can easily be detected by optical Cerenkov light telescopes (not 
to scale). 


component provides a good measure of the energy and 
arrival direction of the y-ray. Because the light spreads out 
as it traverses the atmosphere, the collection area for y-ray 
detection is as large as the lateral dimensions of the light 
pool at detector altitude; this can be as much as 50000 m?. 

This is one of the few astronomical techniques in 
which the Earth’s atmosphere plays an essential positive 
role. However, the technique has its drawbacks. Although 
the atmosphere comes cheap (and the gas does not need 
to be replenished), the observer has no control over it; the 
telescope is wide open to the elements and the detector 
is susceptible to a troublesome background of light from 
Sun, Moon and stars, from the airglow, from lightning 
and meteors, and from a variety of man-made light 
sources, from satellites and airplanes to airport beacons 
and city lights. These limit the sensitivity for y-ray source 
detection. However, the most troublesome background is 
that from air showers generated by charged cosmic rays 
of similar energy to the y-rays under study. These air 
showers are cascades of particles which are superficially 
very similar to a pure electromagnetic cascade but contain 
penetrating particles (mostly muons) which reach ground 
level (See COSMIC RAYS: EXTENSIVE AIR SHOWERS). These showers 
are thousands of times more numerous and their light 
flashes are difficult to distinguish from those from y- 
rays. Because of interstellar magnetic fields, the arrival 
directions of the charged cosmic rays are isotropic; hence 
a discrete source of y-rays can stand out only as an 
anisotropy in an otherwise isotropic distribution of air 
showers. Unfortunately a y-ray source would have to be 
very strong (a few per cent of the cosmic radiation) to be 
detectable in this way. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. The Whipple 10 m y-ray telescope. Note the ‘10 m’ 
refers only to the aperture of the optical reflector; the effective 
collection area is >50000 m? so that the y-ray ‘aperture’ is 120 m. 


Imaging detectors 

Early attempts to discriminate the electromagnetic 
showers initiated by y-rays from air showers initiated 
by charged particles were unsuccessful using either the 
ground-level arrays of particles detectors or atmospheric 
Cerenkov detectors. The development of the Cerenkov 
imaging technique gave the first effective discrimination; 
an array of photomultipliers in the focal plane of a large 
optical reflector was used to record a Cerenkov light 
picture of each air shower. Monte Carlo simulations of 
the development of air showers from photon and hadron 
primaries predicted that the images of the former would 
have somewhat smaller angular dimensions and thus 
could be identified. The largest optical reflector built for 
y-ray astronomy is the Whipple Observatory 10 m optical 
reflector (built on Mount Hopkins in southern Arizona 
in 1968) (figure 5); in 1984 this was equipped with a 
photomultiplier camera with 37 pixels which was used 
to detect the CRAB NEBULA. This first detection led to a rapid 
development of the imaging technique, with significant 
improvements in flux sensitivity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There are currently nine observatories around the 
globe using variants of this technique and the detection 
of some 13 sources has been claimed, both in the Galaxy 
and beyond. Background rejection of cosmic rays is now 
in excess of 99.7%, and the technique is effective from 
energies of 250 GeV-50 TeV. The energy resolution is 
typically 30-40%. A signal with significance of (5-10)o 
can be detected from the Crab Nebula in just an hour 
of observation. Because of the very large collection 
area associated with the technique (>50000 m7), it is 
particularly powerful for the detection of short transients 
in TeV y-ray sources (see also VERY-HIGH-ENERGY GAMMA-RAY 
sources). In fact the shortest flare ever seen from a known 
y-ray source at energies greater than 1 MeV was recorded 
from the blazar, Markarian 421; the duration of the TeV 
flare was 15-20 min. In some cases the telescope is an 
array of small reflectors operated in a stereo mode, e.g. 
the German-Spanish HEGRA experiment in the Canary 
Islands. 


Table 1. Comparison of EGRET and GLAST. 


EGRET GLAST 

Parameter Units (achieved) (desired) 
Energy range GeV 0.02-30 0.02-300 
Effective area cm? 1500 8000 
Field of view sr 0.5 2 
Angular resolution 
(at 100 MeV) deg 5.8 3.0 
Energy resolution % 10 10 
Source sensitivity 

(>100 MeV) x 10-7. cm~*s"! 1 0.04 


There are also two air shower particle detectors which 
have successfully detected y-rays of a few TeV from the 
strongest sources. One is a large water Cerenkov detector, 
MILAGRO near Los Alamos, New Mexico, USA, at an 
elevation of 2.6 km. The other is a densely packed 
array of scintillation detectors in Tibet, which operates 
at an elevation of 4.3 km. Although these telescopes are 
somewhat less sensitive, they have the advantage over 
Cerenkov telescopes in that they can operate continuously 
and hence monitor a large section of the sky. 


Future telescopes 

INTEGRAL 

The International Gamma-Ray Astrophysics Laboratory 
(INTEGRAL) is primarily a European mission which will be 
launched in 2001. It will operate in the 15 keV-10 MeV 
region with two prime objectives: good angular resolution 
(12 arcmin) and good energy resolution (E/5E) = 500). 
To achieve these objectives two instruments are used: 
the spectrometer SPI based on solid-state germanium 
detectors with coded aperture masks to define the field 
of view and the imaging IBIS which used cadmium 
telluride and cesium iodide detectors. These detectors are 
supplemented by small x-ray and optical telescopes for 
the monitoring of transient sources over a broad range 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamma-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of wavelengths. The detector design is based on the 
assumption that broad lines are emitted from point-like 
sources and narrow lines come from extended sources as 
indicated by earlier missions. 


GLAST 

The next-generation pair production telescope will replace 
the spark chamber with solid-state detectors which will 
be more compact, more efficient and have better angular 
and energy resolution. However, the general principle of 
the telescope will be the same, with an anti-coincidence 
scintillator shield, an interaction region with three- 
dimensional imaging system and a calorimeter; only the 
triggering system is unnecessary, as the imaging system 
can be active all the time. There are no expendables and 
no noisy pulsed high voltage and sparks. 

NASA envisages the next-generation telescope as 
operating in the range 20 MeV-300 GeV, with a 
scheduled launch date of 2005. With the somewhat 
unimaginative acronym, GLAST (Gamma-Ray Large Area 
Space Telescope), GLAST will surpass EGRET by a factor 
of 10-40 in most parameters. A comparison of the two 
missions is given in table 1. 

There are two competing technologies for the central 
pair production detector on GLAST. One (fiber GLAST) 
uses crossed planes of silicon fibers coupled to multi- 
anode photomultipliers, separated by thin layers of high- 
Z converter plates. The calorimeter uses the same kind 
of detector but with thicker plates. The fibers are 1.3 m 
long and the whole detector is 1.8 m high; they have a 
square cross-section of side <1 mm. This technology has 
already been used in cosmic ray particle experiments and 
is thus favored by space scientists. The other technology 
(silicon GLAST) uses the silicon strip technology that 
has been used in HE particle accelerator experiments 
for a number of years; it has not so far been used in 
space science applications. Again the layers of ionizing- 
particle-sensitive detectors are alternated with thin layers 
of lead converter. The calorimeter will be made of bars 
of cesium iodide, with individual read-outs to give spatial 
resolution. 

Both technologies seem to address equally well the 
physical demands of GLAST, so it will be a difficult 
choice to select just one of them. Remarkably both 
technologies can achieve the dramatic improvement over 
EGRET, outlined in table 1, with an instrument that will 
only be twice as heavy. 


Next-generation VHE telescopes 

The success of the atmospheric Cerenkov imaging 
technique has led to plans for next-generation VHE 
telescopes (NGVHETs) of increased collection area and 
complexity. One of the most ambitious of these is the 
Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System 
(VERITAS), first proposed to the Smithsonian Institution 
in 1996. An international collaboration has been formed 
to build this array of 10 m aperture Cerenkov telescopes 
in southern Arizona. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Similar NGVHETs are now under construction in 
the southern hemisphere: the High Energy Stereoscopic 
System (HESS) is a European collaboration based in 
Heidelberg, Germany, which plans to build an array of 
four 12 m telescopes in Namibia and the Collaboration 
of Australian and Nippon for a Gamma-Ray Observatory 
in the Outback-IV (CANGAROO-II]) is an Australian— 
Japanese collaboration which will add three more 10 m 
telescopes to their existing 10 m telescope in Woomera, 
Australia. 

VERITAS will consist of six telescopes located at the 
corners of a hexagon of side 80 m with a seventh at the 
center. The telescopes will be similar to the design of 
the Whipple 10 m reflector, which is the most sensitive 
telescope of its kind. By employing largely existing 
technology in the first instance and stereoscopic imaging, 
VERITAS will achieve the following: 


effective area >0.1 km? at 1 TeV; 
effective energy threshold <100 GeV with significant 
sensitivity at 50 GeV; 

e energy resolution 10-15% for events in the range 
0.2-10 TeV; 

e angular resolution <0.05° for individual photons and 
source location to better than 0.005°. 


Other designs are also under consideration. In the 
northern hemisphere a European collaboration centered 
in Munich, Germany, is building an advanced technology 
17 m telescope called MAGIC. This will effectively bridge 
the energy gap between space- and ground-based y-ray 
telescopes. There are also three groups using large solar 
arrays in an attempt to significantly lower the threshold of 
the technique. Although their optics are crude, such arrays 
can have very large mirror areas (>1000 m7?) and attain 
energy thresholds below 50 GeV. Two such experiments, 
STACEE in the USA and CELESTE in France, have already 
reported the detection of a signal from the Crab Nebula. 


Bibliography 

Catanese M and Weekes T C 1999 Very high energy 
gamma-ray astronomy Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 111 
1193-222 

Fichtel C E and Trombka J I 1997 Gamma-Ray Astrophysics: 
New Insight into the Universe NASA Reference 
Publication 1386 

Gehrels N and Michelson P 1999 GLAST: the next 
generation high energy gamma-ray astronomy 
mission Astropart. Phys. 11 277-82 

Morrison P 1958 On gamma-ray astronomy Il Nuovo 
Cimento 7 858-66 


Trevor Weekes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gamow, George (1904-68) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gamow, George (1904-68) 


Physicist, born in Odessa, Russia, researched on 
radioactivity and atomic fission, emigrated to the USA. 
Worked with EDWARD TELLER on beta decay, worked out the 
theory of stellar nuclear reactions in terms of the tunneling 
of a colliding nucleus through another nucleus’s potential 
barrier. Even though there is only a small probability that a 
nucleon in the Sun would tunnel through the electrostatic 
repulsion barrier of another (say once every 10000 million 
milllion million collisions), collisions in the solar core 
are so frequent that enough nuclei do get close enough 
to fuse and release solar energy. Gamow developed a 
Big Bang cosmology in which a primordial matter (ylem) 
existed at the origin of the universe. He supported the 
LEMAITRE Big Bang model, predicting that its consequence 
was a residual cosmic fireball of background radiation 
with a temperature of 10 kelvin (PENzIAsS and WILSON later 
discovered this radiation at 3 kelvin, surprisingly close 
to Gamow’s prediction). He was the prime mover for 
a theory for the origin of the elements in the Big Bang 
in which neutrons were sequentially added to hydrogen 
to build up the periodic table of elements one by one. 
This was the alpha—beta—gamma theory, named in part for 
the sequence and in part for the authors, ALPHER, BETHE 
and Gamow himself. Outside astronomy, he correctly 
theorized that the DNA structure forms a code that directs 
protein synthesis. He was a successful popularizer of 
science, inventing a cartoon character, Mr Tompkins, who 
traveled through a world of scientific adventure. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ganymede 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ganymede 


Ganymede, one of Jupiter’s icy moons and one of the 
Galilean satellites, is the largest planetary satellite in the 
solar system (see figure 1). This moon, which is larger 
than the planet Mercury (Ganymede’s radius is 2638 km, 
Mercury’s radius is 2439 km), generates its own magnet- 
ic field and has large polar caps composed of thin frosts 
which reach an average latitude of 40 degrees. On a glob- 
al scale the surface of Ganymede can be subdivided into 
two basic terrains: dark terrain and bright terrain (see fig- 
ure 2). 

Dark terrains, which make up approximately one- 
quarter of Ganymede’s surface area, are older, more 
heavily cratered regions that are generally crosscut by 
areas of the younger bright terrain. The low ALBEDO of the 
dark terrain is thought to be due to mixtures of rocky 
material with water ice on the surface. The origin of the 
dark material is unknown, but it is believed to have 
resulted in part from the non-ice components of the 
many meteors and comets that have hit Ganymede over 
geologic time. Although dark terrain was originally char- 
acterized using global VOYAGER images, moderate to 
high-resolution Galileo images show that dark terrain is 
made up of discrete regions with a range of albedos (e.g. 


Figure 1. View of Ganymede from the Galileo spacecraft during 
its first encounter with the satellite. North is to the top of the pic- 
ture and the Sun illuminates the surface from the right. The dark 
areas are the older, more heavily cratered regions and the light 
areas are younger, tectonically deformed regions. The brownish- 
gray color is due to mixtures of rocky materials and ice. Bright 
spots are geologically recent impact craters and their ejecta. The 
finest details that can be discerned in this picture are about 13.4 
kilometers across. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 2. Global view of Ganymede’s trailing side, enhanced to 
reveal frosty polar caps in addition to the two predominant ter- 
rains on Ganymede—bright, grooved terrain and older, dark 
furrowed areas. Many craters with diameters up to several 
dozen kilometers are visible. The violet hues at the poles may be 
the result of small particles of frost which would scatter more 
light at shorter wavelengths (the violet end of the spectrum). 
Ganymede’s magnetic field, which was detected by the magne- 
tometer on NASA's Galileo spacecraft in 1996, may be partly 
responsible for the appearance of the polar terrain. 


bright hummocks interspersed with smooth dark patch- 
es; see GALILEO MISSION TO JUPITER). The relatively higher- 
albedo regions within dark terrain are brightened by 
both tectonic and impact processes. Dark material also 
appears to have moved down slopes, exposing bright icy 
walls, and collecting in valleys and depressions. 

Voyager and Galileo images show that this heavily 
cratered terrain, which is almost as old as the solar sys- 
tem itself, was fractured by tectonic activity as well as by 
large impact craters. Concentric furrow systems, similar 
to multiring structures on neighboring CALLISTO, are 
interpreted to have been formed when large asteroids or 
meteors impacted Ganymede early in its history. 

Bright terrain, based on Voyager images, is divided 
into grooved and smooth subunits. Prior to the Galileo 
mission the smooth bright terrain was interpreted to 
have been emplaced by ice vulcanism. However, Galileo 
data not only reveal a paucity of volcanic features associ- 
ated with bright terrain, but high-resolution data also 
show that many of these ‘smooth’ regions are in fact 
grooved or striated by tectonic activity. 

Two wavelengths of troughs and grooves have been 
identified on Ganymede using Voyager and Galileo data. 
The average spacing between parallel grooves, based on 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ganymede 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


low-resolution Voyager data, is about 8.5 kilometers. 
However, high-resolution Galileo images reveal that 
smaller grooves, with an average spacing of about 1 kilo- 
meter or less, are superimposed on the longer-wave- 
length ridges and troughs. This two-wavelength style of 
deformation is interpreted to have formed by brittle 
deformation of an upper layer due to extension and thin- 
ning (producing the ridges/ troughs with ~1 km spacing) 
combined with upwarping of regions by underlying 
warm and buoyant ductile ice (producing the longer 
wavelength deformation). 

TECTONIC activity is now recognized as the dominant 
mechanism that has operated on Ganymede’s surface. 
Tectonic resurfacing is thought to be responsible for 
transforming dark terrain into bright terrain. In one sce- 
nario, for example, a region that began as dark terrain is 
cut by numerous parallel to subparallel faults; the fault- 
blocks tilt with continued extension, and dark material 
slides down into the grooves and furrows, exposing 
bright, icy slopes and resulting in the formation of bright 
grooved terrain. While tectonic resurfacing appears to be 
the dominant process that forms grooved terrain, icy vul- 
canism cannot be completely ruled out. A depression and 
associated lobate material seen in Sippar Sulcus (an area 
of grooved terrain) are interpreted to be a volcanic 
caldera and water-ice volcanic flow. Additional ice-vul- 
canism may have occurred on Ganymede, but if it had, it 
has been subsequently masked by tectonic features and 
impact craters. 

Ganymede is known as an icy satellite because its 
relatively low mean density (1926.8 kg m-3) requires that 
it is made of about equal amounts, by mass, of water ice 
and rock-metal (actually, about 60% rock and 40% ice). 
Ganymede’s mean density and normalized axial 
moment of inertia (C/ MR2 = 0.3105+0.0028, C is the axial 
moment of inertia, M is the satellite’s mass and R is the 
moon’s radius), known from radio Doppler measure- 
ments by the Galileo spacecraft, require that it be differ- 
entiated into a metallic core surrounded by a silicate 
mantle. The deep metal-rock interior of Ganymede is 
covered by a thick (800 km) ice-liquid water shell. 
Ganymede thus has a three-layer internal structure con- 
sisting of an inner metal core (radius 400-1300 km) 
depending on the composition and hence the density of 
the metal with the smallest radius corresponding to a 
pure iron core and the largest radius to an Fe-FeS core), 
a middle rock shell and an outer water (ice-liquid) shell. 

Ganymede’s magnetic field was first detected by the 
Galileo spacecraft. The magnetic field is large enough to 
carve out its own magnetosphere within the Jovian mag- 
netosphere. The source of Ganymede’s magnetic field is 
probably dynamo action within a still liquid part of 
Ganymede’s metallic core. This is the same process, i.e. 
the geodynamo, that produces the Earth’s magnetic field. 
The existence of a large Ganymedean magnetic field sup- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


ports the inference from the gravity (Doppler) measure- 
ments by the Galileo spacecraft that Ganymede has a 
metallic core. The internal differentiation of Ganymede 
into its three-layer structure supports the inference of tec- 
tonism as the predominant surface modification process 
since differentiation is indicative of sufficient internal 
energy for endogenic activity. 

Subsolidus convection in the ice-dominated outer 
layer of Ganymede plays a major role in controlling the 
evolution and present internal state of the satellite. 
Convection through the ice layer transfers Ganymede’s 
internal heat to its surface. The source of this heat is 
mainly the present radioactive heat generation in the sil- 
icate component of the satellite. Secular cooling, i.e. the 
gradual cooling of Ganymede from an initially hot state 
established early in its history by accretion, differentia- 
tion and radioactivity, also contributes to the present heat 
loss from the satellite. Tidal dissipation in Ganymede is 
an additional potential heat source, since Ganymede is in 
an orbital resonance with EUROPA and Io (see 10: VOLCAN- 
ISM AND GEOPHYSICS). While tidal heating is demonstrably 
important in Io, as evidenced by the satellite’s sustained 
and ubiquitous volcanic activity, there is no evidence that 
tidal heating is important in Ganymede at present. 
However, tidal dissipation could have been significant in 
Ganymede in the past as the satellite evolved through 
other resonances in its orbital history. Perhaps this heat 
source played a role in differentiating Ganymede. 
Ganymede cannot have cooled so thoroughly over geo- 
logic time as to have completely frozen its metallic core 
since the satellite’s present magnetic field requires 
dynamo action in a still liquid part of the core. 


Web Update (31 July 2002) 

New observations of Jupiter’s satellites have been made 
during the Cassini spacecraft’s flyby by Cassini, Galileo, 
the Hubble Space Telescope, the Chandra x-ray 
Observatory and Earth-based radio and optical tele- 
scopes. The Galileo spacecraft has been in orbit around 
Jupiter since December 1995 while Cassini observed 
Jupiter from October 1 2000 to March 31 2001. Cassini 
made its closest approach on December 30, 2000, at a dis- 
tance of about 9.7 million kilometers (6 million miles). 
Observational results include data on interactions of the 
Galilean moons with Jupiter’s magnetic field. Persistent, 
faint, far ultraviolet emission from the magnetic foot- 
prints on Jupiter’s upper atmosphere from Ganymede 
has been observed. From these data it is inferred that 
Ganymede has persistent interactions with Jupiter’s 
magnetic field despite its thin atmosphere. 


Web Update reference 

Clarke J T et al February 2002 Ultraviolet emissions from 
the magnetic footprints of Ilo, Ganymede and 
Europa on Jupiter Nature 415 997-1000 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ganymede 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Anderson J D, Lau E L, Sjogren W L, Schubert G and 
Moore W B 1996 Gravitational constraints on the 
internal structure of Ganymede Nature 384 541-3 

Kivelson M G, Khurana K K, Russell C T, Walker R J, 
Warnecke J, Coroniti F V, Polanskey C, Southwood 
D J and Schubert G 1996 Discovery of Ganymede’s 
magnetic field by the Galileo spacecraft Nature 384 
537-41 

Schubert G 1997 Inside the solid planets and moons Phys. 
World 10 45-9 

Schubert G, Zhang K, Kivelson M G and Anderson J D 
1996 The magnetic field and internal structure of 
Ganymede Nature 384 544-5 

G Schubert 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Gas Detectors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anode 


Detector 
pas 


Figure 1. Schematic of a simple single-wire cylindrical 
proportional counter. 


Gas Detectors 


Gas detectors have been one of the principal methods 
of detecting cosmic x-RAys since the early 1960s. They 
function by detecting the charge liberated when a photon 
interacts with the filling gas via the photoelectric process. 
Their principal performance advantage is that they can 
offer different combinations of high temporal and spatial 
resolutions, large area and bandwidth, good background 
rejection efficiency and high throughput. In addition, their 
basic design is well established, being a development of 
the Geiger counter. Only recently has the use of these 
devices in many areas of X-RAY ASTRONOMY and high-energy 
physics been replaced by CHARGE COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs), 
which can offer significantly better spectral resolution. 
Here the method of operation, the principal types and 
how different detector configurations are used to optimize 
different parameters such as energy and spatial resolutions 
and collecting area are discussed. 


Method of operation 

In its simplest form, shown in figure 1, a gas detector 
consists of an enclosed volume sealed with an x-ray 
transmitting entrance window, an anode at a typical 
potential of +2 kV and associated electronics. In front of 
the detector there is normally a grazing incidence x-ray 
optic, a coded mask or a mechanical collimator to focus, 
modulate or restrict the field of view of the incident x-rays, 
respectively. When an x-ray photon with an energy of 
~0.1-50 keV enters the detector it may ionize (i.e. remove 
one or more electrons from) one of the atoms contained in 
the detector volume. Under the influence of the electric 
field, the free electrons are then accelerated towards the 
anode where they cause further ionizations by colliding 
with other atoms. This produces an avalanche of electrons 
close to the anode which is detected as a pulse of charge 
by the associated electronics. 

The number of initial electrons produced is propor- 
tional to the energy of the incident x-ray and depends on 
the characteristics of the filling gas, which often consists 
primarily of a noble gas suchas Ar or Xe. Typically, a mean 
energy, W, of 20-25 eV is needed to liberate each electron. 
This means that a 6 keV x-ray liberates ~300 electrons. If 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the creation of each electron-ion pair was an independent 
event, then Poisson statistics would apply, and the stan- 
dard deviation would be the square root of the number of 
electron-ion pairs. However, this is not the case and this 
process usually gives better energy resolution than pre- 
dicted in this way. The Fano factor, F,, is used to quantify 
this difference and the FWHM energy resolution of the 
initial signal can be expressed as AE/E = 2.35(F/N)°°, 
where N is the number of electron-ion pairs produced. 
F typically has values in the range 0.20.3 for gas-filled 
detectors. 


Types of gas detectors 

There are two principal ways of detecting the charge 
produced by the interaction of an x-ray with the detector 
gas. Ina proportional counter the charge that arrives at the 
anode is measured directly by the associated electronics. 
With a suitable choice of the anode voltage the amount of 
charge read out is proportional to the energy of the incident 
x-ray—hence the name. The overall energy resolution 
of a proportional counter consists of two components. 
The first is derived from the statistics of the initial ion— 
electron pair production (see above) and the second from 
the charge multiplication process. The overall FWHM 
energy resolution at energy E can be expressed as: 


AE/E =2.35[W(F + A)/E]°° 


where A © 0.6 is the relative variance of the multiplication 
process. This component is the larger of the two and 
therefore dominates the overall energy resolution. This 
results in a typical energy resolution (AE/E) of 20% at 
6 keV. Examples of this type of detectors include the 
large area Proportional Counter Array on the Rossi X-RAY 
TIMING EXPLORER Satellite and the imaging Position Sensitive 
Proportional Counter (PSPC) on the rosar satellite. 

Ina gas scintillation proportional counter (GSPC) the 
primary charge cloud normally drifts into a region where 
the electric field strength is such that the electrons gain, 
on average, enough energy to excite the gas atoms to 
higher energy levels, but not enough to ionize them. No 
avalanche occurs and instead the UV light produced by 
secondary interactions is converted to an electrical signal 
by a photomultiplier tube (PMT). A schematic of a GSPC 
is shown in figure 2. The intensity of the UV pulse is 
proportional to the input x-ray energy. GSPCs provide an 
energy resolution of ~10% at 6 keV, a factor ~2 better than 
standard proportional counters, but at the expense of extra 
complexity and poorer background rejection efficiency. In 
addition, because of the low electric field strength in the 
drift region, some of the electrons produced by x-rays that 
interact close to the entrance window will not undergo 
amplification, limiting the sensitivity of these devices at 
energies $1 keV. An example of this type of detector is the 
Gas Imaging Spectrometer on the sca satellite. The Low- 
Energy Concentrator Spectrometer (LECS) on the BePpPosax 
satellite dispenses with separate ‘drift’ and ‘scintillation’ 
regions in order to extend the low-energy response down 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas Detectors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


© X- Ray pholen 
} 
c 
= 
, Entrance 
c Window 
<i — 
ey 
Dnift ‘ 
Region } Primary 
eleeinms 
er 
Sem 
= Gnd 
a wa 
Pare rE UN 
Scintillaton 3° 5%, 
Vom Region ? ~4 Bhotons UV Transparent 


y — ___| Exit window 


PMT 


Figure 2. Schematic of a conventional GSPC with separate drift 
and scintillation regions. 


to 0.1 keV, but at the expense of making the higher-energy 
(24 keV) signals no longer directly proportional to energy. 


Space operation 

As well as being sensitive to x-rays, gas detectors are 
sensitive to the energetic particles that pervade space. 
Many such particles have high enough energies that they 
can pass directly through the detector and the satellite. 
In doing so they deposit a line of charge in the counter 
gas, which is then detected in the same way as an x-ray. 
In an unshielded detector, the counting rate from such 
particles may be many times that from the target cosmic 
x-ray source. Improvements in gas detector design have 
resulted in ways of discriminating between particle and x- 
ray induced events. With proportional counters there are 
three main techniques. 


1. Events that have energies between lower and upper 
boundaries are selected. 

2. Asecond anode, called a guard counter, is placed in 
a region of the detector unreachable by x-rays. If an 
event is detected simultaneously on both wires then 
it is almost certainly produced by a charged particle. 
More complex arrangements of anode and guard 
wires divide the detector gas into many separate 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


regions; simultaneous event detection in more than 
one region results in the event being rejected. 

3. Since an x-ray photon is stopped by the detector 
gas in a very small region it yields a short pulse. 
A charged particle produces a long trail of charge, 
which will normally arrive at the anode over a much 
longer interval. The different timescales of these 
types of events can be measured and only short events 
accepted. 


In the case of GSPCs energy and rise time thresholds 
are also used, supplemented, in the case of imaging 
systems, by analyzing the spatial distribution of light 
observed by the PMT. 


Imaging detectors 

Both proportional counters and gas scintillation propor- 
tional counters can be designed to measure the location in 
the detector where an x-ray was detected, and hence its 
likely location on the sky if a suitable x-ray optic or coded 
mask is used. The spatial resolution of the best imaging 
proportional counters is very good (the PSPC has a spa- 
tial resolution of around 0.3 mm at 1 keV), which has only 
been bettered by CCD and MICROCHANNEL PLATE DETECTORS. 
The PSPC contains two sets of thin cathode wires located 
at right-angles to each other interleaved with a set of an- 
ode wires. The wires are grouped together to minimize 
the number of pre-amplifiers required. The interaction 
site of an x-ray can then be recovered by measuring the 
relative strengths of the signals induced on the cathodes 
using the so-called ‘center of gravity’ technique. Simpler 
arrangements include interconnecting the sensing wires 
with resistors allowing only two signal processing chains 
per dimension. 

The spatial resolution of imaging GSPCs is not as 
good as with proportional counters and is typically around 
1 mm. In imaging GSPCs the PMT normally contains a 
small number of separate anodes which are read out and 
operated like an Anger camera. In the case of the LECS, 
the anodes are arranged in a square 3 x 3 configuration 
and measuring the distribution of light in each direction 
gives a measure of the centroid of the x-ray position. 


Arvind Parmar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas Giants ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gas Giants 


An alternative name for the giant planets, reflecting the 
fact that they are predominantly gaseous. 


See: giant planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gas in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gas in Galaxies 


The interstellar medium (ISM) can be thought of as 
the galactic atmosphere which fills the space between 
stars. When clouds within the ISM collapse, stars are 
born. When the stars die, they return their matter to the 
surrounding gas. Therefore the ISM plays a vital role in 
galactic evolution. 

The medium includes starlight, gas, dust, planets, 
comets, asteroids, fast-moving charged particles (cosmic 
rays) and magnetic fields. The gas can be further divided 
into hot, warm and cold components, each of which 
appears to exist over a range of densities, and therefore 
pressures. Remarkably, the diverse gas components, 
cosmic rays, magnetic fields and starlight all have very 
roughly the same energy density of about 1 eV cm. All 
the major constituents (or phases) of the ISM appear to be 
identified now, although complete multi-phase studies are 
extremely difficult beyond a few thousand parsecs from 
the Sun. The ISM is a highly complex environment which 
does not lend itself to simple analysis. However, this has 
not stopped astrophysicists from producing basic models 
of the ISM in order to make sense of the great wealth of data 
coming in from ground-based telescopes and satellites. 

The study of the ISM began around 1927 with the 
publication of Edward Emerson Barnard’s photographic 
atlas of the Milky Way. The atlas shows dark clouds 
silhouetted against the background starlight. At about 
the same time, spectra by John Plaskett and Otto 
Struve established the existence of clouds containing 
ionized calcium. By number of nuclei, about 90% of 
INTERSTELLAR MATTER is hydrogen, 10% is helium. All of 
the elements heavier than helium constitute about 0.1% 
of the interstellar nuclei, or about 2% by mass. Roughly 
half of the heavier elements are in the gas phase. But 
most of the refractory elements (Si, Ca, Fe) are depleted 
from the gas phase, and are locked up in small dust grains 
mixed in with the gas. Clouds only account for about half 
the mass and 2% of the interstellar volume. A far more 
pervasive ‘intercloud’ component was not identified until 
the discovery of puLsaRs and the invention of ULTRAVIOLET/Xx- 
RAY ASTRONOMY in the mid to late 1960s. 

The ISM’s properties generally depend on the type of 
galaxy, and its distribution shows clear radial trends for a 
given galaxy. In Disk GALAXIES, the gas piles up into spiral 
arms (figure 1); this is where most of the young stars and 
SUPERNOVAE are to be found. 

The ISM in galaxies is constantly evolving. Stellar 
winds and supernova explosions enrich the gas with 
metals over the course of billions of years. In the 
context of the widely accepted cosmological model of 
hierarchical GALAXY FORMATION, this may be compensated 
by the accretion of primordial gas in the outer parts of 
galaxies. Stars are the principal source of energy for 
the ISM. Starlight photons produce photoelectric emission 
from dust grains; these photoelectrons help to heat the 
neutral gas. Ultraviolet photons from the youngest stars 
ionize atoms and dissociate molecules. The main source of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A color composite of the northern spiral arm in M83. 
The molecular gas is shown in blue, the 20 cm radio continuum 
in red and the ionized gas in green (courtesy of R Rand, 
University of New Mexico). Note that the cold gas, warm gas 
and dust pile up into spiral arms. Young stars form within the 
cold gas and then warm up the gas and dust through 
photoionization. Eventually, the young stars evolve to become 
supernovae which interact violently with the gas and dust (see 
figure 2). This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 13. 


kinetic energy is the supernovae: these drive shock waves 
into the surrounding ISM and are largely responsible for 
its complexity. 


Atomic and molecular clouds 

Half of the neutral atomic hydrogen and all of the 
molecular hydrogen in the ISM are concentrated into 
relatively high-density and low-temperature regions 
called ‘clouds’. The properties of the atomic hydrogen 
(H I) clouds have been determined primarily from radio 
observations of the hyperfine ground state transitions of 
hydrogen at 1420 MHz (21 cm); interstellar absorption 
lines of trace elements such as Ca* also continue to play a 
key role in the study of these clouds. For the most common 
clouds, where the 21 cm radiation escapes freely, the 
brightness of the emission provides a direct measurement 
of the H I column density Ny = f myds where ny is 
the atomic hydrogen density. When an H I cloud lies 
in front of a bright source of radio continuum emission, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. A simulation of the breakout from a galactic disk of a 
superbubble driven by multiple supernovae. The densities of 
gas in the disk and superbubble are shown in cross-section, with 
only the upper half of the disk shown. Red is high-density gas, 
while blue is low-density gas, with other colors of the rainbow 
intermediate. Each side of the image is approximately 800 pc 
long. (Courtesy of M-M Mac Low, American Museum of 
Natural History.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 14. 


the decrease in the brightness of the background source at 
21 cm is proportional to Ny = f(nH/Ty) ds, where Ty is 
the temperature of the H I cloud. Thus, observations of 
H I clouds at 21 cm in emission and absorption provide 
direct information about cloud temperatures and column 
densities. Table 1 summarizes basic properties of the cold 
and warm neutral media. Maps of the sky show that 
HI clouds have complex shapes resembling thin extended 
sheets or filaments with embedded small clumps. 

Molecular hydrogen is confined to the interiors of 
the densest and most massive clouds, the dark clouds, 
where starlight capable of dissociating molecules cannot 
penetrate. These clouds constitute the active star- 
forming component of the ISM. Because H) has no 
electric dipole moment, radiative transitions of H2 are 
greatly suppressed. Therefore, most of the structural 
information about molecular clouds in the ISM is obtained 
through observations of the rotational transitions of the 
trace molecule CO at 115 GHz (2.6 mm). In addition, 
a wide variety of other molecules, including complex 
hydrocarbon chains, have been detected within the H 
clouds. Molecular clouds are small (40 pc), dense 
(200 cm~?), with structure on scales of less than 0.1 pc 
(see table 1 and also INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR CLOUDS). Some 
of the small condensations can have densities as high as 
10° cm~?. In disk galaxies like our own, the cold neutral 
gas and molecular gas are confined to a disk which is much 
thinner than the stellar disk. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The intercloud medium 

Astrophysicists have long wondered as to what confines 
gas clouds within the Galaxy. In 1956, Spitzer speculated 
that a rarefied (~10~? cm~’) hot gas (~10° K), extending 
a kiloparsec or more above the Galactic plane, would 
confine the diffuse gas clouds observed far above the 
plane and would prevent their expansion and dissipation. 
Confirmation of the predicted corona came 17 yr later 
with the advent of space astronomy (table 1). Present- 
day satellites allow for the direct detection of diffuse x- 
ray emission and ultraviolet—x-ray spectral lines from the 
highly ionized trace elements within the hot gas (see the 
review by Spitzer 1990). The hot gas is thought to arise 
from the action of supernovae as we discuss below (see 
figure 4). 

The existence of widespread hot gas in the disk 
of the Galaxy comes from observations of O°* ions at 
ultraviolet wavelengths and the direct detection of soft x- 
ray emission. A clear demonstration of coronal halo gas 
far from the disk has been harder to come by. A wide 
range of ions is observed (Si**, C**, N**) towards the halo. 
Current models suggest that ultraviolet light from disk 
stars can only account for some of the ionization. The N V 
absorption lines appear to require collisional heating from 
a pervasive hot corona (Sembach and Savage 1992). 

From a theoretical standpoint, the expectation is that 
hot young stars and supernovae punch holes or blow 
bubbles (figure 2) in the surrounding gas, and the diffuse 
hot component escapes into the halo through buoyancy. 
In fact, there are spectacular examples of bubbles seen at 
21 cm in the Galactic ISM (see figure 3). However, there 
are many outstanding problems with these models, not 
least complications imposed by the magnetic field. Since 
the gas is thermally unstable, it is equally probable that 
the gas undergoes a ‘cooling flow’ or ‘fountain flow’ back 
towards the disk. 

Filling the space between clouds are two additional 
components of the intercloud medium. By mass, most 
of the intercloud medium is in the form of a ‘warm 
neutral’ or a ‘warm ionized’ medium. These phases 
extend far beyond the thin disk of cold gas (table 1). 
The existence of the warm ionized medium was firmly 
established by 1973 from three independent observations: 
(i) low-frequency radio observations by Hoyle and Ellis, 
(ii) time delays in radio pulses from pulsars (see below) 
and (iii) through direct observation of H* recombination 
emission by wide-field Fabry—Perot interferometers. The 
gas has a density of roughly 0.1 cm~? anda temperature 
near 104 K. The dominant source of ionization appears 
to be dilute ionizing flux from young stars in the disk, 
although some models suggest that the cooling radiation 
in old SUPERNOVA REMNANTS can be important. The deepest 
optical spectra to date show that the ionized gas extends 
to at least 5 kpc into the halo in some cases, and extends 
even further in radius than the H I disk. 

Roughly half of the interstellar H I appears to be 
located in the ‘warm neutral’ component of the intercloud 
medium. This intercloud H I was first identified in 1965 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. The component properties of the interstellar medium. 


Temperature Midplane Filling Average 

Component (K) density (m3) fraction (%) height (pc) 
Clouds 

Ho 15 200 0.1 75 

HI 120 25 2 100 
Intercloud 

WarmHI 8000 0.37 35° 500 

WarmHII 8000 0.15 20 1000 

Hot HII ~10° 0.002 438 30008 


* Value uncertain by at least a factor of 2. 


GLAT (degrees; B1950) 


278 


274 eve 


GLON (degrees; B1950) 


Figure 3. An image of a large Galactic H I supershell (white region at center). The empty supershell has a central brightness 
temperature of about 3 K; the shell edges have a brightness temperature around 60 K (black). The shell also shows narrow channels 
which appear to extend to the Galactic halo, forming a ‘chimney’ above and below the plane. The shell lies at a distance of about 

6.5 kpc, has a diameter of roughly 600 pc and extends more than 1.1 kpc above the Galactic plane. The data were obtained at the 
Parkes Radio Telescope as part of the Southern Galactic Plane Survey. (Courtesy of NM McLure-Griffiths and J R Dickey, University of 


Minnesota.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 15. 


as the source of the ubiquitous, relatively broad (velocity 
dispersion ~9 km s~') 21 cm emission features that had 
no corresponding absorption when viewed against bright 
background radio sources. The large velocity dispersions 
and the absence of absorption imply temperatures of 5000-— 
10000 K. Observations of the Ly a absorption line of H I 
toward bright stars show that this gas has a mean extent 
from the midplane of 500 pc, i.e. much thicker than the cold 
neutral disk. If the warm neutral medium is in pressure 
equilibrium with the cold component, then it would be 
clumped into regions occupying 35% of the intercloud 
volume with a density of 0.3 cm~* at the midplane (table 1), 
although these numbers are highly uncertain. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The solar neighborhood 

We now consider the interplanetary medium (heliosphere) 
within the solar system as distinct from the local 
interstellar medium. The Sun moves with a velocity of 
about 20 km s"! relative to the local ISM. The solar wind 
produces a bow shock ahead of the Sun. This discontinuity 
(heliopause) defines the extent of the heliosphere in the 
upstream direction. It is expected that the Pioneer 11 
or Voyager deep space probes will eventually confirm 
the existence of this boundary. The neutral interstellar 
gas is largely unaffected by the heliopause, so that the 
local neutral medium presumably streams relatively freely 
through the solar system. In contrast, ions and charged 
dust grains are probably deflected by the advancing 
heliosphere. cosmic Rays are relativistic particles and 
therefore penetrate the heliosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas in Galaxies ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. ROSAT false-color images of the Corona Australis dark molecular cloud. The contours show the 100 4m emission from dust 
in this cloud measured by the IRAS infrared satellite. The self-scaled images are for two different energy bands: (a) 100 eV and 300 eV 
(C band) and (b) 500-1100 eV (M band). These soft (low-energy) x-rays are absorbed by interstellar dust and gas. Because the M band 
x-rays are more penetrating than the C band x-rays, they are absorbed more strongly in the core of the cloud than in the periphery, 

while the C band x-rays from beyond the cloud are completely absorbed over the entire cloud. These images demonstrate that much of 


the x-ray flux originates from beyond the cloud. (Courtesy of D N Burrows, Penn State University.) This figure is reproduced as Color 
Plate 16. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Gas in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The most local gas we can associate with the local 
ISM has the properties of the warm neutral medium (see 
also SOLAR WIND: INTERACTION WITH LOCALINTERSTELLAR MEDIUM). 
The solar radiation is backscattered by the local medium. 
Studies which exploit the resonance lines of hydrogen and 
helium show that the gas has a temperature of 8000 K, a 
hydrogen density of 0.25 cm~? and a helium density of 
0.02 cm-?. Absorption line measurements toward nearby 
stars indicate that this warm gas is only a few parsecs in 
extent with hotter 10° K gas occupying most of the volume 
within 100 pc of the Sun. 


Theories of the ISM 

The two-phase model 

Field, Goldsmith and Habing (FGH) (Field et al 1969) 
developed the first quasi-static theory of a multiphase ISM. 
The FGH model contained two stable phases, the ‘cold’ 
neutral phase at a temperature of ~100 K and a ‘warm’ 
phase at ~10* K where about 10% of the gas is ionized. 
The model uses cosmic ray heating to balance the cooling 
of these two phases. The cooling is dominated by fine- 
structure excitations from C* in the cool gas, and collisional 
excitations (Lya) in the warm gas. The model predicts an 
ISM where the majority of the volume is occupied by the 
warm (~10! K) intercloud medium while the majority of 
the mass is contained within the dense cold clouds. 

However, the FGH model indicated that the ISM 
should be stratified perpendicularly to the Galactic disk, 
which was known to violate the observed properties of the 
ISM. They therefore appealed to the collective explosive 
effects of H II regions and supernovae, which impart 
sufficient turbulent motions to destroy any gravitationally 
induced stratification. The FGH model allows the cold 
clouds to have a large range of sizes. The smallest clouds 
are destroyed by thermal conduction within the warm 
layer, while the largest are gravitationally unstable and 
prone to collapse. Otherwise, there is no limit on the size 
or shape of the expected neutral structures. 

FGH also raised the possible existence of another 
stable phase at a temperature of ~10° K, dominated by 
bremsstrahlung cooling. However, without observations 
of the soft x-ray background or high-ionization UV spectra, 
there was no need to invoke the actual existence of this 
medium. 

In the FGH model, supernova explosions were 
required to destroy the gravitationally induced vertical 
stratification of the ISM. This inspired theoretical models 
of the expansion and thermal evolution of supernova 
remnants (SNRs), and it was then that the full importance 
of supernovae came to be realized. Supernovae generate 
blast waves with speeds of 10000 km s7! which shock the 
ambient material, producing gas at ~10° K which then 
slowly cools through bremsstrahlung emission and line 
emission from highly ionized ions. The remnant structure 
is a hot bubble surrounded by a thin, dense shell of cool 
~10° K gas. This situation proves to be quite stable; the hot 
bubble cannot expand through the shell expanding ahead 
of it. After a million years, the radius of the hot bubble is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


roughly 80 pc. At this point, the interior pressure of the 
bubble reaches the ambient pressure of the ISM. This static 
situation remains until the hot bubble cools and contracts 
after four million years or so. 

Cox and Smith (1974) were the first to recognize 
the importance of this evolutionary sequence for the 
dynamical and thermal balance of the ISM. If an expanding 
SNR happens to intersect the static hot cavity of another 
remnant, the expanding remnant ‘breaks out’ through 
the old, hot remnant. Because of the low density 
within the static bubble, the expanding shock wave 
propagates preferentially into it, reheating the matter 
inside. Depending on the rate of Galactic SNe, the ISM 
could therefore evolve towards an interconnected tunnel 
network filled predominantly by hot gas. 

To estimate the importance of such a tunnel network, 
a porosity parameter was introduced such that 


gq =rTt Ven (1) 


where r is the average SN rate per unit volume, t is the 
lifetime of an isolated bubble and V,, is the final volume 
of the average SN-generated bubble. For g « 1, q is the 
proportion of the total interstellar volume that would be 
filled with hot bubbles. For an SN frequency of 1 per 
80 yr, they found g ~ 0.1. This implies that 10% of 
interstellar space should be filled by unconnected, hot, 
SN-generated bubbles. Therefore, the probability of any 
new SN occurring within a preexisting cavity was 0.1, but 
the probability that any new SNR would expand into and 
reheat another older remnant was 0.55. The consequences 
of the overlap and phase structure of the ISM were radical. 

This chain of reasoning rests heavily on supernovae 
occurring randomly throughout the Galactic volume. 
The simple conclusion prompted many to believe in the 
‘porosity imperative’, that is the need for a hot 10° K 
phase to occupy the majority of the interstellar volume. 
The cold and warm (~10* K) phases were relegated to the 
walls between the pervasive bubbles. Large filamentary 
structures in the ISM seem to support this, except that the 
overall pervasiveness and smoothness of the ISM are in 
conflict with this picture. 


The three-phase model 
This paved the way for a true theoretical tour de 
force, the McKee-Ostriker (MO) model of the supernova- 
dominated, three-phase ISM. In their model, supernovae 
produce the ‘hot ionized medium’ (HIM), the ~10° K 
component of the ISM in their bubble interiors, as well 
as enhancing the formation of the ‘cold neutral’ (CNM), 
“warm neutral’ (WNM) and ‘warm ionized’ (WIM) media 
along the compressed edges of remnants. There are 
still only two fundamental phases (CNM, HIM) in the 
MO theory. The WNM and WIM are restricted to the 
interface regions of the neutral clouds, and the WIM is in 
direct contact with the HIM and photoionized by thermal 
emission from it. 

The model attempts to balance the thermal and mass 
exchange between the different phases. The energy input 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


from supernovae is offset by radiation cooling from the 
four media. The mass lost by cloud evaporation into the 
HIM is balanced by dense shell formation of swept-up 
interstellar material. The model is known to be incorrect 
in many details. There are numerous observations of 
local, dense clouds that are highly overpressured with 
respect to their environment. The model does not treat the 
influence of magnetic fields which are known to thread 
throughout the ISM and are likely to suppress thermal 
evaporation. The magnetic fields are of the right strength 
to play an important role in equilibrating the pressure 
balance. However, in the absence of a better working 
model, the MO theory remains the dominant conceptual 
framework. In fact, it remains unclear whether thermal 
pressure balance between the phases is an essential feature 
of the MO picture. 

Pressure equilibrium should exist between the cosmic 
rays, the magnetic field and the kinetic interstellar 
component. However, the latter need not be the thermal 
pressure of the gas. Random, turbulent ‘bulk’ motions 
of the gas have a high enough energy density to provide 
the required effective pressure. The minimum interstellar 
pressure, P = nT, is probably about ~25 000 cm~? K and 
may even be higher. 


The influence of supernovae 

After a burst of STAR FORMATION has taken place, the first 
supernovae appear after about 10 million years. These 
type II supernovae arise from collapsing massive stars 
which have exhausted most of their nuclear fuel. Type II 
supernovae are distributed like the young stars in a disk 
galaxy, i.e. concentrated along spiral arms. A billion years 
after the initial starburst, the type I supernovae appear. 
Type Ia supernovae are thought to be due to accretion 
of matter by a white dwarf in a binary pair. These 
are to be found among the older STELLAR POPULATIONS and 
therefore have an exponential distribution with radius like 
the underlying disk. 

The increase in type Ia supernovae towards the 
Galactic centre implies that here the ISM becomes 
supernova dominated, resulting in a two-phase ISM 
with only an HIM and a CNM. The warm phases are 
disrupted as diffuse clouds are shocked and heated to high 
temperatures. The molecular clouds survive the assault 
of supernovae and remain essntially intact, having only 
their outer warm layers stripped away. The scale height 
of the oldest stellar populations is higher (~300 pc) than 
for the atomic hydrogen (~100 pc), such that half of all 
type Ia supernovae explode above the gas and therefore 
deposit much of their energy directly to the halo. This 
picture produces a volume filling fraction of about 25% 
for the HIM, and presumably explains the H I holes seen 
in external galaxies. 

The correlated distribution of type II supernovae has 
an important consequence. The time interval between 
successive supernovae is less than the bubble lifetime. This 
can result in a large-scale wind of energy into the Galactic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


halo. Heiles (1987) derives a two-dimensional porosity 
parameter 
q2p = 8.305N7! (2) 


where o is the supernova rate in kpc? Myr“!, s (~2) is 
a correlation factor and N (~40) is the number of type II 
supernovae that occur in a single association. However, 
this leads to a volume filling factor of more than 95% 
along the spiral arms, and about 80% outside of the arms, 
contrary to observation. Furthermore, the type II energy 
flow is expected to break out and produce a mass flow 
rate of ~20Mo per year, which would deplete the total gas 
content of the disk in 10° yr. How are we to reconcile this? 


The role of pulsars 
Discovered in 1967, pulsars are the rapidly rotating cores 
left behind by exploding type II supernovae. More than 
a thousand have now been observed in our Galaxy, in 
halo globular clusters, and in the LMC and SMC. Radio 
observations of these rapidly pulsating stars provide 
information on the plasma densities and magnetic field 
strengths of the intervening interstellar medium over 
baselines of tens of kiloparsecs. 

The electrodynamic properties of a plasma are 
functions of the frequency of the electromagnetic wave that 
traverses the plasma. The group velocity of a wave ina 


plasma is 
o\'2 
Be “( < | 6) 


where w is the angular frequency and @, is the plasma 
frequency defined by w*, = 4sne?/m, for which n, e and 
m are the number density, charge and mass of the free 
electrons. 

Because the group velocity of a wave depends on its 
frequency, the Fourier components of a pulse will traverse 
a total distance d through a plasma in a time ¢,, given by 


4 ds 
ly = / = (4) 
0 Ug 


where s defines a small increment of distance through 
the plasma. Plasma frequencies in interstellar space are 
typically very low so we can expand equation (3) and 
substitute into equation (5) such that the time taken for 
the Fourier component of a pulse to traverse a plasma is 


d d 
ty © — + (2cw)7! / wr, ds. (5) 
c 0 


The first term is the time taken to traverse a distance d 
in vacuo and the second term is the plasma correction. 

Studies of the arrival times of the various Fourier 
components indicate that the highest frequencies arrive 
ahead of the low-frequency components. What is actually 
measured is the derivative 


dt, Ame? 


pO FD. 
daw cma 


(6) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TITTY Tt TH 


100 


DM sin b 
(em™ pe) 


0.1 


0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 
Galactic z—distance (kpc) 


Figure 5. Dispersion measures from pulsars, Dm sin b where b is 
galactic latitude, versus z-distance above the Galactic plane. The 
horizontal lines show the distance uncertainty for different 
pulsars. The black circles and stars refer to pulsars in globular 
clusters and the Magellanic clouds respectively. The sloping line 
corresponds to a model electron distribution which is uniform in 
density 0.03 cm~, and the two dashed lines are for models in 
which the electron layer has the same density at z = 0 but falls 
off with increasing z as sech*(z//) where h is 500 pe and 800 pc. 
(Courtesy of R N Manchester, Australia Telescope National 
Facility and J Taylor, Princeton University.) 


The dispersion measure, defined as Dx, = fe neds, is a 
measure of the total column of free electrons along the path 
to the pulsar in units of pccm~. Acolumn of 10” electrons 
results ina Dy value of 30 pc cm~? anda delay of 12s fora 
signal at 100 MHz relative to infinite frequency. Dispersion 
measures were first obtained by the pulsar discovery team. 
Since then, we have come to learn (figure 5) from pulsars in 
distant globular clusters and the Magellanic Clouds that 
the warm atmosphere in the Galaxy extends to about a 
kiloparsec above the Galactic plane. 

The radio signals reveal other important properties 
about the diffuse gas. In the presence of a magnetic field 
along the path to the pulsar, B,, the plane of polarization 
of the propagating wave will rotate by an angle x equal to 
the phase delay between the ordinary and extraordinary 
components of the electric field. The so-called Faraday 
rotation angle is given by 


ca? 


d 
posit / oron ds (7) 
0 


for which wp is the cyclotron frequency. We define a 
quantity called the rotation measure, 


d 
Rn = 0.1 | Ne By ds (8) 
0 


in the traditional units of rad m~, and where B is in units 


of microgauss (wG). The ratio of Rm to Dm is the average 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


galactic magnetic field strength along the path, 


Rn 
(By) = 1.232. (9) 


m 


The influence of magnetic fields 

Radio observations towards 500 pulsars show that there 
is a random and ordered magnetic field dispersed 
throughout the Galaxy. The ordered component has a field 
strength of 1-2 4G, while the random component is 5-6 ~G 
with a cell size of about 50 pe. 

The random field has a dramatic effect on the 
evolution of supernovae. While it can be neglected in the 
early stages of the explosion, as the remnant expands, the 
trapped magnetic field in the thin, cool shell resists the 
expansion, and this results in a much thicker shell with 
much lower compression. Now, after a million years, the 
hot bubble has an inner edge at 60 pc and an outer edge 
of 90 pce. Over the next four million years, the combined 
thermal and magnetic pressure of the thick shell forces the 
hot bubble to decrease in size. After ~5 x 10° yr, the bubble 
radius is only 10 pc or so. Supernova bubbles can still 
overlap, but generally at a time when they are significantly 
weaker disturbances. This suggests that, consistent with 
the observations, the HIM produced by type II supernovae 
should be much smaller than predicted by Heiles. 


Dependence on galaxy type 

Surveys of several hundred galaxies show a systematic 
trend in the fraction of molecular gas to neutral gas for 
galaxies along the ‘Hubble sequence’ (see figure 6). This 
relationship is not fully understood although possible 
answers include the effect of the large-scale gravitational 
field in the formation or disruption of molecular clouds. 
For example, the stronger gravitational field in the bulge- 
dominated (early) galaxies may encourage fragmentation 
of the gas as a first step to forming dense clouds through 
collapse. It appears that there is also an enhanced fraction 
of molecules to neutral atoms in merging galaxies and 
cluster galaxies. In the latter case (e.g. Virgo), it is thought 
that the diffuse hydrogen has been swept away by the 
intracluster gas as the galaxy moves through the cluster. 


Unanswered questions 

On the subject of the ISM, there are vastly more questions 
than answers. There are few topics in astrophysics which 
are so well served by the new and planned generation 
of space-borne and ground-based observatories. These 
highly technological and expensive facilities provide the 
necessary impetus to encourage progress from theorists 
and computational analysts alike. 

Although the principal components of the ISM have 
been identified and many of their properties measured, 
there is very little understanding of how they fit together 
into a dynamic system. This lack of progress has begun 
to stifle progress in other astrophysical fields. What are 
the feedback mechanisms that determine the stellar and 
interstellar properties of a galaxy? What regulates the star 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas in Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


8 | 
6 24 $0/Sa 4 
ae | 
aE pe 4 
OF i i = 
BE 14 Sab 4 
4e | 
ee t= | 
0 E SI l 4 
§ 8 27 Sb 
Gs} 4e q 
= 2. 4 
oO OF ot q 
eo) E 35 Sbe 4 
é 10 
a E 4 
oO 6E 4 
E 1 4 
ae: = i 
= 27 Sc q 
“= =10£F 4 
Gq iF we 4 
es _-— “4 
OF 1 7. = 
4 14 Scd 
2b 4 
0) 
Ace 13 Sd/Sm 4 
ae 4 
oF I 1 | 4 
-2 ) 2 
og [M(H,) /M(HI) | 


Figure 6. The ratio of molecular to atomic hydrogen for different 
‘Hubble types’ of spiral galaxies. The histograms are presented 
in order of declining bulge to disk ratios, with the S0-Sa galaxies 
having the largest bulges. The increasing fraction of dense 
molecular clouds towards earlier Hubble types may reflect a 
higher cloud formation rate in the presence of a stronger 
gravitational field. (Courtesy of J S Young, University of 
Massachusetts.) 


formation rate? Why do the many components of the ISM 
have very roughly the same energy density? What are 
the volume filling fraction and topology of the various gas 
phases? What is the large-scale and fine-scale topology 
of the magnetic field for each of the gas phases? How do 
the properties of the ISM change with cosmic time as more 
and more of the gas becomes locked up in stars? 

To quote from Spitzer (1990), ‘Understanding the 
processes that occur as the hot interstellar gas evolves 
in our Galaxy is an ambitious goal that we are far 
from achieving’. The dynamics of a compressible gas 
bombarded by photons and cosmic rays is a highly 
complex problem. Progress has been made through 
idealized models. In these models, one commonly 
recognizes three phases. Initially, the supernova ejects 
a rapidly expanding envelope whose interaction heats 
the ambient gas to high temperatures. Second, the hot 
gas expands and compresses or destroys clouds in its 
wake. Finally, the hot gas may escape or fall back down 
to the galactic plane. The problem is that, in practice, 
these three stages overlap so much that their mutual 
interactions are crucial. Since we can expect major gains 
in the computational power of supercomputers, we can 
look forward to the development of more realistic models 
in the decades ahead. 


Bibliography 


Cox D P and Smith B W 1974 Large-scale effects of 
supernova remnants on the Galaxy: generation and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


maintenance of a hot network of tunnels Astrophys. J. 
189 L105-8 

Field G B, Goldsmith D W and Habing HJ 1969 Cosmic ray 
heating of the interstellar gas Astrophys. J. 155 L149- 
54 

Heiles C 1987 Supernovae versus models of the interstellar 
medium and the gaseous halo Astrophys. J. 315 555-66 

Mac Low M-M, McCray R and Norman M L 1989 
Astrophys. J. 337 141 

McKee C F and Ostriker J P 1977 A theory of the 
interstellar medium—three components regulated 
by supernova explosions in an inhomogeneous 
substrate Astrophys. J. 218 148-69 

Sembach K and Savage B 1992 Observations of highly 
ionized gas in the Galactic halo Astrophys. J. Suppl. 
83 147-201 

Spitzer L 1990 Theories of the hot interstellar gas Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 28 71-102 


Joss Bland-Hawthorn and Ron Reynolds 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gas Tail, Cometary 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gas Tail, Cometary 


The part of a comet consisting of ions and electrons formed 
from gas molecules expelled from the comet during a close 
approach to the Sun; also known as an ion tail or plasma tail. 
The molecules are ionized by ultraviolet light from the Sun 
and drawn away from the head of the comet by the solar 
wind. Not all comets develop a gas tail (or a dust tail), but 
both types of tail always point away from the Sun. Gas tails 
are straight, but may appear kinked or discontinuous as a 
result of a disconnection event—a consequence of a change 
in the polarity of the magnetic field entrained in the solar 
wind. They are predominantly blue, the characteristic 
color of emission by ionized carbon monoxide (CO*) at 
420 nm. Gas tails begin to form typically at 2 AU from the 
Sun and can extend to 10° km. 


See also: cometary atmospheres, disconnection event. 


Compare: dust tail, cometary. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gascoigne, Sidney Charles Bartholemew (‘Ben’) 
(1915-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gascoigne, Sidney Charles 
Bartholemew (‘Ben’) (1915-) 


Astronomer, born in Napier, New Zealand, professor at 
the Australian National University, Canberra. Worked on 
stellar evolution, the distance scale of the universe and 
photometry. He was the project scientist for the Anglo- 
Australian Telescope at Siding Spring, New South Wales. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gascoigne, William (1621-44) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gascoigne, William (1621-44) 


English astronomer and instrument-maker, died on the 
battlefield of Marston Moor, Yorkshire. Invented the 
eyepiece micrometer, using a screw to measure the 
distance between two wires inside the eyepiece, so as to 
measure small angles with precision, and made telescopes, 
including one with two convex lenses. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gaseous Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gaseous Nebulae 


Orion treads the nightly sky, his jeweled sword hanging 
from his belt, its centerpiece a small bright cloud, the 
ORION NEBULA. Though under ideal conditions visible to the 
naked eye, the nebula was discovered telescopically by 
the French scientist Nicolas de Pieresc in 1610 at the same 
time that Galileo was probing the heavens. The Orion 
Nebula was but one of what would become a huge number 
of unresolved ‘nebulae’. Some nebulae yielded to better 
instruments and were revealed as star clusters. In our own 
time, EDWIN HUBBLE began to resolve yet others as galaxies, 
M31 still being known as the Great Nebula in Andromeda. 

Still other nebulae could not be so resolved because 
they were not made of stars. Turning his primitive 
spectroscope in 1864 to one of Herschel’s ‘planetary 
nebulae’, SIR WILLIAM HUGGINS found it to radiate emission 
lines characteristic of a hot gas. Though some astronomers 
had contended that they had indeed seen the Orion 
Nebula break into myriad stars, Huggins found that 
it too displayed the characteristic three emission lines: 
hydrogen at 4861 A and the mysterious green ‘nebulium’ 
lines at 4959 A and 5007 A that, in 1928, were identified by 
1S Bowen as ‘forbidden lines’ of doubly ionized oxygen. 
The Orion Nebula—and large numbers of similar objects— 
must also be made of hot ionized gas. 

Three main kinds of ‘emission nebulae’—those that 
radiate emission lines—inhabit the Galaxy. The PLANETARY 
NEBULAE, found everywhere from the galactic disk to the 
halo, are small shells of gas around, and illuminated by, 
hot dying intermediate-mass stars. SUPERNOVA REMNANTS 
are the heated remains of high-mass exploding stars. To 
distinguish between them, the Orion Nebula and its kind 
are knownas ‘gaseous nebulae’ (in spite of the others being 
gaseous as well), as ‘diffuse nebulae’ from their fuzzy 
appearances, and as ‘H II regions’ because they are largely 
made of ionized hydrogen (figure 1). 

The diffuse nebulae are distinguished by their relation 
to new stars and star formation. Vastly larger than 
planetary nebulae, they are strictly confined to the inner 
plane of the Galaxy where we find the giant molecular 
clouds (GMCs), and specifically are either inside or 
contiguous to the molecular clouds themselves, where 
they are commonly related to young T Tauri stars and 
to the bipolar outflows that make Herbig—Haro objects. 
The nebulae are local portions of the molecular clouds 
that have been ionized by new hot massive stars that the 
molecular clouds have recently spawned. More than any 
other galactic feature, the diffuse nebulae lead our eye to 
the Galaxy’s newest birthing grounds. 

The diffuse nebulae are closely associated with a 
fourth kind of galactic object, ‘REFLECTION NEBULAE’ that glow 
in a similar fashion but whose spectra are the same as 
those of the surrounding stars. Though they too are gas 
clouds, their gas is neutral and largely unilluminated, the 
visual radiance coming from the scattering of starlight by 
embedded dust grains, returning us again to the molecular 
clouds, which are cold because of the dust they contain. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. No diffuse nebula can be ‘typical’, but the Rosette 
Nebula gives a fine sense of their general natures, a huge cloud 
of ionized gas illuminated by hot stars within. Set in the 
foreground are numerous dust clouds including some classic 
‘elephant trunks’ that show the intimate relation between 
interstellar gas and dust (National Optical Astronomy 
Observatories). 


Reflection nebulae are illuminated by stars too cool to 
ionize the gas. Turn up the stellar heat and they glow 
like Orion. 


A tour 

Several diffuse nebulae are fine showpieces that decorate 
the Milky Way. Though the brighter nebulae, like Orion, 
look rather greenish to the eye (as a result of the forbidden 
oxygen lines), photography reveals most as red, the color 
caused by the bright red H, emission line at 6563 A. 
Reflection nebulae are quickly revealed by their blue 
colors, as blue starlight is scattered much more efficiently 
than red. 

Orion was featured as M42 in Charles Messier’s 
famed 1780s list that warned comet hunters of celestial 
mimics. Just to the north, also in Orion’s Sword, lies 
small M43, part of the same complex. To the east in dim 
Monoceros is the Rosette Nebula, which surrounds the 
open cluster NGC 2237, a circular galactic flower well over 
a degree wide. Then go north along the Milky Way into 
Perseus, where glows the California Nebula, faint but three 
degrees long. Swing near the North Pole into Cygnus and 
there next to bright Deneb is the immense North America 
Nebula, three degrees across and visible in binoculars. 

Plunging south we hit the motherlode in and around 
Sagittarius, where diffuse nebulae abound. Here, admire 
the naked-eye Lagoon Nebula, which nearly harbors the 
Winter Solstice. Above it is the smaller Trifid Nebula, 
a red patch with a blue reflection border. A bit to the 
north flies the Eagle Nebula in Serpens, between them 
the Omega. Farther south the wonders yet improve, the 
rich southern Milky Way capped by the Carina Nebula, a 
massive complex over 2.5 degrees across. 

Between these treasures are hundreds more, some 
small and compact, some great glowing clouds so faint 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gaseous Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


they are difficult to see. Many are known by their NGC 
numbers. Others are included in the ‘Sharpless’ catalogue 
of 1959, which contains 313 objects identified on the red 
plates of the Palomar Sky Survey (which highlight H, 
radiation). Prefixed ‘S’, nearly all are true diffuse nebulae, 
with Orion called S281, and the North America S 117. 
Diffuse nebulae are also powerful radio emitters. The 
‘Westerhout’ list of 1958, compiled from a long-wave radio 
survey of the Milky Way, includes over 50 gaseous nebulae 
(and several supernova remnants). Though it overlaps 
with the brighter Sharpless nebulae, it has the distinct 
advantage of including nebulae that are optically obscured 
by interstellar dust, radio waves traveling the Galaxy 
unimpeded. Indeed, W49, one of the largest diffuse 
nebulae in the Galaxy, is invisible optically, hidden behind 
the thick dust in the Great Rift. Numerous other catalogs 
simply designate the nebulae by galactic coordinates (G). 

Other galaxies with active star formation are also 
filled with diffuse nebulae, some—‘giant H II regions’— 
vastly larger than our own classic objects. The LARGE 
MAGELLANIC CLOUD, outlined by vast numbers of glowing 
red nebulae, contains the magnificent Tarantula Nebula, 
so big and bright that even at a distance of 52 kpc it 
acquired a naked-eye star name, 30 Doradus. It is similar 
in scale to NGC 604, which lies within a spiral arm of 
the Triangulum Galaxy M33. Indeed, a mere glance at 
the distribution of diffuse nebulae in an external galaxy 
shows clearly that they lie strictly along the spiral arms, 
and in fact help identify the arms. Since diffuse nebulae are 
closely identified with new stars, their locations show that 
the spiral arms are the galaxies’ star-formation factories 
(figure 2). 

Factoring in the distances of the known diffuse 
nebulae reveals an immense range in size and structure. 
The centerpiece Orion Nebula, considered small, is about 
5 pe across and contains about 100 solar masses of gas. At 
the low end are compact diffuse nebulae whose diameters 
are measured in tenths of a parsec, while at the high end 
the giant diffuse nebulae 30 Doradus and NGC 604 are 
400 pc across and contain thousands of solar masses lit by 
whole clusters of hot stars. If placed at the Orion Nebula, 
they would overfill the entire constellation. 

The nebulae range in structure from ionized bubbles 
set within dark molecular clouds, through blisters on 
the clouds’ surfaces that are heated from the outside, to 
extended thin sheets of ionized matter that have undefined 
boundaries, pervade the Galaxy, are uncataloged, and with 
no specific integrity push the limit of the definition of 
‘diffuse nebula’. This ionized background belongs more 
to discussions of the general interstellar medium. 


The illuminating stars 

Like the planetary nebulae, diffuse nebulae, predomi- 
nantly made of hydrogen, are ionized by stellar radiation 
shortward of the hydrogen Lyman limit at 912 A. Forastar 
to radiate this Lyman continuum, it must be hotter than 
about 25000 K, which corresponds to spectral class B1, 
a limit found empirically by Edwin Hubble in the 1920s. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. The spiral arms of the galaxy M101 are outlined by 
great numbers of giant diffuse nebulae that dwarf the Orion 
Nebula, are lit by clusters of O stars, and reveal the locations of 
active star formation (National Optical Astronomy 
Observatories). 


Earlier (hotter) spectral classes ionize their surroundings, 
while later (cooler) ones do not, their radiation producing 
blue reflection nebulae when the starlight is scattered from 
the dust embedded in the gas. Thus the diffuse nebulae 
are the realm of the O stars (BO included here with them). 

O stars are massive. At 25000 K, a zero-age main 
sequence star has a mass around 10 Mo, the minimum 
mass that can ionize a diffuse nebula. Because typical B1 
stars are evolved from higher masses, the average bottom- 
end mass is more like 12 My. Orion’s ionizing ‘Trapezium’ 
quartet consists of B0.5, BO, O7, and O6 stars. Because 
mass and luminosity climb so quickly with earlier spectral 
class, the O6 star (with about 20 Mo) dominates, it alone 
effectively producing the nebula. Herschel 36, the O7 
luminary of the Lagoon nebula, does the same. At the 
high end are 120 Mg O3 stars whose radiation dwarfs that 
of the mere Trapezium. Exceedingly rare in our Galaxy, 
O3 stars abound in the immense cluster R136 that ionizes 
30 Doradus, over 50 packed into a volume only 2 pc across. 

O stars do not live very long, beginning to evolve 
through the main sequence band as soon as they are born. 
Anew O7 star at 20 Mg has but 10 million years to ionize 
its surroundings and make a diffuse nebula before it cools 
below class B1, where it makes a reflection nebula. At 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gaseous Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


40 Mo we are down to 5 million years and at 120 Mg to 3 
million. At typical stellar velocities, the stars can move 
only a few tens of parsecs before they evolve and cool 
below the limit. Most O stars are thus quite attached to 
the nebulae that mark their places. 

Above about 12 Mo, core hydrogen fusion ceases 
before the stellar surface cools below the limit. Diffuse 
nebulae can therefore be illuminated by evolved O and 
B stars, O giants, and even supergiants. At the extreme, 
the most massive stars can lose their envelopes through 
powerful winds and convert themselves to WOLF-RAYET 
stars, which abound within the illuminating clusters of 
extragalactic giant H II regions. The winds of such 
evolving stars can have dramatic structural effects on their 
surroundings. 

At the low limit near 10 Mo, the stars may evolve 
to oxygen—neon white dwarfs. Much above the limit, 
however, stars seem fated only to explode as Type II (core- 
collapse) SUPERNOVAE. The diffuse nebulae therefore mark 
the spots of future exploding stars, though by that time 
most will have left their surroundings. Supernovae within 
large diffuse nebula complexes can blow huge bubbles that 
shape the interstellar medium for new generations of stars 
to illuminate as diffuse nebulae. 


Distances, dimensions, and distribution 

Even with Hipparcos, diffuse nebulae are too distant for 
parallax measurements of their exciting stars, Orion being 
about 400 pc away. The distances to optically visible 
nebulae thus rely primarily on spectroscopic distances. 
These contain significant errors, as the main sequence 
becomes vertical with earlier spectral class, O7 stars for 
example having a range in luminosity that spans more 
than an order of magnitude. One must therefore have 
some idea of the evolutionary state of the star to pin down 
its luminosity. Much more accurate are distances from 
main sequence fitting of embedded clusters, the distance 
of the Lagoon Nebula coming from the open cluster NGC 
6530 rather than from Herschel 36 alone, and that of the 
Rosette derived from NGC 2237. 

Distances are also obtainable from nebular radial 
velocities found from Doppler shifts of the emission lines. 
Diffuse nebulae are the most extreme of disk Population I, 
allowing the assumption of circular motion around the 
galactic center. Adoption of a rotation curve for the 
Galaxy gives radial velocity as a function of distance 
along any line of sight, from which a distance can readily 
be found. This technique is the only one available for 
nebulae hidden optically by interstellar dust, for which 
radio emission lines are used. Unfortunately, along lines 
of sight toward the inner Galaxy, between longitudes 
270° and 90°, two distances on either side of the point 
nearest the galactic center have the same velocities, so 
there is often an ambiguity. If distances are available 
from spectroscopic parallaxes, the nebulae can be used 
to derive the rotation curve of the Galaxy, a technique 
used to establish the flatness of the curve to great distances 
from the galactic center where dust obscuration is low. As 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with the planetary nebulae, a good recourse is to study 
the diffuse nebulae in other galaxies whose distances we 
already know, first among them being the MAGELLANIC 
coups, in which the nebulae can be readily resolved. 

From a compilation of all information, astronomers 
loosely classify nebulae—u1I REGIONS—into several groups. 
Smallest are the ‘ultracompact H II regions’ under 0.1 pc, 
which are found around the newest stars embedded in 
GMCs. Among them is the ‘BN/KL complex’ that lies 
hidden within the dusty cloud in back of the Orion 
Nebula and visible only through its radio radiation and 
the infrared that arises from dust heated by its embedded 
stars. They are often spatially associated with molecular 
masers whose sources lie within the enclosing molecular 
clouds. At the next scale are the ‘compact H II regions’ 
with dimensions in the realms of tenths of a parsec. The 
Orion Nebula, with a dense core about 0.5 pc across, could 
qualify, though its extended halo, ten times larger, places it 
more into the next category in the hierarchy: the ‘classical’ 
H II regions. Above these are ‘large’ structures like the 
North America Nebula, and at the top the ‘extragalactic 
giant H II regions’ like 30 Doradus and NGC 604, which 
abound in the arms of open spiral galaxies such as M101. 
Once the dimensions of the largest of the diffuse nebulae 
are measured, we can use them as distance indicators for 
yet more distant galaxies, a technique that has met with 
some limited success. 

Diffuse nebulae and their associated stars are the most 
extreme of Population I, more so even than the GMCs, as 
they indicate where new star formation is actually taking 
place. The thickness (full width at half maximum) of the 
distribution in the Galaxy is only about 100 pc. Radially, 
diffuse nebulae track molecular hydrogen (and the GMCs) 
rather well, both peaking around 5 kpc from the galactic 
center, the galactic surface density there being over 10 
times that found in the solar neighborhood (figure 3). 


Spectra 

The spectra of gaseous nebulae are similar to those 
of low excitation planetary nebulae and are formed 
by the same processes. The Zanstra mechanism, first 
applied to the planetary nebulae, produces the hydrogen 
emission lines, including the prominent optical Balmer 
lines and easily observed infrared Paschen and Brackett 
lines. Ignoring helium and the other elements, each 
Lyman continuum photon from the central star causes 
one hydrogen ionization, which results in one recapture 
of an electron by a proton, which in turn results in 
one Balmer photon. Ionization and recombination are 
responsible for the helium lines as well, and for a variety 
of oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, and neon emissions. The 
freed electrons thermally equilibrate by collision, and 
before they recombine can collisionally excite low-lying 
metastable states of lighter ions, particularly those of 
nitrogen, oxygen, and neon, to produce the forbidden 
‘nebulium’ lines, all of these emissions, recombination 
and forbidden, extending from the ultraviolet through the 
infrared and even into the radio. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gaseous Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T T T T T 
25 I ] l I T T al 


ar<(<5r 


Diffuse 
— — —Compact x 0.45 


0.5;-— 


00 FL - 


—— Diffuse x 2.2 
— — — Compact 


0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
R kpc 


Figure 3. Diffuse nebulae of all kinds are tightly concentrated to 
the galactic plane (top), where z is the distance perpendicular to 
the plane. The number peaks about midway between the 
galactic center and the Sun (bottom), R the distance from the 
galactic center (from Lockman F J, Pisano D J and Howard G J 
1996 Astrophys. J. 472 173). 


Spectra of diffuse nebulae differ from the average 
planetary nebula because their exciting stars can be no 
hotter than delivered by the main sequence, about 50 000 K 
for a zero-age O3 star, whereas 50 000 K is only modest for 
an evolved planetary nucleus. As a result, diffuse nebulae 
do not generally exhibit lines of ionized helium (He ID), 
which arise from recombination from the doubly ionized 
state. Since most exciting stars are cooler, helium may not 
even be fully singly ionized within a nebula. Lower star 
temperatures also produce relatively weak double ionized 
oxygen lines, as O* may be the dominant ionization state. 
The exciting stars also commonly have absorption edges 
in the ultraviolet that allow even less ionizing ultraviolet 
radiation to emerge, yielding yet lower effective ionizing 
temperatures. 

The great masses of the diffuse nebulae make the radio 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


continuum and line spectra prominent. There are three 
principal sources of nebular continuum. An electron in 
hydrogen’s second orbit can emit a pair of photons instead 
of Ly-a, the only constraint being that the energies of the 
two add to that of Ly-a. Such two-quantum emission 
provides most of the optical continuum emission (for both 
diffuse and planetary nebulae). Continuous emission is 
also produced by recaptures of free electrons onto bound 
states, producing jumps in continuum strength at the 
Balmer and Paschen limits at 3646 A and 8202 A and 
providing a general background. In the diffuse nebulae, 
these two continuum sources are added to by a stellar 
continuum scattered by internal dust. 

Continuous emission is also radiated by free 
electrons that make close passes to protons but without 
recombination. The interaction changes one hyperbolic 
orbit to another, lost energy radiated as ‘free—free’ 
emission (‘bremsstrahlung’) that is particularly important 
at radio energies. The characteristic spectrum of free— 
free radiation readily allows the identification of diffuse 
nebulae as ‘thermal’ emitters (radiating as a result of 
thermally heated gas), as opposed to the non-thermal 
radiation of supernova remnants. 

Though in principle there is no limit to the orbits 
of the hydrogen atom, the maximum principal quantum 
numbers are limited to under 1000 by interactions with 
neighboring atoms. Electron recombinations to high orbits 
n and the transitions to n — 1 (na), n — 2 (nB), etc., emit 
radio lines that are superimposed on the radio continuum, 
huge numbers of them being observed. At high quantum 
numbers, helium and other elements behave much like 
one-electron atoms. As a result, helium radio lines are 
observed to the high-frequency sides of their hydrogen 
counterparts. At slightly higher frequencies yet are similar 
emissions for ‘carbon’, a mixture of high-order lines from 
heavier atoms. 

Because radio emissions are unimpeded by dust, they 
allow the discovery of nebulae that are hidden behind and 
within the thick dust of galactic GMCs, the emission lines 
also allowing measures of radial velocity and distance. 
Somewhat less obscured nebulae (as well as those optically 
visible) are also studied in the infrared through their 
hydrogen Brackett emissions and from the lines of a variety 
of other species. 

While not hidden, optically visible diffuse nebulae 
are still dimmed and reddened by the dust (the problem 
affecting the planetary nebulae as well). The most 
noticeable effect is the steepening of the Balmer decrement, 
which describes the progressive weakening of higher- 
order lines within the series. After adopting an extinction 
curve (extinction versus wavelength), a coefficient C equal 
to the logarithmic extinction at Hg is found by forcing the 
Balmer line intensities to fit theory. C is readily converted 
to E(B—V) color excess. Application of C to the extinction 
curve then allows the correction of the reddened line 
intensities. Theoretical forbidden-line ratios that span a 
large wavelength base serve as well. A major problem is 
that the diffuse nebulae are surrounded by a great deal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gaseous Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of circumstellar dust that may—and usually does—have 
a non-standard extinction curve as a result of grains that 
have been modified in the local GMC environment, which 
contributes errors to the corrected relative line intensities. 


Physical parameters 

The determination of the physical parameters of diffuse 
nebulae from optical observations involves much the 
same techniques as for planetary nebulae. Electron 
temperatures are easily derived from forbidden-line ratios, 
particularly of the 4363 A and 5007 A lines of [O III] and 
of the 5754 A and 6584 A lines of [N II]. Temperature 
fluctuations within the filamentary gas can cause serious 
distortion of the result, as the forbidden lines from the 
higher metastable states are preferentially produced at 
higher temperature, a problem difficult to account for. 
For both optically visible and obscured nebulae, electron 
temperatures are also derivable from the ratios of the 
fluxes in radio recombination lines to the flux densities 
in the neighboring continua. Account must be taken of 
natural masering in the radio lines and of the nebular 
geometry, as the observed radio flux is the average of that 
produced over a wide range of conditions, accurate results 
requiring anebular model. Emission lines are also Doppler 
broadened as a result of ‘turbulence’ (a vague concept at 
best) and by thermal effects, the linewidth therefore giving 
an upper limit to electron temperature. The two effects 
can be deconvolved by observing emissions from ions of 
differing atomic weight. Line widths of hydrogen lines are 
all that is available for large numbers of distant, weakly 
radiating sources. 

Electron temperatures depend on the balance be- 
tween the heating rate, which depends on the tempera- 
ture and ultraviolet spectrum of the central star, and the 
cooling rate, which effectively depends on the oxygen-to- 
hydrogen ratio (as the forbidden lines are collisionally ex- 
cited by free electrons). They start notably lower than for 
planetary nebulae and range upward from around 4500 K 
for weak sources toward the center of the Galaxy through 
around 9000 K for Orion and up to 20 000 K for some extra- 
galactic objects with low O/H. Since metallicity drops with 
distance from the galactic center, the electron temperature 
rises from its central low of 4500 K up to 10 000 K or so 2 kpc 
outside the solar orbit, the gradient about 400 K kpeo!. 

Densities fall equally well to optical and infrared 
forbidden lines, particularly to the close doublets of [O II] 
at 3727 A and 3729 A and [S II] at 6717 A and 6731 A. 
These ratios give densities within radiating sheets and 
filaments, which may occupy only a small portion of the 
nebular volume. Since the recombination rate depends on 
the product of the electron and proton densities, which 
are about equal, the fluxes in the recombination lines 
and continuum yield a mean electron density. Electron 
densities range from over 10° cm-? for ultracompact H II 
regions to 5000 cm~? or so for the filaments in the central 
regions of Orion to under 100 cm~ for the huge, spread- 
out giant H II regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


UV 
radiation 


Neutral 
gas 


Ionization Ionized 
front gas 


Figure 4. In the classic Strémgren sphere, hot stars ionize a 
bubble within a cold neutral molecular medium, the gas fully 
ionized out to a sharp edge (art from Kaler J B 1997 Cosmic 
Clouds Scientific American Library (NewYork: Freeman). 


The mass of a diffuse nebula appears simple to 
find just by multiplying the electron density found from 
forbidden lines (essentially the proton density) by the mass 
of the proton and the volume of the nebula. Nebulae 
are highly filamentary, however, and the electron density 
is that of the radiating filaments. To find the mean 
density requires that we know the volume occupied by the 
filaments relative to the volume of the nebula, or the ‘filling 
factor’, which is generally set around 0.1, but is highly 
uncertain. The volume of the nebula is also uncertain, 
as the distance may not be well known and the three- 
dimensional structure may not be obvious; what may 
appear to be a rough sphere may be a sheet, or a blister 
on the edge of a GMC, or vice versa. The range of nebular 
masses is enormous, as they depend on the density and 
extent of the local molecular cloud (the amount of matter 
available to be ionized), the temperature and radius of the 
star (which controls the number of ionizing photons), the 
age of the star (how much matter it has had a chance 
to ionize), and on the number of sufficiently hot stars 
within the diffuse nebula. Masses go from under a 
thousandth that of the Sun for young ultracompact H II 
regions through 50-100 M. for modest objects like Orion 
to millions of solar masses for the giant diffuse nebulae 
like 30 Doradus and NGC 604 that are lit by clusters of O3 
stars. The terms ‘diffuse nebula’ or ‘H II region’ define not 
one kind of object but a great many. 

Chemical compositions stem directly from the 
theories of recombination and of the collisional excitation 
of the forbidden lines in both the optical and infrared, 
helium abundances for obscured nebulae also found from 
the radio recombination lines of high-order states. Major 
problems involve the incomplete ionization of helium, 
which gives a lower limit to the helium abundance, 
and severe filamentation, which can distort electron 
temperatures and densities. Detailed models of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gaseous Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MME 
Ee es 


4,72, 
i nil. Maj! — 


“fl 


Figure 5. A three-dimensional model of the Orion Nebula shows its ionization front working its way into a dark molecular cloud, the 
ionizing radiation coming mostly from @1 Orionis C, marked by the dark circle. The dark line to the right indicates the curved surface 
that makes the well known ‘bright bar’ (from Wen Z and O’Dell C R 1995 Astrophys. J. 438 784). 


nebulae can account for these difficulties as well as for 
incompleteness in the ions observed. 

The resulting compositions are similar to those found 
in the Sun and in Population I in general. Indeed, more 
than any other kind of body, the nebulae define the 
composition of Population I. O/H, a general indicator of 
metallicity, averages from around double that found in the 
Sun in the inner Galaxy to about a third solar at distances 
half again the solar galactocentric distance. The N/H ratio 
drops in a similar way, though there are indications that 
it flattens out twice as far from the center as the Sun, the 
N/O ratio thus being anomalously high. Diffuse nebulae 
in other disk galaxies show similar, though controversial, 
relations. 

Orion and other diffuse nebulae effectively at the solar 
circle have O/H ratios significantly lower (about 30%) than 
the Sun, not expected since O/H should have been built 
up in the interstellar medium to greater than solar in the 
five billion years since the Sun was born. One explanation 
posits that the metallicity of the Galaxy has declined as a 
result of infusion of low-metal gas through collisions with 
other systems. 


Structures 

Abasic structure for a diffuse nebulae was defined by BENGT 
STROMGREN in 1939. His ‘Strémgren sphere’ is a bubble 
formed within a neutral cloud (a GMC) by a hot, ionizing 
star. The idea builds on the Zanstra mechanism, in which 
the number of ionizing photons radiated per second equals 
the number of recombinations that take place in the nebula 
per second. A diffuse nebula is illuminated by N stars (N,.) 
of (assumed similar) temperatures T,. If the stars are black 
bodies, the rate of Lyman photon production depends on 
N,, the integral of the Planck function from the Lyman 
limit to infinity (which approaches a T; proportionality 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for a very hot star), and the square of the stellar radius, 
R2. The total recombination rate in a homogeneous 
medium depends on the product of the electron and 
proton density—effectively the electron density squared 
(N2)—multiplied by a rate coefficient computed from 
recombination theory times the nebular volume, which 
depends on the nebular radius cubed (R?,,,). Equating the 
two yields 


Rneb = (constant) x 7, R23 N23 NI" f (T,). 


The (constant) contains a combination of numerical and 
atomic constants and the recombination coefficient (which 
is slowly. dependent on electron temperature), and f(T,) 
is the 4 power of an integral of a function of hv/kT taken 
from the Lyman limit to infinity (figure 4). 

The photons within the Strémgren sphere fully ionize 
the nebula (ionizing those protons that have just captured 
electrons to create the neutral state) out to the radius Ryep, 
at which point the gas suddenly becomes neutral. Photons 
with energies lower than the Lyman limit will pass through 
the Str6mgren sphere unhindered, will ionize atoms 
with low ionization potentials, and will photodissociate 
molecules, producing a ‘partially dissociated region’ (a 
PDR) that is a layered transition to the fully neutral 
molecular gas in the GMC. 

As appealing as it is, the Str6mgren sphere is not 
a very realistic model for optically visible nebulae. By 
definition, the sphere must be inside a dusty GMC, 
and by their very visibility, the classic nebulae are not 
inside GMCs, as they otherwise would not be visible. 
The concept works better for obscured nebulae that are 
detectable only through their radio and infrared radiation. 

Strémgren spheres, indeed diffuse nebulae in general, 
are dynamic. The heated gas in the Strémgren 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gaseous Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


sphere produces a pressure at the boundary—the 
‘ionization front’—that expands the ionized zone into 
the surrounding GMC, shocking the gas in front of it, the 
nebula expanding, the electron density dropping as the 
pressures in the two zones go toward equilibration. If 
the nebula becomes large enough, it can break through 
the outer boundary of the GMC, the high pressure gas 
erupting in an ionized fountain that would readily be 
optically visible. If O stars form near the edge of the GMC, 
they can also erode the molecular layers separating them 
from open space. A nebula might then appear as a blister 
on the molecular cloud’s surface, the stars in front of it, the 
nebula behind. 

Though the Orion Nebula appears more or less 
spherical to the eye, its luminosity relative to its density 
and its internal velocities as measured by Doppler shifts 
clearly show that it is not an expanding Strémgren sphere, 
but in fact is such a blister that has dense ionized gas 
behind the star and a much lower density plasma in front of 
it. The star (mostly 61 Orionis C) is eating its way into the 
dense dark cloud at the same time that the hidden KL object 
is eating its way out. The curvature of the blister relative 
to the line of sight gives the nebula considerable two- 
dimensional structure, the obvious ‘bright bar’ feature, 
for example, an ionization front seen more or less edge 
on, a PDR behind it. These structures make the planetary 
nebulae, for all their complexity, look simple (figure 5). 
The immense power of the ionizing O6 star is readily seen 
in the photoerosion of remnant disks that surround lower- 
mass Stars seen in relief against the nebula. Superimposed 
on such complex nebular structures are the ever-present 
foreground dust clouds that take on a multiplicity of 
shapes that range from tiny black circular patches to 
elongated ‘elephant trunks’ in which stars are still being 
formed. 

Gaseous (diffuse) nebulae thus allow a look into both 
local and global stellar evolution and into the evolution of 
the Galaxy as a whole. We use them to find how massive 
stars are born and how the Galaxy changes its chemical 
composition with time. Similar studies of other galaxies 
allow the comparison of their evolution with ours, yielding 
insights back into the development of our own. Equally 
important, they provide us with grand sights, shimmering 
within the Milky Way, allowing us to see the grandeur of 
star birth before our very eyes. 


Bibliography 

Aller L H 1984 Physics of Thermal Gaseous Nebulae 
(Dordrecht: D Reidel) 

Kennicutt R C Jr 1984 Structural properties of giant H II 
regions in nearby galaxies Astrophys. J. 287 116 

Osterbrock D E 1989 Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and 
Active Galactic Nuclei (Sausalito: University Science 
Books) 

Sharpless S 1959 A catalogue of H II regions Astrophys. J. 
Suppl. 4 257 

Shaver P A et al 1983 The galactic abundance gradient Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 204 53 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Shields G A 1990 Extragalactic H II regions Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 28 525 


James B Kaler 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gaspra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gaspra 


An asteroid discovered by Grigorii Neujmin in 1916, 
designated (951) Gaspra. In October 1991 it became 
the first asteroid to be imaged from close by when the 
Galileo probe passed it at a distance of about 16000 km 
on its way to Jupiter. Images showed a highly angular 
body measuring 18 x 11 x 9 km, pitted with small 
craters but with few large craters, so either Gaspra has 
a strong, metal-rich surface or it is a young object. 
Galileo also detected a significant interaction with the 
local interplanetary magnetic field, suggesting that there 
is remnant magnetism. Gaspra orbits the Sun at a mean 
distance of 2.21 AU (331 million km), near the inner edge 
of the main asteroid belt, in a period of 3.28 years; the 
orbital inclination is 4° and the eccentricity 0.17. It is an 
S-type asteroid, with a reflection spectrum similar to that 
of ordinary chondrite and stony-iron meteorites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gassendi [Gassend], Pierre (1592-1655) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gassendi [Gassend], Pierre 
(1592-1655) 


Theologian, born in Champtercier, Provence, France. 
Gassendi rejected Descartes’ philosophy, emphasizing the 
inductive method, atomism and a mechanistic view of 
nature. Gassendi observed the first recorded transit of 
Mercury, that KEPLER had predicted to occur in 1631. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gauge Bosons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gauge Bosons 


Particles that transmit the fundamental forces. Photons 
convey the electromagnetic force between charged 
particles, intermediate vector bosons (the W and Z 
particles) transmit the weak nuclear force, which governs 
the radioactive decay of atomic nuclei, and gluons carry 
the strong nuclear interaction (or ‘color force’) between the 
quarks that comprise hadrons and mesons. The existence 
of an equivalent force carrier for gravitation, the graviton, 
remains unproven. 

The term ‘gauge’, meaning ‘measure’, is used 
essentially for historical reasons, while the term ‘boson’ 
applies to any particle or atomic nucleus that has an 
integral spin and which, therefore, obeys Bose-Einstein 
statistics (the statistics that govern the behavior of systems 
in which an unlimited number of particles can occupy the 
same quantum state); bosons are not constrained by the 
Pauli exclusion principle. 

Gauge bosons have integral values of spin (expressed 
in units of the Planck constant, h, divided by 27). The 
photon has zero mass and charge. W particles have masses 
(expressed in energy terms) of 83 GeV (88 times that of 
the proton), the W* having a charge of +1 (in units of 
the charge on the electron) and the W~, a charge of —1. 
The electrically neutral Z particles have masses of 93 GeV 
(nearly a hundred times that of the proton). Gluons 
have zero mass and charge but carry another property, 
analogous in some respects to electrical charge, which 
is called ‘color’. Because the lifetime of a force-carrying 
particle is inversely proportional to the amount of energy 
that is required to make it, the range over which a gauge 
boson can transmit a force is inversely proportional to 
its mass. Because the photon and hypothesized graviton 
have zero mass, they can transmit the electromagnetic and 
gravitational forces over infinite distances. Because the 
heavy W and Z particles have lifetimes of about 10-*° s the 
range of the weak interaction is restricted to about 10-7 m. 
Although gluons have zero mass, and might therefore be 
expected to have infinite range, their ‘color’ properties 
confine their range of influence to within the diameter of 
the proton. The strong nuclear force between the protons 
and neutrons in an atomic nucleus is conveyed by pions 
(particles that are composed of quark—antiquark pairs). 


See also: electronvolt, elementary particles, fundamental 
forces, fundamental particles, graviton, hadrons, mesons, 
neutron, Pauli exclusion principle, photon, proton, 
quantum mechanics, quark. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gauss, Carl Friedrich (1777-1855) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gauss, Carl Friedrich (1777-1855) 


Scientist, born in Brunswick (now in Germany), worked 
in mathematics and physics including number theory, 
analysis, differential geometry, geodesy, magnetism, 
astronomy and optics. A child prodigy, at an early age 
Gauss independently discovered Bope’s law, the binomial 
theorem and the prime number theorem, as well as the 
method of the construction of a regular 17-gon by ruler 
and compasses. In 1801, Ceres, a minor planet discovered 
by GPIAzz1, was lost behind the Sun. Several predictions of 
its position on reappearance were made from the rather 
few discovery observations, including a prediction by 
Gauss which differed greatly from the others. When Ceres 
was recovered by ZACH on its reappearance it was almost 
exactly where Gauss had predicted. Although he did not 
disclose his methods at the time, Gauss had used his least 
squares approximation method. A Gaussian distribution 
is the name of the normal distribution of residuals in 
statistical data, solved by the least squares method, which 
Gauss refined in 1828. Gauss became director of the 
G6ttingen observatory and published a book, Theoria 
Motus Corporum Coelestium in Sectionibus Conicis Solem 
Ambientium. This was a treatise on the motion of celestial 
bodies, in which he showed how to estimate and then to 
refine the estimation of a planet’s orbit, following this with 
further work on mechanics. He carried out a geodesic 
survey of Hanover, inventing a surveying instrument, 
the heliotrope, that worked by reflecting the Sun’s rays. 
With Weber he investigated terrestrial magnetism, making 
magnetic surveys. To mark Gauss’ theoretical treatment 
of magnetism, a unit of magnetism, the gauss, was named 
after him (superseded by the SI unit, the tesla). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gellibrand, Henry (1597-1636) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gellibrand, Henry (1597-1636) 


Born in London, England, became professor of astronomy 
in Gresham College, London, and discovered the change 
over time of magnetic declination, showing the shift of the 
magnetic pole and Earth’s magnetic field. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Geminga 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geminga 


A gamma-ray source in the constellation of Gemini, its 
name deriving from ‘Gemini gamma-ray source’. Located 
at a distance of about 300 light-years, Geminga is a pulsar 
with a period of 0.237 s and, as such, is one of the nearest 
known neutron stars. Its optical counterpart is a low- 
luminosity star of apparent magnitude 25 with an annual 
proper motion (angular motion across the sky) of about 
0.2 arcsec. Because its luminosity outside of the gamma- 
ray region is so low, the nature of this source remained 
a mystery until the discovery of pulsed emission, by the 
ROSAT satellite in 1992, showed that it is a pulsar. 


Seealso: gamma-ray astronomy, pulsars, ROSAT. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gemini 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gemini 


(the Twins; abbrev. Gem, gen. Geminorum; area 514 sq. 
deg.) Anorthern zodiacal constellation which lies between 
Auriga and Canis Minor, and culminates at midnight in 
early January. It represents Castor and Pollux, the twin 
sons of Leda, Queen of Sparta, in Greek mythology, whose 
brotherly love was rewarded by a place among the stars. 
Its brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100- 
175) in the Almagest. 

The two brightest stars in Gemini, a Geminorum 
(Castor), (combined) magnitude 1.6, and 6 Geminorum 
(Pollux), magnitude 1.2, are about 4.5° apart and easily 
recognizable. The former is a multiple system, consisting 
of a pair of bluish-white (Al and A2) components, 
magnitudes 1.9 and 3.0, separation 3.1”, period about 467 
years, and a third, red (M1) component (the variable star 
YY Geminorum), magnitude 8.9-9.6, separation 73”, each 
of which has an unseen companion, periods 9.21, 2.93 
and 0.81 days, making this a sextuple system. There 
are 11 other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter, including 
¢ Geminorum, a bright Cepheid variable (range 3.6—-4.2, 
period 10.15 days). Other interesting variables include the 
Mira-type star R Geminorum (range 6.0-14.0, period about 
370 days) and the dwarf nova U Geminorum (range 8.2— 
14.9, mean period about 105 days). 

Other interesting objects include M35 (NGC 2168), 
an open cluster of a couple of hundred stars fainter than 
eighth magnitude, and NGC 2392 (the Eskimo Nebula or 
Clown Face Nebula), a ninth-magnitude planetary nebula. 

The Geminid meteor shower appears to radiate from 
a point just to the west of Castor. 


See also: Castor, Geminids, Pollux. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gemini Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gemini Observatory 


The twin 8 m Gemini telescopes represent a new 
generation ground-based observatory incorporating many 
innovative technologies that will provide astronomers 
in the seven-country Gemini partnership with some of 
the best optical/infrared observations ever obtained from 
Earth or space. 

The Gemini Observatory began as an effort by the 
United States National Science Foundation to build a 
new generation large astronomical telescope for the entire 
US astronomical community. However, it was quickly 
realized that a partnership with the United Kingdom 
and Canada (who had similar observatory plans) could 
produce twin 8 m telescopes more economically while 
providing the same amount of total telescope time for US 
astronomers. Chile, Argentina, Brazil and Australia later 
joined the partnership. Each partner is allotted observing 
time for their astronomical communities in proportion to 
their financial contribution. 

In order to provide complete sky coverage of both the 
northern and southern skies, one of the Gemini telescopes 
is located on Hawaii’s Mauna Kea (Gemini North) and 
the other on central Chile’s Cerro Paché6n (Gemini South). 
Both telescopes are expected to be fully operational 
by mid-2001 employing a staff of approximately 100. 
The Gemini telescopes utilize many new technologies, 
engineering innovations and operational philosophies 
that will allow them to excel in the study of stellar 
nurseries, galactic evolution and distant high-redshift 
galaxies. 

Gemini North’s first adaptive optics images, during 
commissioning in 1999, revealed the remarkable potential 
of the telescopes. Over integrations of several minutes, 
star images of 0.08 arcsec FWHM were obtained in the 
infrared. 

For further information see 
http://www.gemini.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geminids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geminids 


One of the year’s most prolific meteor showers, taking 
place in December. The radiant lies in the constellation 
Gemini. Uniquely, the parent body of the Geminids is 
not a comet but the asteroid (3200) Phaethon, discovered 
in 1983. The perihelion distance of Phaethon is a mere 
0.14 AU. It may be that the Geminid meteor stream 
consists of particles that crumble away from the asteroid’s 
surface under the intense heat of its perihelion passage. 
An asteroidal source is consistent with the Geminid 
meteoroids’ high density of around 2 g cm7?, about an 
order of magnitude higher than other meteoroids, which 
are cometary dust particles. These dense particles tend to 
produce quite slow, bright meteors of long duration. 


See also: meteor shower, Phaethon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geminus (c. 130-c. 70 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geminus (c. 130-c. 70 Bc) 


Astronomer and mathematician, born in Rhodes (?), 
Greece, believed that ‘not all the stars lie on one surface, but 
rather that some of them are higher and some are lower’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gemma Frisius, Reiner [Regner, Regnier] (1508-55) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gemma Frisius, Reiner [Regner, 
Regnier] (1508-55) 


Born in Dokkum, Friesland, Netherlands, became 
professor of medicine and mathematics at the University 
of Louvain. In 1530 wrote De Principiis Astronomiae 
Cosmographicae in which he describes, for the first time, 
how the longitude of a place may be found using a clock 
(‘it must be a very finely made clock which does not vary 
with change of air’) to determine the difference in local and 
absolute times. He described the theory of trigonometric 
surveying as a method of accurately locating places. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity and Gravitation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


General Relativity and Gravitation 


The General Theory of Relativity (GR), created by Albert 
Einstein between 1907 and 1915, is a theory both of 
gravitation and of spacetime structure. It is based on 
the assumption that matter, via its energy-momentum, 
interacts with the metric of spacetime, which is considered 
(in contrast to Newtonian physics and SPECIAL RELATIVITY) 
as a dynamical field having degrees of freedom of its own 
(GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION). In brief, ‘matter tells spacetime 
how to curve, and spacetime tells matter how to move’ 
(J A Wheeler). GR is a generalization of Newton’s theory 
of gravitation and of Special Relativity, which are both 
approximations to GR under appropriate conditions (see 
below). More generally, GR provides a common, coherent 
basis for classical (as opposed to quantum), macroscopic 
physics. Its relation to quantum physics is not yet 
well understood (QUANTUM Gravity). While this poses an 
important problem of principle, it does not present a 
practical difficulty to astrophysics, since the atomic and 
subatomic scales, on which quantum laws operate, are 
very small compared to macroscopic scales, where gravity 
dominates. 

According to present fundamental physics, the only 
one among the four basic interactions which acts between 
all kinds of matter is the gravitational interaction. Since it 
always acts as an attraction and thus cannot be shielded, 
and because its range is unbounded, it dominates the 
behavior of matter on large scales in spite of its extreme 
weakness. Therefore, gravity plays a significant role in 
nearly all parts of astronomy and astrophysics. (In the 
atomic and subatomic domain gravity is unmeasurably 
weak and totally negligible, as is highlighted by the ‘fact’ 
that the gravitational force between a proton and an 
electron is weaker than the Coulomb force by the factor 
5 x 107-*8.) 

Relativistic gravity is important in the following areas 
of research: high-precision astrometry (REFERENCE FRAMES 
AND TIME SCALES IN GR, SPACE AND TIME REFERENCES: CONCEPTS), 
compact objects such as NEUTRON STARS and BLACK HOLES 
and systems thereof (binary PULSARS, low-mass X-RAY BINARY 
STARS), active galactic nuclei and quasars, supernovae and 
gravitational collapse, identification of dark stars and 
planets (MICROLENSING), cosmology (COSMOLOGY: STANDARD 
MODEL, DARK MATTER, COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT, distribution of 
luminous and DARK MATTER Via weak GRAVITATIONAL LENSING). 
In the near future a new window onto the universe 
is expected to open when GRAVITATIONAL WAVES become 
observable. 

Though GR covers a larger range of phenomena 
than Newton’s theory, the latter provides a satisfactory 
description whenever the system under study is (nearly) 
isolated, the relevant velocities are small compared to the 
speed of light, , <1 and bodies are not too compact, 
26 < 1. Moreover, Newton’s theory is used to describe 
the basic facts of gravity; it often serves as a point of 
departure for approximations in GR, and its shortcomings 
motivate the introduction of GR and help to understand 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and highlight GR’s achievements. For these reasons, the 
Newtonian theory of spacetime and gravity is reviewed 
before GR is considered. 


Newton’s theory of gravity 
Can be summarized as follows. 


1(a) On spacetime, the set of events ‘here-now’, there 
exists an absolute time, measurable by means of 
arbitrarily moving, undisturbed clocks. Distances 
between bodies at one instant of time satisfy the 
laws of Euclidean geometry. Hence, motions of 
bodies can be referred to rigid frames of reference 
associated with coordinates (t, x“) specifying times t 
and positions (x*) = x. 

1(b) There exist preferred reference frames, inertial 
frames, with respect to which the motions of N bodies 
which form a nearly isolated system (like the solar 
system or a double star), are given by Newton’s 
gravitational equations of motion 


$ Mp . 
xA = > CAB (1) 
BAA ' AB 


which form the basis of classical celestial mechanics. 
The positive constants M, are called the gravitational 
masses of the bodies, rag denotes the distance 
between the simultaneous positions of the bodies 
A and B, éag indicates the unit vector pointing 
from X, to xp, and dots signify time differentiation. 
Equation (1) characterizes an inertial frame as a 
rigid frame with respect to which the equations of 
motion do not contain velocity dependent (Coriolis 
acceleration) terms and relative to which the center of 
mass of such a system moves uniformly in a straight 
line. 

1(c) If a body, or a part of a body, is subjected not only 
to gravity, its motion relative to an inertial frame is 
governed by the equation 


m(x — (t,x) = F. (2) 


Here, the positive constant m is the inertial mass 
of the body, g denotes the acceleration the particle 
would have if subjected to gravity only, and F is the 
non-gravitational force acting on the particle. The 
product mg is traditionally called the gravitational 
force, although it is not needed to describe purely 
gravitational motions, see equation (1). In contrast to 
other forces, the gravitational force depends on the 
particle solely through the latter’s inertial mass. 

1(d) Measurements indicate that the ratio gravitational 
mass/inertial mass for laboratory-size bodies has a 
universal value. This ratio, 


M 
— = G = 6.673(10) x 10cm? g's! (3) 
m 


though far less precisely known than most other 
physical constants, is assumed to have a universal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity and Gravitation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


value, the constant of gravitation. Accordingly, 
M and m are considered as different measures 
of one physical quantity, ‘mass’. Note, however, 
that the gravitational mass of the Sun defined in 
accordance with equation (1) is known about two 
orders of magnitude more accurately than G: Mo = 
1.32704(2) x 1076 cm? s~?. 

1(e) If matter is described as continuously distributed, 
with (inertial) mass density p, velocity v and pressure 
p, the effect of gravity on motion is expressed, in 
generalization of (2), as 


i rr - 
o (2 +s. a6-80.9) =-Vp (4) 
and the gravitational acceleration g can be obtained 
from the gravitational potential 


0,3) =— f POO oy, (5) 


x — x’ | 
by taking its gradient, 
g=-v¢. (6) 


Equations (5) and (6) generalize the expression for the 
acceleration of equation (1). For a spatially bounded 
mass distribution, the law (5) can be replaced by 
Poisson’s equation 


A@d = 41Ge (7) 
together with the boundary condition 
Jim o(¢, ¥) = 0. (8) 


1(f) The laws (1) and (2) for particles, or (4)-(8) for 
spatially bounded matter distributions, determine 
the motions of all matter elements uniquely if its 
positions and velocities at one time are specified. 
Without the boundary condition (8), the laws (6) 
and (7) do not determine g, and thus do not 
determine the motion; Newton’s theory applies only 
to systems which can be treated as isolated, but not 
to the apparently spatially unbounded cosmic matter 
distribution. 


All laws stated above take the same forms in 
all inertial frames, they are invariant under Galilean 
transformations which express symmetries of Newtonian 
spacetime. 


Shortcomings of the Newtonian theory 
Which led, first, to the special relativity theory (SR) and, 
later, to GR, include the following facts and considerations. 


2(a) The assumptions about time and space listed above 
under 1(a) are incompatible with electrodynamical 
and optical phenomena involving moving bodies, 
with well established facts about moving clocks and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with many other experimental results. Those facts 
for which gravity can be neglected or, more precisely, 
where the temporal and spatial scales on which 
the gravitational acceleration changes, are negligible 
compared to the relevant scales, are well accounted 
for by Special Relativity. According to SR, there is no 
universal, absolute time. Rather, each inertial frame 
has its own measure of time and also of distance, 
and the coordinates of inertial frames are related 
not by Galilean, but by Poincaré transformations. 
The metric of spacetime determines, for each pair 
of events (t;, X;) and (t, X.), whether there exists an 
inertial frame with respect to which the events: (a) are 
simultaneous; or (b) happen at the same point of 
space; or (c) whether the events can be connected by 
a light signal. Formally, the metric is given, in any 
inertial frame, by the interval 


As? = —0"(h — )° + 2 — ¥1) (9) 


and the alternatives just listed correspond to 

(a) As? >0 

(b) As? <0 

(c) As? =0. 

According to SR, no interaction or signal can be 
transmitted faster than with the speed of light in 
vacuum, c. 

2(b) In Newtonian theory, inertial frames can only be 
identified globally for isolated systems. ‘Real’ inertial 
frames associated with spatially separated, nearly 
isolated systems such as galaxies, are relatively 
accelerated and cannot be fitted into a single, ‘truly 
inertial’ frame of reference. Also, freely falling 
test particles which can be observed locally, exhibit 
relative accelerations in any real, inhomogeneous 
gravitational field; ‘free’ particles exactly obeying the 
law of inertia do not exist since all particles ‘feel’ 
gravity in the same way, see equation (2) with F=0. 

2(c) As stated in 1(f), Newtonian theory does not provide 
predictive dynamical laws for spatially unbounded 
matter distributions. 

2(d) Newtonian celestial mechanics is unable to account 
for the ‘anomalous’ advance of the perihelion of 
Mercury’s orbit, noticed first by Leverrier in 1859. 


General Relativity Theory overcame these shortcom- 
ings and predicted additional phenomena. 


Basic concepts and laws of General Relativity 

3(a) In order to preserve locally the approximate validity 
of SR, it is assumed that, for any event E of spacetime, 
there exists a coordinate system (t, x“) such that the 
statements made in connection with equation (9) are 
valid for spacetime points P which are ‘close to E’, in 
the sense that 


As? = —c2 At? + AX? + 0(4). (10) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity and Gravitation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(The symbol 0(4) indicates that additional terms are 
at least as small as fourth powers of the leading 
ones, e.g., c?Ar? - Ax’, and thus are negligible 
for small displacements Ar, Ax connecting E to P.) 
Such coordinate systems are called locally inertial 
at E. They may be vizualized/realized as connected 
with a small, non-rotating, freely falling cabin, like 
a space shuttle. Two such coordinate systems, 
referring to different ‘central’ events E, and EF), 
represent approximately inertial systems near E; 
and E», respectively, but in contrast to Newtonian 
or SR inertial systems they are nonlinearly related, 
and thus exhibit relative accelerations between those 
reference frames. The basic assumption, symbolized 
in equation (10), at the same time preserves SR as 
a local approximation and weakens the concept of 
an inertial frame as suggested by the considerations 
in 2(b). Mathematically this assumption means 
that spacetime carries a Lorentz metric whose 
components in a general coordinate system, gus (x”), 
are functions of those coordinates (a, 6B = 0,1, 2, 3). 
The fact that these functions in general cannot be 
reduced to constants in a finite coordinate domain 
means geometrically that spacetime is curved. 


3(b) The most direct physical interpretation of the metric 


3(c) 


is that it determines the times shown by undisturbed 
clocks or natural time carriers like atoms. The motion, 
or ‘history’, of a clock is represented by a time-like 
curve (figure 1), and the proper time t it measures is 
given by the ‘arc length’ 


T= / [Sap Ax® dx? |"? (11) 


along that world line. This statement is the GR- 
substitute for Newtons’s axiom about absolute time. 
According to Einstein’s equivalence principle all 
local, non-gravitational laws of physics take the 
same mathematical form at the origin of a local 
inertial coordinate system. This principle restricts 
the relativity principle on which SR is based since it 
implies that the laws of SR hold only approximately 
in small domains; at the same time it generalizes 
its approximate validity to arbitrary gravitational 
fields. The principle is used to generalize laws from 
Special Relativity to General Relativity. Applied to 
the law of inertia of SR, it leads to the statement 
that the spacetime curve, or world line, of a freely 
falling particle is a straightest curve, or (timelike) 
geodesic, in spacetime. Applied to Maxwell’s laws of 
electromagnetism it provides the corresponding laws 
in curved spacetime, i.e., in an arbitrary gravitational 
field. In the geometrical optics approximation this 
implies that light rays (= photon world lines) are 
null geodesics, i.e., geodesics everywhere tangent 
to the local light cones (figure 1). Analogously, 
one obtains the equations of motion for fluids 
or gases in gravitational fields. While in these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


and similar cases of classical physics Einstein’s 
equivalence principle works perfectly, it proved to 
be complicated to generalize quantum field theory 
to curved spacetimes. For reasons given in the 
introduction this is, however, so far of no practical 
importance to astrophysics. 

The mathematical forms of the general-relativistic 
laws for particles and fields show that in GR the 
metric gg of spacetime also plays the role of the 
gravitational potential which has ten components 
that replace the one Newtonian potential ¢. 


3(d) The third, and most important, ingredient of General 


3(e) 


3(f) 


Relativity is Einstein’s gravitational field equation. It 
relates the metric field of spacetime to the distribution 
and motion of matter and energy. More precisely, the 
metric tensor gag and its first and second derivatives 
determine the so-called curvature tensor (which 
measures the tidal field) and a tensor derived from 
it, called the Einstein tensor G“*. Moreover, the 
energy density, energy current density and stresses of 
matter and fields are combined into a ten-component 
quantity T%, the stress-energy-momentum tensor. 
These fields are required to satisfy the (tensor) 
equation 

82G 


T?. 
ct 


GY = (12) 
This system of nonlinear partial differential equations 
replaces Poisson’s equation (7) and does for gravity 
what Maxwell’s equations do for electromagnetism. 
In contrast to SR, the topology of spacetime is not 
given once and for all. Rather, the problem of 
finding a spacetime model involves to determine 
a four-dimensional manifold and, on it, physical 
fields satisfying equation (12). This aspect of GR is 
particularly relevant for the study of black holes and 
cosmology. 

The unification of special relativity and Newtonian 
gravitation theory brought about by Einstein’s GR 
has solved an old conceptual problem emphasized 
especially by Ernst Mach. In Newtonian theory (and 
in special relativity), the structure of spacetime as 
exhibited in the set of inertial frames, acts on matter, 
but it cannot be observed independently of the 
motion of matter, and it is not influenced by matter. 
It is, in other words, an absolute, unobservable 
cause. To assume such a cause contradicts the 
scientific mode of thinking (‘widerspricht dem 
wissenschaftlichen Verstande’) according to Mach, 
and Einstein consented. According to GR, the metric 
of spacetime is not given once and for all, but is a 
dynamical field interacting with matter, acting and 
being acted upon; in this respect GR overcomes 
Mach’s objection. The dynamical nature of the metric 
is the most important insight of principle of GR. 


Since the metric depends on the circumstances, one 


cannot introduce coordinates with a definite physical 


General Relativity and Gravitation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


timelike 
world line 


future light 
cone of E 


past light —-————_ 7 


cone of E 


Figure 1. The future and past light cones of event E, generated 
by light rays, and a timelike world line which could represent a 
clock’s motion. 


meaning independently of the physical situation. There- 
fore, coordinates only serve to ‘name’ and distinguish 
spacetime points and to express their ‘nearness’ in a quali- 
tative (topological) sense. For the same reason, the laws of 
the theory have to be formulated so as to hold in arbitrary 
coordinate systems; they have to be generally covariant. 
This requirement, together with the principle of equiva- 
lence, guided Einstein on his way towards GR. 


Some consequences of GR 


Causality 

The mathematical analysis of the field equation (12) has 
shown that the metric (= gravitational field) propagates 
like a wave. Its value in the vicinity of an event A can 
influence the field at a later event B only if B is contained 
in the interior of or on the future light cone of A, i.e. the 
field propagates not faster than light. To determine the 
field at B, it suffices to know the field on a ‘spacelike’, 
three-dimensional subspace S of spacetime earlier than B, 
on that part C of S which is contained in the past light 
cone of B. This is illustrated, with one space dimension 
suppressed, in figure 2. These statements also hold 
for the combined gravitational and matter fields. They 
generalize corresponding laws of special relativity (e.g. 
for electromagnetic fields), and contrast sharply with the 
instantaneous action-at-a-distance of Newtonian forces. 


Violation of local energy-momentum conservation 

The field equation (12) implies that the energy tensor 
satisfies an equation which generalizes the laws of local 
conservation of energy and momentum from SR to GR, in 
accordance with the equivalence principle, 


veT® =0. (13) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


past light 
cone of B' 


S) 


future 
light cone 
of A 


Figure 2. An event B in the interior of the future light cone of A 
and the region C of S which causally determines what happens 
at B’. 


Special cases of this equation provide GR-generalizations 
of the equations of motion (1), (2) and (4) of Newtonian the- 
ory. The derivative operator v7 depends on the metric and 
expresses that the localizable energy and momentum of 
matter and of non-gravitational fields are not strictly con- 
served, due to the action of gravity. For an isolated system, 
however, a global conservation law holds which includes 
a contribution from the gravitational field, see section Iso- 
lated systems, global energy-momentum below. 


Equations of motion and gravitational waves 

A fundamental task for any theory of gravitation is 
the prediction of the motions of bodies such as planets 
and stars. Approximation methods based on the 
gravitational field equation (12) and its consequence (13) 
have been developed to solve that problem. Solutions 
which represent the gravitational fields of well-separated, 
nearly spherical, slowly moving (v « c) and weakly 
stressed (p < pc?) bodies forming an isolated system 
reproduce, in lowest order, the results of Newtonian 
dynamics and provide higher ‘Post-Newtonian’ order, 
general-relativistic corrections, see section Tests of the 
field equation below. These methods have been 
successful in describing effects in the solar system like the 
perihelion advance, and even the effect of the emission of 
gravitational waves on the motions of the binary pulsar are 
in agreement with the theory. We do not yet understand 
in detail what happens if, under the damping action of 
gravitational radiation, two neutron stars and/or black 
holes forming a binary system approach each other and 
then merge to form a single compact object. Such a process 
is expected to produce a strong gravitational wave signal, 
gravitational waves. 

At large distances from the source, gravitational 
waves have properties similar to electromagnetic waves; 
they propagate with the fundamental speed c, are trans- 
verse, and have two independent states of polarization. 
However, while the patterns of two basic states of linear 
polarization of an electromagnetic wave form an angle of 
90° as indicated symbolically by | and —, in the gravita- 
tional case they form an angle of 45° only as indicated by + 
and x. This corresponds, in quantum language, to the fact 
that photons have spin 1 (in units of i), while gravitons are 
expected to have spin 2. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity and Gravitation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitomagnetism 

It follows from equations (12) and (13) that, in addition 
to Newtonian-type gravitational forces depending on the 
mass distribution only, there exist ‘gravitomagnetic’ forces 
depending on the flow of mass, analogous to magnetic 
forces, which depend on the motions of the charges. 
Such forces are taken into account in post-Newtonian 
approximations, but have not yet been measured in 
isolation, see Tests of the field equation below. 


Isolated systems, global energy-momentum 

The spacetime of an isolated system in GR is required to 
be such that its light cones behave, at large distances from 
matter sources, asymptotically like those of the spacetime 
of special relativity. Itis then possible to define a conserved 
total energy momentum of such a system and to show 
that the total energy is positive, except if there is no true 
gravitational field, i.e., no curvature (Yau, Witten). Itis also 
possible to give an exact expression for parts of the total 
energy-momentum which are radiated out of the system 
between two future light cones (Bondi, Sachs). 


Horizons and black holes 

The causal structure of a curved spacetime, indicated in the 
section Causality above, sometimes has the consequence 
that part of spacetime can never be seen by some observers. 
If a spherical star collapses, that particular future light 
cone of the center of the star which passes the star’s 
surface at the instant when the ratio mass/radius of the 
star reaches the ‘Schwarzschild limit’ c?/2G, will never 
reach an outside observer (figure 3). This so-called event 
horizon separates those events, which can be seen from 
outside, from those which are hidden from sight. That part 
of spacetime which is thus hidden is called a black hole; 
the horizon is its surface. Although according to (classical) 
GR no radiation and no particles can be emitted from a 
black hole, it does have a mass and attracts other bodies 
accordingly. For additional information on black holes see 
also QUANTUM Gravity, where singularities of gravitational 
fields are also briefly discussed. 


Cosmology 

General Relativity allows to treat spatially unbounded 
matter distributions and thus provides a basis for 
cosmology. The basic reason for this is that the solutions 
to equations (12) and (13) are determined, like those of 
Maxwell’s equations, by initial data whose influence on 
the evolving metric and matter propagates at most with 
the fundamental speed c, as explained in the section 
Causality. Therefore, the field at some spacetime point 
never depends ona spatially infinite amount of matter, as it 
would according to the old equations (5) or (7). (Boundary 
conditions can be imposed in General Relativity only on 
initial data specifying a solution of the field equation (12), 
not on the field which evolves from these data.) 

To allow for a static and spatially closed world model, 
Einstein in 1917 supplemented his field equation (12) 
of 1915 by a cosmological term —Ag*? on the right- 
hand side. This contribution has later been interpreted as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a singularity 


interior of 
black hole event horizon 
esa light 
<— rays 


~«____ world line of 


time outside observer 


ieee collapsing 


star 


space 


Figure 3. Collapsing star with event horizon, outside observer 
and light rays from the center of the star. The singularity is 
hidden behind the event horizon. 


the expectation value of the energy-momentum of the field 
fluctuations of the quantum vacuum. The appropriateness 
of this interpretation depends on a better understanding of 
the quantum vacuum and its relation to gravity. So far, this 
interpretation has not led to a computation of the value of 
the COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT A. 


Experimental and observational tests of general 
relativity 

Experiments and measurements supporting GR can be 
classified into those which test the Einstein equivalence 
principle and those which probe the gravitational field 
equation. 


Tests of the Einstein equivalence principle 

Tests of the first kind probe the approximate local validity 
of Special Relativity, i.e. the existence of local inertial 
frames or, equivalently, the possibility to assign a unique 
Lorentz metric (see 3(a) and (b)) to spacetime. From 
the viewpoint of GR these experiments serve to identify, 
relative to some arbitrary reference frame, a local inertial 
frame. Free fall experiments and Foucault pendulum 
experiments carried out in a terrestrial laboratory, for 
example, measure the acceleration and the angular 
velocity of the laboratory relative to a local inertial 
frame. Optical experiments and quantum interference 
experiments with neutron waves accomplish the same, 
and the concordance of the results establishes, up 
to experimental uncertainties, the uniqueness of the 
spacetime metric. The experimental fact that local inertial 
frames are accelerated relative to each other shows that 
spacetime is curved. 


Tests of the field equation 

Approximation methods to solve the field equation (12) 
show that, for a nearly isolated system of slowly, not 
too dense bodies, the metric differs from that of the flat 
spacetime of special relativity only in the time component; 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity and Gravitation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the latter is determined by the Newtonian potential ¢ 
according to 


—800 = 1428. (14) 


This formula specifies how the gravitational potential 
affects clock rates and determines frequency shifts of 
electromagnetic waves; it has been tested for the Earth’s 
gravitational field to within a measurement uncertainty of 
2 x 10-4 (Vessot-Levine, gravity probe A). This formula is 
not specific to GR; it has to hold in any ‘metric’ theory of 
gravity to ensure the approximate validity of Newtonian 
theory. Tests which can distinguish between Einstein’s 
theory, equation (12), and alternative theories of gravity 
require more accurate approximations to the metric. To 
obtain the light deflection, the metric 


eta: ( + 28)2 dt? + (1 - 28) dx? (15) 
c € 


which exhibits space curvature, is sufficient. The validity 
of this approximate metric has also been confirmed by 
the retardation of electromagnetic waves in gravitational 
fields (fourth test, Shapiro effect) and by the geodetic 
precession (de Sitter effect) of the angular momentum of 
the Earth-Moon system. Additional terms are needed 
to measure the Schiff precession (mixed dt dx“—terms, to 
be tested in the gravity probe B experiment in 2000), 
as well as the Lense-Thirring precession of the line of 
nodes of satellites orbiting the Earth, due to the Earth’s 
angular momentum. This effect appears to be observable 
through the orbits of the satellites Lageos I and III 
(Ciufolini). The famous perihelion motion of Mercury’s 
orbit requires the additional term +2¢7/c* in the gog term 
of (15). The tests here summarized have verified Einstein’s 
field equation up to relative measurement uncertainties 
of a few parts in 10°. For more details, see GR: SOLAR 
SYSTEM EXPERIMENTS. Of still higher order of approximation 
is the effect of gravitational radiation reaction on the 
orbits of bodies; it has been verified in the case of binary 
pulsars (See GR TESTS: BINARY PULSARS). The major challenge 
of experimental gravity is the direct measurement of 
gravitational radiation which is expected to open a new 
window onto the universe. 


Bibliography 

The state of knowledge in each main area of general 
relativity theory is covered in at least one of the following 
reviews: 


Hawking S W and Israel W (ed) 1997 General Relativity: An 
Einstein Centenary Survey (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Held A 1980 General Relativity and Gravitation vols I and II 
(New York: Plenum) 

Hawking S W and Israel W (ed) 1987 Three Hundred Years 
of Gravitation (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A text book emphasizing relativistic astrophysics: 


Straumann N 1984 General Relativity and Relativistic 
Astrophysics (Berlin: Springer) 


Books concentrating on experimental and observa- 
tional aspects: 


Will C M 1993 Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Ciufolini I and Wheeler J A 1995 Gravitation and Inertia 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 


J Ehlers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity Tests: Binary Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


General Relativity Tests: Binary 
Pulsars 


PULSARS are rapidly spinning NEUTRONSTARS emitting a beam 
of radio waves, like lighthouses. Experiment tells us that 
they are very stable clocks when isolated. A pulsar in a 
binary system is thus a moving clock, the best tool that 
one could dream of to test a relativistic theory. Indeed, 
many orbital data can be extracted from the analysis of the 
pulse arrival times, then compared with the predictions 
of the theory. Currently, general relativity passes all the 
available tests with flying colors. 


Binary-pulsar data analysis 

As the pulsar moves outwards or towards the observer, 
during its orbit, the Doppler effect modifies the pulse 
frequency like that of a fire-truck siren, and the time 
between two maxima of this frequency is thus a measure 
of the orbital period P,. 

More precisely, one can fit the pulse arrival times 
to a general formula taking into account any possible 
timing effect and depending on several phenomenological 
parameters. Five of them describe the approximate 
Keplerian orbit of the pulsar: the orbital period P,, the 
epoch of periastron passage 7y, the eccentricity e, the 
longitude of periastron w and the projected semimajor axis 
xc = a, sini (where a; is the semimajor axis of the pulsar 
orbit and i the inclination angle of the orbit with respect to 
the plane of the sky). The possible relativistic corrections to 
this Keplerian orbit are described by eight ‘post-Keplerian’ 
parameters: 


(i) the Einstein timing parameter yr, which combines 
the second-order Doppler effect (xvj/2c?, where v1 
is the pulsar’s velocity) together with the redshift 
due to the companion (xGm3/r12c?, where my is 
the companion’s mass and 117 the pulsar-companion 
distance); 

(ii) the rate of periastron advance a, i.e. the analogue 
of Mercury’s perihelion shift for the present binary 
system (a relativistic effect of order v?/c?); 

(iii) the rate of change of orbital period Py, caused by 
gravitational radiation damping, i.e. resulting from 
the fact that the system loses energy as it emits 
gravitational waves (an effect of order v°/c? in general 
relativity); 

(iv) the ‘range’ r and 

(v) the ‘shape’ s of the Shapiro time delay, r being a global 
factor for this effect (=Gmz/c? in general relativity), 
while s can be interpreted as the sine, s = sini, of the 
inclination angle; 

(vi) three other parameters which have not yet been 
accurately measured in any system. 


A similar analysis of the pulse structure also gives 
access to 11 extra post-Keplerian parameters, although 
they have not yet been determined precisely enough to 
be used to test relativistic gravity. (For further details, see 
also SOFTWARE: RADIO PULSAR SOFTWARE.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The interest of such a phenomenological analysis of 
binary-pulsar data is that it is theory independent. Once 
the parameters have been obtained by a least-squares fit, 
they can be compared with the predictions of a given 
theory, which may be derived independently. In fact, the 
eight post-Keplerian timing parameters can be predicted 
in a relativistic theory of gravity only if one knows the 
two masses of the pulsar (m) and its companion (mz), 
which are not directly measured. Moreover, the 11 
pulse-structure parameters depend also on two unknown 
angles defining the pulsar spin axis. Therefore, if all the 
post-Keplerian parameters could be measured precisely 
enough, each binary pulsar would give 8+ 11—2—2=15 
tests of gravity. As shown below, only a few of them are 
currently available, in different binary-pulsar systems, but 
they are extremely constraining anyway. Moreover, even if 
one cannot determine enough post-Keplerian parameters 
to obtain a clean test, statistical arguments can still be used 
to constrain the possible theories of gravity. 


The two most precise tests 

PSR B1913 +16 

The Hulse—Taylor binary pulsar, PSR B1913 + 16, has been 
continuously observed since its discovery in 1974. This is 
a rapid (P, ~ 8 h) and eccentric (e ~ 0.6) system, and 
three post-Keplerian parameters have been determined 
with great accuracy: yr, @ and P,. The measure of P, is 
in itself a great experimental achievement, as it confirms 
the existence of gravitational radiation. It is impressive to 
note that this quantity, of order —2 x 10-'’, is presently 
known with a relative precision of 0.35%. 

All three observed parameters are nevertheless 
necessary to provide an actual test of gravity. In a 
given theory, they can be predicted as functions of the 
two unknown masses of the pulsar and its companion, 
and one obtains thus 3 — 2 = 1 test. The equations 
VErGmy, mz) = yrs, O(m1, mz) = OS, Pé (my, m2) = Pees 
define three curves in the two-dimensional plane of the 
masses (11,2). In fact they define three strips if one 
takes into account the experimental uncertainties. If these 
strips meet in a small region, there exists a pair of masses 
(m,,m2) which is consistent with all three observables, 
and the theory is thus consistent with the binary-pulsar 
data. If they do not meet, the theory is ruled out. Figure 1 
displays these strips in the case of general relativity, which 
passes the test with flying colors. Note that, once the test 
is passed, it also gives a very accurate measure of the two 
masses (within the considered theory). A convenient way 
to illustrate the precision of this test is to use the values of 
the masses corresponding to the intersection of the very 
thin yr and @ strips and to compute the prediction of 
general relativity for Py. One finds that it is consistent 
with the observed value at the 0.3% level (i.e. within lo 
error bars). 

It should be noted that alternative theories of gravity 
may pass this test even if they are significantly different 
from general relativity. In this case, the three curves are 
very deformed with respect to figure 1, but they still meet 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity Tests: Binary Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


m/mg 
MN 
2.54 


1.57 


0.5f “ 


0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 


= m/mMg 


Figure 1. General relativity passes the (yr-@— Py) 1913416 test. The 
masses are given in units of the solar mass mo, and the widths of 
the lines are larger than 1o standard deviations. 


in one point (corresponding usually to values of m, and 
mz which are different from those obtained in general 
relativity). However, some fine tuning is necessary to 
construct such alternative theories passing the test. 


On the other hand, this binary-pulsar test is extremely 
constraining if one considers only the most natural and 
best-motivated alternatives to general relativity: ‘scalar— 
tensor’ theories, in which the gravitational interaction is 
mediated not only by a spin-2 graviton, as in Einstein’s 
theory, but also by one or several spin-0 scalar fields 
carrying positive energy. Indeed, a neutron star has a 
small radius R, and its gravitational binding energy is 
proportional to Gm/Rc? * 0.2 (whereas the same ratio 
is of order 10~° for the Sun). Because of nonperturbative 
strong-field effects, scalar—tensor theories can predict large 
deviations from general relativity in systems involving 
such compact bodies, even if they are very close to it in 
the weak-field conditions of the solar system. It has been 
shown that the PSR B1913 + 16 test rules out a wide class 
of these theories, including a subclass which is strictly 
indistinguishable from general relativity in solar system 
experiments. Binary-pulsar tests are thus qualitatively 
different from weak-field experiments. 

To illustrate this difference, it is convenient to work 
within a generic class of scalar—-tensor theories depending 
only on the two ‘parametrized post-Newtonian’ parame- 
ters 6 and y (see GENERALRELATIVITY: SOLAR SYSTEM EXPERIMENTS; 
the parameter y should not be confused with the timing 
observable yr discussed above). Solar system experiments 
tell us that 8 — 1 and y — 1 are both consistent with zero, 
whereas the PSR B1913 + 16 test imposes a bound on their 
ratio: (6B — 1)/(y — 1) < 1.1. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


m,/m, 7 


nN 


25b 


> m/mg, 


Figure 2. General relativity passes the (yr—w—s—r) 1534412 tests. 
The widths of the strips correspond to lo standard deviations. 
In particular, the region between the two lines labeled r is 
consistent with the observed value of this parameter. 


PSR B1534+12 

The binary pulsar PSR B1534+12 is also a rapid (P, © 10h) 
and eccentric (e ~ 0.3) system. It has been observed 
only since 1991, but it is much closer to the Earth than 
PSR B1913 + 16, and its pulses are both stronger and 
narrower. It has thus been possible to measure rapidly the 
post-Keplerian parameters yr and w with good precision. 
Moreover, the orbit is nearly edge on relative to the line of 
sight (i ~ 80°), and the Shapiro time delay parameters r 
and s have also been determined (r with a lower precision). 
As shown in figure 2, the strips corresponding to these four 
quantities are nicely consistent within general relativity. 

The time derivative of the orbital period P, is also 
measured at present, but it is spoiled by a poorly known 
Doppler contribution due to the acceleration of the system 
towards the center of the Galaxy. The corresponding strip 
is consistent with the other four observables at the 1.30 
level, but it can be brought in even better agreement if the 
Earth—pulsar distance is slightly larger than its estimate 
from dispersion measures. 

Out of these 5—2 = 3 tests, only the one corresponding 
to the three parameters yr, @ and s is very precise. 
Contrary to the PSR B1913 + 16 test, it does not use the 
P, observable, and therefore does not depend on the 
radiative structure of the theory. These two binary pulsars 
give thus two complementary tests of relativistic gravity. 
For instance, if one considers a fine-tuned theory passing 
one of these tests while being very different from general 
relativity, it usually does not pass the second one. 

On the other hand, in the most natural class of scalar— 
tensor theories, the PSR B1534 + 12 test has also the 
capability of probing models which are perturbatively 
equivalent to general relativity in weak-field conditions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity Tests: Binary Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


At present, this test is slightly less constraining than the 
PSR B1913 + 16 one. 


Null’ tests of general relativity 

For many binary pulsars, it has not yet been possible 
to measure enough post-Keplerian parameters, and the 
masses of the pulsar and its companion cannot be 
determined as in figures 1 and 2. However, a particular 
combination of them and the inclination angle i, called the 
‘mass function’, is related through Kepler’s third law to 
the observables P, and x: 


(mz sini)? 2n \* (xc)? 
(m, +m)? (F) G 

Moreover, all the neutron star masses that have been 
determined precisely happen to be close to 1.35m 9, with 
a small statistical spread. Since a pulsar is a neutron star, 
one can use a statistical argument on its mass m, and on 
the inclination angle i to predict a probable value for the 
companion’s mass m . Usually, this information suffices to 
determine whether the companion may be itself a neutron 
star or not. When it is very probably a white dwarf, 
the asymmetry of the system can be used to test quite 
precisely some predictions of gravity theories. Actually, 
general relativity does not predict special effects for such 
asymmetric systems, and this is why they can be called 
‘null’ tests. However, they happen to be very constraining 
for alternative theories of gravity. 


Dipolar gravitational waves 

General relativity predicts that the gravitational waves 
emitted by a binary system start at the quadrupolar order. 
If v denotes the average orbital velocity of the bodies, 
this means the radiated energy is of order O(v°/c°). On 
the contrary, alternative theories of gravity generically 
predict also the emission of dipolar gravitational waves, 
of order O(v?/c3). This emission almost vanishes if the 
two bodies are similar, but it can become much larger than 
the general relativistic quadrupole in asymmetric systems. 
Several NEUTRON STAR-WHITE DWARF binaries, such as PSR 
B0655 + 64, happen to have a very small observed value 
of Py, consistent with general relativity (~—10~"*) but not 
with a typical dipolar radiation (~—10-"). This is one 
of the most constraining tests for alternative theories of 
gravity, even if one chooses the masses of the pulsar and 
its companion to obtain the most conservative bounds. 
For the most natural scalar—tensor theories of gravity, this 
test is almost as constraining as the PSR B1913 + 16 one 
discussed above. 


Gravitational Stark effect 

General relativity predicts that different self-gravitating 
bodies fall with the same acceleration in an external 
gravitational field (see GENERAL RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION). 
On the contrary, alternative theories generically predict 
a violation of this ‘strong equivalence principle’: the 
acceleration of a neutron star towards the center of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Galaxy differs from that of a white dwarf. This causes 
a polarization of the orbit of a neutron star-white dwarf 
system towards the Galaxy center, analogous to the Stark 
effect in electromagnetism. (In the case of the Earth-Moon 
system in the gravitational field of the Sun, this is called 
the Nordtvedt effect; see GENERAL RELATIVITY: SOLAR SYSTEM 
EXPERIMENTS.) More precisely, the eccentricity vector e of 
the orbit is the sum of a fixed vector ep directed towards 
the Galaxy center (proportional to the difference of the 
accelerations of the bodies) and of a rotating vector ep (f) 
corresponding to the usual relativistic periastron advance 
at angular velocity wg. Several asymmetric systems of 
this kind (such as PSRs 1713 + 0747, 2229 + 2643, 1455 — 
3330) happen to have a very small eccentricity. The only 
explanation would be that the rotating vector er(t) is 
precisely canceling the fixed contribution ef at the time 
of our observation: ep + er(t) ~ 0. However, this is 
very improbable if the system is old enough, and one 
can use a Statistical argument to constrain the space of 
theories. Moreover, by considering several such systems, 
the probability that they have simultaneously a small 
eccentricity is the product of the already small individual 
probabilities. If m, denotes the gravitational mass of a 
neutron star and m; its inertial mass, this statistical analysis 
gives the bound |1 — mg/mj| < 10~. This rules out a 
wide class of alternative theories of gravity. For the most 
natural scalar—-tensor theories, this test is, however, less 
constraining than the ones discussed above, because it is 
less sensitive to strong-field effects: if such a theory is close 
to general relativity in the solar system, it also predicts that 
mg © m; for neutron stars. 


Local Lorentz invariance and conservation laws 
Theories of gravity which do not respect the symmetries 
of general relativity can also be tested very precisely with 
binary pulsars. If local Lorentz invariance of gravitational 
physics is not respected, there exists a preferred frame in 
the universe, and a binary system undergoes extra forces if 
it is moving with respect to this frame. This causes again a 
polarization of the orbit in a particular direction, as in the 
previous section, and statistical arguments can again be 
used to constrain the theories. In the ‘parametrized post- 
Newtonian’ formalism, the various possible symmetry 
violations of general relativity have been parametrized 
by a set of real numbers. At present, PSRs 1012 + 5307 
and 2317 + 1439 give the tightest bounds on one of them: 
|a,| < 1.2 x 10-4. The statistical analysis of several 
systems also gives a very impressive bound on another 
post-Newtonian parameter: |a3| < 1.5 x 107!%. This is 
one of the most precise null experiments of physics. The 
remaining parameters are currently better constrained by 
solar-system experiments or isolated pulsar observations. 
If the gravitational constant G varies with time, 
the orbital evolution of a binary system is modified, 
and one can prove that P,/P> has an extra contribution 
proportional to —G/G. Binary-pulsar data can thus be 
used to constrain also the time derivative of G, but solar 
system experiments give currently tighter bounds. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity Tests: Binary Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
The most complete reference about the phenomenological 
analysis of binary-pulsar data is 


Damour T and Taylor J H 1992 Phys. Rev. D 45 1840-68 


A detailed description of the PSR B1913 + 16 test, 
together with shorter ones on other binary pulsars, can 
be found in chapters 12 and 14.6 of 


Will C M 1993 Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 283- 
309 and 343-52 


More recent data about PSRs 1913 + 16 and 1534 + 12 
are given in 


Taylor J H 1993 Class. Quantum Gravity 10 S167-74 
Stairs I H et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 505 352-7 


The gravitational Stark effect and other ‘null’ tests of 
gravity are discussed notably in 


Wex N 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 317 976 
Wex N 2000 Pulsar Astronomy—2000 and Beyond (ASP Conf. 
Ser. 202) eds Kramer, Wex and Wielebinski 


The various experimental constraints on a generic 
class of alternative theories of gravity are compared in 


Damour T and Esposito-Farése G 1998 Phys. Rev. D 58 
042001 


Gilles Esposito-Farése 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity: Solar System Experiments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


General Relativity: Solar System 
Experiments 


Modern gravitational theories such as general relativity 
produce, among their outputs, dynamical equations for 
clock rates, for the speed of light propagation and for the 
motion of bodies, with each of these equations containing 
relativistic modifications of their Newtonian versions. 
Such dynamical equations are the chief ingredients 
for modeling the key solar system experiments which 
essentially ‘map out’ the gravitational interaction. The 
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY predicts novel phenomena 
not present in Newtonian gravity and which also differ 
in detail from what emerges from plausible alternative 
relativistic theories of gravity. The experimental mapping 
of the gravitational interaction strengthens verification 
of general relativity as one theory within a broad 
class of possible gravitational theories and from that 
verification places stringent constraints on the existence 
of any additional long-range force fields in physical law 
which might supplement the tensor interaction of general 
relativity. (See also GENERAL RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION.) 


Equivalence principle 

Einstein’s first revolutionary innovation in gravitational 
physics was based on the Equivalence Principle which 
he formulated in 1907, a decade before construction 
of his specific general relativity theory. Generalizing 
from the apparent fact that differently composed bodies 
fall at identical rates in a gravitational field, Einstein 
hypothesized that gravitational phenomena were, when 
tidal effects could be neglected, locally equivalent in 
all respects to phenomena experienced in an accelerated 
frame of reference. From this equivalence he concluded 
that clock rates should be reduced near gravitating matter 
when compared with rates of more distantly located 
clocks. Applying universally to all clocks located at 
heights z and z+h ina gravitational field g(z), the fractional 
rate shift between them is (to lowest order in 1/c”) expected 


to be 
fE+A-f@ — gs@h 
f(@) ~ ae 
or, for large clock separations, the rate shift is better stated 


in terms of the cumulative difference between Newtonian 
gravitational potentials of the clocks: 


(1) 


FG) — fF) a U(F:) — UG;) 
f Gi) ~ c? 


(2) 


This frequency shift was subsequently shown, however, to 
simply follow from energy conservation considerations, so 
its observation does not so much confirm general relativity 
theory specifically as support a broader, often called metric, 
class of gravitational theories. In 1977 a hydrogen maser 
clock was put on a suborbital rocket flight, and its rate 
was compared with an Earth-located clock by means of 
one- and two-way phase-coherent radio links, and the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


shift given by equation (2) was confirmed with precision 
of almost 1 part in 10*. 

Using his Equivalence Principle, Einstein also 
predicted that light would be deflected by the component 
of gravitational acceleration perpendicular to the light 
trajectory 

eafee @) 

S Cc 

with ¢ being the light ray’s unit propagation vector. 
However, this was a less dramatic prediction; a century 
earlier Laplace and others had reached such a conclusion 
based on a finite velocity, corpuscular model of light. The 
real novelty concerning this phenomenon later emerged 
from Einstein’s complete theory of 1916 which he based on 
a tensor field of gravitational interaction; it predicts twice 
as large a rate of deflection. Solar system experiments 
which have specifically focused on measuring the effects 
of gravity on propagation of light yield some of the most 
precise tests of the general relativity theory available today, 
since they have been able to measure the dynamics of light 
rays which passed close to the Sun where the solar system’s 
strongest gravitational fields reside. 

Theories consistent with the traditional form of 
the Equivalence Principle can be constructed using a 
combination of tensor and scalar fields of interaction. In 
these constructions, the static-limit source for the tensor 
field is proportional to matter’s total energy density Ty 
(which is the normally dominant component of matter’s 
entire stress—energy tensor T,’), while the source for the 
scalar field is proportional to the trace of that tensor T. 
The body integral of these two sources can be shown to be 
identical for a general source body which is in stationary 
internal equilibrium, is free of significant external force 
disturbances and has negligible internal gravitational 
binding energy: 


[mav =f raveme withT =)°T!. (4) 
uw 


Such conditions are rather closely fulfilled by the sources in 
the solar system. In such scalar—tensor theories, therefore, 
the observational differences between the hybrid scalar— 
tensor interaction and the pure tensor interaction of 
general relativity are suppressed until the solar system’s 
very weak relativistic corrections to the static limit are 
relevant. 


Dynamical equations for light and bodies 

There is a rich collection of perturbations in the orbits 
of solar system bodies which theory suggests may 
result when Newtonian theory is generally modified but 
which are not, in fact, observed in experiment. These 
often overlooked null experimental results are nevertheless 
important in establishing several properties of gravity, e.g. 
(1) that local gravitational physics is Lorentz invariant so 
that the speed of the solar system through the cosmos 
cannot be detected from the dynamics within that system, 
(2) that conservation laws of energy, momentum and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity: Solar System Experiments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


angular momentum are fulfilled in the solar system’s total 
motion and (3) that the Newtonian-level interaction is 
spatially isotropic. 

Accepting those foundations and then considering 
the class of theoretical possibilities consistent with these 
empirical findings, some general dynamical equations for 
light propagation and for motion of bodies are formed 
which represent the broad class of theoretical alternatives. 
These equations, which are then used to model some 
remaining key confrontations of general relativity and 
its alternatives with experiment, take forms as follows 
(expressed here to order 1/c” which is sufficient for solar 
system applications): the coordinate speed of light near 
the Sun or other body (mass M and distance R) is slowed, 
as measured from afar, owing to the body’s proximity 


ss GM 


y is a dimensionless, theory-dependent parameter (equal 
to 1 in general relativity) which was first introduced by 
Eddington to represent general theoretical possibilities 
for the static, spherically symmetric tensor field exterior 
to a source, and which was later found by Will and 
Nordtvedt to have more wide-ranging significance for 
the general structure of the gravitational field. Here it 
scales the additional effect of gravity on light propagation 
which is not derivable from the Equivalence Principle. 
This location-dependent speed function leads to both 
deflection and retardation of light trajectories. (The 
equations of motion for matter and light depend on 
choice of coordinates for space and time. For solar 
system applications, coordinates in which the speed of 
light is isotropic to 1/c? order are usually employed. 
Experimental observables must, of course, be independent 
of this choice of coordinate system.) For a ray making 
a complete passage by the Sun with distance of closest 
approach D, it produces a deflection 66 of light’s direction 
of travel toward the Sun by an amount 


GM 
56 = 2(1+ y)—— 
G+) a5 (6) 


and it adds an amount 6¢ to light’s time of flight between 
two sites located at distances R; and R2 from the Sun 


M 
ét~ 214+ jee In(4R1R2/D?) (7) 
Cc 


with D again being the ray’s distance of closest approach 
to the Sun. 

Changes of the apparent angular positions of 
cosmologically distant radio sources, numbering in the 
many thousands, have been measured using very-long- 
baseline interferometry (vLBI) techniques in which the 
signals from each source recorded at two or more spatially 
separated radio antennas are cross-correlated as a function 
of time delay; the general relativistic prediction for the 
light deflection—double that given by the equivalence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


principle—has recently been confirmed by this means with 
precision of better than 1 part in 10°. The time-of-flight 
delays of radio signals were earlier confirmed with slightly 
less precision using the Viking mission’s ranging data to 
Mars accumulated during 1977-1982. Radar transponders 
placed on the Martian surface and on spacecraft orbiting 
that planet permitted measurement of the round trip time 
of travel for radio signals originated and detected at Earth, 
with the time delay signal in equation (7) being particularly 
important in the data produced during the periods when 
the Earth—Mars line of sight passed close to the Sun. 

The equation of motion for planets such as Mercury 
which move with respect to an essentially fixed Sun is, to 
sufficient approximation, given by 


d pe ee GM geet 
dt 2 c2 ~ RS © 2 @ 


d GM. 1-26 G?M?._ 
dt c?R 2 c2R4 


(8) 


with V = dR /dt. Eddington’s y parameter appears 
in this equation as a scale factor for the motional 
corrections to Newton’s static-limit interaction, while his 
second parameter £ scales the novel nonlinear feature of 
gravity. 6 also has value unity in general relativity, but 
both parameters will generally have different values in 
alternative theories which have a scalar field augmenting 
Einstein’s tensor field in transmitting the gravitational 
interaction between matter. In these latter cases 1 — y 
quantifies the fractional participation or strength of the 
scalar field in producing the total phenomenon of gravity. 

The expression from SPECIAL RELATIVITY for a body’s 
momentum on the left-hand side of equation (8) 
(approximated to the 1/c* order) plus both the motional 
and nonlinear modifications scaled by y and f on the 
force side of this equation of motion together produce a 
precession of the Keplerian-like orbit around the central 
body of mass M. The precessional rate is 


6Q GM 
NOPE iy ervey Py an |) eee 
Q eee aa —e*)a 


(9) 
with Q, e and a being the orbit’s frequency, eccentricity 
and semimajor axis, respectively. For the general 
relativistic case, y = B = 1, this precession amounts 
to 43 arcsec/century for Mercury’s orbit and adds to a 
Newtonian precession of that planet’s orbit caused by 
accelerations from other planets. A discrepancy of this 
size between predictions of Newtonian theory and the 
astronomical observations of Mercury’s angular positions 
had already been established by the end of the 19th century, 
and the natural remedy for this anomaly was the first 
and immediate empirical triumph of Einstein’s general 
relativity theory in 1916. Today, radar ranging between 
Mercury’s surface and Earth, a somewhat less precise 
procedure than the ranging to specific transponder sites 
at Mars in the Viking mission, nevertheless confirms the 
predicted precession to about 1 part in 10° precision. This 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity: Solar System Experiments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


serves at this time as a somewhat weaker test of general 
relativity than do observations of light propagation or 
lunar laser ranging, and further improvements in ranging 
precision to Mercury will not so much yield a better 
test of gravitational theory but will instead measure 
the Sun’s quadrupole moment (a measure of the Sun’s 
rotational flattening) whose Newtonian gravitational field 
also contributes to Mercury’s orbital precession. 

Revisiting a classic system—the orbit of the Moon— 
which has for centuries played a central role in studying 
details of Newtonian gravitational dynamics, it is found, 
thanks to implementation of the modern laser ranging 
technique, to also be a remarkably sensitive testing ground 
for measuring relativistic features of gravity. To new levels 
of precision the Equivalence Principle can be tested, the 
Eddington parameters, especially 6, can be measured in 
novel ways and to high precision, and a sensitive search 
for time variation in the gravitational coupling parameter 
G can be made. The scientifically operable part of the 
Moon’s equation of motion relative to Earth is remarkably 
Newtonian like: 


di 
dt 


m., GM = 
= GO Gr t bem RB R 


GMs -= 
PAY AY ag VI ees (10) 


with m being the total Earth-Moon system mass, 0 = 
dr/dt and + --- indicating a host of Newtonian solar tidal 
accelerations and small relativistic accelerations of lesser 
interest for our purposes here. 5am is the measure of 
a possible failure, from whatever cause, of equality of 
gravitational free-fall rates of Earth and Moon toward the 
Sun (breakdown of the previously mentioned Equivalence 
Principle of Einstein): 


Earth — 4Moon 


(11) 


dem aa 


&Sun 


This difference between free-fall rates can occur as a result 
of an unusual atomic composition dependence of long- 
range forces (discussed later) and it can also result from 
anomalous coupling between the external gravity of the 
Sun and the internal gravity within the Earth and Moon. 
The latter possibility is controlled by the same Eddington 
parameters y and £ introduced previously in equations (5) 
and (8); as auxiliary calculations show, the gravitational- 
to-inertial mass ratios of celestial bodies must differ among 
themselves in proportion to the fractional gravitational 
internal binding energies of the bodies if the Eddington 
parameters are anomalous: 


|a|_ M(G) 1 pone wee 
Bo Ma. ome: ean 
(12) 


a is the acceleration of the body when in external 
gravitational field g: p(x) is the body’s mass density, so the 
exhibited integral represents minus twice the gravitational 
potential energy within the body. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Universality of gravitational free fall 

Thirty years of laser ranging to several passive reflectors 
placed on the lunar surface by some of the Apollo 
missions to the Moon have confirmed that the Earth and 
Moon fall at equal rates toward the Sun with a precision 
of 3 x 10° (a recent 1998 fit has even pushed this 
equality to 1 x 107'%). The Earth has a substantial iron 
core while the Moon is composed of mantle-like silicate 
materials, so the lunar laser ranging (LLR) result confirms 
the composition independence of gravitational free fall 
to precision better than 10-”, which compares quite 
favorably with the performance of the latest laboratory 
tests of the universality of gravitational free-fall rates for 
different materials. However, because the Earth possesses 
gravitational binding energy equal to about 5 x 1071? of 
its total mass-energy, this experimental result permits 
a second interesting scientific interpretation; the factor 
4B — 3 — y in equation (12) is zero to precision of a few 
parts in 104, serving as the premier measurement of general 
relativity’s nonlinearity quantified by the parameter f. 
This confirmation of general relativity is accomplished by 
measuring, in particular, the amplitude of the synodic 
month period (new moon to new moon) oscillation in 
Earth—Moon range with precision of a few millimeters; if 
dem Were non-zero in equation (10), the anomaly in this 
synodic amplitude would be 2.9 x 10!?Sem cm. 


Time variation of Newton's G 

From analysis of the LLR data one also tests for a 
possible time variation in the gravity coupling parameter 
of Newton—G -> G(t)? There have been general 
speculations by Dirac and others that this coupling 
parameter might evolve in time as the universe expands, 
and theories alternative to general relativity such as the 
scalar—tensor theories usually predict such time variation 
with magnitude of the order of the Hubble rate: 


d 

— ~ (46 -3-y)H. (13) 
H ~ 7 x 107" yr! is the observed Hubble expansion 
rate of the universe. The fit of the LLR data 
places the limit dG/Gdt < 2 x 10-? yr on such 
variation (although a conservative allowance for possible 
unmodeled systematic secular effects is added by some to 
this result). Comparable limitations have been obtained 
by analysis of the radar ranging data between Earth and 
the planets Mars and Mercury and the arrival times of 
the pulsed signals from certain binary pulsar systems (see 
GENERAL RELATIVITY TESTS: BINARY PULSARS). 


Geodetic precession of local inertial frames 

The Coriolis-like acceleration term in the Moon’s equation 
of motion is the basis of a third fundamental confirmation 
of general relativistic predictions achieved from LLR. 
Because the Earth-Moon system is not simply falling 
radially toward the Sun, but rather moves across the 
Sun’s field, the local inertial frame rotates relative to 
distant inertial frames of reference at the average rate 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity: Solar System Experiments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of 19.2 mas yr“! (mas = milliarcsecond), as first derived 
by de Sitter in the context of general relativity, but later 
generalized to other metric theories to be 


. GM. = 


As a result of this acceleration, both the lunar orbit’s 
major axis (its perigee) and its inclined orbital plane 
(line of nodes) precess at about this additional rate when 
referenced to the distant inertial frames. LLR confirms this 
precession to better than 0.1 mas yr} precision. NASA's 
GRAVITY PROBE-B mission, scheduled for launch in May 2002, 
will place gyroscopes in Earth orbit and measure their 
precessions with respect to the line of sight toward a 
distant star. This mission has the potential to measure 
the analogous de Sitter precession of the gyroscopes due 
to motion through Earth’s gravitational field and to do 
so with precision approaching 1 part in 10°, thereby 
determining the fundamental Eddington parameter y 
appearing in equation (14) with a level of precision which 
goes well beyond present knowledge. 

LLR is an on-going experiment, and the performance 
of the passive reflectors on the Moon shows no sign 
of diminishing with age. The three gravitational 
measurements here discussed can be further improved 
in precision as we go into the future, especially the 
latter two measurements whose intrinsic sensitivities grow 
decisively with total time span of observing the lunar orbit. 


Gravitomagnetism 

The full, testable content of the 1/c? corrections to the 
Newtonian equations of motion only appears in situations 
of bodies in mutual motion. As in electromagnetism, 
these more general N-body dynamical configurations 
include what have become called gravitomagnetic forces, 
which are proportional to velocities of both interacting 
bodies, and inductive forces, in which the acceleration of 
one body accelerates the other. Successful modelings of 
astronomical binary pulsar systems, such as PSR 1913+16, 
which consist of bodies of comparable mass moving about 
their joint center of mass-energy in highly eccentric orbits, 
have necessarily brought these additional interactions into 
play as part of the modeling process which achieves 
precision fit of the pulse-arrival-time data. These 
interactions are particularly required for understanding 
the observed 4.2° yr! periastron precession rate of the 
PSR 1913+16 system’s orbit. Closer to home, the computer 
computation of the Moon’s position relative to Earth is 
routinely performed in the solar system’s barycentric rest 
frame, and therefore the gravitomagnetic and inductive 
accelerations of the moving Moon by the moving Earth 
are indispensable components of that computation, which 
as a whole achieves the recent fits of the range data 
with precision at the subcentimeter level. Discrepancies 
of more than 1000 cm would otherwise be present. In 
fact, once local Lorentz invariance and fulfillment of the 
several conservation laws in gravitational physics have 
been experimentally confirmed, as they have, then such 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


interactions as gravitomagnetism are necessarily specified 
in terms of the already discussed Eddington parameter y. 

Nevertheless, explicit and isolated experimental 
expression of the gravitomagnetic interaction has been 
sought. Marginal detection of this force has been 
achieved through measurement and modeling of the nodal 
precession rates of the near-Earth LAGEOS satellites, and 
the previously mentioned Gravity Probe-B mission is 
designed to also measure to better than 1% the precession 
of gyroscopes due to the gravitomagnetic torque generated 
by the spinning Earth. 


The gravitational radiation reaction force in the 
binary pulsar 

The binary pulsar system PSR1913+16 has also provided 
the pioneering, although indirect, evidence that the 
tensor gravitational field, like other dynamical fields, 
carries waves of energy, momentum and angular 
momentum away from its time-varying gravitational 
sources. Imprinted in the pulse arrival time data is, 
with better than 1% agreement with theory, the orbital 
rate speed-up which results from the order 1/c* radiation 
reaction force derived from general relativity theory. Both 
ground and space-based laboratories for directly detecting 
and studying gravitational radiation arriving from distant 
astronomical sources are at present under development 
and construction. 


Equivalence Principle violating interactions 

A failure of the Equivalence Principle at some level of 
precision would probably be indicating the presence of 
an additional very weak, long-range force acting between 
bodies, and for which the coupling strength to sources is 
proportional to attributes of those sources other than total 
mass-energy content. The static-limit force between bulk 
matter resulting from most such additional interactions 
will then be a gradient of a potential with the form 


(15) 


uw # 0 indicates the possibility of a finite-range, Yukawa- 
like interaction due to non-zero mass m = hu/c of the 
transmitting field’s quanta (uw — 0 returns this interaction 
to inverse square). This force will produce differences in 
the acceleration rates of Earth and Moon toward the Sun: 


so= (2a), {(8)-(B) Jone. 09 


If, for example, the coupling strengths K; are 
proportional to matter attributes such as baryon number or 
nuclear electrostatic energy content, then the ratios K;/M; 
vary fractionally by about a part in a thousand among the 
different elements of nature. The mentioned experiments 
which have confirmed composition independence of free- 
fall rates to 10~” then place strength limits of order 
K?/GM* < 10-° on the long-range limit 1/u > 1 AU 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity: Solar System Experiments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


for such interactions. Experiments which exploit the 
advantages of an Earth-orbiting satellite environment 
in order to achieve several orders of magnitude higher 
precision in testing the universality of free fall are under 
development. 

For any atomic clock whose frequency f is deter- 
mined by the difference of two energy levels 


_ EE} 


f 20h 


(17) 
the potential energy assumed in equation (15) produces, in 
the vicinity of source body s, an additional clock frequency 
shift which depends on details of the clock’s atomic 
mechanism; adding this to the previously discussed 
Equivalence Principle’s shift, the total rate shift 5f of this 
particular clock when near a source body s becomes 


K K,; — K; 

14 Lek]. (18) 
GM), M, — M; 

However, GM, in this expression can no longer be 


identified with the Sun’s total attracting strength; in 
interaction with planet p it is now 


6f _ GM, 
al 


K, K 
lr =GM,(1 “Pe HRT 4 WR) |). 1 
om, (14 Bee (+p ) (19) 


The Sun’s total attracting strength [ is the number 
measured to better than 1 part in 10'° precision in the solar 
system and is the standard by which clock gravitational 
rate shifts can be absolutely calibrated. From the above, it 
is then seen that clocks will in general show anomalous 
rate shifts both absolutely measurable with respect to a 
standard and toa differently located clock and relatively and 
locally measurable with respect to clocks of other physical 
mechanisms. 

The difference between the expressions in equations 
(16) and (18) confirms that clock experiments and free- 
fall experiments are, in principle, independent probes of 
the Equivalence Principle. However, comparing these 
equations quantitatively reveals that the former can rarely 
compete in precision as fundamental tests. For example, 
an on-board measurement of the relative rates of two 
physically different atomic clocks sent together on a 
spacecraft to within 4 solar radii of the Sun could probe 
for an Equivalence Principle violating interaction with 
only slightly higher precision than today’s best free fall 
observations already achieve. 


Periastron precession and finite-range interactions 

If the force given by equation (15) has finite Yukawa range 
(u # 0), it contributes to the precession rate of orbit major 
axes. In the case of orbits with small eccentricity this added 
precession da is 


— = ——~_uk)e"*. 20 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Near-Earth satellite, lunar and planetary orbit precession 
rates as measured by laser and radio ranging all strongly 
constrain the presence of any such additional interactions 
with the appropriately matched ranges. For instance, LLR 
constrains the strength ratio KeKm/GMeMm of any new 
interaction to be less than 10" for range 1/2. ~ 2x10 cm, 
and similar constraints result from using data from near- 
Earth satellite and planetary orbits. These powerful 
results hold whether or not the coupling parameters K; of 
the additional interaction are proportional to total mass— 
energies M;. Periastron precession rate measurements 
have been underappreciated observations in the search 
for long-range Yukawa-like interactions, and they deserve 
more attention in the design of future ranging experiments. 


Concluding remarks 

During most of the period since publication of the 
general relativity theory of gravity, the prevailing 
interpretation of Einstein’s revolutionary theory has not 
been the measured and restrained observation—that 
gravity modifies physical phenomena as if the geometry 
of space and time is non-Euclidean—but instead it has 
generally been the stronger ontological assertion—that 
gravity is space-time curvature. Experiment provides 
no support for this stronger interpretative stance, it 
played no part in this summary of the present-day 
experimental situation and indeed it tends to be a divisive 
viewpoint which suggests a difference in nature between 
the gravitational force and the other forces in physical 
law. The inverse assertion better describes the actual 
relationship—that the curved sPace-TIME arena of our world 
is a consequence of the gravitational field. 

We are left at century’s end with a wide variety 
of experimental evidence, which considered as a whole 
indicates that a dynamical tensor field, governed by 
specific field equations and having a unique universal 
coupling to the other fields and particles of physical law, 
and nonlinearly to itself, all as formulated by Einstein’s 
general relativity, provides the currently measured long- 
range interaction between bodies. The empirically 
confirmed, N-body gravitational equation of motion, 
applicable and valid for the most general dynamical 
configurations, is found to be Lorentz invariant and 
Lagrangian based 


doL aL 


See ee ey =) 21 
dt dv; dr; 2) 


with the 1/c? order Lagrangian being 
1 G mm; 
L= ; 24 Hy?) 4+ ae 22 
rm ( 2+ 5) 23s (22) 
1 4 G m;mMj; 
re a +742 
2 2 o> > > aan Mk 
x (> + 3; — 70; “Uj — Uj iii, -26 


ki ik 


(23) 


ijpi Til 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Relativity: Solar System Experiments 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and possessing the conserved system properties of energy 
E,momentum P and angular momentum J 


. OL > aL > . OL 
i Ue L P= ae, J= it OS eae 
» Ov; 7 Ov; Di Ov; 


and a system center of energy R 


which moves at constant velocity P /E. 

From solar system observations, there appears room 
for less than a part ina thousand presence of any additional 
inverse square, metrically structured interaction and room 
for less than 1 part in 10° presence of any inverse square, 
non-metrically structured interaction (and less than 1 
part in 10" Yukawa-like, solar system range interaction 
of either structure) to modify this exhibited dynamics 
derivable from general relativity theory. 


Bibliography 

The most comprehensive book on the interface of theory 
with the experimental foundations of the gravitational 
interaction is 


Will CM 1993 Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics 
revised edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


although the reader should be cautioned that decisive im- 
provements in experimental results and other innovations 
have occurred since publication of this edition. 

A general article on the history of the Moon’s role in 
probing gravity, including the modern lunar laser ranging 
experiment, is 


Nordtvedt K 1996 From Newton’s Moon to Einstein’s 
Moon Phys. Today 49(5) 


The most recent comprehensive overview of the lunar laser 
ranging experiment including its total scientific output is 


Dickey J O et al 1994 Lunar laser ranging: a continuing 
legacy of the Apollo program Science 265 


The modern version of the parameterized post-Newtonian 
expression of the tensor gravitational field used to 
calculate and compare the various experimental effects 
within the general class of metric theories of gravity 
(including general relativity) was developed in 


Will C and Nordtvedt K 1972 Astrophys. J. 177 


Kenneth Nordtvedt 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


General Theory of Relativity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


General Theory of Relativity 


The relativistic theory of gravitation that was devised in 
1915 by Albert Einstein (1879-1955). The general theory 
extended Einstein’s previous work on special relativity to 
deal with observers in accelerated frames of reference. 

A central postulate of the general theory is the prin- 
ciple of equivalence, that ‘all freely-falling, non-rotating, 
laboratories are fully equivalent for the performance of 
all physical experiments’. It follows from this that an ob- 
server in a small closed box (e.g. an elevator, or a window- 
less spacecraft) cannot tell whether that box is subject to 
uniform acceleration or is at rest in a uniform gravitational 
field; both situations would give the observer a feeling of 
‘weight’. Conversely, if a test particle floats freely inside 
a closed box, an observer cannot tell whether the box is in 
the depths of space, far from a gravitating body, or falling 
freely in the gravitational field of a massive body (for ex- 
ample, an observer inside an elevator falling freely down 
its shaft would have no sensation of weight). 

General relativity embodies the concept that the 
three dimensions of space (length, breadth, height) and 
the dimension of time are linked together into a four- 
dimensional spacetime. The effect of a distribution of 
mass (or energy) is to induce curvature into (i.e. to bend) 
spacetime in its vicinity. Conversely, particles and rays of 
light follow paths that are determined by the curvature of 
spacetime in their locality. In general relativity, gravitation 
is regarded as a geometric property of spacetime rather 
than, as in Newtonian gravitation, a force acting directly 
between individual massive bodies. 

Although Newtonian theory is perfectly satisfactory 
for most applications, general relativity is capable of 
dealing with circumstances in which Newtonian theory 
is inadequate. In particular, the perihelion position 
of the planet Mercury’s orbit advances by an amount 
that exceeds the Newtonian prediction by 43 arcsec 
per century; general relativity predicts the correct rate 
of advance. Other important consequences of the 
theory, which have been tested to a high degree of 
precision by experiment and observation, include: the 
bending of light in a gravitational field (rays of light 
passing close to the edge of the Sun, for example, are 
deflected by an amount that is consistent with general 
relativity); gravitational time dilation (clocks run more 
slowly in strong gravitational fields than in weak ones); 
and gravitational redshift (light emerging from a strong 
gravitational field is stretched to longer wavelengths). 

General relativity has important applications in many 
areas of astrophysics and cosmology, including describing 
the behavior and properties of very close binaries, binary 
pulsars, black holes, gravitational lensing and the universe 
as a whole. 


Seealso: binary system, black hole, cosmology, cosmolog- 
ical model, gravitation, gravitational lensing, gravitational 
waves, redshift, spacetime, special relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Genesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Genesis 


NASA Discovery mission to collect samples of charged 
particles in the solar wind. Genesis carries four 
instruments: solar wind collector arrays, made of 
materials such as diamond, gold, silicon and sapphire, 
and designed to entrap solar wind particles; an ion 
monitor, to record the speed, density, temperature and 
approximate composition of the solar wind ions; an 
electron monitor, to make similar measurements of 
electrons in the solar wind; and an ion concentrator, to 
separate and focus elements like oxygen and nitrogen in 
the solar wind into a special collector tile. Isotopes of 
oxygen, nitrogen, the noble gases and other elements of 
the solar wind will be returned to Earth in a capsule 
(planned for September 2004). 

At 1903 UT November 16, 2001, the Genesis 
spacecraft entered into orbit around the balanced-gravity 
point Lagrange 1. Its instruments became fully 
operational on December 3, 2001. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geocentric Coordinate System ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geocentric Coordinate System 
Coordinates as measured from the center of the Earth. 


See also: heliocentric coordinate system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Geodynamo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geodynamo 


The existence of a large-scale magnetic field in the Earth 
has been known for over two millennia. The invention 
of the compass and the observation of the angle between 
magnetic and true north (declination), followed much later 
(16th century) by the discovery of inclination (angle of 
dip), led to the identification of the interior of the Earth 
as the prime source of magnetic activity. cILBeRT believed 
that the Earth acted as a giant permanent magnet, but the 
realization that the Earth possesses a liquid metallic core, 
far above the Curie point, led to a search for generation 
mechanisms. In spite of the efforts of a number of eminent 
physicists to promote rival theories the only mechanism 
now considered viable is dynamo action, caused by electric 
currents driven in the core by Faraday induction. This 
article deals with the main theoretical considerations 
underlying the MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS of the core. 


Manifestation of the magnetic field 

For the purpose of this article, the Earth may be considered 
as a solid insulator (the mantle), surrounding a metallic 
core. In fact, the mantle is a conductor, although a 
poor one. There is some evidence that the region of the 
mantle nearest the core is relatively highly conducting; 
nonetheless, the assumption of an insulator is a good one 
for many purposes. The core itself has an outer, liquid part 
and an inner solid part (see EARTH'S INTERIOR). It is thought 
that the inner core is the result of freezing of heavy material 
from the mixed outer core. The buoyancy generated by 
the freezing process is an important ingredient of the 
energy source for the magnetic field, which dissipates 
energy by Joule heating. Other sources of energy that have 
been investigated include thermal buoyancy (for example 
due to internal radioactive heating in the core) and the 
energy that can be derived from the relative precession 
of core and mantle. While all these possible mechanisms 
can in principle provide enough energy to sustain the 
main field, details of the way in which precessional forces 
could sustain the dynamo are poorly understood. We 
can only observe the potential field at the Earth’s surface 
and in the atmosphere, driven by the electric currents in 
the core (figure 1). Very short timescale phenomena are 
filtered out by the weakly conducting mantle. The field 
is relatively weak at the surface of the mantle (less than 
1 G) but because of the algebraic decay of potential fields 
with distance fields in the core are rather stronger. In 
addition there is the invisible toroidal part of the magnetic 
field that is confined to the core (see below). The field 
is predominantly dipolar at the present epoch, but the 
declination changes in time as has been known since 1634. 
Many surface features of the field also migrate, mostly to 
the west, with a typical timescale of 10? yr. This is known 
as the secular variation. In addition we know from studies 
of remanent magnetism of rocks that the main dipole field 
has reversed direction many times over the Earth’s history, 
at irregular intervals but with a typical interval of 10°- 
10° yr (figure 2). Thus the dynamo process that sustains the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


field must be regarded as a fully dynamic phenomenon, 
requiring for its understanding a proper description of core 
dynamics as well as the kinematics of dynamo action. 


Kinematic models 
In the article on DYNAMO THEORY we have seen that the 
magnetic field B obeys the induction equation 


dB 
— =Vx (vx B)-V x (nV x B) 


7 V-B=0. (1) 


Kinematic theories of the geodynamo suppose that 
the velocity v is given and seek eigenfunctions of the 
induction equation. Because of the near axisymmetry of 
the main field, it is natural to seek axisymmetric solutions. 
This is, however, prohibited by Cowling’s theorem (see 
article on dynamo theory). There is a remedy which 
preserves the possibility of two-dimensional models. In 
mean-field (w effect) dynamos the velocity is supposed 
to exist on two length scales. The inductive effect of the 
small-scale motions on the large scales can be modelled 
by the inclusion of an extra term V x [a(x)B] in the 
induction equation. Because of this extra driving term 
Cowling’s theorem may be avoided and axisymmetric 
solutions sought. Braginsky has developed another model 
based on the limit of small diffusivities and rapid zonal 
flows. Although completely different in spirit from the 
mean-field approach, the method yields equations that are 
essentially the same. Models of this type are discussed in 
the dynamo theory article. Because of the apparent size 
of the zonal flows as evidenced by the secular variation 
the more realistic model is of aw type, although models of 
the a variety are more likely to lead to steady solutions. 
Depending on the choices of a and the differential rotation 
the preferred (fastest-growing) solutions may either have 
dipolar or quadrupolar symmetry. In this picture reversals 
may be explained by a change in the form of internal 
motion that leads to a change in the preferred symmetry 
of the solution. However, this quasi-kinematic approach 
cannot give any information on the dynamic details either 
of reversals or of secular variation, and so recent work has 
attempted to introduce a treatment of the fluid motion and 
the dynamical effects of the Lorentz (magnetic) force. 


Core dynamics 

The velocity field v can be supposed to obey the 
momentum equation (expressed in a frame rotating with 
angular velocity &) 


Dv Kien cal 2 
— +2Qxv=—-VP+Hr+—(Vx Bx B)t+vV~v (2) 
Dt Hp 


where v is the kinematic viscosity and p is the density 
(supposed constant, although this is a simplification). H is 
a source of buoyancy either due to concentration gradients 
associated with inner-core freezing or due to internal heat 
sources. This equation is to be solved together with 
the induction equation above and an equation for H, to 
give a dynamically self-consistent picture of the dynamo. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geodynamo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A 


Si fees 


LINN 
q\ 


os 
PLA KS 
G (CK 


ae 


A) 
Rous bree 


SSK 
SSS 


7 \ CS 
4 VE a 
Zam 


ss 
a 


MESH EN 


AN) 


For 


po 
a, aS S 
OG 


Figure 1. Contour plots of the vertical component of the magnetic field at the core-mantle boundary (from Bloxham et al 1989) for (a) 
1980, (b) 1945, (c) 1915, (d) 1842. Solid curves are positive contours, broken curves are negative contours, bold curves are zero contours 


Because of the marginal (although fully dynamic) nature 
of the geodynamo, we expect that v should be scaled with 
n/L where L is an appropriate lengthscale (presumably 
the core radius). Thus R,,, the magnetic Reynolds number 
based on this radius, is O(1). For completeness we should 
distinguish between the poloidal part Bp and toroidal part 
B, of B, defined by Bp = V x V x Sr, Bp = V X Tr. 
The toroidal field, which is predominantly zonal, cannot 
be directly observed and may be much larger than Bp. 
Observations and stability considerations for large zonal 
fields suggest that |Br| ~ |Bp|. Of course a different 
scaling might apply to the zonal flows, which are less 
constrained by rotation, but if there were to be very large 
zonal flows then By would be so large that the resulting 
field structure would be unstable. 

The structure of the geomagnetic field is thus 
determined from the dimensionless constants that are 
implicit in the above system. These are: 


the Elsasser number A = B?/2Qupn 
the Ekman number E = v/2QL? 
the Rossby number R, = n/2QL? 


Observations suggest that A is of order unity 
(corresponding to a field of about 20 G) while E < R, < 1. 
The principal force balance would therefore appear to 
be between the Coriolis and Lorentz forces and the 
pressure, with viscosity and inertia playing a negligible 
role. Before examining the consequences of this so-called 
magnetostrophic balance, we consider the alternative of 
a weak magnetic field that plays a secondary role in any 
balance. Such weak-field dynamos have certainly been 
found in numerical simulations, but they are implausible 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Normal [} { 
Reversed [ J 


1 
Oo 7 «oe years) 


Figure 2. Record of reversals of the Earth’s dipole polarity over 
the last 4 x 10° yr (from Moffatt 1978). Only the direction of the 
dipole, not its intensity, is shown 


candidates for the geomagnetic field. They are, firstly, 
too weak to be readily compatible with observations. 
Secondly, convection in a spherical shell at low Ekman 
number is characterized by very short (O(E 3 )) azimuthal 
length scales, which would dissipate too much energy 
to be a plausible dynamo. Finally in the absence of 
strong magnetic fields the primary force balance would be 
geostrophic. This causes severe difficulties at the cylinder 
aligned with Q which is tangent to the inner core, causing 
large discontinuities in the velocity. For all these reasons 
the prevailing balance is likely to be magnetostrophic. 


The role of viscosity 

It turns out that viscosity (unlike inertia) cannot simply be 
ignored as pure magnetostrophic balance does not exist in 
general. The reduced equation 


1 
2Qxv=—-VP+Hr+—(V x Bx B) (3) 
Lp 
with the inviscid condition v -m = 0 at the core—mantle 
boundary, has no solution unless the Lorentz force obeys 
Taylor’s condition 


(V x Bx B)gdzd¢ =T(s) =0 (4) 
C(s) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geodynamo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A 
Ne 
Mantle 
oes eer 
s 
Core 


Figure 3. Sketch of the Earth. Shown are the mantle, core and 
inner core. Also sketched are a typical C(s) and the tangent 
cylinder with the inner core. 


where (s, ¢, z) are cylindrical polar coordinates and C(s) 
is the cylinder of radius s aligned with Q and inscribed in 
the sphere (figure 3). (Note that the value of this integral is 
in general discontinuous at the tangent cylinder referred 
to above.) This very severe constraint is associated with 
a free geostrophic solution for the velocity of the form 
v = Vg (s); while there might be hope that there is a 
choice of Vg that allows the Taylor integral to vanish, no 
proof is known and numerical simulations are far from 
providing conclusive results. Indeed, they suggest instead 
that the neglect of viscosity can lead to unacceptable radial 
singularities in the solutions, as well as removing the 
dynamical connection between core and mantle. 

Thus many models of the geodynamo either retain 
the viscous term (which makes the problem extremely stiff 
and hard to solve numerically) or else note that viscosity 
is likely to be important only in thin Ekman boundary 
layers at the core-mantle boundary. The boundary layer 
equations can then be solved to produce instead of the 
Taylor condition T(s) = 0 a formula for Vg of the form 
LVg/n = AE? f(s)T(s), where f(s) is universal. This 
definition, like others, encounters problems at the tangent 
cylinder with the inner core, where further boundary 
layers may be important. Leaving the inner core aside, 
there remains the question of the behavior of fields and 
flows for very small E (which according to some estimates 
may be as low as 107"). Either Taylor’s condition will 
be approximately met (a ‘Taylor state’) or else the zonal 
flows will become very large and severely limit the field 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


growth (an ‘Ekman state’). Braginsky has proposed an 
intermediate alternative in which the zonal flows are 
moderately large but also the meridional field is almost 
aligned with the rotation axis. The dominant balance 
in this case is between viscous damping and the input 
of energy from buoyancy forces, whereas in a Taylor 
state viscosity plays no role. While the idea of this 
balance remains appealing, it has proved hard to obtain 
satisfactory numerical models. While the Ekman regime 
can readily be found numerically, the magnetic field 


strength given by A scales as E -2 and so this balance is 
unlikely to be relevant to the geodynamo. 


Numerical models 

While the above notions have proved challenging 
for theorists, the advent of fast computers has led 
to much progress via direct numerical simulation. 
Cowling’s theorem, that no axisymmetric field can be 
generated by dynamo action, necessitates either a full 3D 
calculation or else a mean-field model in which only the 
axisymmetric mean fields and flows are calculated, with 
the presumed non-axisymmetric small-scale convection 
being parametrized by the a effect. (The convection 
having been parametrized, the heat equation can be 
dropped.) An intermediate (‘2.5D’) method sets up the 
full 3D framework but performs severe truncation in the 
azimuthal direction, retaining the axisymmetric modes 
and just one or two other zonal wavenumbers. Models 
of the last two types can be investigated in considerable 
detail. Viscosity is usually retained in the equations, and E 
made as small as possible. Geophysically realistic values 
have as yet not been attained, however. Solutions show 
irregular oscillatory behavior, but the field strengths are of 
the right order for the Earth. 

The role of the inner core is particularly important 
in these simulations, although it was neglected in early 
computational work. Its influence is manifested in two 
ways; the tangent cylinder separates regions containing 
quite different types of flow, with the most vigorous 
activity within. More importantly, because the inner core 
is a conductor (with conductivity comparable with that of 
the outer core) any magnetic field lines penetrating it can 
only evolve on the diffusion timescale (as the inner core 
is solid). This helps to stabilize the otherwise very wild 
oscillatory behavior in the models and to stop frequent 
reversals of the main dipole field on unrealistically short 
timescales. 

Glatzmaier and Roberts have recently carried out a 
series of ever more sophisticated numerical simulations 
of a fully three-dimensional dynamo model (figure 4). In 
essence the models are the same as the 2.5D simulations, 
but now with full azimuthal resolution. Ekman numbers 
as low as 10~° are reported for some runs, but these used an 
artificial hyperviscosity, which has the effect of mimicking 
the effect of much larger values of E. Nonetheless the 
dynamics in the core is impressively detailed (although 
the field as observed at the Earth’s surface is much less 
regular in the simulation). The runs have also uncovered 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geodynamo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) 


(b) 


Figure 4. Lines of zonally averaged poloidal field (left halves) 
and contours of zonally averaged toroidal field (right halves) for 
a reversal in the model of Glatzmaier and Roberts (1995). 
Black-grey lines denote opposite directions—signs of the 
corresponding fields. 


several reversal events, as well as a number of ‘aborted 
reversals’ whose signature is a large excursion of the 
virtual geomagnetic pole (defined as the axis of amapping 
of the surface field onto a supposed dipole) without 
a complete change of sign. As before, the inner core 
seems to play a large role in the dynamics of reversals. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. (Continued) 


Calculations done by other groups also emphasize the 
crucial importance of the mechanical boundary conditions 
to be applied at the core-mantle boundary. 

Sadly, even these massive computations, using 
hundreds of hours of supercomputer time, do not 
seem to be likely to be able to handle geophysically 
realistic parameters for the immediate future. For 
theorists the primary challenges over the next decade 
are likely to be an effort to understand the nature of 
the convective turbulence in the core, so as to produce 
better-parametrized models of the diffusion coefficients. 
Further understanding of the mechanisms associated with 
the solidification of the inner core will also bring better 
descriptions of the buoyancy forces that drive the motion. 
There can be little doubt that the recent computational 
successes, far from closing the subject down, will provide 
fresh impetus for further theoretical developments. 


Bibliography 

Bloxham J, Gubbins D and Jackson A 1989 Geomagnetic 
secular variation Philos. Trans. R.Soc. A 329 415-502 

Fearn D R 1996 The geodynamo Earth’s Deep Interior ed D 
Crossley (London: Gordon and Breach) pp 79-114 

Glatzmaier G A and Roberts P H 1995 A three-dimensional 
self-consistent computer simulation of a geomagnetic 
field reversal Nature 377 203-9 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geodynamo ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moffatt H K 1978 Magnetic Field Generation in Electrically 
Conducting Fluids (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press) 

Proctor M R E and Gilbert A D (eds) 1994 Lectures on 
Solar and Planetary Dynamos (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Michael R E Proctor 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Geomagnetic Storm 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geomagnetic Storm 


A fluctuation in the Earth’s magnetic field caused by the 
arrival of a disturbance in the solar wind. Also known as 
a magnetic storm. The sequence of events in a typical 
major storm is as follows. The shock wave associated 
with a cloud of plasma ejected by the Sun, as a result 
of a solar flare or coronal mass ejection, compresses the 
Earth’s magnetosphere, producing a rapid intensification 
of the geomagnetic field at ground level. This phase, 
which takes place over a few minutes, is called the ‘sudden 
storm commencement’. This is followed by the ‘initial 
phase’, which lasts for up to a few hours, during which 
the plasma cloud flows past the Earth and the geomagnetic 
field strength remains higher than normal. During the next 
stage, the ‘main phase’, charged particles flow through 
the inner magnetosphere, thereby creating an electrical 
current, the ‘ring current’, which flows around the Earth. 
The ring current generates a magnetic field opposite to 
that of the Earth and causes a pronounced drop in the 
geomagnetic field lasting from a few hours to about a 
day. As the current declines, the field strength gradually 
returns to normal, this recovery phase lasting typically for 
a few days. Geomagnetic storms are often accompanied 
by displays of the aurora. 

Geomagnetic storms induce currents and surges in 
telephone lines and power cables that sometimes cause 
significant damage. For example, circuit breakers in 
transformer stations may be caused to trip out, thereby 
giving rise to power blackouts. 


See also: aurora, flare, magnetosphere of Earth, solar 
coronal mass ejection, solar wind. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Geotail 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geotail 


Japanese-US mission to study the dynamics of the Earth’s 
magnetotail over distances ranging from 8 Earth radii to 
200 Earth radii. Part of the International Solar-Terrestrial 
Physics (ISTP) programme. Launched in July 1992. 
During the first two years, the spacecraft spent most of 
its time in the distant magnetotail. Its orbit apogee was 
kept on the night side of the Earth by using the Moon’s 
gravity in a series of double-lunar-swingby maneouvres. 
In February 1995, the apogee was reduced to 30 Earth radii 
to study near-Earth magnetotail processes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gerard of Cremona (c. 1114-87) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gerard of Cremona (c. 1114-87) 


Italian scholar, born in Cremona, Italy, flourished in 
Toledo, a centre of Islamic culture, learned Arabic to be able 
to translate lost classical works. He translated 92 works 
in all, including the Almagest, Elements, AL-KHWARIZMI'S 
works, the Hippocratic writers, and the physical works of 
ARISTOTLE. Unfortunately, no mathematician, he could not 
understand the Almagest after translating it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


German Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


German Astronomy 


The first larger observatories in Germany started their 
work at the beginning of the nineteenth century. The 
earliest was founded in Gotha in 1791, followed by 
G6ttingen in 1803, where c F Gauss became director in 
1818 after the observatory had been completed. The 
observatories in K6nigsberg and Munich were established 
in 1813 and 1816 respectively, with F w BESssEL and J G 
Soldner as the first directors. The cities of Hamburg (J 
G Repsold) and Berlin (W W Encke) followed in 1825 and 
1832 and the Observatory of Bonn (F W Argelander) was 
founded in 1845. 

Spectroscopy has been one of the great traditions 
in German astronomy. J FRAUNHOFER (Munich) detected 
hundreds of absorption lines in the solar spectrum in 1823. 
Together with Soldner he investigated the spectra of the 
brightest stars and planets and reported morphological 
differences of the stellar spectra. In 1838, the second 
director of the Munich Observatory, J LAMONT, used the 
large ‘Fraunhofer Refractor’ to perform spectroscopy of 
stars down to fourth magnitude. GR KIRCHHOFF and R W 
Bunsen (Heidelberg) developed the concept of spectral 
analysis in 1859 and gave a first qualitative interpretation 
of the solar spectrum in 1860. Hc vocEL started his 
pioneering work on the radial velocities of stars in 
Bothkamp/Kiel in 1870. Four years later, he moved to 
the newly founded observatory in Potsdam and detected 
the line shifts and binary nature of Algol in 1889. Together 
with F Scheiner he published the first radial velocities of 
stars in 1890. With more refined methods they reached 
an accuracy of 3 km st per photographic spectrum. 
F Kistner in Bonn was able to improve this accuracy 
at the turn of the century. Observing F- and M-stars 
he obtained an accuracy of 1.4 km st. Inspired by 
K SCHWARZSCHILD in G6ttingen, E HERTZSPRUNG started his 
spectroscopic work on color-magnitude diagrams in 1910 
in Potsdam. K Schwarzschild, A Unsdld, L Biermann 
and W Grotrian contributed fundamentally to the 
development of the quantitative spectroscopic analysis of 
stellar spectra. UNSOLD’s book ‘Physik der Sternatmospharen’ 
(first edition 1938, second edition 1955) became the ‘Bible’ 
for generations of stellar spectroscopists. 

Parallel to spectroscopy, photometry developed as 
another important branch of German astronomy. The 
Potsdamer Durchmusterung (1905) by G Miller and P 
Kempf provided magnitudes for 14195 stars based on 
a photometer developed by ZOLLNER (1861). It was 
the most precise photometric catalog of the time. In 
1896, K Schwarzschild (then in Vienna) transformed 
photometry with photographic plates into a quantitative 
science. J Wilsing and J Scheiner (Potsdam) performed the 
first determinations of stellar temperatures by measuring 
intensities in five spectral bands in 1909. K Schwarzschild 
(now in Gottingen) published the Gottinger Aktinometrie in 
1910, a catalog of photometric magnitudes of 3522 stars 
down to magnitude 7.5. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Allearly research on the photoelectric effect was done 
in Germany (H Hertz 1887, W Hallwachs 1888 and J Elstner 
and H Geitel 1889). Subsequently, P Guthnick (Berlin) 
and H Rosenberg and E Meyer (Tiibingen) were the first 
astronomers to use a photoelectric cell for astronomical 
measurements in 1912. A year later Guthnick published 
his photoelectric lightcurve of the short-period (4.6 h) low- 
amplitude (0.086 mag) variable star 6 Cephei obtained 
with a sodium cell. In the following years Guthnick, 
R Prager and K Bottlinger experimented with color filters 
and published the colors of more than 400 stars using a 
potassium hybrid cell. 

The founder of astrometry in Germany was F W Bessel 
(K6nigsberg). In 1838 he determined the parallax of 61 
Cygni, the first direct determination of a distance to a 
star. JG GALLE (Potsdam) detected the planet Neptune in 
1846 based on the theoretical predictions by U Leverrier, 
who analysed the orbit perturbations of Uranus. The 
Bonner Durchmusterung organized by F W ARGELANDER and 
collaborators from 1852 to 1862 provided positions and 
finding charts for 73500 stars in the northern hemisphere 
down to ninth magnitude. In 1867 the AsTRONOMISCHE 
GESELLSCHAFT organized an international collaboration of 16 
observatories to produce the Fundamentalkatalog, a catalog 
with precise stellar positions of northern hemisphere 
stars. This work has been extended and improved 
through to the present day under the responsibility of the 
Astronomisches Recheninstitut in Heidelberg. It formed 
an important basis to constrain models for the dynamics 
of our galaxy. 

The investigation of variable stars as a tool to 
understand stellar evolution started with the work of 
Argelander in 1840 and 80 years later led to the systematic 
search for variables by C HOFFMEISTER carried out in the 
observatories of Sonneberg and Bamberg. More than 
4500 variable stars were detected by Hoffmeister. The 
photographic plate archive of the two observatories 
contains more than 200 000 sky exposures. 

MAX WOLF in Heidelberg used his new astrophoto- 
graphic methods to investigate the structure of the Milky 
Way and to detect many minor planets during the years 
from 1887 to 1932. 

There has also been a remarkable tradition in the 
development of telescopes, optics and instrumentation. 
At the beginning of the nineteenth century Fraunhofer 
invented new technologies to produce large lenses of 
excellent optical quality. He also invented the grating 
spectrograph. Together with Metz and Utzschneider he 
constructed the largest and best refractors of the time. 
Repsold (Hamburg) became famous for the quality of 
his meridian circle telescopes. In 1905, K Schwarzschild 
formulated the complete third-order aberration theory of 
large telescopes with one or two mirrors, which became 
the basis for the development of all modern reflecting 
telescopes. In 1930, BscHmiptT (Hamburg) used an aspheric 
refracting plate to built his famous wide-field telescope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


German Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The present situation of German astronomy 
German astronomy deals with practically all aspects of 
modern astrophysical research in theory and observation. 
Stellar astronomy (including the investigation of the 
Sun) through all stages of stellar evolution is a field 
of great activity. This includes the important areas of 
star formation and the formation of planets and proto- 
planetary disks and, of course, the solar system. The 
investigation of the physics of the interstellar medium and 
of the structure and evolution of our galaxy is another very 
important area. Observational extragalactic astronomy 
and cosmology had difficulties in the early phases of their 
development because of the very limited access to large 
telescopes. However, after the completion of the large ESO 
telescopes on La Silla, the national CALAR ALTO OBSERVATORY 
in Spain, the EFFELSBERG and IRAM Rapio TELESCOPES and 
space observatories such as the rosat x-ray satellite this 
situation has improved dramatically. There are now 
many competetive groups, both in observation and theory, 
working in extragalactic astronomy and cosmology. 

The development of telescopes and instrumentation 
has again become a very important part of present German 
astronomy. This comprises radio, mm and sub-mm 
telescopes (Effelsberg, IRAM and the Heinrich Hertz 
Telescope in Arizona), IR astronomy from the ground and 
in space (instrumentation for ESO La Silla and the VLT, 
the Calar Alto and the ISO and FIRST space observatories), 
optical astronomy (instrumentation for the ESO VLT and 
ESO La Silla, the Calar Alto, the LARGE BINOCULAR TELESCOPE 
(LBT) in Arizona and the Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) 
in Texas), UV astronomy (ORFEUS), x-ray astronomy 
(ROSAT, ABRIXAS, Chandra, XMM, XEUS) and gamma- 
ray astronomy (COMPTEL on GRO, INTEGRAL). The 
HEGRA EXPERIMENT on Tenerife provides an observatory for 
very high energies and there is also development of a 
gravitational wave telescope. In solar physics a new 
vacuum tower telescope has been constructed as the most 
important part of the solar observatory on Tenerife by 
three German institutes in collaboration with Spanish 
colleagues. 

At present, astrophysical research in Germany is 
performed at 36 institutes distributed over the reunified 
country. Of these, 22 are university institutes (including 
the observatories of Bonn (with the observatory Hoher 
List at Daun), Hamburg, Gottingen and Munich (with the 
observatory at Mount Wendelstein)). They are integrated 
parts of the physics faculties of their universities, since 
in Germany an astronomer is basically a physicist with 
specialization in astrophysics during the last semesters 
before the diploma (masters degree) and in PhD thesis 
work. Though they have most of the teaching load and 
responsibility for the education of astronomy students, 
the university institutes are usually small (between one 
to five professors and three to fifteen scientific staff) 
and have a very low scientific budget provided by their 
universities. For the funding of graduate students, post- 
docs and instrument development they rely completely 
on grants, which are distributed by the funding agencies 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in a competitive system. Used to being continuously 
forced to survive in this competition, several university 
institutes do extremely well. Most astronomers at the 
universities make observations as guests at ground-based 
or space facilities or do theoretical work. Only a few of 
them at a handful of institutes are involved in instrument 
development. German universities are state universities, 
which means that they are funded through the science 
budgets of the individual states (‘Lander’) of Germany. 

The funding situation is much more positive at 
the seven MAX-PLANCK INSTITUTES (MPIs) dealing with 
astronomy. These institutes have usually several (up 
to four) directors, more than 30 staff scientists and an 
excellent infrastructure, which allows them to engage 
in large-scale instrumentation projects, ground-based 
and in space, and to run their own observatories 
(Calar Alto Observatory, IRAM, Effelsberg, ROSAT). 
They are also able to form large theoretical groups and 
perform observational astronomy as guest observers. 
All these institutes are located close to universities 
with astronomical institutes. However, the amount of 
interaction between MPIs and universities in research 
and the education of students varies strongly from place 
to place. The funding of the MPIs is based on equal 
contributions from the federal science budget and from 
the science budget of the states in which the institutes 
are located. There is also a contribution from German 
industry. 

The situation at the Institutes of the Wilhelm- 
Gottfried-Leibniz-Gesellschaft (WGL), of which there are 
two, and the two Institutes of the Deutsches Zentrum fiir 
Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR) dealing with astronomy is 
similar to that of the MPIs. There are also four state insti- 
tutes in the states of Baden-Witirttemberg and Thtiringen, 
of which two are active observatories (the ‘Landestern- 
warten’ (LSW) in Heidelberg and Tautenburg). Their sizes 
and resources are comparable to university institutes. 

The number of professional astronomers in Germany 
with a PhD is estimated to be 500. The ratio of tenured 
to non-tenured staff is roughly 1:1. Most of them are 
members of the Astronomische Gesellschaft (AG), which 
organizes scientific meetings every year. Many amateur 
astronomers and friends of astronomy have also joined 
the AG. 

The extramural funding comes from separate budgets 
of the federal ministry for education and research 
(BMBF). For astronomy there are two important funding 
agencies—the DLR which sponsors a national program of 
space science and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 
(DFG) which supports almost all branches of research in 
Germany. The DLR has contributed or contributes to space 
missions such as ROSAT, ORFEUS, ABRIXAS, SOFIA 
etc and also provides funding for focal instrumentation 
for ESA/NASA space missions such as Giotto, Chandra, 
XMM, ISO, Pathfinder etc when German groups are 
involved. The DFG has basically three different programs, 
the normal program, where tenured scientists from 
universities, WGL and state institutes can apply to obtain 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


German Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


funding for all kinds of individual smaller science projects 
involving PhD students and post-docs, special programs 
concentrating on selected topics such as ‘cosmic plasmas’ 
or ‘star formation’, which are open to all institutes, and 
local programs, where different institutions in and around 
one or two universities focus on special subjects such as 
‘the evolution of galaxies’ or ‘particle astrophysics’. 

A new program is the ‘Verbundforschung As- 
tronomie’ financed directly through the BMBF and the 
DLR, which supports instrumentation proposals by uni- 
versity groups for ground-based national and interna- 
tional telescopes (to compensate for the lack of internal 
resources of these groups) and provides research funds for 
those astronomers who succeeded in obtaining observing 
time on international space missions such as HST, ISO and 
ROSAT. This new program has turned out to be a tremen- 
dous success and has improved the competitiveness of 
German astronomy significantly. 

The German contributions to international organiza- 
tions like ESO and ESA are funded directly through the 
BMBF. Membership in these organizations is fundamen- 
tal for German astronomy. It has widened the scope of 
astronomical research in Germany significantly and has 
internationalized the working style, in particular of the 
university institutes, substantially. Most importantly, it 
has enabled German astronomy to participate in instru- 
mentation projects clearly beyond the means of national 
or bi-national collaborations. 

The German system is characterized by an enormous 
independence of each research institute. While this 
certainly has significant advantages with regard to 
scientific originality and creativity, it is also the cause of 
difficult problems. Collaboration between universities of 
different states in larger projects is hampered by obstacles 
intrinsic to the German federal system. The same is 
true for the collaboration between universities and MPIs. 
This is one of the reasons why the German national 
observatory on Calar Alto in Spain is managed by a MPI, 
the Max-Planck-Institut fiir Astronomie in Heidelberg, 
and why it is difficult to organize direct participation 
of German universities in large telescope projects such 
as the LBT in Arizona, where so far only three MPIs 
(MPIA Heidelberg, MPIE Garching, MPIfR Bonn), one 
WGL institute (Astrophysikalisches Institut Potsdam) and 
one state observatory (LSW Heidelberg) are involved. 
Two university observatories (Gottingen and Munich) 
have, however, managed to become partners of American 
universities in the HET project in Texas. They have 
also embarked on a collaboration together with the LSW 
Heidelberg to build the faint object spectrographs FORS 1 
and 2 for the ESO VLT. 

In view of the complication caused by the federal 
system and the independence of the individual institutes 
an element of coordination is needed. This is the 
task of the ‘Rat Deutscher Sternwarten’ (RDS, Council 
of German Observatories). It was founded in 1959 
as the ‘Rat Westdeutscher Sternwarten’ to nationally 
and internationally represent the joint interests of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


astronomical institutes in West Germany. In 1990, 
shortly after the reunification of Germany, the renamed 
‘Rat Deutscher Sternwarten’ became the representative 
organization for all German astronomical institutes. At 
present 31 such institutes represented by their directors are 
members of this important committee, which coordinates 
the main directions of German astronomical research, 
defines priorities for future large projects, and interacts 
with the funding agencies, state and federal ministries. It 
also represents German astronomy within the IAU and 
in the interaction with ESO. The RDS is headed by a 
chairman, who is elected for three years and can be re- 
elected for one additional term and a General Secretary. 


Rolf-Peter Kudritzki and Reinhold Hafner 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ghost of Jupiter (NGC 3242) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ghost of Jupiter (NGC 3242) 


Aplanetary nebula in the constellation Hydra, position RA 
104 24.8™, dec. —18° 38’. It is of eighth magnitude and has 
a twelfth-magnitude central star. It is bluish, and with its 
size of 16” it can appear as a faint version of Jupiter. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Giacconi, Riccardo (1931-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giacconi, Riccardo (1931-) 


Astrophysicist, born in Genoa, Italy, American 
astronomer and international project director. Worked on 
x-ray astronomy, and with a rocket-borne x-ray telescope 
intended to study the composition of the Moon, discov- 
ered Scorpius X-1, the first known x-ray source outside 
the solar system. Built the Uhuru x-ray satellite that 
made the first surveys of the x-ray sky. Led the construc- 
tion and successful operation of the powerful x-ray satel- 
lite Einstein. Directed the Space Telescope Science 
Institute, laying the foundation for the impact of the 
Hubble Space Telescope and directed the EUROPEAN 
SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY, bringing to a successful 
completion its Very Large Telescope. 

In 2003, Giacconi received the Nobel Prize in physics 
for ‘pioneering contributions to astrophysics’, which led 
to the discovery of cosmic x-ray sources. Giaconni, cur- 
rently president of the Associated Universities Inc., in 
Washington, and Research Professor of Physics and 
Astronomy at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, dis- 
covered the first x-ray stars and the x-ray background in 
the 1960s and conceived of and led the implementation 
of the UHURU and High Energy Astronomy Observatory- 
2 (HEAO-2) x-ray observatories in the 1970s. He also 
detected sources of x-rays that most astronomers now 
consider to contain black holes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Giacobinids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giacobinids 


A periodic meteor shower associated with the comet 
21P/Giacobini—Zinner which takes place in October. The 
radiant lies in the constellation Draco, and the shower 
is also known as the Draconids. Debris from the comet 
remains in a swarm close to the nucleus, and shower 
activity is possible only when the Earth passes the 
descending node of the comet’s orbit shortly after the 
comet has passed through it. Zenithal hourly rates were 
high in 1933 (up to 450), 1946 and 1985. Radio-echo 
observations in 1946 detected a peak rate of 170 per minute. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Giant Impactor Theory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giant Impactor Theory 


The theory, also known as the big splash theory, that a 
planetoid about the size of Mars collided with the newly 
formed Earth, and ejecta from the collision accreted in 
orbit around the Earth to form the Moon. Support for 
the theory comes from the very close correspondence of 
oxygen isotope ratios in lunar and terrestrial material, and 
the similar mineralogies of the two bodies. In addition, the 
theory explains the large amount of angular momentum 
in the Earth-Moon system. 


See: Moon 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Giant Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giant Planets 


A collective term for the major planets Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus and Neptune, which are the four largest planets 
in the solar system. They are characterized by their size 
(of the order of 100000 km in diameter), their density (of 
the order of 1000 kg m-~°), their largely gaseous nature, 
with no visible solid surface, and their extensive families 
of satellites. They also all possess ring systems. Of the 
giant planets Jupiter is the largest and most massive, and 
rotates the most rapidly. Saturn is the most oblate and 
the least dense, and has the most extensive ring system. 
Saturn and Uranus tie for the largest retinues of confirmed 
satellites, at 18. The most distant, Neptune, is the densest 
and has the largest measured atmospheric wind speed. 
The majority of exoplanets—objects orbiting other stars— 
are more massive than Jupiter, and may be classed as giant 
planets. 


Compare: terrestrial planets. 


See also: exoplanets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gibbous ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gibbous 


The phase of a body in the solar system when more than 
half of its sunlit side is visible, but not all of it. From the 
Earth, the inferior planets, Mercury and Venus, and the 
Moon show gibbous phases. Of the superior planets, Mars 
is the only one that can appear markedly gibbous (with 
a minimum of 84% of its disk illuminated); of the outer 
planets, Jupiter can show a slight gibbous phase but the 
planets beyond are too distant to do so. 


See also: phases of the Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gilbert [Gilberd], William (1544-1603) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gilbert [Gilberd], William (1544-1603) 


Doctor and scientist, born in Colchester, England, wrote 
De Magnete (On the Magnet), published in 1600. The 
magnetic compass was one of most useful the navigational 
instruments before the chronometer, but little was known 
about the lodestone (magnetic iron ore). Gilbert made 
his own experiments, such as testing the folk-belief that 
garlic destroys the magnetic effect of the compass needle. 
He draws the first clear distinction between magnetic 
effects and static electricity, reviewing everything about 
magnetism. His theory of terrestrial magnetism was 
curiously animistic: magnetism was the soul of the Earth 
and a spherical lodestone, aligned with the Earth’s poles, 
would spin on its axis like the Earth. KEPLER and GALILEO 
were very interested in this aspect of Gilbert’s magnetic 
researches, since they were seeking arguments that the 
Earth rotated. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gill, Sir David (1843-1914) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gill, Sir David (1843-1914) 


Astronomer, born in Aberdeen, trained as a watchmaker, 
had a private observatory near Aberdeen, became Her 
Majesty’s Astronomer at the Cape of Good Hope. He 
redetermined the solar parallax by observing the close 
approach to the Earth in 1889 of the minor planets 
Iris, Victoria and Sappho (his was the standard value 
for nearly a century). His measurement was repeated 
by HAROLD SPENCER JONES during the close approach of 
Eros in 1931. Inspired by the unexpected discovery in 
1882 of stellar images on a photograph of a comet, he 
pioneered astronomical photography. He photographed 
the southern sky for the Cape Photographic Durchmusterung, 
CPD, adding to ARGELANDER’s Bonner Durchmusterung. This 
initiated the international Carte du Ciel project and the 
subject of photographic astrometry. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ginga (Astro-C) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ginga (Astro-C) 


Japanese x-ray satellite, launched February 1987. Carried 
three instruments: a large-area proportional counter array 
developed with the UK, an all-sky monitor and a US 
gamma ray burst detector. Observed supernova 1987A 
soon after its appearance, and discovered several pulsars 
and other transient sources. Re-entered the atmosphere in 
November 1991. Ginga means ‘galaxy’. (See also ASTRO.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Giotto 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giotto 


The purpose of the Giotto mission was to study the coma 
and nucleus of Comet P/Halley at close quarters during 
its 1986 perihelion passage. It was the EUROPEAN SPACE 
AGENCY'S first deep space mission and was named after the 
famous medieval Italian artist, Giotto di Bondone, who, 
inspired by the reappearance of COMET HALLEY in 1301, had 
portrayed the Star of Bethlehem as a golden comet in his 
fresco ‘Adoration of the Magi’. 

Giotto was originally proposed as part of a joint US- 
European mission to Halley’s Comet, but after NASA 
withdrew, ESA decided to proceed alone. It was later 
included in an international program to investigate the 
comet. Five space probes—two Soviet, two Japanese and 
one European—were launched towards the comet on its 
return to the inner solar system. While the Japanese 
spacecraft (Sakigake and Suisei) made long-distance 
measurements, the Soviet vecas acted as pathfinders for 
Giotto by accurately locating the comet’s nucleus. 

The cylindrical spacecraft weighed 960 kg. Its design 
was based on the GEOS Earth-orbiting research satellites, 
which were built by British Aerospace at Bristol (UK). 
The most significant modification was the addition of an 
aluminum-Kevlar buffer to protect it from high-speed 
dust particles during the comet encounter. The spacecraft 
was eventually launched by an Ariane 1 rocket (flight V14) 
on 2 July 1985. 

Giotto carried ten scientific instruments which 
included 


@a narrow-angle, multicolor CCD camera to obtain 
pictures of the nucleus, 


@ three mass spectrometers to measure gas and dust 
composition, 


@ a dust impact detector to measure the mass of dust 
particles striking the shield, 


@ two plasma experiments to study the solar wind and 
charged particles, 


@ an energetic particles analyser to study electrons, 
protons and alpha-particles, 


@ a magnetometer to study changes in the magnetic field, 
@ an optical probe to study the brightness of the coma and 


@ a radio science experiment to investigate the electron 
environment by comparing signals sent at different 
frequencies from the spacecraft. 


The first comet data arrived at 21.00 GMT on 12 
March 1986, when the spacecraft’s instruments detected 
hydrogen ions 7.8 million km from the nucleus. Giotto 
crossed the bow shock, where the solar wind slowed to 
subsonic speed, 22 h later and entered the coma (see COMA, 
COMETARY). 

Excitement rose as the stream of pictures and data 
came in to the European Space Operations Centre in 
Darmstadt, Germany, at a rate of 46 000 bits s-!. The first 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of 12000 dust impacts was recorded 62 min before closest 
approach (290000 km out), but the rate of impacts rose 
sharply as the spacecraft passed through a jet of material 
from the nucleus. 

Only 7.6 s before closest approach, the spacecraft was 
sent spinning by an impact from a ‘large’ (c 1 g) particle. 
Although contact with the Earth was lost, the spacecraft’s 
thrusters were able to stabilize its motion and contact 
was restored 32 min later. By then Giotto had passed 
within 596 km of the nucleus on the sunward side and 
was heading back into interplanetary space. 

The remarkably resilient spacecraft continued to 
return scientific data for another 24h. The last dust impact 
was detected 49 min after closest approach. The historic 
encounter ended at 02.00 GMT on 15 March when Giotto’s 
experiments were switched off. 

Altogether 2112 images were returned before commu- 
nications were disrupted. A unique series of images sent 
back by the spacecraft revealed the comet nucleus to be a 
dark, peanut-shaped body, about 15 km long and 7-10 km 
wide. Its surface was very irregular, with hills and depres- 
sions, while its density (0.3 g cm~°) indicated a ‘fluffy’, 
porous texture. The black surface was composed of or- 
ganic compounds (see also COMETARY NUCLEI). 

Seven jets that were identified on the warmer sunlit 
side threw out 3 t s~! of material, but only about 10% of 
the surface was active. These jets gave the comet a strange, 
wobbling rotation which seems to be stable ona time scale 
of centuries or even millennia. 

Water accounted for about 80% by volume of all of the 
material ejected by the comet. There were also substantial 
amounts of carbon monoxide (10%), carbon dioxide (2.5%) 
methane and ammonia. Traces of other hydrocarbons, iron 
and sodium were also found. The surface of the nucleus 
had an albedo of 4-5%—blacker than coal. 

Most of the dust was no larger than specks of cigarette 
smoke. Two major classes of dust particles were found. 
One was dominated by the light “"CHON’ elements— 
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. The other was 
rich in mineral-forming elements—sodium, magnesium, 
silicon, iron and calcium. All of the comet’s light 
elements (except nitrogen) were found in the same relative 
abundance as for the Sun, confirming that Comet Halley 
consists of primitive material derived from the original 
solar nebula. 

Giotto also discovered a magnetic cavity—a region 
where the magnetic field was essentially zero—around 
Halley’s Comet. This is the only time that such a feature 
has been recorded. 

Despite the damage sustained during the flyby, eight 
instruments remained operational and the mission was 
extended to allow an unprecedented second encounter 
with a comet—P/Grigg—Skjellerup. After an Earth flyby 
and a long hibernation, Giotto was reawakened on 4 
May 1992, 12 days before the comet reached perihelion. 
Sweeping past at a distance of only 100-200 km on 10 July, 
it was the closest ever cometary encounter. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Giotto 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Conditions were very different from those during the 
Halley flyby. Grigg—Skjellerup approached Giotto at an 
angle of 68° instead of head on, so the relative approach 
speed was 14 kms“! (as opposed to 68 km s~! for Halley). 

Giotto crossed the bow shock and entered the coma 
about 17 000 km from the nucleus. Grigg—Skjellerup’s dust 
production rate was about 0.5% that of Halley, and only 
three sizeable particles were detected, the largest with a 
mass of about 30 wg. 

The first cometary ions were detected 440 000 km from 
the nucleus, about 12 h before the closest approach. Two 
peaks were seen in the brightness of the coma, due to 
scattering of sunlight by cometary dust particles. One 
peak coincided with the closest approach to the nucleus. 
The second peak a little over 1 min later remains a mystery. 

Scientists were surprised when an abrupt shock 
wave—caused when the supersonic solar wind slammed 
into plasma around the comet—was detected on Giotto’s 
outbound leg, but not clearly identified on the inward 
journey (see also SOLAR WIND: INTERACTION WITH COMETS). 

Magnetic field strength was slightly higher than at 
Halley, but no magnetic cavity was detected around the 
much smaller nucleus. Strangest of all was the discovery 
of unusual magnetic waves, each about 1000 km apart, out 
to at least 300000 km from the comet. Activity rose and 
fell over a period of about 70 s and increased in amplitude 
as time went by. 

The science experiments were switched off for 
the last time at 03.00 GMT on 11 July. On 23 
July 1992, Giotto operations were officially terminated. 


Peter Bond 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Giovanelli, Ronald Gordon (1915-84) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giovanelli, Ronald Gordon (1915-84) 


Solar physicist, born in Grafton, New South Wales, 
studied the nature of solar flares as electromagnetic 
phenomena in which electrons are accelerated by electric 
fields induced by changing magnetic fields. Established 
solar observatories at Fleurs, near Sydney, and at Culgoora 
in north-eastern New South Wales, adjacent to a solar 
radio observatory. His work on sunspots, prominences 
and magnetic reconnection was firmly based on physics, 
with a constant sense of how much there was to learn. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Glazenap [Glasenapp], Sergej Pavlovich [von] (1848- 
1937) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Glazenap [Glasenapp], Sergej 
Pavlovich [von] (1848-1937) 


Russian astronomer who measured the light travel time 
across the solar system as evidenced by time delays in the 
times of eclipses of Jupiter’s satellites (RomER’s method). 
Determined a value for the light travel time between the 
Sun and the Earth of between 496 and 501 s (actual value 
is 499 s). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Global Oscillation Network Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Global Oscillation Network Group 


The Global Oscillation Network Group (GONG) is 
an international, community-based project, operated 
by the NATIONAL SOLAR OBSERVATORY for the US National 
Science Foundation, to conduct a detailed study of 
the internal structure and dynamics of the Sun over 
an 11 year solar cycle using helioseismology. 10 24? 
velocity images are obtained by a six-station network 
located at Big Bear Solar Observatory (California), Mauna 
Loa Observatory (Hawaii), Learmonth Solar Observatory 
(Western Australia), Udaipur Solar Observatory (India), 
Observatorio del Teide (Canary Islands) and the Cerro 
Tololo Interamerican Observatory (Chile), providing 
better than 90% coverage. 
For further information see 

http://www.gong.noao.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster Systems in Interacting Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Globular Cluster Systems in 
Interacting Galaxies 


GLOBULAR CLUSTERS are dynamically bound and dense 
collections of large numbers of coeval stars. Typical 
globular clusters have roughly one million stars within 
a radius of a few parsecs. They are also usually close to 
spherical, hence the name globular. By virtue of their rich, 
isolated population of stars they provide an important 
laboratory for studies of STELLAR EVOLUTION. Moreover, 
because of their high densities, globular clusters are 
prime regions for the study of STELLAR DYNAMIcs. Globular 
clusters are also ubiquitous, being found around nearly 
all galaxies. This suggests that the formation of globular 
clusters is closely connected to the formation of the 
galaxies to which they belong. 

At young ages, globular clusters are expected to 
be very bright and blue because of the concentration 
of many young stars in a compact region. Their high 
luminosities, blue colors and compact sizes make young 
globular clusters easy to detect and identify in imaging 
surveys. Therefore, the absence of known examples of 
young globular clusters in the Milky Way and M31 is 
strong evidence that the current STAR FORMATION in these 
galaxies is somehow not conducive to the formation of 
globular clusters. This was not always the case, as 
these two major SPIRAL GALAXIES in the LOCAL Group both 
have substantial populations of old globular clusters. 
Similarly, ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES, Which have no ongoing star 
formation, also typically have rich populations of globular 
clusters. These observations led to the general idea that 
the formation of star clusters as massive and dense as 
globular clusters was somehow favored at early times. 
However, the same absence of nearby examples of the 
process of globular cluster formation strongly limited the 
understanding of the key physical processes involved in 
globular cluster formation. 

The most nearby example of a galaxy in which there 
is recent formation of young stellar systems with the 
high luminosities, blue colors and compact sizes expected 
of young globular clusters is the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD 
(LMC). The LMC has several star CLUSTERS with ages 
ranging from a few Myr to several Gyr which have the 
properties expected for globular clusters at these ages, as 
well as about a dozen old (10+ Gyr) globular clusters. 
However, in the LMC the handful of massive, dense young 
clusters are strongly outnumbered by many more low- 
mass young star clusters that are not likely to survive 
processes such as stellar mass loss, tidal shocks and 
evaporation. Prior to the launch of the HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE (HST), there were a few other potential examples 
of similar objects in more distant galaxies, but existing 
observations did not have sufficient spatial resolution to 
determine whether objects beyond the Local Group had 
compact sizes characteristic of a globular cluster. 

The subject of globular cluster formation in galaxy 
mergers has been revolutionized by HST observations, 
which have the image quality to resolve the starbursts 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in galaxy mergers and reveal large numbers of highly 
luminous, compact, blue star clusters (see also GALAXIES: 
INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). These were first discovered 
by Holtzman (1992) and Whitmore (1993) and _ their 
collaborators and were immediately recognized as having 
the properties of globular clusters at young ages predicted 
by Ashman and Zepf (1992) and by Schweizer (1987). 
Specifically, HST images of galaxies previously recognized 
as the merger of two disk galaxies based on morphological 
and dynamical information show that these systems have 
large numbers of bright, blue, compact objects. These 
objects are striking with their bright magnitudes (Mg < 
—10) and compact sizes (r < 10 pc). The colors, 
magnitudes, and sizes of these objects are consistent 
with those expected for globular clusters in our own 
Galaxy when they were young. Subsequent moderate- 
resolution spectroscopy of some of the brighter examples 
has shown strong Balmer absorption lines, confirming the 
identification of these objects as young star clusters. 

These candidate young globular clusters have colors, 
luminosities and sizes that globular clusters like those 
in the Milky Way are believed to have had when they 
were young. An important further step for testing 
the connection between the candidate young globular 
clusters and old globular clusters is to compare the masses 
of the clusters in the two populations. In nearly all 
cases, the mass of a candidate young globular cluster 
is determined by estimating the age of the cluster from 
its color or spectral characteristics, using that age and a 
stellar populations model to estimate the mass-to-light 
ratio, and then combining the mass-to-light ratio with 
the observed luminosity to estimate the mass. While 
all of these calculations are standard, they do depend 
on parameters that are not directly observed, including 
the metallicity and, most importantly, the initial stellar 
mass function in the young cluster. Fortunately for this 
purpose, the initial mass function appears to be similar 
in old globular clusters and young star-forming regions, 
so it is difficult to imagine that all of the candidate young 
globular clusters formed with dramatically different stellar 
initial mass functions. Morever, the ages of some of the 
young globular clusters are several hundred Myr, which 
is many crossing times. Thus their compact sizes suggest 
that they are bound, which would be unlikely if the clusters 
are deficient in low-mass stars, which play an important 
role in the mass budget of a cluster with a standard initial 
mass function. Finally, in the one or two cases in which 
a mass has been estimated dynamically from the widths 
of absorption lines, the masses are broadly consistent with 
those given by stellar population models with standard 
initial mass functions. It is therefore very likely that the 
inferred masses for the young star clusters observed in 
galaxy starbursts and mergers are roughly correct. This 
then implies that many of these objects then have masses 
and densities like those of Galactic globular clusters. 

All globular clusters were once bound clusters of 
typically (10°-10°)M. of young stars. However, not all 
bound young star clusters of similar masses and densities 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster Systems in Interacting Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


will evolve to become old globular clusters because there 
are a number of important dynamical processes that act 
to destroy globular clusters. These include evaporation, 
tidal shocking and dynamical friction. These dynamical 
processes that destroy clusters depend on the properties 
of the young globular clusters such as mass, radius and 
concentration, and also on the orbit of the cluster and 
the mass distribution of its host galaxy. Therefore, on an 
individual basis it is not possible to predict the effect of 
these processes on a candidate young globular cluster, as 
this would require detailed knowledge of its orbit, and the 
mass distribution of the host galaxy, even if the cluster’s 
mass profile was well constrained. However, it is possible 
to address the question of the role of dynamical evolution 
by testing predictions for the global properties of globular 
cluster systems. Comparisons of systems of different ages 
and in different galaxies may be particularly useful in 
this regard (see also GLOBULAR CLUSTER SYSTEMS IN NORMAL 
GALAXIES). 

Understanding the effects of these dynamical pro- 
cesses on the evolution of globular cluster systems is im- 
portant for determining the relationship between the sys- 
tems of massive, dense young star clusters in mergers and 
starbursts and systems of old globular clusters such as 
the Galactic globular cluster system. One critical example 
is that the young cluster systems appear to form with a 
power-law mass function. This may not be particularly 
surprising since the giant molecular clouds out of which 
they probably form also have a power-law mass function. 
However, it is in strong contrast to the log-normal mass 
function of old globular cluster systems, such as that in 
the Milky Way and M87, which has a peak at 1-2 x 10°Mo. 
If the young cluster systems are to be identified as globular 
cluster systems at young ages, then dynamical processes 
must preferentially destroy lower-mass clusters so that the 
mass function of the cluster system evolves a Hubble time 
from a power law to log-normal with a peak at slighly 
more than 10°Mo. 

Theoretical analyses suggest that dynamical pro- 
cesses, particularly evaporation and tidal shocking, do 
preferentially destroy low-mass clusters. This work has 
been most thoroughly pursued for the Milky Way, where 
it has been shown that it is plausible that the Galactic glob- 
ular cluster system was once much more numerous and 
had a power-law mass function extending to low masses. 
A significant role for dynamical destruction is also indi- 
cated by the study of the structural parameters of Galac- 
tic globular clusters, which generally fall only within the 
bounds allowed by models of evaporation and tidal shock- 
ing. Although there are obvious uncertainties in running 
the clock backwards to infer the initial conditions of the 
Milky Way gobular cluster system, the consistency of these 
data with significant dynamical evolution leading to a log- 
normal mass function is suggestive that similar processes 
may apply to the candidate young globular cluster systems 
seen in galaxy starbursts and mergers. 

Some observational constraints can be placed on the 
evolution of young globular cluster systems by studying 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


systems of different ages and by looking at joint constraints 
on the luminosities, color and radii within a given system. 
Perhaps the most stringent constraints come from the 
studies of the gobular clusters of NGC 1275 and NGC 
7252, which are about 500 Myr old based on colors and 
moderate-resolution spectroscopy. Both of these systems 
appear to have power-law mass functions to the limit of 
the observations at inferred masses of a few times 10*Mo. 
Thus, any dynamical alteration to the mass function at 
masses above this lower limit must happen at later ages. 
This is plausible, as long as the dependence of radius on 
mass is not too steep. Of course, many clusters can be 
lost at younger ages, but the strong preferential loss of 
clusters with masses between this limit and the peak of 
the old globular cluster mass function must happen at later 
times. The alternative is that the young clusters are not the 
same type of objects as the older clusters, even though they 
have the same masses and densities. A critical challenge 
for observers in this field is to test these ideas about the 
dynamical evolution of systems of globular clusters. 

A striking characteristic of the systems of compact 
young star clusters is that they make up an appreciable 
fraction of the recent star formation in some starbursts and 
mergers, as measured by the fraction of blue light in the 
young clusters as compared with the galaxy as a whole. 
In the most energetic starbursts observed, this fraction of 
blue and ultraviolet light in bright, compact young star 
clusters is up to 20%, with smaller fractions being more 
typical of systems not at the peak of the starburst. This 
result suggests that the formation of compact, massive 
star clusters is not a negligible mode of star formation. It 
also suggests that the formation of massive, compact star 
clusters may be efficient in starburst and mergers. This 
has important implications for the understanding of the 
globular clusters systems around early-type galaxies and 
bulges, which the mergers and starbursts are believed to 
evolve into. Specifically, if the formation of young globular 
clusters is efficient, then it is possible to account for much 
of the globular cluster populations of bulges and ellipticals 
through similar processes. The roughly solar metallicity of 
about half of the globular clusters in ellipticals is consistent 
with this idea. It is also interesting to note that if 20% of 
the star formation in a starburst is in compact clusters, then 
most of these clusters must not survive for a Hubble time, 
as old globular clusters make up only about 1% of the light 
in old stellar populations such as the Galactic halo and in 
giant ellipticals. 


Bibliography 

Ashman K M and Zepf S E 1998 Globular Cluster Systems 
(Astrophysics Series No 30) (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


is amonograph on all aspects of globular cluster systems, 
including the formation of globular clusters in starbursts 
and mergers. Schweizer’s lectures in 


Kennicutt R C et al (ed) 1998 26th Saas—Fee Course on 
Galaxies: Interactions and Induced Star Formation 
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster Systems in Interacting Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


contain an excellent discussion of galaxy interaction and 
mergers and the properties of the candidate young clusters 
in these systems. Kennicutt’s contribution in the same 
volume provides a view of the formation of massive young 
star clusters in the broader context of star formation in 
galaxies. Earlier work on the subject includes 


Ashman K M and ZepfS E1993 The Globular Cluster-Galaxy 
Connection (San Francisco, CA: ASP) p 776 

Larson R B 1993 The Globular Cluster—Galaxy Connection 
(San Francisco, CA: ASP) p 675 


The first predictions of the existence of young globular 
clusters in gas-rich mergers are in 


Ashman K M and Zepf S E 1992 Astrophys. J. 384 50 
Schweizer F 1987 Nearly Normal Galaxies ed S M Faber 
(Berlin: Springer) p 60 


The first HST observations of these objects were by 


Holtzman J et al 1992 Astron. J. 103 691 
Whitmore B C et al 1993 Astron. J. 106 1354 


Stephen E Zepf 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster Systems in Normal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Globular Cluster Systems in Normal 
Galaxies 


All but the smallest dwarf galaxies possess a family of 
GLOBULAR CLUSTERS (GCs). They are among the oldest stellar 
systems in the universe. As such these ‘astronomical 
fossils’ provide valuable clues about the formation and 
evolution of their host galaxy. They offer a unique probe 
of the metallicity and kinematics at large radii in galactic 
halos, including our own Milky Way Galaxy. 

For LOcALGROvP galaxies, spectroscopic studies of GCs 
are well advanced. However the bulk of our knowledge 
about extragalactic GCs comes from imaging. Imaging 
studies received a boost from wide-field-of-view CCDs in 
the late 1980s and from the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) in 
the 1990s. It is now possible to study the magnitude, color 
and spatial distribution of GC systems at the distance of 
the COMA CLUSTER and beyond. Imaging can be hundreds 
of times more efficient than spectroscopy for studying 
GC systems but it supplies little information about age, 
independent of metallicity, and nothing about kinematics 
or abundance anomalies. 

Perhaps the most basic property of a GC system is 
the total number of GCs associated with a galaxy. This 
number varies from dwarf galaxies with a single GC to 
over 10000 in the case of some cD galaxies. The number 
of GCs associated with a galaxy correlates roughly with 
the host galaxy luminosity (ie. N ~ L?). In order to 
facilitate comparison between galaxies, the number of GCs 
is normalized to My = —15. This is termed the specific 
frequency, 

Sy = N1004v +15), 


The Sy value is affected by environment, with cluster 
ellipticals having Sy ~ 5 and their field counterparts 
Sy ~ 3. Some of the most luminous galaxies, typically 
cD galaxies, have Sy ~ 15, ie. several times more GCs 
per unit starlight than other early-type galaxies. Therefore 
high-Sy galaxies have either formed or acquired GCs more 
efficiently than they have field stars. It appears that high- 
Sy galaxies have a high Sy value at all radii throughout 
the galaxy. Although suggestions to explain the high- 
Sy phenomenon have been proposed, none is, as yet, 
universally accepted. Spiral galaxies have Sy ~ 1, but 
if we take account of the lower mass-to-light ratio of the 
young stellar populations in spiral disks then this rises to 
Sy ~ 2. 


Local Group 

Magellanic Clouds 

Both Magellanic Clouds appear to contain young (<1 Gyr), 
intermediate (~5 Gyr) and old (~15 Gyr) GCs. Ata 
distance of only 50 kpc, this would make the Magellanic 
Clouds ideal laboratories to study GCs witha range of ages 
(see also LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD, SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUD). 
However, there are also some disadvantages of studying 
the Magellanic Cloud GC systems. First, assuming that 
GCs have been correctly associated with each Magellanic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Cloud, the GC systems are small. The LMC has ~13 bona 
fide (i.e. old) GCs and the SMC may only have one (NGC 
221). Second, it is difficult to distinguish GCs from open 
clusters (the ratio of open to globular clusters is about 
20:1). The LMC GCs have a similar mean magnitude and 
metallicity to the Milky Way halo ones. They differ in 
their shapes (slightly more extended and flattened) and 
kinematics (both young and old GCs reveal evidence for a 
bulk rotation about the LMC). 


M31 

The GC system of our sister galaxy, M31, reveals many 
similarities to our own, with the advantage of greater 
numbers (i.e. N ~ 400 compared with N ~ 160 
for the Milky Way). For example, the GC luminosity 
function shows a similar peak and width. The metallicity 
distribution, although not as obvious, shows a similar 
metal-poor ([Fe/H] ~ — 1.5) and a metal-rich ([Fe/H] 
~ —0.5) dichotomy. Associating these with halo and 
disk populations via kinematics is complicated by the 
nearly face-on nature of M31. Nevertheless there is some 
evidence that the metal-rich GCs form a disk-like rotating 
system. As with the Milky Way and other galaxies, there 
is a deficit of GCs in the very inner galactic regions. An 
interesting difference in the M31 GCs is the presence of 
abundance anomalies. In particular, the CN and Ca H+K 
lines have enhanced line strengths relative to Milky Way 
GCs. It has been suggested that this difference may have 
a primordial origin. 


M33 and other Local Group galaxies 

The late-type spiral m33 contains ~25 old GCs, and perhaps 
as many again which are young or intermediate aged. The 
magnitude distribution, mean metallicity and kinematics 
of the old GCs appear similar to the Milky Way halo 
system. Most other Local Group galaxies are dwarf 
spheroidals, many of which possess a handful of GCs. 
These GCs tend to be metal-poor and show similarities 
in their color-magnitude diagrams to the young halo GCs 
in our own Galaxy. Direct evidence for accretion of such 
GCs comes from the Sgr dwarf (and its 3-4 GCs) which 
is in the process of merging with our Galaxy. Most dwarf 
galaxies have relatively normal Sy values but the Fornax 
dwarf has Sy ~ 20 indicating that GC formation can be 
very efficient in some small galaxies. 


Luminosity function 
The GC luminosity function (GCLF) is simply the number 
of GCs per luminosity interval (see also LUMINOSITY FUNCTION 
OF GALAXIES). If the number is plotted against magnitude 
then it is well approximated by a Gaussian distribution, 
ie. 

N = Aexp[—(M — M°)*/207] 


where o is the width of the Gaussian, M° is the turnover 
or peak magnitude and A is the number of GCs at the 
peak. An example of a GCLF for a giant elliptical is shown 
in figure 1. What is remarkable about the GCLF is that 
the peak is nearly universal, i.e. all well-studied systems 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster Systems in Normal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


100 — 


N 


ae i ‘\ ] 


60 |- 7 


Number 
t 


40 7 


207- + 


Figure 1. GCLF for the giant elliptical galaxy NGC 5846. The 
histogram shows the binned GC counts and the solid curve 
shows the best-fit Gaussian with a peak magnitude of 

Mo, = -7.4. 


have a peak at M° = —74+£0.2. Fora V band mass- 
to-light ratio of 2 this corresponds to a mean mass of 
1.6 x10°Mo. The small deviations from a universal M?, 
value do exist and various causes have been suggested, 
namely luminosity, Hubble type, color (metallicity) or 
environmental effects. This issue has yet to be settled. 
However, the mass function of GCs seems to be even 
more robust, and closely resembles that of giant molecular 
clouds (GMCs). Prompted by this observation, it has been 
suggested that GCs form in the cores of large GMCs. 

If GCs do indeed have a nearly universal mean 
absolute magnitude, then this can be used as a standard 
candle for distance determination. This has many 
advantages over other distance determination methods: 
GCs are available in large numbers around all large 
galaxies, they do not require repeat measurements (e.g. 
the study of variable stars) and the method can work for a 
variety of Hubble types. Its main disadvantage is perhaps 
a lack of a well-established theory to explain the preferred 
mass of GCs. The Hubble Space Telescope has made a 
significant impact in this area with its ability to obtain high- 
precision photometric data several magnitudes fainter 
than the peak. The GCLF method now shows excellent 
agreement with surface brightness fluctuations and 
Cepheid variable determined distances, giving values of 
the Hubble constant around 75 km s~! Mpc"!. 


Metallicity distribution 

In the last few years it has become clear that several, 
perhaps all, massive early-type galaxies have two distinct 
populations of GCs. These subpopulations are apparent 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


100 —— I 1 71 


80 4 


60+ >| 


Number 


40- 4 


20 4 


Nite eee eee Sees eer eee 


=2 -15 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 
[Fe/H] 


Figure 2. GC metallicity histogram for the giant elliptical galaxy 
NGC 5846. The histogram reveals clear evidence of a bimodal 
metallicity distribution indicating two distinct populations of 
GCs. Metallicities are estimated from photometry assuming a 
standard color-to-metallicity transformation. 


in high-quality photometric observations as a bimodal 
color distribution. It is generally assumed that the color 
separation in the two peaks largely reflects differences 
in metallicity, and to a lesser extent age. The typical 
separation between the relatively metal-poor and metal- 
rich peaks is ~1 dex in [Fe/H]. Breaking the age— 
metallicity degeneracy for GCs with spectroscopy and 
near-IR photometry is an active area of research. For the 
two cD galaxies studied to date (i.e. ms7 and NGC 1399), 
their GC (metal-poor and metal-rich) populations appear 
to be quite old (~10-15 Gyrs). 

The relative numbers in each population are typically 
similar, although there is some evidence that the ratio of 
metal-poor to metal-rich GCs scales with Sy. In other 
words, high Sy galaxies have relatively more metal-poor 
GCs. An example of a bimodal metallicity distribution, for 
an elliptical with a low Sy value, is shown in figure 2. 

The presence of two GC populations appears to 
explain the long-standing observation that the mean 
metallicity of the GC system is ~0.5 dex lower in [Fe/H] 
than the stars in massive ellipticals. This simply arises 
because the metal-rich GCs have a similar metallicity to 
the host galaxy stars while the metal-poor ones are ~1 
dex lower in [Fe/H]. Radial metallicity gradients for the 
entire GC system are due to the changing relative mix of the 
two populations with galactocentric radius (i.e. the metal- 
poor to metal-rich ratio increases with radius). Thus there 
may be no true radial metallicity gradient, suggesting a 
dissipationless formation process. 

The existence of multimodal color distributions 
indicates that GCs formed in distinct star formation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster Systems in Normal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


episodes from different metallicity gas, perhaps at 
different times. A simple monolithic collapse (expected to 
result in a unimodal color distribution) appears to be ruled 
out by such data. Interestingly, unimodal distributions 
may be present in low-luminosity ellipticals although the 
smaller number of GCs present makes any bimodality 
more difficult to detect. 


Metallicity—Iuminosity relation 
The correlation between the mean metallicity of the GC 
system and the luminosity of the host galaxy has been 
subject to much debate. As the number of systems 
studied has increased, it now seems clear that some 
relationship exists from dwarf to cD galaxies. The type of 
relation, contribution of observational errors and second- 
parameter effects are the subject of ongoing debate. For a 
linear fit, the slope of the GC system metallicity-galaxy 
luminosity relation is Z « L°*. This is similar to the 
slope of the galaxy metallicity-galaxy luminosity relation. 
Taken together these indicate that the GC system has had 
a similar chemical enrichment history to its host galaxy. 
If we subdivide the GC system into the mean 
metallicity of the metal-poor and metal-rich peaks, then 
we find that it is the metal-rich peak which correlates with 
galaxy luminosity. This provides further evidence that 
the metal-rich GCs are closely coupled to the formation 
of the galaxy itself. The metal-poor peak shows little or no 
correlation. 


Spatial distribution 

Radial distribution 

When plotted logarithmically, the radial surface density 
distribution for a GC system typically shows a flat 
‘core’ region (i.e. approaching zero slope) in the central 
few kpc and a roughly power-law-like decline to larger 
galactocentric radii. The GC system surface density is 
often more extended than that of the galaxy starlight. Low- 
Sy galaxies cover a range of power-law slopes but high-Sjy 
galaxies only have relatively flat slopes (i.e. an extended 
distribution). For cD galaxies there is a change in slope 
at the radius of the cD envelope indicating that the outer 
GCs and the stellar envelope have a similar origin. 


Azimuthal distribution 

Less is known about the azimuthal distribution of GCs 
than their radial profile. However, it appears that GCs 
generally track the position angle and ellipticity variations 
of the underlying galaxy starlight. In the future, a number 
of GC systems may have been studied in enough detail 
to make comparisons with the spatial properties of x-ray- 
emitting gas. This will provide a unique probe of the dark 
matter distribution at large galactocentric radii. 


Kinematic properties 

The kinematics of large samples of GCs has been 
determined for only a few galaxies to date, although 
the combination of multiobject spectrographs on large 
telescopes is rapidly improving this situation. Studying 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the kinematics of the subpopulations promises to yield 
important clues as to their origin and ultimately place new 
constraints on the formation and dynamical evolution of 
their host galaxy. 

An additional use of GC kinematic studies is their 
application to mass estimates of galaxies. They act like 
test particles in the gravitational potential and have the 
advantage of extending well beyond the optical limit of 
the galaxy. Masses are typically determined using either 
the projected-mass method or the virial theorem. For a 
system of N GCs the projected-mass is 


Sp 


i pe 
PM” G(N —a) 


(x Ver) 

where f, is a numerical factor which describes the type 
of GC orbits, aw is a small correction factor, V; is the 
velocity difference between the ith GC and the system 
mean velocity and 7; is the radial separation from the 
system centroid position. For small samples of GCs, the 
mass is likely to be overestimated. The mass from the virial 
theorem is 

3nN UNV? 


My; = —— — 
a 2G Li<jl/rij 


where r;; is the radial separation between the ith and jth 
GC. 

Only a few galaxies have mass estimates from GC 
motions, although this is likely to be an active area in the 
coming years. Such estimates can be compared with those 
from x-ray satellites for massive ellipticals. However, 
for small ellipticals, without extended hot gas halos, GC- 
based estimates may be the only feasible method for 
estimating mass at large galactocentric radii. 


Formation and destruction 

The origin of GC systems is not currently known. Tradi- 
tionally models fell into three main categories: primary 
(formation before the galaxy), secondary (formation of 
GCs and galaxy contemporaneously) and tertiary (forma- 
tion after galaxies). The current formation ideas tend to 
be more hybrid in nature, motivated by the recent discov- 
eries of two GC populations in massive ellipticals. Ideas 
include creation of new GCs in the gaseous merger that 
forms the elliptical, in situ formation plus accretion from 
smaller galaxies and in situ formation in two distinct star 
formation phases. The reality may be a combination of 
these basic processes (i.e. in situ formation, tidal accretion 
and the creation of new GCs), operating at varying degrees 
in different systems. 

Once formed, a GC can be destroyed by a variety 
of internal and external mechanisms. In the case 
of protoglobular clusters, they will disrupt themselves 
if supernovae inject more energy than is binding the 
cluster together. Low-mass protoglobular clusters may 
evaporate or be tidally shocked. Either way low-mass 
clusters must be destroyed if their observed power- 
law luminosity function is to eventually resemble the 
log-normal distribution of old GCs. Other long-term 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster Systems in Normal Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


dynamical destruction effects include bulge and disk 
shocking. Disk shocking may destroy a GC as it 
passes through the increased density of a galactic disk. 
Bulge shocking is strongest in galaxies with high central 
densities, i.e. low-luminosity ellipticals. Only recently 
have predictions for GC destruction rates in different types 
of galaxies become available. 


Bibliography 

The literature on GCs in external galaxies is growing 

rapidly. Below is a brief, and incomplete, selection. 
Reviews of GC systems can be found in 


Ashman K M and Zepf S E 1998 Globular Cluster Systems 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
Harris W E 1991 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 29 543 


A review of GC luminosity functions as distance 
indicators is given by 


Whitmore B C 1996 The Extragalactic Distance Scale ed 
M Livio, M Donahue and N Panagia (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


The first photometric studies of GCs beyond the Local 
Group include 


Hanes D A 1979 Mon. Not. Astron. Soc. 188 901 
Racine R 1968 Pub. Astron. Soc. Pac. 80 326 
Strom S E et al 1981 Astrophys. J. 245 416 


Photometric studies revealing two GC subpopula- 
tions include 


Harris W E et al 1992 Astron. J. 104 613 

for NGC 5128, 

Lee M G and Geisler D 1993 Astron. J. 106 493 

for M87, 

Secker J et al 1995 Astron. J. 109 1019 

for NGC 3311, 

Zepf S E and Ashman K M 1995 Astrophys. J. 443 570 
for NGC 3923, 

Geisler D, Lee M G and Kim E 1996 Astron. J. 111 1529 
for NGC 4472, 

Forbes D A, Brodie J P and Huchra J 1997 Astron. J. 113 887 
for NGC 5846 and 

Forbes D A et al 1998 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 293 325 


for NGC 1399 and 1404. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spectroscopic studies of extragalactic GCs include 


Brodie J P and Huchra J P 1991 Astrophys. J. 379 157 
Grillmair C J et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 422 L9 
Kissler-Patig M et al 1998 Astron. J. 115 105 

Mould J R, Oke J Band Nemec J M 1987 Astron. J. 92 53 


Recent attempts to explain the presence of two GC 
subpopulations in massive ellipticals include 


Ashman K M and Zepf S E 1992 Astrophys. J. 384 50 

Cote P, Marzke R O and West M J 1998 Astrophys. J. 501 554 

Forbes D A, Brodie J P and Grillmair C J 1997 Astron. J. 113 
1652 


The formation of GCs from large giant molecular 
clouds is described in 


Harris W E and Pudritz R E 1994 Astrophys. J. 429 177 
and subsequent papers. 


Duncan A Forbes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster X-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Globular Cluster X-ray Sources 


Twelve of the 147 globular clusters associated with our 
Galaxy contain a bright (L, = 10°? W) x-ray source; many 
more contain dim (L, < 1078 W) x-ray sources, of which 
more than 40 are now known. X-ray sources have also been 
detected in globular clusters of the ANDROMEDAGALAXY M31. 

The x-ray properties of the bright cluster sources in 
our Galaxy are similar to those of the low-mass x-ray 
binaries in the galactic disk (see also X-RAY BINARY STARS). 
The bright x-ray sources in globular clusters are therefore 
thought to be binaries in which a NEUTRON STAR accretes 
matter from a low-mass companion. 

The nature of the dim x-ray sources in globular 
clusters is more diverse. A single cluster can contain 
several dim sources. Soft x-ray transients, cataclysmic 
variables, recycled radio pulsars, and RS CVN binaries all 
can have x-ray luminosities in the range observed for the 
dim sources, and are known to exist in globular clusters. 

Twelve bright cluster sources correspond to about 
10% of the bright x-ray sources of our Galaxy, a 
surprisingly large fraction if one considers that the 
globular cluster system holds less than 0.1% of the stars 
in our Galaxy. The efficient formation of x-ray binaries 
in globular clusters is ascribed to two processes: tidal 
capture and exchange encounters. Tidal capture occurs 
when a neutron star transfers some of its kinetic energy to 
tides in another star during a close passage, and enough 
tidal energy is dissipated to bind the neutron star in orbit 
around its captor. An exchange encounter occurs when 
a neutron star ejects one of the stars in a binary in a close 
encounter, and takes its place. These processes are efficient 
especially in globular clusters with dense cores, where the 
average distance between stars is relatively small. 


Table 1. Table of the bright x-ray sources in globular clusters, 
giving the position of the source, its (approximate) x-ray 
luminosity, and where known the binary period. All sources 
except Terzan 6 are x-ray bursters. For transients, marked with 
T, the luminosity at maximum is given. 


Cluster Position logL,(W) P, 
NGC1851 0512 — 40 29.2 

NGC6440 1745-20 T1304 

NGC6441 1746 — 37 29.6 5.7h 
NGC6624 1820 — 30 30.8 11.4 min 
NGC6652 1836-33 8129.4 

NGC6712 1850 — 09 29.1 20.6 min 
NGC7078  2127+12 29.4 17.1h 
Terzan 1 1732 — 30 29.3, 

Terzan2* 1724-31 29.5 

Terzan 5 1745 — 25 28.8 

Terzan 6 1751-31 129.7 124h 
Liller 1° 1730-33 130.0 


* X-ray source discovered before the globular 
cluster! 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The bright x-ray sources 

The x-ray luminosities of the bright x-ray sources in 
globular clusters are between L, ~ 10” — 10°! W (see 
table 1). The color temperature of the x-ray spectrum 
in the 2-10 keV energy range is kT. < 5 keV. At these 
luminosities, the x-ray source must be either a neutron 
star Or a BLACK HOLE, that accretes matter froma companion. 
Eleven of these twelve cluster sources have shown x-ray 
bursts. (An x-ray burst is a sudden rise in the x-ray 
luminosity followed by a more gradual decline (see x- 
RAY BURSTERS), and is thought to be caused by explosive 
fusion into carbon of a thin helium layer on the surface 
of a neutron star, see figure 1.) These eleven sources are 
accreting neutron stars. The remaining one—in Terzan 6— 
may be a neutron star as well; if not, it is a black hole. 

Some of the bright sources are transients, i.e. bright 
only occasionally. The source in NGC6440, for example, 
was detected in December 1971/January 1972 and in 
August 1998; between these dates its flux level decreased 
to less than 0.001 of the outburst level. 

The first ever measurement of the radius of a neutron 
star was made from an x-ray burst of the source in 
the globular cluster Terzan 2 (figure 1). The spectrum 
can be fitted with a black body of temperature 7); this 
temperature decreases during the burst. The luminosity 
of the burst is L, = 42 R?oT,3,, where R is the radius of 
the neutron star. Assuming that the luminosity is emitted 
isotropically, and that the globular cluster is ata distance D 
(which can be determined in the optical), we can determine 
R from the flux f, measured on Earth via the equation 


2 
t= (G45) = (5) ons (1) 


For the burster in Terzan 2, R ~ 10 km. The uncertainty in 
the radius is appreciable, due mainly to deviations of the 
x-ray spectrum from a black body, and also to uncertainty 
of the distance to the cluster, and to uncertainty in the 
absorption by the interstellar medium. Nonetheless, 
x-ray bursts prove that the x-ray sources are very small, 
compatible with the theoretically predicted size of a 
neutron star. 

The hypothesis that the neutron star is accreting 
from a binary companion has been confirmed by the 
determination of the orbital period for five sources; for 
three of these sources a counterpart has been identified 
at optical and ultraviolet wavelengths. Surprisingly, the 
orbital periods of two sources are the shortest known for 
x-ray binaries, 685 s in NGC6624 and 1236 s (or 792 s) 
in NGC6712; in these cases the mass donor must be an 
undermassive (M < 0.1M.) white dwarf. The 12.4 and 
17.1 h orbital periods of the sources in Terzan 6 and 
NGC7078 (M15) point to a subgiant donor; the (less secure) 
5.7 h period in NGC6441 suggests a donor on the main 
sequence. 

The x-ray source in the globular cluster Liller 1 is a 
recurrent transient, showing outbursts lasting a month at 
irregular intervals of roughly half a year; when bright, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster X-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


7 e * uate r 1 
2 - [ J 
oF Flay L J 
Ro) Ot 4 
“ [ 4 
cenit jet 
oS | ad | Cee L 4 
o c L a 
ao 2" f 1 
5 [ I 26 [ J 
3 < [ 1 
at oe J 
af | 2st 
bo a lean q °° [ 1 
Oo : ! : l f ! ! [hs ea ; rae el 
0) 200 400 600 O 0.5 1 
time (s) log E (keV) 


Figure 1. Left: An x-ray burst of the source in the globular cluster Terzan 2, observed with the OSO-8 satellite. Right: spectra of the 
x-rays at subsequent phases of the burst, with black body fits (full curve: as observed; dotted curve: corrected for interstellar 
absorption). From the fit of the spectrum 40-70 s into the burst, a radius of ~10 km is derived for the neutron star. 


SAS— 3 Oct 1977 
8 
i) 
© 
“oO 
. wo 
a3 
[o) 
time (s) 
o EXOSAT Aug 1985 


ctr (cts/s) 
200 400 


io 


1 l 1 
) 5000 10* = 1.5x10* 
time (s) 


— oa 


(o) 4 


Figure 2. The Rapid Burster in Liller 1 emits its x-rays mainly in 
discrete bursts. The burst rate was high when the source was 
discovered in 1977 (top), but rather lower during some later 
observations (below). A thermonuclear burst starts in the 1977 
observation at t = 160 s. 


this source is remarkable because it emits all its x-rays in 
discrete bursts (figure 2). When first discovered in 1977 
these bursts lasted a few seconds and occurred at a rate 
of four per minute, and the source was named the Rapid 
Burster. Later observations have found the source emitting 
its x-rays in longer bursts (up to ~10° s) at longer intervals 
(up to about an hour); and occasionally emitting a steady 
x-ray flux. The nature of these x-ray bursts is not clear; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


they are different from the thermonuclear bursts observed 
in many other systems in having a different time scale 
and in the absence of temperature evolution. Maybe they 
correspond to discrete accretion events onto the neutron 
star. The rapid bursts are occasionally interspersed by 
ordinary, thermonuclear bursts. Thermonuclear bursts are 
often called type I, and accretion bursts type II. 

Some 30 x-ray sources in M31 have been identified 
with globular clusters of that galaxy. Their x-ray 
luminosities are comparable with those of low-mass x-ray 
binaries in (the globular clusters of) our own Galaxy. 


The dim sources 


At lower flux levels (f; ~ 107’? W m7, say) fore- or 
background sources must be considered; as a result, dim 
sources can be safely asserted—in a statistical sense—to 
be related to globular clusters only when they are found 
in or close to the cluster cores. Currently some 40 of such 
dim (L, ~ 10“ — 102 W) sources are known in some 15 
clusters, i.e. several clusters contain multiple sources. 

The positional accuracies of the x-ray sources hamper 
identification with optical or ultraviolet counterparts, even 
if one limits onself to blue or variable objects (figure 3). 
The situation will improve when observations from the 
CHANDRA X-RAY OBSERVATORY become available. The only 
secure counterpart is the recycled pulsar of which the 
rotation period of 3.054 ms is present in the x-ray flux from 
NGC6626 (M28). Cataclysmic variables have been found 
with the Hubble Space Telescope as plausible counterparts 
for dim x-ray sources in NGC6397, 47 Tuc and NGC6752. 
In NGC5904 (M5) a dwarf nova discovered well outside 
the core in optical observations in 1941, has been detected 
in x-rays. For most dim x-ray sources in globular clusters 
no optical counterpart has as yet been found. 

The x-ray flux of the dim source in NGC5272 varies 
by at least a factor 30, and is also remarkable because of 
its very soft spectrum, with a characteristic temperature 
$50 eV, when the source is bright. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster X-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a- a, (") 


fe) —20 
T i T 
fe) 
° jo 
N 
QL 
wo 
x oO 
zx aces 
a: | 
“© 
je} 
OF 4 
fo) 
: 1% 
° 
fo) 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
—400 —350 
XPix 


Figure 3. X-ray image of the core of the globular cluster 47 Tuc 
(contours at 0.4, 0.16 and 0.064 times the maximum level 
observed, best positions for five x-ray sources A-E indicated 
with e). Blue and variable stars in the core are indicated with o. 
The limited accuracy of the reconstruction of the satellite 
pointing leaves an uncertainty of about 2 arcsec between the 
x-ray coordinate system (lower and left axes, in pixels of the 
ROSAT HRI detector) and optical coordinates (upper and right 
axes, with respect to the center of 47 Tuc). Of the suggested 
counterparts (indicated with @) two, both cataclysmic variables, 
are good candidates for x-ray sources C and D. 


The detection of dim sources in globular clusters is 
subject to strong selection effects: they can be found only in 
relatively nearby clusters, which are not highly reddened. 
Taking these effects into account, one finds that the number 
of x-ray sources dN in a luminosity interval dL, depends 
on the luminosity L, and on the number density n of stars 
in the cluster core as dN « n!5L,~!°dL,. This scaling 
is in agreement with the observation that the total x-ray 
luminosity of a globular cluster is dominated by individual 
sources. 


Theory of formation mechanisms 

The fraction of neutron stars or WHITE DWARFS expected to 
have experienced a close stellar encounter can be several 
per cent in a globular cluster with a dense core. In the disk 
of the Galaxy—where close stellar encounters don’t occur, 
and where binaries evolve unperturbed by third bodies— 
only a tiny fraction of neutron stars is found ina binary. A 
neutron star binary in a globular cluster is therefore much 
more likely to be the result of a close stellar encounter than 
of the unperturbed evolution of a primordial binary in the 
cluster. The fraction of white dwarfs in a binary in the disk 
of the Galaxy is much higher: a white dwarf in a binary in 
a cluster can therefore be the result either of a close stellar 
encounter or of ordinary binary evolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The basic principle of tidal capture of a neutron star 
can be understood with a simple calculation: consider a 
neutron star with mass m and velocity v at large distance 
(‘infinity’) relative to a main-sequence star with mass M 
and radius R. The relative kinetic energy FE, of the two 
stars is given by 


1 M 
= = _y, (2) 
2m+M 


Fy 


As the neutron star closes in, it deforms the other star. The 
height h of the bulge, and its mass m, can be estimated for 
distance d with 


TERE EW RN 


where k is the apsidal motion constant, which depends 
on the central condensation of the star, and indicates how 
easy it is to deform the star. For a star with a deep 
convective envelope k ~ 0.14. Thus the energy £, in the 
tidal deformation is of order 


GM Gm? (R\° 
E,~m h~k : 4 
jam nk (2) () 
If E, > Ex, the two stars cannot escape from one another 
anymore, and a binary is formed. This condition can be 


written: 


1/6 -1\'/s 
asor(Eoet ee) (oe 6) 


M 2M>5 R v 


Because of the strong dependence of E£, on d, this rough 
estimate is in fact pretty accurate, as more detailed 
calculations confirm. 

The initial binary orbit is highly eccentric, e < 1, with 
a velocity at PERIASTRON close to the escape velocity. Tidal 
forces are expected to circularize the orbit, during which 
process angular momentum is conserved. The semimajor 
axis a, of the circularized orbit is given by 


a, < 2d Ka, (6) 


where a, is the semimajor axis immediately after capture. 
Thus the final orbit after circularization can have a 
semimajor axis of up to twice the capture distance. 

The energy difference AE between the initial, highly 
eccentric, and the final circularized orbit is comparable to 
the binding energy E,, of the main-sequence star. 


AE —GMm —GMm\ (3GM?2\' 
r =( 2a, 2a, )Cae) 
ae 5m R 

~ 6M a,’ 


(7) 


The circularization process provides enough energy to 
destroy the main-sequence star. If the energy has to be 
dissipated very rapidly, it is hard to avoid destruction of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Cluster X-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the donor. It has been suggested, however, that the energy 
present in the tidally induced oscillations of the star can be 
fed back into the orbit; in a very eccentric orbit, the energy 
exchange between (oscillations in) the star and the orbit 
is chaotic. This would mean that the star has much more 
time to dissipate, and thus has a much better chance of 
surviving. 

The cross section o for closest passage within distance 
d follows from conservation of energy and angular 
momentum in a Keplerian orbit: 


2G(m + M) 
= 7zd* {14+ —__ — 
(on TT ( + wd ) 
2G(m + M) 
~ xd ———_. 

v2 


(8) 


The second term within brackets gives the effects of 
gravitational focusing. This term dominates for the small 
relative velocities between stars in globular clusters, which 
justifies the subsequent approximation. 

With number densities n, and n for the neutron and 
target stars respectively, the capture rate of neutron stars 
per unit volume can be written: 


Tl =n,nvo. (9) 


To obtain the formation rate in a cluster, one must integrate 
equation (9) over the cluster volume. Because the density 
is strongly peaked near the cluster center, virtually all close 
encounters occur in the cluster core. In a relatively dense 
core of a globular cluster, n. ~ 100 pe? and n ~ 10° pe~®. 
With a characteristic core volume of ~1 pe and stellar 
velocities of ~10 kms“! it follows from that a close binary 
with a neutron star is formed every 10° yr. For an average 
lifetime of a bright source of 10° yr, we then expect to see of 
order 1 x-ray source in such a cluster, in accordance with 
observations. 

If a neutron star directly hits a giant, then the core of 
the giant and the neutron star may spiral in towards one 
another, leaving a close binary of an undermassive white 
dwarf and a neutron star. Such an encounter may explain 
the x-ray sources in NGC6624 and NGC6712. 

Another way of getting a neutron star in a binary is 
an exchange collision: when a neutron star approaches a 
binary to a distance comparable with the semimajor axis 
of the binary, the three stars may temporarily move in 
complicated orbits around one another. Such a three-body 
system is not stable, and one star is ejected at the end, 
usually the lightest star. In this way, a neutron star may 
take the place of an ordinary star ina binary. The frequency 
of such encounters is proportional to the number density 
of binaries npjn in the cluster core, and to the semimajor 
axes a of these binaries. The capture rate 3 from these 
three-body processes may be compared with tidal capture, 
roughly according to: 


T3 Min 4 


rT onR 


(10) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


when all three stars have equal mass. Thus the smaller 
number of binaries is offset by their larger size, as 
compared to single stars. The actual importance of 
exchange encounters is not clear, because the number of 
binaries in cluster cores is not known. 

The formation of a close neutron-star binary in a 
globular cluster may also arise from a tidal capture 
between stars involved in a three-body encounter. Two- 
body or three-body encounters can also cause direct 
collisions between stars, a process which may be important 
for the formation of single recycled pulsars in globular 
clusters. 


Bibliography 

Bailyn C D 1995 Blue stragglers and other stellar 
anomalies: implications for the dynamics of globular 
clusters Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 33 133-62 

Hut P et al 1992 Binaries in globular clusters Publ. Astron. 
Soc. Pacific 104 981-1034 

Johnston H M and Verbunt F 1996 The globular cluster 
population of low-luminosity x-ray sources Astron. 
Astrophys. 312 80-7 

Supper R et al 1997 ROSAT PSPC survey of M31 Astron. 
Astrophys. 317 328-49 


F Verbunt 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Globular Clusters 


Globular clusters (GCs) are aggregates of approximately 
10*-10° gravitationally bound stars, highly concentrated 
to the center, spread over a volume ranging from a few 
dozen up to more than 300 light-years (ly) in diameter. 
They resemble shining, old islands orbiting the Milky 
Way. As the name indicates, GCs show a largely spherical 
symmetry about their centers. A picture of the classic GC 
w Centauri is shown in figure 1. 

The stellar density in the cluster’s center is so 
high (up to a few 10° stars ly~*) that it is generally 
impossible to separate the individual stars from ground- 
based observations. Only recently has the refurbished 
Hubble Space Telescope (HST) allowed astronomers to dig 
into the very central regions of many Galactic globulars, 
where members (sometimes peculiar or even exotic) move 
randomly like molecules of gas, interacting according to 
the basic laws of gravity. 

Early studies of GCs date back to the birth of modern 
astronomy. Since then, GCs have continued to offer 
excitement to both professional astronomers and sky- 
lovers with surprising results, and they constitute a basic 
benchmark for our astrophysical understanding. 

The Milky Way hosts about 200 GCs. They forma halo 
of roughly spherical shape which is highly concentrated 
around the Galactic center, in the Sagittarius—-Scorpius— 
Ophiuchus region. The most distant Galactic globulars 
(such as NGC 2419) are located far beyond the edge of the 
Galactic disk, at distances out to 300000 ly. 

RADIAL VELOCITY measurements have shown that most 
of the GCs are orbiting the Galaxy in highly eccentric 
elliptical orbits (see figure 2), with orbital periods of about 
108 yr or even longer. 

While following their orbits around the Galactic 
center, GCs are subject to a variety of perturbations (tidal 
forces from the parent galaxy, passage through the Galactic 
plane, star escape, internal dynamical evolution, etc) 
which make the existing GCs perhaps just the survivors of 
a much wider population, partially disrupted and spread 
out throughout the Galactic halo and far beyond. In 
this respect, it has been estimated that, within the next 
ten billion years or so, most of the present Galactic GCs 
could disappear. On the other hand, we know today 
that four clusters in Sagittarius (M54 in particular) are 
likely members of the Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy 
(discovered in 1994), currently merging into the central 
regions of the Milky Way. 

A large majority of the galactic GCs have high relative 
velocities (100-300 km s~') with respect to the Sun, as 
they do not participate in the Galactic disk rotation. There 
is, however, a subsample, commonly referred to as ‘disk 
globulars’, which show properties closely connected to the 
disk. 

Spectroscopic observations of stars in Galactic GCs 
have revealed that their chemical composition differs from 
that of the Sun in heavy elements content. GC stars are in 
fact typically metal poor and old. This is a signature that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The GC w Centauri. 


Figure 2. Orbits of GCs in the Galaxy. 


they were presumably born during the early stages of the 
Galaxy’s formation and thus represent a sort of archeo- 
astronomical site where the universe in its youth can be 
studied. 

Globular clusters seem to be ubiquitous. Edwin 
Hubble pionereed the search for globulars in the galaxies 
of the LOCAL Group with the detection of about 100 GCs 
in M31, the Andromeda Nebula (more than 350 GCs are 
known nowadays). However, it was only in the 1970s 
that the identification of any significant number of GC 
candidates became feasible around galaxies beyond the 
Local Group. The main reason for this difficulty in the 
search is that, with increasing distance, a typical cluster 
becomes progressively indistinguishable in shape from 
foreground stars or distant background galaxies. 

It is now fairly well established that almost all 
galaxies have GC systems, in some cases (e.g. M87) 
containing several thousands of globulars (see GLOBULAR 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CLUSTER SYSTEMS IN NORMAL GALAXIES). There are, however, 
important differences. While all the globulars in our 
Galaxy and in M31 are old (ages of about 10 Gyr, at least), 
there are galaxies, such as the two Magellanic Clouds and 
M33 (the Triangulum Galaxy), hosting much younger GCs 
(ages of a few Gyr, or less). 

The latest GC searches also reveal that dense, massive 
star clusters seem to be currently forming in the halos 
of some interacting galaxies (see GLOBULAR CLUSTER SYSTEMS 
IN INTERACTING GALAXIES). These objects are commonly 
interpreted as young and metal-rich GCs. This idea is 
not universally accepted, however. In fact, observational 
evidence, still quite meager, needs to be confirmed. 
Furthermore, astronomers seem somehow reluctant to 
change their traditional view of the GCs and to admit that 
massive, young and metal-rich GCs could possibly be even 
more frequent in the universe than the ‘classic’, ancient and 
very metal-poor ones. 


Historical background 

Perhaps the first historical detection of a globular cluster 
goes back to the mists of time, when human eyes first saw 
w Centauri, the biggest Galactic GC, barely visible in the 
southern hemisphere. 

The first ‘astronomical’ detection dates back to the 
18th century. John Herschel, in the 1830s, realized that 
a large number of these clusters are concentrated in a 
relatively small portion of the sky in the direction of 
Sagittarius. Later on, HARLOW SHAPLEY detected variable 
stars in several GCs and, on the assumption they were 
Cepheids of known (calibrated) absolute magnitude, 
derived distances to them and to the Galactic center. Doing 
this, in 1917, Shapley understood that the Galactic center 
is located very far away from the Sun, in the direction of 
Sagittarius, and was also able to estimate the size of the 
Milky Way. 

Today we know that Shapley significantly overesti- 
mated (by a factor of 2 or so) the size of the GCs system and 
of the Milky Way as a whole, mainly because the cluster 
variables he identified as Cepheids are actually RR Lyraes, 
whose absolute magnitude is about 2-4 mag fainter than 
Cepheids. 


A key role in astronomy 

Individual clusters as well as GC systems are of great 
worth as specific targets but also represent a powerful tool 
to obtain a deep insight into a large variety of astrophysical 
and cosmological problems (see table 1). Their study still 
represents a benchmark and a major field of interest in the 
international astronomical community. 

Members of any given GC share a common history 
and differ one from another only in their initial mass. 
Consisting of a ‘simple’ STELLAR POPULATION (i.e. coeval, 
chemically homogeneous and isolated), GCs are ideal 
laboratories for testing the theories of stellar structure and 
evolution. In fact, thanks to the very large number of 
stars, almost every evolutionary stage (even those with 
very short lifetimes, down to a few 10* yr) is present at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the appropriate statistical significance among the GC stars. 
This allows a direct check on the validity of the detailed 
evolution theory. When GCs are considered just as a 
million or so pointlike masses in a small volume, subject 
to internal and external dynamical interactions, they 
represent an ideal workbench to study STELLAR DYNAMICS 
and to test most exquisite theoretical dynamical models. 

If studied as a global system, GCs constitute fossil 
tracers of the dynamical and chemical evolution of the 
parent galaxy and can be used as test particles to evaluate 
both the galaxy’s total mass and its radial distribution. 

GCs contain a variety of exciting objects by them- 
selves worth a continuous investigation, for instance 
strong and weak x-ray sources, neutron stars and millisec- 
ond pulsars, white dwarfs, cataclysmic variables, binaries, 
blue stragglers, planetary nebulae, etc. Moreover, they 
contain one of the most popular intrinsic variable stars, 
the so-called RRLYRAE STARS. These stars have light variation 
amplitudes less than a couple of magnitudes and periods 
ranging from 0.2 to 1.1 days. Since their mean absolute 
magnitude is constant and fairly independent of metallic- 
ity (to within 0.3 mag), the RR Lyrae variables and the GCs, 
in turn, are ideal standard candles to measure distances. 

Perhaps one of the most remarkable impacts of GC 
reasearch on other fields of astronomy is provided by the 
estimate of the ages of the Milky Way’s globulars. GCs 
are, in fact, among the few objects in the Galaxy for which 
relatively precise ages can be derived. Since they are 
the oldest objects observed in the Milky Way so far, and 
were born during the very early stages of the Galaxy’s 
formation, they provide a very stringent lower limit to 
the age of the universe. On the other hand, their age 
distribution and how ages vary with varying metallicity, 
spatial location in the Galaxy and kinematic properties 
make these systems direct tracers of the chronology of 
the first epoch of star formation in the Galactic halo and 
may help in understanding the whole process of galaxy 
formation. 


Color-magnitude and Hertzsprung-Russell 
diagrams, and stellar evolution 

The color-magnitude diagram (CMD) as well as its 
twin, the HERTZPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM (H-R diagram), 
substantially plot the temperature of a star on the X- 
axis, with increasing temperature to the left, and the star 
brightness on the Y-axis, with brighter stars at the top. 
Traditionally, the observational CMD reports on the X-axis 
the color of the stars (generally B—V) and on the Y-axis the 
observed apparent magnitude (generally V) or, if distance 
is known, the absolute magnitude (My). 

The CMD is a basic, very powerful tool which 
allows a direct calibration of the observables in terms of 
fundamental intrinsic parameters (e.g. metallicity, age) as 
well as stringent comparisons to be made with theoretical 
model predictions (after ‘tricky’ transformations from the 
theoretical into the observational plane). 

Figure 3(a) shows the observed CMD of the GC M3, 
and figure 3(b) displays the schematic CMD of a typical 
GC. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Importance of GCs. 


Subject 


Reasons for importance 


Witnesses of the early e First to form 


Galactic evolution 


Stellar Evolution Laboratories 


e Chemically uncontaminated 


e Simple stellar populations 


e Test of the ‘stellar clock’ 


Distance indicators 


e Standard candles: the RR Lyrae stars 


e GC system integrated luminosity function 


Age indicators 


e The turn-off luminosity = ‘the clock’ 


absolute ages: lower limit to the age of the universe 
relative ages: ‘second parameter’ and Galaxy formation and evolution 


Dynamics probes 
core collapse 
evaporation 
collisions 


merging-surviving 


segregation 


e Dense environment 


e Test particle of the galactic gravitational field 


Containers of 
peculiar objects e Blue stragglers 


e Binaries 


e Planetary nebulae 


e White dwarfs 


e X sources (strong—weak-—diffuse) 


e Cataclysmic variables 


e Millisecond pulsars 


e Neutron stars 


Labels indicate the main branches of the diagram. The 
modern STELLAR EVOLUTION theory is able to predict quite 
precisely the physical processes undergone by stars which 
evolve along the CMD, and the whole evolutionary path 
of a Population II star is nicely described from the early to 
the final stages. Each specific evolutionary phase is labeled 
in figure 3(b), along with the corresponding basic nuclear 
burnings. A brief description of these main evolutionary 
stages is presented below. 

The evolutionary tracks drawn in the CMD by GC 
stars of given initial mass (below 1Mo, actually ~0.8Mo) 
and chemical composition closely resemble the observed 
main ridge lines shown in figure 3(b). However, there is a 
fundamental difference. Each point of the evolutionary 
track is the locus reached by the same star at different 
ages during its evolution; conversely, each point on the 
observed CMD does indeed correspond to the locus 
of stars with same age and chemical composition, but 
different masses. 

Given a collection of stars having the same chemical 
composition but different masses, each star will evolve 
along its evolutionary track, at its own evolutionary rate 
(depending on the star’s mass). It will thus be possible to 
define loci of constant time along the various evolutionary 
tracks, which will yield constant-age sequences. These 
sequences are generally referred to as ‘isochrones’. The 
isochrones thus represent the loci of stars with the 
same age and chemical composition, but with different 
masses. Since members of a GC can be thought of 
as being born from the same cloud at the same time, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


but with different masses, the comparison of theoretical 
isochrones (transformed into the observational plane) 
with the observed CMD is the key procedure to obtain 
information on the evolutionary status of GC stars. 


The main sequence and the turn-off 

After a free-fall phase, the gravitational contraction leads 
the proto-star to increase its central temperature until the 
ignition of the first nuclear reactions in the stellar core takes 
place. The nuclear energy production slows down and 
eventually stops the contraction. The star reaches a nice 
equilibrium, balancing energy production and transfer 
and global brightness, and enters into the main sequence 
(MS). This equilibrium holds on the MS for more than 70% 
of the total stellar lifetime (~10"° yr), until the nuclear 
fuel (hydrogen, i.e. 1 proton) in the very central core is 
completely burnt out. It should be recalled that there is a 
theoretical lower limit to the stellar mass (~0.08M.) below 
which H burning does not take place in the stellar core. 
Stars smaller than this threshold are usually called very 
low-mass (VLM) stars and brown dwarfs (BDs), and for 
masses far below this limit (~0.001Mj) one has the giant 
planets. 

Stars spend most of their lifetime quietly burning 
hydrogen in their core via nuclear fusion. Our Sun is still 
on the MS. As hydrogen gradually runs out in the center, a 
nucleus of helium (produced by the fusion of four protons) 
grows up, and the star core begins to contract owing to 
gravity, while the outer layers progressively expand and 
cool down. The star leaves the MS. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T | T T T T T T T T T a 
aL M 3 (8161 stars) | 
L ae 4 
A = 4 
6 
Vv L 4 
8 = 4 
20 
Be. 4 
L L | 1 1 1 1 1 1 | 1 L | L 
—0.5 0 0.5 1 15 
(B-V) 
(a) 
He-flash 
Asymptotic RGB Tip 
giant branch ty 
1000 i. H+He pene ‘ 
‘ Na RGB 
orizonta Red giant 
RR Lyrae gap 9 
branch branch 
a RHB 
a 100 Blue Core He+H shell 
> horizontal burnings 
= | branch H shell burning 
= BHB 
= 10} aN) 
Blue 
straggler +— TO Main sequence turn off 
star Central H exhaustion 
1 
« WIS Main sequence | 
Core H burning | 
i= —— ee | 
O B A F G K M 


Spectral type 
(0) 


Figure 3. (a) Color-magnitude diagram of the globular cluster 
M3 and (b) schematic color-magnitude diagram of a typical 
globular cluster. 


The central H exhaustion corresponds quite precisely 
to the bluest and hottest point on the MS, usually called 
the turn-off (TO) point. The precise location of the TO 
depends on the stellar initial mass, and theoretical models 
show that both luminosity and temperature of the TO 
increase with increasing stellar mass. Since, in turn, the 
initial mass depends on the age (stars burn out central 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


H more and more slowly with decreasing mass), the TO 
is actually the ‘stellar clock’. Turning to the isochrones, 
since less massive stars are still in the MS phase, while 
more massive ones are in more advanced evolutionary 
stages, the upper MS becomes more and more depleted 
with increasing age, while the TO becomes fainter and 
cooler. A straightforward relation can thus be derived 
between luminosity of the TO point and age. This relation 
provides a unique, powerful tool for determining the age 
of the GCs. 

It should be pointed out that (a) the engine of the 
‘stellar clock’ relies on theoretical models and (b) any 
method for dating stellar populations is finally founded on 
this ‘stellar clock’. Were our understanding and running 
of this ‘clock’ incorrect, our description of the universe, as 
derived from the stars, would be in error. It should also be 
recalled that recent model calculations based on improved 
equation of state and radiative opacity, as well as the 
inclusion of element diffusion, have significant effects on 
both the luminosity of the TO, which is increased, and the 
MS lifetime, which is decreased with respect to previous 
‘classic’ models. 

Finally, the sharp MS TO observed in most clusters 
indicates that stars within individual GCs all formed 
roughly at the same time. The narrowness of the MS 
indicates that stars in a given GC all have very similar 
chemical composition, and also it constrains the fraction 
of binary stars within GCs. Unresolved binaries are in fact 
expected to produce a population just above the MS since 
the combined luminosity of the two stars exceeds that of 
a single star at the same color (see BINARY STARS IN GLOBULAR 
CLUSTERS). 


The red giant branch 

When the central fuel is exhausted, hydrogen starts 
burning in a thick shell which surrounds the growing 
helium core. A complex balancing between energy 
production and transfer, substantially driven by opacity, 
takes place. Core contraction and heating is accompanied 
by a progressive expansion of the outer envelope. The star 
cools down and brightens, owing to the larger and larger 
increase of the total radius, climbing along the red giant 
branch (RGB). 

During this phase the deepening of the surface 
convection may reach the internal He-enriched zone 
and bring some extra helium to the stellar surface. 
All canonical computations confirm that, because of 
convective mixing phenomena (dredge-up) during the 
RGB phase, the surface He abundance exceeds the original 
He abundance. This increase of the He abundance 
may have important consequences in the subsequent 
evolutionary stages. 

The comparison of the giant branches of different 
clusters has revealed that GCs of higher metallicity exhibit 
giant branches that are shallower and redder than those of 
low-metallicity clusters. The detailed astrophysics of the 
stars on the RGB is very complex, and the exact location 
of the RGB is dependent on details of the convective 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


processes within such stars commonly treated using the 
so-called mixing length (/) theory. 

At the tip of the RGB the temperature in the He-rich 
core has grown up enough (108 K) to ignite the central He 
burning, via the 3a reaction (la = 1 Henucleus = 2 protons 
+ 2 neutrons). Contrary to most of the other evolutionary 
stages, this ignition occurs on a very short time-scale (a 
few years or even less), and it is thus often referred to as 
the ‘He flash’. 


The horizontal branch 

After the He flash, the star quickly rearranges its structure 
and starts a quiescent He core burning phase, which will 
last for about 10° yr or so. In the CMD, the star jumps 
on the horizontal branch (HB) where the helium in the 
core is converted into carbon (C) and oxygen (O). Slightly 
afterwards, H burning re-ignites in a shell immediately 
outside the He core. The relative balancing between 
central He burning and H shell burning has important 
effects on both HB lifetime and star behavior. 

The precise location in luminosity and temperature of 
a star which arrives on the so-called zero-age HB (ZAHB) 
is driven by (at least) three parameters: the chemical 
composition of the envelope, the size of the He core mass 
at the He flash and the mass of the envelope (which was 
generally affected by mass loss during the previous RGB 
phase). 

At given metal abundance—the so-called ‘first 
parameter’—and helium content, the ZAHB becomes 
bluer and bluer (i.e. hotter and hotter) with decreasing 
stellar envelope mass. In turn, the position taken on the 
ZAHB by a given GC star will depend on the amount of 
mass lost during the RGB phase; the larger the mass lost, 
the bluer the ZAHB location. 

Given the absence of quantitative observational 
estimates and with the persistent lack of any reliable theory 
about mechanisms driving the mass loss, it is difficult to 
evaluate the amount of envelope actually lost by stars 
evolving along the RGB. To reproduce the observed HB 
morphologies (i.e. the color distribution of HB stars), it 
has become common procedure (a) to introduce a free 
parameter, which accounts for the whole mass loss process, 
and (b) to adopt an arbitrary dispersion in the total mass 
lost by individual stars. In fact, if no mass loss (or the same 
amount of mass loss) is assumed for stars of equal initial 
mass, the whole HB would collapse to a single clump, 
contrary to any observational evidence. Indeed, in order 
to reconcile theoretical He burning models with the color 
distribution of their observational counterparts, i.e. the HB 
stars in GCs, it seems conceivable that during the RGB 
phase stars lose up to 0.2Mo of their envelopes. However, 
mass loss affects only the very external layers of an RGB 
star, without altering the physical conditions in the core, 
where nuclear energy generation takes place. 

Theoretical models show that both the ZAHB 
luminosity and the temperature location of the star on 
the ZAHB increase with increasing helium abundance 
Y, while both quantities decrease with increasing metal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


content Z. On the other hand, since with increasing age 
the initial mass decreases, at fixed total mass loss the HB 
distribution will become bluer and bluer with aging GCs. 
This property has a very deep impact on the description of 
formation and evolution of the Galaxy as in many studies 
the HB morphology is actually adopted as a ‘secondary 
clock’ (see below) for dating the GCs. 

HB stars of appropriate mass may fall inside the so- 
called ‘instability strip’, also known as the ‘RR Lyrae gap’. 
The envelopes of stars living inside or simply passing 
through this narrow region of the CMD (see figure 3(b)) 
become unstable for radial pulsation. The HB star thus 
becomes a variable of RR Lyrae type, so named from 
the historical prototype of this class of variables. The 
frequency of such stars in GCs is so high that the presence 
of RR Lyrae variables within the ‘instability strip’ of the 
HB is a well-defining feature of the population II stars. 
According to the periods of their RR Lyraes, Galactic 
globulars can be separated into two distinct subsets, the 
two Oosterhoff groups. It has been shown that the 
Oosterhoff separation, often referred to as the ‘Oosterhoff 
effect’, reflects a difference in the metal abundance of the 
host clusters, with variables in metal-poor clusters having 
longer mean periods than those in the metal-rich ones. 

Since the HB is a bright and ‘horizontal’ feature of the 
CMD (hence, all its members have a very similar absolute 
magnitude), and since HB stars spend most of their HB 
lifetime at luminosities very close (0.1-0.2 mag) to their 
ZAHB luminosities, they are ‘standard candles’ to measure 
distances. RR Lyrae variables, in particular, are among the 
most used ‘classic’ standard candles of population II stellar 
systems. (See also HORIZONTAL-BRANCH STARS.) 


The asymptotic giant branch and the white dwarfs 
Eventually, when helium also vanishes in the central 
regions of the He core, the core contracts and He 
burning starts in a shell around it. The stellar structure, 
characterized at this stage by a carbon-oxygen core 
surrounded by a first He burning shell and by a second, 
more external, H burning shell, evolves upward in the 
CMD, asymptotically merging into the RGB during the 
asymptotic giant branch (AGB) phase. 

Most AGB stars exhibit significant mass loss in the 
form of stellar winds, exactly in the same vein as shown 
while evolving along the brightest part of the RGB. Other 
peculiarities include He shell flashes, believed to be a 
consequence of the He burning shell being spatially thin, 
which can cause the star to migrate briefly to the instability 
strip and to mix burnt material into the outer layers. This 
results in significant peculiarities in the abundance of some 
chemical elements, whose detection and measurement 
offer important tests of the global evolutionary theory, 
including mass loss. 

The normal AGB stage culminates, after the onset 
of thermal pulses and a phase of rapid mass loss or 
‘superwind’, with the star blowing off its outer layers until 
all that is left is a central hot wHITE DwarrF (WD) in the middle 
of a PLANETARY NEBULA. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eventually, the white dwarf becomes faint and cools 
down, ending its evolution along the WD cooling line, a 
sequence almost parallel but about 4 mag fainter than the 
MS. 


Blue stragglers 

Discovered first in M3 more than 40 yr ago by Allan 
Sandage, and until recently just peculiar objects detected 
in only one or two clusters, a large number of BLUE 
STRAGGLERS (BSs) are being discovered nowadays by the 
HST observations of the central regions of almost any GC. 
Although all stars above a certain mass and luminosity in 
a given cluster are expected to have evolved off the MS, 
yet the BSs seem to sit nodding on the bright extension of 
the MS (see figure 3(b)), as if they were loitering on their 
evolutionary path compared with the other members of 
the cluster. Since BSs always seem to be more centrally 
concentrated than all other visible stars in a given cluster, 
their masses are expected to be significantly higher than 
either RGB or normal MS stars, and this would explain 
their brighter location along the extension of the MS. Since 
they are still not evolved, although more massive than 
the TO stars, one has to explain their origin, which is 
commonly associated with binaries. BSs could originate 
from collisions of individual stars in the very crowded 
central regions of the cluster or could be the merger 
product of primordial binaries. Some BSs have actually 
been found to be members of eclipsing binary systems. 


Chemical composition 

Galactic GCs are old, metal-poor population II stellar 
objects with metal abundances usually in the range 
—0.7 dex < [Fe/H] < ~—2.5 dex (where [Fe/H] = 
log(Nge/Nu) — log(Nge/Nu)o and N is the number of 
atoms of the given element; our Sun has thus [Fe/H] = 
0.0). Although clusters almost as metal rich as the Sun 
(and perhaps even more) have been recently discovered 
near the Galactic center, the bulk of the GC population 
has metallicities around [Fe/H] = —1.3. The average 
metallicity of the GC system generally correlates with the 
total mass of the host galaxy; the bigger the galaxy, the 
richer the average GC. 

Acommonly accepted basic property of the stars ina 
given GC is that they all have about same age and chemical 
composition (at least primordial). 

While no indication has ever been put forward for any 
age variation among stars of a single cluster, there is now 
gathering observational evidence that small differences in 
chemical composition are perhaps present. It is still a 
matter of debate whether they are primordial or due to 
evolution. 

Besides the use of spectroscopic observations at 
intermediate and high resolution, direct information on 
the chemical properties of a given cluster can also be 
derived from its CMD. In fact, the location and intrinsic 
width of the main branches in the CMD both depend 
on chemical abundance. In particular, as a general rule, 
an increase in the helium fraction leads to bluer colors, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


while an increase of the metal content leads to redder 
colors. Moreover, any significant abundance spread yields 
a spread-out of the stars along the various branches 
with respect to the mean ridge line, which is different 
from one branch to another and increases with increasing 
abundance variation. 

The observed color dispersion of the MS in the 
best-studied clusters implies upper limits to star-to-star 
variations in helium abundance of 0.03 dex (if dispersion is 
attributed to He variations only, but differential reddening, 
metallicity spreads, blending and intrinsic binarity may 
also contribute). This figure compares with an overall 
helium abundance of about 0.23-0.25 (mass fraction). 

Similar reasoning can be applied to the giant branch. 
Here, since elements with low ionization potential such 
as Fe, Si and Mg significantly affect the opacity in the 
stellar envelopes, star-to-star variations would result in a 
color dispersion of the giants. Observations show that, 
with the exception of w Cen which clearly displays a 
wide giant branch, compatible with abundance variations 
up to a factor of 10 at least, the vast majority of the 
Galactic GCs have quite narrow giant branches and, in 
turn, small intrinsic variations in the abundance of iron- 
peak elements. 

Spectroscopy of giants is potentially a more powerful 
technique to detect metallicity variations. However, such 
observations require high resolution and are highly time 
consuming on large telescopes. The still poor samples 
already available actually confirm the general indications 
of the CMDs. Only w Cen (the biggest and most elliptical 
Galactic GC) and perhaps M22 show a dispersion in 
[Fe/H]. 

One reason why metal homogeneity within GCs is so 
remarkable is that galaxies, including dwarf spheroidals 
of integrated luminosities comparable with GCs, all 
show quite wide dispersions in chemical abundances, 
suggesting that star formation probably occurred in a 
different way and that self-enrichment was at work much 
more efficiently. 

Despite the homegeneity in [Fe/H] within stars 
of individual clusters, there are significant star-to-star 
variations in the abundances of other heavy elements. The 
best famous are the CN variations, known among GC stars 
for many years. The central question is whether these 
variations are primordial star-to-star differences built in 
when GCs formed or whether they result from stellar 
evolutionary processes. 

Stellar evolution is expected to produce some abun- 
dance variations among stars at different evolutionary 
phases. If the convective envelope of an RGB star reaches 
sufficiently deep inside the star, it mixes material which 
underwent CNO processing up to the surface of the gi- 
ant. This theoretical prediction is now supported by 
many observational results, although observational evi- 
dence would require more mixing than currently predicted 
by theory. 

Other elements also exhibit abundance variations in 
the GCs. The [O/Fe] ratio in cluster giants sometimes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


shows considerable depletion compared with halo field 
stars, which are enhanced by a factor of several relative 
to the solar abundance. However, it is still not clear 
whether there is a real systematic ehnancement of [O/Fe] 
in GCs with respect to the solar fraction, and, if any, how it 
varies with varying total metal abundance. At present, 
metal-poor clusters with [Fe/H] = —2.0 dex seem to 
have approximately [O/Fe] = +0.3 dex, while this figure 
perhaps decreases to about 0 at [Fe/H] = —0.7 dex. 

Finally, it should be mentioned that Al, Na and Mg 
show variations which seem to be hardly compatible with 
just evolutionary processes. In particular, Al and Na tend 
to be overabundant in GCs, show wide variations and 
are correlated with each other and anti-correlated with 
[O/Fe]. If these Al and Na variations are primordial, their 
anticorrelation with [O/Fe] suggests that CNO variations 
are also primordial, and this may have a deep impact 
on the description and understanding of star and cluster 
formation. 


The horizontal branch morphology and the 
second parameter’ problem 
The color (temperature) distribution of the cluster stars 
along the HB is often referred to as the ‘HB morphology’ 
of the cluster. The number of stars within (V) and on both 
red (R) and blue (B) sides of the ‘RR Lyrae gap’ describes 
the overall HB morphology of a given cluster through the 
parameter 
B-—R 
= Be aR: 


Observations show that Galactic GCs exhibit a fairly 
broad variety of HB morphologies, with the C parameter 
ranging from —1.0, for clusters where only the red portion 
of the HB is populated, to +1.0, for clusters with stars only 
to the blue of the instability strip. 

Since the color (temperature) of HB stars depends 
primarily on the stellar metal content—HB stars in metal- 
rich clusters are redder than those in metal-poor clusters 
as a result of the higher opacity in their envelopes and 
of higher initial masses (at fixed age)—metallicity is 
commonly considered the ‘first parameter’ driving the HB 
morphology. 

However, metallicity variations alone cannot account 
for the extension in effective temperature and for the 
differences observed between HBs. In fact, were the HB 
morphology strictly driven just by metallicity, both the 
high chemical homegeneity among cluster members and 
the fine tuning of the TO masses would lead to a highly 
peaked clump of HB stars. The common evidence that 
most of the observed HBs display a wide coverage in color 
(only very metal-rich clusters show in fact a red stubby 
HB) suggests that mass loss affects in rather different ways 
GC stars of identical initial mass, no matter whatever 
mechanism(s) drives it. 

On the other hand, although the HB morphology— 
metallicity correlation accounts for a large part of the 
observed HBs and most clusters exhibit a ‘blueing’ of 
their HBs with decreasing metal abundance, several other 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


clusters do not obey this general rule. This is the essence of 
the long-standing historical ‘second parameter problem’: 
another parameter besides metallicity must be at work on 
the HB of the GCs. 

Age, helium abundance and metal abundance ratios 
are the ‘classical’ second parameter candidates most often 
invoked to explain the observed HB morphologies. 

Age has long been claimed to be the second parameter, 
but with no unanimous consensus among the astronomical 
community as not all second parameter clusters seem 
to be explicable in terms of age variations. Theoretical 
calculation shows that the average mass of a stars evolving 
onto the HB decreases with increasing cluster age. Since 
the He core mass is roughly constant for ages older than 
~10 Gyr, the mass of the envelope decreases with age. 
Hence, at fixed metallicity, older cluster ages would imply 
less massive HB stars, with increasingly thin evelopes and, 
in turn, bluer HBs. If age is the second parameter, the HB 
morphology could be used as a ‘secondary clock’, besides 
the TO luminosity, to test the existence of possible age 
gradients with varying distance from the Galactic center 
and the metallicity. This approach has been widely used 
in recent years to show that the GC system in the Milky 
Way is perhaps formed by different subgroups: (a) the 
halo GCs, possibly further subdivided into young and 
old, metal poor and spherically distributed throughout the 
wide halo; (b) the disk GCs, of intermediate metallicity, 
somehow kinematically related to the disk; (c) the bulge 
GCs, in general fairly metal rich (almost solar) and 
preferentially located in the central regions of the Galaxy; 
(d) the (possibly) captured GCs, originally members of 
disrupted or tidally interacting satellites of the Milky Way. 

Variations in the helium content, with increasing 
helium abundance producing bluer HBs, could possibly 
explain some of the observed HB morphologies. On the 
other hand, also a variation in the CNO abundance (at 
fixed [Fe/H] content) would affect the HB morphology, 
with increasing CNO abundance yielding redder HBs, 
since elements of the CNO group directly control the 
opacity and energy generation within HB stars. 

Also many other physical phenomena could affect the 
HB star properties. For instance, the stellar core rotation, 
if increased, would probably lead the star (a) to have a 
higher He core mass, consequently (b) to climb up brighter 
portions of the RGB and (c) if mass loss increases with 
increasing luminosity, as it appears to, to suffer in turn a 
larger mass loss, yielding bluer HBs. 

Environmental conditions have also been shown 
to have some impact on the evolution of GC stellar 
populations. In particular, there are observational 
indications suggesting that higher cluster densities and 
concentrations would favor bluer HBs since stellar mass 
loss could be enhanced, because of the increased stellar 
interactions. 

In conclusion, there is growing observational evi- 
dence that just a single ‘second parameter’ may be insuf- 
ficient to explain the observed HBs and that a comprehen- 
sive understanding of the full range of the observed HB 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


morphologies may require a ‘third parameter’, at least, al- 
though age is perhaps a dominant parameter in most GCs. 

In this respect, a distinction could be made between 
a ‘global’ second parameter ruling the HB morphology 
and second parameters most likely determining the HB 
morphology of individual clusters. The former deals 
with the Milky Way globulars as a system and aims at 
describing the ‘global’ properties of the HB morphology 
compared with the other clusters of similar metallicity. 
In particular, it has been found that HB morphology 
correlates with Galactocentric distance, suggesting that 
the intrinsic quantity or phenomenon which causes the 
anomalous HB star distribution at that metallicity is also 
varying with varying cluster location within the Galaxy. 
Several authors have concluded that, of the various second 
parameter candidates, only age differences can reproduce 
the global second parameter effect and, at the same 
time, successfully reproduce the observed properties of 
RR Lyraes and the MS TOs. On the other hand, most 
observed HBs present special features (gaps, clumps, 
distortions) which naturally require the existence of ‘non- 
global’ effects, which relevance could also vary from star 
to star in a cluster. 

In conclusion, any choice is uncertain at this stage, 
and the whole issue of the ‘second parameter’ effect is still 
matter of hot discussion and tireless study. 


Absolute and relative ages 

One of the most frequently asked questions in astronomy 
is, how old is the universe we live in? Since GCs (the 
most metal-poor ones, in particular) were formed during 
the very early times of the Galaxy, and represent the 
oldest stellar systems for which age can be estimated fairly 
accurately, their absolute ages set a very stringent lower 
limit on the universe’s age itself, since the universe cannot 
be younger than the oldest objects it contains. 

The observational parameters required to estimate the 
absolute age of a given GC are the apparent magnitude and 
color of the TO, along with the distance to the cluster, its 
helium and metal content and the interstellar reddening 
along the line of sight. This allows the calculation of 
the absolute magnitude of the MS TO (the ‘observational 
stellar clock’). Once the absolute magnitude of the MS TO 
has been determined, ages can be estimated by comparison 
with appropriate model isochrones (the ‘theoretical clock’) 
properly transformed into the observational plane. 

The primary source of uncertainty in the absolute 
ages derived from the luminosity of the MS TO is our 
poor knowledge about distances to clusters, although 
uncertainties in quantities such as metallicity, reddening 
and elemental abundance ratios must also be taken into 
account. It should be remembered that errors of 0.07 mag 
in the absolute luminosity of the MS TO or 0.01 mag in 
its color bring a corresponding error in the derived age of 
about 1 billion years. 

Several methods exist to measure distances to GCs. 
Until recently, all of them were uncertain at about a 20% 
level. The effects of model uncertainties on the derived age 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


estimates are more difficult to assess as they are dependent 
(with different weights) on parameters and calibrations 
which are not directly observable (reaction rates, opacities, 
treatments of convection and mixing, basic input physics, 
etc). 

A recent attempt to quantitatively evaluate the global 
uncertainty of both observations and stellar models 
concluded that the age of the oldest clusters lies in the 
range 11-21 Gyr (Chaboyer et al 1996). These figures do 
not allow us to discriminate among different cosmological 
models. 

Nearby subdwarfs, whose distances can be deter- 
mined to high accuracy through trigonometric parallax, 
provide the best standard candles to estimate GC dis- 
tances, especially after the results yielded by the ESA’s 
astrometrical satellite Hipparcos. The magnitude offset be- 
tween the observed cluster MS and the absolute-calibrated 
MS of the local subdwarfs (assumed to be ‘bona fide’ repre- 
sentatives of GC subdwarfs of the same metal abundance) 
eventually gives the distance to the cluster. 

Before HIPPARCOS, the available sample of local sub- 
dwarfs with known metallicity and accurate PARALLAXES 
was extremely poor. In early 1997, HIPPARCOS substan- 
tially increased the observational database, bringing the 
number of subdwarfs with very accurate parallaxes to 
about 900 stars, 30 of which have metallicities compara- 
ble with those of the GCs ([Fe/H] < —1.0). The enlarged 
sample of subdwarfs and the use of new metal abundances 
in the same metallicity scale as used for GC stars have led 
to an almost halving of the uncertainty in derived cluster 
distances and, in turn, ages. 

The discussion on the ages of the galactic GCs has 
been stirred up because of the global modifications of the 
astronomical distance scale implied by the HIPPARCOS 
results, which suggest that many Galactic objects, 
including the GCs, may be at distances about 10% larger 
from us than previously thought. The intrinsic luminosity 
of their TO stars should thus be about 20% brighter and 
they should also be roughly 15% younger, given the quoted 
relationship between TO luminosity and age. 

The latest estimates yield therefore an age of 12-14 
billion years for most of the GCs, and 13-14 billion years is 
perhaps the age of the most metal-poor and (presumably) 
oldest GC: M92. 

An independent check of the distances derived from 
the subdwarf technique is absolutely necessary. A 
promising alternative is offered by the use of the WD 
cooling sequence. This technique relies on the matching 
of local WDs to WDs observed in GCs, as a matter of fact 
so exploiting, to a much fainter level, the same technique 
used with the subdwarfs. With the refurbished HST, it 
has become technically feasible to observe WDs in GCs. 
The first result from this technique for the GC NGC 
6752 was obtained by Renzini et al in 1996. They find a 
distance consistent with other estimates, and derived ages 
of around 15 Gyr. 

Although not totally incompatible, absolute ages 
derived for GCs in the pre-HIPPARCOS era were poorly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globular Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


consistent with most cosmological age determinations, 
such as those obtained through measurements of the 
Hubble constant. However, if the latest estimates of 
the GC ages obtained via HIPPARCOS parallaxes for 
the local subdwarfs are correct, the problems of the 
compatibility between the so-called ‘stellar route’ to 
cosmology and alternative routes are reduced, and would 
possibly disappear. 

Relative ages of GCs are more reliable than absolute 
ages, primarily because determinations of age differences 
are less sensitive to stellar models and, second, and 
most important, because they do not depend on the 
assumed cluster distance. Their use allows one to address 
outstanding questions concerning the process of formation 
of our Galaxy. In particular, if we could define a reliable 
age-metallicity relation, as well as determine a variation 
of age with Galactocentric distance, we would be able to 
make a choice between the scenario suggested first by 
Eggen, Lynden-Bell and Sandage (1962), who think that 
the Galaxy was formed in a rapid, monolithic collapse (in 
a few 108 yr), and that proposed by Searle and Zinn (1978), 
who rather believe that the Galaxy formed much more 
gradually through the accretion of independent fragments 
(with masses ranging from 10’ Mo up to 10° Ma), over a few 
billion years or so. The detection of age differences among 
the Milky Way’s GCs would in fact provide stringent 
constraints on the time scale and mechanism of formation 
of the Galactic halo. 

Several methods have been employed so far to derive 
GC relative ages. 

The most widely used technique exploits the 
difference in luminosity between MS TO and HB. Since the 
core mass of GC stars on the HB is roughly constant, the HB 
luminosity is almost independent of cluster age. On the 
contrary, the MS TO luminosity decreases with increasing 
the age, so the magnitude difference between the MS TO 
and the HB provides an estimate of the age of the GCs. 

This method is elegant and simple in principle; 
however, it does suffer from several problems. The basic 
observational limitation is that while it works nicely for 
clusters having HBs well populated on both sides of the 
instability strip, it can hardly be applied when only red 
stubby HBs or just blue HB tails are present in the CMD. 
The latter case is particularly worrying since, if age is 
the second parameter, metal-poor clusters with blue HBs 
could be the oldest ones. Asecond basic problem is the still 
poor accuracy in our knowledge of the absolute magnitude 
of RR Lyrae stars (and thus of the HB (to yield absolute 
ages)) and of its dependence on metallicity. 

The magnitude versus metallicity relation for RR 
Lyraes is usually described as: My(RR) = a[Fe/H] + 
b. The values currently obtained for a cover the range 
0.15-0.35 mag dex"!. This uncertainty is large enough 
to prevent any reliable determination of the GC age 
distribution since an error in the absolute magnitude of 
~0.20 mag implies a 2.5 Gyr error in the age. Furthermore, 
an estimate of the absolute age, with an error less than 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1 Gyr, based on the RR Lyrae variables as absolute standard 
candles, requires knowledge of b to better than 0.07 mag. 

The detailed comparison of the CMDs offers an 
alternative technique to deriving relative ages for GCs of 
similar metallicity. In fact, the relative distance of the 
clusters can be measured by simply superimposing the 
ridge lines of the main branches in the observed CMDs, 
after taking into account any differential interstellar 
reddening. If clusters of different metallicity are 
compared, further corrections (often uncertain) must be 
drawn from stellar atmosphere models. Once the best 
matching is achieved, however, the difference in the 
magnitude of the MS TO between the two compared 
clusters yields a straightforward measure of the age 
difference, if any. 

Recent analyses of the relative ages of the best- 
observed Galactic GCs seem to indicate in general the 
existence of a small (less than 1 Gyr) spread. However, 
there is now also compelling evidence for larger age 
differences between some globulars. Probably the best- 
established cases are Ruprecht 106, Palomar 12, Terzan 
7 and Arp 2. They (especially the first two) appear 
to be around 3 Gyr younger than other GCs of similar 
metallicity. It is unknown whether they are truly 
exceptions or whether other ‘young’ clusters lie still 
undetected. They could perhaps originally belong to 
a Satellite galaxy tidally disrupted and captured by the 
Milky Way, but further confirmation is necessary. 

In conclusion, the current status of our knowledge 
about the age of the Galactic GCs is consistent with an 
age distribution in which most Milky Way globulars are 
quite uniformally old (with ages of about 13 Gyr), and the 
oldest ones as old as 14 Gyr, but also with a few globulars 
significantly younger (by about 2-3 Gyr). 


Bibliography 

Chaboyer B, Demarque P, Kerman P J and Krauss M 1996 
Science 271 957 

Eggen O J, Lynden-Bell D and Sandage A R 1962 
Astrophys. J. 136 748 

Renzini A et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 465 L23 

Searle Land Zinn R J 1978 Astrophys. J. 225 357 


Flavio Fusi-Pecci and Gisella Clementini 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Globule 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Globule 


A small, round dark nebula thought to represent a stage 
in the collapse of a concentration in a molecular cloud 
toward a protostar. They range in mass from about 1 to 
1000 or more solar masses, and in size from about 10000 
AU to 3 light-years, and are visible in silhouette against 
bright nebulae such as the Rosette Nebula, or against 
bright Milky Way starfields. Bart Bok was the first to 
suggest that they might be the precursors of protostars; 
they are sometimes called Bok globules. What appear to 
be protostars have been detected within some globules by 
orbiting infrared telescopes. 


See also: Cometary globule. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Goddard Space Flight Center 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Goddard Space Flight Center 


The Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), in Greenbelt, 
MD, named for Dr Robert H Goddard, a pioneer in rocket 
research, was established in 1959. Since that time, GSFC 
has played a major role in space and Earth science. 

Goddard’s fundamental mission is to expand knowl- 
edge of the Earth and its environment, the solar system 
and the universe through observations from space. The 
center is committed to excellence in scientific research and 
investigation, the development of space systems and the 
advancement of essential technologies. 

Approximately 11740 people work at the Goddard 
Space Flight Center at all of its sites. Goddard has 
personnel and facilities capable of creating, building, 
testing, launching and operating various satellite projects 
in support of Earth science, space science and advanced 
technology programs. 

Goddard’s Greenbelt campus includes the Earth 
Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS) 
facility built in 1995, and the Earth Systems Science 
Building built in 1998. 

The EOSDIS facility serves as a key data-retrieval 
node in the Earth Observing System communications 
system, as well as a distribution center for Earth data from 
numerous spacecraft and instrument sources, such as the 
Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer and Tropical Rainfall 
Measuring Mission. 

The Earth Systems Science Building houses the 
laboratories of Goddard’s Earth Sciences Directorate: the 
Laboratory for Atmospheres, Laboratory for Terrestrial 
Physics and Laboratory for Hydrospheric Processes. 

To support NASA’s Space Science Enterprise, God- 
dard leads the mission of space-based physics and as- 
tronomy to create opportunities for conducting research 
through a broad variety of flight opportunities. Goddard 
promotes the development of advanced technology de- 
signed to enhance scientific capabilities at an affordable 
cost. 

Goddard provides agency leadership to advance next 
generation spacecraft, sensor and instrument technology. 
Goddard scientists and engineers have gained significant 
expertise in areas such as optics development, cryogenics, 
microelectronics, x-ray astronomy, Earth observation and 
information systems. 

For further information see 
http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Goddard, Robert Hutchings (1882-1945) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Goddard, Robert Hutchings 
(1882-1945) 


American rocket pioneer, whose achievements in rocketry, 
sometimes in the face of official disapproval or ridicule, 
form a long list. He was the first to prove, by static 
test, that a rocket will indeed work in a vacuum—that it 
needs no air to push against. He received a US patent on 
his idea for a multistage rocket (1914). In the document 
(1920) which laid out his life’s work, entitled ‘A method of 
reaching extreme altitudes’, he outlined methods of raising 
weather-recording instruments higher than balloons and 
developed the mathematical theories of rocket propulsion 
to reach high altitudes. He foresaw the possibility of 
a rocket reaching the Moon and suggested that it could 
explode flash powder there to signify its arrival. This was 
the most dramatic, eye-catching part of the report, and 
was widely (and sceptically) reported in both the USA and 
Germany, where it coincided with the surge of interest 
in rockets there. He developed and fired the world’s 
first liquid fuel rocket (gasoline/petrol and liquid-oxygen 
fuelled) in 1926, and was the first to launch a scientific 
payload (barometer and camera) in a rocket flight (1929). 
He made various technical advances in the use of pumps, 
gyros and other rocket mechanisms, as evidenced by the 
200 patents in his name. NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center, located near Washington, DC, is named after him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gold, Thomas (1920-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gold, Thomas (1920-) 


Astronomer born in Vienna, Austria, emigrated to Britain 
and then the USA. Noted for provocative, imaginative 
and sometimes wholly incorrect theories, he proposed 
the now discredited steady-state theory of cosmology 
(with BONDI and HOYLE), in which matter was continuously 
created to maintain the density of the Universe while it 
expanded. At Cornell University, he directed the Center 
for Radio Physics and Space Research, where he named the 
magnetosphere and studied pulsars, proposing that they 
were rotating magnetic neutron stars, as now thought to 
be correct. Gold caused some concern for the safety of US 
astronauts when he incorrectly theorized that the Apollo 
lunar lander would sink into meters of lunar dust. He 
is at the present time offering an unconventional view of 
terrestrial carbon fuel deposits (coal, oil), that they are not 
of biological origin but are cosmic carbon welling up from 
the Earth’s central regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Goldberg, Leo (1918-87) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Goldberg, Leo (1918-87) 


Astronomer, born in New York City of Polish origin. 
Became director of the Kitt Peak National Observatory in 
Tucson. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Goodricke, John (1764-86) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Goodricke, John (1764-86) 


Born of English parents in the Netherlands, a deaf-mute, 
he discovered in 1782 that Algol, identified as a variable 
star by G MONTANARI in 1669, was an eclipsing binary and 
estimated its period. He also discovered the variability of 
Delta Cephei. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gould Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gould Belt 


Most stars in the solar neighborhood younger than about 
60 million years are located ina flattened structure of about 
700 parsec (pc) in size, surrounding the Sun. This structure 
also contains much interstellar atomic and molecular gas, 
and is called Gould’s Belt. It is inclined by nearly 20° 
relative to the general stellar population of the Galactic 
plane, which has an average age of several billion years. 
The properties of the Gould Belt can be used to trace the 
recent star formation history in our part of the Galaxy. 


Discovery 

Sir John Herschel noted in 1847 that the brightest stars in 
the sky are not arranged symmetrically about the Galactic 
plane. From observations made in South Africa (see 
HERSCHEL FAMILY) he concluded that the Galactic equator 
is crossed by a zone of bright stars which is delineated 
by the southern constellations Orion, Canis Major, Carina, 
Puppis, Vela, Crux (the Southern Cross), Centaurus, Lupus 
and Scorpius. The great circle which connects the stars 
é Orionis (Alnilam) and a Crucis (Acrux) defines the axis of 
this zone of stars. Benjamin Gould pointed out in 1874 that 
the feature observed by Herschel is traced in the northern 
sky by the constellations of Taurus, Perseus, Cassiopeia, 
Cepheus, Cygnus and Lyra, although less conspicuously. 
Gould studied the distribution of these stars in detail and 
concluded that together they define a great circle with an 
inclination of 20° to the Galactic equator (see figure 1). 
This apparent distribution on the sky implies the presence 
of a flattened structure, with the Sun located in its interior, 
which is nowadays known as the Gould Belt. 


Stars 

The stellar spectral classification scheme which was 
developed shortly after the discovery of Gould’s Belt 
showed that most visible stars in the Belt were of early 
spectral type (O and B type stars). When the principles of 
STELLAREVOLUTION were established in the middle of the 20th 
century, it became clear that early-type stars are massive 
and young (less than a few tens of Myr). At the same time 
the Russian astronomer Ambartsumian recognized that 
groups of O and B stars, OB ASSOCIATIONS, are gravitationally 
unbound. These groups therefore expand and quickly 
dissolve into the Galactic disk star population, which led 
Ambartsumian to postulate that the observed associations 
must be young. Thus, both O and B stars in associations 
and the associations themselves were formed recently 
(~10-100 Myr ago). 

The realization that most O and B stars reside in OB 
associations immediately led to the conclusion that many 
of the nearby OB associations are connected with Gould’s 
Belt. Figure 2 shows that the Scorpio-Centaurus—Lupus— 
Crux (Sco OB2), Orion (Ori OB1), Perseus (Per OB2), and 
Lacerta (Lac OB1) associations lie in the Gould Belt. These 
groups have typical ages of less than ~15 Myr. 

Many detailed photometric, radial velocity and 
astrometric studies of stars in the Solar neighborhood 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


have been carried out in order to investigate the existence 
and characteristics of the Gould Belt. It was found 
that stars within 500-1000 pc of the Sun older than 
~60 Myr generally tend to be distributed symmetrically 
with respect to the Galactic plane, while ~90% of the stars 
of spectral type O, B and A younger than 30 Myr, and 
~70% of early-type stars with ages between 30 and 60 Myr, 
define a distinct spatial and kinematical feature within 
the MILKY WAY GALAXY. The Gould Belt stars are distributed 
in a flattened elliptic structure with a semi-major axis of 
~360 pc and a semiminor axis of ~210 pc, which is tilted 
by ~20° with respect to the Galactic plane. The distances 
of the Gould Belt stars indicate that its three-dimensional 
structure is not a thin ring but rather resembles a ‘disk 
with a hole’. The center of the Gould Belt is located 
~170 pc from the Sun in the direction (¢, b) ~ (130°, —15°), 
so that the Sun is located inside the Gould Belt. The 
ascending node of the ring lies in the direction of € ~ 
280°. The kinematics of the Gould Belt stars, which was 
recently much improved with the addition of astrometric 
data from the Hipparcos satellite, cannot be explained by 
differential galactic rotation alone but shows evidence for 
an additional expansion and rotation of the system as a 
whole. 

Recently it was found that Gould’s Belt is also 
associated with young low-mass stars. These stars are 
bright in x-rays, and ROSAT satellite observations made 
in 1998 show that they outline the same inclined flattened 
structure as observed in the early-type stars. Figure 3 
shows the distribution of these low-mass stars on the sky; 
the Gould Belt as determined from the early-type stars is 
also indicated in this figure. The total stellar mass of the 
Gould Belt is estimated to be at least a few times 10° solar 
masses. 


Interstellar matter 

STAR FORMATION is an inefficient process; less than half of 
the available gas is generally converted into stars. This 
implies that recently formed stars should still be associated 
with copious amounts of interstellar matter. Indeed, many 
nearby molecular cloud complexes (e.g. the Great Rift 
stretching from Ophiuchus through Aquila to Cygnus, and 
the Orion and Perseus molecular clouds) are related to 
the recent formation of Gould’s Belt (see also figure 2); 
Herschel already recognized the relation of the Orion 
Nebula to the Gould Belt. The molecular gas in Gould’s 
Belt interacts with the recently formed massive stars: 
(1) these stars illuminate nearby gas and dust resulting 
in REFLECTION NEBULAE, and (2) COsMIC RAYS from supernovae 
produce high-energy GAMMA RAYS through the interaction 
with the gas. Measurements by the ESA COS-B satellite 
in the 1970s and the IRAS infrared satellite in the 1980s 
indeed revealed that the distribution of bright stars in 
Gould’s Belt is correlated with high-energy gamma rays 
and nearby reflection nebulae, respectively. The latter 
correlation had already been noted in the 1920s by Hubble, 
who found, unaware of their true nature, that nearby 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gould Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


North Gal. Pole 


2 


ae 


goes 


South Gal. Pole 


Figure 1. The distribution in GALACTIC COORDINATES of young stars (spectral type B) brighter than visual magnitude 5.25. These stars are 
visible to the naked eye. The curved solid line labeled ‘Gould Belt’ depicts a great circle inclined at 20° to the Galactic equator. The Belt 
is most conspicuous at its ascending node, which is in the southern celestial sky. 


reflection nebulae (at the time simply called ‘large diffuse 
nebulae’) are distributed on the sky along the Gould Belt. 

There is also ample evidence for atomic gas associated 
with the Gould Belt. Soon after the prediction of the 
hydrogen 21 cm line transition by Van de Hulst in 1944, 
and the first detection of interstellar neutral hydrogen 
(H J) in 1951 by Ewen and Purcell, Heeschen and Lilley 
observed the galactic center and anti-center regions. In 
the late 1920s Oort and B Lindblad had proposed a model 
which assumed that gas follows circular orbits around 
the Galactic center in a thin disk. Therefore, Heeschen 
and Lilley expected to find HI gas only at low Galactic 
latitudes (|b| < 5°) and with radial velocities equal to 
zero km s~! with respect to the local standard of rest. To 
their surprise, they found significant amounts of H I gas 
at (€, b) ~ (0°, 20°) and (£, b) ~ (180°, —20°) moving with 
radial velocities of ~ +5 kms-!. This result provided the 
first evidence that HI gas is associated with the early-type 
stars in Gould’s Belt (cf figure 1). 

Firm evidence for the association of neutral gas with 
Gould’s Belt was presented in 1967 by P Lindblad. Using 
the Dwingeloo Telescope he identified several distinct 
low-velocity-dispersion components in the low-latitude 
H I distribution in the direction towards the Galactic 
anticenter. Inspired by Blaauw’s idea that the early- 
type stars in Gould’s Belt form an expanding system, 
Lindblad showed that the velocity—longitude data for one 
of these local peculiar H I components (feature A) could 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


roughly be modeled as a ballistically expanding gas ring 
(Lindblad’s Ring) with the Sun located off-center in its 
interior. Later investigations expanded Lindblad’s data 
set to include other longitude ranges and improved the 
quality of the data. These studies confirmed Lindblad’s 
original hypothesis. The total mass of the interstellar 
matter associated with the Belt is estimated to be a few 
million solar masses. 


Origin and evolution 
In order to understand the stellar and gaseous content of 
Gould’s Belt as one physical system all observational facts 
presented in the previous sections must be accounted for 
by one consistent formation and evolution scenario. It 
is thought that Gould’s Belt is the result of a large-scale 
star formation event which started with the passage of the 
Carina SPIRAL ARM. This arm is currently at a distance of 
~4 kpc from the Sun along the Solar circle at € ~ 280° 
and passed a large gaseous condensation in the Solar 
neighborhood (a giant molecular cloud) roughly 60 Myr 
ago. This passage triggered star formation, resulting in the 
birth of the Cassiopeia—Taurus OB association and @ Persei 
cluster (figure 4, panel 1). Both groups have similar ages 
and kinematics. 

Based on the present-day stellar content of the Cas— 
Tau association Blaauw estimated that roughly 15 semi- 
simultaneous supernova explosions must have occurred 
shortly after its formation. The energy output of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gould Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mon 


Col 121 


@ vel oe a0 ue 


Vela Sheet 


Chamaeleon’ 
Coal Sack 
G317-4 


Lupus 
p Oph 


Cam OBI 


"sr Cepheus 


” 


* at 


Figure 2. OB associations and molecular clouds near the Sun, projected onto the Galactic plane. The Sun is at the center of the broken 
lines which give the principal directions in Galactic longitude, ¢. The size of the black-filled circles represents the projected dimension 
of the associations. The gray-filled circles represent molecular clouds; the circle radii are proportional to the cube roots of the cloud 
masses and are close to the clouds’ actual radii. The distribution of small dots indicates a schematic and simple model of the gas 
distribution at low latitudes in Gould’s Belt. Adapted from de Zeeuw et al (1999 Astron. J. 117 354-99) and Dame et al (1987 Astrophys. J. 


322 706-20). 


SUPERNOVAE, combined with the stellar winds of other 
massive stars, was sufficient to clear the association of 
its parental gas and create a rapidly expanding hydrogen 
shell (figure 4, panel 2). This initially spherical shell 
traveled through the interstellar medium while sweeping 
up and compressing gas and dust near the Galactic 
plane (Lindblad’s Ring), leaving behind a cavity in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


molecular cloud. The interaction between the shell and 
the interstellar medium caused the expansion velocity of 
the shell to decrease slowly. The effects of the Galactic 
tidal field gradually deformed the shell’s circular shape 
into an elliptical one (figure 4, panel 3). In the direction 
perpendicular to the Galactic plane, the shell did not 
encounter much resistance, with the result that it broke 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gould Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


30° 


Oph-Scorpius 


on 4 


SS 
— cal 
| a. 


= 


02 


a ae < 


stars/deg’ 
1 


| 


0.1 


Chamaeleon 


0.01 


Figure 3. The all-sky distribution in Galactic coordinates of ~8600 x-ray-bright low-mass young stars identified by the ROSAT satellite 
(small black dots). The gray scale represents the surface density of these stars on a logarithmic scale from 0.01 to 1 star per square 
degree (see gray-scale coding bar). The white broken line indicates the Gould Belt (see also figure 1). Circles denote some nearby 
young Galactic clusters and star forming regions. Adapted from Guillout et al (1998 Astron. Astrophys. 334 540-4). A color version of 


this figure is reproduced as Color Plate 19. 


open allowing the hot gas in its interior to blow out of 
the plane into the lower galactic halo through a so-called 
Galactic fountain. 

After ~45 Myr the physical conditions of the gas 
and dust (density and temperature) in the shell were 
suitable for the formation of stars. Low-mass stars 
formed throughout the entire shell (figure 4, panel 3) 
while star CLusTERS and OB associations formed in dense 
clumps. These clumps are the result of fragmentation of 
the hydrogen shell. The new (second) generation of stars 
currently defines the Gould Belt (figure 4, panel 4, and 
figure 2). The observed motions of these stars still bear the 
signature of the expanding parental gas shell. Whereas 
the stars continued their expansion unobstructed since 
their birth, the gas shell continued to slow down owing to 
braking forces. Observations indeed show that the Gould 
Belt stars have radial velocities which are slightly larger 
than the +5 kms“! gas velocities. 

The most conspicuous stellar complexes in Gould’s 
Belt are the OB associations Sco OB2, Ori OB1, Per OB2 
and Lac OB1. These aggregates themselves have already 
induced the formation of a third generation of stars (e.g. 
p Ophiuchus, Orion Nebula Cluster, IC 348). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Open issues 

The evolutionary history of Gould’s Belt presented in 
the previous section is a simplified representation of 
reality and some complications remain that have not been 
addressed. 


e Star formation in the expanding shell influences its 
density and velocity structure because of, e.g., local 
bubbles blown by the supernovae and stellar winds of 
the second generation of massive stars. Examples of 
such local bubbles are the Orion—Eridanus superbubble 
and the shells around Sco OB2, Col 121, Per OB2 and Lac 
OB1 (see, e.g., figure 5 and figure 3.15 in Poppel (1997)). 


e High-galactic-latitude observations show infalling gas 
near the Galactic Poles. This gas was originally blown 
out of the plane of the Galaxy (Galactic fountain) and is 
now falling back on a collision course with the Gould 
Belt itself. Such collisions can produce disturbances of 
the expanding shell, e.g. the North Celestial Pole Loop. 


e The presence of several large dark cloud complexes, 
notably the Taurus molecular cloud and Pleiades cloud, 
inside Lindblad’s Ring cannot be explained if the 
expanding shell encountered these clouds in the past. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gould Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Schematic representation of the formation of Gould’s Belt. Sixty Myr ago the Cassiopeia—Taurus (Cas—Tau) association 
formed inside a giant molecular cloud (panel 1). The stellar winds of the massive stars and the supernovae in Cas—Tau cleared the 
association from its primordial gas creating an expanding shell sweeping up material of the molecular cloud (panels 2 and 3). Star 
formation occurred throughout the entire shell and approximately 15 Myr ago several OB associations formed where the shell 
fragmented into dense condensations (panel 4). The expanding shell of gas and the newly formed stars are at present denoted as 


Gould’s Belt. 


These complexes may have been ejected inwards from 
the shell in the past. 


@ One of the most noticeable and remarkable properties 
of Gould’s Belt is its 20° tilt with respect to the Galactic 
plane. There are three possible explanations for this tilt. 
(1) The tilt is the coincidental result of the fragmentation 
of the superbubble blown by Cas-Tau (this would be 
consistent with the fact that Gould’s Belt is dominated 
by two associations Sco OB2 and Ori OB1). (2) The 
shell blown by Cas—Tau expanded into a pre-existing 
tilted gas layer (shingle). (3) The original burst of star 
formation was caused by the oblique impact of a HIGH- 
VELOCITY CLOUD. This scenario naturally explains the tilt 
of Gould’s Belt. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Expectations for the future 

The distribution and kinematics of the atomic and 
molecular gas associated with the Gould Belt have been 
studied by a number of authors, although it is clear that 
the details remain an open question; observations and 
analyses need to be pursued. By contrast, we still lack 
much information on the properties of the stars in the 
Belt, despite the major contributions by the Hipparcos 
satellite for the massive stars, and by ROSAT for low-mass 
stars. This situation can be considerably improved by the 
proposed GAIA satellite, which is currently under study 
by ESA. This satellite will provide accurate distances, 
space motions, and photometry throughout the Gould 
Belt region. At a limiting magnitude of ~20, GAIA will 
even observe many low-mass stars. This will allow a full 
understanding of the Gould Belt and a reconstruction of 
the sequence of star formation in the Solar neighborhood 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gould Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


V (km/s) 


180 120 60 O 


lL (degrees) 


Figure 5. Position—velocity diagram of local CO gas: radial velocity of the gas versus Galactic longitude. The gray scale represents the 
brightness temperature of the CO clouds. The nearby OB associations are indicated by asterisks (the three subgroups of Sco OB2 at 

£ = 300°-360°, Collinder 121 at ¢ = 240°, Ori OB1 at £ = 210°, Per OB2 at € = 165° and Lac OB1 at ¢ = 100°). The curves (solid or 
broken) show the expected velocity fields for gas shells assuming that the shell velocities reflect both differential Galactic rotation and 
expansion powered by the energy released by the early-type association members. The broken curve denotes the supershell powered 
by the at present fossil Cas—Tau association (Lindblad’s Ring); the solid curves denote local bubbles powered by the young OB 
associations in the Solar neighborhood (see above). Note that the association Collinder 121 is not part of Gould’s Belt although its shell 
does interact with Lindblad’s Ring. Adapted from Bally, Theil and Sutherland (2000 Orion’s superbubble The Orion Complex Revisited 


(ASP Conf. Ser.) ed M J McCaughrean and A Burkert). 


in the past 60 Myr. Detailed knowledge of the local star 
formation history will ultimately be of great value in the 
study of extragalactic Gould Belt analogs (i.e. massive-star 
formation in spiral DISK GALAXIES) and STARBURST GALAXIES. 


Bibliography 
Acomprehensive study of Gould’s Belt is presented by 


Poppel W 1997 The Gould Belt system and the local 
interstellar medium Fundam. Cosm. Phys. 18, 1-271 


Information on the Hipparcos and GAIA satellite 
projects can be found at 


http:/ /astro.estec.esa.nl/hipparcos / 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


http: / /astro.estec.esa.nl/gaia/ 


P T de Zeeuw, R Hoogerwerf, J H J de Bruijne, AG A Brown 


and A Blaauw 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gould, Benjamin Apthorp (1824-96) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gould, Benjamin Apthorp (1824-96) 


Astronomer, born in Boston, MA, his early work in 
Germany was on the observation and motion of comets 
and asteroids. His greatest work was his mapping of 
the stars of the southern skies. He helped found the 
National Observatory in Cordoba, Argentina, and was its 
director as it compiled a catalog of stars using recently 
developed photometric methods. On returning to the 
USA, he spent his final years measuring the star clusters he 
had photographed in Argentina, and published the results 
as Uranometry of the Southern Heavens. He founded the 
Astronomical Journal. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Graham, George (c. 1674-1751) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Graham, George (c. 1674-1751) 


Instrument-maker, born in Hethersgill, Cumberland, 
England. Employee, partner, and by virtue of marriage 
to the niece of clock-maker THOMAS TOMPION, his heir. With 
TOMPION he made an orrery, the original one from which the 
name comes, for the Earl of Orrery; in fact he may have 
invented the instrument (which is a mechanical model 
for demonstrating the relative positions and motions of 
the planets). He invented improvements to precision 
clock mechanisms such as the deadbeat escapement, 
the mercury compensated pendulum and the cylinder 
escapement for watches, and he used clocks he had 
made to measure the exact shape of the Earth, correcting 
NEWTON'S figures. He made instruments for HALLEY (an 
8 foot quadrant with vernier) and BRADLEY (a 12.5 foot 
zenith sector with a micrometer screw with which Bradley 
discovered the aberration of light). He also made the 
apparatus used for the measurement of a degree of the 
meridian by the French Académie des Sciences in its 
northern expedition. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Granat ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Granat 


Soviet gamma ray mission, launched December 1989. 
Carried the French SIGMA coded mask telescope, 
designed for high resolution imaging in the range 30 keV— 
2 MeV. Also carried instruments for x-ray imaging and 
spectroscopy, and x-ray/gamma ray burst detectors. 
Made detailed studies of the Galactic centre. Operated 
for more than five years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Grand Unified Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Grand Unified Theory 


A theory that attempts to show that the strong nuclear 
force, the weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic 
force are different manifestations of a single, unified, 
fundamental force. 

Each of these forces may be described by quantum 
field theories, which imply that forces are communicated 
(‘mediated’) between real particles by means of virtual 
particles (particles that cannot be observed directly but 
which are permitted brief existence by the Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle). The electromagnetic force is 
conveyed by virtual photons, the weak nuclear force by 
massive ‘W’ and ‘Z’ particles (intermediate vector bosons) 
and the strong nuclear force between nucleons, by virtual 
mesons, and between quarks, by ‘gluons’. Particles that 
are acted on by the strong nuclear force are called hadrons 
(hadrons, of which protons and neutrons are examples, are 
composed of quarks), those which do not experience the 
strong force are called leptons. In the present, low-energy 
(‘cool’) phase of the universe, the four fundamental forces 
(gravitation is the fourth force) are separate and distinct, 
and have markedly different strengths. Grand unified 
theories (or ‘GUTs’) attempt to unify the weak, strong and 
electromagnetic interactions. Many physicists believe that 
a more comprehensive theory (a ‘theory of everything’) 
that unifies all four forces will eventually be found. 

The first step towards unification was achieved by 
the Weinberg—Salam-—Glashow theory of the electroweak 
force, published in 1967, which predicted that at 
particle energies greater than 100 GeV (10" eV), the 
electromagnetic and weak nuclear interactions become 
indistinguishable from each other (force-carrying W and 
Z particles would behave in the same way as virtual 
photons) and act as a unified force. The theory received 
strong confirmation through the discovery, in 1983, of the 
predicted W and Z bosons. Grand unified theories predict 
that at much higher energies, around 10!° GeV (10% eV), 
the electroweak and strong interactions lose their separate 
identities and behave as a single, unified ‘superforce’. 
Such energies far exceed the capabilities of terrestrial 
particle accelerators but, according to the Big Bang model, 
would have existed throughout the universe during 
the first 10-% s of its existence, when the temperature 
everywhere was in excess of 108 K. Thereafter, as the 
universe expanded and cooled, the unified force would 
have split into the strong and electroweak forces (the 
‘symmetry’ between the forces was broken). About 10-"' s 
later, when the temperature had dropped to around 10° K, 
the electroweak force would have separated out into the 
electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces. 

The simplest grand unified theory, proposed in 1974 
by Sheldon Glashow and Howard Georgi, requires the 
existence of a set of supermassive particles (‘X-particles’) 
that can transform quarks into leptons and leptons into 
quarks (the unified force then acts equally on both kinds 
of particle). Because quarks are the basic constituents of 
protons (and of all the hadrons), the theory predicts that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


protons themselves must eventually decay into leptons 
and photons (proton decay would occur if two of the 
constituent quarks inside a proton came sufficiently close 
to enable a virtual X-particle to be exchanged between 
them). The mean lifetime of a proton is expected to be 
at least 10° years but, given a large enough sample of 
protons, the occasional decay ought to be detectable at the 
present time. This is being attempted by the Kamio Kande 
detector. Experiments have not yet detected such an event, 
but if the theory is confirmed, then it implies the eventual 
demise of matter as we know it. 


Seealso: Big Bang theory, electroweak force, fundamental 
forces, gauge bosons, hadrons, leptons, quark, string 
theory/superstring theory, supersymmetry. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Granulation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Granulation 


The mottled structure exhibited by the visible surface of the 
Sun, in other words the photosphere, when it is observed 
under good conditions. Due to convection hot gas is rising 
and cooler gas descending in the outer layers of the Sun, 
and this gives rise to the visible granules, typically 1200 km 
in diameter, which are about 100 K hotter than the duller 
regions which separate them. 


See also: solar photosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gravitation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitation 


One of the four fundamental forces, gravitation is the 
force of mutual attraction that is exerted between massive 
bodies and between particles that have mass. Although 
gravitation is far weaker than the other three forces (the 
electromagnetic force and the weak and strong nuclear 
forces) over short ranges, it is the dominant force on large 
scales because its range of influence is far greater than that 
of the nuclear forces and because, unlike electrical charges 
(which can be positive or negative), all mass is positive 
(and mutually attractive). Because like charges repel and 
opposite charges attract, and matter on the large scale is 
electrically neutral (there are equal numbers of negative 
and positive charges in the universe), the electromagnetic 
force does not play a major role in the overall dynamics of 
the universe. Consequently, gravitation alone determines 
the motions of, and mutual interactions between, planets, 
stars and galaxies, and dominates the overall dynamics of 
the universe. 

In 1687 Isaac Newton (1642-1727) published his law of 
universal gravitation in his book, De Philosophiae Naturalis 
Principia Mathematica (The Mathematical Principles of 
Natural Philosophy). It stated that the force of attraction 
between any two masses is directly proportional to the 
product of their masses and inversely proportional to the 
square of the distance between them. For two bodies, 
with masses m, and m2, separated by distance, r, the 
mutual force of attraction, F, is given by F = Gm mp /r’, 
where G is the universal gravitational constant (=6.670 x 
10°" N m? kg~?). An equal and opposite force acts on 
each of the masses; thus the force exerted on m, is equal 
in magnitude but opposite in direction to the force exerted 
on m. 

According to Newtonian theory, gravity is a force 
that acts, instantaneously, directly between individual 
bodies and particles (a process that is called ‘action at 
a distance’). Although, for most purposes, Newtonian 
gravitation gives a perfectly satisfactory description of 
the motions of, for example, projectiles, planets, stars 
and galaxies, in certain situations (for example, where 
gravitation is very strong, as in the vicinity of a black hole, 
or when dealing with the structure and dynamics of the 
universe as a whole), the theory is inadequate. The best 
current theory of gravitation is Einstein’s general theory of 
relativity, according to which mass distorts the geometry 
of space (or, strictly, four-dimensional spacetime) and the 
paths followed by material particles, or rays of light, in the 
neighborhood of massive bodies are determined by these 
local distortions of space. 


See also: fundamental forces, general theory of relativity, 
graviton, mass, spacetime, supersymmetry. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitational Lensing 


Gravity bends light rays in a way analogous to, but 
quantitatively different from, the way it bends trajectories 
of passing particles. If light from some bright object 
passes close enough to some foreground mass, that 
object’s image will be altered. The effect is more like 
a piece of bathroom glass in the sky than a precision- 
ground and well-focused lens, but the terms ‘gravitational 
lensing’ or simply ‘lensing’ have stuck. The observable 
effect varies, depending on the mass of the lens and the 
relative positions of lens and background source. ‘Weak 
lensing’ produces a shape change in the image, typically a 
stretching along one direction; for very weak lensing such 
stretching is imperceptible in images of individual sources 
but statistically measurable from images of many sources 
close together on the sky. ‘Strong lensing’ produces 
multiple images of the same source, one or more being 
brighter than the unlensed source would have been, and 
typically all having very distorted shapes. 

The bending of light by the Sun can be measured 
directly, but apart from this all known examples of lensing 
involve very distant objects. (A peculiar feature of the 
physics of lensing is that lensing becomes easier to find 
as one observes more distant objects.) Lensing of stars in 
the Milky Way and its environs by foreground stellar-sized 
masses is now routinely observed; this requires very large 
surveys because of order 1 in 10° stars is being strongly 
lensed. Lensing by foreground galaxies of quasars is 
proportionately much more common—of order 1 in 108 
quasars is strongly lensed. GRAVITATIONALLENSING BY CLUSTERS 
OF GALAXIES is ubiquitous—a long-exposure image of any 
rich cluster of galaxies at cosmological distance will show 
obvious weak lensing and possibly also strong lensing. 

What makes lensing particularly attractive is that it 
depends only on gravity and geometrical things such as 
source and lens positions; the effects of lensing do not 
come mixed up with other (possibly poorly understood) 
physical effects. Thus astrophysical inferences made from 
lensing will hopefully be particularly robust. Lensing 
is astrophysically most important as a probe of dark 
matter (See DARK MATTER: ITS NATURE). However, it has other, 
sometimes surprising, uses too. 

The main part of this article is based on physical 
arguments. Mathematical material is confined to sections 
indicated between ( and @, and these may be skipped. 


Basic physics of lensing 

Photons are affected by a gravitational field, but not 
in the same way as massive particles are. For the 
details one needs general relativity, and because of this 
lensing was considered a very difficult subject for a long 
time (See GENERAL RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION). However, 
in astrophysical situations some useful approximations 
apply, and these make the physics very much simpler than 
in full general relativity. If anything, lensing is easier than 
the astrophysical applications of Newtonian dynamics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There are several ways of expressing the effect of 
gravity on light, in the context of lensing. Perhaps the 
most intuitive is through the wavefront. A wavefront is 
the locus of points with a given light travel time from 
the source. When a wavefront crosses an observer, they 
see an image of the source in the direction normal to 
the wavefront. Normally a wavefront is an expanding 
sphere, and light travels in straight lines. The effect of 
a gravitational field is to delay the part of the wavefront 
that passes through it. This naturally changes the shape of 
the wavefront and hence the direction normal to it, i.e. the 
position of the image, which is equivalent to saying that 
the light ray is bent. Figure 1 illustrates this. Note that 
if the gravitational delay is large enough, the wavefront 
can double in on itself, producing multiple images (strong 
lensing). A good way to gain some intuition about the 
wavefront is to take a plastic transparency with a blank 
piece of paper behind it and look at the reflections of a 
lightbulb. The shape of the plastic produces delays in 
the lightbulb’s wavefront analogous to the gravitational 
time delays. Notice how changing the shape of the plastic 
causes images to merge and split, and the appearance of 
grotesquely stretched images at these transitions. Images 
of galaxies lensed by clusters show just such effects. 

The wavefront formulation is not in practice the most 
useful because it works in terms of a single source and 
many observers, whereas in astrophysics one is usually 
interested in many sources and a single observer. So 
lensing work generally uses two other formulations and 
some standard approximations. 

The standard approximations are the following. First, 
the gravitational fields are weak enough that massive 
particles simply follow Newtonian dynamics. (Weak 
gravitational fields should not be confused with weak 
lensing—strong lensing can still happen.) Second, the 
extent of the lens masses along the line of sight is negligible 
compared with the distances between source and lens and 
observer. Then a lens behaves as if its mass had been 
squashed along the line of sight into a sheet of mass. 
The mass distribution transverse to the line of sight is 
still important, however. Third, the lens and source are 
nearly aligned along the line of sight, in the sense that the 
angular separation (say 6) on the sky between the lens and 
source is such that sin @ ~ @. Fourth, diffraction effects are 
negligible, because even for radio waves the wavelengths 
are too small. 

With these approximations, the effect of gravity on 
photons can be described by adopting the following result 
from general relativity. A point mass M at perpendicular 
distance R from a light ray bends the light towards it by 
an angular amount 

4GM 

c2R 
where G is the gravitational constant and c the speed 
of light. For the weak field approximation to apply R 
must be much larger than 2GM/c? (the Schwarzschild 
radius), but this condition is easily satisfied because 
Schwarzschild radii are at most a few km for stars, <1 pc 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Weak Lensing : ve 


Le 


Very Weak Lensing 


—=~2 Source 


Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the wavefront. Observers see images of the source in the direction normal to the wavefront where 
the wavefront crosses them. If delayed enough by the lens, part of the wavefront can double in on itself, producing multiple images for 
some observers (strong lensing); other observers see single images (weak lensing). Images usually experience size and shape changes. 


for a galaxy and <10° pc for a cluster of galaxies. (The 
bending angle of 4GM/c’R was the first prediction of 
general relativity; Newtonian dynamics would predict 
half that value. Measurement of the bending angle for 
the Sun demonstrated that the dynamics of photons is not 
Newtonian, and was the first test of general relativity.) 

Alternatively, one can proceed from another result 
from general relativity, which is that a photon passing 
by a point mass M and then reaching an observer from 
a direction @ relative to the mass will have had its arrival 
time been delayed by 


4GM 


fal 


In@ 


by the mass. (Here 6 will be very small, so the logarithm 
will be negative; hence the minus sign.) Now Fermat’s 
principle is that photons take paths which make the arrival 
time a maximum, minimum or saddle point. In the 
absence of special delays photons simply minimize the 
arrival time, i.e. they follow straight lines. However, 
with a gravitational time delay, photons will follow a 
different path; this path will be such that the new arrival 
time (considering both the increased path length and 
the gravitational delay) is still a maximum, minimum or 
saddle point. It is often useful to consider the arrival time 
as a function of the arrival direction of photons from a 
particular source past some lens: this is known as the 
‘arrival time surface’. It is related to the wavefront, but 
is not quite the same thing, for the wavefront is a surface 
in real space whereas the arrival time surface is a more 
abstract entity. 

The bending angle and arrival time formulations 
are equivalent. In both cases the effect of a distributed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mass (rather than a point mass) is simply the sum 
of contributions from all points making up the mass 
distribution. 


© Derivation of the arrival time 

Consider a situation as in figure 2, where an observer 
is viewing a source at distance Ds, with a lens (a mass 
screen) intervening at distance D,; Dts is the distance 
from lens to the source. On galactic scales Di, Ds, Dis 
are ordinary distances, but on cosmological scales they 
must be understood as angular diameter distances, and 
Ds # D+ Dts. (The reason for this complication is that the 
universe expands significantly over the light travel time.) 
We use angular coordinates for the transverse position; 05 
is the position of the source and @ is its observed position 
after being lensed. Let &(@) be the lens’s surface mass 
density, i.e. mass per unit solid angle. (An important 
notational point: &(@) is often defined as mass per unit 
physical area, i.e. D;” times the convention in this article.) 
Let a(@) be the deflection angle. Then, comparing vectors 
in the source plane, we obtain 


Dcs@ = DOs + Disa. (1) 


(By convention, a is directed outwards from the deflecting 
mass rather than towards it.) Using 4GM/c’R for the 
deflection from a point mass, we obtain 


4G ff d(0')(0- 6) LO’ 


@)= 
aR. 0-672 


D 
6 = 65+ —2a(6) 
Ds 


(2) 
This is known as the lens equation. It gives 0s as an explicit 
function of 6, but 6 as an implicit function of 8s. Moreover, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apparent 
Source source 


e @ ; ‘ 
4 / 
H / 
1 i 
Source Plane H 1 
The 
1 i | a , D. 
' LS 
' i 
1 Hl ] 
u vi 
i ' 1 
' 7 ' 
i 1 e 
: @ @ |) » Py 
‘® ee e H D 
e 7° bd ' s 
e % ® 


Lens Plane 


e 
e 
—s 


Figure 2. The geometrical meanings of the various distances and 
angles used in lensing work. 


0(@s) need not be single valued, so sources can be multiply 
imaged. 

We can change from this bending-angle formalism 
to the arrival time formalism by noting that the lens 
equation 2 amounts to equating a gradient to zero: 


VT(@)=0 T(6)=}%(0— 6s)? — ¥(6) 


4 
V0) = (1+ ee / x(0') In|@ — @'| d°a’ 
é 


D,Ds 
cDis— 


Ty) = (1 + 21) (3) 
Here T (6) is of course the arrival time, up to an irrelevant 
constant, for arbitrary deflections: the first term in it is 
the change in light travel from geometrical considerations 
alone; the second term is the gravitational time delay (the 
factor of 1 + z;, comes because everything that happens in 
the lens plane is observed redshifted, and that goes for time 
delays too). The deflections that actually occur are those 
that make T (8) stationary; this is Fermat's principle. Later 
on, we will rearrange equation (3) to show the dimensions 
involved a little better. 4 


The Einstein radius 

In the absence of lensing the wavefront is spherical. 
However, in lensing we are always only interested in 
very small regions of the wavefront, and over a small 
enough angular region a sphere is indistinguishable from 
a parabola. Similarly, in the absence of lensing the relevant 
part of the arrival time surface is also parabolic, with the 
image of course at the bottom. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Now consider what happens if a point lens is 
interposed exactly along the line of sight to the source. The 
arrival time surface will be raised according to the lens’s 
time delay, and if the lens is strong enough the bottom of 
the parabola will become a dimple. The old minimum 
will now become a maximum, and the whole edge of 
the dimple will become a minimum. Observationally, 
the dimple edge corresponds to a spectacular ring image, 
called an Einstein ring. Its radius is known as the Einstein 
radius, say 6; if the source is much further away than the 
lens 


Min Mo y 


Og ~ 0.1 arcsec x : ; 
lens distance in parsecs 


where Mo denotes the solar mass. 

Actually the lens need not be a point mass. Just as 
in Newtonian gravity a sphere attracts externally as if it 
were a point mass, a circular lens affects light outside the 
circle as if it were a point mass. So any circular mass can 
produce an Einstein ring, provided that the Einstein ring 
is ‘outside the mass’. In other words the mass needs to 
be smaller than a length that projects to 6g; this length, 
which we may denote by Rg (=6g x lens distance) is also 
called the Einstein radius. (Whether one means 6; or Rg 
will always be clear from context.) It turns out that Rg is 
roughly the geometric mean of the Schwarzschild radius 
and the lens distance. Thus for the ANDROMEDAGALAXY, Rx is 
some tens of parsecs—much smaller than the galaxy itself. 
However, a similar galaxy at cosmological distances will 
have Rg comparable with or bigger than its own size, and 
thus can produce strong lensing. Masses that are smaller 
than their Rg are said to be ‘compact’ to lensing. 

In practice, Einstein rings are rarely observed. The 
reason is that the above scenario for forming one requires 
a perfectly circular lens and a perfectly aligned source. 
These improbable requirements relax a little if the source 
is very broad, however, and a few examples have been 
observed. Nevertheless, the concept of an Einstein ring 
is very important, because even if there is no Einstein 
ring the interesting strong lensing behavior all happens 
over a scale of 6:. The larger 6g, the likelier it is that 
there are some background sources to strongly lens. Thus 
from the above expression for 6g one can easily infer that 
lensing by massive galaxies (M ~ 10'?M. and 6, perhaps 
~1 arcsec) is much likelier than lensing by nearby stars 
(where 6g « 1 arcsec), while rich clusters of galaxies (with 
M = 10'*Mz and 6; ~ 10 arcsec) are even more favorable 
for lensing. 


© The Einstein radius and other scales 

Expressions for 6; and R¢ are easily derived by considering 
the lens equation for a collinear point mass and source, i.e. 
8s = 0 and X(6) = M6(6). The lens equation is trivially 
solved by 6 = 6g, with 


_4GM Dis > _ 4GM D, Dis “) 
= 2 alate g 


62 
r c2 D,Ds C2 Ds 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


As mentioned in the previous section 
Rg ~ (Schwarzschild radius x D,). (5) 


By a Gauss law type argument, for any circular mass 
distribution &(6,), ¥(@) and w(@) will be influenced only 
by interior mass. So any circular distribution of the mass 
M, provided that it fits within an Einstein radius, can produce 
an Einstein ring. 

For given D,, Ds, to obtain a compact object one needs 
to pack a mass (in projection) into a circle of radius 6g, but 
the area of the circle is proportional to the mass. It follows 
that there is a critical density, say Zeit, such thatif © > Voit 
somewhere then there is a compact (sub)object. Working 
out the algebra we easily find 


D,Ds c? 


Lerit = : 
crit Dis 4nG 


(6) 


If now we define « as the projected mass density in units 
of the critical density, equation (3) can be rewritten as 
Vr(0)=0 (0) = (0 — Os)” — WO) 


W(0) = ~ fe In|@ — 6'| d’a’ 
ie 


D_D 
TO\= 0 #2) a 70). (7) 


LS 
From the second line of equation (7) it should be evident 
that y satisfies a two-dimensional Poisson equation 


Ve = 2k. (8) 


Note that the first two lines in equation (7) involve only 
dimensionless quantities and the scale of 7(@) is set 
entirely by the distances and lens redshift. 4 


On images and magnification 

Let us now see what can happen to the arrival time surface 
from masses of arbitrary shape. For small masses, the 
shape changes slightly from being a parabola and the 
mininum moves a little. However, for large enough mass, 
a qualitative change occurs, in that a contour of constant 
arrival time becomes self-crossing. There are two ways 
in which a self-crossing can develop: as a kink on the 
outside of a contour line or a kink on the inside. These are 
illustrated in figure 3. The outer-kink type is topologically 
a lemniscate and the inner-kink type a limacon. _ If 
the original contour loop enclosed a minimum then a 
lemniscate produces another minimum, plus a saddle- 
point at the self-crossing, while a limacgon produces a new 
maximum plus a saddle point. (Interchange maximum 
and minimum in the previous sentence if the original 
loop enclosed a maximum.) The process of contour self- 
crossing can then repeat around any of the new maxima 
and minima, producing more and more new images, but 
always satisfying 


maxima + minima = saddle points + 1. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


~©@ 
7? 


CG) —s 
‘9- 


Figure 3. Multiple images via self-crossing contours in the 
arrival time surface. Here L marks minima and H marks 
maxima. 


§@ 


The rightmost part of figure 3 shows a typical configura- 
tion in observed systems. 

Multiple images are not all equally bright. It turns 
out that each image is magnified by an amount equal to 
the inverse of the curvature of the arrival time surface. 
This curvature need not be the same in all directions. 
Very stretched images (of which an Einstein ring is an 
extreme example) correspond to very small curvature in 
one direction with larger curvature in the perpendicular 
direction. The standard way of quantifying lensing 
magnification (also called amplification in the literature) 
is through the ‘convergence’ which is total change in 
brightness and the ‘shear’ which is the amount and 
direction of stretching. 

If the lens’s mass density is infinite anywhere (as for 
any point mass, or say a galaxy with a central BLACK HOLE) 
the arrival time surface is going to have a needle-sharp 
but infinitely high maximum at that point, and, while this 
will formally be an image, because of the needle-sharp 
curvature the image will be (de)magnified to nothing. 
For example the five-image configuration in figure 3 is 
always in practice a four-image system, with the maximum 
completely demagnified by a very high central density in 
the lens. 

Surface brightness (photon flux per unit sky area per 
unit telescope area) is conserved by lensing. Magnification 
changes only angular sizes on the sky. Thus a constant 
surface brightness sheet stays a constant brightness 
sheet when lensed. If this were not the case, the 
microwave background would be wildly lensed by large- 
scale structure. Polarization of light is also unaffected by 
lensing. 

For unresolved sources, magnification is not observed 
directly; only their total luminosity changes under lensing. 
This leads to an interesting effect known as magnification 
(or amplification) bias. Imagine an unlensed patch of sky 
that has been surveyed down to some brightness limit 
for some type of unresolved objects. Now imagine the 
same patch lensed with some magnification factor A, for 
definiteness say A > 1. This magnification will increase 
the area of the patch by A, and if the survey area stays 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the same the source area will be reduced by A. Thus the 
number of objects available will also be reduced by A. 
However, at the same time all the objects will be brightened 
by A,sosome objects that were originally below the survey 
brightness limit will now climb above it. The net effect 
depends on the luminosity function: if going fainter leads 
to enough new objects (a steep luminosity function) then 
the net effect will be an increase in the number of sources 
detected, otherwise there will be a net decrease. 


Magnification 

Magnification is formalized as the derivative of the image 
position with respect to the source position. It is a tensor, 
which we denote by M. We have 


00, a 
1? —T(@). 9 
o> op? (0) (9) 
In Cartesian coordinates 
ew ew | 
902 «80,80, 
-1_ x ‘x OUy 
90,00, 002 


It is helpful to write M7! in terms of its eigenvalues, and 
the usual form is like 


wise F 4 Las os 


sin 2d 
0 1 sin 2d ) fs) 


—cos2¢ 


The first term in equation (1) is the trace part—and 
comparing equations (10) and (8) shows that it must be 
x—while the second term is traceless. The « part produces 
an isotropic expansion or contraction, while the y part 
produces a stretching in the ¢ direction and a shrinking in 
the perpendicular direction; « is known as ‘convergence’ 
and y as ‘shear’. 

The determinant of M can be thought of as a scalar 
magnification: 


IM| =[G—«)?-y*]". (12) 


The places where one of the eigenvalues of M~' becomes 
zero (and in consequence |M| is infinite) are in general 
curves and are known as critical curves. When critical 
curves are mapped onto the source plane through the 
lens equation, they give caustics; a point source lying on 
a caustic is infinitely magnified. Some straightforward 
algebra shows that for a point mass 


= OE 
IM*=1- 77 (13) 


and that for a circular mass distribution © « 671 


A 
(M|-? =1— (14) 


The latter case is known as the ‘isothermal lens’ after the 
isothermal sphere in stellar dynamics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


One way of proving that surface brightness is 
conserved by lensing is by setting up a correspondence 
with Hamiltonian dynamics. Let us write z for the 
axial coordinate in figure 2, and w for the transverse 
coordinates, and allow for observers at arbitrary w, z. 
A photon trajectory can be expressed as w(z), and an 
observer at w, z sees the photon coming from direction 6 = 
dw/dz (in the small-angle regime). In these coordinates 
the lens equation 65 = @ — Vy() becomes 


O(Wobs, Zobs) — O(Weources Zsource) 


a 
= (Zobs Ziens) wv ( 
dw 


ee ) . (15) 


Zobs — Zlens 


However, this is a solution of Hamilton’s equations for the 
Hamiltonian 


Wiens 


H= 50 - 8 — (Zobs — Ziens) W ( ) 5(Z — Ziens) (16) 


Zobs — lens 


with z as a formal time variable and 6 = dw/dz identified 
as the momentum. By Liouville’s theorem (or equivalently 
the collisionless Boltzmann equation), the photon density 
(say f) in the phase space of (w, 8) space is conserved 
along photon trajectories. This f must be conserved by 
the act of placing the lens there too—think of f before 
and after going through the lens. In fact f is nothing but 
the surface brightness, because 6 corresponds to sky area 
and w to telescope area. This proves surface brightness 
conservation, although we must be careful with two things 
about interpretation. First, because the result is ‘along 
photon trajectories’ we must always be looking at photons 
from the same source; so if the image is moved in the sky 
by lensing we must follow it when we measure surface 
brightness. Second, z here is just a formal variable and is 
neither time nor REDSHIFT, So the above does not imply that 
surface brightness is independent of redshift. 


Lensing in the Milky Way 

The Einstein radius for lensing of a Milky Way star by 
another star or a brown dwarf is, for typical distances, 
only ~1 AU for Rg and <1 marcsec for 6g. Nevertheless, 
because of stellar motions, stars do occasionally manage 
to come within an Einstein radius (in projection of course) 
of lenses in the Milky Way. The fraction of source stars 
in a field that are doing this at a given time is known 
as the microlensing optical depth, and it is of order 10~° 
in the Milky Way. (‘Microlensing’ is a term used when 
stellar-mass lenses are important.) As the source enters 
and then exits the Einstein radius of the lens, the image 
brightens and then dims again in a characteristic way, 
over timescales of weeks to months. Such lensing is now 
being detected by large surveys that monitor ~10’ stars, 
searching for the characteristic behavior of the brightness. 
The aim of these surveys is to measure the optical depth in 
different directions and thence infer something about the 
mass density in compact objects in the Milky Way. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Microlensing optical depth 
Approximating a star or a brown dwarf as a point lens, 
there will be two images, at 


|0| = 4010s] + (Os|? + 408) /7]. (17) 


The image separation is too small to resolve. What 
will be observed is a brightening equal to the combined 
magnification of both images. Using equation (13) for the 
magnification, and adding the absolute values of |M| at 
the two image positions, we obtain the total brightness 
amplification 


u2 +2 \0s| 
| eee es) 18 
Wet Oe ue) 


If the background source star has impact parameter b and 
velocity v (projected onto the lens plane) with respect to 
the lens, then 

(b? + vt?) 1/2 


Re (19) 


Inserting equation (19) into (18) gives us Ajot(u), i.e. the 
light curve, plotted for three different b in figure 4. The 
height of a measured light curve immediately gives Rg/b, 
and the width gives Rp/v. 

We can express the microlensing optical depth 
(usually denoted by r) as follows. Using equation (4) for 
Rg, the total area covered by the Einstein rings of lenses at 
distances between Dr, and D, + dD, ina patch of sky is 


4nGM 
C2 Ds 


D, Dise(Dy) dD, x (area of patch). (20) 


To obtain the fraction of sky covered by Einstein rings, we 
divide equation (20) by the area and integrate over D_, 
giving 

4nG 


Ds 
eer) / D.Disp(Dy) dDt. (21) 
Cc Ds 0 


The really nice thing about this formula is that it does not 
depend on the mass distribution of the lenses, as long as 
each mass fits within its own Einstein radius (diffuse gas 
clouds do not count, nor does any kind of diffuse dark 
matter). So t estimated from light curve monitoring could 
be used to make inferences about p. 

Although trying to resolve the images in microlensing 
seems hopeless with foreseeable technology, it may be 
possible to track the moving double image indirectly. By 
combining the positions and magnifications of the two 
images, we have for the centroid 


u(3 +u*) 


cen — a Og. (22) 


Since images can be centroided much better (10?-10° times 
more precisely) than they can be resolved, measuring the 
proper motion of the centroid seems a realistic prospect. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Lensing by galaxy clusters 

At the other end of the lensing scale, we have clusters 
of galaxies, which are the most effective lensers of all. 
A rich cluster at cosmological distance will be effective 
for lensing over a large enough patch of sky to include 
plenty of background objects (faint blue galaxies) to lens. 
A number of clusters show all the regimes of lensing, 
with multiple-image systems in the inner region, arcs and 
arclets (highly stretched single images) outside of that 
and statistical stretching in the outer regions. Each of 
these regimes contributes different types of information 
about the mass distribution. Now galaxy clusters are 
generally not in dynamical equilibrium (there have not 
been enough crossing times since they formed), so their 
mass distributions tend to be more complicated than those 
of single galaxies. This makes it all the more important to 
have good ways of mapping cluster masses, and makes 
clusters particularly interesting to researchers in lensing. 


Lensing constraints on clusters 
There are several approaches in the literature to mass- 
mapping clusters from lensing data. The following 
sketches one approach. 

Cluster lensing data provide three types of informa- 
tion: 


(i) multiple image positions 0), 62 and so on; 

(ii) relative brightnesses at 0), 82 and so on; 

(iii) elongated images of sources may be obvious (arcs 
and arclets) or statistical (requiring a large number of 
background galaxies to measure). 


Going back to equation (7), these can be translated 
into three types of constraints on « (9). 


(i) Image positions imply Vrt(6,) = 0, Vr(@2) = 0 
and so on. From equation (7) these are clearly 
dimensionless linear constraints on @s and « (6). (If 
there is more than one multiple-image system, there 
will be a separate 0s for each of these.) 

(ii) Relative brightnesses are constraints of the type 


VV1(01) = (measured number) x VVrt(02). 


(iii) Elongated images (whether arclets or statistical 
elongations) provide constraints of the type 


a a? 
k—1t(@1) < —T(0 
362° vs 308° 7) 


where 6, and 6, are a coordinate system rotated to 
align with the observed direction of the elongation. 
This equation expresses the statement that the 
magnification along 6, is at least k times the 
magnification along the 6, direction. Provided 
that the elongation direction is well-measured, the 
constraint is linear in « (0). 


Types (i) and (ii) are strong lensing constraints and 
available only in the inner regions of rich clusters. Type (iii) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


jo) 
a 
ey) 


Figure 4. Light curves for impact parameters of Rg (lowest), 0.5R— and 0.2Rg. The unit of time is how long it takes the source to move 


a distance Rg. 


constraints apply also in the the weak lensing regime and 
can be extracted over a much larger area (~5 times further 
out). 

Expressed as above, cluster mass reconstruction 
becomes an underdetermined problem with linear, plus 
possibly some quadratic, constraints in both strong and 
weak lensing regimes. It is thus a relative of image 
reconstruction problems. The standard way of proceeding 
to derive an image (or a mass map in this case) would be 
to pixellate « (6), select some figure of merit on « such as 
smoothness or entropy and then optimize it subject to the 
data constraints. 


Multiple-image quasars 

These occur when a QUASAR (or other small but very bright 
object) is strongly lensed by a foreground galaxy and 
produces two or four images with arcsec order separations. 
(A third or fifth image is invariably demagnified to 
undetectability by the lens’s high-density core.) These are 
of some interest for constraining the masses of the lensing 
galaxies, but they are perhaps much more interesting to 
astrophysicists for two other reasons. 

The first is that since quasars are often very time 
variable and the different images have different arrival 
times, the images will show the same time variability, 
but with offsets. These offsets, or differences in arrival 
times, are unique among lensing observables, because 
they are dimensional. All other lensing observables, i.e. 
image positions and magnifications, are dimensionless. 
Measuring a dimensional quantity immediately sets a 
scale for the system. That scale is the distance scale, 
which in a cosmological context amounts to HUBBLE’S 
CONSTANT. Unfortunately, an accurate measurement of 
variability offsets does not immediately give an accurate 
determination of Hubble’s constant, because the offsets 
also depend on the distribution of mass in the lens 
plane; the latter still needs to be determined or modelled 
somehow. Still, the prospect of measuring Hubble’s 
constant from lensing is attractive because it involves 
no extra physics apart from gravitation, thus hopefully 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


leaving less room for the sort of systematic errors that 
plague Hubble constant estimates. 

The second has to do with the extremely small size of 
quasars in optical continuum. Now the mass distribution 
of a galaxy is not perfectly smooth; it becomes granular 
on the scale of individual stars. This produces a very 
complicated network of critical lines (in the lens plane), 
and a corresponding complicated network of caustics in 
the source plane (like the pattern at the bottom of a 
swimming pool). The optical continuum emitting regions 
of quasars are small enough to fit between the caustics, 
but the line emitting regions straddle several caustics. As 
proper motions move the caustic network, the continuum 
region will sometimes cross a caustic, and show a sudden 
change in brightness; the time taken for the brightness to 
change is the time it take to cross the caustic. This is the 
phenomenon of quasar microlensing: continuum shows 
it but lines do not. (It is just the gravitational version 
of stars twinkling and planets not twinkling.) This has 
been observed, and modelling the caustic network and 
putting in plausible values for the proper motion leads to 
an estimate of the intrinsic size of the continuum source. 
The conclusion is that the optical continuum regions of 
a quasar—the heart that emits much more light than the 
entire host galaxy—cannot be much larger than the solar 
system. 


Arrival times and Hubble’s constant 

In equation (7) t(@) is dimensionless while T(@) has 
dimensions of time, and the factor relating them is « Hy '. 
(This factor actually depends on Q and A as well, but a 
case such as zy < 0.5, zg > 2, the 2 and A dependences 
are very weak.) So if we can measure the arrival time 
difference T (0,)—T (82) between two images (and accurate 
measurements are now starting to appear) and we know 
« (0), we can determine Ap. 

The difficulty here is that we need to know «(6), 
because for a given T(0,) — T(62) the inferred Hy can 
vary by a factor of several depending on the «(@) 
assumed. However, naturally, we can use the lensing data 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


themselves to help constrain «(@). The constraints (i) and 
(ii) from the cluster lensing case are available here also, 
since we have a multiple-image system. Constraints of the 
type (iii) may possibly be available. If there are more than 
two images then a fourth type of constraint exists, which 
comes from the ratio of arrival time differences between 
different pairs of images, i.e. 


T (0,) — T(@2) = (measured number) x [T (02) — T (03)]. 


Some algebra from equation (7) shows that this is a 
dimensionless linear constraint on 0s and « (@). 

That the lensing constraints are mostly linear and 
at worst quadratic is a useful simplification, but still the 
number of constraints possible is small and leaves «(@) 
underdetermined, implying some residual uncertainty 
in Hy even for perfect lensing data. Hopefully this 
uncertainty can be reduced by well-motivated modelling 
or other observations constraining «(@). However, 
whether the residual uncertainty in Hp for any system can 
be made small enough to be interesting is at present an 
unanswered question. 


Bibliography 
The lensing literature being as large as it now is, the 
following cannot hope to be comprehensive. However, 
here are pointers to a number of key papers in the 
development of the field, and to some recent surveys of 
research in the field. 

The first person to take gravitational lensing seriously 
as an observational prospect appears to have been Zwicky, 
in 


Zwicky F 1937 Phys. Rev. 51 290, 679 
It is interesting to compare these papers with 
Einstein A 1936 Science 84 506 


Einstein sounds almost apologetic for publishing the 
results for a point lens, because stellar lenses seemed 
improbable to observe. Zwicky, writing the following 
year, points out that for galaxies and clusters of galaxies the 
situation is very different, and lensing becomes ‘virtually 
a certainty’. 

Discoveries of the first two lensed systems (both 
multiply imaged quasars) appeared in 


Walsh D, Carswell R F and Weymann R J 1979 Nature 279 
381 

Weymann RJ, Latham D, AngelJ RP, Green R F, Liebert] W, 
Turnshek D A, Turnshek D E and Tyson J A 1980 
Nature 285 641 


The first arcs in clusters were reported in 


Soucail G, Fort B, Mellier Y and Picat J P 1987 Astron. 
Astrophys. 172 L14 
Lynds Rand Petrosian V 1987 Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 18 1014 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The study of statistical weak lensing by clusters was 
initiated by 


Tyson J A, Wenk R A and Valdes F 1990 Astrophys. J. 349 L1 
The first quasar microlensing event is in 


Irwin M J, Webster R L, Hewett P C, Corrigan R T and 
Jedrzejewski R I 1989 Astron. J. 98 1989 


The first galactic microlenses were published in 


Alcock C et al 1993 Nature 365 621 
Aubourg E et al 1993 Nature 365 623 
Udalski A et al 1993 Acta Astron. 43 289 


Our present understanding of lensing theory is 
due very largely to Sjur Refsdal. The now-standard 
approximations and basic methods of calculation, and the 
relation between time delays and Hubble’s constant, are 
set out in 


Refsdal S 1964 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 128 295 
Refsdal S 1964 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 128 307 


These long preceded the discovery of the first lens. 
Quickly following the discovery of the first lensed system 


Chang K and Refsdal S 1979 Nature 282 561 


predicted microlensing in lensed quasars. Further 


developments of the formalism appeared in 
Kayser R and Refsdal S 1983 Astron. Astrophys. 128 156 
introducing the wavefront picture, and 


Blandford R D and Narayan R 1986 Astrophys. J. 310 568 
Schneider P 1985 Astron. Astrophys. 143 413 


which introduce Fermat’s principle by very different 
routes. 
The most comprehensive book on lensing is 


Schneider P, Ehlers J A and Falco E E 1992 Gravitational 
Lenses (Berlin: Springer) 


The most recent conference proceedings covering all 
aspects of lensing is 


Brainerd T G and Kochanek C S (ed) 2000 Gravitational 
lensing: recent progress and future goals ASP 
Conference Series 


For eight unsolved problems in gravitational lensing, see 


Blandford R D 1997 Unsolved Problems in Astrophysics 
ed J N Bahcall and J P Ostriker (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press) 


P Saha 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing by Clusters of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitational Lensing by Clusters of 
Galaxies 


CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES are massive and relatively rare 
objects containing hundreds of galaxies. Their huge 
mass—dominated by DARK MATTER—bends light from all 
background objects, systematically distorting the images 
of thousands of distant galaxies (shear). This observed 
gravitational lens distortion can be inverted to produce an 
‘image’ of the mass in the foreground cluster of galaxies. 
Most of the mass in clusters of galaxies is dark matter, 
not the stars, gas and dust associated with the galaxies 
in the cluster. This dark matter outweighs ordinary 
matter by at least 10:1, and GRAVITATIONAL LENSING studies 
of the dark matter distribution around clusters promise a 
deeper understanding of the nature of dark matter and the 
scenario of structure formation. 

The most direct method currently available to 
determine the entire mass distribution of a galaxy cluster 
is gravitational lensing. How does one get from the 
observed distorted forest of background galaxies to a map 
of the mass responsible for the distortion? The optimal 
method of inverting the observed galaxy distortions to 
obtain the projected mass map depends on the number 
of observational constraints. In turn, the resolution of 
the mass map will be proportional to the density of 
constraints on the plane of the sky. Strong lensing 
(multiple resolved images of a single source) can offer 
high mass resolution near the source image positions, but 
the resolution degrades far from these positions. Weak 
lensing (single distorted images of each resolved source) 
is ubiquitous since there are nearly a million background 
galaxies per square degree anywhere on the sky, and 
can yield moderate resolution maps of projected mass 
over wide areas. Figure 1 shows a good example of 
gravitational lensing (both strong and weak) by a cluster 
of galaxies. 

The properties of clusters are functions both of the 
dynamical processes operating within them and of the 
underlying cosmology. While the present epoch mass 
function gives the parameters of the mass fluctuation 
spectrum on cluster scales, changes measured at higher 
REDSHIFT depend on cosmological parameters. Previous 
work has used the temperature (or equivalently the 
cluster velocity dispersion) distribution as a proxy for the 
mass. The average matter density of the universe Qm has 
been estimated by extrapolating observations of cluster 
luminosities to the rest of the universe and assuming 
the mass-to-luminosity ratio is the same for clusters and 
the universe as a whole. If we could explore mass 
structure and pin down 2,, via direct observations of 
mass, this would significantly clarify cosmology. Recently, 
the first steps have been taken toward addressing three 
fundamental questions: what is the total mass of clusters, 
how is the mass distributed within clusters, and how 
does the cluster’s mass evolve over time? Comparisons 
of the cluster mass spectrum, particularly its evolution 
over cosmic time, with N-body simulations of dark matter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


t a ; "4 rr i. * i 


. 
' 
> . 


. 


5 a 
Sm ss . °° | 


-— 2 


+ 


Figure 1. A Hubble Space Telescope image of the cluster of 
galaxies A2218, showing multiple ‘arcs’: lens-distorted images 
of background galaxies. The mass of the dark matter in the 
cluster is far greater than the mass of all the stars. This mass 
bends light rays from distant galaxies, causing a tangential 
‘stretching’ of the images of the background galaxies. Courtesy 
W Couch (University of New South Wales), R Ellis (Cambridge 
University), and NASA. 


structure formation for different cosmological models can 
in principle be used to distinguish among these models. 


Background sources 


Observations of distant GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT suggest 
that we are seeing these galaxies at the epoch of formation 
of much of their stellar content. The resulting UV-bright 
spectrum, when redshifted to redshifts of 1-3, would 
produce the observed blue spectral shape. This backdrop 
of distant galaxies may be used as a tool for studying 
foreground mass concentrations. Their unusual spectral 
shape makes it particularly easy to distinguish them from 
red cluster galaxies which have been swept of most of 
their gas and thus are not undergoing STAR FORMATION. 
Light from the forest of distant galaxies passes by and 
through a foreground cluster of galaxies. For small 
impact parameters, close to the cluster center, gravitational 
lensing of a chance projection of one of these distant 
galaxies is strong enough to produce multiple images 
(strong lensing). Farther out, lensing distorts the shape 
of all distant galaxies (weak lensing). 

Gravitational lensing studies of clusters of galaxies 
present an opportunity to learn about the properties of 
dark matter via its clustering properties on a variety of 
spatial scales. Of interest is the mass profile near the 
center (from strong lensing observations) to probe dark 
matter at peak densities, the mass profile at large distance 
from the cluster to probe the nature of structure formation 
(from weak-lensing observations), the correlation with 
luminosity, and mass segregation between galaxies and 
the totally dark component. Using mosaics of CCDs, 
wide-field weak-lensing studies can now map the mass 
out towards the linear regime beyond 2 Mpc radius. 
Both observations and N-body cold dark matter (CDM) 
simulations show a steep mass drop-off at large radii in 
clusters. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing by Clusters of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Strong lensing 

A single background galaxy, if placed by chance directly 
behind the cluster lens, is heavily distorted into one or 
more long arcs concentric with the mass centroid of the 
cluster. This type of strong lensing forms the basis of the 
highest resolution mass maps. In cases where multiple 
images of a source are created by the lens, the details of 
the position and distortion of these sub-images are highly 
sensitive to the projected 2-dimensional mass distribution 
within the lens. Parametric models of the lens mass can 
then be used to first unlens the sub-images to get an image 
of the source, and then ray trace light from this source past 
the lens in an iterative fit in the image plane for the lens 
mass parameters. 

As an example, figure 2 shows a high-resolution 
mass map of the cluster 0024 + 1654, some three billion 
light-years distant, based on parametric inversion of the 
associated gravitational lens. This lens creates eight well 
resolved whole or partial sub-images of a background 
galaxy, seen in deep imaging with the HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE. Excluding mass concentrations centered on 
visible galaxies, more than 98% of the remaining mass 
is represented by a smooth concentration of dark matter 
centered near the brightest cluster galaxies, with a 50 kpc 
soft core (throughout we use Hubble constant Hy) = 
70 km s“! Mpe7'). The dark matter distribution we 
observe in CL0024 is far more smooth, symmetric, and 
nonsingular than in typical simulated clusters using the 
CDM model. Inside 160 kpc radius, the rest-frame mass- 
to-light ratio is 170 times the solar value, rising with radius. 
Because galaxies were brighter in the past, this translates 
to a current mass-to-light ratio of 280. For scale, we would 
need around 1400 for an average cluster to extrapolate to 
a closed universe. 

The mass core radius is smaller than most observed 
x-ray core radii in nearby clusters, suggesting that the x- 
ray gas may be less relaxed dynamically than the dark 
matter. Recent high resolution N-body simulations of dark 
matter clustering develop mass cores much smaller than 
the observed mass cores. Perhaps there are other physical 
mechanisms at work in the cores of clusters, beyond 
gravitational instability and merging of dark matter halos, 
which are capable of damping the buildup of the mass 
at the center. But strong lensing events like this are rare. 
The large mass associated with rich clusters of galaxies 
distorts background galaxy images over a large area of 
the sky. To accurately measure this effect, deep multi- 
wavelength imaging to 29th magnitude over a wide field 
must be obtained. 


Statistical weak lensing 

Foreground GALAXY CLUSTERS at redshifts 0.2—0.5 with radial 
velocity dispersions above 700 km s-! have sufficient mass 
density to significantly distort background galaxies of 
redshift greater than 0.4—1. Lensing preserves the surface 
brightness and spectrum of the source, so that most lensed 
sources have the very faint surface brightness and blue 
color of the faint blue galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


250 


125 


—125 


—125 ) 125 250 
(0) 


Figure 2. (a) A Hubble Space Telescope image of the redshift 0.4 
cluster CL0024+1654. Multiple images (A-E) of az = 1.6 
background galaxy may be seen. This figure is reproduced as 
Color Plate 17. (b) A contour map of the projected mass density 
in CL0024+1654, obtained by fitting the observed distorted 
images of the source galaxy. The concentrated dark matter halos 
of individual cluster galaxies can be seen. However, most of the 
mass in the cluster is in a smooth non-singular distribution. 


Since there are roughly 100 independent resolved 
sources per square arcminute, this enables a different 
kind of solution to the inverse problem, called ‘statistical 
weak lensing’. This method has the advantage that it 
is generally applicable, and gives good signal-to-noise 
inversions in regions of low shear which are much more 
representative of random regions. In statistical weak 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing by Clusters of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. A simulated field, several arcminutes wide, looking 
through the forest of galaxies out to redshift 3. The effects of a 
dark matter concentration of the type found in a massive cluster 
centered at lower left are shown. 


lensing it is necessary to average over the apparent 
orientation of many sources for each mass resolution 
element; this is why weak-lens statistical inversion uses 
tens of thousands of distorted background galaxies over 
a wide field. The largest source of noise in weak-lens 
inversion of deep optical images is the ellipticity noise of 
the source population itself; galaxies are not round and 
they come inall orientations. Anumber of non-parametric, 
regularized algorithms have been developed for inverting 
the distortion field represented by the observed distorted 
source galaxy images. A simulation of both weak and 
strong lensing is shown in figure 3. First, a long 
cone is populated with galaxies of appropriate size and 
luminosity, out to redshift 3. Then a cluster mass is placed 
at redshift 0.3, distorting the images of these background 
galaxies. 

To construct a map of the gravitational lens projected 
mass distribution, we need to estimate the distortion at 
each point in the field. Start with the (7,6) principal- 
axis transformed second moments of the intensity / (the 
tangential and radial components of the major axis a 
and minor axis b) for each background galaxy image g 
about some point on the sky (x, y). The excess tangential 
alignment about that point is then given by the distortion 
statistic 


T,(x,y) = (a — b’)/(a’ +b’) 
For example, about position (0,0) in figure 3 this tangential 
alignment is high. In the weak-lensing limit it can be 


shown that the integral of the tangential alignment T 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


around a circle of radius r about the point (xo, yo) is a 
measure of the mass contrast interior: 


[26.40.90 dr = 2[Zn(<r)- BQ] Ey", 
cad 

where », is the critical mass density for lensing the source 
onto the observer. A typical value for &, for lenses at 
moderate redshift is 1 g cm~?. To construct an image 
of the gravitational lens projected mass distribution, the 
distortion statistic T (x, y) may be computed over a grid of 
positions as candidate lens centers. The average projected 
mass density at point (x, y) on the sky, with resolution 
rmin, is given by 


= G m 2 
x(x, y) = x | Pre.x.9 d’r + Louter; 
r 


where Xo(rmin, rmax, zs, zl) is a function of the source and 
lens redshifts and is calibrated with strong lensing cluster 
test masses, G(r, rmin, rmax) is an apodizing filter which 
smoothly cuts on at rmin and off at rmax, and 3 dee (rmin, 
rmax) is the average density in the annulus between rmin 
and rmax. ¥(x, y) is a direct map of the projected mass 
density. 

In practice, a catalog of faint blue galaxy positions, 
total magnitudes, and second moments of flux is passed 
to the lens arclet inversion software. Currently there are 
more than 30 clusters with weak-lensing mass estimates. 
The center of (lensing) mass corresponds well to the center 
of optical light. The lens projected mass overdensity 
(see second equation above) as a function of radius from 
the centroid of the mass distribution may be compared 
to the lens cluster light (baryonic) distribution. The 
smoothed optical light distribution traces the (lensing) 
mass well. Despite earlier indications that the x-ray 
derived mass disagreed with the lensing mass inside 200- 
300 kpc, recent measurements of both quantities out to 
1 Mpc radius show that the two methods are in closer 
agreement inside this larger radius. This suggests that 
the assumptions of pressure support and isothermality 
for the x-ray gas break down inside ~ 300 kpc. This has 
been resolved, in large part due to wide-field imaging of 
cluster lenses. Until recently, observations of lensing, x- 
rays, and galaxy velocities (i.e. virial mass) were often 
made on very different physical scales and this appears 
to have contributed to the confusion in the literature as to 
which of the three independent mass estimates for a given 
cluster was correct. As multiband deep imaging becomes 
more common in lensing work, color-redshifts will enable 
weak-lens studies of clusters at high redshift. 


Mass and light in typical clusters 

Many clusters studied in this way have been chosen for 
their high x-ray luminosity. This may bias the statistics of 
mass in clusters. A recent weak-lensing survey studied 
ten x-ray selected ‘normal’ clusters of galaxies with a 
wide-field CCD mosaic camera. Mass and light in a 
sample of clusters of galaxies of typical x-ray luminosity 
at redshifts (z = 0.15-0.25) were studied. These clusters 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Lensing by Clusters of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are more representative of cluster mass distribution than 
the rare x-ray luminous rich clusters studied so far. Out 
to 3 Mpc radius, mass generally traces light. Some of the 
cluster mass profiles are flatter than isothermal in a central 
region, with downturns at radii beyond 2 Mpc. Outside 
the core, these profiles are well-fit by N-body cold dark 
matter clustering simulations. Mass-to-light ratios at red 
wavelengths in the cluster rest frame scatter around 350, 
with no systematic trend with mass. Scaling the average 
M/L by the luminosity density leads to an estimate for the 
mean mass density of Qn = 0.2. But there may be low 
mass density regions in the huge volume outside clusters. 
Taking all the clusters observed to date (both high and 
low x-ray luminosity), lensing-inferred mass to light ratios 
bracket a broad range, from 200h to 800h (in solar units), 
with most of the clusters being in the low to middle part 
of this range (Here, h = Ho/100.) 


Beyond clusters 

Weak lensing is a tool which may be applied anywhere 
on the sky. One may even search for mass overdensities 
comparable to clusters without first knowing a cluster is 
there. Some clusters have already been found via their 
mass in this way. More importantly for our understanding 
of cosmology, weak lensing may be used to directly 
investigate the evolution of mass structures over cosmic 
time, and surveys are currently under way. Figure 4 
shows a mass map of a 0.8 degree wide field, revealing 
several mass concentrations. If the shear pattern of 
sufficiently distant galaxies is measured over a wide field, 
then intervening mass overdensities over a wide range of 
redshift are revealed. 

In different cosmologies mass structure develops 
differently; this leads to a weak-lens cosmological 
diagnostic. Generally, the net effect of all intervening 
mass overdensities is a correlation of orientations of faint 
galaxies separated by some angle on the sky. A direct 
probe of the development of mass structures, this ‘cosmic 
shear’ has recently been detected. Meaningful tests of 
cosmological models will result from the comparison 
of what is found for this cosmic shear (as well as 
counts of discrete clusters found via weak lensing) 
with theoretical models for the evolution of large scale 
structure. Comparing mass maps from deep weak-lensing 
observations with data from upcoming satellite cosmic 
MICROWAVE BACKGROUND anisotropy missions will lead to a 
precision test of the nature of cosmic mass-energy, probing 
the basic theory of structure formation in our universe. 


Bibliography 

Blandford R D and Narayan R 1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 311 

Kaiser N 1998 Astrophys. J. 498 26 

Mellier Y 1999 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 37 127 

Tyson J A, Kochanski G and Dell’Antonio I P 1998 
Astrophys. J. 498 107 


J A Tyson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The ellipticities of over 50 000 faint galaxies can be 
inverted to reconstruct a map of the intervening mass 
distribution. Several projected mass concentrations are seen in 
this weak-lensing mass map covering 0.8 degrees of the sky. One 
of these structures spans 6 Mpc, twelve times the size of the map 
shown in figure 2. At the center of the mass structure is a cluster 
of galaxies. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitational Radiation 


Gravity is one of the fundamental forces of nature, and it 
is the dominant force in most astronomical systems. In 
common with all other phenomena, gravity must obey the 
principles of SPECIAL RELATIVITY. In particular, gravitational 
forces must not be transmitted or communicated faster 
than light. This means that, when the gravitational field 
of an object changes, the changes ripple outwards through 
space and take a finite time to reach other objects. These 
ripples are called gravitational radiation or gravitational 
waves!. 

In Einstein’s theory of gravitation (see GENERAL 
RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION), aS in many other modern 
theories of gravity, gravitational waves travel at exactly 
the speed of light. Different theories make different 
predictions, however, about details, such as their strength 
and polarization. There is strong indirect observational 
evidence (see GENERAL RELATIVITY TESTS: BINARY PULSARS) that 
gravitational waves follow the predictions of general 
relativity, and instruments now under construction are 
expected to make the first direct detections of them in the 
first years of the 21st century. 

These instruments and plans for future instruments in 
space are described in the article GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION 
DETECTORS ON EARTH AND IN SPACE. Detectors must look 
for gravitational radiation from astronomical systems, 
because it is not possible to generate detectable levels of 
radiation in the laboratory. It follows that gravitational 
wave detection is also a branch of observational 
astronomy. 

The most striking aspect of gravitational waves is 
their weakness. A comparison with the energy in light 
will illustrate this. The human eye has no trouble sensing 
the light from the planet Jupiter: the amount of energy 
that passes through the iris of the eye is far more than the 
minimum the eye can detect. Yet several times a week 
a gravitational wave, generated in a far distant galaxy, 
carries a similar amount of energy into the eye, and we 
do not notice it. 

The reason is that gravity is the weakest of the 
fundamental forces, and the disturbance created by even 
such an energetic wave is so tiny that no man-made 
instrument has so far registered it. While all the energy in 
the light from Jupiter that enters the eye is absorbed in the 
eye, the gravitational wave passes right through, leaving 
behind almost none of its energy. All the matter in the 
present universe is similarly transparent to gravitational 
waves. 

Gravitational radiation is today one of the last 
unopened windows into the universe. There are at least 
five reasons motivating scientists to develop gravitational 
wave astronomy. 


1 They are also sometimes referred to as gravity waves, but 
since this term has a different meaning in meteorology and 
stellar hydrodynamics, we will avoid it here. See SOLAR INTERIOR: 
HELIOSEISMOLOGY. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e The weakness with which gravitational waves 
interact with matter is a great advantage for 
astronomy. It means that gravitational waves arrive 
unaffected by any intervening matter they may have 
encountered since being generated. There is no 
significant scattering or absorption, although they 
will be deflected by GRAVITATIONALLENSING in the same 
way as light. Gravitational waves carry uncorrupted 
information even if they come from the most distant 
parts of the universe or from its most hidden regions, 
like the interiors of SUPERNOVAE. 

e Gravitational waves are emitted by the bulk motions 
of their sources, not by individual atoms or electrons, 
as is normally the case for electromagnetic waves. 
They therefore carry a completely different kind of 
information about their sources from that which is 
normally available in observations of binary stars (see 
BINARY STARS: OVERVIEW), SUpernovae and NEUTRON STARS. 

e Gravitational waves can be emitted by black holes, 
which are described in the article GRAVITATIONAL 
RADIATION DETECTORS ON EARTH AND IN SPACE. Indeed, 
gravitational waves provide the only way to make 
direct observations of these objects. Since there is 
now strong indirect evidence that giant black holes 
inhabit the centers of many (or even most) galaxies 
(See SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES IN AGN), and since smaller 
ones are common in the Galaxy (see BLACK HOLE 
CANDIDATES IN X-RAY BINARIES), there is great interest in 
making direct observations of them. 

e Gravitational waves can come from extraordinarily 
early in the history of the universe. The electromag- 
netic radiation from the big bang is called the cos- 
MIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND. Observations of it describe 
the universe at it was about 10° yr after the big bang. 
Studies of cosmological NUCLEOSYNTHESIS give infor- 
mation about what the universe was like as little as 
3 min after the big bang. Gravitational waves, if they 
can be detected, would picture the universe when it 
was only perhaps 10~*‘ s old, just at the end of INFLA- 
TION. 

e Gravitational radiation is the last fundamental 
prediction of Einstein’s general relativity that has 
not yet been directly verified. If another theory of 
gravity is correct, then differences could in principle 
show up in the properties of gravitational waves, 
such as their polarization. In principle, there 
must be a better theory of gravity, since general 
relativity is not a quantum theory, a deficiency that 
theoretical physicists today are working hard to 
remedy. The majority belief today is that there 
should be a unified theory of the fundamental forces, 
in which gravitation is related to the other forces. 
Evidence for the nature of this relation could show up 
in observations of gravitational waves, particularly 
those from the big bang. 


These motivations and their implications are devel- 
oped in the following sections. Each section begins with 
an introduction to the physical ideas and then develops 
some of the mathematical details. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The physics of gravitational radiation: weakness 
and strength 

The starting point for understanding gravitational radi- 
ation is Newtonian gravity. The weakness of gravity is 
evident. If a child picks up a book, she defeats the cumu- 
lative gravitational pull of the entire planet Earth on the 
book. The strength to do this comes from the chemical 
forces in her muscles, which come from electromagnetic 
interactions. 

In fact, the electromagnetic force between the electron 
and the proton in a hydrogen atom is 2 x 10” times bigger 
than the gravitational force between them. The reason that 
gravity can nevertheless dominate on the cosmic scale is 
that opposite electrical charges cancel each other, while the 
gravitational forces of all the particles add. 

Another fact about gravity that was known to Newton 
is what is now called the equivalence principle. This is 
the principle that all bodies accelerate in the same way 
in a gravitational field, so that the trajectory that a freely 
falling body (a body influenced only by gravity) follows 
in a given gravitational field depends only on its starting 
position and velocity, not on what it is made of. 

Imagine now a machine made in some way to detect 
gravitational waves. Whatever the method of detection, 
a wave needs somehow to alter the internal state of the 
detector. If the wave carries a gravitational field that 
is completely uniform across the detector, then by the 
equivalence principle all of the parts of the detector will 
accelerate together, and its state will not change at all. To 
detect a gravitational wave, the machine must measure 
the non-uniformities of the gravitational field across a 
detector. 

These non-uniformities are called tidal forces, because 
they produce the stretching effects that raise tides on the 
Earth. Gravitational waves are traveling tidal forces. 

Newton’s theory of gravity had no gravitational 
waves. For Newton, if a gravitational field changed 
in some way, that change took place instantaneously 
everywhere in space. This is not a wave. Let us consider 
what we mean by the term ‘wave’ in ordinary language. 

Imagine a child’s rubber duck floating in a bath tub 
half full of water. If a child presses down on the duck very 
gently, until is is nearly submerged, then the level of the 
water will rise everywhere in a nearly uniform way, and 
this is not called a wave. If instead he drops the duck, 
then the disturbance rises around the base of the duck 
rapidly, moves away from it and eventually reaches the 
walls. This is a wave. Wave motion requires a finite speed 
for the propagation of disturbances. If the disturbance is 
very slow, as for the floating duck, then the wavelength is 
very long, and near the site of the disturbance the wave 
motion is not noticeable. We say we are in the ‘near zone’. 
However, when we are more than a wavelength away, 
then we see waves, and this is the ‘wave zone’ or ‘far 
zone’. For the dropped duck, we see the waves because 
their wavelengths are shorter than the size of the bath. 
In general relativity, the speed of gravity is the speed of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


light. Because of this finite speed, gravity must exhibit 
wave effects. 

Many of Newton’s contemporaries were unhappy 
that his theory of gravity was based on instantaneous 
‘action at a distance’, but Newton’s theory fitted the 
observational facts. If gravity had a finite speed of 
propagation, there was no evidence for it in the solar 
system. Interestingly, the brilliant 18th century French 
mathematician and physicist Laplace tried out a variation 
on Newton’s theory in which gravity was represented 
by something ‘flowing’ out of its source with a finite 
speed. He reasoned that a planet like the Earth, moving 
through this fluid of gravity, would experience friction and 
gradually spiral in towards the Sun. 

Laplace could show that the observational limits on 
this in-spiral even in his day were so stringent that the 
speed of gravity in his model needed to be huge compared 
with the speed of light. He did not find this result attractive 
and took the theory no further. (Laplace also explored the 
notion of what we now call a black hole, which for him was 
a region where gravity was strong enough to trap light.) 

It is interesting that, today, observations of the two 
neutron stars in the binary system PSR1913 + 16 spiraling 
together as they orbit one another provide the most 
convincing evidence that gravitational waves exist and are 
as described in general relativity (see below). Laplace had 
the right effect, but the wrong theory. This evidence is 
described in the next section. 

In general relativity, Einstein used the principle of 
equivalence as the basis for a geometrical description of 
gravity. In the four-dimensional world of space-time, the 
trajectory of a particle falling freely in a gravitational field 
is a certain fixed curve. Its direction at any point depends 
on the velocity of the particle. The equivalence principle 
implies that there is a preferred set of curves in space-time: 
at any point, pick any direction, and there is a unique 
curve in that direction that will be the trajectory of any 
particle starting with that velocity. These trajectories are 
thus properties of space-time itself. 

Moreover, if there were no gravitational field, the 
trajectories would be simple straight lines. Even in a 
gravitational field, a small freely falling particle does not 
‘feel’ any acceleration: its internal state is the same as 
if there were no gravity. Therefore Einstein postulated 
that a gravitational field made space-time curved, and 
that the preferred trajectories were locally straight lines 
that simply changed direction as they moved through the 
curved space-time, in much the same way as a great circle 
ona sphere changes direction relative to other great circles 
as one goes along it. For weak gravitational fields of slowly 
moving bodies, Einstein’s theory reduces to Newton’s in 
the first approximation. 

For gravitational waves, one could make a very 
simple detector just by monitoring the distance between 
two nearby freely falling particles. If they are genuinely 
free, then any changes in their separations would indicate 
the passage of a gravitational wave. Because this measures 
a tidal effect, the bigger the separation of the particles, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the bigger will be the change in their separation, at least 
for particles that are separated by less than a gravitational 
wavelength. Most modern gravitational wave detectors 
are designed to be as big as cost and practicality allows. 

Although gravitational radiation is well understood 
in theoretical terms in general relativity, the complexity 
and non-linearity of Einstein’s equations means that 
calculations are often difficult. In the historical 
development of general relativity, between 1915 and 
the 1950s and 1960s, these mathematical difficulties 
created confusion over the physical nature of gravitational 
radiation, and in particular over whether it carried energy 
away from the source. Improved mathematical techniques 
finally resolved the matter in favor of the simple physical 
picture presented here, but this picture would not be 
complete without the strong mathematical underpinning 
that now exists. 

The question of energy in gravitational waves is still a 
delicate one. There is no question that waves carry energy 
(and momentum) away from their sources. Nevertheless, 
it is not possible in general relativity to localize the 
energy in the radiation to regions smaller than about 
a wavelength. Indeed the equivalence principle shows 
that ‘point’ particles feel nothing, no matter how strong 
the wave. The wave only acts by stretching space-time, 
producing a tidal distortion in the separations between 
particles (see the discussion of polarization below). 

For this reason, energy is localized only in regions, not 
at points. It is nevertheless real energy: the non-linearity 
of general relativity allows waves to create gravitation 
themselves. Recent numerical simulations have shown 
that focussed gravitational waves can actually form black 
holes, trapping themselves. If the waves are weak, they 
enter the focussing region and re-emerge. If they are strong 
enough, they enter and never leave. 


Gravitational waves in a quasi-Newtonian model 

It is possible to calculate the approximate size of the 
effect of a given gravitational wave by beginning with 
Newtonian gravity and adding waves to it. In Newtonian 
gravity the gravitational field produced by a mass M ata 
distance r is given by 


¢=—GM/r (1) 


where G is Newton’s gravitational constant. The field of a 
gravitational wave must be a ripple on this, which means 
asmall change that oscillates in space and time. A suitable 
form for a change that propagates at the speed of light in 
the z-direction with an angular frequency is: 


bo = -<o™ sin[w(z/c — t)] (2) 


where ¢€ is a dimensionless number that would be expected 
to be small compared with 1. Its size is the subject of the 
next main section. 

The field 5@ produces an acceleration in the z- 
direction that depends on its z-derivative. Both 1/r and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the sin() term depend on z. The derivative of 1/r will 
be proportional to 1/r?, which is how the acceleration 
falls off in Newton’s theory (where ¢ is the only field). 
However, the derivative of the sin() term does not change 
the 1/r; rather, it essentially just multiplies 6¢ by w/c. At 
sufficiently large distances from the source, this term will 
dominate the 1/r” term and the acceleration produced by 
the wave will be 


ba, = apart cos[w(z/c — t)]. (3) 
rc 


Note that this term would not be present in the x- and 
y-derivatives, so these components of the acceleration 
are much smaller in this quasi-Newtonian model of a 
gravitational wave. 


Effect on a simple detector 
The tidal part of this acceleration, for a detector that has 
size ¢ in the z-direction, is to a first approximation 


d GM 
£—Sa, = €w* —— sin[w(z/c — 1)]. (4) 
dz re 
If a detector consists of two freely falling particles with 
this relative acceleration, the equation of motion for their 
separation £ will be 


d’¢ GM 

aa = ewt— > sin[w(z/c — t)]. (5) 
The dimensionless coefficient «GM/rc* is typically 

very small. Even if € is of order 1, the other number is, 

with reasonable values for M and R, 


M M 
ae = 2.4 x 10-7! — ( 
rc Mop 


x -1 
20 wm) 

The mass and distance scales here are those appropriate 
to a neutron star in the nearest large cluster of galaxies, 
the Virgo Cluster. (The distance unit is based on the 
astronomers’ parsec, denoted pc, which is about 3 x 101 m. 
The unit Mpc is a megaparsec.) It is believed that several 
neutron stars are formed in the Virgo Cluster each year 
in supernova explosions. Ever since the beginning of 
the development of gravitational wave detectors such 
events have been high on the list of possible sources of 
gravitational waves. 

To solve equation (5), one takes r and z as constants 
and uses the smallness of the right-hand side, which 
implies that the changes in ¢ are tiny compared with ¢ 
itself. On the right-hand side one can therefore replace ¢ 
by £o, the initial value of ¢, and then simply integrate twice 
in time to obtain (for an initial value dé/dt = 0) 


A ese wt sin[o(c/e— 1] (6) 
Lo rc 


The right-hand side of equation (6) is identical to that 
of equation (2). This is an important conclusion which 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


fits neatly with Einstein’s geometrical conception of 
gravity: the size of a gravitational wave gives directly the 
stretching of the distance between nearby free particles. 
It is conventional to call this 4/2 and refer to h as the 
gravitational wave potential: 


L(t) — 
9 (t) 0 
Lo 


his 25. (7) 


The amplitude of the oscillations of h is 


GM 
h~ 2 mira (8) 
It is evident from this that a detector must be able to 
measure changes in its own size that are smaller than 1 part 
in 107! to have a reasonable chance of making astronomical 
observations. The extraordinary smallness of this effect 
also explains why ordinary objects in the universe are 
transparent to gravitational waves. As the waves pass 
through them, they disturb them so little (parts per 107! 
typically) that the transfer of energy to the object and any 
back-reaction effects of this on the wave are negligibly 
small. 


Energy flux carried by waves 

The energy in the waves can also be estimated from 
these equations and general physical principles. Quite 
generally, in classical field theories, the energy flux of a 
propagating sinusoidal plane wave is proportional to the 
square of the time-derivative of the fundamental field. In 
electromagnetism, the Poynting flux is proportional to the 
square of the time-derivative of the vector potential. 

In general relativity, the flux is therefore proportional 
to the square of the time-derivative of A(t). The 
proportionality constant must be built only out of c, G 
and pure numbers. To obtain the right units, it must 
be proportional to c?/G: to obtain the pure number, a 
calculation in general relativity is required; 1/327 for a 
linearly polarized wave. (Polarization is described later.) 


This gives 
1 3 /dh\ 
Fuw = =—- = | 
32 G \ dt 


engl 22 i (9) 
cual 100Hz) \ 10-2 


for a wave with frequency f = w/2z. For comparison, 
reflected sunlight from Jupiter has a flux on Earth of 
2.3 x 10-7 W m7, almost 100 times smaller than that of 
a gravitational wave with an amplitude of 10-”. 


Deficiencies of the quasi-Newtonian model 

The calculation and equations in this section have been 
framed within a modified Newtonian model of gravity 
with a propagation speed of c, and one would expect some 
differences from general relativity. The most important 
difference is in the direction in which the tidal forces act. In 
the simple model, wave accelerations act in the z-direction, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which was the direction of propagation of the wave. This 
is called a longitudinal wave. 

In general relativity, gravitational waves are trans- 
verse waves: if the wave propagates in the z-direction then 
the tidal forces act only in the x—y-plane. We will discuss 
later the exact form that their action in this plane takes. 
Remarkably, the rest of the formulas above are good ap- 
proximations even in general relativity, provided that € is 
calculated correctly, as described in the next section. 


The emission of gravitational waves 

The previous section described the propagation of 
gravitational waves, their interaction with detectors and 
the energy they carry. This section deals with the strength 
with which waves are emitted by astronomical bodies. 

In Newtonian gravity there is a fundamental theorem, 
proved by Newton, that the gravitational field outside a 
spherical body is not only spherical but the same as that 
of a point mass located at the origin of the body. It has 
the form given in equation (1). In particular, the field is 
independent of the size of the body, as long as we consider 
only points outside it. This is true even if the star pulsates 
in a spherical manner. 

This theorem is essentially the same in general 
relativity, and is known as Birkhoff’s theorem. Outside 
a spherical body the field is the same as that of a black 
hole of the same mass as the body (the Schwarzschild 
metric), evenif the body is pulsating spherically. However, 
if the pulsation is non-spherical, then the outside field 
will change. In general relativity the changes generally 
propagate as a wave. So gravitational waves will be 
emitted by non-spherical motions. 

In general the calculation of the emitted waves is 
extremely difficult, since the field equations of general 
relativity are a system of many coupled, non-linear, partial 
differential equations. However, in four circumstances the 
emission mechanisms are understood in some detail: 


e Small-amplitude pulsations of relativistic stars and 
black holes. Normally gravitational radiation carries 
away energy and damps pulsations away, but 
in rotating stars the opposite may happen: the 
radiated loss of angular momentum may allow 
the star to spin down to an energetically more 
favored state, in which case the perturbation will 
grow, at least until non-linear effects intervene. 
Discovered by S Chandrasekhar and now called the 
Chandrasekhar-Friedman-Schutz (CFS) instability, 
it is thought to limit the rotation speed of young 
neutron stars (see below). Black holes also emit 
gravitational radiation when they are disturbed, e.g. 
by something falling into them, but they are not 
unstable: they always settle down into a steady state 
again. 

e = Radiation from ‘test’ objects orbiting black holes. 
If the mass of the object is small enough then 
the total gravitational field may be treated as a 
linear perturbation of the exactly known field of a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


black hole (the Schwarzschild or, with rotation, the 
Kerr solution). These studies give insight into the 
general problem of gravitational radiation, and they 
also predict gravitational waveforms that might be 
observed by space-based observatories looking at 
compact stars falling into the giant black holes in the 
centers of galaxies (see below). 

e Weak gravitational fields and slow motion. Such 
weakly relativistic sources are studied in the post- 
Newtonian approximation, which includes higher- 
order corrections to Newtonian gravity from general 
relativity. This is analogous to the slow-motion 
multipole approximation that is so powerful in the 
study of electromagnetic radiation. Most realistic 
gravitational-wave sources can be studied to some 
approximation this way. 

e Collisions of black holes and neutron stars. These 
events, which are expected to be observed by 
gravitational wave detectors (see below), must be 
modeled by solving the full set of Einstein equations 
on a powerful computer. Techniques to do this 
are advancing rapidly, and simulations of realistic 
mergers of stars and black holes from in-spiraling 
orbits can be expected to yield useful results in the 
first years of the 21st century. 


Quadrupole approximation 

The post-Newtonian approximation has so far been the 
most powerful of these methods, and it yields the most 
insight into the emission mechanisms. Its fundamental 
result is the quadrupole formula, which gives the first 
approximation to the radiation emitted by a weakly 
relativistic system. 

The quadrupole formula is analogous to the dipole 
formula of electromagnetism. In this language, monopole 
means spherical, which emits no radiation. This is also true 
in electromagnetism, where it is linked to conservation of 
charge. The ‘monopole moment’ in electromagnetism is 
the total charge of a system, and since that does not change, 
there can be no spherical radiation. 

Again in electromagnetism, the dipole moment is 
defined as the integral 


dj = i px; ax 


where p is the charge density and x; is a Cartesian 
coordinate. If this integral is time dependent, then 
the amplitude of the electromagnetic waves will be 
proportional to its first time-derivative dd;/dt, and the 
radiated energy will be proportional (as we remarked 
earlier) to the square of the time derivative of this 
amplitude, i.e. to )*; |\d?d;/dt?|?. 

In the post-Newtonian approximation to general 
relativity, the calculation goes remarkably similarly. The 
monopole moment is now the total mass-energy, which 
is the dominant source of the gravitational field for non- 
relativistic bodies, and which is constant as long as the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


radiation is weak. (Radiation will carry away energy, but 
in the post-Newtonian approximation that is a higher- 
order effect.) The dipole moment is given by the same 
equation as above, but with p interpreted as the density of 
mass-energy. 

However, here general relativity departs from 
electromagnetism. The time-derivative of the dipole 
moment is, since the mass-energy is conserved, just the 
integral of the velocity v;: 


d; =f ow d°x. (10) 


However, this is the total momentum in the system, and 
(to lowest order) this is constant. Therefore, there is no 
energy radiated as a result of dipole effects in general 
relativity. The gravitational field far from the source does 
contain a dipole piece if d; is non-zero, but this is constant 
because it reflects the fact that the source has non-zero total 
momentum and is therefore moving through space. 

To find genuine radiation in general relativity one 
must go one step beyond the dipole approximation 
to the quadrupole terms. These are also studied in 
electromagnetism, and the analogy with relativity again 
is close. The fundamental quantity is the spatial tensor 
(matrix) Q jx, the second moment of the mass (or charge) 
distribution: 


O jx = f exis dex. (11) 


A gravitational wave in general relativity is represented 
by a matrix hj, rather than a single scalar h, and its source 
(in the quadrupole approximation) is Q jx. 

As in electromagnetism, the amplitude of the 
radiation is proportional to the second time-derivative of 
Qjx, and it falls off inversely with the distance r from 
the source. A factor of G/c* is needed in order to obtain 
a dimensionless amplitude h, and a factor of 2 to be 
consistent with the definition in equation (8). The result 
for h jx is 

26 BOK 
mre dr 

General relativity describes waves with a matrix 
because gravity is geometry, and the effects of gravity 
are represented by the stretching of space-time. This 
matrix contains that distortion information. Here is the 
information about the transverse action of the waves that 
the quasi-Newtonian model of the last section did not get 
right. 


(12) 


Simple estimates 

If the motion inside the source is highly non-spherical, then 
a typical component of d?Q ;;,/dt? will (from equation (11)) 
have magnitude M vxg, where vyjg is the non-spherical part 
of the squared velocity inside the source. So one way of 
approximating any component of equation (12) is 


ve 2GMrX, 
—~. 


(13) 


re 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Comparing this with equation (8) we see that the ratio € of 
the wave to the Newtonian potential is simply 


2: 
UNS 


ew 
C2 


By the virial theorem for self-gravitating bodies, this will 
not be larger than 

é€< Pint /C (14) 
where @¢j, is the maximum value of the Newtonian 
gravitational potential inside the system. This provides 
a convenient bound in practice. It should not be taken to 
be more accurate than that. 

For a neutron star source one has gin. ~ 0.2c?. If 
the star is in the Virgo cluster, then the upper limit on 
the amplitude of the radiation from such a source is 
5 x 10°”. This has been the goal of detector development 
for decades, to make detectors that can observe waves at 
or below an amplitude of 10-71. 


Polarization of gravitational waves 

The matrix nature of the wave amplitude comes from 
general relativity and has no Newtonian analog. In order 
to find the effect of the waves on the separation of two free 
particles (the idealized detector), one has to start with h jx 
as given by equation (12) or by any other calculation, and 
then do three things. 


1. Project the matrix h;, onto a plane perpendicular 
to the direction of travel of the wave. In the 
simple case considered above, where the wave 
was traveling in the z-direction, this means leaving 
the components {h,,, hy, hyy} alone and setting the 
remaining components to zero. It is then a two- 
dimensional matrix in the transverse plane. 

2. Remove the two-dimensional trace of the projected 
matrix. Call the resulting matrix hj{, where TT 
stands for transverse-traceless. In the example this 
means subtracting (hy. +hy,)/2 from both h,, and hy,. 
Then there are only two independent components 
left, ny = ayy and hil = mie 

3. To find the change in the separation of two particles 
that have an initial separation given by the vector £;, 
let the matrix hj/ act on it: 


5f; = Done. (15) 
k 


It is clear that any longitudinal component of the 
separation ¢; between the particles is unaffected by the 
wave (in the example, this is the z-separation), and that 
there are two degrees of freedom (the two independent 
components of hj/) to move particles in the plane 
perpendicular to the propagation direction. These two 
degrees of freedom are the two polarizations of the wave. 

Figure 1 shows the conventional definition of the two 
independent polarizations, from which any other can be 
made by superposition. What is shown is the effect of 
a wave on a ring of free particles in a plane transverse 
to the wave. The first line shows a wave with h,y = 0, 
conventionally called the ‘+’ polarization. The bottom line 
shows a wave with h,, = 0, the ‘x’ polarization. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Polarization of gravitational waves. The center line 
gives the wave as a function of time, with an amplitude of 

h = 0.2, and the top and bottom lines show to scale the 
distortions produced by two polarizations with this amplitude. 


Luminosity in gravitational waves 

The energy carried by the gravitational wave must be 
proportional to the square of the time-derivative of the 
wave amplitude, so it will depend on the sum of the 
squares of the components d° Q ;,/dr°. The energy flux falls 
off as 1/r?, but when integrated over a sphere of radius r 
to obtain the total luminosity, the dependence on r goes 
away, as it should. The luminosity contains a factor G/c® 
on dimensional grounds, and a further factor of 1/5 comes 
from a careful calculation in general relativity. The result 
is the gravitational wave luminosity in the quadrupole 
approximation: 


G as ites 
bor = $5( DO nn 307] (16) 


where Q is the trace of the matrix Qj,. Its squared third 
derivative must be subtracted in order to ensure that 
spherical motions do not radiate. 

This equation will be used in the next section to 
estimate the back-reaction effect on a system that emits 
gravitational radiation. 


Emission estimates 

Until observations of gravitational waves are successfully 
made, one can only make intelligent guesses about most 
of the sources that will be seen. There are many that 
could be strong enough to be seen by the early detectors: 
binary stars, supernova explosions, neutron stars, the early 
universe. The estimates in this section are accurate only 
to within factors of order 1. The estimates correctly show 
how the important observables scale with the properties 
of the systems. 


Man-made gravitational waves 

One source can be ruled out: man-made gravitational 
radiation. Imagine creating a wave generator with the 
following extreme properties. It consists of two masses of 
10° kg each (a small car) at opposite ends of a beam 10 m 
long. At its center the beam pivots about an axis. This 
centrifuge rotates 10 times per second. All the velocity is 
non-spherical, so v5, in equation (13) is about 10° m? s~?. 
The frequency of the waves will actually be 20 Hz, since the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mass distribution of the system is periodic with a period of 
0.05 s, only half the rotation period. The wavelength of the 
waves will therefore be 1.5 x 10” m, about the diameter of 
the earth. In order to detect gravitational waves, not near- 
zone Newtonian gravity, the detector must be at least one 
wavelength from the source. Then the amplitude h can be 
deduced from equation (13): h ~ 5 x 10-*. This is far too 
small to contemplate detecting. 


Radiation from a spinning neutron star 

Some likely gravitational wave sources behave like the 
centrifuge, only on a grander scale. Suppose a neutron 
star of radius R spins with a frequency f and has an 
irregularity, a bump of mass m on its otherwise axially 
symmetric shape. Then the bump will emit gravitational 
radiation (again at frequency 2 f because it spins about its 
center of mass, so it actually has mass excesses on two 
sides of the star), and the non-spherical velocity will be 
just uys = 27 Rf. The radiation amplitude will be, from 
equation (13), 


Ipump ~ 2(20 Rf/c)?Gm/rc? (17) 


and the luminosity, from equation (16) (assuming that 
roughly four comparable components of Qj, contribute 
to the sum), 


Loump mo (G/5c°) (2m f )®m? R*. 


The radiated energy would presumably come from the 
rotational energy of the star. This would lead to a 
spindown of the star on a timescale 


Ts 5 4 (Gm\" pvy-3 
Tspindown = gm /Loump in f (=) (<) . 


It is felt that neutron star crusts are not strong enough 
to support asymmetries with a mass of more than about 
m ~ 10-°Mo, and from this one can estimate the likelihood 
that the observed spindown timescales of PULSARS are due 
to gravitational radiation. In most cases, it seems that 
gravitational wave losses cannot be the main spindown 
mechanism. 

However, lower levels of radiation would still be 
observable by detectors under construction, and this may 
be coming from a number of stars. In particular, there 
is a class of neutron stars in X-RAY BINARY STARS. They are 
accreting, and it is possible that accretion will create some 
kind of mass asymmetry (bump) or else lead to a rotational 
instability of the CFS type in the r-modes (see below). In 
either case, the stars could turn out be long-lived sources 
of gravitational waves. 


Radiation from a binary star system 
Another ‘centrifuge’ is a binary star system. Two stars 
of the same mass M in a circular orbit of radius R have 
Uys = GM/4R. The gravitational-wave amplitude from 
equation (13) can then be written 


1GM GM 
2 rez Rez" 


(18) 


hpinary ic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Compare this with the implications of putting equation 
(14) into equation (8). 

The gravitational-wave luminosity of such a system 
is, by a calculation analogous to that for bumps on neutron 


stars, 

L 102 /GM\ 

binary ~ 80 G (Fe) : 

In this equation there appears the important constant 
©/G = 3.6x W, a number with the dimensions of 
luminosity built only from fundamental constants. By 
comparison, the luminosity of the Sun is only 3.8 x 
10*° W. Close binaries can therefore radiate more energy 
in gravitational waves than in light. 

The radiation of energy by the orbital motion causes 
the orbit to shrink. The shrinking will make any observed 
gravitational waves increase in frequency with time. This 
is called a chirp. The timescale for this is 


Cchirp = Mv? /Lojnary ie (19) 


3 Re? 


20GM ey 

The binary pulsar system—verifying gravitational waves 
This orbital shrinking has already been observed in the 
HULSE-TAYLOR PULSAR system, containing the radio pulsar 
PSR1913 + 16 and an unseen neutron star in a binary 
orbit. Discovered in 1974 by R Hulse and J Taylor, it 
has established that gravitational radiation is correctly 
described by general relativity. For their discovery, Hulse 
and Taylor received the 1993 Nobel Prize for Physics. 

The key to the importance of this binary system is 
that all of the important parameters of the system can be 
measured before one takes account of the orbital shrinking. 
This is because a number of post-Newtonian effects on the 
arrival time of pulses at the Earth, such as the precession 
of the position of the periastron and the time-dependent 
gravitational redshift of the pulsar period as it approaches 
and recedes from its companion, are measured in this 
system. They fully determine the masses and separation of 
the stars and the inclination and eccentricity of their orbit. 
From these numbers, without any free parameters, it is 
possible to compute the shrinking timescale predicted by 
general relativity. The observed rate matches the predicted 
rate to within the observational errors of less than 1%. 

The stars are in an eccentric orbit (e = 0.615) and 
both have masses of 1.4M >. The orbital semimajor axis 
is about 7 x 8 m. Equation (19) assumes a circular 
orbit and gives a shrinking timescale of 6 x 10'° yr. 
This is an overestimate, however, partly because it is 
in any case a rough approximation, and partly because 
the timescale is very sensitive to eccentricity. With the 
observed eccentricity, a careful calculation shows that 
the expected shrinking timescale is around 4 x 108 yr, 
consistent with observations. 


Chirping binaries 
For a circular equal-mass binary, the orbital shrinking 
timescale and the frequency of the orbit determine both 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M and R. If in addition a gravitational wave detector 
measures the wave amplitude hpinary, then the distance r 
to the binary system can be determined. 

Remarkably, this conclusion holds even for binaries 
with unequal masses. In such a case, the measurable mass 
is the chirp mass of the binary, defined as M := 3/5.M7””, 
where yu is the reduced mass of the binary system and 
My its total mass. Then the distance r is still measurable 
from the chirp rate, frequency, and amplitude. In other 
words, a chirping binary is a standard candle in astronomy. 
Post-Newtonian corrections to the orbit, if observed in the 
waveform, can determine the individual masses of the 
stars and even their spins. 


Recognizing weak signals 

For ground-based detectors, all expected signals have 
amplitudes that are close to or even below the instrumental 
noise level in the detector output. Such signals can 
nevertheless be detected with confidence if their waveform 
matches an expected waveform. The pattern recognition 
technique that will be used by detector scientists is called 
matched filtering. 

Matched filtering works by multiplying the output of 
the detector by a function of time (called the template) 
that represents an expected waveform, and summing 
(integrating) the result. If there is a signal matching the 
waveform buried in the noise then the output of the filter 
will be higher than expected for pure noise. 

A simple example of such a filter is the Fourier 
transform, which is a matched filter for a constant- 
frequency signal. The noise power in the data stream is 
spread out over the spectrum, while the power in the signal 
is concentrated in a single frequency. This makes the signal 
easier to recognize. The improvement of the signal-to- 
noise ratio for the amplitude of the signal is proportional 
to the square root of the number of cycles of the wave 
contained in the data. This is well known for the Fourier 
transform, and it is generally true for matched filtering. 

Matched filtering can make big demands on compu- 
tation, for several reasons. First, the arrival time of a short- 
duration signal is generally not known, so the template has 
to be multiplied into the data stream at each distinguish- 
able arrival time. This is then a correlation of the template 
with the data stream. Normally this is done efficiently 
using fast Fourier transform methods. 

Second, the expected signal usually depends on 
a number of unknown parameters. For example, the 
radiation from a binary system depends on the chirp mass 
M, and it might arrive with an arbitrary phase. Therefore, 
many related templates must be separately applied to the 
data to cover the whole family of signals. 

Third, matched filtering enhances the signal only if 
the template stays in phase with the signal for the whole 
data set. If they go out of phase, the method begins to 
reduce the signal-to-noise ratio. For long-duration signals, 
such as for low-mass neutron star coalescing binaries or 
continuous-wave signals from neutron stars (see below), 
this requires the analysis of large data sets and often forces 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the introduction of additional parameters to allow for 
small effects that can make the signal drift out of phase 
with the template. It also means that the method works 
well only if there is a good prediction of the form of the 
signal. 

Because the first signals will be weak, matched 
filtering will be used wherever possible. Asa simple rule of 
thumb, the detectability of a signal depends on its effective 
amplitude hem, defined as 


hese = hNojetes (20) 
where Neyctes is the number of cycles in the waveform that 
are matched by the template. 

For example, the effective amplitude of the radiation 
from a bump on a neutron star (equation (17)) will 
be hbump(2f Tovs)'/”, where Tops is the observation time. 
In order to detect this radiation, detectors may need 
to observe for long periods, say four months, during 
which they accumulate billions of cycles of the waveform. 
During this time, the star may spin down by a detectable 
amount, and the motion of the Earth introduces large 
changes in the apparent frequency of the signal, so 
matched filtering needs to be done with care and precision. 

Another example is a binary system followed to 
coalescence, i.e. where the chirp time in equation (19) is 
less than the observing time. For neutron star binaries 
observed by ground-based detectors this will always be 
the case (see the next section), so the effective amplitude 
is roughly 


GM (GM\“* 
chirp es hig’ fawtahion ie ao ( ) (21) 


rc Re? 


where for jf, one must use twice the orbital frequency 
(GM/R°)'’?/4z. This may seem a puzzling result, because 
it says that the effective amplitude of the signal gets smaller 
as the stars become closer. However, this just means that 
the signal will be more detectable if it is picked up earlier, 
since equation (21) assumes that the signal is followed right 
to coalescence. If one picks up the signal at earlier times, 
then there are more cycles of the waveform to filter for, 
and this naturally gives a better signal-to-noise ratio. This 
gives an advantage to detectors that can operate at lower 
frequencies. This has been an important consideration in 
the design of modern detectors. 

In general, the sensitivity of detectors will be limited 
not just by detector technology but also by the duration of 
the observation, the quality of the signal predictions and 
even the availability of computer processing power for the 
data analysis. 


Astronomical sources of gravitational waves 
Estimating the frequency 

The signals for which the best waveform predictions are 
available have narrowly defined frequencies. In some 
cases the frequency is dominated by an existing motion, 
such as the spin of a pulsar. However, in most cases the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitational Dynamics 


radius R (m) 


1o' 10° ~— 101 10? = 108 = 10 = 108 = 108 = 107 — 108 


mass M (solar masses) 


Figure 2. Mass-radius plot for gravitational wave sources. 


frequency will be related to the natural frequency for a 
self-gravitating body, defined as 


fo = (Gp/4n)"? (22) 


where p is the mean density of mass-energy in the source. 
This is of the same order as the binary orbital frequency 
and the fundamental pulsation frequency of the body. 

The frequency is determined by the size R and mass 
M of the source, taking p = 3M /4a R°. For a neutron star 
of mass 1.4Mo and radius 10 km, the natural frequency is 
fo = 1.9 kHz. For a black hole of mass 10M, and radius 
2GM/c? = 30 km, itis fo = 1 kHz. For a large black hole 
of mass 2.5 x 10°Mo, such as the one at the center of our 
Galaxy, this goes down in inverse proportion to the mass 
to fo = 4mHz. 

Figure 2 shows the mass-radius diagram for likely 
sources of gravitational waves. Three lines of constant 
natural frequency are plotted: fo = 10* Hz, fo = 1 Hz 
and fy = 10~* Hz. These are interesting frequencies from 
the point of view of observing techniques: gravitational 
waves between 1 and 10+ Hz are accessible to ground- 
based detectors, while lower frequencies are observable 
only from space. Also shown is the line marking the black 
hole boundary. This has the equation R = 2GM/c*. There 
are no objects below this line. This line cuts through 
the ground-based frequency band in such a way as to 
restrict ground-based instruments to looking at stellar- 
mass objects. Nothing over a mass of about 104M, can 
radiate above 1 Hz. 

A number of typical relativistic objects are placed in 
the diagram: a neutron star, a binary pair of neutron stars 
that spiral together as they orbit, some black holes. Two 
other interesting lines are drawn. The lower (dotted) line 
is the 1 yr coalescence line, where the orbital shrinking 
timescale in equation (19) is less than one year. The upper 
(solid) line is the 1 yr chirp line: if a binary lies below this 
line then its orbit will shrink enough to make its orbital 
frequency increase by a measurable amount in 1 yr. (Ina 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1 yr observation one can in principle measure changes in 
frequency of 1 yr~!, or 3 x 10-8 Hz.) 

It is clear from the figure that any binary system 
that is observed from the ground will coalesce within an 
observing time of 1 yr. Since pulsar statistics suggest that 
this happens less than once every 10° yr in our Galaxy, 
ground-based detectors must be able to register these 
events in a volume of space containing at least 10° galaxies 
in order to have a hope of seeing occasional coalescences. 
When detectors reach this sensitivity (sometime in the first 
decade of the 21st century), then astronomers will be able 
to use the observed chirping binaries as standard candles 
to measure distance scales in the universe. 


Radiation from neutron star normal modes 

In figure 2 there is a dot for the typical neutron star. The 
corresponding frequency is the fundamental vibrational 
frequency of such an object. In fact, neutron stars 
have a rich spectrum of non-radial normal modes, which 
fall into several families: f-, g-, p-, w- and r-modes 
have all been studied. If their gravitational wave 
emissions can be detected, then the details of their spectra 
would be a sensitive probe of their structure and of the 
equation of state of neutron stars, in much the same way 
that HELIOSEISMOLOGY probes the interior of the Sun (see 
HIGH-ENERGY EQUATION OF STATE OF NEUTRON STARS). This is a 
challenge to ground-based detectors, which cannot yet 
make sensitive observations as high as 10 kHz. 


Radiation from gravitational collapse 

The event that forms a neutron star is the gravitational 
collapse that produces a supernova. It is difficult to 
predict the waveform or amplitude expected from this 
event, because we have no observational evidence about 
how non-spherical the collapse event might be in a typical 
supernova: the collapse is hidden deep within the star. 
So we can only guess. For example, a gravitational wave 
burst might be broad band, centered on 1 kHz, or it might 
be a few cycles of radiation at a frequency anywhere 
between 100 Hz and 10 kHz, chirping up or down. The 
amplitude could be large, in which a good fraction of the 
energy released by the collapse is radiated in gravitational 
waves, or it could be negligibly small. It is indeed ironic 
that, although detecting supernovae was the initial goal of 
detector development when it started four decades ago, 
little more is known today about what to expect than 
scientists knew then. 


Radiation from r-modes 

Hot neutron stars that rotate faster than about 100-200 Hz 
appear to be unstable to the emission of gravitational 
radiation through amplification of their r-modes by the 
CFS mechanism. In stars colder than about 108 K, viscosity 
may be strong enough to damp out this instability. This 
instability may explain why only old, recycled, cold 
pulsars are seen at higher rotation rates. It also suggests 
that the formation of a rapidly rotating neutron star may 
be followed by a period of steady gravitational radiation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


as the star emits angular momentum and spins down to 
its stability limit. If as few as 10% of all the neutron 
stars formed since STAR FORMATION began (at a redshift of 
perhaps 4) went through such a spindown, then they 
may have produced a detectable random background of 
gravitational radiation. 

Interestingly, the r-modes are disturbances primar- 
ily of the fluid velocity; they have little density perturba- 
tion. Their name comes from their similarity to the Rossby 
waves of oceanography. The gravitational radiation they 
emit is not primarily mass quadrupole (as in equation (12)), 
but rather mass-current quadrupole, the analog of mag- 
netic quadrupole radiation in electromagnetism. This is 
the wave counterpart of what is called gravitomagnetism, 
which is responsible for the Lense-Thirring effect: an extra 
precession of a spinning gyroscope as it orbits a rotating 
body such as the Earth caused by the spin-spin gravita- 
tional coupling of the gyroscope to the Earth. 


Black holes and gravitational waves 

Black holes are regions of space-time within which 
everything is trapped: light cannot escape, nor can 
anything else that moves slower than light. The boundary 
of this region is called the event horizon. This boundary is 
a dynamical surface. If any mass-energy falls into the hole, 
the area of the horizon increases. In addition, the horizon 
will generally wobble when this happens. These wobbles 
settle down quickly, emitting gravitational waves, and 
leaving a smooth (and slightly larger) horizon afterwards. 

Undisturbed black holes are time independent and 
smooth. In fact, according to general relativity the external 
gravitational field of such a black hole and the size and 
shape of its horizon are fully determined by only three 
numbers: the total mass, electric charge and angular 
momentum of the black hole. This black hole uniqueness 
theorem is remarkable, considering how much variety 
there can be in the material that collapsed to form the black 
hole and that may have subsequently fallen in. 

Observations of the gravitational waves emitted by a 
wobbling horizon or by a particle in orbit around a black 
hole have the potential to test the uniqueness theorem and 
thereby to verify the predictions of general relativity about 
the strongest possible gravitational fields. 

Astronomers now recognize that there is an abun- 
dance of black holes in the universe. Observations of vari- 
ous kinds have located black holes in x-ray binary systems 
in the Galaxy and in the centers of galaxies. 

These two classes of black holes have very different 
masses. Stellar black holes typically have masses of 
around 10M. and are thought to have been formed 
by the gravitational collapse of the center of a large, 
evolved RED GIANT STAR, perhaps in a supernova explosion. 
Massive black holes in galactic centers seem to have masses 
between 10°Mo and 10!°Mo5, but their history and method 
of formation are not yet understood. 

Both kinds of black hole can radiate gravitational 
waves. According to figure 2, stellar black hole radiation 
willbe in the ground-based frequency range, while galactic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


holes are detectable only from space. The radiation from 
a black hole typically is strongly damped, lasting only a 
few cycles about the frequency, which for a spherical black 
hole is given by equation (22) with R = 2GM/c?: 


M\" 
Stellar-mass black holes 

Radiation from stellar black holes is expected mainly 
from coalescing binary systems, when one or both of the 
components are a black hole. Although such systems are 
thought to be rarer than systems of two neutron stars, the 
larger mass of the black hole makes the system visible 
from a greater distance. By measuring the chirp mass 
(as discussed above) observers will recognize that they 
have a black hole system. It is very possible that the first 
observations of binaries by interferometers will be of black 
holes. 

When a two-black-hole binary coalesces, there should 
be a burst of gravitational radiation that will depend in 
detail on the masses and spins of the objects. Numerical 
simulations of such events will be needed to interpret this 
signal and possibly even to extract it from the instrumental 
noise of the detector. The research field of numerical 
relativity is making rapid progress, and it can be expected 
to produce informative simulations in the first few years 
of the 21st century, using the largest and fastest computers 
available at that time. 


Massive and supermassive black holes 

Gravitational radiation is expected from supermassive 
black holes in two ways. In one scenario, two massive 
black holes spiral together in a much more powerful 
version of the coalescence we have just discussed. The 
frequency is much lower, but the amplitude is higher. 
equation (21) implies that the effective signal amplitude 
is almost linear in the masses of the holes, so that a 
signal from two 10° Mo black holes will have an amplitude 
10° times bigger than the signal from two 10Mq holes 
at the same distance. Even allowing for differences in 
technology, space-based detectors will be able to study 
such events with a very high signal-to-noise ratio no matter 
where in the universe they occur. 

Observations of coalescing massive black hole 
binaries will therefore provide strong tests of the validity 
of general relativity in the regime of strong gravitational 
fields, provided that numerical simulations can match the 
accuracy of the observations by that time. 

The event rate for such coalescences is not easy 
to predict: it could be zero, but it may be large. It 
seems that the central core of most galaxies may contain 
a black hole of at least 10°M,. This is known to be 
true for our Galaxy and for a number of others nearby. 
Supermassive black holes (up to a few times 10°Mo) 
are believed to power quasistellar objects and active 
galaxies (See QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: OVERVIEW, ACTIVE GALAXIES: 
OVERVIEW). There is some evidence that the mass of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


central black hole is proportional to the mass of the core of 
the host galaxy. 

If black holes are formed with their galaxies, ina single 
spherical gravitational collapse event, and if nothing 
happens to them after that, then coalescences will never 
be seen. However, it is believed that GALAXY FORMATION 
probably occurred through the merger of smaller units, 
subgalaxies of masses upwards of 10°Mo. If these units 
had their own black holes, then the mergers would have 
resulted in the coalescence of many of the holes on a 
timescale shorter than the present age of the universe. 
This would give an event rate of several per year. If 
the supermassive black holes were formed from smaller 
holes in a hierarchical merger scenario, then the event rate 
could be hundreds or thousands per year. It is likely that 
only space-based observations of gravitational waves will 
answer these questions. 

A second scenario for the production of radiation by 
massive black holes is the swallowing of a stellar-mass 
black hole or a neutron star by the large hole. Massive 
black holes exist in the middle of dense star clusters. The 
tidal disruption of main-sequence or giant stars that stray 
too close to the hole is thought to provide the gas that 
powers the quasar phenomenon. These clusters will also 
contain a good number of neutron stars and stellar-mass 
black holes. They are too compact to be disrupted by the 
hole even if they fall directly into it. 

Such captures therefore emit a gravitational wave 
signal that may be approximated by studying the motion 
of a ‘point mass’ near a black hole. It will again emit a chirp 
of radiation, but in this case the orbit may be very eccentric. 
The details of the waveform encode information about 
the geometry of space-time near the hole. In particular, 
it may be possible to measure the mass and spin of the 
hole and thereby to test the uniqueness theorem for black 
holes. The event rate is not very dependent on the details 
of galaxy formation, and is probably high enough for many 
detections per year from a space-based detector. 


Gravitational waves from the big bang 
Gravitational waves have traveled almost unimpeded 
through the universe since they were generated at times as 
early as 10-** s after the big bang. Observing them would 
provide important constraints on theories of inflation and 
high-energy physics. 

Inflation is an attractive scenario for the early 
universe because it makes the large-scale homogeneity 
of the universe easier to understand. It also provides 
a mechanism for producing initial density perturbations 
large enough to evolve into galaxies as the universe 
expands. These perturbations are accompanied by 
gravitational-field perturbations that travel through the 
universe, redshifting in the same way that photons 
do. Today these perturbations should form a random 
background of gravitational radiation. 

The perturbations arise by parametric amplification 
of quantum fluctuations in the gravitational wave 
field that existed before inflation began. The huge 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


expansion associated with inflation puts energy into these 
fluctuations, converting them into real gravitational waves 
with classical amplitudes. 

If inflation did not occur, then the perturbations that 
led to galaxies must have arisen in some other way, 
and it is possible that this alternative mechanism also 
produced gravitational waves. One candidate is cosmic 
defects, including cosmic strings and cosmic texture. (See 
TOPOLOGICAL DEFECTS IN COSMOLOGY.) Although observations 
at present seem to rule cosmic defects out as a candidate for 
galaxy formation, cosmic strings may nevertheless have 
produced observable gravitational waves. 

If inflation did not occur, there could also be a thermal 
background of gravitational waves at a temperature 
similar to that of the cosmological microwave background, 
but this radiation would have such a high frequency that 
it would not be detectable by any known or proposed 
technique. 

The random background will be detectable as a noise 
in the detector that competes with instrumental noise. In 
a single detector, such as the first space-based detector, 
this noise must be larger than the instrumental noise 
to be detected, and one must have great confidence in 
the detector in order to claim that the observed noise is 
external. This is how the cosmic microwave background 
was originally discovered in a radio telescope. 

If there are two detectors, then one can multiply the 
outputs of the two detectors together and sum (integrate). 
In this way, the random wave field in one detector acts like 
a matched filtering template, matching the random field in 
the other detector. This allows the detection of noise that is 
below the instrumental noise of the individual detectors. 
For this to work, the two detectors must be close enough 
together to experience the same random wave field. In 
practice, the sensitivity of this method falls off rapidly 
with separation if the detectors are more than a wavelength 
apart. 


Measure of the strength of random gravitational waves 

When describing the strength of a random wave field, it 
is not appropriate to measure the amplitude of any single 
component. Rather, the rms amplitude of the field is the 
observable quantity. It is common to use an equivalent 
measure, the energy density pgw(f) in the radiation field 
as a function of frequency f. For a cosmological field, 
what is relevant is to normalize this energy density to the 
critical density p, required to close the universe. It is thus 
conventional to define 


— Apgw/Pe 


Qew = “dinf- ; (23) 


This is roughly the fraction of the closure energy density 
in random gravitational waves between the frequency f 
and 2.718 f. 

Current and planned detectors may reach a sensitivity 
of Qew ~ 10~? at 1 mHz and 10~' at 40 Hz, but there is a 
possibility that backgrounds due to other sources (binary 
white dwarf systems and r-mode spindown, as discussed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Gravitational Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


above) could obscure a cosmological background at these 
levels. 


Predicted spectrum of cosmological radiation 

The simplest models of inflation suggest that the 
spectrum of the gravitational wave background should 
be flat, so that Qgy is independent of frequency over 
a very large range of frequencies. In this case, 
the observed fluctuations in the cosmic microwave 
background radiation set a limit on gravitational radiation 
at ultra-low frequencies, and this constrains the energy 
density in the observable range (0.1 mHz-10 kHz) to below 
about 10-!° of closure. This will be too small to be seen 
by the current and planned detectors on the ground or in 
space. 

However, there is a great deal of room in these 
models for other spectra. The period before inflation 
may produce initial conditions for the phase of parametric 
amplification that give large amounts of radiation in the 
observable frequency range. One family of models based 
in superstring theory has a spectrum that rises at high 
frequencies. If a cosmological background from inflation 
or from cosmic defects can be observed, it will contain 
important clues to the nature of the theory that unifies 
gravitation with the rest of quantum physics. 


Conclusions 

The first few years of the 21st century should see the first 
direct detections of gravitational radiation and the opening 
of the field of gravitational wave astronomy. Beyond 
that, over a period of a decade or more, one may expect 
observations to yield important and useful information 
about binary systems, stellar evolution, neutron stars, 
black holes, strong gravitational fields and cosmology. 

If gravitational wave astronomy follows the example 
of other fields, such as X-RAY ASTRONOMY and RADIO 
ASTRONOMY, then at some level of sensitivity it will begin 
to discover sources that are completely unexpected. 
Many scientists think the chance of this happening 
early is very good, since the processes that produce 
gravitational waves are so different from those that 
produce the electromagnetic radiation on which most 
present knowledge of the universe is based, and since more 
than 90% of the matter in the universe is dark and interacts 
with visible matter only through gravitation. 

Present and planned detectors are known not to 
be ideal for some kinds of gravitational wave sources. 
Sensitive measurements of a cosmological background of 
radiation from the big bang may not be possible with 
these instruments if the spectrum follows the predictions 
of ‘standard’ inflation theory. Most of the normal mode 
oscillations of neutron stars will be very hard to detect, 
because the radiation is weak and at a high frequency, but 
the science there is compelling: neutron star seismology 
may be the only way to probe the interiors of neutron stars 
and understand these complex and fascinating objects. 
Detector technology will continually improve, and these 
sources provide important long-term goals for this field. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There will clearly be much to do after the first observations 
are successfully made. 


Bibliography 

Folkner W M (ed) 1998 Laser Interferometer Space Antenna 
(AIP Conf. Proc. 456) (Woodbury, NY: American 
Institute of Physics) 

Marck J-A and Lasota J-P (ed) 1996 Relativistic Gravitation 
and Gravitational Radiation (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Thorne K S 1994 Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein’s 
Outrageous Legacy (New York: Norton) 

Wald R M (ed) 1998 Black Holes and Relativistic Stars 
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press) 


Bernard Schutz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on Earth and in 
Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on 
Earth and in Space 


GRAVITATIONAL WAVES, one of the more exotic predictions of 
Einstein’s general theory of relativity, may, after 80 yr of 
controversy over their existence, be detected within the 
next decade. 

Sources such as interacting black holes, coalescing 
compact binary systems, stellar collapses and pulsars are 
all possible candidates for detection; observing signals 
from them will significantly boost our understanding 
of the universe. New unexpected sources will almost 
certainly be found and time will tell what new information 
such discoveries will bring. A full review of sources of 
GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION is given by Bernard Schutz. 

Gravitational waves are ripples in the curvature of 
SPACE-TIME and manifest themselves as fluctuating tidal 
forces on pieces of mass placed a distance apart. The 
first gravitational wave detectors were based on the effect 
of these forces on the fundamental resonant mode of 
aluminum bars at room temperature. Following the lack 
of confirmed detection of signals, aluminum bar systems 
operated at and below the temperature of liquid helium 
were developed and work in this area is still underway. 
However, the most promising design of gravitational wave 
detector, offering the possibility of very high sensitivities 
over a wide range of frequency, uses test masses a long 
distance apart and freely suspended as pendulums on 
Earth or in drag-free craft in space; laser interferometry 
provides a means of sensing the motion of the masses 
produced as they interact with gravitational waves. 

Ground-based detectors will be used to observe 
sources whose radiation is emitted at frequencies above 
a few Hz and space-borne detectors will be developed 
for implementation at lower frequencies. Already 
gravitational wave detectors of long baseline are being 
built in a number of places around the world: in the 
USA (LIGO project led by a Caltech-MIT consortium), 
in Italy (VIRGO project, a joint Italian—French venture), 
in Germany (GEO 600 project being built by a team of 
German and British research groups) and in Japan (TAMA 
300 project). A space-borne detector, LISA—proposed by 
a collaboration of European and US research groups—has 
been adopted by ESA as a future Cornerstone Mission. 

The observation of gravitational waves will not only 
provide unique information on testing aspects of general 
relativity but will also open up a new field of astronomy. 


Background 

Some early relativists were skeptical about the existence 
of gravitational waves. However, the 1993 Nobel Prize 
in Physics was awarded to Hulse and Taylor for their 
experimental observations and subsequent interpretations 
of the evolution of the orbit of the binary putsar, PSR 
1913 +16. The decay of the binary orbit is consistent with 
angular momentum and energy being carried away from 
this system by gravitational waves. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Gravitational waves are produced when matter is 
accelerated in an asymmetrical way; however, owing to 
the nature of the gravitational interaction, significant levels 
of radiation are produced only when very large masses 
are accelerated in very strong gravitational fields. Such 
a situation cannot be found on Earth but is found in 
a variety of astrophysical systems. Gravitational wave 
signals are expected over a wide range of frequencies; 
from ~10-!” Hz in the case of ripples in the cosmological 
background to ~10° Hz from the formation of neutron 
stars in supernova explosions. The most predictable 
sources are BINARY STAR systems. However, there are many 
sources of much greater astrophysical interest associated 
with black hole interactions and coalescences, neutron star 
coalescences, stellar collapses to neutron stars and black 
holes (supernova explosions), pulsars and the physics of 
the early universe. 

Why is there currently such interest worldwide in 
the detection of gravitational waves? This is partly 
because observation of the velocity and polarization states 
of the signals will allow a direct experimental check 
of the wave predictions of GENERAL RELATIVITY, but more 
importantly because the detection of the signals should 
provide observers with new and unique information about 
astrophysical processes (see also GENERAL RELATIVITY TESTS: 
BINARY PULSARS). 


Detection of gravitational waves 

Gravitational waves are most simply thought of as ripples 
in the curvature of space-time, their effect being to 
change the separation of adjacent masses on Earth or in 
space; this tidal effect is the basis of all present detectors. 
The problem for the experimental physicist is that the 
predicted magnitudes of the strains in space caused by 
gravitational waves are of the order of 10-7! or lower. 
Indeed, current theoretical models suggest that in order to 
detect a few events per year—from coalescing neutron star 
binary systems for example—a sensitivity close to 10~” is 
required. Signal strengths at the Earth for a number of 
sources are shown in figure 1. 

The small signal levels mean that limiting noise 
sources resulting from the thermal motion of molecules 
in the detector (thermal noise), from seismic or other 
mechanical disturbances, and from noise associated with 
the detector readout, whether electronic or optical, must 
be reduced to a very low level. For signals above ~10 Hz 
ground-based experiments are possible, but for lower 
frequencies where local fluctuating gravitational gradients 
and seismic noise on Earth become a problem, it is best to 
consider developing detectors to be used in space. 


Initial detectors and their development 

The earliest experiments in the field were ground based 
and were carried out by Joseph Weber of the University 
of Maryland about 30 yr ago. Having looked for evidence 
of excitation of the normal modes of the Earth by very 
low-frequency gravitational waves, Weber then moved on 
to look for tidal strains in aluminum bars which were at 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on Earth and in 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space 
10°18 
Pendulum 
4 Suspension Test Masses 
Black Hole Binary 
» 102° @ Coalescence 10° Me \\ 
8 Black Hole | Mirror ——~ 
& @ Formation 10° Mo 
A= @ Black Hole %, 
< ing 5 C,@. Stellar 
5 eS Binary 10° Mo Oop Rey 
P=} Sc , 4 
a eet Beamsplitter 
White Dwarf @ BH-BH 103 Mo 
Binaries Collapse 
t + + + 
10? 104 


Frequency [Hz] 
+_  —— ——_ 
Ground Based Detectors 


—+—_ ————qr»r 
Space Based Detectors 


Figure 1. Some possible sources for ground-based and 
space-borne detectors. 


room temperature and were well isolated from ground 
vibrations and acoustic noise in the laboratory. The bars 
were resonant at 1600 Hz, a frequency where the energy 
spectrum of the signals from collapsing stars was predicted 
to peak. Despite the fact that Weber observed coincident 
excitations of his detectors placed up to 1000 km apart, 
at a rate of approximately one event per day, his results 
were not substantiated by similar experiments carried out 
in several other laboratories in the USA, Germany, Britain 
and Russia. It seems unlikely that Weber was observing 
gravitational wave signals because, although his detectors 
were very sensitive, being able to detect strains of around 
10~'° over millisecond timescales, their sensitivity was far 
away from what was predicted to be required theoretically. 

Development of Weber bar type detectors has 
continued with the emphasis being on cooling to reduce 
the noise levels, and currently systems at the Universities 
of Rome, Padua, Louisiana and Perth (Western Australia) 
are achieving sensitivity levels better than 10~'8 for 
millisecond pulses. Bar detectors have a disadvantage, 
however, of being sensitive only to signals that have 
significant spectral energy in a narrow band around their 
resonant frequency. 


Long-baseline detectors on Earth 

Analternative design of gravitational wave detector offers 
the possibility of very high sensitivities over a wide 
range of frequency. This uses test masses placed a long 
distance apart and freely suspended as pendulums to 
isolate against seismic noise and reduce the effects of 
thermal noise; laser interferometry provides a means of 
sensing the motion of the masses produced as they interact 
with a gravitational wave (figure 2). 

This technique is based on the Michelson interferom- 
eter and is particularly suited to the detection of gravita- 
tional waves as they have a quadrupole nature. Waves 
propagating perpendicular to the plane of the interferom- 
eter will result in one arm of the interferometer being in- 
creased in length while the other arm is decreased and vice 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Taser Photodiode 


Figure 2. Schematic of gravitational wave detector using laser 
interferometry. 


versa. Gravitational wave strengths are characterized by 
the gravitational wave amplitude h, given by 


h = 2AL/L (1) 


where AL is the change in the length L of one arm of the 
detector. Thus / is a measure of the strain in space induced 
by a gravitational wave. 

The induced change in the length of the interferometer 
arms results in a small change in the interference pattern of 
the light observed at the interferometer output. A typical 
design specification to allow a reasonable probability for 
detecting sources requires a noise floor in strain smaller 
than 2 x 10-73 Hz’? to be achieved. The distance between 
test masses possible on Earth is limited to a few km by 
geographical and cost factors. If we assume an arm length 
of 3 km the above specification sets the requirement that 
the residual motion of each test mass is smaller than 
3x 10-*° m Hz!” over the operating range of the detector, 
which may be from ~10 Hz to a few kHz. It requires 
that the optical detection system at the output of the 
interferometer must be good enough to detect such small 
motions. 


Main noise sources relevant to interferometric 
gravitational wave detectors 

Fundamentally it should be possible to build systems 
using laser interferometry to monitor strains in space 
which are limited only by the Heisenberg UNCERTAINTY 
PRINCIPLE; however, there are other practical issues which 
must be taken into account. Fluctuating gravitational 
gradients pose one limitation to the interferometer 
sensitivity achievable at low frequencies and it is the level 
of noise from this source that dictates that experiments 
to look for sub-Hz gravitational wave signals have to be 
carried out in space. 

In general for ground-based detectors the most 
important limitations to sensitivity result from the effects 
of seismic and other ground-borne mechanical noise, 
thermal noise associated with the test masses and their 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on Earth and in 
Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


suspensions, and shot noise in the photocurrent from the 
photodiode which detects the interference pattern. 

The significance of each of these sources will be briefly 
reviewed. 


Seismic noise 

Seismic noise at a reasonably quiet site on the Earth follows 
a spectrum inall three dimensions close to 10-7 /f* mHz!”. 
Thus if the motion of each test mass has to be less than 
3 x 10°? m Hz!” at a frequency such as 30 Hz then the 
level of seismic isolation required at 30 Hz, for example, 
in the horizontal direction is greater than 10°. Since there 
is liable to be some coupling of vertical noise through to 
horizontal a significant level of isolation has to be provided 
in the vertical direction also. 

Isolation can be achieved ina relatively simple way by 
realizing that for a simple pendulum system the transfer 
function to the pendulum mass of the horizontal motion 
of the suspension point falls off as 1/(frequency)? above 
the pendulum resonance. In a similar way isolation can 
be achieved in the vertical direction by suspending a mass 
on a spring. In the case of the VIRGO detector system the 
design allows operation to below 10 Hz and here a seven- 
stage horizontal pendulum arrangement is adopted with 
six of the upper stages being suspended with cantilever 
springs to provide vertical isolation. Similar systems are 
being developed in Australia and at Caltech. For the GEO 
600 detector, where operation down to 50 Hz is sought, a 
triple-pendulum system is used with the first two stages 
being hung from cantilever springs to provide the vertical 
isolation necessary to achieve the desired performance. 
This arrangement is then hung from a plate mounted 
on passive ‘rubber’ isolation mounts and on an active 
(electromechanical) anti-vibration system. 

In order to cut down motions at the pendulum 
frequencies, active damping of the pendulum modes 
has to be incorporated, and to reduce excess motions 
at low frequencies around the microseismic peak low- 
frequency isolators have to be incorporated. These low- 
frequency isolators can take different forms—tall inverted 
pendulums in the horizontal direction and magnetic 
antisprings for the vertical direction in the case of the 
VIRGO system; Scott Russell mechanical linkages in the 
horizontal and torsion bar arrangements in the vertical for 
an Australian design; a seismometer-actuator system for 
GEO 600. 


Thermal noise 

Thermal noise associated with the mirror masses and the 
last stage of their suspensions is likely to be the most 
significant noise source at the lower end of the operating 
range of long-baseline gravitational wave detectors. The 
operating range of a detector lies between the resonances 
of the test masses and their pendulum suspensions, and 
thus it is the thermal noise in the tails of the resonant 
modes which is important. For any simple harmonic 
oscillator, such as a mass hung as a pendulum or the 
internal resonance of a test mass, the spectral density of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


thermal motion of the mass at an angular frequency w can 
be expressed as 


Aky Tago (w) 
om|[ (a3 —w?)2 + oi ¢2(@)] 


x2(@) = 


(2) 


where k, is Boltmann’s constant, T is the temperature, 
m is the mass and $() is the loss angle or factor of the 
oscillator of resonant angular frequency wo. Inspection of 
this equation tells us that the thermal noise away from 
resonance becomes smaller as ¢(w) is reduced. For a 
pendulum, most of the energy is stored in the lossless 
gravitational field and thus the loss factor is lower than 
that of the material of the wires or fibers used to suspend 
the pendulum. Unfortunately this is not the case for the 
internal resonances of the test masses. 

In order to keep the background thermal noise 
between the pendulum resonances and the internal 
resonances of the test masses as low as possible, the 
material loss factors should be as low as possible or the 
mechanical quality factors of the masses and pendulum 
resonances should be as high as possible. To achieve the 
level of sensitivity discussed earlier the loss factors of the 
test masses (of order 10 kg) must be ~3 x 10-° or lower 
and the loss factor of the pendulum resonances should be 
smaller than 10-8. Obtaining these values puts significant 
constraints on the choice of material for the test masses and 
the suspending fibers. One viable solution is to use fused 
silica masses hung by fused silica fibers as the intrinsic 
loss factor in samples of synthetic fused silica has been 
measured at around 2 x 10~°. The use of other materials 
suchas sapphire may be possible. Work in this area is being 
carried out by a number of universities, predominantly at 
Moscow and Glasgow (GEO 600 group), and more recently 
at Perugia, Syracuse and Stanford. 


Photoelectron shot noise 

For gravitational wave signals to be detected, the output 
of the interferometer must be held at a particular point 
on an interference fringe. An obvious point to choose 
is halfway up an interference fringe since the change in 
photon number produced by a given differential change 
in arm length is greatest at this point. The interferometer 
may be stabilized to this point by sensing any changes in 
intensity at the interferometer output with a photodiode 
and feeding the resulting signal back, with suitable phase, 
to a transducer capable of changing the position of one of 
the interferometer mirrors. Information about changes in 
the length of the interferometer arms can then be obtained 
by monitoring the signal fed back to the transducer. 

As mentioned earlier it is very important that the 
system used for sensing the optical fringe movement on 
the output of the interferometer can sense strains in space 
of 2 x 10-*? Hz~"” or differences in the lengths of the two 
arms of less than 107'? m Hz~', a minute displacement 
compared with the wavelength of light, ~10-° m. A 
limitation to the sensitivity of the optical readout scheme 
is set by shot noise in the detected photocurrent, and from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on Earth and in 
Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


consideration of the number of photoelectrons measured 
in a time t it can be shown that the detectable strain 
sensitivity depends on the level of laser power P of 
wavelength A used to illuminate the interferometer of arm 
length L, and on the time t, such that 


1 Ane \"? 
detectable strain in time t = — os (3) 
L \ 2n?Pr 
or a 
1 ( Ahe 
detectable strain/Hz'/? = 7 (=) (4) 


where c is the velocity of light and h is Planck’s constant. 
Thus to achieve the required strain sensitivity level 
requires a laser, operating at a wavelength of ~10-° m, to 
provide 6 x 10° W power at the input to the interferometer. 
This is a formidable requirement; however, there are a 
number of techniques that allow a large reduction in this 
power requirement and these will be discussed in the next 
section. 


Interferometric techniques for gravitational wave 
detectors 

The situation can be helped greatly if a multipass 
arrangement is used in the arms of the interferometer as 
this multiplies up the apparent movement by the number 
of bounces the light makes in the arms. The multiple 
beams either can be separate as in an optical delay line or 
may lie on top of each other as in a Fabry—Perot resonant 
cavity. 

The light should not stay in the arms longer than 
the characteristic timescale of the signal—otherwise some 
cancellation of the detected signal may occur. There is thus 
an optimum number of bounces. If signals of characteristic 
timescale 1 ms are to be searched for, the number of 
bounces should not exceed 50 for an arm length of 3 km. 
With 50 bounces the required laser power is reduced to 
2.4 x 10° W, still a formidable requirement. 


Power recycling 

It can be shown that the optimum signal-to-noise ratio 
in a Michelson interferometer is obtained when the arm 
lengths are such that the output light is very close to a 
minimum. Thus rather than lock the interferometer to the 
side of a fringe as discussed above, it is usual to make use 
of a modulation technique to operate the interferometer 
close to a null in the interference pattern. An electro-optic 
phase modulator placed in front of the interferometer can 
be used to phase modulate the input laser light. If the 
arms of the interferometer are arranged to have a slight 
mismatch in length, this results in a detected signal which, 
when demodulated, is zero with the cavity exactly ona null 
fringe. The detected signal changes sign on different sides 
of the null, providing a bipolar error signal; this can be 
fed back to the transducer controlling the interferometer 
mirror to hold the interferometer locked near to a null 
fringe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In this situation, if the mirrors are of very low 
optical loss, nearly all of the light supplied to the 
interferometer is reflected back towards the laser. In 
other words the laser is not properly impedance matched 
to the interferometer. The impedance matching can be 
improved by placing another mirror of carefully chosen 
transmission—a power recycling mirror—between the 
laser and the interferometer so that a resonant cavity 
is formed between this mirror and the rest of the 
interferometer and no light comes back towards the laser. 
There is then a power build-up inside the interferometer, a 
build-up which can be high enough to create the required 
laser power at the beamsplitter from ~10 W or so out of 
the laser. 


Signal recycling 

To enhance further the sensitivity of an interferometric 
detector and to allow some narrowing of the detection 
bandwidth, which may be valuable in searches for 
continuous wave (CW) sources of gravitational radiation, 
another technique known as signal recycling was invented 
in Glasgow by the late Brian Meers. This relies on the 
fact that sidebands created on the light by gravitational 
wave signals interacting with the arms do not interfere 
destructively and so do appear at the output of the 
interferometer. If a mirror of suitably chosen reflectivity is 
put at the output of the system as shown in figure 3, then 
the sidebands can be recycled back into the interferometer 
where they resonate and hence the signal size over a given 
bandwidth (set by the mirror reflectivity) is enhanced. 


Application of these techniques 
Using appropriate optical configurations the required 
laser power may thus be reduced to a level (~10 W) 
where laser sources are available. It should be noted, 
however, that trade-offs between the different techniques 
are possible. For example, the GEO 600 detector uses a 
four-bounce delay line in each arm with power recycling 
and signal recycling, whereas the initial designs of the 
LIGO and VIRGO detectors have Fabry-Perot cavities in 
the arms and use power recycling but not signal recycling. 
Itis expected that both these experiments will be upgraded 
to use signal recycling ata later stage of their development. 
There are few lasers currently available that can 
produce CW laser light of enough power and with high 
enough frequency stability to allow the levels of sensitivity 
discussed above. Indeed there is only one realistic 
candidate—the diode-pumped Nd:YAG laser capable of 
producing several tens of watts of single-frequency light 
at 1.06 wm wavelength. 


Long-baseline detectors under construction on 
Earth 

Prototype detectors using laser interferometry have been 
constructed by various research groups around the 
world—at the Max-Planck-Institut fiir Quantenoptik in 
Garching, at the University of Glasgow, at California 
Institute of Technology, at the Massachusetts Institute of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on Earth and in 
Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Power Recycling 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on Earth and in 
Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Relative 
Orbit of 
Spacecraft 


Figure 5. The proposed LISA detector. 


arms making significant angles with each other using laser 
interferometry. 

A particularly exciting experiment is being proposed 
by an American—European team; it consists of an array of 
three drag-free spacecraft at the vertices of an equilateral 
triangle of length of side 5 x 10° km. This cluster is 
placed in an Earth-like orbit at a distance of 1 AU from 
the Sun and 20° behind the Earth. Proof masses inside the 
spacecraft (two in each spacecraft) form the end points of 
three separate but not independent interferometers. Each 
single two-arm Michelson-type interferometer is formed 
from a vertex (actually consisting of the proof masses 
in a ‘central’ spacecraft) and the masses in two remote 
spacecraft as indicated in figure 5. 

The three-interferometer configuration provides re- 
dundancy against component failure, gives better detec- 
tion probability and allows the determination of the po- 
larization of the incoming radiation. The spacecraft in 
which the interferometers are accommodated shields each 
pair of proof masses from external disturbances (e.g. so- 
lar radiation pressure). Drag-free control servos enable 
the spacecraft to follow the proof masses to a high level 
of precision, the drag compensation being effected using 
proportional electric thrusters. Illumination of the inter- 
ferometers is by highly stabilized laser light from compact 
Nd:YAG lasers at a wavelength of 1.064 wm. For each 
interferometer—consisting of a central spacecraft and two 
distant spacecraft—two lasers in the central spacecraft, 
each pointing along one of the arms, are phase locked to- 
gether so they effectively behave as a single laser. 

For LISA to achieve its design performance, adjacent 
arm lengths have to be sensed to an accuracy of better than 
30 pm Hz-"?. Because of the long distances involved and 
the spatial extent of the laser beams, the low photon fluxes 
make it impossible to use standard mirrors for reflection; 
thus active mirrors with phase-locked laser transponders 
on the spacecraft will be implemented. Telescope mirrors 
will be used to reduce diffraction losses on transmission 
of the beams and to increase the collecting area for 
reception of the beams. Given that the available laser 
power in each arm is of the order of 1 W, and that 
sensitivity arguments similar to those already discussed 
for ground-based detectors can be made, photoelectron 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


shot noise considerations suggest that the diameters of the 
transmitting and receiving mirrors on the space craft need 
to be ~30 cm. 

LISA has been adopted by ESA as a Cornerstone 
Project in their post Horizon 2000 program. However, 
because of financial uncertainties the timescale of this 
program is somewhat long and the possibility of an 
earlier launch as a NASA-led or ESA-led collaborative 
medium-scale mission is being enthusiastically addressed 
at present. 


Conclusion 

A large amount of effort worldwide is now being invested 
in the development of both ground and spaced based 
searches for gravitational radiation and we are entering 
a new era where the signals from neutron star and black 
hole interactions will widen our understanding of the 
Universe. Beyond this, however, there is the very exciting 
prospect that gravitational wave astronomy will, like radio 
astronomy and x-ray astronomy, allow the discovery of 
very active sources currently unknown to us. 


Bibliography 
The existence of gravitational waves was postulated by 
Albert Einstein: 


Einstein A 1916 Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, Sitzungsber. Phys.- 
Math. Klasse 688 

Einstein A 1918 Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, Sitzungsber. Phys.- 
Math. Klasse 154 


First experiments with apparently positive results were 
carried out by Joseph Weber of the University of Maryland: 


Weber J 1969 Phys. Rev. Lett. 22 1320 


These results were not confirmed by a number of 
experimental groups—for a discussion of this see for 
example 


Kafka P and Schnupp L 1978 Astron. Astrophys. 70 97 
Tyson J Aand Gifford R P 1978 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
16 521 


A good review of bar detectors and developments towards 
laser interferometer detectors is well described in 


Saulson P R 1994 Fundamentals of Interferometric Gravita- 
tional Wave Detectors (Singapore: World Scientific) 


For a popular account of the development of the 
gravitational wave field the reader should consult 


Thorne K S 1994 Black Holes and Time Warps (New York: 
Norton) ch 10 


The challenge of reducing thermal noise in interferometric 
gravitational wave detectors is highlighted in 


Braginsky V B, Mitrofanov V P and Panov V1 1985 Systems 
with Small Dissipation ed K S Thorne and C Eller 
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Radiation Detectors on Earth and in 
Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rowan S, Twyford S M, Hutchins R, Kovalik J, Logan J E, 
McLaren A C, Robertson N A and Hough J 1997 Phys. 
Lett. A 233 303 

Saulson P R 1990 Phys. Rev. D 42 2437 


Recent progress in interferometric detectors is outlined in 


Ciufolini I and Fidecaro F (ed) 1997 Gravitational Waves, 
Sources and Detectors (Edoardo Amaldi Foundation Series 
vol 2) (Singapore: World Scientific) 


Developments towards LISA are well documented in 


1997 Ist Int. LISA Symp., Class. Quantum Gravity 14 


Jim Hough and Sheila Rowan 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravitational Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravitational Waves 


Wavelike disturbances in the geometry of space and time. 
Just as an accelerating or oscillating charged particle 
will radiate electromagnetic waves, so an accelerating, 
oscillating or violently disturbed mass, or system of 
masses, is expected to radiate wave-like gravitational 
disturbances (i.e. gravitational waves). According to the 
general theory of relativity, any change in a gravitational 
field should propagate through space at the speed of 
light. For example, if the Sun were suddenly to be 
annihilated, 8.3 min (the light-travel time from the Sun to 
the Earth) would elapse before the Earth ceased to ‘feel’ the 
gravitational influence of the Sun. Likewise, gravitational 
waves in general should propagate through space at the 
speed of light. 

A gravitational wave vibrates in planes perpendicular 
to the direction in which it is propagating. The effect 
of a gravitational wave passing through a solid body (or 
through a distribution of individual particles) is to stretch 
the body first along one direction (while compressing it 
at right angles to this direction) and then, similarly, in 
the plane perpendicular to this direction. In principle, 
gravitational waves may be detected by measuring the 
periodic distortions that they produce in solid bodies or 
in the separations between freely suspended masses or 
freely orbiting spacecraft. However, because gravitation is 
by far the weakest of the fundamental forces, gravitational 
waves are expected to be exceedingly feeble and difficult 
to detect (for example, because the gravitational attraction 
between two electrons is more than 10” times weaker than 
the electromagnetic interaction, the gravitational waves 
radiated by a pair of oscillating electrons will also be more 
than 10*° times weaker than the electromagnetic waves 
that they emit). As yet no man-made device has made 
a confirmed detection of gravitational radiation from any 
source. 

The most likely sources of potentially detectable 
gravitational waves are processes involving dramatic 
changes in strong gravitational fields, for example the 
collapse of the core of a massive star during a supernova 
explosion, the formation of a black hole, very close and 
rapidly rotating binary systems, or collisions and mergers 
involving neutron stars or black holes. Although no source 
of gravitational radiation has yet been detected directly, 
strong confirmation of the existence of gravitational 
radiation has been provided by the behavior of pulsar PSR 
1913+ 16, which is a member of a binary system consisting 
of two neutron stars that orbit around each other in 7.75 h. 
The orbital period of this system is decreasing at a rate 
that is precisely consistent with what would be expected 
if the two stars were spiralling in towards each other as 
a consequence of radiating away rotational energy in the 
form of gravitational waves. 


See also: fundamental forces, general theory of relativity, 
gravitation, neutron stars, pulsars, supernovae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Graviton 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Graviton 


The hypothetical force-carrying particle (gauge boson) 
for gravitation. Although there is, as yet, no generally 
accepted quantum theory of gravity, it is widely believed 
that gravitation, like the other fundamental forces, should 
be amenable to being formulated in quantum terms 
and that the gravitational interaction between particles 
of matter should be conveyed by gravitons. The 
hypothesized graviton has zero mass, zero charge and a 
spin value of 2 (expressed in units of the Planck constant 
divided by 27). 


See also: fundamental forces, gauge bosons, gravitation, 
quantum mechanics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gravity Probe B ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gravity Probe B 


A relativity gyroscope experiment being developed by 
NASA and Stanford University to test two unverified 
predictions of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Due 
for launch into polar orbit in May 2002. It will very 
precisely monitor tiny changes in the direction of spin of 
four gyroscopes on the satellite. Free from disturbance, 
the gyroscopes will measure how much space and time are 
warped by the presence of the Earth, and how the Earth’s 
rotation drags space-time around. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gray, Stephen (1666-1736) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gray, Stephen (1666-1736) 


Astronomer and scientist, born in Canterbury, Kent, 
England. Something of a scientific enigma, Gray at 
first devoted his energy to astronomy, observing eclipses, 
sunspots, the satellites of Jupiter, and communicating 
his results to the first Astronomer Royal, JOHN FLAMSTEED. 
He was interested in instrumentation and invented a 
microscope in which a drop of water was the lens. In his 
later years, he devoted himself to electricity, discovering 
that electricity could be conducted. He was apparently 
not allowed to communicate the results of his electrical 
experiments to the Royal Society by Isaac NEWTON, while 
Newton organized its meetings and concentrated on 
gravity, but was twice awarded its Copley Medal as 
Newton’s influence declined. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Grazing Incidence Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Grazing Incidence Optics 


When a beam of light is reflected from a mirror or 
DIFFRACTION GRATING the angle of incidence (6) is measured 
from the surface normal (perpendicular to the surface) to 
the light ray. If this angle is greater than about 80° the 
reflection is said to be at grazing incidence and the angle 
between the surface and the ray is called the grazing angle. 
The grazing angle is therefore 6, = 90°—@. Optical systems 
in which grazing incidence is employed are called grazing 
incidence optics. 

Optics in which the angles of incidence are near to 
90° are called normal incidence optics. Imaging systems 
use normal incidence, when possible, because ABERRATIONS 
or image imperfections introduced by the reflection 
geometry (rather than by diffraction or scattering) become 
more severe as the incidence angles increase. However, for 
x-rays there is a compelling reason to tolerate the severe 
drawbacks of grazing incidence devices. 

X-RAYS, electromagnetic radiation with photon ener- 
gies in the range 0.1-100 keV or with wavelength in the 
range 124—0.124 A, will only reflect if the surface is highly 
polished and at grazing incidence. The higher the photon 
energy the smaller the grazing angle must be to give a good 
reflection. At normal incidence all x-rays are absorbed. 

The only way to focus x-rays with a broad energy 
spectrum from a large aperture is to use grazing incidence 
reflections and so X-RAY TELESCOPES and devices used to 
focus or concentrate x-rays from laboratory sources such 
as synchrotron rings are grazing incidence optics. 


X-ray reflectivities 

The complex refractive index for x-rays in materials is 
given by n = (1 — 6) —if where both 6 and £ are positive 
and small. The imaginary part describes absorption and 
is directly related to the mass absorption coefficient = 
41 B/hp where p is the mass density of the material. The 
mass absorption is, in turn, directly related to photoelectric 
absorption. 

The real part of n is a little less than unity and 
therefore the phase velocity of x-rays in materials is slightly 
higher than the velocity of light in vacuum. Thus when 
x-rays pass from vacuum into a material the refraction 
angle (measured from the normal within the material) 
is slightly larger than the incidence angle. At a critical 
grazing angle given by cos@ = 1 — 6 total external 
reflection occurs, analagous to total internal reflection of 
visible light at a glass-vacuum boundary. Because of the 
imaginary part of the refractive index, 8, the reflection is 
not total but for grazing angles smaller than 6, ~ (25)! 
the reflection coefficient for x-rays can be high. To obtain 
good reflectivities the surface must be coated with dense, 
heavy metals such as nickel, gold, platinum or iridium. 
Ignoring absorption edges the critical angle in degrees for 
heavy elements of density p (g cm~*) at x-ray wavelength 
4 measured in A is given by 6 © 0.14p"?. For gold the 
critical angle is approximately 6 = 0.4. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The decrements 6 and f are functions of wavelength 
and the specular reflection coefficient for x-rays of a given 
wavelength can be calculated accurately using Fresnel’s 
equations in the same way as for longer-wavelength 
electromagnetic radiation. However, since the reflection 
is only appreciable at grazing angles there is very little 
difference between the reflection efficiency of the parallel 
and perpendicular polarizations. 

The value of 6 can be calculated theoretically using 
numerical electronic wavefunctions or obtained from 
measurements of photoelectric absorption. The real 
decrement 6 can then be calculated using the Kramers— 
Kronig relation from dispersion theory. Alternatively 6 
can be calculated directly using Kramers—Kallmann—Mark 
anomalous dispersion theory. For x-ray wavelengths 
sufficiently far from absorption edges (|AE| > 30 eV) the 
refractive index can be predicted accurately. In the vicinity 
of absorption edges the calculations are limited by the 
details of the electronic energy structure included in the 
theory and by extended x-ray absorption fine structure 
(EXAFS), which is a correction introduced by a second 
scattering of the out-going primary scattered wave by 
nearby atoms in the surface. Tabulations of the refractive 
index decrements for all atomic types over the entire 
x-ray energy band are available and therefore the Fresnel 
reflectivity of x-rays from mirror surfaces can be calculated 
in a straightforward manner. 

Figure 1 shows the calculated reflectivity for pure 
gold. The left-hand panel shows how the critical grazing 
angle becomes smaller as the photon energy increases. 
The right-hand panel shows the reduction in reflectivity 
introduced by absorption edges. There is a series of M- 
edges in gold starting at 2.1 keV. 

Bragg reflections from crystals or multilayers can be 
used for narrow band imaging and spectroscopy or for 
enhancing the high-energy response of grazing incidence 
surfaces but they are inefficient for broad-band use below 
15 keV. 

Refractive x-ray lenses are not possible because the 
real part of the refractive index in materials, 1 — 4, is 
too close to unity and the penetration depth is too small 
because £ is relatively large. 


Scattering of x-rays at grazing incidence 

The wavelength range for x-rays is 0.1-100 Aand therefore 
roughness and imperfections in the surface chemistry 
and geometry on the atomic scale are expected to 
influence specular reflection from the surface. Roughness 
or chemical contamination introduces small phase and 
amplitude changes in the reflected x-ray wavefronts and 
some of the light is scattered (or diffracted) away from the 
specular direction. 

The complete theory of scattering of electromagnetic 
radiation from surface roughness was originally devel- 
oped to describe scattering of radar from land and sea 
but the results apply equally well to the much shorter- 
wavelength regime of x-rays. Surface roughness is mod- 
eled as a two-dimensional aperiodic diffraction grating 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Grazing Incidence Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


reflectivity 


grazing angle degrees 


reflectivity 
0.6 


0.4 


0.2 


grazing angle 1 degree 


energy keV 


Figure 1. The x-ray reflectivity of gold. 


and each Fourier component of the surface height profile, 
period d, produces diffraction orders m at angles given by 
the grating equation sin 6, — sin@ = md/d where 6 is the 
angle of incidence and 4, is the angle of scatter measured 
with respect to the surface normal. The total integrated 
scatter (TIS) is the fraction of the incident intensity which 
is scattered out of the specular beam. If the surface is rea- 
sonably smooth and first-order scattering dominates then 
the TIS = R,(6,4)(420 cos @/i)*? where R, is the Fresnel 
reflectivity for polarization t and o is the root mean square 
(rms) of the surface height fluctuations. Typically o must 
be <5 Arms to keep the TIS at an acceptable level. Surface 
contamination which is distributed unevenly over the sur- 
face can be modeled in a similar way and acts like a phase 
grating. Any particle or dust contamination will further 
block or scatter the x-rays. 

Surface contamination by hydrocarbons or similar 
compounds often forms a smooth layer or layers. A 
Fresnel reflection will result from each interface and 
the total reflection must be calculated by summing the 
component wave amplitudes taking into account the 
phase difference introduced by the thickness of the layers. 
The contamination acts in the same way as a multilayer 
coating on a conventional lens. A single monolayer of 
hydrocarbon contamination can severely compromise or 
indeed enhance the x-ray reflectivity of a grazing incidence 
mirror. 


Geometries for imaging at grazing incidence 

Anearly stigmatic telescope system must have a principal 
surface that is a sphere centered on the axial focus. If 
the F-ratio is small enough (small aperture diameter / focal 
length) then this sphere is well approximated by a plane 
perpendicular to the optical axis. For an imaging system 
which uses just one reflection the principal surface of 
the optic must necessarily be the reflecting surface itself 
and therefore a grazing incidence system employing one 
reflection is very astigmatic. A parabolic mirror with high 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


curvature and large enough diameter such that the outer 
edges are reflecting at grazing incidence will bring rays 
parallel to the axis into a point focus. However, parallel 
rays which are slightly off-axis will form a highly comatic 
image consisting of a circle centered on the axis. 

It is possible to produce a nearly stigmatic imaging 
system using an even number of grazing incidence 
reflections. The first such system devised was described 
by P Kirkpatrick and A V Baez in 1948. This comprises two 
orthogonally mounted cylinders each of which produces a 
line focus as illustrated in figure 2. The axially symmetric 
solution to the problem was provided by H Wolter in 
1952. The two Wolter geometries which can be used for 
telescopes are called Wolter type I and type II and are 
illustrated in figure 3. The solid lines are the physical 
mirrors, the dashed lines indicate the path of on-axis rays 
and the dotted lines show the principal surface and surface 
generators. The first reflecting surface has a parabolic 
profile while the second is hyperbolic. In fact the surfaces 
are essentially the same as a CASSEGRAIN TELESCOPE except 
that grazing incidence rather than normal incidence is 
used. For the type I design the two physical surfaces meet 
at a join plane and the distance from this plane to the focus 
is the focal length. For type II the join plane is in front of the 
physical surfaces and therefore the focal length is larger 
than the instrument length. This design is best suited 
to larger grazing angles and is therefore only useful for 
longer wavelengths or lower energies in the soft x-ray and 
extreme ultraviolet bands. Wolter type II telescopes were 
used on the EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER Satellite launched 
1992. 

Both the Kirkpatrick—Baez (K-B) and Wolter type I 
geometries can be nested. In the K-B case a large number 
of reflecting plates can be stacked together such that they 
have a common line focus. For Wolter I systems a series of 
surfaces of revolution are placed one inside the other with 
a common axis. For a Wolter type I aperture of radius R 
the grazing angle is given by 6, = tan-!(R/F)/4 where F 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Grazing Incidence Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


— ee cylinder 


line focus 


Figure 2. The Kirkpatrick-Baez geometry. 


Type ll 


Type | ae 


on 


Figure 3. Wolter type I and II geometries. 


is the focal length. The F-ratio therefore determines the 
largest grazing angles in the nest. Efficient nesting can be 
achieved over radii from R to R/3. Further surfaces added 
at smaller radii will increase the high-energy collecting 
area but have little effect on the lower-energy collecting 
area. 

Small square pores or channels can be packed together 
to approximate a K—B or Wolter I geometry. If the channels 
are packed on a Cartesian grid then the resulting optic 
works in the same way as the eye of a lobster. The image 
consists of a true focus produced by an even number of 
reflections, a cruciform focus produced by a odd number 
of reflections and a diffuse background produced by no 
reflections. The Wolter I geometry can be approximated 
by packing the square pores in a radial pattern and using 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


two successive plates of channels. 


Designing grazing incidence telescopes 

All the large focusing x-ray telescopes which have been 
built to date have used grazing incidence reflection in the 
Wolter type I geometry. The main problem with grazing 
incidence optics is low surface utilization. The effective 
area of a K-B or Wolter type I system for wavelength A 
is given by Ac = $R?(Og,A) sin Og Ageom Where Ageom is 
the geometric area and R(6g, i) is the reflectivity from one 
reflection. The grazing angle must be small so that the 
square of the reflectivity is high, typically 6, < 1.5°, and 
so the ratio of the polished surface area to the effective area 
is very large. To give a large collecting area the surfaces 
must be long in the axial direction and/or they must be 
nested. The maximum two-reflection reflectivity is usually 
achieved if the grazing angles on the two surfaces are 
equal. The surfaces look like cylinders with a slight taper. 
The individual surface elements are often referred to as 
shells and it may be advantageous to manufacture a pair 
of parabolic and hyperbolic surfaces in a single monolithic 
shell. 

The figuring errors must be significantly less than the 
angular resolution required and the gradient errors must 
be kept small over the entire axial length of the surfaces. 
The mirror shells must be thick enough to support the 
figure but aperture area is inevitably lost at the front 
ends of each shell. There is therefore a direct trade-off 
between angular resolution (shell stiffness) and effective 
area (aperture utilization). 

The radius of the field of view is necessarily less than 
the grazing angle but as the grazing angles increase the 
upper energy cutoff of the telescope decreases so there is 
a direct trade-off between the maximum field of view and 
the broad band response. 


Manufacturing grazing incidence telescopes 
The traditional way of producing Wolter type I x-ray 
mirrors is as monolithic shells. Wolter I blanks are drilled 
out of a block of Zerodur or similar glass ceramic. The 
blanks are then ground to the correct thickness and figure. 
Superpolish is achieved by a very fine grinding—polishing 
process. Provided that the shells are thick enough very 
high figure tolerances and a superpolish of 3 Arms can be 
met giving 0.5 arcsec angular resolution. Using monolithic 
shells the aperture utilization is limited to ~0.1 by the shell 
thickness required and the shells are very massive. 
Wolter type I surfaces can be approximated by 
thin conical aluminum foil sectors with a foil thickness 
~130 wm. A very large number of nested sections can 
give a high aperture utilization of up to ~0.6. A high- 
quality surface finish is produced by laquering or epoxy 
replication of a smooth mandrel former and high x-ray 
reflectivity is achieved by coating the surfaces with gold 
or some other high-Z material. Unfortunately figuring 
errors limit the angular resolution to ~2 arcmin. The x-ray 
telescopes on the Japanese satellite asca launched in 1993 
employed foil mirrors. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Grazing Incidence Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Large x-ray telescopes. 


Einstein ROSAT Chandra XMM 
Focal length (mm) 3440 2400 10069 7500 
Diameter (mm) 580 835 1200 700 
Axial length (mm) 1022 1000 1660 600 
Number of shells 4 4 4 58 
Shell material Fused quartz Zerodur Zerodur Nickel 
Surface coating chrome-nickel Gold Iridium = Gold 
HEW (arcsec) 9 5 1 16 
FWHM (arcsec) 3 3 0.5 8 
Area, 1 keV (cm?) 400 400 800 1475 
Area, 8.0 keV (cm?) - - 100 580 


Wolter type I shells can be produced by a replication 
process. The surfaces are machined on a very stiff, stable 
mandrel in a similar way to the production of monolithic 
shells except that the surfaces are external rather than 
internal to the cylinder. The mandrel is then coated with 
~1500 A of gold and a thin layer of nickel, ~1.0 mm thick, 
is electroformed onto the mandrel surface. Luckily the 
gold acts as a release agent for the electroforming process 
and is conveniently transferred from the mandrel onto 
the electroformed nickel shell. After release the shell has 
a superpolished gold surface ready for use as an x-ray 
mirror. Shells can be produced with a thickness as little 
as 0.3 mm and so the aperture utilization can be ~0.4. 
After release residual stress in the electroformed nickel 
may cause the shells to distort and the shells must be 
handled very carefully to avoid introducing figure errors. 
The first replicated Wolter type I mirrors were flown on 
EXOSAT launched in 1983. 

Microchannel plate technology can be used to 
produce square pores in either the K—B (lobster eye) or the 
Wolter I approximation (see MICROCHANNELPLATE DETECTORS). 
Very small grazing angles arise for the channels near the 
center of the plates giving a hard x-ray response and the 
geometry can provide a very wide field of view. The 
channel walls are thin, the aperture utilization is high and 
the optics have very low mass. However, it is difficult to 
align the channels, coat the channel walls and reduce the 
surface roughness. 

Whatever the production process the reflecting 
surfaces must be kept very clean and free from dust and 
contamination, during manufacture, through launch to 
deployment in space. 


Large x-ray telescopes 

The brightest cosmic x-ray source Sco X-1 (SCORPIUS X-1) 
gives a flux at the Earth of about 150 photons cm~ s7! 
in the energy band 0.1-10 keV while typical sources are 
at least 10000 times fainter. To detect the weaker sources 
a collecting area of a few hundred cm? is sufficient but 
to detect distant objects and perform accurate photometry 
or spectroscopy thousands of cm? are required. As the 
sensitivity increases with larger areas so the angular 
resolution must improve to avoid confusion and reveal 
detail in diffuse and extended objects. Successive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pt) = 


Figure 4. XMM mirror module number 1. 


generations of x-ray telescopes have gradually improved 
in collecting area and angular resolution. 


The first large imaging x-ray telescope was the EINSTEIN 
Observatory, launched by NASA in 1978. The first x-ray 
all-sky survey produced with an imaging telescope was 
taken by rosat which was built in Germany and launched 
in 1990. Both these instruments used a Wolter type I design 
and monolithic shell technology. 


xmM! and CHANDRA are the two largest x-ray 
observatories built to date. Chandra was launched by 
NASA on 23 July 1999 and XMM was launched by ESA on 
10 December 1999. They are complementary in terms of 
both technology and performance. XMM contains three 
mirror modules produced using replication technology 
which provide over 4000 cm? of collecting area. Chandra 
is a single telescope constructed from monolithic shells 
with an angular resolution of 0.5 arcsec. Both XMM and 
Chandra are remarkable feats of optical engineering. 


Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of these 
telescopes. Figure 4 shows the complete XMM mirror 
module number 1. 


1 XMM was renamed XMM-Newton after launch. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Grazing Incidence Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Future goals for grazing incidence optics 

To achieve a sensitivity in the x-ray energy band 
comparable with the largest optical, infrared and radio 
telescopes the collecting area must be ~10 m’. Itis unlikely 
that monolithic Wolter I shells could ever be produced 
to fill such an aperture area. However, it is possible 
to split the aperture into sectors and stack sector plates 
of Wolter I geometry into mirror modules which could 
then be integrated into a complete x-ray primary mirror, 
focusing all the x-ray light into a single focal plane. The 
XEUS concept under study at ESA is working towards this 
goal. 

The diffraction limit of the angular resolution in x-ray 
astronomy is potentially very small, <0.02 arcsec for a 
modest 10 cm aperture. At present x-ray telescopes are 
nowhere near this limit. Very high angular resolution 
is possible if the surfaces can be manufactured and 
aberrations can be reduced by using multiple reflections. 
W Cash has suggested this can probably be realized using 
very-high-quality spherical mirrors in a K-B geometry. 
Prototype systems with ~0.1 arcsec resolution have 
already been built. Unfortunately a high level of nesting 
must be used to give a useful area and the surface elements 
must be aligned to extremely high precision to reach the 
diffraction limited performance. 


Bibliography 

Beckmann P and Spizzichino A 1963 The Scattering of 
Electromagnetic Waves from Rough Surfaces (New York: 
Pergamon) 

Henke B L, Lee P, Tanaka T J, Shimabukuro R L and 
Fujikawa B K 1982 Low-energy x-ray interaction co- 
efficients: photoabsorption, scattering, and reflection 
At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 27 1-144 

Kirkpatrick P and Baez A V 1948 J. Opt. Soc. Am. 38 766 

Wolter H 1952 Ann. Phys. 10 94,286 


Richard Willingale 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Great Circle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Great Circle 


The circle obtained on the surface of a sphere by the 
intersection with the surface of a plane which passes 
through the center of the sphere. Any plane which 
intersects the sphere but does not pass through the center 
meets the sphere in a small circle. A great circle is, in 
fact, the largest possible circle that can be drawn on the 
surface of a sphere. The shortest distance between two 
points on a sphere is an arc of a great circle passing though 
those points. Examples of great circles on the Earth are the 
equator and lines of longitude; on the celestial sphere, the 
celestial equator, the meridian, ecliptic, etc. 


See also: celestial coordinates, celestial latitude, celestial 
longitude, ecliptic, meridian. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Great Red Spot (GRS) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Great Red Spot (GRS) 


A huge permanent anticyclone in Jupiter’s southern 
hemisphere, visible as a reddish oval at just over 20°S. 
The earliest unequivocal observation was by Heinrich 
Schwabe in 1831 (the often-quoted sighting by Robert 
Hooke in 1664 now seems to have been of a similar but 
different spot). The GRS became a striking feature around 
1880, when it developed a deep red coloration. It was 
also prominent in the early 1970s, but on other occasions 
the color has been less pronounced, fading on occasion to 
a pale buff or salmon pink and sometimes disappearing 
completely, to leave what is known as the Red Spot hollow. 
Its size has varied too: from about 10000 to 14000 km 
(north-south) by 24 000 to 40 000 km (east-west). The GRS 
drifts back and forth in longitude, and over the course 
of the twentieth century it completed about three circuits 
back and forth around the planet. There is also a 90-day 
oscillation in latitude that takes it nearly 2000 km either 
side of its mean position. In addition, it rotates counter- 
clockwise with a period of about 7 days. That the GRS is 
anticyclonic in nature is well accepted. What is not clear is 
what continues to drive it; one theory is that it is powered 
by the energy released as latent heat from the condensation 
of gases below. Its color variations may be caused by 
variations in the concentartion of phosphine (PHs3), or even 
of organic compounds. 


See also: Jupiter: atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Great Rift ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Great Rift 


A prominent division of the Milky Way consisting of a 
string of dark molecular clouds. It stretches from Cygnus 
(a section known as the Cygnus Rift), down through 
Aquila, to Sagittarius. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Great Wall 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Great Wall 


A vast sheet-like aggregation of galaxies that is about 800 
million light-years long, 280 million light-years ‘high’, but 
only about 15-20 million light-years ‘thick’. One of the 
largest known structures in the universe, it lies ata distance 
of about 300 million light-years. The coma cluster, one 
of the nearest great clusters of galaxies, forms part of the 
‘wall’. 

As with other remote structures in the universe, the 
distance and dimensions of the Great Wall depend on the 
value of the Hubble constant, Ho, the above figures being 
based on a value of 70 km s“! Mpc"!. In general terms, 
the size of the Great Wall, expressed in megaparsecs, is 
about 60/h by 170/h, and its distance about 65/h, where 
h = H)/100. For example, if Hp = 70 kms“! Mpc}, 
then h = 70/100 = 0.7, and the length of the ‘Wall’ is 
170/0.7 ~ 250 Mpc * 800 million light-years. 


See also: cluster of galaxies, Coma cluster, Hubble 
constant, parsec, superclusters and the Local Supercluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Green Bank (National Radio Astronomical Observa- 


tory) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Green Bank (National Radio 
Astronomical Observatory) 


Located in Green Bank, Pocahontas County, West Virginia. 
The site of the world’s largest fully steerable radio 
telescope, which was under construction during 1999 
and 2000. The National Radio Astronomy Observatory 
(NRAO) isa facility of the US National Science Foundation, 
and is operated under a cooperative agreement by 
Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI). 

Funding for the new 100 m (330 ft) telescope was 
provided by the NSF’s Division of Math and Physical 
Sciences. The telescope has actual surface dimensions of 
100 by 110 m. Its structure allows the telescope to view the 
entire sky above 5° elevation. Operations are expected to 
begin during 2000. 

Of the other instruments at Green Bank, the 42 m 
telescope closed on 19 July 1999, while the 91 m telescope 
collapsed on 15 November 1988. The collapse was due 
to the sudden failure of a key structural element in the 
box girder assembly that formed the main support for the 
antenna. The loss of the 91 m telescope resulted in the 
Green Bank Telescope Project. 

The Green Bank Interferometer (GBI) is also operated 
by the NRAO. It includes three radio telescopes of 26 m 
(85 ft) diameter, designated 85-1, 85-3 and 85-2 (85-1 is 
also known as the Tatel Telescope). 85-1 and 85-2 form 
a one-baseline interferometer, funded by NASA, which is 
engaged in monitoring variable radio sources. This GBI- 
NASA monitoring program observes x-ray binary stars 
and active galactic nuclei. 

The VLBI tracking station in Green Bank is one of four 
such NASA facilities dedicated to the support of very long 
baseline interferometry satellites. 

For further information see 
http://info.gb.nrao.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Greenhouse Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Greenhouse Effect 


The greenhouse effect is the radiative influence exerted by 
the atmosphere of a planet which causes the temperature 
at the surface to rise above the value it would normally 
reach if it were in direct equilibrium with sunlight (taking 
into account the planetary ALBEDO). This effect stems from 
the fact that certain atmospheric gases have the ability 
to transmit most of the solar radiation and to absorb 
the infrared emission from the surface. The thermal (i.e. 
infrared) radiation intercepted by the atmosphere is then 
partially re-emitted towards the surface, thus contributing 
additional heating of the surface. 

Although the analogy is not entirely satisfactory in 
terms of the physical processes involved, it is easy to 
see the parallels between the greenhouse effect in the 
atmosphere-surface system of a planet and a horticultural 
greenhouse: the PLANETARY ATMOSPHERE plays the role of the 
glass cover that lets sunshine through to heat the soil while 
partly retaining the heat that escapes from the ground. 
The analogy goes even further, since an atmosphere may 
present opacity ‘windows’ allowing infrared radiation 
from the surface to escape, the equivalent of actual 
windows that help regulate the temperature inside a 
domestic greenhouse. 


Physical description 

A more physical description is given by the simple 
two-stream approximation for the solution of radiative 
equilibrium in a planetary atmosphere. In the simplest 
case of a gray atmosphere (the opacity to thermal radiation 
is independent of wavelength) and in the absence of 
absorption of the solar radiation, the thermal emission 
from the surface has the following expression: 


ot W. 3 
B(t,.) = She = (1+ 3%) (1) 


where B is the integral of the Planck function over all 
wavelengths, o is Stefan’s constant, 0, is the surface 
temperature, Ws is the constant downward solar energy 
flux and t, is the infrared optical depth at the surface. 
From this expression, one notes that the surface tempe- 
rature is greater than it would be if the atmosphere were 
totally transparent to thermal radiation (i.e. when t, = 0). 
This reference value, defined as the equilibrium effective 
temperature, is given by 


We \"/4 
Beq = (=) (2) 
and the surface temperature may then be expressed as 
3r,\ 4 
Og = Ge (1 + =) (3) 


The atmosphere being in radiative equilibrium, the fact 
that the surface temperature is larger than the equilibrium 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


temperature implies that, at higher levels, the temperature 
must decrease below that value. Since the atmospheric 
temperature, expressed as a function of the optical depth 


T, is 
1 3r\" 
O(t) = Beq € r 7) (4) 


one notes that, for values of t smaller than t, temperatures 
are indeed below 4 q- 

A comparison between equations (3) and (4) reveals 
a temperature discontinuity near the surface, the surface 
being somewhat warmer than the layer just above it. 
This corresponds to a difference 5B = Ws/2z in the 
radiative budgets of the two systems: the surface is 
assumed to only radiate upwards within 27, whereas an 
atmospheric layer radiates both upwards and downwards. 
Formally, the amplitude of that discontinuity decreases as 
Tt, increases (if tg = 1 and 100, then 56/@q = 3.1% and 
0.5%, respectively). Physically, however, this temperature 
discontinuity is hydrostatically unstable and convection 
will tend to counter it. In this simple approximation, the 
radiative lapse rate is 


sue ais 5 
z 814+5r 
where H is a scale height characteristic of the vertical 
distribution of the infrared absorbing gas(es). The 
temperature lapse rate varies from zero (i.e. isothermal) 
at the top of the atmosphere to a maximum value at the 
surface. At some point, it may become superior to the 
adiabatic lapse rate, in which case convection sets in. 

The case of a semi-infinite gray atmosphere opaque 
to both solar and thermal radiation can also be solved in 
the two-stream approximation and leads to the following 
reduced source function B*(t) = 2 B(t)/ Ws(0): 


* = a i 3/40 a —at/ 9 
2B*(t) = (1+<) (F “ja eee. 6) 


where Ws(0) is the SOLAR CONSTANT at the top of the 
atmosphere, a is the ratio (assumed to be constant with 
altitude) of the extinction coefficient for solar radiation to 
that for thermal radiation, j19 is the cosine of the zenith 
solar angle and t is the optical depth for thermal radiation. 
The boundary conditions are 


oR Oy = 14 (7) 
2Lo 
2B*(co) = 1+ 22 (8) 
2a 
and their ratio is 
B* (co) _ xt+1 (9) 
B*(0) (x +2)(x — 2) 
with x = 2(1 + a/po) varying from 2 to oo. For 


values of a/[o < 3 (weak to moderate solar extinction 
versus thermal) the solution corresponds to a greenhouse 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Greenhouse Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


atmosphere in which the temperature increases with 
increasing optical depth, reaching values larger than the 
equilibrium effective temperature at some depth. For 
larger values, the solution is the reverse, i.e. the tempe- 
rature decreases with optical depth because solar radiation 
is deposited in the upper atmospheric layers instead. In all 
cases, the temperature varies monotonically with altitude. 

In real non-gray atmospheres, the extinction (of either 
solar or thermal radiation) varies both with altitude and 
with wavelength within each spectral domain. Then, an 
important additional feature may be the existence of a 
high-altitude temperature inversion if absorption of solar 
photons occurs preferentially in the upper atmospheric 
layers. The temperature in the stratosphere increases 
with altitude above a temperature minimum overlying a 
tropospheric greenhouse, provided that solar radiation is 
not completely blocked above these levels. In terms of 
the parameter a, these conditions are met if a >> 1 over a 
reasonably large fraction of the solar spectrum, and, at the 
same time, a < 1 over most of the rest of the spectrum. 

One may quantify the amplitude of an atmospheric 
greenhouse in at least two ways. The simplest estimator is 
just the relative increase in surface temperature compared 
with the equilibrium effective temperature A6/0 = (6, — 
6eq)/Gcq- A more elaborate estimator is the effective value 
of a that can be evaluated from the radiative properties 
of the atmosphere. This represents a global value of 
a characterizing the whole atmosphere over the whole 
spectrum. From equation (6), one derives the following 
equation: 


m[BO) — B(ts)] _ bo ( “;) 
= 3 10 
Ws(0) — Ws(t,) 4a Le @0) 
which may be solved for a: 
“= 5743)? 8 (11) 
Ho 
where 
$= p— FB? +3)? — Bp +2] (12) 
21 B(T,) 
= 13 
P Ws(0) — Ws(tz) ) 
and ede W. 
a 5(0) — Ws (tz) (14) 


Ws (0) 


These quantities are listed in table 1 for the terrestrial 
planets and T:TAN. By all accounts, vENus is the champion 
of the greenhouse effect, with the EARTH and Titan coming 
in second and third. mars definitely shows the weakest 
case. The following section provides an attempt to explain 
these striking differences in terms of the climatic evolution 
of each planet. 

Actually, as inferred from equations (6)-(9), it is 
not necessary that there be a surface boundary for 
a greenhouse effect to take place. For instance, the 
tropospheric thermal structure of the giant gaseous planets 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune) is partly due to a 
greenhouse effect exerted by molecular hydrogen, which 
is a fairly efficient infrared absorber. Because there is no 
solid surface, however, this effect is spread out over a large 
altitude range. Furthermore, with the possible exception 
of Uranus, these planets possess an internal source of heat 
that strongly modifies the lower boundary condition and 
tends to overwhelm the greenhouse effect. 

As noted above, the conditions that lead to the 
establishment of a greenhouse effect can also be reversed, 
thus leading to an anti-greenhouse effect. For instance, 
this occurs when a high-altitude haze absorbs or scatters 
visible sunlight and lets infrared radiation escape. On 
Earth, it has been predicted that extended fires resulting 
from a global nuclear conflict would inject large amounts 
of soot particles in the stratosphere that would act in such 
a way and provoke a dramatic surface cooling (so-called 
‘nuclear winter’). 

The above description focused on the atmospheric 
greenhouse effect. It is also possible for a greenhouse to 
occur in solid phase, for instance in the upper layers of 
ice deposits. The same conditions apply, that is the icy 
material needs to be somewhat transparent to sunlight 
and opaque to infrared radiation. It has been suggested 
that this mechanism is currently active at the surface of icy 
satellites. 


Greenhouses in the solar system 

From measurements collected in the solar system over 
the last 40 yr, it appears that all planets with a 
substantial atmosphere exhibit a greenhouse effect. The 
amplitude of this effect varies greatly from one planet 
to another, depending on the relative strength of 
the physical parameters involved (heliocentric distance, 
surface pressure, composition, feedback mechanisms, etc). 
In itself, this variety provides very useful clues for a better 
understanding of the impact of the various parameters. 
There are four cases of atmospheric greenhouse for bodies 
with a solid surface: Venus, Earth, Mars and Titan. Recent 
studies suggest that the greenhouse effect has played a 
major role in the climatic evolution of these planets. In 
addition, there are two cases of a suspected solid-state 
greenhouse, on Io and TRITON. 


Atmospheric greenhouses 

(a) Venus. Venus represents the archetype of the 
atmospheric greenhouse. Observationally, the first piece 
of evidence came in the late 1950s when measurements 
of the Venusian emission at centimetric wavelengths 
revealed a surface temperature on the order of 730 K. 
This value is about 500 K larger than the equilibrium 
effective temperature and could not readily be explained 
by the existing models of the Cytherean atmosphere. In 
1960, Carl Sagan was the first to recognize that two of 
the main atmospheric constituents—CO , and H,0—were 
probably responsible for a strong greenhouse effect. The 
Pioneer Venus mission later confirmed his hypothesis 
by providing a detailed account of the contribution of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Greenhouse Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Physical quantities characterizing the greenhouses on the terrestrial planets and Titan. 


Descriptor Quantity Venus Earth Mars _ Titan 
Surface temperature 6g (K) 731 288 218 94 
Equilibrium temperature 6eq (K) 231 255 212 82 


Relative increase of surface temperature 
Surface emission 


AO/0 = (Og — eq) /Oeq 2-16 0.13 0.03 0.15 
7 B(tg) (W m~”) 


16170 326 50 4.12 


Solar flux at the top of the atmosphere Ws(0) (W m7?) 937 882 512 10.3 
Solar flux reaching the surface Ws (Tg) (W m~?) 20 162 102 0.35 
Relative extinction of atmosphere for light and IR a (up = 5) 0.02 0.71 1.62 1.29 


the various greenhouse agents: in decreasing order of 
importance, they are CO2, H,O, H2SO, clouds, SO,, CO 
and HCl (see VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). 

One of the enigmas regarding the present-day Venus 
is the very low abundance of water. If Venus once 
possessed as much water as the Earth, what process made 
it disappear almost completely? In answer to this question, 
it was suggested that Venus has experienced a ‘runaway 
greenhouse’ inits early stage. In the original models (1960- 
84), it was considered that all of the water outgassed by 
the crust accumulated in the atmosphere as steam because 
initial conditions were already too warm for water to 
condense at the surface. Then, a runaway developed 
from the positive feedback between the accumulation 
of steam in the atmosphere and the greenhouse effect 
induced by that steam. This mechanism led to a high 
abundance of water vapor in the stratosphere, where it 
was photodissociated by solar UV photons. Hydrogen 
atoms hydrodynamically escaped from the atmosphere, 
thus sealing the fate of water on Venus. These early 
models, however, did not produce a complete loss of water 
because of a stratospheric cold trap that set in when the 
partial pressure of water vapor was still about 20 bar. 
Subsequent modeling (1988), taking into account moist 
convection as well as the 30% reduced luminosity of the 
fainter young Sun, suggested instead that an ocean may 
have existed at the surface, where temperatures reached 
the boiling point of water. Through the same feedback 
and loss mechanisms, this ‘moist greenhouse’ scenario 
leads to a complete dry-out of the atmosphere since the 
stratospheric cold trap does not set in before nearly all of 
the water has been lost. 

(b) Earth. Earth’s greenhouse is very mild in 
comparison with that of Venus. The surface temperature 
is only 33 K warmer than the equilibrium temperature. 
Yet, it has a profound significance for the existence and 
the development of life on our planet. As on Venus, the 
main greenhouse gases in EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE are CO, and 
HO. Besides a larger heliocentric distance, the case of the 
Earth reflects three fundamental differences with respect 
to Venus: (a) a smaller surface pressure (1/90th that of 
Venus) which limits the total infrared optical depth; (b) the 
existence of an atmospheric opacity window between 8 
and 12 wm, an interval which contains a significant portion 
of the thermal emission from the surface; (c) a regulation 
mechanism for the natural abundance of atmospheric CO>. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Under the influence of weathering alone, the amount 
of CO, in the atmosphere tends to decrease owing to 
its dissolution in pluvial and surface waters and the 
formation of calcium carbonate in ocean waters. (In 
present-day oceans, the precipitation of calcium carbonate 
on the seafloor is performed by shelled organisms, mainly 
calcareous plankton. In the early stages, it may have been 
performed by bacterial mats.) On the other hand, tectonic 
and volcanic activity releases some of the CO, sequestered 
in seafloor carbonates. The two processes counterbalance 
each other and result in a stable equilibrium state for 
the Earth climate. This balancing mechanism has in fact 
been invoked as a way of resolving the ‘faint young Sun’ 
paradox: given the lower luminosity of the early Sun, the 
Earth should have experienced a global ice age during its 
first 2-3 billion years. The fossil record shows that this was 
not the case. Indeed, with a surface entirely covered by 
glaciers, the CO) sink due to the weathering cycle would 
have been much reduced and the amount of atmospheric 
CO, would have increased rapidly. This would have led 
to a reinforced greenhouse effect that would have raised 
the surface temperature above the melting point of water 
ice. 

Since the beginning of the industrial era, human 
activity has resulted in a steady increase of the amount 
of atmospheric CO, and the climatic implications of that 
have now become a subject of concern. Present modeling 
suggests that a doubling of the CO, abundance would 
result in a global warming of about 2.5 K (other minor 
species such as CH, and CFCs may also have a significant 
impact by closing the 8-12 wm window). This estimate 
takes into account the feedback effect due to water vapor 
but assumes that the influence of clouds remains constant. 
The influence of an enhanced cloud cover is two-fold: it 
increases the albedo, therefore reducing the greenhouse 
effect, but it also increases the infrared opacity of the 
atmosphere, thereby increasing the greenhouse effect. It 
is generally thought that a moderating influence would 
prevail, although there are also ‘worst-case’ scenarios in 
which an enhanced cloud cover leads to a mean surface 
temperature increase of 4-5 K. In any case, because 
of the increased melting of the polar ice sheets and 
the subsequent rise of the mean sea level, a significant 
warming would have dramatic consequences for the 
habitability of the coastal areas in many countries. 

(c) Mars. Mars presents a weak greenhouse effect, 
with a surface temperature only 6 K warmer than the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Greenhouse Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


equilibrium value. This may be explained by two key 
factors: (a) the surface pressure is 7/1000th that of the 
Earth and (b) the atmosphere is too cold to contain 
a significant amount of water vapor. Even though 
CO, constitutes 95% of the Martian atmosphere—which 
incidently contains more CO; than that of the Earth—the 
low surface pressure severely limits the infrared optical 
thickness. This effect is compounded by the lack of water 
vapor. Furthermore, the Martian greenhouse is regularly 
perturbed by quasi-periodic global dust storms which 
are triggered in the southern hemisphere. In the case 
of storms encircling the planet and lasting one season, 
calculations show that the mean seasonal daily insolation 
is dramatically reduced (by factors of tens to thousands 
depending on the latitude and the season). This may 
explain, for instance, the observed 5 K decrease of the mean 
diurnal surface temperature at the Viking 1 landing site 
after the 1976-7 global dust storm. However, the influence 
of dust loading in the atmosphere is not a one-way street. 
Evidence from Viking and Mars Global Surveyor also 
indicates atmospheric heating near the surface, even for 
large amounts of dust (see MARS: ATMOSPHERE). 

The Red Planet has not always been so cold and 
dry. Surface morphological features observed by various 
orbiting spacecraft can only be explained by the presence 
of liquid water at some remote stage of the Martian 
evolution. It is currently assumed that a greenhouse effect 
generated by a thick CO, atmosphere (1000-5000 hPa) 
created a much warmer and wetter climate on the 
early Mars. This stage—during which life may have 
developed—probably lasted a few million years, until 
most of the CO) was converted into carbonates by the 
weathering cycle. The lack of tectonic activity on Mars 
prevented any recycling of these carbonates into carbon 
dioxide, thus quenching the atmospheric greenhouse. In 
principle, it would be possible to transform Mars into 
a habitable planet (terraforming) provided that most of 
the carbonates are converted back into atmospheric CO). 
Other necessary conditions for life would be production 
of O, by plants, protection from CO, toxicity by a buffer 
gas such as N> and shielding from solar UV radiation by 
CFCs. 

(d) Titan. Titan, the largest satellite of Saturn and 
the only satellite in the solar system with a substantial 
atmosphere (1500 hPa surface pressure), represents an 
interesting case of greenhouse effect which is intermediate 
between those of Venus and the Earth. Despite the 
large distance from the Sun, the amplitude of the 
atmospheric greenhouse effect is relatively large. The 
main greenhouse gases are N> (constituting more than 
94% of the atmosphere), CH, (less than 6%) and Hp (0.1%). 
The abundance of the last of these constituents is critical 
since its absorption affects the transparency of the unique 
opacity window located between 16 and 25 ym. Itis worth 
noting that the warming of the surface would be about 10K 
greater were it not for the anti-greenhouse effect caused by 
a thick stratospheric haze. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Solid-state greenhouses 

Io and Triton are very different in terms of surface 
composition and internal structure. One feature they 
may have in common, however, is the presence of a 
solid-state greenhouse at their surface. lIo’s surface is 
almost entirely covered with a SO, porous frost. From 
the positions of the near-infrared absorption bands due to 
this frost, it has been argued that a reverse temperature 
gradient exists at the subsolar point, i.e. the subsurface 
at 10-20 cm depth would be some 40 K warmer than the 
surface (at 85 K). However, other sulfur bands (SO, and Sg) 
measured by Voyager in the mid-infrared would argue 
against that conclusion. On Triton, the evidence is more 
indirect. Voyager images showing plumes of dark material 
extending several kilometers into the tenuous atmosphere 
suggest that local solid-state greenhouse warming of 
the subsurface CH,—N2 ice leads to rapid sublimation, 
resulting in a geyser-like phenomenon. 


Bibliography 

Goody R M and Yung Y L 1989 Atmospheric Radiation— 
Theoretical Basis (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Kasting J F 1988 Runaway and moist greenhouse 
atmospheres and the evolution of Earth and Venus 
Icarus 74 472-94 

Matson D L and Brown R H 1989 Solid-state greenhouses 

and their implications for icy satellites Icarus 77 67-81 

McKay CP, Pollack J B and Courtin R 1991 The greenhouse 

and antigreenhouse effects on Titan Science 253 

1118-21 

McKay C P, Lorenz R D and Lunine J I 1999 Analytic 

solutions for the antigreenhouse effect: Titan and the 

early Earth Icarus 137 56-61 

McKay C P, Toon O B and Kasting J F 1991 Making Mars 
habitable Nature 352 489-96 


Régis Courtin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Greenstein, Jesse Leonard (1909-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Greenstein, Jesse Leonard (1909-) 


Born in New York City, worked at the California Institute 
of Technology at the time of the start of the 200 in telescope, 
and seized the chance to apply his training in spectroscopic 
theory to observation, studying the interstellar medium, 
abundances of the elements and peculiar stars. He has 
made detailed studies of white dwarf stars, determining 
their masses, luminosities, temperatures, compositions, 
gravitational redshifts and motions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Gregorian Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gregorian Telescope 


A type of reflecting telescope originally designed in 1663 
by the Scottish mathematician, James Gregory. It utilizes 
a concave paraboloidal primary mirror and a concave 
ellipsoidal secondary mirror that is located outside the 
focus of the primary. Light reflected from the secondary 
travels back down the telescope tube, through a central 
hole in the primary, to the eyepiece. Because the secondary 
mirror causes light rays to converge at a smaller angle 
than the rays reflected directly from the primary, it 
increases the effective focal length of the instrument, so 
enabling a telescope of long effective focal length to be 
contained within a relatively short tube. The Gregorian 
optical system produces an upright image but suffers from 
having a very small field of view. Gregorian instruments, 
constructed by instrument-makers such as James Short 
(1710-68), became popular during the eighteenth century 
largely because their concave secondaries were easier to 
make than were the convex secondaries of the broadly 
similar Cassegrain instruments. Several modern solar 
telescopes are based on the Gregorian design, since it 
produces a real image of the Sun which can be occulted 
by a disk (to reduce scattered light or extract heat). 


Seealso: Cassegrain telescope, field of view, focal length, 
mirror, reflector, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gregory [Gregorie], James (1638-75) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gregory [Gregorie], James (1638-75) 


Scottish mathematician and optician, born in Aberdeen. 
Gregory described in Optica Promota a design (which he 
never realized) for the first practical reflecting telescope 
in which a perforated primary concave parabolic mirror 
converges the light to the focus of a concave ellipsoidal 
secondary mirror. The light is reflected back to the 
ellipsoid’s second focus behind the main mirror. A real 
image is formed at the common focus of the two mirrors 
(by contrast to the virtual image in a Cassegrain telescope). 
The Gregorian telescope (as the design came to be called) is 
used in solar instruments where the light and heat of the 
Sun can be drawn out of the instrument by a blockage 
placed at this position. (For the first Gregorian telescope 
made, see JOHN HADLEY, ROBERT HOOKE.) After a time in Padua, 
Gregory returned to Scotland (St Andrews, Edinburgh) 
and worked on pure mathematics. He invented a brilliant 
method to determine the scale of the stellar universe, by 
comparing Sirius (as an assumed typical star) with the Sun 
(assumed the same). Waiting until a planet became the 
same brightness as Sirius, he calculated the fraction of light 
that, at that time, the planet intercepted and reflected from 
the Sun. He was able to estimate Sirius’s distance in units 
of the Sun’s distance, arriving at a number of 83190 AU, 
which he realized was a lower limit because of limitations 
in the scale of the solar system then known (1668). When in 
1685 NEWTON repeated Gregory’s calculation he concluded 
that Sirius was at 1 million AU. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Grimaldi, Francesco Maria (1618-63) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Grimaldi, Francesco Maria (1618-63) 


Italian astronomer and optician, born in Bologna, became 
a Jesuit. Prepared a map of the Moon that Riccioli used to 
assign the currently used names to its principal features. 
Discovered diffraction of light at small apertures. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Groombridge 1830 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Groombridge 1830 


This star (abbr. Gr 1830), despite its being at the limit of 
naked-eye visibility (apparent magnitude 6.42), is very 
well known due to its large proper motion. It is identified 
by its number in the Catalogue of Circumpolar Stars, 
compiled by the wealthy amateur astronomer Stephen 
Groombridge (1755-1832) from observations made at his 
private observatory in Blackheath, approximately one 
kilometer from the Royal Observatory at Greenwich. 
Groombridge used a fine transit circle of 3.5 inches 
aperture with circles 4 feet in diameter, made for him in 
1806 by Edward Troughton (1753-1835). This excellent 
instrument was the first successful transit circle used in 
Britain, and was one of the inspirations of G B Airy (1801- 
92), the seventh Astronomer Royal, to design his own great 
transit circle which came into use in 1851. Groombridge 
suffered a stroke in 1827 and was unable to complete the 
reductions of his observations. These were completed 
under Airy’s supervision and the catalog, containing the 
positions of 4243 stars in the declination band 38-90°, was 
published in 1838. ‘Groombridge’ remained the standard 
reference for circumpolar stars for over 150 years; a revised 
edition was published in 1905. 

Groombridge 1830 is a yellow main sequence star, 
spectral type G8Vp, apparent magnitude 6.42, situated 
about 16° south of y Ursae Majoris in the Plough. It 
lies at a distance of 30 light-years, and has a parallax of 
0.109”. Its absolute magnitude is 6.6. The significance of 
Groombridge 1830 was first recognized in 1842 by FWA 
Argelander (1799-1875), Director of the Bonn Observatory, 
who analyzed observations of its position made by various 
observers since 1794 and demonstrated that it had the then 
largest-known proper motion of any star. Even today its 
proper motion of 7.058” per annum is the third largest 
known, surpassed only by Barnard’s Star and Kapteyn’s 
Star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Groups of Galaxies 


Gravity creates a huge variety of cosmic structure, but most 
galaxies are found in groups of no more than a few dozen 
members. Groups range from the satellite systems of giant 
galaxies to loose associations a few times denser than their 
surroundings to compact cores of rich galaxy clusters. The 
common thread linking these examples is that the galaxies 
making up a group interact more with each other than they 
do with the rest of the universe; thus a group is a dynamical 
unit. 

Groups are important for the evolution of galaxies 
and of large-scale structures. GALAXY FORMATION appears 
to be a drawn-out process, involving the collapse of 
primordial perturbations, accretion of gas and dark matter, 
outright merging of distinct objects and outflows of gas 
enriched by supernovae. Most galaxies conduct these 
transactions in group environments. However, group 
environments are unstable; while the galaxies in a group 
are forming, the group itself may be separating out from 
the cosmic expansion, collapsing under the influence of 
gravity, accreting new members and finally merging with 
other groups to build clusters and superclusters. 

We can study the present outcome of these ongoing 
processes in our immediate vicinity and glimpse some 
earlier stages at high repsHirt. However, reconstructing 
the evolution of groups is a difficult problem. Two 
powerful tools which complement optical studies are 
computer simulations and multiwavelength observations. 
Simulations model the key dynamical ingredients of 
groups, including the DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES which is 
otherwise inaccessible. Observations at radio and x- 
ray wavelengths show how intergalactic gas responds as 
groups evolve. 


Evolutionary stages 

Figures 1 through 4 show four groups, ordered by stage 
of development. Group evolution begins when a bound 
configuration of several galaxies collapses out of the 
Hubble flow; the LocaL Group (LG) is now at this stage, 
with the Milky Way (MW) and M31 approaching each 
other for the first time (figure 1). One of our nearest 
neighbors, the M81 group (figure 2), illustrates a more 
advanced stage; as the HI image shows, three galaxies are 
linked by a complex structure indicating that they have 
already undergone at least one passage. STEPHAN’S QUINTET 
(figure 3), a compact group, contains an extended, possibly 
tidal feature in neutral hydrogen and a central cloud of 
hot gas visible in x-rays; this gas may have been heated by 
a fast, interpenetrating encounter between two galaxies. 
Finally, V Zw 311 (figure 4) is actually the core of cluster 
Abell 407; it is likely that several of these galaxies will 
merge over the next ~1 Gyr. 

These four examples represent not only different 
evolutionary stages but also different evolutionary tracks. 
For example, the LG will become more compact as the MW 
and M31 draw closer, possibly evolving into a system like 
the M81 group, but probably not attaining the dramatic 
status of Stephan’s Quintet, let alone V Zw 311. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Collapse 
The LG (figure 1) is probably the best place to study a 
collapsing group. Most of its luminosity is associated 
with the MW and M31, which are currently separated 
by ~0.73 Mpc and approaching each other at 120 km s7}. 
A simple model treats the main galaxies as point masses 
moving along a linear orbit—an ellipse of zero width. In 
this approximation, the two galaxies coincided at the big 
bang fo ~ 13 Gyr ago, separated smoothly with the Hubble 
flow, reached a maximum separation of ~1 Mpc some 
5 Gyr ago and are now falling together. To account for 
this history, the LG’s total mass must be about 4 x 10’°Mo5 
and its mass-to-light ratio M/Ly ~ 100. This is several 
times most estimates of the MW’s M/L ratio, a sign that 
unseen dark matter is important in extragalactic dynamics. 
Thus it seems that much of the LG’s mass resides in 
structures larger than individual galaxies. Cosmological 
N-body simulations show that gravity deforms a smooth 
distribution of dark matter with a plausible spectrum of 
density fluctuations into a complex web of ‘pancakes’ and 
filaments; this web constantly evolves as ever-larger scales 
break away from the Hubble expansion. Halos of dark 
matter form at the intersections of filaments and grow as 
mass flows along the filaments. In this picture, the MW 
and M31 are presumably linked by a major filament and 
are ‘sucked together’ as this filament collapses. 


Spins and swings 

In gravitational clustering, galaxies acquire their spins 
from tidal torques. At early times, the material which 
eventually forms a galaxy has an irregular shape, and 
as density fluctuations grow this material feels a torque 
due to the tides of other proto-galaxies. Groups seem 
natural places to apply this scenario; for example, it has 
been argued that the MW and M31 are mutually more or 
less edge-on because each provided the tidal torque which 
spun up the other. The further assumption that the total 
spin and orbital angular momentum of the LG is zero then 
yields a definite prediction for the M31’s transverse motion 
with respect to the MW. 

This simple calculation is less plausible on closer 
inspection. First, in a tally of angular momentum, spins 
are less important than satellite orbits; for example, the 
LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD’s orbit about the MW has several 
times the angular momentum of the MW’s spin, and 
the same may be true for M31 and M33. Second, the 
external torque on the MW-M31 binary due to the nearby 
galaxies shown in figure 1 is sufficient to give the pair 
a transverse velocity of at least ~40 km s-!. This orbital 
swing completely dominates the total angular momentum 
of the LG; clearly the LG’s dynamical isolation is very 
imperfect. It is possible that MW and M31 set each other 
spinning, but the reflex torque on their relative orbit is tiny 
compared with the torques due to surrounding galaxies. 
Tests of the tidal torque hypothesis based on auditing the 
angular momentum of the LG seem doomed to founder 
on this complication. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Groups of Galaxies ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


~ M81 
2 e3 
N4945 53 
ZO <CenA ee =< 
UG “10342 
e a oe 
N6946 © 
e 
MW ; O ‘com 
Maf 1» ~- 
. o M31 
8 e 
e ee 
e 
e 
oO N55 
_ N253 


Figure 1. The LG (filled circles) and other nearby galaxies (open circles). Luminous galaxies (large circles) are labeled. (Courtesy B 


Tully.) 


Least-action models 

To investigate the effects of surrounding galaxies in greater 
detail requires more than two free-falling bodies. An 
elegant approach minimizes the action of a system of 
point-like galaxies subject to mixed boundary conditions: 
peculiar velocities vanish as t — 0, and all galaxies reach 
their observed positions at the present. This approach 
assumes that each galaxy’s trajectory and gravitational 
field are adequately reproduced by a single particle. 
However, it also admits a rather strong test; given the 
present masses and redshift-independent distances of 
galaxies, it predicts their redshifts. 

When applied to the LG this method yields 
impressive agreement between predicted and observed 
redshifts. Plausible solutions, in which the MW and 
M31 approach each other for the first time, assign the 
LG a total mass consistent with the simple two-galaxy 
estimate above. However, the transverse velocity of M31 
depends sensitively on the volume simulated, growing to 
several hundred km s~! when the other galaxies in figure 1 
are included; indeed, it is possible that yet more distant 
galaxies may further modify the solutions. These results, 
if correct, completely rewrite the past and future of the 
LG; the MW and M31 are no longer partners in a dance 
lasting aeons but ‘ships passing in the night’ at several 
times their escape velocity. PROPER MOTIONS for M31 and 
other LG galaxies would settle the issue. 


Virial equilibrium 

Simple models assume that bound groups reach a quasi- 
equilibrium state in which galaxies have isotropic orbits 
with random phases. This state of randomized grace 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


results from scattering of galaxies by each other and by 
masses outside the group. However, when do these 
scatterings occur? If a group is isolated and remains fairly 
spherical then its constituent galaxies are not deflected 
from their radial trajectories until the group has collapsed 
to a small fraction of its maximum radius. In this case 
the collapse is fairly violent, and the new-born group 
first reaches equilibrium at ~200 times the mean cosmic 
density. At the opposite extreme in which a nascent group 
is strongly influenced by surrounding objects the collapse 
is gentle and the group attains equilibrium at only ~30 
times the mean density. This is basically the same set of 
alternatives considered in the discussion of the LG. 

Once a group is in equilibrium, a time-averaged 
version of the virial theorem applies: 2(T) + (U) = 0, where 
angle brackets denote time averages and T and U are the 
kinetic and potential energy of the group, respectively. 
Of course, these time-averaged quantities cannot be 
determined observationally; instead, we observe an 
ensemble of groups and use orbital randomness to justify 
taking ensemble averages. Observable quantities include 
the mean harmonic radius of the group, ry, and the line- 
of-sight velocity dispersion, o. These parameters may 
be used to check that group has actually had time to 
reach virial equilibrium. The collapse time for an isolated, 
spherical group is approximately the Keplerian period of 
a particle at the edge of the group, or ~2.9t,., where 


le = = (1) 


is the crossing time. Starting from the big bang, it takes a 
group about one collapse time to reach equilibrium, so a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The M81 group in (left) visible light and (right) neutral 
hydrogen. (Courtesy M Yun.) 


reasonable criterion might be 34, < fp. This limit is stricter 
than necessary for groups which are strongly influenced by 
neighboring masses, since such groups attain equilibrium 
with little or no collapse. 

In view of the evidence for dark matter in the LG and 
in rich galaxy clusters, much effort has been devoted to 
measuring the masses of bound groups. For groups in 
equilibrium, the virial theorem provides an estimate of 
the dynamical mass, 

60 2n h 


My= a (2) 


Group mass-to-light ratios obtained using this approach 
generally show a wide scatter about a median value 
of several hundred. Some of this scatter represents 
fluctuations around virial equilibrium. However, a far 
larger and more systematic uncertainty arises in assigning 
galaxies to groups; if Mg is to provide meaningful group 
masses, the procedures used to identify groups must be 
carefully calibrated. 


Catalogs and parameters 

In the days before redshift surveys, groups were identified 
by noting galaxies with similar positions, apparent 
distances, and other signs of association. This subjective 
process produced accurate membership lists for nearby 
groups (e.g. figure 2), but contamination by foreground 
and background galaxies became much more serious at 
larger distances. As more redshifts became available 
it became clear that some ‘traditional’ groups extend 
along the line of sight for many Mpc; in such cases, a 
virial analysis is useless since o reflects Hubble expansion 
instead of internal dynamics. 

Redshift surveys down to a fixed limiting magnitude 
are probably the best available starting point in construct- 
ing group catalogs. However, redshifts reflect peculiar 
motions as well as Hubble expansion, and this distorts the 
galaxy distribution deduced from redshift surveys. Con- 
sequently, algorithms for group finding cannot treat ra- 
dial and transverse directions on the same footing. Most 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


group-finders use a ‘friends of friends’ algorithm which 
links two galaxies if their projected separation and line-of- 
sight velocity difference are less than some cutoff values; 
each set of galaxies linked either directly or via intermedi- 
aries defines a group. 

The velocity cutoff strongly influences the resulting 
catalogs; if it is too high then unrelated galaxies along 
the line of sight may be linked together, while if it is 
too low then bona fide groups may be broken up. The 
same velocity information is used to define groups and 
to calculate their velocity dispersions, so it is no surprise 
that dispersions are also sensitive to the velocity cutoff. 
Tests run on simulated redshift surveys derived from 
cosmological N-body experiments offer some guidance 
in selecting distance and velocity cutoffs that produce 
reasonable group catalogs. 

Atypical catalog generated in this manner links about 
half of all galaxies into groups. Most groups have three 
or four members, while a small fraction are much richer. 
The median density of such groups is about 100 times 
the background density, and about half the groups have 
crossing times short enough to be virialized. The mass-to- 
light ratios derived for these groups are roughly consistent 
with the value obtained for the LG. 


Dynamical evolution 

It has been convenient so far to treat groups as systems 
of point-like galaxies. However, in reality galaxies are not 
points, and groups may have a good deal of dark matter 
not associated with individual galaxies. This can have 
dramatic consequences. For example, virial equilibrium is 
at best a temporary condition; in the long run, an isolated 
group cannot attain true equilibrium until all its galaxies 
coalesce to form a single group remnant. 


Galactic encounters 

Thanks to their finite sizes, galaxies are subject to 
tides. Galaxies in close proximity are simultaneously 
stretched and squeezed by tidal forces. DISK GALAXIES 
respond by forming dramatic bridges and tails of stars 
and gas which reflect the effects of tides on rotationally 
supported disks; ELLIPTICALGALAXIES, Supported by random 
motions, may exhibit distended envelopes and off-center 
isophotes. The explanation of such features as relics of 
tidal interactions was a key step in understanding the 
peculiar morphologies of colliding galaxies. 

Groups of galaxies are likely sites for tidal interac- 
tions. Simple estimates and detailed simulations indicate 
that ina typical group there is roughly one close encounter 
per crossing time. A curious feature of tidal interactions 
is that slower encounters do more damage; groups have 
relatively low velocity dispersions, so most encounters in 
groups are slow enough to produce rather spectacular ef- 
fects. 

One example of tidal interactions is shown in figure 2. 
Even before the HI observations there were signs that 
the two brightest galaxies in this group were interacting; 
evidence included the ‘grand design’ spiral of M81 and an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Stephan’s Quintet, a compact group of galaxies. 
Plotted on top of the optical image (courtesy M Moles) are thin 
contours of HI emission (courtesy B Williams) and thick 
contours of x-ray emission (courtesy H Ebeling). The large spiral 
galaxy at the bottom is a foreground object. 


‘explosion’, now recognized as a burst of star formation, 
in M82. The HI maps reveal complex filaments linking 
these galaxies as well as the third most luminous member, 
NGC 3077. These structures appear to be bridges 
and tails extracted from the extended gas disks of the 
individual galaxies by tidal forces during a fairly recent 
triple encounter; this encounter may represent the initial 
collapse of the M81 group. 


Tidal interactions are common in COMPACT GROUPS 
OF GALAXIES where three or more galaxies are seen in 
near proximity. Besides tidal signatures similar to those 
already described, many disk galaxies in such groups have 
asymmetric rotation curves or other unusual kinematic 
features. Such kinematic peculiarities are among the first 
signs of a tidal interaction; bridges and tails develop later 
as perturbed stars drift away from their parent disks. 

Acompact group with a rather complicated history is 
shown in figure 3. This is Stephan’s Quintet, discovered in 
1877. As often happens, not all the galaxies are the same 
distance; in this case, the largest spiral is a foreground 
object, while the other five galaxies, including the small 
spiral on the left, are associated. Of these five, two exhibit 
tidal tails and other signs of interactions. However, tides 
are not the only forces at work here—velocity fields of 
both neutral and ionized hydrogen reveal two components 
separated by at least 700 km s“!, while x-rays show a cloud 
of hot gas at the center of the group. The data suggest 
that gas is heated by a high-velocity shock between two 
distinct streams of tidal material, with further energy input 
from localized formation of massive stars. If so, at least 
two tidal encounters are required, since the debris of a 
single passage generally separate at roughly the encounter 
velocity. Moreover, the large shock velocity implies a 
deep potential well associated with one or more massive 
dark halos. Finally, the hot gas responsible for the x-ray 
emission points to a long-term change, since such gas, once 
heated, is slow to cool off. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. ‘The once and future cD’, V Zw 311, is a complex of 
galaxies at the center of a poor cluster (courtesy D Schneider). 


Orbital decay 

Another consequence of extended mass distributions in 
groups is the decay of galactic orbits. Tidal encounters 
between galaxies cause significant orbital decay—roughly 
speaking, the work required to raise tidal features of visible 
stars and of dark matter comes from the relative motion 
of the participants. Two equally matched galaxies whose 
halos interpenetrate after falling from a great distance will 
never return to anything like their maximum separation, 
but will pass even closer the next time around, and merge 
after a few orbits. This decay is slower in unequally 
matched encounters, but no less inexorable; it represents a 
one-way process, a randomization of the ordered relative 
motions of two galaxies. A similar process occurs when a 
galaxy orbits within the common halo of a larger group. 
In the limit where the group halo is much more massive 
than the galaxy this process can be described by several 
analytic approximations, none perfect yet all predicting 
that the galaxy will spiral inward after some M/m orbits, 
where M is the mass of the group and m is the mass of the 
galaxy. 

Orbital decay can have dramatic consequences in 
extremely compact groups like the one in the center of V 
Zw 311 (figure 4). Here we see nearly a dozen early-type 
galaxies embedded in a common envelope of comparable 
total luminosity. The velocity dispersion of this group is 
ao ~ 600 km s“!, while the brighter group members have 
velocities within ~200 km s~! of the mean. Assuming this 
system is bound, its virial mass is about 10 times the total 
mass of the visible galaxies, and the unseen material is 
probably more extended than the luminous envelope. If 
the brighter galaxies are now on roughly circular orbits, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


they will spiral toward the center and presumably merge 
in ~1 Gyr. 

While objects as extreme as V Zw 311 are fairly rare, 
orbital decay occurs in both loose and compact groups. 
Numerical simulations in which galaxies and dark matter 
are represented using many thousands of particles are the 
most reliable way to follow the decay of galactic orbits. 
Such simulations show that galaxies spiral inward about 
as fast as predicted by the analytic models. The orbital 
decay timescale depends on the initial set up, being shorter 
if most of dark mass is associated with individual galaxy 
halos and longer if most of the dark mass is invested 
in a common group halo. However, unless the initial 
conditions are somehow fine-tuned, the orbits of massive 
galaxies shrink quite noticeably with each revolution. 

In view of this relentless evolution, one might wonder 
whether it is correct to estimate group masses using 
the virial theorem. Numerical studies show that the 
systematic non-equilibrium effects are fairly modest; on 
the average, galaxies move about as fast as they would 
if their orbits were not decaying, and the virial theorem 
yields consistent mass estimates. However, as galaxies 
spiral in they explore less and less of the group’s potential 
well, and any mass which lies beyond the region they 
sample will not be detected by a virial analysis. 


Mergers 

When galaxies spiral toward the center of a group it also 
becomes more and more likely that they will capture 
each other and merge. Merging can be described as a 
combination of orbital decay and tidal disruption. As two 
or more galaxies undergo successively closer passages, 
they are tidally stripped from the ‘outside in’; most of the 
stripped material remains bound to the merging system 
and forms the body of the resulting merger remnant. 

The outcome of a merger depends on the participants. 
Much attention has focused on the hypothesis that 
elliptical galaxies form by mergers of spiral galaxies. This 
suggestion is supported by observations of ‘twin-tailed’ 
merger remnants which have luminosity profiles and 
kinematic properties resembling bright elliptical galaxies 
and by numerical experiments which detail the mechanics 
of such catastrophic transformations. Together with the 
companion hypothesis that violent encounters can trigger 
bursts of star formation, merging succeeds in linking 
normal and peculiar galaxies into a coherent evolutionary 
scheme (see GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). Yet it is 
unlikely that all ellipticals resulted from mergers of equal- 
mass spirals. Some elliptical galaxies may have had 
multiple bursts of star formation, while others seem 
more thoroughly ‘scrambled’ than typical spiral-spiral 
mergers. If these objects originated in multiple mergers, 
they probably did so in group environments. 

There are many groups with recent or ongoing 
mergers. One example is the loose, spiral-rich group 
containing Cen A, a peculiar elliptical galaxy with an 
active nucleus (See NGC5128/CENTAURUSA). The dark bisecting 
dust lane, subtle ‘shells’ superimposed on the luminosity 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Numerical simulation of a compact group. These 
frames span an interval of ~3 Gyr. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


profile, unusual kinematics revealed by planetary nebulae 
and irregular structure of its extended envelope all suggest 
that Cen A swallowed a good-sized gas-rich companion 
~1 Gyr ago. Another example is the small group of 
four galaxies including NGC 3921, a classic twin-tailed 
remnant of a recent merger between two disk galaxies of 
comparable mass. A third example is Hickson Compact 
Group 95, in which two smaller spirals appear to be 
simultaneously merging with a larger elliptical galaxy. 

In the case of V Zw 311 (figure 4), the extended 
envelope surrounding the galaxies probably represents 
material stripped in the early stages of the merging 
process. Further stripping as the galaxies sink toward the 
center of the group will liberate more material, building 
the merger remnant from the outside in. Once the 
larger galaxies finish merging, V Zw 311 will contain a 
very luminous central galaxy with an extended envelope; 
the expected parameters of this object suggest that we 
are witnessing the formation of a ‘cD’ galaxy similar to 
those which dominate the central regions of many galaxy 
clusters. 

A numerical simulation illustrating the later stages 
of orbit decay and merging is presented in figure 5. 
This experiment started with a compact near-equilibrium 
configuration of six disk galaxies, each surrounded by 
a modest dark halo. The first frame shows the system 
shortly before two pairs merge; note the twin-tailed 
morphology of the pair at the top. Later frames show a 
further merger of the two remnants, a violent interaction 
between the composite remnant and the two remaining 
disk galaxies, and the final remnant, which resembles an 
elliptical galaxy. Scaling the initial disk galaxies to the 
MW, the group starts with a diameter of ~120 kpc and 
takes about 3 Gyr to completely merge. 

In absolute terms, the merger rate in a loose group 
is a good deal lower than in a compact group. However, 
this difference is largely due to the long crossing times 
of loose groups; within broad limits, there is about one 
merger per crossing time in loose and compact groups 
alike. Since loose groups are a good deal more common 
than compact ones, they probably dominate the net merger 
rate. Demographic estimates show that while galaxies 
in compact groups are ~20 times more likely to undergo 
violent interactions and mergers, only one merger in four 
occurs in a compact group. The timescale for a typical 
loose group to merge is several times the age of the 
universe; nonetheless, a modest fraction of galaxies in 
loose groups have probably undergone multiple mergers. 

Where are the relics of group mergers to be found? 
Some compact groups seem to be truly isolated, and the 
remnants of such groups should appear as bright, isolated 
elliptical galaxies. A small number of possible fossils 
have now been identified; these galaxies typically have 
extended halos of hot, x-ray-emitting gas similar to those 
seen in compact groups and poor clusters. However, 
while ongoing merging in groups has been building up the 
population of merger remnants, gravitational clustering 
has been incorporating these remnants into new groups 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and larger structures. Even today we find groups ‘caught 
in the act’ as they fall together and coalesce to form clusters. 
Once incorporated into clusters, galaxies are less likely to 
merge since their encounter velocities are now too high for 
tidal capture; if cluster ellipticals formed by merging, they 
can only have done so before the clusters themselves had 
collapsed. Elliptical galaxies in clusters may have formed 
in dense groups at redshifts z ~ 2; if so, compact groups 
are the low-redshift analogs of the birthplaces of cluster 
ellipticals. 


Bibliography 

Barnes J E 1989 Evolution of compact groups and the 
formation of elliptical galaxies Nature 338 123-6 

Binney J and Tremaine S 1987 Galactic Dynamics (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press) 

Nolthenius R and White S D M 1987 Groups of galaxies 
in the CfA survey and in cold dark matter universes 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 235 505-30 

Peebles P J E 1994 Orbits of the nearby galaxies Astrophys. 
J. 429 43-65 

Raychaudhury S and Lynden-Bell D 1989 Tides, torques 
and the timing argument Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
240 195-218 


Joshua E Barnes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Grubb, Thomas (1800-78) and Grubb, Howard (1844— 
1931) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Grubb, Thomas (1800-78) and Grubb, 
Howard (1844-1931) 


Irish telescope makers, based in Dublin, then in St 
Albans, England. Thomas was born in Waterford and 
set up a machinery business. After making a 9 in 
telescope for himself, he made many giant reflecting 
telescopes commercially. One of his first contracts 
was for a Cassegrain reflector for ROMNEY ROBINSON 
of Armagh Observatory, which introduced mechanical 
design features of significance for the future, including 
the viewing position of the user (through a hole in 
the center of the main mirror, not from the top of the 
telescope), the mirror support system and its clock-driven 
equatorial mounting. With this successful start, the firm 
made telescopes that were exported all over the world, 
to Madras, Madrid, Mecca, Melbourne and Mississippi, to 
list just one letter of the alphabet. Howard, born in Dublin, 
joined the business and diversified to a range of optics. In 
1925 the firm was taken over by CHARLES PARSONS, becoming 
the firm of Grubb-Parsons, and moving to Newcastle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gruithuisen, Franz von Paula (1744-1852) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gruithuisen, Franz von Paula 
(1744-1852) 


German astronomer, became professsor at Munich, 
asserted to a skeptical astronomical community that he 
had seen a city, a forest and artificial structures on the 
Moon, near Sinus Aestuum. Proposed the impact theory 
of lunar craters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Grus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Grus 


(the Crane; abbrev. Gru, gen. Gruis; area 366 sq. 
deg.) A southern constellation which lies between Piscis 
Austrinus and Tucana, and culminates at midnight in late 
August. It was first shown on Petrus Plancius’ celestial 
globe of c. 1598, though it is usually attributed to the Dutch 
navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known as Petrus 
Theodorus) and Frederick de Houtman, who charted that 
part of the southern sky in 1595-7. On later globes Plancius 
gave it the now obsolete name of Phoenicopterus (the 
Flamingo). 

A small but not inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Grus are a Gruis (Al Na’ir), magnitude 
1.7, B Gruis, magnitude 2.1, and y Gruis, magnitude 3.0. 
There are four other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. 
Interesting objects include the naked-eye optical double 
stars 6 Gruis, which has yellow (G6-8) and red (M4.5) 
components, magnitudes 4.0 and 4.1, separation about 13’, 
each of which is a binary, with components of magnitude 
12.8 and 8.8, separation 5.6” and 60.6”, respectively, and ju 
Gruis, which has yellow (G8) components, magnitudes 4.8 
and 5.1, separation about 17’, the former of which is a close 
binary with a component of magnitude 6.7, separation 
0.15”. 

There are no bright star clusters, nebulae or galaxies 
in Grus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Guide Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Guide Telescope 


A second telescope, attached to, and aligned parallel to, 
the main telescope, which is used to monitor the position 
of the object of interest in the field of view while the main 
telescope is being used to obtain a long-exposure image 
of the object. Because of imperfections in the telescope 
mounting, flexure of the telescope or its mounting and 
imperfections in the drive mechanism, the object that 
is being observed will tend, to some extent, to wander 
around the field of view during a long exposure. To 
compensate for this, the telescope must be guided (ie. it 
must be adjusted, continually or at regular intervals, to 
ensure that the object remains in the center of its field of 
view). Traditionally, this is done by the observer adjusting 
the telescope controls to keep the object at the center of 
the field of view of the guide telescope—a tedious and 
time-consuming process. A widely used alternative is 
the autoguider, an electronic device that senses when the 
object drifts from its correct position and generates a signal 
that causes the slow-motion drives to restore the main 
telescope to the correct position. The autoguider may 
be attached directly to the guide telescope or be used to 
monitor a region of the field of view of the main telescope 
close to the object of interest. If the object of interest is too 
faint to be seen in the guide telescope, the guide telescope 
may be adjusted to focus on a nearby brighter object (guide 
star) while the main telescope remains pointed at the object 
being imaged. This process is called off-axis guiding. 

Insmaller sizes of telescope the role of guide telescope 
may have to be fulfilled by the finder. 


Seealso: field of view, finder, telescope mountings. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gum Nebula 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gum Nebula 


Avery large, near-circular emission nebula, approximately 
36° in diameter, in the constellations Puppis and Vela. 
The largest known nebula in the sky, it was discovered 
by the Australian astronomer C S Gum (1924-60), and 
is believed to be an ancient supernova remnant, with an 
age exceeding a million years. It is a convoluted mass 
of nebular wisps and loops, many of them very faint, 
but there are also numerous brighter parts. Its distance 
has been estimated at 1300 light-years, indicating that the 
nebulosity is approximately 840 light-years across. Within 
one of its brightest regions both the brightest-known O- 
type star ¢ Puppis (spectral type O5f) and the brightest 
Wolf-Rayet star y” Velorum (type WC8), are found. 

The much more recent Vela pulsar and supernova 
remnant also lie within the Gum Nebula, which for 
many years has rivalled the Crab Nebula in interest for 
astrophysicists. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Gum, Colin (1924-60) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gum, Colin (1924-60) 


Australian radioastronomer, mapped the southern sky for 
radio sources and emission nebulae, and discovered the 
Gum Nebula in the Vela Puppis region. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


H | Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


H | Region 


A cloud of interstellar matter consisting predominantly of 
neutral hydrogen atoms. ‘Neutral’ means not ionized— 
each hydrogen atom consists of a proton and its lone 
electron; this is what is implied by ‘H I’ (pronounced ‘H 
one’). In HII (‘H two’) regions, the hydrogen is ionized, 
each atom having lost its electron. In mass and volume, 
neutral hydrogen accounts for about half of all interstellar 
matter. A typical H I region is 15-20 light-years across, 
and contains 50 solar masses of hydrogen at a temperature 
of around 100 K. H I regions emit no visible light, but 
are detectable by their radio emission at a wavelength of 
21 cm (frequency about 1420 GHz). This so-called 21 cm 
radiation is what first allowed the form of our Galaxy to be 
mapped in the mid-twentieth century: neutral hydrogen is 
present in the disk of the Galaxy, concentrated in the spiral 
arms, and 21 cm radiation is little affected by intervening 
interstellar matter. H I regions have also been detected 
in other spiral galaxies, and in irregular galaxies, though 
they are largely absent from elliptical galaxies. 


Compare: HII regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


H Il Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


H Il Regions 


The birth of stars occurs in the densest parts of molecular 
cloud complexes. The radiation fields and stellar winds 
of newly formed stars excite and stir the surrounding gas. 
Low-mass stars (M < 5Mo) affect only relatively small 
volumes of the cloud. The stronger radiation fields and 
winds of more massive stars (M > 10Mo.) can excite, 
ionize and excavate holes in the parent molecular cloud. 
A few massive stars can clear out the dense gas from 
the star-forming regions, exposing the recently formed 
group of stars. The ultraviolet stellar photon flux ionizes 
the surrounding gas, creating the beautiful and complex 
NEBULAE known as H II regions (or regions of ionized 
hydrogen). 

The stars that create them are among the brightest, 
most massive and shortest-lived stars in galaxies. They 
have surface temperatures above 3 x 10* Kandare brighter 
than 10! Suns, although their masses are only 20-100 times 
as great. They end their lives by exploding as SUPERNOVAE 
less than about 10 million years after birth, a time short 
compared with the age (about 4500 million years) of 
our solar system. These massive stars are generically 
designated as OB stars and are excellent tracers of regions 
undergoing active STAR FORMATION both in our Galaxy and 
in external galaxies. 


Physical properties 
The spectra of H II regions at optical wavelengths are easy 
to recognize and contain strong emission lines of H, C, N, 
O and S. These lines provide us with information about 
the chemical abundances, densities and temperatures of 
the photoionized plasma. Additionally, the shapes and 
widths of these emission lines provide information about 
the spatial distributions and velocities of the emitting ions. 
This plasma has elemental abundances similar to those 
found in the solar system, and by terrestrial standards 
is very hot and dilute. The gas temperature is about (8- 
10) x 10° K and the average number densities are in the 
range 107-10‘ particles cm~°, far below the densities in 
the best vacuum ever achieved on Earth. However, H II 
regions by terrestrial standards are huge and can contain 
far more material than in the Sun (cf table 1). 

Not all H II regions are visible to optical telescopes. 
A fraction of these objects is buried deep in the parent 
molecular clouds and can be detected only at long 
wavelengths using RADIO TELESCOPES or infrared detectors. 
They are called ultracompact H II regions (UCHIIRs). The 
fraction of H II regions which these represent is generally 
believed to be about 20% of the total number of H II 
regions. They were discovered as recently as the 1960s 
and more than 200 are at present known. Thanks to the 
fast growth in radio and IR techniques, our knowledge 
of these objects has increased enormously in recent years. 
This is also true for optically observed regions, particularly 
after the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the 
advent of the new generation of large optical telescopes. 
Advances in optical, IR and radio studies together have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


provided us with a wealth of unprecedented detail about 
these fascinating objects. 


Classification 

HII regions in the Milky Way are classified into three main 
categories by their average sizes. In order of increasing 
size they are (i) UCHIIRs, (ii) compact H II regions and 
(iii) extended or ‘classical’ H II regions. There is a recently 
defined class, hypercompact (or superultracompact) H II 
(SUCHII) regions. They are detected at radio wavelengths 
and only a handful of them are at present known. Their 
observed properties indicate that they are denser and more 
compact than UCHIIRs and may be the youngest H II 
regions yet found. 

The larger H II regions can be found in external 
galaxies. These include giant and supergiant H II 
regions. Table 1 lists these six categories along with their 
characteristic physical parameters including N,, which is 
a (very) rough guide to the number of massive stars which 
excite them. This has been estimated by assuming that 
each star produces 10% ionizing photons s~!, a number 
we will use subsequently. 

In external galaxies, the population of H II regions 
delineates the distribution of star-forming regions. Giant 
and supergiant H II regions are not single objects but a 
conglomerate of many individual H II regions occupying 
a large fraction of the volume of their parental giant 
molecular clouds. These objects trace the locations where 
vigorous star-formation activity, or a ‘starburst’, is taking 
place in gaseous (spiral and irregular) galaxies. Giant H II 
regions can be used as distance indicators for their host 
galaxies. 

In sPIRAL GALAXIES, H II regions are located preferen- 
tially either along the spiral arms or in ring-like distri- 
butions at/or surrounding the dynamical centres of the 
host galaxies (these are called nuclear and circumnuclear 
starbursts). A beautiful example of a spiral arm distribu- 
tion is found in the grand-design spiral galaxy M51. In 
the case of the nuclear and circumnuclear starbursts, the 
gas that is fuelling the star-forming activity was proba- 
bly driven towards the dynamical center by a series of 
different perturbations in the disk, including interactions 
with other galaxies and stellar bars. Similar flows may 
also fuel the intense power generated in ACTIVE GALACTIC 
NuCLEI (AGN). This possible connection suggests that the 
starburst and AGN phenomena can coexist in the central 
regions of many galaxies. An intriguing example of an 
active galaxy with circumnuclear regions is the face-on 
SEYFERT 2 GALAXY, NGC7742. 

In the case of IRREGULARGALAXIES, which are smaller and 
more gas-rich, the population of H II regions is randomly 
distributed and does not follow a regular pattern. For 
instance, the brightest H II region complex in the Large 
Magellanic Cloud is called the ‘TARANTULA’ NEBULA and 
represents a violent starburst. It does not seem to be 
coincident with any particularly significant point of this 
galaxy. The most dramatic examples of small galaxies 
undergoing starburst phenomena are the so-called ‘H II 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


H Il Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Types of H II regions. 


Number of 
Number Ionized mass _ ionizing stars 

Type of region Size(pc) density(cm~°) (Mo) N, 

SUCHII ~0.003 >10° ~10-3 1 

UCHII <0.1 >10+ ~10-2 1 

Compact <0.5 >5 x 10° 1 1 

Classical ~10 100 ~10° Few 

Giant ~100 30 10%-10° ~10° 
Supergiant >100 10 10-108 105 


galaxies’. These are very small and dim galaxies that are 
difficult to detect other than in the emission lines of their 
H I regions. 


Physical processes in H II regions 

Stellar photons with energies greater than the ionization 
potential of hydrogen (Jy = 13.6 eV) ionize hydrogen 
and other elements. The excess energy goes into 
kinetic energy of the ejected electron, and this is 
shared with other particles by collisions, heating the 
gas. Photoionization takes place from the ground 
level of hydrogen (photoionization from higher levels 
is rarely important). This is balanced by proton and 
electron recombination into any level. The resulting 
cascade downwards gives the hydrogen recombination 
line spectrum. Lines are produced over a wide range of 
wavelengths from the UV to the radio region. 

The degree to which the hydrogen is ionized depends 
on the balance between the rates of photoionization and 
recombination. If the characteristic time for a photon 
and an electron to recombine is much greater than the 
characteristic ionization time of an atom, the hydrogen 
will be essentially fully ionized. This indeed is the case 
in the interiors of H II regions and far less than 1% of the 
hydrogen is in the neutral form. 

The gas temperature in H II regions is remarkably 
constant because of a thermostatting mechanism. The 
heating rate per unit volume is proportional to the 
number density of neutral hydrogen, which decreases 
with increasing gas temperature. The cooling of the 
plasma is largely due to the radiative decay of electron- 
impact-excited levels of ions such as O**. The lines 
produced are called ‘forbidden’ lines because of their 
low transition probabilities. The rate of emission of 
radiation in these lines is proportional to the populations 
of the excited levels from which they originate which 
are essentially proportional to a Boltzmann factor which 
increases as the temperature increases. Thus, an 
increased gas temperature results in decreased heating 
and increased cooling while the converse is true for a 
lowered temperature. This thermostat regulates the gas 
temperature to the value quoted. 

The forbidden lines carry information about the 
physical structure of H II regions. The gas temperature 
and density determine the ratios of line intensities. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ratio of the intensity of the 436.3 nm line of O** to the 
sum of the intensities of the 500.7 nm and 495.9 nm 
lines is a good probe of temperature, whereas the ratio 
of the intensities of the 372.6 nm and 372.9 nm lines 
of O* probes the density. Many other lines can be 
used. Care is needed in the interpretation of such 
data. The ionization state of any particular element 
depends on the energy distribution of the photons to 
which the parent element is exposed. This energy 
distribution is strongly influenced by photoabsorption by 
helium. Hard photons are absorbed nearest the star and 
so ions with the highest parent ion ionization potential 
are found there (e.g. O**, N**). The radiation field 
is softer further out and lower parent ionization ions 
(e.g. OT, N*) predominate. The phenomenon is called 
‘ionization stratification’. Consequently, measurements 
of temperature from O** lines do not probe the same 
regions as the density measurements from O* lines. The 
lines can be used to obtain elemental abundances relative 
to hydrogen. In fact, the use of H II regions as probes 
of abundance variations in distant galaxies has proved 
to be one of the most reliable methods of obtaining this 
information. 

Emission lines enable astronomers to probe the 
dynamics of H II regions. The Doppler EFFECT, to which 
there are two contributions, determines the wavelength 
(or frequency) width of a spectral line. Lines are 
broadened by thermal velocities as well as by internal bulk 
nebular velocities. These two velocities are about equal 
for hydrogen and a hydrogen line has two comparable 
contributions to its width. The thermal velocity of a heavy 
ion (e.g. O*) is much smaller than that of the hydrogen 
so forbidden lines are broadened by bulk motions. 
Comparison of forbidden line and hydrogen line widths 
enables these two contributions to be distinguished. In 
addition to their effects on the line widths, bulk motions 
also affect the wavelength of the line maximum intensity. 
Thus line widths and peak wavelengths map velocity 
fields. 

Important information on nebular structures can also 
be obtained at radio wavelengths from e.g. hydrogen 
radiofrequency recombination lines. Nebulae also 
have a strong radio continuum spectrum produced by 
bremsstrahlung. This gives information on the total 
recombination rate in the ionized gas and is one means 
of estimating the number of stars which excite the nebula. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


H Il Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Because photons are continuously absorbed in 
balancing recombination, the stars do not ionize an 
indefinitely large region. When a star ‘switches on’, the 
gas is initially fully ionized out to the ‘Strémgren radius’ 
Rs = (3S,/47njB)'/? where no is the hydrogen number 
density of the surrounding gas, S, is the number of ionizing 
photons produced per second by the ionizing star(s) and 
B(® 2.6 x 10-8 cm? s~') is the hydrogen recombination 
coefficient. We find Rs ~ 31/ no! ? pe. (This is an 
overestimate since dust in nebulae also absorbs photons.) 

The transition zone between neutral and ionized gas is 
termed an ‘ionization front’ (IF) and has a thickness about 
equal to the mean-free-path of an ionizing photon in the 
neutral gas. This distance is approximately 0.05/19 pc, 
far smaller than R,;. Consequently, nebulae bounded 
by ionized—-neutral zones—‘ionization bounded’ H II 
regions—are sharp edged. If the nebula has insufficient 
hydrogen to absorb all the stellar UV there is no transition 
zone, all the gas is ionized and the region is called ‘density 
bounded’. 


HII region dynamics 

The ionizing photons propagate outwards from the star 
to set up the Strémgren sphere. Conditions across 
the IF are related by equations analogous to the well- 
known Rankine-Hugoniot (R-H) jump conditions, which 
hold across shock fronts. However, the principle that 
the specific entropy increases across a shock usually 
allows only one solution to the R-H conditions, namely 
a compressive shock. The situation across IFs is more 
complicated since radiative heating and cooling of the 
gas means that this entropy condition is no longer 
relevant. There are in fact four allowed transitions whose 
nomenclature was first introduced in a classic paper by F 
D Kahn in 1954. 

Across ‘R-type’ IFs, the density increases. They 
move supersonically into the neutral gas and divide into 
weak-R types and strong-R types according to whether 
the ionized gas moves supersonically or subsonically 
respectively away from the IF. Strong R-type fronts 
demand special circumstances for their existence and are 
of no astrophysical significance. Across ‘D-type’ fronts the 
density decreases. These fronts move subsonically into 
the neutral gas and again divide into weak D-type fronts 
and strong D-type fronts according to whether the ionized 
gas moves subsonically or supersonically with regard to 
the IF, the reverse of the R-type nomenclature. There 
is a ‘forbidden’ gap in IF velocity, roughly between 2c; 
and c%,/2c;, where c/(* 10 km s~) and cy(® 1 km s7!) 
are respectively the sound speeds in ionized and the 
neutral gas. The internal structures and propagation of 
IFs were examined in classic papers by W I Axford and F 
A Goldsworthy in 1961. These studies (and that of Kahn) 
show that if an initially fast IF has a velocity which tries 
to decrease into the forbidden gap, a shock wave moves 
ahead of the IF into the neutral gas. The increased gas 
density behind the shock makes the IF velocity drop to a 
value below that of the lower limit of the gap. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


If a star is suddenly switched on in a uniform region 
of neutral hydrogen (see HI REGION), a weak R-type front 
sweeps across the neutral gas, ionizing it but leaving its 
density (and velocity) essentially unchanged. The speed 
of the ionization front Vp is given by Ve = J/no, where 
J is the ionizing photon flux at the IF and no is the 
neutral gas number density. As the IF moves outwards 
from the star, the flux is reduced by geometrical dilution 
(since the IF is a spherical surface centered on the star) 
and absorption by hydrogen atoms to maintain ionization 
balance. Clearly Vr decreases as the IF moves away 
from the star. The ionized gas has a pressure that is 
a factor 27;/T) greater than that in the neutral gas (the 
factor of 2 arises because each hydrogen atom produces 
two particles when ionized). The ionized gas temperature 
typically is T; ~ 8000 K and the neutral gas temperature is 
Ty © 100 K. The ionized gas is overpressured with respect 
to the neutral gas by a factor of over 100 and will expand 
at a speed of approximately c;. As long as Vr > c, , this is 
of no significance. However, when the IF velocity drops to 
about 2c; , a shock is driven ahead of the IF and it switches 
from weak R-type to weak D-type. The H II region acts asa 
spherical piston pushing a shock front into the neutral gas. 
This occurs after a time approximately equal to (no BB), 
which is roughly the recombination time in the ionized 
gas. The radius of the IF when this occurs is about equal 
to Rs. 

The expansion of the H II region continues with 
the IF remaining weak D-type and the shock gradually 
weakening with time. In principle, the expansion 
continues until the H II region is in pressure equilibrium 
with its surroundings when its radius would be 
(27; / Tp)*/°R,(& 30Rs) and the mass of ionized gas would 
be a factor 27;/T)(* 160) greater than that in the initial 
Stré6mgren sphere. The density in the final equilibrium 
state is np © (T,/2T;)no(* 0.006n9), far lower than the 
original neutral density. A lower bound to the time taken 
to reach this final pressure equilibrium is t; ~ 8.8 x 
108/n¢? yr. 

It is instructive to ask whether a final pressure 
equilibrium state is likely. Let us first take average 
conditions in the general interstellar medium. The 
interstellar gas pressure at the solar circle (the distance 
of the Sun from the center of our Galaxy) is Prsy = 
10°" dyn cm’. The H II region reaches pressure 
equilibrium at a radius of about 30 pc and a density 
of about 0.4 cm-3. However, the time to reach this 
equilibrium state is very long (= 10’ yr) and most 
massive stars would have evolved significantly off the 
main sequence before equilibrium could be achieved. On 
the other hand, the H II region set up by a star buried 
deep in a high-density molecular core where the pressure 
is much greater (~10~” dyn cm~”) could reach equilibrium 
in a time ~10* yr with a radius of about 0.1 pc and a 
density ~4 x 10* cm~°. Such values are similar to these 
determined observationally for UCHIIRs. We will discuss 
these similarities later. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


H Il Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


During the expansion process, both the ionized gas 
and the shocked neutral gas acquire kinetic energy. Once 
the shock has been established, that in the neutral gas 
dominates. The velocity in the ionized gas rapidly falls 
below the sound speed and its energy is largely thermal. 
This comes from the heating of the gas by the stellar 
radiation field. The kinetic energy of the neutral gas 
arises from the expansion work done on it by the hot gas. 
Comparison of the kinetic energy in the neutral gas at any 
time with the total radiant energy absorbed up to that time 
shows that the former is much less than 1% of the latter. 
Nearly all the radiant energy absorbed in the ionized gas 
is radiated away in the forbidden lines. 

Observations of regions of star formation show that 
the gas around young stars is far from homogenous. If 
an IF encounters a strong negative density gradient and 
overruns it, the gas expansion is accelerated. For stars 
located near the boundary of the dense molecular core 
in which they formed, the ionized gas accelerates out of 
this core and creates an extended flow. The evolution in 
a decreasing-density environment displays a rich variety 
of hydrodynamic phenomena including shocks in the 
ionized gas, receding ionization fronts, rapid evaporation 
of the dense core and the creation of new clumps in the 
expanding shocked gas. 

Two factors influence the dynamical evolution of 
flows set up in a dense core. The first is the position of 
the star in the core. If the pressure equilibrium Strémgren 
sphere is contained within the densest part of the core fora 
star located there, a long-lived pressure equilibrium region 
can be formed. By contrast, if the star is located towards 
the core boundary, the IF can move rapidly outside the 
core region into the envelope and a transient high-pressure 
region is set up. The second factor is the density variation 
in the envelope that surrounds the core. 

As an illustration, detailed investigations of the 
evolution of an H II region produced in an envelope with 
a power law density distribution with distance r,n « r~®, 
show the following. If w < 3/2, the interface between 
the IF and the leading shock accumulates neutral gas 
(exactly as in the uniform-density case described above). 
If w = 3/2, the IF and the shock move together without a 
neutral interface. Ifw > 3/2, the IF overtakes the shock and 
moves out of the cloud: in this case, steep enough density 
distributions can lead to velocities as high as 100 km st. 
Such velocities are not produced in uniform-density media 
when the expansion velocity never exceeds the sound 
speed in the ionized gas. 

Another important dynamical process needs to be 
included. Massive stars lose material from their surfaces in 
a continuous stream, a ‘stellar wind’. This wind is driven 
by radiation pressure and the typical speed (*2000 km s~') 
is about three times the escape velocity of the star. The 
mass-loss rate for a supergiant star is about 10-°Mo yr“!, 
and that for a main sequence star about 10~’ Mg yr~'. The 
wind kinetic energy output rate (known as the ‘mechanical 
luminosity’) ranges from about 10* to 10* erg s~!, far less 
the rate at which the star pumps radiant energy into the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ionized gas. When the wind impacts on the nebular gas, it 
acts as a piston and pushes a shock wave into the gas, 
sweeping it up into a shell. The wind itself is slowed 
down by another shock wave. The wind gas is shocked 
to a high temperature (~10’-10° K) and the pressure of 
this hot gas drives the shell. Remarkably, the fraction 
of the mechanical energy of the wind transformed into 
kinetic energy of swept-up gas is constant (about one- 
fifth), far higher than the radiation conversion efficiency, 
and consequently, stellar winds play an important role in 
the dynamics of H II regions. 

The evolution and dynamics of H II regions where 
wind activity is important are different from those where 
the winds are weak. The most immediately obvious 
difference is that a hole is blown around the star. A 
spectacular example of this is in the ROSETTE NEBULA where 
the hole is blown by the combined winds of several 
stars. Additionally, the velocities of the ionized shells can 
be several times the sound speed, much higher than in 
uniformly expanding H II regions. The compression of 
the nebular gas by the shock increases the recombination 
rate considerably and the IF, which initially outruns the 
shell, may become trapped inside the shell. 


A simple evolutionary scheme 
A simple expansion scheme may connect the different 
classes of H II region. SUCHII regions and UCHIIRs are 
buried inside the inner, high-pressure, parts of the parent 
molecular clouds and are invisible to optical telescopes. 
Compact H II regions are bright and visible and are located 
next to the opaque regions. They therefore seem to be more 
evolved objects. Extended optically visible H II regions 
represent the more mature expanded state of these objects. 
Even this simple scheme meets with difficulties. The 
fraction of objects in each class should be roughly the 
time that it takes the region to expand from one class 
into another, divided by the typical lifetime of the star. 
The number of UCHIIRs known is larger than expected if 
they really do expand to become compact regions. This 
has been termed the ‘lifetime problem’. There is no clear 
answer to this problem at present although recent surveys 
have found faint extended emission in several samples 
of UCHIIRs. This implies that some of these objects are 
larger, partially mitigating the problem. The simplest 
way around the lifetime problem is to assume pressure 
confinement. 


Structures in H II regions 

H II regions show complex structure on large and small 
scales. The ‘Pillars of Creation’ in M16, the EAGLE 
NEBULA, are a spectacular example. Many H II regions 
display such dark clouds of neutral material silhouetted 
against the nebula. An important question is whether 
the structure is primordial (i.e. reflects conditions in 
the neutral gas prior to ionization) or is produced by 
dynamical processes. Opinion at present favors the former 
because observational data on the structure of star-forming 
regions show that the neutral gas is fragmented on all 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


H Il Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


scales. However, it is far from clear that the latter do 
not contribute. There are a variety of ways in which 
this could happen. For example, a wind-driven shell can 
fragment by a combination of Rayleigh-Taylor and thin- 
shell dynamical instabilities if the shell accelerates because 
of, for example, a steep drop in density ahead of the shell. 
On the other hand, primordial clumps may actually be 
destroyed by photoionization or by the passage of the 
shock ahead of the IF. 

If the neutral material in the star-forming cloud is 
clumpy, considerable revision has to be made to our 
description of H II region dynamics. If a neutral clump 
survives inside the H II region, it acts a mass injection 
source. Mass injection occurs either by photoionization of 
the clump or by hydrodynamic ablation as the H II region 
gas moves around it. Which process is dominant depends 
on factors including the location of the clump with respect 
to the star and the strength of any stellar wind. The injected 
gas may move subsonically or supersonically with respect 
to the flow in the H II region (in the latter case, localized 
shocks are set up in the H II region around the clumps, 
generating localized supersonic velocities). The injection 
of mass can lead to a situation where matter has to flow 
out of the H II region and become neutral. In this case, the 
HII region is bounded by a recombination front through 
which ionized gas flows, recombines and becomes neutral 
(the opposite of an IF). Such a region can be in pressure 
equilibrium and models of this nature have been proposed 
for UCHIIRs. 


Stellar nurseries revealed 

The ORION NEBULA is just one of several star-forming regions 
in the Orion molecular cloud complex. In this complex, 
both low- and high-mass star formation is taking place. 
It has been known for about three decades that in the 
Orion nebula there exist compact knots that have similar 
spectra to H II regions. These knots are extremely small, 
characteristically about 500 AU in size, and are therefore 
not stars. An early suggestion was that the radiation came 
from the ionized surfaces of neutral clumps embedded 
in the H II region. A second suggestion was that the 
clumps contained stars and that the bright knots were 
externally ionized envelopes around these very young 
stars. It was, however, the first Hubble Space Telescope 
images of the objects obtained in 1993 which revealed 
their true natures. They are actually externally ionized 
disks of material around young low-mass stars and are 
known as PROPLYDs (PROTOPLANETARY DISKS). They are 
seen silhouetted against the nebular backgrounds and, in 
several, the stars are clearly visible. Thus massive star 
and consequent H II region formation has provided a new 
window for the study of low-mass stars. They also have 
provided new laboratories for the study of the interaction 
of stellar UV radiation and fast stellar winds with neutral 
material. Many of these objects have a ‘teardrop’ shape 
with tails pointing away from 6! OriC, the brightest star in 
the TRAPEZIUM cluster which is responsible for the excitation 
of the Orion nebula. Although there are some difficulties 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


yet to be resolved, it is likely that the morphology can be 
accounted for by models where an ionized flow of gas off 
the disk interacts with the fast stellar wind from 6! Ori C. 


Some important problems 

Most theoretical studies of H II region evolution 
assume that the stellar winds and radiation fields turn 
on suddenly with full main-sequence mechanical and 
radiative luminosities. The actual way this happens 
is unclear and has consequences for the subsequent 
ionization and dynamics. Moreover, massive stars 
commence nuclear burning when they are still in the 
process of accreting matter and are therefore surrounded 
by dense dusty cocoons when this turn-on occurs. It is 
therefore likely that there is an initial phase of combined 
inflow and outflow. There has been little work so far on the 
propagation of IFs into clumpy dusty media, in particular 
any studies of the possible transition from an H II region 
headed by an IF to one headed by a recombination front. 

Gas in regions where active star formation is 
continuously taking place can be compressed by wind- 
and supernova-driven shock waves. Any magnetic field in 
the unshocked gas can be greatly magnified provided that 
the shocked gas cools well. Under such circumstances, 
IFs may move into gas where the magnetic pressure 
dominates the gas pressure. Magnetohydrodynamic IFs 
behave in a much more complex fashion than do the 
‘classical’ hydrodynamic IFs described above; in particular 
there are many more jump possibilities. 

The morphologies of H II regions have been the 
subject of many theoretical studies. For example, UCHIIRs 
have a whole range of morphologies ranging from simple 
spherical, through core-halo, irregular and cometary. It 
is likely that many of the differences in appearance are 
the result of viewing aspect. In particular, cometary 
UCHIIRs have been widely studied. The cause of this 
particular morphology has been variously ascribed to 
the generation of umbrella-shaped stellar-wind-supported 
envelopes around moving stars, flows produced at the 
edges of dense clouds (‘champagne’ flows) and flows 
produced when a stellar wind from a stationary star 
blows into a spatially varying distribution of mass- 
injecting clumps. Ultimately, the confrontation of theory 
with very detailed observational data will resolve these 
uncertainties. 


Bibliography 
There are several good books describing the physics of H II 
regions. 


Dyson J E and Williams D A 1997 The Physics of the 
Interstellar Medium 2nd edn (Bristol: Institute of 
Physics Publishing) 

Osterbrock D E 1989 Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and 
Active Galactic Nuclei (Mill Valley: University Science 
Books) 

Spitzer L 1978 Physical Processes in the Interstellar Medium 
(New York: Wiley) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


H Il Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Review papers: 


Churchwell E 1990 Ultracompact H II regions: the impact 
of newly formed stars on their environment Astron. 
Astrophy. Rev. 2.79 

Franco J, Kurtz S, Garcia-Segura G and Hofner P 2000 The 
evolution of H II regions Astrophys. Space Sci. at press 

Garay G and Lizano S 1999 Massive stars: their 
environment and formation Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 
111 1049 

Habing H J and Israel F P 1979 H II regions and OB star 
formation Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 17 345 

Yorke H W 1986 The dynamical evolution of H II regions 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 24 36 


Specialist papers: 


Axford W I 1961 Ionization fronts in interstellar gas: the 
structure of ionization fronts Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 253 
301 

Franco J, Tenorio-Tagle G and Bodenheimer P 1990 On the 
formation and expansion of H II regions Astrophys. J. 
349 126 

Goldsworthy F A 1961 Ionization fronts in interstellar gas 
and the expansion of H II regions Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
A 253 277 

Kahn F D 1954 The acceleration of interstellar clouds Bull. 
Astron. Inst. Neth. 12 187 

Redman M P, Williams R J R, Dyson J E, Hartquist T W 
and Fernandez B R 1998 Magnetic ionization fronts 
Astron. Astrophys. 331 1099 


J E Dyson and J Franco 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hogbom, Jan (twentieth century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hogbom, Jan (twentieth century) 


Swedish astronomer, pioneer in radioastronomy and 
interferometry, invented the Hogbom CLEAN algorithm for 
deconvolving an interferometric image from the effects of 
incomplete sampling. In general the raw map produced 
by an interferometer is too dirty for scientific analysis. 
CLEAN uses the sampling function of the radio telescope 
interferometer (the ‘dirty beam’) to match the brightest 
peaks on the observed brightness distribution (‘dirty 
map’) of a radio source. It subtracts (deconvolves) the 
effect of the bright radio sources seen by the dirty beam 
from the map and looks in the residual map for less 
bright peaks. The position of each source is saved in 
a ‘CLEAN component’ table in the CLEAN map file, 
and the algorithm stops when the residual brightness 
distribution consists mainly of noise. ACLEAN radio map 
is then reconstructed from the CLEAN components. There 
are many variants on Hégbom’s basic CLEAN algorithm 
(associated with the names of Clark, Cornwell, Cotton— 
Schwab, Gerchberg-Saxton, Steer, Steer-Dewdney-Ito, 
and van Cittert). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hadley, John (1682-1744) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hadley, John (1682-1744) 


Mathematician and instrument designer, born in Enfield 
Chase, Hertfordshire (now in Greater London), credited 
with ROBERT HOOKE in building the first Gregorian reflector 
telescope, making it into an accurate instrument for use 
in astronomy. Invented a double-reflecting quadrant with 
bubble-level to measure the altitude of the Sun or of a star. 
It was used to determine position at sea and evolved into 
the sextant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hadrons ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hadrons 


Subatomic particles that are composed of quarks and 
which are acted on by the strong nuclear force. Hadrons 
may be subdivided into mesons and baryons, a meson 
consisting of a quark—antiquark pair and a baryon of three 
quarks. Most hadrons, with the exception of protons and 
neutrons (which are baryons), have very short lifetimes. 


See also: baryons, fundamental forces, mesons, neutron, 
proton, quark, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hagen, Johann Georg (1847-1930) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hagen, Johann Georg (1847-1930) 


Became a Jesuit. Director of the Georgetown College 
Observatory, Washington DC, and of the Roman College 
Observatory. Hagen is noted for his observations of light 
and dark nebulae and his unproven theories about them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


HALCA (Highly Advanced Laboratory for Communica- 
tions and Astronomy/Muses-B) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HALCA (Highly Advanced Laboratory 
for Communications and 
Astronomy/Muses-B) 


Japanese-US radio astronomy observatory, the first very 
long baseline interferometry satellite. | Launched in 
February 1997 into a highly elliptical (1000 x 10000 km) 
Earth orbit. Equipped with an 8 m antenna operating 
at frequencies near 1.6, 4.8 and 22 GHz. Returned 
high resolution images of quasars and distant active 
galaxies. An alternative name is Haruka, the Japanese 
pronunciation of the HALCA acronym. Haruka is 
Japanese for ‘far away’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hale, George Ellery (1868-1938) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hale, George Ellery (1868-1938) 


American astrophysicist, born in Chicago, IL, as an 
undergraduate at MIT invented the spectroheliograph, 
which made it possible to photograph the Sun’s 
prominences in daylight. At the University of Chicago he 
used a 40 in lens as the basis for the telescope of the Yerkes 
Observatory, completed 1897. Founded Mount Wilson 
Observatory, where he discovered the magnetic fields in 
sunspots. Planned and completed the 60, 100 and 200 in 
reflectors, the last, on Mount Palomar, named for him after 
his death. He was the first astronomer to be officially called 
an astrophysicist and started the Astrophysical Journal. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hall, Asaph (1829-1907) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hall, Asaph (1829-1907) 


Carpenter, computer and astronomer; born in Goshen, CT. 
While at the US Naval Observatory in Washington, DC, 
he discovered the two satellites of Mars, naming them 
Deimos and Phobos. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Halley, Edmond (1656-1742) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Halley, Edmond (1656-1742) 


Astronomer and scientist, born in Hagerston, Shoreditch 
(near London), became professor at Oxford and second 
Astronomer Royal at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. 
From the island of St Helena, he cataloged the positions of 
about 350 southern hemisphere stars (Catalogus Stellarum 
Australium), including his own discovery of the globular 
cluster Omega Centauri; he also discovered the globular 
cluster M13. He dedicated a planisphere of the southern 
hemisphere stars to King Charles II. The planisphere 
flatteringly included a now disused constellation (in 
Carina) which Halley named ‘Robur Carolinum’, the oak 
tree in which Charles hid after his defeat by Cromwell 
after the battle of Worcester. He observed a transit of 
Mercury and invented the idea to use transits of Mercury 
and Venus to determine the distance of the Sun. Using 
PTOLEMY’S catalog, he deduced that the stars had moved 
relative to each other and detected this ‘proper motion’ 
in three. Apart from his own scientific contributions 
Halley was a friend of Newron. He supported NEWTON 
in his controversy with Leibniz over who invented the 
calculus, persuading him to distribute his work in the 
Principia, whose publication Halley paid for, and helping 
him access FLAMSTEED’s observations of the Moon before 
they were completed to Flamsteed’s satisfaction. This last 
was thought by the two friends to be necessary for Newton 
to be able to test his theory of gravitation, but it was 
Halley who provided the more successful and dramatic 
proof. Using Newton’s theory of cometary orbits, Halley 
calculated that the comet of 1682 was periodic, and 
predicted (A Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets) that it 
would return in 76 years. It did (after Halley’s death), and 
it is now called Halley’s Comet. Halley is considered the 
founder of geophysics, especially for his work on trade 
winds, the tides and the magnetism of the Earth, and 
with the Breslau Table of Mortality, he laid the actuarial 
foundations for life insurance and annuities. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Halo, Galactic 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Halo, Galactic 


A spherical or spheroidal distribution of globular star 
clusters and old stars that surrounds a spiral galaxy. The 
diameter of a galactic halo is comparable to, or larger than, 
the overall diameter of the disk within which the spiral 
arms are located (about 100000 light-years in the case of 
the Milky Way Galaxy, the galaxy of which the Sun is a 
member). 

The globular clusters are composed of ‘Population II’ 
stars—old, metal-poor stars that formed at an early stage 
in the evolution of galaxies from clouds of hydrogen and 
helium that contained very little in the way of heavier 
elements. The halo of our own galaxy also contains 
individual Population II stars that circulate around the 
galactic center in orbits that are tilted at random angles 
to the galactic plane. Because these stars do not share 
in the orderly motion of stars in the galactic disk (all of 
which are proceeding in the same direction around the 
galactic center, in the same plane), their velocities relative 
to the Sun are much higher than those of stars in the 
disk population. Consequently, they are known as ‘high 
velocity’ stars. 

Studies of motions of distant globular clusters and of 
the rates at which stars and gas clouds in the galactic disk 
revolve around the galactic center show that the total mass 
of the Milky Way Galaxy is about 10”? solar masses, about 
ten times greater than the combined mass of all the stars, 
gas and dust that can be detected directly, and that most of 
this mass is contained in the halo. Similar results have also 
been obtained for other spiral galaxies. These observations 
imply that up to 90% of the mass of a typical spiral galaxy 
is made up of dark matter. While part of this total may 
be provided by objects with extremely low luminosities, 
such as brown dwarfs (stars with masses too low to enable 
nuclear energy generation to occur in their cores) or black 
holes, much of it may exist in the form of exotic elementary 
particles. 


See also: dark matter, globular clusters, Milky Way 
Galaxy, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hamilton, James Archibald (1748-1815) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hamilton, James Archibald 
(1748-1815) 


Irish astronomer, born in Athlone, on the recommendation 
of NEVIL MASKELYNE became first director of Armagh 
Observatory, where he supervised the erection of the 
equatorial telescope by EDWARD TROUGHTON. The benefits of 
his efforts were reaped in science not by himself but by the 
third director of Armagh Observatory ROMNEY ROBINSON. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Harding, Karl Ludwig (1765-1834) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Harding, Karl Ludwig (1765-1834) 


German astronomer, became professor of astronomy at 
G6ttingen,where he advised HEINRICH SCHWABE on solar 
observations. Discovered Juno, the third asteroid, from 
} H SCHROTER’s observatory at Liliethal, where he was an 
assistant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Haro, Guillermo (1913-88) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Haro, Guillermo (1913-88) 


Mexican astronomer, director of the Mexican Institute of 
Astronomy, and the Tonantzintla Observatory. 
Independently of George Herbig, he identified small 
emission-line nebulae in the Orion nebula, associated 
with but differing from T Tauri stars. These objects, now 
known as Herbig—Haro objects, are thought to be shock- 
excited impact regions with their energy derived from 
outflowing jets from young stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Harriot, Thomas (c. 1560-1621) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Harriot, Thomas (c. 1560-1621) 


Teacher, probably born in Oxfordshire, Harriot travelled 
with Sir Walter Raleigh to Virginia as cartographer and 
navigator, writing on his return A Briefe and True Report of 
the New Found Land of Virginia. He was Ralegh’s tutor and 
mathematics teacher and introduced simplified notation 
for algebra, inventing the symbols < for ‘less than’ and 
> for ‘greater than’, as well as . for multiplication. When 
he died he left a large number of manuscripts, and his 
scientific genius emerged. He had corresponded with 
JOHANNES KEPLER on optics and had discovered what is 
now known as Snell’s law of refraction before Snell. He 
observed Halley’s Comet in 1607 (Kepler had discovered 
the comet six days earlier) and a second comet in 
1618. From 1609 to 1613 he made numerous telescopic 
astronomical observations. He observed the moons of 
Jupiter, unaware of GALILEO’s discovery. His drawing of 
the Moon, the first recorded, preceding Galileo by several 
months, he was also first to record sunspots. These 
were not isolated events—he made 199 observations of 
the Sun over three years and deduced the Sun’s rotation 
period. In contrast to Galileo, who published his book 
on his telescopic discoveries within weeks of making 
them, Harriot published none of his discoveries and 
therefore had no influence on the development of optics 
or astronomy (publish, or the ideas perish), although his 
influence as a teacher on the development of mathematics 
in England was profound. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Harrison, John (1693-1776) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Harrison, John (1693-1776) 


Clockmaker, born in Foulby, West Yorkshire, England. 
In 1713 the British Government offered a valuable prize 
for the invention of a method to determine longitude 
accurately. Harrison developed a series of clocks through 
wooden models, and in 1726 invented the bimetallic 
pendulum that compensated for thermal expansion due 
to the variations of climate expected on long sea voyages, 
as well as several other mechanical devices to minimize 
friction. He made three spring-pendulum chronometers 
(H1, H2, H3) which worked regularly even during the 
rolling of a ship. They were finally surpassed in accuracy 
by a watch-like marine chronometer (H4), which, in a 
voyage to Jamaica (1761-2) determined longitude with an 
accuracy of two geographical miles. He was shamefully 
treated by the Board of Longitude, which made up 
conditions to delay awarding him the prize, and was 
finally awarded it in his old age by the intervention of 
King George III. Harrison’s restored chronometers are 
displayed in the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hartebeesthoek Radio Astronomy Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hartebeesthoek Radio Astronomy 
Observatory 


The Hartebeesthoek Radio Astronomy Observatory 
(HartRAO) is located in the Gauteng Province of South 
Africa, 60 km NW of Johannesburg. It is one of four na- 
tional research facilities operated by the National Research 
Foundation. The Observatory was established in 1975 
at the former NASA Deep Space Station 51, which was 
founded in 1961 to support unmanned US space probes to 
the Moon and planets, a function it fulfilled from 1961-74. 

HartRAO operates a 26 m radio telescope which is 
equipped with cryogenic receivers for 1.6, 2.3, 5.0, 6— 
6.7 and 8.5 GHz. It has instrumentation for continuum, 
spectroscopic and pulsar observations. It also participates 
in a variety of networks using the technique of very 
long baseline interferometry (VLBI) for high-resolution 
imaging of compact radio sources and for geodesy. As 
the only operational radio telescope in Africa, it plays a 
cardinal role providing both NS extensions to northern 
networks and EW extensions to southern networks. It is a 
key element in the ground network of VLBI stations that 
support the Japanese space VLBI satellite, Halca. 

HartRAO operates a number of global positioning 
system (GPS) receivers in Southern Africa as part of the 
International GPS Service (IGS) and serves as a regional 
IGS data center. From early 2000 HartRAO will also 
operate a satellite laser ranging system, making the 
Observatory a fiducial geodesy station for the African 
continent. The ITRF94 position of the 26 m radio telescope 
provides the datum for the South African WGS94 National 
Survey Network. 

For further information see 
http: / /www.hartrao.ac.za. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hartmann, Johannes Franz (1865-1936) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hartmann, Johannes Franz 
(1865-1936) 


Born in Erfurt, Germany, became professor in Potsdam 
where he developed astrophysics. During this time an 80 
cm refracting telescope was installed in the observatory 
for photographic use. Its performance was disappointing, 
and Hartmann developed the method of testing optics 
today named after him. The Hartmann test consists of 
partly obscuring the lens with a Hartmann shutter, and 
revealing differences of optical focus in the various zones 
of the lens. Hartmann refigured the telescope’s lens and 
was able to use it for spectroscopy. After a spell at 
G6ttingen as director of the observatory, he went to La 
Plata, Argentina, where he developed a theory on novae 
and discovered from its light curve that the minor planet 
Eros is a rotating non-spherical body. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Harvard—Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Harvard—Smithsonian Center for 
Astrophysics 


The Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CfA) 
is a joint facility of the Smithsonian Institution and 
Harvard University that combines the staff and resources 
of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the 
Harvard College Observatory under a single director 
to pursue research in nearly every branch of modern 
astrophysics—from laboratory measurements of the 
structure of atoms and molecules to observations of 
the large-scale structure of the universe. Investigations 
are organized broadly in seven divisions: atomic and 
molecular physics, high-energy astrophysics, optical 
and infrared astronomy, planetary sciences, radio and 
geoastronomy, solar and stellar physics and theoretical 
astrophysics. 

Observational facilities include the multipurpose 
Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory (FLWO) on Mount 
Hopkins in Arizona and the Oak Ridge Observatory in 
Massachusetts, as well as a 1.2 m radio telescope at 
the CfA headquarters in Cambridge, MA. The major 
instrument on Mount Hopkins, the Multiple Mirror 
Telescope (MMT), is operated jointly with the University of 
Arizona. Also located at FLWO is a 10 m diameter reflector 
to detect gamma rays; a 1.2 m imaging optical/infrared 
telescope; a 1.5 m spectroscopic telescope; an optical and 
infrared interferometer operated in collaboration with the 
University of Massachusetts, the Paris Observatory at 
Meudon, NASA Amesand MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory; and, 
a 1.3 m infrared telescope operated by a consortium for a 
2 micron all-sky survey. 

Major support facilities in Cambridge offer a 
host of computers connected by a local-area network. 
Special laboratories are maintained for petrologic and 
mineralogic studies of meteorites and lunar samples, 
for spectroscopy of atoms and molecules, and for 
development of instrumentation (e.g. advanced optical 
and x-ray detectors). Major projects include development 
of a submillimeter telescope array in Hawaii, conversion 
of the MMT to a single-mirror telescope 6.5 m in diameter, 
and participation in the Magellan Project to build two 6.5m 
diameter telescopes at Las Campanas, Chile. 

CfA instrumentation operating in space includes a 
high-resolution camera on the Chandra X-ray Observa- 
tory, ultraviolet coronagraph spectrometers on the Spartan 
and Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) space- 
craft, special mirrors on the Transition Region and Coro- 
nal Explorer (TRACE), and detectors on the Submillimeter 
Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS). Development of new 
instrumentation for the Space Infrared Telescope Facility 
(SIRTF) continues. 

Numerous facilities serving the general astronomi- 
cal community are located at the CfA: the Institute for 
Theoretical Atomic and Molecular Physics; the Interna- 
tional Astronomical Union’s Central Bureau for Astro- 
nomical Telegrams and the Minor Planet Center; the US 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gateway for SIMBAD, an international astronomical com- 
puter database; and Harvard’s extensive collection of as- 
tronomical photographic plates. In addition, the Astro- 
physics Data System (ADS), operated on behalf of the Na- 
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (Nasa), Con- 
trol Center is also based here. 

For further information see 
http: //cfa-www.harvard.edu/. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hat Creek Radio Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hat Creek Radio Observatory 


Located 400 km north of Berkeley, California. It is the 
site of the BIMA Millimeter Array, a 10-antenna aperture 
synthesis telescope which operates at wavelengths of 
3 mm (70-116 GHz) and 1 mm (210-270 GHz). 

The array is operated by the BIMA consortium, 
consisting of the Radio Astronomy Laboratory of the 
University of California at Berkeley, the Laboratory for 
Astronomical Imaging of the University of Illinois, and 
the Laboratory for Millimeter Astronomy of the University 
of Maryland, with support from the National Science 
Foundation. 

The BIMA telescopes are 6.1 m in diameter. The 
antennas may be located at various stations along 
an approximately T-shaped track to allow antenna 
separations ranging from 7 m to 2 km. Normally, 
the antennas are deployed in one of four standard 
configurations which provide angular resolutions of 
roughly 0.4, 2, 6 or 14” at 100 GHz. 

For further information see 
http:/ /astron.berkeley.edu/ plambeck/technical.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hawking, Stephen W (1942-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hawking, Stephen W (1942-) 


Cosmologist and theoretical astrophysicist, born in 
Oxford, England, where he studied physics at University 
College. Moved to Cambridge to take up research 
in general relativity and cosmology, became Lucasian 
professor (an appointment earlier held by IsAac NEWTON, 
with whom Hawking has been compared). Hawking 
worked to develop a valid mathematical treatment of the 
‘singularities’ in the theory of general relativity, that is 
the central regions in black holes, where conventional 
mathematics breaks down. Uniting quantum theory and 
general relativity, he showed that black holes can emit 
energy, now known as Hawking radiation. He investigated 
the conditions in the energy released in the Big Bang at the 
creation of the universe, and predicted that many mini- 
black holes would be created, perhaps as heavy as 10 tons 
but only the size of a proton. Hawking found that the 
smaller mass black holes would lose energy by Hawking 
radiation, and would have evaporated in the lifetime of 
the universe. They therefore have had an effect on the 
formation of structure early in the universe’s history but 
have now disappeared. Another remarkable proposal 
by Hawking is his ‘no-boundary proposal’ explained by 
him as meaning ‘... that both time and space are finite 
in extent, but they don’t have any boundary or edge .... 
There would be no singularities, and the laws of science 
would hold everywhere, including at the beginning of the 
universe.” Hawking suffers from motor neurone disease 
and, confined to a wheelchair, he speaks through a voice- 
synthesizer. Nevertheless, he has taken up an arduous 
and highly successful career as a popularizer of science 
through lectures, TV and other public appearances, and a 
best-selling popular book on cosmology A Brief History of 
Time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hawkins, Gerald 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hawkins, Gerald 


British-born astronomer, professor at Boston University, 
claimed to have ‘decoded’ Stonehenge. He found a 
pattern of alignments with 12 major lunar and solar 
events, finding a way to predict eclipses of the Moon, 
the summer and winter solstice, by use of the 56 Aubrey 
holes, the Heel Stone, and the four Station Stones. 
His work was supported by astronomer FRED HOYLE and 
savagely criticised by archaeologists, (e.g. ‘Moonshine on 
Stonehenge’ by R J C Atkinson). Undeterred, he turned 
to a similar problem in Peru, the possible astronomical 
alignments and associations found in the mysterious lines 
and gigantic geometric figures at Nazca, mapped by MARIA 
REICHE. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hay, William Thompson [Will Hay] (1888-1949) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hay, William Thompson [Will Hay] 
(1888-1949) 


British comedian and amateur astronomer, discovered the 
white spot on Saturn in 1933. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Haystack Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Haystack Observatory 


The Haystack Observatory is a multidisciplinary research 
center of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and 
its primary mission in astronomy is the advancement of 
scientific research and technical developments in radio 
interferometry. Current emphasis is on Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry (VLBI) observations at 3 mm wavelength 
aimed at high-resolution imaging of quasars, and on the 
application of VLBI geodetic techniques to measurements 
of the Earth’s orientation parameters. The facilities 
of the Observatory include 37 m and 18 m diameter 
radio telescopes, and a multi-station VLBI correlator. 
The Observatory’s mission includes training students in 
instrumentation technology and providing opportunities 
for students to link their education to research through 
radio astronomy using the Observatory’s telescopes. The 
radio astronomy program at Haystack Observatory is 
guided by the Northeast Radio Observatory Corporation, 
a consortium of twelve educational institutions. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.haystack.mit.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Heavy Elements ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Heavy Elements 


Chemical elements of relatively high atomic weight. 
Because less than 2% of the mass of a solar-type star is 
made up of elements heavier than helium, the term ‘heavy 
element’, in an astrophysical situation, is applied to all 
elements that have mass numbers greater than that of 
helium (4). 


See also: atom, cosmic abundance of elements, element 
(chemical), nucleosynthesis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Heckmann, Otto Hermann Leopold (1901-83) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Heckmann, Otto Hermann Leopold 
(1901-83) 


Astrometrist and cosmologist, became director of the 
Hamburg Observatory, and of the European Southern 
Observatory in Chile. By determining the motions of the 
stars in the direction of several star clusters (including the 
Praesepe, or Beehive cluster), he was able to see which 
stars were moving together in the cluster, and which, 
although in the same direction, were moving differently. 
Eliminating the latter from consideration, he was able to 
identify the true members of each cluster and clarify their 
H-R diagrams. He organized the international effort to 
produce the third Astronomische Gesellschaft to show the 
proper motions of 180000 stars. As a cosmologist, he 
rigorously used general relativity to find open and flat 
solutions to the EINSTEIN field equations for a homogeneous, 
isotropic, possibly rotating universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


HEGRA Experiment 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HEGRA Experiment 


The La Palma cosmic-ray observatory HEGRA (High- 
Energy Gamma-Ray Astronomy) is an air shower 
experiment, located at the OBSERVATORIO DEL ROQUE DE LOS 
MUCHACHOS (2200 m above sea level, 28.75°N, 17.89°W) on 
the Canary island of La Palma, and is operated by institutes 
from Germany, Spain and Yerevan. 

The main scientific goal is gamma-ray astronomy 
in the energy range from 500 GeV to 100 TeV using 
the technique of ground-based imaging atmospheric 
Cerenkov telescopes. A unique feature of the HEGRA 
experiment is the use of five Cerenkov telescopes to 
simultaneously measure the same air shower (stereoscopic 
observation). This technique yielded an energy spectrum 
with unprecedented precision of up to 24 TeV for the Blazar 
Markarian 501 during flaring states in 1997. 

From 20 TeV up to 10 PeV air showers are also detected 
with the showerfront sampling technique using arrays of 
243 scintillator counters, 99 wide-angle Cerenkov counters 
and 17 Geiger towers spread over an area of 200 m x 200 m. 

For further information see 
http:/ /wpos6.physik.uni-wuppertal.de:8080/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hektor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hektor 


A Trojan asteroid discovered by August Kopff in 1907, 
designated (624) Hektor. It belongs to the largest group 
of Trojans, orbiting ahead of Jupiter around the [y 
Lagrangian point. Hektor orbits the Sun at a mean distance 
of 5.17 AU (774 million km) in a period of 11.76 years; 
the inclination is 18° and the eccentricity 0.02. Its rotation 
period, as determined from its light curve, is 6.92h. Hektor 
is the largest and brightest of the Trojans. Variations 
in its light curve suggest that it is elongated, measuring 
about 300 x 150 km; alternatively it could be shaped like 
a dumbbell, or a contact or close binary asteroid. Like 
the majority of Trojans, Hektor is D-type, with a reddish 
reflectance spectrum indicating a carbon-rich surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Heliocentric Coordinate System ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Heliocentric Coordinate System 


Coordinates specifying the position of an object as seen 
from the center of the Sun. Heliocentric coordinates are 
usually referred to the plane of the ecliptic—thus the 
position of a planet in its orbit at any instant is often 
specified in terms of heliocentric ecliptic coordinates. 


See also: ecliptic, geocentric coordinate system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Helios ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helios 


Two German-US satellites designed to study the solar 
wind, interplanetary dust and Galactic cosmic rays in the 
inner Solar System. Helios 1, launched in December 1974, 
passed within 48 million km of the Sun. Helios 2, launched 
in January 1976, approached to within 45 million km of the 
Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Helioseismic Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helioseismic Observations 


This article describes how wave motions of the Sun are 
observed and utilized to learn about the properties of the 
solar interior. 

Most of what we know about the Sun, and the rest of 
the universe, is based on observations of electromagnetic 
(e.g. light) waves. We cannot see more than about 100 km 
below the visible surface of the Sun because the material 
rapidly becomes opaque to electromagnetic waves. To 
‘see’ deeper we observe, at the surface, wave motions of 
the solar material itself that easily travel large distances 
through the solar interior. HELIOSEISMOLOGY is the science of 
using these motions to study the Sun’s internal structure 
and dynamics. 


Wave motions 

When most physical bodies are disturbed from an 
equilibrium state they tend to vibrate as they return to 
equilibrium. The Sun is no exception. In the case 
of the Sun, the disturbances that make it vibrate are 
believed to be violent convective motions (SOLAR INTERIOR: 
CONVECTION ZONE) beneath and within a few hundred km 
of the visible surface, and to a much lesser extent, rare, 
powerful explosions (solar flares) above the surface (SOLAR 
FLARE OBSERVATIONS). The convective disturbances occur 
continually, so the surface of the Sun is always oscillating. 
The goal of helioseismic observations is to detect and 
measure as many of the oscillations as accurately as 
possible. 

Once produced, several types of wave motion can 
propagate inside the Sun (HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY). Just 
as with light waves, these waves can be refracted, 
reflected, attenuated, scattered, dispersed, and absorbed, 
depending on the characteristics of the medium through 
which they travel. It is these phenomena that enable 
detailed probing of the interior. The waves are more 
than 10” times larger than visible light, so using them 
to study the Sun is akin to using light waves to study a 
1 mm diameter marble. One simple type of wave motion 
occurs when material is displaced from its equilibrium 
position and then moves back toward its original position 
under the combined forces of gravity and pressure 
from the immediate surroundings, producing what is 
usually called buoyancy. It oscillates about this position 
because of inertia until the wave energy is dissipated. 
Such buoyancy-driven motions are called gravity waves. 
Another wave motion is driven by pressure gradients and 
consists of alternating regions of changing pressure. These 
are the well-known acoustic or sound waves. Other types 
of wave motion are possible within the Sun, but they have 
not yet become significant in helioseismology. 

Waves moving within the Sun may be confined to 
natural cavities by reflection and refraction. If the wave 
motions last long enough, standing wave patterns may 
form. The resonant frequencies of the standing wave 
oscillations are determined by propagation conditions 
(e.g. sound speed) within the entire cavity. Cavities 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Line-of-sight component of the velocity of the solar 
photosphere shown as light (dark) shades for away (toward) 
motions. Solar rotation causes the large variation from left to 
right, while the oscillations are the fine-grained texture seen 
most clearly at disk center. (Courtesy of SOHO/SOI consortium. 
SOHO is a project of international cooperation between ESA and 
NASA.) 


that trap acoustic waves produce resonant pressure (p) 
modes. Cavities that trap gravity waves produce gravity 
(g) modes. The strong density gradient at the surface of the 
Sun supports surface gravity waves called fundamental (f) 
modes. High-frequency waves are not trapped at the solar 
surface. These waves may travel from their point of origin 
once through the solar interior and then leak outward 
in the solar atmosphere. Both trapped and untrapped 
waves are important for helioseismology. The former are 
used to learn about average properties within the trapping 
cavities, and the latter are used for diagnosing local, and 
possibly short-lived, conditions in the solar interior. 


Basic observations 

There is scant evidence or expectation that the type of 
waves that propagate within the Sun reach the Earth 
directly. Therefore we detect them indirectly, observing 
their effect at the surface of the Sun using traditional 
astronomical techniques. 

Solar oscillations were first detected by R Leighton 
in 1960 by measuring the line-of-sight component of the 
motion of the solar photosphere using the Doppler effect. 
This remains the most powerful observational method. 
Figure 1 is a picture of the Sun’s line-of-sight motions at a 
single instant of time. Images like this are the major (but 
not the only) source of helioseismic data. 

If we isolate a few arcsec of the solar surface and 
measure its Doppler velocity or brightness as a function 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismic Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of time, we find characteristic oscillations with periods 
of 5 + 2 min superimposed on other, non-periodic 
variations. The Doppler velocity oscillation is strongest 
at the center of the solar disk with an amplitude of 
about 300 m s~!, and decreases roughly proportional to 
the cosine of the angle away from disk center. This 
shows that the motions are nearly radial to the solar 
surface. If we make measurements higher in the solar 
atmosphere, we find a greater amplitude and a tendency 
for the average period to shift to shorter values. The 
oscillations have been detected above the chromosphere 
(SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC OSCILLATIONS) but have not been used 
much for helioseismology. Intensity oscillations mimic 
the velocity oscillations in most respects except that they 
are superimposed on a noisier background and they are 
phaseshifted relative to the velocity oscillation by roughly 
one-quarter of a period. The sense of the phaseshift is that 
brightest emission occurs when the atmosphere is most 
compressed downward, consistent with a nearly adiabatic 
compression. The amplitude of intensity oscillations is 
about 1% (depending on spectral wavelength), and does 
not decrease strongly away from the disk center. 

If we enlarge the measured area of the Sun, the 
oscillation signal decreases with the square root of the 
area. This demonstrates that the signals are in phase and 
coherent over only a small spatial distance. This finding 
led early observers to conclude that the oscillations were 
a local, atmospheric phenomenon. The picture changed 
as simultaneous observations at many spatial locations 
became possible, and as theoretical work progressed. The 
birth of helioseismology occurred when it was realized 
that the oscillations seen at a single point on the Sun are the 
incoherent addition of millions of larger-scale oscillations. 
Shortly afterward it was also recognized that some of these 
oscillations are global in scale and sample the average 
properties over large portions of the solar interior. 

Helioseismic observations are made using a wide 
range of solar instruments. Conceptually the simplest 
is just a stable detector exposed to sunlight. Since the 
amplitude of the 5 min intensity oscillation averaged 
over the entire solar disk is about 10~°, as long as this 
instrumental set-up can accurately detect tinier intensity 
fluctuations in less than a minute, it can be used for 
helioseismology. The Earth’s atmosphere is generally too 
noisy to permit this to succeed from the ground, but it has 
been done from space and from high-altitude balloons. 
Adding optical filters to restrict which wavelengths reach 
the detector enables more useful observations. These 
types of observation have also been done in space. Next 
in complexity are intensity measurements made with 
small telescopes that form images of the Sun’s disk on 
detector arrays (segmented diodes or charge coupled 
device arrays). The primary requirement for using such 
instruments is that the noise from all sources at a single 
detector element be less than the amplitude of the solar 
oscillations, and preferably less than the non-oscillatory 
solar noise sources as well. This enforces stringent 
requirements on guiding stability, but such observations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are relatively easy to do from the ground and have been 
made since the mid-1980s. 

The next jump in instrumental complexity is to 
observe the Doppler shift of a single solar spectral 
line. Here the simplest instrument consists of a detector 
preceded by a spectrometer that isolates the red and blue 
wings of a spectral line so that the relative intensities 
of unimaged sunlight can be interpreted as a Doppler 
shift. Since the two isolated wavelengths are so close 
together, many noise sources affect both intensities almost 
identically. This enables high-quality, ground-based 
observations. | However, since the amplitude of the 
5 min oscillation averaged over the solar disk is only 
about 0.7 m s“!, the spectrometer must be sensitive and 
stable. The spectrometer of choice is a cell filled with 
heated sodium or potassium vapor in a magnetic field. 
Such cells can be arranged to scatter or transmit light 
preferentially at discrete wavelengths in the wings of a 
resonance line of the element. These instruments have 
been in use since the mid-1970s. Vapor cells are also 
used in imaging instruments, but by sacrificing some 
stability (the required noise level at an element of an 
imaging instrument is about 10 m s~'), more spectral lines 
can be observed with other spectrometers. The current 
instrument of choice is a temperature-stabilized, narrow- 
band birefringent filter, often combined with a rapidly 
tunable Michelson interferometer. These instruments 
allow simultaneous measurements of Doppler shift to be 
made over a well-resolved image of the Sun. Filter systems 
have been in use since the mid-1980s. The number of 
elements that can simultaneously be observed across the 
solar disk has increased by about an order of magnitude 
per decade as detector technology has improved. Current 
observations use up to 10° individual elements. 


Trapped oscillations and global helioseismology 

For anearly perfect sphere such as the Sun it is appropriate 
to use spherical harmonic functions to represent the 
trapped modes. A single mode can be represented as 
a single spherical harmonic using a set of three integers 
l,m,n. The degree, /, is the number of nodal lines on 
the solar surface, and for p modes ranges from zero to 
thousands; it is a measure of the spatial wavenumber of 
the mode—from the scale of the entire Sun to the scale 
of granulation. The azimuthal order, m, is a measure 
of the number of nodal lines that cross the equator, and 
ranges from zero to plus and minus the degree number; 
it represents the concentration of a mode toward the 
equator. Roughly speaking, the radial order, n, is the 
number of nodal surfaces (in the vertical component of 
the velocity) encountered in the radial direction, and 
is seen in observations to range from zero to nearly 
50. Theory predicts, and observations confirm, that 
the Sun is oscillating in millions of different p modes 
simultaneously. Of these, about 3 x 10° are long lived 
enough to remain coherent around a solar circumference 
and are the foundation of global helioseismology. The 
remaining modes, of higher degrees, are not globally 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismic Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Spherical harmonic representations of p-mode 
oscillations of degree 40. The azimuthal orders in sequence are 
0, 10, 35 and 40. The line-of-sight component of material motion 
is represented as light and dark shades of gray. Seen from a 
latitude of 10 degrees. 


coherent and are used mainly for local helioseismology 
(SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY). 

Different modes sample different volumes of the 
solar interior. That is, they are confined within resonant 
cavities that extend over different ranges in depth and 
latitude. Figure 2 represents four different global p modes 
showing their extent in latitude. Since p-mode frequencies 
are controlled by the sound speed within the sampled 
volumes, it is possible to deduce the radial variation 
of sound speed by measuring the frequencies of many 
different p modes. P-mode frequencies are also affected by 
the average rotation within the sampled volume, and the 
frequency variations allow the rotation profile with depth 
and latitude to be unraveled (SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). 
Thus, the essence of global helioseismology is to measure 
the frequencies of p-mode (and f-mode) oscillations as 
accurately as possible to deduce interior conditions (SOLAR 
INTERIOR: INVERSIONS OF HELIOSEISMIC DATA ). 

The major task for global observational helioseismol- 
ogy is to produce an accurate spectrum of solar oscilla- 
tions in terms of spherical harmonic integers and cyclic 
frequency, v. In such a spectrum, the global p modes ap- 
pear as peaks of power at specific values of / and m at 
specific frequencies that depend on n. Displaying a three- 
dimensional spectrum is difficult, and it is common to 
make two-dimensional projections. A frequent projection 
is to select an/ value and show the spectrum as a function 
of m and v (figure 3). This projection reveals that the fre- 
quencies of p modes vary with m value, and this provides 
the basis for determining the internal rotation of the Sun 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1007 \ 


50 lh, 


AZIMUTHAL ORDER 
° 
| 


| 
-50 aNg 


-100 We 


250 260 2.70 280 290 3.00 310 3.20 330 340 3.50 
FREQUENCY (mHz) 


Figure 3. A section of the observed spectrum of p-mode 
oscillations for spherical harmonic degree 100 and four values of 
radial order. Dark indicates more power. The frequency 
variations are caused by solar rotation. Spatial leakage produces 
the finely spaced patterns. (Data from the GONG project, 
managed for the National Science Foundation by the National 
Solar Observatory.) 


6.67] 


5.6 eae tiy 


a 
fo 
| 


FREQUENCY (mHz) 
2) 
Oo 
l 


2.65 


0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 
DEGREE 


Figure 4. A portion of the observed spectrum of solar 
oscillations averaged over m after a correction for solar rotation. 
Dark indicates more power. The spectrum has been processed to 
reduce the dynamic range so that oscillations over most of the 
span can be seen. Note individually resolved modes to the left. 
(From observations at the geographical South Pole by an 
NSF-supported Bartol/ NASA/NSO team.) 


as well as departures from spherical symmetry. An even 
more popular projection removes the effects of solar rota- 
tion and then averages the result over m. The resulting 
spectrum, displayed as a function of / and v, represents 
the spectrum that the Sun would produce if it were not 
rotating. An example of this kind of spectrum is figure 4. 

To help define the observational requirements needed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismic Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to obtain the best possible spectrum of solar oscillations, 
we note that a time series of images and the /,m,v 
spectrum are transform pairs of each other. Thus, if we 
want excellent frequency (v) resolution, we need to acquire 
images for a long period of time. Similarly, to get the best 
possible resolution in / and m, the entire surface of the 
Sun should be observed. At present this is technically 
impossible and sets limits to the accuracy of a spectrum 
of solar oscillations. Seeking guidance from theory, we 
expect that p-mode oscillations should range in /, m from 
zero (the entire surface of the Sun oscillating in unison) 
to about 4000 (a horizontal scale of about 1/4000 of the 
solar circumference or 1.1 Mm). The highest frequency p- 
mode oscillations that are expected to be reflected by the 
strong gradients in the solar atmosphere are about 5.6 mHz 
(180 seconds period). This means that we should sample 
the oscillations at least as frequently as every 90 seconds. 
One of the surprises of helioseismology was that mode- 
like oscillations are observed at higher frequencies. Some 
of these high-frequency oscillations may be caused by 
reflections high in the solar atmosphere (TRANSITION REGION 
MODELS), but most are thought to result from interference 
of outward traveling waves from a source with waves 
from the source that travel once through the solar interior. 
These waves have been clearly seen to frequencies of 
11 mHz and there is evidence that they exist to a much 
higher frequency. Their amplitude weakens rapidly with 
increasing frequency and, as a practical matter, most 
helioseismic observations are made once per minute with 
little problem from inadequately sampled, weak, high- 
frequency waves. 

A few low-frequency, low-degree p modes are 
expected to last without significant change for several 
years. This means that observations should continue for 
that long in order to measure the frequencies of long-lived 
modes accurately. Data gaps generate noise and other 
spectral artefacts, and observers strive to make their data 
as continuous as possible to produce the cleanest spectra. 

Since we cannot at present observe oscillations 
simultaneously over the entire solar surface, there is a 
spread in the range of /,m values that are close matches 
to an oscillation pattern observed only over the visible 
hemisphere of the solar surface. This ambiguity causes 
smearing and artefacts in the spectrum. The best that can 
be done is to observe the full solar disk and try to use 
knowledge of the leakage to estimate the spectrum as if 
there had been no leakage. 

Several steps are needed to convert a time series 
of Doppler velocity or intensity measurements to a 
helioseismic spectrum. For unimaged measurements, 
gaps in the time series are filled (generally using 
autoregressive interpolation), and a Fourier transform of 
the time series is computed. The result is a spectrum 
of the low-degree oscillations (1 = 0 to 3). Imaged 
observations undergo the same steps, but each image 
is first decomposed into a set of spherical harmonic 
coefficients. It is the time series of these coefficients that are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Fourier transformed to produce the oscillation spectrum. 
There are numerous variants of these basic steps. 

Once a spectrum is produced, the frequencies of the 
modes must be determined. This is not trivial because 
the spectra are noisy, there is a varying background 
beneath the peaks, the shape of the peaks is intrinsically 
asymmetric, and there is leakage of spectral features from 
nearby values of /, m and v. 


Local helioseismology and short-lived oscillations 
Several techniques have been developed to study the local 
structure and dynamics of the solar interior. The various 
methods use observations that are essentially the same 
as those used for global helioseismology. The primary 
difference is in how they are analysed. The simplest 
method consists of isolating a region of the solar disk and 
producing a Fourier transform spectrum of the oscillations 
of the region in terms of spatial wavenumber and temporal 
frequency. Such a spectrum is very similar to that shown 
in figure 4, but is usually projected into a k,, k, plane at a 
given frequency. It has the appearance of rings of power. 
The rings are distorted if the region is moving, or if it has 
a structural asymmetry. Analysis usually involves finding 
the flow and temperature distributions that best fit the 
observed distortions. 

Another method is based on a Hankel spatial 
transform and Fourier temporal transform of p-mode 
oscillation patterns. This produces a spectrum in which 
inward and outward pattern propagation directions are 
separated with respect to a single point on the solar surface. 
If the central point is a sunspot or strong magnetic region, it 
is found that far more power moves inward than outward. 
Thus, sunspots are acoustic sinks (SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND 
SEISMOLOGY). A spatial map of this difference can be built 
up by successively moving the center of the analysis to 
different positions. 

A completely different method is closely related to 
terrestrial earthquake seismology. The time is measured 
for a particular oscillation to travel from one point on the 
solar surface, through the interior, to another point. Time 
differences can be related to variations of the properties 
of the material through which the wave motion passed. 
Figure 5 shows a so-called time—distance plot averaged 
over a large part of the solar disk. Plots like this are 
constructed by correlating the oscillation signal at a point 
with the signal at varying distances away as a function 
of time lag. Usually, the distant signal is averaged over 
a complete or partial annulus centered on the target 
point. The analysis can also be done backward to measure 
travel time differences for waves moving in the opposite 
direction. The time—distance technique is sensitive to 
geometrical image distortion and timing errors, so these 
potential observational problems require close attention. 
It is also necessary to carefully isolate just those waves 
that penetrate to a desired depth and have a particular 
frequency range since travel time is a strong function of 
frequency owing to surface effects. There are also tricky 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismic Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


140 > 


120 + 


100 + 


TIME (min) 


404 


t ~T T T T T T T T 1 
0 15 30 45 60 75 90 105 120 135 
DISTANCE (deg) 


Figure 5. Observed correlation between high-frequency 
untrapped oscillations at a point and oscillations at different 
times and distances. The curved lines are prominent at the times 
and distances that correspond to one passage of the waves from 
near the surface, through the interior, to the surface again. Only 
oscillations with frequencies of 8.7+1 mHz and that reached a 
depth of about 150 Mm were used to compute this diagram. 
(Observations obtained at the South Pole by an NSF-supported 
Bartol/ NASA/NSO team.) 


problems of interpretation when the length of the wave is 
comparable to the scale of variation of the solar interior. 
The newest technique for local helioseismology uses 
observations of the wave field at the solar surface and 
mathematically propagates them through the equivalent 
of a lens. The ‘lens’ can be focused at various depths to 
make images of features that perturb the normal progress 
of the wave motions. This method is called helioseismic 
holography because of its similarity to laser holography 


The state of the art 

In the 1970s, helioseismic observations were made using 
instruments designed for other purposes and located 
at single ground-based observatories. By the mid- 
1980s, the capabilities of such observations were fully 
exploited. Time resolution and continuity were improved 
by deploying simple, inexpensive instruments around the 
world in networks, and by mounting expeditions to the 
geographical South Pole to take advantage of continuous 
sunlight during the austral summer. Observations were 
also made from space serendipitously using an instrument 
designed to study solar irradiance. As solid state detector 
arrays became available, instruments were built to exploit 
them for helioseismic observations. 

By the early 1990s, instrumental designs had matured, 
and funding agencies were convinced of the scientific 
merit of helioseismology, so that today, helioseismic 
observations have been done by a variety of space and 
ground-based projects. This complementarity is vital 
since it is the only way to detect systematic errors that 
can seriously affect helioseismic measurements. Space 
provides the great advantage of continuous sunlight 
unaffected by the vagaries of weather and atmospheric 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


distortions. On the other hand, ground-based facilities can 
be repaired and upgraded, and are not limited by weight, 
power and data bandwidth constraints. Both types of 
observation are needed. 

The major helioseismic space instruments com- 
menced observations early in 1996 on board sono, the So- 
lar and Heliospheric Observatory, a joint project of ESA 
and NASA. There are three helioseismic instruments on 
SOHO: GOLF, VIRGO and SOI/MDI. GOLF (Global Os- 
cillations at Low Frequencies) is a non-imaging instrument 
that uses a sodium vapor resonance spectrometer to detect 
low-degree Doppler velocity oscillations. VIRGO (Vari- 
ability of solar IRradiance and Gravity Oscillations) mea- 
sures solar intensity oscillations with non-imaging detec- 
tors operating at three wavelengths, and also provides 12- 
element resolution of the solar disk intensity. SOI-MDI 
(Solar Oscillations Investigation—Michelson Doppler Im- 
ager) resolves the solar disk using a 1024* element CCD 
camera and a narrow-band tunable filter that provides 
Doppler velocity, continuum and spectral line intensity, 
and longitudinal magnetic field. Because of data band- 
width restrictions, only subsets of the data can be provided 
continuously. One such product is a reduced resolution 
Doppler image. 

Future space helioseismic missions may seek higher 
angular resolution and higher time cadence (both 
important for local helioseismology), and helioseismology 
from a direction away from the Earth (important for 
studies of the solar poles and for deep probing of the 
solar core). A space mission may also be warranted if a 
promising way to detect g modes can be devised. 

Current ground-based helioseismic observations are 
primarily produced by international networks established 
to obtain high observational duty cycles. Duty cycles of 
up to 90% can be obtained using six sites well distributed 
in longitude. The longest operating network is BiSON 
(Birmingham Solar Oscillation Network) organized by the 
University of Birmingham and operating continuously 
since 1981. It consists of six non-imaging potassium vapor 
resonance spectrometers. A similar set of instruments, 
except using sodium vapor, is organized in the IRIS 
(International Research on the Interior of the Sun) project. 
This project was started by the Université de Nice and has 
been taking continuous data since 1989. It has recently 
joined efforts with other projects to enhance the quality of 
non-imaged helioseismic data. 

Ground-based imaging networks date back to 1994 
when the TON (Taiwan Oscillation Network, managed by 
Tsing Hua University) started taking data continuously 
at three sites. The data are intensity images of the Sun 
filtered by a 1 nm filter centered on the Ca II K line. These 
intensity images have a diameter of about 1000 pixels 
and are obtained once per minute. In 1995, the GONG 
(Global Oscillation Network Group) started continuous 
Doppler velocity observations at six sites. This project 
is managed by the National Solar Observatory for the 
National Science Foundation. The GONG instruments use 
a Michelson interferometer to produce rapid modulation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismic Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of 220 pixel diameter images from which the Doppler shift 
can be determined. The data also include intensity and 
line strength images once per minute and line-of-sight 
component magnetograms less frequently. It is planned 
to continue the operation of GONG through a complete 
solar cycle and to increase the resolution to an 800 pixel 
diameter image size. 

Several smaller networks are operational. The 
HdHN (High Degree Helioseismology Network) is a 
cooperation between the University of Southern California 
and the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory. The two 
sites operate resonance vapor spectrometers arranged to 
provide Doppler velocity images with diameters between 
500 and 1000 pixels. The RODOMA (Roma Doppler and 
Magnetic) network intends to provide Doppler velocity 
and line-of-sight magnetograms from sites in California, 
Austria and Uzbekistan. These instruments will use 
potassium resonance spectrometers in an imaging mode 
with an image diameter of about 400 pixels. The ECHO 
(Experiment for Coordinated Helioseismic Observations) 
network is a cooperation between the High Altitude 
Observatory and the Instituto Astrofisica de Canarias, and 
will have sites in Hawaii and the Canary Islands to provide 
roughly 200 pixel diameter Doppler images, also using 
potassium resonance spectrometers. 

Although non-imaged helioseismic measurements 
have been available more or less continuously since the 
early 1980s, imaged data were very sporadic until the 
mid-1990s. Notable exceptions were observations made 
at Big Bear Solar Observatory, at the South Pole, and a 
collaboration between the High Altitude Observatory and 
National Solar Observatory. Many of the basic discoveries 
of helioseismology were made using these observations. 
A revolution has occurred in the last few years with the 
availability of nearly continuous, high-quality imaged and 
non-imaged observations from space and ground-based 
networks. 

The quality of helioseismic observations is currently 
very good. Signal-to-noise ratios are limited mainly by 
the Sun itself. The major lack is continuous intensity and 
Doppler velocity measurements at a resolution of the order 
of 1000 pixels per diameter. It would also be beneficial 
to have simultaneous observations at several heights in 
both intensity and Doppler velocity. Amore rapid cadence 
of observation would reduce small effects of aliasing of 
high-frequency oscillations into low frequencies. Almost 
all imaged observations suffer from aliasing of spatial 
information. The only cure is to ensure that no spatial 
frequencies are present above the Nyquist sampling 
frequency. 

Spectral leakage of modes is a serious problem for 
global helioseismology. This corrupts the oscillation 
spectrum so that when many modes overlap it is difficult 
to assign a unique frequency to each one. The situation 
is even worse when the individual modes cannot be 
resolved. An additional complication is an asymmetry 
in the spectral line profiles which varies with frequency, 
degree, and whether intensity or velocity is observed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Several explanations for this phenomenon have been 
suggested, but a consensus has not yet been achieved. 

The most outstanding observational problem is to 
detect g modes. Many detections have been claimed in the 
past, but none has survived careful scrutiny. The problem 
is that noise from non-oscillatory processes is strong in 
the frequency range where g modes are expected, and, 
evidently, the g modes are weak. It seems likely that 
some new observational approach is required to cancel the 
effects of background noise while preserving the coherent 
g-mode signals. 

The major growth area in observational helioseismol- 
ogy is to detect time variability of previously inaccessi- 
ble regions of the Sun. Global helioseismology techniques 
have recently revealed zonal velocity flows near the base 
of the convection zone that vary with a 1.3 year period. 
Helioseismic holography has recently been used to make 
images showing the eruption and evolution of solar ac- 
tive regions on the far side of the Sun, many days before 
they rotate onto the side facing Earth. These results are 
initial contributions of helioseismology to a better under- 
standing of the mystery of the solar activity cycle (SOLAR 
CYCLE). The new ability to make images of the far side of 
the Sun should become a powerful tool for the study and 
prediction of space weather. 

Since the birth of helioseismology, the confrontation 
of solar models with observations has stimulated 
improvements in the models so that current agreement 
is at the one per cent level. In other words, the 
theoretical solar model is basically correct. Thus, a 
solar physics explanation for the deficit of neutrinos 
observed from the Sun was ruled out several years 
ago on the basis of helioseismology (SOLAR INTERIOR: 
NEUTRINOS). However, the disagreement between observed 
and predicted frequencies is far larger than the errors of 
measurement. Until recently, using improved physics in 
the models produced better agreement. Currently we 
have the odd situation that improving the physics in the 
models causes larger discrepancies. Evidently there is a 
significant missing element in the solar models. Tracking 
that down should yield another in the long series of 
surprises produced by helioseismology. 

Starting in 1975, helioseismic observations have given 
us a continually improving picture of the nature of 
the solar interior. There have been many surprises. 
Perhaps the most sobering one is that many of our 
preconceptions about the nature of the solar internal 
structure and dynamics were found to be incorrect— 
sometimes spectacularly so. While much has been learned, 
much remains to be done. 


Bibliography 

Gough D and Toomre J 1991 Seismic observations of the 
solar interior Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 29 627-85 

Harvey J 1995 Helioseismology Phys. Today 48(10) 32-8 

Hill FE, Deubner F-L and Isaak G 1991 Oscillation 
observations Solar Interior and Atmosphere ed A 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismic Observations ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cox, W Livingston and M Matthews (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 329-400 
Stix M 1989 The Sun—an Introduction (Berlin: Springer) 
Unno W, Osaki Y, Ando H, Saio H and Shibahashi H 
1989 Nonradial Oscillations of Stars 2nd edn (Tokyo: 
University of Tokyo Press) 


John Harvey 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 7 


Helioseismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helioseismology 


The study of the internal structure and dynamics of the Sun 
through the analysis of solar oscillations. The Sun vibrates 
like a gong with periods ranging from minutes to hours, 
but principally in the range 3 to 20 min. These oscillations 
can be detected as small periodic Doppler shifts in the 
wavelengths of spectral lines emitted by localized regions 
of the solar surface as they rise toward, and fall away 
from, the observer. The oscillations are produced by 
sound waves (pressure waves) that propagate through 
the solar globe. The speed of sound depends on various 
factors, including temperature and density, both of which 
increase with increasing depth below the solar surface. 
Consequently, a wave moving downward from a point 
on the surface is refracted and eventually curves back to 
meet the surface at another point. The sharp change in 
density at the surface then reflects the wave back down into 
the solar interior, enabling it to bounce repeatedly around 
the Sun and thereby produce standing waves that cause 
different parts of the solar surface to vibrate up and down 
in a systematic fashion. The deeper the wave penetrates, 
the fewer the points at which it meets the surface. By 
analyzing the millions of different modes of oscillation, 
and separating out those that penetrate to different depths, 
solar physicists can study the structure of the solar interior 
in the same sort of way as geophysicists use seismic 
waves to study the interior of the Earth. Furthermore, by 
comparing the speeds at which waves travel in the same 
direction as, and in the opposite direction to, the rotation 
of the Sun itself, it is possible to determine how the rotation 
rate of the solar interior varies with depth and latitude. 
Helioseismology provides information on the varia- 
tion with depth of temperature, density, pressure, chem- 
ical composition and rotational velocity. Observations 
made by ground-based projects such as the Global Oscilla- 
tion Network Group (GONG) and instruments carried on 
spacecraft such as SOHO, have shown, for example, that 
the boundary between the radiative and convective zones 
occurs 71.3% of the way from the center to the surface and 
that the differential rotation that is observed in the photo- 
sphere extends down to the base of the convective zone. 


See also: differential rotation, Doppler effect, SOHO 
(Solar and Heliospheric Observatory), Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helioseismology: Theory 


Observations have shown that the solar surface is in 
a state of continual oscillation, involving a very large 
number of different modes (see HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS). 
The observed frequencies depend in a relatively simple 
manner on the structure and rotation of the solar interior. 
To use this information to probe the Sun we need to 
understand how the properties of the oscillations reflect 
conditions in the solar interior. 


The Seismic Sun 

The observed solar oscillations share many similarities 
with the waves used in geoseismology to probe the interior 
of the Earth. However, while geoseismology is mostly 
based on travel times of waves travelling, e.g. from 
an Earthquake to a seismograph, global helioseismology 
uses frequencies of standing waves in the Sun (recently, 
analyses more akin to geoseismology have also been 
developed: see SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY). Even 
so, the observations can be discussed conveniently in 
terms of propagation of waves through the Sun. The waves 
relevant in the observed frequency range are acoustic 
waves, whose properties depend primarily on the sound 
speed, which is roughly proportional to the square root 
of temperature. Thus, as one moves to greater depth 
within the Sun, the sound speed increases. The acoustic 
waves are believed to be generated immediately below the 
solar surface, by the intense turbulence in the uppermost 
part of the convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
THEORY). With the exception of those travelling radially, 
the waves are refracted by the increasing sound speed 
(cf figure 1), as they propagate towards the solar interior; 
they undergo total internal refraction at the so-called lower 
turning point, at a distance r, from the solar center. When 
the wave reaches the surface again, it is reflected by the 
rapidly shrinking scale of variation of the density (at least 
for frequencies below about 5 mHz). Thus the wave travels 
ina series of ‘bounces’ between the surface and the turning 
point. 

Interference between such bouncing acoustic waves 
gives rise to the observed modes; since the dominant 
restoring force for acoustic waves is pressure, the modes 
are known as p modes. Conditions of regularity for 
waves propagating in a sphere enforce a specific pattern 
to these standing waves: as a function of position on 
spherical surfaces they behave as spherical harmonics (see 
also HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS, figure 2). This defines two 
of the three wavenumbers characterizing a given mode: 
the degree / and the azimuthal order m. The degree 
measures the total number of nodal lines on the solar 
surface; very roughly, the ‘average horizontal wavelength’ 
on the surface is given by A, ~ 27R// where R is the 
solar surface radius. For modes with / = 0 (the so-called 
radial modes) the Sun preserves its spherical shape while 
pulsating. The azimuthal order m is between —/ and J; it 
provides a measure of the number of nodal lines crossing 
the equator. For each (/,m) the Sun has a set of modes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Propagation of rays of sound in a cross-section of the 
solar interior. The ray paths are bend by the increase in sound 
speed with depth until they reach the inner turning point 
(indicated by the dotted circles) where they undergo total 
internal refraction. At the surface the waves are reflected by the 
rapid decrease in density. 


distinguished by the third wave number, viz. the radial 
order n which essentially measures the number of nodal 
surfaces in the radial direction. 

As is clear from figure 1 there is a relation between 
the initial direction of propagation of the waves, the 
depth of the turning point and the separation between 
successive bounces at the surface: modes propagating 
more nearly vertically reach a greater depth and returns 
to the surface further from the start. More precisely, 
the location of the turning point is determined by the 
relation c(r,)/r, = 2av/(l + 1/2), where c is the speed of 
sound and » is the (cyclic) oscillation frequency, v = 1/TI 
where IT is the pulsation period. The observed modes 
cover a range in degree from zero to more than one 
thousand. Correspondingly, the turning points range from 
very near the center to a few thousand kilometres below 
the solar surface. This is what allows inverse analyses 
(See SOLAR INTERIOR: INVERSIONS OF HELIOSEISMIC DATA) to infer 
local properties, in particular the sound speed, within the 
Sun. The frequency of a given mode depends essentially 
only on the structure outside the turning point. Hence, 
by combining frequencies of two modes with slightly 
differing turning points (see the dashed and dash-dotted 
rays in figure 1), information is obtained about conditions 
between the turning points. Needless to say, the actual 
analysis is substantially more complex and involves a 
large number of modes; but the principle, corresponding 
essentially to peeling off layer after layer of solar structure 
as the layers of an onion, still holds. In particular, 
the solar internal sound speed has been determined 
with high precision and resolution; comparison with the 
sound speed in solar models shows both generally good 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


agreement and some very intriguing differences (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS). 

The oscillation frequencies also depend on the 
dynamics of the solar interior. Particularly important is 
the effect of rotation. The spherical-harmonic pattern is 
advected by rotation, increasing the observed frequency 
of modes travelling in the same direction of rotation 
and decreasing it for modes travelling in the opposite 
direction. The resulting so-called rotational splitting 
essentially reflects an average of the solar angular velocity 
over that part of the Sun which is occupied by the given 
mode. In addition to the variation in radial extent, there 
is a variation of the extent in latitude with the azimuthal 
order, modes with |m| = / being concentrated near the 
equator, while modes with low m extending over the entire 
range in latitude. Thus, similarly to the case of structure, 
discussed above, it is possible carry out inversions to infer 
the angular velocity as a function of both latitude and 
depth. The results reveal a complex pattern of rotation 
which is so far not understood (see SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). 

It should finally be noticed that, in addition to the 
acoustic modes discussed so far, other types of modes are 
possible in the Sun. At relatively high degree one observes 
the so-called f modes, which are essentially surface gravity 
waves. Furthermore, solar models show the possible 
existence of internal gravity (or g) modes, with amplitudes 
strongly concentrated near the core of the model. Such 
modes would therefore provide excellent diagnostics of 
the structure and rotation of the solar core; unfortunately, 
however, they have so far not been definitely observed. 


Properties of solar oscillations 

The goal of the theoretical treatment of helioseismology 
is to relate the observable properties of the oscillations, 
in particular the frequencies, to the properties of the 
solar interior. In principle, the oscillations should be 
described by the complete set of magnetohydrodynamical 
equations governing the behavior of the solar interior. 
The description should then also include the convective 
motions in the outer approximately 28% of the solar radius, 
as well as the coupling to the radiation field in the solar 
atmosphere. 

In practice, many simplifications are possible, making 
the problem tractable. The amplitudes of the observed 
modes are so small that the oscillations can be regarded as 
small perturbations around a state of equilibrium. Also, 
the effects on the oscillations of rotation and magnetic 
fields can be regarded as small perturbations, relative 
to oscillations of a spherically symmetric equilibrium 
model; the latter corresponds to a normal model of the 
solar interior. Finally, the characteristic thermal time 
scale in the most of the Sun is far longer than the 
pulsation period, and as a result the modes can to a 
good approximation be regarded as adiabatic, occurring 
without heat loss or gain; also, microscopic viscosity 
can certainly be neglected. Although some of these 
simplifications become questionable near the solar surface, 
they indicate that the basic problem of helioseismic theory 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is that of small-amplitude adiabatic oscillations around 
a spherically symmetric equilibrium structure. This is 
sufficiently simple that the frequencies of a given solar 
model can be computed with high precision; consequently, 
the observed frequencies provide a clean measure of solar 
structure which is relatively simple to interpret. 

We now turn to the properties of such adiabatic 
oscillations. 


Equations of linear oscillations 

We assume that the amplitudes are so small that quantities 
of higher order than one in the perturbations can be 
neglected. It is convenient to work in terms of the 
displacement 6r induced by the oscillation, related to the 
oscillation velocity v by 


_ 06r 
ar 7 


Two descriptions of the perturbations are used: the 
Eulerian perturbations, indicated by a prime, are ata given 
location, while the Lagrangian perturbations, indicated 
by 6, correspond to following the motion. The two are 
closely related: for example, the Eulerian and Lagrangian 
pressure perturbations p’ and 5p satisfy 


6p = p'+ 6r-Vpo, (1) 


where po is the pressure in the equilibrium model. 

Itis now straightforward to write down the linearized 
equations of hydrodynamics: 
Equation of continuity: 


p' + div(pdr) = 0; (2) 
equations of motion: 


aor 


are —Vp' + poV®' + p'V®q ; (3) 


Po 


and Poisson’s equation: 
V?@' = —4nGp'. (4) 


Here p is density, ® is the gravitational potential, and G is 

the gravitational constant. In addition, the perturbations 

in pressure and density are related by the adiabatic 

relation, 

_ Topo 
Po 


where Tj = (dInp/dInp);, the derivative being at 
constant specific entropy s. 

The analysis is greatly simplified by the fact that the 
equilibrium structure is spherically symmetric and time 
independent. We introduce a spherical polar coordinate 
system (r, 6, ¢), where r is the distance to the center, 6 is 
co-latitude, i.e. the angle from the polar axis, and ¢ is 
longitude. Then the solution is separable in time, and in 
the angular coordinates (6,¢). The time dependence is 
naturally expressed as a harmonic function, characterized 


ép dp (5) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by an angular frequency w. The dependence on (6, ¢) 
may be obtained from an analysis of the way in which 
the angular coordinates enter into the equations. The 
result is that the expansion function in (6,¢) must be 
an eigenfunction of the tangential part Vn of the Laplace 
operator. This can be taken to be a spherical harmonic, 


(—1)"cim P;" (cos 6) exp(imd) = Y/" (6, #) (6) 


where P;” isa Legendre function and c;,, is a normalization 
constant, such that the integral of | ¥/"|? over the sphere is 
unity. Here / and m are integers, such that —/ < m < 1; Y;" 


satisfies 
ld + 


r2 


1 
Vey" = — ym ; (7) 
Some properties of the spherical harmonics were discussed 
above. Also, it is useful to note that if the oscillation is 
approximated locally by a plane wave, with horizontal 
wave number kj, then 


1(1 +1) 


r2 


mig (8) 


according to equation (7). This identification is very useful 
in the asymptotic analysis of the oscillations. 

It is convenient, in the mathematical analysis, to 
express the solution on complex form as is indeed implied 
by equation (6). The physical variables are obtained by 
taking the real part of the complex solution. Thus after 
the separation of variables the pressure perturbation, for 
example, can be expressed as 


pr, 0, dg, t) = Rp)", op) exp(—iot)] 


in terms of an amplitude function p’ which depends just 
on r; here ti denotes the real part. Also, it follows from 
the equations of motion that the displacement vector can 
be written as 


ér=V/4an {[Eeo (6, p)a, 


n( ) oy;" 1 oy 
oe ( cE an sin 6 x6 ay) | exp(—ie| (9) 


where 


2 L a see 

nr) = (<> - é) (10) 
ro \ Po 

and L = ,//(/ + 1); in equation (9) a,, ag and ay are unit 

vectors in the r, 6 and ¢ directions. With this definition 

&. and fj are essentially the root-mean-square radial and 

horizontal displacements. 

Given the separation of variables, the equations 
of stellar pulsation are reduced to a set of four 
ordinary differential equations for the amplitude functions 
{E., 7, B', d®’/dr}. These must be combined with 
boundary conditions: two of these ensure regularity at 
the center, r = 0, which is a regular singular point 
of the equations. One condition enforces continuity of 
®’ and its gradient at the surface, r = R. Finally, a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dynamical condition must be imposed on the surface 
pressure perturbation. This in its most simple form 
imposes zero pressure perturbation on the perturbed 
surface, i.e. 


6p =0 at r=R. (11) 


Under the assumption of spherical symmetry, the 
frequencies are independent of m. Formally, m does not 
appear in the separated oscillation equations; physically, 
m is related to the equator in the coordinate system 
chosen, and this choice can have no effect in a spherically 
symmetric star. 

The modes observed in the Sun are of high radial 
order or degree. In this case it is often possible to 
neglect the perturbation in the gravitational potential, 
at least in simplified analyses (&’ should in general be 
included in numerical computations). In this so-called 
Cowling approximation, the order of the equations is 
reduced to two, greatly simplifying the analysis. In this 
case, furthermore, equation (10) directly relates the surface 
pressure perturbation and horizontal displacement. Using 
also equations (11) and (1), we obtain 


n(R) | GM L 
E(R) Ro 


where M is the total mass; from this it follows that at the 
observed frequencies, and low or moderate degree, the 
oscillations are predominantly in the radial direction. 


What do the frequencies depend on? 

Adiabatic oscillations are essentially mechanical phenom- 
ena. Thus they depend on the forces in the star, i.e. pres- 
sure and gravity. In turn, the pressure is determined by 
the mass distribution, through the condition of hydrostatic 
equilibrium in the equilibrium model. Thus, as far as the 
oscillations are concerned, stellar structure is essentially 
characterized by the dependence p(r) of density on dis- 
tance to the center. In addition, the oscillations depend 
on the relation between the pressure and density pertur- 
bations, as characterized by I; (cf equation (5)). It follows 
that, given [p(r), [1(r)] for a stellar model, its adiabatic 
oscillation frequencies can be computed. This pair of vari- 
ables can be replaced by other, equivalent pairs; since the 
observed solar oscillations are essentially acoustic modes, 
a natural choice is (c, 0) where 


(my. 
Cc —-4 ————— 
Po 


is the adiabatic sound speed. Conversely, to the 
extent that the adiabatic approximation is adequate, 
observed frequencies provide information only about such 
mechanical quantities. 


Asymptotics of acoustic modes 
A great deal of insight into the properties of the observed 
solar oscillations can be obtained from a simple analysis 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of acoustic waves. The starting point is the dispersion 
relation for plane sound waves, 


wo = C7 |ki? 


where k is the wave vector. Separating k into radial and 

horizontal components k, and k, and using equation (8), 

we obtain 

wo L? 
= (12) 


where again L = //([+1)'. The interpretation of this 
equation is entirely in accordance with the discussion 
accompanying figure 1: with increasing depth and hence 
increasing sound speed, k, decreases and hence the wave 
travels more and more horizontally. The lower turning 
point r = rm, where the wave travels horizontally, is 
reached where k, = 0, i.e. 


c(i) _ @ 
oe: (13) 


For r < 1, k, is imaginary and the wave decays 
exponentially. It follows from equation (13) that the lower 
turning point is closer to the center, the lower is the degree 
or the higher is the frequency. Radial modes, with / = 0, 
penetrate the center, whereas the modes of highest degree 
observed, with / = 1000, are trapped in the outer 0.2 % of 
the solar radius. 

To obtain a standing wave, i.e. a mode of oscillation, 
suitable conditions must be satisfied at the surface and at 
r =r. These essentially induce phase changes in the wave 
which, together with the phase change between r;, and R, 
must equal an integer times z. It follows that the condition 
for a standing wave can be expressed as 


R 
/ k,dr = (n+a)1 
rt 

or, using equation (12), 


R 272\ 1/2 
ae =a) cele ae (14) 


r2a c o 


Here n is the mode order and a (which in general is a 
function of frequency) accounts for the phase changes 
at r = rm andr = R. The observed frequencies of 
solar oscillation satisfy a relation of this general functional 
form with reasonable precision. It should be pointed out 
that equation (14) can be given a more solid justification 
through a formal asymptotic analysis of the oscillation 
equations. 

The observed frequencies are most often analyzed 
by comparing them with frequencies computed for solar 
models. Thus we need to relate differences in frequencies 
to differences between the properties of the Sun and the 
model. Let 6@ = Wo — @moa be the difference between 


1 A more careful asymptotic analysis shows that this should be 
replaced by L =1+1/2. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the observed and the model frequencies, 6,c(r) = cg(r) — 
Cmoa(r) be the difference between the solar and model 
sound speeds, and da(w) = ao(w) — Amoa(w) be the 
difference between phase changes in the Sun and model; 
then it may be shown from equation (14) that 


bw o 
S— = 1a (F) + Halo) (15) 
where 
rae - i L2e2\"? dr da (16) 
- [ r2a2 c « dw 
R > \-1/2 
, 6-c d. 
raw) = f (1 £ :) Sw) 
" r2w c oC 
and = 
H2(w) = —da(o) . (18) 
o 


Thus, apart from the term in 12, the frequency difference 
is essentially a weighted average of 6,c/c. The weight 
factor has a simple physical meaning: dr/c is the sound 
travel time over the distance dr; multiplying by the 
factor (...)~/? converts this into the sound travel time, 
corresponding to the radial distance dr, along the relevant 
ray. Thus the average is weighted by the local sound 
travel time along the ray corresponding to the mode, as 
might indeed have been expected. The term in Hp is 
dominated by the change in the near-surface phase shift; 
thus it contains contributions from the treatment of the 
near-surface properties of the model and oscillations, as 
discussed below. 

Equation (15) may be fitted to differences between 
observed and model frequencies. Even this simple type of 
analysis provides excellent insight into the likely sources 
of error in the model. An example is illustrated in 
figure 2. Panel A clearly shows that the scaled differences 
are predominantly a function of frequency; as discussed 
above, this indicates that the dominant sources of error 
in the model are in the near-surface region. However, as 
shown in panel B, there is a very significant contribution 
from the term in 7;(w/L), resulting from differences in 
the internal sound speed between the Sun and the model. 
Particularly striking is the variation near r, ~ 0.7R, i.e. for 
modes which just penetrate beyond the convection zone, 
suggesting a relatively substantial and rather localized 
difference in sound speed in this region (cf equation 
(17)); this inference is indeed confirmed by more detailed 
analyses (see the article SOLAR INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS). 


Near-surface problems 

The simple assumption of adiabatic oscillations breaks 
down near the surface, where the local thermal time scale 
is comparable to the oscillation period. Although it is 
possible in principle to solve the full set of nonadiabatic 
oscillation equations, in practice this is greatly complicated 
by the uncertainty about how to treat the perturbation, 
induced by the oscillations, in the convective flux. 
Furthermore, there are other uncertainties in the physics 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.000 
g 
a _ 
£9 o 
~y -0.001 3 
2 3 
= 4 
& oe 
™~ 
“” —0.002 
-0.003 
1000 2000 3000 
Vy (wHz) 


2x10% 


—2x107* 


-4x10+ 


r/R 


0.950.9 0.8 0.5 


0.3 0.2 0.1 


100 1000 
Vm/(t + 1/2) (wHz) 


Figure 2. Panel A shows relative differences between observed and model frequencies, scaled by S/So, where S is defined in 

equation (16) and Sp is its value in the limit 7, > 0. The results are plotted against the cyclic frequency v = w/(2z). Panel B shows the 
residuals after subtracting the function 2 (w), obtained by fitting the expression (15) to the data shown in panel A; these residuals 
essentially correspond to H1(w/L). Here the abscissa is v/L which is related to the location of the lower turning point, shown on the 


upper abscissa, by equation (13). 


of the near-surface region. The model structure depends 
on the details of the treatment of the convective flux, 
usually grossly simplified, and of the convectively induced 
turbulent pressure which is often neglected. Perturbations 
in turbulent pressure are also likely to be significant, yet are 
very uncertain. Finally, the processes responsible for the 
excitation of the solar oscillations, which may also affect 
the oscillation frequencies, are likely to be concentrated 
near the solar surface. 

Numerical modelling of this region, including a 
detailed treatment of convection and its interaction with 
the oscillations, is becoming computationally feasible, 
although not yet at a level which allows sufficiently 
precise predictions of the influence on the frequencies. 
However, it is still possible under many circumstances to 
suppress the frequency errors induced by our incomplete 
understanding of the near-surface layers. Except at high 
degree, the modes essentially propagate vertically in 
this region, with a horizontal wavelength that is much 
larger than the vertical wavelength (cf equation (12)). 
Consequently, the behavior of the modes, and the direct 
effect of the near-surface errors, is essentially independent 
of degree and hence is a function of frequency alone. 
The influence on the frequency does depend on degree, 
through the dependence of the penetration depth and 
hence the fraction of the solar mass which is involved in the 
oscillation (cf figure 1): compared with low-degree modes 
at the same frequency, high-degree modes are trapped 
close to the surface, involving little mass and hence their 
frequencies are more strongly affected by the near-surface 
errors. Quantitatively, the effect is a change dsu,¢@ in the 
frequency, of the form dsuf@ = E~'Feurt(@), where 


_ f plérPav 


~ Miér(R)/? eo) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is anormalized mode inertia, which measures the fraction 
of the solar mass taking part in the oscillation; Four is a 
function of frequency which depends on the properties of 
the near-surface layers. This scaling of the near-surface 
effects is largely equivalent to the asymptotic scaling by S 
of the frequency shifts in equation (15); in fact, the function 
H2(w) in that equation contains a contribution from the 
near-surface errors, as described by Four. 

In the analysis of observations, it is assumed that the 
differences between the observed solar frequencies and 
those computed for a solar model contain a contribution 
of the form given by dsurr@, with an unknown function 
Feurp(@). On the other hand, determination of Fou¢(@) 
serves as a diagnostics of the physics of the outermost 
layers, including possible effects of convection. In fact, 
as already seen in figure 2, the differences between 
observed frequencies and frequencies of current models 
are dominated by a contribution of this form; its physical 
origin is not fully understood, however. 


Variational principle 
Equation (15) still suffers from being based on a highly 
simplified asymptotic analysis. To obtain the full benefit 
of the very accurate observed frequencies, we need more 
precise relations between differences in frequencies and 
differences in solar structure; these may be obtained from 
the basic equations of adiabatic oscillation. 

The starting point is equation (3), which we write as 


w pdr = poL(6r) . (20) 


Here L(dr) is defined by the right-hand side of 
equation (3); note that p’, p’ and ®’ can in fact be 
obtained as functions of dr, from the remaining linearized 
equations. From equation (20), w” can be expressed as 


2 f or -L(6r)po dV 


21 
J \6r? 0 dV en) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It may be shown that this is a variational expression: 
it is stationary to small changes in ér. This provides 
the basis for analyzing the effects on the frequencies of 
changes in the equilibrium model or other aspects of the 
oscillation equations. Such changes can be expressed 
formally as a perturbation to the operator CL; it follows 
from the stationarity of equation (21) that the effect on the 
frequencies can be evaluated from that equation, using the 
eigenfunctions of the unperturbed operator. 

A simple example of such a perturbation is a change 
in the structure of the equilibrium model. As discussed 
above, the helioseismic structure of the model can be 
specified by (c, e); consequently, the changes in the model, 
and hence in the operator £, are characterized by the 
changes 6,c and 4, in c and p, at fixed r. After some 
manipulation, the resulting change in the frequencies can 
be expressed as 


. orc 6; 
oe / [Rent + Kk, 00] dr 
0 c p 

a E™ Feurt(@) : (22) 
Here the kernels K.., and K,,. can be determined from 
the reference model, corresponding to the unperturbed C; 
also, in accordance with the earlier discussion, we have 
included a term in Fyur¢ accounting for the near-surface 
errors. Equation (22) forms the basis for inverse analyses 
to determine corrections to the model sound speed and 
density. Note that although equation (22) was expressed in 
terms of (c, e), other variables may be used; in particular, 
if the equation of state of solar matter is assumed to be 
known, the frequency differences can be expressed in 
terms of, say, p and the abundance Y of helium, providing 
the basis for determination of the solar envelope helium 
abundance. 


Effect of rotation 

So far, we have considered only oscillations of a 
spherically symmetric star; in this case, the frequencies 
are independent of the azimuthal order m. Departures 
from spherical symmetry lift this degeneracy, causing a 
frequency splitting according to m. 

The most obvious, and most important, such 
departure is rotation. Effects of rotation were already 
discussed in the introduction. The description provided 
there can be made somewhat more precise by noting that, 
according to equations (6) and (9), the oscillations depend 
on longitude ¢@ and time t as cos(m@ — of), ie. asa 
wave running around the equator. We now consider 
a star rotating with angular velocity Q and a mode of 
oscillation with frequency wo in a frame rotating with the 
star (see figure 3). Letting ¢’ denote longitude in this 
frame, the oscillation therefore behaves as cos(m@’ — wot). 
The longitude ¢ in an inertial frame is related to ¢’ by 
?' = @— Qt; consequently, the oscillation as observed from 
the inertial frame depends on @ and t as 


cos(m@ — mQt — wot) = cos(md — wmt) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Geometry of rotational splitting, in a star rotating with 
angular velocity Q. The point P has longitude ¢’ in the system 
rotating with the star and longitude ¢ = 9’ + Qt in the inertial 
system. 


where 
On = @ +mQ. (23) 


Thus the frequencies are split according to m, the 
separation between adjacent values of m being simply the 
angular velocity. 

This simple description contains the dominant 
physical effects of rotation on the observed modes of 
oscillation, but it suffers from two problems: it assumes 
solid-body rotation, whereas the Sun in fact rotates 
differentially (see DIFFERENTIAL ROTATION); and it neglects 
the effects, such as the Coriolis and centrifugal forces, 
in the rotating frame. The effects of differential rotation 
can be accounted for, roughly speaking, by replacing Q in 
equation (23) by a suitable average; a natural expectation 
is that the appropriate weight is the energy density p|ér|* 
in the mode. To obtain a full description, including 
also the additional forces in the rotating frame, we must 
modify equation (3) appropriately. Since the Sun rotates 
slowly, the centrifugal force and other effects of second or 
higher order in Q can be neglected; this includes also the 
distortion of the equilibrium structure caused by rotation. 
Then it is relatively simple to write down the required 
modification to equations (3) and (20), as a perturbation 
to the operator £. Using again the stationarity of 
equation (21) we finally obtain the perturbed frequencies 
on the form 


R 1 
nlm = Onio +m / / Knim(r, Q(x, Or drdé (24) 
0 Jo 


where the kernels K,;, can be calculated from the 
eigenfunctions for the non-rotating model. It might be 
noted that the rotational splitting @nim — @nio is an odd 
function of m. 

The general expression for the kernels is quite 
complicated and will not be presented here. However, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


its basic properties follow the simple discussion given 
above. In particular, except for modes of low order and 
low degree, we have approximately that 


2 
Knim & por|or| 5 


in this limit, the splitting is essentially given by an 
energy-weighted average of the angular velocity, and 
hence is dominated by the advection of the mode 
by the average angular velocity, as in equation (23); 
the contribution from the Coriolis force is small, in 
comparison. This also illustrates quite simply how 
different modes sense the angular velocity: in the radial 
direction the sensitivity is restricted to the region outside 
the turning point r,, whereas in latitude the sensitivity 
reflects the behavior of the Legendre function P/”. It 
may be shown that P;” is essentially confined to the 
latitude band +sin“'[(1 — m?/L?)"/?]; thus modes with 
m ~ lhave substantial amplitude only close to the equator, 
whereas modes with m ~ 0 extend over all latitudes (see 
HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS, figure 2). As already discussed 
in the introduction, this variation in sensitivity over the 
range of observed modes permits inversion to infer the 
angular velocity as a function of r and 6. 

Perhaps the most interesting inference concerns the 
rotation of the solar core. Unfortunately, this is also the 
most difficult region to probe: only the lowest-degree 
modes reach the core, and for these the range in m is 
small, making the observational determination of the 
rotational splitting difficult. Furthermore, the p modes 
have relatively small amplitude in the core, reducing 
their sensitivity to the core rotation, and the effect of 
rotation is further reduced by geometry, as a result of 
the small distance from the rotation axis. A similar 
geometrical reduction in sensitivity holds in the, otherwise 
dynamically very interesting, region near the polar axis 
throughout the Sun. 


Mode excitation 

We have so far discussed only the diagnostic potential 
of observed frequencies of solar oscillation. However, a 
condition for observing the modes is that they are excited. 
Thus we should also consider the possible causes for the 
oscillations. 

‘Classical’ pulsating stars (see, for example, VARIABLE 
STARS) owe their pulsations to an intrinsic instability, 
whereby the star acts as a heat engine, extracting 
mechanical energy from the radiative or convective flow 
of energy through the star. In the solar case, such 
mechanisms appear not to be effective: the modes 
are intrinsically damped. Instead they are forced 
stochastically by the vigorous turbulent convection near 
the top of the convection zone. 

Turbulence is a source of acoustic noise, the emission 
of sound increasing as a high power of the mach number 
M = vturb/c, where vyxp is a typical convective velocity. 
In models of solar convection, M is of order unity 
in the uppermost parts of the convection zone, with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


intermittent supersonic flows being possible (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: CONVECTION THEORY). In particular, very strong 
flows are associated with the cool downdrafts. Such 
motion acts as sources of sound waves, which excite the 
normal modes of the Sun. The resulting mode amplitudes 
are determined by a balance between the energy input 
from the forcing and the energy loss through radiative and 
convective damping. Very roughly, the outcome is that 
the energy of a single mode of oscillation is approximately 
equal to the energy of a single convective eddy with a 
timescale corresponding to the pulsation period. More 
detailed calculations, based either on simple models of 
convection or on hydrodynamical simulations, give results 
that are approximately in agreement with the observed 
amplitudes. 

The stochastic nature of the excitation, and the 
resulting fluctuations in the mode amplitudes, must be 
taken into account in fits to determine frequencies and 
amplitudes from observed time strings of oscillation data. 
Also, it appears that the localized nature of the source 
causes asymmetry in the peaks in the power spectra 
which further complicates the fits. On the other hand, 
these properties of the observed power obviously carry 
information about the forcing. The distribution of power is 
in reasonable agreement with the predictions of stochastic- 
excitation models. Furthermore, the line asymmetries and 
properties of high-frequency resonances carry information 
about the location of the source of the forcing, placing it 
within the upper few hundred kilometer of the convection 
zone; this again is not inconsistent with models of the 
convection zone. 


Other aspects 


The oscillation frequencies, and other aspects of the 
observations, carry additional information, some of which 
is discussed elsewhere. As discussed above, rotation 
induces a frequency splitting which is an odd function 
of the azimuthal order m. Departures of solar structure 
from spherical symmetry gives rise to a frequency splitting 
which is an even function of m. Such departures might 
arise, for example, from latitudinal variations in the 
convective energy transport, or from effects of magnetic 
fields. More local effects of magnetic fields are observed 
near sunspots, which absorb and scatter the waves, and 
in addition are hosts to a separate class of modes (see 
SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND SEISMOLOGY). Information about 
local properties of the Sun, including three-dimensional 
and time-dependent inhomogeneities and flow fields, are 
becoming available from analyses of the waves that do 
not assume a modal structure. Also, it has been possible 
to detect large sunspots on the far side of the Sun; such 
detections have potentially substantial practical value, 
in predicting possible solar storms affecting the Earth’s 
environment, once the active region rotates to the near 
side. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helioseismology: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Christensen-Dalsgaard J and Berthomieu G 1991 Theory of 
solar oscillations Solar Interior and Atmosphere ed AN 
Cox, W C Livingston and M Matthews (Space Science 
Series) (University of Arizona Press) pp 401-78 

Christensen-Dalsgaard J, Dappen W, Dziembowski W A 
and Guzik J A 2000 An introduction to helioseismol- 
ogy Variable Stars as Essential Astrophysical Tools ed C 
Ibanoglu (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic) pp 59-167 

Christensen-Dalsgaard J and Dziembowski W A 2000 Basic 
aspects of stellar structure and pulsation Variable 
Stars as Essential Astrophysical Tools ed C Ibanoglu 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic) pp 1-57 

Gough D O 1993 Course 7. Linear adiabatic stellar 
pulsation Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics, Les Houches 
Session XLVII ed J-P Zahn and J Zinn-Justin 
(Amsterdam: Elsevier) pp 399-560 

Gough D O and Toomre J 1991 Seismic observations of the 
solar interior Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 29 627-85 

Unno W, Osaki Y, Ando H, Saio H and Shibahashi H 1989 
Nonradial Oscillations of Stars 2nd edn (University of 
Tokyo Press) 


Jorgen Christensen-Dalsgaard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helium (He) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helium (He) 


The second lightest element which, after hydrogen, is the 
second most abundant in the universe. The most abundant 
isotope of the neutral helium atom consists of a nucleus 
made up of two protons and two neutrons around which 
revolve two electrons. The atomic mass is 4, and the atomic 
number (i.e. charge on the nucleus) is 2. The nucleus of 
such a helium atom is also known as an alpha particle. 
Helium nuclei with only one neutron also exist but are 
more rare. 

In terms of number of atoms, nearly 8%, and in terms 
of mass, about 25%, of all the directly observed matter 
in the universe is helium. If, as is generally agreed, the 
heavier elements have been built up from the lighter ones 
(starting with hydrogen) in a chain of nuclear reactions, 
the problem is to account for the observed abundance of 
helium. Helium is being produced from hydrogen by 
means of nuclear reactions inside stars, but this process is 
not adequate to account for the amount of helium actually 
observed. If the Big Bang theory of the origin of the 
universe is correct, then the observed quantity of helium 
could have been produced in the first few minutes of the 
existence of the universe, while the temperature lay in the 
region of 10° kelvins. The observed abundance of helium 
is one of many factors that favour the Big Bang theory. 


See also: cosmic abundance of elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helix Nebula (NGC 7293) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helix Nebula (NGC 7293) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Aquarius, position 
RA 22" 29.6™, dec. —20° 48’. It is the nearest planetary 
nebula to Earth, it has the largest angular size, at 15’ 
by 12’, and its magnitude of 6.5 makes it the brightest 
(though like all extended objects it does not have a high 
surface brightness). It is illuminated by its hot thirteenth- 
magnitude central star. The Helix gets its name from its 
appearance of a spiral viewed from above; an alternative 
name is the Sunflower Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hell [Héll], Maximilian [Miksa] (1720-92) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hell [Hdll], Maximilian [Miksa] 
(1720-92) 


Born in Schemnitz, Hungary, became a Jesuit, and worked 
in Leutschau, Klausenburg and in Vienna where he set up 
and directed an observatory for Maria Theresa of Austria 
and Hungary. Somewhat to his own surprise, Hell was 
invited by Christian VII, king of Denmark, to observe 
the 1769 transit of Venus from the then Danish island 
Vard@ within the Arctic Circle off the coast of Lapland, 
all expenses paid. The location was of considerable 
importance to the accuracy of the ultimate goal of the 
observations, since Vard@ was at an extremity of the 
distribution of the other observing sites in Manila, Batavia, 
California, Peking, and Tahiti. }LALANDE was collecting the 
observations to combine them all into a single accurate 
value for the distance of the Sun and asked for Hell’s data, 
but Hell reserved their publication until they had been seen 
by his sponsoring royal patron. LALANDE’s suspicions were 
aroused, and when Hell’s observations proved to show 
inconsistencies with others, he accused Hell of falsifying 
the data. Rumors circulated that Hell had not even seen 
the transit and had made up the data while he was in 
Copenhagen. Hell’s scientific reputation was destroyed, 
although before he died in 1792 he built an observatory in 
Erlau and worked on the (imaginary) healing properties 
of magnetism with Franz Mesmer (from whose name the 
word mesmerism is derived). This story forms part of the 
events of the suppression of the Jesuit Society, in a power 
struggle in Europe in the eighteenth century between 
civil, royal and religious forces. In 1835 C L Littrow 
discovered parts of the original journal that Hell wrote 
during the event on Vardg, and noted that Hell had 
indeed altered records of the timing, according to Littrow 
writing new times in ink of a different color. Hell’s low 
reputation in scientific history was apparently confirmed. 
In 1883, however, SIMON NEWCOMB visited Vienna, where 
Hell’s manuscripts were kept, and came to a different 
conclusion. The times had indeed been altered, not after 
the event but while the observations were being made, 
correcting smudged ink, and difficulties in writing with 
a defective pen in the Arctic cold. Nor could Newcomb 
see changes of color, only a change of shade on drying. 
Newcomb noted that Littrow’s color sensitivity was weak 
and that he couldn’t distinguish the color of Aldebaran. 
Newcomb fully rehabilitated Hell in a paper called ‘On 
Hell’s alleged falsification ...’ in the Monthly Notices of the 
Royal Astronomical Society. There is a crater on the Moon 
named after Hell; it is not particularly deep. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hellas Planitia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hellas Planitia 


The official name for the Hellas Basin, the largest impact 
feature on Mars and indeed the largest in the solar system, 
centered at 44.3°S, 66.2°W. The inner part of Hellas 
Planitia is around 2100 km across and is surrounded by 
a rim 2 km high. At its deepest it is 9 km below Mars’s 
average surface level—the greatest depth on the planet. 
The outer part of the basin extends for about 4000 km. 
The impact that formed Hellas was probably the last big 
impact event on Mars, and may have created the uplift of 
the Tharsis Bulge on the opposite side of the planet. 


See also: Mars: surface, Tharsis Montes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Helmholtz, Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von (1821-94) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helmholtz, Hermann Ludwig 
Ferdinand von (1821-94) 


Born in Potsdam, Germany, had a varied career as an 
army doctor, professor of anatomy and physiology, and 
professor of physics at Berlin. At the same time as, 
but independently of, Lord Kelvin, he studied (1854) the 
source of energy of the Sun. He suggested that instead of 
radiating by consuming chemical energy, which would be 
used up ina lifetime of a few thousand years, the Sun was 
gradually settling under gravity so that the source of its 
radiation was gravitational potential energy. There was 
enough potential energy in the Sun to supply its radiation 
for several million years. Even this was shorter than the 
age of the Earth as deduced from geological evidence, and 
the problem was not resolved until the discovery of solar 
nuclear energy. However, Helmholtz’s conjecture about a 
source of stellar energy has proved to be applicable at the 
time when stars first settle from interstellar clouds—the 
cloud’s gravitational potential energy heats the star which 
it forms and ignites its nuclear reactions. The duration of 
this settling process is called the Kelvin-Helmholtz timescale. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Henderson, Thomas (1798-1844) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Henderson, Thomas (1798-1844) 


Born in Dundee, after a career as a lawyer’s clerk, 
appointed as HM Astronomer at the Cape of Good Hope, 
but soon left because of poor health. Henderson returned 
to Scotland as the first Scottish Astronomer Royal and, 
from observations made in South Africa, he was the first 
person to measure the distance of a star, namely Alpha 
Centauri, a member of the nearest star system to the Sun, 
at 4.5 light-years. BESSEL’s independent measurements of 
the star 61 Cygni were, however, published three months 
earlier. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Henry, Paul (1848-1905) and Henry, Prosper (1849- 
1903) [known as Freres Henry] 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Henry, Paul (1848-1905) and Henry, 
Prosper (1849-1903) [known as 
Freres Henry] 


Born in Nancy, the brothers worked together at the Paris 
Observatory searching for minor planets. Decided to 
exploit photography to facilitate the search and thus 
built telescopes at home for the purpose. With the 
encouragement of the then director of the observatory 
(Admiral Mouchez), built (1885) a 34 cm photographic 
refractor; this work was the foundation of the Carte du Ciel 
project to photograph the sky in its entirety. The Fréres 
Henry made half the telescopes used in the international 
project, led by France. The project took the attention of 
French astronomy for decades, at a time when astrophysics 
was developing in America, Britain and Germany. The 
two brothers, and their lifetime of work together, are 
commemorated by the single name, Fréres Henry, of a 
close pair of craters on the Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Heracleitus of Ephesus (c. 540-c. 475 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Heracleitus of Ephesus (c. 540—c. 475 
BC) 


Greek philosopher, born in Ephesus, thought of the 
universe as a place of ceaseless change (‘becoming’), going 
so far as to suggest that the Sun was created anew each day. 
He believed the fundamental element was fire, because it 
was always changing, and that the Sun and Moon were 
bowls of fire. So too were stars, at great distances. Eclipses 
occurred when the bottom of the bowl was turned towards 
us. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Heraclides of Pontus (c. 388-315 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Heraclides of Pontus (c. 388-315 Bc) 


Greek philosopher, born in Heraclea, Pontus, Heraclides 
was taught by plato and ArisTOTLE, and the Pythagoreans 
in Athens. Although his written works are lost, it is said 
that he considered the planets to be individual worlds. He 
was the first philosopher to suggest that the rotation of the 
Earth would account for the apparent rotation of the stars, 
even distinguishing between the solar day of rotation and 
the sidereal day. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Herbig, George Howard (1920-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Herbig, George Howard (1920-) 


American astrophysicist, Herbig was educated and 
worked in California, mostly at the Lick Observatory, and 
Hawaii. He is known for his spectroscopic studies of 
recently formed stars and the interstellar medium, from 
which he studied the still mysterious diffuse interstellar 
lines. He found and investigated many Ha emission stars, 
T Tauri stars, and peculiar stars, all of them different 
stages of the early history of stars. He and GUILLERMO 
HARO independently discovered the eponymous Herbig— 
Haro objects, gas clouds now thought to be the result 
of shocks in the interstellar medium caused by ejected 
material from unstable young stars. Herbig showed that 
the lithium abundance is correlated with age in young 
stars, and he investigated the rotation speeds of stars of 
different spectral class. From his data it is hypothesized 
that the slow rotation of the more numerous, less massive 
stars is associated with the almost universal existence of 
planetary systems around them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herbig—Haro Objects and Exciting Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Herbig—Haro Objects and Exciting 
Stars 


Herbig—Haro (HH) objects correspond to high-velocity 
material ejected from young stars, which interacts with 
the environmental gas and with previous ejections, 
forming a complex shock wave structure. The shock 
waves heat and ionize the outflowing and_ the 
environmental material, which then emits a rich emission 
line spectrum that is observed over a wide wavelength 
range. 


The sources of HH objects 

The stars that eject HH objects in some cases are 
optically detected, T TAURI STARS and in other cases are 
infrared sources (not detected optically). Some of the 
sources are not directly detected even in the infrared, as 
the infrared emission seen in the source region is 
spatially offset from a radio emission peak, which is 
believed to indicate the true position of the source. In 
such cases, the infrared emission observed close to (but 
not coinciding with) the RADIO SOURCE is believed to 
correspond to stellar light which is being scattered by 
dusty gas which surrounds the star. 

It is tempting to think about a possible evolutionary 
sequence, with the more embedded, optically invisible 
objects corresponding to earlier stages in the evolution of 
the young star plus outflow system, and the optically 
visible T Tauri stars to later evolutionary stages (see also 
STELLAR EVOLUTION). However, whether or not the 
central star is visible also depends on the nature of the 
surrounding environment, and possibly also on the 
orientation of the system with respect to the plane of the 
sky. 


The production of the jet 

One of the main uncertainties in our current picture of 
HH objects and their sources is the mechanism by which 
the source produces the observed high-velocity ejections. 
Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of the elements 
which are believed to be present. In the center of the 
system, there is a star, which is possibly surrounded by a 
magnetosphere (similar to the MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH) extending out to a few times the radius of the star 
(central circle of the diagram). Around the star there is an 
orbiting ACCRETION DISK, the material of which slowly 
drifts in towards the star, eventually becoming 
incorporated into the star (through a quite complex flow 
involving the interaction of the stellar magnetosphere 
with the inner edge of the accretion disk). The star + 
accretion disk system is surrounded by a flattened, 
infalling envelope of material belonging to the region of 
the interstellar medium which is collapsing to form the 
central star. The material of this infalling envelope is first 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


incorporated into the accretion disk, and then into the 
central star. 

The high velocity ejections (which we see as HH 
objects) could come directly from the surface of the star 
(as a stellar wind), but it has still not been possible to 
come up with an explanation of how to produce a stellar 
wind with appropriate parameters for explaining the 
observed HH objects. The currently more favored 
possibility is that the ejected material might actually 
come from the inner region of the accretion disk or from 
the region of interaction between the disk and the stellar 
magnetosphere. 

The high-velocity wind escapes through two 
oppositely directed channels in the surrounding envelope, 
forming what is called a bipolar outflow (composed of 
two jets traveling away from the star in opposite 
directions). It is still unclear whether these channels are 
ploughed up by the passage of the jets or whether they 
are directly produced by the process of gravitational 


collapse which has formed the star (see also 
ASTROPHYSICAL JETS). 
Se 
—_ 


——_ 
~~ eae 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of a young star-HH object 
system. The HH objects are the pairs of black arcs at the top 
and bottom of the diagram. The star + magnetosphere system 
(central circle) is surrounded by an accretion disk, which is fed 
by the material from a surrounding, infalling envelope. The star 
and/or the inner region of the accretion disk produce a wind, 
which escapes from the system through two oppositely directed 
‘channels’ drilled through the infalling envelope. This 
collimated wind interacts with previously ejected material and 
with the surrounding environment, producing a system of shock 
waves, which we observe as HH objects. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herbig—Haro Objects and Exciting Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The observational characteristics of HH 


objects 

The region of interaction between the collimated winds 
ejected from young stars and the surrounding 
environment (or with previous ejecta) has a number of 
shock waves that produce an emission line and 
continuum spectrum. This spectrum has clear differences 
with the spectra of photoionized regions (showing strong 
emission lines of neutrals as well as of ionized species) 
and has been used to identify the class of objects known 
as HH objects. 

HH objects have now been detected over a wide 
wavelength range, ranging from radio (centimeter) 
wavelengths to the ultraviolet. The observed continuum 
emission includes the free—free, two-photon and 
recombination continua of hydrogen. Emission lines of 
neutral, singly and doubly ionized species of many of the 
most abundant elements have also been detected. 
Ultraviolet and infrared molecular hydrogen emission 
lines (which are clearly associated with the HH objects) 
have also been detected. In 2001, observations with the 
Advanced CCD Imaging Spectrometer on NASA’s 
Chandra X-ray Observatory have revealed x-ray 
emissions from HH 2, one of the brightest and closest 
Herbig Haro objects in the Orion Nebula. Previous 
instruments lacked the resolution and _ sensitivity 
necessary to observe these x-rays. 

Traditionally, HH objects have been divided into 
low- and high-excitation objects, depending on the range 
of ionization states implied by their emission line spectra. 
High-excitation objects show strong lines of, e.g., singly 
and doubly ionized oxygen, while the emission of low- 
excitation objects is dominated by lines of neutral 
oxygen, neutral and singly ionized carbon, etc. Both the 
emission line and the continuum spectra have been 
modeled with reasonable success in terms of the 
excitation produced by the passage of shock waves with 
velocities ranging from 20 to 200 km s‘ (with the lower 
velocities corresponding to the low-excitation objects and 
the higher velocities to the high-excitation objects). 

Some of the most interesting characteristics of HH 
objects are their kinematical properties. The emission 
line profiles have widths indicating line-of-sight 
velocities of up to 500 km s" (in the high-excitation 
objects). Given the magnitude of these velocities and the 
fact that most of the detected HH objects are clearly 
within | kpc of the Sun, it is easy to detect the PROPER 
MOTIONS of these objects. 

The proper motions of approximately 10% of all of 
the known HH objects have now been measured. The 
first measurements were done with photographic plates 
(about 20 yr ago), using sequences of plates obtained 
over a time baseline of decades. In the last few years, 
proper motions have been measured using higher angular 
resolution CCD frames, obtained over a period of only a 
few years. In the recent images obtained with adaptive 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


optics (in ground based telescopes) or with the HST, the 
proper motion of HH objects can already be detected 
using images obtained over a period of only a few 
months. This recent increase in the attainable angular 
resolution will produce a detailed picture of the time 
evolution of HH objects. During 2000-2001, spatially 
resolved spectroscopic observations of a few HH jets 
were carried out using the Hubble Space Telescope. 
These observations have unprecedented angular 
resolution and show details of the jet collimation region 
and of the shock structures present along the jets. 

Even though HH objects have spectra that are not so 
diverse (allowing a clear identification of the objects) 
they do show a wide range of quite different 
morphologies. Many objects show groups of compact 
emission knots, located in two diametrically opposed 
regions (or ‘lobes’) with respect to the central source. 
The two lobes show proper motions directed away from 
the source, one of them showing redshifted radial 
velocities, and the other one being blueshifted. 

In other objects, only one of the two lobes is 
observed. In most of these cases, the observed lobe is 
blueshifted, indicating that the invisible lobe is the one 
directed away from the observer. This is probably a result 
of the fact that the lobe directed away from the observer 
is hidden by the dense, high-extinction region 
surrounding the central star. 

Many HH objects show only 1-3 knots in each lobe, 
while others show larger numbers of emission line knots. 
A few objects show chains of well-aligned knots, 
extending radially away from the central star. Even 
though only few good examples of such ‘HH jets’ are 
found (approximately 10% of the known HH objects), 
they have received a lot of attention from both observers 
and theoreticians, as their organized structures appear to 
be more straightforward to interpret than the more 
chaotic structures of other HH objects. 


The interpretation of the jet-like HH objects 
HH jets have very high Mach numbers (their velocities 
are 10-100 times higher than their sound speed), and 
interact with the surrounding environment forming a 
number of shocks. The leading edge (or ‘head’) of the jet 
produces a bow shock, similar to the shock formed 
around the nose of a supersonic airplane or a bullet. 
Actually, in the case of the head of a jet, two shocks 
are produced: the bow shock, which pushes aside the 
surrounding environment to make way for the jet 
material, and the jet shock (also called the ‘Mach disk’), 
which is induced on the jet by the surrounding material. 
This pair of shocks is called a ‘working surface’. 
Working surfaces can also be formed in the body of 
the outflow, and not only at the leading edge. If the 
velocity with which the material is ejected from the 
central source varies with time, faster material (ejected at 
later times) catches up with slower material ejected 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herbig—Haro Objects and Exciting Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


earlier. This catching up process leads to the formation of 
two-shock working surfaces similar to the ones formed at 
the leading edge of the jet. 

In HH objects, we observe a series of aligned knots. 
An example of this kind of structure is shown in figure 2, 
in which an image of the HH 34 object is shown. This 
image has been taken with the HST in the light of the red 
lines of singly ionized sulfur. 

From this figure, we see that the successive knots are 
quite different from each other. Some of them are small, 
appearing just barely resolved in the HST image, and 
some of them are quite large, showing a clear, bow-like 
shape. In larger field of view images of this outflow 
(obtained with other telescopes), a number of knots at 
larger distances from the source have also been detected. 

The knots along the HH 34 jet are observed to move 
away from the source at velocities of about 300 km s". 
This motion is observed as a wavelength shift of the 
emission lines of the object (as a result of the DOPPLER 
EFFECT), and also directly as a displacement of the 
positions of the knots in the plane of the sky. 

It is interesting that the structure of HH 34 can be 
reproduced with a numerical solution to the gas-dynamic 
equations (which describe the motion of a diffuse gas 
moving at supersonic velocities), if one allows oneself to 
choose an arbitrary time variability for the velocity with 
which the material is ejected from the source. For 
example, one can choose a variability with several 
sinusoidal modes. Modes with large amplitudes and long 
periods produce well-separated, large, bright working 
surfaces traveling down the outflow. Modes with low 
amplitudes and short periods produce little chains of low- 
intensity knots. 


Figure 2. Bottom: HST image of the HH 34 jet, obtained 
through a filter which isolates the red forbidden lines of singly 
ionized sulfur ({S H] 6717+6731). The source of the jet is the 
compact knot close to the left edge of the image. Top: the 
corresponding intensity map predicted from a numerical model 
of a jet with a time-dependent ejection velocity with three 
sinusoidal modes of different periods and amplitudes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 3. Composite image of HH 34 obtained with the FORSZ 
instrument of the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large 
Telescope. 


Picking three modes of appropriate periods and 
amplitudes, one can compute models with knots that have 
morphologies and kinematical properties that strongly 
resemble the knots along the HH 34 jet. An image (in the 
red lines of singly ionized sulfur) predicted from such a 
model is shown in figure 2, from which one can see that 
structures that resemble HH 34 can indeed be obtained 
from a model of a jet with a variable ejection velocity. 

A recent image of HH 34 is shown in figure 3. 


Molecular outflows 

In many systems of HH objects, one also observes 
emission in molecular lines (for example, in lines of CO 
and NH; in radio and millimeter wavelengths), coming 
from a region that surrounds the HH objects. The 
molecular emission is also distributed in two lobes, one 
blue- and one redshifted, with velocities that in general 
are lower than the ones measured for the associated HH 
objects. It is possible that this molecular emission 
corresponds to material from the molecular cloud out of 
which the young stars are forming, which is being pushed 
by the stellar outflows. It has also been suggested that the 
molecular outflows could correspond to a_ slower, 
molecular wind, ejected from the outer regions of the 
accretion disk around the central star. 

Recent, high angular resolution observations of 
molecular outflows obtained with millimeter 
interferometers show that the situation is really more 
complex. Some outflows are found to have a broad, low- 
velocity emission component (which probably does 
correspond to environmental gas which is being pushed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herbig—Haro Objects and Exciting Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by the HH flow) but also show a high-velocity, central 
component. 

These high-velocity components of molecular 
outflows have dynamical properties and morphologies 
which are very similar to the ones of HH jets. It is 
possible that this molecular emission traces small 
quantities of environmental gas which has been entrained 
into the HH jet ejected by the star. Also, the molecular 
emission might be indicating that the gas associated with 
the HH ejection is at least partially molecular. 

At the present time, the relation between HH objects 
and the molecular outflows is not clear. The ongoing 
debate on this subject will have interesting implications 
for our ideas about the formation and propagation of 
outflows from young stars. 


Bibliography 

It is straightforward to find the up-to-date literature on HH 
objects, as there is an on-line catalog of HH objects (‘A general 
catalogue of Herbig—Haro objects’, by B Reipurth), which can 
be downloaded from the web address: 
http://casa.colorado.edu/hhcat/ 

This catalog gives an extensive list of the literature on the 
observations of all of the known HH objects. A more or less 
complete compilation of the literature on the theory of HH 
objects is given in the paper: 


Reipurth and Raga 1999 The Origin of Stars and Planetary 
Systems ed C Lada and N D Kylafis (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 
267 


Also, there is a monthly ‘Star formation newsletter’ (edited by 
B Reipurth) which gives the abstracts of most of the recent 
papers in the fields of star formation and outflows from young 
stars. This newsletter is available at the web address: 
http://casa.colorado.edu/reipurth/ 


Alejandro C Raga 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hercules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hercules 


(abbrev. Her, gen. Herculis; area 1225 sq. deg.) Anorthern 
constellation which lies between Draco and Ophiuchus, 
and culminates at midnight in mid-June. The origin of the 
constellation figure is uncertain, though its name dates 
back to ancient Greece, where it was identified with the 
strong man and hero of Greek mythology. Its brightest 
stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) in the 
Almagest. 

A large but rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Hercules are a Herculis (Rasalgethi), a 
multiple system, consisting of a red (M5) primary, which 
is a semi-regular variable, magnitude range 2.7-4.0, and 
a yellow (G5) secondary, magnitude 5.4, separation 4.8”, 
both of which have a much fainter companion, 6 Herculis 
(Kornephoros), magnitude 2.8, which also has an unseen 
companion, and ¢ Herculis, a close binary with yellow (F9 
and G7) components, magnitudes 3.0 and 5.7, separation 
1.55”, period 34.5 years. There are 12 other stars brighter 
than fourth magnitude. Other interesting stars include 
the Mira-type variable S Herculis (range 6.4-13.8, period 
about 307 days) and the eclipsing binary DQ Herculis 
(Nova Herculis 1934), one of the brightest novae of the 
twentieth century, which attainted about magnitude 1.4 
before fading to magnitude 14-15. 

Other interesting objects include the Great Cluster in 
Hercules (M13, NGC 6205), the brightest globular cluster 
in the northern sky, which lies between 7n and ¢ Herculis 
and, at magnitude 5.9, is just visible to the unaided eye as 
a faint misty patch, M92 (NGC 6341), another fine globular 
cluster, magnitude 6.5, and NGC 6210, a ninth-magnitude 
planetary nebula. 

Also in Hercules are Hercules X-1, an x-ray binary, 
and Hercules A, a powerful extragalactic radio source. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hercules X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hercules X-1 


Hercules X-1 (Her X-1) is a pulsating x-ray source detected 
with the first x-ray satellite, UHURU, in 1971. It is 
an accreting X-RAY BINARY system consisting of a NEUTRON 
STAR that rotates every 1.24 s while orbiting a ‘normal’ 
stellar companion every 1.7 days; the misalignment of 
the magnetic axis relative to the rotation axis results in 
a distinctive pulse profile in x-rays. The 1.7 day orbital 
motion shows up clearly in Doppler shifts of the 1.24 s 
pulse; the x-ray source shows distinct eclipses every 
1.7 days; and a previously known optical variable star 
HZ Herculis (HZ Her), colocated with the x-ray source, 
is found to have an identical period. The fact that we see 
total eclipses implies that our line-of-sight is within a few 
degrees of the orbital plane. The x-ray source shows sharp 
eclipses, attesting to its compact size. Variation in optical 
light by 1.8 magnitudes over the 1.7 day orbital period is 
attributed to x-ray heating on the side of the companion 
facing the active neutron star. 

In addition to the 1.24 rotation period and the 1.7 day 
orbital period, the system has an approximately 35 day 
‘superorbital’ period in which the x-ray emission displays 
so-called main and short ‘on’ states separated by relative 
x-ray quiescence. The (0.2-100 keV) x-ray fluxes are 
~2 x 10~° ergs cm~™ s~' during main-on state which lasts 
from 9-12 days; ~6 x 10-'° ergs cm~? s~! during the short- 
on state (5-7 days); and ~1 x 107'° ergs cm™ s7! during 
the low or quiescent state. However, the 1.7 day optical 
and UV flux variations attributed to x-ray heating of the 
companion star continue throughout the 35 days with the 
optical light curves showing less than 20% change in peak- 
to-peak amplitude over the 35 day cycle. The optical light 
curves have a power spectrum that shows power at the 
sum of the orbital and long-term frequencies, but not in 
the difference, implying that the long-term variations are 
due to counter-precession of a tilted, co-rotating ACCRETION 
DISK. However, the underlying physics that causes the disk 
to start precessing has not as yet been determined. Her 
X-1 is one of only a half-dozen known x-ray binaries that 
show a superorbital period. 

Due to its brightness over a broad range of energies 
and its high inclination, with eclipses of the neutron 
star, Her X-1 provides an excellent opportunity to study 
accretion processes onto a compact object which have 
come to be recognized as an important energy release 
mechanism in the universe. In addition it allows 
us to study the characteristics of matter and radiation 
under extreme conditions: the intense gravitational and 
magnetic fields of the compact object. 


2 


Temporal variations 

The 1.24 s pulsations have also been detected in both 
optical and UV continua. The rms pulsed fraction is of 
order 0.5% in the UV, two to four times that of the reported 
optical pulsed fraction. The UV and optical pulses are in 
phase with the hard x-rays during orbital phases when 
x-ray dips occur. The lack of UV/x-ray delay indicates 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that the dips and the UV pulses may originate in the same 
material near the line of sight. 

Absorption dips that last nearly as long as the x-ray 
eclipse regularly occur before the eclipse (pre-eclipse dips) 
and occasionally at orbital phase 0.3-0.6 (anomalous dips). 
The pre-eclipse dips exhibit the characteristic of starting 
out with the main-on state merged with the first eclipse 
ingress and progressing toward an earlier orbital phase 
as the main-on progresses: This pattern has persisted 
since the discovery of Her X-1 in 1971. The recurrence 
interval (1.65 days) is somewhat longer than the beat 
period between orbital and 35 day cycles. Since the pattern 
of the dips does not drift significantly in orbital phase over 
many 35 day cycles, it must be tied to the 35 day ‘clock’. 

The 35 day superorbital period is not coherent; it can 
vary in length from 19.5 to 21.5 orbital cycles with the most 
favored length being 20.5 cycles (34.85 days). The turn-on 
of the main-on state (which defines phase 0.0 of the 35 
day cycle) occurs preferentially at orbital phases 0.2 and 
0.7 (where orbital phase 0.0 refers to the center of x-ray 
eclipse). The existence of just these two types of turn-on 
causes phase jumps between successive 35 day cycles to 
be integral multiples of 0.5 orbital cycles. 

The system has undergone several ‘anomalous low’ 
states during which it shows a substantial, unexpected 
drop in x-ray flux, with no substantial change in absorbing 
column density; little or no change in UV and optical 
fluxes; and a noticeable increase in pulse period. With the 
exception of the increase in pulse period and the degree 
of x-ray flux reduction these characteristics are similar to 
those observed during ‘normal’ 35 day low states. 

Study of archival optical data of the variable star HZ 
Her shows that the system also displays intervals (lasting 
from months to years) when the 1.7 day optical variations 
attributed to x-ray heating disappear—which implies that 
accretion does turn off. A small amplitude modulation 
(~0.3 magnitudes) with twice the orbital frequency is 
observed at this time and is interpreted as the changing 
light from the distorted companion. 


Spectral behavior 

The normal star companion fills its ROCHE LOBE and the 
x-rays are powered by matter spilling over the inner 
LAGRANGIANPOINT and transferred through an accretion disk 
onto the neutron star surface. Her X-1 accretes matter at a 
rate of a few times 10~° solar masses (Mo) per year. The 
energy release due to accretion is given by 


Face = GMxsM /Rxs (1) 


where Mys and Rng are the mass and radius of the accreting 
object. The x-ray luminosity may be related to the mass 
accretion rate, M, via 


GMM 
R 


L=f (2) 


where f, of order unity, takes account of possible 
anisotropy of the radiation. For Her X-1, for a distance 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hercules X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of 5 kpc, L, is about 2 x 10°” erg s —! during the main-on 
state. 

At maximum light during the ‘normal’ main-on state 
Her X-1/HZ Her shows a nearly constant energy flux 
per logarithmic frequency interval over a frequency range 
of 10'°-10"? Hz. A reduction in x-ray flux during the 
anomalous low state is not associated with an increase in 
flux at some other wavelength. 

Figure 1 shows the x-ray spectrum of the main- 
on state obtained with BeppoSax. The pulse-averaged 
spectrum is a flat power law with a high-energy cut-off 
and an excess strong thermal blackbody component at low 
energies (a characteristic of many binary x-ray pulsars). 
Its unusually high galactic latitude and correspondingly 
low interstellar absorption (Ny ~ 107° cm~?) make Her X- 
1/HZ Her especially well suited for the study of this soft 
component. Spectral features around 1.0 and 6.4 keV are 
attributed to Fe L- and K-shell emission; a feature between 
35 and 58 keV is attributed to electron—cyclotron resonance 
which implies a surface magnetic field of a few x10” G. 
The spectrum changes as a function of pulse phase: the 
Fe line and thermal emission are strongest during the off- 
peak of the pulse. The pulse profile changes as a function 
of energy: the pulse peak shifts and shows less structure 
below 1 keV. The pulse phaseshift suggests that the soft 
x-rays are likely reprocessed hard x-rays and the Fe-line 
emission originates at the reprocessing site. 

The ultraviolet spectra of Her X-1 show strong 
emission lines due to N V, C IV, and He II (figure 2). The 
Goddard High-Resolution Spectrograph on the Hubble 
Space Telescope (HST) resolved two moving emission 
components of the N V emission doublet: a broad emission 
line that can be attributed to the x-ray illuminated surface 
of a Keplerian accretion disk and a narrow line associated 
with the x-ray heated atmosphere of the companion star, 
HZ Her. The ultraviolet continuum is flatter than normal 
stellar spectra, presumably due to x-ray heating effects. 

Optical spectra of HZ Her show Balmer absorption 
lines down to the series limit (figure 3). Absorption lines 
are seen in the spectrum both at minimum and maximum 
light. Emission lines at He II 44686 and N III/C III 
around 14400 are seen during maximum; those due to He II 
persist during the minimum. At minimum light the optical 
spectrum of HZ Her corresponds to a spectral type of A7 
(Ter = 8100 K). At maximum light the spectral type ranges 
from B3 to B6 depending on the lines used. The dramatic 
change in spectral type from minimum to maximum is also 
attributed to x-ray heating of the side facing Her X-1; the 
lack of a good match to a single spectral type is attributed 
to x-ray heating effects. The optical flux is mainly from the 
x-ray heated star surface with the disk surface contributing 
less than 15% of the total optical flux. 


Pulse and orbital period history 

Overall the pulse period of Her X-1 shows a secular 
decrease or spin-up as is expected for a system accreting 
mass (and hence angular momentum). However, during 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


anomalous low states the system shows a noticeable spin- 
down. Correlation between times of low hard x-ray 
luminosity and episodes of spin-down is predicted by 
models which suggest that a decrease in mass accretion 
rate causes the Alfvén radius at which material joins the 
magnetosphere to move out, thereby increasing the drag- 
producing torques of the field lines threading the disk 
outside the co-rotation radius, leading to spin-down. 

The orbital period has been shown to be decreasing 
at a rate of 2 x 10-8 days yr“. If all the mass lost by the 
companion is accreted by the neutron star the mass transfer 
rate needed to explain the decrease in orbital period is 1.4 x 
10-8Mo yr, nearly an order of magnitude greater than 
the mass loss rate required to provide the observed x-ray 
luminosity. Mass loss through a simple self-excited wind 
also cannot explain the observed period decrease. Braking 
of the companion star by a magnetically-channelled stellar 
wind provides a mechanism for the angular momentum 
loss rate. UV spectra do not show the presence of 
either P Cygni profiles or modest line shifts indicative of 
wind flows; however, it is possible that the high x-ray 
luminosity ionizes the material in the wind flows and 
thereby precludes spectroscopic detection of a wind. 


Open questions 

Evolutionary status 

X-ray binaries containing neutron stars are classified 
according to the mass of the ‘normal’ stellar companion. 
The high-mass systems (HMXBs) contain massive early- 
type stars with short lifetimes (<10’ yr). More than 
half of HMXBs exhibit regular x-ray pulsations (implying 
magnetic fields of the of order 10’? G) with periods from 0.1 
to 1000 s. The x-ray emission is caused by matter accreted 
from the stellar wind of the massive companion. The 
optical fluxes, due mainly to emission from the massive 
companion, are high, giving x-ray to optical luminosity 
ratios in the range 10~° to 10. The low-mass x-ray binaries 
(LMXBs) contain faint optical companions with long 
lifetimes of 108-10° years. The x-ray emission is caused by 
matter overflowing from the Roche lobe of the companion. 
The optical light is due predominantly to x-ray heating of 
the accretion disk, giving x-ray to optical luminosity ratios 
from 10 to 10*. With few exceptions, strong pulsations 
are not seen, implying that LMXBs have relatively weak 
magnetic fields (<10'° G). The Her X-1 system is unusual in 
that, with an approximately 2M. companion, it is the only 
known ‘intermediate’-mass system. It is like the HMXBs 
in that it exhibits pulses and its optical light is dominated 
by emission from the companion, but it accretes matter 
via Roche lobe overflow through an accretion disk like the 
LMXBs. The location of Her X-1, more than 3 kpc above 
the Galactic plane, suggests that it is a rather old system 
like the LMXBs, or that, if it originated in the Galactic 
plane, the neutron star must have obtained a significant 
kick from the suPERNOva that formed it. The pulses and the 
cyclotron line feature which attest to the high magnetic 
field of Her X-1 are difficult to reconcile with theories of 
STELLAR EVOLUTION Which require that the magnetic fields of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hercules X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


o) 


10 


1078 


eee 


Energy (keV) 


Figure 1. x-ray photon spectrum of Her X-1 taken by BeppoSax with spectral components (blackbody, power-law, Fe L line and Fe K 
line) indicated by broken curves. Averaged over orbital phases, excluding eclipses and dips. 


Flux (x1018) 


2b cus a 


erg s-! cm=@ A-!) 
>» 


SilV,OIV,SIV CIV 


Hell 7 
NIV 


see 1300 


1600 ans 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. Ultraviolet spectrum of Her X-1 taken with HST/STIS averaged over orbital phases 0.69-0.76. 


neutron stars decay over time. The large orbital decay rate 
is also difficult to reconcile with the relatively low mass 
accretion rate and lack of evidence for mass loss through 
a wind. 


System mass 

The Her X-1 system is considered one of about seven (out of 
several hundred known) x-ray binaries for which reliable 
estimates of the component masses exist. However, 
both methods used to determine the component masses 
of the system rely on assumptions that have not been 
independently verified. The mass determinations made 
utilizing x-ray and optical pulse timing assume that the 
companion star fills its Roche lobe and that the optical 
pulses are reprocessed at the inner Lagrangian point of 
HZ Her. RADIAL VELOCITY measurements are hampered 
by the uneven heating of the star (the center of light is 
not the center of mass) and the presence of substantial 
amounts of gas in the system. Lower limits to the 
mass of the neutron star (M, > 1.3+0.1M ,) obtained 
by radial velocity measurements are consistent with the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pulse-timing determination (M, = 1.3+ 0.1Mo). 


The superorbital period 

The interpretation of superorbital periods in terms of 
disk precession has been questioned, because if the disk 
precession is controlled by the gravitational fields of the 
neutron and companion stars any induced precession 
would be damped rapidly because of differential 
precession within the disk. The preferential turn-ons at 
orbital phases 0.2 and 0.7 have been attributed to the 
interaction of a tilted accretion disk with the time variation 
of the torque induced by the companion star leading to a 
wobble or ‘nodding’ motion in the disk. Again the physics 
that causes the disk to tilt in the first place is not known. 
Several models have been put forward that attempt to tilt 
and precess the disk without invoking precession of the 
neutron star and/or its companion. One viable suggestion 
is that the behavior attributed to precession is maintained 
by the influence of the x-ray emission on the structure of 
the disk; that strong central illumination can maintain disk 
warping has been shown analytically. Another possibility 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hercules X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


6LEPNIIIN 


= 1¥7/VE9PNIIIN | 


/ LVOWNIIO 
— 9g9rVIleH 


“0G 


~~ VOOSPXAN 


= 
= 
= 
BP OF 7 
@ 
q 
| 
- | 
* | ™ 
= | x | i = x 
S mx xs x = @ && 
-5}- o 7 o rd x ae 7 
> > HS ce oy. as 
od s | Ep > oo 
w me a rar 
» fo) aa a © for) 
s - 2 rX) 
S 
x 
w 
-10— x “| 
7 Ea 
3 3 8 
n n | L n L | L n ! n n ! n 1 | n L 
4200 4400 4600, 4800 5000 


Wavelength (A ) 


Figure 3. Optical spectrum of HZ Her obtained with the Isaac Newton Telescope on La Palma at orbital phases 0.45-0.55. 


is that shadowing of the companion star may lead to 
transfer of matter with misaligned angular momentum. 


Table 1. Properties of Her X-1. 


Apparent magnitude my 14.7-13.0 

Orbital epoch To» JD2443805.019980(14) 
Orbital period, P 1.700 167 720(10)d 
Pulse period 1.237 759 653(3)s 

Pop —2.0(0.4) x 1078 days yr! 
NS* mass 1.3(0.1)Mo 

CS mass 2.2(0.1)Mo 

CS spectral type A7-B3/6 

Distance, D 5-7 kpe 

Inclination of orbit to LOS,i — 87(2)° 

Orbital eccentricity, e <0.0003 

ax sini 13 light seconds 
x-ray eclipse duration 0.2320(3) days 


* NS stands for neutron star; CS stands for companion star. 
LOS for line-of-sight. 


Emission lines 

The optical N IT and C III emission lines at 44640 and 44650 
disappear during mid-eclipse as do the O III 13133 lines 
in the UV, suggesting that they can be attributed to Bowen 
fluorescence from the x-ray heated side of the companion 
star. However, the origin of the high excitation emission 
line of He IT (44686) is not clear: the line persists at orbital 
phase 0.0 when neither the heated side of HZ Her nor the 
accretion disk are visible. This suggests either an accretion 
disk corona or an extended source of hot gas in the system. 


Bibliography 

Over 300 papers deal with direct observations or 
interpretations of the Hercules X-1/HZ Herculis system. 
The first discovery paper: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Tananbaum H, Gursky H, Kellogg E M, Levinson R, 
Schrier E and Giacconi R 1972 Discovery of a periodic 
pulsating binary x-ray source in Hercules from 
UHURU Astrophys. J. Lett. 174 L143 


A follow-up paper: 


Giaconni R, Gursky H, Kellogg E, Levinson R, Schreier E 
and Tananbaum H 1973 Further x-ray observations 
of Hercules X-1 from UHURU Astrophys. J. 184 227 


captured the most prominent behavior and gave the initial 
interpretation in terms of an accretion-powered, pulsating 
binary x-ray source. 

The twisted, tilted accretion disk was first suggested 
as an explanation of the 35-d variations in: 


Katz 1973 Nature Phys. Sci. 246 87 


A comprehensive summary of research on x-ray binaries 
has been compiled by: 


Lewin W HG, van Paradijs J and van den Heuvel E PJ 1995 
X-Ray Binaries (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Saeqa Dil Vrtilek 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hermes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hermes 


An Apollo asteroid discovered by Karl Reinmuth in 1937, 
provisionally designated 1937 UB. Hermes is the only 
asteroid to have been given a name without first having 
received a permanent number and having had its orbit 
accurately calculated. On 30 October 1937 it passed Earth 
at a distance of 733000 km, a close-approach record that 
stood for over 50 years. The parameters of its orbit are 
approximate only: mean distance from the Sun 1.64 AU 
(245 million km), perihelion 0.62 AU, aphelion 2.66 AU, 
period 2.11 years, inclination 16°, eccentricity 0.62. It has 
never been seen again, but with an estimated diameter of 
900 m and a potential closest-approach distance of 0.003 
AU (450000 km) it remains near the top of the list of 
potentially hazardous asteroids. 


See also: near-Earth asteroids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herrick, Edward Claudius (1811-62) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Herrick, Edward Claudius (1811-62) 


Bookseller and librarian, born in New Haven, CT, self- 
educated by association with Yale University academics, 
and observer of the 9 August 1837 meteor shower, which 
he identified as the Perseids. With the Leonids in mind 
(after a brilliant display in November 1833 they proved to 
be an annual shower, the first identified), Herrick found 
other August records of meteor showers. In 1839 he 
confirmed the radiant of the shower as being in Perseus. 
Asa result of his library research, he also identified a third 
annual meteor shower around 30 April (now called the 
Lyrids) and, later, a fourth annual shower, in December, the 
Andromedids (or Bielids, named for their association with 
Biela’s Comet). Herrick had in fact been preceded in the 
identification of the Perseids as an annual meteor shower 
by ADOLPHE QUETELET. The two of them had been preceded 
by anonymous English and German farmers who for 
generations had referred to the Perseids as the Tears of 
St Lawrence (martyred on 10 August 258). Feted locally 
for his discoveries, Herrick became the Yale University 
librarian, where he wrote obituaries of graduates and 
faculty, including his own, which he completed a few days 
before he died in 1862. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herrick, Samuel (1911-74) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Herrick, Samuel (1911-74) 


Professor of astronomy and engineering at UCLA, founder 
of the field of astrodynamics, which applied the disciplines 
of celestial mechanics and mathematics to the problems of 
space flight. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Herschel Family 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Herschel Family 


William Herschel (1738-1822), his sister Caroline (1750- 
1848) and his son John Frederick William (1792-1871) freed 
astronomy from its preoccupation with the solar system 
and helped to make the study of the stars, the nebulae and 
the cosmos as a whole part of mainstream science. 


William and Caroline Herschel 

William was the third surviving child, and Caroline the 
fifth, of a humble bandsman in the Hanoverian Guards. 
William was given as good an education as the family 
could afford, after which in 1753 he joined his father in the 
military band, but Caroline’s illiterate mother prevented 
her from learning more than reading and writing. 

In 1757, after the defeat of the Hanoverian army by 
the French, William fled to England, where he scratched 
a living as a musician, first in the capital and then in 
the north. His fortunes took a turn for the better in 
1766, when he was appointed organist to a fashionable 
chapel in the spa resort of Bath. Despite his busy life 
as performer, conductor and teacher of music, William’s 
financial security now allowed him to develop other 
interests, including astronomy. 

In 1772 William visited the family home in Hanover 
and was dismayed to find Caroline a household drudge. 
Their father was now dead, and William persuaded his 
mother and eldest brother to release Caroline so that she 
could join him in Bath, to pursue a career as a singer. Before 
long, however, Caroline found William devoting every 
leisure minute to astronomy. Being self-taught, he did not 
know that astronomers studied the nature and movements 
of the familiar bodies of the solar system; instead, from 
the start he set himself the goal of understanding ‘the 
construction of the heavens’. He realized that to see distant 
and therefore faint objects he would need telescopes as 
large as possible, but his funds were limited, and before 
long he resorted to making his own reflectors with the 
help of some second-hand tools and Robert Smith’s classic 
treatise on Opticks. These early experiments were to 
culminate in 1781 in two unsuccessful attempts to cast a 
3 ft diameter mirror in a foundry set up in the basement 
of their home. He did, however, successfully build a 
Newtonian REFLECTOR of 20 ft focal length with 12 in mirrors 
(See NEWTONIAN TELESCOPE, REFLECTING TELESCOPES); but it was 
simply slung froma pole and used by an observer perched 
precariously ona ladder. In 1778 he succeeded in polishing 
a mirror of 7 ft focal length to a shape of high precision, 
and soon he was using this systematically to familiarize 
himself with the night sky. 

In 1774 William had opened his first observing book, 
and on the first page he sketched the ORION NEBULA, 
remarking that it had changed shape since the drawing 
reproduced in the book by Smith. In prophetic words he 
commented that ‘perhaps from a careful observation of 
this Spot something might be concluded concerning the 
Nature of it’. But he realized that first he must familiarize 
himself with the brighter stars. While thus engaged he 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


began to collect stars that were double, hoping that they 
might prove of use in the detection of annual parallax, for 
GALILEO had suggested long ago that the more distant star 
of a pair might be used as a quasi-fixed reference point 
against which to measure the annual movements of the 
nearer star. On 13 March 1781, while doing this, William 
came to examine a ‘star’ in Taurus, and saw at a glance 
that there was something unusual about its appearance. 
Re-examining it four days later, he found that it had 
moved, and was therefore no star but a member of the solar 
system. Speculations about undiscovered planets were in 
fact commonplace at the time, but this was unknown to 
William, who therefore took the object to be a comet. 

By this time word of this extraordinary musician 
had spread in scientific circles, and William’s home had 
been visited by a number of astronomers, including NEviL 
MASKELYNE, the Astronomer Royal. William did not know 
how properly to describe the position of the supposed 
comet, and Maskelyne’s Greenwich instruments were 
inferior to William’s 7 ft reflector and showed nothing 
unusual about any object in the region he indicated. 
Eventually Maskelyne identified the object by its motion. 
It proved to be nota comet, buta primary planet of the solar 
system (later named Uranus), the first to be discovered 
since the dawn of history. 

William became famous overnight, and his allies 
(notably Sir Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society) 
lobbied King George II]—himself a Hanoverian—to make 
available funds to enable William to give up music and 
devote himself to astronomy. William was invited to 
take his 7 ft reflector to Greenwich to be compared with 
Maskelyne’s instruments, and then to the court in London 
and afterwards to Windsor Castle. Suitably impressed, 
King George awarded William a modest but adequate 
pension, if he would settle near Windsor and show the 
heavens to the royal family when asked. 

William accepted, without consulting Caroline, who 
thus changed overnight from a singer to an assistant 
astronomer. By the autumn of 1783 William had built 
a new and larger 20 ft reflector with a stable platform, 
and with this he began to ‘sweep’ the sky for NEBULAE, in 
a campaign that was to take two decades and increase 
the number of known nebulae from about 100 to 2500. 
Caroline shared the night watches, sitting at a desk at an 
open window and recording their observations. Next day 
she would write up a fair copy, and she later arranged 
their results for publication. On her spare nights she 
searched for comets, and she was to discover no fewer than 
eight. In addition, William had found that Flamsteed’s 
British Catalogue of stars was riddled with errors, and so 
Caroline prepared an index that would take the user from 
the catalogued star back to the observations on which the 
catalogued data were based. This Index was published in 
1798 by the Royal Society at its own expense. 

In the 1770s William several times observed the Orion 
Nebula and thought it had altered shape and was therefore 
small, and so near and truly nebulous. Indeed, any 
nebula of a uniform milky appearance was, he thought, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herschel Family 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


truly nebulous, while a distant star cluster would appear 
mottled. In 1784, however, he encountered nebulae that 
displayed both forms of nebulosity, and this led him to 
change his mind and conclude that all nebulae were star 
CLusTERS, the differences in appearance being in part a 
reflection of the differences in the distances of the stars 
concerned. 

This being so, the nebulae were clusters of stars, 
some of them scattered while others were tightly packed. 
Clustering implied the action of an attractive power 
or powers (presumably, but not necessarily, gravity), 
and with time a scattered cluster would become more 
compressed. This led William to introduce into astronomy 
the concept of development with time, a scattered cluster 
being younger than a compressed one. Furthermore, the 
need to classify the great numbers of specimens of nebulae 
that he was collecting led him to play the natural historian, 
a methodology wholly alien to traditional astronomy. 
This, plus the fact that few other astronomers could so 
much as glimpse the nebulae about which William was 
theorizing so freely, made his contemporaries uncertain of 
how to react to this gifted maverick. 

In 1790 William came across what is now classified 
as the planetary nebula NGC 1514, but which to him was 
a star surrounded by a shell of nebulosity out of which 
it was surely condensing. This caused him to change his 
stance once more and to accept the existence of nebulosity 
that had not yet condensed into stars, but would in time 
do so. 

William made many other contributions to astron- 
omy, including the discovery of satellites of both Saturn 
and Uranus. Re-examining DOUBLE stars after a long in- 
terval, he found that in some the two stars had moved in 
orbit around each other, though he did not have enough 
information to demonstrate that the force binding them to- 
gether was gravitational. He published long lists in which 
stars of almost equal brightness were compared with each 
other, the intention being that a variation in the brightness 
of a particular star would reveal itself by disturbing the 
published comparisons. He investigated the shape of the 
Galaxy on the assumptions that his telescopes could pen- 
etrate to the borders in all directions, and that within the 
Galaxy the stars were distributed with fair uniformity, so 
that the number of stars he could see in a given direction 
was an index of the distance to the border in that direc- 
tion. He carried out the star counts for a great circle of the 
sky and published an influential plan of this cross-section 
of the Galaxy; but in later life he abandoned both the as- 
sumptions on which it was based. In 1783 he published the 
first analysis of proper motions and concluded that the so- 
lar system is moving in the direction of Lambda Herculis, 
though the similarity between his result and that of mod- 
ern analyses was partly a matter of luck. His experiments 
with sunlight led him in 1800 to the discovery of infrared 
radiation. 

William also supplemented his income by making 
telescopes for sale, and many of the crowned heads of 
Europe were among his clients. For himself he completed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in 1789 a monster 40 ft reflector with 4 ft mirrors. But it was 
cumbersome, the mirrors tarnished easily, and perhaps 
his own conversion to belief in nebulosity removed the 
reflector’s primary raison d’étre. 


John Herschel 

In 1788 William married, with unwelcome consequences 
for Caroline who found herself thereby displaced in his 
priorities. In 1792 his son John was born. Where William 
had been self-taught in astronomy, John was to enjoy a 
Cambridge education, and by 1815 was embarked on a 
career as a Cambridge don. His father, however, now 
in failing health, still had ambitions in astronomy that he 
could fulfil only through his son, and in 1816 he prevailed 
upon John to return home and become his astronomical 
apprentice. The 20 ft with which William had swept for 
nebulae was now in a poor state, and John was to build 
another to similar design. In 1821, Caroline came out of 
retirement to act as an amanuensis to her nephew in his 
trial sweeps for nebulae. 

John’s first task, however, was to re-examine his 
father’s double stars, in collaboration with James South, 
another wealthy amateur who owned two fine equatorials 
ideal for the purpose. A few years later John was to be 
one of several astronomers who showed that the attractive 
force binding together the two members of a binary system 
was indeed gravitational. 

John next used his 20 ft to re-examine his father’s 
nebulae. In William’s catalogues the nebulae were 
classified by type and this made the catalogues unsuitable 
for systematic re-examination. The problem was solved by 
Caroline, who had retired to Hanover after her brother’s 
death in 1822. She rearranged the entire 2500 nebulae 
into a form convenient for John to use when sweeping, 
a work for which she was awarded the medal of the 
ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY (in whose foundation John had 
played a leading part, and of which William had been the 
nominal first President). 

John’s re-examination resulted in his 1833 catalogue 
of 2306 nebulae. It was now time to complete his father’s 
work by surveying the southern skies invisible from 
England. Taking the 20 ft, an equatorial purchased from 
South, and one of Caroline’s ‘comet sweeper’ telescopes, 
he sailed to the Cape of Good Hope where from 1834 
to 1838 he engaged in an observational campaign of 
unparalleled intensity. His results were published in 
a sumptuous volume in 1847, ‘being a completion of 
a telescopic survey of the whole surface of the visible 
heavens’, for John had examined the entire heavenly 
sphere with his 20 ft. His return in 1838 marked the 
end of his career as an observer, and the end too of the 
Herschels’ virtual monopoly of observations of nebulae, 
for in 1839 the future Lord Rosse at Birr in Ireland 
completed a reflector with 3 ft mirrors, followed in 1845 by 
‘the Leviathan of Parsonstown’ with its 6 ft mirrors. John 
did, however, advance astronomy by working at his desk. 
In particular, Philosophical Transactions for 1864 contained 
his catalogue of over 5000 nebulae and star clusters; the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herschel Family 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


great majority had been discovered by him or by his father, 
and the enlarged version of the catalogue published by 
J LE Dreyer in 1888 is the NEW GENERAL CATALOGUE OF NEBULAE 
AND CLUSTERS OF STARS or NGC in widespread use today. 

As a theorist John lacked the daring of his father, 
and he was inhibited too by the obligation he felt always 
to portray his late father’s work in a favorable light, 
even when he himself had come to a different view. 
Also, by the mid-nineteenth century the daring, even 
shocking theorizing of his father had become components 
of mainstream astronomy. William, Caroline and John had 
enlarged the science from the study of the solar system to 
the study of the cosmos. 


Alexander Stewart Herschel and John Herschel II 
Two of John’s sons, Alexander Stewart and John II (both 
born in South Africa), made their own contributions 
to astronomy, the former particularly in cometary and 
meteoric studies. The later members of the family carefully 
preserved the manuscripts of their forebears, which are 
now largely in permanent collections, notably the Library 
of the Royal Astronomical Society. 


Bibliography 

Buttmann G 1974 The Shadow of the Telescope: A Biography 
of John Herschel (Guildford: Lutterworth) 

Hoskin M 1982 Stellar Astronomy: Historical Studies 
(Chalfont St Giles: Science History Publications) 

Hoskin M (ed) 1997 The Cambridge Illustrated History 
of Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) ch 7 

Hoskin M (ed) 1999 The Cambridge Concise History 
of Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) ch 7 

Lubbock C A 1933 The Herschel Chronicle (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Michael Hoskin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung, Ejnar (1873-1967) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hertzsprung, Ejnar (1873-1967) 


Danish astronomer, studied chemical engineering and 
worked as a chemist in St Petersburg before returning to 
Denmark to take up astronomy, worked in Gottingen and 
Potsdam with KARL SCHWARZSCHILD, and then at the Leiden 
Observatory (Netherlands) where he became director. 
Hertzsprung determined the proper motions of stars, and 
about a million positions of binary stars, as well as the 
brightnesses of stars, determining by photography not 
only their brightnesses, but also their colors (expressed 
as the ratio of a star’s brightness through two different 
colored pieces of glass). A star’s color is connected to 
its temperature, and its brightness relative to others in 
a cluster all at the same distance is connected to its 
absolute magnitude. In 1911 he plotted these quantities 
in what became known as a color-magnitude diagram 
for the Hyades star cluster, and discovered the distinction 
between giant stars and ‘main sequence’ stars. Two years 
later HENRY NORRISRUSSELL plotted an equivalent diagram for 
stars whose spectral classes were known and which were 
not in clusters but so nearby that their distances and thus 
their absolute magnitudes could be determined. A star’s 
spectral class is, like color, connected to its temperature. 
The spectral class-absolute magnitude diagram also 
showed the distinction between giants and main sequence 
stars like the color-magnitude diagram. The two diagrams 
have the same topography, and collectively are known 
as the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram. (By an accident of 
history, an apparently independent parallel study of the 
‘relation between brightness and spectral type in the 
Pleiades’ was undertaken by Hans Rosenberg (1879-1940) 
of Géttingen, whose overlooked paper contained the 
first published Hertzsprung—Russell diagram (June 1910).) 
Hertzsprung also determined the distance to the Small 
Magellanic Cloud, by use of the statistical parallax of 
a group of Cepheid stars (triangulating onto the stars 
over the baseline of the Sun’s journey through space over 
several years). Although he made a mistake, putting the 
stars a factor of ten too close, possibly through a slip of the 
pen, it is interesting that the distance, the largest distance 
of anything known at the time, was so large that a factor 
of ten too small did not immediately stand out. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


The Hertzsprung-—Russell diagram (HR-diagram), pio- 
neered independently by EJNAR HERTZSPRUNG and HENRY 
NORRIS RUSSELL, is a plot of the star luminosity versus the 
surface temperature. It stems from the basic relation for 
an object emitting thermal radiation as a black body: 


L =4no0R°T? (1) 


where L is the luminosity (energy emitted per second by 
the whole radiating surface), o is the Stefan—Boltzmann 
constant, R is the radius and T, is defined as the 
temperature of a hypothetical black body of the same 
radius R radiating the same total luminosity L. In 
general, physical temperatures in stellar surface regions 
closely approximate T., and the place where a photon 
has 50% probability of radiating directly into space—the 
photosphere—is well defined. Thus R in equation (1) is 
also well defined. In red giant and supergiant stars the 
radius is more uncertain, because they have very extended 
atmospheres partly out of hydrostatic balance. 

The luminosity is customarily expressed in solar units 
Lo = 3.90 x 10° erg s~! and plotted on a magnitude scale 
My = —2.5log L/Lo + Mp,o, where M, and Mpg = 4.77 
are the bolometric magnitudes of the star and the Sun, 
respectively. 

Every star at every instant of its life has a given L 
and R and therefore T. which are dictated by the global 
structure of the star and the physical processes taking 
place in it. Since the structure of a star is not constant 
in time because of the continuous energy leakage from the 
surface (and nuclear fusion), L and T, will change as the 
star evolves. Therefore a star will describe a path in the 
HR-diagram which is a function of its mass and chemical 
composition. It follows that the HR-diagram is a powerful 
diagnostic of the star’s structure and evolution during its 
whole life. 

Different populations of stars have different HR- 
diagrams: they go from the well-behaved ones of 
globular clusters, in which almost all evolutionary phases 
are detectable, to the poor ones of open clusters and 
associations, where only very few stars beyond the 
main sequence are visible, to the patchy HR-diagrams of 
composite stellar populations, in which at least one more 
dimension is added, namely the past history of stellar 
formation. 

By studying the path in the HR-diagram of single 
stars and/or the morphology of the HR-diagram of stellar 
aggregates of different complexities (from clusters to 
galaxies) we will learn very much not only about how 
stars are made and evolve but also about many physical 
properties of the host system. 


Passing from observations to theory and vice 
versa 

The observational data are apparent magnitudes and 
colors in a given photometric system (for instance the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


classical Johnson UBV system). The colors are defined as 
the difference (m,;, — m,,’) between any two magnitudes 
ma, and ma, corresponding to the fluxes in the adopted 
pass-bands Aid and Ad’. Going from apparent magnitudes 
ma, and colors to luminosities and effective temperatures 
is not trivial as anumber of steps are needed. Determining 
the absolute luminosity requires distance, color excess, 
and bolometric corrections. Determining T. is even more 
indirect. For the few cases for which the radius R is 
known, T, is derived from its definition via the black body 
law. In all other cases some measure of the temperature 
is estimated by at least three different methods: (i) from 
the entire spectral energy distribution matched by a black 
body of given temperature; (ii) from the Wien law AmaxT = 
cost, where Amax is the wavelength of the maximum 
intensity of the spectrum; (iii) from suitable relationships 
between colors and temperature based on preliminary 
comparison with the black body emission. Each method 
is affected by some degree of uncertainty. In the same 
star, these different methods can yield different values of 
temperature. These are generally close to each other and 
to the idealized T, defined by equation (1). 

From an operational point of view, we start from 
apparent magnitudes and colors, correct them for 
extinction if possible, translate apparent magnitudes ma, 
into absolute magnitudes M,, if the distance is known, 
derive from M,, the absolute bolometric magnitudes 
My applying the so-called bolometric correction (BC), 
transfer colors into T., and finally compare the resulting 
HR-diagram with the theoretical counterpart obtained 
from the theory of stellar structure and evolution. The 
BC is required to account for the fraction of the flux 
not detected by the pass-band in use. It is worth 
recalling here that BCs and color—T7, relationships are 
complicated functions of spectral type, luminosity class 
and chemical composition X, Y and Z, i.e. the fractional 
mass abundances of hydrogen, helium and all heavier 
elements lumped together. The whole procedure can be 
repeated backward, i.e. starting from theoretical L and 
T. to predict the corresponding observational magnitudes 
and colors. 


HR-diagram of cluster and field stars 

Figure 1 shows the apparent HR-diagrams of two Galactic 
GLOBULAR CLUSTERS, the metal-rich 47 Tucanae and the 
metal-poor M55. Each HR-diagram clearly illustrates 
the properties of assemblies of stars with the same age, 
chemical composition and distance. 

Most of the stars fall along the main sequence 
(MS) band, running from low to high magnitudes and 
colors. The bending portion of the top of the main 
sequence defines the so-called turn-off (TO). Along the 
main sequence are stars in the core H-burning phase 
(see below). The remaining stars are distributed in four 
different loci. 

(i) The sub-giant branch (SGB) and the red giant 
branch (RGB) are so named for the large dimensions of the 
stars. The sub-giant branch runs nearly horizontally from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10 | 


| HB ‘iif. | 


o 


ay) 
Oo 


wo"... eS 
- SMC stars . 


yy O 1 | 1 1 4 1 | 1 a 1 L 1 | i 


LO. T T a | ar | T TY] 


TO 


w 
1 


he Sag stars 


0 1 ee 3 


Figure 1. Upper panel: the HR-diagram of the metal-rich 
Galactic globular cluster 47 Tucanae. Superposed is the 
isochrone with Z = 0.008 and age of 10 Gyr. Lower panel: the 
same but for the metal-poor Galactic globular cluster M55. The 
superposed isochrone has metallicity Z = 0.0004 and age of 

14 Gyr. In these figures, V is visual and / an infrared bandpass. 
Courtesy of M Zoccali. 


the turn-off to the bottom of the red giant branch. This 
is nearly vertical for metal-poor clusters (M55), whereas 
it has a pronounced curvature for metal-rich clusters 
(47 Tucanae). For the latter, the brightest red giant branch 
stars in the V-passband are not the reddest ones. The sub- 
giant and red giant branch stars are in the shell H-burning 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


5 
| PLEIADES ; 
10+ To . 4 
~ : 
15 E- el 
on 
20 , : 
0 1 ees 3 
B-V 
T T T ] T T T T 
-5 
SUPER-GIANTS 
OF | 
> Fr el 
5 
10 + 4 
[ HIPPARCOS | 
1 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 
-0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 
B-V 


Figure 2. Upper panel: the HR-diagram of the Pleiades. Lower 
panel: field stars in the solar vicinity (within 50 pc of the Sun) 
after Hipparcos. 


phase prior to core He ignition. 

(ii) The group of stars slightly bluer than the red 
giant branch and crowding into a clump in the case of 
47 Tucanae, or significantly bluer and more dispersed 
(a sort of blue tail) in the case of M55, both correspond 
to the so-called horizontal branch (HB). This was so 
named originally because, in many intermediate-metal 
clusters, the corresponding feature defines a broad, 
essentially horizontal distribution in V. As it happens, 
with due allowance for the BC, even dropping blue 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


horizontal branches like that of M55 are indeed remarkably 
horizontal. Horizontal branch stars are burning helium in 
the core. 

(iii) Just above the red giant branch and with a 
merging path are the few asymptotic giant branch (AGB) 
stars. They are in post core He-burning stages (‘double 
shell source’ stage) prior to the ejection of their envelopes 
to become first planetary nebulae (PNe) and later white 
dwarfs (WDs). 

(iv) Finally, there is the fainter sequence of white 
dwarf stars that are the end product of globular cluster 
stars’ evolution. The white dwarf sequence is nearly 
parallel to the main sequence, but about 12 mag fainter, 
and nicely corresponds to a line of constant radius (see 
below). The white dwarf sequence was rarely visible in 
the past and became clearly detected only with the advent 
of modern ground and space telescopes. 

To complete the star census, it is worth recalling 
that in both panels of figure 1 contamination by fore- 
and background stars is clearly visible. In the case of 
47 Tucanae the blob of stars fainter than the main sequence 
but brighter than the white dwarf sequence are stars of 
the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC), displaced in this part 
of the HR-diagram because of the large distance. In the 
case of M55, the stars blurring the main sequence band 
on both sides are those of the Sagittarius galaxy against 
which M55 is observed. Situations like this are common to 
other HR-diagrams and must be kept in mind for a correct 
interpretation to be obtained. 

The upper panel of figure 2 shows the HR-diagram of 
the Pleiades, a sparsely populated open cluster, in which 
only the main sequence is visible. Finally, the lower panel 
of figure 2 shows the recent HR-diagram of field stars 
in the solar vicinity (within 50 pc of the Sun) observed 
by the Hipparcos satellite. The novelty of this diagram 
with respect to many previous versions of it is that for 
the first time all these stars have distances measured with 
the greatest accuracy. One may easily identify the main 
sequence band, the sub-giant branch, the red giant branch, 
a clump of red stars hereafter known as the ‘red clump’ 
(RC), and finally the sequence of white dwarfs. 

Why do we have such different HR-diagrams? What 
are the physical causes driving the evolution of stars and 
determining the morphology of the HR-diagram? Can we 
infer from their properties important parameters such as 
the age of the stars in order to set limits on the age of the 
universe? What can we learn from HR-diagrams about the 
past history of galaxies? Answering these questions is the 
aim of the following sections. 


Basic physics of stellar interiors 


Looking at the Sun as a prototype star, convincing 
arguments indicate that it has been radiating energy at 
nearly the same rate for several billion years (at least 
4.6 Gyr), thus making clear that several conditions have 
always been satisfied. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Hydrostatic equilibrium 

If the complex structure of the Sun (or a star in general) 
is reduced to a self-gravitating isotropic sphere of gas 
of constant mass, this means that gravitational pull is 
balanced by differential gas pressure. Neglecting all other 
forces but those due to gravity and pressure, at each 
layer of radial distance r the conditions of hydrostatic 
equilibrium and mass conservation are 


dP GM, dM, 
coe eee 


where M, is the mass contained in the sphere of radius r 
and p is the local density. It can easily be checked that 
even a very small departure from hydrostatic equilibrium 
would imply a variation of the star radius over the free-fall 
time scale 


R 1/2 R \3/2 7 M \¥2 
n= 2(25) =3.2~x 10° (x) (sz) (3) 
GM Ro Mo 


which in the case of the Sun is about 1 h. We will assume 
hydrostatic or quasi-hydrostatic equilibrium from now on. 


Thermal equilibrium 

This demands that the energy leakage from any spherical 
surface within the star is balanced by continuous supply 
from an internal reservoir. In other words the following 
equation must be satisfied once we have a quasi-static star: 


dL, 


ag Amr? pe (4) 


where L, is the luminosity emitted by the sphere of radius 
r and ¢ is the amount of energy per unit mass and time 
generated inside it by all sources. What can produce the 
3.90 x 10° erg s~! of the Sun’s luminosity and doit for about 
4.6 Gyr, or, in general, the luminosities of any other star 
over its whole life? These questions, taken together, limit 
the candidate mechanisms to gravitational contraction and 
nuclear fusion. 


Gravitational energy 

According to the virial theorem for a system in hydrostatic 
equilibrium, any variation of the gravitational potential 
by contraction goes to increasing the internal energy and 
liberating (radiating) an equal amount of energy. An 
estimate of the thermal energy of a star is soon derived 
from the virial theorem and gravitational potential energy 
Q: 


(5) 


with g = 3/2 (a numerical factor accounting for the mass 
distribution). Supposing that the whole internal energy is 
radiated away at the rate L (luminosity), the duration of 
this source is 


_ 3GM? 
~ 4A RL 


M 


2 
= 2x10" (=) — — yr. (6) 


tk 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thus, gravitational contraction and hence internal energy 
could power the Sun for about 20 million years. This is 
too short compared with the time scales of biological and 
geological evolution on the Earth. Similar considerations 
apply to any other type of star. 


Nuclear fusion 

Thermonuclear reactions in stellar interiors are indeed 
the main source of energy (see STELLAR INTERIORS: THERMO- 
DYNAMICS). The fusion of light nuclei into more massive 
nuclei (for instance 4 x 'H into 1 x *He in main sequence 
stars) provides the required amount of energy for a very 
long time. To get positively charged nuclei to fuse together 
despite their electrical repulsion, they must approach 
each other closer than about 10-8 cm, which is the 
range of the strongly attractive nuclear forces (roughly the 
nuclear radius Ry). This means that the positive Coulomb 
potential energy Veou = Z1Z2e?/r for r > Rn suddenly 
drops to large negative values for r < Rx. At Rn Veou 
is at a maximum and of the order of 1 MeV (peak of 
the so-called potential barrier). At the temperatures and 
densities of stellar interiors, the relative kinetic energy of 
random thermal motions is only Ex ~ 10° eV and therefore 
no reactions should occur. However, thanks to QUANTUM 
MECHANICS, even in this case there is a finite albeit small 
probability of barrier crossing and reactions take place. 
The energy liberated by each fusion event is 


AE = AMC" (7) 


where AM is the mass difference between the combined 
mass of the original nuclei and that of the fused nucleus. 
In the case of four 'H fusing into one nucleus of *He, the 
“He nucleus has a mass of 3.97m, (mp, is the proton mass). 
Therefore an amount of mass equal to 0.03m, has been 
converted into energy and liberated to form the compound 
nucleus. This energy amounts to 6.3 x 10'8 erg (g of 
matter)"'. Similarly, when three *He fuse to form a 
nucleus of *C, the energy liberated per gram is about 
0.61 x 10'8 erg. Remarkably, H fusion liberates roughly 
10 times more energy than He fusion. We will see that 
this corresponds to the observed fact that main sequence 
stars are about 10 times more numerous than all post-main 
sequence stars. Fusion of light nuclei into heavier ones 
liberates energy up to the synthesis of °°Fe, which has the 
largest binding energy per nucleon AM c”/A (A is the mass 
number). Above this, not only is the electrical repulsion 
between nuclei so strong that in practice no nucleus has 
enough energy to cross the barrier but also the binding 
energy starts decreasing. This means that energy must be 
supplied to nuclei from the thermal reservoir in order to 
make them fuse. This fact limits the maximum number of 
large-scale fusion steps that may occur inside a star. Each 
of these requires a minimum temperature (and density) 
to occur, which means a minimum mass of the star (or its 
inner core). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


H burning 

Fusion of 1H into *He occurs through two channels 
called the PP chain and the CNO cycle. The PP chain 
in its simplest version is a sequence of reactions: first 
'H(1H, e*v)?H where two protons react to form deuterium 
plus a positron and a neutrino, followed by 7H(1H, y)*He. 
The first two reactions must occur twice in order to 
produce two 3He nuclei. Finally, these fuse through 
3He(He, 2'H)*He. In total, four protons are fused into 
one nucleus of *He. The initial reaction can occur at 
about 1 x 10° K, but the last one requires temperatures 
greater than about 10 x 10° K. The individual reactions 
are very slow and a very small fraction of nuclei have 
enough energy to overcome the electrical repulsion. Even 
so, in a star like the Sun every second 6 x 10" g of H 
are converted into 5.96 x 10'* g of He and 4 x 10” ¢ 
of matter are transformed into energy. The CNO cycle 
proceeds through a different mechanism. The initial step 
is a nucleus of #C reacting with a proton to give rise to a 
series of reactions whose net result is the transformation 
of 4x 1H > 1x *He, leaving all other species unchanged. 
The CNO cycle requires significantly higher temperatures 
and it is much more sensitive to temperature than the PP 
chain. In the CNO cycle ecno « 7”; in the PP chain 
€pp « T°. Main sequence stars more massive than about 
1.5Mo generate their nuclear energy via the CNO cycle at 
temperatures larger than 17 x 10° K. 


He burning 

The next step is the non-simultaneous fusion of three 
“He according to He +* He > Be +*He > PC+y. 
It is accompanied by the reactions "C(*He, y)'®O and 
?O(*He, y)*°Ne. He burning, called the 3a process, 
requires high temperatures (T > 100 x 10° K) and takes 
place only after stars have exhausted the central H content 
and formed a central core of pure He. The threshold mass 
of the He core depends on the physical state of the gas. In 
the electron degenerate material of the central regions of 
low mass stars (up to about 2.2M.) the minimum mass is 
about 0.5M 9, which immediately sets also a gross lower 
limit for a star to be able to ignite He in the core. All 
low mass stars in the range 0.5 < M/Mo < 2.2 undergo 
explosive He ignition because core contraction proceeds 
to degeneracy before the ignition temperature is reached. 
Stars more massive than 2.2M, ignite helium without 
becoming electron degenerate and do it when the He core 
mass is only ~ 0.3Mo. 


Later burnings stages 

The following principles influence the occurrence of later 
burning stages beyond the 3a process. (i) Higher and 
higher threshold temperatures and densities are required; 
this implies that minimum values of the core mass must 
be reached by the stars. (ii) The amount of liberated 
energy decreases so that the duration of later burning 
stages becomes shorter and shorter. (iii) Nuclear burning 
can only proceed up to the formation of an iron core. (iv) 
With increasing core density the gas becomes more and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


more electron degenerate. (v) Ignition of anuclear burning 
stage in a degenerate gas is potentially explosive and may 
lead to complete disruption of the star. (vi) External causes 
(for instance mass loss by stellar wind) may prevent a star 
from reaching the required core mass for a certain burning 
stage to occur. 

Following core He exhaustion, in stars more massive 
than about 10M, carbon is ignited at temperatures of 
about 500 x 10° K. Two nuclei of C are fused into a 
variety of heavy elements, for instance 'C(?C, y)*4Mg, 
or °C(?C, n)3Mg, or ?C(?C,4 He)”Ne etc. After core 
C exhaustion, at temperatures of about 1 x 10° K, high- 
energy thermal photons begin to break up *°Ne by the 
reaction 7°Ne(y, *He)!°O, followed by 7Ne(*He, y)*Mg. 
The core of the star consists now mainly of !°O and 
24Mg. When the temperature reaches 2 x 10° K, oxygen 
burning begins. Although it is schematically indicated by 
16O(1°O,* He)8Si, because the most important product is 
°8Si, many other elements are generated such as Mg, S 
and P and copious y, p, n and a particles are liberated. 
Finally, at temperatures of about 3 x 10° K, Si burning 
occurs through a complex network of nuclear reactions 
briefly indicated by *Si +72 Si > ‘Ni. Although 
these advanced stages involve the same physics of 
thermonuclear reactions encountered in previous stages, 
they are characterized by photo-dissociation and radiative 
captures that transform the nuclear material into its most 
stable form. The process is started by *Si(y, “He)**Mg. 
The liberated “He nuclei induce a long series of reactions 
such as *8Si(*He, y)**S, *S(#He, 7)**Ar, *Ar(*He, y)’Ca, 
..., Fe(*He, y)°°Ni. The nuclear sequence is terminated 
with Si-burning and the formation of the most stable 
nuclei. 


Lifetime of a nuclear phase 

Let f; be the mass fraction of the star in which the 
temperature is high enough to burn a certain nuclear fuel 
i (hydrogen, helium, carbon, etc), X; the fractional mass 
abundance of it and £; the energy released per gram of 
matter by the corresponding complex of nuclear reactions. 
The duration ¢; of the phase is given by 


M 
&~ Ef XiT- (8) 
In the case of H burning, inserting Ey = 6.0 x 10'8 erg g“!, 
fa = 0.1, Xy = 0.7 (typical values) and the mass and 
luminosity of the Sun we obtain t ~ 7 Gyr. In the case of 
He burning for which Ey. = 0.6 x 10'8 erg g-!, fre = 0.2, 
Xe 1, and a star with the same mass and luminosity as 
those in the horizontal branch phase (see case F in table 2), 
we obtain fe X 108 yr. 

Main sequence stars obey the mass-luminosity 
relationship L «x M* with a = 3.54 (in reality 
a core mass-luminosity relationship applies to all 
evolutionary phases). Therefore, the nuclear lifetime of 
any evolutionary phase depends on the star mass or core 
mass. If we limit ourselves to the case of main sequence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stars for which the lifetime is the longest, fi; ~ 0.1 and 
Xy = 0.7 we obtain the approximate relation 


M 


—a+1 
ty 101° (7) yr. (9) 


More precise H-burning lifetimes are given in table 1. 
They vary from a few million years for very massive stars 
(100M) to many hundreds of billions of years for stars 
of very low mass (0.1M.). For stars like the Sun the H- 
burning lifetime is about 10 Gyr. 

The energy production by nuclear sources is regulated 
by the stellar luminosity (and ultimately by the opacity 
of the material); therefore the whole history of a star 
can be viewed as a series of slow nuclear burning stages 
alternating with periods of fast gravitational contractions 
causing the increase in the central (mean) temperature to 
the threshold value for the next nuclear step to occur. Asa 
consequence fx and ty are also the time scales over which 
a star changes its properties (L, T., etc). 


Equation of state 

To a high degree of precision, stellar interiors are in 
conditions of local thermodynamic equilibrium so that 
radiation is described by the Planck law, particles obey the 
appropriate law of statistical mechanics and the interaction 
between matter and radiation is governed by the Kirchhoff 
law. 

The structure and evolution of a star are particularly 
sensitive to the equation of state governing the pressure P 
as a function of density p, temperature T and molecular 
weight jz of the particles. Matter in stellar interiors is 
composed of ions and/or nuclei (complete ionization) and 
electrons, immersed ina bath of photons. Each component 
contributes to the total pressure P = P, + P, + Po. 

The functional dependence P(p,7,) for each 
component depends on the quantum number density of 
particles with momentum p (an isotropic distribution 
of momenta is supposed). Quantum statistics predicts 
that fermions (protons, neutrons, electrons etc) and 
bosons (photons) have different number-momentum 
distributions n(p). However, for all particles but photons, 
n(p) reduces to the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann law 
when the mean inter-particle separation is much greater 
than the de Broglie wavelength Ag = h/p (h is the Planck 
constant). Therefore, there will be a certain density at 
which the quantum behavior shows up. This condition is 
known as the onset of degeneracy. Because of their small 
mass and hence long Ag, electrons are the first particles 
to become degenerate. Protons, neutrons and nuclei in 
general reach degeneracy only at densities comparable 
with nuclear densities (10'° g cm~%), which occurs only 
in very peculiar situations that are ignored here. In 
the case of photons, considered as relativistic, zero-mass 
particles, the quantum n(p) must always be used. Based 
on these considerations, the equation of state for the 
various components is found by integrating over the 
corresponding functions n(p). The results are as follows. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Typical parameters of main sequence stars and core H-burning lifetimes. 


M/Me logLl/Lo logTe R/Ro Te pec M./M M./M_ Energy tH 

30.0 5.11 4.60 6.6 37 3.3 0.61 0 CNO 5.7 x 10° 
15.0 4.29 4.49 4.7 33 5.8 0.49 0 CNO 1.2 x 107 
9.0 3.60 4.37 3.5 31 99 041 0 CNO 3.0 x 107 
5.0 2.76 4.23 2.3 2720.9 0.32 0 CNO 1.1 x 108 
3.0 1.91 4.09 1.7 24 =40.3 0.25 0 CNO 3.7 x 108 
2.0 1.25 3.36 1.4 21 65.7 0.19 0 CNO 1.1 x 10° 
10 -0.16 3.75 0.9 14 975 O 0.1 PP 9.7 x 10° 
0.5 —1.39 3.59 0.4 9 701 O 0.3 PP 8.7 x 1019 
0.3 —1.90 3.56 0.3 8 1064 1 1.0 PP 1.7 x 10!2 


The surface temperature 7. is in K; the central temperature T, is units of 10° K; the central density 


pc ising/ cm?. The fractional masses M./M and M./M show the extension of the convective core 
and external convective envelope respectively. ty is the lifetime in years of the core H-burning 


phase. 


The photon pressure P, depends only on the gas 
temperature: 


Be 1 rt 82°k4 
es ens 
= 7.564 x 107 erg cm? K™*. 


where a= 
(10) 


There is no density dependence, because the number of 
photons is not conserved owing to continuous emission 
and absorption, a result already predicted by classical 
thermodynamics. 

At ordinary low densities (no electron degeneracy) 
ions and electrons have the equation of state 


k 


UeMp 


k k 
Limp 


P,+ P. ae 
P 


pT + pT (11) 


= 
where k is the Boltzmann constant, m, is the proton mass, 
and ji, Le, 4 are the mean molecular weights of just ions, 
just electrons and the mixture of the two, respectively. 
The mean molecular weights of a fully ionized gas with 
abundance mass fractions X, Y and Z are 


4 
~AX+4+Y 


a 2 
~ 14+X 


1 
~ OX +0.75Y +052. 
(12) 


Ki Me Mb 

At increasing density (and decreasing temperature), 
electrons become degenerate. The equation of state is very 
complicated. It acquires a simple form only in the extreme 
cases of fully degenerate, non-relativistic electrons (kT < 
m.c”, thermal energy much smaller than the electron rest 
energy) and fully degenerate, relativistic electrons (kT >> 
mec’), for which we have 


e 


hw (3V8/ 9 \ 
P.= 
°~ 20m (=) (4) 
or 
ch (3° (_p 


1/3 4/3 
— F 13 
i (se) Gea) as 
The first and second equations are for non-relativistic and 
relativistic electrons, respectively. The lower power of p 


[oH 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the latter expression is due to the electrons’ velocities 
saturating at the speed of light c. In both cases the pressure 
of degenerate electrons does not depend on temperature 
but only on density. 

Studying the equation of state in many stellar 
environments we learn that P, is important in massive 
stars, and among main sequence stars electron degeneracy 
is important only in the low-mass ones. In more advanced 
evolutionary phases, electron degeneracy progressively 
becomes the dominant central source of pressure. 

The lack of temperature dependence in the equation 
of state of fully degenerate electrons bears very much 
on stellar structure. If for any reason the temperature 
starts increasing, for instance by deposition of energy 
from nuclear reactions commencing in a degenerate gas, 
the equation of state does not provide a compensating 
expansion to quench the instability, and the temperature 
increases even further, thus making nuclear energy release 
even stronger. Thermal runaway soon occurs. In many 
circumstances a thermonuclear explosion occurs, tearing 
the star apart. 


Energy transport 

There are three mechanisms for the transport of heat 
inside a star: (i) the random thermal motion of individual 
electrons and/or ions that interacting with each other 
transport energy from hot to cold regions (thermal 
conduction); (ii) The continuous absorption, emission, 
scattering of photons with the same effect (radiative 
transfer). In both cases the link between flux of energy and 
temperature gradient is derived from the same principles. 
(iii) The third is the large-scale motions of fluid elements, 
in which rising blobs of hot, less dense gas and sinking 
blobs of cool, denser gas transfer energy from hot to cold 
regions of a star. This mechanism is called convection. 


Radiative transfer 

Based on simple dimensional arguments, the flux density 
of heat along the radial direction r due to propagation 
of photons with velocity c, frequency-averaged mean free 
path / and heat capacity per unit volume C = dU/dT = 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


4aT*, where U is the internal energy density aT, is given 
by 


Lr _ 1 jdudT_ 15, aT 
Anr2 3° dT dr or ‘ dr 
nae dT 3 L 
__ 3p Ly (14) 
dr /p 4acT? 4rr2 


where the mean free path i has been averaged over all 
frequencies of the black body spectrum to account for the 
frequency dependence of the absorption, emission and 
diffusion processes. In doing so, the frequency-averaged 
mean free path can be expressed in terms of the so- 
called Rosseland opacity « = 1/ p(i) and the fundamental 
equation for radiative transport is obtained. 

The above equation can be interpreted in the 
following way: given a certain temperature gradient (and 
opacity «) implied by the mass and pressure balance, the 
luminosity L, is determined. The steeper the temperature 
gradient and the lower the opacity, the higher is the 
luminosity. 


Convective transport 

Can the radiative temperature gradient be arbitrarily 
steep? The answer is no, because when the gradient 
becomes steeper than the local adiabatic value, convection 
sets in and a different temperature gradient is built 
up. However, for the very outer layers in which a 
more complicated treatment is required, thanks to the 
high thermal capacity of convective elements in all but 
distended giant envelopes, the real temperature gradient 
is nearly identical to the adiabatic one and the following 
approximation holds: 


dT y—-1T dP 
(s).- y Pdr (15) 


where y = ¢p/cy, i.e. the ratio of the specific heats at 
constant pressure and constant volume for the gas under 
consideration. 


Where is convection? 

Performing some algebraic manipulations, we may 
express the radiative gradient as (dIn7T/dInP)gp « 
kL,P/M,T*, where the luminosity—mass ratio L,/M, has 
been introduced. Neither « P/T* nor L,/M; is constant 
throughout a star. It can be shown that the ratio 
P/T* «x P/p, is nearly constant, whereas « greatly 
varies throughout a star. In the outer layers « is very 
large because of ionization, while L,/M, reaches a nearly 
constant value. Therefore we expect the external layers of a 
star to be often in convective conditions. In contrast, in the 
internal regions, while the opacity decreases toa minimum 
(electron scattering), the ratio L,/M, increases in a way 
that depends on the temperature sensitivity of the nuclear 
energy source. It follows that low-mass stars with epp « T° 
have radiative cores, whereas massive stars with ecno « 
T° have convective cores. Later burning stages (helium, 
carbon, etc) will always occur in convective conditions. 
Table 1 contains a few characteristic parameters for main 
sequence stars of different mass. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Central values 
Useful analytic expressions for the central density, 
pressure and temperature of main sequence stars in which 
the equation of state is that of a perfect gas (no radiation 
pressure and no degeneracy) are 
2 
pe= 145 gs cm? P.=1.1x 10 dyn cm~ 


M 
T.=2.3x 10> K (16) 


where mass and radius are in solar units. Along the main 
sequence, the density decreases and the temperature and 
pressure increase with the star’s mass. 


Sketching the evolution of solar-type stars 

Stars in the mass range (0.7-1.5)Mo are those we see 
today in old globular clusters and old open clusters and 
therefore they are of primary interest in interpreting the 
HR-diagram. Table 2 contains some data for the various 
phases we are going to describe below, limited to the case 
of low-mass stars such as the Sun. Representative post- 
main sequence paths in the HR-diagram are shown in the 
upper panel of figure 3. The paths illustrated are for low- 
metal stars with abundances more like those in globular 
clusters. In broad terms their evolution is similar to that 
of stars of solar-like compositions; in detail, they differ. 


Protostars 

STAR FORMATION is by far the most uncertain aspect of stellar 
theory. Based on observations, we know that stars form 
in dense, cold molecular clouds, in which various kinds of 
instability combine to trigger fragmentation and collapse 
of gas into small entities of stellar size (protostars). This 
stage is reached when trapping of energy by increasing 
opacity supplies pressure support against gravity and 
the condition of hydrostatic equilibrium is established. 
During this very short-lived phase the sole source of 
energy is gravitational contraction. The star is cool and 
red but very extended in radius (large luminosity). To 
avoid confusion with the later stages of evolution, neither 
this nor the next, pre-main sequence phase is illustrated in 
figure 3. 


Pre-main-sequence 

Once hydrostatic equilibrium is established, the contrac- 
tion slows down but it continues until the central temper- 
ature is high enough to initiate nuclear burning. The star, 
fully convective, slides down the Hayashi line, i.e. the lo- 
cus in the HR-diagram of fully convective objects in hydro- 
static equilibrium. No star cooler than this limit can exist. 
On the Hayashi line and prior to main sequence stage, light 
elements such as 7H, ’Li, etc are all burned. 1-TAuRI STARS 
located at the right of the main sequence are associated 
with the pre-main sequence phase. Their phenomenology 
is quite complicated, because there is simultaneous infall 
of material onto the star (disk accretion) but also strong 
ejection of material in the form of winds (bi-polar flows). 
It takes another several million years before the star settles 
down on the main sequence where quiet H burning takes 
place. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Evolution of a 1Mo star with X = 0.698, Y = 0.282 and Z = 0.019. 


Phase log(age) logL/Lo logTe R/Ro logT, logpe M-/M M./M_ Energy 

Al —4.00 1.0 2x10° 1.0 —18.0 0 1.00 Ec 

A2 5.92 —0.20 3.64 21 6.60 0.17 0 1.00 Ec 

Bl 6.94 —0.30 3.64 1.6 6.77 1.04 0 1.00 Ec 

B2 7.39 0.04 3.77 1.0 7.11 192 0 0.30 En 

Cl 7.54 —0.16 3.75 0.9 7.14 199 0 0.06 PP 

C2 9.98 0.25 3.76 0.9 7.28 2.89 0 0.74 H shell 

D 10.05 0.33 3.72 1.8 7.38 4.06 0 0.62 H shell 

E 10.08 3.37 3.49 170.6 7.89 5.94 0 0.46 H shell 

F 10.08 1.66 3.66 10.9 8.10 4.24 0.21 0.50 He burning 
G 10.08 3.32 3.50 153.8 8.02 6.16 0 0.52 H, He shell 
H >10.08 —2.60 4.0 0.02 6.60 744 0 0 Thermal energy 


A1, collapse; A2, protostar in hydrostatic equilibrium; B1, pre-MS (minimum luminosity on the Hayashi line); 
B2, pre-MS (maximum luminosity before the MS); C1, start of the MS phase; C2, end of the MS phase; D, 
post-MS (bottom RGB); E, tip of RGB and He flash; F, core He-Burning and HB (mid-stage); G, AGB phase; H, 
WD. Age in years, temperature in kelvins, density in g cm~°, radius in solar units. 


Main sequence 

During this phase H burning produces enough energy to 
balance the luminosity (the star is said to be in thermal 
equilibrium). The nuclear production is a strong function 
of temperature (PP chain versus CNO cycle, the first one in 
the case of the Sun). Gravity is balanced by differential gas 
pressure (the ideal gas law in this case). The H content in 
the center decreases until it eventually reaches zero. Heat 
is carried out by radiative transport. 


Post-main-sequence 

When the H content becomes zero in a small central sphere, 
the tiny He core contracts and H burning begins in a shell 
surrounding the core. Gravitational contraction in the core 
makes it electron degenerate. The star leaves the main 
sequence and moves toward low T, at nearly constant L. 
This phase corresponds to the sub-giant branch in the HR- 
diagram. The external convection penetrates very deeply 
into the star. The energy generated by the H-burning shell 
and the increased opacity force the star to expand to large 
radii and once the Hayashi line is reached to climb along 
it at nearly constant T. but increasing luminosity. The star 
is in the red giant branch phase. 


Red giant branch and He flash 

The outward migration of the H-burning shell makes the 
He core grow in mass and it slowly increases temperature 
until the threshold limit for He burning is reached. Since 
the core is electron degenerate, (i) this occurs when the core 
has acquired a certain value of the mass and (ii) He ignition 
is explosive but does not disrupt the star (He flash). Core 
degeneracy is removed and the star begins to burn helium 
relatively quietly in a convective core. The mass of the He 
core at the He ignition stage is nearly independent of the 
initial mass and chemical composition of the star. The He 
core mass at the He flash stage is Mren X 0.5Mo. 


Core He burning and horizontal branch 


During the brightest stages along the red giant branch 
mass loss by stellar wind occurs; this removes part of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


envelope’s mass. According to current estimates of the 
efficiency of mass loss and theoretical lifetimes during the 
brightest stages of the red giant branch, little mass is lost 
by stars more massive than about 1M, whereas about 20% 
of the mass is lost by stars of about 0.8M>. While burning 
helium in the core, the star settles on the horizontal branch. 
The luminosity isnow much lower than thatat the tip of the 
red giant branch and 7, is higher than the corresponding 
value on the Hayashi line. The range in TJ, covered by 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS depends on the amount of mass 
(A Mgcp) lost at the tip of the red giant branch and several 
structural details that cannot be described here. Suffice it to 
recall that at given A Mcp and initial mass, T. of horizontal 
branch models is higher for decreasing metallicity and 
increasing age. Since core H ignition occurs in He cores 
of nearly the same mass, the horizontal branch luminosity 
is nearly constant and the duration of central He burning 
is also nearly constant (a few 108 yr). 


Asymptotic giant branch phase and planetary nebula ejection 

When helium is exhausted, the C—O core contracts again 
and becomes strongly electron degenerate. In order to 
ignite carbon in such conditions, the core mass has to grow 
to about 1.4My, which is not possible because the total 
mass of these stars is smaller than this. The star continues 
to evolve thanks to the He- and H-burning shells that force 
it to expand and to settle again on the Hayashi line along 
which it moves, with the luminosity increasing and mass 
being lost by the stellar wind. The novelty with this phase 
is that the He-burning shell is thermally unstable due 
to the high temperature dependence of the 3a reactions 
and its very small thickness (the so-called Schwarzschild- 
Harm instability). The He shell goes through a series of 
paroxysmal activity alternated with periods of quiescence, 
which causes periodic expansions and contractions of the 
overlying envelope. This likely enhances the efficiency 
of stellar winds till the whole envelope is lost. In total an 
additional 10% of the star mass is stripped away, revealing 
the hot inner regions with temperatures in excess of about 
10° K. The overall duration of the asymptotic giant branch 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T T T T T T T T 
r Z=0.008 Y=0.250 


He—burning Loop 
AGB 


{ f 
Pf 5 Mo ae - | / 
a we NY ff / 
2 ae // / 
20 3 My C2 | 
a . 80 M 
+ S Up") 
XS, 088 Me [RGB 
r ae %o i 
ae | 


THEORETICAL HRD 
Loop 


Log L/Le 


MS :¢ | |.ay- A 
1 1 | 1 1 1 1 | 1 1 

4 3.5 
Log Te 


Figure 3. Upper panel: evolutionary tracks of different mass. 
The composition is Y = 0.250 and Z = 0.008. Lower panel: 
Isochrones of different age and metallicity Z as indicated. Note 
that a large range of T. is covered in this panel. 


phase is only a few 10° years. The newly expelled gas 
illuminated by the very hot central objects interacts with 
the surrounding material lost in previous stages. This is 
the origin of the so-called PLANETARY NEBULAE (PN), which 
takes about 10* years to disperse into the interstellar 
medium. 


White dwarfs 
As the planetary nebula disperses, the He- and H-burning 
shells surrounding the inert C—O core are extinguished, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


leaving a WHITE DwarF. This remnant is supported by 
electron degeneracy. Gravitational contraction is almost 
ineffective as a source of heat and therefore no nuclear fuel 
(C and/or O) can be ignited. The internal temperature is 
a few 10° K. The radius of the star is small, only a few 
thousand km (the radius of the Earth). The luminosity 
rapidly decreases to small values. The source of energy is 
mainly the thermal energy stored in the ions (the kinetic 
energy of degenerate electrons cannot be tapped). After an 
initial phase of rapid cooling, the white dwarf will take a 
long time to radiate stored energy away. As a consequence 
of the strong degeneracy, the white dwarfhasa fixed radius 
determined by its mass. Decreasing its luminosity by 
losing energy, the white dwarf will move towards lower 
Te, sliding down its line of constant radius (see the lower 
panel of figure 3. 


A counterintuitive rule 

In general, exhaustion of central fuel tends to make a star 
brighter and cooler (shift in the HR-diagram to the right 
and upward), whereas ignition of a new central fuel tends 
to make it fainter and hotter (shift in the HR-diagram to 
the left and downward). 


What about other stars? 

We deliberately omit here objects with masses comparable 
with those of giant planets (M < 0.01M,) and brown 
dwarfs (0.01M, < M < 0.08M,) that never become hot 
enough in their cores to ignite the PP chain. In contrast, 
stars more massive than 0.08Mo all ignite core H burning 
on the main sequence. 


0.08Ms < M <0.5M, 

These stars are very long lived, lasting several hundred 
billions of years. Those with mass <0.3 Mo are also fully 
convective. In any case they will never become hot enough 
to ignite helium in the core. If no other cause intervenes 
they will become helium white dwarfs. 


0.5Me < M <2.2M, 

Their evolution is that thoroughly described in the 
previous section so that no other details are given here, 
but for mentioning the transition from PP chain to CNO 
cycle, which occurs at about 1.3M, and is accompanied by 
the transition from radiative to convective core H burning. 


2.2M, < M < 8M, 

The major novelty here is that central He ignition takes 
place in a non-degenerate core. Therefore, there is no 
red giant branch to climb and no He flash. After core H 
exhaustion the stars go back to the Hayashi line, ignite He 
burning in the core, spend some time there and then go 
back towards high T. (going around a loop) to settle on 
the core He-burning band. This is nearly parallel to but 
brighter and cooler than the MS band (see the isochrone of 
0.06 Gyr, whose turn-off mass is about 7M,, shown in the 
lower panel of figure 3). Following exhaustion of central 
helium, the stars, now made of a C—O core surrounded 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by He- and H-burning shells, expand once more to the 
Hayashi line, experiencing the asymptotic giant branch 
phase on the way. Stars with mass up to about 6M, 
will become C—O white dwarfs after the planetary nebula 
phase. Stars more massive than 6M, may reach the stage 
of C ignition in the extremely degenerate C—O core while 
in the asymptotic giant branch phase. The consequent 
thermonuclear runaway will disrupt the whole star in a 
SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION. No remnant is left. 


8 Mo < M < 100M, 

This is the range of massive stars that are able to proceed 
through the whole series of nuclear burning stages up to 
the formation of the iron core. While the evolution of their 
cores is relatively straightforward, the path in the HR- 
diagram is more uncertain because these stars are heavily 
affected by mass loss by stellar wind. In brief, stars less 
massive than about (30-40)Mo evolve in the HR-diagram 
in a way quite similar to that of stars of lower mass (~7M) 
as described in the previous section. These stars should 
eventually explode as type II supernovae while shining 
as red super-giants. The situation is uncertain for more 
massive objects for which all evolutionary phases seem 
to occur at high T., the whole H-rich envelope being lost 
by mass loss. They probably explode as another type of 
supernova. In any case the final fate of all massive stars 
is core collapse triggered by photodissociation of iron, 
electron capture and neutronization of matter in the central 
core. The core collapse induces a supernova explosion 
which leaves a compact remnant: either a NEUTRON STAR of 
1.4Mo or a BLACK HOLE of larger mass depending on details 
of the collapsing core’s physical structure. 


Tracks or isochrones? 


In cluster HR-diagrams, stars lie on isochrones (loci of 
constant age but varying mass). How large is the mass 
range AMj,, spanned by stars in all post-main sequence 
phases of an isochrone or, equivalently, how much does 
an isochrone depart from the evolutionary sequence with 
the turn-off mass Myo? The answer lies in relation (8) 
and the short duration of all post-main squence phases, 
a time of the order of 0.1f; or so. Therefore, for any 
practical purpose the total lifetime can be approximated 
by t = ty + tye = (1+ 0.1)ty. Differentiating this relation 
and performing a little algebra, we obtain the approximate 
relation (to be used only for illustrative purposes) 


AMigo X 0.045M70. (17) 


Except for massive stars, say above 10M. (where AMigo 
is significant), this mass spread is small. Therefore, over 
ample ranges of Mro and hence ages, isochrones are almost 
identical to the evolutionary track of the star just leaving 
the main sequence: compare the upper and lower panels 
of figure 3. In any case, accurate age determinations are 
ultimately possible only by using detailed isochrones. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Interpreting the HR-diagram of star clusters with 
single stellar populations 

STAR CLUSTERS are assemblies of stars for which one 
can reasonably assume the same initial composition 
[X, Y,Z], same age (within a narrow range), same 
distance and finally the same initial mass function (IMF). 
Therefore, they constitute useful examples of a single 
STELLAR POPULATION Whose properties bear very much on 
understanding the HR-diagram of any type of stellar 
population from clusters to galaxies, the latter conceived 
as convolutions of many single stellar populations. 

Single stellar populations are governed by the so- 
called fuel consumption theorem: the contribution of 
stars in any post-main sequence phase to the integrated 
luminosity of a single stellar population is directly 
proportional to the amount of fuel burnt during that stage. 
In other words the fuel consumption theorem explains 
how and why stars distribute themselves along a given 
isochrone with number frequencies that vary with the 
position (evolutionary phase). In other words it explains 
why clusters of different age and chemical composition 
have different HR-diagrams. 

The turn-off mass Myo of a single stellar population 
with age t is defined as the mass of the star at the stage of 
central H exhaustion. Stars with mass M; < My7o are still 
on the main sequence, whereas those with M; > Myo are 
in later evolutionary stages. In other words, the turn-off is 
the stage at which stars leave the main sequence, venture 
towards later stages and eventually die. The rate at which 
this occurs is given by 


b(t) = ®(My0)|Mro| stars yr! (18) 


where ®(M;) = AM ere is the IMF and Myo is rate at which 
the turn-off mass decreases at increasing age. Therefore, 
b(t) is the evolutionary flux of the single stellar population 
and does not depend on the particular evolutionary 
stage. It is the speed at which stars enter and leave any 
evolutionary phase. In other words, the number of stars 
N; in the jth post-main sequence phase is 


Nj = b(t)t; (19) 


where f; is the lifetime of the phase. 

The integrated bolometric luminosity Ly can be 
separated into the contribution from main sequence stars 
and from all the others: 


PMS 


MS 
Lr = 0 Li+ NL); (20) 
i J 


where L; is the luminosity of single MS stars and (L); 
is the mean luminosity of the post-main sequence jth 
phase. Denoting by M; the lower mass limit of the IMF, 
and using the mass-luminosity relation L(M) = BM", the 
contribution from main sequence stars becomes 


MS Mto AB 
Li =p L(M)®(M) dM ~ (Mio* — Mi *) 
i Mi; 


a-x 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


AB 


a-x 


Mio" (21) 


and that of post-main sequence stars 


PMS PMS 
Lows = b(t (L); = b(t) DOF; (22) 

J J 
where F; = t;(L); is the nuclear consumption during 


phase j, after which the theorem is named. F; = mi + 
0.1mi° where mi and mie are the amounts of hydrogen 
and helium burnt (in solar units). It follows from the 
above equations that the contribution to Ly by post-main 
sequence stars increases with the number of stars in the 
phase and its duration. 

Given a cluster with age t, total bolometric luminosity 
Lr(t) (in solar units) and total number of stars Nr, the 
theory of single stellar populations predicts—explains the 
number of stars expected-observed in each post-main 
sequence evolutionary phase. Indeed relation (17) can be 
rewritten as 

vy - £0 


;= Rol t; = BO)Ly (tj. (23) 


It can be shown that B(t) is nearly independent of 
the IMF and constant over a large range of ages. It goes 
from 5 x 107! to 2 x 10-"' for ages lying between 10’ and 
10'° yr. To fully appreciate the potential of this result let 
us consider the asymptotic giant branch stars, for which 
theory predicts a lifetime of a few 10° yr (say 5 x 10° yr 
in round numbers). It follows that N; ~ 10x10-°Lr(t), 
which means that 10 asymptotic giant branch stars are 
expected in a cluster with Ly = 10° Lo, in agreement with 
real clusters. If the total luminosity is a factor of 10 less, 
almost no asymptotic giant branch stars are expected to 
be seen. The asymptotic giant branch phase is still there, 
but the corresponding stars could be easily missed for 
statistical reasons. 


Age of star clusters 

Globular clusters 

Determining the age of globular clusters is a complex game 
which requires a knowledge of many parameters, such as 
the helium content Y, metallicity [M/H], CNO abundance 
[CNO/H], distance modulus and reddening. 


Abundance of helium 

Direct spectroscopic measurements of helium abundance 
are not possible because the stars of globular clusters are 
too cool. The abundance is derived from several indirect 
methods which yield the value Y = 0.235 + 0.005. 


Metallicity 

By this quantity one usually refers solely to the iron 
content expressed in the standard notation [Fe/H] = 
log(Nge/Nu) — log[(Nre/Nu)o], where N, denotes the 
number density of atoms of any species. The majority 
of globular clusters have [Fe/H] ranging from —1.0 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to —2.3 dex with a typical uncertainty of 0.15 dex. 
The observation of HR-diagrams showing sequences 
of virtually undetectable width indicates a uniform 
abundance of heavy elements within the stars of a 
particular cluster. 


Abundances of a-elements 

An important question that has arisen in recent years is 
whether the abundances of elements such as C, N, O, Mg 
with respect to Fe have always been like those observed 
in the Sun, i.e. [X;/Fe] = 0 in the standard notation, or 
whether instead they had supersolar values [X; /Fe] > 0 for 
[Fe/H] < —1. Current observations yield [X; /Fe] from 0.3 
to 1.0 for low metallicities. The overabundance is different 
for different elements. We will refer to it as the [C,N, O, 
Mg/Fe] versus [Fe/H] relation. 


Reddening 

Since there are many globular clusters with low color 
excess (Ez_y < 0.1) spanning a broad range of metallicities 
(up to [Fe/H] = —1), reddening is not a serious problem 
in finding the intrinsic color of the turn-off. 


Distances 

The distance scale of globular clusters is perhaps the topic 
of major controversy. There are three ways to derive 
globular cluster distances. 

(1) Subdwarfs. The nearby subdwarfs (metal-poor 
stars with halo kinematics located on a sequence parallel 
to but fainter than the main sequence) close enough to 
have measurable parallaxes allow us (i) to derive absolute 
My so that accurate testing of theoretical zero-age main 
sequences at varying [Fe/H] in the low-metallicity regime 
is possible; and (ii) to tie the relative cluster distances to 
the local distance scale, under the assumption that these 
stars are similar to unevolved stars in globular clusters. 

(2) RR Lyrae. Modern determinations of the distance 
modulus reduce to comparing the apparent magnitudes 
of the RRLYRAESTARS or equivalently horizontal branch stars 
with the corresponding absolute visual magnitudes. There 
are several independent methods to obtain the absolute 
visual magnitudes of RR Lyrae stars, My(RR), which 
ultimately lead one to assess whether or not a correlation 
between My (RR) and [Fe/H] exists and try to fix the slope 
and zero point of this relation. The zero point is of critical 
importance for determining the age of the oldest clusters, 
whereas the slope A My (RR)/A[Fe/H] bears very much on 
the age—metallicity relation, i.e. whether or not the age of 
globular clusters becomes younger at increasing [Fe/H]. 

(3) White dwarfs. This method rests on fitting 
the theoretical white dwarf-cooling sequences to the 
observational position of white dwarfs in the HR-diagram. 


The second parameter 

The HR-diagram of globular clusters can be ranked as 
a function of the metallicity [Fe/H]. Generally, metal- 
rich globular clusters have cool RGBs and red horizontal 
branches, while the opposite is true in metal-poor globular 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


clusters, in which very extended, blue horizontal branches 
are observed. This rule is, however, broken by a number 
of globular clusters whose metallicities are identical (as 
far as we can tell) but whose horizontal branches are 
different. As a matter of fact, we have metal-poor 
globular clusters with red horizontal branches. This opens 
the gate to the so-called second parameter problem: in 
addition to metallicity another important parameter helps 
to determine the morphology of HR-diagrams. Several 
second parameters have been suggested, among which are 
the helium content, the [C, N, O, Mg/Fe] versus [Fe/H] 
relation, the age or finally a subtle combination of all of 
them. 


Methods for determining the age 

Anessential prerequisite is that HR-diagrams of extremely 
good photometric quality with precision down to a tenth 
of a magnitude are available. If so, ages can be derived 
from the following. 

(1) In the isochrone fitting method all the above 
ingredients are simultaneously necessary. These ages are 
therefore subject to the highest uncertainty. 

(2) The AV method rests on the fact that the turn- 
off magnitude becomes fainter as a cluster ages, while 
the horizontal branch luminosity is virtually constant. 
AV is the magnitude difference between the turn-off 
and the horizontal branch at the turn-off color. The 
method is independent of reddening and to some extent 
of distance, but it requires an assumption for the helium 
abundance. The disadvantage is that not all globular 
clusters possess RR Lyrae stars, and some horizontal 
branches are not horizontal. Furthermore, the turn-off is 
often almost vertical, thus making the identification of the 
turn-off magnitude very uncertain. Finally, there is the 
effect of the controversial relations My (RR) — [Fe/H] and 
[C, N, O, Mg/Fe] — [Fe/H]. 

(3) The A(B — V) method is based on the color 
difference between the turn-off and the base of the red 
giant branch. This color difference decreases as the cluster 
age increases. Within a certain approximation, the method 
is independent of distance, reddening, photometric zero 
point, helium abundance and, to first order, variations in 
[Fe/H]. Among others, the major uncertainties are with the 
transformations from T, to colors, and the [C, N, O, ... /Fe] 
ratios, all these affecting the turn-off color. 


Ages, age spread, and age-metallicity relation 

The absolute ages, the age spread at given metallicity 
and the mean age—metallicity relation of globular clusters 
are significant for COSMOLOGY and GALAXY FORMATION. The 
oldest globular clusters set a firm lower limit on the 
age of the universe, the age spread and age-metallicity 
relation constraining the time scale and mechanism of 
halo formation. Because of this, an impressive body of 
literature exists on the age subject. Since even a short 
summary of the vivid debate is not possible here, we 
limit ourselves to stating that over the years the following 
alternative scenarios have emerged. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(1) The age of globular clusters peaks at about 16 (+2) 
Gyr, with wings going down to 10 Gyr and up to 20 Gyr. 
The spread in age is large, and the most metal-rich globular 
clusters are also the youngest objects. It follows that the 
age is the second parameter and halo formation occurred 
on a long time scale. 

(2) Globular clusters are younger than above. Only 
the most metal-poor globular clusters (presumably the 
oldest objects) may have ages near 15 Gyr, and, finally, 
ages below 12 Gyr and above 20 Gyr appear to be 
unlikely. Furthermore, there is no substantial body of 
evidence that the age is the dominant second parameter 
nor for a significant spread in age among clusters of given 
metallicity. 

(3) Globular clusters are even younger. Their age is 
about 12+2 Gyr. This result is ascribed to improvements in 
the equation of state and other details of the input physics 
that cannot be discussed here. 

(4) Remarkably, most of the ages for globular clusters 
estimated before the Hipparcos mission fell in the range 
14-18 Gyr (with exceptions), whereas most of those after 
Hipparcos are in the range 10-14 Gyr. The age spread and 
mean age-metallicity relation are still debated. 

(5) Going deeper into the reason for the discordant re- 
sults, this can always be reduced to knowing the distances 
of globular clusters. Most of the uncertainty stems from a 
difference in distance modulus of ~0.25 mag, which is the 
typical uncertainty with which the magnitudes of horizon- 
tal branch, turn-off, main sequence and white dwarf stars 
are known (from both theory and observations). Amaz- 
ingly, an uncertainty of about 0.05 mag would immedi- 
ately imply an uncertainty of ~1 Gyr. Although we can- 
not firmly choose between 10-14 and 14-18 Gyr, the first 
option is certainly to be preferred. 


Old open clusters 

Old open clusters, whose ages range from say 1 to 7-8 Gyr, 
trace most of the history of the Galactic disk. Therefore, the 
correct ranking as a function of age, chemical composition 
and kinematic properties, is of paramount importance 
for understanding the process of star formation in the 
Galactic disk. Furthermore, old open clusters have turn- 
off masses between 1M, and 2Mo. Therefore, they probe 
the stellar structure in that mass range, in which during 
the main sequence phase the transitions from radiative to 
convective cores, i.e. from PP chain to CNO cycle, occur. 
Later they see the transition from bright red giant branches 
as in M67 to much less evident red giant branches as in 
the Hyades. The techniques used to interpret the HR- 
diagrams of open clusters are similar to those of GCs. 
However, the much smaller number of stars present in 
each open cluster and their sparse spatial distribution 
make the identification of the main sequence, red giant 
branch, He-burning band—here called the red clump to 
distinguish it from the classical horizontal branches— 
much more difficult. The small total number of stars and 
the fuel consumption theorem cause the red giant branch, 
red clump, and asymptotic giant branch to be populated by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


only by a handful of stars (if any at all). The contamination 
by foreground objects blurs the main sequence and turn- 
off. In reality the whole HR-diagram is often immersed in 
a bath of contaminating stars. Despite these uncertainties, 
ages and the age—metallicity relation are derived. The ages 
go from 0.9 Gyr for NGC 2477 to 8 Gyr for NGC 6791. As 
far as the age—metallicity relation is concerned, it runs at 
nearly constant metallicity close to the solar value. 


Young, rich clusters of the Magellanic Clouds 

Young clusters with physical properties (luminosity, total 
mass, shape, etc...) comparable with those of globular 
clusters are no longer formed in our own Galaxy so that 
testing the theory of STELLAR EVOLUTION with the same 
accuracy as for globular clusters is not feasible. In the 
Milky Way, young clusters such as the Hyades, h+x Persei 
and many young associations contain so few stars that 
only the main sequence is visible. One is forced to 
combine HR-diagrams for a chosen age class, but spurious 
inhomogeneities due to different chemical composition 
are easily introduced. Luckily, the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS 
(satellites of the Milky Way) are rich in objects of this type. 
Because of the large number of stars contained in these 
clusters, it is possible to make meaningful comparisons 
even for the shortest-lived evolutionary phases. The 
classical workbench for this kind of study is the cluster 
NGC 1866 in the LMC. This cluster, whose total mass 
is estimated to be in the range (3.6-5) x 10°Mo, is well 
populated throughout the various evolutionary phases, 
exhibits an extended loop of giant stars and is rich in 
Cepheids, for which membership is less of a problem. 
The classical estimates of the turn-off mass and age of 
NGC 1866 are 5M, and 70 x 10° yr, respectively. The 
existence of Cepheids among the other giant stars of the 
cluster allows us to check the mutual consistency between 
properties derived from stellar models and pulsational 
theory. Corresponding attempts in our own galaxy have 
always been hampered by the uncertainty in the cluster 
membership of the Cepheid stars (always the distance 
problem). 


Star formation history of galaxies from their 
HR-diagrams 

Figure 4 shows two HR-diagrams for field stars in different 
astrophysical environments: (i) the Galactic bulge (upper 
panel), and (ii) an external galaxy (lower panel). Although 
they seem to greatly differ from each other, they share 
many points in common. In HR-diagrams such as these, 
the interpretation by means of single stellar populations 
we have used for single clusters, no matter whether old or 
young, no longer applies. Indeed, these HR-diagrams are 
the results of many stellar populations spanning ample 
ranges of ages, chemical compositions and distances, 
suffering different amounts of extinction and reddening, 
and maybe having different IMFs. Finally, we remind 
the reader that owing to the complex nature of these HR- 
diagrams, in addition to the key parameters characterizing 
the stellar populations, the number density of stars in each 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


14 1 1 1 


16 + oe 4 
DISC STARS - 


© 
ww 


GALACTIC BULGE 
n ! ! ! . i 
Q | z 3 


T T T T T 


20 LEO | 


Blue Loop 
RGB 


RED CLUMP 


24 -— #£MS STARS 


Figure 4. Upper panel: the HR-diagram toward the Galactic 
center as observed through one of the Baade windows. The dark 
areas are HST data, whereas the gray areas are ground-based 
data. Lower panel: the HR-diagram of the dwarf spheroidal 
galaxy Leo I in the Local Group. 


subarea is related to the past history of star formation and 
structural properties of the host galaxy. Because of this, 
much interest has recently been given to deciphering the 
past star formation and chemical enrichment and structure 
of the population generating such complex HR-diagrams. 
Various sophisticated techniques aimed at unraveling 
the parameters in question have been designed. In the 
following we will briefly analyze the two HR-diagrams 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


13 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


shown. 


Galactic bulge 

This is the HR-diagram of stars observed towards the 
Galactic center through one of the Baade windows. In 
this HR-diagram there are stars coming from different 
regions along the line of sight: the stars in the bulge 
itself (the intrinsic depth and extinction of the bulge 
combine to blur their magnitudes and colors) and the stars 
belonging to different zones of the disk, each of these 
at a different distance, affected by a different degree of 
extinction and containing a different total mass in stars. 
The only easy thing to say is that main sequence stars 
of the disk are responsible for the blue plume along the 
main sequence band, whereas disentangling all the others 
requires an iterative comparison between simulations of 
the HR-diagram based on a model mass distribution, star 
formation rate, and chemical enrichment in both the bulge 
and the disk, the extinction law along the line of sight 
and the observed HR-diagram. Neglecting all details 
of the techniques used, the study of a number of such 
HR-diagrams has led to the following provisional picture 
about the various components. 

(i) A two-component system (disk and spheroid) is 
sufficient, with no compelling evidence for the so-called 
thick disc. 

(ii) The majority of stars belong to the disk. They 
are rather metal rich (0.008 < Z < 0.02) and relatively 
old (7-4.5 Gyr). The star formation rate exponentially 
declined with a time scale of about 2.5 Gyr. The Disc has a 
mass distribution with vertical scale height z = 230-250 pc 
and radial exponential profile with scale length ho = 3.5- 
4.5 kpe. 

(iii) There is another much younger and thinner 
component (Z) = 100 pc; ho = 4.5 kpc) with Z = 0.015- 
0.020, age from 5.0 to 2.0 Gyr and constant star formation 
rate. 

(iv) The spheroid seems to contain two populations: a 
very old, metal-poor halo component (Z = 0.0004—0.005), 
age of 16-10 Gyr), with a star formation rate exponentially 
decreasing over a time scale of about 3.0 Gyr, and a 
younger metal-rich bulge component with Z = 0.005-0.02, 
an age of 10-5.0 Gyr and star formation rate exponentially 
decreasing with time scale of 2.5 Gyr. 

(v) Ratios of the components are halo: intermediate 
disk = 1:1, bulge: intermediate disk = 7:9, young 
disk:intermediate disc = 1:10. 

(vi) There seems to be a sharp increase in the number 
star density, a sort of stellar ring, centered at about 3.5 kpc 
from the galactic center with o = 0.5 kpc. 

(vii)The mass distributions along three lines toward 
the bulge are not the same. Does this suggest that the bulge 
has a bar? 

(viii) Finally, the bulge, in addition to the main 
component of old stars, also seems to contain younger 
stars (age of about 8-9 Gyr and Z = 0.005-0.03), perhaps 
associated with formation of the bar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


External galaxy: Leo I 

This is the HR-diagram of the LocaL croup dwarf 
spheroidal (dSph) galaxy Leo I. In this case the distance 
and extinction are less of a problem as they are the same 
for all stars. Details of the galaxy’s structure are not 
considered here, because the data refer to the galaxy 
as a whole. Leo I is a metal-poor galaxy (estimated 
[Fe/H] = —2) at a distance of about 300 kpc. Its HR- 
diagram shows very broad main sequence-turn-off and 
subgiant regions with no evidence of discontinuities, a 
compact broad red clump, a large red giant branch, an 
inconspicuous horizontal branch if any at all and a V- 
shaped structure above the red clump. The majority of 
stars in the red arm of the V-shaped structure are red giant 
branch objects (low mass) with a smaller fraction made of 
more massive core He-burning objects in the red stages of 
the loop. The blue arm is stars of the same evolutionary 
phase but on the blue side of the loop. All these features 
together suggest that star formation in Leo I extended from 
10-15 Gyr ago to less than 1 Gyr ago and proceeded in a 
rather smooth fashion. The lack of a prominent horizontal 
branch and the low metallicity suggest that very little star 
formation took place earlier than ~10 Gyr ago. 

Field stars have been studied in other galaxies of the 
Local Group going from the Magellanic Clouds, M31 and 
M32 to many dwarf irregulars (dIrr) and dSph, and their 
star formation and chemical enrichment histories have 
been derived. Several interesting preliminary conclusions 
are possible. (i) No two galaxies of the Local Group have 
the same star formation history. (ii) The LMC and SMC 
had dominant episodes of star formation starting only 
several Gyr ago. An old component is, however, present. 
(iii) Many dIrr have old populations (NGC 6822). (iv) 
No galaxy is composed exclusively of stars older than 10 
Gyr. (v) Some galaxies have only a small fraction of stars 
older than 10 Gyr (Leo I). (vi) Some galaxies had nearly 
constant star formation rate up to the recent past followed 
by strong activity (Sextans A). (vii) Others had recurrent 
episodes of varying intensity separated by periods of 
quiescence (Carina). (viii) The second parameter problem 
is common throughout the Local Group. Many low- 
metallicity galaxies have red horizontal branches. This 
suggests that their oldest stars are indeed younger than 
the oldest globular clusters. 


Motion in the HR-diagram is the outward and 
visible sign of an inward nuclear turmoil 
John Faulkner to his students 


Bibliography 
The literature on the various subjects related to the HR- 
diagram being as large as now it is, the following cannot 
be comprehensive at all. However, we indicate some basic 
textbooks and some surveys of research in the field that 
may guide the reader to extend his/her interest. 

Useful textbooks on stellar structure and evolution 
are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


14 


Hertzsprung—Russell Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Clayton D D 1983 Principles of Stellar Evolution and 
Nucleosynthesis (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press) 

Cox J P and Giuli R T 1968 Principles of Stellar Structure 
vol 1, 2 (New York: Gordon and Breach) 

Huang R Qand YuKN 1998 Stellar Astrophysics (Singapore: 
Springer) 

Kippenhahn R and Weigert A 1990 Stellar Structure and 
Evolution (Astronomy and Astrophysics Library) (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Phillips A C 1994 The Physics of the Stars (London: Wiley) 

Schwarzschild M 1958 Structure and Evolution of the Stars 
(New York: Dover) 


Review and research articles on stellar structure, 
evolution and cluster ages are 


Chaboyer B, Demarque P, Kernan P J and Krauss L M 1998 
Astrophys. J. 494 96 

Chiosi C, Bertelli G and Bressan A 1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 30 235 

Demarque P 1996 The Extra-galactic Distance Scale ed M 
Livio (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 30 

Fusi-Pecci F and Cacciari C 1991 New Windows to the 
Universe, ed F Sanchez and M Vasquez (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) p 364 

Iben I Jr 1974 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 12 215 

Iben I Jr and Renzini A 1983 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 21 
271 

Iben I Jr and Renzini A 1984 Phys. Rep. 105(6) 329 

Renzini A and Fusi-Pecci F 1988 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 26 199 

Salaris M and Weiss A 1998 Astron. Astrophys. 335 943 

Salaris M, Degl’Innocenti S and Weiss A 1997 Astrophys. J. 
479 665 

Sarajedini A, Chaboyer B and Demarque P 1997 Publ. 
Astron. Soc. Pac. 109 1321 

Vandenberg D A 1998 The Interaction between Observation 
and Theory, ed T R Bedding, A J Booth and J Davis 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 439 


The fuel consumption theorem is by 


Renzini A and Buzzoni A 1986 Spectral Evolution of Galaxies 
ed C Chiosi and A Renzini (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 135 


Review and research articles on dwarf galaxies and 
the Galactic bulge are 


Mateo M 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 435 

Ng Y K, Bertelli G, Chiosi C and Bressan A 1996 Astron. 
Astrophys. 310 771 

Wyse RFG, Gilmore G and Franx M 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 35 637 


Cesare Chiosi 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


15 


Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics 


The Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics (HIA) is the 
Institute within the NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL of Canada 
responsible for providing astronomical facilities, and 
developing related instrumentation and software for 
Canadian researchers. The Institute was established 
in 1975, and now operates 1.8 m and 1.2 m optical 
telescopes at the DOMINION ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY Close 
to Victoria, BC, as well as a 26 m radio telescope, a 
seven-antenna synthesis telescope and two telescopes 
dedicated to monitoring the solar radio flux at the DOMINION 
RADIO ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY near Penticton, BC. HIA 
also supports NRC’s international partnerships in the 
3.6 m optical infrared CANADA-FRANCE-HAWAII TELESCOPE and 
the 15 m submillimeter JAMES CLERK MAXWELL TELESCOPE On 
Mauna Kea, Hawaii, and the Gemini twin 8 m optical 
infrared telescopes on Mauna Kea and on Cerro Pachon 
in Chile. The Institute has about 100 staff. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.hia.nrc.ca. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Herzberg, Gerhard (1904-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Herzberg, Gerhard (1904-) 


Molecular spectroscopist, born in Hamburg, Germany, 
winner of the Nobel prize for chemistry (1971) ‘for his 
contributions to the knowledge of electronic structure 
and geometry of molecules, particularly free radicals’, 
specifically methylene, a molecule having a carbon with 
a hydrogen on either side, since identified in nebulae and 
other interstellar objects. Herzberg’s first application for a 
job as an astronomer, to Germany’s Hamburg Observatory, 
was turned down with the advice that ‘there is no point in 
thinking of a career in astronomy unless one has private 
means of support’, and he turned to engineering, and 
atomic and molecular physics. At Gottingen, Herzberg 
worked under Max Born and James Franck, and at Bristol, 
on the quantum mechanics of molecules, work that he 
continued in Darmstadt. In 1934, he was dismissed from 
his job there because his wife was Jewish, and emigrated to 
Saskatoon in Canada. After a brief period at the University 
of Chicago and the Yerkes Observatory, he returned to 
Canada to establish a laboratory for fundamental research 
in spectroscopy, now known as the Herzberg Institute. 
He identified the water in Comet Kohoutek, and in 1980 
discovered triatomic hydrogen. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hesiod (eighth century Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hesiod (eighth century Bc) 


Greek epic poet who described his cosmology in Theogeny, 
the birth of the gods, which he derived from Babylonian 
mythology. In his family tree of the gods, Chaos (the 
yawning gap between Earth and Heaven) produced 
Erebus (the Abyss) and Night, who produced Ether and 
Day. At the same time, Earth produced the Heavens, 
Mountains, and Sea. The Heavens and Earth then 
produced Cronos. This family tree was mimicked by his 
structural model of the universe, divided into Heaven, 
Ether, Chaos, Earth, Erebus, Tartarus and surrounded by 
the Ocean. The cosmology is completely pre-scientific but 
Hesiod’s is the earliest surviving reference to the Pleiades. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hess, Harry Hammond (1906-69) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hess, Harry Hammond (1906-69) 


Geophysicist, born in New York City, professor of geology 
at Princeton, led Project Mohole, the first expedition to drill 
through the Earth’s oceanic crust to the mantle beneath, 
theorized that spreading of mid-ocean ridges was the 
source of new mantle-derived continental material. Also 
a lunar geologist. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hess, Victor Franz (1883-1964) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hess, Victor Franz (1883-1964) 


Physicist, born in Waldstein Castle, near Peggau in 
Steiermark, Austria, Nobel prizewinner in physics (1936, 
shared with CARL ANDERSON) ‘for his discovery of cosmic 
radiation’. In a distinguished career in atomic, nuclear 
and atmospheric physics, Hess held positions in Vienna, 
Graz, New Jersey, Washington, DC, and Innsbruck. In 
1911-13 he discovered ‘ultra-radiation’ (cosmic radiation), 
and later founded the station at the Hafelekar mountain 
(altitude 2300 m) near Innsbruck for observing and 
studying cosmic rays. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hevelius, Johannes [Jan Hewelcke] (1611-87) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hevelius, Johannes [Jan Hewelcke] 
(1611-87) 


German astronomer and instrument-maker, born in 
Danzig, now Gdansk, Poland. Hevelius was an accom- 
plished instrument-maker and engraver. Influenced by 
TYCHO BRAHE in subject and instrumentation, he erected in 
Danzig what must have been then the world’s finest obser- 
vatory Stellaburgum (cf Brahe’s Uraniborg), destroyed by 
fire in 1679. He made several large telescopes and some 
of the last large, open-sighted instruments, to which he 
introduced the vernier scale for reading the scales and 
determining star positions. He wrote a book on instru- 
ments, the Machina Coelestis (1673) and his widow Elisa- 
beth posthumously published his catalog of star positions, 
Prodromus Astronomiae and his celestial atlas Firmamentum 
Sobiescianum (1687, 1690). The atlas introduced the con- 
stellations Canes Venatici, Lacerta, Leo Minor, Lynx and 
Vulpecula cum Ansere (the fox and the goose, now known 
simply as Vulpecula), and named Scutum Sobiescianum 
(now simply Scutum, the shield) after the King of Poland, 
John Sobieski. Two constellations that Hevelius intro- 
duced did not survive—Mons Maenalus and Cerberus. 
Selenographia, his atlas of the Moon, dubbed the gray flat 
regions as maria but his crater names were superseded by 
those of rIccIOLI. He discovered four comets, and was one 
of the first to observe the transit of Mercury. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hewish, Antony (1924— ) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hewish, Antony (1924— ) 


Radioastronomer, born in Fowey, Cornwall, Nobel 
prizewinner for physics (1974) for pioneering research in 
radio astrophysics, and the discovery of pulsars. After 
working in war-time radar development, he was educated 
and worked at Cambridge where he became professor of 
radioastronomy and led the Mullard Radio Astronomy 
Observatory from 1982-8. First worked on _ the 
scintillation or twinkling of radio ‘stars’, which he used 
to investigate the properties of the plasma clouds in the 
ionosphere. Extended this to identify scintillation due to 
the solar wind and built a radio telescope to use this 
technique to obtain very high angular resolution 
observations of radio sources. By a stroke of good 
fortune the observational requirements were precisely 
those needed to detect pulsars and it was with this 
telescope that Hewish’s graduate student, JOCELYN BELL, 
noticed them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hey, James Stanley (1909-90) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hey, James Stanley (1909-90) 


English radioastronomy pioneer, made three fundamental 
discoveries in radio astronomy. Working on radar during 
the second World War, he discovered radio interference 
from solar storms (at first thought to be enemy ‘jamming’ 
of radar). It is surprising that he should have found 
this emission serendipitously, since solar radio emission 
had been sought without success by several scientists 
since Hertz discovered radio waves in 1888 (Thomas 
Edison, Oliver Lodge, J Scheiner and C Nordham). 
Then in attempting to detect and predict V-2 rockets he 
saw the radar reflections from meteor trails. Finally, 
from Richmond Park (a government military research 
laboratory) he detected Cygnus A as interference behind 
meteor trail reflections, the first recognized discrete source 
of radio waves. Became Chief Scientific Officer at the Royal 
Radar Establishment at Malvern, and constructed one of 
the two first variable-spacing radio interferometers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hidalgo ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hidalgo 


An asteroid discovered by Walter Baade in 1920, 
designated (944) Hidalgo. It was the first known Jupiter- 
crossing asteroid, having an orbit that takes it from 2.01 
AU, near the inner edge of the main belt, to 9.69 AU, 
just beyond the mean distance of Saturn, in a period of 
14.15 years. Hidalgo’s mean distance from the Sun is 5.85 
AU (875 million km); its diameter is uncertain but is about 
40 km. Its highly inclined (42°) and eccentric (0.66) orbit 
suggests that it may be a large extinct cometary nucleus. 
It is a D-type object, indicating a dark surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


High-z Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The distant cluster MS1054—03 at a redshift of 0.83. 
This is the most distant cluster found with the Rosat satellite. 
The image was taken with the Hubble Space Telescope (courtesy 
van Dokkum, Franx, ESA and NASA). The cluster is easily 
recognized by the high density of red galaxies. These galaxies 
appear red because of the high redshift of the cluster. This 
figure is reproduced as Color Plate 7. 


High-z Clusters 


CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES are the largest and most massive 
structures in the universe, held together by gravity. Their 
density is more than a thousand times the average density 
of the universe, and they are filled with galaxies, hot gas 
and dark matter. 

It is very interesting to study clusters of galaxies out 
to the largest distances and highest REDsHIFTS. The most 
distant clusters are so far away that the light has traveled 
for a large fraction of the age of the universe, and we 
are therefore looking back in time when we study these 
clusters. 

It is very hard to find the high redshift clusters. The 
oldest method relies on deep optical images taken of the 
sky. The clusters can be recognized as small concentrations 
of very faint galaxies. The Palomar Sky Survey was used 
to find clusters, but it is very hard to find clusters beyond a 
redshift of 0.4. Other techniques have been more efficient 
at finding higher redshift clusters. Powerful RADIOGALAXIES 
can reside in clusters, although most of the clusters found 
in this way are not very rich. 

One of the most efficient ways of finding high redshift 
clusters is based on their x-ray emission. The hot gas that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hea Mpc 
—0.6 -0.4 -0.2 06 0.2 0.4 0.6 
: aE 


SFE eee rs 
3 al i * 


0.6 


aremin 


a Fo) —1,0 —0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 15) 
aremin 


Figure 2. The most distant x-ray cluster RXJ0848.9+4452 at a 
redshift of 1.26. The contours show the x-ray emission, overlaid 
over an optical image of the cluster (courtesy P Rosati). The 
confirmed cluster members are indicated with boxes. Many 
more galaxies are expected to be member of this cluster. 


fills clusters emits strongly in x-rays. This x-ray emission 
is so bright that it can be seen out to redshifts of 1 and 
higher. An example of such an x-ray cluster is shown in 
figure 1. This cluster, MS1054—03, was discovered with the 
Einstein satellite in a deep survey on part of the sky. All 
x-ray sources in the survey were carefully identified in the 
optical by Isabella Gioia and collaborators. Finally, optical 
spectroscopy with the 10 m W M Keck telecope showed 
that this was the most distant cluster discovered with the 
Einstein satellite. It has a redshift of 0.83, and the universe 
was less than half its present age when the cluster emitted 
the light we observe. 

The most distant cluster found in this way is 
RXJ0848.9+4452, which was first detected by the Rosat 
satellite, and identified as a cluster at a redshift of 1.26 
by Rosati and collaborators. The image is shown in 
figure 2. The cluster is as massive as nearby ABELL CLUSTERS. 
The optical emission is quite faint because the light of 
the galaxies has been shifted to the infrared by the high 
redshift. Images in the infrared are necessary to find such 
high redshift clusters. Surprisingly, this cluster has been 
found to have a very close neighbor, at the same redshift. 
The second cluster had been found serendipitously by an 
infrared survey of the sky. This pair of clusters forms a 
‘supercluster’. 

Now that large samples of clusters at high redshifts 
have been found, we can determine whether the clusters 
change with time, and whether the galaxies inside clusters 
change with time. The first question to answer is 
whether the number of clusters is different at high 
redshift. Many theoretical models predict that clusters 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-z Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


form ‘hierarchically’, which means that large clusters grow 
by the accumulation of smaller clusters. Some of these 
theories predict that the most massive clusters should not 
exist, or be very rare at redshifts of 1. Interestingly enough, 
the cluster MS1054—03 is so massive that its existence at 
a redshift of 0.83 poses problems for some theories. In 
general, there is no strong evidence that the number of 
clusters changes with redshift. The newest results indicate, 
however, that the most massive clusters are somewhat 
rarer at high redshift. 

The high redshift clusters are also very suitable for 
studying the evolution of the galaxies inside the clusters. 
In the nearby universe, rich clusters are dominated by 
SO galaxies and elliptical galaxies, and have only a small 
fraction of spiral galaxies at their center. Only recently 
has it become possible to obtain images of high redshift 
clusters with a quality good enough to undertake such 
studies. The very sharp images taken with the Hubble 
Space Telescope are of comparable quality to the earlier 
images taken of low redshift clusters. 

Studies by Dressler and co-workers have demon- 
strated that the fraction of sPIRAL GALAXIES is significantly 
higher in clusters at a redshift of 0.5. Figure 3 shows the 
center of the cluster CL0939+4713 at a redshift of 0.41. The 
high fraction of spiral galaxies in the center of this cluster 
is obvious. Generally, high redshift clusters have far fewer 
SO galaxies than low redshift clusters. These galaxies are 
the most common type of galaxy in low redshift clusters. 
They have probably been added to the low redshift clus- 
ters from the outside. Before they fall into the clusters, 
they look like spiral galaxies. When they fall in, they lose 
their gas, and appear as SO galaxies soon after. 

At even higher redshifts, the evidence for merging 
between galaxies becomes stronger. It has been speculated 
for a long time that ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES form by collisions 
of less massive galaxies. After two galaxies collide, they 
quickly merge together and form a new galaxy. If the two 
galaxies contain no or little gas, they will form a regular 
elliptical after the mergers. 

It has always been difficult to find such mergers in 
clusters. However, a recent study of the rich cluster 
MS1054-03 shows that 18% of the member galaxies are 
mergers. These colliding galaxies are shown in figure 4. It 
is likely that the mergers evolve into elliptical galaxies or 
SO galaxies. This is direct evidence that galaxies evolve 
through merging. (See also GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND 
MERGERS.) 

The mergers and the conversion of spiral galaxies 
into SO’s may very well explain why galaxies in 
clusters are very different from galaxies outside clusters. 
Understanding the origin of this effect is one of the goals 
of studies of distant cluster galaxies. By observing these 
clusters, astronomers can directly see what happened to 
the galaxies in the distant past. 


Marijn Franx 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. The central part of the distant cluster CL 0939+4713, 
imaged with the Hubble Space Telescope (courtesy A Dressler 
and NASA). The center contains many spiral galaxies, unlike 
clusters nearby. Many of these spiral galaxies look disturbed. 


Figure 4. Mergers in the distant cluster MS1054—03 (courtesy 
van Dokkum, Franx, ESA and NASA). These galaxies have been 
confirmed to be cluster members. They are classified as mergers. 
Some show tidal arms, others double nuclei, or faint extensions 
due to the collisions of galaxies. Such mergers may have been 
much more prevalent in the past. This figure is reproduced as 
Color Plate 8. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High Altitude Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


High Altitude Observatory 


The High Altitude Observatory (HAO), in Boulder, CO, 
established in 1940, is dedicated to research in solar and 
solar-terrestrial physics with emphasis on solar—variability 
and its impact on the Earth. HAO is a division of the 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, sponsored 
by the National Science Foundation and operated by 
the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, 
Boulder, CO. HAO’s program includes visiting scientists, 
advanced education, workshops, development of ground- 
and space-based instruments, operation of observing 
facilities, distribution of data to the scientific community 
and numerical modeling. HAO conducts its research in 
strong cooperation with the university community, NASA 
and NOAA, and with many research centers worldwide. 
For further information see 
http://www.hao.ucar.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High Energy Astrophysical Observatory (HEAO) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


High Energy Astrophysical 
Observatory (HEAO) 


Series of three NASA orbital observatories. HEAO-1, 
launched in August 1977, successfully completed the 
most accurate all-sky survey of x-ray sources up to that 
time. Discovered the ‘Cygnus Superbubble’ created by a 
series of supernovae. HEAO-2 (later known as EINSTEIN), 
launched in 1978, was the first true x-ray astronomy 
satellite. HEAO-3, launched in September 1979, carried 
a gamma ray spectrometer and two cosmic ray detectors. 
It observed spectral lines produced by electron—positron 
annihilation from the direction of the Galactic centre. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High Energy Transient Experiment (HETE) 2 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


High Energy Transient Experiment 
(HETE) 2 


A US-French satellite launch in October 2000. Its prime 
objective is to carry out a multiwavelength study of 
gamma ray bursts with ultraviolet, x-ray and gamma ray 
instruments. It will be able to localize bursts to within 
several arcseconds. The first HETE was lost due to a 
Pegasus launch failure in 1996. 

On September 21, 2001, HETE detected a rare 
optical afterglow of a gamma-ray burst in the 
constellation Lacerta. The source was relatively close, 
only about 5 billion Ly. from Earth. The opportunity to 
see the afterglow in optical light provides crucial 
information about what is triggering these mysterious 
bursts, which scientists speculate to be the explosion of 
massive stars, the merging of neutron stars and black 
holes, or possibly both. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-density Equation of State of Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ox 
7 


x is 
on Nuclei+e+! 


are 


Absolutely stable 
u,d,s quark 


R~10km 


M~1.4Mz) 


Figure 1. Competing structures and novel phases of 
high-density matter predicted by theory to make their 
appearances in the cores (R < 8 km) of neutron stars. 


High-density Equation of State of 
Neutron Stars 


The enormous gravitational pull that binds NEUTRON STARS 
compresses most of their matter to densities that are up 
to an order of magnitude higher than the mass density 
of atomic nuclei, 2.5 x 10 g cm™°. This provides a 
high pressure environment in which numerous subatomic 
particle processes, ranging from the generation of new 
BARYON particles (XZ, A, &, A), to QuaRK deconfinement, 
to the formation of (7~ or K~) boson condensates and 
H (dibaryon) matter, are expected to compete with one 
another, and novel phases of matter, like the quark— 
gluon plasma state being sought at the most powerful 
terrestrial particle colliders, could exist (figure 1). There 
are theoretical suggestions of even more exotic processes at 
supernuclear densities such as the formation of absolutely 
stable strange quark matter, a configuration of matter even 
more stable than the most stable atomic nucleus, iron. 

No matter which physical processes are actually 
realized in the dense interiors of neutron stars, each one 
manifests itself in the high-density equation of state (EoS) 
that is pressure as a function of total energy density, P(e), 
of neutron stars (figure 2). 

Neutron stars are objects of highly compressed matter 
so that the geometry of spACcETIME is changed considerably 
from flat space. Thus models of such stars are to 
be constructed in the framework of Einstein’s GENERAL 
THEORY OF RELATIVITY combined with theories of high-density 
matter. The connection between both is provided by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Einstein’s field equations (G denotes the gravitational 
constant, and wu, v = 0, 1, 2, 3), 


G"" = 81GT"'(e, P(e)), (1) 


which couples the Einstein curvature tensor, G””, to the 
energy-momentum density tensor, T“’, of neutron star 
matter. The tensor 7“” contains the EoS of neutron star 
matter, which is derivable from a given stellar matter 
Lagrangian C,,({x}). In general, £,, is a complicated 
function of the numerous baryon (x = p,n, U, A, &, A), 
meson (x = za ,K~) and quark (x = u,d,s) fields 
predicted to make their appearance in the cores of neutron 
stars (figure 1). Once L,, is specified, models for the EoS 
then follow according to the scheme 


OL» OL» 


In general, equations (1) and (2) are to be solved 
simultaneously since the particles move in curved 
spacetime whose geometry, determined by Einstein’s field 
equations, is coupled to the total energy density of the 
matter fields. For neutron stars, however, the deviation 
from flat spacetime over the length scale of the nuclear 
force, ~1 fm, is practically zero up to the highest densities 
reached in the cores of such stars (some 10'° g cm7*). 
This circumstance divides the construction of models of 
neutron stars into two distinct problems. Firstly, the 
effects of the short-range nuclear forces on the properties of 
neutron star matter are described in a local inertial frame, 
where spacetime is flat, by the parameters and laws of 
many-body physics. Secondly, the coupling between the 
long-range gravitational field and the matter is then taken 
into account by solving Einstein’s field equations for the 
gravitational field, which leads to the global properties of 
neutron stars. 


Hyperon population 

In the most primitive conception, high-density neutron 
star matter is constituted of only neutrons. Such 
matter, however, constitutes a highly excited state relative 
to neutron star matter which will therefore quickly 
transform, via the weak reaction 


n> pte +i, (3) 


into its chemically equilibrated state, made up of neutrons 
(n), protons (p) and electrons (e~). NEUTRINOS do not 
accumulate (i.e. 4” = 0), because of their extremely small 
cross sections in neutron star matter. In this way the 
stellar matter develops Fermi seas of degenerate neutrons, 
protons and electrons, each one being filled up to the 
highest possible energy level determined by 


po =pP +p. (4) 
Equation (4) is a special case of the general relation 


uk = BX —g* ue, (5) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-density Equation of State of Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


400 7 
/ 
/Hyperons 
/ / 
a “ 
’ rs 
/ xe 
cS / , 
300 |. : / 4 
; 
pe ‘ F ‘ 
/ 7 rs 
/ 
/ s x 
F 
oo Hyperons+Kaon / , / vs 
£ condensate i 7 eZ st 
; / J 
o 200 / 
> ie Hyperons 
= 
o. wf +Quarks 


100 | | 


0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 
e (MeV/fm’) 


Figure 2. Models for the EoS of high-density neutron star matter. 
Constraints from causality and observed neutron star masses are 
indicated. 


which holds in any system characterized by two conserved 
charges. These are, in the case of neutron star matter, 
electric charge g*, and baryon number charge B*. Applied 
to the A hyperon (B“ = 1, g* = 0), for instance, 
equation (5) leads to 


=e. (6) 


Ignoring particle interactions, the chemical potential of a 
given particle x follows from 


LX = wlkr,) = fm + kz, (7) 


where w(kr,) is the energy-momentum relation of a free 
relativistic particle moving with Fermi momentum k,,. 
Substituting (7) into (6) leads to (mx, = 1116 MeV, m, = 
939 MeV) 


k 
kr > Hi ty, 3fm7! > pr = a ~ 2p. (8) 


That is, neutrons begin to transform into As at baryon 
number densities around twice the density of nuclear 
matter, 9 = 0.16 fm7!. This value is only slightly altered 
by the inclusion of particle interactions, as can be seen from 
figure 3. 

Aside from chemical equilibrium, the condition of 
electric charge neutrality constitutes another characteristic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10° PP nets oe 
-1 L 
age RSS Ep 
Z 
ine) L 
oO 
2 Aare 
= c 
[any be 
i. [ 
Z L 
2 10-3 F 
{0-4 this ree Ded PON a fal ran oe ee 


0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 


p (fm*) 


Figure 3. Baryon composition of neutron star matter. 


feature of neutron star matter, as any net charge per particle 
Z/A in excess of around 10~*° would prevent gravity from 
binding neutron star matter. This too leads to decisive 
constraints on the particle Fermi momenta, which follow 
from the charge neutrality condition 


k3. 
So gS + pm Ou" — my) =0. 9) 


37? 
X=Pp.B,..3e7 we 


The last term in equation (9) accounts for the electric 
charges carried by condensed mesons of type M, of which 
only the z~ or, alternatively, the currently more favored 
K™ come into question. 

Figure 3 shows a representative sample composition 
of neutron star matter assumed to consist of only neutrons, 
protons and hyperons. The interactions are computed, 
following the scheme in equation (2), in the framework of 
relativistic nuclear field theory, where the motion of the 
particles is described by the coupled field equations 


iy" dp — my Vy) = D> gM), (2), 


M=o,w,n,... 
(Mn tme)o(X)= D> BoxWx(X)Vy(x), (10) 
YS pny Dy: 


plus additional equations for the other meson fields (MV = 
w,1,p,...). Evidently, the free-particle case is recovered 
by setting the meson-baryon coupling constants gy, = 
0. Equations (10) are to be solved in combination with 
conditions (5) and (9) for the fields wy, (x) and M(x). This 
can be accomplished in the framework of different many- 
body approximations, of which the relativistic Hartree 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-density Equation of State of Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(mean-field) approximation is the simplest approach, 
followed, with increasing level of complexity, by the 
relativistic Hartree-Fock (RHF) and relativistic Brueckner- 
Hartree-Fock (RBHF) approximations. In the Hartree 
and RHF approximations the coupling constants gy, 
are chosen such that the theory accommodates the bulk 
properties of nuclear matter at saturation density pp. These 
are the binding energy E/A = —16 MeV, effective nucleon 
mass my/mx = 0.79, incompressibility K ~ 265 MeV, 
and the symmetry energy a; = 32 MeV. Of the five, the 
value for the incompressibility of nuclear matter carries 
the largest uncertainty. Its value is currently believed to 
lie in the range between about 180 and 280 MeV. In sharp 
contrast to Hartree and RHF, the RBHF approximation 
makes use of meson-exchange models for the nucleon— 
nucleon interaction, whose parameters are adjusted to 
the nucleon-nucleon scattering phase shifts in free space 
and the deuteron’s properties, so that all nuclear matter 
properties are computed self-consistently. 

Once the fields y, (x) and M(x) are computed, models 
for the EoS of high-density neutron star matter follow from 
the energy-momentum tensor T"” = T"’(y,), 


ee 
PSS ae 11 
32 (11) 


€e= T™, 
The neutron star matter composition shown in figure 3 is 
computed for the relativistic Hartree approximation, with 
the associated EoS illustrated in figure 2. Three general 
physical features emerge. (1) The electric charges add 
up to zero at each density, as required by electric charge 
neutrality. (2) The generation of ~~ and X~ replaces high- 
energy electrons at the top of the electron Fermisea. (3) The 
generation of baryons with isospin orientations opposite 
to the neutron’s (e.g. £*, E°) renders neutron star matter 
more isospin symmetric, that is closer equality between 
the number of neutrons and protons. All three features 
are essential for neutron star matter to settle down in the 
lowest energy state. 

Another access to the derivation of the EoS is provided 
by Schrédinger-based treatments. These are based on 
phenomenological models for the two (v;;) and three 
(v;jx) Nucleon interaction, eventually supplemented with 
relativistic corrections. The Hamiltonian thus is of the 


form 
N k2 N N 

u=>(E) + Dams Ds te (12) 
with N (~10°”) the number of nucleons. The method 
adopted to solve the many-body Schrédinger equation 
H|¥) = E|W) is based on the variational approach, where 
the variational parameters contained in the wave function 
|W) are varied to minimize the energy per baryon for a 
given density, ie. 


 (whAlw) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The energy density, €(¢), and pressure, P(p), are then 
given by 


a 
€(p) = p(E(p) + my), P(p) = p* = E(p), (14) 


which can be combined to the EoS in the form P(e). The 
dotted curve in figure 2 is an example of an EoS derived 
in this framework. 


Condensation of K~ mesons 
Once the reaction 


e > K +v, (15) 


becomes possible in neutron star matter, it is energetically 
advantageous for the matter to replace the fermionic 
electrons with the bosonic K” mesons. Whether or not 
this actually happens depends on the effective mass of the 
K~ and the value of w* in neutron star matter, as can be 
seen from the threshold condition 


me =p = pe, (16) 
which follows from equation (5). Calculations indicate 
that mj. may become as small as my. ~ 200 MeV in 
neutron star matter above a few times py. Such mass values 
lie in the vicinity of w° so that the threshold condition for 
the onset of K~ condensation could indeed be fulfilled. A 
sample EoS of K~ condensed neutron star matter is shown 
in figure 2. Reaction (15) is followed by 


n+e >pt+K +4, (17) 


with the neutrinos leaving the star as described above. 
By this conversion the nucleons in the cores of newly 
formed neutron stars can become half neutrons and half 
protons. The relatively isospin symmetric composition of 
neutron star matter achieved in this way resembles the 
one of atomic nuclei, which are made up of roughly equal 
numbers of neutrons and protons. Neutron star matter is 
therefore referred to, in this picture, as nucleon star matter. 


H-dibaryons 

Another boson that could make its appearance in high- 
density neutron star matter is the H-dibaryon, a doubly 
strange six-quark composite with baryon number two. 
Since its first prediction in 1977, the H-dibaryon has 
been the subject of many theoretical and experimental 
studies as a possible candidate for a strongly bound exotic 
state. In neutron star matter, which, as known from 
figure 3, may contain a significant fraction of A hyperons, 
pairs of them could combine to form H-dibaryons, which 
could give way to the formation of H-matter at densities 
somewhere between 3) and 69, depending on the in- 
medium properties of the H-dibaryon. The condensation 
could be accompanied by a pronounced softening of the 
EoS (solid curve in figure 2) of such matter. If indeed 
formed, H-matter may not form a permanent component 
of neutron star matter but, because of its instability against 
compression, could trigger the conversion of neutron star 
matter into hypothetical strange star matter (see below). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-density Equation of State of Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1p SS | 


p (fm® ) 


Figure 4. Sample composition of neutron star matter accounting 
for quark deconfinement. 


Quark deconfinement 

It has been suggested already back in the 1970s that, 
because of the extreme densities reached in the cores of 
neutron stars, neutrons and protons may melt, creating 
the quark-gluon plasma state being sought at the most 
powerful terrestrial heavy-ion colliders. At present one 
does not know from experiment at what density the 
expected phase transition to quark matter occurs, and 
one has no conclusive guide from lattice QCD simulations 
either. From simple geometrical considerations it follows 
that neutrons and protons begin to touch each other 
at densities of ~(47r3./3)-! ~ 0.24 fm-3, which, for 
a characteristic nucleon radius of rn ~ 1 fm, is less 
than twice pp. Above this density, therefore, it appears 
plausible that the nuclear boundaries of neutrons and 
protons dissolve and that the quarks, formerly confined 
inside neutrons and protons, begin to populate free states 
outside of the nucleons. More than that, since the mass 
of the strange quark is only m, ~ 150 MeV, high-energetic 
up and down quarks are expected to readily transform 
to strange quarks at about the same density at which up 
and down quark deconfinement sets in, giving way to the 
formation of three flavor (u,d,s) quark matter at densities 
just a few times po. A sample composition of such matter 
is shown in figure 4, and its associated EoS is illustrated in 
figure 2. 


Diquark condensation and color superconductivity 

Very recently it was discovered that strong correlations 
between up and down quarks may exist which could 
lead to the formation of colored diquark pairs in high- 
density matter. These pairs, carrying integer spin, could 
form a Bose condensate in cold (T < 50 MeV) and 
dense (ep > 39) quark matter which ought to exhibit 
color superconductivity. Both the magnitude of the gap 
and the critical temperature associated with the color 
superconductive phase were estimated to be on the order 
of ~100 MeV, about two orders of magnitude larger than 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the gaps associated with neutron and proton superfluids. 
Future theoretical studies may reveal whether these 
features will have their correspondence ina more complete 
treatment of QCD at finite baryon number density. 


Absolutely stable strange quark matter 

So far it was assumed that quark matter forms a state of 
matter higher in energy than atomic nuclei. This most 
plausible assumption, however, may be quite deceiving 
because, for a collection of more than a few hundred u,d,s 
quarks, the energy per baryon (£/A) of quark matter can 
be equally well below the energy of the most stable atomic 
nucleus, *°Fe, whose energy per baryon is M(°Fe)c”/56 = 
930.4 MeV, with M (Fe) the mass of the Fe atom. The EoS 
of strange quark matter can be represented mathematically 
as P = (« —4B)/3 (bag constants B ~ 80 MeV fm~°). This 
implies a surface density of ¢ = 4B ~ 6 x 10’ g cm® for 
stars made up of such matter which distinguishes them 
from neutron stars made up of conventional matter. 


Bibliography 
Comprehensive overviews of modern research on the EoS 
of neutron star matter and stellar structure are compiled 


by: 


Glendenning N K 1997 Compact Stars, Nuclear Physics, 
Particle Physics, and General Relativity (New York: 
Springer) 

Weber F 1999 Pulsars as Astrophysical Laboratories for Nuclear 
and Particle Physics (Bristol: Institute of Physics) 


Fridolin Weber 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-luminosity Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T T T 1 
—67D211 eta Car 2 
Pa a = Mk42 es 5980 Y Pistol Star | 
“| 93129 D 9325 120 M_sun 
q a \s Yer se 
2 AV. VAG Car ~~. _ 
| 6.0F es2 00 t+ R143 tL 4 
s W : aes 
> P Cygni mS 
a 41-8712 
L e 4 
= 5.5 922075 041-3654 
- 
5 0b 25 M_sun 7 a 
i 1 i 1 1 1 


4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2 4.0 3.8 
T_eff in Kelvin 


Figure 1. The Hertzsprung—Russell diagram of the most 
luminous stars. Stars of spectral type O and luminous blue 
variables are represented by squares and triangles, respectively. 
Open symbols correspond to the Galaxy, solid symbols to the 
Large Magellanic Cloud and grey symbols to the Small 
Magellanic Cloud. To avoid confusion the diagram does not 
include other hot and very luminous stars of spectral type WN 
detected recently in the 30 Doradus region of the LMC, which 
are similar to Mk42. The crosses represent the most luminous 
stars of the young stellar cluster in the very center of our galaxy. 
Circles correspond to A supergiants (open symbols, galaxy; 
solid, M31). Although they are a factor of 10 fainter in 
bolometric luminosity, objects of this kind are the brightest 
‘normal’ stars in visual light. The theoretical main sequence and 
stellar evolutionary tracks (labelled by the stellar mass) are 
given as solid curves. The dashed curve is the 
‘Humphreys-—Davidson limit’ discussed in the text. 


High-luminosity Stars 


The most luminous stars in galaxies are of extraordinary 
astronomical importance. With the new generation of 
10 m class ground-based telescopes and with the large 
observatories in space such as the HST they can be studied 
as individuals in galaxies out to 20 Mpc distance including 
the vIRcO and FORNAX GALAXY CLUSTERS. The quantitative 
analysis of their spectra yields important information 
about distances, chemical composition and evolution of 
galaxies. 

In recent years galaxies at extremely large distances, 
billions of light-years distant, have been detected. Because 
of their large REDsHIFTS (z ~ 34) these galaxies show 
their ultraviolet light shifted to optical wavelengths. 
Spectroscopy with 10 m class telescopes reveals that 
the radiation of these galaxies is dominated by the 
contribution of the most luminous stars which are usually 
very hot and emit mostly in the ultraviolet. Using the 
knowledge obtained about this extreme population of stars 
in our own Galaxy and the galaxies of the LocALGROUP it is, 
at least in principle, possible to investigate the physics of 
GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT belonging to an early phase of the 
evolution of the universe. 

The spectral analysis of the most luminous stars 
is difficult and complex. The physical reason for 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the complexity is precisely this prodigious luminosity 
and the correspondingly large energy and momentum 
density of their intrinsic radiation field, which dominates 
the thermodynamics and hydrodynamics of the interior 
structure and the entire atmospheres. Extreme departures 
from local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE), which 
require the extensive effort of non-LTE radiative transfer 
and model atmospheres for the spectral analysis, result 
from this dominating role of the radiation field. In 
addition, very strong stellar winds are initiated and 
maintained by the absorption of photon momentum 
through ionic species of the atmospheric plasma. Through 
these winds a significant amount of the stellar mass is lost 
and recycled back to the interstellar medium during the 
lifetime of these stars. 

Figure 1 shows the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM 
(HRD) of the most luminous stars known so far in the 
Milky Way and the nearby galaxies of the Local Group. 


The spectral type O3—the most luminous 
hydrogen burning stars 
Luminous stars are usually formed in giant and dense 
molecular clouds as the most massive objects of very 
young stellar clusters. Typical examples are the clusters in 
the cARINA Nebula of the Milky Way and in the TARANTULA 
NEBULA of the Large Magellanic Cloud. After birth 
these objects are very hot. Their atmospheric effective 
temperatures are about 50000 K. With masses of about a 
hundred solar masses or more their luminosities are in the 
range between one and three million solar luminosities. 
The energy production leading to these enormous 
luminosities is central nuclear hydrogen burning in the 
CNO cycle. The interior hydrostatic equilibrium is kept 
mostly through radiation pressure which may be the cause 
for pulsational instability. The nuclear lifetime in this 
stage is very short, roughly 2.5 million years. It is almost 
independent of the stellar mass in these extreme conditions 
dominated by electron scattering in the STELLAR INTERIOR. 
It is not so easy to detect these most luminous 
objects in our Milky Way by conventional photometric 
techniques. Interstellar reddening and extinction and the 
fact that stellar colors measured in the optical part of 
the electromagnetic spectrum depend only very weakly 
on temperature as soon as T.¢ is above 35000 K make it 
impossible to identify these stars by photometry only. The 
only reliable way is spectroscopy. For optical spectroscopy 
the criterion for the most luminous and most massive very 
young stars in the stage of central hydrogen burning is the 
extreme weakness or complete absence of neutral helium 
lines relative to strong lines of singly ionized helium. The 
corresponding spectral type is O3. O3 stars are the hottest, 
most luminous and most massive stars known. Figure 2 
shows how the relative strength of neutral to ionized 
helium lines changes between spectral types O3, O5 and 
06.5 corresponding to a temperature range from 50000 K 
to 41 000 K. However, there might be a significant intrinsic 
spread in effective temperature and luminosity among the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-luminosity Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hel Hell 


2.0 
03 HD93250 


1.5 

05 HD193682 
1.0 

06.5 HD190864 


4460 4480 4500 4520 4540 4560 
Wavelength in A 


Normalized Flux 


Figure 2. He I and He II spectral lines in the optical spectra of O 
stars. At spectral type O3 the He I lines are very weak. 


03 HD93250 
1.030 | 


1.020 


1.010 


03 Sk-67D211 
1.000 SO pre ES 
0.990} | 


Normalized Flux 


4466 4468 4470 4472 4474 4476 
Wavelength in A 


Figure 3. Enlarged plot of the He I 4471 line in two O3 stars (the 
vertical bar indicates a line depression of 0.01 in units of the 
continuum). While the line can still be recognized in the galactic 
object HD93250 (Tere ~ 50000 K, log L/Lo ~ 6.3), it is absent in 
the spectrum of Sk-67D211, one of the hottest, most luminous 
and most massive stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud 

(Tege X 60000 K, log L/Lo ~& 6.6). (See Puls et al 1996 Astron. 
Astrophys. 305 171.) 


O3 stars. This is indicated by figure 3 which compares 
high signal-to-noise spectra of two O3 stars. 

The ultraviolet spectra of O3 stars are dominated 
by strong and broad stellar wind lines superimposed on 
a forest of narrow photospheric lines mostly of highly 
ionized iron. Figure 4 shows the UV spectrum of the 
possibly most massive star in our galaxy. 

The signatures of the same UV stellar wind lines are 
also found in the optical spectra of galaxies at high redshift 
(figure 5), indicating that the ultraviolet light of these 
objects is dominated by the emission of the population 
of the most massive stars. 


The evolution of the most luminous stars—the 
Humphreys-—Davidson limit 

During central hydrogen burning O stars evolve towards 
lower effective temperature in the HRD. However, how far 
they evolve to the right in the HRD is obviously a function 
of luminosity. The corresponding observational border 
line in the HRD is called the ‘Humphreys—Davidson limit’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The physical reason for the occurrence of this limit is the 
strong stellar mass loss which peals off the outer stellar 
layers and leads to a more or less bare contracting stellar 
core evolving to the helium burning main sequence at very 
high temperatures before the star has the chance to become 
a red supergiant (See RED GIANT STARS). Since the strength 
of mass loss is a function of luminosity (see below), the 
Humphreys—Davidson limit has a certain slope in the HRD 
for luminosities larger than 6 x 10° solar luminosities. 
Objects with lower luminosity pass through the stage of 
the red supergiants and return to the blue on their way to 
the helium main sequence. 

Close to the Humphreys—Davidson limit the most 
luminous stars enter an extremely unstable phase of their 
evolution. They become ‘LUMINOUS BLUE VARIABLES’ (LBVs). 
These objects show very strong stellar winds, a significant 
variability of their brightness and sometimes dramatic 
eruptions, where significant amounts of stellar mass are 
ejected and the stellar properties change dramatically. The 
most famous examples of this group are 7 Carinae and 
P Cygni. During such eruptions the luminosity stays 
constant, but the radius increases substantially and the 
effective temperature drops. As a result of this process 
LBVs in outburst become much brighter in visual light. 
n Carinae, for instance, suddenly became one of the 
brightest stars in the southern sky during the late 1830s. 
Something similar happened with P Cygni in the 17th 
century. 

Before and after the LBV phase or when evolving 
towards or away from the red supergiant phase the most 
luminous blue stars are spectroscopically identified as 
blue supergiants with characteristic emission lines in their 
optical and IR spectra caused by their stellar winds. These 
‘normal supergiants’ are extremely useful as extragalactic 
distance indicators (see below). The evolution of the most 
luminous stars comes to an end when they have lost most 
of their hydrogen envelope through winds and eruptions 
and appear as bare helium stars on the helium burning 
main sequence. Still suffering from extremely strong 
stellar winds these objects show very broad pronounced 
emission lines of helium, nitrogen or carbon in their optical 
spectra. They appear as ‘WOLF-RAYET STARS’. After this 
evolutionary stage they explode as SUPERNOVAE. 


The cluster of luminous stars in the Galactic 
center 

There is a long-standing debate as to what is the source of 
luminosity of the central few parsecs of our Galaxy. Using 
adaptive optics combined with imaging spectroscopy 
in the infrared it has become clear that the center of 
the Milky Way is populated by young stellar clusters 
of very luminous and very massive stars which are 
only a few million years old and fully account for the 
bolometric Lyman ionizing luminosities observed. The 
most luminous objects are evolved blue supergiants close 
to the evolutionary stage of Wolf-Rayet stars. Their 
striking spectroscopic characteristic is the strong emission 
in the He I 2.06 wm line transition in the IR (see figure 6). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-luminosity Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


cll NII NV olv ov 
2.0 T T 7 I + 
pa || if i ] 
cal li ‘ee | 
shall | ya | 
ro HNL sbetaaglan bit | [\ \ | 
Biol N lipyl fi ht ' Ty A hw f ah ‘al i | fh ! 
o's i iy , rN hi i i | \A Nf er NAAN, ie r Jill Aid NAN Aw P 
6 ‘ay wy iy i _— | UN fi it wy ren ip (i ay, M 
7 rt Ht on if iM a maf 
nit i Vp yee i loot il 1 | 
ann A | 
1160 1180 on 1220 1240 1260 1280 1300 1320 1340 1360 1380 1400 
Wavelength 
SilV. SilV clv 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
EI 1.0 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 A 
1360 1380 1400 1420 1440 1460 1480 1500 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600 
Wavelength 
Hell NIV 
2.0 
1.8 Ff: 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
EI 1.0 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 A | A 2 A 
1560 1580 1600 1620 1640 1660 1680 1700 1720 1740 1760 1780 1800 
Wavelength 


Figure 4. The observed UV spectrum (dotted) of the extremely luminous O3 star HD93129A in the Carina Nebula. The spectrum 
shows broad stellar wind lines of N IV, N V, O IV, O V and He II and many pseudophotospheric lines of Fe IV and V. The solid 
spectrum is the result of a non-LTE model atmosphere computation used for a detailed spectral analysis. (From Taresch et al 1997 
Astron. Astrophys. 321 531.) 


— a ee a 
cB58 z=2.723, 3.5 A Resolution, 3600 s 
Keck/LRIS May 1996 | 
20 - 
Ol } | ; 
cal : 
2 
& 1 
20 ] 
_ ee oo io ince (4214, LHST/GHRS 
—A40 in 1 | 1 1 nl in 1 in 1 1 1 1 1 L 1 1 | L 
4500 5000 5500 6000 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 5. Optical spectrum of the gravitationally lensed galaxy cB58 at redshift z = 2.7 compared with a spectrum of a ‘local’ starburst 
galaxy. The broad stellar wind lines and interstellar lines can easily be recognized. (From Pettini et al 2000 Astrophys. J. 528 96.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


High-luminosity Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


I/Ice 


AAABALBIS DARAAARAI ARAAARAAAS RAAAAABA LAAALLLABS BAAR RAR 


WeRHREEE QUCREH EOE SOR ROERONS SPREE SEES CRORE TREES ROOST S CORRE 


—2000 — 1000 ie) 


V (kms“') 


2000 


Figure 6. Profile of the K-band infrared He I 2.06 4m emission 
line of one of the blue supergiants in the Galactic center 
compared with model atmosphere calculations including stellar 
winds. (See Najarro et al 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 325 700.) 


Luminosities and temperatures of the brightest objects are 
indicated in figure 1. 


The optically brightest ‘normal stars’, the wind 
momentum-luminosity relationship and the 
determination of extragalactic distances 

Massive stars with luminosities below the Humphreys-— 
Davidson limit evolve at (roughly) constant luminosity 
towards the red supergiant stage and then back towards 
hotter temperatures. These blue supergiants are the 
brightest ‘normal’ stars in visual light, where ‘normal’ 
means that they do not suffer from strong eruptions 
such as those of the LBV. The reason for their enormous 
visual brightness is that with decreasing atmospheric 
temperature during the evolution away from the O star 
domain an increasing fraction of the total luminosity is 


emitted in visual light as a consequence of Wien’s law 
of radiation. The A supergiants shown in figure 1 have 
absolute magnitudes M, of about —9 mag. Only LBV 
in outburst or supernovae can become brighter in visual 
light. Consequently, such objects are ideal for study 
as individuals in distant galaxies to provide information 
about chemical composition and distance. 

One of the most interesting aspects of the recent 
work on normal blue supergiants is the detection that 
the strengths of their stellar winds are strongly correlated 
with stellar luminosity (see figure 7). A careful analysis 
of the hydrodynamics of radiation-driven winds leads 
to the prediction that for each supergiant spectral type 
the mechanical momentum of the stellar wind flow, 
which is the product of the mass-loss rate M and the 
maximum velocity v.., should be strongly dependent on 
stellar luminosity. This prediction has been confirmed 
by the detailed spectral analysis of stellar winds of O, 
B and A supergiants. Figure 8 gives an example for A 
supergiants (the figure shows wind momenta multiplied 
by the square root of the stellar radius in units of the 
solar radius, since this is exactly the quantity predicted to 
depend on luminosity or—for A supergiants—on absolute 
visual magnitude). The fact that the relationship holds in 
this range of extremely high absolute visual magnitudes 
is very encouraging for the use of A supergiants as 
extragalactic standard candles. The idea is to determine 
their wind momenta from spectroscopy and then to use the 
wind momentum-luminosity relationship observed and 
calibrated in the Milky Way and in galaxies of the Local 
Group to determine extragalactic distances. First estimates 
come to the very encouraging conclusion that with the 
use of spectrographs attached to 10 m class telescopes the 
method will allow accurate distance determinations out to 
galaxies as distant as 20 Mpc. 


Bibliography 
A comprehensive description of the physics of atmo- 
spheres and winds as well as the observed properties of 


4 T 4 T 4 T 
3r 4 3F 4 
B1.5 la* B1.5 la* 
x 
3 Pf 
cf me ww B2Ia 
£ B2 Ib B2 Ib 
S 
z 
B2 il B2 Il 
1 (ees u etn cuca 
Hy HB Ho. 
0 0 L 0 L 1 


43 


| 1 | 
20 4330 4340 4350 4360 
Wavelength 


Wavelength 


L l 
4840 4850 4860 4870 4880 


6520 


6540 


| 
6560 6580 6600 
Wavelength 


Figure 7. Hydrogen Balmer line profiles of galactic B2 supergiants of different luminosity classes showing the increasing 
contamination with stellar wind emission in Ha and Hf. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-luminosity Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the most luminous stars is given in a book which appeared 

recently in the series of Cambridge Contemporary Astro- 

physics: 

Aparicio A et al (ed) 1998 Stellar Astrophysics for the Local 
Group (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


This book (the proceedings of the VIII Canary Islands 
Winter School) contains three longer articles by P Massey, 
‘Observations of the most luminous stars in Local 
Group galaxies’ (pp 95-148), R P Kudritzki, ‘Quantitative 
spectroscopy of the brightest blue supergiant stars in 
galaxies’ (pp 149-262), and C Leitherer, ‘Populations 
of massive stars and the interstellar medium’ (pp 527- 
607) dealing with role of massive stars in galaxies. An 
additional article by C Chiosi (pp 1-94) deals with 
stellar evolution. Alternatively, a comprehensive article 
describing the evolution of massive and very luminous 
stars is the paper 


Schaller G, Schaerer D, Meynet G and Maeder A 1992 New 
grid of stellar models from 0.8 to 120 solar masses at 
Z = 0.02 and Z = 0.001 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 96 
269-331 


A description of our knowledge about LBV is found 
in 
Humphreys R H and Davidson K 1994 The luminous blue 
variables: astrophysical geysers Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 
106 1025-51 


The physical properties of the luminous blue 
supergiants in the central parsec of the Galaxy are 
discussed by 


Najarro F, Krabbe E, Genzel R, Lutz D, Kudritzki R P and 
Hillier DJ 1997 Quantitative spectroscopy of the Hel 
cluster in the Galactic center Astron. Astrophys. 325 
700-13 


The article 


Figer D, Najarro F, Morris M, McLean I S, Geballe T R, 
Ghez A M and Langer N 1998 The pistol star 
Astrophys. J. 506 384 


describes the IR diagnostics of one of the most 
luminous stars in the Galaxy. 

The observed wind momentum-luminosity relation- 
ship of ‘normal’ blue supergiants is discussed in 


Puls J et al 1996 O-stars mass-loss and wind momentum 
rates in the Galaxy and the Magellanic Clouds. 
Observations and theoretical predictions Astron. 
Astrophys. 305 171 


and in 


Kudritzki R P, Puls J, Lennon D J, Venn K A, Reetz J, 
Najarro F, McCarthy J K and Herrero A 1999 The 
wind momentum-luminosity relationship of galactic 
A- and B-supergiants Astron. Astrophys. 350 970-84 


Rolf-Peter Kudritzki 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A-supergiants 


T T 


° M31 . 
> 28.5+ © Galaxy ante 4 
3 oe 
fe 
NN a 
& 28.0 ase 1 
2 a 
3 
{e} oO, 
o - 
= 2757 fe 4 
Q0 fe) 
& 7 
27.06 4 
—7.0 7.5 —8.0 —8.5 —9.0 


M_v (mag) 


Figure 8. Modified stellar wind momenta of A supergiants in the 
Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy M31 as a function of 
absolute visual magnitude. This wind momentum-luminosity 
relationship can be used to determine distances out to the Virgo 
and Fornax cluster of galaxies. (From Kudritzki et al 1999 Astron. 
Astrophys. 350 970.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-redshift Quasars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


High-redshift Quasars 


The enormous luminosities of Quasars allow their 
detection at great distances; the highest-redshift quasars 
have excited particular interest because they reveal 
information about the conditions in the universe at a very 
early epoch. In a single generation the volume of the 
universe encompassed by the most distant known object 
has increased by a factor of approximately 40. We have 
now observed quasars that existed within about a billion 
years of the Big Bang. 


Historical perspective 

Quasars were first identified as a discrete class of objects 
in 1960. Their combination of strong radio emission, 
substantial brightness variations, and unusual optical 
spectra (a series of broad, unidentified emission lines 
superposed on a smooth continuum) was unprecedented; 
these ‘radio stars’ were thought to represent an exotic 
stage of STELLAR EVOLUTION. Maarten Schmidt’s decoding 
of the spectrum of 3C 273 in 1963 (see BRIGHT QUASAR 3C 
273) revealed that the redshift! (z) of the source was 0.158; 
his interpretation of the spectrum removed quasars from 
the realm of our Galaxy and placed them in the distant 
regions of the universe, and made quasars, by a substantial 
factor, the most luminous known objects. Within a year 
the largest quasar redshift exceeded the highest measured 
galaxy redshift”. For more than 30 years the largest redshift 
belonged to quasars; their reign as the most distant known 
objects ended in 1997 with the Hubble Space Telescope- 
aided discovery of az = 4.92 gravitationally lensed galaxy. 


Table 1 lists the objects that have at one time possessed 
the largest known quasar redshift. It is clear that the 
study of the distant universe has not proceeded at a 
steady rate; there was a rapid increase in the mid- 
1960s (note the spectacular discovery of 3C 9), a hiatus 
of 9 years from 1973-1982, and a spate of discoveries of 
z >4 quasars in the late-1980s. A particularly striking 
aspect is the change in the discovery technique for high- 
redshift quasars; before 1985 all the ‘highest-redshift’ 
quasar identifications were initially based upon radio 
detections, while all subsequent listings in the table were 
found purely from optical observations. The definition of 
what constitutes a high-redshift quasar obviously changes 
with time. For the past decade this term has been applied 
to quasars with redshifts larger than four; in July 1998 61 
quasars have been identified with z > 4. 


1 The redshift of a photon is defined by 


a observed =| 


Aemitted 


For an object at redshift 1, the observed wavelengths of all the 
radiation have been increased by a factor of two over the emitted 
wavelengths. 

? In 1961 R Minkowski capped a distinguished career by 
obtaining a spectrum of the radio galaxy 3C 295 (z = 0.46) on 
his last night of observing. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Highest known quasar redshift. 


Quasar z Month-yeart Discovery 
3C 273 0.16 03-1963 Radio 
3C 48 0.37 03-1963 Radio 
3C 147 0.55 02-1964 Radio 
3C 9 2.01 04-1965 Radio 
PKS 0106+01 2.11 02-1966 Radio 
PKS 1116+12 2.12 04-1966 Radio 
PKS 0237-23 2.22 02-1967 Radio 
4C 25.05 2.36 06-1968 Radio 
5C 02.56 2.39 12-1968 Radio 
4C 05.34 2.88 05-1970 Radio 
OH 471 3.40 04-1973 Radio 
OQ 172 3.53 06-1973 Radio 
PKS 2000-330 3.78 09-1982 Radio 

Q 1208+1011 3.80 07-1986 Opticalt 
Q 0046—293 4.01 01-1987 Optical§ 
PC 0910+5625 4.04 10-1987 Opticalt 
Q 0051—279 4.43 12-1987 Optical§ 
PC 1158+4635 4.73 12-1989 Opticalt 
PC 1247+3406 4.90 09-1991 Optical§ 


+ Date of publication of discovery. 


{ Slitless Spectroscopy. 


§ Multicolor. 


Relative Flux 
5000 7500 


2500 


0 
T 
= 


7000 8000 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 1. The spectrum of PC 1247+3406, the quasar with the 
highest known redshift (z = 4.90). The strongest emission line is 
Lyman a; the line at A = 9150 A is produced by C IV. The sharp 
drop in the continuum at wavelengths below the Lyman a 
emission line is absorption produced by intervening material. 


Figure 1 displays the spectrum of PC1247+3406, the 


quasar with the highest known redshift (z = 4.90); this 
observation is a typical example of a high-redshift quasar 
spectrum. The most prominent feature is the Lyman a 
emission line; it is produced by the transition from the 
first excited state to the ground state in hydrogen, and 
has a rest wavelength of 1216 A. At a redshift of 4 this 
feature is shifted from the far-ultraviolet to the red region 
of the optical spectrum. The second strongest emission 
line is that of thrice-ionized carbon (a doublet with rest 
wavelengths of 1548 and 1550 A). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-redshift Quasars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Redward of the Lyman a line the spectrum is 
relatively smooth and flat, but as one traverses the line 
to the blue, there is a dramatic decrease in the flux. At 
a redshift of 4 the level of the ‘red continuum’ is about 
twice that of the ‘blue continuum’; in the highest-redshift 
quasars this drop becomes nearly a factor of four. High 
spectral resolution data show that the apparent decrease 
in the continuum level is actually due to a multitude of 
discrete absorption lines. This absorption is produced by 
individual ‘clouds’ of material along the line of sight; the 
strongest transition is Lyman a, and thus this region of the 
spectrum is referred to as the ‘LYMAN a@ ForESsT’. A second 
discontinuity frequently appears in the spectra of high- 
redshift quasars at a rest wavelength of ~900 A;in figure 1 
it occurs at an observed wavelength near 5400 A. This 
feature is the Lyman series limit, and is caused by a path 
through a neutral hydrogen column density of >10'” cm~. 


Surveys for high-redshift quasars 

The identification of high-redshift quasars presents a 
difficult challenge, as one can see from the nearly quarter- 
century lag between the initial quasar redshift and the 
discovery of the first z > 4 source. It is usually impossible 
to determine whether an image of an object, taken with a 
ground-based telescope, is a star or a quasar (remember 
that the word ‘quasar’ is derived from ‘quasi-stellar’). 
Attempts to locate z > 4 quasars using radio observations 
were not successful (until quite recently). To discover 
high-redshift quasars with optical telescopes, a number of 
obstacles must be overcome (see also QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: 
SURVEYS). 


e High-redshift quasars are rare. On average there is one 
z > 4 quasar brighter than an R magnitude of 20 for 
every 15 square degrees of sky. Even in the regions 
of lowest stellar density (near the galactic poles), this 
amount of sky would contain approximately 10 000 stars 
of similar brightness. 


e High-redshift quasars are red. At a redshift of 4, most of 
a quasar’s light below 6000 Ais absorbed by intervening 
material. Photographic emulsions, the primary detector 
for wide area surveys, tend to be most sensitive in the 
blue. As one moves to higher redshifts, the bulk of a 
quasar’s luminosity is observed in the near-infrared, 
where the background produced by the night sky is 
much higher than the arrcLow in the blue and visible 
regions of the spectrum. 


e High-redshift quasars are faint. Only a small fraction of 
z > 4 quasars can be detected in the Palomar Sky Survey, 
which has served as the primary optical database for the 
second half of this century. 


This sounds like a hopeless task indeed, until one 
notes that the optical spectrum of a high-redshift quasar is 
very different from the principal source of confusion, stars. 
In contrast to stars, whose spectral energy distribution is 
generally relatively smooth, high-redshift quasars possess 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a series of strong emission lines as well as broad and deep 
absorption features. 

The explosion in the level of computational ability 
available to individual investigators in the 1980s led to a 
revolution in high-redshift quasar research. Using data 
obtained from either red-sensitive photographic plates 
or electronic detectors such as CCDs, it became possible 
to digitize large-scale surveys, find and characterize all 
objects using automated software packages (See SOFTWARE: 
DIGITAL SKY SURVEYS), and sift through the myriads of stars 
for the 1-in-10 000 source. 

The vast majority of high-redshift quasars have been 
identified with optical telescopes. Discovery techniques 
include 


e Multicolor imaging. The colors of all objects in a 
given region of sky are determined from images taken 
through a set of filters. The colors of stars fall along a 
well-defined locus of points in multidimensional color 
space, whereas high-redshift quasars lie significantly 
(often more than a magnitude) away from the stars. For 
example, if one performs a survey with the BRI filter 
set, the Lyman a emission line in a z = 4.4 quasar will 
fall near the center of the R filter. The (B — R) color 
of the quasar will be extremely red (line-enhanced R 
emission compared to the Lyman a forest/Lyman-limit 
system depressed B flux) while the (R — /) color will be 
moderately blue. Stephen Warren and his collaborators 
employed a multicolor technique to identify the first 
z > 4 quasar. To date about 60% of the z > 4 
quasars have been found using multicolor photometry, 
including PC 1247+3406. 


e Slitless spectroscopy. Multicolor imaging can be 
thought of as very low resolution spectrophotometry 
(spectral resolution of ~5). Observing a large region of 
sky through a dispersive element (commonly referred 
to as the ‘objective prism’ technique) will produce 
spectra of all sources in the field with the spectral 
resolution defined by the instrumental configuration 
and the atmospheric seeing. This has the advantage 
over mulitcolor imaging in that all of the data are 
obtained at once as well as at considerably higher (~50) 
spectral resolution at the cost of reduced sensitivity 
and higher source confusion (the spectrum from an 
individual object covers a much larger region of sky 
than does an image). Approximately one-sixth of the 
known high-redshift quasars have been found via this 
technique. 


e Variability. It has been known since the discovery 
of the first quasars that they could exhibit spectacular 
variations in brightness; it is now believed that virtually 
all quasars display fluctuations of the 10-30% level on 
a timescale of years. Several high-redshift quasars have 
been identified by monitoring programs. 


e Serendipity. In the summer of 1987 Patrick McCarthy 
and collaborators discovered a redshift 4.41 quasar (then 
the second largest redshift) while obtaining a spectrum 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-redshift Quasars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of a RADIO GALAXY (the quasar was near the radio source 
and was in the spectrograph entrance aperture). This 
supposedly once-in-a-lifetime event was repeated a few 
years later with the identification of a z = 4.21 quasar. 


Although optical investigations have produced the 
vast majority of high-redshift quasar identifications, other 
regions of the electromagnetic spectrum may provide 
substantial contributions in the near future. In 1994 Patrick 
Henry and collaborators identified a high-redshift quasar 
based on x-ray observations with the rosat satellite (this 
was the first z > 4 object that was not discovered through 
optical observations), and in 1998 the x-ray discovery 
redshift limit was raised to 4.45 with the identification 
of an R *© 23 quasar. The latter observation was made 
possible because of the high accuracy (2 arcsec) of the x-ray 
positions; this level of positional accuracy will be met or 
exceeded by future x-ray missions. 

RADIO ASTRONOMY, Which was the prime source of the 
first two decades of high-redshift quasar work, has for the 
most part contributed very little to the discovery of z > 4 
quasars, but this too may be changing. In 1997 Isabel Hook 
and Richard McMahon found a z = 4.72 quasar in a radio 
survey; this object was later shown to be a strong x-ray 
source as well. Large-scale radio surveys (e.g. the FIRST 
project with the Very Large Array) currently underway 
will within the next few years undoubtedly produce a 
multitude of high-redshift quasar candidates. 

The SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY, which will image one- 
quarter of the sky (the North Galactic Cap) in five 
optical filters, should have an enormous impact on our 
understanding of high-redshift quasars. The filters were 
selected so that a multicolor identification technique 
will identify high-redshift quasars brighter than an R 
magnitude of +22; this should produce a sample of more 
than 1000 z > 4 quasars, an increase of nearly a factor 
of 20 over the number of currently known high-redshift 
quasars. 


Scientific programs 

The next decade will see an enormous increase in the 
observational database on high-redshift quasars; what 
are the important scientific issues that will be addressed? 
Since these objects are seen at such large redshifts, the 
radiation we detect was created billions of years ago when 
the state of the universe was quite different from the 
current conditions; standard cosmological models predict 
that the most distant quasars are seen when the universe 
was considerably less than 10% of its current age, the 
density was approximately 200 times that of the current 
value, and the temperature of the cosmic background 
radiation field was 16 K. 


e Constraints on cosmological models. Soon after the 
discovery of the z > 4 population, George Efstathiou, 
Martin Rees and Edwin Turner pointed out the 
consequences of the existence of black holes of a billion 
solar masses within a billion years of the Big Bang. These 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Kx 


2.0 
54 
| 


5 
| 


log [Number Density of Luminous Quasars] 
1 


Redshift 


Figure 2. The number density of luminous quasars as a function 
of redshift based on low-redshift studies containing several 
hundred quasars (straight line, z < 2) and a z > 2.7 slitless 
survey with 90 quasars (points). 


objects provide one of the key constraints on theories of 
galaxy formation. 


e Quasar evolution. Within a few years of the discovery of 
quasars, it was shown that they were a rapidly evolving 
population of objects; their co-moving number density 
out to a redshift of one was proportional to ~ (1 + z)® 
(or, from a chronological viewpoint, the number density 
of quasars has dropped by a factor of 50-100 in the 
past several billion years). Patrick Osmer published 
a study in 1982 suggesting that this rise with redshift 
did not continue indefinitely; it appeared that beyond 
a redshift of 3.5 the number density of quasars actually 
declined. A number of recent investigations, using both 
photographic plates and CCDs anda variety of detection 
methods, indicate that the number density of luminous 
quasars peaked near redshift 3 (see figure 2). 


e The properties of intervening material. One of the 
most important (if not the most important) areas of 
quasar research does not involve the properties of 
the quasars themselves but the ability to investigate a 
wide variety of types of non-luminous matter through 
absorption features in the quasar spectrum produced by 
material that lies along the line of sight. Since the quasar 
must obviously be at a greater distance than the material 
for absorption lines to be created, the higher the quasar 
redshift the further back in time we can investigate non- 
luminous material; we can now trace the properties of 
a number of types of features (e.g. the Lyman a forest, 
haloes of galaxies) throughout nearly the entire history 
of the universe. 


e Evolution of abundances of the elements. Quasars 
possess emission lines of elements produced only in 
stellar nucleosynthesis (e.g. carbon, oxygen); one might 
expect that the metal abundances of quasars would 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-redshift Quasars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


decrease with increasing redshift. An interesting aspect 
of quasar spectra is that, if one ignores the region 
shortward of the Lyman a emission line, where the 
high-redshift Lyman a forest removes a majority of the 
radiation, it is impossible to make any estimate of the 
quasar redshift if the spectrum is translated to the rest 
frame; in other words, there appears to be no evolution 
in the strengths of the emission lines. Quasar abundance 
determinations are notoriously difficult, but the best 
estimates suggest that even in the highest-redshift 
quasars the metal abundances are approximately ten 
times the solar value. 


e Detection of distant clusters of galaxies. If high- 
redshift quasars mark the sites of substantial density 
perturbations, as seems plausible, it may be possible, 
with substantial efforts of observing time, to detect 
‘normal’ galaxies that are physically associated with the 
quasar. Some preliminary studies have already yielded 
intriguing results. 


e Gravitational lenses. The longer the path length to an 
object, the greater its chance of being gravitationally 
lensed; hence high-redshift quasars are attractive 
candidates for gravitational lenses. If a multiply imaged 
high-redshift quasar is found where the lens can be 
identified and characterized, one will have a test of 
General Relativity on the largest imaginable scale! 


The first decade of z > 4 research has revealed much 
about the conditions of the universe in its first billion years. 
Nature has been able to assemble massive objects in that 
time, but we have clearly seen past the peak of quasar 
activity (at least in the rest frame optical and ultraviolet). 
At redshifts above 4 the absorption due to the Lyman a 
forest removes more than half of the incident radiation, 
and this opacity continues to increase at the limits of 
our measurements. These discoveries, and other results 
summarized in the bibliography, have been produced by 
a sample of a few dozen objects. The next ten years 
should witness a dramatic increase (more than a factor of 
ten!) in the number of known high-redshift quasars given 
the capabilities of planned optical surveys and the recent 
demonstration that both x-ray and radio observations can 
be effective methods for detecting z > 4 objects. 


Bibliography 
Excellent technical reviews of the first years of the z > 4 
era are presented by 


Turner E L 1991 Astron. J. 1015 
Warren S J and Hewitt P C 1990 Rep. Prog. Phys. 53 1095 


Papers describing some milestones in detection of distant 
quasars include 


Henry J P et al 1995 Astron. J. 107 1720 

Hook IM and McMahon R G 1998 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
294 L7 

Schmidt M 1963 Nature 197 1040 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Schmidt M 1965 Astrophys. J. 141 1295 

Schneider D P, Schmidt M and Gunn J E 1991 Astron. J. 
101 837 

Warren S J et al 1987 Nature 325 131 


Technical References for all objects in table 1 are given in 


Schneider D P, van Gorkom J H, Schmidt M and Gunn J E 
1992 Astron. J. 103 1451 


The two serendipitous discoveries are described in 


McCarthy P J et al 1988 Astrophys. J. Lett. 328 29 
Schneider D P, Schmidt M and Gunn J E 1994 Astron. J. 
107 880 


Cosmological implications of high-redshift quasars are 
discussed in 


Efstathiou G and Rees M 1988 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
230 5P 
Turner E L 1990 Astrophys. J. Lett. 365 43 


A sample of investigations of the high-redshift quasar 
luminosity function (using a variety of techniques) 


Hawkins M RS and Véron P 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
281 348 

Kennefick J D, Djorgovski S G and de Carvalho R R 1995 
Astron. J. 110 2553 

Osmer P S 1982 Astrophys. J. 253 28 

Schmidt M, Schneider D P and Gunn J E 1995 Astron. J. 
110 68 

Warren S J, Hewitt P C and Osmer P S 1994 Astrophys. J. 
421 412 


Some representative articles that discuss absorption in 
high-redshift quasars are 


Lu L, Sargent W L W, Womble D S and Takada-Hidai M 
1996 Astrophys. J. 472 509 

Lynds C R 1971 Astrophys. J. Lett. 164 73 

Schneider D P, Schmidt M and Gunn J E 1991 Astron. J. 
101 2004 

Storrie-Lombardi L J, McMahon R G, Irwin M J and 
Hazard C 1996 Astrophys. J. 468 121 


A study of the abundances in high-redshift quasars can be 
found in 


Hamann F and Ferland G 1993 Astrophys. J. 418 11 


Recent work on galaxies surrounding quasars is presented 
by 
Giallongo E et al 1998 Astron. J. 115 2169 


Donald P Schneider 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-velocity Cloud (HVC) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


High-velocity Cloud (HVC) 


An interstellar cloud of neutral hydrogen whose velocity 
exceeds, typically by 100-200 km s!, the rotational speed 
of the Galaxy (which is 220 km s!). Some HVCs 
are thought to have been produced by gravitational 
interactions—most notably the Magellanic Stream, a huge 
bridge of material between the Galaxy and the Magellanic 
Clouds, presumed to have been drawn out during a close 
passage in the past. Other HVCs may be clouds of 
intergalactic hydrogen falling into the Galaxy, or material 
expelled out of the galactic plane as supernova remnants 
and now falling back. 


See: Magellanic Stream. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


High-velocity Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


High-velocity Star 


A star that is moving with very high velocity relative to 
the Sun, usually 65 km s7! or more, faster than the average 
velocity of stars in the solar neighborhood. High-velocity 
stars are usually part of the galactic halo and move in very 
elliptical orbits which are highly inclined to the galactic 
plane. Hence they do not share the revolution of the Sun 
and other stars in the spiral arms of the Galaxy around the 
galactic center and are being left behind as the Sun races 
ahead of them. They may be remnants of a very early 
stage in the evolution of the Galaxy, so high-velocity stars 
are runaway stars. 


See also: Runaway star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hill, George William (1838-1914) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hill, George William (1838-191 4) 


Celestial mechanician, staff member at the Nautical 
Almanac Office then in Cambridge, MA, computed the 
orbit of the Moon and, under sIMON NEWCOMB’s direction, 
solved the difficult problem of the orbits of Jupiter and 
Saturn. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hind, John R (1823-1895) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hind, John R (1823-1895) 


English astronomer, discovered in 1852 a small nebula in 
Taurus which, in 1861, was found by HEINRICH D’ARREST 
to have disappeared. By the end of the year, D’Arrest 
and OTTO WILHELM STRUVE had recovered it. Hind’s variable 
nebula, as it came to be called, demonstrated that at 
least some nebulae were small, as nothing larger than 
a light year in dimension can disappear in a year. The 
nebula is a reflection nebula which comes and goes as 
dark clouds intercept the light from its illuminating star. 
Hind discovered 11 asteroids, Nova Ophiuchus 1848, and 
became Superintendent of the Nautical Almanac Office. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hinotori (Astro-A) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hinotori (Astro-A) 


Japanese satellite, launched in February 1981 to observe 
the Sun during the peak of its 11-year cycle. Carried 
instruments to image x-rays from solar flares and detect 
x-ray emission lines from highly ionized iron in solar flares. 
Hinotori means ‘firebird’. (See also ASTRO.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hipparchus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hipparchus 


Hipparchus (2nd century BC) was the most highly 
regarded Greek astronomer in antiquity before Ptolemy. 
In a series of writings, only one of which has come 
down to us, he investigated a wide range of problems 
in observational and mathematical astronomy. In his 
most important works he studied the periodicities of the 
motions of the heavenly bodies and used observations to 
test and quantify geometrical models for those motions. 


Biography and writings 

Hipparchus was born at Nicaea in Bithynia (Iznik, Turkey) 
within the first half of the 2nd century BC. While living in 
Bithynia, he recorded observations of weather correlated 
with the solar year and the risings and settings of fixed 
stars. (Such weather calendars were produced by many 
Greek astronomers from the 5th century BC onwards.) The 
earliest dated observations that he appears to have made— 
there is some disagreement about whether they should be 
attributed to him—are determinations of the date of the 
autumnal equinox in 162-158. After this there is an 11 yr 
gap, and then about 25 observation reports spread through 
the years 147-127. These reports are known to us only 
because they are cited in Ptolemy’s Almagest (see PTOLEMY). 
Ptolemy informs us that Hipparchus was on the island of 
Rhodes when he made observations in 141 and 128-127, 
and there are plausible arguments for supposing that he 
resided there through most of his working life. He was in 
contact with astronomers in Alexandria, and very likely 
also with those of Babylon (see BABYLONIAN ASTRONOMY). It 
is not known how long he lived after 127 BC. 

Late in his career Hipparchus published an anno- 
tated list of his writings, which must therefore have been 
numerous; most, however, seem to have been compara- 
tively short and dealt with specialized topics. In addition 
to the surviving Commentary on the Phainomena of Aratus 
and Eudoxus we know titles of about 14 books. Almost 
all the works that we know something about were con- 
nected with astronomy, although there exist tantalizing 
references to his investigations of falling bodies and com- 
binatoric mathematics. A highly critical, even polemical, 
tone characterized certain of his writings (the Commentary 
on the Phainomena, the Against the Geography of Eratosthenes 
and the work on planetary models). Ptolemy, who among 
all the classical authors who praise Hipparchus was the 
most competent to judge him, singles out Hipparchus for 
his ‘love of truth’ and diligence. 


Models and periodicities 

In his studies of solar and lunar motion, Hipparchus 
assumed that each of these bodies has only one periodic 
anomaly and travels according to a simple kinematic 
model of either the epicyclic or eccentric variety (see 
PLANETARY THEORY FROM EUDOXUS TO COPERNICUS). In the 
epicyclic model, the body revolves uniformly about an 
epicycle, that is, a circle the center of which itself revolves 
uniformly on a larger deferent circle concentric with the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Earth. In the eccentric model, the body revolves uniformly 
about an eccenter, that is, a circle surrounding the Earth but 
with its center at a fixed distance from the Earth’s center; 
the direction from the Earth’s center to the eccenter’s center 
may be either fixed or uniformly rotating. The two kinds 
of model are, as Hipparchus knew, interchangeable. In 
various works Hipparchus attempted to determine the 
periodicities of the several circular motions presumed in 
these models and the relative sizes and orientations of the 
radii. 

The approach that Hipparchus used to establish 
periodicities can be illustrated by his determination of the 
length of the mean synodic month and the Moon’s period 
of anomaly. Hipparchus started out with a relation that 
was embedded in the Babylonian lunar theory known as 
System B: 


251 synodic months = 269 anomalistic periods. (1) 


This relation can be read as saying that any interval of 
251 synodic months bounded by a pair of conjunctions or 
oppositions has exactly the same length. Since the only 
direct way of observing the precise moment of a syzygy 
was at a lunar eclipse, Hipparchus found the smallest 
multiple of 251 synodic months that also brings the Moon 
roughly from one of its nodes back to one of its nodes, 
which is 4267 synodic months (or just short of 345 yr). 

Conveniently, Hipparchus had access to records of 
observations of lunar eclipses made at Babylon this 
long before his time. To compare them with his own 
eclipse observations, however, would not have been 
easy. The Babylonian records would have been dated 
according to the regnal years of the Persian kings who 
ruled Mesopotamia, with dates in an observational lunar 
calendar and probably only the time of the beginning 
of obscuration noted. Hipparchus must have possessed 
a king list giving lengths of reigns, but he cannot have 
known the precise sequence of 29 and 30 day Babylonian 
lunar months over the several intervening centuries. He 
did, however, have a value for the length of the mean 
synodic month, again from the Babylonian system B 
theory: 


1 mean synodic month = 29;31,50,8, 20 days (2) 


(the numerals after the semicolon are to be read as sixtieths, 
sixtieths of sixtieths, etc). Hipparchus evidently had 
enough confidence in equation (2) to conclude that the 
resulting equation 


4267 mean synodic months 
= 126007 days+ 1h(+lessthan4min) (3) 


was at least accurate to the nearest day, so that it would 
only be necessary to compare the times of observed 
eclipses 345 yr apart. To test for the constancy of the time 
interval, he found two pairs of observed eclipses such that 
in one pair the Moon was both times close to its maximum 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparchus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


apparent speed, and in the other pair close to its minimum 
apparent speed, so as to maximize any discrepancy. In 
comparing the times, Hipparchus had to estimate the 
duration of the eclipse observed in Babylon to find the mid- 
eclipse and take account of the geographical situations of 
Babylon and Rhodes to synchronize the times. He even 
introduced a correction for the small influence of solar 
anomaly. The result of this carefully thought out analysis 
was a confirmation of the accuracy of the Babylonian 
period relations (1) and (2). By a similar investigation of 
the magnitudes of widely separated eclipses, Hipparchus 
also confirmed a Babylonian value for the Moon’s mean 
period of latitude. 

To measure the length of the tropical year, Hipparchus 
attempted to determine the intervals separating three 
observations of the summer solstice, by Meton and 
Euctemon in 432 BC, by Aristarchus in 280 BC, and by 
himself in 135 BC. For the oldest of these observations, 
which was originally dated according to a lunar calendar, 
it is probable that Hipparchus had to determine the 
date in his own calendrical system by assuming a first 
approximation of the length of the year, and the date 
that he found looks as if it is a day too early. The 
interval that he found between Aristarchus’ observation 
and his own was 52 9603 days, implying a tropical year 
of approximately 365;14,47,35 days, whereas between 
the Metonic observation and his own he appears to 
have counted 108478 days, implying a tropical year of 
approximately 365;14,44,51 days. Remarkably, the latter 
value, which can only have arisen from comparison of 
observations at precisely the 297 year interval, is attested 
in a Babylonian tablet (which thus is strong evidence 
for Babylonian contacts with Hipparchus or someone 
who knew his work). On the other hand, Ptolemy cites 
several passages in writings of Hipparchus where he elects 
for the value 365;14,48 days. Ptolemy also reports that 
Hipparchus was led by his observations to suspect that the 
tropical year was subject to small short-term fluctuations. 

Hipparchus’ most famous accomplishment, the 
discovery of the PRECESSION of the EQUINOXES, was made 
in connection with these last measurements. During 
lunar eclipses, Hipparchus observed the elongation of 
the Moon from certain fixed stars close to the ecliptic, 
and from this he was able to deduce the elongation of 
the stars from the equinoctial points. As well as small 
inconsistencies, which he was ready to attribute to a 
wobble in the equinoctial points, he also found that the 
elongations were about 2° less in his own time than about 
150 yr earlier, when Timocharis had performed similar 
observations. Hipparchus was uncertain of the nature of 
this displacement, hypothesizing among other things that 
the fixed stars close to the ecliptic might exhibit a very slow 
quasi-planetary motion of their own. Ptolemy was able to 
find passages in which Hipparchus seemed to maintain 
the model that Ptolemy himself adopted, that the fixed 
stars make a slow revolution about the poles of the ecliptic 
relative to the equinoctial points. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Hipparchus was the first known astronomer to 
deduce the eccentricity of a hypothetical orbit from 
selected observations. | His method required three 
observations of the longitude of a heavenly body at 
known times; with approximate values for the periods of 
longitude and anomaly of the object in question, he could 
reduce the problem to the geometrical problem of finding 
the point from which the sides of a given triangle are seen 
as subtending given angles. A numerical solution further 
necessitated some sort of trigonometry, and Hipparchus 
is believed to have constructed a table of the lengths of 
chords of angles in a standard circle, perhaps the first such 
table. 

In the case of the Sun, observations of the dates of 
two equinoxes and a solstice provided the required three 
positions, since, if the Sun travels on a great circle (the 
ecliptic), the longitudes of the tropical and equinoctial 
points must be separated by right angles. Taking the 
interval from vernal equinox to summer solstice as 943 
days, and the interval from summer solstice to autumnal 
equinox as 923 days, Hipparchus calculated that the 
eccentricity of the Sun’s hypothetical circular orbit was 
1/24 of its radius, with the apogee 653" east of the vernal 
equinoctial point. This is the version of the solar model 
that Ptolemy later adopted. There is good reason to 
believe, however, that Hipparchus also performed the 
same calculations with at least one other pair of intervals 
(944 days from vernal equinox to summer solstice, and 923 
days to the autumnal equinox), hence obtaining a different 
eccentricity and apogee. What Hipparchus made of this is 
not known. 

Similarly, Hipparchus measured the lunar anomaly 
twice, with conflicting results. In this instance, he used 
sets of three observed lunar eclipses, for which it was 
possible to estimate the Moon’s longitude by calculating 
the diametrically opposite position of the Sun. Ptolemy 
later showed that the discrepancy arose from inaccuracies 
in Hipparchus’ solar longitudes and time intervals. Again, 
we have no knowledge of how Hipparchus reconciled his 
results. 

Ptolemy knew of no writings by Hipparchus on the 
planets comparable with his works on the solar and 
lunar models. He does, however, describe a book in 
which Hipparchus gave observational arguments for the 
inadequacy of the planetary models proposed in his 
time. According to Ptolemy, the critical defect Hipparchus 
exposed in these models was that they assumed a single 
periodic anomaly for each planet, so that, for example, 
their retrogradations were always of the same size and 
duration. 


Other astronomical research 

Hipparchus devised two methods of estimating the 
distance in Earth radii of the Moon from the Earth’s 
center. The first method assumed that the distance of 
the Sun is effectively infinite, and finds the distance of 
the Moon by comparing observations of the magnitude 
of a solar eclipse seen in two localities on the same 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparchus ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ou is Toomer G J 1978 Hipparchus Dict. Sci. Biogr. 15 207-24 
Toomer G J 1984 Ptolemy’s Almagest (London: Duckworth) 


Alexander Jones 


Figure 1. Hipparchus’ eclipse diagram relating the Sun’s and 
Moon’s distance from the Earth. 


meridian. The second method uses the eclipse diagram 
made familiar by Ptolemy to relate the distance of the 
Moon to a hypothesized solar distance. In this diagram 
(figure 1) it is assumed that the Sun and Moon subtend 
the same angle from the Earth’s center and that the 
ratio of the diameter of the Moon to the diameter of the 
Earth’s shadow at the Moon’s distance is known. From 
these relations it is theoretically possible to derive the 
solar distance from the lunar distance and vice versa, 
although in practice small variations in the lunar distance 
correspond to extremely large variations in the solar 
distance. Assuming that the Sun is 490 Earth radii from 
the Earth’s center (corresponding to a ‘least perceptible’ 
parallax of 7 arcmin), Hipparchus found the mean distance 
of the Moon as 67% Earth radii, while from the solar eclipse 
he found it to be 77 Earth radii. 

With an approximate value for the distance of 
the Moon, Hipparchus was able to determine the 
magnitude of lunar parallax and correct observed 
positions accordingly. Regrettably little is known of the 
details of Hipparchus’ handling of this topic. Of his work 
on the theory of eclipses, our most substantial information 
concerns his examination of the possible time intervals 
separating lunar and solar eclipses. 

The most controversial part of Hipparchus’ astronom- 
ical work is his star catalogue. His one surviving book, the 
Commentary on the Phainomena of Aratus and Eudoxus, is de- 
voted to a detailed criticism of the detailed nonmathemat- 
ical description of the constellations given by Eudoxus in 
the 4th century BC, and versified by Aratus a century later. 
The Commentary closes with a presentation of data con- 
cerning the risings, culminations, and settings of constel- 
lations, all of which presupposes numerous observations 
of stellar positions. Classical authors, particularly Pliny, 
make vague references to a Hipparchian star catalogue 
containing positions of the stars along with some indica- 
tion of their brightnesses. Since Tycho, arguments have re- 
peatedly been put forward, and repeatedly disputed, that 
the catalogue in Ptolemy’s Almagest is an unacknowledged 
substantial reproduction of Hipparchus’, with the longi- 
tudes adjusted to reflect the precessional motion between 
Hipparchus’ time and Ptolemy’s. At present the balance of 
evidence seems to preponderate in favor of the hypothesis 
that Ptolemy depended heavily on Hipparchus’ catalogue. 


Bibliography 
Neugebauer O 1975 A History of Ancient Mathematical 
Astronomy (Berlin: Springer) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hipparcos 


The Hipparcos space astronomy mission was dedicated 
to the very accurate measurement of star positions, and 
their distances and motions in space. The satellite was 
designed, built and operated under the responsibility of 
the EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY (ESA), with the guidance of an 
international scientific advisory committee. Launched in 
August 1989 and operated until mid-1993, two resulting 
star catalogs were completed and published in 1997: 
the Hipparcos Catalog is a high-accuracy compilation of 
nearly 120 000 star positions, distances and space motions; 
the Tycho Catalog is a lower-accuracy catalog of slightly 
more than one million stars. Together they represent 
astronomers’ best understanding of the space distribution, 
space motion, and corresponding physical properties of 
stars in the solar neighborhood. The experiment was 
carried out within a large collaboration of about 200 mainly 
European scientists. 


Background 

Catalogs of star positions have been compiled for more 
than two thousand years. The name of the ESA mission, 
as well as being an acronym for ‘high precision parallax 
collecting satellite’, reflects the contribution of the ancient 
Greek astronomer HIPPARCHUS who prepared a naked-eye 
catalog of about 1000 stars around the first century BC. 

Over the past few hundred years, improved 
instruments and observational techniques have led to star 
catalogs of continuously improving accuracy and size. 
This astronomical discipline, technically referred to as 
ASTROMETRY, has led to a greatly improved picture and 
comprehension of our place in our Galaxy. Directly and 
indirectly the accurate measurement of star positions has 
provided profound insights into the content and structure 
of the universe as a whole. 

Star position measurements in the 17th century were 
directed at compiling catalogs to assist sea navigation 
and the determination of longitude, but measurements 
were also aimed at furthering scientific understanding of 
the Earth’s motion in space. During the 18th and 19th 
centuries positional improvements led to the detection of 
small changes in the relative positions of stars, attributed 
to the motions of the stars themselves through space. 
The realization that stars lie at finite, albeit very large, 
distances from our own solar system led to intensified 
efforts at measuring the effect of PARALLAX, which is the 
apparent displacement of nearby stars compared to more 
distant stars as the Earth moves in its orbit around the Sun. 
Because of their enormous distances, the resulting angular 
displacements are very small, and even the nearest stars 
have parallaxes of only about 1 arcsec (1/3600°). For more 
distant stars the effect is much smaller. Consequently, to 
measure stellar distances even within our Galaxy, angular 
accuracies very much better than 1 arcsec are required. 

Similar considerations apply to the measurements of 
PROPER MOTION, Which are the changes in angular position 
on the sky with time resulting from the projection, on the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


plane of the sky, of the star’s motion through space. While 
the largest proper motions reach about 10 arcsec per year, 
typical stellar motions within our Galaxy, of the order of 
several tens of km s~!, combine with their considerable 
distances to result in typical angular positional motions of 
only a few hundredths of an arcsec per year. Ground-based 
proper motion measurements can often discern these tiny 
motions, in particular by extending the observational 
baseline over decades. Nevertheless, reaching very high 
proper motion accuracies, with minimal systematic errors, 
faces problems similar to those encountered for high- 
accuracy parallax work. 

Because of the size of the effects involved, the 
measurement of stellar parallaxes from the ground has 
always been very difficult, and complicated primarily 
by the perturbing effects of the Earth’s atmosphere. 
Measurements are made relative to an average parallax 
of more distant background stars, and an estimate of this 
background parallax is accounted for in the correction of 
the measured (relative) parallax to an absolute value. 

In the 1960s an alternative approach for measuring 
parallaxes was developed, with particular emphasis on 
obtaining absolute rather than relative values. The basic 
idea was to combine the images from two areas of sky onto 
one detector, and to do this at different times of the year. 
The parallactic displacements for the two fields would 
then be uncorrelated, and relative measurements would 
therefore circumvent the parallax zero-point problem. 
It was soon realized that such technology could not 
be employed from the ground, as it required a stable 
and precisely known angle between the two viewing 
directions, which was affected by variable atmospheric 
refraction, along with gravitational and thermal effects. 
The first ideas for implementing this technique in a space 
mission were submitted by P Lacroute in France in 1966. 
The implementation appeared too complex at that time, 
in particular with respect to the construction of the mirror 
necessary to combine the two viewing directions, and in 
1970 further studies for a space mission were suspended. 

The basic idea, however, survived and with the input 
of several new ideas, the concept of a space astrometry 
mission became more realistic. A meeting on space 
astrometry in Frascati in 1974 marked the start of what 
was to develop into the Hipparcos project. Its official 
status as an ESA study was obtained in 1976, and growing 
recognition of the fundamental importance of being able 
to obtain greatly improved stellar distances and space 
motions led to the acceptance of the Hipparcos mission 
within ESA’s scientific programme in 1980. 

For the 120000 stars observed and contained 
within the Hipparcos Catalog, mean errors in positions, 
parallaxes, and annual proper motions are around 
0.001 arcsec, a value which yields distance accuracies of 
10% for stars at a distance of 100 pc. These numbers 
can be compared with the relatively small number (about 
8000 stars in the 1995 Yale Parallax Catalog) of pre- 
Hipparcos parallaxes accumulated through a century 
of astrometric work, and with the lower precision 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(5-10 milliarcsec at best) of the classical photographic 
parallaxes. Modern ground-based electronic parallax 
observations (e.g. from the US Naval and Allegheny 
observatories) are comparable to Hipparcos both in 
precision and accuracy, but only a few hundred stars, 
mostly quite faint, have been observed to date. Hipparcos 
therefore provides the unique source of large numbers of 
high-quality parallaxes for bright stars; these are the data 
needed for most luminosity calibration and distance-scale 
problems. 

As the first satellite devoted to star position 
measurements, the scientific interest in the Hipparcos 
results has led to plans for future space missions aiming at 
significantly higher angular accuracies, of a few millionths 
of a second of arc, and for a very much larger number of 
stars. 


Operational principle 


The Hipparcos satellite was built by a large European 
industrial consortium, led by Matra Marconi Space 
and Alenia Aerospazio, under contract to ESA. The 
satellite comprised a spacecraft platform, including the 
power, telecommunications, attitude and thermal control 
subsystems, and the payload containing the optical 
telescope and detector chains (table 1). The satellite was 
launched by an Ariane 4 rocket, flight V33, on 8 August 
1989, and was operated from ESA’s satellite operations 
center at ESOC (Darmstadt, Germany) through ground 
stations at Odenwald (Germany), Perth (Australia), 
Goldstone (USA), and Kourou (French Guyana). 


Table 1. Instrument characteristics. 


Optics 

Telescope configuration All-reflective Schmidt 
Field of view 0.9° x 0.9° 
Separation between fields 58° 

Primary mirror diameter 0.29 m 

Focal length 1.4m 

Scale at focal surface 6.8 wm arcsec” 
Mirror surface accuracy 4/60 rms at 550 nm 


1 


Primary detection system: 


Modulating grid 2688 slits 

Slit period 1.208 arcsec (8.2 zm) 
Detector Image dissector tube 
Photocathode $20 


Scale at photocathode 1 


Sensitive field of view 
Spectral range 
Sampling frequency 


3.0 wm arcsec” 
38 arcsec diameter 
375-750 nm 

1200 Hz 


Star mapper (Tycho) system: 


Modulating grid 4 slits at 90° to scan 

4 slits at +45° to scan 
Detectors Photomultiplier tubes 
Photocathode Bi-alkali 
Spectral range (Br) Aete/AA = 430/90 nm 
Spectral range (Vr) Aete/AA = 530/100 nm 
Sampling frequency 600 Hz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The Hipparcos satellite configuration with the three 
solar array panels deployed (seen at bottom). The hemispherical 
apertures define the two viewing directions. The satellite rotated 
about the vertical axis. 


Originally intended to be stationed in a geostationary 
orbit, the apogee boost motor intended to circularize the 
orbit failed to function, and the mission was conducted 
from a highly elliptical transfer orbit. Apart from a 
considerable increase in operational complexity and a 
reduced fraction of useful observing time, the unplanned 
orbit had a relatively small effect on the data quality, 
and all of the mission’s original goals were comfortably 
surpassed. Nevertheless, the high particle radiation levels 
in the operational orbit led to a progressive deterioration 
of certain satellite elements (gyroscopes, thermal control, 
telecommunications). Useful observations ceased in 
March 1993, and satellite operations were terminated on 
15 August 1993. More than three years of useful data had 
been acquired, exceeding the 2.5 yr design goals. 

The satellite comprised a small but highly accurate 
optical telescope, with a primary mirror diameter of about 
0.3 m, and with two distinct viewing directions separated 
by about 58° (figure 1). A beam combiner mirror brought 
the light from the two viewing directions to a common 
focal surface. A highly accurate grid system in the focal 
surface modulated the star images, and the modulated 
light was sensed by a detector located behind the grid. 
The measurement principle was similar to that used in 
ground-based meridian instruments, the purpose of both 
types of instrument being the determination of accurate 
transit times. In the case of meridian telescopes the stellar 
images pass through a set of slits as a result of the Earth’s 
rotation. In the case of Hipparcos, the passages were the 
results of the satellite rotation, which was maintained at a 
roughly constant spin rate of approximately 168 arcsec s~! 
through the periodic firing of 20 mN gas jet thrusters. 
These were activated in order to maintain the required 
attitude, itself sensed by the passage of bright stars across 
the satellite’s star mappers. The near simultaneity of 
measurements obtained in the two fields of view, together 
with the satellite scanning, made it possible to obtaina very 
accurate calibration of the angle between the two viewing 
directions, using closure conditions on the observed great 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The scanning motion of the Hipparcos satellite on the 
celestial sphere, shown in ecliptic coordinates. Top: the path of 
the spin axis between 22 May 1990 and 23 September 1991. 
Bottom: the two viewing directions swept out great circles on 
the sky: one out of five of every great circle scan is shown for the 
interval 22 May 1990 to 14 July 1990 (courtesy F van Leeuwen). 


circle. As a result, the very precise relative separations 
measured in the 0.9° x 0.9° combined field of view could 
be transformed into very precise large angular separations 
on the sky. 

Scanning the entire sky in a continuous and regular 
manner, whilst maintaining a constant inclination of the 
spin axis to the Sun direction for thermal control reasons, 
the observations were used to build up a network of 
one-dimensional angular measurements between the stars 
(figure 2). Scanned at different orientations and at many 
different epochs throughout an operational lifetime of 
about 3 yr, the on-ground processing then led to the 
reconstruction of the positions, distances, and proper 
motions of each star. 

The two widely separated viewing directions led to 
the construction of a very rigid positional frame, and 
to the possibility of determining absolute parallaxes, in 
which the stellar distance determinations are independent 
of the assumed distance to other stars. The resulting 
network of star positions and proper motions was, 
however, not directly connected to other independent 
reference points, but was attached to a quasi-inertial 
system through the linking of the resulting star positions to 
those of extragalactic objects, especially extragalactic radio 
sources. As a result, the Hipparcos reference frame is the 
optical realization of the International Celestial Reference 
System (ICRS): the catalog positions are on the same 
reference system as VLBI radio measurements, and the 
proper motions are inertial. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Satellite observations were conducted on the basis of 
an ‘input catalog’, the compilation of target stars to be 
observed throughout the mission. Selected stars were 
chosen on the basis of their scientific importance (as 
perceived during the years before launch), taking into 
account operational and data reduction requirements of 
a reasonably uniform distribution of stars on the sky, with 
a surface density of about 3 stars per square degree. The 
magnitude distribution down to the observational limiting 
magnitude of about 12 mag also had to be consistent with 
the available observing time as a result of the regular 
scanning motion of the satellite. 

Stellar images modulated by the grid in the focal 
surface were sampled by an image dissector tube’s 
sensitive area, pointed sequentially to the star positions 
defined by the input catalog, and sampled at 1200 Hz. A 
data rate of 24 kb s7! yielded a data stream distributed 
to and analysed by three European scientific consortia. 
The data analysis tasks were lengthy and complex, and 
proceeded from the raw satellite data, using the attitude 
determination on the basis of the satellite’s sky mappers, 
to yield one-dimensional positions of the stars along a 
reference great circle at the epoch of observation. 


Data analysis 

The interconnection of all of the reference great circle 
data obtained throughout the mission, during which the 
sky was scanned at many different epochs, and at many 
different position angles, eventually yielded the two- 
dimensional positions of each star (in right ascension and 
declination), the time-dependent proper motion of each 
star due to its motion through space, and the additional 
annual elliptical component of motion due to the Earth’s 
motion around the Sun, which provides the stellar 
distances. The radial component of the space velocity 
of each star (which can be obtained spectroscopically 
from the Doppler shift of the star’s spectrum), needed 
to complete the full six-dimensional Cartesian coordinate 
location of each star (the three positional components and 
the three velocity components), was not measured by the 
Hipparcos satellite. 

The entire data analysis chain, from the determination 
of one-dimensional great circle coordinates and their 
interconnection through the ‘sphere reconstruction’ step, 
was iterated a number of times to achieve full consistency 
and convergence. Results were verified through extensive 
cross-checks of the results of two parallel reduction 
efforts before publication. Median accuracies, around 
1 milliarcsec (mas), depend primarily on the star 
magnitude (the Hipparcos measurements are in a broad- 
band system, referred to as Hp), and on its ecliptic latitude, 
due to the form of the scanning law (figure 3). 

The more complex observational behavior of double 
and multiple stars and astrometric binaries were subjected 
to specific analysis procedures. In the case of resolved 
double or multiple systems, the results yielded accurate 
angular separations, position angles, and magnitude 
differences at the various epochs of observation, and these 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


o [mas(/yr)] 


0 1 1 i 1 1 | s 1 | 1 1 1 : 1 | 1 1 
-90 -60 -30 0 30 60 90 
ecliptic latitude [deg] 


5 6 7 8 9 10 1 12 
Hp [mag] 


Figure 3. Hipparcos Catalog errors as a function of position and 
magnitude. Top: median standard errors of the five astrometric 
parameters as a function of Hp magnitude. The unit of the 
standard error is milliarcsec (mas) for the positional components 
(a, 6) and parallax (7), and mas yr~! for the proper motion 
components (qx = a Cos 4, 43). Bottom: median standard 
errors of the astrometric parameters as a function of ecliptic 
latitude. The dependency on ecliptic latitude is a consequence of 
the ecliptic-based scanning law. The errors are given at the 
catalog epoch, J1991.25 (courtesy H Schrijver). 


results were compiled into a specific annex of components 
of 12195 double and multiple systems. A further 235 
orbital systems, 2910 astrometric binaries (recognized 
through the nonlinear motion of their photocenters), and 
8542 suspected non-single objects make up the total of 
23 882 solved or suspected double or multiple systems 
classified in the Hipparcos Catalog. 

Although the primary objective of the mission was 
the determination of accurate astrometric data, the 
positional results were obtained from a modulated stellar 
signal whose careful analysis and calibration yielded a 
substantial database of homogeneous photometric data 
which is contained in annexes to the main Hipparcos 
Catalog. Each star was observed an average of about 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


110 times throughout the 3 yr mission, yielding a median 
broad-band photometric precision of about 0.0015 mag for 
stars brighter than 9 mag. The results provide extensive 
data on stellar variability. As a result of the photometric 
analysis undertaken in advance of the catalog publication, 
11597 stars were classified as variable, of which 8237 
were newly identified as such. Of these, 2712 stars 
were classified as periodic variables, with light curves 
provided in the catalog annexes, and 5542 non-periodic 
and unsolved variables were classified, of which 4145 
were newly identified. These results have underlined the 
quality of photometric data which can be acquired above 
the Earth’s atmosphere, and have led to greatly improved 
categorization of stellar luminosity and variability as a 
function of position in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM. 

The Tycho Catalog of more than one million stars, of 
lower astrometric accuracy than that of the main catalog, 
was constructed from the data derived from the satellite’s 
sky mappers. It provides a positional reference catalog 
with about 25 stars per square degree, with a limiting 
magnitude of about V = 11.5 mag, completeness at 
about V = 10.5 mag, and a median precision at the 
catalog reference epoch of about 25 milliarcsec. The 
median astrometric precision is about 7 milliarcsec for stars 
brighter than 9 mag, and systematic errors are expected to 
be below about 1 milliarcsec. 

Although the majority of objects contained within the 
Hipparcos Catalog are stars within our Galaxy, about 45 
are bright stars in the Magellanic Clouds. In addition, a 
particular effort was devoted to obtaining observations of 
all solar system objects which could be observed by the 
satellite, taking into account the observing constraints of 
magnitude, angular size, and proximity to nearby bright 
objects (planets). In total, 48 minor planets and three 
planetary satellites (J II Europa, S VI Titan, S VIII Iapetus) 
were observed by the main experiment. Observations of 
solar system objects were complicated by their non-point- 
like nature, which affects the phase estimates (due to the 
varying solar aspect angle) and their resulting relation to 
stellar positions. Additionally, their rapid motion on the 
sky called for specific treatment of the data during their 
crossing of the instrument’s focal plane. 

Following the scientific analysis phase, the European 
Space Agency published the results of the project on 
behalf of the scientific collaborators in June 1997: the 
Hipparcos Catalog is a 17-volume publication containing 
the positions, distances, proper motions, and photometric, 
variability, and multiplicity properties of the more 
than one hundred thousand stars brighter than about 
12 mag observed by the satellite (see HIPPARCOS AND TYCHO 
CATALOGUES). Volume 1 is an introduction and guide to 
the catalog data, including sky distributions illustrating 
statistical properties of the data. Volumes 2-4 document 
the satellite measurement and operational principles, and 
the construction of the Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogs 
respectively. Volumes 5-9 contain the main Hipparcos 
Catalog, with annexes of double and multiple star data 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


gh 4gm gh 44m gh 4m 
— 
ee = 
Py ._ Asellus Borealis 
43 1@ : 
159 ly 
. Bis . UV (i) 
. ‘ 10} 
— : : +21° 
; F 
. . ° ee 
. ‘ 7 
ee . ere Pare 
Praesepe --“@ = 
e Beehive) ,~ . 
. . : (Bee ee BW (dO), 
’ . BQ (do) 
184 ly. 
e ! 
we % ie 
° \ 
. [4 i. 3 oF os 
Maa" = © qe oy BS (a0) 
. 2632, BX (dO) fas ns |. * 
. | No. te Me 
\ ; a 
4 ae e 3 Ke? 
2672 . See) races 
pas : Sy eS 
e, , 
‘ ; 
) 
* SEV : 
: ve 
. oD 
ere _—_— oo 
IC 2409, = ' we 
Asellus Australis .! "+ ae 
eo 478 5 
& ; Rae 
. 2 Ae ° 
- < = x] +18 
fs O PK208+33.1 
ae . 
e “lic 2406 


Figure 4. The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogs are the basis for 
Sky Publishing Corporation’s three-volume Millennium Star 
Atlas, published in 1997. Each square represents an area of 

1 square degree. Graphical representation of magnitudes and 
variability, and of nearby and high-proper motion stars, is 
included in the Atlas. This example is from Chart 712, and 
includes the Praesepe star cluster (courtesy Sky Publishing 
Corporation and ESA). 


(Volume 10), variability data and light curves (Volumes 11- 
12), and identification charts (Volume 13). Volumes 14— 
16 are sky charts of the Hipparcos and Tycho Catalog, 
comprising the Millenium Star Atlas, and indicating 
the most significant motions, distances, duplicity and 
variability properties (figure 4). All results from the 
mission, including intermediate astrometric data and 
individual photometric measurements, are included in the 
6 CD-ROMs of Volume 17. The Hipparcos results can also 
be accessed via the WWW. 

The scientific effort involved in the preparation of the 
Hipparcos mission and in its data analysis was substantial: 
some 200 scientists were involved in various aspects 
of the mission, in many cases for the 18 yr project’s 
duration, from acceptance by ESA (or before) to the catalog 
publication. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


T r P T 
re) Lo | 
| 
O..-F a 
o 
ne) 
5 . 
& ; giants 
ie] main sequence 
€ 
Sof 7 
on 
S 
oO 
Ss 
ze) 
n 
Ba] 
<= 
oL 4 
white dwarfs 
rome 4 
1 1 1 n | 1 1 1 1 | 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
-0.5 fe) 0.5 1 1.5 2 


Colour index 


Figure 5. The Hertzsprung—Russell diagram (absolute visual 
magnitude, My, versus color index B — V) for about 14000 
single stars within a sphere of radius 100 pc centered on the Sun, 
taken from the Hipparcos Catalog. The few objects lying 
between the main sequence and the white dwarf sequence 
mostly arise from color index errors in the catalog. 


Catalog details 

The basic astrometric data in the Hipparcos and Tycho 
Catalogs include directions (positions), specified by 
celestial coordinates, their rate of change (proper motions), 
and trigonometric parallaxes. They are the first 
observational catalogs to contain parallaxes in addition 
to positions and proper motions for all stars in the 
observing programme. Positions and proper motions 
are given within the International Celestial Reference 
System (ICRS), which is consistent with the conventional 
equatorial system for the mean equinox and equator of 
J2000, previously realized by the FK5 Catalog. Timing of 
events is consistently based on terrestrial time (TT). 

The standard astrometric model for a single star 
assumes uniform rectilinear space motion relative to the 
solar system barycenter. At some reference epoch, 7p, 
the motion of a star is described by the following six 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


parameters: barycentric coordinate direction, specified 
as right ascension, a, and declination, 5; annual 
parallax, 2, from which the coordinate distance is 
(sinz)~! astronomical units (to sufficient approximation, 
the distance in parsec is given by 1000/mz, where z 
is expressed in milliarcsec); the rate of change of the 
barycentric coordinate direction expressed as proper 
motion components jz, cosé and j13;, in angular measure 
per unit time; radial (i.e. line of sight) velocity, Vg, in 
linear measure per unit time. The radial velocity is 
normally obtained from spectroscopic observations. The 
remaining five parameters are determined from analysis 
of the Hipparcos observations and are given for almost all 
stars in the catalog. 

The standard astrometric model was adequate for 
the majority of stars, including the components of most 
resolved double and multiple stars. For several thousand 
apparently single stars, however, the standard model did 
not give an acceptable fit to the observations. These are 
probably binary stars, in which the center of light describes 
a curved path on the sky due to the orbital motions of 
the components around their common center of mass. 
For such ‘astrometric binaries’ additional parameters were 
introduced to describe the motion in accordance with the 
observations. In most cases a good empirical fit was 
obtained by including one or two additional terms in 
the Taylor expansion of the variation of the barycentric 
coordinate direction with time. In a few hundred cases 
even this was not sufficient, and Keplerian elements 
(sometimes partially based on existing ground-based data) 
were introduced to describe the orbital motion of the 
photocenter. 

The catalog reference epoch is Ty) = J1991.25(TT), 
close to the central epoch of observations (the distinction 
between the epoch which specifies the equinox and 
equator of a coordinate system, typically B1950 or J2000, 
and the epoch at which the star passed through the 
given position, should be noted). The International 
Celestial Reference System (ICRS), as represented by the 
Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogs, replaces the FK5 system 
as the practical definition of celestial coordinates in the 
optical region. The construction of the ICRS ensures that 
no discontinuity larger than the uncertainty of the FK5 
system occurs in the transition from FK5 (mean equinox 
and equator J2000) to ICRS. Thus, from the viewpoint 
of optical astrometry, the Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogs 
can be regarded as an extension and improvement of 
the J2000(FK5) system, retaining approximately the global 
orientation of that system but without its regional errors. 
However, the Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogs have not 
simply been tied to the FK5 system, but to the ICRS 
through the extragalactic radio frame. Providing positions 
within the ICRS means that they are consistent with 
present knowledge of the (extragalactic) radio reference 
system. Providing proper motions within the ICRS means 
that they are consistent with the best present realizations 
of a quasi-inertial reference system (i.e. non-rotating with 
respect to distant galaxies). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Since parallax is explicitly derived in the data reduc- 
tion, the directions represented by the right ascension and 
declination at epoch 7p are strictly barycentric. In previ- 
ous astrometric catalogs, the unknown displacement due 
to parallax for each observation perturbed the final catalog 
positions. 

At the accuracy achieved by Hipparcos, general 
relativity effects cannot be ignored. In the relativistic 
framework, the observed directions are ‘proper directions’ 
referred to the Lorentzian frame moving with the observer. 
In order to relate the observed directions at different 
epochs and of different objects to a simple geometrical 
model of the stars and their motions, the ‘local’ effects 
of the moving observer (stellar aberration) and space 
curvature (gravitational light deflection by the Sun) 
are removed by transforming the proper directions to 
‘coordinate directions’ corresponding to the coordinate 
differences between the object and observer, expressed in 
the (solar system) barycentric coordinate system. 

Stellar aberration was computed from the barycentric 
motion of the satellite, using the full relativistic formula 
and combining the geocentric satellite velocities accurate 
to about 0.2 m s~!, determined by the ground stations, 
with the appropriate ephemeris for the barycentric motion 
of the Earth. Gravitational light deflection was computed 
in the heliocentric metric, assuming spherical symmetry. 
The treatment of aberration is consistent with the [AU 
(1984) recommendation that the total barycentric velocity 
of the Earth should be used; prior to that date the elliptic 
component of velocity, which changes very slowly with 
time, was conventionally ignored. 

For the propagation of the astrometric parameters 
and their covariances to arbitrary epochs, normally only 
the changes in a and 4, due to the proper motion, are 
appreciable. In rigorous treatment the time dependence of 
all six parameters must however be explicitly considered, 
as described in the published catalog. 

The proper motions are instantaneous rates of change 
of the barycentric coordinates at the epoch 7p. For stars 
with large parallax, large proper motion, and large radial 
velocity, the apparent acceleration of coordinates due to 
perspective effects may be significant. These can be 
calculated on the assumption of uniform space motion 
relative to the barycenter, and were accounted for, in the 
case of the few most significantly affected stars, in reducing 
the individual observations to Tp. 


Scientific applications 

The resulting stellar distances and motions impact on all 
areas of astronomy and astrophysics, but most particularly 
on the understanding of stellar structure and evolution, 
and the structure and dynamics of our own Galaxy. More 
than twenty thousand stars out to distances of about 100 pc 
now have their distances known to better than 10%, and 
another thirty thousand are known to better than 20%. 
Table 2 lists the 20 stars closest to the Sun, as deduced 
from the Hipparcos parallaxes, and supplemented by Yale 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. The 20 known stars closest to the Sun. The parallax is 
given in milliarcsec (mas). The distance in pc is given by 1/z, 
where z is the parallax in arcsec. The data are from the 
Hipparcos Catalog, Volume 1, Table 3.6.1, supplemented by four 
objects from the Yale Parallax Catalog too faint to be observed by 
Hipparcos. 


HIP 4 My 4 Name 
70890 11.01 15.45 77233 aCenC 
71681 1.35 5.70 742.12 a%Cen 
71683 —0.01 4.34 742.12 a! Cen 
87937 9.54 13.24 549.01 Barnard’s star 

— 13.46 16.57 419.1 Wolf 359 
54035 749 10.46 392.40 BD +36 2147 
32349 —1.44 145 379.21 aCMa 

— 12.56 15.42 373.7 Luyten 726-8 A 
92403 10.37 13.00 33648 Ross 154 

— 12.27. 14.77 316.0 Ross 248 
16537 3.72 6.18 310.75 e€Eri 

114046 7.35 9.76 303.90 CD-36 15693 
57548 11.12 13.50 299.58 Ross 128 

— 12.32 1463 289.5 Luyten 789-6 

104214 5.20 749 287.13 61CygA 
37279 0.40 2.68 285.93 aCMi 

104217 6.05 8.33 285.42 61CygB 
91772 9.70 11.97 28448 BD+591915B 
91768 8.94 11.18 280.28 BD+591915A 

1475 8.09 10.33 280.27 BD+4344A 


Parallax Catalog data for nearby stars too faint to be 
observed by Hipparcos. 

Stars differ from each other in many important re- 
spects: in their mass, chemical composition, size, rota- 
tion rate, age, and in many other details. Understanding 
their composition and structure, how and where they were 
born, how they are evolving, and how they will eventu- 
ally die, means determining their individual properties, 
and comparing them with detailed models of their ini- 
tial conditions and subsequent evolution, involving a very 
comprehensive understanding of many areas of physics. 
Specifically, knowing the luminosity of a star requires 
knowledge of the star’s distance, in order to convert its 
apparent magnitude into an absolute luminosity. The 
Hertzsprung—Russell diagram is the distribution of abso- 
lute magnitude versus color index. In its observational 
form (figure 5) it reveals one of the most important corre- 
lations of stellar properties known. The Hipparcos results 
have made significant contributions to the understanding 
of stellar properties, through the improved definition of 
their luminosities. 

Comparing theoretical models with measurements 
of the brightnesses, temperatures, masses, and ages 
of the stars provides direct information on whether 
present understanding of the star formation process and 
subsequent evolution are correct. Ultimately, it leads to an 
understanding of the internal structure and other ‘hidden’ 
properties of the stars, since only when the correct physical 
ingredients and processes are included will the models 
agree with ever-improving observations. In the context of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the relatively new discipline of asteroseismology, in which 
stars other than our Sun are scrutinized for observational 
signatures of solar-like oscillations, accurate distance 
measurements yield precise stellar luminosities, and thus 
provide a direct check on models of internal stellar 
structure. 

The collective positional and kinematical distribu- 
tion of the one hundred billion stars comprising our own 
Galaxy are linked through their gravitational environ- 
ment, and via the history of star formation throughout the 
Galaxy. The initial properties are subsequently modified, 
often substantially, by small- and large-scale dynamical 
processes. Thus present-day star positions and motions 
encode the details of the initial formation and subsequent 
evolution of our Galaxy. 

The Hipparcos Catalog results have led to important 
progress in understanding the space and velocity 
distribution of nearby stars. This knowledge is used 
to define the distribution of stellar luminosities, the 
distribution of stellar masses, and the kinematical 
behavior of stars in the solar neighborhood. Additionally, 
by observing the distances and motions of stars 
perpendicular to the plane of our Galaxy, the results have 
also been used to probe the distribution of ‘dark matter’ in 
the Universe, which is inferred to exist from cosmological 
and other arguments. This is possible because stars act 
as kinematic tracers, probing the gravitational signature 
of material irrespective of its physical manifestation. The 
results support a growing consensus concerning the main 
structural parameters of the galactic disk populations of 
stars, and on the possible distribution of dark matter in 
our Galaxy. 

The Hyades is the nearest moderately rich open 
CLUSTER, Whose distance has been the subject of intense 
interest and investigation over a very long period, due 
to its central role in defining the entire distance scale 
used in astronomy. More generally, clusters are important 
because they represent a gravitationally bound collection 
of typically a few hundred stars, born at the same time, and 
with a given chemical composition. The development of 
such a coeval system, both dynamically and with respect 
to the individual stellar properties such as temperature 
and luminosity, therefore provides an ideal laboratory for 
testing models of stellar evolution. Open star clusters 
are also subject to ‘evaporation’ and eventual disruption 
over timescales of tens or hundreds of millions of years 
due to gravitational encounters between stars within the 
cluster, or between the cluster and the galactic disk or 
giant molecular clouds. Hipparcos has provided a reliable 
direct distance measurement to about 200 stars in the 
Hyades cluster, allowing its internal structure, internal 
motion, mass segregation, and disintegration processes to 
be observed. 

Distance estimates for clusters out to several hundred 
parsec have also been measured directly with Hipparcos. 
These are being used to extend the distance scale 
calibrations, and to verify models of stellar evolution 
according to age and chemical composition. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The problem of deriving accurate distances to objects 
throughout our Galaxy, beyond distances which are 
directly accessible by means of trigonometric parallax 
determinations, is one of the central themes in present 
day astronomy. On the largest scales, distances to other 
galaxies affect our knowledge of the HUBBLE CONSTANT. 
While most astronomers do not question the fact that 
the universe is expanding, the actual expansion rate is 
still vigorously debated. The precise value, as given 
by the Hubble constant, is of more than quantitative 
interest, since theories seeking to explain the formation 
and subsequent evolution of the early universe now 
predict properties of the present day universe which 
are becoming ever more stringently constrained by 
observations. Cepheid variables have played a very 
crucial role in these discussions, due to their regular 
pulsations with a period considered to depend primarily 
only on their luminosity. The Hipparcos results on these 
and other objects is leading to more secure distance scales 
within and beyond our Galaxy. 

Hipparcos results are facilitating efforts to determine 
stellar ages and, in particular, to date the oldest stellar 
populations in our Galaxy, the GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. These 
ages therefore provide a lower limit on the age of 
the universe. Pre-Hipparcos estimates had put some 
globular cluster ages as high as 18 Gyr, older than current 
cosmological age estimates of the universe itself. Revised 
ages, derived from the new distance measurements, of 
perhaps 12-14 Gyr may have alleviated this age paradox. 


Future developments 

A number of proposed space missions are set to exploit 
the possibilities of measuring significantly more accurate 
stellar positions from space. The SPACE INTERFEROMETRY 
MISSION (SIM) is a US mission which will employ a medium- 
sized pointed interferometer to establish measurements 
of several tens of thousands of stars with microarcsec 
precision. GAIA is a mission under consideration by 
the European Space Agency which will combine the 
basic principles of Hipparcos with numerous innovative 
features, and which will result in microarcsec positional 
accuracy for approximately one billion stars. In addition 
to the satellite’s two main astrometric lines of sight, 
a third viewing direction is devoted to the acquisition 
of radial velocities of the brighter 10° or so stars, 
down to about 17 mag. Sampling roughly 1% of the 
stellar population of our Galaxy, GAIA is designed to 
provide a six-dimensional spatial and velocity mapping 
extending throughout the Galaxy. The motivation is to 
rectify the shortcoming of classical two-dimensional star 
measurements by providing the third space component of 
the star’s velocity vector, important for understanding and 
interpreting stellar kinematics and dynamics. 

GAIA will be positioned and operated at the Sun— 
Earth LAGRANGE POINT L2, roughly 1.5 x 10° km from Earth, 
which provides a rather benign thermal environment, and 
an absence of eclipses and occultations. It will demand 
data transmission rates of about 1 Mb s7! throughout 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the planned 5 yr lifetime. The payload will employ 
larger optics, CCD detectors giving higher efficiency and 
parallel observation of many more stars, and innovative 
approaches to the problem of structural and thermal 
stability, yielding positions nearly a thousand times better 
than Hipparcos. GAIA will circumvent the complexities of 
an ‘input’ or pre-defined observing catalog, and select its 
targets autonomously on-board. The goal is to observe 
essentially every star down to 20 mag, thereby largely 
eliminating the problems of ‘selection effects’ which 
plague the interpretation of catalogs relying on the pre- 
selection of objects. At an average of around 25000 
stars per square degree GAIA will dwarf the Hipparcos 
Catalog’s 3 stars per square degree, or even the Tycho 
Catalog’s 25. 


Bibliography 

http: //astro.estec.esa.nl/Hipparcos is the ESA site with 
details of Hipparcos, access to the catalogs and annexes, 
and links to related scientific papers 


ESA 1997 The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues European 
Space Agency ESA SP-1200 (17 volumes) 

Heg E et al 1997 The Tycho Catalogue Astron. Astrophys. 
323 L57-L60 

van Leeuwen F 1997 The Hipparcos Mission Space Sci. Rev. 
81 (3-4) 201-409 

Perryman M A C 1998 The Hipparcos Astrometry Mission 
Phys. Today June 38-43 

Perryman M A C et al 1997 The Hipparcos Catalogue 
Astron. Astrophys. 323 L49-L52 

Turon C et al 1997 From Hipparchus to Hipparcos Sky & 
Telescope July 28-34 


Michael Perryman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues 


The decision of the International Astronomical Union 
to adopt the new celestial reference system ICRS (see 
EXTRAGALACTIC REFERENCE FRAMES), and its realization in 
the radio domain (ICRF, see sPACE AND TIME REFERENCES: 
CONCEPTS), Was contingent upon the completion of a 
secondary catalog of star positions and proper motions in 
optical wavelengths. The only suitable catalog was the one 
obtained from the data of the Hipparcos space astrometry 
mission (see HIPPARCOS). 


Reference frame of the Hipparcos Catalogue 
Hipparcos measured the angles between the objects in its 
observing list. From these and their variations with time, 
positions, proper motions and parallaxes were calculated 
in a single coordinate system. However, because the 
angles are invariant with respect to a rigid rotation of 
the coordinates, the axes of this preliminary Hipparcos 
Catalogue were arbitrarily placed and had an arbitrary 
linearly time-dependent rotation. The necessary link to 
ICRS could then be expressed as a rotation vector R that 
would bring the coordinates and proper motions into the 
ICRS: 
R=€+0(T —T). 


where «€ is the rotation vector to be applied at a reference 
time 7p and w is the yearly spin vector. The components 
of € and w were obtained by comparing the positions 
and/or proper motions of stars in the preliminary 
Hipparcos Catalogue with those observed with respect to 
extragalactic radio sources of the ICRF or more generally to 
galaxies which were assumed to be remote enough in order 
to be considered as fixed. Ten different programs were 
organized to provide the necessary relations to determine 
R. They included observation of radio stars with respect to 
ICRF objects by VLBI or connected radio interferometers, 
special large-scale photographs including Hipparcos stars 
and galaxies taken at two largely separated epochs, the 
use of large proper motion surveys made with respect to 
galaxies and the comparison of Earth rotation parameters 
obtained by VLBI and optical astrometry using Hipparcos 
positions. The synthesis of all these results provided the 
components of € for 1991.25 with an uncertainty of 0.6 
mas (milliseconds of arc) and of w with an uncertainty of 


0.25 mas yr!. 


Contents of the Hipparcos Catalogue 

The catalog contains astrometric data for 117955 stars. It 
includes a basic list of 52000 bright stars, a survey to a 
limiting visual magnitude V that is a function of the star’s 
spectral type and galactic latitude b: for spectral types 
earlier than or equal to G5, 


V <7.9+1.1sin |b| 
for spectral types later than G5, 


V <73+4+1.1sin |b. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In addition, there are 66000 stars of magnitudes up to 
V = 124 selected for their astrophysical or astronomical 
interest, or chosen in order to fill up empty regions of the 
sky. The mean astrometric characteristics of the catalog for 
stars of magnitude V < 9 are the following: 


Median uncertainty of positions: 0.77/0.64 mas 
(RA/dec) 

Median uncertainty of proper motions: 

0.88/0.74 mas yr! (RA/dec) 

Median uncertainty in parallaxes: 0.97 mas 

Ten per cent of these parameters have uncertainties 


less than 0.47/0.66 mas (RA/dec) 


In addition, complete or partial information on 14340 
double or multiple systems is provided, while 8542 other 
stars are marked as suspected double stars. 

Hipparcos was also a wide-band photometer. Results 
for 118204 stars are given, in the mean, from 110 
observations of each object. The median photometric 
precision for bright stars (Hipparcos magnitude up to 9) 
is 0.0015 mag. Within the whole material, there are 11597 
variable stars, 70% of which have been first identified as 
variables by Hipparcos. 


Contents of the Tycho Catalogue 

The Tycho Catalogue was constructed from the data 
collected by the star-mapper of the Hipparcos mission 
(see also TYCHO STAR CATALOGS). In contrast with the main 
mission in which stars are observed roughly during 4 s 
per transit, all stars in the field of view of the star-mapper 
gave a signal, but during only a quarter of a second. This 
explains why many more stars have been observed and are 
present in the Tycho Catalogue, but that the uncertainties 
are much larger. Actually for most stars only positions 
at the mean epoch are really useful. The total number of 
entries is 1 058 332. This includes practically all stars up to 
V magnitude 10.5 and many others up to V = 11.5. The 
mean median uncertainty in position for all stars is 25 mas. 
It is 7 mas for stars with V < 9. 

During the construction of the catalog, the coordinate 
axes were identical to those of the preliminary Hipparcos 
Catalogue. Then, the catalog was turned by the same 
rotations as the Hipparcos Catalogue so that the reference 
system of the final Tycho Catalogue is also the ICRS. 
This means that, although the Hipparcos Catalogue is the 
best optical reference frame realizing the ICRS, the Tycho 
Catalogue is also a realization of the same system. 

Tycho measured magnitudes in two colors close to 
the V and B magnitudes of the Johnson system. The mean 
uncertainties for all stars are 0.07 and 0.06 mag respectively 
for the Tycho B and V magnitudes. For stars with V < 9, 
these numbers should be divided by 5. 


Bibliography 

European Space Agency 1997 The Hipparcos and Tycho 
Catalogues (ESA Special Publication SP-1200) vol 1 

Kovalevsky J, Lindegren L, Perryman M A C et al 1997 
The Hipparcos Catalogue as a realization of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


extragalactic reference system Astron. Astrophys. 323 
620-33 

van Leeuwen F 1997 The Hipparcos mission Space Sci. Rev. 
81 201-409 


Jean Kovalevsky 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Hirayama Family 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hirayama Family 


Any of several groups of asteroids each of whose members 
share similar orbital elements, in particular a closely 
similar semi-major axis and orbital inclination. These 
similarities are surmised to indicate that the members of a 
particular Hirayama family share a common origin in the 
collisional break-up of a large parent body. The existence 
of such groups were first pointed out by Kiyotsugu 
Hirayama in 1918. Several dozen Hirayama families have 
been identified with a fair degree of certainty. Spectral 
similarities within some families support the idea of a 
common origin. This is true of the most populous families. 
The Themis family, for example, orbits at 3.13 AU with an 
inclination of 1°. It has several main members, including 
the 228 km diameter (24) Themis, and many minor 
members, which are all low-albedo C-type (carbonaceous 
chondrite) objects. However, there are families which 
contain a variety of types: the Alexandra family, for 
example, orbits at between 2.6 and 2.7 AU with inclinations 
of 11° to 12°, but has C-, G- and T-type members—difficult 
to reconcile with an origin as a single object. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hiten (Muses-A) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hiten (Muses-A) 


First Japanese Moon mission. Launched January 1990. 
Named Hiten after a Buddhist angel who plays music in 
heaven. Used to verify the swingby technique by utilizing 
lunar gravity. Returned engineering data, detected cosmic 
dust, and released a 12 kg orbiter called Haroromo. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hoba Meteorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hoba Meteorite 


The largest known single meteorite mass, weighing an 
estimated 60 tonnes; it is sometimes called the Hoba 
West meteorite. It still lies where it was discovered in 
1920, at Hoba Farm, near Grootfontein in Namibia. It 
produced no impact crater, but sits partially embedded in 
a hollow in the ground. The Hoba meteorite is an ataxite, 
a variety of iron meteorite, and measures about 2.7 m in 
its longest dimension. It is considerably weathered, and 
the surrounding surface is covered by a rusty deposit, the 
amount of which suggests that when the meteorite landed 
it may have weighed 75 tonnes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hoffman, Jeffrey A (1944-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hoffman, Jeffrey A (1944-) 


X-ray astronomer and astronaut, born in Brooklyn, New 
York, educated as an astrophysicist. Researched cosmic 
gamma ray and x-ray astronomy, flying a balloon-borne, 
low-energy, gamma ray telescope as a PhD project, worked 
at Leicester University on the x-ray astronomy rocket 
payload, and was project scientist for the medium-energy 
x-ray experiment on the EXOSAT satellite. At MIT worked 
on HEAO-1. Became an astronaut in 1979 and made five 
flights, during the fourth of which in 1993, on the shuttle 
Endeavor, he serviced and restored to full capacity the 
Hubble Space Telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hoffmeister, Cuno (1892-1968) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hoffmeister, Cuno (1892-1968) 


German astronomer, founder of the Sonnenberg Obser- 
vatory. Discovered thousands of variable stars through 
repeated photography of the sky and his technique of ‘fly- 
spanking’, comparing the size of the stellar images to iden- 
tify changes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hogg [Sawyer Hogg, Hogg-Priestley, Sawyer-Hogg- 
Priestley], Helen, née Battles (1905-93) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hogg [Sawyer Hogg, Hogg-Priestley, 
Sawyer-Hogg-Priestley], Helen, née 
Battles (1905-93) 


Astronomer, born in Lowell, MA, and planned a career as a 
chemist. However, a total eclipse of the Sun in 1925, as she 
said, ‘tied me to astronomy for life’. After meeting ANNIE 
CANNON of the Harvard College Observatory, she worked at 
Harvard with HARLOW SHAPLEY on star clusters. She moved 
to Victoria, British Columbia, and started an observing 
program with the 72 in telescope to study variable stars in 
globular clusters, chaperoned by her astronomer husband 
and accompanied to the dome at night by her new-born 
baby girl in her basket. The work continued in Toronto’s 
David Dunlap Observatory, where she became professor at 
the University of Toronto. She took over 2000 photographs 
during her research on variable stars in globular clusters, 
discovering hundreds of them, and compiling her work 
and others into the Catalogs of Variable Stars in Globular 
Clusters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hogg, Arthur Robert (1903-66) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hogg, Arthur Robert (1903-66) 


Australian atmospheric physicist, turned astronomer, 
born at Creswick, Victoria. Hogg joined the Mount 
Stromlo Observatory and became an astronomer after the 
Second World War, carrying out photoelectric photometry 
on eclipsing variables. The most important system 
that he observed was zeta Phoenicis, one of the 13 for 
which ‘first-order’ masses and radii can be determined. 
He determined standard magnitudes, and measured 
the integrated magnitudes and colors of the Magellanic 
Clouds, finding that the Small Cloud was appreciably 
bluer in its bright nuclear regions than in its outskirts. 
He worked on galactic clusters (he measured color— 
magnitude diagrams for five galactic clusters, and 
published a photographic atlas of southern galactic 
clusters). He played a leading part in the setting up 
and testing of the new 74 in telescope. Directed by 
BART BOK, he surveyed outback Australia for alternative 
astronomical sites when the sky quality at Mount Stromlo 
was compromised by the growth of Canberra, as result of 
which Siding Spring Mountain near Coonabarabran was 
chosen, becoming the site for the Anglo-Australian 150 in 
telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Holden, Edward Singleton (1846-1914) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Holden, Edward Singleton 
(1846-1914) 


Astronomer, born in St Louis, MO, designed and directed 
the Lick Observatory in California. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Holmberg, Erik [Eric] Bertil (1908—) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Holmberg, Erik [Eric] Bertil (1908-) 


Swedish astronomer who investigated the photometric 
properties of galaxies. He identified a characteristic size 
for a galaxy in terms of its brightness (the Holmberg radius) 
and by comparing elliptical galaxies tilted at different 
angles to the line of sight found that galaxies do not 
differ significantly in brightness, concluding that they 
were relatively free of dust obscuration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Home Observatories 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Home Observatories 


Sooner or later—generally sooner, rather than later—the 
average amateur astronomer is going to feel the need for 
a telescope. Binoculars are of immense use (see BINOCULAR 
ASTRONOMY), but their low magnification means that they 
are bound to be limited. Most amateur societies either 
have observatories or include members with telescopes 
of their own (see AMATEUR ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES) but it is 
much more satisfying to be able to go straight outdoors 
and make ready for observing without the need to go on 
a journey. 

Small telescopes are portable, and this is almost 
essential for the would-be observer who lives in a town; 
light pollution will probably make the seeing conditions 
intolerable, and the only solution is to have a telescope 
which can be put into the boot of a car and moved around. 
There are also many observers who keep their telescopes 
indoors and take them out when needed, but this too 
has its disadvantages; moving a telescope (particularly a 
Newtonian REFLECTOR) may well disturb the alignment of 
the optics, and in any case it is only a matter of time before 
something is dropped, with disastrous results. All in all, a 
permanent observatory is very much to be recommended. 

The first essential is to select a site, and this is never 
easy, particularly if the choice is restricted. Let it be said 
at once that setting up an observatory on the roof of a 
dwelling house is unwise. Heated air rising from below 
will swirl around and destroy the sEEINc. It is necessary to 
build the observatory well away from the house—within 
reason, the further away the better. Also, with a permanent 
building, planning permission has to be watched, at least 
in the UK. If you are faced with an awkward Council, the 
way round this problem is to put down a concrete base 
and then place the observatory on top, without actually 
fastening it. It then comes under the heading of a portable 
structure, and the Council will be powerless unless the 
building interferes with a neighbor’s view. 

Houses and trees are always inclined to cut off part of 
the view of the sky, and it is axiomatic that if a tall tree can 
be in the most awkward possible position, itis. Remember, 
too, that heated air will always rise from a dwelling house, 
so if possible site the observatory so that there is an 
unobstructed view of the horizon—or, more precisely, that 
part of the horizon in which you are particularly interested. 
Lunar and planetary observers will need the southern sky, 
while the variable-star enthusiast or the nova hunter may 
well prefer the north, and those who search for comets will 
try to ensure that there is nothing to obstruct the western 
sky after sunset or the eastern sky before dawn. Nearly 
always, of course, it is a matter of compromise. Street 
lights can be an unmitigated nuisance, particularly if they 
remain on all night (as many of them now do), but there is 
no real solution here. The airgun remedy is, unfortunately, 
illegal. 

The very simplest form of observatory, suitable for 
any kind of telescope, is the run-off shed. This is simply an 
ordinary shed mounted on rails; when the telescope is to be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


used, the shed is simply rolled back by its wheels. It is wise 
to make the shed in two sections which join in the middle, 
rather than having a single shed with a door. Any door has 
to be fixed at one end of the shed and must be either hinged 
or removable. If hinged, it flaps; if removable, there may 
be problems in replacing it during a dark, possibly windy 
night, because it will tend to act as a powerful sail. 

Anyone who is reasonably good with their hands can 
make a run-off shed, and there is very little to go wrong, 
but it does mean that the observer is in the open when 
actually observing, so that the telescope may be affected 
by wind-shake and the observer may feel decidedly chilly. 
Certainly it is much more comfortable to carry out one’s 
observational program from inside a structure. 

Another simple pattern is the run-off roof. Here there 
are permanent walls, and the roof—or even the entire 
top part of the structure—is rolled back on rails, which 
means of course that the rails have to protrude and must 
be supported on an adequate mounting. Again there 
is not much to go wrong, and the observer is shielded 
from the wind as well as being screened, at least to 
some extent, from obtrusive lights. The run-off roof is 
better suited to refractors, because a Newtonian reflector 
must be mounted lower down and will have a more 
restricted view of the sky, but there are in general no 
insurmountable difficulties, and again an observatory of 
this kind is comparatively easy to build. 

The material for the observatory may be wood, metal, 
plastic, brick or fiberglass; metal has the disadvantage of 
shutting in the daytime heat, so that it is essential to open 
the observatory and stabilize the temperature some time 
before observing is due to begin. One pointis worth noting 
(it should be obvious, but can sometimes be overlooked): 
make sure that the roof is not perfectly level. If it is, the 
first shower of rain will convert it into a pond. 

The popular picture of an observatory is that of a 
graceful dome, with a slit which can be opened; the dome 
must be rotatable, so that full access can be given to any 
part of the sky. The main problem here is that making a 
dome is by no means easy, and it is also essential that the 
ring upon which it revolves is absolutely true; otherwise 
the dome will stick. In some cases the entire observatory 
rotates, and this does solve some of the difficulties, but a 
complete dome is heavy to push around, and it too is apt 
to stick unless all the components have been made with 
real precision. 

Fiberglass domes can now be bought commercially, 
and many amateurs are now making use of them; 
purchasing a dome and then building the supporting 
structure is much cheaper than paying for a complete 
observatory. A ‘skeleton’ dome, with roofing felt, can also 
be used, although it is less durable and cannot be expected 
to last for very long without major repairs. 

One variant which is quite popular is what can be 
referred to as the ‘wedding-cake’ pattern. Here there is a 
basic structure, with a ring upon which the upper section 
rotates, but the shape is not that of a dome; there are 
vertical sides and a roof made in sections, of which one 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Home Observatories 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


can be swung back to provide access to the sky. In this 
case the design should not be perfectly symmetrical; if it 
were, the telescope would never be able to point to the 
zenith—and although one seldom wants to look ‘straight 
upward’, it can be necessary occasionally, to observe a 
comet or perhaps an interesting variable star. 

Probably the first decision to be made is a 
straightforward one: buy an observatory complete, buy 
parts, such as the dome, and make the rest or construct 
the entire observatory oneself? A run-off shed, or even a 
run-off roof pattern, is within the scope of most people, 
but it is true that making a dome, or even a wedding-cake, 
is more of a problem. 

Some observatories are designed for special needs. 
The solar observer will work by day and may not be much 
concerned with anything but the Sun; he or she may well 
need an observatory with a coelostat which catches the 
Sun’s rays and sends them in a fixed direction, so that 
there is no need for a rotating dome or roof, and even the 
observatory itself can remain fixed. One leading British 
solar observer, Commander Henry Hatfield, has taken 
matters to the limit—he designed his spectrohelioscope, 
and then literally had his house built round it. It works 
excellently, but not many people, however enthusiastic, 
will be able to follow his example. Amateur radio 
astronomers will have different requirements, and will be 
concerned largely with avoiding electronic ‘noise’ rather 
than light pollution. 

Various other points are worth noting here. First, any 
driven telescope will need a power supply. Falling weights 
are convenient and self-sufficient, but in most cases the 
drive will be electrical, and connecting the observatory to 
a mains power supply can be awkward. Secondly, there 
is the question of security. If the observatory is to be set 
up in the owner’s garden this should not be a problem, at 
least in most areas, but if it is to be built on a site well away 
from the house there must be adequate protection; there 
have been many cases of observatories being vandalized. 
It is also wise to have proper insurance cover. Moreover, 
there is always a potential threat from the forces of nature. 
A local tornado, for example, can have devastating results. 

Finally, always make sure that your observatory is 
large enough for your needs. For much of the time it will 
be used in the dark, and it is only too easy to damage 
oneself by blundering into a telescope or some other piece 
of equipment. 

Not every amateur astronomer can own an observa- 
tory, and there is certainly no point in erecting any perma- 
nent structure in a small garden which is surrounded by 
trees or houses and is flooded with artificial lights nearby. 
However, there is no doubt that there is tremendous sat- 
isfaction in being able to walk through one’s door into an 
observatory which can be opened and made ready for use 
in a matter of minutes. 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Homunculus Nebula ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Homunculus Nebula 


A cloud of dust surrounding the unstable star 1 Carinae, 
position RA 10 45.1™, dec. —59° 41’. The cloud has been 
shed from the star during outbursts that began in 1843, 
and now measures about 17” by 12”. In shape it resembles 
a human figure. 


See: Eta Carinae Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hooke, Robert (1635-1703) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hooke, Robert (1635-1703) 


Scientist, born in Freshwater, Isle of Wight, England, 
educated at Christ Church College, Oxford where he met 
Boyle and was employed by him to construct his air 
pump, became professor of geometry at Gresham College, 
London. Discovered Hooke’s law of elasticity. Worked on 
optics, simple harmonic motion and elasticity in strings. 
Published a monograph called Micrographia, containing 
beautiful pictures of objects Hooke had studied through a 
microscope he had made himself. He coined the use of the 
word ‘cell’ (meaning a tiny bare room) for the structures 
in cork and other living organisms. Hooke invented the 
conical pendulum and is credited with HADLEY as the first 
to build a reflecting telescope to GrecoryY’s design. He 
made important astronomical observations including the 
fact that Jupiter revolves on its axis. He determined this 
from the Great Red Spot, which he was first to observe. 
His drawings of Mars were later used to determine its 
period of rotation, since they recognizably showed Syrtis 
Major, and were the earliest drawings to fix the phase of 
Mars. He wrote a book on comets which was read by 
NEWTON. In 1672 Hooke attempted to show that the Earth 
moves in an elliptical orbit and in 1678 that an inverse 
square law of gravitation explained planetary motions, but 
seemed unable to give a rigorous proof. He communicated 
these ideas to Newton, and, in a bad tempered dispute 
continued to this day by his descendants, claimed priority 
in the discovery of the inverse square law. Newton, as 
a consequence of the dispute, expunged all references to 
Hooke from the Principia. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizon ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Horizon 


A plane perpendicular to the line from an observer to the 
zenith. The astronomical horizon is the great circle formed 
by the intersection of the plane of the horizon with the 
celestial sphere. 


See also: celestial sphere, great circle, zenith. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


This article deals with the subject of the horizontal branch 
and horizontal-branch stars, those stars which are found 
on the horizontal part of the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram 
of a globular cluster. Figure 1 shows the location of this 
type of star. After an introduction there are sections on 
studies of globular clusters and the horizontal branch, 
the second parameter problem and field horizontal-branch 
stars. 

In the 19th century, astronomers thought that stars 
of different spectral types were composed of different 
elements. In the 1920s a major step forward in stellar 
analysis was made by Cecilia Payne Gaposchkin who 
determined that stars were essentially the same, i.e., they 
are made up mostly of hydrogen with a lesser amount of 
helium and very small amounts of all the other elements 
in the periodic table. Later on in the 20th century, with 
an increasing precision in the ability to measure stellar 
abundances, a major advance in stellar analysis was to 
show how stars are different. Stars have been divided into 
many groups depending on their detailed spectroscopic 
abundances. This article will discuss one important group 
of old stars, the horizontal-branch (HB) stars. HB stars 
are most easily detected in GLOBULAR CLUSTERS and open 
clusters, but have also been detected in the general field of 
the Galaxy. 

Astronomers have an impressive tool to use in 
the study of stellar evolution, the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL 
DIAGRAM (HRD), in which the absolute magnitudes of 
stars are plotted versus their colors (or spectral type or 
temperature). For a group of stars at the same distance, 
the apparent magnitude can be used (i.e., for a globular 
or open cluster) in place of the absolute magnitude. In the 
original HRDs the majority of stars fell in an inclined band, 
named the main sequence, running from the upper left to 
the lower right (from high temperature and luminosity to 
low temperature and luminosity). These were the normal 
Population I (Pop J) stars like the Sun, with spectral types 
running from O (very hot) to M (cool). In the upper right 
side of the diagram there are the red giants, which are 
cool, more luminous stars that have evolved from the main 
sequence and have become stars of a much larger radius. 

Globular clusters are important objects for the study 
of stellar evolution. They are presumed to be among 
the first objects formed in our galaxy and thus give us 
information about the galaxy’s very early history. The 
stars in a cluster are all at the same distance from the Sun 
and they (in almost all cases) are formed coevally out of 
interstellar material with the same chemical composition. 
Thus, they are experimental ‘test beds’ to be used by 
astronomers in their studies of STELLAR EVOLUTION. 

HARLOW SHAPLEY investigated the magnitudes of stars 
in globular clusters, starting about 1915 at MOUNT WILSON 
OBSERVATORY. He found that the HRDs for globular clusters 
differed from the diagrams for the stars near the Sun in 
that the red stars (red giants) were brighter than the blue 
stars in the cluster. In the diagrams of stars near the Sun, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the blue stars were the brightest stars in the diagram. 
The significance of this different distribution of stars in 
the HRD was not understood until the work of Walter 
Baade. He took pictures of the Andromeda galaxy (M31) 
in which, for the first time, individual stars in the central 
regions of the galaxy were resolved. These pictures were 
taken at Mt Wilson on the 100 inch telescope during WWII 
blackouts under good seeing conditions. The stars in the 
center of M31 had an HRD similar to that of globular 
clusters; the stars in the outer regions had an HRD similar 
to the distribution of stars in Russell’s diagram for the 
nearby stars. This was the start of the idea of STELLAR 
POPULATIONS; that there are young stars with relatively 
larger abundances of elements other than hydrogen and 
helium, distributed mainly in the spiral arms of our galaxy, 
and that there are old stars with very small abundances 
of elements other than hydrogen and helium, distributed 
in a spherical halo around the galaxy. In time this simple 
picture of two populations was modified with the addition 
of other population types. 

In 1952 at a Symposium on Stellar Populations held at 
the Vatican Observatory, Jan Oort presented a table in his 
summary in which stars were divided into five different 
populations. At one extreme were the Halo Pop II stars, 
then Intermediate Pop II, Disk Population, Intermediate 
Pop I and at the other extreme were the Extreme Pop 
I stars. We know now that Pop II stars are old, metal 
poor and have high velocities while the Pop I stars are 
young, have a higher metal abundance and have small 
velocities. Globular clusters were members of the Halo 
Pop II and it is in these clusters that we find a distribution 
of stars known as HB stars. In figure 1, at the top, a color— 
magnitude diagram (CMD) is presented for the globular 
cluster M92 (by Peter Stetson, Dominion Astrophysical 
Observatory). It is the result of CCD (charge coupled 
device) photometry of more than 50000 stars. Below, a 
CMD is shown for the globular cluster M3 by Roberto 
Buonanno and his collaborators (University of Bologna) 
with the various areas of the diagram labeled. 

In the lower middle of each diagram, a band of 
points can be seen, extending up to the left. These 
points represent the main sequence of the cluster, which 
is made up of stars burning hydrogen in their cores. In 
the early 1900s stellar energy was thought to be produced 
by stellar contraction. However, contraction models did 
not provide a long time scale for stellar evolution. In the 
late 1930s Bethe and von Weizacker showed that nuclear 
fusion takes place in the solar core and this understanding 
provided the means to calculate stellar models showing 
how stars evolve over time. Stellar evolutionary theories 
are tested mainly by comparing theoretical models with 
observations made of stars in clusters. For stars like the 
Sun, protons are transformed into helium nuclei in the 
stellar core, liberating vast amounts of energy. This is 
a long-lived stage in a star’s life, and during it the star 
remains at almost constant temperature and luminosity, 
on the main sequence. The more massive stars form on 
the upper left of the main sequence and evolve rapidly; 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


12 


14 


18 


‘y! = i + 0.6(b-i) 
a 


4 
o 
L 


= 
BSS-Descendants? “4 

14 be sy 

a 

7 

4 

16 be \P-AGB a 
v 4 
18 TRS 
UV-Bright ol 
Post-AGB? pens 
BSS-Parents? 7 

20 Se 
n — 
ai 

4 

a 


0.4 0.0 O4 08 12 1.6 


Figure 1. Top: a CMD for the globular cluster M92, showing the 
distribution of more than 50000 stars (Peter Stetson). Bottom: a 
CMD for M3 with the various regions labeled (Roberto 
Buonanno). 


the smaller mass stars sit on the lower right of the main 
sequence and evolve very slowly. Eventually all the 
hydrogen is converted to helium in the center of the star. 
However, the helium is at too low a temperature to burn 
and the core contracts, raising the temperature in the 
central regions of the star. Hydrogen burns in a shell 
outside the core, and the star leaves the main sequence and 
starts moving up and to the right in the diagram, mapping 
out the red giant branch (RGB). As the star becomes more 
extended on its way up the giant branch, it becomes more 
difficult for it to retain the gas on its surface and there 
is envelope mass loss. It is thought that perhaps 0.2 
solar masses are lost before the star reaches the horizontal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


log g 


450 440 4.30 4.20 4.10 4.00 


log T otf 


Figure 2. Sweigart models of the horizontal branch. Data points 
from observations in globular clusters are also shown. 


branch (HB). At the tip of the RGB, the helium in the core 
of the star ignites, in the so-called helium flash. The star 
then moves rapidly to the HB, the group of stars on the 
far left in the range v = 15-17 in the M92 diagram. If the 
mass of the star is small, it lands on the left extension of 
the HB; if the mass of the star is larger, it will fall further to 
the right on the HB. The locus of points that is defined by 
stars arriving on the HB, as a function of mass, is called the 
zero-age horizontal branch (ZAHB). During this stage of 
its life the star is burning helium in the core and hydrogen 
in a shell surrounding the core. 

According to HB stellar models calculated by Allen 
Sweigart (NASA/GSVC), the evolutionary path of a 
classical HB star starts by brightening a bit and then moves 
to the blue (left), paralleling the zero-age horizontal branch 
(ZAHB). Then the star brightens some more and turns 
back toward the red (right), climbing up the asymptotic 
giant branch (AGB), which is the locus of the points 
scattered in a band just above the giant branch in the 
CMD (figure 2). These evolutionary tracks depend on 
the specific parameters of the HB star under investigation. 
On the AGB a star has two burning shells: hydrogen and 
helium. 

It is interesting to note that in the 1960s, some 
textbooks had diagrams showing that stars evolved down 
the asymptotic giant branch and finally reached the HB. 
In modern theories of stellar evolution, the stars evolve to 
the ZAHB and then evolve to the red, up the asymptotic 
giant branch in the opposite direction. 

In studies of certain variable stars (called RR LYRAE 
stars) on the HB of globular clusters, Oosterhoff found 
in 1939 that there were two groups determined by their 
average period. One group had average periods of 0.55 
days, the other had average periods of 0.65 days. The 
long-period group was found to be more metal poor 
than the short-period group. Work by ALLAN SANDAGE 
(Carnegie Observatory) and others showed that there 
was a difference in their periods, in that for stars at 
constant effective temperature the more metal-poor stars 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


had longer periods than the stars of higher metallicity. 
This is an illustration that the parameters concerning stars 
in globular clusters are more complex than originally 
thought. 


Studies of globular clusters and the horizontal 
branch 

In 1919 Shapley noted that the LUMINOSITY FUNCTIONS OF 
GALAXIES for M3 and M13 were different. M3 had many 
cluster-type variables but was poor in the number of blue 
stars, and M13 had few variables but had many blue stars. 
He commented that there might be significance in this 
difference. This was one of the first statements concerning 
differences between globular clusters. 

In the following decades observational evidence, 
combined with theoretical studies, showed that globular 
clusters were old. Shapley had already placed the center of 
the globular cluster distribution at the center of the Milky 
Way. It was assumed that each globular cluster is formed 
of stars created out of the same interstellar material, at 
the same time and at the same distance from the solar 
system. Thus, if the chemical compositions, ages and 
kinematics could be determined for clusters as a function 
of galactocentric distance, one could learn much about the 
early chemical and dynamical history of the Galaxy. 

In 1955 Halton Arp (now at the Max Planck Institute) 
published the results of an investigation of seven globular 
clusters (M2, M3, M5, M10, M13, M15 and M92). The 
CMDs of these seven clusters were quite similar. The 
[Fe/H] values (the so-called metal-abundance parameter 
which is the logarithm of the iron abundance divided by 
the hydrogen abundance, all relative to the Sun) varied 
from [Fe/H] = —2.02 for M15 to [Fe/H] = —1.34 for 
M5. It is now known that for the most metal-rich clusters 
[Fe/H] reaches values of —0.3, close to the solar value of 
zero, but in Arp’s original sample there were no clusters 
this metal-rich. The clusters in the list all had CMDs with 
strong, blue HBs and there was not much variation from 
one cluster to the next. Even in the days of photographic 
photometry, the narrow sequences found in the CMDs 
implied that the stars in a globular cluster were chemically 
homogeneous. Changes in the chemical abundances, and 
other parameters, affect the position of the star in the HRD 
and thus, if the sequence is narrow, imply that the stars 
are very similar. Modern CCD diagrams have sequences 
which are much more sharply defined, reinforcing this 
conclusion. 

The CMDs provide several methods of determining 
ages of globular clusters. One of the first methods was 
to measure the magnitude difference between the bluest 
point on the turnoff (TO in figure 1, bottom diagram) 
and the magnitude of the HB at the same color. The 
TO magnitude gets fainter by about 0.01 mag for each 
1% increase in the age. Cluster model builders, like 
Don VandenBerg (University of Victoria) create isochrones 
which predict how a CMD of acluster should appear, given 
a set of parameters (such as helium abundance, [Fe/H], 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


[CNO/Fe], age). These isochrones can then be fitted to 
observed CMDs to obtain estimates of cluster ages. 

In 1976 Philip, Cullen and White published a 
compendium of all the galactic globular clusters then 
available, all drawn to the same scale and with [Fe/H] 
and reddening values listed for each. This presentation 
made it easier to intercompare clusters. The first CMDs 
were made photographically by taking pictures through 
V (visual) and B (blue filters). When the magnitudes 
were reduced to the UBV SYSTEM then one could plot 
V versus (B-V) and so arrive at a CMD. The accuracy 
of the magnitude determination for a single star was 
of the order of ~0.03 mag for the brightest stars in a 
globular cluster and decreased in precision as one went 
to fainter magnitudes. Photoelectric photometry was 
much more accurate but in the 1970s stars were measured 
with a single-channel photometer, one at a time, and so 
it was difficult to measure a large number of stars in 
any given cluster. In the 1980s the CCD was introduced 
and soon became the instrument of choice at observatory 
telescopes to take images, measure magnitudes and record 
spectra. For the first time, stars in the central areas of 
globular clusters could be measured, and as can be seen in 
figure 1, tens of thousands of stars could be recorded with 
a single exposure. The CCD allows one to measure stars 
much fainter than could be measured with photography 
and the precision of the measurements is much higher. 
One per cent photometry is now possible for faint stars 
and this allows the various regions of the HRD (or a 
CMD) to be much more precisely defined. Some recent 
technological advances have made stellar photometry 
even more effective. The HUBBLESPACE TELESCOPE has allowed 
extremely faint objects to be measured in very crowded 
areas with high accuracy. On the ground ADAPTIVE OPTICS 
allows a telescope to be kept in the best possible focus 
during observations and thus increases the accuracy of the 
measurements. CCDs also allow high resolution spectra 
with signal/noise ratios of 150 to be obtained for stars 
even in globular clusters and equivalent widths of lines can 
be measured with errors as small as ~2 mA. This means 
that better tests can be made of the predictions of stellar 
evolution theories. 

Studies of HB and other stars in clusters have been 
greatly aided by the increased photometric accuracy 
possible due to the new software which has been created 
to measure images on CCD frames. The most important 
part of this process is the fitting of the point spread 
function (PSF), which is a three-dimensional model of the 
shape of the intensity distribution of each image. This 
method replaces the older aperture photometry, which 
just measured the total luminosity of the image. At the 
Dominion Astrophysical Observatory Peter Stetson has 
written DAOPHOT, at MIT Paul Schecter has written 
DoPhot and in Italy Roberto Buonanno and collaborators 
have written ROMAFOT. These programs allow one to 
create a mean PSF (by measuring the profiles of isolated 
stars well spaced over the frame) which is then fitted 
to all the images to find the magnitude of each star. If 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the PSF varies across the frame (which happens as the 
frames become larger) the programs can apply a variable 
PSF as a function of position on the frame. Without 
the development of modern computer technology these 
kinds of reduction programs for magnitude determination 
would not be possible. 

As more globular clusters were studied, it was found 
that not all clusters had the same type of HB. Some had 
long, extended blue tails; others had only red HB stars, to 
the right of the RR Lyrae gap. The main factor that seemed 
to determine the morphology of the HB was metallicity, 
[Fe/H], but investigators found some clusters with the 
same metallicity which had very different distributions of 
stars along the HB, suggesting the influence of a ‘second 
parameter’. 

In the early 1970s Robert Rood (University of Virginia) 
constructed synthetic HB models and he studied what 
parameters would produce the observed HBs. He 
confirmed the need for a mass loss of 0.2M. between the 
main sequence and the HB and for a 10% dispersion in the 
amount of mass loss for stars on the HB to reproduce the 
observed distribution of stars. He produced a list of second 
parameter candidates and showed how it was possible to 
produce any desired HB morphology. 

Gaps have been found in the distribution of stars 
along the HB, in field HB stars and for HB stars in globular 
clusters. One of the first people to discuss the gaps 
was Barry Newell (Canberra, Australia) while he was at 
Yale in the late 1970s. He found two gaps at effective 
temperatures log Tog = 4.11 and 4.33 in the distribution 
of galactic halo blue stars and suggested that these gaps 
were an HB phenomenon. In the CMD these gaps occur at 
(U — B),(B—V) = —0.4, —0.14 and —0.9, —0.24. Another 
possibility, discussed by others later to explain stars on the 
blue end of the HB, is that some stars of a different type 
end up in positions near the HB. 


The second parameter problem 

The changes found in the morphology of the CMD of 
the HB were first attributed to a change in the metal 
abundance. As the metal abundance of the cluster 
increases, the giant branch in the CMD shifts to the red. 
For high metal abundance the blue HB stars do not appear 
and the red part of the HB becomes a short red stub. The 
most metal-poor clusters showed strong, blue HBs, and 
more modern observations which reach stars of fainter 
magnitudes show long, drooping blue tails for blue HBs 
of metal-poor clusters. In figure 3 two pairs of CMDs are 
shown. The first pair is NGC 1904 and NGC 6637 which 
show the change in HB morphology from a [Fe/H] of —1.5 
to —0.2 ina V,(B—V) diagram. The HB changes from one 
with a very strong, blue component to a cluster with only 
a short red stub of a HB. The second pair, on the right, 
shows a V, (U — V) diagram for M3 and M13 and is a clear 
example of the influence of a second parameter acting. 
At the bottom are three CMD, reported on by Jim Hesser, 
quoting photographic observations by Roberto Buonanno 
of the clusters M15, M92 and NGC 5466, each of which 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


have [Fe/H] near —2.1. Again there is a dramatic change 
in the morphology of the HB. This is in spite of the fact 
that these three clusters have the same metal abundance. 

As more clusters were investigated it was found that 
there were some clusters with HBs too blue or too red for 
their metallicity. Astronomers studying CMDs searched 
for another parameter that could cause such an effect. 
The effect was found to be stronger for globular clusters 
furthest from the galactic center and is very weak for 
clusters in the central regions of the Milky Way. One 
of the first papers on the second parameter problem 
was by Sidney van den Bergh (Dominion Astrophysical 
Observatory) in 1967, in which he stated: ‘It is shown that 
at least two parameters (one of which is metal abundance) 
are required to describe globular clusters. ... a second 
parameter which might be either age or the helium to 
metals ratio’. Also in 1967 Allan Sandage and Robert 
Wildey discussed the globular cluster NGC 7006 and 
pointed out that, although its metal abundance was low, 
it had a distribution of stars similar to the HB of a cluster 
of much higher metallicity. 

Some additional examples of globular clusters with 
‘second parameter’ problems are M3 and M13; M15, M92 
and NGC 5466; Arp 2 and Ruprecht 106. M3 and M13 (top 
right in figure 3) have [Fe/H] values of about —1.6, but 
MS has a redder HB while M13 has a very strong blue HB. 
(Note that this diagram is a V, (U — V) diagram and not the 
usual V, (B—V) diagram). Their helium abundances seem 
to be the same and the differences in magnitude between 
the main-sequence turnoff and the HB (a measurement 
of the cluster age) in a V, (B — V) diagram are similar, 
implying that the two clusters have the same age. 

Many parameters have been suggested as the prime 
second parameter. One of the first suggested was the 
helium abundance, but later evidence showed that the 
helium abundance does not vary very much from globular 
cluster to globular cluster. The abundances of the elements 
carbon, nitrogen and oxygen (CNO) have been proposed 
as parameters affecting HB morphology. The density of 
the stellar environment in which the cluster was formed 
may have an effect. The core mass and the rate of rotation 
have an influence on the morphology of the HB. A strong 
parameter is the age of the cluster. Young-Wook Lee, in 
his 1989 thesis at Yale University, has presented the results 
of many models of the HB. Some of these are shown in 
figure 4. These diagrams help to explain the effects of 
various parameters on the shape of the HB. The five sets 
of diagrams are explained in the caption. 

Aratio involving the numbers of stars on various parts 
of the HB has been constructed by Zinn (Yale University) 
and Lee. Itisc = (B— R)/(B+V+R) where B is the number 
of stars bluer than the RR Lyrae gap, V is the number of 
variables and R is the number of stars redder than the RR 
Lyrae gap. It is a good way of assigning a number to the 
HB distribution, but it does not work well for globular 
clusters without blue HB stars or without red HB stars. 

There are some groups of astronomers (notably the 
Yale group) who argue that age is the second parameter. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neola NGC 6637 


NGC 5466 


Figure 3. On the upper left is a pair of CMD of two globular clusters showing the normal differences in HB morphology for clusters 
with different metal abundances. On the upper right are two CMD (V versus U — V) of two clusters with [Fe/H] = —1.6 but with very 
different HB morphology. On the bottom are three CMD of clusters with [Fe/H] = —2.2, again showing very different HB morphology. 


Age variations of several 10° years could explain the 
CMD differences found for globular clusters with the 
same [Fe/H] but different morphology. However, as 
we saw in figure 4, there are other possibilities. The 
Italian group (Flavio Fusi-Pecci, Roberto Buonanno and 
collaborators) contend that, although age sometimes is a 
second parameter, the morphology of the HB is the result 
of the global combination of age and other parameters. 
The problem has become more complex with the stream 
of increasingly accurate new data based on the CCD 
observations being made all over the world. As more 
spectral observations are made of HB stars in second 
parameter clusters with the new, very large telescopes 
already working and those still in construction, there will 
be many further discussions on the second parameter 
problem. 


Field horizontal-branch stars 

In 1933 Albitzky obtained a spectrum of HD 161817 and 
noted that it had a high radial velocity (—363 km s7'). 
In 1952 Arne Slettebak noted that the hydrogen lines in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


HD 161817 were slightly weaker than normal for a star 
of its type. In 1966 Bev Oke, Jesse Greenstein and James 
Gunn proposed that four stars (HD 2857, 86986, 109995 
and 161817) were field horizontal-branch (FHB) stars on 
the basis of photoelectric spectrum scans. These are stars 
which are supposed to be identical to the blue horizontal- 
branch stars in globular clusters, but which are found 
in the field and not associated with any cluster. They 
have the characteristics of low surface gravities, low metal 
abundance and a high velocity dispersion, all of which 
place them as members of Pop II. 

Further observations of faint blue stars were made 
by Barry Newell, using his special filter system, and he 
identified three additional field HB candidates (HD 60778, 
74721 and 130095). In 1964 the First Conference on Faint 
Blue Stars was held in Strasbourg, where reports were 
made on numerous surveys for faint blue stars and follow- 
up observations of selected stars. The proceedings contain 
a bibliography of the important papers in the field and a 
set of finding charts for the Humason—Zwicky (HZ) stars 
(a search for faint blue stars that was published in 1947). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizontal-branch Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(2) Z= 0.0001 (B:V:R = 0.98:0.02:0.00) (@) Age = 11 Gyrs (B:V:R = 0.01:0.10:0.89) (@ M, =0.475, AM = 0.15 (B:V:R = 0.03:0.17:0.80) 


Zz at tet twine latte lead, 


(b) M, = 0.525, AM = 0.15 (B:V:R = 0.49:0.30:0.21) 


()) Z=0.001 (B:V:R = 0.28:0.33:0,39) (b) Age = 15 Gyrs (B:V:R = 0.42:0.29:0.29) 
= ote PPLE EBay: . : . ences 
= ; ia 


. 


(c) Z=0.004 (B:V:R = 0.00:0.00:1.00) {c) Age = 19 Gyrs (B:V:R = 0.88:0.10:0.02) (©) M, = 0.525, 4M = 0.187 (B:V:R = 0.82:0.16:0.02) 


rr mr 
2 
Bi cate tee 


i, teed! Os 


N362 MODEL (B:V:R = 0,02:0.06:0.92) 
wee te ti. 


(a) Yyg = 0.20 (B:V:R = 0.10:0.26:0.64) 


eee nC ae 
as ‘s M5 OBS (B:V:R = 0.56:0.24:0.20) MS MODEL (B:V:R = 0.55:0.26:0.19) 


te @e = 
Pe ee 


i ante - $ Fs 


(>) Yyg = 0.23 (B:V:R = 0.54:0.29:0.17) 
N288 MODEL (B:V:R = 0,97:0.03:0.00) 


tae tag 
ae 
: wy 


-0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 02 00 02 04 0.6 0.2 00 02 04 06 
B-V)o B-V)o B-V)o 


(d) (e) 


Figure 4. Models published in Y-W Lee’s thesis (1989) from Yale University. The upper set of diagrams on the left show the effect of 
changing [Fe/H]. As the metal abundance approaches the solar value the blue HB does not appear and there is only a short red HB. 
The middle diagram shows the effect of changing the age of the cluster. Younger clusters have red HBs and the older clusters have 
blue HBs. The upper right diagram shows the effect of stellar rotation, which affects the core mass. As the rotation increases the CMD 
becomes bluer. On the lower left the effect of changing the surface helium abundance is shown. HBs become bluer as the helium 
abundance increases. On the lower right three sets of diagrams compare observational data for the globular clusters NGC 362, M5 and 
NGC 288 with models. The agreement is quite good. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 6 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.8 


0.4 


0.0 


. DA-DAss 


(DAwk) (DA, DAe)? 


-0.4 
-0.2 0 0.2 0.4 


9.50 
Teff « 8500 K 


Log g * 3 (FHB), 4 (Pop J) 


FHB 
9,00 


~0.50 


LOG FX 


1.00 


1.50 


1200 1500 


1600 


({b-y} 


1700 1800 i900 2000 


WAVELENGTH 


Figure 5. Ways of classifying early-type stars as field HB stars. The two diagrams at the top are from Kilkenny and Hill, showing the 
location of field HB stars in the Str6mgren four-color system. The diagram at the bottom shows mean ultraviolet spectra of an average 
Pop I A-type star compared to an average Pop II A-type star. The field HB spectrum has a higher luminosity in the region around 
1500 A and does not show the absorption line features seen in the Pop I spectrum. 


In the mid 1960s Tom Kinman (KPNO) made a survey for 
RR Lyrae stars in a field at the North Galactic Pole and a 
field towards the Galactic center. 

In the 1960s Bengt Stroémgren set up a new system 
of photometry, the four-color system (uvby). David 
Crawford was one of the people who helped calibrate 
the new system and Davis Philip started using it in the 
1970s. John Graham (Carnegie Institution) and Katy 
Doremus (University of Colorado) made the first four- 
color observations of blue HB stars in a globular cluster, 
in NGC 6397. David Kilkenny (SAAO) and Graham Hill 
(University of St Andrews) published two plots in 1975 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


showing how the system could be used to classify early- 
type stars. They are reproduced at the top of figure 5. 
The leftmost plot shows the c; (Balmer Jump index) versus 
(b—y) and the right plot shows m, (the metal index) versus 
(b — y). The Strémgren four-color system does very well 
in identifying field HB stars because of the high c; index 
and lower than normal m, indices found for these stars. 
Using this system to measure early-type stars in the High 
Latitude Field (HLF) survey project lists of field HB stars 
were published and then summarized by Philip in Finding 
Charts for FHB Stars for 71 stars. As shown at the bottom of 
figure 5, ultraviolet spectroscopy is a good way to separate 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


“oO ox “7H = 
aad o e o on = 
Ho m rw 

=a & we ore 
ti us ti te ers 

® & @ @ ooqg £& 
= & a3 Seo = 
GG ao uaa = 
> > m>onw *° 
& & 6&8 S82 a 

= ao 


69°s9o7y II TL 
iz°\0Sy II TL 


os°evey Il tL 


9) OO* "ES? II TL 


(9) €z* tae Ir Sy 
Q) 0S°69S1 


HD 109995 


HD 66986 


i ' Ld i iS 


HD 161817 


n 


Figure 6. 6 m spectra, at 9 A mm_7!, of three of the prototype FHB stars obtained by Philip and Samus in 1980. 


field HB stars from normal Pop I A-type stars. 

George Preston, Stephen Shectman (both Carnegie 
Observatory) and Timothy Beers (Michigan State Univer- 
sity) have made a Schmidt objective-prism survey using 
narrow interference filters centered on the Ca II H and K 
lines. This HK survey identifies low-metallicity stars and 
a good proportion of these stars turn out to be field HB 
stars. They are following up with photometry and spec- 
troscopy and there is now a catalog of thousands of field 
HB candidates. The new Sloan Survey is now underway 
and it is also turning up large numbers of faint, metal- 
poor early-type stars. Another survey, the Hamburg /ESO 
survey, has identified tens of thousands of field HB candi- 
dates. Follow-up spectral studies of these stars are being 
made with the CTIO/KPNO 4 m telescopes. These inves- 
tigations will reach stars out to 25 kpc. Future studies of 
these stars will enable the galactic halo to be studied out 
to many tens of kiloparsecs. 

Figure 6 shows the spectra of three of the original 
field HB stars obtained with the 6 m telescope in Russia by 
Philip and Samus. Spectroscopic work of Chris Corbally 
(Vatican Observatory) and Richard Gray (Appalacian State 
University), who measured stars from the Philip catalog 
of field HB stars, found that only two of the stars had the 
characteristic sharp-line features expected. The rest of the 
stars had broader hydrogen lines than expected. 

The field HB stars are like the blue HB stars in 
globular clusters in that they have similar four-color 
indices, metallicities, photoelectric scans, velocities and 
stellar rotation. However, there are some differences. 
The field star metallicities reach much lower values of 
[Fe/H] (to —3.8) than do the cluster stars. Robert Kraft, 
in a review article, has pointed out that some field stars 
have lower nitrogen abundance than the cluster stars. The 
field HB stars could be stars that escaped from globular 
clusters or stars left in the halo after a globular cluster is 
broken up or stars captured in the halo from incoming 
fragments. Now that there are large databases of field HB 
stars and field HB candidates available, combined with the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


substantial number of large telescopes online and coming 
online, much progress in the spectroscopy of these stars 
should be made. 

Jesper Sommer-Larsen (Copenhagen, Denmark) and 
his collaborators have been analysing the kinematics of the 
HB stars in the galactic halo and they have found that the 
radial component of the stellar halo’s velocity dispersion 
decreases fairly rapidly beyond the solar circle. At the 
same time the tangential velocity dispersion increases with 
increasing radius. They conclude that the Galaxy may 
have formed from the merging of smaller subsystems, a 
formation theory favored by many theorists. For example, 
Leonard Searle (Carnegie Observatory) and Robert Zinn 
(Yale University) have proposed sucha model from studies 
of globular clusters. 

Ronald Wilhelm (University of Texas) and his collab- 
orators have been making photometric and spectroscopic 
observations of the A-type stars in the galactic halo. They 
obtain effective temperatures, surface gravities, [Fe/H] 
values and radial velocities for approximately 1000 stars. 
They find that 40% of the stars in the sample were FHB 
stars, 37% were main-sequence A-type stars, 12% were Am 
or Ap stars and 11% were unclassifiable. 

The masses of field HB stars have been investigated 
by Klaas de Boer (Bonn University) using Hipparcos data 
and he finds masses from 0.32 to 0.48Mo for five field HB 
stars. Their absolute magnitudes follow the theoretical 
HB calculated by Ben Dorman (NASA/GSFC). Plans are 
underway to use the Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) 
to measure the parallaxes of the 100 or so brightest field 
HB stars, which will then give us better data to determine 
their masses and absolute magnitudes. 

The HB is a remarkable feature and it is fortunate 
that nature has produced a situation where the HB covers 
such a wide range of the CMD. Different initial conditions 
(suchas a higher average [Fe/H], could have given us only 
short, red HBs and we would not have the opportunity to 
study the effects of variations of the parameters mentioned 
above. At present, as more data arrive in the database, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horizontal-branch Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


things are getting ever more complex. The possibilities of 
gaining a better understanding of the HB will improve 
with time and new, accurate observations. With this 
improvement, we will arrive at a better understanding of 
globular clusters and their formation. 


Bibliography 

Philip AG D, Liebert] W and Saffer R A (eds) 1999 The Third 
Conference on Faint Blue Stars (Schenectady: L Davis 
Press) 


especially the articles by 


de Boer et al 1999 The Third Conference on Faint Blue Stars ed 
AG D Philip, J W Liebert and R A Saffer (Schenectady: 
L Davis Press) p 515 

Fusi-Pecci and Bellazzini 1999 The Third Conference on Faint 
Blue Stars ed AG D Philip, J W Liebert and R A Saffer 
(Schenectady: L Davis Press) p 255 


Also: 


Adelman S J, Upgren A R and Adelman C J (eds) 1994 
Hot Stars in the Galactic Halo (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press 1994) 

Grindlay J E and Philip A G D (eds) 1988 IAU Symposium 
No. 126, The Harlow Shapley Symposium on Globular 
Cluster Systems in Galaxies (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Lee Y-W 1989 The evolution of HB stars and the calibration 
of globular cluster ages Thesis Yale University 

Smith G H and Brodie J P (eds) 1993 The Globular Cluster 
Galaxy Connection (Astronomical Society of the Pacific 
Conference Series, 48) 


AG Davis Philip 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horologium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Horologium 


(the clock; abbrev. Hor, gen. Horologii; area 249 sq. deg.) 
Asouthern constellation which lies between Eridanus and 
Reticulum, and culminates at midnight in early November. 
It was introduced by the French astronomer Nicolas L 
de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 
1751-2. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Horologium is a Horologii, magnitude 3.9. There 
are no other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. 
Interesting objects include R Horologii, a Mira-type 
variable star (range 4.7-14.3, period about 408 days), and 
NGC 1261, an eighth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horrocks, Jeremiah (1619-41) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Horrocks, Jeremiah (1619-41) 


Schoolmaster (?) and astronomer, born in Toxteth, 
near Liverpool, educated at Cambridge, lived for a 
mere 22 years. His colleague WILLIAM CRABTREE lived 
near Manchester, and the group that formed around 
them constituted Britain’s first Keplarians, nos Keplari as 
they called themselves. When he found that Ptolemaic 
predictions of the positions of the planets were incorrect, 
Horrocks developed a celestial dynamics, related to 
Kepler’s but not identical to it, which employed concepts 
from terrestrial dynamics. Horrocks predicted a transit 
of Venus, and with Crabtree observed it by a telescopic 
projection method. From the observation, Horrocks 
calculated the solar parallax, finding a much greater 
distance of the Sun than anyone before him. The Keplari 
were the first people to realize the solar system’s size and 
their figure was incredible to some of their contemporaries. 
When in 1662 the Dutch astronomer Helvetius published 
some material by Horrocks (Venus in Sole Visa), he scaled 
down Horrock’s estimate of the size of the solar system. 
With his theory of celestial mechanics, Horrocks calculated 
the motion of the Moon, which FLAMSTEED admired as’... 
questionless the finest of his monuments’. NEWTON’s theory 
of the motion of the Moon, according to one historian, 
was ‘Newton's interpretation of HALLEY’s variation of 
Flamsteed’s version of Crabtree’s account of Horrock’s 
lunar theory’. Apparently Horrocks made his own 
telescope, and developed projection techniques to view 
the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Horsehead Nebula (B33) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Horsehead Nebula (B33) 


A dark nebula in the constellation Orion, position RA 05 n 
41.0™, dec. —02° 24’. Though small (6’ by 4’), it has the 
distinctive shape of a chess knight, and is one of the best 
known of all astronomical images, projected in silhouette 
against the emission nebula IC 434. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hot Dark Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hot Dark Matter 


Dark matter made of light neutrinos, with masses of a 
few electron-volts (eV) or less, is called ‘hot dark matter’ 
(HDM) by cosmologists. Light neutrinos would have 
been ‘hot’, moving at nearly the speed of light, in the 
early universe. For a few years in the late 1970s and early 
1980s, hot dark matter looked like the best dark-matter 
candidate. However, HDM models of cosmological 
structure formation led to a ‘top-down’ formation 
scenario, in which superclusters of galaxies are the first 
objects to form after the big bang, with galaxies and 
clusters forming through a subsequent process of frag- 
mentation. Such models were abandoned by the mid- 
1980s after cosmologists realized that if galaxies had 
formed early enough to agree with observations, their 
distribution would be much more inhomogeneous than 
is the case. 

Since 1984, the most successful structure-formation 
models have been those in which most of the mass in the 
universe comes in the form of cold dark matter (CDM)— 
particles that were moving sluggishly in the early uni- 
verse. For a while in the mid-1990s it appeared that a 
mixture of mostly CDM with 20-30% HDM gave a better 
fit to the observations than either one or the other. This 
‘cold plus hot dark matter’ (CHDM) theory fitted data on 
nearby galaxies and clusters only if the average density 
of matter in the universe were at or close to the critical 
density (Q,, = 1). However, like all such critical-density 
models, CHDM required that galaxies and clusters must 
have formed fairly recently. It is now clear that this dis- 
agrees with observations. The evidence now increasing- 
ly favors ACDM models, in which CDM and a little ordi- 
nary matter make up about a third of the critical density, 
with a cosmological constant or some other form of ‘dark 
energy’ contributing the remainder. This model also 
helped resolve a crisis regarding the age of the universe. 
The HDM question has now become how much room is 
left for neutrinos in such a universe. 

To understand the possible role of neutrinos as dark 
matter, consider how structures such as galaxies formed 
as the universe expanded. The expansion itself is 
described by our modern theory of gravity and space- 
time, Einstein’s theory of general relativity. In order for 
structure to form, there must have been some small fluc- 
tuations in the initial density of matter. The only alterna- 
tive is that some mechanism generated such fluctuations 
after the big bang, but the only such mechanisms that 
have been investigated are ‘cosmic defects’ such as cos- 
mic strings, and the pattern of fluctuations produced by 
such defects is inconsistent with the temperature fluctu- 
ations observed in the cosmic microwave background 
(CMB) radiation. However, ‘adiabatic’ fluctuations—in 
which all components of matter and energy fluctuate 
together—occur naturally in the simplest cosmic infla- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


tion models and are in excellent agreement with the lat- 
est CMB results. The evolution of adiabatic fluctuations 
into galaxies and clusters is easy to understand: the rich 
always become richer and the poor become poorer. A 
‘rich’ region of the universe is one that has more matter 
than average. Although the average density of the uni- 
verse steadily decreases owing to its expansion, those 
regions that start out with a little higher density than 
average expand a little slower than average and become 
relatively more dense, while those with lower density 
expand a little faster and become relatively less dense. 
When any region has attained a density about twice the 
average, it stops expanding and begins to collapse— 
typically first in one direction, forming a pancake-shaped 
structure, and then in the other two directions. 

The first HDM boom occurred about two decades 
ago. By about 1980, improving upper limits on CMB 
anisotropies were ruling out the previously favored cos- 
mological model, which included only ordinary matter. 
There was also evidence from a Moscow experiment sug- 
gesting an electron neutrino mass of about 20 eV, which 
would have corresponded to a nearly-critical-density 
universe in which neutrinos would have constituted 
most of the matter. In such a cosmology, the primordial 
fluctuations on galaxy scales are erased by ‘free stream- 
ing’ of the relativistic neutrinos in the early universe. 
About 1 yr after the big bang, a region about 1 ly across 
contained the amount of matter in a large galaxy like our 
own Milky Way. However, the temperature was then 
about 100 million kelvins (104 eV), so each particle had a 
thermal energy far higher than the rest energy of light 
neutrinos. As they would therefore have been moving at 
nearly the speed of light, these neutrinos would have 
rapidly spread out, and any fluctuations in density on 
the scale of galaxies would soon have been smoothed 
back to the average density. The first scales to collapse in 
such a HDM scenario would therefore correspond to the 
mass inside the cosmic horizon when the temperature 
dropped to a few eV and the neutrinos inside it became 
non-relativistic. This mass turns out to be about 10000 
times the mass of our galaxy, including its dark halo. 
Evidence was just then becoming available from the first 
large-scale galaxy surveys that the largest cosmic struc- 
tures—superclusters—have masses of approximately 
this size, which at first glance appeared to be a success 
for the HDM scenario. Superclusters of roughly pancake 
shape were observed to surround roughly spherical 
voids (regions where few galaxies are found), in agree- 
ment with the first cosmological computer simulations, 
which were run for the HDM model. In this picture 
superclusters should have formed first, since any small- 
er-scale fluctuations in the dominant HDM would have 
been erased by free streaming. Galaxies then had to form 
by fragmentation of the superclusters. However, it was 
already becoming clear from observations that galaxies 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Hot Dark Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are much older than superclusters, contrary to what the 
HDM scenario implies. Also, the apparent detection of 
electron neutrino mass by the Moscow experiment was 
soon contradicted by results from other laboratories. Hot 
dark matter fell into decline. 

The CDM model originated in 1982-1984, just as the 
problems with the HDM model were becoming clear. 
Proto-galaxies form first ina CDM cosmology, and galax- 
ies and larger-scale objects form by aggregation of these 
smaller lumps—although the cross-talk between smaller 
and larger scales in the CDM theory naturally leads to 
galaxies forming earlier in clusters than in lower-density 
regions. In this and other respects, CDM models 
appeared to fit observations much better than HDM. The 
first great triumph of CDM was that it successfully pre- 
dicted (to within a normalization uncertainty factor of 
about 2) the magnitude of the CMB temperature fluctua- 
tions, which were discovered in 1992 using the COBE 
satellite. However, the simplest CDM model, standard 
CDM (SCDM) with the matter density equal to the criti- 
cal value (Q,, = 1), had already begun to run into trouble. 

Cosmological theories predict statistical properties 
of the universe—for example, the size of density fluctua- 
tions on various scales, described mathematically by a 
power spectrum. Sound or other fluctuation phenomena 
can be described in the same way—for example, low fre- 
quencies might be loud, corresponding to relatively high 
power at long wavelengths. With a given amount of fluc- 
tuation power on the large scales probed by COBE (bil- 
lions of light-years), SCDM has a little too much power 
on small scales relevant to galaxies and clusters (millions 
of light-years and less). However, the fact that the SCDM 
theory could work fairly well across such a wide range of 
size scales suggested that it had a kernel of truth. 
Cosmologists began to examine whether some variant of 
SCDM might work better. For example, in the late 1980s, 
my former student Jon Holtzman calculated detailed 
expectations for 96 variants of CDM. When we compared 
these predictions with the data available in early 1992, it 
was clear that the best bets were CHDM and ACDM, 
each of which could fit the data on small scales better 
than SCDM. Both of these variants had been proposed in 
1984, when CDM was still a new idea, but their detailed 
consequences were not worked out until the problems 
with SCDM began to surface. 

Even if most of the dark matter is cold, a little HDM 
can still have dramatic effects on the small scales relevant 
to the formation and distribution of galaxies. In the early 
universe, the free streaming of fast-moving neutrinos 
would have washed out any spatial inhomogeneities in 
the neutrino component on the scales that later became 
galaxies, just as in the HDM scenario. Consequently, fluc- 
tuations in the CDM component grew more slowly on 
these scales, and at the relatively late times when galax- 
ies formed there was less fluctuation power on small 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


scales in CHDM models. Adding a little HDM appeared 
to be just what was needed to solve the SCDM problem 
that the galaxy-scale inhomogeneities are too big. Also, 
there was even a hint from an accelerator experiment 
that neutrino mass might lie in the relevant range. This 
was the Liquid Scintillator Neutrino Detector (LSND) 
experiment at Los Alamos National Laboratory, which 
recorded a number of events that appear to be v,, > Ve 
neutrino oscillations. Comparison of the LSND data with 
results from other neutrino experiments allows two dis- 
crete values of | m(v,) — m?(v3) |, around 10.5 and 5.5 
eV2, or a range of values between 0.2 and 2 eV2. If true, 
this means that at least one neutrino has a mass greater 
than 0.5 eV, which would imply that the contribution of 
HDM to the cosmological density is much greater than 
that of all the visible stars. Such an important conclusion 
requires independent confirmation. The Karlsruhe 
Rutherford Medium Energy Neutrino (KARMEN) exper- 
iment results exclude a significant portion (but not all) of 
the LSND parameter space, and the numbers quoted 
above take into account the current KARMEN limits. The 
Booster Neutrino Experiment (BooNE) at Fermilab 
should attain greater sensitivity and help to resolve this 
issue. 

By 1995 simulation techniques and supercomputer 
technology had advanced to the point where it was pos- 
sible to do reasonably high-resolution cosmological-scale 
simulations including the random velocities of an HDM 
component. The results at first appeared very favorable 
to CHDM. Indeed, as late as 1998 a CHDM model with 
Hubble parameter h = 0.5, mass density Q,, = 1 and neu- 
trino density Q, = 0.2 was found to be the best fit of any 
cosmological model to the galaxy distribution in the near- 
by universe. However, cosmological data were steadily 
improving, and even by 1998 it had become clear that h = 
0.5 and Q,, = 1 were increasingly inconsistent with obser- 
vations, and that h ~0.7 and Q,, ~1/3 worked much bet- 
ter. For example, CHDM predicts that galaxies and clus- 
ters formed relatively recently, but around 1998 increas- 
ing numbers of galaxies were discovered to have formed 
in the first few billion years after the big bang. Also, the 
fraction of baryons found in clusters, together with the 
reasonable assumption that this fraction is representative 
of the universe as a whole, again gives Q,, ~1/3. That 
there is a large cosmological constant (or some other form 
of dark energy) yielding QA ~2/3 then follows from any 
two of the following three results: (1) Q,, ~0/3, (2) CMB 
anisotropy data implying that Q,, + QA = 1, and (3) high- 
redshift supernova data implying that QA - Q,, ~0.4. The 
abundance of galaxies and clusters in the early universe 
agrees well with the predictions of the ACDM model. 
However, the highest-resolution simulations of this 
model that were possible in the mid-1990s gave a dark 
matter spectrum that had more power on scales of a few 
million light-years than did the observed galaxy power 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Hot Dark Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spectrum, although the simulations and data agreed on 
larger scales. This result was inconsistent with the expec- 
tations that galaxies would be more clustered than the 
dark matter on small scales, not less. When it became pos- 
sible to do even higher-resolution simulations that 
allowed the identification of the dark matter halos of indi- 
vidual galaxies, however, their power spectrum turned 
out to be in_ excellent agreement with 
that of galaxies. The galaxies were less clustered than 
dark matter because galaxies had merged or were 
destroyed in very dense regions owing to interactions 
with each other and with cluster centers. This explanation 
turned a troubling discrepancy into a triumph for ACDM. 

Thus ACDM is the favorite theory today. However, 
we know from the Super-Kamiokande evidence for 
atmospheric neutrino oscillations that there is enough 
neutrino mass to correspond to some HDM, at least 
Q,=10-3, about one-fourth as much as the visible stars. 
How much room remains for a little HDM in ACDM 
cosmologies? The reason there is any upper limit at all 
from cosmology is because the free streaming of neu- 
trinos in the early universe must have slowed the 
growth of the remaining CDM fluctuations on small 
scales. Thus, to have the galaxy structures we see 
today, there must be much more cold than hot dark 
matter. From the shape of the galaxy power spectrum 
observed by the 2dF galaxy redshift survey, the limit on 
the sum of the neutrino masses is m/(v) < 2.2 eV, corre- 
sponding to Q, < 0.05. This limit on m(w) is much 
stronger than the best current laboratory limit. 
Astronomical observations that may soon lead to 
stronger upper limits on neutrino mass—or perhaps a 
detection—include more precise measurements of the 
power spectrum from galaxy redshift surveys, data on 
the distribution of low-density clouds of hydrogen (the 
‘Lyman-alpha forest’) at high redshifts, large-scale 
weak gravitational lensing data and improved mea- 
surements of the cosmic background radiation temper- 
ature fluctuations on small angular scales. These types 
of data can be used to probe for the effects of any free 
streaming of neutrinos in the early universe, which can 
lead to less power on small scales depending on the 
values of the neutrino masses. 


Bibliography 

For a more technical article on the present subject with 

extensive references see 

Primack J R and Gross M A K 2001 Hot dark matter in 
cosmology Current Aspects of Neutrino Physics ed 
Caldwell D O (Berlin: Springer) 

This is also available online at astro-ph/0007165 and 
interactively as 
http: / /nedwww.ipac.caltech.edu/level5 / 
Primack4/ frames.html 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


A positive assessment of the old HDM cosmology 


Silk J, Szalay AS and Zel'dovich Y B 1983 The large-scale 
structure of the universe Sci. Am. 249(4) 56 


Problems revealed by simulations of the old HDM cos- 
mology 


White S D M, Frenk C S and Davis M 1983 Clustering in 
a neutrino-dominated universe Astrophys. J. 274 L1 


Predictions for many variants of CDM 


Holtzman J 1989 Microwave background anisotropies 
and large-scale structure in universes with cold 
dark matter, baryons, radiation, and massive and 
massless neutrinos Astrophys. J. Suppl. 71 1 


Comparison with data 


Holtzman J and Primack J R 1993 Cluster correlations for 
cold and hot dark matter and other models 
Astrophys. J]. 405 428 


CHDM simulations 


Klypin A, Holtzman J, Primack J R and Regos E 1993 
Structure formation with cold plus hot dark matter 
Astrophys. J. 416 1 

Primack J R, Holtzman J, Klypin A and Caldwell D O 
1995 Cold and hot dark matter cosmology with 
m(v,,) = m(v;) = 2.4 eV Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 2160-3 


Paper concluding that CHDM was the best match to data 
Gawiser E and Silk J 1998 Extracting primordial density 
fluctuations Science 280 1405-11 


The latest published upper limit on the sum of neutrino 
masses from cosmology (also available online at 
astro-ph/ 0204152) is 


Elgaroy O, et al 2002 New upper limit on the total neutri- 
no mass from the 2 degree field galaxy redshift sur- 
vey Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 061301 


Joel R. Primack 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hot Stellar Populations in 
Elliptical Galaxies 


The term ‘hot stellar populations in elliptical galaxies’ 
refers to the presence of a population component that 
produces a thermal far-ultraviolet continuum in spectra 
taken of the centers of elliptical galaxies. This 
phenomenon, called the ‘UV rising branch’, ‘UV upturn’ 
or ‘UVX’! is also found in the spectra of SO galaxy 
nuclei, and in those of the bulges of spiral galaxies (see 
GALAXIES: CLASSIFICATION). 

The UVX was first discovered by the OAO-2 (see 
ORBITING ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY). Since then, it 
has been found to some measure in all of the above 
systems observed to date. Additional data have been 
collected with the TUE (see INTERNATIONAL 
ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER), the Astro Shuttle missions 
(Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope and Ultraviolet Imaging 
Telescope) and with the HST (see HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE). 

The most striking characteristic of the UVX 
phenomenon is its high variability among galaxies, 
ranging by a factor of 10 in intensity as measured by the 
color (15 — JV), the ratio of a broadband magnitude 
centered at 1500 A to the optical light (see figure 1). 
Arguably the single most important observation, which 
has dominated work on the far-ultraviolet radiation from 
galaxies, is the apparent correlation with galaxy 
abundances first noted by Faber (1983). The variability 
and apparent relation to galactic abundances, as well as 
evidence for relationship to dynamic properties, have 
made the UV upturn an important issue for the study of 
the origin and formation of galaxies. It represents a 
discriminant among objects that is not available from the 
optical record. 

The thermal nature of the radiation—corresponding 
to a blackbody spectrum with T.¢ ~ 20 000 K—pointed to 
an origin in starlight, rather than one in galactic nuclear 
activity, for this ultraviolet flux component. It was also 
noted that the old stellar populations expected to 
constitute the ellipticals were likely to contain post- 
asymptotic giant branch stars (see STELLAR EVOLUTION, 
RED GIANT STARS, PLANETARY NEBULAE), which become 
very hot during their evolution from the red giant branch 
(RGB) to become white dwarfs. The other obvious 
candidate for the origin of the flux was a population of 
normal early B stars, products of recent star formation. 

It was later realized that hot (blue) horizontal branch 
(HB) stars (see HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS) were a 
copious source of ultraviolet radiation. HB stars are 
differentiated according to the size of their hydrogen-rich 
envelope that remains after the RGB phase, where mass 


'Tt is also sometimes confusingly referred to as the ‘UV excess’, which 
has a separate meaning in stellar photometry. 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


loss takes place. Blue horizontal branch stars (with 8000 
< Tee < 20 000 K) are abundant in the Galactic globular 
clusters (see GLOBULAR CLUSTERS) of low metal 
abundance. The hottest HB stars have extremely thin 
hydrogen envelopes, less than 0.05 solar masses, and 
during central helium burning evolution have surface 
temperatures up to 36 000 K. Their thin envelope cannot 
support a return to the giant branch after the central 
helium is exhausted, and thus they continue to emit 
copiously in the far-ultraviolet until their evolution to the 
white dwarf phase. These are termed extreme horizontal 
branch (EHB) stars. 

However, the appearance of hot HB stars in metal- 
rich stellar populations was thought to be rare since, until 
about 1995, they had never been observed in globular 
clusters with metal abundances approaching that of the 
Sun. Indeed, until the last few years, the existence of 
EHB stars was thought to be rare even among the metal- 
poor globulars, whereas the elliptical galaxies have 
spectra implying a dominant population of stars 
exceeding the solar abundance (see ELLIPTICAL 
GALAXIES). 

On the other hand, as was known from studies in the 
early 1970s, the field population of our own galaxy 
contains many hot subdwarf (sdB and sdO) stars. Their 
location on the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram coincides 
with the EHB stars and their post-HB progeny. However, 
the possible connection between the UVX phenomenon 
and the field hot subdwarf population was not realized 
until much later. 

In the last few years, great strides have been made in 
observing hot populations in ellipticals, and these have 
all but ruled out an explanation in terms of radiation from 
young, massive stars, as is detailed in the next section. 
The widely accepted model is now of a hot, evolved 
stellar population of EHB stars whose numbers and 
spatial distribution may reflect both galactic enrichment 
history and dynamical properties. The study of the UVX 
has therefore concentrated on determining not only the 
origin of the flux but its relation to other known 
properties of galaxies, both of population and of 
structure. 


Summary of data 

A number of different observations have provided 

constraints on the originating population of the UV 

upturn. To summarize, the main points are as follows. 

e It is observed in all elliptical, SO, and spiral bulges 
that have signs of neither nuclear activity nor recent 
star formation. 

e Its amplitude, measured by the color (15 — V), varies 
by 2.5 magnitudes and attains 15 — V ~ 2 in the 
brightest example, NGC1399 (Burstein et al 1988) 
(figure 2). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


OF : ome | fi 
Pod | ‘ 
1 NGC1399 (HUT) wer ll 
ie | Yar 
iy : M13 (ANS) ; hy A/ My 
24 y, mf v 
ih I i 
a : ool | Ny 
ae | M31 | i. 1 
i nat | 
Wi | | ul 1 
wy 
M | \" 
5 Hl 
M32 i 
6 | 


1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 
i (Angstrom) 


Figure 1. The UVX phenomenon as seen with IVE and HUT data. The spectra are of NGC1399 (uppermost), M31 (middle) and 
M32 (lowermost). For comparison is shown also the flux distribution of the Galactic globular cluster M13 taken with the 
Astronomical Netherlands Satellite (ANS); its ultraviolet radiation is thought to emanate from similar stars (see text). The galaxy 
spectrum is, however, harder (emanating from hotter stars) and has a much steeper descent from the optical to the mid-ultraviolet 
wavelengths, which is a consequence of the higher abundance of the background population. 


e It is positively correlated with the optical magnesium characteristic temperature also disfavors an 


index Mg, (Burstein ef al 1988)°, which in turn 
correlates with the galaxy central velocity dispersion 
Oo (a measure of the galaxy mass). It is also 
correlated with other light element indices. The 
UVX is not, however, correlated with indicators of 
iron-peak element abundance. Burstein ef al, noting 


explanation purely in terms of post-AGB. stars, 
which radiate much of their energy while at higher 
temperatures. 


a 


B Galarles 
& Clusters 


both relationships, suggested that the abundance 
correlation was tighter than that in oo and therefore 
more likely to be the causal factor. Additionally, 
there is not yet a theory linking variations in the 
stellar content (such as the production of hot stars) 
with galactic dynamical properties, whereas the 
effect of abundance on stellar populations can be 
studied using stellar evolution theory. 

e Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope (HUT) spectral data, 
reaching wavelengths beyond the Lyman break at 
912 A, give an effective temperature of 20 000- 
25 000 K for the far-UV flux in a sample of galaxies 
(Ferguson and Davidsen 1993). The narrow range of 
characteristic temperatures argues against an 
interpretation in terms of young massive stars, as did 
the lack of strong metal absorption lines 
characteristic of the spectra of such objects. The 


Figure 2. The 15 — V versus Mg, (UV upturn versus 
abundance) diagram. To the right are the galaxies, with strong 
absorption lines. For comparison plotted to the left are the 
Galactic globular clusters whose UV bright populations are 
resolved and studied in detail. They are weaker-lined (low- 
abundance) systems. 


? Mg) is an abundance indicator that is strongly correlated with iron- 

peak abundances in (metal-poor) Galactic globular clusters, and is 

widely used as an abundance indicator in galaxies. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e HUT data also demonstrate qualitative differences in 
the spectral slopes between two systems, M31 in 
Andromeda and NGC1399 in Fornax (Ferguson and 
Davidsen 1993), implying that the UVX might 
emanate from a blend of sources with different 
properties. 

e The spatially resolved data show the UV flux to be 
distributed in a fashion that is morphologically 
similar to that of old stellar populations, i.e. smooth 
and centrally concentrated (see figure 3). This is in 
contrast to the appearance of young star associations, 
which are clumped and dispersed from the center 
(O’Connell et al 1992). The data also show the 15 — 
V measure of UVX intensity to possess a radial 
gradient that is usually steeper than that of any 
optical index (O’Connell et al 1992). 

e Ultraviolet photometry of Local Group galaxies, in 
which individual sources can be resolved and 
measured, confirms the presence of hot, old stellar 
populations in those systems, and a lack of evidence 
for massive stars (O’Connell et al 1992, Brown et al 
2000). 

e Radial gradients in the 15 — V color do not strongly 
correlate with radial gradients in the Mg index (Ohl 
et al 1998). Thus, abundance cannot be the sole 
factor causing the strength of the UV upturn. 

e The UVX has been observed with Hubble Space 
Telescope in galaxy clusters at redshifts z = 0.375 
and 0.55, corresponding to lookback times of 4 and 6 
Gyr. These two datasets give the first evidence that 
the phenomenon evolves with time, and may in 
future give evidence that constrains the age of galaxy 
formation. 

Fuller reviews of the data and their implications are given 

in Burstein et al (1988), Greggio and Renzini (1990), 

Dorman et al (1995) and O’Connell (1999). 


Hot evolved stellar populations 

The extensive theoretical review of Greggio and Renzini 
(1990) named as possibilities evolved helium burning 
objects and their descendants, post-RGB remnants (stars 
losing so much mass on the red giant branch that they 
proceed directly to the white dwarf cooling phase), and 
various interacting binary star scenarios. However, the 
subdwarf population of our Galaxy dominates the 
detections of blue sources in field surveys looking for hot 
objects. Objects of this type, even while many of them 
have companions, have luminosities that imply a single- 
rather than multiple-star origin. This suggests that a 
population of hot horizontal stars may be a normal 
constituent of evolved stellar populations. Perhaps this 
also provides the strongest plausibility argument for the 
prevailing hypothesis that hot, helium burning stars are 
indeed responsible for the UVX phenomenon, rather than 
any of the other more exotic candidates that have yet to 
be fully investigated. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) 


(b) 


Figure 3. Elliptical and spiral galaxy optical—far-ultraviolet 
comparison. (a) B-band exposure of the same field obtained at 
Palomar Observatory. (b) Far-ultraviolet image of the elliptical 
M60 (NGC 4649) and Sc spiral galaxy NGC 4647, taken from 
the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope. Note the contrast in the 
distribution of ultraviolet radiation between the elliptical and 
the spiral galaxy. From Ohl R G 2000 PhD Thesis John 
Hopkins University. 


Much is known about hot evolved stars from the 
Galactic globular cluster system in which large HB 
populations can be resolved and studied in detail. The 
properties of stars in the field hot subdwarf population 
smoothly mesh with the hottest stars in these clusters. 
Additionally, the field population of hot subdwarfs is 
identified kinematically with the old disk population of 
our Galaxy which is thought to have an abundance 
distribution similar to that of the galaxies. Hence, our 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


understanding of the potential source of the UVX is 
augmented by analogy with both old Galactic hot stellar 
populations. 

From the fuel consumption theorem (see next 
section), sources of far-UV radiation in old stellar 
populations that are most significant are those which are 
powered by stable nuclear reactions. The evolved hot 
stellar population components comprise stars in the post- 
asymptotic giant phase, hot and extreme horizontal 
branch stars, and the post-horizontal branch phases of 
extreme HB stars (see figure 4 for a schematic). Detailed 
evolutionary sequences and discussion can be found in 
Dorman et al (1993) and references therein. 

Post-asymptotic giant stars are the central stars of 
planetary nebulae. When the hydrogen envelope of an 
asymptotic giant branch star is largely consumed, the star 
evolves rapidly towards higher temperatures. During this 
evolution, ending on the white dwarf cooling curve (see 
WHITE DWARFS) they span a temperature range of about 
3000 to in excess of 100 000 K at a fixed luminosity that 
exceeds 2500Lo. The lifetime in this phase, however, is 
short (since the fuel is rapidly consumed), generally a 
few times 10° yr to only a few thousand years. It 
decreases strongly with increasing luminosity, and the 
total energy radiated decreases with it. The spectrum 
integrated over this phase has a high characteristic 
temperature. 

Horizontal branch stars are formed after a star 
reaches the tip of the red giant core, undergoes an off- 
center helium flash and subsequently develops a stable 
helium fusion source. The HB lifetime is substantial, 
about 100-150 Myr, at a luminosity of (10-50)Zo, so that 
stars that are sufficiently hot are important UV emitters. 
The key parameter determining ultraviolet radiation from 
HB stars is the size of the hydrogen-rich envelope, 
denoted M,,,, at the onset of stable central helium 
burning. Because the helium flash takes place at a fixed 


P-AGB 


Thermal Pulsing ———>- 


P-EAGB 


Steady Mass Loss 


: 
Fs AGB-Manque 
' 1 


Luminosity 


“Intermediate” 


Blue HB 
Extreme HB 


Horizontal Branch 


—=—— Temperature 


Figure 4. Schematic of the various types of hot, evolved star 
shown in the theoretical plane. From Dorman et al (1993). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


temperature in red giant interiors, the size of the helium 
core inside new HB stars varies relatively little with 
envelope mass (or, for that matter, abundance and age), 
being about 0.5Mo. The temperature of an HB star 
increases with decreasing M,,,, which also corresponds to 
decreasing hydrogen shell luminosity. The most extreme 
HB stars (see below) are, initially, almost identical to 
pure helium burning stars. 

Observations of Galactic globular clusters 
demonstrate that in real stellar populations M.,, for the 
HB stars is often scattered, for reasons not properly 
understood. The distribution arises because stars in the 
population lose varying amounts of mass in the preceding 
red giant branch stage of evolution. The observational 
record shows that, with a few notable exceptions, stars in 
clusters that have relatively high heavy element 
abundance are usually cool (Teg ~ 4000-5000 K) and are 
therefore dark in the UV. In contrast, HB stars in clusters 
with low abundance are found to span a large range in 
temperature, Ter ~ 6000-30 000 K. 

Numerical models of HB stars show that stars 
sufficiently hot to radiate in the ultraviolet can be formed 
for almost any chosen abundance. However, the amount 
of mass that must be lost to make HB stars that are strong 
UV emitters is dependent on their heavy element 
abundance Z and also their helium abundance Y. For stars 
with high abundance, nearly the entire mass of the 
envelope must be stripped in order to produce a hot star. 
At low Z, models with substantial hydrogen-rich 
envelopes can be hot enough to radiate strongly in the 
far-UV. 

After the core helium is exhausted, helium shell- 
burning is initiated. If the remaining envelope at this 
stage is sufficiently large (greater than 0.05Mo) the hot 
HB stars return to the AGB (i.e. they develop a deep, 
cool convective exterior) as do their more massive red 
HB counterparts. They evolve through the thermally 
pulsing stage, finally becoming P-AGB stars and white 
dwarfs. 

The designation ‘EHB star’ is used to refer to stars 
that do not reach the P-AGB stage of evolution. These 
stars have envelope masses = 0.05Mo, have weak or 
insignificant hydrogen shell burning during helium core 
burning and effective temperatures that range from about 
20 000 to 37 000 K depending on both envelope mass 
and abundance. After core exhaustion they become 
brighter and develop significant hydrogen shell energy 
sources and are called ‘post-early AGB’ stars or ‘AGB 
manqué’ (‘failed AGB’) stars depending on whether or 
not they reach the early part of the AGB evolutionary 
sequence. 

The later evolutionary stages of the EHB stars do not 
have enough hydrogen to develop a cool outer 
convection zone after the central helium source is 
exhausted. These stars remain hot in the post-HB phase 
and emit similar amounts of UV radiation over their post- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HB lifetime to those during core helium burning. These 
are the AGB manqué stars. They have lifetimes typically 
20-40 Myr (similar to the AGB itself), with L ~ (100- 
500)Lo. They reach effective temperatures of 80-10 000 
K before settling on the white dwarf cooling sequence. 
The continuum of possible evolutionary paths includes 
also a transitional type, the “post-early AGB’ stars, that 
reach the earlier but not the later stages of evolution on 
the asymptotic giant branch. These stars resemble the 
behavior of AGB stars, but are slightly less luminous and 
somewhat longer lived. 

Observations indicate that there is a strong ‘stellar 
populations’ component to the mass loss during the RGB 
phase. That is, the mass loss phenomenon varies among 
populations, so that systems that are apparently similar in 
the gross properties that govern stellar evolution do not 
produce the same HB stellar distribution (‘HB 
morphology’)’. This complicates the explanation of HB 
populations in general, and the UVX in particular. 

For example, one simple reason why HB 
morphology might be different between two populations 
is age. As a population ages, the mass of the stars at the 
tip of the red giant branch decreases. All things being 
equal—in particular, the abundance of the stars and 
distribution of total mass lost among stars of that 
abundance—one would expect the distribution of M.,, on 
the HB to be smaller for older stars and thus the 
probability of forming more hot stars increases. 
However, the observational record only supports this 
explanation for HB morphology differences in a limited 
way on a subset of the Galactic globular cluster system, 
and thus the observations of a particular 15 — V color 
cannot be used to give a definitive age to a stellar 
population. 

Nevertheless, for a sufficiently ‘young’ evolved 
population, one does not expect to see far-UV radiation. 
For example at age 5 Gyr, the mass of red giants in 
metal-abundant galaxies is about (1.4-1.5)Mo. The 
amount of mass loss required to produce hot stars, about 
1Mo, is much greater than in populations of age 14 Gyr, 
whose giants have mass ~(0.8-0.9)Mo. If mass loss 
processes act in similar fashion in both cases, the number 
of hot stars in the younger population will be smaller. 
Thus it is predicted that the UVX arises later in galaxy 
evolution, or that the restframe UV radiation should fade 
with increasing redshifts of distant galaxy clusters. The 
observations of galaxies at moderate redshift are 
consistent with this prediction. 


3 This problem is known as the Second Parameter Effect, the ‘first 
parameter’ being metal abundance: see GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. The local group galaxy M32, imaged in the UV 
(1450-3500 A) with the Space Telescope Imaging 
Spectrograph of the Hubble Space Telescope. The individual 
stars in the picture have magnitudes consistent with being hot 
HB or post-HB stars. From Brown et al 2000, © The 
Astrophysical Journal, reproduced with permission. 


The fuel consumption theorem and synthetic 


populations 

The UVX phenomenon can be studied using the methods 
of evolutionary population synthesis (see SYNTHETIC 
STELLAR POPULATIONS). Briefly, such methods build a 
population model from the constituents of the population 
under study using results from stellar evolution 
calculations. Then, integrated spectra are computed using 
either synthetic stellar fluxes computed from model 
atmospheres and synthetic stellar flux calculations, or a 
library of empirical fluxes derived from observations. 
Finally, colors such as the 15 — V measure can be derived 
as a function of any input population model by 
integrating a synthetic spectrum over desired filter 
bandpasses. 

To compute the synthetic 15 — V color of a stellar 
population, it is necessary to select the following 
ingredients for the model: 

(a) The population responsible for the far-UV radiation. 
(b) The constituents of the ‘background’ population. For 

elliptical galaxies the bulk of the population is 
unambiguously composed of older stars (Tere < 7000 
K) on the main sequence and red giant branch, none 
of which emits significant far-UV radiation (see 
figure 5). This part will consist of a set of one or 
more isochrones representing populations of a set of 
ages and abundances and the assumption of a mass 
function. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(c) A measure of the input rate of stars into the late 
evolutionary stages. This can found empirically 
through relative number counts or theoretically by 
differentiation performed on_ stellar isochrone 
sequences (see Dorman ef al 1995). 

The fuel consumption theorem (see e.g. Renzini and 

Buzzoni 1986) states that the total bolometric flux 

produced in an advanced phase of stellar evolution is 

proportional to the fuel consumed during that phase. It is 
instructive to sketch the derivation of this result and to 
show how it may be extended to synthesize stellar 
population properties. 

The energy radiated by a star 
evolutionary phase is 


a il L dr. 
phase 


This energy is, to a good approximation, produced by 
nuclear burning and therefore proportional to the fuel 
consumption. 

In a large stellar system, the number of stars 
evolving off the RGB to the HB is a Poisson process, 
with the input rate to the HB having a finite mean. Since 
this mean varies on a timescale larger than the length of 
any subsequent phase, the numbers of stars in that phase 
will approach a steady state. 


during any 


If we denote this mean input rate by N, and divide 
the evolutionary path from the beginning of the HB phase 
to its end by a set of time intervals {f},;, then the number 
of stars in the jth time interval Az; = 4 — ¢;-1 is 


AN; = N Aty. 


The total luminosity of all the stars along the track is then 


L=N)_L, At,. 
i 


In the limit where the population is large, 
N At; > 1 


(i.e. there are expected to be many stars in each interval 
J), this equation becomes an integral, with 


L=WNE. 


This is the fuel consumption result. Derived in this form, 
one may also see that the luminosity of a stellar 
population in a given passband denoted by 2A is 
proportional to the total energy radiated in that band 
given by their integrated luminosity at 4 over their 
lifetime multiplied by their rate of formation, i.e. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


. death . 
L, = vf L; dr = NE,. 
birth 

The terms in these equations can be estimated from fits to 
stellar evolutionary sequences (Renzini and Buzzoni 
1986), or computed directly from the stellar evolution 
calculations (Dorman et al 1995) if the bolometric 
correction at A, a, = L,/L, is also known. Bolometric 
corrections are derived from the stellar flux library 
adopted for the analysis. 

Colors can then be computed for the synthetic stellar 
population and compared with observations. For 
example, to compute the 15 — V color one needs to 
calculate both Lj599, which arises purely from the hot 


population, and L,, the visual brightness, which consists 
of 


E = Levovea + Laas + Luss 


since all of the evolved, red giant branch and main 
sequence stars radiate at optical wavelengths. The 
contribution from the two earlier stages is evaluated at 
fixed age and abundance by assuming a stellar isochrone’ 
and a mass function describing the number of stars 
forming of a given mass. 

The synthetic color of the model is then given by 


15 — V = —2.5 logiL jsgo/ L,) + constant 


where the constant is a normalization chosen by 
convention (-21.1 on the monochromatic scale), and 
similarly for other colors. 


Quantitative analyses of the UVX 

The object of quantitative analysis is to understand how 
the variation of UVX strengths in galaxies might arise, 
how that might account for the apparent variation of the 
amplitude with abundance, and what range of model 
parameters are consistent with the behavior of spectra 
such as are illustrated in figure 1. 

Of particular utility is a measure of the lifetime- 
integrated ultraviolet energy, e.g. Fj509, the energy 
radiated in a bandpass centered at 1500 A. One may 
evaluate this function for models of various potential 
contributors to the UV upturn and thus quantitatively 
estimate under which circumstances each will dominate 
the observed radiation. 

For horizontal branch models, F599 is a function of 
Mew, Z, Y and age. By varying the assumed mass 
distribution of HB stars the effect of various hypotheses 
concerning its behavior can be studied. In a population 


* An isochrone is a curve constructed from stellar evolution calculations 
defining the locus on the theoretical Hertzsprung—Russell diagram 
joining stars at a chosen age. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


model, for any given abundance Ej599 (Meny) must be 
integrated over a mass distribution P(M.ny), with unit 
integral over the range of the available horizontal branch 
masses. That is, 


ated 
a = P(M°E,(M') dM’. 
blue 


A detailed study of the stellar models gives the following 

conclusions. 

e = The peak contribution from extreme HB stars is 20— 
30 times greater than for post-AGB stars, so that if 
the former exist in significant numbers they will 
dominate the UVX. 

e The maximum possible post-AGB flux in a 
population cannot produce the strongest UV upturns 
that have been observed. 

e £599 itself is insensitive to age: it is the ‘population’ 
function P(M) that gives rise to any age variation. 

e i509 is also relatively insensitive to the abundances 
of stellar populations, varying by some tens of 
percentage points rather than by orders of 
magnitude. This suggests that the variations in the 
UVX we see are due to variations in the number of 
sources that are present. 

e  =If all of the red giants in an old stellar population 
turned into EHB stars, the resulting UV flux would 
be about 6 times stronger than in the strongest UVX 
galaxy. Thus, in the most extreme UVX object, NGC 
1399, about 16% of the HB stars are hot. 

e The range of masses for which E509 is significant at 
high Z is somewhat smaller than at low abundance, 
and thus abundance alone cannot drive the UVX: 
one needs to invoke a variation in mass loss too. 

e §©Surprisingly, the range of masses for which Ejs509 is 
significant increases with increasing Y, so that it is 
easier to make EHB stars in_helium-enriched 
populations. 

Figure 6, showing samples of galaxy and globular cluster 

data, supports the hypothesis that variability in the UVX 

is caused by a variation in numbers of sources. In figure 

6(a), the globular clusters, which have known variation 

in the HB morphology (and therefore in numbers of UV 

emitting sources) and low abundance, are compared with 
the UVX data for galaxies, which have a spread in UVX 
strength and high abundance. The sequences of different 
types of objects separate into almost parallel lines. Figure 

6(b) shows that the reason for the separation is the 

relative weakness of the galaxies in the mid-ultraviolet, at 

2500 A. This is the direct result of the steeper slope of 

the galaxy spectra compared with the cluster spectrum 

seen in figure 1. 

Stellar population models constructed using the 
methods briefly described in the previous section can 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


@ Galaxies 


a 
O p Clusters 
e 


(1S-25), 


Clusters 


@5-¥), 


Galaxies 


(15-¥), 


Figure 6. The UV characteristics of galaxy and globular cluster 
data compared (from Dorman et al 1995). The globular clusters 
(triangles and circles), with known variation in numbers of HB 
stars and low abundance, form sequences parallel to the 
galaxies (squares) with varying UVX strength and high 
abundance in mid-UV color—magnitude and color-color 
diagrams. 


indeed reproduce the location of the data on these two 
diagrams. Hence, despite the uncertain relationship 
between the (far-ultraviolet) UVX and galaxy abundance, 
the mid-UV shows some promise as a population 
abundance indicator (but see SYNTHETIC STELLAR 
POPULATIONS for other issues arising from population 
indicators). Although the mid-UV fluxes of galaxies are 
strongly affected by the presence of a strong UV upturn 
component, the relative invariance of its temperature 
yields simple methods for subtracting this effect if it has 
been quantified by far-UV observations. 

Various lines of argument have led researchers to 
adopt three distinct explanations for the galaxy 
population from which the UVX stars are drawn. All of 
these assume that the elliptical galaxies have an 
abundance spread which is similar to that found in our 
own Galaxy, and all appeal to different abundance ranges 
to explain the phenomenon. 

(a) The UVX arises from the metal-poor tail of the 
galactic abundance distribution, from stars similar to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hot Stellar Populations in Elliptical Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


those found in the Galactic globular clusters. By 
extension of the age effect on HB morphology, the 
high temperature of the UVX relative to most 
globular clusters implies that the phenomenon 
implies an age for the galaxies greater than the 
globular clusters. 

(b) Assuming that the helium content of high-Z stars 
continues to increase for Z > Zo as is found for Z < 
Zo, (i.e. AY/AZ > 2.5, so that for Z = 3Z5, Y ~ 0.4) 
the UVX phenomenon will arise naturally from the 
high end of the galactic abundance distribution, also 
at great age. 

(c) No inference can be drawn concerning the 
abundances of the UVX stars since the intrinsic 
properties of the HB vary only weakly with 
abundance parameters compared with the 
(undetermined) nature of mass loss. The most 
plausible assumption is that the UVX stars are most 
likely to be drawn from the peak of the abundance 
distribution since it is by definition the most 
numerous background population. According to this 
scenario, the UVX is not directly related to 
abundance but indicates something yet to be 
understood about the history of stellar populations in 
galaxies. 

Of these hypotheses, the first two both interpret the UVX 
phenomenon as an age effect based on the argument 
given earlier for HB morphology as largely an age effect. 
The ‘low-abundance’ hypothesis (a) appears however, to 
be inconsistent with the observations, at least for the 
strongest UVX galaxies. Since these require about 15% 
of all HB stars to be of EHB type, a low-Z subcomponent 
of this size would radiate more strongly in the mid-UV 
than the observations allow. The ‘high-Z‘ abundance 
argument depends on an uncertain extrapolation of the 
helium enrichment function for these stars. Since it 
appears both that the galaxy abundances are in fact more 
strongly enhanced in lighter elements and that the UVX 
is not correlated with Z, helium content in stars increases 
with elements such as magnesium. Finally, the third, 
most conservative, hypothesis leaves the direct 
interpretation of the UVX inconclusive. 

While it is common in astronomy to appeal to the 
need for more observational data, this is particularly true 
in the ultraviolet. Observations require space-based 
astronomy and the number of observing platforms that 
have been able to collect sufficiently high-quality data of 
distant galaxies has been small. 

A final point is that the UVX is observed to be 
correlated with the light element index Mg, and not with 
indices measuring the iron-peak elements (£j599 should 
be relatively insensitive to light element variations, since 
it is sensitive to the deep structure of the star which is 
unaffected by light element abundance). Further, 
resolved observations of the UVX indicate that it does 
not vary radially the same way that abundance 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


measurements do. Hence, despite the initial optimism for 
understanding the UVX in terms of a variation in 
population abundance, later evidence implies that the 
relationship is far from straightforward. 

There are a couple of lines of evidence tentatively 
linking the UVX to dynamical properties of galaxies 
rather than abundance, a link for which there is currently 
no explanation. The data suggest a relationship between 
the shape of galactic isophotes (curves of constant 
brightness) such that galaxies with ‘boxy’ isophotes 
associated with possible merger products are also 
galaxies with stronger UV upturns. Also, there is the 
possibility that the UVX-—Mg) correlation actually 
consists of several distinct groups rather than a 
continuous relationship. In this view the brightest UVX 
galaxies, which correspond to giant ellipticals with the 
largest central velocity dispersions, form a group with 
distinct ultraviolet properties. The UV upturn may thus 
be an as yet inscrutable indicator of a relationship 
between galaxy dynamics and stellar populations. 


Bibliography 

Brown T M, Bowers C W, Kimble R A and Sweigart A V 2000 
Astrophys. J. 532 308 

Burstein D, Bertola F, Buson L, Faber S M and Lauer T R 1988 
Astrophys. J. 328 440 

Dorman B, O’Connell R W and Rood R T 1995 Astrophys. J. 
442 105 

Dorman B, Rood R T and O’Connell R W 1993 Astrophys. J. 
419 596 

Faber S M 1983 Highlights of Astronomy 6 165 

Ferguson H C and Davidsen A F 1993 Astrophys. J. 408 92 

Greggio L and Renzini A 1990 Astrophys. J. 364 35 

O’Connell R W 1999 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 37 603 

O’Connell R W, Bohlin R C, Collins N R, Cornett R H, Hill J 
K, Hill R S, Landsman W B, Roberts M S, Smith A M and 
Stecher T P 1992 Astrophys. J. Lett. 395 45 

Ohl R G, O’Connell R W, Bohlin R C, Collins N R, Dorman B, 
Fanelli M N, Neff S G, Roberts M S, Smith A M and 
Stecher T P 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 505 11 

Renzini A and Buzzoni A 1986 Spectral Evolution of Galaxies 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) p 232 


Ben Dorman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hour Angle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hour Angle 


The angle between an observer’s meridian and a celestial 
body measured westwards (i.e. clockwise) from the 
meridian in a direction parallel to the celestial equator. 
Hour angle is usually expressed in terms of time units 
(hours, minutes, and seconds, where 1 h is equivalent to 
15°) since the value of hour angle increases due to the 
apparent daily rotation of the celestial sphere. Thus the 
hour angle of a star is zero when it crosses the meridian 
(at upper transit); 6 h later, the celestial sphere has rotated 
through 90°, and the value of hour angle is 6 h. Thus, the 
hour angle is equal to the time which has elapsed since the 
last occasion on which the star crossed the meridian. After 
24h, the star returns to the meridian once more. 


See also: celestial sphere, diurnal motion, meridian. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hourglass Nebula (MyCn 18) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hourglass Nebula (MyCn 18) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Musca, position 
RA 13" 40™, dec. —67° 23’. It is only 4” in size, and was 
first imaged well by the Hubble Space Telescope. The 
twin lobes of ejected matter from the central star form a 
distinctive hourglass shape, while recently expelled gas at 
the center strongly resembles a human eye. 


See also: Lagoon Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Houzeau de Lehaie, Jean-Charles-Hippolyte-Joseph 
(1820-88) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Houzeau de Lehaie, 
Jean-Charles-Hippolyte-Joseph 
(1820-88) 


Belgian astronomer, became director of the Royal 
Observatory of Belgium. With Albert Lancester, Houzeau 
wrote Bibliographie Generale de L’astronomie (1887), listing 
all the publications in astronomy since the invention of 
writing. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hoyle, Sir Fred (1915-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hoyle, Sir Fred (1915-) 


Astrophysicist, controversialist and science fiction writer, 
born in Bingley, West Yorkshire, England, became 
professor of astronomy at Cambridge where he founded 
the Institute of Theoretical Astronomy (IOTA), later 
merged with the Cambridge Observatory as the Institute 
of Astronomy. Motivated by anti-religious sentiments, 
and wishing to avoid the issue of cause of the start of 
the universe, Hoyle joined HERMANN BONDI and THOMAS 
GOLD in developing steady state cosmology, providing 
the general relativistic formulation of the theory. He 
became the most visible proponent of the new theory, 
and it was he who coined the term ‘Big Bang’ for the 
explosive event at the start of the universe, intending it 
to be derisive about evolutionary theories of cosmology. 
Since space was expanding but wanting to maintain the 
overall density of the universe in steady state, it was 
necessary to hypothesize the phenomenon of continuous 
creation of matter in space. Finding that this, contrary to 
intention, was regarded as evidence of a creator in action, 
Hoyle published the polemical Nature of the Universe about 
the steady state theory. The steady state theory is generally 
regarded as disproved (by the existence of the cosmic 
microwave background), although it survives in a version 
in which a large steady state universe in which there is 
a continuous sequence of randomly occurring Big Bangs. 
It is undisputable, however, that the development of the 
steady state theory led to an epoch-making discovery. It 
had been thought that the Big Bang created all the chemical 
elements (the alpha-beta-gamma theory), and if there was 
no Big Bang, then the elements must have been made 
elsewhere and at other times. This led Hoyle to work on 
the origin of chemical elements in stars. He collaborated 
through visits to the California Institute of Technology 
and the Mount Wilson and Palomar Observatories with 
MARGARET BURBIDGE, Geoffrey Burbidge and WILLIAM FOWLER, 
working on the synthesis of the elements, and became an 
author of the landmark paper on this topic, known from 
its authors’ initials as B*FH. Hoyle has also been, with 
N Wickramasinghe, a modern proponent of ARRHENIUS’S 
panspermia hypothesis, that life on Earth comes from 
space, in particular in the form of viruses delivered by 
comets. Hoyle has published fourteen novels, a play, and 
numerous works for the popularization of science. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble Classification 


A classification scheme for galaxies, devised in its original 
form in 1925 by Edwin P Hubble (1889-1953), and still 
widely used today. The Hubble classification recognizes 
four principal types of galaxy—elliptical, spiral, barred 
spiral and irregular—and arranges these in a sequence that 
is called the tuning-fork diagram. 

Elliptical galaxies are denoted by the letter ‘E’ 
followed by a number from 0 to 7 to indicate the degree 
of flattening of the observed elliptical shape. For an En 
galaxy, the number, n, is obtained from n = 10[(a — b)/a] 
where a is the maximum diameter and b the minimum. 
Thus EO galaxies appear spherical (n = 0 because a = b) 
while E7 galaxies are markedly flattened with a maximum 
diameter more than three times greater than the minimum 
diameter. 

Spiral galaxies, denoted by the letter ‘S’, have a central 
bulge surrounded by a flattened disk within which stars, 
nebulae and clouds of gas and dust are concentrated into 
a pattern of spiral arms. Spirals are subdivided into three 
categories, Sa, Sb and Sc, an Sa galaxy having a large 
central bulge surrounded by tightly wound arms, an Sb 
galaxy having a somewhat smaller bulge and less tight 
arms, and an Sc galaxy having a relatively small bulge 
and loose, open arms. In barred spiral galaxies, denoted 
by ‘SB’, the arms emerge from the ends of what looks like 
a rigid bar, or elongated ellipsoid of stars and luminous 
material that straddles the central nucleus. Barred spirals 
are subdivided into types SBa, SBb and SBc according to 
similar criteria to ordinary spirals. Intermediate categories 
are labelled appropriately; for example, a galaxy mid- 
way in appearance between categories Sa and Sb would 
be labelled Sab. Other peculiarities are identified by 
additional letters such as ‘p’ (for ‘peculiar’) or ‘r’ (to denote 
the presence of a ring around the nucleus). The Milky Way 
Galaxy, of which the Sun is a member, used to be classified 
as an ordinary spiral of type Sbc, but because recent 
observations indicate that its central bulge is elongated, 
it may be more appropriate to regard it as an SBbc barred 
spiral. 

Intermediate between the ellipticals and spirals are 
the lenticular (lens shaped) galaxies, denoted by ‘SO’ or 
‘SBO’. Although a lenticular possesses a central bulge 
surrounded by a disk, it displays no sign of a spiral 
structure. 

Irregular galaxies, which have no obvious nucleus or 
ordered structure, are denoted by ‘Irr’ and are broadly 
subdivided into ‘Irr I’ and ‘Irr II’. Irr I galaxies display 
evidence of ongoing star formation (for example bunches, 
or ‘associations’, of hot young stars and bright HII regions). 
Irr II galaxies have a disturbed appearance, their shapes 
seeming to have been distorted by violent internal activity 
or as a result of collisions or close encounters with other 
galaxies. 

Ellipticals contain little, if any, gas and are dominated 
by the light of old red giant stars. Spirals and barred spirals 
contain significant quantities of gas and dust (about 5-15% 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the galaxy’s mass), Sc and SBc galaxies, on average, 
containing more than Sa and Sba galaxies. Some, but not 
all, irregulars contain higher proportions of gas and dust 
(up to 20-30% by mass). 


See also: barred spiral galaxy, elliptical galaxies, galaxies: 
classification, galaxy, galaxy evolution, irregular galaxy, 
lenticular galaxy, Milky Way Galaxy, spiral galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble constant 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble constant 


The constant of proportionality, denoted by H, that relates 
the velocities at which galaxies are receding to their 
distances. According to the Hubble law, velocity of 
recession (V) is directly proportional to distance (D), a 
relationship which may be expressed as follows: V = 
HD, where Hp is the value of the Hubble constant at the 
present epoch in the history of the universe. 

The Hubble constant, or Hubble parameter, is a 
measure of the rate of expansion of the universe and is, in 
effect, ameasure of the fractional increase in the scale of the 
universe in unit time. Its value is usually expressed in units 
of velocity, expressed in kilometers per second, divided by 
distance, expressed in megaparsecs (i.e. km s~' Mpc“), 
but it may also be expressed in units of s-!. There is 
still a significant degree of uncertainty about the precise 
value of Ho, although there is wide general agreement that 
it lies between 50 km s-! Mpc! and 100 km s~! Mpc}. 
The uncertainty arises primarily because it is hard to 
obtain reliable measurements of the distances of galaxies. 
Many recent research programs using the apparent 
brightnesses of Cepheid variables or Type Ia supernovae 
as distance indicators have yielded values in the range 57— 
80 km s“! Mpc", with a concentration of values in the 
range 60-70 km s~' Mpc’. A value of 65 km s~! Mpc", 
for example, would imply, in principle, that a galaxy at a 
distance of 1 megaparsec should be receding at a speed of 
65 km s“', a galaxy at a distance of 1000 megaparsecs at 65 
000 km s~!, and so on. 

The Hubble time is the time that it would take for the 
universe to double its size (i.e. for each galaxy to recede to 
twice its present distance) at a constant rate of expansion 
equal to the present rate. Equivalently, it is the time that 
the universe would have taken to expand to its present 
size (i.e. for each galaxy to recede to its present distance) 
at a constant rate of expansion. The Hubble time is equal 
to the reciprocal of the Hubble constant (i.e. 1/Ho). The 
uncertainty in the value of the Hubble constant is reflected 
in a similar uncertainty in the value of the Hubble time, 
and hence in estimates of the age of the universe. If Hp lies 
in the range 50-100 km s~! Mpc", values of the Hubble 
time lie between 20 and 10 billion years, respectively. If, 
for example, Hy = 65 km s~' Mpc™!, then the value of the 
Hubble time is 15 billion years. The Hubble time is related 
to the age of the universe through a model of its expansion. 
In the standard model, the age of the universe is two-thirds 
the Hubble time. 


See also: cosmological model, cosmology, deceleration 
parameter, expanding universe, Hubble law, redshift. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Deep Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble Deep Fields 


The Hubble Deep Fields are two small areas of the sky that 
were carefully selected for deep observations by the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE (HST). They represent the deepest optical 
observations to date and reveal galaxies as faint as V = 30, 
4 billion times fainter than can be seen with the unaided 
eye. 

Ten-day observing campaigns were carried out by 
HST in December 1995 on a field in the northern 
hemisphere (HDF-N) and in October 1998 on a field in 
the southern hemisphere (HDF-S). The fields were chosen 
to avoid bright stars, dust or nearby galaxies interrupting 
the view of more distant galaxies. To make the most 
efficient use of HST, the fields were also required to be in 
the ‘continuous viewing zone’, at about +60° declination. 
Other than that, the fields are essentially random ‘core 
samples’ of the universe. The observations were released 
to the public within weeks of being obtained and have 
been the subject of extensive research and followup 
observations with other telescopes. The Hubble Deep 
Fields represent the deepest observations not only of HST 
but also of some the largest ground-based telescopes and 
other space observatories. 


Observational details 

The coordinates of HDF-N are 12°36™49.4° + 62°12'58” 
(J2000). The HDF-N has been observed at optical 
wavelengths by the Wide Field Planetary Camera-2 
(WFPC-2) (see also ASTROMETRY WITH HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE), 
which has a field of view roughly 3 arcmin on a side, 
and in the infrared with the NICMOS camera. The 
coordinates of the HDF-S field are 22°32™56.25 — 60°33'03”. 
During the HDF-S campaign, observations were carried 
out in parallel on adjacent fields with NICMOS and 
STIS. The STIS field was centered on QSO J2233-606. 
The WFPC-2 camera observed both fields through four 
broadband filters, centered at 300, 450, 606, and 814 nm. 
The STIS observations of the southern field included UV 
spectroscopy of the QSO and optical and UV observations 
of the field around the QSO. The NICMOS observations of 
both the southern and northern fields were taken through 
broadband filters centered at 1.1 ~m and 1.6 wm. 


Census of the HDF-N 
The WFPC-2 image of HDF-N covers an area of 5 arcmin’. 
Within this area it contains approximately 


3000 galaxies brighter than magnitude V = 29, 
130 galaxies with measured spectroscopic redshifts, 
20 galaxies with spectroscopic redshifts greater than 
Z= 2.5, 
17 sources brighter than 65 Jy at at 6.7 wm or 200 pJy 
at 15 xm detected by the Infrared Space Observatory, 
10 _ stars along the line of sight through the Milky Way, 

9 radio sources brighter than 9 Jy at 8.5 GHz or 40 py 
at 1.4 GHz, 

4 — sources brighter than 2 m Jy at 850 4m detected by 
the SCUBA bolometer array at the James Clerk 
Maxwell Telescope, 

0 stars redder than V — J = 1.8 and 

3 sources redder than V — K =7. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The numbers are approximate because it is difficult to 
differentiate true sources from noise at the limits of the 
observations and because among the brighter galaxies 
it is sometimes difficult to decide whether to count 
neighboring objects separately or as part of a larger galaxy. 
The HDF-S has a similar number of galaxies but roughly 
five times as many stars owing to the different line of sight 
through the Milky Way. 


Galactic dark matter 


The lack of faint red stars in the HDF-N was used to 
rule out faint hydrogen-burning stars as the source of 
Galactic DARK MATTER. The HDF constraint is most concisely 
expressed as a limit on the J band absolute magnitude of 
the constituents of the Galactic dark halo: 


05M. 
M 


M, > 15.9+ > tog (1 (1) 


where M is the mass of the objects and f is their density asa 
fraction of the local halo density. Faint RED DWARFS account 
for less than 1% of the Galactic dark halo for M; < 14 
and less than 6% for M; < 15. The limits are even more 
stringent on the contribution from extremely metal-poor 
dwarfs. 


Galaxy counts 


Figure 1 shows the number of galaxies as a function of 
brightness in HDF-N and HDF-S, together with results 
from shallower ground-based surveys. The counts are 
compared with a simple model that includes the effect 
of cosmological curvature but does not include galaxy 
evolution. A variety of evolutionary models have been 
shown to match the counts, but work is still underway 
to determine which if any of the models match the full 
distribution of colors, sizes and morphologies of the HDF 
galaxies. 


Spectroscopic and photometric redshifts 


The spectroscopic survey of the HDF with the W M Keck 
telescope is among the deepest ever attempted. The 
survey is nearly complete to a magnitude R = 23.5 and 
extends more than a magnitude fainter for selected objects. 
Although this spectroscopy at this depth is limited to the 
brightest 5% of the HDF galaxies, it has served to confirm 
the existence of a population of galaxies at redshifts z > 2.5 
and has validated the use of broadband photometric data 
as a means for estimating redshifts. These ‘photometric 
redshifts’ are determined either by fitting template spectra 
to the photometry of galaxies through different filters or 
by using the spectroscopic sample as an empirical ‘training 
set’ to determine the relation between colors and redshift. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Deep Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Log flux density (W m™ Hz7') 


; 29 30 31 32 -33 -34 
100 T 
E o *¢ 
10° b . I ban 
E Kband* 10 ,@ eee? 


a 
oO 
a 
TTT 


100 kt 


10 


pol po) ern 


BI 


Galaxies per square degree per magnitude 
=) 
is) 
io) 


1 ! 


ET 


0.1 


= 
ao 
ay) 
oO 
ae) 
oO 
wo 
oO 


AB Magnitude 


Figure 1. Counts of galaxies in the B, I and K bands (centered 
roughly at 0.4, 0.8 and 2.2 wm, respectively). The full symbols 
show the counts from the HDF observations. The HDF counts in 
the K band are from observations at 1.6 4m, corrected by 0.4 mag 
in mean color to match the brighter K band observations. The 
other symbols show measurements from various ground-based 
surveys. The lines show a no-evolution model with the 
following cosmological parameters: Ho = 65 km s~! Mpc7!, 
Qtot = 1, Qmatter = 0.3 and Qa = 0.7. Galaxies in this model are 
distributed with the brightnesses and colors typical of 
present-day galaxies, and these are held constant with lookback 
time. The deviation of the counts from this model (a factor of ~3 
at faint magnitudes in the B band) indicates the extent to which 
galaxy evolution contributes to the modeling problem. 


Lyman-break galaxies 

The most robust feature in the spectra of star-forming 
galaxies is the Lyman break. This opacity edge is produced 
when hydrogen atoms in the ground state are ionized by 
photons of energy greater than 13.6 eV (corresponding 
to wavelengths shorter than 912 A). Photons with 
wavelengths slightly shorter than this are absorbed by 
hydrogen in stellar atmospheres, the interstellar medium 
of a galaxy and the intergalactic medium. In addition, 
as the light travels through the intergalactic medium it is 
partially absorbed by the Lyman-series lines of hydrogen 
at rest-frame wavelengths between 912 and 1216 A. The 
combined effect produces a discontinuity in the spectra of 
high-redshift galaxies that is easy to detect. Figure 2 shows 
an example. 

The four filters of the HDF offered the first 
opportunity with HST to search for Lyman-break galaxies. 
While the exact number of galaxies found depends on the 
color selection criteria, roughly 100 candidate objects were 
found with redshifts likely to be in the range 2.5 < z < 3.5 
and roughly 15 with redshifts likely to be in the range 3.5 < 
z < 4.5. The brightest of these objects were confirmed 
spectroscopically. In addition, several objects were noted 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1.5 T T T T 


Model galaxy at z=3.0 


\ 


unattenuated spectrum 


redshifted Lyman limit 


relative flux 


attenuated spectrum 


HST Filters 


‘450 Vesos Tena 


transmission 


2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 
observed wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. Illustration of the Lyman-break technique for 
identifying high-redshift galaxies. The top figure shows the 
theoretical spectrum of a star-forming galaxy at a redshift z = 3, 
with and without attenuation from intergalactic hydrogen along 
the line of sight. The curves below the theoretical spectra show 
the bandpasses of the HST filters used for the HDF observations. 
The signature of a high-redshift galaxy is that it ‘drops out’ of 
the ultraviolet F300W band (being either undetected or much 
fainter than at the next-longer wavelength). The image below 
shows the brightest of the Lyman-break galaxies identified in the 
HDE-N. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 11. 


with colors consistent with redshifts higher than z = 4.5. 
Spectroscopy at the Keck telescope confirmed one of these 
candidates to be at redshift z = 5.34. 

The Lyman-break galaxies are generally compact, 
with half-light radii 1 kpc < r < 7 kpc. Those that are 
well resolved generally appear morphologically peculiar. 
There are several prominent examples in the HDF of 
Lyman-break galaxies made up of multiple components 
spaced irregularly within a region of less than 2 arcsecs, 
suggesting that we are witnessing the merging of several 
smaller components into a larger galaxy. 

See HIGH-REDSHIFT GALAXIES for more detail. 


Cosmic star-formation history 

The photometric redshift estimates (including in particular 
those from the Lyman break) can be used to estimate the 
ultraviolet luminosity density of the universe as a function 
of redshift. This is a particularly useful quantity as it is 
closely tied to the history of heavy-element formation: 
the massive stars that emit most of the UV radiation 
detected in the HDF (redshifted to optical wavelengths) 
also produce most of the elements of atomicnumber Z > 6. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Deep Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In the approximation of instantaneous recycling, the metal 
ejection rate can be written as 


pz =v / MDzmG (mM) dm (2) 


where y is the star formation rate per unit co-moving 
volume, ¢(m) is the stellar initial mass function (IMF) 
and pz» is the stellar yield, ie., the fraction of a star 
of mass m that is converted to metals and ejected. At 
short wavelengths, the luminosity density radiated per 
unit frequency during the main-sequence phase of stellar 
evolution is related to the star-formation rate y by 


pat = 0.007¢2yp i mfre(m) f,(m)o(m)dm (3) 


where fie (m) is the mass fraction of hydrogen burned into 
helium and f,(m) is the normalized spectrum of stars of 
mass m on the main sequence. Evolutionary synthesis 
models give the following approximate relation between 
luminosity density at a rest-frame wavelength of 1500 A 
and star-formation rate y in solar masses per year: 


p1s00 = 8.0 x 107” erg s-! Hz~! Mpc. (4) 


Figure 3 shows the star-formation or metal-formation 
rate as a function of redshift as derived from the HDF 
(north and south) and various ground-based surveys. Two 
major uncertainties affect these estimates: the effects of 
dust and the amount of light coming from galaxies too 
faint to be detected individually. Dust in star-forming 
galaxies absorbs ultraviolet light and reradiates it at 
longer wavelengths. The attempt to quantify the amount 
of dust-enshrouded starlight motivated studies of the 
HDF with the Infrared Space Observatory and with the 
SCUBA submillimeter bolometer array on the James Clerk 
Maxwell Telescope. These observations, together with 
measurements of the spectral-energy distributions and 
optical emission-line strengths for Lyman-break galaxies, 
suggest that the star-formation rates derived purely from 
the UV luminosities should be corrected upwards by a 
factor of 3-10. 


Background measurements 

To derive the luminosity density, the counts of galaxies 
in a particular redshift interval are extrapolated to 
magnitudes below the detection limit of the images. This 
extrapolation can be tested by measuring the background 
light between the detected galaxies. Measuring the 
extragalactic component of this background light is 
difficult because it is only small percentage of the zodiacal 
background. Estimates of the fraction of the total 
extragalactic background accounted for by the detected 
galaxies range from 30% to 90%. An analysis of the 
autocorrelation of the residual fluctuations in the HDF 
image suggests that the total extragalactic background at 
2 = 8100 A lies in the range 7.8 x 10-° ergs"! cm™ sr“! < 
vl, < 1.2x10- erg s-! cm™ sr7!, while the analysis of the 
total flux left after subtracting galaxies and zodiacal light 
gives somewhat higher values. See also EXTRAGALACTIC 
BACKGROUND LIGHT. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Lookback Time (Gyr) 


24 6 8 10 12 
0 ftTT—T 7 
a L 4 
Q L J 
= L 4 
5 70.5 - 4 
o L | 
5 E J 
oO 
~ Le —A—_ 4 a 
o 1p , aT ——— aa 
a L if J 
9 L J 
a [ — a 
e=ioh a 
S [ ] 
ee 
ad L J 
ew 9b 
GH ta | 
or 5 J 
Ke) L 4 
ee Mle) cD sD | 
0) 1 2 3 4 5 
Redshift 


Figure 3. The star-formation rate per unit volume versus 
redshift (bottom axis) or lookback time (top axis). The assumed 
cosmology has Ho = 50 kms~! Mpc7! and Qy = 1. The points 
are derived from the total integrated UV fluxes of galaxies 
measured in various surveys, including the HDF-N (open 
triangles) and the HDF-S (solid triangles). A simple correction 
for dust extinction has been applied to the data, but there are 
large uncertainties in this correction. 


Galaxy clustering 

The combination of deep photometry and photometric 
redshifts makes the HDF images a useful tool for studying 
the evolution of clustering in the universe (see GALAXY 
CLUSTERS). However, these studies are limited by the small 
field size, which subtends no more than about 2 Mpc at 
any redshift. Nevertheless, the analyses of galaxies in 
different redshift bins suggests that the amplitude A,, of 
the angular correlation function decreases with redshift 
out to z = 1 and then rises again to higher redshift. A 
plausible explanation is that the galaxies at higher redshift 
trace higher peaks in the underlying density field and are 
hence biased relative to the underlying mass distribution. 
Another possible contribution to the stronger clustering at 
high redshift is the tendency for high-redshift galaxies to 
have multiple components, suggesting that in many cases 
the structures are part of the same underlying galaxy. 


Bibliography 
The HDF observations are described by 
Williams R E et al 1996 Astron. J. 112 1335 


The use of Lyman-break galaxies to estimate the star- 
formation rate as a function of redshift was first presented 


by 
Madau et al 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 283 1388 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Deep Fields ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A useful summary of the various areas of research using 
the HDF images can be found in 


Livio M, Fall SM and Madau P (ed) 1998 The Hubble Deep 
Field (Cambridge: Cambridge Univeristy Press) 


Henry C Ferguson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Hubble Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble Diagram 


Initially introduced as a way to demonstrate the expansion 
of the universe, and subsequently to determine the 
expansion rate (the HUBBLE CONSTANT Ho), the Hubble 
diagram is one of the classical cosmological tests. It is a 
plot of apparent fluxes (usually expressed as magnitudes) 
of some types of objects at cosmological distances, against 
their REDSHIFTS. It is used as a tool to measure the global 
geometry of the universe, and as a probe of galactic 
evolution. 

As in most other cosmological tests, the observables 
used in this diagram are really proxies for the expansion 
factor of the universe (measured as the cosmological 
redshift) and some independently determined proper 
distance to the objects used in the test. The observed 
trend of distance-related quantities (e.g. apparent fluxes, 
angular diameters, etc) against the redshift can thus, at 
least in principle, be mapped to the expansion history 
of the universe, which in turn uniquely determines the 
COSMOLOGICAL MODEL. The slope of the trend at low redshifts 
determines the present normalized expansion rate, i.e. the 
Hubble constant. The shape of the trend at large redshifts 
determines the global geometry of the universe. 

In the case of the Hubble diagram, a relativistic 
version of the inverse square law is used to determine the 
relative distances to the light sources used. Simply put, the 
more distant objects of a fixed intrinsic brightness should 
be fainter, by a factor determined exactly by the geometry 
of space. Redshifts are measured spectroscopically, and 
do not depend on the complicating factors which may 
affect the distance measurements, such as the evolution of 
sources used, sample selection effects, etc. The distances 
are much more difficult to determine, and this is where 
most of the practical problems lie. 

The objects used as the test particles in a Hubble 
diagram are often called ‘standard candles’, thus 
expressing the hope of their constancy in time and 
at different locations. Yet this is hardly ever the 
case, and much of the effort involved goes into their 
standardization—removal of the various second-order 
parameters which cause the scatter around the ostensible 
universal mean luminosity of a given type of object. 

Hubble (1929) used this diagram to demonstrate the 
expansion of the universe: fainter and thus on average 
more distant galaxies were receding from us with larger 
apparent speeds. Once the universal expansion was 
generally established, the test acquired other cosmological 
uses. There are two regimes in which the Hubble diagram 
is used today, each with its own goals, methods and 
problems. 

In the low-redshift regime, the Hubble diagram is 
used in determinations of the Hubble constant. The local 
geometry is very close to being Euclidean, and thus the 
effects of the global curvature can be safely ignored. The 
look-back times to the objects used are small enough so 
that evolutionary effects can also be neglected. The local 
universal expansion is practically linear, producing the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


well-known HUBBLE’S LAW: cz = Hy D, where c is the speed 
of light in a vacuum, z is the observed redshift (assuming 
that the peculiar velocity of the object is negligible), Ho 
is the Hubble constant and D is the proper distance. 
Since distances are not directly measurable, even for the 
nearest galaxies, a proxy quantity is used; in the case of 
the Hubble diagram, this is often the magnitude of an 
object of given class, e.g. a Cepheid variable (or, more 
accurately, the intercept of the CEPHEID PERIOD-LUMINOSITY 
RELATION), a SUPERNOVA at its peak brightness, etc. If one 
knows the actual absolute luminosities of the objects used 
in the test, obtained from some independent calibration 
procedure, then the slope of the observed relation gives 
directly the local normalized expansion rate, the Hubble 
constant Hp. The difficulties in establishing the absolute 
brightness scale of the objects used for such purposes, and 
other problems involved in the measurements of Ho, are 
beyond the scope of this article. 

In the more distant universe, the global geometry 
comes into play, causing the trend to deviate from 
linearity. The shape of the relation becomes a probe of 
the cosmological parameters; for the standard Friedmann-— 
Lemaitre models, these are the density parameter Qo and 
the cosmological constant Ay. (We note in passing that 
for many years the value of the COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT 
was declared to be zero on purely ideological grounds, 
and only a single parameter, 829, was used to characterize 
the global geometry, or equivalently, the deceleration 
parameter qo.) Since the shape of the trend does 
not depend on the absolute value of the luminosities, 
the normalization and the Hubble constant factor out. 
The curvature of the trend reflects directly the global 
kinematics of the universe as observed over cosmological 
time-scales for true ‘standard candles’. 

Consider the effect of an increase in the mean density: 
it causes the expansion to slow down more, and thus the 
objects at a given redshift are closer and appear brighter. 
The same effect is accomplished by the negative values of 
the cosmological constant (which correspond to a positive 
energy density), and the opposite effect by the positive 
values of this parameter, which then acts as a repulsive 
force, accelerating the expansion. These effects become 
detectable only over very large look-back times, i.e. at 
relatively high redshifts, requiring the use of objects bright 
enough to be detected at such large cosmological distances. 
Moreover, there is a considerable parameter coupling 
between Qo and Ag, as they can have qualitatively similar 
effects. A large baseline in redshift is also necessary 
in order to separate their contributions, since they may 
dominate the changes in the expansion rate at different 
epochs. 

For a source with an intrinsic luminosity L, at a 
cosmological redshift z, the observed flux is: 


L L 


F= = 
4nD?(1+z)? 4 D3 


where D is the proper distance and z is the source 
redshift. The quantity D, = D(1 + z) is called the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


luminosity distance. The formula differs from the classical 
inverse square law by the two powers of the expansion 
factor, (1 + z): one is due to the energy loss of photons 
as their wavelengths are redshifted, and one is due 
to the relativistic time dilation in the photon emission 
rate, since the source is moving away from us. In the 
simple Friedmann cosmological models, with a vanishing 
cosmological constant, Ay = 0, the proper distance is given 
by the following formulae: 


c z(1+z/2) 
A 1 +Z 


D= for Qo = 0 


2c 

pe = (1-1/v1+2) for 29 = 1 
0 

D= 2c 2— Qo + zQo — (2 — Qo) V1 + ZQH 


5 otherwise 
Hp O2(1 +z) 


where c is the speed of light in a vacuum, Hp is the Hubble 
constant and Qj is the density parameter of the universe, 
the ratio of the mean density to the critical density at the 
present epoch. 

HUBBLE’S pioneering vision of determining the global 
geometry through this and other tests was frustrated by 
the technology available to him at the time, by not being 
able to reach out to sufficiently large redshifts where 
the cosmological effects may be detectable. His quest 
was then carried out over many years by 4 SANDAGE and 
collaborators, as well as many others; for a fascinating 
historical account, see, e.g., Sandage (1995). Typically, 
magnitudes of the brightest cluster ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES 
were used as the standard candles, and the quest was 
on for finding the ever more distant ones. At low 
redshifts, suitably defined magnitudes of these objects 
show an intrinsic scatter of only about 30%, which was 
considered constant enough. Unfortunately, no conclusive 
cosmological results were achieved in these studies despite 
much effort and observing time spent, in part because they 
did not reach out to sufficiently large redshifts. 

Quasars, discovered in 1963, provided luminous 
probes of even larger redshifts, but had too much 
of a spread in intrinsic luminosities and too much 
variability to be viable for this purpose. Other candidate 
standard candles tried at cosmological distances include 
supernovae, the characteristic luminosity (L,.) of the 
galactic luminosity function in distant clusters, etc. 

The observed apparent magnitude of a source is given 
by 

Mops = M +5 —5log D; + K + Ame 


where M is the absolute magnitude of the source, which 
may be affected by evolution effects, and D, is the 
luminosity distance defined above. K is the so-called 
K correction, which accounts for the difference in the 
detector bandpass in the observer’s frame and in the 
source restframe. It is given by the ratio of the fluxes of 
the source, with its spectrum integrated over the observed 
bandpass and its redshifted counterpart, and expressed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


22 nie ee a 


‘ /* 
20 Aa e le 
20 ee. cow 
a ee 4 Mh! !/ 4 
L L At J e 2% J 
a“ oy ae | 
el ae" 
18 . a ‘ 
aa ’ e 
L om J 
2 1g LI | 
Qa 
= 16 - @ 2 . 7 
oO 
< 4 


3C sample a 
6C sample e 


NIRC HzRG 


Gyr burst @ z,=20 —H 


0.1 Gyr burst @ z,=20. --.------- 


Redshift z 


Figure 1. The infrared Hubble diagram (in the K band, 2.2 um 
effective observed wavelength) for a set of powerful radio 
galaxies, reaching out to z = 5.19 (indicated with the large 
triangle). The insert is a zoom-in on the high-z portion of the 
diagram. Two galactic evolution models are shown, both 
corresponding to a single burst of star formation starting at 

z = 20, and assuming a cosmology with Ho = 65 km s~! Mpc?. 
Qo = 0.3 and Ap = 0. The diagram shows a remarkably small 
scatter at any redshift, even though every relevant effect we 
know of would increase the scatter: the variations in star 
formation histories and formation redshifts, in the contributions 
from active nuclei, in extinction, line emission, merging rates, 
etc. While no one is yet brave enough to try to use this diagram 
to measure the cosmological parameters, the small observed 
scatter presents a challenge for theoretical models of powerful 
radio galaxies and their evolution. (Reprinted with permission 
from van Breugel W et al 1999 Astrophys. J. Lett. 518 L61 © The 
American Astronomical Society.) 


in the magnitude form. This of course requires the 
knowledge of the source’s spectrum at z = 0; any possible 
evolutionary effects are not included. Am,, is an empirical 
correction used to standardize the candle, i.e., remove 
statistically some other observable effects which may be 
correlated with M. In the case of the brightest cluster 
ellipticals, such corrections include subtle dependences 
on the cluster richness and morphology; in the case of 
supernovae, shapes of their light curves are used to derive 
such corrections. 

As in the case of most other cosmological tests, the 
use of the Hubble diagram as a probe of the global 
geometry was severely undermined by the inevitable 
cosmic evolution of whatever objects are used as the test 
particles. The light from galaxies comes from their STELLAR 
POPULATIONS, which must evolve in time, in brightness and 
in color. By the late 1970s it became clear that the effects 
of galactic evolution will dominate over the cosmological 
effects for any type of galaxy at sufficiently large redshifts. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(QyQ.j)=(0, 1) 


re L 
= 20+ 
me L 
> 

5 [ 
2 18- 
ny L 

-# Calan/Tololo 

16 = (Hamuy et al, 

A.J. 1996) 


(0.5.0.5) (0,0) 
aoe (1. 0) (9) 
1 (LS0.5) (2, 0) 

~ o 

Ss i 

a < 


mag residual 


i—| 
2 
S 
g 
3 
as) 
a 
a=] 
3 
0.0 0.2 0.4 
redshift Z 


0.6 


Figure 2. An example of a Hubble diagram for type Ia supernovae, with peak magnitudes corrected using the light curve shapes. 
Several cosmological models are drawn through the points, with the corresponding values of the parameters Qo and Ag as indicated. 
The best fit to these data indicates a low-density universe with a positive cosmological constant. The top panel shows the diagram 
itself. The bottom panel shows the residuals from the best-fit model, and the bottom panel shows the photometric deviations from the 
model in units of the standard deviations. (Reprinted with permission from Perlmutter S et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 517 565 © The 


American Astronomical Society.) 


This is especially true at the observed visual wavelengths, 
which correspond to the ultraviolet light restframe, which 
may be dominated by a few luminous, young and short- 
lived stars. Moreover, galactic merging and interactions, 
which must have been more frequent at higher redshifts, 
further complicate the interpretation of observations: 
galaxies may grow in time, and undergo merger-induced 
bursts of star formation (See GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND 
MERGERS). 

The Hubble diagrams thus became a probe of galactic 
evolution, where a set of cosmological parameters was 
often assumed out of necessity in order to measure the rate 
of galactic evolution. More recently, the Hubble diagram 
has made a comeback as a potential cosmological tool, as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


described below. 

Even if the evolutionary effects can be controlled, an 
additional difficulty is the possible (likely?) presence of 
sample selection effects. Typically, brighter representa- 
tives of any class of objects would be found at larger red- 
shifts, as the fainter ones may not make it into a flux- 
limited sample. Such biases are hard to correct, since one 
never knows how many objects are not even detected, let 
alone what is their brightness distribution. Reducing the 
scatter of observed luminosities at a given redshift (i.e. 
using a more standard candle) helps, but some bias is al- 
ways present. Understanding the sample completeness is 
essential. 

In addition, it is sometimes hard to guarantee even 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Diagram 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the homogeneity of the samples, i.e. that the same type 
of objects are being selected both at high redshifts, and 
as their ostensible low-redshift progeny. Additional 
problems include possible effects of GRAVITATIONAL LENSING 
by the intervening masses, and interstellar extinction 
corrections, both in our Galaxy and in the distant galaxies 
used in the test. 

Some hope came with technological advances in 
near-infrared measurements (see INFRARED TELESCOPES). The 
advantages of infrared observations are considerable. 
They probe the restframe wavelengths of normal galaxies 
which are much less affected by a possible flicker of 
massive star formation. The infrared light is typically 
dominated by the relatively stable and slowly changing 
stellar subpopulations such as the red giants. Thus, the 
effects of galactic evolution effects should be minimized. 
Infrared observations are also much less sensitive to 
interstellar extinction. 

One example is the infrared Hubble diagram for 
powerful RADIO GALAXIES at high redshifts (figure 1). The 
advantages of radio galaxies are that they can be identified 
at very large redshifts (as of this writing, at z > 5), 
and that they are generally believed to be progenitors 
of at least some giant ellipticals today. Their chief 
disadvantage is the presence of a powerful active nucleus, 
which may be contaminating the observed brightness and 
affecting the host galaxy in uncertain ways. Perhaps 
the infrared observations of normal, quiescent cluster 
ellipticals (known out to z ~*~ 1.3, as of mid-1999), 
or magnitude intercepts of their fundamental plane 
correlations may be more promising. 

There has been much excitement in recent years 
about the use of distant supernovae as possible ‘standard 
candles’ to measure the global geometry of the universe. 
At their peak, supernovae of type Ia reach an absolute 
magnitude Mg ~ —-19.5, and are thus sufficiently 
luminous to be detected at redshifts approaching unity, 
where the effects of cosmic geometry should be readily 
detectable. Furthermore, the shape of the supernova light 
curve is found to correlate with the peak luminosity, thus 
providing a handy observational way to lower the scatter 
of the peak magnitudes by correcting for this ‘second 
parameter’. Scatter as low as 15% or even less may be 
achieved (this made type Ia supernovae also a viable tool 
in the efforts to measure Hy at low redshifts). Since the 
physics of the supernova explosions should be universal, 
this novel standard candle clearly has a lot of promise as a 
cosmological tool. Note, however, that some evolution 
in the observable properties of supernovae is possible, 
e.g. due to the slowly changing metallicities of the stellar 
populations from which these supernovae originate. 

Using this approach, two groups have recently 
measured the values of the cosmological parameters 
Qo and Ao (figure 2), with mutually consistent results 
(Schmidt et al 1998, Perlmutter et al 1999). Both 
groups found that the best fit to their observations 
is consistent with a zero-curvature universe, preferred 
by the theoretical prejudice of inflation models, but 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with a positive cosmological constant, which was 
something of a surprise. If this result is confirmed by 
future observations and tests, it would be of profound 
cosmological significance. 

It remains to be seen if any other types of luminous 
objects turn out to be good standard candles, or if new 
ways of standardizing the old ones are invented. In any 
case, the Hubble diagrams will remain a useful probe 
of galactic evolution, and possibly even of the global 
geometry of the universe. 


Bibliography 
The first-hand historical account of the initial uses of the 
Hubble Diagrams can be found in 


Hubble E 1929 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci., USA 15 169 


This work was summarized in a much more accessible and 
easier to find book 


Hubble E 1936 The Realm of the Nebulae (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press) (reprinted in 1982) 


An excellent scientific and historical outline of the use of 
the Hubble Diagrams from the early days until about early 
1990s is given in 


Sandage A 1995 The Deep Universe, (Saas-Fee Advanced 
Course 23) (Berlin: Springer) 


Two modern papers describing the use of the Hubble 
diagrams of type Ia supernovae, along with the more 
modern references are 


Perlmutter S et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 517 565 
Schmidt B et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 507 46 


S George Djorgovski 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Law 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble Law 


The relationship that states that the recessional velocities of 
distant galaxies are directly proportional to their distances. 
Itis named after the American astronomer Edwin P Hubble 
(1889-1953) who, in 1929, published his discovery that 
the redshifts in the spectra of galaxies are proportional 
to their distances. This was one of the key discoveries in 
cosmology for it showed that the galaxies are receding and 
the universe as a whole is expanding. 

The relationship between velocity of recession, V, 
and distance D, may be written as V = HoD, where Ho 
is the present-day value of a constant of proportionality 
known as the Hubble constant, or Hubble parameter. The 
law is consistent with a universe undergoing uniform 
expansion whereby each galaxy (or cluster of galaxies) is 
receding from every other one with a speed proportional 
to the separation between them. In such a universe each 
observer, no matter on which galaxy he is located, sees 
all other galaxies receding with speeds proportional to 
their distances, and no one galaxy is the unique center 
of this expansion. The smooth, idealized, recession of the 
galaxies from each other (ignoring local variations caused, 
for example, by the gravitational influence of clusters and 
superclusters of galaxies) in accordance with the Hubble 
law is called the ‘Hubble flow’. 


See also: Doppler effect, Hubble constant, Hubble 
diagram, redshift. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble Space Telescope 


Since its deployment from the Space Shuttle Discovery on 
25 April 1990, the NASA-ESA Hubble Space Telescope 
(HST) has revolutionized observational and theoretical 
astronomy with a stream of remarkable observations and 
beautiful images which have stunned astronomers and 
public alike. Yet, during its first weeks of operation, these 
dramatic successes seemed a world away. 

A number of serious issues came to the fore 
almost immediately. Warping and deformation of the 
observatory’s huge solar arrays occurred each time that 
the HST crossed the day-night terminator. The result was 
a shaking which could not be counteracted by the onboard 
attitude control system. On occasions, the vibration was 
so severe that the satellite lost its lock on the guide stars 
which were expected to provide pointing to an accuracy 
of a fraction of an arcsecond. 

Even worse was the revelation that the initial images 
captured by different instruments revealed a mysterious 
halo of light around the stars. It soon became clear that 
the 2.4 m diameter primary mirror was badly flawed. 
Investigations revealed that the SPHERICAL ABERRATION WaS 
caused by a mirror which had been ground into the wrong 
shape—it was 2 xm too flat near its edge. The result 
was that, while the spatial resolution of around 0.1 arcsec 
was close to specification, the telescope’s sensitivity was 
seriously compromised, since it was only focusing 15% of 
the incoming light. The flaw had not been noticed prior 
to launch because the primary and secondary mirrors had 
never been tested together. 

Instead of inaugurating a new golden era of space 
exploration and discovery, the much-heralded arrival of 
the world’s first large orbital observatory rapidly turned 
into a public relations fiasco as the myopic telescope and 
NASA management in general came under heavy criticism. 

The immediate answer was to remove the ‘fogging’ 
by means of computer processing. However, in the long 
term, the only solution was to compensate for the faulty 
optics by installation of a corrective optics space telescope 
axial replacement (COSTAR) system. This comprised ten 
coin-sized, adjustable mirrors which were to be inserted 
into the optical train of three of HST’s instruments in order 
to improve their focusing capability. 

The COSTAR was eventually installed during the first 
servicing mission (SM-1) in December 1993. With the 
HST captured by the remote manipulator arm and located 
upright in the Shuttle’s payload bay, the astronauts spent 
354 hours of extravehicular activity fitting the COSTAR, 
replacing the warped solar arrays and installing a modified 
Wide-Field Planetary Camera. 

On 13 January 1994, NASA triumphantly released the 
first images from the revamped observatory, including 
a view which showed the central regions of spiral 
galaxy M100 in unprecedented detail. Senator Barbara 
Mikulski proudly announced, ‘I am delighted to be able 
to announce today, after the launch in 1990 and the early 
disappointments, the trouble with Hubble is over!’ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The telescope 

The EDWIN P HUBBLE Space Telescope is named in honour 
of the American astronomer who made two major 
breakthroughs in cosmology during the 1920s. By 
measuring the distance to the Andromeda galaxy, he 
became the first person to establish that spiral and elliptical 
galaxies existed far beyond our own Galaxy. Then, in 1929, 
he analysed the spectra of galaxies and found a linear 
relationship between their distances and their REDSHIFTS 
which suggested that they were all moving away from us, 
with the furthest galaxies receding at the fastest rate. 

The HST was intended to extend astronomical 
knowledge of the universe by observing from an altitude of 
about 600 km (375 miles) above the turbulent atmosphere. 
The idea for such a space telescope was first proposed in 
1946 by American astronomer Lyman Spitzer, and was 
later revived in the 1970s as the Large Space Telescope 
project. The fate of the project was closely tied to the 
development of NASA’s reusable Space Shuttle, the only 
launch vehicle which could place the giant telescope 
into low-Earth orbit and deliver astronauts for regular 
servicing missions. 

Although it began as a NASA project, the EUROPEAN 
SPACE AGENCY was also keen to participate. This resulted in 
a memorandum of understanding in 1977 which provided 
ESA with approximately 15% of the available observing 
time in return for providing the Faint Object Camera 
and a pair of solar arrays. This, in turn, resulted in 
positions for ESA scientists being established at the space 
TELESCOPE SCIENCE INSTITUTE in Baltimore and the creation 
of the SPACE TELESCOPE EUROPEAN COORDINATING FACILITY in 
Garching, Germany. 

At the time of its launch, the HST was the largest 
optical telescope ever placed into orbit. The observatory 
weighs approximately 11.5 tonnes, and its main body is 
13.3 m (43.5 ft) long and 4.3 m (14 ft) in diameter. Two 
12 m (40 ft) long solar panels attached on either side of the 
observatory provide a maximum power output of 4.4 kW. 
A large aperture door is closed to protect the telescope 
during servicing missions. 

The HST has a Ritchey—Chrétien design, which uses a 
2.4 m (94 in) primary mirror made of ultra-low-expansion 
glass coated with a thin film of aluminum. The mirror 
collects radiation across the range of wavelengths from 
ultraviolet to near-infrared. Light is reflected from the 
primary mirror to a 33 cm (13 in) secondary located 4.6 m 
(15 ft) in front of it. This reflects the light back through a 
66 cm (26 in) hole in the primary mirror to the scientific 
instruments behind it in the aft shroud section. 

The observatory was one of the first satellites to be 
designed with in-orbit maintenance in mind. In order 
to aid astronauts during extravenicular activity, the HST 
has 68 m (225 ft) of handrails and 31 foot restraints on 
its surface. It also contains 70 orbital replacement units— 
parts which are designed to be replaced in space. 

Apart from providing the option to upgrade the 
scientific instruments and hardware such as the computer, 
data recorder or attitude control systems, this also allowed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


for replacement of the two giant solar arrays which charge 
the HST’s batteries when they are in sunlight. This 
provided a scientific bonus when one of the first set of 
arrays was brought back to Earth for analysis after 35 
years in orbit. Subsequent studies of thousands of impact 
craters on the surface of the array revealed that those with 
diameters in the range 100-1000 wm were predominantly 
micrometeoroid in origin, while craters below 100 ~m in 
size were mainly created by space debris. 

The HST was originally equipped with five instru- 
ments: two cameras, two spectrographs and a photome- 
ter. 


@ The Wide Field and Planetary Camera, developed by the 
California Institute of Technology and the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. 


@ The European Space Agency’s Faint Object Camera. 


e@ The Goddard High-Resolution Spectrograph for ultravi- 
olet observations, developed at NASA’s Goddard Space 
Flight Center. 


e The Faint Object Spectrograph, developed at the 
University of California, San Diego. 


e@ The High Speed Photometer, developed at the Univer- 
sity of Wisconsin. 


Over the years, this complement of instruments has 
been modified due to the initial flawed optics, changing 
observational requirements and development of improved 
technology. The High Speed Photometer was replaced 
during the December 1993 servicing mission in order 
to make room for the COSTAR. At the same time, the 
Wide Field and Planetary Camera was also replaced by 
a version with modified optics (WFPC-2) to offset the 
HST’s spherical abberation. In its wide field mode, this 
instrument can image an area up to 2.6 arc minutes across, 
while in its planetary mode, although the field of view 
is reduced to 1.1 arc minutes, the spatial resolution is 
improved to 0.04 arcsec. 

In February 1997, during a second servicing mission, 
the Goddard High-Resolution Spectrograph and the Faint 
Object Spectrograph were replaced by the Space Telescope 
Imaging Spectrograph, which is designed to take spectra 
over a wider wavelength range (1050-11000 A) than 
the previous instruments combined. In addition, the 
Near-Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer 
(NICMOS), gave the observatory the capability of 
observing in the near-infrared (0.8—2.5 m) spectral region. 

Unfortunately, a higher than expected rate of 
evaporation by the solid nitrogen coolant in NICMOS 
resulted in a reduced lifetime for the instrument. Its 
cameras were switched off after the instrument reached 
cryogen exhaustion on 3 January 1999. However, the 
science capabilities of NICMOS are expected to be fully 
restored after a closed-loop cooling system is installed 
during the fourth servicing mission (3B) in the summer 
of 2001. 

The next generation of HST instruments includes the 
Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), which will replace 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Faint Object Camera. The ACS, which is due to be 
installed during servicing mission 3B, will operate in three 
different modes. Although it can be used as a wide field 
camera, in its high resolution mode it will have ten times 
the spatial resolution of the WFPC: —2. A third mode, the 
Solar Blind Camera, will be able to take high-resolution 
ultraviolet images. 

Since all of the scientific instruments will then 
incorporate their own internal correcting optical system, 
the redundant COSTAR system will be removed during a 
fifth servicing mission, around 2004. At the same time, 
the HST will receive two more instruments—the Wide 
Field Camera 3, which reuses parts of the original WFPC, 
and the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph, which will greatly 
expand the ultraviolet spectroscopic capability of the HST, 
especially in the far-UV. 


Control and communication 

Since the telescope is in such demand, and maneuvring 
in space from one target to another is both difficult 
and time-consuming, detailed long-term planning is 
essential. Computer programmers are employed to write 
the second-by-second instructions that point the telescope, 
keep it on target and command the scientific instruments. 

Programmed pointing instructions are made more 
complicated by the fact that the observatory follows a 
circular orbit inclined at 28.5 degrees to the equator. 
Although its orbital period is approximately 95 minutes, 
the observatory’s motion around the planet means that 
a particular target above the equator will be occulted 
by the Earth for up to 45 minutes. The onboard 
computer overcomes this handicap by instructing the HST 
to reacquire its target as the OCCULTATION ends. In this way, 
multiple exposures lasting many hours can be obtained. 
This problem does not arise for objects above the polar 
regions, since they are never hidden behind the planet. 

The HST uses a number of systems for attitude control 
and accurate pointing. It has three rate sensor units, each 
containing two gyroscopes. Frequent failures of these 
gyros have caused a few headaches for mission controllers, 
particularly in November 1999, when the observatory 
went into an automatic safe mode and had to be shut down 
for two months after four of its gyros stopped functioning. 
The HST needs at least three operational gyros for accurate 
alignment of the instruments on its astronomical targets. 

The HST also carries four reaction wheels, which 
move the telescope from one target to another. These only 
allow the telescope to slew very slowly across the sky— 
about 90 degrees every 18 minutes. Three fixed head star 
trackers refine the telescope’s position by commanding the 
reaction wheels to make minor adjustments. At all times, 
the HST must be orientated away from the Sun so that its 
sensitive optics are not damaged. 

Once in position, the observatory’s set of fine 
guidance sensors are used to pinpoint the particular target 
by fixing on pairs of guide stars in the telescope’s field of 
view. After locking on to the guide stars, these sensors are 
able to aim the telescope with an accuracy of 0.01 arcsec 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


for up to 24 hours. The Fine Guidance Sensors also 
have a secondary scientific role since they can be used for 
astrometry, measuring star positions to within 0.005 arcsec 
(See ASTROMETRY WITH HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE). The Guide Star 
Catalog used by the HST to lock onto celestial targets 
includes the precise locations of 15 million stars down to 
magnitude 14.5. 

Instructions from the control centre at Goddard Space 
Flight Center are relayed to the HST via one of NASA's 
Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS). The HST 
receives the data by means of two high-gain antennae, 
which usually receive programmed instructions from the 
Earth three times a day. 

Until December 1999, scientific data were recorded 
on a mechanical reel-to-reel data recorder until it could 
be downloaded to the ground, but this was replaced by 
a solid state digital version during servicing mission 3A. 
The observational data are eventually transmitted back to 
a ground station at White Sands, New Mexico, viaa TDRS. 
From there, the data are sent by satellite relay to Goddard 
Space Flight Center. After checking that the data have not 
been lost or corrupted, controllers at Goddard pass them 
on to the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore 
where they are stored and processed for scientific analysis. 

Responsibility for conducting and coordinating the 
science operations of the HST rests with the Space 
Telescope Science Institute, which is operated for NASA 
by the ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH IN ASTRONOMY, 
Inc. (AURA). 


A revolution in astronomy 

Apart from a brief hiatus from November 1999 to January 
2000, when the telescope went into safe mode after the 
failure of a fourth gyro, the HST has been sending back a 
stream of data almost continuously for over a decade. 

During this period, the observatory has led to an 
unprecedented series of discoveries that have invigorated 
all areas of astronomical research. The HST has helped 
confirm some astronomical theories, challenged others, 
and, more often than not, come up with complete surprises 
which leave theorists scrambling for answers. 

Apart from the Sun and Earth, only Mercury is 
inaccessible to the HST’s gaze—the planet is always so 
close to the Sun in the sky that it would be far too risky to 
point the telescope’s sensitive optics in its direction. Many 
thousands of celestial objects have been studied with the 
orbiting observatory since its inauguration. 

In the solar system, the HST has observed seven 
of the nine planets and many of their larger satellites, 
searched for Kuiper Belt objects, studied comets such 
as Hyakutake and Hale-Bopp, and imaged numerous 
asteroids. Major advances include the first maps of 
Pluto, its moon Charon and the large asteroid Vesta, 
and detailed views of the fragmented Comet Shoemaker-— 
Levy 9 as it collided with Jupiter. Regular monitoring 
of atmospheric phenomena has revealed cyclonic systems 
and dust storms on Mars, and chaotic changes on the outer 
gas giants, including ultraviolet aurorae on Jupiter and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Saturn, equatorial storms on Saturn and a transient Great 
Dark Spot on Neptune. 

Within the Milky Way, the HST has unveiled a 
wondrous menagerie of intricate planetary nebulae; found 
evidence for brown dwarfs and solitary black holes; 
studied the changing environment around supernova 
1987A as its encircling rings of glowing gas expand 
outwards and interact; discovered circumstellar disks in 
which planets may be forming; probed the inner reaches 
of star forming regions such as the Orion Nebula; found 
stars incubating inside tall pillars of gas and dust which 
are being eroded by the radiation from nearby hot stars; 
and investigated ancient globular clusters. 

Nearby galaxies have also come under the HST’s 
scrutiny. In the Andromeda galaxy and the ultraluminous 
infrared galaxy Arp 220, it revealed not one, but two, 
luminous core regions. Evidence for massive black holes 
has been found in the cores of many galaxies, and jets 
of material have been imaged spewing away from these 
central power sources. The most massive black hole so 
far detected, located in the core of elliptical galaxy M87, 
appears to be equivalent to 3 billion solar masses. 

By means of extremely long exposures of the same 
regions of sky, the observatory has been able to obtain the 
deepest views yet of the distant universe, looking back 
more than 90% of the age of the universe, to the era when 
galaxies were first being formed. The first groundbreaking 
HUBBLE DEEP FIELD image of the northern hemisphere was 
assembled from 342 separate exposures by the WFPC-2 
over 10 consecutive days in December 1995. Asimilar deep 
field view was obtained for the southern hemisphere in 
October 1998. Both images contained about 2500 galaxies 
with apparent brightness down to thirtieth magnitude. A 
subsequent ‘long exposure’ infrared image of a portion of 
the deep field—north, taken with NICMOS, uncovered the 
faintest galaxies ever seen. 

Images such as these have provided astronomers 
with the first clear optical views of the host galaxies in 
which quasars are embedded. By studying the highly 
variable shapes and sizes of galaxies in the early universe, 
new theories have evolved concerning the frequency of 
collisions and the evolution of spiral and elliptical galaxies. 
However, while galaxies started to form quite soon after 
the Big Bang, studies with the HST support the idea that 
star formation only reached a peak much later, some 7 
billion years ago. 

Apart from the deep field images, astronomers have 
also been able to use the HST to probe the distant universe 
by means of gravitational lenses. Other cosmic puzzles, 
such as the origin of gamma-ray bursts, the age of the 
universe and value of the Hubble constant, have also been 
attacked using the space telescope. 

By monitoring the visible afterglow of gamma-ray 
explosions, astronomers have been able to confirm that 
at least some of these events occur at cosmic distances, far 
beyond our Milky Way. Studies of Cepheid variable stars 
in galaxies up to 65 million light years away have pinned 
down the Hubble constant to 70 km s~' Mpc“, with an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble Space Telescope ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


uncertainty of 10%. Based on these results, astronomers 
have calculated that the Universe was born about 12 billion 
years ago. 

Discoveries such as these should keep on coming. 
Although the HST was originally intended to have an 
operational lifetime of 15 years, after the successful 
servicing mission 3A, the telescope’s life expectancy has 
been extended until at least 2010, by which time the Next 
Generation Space Telescope may be in orbit. 


Peter Bond 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Hubble Space Telescope: Technical Specifications 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble Space Telescope: Technical 
Specifications 


The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) (figure 1) is a cooper- 
ative project between the US National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) and the European Space 
Agency (ESA). Designed to cover the wavelengths 
between approximately 0.1 and 3um, from the near- 
ultraviolet through the visible to the near-infrared 
portions of the spectrum, it was launched on 25 April 
1990, the first of NASA’s ‘Great Observatories’. It is 
operated as a general-purpose observatory capable of 
observing almost all celestial objects from the solar sys- 
tem to the distant universe. Access to the observing time 
is granted using peer review of proposals solicited com- 
petitively on a yearly basis without restriction on who 
can apply. 

HST contains an f/24 Ritchey—Chretien reflecting 
telescope with a 2.4 m diameter primary mirror and five 
astronomical instruments that are designed to be 
replaced in orbit. The entire spacecraft has a cylindrical 
shape, 13.1 m long and 4.3 m in diameter at its widest 
point, not including the solar arrays, and has a mass of 
11.6 t. 

HST’s instruments are modules that reside in sepa- 
rate compartments at the telescope focal plane (figure 2). 
The radial instrument is perpendicular to the optical axis 
with a pick-off mirror on the optical axis. The axial 
instruments are in four bays surrounding the optical axis. 
There are three additional sectors outside the optical 


Reaction Wheel Assemblies: =a 


Fine Guidance 
Sercrs (3) a 


Aft Shroud = 


Axial Instruments” 
(POC, NICMOS, COSTAR, STIS} 
Radial Instrument (WFP o2|— 


Telescope 
Posirsteregy 
Syaiem 


Li 
engsT? 
Uy, pe Ws, 
wa WA 
NAHAS 
BS: aS O) roc 
o FOCI 
We 
Ww 
-————_] 


Figure 2. The different shapes show where the different instru- 
ments observe the sky relative to one another in the focal plane 
of the telescope. The three FGSs can observe over three-quarters 
of a ring surrounding the optic axis. Because the other instru- 
ments sample different parts of the focal plane, several instru- 
ments can be used simultaneously for parallel observing. The 
bar at the bottom of the figure is 10minutes of arc in length. 


axis that contain the fine guidance sensors (FGSs), 
which are used to point and stabilize the telescope by 
measuring the precise positions of field stars. The high 
accuracy of the FGSs for measurement of relative 


a. ——High Gain Antenna 


Secomiary 
_ Mirror __ Aparture Doar 
Primary | wail = 


[Mier | see 7 — Light Shield 


ca Telescope Campartment 


— Solar Array na 


We WA 


Figure 1. This schematic diagram of HST shows the key elements of the spacecraft. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Hubble Space Telescope: Technical Specifications 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


positions of stars allows them to be used as a sixth 
instrument for astrometry. 

HST is in a circular orbit approximately 600 km 
above the Earth, at an inclination of 28.5° relative to the 
Earth’s equator. It has an orbital period of 96.4 min. Its 
low orbit makes it accessible to visits by astronauts in ser - 
vicing missions. During a servicing mission, the astro- 
nauts can replace the instruments, upgrade spacecraft 
components such as computers, repair faulty hardware 
and electronics, and boost the telescope to a higher orbit 
to offset its rate of descent of 0.4 km/yr. There have been 
servicing missions in 1993, 1997 and 1999, and two more 
are planned for 2002 and 2004. 

The current complement of instruments in addition 
to the fine guidance sensors includes the Wide Field and 
Planetary Camera 2 (WFPC2, radial), the Space Telescope 
Imaging Spectrometer (STIS, axial), the Faint Object 
Camera (FOC, axial), and the Near Infrared Camera and 
Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS, axial). The fourth 
axial instrument bay contains the Corrective Optics for 
Space Telescope Axial Replacement (COSTAR), a set of 
optics that correct aberrations of the primary mirror for 
the FOC. NICMOS stopped functioning in 1998 follow- 
ing the exhaustion of its solid nitrogen cryogen used to 
cool the detector and optics. In the servicing mission 
planned for 2002, the FOC will be replaced by the 
Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS, axial), and the 
NICMOS Cooling System (NCS), a mechanical cooler, 
will be installed to restore functioning of the NICMOS. In 
the 2004 mission, the WFPC2 will be replaced by the 
Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3, radial), and the COSTAR 
will be replaced by the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph 
(COS, axial). 

HST was launched with a primary mirror figured to 
the wrong focal length, so the images in the initial instru- 
ments were severely degraded by spherical aberration. 
The original solar panels providing power for the space- 
craft vibrated at day or night entry, making it difficult to 
maintain accurate pointing for precise observations at 
those times. The first servicing mission replaced the main 
axial instrument, the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 
(WFPC), with WFPC2, an improved version fitted with 
optics to correct the spherical aberration of the primary 
mirror. COSTAR replaced one of the original radial 
instruments, the High Speed Photometer, and corrected 
the images for the other radial instruments. The correc- 
tions restored HST to its full imaging capability, with 
image quality limited only by diffraction from the pri- 
mary mirror. A new set of solar panels eliminated the 
vibrations that kept HST from maintaining its pointing 
accuracy. 

HST maintains pointing stabilization to better than 7 
milliseconds of arc and absolute pointing better than 1 
second of arc. It uses an elaborate system for attitude 
control to achieve this accuracy. Six gyroscopes provide 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


an inertial frame of reference that allows HST to make an 
initial pointing accurate to a few tens of seconds of arc. 
Subsequently the fine guidance sensors lock onto stars 
and provide very precise pointing information to the 
control system to stabilize the spacecraft to its highest 
accuracy. Reaction wheels change the orientation of the 
spacecraft in space in response to commands from the 
attitude control system. HST also contains magnetome- 
ters that sense the direction of the Earth’s magnetic field; 
they can be used to orient the spacecraft very crudely to 
keep it pointed away from the Sun in case the gyroscopes 
fail. 

Following the correction of the optics during the 
1993 servicing mission, HST enjoyed success as NASA 
and ESA’s most important mission measured by scientif- 
ic and public impact. It has made discoveries in almost 
every field of astrophysics from the nearest to the most 
distant celestial objects. Free from the distorting effects of 
the Earth’s atmosphere, HST yields images of unrivalled 
resolution and clarity, many of which have become pub- 
lic icons. 

To learn more details 
http://www:stsci.edu/hst/. 


about HST, visit 


Steven Beckwith 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Hubble, Edwin Powell (1889-1953) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble, Edwin Powell (1889-1953) 


Astronomer, born in Marshfield, MO, trained as a lawyer, 
with a Rhodes scholarship to Oxford University. Switched 
to astronomy at the University of Chicago, and became 
a staff astronomer at Mount Wilson Observatory where 
he had access to the best telescope in the world at that 
time—the 100 in telescope. Hubble was regarded as an 
aloof scientist, and, by contrast say to FRED HOYLE, did not 
speculate about the meaning of his discoveries, about the 
evolution of the universe or its origin in a ‘creation event’. 
In fact he could be regarded as unimaginative, his work 
being characterized by a gathering of information from 
which he drew conclusions, as Francis Bacon would have 
done. Perhaps for this very reason the four discoveries 
that he made between 1922 and 1936 not only changed 
our view of the universe, but also endured. In the 
first part of this period, he proposed a classification 
system for nebulae, both what we would now describe 
as galactic and extragalactic nebulae. He recognized both 
emission nebulae (shining by their intrinsic emission) and 
reflection nebulae (redirecting the light of an associated 
star). He divided extragalactic nebulae into the now- 
standard classification system of Hubble galaxy types— 
elliptical, spiral and irregular galaxies arranged in a 
scheme known as the Hubble tuning fork diagram. In fact, 
with his discovery of Cepheid variable stars in NGC 6822, 
M33 and M31, he demonstrated the nature of extragalactic 
nebulae as collections of stars comparable to our own 
Milky Way (what we now call galaxies) at great distances. 
This settled a question that had been argued between 
curtis, Lundmark, sHAPLEY and OPik, to name only four. He 
then showed that the distribution of galaxies was uniform, 
and they occupy a space that is cosmological. Finally, 
and most importantly, working with HUMASON, Hubble 
showed in 1929 that galaxies are moving away from us 
with a speed proportional to their distance (Hubble’s law). 
The explanation led to the discovery of the expanding 
Universe. The slope of the Hubble diagram of the velocities 
of galaxies plotted against their distances is known as the 
Hubble constant, and its reciprocal, the Hubble time, is an 
estimate of the age of the universe. Hubble summarized 
his discoveries in a successful popular book The Realm of the 
Nebulae. He is commemorated by the name of the Hubble 
Space Telescope, which continues his investigations with 
modern space equipment. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hubble’s Variable Nebula (NGC 2261) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hubble’s Variable Nebula (NGC 2261) 


A reflection nebula in the constellation Monoceros, 
position RA 06* 39.2™, dec. +08° 44’. It is small (2’ by 
1’) but of quite high surface brightness. The nebula’s 
average magnitude is 10, but, as Edwin Hubble discovered 
in 1916, it varies in brightness, mirroring the variability of 
its illuminating star, R Monocerotis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Huggins, Margaret Lindsay Murray (1848-1915) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Huggins, Margaret Lindsay Murray 
(1848-1915) 


Astronomer, whose early interest in astronomy, taught 
to her by her grandfather, led to a meeting with and 
marriage to WILLIAM HUGGINS, a spectroscopist. Together 
they produced some of the earliest spectra of astronomical 
objects, particularly the Orion nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Huggins, Sir William (1824-1910) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Huggins, Sir William (1824—1910) 


Astronomer, born in Stoke Newington, London, a wealthy 
amateur who built an observatory where he invented 
the stellar spectroscope. Building on KIRCHHoFF’s and 
Bunsen’s discoveries about terrestrial and solar spectral 
emission and absorption lines, and their conclusions 
that spectroscopy could reveal the composition of the 
source of the light, Huggins compared laboratory spectra 
with those of stars. At first he examined the spectra 
of astronomical sources visually. In 1875, after many 
experiments frustrated by the faintness of the stars and 
the insensitivity of the available photographic material, 
he recorded the spectrum of Vega on a dry gelatine plate. 
He explored the spectroscopic nature of stars, nebulae 
and comets. He showed that some nebulae, including 
the Orion nebula, have pure emission-line spectra and 
thus must be truly gaseous, while others, such as that 
in Andromeda, have continuous spectra characteristic of 
stars. He observed the spectrum of a nova and discovered 
that comets emit the light of luminescent carbon gas. He 
imaged solar prominences in monochromatic Ha emission 
by aligning a high-dispersion spectrograph slit tangent to 
the Sun’s disc and gradually opening the slit. With Miller 
in 1868 he made the first measurement of the Doppler shift 
in a star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hulse, Russell A (1950-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hulse, Russell A (1950-) 


Radioastronomer and plasma physicist, born in New 
York City, Nobel prizewinner in physics with JosEPH H 
TAYLOR (1993) ‘for the discovery of a new type of pulsar, 
a discovery that has opened up new possibilities for the 
study of gravitation’. Using the 300 m radio telescope at 
Arecibo in Puerto Rico, Taylor and his research student 
Hulse searched systematically for pulsars, discovering the 
one now known as PSR 1913 + 16 and the Hulse—Taylor 
pulsar. The pulsar, it transpired, is in orbit around another 
neutron star. Each star is the mass of the Sun but very 
small (ten kilometers in dimension), and they are a short 
distance from each other, only several times the Moon’s 
distance from the Earth. Since their mutual gravitational 
pull is large, their orbit shows deviations from Newton’s 
gravitational laws. In particular, it was found that the 
period of the orbit is declining at the rate of about 75 
millionths of a second per year, because the pulsar system 
loses energy by emitting gravitational waves. The rate is 
fully consistent with the predictions of general relativity. 
This was the first, albeit indirect, proof of the existence of 
gravitational waves. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hulst, Hendrik van de (1918-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hulst, Hendrik van de (1918—) 


Dutch astronomer, born in Utrecht, became professor 
at Leiden. During the Second World War, because 
of the shortage of equipment, Dutch astronomers were 
confined to work in theoretical topics. JAN oorT (Leiden 
Observatory) realized that radio waves would be able to 
penetrate the dust of interstellar space and would reveal 
the structure of the Galaxy. He therefore set a student, van 
de Hulst, to determine theoretically what radio emission 
would come from hydrogen, the most abundant element 
in interstellar space, indeed in the universe. Van de 
Hulst showed that the strongest emission from hydrogen 
in the radio spectral region would arise as a result of a 
spontaneous change of direction of spin from the electron 
orbiting a neutral hydrogen atom. In any given atom the 
change would occur once in millions of years, but there 
are so many neutral hydrogen atoms in space that the 
cumulative effect is very significant. The prediction of 
radio emission at a wavelength of 21 cm was confirmed 
by van der Hulst, Jan Oort and C Alex Muller in 1951, and 
the discovery matched Oort’s expectations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Humason, Milton La Salle (1891-1972) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Humason, Milton La Salle (1891-1972) 


American astronomer, born in Dodge Center, MN, who 
began his astronomical career as a muleteer and janitor 
at the Mount Wilson Observatory, and became a night 
assistant. He learnt photography and became HUBBLE’S 
research assistant and then an astronomer in his own right, 
measuring the speeds of faint galaxies, and the properties 
of the supernovae in them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Humboldt, Alexander von (1769-1859) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Humboldt, Alexander von (1769-1859) 


Naturalist, geographer, explorer, born in Tegel Palace, 
Berlin. The Humboldt current off the west coast of 
South America is named after him. He named the 
gegenschein. He set in train an international project 
organized by Gauss to study terrestrial magnetism. His 
major work, Kosmos, based on lectures at Berlin University, 
endeavoured to provide a comprehensive physical picture 
of the universe. In it he described the results of the 
survey of terrestrial magnetism, and, in a particularly 
influential section, he drew attention to the observations 
of the Sun made by HEINRICH SCHWABE of the sunspot cycle. 
Humboldt’s description of Schwabe’s work provoked 
numerous follow-up studies (see JOHANN WOLF, EDWARD 
SABINE). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Huygens, Christiaan (1629-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Huygens, Christiaan (1629-95) 


Born in The Hague, Netherlands, to a prominent Dutch 
family, tutored at home, and came under the influence of 
DESCARTES who was an occasional visitor at the Huygens’ 
home. Studied law and mathematics at Leiden, turned 
to scientific studies of nature. Made microscopes and 
telescopes, and in 1655, using one of his own lenses, 
Huygens detected Titan, the first moon of Saturn. He 
discovered the true shape of the rings of Saturn with 
one of his telescopes with a focal length of 7 m, and in 
Systema Saturnium (1659), explained the changes in the 
apparent shape of the rings. His telescopes, of enormous 
focal length, with the objective lenses supported on masts, 
were so far in advance of the rest of the field that at first 
his observations were not believed. In 1656 Huygens 
patented the first pendulum clock, testing models at sea 
to determine longitude. He also derived the law of 
centrifugal force for uniform circular motion, which in 
combination with Kepler’s third law led wren, HALLEY and 
others to the inverse square law of gravitation. Huygens 
proved by experiment the conservation of momentum, 
such that the momentum before the collision of two bodies 
is equal to the momentum after. In his Traité de la Lumiere 
Huygens argued in favor of a wave theory of light, stating 
that an expanding sphere of light behaves as if each point 
on the wave front were a new source of radiation of 
the same frequency and phase. In the final years of his 
life Huygens composed his book Cosmotheoros, published 
posthumously, apparently regarding it as a more scientific 
version of FONTENELLE’Ss discussion of extraterrestrial life. It 
is a discussion that on the whole a modern astronomer can 
identify with. The Huygens probe that will eject from the 
Cassini spacecraft and parachute to the surface of Titan in 
2004 is named for him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hydra 


(the Water-snake; abbrev. Hya, gen. Hydrae; area 1303 
sq. deg.) A predominantly southern constellation which 
winds its way around almost one-third of the sky between 
Canis Minor and Libra. The center of the constellation 
culminates at midnight in mid-March, though part of 
it is on the meridian from late January to early May. 
It represents, in Greek mythology, either the multi- 
headed Lernaean Hydra which was killed by Hercules 
as the second of his 12 labors, or the water-snake that 
prevents Corvus, the Crow, from drinking from Crater, 
the cup of the god Apollo. The brightest stars of 
Hydra were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) in 
the Almagest. Owing to its great extent, some early 
celestial cartographers divided Hydra into four divisions: 
Hydra, Hydra et Crater, Hydra et Corvus and Continuatio 
Hydrae. 

Hydra is the largest of the 88 constellations but is not 
particularly prominent. Its brightest stars are a Hydrae 
(Alphard), magnitude 2.0, y Hydrae, magnitude 3.0, and ¢ 
Hydrae and v Hydrae, both magnitude 3.1. There are eight 
other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. Interesting 
stars include e Hydrae, a multiple system, consisting of 
yellow (G5 and F7) components, magnitudes 3.8 and 7.8, 
separation 3”, the former of which has a close (white, 
A8) companion, magnitude 4.7, separation 0.2”, period 
15 years, the latter of which has an unseen companion, 
period 9.9 days, and a fifth component, magnitude 12.7, 
separation 19”, and R Hydrae, a Mira-type variable (range 
3.5-10.9, period about 389 days). 

Other interesting objects in Hydra include M48 (NGC 
2548), an open cluster of several dozen stars between 
ninth and thirteenth magnitude, and M68 (NGC 4590), a 
globular cluster, NGC 3242 (the ‘Ghost of Jupiter’), a bluish 
planetary nebula, and M83 (NGC 5236), a spiral galaxy, all 
of eighth magnitude. 


See also: Corvus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hydrodynamic Instabilities 


Most of the universe is made of gas, over all scales 
ranging from the intergalactic medium to stars and giant 
planets. This fluid rarely remains in static equilibrium or 
in stationary motion—many forces and processes conspire 
to render it unstable. When it is unstable, it may oscillate 
more or less regularly around its equilibrium state, as 
do variable stars. Alternatively, it may reach a state 
of turbulent motion, which then plays a crucial role 
in transporting momentum, heat and chemicals and in 
amplifying a magnetic field when the gas is ionized. In 
some cases there is direct observational evidence for such 
turbulence: in the interstellar medium, at the surface of 
the Sun and of the giant planets, in the solar wind. More 
often only indirect proof of turbulence is available, as in 
accretion disks or in stellar photospheres and interiors. 

To test the stability of any fluid medium in the 
universe, one applies to it an arbitrary perturbation— 
that is, one applies this perturbation to a mathematical 
model built with the equations of fluid dynamics (see FLUID 
DYNAMICS). Once perturbed, the fluid may settle back into 
its initial state, whichis then deemed to be stable, or else the 
perturbation grows to finite amplitude, and the medium 
becomes turbulent or oscillatory. In the mathematical 
treatment, one makes a distinction between a linear 
instability, which is triggered by an exceedingly small 
perturbation, and a finite-amplitude instability, which 
requires a perturbation of a certain strength (depending 
on the degree of instability). However, for the description 
of the final state it does not much matter whether the 
instability is of either type. 

Non-linear effects are required to prevent the 
infinite growth of any hydrodynamic instability. For 
example, turbulence acts always to suppress—at least 
to reduce—the cause of instability, in modifying for 
instance the mean flow profile (shear instabilities) 
or the temperature stratification (thermal convection). 
Numerical simulations have greatly helped to describe 
these finite amplitude regimes, but, even with present-day 
computers, the spatial resolution is often too limited for a 
realistic description. 

Here we shall briefly review the main hydrodynamic 
instabilities encountered in astrophysics; we shall classify 
them according to their cause, describe their major 
properties and mention the objects where they presumably 
play an important role. We shall put more emphasis on 
recent results; for the others we refer the reader to classical 
treatises. Finally, we shall not discuss here the various 
instabilities involving a magnetic field, which are dealt 
with in MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS and ACCRETION DISKS. 


Testing the linear stability 

When the medium or the flow under consideration is 
submitted to a small perturbation, say a displacement 
é6r(r,t) (r designates the spatial coordinate and ¢ the 
time), then only the linear terms in dr may be kept in the 
equations describing the evolution of that perturbation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


After some manipulations, the result may be cast in the 


general form 
L 2 L, |) dr =0 (1) 
2}o (a. — Ln] dr 


where the £; are linear spatial operators. Equation (1) 
admits separable solutions of the type 


dr(r, t) = A(r) exp(ot) 


and the vector function A obeys the partial differential 
equation (in space) 


(o —Li)(o — £2)...(6 —L,)A(r) = 0 (2) 


which, after imposing suitable boundary conditions, 
constitutes an eigenvalue problem for o. These 
eigenvalues depend on the spatial characteristics of the 
perturbation, such as its wavelength or the number of 
nodes. In simple cases, they are solutions of an algebraic 
equation of degree n, which is then called the dispersion 
relation. Examples of such relations are given below in 
equations (3) and (4). 

In many cases, the eigenvalues o are complex 
quantities; it is their real part R(o) which determines 
the linear stability of the considered medium or flow. 
Instability arises whenever one of the eigenvalues has a 
positive real part. 


Gravitational instabilities 

Jeans instability 

In most astrophysical objects, pressure forces balance the 
gravitational attraction. However, if the density (hence 
the mass) is too large, the medium may become unstable 
to infinitesimal perturbations. In a uniform medium, or 
locally in a non-uniform medium, the criterion for this 
instability takes the form 


7 > (2a 
o” = 41Gp — c; a =0 (3) 


where o? is the exponential growth rate, c, the isothermal 
sound speed (c? = P/p in terms of pressure and density), 
G the gravitational constant and 4 the wavelength of 
the perturbation. Setting o = 0 one obtains a critical 
wavelength A, and a critical mass M; ~ pay. If the medium 
is already turbulent for another reason, the turbulent 
pressure acts to increase the critical mass. So does also 
a magnetic field, when present. 

In a uniformly rotating flow, the criterion includes a 
Coriolis term: 


2 2 (2m 2 
o° = 4nGp — cy es — 40° > 0. 


With differential rotation, as in a galactic disk, and 
assuming that all the mass is concentrated in the equatorial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


plane, the instability criterion involves the epicyclic 
frequency Qe. (Toomre 1964): 


2n 1d 
a 2nGh— — 402.>0 Qo= aq (4) 


with & being the surface density and s the distance from 
the rotation axis. 

The Jeans instability is probably the main cause of star 
formation in the interstellar medium; the dynamical phase 
of the contraction ends when the gas becomes opaque 
enough to build up a temperature gradient: the associated 
pressure gradient is then able to balance the gravitational 
attraction. 


Rayleigh-Taylor instability 

This instability arises when denser fluid is superposed 
on lighter fluid in a gravitational field or an accelerating 
medium. It plays a crucial role in mixing chemical species 
during supernova explosions. A detailed description may 
be found in FLUID DYNAMICS. 


Shear instabilities 

Kelvin-Helmholtz instability 

In this prototype of all shear instabilities, two parallel 
flows of different velocities V; and V2 are separated by 
a sharp interface: if the interface is perturbed by an 
infinitesimal amount, all downstream wavelengths are 
unstable. When the transition layer between the two 
flows has a finite width H in z, only the wavelengths 
larger than ~#H are unstable. This result holds also for 
a smooth velocity profile V,(z), containing an inflection 
point at which the vorticity dV, /dz has a local extremum 
of width H (see figure 1); this instability condition is called 
the Rayleigh-Fjorteft criterion. The instability domain 
is further reduced when the viscosity (v) is taken into 
account; the instability occurs if the Reynolds number is 
larger than unity, with this number being defined as 


H 


Vv 


dV, 


R Se 
e ae 


(6) 


max 


where |dV,/dz|max measures the vorticity contrast. This 
plain Kelvin-Helmholtz instability is likely to occur in 
ASTROPHYSICAL JETS. 

Even in the absence of a such a vorticity extremum, 
a parallel shear flow becomes unstable to perturbations of 
finite amplitude, but at much higher Reynolds number, 
as demonstrated by many laboratory experiments. In 
channel flows, the critical Reynolds number is found 
around 1000, with H being the channel width and 
replacing the vorticity contrast in the definition above by 
a measure of the vorticity itself. 


Shear instability in a stratified medium 
When an incompressible shear flow is stratified in density 


(in z, the cross-stream direction), buoyancy acts to inhibit 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A 

Z 

Vx 

A 

Z 

H 
dV, /dz 

0 


Figure 1. Plane parallel shear flow: the velocity vector is parallel 
to the x-axis and it varies in the (span-wise) z-direction. In this 
example, the velocity profile has an inflection point where the 
vorticity dV, /dz is extremum: according to the Rayleigh-Fjorteft 
criterion, this flow is linearly unstable. 


the instability. Neglecting dissipative effects, instability 
sets in only if the Richardson criterion is met: 
a N? oa dinp 
=> — —— 1, = 
|dV,/dz|? — 


(6) 


where N is the buoyancy frequency, which measures the 
stability of the density stratification (g is the acceleration 
due to gravity). The critical Richardson number Ri, is of 
order unity. 

Astrophysical fluids are compressible in general, and 
there the entropy stratification plays the role of the density 
stratification for incompressible fluids. The buoyancy 
frequency is then defined as 


nea #8 Ee (325) |-ge-% @ 
ad 


Hp| dinP dlnP 


with 6 = —(dInp/dlnT)p, Hp being the pressure 
scale height, and the notations used in stellar structure 
theory for the actual (V) and adiabatic (V.q) temperature 
gradients having been introduced. Note that the 
stabilizing effect of the entropy stratification is felt only 
in the vertical direction: it does not prevent a horizontal 
shear from becoming unstable. In the latter case the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


turbulent motions are anisotropic, i.e. much stronger in 
the horizontal than in the vertical direction. 

However, this instability criterion (6) applies only 
for adiabatic perturbations. In the presence of thermal 
diffusion (due to conduction or radiation), the buoyancy 
force weakens, and therefore also its stabilizing effect. The 
outcome is that the flow may sustain turbulence as soon 
as 

NZ ove 


ldv, /dze ra < Ri, (8) 


where v is the root mean square velocity, ¢ the dimension of 
the largest turbulent eddies and K the thermal diffusivity. 
These motions will carry heat and chemicals across the 
flow in the z-direction, with a turbulent diffusivity 


2 
D, © gq Sele . 
N. T 

So far we have assumed that the fluid is homoge- 
neous. A chemical composition gradient, with molecular 
weight yw increasing with depth, will also act to stabilize 
the flow, and one retrieves the original Richardson crite- 
rion (6) with 


However, the stabilizing effect of this 1 gradient may 
be drastically lowered if the horizontal shear is unstable, in 
which case the anisotropic turbulence acts to smooth out 
the horizontal inhomogeneities. The resultant turbulent 
diffusivity in the vertical direction then becomes (Talon 
and Zahn 1997) 


eS |dV, /dz|? 
N7/(K + Dn) + N2/Dn 


t 


where N7? is the thermal component of the stratification as 
defined in equation (7) and D,, the horizontal diffusivity 
generated by the horizontal shear. 

These shear instabilities certainly play an important 
role in the mixing of stably stratified stellar interiors. 


Shear instability of differential rotation 

Most of the results above can be transposed to 
differentially rotating flows. In cylindrical rotation, where 
the rotation rate depends only on the distance s from 
the rotation axis, an extremum of vorticity again renders 
the flow linearly unstable. Another linear instability 
arises when the angular momentum decreases with the 
distance from the rotation axis: a slight axisymmetric 
perturbation then grows because the pressure gradient 
no longer balances the centrifugal force (Rayleigh 1916). 
This instability has been studied in the laboratory with 
the famous Couette-Taylor experiment, where liquid is 
sheared between two concentric cylinders of mean radius 
s rotating at different speeds Q and Q2. Taking the gap As 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between cylinders as the characteristic length, one defines 
the Reynolds number as 


s|Qo = Qy|As 
. : 


Re= 


In the narrow gap limit, the critical Reynolds number for 
this linear instability is Re, = 41.2(s/As)!/, provided that 
Qs? > Qos? i. 

However, even when {157 < Q253, where the flow is 
linearly stable, turbulence has been observed for various 
rotation regimes, implying that the instability occurs at 
finite amplitude. There is still debate on whether a 
positive gradient of angular momentum is able to suppress 
hydrodynamic turbulence for certain flow profiles, such 
as in the Keplerian rotation of accretion disks. However, 
laboratory experiments seem to indicate that turbulence 
occurs whenever the gradient Reynolds number Re* 
exceeds some critical value: 

3 
Ret = © AG, Ret wbx 105. 
v As 
For a recent discussion of this problem we refer to Richard 
and Zahn (1999). 

In objects such as stars and planets, a differential 
rotation in latitude becomes linearly unstable when the 
rotation profile meets certain conditions. For instance, 
when & varies in proportion to 1 — acos’ 6 (6 being the 
colatitude), the flow is unstable to infinitesimal horizontal 
perturbations for a > 0.29 (Watson 1981). 

Another instability, called baroclinic instability, may 
arise in stars whenever the rotation departs from 
cylindrical rotation, because the level surfaces (or isobares) 
do not coincide with the surfaces of equal density, and 
hence of equal entropy, ina homogeneous star. One is then 
tempted to conclude that an axisymmetric displacement 
directed sideways, in the wedge between these two 
surfaces, will escape the restoring action of the buoyancy 
force, and therefore lead to instability. However, such 
a displacement cannot be entirely arbitrary: it has to 
conserve angular momentum. When this is taken in 
account, one finds that the baroclinic instability occurs 
only when the specific angular momentum Qr? sin? 6 
increases towards the equator on an isentropic surface. 

However, this condition has been derived by 
assuming that the perturbations were adiabatic. Thermal 
diffusion will here again weaken the buoyancy force, and 
since in stellar interiors the viscosity v is much smaller than 
the thermal conductivity K, axisymmetric perturbations 
will become unstable as soon as either 


10 v 
7g vr” < gr or 


This so-called Goldreich-Schubert—Fricke instability be- 
longs to the class of multidiffusive instabilities, which arise 
because two agents (here heat and momentum) diffuse at 
sufficiently different rates. Until now it has still not been 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


clarified whether this instability will lead to turbulence 
and mixing once it reaches its finite-amplitude regime. 

On the other hand, any differential rotation is prone 
to shear instabilities of finite amplitude, as has been 
mentioned earlier: the situation is then very much like 
that of plane parallel shear, and the results quoted above 
apply. The horizontal shear of differential rotation in 
latitude will easily become unstable, since the Reynolds 
number characterizing such flows is extremely high 
(Re* ~ 10} at the base of the solar convection zone). A 
stable entropy stratification will inhibit the vertical shear 
instabilities, but only to some extent, as has already been 
explained: it suffices to express the vertical shear |dV, /dz| 
by rsin@dQ/dr. These instabilities certainly play an 
important role in the mixing of stably stratified stellar 
interiors (Zahn 1992). 


Thermal instabilities 

Convection 

A temperature gradient is required to transport heat 
through a conductive or optically thick medium, and often 
this gradient is parallel to the gravity force, as illustrated 
in stars and accretion disks. In terms of the heat flux F and 
of the thermal diffusivity K, this temperature gradient is 
given by 


F=K 


pCpT (ser) (0) 


Hp dInP 


(Cp is the heat capacity at constant pressure). In such 
a stratification, a vertical perturbation will grow if it 
rises in colder surroundings, and this will lead to a 
familiar instability called thermal convection. This (linear) 
instability sets in when the Schwarzschild criterion is 


satisfied: 

dlnT dlInT 

dinP ~ (sre). 
or in the classical notation of stellar structure theory, 
V > Vad (small corrections apply when including the 
effect of thermal and viscous dissipation). Vaq measures 
the temperature increase in an adiabatic compression. 
The temperature gradient then tends to become adiabatic, 
and a fraction of the heat flux is transported through 
the convective motions. In astrophysical settings these 
motions are turbulent, and at sufficient optical depth the 
energy flux is given by 


P 


Defining the radiative gradient V,aq as the gradient which 
would be needed to carry the total flux Fj. through 
conduction or radiation (cf equation (9)), the conservation 
of flux Fict = Foonv + Fraga translates into 

Vina -V vl 


V—Vaa K’ 


The higher the Péclet number vé/K, the closer the 
temperature gradient comes to being adiabatic (at the base 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the solar convection zone, vé/K ~ 10°). A prescription 
is needed to estimate the turbulent diffusivity v2, and the 
classical mixing-length treatment is still widely used, for 
lack of something better: one assumes that the convective 
eddies are accelerated over a distance A (the mixing 
length), after which they dissolve in the surrounding 
medium where they release their heat content. For most 
purposes, the mixing length is taken as proportional to the 
local pressure scale height. 

Great progress has been achieved already with three- 
dimensional numerical simulations, but the range of 
scales which has to be spanned is challenging, and these 
simulations are necessarily restricted to a small physical 
domain (near the surface of the star for instance) or to the 
largest motion scales (when the goal is to encompass a 
whole convection zone). 


«-Mechanism 

In stellar interiors, the opacity peaks in the ionization 
zones of the most abundant species; there radiative 
diffusion is then no longer a dissipative process, and 
oscillations of the star grow owing to a valve mechanism. 
This thermal oscillatory instability is the cause of the 
pulsation of most variable stars (See STELLAR PULSATION). 


Eddington—Sweet circulation 

The centrifugal distortion makes it impossible, in general, 
to achieve radiative equilibrium in a rotating star, and 
the resulting thermal imbalance induces a large-scale 
meridian flow throughout the radiation zone. The time- 
scale for this Eddington—Sweet circulation is: 


Q2 R3 -1 
tes = TkKH ( GM ) 
where M, R and L are the mass, radius and luminosity of 
the star and txy is the Kelvin-Helmholtz time governing 
the global thermal adjustment. This time-scale is very 
large: only rapidly rotating stars will feel the effect of that 
circulation, which is then potentially able to mix them. 
This circulation also transports angular momentum, and 
it tends to establish a rotation profile for which there 
would be no circulation at all, and hence no mixing. 
However, for several reasons this regime of complete 
rest is never attained: (i) most often the vertical shear is 
unstable, and turbulence generates its own transport of 
angular momentum; (ii) the star loses angular momentum 
carried away by a wind; (iii) while evolving, and hence 
contracting or expanding, the star alters its internal 
angular momentum distribution (cf Zahn 1992). 

More seriously, the vertical composition gradient 
which builds up through nuclear burning interferes with 
the circulation and acts to slow it down. Presumably it will 
not succeed in suppressing it altogether (Maeder and Zahn 
1998). However, we are still in great need of a realistic 
description of the turbulence arising in such a stratified, 
differentially rotating star to properly assess the amount 
of mixing. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Chandrasekhar S 1961 Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic 
Stability (Oxford: Clarendon) 

Drazin P G and Reid W H 1981 Hydrodynamic Stability 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Landau L D and Lifshitz E M 1987 Fluid Mechanics (Oxford: 
Pergamon) 

Maeder A and Zahn J-P 1998 Stellar evolution with 
rotation: III. Meridional circulation with -gradients 
and non-stationarity Astron. Astrophys. 334 1000 

Pinsonneault M 1997 Mixing in stars Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 35 557 

Richard D and Zahn J-P 1999 Turbulence in differentially 
rotating flows: what can be learned from the Couette— 
Taylor experiment Astron. Astrophys. 347 734 

Talon S and Zahn J-P 1997 Anisotropic diffusion and shear 
instabilities Astron. Astrophys. 317 749 

Toomre A 1964 On the gravitational instability of a disk of 
stars Astrophys. J. 139 1217 

Watson M 1981 Shear instability of differential rotation in 
stars Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn. 16 285 

Zahn J-P 1992 Circulation and turbulence in rotating stars 
Astron. Astrophys. 265 115 

Zahn J-P and Zinn-Justin J (ed) 1993 Astrophysical Fluid 
Dynamics (Les Houches LXVII) (Amsterdam: North- 
Holland) 


Jean-Paul Zahn 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrogen (H) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hydrogen (H) 


The lightest and most common element in the universe. 
About 92% by number of atoms, and about 75% by mass, 
of all the directly observed matter in the universe is 
hydrogen. The most common form of hydrogen atom 
consists of one positively charged particle, the proton, 
and one negatively charged particle, the electron, which 
orbits the proton. The atomic mass is 1 and the atomic 
number (i.e. charge on the nucleus) is also 1. Hydrogen 
nuclei exist with one or two neutrons in addition to the 
one proton. These forms of ‘heavy hydrogen’ are called 
deuterium and tritium, respectively. Regions of neutral 
hydrogen are referred to as HI regions. Regions of ionized 
hydrogen are HII regions. 


See also: cosmic abundance of elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrogen Spectrum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hydrogen Spectrum 


The series of absorption or emission lines that are 
characteristic of the hydrogen atom. According to the Bohr 
theory of the hydrogen atom, devised by Danish physicist 
Neils Bohr (1885-1962) in 1913, the hydrogen atom can 
be envisaged as consisting of a central nucleus (a proton) 
around which a single electron revolves. The electron is 
located in one of a number of possible permitted orbits, 
each of which corresponds to a different energy level. If 
an electron drops down from a higher to a lower level 
(makes a ‘downward transition’), energy is emitted in the 
form of a photon, the energy of which is equal to the 
difference in energy between the two levels. Conversely, 
if an electron absorbs a photon of the correct energy, it can 
make an upward transition from a lower to a higher level. 
Because a photon of a particular energy corresponds to 
light of a particular wavelength, the various downward, or 
upward, permitted transitions correspond to the emission, 
or absorption, of particular wavelengths of light. This 
mechanism is responsible for the production of the various 
lines in the hydrogen spectrum. 

In the hydrogen atom, the various energy levels are 
denoted by a number (a quantum number), n; n = 1 
corresponding to the lowest level, n = 2 to the second level 
(the first ‘excited’ level), n = 3 to the third level (the second 
excited level), and so on. The wavelength, A, of the line that 
is produced by a transition between a lower level, n, anda 
higher level, m, is given, in nanometers, by the following 
formula: 4 = 91.16/(4 — 5). For example, a transition 
between n = 2 and n = 3 gives rise to a line of wavelength 
A = 91.16/(35 — =) = 91.16/(5 — 3) = 656.3 nm. This line, 
which is called the hydrogen alpha (Ha) line, lies towards 
the red end of the visible spectrum and is the first in a series 
of lines, known as the Balmer series, which is produced by 
the various possible transitions between the n = 2 level 
and higher levels. The second line, Hf, which occurs 
at a wavelength of 486.2 nm corresponds to transitions 
between the second and fourth levels (n = 2,m = 4), the 
third, Hy, at 434.1 nm, and so on. The series comes to an 
end at 364.6 nm (n = 2,m = oo), which corresponds to the 
electron being completely removed from the atom. 

Transitions between the ground level (n = 1) and 
higher levels involve larger energy gaps and, because the 
energies of photons are inversely proportional to their 
wavelengths, give rise to lines of shorter wavelengths than 
those of the Balmer series. The resulting series of lines, 
which occur in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum, is 
called the Lyman series. The series begins with Lyman 
alpha, at 121.5 nm and ends at the series limit of 91.16 nm. 
Transitions between the third level (n = 3) and higher 
levels correspond to small energy gaps and give rise to the 
Paschen series, in the infrared region of the spectrum. 


Seealso: absorption spectrum, atom, emission spectrum, 
photon, quantum theory, wavelength. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hydrus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hydrus 


(the Little Water-snake; abbrev. Hyi, gen. Hydri; area 
243 sq. deg.) A southern constellation which lies between 
Tucana and Horologium, and culminates at midnight in 
late October. It was first shown on Petrus Plancius’ 
celestial globe of c. 1598, though it is usually attributed to 
the Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known 
as Petrus Theodorus) and Frederick de Houtman, who 
charted that part of the southern sky in 1595-7. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, which lies 
between the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds, the 
brightest stars in Hydrus are 6 Hydri, magnitude 2.8, 
which is the closest conspicuous star to the south celestial 
pole, about 12° distant, w Hydri, magnitude 2.9, and y 
Hydri, magnitude 3.3. There are no other stars brighter 
than fourth magnitude. Interesting objects include NGC 
1466, an eleventh-magnitude globular cluster of the Large 
Magellanic Cloud, and NGC 1511, a small edge-on spiral 
galaxy, also eleventh magnitude. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hygiea ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hygiea 


The tenth asteroid to be discovered, by Annibale De 
Gasparis in 1849, and so designated (10) Hygiea. It is the 
fourth-largest asteroid, with a diameter of 408 km. It orbits 
the Sun at a mean distance of 3.14 AU (470 million km), 
in the outer part of the main asteroid belt, in a period of 
5.55 years. The orbital inclination is 4, the eccentricity 0.12 
and the rotation period an estimated 27.6 h. It is a C-type 
asteroid, with a reflectance spectrum very similar to that 
of carbonaceous chondrites, and has an albedo of 0.07. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hypatia of Alexandria (370—415) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hypatia of Alexandria (370-415) 


Born in Alexandria, Egypt, daughter of the mathematician 
and philosopher Theon, and the first woman mathemati- 
cian of note. As head of the Platonist school at Alexandria, 
she symbolized the learning that early Christians identi- 
fied with paganism, and became a focal point of riots dur- 
ing which she was brutally murdered, perhaps under the 
orders of Cyril, the fanatical Christian Patriarch of Alexan- 
dria. She wrote commentaries on algebra, arithmetic, con- 
ics and on PTOLEMY’s astronomical works, all lost. She de- 
veloped apparatus, including an astrolabe (for measuring 
the positions of the stars, planets and Sun). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Hyperbola ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hyperbola 


The conic section obtained when a right circular cone is 
cut by a plane which makes an angle with the base greater 
than that made by the side of the cone. It is an open curve, 
i.e. it does not close on itself like an ellipse. 


See also: conic sections, ellipse, parabola. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Hyperion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hyperion 


A mid-sized icy satellite of Saturn, discovered by W C 
Bond and, independently, William Lassell, in 1848. It 
orbits at a distance of 1481000 km, and is an irregular 
object, measuring 330 by 260 by 220 km. Hyperion was 
probably once a larger object which suffered a number 
of near-catastrophic collisions. Most of the impact debris 
would have been swept up by Titan, but some would 
have peppered Rhea, giving the latter its heavily cratered 
surface. Hyperion has chaotic rotation: it tumbles along 
in its orbit instead of rotating about a single axis; this adds 
credence to the collision hypothesis. Its surface is heavily 
cratered, with a scarp over 200 km long named Bond- 
Lassell Dorsum in honor of the satellite’s discoverers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lapetus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lapetus 


Amid-sized icy satellite of Saturn, discovered by Giovanni 
Cassini in 1671. It is 1440 km in diameter, and orbits 
at a distance of 3561000 km. Iapetus is unique in the 
solar system in its harlequin appearance: the leading 
hemisphere—facing the direction of orbital motion—is 
dark, with an albedo of around 0.05, while the trailing 
hemisphere is bright, with an albedo of 0.5. Its magnitude 
thus changes in the course of its orbit, as Cassini himself 
noticed, and he guessed correctly at the reason. It has 
been suggested that dust from Saturn’s dark outer satellite 
Phoebe, thrown off by impacts, is spiraling inward and is 
swept up by lapetus, which, like most of Saturn’s satellites, 
has captured rotation, so that the dust would accumulate 
on the same (leading) hemisphere. It may be that Iapetus’ 
surface ices contain methane, and when they are shock- 
heated by the impact of the dust particles, dark tarry 
organic substances are formed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ibn Rushd, Abu’l Waleed Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn 
Muhammad [known as Averroes] (1128-98) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ibn Rushd, Abu’! Waleed Muhammad 
Ibn Ahmad Ibn Muhammad [known as 
Averroes] (1128-98) 


Islamic philosopher, lawyer, physician and astronomer, 
born in Cordoba, Spain, became physician to the 
Caliph of Morocco. Ibn Rushd’s controversial views 
on philosophy—he was the greatest Islamic proponent 
of aristotLE—led to the burning of his books and 
banishment by the Caliph. He wrote numerous books 
(87 survive) dealing with philosophy, logic, medicine, 
jurisprudence and astronomy, which were translated (his 
name westernized to Averroes, The Commentator) and 
were very influential on European medieval thought. 
In astronomy he wrote a Treatise on the Motion of the 
Sphere, Kitab fi-Harakat al-Falak, and a summary and 
commentary on PToLeMy’s Almagest. His Aristotelianism 
was retrogressive in that, admitting that developments 
of the Ptolemaic system such as epicyclic motion of 
the planets gave numerically more accurate results, he 
nevertheless held that only concentric spheres were perfect 
enough to make up the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ibn Sina, Abu Ali [known as Avicenna] (980-1037) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ibn Sina, Abu Ali [Known as Avicenna] 
(980-1037) 


Islamic philosopher and scientist, born in Kharmaithen, 
near Bukhara (now Uzbekistan). Avicenna’s life was 
marked by swings of fortune, from physician and favored 
scholar of a Samanid prince, to peripatetic country 
doctor when the Samanid regime fell. He became court 
physician in Hamadan (Iran), where he was for a time 
imprisoned as a political prisoner. He ended his life in a 
peaceful, contemplative retirement in Isfaham, where he 
completed his two most important works, The Canon of 
Medicine (the most influential single book in the history 
of medicine, identifying the manner of the spread of 
epidemics, including tuberculosis) and The Book of Healing 
(an encyclopedia covering the whole of the sciences). 
Avicenna observed Venus as a spot against the surface of 
the Sun, inferring that Venus must be closer to the Earth 
than the Sun. He was one of several Islamic authorities 
who stated, on no particular grounds, that the velocity of 
light is finite. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ibrahim, ibn Sinan ibn Thabit ibn Qurra (908-46) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ibrahim, ibn Sinan ibn Thabit ibn 
Qurra (908-46) 


Geometrist and astronomer, born in Baghdad (now Iraq), 
grandson of THABIT IBN QURRA, Worked on conic sections, 
studied the motions of the Sun, particularly as revealed 
through the geometry of shadows, and summarized his 
work in a book which analyses the data in terms of 
PTOLEMY’s and his own theory of the solar motion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Icarus ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Icarus 


An Apollo asteroid discovered by Walter Baade in 1949, 
designated (1566) Icarus. In 1968, when it passed just 0.04 
AU from the Earth, it was observed by radar and found to 
be about 1 km in diameter and to rotate in 2.27 h. Icarus 
is one of only a handful of asteroids with a perihelion 
distance (0.19 AU) within the orbit of Mercury; aphelion is 
at 1.97 AU, and its mean distance from the Sun is 1.08 AU 
(161 million km). The inclination is 23° and the eccentricity 
0.83. Icarus is classed as a potentially hazardous asteroid. 


Seealso: near-Earth asteroids 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ida 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ida 


An asteroid discovered by Johann Palisa in 1884, 
designated (243) Ida. In August 1993 it became the second 
asteroid to be imaged in close-up from a spacecraft when 
the Galileo probe passed within 2400 km en route to Jupiter. 
Ida was found to be a heavily cratered object measuring 
56 x 24 x 21 km, possessing a small companion: the 
first confirmed asteroidal satellite. Named Dactyl, the 
satellite measures 1.6 x 1.3 x 1.0 km. From Dactyl’s orbital 
motion, Ida’s density was found to be between 2.0 and 
3.1¢ cm, consistent with a composition similar to that of 
ordinary chondrites, as suggested by its S-type reflectance 
spectrum. It orbits the Sun in the main asteroid belt at a 
mean distance of 2.86 AU (428 million km) in a period of 
4.84 years; the orbital inclination is 1°, the eccentricity 0.04 
and the rotation period 4.6 h. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Imaging Near-Earth Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Imaging Near-Earth Space 


Space in the Earth’s neighbourhood was studied remote- 
ly from the ground long before the space age began, 
mostly through observation of the AURORA, but also by 
radio investigation of the ionosphere (see PLANETARY 
IONOSPHERES) and the plasmasphere (the low-energy 
PLASMA region around the Earth) (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH: PLASMASPHERE). More recently, it has been studied 
mainly through direct in situ measurements of charged 
particles and electromagnetic fields. A major problem 
for remote sensing of plasmas is that protons neither 
emit nor scatter photons. The first views of Earth from 
space showed little evidence for the SOLAR WIND, radia- 
tion belts (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RADIATION 
BELTS), or plasmasphere that were discovered from early 
spacecraft measurements. When the Earth was viewed 
in Lyman-o ultraviolet light by the Apollo 16 mission, an 
extended hydrogen gas geocorona was evident, and 
there was even a hint of day-night asymmetry sugges- 
tive of an interaction with solar radiation. However, 
space views of telltale auroral displays made it clear that 
something fascinating was going on in space around the 
Earth. At the time, there was no simple means of obtain- 
ing images of the space plasmas responsible for these 
phenomena. 

In the 1970s, measurements showed the existence of 
solar helium ion emissions scattered from helium ions in 
the plasmasphere. Analysis showed that the fluxes were 
sufficient to image the helium in this region using cam- 
eras of suitable response and sensitivity. In the 1980s, it 
was discovered that the energetic plasma regions around 
the Earth emit a glow of energetic neutral atoms (ENAs) 
(see ATOM). This results from charge exchange interac- 
tions between energetic ions and low-energy neutral gas 
atoms. At that point, scientists began to realize that, since 
fast neutral atoms radiate in nearly straight lines, they 
can serve much as photons can to form a flux image of 
their source regions. Together, these discoveries offered 
the opportunity to remotely sense and image diffuse 
space plasmas that are otherwise invisible. The ENA 
imaging concept was proven using instruments designed 
for charged particle measurements on the ISEE mission 
in the 1980s and the POLAR mission in the 1990s. A plan 
emerged for the development of the NASA Imager for 
Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) in 
the late 1990s. Using all of the known plasma imaging 
techniques, IMAGE completed its first year of operations 
in May 2001, changing forever the way we view space 
plasma storms. 

The SOHO mission’s spectacular imagery of the 
Sun has provided dramatic evidence that it is anything 
but a quiescent and constant star. SOHO showed huge 
explosions launching billion-tonne coronal mass ejec- 
tions (see SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION) into the solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


system at millions of kilometers per hour, some of 
which impact the Earth on their way to the heliopause. 
IMAGE has provided corresponding images of plasmas 
around the Earth and their response to the solar wind 
buffeting that they receive. Multispectral movies show 
the development of electron and ion auroras, as the 
solar wind scours the outer boundaries of the magne- 
tosphere (see PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES) and enters 
into the dayside cusp regions. The ionosphere is seen to 
respond to auroral energy inputs by flowing out into 
space. Clouds of hot plasma form near midnight and 
drift rapidly as they encircle the Earth, inflating the geo- 
magnetic field. The cold plasma near the Earth is swept 
sunward by the return flow through the centre of the 
magnetosphere. Finally, one sees the galactic gas flow- 
ing through the solar system, the remnant nebular dust 
disk (see NEBULA) and their interactions with the solar 
wind. 


Instrumentation 

The ENA glow from near-Earth space extends over sev- 
eral orders of magnitude in particle energy, requiring 
multiple imaging techniques. Energy and mass analysis 
of the neutral atoms is most effectively done using elec- 
trostatic deflection and time-of-flight measurements. 
Detection of secondary electrons produced on particle 
passage through thin carbon foils is an effective tech- 
nique for recording the passage of a particle, yielding a 
time-of-flight start signal. 

At energies greater than about 20 keV (greater for 
heavier species), neutral atoms will penetrate carbon 
foils that are thick enough to stop solar UV radiation, a 
significant contaminant signal. From 20 keV down to 
about 1 keV, neutral atoms can penetrate the thinnest car- 
bon foils, but these foils do not stop UV radiation, so it is 
necessary to use sophisticated diffraction grating filters 
that stop very nearly all of the UV without stopping so 
large a fraction of the fast particles. In both higher-ener- 
gy ranges, the subject of interest is the hot plasma that 
forms around the Earth, particularly during magnetos- 
pheric storms. This plasma carries the largest and 
longest-lived electrical current of such storms, known as 
the ring current because of its eventual encirclement of 
the Earth. Cameras for this energy range must have 
wide-angle fields of view, 120° or wider. 

Below 1 keV, neutral atoms cannot penetrate even 
the thinnest carbon foils, so it is necessary first to con- 
vert the atoms into ions using interactions with other 
atoms, ideally to produce corresponding negative ions 
via electron attachment. Once charged, the atoms can 
be manipulated with electrostatic fields to measure 
their energy and accelerate them, and then time-of- 
flight methods can be used to determine their velocity 
or, knowing their energy, their mass. In this lowest 
energy range, the target of greatest interest may be the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Imaging Near-Earth Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ionosphere itself, where plasmas are initially heated to 
a few tens of eV or higher, causing them to escape 
promptly from the Earth’s gravity and flow into the 
magnetosphere. Cameras for this energy range may 
have somewhat smaller fields of view, but 90° or wider 
is highly desirable. 

The scattered solar extreme UV (EUV) glow from 
near-Earth space originates from the atomically active 
cold helium ions of the ionosphere and its dense exten- 
sion into the magnetosphere, known as the plasmas- 
phere. This glow had been noted by some sounding rock- 
et instruments and crudely imaged during Apollo mis- 
sion flights to the Moon. The plasmasphere is generally 
contained within geomagnetic flux tubes extending at 
most about 4-5 Earth radii, requiring a wide-angle cam- 
era when viewed even from high-altitude Earth-orbiting 
spacecraft. Here again, a 120° field of view or larger is 
essential to encompass the object being imaged. Spectral 
coverage must be confined to the 30.4 nm line of Het, 
which produces a substantial isotropic glow from the 
corresponding solar emission feature. The aurora is also 
active in this wavelength range, but, because of its very 
different morphology, will not be confused with plasma- 
spheric emissions. 


pre-storm main phase 


storm sudden 
commencement 


July 15 July 16 July 17 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


early recovery 


The auroral far ultraviolet (FUV) glow is preferable 
to visible emissions for auroral imaging because it is rel- 
atively uncontaminated by light scattered from the sunlit 
parts of the auroral zone. The most useful wavelength as 
a measure of electron precipitation is the 135.6 nm line of 
oxygen, because it is scattered only very slightly and can 
be simply related to the energy flux of electron precipita- 
tion. Another bright line at 130.4 nm must be discrimi- 
nated against because it is severely scattered and conta- 
minated with airglow. In addition, energetic protons pre- 
cipitating into the atmosphere in what is called the ‘pro- 
ton aurora’ also emit FUV photons. These precipitating 
protons spend part of their time as fast neutral atoms as 
they begin to charge exchange with atmospheric atoms, 
some of which radiate in Doppler-shifted Lyman-a. 
These photons can be distinguished from others emitted 
by the cold atmospheric hydrogen by a space-based 
spectrographic imager capable of resolving the red shift 
of the precipitating keV protons as they move rapidly 
away from the instrument into the atmosphere. Imagers 
for auroral emissions can have much narrower fields of 
view (~15°), since the aurora is a relatively small feature 
of the magnetosphere, contained for the most part with- 
in the Earth’s disk. 


late recovery 


Dst Index 


D 


Figure 1. The development of ring 
current neutral atom glow during 
the overall development of a 
space plasma storm, as indicated 
by the concurrent variation of the 
equatorial geomagnetic field 
Juy 18 intensity (known as the storm 
time deflection, Dst). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Imaging Near-Earth Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


An additional technique — strictly speaking a 
remote sensing technique — has proved useful for estab- 
lishing quantitative calibrations of the EUV images, for 
detection of relatively fine-scale features and for sensing 
plasma density gradients at densities below the detection 
limit for EUV imaging. This is the radio plasma imaging 
(RPI) method, using extremely long wire antennas (hun- 
dreds of metres) to broadcast and receive radio wave 
pulses (3 kHz-3 MHz) reflected or refracted from plasma 
density gradients. This technique is closely related to 
ground-based ionospheric sounding observations and 
indeed represents a generalized topside-sounder method 
useful for sensing the plasmasphere and any other suit- 
ably oriented plasma density gradient structures in the 
magnetosphere. 


Observations 

Since its launch in late March 2000, IMAGE has provided 
a large quantity of new imaging data for near-Earth 
space, including magnetospheric dynamics as driven by 
solar storm events and some observations of the helios- 
pheric environment including interstellar gas (see INTER- 
STELLAR MATTER) and remnant dust. 

The ENAglow of the Earth contains many expected 
features and several new features that are still being 
interpreted and modeled. Figure 1 shows an example of 
the development of a relatively symmetric ENA glow 
encircling the Earth, representative of the corresponding 
cloud of energetic ions. Initially, the source of new parti- 
cle injection fills the magnetosphere from the antisun- 
ward side by means of a relatively strong sunward plas- 
ma flow. Hot plasma particles that were injected then 
find themselves on stably trapped drift orbits that simi- 
larly encircle the Earth. With time, this hot plasma cloud 


decays away through a combination of processes, includ- 
ing losses into the atmosphere as well as the losses to 
charge exchange that permit these images to be recorded. 

The Sun and solar wind are also sources of neutral 
atom glow. On its way to Earth, the solar wind passes 
through interstellar gas and an even smaller amount of 
gas emitted by dust particles in the inner solar system. As 
it arrives near Earth, it encounters a third gaseous charge 
exchange medium, the geocorona. Changes in solar wind 
intensity can be viewed from inside the magnetosphere 
as a brightening of the ENA glow from the solar wind 
interaction with the geocorona. Ionospheric plasma heat 
ing responds promptly to solar wind energy, causing the 
Earth to emit low-energy neutral atoms (LENAs), while 
the global storm response develops over somewhat 
longer time scales involving the magnetic tail. Figure 2 
shows an example of LENA data illustrating simultane- 
ous observation of LENA from the Sun, from the Earth 
and from the interstellar medium. Long-term variations 
serve as a probe of the interplanetary and interstellar gas 
medium. 

In EUV, the plasmasphere was found to be 
detectable above a threshold He* density of about 30 cm- 
3 (where He*+ density is about 10% of total density). As 
shown in figure 3, this provides very useful imagery of 
the main body of the plasmasphere. This image, taken 
from a disturbed period, clearly shows the formation of a 
drainage plume of plasma extending from the dusk sector 
sunward toward noon. Such a feature was predicted over 
30 yr ago, but in situ observations from single spacecraft 
were somewhat ambiguous regarding the presence of this 
feature and could also be interpreted as evidence for 
‘detached plasma regions’ with no connection to the main 
body of the plasmasphere. A large number of other 


IMAGE/LENA Stop Singles: Helium-4 Prediction; m=0.0; v,=20 km/s 


Start Time: 2001/01/25 ( 25) 08:00:00 ease 
Stop Time: 2001/01/25 (25) 18:00:00 Bh i ents 
270 2.0 
Spacecraft ram direction = 
180 «relative to interstellar neutrals s 
® ke = 
D o) 
= ee 
<= 390 w 
c ee 
‘= c 
~ Oo 
0 eo 
~ Figure 2. LENA glow from the 
Sun from the Earth, and from the 
90 1.0 interstellar gas, during several 
UT 08:00 09:40 11:20 13:00 14:40 16:20 18:00 nicer hours of the IMAGE orbit. 
Lshell 7.49 472.56 338.29 94.76 55.65 35.65 18.76 Each vertical strip is formed by 
RE 3.13 5.73 7.24 7.99 8.07 7.53 6.28 Re collapsing a 90° x 360° image in 
MLT 14.50 13.87 13.54 12.77 9.68 5.84 4.64 hrs so . 
MLat «5.36 38.69 56.33 70.64 79.39 72.57 57.58 degs the 90° polar angle. White traces 
Invlat 68.56 87.36 86.88 84.10 82.30 80.36 76.65 degs indicate the limbs of the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Imaging Near-Earth Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The EUV plasmasphere, illustrating drainage plume, 
shoulder and trough. The Sun’s shadow provides a directional 
reference (toward upper left). EUV aurora and dayside ionos- 
pheric limb also appear in the image. 


features have been identified in EUV imagery of the plas- 
masphere, including the shoulder and trough features 
visible in figure 3. 

In FUV, IMAGE has provided valuable electron 
precipitation information that establishes storm context 
and connects with earlier auroral imaging efforts. In 
addition, the achievement of global Doppler-shifted 
proton imaging provides the first clear imagery of day- 
side solar wind interaction regions in which solar plas- 
ma entering the magnetospheric cusp regions is shown 
to be organized by interplanetary magnetic field orien- 
tation. Figure 4 illustrates the simultaneous electron/ 
ion imaging capability and shows how different the 
morphologies of the two types of particle precipitation 
can be. 


RPI obtains discrete echoes from the plasma of the 
topside ionosphere in the polar regions and near the 
plasmapause at lower latitudes. As illustrated in figure 
5, echoes just inside the plasmasphere show that 
magnetic-field-aligned ducts exist and extend for dis- 
tances of several Earth radii. Diffuse echoes from the 
plasmapause show that this boundary has a very irregular 
structure. When suitably inverted, these echo traces yield 
the distribution of plasma electron density for distances of 
2-3 Earth radii along field lines linking the IMAGE space- 
craft. These quantitative density measurements comple- 
ment and serve to calibrate the EUV imagery. 


Conclusions 

The space environment of Earth has become an astro- 
nomical object in the sense that its component plasmas 
can now be remotely sensed and imaged as dynamic 
global structures. In another sense, the space environ- 
ment contains dynamic meteorology and is an increas- 
ingly well-understood medium subject to global mod- 
eling and prediction. It can then be said that near-Earth 
space is the first plasma medium to be simultaneously 
studied using both plasma imaging and in situ tech- 
niques. Direct in situ measurements provide great 
detail in limited regions of space, with global structure 
emerging only over orbital evolution time scales. 
Plasma imaging produces a global perspective in the 
image accumulation time scale, but with modest spa- 
tial resolution. The best capabilities of the two observ- 
ing techniques can now be exploited and validated 
against each other so as to strengthen the conclusions 
that can be drawn from either. The first year of opera- 
tions of the IMAGE mission, in conjunction with other 
NASA spacecraft making in situ measurements, has 
confirmed the expected appearance of many features of 
near-Earth space, while revealing a number of new fea- 
tures that were either unexpected or previously undoc- 
umented. 


Figure 4. The electron and proton aurora in FUV, showing differences in distribution, with proton auroral emissions generally some- 
what equatorward of the electron aurora. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Imaging Near-Earth Space ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


November 7, 2000 
09:32 UT 


2+3+2 


Virtual Range (Re) 


Figure 5. Radio plasma sounder 
Plasmapause L=3.0 1 traces showing the presence of 
~22 MLT 300 400 500600 ducts (magnetic flux tubes with 


distinct properties) in the outer 
Frequency (kHz) plasmasphere. Traces can be inter- 


RS preted to give the electron density 
as a function of distance along the 


0 1000 2000 2897 


magnetic flux tube away from the 
Relative Amplitude spacecraft. 


Bibliography 

2001 Imaging the inner magnetosphere Geophys. Res. Lett. 
28(6, 8) 

Burch J Let al 2001 Views of Earth’s magnetosphere with 
the IMAGE satellite Science 291 619 

Carruthers G R, Page T and Meier R R 1976 Apollo 16 
Lyman alpha imagery of the hydrogen geocorona J. 
Geophys. Res. 81(10) 1664 

Holzer T E 1977 Neutral hydrogen in interplanetary 
space Rev. Geophys. 15 467 

Williams D J, Roelof E C and Mitchell D G 1982 Global 
magnetospheric imaging Rev. Geophys. 30 183 


Thomas E Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK a 


Imbrium Basin 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Imbrium Basin 


A large multiringed impact structure on the nearside of 
the Moon, measuring 1123 km at its largest diameter, 
centered at 32.8°N, 15.6°W. It is visible as the lava 
floodplain known as the Mare Imbrium (‘Sea of Showers’). 
Stratigraphic dating shows the Imbrium Basin to be the 
second youngest of the Moon’s large impact features; had 
the impact been any greater it would most likely have 
shattered the Moon completely. The impact took place 
around 3.85 billion years ago, near the end of the period 
of intense cratering in the solar system known as late 
heavy bombardment. Ejecta from the impact covers much 
of the Moon’s nearside. Lava flooding took place over 
the next 600 million years. Only the outermost ring is 
fairly well defined by mountain ranges, to the east by 
Montes Caucasus, to the southeast by Montes Apenninus, 
and to the south by Montes Carpatus. The Montes Alpes 
form part of an ill-defined inner ring. To the southwest, 
Mare Imbrium opens into Oceanus Procellarum. To the 
northwest, a more recent impact crater has formed Sinus 
Iridum (‘Bay of Rainbows’). Two other prominent craters 
lie at the eastern edge: Archimedes and Plato. The basaltic 
lava floodplain of the mare itself is punctuated by Montes 
Spitzbergen and the isolated peaks Mons Pico and Mons 
Piton. 


See also: Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inclination 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Inclination 


The angle at which one plane is tilted to another. Taking 
three examples, first, the inclination of a planetary orbit 
is normally taken to mean the angle between the plane 
of the orbit and the plane of the Earth’s orbit. The 
closest and most distant planets have the greatest orbital 
inclinations—Mercury’s orbit is inclined at 7° and Pluto’s 
at 17°. Second, equatorial inclination of a planet is the 
angle between the plane of its equator and its orbit plane. 
Third, the inclination of the orbit of an artificial Earth 
satellite is the angle at which its orbit plane intersects the 
plane of the equator. 


See also: node, orbital elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Index Catalog (IC) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Index Catalog (IC) 


A catalog of nebulae and clusters prepared by Danish 
astronomer J L E Dreyer (1852-1926) as a sequel to his 
New General Catalog (NGC), which had been published 
in 1888. The Index Catalogue was published in two 
parts— Index Catalog of Nebulae Found in the Years 1888 
to 1894 with Notes and Corrections to the New General 
Catalog’ (published in 1895), and ‘Second Index Catalog 
of Nebulae Found in the Years 1895 to 1907; with Notes and 
Corrections to the New General Catalog and to the Index 
Catalog for 1888 to 1894’ (published in 1908). Objects in 
this catalog are denoted by the letters ‘IC’ followed by a 
number, for example, ‘IC 2220’. 

A revised edition of the NGC and the two Index 
Catalogs, edited by R W Sinnott and updated to epoch 
2000.0, was published as a single volume in 1988. 


See also: epoch, New General Catalog of Nebulae and 
Clusters of Stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Indian Astronomy: History of 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Indian Astronomy: History of 


From the time of Aryabhata (ca AD 500) there appeared 
in India a series of Sanskrit treatises on astronomy. 
Written always in verse, and normally accompanied by 
prose commentaries, these served to create an Indian 
tradition of mathematical astronomy which continued 
into the 18th century. There are as well texts from earlier 
centuries, grouped under the name Jyotishavedariga, that 
is, supposed to belong the latest stage of Vedic literature. 
These present, somewhat obscurely, a calendrical system 
governed by a five year cycle. 

The general characteristics of the principal treatises, 
those written by Aryabhata and his successors, seem 
calculated to induce a certain skepticism on the part of 
modern readers, who would be inclined to doubt whether 
any scientific content could be found in these verses. The 
verses are concise in the extreme, so that in general the 
prose commentaries are essential for any understanding. 
The mean motions are expressed by giving the number of 
revolutions in a huge period of time, typically the 
mahayuga of 4 320 000 years. There is no tabular 
presentation, not even in the commentaries, in contrast to 
Babylonian and Greek texts, so that even the values of 
the trigonometrical function are given in a verse. The 
presentation of the mean motions is, as a rule, so closely 
bound up with the luni-solar calendar, itself dependent on 
the motions of the Sun and Moon, that it is not clear at 
first which is being defined. Although the texts show a 
clear understanding that the Earth is a sphere, and of the 
prime meridian, together with the need to make 
corrections for a change of MERIDIAN, that prime 
meridian is defined as a line passing through ‘Lanka’ 
(modern Sri Lanka, Ceylon), rather than to the actual site 
of observation; the commentaries, however, make it clear 
that Ujjain in Madhya Pradesh was that site. All these 
difficulties and obscurities have led Europeans to doubt 
whether the Indians ever observed at all. Modern studies 
of these texts have produced a wide range of opinions 
concerning the ‘scientific’ quality of Indian work, but 
recently Roger Billard has largely settled the matter by 
showing that the parameters were closely based on 
observations; see the section below on modern studies. 

The bibliography of the subject is vast, but it seems 
to be true that the major Sanskrit texts have now been 
published. There are nevertheless innumerable 
manuscripts certainly worthy of study; see Pingree (1970 
and subsequent volumes) for a survey of the manuscripts 
and a full bibliography of researches. In recent years 
important editions and reeditions have been brought out 
by Indian scholars, notably K S Shukla (Lucknow) and K 
V Sharma (Madras). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Aryabhata 

Aryabhata may fairly be considered as the founder of 
Indian scientific astronomy. Unusually, the year of his 
birth, AD 476, is known; however the region of India in 
which he lived is not known. He is the author of two 
scientific works, one of which is extant; this has been 
passed down to us under the name Aryabhatiya, a name 
given to the material by later scholars. The other, and 
earlier, work may be identified as the Surya Siddhanta as 
described by Varahamihira in his Paricasiddhantika (ca 
AD 580). The Aryabhatiya is known from a number of 
manuscripts from which good editions and translations 
have been made; the first European edition was made by 
H Kern in 1873. Aryabhata’s works were referred to as 
tantras in his own life time, tantra being a general term 
for a treatise. Since then the tendency has been to denote 
the formal canons as siddhdntas, and the less formal, 
intended for easy application with simpler arithmetic, as 
karanas. 

In the work of Aryabhata one finds, at least in 
germinal form, a large part of the astronomical science 
that will develop in India over the centuries that follow, 
so much does it define the whole paradigm of the subject. 
The mathematical section is notable for a number of 
reasons, for an original numerical notation, for the 
introduction of the sine function essentially as we know 
it, for the value of z = 3.1416 and for the procedure of 
solving indeterminate equations of the form ax — by = 1. 
The astronomical parameters and procedures define 
completely the mean and true longitudes for the Sun, 
Moon and planets, as well as various procedures that 
would be classed as spherical astronomy. It is noteworthy 
that Aryabhata held that the Earth revolved daily, so 
accounting for the daily rotation of the heavens; this view 
was, however, rejected by all later Indian writers. 

That the work is indebted in part to Greek astronomy 
is evident from the use of trigonometry. However, neither 
the trigonometrical nor the astronomical procedures 
follow Ptolemaic usage closely. It may be inferred that 
the transmission of Greek knowledge to India included 
only material from pre-Ptolemaic stages, even though the 
transmission must have occurred much later than the time 
of PTOLEMY (2nd century AD). 

The procedures for the computation of the longitudes 
of Sun, Moon and planets require that first of all the 
mean longitudes are calculated, always as_ linear 
functions of time. The practical epoch employed by 
Aryabhata is noon 499 March 21 but, for theoretical 
purposes, he takes a moment 3600 years previous, where 
the ‘year’ is that defined by the system. In the Surya 
Siddhanta this comes to midnight —3101 February 17/18, 
while in the Aryabhatiya it comes to —-3101 February 18 
at 6 am, because the mean year is slightly shorter in the 
latter. In either case this defines the epoch of ‘Kaliyuga’. 
All the mean motions are assumed to be zero at that 
epoch, and the motions are defined by a number of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Indian Astronomy: History of 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


revolutions in 4 320 000 years, which is 1 577 917 800 
days for the Surya Siddhanta and 1 577 917 500 days for 
the Aryabhatiya. Although the long period 4 320 000 
years is found in speculation from much earlier centuries, 
and which presumably links up with Babylonian 
schemes, because of its obvious sexagesimal character 
(20x60*) (see BABYLONIAN ASTRONOMY), the Kaliyuga 
as such is not ancient, but originates only with Aryabhata. 

An equation (or correction) is added to the mean 
longitude to give the true longitude. In Indian astronomy 
such procedures were somewhat simpler than those 
developed by Ptolemy. For the Sun and Moon, for 
example, the equation is of the form (in modern notation) 


u(é) = arcsin[sin(u,,) sin(é )] 
where 0 is angle from the apogee to the mean longitude 
and [tm is a constant. For the planetary equations a second 
function is also needed, 


a (@) = arctan ( ented ae) ) 


1+ sin(o,) cos(@) 


These two functions (the so-called manda and sighra 
corrections) were used throughout the Indian procedures 
for calculating the true longitude. The procedures varied 
from one author to another, and, indeed, Aryabhata 
proceeds differently in his two works. In the Surya 
Siddhanta, which is simpler in this respect, the true 
longitude L of the outer planets depends on the mean Sun 
Xs, the mean planet A and the planet’s apogee I; it is fixed 
after four steps, where o, B and y are intermediate 
quantities: 


of 


T — to(a, — A) 
B=at+ip(s—a) 
¥=A-—pA— B) 

L=ytoala, —y). 


The same steps are used for the inner planets, provided 
only that 4, and \ are interchanged. 

In the Aryabhatiya the steps differ somewhat, and 
moreover the ‘constants’ [,,, 6 Now vary periodically by 
small amounts, as expressed by 1; + p|sin 6] and o, + 
o,|sin 8 |. 

It should be noted that all the celestial longitudes are 
sidereal, not tropical, and are measured from a point on 
the ecliptic where the equinoctial point was located 
around the year AD 514. Precession as such plays no role 
in the Aryabhatiya, apparently a deliberate choice, 
although it occurs in other contemporary work. In any 
case, with this origin, the precessional correction in 
Aryabhata’s time was very small. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brahmagupta 

After the time of Aryabhata the next figure of note is 
BRAHMAGUPTA, who flourished during the 7th century. 
He is noted for two works, the voluminous 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta, and the Khandakhadyaka. The 
former is a substantial treatise on mathematics as well as 
astronomy, the latter a short astronomical tract, in which 
the parameters not only differ from those in the earlier 
work but agree with the Siirya Siddhanta of Aryabhata. It 
is interesting that although Aryabhata is heavily criticized 
in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, the parameters given 
there are in poor agreement with observations compared 
with the work of Aryabhata. 

Both these works played a significant role in the 
transmission of Indian astronomy to the Islamic world, 
where they were known as Sindhind and Arkand; from 
the former there was derived, after some modification, 
the zij (astronomical handbook) of AL-KHWARIZMI, ca AD 
830 (see also ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY). It is in this period 
that Indian astronomy was also passed to South East Asia 
(Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Indonesia), Nepal, Tibet, 
Central Asia and China; in South East Asia it was 
dependent on a source that used the epoch AD 638, an 
epoch still found in Burma. In fact, the analysis of a Thai 
calendrical treatise by Giovanni Cassini in 1691 marks 
the true beginning of the European interest in the subject. 


The later centuries 

Over the centuries, from the 10th to the 18th, many more 
treatises and commentaries were written. Under Moghul 
tule this Sanskrit tradition was deflected from its 
traditional course by the influence of Islamic work, for 
example the Persian treatise of ULUGH-BEG. By the early 
18th century one curious byproduct of this influence was 
a Sanskrit translation of Ptolemy’s Almagest, via a 
Persian version. At the same time European work became 
known, especially the Astronomical Tables of Philipp de 
la Hire (1727), transcribed into Persian as the Zy-i 
Muhammed Shahi at the court of Jai Singh ca 1730. 


Modern study 

Once the obscure conventions of the Indian texts are 
grasped, it is not difficult to make precise calculations of 
the mean and true positions of the Sun, Moon and planets 
according to any of these treatises, so that one may 
compare the results with modern calculations. 
Comparisons have been made in this way since the early 
19th century, most notably by John Bentley (1825) but 
also by William Dwight Whitney (1860). Bentley’s 
efforts were handicapped both by the shortage of Sanskrit 
sources then known and by the fact that the parameters of 
‘modern’ astronomy were then inadequate for the 
purpose. In the end his findings were held up to ridicule 
by indologists. In recent years, however, this approach 
has been pursued with singular success by Billard (1971), 
from whose work it is clearer than anyone might have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Indian Astronomy: History of 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


imagined that the Indian parameters from the time of 
Aryabhata are based on serious and close, often very 
exact, observation. Billard’s L’Astronomie indienne 
marks a uniquely profound advance in our understanding 
of the history of Indian astronomy. 

Billard studied the mean longitudes provided by the 
Indian canons. These are sidereal longitudes, deviating 
therefore from the corresponding modern values by the 
rate of precession. Taking all of the deviations (Sun, 
Moon, lunar apogee, lunar node, five planets) one finds 
that, for most canons, all such deviations agree at only 
one time, clearly the time when the parameters were 
fixed to agree with observation. Such a bundle of 
deviation curves is shown in figure 1, calculated from the 
Aryabhattya. The curves in the bundle diverge widely at 
other times, because the rates of motion have not been 
made to fit observations of an earlier date and are indeed 
controlled to some extent by a priori arguments. It is 
clear that the actual rates of mean motions were not fixed 
over a long time base but were only accurately fitted to 
observations in Aryabhata’s time. While this is a defect 
from the astronomical point of view, it also means that 
the time of that agreement is very securely fixed, in one 
brief interval near AD 500, when the agreement with 
observation is excellent. When Billard’s determination of 


400 -200 0 an 400 
0 
y ey igm 9 
0 
Q 
0 
0 
Q 
0 
0 
i) 
Q 
Q 
400 -200 ie} 200 40g 
ARYABHATA 
Meridian: 76.767 
Deviations 


the optimum year is extended to find the optimum 
meridian, we find that that meridian passes through 
central India, so reinforcing the conclusion that the 
observations were carried out not only in the time of 
Aryabhata, but certainly in India, as shown in figure 2 
(Mercier 1987). Thus, while his procedures clearly owe 
something to Greek material, we see that Aryabhata’s 
work is thoroughly Indianized and based on observations 
made during the lifetime of the author. 

Generally speaking the Indian determinations of 
mean longitudes were not established over a long time 
base, but there is an outstanding exception in some 
treatises that appear in the 9th century. These are known 
partly through the work of Lalla, the Sishya dhivrddhida 
tantra. It is not that this work or its author was so 
outstanding, but it happens that we find here a set of 
modifications of the received parameters which amount 
to a set of mean longitudes established accurately over 
the period AD 500-850 and which so clearly took into 
account observations made at the earlier date, or if not 
earlier observations, at least the values of mean 
longitudes determined at that earlier date. Much later, 
Acyuta (1550-1620) of Kerala (South India), in his 
Sputanirnayana-tantra, gave mean longitudes which also 
agree extremely well together over a very long time base. 


600 800 1000 1206 1400 1600 


ty ar ? 


600 800 1009 1200 1400 1600 


Figure 1. Deviation curves of the mean longitudes according to the Aryabhatiya. The deviation is the excess over the modern mean 


longitude. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Indian Astronomy: History of 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


25 35 45 55 65 


25 35 45 55 65 


ARYABHATA etalislic 0111101111 


75 85 95 505 115 


75 85 95 405 115 


Optimum: Year 502.148+/-4.600, Meridian 76,8644/-1.745 


Figure 2. Contour curves showing the optimum meridian and date for the mean longitudes of the Arvabhafiya for Sun, Moon and all 
planets except Mercury. The optimum values are 76.86+1.76, 502.15+4.6. 


Generally speaking, however, the lesson was not 
learnt that astronomy is natural history and requires a 
long time base for the determination of its parameters. 
There was in Indian astronomy the inbuilt assumption 
that a certain a priori framework based on the long 
periods, the yugas, could always be safely assumed, so 
that observations made at the time of the composition of 
the treatise would suffice. 


Calendar 

The calendar in India is luni-solar, that is it depends on 
the sequence of lunations, with an intercalated month 
every second or third year. The lunation is determined by 
the mean or true conjunction, but never by the visibility 
of the crescent, in contrast to the Babylonian or Islamic 
calendar (see CALENDAR IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND 
EUROPE). 

At some time in the period following Aryabhata the 
calendar came to be calculated according to one of the 
many treatises on astronomy. This had the effect of 
introducing certain formalities into the dating formula, in 
particular the ‘lunar day’ (tithi; see technical terms), in 
place of the ordinary civil day. In other respects the 
dating formula remained similar to that found in earlier 
periods. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There is a wealth of inscriptions in India, going back 
at least to the time of Asoka (3rd century BC), and many 
are dated. Manuscripts also carry dates in their 
colophons. This means that there is much material from 
which to determine the application of the various 
astronomical procedures. Conversely, the historian calls 
upon expert understanding of the astronomical reckoning 
in order to interpret the date. Although a number of 
differing treatises have been used in practice to fix dates, 
the results rarely differ, and then by at most one day, or 
rather tithi. The era used in the date must also be 
established, and there are indeed many found in India. 
The era used in astronomy is the Saka era, reckoned from 
AD 78, while the Vikrama era, from 57 BC, is widely used 
elsewhere. 


The calendrical scheme 
The calendrical scheme may be briefly sketched. The 
names of the months are as follows. 


Caitra ASsvina 
Vaisakha Karttika 
Jyeshta Margasirsha 
Ashadha Pausha 
Sravana Magha 
Bhadrapada Phalguna 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Indian Astronomy: History of 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


These names are taken from the names of the 27 
nakshatras (see the technical terms). Each month begins 
at sunrise following the moment of lunation. The Indian 
names for the zodiacal signs are given in the following 
table, together with the corresponding Western names. 
The Indian names are essentially translations of the 
Western names, so that, Mesha, for example, means 


‘ cy 


fram . 


Aries Mesha 
Taurus Vishabha 
Gemini Mithuna 
Cancer Karka 
Leo Simha 
Virgo Kanya 
Libra Tula 
Scorpio Vrscika 
Sagittarius | Dhanus 
Capricorn Makara 
Aquarius Kumbha 
Pisces Mina 


The coordination of the month and zodiacal names is so 
arranged that the new Moon at which Caitra begins is the 
last one before the Sun enters Mesha. The same monthly 
names are used, in addition, to specify 12 solar months. 
In this system, Solar Caitra begins when the Sun enters 
Mina, and so on. In some inscriptions the date is given in 
terms of the solar months, rather than lunar months. 

As in any luni-solar calendar there are intercalary 
months, but the Indian system is quite complex, and is 
such that any month might be repeated in order to keep 
the lunar months in step with the seasons. It may happen 
that the Sun does not enter a new sign from one lunation 
to the next, in which case the month of that name is 
repeated. In the same way it may enter two successive 
signs between two lunations, in which case the month 
name corresponding to the second sign is omitted. If 
mean lunations are used it is always the case that the 
interval of time between successive entries into signs is 
less than the mean interval between lunations, so that 
there are no omitted months. In either system there are 
always repeated months. 

If the year begins in the spring the new year begins 
with the month Caitra, or if that month is omitted, with 
the month Vaisakha. If the year begins in the autumn the 
new year begins with the month Karttika, or if that month 
is omitted, with the month Margasirsha. 

Indian dates do not refer to the ordinary civil day, 
but to the so-called tithi, the lunar day. This is defined as 
the interval of time in which the luni-solar elongation 
increases by 12°. If mean lunations are used, this interval 
is 1/30 of the mean synodic month. The precise length of 
the mean fithi depends on the canon, but it is very nearly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.984 of the ordinary civil day. The first tithi of the 
month begins at the moment of lunation (true or mean). 

The tithis are counted from 1 to 15, in the first or 
‘bright’ fortnight, starting with the new Moon, and from 
1 to 15 again in the second or ‘dark’ fortnight, starting 
with the full Moon. The ¢ithi in the ‘bright’ fortnight is 
marked sudi, an acronym for shukla paksha dina, and the 
tithi in the ‘dark’ fortnight is marked badi, an acronym 
for bahula paksha dina. In most cases only one sunrise 
occurs during the interval of the ¢ithi, and that tithi 
occurs, and once only, in the sequence. However, in other 
cases, a tithi may be omitted or repeated. If it is omitted, 
it is because it begins after one sunrise, and ends before 
the next. If it is repeated, it is because it begins before 
one sunrise and ends after the next. 

The course of the Moon is plotted against a division 
of the sky into 27 nakshatras, so-called ‘lunar mansions’. 
These are each related to certain stars, and if their 
positions were strictly recognized the nakshatras would 
have varying widths. It is more common to assume a 
constant width of 13° 20' for each. 


Almanacs 

The Indian ALMANAC in the form of the paricanga is 
widely available at a popular level. The almanacs are 
written in one of the Indian languages, Hindi, Gujarati, 
etc, not in English. These are popular works, intended 
essentially for the astrology market, which flourishes in 
India. Nevertheless, they are no less interesting to the 
historian of astronomy, continuing as they do the 
tradition of the medieval astronomical handbook, the zij 
of Arabic—Persian tradition, itself based on the Handy 
Tables of Ptolemy. The pavicanga, as the name indicates, 
consists of five elements, namely tithi, vara, nakshatra, 
yoga, karana (see the technical terms). These concern 
only the Sun and Moon, and are the principal elements of 
an Indian date. Typically the almanac will go further to 
give the actual positions of the Sun, Moon and planets 
(always sidereal positions), and much besides, including 
a profusion of articles, many concerning astrology. It is 
in some ways a popular and accessible equivalent of the 
Astronomical Ephemeris, in contrast to the official Indian 
equivalent, the Indian Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac. 

It is likely that, at the present time, most if not all of 
these calendars are founded on modern elements as 
represented in the Indian Ephemeris, which in turn agrees 
entirely with its Western counterparts, both in style and 
content. Indeed the positions of Sun, Moon and planets 
are in some almanacs not given for the Indian central 
meridian (82° 40' E of Greenwich) but for the Greenwich 
meridian. 

The more ambitious of these almanacs give far more 
than the five basic elements and provide almost as much 
as the official Nautical Almanac, but in a somewhat more 
accessible form. These works suffer from the absence of 
any full acknowledgment of the methods of calculation, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Indian Astronomy: History of 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


or their source. However, the survey carried out for the 
Calendar Reform Committee (1955) included a survey of 
more than 50 of these almanacs, and the results showed 
whether traditional or modern sources of parameters had 
been employed, along with other technical details, 
including the ayanamsa. 


Technical terms 
It is convenient to collect here a number of the technical 
terms used in the Indian almanacs. 


ayanamsa. Effectively a measure of precession, applied 
to the sidereal longitudes computed from the canon. 
karana. A sort of half-tithi, the interval during which the 
luni-solar elongation increases by 6°. 

nakshatra. One of the 27 divisions of the ecliptic, named 
after the 27 (or 28) small constellations known 
collectively as the nakshatras. 

pancanga. ‘Five elements’, namely tithi, vara, nakshatra, 
yoga, karana. 

tithi. Interval of time counted from luni-solar 
conjunction, representing increments of 12° in the 
elongation. Mean and true fithis are recognized, 
according to whether the positions of the Sun and Moon 
are mean or true. 

yoga. The interval during which the sum of the solar and 
lunar positions increase by 12°. 

vara. Weekday. 


Bibliography 

Billard R 1971 L’Astronomie indienne (Paris: Ecole Francaise 
d’Extréme Orient) 

Calendar Reform Committee 1955 Report (New Delhi: 
Government of India, Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research) 

Indian Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac (annual) (New Delhi: 
Government of India) 

Mercier R 1987 The meridians of reference of Indian 
astronomical canons History of Oriental Astronomy: Proc. 
IAU Colloquium 91 (New Delhi, 13-16 November 1985) 
ed G Swarup, A K Bag and K S Shukla (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 97-107 

Pingree D 1970 Census of the Exact Sciences in Sanskrit. 
Memoirs vol 41 (Philadelphia: American Philosophical 
Society) 

Sewell R and Dikshit S B 1897 The Indian Calendar (New 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas) 

Subbarayappa B V and Sarma K V 1985 Indian Astronomy, A 
Source Book (Bombay: Nehru Centre) 


Raymond Mercier 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Indus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Indus 


(the Indian—usually represented as a Native American; 
abbrev. Ind., gen. Indi; area 294 sq. deg.) A southern 
constellation which lies between Telescopium and Grus, 
and culminates at midnight in mid-August. It was first 
shown on Petrus Plancius’ celestial globe of c. 1598, 
though it is usually attributed to the Dutch navigators 
Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also knownas Petrus Theodorus) 
and Frederick de Houtman, who charted that part of the 
southern sky in 1595-7. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Indus are a Indi, magnitude 3.1, and £ Indi, 
magnitude 3.7. There are no other stars brighter than 
fourth magnitude. ¢ Indi, magnitude 4.7, distance 11.8 
light-years, has a proper motion of 3.96” per year, which 
will bring it close to the south celestial pole in about 
50000 years. Interesting objects include 6 Indi, a binary 
star with bluish-white (A5) and yellow (G0) components, 
magnitudes 4.5 and 7.2, separation 6.7”, and NGC 7049, an 
eleventh-magnitude spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inertia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Inertia 


The resistance of a massive body to any change in its 
velocity. Any body will continue in a state of rest or of 
uniform straight-line motion unless acted upon by a force. 
Thus a spacecraft, when its rocket motors are switched 
off, follows a ballistic trajectory because of its inertia. In 
Newton’s second law of motion, the relationship between 
acceleration, a, of a body and the applied force, F, is 
F = ma, where m is the inertial mass of the body. As 
far as can be determined, the inertial mass of a body is 
exactly equal to its gravitational mass, which determines 
its gravitational attraction. This is called the Equivalence 
Principle. There does not seem to be any a priori reason 
why these two masses should be exactly equal, and there 
is still considerable debate on the question of the nature of 
inertia. 


See also: acceleration, energy, Newton’s laws of motion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inferior Planets ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Inferior Planets 


Acollective term for the major planets Mercury and Venus, 
whose orbits lie within that of the Earth, as opposed to 
the superior planets, those major planets whose orbits lie 
outside the Earth’s. 


Compare: inner planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Inflation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Inflation 


According to inflationary theory, there was a stage of 
exponentially rapid expansion of the early universe. 
The existence of this stage resolves many long-standing 
problems of the BIG BANG THEORY and changes our 
understanding of the origin of the universe and of its global 
structure. 


Inflation and the big bang theory 

Inflationary cosmology describes the very early stages of 
the evolution of the universe and its structure at extremely 
large distances from us. For many years, cosmologists 
believed that the universe from the very beginning looked 
like an expanding ball of fire. This explosive beginning 
of the universe was called the big bang. In the end of 
the 1970s a different scenario for the universe’s evolution 
was proposed. According to this scenario, the universe 
at the very early stages of its evolution came through 
the stage of inflation, an exponentially rapid expansion 
in a kind of unstable vacuum-like state (a state with large 
energy density, but without elementary particles). This 
stage could be very short, but the universe within this 
time became exponentially large. At the end of inflation 
the vacuum-like state decayed, the universe became hot 
and its subsequent evolution could be described by the 
standard big bang theory (see also UNIVERSE: SIMULATIONS OF 
STRUCTURE AND GALAXY FORMATION, UNIVERSE: THERMAL HISTORY). 

The existence of the inflationary stage is necessary to 
resolve many difficult problems which arise when one tries 
to unify the modern theory of elementary particles and the 
standard big bang theory. The standard big bang theory 
asserts that the universe was born at some moment t = 0 
about 15 billion years ago, in a state of extremely high 
temperature T and density p (cosmological singularity). 
It is usually assumed that the standard description of the 
universe in terms of space and time becomes possible 
at the Planck time t ~ 10-* ¢ after the singularity, 
when its density drops below the so-called Planck density 
Pp ~ 10% g cm” (see UNIVERSE: DENSITY). (At greater 
density, quantum fluctuations of space-time are so large 
that an alternative description of space-time is required.) 
The temperature of the expanding universe gradually 
decreased, as the reciprocal of its size, and finally the 
universe evolved into the relatively cold universe where 
we live now. Remnants of this primordial cosmic fire still 
surround us in the form of the microwave background 
radiation with a temperature of 2.7 K. 

This theory was extremely successful in explaining 
various features of our world. However, in combination 
with the modern theory of elementary particles, it predicts 
the existence of a large amount of superheavy stable 
particles carrying magnetic charge: magnetic monopoles. 
These objects have a typical mass 10! times that of the 
proton. According to the standard big bang theory, 
monopoles should appear at the very early stages of 
the evolution of the universe, and they should now be 
as abundant as protons. In that case the mean density 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of matter in the universe would be about 15 orders 
of magnitude higher than its present value of about 
10-” gcm®. 

In addition to this problem, the standard big bang 
theory was unable to answer many other questions. For 
example, the universe is closed if 2 = p/p, > 1, it is flat 
if Q = 1 and it is open if Q < 1. Here p is the density 
of the universe, p, is the critical density, which at the 
present epoch is of the order 10-” g cm™?. The value 
of the parameter changes in an expanding universe. 
Observational data suggest that now 0.3 < Q < 1.2, 
which does not seem unnatural. However, according to 
the big bang theory, this requires that at the Planck time 
the value of Q should coincide with 1 with an accuracy of 
10-©. A slightly higher value of 2 would lead to a closed 
universe which would immediately collapse; a slightly 
smaller value of Q would lead to an open universe, which 
at present would be practically empty. The need for this 
incredible fine tuning of initial conditions in the standard 
big bang theory is the essence of the flatness problem. 

One may also wonder, where did the universe 
come from? How could it happen that its different, 
causally disconnected parts could begin their expansion 
simultaneously? Why it is so big, homogeneous and 
isotropic? If it must be homogeneous for whatever reason, 
then what is the origin of galaxies? Why is our space 
three-dimensional? Is it possible that our universe could 
be created differently? 

All these problems are extremely difficult, and some 
of them sound almost metaphysical. That is why it is so 
encouraging that most of the problems mentioned above 
can be resolved in the context of one simple scenario of 
the evolution of the universe—the inflationary universe 
scenario. 


New theories of elementary particles and the 
notion of a scalar field 

Inflationary theory became possible owing to the rapid 
progress of the theory of elementary particles during the 
last two decades, after physicists have found a way to 
unify weak, strong and electromagnetic interactions (see 
STANDARD MODEL OF PARTICLE PHYSICS). 

It is well known that electrically charged particles 
interact with each other by creating an electromagnetic 
field around them. Small excitations of this field are called 
photons. Photons do not have any mass, which is the 
main reason why electrically charged particles can easily 
interact with each other at a very large distance. Weak 
and strong interactions are mediated by similar particles. 
For example, weak interactions are mediated by particles 
called W and Z. However, whereas photons are massless 
particles, the particles W and Z are extremely heavy; it 
is very difficult to produce them. That is why weak 
interactions are so weak. In order to obtain a unified 
description of weak and electromagnetic interactions 
despite the obvious difference in properties of photons and 
the W and Z particles, physicists introduced scalar fields 
¢, which will play the central role in our discussion. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inflation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The closest analog of a scalar field is the electrostatic 
potential ©. Electric and magnetic fields appear only if 
this potential is inhomogeneous or if it changes in time. 
If the whole universe were to have the same electrostatic 
potential, then nobody would notice it; it would be just 
another vacuum state. Similarly, a constant scalar field ¢ 
looks like a vacuum state; we do not see it even if we are 
surrounded by it. 

The main difference is that the constant electrostatic 
potential © does not have its own energy, whereas the 
scalar field ¢ may have potential energy density V(@). If 
V(¢) has one minimum at ¢ = go, then the whole universe 
eventually becomes filled by the field $9. This field is 
invisible, but, if it interacts with the W and Z particles, 
they become heavy. Meanwhile, if photons do not interact 
with the scalar field, they remain light. Therefore we 
may begin with a theory in which all particles initially are 
light and there is no fundamental difference between weak 
and electromagnetic interactions. This difference appears 
later, when the universe becomes filled by the scalar field 
g. At this moment the symmetry between different types 
of fundamental interactions becomes broken. This is the 
basic idea of all unified theories of weak, strong and 
electromagnetic interactions. A scalar field ¢ of a similar 
type is the main ingredient of inflationary theory. 


Development of inflationary theory 
According to the big bang theory, the rate of expansion 
of the universe given by the HUBBLE ‘CONSTANT’ H(t) is 
(approximately) proportional to the square root of its 
density. If the universe is filled by ordinary matter, then 
its density rapidly decreases as the universe expands. 
Therefore expansion of the universe rapidly slows down 
as its density decreases. This rapid decrease of the rate 
of the universe’s expansion is the main reason for all our 
problems with the standard big bang theory. However, 
because of the equivalence of mass and energy established 
by Einstein (E = mc’), the potential energy density V(¢) 
of the scalar field ¢ also contributes to the rate of expansion 
of the universe. In certain cases the energy density V(¢) 
decreases much more slowly than the density of ordinary 
matter. This may lead to the existence of a stage of 
extremely rapid expansion (inflation) of the universe. 
The first version of inflationary theory was proposed 
in 1979 by Alexei Starobinsky of the Landau Institute, 
Moscow. Starobinsky’s model created a sensation among 
Russian astrophysicists, and for two years it remained the 
main topic of discussion at all conferences on cosmology 
in the Soviet Union. However, his model was rather 
complicated, being based on the theory of anomalies in 
QUANTUM GRAVITY; it was not well known outside of Russia. 
The crucial step in the development of inflationary 
theory was made in 1981 by Alan Guth of MIT. He 
suggested that the hot universe at some intermediate 
stage could expand exponentially, being in an unstable 
supercooled state called the ‘false vacuum’. He called 
this stage of exponential expansion ‘inflation’. The main 
idea of his model was based on the theory of cosmological 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


phase transitions with supercooling, which was developed 
in the mid-1970s by David Kirzhnits and Andrei Linde 
at the Lebedev Institute, Moscow. This scenario was so 
attractive that even now many people associate inflation 
with expansion in a false vacuum. Unfortunately, as 
Guth has found himself, the universe after inflation in his 
scenario becomes extremely inhomogeneous. After a year 
of investigation, Guth, in his paper with Eric Weinberg of 
Columbia University, concluded that his model could not 
be improved. 

In 1982 Linde introduced the so-called new inflation- 
ary universe scenario, which later was also discovered by 
Andreas Albrecht and Paul Steinhardt at the University of 
Pennsylvania. Inflation in this scenario occurs not only in 
the false vacuum ¢ = 0 but also when the scalar field ¢ be- 
gins slowly moving towards the minimum of V(@). This 
scenario was free of the main problems of the model sug- 
gested by Guth, but it was rather complicated. It assumed 
that the universe from the very beginning was extremely 
large and hot, that it was in a state of thermal equilibrium 
although the field ¢ was practically decoupled from all 
other particles. It also required the potential V(¢) to have 
a very specific, fine-tuned form. No realistic versions of 
this scenario have been proposed so far. 

Finally, in 1983 Linde has found that inflation can 
naturally occur in many theories of elementary particles. 
There is no need for quantum gravity effects, phase 
transitions and supercooling. There is no need to assume 
that the whole universe was created at the same moment, 
that it was in a state of thermal equilibrium and that the 
scalar field from the very beginning was at the minimum 
of its potential energy density. One should consider all 
possible chaotic distributions of the scalar field in the early 
universe, and then check whether some of them lead to 
inflation. Those places where inflation does not occur 
remain small, whereas those domains where inflation 
takes place become exponentially large and give the main 
contribution to the total volume of the universe. This 
scenario was called ‘chaotic inflation’. Its simplest version 
was described in the previous section. In the context of this 
scenario inflation is not an exotic phenomenon invoked by 
theorists for solving their problems. It is a very general 
regime which occurs in a wide class of theories including 
many models with polynomial and exponential potentials 


V@). 


Chaotic inflation 

To explain the basic idea of chaotic inflation, let us consider 
the simplest model of a scalar field ¢ with a mass m 
and with the potential energy density V(¢) = (m?/2)¢? 
(figure 1). Since this function has a minimum at ¢ = 0, 
one may expect that the scalar field ¢ should oscillate near 
this minimum. This is indeed the case if the universe 
does not expand. However, one can show that in a 
rapidly expanding universe the scalar field moves down 
very slowly, as a ball in a viscous liquid, viscosity being 
proportional to the speed of expansion. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inflation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


__Planck_ density 


Figure 1. Motion of the scalar field in the theory with 

V(¢) = (m?/2)¢?. Several different regimes are possible, 
depending on the value of the field ¢. If the potential energy 
density of the field is greater than the Planck density 

10°4 g cm~%, quantum fluctuations of space-time are so strong 
that one cannot describe it in usual terms. Such a state is often 
called space-time foam. At a somewhat smaller energy density 
(region A) quantum fluctuations of space-time are small, but 
quantum fluctuations of the scalar field ¢ may be large. Jumps 
of the scalar field due to quantum fluctuations lead to a process 
of eternal self-reproduction of inflationary universe which we 
are going to discuss later. At even smaller values of V(@) 
(region B) fluctuations of the field ¢ are small; it slowly moves 
down as a ball in a viscous liquid. Inflation occurs in both the 
region A and region B. Finally, near the minimum of V(@) 
(region C) the scalar field rapidly oscillates, creates pairs of 
elementary particles, and the universe becomes hot. 


There are two equations which describe the evolution 
of a homogeneous scalar field in our model: 


k 4nG , 
H+ a pa al +m$°) 


6 +3Hd = —m’¢. 


Here H = a/ais the Hubble parameter in the universe with 
a scale factor a(t), k = —1,0, 1 for an open, flat or closed 
universe respectively, G is the gravitational constant. The 
first of these two equations is the Einstein equation for 
a homogeneous universe containing a scalar field ¢ with 
energy density p = ¢7/2 + m??/2. The second equation is 
the standard Klein—-Gordon equation for a homogeneous 
scalar field. The only difference (but a very important one) 
is the presence of the term 3H ¢, which appears owing to 
the expansion of the universe. This equation is similar to 
the equation of motion for a harmonic oscillator, where 
instead of x(t) we have (rt), with a friction term 3H. 

If the scalar field initially was large, the Hubble 
parameter H was large too, according to the first equation. 
This means that the friction term 3H@ in the second 
equation was very large, and therefore the scalar field was 
moving very slowly, as a ball in a viscous liquid. Therefore 
at this stage the energy density of the scalar field, unlike the 
density of ordinary matter, remained almost constant, and 
expansion of the universe continued with a much greater 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


speed than in the old cosmological theory. Because of the 
rapid growth of the scale of the universe and the slow 
motion of the field ¢, soon after the beginning of this 
regime one has & < 3H¢, H? > k/a’, ¢ « m’¢?, so 
the system of equations can be simplified: 


: 1/2 4 
“ =2m¢ (=) 396 = —m9. (1) 
a a 


The first equation shows that if the field @ changes very 
slowly, then the size of the universe grows approximately 
ase”, where H = (81 GV(¢)/3)'/? = 2m¢(xG/3)'”. 

This stage of exponentially rapid expansion of the 
universe is called inflation. In realistic versions of 
inflationary theory its duration could be as short as 10-* s. 
When the field ¢ becomes sufficiently small, viscosity 
becomes small, inflation ends and the scalar field ¢ begins 
to oscillate near the minimum of V(¢). As any rapidly 
oscillating classical field, it loses its energy by creating 
pairs of elementary particles. These particles interact with 
each other and come to a state of thermal equilibrium with 
some temperature 7. From this time on, the corresponding 
part of the universe can be described by the standard hot 
universe theory. 

The main difference between inflationary theory and 
the old cosmology becomes clear when one calculates the 
size of a typical inflationary domain at the end of inflation. 
Investigation of this question shows that even if the size 
of inflationary universe at the beginning of inflation in our 
model was as small as the Plank size Jp ~ 10-3 cm, after 
10-* s of inflation the universe acquires a huge size of 
1 ~ 10! cm. These numbers are model dependent, but in 
all realistic models this size appears to be many orders of 
magnitude greater than the size of the part of the universe 
which we can see now, / ~ 108 cm. This immediately 
solves most of the problems of the old cosmological theory. 

Our universe is so homogeneous because all 
inhomogeneities were stretched 10°” times. The density 
of primordial monopoles and other undesirable ‘defects’ 
becomes exponentially diluted by inflation. The universe 
becomes enormously large. Even if it was a closed 
universe of a size ~ 10-* cm, after inflation the distance 
between its ‘south’ and ‘north’ poles becomes many orders 
of magnitude greater than 107° cm. We see only a tiny 
part of the huge cosmic balloon. That is why the universe 
looks so flat. That is why we do not need expansion of 
the universe to begin simultaneously in many different 
causally disconnected domains of a Planck size. 

If one considers a universe which initially consisted 
of many domains with chaotically distributed scalar field 
¢ (or if one considers different universes with different 
values of the field), then domains in which the scalar field 
was too small never inflated. The main contribution to 
the total volume of the universe will be given by those 
domains which originally contained a large scalar field 
@. Inflation of such domains creates huge homogeneous 
islands out of initial chaos. Each inflationary domain in 
this scenario is much greater than the size of the observable 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inflation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


part of the universe. The properties of space inside each 
such domain after inflation practically do not depend on 
initial conditions at the beginning of inflation. 


Quantum fluctuations as a source for galaxy 
formation 

Solving many difficult cosmological problems simultane- 
ously by a rapid stretching of the universe may seem 
too good to be true. Indeed, if all inhomogeneities were 
stretched away, there will be no inhomogeneities left, and 
these are necessary for the creation of galaxies (see GALAXY 
FORMATION). Fortunately, while removing previously exist- 
ing inhomogeneities, inflation at the same time created 
new ones. The basic mechanism can be understood as fol- 
lows. 

According to quantum field theory, empty space is 
not entirely empty. It is filled with quantum fluctuations 
of all types of physical fields. These fluctuations can 
be regarded as waves of physical fields with all possible 
wavelengths. If the values of these fields, averaged over 
some macroscopically large time, vanish, then the space 
filled with these fields seems to us empty and can be called 
the vacuum. 

In the inflationary universe the vacuum structure is 
more complicated. Those waves which have very short 
wavelength ‘do not know’ that the universe is curved; they 
move in all directions with a speed approaching the speed 
of light. However, inflation very rapidly stretches these 
waves. Once their wavelengths become sufficiently large, 
these waves begin feeling that the universe is curved. At 
this moment they stop moving because of the effective 
viscosity of the expanding universe with respect to the 
scalar field. 

The first quantum fluctuations to freeze are those 
with large wavelengths. The amplitude of the frozen 
waves does not change later, whereas their wavelengths 
grow exponentially. In the course of expansion of the 
universe newer and newer fluctuations become stretched 
and freeze on the top of each other. At that stage one cannot 
call these waves ‘quantum fluctuations’ anymore. Most 
of them have exponentially large wavelengths. These 
waves do not move and do not disappear on being 
averaged over large periods of time. What we obtain is 
an inhomogeneous distribution of the classical scalar field 
@ which does not oscillate. Perturbations of the scalar 
field create Gaussian adiabatic perturbations of the metric 
(density perturbations). It is these perturbations that are 
responsible for the subsequent appearance of galaxies and 
formation of the large-scale structure of the universe. 

Note that the amplitude of inflationary perturbations 
depends on the Hubble parameter H, which changes 
only very slowly during inflation. At the same time, the 
wavelength of the perturbations grows exponentially. Asa 
result, the amplitude of the density perturbations is nearly 
scale independent; they have flat spectrum. The fact that 
inflation produces adiabatic Gaussian perturbations with 
a nearly flat spectrum practically does not depend on 
the choice of the inflationary potential V(¢), even though 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the amplitude of the perturbations does depend on V (¢). 
In addition to adiabatic perturbations, inflation produces 
gravitational waves, which also have a flat spectrum. 


Eternal inflation 

The possibility that galaxies appear as a result of quantum 
fluctuations may seem very unusual. However, a further 
pursuit of this idea has led to an even less expected 
conclusion: quantum fluctuations may lead to an eternal 
process of self-reproduction of the universe. This effect is 
rather general, but it looks especially surprising and leads 
to most dramatic consequences in the context of the chaotic 
inflation scenario. 

As we already mentioned, one can visualize quantum 
fluctuations of the scalar field in inflationary universe as 
waves, which move in all possible directions and then 
freeze on the top of each other. Each freezing wave slightly 
increased the value of the scalar field in some parts of the 
universe and slightly decreased this field in other parts of 
the universe. 

Consider those rare parts of the universe where these 
freezing waves always increased the value of the scalar 
field $, persistently pushing the scalar field uphill, to the 
larger values of its potential energy V(#). This is an 
unusual and obviously improbable regime. Indeed, the 
probability that the field ¢ will make one jump up (instead 
of jump down) is equal to 1/2 and the probability that the 
next time it also jumps up is also 1/2, so that the probability 
that the field ¢ without any special reason will make N 
consecutive jumps in the same direction is extremely small; 
it will be proportional to 1/2”. 

Normally one neglects such fluctuations. However, in 
inflationary cosmology they can be extremely important. 
Indeed, those rare domains of the universe where the field 
jumps high enough begin exponentially expanding with 
ever-increasing speed. Remember that the inflationary 
universe expands as e””’, where the Hubble constant is 
proportional to the square root of the energy density of 
the field ¢. In the simple model with V(¢) = (m?/2)¢* 
the Hubble constant H will be simply proportional to ¢. 
Thus, the higher the field ¢ jumps, the faster the universe 
expands. Very soon those rare domains, where the field 
¢ persistently climbs up the wall, will acquire a much 
greater volume than those domains which keep sliding 
to the minimum of V(¢) in accordance with the laws of 
classical physics. 

This implies that, if the universe contains at least 
one inflationary domain of a sufficiently large size, it 
begins unceasingly producing newer and new inflationary 
domains. Inflation at each particular point may stop very 
quickly, but there will be many other places which will 
continue expanding exponentially. The total volume of 
all inflationary domains will grow without end. This 
picture differs considerably from the standard big bang 
cosmology which assumed that our universe is similar 
to one huge homogeneous expanding ball. According to 
the new theory, our universe is not a ball but a fractal, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inflation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which looks like a tree consisting of an infinite number of 
inflationary balloons producing new balloons. 

In this scenario the universe as a whole is immortal. 
Each particular part of the universe may appear from a 
singularity somewhere in the past, and it may end up in 
a singularity somewhere in the future. However, there 
is no end to the evolution of the whole universe. The 
situation with the beginning is less certain. It is most 
probable that each part of the inflationary universe has 
originated from some singularity in the past. However, 
at present we do not have any proof that all parts of 
the universe were created simultaneously in a general 
cosmological singularity, before which there was no space 
and time at all. Moreover, the total number of inflationary 
bubbles on our ‘cosmic tree’ exponentially grows in time. 
Therefore most of the bubbles (including our own part 
of the universe) grow indefinitely far away from the root 
of this tree. This does not necessarily eliminate the big 
bang, but it removes the possible beginning of the whole 
universe to the indefinite past. 

Until now we have considered the simplest inflation- 
ary model with only one scalar field ¢. However, in realis- 
tic models of elementary particles there are many different 
scalar fields. For example, in the unified theories of weak 
and electromagnetic interactions there exist at least two 
other scalar fields, ® and H. In some versions of these the- 
ories the potential energy density of these fields has about 
a dozen different minima of the same depth. During in- 
flation these fields, just as the field ¢, jump in all possible 
directions owing to quantum fluctuations. After inflation 
they fall down to different minima of their energy den- 
sity in different exponentially large parts of the universe. 
Scalar fields change properties of elementary particles and 
the laws of their interaction. This means that after infla- 
tion the universe becomes divided into exponentially large 
domains with different laws of low-energy physics. 

Note that, if fluctuations are not too strong, scalar 
fields cannot jump from one minimum of their energy 
density to another. In this case the new parts of the 
inflationary universe remember the ‘genetic code’ of their 
parents. However, if fluctuations are sufficiently large, 
mutations occur. In some inflationary models quantum 
fluctuations become so strong that even the effective 
number of dimensions of space and time can change. 
According to these models, we find ourselves inside a four- 
dimensional domain with our kind of physical laws not 
because domains with different dimensionality and with 
different particle properties are impossible or improbable, 
but simply because our kind of life cannot exist in other 
domains. 


Inflation, observational data and particle physics 

In addition to explaining many features of our world, 
inflationary theory makes several important predictions. 
First of all, most of the inflationary models predict that 
the universe should be extremely flat, 2 = 1+ 10~*!. It 


1 Note that, from the point of view of the geometry of the 
universe, the flatness condition Q = 1 takes into account the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is possible to have inflationary models with Q < 1 (open 
inflation). So far all models of this type are much more 
complicated than the models which lead to Q = 1. 

Also, as we already mentioned, inflation generates 
Gaussian adiabatic perturbations of metric with a nearly 
scale-independent (flat) spectrum. This is one of the 
most important and robust predictions of inflationary 
cosmology that can be experimentally tested. We are 
unaware of any non-inflationary mechanism that would 
produce such perturbations. 

Flatness of the universe can be experimentally 
verified, since the density of a flat universe is related in a 
very simple way to the speed of its expansion given by the 
Hubble constant. So far observational data are consistent 
with the simplest possibility Q = 1. If it happens that 
the total energy density is smaller than p., so that the 
universe is open, it will be necessary to make substantial 
adjustments to inflationary theory and consider models of 
open inflation. 

Properties of density perturbations produced during 
inflation can be tested not only by looking at the 
distribution of matter in the universe. These perturbations 
make their imprint on the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND 
radiation. They make the temperature of this radiation 
slightly different in different places in the sky. This 
is exactly what was found by the Cosmic Background 
Explorer (cose) and later confirmed by several other 
groups of observers. 

A new generation of satellites measuring the 
anisotropy of the microwave background radiation will 
bring us much more detailed information about the 
spectrum of perturbations of the metric in the early 
universe. This information, combined with independent 
investigation of Q by other methods, will make it 
possible to perform a thorough test of various versions 
of inflationary theory. It may rule out many particular 
versions of inflationary theory. However, even though 
each particular version of inflationary theory can be tested, 
it may be difficult or even impossible to rule out the main 
idea of inflationary cosmology. For example, as we already 
mentioned, if observations show that the universe is not 
flat but open, we will need to consider more complicated 
versions of inflationary theory. However, it is important 
that these versions do exist. Meanwhile, at present we do 
not have any non-inflationary theory of an open universe 
which would explain why the universe is so homogeneous 
and predict the small inhomogeneities (‘ripples in space’) 
discovered by COBE. 

It is too early to claim that the recent observational 
data have confirmed inflationary theory, but it is certainly 
true that these results already at their level of accuracy 
could definitively disprove most of the inflationary 
models, and this did not happen. Recent observational 
data give certain evidence in favor of the simplest 


contributions to p from all sources, including vacuum energy, 
or cosmological constant. However, astronomers often exclude 
the contribution to Q from the vacuum energy, which sometimes 
leads to terminological misunderstandings. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inflation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


versions of inflationary theory predicting a flat universe 
with a flat spectrum of Gaussian adiabatic perturbations. 
Meanwhile, during the last few years the observational 
data practically ruled out the only alternative mechanism 
of formation of the large-scale structure of the universe, 
based on the theory of topological defects. Note also that 
the theory of topological defects did not address any other 
problems of the standard big bang theory that have been 
solved by inflation. Thus, although we still do not know 
whether inflationary theory is true, perhaps it is fair to say 
that it is the only internally consistent cosmological theory 
that is at present available. 

Inflationary theory is changing together with the 
rapid development of elementary particle theory. The 
greatest challenge is to obtain a natural realization 
of the inflationary universe scenario in the context of 
supergravity, string theory or M-theory. This appears to 
be a very difficult task. In order to accomplish it, many 
different inflationary models have been suggested, some 
of which are based on investigation of more complicated 
theories with several different scalar fields. The list of new 
models includes ‘extended inflation’, ‘natural inflation’, 
‘topological inflation,’ ‘hybrid inflation,’ etc. Most of 
these models are based on the same physical principles 
as the simplest chaotic inflation model discussed above, 
but each of them has its own unique features which can be 
experimentally tested. 


Conclusion 

For many centuries scientists believed that the universe 
is static. Later, they learned that the universe 
expands. This was a psychological shock, which 
provoked many attempts to restore stationarity either 
by modifying the Einstein equations or by invoking 
permanent matter creation in a steady-state universe. 
Eventually all these attempts failed. Discovery of the 
cosmic microwave background radiation and successful 
prediction of abundances of hydrogen, helium and other 
elements in the universe confirmed the big bang theory. 
Finally, the inflationary scenario appeared, which solved 
many of the intrinsic problems of the big bang cosmology 
and apparently removed the last doubts concerning its 
validity. 

However, the development of the inflationary theory 
is gradually giving rise to a completely new cosmological 
paradigm, which is considerably different from the old big 
bang theory and even from the first versions of inflationary 
cosmology. The universe appears to be both chaotic and 
homogeneous, expanding and stationary. It may consist 
of many exponentially large domains with different laws 
of low-energy physics and perhaps even with different 
dimensionality. Our cosmic home grows, fluctuates and 
eternally reproduces itself in all its possible forms, as if 
adjusting itself for all possible types of life which it can 
support. Some parts of the new theory, itis hoped, will stay 
with us for years to come, some others may be considerably 
modified in the nearby future. However, it seems that 
the last 20 yr of development of cosmology have already 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


changed in an irreversible way our understanding of the 
structure and the fate of our universe and of our own place 
in the world. 


Bibliography 

Kolb E W and Turner M S 1990 The Early Universe (New 
York: Addison-Wesley) 

Liddle A Rand Lyth DH 1993 The cold dark matter density 
perturbations Phys. Rep. 231 1-105 

Linde A D 1990 Particle Physics and Inflationary Cosmology 
(Chur: Harwood Academic) 

Linde A D 1994 The self-reproducing inflationary universe 
Sci. Am. 271 (5) 48-55 


Andrei Linde 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Inflationary Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Inflationary Universe 


A modification to the standard Big Bang model that 
incorporates a period of exponential (accelerating) 
expansion, called ‘inflation’ into the early evolution of 
the universe. In a typical inflationary scenario, the 
exponential expansion would have started about 10 s 
after the beginning of time and would have ended when 
the universe was, say, a hundred times older (i.e. after 
about 10-* s). During this time interval (the ‘inflationary 
epoch’), all distances in the universe would have increased 
by a factor of about 10°°. An inflationary factor of 10°° 
corresponds to a region of space 10™* light-seconds in 
radius and would expand to a radius of about 10’° light- 
seconds (about 300 million light years). Although this 
appears to imply expansion ‘faster than light’, because 
inflation involves the expansion of space, rather than the 
motion of particles through space, it does not contradict 
Einstein’s assertion that nothing can exceed the velocity of 
light. 

According to grand unified theories of elementary 
particles and forces, inflation was driven by a change 
that occurred, about 10 s after the beginning of time, 
when the grand unified force separated into the strong and 
electroweak forces and immense quantities of energy were 
released that previously had been stored in the vacuum of 
spacetime. This ‘phase change’ in the state of the universe 
has been likened to the change that occurs when water 
turns to ice and heat (‘latent heat’) is released. 

The inflationary hypothesis was introduced in 1981 
by American mathematical physicist Alan Guth, in order 
to tackle a number of outstanding issues in cosmology, 
including the ‘flatness’ problem and the ‘horizon problem’. 
The flatness problem arises from the fact that observations 
indicate that the mean density of the universe is within a 
factor of ten of the critical density, the density of a so-called 
‘flat’ universe (one in which the net overall curvature of 
space is zero). Standard Big Bang models imply that 
had the mean density differed even microscopically from 
the critical value in the first instants of the history of 
the universe, it would differ from the critical value by 
a huge factor now. The horizon problem relates to the 
question of how the universe on the large scale came to 
be so homogeneous and isotropic (the same everywhere 
and in all directions). For example, when we look at the 
microwave background in opposite regions of the sky, that 
radiation has been traveling through space for virtually 
the entire lifetime of the universe (about 15 billion years). 
Because the diameter of the observable universe is twice 
as great as this (about 30 billion light years), there would 
not have been enough time, in standard Big Bang models, 
for these widely separated regions to have had any kind of 
contact with each other (no signal, traveling at the speed 
of light, could have traveled from one to the other). How, 
then, could these regions be identical? 

By blowing up the universe by such a huge factor, 
inflation ensures that the curvature of space becomes 
indistinguishably close to zero (the ‘flat’ case). If the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


inflationary model is correct, the observable universe is a 
tiny portion of the whole, and space appears flat in much 
the same way as the surface of the planet Earth appears 
flat if we examine only a tiny portion of it. The huge 
inflationary factor also offers a solution to the horizon 
problem. Prior to the epoch of inflation, there would 
have been time for a sufficiently small volume of space 
(smaller, say, than 10 light-seconds across) to iron out 
any internal differences and become uniform throughout. 
By blowing up this microscopic volume to become larger 
than the observable universe, inflation would ensure that 
the entire observable universe, on the large scale, looks 
exactly the same. 

Inflation also resolves a number of problems relating 
to particle physics and, by inflating tiny quantum 
fluctuations to enormous scales, provides a possible 
mechanism for generating the ‘seeds’ from which galaxies 
and larger-scale structures subsequently developed. 


Seealso: Big Bang theory, cosmological constant, cosmo- 
logical model, grand unified theory. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Information Handling in 
Astronomy 


In a science such as astronomy, information handling 
encompasses data collection, analysis and dissemination, 
as well as the way astronomers publish, interact and 
communicate, including with other communities, with 
amateur astronomers and with the public at large. 

The main aim of astronomers is to contribute to a 
better understanding of the universe (as well as of its past 
and future) and consequently to a better comprehension 
of the place and role of humans in it. 

To this end, together with theoretical investigations, 
they carry out observations to obtain data that 
subsequently undergo treatment and studies leading to 
the publication of results. The whole procedure can 
include several iterations between the various steps as 
well as with external fields, non-scientific disciplines, 
instrumental technologies and information handling 
methodologies. 

In the following, the concept of information will 
cover the observational material, the more or less reduced 
data extracted from it, the scientific results and the 
accessory material used by scientists in their work 
(bibliographical resources, yellow-page services, and so 
on), as well as the communications and publications of 
all kinds. 

It should also be noted that, contrary to other 
scientific disciplines, astronomy has the peculiarity of not 
being able to interact with the objects it investigates 
(except for very few bodies of the solar system where in 
situ. studies can be carried out by spacecraft). 
Consequently all our knowledge of the universe has so 
far depended almost exclusively on the photons reaching 
us from outer space. 

Astronomy has thus to rely on the ingenuity of 
instrumentalists to conceive and design a whole range of 
observing tools exploiting at best the latest technologies 
and the most sensitive detectors to obtain the most 
relevant and most varied information allowing progress 
of astronomical knowledge. The current trend is also 
towards panchromatic astronomy, i.e. combining 
information from the various wavelength ranges of the 
ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM (radio, infrared, visible, 
ultraviolet, x, y, ...), instead of restricting oneself to 
specific ranges as used to be the case in the past. 

Compared with the past too, ever larger amounts of 
data are being collected, and the rate will probably 
continue to accelerate. Instruments such as NASA/ESA’s 
Hubble Space Telescope (HST) or ESO’s Very Large 
Telescope (VLT) are generating or will generate annually 
a volume of information of the order of terabytes of data. 
The rate of increase of observations is also matched by 
the diversification. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Until not so long ago, an astronomer could also work 
individually from the conception of a project through to 
the collection and analysis of data. Nowadays, as 
instrumentation has become more complex, teams of 
researchers, most often international ones, have become 
necessary and they quite naturally include technologists 
or instrumentalists. 

At the other end of the chain, the teams are more and 
more including methodologists, i.e. specialists of 
information handling. If image processing is a natural 
consequence of a sophisticated technology, information 
handling rather qualifies whatever happens to already 
well-reduced data. 

Astronomy and related space sciences have always 
been at the leading edge of new information 
technologies, often testing, contributing to and pushing 
for new developments, be it for the access to databases, 
the usage of networks or the initial explosion of world- 
wide web (WWW) sites, as well as for remote observing 
(spacecraft and ground-based telescopes remotely 
operated). 

The recent dramatic evolution of communication and 
information technologies had a deep impact on the way 
the astronomy community interacts and works, in other 
words on its dynamics, and one can certainly expect 
more evolution in the future as the corresponding 
technologies will bring in new potentialities. 

Information handling in astronomy thus reflects the 
way astronomers work and ensures progress of the 
astronomical knowledge which is then shared with 
colleague scientists as well as, on a less specialized level, 
with the significant community of amateur astronomers 
round the world (also a phenomenon proper to 
astronomy; see AMATEUR—PROFESSIONAL 
COLLABORATION IN ASTRONOMY) and with the public at 
large since cosmic perceptions have always been a 
fundamental component of human culture and 
philosophy. Astronomers are of course also deeply 
involved in EDUCATION at all levels. 

As described in the following and as illustrated by 
figure 1, the information flow in astronomy is far from 
being a simple linear one. More and more of the 
processes and corresponding exchanges are performed 
electronically. 


Observing and collecting data 
Carrying out professional astronomical observations 
implies having access to ground-based and space-borne 
instruments which is a highly, sometimes fiercely, 
competitive process. Candidates have to submit proposals 
requesting instrument or spacecraft time with 
specifications for secondary instrumentation, observing 
modes and configurations. 

The cases must be made not only on the basis of the 
technical capabilities requested but also with strong 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| Observing/Collecting data fromlapprovediprograms 
= > 


* 


_—_ 


“.. 


Pea a ~ ” 
/Expertidommittees Se ee 
Mig Selection L7” “Sy Y ai 
~~ Observational — Other disciplines, 
andteduced data [ technologies L& lmethodologies 
ee = 
Proposals pee - é‘ —<., 
A el ink ; . 
x ea Think [tank — Ss Yellow-page services 
eee ones) J —_ Other resources 
~ ™, 
a a 
| bea ics 
¥ ae “Sh 
aie To , | Databasesland archives 
Validation/Referces Pad 


Amateur astronomers 


- 


Pubhe dutteach 


Figure 1. A schematic view of the information flow in astronomy. 


references to the scientific achievements aimed at in the 
light, not only of what has already been achieved, but 
also of the expertise of the proposers themselves. 

Expert committees review the technical feasibility of 
the proposals and the relevance of the scientific cases. 
They refer to the available literature (a reason for 
publishing, see below) and to the past observations 
carried out with the instrument requested in order to 
avoid duplication of activities of sometimes highly 
oversubscribed equipment (hence the need for observing 
logs, see below). 

Oversubscribing factors vary with — specific 
instruments or spacecraft (the new ones and the most 
efficient ones being generally more sought for), but it is 
not rare that between five and ten times more observing 
time is requested than is available. The task of the time 
allocating committees is therefore not an easy one. 

Often astronomers, or even entire teams of 
astronomers, are encouraged to collaborate with each 
other, thus to share observing time and the resulting data. 
Astronomy is by essence an international science and it is 
quite common to find scientists from all over the world 
joining efforts in the same team (hence a need for 
yellow-page services, see below). 

Incidentally, service observing (i.e. observations 
carried out, not by the proposers themselves, but by a 
team of trained resident astronomers and technicians) is 
becoming increasingly common in order to maximize 
return of heavy investments, to optimize instrumental 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Trofessional publications 


aa ao 
aI (paper, CD-ROM, ldlectronic) L 


Ne 
Education 


pointing by combining lists of objects (‘targets’) of 
several programs and to minimize effects of some 
adverse factors such as seeing, weather, avoidance zones, 
solar activity, eclipses, radiation belts and so on. 

Service observing also makes it easier to deal with 
contingency time and with targets of opportunity (i.e. 
unscheduled events such as discoveries of novae, 
supernovae, comets and so on). In such cases, quick and 
efficient interactions with teams of specialists are critical 
for making the best of such opportunities. 


Nomenclature of celestial objects 

Cataloging objects properly is a fundamental issue of all 
astronomical observations and studies. However, when 
dealing with a study field as populated as the universe, to 
unequivocally identify the objects at hand is something 
that is made complicated by several factors. 

First of all, the relative positions of objects in the 
universe—thus in the sky—are not fixed, even if those 
relative movements are imperceptible to the unassisted 
eye and often on a human time scale (except again for the 
solar-system objects). 

Second, and all amateur photographers know that 
effect, the sky looks differently if observed in different 
wavelength ranges: the infrared sky is not quite the same 
as the visible one which in turn differs from the radio 
one, and so on. This results from the fact that celestial 
bodies radiate the peak of their energy in different 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


wavelength ranges (some stars are red, others are blue; 
some bodies are strong emitters in the infrared, others in 
the x range; and so on). 

Finally, and maybe most importantly, it all depends 
at which sensitivity and resolution the sky is observed in 
a specific wavelength range. The more sensitive is the 
tool, the more crowded is the sky ‘seen’ in that range, 
and the more precise must be the corresponding 
identification of a given object. 

It is not rare either that an object (star, nebula, 
galaxy,...) become resolved in several, sometimes many, 
components or elements when observed at a higher 
resolution. Hence the need for establishing some 
hierarchical relationships between the designations of 
those objects as seen in different conditions. 

In an excellent environment (i.e. away from the light 
pollution of densely populated areas), the unassisted 
human eye can see about 9000 stars brighter than 
magnitude 6.5 for the whole sky. This corresponds 
roughly to the Bright Star Catalog (BSC) that provides 
basic astronomical information. The Henry Draper (HD) 
Catalog, that goes down to about magnitude 9 (remember 
that the larger the magnitude, the fainter the object), lists 
already more than 272 000 stars. 

One of the first astronomical space experiments, the 
Belgian—UK Ultraviolet Sky Survey Telescope (S2/68) 
on board the TD1 satellite, led to a catalog of ultraviolet 
fluxes for 31 215 stars collected at the beginning of the 
1970s. A decade later, the IRAS Catalog of Point Sources 
(alone) gathered together some 250 000 well-confirmed 
infrared point sources observed by the INFRARED 
ASTRONOMY SATELLITE. 

As to the Guide Star Catalog (GSC) for the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE (HST), it contains nearly 19 million 
objects brighter than magnitude 16, of which more than 
15 million are classified as stars. A HUBBLE DEEP FIELD 
(HDF) typically reveals about 1500 galaxies down to 
nearly magnitude 30 (i.e. nearly four billion times fainter 
than the human eye can see) in an area of a few 
arcminutes (equivalent to a dime seen at a distance of 75 
feet). One thus realizes the challenge of unequivocally 
identifying objects in the sky as the instrumental 
sensitivity and resolution increase so dramatically. 

The nomenclature of astronomical objects follows a 
number of rules that differ with the objects at hand (see 
CONSTELLATIONS, STARS, AND DEEP-SKY OBJECTS: 
NOMENCLATURE). 

Solar-system objects, including natural satellites, 
minor planets and comets, as well as planetary features, 
are named following recommendations of ad hoc 
professional committees confirmed by the 
INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION (IAU). 

Discoveries of new bodies are handled by the 
Central Bureau of Astronomical Telegrams (CBAT) and 
the Minor Planet Center (MPC) that assign provisional 
designations until ratification by the IAU (for example, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lunar craters named after outstanding scientists, asteroids 
bearing names selected by their discoverers, and so on). 
Comets are nowadays the only bodies still receiving the 
names (up to three) of their discoverers, together with an 
alphanumerical identification. The CBAT also informs 
on discoveries of supernovae as well as other remarkable 
discoveries, events and celestial objects. 

A whole book would be necessary to describe in 
details all the systems used to designate stars and non- 
stellar objects. If a few bright ones have ancient historical 
names (Sirius), other designations include constellation 
memberships (a@ CMa), memberships of declination 
zones (—18°1345), sequential discovery numberings 
(V341 Sco), references to wavelength ranges (Sco X-1), 
to object natures (PSR 0031-007), to observatories, 
instruments or spacecraft (Lick Ha 52), to larger objects 
(NGC 125-6), to astronomer names (Barnard’s star), and 
so on, not to forget the most common identifications: 
sequence numberings in hundreds of astronomical 
catalogs and observing logs available. In other words, 
most celestial objects have just numbers and positions on 
the sky. 

A few words are in order here on a fashion that has 
been developed by non-official organizations on naming 
celestial objects and selling corresponding certificates. 
The fact is that such names have no formal or official 
validity whatever. Astronomers and their representative 
organizations dissociate themselves entirely from such 
commercial practices of selling fictitious names of 
surface features, of stars and of celestial bodies. 

The IAU is the sole internationally recognized 
authority for naming them. Those names are not sold, but 
assigned according to internationally accepted rules, 
recognized and used by scientists, space agencies and 
authorities worldwide. 


Catalogs, surveys, observing logs and 


archives 
As introduced above, catalogs can be organized 
according to object types (e.g. planetary nebulae, quasars, 
pulsars, ...), according to the type of data they offer (e.g. 
proper motions, photometric indices, spectral types, ...), 
or both. So many catalogs are available nowadays that it 
is out of the scope of this article to detail them. Refer, 
however, to the services maintained by the data centers 
(see below and the list of URLs at the end of the article). 
Surveys refer more to systematic coverages of the 
sky with specific instruments, such as the famous 
Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS), which was in 
fact a professional photographic atlas of the sky as seen 
in two colors by the Palomar Schmidt telescope. 
Important catalogs nowadays are also what is called 
the observing logs gathering together the details of the 
observations carried out with a specific instrument 
(objects observed; date, time, duration of observations; 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


instrumental specifications and/or configurations; and so 
on). They are in general linked to instrumental archives. 

Archiving is also a critical issue in astronomy, 
basically because practically all celestial objects are 
variable with time in a way or another and also, as seen 
earlier, because we are essentially passive observers of 
the universe and not experimenters who would be able to 
recreate at any time situations for further investigations. 

The memory of past observations is thus 
fundamental for future studies since furthermore it is not 
known for what purposes the next generations of 
astronomers would use the data. For a couple of decades 
now, the funding of all big new projects has included 
provisions for comprehensive image processing, 
adequate archiving and further exploitation of the archive 
after the possible termination of the mission. This might 
sound an obvious policy, but it is in fact a rather recent 
approach. 

The challenge here is of a technical nature as the 
average lifetime of storage media is about 4 yr and about 
3 yr for the user interfaces. Thus any long-term archiving 
policy has to make provisions for regularly transfering 
data on new material. 


Dababases and information hubs 
Beyond catalogs and collections of catalogs, extremely 
powerful databases are now available. The data centers 
themselves have become information hubs providing a 
whole spectrum of world-wide services. 

The Strasbourg astronomical Data Center (CDS) 
(figure 2) has been a long-time pioneer and is nowadays 
recognized as the world leader in these matters. 


VizieR: 
Catalogues and 
published tables 


SIMBAD: 
Aatronomical 


objects 


AatroGlu: 
Discovery tools 


In the early 1970s, a number of European institutions 
decided indeed to collaborate and to create a data center 
at Strasbourg Observatory with the daunting task of 
establishing an enormous table of synonyms between all 
catalog identifications. This was definitely aimed at 
avoiding the repetition of a couple of situations where 
two qualified astronomers studied and published papers 
on the same object, but under different identifications and 
without realizing it. 

However, more interestingly, this was allowing, with 
a single object name, access to all other identifiers, plus 
to the data listed in the various catalogs. As CDS also set 
up a comprehensive and very successful bibliographical 
object-oriented database, the references of the papers 
dealing with that object were immediately available by 
the same token. The popular Simbad database was born. 

Simbad holds today more than 2 200 000 objects 
under about 5 500 000 identifiers, together with more 
than 105 000 bibliographical references including about 
3000 000 object citations. Anyone starting studying 
seriously an astronomical object must pay a visit to 
Simbad first. 

Figure 2 shows other components of CDS’s 
information hub. VizieR is a search-and-shop individual- 
catalog service, with also access to large tables published 
in professional journals. Aladin is an interactive digitized 
sky atlas. Besides the references of Simbad, the CDS 
bibliographical service provides also access to abstracts 
of several major journals (see also ADS hereafter). The 
dictionary of nomenclature gives references and details 
on usage for more than 4000 different catalog acronyms. 
AstroGlu is a discovery tool helping to locate database 
servers providing relevant information. 


Bibliography : 
Abstracts 
Search angina 


Journals 
Bitliographic 
databases 


Figure 2. A schematic view of the CDS information hub (courtesy Centre de Données de Strasbourg, CDS). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Last, but not least, the StarPages are a set of 
permanently updated yellow-page resources providing 
detailed information on astronomy-related organizations 
(StarWorlds: about 6300 entries, more than 5500 WWW 
links), as well as on individual astronomers and related 
scientists (StarHeads: more than 5200 WWW home 
pages). They offer also access to an enormous dictionary 
(StarBits: about 140 000 entries) of abbreviations and 
acronyms related to astronomy and associated space 
sciences. The master files for StarWorlds have been used 
to produce figure 4 (see below). 

A few other multipurpose resources deserve also a 
mention in this section. 

The NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED) has 
been built around a master list of extragalactic objects for 
which cross-identifications of names have been 
established, accurate positions and redshifts entered to 
the extent possible, and some basic data collected. 
Bibliographic references relevant to individual objects 
have also been compiled. 

The Astrophysics Data System (ADS) is a NASA- 
funded project whose main resource is an abstract service 
(about half a million abstracts for astronomy and 
astrophysics only), together with links to scanned images 
of over 40 000 journal articles. ADS provides also access 
to astronomical data catalogs and data archives, thereby 
making data collected by NASA space missions available 
to astronomers. It offers also access to the StarPages. 

The National Space Science Data Center (NSSDC) 
provides access to a wide variety of astrophysics, space 
physics, solar physics, lunar and planetary data from 
NASA missions, together with some complementary 
data. 

The Canadian Astronomy Data Centre (CADC) and 
the Astronomical Data Analysis Center (ADAC) at the 
National Astronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ) are 
national resources offering access to a number of 
catalogs, databases and archives. 


Data processing 

Until not so long ago, data processing consisted 
essentially in photographic-plate scanning and in 
reduction of raw photometric data from punched 
papertapes. 

Nowadays, with the omnipresent digitization and 
multidimensionality of collected data, one rather speaks 
of image processing and a whole treatise could be 
devoted to it. 

Indeed the time seems definitely gone, at least with 
the big instruments, when astronomers were coming 
themselves to the telescope (or ground observatory for a 
spacecraft) and later returning home with unprocessed 
data. The advanced experiments have developed their 
own specific image processing which is now part of the 
projects themselves since the development phase. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Several comprehensive image handling systems have 
however been developed such as ESO’s Munich Image 
Data Analysis System (MIDAS) and NOAO’s Image 
Reduction and Analysis Facility (IRAF). They can be 
considered as general-purpose software systems for the 
reduction and analysis of astronomical data and are 
regularly upgraded. 

Complementary resources would include specific 
software packages and libraries (such as statistical ones), 
spectral line compilations, abundance libraries, opacity 
tables, and so on. A network such as Starlink helps UK- 
based astronomers to reduce and analyze their 
observations. 

It is certainly worthwhile to mention here that 
astronomers have introduced the Flexible Image 
Transport System (FITS) which is a general way to 
encode both definitions of data and the data themselves 
and which is machine independent. The FITS format has 
been quickly recommended for interchange of image data 
between all observatories—and is now in use even 
outside astronomy. 


Publishing and information sharing 

Publishing is not only motivated by the noble aims of 
educating and information sharing but also strongly 
conditioned by career constraints involving recognition, a 
necessity that should not be underestimated. Recognition 
is sought for getting positions (i.e. grants and salaries), 
for obtaining acceptance of proposals (e.g. leading to 
data collection) and for achieving funding of projects 
(allowing materialization of ideas). 

The pressure for recognition has contributed to the 
strong increase of professional publications (see figure 
3), together with other factors such as the expansion of 
the astronomy community itself (especially after the 
beginning of the space age), the multiplication of large 
instruments and spacecraft equipped with always faster, 
more diversified and more efficient detectors, and so on. 
Commercial publishers have also put on the market more 
journals which were as many additional communication 
outlets. 

The major professional journals use the peer-review 
procedure (‘refereeing’) for accepting, amending or 
rejecting submitted contributions. Albeit a matter of 
regular debates (on the principle itself as well as on the 
way it is conducted), the refereeing process has been so 
far the best one (or the less questionable one) to publish 
contributions with validated content, i.e. an assurance of 
good-quality, novel results obtained by reproducible 
experiments, calculations or analyses on which enough 
details are provided. 

The most important general professional journals 
include the Astrophysical Journal and the Astronomical 
Journal published by the American Astronomical Society, 
the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ik Hh i! 


180519 1914 9 1934) 1954 


yoo 
cecal 
peer) 
= 
dab 
"eee 
SRT 
EAT 
eo) 
mesic! 
FRET, 
Tata 
eae 
penne 
ET 
Bed 
deme 
prrercreeety) 


Figure 3. An illustration of the dramatic increase of 
astronomical literature over the past decades. Helmut A Abt, 
Editor-in-Chief of the Astrophysical Journal, is standing next to 
stacks of that leading professional publication (courtesy the 
National Optical Astronomy Observatories, NOAO). 


and Astronomy and Astrophysics resulting from the 
merging in 1969 of a number of European professional 


journals (see also ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES AND 
PUBLICATIONS). 
Astronomers communicate also via a_ whole 


spectrum of publications ranging from informal 
newsletters to books gathering together review papers by 
the best specialists on specific topics. Conferences, 
colloquiums, workshops and meetings of all kinds 
provide also efficient ways of exposing oneself to both 
excellent review talks and presentations of works in 
progress. The corresponding proceedings are published 


by commercial publishers, by learned societies, by 
research institutions or even by individuals, reasonably 
soon after the events. 

As described in the following section, publishing is 
nowadays increasingly done electronically, or, better 
said, there is more and more of diversified publishing, 1.e. 
of information available on different media (paper, CD- 
ROM, web sites, and so on). These media are not 
excluding, but complementing, each other. Several 
journals have an electronic counterpart. 

As mentioned earlier, professional astronomers are 
also contributing substantially to less _ specialized 
publications, mainly directed towards amateur 
astronomers and the public at large. Many countries have 
their own such national journal, but Sky & Telescope is 
probably the magazine with the largest audience world- 
wide (see also MEDIA). 


Electronic astronomy 

As mentioned already, more and more of the information 
exchanges in astronomy are done electronically, both 
dynamically (e-mail) and passively (web sites). 
Electronic handling is particularly well adapted to the 
fluid and living nature of today’s information material, to 
the digitized nature of most data and to the efficiency of 
contacts between collaborators spread over the world, as 
well as to the retrieval of information from the 
information hubs. It also makes easy the various 
interactions upstream and downstream, and allows 
diversified publishing. 

Figure 4 gives an idea of the distribution, at the time 
of writing this article, of the astronomy-related 
organizations using e-mail and/or having a web site. 
Together with the general world distribution, more 
detailed views are displayed for North America and 
Western Europe. 


Figure 4. Geographical distributions (North America, World, Western Europe) of astronomy-related organizations (all categories) 


with electronic facilities (e-mail and/or web pages) in April 1999. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The largest concentrations are located in Europe and 
in the USA (Northeast and California), with a few nuclei 
in Australia, India, Japan, New Zealand, as well as a few 
spots in South America. A striking feature of the central 
map is the desperate emptiness of the African continent. 
A similar comment is also applicable to quite a number 
of the so-called third-world countries. 

In Western Europe, it is striking how France, 
Portugal and Spain have significantly much lower 
densities than their European neighbors, obviously 
lagging behind as to the penetration of the internet and 
the WWW, a few years after the electronic medium 
started spreading quickly over the world. 

The ‘electronization’ of astronomical information 
handling is, however, not a bed of roses. New facilities 
and new possibilities bring in naturally new questions, 
new challenges and new problems that have to be faced, 
especially at the ethical level (proper credits of 
downloaded material, for instance), as well as at the legal 
(financial and copyright policies, electronic signatures, 
for instance) and educational (training of young and not- 
so-young people) ones, without forgetting the security 
and the fragility of the material delivered via the 
electronic medium—a very worrying factor for many 
people. 

The most demanding challenge, however, arises 
probably from the enormous quantity of information 
easily reachable (and providable) by everybody 
nowadays, as discussed in the following section. 


The information retrieval challenge 

At ACM97, the conference celebrating the 50th 
anniversary of the Association for Computing 
Machinery, the Nobel Prize laureate Murray Gell-Mann 
called attention to the fact that, with the digital age 
producing an ‘immense sea of data that threatens to 
drown humanity’, people needed to adapt how they think 
so that true knowledge can be distilled from the deluge. 


“We hear, in this dawn of the so-called information 
age, a great deal of talk about the explosion of 
information and new methods for its dissemination. It 
is important to realize, however, that most of what is 
disseminated is misinformation, badly organized 
information or irrelevant information. How can we 
establish a reward system such that many competing 
but skillful processors of information, acting as 
intermediaries, will arise to interpret for us this mass 
of unorganized, partially false material?’ 


That challenge is probably the most critical one 
currently in the field of information handling—and 
astronomy is facing it too. 

We shall have to rely, indeed, on the wisdom of 
providers and users of electronic information, as well as 
on the various intermediaries (compilers, information 
hubs,...) and on the learned societies, committee experts 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and so on to take this into account, to put, more than 
ever, the emphasis on validated and authenticated 
electronic information, and to reward appropriately the 
scientists who are or will dedicate a full-time job to such 
activities. 

The quality of resources as well as their maintenance 
must be continuously improved from lessons learned 
with time and using the most adequate tools. Generally 
speaking, information has to be collected, verified, de- 
biased, homogenized and made available not only in an 
efficient way but also through reliable channels. 
Sophisticated techniques cannot save the extensive 
background, unrewarding and very careful work which is 
indispensable for the compilation of a valuable resource. 
One could never stress enough the importance of this 
obscure daily work consisting of patiently collecting 
data, checking information and updating it. This has also 
to be carried out by knowledgable scientists or 
documentalists and cannot be delegated to inexperienced 
clerks. 

Efficient search engines working on validated and 
authenticated material must enable finding information 
looked for, if available at all, and whether it relates to 
celestial objects, to data, to bibliography or to the vast 
coverage by yellow-page services. That information must 
be of good quality, relevant and on target. The best 
search engines available today and the corresponding 
organizations have been mentioned in this article. 

As technology leaders agree that changes are the only 
sure thing about computing and communications in the 
next decades, we can certainly expect further 
modifications on the information handling in astronomy 
and consequently on the sociodynamics of the astronomy 
community itself. 


Useful URLs 

For WWW access, here are—in alphabetical order—the 

URLs of the most relevant organizations and resources 

mentioned in the article. Most of them are collaborating 

with each other and are hosting mirror pages of their 

partners. Complementary resources are also generally 

available from the sites. 

e American Astronomical Society 
(http://www.aas.org/) 

e Association for Computing Machinery 
(http://www.acm.org/) 

e Astrophysics Data System 
(http://adsabs.harvard.edu/) 

e Canadian Astronomy Data Centre 
(http://cadcwww.dao.nre.ca/CADC-homepage.html) 

e Central Bureau of Astronomical Telegrams 
(http://cfa-www.harvard.edu/cfa/ps/cbat.html) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Information Handling in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e = International Astronomical Union 
(http://www.iau.org/) 

e §=Minor Planet Center 

(http://cfa-www.harvard.edu/iau/mpce.html) 

e NAOJ Astronomical Data Analysis Center 

(http://adac.mtk.nao.ac.jp/) 

e NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database 

(http://nedwww.ipac.caltech.edu/) 

e National Space Science Data Center 
(http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/) 

e Royal Astronomical Society 
(http://www.ras.org.uk/ras/) 

e Simbad 
(http://simbad.u-strasbg. fr/Simbad) 

e §©6Sky & Telescope 
(http://www.skypub.com/) 

e = Starlink 
(http://star-www.rl.ac.uk/) 

e §©StarPages 
(http://vizier.u-strasbg.fr/starpages.html) 

e Strasbourg Data Center 
(http://cdsweb.u-strasbg.fr/CDS. html) 


Bibliography 

Because of the quick evolution of information 
technologies nowadays, and because of the impact they 
have on the dynamics of the astronomy community, some 
aspects of the most recent compilations and reviews 
could become rather quickly outdated. The basic 
principles will largerly remain unchanged, however, and 
the following books could be recommended as possible 
further, more technical, reading. 


Boroson T, Davies J and Robson I (ed) 1996 New Observing 
Modes for the Next Century (San Francisco, CA: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 

Egret D and Albrecht M A (eds) 1995 Information & On-Line 
Data in Astronomy (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Heck A (ed) 1997 Electronic Publishing for Physics and 
Astronomy (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Heck A and Murtagh F (ed) 1993 Intelligent Information 
Retrieval: The Case of Astronomy and Related Space 
Sciences (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Jaschek C 1989 Data in Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Series of specialized conferences provide also sources for 
advanced material. See for instance the following as well 
as the numerous references quoted therein: 

e the Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems 
conferences (proceedings published by the Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific, San Francisco), 

e the Astronomy from Large Databases conferences 
(proceedings published by the European Southern 
Observatory, Garching), 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Data Analysis in Astronomy (‘Erice’) workshhops 
(proceedings published by Plenum Press, New York, and 
World Scientific, Singapore), 

the Converging Computing Methodologies in Astronomy 
workshops of the European Science Foundation 
(proceedings published in Vistas in Astronomy). 


André Heck 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Arrays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Infrared Arrays 


Infrared arrays are small electronic imaging devices 
subdivided into a grid or ‘array’ of picture elements, 
or pixels, each of which is made of a material sensitive 
to photons (ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION) with wavelengths 
much longer than normal visible light. Typical dimensions 
of currently available devices are about 27-36 mm square, 
and formats now range from 2048 x 2048 pixels for the near- 
infrared detectors down to about 128 x 128 pixels for the 
mid-and far-infrared regions. These imaging devices have 
completely revolutionized INFRARED ASTRONOMY since their 
introduction in the late 1980s because they provide images 
and spectroscopic information about regions of space 
that are not accessible to visible light detectors (see also 
INFRARED IMAGERS). Such regions include the dusty, gaseous 
clouds where star formation occurs, the obscured center 
of the Milky Way some 28000 light-years from the solar 
system, as well as the most distant galaxies in the universe. 
Distant objects must be studied at infrared wavelengths 
because the Hubble expansion of the universe has shifted 
their spectra far into the red. 

While there is some similarity between infrared arrays 
and silicon CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs), there are also 
fundamental differences. Infrared arrays cannot use 
pure silicon as the detector material because it is not 
sensitive to light of wavelengths longer than 1.1 4m, no 
charge-coupling is used to extract the signals, and much 
lower cryogenic temperatures are needed to operate these 
devices. Infrared arrays require cooling to temperatures 
between liquid nitrogen (77 K) and liquid helium (4 K), 
depending on their wavelength range of operation. 

To generate an image, all infrared array detectors 
must convert radiation into electrical charge by absorbing 
a photon. The material used to detect the photon is a 
semiconductor, that is, a crystalline material with electrical 
conductivity properties intermediate between that of a 
good conductor like copper and an insulator like glass. 
Silicon is the best known semiconductor. Other examples 
include germanium (Ge), gallium arsenide (GaAs) and 
indium antimonide (InSb). Each is characterized by a 
crystal structure with an energy bandgap which separates 
a conduction band from the normal valence band of 
the atoms. The absorption of a photon of sufficient 
energy excites an electron from the valence band into the 
conduction band. The smaller the bandgap, the lower 
the photon energy needed and the longer the wavelength 
of radiation that can be detected by the material. If 
the bandgap energy (EG) is expressed in electron-volts, 
then the longest wavelength that can be detected is 
given by 1.24 w~m/EG. The bandgap varies slightly with 
temperature, but typical values are 1.1 eV for Si, 0.67 eV 
for Ge, 0.18 eV for InSb 

There are two classes of semiconductors used in 
infrared photon detection; intrinsic and extrinsic. In an 
intrinsic semiconductor crystal, a photon with sufficient 
energy creates an electron-hole pair when the electron 
is excited to the conduction band, leaving a positively 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


charged site or ‘hole’ in the valence band; this is the 
same physical process that operates in a silicon CCD to 
detect photons. Common infrared intrinsic materials are 
germanium (Ge), lead sulfide (PbS), indium antimonide 
(InSb) and mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe). As 
already shown above, these have bandgap energies 
less than silicon and therefore have a longer cut-off 
wavelength. Extrinsic semiconductors are intrinsic 
materials, typically silicon and germanium, which have 
been ‘doped’ with impurity atoms so that a very low 
energy photon, with insufficient energy to excite an 
electron-hole pair directly, can still cause an excitation 
from an energy level associated with the impurity 
atom. In effect, a stepping stone is placed in the 
energy bandgap of the intrinsic material. Examples of 
extrinsic semiconductors used in astronomy applications 
are arsenic-doped silicon (Si:As) which can detect photon 
wavelengths as long as 23 ym, and gallium-doped 
germanium (Ge:Ga) which goes all the way to 115 wm. 

Another kind of infrared array device is found 
frequently in industrial surveillance applications, this is 
the platinum silicide (PtSi) array. A PtSi array is based 
on the Schottky barrier principle. When a metal such 
as platinum silicide is brought into contact with p-type 
silicon, the result is an asymmetric potential barrier. 
Conduction holes in the metal must now overcome a 
slightly higher barrier to enter the valence band of the 
semiconductor. The barrier height is determined by the 
contact potential and can be less than the semiconductor 
bandgap; for PtSi the cut-off wavelength is 5.6 wm. 
Although more easily manufactured into large-format 
arrays, because it is an all-silicon process, the photon 
detection efficiency of these detectors is rather low and 
their use in astronomy has been quite limited so far. 

All of the detectors mentioned so far are photon 
detectors. For completeness, a fundamentally different 
kind of detector should be mentioned. It is the bolometer, 
which belongs to a class called thermal detectors. These 
devices absorb photons and convert their energy to heat 
and the heat energy is detected through some change in 
physical properties such as conduction of the material. 
Only the energy deposited by the photons is important, 
not their wavelength. Semiconductor bolometers are the 
most highly developed, but bolometer arrays have tended 
to be very small (30 x 30 pixels) so far, compared with 
near-infrared arrays. 

Any infrared array detector must perform three 
functions: 


@ store the accumulated electrical charge at the site of 
generation, i.e. in a pixel; 


@ transfer the charge on each pixel to an outlet; this task is 
called multiplexing; 


@ convert charge to a voltage which can then be readily 
digitized into a number for storage in a computer. 


All infrared arrays separate the functions of detecting 
infrared radiation from that of multiplexing the resulting 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Arrays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


INFRARED 
ILLUMINATION 


INTRINSIC. or EXTRINSIC 
DETECTOR ARRAY 


INDIUM 
SILICON 


INTERCONNECTS 
READOUT 
ARRAY 
MULTIPLEXED 
OUTPUT 


Figure 1. A schematic diagram illustrating the hybrid nature of 
infrared arrays. The upper slab is the infrared detector and the 
lower slab is the silicon-based readout device. Interconnections 
are made with ‘bump’ bonds of indium. 


electrical signal, with the latter task going to silicon. 
Infrared arrays are like ‘sandwiches’ in which the upper 
slab is the infrared sensor (e.g. InSb, HgCdTe; Si:XX, 
Ge:XX, where XX represents the element used for doping, 
or PtSi), and the lower slab is a silicon multiplexer of some 
sort. A special array of ‘switches’ made from silicon field 
effect transistors (FETs) in microscopic form is typically 
used in the lower slab to access the signal from each IR 
pixel above. 

The infrared-sensitive part of an infrared array is a 
tightly packed grid of individual pixels with minimum 
dead space between them (figure 1). Both slabs are 
provided with a grid of electrical connections in the form 
of tiny raised sections, referred to as ‘bumps’, of a soft 
electrical conductor called indium; indium remains soft at 
low temperatures. The slabs are literally pressed together 
to enable the indium bumps to mate. Gaps between 
the bumps are usually back-filled with an epoxy to help 
maintain the integrity of the sandwich, especially through 
thermal cycles to low temperatures. Charge storage may 
occur on the junction capacitance of the IR sensor itself 
or on a separate storage capacitor associated with the 
silicon circuitry. Infrared arrays are harder to manufacture 
than silicon CCDs and consequently more expensive. The 
leading suppliers of astronomical devices are Rockwell 
International, Boeing and Raytheon/SBRC in the United 
States. Several other companies provide infrared arrays 
suitable for surveillance applications. 

Either the upper slab is constructed on an IR- 
transparent substrate, such as the sapphire substrate used 
for the HgCdTe arrays, or the bulk semiconductor is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


physically thinned to enable photons to penetrate the 
backside to the pixel locations on the inner face, as in the 
case of the InSb arrays. When the absorption of a photon 
with a wavelength shorter than the cut-off wavelength 
generates an electron-hole pair in the semiconductor, at 
the location of the pixel, the pair is immediately separated 
by an electric field which can be applied externally or 
internally or both. For example, in near-infrared arrays 
of InSb and HgCdTe, the electric field results from a 
reverse-biased pn junction or photodiode. The depletion 
region produced by the reversed-bias junction acts like 
a capacitor (C) which is discharged from its initial state 
(the full reverse-bias voltage V) by the migration of the 
electrons and holes; in effect, photo-generated charges are 
being ‘stored’ locally at each pixel. The maximum amount 
of charge (expressed as a number of electrons) which can 
be stored is given by Q = CV/e, where e is the charge 
on the electron (1.6 x 10-1? C). Of course, there must be a 
small perimeter or boundary around a pixel to define each 
individual photodiode, and this region cannot be too large 
otherwise there is a serious light loss, nor can it be too small 
because then there will be cross-talk between pixels, i.e. the 
charge from one pixel can be collected by an adjacent pixel. 
When the capacitor is completely discharged, the storage 
well is full and the pixel is said to be ‘saturated’. No 
damage occurs, but charge accumulation ceases and the 
signal is no longer proportional to the number of photons 
detected. 

Charge on each pixel is said to be ‘read out’ by 
sequentially connecting its signal toa common output line, 
or bus, leading to one or more output amplifiers. Multiple 
readout amplifiers are common in infrared arrays because 
thermal emission of radiation by the telescope optics 
and the sky itself introduces a significant ‘background’ 
light at wavelengths longer than about 2.5 wm. This 
background photon emission fills up the storage wells 
sufficiently rapidly that it helps to expedite the readout 
process by having more than one amplifier. On-chip 
circuits called ‘shift registers’ perform the readout and 
multiplex sequencing. In the most common and successful 
multiplexer designs, the ‘unit cell’ of an infrared array 
contains a silicon field-effect transistor (FET) used as a 
source-follower amplifier, essentially providing a buffer 
for the accumulated charge in the infrared pixel. The term 
used to describe this structure is SFD (source follower per 
detector). There is also an electrical noise associated with 
this circuitry which results in an unwanted ‘readout’ noise. 

The voltage change across the detector capacitance is 
applied directly to the input gate of the silicon FET (across 
the indium bump interconnect), which in turns relays the 
voltage change to one or more output lines when it is 
switched on or ‘addressed’ to do so. The output voltage is 
amplified and digitized by external circuits and a number 
for the signal in that pixel is stored in the corresponding 
location in a computer file. 

Infrared array detectors are not based on the 
charge-coupling principle of the silicon CCD. This 
is an important distinction which has some practical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Arrays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


implications. For example, IR arrays do not ‘bleed’ along 
columns when a pixel saturates, and ‘bad’ pixels do not 
block off others in the same column. Also, since the 
pixel charge does not move, ‘non-destructive’ readout 
schemes are possible and are very effective in reducing 
unwanted electrical noise. Some near-infrared arrays 
manufactured by Rockwell International using HgCdTe 
detectors have achieved readout noise levels as low as 
two to three electrons (equivalent) using multiple non- 
destructive measurements to average down the noise, 
but noise of 15-30 electrons is more common. On the 
other hand, CCD features such as on-chip charge binning, 
charge-shifting and drift-scanning are not possible with 
infrared arrays. 

Most long-wavelength (i.e. wavelengths >8 jm) 
arrays use extrinsic silicon detectors employing a 
technology called impurity band conduction (IBC). In an 
IBC device, a heavily doped infrared-active layer is placed 
in contact with a pure (undoped) epitaxial (thin) layer, the 
blocking layer, which is isolated by an oxide (insulating) 
layer from metal contact pads and the device is usually 
back-illuminated. These arrays are also called blocked 
impurity band (BIB) devices. Because of the high donor 
density, the applied (bias) electric field causes a migration 
of holes toward the (negative) metal contact forming a 
depletion region similar to that in the photodiode (pn 
junction) devices used at shorter wavelengths. 

For wavelengths longer than 40 wm there are no 
appropriate shallow dopants for silicon and therefore 
extrinsic germanium must be used. There are a number 
of problems with the use of germanium. For example, 
to control dark current the material must be relatively 
lightly doped and therefore absorption lengths become 
long (3-5 mm). Since the diffusion lengths are also large 
(250-300 wm), then pixel dimensions of 500-700 zm are 
required to minimize ‘cross-talk’ of the signals between 
pixels. Large pixels imply higher hit rates for cosmic rays, 
especially for space applications, which in turn means 
that the readout device must be very low noise so that 
the background limit is reached in the shortest possible 
exposure time. But a large detector pixel means a large 
capacitance and more noise. Also, the photoconductive 
gain is inversely proportional to the interelectrode 
spacing, resulting in poor quantum efficiency unless side- 
illuminated detectors with transverse contacts are used. 
Finally, because of the very small energy bandgaps, these 
detectors must operate at liquid helium temperatures 
well below the silicon ‘freeze-out’ range. Despite these 
challenges, small format arrays with response out to 
beyond 200 wm have been constructed for infrared space 
missions such as SIRTF. 

Since very narrow bandgap semiconductor crystals 
are harder to grow, it is tempting to seek a method of 
‘engineering’ small bandgaps in wide-bandgap material 
such as gallium arsenide (GaAs). Using GaAs and 
AlGaAs junctions it is possible to create a ‘quantum 
well’ or potential associated with either the conduction 
or the valence band. The quantum well is equivalent 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


13’ x 13° 
45 second J and K' Exposure 


UCLA Gemini Infrared Camera 


Figure 2. The star-forming region NGC2024 near Zeta Orionis in 
Orion. The image is a three-color composite of near-infrared 
bands at 1.2, 1.65 and 2.2 wm represented as blue, green and red 
respectively. The central region of this nebula appears black in 
optical photographs due to absorption by dust grains. Infrared 
images reveal a dense cluster of very young stars. 


to the particle-in-a-box problem in quantum mechanics 
and so the well will contain energy levels or sub-bands. 
The energy difference between these levels is very small 
compared with the normal bandgap. Transitions between 
the sub-bands provide the infrared detection process. 
Such detectors are currently under development. 

As an illustration of their use, figure 2 shows an image 
obtained with an infrared array camera. 


Bibliography 

Fowler A (ed) 1998 Infrared astronomical instrumentation 
Proc. SPIE 3354 

McLean I S 1997 Electronic Imaging in Astronomy: Detectors 
and Instrumentation (Chichester: Praxis) 

Rieke G H 1994 Detection of Light: from the Ultraviolet to 
the Submillimeter (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Ian S McLean 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Infrared Astronomy 


The infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum covers 
the wavelength range from about 1 mm (300 GHz) to 
1 wm (300 THz). The infrared (IR) band is usually 
subdivided into the sub-millimeter (1 mm to 0.3 mm), 
the far- (0.3 mm to 50 «wm, FIR), mid- (50 wm to 10 wm, 
MIR) and near-infrared (10 wm to 1 wm, NIR). At the 
long-wavelength end it connects to the radio domain 
and at the short end to the optical. In the FIR and 
most of the MIR domain astronomical sources cannot be 
observed from the ground. The other domains exhibit 
atmospheric windows of varying depth. Astronomical 
sources observed in the IR exhibit radiation temperatures 
of a few thousand to a few degrees kelvin. The most 
prominent sources are PLANETS, late-type stars, interstellar 
dust and gas clouds (see INTERSTELLAR MATTER), infrared 
luminous galaxies, the 3 K COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND 
and non-thermal extragalactic radio sources (QUASARS). 
Important reasons to carry out observations in the infrared 
are that the effect of dust extinction is minimized in 
this wavelength domain, the determination of the total 
luminosity of dust-enshrouded objects, and the fact that 
the visible to ultraviolet spectra of highly redshifted 
galaxies and quasars are shifted into the infrared while 
these objects become unaccessible in the optical due to 
extinction by hydrogen below a rest wavelength of 91 nm. 


History 

In 1800 Sir John HERSCHEL dispersed solar light through a 
glass prism onto several thermometers. Thomas Edison 
observed a total solar eclipse in 1878 in the infrared. In 
the early 1900s the Moon, planets and bright stars were 
observed in the infrared by S Pettit and E Nicholson. 
This work was continued by the systematic and extensive 
infrared studies of planets and stars by G KuIreR and H 
L JOHNSON in the 1950s (see Low and Rieke 1974). Frank 
J Low fully opened the field to astronomy in the early 
1960s by inventing a low-noise gallium-doped germanium 
bolometer. In the following years the development of 
array detectors based on InSb and HgCdTe (up to 1024 x 
1024 pixels) as radiation-sensitive substances determined 
the progress in the near-infrared. Balloon, airborne 
and satellite based observatories allowed measurements 
even at far-infrared wavelengths. Dedicated telescopes 
and sensitive bolometers and heterodyne receivers based 
on Schottky and SIS diodes opened the submillimeter 
domain. 


Telescopes and observational techniques 

The short NIR domain is contaminated by variable non- 
thermal atmospheric line emissions and with the exception 
of the NIR shortward of 2 4m the infrared is dominated 
by the thermal emission of the local background that 
includes the partially transparent atmosphere and all 
optical elements at the ambient temperature. Sensitive 
measurements are only possible from high mountains, 
balloons, airplanes or satellites using cooled instruments, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


detectors or (in space) even cooled telescopes. To further 
suppress the thermal background, secondary telescope 
mirror sizes are kept as small as possible and in the MIR the 
solid angle on the sky that is encompassed by individual 
detector elements is minimized in order to suppress the 
atmospheric thermal radiation. A novel technique in 
the short NIR is ‘OH background suppression’ which 
involves instrumental blanking of the OH line emission at 
a high spectral resolution. Stable background suppressed 
observations include observational techniques such as 
‘nodding’ (measurements at alternating positions by 
moving the telescope back and forth) and ‘chopping’ 
(measurements at alternating positions by moving, for 
example, the secondary mirror at a frequency >1 Hz). The 
flux calibration is usually performed via a comparison 
with local radiation sources (black-bodies) at ambient 
(~300 K) or liquid nitrogen (~77 K) temperature or 
astronomical standards like planets, quasars or reference 
stars. 

Usually the angular resolution of an optical/infrared 
telescope is limited to about one arcsecond due to the 
turbulent atmosphere. In order to obtain diffraction- 
limited images from the ground at several telescopes 
‘adaptive optics’ has been employed (Alloin and Mariotti 
1994, Tyson 1991). Traveling through the Earth’s 
atmosphere the initially plane wave front from the object 
is distorted and measured at the telescope in the optical 
with a Shack—-Hartmann or curvature wavefront sensor 
(see Tyson 1991). This signal is then used to control 
a deformable mirror that can correct the wavefront 
distortions in the NIR. The resulting images have a 
diffraction-limited part that contains typically up to 60% 
of the light. The angular resolution A in arcseconds that 
can be achieved depends on the observing wavelength in 
micrometers and the diameter D of the telescope in meters 
and can be calculated via A (arcsec) ~ 0.206 x A/D. For an 
8 m class telescope it is of the order of 0.06 arcseconds at 
a wavelength of 2.2 wm. Combining different telescopes 
interferometrically subarcsecond angular resolutions can 
be obtained in the submillimeter domain (Downes 1989, 
Watt and Webster 1990). Interferometric measurements 
can also be applied in the MIR and NIR domain. They 
provide high-accuracy astrometry and information on 
stellar diameters and orbital elements of multiple stars. 


Telescopes 

A large amount of information has been gained with 
INFRARED TELESCOPES in the 2 to 4 m class (e.g. the Infrared 
Telescope Facility, IRTF, of NASA or the New Technology 
Telescope, NTT, of the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY, 
ESO). Large-aperture telescopes with dedicated NIR and 
MIR facilities are the Keck Telescope in Hawaii (10 m 
diameter) the ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT) on Paranal 
in Chile (four 8 m telescopes). Others like the LARGE 
BINOCULAR TELESCOPE (LBT; two mechanically coupled 8.4m 
telescopes) at the MT GRAHAM INTERNATIONAL OBSERVATORY in 
Arizona, the multinational GEMINI OBSERVATORY twin 8.1 m 
telescopes in Chile and Hawaii, or the 8.3 m diameter 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SUBARU TELESCOPE of Japan in Hawaii will soon come 
into operation. In addition to space missions that are 
summarized below, MIR and FIR observations have been 
carried out using the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) 
with a 36 in telescope on board a C-141 airplane at a 
height of up to about 14 km. This observatory will 
be followed by SOFIA (the USA/German Stratospheric 
Observatory for Infrared Astronomy), a 2.5 m mirror on 
board a Boeing 747. In the submillimeter domain large 
single-dish antennas like the NOBEYAMA RADIO OBSERVATORY 
40 m dish in Japan and the 30 m telescope of IRAM (INstITUT 
DE RADIO ASTRONOMIE MILLIMETRIQUE) in Europe and the JAMES 
CLERK MAXWELL TELESCOPE (JCMT) in Hawaii (15 m), as well 
as several millimeter wavelength interferometry arrays 
in the USA, Europe and Japan have contributed to the 
investigation of line and continuum emission of gas and 
dust in our own and external galaxies in the local universe 
and at cosmological redshifts. Further progress will be 
achieved in the near future via the infrared optimized 
NGST (Next Generation Space Telescope), interferometric 
arrays with a very large collecting area like the ALMA 
(the ATACAMA LARGE MILLIMETER ARRAY in northern Chile), as 
well as large bolometer and spectrometer focal plane array 
receivers for single dish telescopes. 


Detectors 

A broad variety of detector techniques is required in the 
infrared (e.g. Rieke 1994). In the NIR and MIR range 
large-format focal plane detector arrays are used. Arrays 
that use HgCdTe as IR sensitive material are hybrid 
structures. They have been built using molecular beam 
epitaxy and liquid phase epitaxy techniques to grow 
the infrared sensitive HgCdTe material. The spectral 
response for HgCdTe focal plane arrays typically used 
in astronomy ranges from from 0.8 4m to 2.4 wm. The 
backside illuminated material is connected to multiplexers 
of different formats (e.g. 1024 1024 pixels). For arrays that 
use InSb as a detector material the spectral response goes 
from 0.5 to 5.4 4m. Typical pixel sizes range between about 
10 and 40 pm. About 60% to 80% of all incident photons are 
detected. Very low dark current and low read noise values 
make these arrays suited for long exposures under low- 
background conditions as realized in most astronomical 
applications. On the other hand, frame rates of above 
10 Hz can be reached as well. A similarly high potential 
for low-background observations in the MIR have BIB 
(blocked impurity band) detectors. 

Focal plane array detectors have also been used in 
the FIR. A5 x 5 array of stressed Ge:Ga photoconductors 
was flown on the KAO in an imaging spectrometer. Such 
arrays have also successfully been operated in space (ISO- 
LWS and ISOPHOT, see below). Larger-format arrays will 
soon be used on SRTF (Space Infrared Telescope Facility) 
and FIRST (Far-Infrared and Submillimeter Telescope) and 
SOFIA. The wavelength range between approximately 
80 and 210 xm can be covered with spectral resolutions 
(R = 1/AA) of the order of a few thousand. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In the submillimeter and FIR domain *He-cooled 
bolometers can be used to perform sensitive measure- 
ments of cold dust and faint continuum sources in gen- 
eral (e.g. SCUBA: Submillimetre Common-User Bolome- 
ter Array at the JCMT and the IRAM bolometer ar- 
rays). Heterodyne receivers for low-noise high-spectral- 
resolution measurements in the submillimeter range em- 
ploy Schottky diodes (semiconductor—metal contacts) and 
SIS diodes (supraconductor/insulator/supraconductor 
tunneling contacts). 


Physical mechanisms 

The most prominent infrared continuum radiation 
mechanism in astrophysical sources is the BLACK-BODY 
RADIATION that follows a Planck law (see below). This 
radiation is emitted by all bodies, from dust to planets and 
stars, and peaks for temperatures below a few thousand 
kelvin in the infrared. For the ambient temperature of 
about 300 K the spectral peak is at a wavelength of 
10 zm. Other important continuum radiation mechanisms 
are the free-free and synchrotron radiation emitted by 
thermal and relativistic plasmas respectively, in or near 
star-forming regions in our own galaxy and in the nuclei 
of Seyfert galaxies and quasars. The line emission 
is dominated by rotational lines in the millimeter and 
submillimeter domain, fine structure lines of atoms and 
ions in the FIR and rotational vibrational as well as 
recombination lines in the MIR and NIR domain. Due 
to large variations of optical depths and large column 
densities of emitting and absorbing material, radiative 
transport of energy is of special interest for both continuum 
and line radiation (e.g. Osterbrock 1974, Spitzer 1978). 


Radiative transport 

Ina plane-parallel cloud, radiative transport at a frequency 

v can be treated simply. The change of specific line 

intensity /, (erg s-! cm~? Hz" sr“) along an infinitesimal 

element dz along the line of sight through a molecular 

cloud is given by: 
dil, oh 


v 
= Ny Aut 


dz 4n 


hv 
Ov), (My Buy —11 Biv) = €y—Kyly. (1) 
4n 


Here n,, n; are the volume densities of molecules in 
the upper and lower states of the transition, with the 
corresponding statistical weights g, and g;. The Einstein 
coefficient A,; (s~!) is the rate of decay of n, by spontaneous 
radiative transitions. The line shape is described by ®(v), 
normalized to f ®(v) dv = 1. The volume emissivity and 
absorption coefficient are denoted by €, and «,. With these 
coefficients the sources function ©, can be defined that 
is equivalent to Planck black-body radiation law and is 
the most important source function for electromagnetic 
radiation in the infrared: 


y= = in (2) 


exp(gr) — 1 


This gives the spectral energy density of a black- 
body as a function of the excitation temperature Tx 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(an equivalent Planck temperature) that describes the 
population of states / and u through a thermal Boltzmann 
population. Using &, and an optical depth through the 
cloud t, = — It k, dz the radiative transport equation from 
above can be simplified to: 


I, observed = I, background e” + xy(1 — e”). (3) 


This equation shows that the absorption in a molecular 
cloud is proportional to e~” and the emission proportional 
to(l—e7”). 


Line emission 

Besides recombination lines of hydrogen and helium 
the IR exhibits a broad variety of fine structure lines 
from atoms and ions and rotational and vibrational lines 
of molecules. The line emission in the submillimeter 
and long-wavelength FIR is dominated by rotational 
transitions of simple diatomic and linear multiatomic 
molecules. They have a simple ladder of rotational energy 
states E,; depending on the rotational quantum number J 
and the rotational constant B(Hz) as (to first order): 


E,;=hBJ(J +1). (4) 


Electric dipole transitions in molecules with perma- 
nent electric dipole moments occur at a frequency vy = 
2BJ. The maximum emission in the ladder populated at 
a temperature T,., occurs approximately at Ey =hBJ(J + 
1) © kT yt, OF Imax © S(KTiot)/(2B). One of the most im- 
portant molecules for millimeter and infrared astronomy 
is carbon monoxide (CO) with its lowest J = 1-0 rota- 
tional transition at 115 GHz (2.6 mm wavelength). In the 
submillimeter and FIR higher rotational transitions from 
warm (30 to 100 K) and hot (several 100 K) molecular gas 
can be observed. These transitions are excited via colli- 
sions of CO with H2 molecules. The dipole line radiation 
of CO therefore indirectly traces the spatial distribution, 
density and temperature of molecular gas. Only a small 
fraction (in star-forming regions of entire galaxies typically 
one part in a million or less) of very hot molecular gas (a 
few 1000 K) can be observed via quadrupole radiation in 
ro(tational)-vibrational NIR lines from the H2 molecule. 

In case of ro-vibrational transitions of linear molecules 
that occur in the NIR domain the energy states are labeled 
by the vibrational (v) and rotational (J) quantum numbers 


E(v, 1) = hoy (045) snes +n, (5) 


The correction terms are due to centrifugal stretching 
and Coriolis coupling of the rotational and vibrational 
motions. The ro-vibrational lines in electric dipole 
transitions with v > v—1and J — J+1 can be 
approximated via 


Vy poset = Oy $2HBI(J +1). (6) 


An important band head of ro-vibrational CO line 
absorption is found in ~3000 K atmospheres of late-type 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stars in the NIR at a wavelength of 2.31 wm. It is used for 
instance to analyse stellar populations and kinematics in 
the nuclei of galaxies. 

The line emission in the MIR and FIR is dominated by 
fine structure line transitions. In the optical thin limit the 
integrated line flux (erg s~' cm7) of a fine structure line 
can be written as: 


h 
Fine = dist i i Ny di dQ. (7) 
An Beam J LOS 


Here LOS is the line of sight and dQ the differential solid 
angle used to integrate the line emission over the telescope 
beam. An important fine structure line is the [CII] line at 
a wavelength of 158 ym. It is one of the brightest cooling 
lines of the interstellar medium and can contain up to 
almost 1% of the overall infrared luminosity of an entire 
galaxy. In figure 1 the infrared spectrum of the starburst 
galaxy M82 is shown. 


Space missions 

In the following some of the recent larger INFRARED SPACE 
MISSIONS are summarized briefly, both in terms of their 
technical definitions and scientific results. 


IRAS 

IRAS was launched on 25 January in 1983 with a telescope 
mounted in a liquid helium cooled cryostat. The telescope 
was a Ritchey—Chrétien design with a 0.57 m aperture. 
The mirrors were made of beryllium and cooled to 
approximately 4 K. During its 10 months of operation, 
and in addition to numerous pointed observations, IRAS 
surveyed more than 96% of the sky up to four times at 
four infrared bands centered at wavelengths of 12, 25, 
60 and 100 wm with its detectors cooled to 3 K. The 
survey array consisted of 62 rectangular infrared detectors 
arranged in staggered rows such that any real point 
source crossing the focal plane as the satellite scanned 
the sky would be seen by at least two detectors in 
each wavelength band. The survey covered the sky in 
overlapping strips as the satellite was orbiting in its near- 
polar orbit, which precessed by about a degree each day. 
During some pointed observations, individual sources 
were mapped simultaneously at 50 and 100 wm using 
a cold internal chopper for flux reference. IRAS also 
contained a low-resolution spectrometer, which produced 
a relevant spectral atlas. 

With 350000 detected objects the IRAS mission 
increased the number of cataloged astronomical sources 
by almost 70% and has had a major impact on almost every 
area of astronomy. IRAS extended our knowledge on the 
evolution of external galaxies. The instruments on board 
the satellite detected ~75 000 starburst galaxies—galaxies 
which are extremely bright in the infrared due to their 
intense star formation. Many of these starburst galaxies 
showed signs of interaction with companion galaxies 
and have ‘super winds’ (galactic scale gaseous outflows) 
emerging from their centers due to the large number of 
supernova explosions which occur in these galaxies. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3000 r r r r 1 


an 
i 
= 
\S) 
— 
> 
4 
= 
G 2000 + = 
= 
ec Z 
ay = 
z Soy 
— 
Oo a a 
ao) \ Us 
a! 1000 + se 
aS jf 
l 


= 
2 q = 
a M82 \@ 


—_ 
i 
=| i 
‘e) oe) 
— — 
a 
S 
— 
— 
— 
om 
S 
1 | & i 
| e- WN 2 ee 
a a fe) = 
a = \| J) 
\ | — 


l l _ 


200 150 


100 50 


wavelength in micrometers 


Figure 1. The infrared spectrum of the starburst galaxy M82 as taken with the ISO SWS and LWS spectrometer. In addition to the peak 
in the dust continuum emission, strong fine structure lines are indicated. 


IRAS also found for the first time infrared cirrus: 
warm dust associated with diffuse clouds mostly at large 
galactic latitudes. IRAS discovered six new comets and 
found that comets in general are dustier than previously 
thought. The FIR observations provided evidence of 
zodiacal dust bands around other stars (e.g. Vega), and 
detected several probable protostars embedded in clouds 
of gas and dust. 


ISO 

The Infrared Space Observatory (ISO), (see figure 2) 
(Kessler et al 1996) of the European Space Agency (ESA) 
was an astronomical satellite, operating at wavelengths 
from 2.5-240 ym. Essentially, ISO consisted of a large 
cryostat which contained at launch about 2300 1 of 
superfluid helium to maintain the Ritchey—Chrétien 60 cm 
diameter telescope, the scientific instruments and the 
optical baffles at temperatures of 2-8 K. ISO was launched 
by an Ariane 4 on 17 November 1995 and kept in operation 
for 29 months. The satellite spent roughly 16 h per 
day outside the radiation belts and during this time the 
sensitive FIR detectors could be operated. The four focal 
plane instruments on board ISO consisted of one short- 
and one long-wavelength spectrograph (SWS and LWS) 
and imaging experiments in the MIR (ISOCAM) and FIR 
(ISOPHOT) domain. 

The SWS instrument consisted of two grating 
spectrometers, together covering the wavelength range 
between 2.38 and 45.2 wm. The overall spectral resolution 
covered a range of R = 1000 (300 km s“!) to R = 30000 
(10 km s~') by inserting Fabry—Pérot (FP) filters. In its 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. The Infrared Space Observatory. 


grating mode, the LWS operated from 45 wm to 180 wm 
with a resolving power between a few 100 and 10000 
using FPs. The ISOCAM infrared imaging camera used 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


two 32 x 32 pixel detectors, one devoted to the 2.5-5 wm 
range and the other to the 4-17 xm range. Images in direct 
and polarized light at several spatial resolutions through 
a variety of spectral filters could be taken. ISOPHOT was 
an imaging photopolarimeter for the wavelength range 2.5 
to 240 wm and included a low-resolution spectrometer for 
the 2.5 to 12 wm range. 

ISO observations resulted in the first measurements 
of the lowest rotational transition of molecular hydrogen 
Hz at 28.1 «wm which is important in determining 
the distribution and abundance of cold molecular 
material directly. ISOCAM observations determined the 
distribution of warm dust near star-formation regions in 
external galaxies. Via 200 wm imaging, ISO detected 5 
to 10 times more 15 to 21 K cold dust than IRAS. LWS 
and SWS observations of luminous galaxies allowed the 
determination of the relative contribution of starburst and 
non-thermal activity in their nuclei. 


COBE 

The cose satellite was developed by NASA’s GopDARD 
SPACE FLIGHT CENTER to measure the diffuse infrared and 
microwave 2.7 K cosmic background radiation from the 
early universe (due to the Big Bang). It was launched on 
18 November 1989 and carried three instruments, a far- 
infrared absolute spectrophotometer (FIRAS) to compare 
the spectrum of the microwave background with that of a 
black-body, a differential microwave radiometer (DMR) to 
map the cosmic radiation sensitively, and a diffuse infrared 
background experiment (DIRBE) to search for the cosmic 
infrared background radiation. The cosmic microwave 
background spectrum was measured with a precision of 
0.005%; for the first time the background was found to 
have an intrinsic anisotropy, at a level of 1 part in 100 000. 
Absolute sky brightness maps from 1.25 wm to 240 wm 
were obtained and the background radiation was detected 
in the two longest DIRBE wavelength bands at 140 and 
240 4m wavelengths. 


NICMOS 

NICMOS (near-infrared camera and multiobject spectrom- 
eter) was an instrument which has been installed in the 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) in orbit and allowed it to ob- 
serve in the near-infrared. The camera was a second- 
generation Hubble instrument installed aboard the satel- 
lite during a servicing mission in February 1997. NICMOS 
provided the capability of both imaging and spectroscopy 
at wavelengths between 0.8 and 2.5 wm. NICMOS con- 
tained three cameras designed for simultaneous operation. 
The optics presented the detectors with three adjacent, but 
not spatially contiguous, fields of view of different image 
scales. NICMOS employ three low-noise, high-quantum- 
efficiency, HgCdTe 256 x 256 element focal plane arrays 
in a passive dewar using solid nitrogen as a coolant. The 
camera contained a variety of filters, grisms (a combina- 
tion of a grid and a prism to allow for dispersion on the 
optical axis) and polarizers selected through three inde- 
pendent filter wheel mechanisms. Slitless imaging spec- 
troscopy in the widest field camera provided a multiobject 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


spectrographic capability with a resolution of ~200. NIC- 
MOS achieved diffraction-limited performance at 1.0 and 
1.75 wm. 

Sensitive near-infrared images have been obtained of 
solar system planets, the central regions of nearby galaxies 
with ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGN)—like the nearest radio 
galaxy Centaurus A—or violent star formation activity 
as in Arp 220. NICMOS also provided a detailed stellar 
census of the stars in obscured or embedded star clusters 
like the ORION NEBULA and the galactic center. A comparison 
of long exposures taken toward selected regions of the so- 
called HUBBLE DEEP FIELD (HDF) allowed us to improve our 
knowledge on the spectral energy distribution of the most 
distant galaxies in the universe. 


Sources 

In general, dust-embedded sources or dense molecular 
clouds heated by stars or active galactic nuclei are 
most luminous in line and continuum radiation in the 
infrared. In galaxies the luminosity is concentrated 
toward the nuclei and some active star-forming regions 
mostly within spiral arms or in barred spirals at the 
tips of the bars. Ultraluminous galaxies belong to the 
most luminous objects in the universe and can exhibit 
more than 10” (a million million) solar luminosities in 
the infrared. As typical examples of infrared bright 
objects the nuclear region of the Milky Way (the galactic 
center), ultraluminous galaxies and star-forming regions 
are discussed in the following. 


Galactic center 
Photospheric emission of stars in the galactic center at a 
distance of 8 kpc (26400 light years; one parsec (1 pc) 
equals 3.3 light years) can only be observed in the near- 
infrared. The visible light from the central stellar cluster 
is obscured by about 30 magnitudes (one magnitude is 
a factor of 2.5 in intensity) due to the dust and gas in 
the galactic plane. High angular resolution, near-infrared 
imaging and spectroscopy have made it possible in the 
last few years to measure stellar proper motion and radial 
velocities in the galactic center down to separations of less 
than five light days from the compact radio source SgrA* 
(in the constellation Sagittarius) at the dynamic center of 
the Milky Way (Eckart and Genzel 1997, Genzel et al 1997, 
Ghez et al 1999). These measurements make a compelling 
case for the presence of a compact, central dark mass of 
2.6 x 10° solar masses which is most likely in the form of 
a supermassive black hole. 

The first indications for a central mass concentration 
in the Milky Way (for a summary see Genzel et al 1994) 
emerged in the late 1970s from spectroscopic observations 
of a mid-infrared fine-structure line of Net. As radio 
interferometric observations had discovered a compact, 
non-thermal radio source, SgrA*, in the same region, a 
plausible interpretation—by analogy to quasars—was that 
the large gas velocities indicate orbital motions in the 
vicinity of a million solar mass black hole, coincident with 
SgrA*. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| 400 km/s 


-0.5” 


+0.5” 0.0” 


Figure 3. Proper motion vectors of the central sources close to Sgr A* at the galactic center. 


In the following years further infrared (and radio) 
spectroscopic data including radial velocities of stars 
strengthened the gas dynamic evidence for a dark 1 to 
3 x 10° Mz central mass. Speckle interferometry revealed 
a compact 1” diameter cluster of stars at the position 
of Sgr A*. Several of these stars in this so-called SgrA* 
cluster show proper motions in excess of 1000 km s~! (see 
figure 3). The analysis shows that the projected velocity 
dispersion of stars increases towards the center as expected 
in the potential of a large central point mass (a ‘Kepler 
law’). The location of the largest stellar velocities (the 
dynamic center), the stellar density maximum and the 
position of SgrA* all agree to within +0.004 pc. The final 
distribution of enclosed mass as a function of true radial 
separation from SgrA* is shown in figure 5 of the article 
ON SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES IN INACTIVE GALAXIES. Simple 
physical considerations show that this central object with 
such a high mass and density cannot be stable and must 
be present in the form of a supermassive black hole. 
Together with the nucleus of NGC4258 (Greenhill et al 
1995, Myoshi et al 1995)—in which very long baseline radio 
interferometric observations discovered a rapidly rotation 
circumnuclear disk—the galactic center currently is the 
very best case for a supermassive black hole. 


Ultraluminous infrared galaxies 

The extragalactic infrared background radiation and the 
identification of individual FIR galaxies (results from 
COBE, ISO, SCUBA) is starting to tell the history of 
star formation in the early universe. The IRAS satellite 
discovered a class of ultraluminous infrared galaxies 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which have the luminosity of quasars and show obvious 
signs of nuclear activity and advanced tidal interactions 
(Sanders et al 1988). Ultraluminous infrared galaxies 
(ULIRG) represent an important stage in the evolution of 
a wide variety of extragalactic objects including powerful 
nuclear starbursts, radio galaxies and quasars. They 
may also represent a primary stage in the formation 
of elliptical galaxy cores via the merger of two gas- 
rich spirals. ISO could contribute significantly to the 
investigation of ULIRGs. The ISO SWS and ISOPHOT 
mid-infrared spectroscopic survey of ULIRGs showed that 
70-80% of them are predominantly powered by recently 
formed massive stars (Genzel et al 1998). However, about 
20-30% are powered by a central AGN. These conclusions 
are based on an infrared ‘diagnostic diagram’ involving 
the ratio of high- to low-excitation mid-IR emission 
lines and the strength of the 7.7 wm PAH (polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbon) feature. At least half of the 
sources probably have simultaneously an active nucleus 
and recent or on-going starburst activity in a 1-2 kpc 
diameter circumnuclear disk or ring. No obvious trend 
for the AGN component to dominate the most compact, 
and thus most advanced, mergers was found. Instead, 
at any given time during the merger evolution, the time- 
dependent compression of the circumnuclear interstellar 
gas, the accretion rate onto the central black hole and 
the associated radiation efficiency may determine whether 
star formation or AGN activity dominates the luminosity 
of the system. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Star formation process 

The investigation of the star-formation process profits sig- 
nificantly from infrared and submillimeter observations 
(Beckwith and Sargent 1996). Although the solid particles 
probably make up no more than about 1% of the disk mass 
they produce almost 100% of the radiation between 2 wm 
and ~1 mm wavelength. The range of strong emission 
from the NIR to the radio is the result of a wide variation 
of temperatures, from ~1000 K very close to the stars to 
~30 K near the outer edge of the disk at several hundred 
AU distance from the center. This makes it relatively easy 
to find disks at infrared wavelengths. The silhouettes of 
these disks are seen by the HST against the bright back- 
ground of the Orion nebula. They show flattened, ellipti- 
cal shapes and demonstrate for the first time that disks are 
truncated sharply at their outer radii. 

Disks are very common surrounding many young 
stars. Half of the classical T Tauri-type stars in the Taurus— 
Auriga and Ophiuchus dark clouds show evidence for 
disks. An important new finding is that disks are common 
in dense clusters of young stars such as at the center of the 
Orion nebula (Lada et al 1993). 

In general one discriminates between four stages of 
star formation (Shu et al 1987): first dense cores form in 
molecular clouds while magnetic and turbulent support is 
lost through diffusion of neutral particles. Then a protostar 
with a surrounding nuclear disk is formed via a collapse 
of the dense cores from inside out. Following this stage 
a stellar wind breaks out along the rotational axis of the 
system and creats a bipolar outflow. Finally the infall is 
terminated and a young star with a circumstellar disk is 
revealed. 


Star-forming regions 

Infrared observations are especially well suited for 
observations of gas clouds in active star-forming regions 
within our own galaxy such as the Trapezium region in 
the Orion nebula, M17 or M49 (see e.g. Yun and Liseau 
1998). The UV radiation of clusters of recently formed 
O- and B-stars interacts in so-called photon-dominated 
regions (PDR) with the surrounding dense molecular gas 
at a distance of only a fraction of a parsec. By heating the 
gas, about 0.5% of the strong UV radiation is converted into 
bright infrared line emission. The investigation of these 
lines allows us to determine the density and temperature 
structure as well as abundances and chemical processes in 
these interface regions. 

The ISO SWS observations allowed detailed investi- 
gations of interstellar ices and for the first time an unbi- 
ased overview of their compositions. The results include 
observations of solid CO, solid CH, and HCOOH. In 
the gas phase important information has been obtained 
on the abundance of water in warm star-forming regions, 
through the study of rotation vibrational lines with SWS 
and pure rotational lines with LWS. The gas to solid state 
ratios are important for investigations of the gas-grain 
chemistry in dense clouds in star-forming regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Alloin D M and Mariotti J-M 1994 Adaptive Optics for 
Astronomy (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Beckwith V W and Sargent AI 1996 Nature 383 139 

Downes D 1989 Radio Astronomy Techniques Evolution of 
Galaxies—Astronomical Observations ed I Appenzeller, 
H Habing and P Léna (Heidelberg: Springer) 

Eckart A and Genzel R 1997 Stellar proper motions in the 
central 0.1 parsec of the galaxy Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 284 576 

Genzel et al 1998 What powers ultra-luminous IRAS 
galaxies? Astrophys. J. 498 579 

Genzel R, Eckart A, Ott T and Eisenhauer F 1997 On the 
nature of the dark mass in the center of the Milky Way 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 291 219-34 

Genzel R, Hollenbach D J and Townes C H 1994 Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 57 417 

Ghez A, Klein B, Morris M and Becklin E 1998 Astrophys. 
J. 509 678 

Kessler M F, Steinz J A, Anderegg M E et al 1996 Astron. 
Astrophys. 315 L27 

Greenhill L et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 440 619 

Lada C J, Young E T and Greene T P 1993 Astrophys. J. 408 
471 

Low FJ and Rieke G H 1974 Methods Exp. Phys. 12A 415 

Myoshi M et al 1995 Nature 373 127 

Osterbrock D E Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae 1974 (San 
Francisco: Freeman) 

Rieke G H 1994 Detection of Light: From the Ultraviolet to 
the Submillimeter (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Sanders D B, Soifer B T, Elias J H, Madore B F, Matthews K, 
Neugebauer G and Scoville N 1988 Astrophys. J. 325 
74 

Shu F H, Adams F C and Lizano S 1987 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 25 23 

Spitzer L 1978 Physical Processes in the Interstellar Medium 
(New York: Wiley) 

Tyson RK 1991 Principles of Adaptive Optics (Academic: San 
Diego) 

Watt G D and Webster A S 1990 Submillimetre Astronomy 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Wall J V and Boksenberg A 1990 Modern Technology and 
its Influence on Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Yun J Land Liseau R 1998 Star Formation with the Infrared 
Space Observatory (ISO) (San Fransisco: Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific) 


Andreas Eckart 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy Satellite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Infrared Astronomy Satellite 


The Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), a collabora- 
tion between the United States, the United Kingdom and 
the Netherlands, was the first space mission aimed at a 
systematic all-sky survey at infrared wavelengths inac- 
cessible from the ground. IRAS surveyed more than 96% 
of the sky at 12, 25, 60 and 100 um (micrometers) with 
unprecedented sensitivity, revolutionized INFRARED 
ASTRONOMY and made significant contributions to almost 
every area of astrophysical research from solar system 
studies to cosmology. 

The IRAS telescope (figure 1, made of beryllium, 
had a 57 cm primary mirror and was kept at about 4 K 
inside a cryostat cooled by liquid helium. The focal plane 
of the telescope carried 62 detectors, divided about 
equally among the four survey wavelengths, and 
arranged in a staggered array to collect data for the all- 
sky survey as the telescope scanned the sky. The detec- 
tors subtended from 0.5 to 5 arcminutes each on the sky 
and allowed detections down to 0.1-1 Jy depending on 


Figure 1. An artist’s rendering of IRAS in its 560-mile-high, near- 
polar orbit above the Earth. Credit: Infrared Processing and 
Analysis Center (IPAC), Caltech/JPL. IPAC is NASA's Infrared 
Astrophysics Science and Data Center. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


wavelength. The focal plane also carried a Low 
Resolution Spectrometer (LRS) covering from 7.5 to 23 
um with a spectral resolution of about 20 and a Chopped 
Photometric Channel (CPC) with one detector at each of 
50 and 100 um, as well as visible star sensors used for 
pointing information. 

IRAS was launched on 25 January 1983 into a 900 
km, 103 min Earth orbit which remained in a plane near- 
ly normal to the Earth—-Sun line. As the satellite traveled 
on its Sun-synchronous orbit, the telescope pointed away 
from the Earth and scanned methodically so the image of 
the sky traveled across the focal plane, and sources were 
sensed by the detectors. The resulting data were calibrat- 
ed and processed at IPAC to catalog over 370000 infrared 
sources and to generate all-sky images at a resolution of 
a few arcminutes and spectra of almost 3000 infrared 
sources (see figure 2). Part of the mission was also used 
to conduct deeper observations of preselected targets 
(see figure 3). The IRAS cryostat ran out of helium in 
November 1983, rendering the focal plane useless and 
ending the mission. 

IRAS detected six new comets, measured the emis- 
sion from 2000 asteroids and discovered the zodiacal 
dust bands which trace the dust generated in collisions 
among asteroids. IRAS also detected more infrared emis- 
sion from stars than could be attributed to the stars them- 
selves, evidence of dust around those stars analogous to 
zodiacal dust around the Sun and potentially an indica- 


Figure 3. The Loop (or Veil) Nebula in Cygnus is thought to be 
the remnant of a supernova outburst that occurred over 15 000 
yr ago. This IRAS image shows the infrared emission from dust 
grains in the expanding shell of the remnant. The image has 
been color coded to display relatively warm infrared emission 
as blue, cooler emission as green and the coldest emission as 
red. The blue dots are stars, and the diffuse emission to the right 
of the Loop is from interstellar dust grains heated by starlight. 
Credit: IPAC, Caltech /JPL. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Infrared Astronomy Satellite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tion of planetary systems; VEGA and BETA PICTORIS are 
especially well-studied cases. IRAS mapped in detail the 
density and temperature in molecular clouds where stars 
form, revealed their full energy balance and found thou- 
sands of cores hosting protostars. IRAS revealed a full 
view of the bulge of the Milky Way and discovered dif- 
fuse infrared emission from dust in our galaxy, bright 
and warm towards the plane and wispy and cold above 
the plane, hence the name ‘infrared cirrus’. Cirrus emis- 
sion is a valuable source of information on the interstel- 
lar medium and a potential impediment to infrared 
source measurement in certain lines of sight. It was used 
to estimate the amount of visible light extinction by dust 
for each direction on the sky and to find the best win- 
dows for observing outside the Milky Way at all wave- 
lengths. 

IRAS detected a total of 75000 galaxies and quasars 
whereas less than a hundred had been observed as 
infrared sources before. This was the first truly unbiased, 
unobscured survey of extragalactic objects, allowing for 


the analysis of their infrared colors, of their distribution 
in space and of their evolution over the past few billion 
years. IRAS discovered a new class of galaxies with tens 
of times more luminosity emerging in the infrared than 
in the visible and with overall luminosities comparable 
with quasars. These ‘ultraluminous infrared galaxies’ 
arise most often from collisions or mergers between 
normal disk galaxies and may turn into quasars after 
the infrared-emitting dust has dissipated; Arp 220 and 
IRAS F10214+4724 are especially well studied cases. At 
lower luminosities, IRAS data allowed detailed analysis 
of the STARBURST phenomenon, due to intense star forma- 
tion in extremely dense gas at the centers of galaxies. 
IRAS has also made certain types of objects famous, for 
example Arp220 and F10214. 


Bibliography 
The IRAS home page can be found at 
http: / / www.ipac.caltech.edu/ipac/iras/iras.html 


G. Helou 


Figure 2. Nearly the entire sky, as seen in infrared wavelengths and projected at 0.5° resolution, is shown in this image, assembled 
from 6 months of data from IRAS. The bright horizontal band is the plane of the Milky Way, with the center of the Galaxy located at 
the center of the picture. The colors represent infrared emission detected in three of the telescope’s four wavelength bands (blue is 12 
um, green is 60 um and red is 100 um). Hotter material appears blue or white while the cooler material appears red. The hazy, hori- 
zontal S-shaped feature that crosses the image is faint heat emitted by dust in the plane of the solar system. Celestial objects visible in 
the photograph are regions of star formation in the constellation Ophiucus (directly above the galactic center) and Orion (the two 
brightest spots below the plane, far right). The Large Magellanic Cloud is the relatively isolated spot located below the plane, right of 
center. Black stripes are regions of the sky that were not scanned by the telescope in its first six months of operation. Credit: IPAC, 


Caltech/JPL. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Infrared Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Infrared Imagers 


In contrast to visual observations at wavelengths of 
0.35-0.7 ym with their long history of astronomical 
discoveries, the only celestial source detectable in the 
infrared region (A > 1 um) by unaided human senses 
is the Sun. Consequently, the development of INFRARED 
ASTRONOMY had to wait for technical detection methods. 
The existence of infrared radiation was first demonstrated 
by Herschel, using thermometers to show that energy 
is being received in the invisible parts of the solar 
spectrum. Sophisticated versions of thermometers, so- 
called bolometers, are still the detector of choice at 
very long (submillimeter) wavelengths. At shorter 
infrared wavelengths, photon-detecting semiconductor 
detectors became available shortly after WWII. Detector 
systems built around these devices were only single- 
point photometers, and spatial images had to be obtained 
by sequentially measuring the signal at each position in 
the image. The first true infrared imagers were built 
in the 1980s when INFRARED ARRAYS became available for 
astronomy. 


Problems of ground-based infrared observations 
Several factors combine to make ground-based infrared 
observations more difficult than observations in the optical 
(0.3-1.0 wm) region. While the atmosphere in the optical 
is of uniformly high transmission, the infrared region is 
subdivided into windows of atmospheric transmission, 
separated by spectral bands where absorption by 
atmospheric trace gases such as CO and H2O renders the 
atmosphere opaque. Since the water vapor content of the 
atmosphere strongly depends on the climatic conditions 
and since the scale height of water in the atmosphere is 
small, infrared astronomical observations are best carried 
out from dry, high-altitude sites. 

Ambient temperature (T ~ 300 K) surfaces emit 
copious photons at wavelengths longer than about 2 4m. 
Therefore, the emissivity (e) of the telescope optics must be 
minimized to reduce the photon background contributed 
by the telescope itself. While high reflectivity (r) of the 
mirrors, and thereby low emissivity (e = 1—r), is desirable 
for any telescope, high emissivity reduces the signal-to- 
noise ratio in the infrared much faster than poor reflectivity 
does in the optical. Dedicated INFRARED TELESCOPES are 
designed to minimize the area of obstructions by black, 
highly emitting surfaces in the lightpath (e.g. secondary 
support spiders, the secondary mirror mount and the 
hole in the primary mirror). The technologies have been 
developed to coat at least the secondary mirror, if not 
also the primary, with silver, to significantly reduce the 
emissivity compared with the more traditional aluminum 
coatings. 

Infrared detectors are sensitive to the radiation 
emitted by ambient temperature surfaces. Simply 
enclosing the detector with black surfaces does therefore 
not eliminate the background radiation. In addition to 
cooling the detector itself to its operating temperature, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


an infrared camera requires all surfaces surrounding the 
detector, including the optics, to be cooled, using liquid 
cryogens such as liquid nitrogen or liquid helium, or by 
closed-cycle cooler systems. As a consequence, infrared 
astronomical instruments tend to be far more complicated 
and costly than their optical counterparts. 


The design of infrared imagers 

Various optical designs are possible for an infrared 
imager. The choice of a specific design is driven by the 
requirements of field of view, pixel scale, image quality, 
throughput and wavelength range as scientific criteria, 
but also by budget and schedule considerations. Further, 
a distinction is often made between investigator-class 
instruments, which are designed to primarily serve the 
specific scientific interest of their designer, and facility 
instruments, which are intended to serve a wide user 
community for a variety of scientific projects. Facility 
instruments typically offer a larger number of operating 
modes, have more elaborate software to allow occasional 
users to operate them efficiently, are generally built to 
higher standards of reliability and serviceability, and are 
better documented. Not surprisingly, they also tend to 
be far more expensive than investigator-class instruments 
and take much longer to design and build. 


A specific example 

Figure 1 illustrates the very basic elements of a simple 
infrared imager design and shows the optical path for three 
field points. Figure 2 gives more details of the specific 
technical implementation chosen for the Quick Infrared 
Camera (QUIRC) built at the University of Hawaii for their 
2.2m telescope. When this camera was built in 1994, it was 
the first to use a detector array of 1024 x 1024 format. 

A dewar window of infrared-grade fused silica seals 
the inside of the cryostat and allows it to be evacuated in 
preparation for cooling of the interior components of the 
infrared camera with liquid nitrogen. The dewar window 
is the last optical element of an infrared camera that 
remains at ambient temperature. Therefore, its emissivity 
must be kept low and scattering of thermal radiation into 
the lightpath of the camera must be minimized. These 
requirements dictate the choice of a high-transmission 
material and good surface polish. 

The first cooled optical element is a field lens located 
in or close to the focal plane of the telescope. The field 
lens produces an image of the telescope pupil, which is 
the optical surface defining the aperture of the telescope. 
Many infrared telescopes are designed with undersized 
secondary mirrors, making the secondary the pupil in the 
system. However, the UH 2.2 m telescope is a classic 
optical wide-field telescope, so the f/10 secondary mirror 
is oversized and therefore the primary mirror is the pupil 
of the telescope. The field lens thus produces an image 
of the telescope primary, seen reflected in the secondary 
mirror, on a surface inside the cryostat where a cold stop 
can be placed. Since a field lens is located close to the 
focal plane of the telescope its optical aberrations do not 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TELESCOPE 
FOCAL 
PLANE 


DETECTOR 


\ REIMAGING 
\ LENS ARRAY 
FIELG LENS 
Figure 1. Basic elements of a simple infrared imager design. 
dewar window 
field lens ; 
. | mounting 
Ni C= geN flange 
Y Y 
baffles 
radiation shield ——Z 

filter wheel 1 

Z 
reimaging lens system —¥ SH y cold stop 
filter wheel 2 
photon shield —~yY . 
infrared detector array —N : | \\ 
| cf 630 mm 
connector flange — LE Z 
cial TT. 
N SWS 
detector array mount —~< i a — 
Z 


work surface 


LNo reservoir 


vacuum vessel —— 


a 


LN» fill tube 


charcoal getter — ae 


[ormeorce tcl | 


Figure 2. Infrared imager implementation for QUIRC. 


significantly affect the image formed on the detector. Field 
lens aberrations do, however, affect the quality of the 
pupil image and thereby our ability to mask off unwanted 
thermal radiation. In a simple camera like QUIRC, the 
field lens is usually a single spherical lens made of a high 
refractive index material (ZnSe or ZnS), so that spherical 
aberration is minimized. A better, but more expensive, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


solution would be to use an aspheric lens. 

The next important element is the pupil cold stop. Its 
purpose is to block all radiation that does not come from 
the telescope pupil (the primary mirror in our case) from 
reaching the detector. In particular, radiation coming from 
the mirror mount just outside of the mirror’s reflective 
surface and radiation emitted by the central hole in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cassegrain primary mirror must be blocked. The cold 
stops are typically designed as an aperture slightly smaller 
than the pupil image, with a central occulting disk masking 
the image of the hole in the primary. The central occulting 
disk is usually suspended by wires that also act to mask 
the support ‘spider’ arms holding the telescope secondary 
mirror. By undersizing the hole in the cold stop, the 
cold stop effectively becomes the pupil of the combined 
telescope and camera system. 


Infrared imagers use interference filters to select the 
spectral region of interest. Usually one or more filter 
wheels are located near the pupil stop of the optical system. 
When placed near the pupil (figure 1), light from all field 
points passes through the same area of the filter so that 
non-uniformities in the filter affect all objects in the field 
in the same way and can therefore be more easily corrected. 


The main optics of the infrared camera are located 
just behind the pupil stop. Their purpose is to reimage the 
telescope focal plane onto the detector array. By choosing 
the focal length and the distances, these reimaging optics 
can be used to magnify or demagnify the original focal 
plane image, depending on the desired pixel scale. 
Usually, combinations of two or more lens materials 
are used to correct chromatic aberrations. For example 
combinations of BaF, and Schott SF6 glass work well in 
the near infrared, while combinations of BaF, and LiF, 
sometimes combined with other, higher-index materials 
such as ZnS and ZnSe work well at wavelengths out to 
5.5 wm. 

The final and most important element in the infrared 
camera is the focal plane detector array that collects 
the photons and allows the signal to be measured. 
Detector arrays of up to 1024 x 1024 pixels are now 
available for near-infrared observations (1.0-5.5 4m) and 
arrays in 2048 x 2048 format are under development. 
Infrared arrays for mid-infrared wavelengths typically 
have smaller formats (See MID-INFRARED INSTRUMENTATION). 

The refractive optical design outlined above is by 
no means the only possible solution. Purely reflective 
designs have been developed, in particular for mid- 
infrared cameras where the choice of suitable refractive 
materials is even more restricted than in the near infrared. 
One particular, surprisingly simple reflective design is 
the Offner relay (figure 3), consisting of a large, concave 
spherical mirror and a small, convex spherical mirror of 
double the curvature of the large mirror. The two mirrors 
are mounted concentrically. In this configuration, the 
Offner relay reimages the focal plane of the telescope onto 
the detector while forming a pupil image on the small 
secondary mirror. This simple optical arrangement is free 
of all first-order aberrations and offers high throughput, 
but it is limited to exactly reproducing the image scale 
in the telescope focal plane. Further, the quality of the 
pupil image is not very good, but can be corrected with 
additional optical elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Additional capabilities 

Most infrared imagers, in particular facility-class instru- 
ments, include additional optical elements to expand their 
capabilities beyond pure imaging. 


Polarimetry 

Infrared imaging polarimeters usually use a fixed, cooled 
analyser in the instrument and rotate the polarization 
plane by an external warm rotatable half-wave plate 
that emits very little thermal radiation owing to its low 
emissivity. Wire-grid analysers transmit one polarization 
plane and absorb the other. Their advantage is that they 
can be used in the same way as filters, and therefore allow 
the implementation of polarimetric capability at very low 
system cost. Beamsplitting elements such as Wollaston 
prisms split the light into two orthogonal polarization 
planes, allowing the simultaneous detection of both planes 
as two separate images of the object. This is obviously a 
more efficient use of the photons coming from the object 
and has the added advantage that any instabilities in the 
atmospheric transmission during the exposure time affect 
both polarization planes in the same way, making the 
observation immune to such atmospheric effects. The 
disadvantage is that Wollaston prisms require a collimated 
light path and thus dictate a slightly more complex optical 
design. 


Spectroscopy 

Spectroscopic capability can be implemented in an 
infrared imager by using a grism (an integrated grating 
and prism combination) in a collimated light path near 
the pupil of the system. Except for rare slitless use, 
spectroscopy usually requires a slit to be placed in the focal 
plane of the telescope. 


Coronagraphic observations 

A special case of imaging observations are coronagraphic 
observations. In this context these are not observations of 
the solar corona but of faint features and objects near bright 
stars, such as faint binary companions, including brown 
dwarfs, faint dust-scattering features such as remnants 
of protoplanetary disks, and faint emission line features 
associated with stellar jets. What these observations have 
in common with observations of the solar corona is that 
careful attention must be paid to reducing the scattered 
light from the bright central object. Infrared cameras 
already have a pupil stop (called a Lyot stop in the context 
of coronagraphs). With the addition of an occulting mask 
in the telescope focal plane, proper attention to stray light 
issues in the optical design (avoiding ghost reflections) 
and potentially the use of special cold stop masks, infrared 
imagers can become very capable CORONAGRAPHS. 


Data reduction 

Most near-infrared detector arrays used today provide 
the option of non-destructive reading, i.e. reading the 
accumulated image information in the array without 
destroying this information. After resetting a detector 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


DETECTOR 
ARRAY 


OFFNER 
PRIMARY 


TELESCOPE 
FOCAL PLANE 


Figure 3. The Offner relay. 


array to erase all previous imaging information, a typical 
double-correlated frame consists of two reads of the 
detector array: one read at the beginning of the integration 
time and then one read at the end. The difference of these 
two reads represents the signal accumulated during the 
integration time. While this double-correlation technique 
eliminates many of the artifacts from the detector array 
and the readout electronics, such a single frame is usually 
not a useful astronomical image. Two additional steps 
are required, at minimum, to extract and calibrate the 
astronomical information. 

The first is usually called ‘sky subtraction’, but it 
removes more than just uniform background from the sky. 
For example, a dust particle on the cryostat window emits 
infrared radiation that is clearly not coming from the sky 
but is superposed on the astronomical signal. The most 
straightforward way of subtracting the sky would be to 
take an exposure of a blank piece of sky close to the object 
and subtract that from the object frame. While this method 
was commonly used in the early days of infrared imaging, 
the sensitivity of today’s infrared imagers is so high that 
there is virtually no place in the sky that is really ‘blank’, 
i.e. devoid of detectable objects. Therefore, a sky frame 
needs to be computed froma large number of images taken 
at different telescope positions close to and including the 
position of the object of interest. All features that remain 
stationary in sucha set of images are instrumental artifacts, 
such as the dust particle on the window discussed earlier. 
Computing a median through such a stack of frames 
eliminates all objects that changed their position between 
exposures, i.e. all astronomical sources, and preserves all 
stationary features. The resulting ‘median sky’ can then 
be subtracted from each frame individually, to remove 
instrumental artifact emission and sky background from 
the frames. 

The second step is to correct for non-uniformities 
in the pixel response across the array. One way to 
measure this so-called ‘flat field’ is to take images of a 
uniformly illuminated surface. The inside of a telescope 
dome, which is quite uniformly painted and out of focus 
to the telescope, is usually suitable for this calibration 
measurement. The difference between an exposure of the 
dome with incandescent lights on and a second exposure 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with the lights off gives the response of the detector array 
to radiation of the few thousand kelvin temperature and 
eliminates artifacts from ambient temperature emission 
from the telescope optics. A flat ‘field frame’ obtained this 
way is then used to divide the individual astronomical 
frames by correcting the non-uniformities in the detector 
array. The resulting sky-subtracted and flat-fielded frames 
are then added together, compensating for the telescope 
motions between frames to form a ‘mosaic’ image. 


Bibliography 
The infared camera QUIRC used here as an example is 
described in more detail in 


Hodapp K W et al 1996 New Astron. 1177 


A good introductory textbook for modern instrumen- 
tation technology, including infrared imagers, is 


McLean 1S 1997 Electronic Imaging in Astronomy (New York: 
Wiley) 


The technology of infrared imagers is evolving 
rapidly and so is the literature describing this progress. 
The largest body of information is found in the Proceed- 
ings of the International Society for Optical Engineering 
(SPIE). A number of papers in the latest SPIE Proceedings 
devoted mainly to astronomical instrumentation describe 
the current state of the art in infrared imager design: 


Hodapp K W et al 1998 Gemini near-infrared imager Proc. 
SPIE 3354 545 

Lenzen R et al 1998 CONICA: the high-resolution near- 
infrared camera for the ESO VLT Proc. SPIE 3354 606 

Tokunaga A T et al 1998 Infrared camera and spectrograph 
for the Subaru telescope Proc. SPIE 3354 512 

Wishnow E H et al 1998 Long-wavelength infrared camera 
(LWIRC): a 10 wm camera for the Keck telescope Proc. 
SPIE 3354 591 


Klaus Werner Hodapp 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Space Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Infrared Space Missions 


Infrared radiation occurs at longer wavelengths than 
visible light, in the region 1-250 pm. Although 
cosmic near-infrared radiation can penetrate Earth’s 
atmosphere through narrow ‘windows’, making ground- 
based observations possible, longer wavelengths are 
absorbed by the air. Observations at these wavelengths 
are possible only through space-based observatories. 

Preliminary studies using instruments on sounding 
rockets, the Soviet Salyut 4 space station and the Kuiper 
Airborne Observatory took place in the 1970s and paved 
the way for the first infrared sky survey satellite. 

The US—Netherlands—UK INFRARED ASTRONOMY SATEL- 
uiTE (IRAS) was launched into a 900 km Sun-synchronous 
orbit on 25 January 1983. It carried a Ritchey-Chrétien tele- 
scope, with a 57 cm primary mirror, which was cooled to 
2 K by liquid helium. During its operational lifetime of 
300 days, IRAS surveyed 98% of the sky at 12, 25, 60 and 
100 zm. Some 250000 infrared sources were cataloged as 
the result of IRAS observations, compared with approxi- 
mately 5000 previously known sources. 

IRAS made many new discoveries within the solar 
system. Six new comets were found, including IRAS-— 
Araki—Alcock, which passed close to the Earth in May 
1983. Among the new asteroid finds was an unusual 
object, 3200 Phaethon, which may be an extinct comet. 
IRAS also revealed hitherto unsuspected dust trails 
associated with comets, as well as a torus of warm dust 
produced by collisions between Main Belt asteroids and 
associated with the Zodiacal Light. 

Further afield, IRAS discovered that a number of 
stars, including Vega, which appeared much brighter than 
expected at infrared wavelengths, were surrounded by 
dust disks. Astronomers were also able to study cool 
interstellar dust clouds, newborn stars embedded inside 
nebulae and some 50000 distant galaxies. 

Infrared observations were made subsequently dur- 
ing two shortlived space missions. A 15 cm infrared tele- 
scope was flown on the Spacelab 2 mission (29 July-6 Au- 
gust 1985), but results were disappointing, largely due to 
high infrared background radiation from the Space Shut- 
tle. 

An instrument of similar size, known as the Infrared 
Telescope in Space, was placed on the Japanese-US Space 
Flyer Unit, a small orbital platform which was launched 
by an H-2 rocket on 17 March 1995. It operated for a 
few weeks until its supply of helium was exhausted, then 
remained dormant until the other onboard experiments 
were completed and the satellite could be recovered by 
the Space Shuttle in January 1996. 

An infrared mission of a very different kind operated 
in the period between these two brief flights. NASA’s 
Cosmic Background Explorer (cose) carried the Diffuse 
Infrared Background Experiment, which studied the entire 
sky at ten wavelengths between 1 and 300 pm. Its 20 cm 
Gregorian telescope produced some of the best maps ever 
made of the infrared sky’s overall structure, as well as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the first map of the cumulative infrared emission from 
primordial galaxies which formed soon after the the Big 
Bang. 

Also located inside the satellite’s helium cryostat 
was the Far-Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, which 
studied the spectrum of the cosmic background radiation. 
Two months after launch, researchers announced that the 
spectrum of the Big Bang’s afterglow matched that of a 
2.73 K black body. 

The true successor to IRAS was the European Space 
Agency’s Infrared Space Observatory (ISO), though its 
mission was to focus on specific targets rather than carry 
out an all-sky survey. ISO was launched into a highly 
elliptical orbit on 17 November 1995. 

Much larger than its predecessor, ISO carried a 60 cm 
Ritchey—Chrétien telescope, four scientific instruments 
and sufficient helium coolant to operate for 28 months. 
The camera, photometer and two spectrometers between 
them covered the full range of infrared wavelengths from 
2 to 200 wm. 

Data from ISO are still being analysed, but a 
number of significant initial results have been announced, 
including the discovery that water is much more 
widespread throughout the Galaxy than expected. ISO 
observations show that water is present in the atmospheres 
of Saturn’s moon Titan and the outer planets, in planetary 
nebulae and in giant molecular clouds. The satellite was 
also well placed to study the prodigious dust and gas 
emissions from Comet Hale-Bopp. 

The observatory has also revealed the first glows from 
concentric rings of cold dust in the Andromeda galaxy, 
the existence of complex organic molecules around young 
stars, and the first known infrared-bright gravitational 
arcs. Dozens of distant galaxies which contribute to the 
Cosmic Infrared Background have been detected. 

Two more infrared observatories are currently 
planned. NASA’s sPACE INFRARED TELESCOPE FACILITY (SIRTF) 
has undergone many changes since it was first proposed 
in the 1970s. Although its mass has been reduced to about 
900 kg, and the amount of liquid helium it will carry is 
only 360 litres, its mission lifetime requirement remains 
2.5 years. 

In late 2001 or early 2002, SIRTF will be placed into 
an Earth-trailing heliocentric orbit which causes it to drift 
away from Earth at the rate of ~ 0.1 AU per year. This 
choice of orbit has been preferred over a geocentric orbit 
for its more benign thermal environment. A ‘warm- 
launch’ scenario has also been chosen, whereby SIRTF’s 
telescope assembly is launched at ambient temperature 
and allowed to cool passively in space. Only the focal- 
plane instruments and the compact cryostat are enclosed 
in a vacuum shell, resulting in a dramatic reduction in the 
volume of liquid helium required. The 85 cm diameter 
primary mirror is fabricated entirely of beryllium, and the 
telescope is a Ritchey—Chrétien design. 

The Infrared Imaging Surveyor (RIs)—originally des- 
ignated as ASTRO-F—is the second infrared astronomy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Space Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mission of the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronauti- 
cal Science (ISAS). Scheduled to be launched in February 
2003, IRIS will be placed into a Sun-synchronous polar or- 
bit at an altitude of 750 km by the ISAS M-V rocket. It 
will carry out an infrared sky survey with much better 
sensitivity than IRAS, and is expected to add significant 
information on many astrophysical problems such as the 
evolution of galaxies, formation of stars and planets, and 
the contribution of brown dwarfs to dark matter. 

IRIS has a 70 cm Ritchey-Chrétien type telescope 
cooled to 6 K with liquid helium and Stirling-cycle 
coolers. It will carry two focal-plane instruments: a Far- 
Infrared Surveyor, which will survey the entire sky in 
the wavelength range from 50 to 200 wm with angular 
resolutions of 30-50 arcsec; and an Infrared Camera that 
will take deep images of selected sky regions in the near- 
and mid-infrared range. 

Meanwhile, observational capabilities in the near- 
infrared will also be enhanced by the launch of the 8 m Next 
Generation Space Telescope (NGST) in 2007-8. Following 
on from the successful installation of the Near Infrared 
Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) on the 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE in 1997, NASA and ESA are looking 
towards building an observatory that will detect radiation 
at wavelengths of 0.6 to 20 wm (optimized for the 1-5 wm 
region). NGST will enable astronomers to study extremely 
distant objects whose radiation has been greatly redshifted 
when observed in the current epoch. 


Peter Bond 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Infrared Telescopes 


The infrared region of the spectrum covers a wide 
range of wavelengths—from 0.7 to 1000 wm. However, 
astronomers usually restrict the term ‘infrared’ to the more 
limited region of 1 to 350 4m—though even this is over 100 
times wider than the visible region of the spectrum. 

Infrared radiation was discovered in 1800 by William 
HERSCHEL, during his investigations of the visible light 
spectrum. When he placed a thermometer outside the 
red end of the rainbow spectrum, Herschel found that 
an invisible source of radiation caused the instrument to 
record a rise in temperature. He called the invisible rays 
‘infrared’. 

We now know that the strongest infrared sources are 
relatively cool objects, such as red giant stars, nebulae, 
planets and comets, whose temperatures are between 
about 70 K and 3000 K. In contrast, the Sun is a fairly 
weak infrared emitter. With its surface temperature of 
about 5500 K, our nearest star emits most of its radiation at 
visible wavelengths. Herschel’s discovery was only made 
possible because of the Sun’s close proximity. 

Little progress towards understanding the infrared 
universe was made until the invention of more sensitive, 
electronic detectors in the 1950s. Some notable exceptions 
were the detection of infrared emission from the Moon by 
Charles Piazzi sMyTH in 1856, and infrared observations of 
the Moon through its cycle of phases by the 4th Earl of 
ROSSE, Who attempted to calculate its surface temperature. 
The first infrared observation of an object outside the solar 
system seems to have been made in 1878 by Thomas 
Edison, who observed the star arcrurus during a solar 
eclipse. 

Not until 1969 was the first infrared sky survey 
undertaken by Gerry Neugebauer and Bob Leighton 
from Caltech. With the aid of lead sulphide detectors, 
their relatively crude 1.5 m (60 in) diameter telescope 
scanned 70% of the sky and detected 5612 cosmic infrared 
sources at 2.2 4m. More recently, detectors have been 
made from germanium doped with copper, mercury or 
gallium. Unfortunately, while these are able to probe 
to longer wavelengths, they require cooling to very low 
temperatures (2 K) in order to eliminate background 
interference. 

Another problem to be overcome by ground-based 
observatories was the absorption of infrared radiation 
by gases such as water vapor and carbon dioxide in the 
Earth’s atmosphere. Fortunately, in the near-infrared 
and mid-infrared regions, from 1 to 10 um, there are 
some clear atmospheric ‘windows’. From observatories 
on high mountain peaks, astronomers are able to use 
these ‘windows’ to investigate the infrared sky at certain 
wavelengths. 

Most observations are obtained by means of near- 
infrared detectors attached to optical telescopes. For 
example, the 5 m (200 in) Hale telescope on Mount PALOMAR 
has recently been fitted with a near-infrared camera which 
operates at 1-2.5 wm, while the 8 m (300 in) units of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Very Large Telescope in Chile utilize a cryogenic infrared 
spectrometer and array camera (ISAAC) which observes 
in the spectral region 0.9-5 wm. 

Modern instruments attached to smaller telescopes 
can also return data of major importance. The latest census 
of the near-infrared sky, known as the Two Micron All Sky 
Survey (2MASS) project, began in June 1997. 2MASS uses 
two new, highly automated 1.3 m (51 in) telescopes, one 
at Mount Hopkins in Arizona, and one at CERRO TOLOLO 
in Chile. Both telescopes are equipped with a three-color 
infrared camera, each channel consisting of a 256 x 256 
array of detectors which is capable of observing the sky 
simultaneously at 1.25, 1.65 and 2.17 wm. 

The development of large-format infrared detector 
arrays, funded by the US Department of Defense and 
NASA, has made the new survey possible. These 
mercury—cadmium-tellurium detectors, similar to those 
developed for the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object 
Spectrometer on the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE, can now detect 
astronomical objects over 100 million times fainter than 
those seen by the original Two Micron Survey. 

When completed, the 2MASS survey will contain 
accurate positions and fluxes for some 300 million 
stars and other unresolved objects, together with 
positions and total magnitudes for more than a million 
galaxies and nebulae, including galaxies in the 60° 
wide ‘zone of avoidance’, where dust within the Milky 
Way renders optical galaxy surveys incomplete. Rare 
objects such as extremely low-luminosity stars and 
brown dwarfs, or heavily dust-obscured AGNs and 
globular clusters located in the galactic plane, should 
also be discovered. (For further information see 
http: / /www.ipac.caltech.edu/2mass/) 

Despite such advances, the best site for ground-based 
infrared observations remains the 4200 m (13 800 ft) high 
Mauna Kea in Hawaii. Located on its summit are the two 
largest purpose-built infrared telescopes in the world, the 
3 m (120 in) NASA INFRARED TELESCOPE FACILITY and the 3.8 m 
(150 in) UNITED KINGDOM INFRARED TELESCOPE. Nearby are the 
twin 10 m (400 in) Keck telescopes and the 3.6 m (140 in) 
CANADA-FRANCE-HAWAII TELESCOPE, Which are used for both 
optical and infrared observations. 

However, even the Mauna Kea site is not high 
enough to allow far-infrared observations. In order to rise 
above the bulk of the water vapor and the atmosphere, 
astronomers have turned to placing telescopes on balloons, 
sounding rockets or high-flying aircraft. 

In 1972 and 1974, the US Air Force Cambridge 
Research Laboratories (later known as the Air Force 
Geophysics Laboratory) carried out project HISTAR to 
survey the sky at various wavelengths between 4 and 
27 wm. Using a liquid helium-cooled 16.5 cm (6.5 in) 
telescope on nine suborbital rocket flights, the project 
cataloged over 2000 infrared sources. 

This was soon followed by the introduction of 
NASA's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a modified 
Lockheed C-141 military aircraft equipped with a 90 cm 
(36 in) infrared telescope. After 20 years and more than 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Infrared Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1500 flights, budget cuts brought the KAO to an end on 
13 October 1995. 

However, a much larger, more powerful successor is 
scheduled to become operational in 2002. NASA’s Strato- 
spheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) will 
fly on board a modified Boeing 747-SP aircraft at an 
operational height of 12.5 km (nearly 41000 ft). From 
this altitude, SOFIA will be above 99.9% of the infrared- 
absorbing atmospheric water vapor that limits ground- 
based infrared observations. 

With its European-made 2.7 m (106 in) primary 
mirror, SOFIA will be one of the most capable infrared 
observatories in the world. It will operate primarily 
at infrared and submillimeter wavelengths, from 0.3 
to 1600 um, though it can also be used for visible 
observations. Despite its size, SOFIA has been designed 
to meet the stringent weight requirements of an airborne 
telescope, and the complete system is expected to weigh 
only about 20 tonnes (44 000 Ib). 

The observatory is expected to provide unprece- 
dented views of regions of star formation in interstel- 
lar dust clouds, circumstellar dust disks, distant comets 
and moons, as well as spectral information on complex 
molecules in space, planetary atmospheres and nearby 
galaxies. 

SOFIA is being developed by the American Univer- 
sities Space Research Association (USRA), which will also 
operate the telescope for NASA once it becomes opera- 
tional. Under an international agreement between the 
United States and the German government, the German 
Aerospace Research Centre (DLR) is responsible for the 
design and construction of the SOFIA telescope. In re- 
turn for supplying the telescope and part of the funding 
for its operation, German astronomers will receive 20% of 
SOFIA’s observing time. 

see also: INFRARED SPACE MISSIONS 


Peter Bond 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ingalls, Albert (1888-1958) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ingalls, Albert (1888-1958) 


American amateur astronomer and amateur telescope 
maker. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Inner Planets ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Inner Planets 


A collective term for the major planets Mercury, Venus, 
Earth and Mars: those whose orbits lie closest to the Sun, 
inside the main asteroid belt, as opposed to the outer 
planets, orbiting beyond the main asteroid belt. 


Compare: inferior planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Institut de Radio Astronomie Millimétrique 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Institut de Radio Astronomie 
Millimétrique 

The Institut de Radio Astronomie Millimétrique (IRAM) 
is an international scientific institute covering all aspects 
of radio astronomy at mm wavelengths. In this spectral 
range thousands of molecular emission lines allow the 
study of physics and chemistry in the interstellar medium, 
and the coldest parts of the universe can be observed 
through the continuum emission of dust. 

The IRAM headquarters are located in Grenoble, 
France. The institute operates two unique observatories 
which are available for the astronomical community. One 
is a radio interferometer, consisting of currently five (soon 
six) 15 m diameter antennas on the Plateau de Bure in 
the French Alps, with imaging capabilities at an angular 
resolution below one arcsec. The other is a 30 m diameter 
telescope, located at an altitude of 2900 m on the Pico Veleta 
in southern Spain, with a support base in Granada. 

IRAM was founded in 1979 by the German Max- 
Planck-Gesellschaft and the French Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique. The Spanish Instituto Geografico 
Nacional, initially an associate member, became a full 
member in 1990. About 130 people are currently working 
at IRAM, most of them engineers and technicians. 

The objectives of IRAM include the development and 
production of instrumentation for mm wave astronomy, 
such as extremely low-noise receivers, superconducting 
(SIS) detectors, and fast digital spectrometers. They also 
include the development of data reduction software. 

In addition to supporting the user community, 
the IRAM astronomers perform forefront research in 
several fields, from the solar system to cosmological 
distances. Among the scientific highlights from the IRAM 
observatories are the detection of molecular gas in high- 
redshift objects, the mapping of CO and dust emission in 
nearby galaxies, the investigation of circumbinary disks 
and proto-planetary disks around pre-main sequence 
stars, and also observations of molecular line and 
continuum emission of comets and other solar-system 
objects. 

For further information see 
http:/ /iram.fr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Institut National des Sciences de I’Univers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Institut National des Sciences de 
Univers 


The Institut National des Sciences de l’Univers (INSU) was 
created in 1985, under the joint authority of the French 
Ministry of Higher Education and the CNRS. INSU is 
responsible for the major facilities and programs in the 
fields of astronomy and Earth sciences, including the 
Universe Sciences Observatories. 

INSU operates major research facilities, both for col- 
lecting data (by satellite, oceanographic ship, atmospheric 
research aircraft or multisite field campaigns), and for the 
computer processing and interpretation of the collected 
data with data bases, models and numerical simulations. 

It also has administrative and technical divisions 
designed to help implement policies. The mission of the 
technical division is to design projects for the necessary 
equipment and instruments and to operate the French 
facilities. 

Sciences of the Universe are also represented as 
a department within the CNRS, and both the CNRS 
department and INSU are headed by the same director. 
The department has responsibility for CNRS-associated 
laboratories and personnel and, with the help of the 
National Committee, for the analysis of overall scientific 
trends. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.insu.cnrs-dir.fr/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Institute of Space and Astronautical Science 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Institute of Space and Astronautical 
Science 


The Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) 
is situated in Sagamihara, Japan. ISAS is a central 
institute for space science research belonging to the 
Ministry of Education, and functions as an inter-university 
research organization. It was established in April 1981 
by reorganizing the Institute of Space and Aeronautical 
Science, University of Tokyo. ISAS consists of around 
300 staff, which include professors, associate professors, 
research associates, technicians and administrative staff. 
The major facilities are: Kagoshima Space Center (rocket 
launch), Noshiro Testing Center (static firing test of 
rocket motors), Sanriku Balloon Center (scientific balloon 
launch) and Usuda Deep Space Center (deep space 
communication). ISAS is one of the leading agencies in the 
world in some fields of space science, e.g. x-ray astronomy, 
space plasma physics, solar physics and radio astronomy. 
The latest version of its satellite launch vehicle is the M-V 
rocket, which launches almost one satellite per year into 
space. 
For further information see 
http://www.isas.ac.jp/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Instituto Argentino de Radioastronomia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Instituto Argentino de 
Radioastronomia 


The Instituto Argentino de Radioastronomia (IAR) is 
an astrophysics research center and radio astronomical 
observatory located 40 km from Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
It was built during 1962-65 and officially inaugurated on 
26 March 1966. 

The primary instruments of the institute are two 30 m 
single dish radio telescopes which provide a coverage 
of the southern sky from declinations of —90° to —10°. 
The maximum tracking time on a given source is about 
four hours. The telescopes are used with receivers that 
operate at 1420 MHz, 1670 MHz and 3.3 GHz. The neutral 
hydrogen line (21 cm) can be observed with a helium- 
cooled HEMT receiver and a 1008-channel autocorrelator 
at the backend. The HPBW of the telescopes is ~15 and 
~30 arcmins at 3.3 GHz and 1.4 GHz, respectively. 

IAR’s observing facilities have been used to survey 
the extended H I line emission in the southern sky and, 
in recent years, to study the variability of extragalactic 
radio sources on short time-scales. Many new supernova 
remnants and radio counterparts of gamma-ray sources 
have been also discovered with these telescopes. 

In addition to the astronomical instruments, the IAR 
has a laboratory of electronics, a department of mechanics, 
and a well-stocked library. There is an open policy for 
granting telescope time on the basis of refereed proposals. 

For further information see 
http://www.iar.unlp.edu.ar/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias 


The Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias (IAC) and 
its Observatories—the OBSERVATORIO DEL TEIDE on Tenerife 
and the OBSERVATORIO DEL ROQUE DE LOS MUCHACHOS on 
La Palma—are a Spanish research center open, from 
1979, to the international scientific community through 
its Agreements on Cooperation in Astrophysics. The 
IAC Observatories in fact form the European Northern 
Observatory (ENO), in which instruments have been 
installed from over thirty scientific institutions belonging 
to Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Holland, 
Ireland, Italy, Norway, Spain, Sweden and the United 
Kingdom. The Observatories were inaugurated in 1985 
by the Spanish Royal Family in the presence of six other 
European heads of state. 

Although it was created in 1982 as a Public 
Consortium in partnership with the Spanish State, the 
Autonomous Canarian Government, the University of La 
Laguna and the Higher Council of Scientific Research 
(CSIC), the IAC inherited the Observatorio del Teide, 
which was created in 1959. 

The IAC’s activities include astrophysical research, 
the development of ground-based and_ space-borne 
instrumentation, the training of researchers, university 
education and popularization. Its central headquarters are 
a scientific-technical institute, whose resources include a 
library, a computer center, workshops and laboratories. 
Over 300 people work at the IAC, including scientific, 
technical and administrative personnel. 

The IAC’s research program consists of projects 
covering the universe and cosmology, stars, the Sun, 
interstellar matter, planetary systems, atmospheric optics, 
high spatial resolution, the design and construction 
of telescopes, and space-borne optical and infrared 
instrumentation. Among these projects should be 
highlighted the 10 m large telescope (the Gran Telescopio 
de Canarias, GTC), which will become operative at the 
Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos at the end of 
2003. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.iac.es. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Instrumentation: Adaptive Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Instrumentation: Adaptive Optics 


Turbulence in the Earth’s atmosphere produces inhomo- 
geneities in the refractive index of the air, which affect 
the image quality of ground-based telescopes (see SEEING). 
ADAPTIVE OPTICS (AO) is a means for the real-time compen- 
sation of image degradation. It consists of using an active 
optical element such as a deformable mirror to correct the 
instantaneous wave-front distortions. These are measured 
by a device called a wave-front sensor which delivers the 
signals necessary to drive the correcting element. 

First proposed in 1953 by the astronomer Horace 
Babcock, the technique was developed only in the 1970s, 
mainly for defense applications (optical surveillance). 
The first operational astronomical AO system was built 
in France and successfully tested in October 1989 in 
OBSERVATOIRE D/HAUTE PROVENCE. It was later installed on 
the 3.6 m telescope at the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY. 
Since 1994, a growing number of observatories have been 
equipped with AO systems, mostly in the United States of 
America. 

Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of a typical 
astronomical AO system. It consists of three main 
components, a deformable mirror, a wave-front sensor and 
control electronics. They operate in a closed feedback loop. 
The deformable mirror first compensates the distortions 
of the incoming wave-front. Then a beam splitter diverts 
part of the light toward the wave-front sensor to estimate 
the residual wave-front distortions. The control system 
uses the wave-front sensor information to update the 
deformable mirror figure. As the incoming wave-front 
evolves, these operations are repeated indefinitely at a rate 
of the order of a thousand times per second. 

Wave-front sensors require the use of a so-called 
‘guide’ source. They work best on a point source. 
Fortunately, nature provides astronomers with many 
point sources, in the form of stars. However, they 
are quite faint. With current systems, observations are 
limited to the vicinity of bright stars, that is a small 
fraction of the sky. Wave-front sensing is also possible 
on extended sources if they are sufficiently bright and 
compact. Examples are solar system objects such as small 
planets, satellites or asteroids, but also a few galaxy cores 
or even small nebulosities. Solar astronomers are now 
able to do wave-front sensing on the solar surface. To 
improve the ability to sense the wave-front, a number 
of researchers are also producing artificial light sources 
by illuminating the atmosphere with a powerful laser 
beacon. Unfortunately, the laser beacon itself is affected 
by atmospheric turbulence, and stellar sources are still 
needed to complement the information. Today, laser 
systems are costly and have not yet fully come up to 
expectations. 


Current technology 

Currently, there are two competing technologies referred 
to as ‘conventional’ versus ‘curvature’ AO systems. Con- 
ventional systems are based on components developed in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Light from Deformable Beam Astronomical 
telescope mirror 2 splitter 2 instrument 
Control | 22g: Wave-front 

electronics sensor 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of an AO system. 


continuous facesheet piezo-stack actuators 
\ 
[ ] 


base plate 


(a) 


& 


wafers 


\% = 


high voltage input 
(b) 


Figure 2. Deformable mirrors: (a) conventional, (b) bimorph. 


the industry: Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensors with 
charge coupled devices (CCD) detectors, and continu- 
ous facesheet mirrors with piezo-stack actuators. Curva- 
ture systems are based on a new approach pioneered at 
the Institute for Astronomy in the University of Hawaii 
(UH), and first used at the CANADA-FRANCE-HAWAII TELESCOPE 
(CFHT) on Mauna Kea. A novel wave-front ‘curvature’ 
sensor is used together with an array of discrete photon 
counting avalanche photodiodes (APDs) for light detec- 
tion. Also a new deformable mirror technology is used 
based on piezo bimorph wafers. 

Figure 2 shows the two main types of deformable 
mirrors used in astronomy. Conventional mirrors consist 
of a thin plate of glass or silicon supported by an 
array of stacked piezoelectric or electrostrictive actuators. 
Actuators push or pull on the plate producing local bumps 
or dips (figure 2(a)). Bimorph mirrors consist of a pair 
of piezoelectric wafers glued together with electrodes 
in between and outside. The wafers are polarized 
perpendicular to the surface. When voltages are applied 
to the electrodes, electric fields are produced inside the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Instrumentation: Adaptive Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


focal plane edge 
plane wave lenslet array detector array shift 
lack of Se telescope = 
illumination Pa aperture I 
excess of | fr y~ 
illumination | ps, i y edge 
== es | [ a | Shit 
edgeA —™ | | = 
9 XS, | \ ; 6] a ») excess of 
gee eeo as ese Se Se eS shift ~ \ { Sin inati 
| ee illumination 
} <a 
Sone Sele See Oe, Ee | >a 
} Sg eS lack of 
ie. par distorted illumination 
wave front d 
edge 
| shift 
(a) (c) 
Fan 
; focal plane i iy light: teat 
distorted wave lenslet array detector array y | | 
: Us he telescope 
\ See hw 
| = ar - - -- _ jens 
{ ib i a 
f III vibrating — 
| q membrane > detector 
| <a... mirror a —— aay 
| | 
\ ——————Srti‘( ;'‘( s;‘( (Cs = 
——$ a 


(d) 7 


Figure 3. Wave-front sensors: (a, b) Shack—Hartmann sensor, (c, d) curvature sensor. 


wafers so that one wafer contracts whereas the other 
one expands, locally bending the mirror (figure 2(b)). In 
all cases, digital to analog converters and high-voltage 
amplifiers are used to produce the voltages necessary to 
deform the mirror (typically a few hundred volts). 

Figure 3 shows the two main types of wave-front 
sensors. A Shack—Hartmann sensor consists of an array 
of small lenses set in a plane conjugate to the telescope 
aperture. Each lenslet forms an image of the guide source 
ona CCD detector array (figure 3(a)). By comparison with 
a reference plane wave, a distorted wave-front produces 
shifts in the location of each of these images (figure 3(b)). 
A measure of the shift gives an estimate of the local wave- 
front slope. Mathematically, the wave-front surface can be 
reconstructed by integrating these wave-front slopes along 
two orthogonal directions. It can be shown that a least- 
square solution is obtained by computing the wave-front 
Laplacian (total curvature) from the slopes. The Laplacian 
is then integrated by solving a Poisson equation with radial 
edge slopes as boundary conditions. 

A curvature sensor directly gives estimates of the 
wave-front Laplacian and radial edge slopes. This is 
done by comparing the illuminations in two symmetrically 
defocused images of the telescope aperture (figure 3(c)). 
Differences in the illumination give a measure of the local 
convergence or divergence of the beam, that is of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wave-front total curvature (Laplacian). Differences in the 
position of the aperture edges gives a measure of the 
local edge ray inclination, that is of the wave-front edge 
slope. In practice a vibrating membrane mirror is used to 
defocus back and forth an image of the telescope aperture 
(figure 3(d)). Any deviation of the wave-front surface from 
a plane wave produces a modulation of the light intensity 
at the frequency of the membrane drum oscillations (kHz 
rate). A phase-locked demodulation produces the sensor 
signals. 

Real-time computers are used to control the feedback 
loop. Conventional systems use a wave-front computer 
to calculate the centroids of the Shack—-Hartmann 
subaperture images. The coordinates of the centroids are 
compared with reference coordinates, and the differences 
form the sensor signals. Curvature systems use a two- 
channel counter to count photons during each half cycle 
of the membrane vibration. The differences in photon 
counts form the sensor signals. No reference is needed. 
In all cases, a control computer is used to convert the 
sensor signals into the voltages one must apply to the 
deformable mirror. This is done by multiplying the sensor 
signals with a control matrix. The control matrix is often 
determined experimentally with a calibration light source. 
The deformable mirror actuators are excited sequentially 
and the corresponding sensor responses are recorded. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Instrumentation: Adaptive Optics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


resulting interaction matrix is then inverted through a 
singular value decomposition to produce a control matrix. 
The eigenmodes of the control matrix are called the system 
modes. The eigenvalues are the loop gains of each mode. 
These gains can be individually modified to minimize 
the effect of sensor noise. The procedure is called modal 
control. 


Performance and limitations 

Figure 4 shows an example of three different profiles of 
the intensity distribution in a stellar image, also called 
the point spread function (PSF). The left profile is for 
an uncompensated image, and is often referred to as the 
seeing disk profile. The center profile is for a partially 
compensated image obtained with an AO system turned 
on. The right profile, often referred to as the airy DISK 
profile, is the theoretically ideal profile of the diffraction- 
limited image one would obtain with perfect optics and 
no atmosphere. Astronomers are used to measuring image 
quality in terms of the angular full width at half maximum 
(FWHM) of a stellar image. Expressed in radians, the 
FWHM ofan Airy disk profile is very close to 1/D, where 
is the wavelength of light and D is the telescope diameter. 
That of a seeing disk profile is very close to A/rp, where 
ro is a seeing parameter first introduced by David Fried 
(1966) and now called the Fried parameter. Figure 4 shows 
that the FWHM of a partially compensated PSF is much 
closer to that of the Airy disk than to that of the seeing 
disk. This is because a compensated PSF consists of a 
narrow (almost diffraction-limited) core, on top of broad 
halo, barely narrower than the seeing disk. The halo is 
due to the light diffracted by the small-scale wave-front 
distortions which have not been compensated by the AO 
system. 

A consequence is that the FWHM is a poor quality 
criterion for an AO-compensated image. A more widely 
used criterion is the Strehl ratio, which is the ratio [,/I, 
of the maximum intensity in the compensated PSF to 
that in the diffraction-limited PSF obtained with the same 
telescope (see figure 4). Visually, an image appears fairly 
sharp if its Strehl ratio is greater than 0.3. It appears 
blurry if it is less than 0.3. Following Fried, AO specialists 
also use another criterion called the normalized Strehl 
ratio or normalized resolution, which is the Strehl ratio 
of the compensated PSF divided by that of the pure seeing 
disk. If one neglects diffraction in the uncompensated 
PSF, then the normalized resolution is simply J./J, (see 
figure 4). This criterion has the advantage of being 
telescope independent. 

Figure 5(a) shows theoretical curves for the normal- 
ized resolution as a function of D/ro. These are for zonal 
compensation over N subapertures assuming no wave- 
front sensing error. The curve labeled (0) is for uncom- 
pensated images. Atmospheric turbulence is supposed to 
follow Kolmogorov statistics. The performance of real AO 
systems follows very similar curves except that the actual 
number N, of actuators is typically two to five times larger. 
The ratio N/N, is a measure of the system compensation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1 — 4 
ra 
i 
0.84 | | 
| 
| 
| 
0.64 | J 
| 
A/D > < 
| 
0.4L | | | 
|| 
vl | 
| c | | 
0.24 [| | | : 
a/D> be | 
Mog NOT 
Pe 2 | 
Hila ae ah a Lon 


Figure 4. Intensity profiles for three different point source 
images: (a) uncompensated, (b) compensated, 

(c) diffraction-limited. For the clarity of the figure we have 
plotted only results for image motion compensation under very 
good seeing conditions (D/ro = 4). 


efficiency. It is limited by errors due to finite wave-front 
sampling both in space and in time. It is interesting to note 
that the Strehl ratio improvement brought by adaptive op- 
tics goes to a maximum for D/rp = 2.3./N. At this point 
the gain is by a factor of 1.6N, and the Strehl ratio of the 
compensated image is about 0.3. 

When a faint source is used to sense the wave-front, 
there is an additional loss of Strehl ratio (or compensation 
efficiency) due to measurement noise, including photon 
shot noise, read-out noise and sky background noise. 
Curvature AO systems with photon counting APDs have 
constantly outperformed other systems on faint guide 
sources. Figure 5(b) shows the actual performance of 
three curvature systems which have been used on the 
CFHT: the 13-actuator UH prototype, the 19-actuator 
CFHT user instrument (Pueo), and the 36-actuator UH 
system called Hokupa’a. The broken curve indicates the 
projected performance for an 85-actuator curvature AO 
system. Itis interesting to note that the limiting magnitude 
is independent of the number of actuators as one expects 
from pure photon shot noise. 

Another loss of Strehl ratio occurs when the guide 
source is away from the observed object. This is because 
the two wave-front distortions differ, a property called 
anisoplanatism. On a 3.6 m telescope such as the CFHT, 
the observed loss of Strehl ratio is typically 10% over a 
distance of 10 arcseconds. This number depends heavily 
on seeing conditions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Instrumentation: Adaptive Optics ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Normalized CFHT median seeing: 

resolution KHJ T bands 
Vdd od 

100 


Strehl ratio: 1/ 0.3/ 0.1/0.03/0.01/ 


Neptune 
10 
Pluto 
Charon 
1 
0.1 1 2.3 VN 10 100 
D/t, 
(a) BD+303639 
Strehl ratio Figure 6. Examples of astronomical images recorded with 
08 adaptive optics. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 32. 


_ 85 actuators (N=42) Curvature systems 


a CFHT median seeing Examples of astronomical images 


J band Figure 6 shows examples of infrared astronomical images 
obtained with adaptive optics. The upper part shows 
solar system objects all at the same scale. From to 
28 pesto (Nate) to fe and ieft to right are two images of cae 
showing rotating cloud bands, an image of 10 showing 
glowing lava flows during an eclipse in the shadow of 
JUPITER, two images of TITAN showing a rotating surface 
feature, and an image of PLUTO AND CHARON. The bottom 
part shows circumstellar structures at a scale twice smaller: 
a PLANETARY NEBULA around an evolved star BD+303639 
0.2.13 actuators (N=6) | (bottom left) and a DUSTY CIRCUMSTELLAR DISK around a young 
star GG Tau (bottom right). In both cases the central 
source is displayed with an attenuated intensity scale. The 
images of Io, Pluto-Charon and GG Tau were obtained at 
the CFHT with the UH 13-actuator prototype AO system. 


0.6 


0.4 


19 actuators (N=9) 


: s 10 15 0 The other images were obtained with the UH 36-actuator 
Hokupa’a system either at the CFHT (Neptune and Titan) 
Stellar magnitude or on the 8-m GEMINI telescope (BD+303639). In all cases 


the object itself was used as a guide source except for Io 
where nearby EUROPA was used. 


(0) 


Figure 5. (a) The theoretical compensation performance of an 
ideal AO system. (b) The actual performance of curvature AO Bibliography 
systems as a function of the guide source magnitude. Hardy J W 1998 Adaptive Optics for Astronomical Telescopes 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
Roddier F (ed) 1999 Adaptive Optics in Astronomy 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Instrumentation: Adaptive Optics ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tyson R K 1997 Principles of Adaptive Optics 2nd edn 
(New York: Academic) 


Francois Roddier 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Integral (International Gamma Ray Astrophysics 
Laboratory) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Integral (International Gamma Ray 
Astrophysics Laboratory) 


European Space Agency gamma ray astronomy mission, 
due for launch in 2001. Instruments include a gamma 
ray imager, gamma ray spectrometer, x-ray monitor 
and optical camera. These will pinpoint the locations 
of gamma ray sources to within a few arcminutes 
and measure their radiation energy with unprecedented 
accuracy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interacting Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interacting Galaxies 


Galaxies that interact with each other during close 
encounters or collisions. In a close encounter between two 
galaxies, both are distorted by gravitational tidal forces. 
Typically, matter will be pulled into bulges on both sides 
of each galaxy and, depending on the angular momentum 
(a quantity that depends on the distribution of mass and 
rotational velocity within each galaxy) of each galaxy and 
on the minimum separation and relative velocity of the two 
galaxies, stars and gas clouds may be flung out into long, 
looping ‘tails’ and/or material may flow into bridges that 
link the galaxies together. The pair of galaxies, NGC 4038 
and 4039, which is known as the ‘Antennae’ because of the 
huge pair of antenna-like arms that curve away from the 
main bodies of the two colliding galaxies, appears to be a 
classic example of this process in action. Close encounters 
may also be responsible for initiating spiral structure in 
some galaxies. 

When two galaxies collide, their individual member 
stars do not themselves collide (the average separation 
between stars is so great that the chance of any direct 
stellar collisions taking place is microscopic), but their 
constituent gas clouds do. Through mutual interactions, 
some stars will gain energy and be ejected from the 
member galaxies; others will lose energy and fall towards 
the center of mass of the two galaxies. A possible outcome 
of this process is that the two galaxies will merge into one. 
In some situations, collisions between their constituent 
gas clouds may strip one or both galaxies of their gas. 
This gas, heated by the violence of the collision, is then 
added to the tenuous distribution of high-temperature 
intergalactic gas that is known to be present in many 
clusters of galaxies. In other cases, gas clouds that have 
been compressed through collisions or tidal interactions 
collapse on themselves and trigger dramatic bursts of star 
formation. This process may account for the existence 
of starburst galaxies, highly luminous galaxies that shine 
with the light of large numbers of newborn stars. Where a 
compact galaxy passes through a larger spiral galaxy, it can 
initiate star formation in a ring within the larger galaxy’s 
disk. The ‘Cartwheel’ Galaxy, for example, appears to be 
the result of an event of this kind. 

Because most galaxies are members of groups and 
clusters within which the average separation of galaxies 
is ten to a hundred times the average diameter of a galaxy, 
close encounters, collisions and mergers are common 
events that play a major role in the evolution of galaxies 
and clusters. If small galaxies make close encounters with, 
or collide with, larger, more massive, ones, the smaller 
galaxies may be completely disrupted and absorbed by 
the larger ones. This process of ‘galactic cannibalism’ 
causes large galaxies to grow at the expense of smaller 
ones and is believed to be responsible for the existence of 
giant elliptical galaxies in the centers of richly populated 
clusters of galaxies. 


See also: Cartwheel galaxy, cluster of galaxies, elliptical 
galaxies, galaxies: interactions and mergers, galaxy, spiral 
galaxy, starburst galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interball ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interball 


Solar—terrestrial study involving two Russian PROGNOZ 
spacecraft and two small subsatellites made in Czechoslo- 
vakia. Designed to study plasma processes in the Earth’s 
magnetosphere by using two pairs of spacecraft, one above 
the polar aurora and one in the magnetospheric tail. The 
Tail Probe and its subsatellite S2-X were launched in 
August 1995. The Auroral Probe and S2-A were launched 
in August 1996. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Interference 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interference 


The pattern of light and dark obtained when two beams 
of light combine or interfere with each other. If two waves 
of the same wavelength and amplitude have the same 
phase (i.e. their crests and troughs are in step), then the 
crests will enhance each other to produce a bright fringe 
light. If they are exactly out of phase, then the crests of 
one wave and the troughs of the other will cancel each 
other out, so producing a dark fringe. These patterns are 
also referred to as interference fringes. Such patterns may 
be formed with any type of electromagnetic radiation (or 
with other types of waves, water waves, for example), and 
the interpretation of these interference patterns forms the 
basis of the technique of interferometry. 

An interferometer makes use of the phenomenon of 
the interference of electromagnetic wavefronts arriving 
at two separate detectors to attain more precise position 
measurements or better resolving power than could be 
achieved with a single telescope or detector. 

For example, a typical radio interferometer consists 
of two telescopes, separated by a known distance. Both 
telescopes are used to study the same source. Because of 
the separation of the two receivers, there is a small delay 
between the arrival of a given radio wave at the first and 
second radio telescope (i.e. the wavefronts arriving at any 
instant at the two receivers will be out of phase, in general, 
and will interfere with each other if they are combined). 
The combined signal is analyzed and, for example, as the 
source moves across the sky, the analysis of the changing 
interference pattern will yield a precise position of the 
source. 

For a given wavelength of radiation, the greater the 
separation of the telescopes the higher the resolving power 
achieved. The most precise position measurements in 
radioastronomy have been made by long-baseline inter- 
ferometry, combining signals from two radio telescopes 
separated by thousands of kilometers. The longest base- 
line so far achieved is between California and Australia, 
some 10600 km, by means of which a resolving power of 
0.001 seconds of arc has been achieved at a wavelength of 
13 cm. 


See also: diffraction, electromagnetic radiation, polariza- 
tion, aperture synthesis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interferometer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interferometer 


A device that utilizes interference effects between two 
or more light or other types of waves in order to attain 
higher angular resolutions than can be attained by a single 
telescope or other device. 

The underlying principle of interference is as follows. 
If two light waves of the same wavelength are combined 
in phase (i.e. the wavecrests of one wave are in step 
with the wavecrests of the other) they add together to 
produce a wave of greater amplitude (this process is called 
constructive interference). Conversely, if two waves are 
180° out of phase (the crests of one coinciding with the 
‘troughs’ of the other), they cancel out, so producing a 
wave of zero amplitude (destructive interference). If two 
beams of light, originating from a single source, follow 
paths of different lengths and are then recombined, they 
will interfere with each other, producing bright fringes 
where they arrive in phase and dark fringes where they 
arrive out of phase. Likewise, beams of light originating 
from different parts of the same source, or from separated 
sources, will interfere when combined. The pattern of 
fringes, or interference pattern, that is produced in this 
way can be analyzed to yield information about the 
different path lengths that the beams have followed and 
hence to provide information about the angular size of 
a source, the angular separation between different parts 
of the same source, the angular separation between two 
separate point sources or the location of the source on the 
sky. 

The interferometer was invented by Albert A 
Michelson (1852-1931) in 1881 in order to measure 
differences in path length for light beams, and has 
since had a wide variety of applications. A subsequent 
version, the Michelson stellar interferometer, consisted 
of two separate apertures, or slits, placed in front of a 
large telescope. In principle, when light from a single 
star, or a double star, passed through the two slits and 
recombined at the focus of the telescope, analysis of 
the resulting interference pattern allowed the angular 
diameter of a large star or the angular separation between 
the components of the binary to be measured. The 
resolving power of an interferometer of this kind depends 
on the separation between the apertures or slits; the larger 
the separation the better the resolution (R = A/2D, where 
R = angular resolution in radians, A = wavelength and 
D = the separation of the apertures). Later versions 
extended the separation between the apertures by means 
of mirrors placed on a beam located across, and extending 
beyond, the aperture of the telescope itself. 

The radio interferometer combines the signals 
received by two (or more) separate radio dishes. As 
the source (or sources) is carried across the sky by the 
Earth’s rotation, the advancing wavecrests have different 
distances to travel before reaching each of the two dishes 
and move in and out of phase with each other, so 
producing an interference pattern, which can then be 
analyzed. The greater the separation of the dishes (the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


baseline), the better the resolution. High resolution is 
obtained only along a direction parallel to the baseline. 
However, if use is made of the Earth’s rotation (to change 
the orientation of the baseline relative to the sky), and 
the separation between dishes can be varied, then a 
series of observations can yield an image equivalent to 
that which would be produced by a single dish equal 
in aperture to the maximum separation between dishes. 
This technique is called aperture synthesis. Because light 
waves are many orders of magnitude (typically a million 
times) shorter than radio waves, the tolerances necessary 
to use separated optical telescopes as interferometers 
or aperture synthesis systems are orders of magnitude 
finer than those that radioastronomers have to achieve. 
Consequently, although optical fringes produced by 
two separate telescopes were first observed by French 
astronomer Antoine Labeyrie in 1975, it is only in very 
recent years that optical astronomers have begun to 
be able to use separated telescopes to good effect as 
interferometers and aperture synthesis systems. 

The COAST (Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis 
Telescope) system achieved optical resolutions of around 
0.01 arcsec in 1995. The twin 10 m Keck telescopes (on 
Mauna Kea, Hawaii) and the four 8 m mirrors of the 
Very Large Telescope (on Mount Paranal, Chile) are each 
expected to be able to achieve milliarc second resolutions 
when they become operational in interferometer and 
aperture synthesis modes. 


See also: aperture synthesis, radio interferometer, resolv- 
ing power. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interferometry: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interferometry: Ground 


Astrometry is the measurement of angular positions of 
stars. Historically, this was done by measuring the 
position of a stellar image in the focal plane of a telescope 
using for example a CCD, a photographic plate or the 
observer’s eye. When changes in position over a small 
field of view are required—for PARALLAXES or astrometric 
orbits of BINARY sTARS—the star’s position is measured 
relative to other stars within the telescope’s field of view. 
This is called narrow-angle astrometry. Global positions 
needed for reference frame problems require wide-angle 
astrometry. Here the telescope’s orientation is known 
relative to the Earth and is called a transit circle. 

The astrometric precision is limited by the size of the 
star’s image in the telescope’s focal plane, which in turn is 
limited by diffraction of light at the edges of the telescope’s 
aperture. The larger the aperture, the smaller the image 
and the more precise the astrometric measurement. The 
angular resolution can be increased by combining light 
from multiple telescopes. Done properly, this is called 
optical interferometry and the resolution now depends 
on the baseline, the distance between the two telescopes 
instead of on the diameter of the telescope apertures. With 
this technique, the resolution, hence the precision of the 
measurement, can be improved simply by increasing the 
baseline. Baselines much longer than the diameter of 
the largest telescope are possible. (See also ASTROMETRY: 
TELESCOPES AND TECHNIQUES.) 

The astrometric accuracy, however, is limited by 
systematic effects and not by the precision of the 
measurements. The atmosphere produces the largest 
systematics: anomalous refraction, image blurring and 
motion. These effects favor the use of an INTERFEROMETER. 


Anomalous refraction 

The Earth’s atmosphere bends light, making stars appear 
higher in the sky than they actually are. This is because 
air has a larger index of refraction than empty space. 
As light enters a region of higher index of refraction it 
is bent toward the direction of the gradient. Since the 
air’s index of refraction depends on both its temperature 
and pressure and therefore, on the local meteorological 
conditions, the stellar refraction will, in general, depart 
from that caused by the mean atmosphere. This 
departure is anomalous refraction and limits the accuracy 
of astrometric measurements. Although monitoring the 
atmosphere with the hope of correcting the data for 
anomalous refraction could be done, the required accuracy 
of the measurements is greater than what can be obtained. 
For example, at a zenith angle of 45°, an error in the mean 
temperature along the line-of-sight of only 0.5° will result 
in an astrometric error of 0.1 arcseconds. 

For wide-angle astrometry, an interferometric mea- 
surement should be of higher accuracy because it is inher- 
ently differential; it compares the difference between the 
optical paths from the star to where the light is combined 
from the two telescopes. To the extent that the atmosphere 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is the same over both telescopes, its effect cancels. This can- 
cellation is a strong argument for using an interferometer 
for ground-based astrometric measurements. 


Image blur and motion 
The weather patterns that give rise to anomalous refraction 
can be relatively constant over periods of hours. There 
are, however, random fluctuations in temperature and 
pressure which occur on much faster time scales. These 
are the same fluctuations responsible for shimmer seen 
when looking toward the horizon on a hot day; and for 
the scintillation (twinkling) of stars at night. Although 
scintillation does not directly affect the astrometry, it is 
accompanied by a distortion of the wavefront that results 
in image blur in a large telescope and image motion in 
a small telescope. These effects directly impact both the 
accuracy and precision of the astrometric measurement. 
As with most optical media, the index of refraction 
of air increases with decreasing wavelength. As 
a result, atmospheric refraction is larger at shorter 
wavelengths. In principal, this shift of the stellar 
image with wavelength can be measured and used to 
estimate the total atmospheric refraction. In practice, 
the wavelength dependence is too small to be practical 
for telescopic observations. This situation is different 
for the interferometer which maintains its high precision 
looking through the atmosphere; for an interferometer, 
this technique is feasible and has been demonstrated. 


Background 

The workings of an OPTICALINTERFEROMETER can be described 
in two ways. In the previous section, we described an 
optical interferometer as giving a higher resolution image 
than that obtained with a single telescope. Although this is 
true, an astrometric interferometer usually does not form 
an image; it is better to think of its operation in terms of 
interference fringes. 


Interference fringes 
The schematic of a simple optical interferometer is shown 
in figure 1. Two telescopes, pointing at the same star, 
intercept sections of a single wavefront of light. Those 
sections of wavefront are combined at the beam splitter, 
BS. The detectors D; and D> each see half the light from 
each section of wavefront. The interferometer is aligned 
when the wavefronts entering the detectors are parallel 
to each other and the path length from the star to the 
beam splitter is the same regardless of which telescope 
intercepted the light. The path lengths are equalized with 
delay lines which consist of mirrors on a cart that can be 
moved to change the delay internal to the interferometer. 
Achange of the internal delay shifts the relative phase 
of the two waves reaching a detector. When the waves are 
exactly in phase, they superimpose, reinforcing each other. 
They result in a larger amplitude and more light. This is 
called constructive interference. When the wave are 180°, 
or half a wavelength, out of phase, they cancel each other 
with one at a maximum while the other is at a minimum. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interferometry: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Atmosphere | 


Baseline 


Delay 
lines 


Telescope Telescope 


\Jariauie delay 


Figure 1. Layout of a simple Michelson interferometer. 


This case results in no light at the detector. This is 
destructive interference. In an astrometric interferometer, 
the fringe is detected as a variation of intensity as a function 
of delay in the combined beams. 

To look at this from another perspective, consider 
a perfect beam splitter for which the reflected beam is 
retarded by a quarter wave (90° of phase) relative to 
the transmitted beam. When the internal delay exactly 
matches the external delay, the light from one telescope 
is a quarter wave retarded relative to the light from the 
other telescope when it reaches detector D, but is a quarter 
wave advanced when it reaches detector D,. In both cases, 
there is quarter wave phase shift between the two waves 
so the two detectors see equal light. This is exactly what is 
expected since the system is completely symmetric. When 
the internal delay changes, the phase difference increases 
at one detector and decreases at the other. The output of 
the detectors varies sinusoidally with phase but since they 
are 180° out of phase, the total amount of light is constant. 


The fringe packet and temporal coherence 

We have seen how interference fringes are formed. As 
the delay changes, the outputs of the beam combiner 
oscillate. These intensity oscillations have a period of 
one wavelength. Now, consider what happens when the 
interferometer passes light over a range of wavelengths. 
When the path lengths are equal, all wavelengths interfere 
constructively. But since the blue fringes are shorter than 
the red fringes, as the delay difference increases, successive 
intensity maxima are broadened by the blue light reaching 
maximum earlier than the red light. This smearing of the 
colors across the peak results in a lower maximum. The 
same process occurs at the minimum; the blue minimum 
occurs before the red and the minimum at one wavelength 
is partially filled in by the other wavelengths. The result 
is reduced fringe contrast or visibility’. The result is each 


1 Tobe precise, the fringe contrast should be called the visibility 
amplitude, since properly defined, the visibility is a complex 
number. The visibility phase depends on source structure but 
since it is usually zero for astrometric sources, we ignore it here. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


successive fringe has lower visibility. The central fringe 
is the highest visibility fringe and is also called the white 
light fringe because it is the only fringe that occurs nearly 
simultaneously for all wavelengths. For a bandpass of Ad, 
centered at wavelength, A, the visibility drops off as 


P 2 

V=\ sin(ad Ad/2*) (1) 
md Ad/22 

where Vo is the visibility of the white light fringe, and d is 

the delay offset from that fringe. Thus the fringes are not 

visible at all delays; they are confined to a region of delays 

of width 47/Ad and form a fringe packet. 

The path length mismatch is referred to as the delay 
because it can be thought of as a mismatch in the time 
of arrival of the wavefronts between the arms of the 
interferometer. For the same reason, the width of the fringe 
packet is referred to as the temporal coherence because it 
is related to the maximum timing error that can be allowed 
for interference to occur. 


Astrometry 

Because the white light fringe occurs when the internal 
delay equals the external (or geometric) delay, the delay 
can be written as 


dutC=B-+s (2) 


where B is the baseline, the vector distance between the 
two telescopes, s is the unit vector pointing toward the 
star and C is the delay constant, a zero point offset in 
the internal delay measurement. This equation contains 
four parameters that describe the instrument, the three 
components of the baseline and the delay constant. It also 
contains two unknowns for each star, the right ascension 
and declination. Including these parameters explicitly in 
equation (2) gives 


dint = By cos(5) cos(t — a) 
— By cos(6) sin(t — a) 
+ B,sin(d) — C (3) 


where ¢ is the local sidereal time. A right-handed 
coordinate system has been used with z-axis parallel to 
the Earth’s rotation axis, y-axis pointing toward the east 
point on the horizon, and x-axis pointing toward the point 
where the celestial equator crosses the meridian. 

An observation with an astrometric interferometer 
consists of pointing the telescopes at the same star and 
moving the delay lines until the white light fringe is 
located. The time and internal delay of the white light 
fringe are recorded. Figure 2 shows what a typical data 
set looks like for a north-south baseline. It can be seen 
from equation (4) and figure 2, that the delay for a star is 
a sinusoidal variation with a 24 h period. For two stars, 
the difference in the phase of this oscillation is equal to 
the difference in the stars’ right ascensions. Moving from 
the equator to the pole, the amplitude of the oscillation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interferometry: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


20 
& 


Delay (meters) 
0) 


Sidereal Time (hours) 


Figure 2. Delay as a function of time for a north-south baseline. 
Data for the same star are connected by a solid curve. Stars at 
higher declination show a smaller amplitude variation and the 
mean delay is more negative. For two stars, the difference in 
time between the maxima is the difference in the star’s right 
ascensions. 


decreases and its offset from zero delay increases. With 
enough data, the four instrumental parameters, all the 
declinations, and the relative right ascensions can be 
determined. 

Although this method will work, it requires nearly 
horizon to horizon coverage in order to determine the 
amplitude, phase, and offset of the delay variations, each 
with errors comparable to a single measurement. Thus 
it is difficult to exploit partial nights of data and the 
observations are susceptible to slow instrumental drifts. A 
more robust interferometer has at least three independent 
baselines (four telescopes). With three baselines, three 
delays are measured simultaneously and the number of 
data increases faster than the number of unknowns as 
stars are added to the list of observations. In this way, 
the baselines and relative angles between the stars can 
be determined with a short set of observations. Multiple 
observations of the stars through the night are needed 
only to tie the coordinate system to the Earth’s rotation 
axis. This type of instrument is less susceptible to 
subtle instrumental effects corrupting the results since 
the instrumental parameters can be determined from data 
spanning a shorter time. 


Practical considerations 

To achieve milliarcsecond accuracy with 100 meter class 
baselines, the delay must be determined with an accuracy 
of better than 1 wm. This implies that the internal delay, or 
at least changes in the internal delay needs to be measured 
with similar accuracy. This is while those delays are 
changing by several tens of meters as the observations are 
switched between different parts of the sky. Unmonitored 
changes produce noise on the astrometric data. The most 
important parts of the interferometer to monitor are the 
delay lines and the telescopes. The delay lines allow 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


large, rapid variations of the internal delay without tilting 
the beam or introducing path length vibrations. A laser 
metrology beam, injected into the system parallel to but 
displaced from the stellar beam, is used for monitoring 
the position of the delay line cart; hence, the change in the 
internal delay. 

At high frequencies, the signal from the laser 
metrology system is used for controling vibrations. At 
lower frequencies, it becomes the primary astrometric 
data. 

The only moving parts in the interferometer are the 
delay lines and the telescopes. Since the delay lines are 
monitored, most of the astrometric noise is due to the 
telescopes; either due to bearing errors or to an offset 
between its mechanical and optical pivots. Bearing errors 
can be kept down to a few tenths of a micrometer. The 
pivot offsets can be controled during manufacture. Instead 
of zeroing the pivot-point offsets, it is more important to 
make the telescopes identical so that the delays introduced 
are the same for the telescopes at both ends of the baseline 
and can cancel. Alternatively, these motions can be 
monitored with a three-dimensional metrology system 
tying the position of the telescope to local bedrock. 

Most of the optical paths through the system should 
be in vacuum. This is certainly true for the delay lines 
because the paths from the telescopes to the star all contain 
the same amount of air. Since the external delay is the 
difference between these path lengths, the air cancels out 
and the external delay can be thought of as occurring 
in vacuum above the Earth’s atmosphere. Therefore the 
change in internal delay must also occur in vacuum in 
order to keep the air paths matched in all arms of the 
interferometer. If this is not done, the dispersion due to 
propagation through air will severely limit the observing 
bandpass. The rest of the path lengths do not have to be in 
vacuum as long as the amount of air is matched between 
the arms. However, the less air in the path the better 
since small temperature gradients will refract the light 
and air turbulence will degrade the stellar wavefronts, as 
previously described. 

Finally, the mirrors in the feed optics between 
the telescope and the beam combination laboratory can 
move, introducing delay errors. Because these mirrors 
are exposed to the elements and can experience large 
temperature variations, they can be unstable and produce 
delay variations that may limit the performance of the 
system. These variations can be minimized either by 
monitoring the path length variations with a metrology 
system, or by controling and monitoring the environment 
so that the variations are kept to a tolerable level. 


Atmospheric effects 

For wide-angle astrometry, traditional measurements 
with a transit circle are limited in accuracy by our 
inability to correct the data for anomalous refraction. An 
interferometer measures the difference in optical path 
between its arms. To the extent that the telescopes sample 
the same atmosphere, refraction affects all the light paths 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interferometry: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Star 1 Star 2 


Turbulence 


a Baseline =! 


Figure 3. Diagram of the observation of two stars separated by a 
small angle. 


the same and atmospheric refraction has no effect on the 
interferometer data. The major systematic error in transit 
circle measurements, anomalous refraction, is missing 
from the interferometer data. 

For an interferometer, the largest systematic effect is 
due to the zenith angle of the star being different at the 
two ends of the baseline. Since the air path varies as the 
secant of the zenith angle, this introduces a delay error that 
is zero for an observation at the zenith but grows toward 
the horizon in the direction of the baseline. The delay 
error is proportional to the length of the baseline. For a 
100 meter baseline, the difference between the optical and 
geometric paths is 2 meters at a 45° zenith angle, but the 
delay error is never more than 30 4m corresponding to 
an astrometric error of 60 milliarcseconds. By contrast, 
the angles measured with a transit circle are directly 
affected by atmospheric refraction. Thus the correction 
has to be calculated and applied with 1000 times the 
accuracy in order to achieve the same performance as the 
interferometer. 

The atmosphere also adds random noise to the 
systematics caused by refraction. The optical path 
length through the atmosphere depends not only on the 
geometric path length, but also on the index of refraction 
of the air along that path. Fluctuations in the temperature, 
pressure and composition (primarily water vapor) of the 
air result in changes of the index of refraction and hence the 
delay. These variations in the index of refraction distort, 
as well as delay the stellar wavefront. These distortions 
are the cause of the sEEING which blurs the images made 
with a conventional telescope. The change in delay adds 
noise to the interferometric measurement. 

This atmospheric noise is poorly behaved. It increases 
both with increasing baseline length and with increasing 
interval between observations. For extended observations 
of a single source, the accuracy of the measurement 
improves as the sixth root of the integration time, instead 
of the square root dependence typical of white noise. 

The first consideration in dealing with this problem 
is the choice of baseline. For short baselines, the delay 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


variations increase almost linearly with baseline length so 
the astrometric accuracy should improve very slowly with 
increasing baseline length. However, the size of the delay 
variations saturates when the baseline length reaches the 
outer scale of atmospheric turbulence. When the current 
flurry of optical interferometer construction began in the 
late 1980s, it was generally thought that the outer scale 
was very large so there was little advantage to using long 
baselines. However, since then, evidence has been steadily 
accumulating for outer scales at interferometric sites on 
the order of 30-100 meters. Longer baselines may indeed 
improve the accuracy of ground baseline astrometry. 

If the air mismatch between the arms of the 
interferometer can be estimated, the observed delays can 
be corrected for the mismatch. This effectively reduces 
or eliminates the atmospheric noise. The correction is 
possible because the index of refraction of air increases 
toward shorter wavelengths with a known functional 
form. The delay variations are larger at blue wavelengths 
than at red wavelengths. This dispersion can be measured 
and is used to correct the observed delays for the 
atmospheric contribution. Specifically, over the visible 
spectrum, the index of refraction of air can be represented 
to high accuracy as a quadratic function of wavelength: 


(n = 1) air =Nnot nat nod’, (4) 


The delay can be represented by two terms; a vacuum 
delay, d,, which is the delay that would have occurred if 
there were no air; and the air mismatch, Li, Even though 
it is the index of refraction of air that is varying with time, 
not the actual air path, equation (4) provides a sufficiently 
good approximation to the problem. The optical path 
difference, O P D, is now a function of wavelength where 
OPD=d, + (n—1)Lair. The fringe phase is given by 


b= opp 
~ 


— 27 [(dy + noLair)/ + 14 Lair + n2 Laird]. (5) 


The first term depends on wavelength and represents 
the offset between the internal delay and the center of 
the fringe packet. The second term represents an offset 
between the center of the fringe packet and the white light 
fringe. The third term, the one containing nz causes a 
decrease in visibility for large air mismatches. As Lyir 
increases, the central fringe is displaced from where it 
would have been in the absence of the air mismatch. The 
fringe packet is displaced by a different amount so a fringe 
is no longer centered in the fringe packet. By measuring 
both the position of the fringe packet and the offset of the 
fringe from the center of the packet, it is possible to solve 
for the air mismatch and the vacuum delay. 

Since the water vapor content along the line-of-sight 
is not known, the coefficients used in equation (4) will 
not be exact. Nevertheless, they are known well enough 
and improvements in accuracy of a factor of 5 to 10 are 
routinely obtained. The wavelength dependence of the 
index of refraction produces a corresponding change in 
angle for observations with a transit circle, but this effect 
is too small to be exploited in a practical instrument. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interferometry: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Narrow angle astrometry 

Restricting astrometric observations to a small portion of 
the sky results in higher precision astrometry since some 
systematic effects are common to all of the observations. 
These common effects shift the measured position for all 
the stars, but do not affect the measurement accuracy of 
the angles between the stars. 

Delay fluctuations between two paths through the 
atmosphere increase as the separation of the paths 
increases. Figure 3 shows the observation of two stars 
separated by a small angle. If the separation, X, 
of the lines-of-sight at the distance of the turbulence 
is much smaller than the baseline, then the delay 
fluctuations between stars will be much smaller than 
the delay variations of either star separately. For this 
to work, the atmosphere must not change significantly 
between the observations of the two stars. For 
practical purposes, this means the stars must be observed 
simultaneously. For baselines on the order of 100 
meters and stars separated by less than an arc minute, 
the measurements should be dramatically more accurate 
than wide angle measurements. Accuracies better 
than 100 microarcseconds, and possibly as good as 10 
microarcseconds should be possible. 

To achieve 10 microarcsecond accuracy ona 100 meter 
baseline, the differential delay between the two stars has 
to be measured with 5 nm accuracy—ten to one hundred 
times the accuracies required for wide angle astrometry. 
As a result, all optical paths in the system have to be 
measured with a metrology system. 


Very narrow angle astrometry 

The data in narrow angle astrometry is the same as it is 
in wide angle astrometry: the delay of the fringe as a 
function of time. When the separation of the two stars is so 
small that the fringe packets of the two stars observed on 
the same baseline overlap, a single detector can be used 
to observe both sets of fringes. In this case, the fringe 
amplitude becomes the observable. If the difference in 
delay between the two stars is zero, or an even number of 
wavelengths, the fringes from the two stars are in phase 
and strong fringe contrast is observed. However, if the 
delay difference is an odd number of half wavelengths, the 
fringes from the two stars are out of phase. The intensity 
from one star will be ata maximum when the other star will 
be at a minimum and the fringes will cancel, resulting in 
low fringe contrast. This is a simple example of measuring 
the spatial coherence to determine an image of the source. 
This type of observation is straightforward and is readily 
applied to measuring the orbits of binary star systems. 
Much has been published with the separations of the stars 
determined to an accuracy of 50 to 100 microarcseconds. 


Bibliography 

Detecting fringe phase with an optical interferometer 
and its usefulness for astrometry was demonstrated with 
a series of optical interferometers built on Mt Wilson, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


California. These were the Mark I, the Mark II, and the 
Mark III interferometers: 


Shao M and Staelin D H 1980 J. Appl. Opt. 19 1519 
Shao M et al 1988 Astron. Astrophys. 193 357 


For the first demonstration of dispersion compensation for 
improving astrometric accuracy: 


Colavita M M, Shao M and Staelin D H 1987 Appl. Opt. 26 
4113 


Narrow angle astrometry has been demonstrated with the 
Palomar Testbed Interferometer. Interferometers are being 
built to combine light from the two Keck telescopes and 
the four large telescopes of the VLT. 


Colavita M M et al 1999 The Palomar Testbed Interferom- 
eter Astrophys. J. 510 505-21 

Armstrong J T, Hutter DJ, Johnston K J and Mozurkewich 
D 1995 Physics Today 42 


The highest resolution images obtained to date are with the 
Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer (NPOI). The NPOI 
was built to do wide angle astrometry, but very narrow 
astrometry of binary star systems is a major portion of 
their science program. 


Benson J A et al 1997 Multichannel optical aperture 
synthesis imaging of Zeta 1 Ursae Majoris with the 
navy prototype optical interferometer Astron. J. 114 
1221 


David Mozurkewich 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Intergalactic Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Intergalactic Medium 


About half a million years after the big bang, the ever- 
fading cosmic blackbody radiation cooled below 3000 K 
and shifted first into the infrared and then into the radio, 
and the smooth baryonic plasma that filled the universe 
became neutral. The universe then entered a ‘dark age’ 
which persisted until the first cosmic structures col- 
lapsed into gravitationally bound systems and evolved 
into stars, galaxies and black holes that lit up the uni- 
verse again. Some time between REDSHIFTS of 7 and 15, 
stars within PROTOGALAXIES created the first heavy ele- 
ments; these systems, together perhaps with an early 
population of QUASARS, generated the ultraviolet radia- 
tion that reheated and reionized the cosmos. The history 
of the universe during and soon after these crucial for- 
mative stages is recorded in the all-pervading intergalac- 
tic medium (IGM), which is believed to contain most of 
the ordinary baryonic material left over from the big 
bang. Throughout the epoch of structure formation, the 
IGM became clumpy and acquired peculiar motions 
under the influence of gravity and acted as a source for 
the gas that becomes accreted, cools and forms stars 
within galaxies and as a sink for the metal-enriched 
material, energy and radiation which they eject. 
Observations of absorption lines in quasar spectra at red- 
shifts up to 5 provide invaluable insight into the chemi- 
cal composition of the IGM and the primordial density 
fluctuation spectrum of some of the earliest formed cos- 
mological structures, as well as of the ultraviolet back- 
ground radiation that ionizes them. 


Cosmological reionization 

At epochs corresponding to z~1000, the IGM is expected 
to recombine and remain neutral until sources of radia- 
tion develop that are capable of reionizing it. The detec- 
tion of transmitted flux shortward of the Lya wavelength 
in the spectra of sources at z~5 implies that the hydrogen 
component of this IGM was ionized at even higher red- 
shifts. There is some evidence that the double reioniza- 
tion of helium may have occurred later, but this is still 
controversial. It appears then that substantial sources of 
ultraviolet photons were already present when the uni- 
verse was less than 7% of its current age, perhaps quasars 
and/or young star-forming galaxies: an episode of pre- 
galactic STAR FORMATION may provide a possible explana- 
tion for the widespread existence of heavy elements 
(such as carbon, oxygen and silicon) in the IGM, while 
the integrated radiation emitted from quasars is proba- 
bly responsible for the reionization of intergalactic heli- 
um. Establishing the epoch of reionization and reheating 
is crucial for determining its impact on several key cos- 
mological issues, from the role reionization plays in 
allowing protogalactic objects to cool and make stars to 
determining the small-scale structure in the temperature 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


fluctuations of the cosmic background radiation. 
Conversely, probing the reionization epoch may provide 
a means for constraining competing models for the for- 
mation of cosmic structures and for detecting the onset of 
the first generation of stars, galaxies and black holes in 
the universe. 


Intergalactic hydrogen density 
The proper mean density of hydrogen nuclei at redshift z 
may be expressed in standard cosmological terms as 


Tie = (pere/mtn) (1 — ¥)S&y(1 + 2)? 
= (11 x 10% em73)(1 — Y) 242701 + 2 


where Y is the primordial He abundance by mass, 
Pcrit=3H2/8xG is the critical density, Q,=p'/pctit is the 
current baryonic density parameter and Hy=100h km s7! 
Mpc-! is the present-day Hubble constant. Standard 
NUCLEOSYNTHESIS models together with recent observa- 
tions of deuterium yield Y=0.247+0.02 and 
Q,2=0.0193+0.0014. Thus, 
fig = (1.6 x 1077 cm) (I +27. 

As some of the baryons had already collapsed into 
galaxies at z=2-5, the value of Q,,2=0.019 should strictly 
be considered as an upper limit to the intergalactic den- 
sity parameter. 

Because of the overwhelming abundance of hydro- 
gen, the IONIZATION of this element is of great importance 
for determining the physical state of the IGM. Popular 
cosmological models predict that most of the intergalac- 
tic hydrogen was reionized by the first generation of 
stars or quasars at z=7-15. The case that has received the 
most theoretical studies is one where hydrogen is ionized 
by the absorption of photons, H+yp+e (as opposite to 
collisional ionization H+e—>p+e+e) shortward of 912 A; 
that is, with energies exceeding 13.6 eV, the energy of the 
Lyman edge. The process of reionization began as indi- 
vidual sources started to generate expanding H II REGIONS 
in the surrounding IGM; throughout an H II region, H is 
ionized and He is either singly or doubly ionized. As 
more and more sources of ultraviolet radiation switched 
on, the ionized volume grew in size. The reionization 
ended when the cosmological H II regions overlapped 
and filled the intergalactic space. 


Photoionization equilibrium 

At every point in an optically thin, pure hydrogen medi- 
um of neutral density py, the photoionization rate per 
unit volume is 


h pres dv 
Ht n hipy 


where Jy is the mean intensity of the ionizing radiation 
(in energy units per unit area, time, solid angle and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Intergalactic Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


frequency interval) and hp is the Planck constant. The 
photoionization cross-section for hydrogen in the ground 
state by photons with energy hp, (above the threshold 
hpy+=13.6 eV) can be usefully approximated by 
ou(v) = oL(v/v)73 o. = 6.3 x 10°" cn. 
At equilibrium, this is balanced by the rate of radia- 
tive recombinations p+e—>H+y per unit volume, 


NeNpX (T) 


where ne and Np are the number densities of electrons 
and protons and a,=><ov,> is the radiative recombi- 
nation coefficient, ie. the product of the electron capture 
cross-section o" and the electron velocity ve, averaged 
over a thermal distribution and summed over all atomic 
levels n. At the commonly encountered gas temperature 
of 104 K, a,=4.2x10-13 cm3 s-1. 

Consider, as an illustrative example, a point in an 
intergalactic H II region at (say) z=6, with density 
Ay=(1.6x10-” cm-3)(1+z)8=5.5x10 cm. The H II region 
surrounds a putative quasar with specific luminosity 
Ly=10%(v,,/v)? erg s-! Hz-!, and the point in question is 
at a distance of r=3 Mpc from the quasar. To a first 
approximation, the mean intensity is simply the radia- 
tion emitted by the quasar reduced by geometrical dilu- 
tion, 


age ek 
ey ar 


We then have for the photoionization timescale 


And. at ' 

ie, = [f oo dv] =5x 10"s 
n hipy 

and for the recombination timescale 


1 Ry 
Tree = =5x10"sx —. 
Res Re 


As in photoionization equilibrium nyy,/to=np / tec, 
these values imply nyy,/nP~10-, that is hydrogen is very 
nearly completely ionized. 

A source radiating ultraviolet photons at a finite rate 
cannot ionize an infinite region of space, and therefore 
there must be an outer edge to the ionized volume (this 
is true unless, of course, there is a population of UV emit- 
ters and all individual H II regions have already over- 
lapped). One fundamental characteristic of the problem 
is the very small value of the mean free path for an ion- 
izing photon if the hydrogen is neutral (o,nH)-1=0.9 kpc 
at threshold, much smaller than the radius of the ionized 
region. If the source spectrum is steep enough that little 
energy is carried out by more penetrating, soft x-ray pho- 
tons, we have one nearly completely ionized H II region, 
separated from the outer neutral IGM by a thin transition 
layer or ‘ionization front’. The inhomogeneity of the IGM 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


is of primary importance for understanding the ioniza- 
tion history of the universe, as denser gas recombines 
faster and is therefore ionized at later times than the ten- 
uous gas in underdense regions. An approximate way to 
study the effect of inhomogeneity is to write the mean 
rate of recombinations as 


(nenp)aa(T) =C (ney aa (T) 


(assuming T, is constant in space), where the brackets 
are the space average of the product of the local proton 
and electron number densities and the factor C>1 takes 
into account the degree of clumpiness of the IGM. If ion- 
ized gas with electron density n, filled uniformly a frac- 
tion 1/C of the available volume, the rest being empty 
space, the mean square density would be 
<Ne2>=nN2 | C=<ne>?2C. 

The IGM is completely reionized when one ionizing 
photon has been emitted for each H atom by the radia- 
tion sources and when the rate of emission of UV pho- 
tons per unit (comoving) volume balances the radiative 
recombination rate, so that hydrogen atoms are pho- 
toionized faster than they can recombine. The complete 
reionization of the universe manifests itself in the 
absence of an absorption trough in the spectra of galax- 
ies and quasars at high redshifts. If the IGM along the 
line of sight to a distant source were neutral, the resonant 
scattering at the wavelength of the Lya (2p—1s; 
hpVg=10.2 eV) transition of atomic hydrogen would 
remove all photons blueward of Lya off the line of sight. 
For any reasonable density of the IGM, the scattering 
optical depth is so large that detectable absorption will 
be produced by relatively small column (or surface) den- 
sities of intergalactic neutral hydrogen. 


Gunn-Peterson effect 

Consider radiation emitted at some frequency v, that lies 
blueward of Lya by a source at redshift z, and observed 
at Earth at frequency vg=v,(1+z®)-1. At a redshift z such 
that 1+z=(1+z¢)v,/ Ve, the emitted photons pass through 
the local Lya resonance as they propagate towards us 
through a smoothly distributed sea of neutral hydrogen 
atoms and are scattered off the line of sight with a cross- 
section (neglecting stimulated emission) of 


“*f dlw(1 +2) 
FHC 


Pe 


o[v(1+ 2)] = 


where f=0.4162 is the upward oscillator strength for the 
transition, @ is the line profile function (with normaliza- 
tion @f(v) dv=1), c is the speed of light and e and m, are 
the electron charge and mass, respectively. The total 
optical depth for resonant scattering at the observed fre- 
quency is given by the line integral of this cross-section 
multiplied by the neutral hydrogen proper density nyy(z), 


' dé 
top = [ o[u(1 + 2b) dz 
ie] 4 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Intergalactic Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where d&/ dz=cHp-!(1+z)-1[Qy(1+z)3 + Qe (1+z)2+ Qa] 
-1/2 is the proper line element in a Friedmann-— 
Robertson—Walker metric and Quy, Q, and Qx=1-QM-Q, 
are the matter, vacuum and curvature contributions to 
the present density parameter. As the scattering cross- 
section is sharply peaked around vy, we can write 


a dé 
cr =f ol (1 + 2h) dz 
[6] 4 


In an Einstein-de Sitter (Qy=1, 2,=0) universe, this 
becomes 


Bef Mee _ 6 gy gi So me 
: 0.019 fix 


— 1+ 29”, 
i, Hovq (1+ 257 wee 


Tap (2) = 


The same expression for the opacity is also valid in 
the case of optically thin (to Lya scattering) discrete 
clouds as long as 74; is replaced with the average neutral 
density of individual clouds multiplied by their volume 
filling factor. 

In an expanding universe homogeneously filled 
with neutral hydrogen, the above equations apply to all 
parts of the source spectrum to the blue of Lya. An 
absorption trough should then be detected in the level of 
the rest-frame UV continuum of the quasar; this is the so- 
called ‘Gunn-Peterson effect’. Between the discrete 
absorption lines of the Lya forest clouds, quasar spectra 
do not show a pronounced Gunn-Peterson absorption 
trough. The current upper limit at z.~5 is tcp<0.1 in the 
region of minimum opacity, implying from equation (14) 
a neutral fraction of myy/HH<10-6h. Even if 99% of all the 
cosmic baryons fragment at these epochs into structures 
that can be identified with quasar absorption systems, 
with only 1% remaining in a smoothly distributed com- 
ponent, the implication is a diffuse IGM which is ionized 
to better than 1 part in 104. 

In modern interpretations of the IGM, it is difficult 
to use the Gunn-Peterson effect to quantify the amount 
of ionizing radiation that is necessary to keep the neutral 
hydrogen absorption below the detection limits. This is 
because, in hierarchical clustering scenarios for the for- 
mation of cosmic structures (the cold DARK MATTER 
model being the most studied example), the accumula- 
tion of matter in overdense regions under the influence 
of gravity reduces the optical depth for Lya scattering 
considerably below the average in most of the volume of 
the universe, and regions of minimum opacity occur in 
the most underdense areas (expanding ‘cosmic 
minivoids’). 


A clumpy IGM 

Owing to the non-linear collapse of cosmic structures, 
the IGM is well known to be highly inhomogeneous. The 
discrete gaseous systems detected in absorption in the 
spectra of HIGH-REDSHIFT QUASARS blueward of the Lya 
emission line are assigned different names based on the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


appearance of their absorption features (see figure 1). 

The term ‘Lya. forest’ (LYMAN ALPHA FOREST) is used 
to denote the plethora of narrow absorption lines whose 
measured equivalent widths imply H I column densities 
ranging from 1016 cm-2 down to 10!2 cm-2. These sys- 
tems, observed to evolve rapidly with redshift between 
2<z<4, have traditionally been interpreted as intergalac- 
tic gas clouds associated with the era of baryonic infall 
and galaxy formation, photoionized (to less than a neu- 
tral atom in 104) and photoheated (to temperatures close 
to 20000 K) by an ultraviolet background close to the one 
inferred from the integrated contribution from quasars. 
Recent spectra at high resolution and high signal-to- 
noise ratio obtained with the Keck telescope have shown 
that most Lya forest clouds at z~3 down to the detection 
limit of the data have undergone some chemical enrich- 
ment, as evidenced by weak, but measurable, C IV lines. 
The typical inferred metallicities range from 0.3% to 1% 
of solar values, subject to uncertainties of photoioniza- 
tion models. Clearly, these metals were produced in stars 
that formed in a denser environment; the metal-enriched 
gas was then expelled from the regions of star formation 
into the IGM. 

An intervening absorber at redshift z having a neutral 
hydrogen column density exceeding 2x1017 cm is opti- 
cally thick to photons having energy greater than 13.6 eV 
and produces a discontinuity at the hydrogen Lyman limit, 
ie. at an observed wavelength of 912(1+z) A. These scarcer 
LLSs are associated with the extended gaseous haloes of 
bright galaxies near the line of sight and have metallicities 
which appear to be similar to that of Lya forest clouds. 

In ‘damped Lya systems’ the H I column is so large 
(NyS1020 cm-2, comparable with the interstellar surface 


1.2x104 


Q1159+123 


1.0x104 
8.0x10° 
6.0x10" 


4.0x10° 


TOTAL COUNTS 


2.0x10° 


ie) 


-2.0x10% ; ; ,; 1 ; ; 
4000 4400 4800 5200 5600 6000 6400 6800 7200 
VACUUM HELIOCENTRIC WAVELENGTH (ANGSTROM) 

Figure 1. High resolution (4/ AA=37 000) spectrum of the ze=3.50 
quasar Q1159+123, taken with the Keck High Resolution 
Spectrograph (exposure time 8 h). The data are taken from 
Songaila (1998). The Lya forest is clearly seen in absorption 
blueward of the atomic hydrogen Lya emission line from the 
quasar (the broad peak at 5470 A) and is produced by resonant 
Lya scattering in gas clouds along the line of sight between us 
and the quasar. The spectrum shows a Lyman-limit system 
(LLS) just shortward of 4150 A, ice. close to the quasar emission 
redshift. Most of the features between the Lya and C IV emis- 
sion (the other broad peak just below 7000 A) are C IV inter- 
galactic absorption lines. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Intergalactic Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


density of spiral galaxies today) that the radiation damp- 
ing wings of the Lya line profile become detectable (see 
LYMAN ALPHA ABSORPTION: THE DAMPED SYSTEMS). While rel- 
atively rare, damped systems account for most of the 
neutral hydrogen seen at high redshifts. The typical 
metallicities are about 10% of solar and do not evolve sig- 
nificantly over a redshift interval 0.5<z<4 during which 
most of today’s stars were actually formed. 

Except at the highest column densities, discrete 
absorbers are inferred to be strongly photoionized. From 
quasar absorption studies we also know that neutral 
hydrogen accounts for only a small fraction, ~10%, of the 
nucleosynthetic baryons at early epochs. 


Distribution of column densities and evolution 
The bivariate distribution f (Ny Lz) of H I column densi- 
ties and redshifts is defined by the probability dP that a 
line of sight intersects a cloud with column density Nyy 
in the range dNyyy, at redshift z in the range dz, 


dP = f (Ne, 2) din dz. 


As a function of column density, a single power law 
with slope -1.5 appears to provide at high redshift a sur- 
prisingly good description over 9 decades in Nqp, i.e. from 
1012 to 1021 cm-2. It is a reasonable approximation to use 
for the distribution of absorbers along the line of sight: 


F (Net, 2) = ANG'?(14+2)". 


Lyo forest clouds and LLSs appear to evolve at 
slightly different rates, with y=1.5+0.4 for the LLSs and 
y=2.8+0.7 for the forest lines. Let us assume, for simplici- 
ty, a single redshift exponent, y=2, for the entire range in 
column densities. In the power-law model (16) the num- 
ber N of absorbers with column densities greater than 
Nyt per unit increment of redshift is 


dN a ‘ ’ -0.5 3 
= ff (Ng 2 dN = 2AN GS 4 2). 
dz Na 


A normalization value of A=4.0x107 produces then 
~3 LLSs per unit redshift at z=3 and, at the same epoch, 
~150 forest lines above Nyy=10198 cm-2, in reasonable 
agreement with the observations. 

If absorbers at a given surface density are con- 
served, with fixed comoving space number density 
n=ng(1+z)> and geometric cross-section Z, then the inter- 
section probability per unit redshift interval is 

dP dé ,de 
z= -_ a = Eno(1 +z) re 

If the universe is cosmologically flat, the expansion 
rate at early epochs is close to the Einstein—de Sitter limit, 
and the redshift distribution for conserved clouds is pre- 
dicted to be 


dP 3dé is 
— a(l+z~— a (l+2)"". 
dz dz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The rate of increase of f (Nyp)z) with z in both the 
Lya forest and LLSs is considerably faster than this, indi- 
cating rapid evolution. The mean proper distance 
between absorbers along the line of sight with column 
densities greater than Nyy is 


dé dz cNet 
~ azdN HW QNP2A + 2)45° 


For clouds with Ny >1014 cm, this amounts to 
L~0.7h-1Qy-1/2 Mpc at z=3. At the same epoch, the mean 
proper distance between LLSs is L~30h-1Qyy-1/2 Mpc. 


Intergalactic continuum opacity 

Even if the bulk of the baryons in the universe are fairly 
well ionized at all redshifts z<5, the residual neutral 
hydrogen still present in the Lya forest clouds and 
Lyman limit systems significantly attenuates the ioniz- 
ing flux from cosmological distant sources. To quantify 
the degree of attenuation we have to introduce the con- 
cept of an effective continuum optical depth Teg along the 
line of sight to redshift z, 


fe} =e 


where the average is taken over all lines of sight. 
Neglecting absorption due to helium, if we characterize 
the Lya forest clouds and LLSs as a random distribution 
of absorbers in column density and redshift space, then 
the effective continuum optical depth of a clumpy IGM at 
the observed frequency vo for an observer at redshift zg is 


tog (p, 20, 2) =-[ az [ dNex f (New 2)(1 —e-*) 
<a is} 


where t=Ny0'(v) is the hydrogen Lyman continuum 
optical depth through an individual cloud at frequency 
v=vo(1+z)/(1+z9). This formula can be easily understood 
if we consider a situation in which all absorbers have the 
same optical depth to independent of redshift and the 
mean number of systems along the path is AN=f dz 
dN/dz. In this case the Poissonian probability of encoun- 
tering a total optical depth kt, along the line of sight 
(with k integer) is p (kt,)=e-4N AN x/tok!, and 
<et>=e-, Top (kt.)=e[-AN(1-e-0)]. 

If we extrapolate the NHI-!5 power law in equation 
(16) to very small and large column densities, the effec- 
tive optical depth becomes an analytical function of red- 
shift and wavelength, 


4 Ww -15 
Tee (Wo, Zo, 2) = =(4 OL)" A (2) 
3 UL 


x (142%) *[(1 +2)" — (14 &)!*)- 


Because of the rapid increase with lookback time of 
the number of absorbers, the mean free path of photons 
at 912 A becomes so small beyond a redshift of 2 that 
the radiation field is largely ‘local’. Expanding equation 
(23) around z, one obtains Teg (v-)=0.36(1+z)2 Az. This 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Intergalactic Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


means that at z=3, for example, the mean free path for a 
photon near threshold is only Az=0.18, and sources of 
ionizing radiation at higher redshifts are severely atten- 
uated. 


Recent observational results 

NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) 
satellite has given astronomers a glimpse of the ghostly 
cobweb of helium gas left over from the Big Bang, which 
underlies the universe’s structure. The helium is not 
found in galaxies or stars but spread thinly through 
space. The observations help confirm theoretical models 
of how matter in the expanding universe condensed into 
a web-like structure pervading all the space between 
galaxies. The helium traces the architecture of the uni- 
verse back to very early times. This structure arose from 
small gravitational instabilities seeded in the chaos just 
after the Big Bang. 


Bibliography 
For a recent deuterium abundance measurement and its 
implications for the baryon density parameter see 


Burles S and Tytler D 1999 Astrophys. J. 499 699 


A short and hardly comprehensive list of references on 
issues related to the reionization of the IGM includes 


Arons J and Wingert D W 1972 Astrophys. J. 177 1 

Shapiro P R and Giroux M L 1987 Astrophys. J. 321 L107 

Meiksin A and Madau P 1993 Astrophys. J. 412 34 

Tegmark M, Silk J, Rees M J, Blanchard A, Abel T and 
Palla F 1997 Astrophys. J. 4741 

Gnedin N Y and Ostriker J P 1997 Astrophys. J. 486 581 

Haiman Z and Loeb A 1997 Astrophys. J. 483 21 

Miralda-Escudé J 1998 Astrophys. J. 501 15 

Madau P, Haardt F and Rees M J 1999 Astrophys. J. 514 
648 


The use of Lya resonant absorption as a sensitive probe 
of intergalactic neutral hydrogen was predicted indepen- 
dently by 

Gunn J E and Peterson B A 1965 Astrophys. J. 142 1633 


Shklovsky IS 1965 Sov. Astron. 8 638 
Scheuer P A G 1965 Nature 207 963 


The quoted upper limit to the Gunn-Peterson optical 

depth at z~5 is from 

Songaila A, Hu E M, Cowie L L and McMahon R G 1999 
Astrophys. J. 525 L5 

The high-resolution quasar spectrum shown in figure 1 

was taken from 


Songaila A 1998 Astron. J. 115 2184 


who also discusses the evolution of metal abundances in 
the Lya forest. An extensive discussion of the physics of 
the intergalactic medium can be found in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Peebles P J E 1993 Principles of Physical Cosmology 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) ch 23 


The physics of an ionized hydrogen gas is covered in 


Osterbrock D E 1989 Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and 
Active Galactic Nuclei (Mill Valley, CA: University 
Science Books) ch 2 and 3 


Our present understanding of the Lyo forest is summa- 
rized in 
Rauch M 1998 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 267 


The use of hydrodynamic cosmological simulations to 
make quantitative prediction of the physical state of the 
IGM was pioneered by 
Cen R, Miralda-Escude’ J, Ostriker J P and Rauch M 1994 
Astrophys. J]. 437 L9 
Piero Madau 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


International Astronomical Union 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


International Astronomical Union 


The mission of the International Astronomical Union 
(IAU), founded in 1919, is to promote and safeguard the 
science of astronomy in all its aspects. Through its 11 
scientific divisions and 40 commissions, the IAU plays 
a key role in promoting and coordinating worldwide 
cooperation in astronomy. Strong emphasis is placed on 
personal involvement of its over 8300 individual members 
from 67 member countries. The IAU is integrated into the 
worldwide scientific community through its membership 
of the International Council for Science (ICSU). 

The tasks of the IAU range from the definition 
of fundamental astronomical and physical constants 
and unambiguous nomenclature, rapid dissemination of 
new discoveries, organization of international observing 
campaigns, and promotion of educational activities in 
astronomy, to early informal discussions of possible future 
international large-scale facilities. 

The IAU is also the sole internationally recognized 
authority for giving designations and names to celestial 
bodies and their surface features. 

The organization of scientific meetings is a key 
activity. The triennial General Assemblies feature a 
rich scientific program, recorded in the ‘Highlights of 
Astronomy’. The IAU also sponsors about a dozen 
carefully selected Symposia and Colloquia each year. 
Proceedings of these meetings are published under the 
auspices of the IAU as important records of the status of 
their scientific fields. 

The IAU promotes astronomical education and 
research in developing countries through the International 
Schools for Young Astronomers and Teaching for 
Astronomy Development program, and through joint 
initiatives with other ICSU and UN organizations. 

An IAU ‘Information Bulletin’ is published twice per 
year and distributed free of charge to individual members, 
adhering bodies, and astronomical institutes and libraries 
throughout the world. The IAU homepage on the Internet 
provides information and news from the Union and links 
to Divisions, Commissions, Working Groups and related 
organizations. The official languages of the IAU are 
English and French. 

For further information see 
http://www.iau.org/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


International Atomic Time 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


International Atomic Time 


The international reference scale of time based on the 
continuous intercomparison of atomic times registered on 
numerous atomic clocks in laboratories and institutions 
around the world. Since 1971, international atomic time, 
which is denoted by the abbreviation TAI, has been 
provided by the Bureau International de l’Heure in Paris. 

An atomic clock is a device that is regulated by 
reference to the natural frequency of a specific transition 
between two levels of a particular atom, usually cesium- 
133. The basis of atomic time is the SI (Systéme 
International) second, which is defined as 9192 631 770 
cycles (periods of vibration) of the radiation corresponding 
to the hyperfine transition between two levels of the 
ground state of cesium-133. Because of small irregularities 
and changes in the rotation period of the Earth, time 
systems such as Universal Time (UT), which are based on 
the rotation of the Earth, differ very slightly from the much 
more uniform time-scale provided by atomic time. Since 
1972, the time signals disseminated for civil use have been 
offset by whole numbers of seconds from TAI in order to 
keep these signals within 1 s of UT. The offset is changed in 
steps of 1 s when required. The adjusted atomic time-scale 
given by these signals is called Coordinated Universal 
Time and is denoted by UTC. 


Seealso: atom, radiation, Timescales: Terrestrial, Univer- 
sal Time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


International Cometary Explorer (ICE) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


International Cometary Explorer (ICE) 


NASA spacecraft, originally known as ISEE-3 (Interna- 
tional Sun—Earth Explorer). First spacecraft to encounter 
a comet. Launched in August 1978. After completing its 
original mission, it was reactivated and diverted to pass 
through the tail of Comet Giacobini—Zinner on 11 Septem- 
ber 1985. It also observed Halley’s Comet from a distance 
of 28 million km in March 1986. (See also INTERNATIONAL 
SUN-EARTH EXPLORER and EXPLORER.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


International Dark-Sky Association ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


International Dark-Sky Association 


The International Dark-Sky Association is a membership- 
based non-profit organization whose goals are to be 
effective in stopping the adverse environmental impact on 
dark skies—by building awareness of the problem of light 
pollution and of the solutions—and to educate everyone 
about the value and effectiveness of quality night-time 
lighting. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.darksky.org. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


International Space Science Institute 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


International Space Science Institute 


The International Space Science Institute (ISSI) was 
established in 1995 in Bern, Switzerland. Its main purpose 
is to provide a forum for the multidisciplinary analysis 
and interpretation of data from space research missions. 
The principal scientific focus is on solar system science 
and its implication for astrophysics and cosmology on one 
hand and for the Earth sciences on the other. The scientific 
activities are carried out through the organization of 
workshops on important scientific issues (twelve from its 
inception until 1999) and through international scientific 
teams of three to fifteen scientists, assembling at ISSI 
repeatedly for various periods of time. The scientific 
output is published in the ISSI Space Science Series of 
books (published by Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht), ISSI 
scientific reports (European Space Agency) and papers 
in scientific journals. Financial support is received in 
matching amounts from ESA and Switzerland. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.issi.unibe.ch. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


International Sun—Earth Explorer (ISEE) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


International Sun—Earth Explorer 
(ISEE) 


Series of three US satellites designed to study the solar 
wind and its interaction with the Earth’s magnetosphere. 
ISEE-1 and 2 were placed into highly elliptical Earth orbits. 
ISEE-3 was placed in a halo orbit at the L1 Lagrangian 
point between the Sun and Earth. It gave advance 
warning of solar storms heading towards Earth. (See also 
INTERNATIONAL COMETARY EXPLORER and EXPLORER.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) 


NASA-ESA-UK ultraviolet observatory, launched in 
January 1978. Operated for 24 hours a day from 
geosynchronous orbit. Short and long wavelength 
spectrographic cameras covered ultraviolet wavelengths 
from about 1200 to 3400 A. IUE observed planets, comets, 
novae, supernovae and galaxies. In July 1994 it observed 
the collision of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter. IUE 
provided confirmation of the nature of the precursor star 
which exploded as supernova 1987A, and revealed the 
chemical elements present in the star Nova Cygni 1978. 
Also took part ina major campaign to determine the nature 
of the mini-quasar at the centre of Seyfert galaxy NGC 
7469. Provided a Final Data Archive containing more than 
100000 spectra. Operations ceased in September 1996. 
(See also EXPLORER) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interplanetary Dust 


The birth of a solar system is enshrouded in gas and dust. 
A collapsing rotating cloud increases in density until a 
critical point is reached and a YOUNG STELLAR OBJECT begins 
its rapid accretion at the center, still surrounded by a disk 
of gas and dust (figure 1). As stars evolve througha T-Tauri 
phase, much of this primordial dust cloud is removed by 
strong stellar winds and radiation forces. What remains 
may further accrete into planets and smaller bodies. Dust 
not accreted into larger bodies may find itself spiralling 
into the star by radiation drag or colliding with other 
particles, breaking up, and being ejected by radiation 
pressure. 

By the time a star is as old as our Sun, no dust 
remains from those early years. Yet we find ourselves 
in a sea of dust, which we refer to as the zodiacal cloud 
or interplanetary dust complex. About one-third of other 
nearby stars are also surrounded by dust disks, though 
only one—Beta Pictoris—has been successfully imaged at 
the close of the 20th century (figure 2). 

The zodiacal cloud is not primordial dust. Rather 
it is dust that has been generated, in the case of our 
own solar system, primarily by asteroid collisions and 
comet mass loss. Studies of the origin and nature of the 
zodiacal cloud provide insights into post-primordial dust 
production processes around other stars. Indeed, dust 
around other stars like ours is evidence for the existence 
of asteroidal and cometary bodies that would be too small 
to detect directly. The number of such systems is an 
indication of how common planet formation may be. 


What is interplanetary dust? 

This is a broad category of material which may range in 
size from submicron particles to automobiles. Basically, 
anything in orbit about the Sun which is too small to 
be a likely candidate for eventual individual designation 
as an asteroid or comet could be considered ‘dust’—or 
better, interplanetary ‘debris’. The particles can be of any 
composition as long as they are not artificial. The focus, 
however, is on the smaller members of this population. 


History 

Interplanetary dust can be seen with the naked eye in 
the morning and evening sky as a faint glow, brightest 
towards the Sun, extending and tapering along the ecliptic 
(figure 3). It can be comparable in brightness to the Milky 
Way. Since the zodiacal constellations lie along the ecliptic, 
this gave rise to the term ‘ZODIACAL LIGHT’ to describe the 
phenomenon. The 11th century Persian poet, astronomer 
and mathemetician, Omar Khayyam alluded to this ‘false 
dawn’ in his Rubaiyat. In 1683, Italian-born astronomer 
Gian Domenico Cassini ‘discovered’ the light in Europe 
(where inexplicably it had previously received no obvious 
note) and later ascribed it to a cloud of dust flattened on 
the solar equator, becoming brighter as one approached 
the Sun or its plane of symmetry. Under very good 
conditions, the zodiacal light can be traced completely 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A protoplanetary disk and imbedded young star near 
the center of the Orion nebula, imaged by the Hubble Space 
Telescope. 


Figure 2. Beta Pictoris disk, imaged by the Hubble Space 
Telescope. 


Figure 3. The zodiacal light, seen from the top of Mauna Kea, 
Hawaii. Courtesy M Ishiguro, Kobe University group. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Engraving from Bible Readings for the Home Circle, 1889. 


across the sky, with a small increase in brightness at the 
anti-Sun position, which was named the ‘Gegenschein’ 
by the German naturalist and explorer Alexander von 
Humboldt in the early 19th century. 

The existence of interplanetary dust having been 
established in one context (zodiacal light), it was in the 
late 18th and early 19th centuries when it was realized 
that this dust might be showering the Earth. The 
father of acoustical science, Ernst Chladni, argued for the 
extraterrestrial origin Of METEORS, FIREBALLS and METEORITES 
in 1794. The spectacular Leonid meteor shower of 1833 
(figure 4), and the observation that the meteors appeared 
to emerge from a stationary point in the constellation Leo, 
led many scientists of the day to independently conclude 
that these meteors were of extraterrestrial origin. 

Near the end of the 19th century ‘cosmic spherules’ 
were collected from deep ocean sites and found to be 
chemically similar to meteorites. Analysis by E J Opik 
of deep ocean samples collected in the 1930s suggested 
that the Earth was accumulating 8 x 10° kg of meteoritic 
material per year (or about 1.5 grams of material per square 
centimeter per year). If packed into a rock-like cube witha 
density of 3.5 gcm~°, its dimension would be 132 meters. 
Dust collection experiments were conducted in ernest 
in the first half of the 20th century—often in scientists’ 
back yards or on their rooftops. Rain and snowmelts 
were studied, generally involving magnetic separation of 
particles, and yielding nickel-iron particles which were 
presumed to be meteoritic. Estimates of the amount of 
material accumulated by the Earth over the course of a 
year varied by orders of magnitude, ranging from around 
10* to 10° kg. Methods depended on meteor observations 
and meteorite falls as well as dust collection experiments. 
It was recognized that these estimates were necessarily 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


incomplete. In the early 1950s, Warren Thomsen laid out 
several gallon cans lined with plastic on a farm several 
miles outside of Iowa City, and over a six month period 
examined the collected contents under a microscope. He 
estimated that magnetic, spherical, meteoritic dust fell at 
a rate of 2.0 x 10° kg/year over the entire Earth. This 
result (though ultimately within a factor of 2-4 of the later 
consensus value) sparked criticism which gave focus to 
concerns about the high potential for contamination of 
dust samples collected on the Earth’s surface. 

An effort was made to link dust collected on the Earth 
to dust observed in space. In 1947, van de Hulst estimated 
the mean mass density of interplanetary dust particles 
(IDPs) giving rise to the zodiacal light, taking into account 
light scattering properties of particles. Assuming this dust 
is swept up at the Earth’s orbital velocity, the annual infall 
of dust would be 6 x 108 kg. 

As new technologies became available, they were ap- 
plied to the problem of identifying infalling interplanetary 
dust and to determine its properties. In the 1940s, radar 
was used to determine meteor velocities. Converted V2 
rockets were launched with acoustical detectors to detect 
the sounds of small particles bouncing off the surface. The 
problems of contamination near the Earth’s surface were 
solved with the advent of aircraft collectors by 1960 and 
the use of high-altitude balloons. Zodiacal light was in- 
creasingly studied photographically and with photoelec- 
tric photometers and polarimeters, but airglow, extinction 
and other atmospheric problems made this difficult. By 
the 1960s the zodiacal light could be observed from space- 
craft. With better measurements of zodiacal light and bet- 
ter collections of extraterrestrial particles in the upper at- 
mosphere of the Earth, the consensus value for the amount 
of dust accreted by the Earth each year became around 10 


kg. 


Table 1. Spacecraft studying interplanetary dust. 


Launch  Heliocentric 

date distance (AU) 
Pioneer 8 1967 0.97-1.09 
Pioneer 9 1968 0.75-0.99 


HEOS 2 1972 1.0 

Pioneer 10 1972 1-18 
Pioneer 11 1973 1-10 
Helios 1 1974 0.3-1 
Helios 2 1976 0.3-1 


Galileo 1989 0.7-5.3 
Hiten 1990 1.0 

Ulysses 1990 1.0-5.4 
Cassini 1997 1.0-10 


In the last third of the 20th century, spacecraft and 
orbiting infrared telescopes have dramatically increased 
our knowledge of the complexity of the interplanetary 
dust cloud. Beginning in the late 1960s, these particles 
were sampled directly in space via impact detectors 
(see table 1). The Pioneer 8 and 9 spacecraft detected 
small particles which seemed to come straight from the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. The sky in the infrared as seen from the Infrared 
Astronomical Satellite. The clouds in the upper right and lower 
middle are interstellar cirrus. The zodiacal cloud contains broad 
banded structures associated with asteroid collisions and 
contrail-like features associated with short-period comets. 

M Sykes, University of Arizona. 


Sun. These were designated f-meteoroids. In the 
1970s, Pioneers 10 and 11 extended measurements of 
dust densities beyond the orbit of Jupiter. In the 1980s, 
the Infrared Astronomical Satellite, an orbiting telescope 
sensitive to thermal emission, discovered numerous 
spatial structures within the zodiacal cloud in the inner 
solar system (figure 5). In the 1990s, impact detectors 
on the Galileo and Ulysses spacecraft detected streams of 
dust orginating from the Jupiter system. In 1993, using 
information from the Ulysses dust experiment, Eberhard 
Griin and colleagues announced the first direct detection 
of interstellar dust grains within the solar system. 

These observations have greatly expanded the issues 
that can be addressed through studies of interplanetary 
dust (and debris). Specific dust production mechanisms, 
such as asteroid collisions and cometary mass loss, can 
be constrained. The birth of METEOR STREAMS is observed. 
The dynamical evolution of dust from its source regions 
can be modeled and the effects of radiation forces and 
gravitational perturbations from other planets explored. 
The study of interplanetary dust now offers increased 
insights into the nature and evolution of ASTEROIDS, COMETS 
and other source objects. 

To date we have been restricted to a vantage point 
wholely within the cloud, and mostly interior to the 
dust production regions of the solar system. This 
makes it impossible to directly observe the edges of the 
cloud, to determine its full extent and more easily study 
the interactions between the cloud and the interstellar 
environment surrounding it. It is also difficult to observe 
structures which overlap each other along our lines of 
sight. In the 21st century, small telescopes might be sent 
beyond the orbit of Jupiter to observe from the outside 
what appears to be primary dust production regions of 
the cloud we see from Earth and to measure the extended 
cloud beyond. In the meantime, the Earth continues to 
collect dust, meteors and meteorites, from which more 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 6. A stratospheric interplanetary dust particle, 
approximately 11 4m in diameter. Courtesy of NASA. 


science is extracted as their context continues to broaden, 
and in 2006 the Stardust mission will return to the Earth a 
sample of dust taken from the coma of a comet. 


Composition and morphology 

Unmelted interplanetary dust, collected in the upper 
atmosphere by aircraft and balloons and collected from 
Antarctic ice, exhibits a range of porosities from delicate 
‘fairycastle’ structures to more compact forms (figure 6). 
Large particles are more likely to be heated to melting 
upon entering the Earth’s atmosphere. These melted 
‘cosmic spherules’ characterize particles extracted from 
lake bottoms and soil—primarily because the unmelted 
particles are difficult to distinguish from terrestrial 
materials. 

Typical compositions of IDPs collected at the Earth are 
similar to primitive carbonaceous chondritic meteorites 
(e.g., CL, CM, CR), many with relative excesses of carbon. 
It is interesting that these meteorites are rare, representing 
less than 3% of recent meteorite falls. However, details 
of IDP minerology (particularly evidence of interactions 
between minerals and solar nebula gas) in the larger (50- 
500 zm) MICROMETEORITES collected from polar ice suggest 
that their origin may be more primordial than that of the 
CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITE parent bodies. This may or may 
not be the case for the smaller (10 zm) particles collected 
in the stratosphere. 


Dynamics and evolution 
To understand the origin of particles collected at the 
Earth’s orbit or detected by spacecraft elsewhere in the 
solar system we need to understand the forces acting on 
particle orbits. It is the evolution of these orbits under 
these forces that gives rise to what we perceive as the 
zodiacal cloud. 

There are four general mechanisms which can affect 
the orbit of a particle: radiation forces, gravitational 
perturbations by planets, the interplanetary magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10 


0.1 


B RATIO 


0.01 Porous silicate 
Porous carbon 


Compact silicate --- 


Compact carbon 
Asteroidal dust 
Young cometary dust 
Old cometary dust 


0.001 


GRAIN RADIUS [pm] 


Figure 7. A log—log plot of the ratio 6 of radiation force to gravitational force as a function of particle radius for materials of different 
composition and density. Courtesy A Krivov and I Mann, MPI fiir Aeronomie. 


field and collisions. With the exception of gravity, the 
other forces depend on particle size and mass, with the 
result that the ultimate distribution of particles in the 
interplanetary dust cloud will depend upon the size and 
mass of the particles being discussed. 


Radiation forces 
As a particle orbits the Sun, it will absorb or scatter 
solar photons, thereby picking up a component of the 
photon’s momentum away from the Sun. This radiation 
pressure diminishes the effect of the Sun’s gravitational 
attraction. Its strength is generally described by the ratio B 
of radiation force to gravitational force. Since both forces 
diminish as the square of a particle’s distance from the 
Sun, their ratio is the same throughout the solar system, 
and depends solely on physical properties of the particle: 
B ~ Qpr/ps, where Qp, is a radiation scattering efficiency 
factor, p is the particle mass density, and s is its radius. 
Smaller particles are generally more sensitive to radiation 
pressure than larger particles because their surface-area- 
to-mass ratio is greater for a given density. However, there 
comes a point when smaller particles become transparent 
to a given wavelength of light, and the effect of radiation 
pressure is diminished. For particles in orbit around the 
Sun, this transparency begins to occur near a radius of 
0.1 wm. Figure 7 shows £ as a function of size for spherical 
particles of various compositions. 

If an object is large enough, the effect of radiation 
pressure is minimal and f is near zero. A small particle, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with non-negligible 6, chipped off or emitted from a big 
object (6 ~ 0) will move into a larger orbit in response to 
the effectively weaker pull of the Sun. If its 6 is greater 
than 1, it will be repelled by the Sun and escape the solar 
system. However, presuming that the particle is ejected 
from an object already in orbit about the Sun, a much lower 
B will be required for escape. Figure 8 shows the orbital 
paths of particles of different 6’s which are released from 
a circular orbit. Particles with 6 < 0.5 remain in the solar 
system. 

Because of the finite speed of light, particles scattering 
or absorbing a solar photon will pick up a component 
of momentum which acts to slow them down that is 
proportional to v/c, where c is the speed of light and v 
is the component of particle motion perpendicular to the 
direction to the Sun. This is known as Poynting—Robertson 
(P-R) drag. Its effect is maximum at perihelion, where 
the particle’s velocity is maximum. The result is that 
a particle’s orbit will become more circular as it slowly 
spirals into the Sun. Both radiation pressure and P-R 
drag act only in the orbital plane of the particle. The 
timescale (in years) for P-R decay from a circular orbit 
at a heliocentric distance, R, is Tp, = 400R7/B. So evena 
fairly large object having a radius of 1 cm and density of 
3 gcm™ (hence Q,, ~ 1 and B = 1.9 x 107°) that starts 
out in the asteroid belt at a heliocentric distance of 2.5 
AU in a circular orbit will have fallen into the Sun after 
130 000 000 years—a short time in comparison with the age 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 8. The orbital paths of particles having different values of 
B, ejected from a large (6 ~ 0) object in circular orbit of radius 

1 AU about the Sun. Particles having 6 > 0.5 escape the solar 
system. Particles in repulsive orbits (6 > 1) are typical of comet 
tail particles. Courtesy of D Lien. 


of the solar system. A 10 xm radius particle would take 
only 130000 years. Thus, from radiation forces alone, a 
star’s primordial interplanetary dust cloud would be lost 
on a fairly short timescale. 

An interesting radiation force which acts primarily on 
particles large enough to sustain a temperature gradient 
from night to day is the Yarkovsky effect. The day side of 
an object will be warmer and hence emit a greater amount 
of thermal energy than the dark night side. Since radiation 
imparts momentum, the day side will feel a greater push 
away from the Sun than the night side feels a push towards 
the Sun. The net effect of this radial force on the object’s 
orbit will be negligible. However, because of rotation and 
the fact that a warm surface takes a while to cool when 
it is no longer being heated, the evening terminator of 
the object will be warmer than the dawn terminator. This 
results in a force component which tends to either decrease 
or increase the orbital speed of the object, depending on 
its sense of rotation relative to its direction of motion. As 
a consequence of the Yarkovsky effect, an object between 
centimeters and tens of meters in diameter can be moved a 
significant fraction of an AU over many millions of years. 
This becomes even more important when combined with 
the effects of gravitational perturbations by planets. 


Solar wind 

The sOLAR WIND can also modify dust particle orbits 
analogously to radiation pressure and P-R drag. The solar 
wind is a fully ionized, magnetized plasma flowing nearly 
radially outward from the Sun. It is composed primarily 
of protons, electrons and alpha particles. The impact of the 
solar wind on dust particles has an effect that is negligible 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Trailing Dust Cloud: 132m Diameter Particle 


Y (au) 
Co 


EARTH'S ORBIT 0 | 


0.2 


I oot 


oS 
Qo 
=) 
Ny 


04 O06 O8 10 12 14 
x (AU} 


Figure 9. A simulated image of the Earth’s resonant ring ina 
rotating reference frame with the Earth (the Earth’s path shown 
as a small ellipse). Figure courtesy of S Jayaraman, Vanguard 
Research. 


when compared to radiation pressure, but the ‘corpuscular 
drag’ force is about 30% that of P-R drag. This force 
becomes relatively more important as particles become 
small enough to be transparent to the solar radiation field. 
The particle cross sections to the solar wind continue to be 
described by geometric optics. 


Gravitational perturbations by planets 

Newton’s law of gravity states that each object in the 
universe attracts each and every other body. The 
gravitational attraction of a dust particle is negligible, but 
the attraction of planets can be significant as a particle 
moves around the Sun. The effects of planets on particle 
orbits are greatest when a particle comes close to a planet 
and when it passes through a gravitational resonance. 
Resonances arise when the orbital motion of a particle is 
commensurable to that of a perturbing planet, causing an 
effect on the particle’s orbit analogous to a forced harmonic 
oscillator. In some cases the particle’s orbit becomes 
chaotic, changing wildly in eccentricity and inclination. 
Sometimes it can be ‘trapped’, its inward spiral interrupted 
for a time. This occurs in the vicinity of the Earth where 
dust is temporarily trapped in a resonant ring extending 
completely around the Earth’s orbit (figure 9). The ring is 
not symmetric, having a region of higher density which 
trails the Earth as it moves around the Sun. 


Dust interaction with the interplanetary magnetic field 

UV radiation from the Sun, incident on a dust particle’s 
surface, will release photoelectrons, resulting in the 
dust particle becoming positively charged. Equilibrium 
between the photoelectric current and the currents of the 
solar wind electrons and ions induces a surface potential 
of the order of a few volts positive. This causes the particle 
to interact with the magnetic field being carried away from 
the Sun with the solar wind. A particle orbiting the Sun 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


near the ecliptic will feel the resultant Lorentz force up 
or down, generally perpendicular to its orbital plane, as it 
travels through regions of different polarity, called sectors. 


Collisions 

In the asteroid belt, objects move with relative speeds 
of ~5 kms~', when objects up to tens or hundreds of 
kilometers in diameter collide ‘head on’, they will be 
destroyed or ‘catastrophically disrupted’. The mass of 
the original objects is redistributed into smaller fragments, 
dust and a small amount of vapor. When smaller 
dust particles collide the results are the same—mass is 
redistributed into smaller sizes. Some of the energy of 
collision goes into fragmentation and some into kinetic 
energy of the fragments. The latter causes some dispersion 
in the orbital elements of the fragments. The importance 
of this mechanism with respect to dust is that mass may 
be moved from sizes that are relatively insensitive to 
radiation forces to sizes that are very sensitive. Some 
amount of mass in 1 ym-sized particles will find itself 
on escape trajectories from the solar system. Also, some 
fraction of the fragments of debris having experienced 
numerous collisions may migrate from a relatively stable 
orbital position in the asteroid belt to a resonance region 
which puts them into Earth-crossing orbits. 


Sources 

The existence of a zodiacal dust cloud and the fact that 
particle orbits will ultimately decay under P-R drag 
necessitates a source or sources which replenishes the 
cloud we observe today. In the 20th century there was 
much discussion about potential sources of this dust. As 
more and more asteroids were being discovered, it was 
thought that the dust giving rise to the zodiacal light as 
well as METEOROIDS were just the small end of the asteroid 
size distribution. However, as methods were developed 
to determine the orbits of meteoroids prior to entering 
the Earth’s atmosphere, it was discovered that many had 
high inclinations or large eccentricities, more similar to 
cometary orbits. Only four of 20 particles impacting early 
experiments on Pioneers 8 and 9 were determined to have 
asteroidal orbits. Consensus shifted to cometary sources. 
At the same time, however, estimates of dust produced by 
all comets fell far short of that felt necessary to generate 
the observed cloud. The situation was not improved until 
space-based observations in the thermal infrared revealed 
significant dust production directly related to both comets 
and asteroids. 


Comets 

Comets are known agglomerations of ice and dust. 
However, the dust we see in COMETARY TAILS is only a fraction 
of the refractory material comets release. The greatest 
mass of dust is lost in large particles. Unlike the micron- 
sized tail particles which stream away from the Sun by 
radiation pressure, millimeter to centimeter sized particles 
have low f values and move slowly away from the parent 
comet, tracing out a portion of the comet’s orbit ahead of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 10. The most prominent dust trail in 1983 was associated 
with Tempel 2, appearing as a long narrow feature tracing out a 
portion of its orbit, ahead of and (primarily) behind the comet. 
Trails are the first stage in the dynamical evolution of meteor 
streams. They are the principal source of cometary dust 
contributed to the interplanetary dust complex. M Sykes, 
University of Arizona. 


and behind the comet’s position. This is a dust trail, the 
first stage in the evolution of a meteor stream (figure 10). 
These are not easily detected at visible wavelengths 
because comet refractory material is very dark. Because 
dark particles are warmer than lighter particles, the dark 
particles will be brighter in the thermal infrared—which is 
how cometary dust trails were discovered. One conclusion 
from studying these large comet particles is that comets are 
far rockier than previously thought, by factors of several. 
This gives comets dust-to-gas mass ratios comparable to 
that estimated for Pluto, at which distance these dust 
sources are thought to have formed. 

The cometary contribution to the zodiacal cloud is 
primarily due to short-period comets. Contributions to the 
zodiacal cloud from comets newly entering from the oorT 
CLOUD are small. Most dust particles released will escape 
the solar system, unless strongly perturbed by Jupiter or 
another planet into orbits which will retain them in the 
inner solar system. 


Asteroids 

Dust production by asteroids was first observed by IRAS 
(figure 11). IRAS observed bands of dust within the 
zodiacal cloud, which were associated with the major 
Hirayama asteroid families, Themis, Koronis and Eros. 
These families were sites of large disruptive events in the 
past in which a parent asteroid was shattered into a large 
number of smaller fragments. Continued disruptions 
of the smaller of these fragments by collisions with 
background asteroidal and cometary particles generate the 
dust we observe today. This process must be repeated 
throughout the asteroid belt, giving rise to the asteroidal 
contribution to the zodiacal cloud. While it is thought 
that the innermost bands, associated with the Themis and 
Koronis families, may be generating only 5% of the dust in 
the zodiacal cloud at present, their low inclinations result 
in their being a significant source of interplanetary dust 
particles at the Earth’s orbit! 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 11. A map of the sky within 30° of the ecliptic plane constructed from IRAS scans high-pass filtered in latitude, showing dust 
bands (horizontal) encircling the inner solar system. These are associated with dust production within prominent asteroid 
families—sites of large past catastrophic collisions. Dark vertical bands indicate the areas not scanned during the third and final 
survey by IRAS which covered 75% of the sky. The angled lines and other noise-like features are associated with the plane of our 


Milky Way galaxy. M Sykes, University of Arizona. 


Figure 12. Analysis of the dynamical evolution of dust 
associated with the ‘comet’ Elst-Pizarro has led some to 
hypothesize that it is actually debris from a recent asteroid 
collision. C Hergenrother, University of Arizona. 


While the dust bands indicate the sites of ancient 
large collisional events, smaller dust-producing events are 
occurring in the asteroid belt all the time. Initially, debris 
from an asteroid collision would assume a distribution in 
space very similar to that of a comet dust trail. Differences 
in detail over time would arise due to the fact that the 
former is the result of a single event, while the latter 
is a more continuous process (by comparison). The 
discovery of ‘comet’ Elst—Pizarro in 1996 may have been 
one such example (figure 12). It had been detected in 1979, 
but was stellar in appearance with an asteroid-like orbit 
(low inclination and low eccentricity), so it was given a 
provisional asteroidal designation. Analysis of the dust 
seen in 1996 indicated a short outburst. Some analyses 
suggest a single event as would be expected for an asteroid 
collision. 

One might hypothesize that if all asteroids are 
engaged in dust production via collisions then the radial 
distribution of dust through the asteroid belt should 
reflect the density of asteroids. To some extent this is 
true, and is reflected in the observations of the asteroidal 
dust bands. On the other hand, the orbits of the dust 
being generated decay under P-R drag, which acts to 
significantly smooth out local variations. This has been 
seen by the Ulysses spacecraft as it traveled through the 
asteroid belt, and swung around Jupiter back towards the 
Sun. The dust impact experiment on Ulysses indicated 
a relatively smooth distribution of dust flux from about 
the orbit of Mars to that of Jupiter. If this dust were 
dominated by asteroidal sources, it suggests that even the 
TROJAN ASTEROIDS (in a 1:1 resonance with Jupiter’s orbit) are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 13. An external view of the solar system in the thermal 
infrared with a spatial resolution of 0.2 AU at an angle of 30° 
above the ecliptic plane. The zodiacal cloud is simulated using 
a parametric model constrained by IRAS observations. To 
enhance the cloud, the image is logarithmically stretched. 
Jupiter is to the upper left. Earth and Mars are distinguishable to 
the left and right of the inner cloud, respectively. M Sykes, 
University of Arizona. 


significant generators of dust. 


Io 

As the Ulysses spacecraft approached within approxi- 
mately 1 AU of Jupiter, it began to detect streams of tiny 
particles (< 0.1 um) traveling at extremely high veloci- 
ties (> 200 kms~'). Analysis of these observations and 
later observations by the dust detector aboard the Galileo 
spacecraft showed that these particles originated from the 
volcanoes on Jupiter’s moon Io (see 10: VOLCANISM AND GEO- 
PHYSICS). 


Interstellar space 

Our solar system is traveling through the Milky Way 
in a direction that is different from the flow of a local 
interstellar cloud of gas and dust. As a consequence, 
dust particles penetrate the solar system and add to the 
interplanetary dust population, if only temporarily. These 
particles have been detected by the Ulysses, Galileo and 
possibly Hiten spacecraft. Their path through the solar 
system is complicated by gravitational focusing, radiation 
pressure and Lorentz forces, but there is still a discernable 
flow from the upstream direction of the interstellar cloud. 


The shape of the zodiacal cloud 

From the Earth, we are limited in our ability to discern 
the boundaries and large scale distributions of dust within 
our solar system, because we are looking from the inside 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 14. An external view of the zodiacal cloud along the 
ecliptic plane. A physical model of 75% asteroidal and 25% 
cometary dust particles is used. Unlike the parametric model, 
the physical model has a distinctly toroidal shape (planets are 
not shown). The image is logarithmically stretched. Image 
courtesy of Keith Grogan, Goddard Space Flight Center. 


out. Two kinds of models have been developed to provide 
a picture of the cloud: parametric and physical. In a 
parametric model, we assume we know the functional 
form of the spatial distribution of particles. For instance, 
for a family of particles spiraling into the Sun by P-R drag, 
perhaps complicated by mutual collisions and Lorentz 
forces, the number density of particles would be expected 
to vary as r-* where r is heliocentric distance. Some 
collision models and data from the Helios spacecraft 
suggest that the distribution of dust perpendicular to 
the ecliptic plane may be describable by a formula that 
looks like exp[—w(|z|/r)‘] where z is the distance from the 
ecliptic plane. The values of the parameters k, w and ¢ are 
then determined by comparing predictions made by such 
a model with observations. Complexity can be increased 
by considering other reasonable conditions, such as the 
orientation of the cloud with respect to the ecliptic (after 
all, why should everything be exactly symmetric about 
the plane of the Earth’s orbit?). Mathematically, the 
parametric model cloud stretches out to infinity in all 
directions (with decreasing density, of course). Viewed 
from outside the solar system such models generally 
provide uniform clouds, increasing in brightness rapidly 
as one approaches the Sun (figure 13). 

With the discovery of the sources of zodiacal dust, 
the formation of the cloud itself can be simulated by 
considering those sources and modeling the dynamical 
and collisional evolution of those particles (figure 14). 
This is more realistic inasmuch as it deals directly with 
processes. We are still constrained, however, by the 
limitations of our observations within the inner solar 
system. Dust production is expected even beyond 
Neptune in the kurrer BELT, through collisions. It is 
difficult to constrain such mechanisms without direct 
observations without the foreground contamination of 
local interplanetary dust. 


A complex picture 

At the beginning of the 21st century, one can no longer 
speak of ‘interplanetary dust’ in a monolithic fashion. 
The pieces of the puzzle that have been collected to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


date suggest that the composition and distribution of 
dust vary with size and location in the solar system. 
Throughout the inner solar system, the largest debris 
is probably asteroidal, but as we consider dust below 
a millimeter to centimeter in size, we would expect 
to see a significant increase in the contribution due to 
comets. This may in part offer an explanation for 
the difference in compositions between collected dust 
and meteorites at the Earth. However, the much 
larger fraction of ‘primitive’ carbonaceous material in 
micrometeorites may have more than one explanation. 
Such carbonaceous material is physically weaker than 
stony material, and asteroids composed of such weaker 
material may more easily generate dust through collisions 
in the main belt, which is then removed via P-R drag. 
Further, observations by Ulysses suggests significant dust 
production is occurring within the dark and carbonaceous 
Trojan asteroid population. There is mass fractionation 
of dust in the inner solar system, because small particles 
(not on escape trajectories) will spiral into the Sun more 
quickly than large particles. Because orbital decay times 
increase with increasing particle size, eventually collision 
timescales will be shorter. The result is that the largest 
particles or debris will tend to be found near their source 
locations in the asteroid belt and near comet orbits, and 
changes in their spatial distribution will be dominated 
by mechanisms such as gravitational perturbations—the 
mechanism by which meteorites are transported to Earth- 
crossing orbits. As we move away from the Earth’s 
orbit we cross the resonant ring of dust which locally 
enhances a narrow range of particle sizes. As we move 
away from the plane of the ecliptic we would find that 
the composition of the asteroidal component of the dust 
reflects the composition of higher latitude asteroids. 

The advent of space-based observations from tele- 
scopes and spacecraft has resulted in linking interplan- 
etary dust directly to its sources, which include both aster- 
oids and comets. The study of dust now provides a new 
means by which the nature and evolution of those sources 
can be explored. Better estimates of the physical composi- 
tion of comets, and hence their formation locations, have 
been determined. Asteroid collision models now have a 
new constraint to reproduce. Dust production in our own 
solar system is the one bit of ‘ground truth’ we have in 
understanding how dust around other older stars is be- 
ing produced today. Ultimately, it will provide us with 
our best insights into the formation and existence of small 
bodies in other solar systems. 


Bibliography 
Anoverview of dust collection experiments up to 1950 may 
be found in: 


Buddhue J D 1950 Meteoritic dust Meteoritics (University 
of New Mexico) 


An overview of interplanetary dust studies through the 
1970s may be found in: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interplanetary Dust ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hodge P W 1981 Interplanetary Dust (New York: Gordon 
and Breach) 


A collection of interplanetary dust studies through the 
mid-1990s may be found in: 


Gustafson B and Hanner M (ed) 1996 Physics, Chemistry, 
and Dynamics of Interplanetary Dust (Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Volume 104) 


Mark Sykes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 9 


Interplanetary Network 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interplanetary Network 


An interplanetary network is a collection of spacecraft, 
separated by large distances, equipped with y-ray burst 
detectors. By timing the arrival of a burst at each pair of 
spacecraft, an annulus of possible arrival directions for 
the burst is derived. With three spacecraft, two possible 
arrival directions are obtained, corresponding to the two 
intersections of two annuli (figure 1). With four non- 
coplanar spacecraft, a unique arrival direction can be 
determined. The accuracy of the determination depends, 
among other things, on the separations between the 
spacecraft. Separations of the order of an astronomical 
unit or more can give accuracies in the tens of arcseconds 
range. In many cases, the individual detectors have no 
direction-finding capability. However, if one or more 
detectors in the network can determine even a coarse 
arrival direction, it is often possible to derive a unique 
location with a three-spacecraft network by eliminating 
one of the possible intersections. 

Interplanetary networks have been in operation 
since 1977. The current (third) network began in 1991 and 
at present consists of the Ulysses, Mars Odyssey, Wind 
and HETE missions. In general the detectors on inter- 
planetary spacecraft are small, and the burst detection 
rate is about one per week. However, the good location 
accuracy allows successful searches for y-ray burst coun- 
terparts to take place. 


Kevin Hurley 


AC 
SB 


S 


fy 
Z \ 


oy 


ea"4_9 ANNULUS 


Figure 1. The triangulation method. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


Various constituents of the gaseous interstellar medium 
absorb radiation from a background source at specific 
combinations of wavelengths. As a result, there may 
be one or more localized reductions of intensity (or 
outright gaps), often referred to as ‘lines’ (images of 
a spectrograph’s entrance slit—see figure 1), when one 
views a spectrum of the source. This effect arises from the 
ability of individual atoms, ions and simple molecules in 
space to assume unique, well-defined states of excitation 
(see also SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: ATOMIC PROCESSES). These states 
are created by specific combinations of the electron 
wavefunctions, the coupling of spins or angular momenta 
of subatomic particles and, for molecules, the additional 
excitation levels arising from various allowed modes of 
vibration and rotation of bonded atoms. A transition from 
a state of low excitation (for interstellar species, usually 
the lowest possible one) to a more energetic state is made 
possible by the absorption of a photon having an energy 
very close to the difference in energy of two levels. A 
change in the reverse direction results in the emission of 
a photon. Observations of either of these processes can 
reveal the amount, composition, general physical state and 
movement of the interstellar gaseous medium. 

Our earliest indication of the existence of gases in 
space arose from evidence that some absorption lines 
in the spectra of stars were not produced by the outer 
parts of the stellar atmospheres, as is usually the case 
for most of the spectral features that can be seen (e.g. the 
FRAUNHOFER LINES in the spectrum of our Sun). This finding 
was first brought out by observations of the BINARY STAR 
6 Orionis reported in 1904 by J HARTMANN. He found that 
the absorption features from singly ionized calcium atoms 
(Ca II) did not exhibit the periodically changing Doppler 
shifts resulting from the stars’ orbital motions (as revealed 
by other spectral features). Later, other observers noted 
that these lines were generally stronger for more distant 
stars, thus ruling out the explanation that the lines arose 
from gaseous envelopes around the binary systems or the 
extended atmospheres of unseen companion stars. 

Figures 1 and 2 show an example of absorption lines 
from the doublet of neutral sodium (Na I) at wavelengths 
of 589.0 and 589.6 nm in the spectrum of the star 6 Cas. The 
multiple lines within each feature illustrate that different 
clouds of gas have different Doppler shifts, indicating that 
they are moving at slightly different velocities projected 
along the line of sight. 

Atoms and molecules have many transitions between 
excited electronic levels well above the ground state, but 
such features never arise from interstellar gases because all 
of the species are in levels with the lowest possible energy’. 


1 An exception is that some atoms can be found in excited fine- 
structure states within the lowest electronic level. The relative 
populations in these states can give important information on 
local physical conditions in the gas, since they are populated 
by collisions with other atoms, even at the low density of the 
interstellar medium; see figure 7. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A print of the original photograph of a small portion of 
the spectrum of the star 6 Cas in the vicinity of the two D lines of 
neutral sodium. The intensity of starlight at successively longer 
wavelengths was recorded as a bright band spread from left to 
right, with vertical interruptions (‘lines’) caused by absorption 
from the intervening sodium atoms in space. (From Miinch G 
1957 Astrophys. J. 125 42-65 © American Astronomical Society.) 


7 dork HD223385 = 6 Cas 


" D2 DI | 


Gear 
0 20 40 60 80 100 Kmfec 


Scale G704 08 12 16 20A Fe orc Ines 


Figure 2. A densitometer tracing of the photographic exposure 
(hence ‘dark’ means a strong exposure level and ‘clear’ means 
little or no exposure) depicted in figure 1. The D2 atomic 
transition is twice as strong as the one for D1, and they are 
separated by 0.6 nm (=6 A on the scale shown at the bottom). 
Peaks and valleys within the D2 and D1 features are caused by 
absorbing clouds that have different Doppler velocity shifts. 
Emission lines from an iron arc are used to establish an accurate 
wavelength scale. (From the same source as for figure 1 © 
American Astronomical Society.) 


By contrast, the atmosphere of a star has a large enough 
density and high enough temperature to create frequent 
collisional excitations with enough energy to populate the 
excited levels, thus leading to a much richer collection of 
spectral features. 

A fundamental challenge in the investigation of 
interstellar lines is to separate them from the plentiful 
stellar lines. The easiest way to accomplish this is to 
observe only those stars that are rotating rapidly enough 
to make their lines wash out, owing to the superposition 
of many Doppler shifts from points on the star’s surface 
that are moving at different radial velocities. 

Constituents that can be observed at visible wave- 
lengths and thus are available to ground-based, optical 
observatories include Ti II, Na I, Ca I, Ca II, K I, NH, 
CN, CH and C>. In addition to these features, there are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


more than 100 broad absorptions called diffuse interstellar 
bands that, for the most part, have origins that are poorly 
understood. These bands are detected only through signif- 
icant accumulations of interstellar material, and it is gen- 
erally acknowledged that they probably arise from com- 
plex, polyatomic molecules. It is clear that many types 
of molecules are involved, because different lines of sight 
exhibit features that have dissimilar relative strengths. 

Unfortunately, all of the species identified with 
transitions in the visible part of the spectrum are minor 
ones, and, moreover, the atomic transitions (with one 
exception, Ti II) apply to stages of ionization that are not 
generally favored for most of the interstellar medium. 
Thus, while revealing the presence of gaseous matter and 
its motions, the lines in the visible part of the spectrum 
do not tell us much about the composition of the gas. 
Fortunately, other spectral regions offer much of the 
missing information. The ultraviolet part of the spectrum 
(91.2 nm-310 nm; see ULTRAVIOLET ASTRONOMY)’ has a great 
abundance of strong lines from important atomic and 
molecular species, with many elements offering choices 
of features from several different degrees of ionization. 
The infrared and submillimeter regions (3 zm-1 mm) offer 
insights on the presence of many different molecules in 
dense interstellar clouds, with a number of transitions 
at wavelengths in the tens of centimeters (see INFRARED 
ASTRONOMY and MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER ASTRONOMY). 
These molecules can be seen in emission or, if there 
is a background continuum source, also in absorption. 
Finally, there is the very important (but very weak) 
transition of neutral hydrogen at a wavelength of 21 cm 
(or frequency = 1420.406 MHz) caused by a reversal 
in the alignment of the proton and electron spins (see 
RADIOASTRONOMY). 

An overview of the composition of the interstellar 
medium is presented in INTERSTELLAR MATTER. Briefly, the 
most abundant chemical element in space is hydrogen, 
making up about 91% of all the atoms. Helium is the 
second most abundant element, and it accounts for nearly 
all of the remaining 9%. The heavier elements in the 
periodic table add up to only 0.13% of the total (by number 
of atoms, not by mass). Large fractions of many of the 
heavier elements have condensed into solids, in the form 
of small dust grains (see INTERSTELLAR GRAINS). 

Within the disk of our Galaxy (the Milky Way) 
the average density of the gas is about 1 atom cm-%, 
but there are enormous contrasts that range from about 
10-3 atom cm~°, where all of the atoms are ionized 
and very hot, to 10*-10° atom cm™ in cold clouds 


? Because the Earth’s atmosphere is opaque to the UV radiation, 
these wavelengths must be observed by telescopes in orbit. The 
region below the Lyman limit at 91.2 nm is also useful in principle, 
but the intensities of all but the nearest stars in the sky are strongly 
attenuated by interstellar hydrogen atoms as they become ionized 
by the radiation. In the soft x-ray region, the opacity from 
hydrogen ionization is much lower. However, spectroscopic 
findings based on x-ray observations have been limited by the 
shortcomings of currently available instruments. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


U,z 
"My 
Level Zo 
U,Bo, Lp 
2 
Level o £1 
Spontaneous Absorption Stimulated 
Emission Emission 


Figure 3. Three types of radiative interactions driven at rates 
Az1, U, B12 and U, Bz between two atomic levels separated by 
an energy difference AE. The statistical weights (number of 
degenerate quantum states within the levels) for levels 1 and 2 
depicted here are gj = 2 and g2 = 4. The Einstein coefficients 
A21, By2 and Bz, are related to each other in the manner shown 
by equation (1). 


that are known from their emission lines in the radio 
to have complex molecules (see INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR 
cLoubs), or to even higher densities in regions that are 
collapsing to form stars. Over the distances to typical 
hot, luminous stars that can be seen by the unaided eye, 
a representative column of intervening atoms (mostly 
hydrogen) corresponds to a surface density in projection 
of about 3 x 107° atom cm~*. Put in terms of our 
everyday experience, this is equivalent to the number of 
air molecules at sea-level pressure and 0°C in a column 
that is 11 cm long. For minor constituents that can be 
detected in optical or ultraviolet absorption lines, a typical 
detection limit for a stellar spectrum taken with a modern 
spectrograph that can give a high signal-to-noise ratio and 
good spectral resolution is of order 10’? atom cm~?. Again 
using a terrestrial example, this is equivalent to the surface 
density of gold atoms contained within a column of sea 
water that is 1 cm long. 


Fundamentals of radiative interactions 
Asingle atom? interacts with radiation in three fundamen- 
tal ways that were originally defined by EINSTEIN and are 
illustrated in figure 3. First, an atom in an excited level 
can decay to the lower state spontaneously and emit a 
photon with an energy hv very nearly equal to AE, the 
energy difference between the two levels. The probabil- 
ity of this happening per unit time is given by the quan- 
tity Az1, a property of the radiative transition between the 
levels called the Einstein A coefficient (or transition prob- 
ability). For transitions that are observed in interstellar 
studies, values for Az, range from 2.9 x 10-15 s“! for the 
21 cm transition of neutral hydrogen to a few x 10° s“! for 
the strongest UV lines between electronic excitation levels. 
The other two modes of interaction, regulated by 
the rate coefficients By. and By, called the Einstein B 
coefficients, occur when the atom is exposed to a radiation 


3 Hereafter, for brevity, the term ‘atom’ is understood to mean a 
neutral atom, an ion or a molecule. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


field. If photons with an energy hv = AE are present with 
an energy density U, (per unit frequency), transitions can 
be induced at a rate U, Biz from level 1 up to level 2. The 
absorption of the photon supplies the necessary energy for 
this to happen. The reverse of this process is also possible, 
i.e. a photon can induce an atom in level 2 to decay to 
level 1, and inso doing, anew photon is created that has the 
same frequency, phase and direction of the one that caused 
the event. This process, called stimulated emission, occurs 
at a rate U,By,. There are instances where AE is small 
and, as a result, there are enough atoms in the upper level 
to create enough stimulated emission to act as a negative 
absorption that partly cancels the normal absorption. This 
effect is significant for many transitions in the radio region. 

The Einstein A and B coefficients are related to each 
other by the equation 


3 
By = g2Bx = 522A 1 
81 P12 = 82ba1 = Bs 8241 (1) 


where g, and g, are the statistical weights of the lower and 
upper levels, respectively. This relationship arises from 
the requirement that if the atoms were totally immersed in 
a hollow volume that had an interior radiation field with 
a Planck black body energy density distribution 


3 
i= 82rhv (2) 


3(eh/kT — J) 


with a temperature 7, they must establish level 
populations n; and nz consistent with a Boltzmann 


distribution: 

AE 

Be ot exp ( ) , (3) 
ny 81 kT 


That is, without any coupling to other process, the 
atoms must be in thermal equilibrium with the radiation 
field. This can only happen when the coefficients for the 
transitions satisfy equation (1)*. 

Since the lifetime of the upper state is finite, the 
uncertainty principle allows radiative processes to occur 
with photons that have energies hv slightly different to 
AE. The relative response as a function of frequency v is 
given by the Lorentz profile 


Y 
[(v — v9)? + (y/40)7] 


OW) = 75 (4) 
where vo is the central frequency of the transition having 
a reciprocal mean upper state lifetime y (not necessarily 
equal to Az, because other processes, such as collisions 
or other transitions, may shorten the state’s lifetime even 
more). 

Instead of having an atom inside a radiation bath 
with an energy density U,, we may think of an equivalent 
situation where the atom is exposed to a highly directed 


* The B coefficients are sometimes defined in terms of a radiation 


energy flux J, instead of energy density U,. These coefficients are 
equal to 4z7/c times the ones described here. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


beam with a photon flux per unit area and frequency 
N, = cU,/hv. The atom’s transition rate from level 1 to 
level 2 then becomes (AvN,/c)Bi. If N, varies with v, 
the rate becomes (hv/c) Bi { Nvo(v) dv. It follows that the 
effective geometrical cross section of an atom to remove 
photons from a beam is simply 


h 2, 
o(v) = —b(v) By = Bp) An. 6) 
c g 8v 


Interpretations of the observations 

By custom, representations of the strengths of transitions 
seem to differ for investigators who work with different 
spectral regions or types of transitions. Many radio 
transitions are expressed in terms of A»; defined above, 
but most of the molecular transitions have their strengths 
defined by the squared modulus of the dipole matrix 
element |/.|? used for calculating transition probabilities 
of electric dipole transitions: 


21 6404V9 
7 i as 
82 3he3 


lu. (6) 


For transitions in the visible and ultraviolet, itis customary 
to speak in terms of a quantity f, called the oscillator 
strength or sometimes just the f value. This quantity refers 
to the cross section of an atom (equation (5)), but expressed 
in terms of the outcome from a classical derivation of 
fo@)dv = ze?/mec for an electron with a charge e 
and mass m, that is bound in a harmonic potential. For 
most discussions in a context of absorption lines, the 
applicable f value is the one that goes from the lower to 
the upper state fiz, but the subscript is usually omitted. 
The alternative forms of equation (5) are 


8 3 
o(v) = aye eo) (7) 
and ‘ 
o(v) = =~ fv). (8) 
MeC 


A collection of atoms having a differential number 
distribution N (v) asa function of velocity v projected along 
the viewing direction will present a combined cross section 


qe? 


Pf OO N Te +AGn—]dv ©) 
0 


MeC 


o(v) = 


if all of them are in the lower level. (A is the central 
wavelength of the transition, c/vp.) Generally, the Doppler 
shifts in frequency caused by velocities over the extent of 
N(v) are very much larger than the line’s natural width y. 
Given that oa ¢(v) dv = 1, we can simplify equation (9) 
to the form 


we 


2 
fAN(v) = 0.02654 fAN(v) (10) 
eC 


o(v) = 
m 


if we ignore the small contribution to ¢(v) from the 
low-level, broad Lorentz wings that are well beyond the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


frequency shifts due to Doppler motions. The explicit 
details of equation (9) are important only for very strong 
lines in the ultraviolet, which will be discussed later. In 
other applications, cross sections can simply be expressed 
in terms of either equation (10) or equations (5) and (7) 
with #(v) replaced by AN(v). 

If some of the atoms are excited to an upper level, 
the stimulated emission from this level reduces the cross 
section by a factor 1 — exp(—AE/kT.), where T,. is 
the excitation temperature of the levels defined by the 
Boltzmann equation (equation (3)). An extreme example 
of this is with the 21 cm transition of neutral hydrogen. 
The levels have a separation AE/k = 0.068 K, and 
the populations are very strongly coupled to the gas’s 
kinetic temperature (of order 20-100 K) because collisions 
populate the upper level much more frequently than its 
radiative decay rate. Thus the net absorption is dependent 
on the very small difference between absorption and 
stimulated emission, giving an absorption coefficient that 
is proportional to N(v)/T. (An even more extreme 
example is sometimes observed for transitions of the OH 
radical (A = 18 cm) or H2O (A = 1.35 cm), where 
some source of energy populates the upper level so that 
8inz > gon, making T, negative, and the region becomes 
a maser radio source; see RADIO souRCES.) For visible and 
UV transitions, nz is almost always equal to zero because 
the states undergo radiative decay so rapidly. When this 
is true, we can neglect stimulated emission. 

So far, we have not yet addressed the issue of how the 
collective absorption by the N atoms that contribute to a (v) 
produces an observable attenuation of a beam of radiation. 
Consider that these atoms are distributed with a uniform 
density and confined within some volume that has a 
cross sectional area A perpendicular to the beam. As the 
radiation starts to traverse this volume, it encounters an 
infinitesimal fraction p of the atoms which block the beam 
and reduce its intensity /(v) by a relative factor pa(v)/A, 
ie. d/(v)/I(v) = —[o(v)/A]dp. The cumulative effect 
of successive encounters with the remaining fractions of 
atoms is found by integrating the expression 


' div) ov) A 
=- d 1 
Joes F0 Ay” = 


which, in turn, leads to an exponential absorption law 
for the ultimate fraction of the radiant energy that is 
transmitted, 
T(v) -r(v) 
=e ' 
Ip(v) 
In this expression, the optical depth t(v) is identical to 
o(v) with the understanding that N(v) now denotes the 
number of atoms per unit velocity and per unit area in 
projection. (Henceforth, we will adopt this definition of 
N(v) and work with the quantity t(v).) 

Generally speaking, N(v) can be a complicated 
function that produces absorption profiles with fairly 
arbitrary shapes, such as those shown in figure 2. If the 
resolving power of a spectrograph is so high that no detail 


(12) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the structure of the line is lost by blurring, one can derive 
N(v) from an observation by inverting equations (10) and 


(12), 
MeC Io(v) 
ee | T(v) (13) 


N(v) = 


and estimating J)(v) by interpolation of the flux on either 
side of the line’. This method is the ideal way to interpret 
an absorption line observation, but its accuracy can be 
compromised, sometimes seriously, if (1) the velocity 
structure in the line is not fully resolved by the instrument, 
(2) the intensity in some part of the profile is very near zero 
(as it is in the example shown in figure 2) or (3) either the 
reading that corresponds to a zero intensity or the level of 
the continuum intensity Jo(v) is hard to measure. 

For either of the first two reasons stated above, one 
may have an observation of generally good quality but not 
be able to obtain a direct measure of N(v). We consider first 
the simplest case where the details in the velocity structure 
of a line are degraded, or in extreme cases completely 
lost, by an instrument with limited wavelength resolution. 
Here, the intensity profile /, (not t()) is smoothed by a 
convolution with the instrument’s response function S(A). 

If the absorption at all wavelengths within the feature 
is so weak that the approximation 


_ bh) — 1A) 


is valid to a needed level of accuracy, we can determine 
the total number of absorbing particles in projection along 


the line of sight, the column density Mota = { N(v) du, by 
the relation 


N _ Mec? / In(A) — IA) da 
total = me. fr2 In(A) 
1.13 x 10° W, 
= ——_—_ —.. 1 
Fis oo (15) 


(This equation is an integral form of equation (13) with 
the approximation of equation (14) and the transformation 
dv = cdd/d.) The integral in equation (15) is called 
the equivalent width of a line and is usually expressed 
in wavelength units, ic. Wi. (Anm is the wavelength 
expressed in the units of nanometers and Miotal is in 
atoms cm~*.) A geometrical interpretation of W, is that 
it represents the width of a box that extends from the 
continuum level to zero intensity and has the same area 
as the space enclosed by the reduced (absorbed) intensity 
I(A) and the continuum level /)(A). This concept is 
illustrated by figure 4 (but, in this depiction, for a line 
that is too strong for equation (15) to be valid). The value 


5 Almost all of the modern methods of detecting intensity use 
detectors that give a linear response. However, for a densitometer 
tracing of a photographic exposure, such as the example shown 
in figure 2, this is not true. One must measure the response of the 
photographic film to varying levels of illumination and then use 
this information to apply a correction to each of the film density 
(darkness) values in the spectrum. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Concept of the Equivalent Width 
1.2 TTTTTTTTPTTTTT TTT Ty TT errr ry rrr errr trp rrr rrr 


1.0 


y to Continuum 
Rn Boe OO 
 ® @ 


Intensity rel. 
Oo 
i) 


Oo 
je) 


Figure 4. An illustration that demonstrates the concept of an 
equivalent width, as discussed in the text. 


of W, is unchanged by instrumental smoothing, making it 
a useful general property of a line and one for which we 
can obtain an answer for Nota that is not dependent on the 
instrument’s S(A). 

When a line becomes strong enough that it starts to 
become saturated, the approximation in equation (14) is 
no longer valid, and the linear relationship between N 
and W, expressed in equation (15) breaks down. A line 
with moderate saturation is illustrated in figure 4. If the 
line is well resolved by the instrument, we can go back to 
equation (13) and integrate it over velocity to obtain Mota. 
If one has reason to believe that the line is not well resolved 
and is saturated, the value of N cannot be determined 
unless some assumptions are made or some independent 
information is available about the shape of the line. 

Acommon practice is to assume that the line is formed 
by atoms that have a Maxwellian speed distribution, 
resulting in a velocity projected along the line of sight that 
follows the familiar Gaussian distribution centered at a 
macroscopic radial velocity vo, 


_ Nrotal 
N(v) = sah exp ( 


where b is a velocity dispersion parameter (often called 
a b value or Doppler parameter). This assumption 
has its roots in the early, but usually mistaken, belief 
that the Doppler shifts are always dominated by the 
thermal motions of the atoms with b = (2kT/m)'? 
(or perhaps turbulent motions that resemble thermal 
ones), rather than unpredictable macroscopic dynamical 
processes that could lead to profiles with very different 
shapes. Moreover, it overlooks the fact that one may 
be viewing a profile composed of multiple components, 
perhaps even superposed on each other (figure 2 is a 
good illustration of this situation). In spite of these 
shortcomings, the formalism is still very useful. 


eee ND, 
(v am ) (16) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Voigt Function 


10°F : rn : 
a(v) for af \ 
= Gaussian N(vy \ 
= 10 + oe a 
= ae _ 
pa | we I a 
Bont} | 
7 av) J 
ay Hees, 
10 ee _ 
—2000 -—1000 0) 1000 2000 
Yor Vv 


Figure 5. A semilogarithmic display of Voigt profiles for (lower 
curve) an atom at rest (giving the simple profile form ¢(v) of 
equation (4)), compared with the combined effect of many atoms 
(equation (9)) having a Gaussian distribution of velocities (upper 
curve), as described in equation (16). Both scales in this 
representation are in arbitrary units. 


When N(v) obeys the Gaussian form given in 
equation (16), the outcome for o(v) (or t(v) for a column 
density representation of N(v)) in equation (9) is a Voigt 
profile. One example of this profile is depicted by the 
upper curve in figure 5. Its upper, parabolic portion (above 
10~? in this particular representation) gives optical depths 
that conform to equation (10) and is the only portion that 
can be detected for weak or moderately saturated lines. 
Only when the lines are exceptionally strong and saturated 
does one have a chance of seeing the effect of the broad 
Lorentz wings, as with the La and Lf profiles in figure 6. 

When the Voigt profile starts to become saturated, 
its equivalent width falls short of an extrapolation of the 
linear trend shown in equation (15). It now takes on the 
form 

Wi, = 2bF (To) 


; : (17) 


where F(t) is a special function of the line’s central optical 

depth 

m2 @ FP Neotal 
MeC b 


T= 


(18) 
given by 


F(t) = / [1 — exp(—t9 e*)] dx 
0 


2 nin/2 
n=1 


(In the limit t <« 1, F(t) = ./7t0/2 and equations (17)- 
(19) reduce to equation (15).) 

If one can measure W,/A for two or more lines 
of different strengths from a particular atom, it is then 
possible to derive within this formalism the values of Mota 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


91.420 


a aE ag 


Vcrap—30¥ 91.288 


91.210 


91.274 


Wavelength (nm) 


Curve of Growth 


—3.5 


—4.0 


-4.5 7 


L18—20 
—5.0 


flat portion 


Log W,/A 


—5.5 


peer te Be a 


—6.0 


peo tourer iii 


—3 2 —1 0 1 


Log fAum 


Figure 6. Selected line profiles in the Lyman series of hydrogen displayed over a radial velocity range of 4 


2 


ce) 


+100 km s~ (top panel) and 


a plot that shows where their equivalent widths occur on a curve of growth (bottom panel). In this example, 

Mtotal (H I) = 2 x 10'6 atom cm~? and the velocity profile is a pure Gaussian (equation (16)) with b = 1kms7!. Different members of 
the Lyman series have different damping curves because their y values are different (see equation (21)). (The condition that 

b =1kms"! for hydrogen is an artificial one that was imposed to give the best demonstration of the principle of the curve of growth. 


Generally, interstellar or intergalactic hydrogen is observed to have b > 10 km s! when Miotal is as low as 2 x 10! atom cm~?.) 


and b by finding the best fit with a curve of growth°’— 
a curve that takes on a universal shape for log(W,/A) — 
log(b) as a function log(Mtota fA) — log(b) for a Gaussian 
velocity distribution (equation (16)). Opportunities to 
perform such an analysis arise either from transitions that 
are completely unrelated or, alternatively, from a group 
of spectral features, called a multiplet, between a pair 
of electronic levels. The transitions in a multiplet are 
separated from each other by the slightly different energies 
that arise from different couplings of the electronic spins 


6 A misapplication of the curve of growth fitting with strongly 
saturated lines can lead to egregious errors in Miotal (usually 
resulting in significant underestimates). This is especially true 
if narrow absorption features are hidden in a broad line whose 
equivalent width is dominated by a small amount of gas with a 
large value of b. In less extreme situations, such as a blended 
ensemble of lines with only mildly different bs and strengths, the 
underestimate in Miota) that results from the oversimplification 
that there is a single component is relatively mild: it is usually of 
order 20% or less. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and angular momenta. 

A curve of growth is illustrated in figure 6 for the 
Lyman series of atomic hydrogen’. Lines weaker than 
about L30 (only L30-L49 are shown) exhibit a nearly linear 
trend between W,/ and fA. The intensity profiles of lines 
that are found on the linear portion of the curve of growth 
(bottom sequence of features in the top panel of figure 6) 
approximately reflect an upside down representation of 
the shape of N(v). As the transitions become stronger, their 
equivalent widths are described by equations (17)-(19) and 
their shapes become distorted into a more box-like profile. 
Lines in this regime are said to lie on the flat portion of the 
curve of growth. Finally, as the lines become exceptionally 
strong, the broad Lorentz (or damping) wings of the 
Voigt profile become evident and the equivalent widths 
reflect this additional contribution. Lines that exhibit this 


” The Lyman series is a progression of transitions out of the 
innermost (and lowest-energy) electron orbit of the atom. They 
lie between the ionization limit of hydrogen at 4 = 91.25 nm and 
the La feature at 121.57 nm. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


property are said to lie on the damping portion of the curve 
of growth. 

If the lines are completely dominated by the damping 
wings, the optical depth is given by the product of Mtotai 
and each atom’s a (v) (equation (4) in the limit that v— vp >> 
y/4x substituted into equation (8)): 


e fy 


TV=N a reer 
( ) total Arm.c(v = v0)? 


(20) 


By integrating this expression over all v, it follows that 


tte (my (21) 


If possible, one should try to identify the damping wing 
shapes to confirm that indeed equation (21) is the valid one 
to use, instead of equations (17)-(19) that might, instead, 
apply to a portion of the curve of growth that has about 
the same slope. 

When some of the velocity structure in a profile is 
partly resolved by the instrument so that more information 
is present than just W,, one can invoke an approach that 
is more sophisticated than the curve of growth analysis. 
A model for N(v) is constructed on the assumption that 
it can be approximated as the sum of separate Gaussian 
components, each with its own Mota, vo and b. One then 
solves (or searches) for the best fit between the recorded 
data and the expectation 


Iv) _ " a 
Iw) > exp (- S00) * (2 (22) 


an expression that substitutes t(v) for o(v) in equation (9) 
for each of the n components and uses the definition for 
N(v) given in equation (16) (+ denotes convolution). This 
is usually done by varying the free parameters Mtotal,i, V0, i 
and b; untila minimum x? is found, indicating that the best 
fit has been achieved. Ashortcoming of this method is that 
one may be forced to make an arbitrary choice between two 
or more solutions that have equally good fits with the data 
(and, likewise, the number n of possible components is a 
matter of judgment). 


Insights derived from the lines 

Lines in the visible part of the spectrum have been used to 
explore the kinematics of the interstellar material as well 
as to bring out the general statistical properties of small 
clumps of gas and how they are distributed in space. These 
studies have been facilitated by spectrographs with very 
high resolving powers, some being able to differentiate 
Doppler shifts that change the wavelength by only one 
part in a million. Observations of molecular features at 
visible wavelengths have given insights on the presence 
of a few simple diatomic species. Measurements in the 
infrared and radio parts of the spectrum have completed 
the picture for more complex molecules, usually residing 
in clouds that are too dense to view at ultraviolet and 
visible wavelengths. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A particularly noteworthy observation was the 
discovery by A McKellar in 1941 that CN molecules in 
front of the star ¢ Ophiuchi had their excited rotational 
levels populated according to a Boltzmann distribution 
(equation (3)) for a temperature slightly below 3 K. The 
significance of this was not fully appreciated until the 
discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation 
some 22 yr later (see COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND). 

The UV spectrometer and telescope on the COPERNICUS 
(oao-3) satellite that operated from 1972 to 1981 opened 
up an important spectral range that contained the Lyman 
series of hydrogen, strong lines of elements ranging from 
carbon to zinc in the periodic table and, perhaps most 
significant, the only means (at the time) for detecting 
molecular hydrogen—the most abundant molecule in the 
universe. From spectra obtained by Copernicus, we 
learned from the absorption features of five-times-ionized 
oxygen (O VI) about the presence of gases at temperatures 
of around 3 x 10° K (hotter gases with T ~ 10° K are 
revealed by a diffuse, soft x-ray background emission). We 
also discovered that the gas-phase abundances of various 
heavy elements are significantly reduced as they condense 
into solid form to create the dust grains. The relative 
completeness of this depletion is increased for lines of sight 
where the density is large, and elements that can form 
refractory chemical substances tend to be more depleted 
than ones that form more volatile compounds. 

The launch of the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) in 1990 
started a new era in the investigation of absorption lines 
in the ultraviolet. Vast increases in collecting area and 
spectrograph resolution over those of previous orbiting 
observatories have significantly improved our ability to 
record spectra with better precision and over much greater 
distances (toward fainter objects). We can now gather 
many spectral elements simultaneously. This has been 
facilitated by advances in light detection technology, 
starting from zero-dimensional detectors on board 
Copernicus (scanning photomultiplier tubes), moving 
on to one-dimensional ones (linear arrays) on the first- 
generation instruments of HST and finally arriving at two- 
dimensional sensors on a second-generation instrument 
called the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS). 
Figure 7 shows a small segment of the spectrum of a 
star (one echelle spectrum order out of 53 obtained in 
a single exposure). The wavelength resolving power of 
this spectrum is 1 part in 200000, a figure that allows 
us to discriminate Doppler velocity differences of only 
1.5kms7!. To appreciate the the better information content 
provided by higher resolutions, one can compare the fine 
details and the velocity scales shown in this figure with 
those of figure 2. With the added capabilities of HST, we 
have been able to survey the abundances of elements with 
very low abundances, probe the interstellar abundances 
and conditions toward stars in the halo of the Galaxy and 
(at lower resolution) examine absorption features from 
gas systems associated with other galaxies, using some 
of the brightest quasars and active galactic nuclei as the 
background light sources. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


i: STIS Far UV Spectrum (mode: E140H echelle grating) 


& 

ee ee 22 ; sez 2 a3 
& = =o 2 f2 4 zo: a Luba 
Tere} PR Pe ae o 49 a 
ve Is q 
o 0.55 oa 
S E = 
= Fe th Nseli DaS ihn aN bane Balsa Lacan Uh a NMet Bete an sae NGe coca tyht el Sant, AM MAI tal Lantn Neha of holding. te eit 4 
~~ 0.0 is Velocity scale (km/s): poy q 

1 1 

x 

= 126.00 126.10 126.20 126.30 
oy 


Wavelength A (nm) 


Figure 7. A small portion of the spectrum of the star 4 Cep, recorded by the STIS on the HST, using a grating configuration that gave 
the highest resolution. Transitions are identified with markers aligned with the strongest velocity component at a velocity of 

—13 km s“! ina heliocentric reference frame. For neutral carbon (C I), there are three main velocity components at —33, —13 and 

—3 km s7!. Five out of the six C I transitions arise from two excited fine-structure levels in the ground electronic state (C I* is the first 
excited level and C I** the second one). The strengths of these features, relative to that out of the lowest level, indicate the local 
densities and temperatures of the gas where the carbon atoms are located. The wavelengths of the Si II and Fe II transitions are so close 


to each other that their absorption features overlap. 


By virtue of the very large (Doppler) redshifts 
produced by the Hubble expansion of the universe, we 
can observe with large-aperture telescopes on the ground 
the UV transitions from distant gas clouds that are in 
front of even more distant quasars (See INTERGALACTIC 
MEDIUM and QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: INTERVENING ABSORPTION 
LINES). Intergalactic gas clouds of almost pure hydrogen 
were discovered by the numerous Lyman a absorption 
features that appear at wavelengths shortward of the 
quasar’s red-shifted Lyman a emission feature (see LYMAN 
ALPHA FOREST). These clouds are mostly ionized, but 
they still contain enough neutral hydrogen to create 
conspicuous absorption features, including also the higher 
members of the Lyman series (shown in the very simplistic 
representations of the top panel of figure 6). Some sight 
lines to quasars penetrate foreground galaxies or their 
outermost fringes (See GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT). Such cases 
have given us opportunities to explore the character and 
composition of the gas in these distant systems, many of 
which cannot be seen in direct images. 

Telescopes on the ground with apertures that 
range from 8 to 10 m in diameter are beginning 
to flourish. Working with modern, high-resolution 
spectrographs and sensitive electronic imaging devices 
(See SPECTROGRAPHS: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROGRAPHS, CHARGE- 
COUPLED DEVICE), these new facilities will bring forth an 
abundance of superior observations of absorption lines 
that appear in quasar spectra and will tell us much about 
the evolution of gas systems through cosmic time. 


Bibliography 

A very simplified development of the ideas presented 
here, with an accounting of the principal results from the 
Copernicus satellite: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spitzer L Jr 1982 Searching Between the Stars (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press) 


A review of recent conclusions about atomic abun- 
dances in our Galaxy from spectroscopic observations by 
the Hubble Space Telescope: 


Savage B D and Sembach K R 1996 Interstellar abundances 
from absorption line observations with the Hubble 
Space Telescope Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 279- 
329 


A review of diffuse interstellar bands: 


Herbig G H 1995 The diffuse interstellar bands Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 33 19-73 


Edward Jenkins 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interstellar Chemistry 


Molecules are not limited to the solar system but appear 
to exist throughout the universe. Interstellar chemistry 
is the study of molecular matter in interstellar space. It 
seeks to determine what the molecules can tell us about the 
physical conditions in the sources where they are detected 
and how the molecular matter is produced. 

More than 25 yr of observational studies have shown 
that a rich variety of gas-phase molecules is associated 
with INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR CLOUDS, which are vast regions 
of gas and tiny dust particles found among the stars 
in our Galaxy and others. A considerable number of 
molecules are also found in the extended atmospheres of 
certain classes of older stars. Molecules are detected in 
astronomical environments by comparing spectroscopic 
lines, in absorption or in emission, with known spectra 
in the laboratory. From the strengths and shapes of 
spectral lines, astronomers can deduce the concentrations 
of the molecules as well as the heterogeneous physical 
conditions prevailing in the sources. The existence of a 
solid interstellar phase consisting of dust particles of size 
~0.1 ym covered with a mantle of assorted molecular 
ices is inferred from the wavelength dependence of the 
scattering and absorption of visible light as well as from 
broad spectroscopic features. It is thought that interstellar 
molecules are formed locally, i.e. where they are detected, 
by chemical processes that can occur efficiently under 
physical conditions—very low temperatures and very low 
densities—quite different from those on Earth. Although 
our understanding is far from complete, the current state 
of knowledge of these chemical processes is sufficient to 
calculate correctly the abundances of many well-known 
interstellar molecules and to make accurate predictions for 
the abundances of others still unseen. 


Interstellar molecules 
The first gas-phase interstellar molecules—CH, CH*, and 
CN—were discovered in the years 1937-1941 using the 
technique of optical absorption spectroscopy, a method 
which is only possible for so-called ‘diffuse’ interstellar 
clouds, which are sufficiently rarefied that stellar radiation 
can penetrate them. A far greater extent of molecular 
development is found in dense interstellar clouds, which 
have sufficient matter to extinguish the radiation of 
background starlight. Although the gas phase of such 
clouds contains approximately 99% of the matter, it is 
the dust particles that are responsible for most of the 
extinction. Dense clouds, which are sites of newly formed 
stars, are typically found in ‘giant’ complexes of material 
with higher-density objects (known as cores) embedded in 
lower-density material. The cores can contain protostars, 
which consist of warming, infrared-emitting, collapsing 
material in the act of forming new stars. Figure 1 shows a 
schematic view of a dense cloud complex. 

Dense clouds have been studied primarily via Ra- 
DIOASTRONOMY and, to an increasing extent, via INFRARED 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


new stars 
e 


e 
protostar (infrared source) 


gas density: 10% cm 3 


temperature: 10-50 K 


<<? 10 -- 100 light years —————_> 


Figure 1. Schematic view of a dense interstellar cloud complex 
with some associated phenomena. 


ASTRONOMY. Both techniques can be employed since wave- 
lengths longer than visible wavelengths are extinguished 
to a diminished degree. In the gas phase, individual 
molecules undergo rotational and vibrational motions; the 
rotational—vibrational energies are quantized according to 
the laws of quantum mechanics. Transitions between ro- 
tational levels lead to spectra from the radio through the 
submillimeter-wave portion of the electromagnetic spec- 
trum while transitions involving vibrational levels lead to 
spectra in the infrared region. Astronomers sometimes use 
the word ‘radio’ to apply to all wavelengths larger than in- 
frared. 

The first molecule detected by radioastronomical 
means was the diatomic species OH, which was found in 
1963. The first polyatomic molecules—ammonia (NHs3) 
and water (H,O)—were discovered in 1968 and the 
first organic (carbon-containing) polyatomic molecule— 
formaldehyde (HzCO)—was detected soon thereafter. 
Since then, new molecules have been detected regularly 
every year, and there currently are known to exist over 
100 gas-phase molecules consisting of up to 13 constituent 
atoms. These molecules are listed in table 1. (Some 
molecules in this table, classified as circumstellar, have 
been detected only in extended stellar atmospheres or both 
in these sources and in interstellar clouds.) In addition 
to these species, molecules containing isotopes such as 
deuterium, °C, and !8O have been detected. In the last 
decade, infrared techniques have become increasingly 
powerful despite severe atmospheric interference, and 
a significant fraction of the molecules in table 1 have 
been detected in the infrared. Infrared detection is 
especially useful for non-polar molecules since such 
species do not possess strong rotational spectra. Although 
most ‘radio’ detections are observed over wide regions 
of clouds in emission, infrared detections are seen in 
absorption against background sources of radiation or 
against protostars forming in the clouds themselves. Much 
recent work in the infrared has been accomplished with the 
European infrared satellite called ISO (see INFRARED SPACE 
MISSIONS (INCLUDING ISO)). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The molecules listed in table 1 have all been detected 
under high spectral resolution. This fact, coupled with the 
detection of at least several lines for each species, makes 
the identification unambiguous except for a few species 
such as the simplest amino acid glycine (NH2CH2COOH), 
which are followed by question marks in table 1. The 
certainty of the assignments is important since the nature 
of the gas-phase molecules seen in interstellar clouds 
is very different from what chemists are used to on 
Earth. A glance at table 1 shows that most of the 
large molecules are organic in nature; this observation 
mirrors the relative numbers of inorganic and organic 
molecules known on Earth. On the other hand, the 
carbon-containing molecules in astronomical sources are 
often very unsaturated (hydrogen-poor), unlike naturally 
occurring species on Earth. Moreover, a large fraction of 
the interstellar molecules are not stable in the terrestrial 
laboratory because they are quite reactive. The unstable 
molecules include molecular ions (all but one positively 
charged), fragments known as ‘radicals,’ and metastable 
isomers, which are unusual geometrical arrangements of 
atoms. For example, HNC is an isomer of HCN, and 
c-C3H is a cyclic isomer of linear C3H, itself a rather 
reactive radical. It is because of the ingenuity of molecular 
spectroscopists, who have managed to take the spectra of 
many unusual species in the laboratory, that this witches’ 
brew of interstellar molecules has been characterized. 
Although most of the molecules shown in table 1 have 
been found in clouds in our own Galaxy only, an increasing 
number have been found in external galaxies. In fact, 
simple molecules have been found in sources as distant 
as quasars and radiogalaxies with REDSHIFT z > 4. 

Molecular spectra can be used for purposes other 
than the identification of individual molecules. From 
the relative intensities of the spectral peaks, relative 
concentrations, or ‘abundances’, can be determined. 
The abundances reflect both the relative amounts of 
elements available for incorporation into molecules and 
the chemical processes occurring in interstellar clouds. 
From studies of diffuse clouds, where the gas phase 
is mainly atomic, it is possible to determine elemental 
abundances that pertain to the gaseous interstellar 
medium. In general, these show that, compared with 
stellar atmospheres, heavy elements are partially depleted 
from the gas onto the dust grains. The depletion may 
or may not be greater in dense clouds. The abundances 
of heavy elements are also affected by the metallicities of 
galaxies. In the gas phase of a ‘typical’ interstellar cloud 
in our Galaxy, hydrogen is the dominant element, while 
the elements carbon, nitrogen and oxygen are lower by a 
factor of ~10~4, with oxygen more abundant than carbon 
(‘oxygen-rich’ conditions). ‘Carbon-rich’ conditions, on 
the other hand, exist in certain stellar atmospheres. 

Not surprisingly, the dominant molecule in dense 
interstellar clouds is molecular hydrogen, Hy. Whereas 
in diffuse clouds there is also a significant amount of 
hydrogen in atomic form, in dense clouds the hydrogen 
is almost completely molecular. One exception to this 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


statement occurs in ionized regions around newly formed 
high-mass stars, where the hydrogen is mainly in its 
ionized atomic form. The second most abundant species 
in the gas—carbon monoxide (CO)—has a fractional 
abundance with respect to Hz of ~10-+ by number 
for typical dense clouds in our Galaxy, implying that 
this molecule consumes much of the available elemental 
carbon and oxygen. The fractional abundances of all 
polyatomic organic molecules with respect to Hp are rather 
small; for example, that of methanol ranges from 107-7 to 
10-1°. Despite their low fractional abundances, the total 
amounts of organic molecules in interstellar clouds are 
greater than corresponding amounts on the Earth. The 
molecular abundances in interstellar clouds do not reflect 
any equilibrium but are determined by rate processes. The 
positively charged species suggest an ionization source, 
and this is universally acknowledged to be cosmic Rays, 
which are chiefly high-energy protons. Such particles 
can ionize material directly or indirectly through the 
generation of ionizing photons. 

From the point of view of many astronomers, the 
major use of molecular spectra from interstellar sources 
is the determination of the physical conditions and their 
heterogeneities in the sources. The rotational temperature 
of a molecule can be found from the relative intensities of 
differing spectral lines, and this temperature is related to 
the kinetic temperature of the source. The overall density 
of a source can be found from an analysis of the minimum 
density necessary to collisionally excite molecules which 
subsequently radiate; weakly polar molecules such as CO 
are easily excited and so appear at all densities above 
a low value whereas strongly polar molecules such as 
CS and HCN can only be detected in high-density cores 
where the collisional excitation is more rapid than the 
rapid rotational emission. In this manner, the low-density 
portions of dense cloud complexes have been determined 
to have gas densities ~10° cm~? while the densities in the 
cloud cores range from ~10* to 10° cm~*. Temperatures 
in quiescent cores, which show no dramatic signs of star 
formation, can be as low as 10 K, while temperatures in 
the more diffuse regions can rise to 50 K. 

In addition to the narrow spectra, there also exist 
broad spectra from interstellar sources, the interpretation 
of which can be ambiguous. One such class of spectra 
derives from ices constituting INTERSTELLAR GRAIN mantles. 
The ices form in dense clouds as molecules condense onto 
the cold dust particles. Condensed-phase species tend 
not to show rotational spectra in the radio region because 
rotation is hindered by intermolecular forces. Condensed- 
phase species do undergo the same vibrational motions as 
gas-phase species. The vibrational spectra of molecules in 
the solid state are both broadened and shifted compared 
with the gas-phase values. The broadening and the 
shifting are sensitive to the local environment, so that 
these quantities can be used to characterize the nature of 
interstellar grain mantles. The most abundant molecule in 
the ice is water, which has a fractional abundance relative 
to gas-phase hydrogen of ~10-4 by number. This high 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Gas-phase interstellar and circumstellar molecules. 


2 atoms 
H2 CH CH* NH OH 
HF HCl (@) CN CO 
CSi CP CS NO NS 
OS NaCl KCl AIF AIcl 
PN SiN SiO SiS Cot 
sot 
3 atoms 
H3 CH» NH2 H2O H2S 
QH HCN HNC HCO HCOt 
HOC* HN3 HNO Hcst C3 
(oe) QS SiC CO2 N2O 
SO, OCS MgCN MgNC NaCN 
4 atoms 
NH3 H30t GH H2CO HoCN 
HCNH* H2CS C3H c-C3H HCCN 
HNCO HOCOt HNCS C3N C30 
C3S 
5 atoms 
CH, SiH, HoC3 c-C3H2 CH»NH 
H,COH* CH2CN NH2CN CH2CO HCOOH 
C4H HC3N HCCNC HNCCC Cs 
CySi 
6 atoms 
CoH, CH30H CH3SH CH3CN CH3NC 
NH2CHO H2Cy HC3NH* HC,CHO CsH 
C5N 
7 atoms 
CH3NHp2 CH3CCH CH3CHO c-CH2OCH2 CH2CHCN 
Ce6H HC5N C;(?) 
8 atoms 
HCOOCH3 CH3COOH CH3C3N H2C6 9 atoms 

C7H 
C,H50H CH30CH3 CoH5sCN CH3C4H CsH 
HC7N 
10 atoms 
CH3COCH3 CH3Cs5N(?) NH2CH2COOH(?) 
11 atoms 
HCoN 
13 atoms 
HCyN 


abundance far exceeds what is found in the gas. Carbon 
dioxide (CO,) is another well-characterized abundant 
surface species. Other molecules include CO, which is far 
less abundant than in the gas, as well as methane (CHg), 
methanol (CH30H), ammonia (NH3) and H2S. The shape 
of the CO spectral line has been used to show that this 
species is found in two types of mantle environments— 
a polar and a non-polar one. Broad spectra also arise 
from a population of grain cores that consists of silicates, 
much like beach sand. A population of carbonaceous 
grains is inferred from a broad bump in the extinction 
of star light through diffuse clouds at 2200 A, although 
whether this bump is due to graphite or amorphous carbon 
particles remains to be determined. Finally, emission 
from a planetary-nebula-type source known as the ‘Red 
Rectangle’ has been used to infer the existence of much 
smaller dust particles, known as nanoparticles, which 
consist of either carbonaceous or silicon-based material. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Not all broad spectral features originate from dust 
particles. A series of previously unidentified emission 
features throughout the infrared, known as the ‘UIBs’ or 
“UIR’ bands (standing for unidentified infrared bands), 
most probably arises from a collection of large molecules 
(=30 atoms in size) known as polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are found terrestrially in 
automobile exhaust. Although no specific interstellar 
features can be identified with particular PAH species, 
it is likely that the broad interstellar spectra arise from 
a collection of PAHs with slightly differing vibrational 
frequencies and an overall fractional abundance with 
respect to Hz of ~10-’. An alternative interpretation in 
terms of small amorphous carbon particles exists. 

Another series of broad features is seen in the 
visible, typically against the light of background stars, 
and presumably arises from diffuse interstellar clouds. 
These so-called ‘diffuse interstellar bands’ (DIBs; the word 
‘diffuse’ is used to mean ‘broad’) have been known for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


much of the century and have remained unassigned except 
for a few tentative possibilities. Following Sherlock 
Holmes’ dictum that if one rejects the impossible, the 
improbable must be truth, investigators have considered 
the possibility that large gas-phase molecules can account 
for the lines and their large widths. The astronomical 
problem with this hypothesis is that small molecules are 
attacked by radiation, which is one reason that polyatomic 
molecules are not detected in diffuse clouds. It is possible, 
however, that very large molecules are relatively immune 
to photodestruction since they can store excess energy 
much like a heat bath. The spectroscopic problem with 
the hypothesis is that the molecules must heretofore have 
eluded laboratory detection. Most recently, five DIBs have 
been assigned to the negatively charged molecular ion C7, 
which has been studied in detail in the laboratory within 
the last year. Another two lines may be due to the gaseous 
‘fullerene’ ion CZ), although in the laboratory this species 
has only been studied in a solid matrix phase in which 
the vibrational spectral frequencies are displaced from the 
gas phase values. The remaining DIB problem is a large 
one; its eventual solution may yield surprising inferences 
about the state of interstellar matter. 


Low-temperature chemistry 
Although some molecules are formed in extended stellar 
atmospheres and blown out into space, the radiation field 
present in the unshielded interstellar medium is sufficient 
to destroy them long before they are incorporated into a 
dense molecular cloud along with other stellar detritus 
by the force of gravity. Large molecules such as PAHs, 
assumed to be formed in carbon-rich stellar atmospheres, 
and dust particle cores, observed to be formed in both 
oxygen-rich and carbon-rich stellar atmospheres, probably 
withstand photodestruction to a considerable extent. 
Thus, as interstellar clouds form, they are composed of 
a gas phase consisting mainly of atoms and a solid phase 
consisting of dust particles without ices. To produce the 
interstellar molecules of table 1 from atomic precursors 
requires an active local chemistry, which can occur both in 
the gas phase and on the surfaces of the dust particles. 
The chemistry is severely constrained by the low 
density and temperature of the cloud, however dense 
it may be. The low density requires the gas-phase 
chemistry to consist of two-body collisions, since three- 
body collisions, by which is meant the collision of a third 
body with the temporary molecule formed by the collision 
of two other particles, are improbable. Temporary gas- 
phase molecules last for periods far less than 1 s while 
collisions in a gas of density ~10* cm~? occur every ~10° s, 
or 1 week. Unlike the situation in the gas phase, dust 
particles can act as third bodies for reaction because atoms 
and molecules can stick to them. Consider a gas-phase 
species that lands on a dust particle and sticks to it with a 
certain efficiency. A second species then lands and sticks 
on the same grain, either atop the first species (Eley—Rideal 
mechanism) or elsewhere, in which case the two species 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


endothermic products 


“\ SG ener Pe 


activation energy barrier —___» , a 
/ \ 
7 
\ 


exothermic products 


energy of reactants energy of products 
A+B C+D 


Figure 2. The energy profiles of three types of chemical 
reactions: endothermic, exothermic with activation energy and 
exothermic without activation energy. 


must diffuse on the grain surface to find one another 
(Langmuir—Hinshelwood mechanism). 

The low temperatures remove from consideration 
both gas-phase and grain-surface reactions that require 
significant amounts of energy. These processes include all 
‘endothermic’ reactions, in which the products lie at higher 
energy than the reactants, and those ‘exothermic’ reactions 
that require energy to overcome a potential barrier (the so- 
called ‘activation’ energy) occurring during the course of 
reaction even though the energy of products lies lower 
than that of reactants. See figure 2. 

The rates of gas-phase chemical reactions are 
normally expressed in terms of thermal rate coefficients 
k(T) and concentrations. For example, the rate of the 
reaction 

A+B—+C+D (1) 


is written as 
dn(A)/dt = —dn(C)/dt = —k(T)n(A)n(B) (2) 


where n(J) stands for the concentration of species J. The 
thermal rate coefficient is related to the reaction cross 
section o by 

kK(T) = (vo) (3) 


where v is the relative collision velocity between the 
reactants and the symbols (- - -) stand for a thermal average 
over all degrees of freedom. In the limit of large numbers 
of reactive species on a grain surface, a rate equation 
treatment is appropriate for the diffusive (Langmuir— 
Hinshelwood) mechanism although the rate coefficients 
must incorporate a random walk or quantum mechanical 
tunneling motion rather than a simple relative velocity. In 
the limit of small numbers of reactive species on a grain 
surface, the rate equation method is problematic. 

For endothermic reactions or for exothermic reactions 
with potential barriers, it is well known that 


kK(T) = A(T) exp(- E,/T) (4) 


where A(T), the pre-exponential factor, can have a weak 
direct or inverse temperature dependence depending, for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


gas-phase processes, mainly on the nature of the long- 
range potential and E,, the activation energy, is written 
here in units of temperature. For most chemical reactions 
involving neutral species E, > 10000 K so that, at typical 
interstellar cloud temperatures under 100 K, the rate of 
reaction is negligible. For reactions with smaller activation 
energies and light reactants, tunneling processes, not 
included in the above expression, can increase the rate 
coefficient at low temperatures, especially for processes on 
grain surfaces. Even so, interstellar chemistry is effectively 
limited to reactions with zero or small activation energy. 
In the gas phase, these include the following classes of 
exothermic processes: (i) reactions involving charged and 
neutral species, known as ion—molecule reactions, and 
(ii) reactions between neutral species in which at least 
one of the reactants is an atom or a ‘radical’, which is 
a particularly reactive molecule with an odd number of 
electrons. On the surfaces of grains, reactions of the second 
type must dominate since positive ions striking grains are 
thought merely to be neutralized by the excess negative 
charge present. 

Ion—molecule reactions have been studied extensively 
in the laboratory down to low temperatures; they 
are known to occur with temperature-independent 
rate coefficients k(T) * 10-? cm? s7! for non-polar 
neutrals and, for polar neutrals, with somewhat larger 
rate coefficients that increase weakly with decreasing 
temperatures. Gas-phase neutral—neutral reactions 
involving a radical are somewhat slower at room 
temperature, with a weak temperature dependence that is 
not fully understood. Very few studies of these systems at 
low temperatures have been undertaken. The products of 
all classes of reactions cannot be easily guessed at; rather, 
they must be measured or calculated via detailed quantum 
mechanical methods. For diffusive surface reactions, very 
few reactive systems have been studied in any detail, and 
estimates are often used for the rates of reaction. 


The formation of interstellar molecules 
Starting from atomic matter, it is difficult to form diatomic 
molecules in a low-density gas. Consider the collision 
of two hydrogen atoms to form a temporary hydrogen 
molecule, known as a ‘complex’. This complex typically 
flies apart long before a third body approaches. There 
is a small chance that the complex can stabilize itself 
via the emission of a photon in a process known as 
‘radiative association’, but this chance has been calculated 
to be remote for the association of two hydrogen atoms. 
Indeed, radiative association becomes efficient only for 
larger species. Although there do exist more efficient 
gas-phase syntheses of Hz involving H* or H_, it is 
now generally thought that interstellar Hz is formed by 
diffusive recombination on dust grains and released back 
into the gas via both non-thermal and thermal processes, as 
depicted in figure 3. The recombination has been studied 
in the laboratory. 

Once Hy, is formed, a complex gas-phase chemistry 
ensues in dense interstellar clouds; this chemistry 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


H H 


HR, 


Figure 3. The formation of interstellar H2 by a diffusive 
(Langmuir—Hinshelwood) process on an interstellar grain. 


is dominated by positive ion—-molecule reactions, but 
contains radical—neutral reactions as well. The ionization 
is typically provided by cosmic rays, which can penetrate 
through a total column density (concentration x path 
length) of more than 10% cm~?. The flux of cosmic rays, 
which are presumably formed in supernovae, is probably 
dependent on position within a galaxy and varies from 
one galaxy to another. Attempts to estimate this flux 
based on molecular observations are uncertain to an order 
of magnitude. The ionization provided is not great in a 
quantitative sense; both theory and observations of ions 
indicate that the fractional ionization is perhaps 10~” with 
the largest uncertainty being the unmeasured metallic ion 
concentration. The small ionization is sufficient, however, 
to drive the ion—molecule chemistry. In diffuse clouds, the 
strong interstellar radiation field penetrates and provides 
a more potent source of ionization. The UV radiation is 
sufficiently energetic to ionize carbon, which possesses 
a rather low ionization potential, into C*, leading to a 
factional ionization of ~10-*. Even in diffuse clouds, 
however, ionization of hydrogen and helium requires 
cosmic rays. 

Let us see how the initial stages of molecular synthesis 
work by considering the formation of water and simple 
hydrocarbons (molecules containing only carbon and 
hydrogen). 

When a hydrogen molecule collides with a cosmic ray 
proton (CRP), the major products are the molecularion and 
an electron: 


Hy + CRP —> H} +e” + CRP. (5) 


The newly formed H3 ‘quickly’ recombines with a neutral 
hydrogen molecule to form the simple polytomic ion H}: 


H; + H,. — Hj} +H. (6) 


This ion can react with different atoms present in the initial 
gas. The reaction with oxygen atoms is followed by a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


sequence of reactions with ubiquitous H2 leading to the 
rather stable protonated water ion: 


O+H; —> OH* +H, (7) 
OH* + H, —> H,0° +H (8) 
H,0+ Hp > H30+ H. (9) 


Not reactive with Hz, H30* eventually recombines with 
free electrons; recombination reactions are known to be 
dissociative in nature but only recently have experiments 
been able to determine the branching fractions among 
the various possible products. For the reaction between 
H;30% and electrons, both the radical OH and the normal 
molecule water (H2O) are products. 

A similar sequence of reactions starting with atomic 
carbon leads to the methyl (CH$) ion; this ion cannot react 
with Hp in the normal manner but does undergo a rather 
slow but competitive radiative association reaction with 
hydrogen, 

CH; + H, —> CH: +hv (10) 


to lead to CH, which is a precursor of methane (CHy) and 
methyl (CHs). 

Once simple molecules are synthesized, they are 
depleted via reactions with atomic and molecular ions and, 
in the case of radicals, neutrals. Photodestruction also 
plays a significant role, especially in diffuse clouds. Some 
of the depletion reactions lead to more complex species; 
others do not. Sequences of reactions leading to the 
production and depletion of most of the species in table 1 
have been written down, although laboratory evidence for 
many of these processes is lacking. Occasionally, neutral— 
neutral reactions play important roles in the synthesis of 
molecules. Two examples, both studied in the laboratory 
at low temperature, are 


C+ CoH> — C3H +H (11) 


CN +C@,H, —> HC;3N+H (12) 


these reactions produce the interstellar molecules C3H 
and cyanoacetylene (HC3N) more rapidly than do ion— 
molecule and dissociative recombination pathways. 
Clearly, gas-phase chemistry does not represent the 
complete story. If molecular hydrogen is formed on 
grain surfaces, so must other species be. The production 
of molecules other than H2 on grain surfaces is not 
well understood. It does appear that the dominant 
process is hydrogenation via hydrogen atoms which, 
although much less abundant than H; molecules in the 
dense cloud gas, are more reactive on surfaces and 
are able to hydrogenate species into rather saturated 
(hydrogen-rich) forms. The hydrogenation of atoms 
such as C, N and O into the saturated forms CH,, NH; 
and HzO via successive ‘three-body’ reactions with H 
is non-controversial, but the hydrogenation of molecular 
species such as CO into more hydrogenated molecules— 
H2CO (formaldehyde) and CH3O0H (methanol)—is indeed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


controversial since small activation energies of uncertain 
amounts are involved. Although large amounts of 
hydrogenated species can probably be produced on grains, 
and are detected via infrared absorption studies, it is still 
unclear how some of these molecules get back into the gas 
phase since evaporation is too slow for all but the lightest 
species. Because the time scale for sticking to a dust 
grain is short compared with cloud lifetimes and because 
cold interstellar clouds are not devoid of gaseous material, 
there must exist non-thermal ‘desorption’ mechanisms 
such as heat generation by cosmic ray bombardment and 
by exothermic chemical reactions occurring on the grain 
surfaces. 


Models of dense interstellar clouds 
Chemical models of interstellar clouds date from the early 
1970s. Such models are used to calculate concentrations 
of molecules as a function of time. To produce a time- 
dependent model, one integrates coupled differential rate 
equations, of the type shown in equation (2) but with 
both formation and depletion processes, for all species in 
the model. The initial concentrations and the elemental 
abundances to be used are constraints. The approach is 
only approximate for grain chemistry. Early models were 
steady state in nature, used only gas-phase reactions and 
did not involve the solution of simultaneous differential 
equations; rather, the concentration derivatives were set to 
zero so that the coupled equations could become algebraic 
in nature. Models of this type are able to explain the 
observed abundances of many of the smaller molecules. 
After a decade of work and advances in computer 
technology, gas-phase pseudo-time-dependent models 
became available. In these models, coupled rate equations 
are solved but the physical conditions (temperature, 
density) remain fixed and uniform. The initial abundances 
are mainly atomic except for H2. Such homogeneous 
models still represent the dominant approach today; these 
now contain thousands of gas-phase reactions connecting 
hundreds of molecular species. For the best-studied dense 
molecular cloud core, a quiescent core with gas density 
104 cm~? knownas the Taurus Molecular Cloud 1 (TMC-1), 
pseudo-time-dependent models can produce order-of- 
magnitude agreement with observed abundances for up to 
80% of the more than 50 detected molecules in the source. 
The time of best agreement depends on the gas-phase 
elemental abundances chosen, most specifically on the gas- 
phase carbon-to-oxygen abundance ratio. For oxygen-rich 
gas, the most complex of detected molecules are predicted 
to be abundant only at pre-steady-state times of ~10° yr, 
after which they tend to ‘combust’ into CO, much like the 
incomplete combustion that occurs in an old furnace. 
Since gas-phase models ignore the contribution of 
grain chemistry to gas-phase abundances (other than 
to the formation of H)), it is tempting to suggest 
that the synthesis of molecules with abundances not 
reproduced by such models can be ascribed to grain 
chemistry. Chemical models with both gas-phase and 
grain-surface reactions have been reported, but these 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are still beset with uncertainties, including the correct 
mathematical approach and the role of surface chemistry 
in the production of species returned to the gas. Besides 
the absence of grain chemistry, other possible sources 
of error in gas-phase pseudo-time-dependent models 
include (i) uncertainty in the rates and products of 
gas-phase reactions, especially neutral—neutral processes 
and (ii) the assumption of homogeneous and time- 
independent physical conditions. More advanced gas- 
phase and gas-grain models, incorporating heterogeneous 
and changing physical conditions, have been reported. 
One particular approach is to utilize a number of slabs 
of different densities and temperatures; as one goes from 
slabs representing outer layers to slabs representing inner 
portions of the clouds, the densities become higher and 
the temperatures lower. Reality, unfortunately, is still 
more complex than this. There is good evidence that 
dense clouds have time-dependent self-similar structures 
on many distance scales down to clumps of stellar masses. 

Recently, an interesting feature of gas-phase models, 
known as ‘bistability’, has been found. For selected 
choices of the parameters (density, temperature, elemental 
abundances), there exist not one but at least two solutions 
to the rate equations, labelled the ‘low-ionization’ and 
‘high-ionization’ phases. Whether this bistability is an 
artifact of the models or whether it actually occurs in 
interstellar clouds remains to be determined. 

Given the physical complexity of dense cloud 
complexes, it is important to note the major successes of 
simple gas-phase chemical models of cloud cores: (i) they 
predict the abundances of the major species (e.g. CO) 
and most minor species correctly, (ii) they account for 
the witches’ brew (radicals, ions, metastable isomers) of 
unusual molecules present and the fact that the chemistry 
is mainly unsaturated (hydrogen-poor) despite the large 
abundance of H) and (iii) they account for very strong 
isotopic fractionation, particularly regarding deuterium, 
in which singly deuterated isotopomers (e.g. DCN) can 
have abundances approaching 10% of the normal species 
(HCN) despite the fact that the D/H elemental abundance 
ratio is only 10~°. 

The fractionation of deuterium is a thermodynamic 
effect made possible by the low temperatures. Consider 
the reaction of the ion H} with HD, the major repository 
of deuterium: 


Hi + HD —> H)D* + Hp. (13) 


The reaction is exothermic by approximately 200 K 
owing partially to differences in the so-called zero-point 
energies of vibration between products and reactants. The 
reverse reaction, which is endothermic by this amount, 
cannot occur rapidly (see equation (4)) at temperatures 
significantly under 200 K because of the Boltzmann factor 
in the expression for the rate coefficient. If we neglect other 
reactions, equate the rates of the forward and backward 
reactions (as is appropriate at steady state) and make the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


assumption that the pre-exponential factors are the same, 
we obtain the following expression: 

[H,D*] | [HD] 

[H3] [Hz] 


exp(200/T) (14) 


where T is the temperature and the symbols [---] refer 
to concentration. Although not quantitative owing 
to the exclusion of side reactions and the assumption 
concerning the pre-exponential factors, the relation shows 
how the ratio [H,D*]/[H3] can become quite large at 
low temperatures. The high abundance ratio between 
the deuterated isotopomer and the normal species for 
Hj and other molecular ions (e.g. HCO*) then leads to 
the production of large abundances of deuterated neutral 
species through ion—molecule reaction chains. Isotopic 
fractionation also occurs on grain surfaces when high 
abundances of atomic D, generated from the dissociative 
recombination reactions of deuterated ions such as H,Dt 
and DCO? with electrons, adsorb onto the dust. 


Current and future prospects 

Much current work in interstellar chemistry pertains to 
distinctive regions surrounding sites of STAR FORMATION in 
dense interstellar clouds. Star formation is a complex 
process which gives rise to many physical manifestations 
in the surrounding material. The unusual physical 
conditions in turn give rise to chemical manifestations 
which are quite distinct from the ambient interstellar 
medium. 

Sites of high-mass star formation are associated with 
shock waves and more quiescent dense regions called 
hot cores. The physics of shock waves is rather complex 
and is highly dependent on the size and direction of any 
magnetic field. In the limit of low magnetic field, there is 
a well-defined shock front which induces a rapid jump 
in temperature, depending on the square of the shock 
velocity. The temperature can rise to thousands of kelvins 
before subsequent cooling, so that a high-temperature 
chemistry can occur with endothermic reactions plus those 
exothermic reactions that contain activation energy. At 
sufficiently high shock velocities, molecular dissociation is 
manifest. Sputtering also occurs off dust grains, a process 
which is probably the only one to place refractory elements 
such as silicon into the gas phase. With a sufficiently 
large magnetic field, the temperature of the shock increases 
continuously in a more modest manner, and ions stream 
relative to the neutral species, powering otherwise slow 
ion—molecule reactions. In addition to their association 
with high-mass star formation, shocks are also found in 
the diffuse interstellar medium. Modelers have attempted 
to understand the shock chemistry in both diffuse and 
dense media, and have focused on those molecules the 
abundances of which constitute ‘shock signatures’. In 
the diffuse medium, the molecule CH* has long been 
associated with shocks, where it can be formed by the 
strongly endothermic reaction 


Ct +H, — CH* +H. (15) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Chemistry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Still, after much work, the importance of shock chemistry 
remains unclear. In diffuse regions, more attention is now 
being given to interstellar intermittent turbulence as a 
source for high-temperature chemistry. 

Perhaps more successful have been chemical models 
of hot cores, which are quiescent regions of high density 
(~10°* cm-3) and elevated temperatures (~100-300 K) 
in the vicinity of newly forming high-mass stars. In 
chemical models of hot cores, it is assumed that the 
rising temperatures drive material off grain mantles. 
Based on current ideas of grain chemistry, the desorbed 
molecules are thought to be mainly saturated (hydrogen 
rich) in nature, in good agreement with observations 
that show hot cores to have high abundances of simple 
species such as water and ammonia as well as more 
complex species such as the alcohols methanol (CH3;0H) 
and ethanol (C,H;OH), dimethyl ether (CH30CH3) and 
methyl formate (HCOOCH3). The original desorbed 
species undergo a gas-phase chemistry which takes 
~10*> yr to change the chemical composition and allows 
investigators to determine the ages of particular hot cores. 

Sites of low-mass star formation are associated with 
protostellar disks, the chemistry of which is a current 
topic of considerable interest since radioastronomers are 
beginning to use interferometric methods to resolve such 
disks spatially and since the chemistry of these objects 
can be related to the chemistry of comets and planets in 
the initial stages of formation. These disks have higher 
densities than do ambient interstellar clouds but, unlike 
high-mass star formation regions, are characterized by 
low temperatures (<50 K) to within 10 AU (1 AU = mean 
distance between the Sun and the Earth) of the protostar. 
The high densities and low temperatures enhance the roles 
of grains and grain surface chemistry. Still, ion—molecule 
reactions are now known to be crucial because cosmic rays 
can penetrate through the plane of the disk at distances 
greater than a few AU from the protostar. Consequently, 
the chemistry bears some relation to that of the normal 
interstellar medium. Complications include the existence 
of an additional mode for ionization—radioactive decay— 
and the need to include three-body reactions for that 
portion of the disk closer than ~10 AU to the newly formed 
star because of the especially high densities in the inner 
regions. 

Although most observational and theoretical work 
on interstellar molecules has concerned our own Milky 
Way Galaxy, increasing emphasis in future work will shift 
to extragalactic studies. One can expect the chemistry 
occurring in different galaxies to have subtle and not-so- 
subtle differences from the chemistry in the Milky Way 
owing to factors such as varying ionization rates and 
metallicities as well as differing rates of star formation. 
Another field with potential for the future is the laboratory 
detection of unusual carbon-containing molecules that 
are likely candidates for interstellar detection. Several 
laboratories are currently working on both microwave and 
visible detection of such species. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In addition to increasing emphasis on the role 
of molecules as probes of diverse physical conditions 
and the synthesis of new and unusual molecules likely 
to be present in the interstellar gas, much research— 
both experimental and theoretical—will continue to be 
concerned with improving our understanding of the basic 
chemistry. For example, new experiments are being 
undertaken to simulate low-temperature grain chemistry, 
currently a large uncertainty in our understanding of the 
interstellar medium, and to simulate how large molecules 
such as PAHs can form in the gas phase. New theoretical 
techniques are being used to probe the chemistry involved 
in the formation of dust particles, and new approaches 
are being tried out to incorporate grain chemistry into 
chemical models. These and other efforts testify to a 
vigorous area of current research. Interstellar chemistry 
has been a major concern in astronomy for only 25-30 yr, 
but the role of molecules as probes of the cosmos and of 
our place in it will continue to intrigue many investigators 
in the future. 


Bibliography 

Duley W W and Williams D A 1984 Interstellar Chemistry 
(London: Academic) 

Faraday Division, Royal Society of Chemistry 1998 
Chemistry and physics of molecules and grains in space 
Faraday Discuss. 109 

Herbst E 1995 Chemistry in the interstellar medium Ann. 
Rev. Phys. Chem. 46 27-53 

Herbst E and Klemperer W 1973 The formation and 
depletion of molecules in dense interstellar clouds 
Astrophys. J. 185 505-33 

van Dishoeck E F (ed) 1996 Molecules in Astrophysics: Probes 
and Processes (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Eric Herbst 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Grains 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interstellar Grains 


Submicron solid particles are dispersed through interstel- 
lar gas. These interstellar grains absorb and scatter light, 
thus shielding some regions from ultraviolet radiation, but 
also limiting our ability to detect photons which have been 
emitted by astronomical objects. Dust grains re-radiate 
absorbed energy in the infrared, thus contributing to the 
overall emission spectrum of astronomical systems rang- 
ing from dusty disks around stars to ultraluminous star- 
burst galaxies. 

A naked-eye view of the sky from a dark site on a 
clear summer night reveals dramatic dark patches in the 
Milky Way. These dark regions are not due to a deficiency 
of stars—they are instead the result of obscuration by dust 
clouds interposed between the Earth and distant stars. The 
obscuration tends to be greater at shorter wavelengths; as 
a result, the light reaching us from distant, obscured stars 
is ‘reddened’. This reddening by interstellar dust can be 
understood as arising from scattering and absorption by a 
population of interstellar submicron dust grains. 

The grain population spans a range of sizes, from 
molecules! containing only tens of atoms to particles 
as large as ~0.3 ym, containing ~10!° atoms. Most 
of the grain mass appears to be due to two types of 
solid, in approximately equal amounts: an amorphous 
silicate mineral and carbonaceous material. A number 
of elements—including silicon and iron—are primarily in 
solid form in the interstellar medium. Approximately two- 
thirds of the interstellar carbon in diffuse clouds is in solid 
form (See INTERSTELLAR ABSORPTION LINES). 

It is of course important to characterize the 
wavelength-dependent interstellar extinction so that 
astronomical observations can be ‘corrected’ for the 
obscuring effects of dust. In addition, the infrared 
emission from dust grains provides a valuable probe 
of dense regions, and the dust grains themselves play 
important roles in interstellar chemistry (shielding from 
ultraviolet radiation, and catalysing the formation of 
H)), interstellar gas dynamics (radiation pressure forces 
on dust grains, and coupling of charged dust grains to 
magnetic fields) and heating and cooling of interstellar 
gas. Dust grains are central to many problems in modern 
astrophysics. 


Observational evidence: summary 
There are many different astronomical phenomena which 
both reveal the existence of interstellar dust grains and 
provide information allowing us to infer the properties of 
this dust. Some of the information is quite direct, due to 
absorption, scattering, or emission of light by the grains: 
(a) Wavelength-dependent extinction—attenuation 
and ‘reddening’ of the light from distant stars due to in- 
tervening dust (see figure 1). 
(b) Spectroscopic features in the extinction. There 
are a number of extinction features, including: a strong 


| Since all grains are ‘molecules’, it is natural to consider small 
molecules as the small-size end of the overall grain population. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


; ; 7 
L 4 {| 
10 = ie 4 
L 217.5nm i : 
L / 4 
/ 
ce; / P| 
/ 
BF 7\ ie “| 
L fy 7 al 
i \ 7 
L | \ of = 
1 \ 7 
he ! \ Bis 1 
1 ay 7 
6 2.75 Pen 
= / 
ze i if oe 4 
at : 3.1 r | 
L va rN Be 4 
4 i yee - * eA | 
/ / Se! =, 2age 
L pf ba A > 
9.7m WR’ wie NS eee | 
L 1, Zs pare Sere eee eee’ Soe | 
aL Yor Ry=5.50 
L fe 4 
10) L 1 L | 1 £ 1 | L L L | 1 1 1 | L L 1 
0) 2 4 6 8 10 
A~*(um~') 


Figure 1. Wavelength-dependent extinction, normalized to the 
extinction at J = 900 nm, for different types of clouds, identified 
by the value of Ry = Ay/(Ag — Ay), where V = 550 nm and 

B = 440 nm. The average extinction for diffuse clouds is 
characterized by Ry ~ 3.1. Dense gas near the surfaces of 
molecular clouds can have Ry as large as 5.5. The extinction at J 
is approximately proportional to Ny = N(H) + 2N(H2) + N(H*), 
with A;/Ny © 2.6 x 10-76 m?/H. 


T T T T | T T T Tt T if T T T 
2K 
xf § 
A Sc 
K< r [o) 
<x re 
1.8 | iD 
| | 
[hee 
c xy 4 
(Ie es ame 
[ FE ¢ eo 8 & “| 
q ae cs Xe} 
nN lo ee 
) 2 
L 2 co | 
i j | 1 1 | i 1 1 | 1 L | 1 1 
1.5 1.55 1.6 1.65 1.7 1.75 
A~!(um~') 


Figure 2. A portion of the extinction curve showing some of the 
‘diffuse interstellar band’ extinction features, labelled with their 
respective wavelengths. These diffuse bands may be due to 
impurities in grains, or to ‘free-flying’ large 
molecules/ultrasmall grains. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Grains 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and very broad extinction ‘bump’ at 217.5 nm (see 
figure 1), probably due to carbonaceous material, perhaps 
graphite; infrared extinction features at 9.7 wm and 18 wm, 
almost certainly due to silicates; a number of weaker 
‘diffuse interstellar bands’ (see figure 2), the strongest 
of which are at 443 nm and 578 nm, and which remain 
generally unidentified; an absorption feature at 3.4 wm, 
seen in diffuse clouds, presumably due to the C-H 
stretching mode in aliphatic hydrocarbons; and a number 
of absorption features, seen only in molecular clouds, due 
to ice mantles which apparently coat the grains in these 
regions. The strongest such feature is a 3.1 xm feature 
attributed to HO ice. 

(c) Polarization of starlight—preferential attenuation 
of one linear polarization over another by aligned 
interstellar dust grains, so that initially unpolarized light 
from a star is partially polarized by the time it reaches the 
Earth (see POLARIZATION). 

(d) Reflection nebulae—dust clouds which are 
relatively close to bright stars, so that the starlight reflected 
by dust grains near the cloud surface renders the cloud 
visible (See REFLECTION NEBULAE). 

(e) X-ray haloes around x-ray point sources located 
behind interstellar dust clouds. The haloes result from 
small-angle scattering of x-rays by interstellar dust grains. 

(f) Infrared emission from dust grains heated by 
interstellar starlight (see figure 3). 

(g) Infrared emission features indicative of aromatic 
hydrocarbons. The strongest features from the general 
interstellar medium are at 11.3 wm, and 7.7 um (see 
figure 3). 

(h) Emission features at 18 wm and 9.7 wm, generally 
thought to be due to silicates, from dust in regions with 
radiation fields >10* times stronger than the average 
starlight background. 

(i) There is strong evidence for emission from 
interstellar grains in the far red, presumably fluorescence 
following absorption of a shorter-wavelength photon. 

(j) In the local interstellar medium, the dust-to-gas 
ratio appears to be approximately constant—the dust 
follows the gas. 

Although limited, we also have some quite direct 
evidence concerning interstellar grains: 

(a) Relic interstellar grains found in primitive 
‘carbonaceous chondrite’ meteorites. 

(b) Impacts with interplanetary probes of interstellar 
grains passing through the solar system. 

In addition, there are a number of astrophysical 
phenomena which provide indirect information about 
interstellar grains: 


(a) Underabundances, relative to solar abundances, of 
certain elements in interstellar gas—including iron, 
silicon, magnesium, and carbon. These elements 
are presumed to be underabundant in the gas phase 
because a large fraction of the atoms are locked up in 
interstellar grains. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a a as a | iE T T Tce te T T T TTTT T T 
+ Observed Emission from Interstellar Dust 4 
107-28 & 
ST. = 
am) L 
* L 
a bee PAN 
n z. 
v [ a 
i | ; 
u 
< a 
=1Q0-26 | 
= E a 
= E o COBE FIRAS 
3 E 7 
L Oo 
| o | 
Oo 
iH] 
10-27 if; 1 4 L 1 Loria at 1 1 Pree Ds 
1000 500 300 200 100 50. 30 20 10 5 3 


pm 


Figure 3. Infrared emission from interstellar dust grains from 
dust in diffuse clouds, per H nucleon. Crosses indicate data 
from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) at 100, 60, 25 and 
12 wm. Squares indicate data from the FIRAS instrument on the 
Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE). Diamonds indicate data 
from the DIRBE instrument on COBE. The heavy full line at 
12-5 wm and 4.6-3 zm is the spectrum measured by the Infrared 
Telescope in Space (IRTS). 


(b) The presence in different parts of the interstellar 
medium of molecular hydrogen (Hz) with abun- 
dances far exceeding what could be produced by 
purely gas-phase processes. The required rate of Hz 
catalysis on interstellar grain surfaces provides in- 
formation on interstellar grain properties, including 
total surface area. 


Extinction by interstellar dust grains 
The ‘extinction curves’ shown in figure 1 represent the 
wavelength-dependent extinction A, at wavelength i 
observed on different kinds of sightlines. Careful studies 
of the extinction on many lines of sight reveal that the 
extinction curves can be approximately described by a 
one-parameter family of extinction curves, and the curves 
shown in figure 1 are obtained from fitting functions 
originally developed by Cardelli et al (1989) and others. It 
is convenient to take Ry = Ay/(Az— Ay) as the parameter, 
where V = 550nm and B = 440 nm. Values of Ry as small 
as 2.75 and as large as 5.5 are observed in different regions. 
Grains in diffuse regions tend to have Ry ~ 3.1, 
while larger values of Ry tend to be seen when studying 
the extinction by dust in dense clouds. Larger values of 
Ry—corresponding to ‘greyer’ extinction—are indicative 
of larger grains. The observed tendency for larger values 
of Ry to be found in denser regions strongly suggests 
that characteristic grain sizes are larger in these regions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Grains 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It can be shown that the increased values of Ry cannot 
be explained simply by accretion of atoms and molecules 
from the gas phase—because of the very large amount of 
surface area contributed by the smaller grains, accretion 
from the gas phase would result in only a very small 
increase Aa in the radii of all grains, with minimal effect 
on the extinction at B and V. Instead, small grains must 
coagulate with larger grains to convert diffuse cloud dust 
to dense cloud dust. 


Extinction features 

The strongest spectroscopic feature in the extinction curve 
is a conspicuous ‘bump’ at 217.5 nm (see figure 1). This 
feature has approximately the wavelength and width 
expected for small (radius a < 15 nm) particles of graphite. 
While identification of the feature is still not certain, it 
appears highly likely that it is due to small carbonaceous 
particles with sp? carbon-carbon bonds as in graphite and 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. The strength of the 
217.5 nm feature requires that ~15% of the solar abundance 
of carbon be present in small (a < 15 nm) particles. 

Between 1.32 um and 400 nm there are many 
weak diffuse extinction features, known as the ‘diffuse 
interstellar bands’, or DIBs. Approximately 300 such 
features have been identified, with full width at half- 
maximum (FWHM) ranging from ~0.05 nm up to ~4 nm. 
The strongest DIB is at 442.9 nm. 

The first DIBs were recognized in 1934 by Merrill, yet 
they remain essentially unidentified to this date. They 
must be due to either ‘impurities’ within dust grains, or to 
small free-flying molecules (i.e. ultrasmall dust grains). A 
few of the weaker features have been identified recently as 
electronic transitions of C7, and it seems likely that many 
other of the DIBs are also produced by small hydrocarbon 
molecules, either neutral or charged (either positively or 
negatively). 

A broad extinction feature at 3.4 «um is attributed 
to the C-H stretching mode in aliphatic (chainlike) 
hydrocarbons. This feature is present in the diffuse 
interstellar medium. 

There are strong infrared extinction features peaking 
at 9.7 wm and 18 wm which are almost certainly due to 
amorphous silicates with a composition approximating 
that of olivine (Mg,Fe:_,SiO,). In regions where the 
dust is hot (e.g. circumstellar dust, or the dust near the 
TRAPEZIUM in the ORION NEBULA), these features appear in 
emission. In some circumstellar dust shells and disks 
(e.g. the dusty disk around the Herbig Ae/Be star HD 
100546), sharp features characteristic of crystalline silicates 
appear in emission, but these features have not been 
detected in either emission or absorption in the interstellar 
medium, indicating that the bulk of interstellar silicates are 
amorphous. 

In dark clouds, a number of additional features 
appear in the infrared extinction, presumably due to 
growth of molecular ice mantles on the refractory dust 
grain cores. The strongest feature is at 3.08 wm and is 
due to amorphous H2O ice. Additional features have been 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


identified as frozen CH3OH (3.53 wm), CO (4.67 wm), CH, 
(7.65 wm) and CO, (15.2 wm). 


Alignment of dust grains 

When initially unpolarized starlight passes through the 
dusty interstellar medium, it acquires both linear and 
circular polarization. The linear polarization is due to 
preferential attenuation of one linear polarization over the 
other, due to a population of non-spherical dust grains 
which are somehow aligned. The linear polarization peaks 
near V = 550 nm, with peak polarization P ~ 0.03Ay. 
The circular polarization, generally quite small, is due 
to conversion of linear to circular polarization when the 
alignment direction of the dust grains undergoes a twist 
along the line of sight to the source. 

Spinning dust grains have magnetic moments 
antiparallel to their angular velocities, and the angular 
momentum therefore precesses around the local galactic 
magnetic field. As a result, the observed direction of 
starlight linear polarization must be either parallel or 
perpendicular to the projection of the magnetic field on 
the sky. Theories of grain alignment lead us to expect 
the grain angular momentum to tend to align with the 
magnetic field, and the ‘long’ axis of the grains to tend 
to be perpendicular to the angular momentum. The long 
axis of the grain therefore tends to be perpendicular to 
the magnetic field, and as a result light becomes linearly 
polarized parallel to the projection of the magnetic field on 
the plane of the sky. 

Our understanding of the physics of dust grain 
alignment is not yet complete, but it appears that the 
observed alignment in diffuse clouds is produced mainly 
by a combination of paramagnetic dissipation (originally 
proposed by Davis and Greenstein in 1951) and radiative 
torques on irregular dust grains due to anisotropic 
starlight. In some cases the alignment may result from 
drift of the dust grains through the gas cloud. 


Scattering of light by dust grains 
Reflection nebulae such as NGC2023 or the beautiful 
filamentary structures near the Pleiades show that dust 
grains scatter starlight. While most conspicuous when a 
bright star is located near the surface of a dense clouds, 
reflected starlight also manifests itself as the ‘diffuse 
galactic light’/—reflected starlight seen in all directions in 
the sky where there is dust. Measurements of the surface 
brightness of reflection nebulae, or of the diffuse galactic 
light, provide constraints on the scattering properties 
of interstellar dust grains—both the total ‘albedo’ w = 
Csca/Cext, and the angular dependence of the scattering, 
often characterized by g = (cos 6), where 0 is the scattering 
angle. At visible wavelengths, the albedo w ~ 0.5 
and the grains are moderately forward-scattering, g ~ 
0.5, consistent with current models for interstellar grains 
which reproduce the wavelength-dependent extinction as 
well as the infrared emission from dust. 

Scattering by dust grains can also be observed at x- 
ray wavelengths. A grain is essentially transparent to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Grains 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hv > 0.5 keV x-ray photons. Since the refractive index of 
the grain material is very close to 1, the scattering can be 
calculated in the ‘Rayleigh—Gans’ approximation, and one 
finds that only small-angle scattering is expected. X-ray 
haloes around compact x-ray sources have been imaged by 
the EINSTEIN (HEAO-2) and RosAT observatories; the observed 
x-ray haloes appear to be approximately consistent with 
the scattering expected for a grain model developed to 
account for the optical-UV extinction curve. 


Dust grain luminescence 

Observations of REFLECTION NEBULAE (e.g. NGC 7023) as 
well as the general interstellar diffuse clouds or ‘cirrus’ 
appear to show evidence of far-red continuum radiation 
in excess of what is expected from simple scattering of 
starlight by dust grains. The far-red emission peaks near 
~700 nm, and has a spectrum resembling the luminescence 
from hydrogenated amorphous carbon illuminated by 1 < 
550 nm radiation. This suggests that some of the grain 
material may resemble hydrogenated amorphous carbon, 
although ultrasmall silicon grains have also been proposed 
as the source of the emission. Even if it is assumed that 
hydrogenated amorphous carbon is responsible for the 
observed emission, an accurate estimate of the quantity 
of material required is not possible, since luminescence 
efficiencies of hydrogenated amorphous carbon in the 
laboratory depend on the preparation of the sample. 


Infrared emission from dust grains 

Starlight is in part absorbed by dust grains, and the 
absorbed energy is re-radiated by dust grains in the 
infrared. The observed emission spectrum for interstellar 
dust is shown in figure 3. It consists of far-infrared 
emission peaking at A ~ 140 wm, plus substantial emission 
at shorter wavelengths. 

The emission at A < 12 wm shows conspicuous 
emission features at 11.3, 8.6, 7.7, 6.2 and 3.3 4m; emission 
peaks at these same wavelengths have also been observed 
from reflection nebulae, planetary nebulae, HII regions, 
and circumstellar dust. The emission features have 
been identified as characteristic of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs): C-H stretch (3.3 zm), C-C stretch 
(6.2 and 7.7 wm), in-plane C-H bend (8.6 wm) and out- 
of-plane C-H bend (11.3 4m). Variations in the relative 
strengths and precise wavelengths of these features from 
one object to another may be due to changes in the 
PAH mixture, including changes in the fraction which are 
positively or negatively charged. 

The ‘classical’ grains with radii 0.01-0.3 xm radiate a 
spectrum characteristic of thermal emission at the (steady) 
temperature of the grain, ~15-20 K for grains in the diffuse 
interstellar medium. This accounts for nearly all of the 
emission at A > 60 wm. For very small grains, however, 
absorption of a single starlight photon can appreciably 
change the grain temperature. For example, a single 
photon of energy hv = 10 eV can heat a 230 atom graphite 
grain toa peak temperature T ~ 300K. At this temperature 
the grain can radiate effectively at wavelengths as short as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2 & 8 wm. The observed emission feature near 7.7 4m 
could therefore be due to thermal emission from grains 
with ~100-300 atoms. The relatively large amount of 
power radiated at 2 < 10 ~m requires that the grains with 
<300 atoms account for an appreciable fraction (>15%) of 
the total absorption of starlight by interstellar grains. 


Microwave emission from dust grains 

Sensitive observations of the cosmic microwave back- 
ground radiation have revealed 10-60 GHz emission from 
interstellar matter with intensities greatly exceeding what 
would be expected from an extrapolation of the ther- 
mal far-infrared emission to these lower frequencies. It 
appears likely that the observed 10-60 GHz emission 
is largely rotational electric dipole emission from very 
rapidly rotating ultrasmall grains, although a fraction of 
the radiation could be thermal emission from grains con- 
taining materials that are ferromagnetic (e.g. metallic Fe 
inclusions) or ferrimagnetic (e.g. magnetite Fe3O,). 


Interstellar dust grains in the solar system 

The solar system was formed out of interstellar gas and 
dust approximately 4.5 billion years ago. The formation of 
planetesimals and planets was accompanied in many cases 
by high temperatures and violent conditions, and most 
interstellar dust particles were destroyed. However, the 
class of meteorites known as carbonaceous chondrites (see 
METEORITES) contain small particles with unusual isotopic 
ratios (see ISOTOPIC ANOMALIES) which indicate that they did 
not form in the solar nebula, but rather must have been 
formed in a region with an anomalous composition (e.g. 
outflow from an evolved star) long before the formation 
of the solar system. Therefore these particles must have 
been part of the interstellar grain population prior to the 
formation of the solar nebula. 

To date, five different types of presolar grains 
have been isolated and identified (see table 1). The 
evidence that the grains listed in table 1 were truly 
interstellar is compelling, but it is important to realize 
that they apparently do not include typical interstellar 
grains, for the simple reason that the procedures used 
to isolate interstellar grains in meteorites are designed to 
deliberately destroy silicate material (which comprises the 
bulk of the carbonaceous chondrite meteorite ‘matrix’). 
These laboratory procedures are therefore not going to find 
interstellar silicate grains even if they are present. 

Detectors aboard the Ulysses and Galileo probes 
measured impacts by interplanetary dust particles, but 
also observed impacts attributed to the flux of interstellar 
grains expected due to the 20 km s-! motion of the Sun 
relative to the local interstellar medium. (See SOLAR WIND: 
ULYSSES, GALILEO MISSION) The detectors are sensitive only 
to collisions with the large-size end of the interstellar 
grain distribution, but the observed distribution of impact 
energies appears to be consistent with both the overall 
numbers and size distribution expected based on studies 
of interstellar extinction. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Grains 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Interstellar grains in meteorites. 


Composition Diameter (um) Abundancet 
C (diamond) 0.002 5 x 10-4 
SiCf 0.3-20 6 x 10-6 
C (graphite) 1-20 1x 10-6 
AloO3 (corundum) _0.5-3 3 x 10-8 
SisNa ~1 2x 10~? 


+ Mass fraction in ‘primitive’ carbonaceous chondrite 
meteorites. 

{SiC and graphite grains sometimes contain very 
small TiC, ZrC, and MoC inclusions. 


The lines of evidence listed above serve to strongly 
constrain theoretical models for the interstellar grain 
population. Unfortunately, interstellar grain researchers 
have thus far not been able to uniquely determine the 
grain model from the available observational constraints, 
so debates continue concerning the details. 

Nevertheless, there is broad consensus on a number 
of properties of interstellar grains: 

(a) The grain population must have a broad size 
distribution, with grain radii? covering the range 0.5- 
300 nm—a factor of at least 10° in grain mass. 

(b) Most of the grain mass is in particles with radii 
50 < a < 300 nm. 

(c) Most of the grain area is in particles with radii 
a <50nm. 

(d) Approximately 50% of the grain mass in diffuse 
clouds is contributed by amorphous silicate material, 
accounting for the broad 9.7 wm and 18 ym silicate 
features. Most of the silicon, iron and magnesium 
abundance is in solid form. 

(e) Approximately 50% of the grain mass in 
diffuse clouds is contributed by carbonaceous material. 
Approximately two-thirds of the total carbon abundance 
is in solid form. 

(f) The 217.5 nm feature is probably due to some form 
of carbonaceous material, possibly graphitic. 


Graphite-silicate grain model 
It is not possible to invert the observations to obtain 
a unique grain model. Instead, one makes some 
assumptions concerning the grain composition and the 
form of the size distribution, and then attempts to 
adjust the model to achieve a good match to the 
observed interstellar extinction, infrared emission and 
other constraints such as observed gas phase abundances. 
One grain model which has proven fairly successful 
in conforming to observations consists of a mixture of 
carbon grains and silicate grains. The carbon grain 
material is taken to have the optical constants of crystalline 
graphite. A good fit to the extinction can be obtained if 
both graphite and silicate grains have size distributions 
which are approximately a power-law, dn/da « a~**, 


? The particles are of course not spherical. By grain ‘radius’ we 
refer to the radius of a sphere of equal volume. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


truncated at dmin © 5nm and dma, © 250 nm The 217.5 nm 
feature is then reproduced by the a < 15 nm graphite 
grains. This grain model—the combination of graphite 
and silicate grains, and the dn/da « a~*° power law—was 
first put forward in 1977 by Mathis, Rump] and Nordsieck, 
and is often referred to as the ‘MRN’ model. The MRN 
model achieves a good fit to the Ry = 3.1 extinction curve 
for diffuse clouds with essentially all of the Mg, Si and 
Fe in the silicate grains, and approximately two thirds 
of the C in the graphite grains, in reasonable agreement 
with observed depletions. The grains are heated to 
temperatures ~18 K by starlight, and the resulting thermal 
emission is approximately consistent with the observed 
far-infrared emission at A > 604m. 


Ultra-small dust grains 


Unfortunately, the original graphite-silicate grain model 
described above fails to reproduce the A < 50 wm 
infrared emission shown in figure 3. The model lacks 
the ultrasmall grain component required to explain the 
observed 3 < A < 50 mum infrared emission from 
interstellar dust. The simplest modification is to allow 
the carbon grain distribution to extend down to very 
small sizes, with the smallest grains assumed to have 
infrared optical properties suitable to explain the emission 
features at 3.3, 6.2, 7.6, 8.6 and 11.2 4m when heated to the 
appropriate temperatures by absorption of single starlight 
photons. In order to have sufficient numbers of ultrasmall 
grains, while still reproducing the extinction curve, the 
size distribution of at least the carbonaceous grains can no 
longer be approximated by a single power law. 


Other grain models 


Other grain models, with different grain geometries 
and/or compositions, have been proposed to account for 
the observed interstellar extinction and infrared emission: 

(a) Mathis and Whiffen proposed a grain model 
wherein the larger grains are porous aggregates of small 
graphite and silicate particles. 

(b) Some authors have favored metal oxides (MgO, 
SiO, FeO), either in addition to or in place of silicates. 

(c) Some models assume the silicate grains in diffuse 
clouds to be coated with a carbonaceous ‘mantle’ material, 
which might be hydrogenated amorphous carbon. 

(d) Metallic Fe and FeS incorporate significant 
fractions of the Fe in some grain models. 

(e) Small particles of crystalline silicon, with 
hydrogenated or oxidized surfaces, have been proposed 
as an explanation for the observed luminescence near 
~700 nm. 

Grain models generally tend to have the bulk of the 
Fe, Mg, Si in dust, approximately two-thirds of the C, and 
about 20% of the O, resulting in dust-to-gas mass ratios of 
~0.007. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Grains 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Dynamics of interstellar grains 
Interstellar grains are acted on by forces due to a number 
of distinct physical processes, including: 

(a) Gas drag forces when the grain velocity differs 
from that of the gas. In addition to direct collisions with 
atoms and ions, there is also a ‘plasma drag’ force on 
charged grains due to momentum transfer with ions which 
do notactually collide with the grain. For subsonic motion, 
the plasma drag force is typically a factor of ~20-30 larger 
than the drag due to direct collisions with ions. 

(b) Electromagnetic forces on charged grains. Since 
there is usually a ‘plasma’ reference frame in which the 
electric field is very small (interstellar plasma being a 
very good conductor), the electromagnetic force can be 
attributed to the Lorentz force F = Q(v/c) x B, where Q 
is the grain charge, B is the magnetic field and v is the 
grain velocity relative to the plasma. 

(c) Scattering and absorption of photons (‘radiation 
pressure’) when the grain is illuminated by an anisotropic 
radiation field. 

(d) Poynting—Robertson drag, as when a grain is 
moving perpendicular to a directional radiation field. 
While not normally important in the interstellar medium, 
Poynting—Robertson drag can be very important for dust 
grains orbiting stars (See INTERPLANETARY DUST). 

(e) Recoil forces when photoelectrons or photodes- 
orbed molecules are emitted anistropically from a grain 
which is illuminated by an anisotropic ultraviolet radia- 
tion field. 

(f) Gravitational force. In clouds supported by gas 
pressure, dust grains will tend to ‘sediment’ toward the 
minimum of the gravitational potential. 

Because the gas and grains are subject to different 
forces, the dust grains generally have a drift velocity 
relative to the gas. In typical diffuse clouds, anisotropic 
starlight can result in drift velocities of order ~0.1 km st. 
In regions with strongly anisotropic ultraviolet radiation 
fields (such as photodissociation regions) the drift 
velocities can be larger. 

The rotational dynamics of interstellar grains are also 
of great interest, in connection with both the problem of 
grain alignment (which requires alignment of the grain 
angular momentum vector with the local magnetic field) 
and with electric dipole radiation which will be radiated by 
very rapidly rotating ultrasmall grains. The grain angular 
momentum is affected by: collisions with gas atoms and 
molecules; recoil associated with photoelectric emission; 
recoil associated with H; formation on the grain surface; 
absorption and scattering of starlight by an asymmetric 
grain; thermal infrared emission; the interstellar magnetic 
field acting on the magnetic dipole moment resulting from 
the Barnett effect in a spinning grain; and the interstellar 
magnetic field acting on the magnetization induced in 
the spinning grain by the interstellar magnetic field (the 
‘Davis—Greenstein’ torque associated with paramagnetic 
dissipation). 

Because the interstellar medium is far from thermo- 
dynamic equilibrium, some of these torques can act sys- 
tematically. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Grains can be driven to rotational kinetic energies 
much larger than kT,,; (where T,a; is the gas temperature) 
by collisions with gas atoms and molecules (because the 
grain and gas temperatures differ), by photoelectric emis- 
sion or by absorption and scattering of starlight (because 
the starlight radiation field is not in thermodynamic equi- 
librium with the grain temperature), and by H2 formation 
(because the Hz abundance and gas and grain tempera- 
tures are not in thermodynamic equilibrium). 

Gradual alignment of the grain angular momentum 
with the magnetic field can be produced by paramagnetic 
dissipation (because the grain rotational kinetic energy is 
not in thermodynamic equilibrium with the ‘vibrational’ 
temperature of the grain). 


Effects of interstellar grains 

Photoelectric heating 

Perhaps the most important effect of interstellar dust 
grains is their role in heating the gas via photoelectric 
emission. When a dust grain absorbs an ultraviolet photon 
of energy hv, there is a probability Y (hv)—often referred 
to as the ‘yield’ that a photoelectron will escape from the 
grain surface and thermalize with the local gas. When 
this happens, the kinetic energy of the emitted electron 
(at ‘infinity’, since the grain it is escaping from may be 
charged) acts to heat the interstellar medium. On average, 
grains must capture electrons as rapidly as they are ejected, 
and the net heating rate then is equal to the difference 
between the mean energy of the emitted electrons and the 
captured electrons. Since photoelectric yields Y may be 
of the order of ~10%, and since the kinetic energy of the 
electron at infinity may be of the order of ~1 eV (if the 
grain is not highly positively charged) the photoelectric 
heating mechanism, at best, converts a few per cent of the 
absorbed ultraviolet starlight energy into heating of the 
gas. While this few per cent conversion efficiency may 
seem small, the availability of energy in starlight is so 
great that photoelectric heating is generally the dominant 
heating mechanism for diffuse interstellar gas. 


Radiative forces on dust grains 

In astrophysics, anisotropic radiation fields are the rule 
rather than the exception, and these anisotropic radiation 
fields can have dynamical consequences for dust and gas. 
Circumstellar grains are of course subject to extremely 
anisotropic radiation from the star. At a typical point 
in the interstellar medium, the non-uniform distribution 
of stars in the galaxy, together with patchy obscuration 
by interstellar dust, results in starlight with appreciable 
anisotropy. The dipole component of the starlight 
anisotropy may be typically ~10%. 

When the radiation field is anisotropic, scattering and 
absorption by the grain produces a net force on the grain, 
commonly referred to as the ‘radiation pressure’ force. If 
the grain is coupled collisionally to the gas by gas drag 
and perhaps magnetic fields, then the force exerted on the 
grains is transmitted to the gas. These radiation pressure 
forces can dominate the dynamics of gas in certain regions, 
such as dust-forming winds from cool stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Grains 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hy formation on grains 

Interstellar chemistry largely starts with the catalysis of Hz 
on interstellar grain surfaces (see INTERSTELLAR CHEMISTRY). 
The inferred production rate of H2 in the interstellar 
medium requires that an appreciable fraction of the H 
atoms arriving at interstellar grains surfaces must leave 
the grains as part of H) molecules. While the details 
of the kinetics remain uncertain, the overall picture is 
broadly as follows: when an H atom in a diffuse cloud 
arrives at a grain surface it has a high probability of 
sticking. The H atom then explores some fraction of 
the grain surface by either thermal diffusion or quantum 
tunnelling, until it either finds another H atom with 
which it can recombine to form Hp, or it arrives at a 
location on the grain surface where the binding by either 
van der Waals forces (‘physisorption’) or formation of 
a chemical bond (‘chemisorption’) is strong enough that 
it becomes trapped. If such trapping occurs, then the 
surface coverage of trapped H atoms builds up until 
newly arrived H atoms have an appreciable probability 
of reacting with a previously trapped H atom rather than 
becoming trapped themselves, or the adsorbed H atoms 
are removed by some other process (e.g. photodesorption 
or thermal desorption). 


Coupling magnetic fields to neutral gas 

Dynamically important magnetic fields are commonly 
present in interstellar gas (see INTERSTELLAR MAGNETIC FIELDS). 
In a dense molecular gas with very low fractional 
ionization, a large fraction of the ‘free’ charge resides on 
positively and negatively charged dust grains. Under 
these conditions—which prevail in high-density regions in 
molecular clouds, and presumably in protostellar disks— 
dust grains dominate the coupling of magnetic fields to the 
gas, since the neutral gas atoms and molecules themselves 
are not directly coupled to the magnetic field. The charged 
dust grains are coupled both to the magnetic field (by 
Lorentz forces) and to the neutral gas (by collisional drag). 
As a result, the grains will drift with a velocity which 
is intermediate between the velocity of the neutral gas 
and the velocity with which the magnetic field lines (and 
plasma) ‘slip’ through the neutral gas. Thus the dust grains 
determine the rate of ‘ambipolar diffusion’ of magnetic 
field lines in dense molecular regions. 

Charged dust grains play a similar role in the 
dynamics of magnetohydrodynamic shock waves in gas 
of low fractional ionization but dynamically significant 
magnetic fields. 


Formation and destruction of interstellar grains 

While interstellar grains are observed to be ubiquitous, 
it is not obvious that this should be so. In the violent 
interstellar medium (see INTERSTELLAR MATTER, SUPERNOVA 
REMNANTS), grains can be destroyed when the gas which 
they are in is overtaken by a shock wave with shock speed 
vs > 200 km s“!, as is expected in supernova blastwaves. 
Estimates of the rate of occurrence of supernovae, together 
with models for the resulting blastwaves, lead one to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


estimate that the mass in interstellar grains will be returned 
to the gas phase on a timescale of ~5 x 108 yr, short 
compared with the age of the Galaxy and the interstellar 
medium. We know that grains are injected into the 
interstellar medium in outflows from cool red giants and 
supergiants, and even in supernova ejecta, but if there 
were no conversion of gaseous atoms back to solid form 
in the interstellar medium, we would expect very little 
grain material to be present at any time. In particular, even 
for elements like Fe we would expect most of the atoms 
to be in the gas phase. The fact that this is not so—that 
most of the interstellar Fe is in fact missing from the gas 
phase—requires that there be efficient recondensation of 
Fe, Si, Ca and other elements back into solid form in the 
interstellar medium. The ‘mineralogy’ of interstellar grains 
must therefore largely reflect the surface chemistry which 
will occur on the surfaces of interstellar grains. 


Bibliography 
An excellent overall description of interstellar dust grains 
is provided in 


Whittet D C B 1992 Dust in the Galactic Environment (Bristol: 
IOP Publishing) 


The observed optical properties of dust have been recently 
reviewed in 


Mathis J S 1990 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 28 37 
The ultrasmall grain population is discussed by 


Puget J Land Leger A 1989 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 27 
161 


An overall review of interstellar and circumstellar dust is 
given by 


Dorschner J and Henning T 1995 Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 6 
271 


Microwave emission from dust grains is reviewed by 


Draine B T and Lazarian A 1999 Microwave Foregrounds ed 
A de Oliveira-Costa and M Tegmark (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) p 133 


Bruce T Draine 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


The interstellar medium is permeated by magnetic fields 
that have important astrophysical consequences. This 
article describes how interstellar magnetic fields are 
detected, measured and mapped, the results of such 
observations and the role played by interstellar magnetic 
fields in the physics of the interstellar medium. 

The intensity of SYNCHROTRON RADIATION may be used 
to infer the strength of the magnetic field in the plane of the 
sky, B,. Synchrotron radiation is polarized perpendicular 
to B,, SO POLARIZATION observations map the geometry 
of interstellar magnetic fields. Also, the percentage 
polarization is a measure of the ratio B,/B, of uniform 
to total fields. Dust grains are aligned by magnetic fields, 
and the linear polarization of background starlight and 
thermal dust emission traces the geometry of magnetic 
fields. A new technique that also traces B, is mapping 
of linearly polarized spectral-line emission. 

Faraday rotation of the position angle of linearly 
polarized radiation may be used to measure the strength 
of magnetic fields parallel to the line of sight, B), if the 
density of interstellar electrons is known. By observing 
the dispersion measures of pulsars, B,; weighted by the 
electron density may be determined. Finally, detection of 
Zeeman splitting of spectral lines gives B). 

Although the various probes sample different phases 
and regions of the interstellar medium, a fairly consistent 
picture has emerged. The Galactic interstellar magnetic 
field has a spiral pattern, with reversals in field direction 
in interarm regions. Near the Sun B, ~ 5-10 “G, with 
a ratio of uniform to random components B,/B, ~ 0.3- 
0.7. The field strength increases inward in the Galaxy, 
with milligauss fields in the Galactic center. The Galactic 
magnetic field is probably maintained by a Galactic 
dynamo, although the details are very unclear. 

The interstellar gas, cosmic ray gas and magnetic 
fields are an unstable dynamic system, with blast waves 
from SUPERNOVAE inflating the system and extending lobes 
of magnetic field, hot gas and cosmic rays outward from 
the Galactic plane to form the Galactic halo. 

Observations of the position angles of dust polariza- 
tion generally show little small-scale variation in inter- 
stellar clouds; analysis suggests that uniform and tangled 
field components may be roughly comparable in strength. 
Magnetic field strengths increase little with gas density 
up to n(H2) ~ 10° cm™, with B ~ 10-20 wG in diffuse 
interstellar clouds and extended dark clouds; at higher 
densities the data are consistent with the theoretical pre- 
diction B « n'/*. In some molecular cores there is evi- 
dence for the ‘hourglass’ pinch that would be produced 
by cloud contraction with the magnetic field frozen into 
the matter. Strengths of the uniform component of mag- 
netic fields in molecular clouds are only slightly less than 
the critical values needed for support against gravitational 
collapse. Hence, magnetic fields play a crucial role in the 
STAR FORMATION process. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Observational techniques 

All methods of observing magnetic fields in the interstellar 
medium are sensitive only either to the component of B 
parallel to the line of sight, By, or to the component in the 
plane of the sky, B,. Direct tracers involve the detection 
of polarized radiation emitted by or passing through the 
interstellar medium. 


Polarization 

The polarization of electromagnetic radiation may be 
conveniently described by the Stokes parameters /, Q, 
U and V, where J describes the total intensity, Q and 
U describe the linear polarization and V describes the 
circular polarization of radiation. The electric vector of an 
electromagnetic wave propagating along the z-axis may 
be resolved into two orthogonal components 


E,(t) = E; cos(2rvt) 


Ey(t) = E2 cos(2mvt + @). 


Then 
l= E,+E3 


Q= EYE; 
U = 2E, E> cos(¢) 
v= 2E, E> sin(?) 


and the total polarized intensity is 
T= (OP SUF EV: 


What are often stated for observations of linear 
polarization are the fractional polarization /,/I and the 
position angle y of the major axis of the polarization 


ellipse, 
y= ; arctan (5) : 


If radiation is observed with a detector sensitive to 
linear polarization, the maximum signal will be detected 
when the detector is oriented at the position angle yw. 
If a detector sensitive to circular polarization is used to 
measure the intensities Jp and /,, of the right and left 
circularly polarized components, Stokes V may be inferred 
directly from the difference. Unfortunately, there is not a 
standard used consistently by astronomers for the sense 
of circular polarization, so care must be exercised. 


Tracers of By 

Synchrotron radiation 

An electron moving with velocity v at an angle 6 toa 
magnetic field B will move in a helical path around the 
field lines owing to the Lorentz force v x B and will 
therefore emit electromagnetic radiation as a result of this 
acceleration. An ensemble of electrons is generally treated 
by assuming that the distribution function of the energies 
of the electrons is a power law with index p: 


N(E) dE = NoE~’ dE. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


For an assumed uniform magnetic field in a region of 

extent L along the line of sight, the intensity of radiation 
that would be emitted is given by 

3e°L 3 

roy /3e ( e 


mal AoE ae) 


82 mc2 
where n = (p — 1)/2 and a(n) is a slowly varying function 
of order unity. For a uniform magnetic field the fractional 
linear polarization is 


n+1 
I n+5/3° 


Hence, by measuring the position angle of the 
linearly polarized synchrotron radiation emitted by highly 
relativistic electrons (y >> 10°), the direction of the 
magnetic field in the plane of the sky may be mapped. 
An estimate of the ratio of strengths of the random (B,) 
and uniform (B,) components of the magnetic field may 
be obtained from the degree of polarization, since for a 
completely random field the synchrotron radiation will be 
unpolarized. 

By making various assumptions, the most important 
being equilibrium between the energy densities of the 
relativistic electrons and of the magnetic field, an estimate 
of the strength of the magnetic field may be obtained from 
the flux density S, of the synchrotron emission: 


D2 
Beq = FO (Sry? 


where D is the distance to the emitting gas, V is its volume 
and f(n) is a function of n. 

These techniques are most useful for mapping the 
large-scale morphologies of interstellar magnetic fields in 
external galaxies and in the Milky Way. 


Dust polarization 

Linear polarization at optical, infrared or millimeter 
wavelengths arises from elongated grains with their 
short axes aligned with the magnetic field. The 
Davis—Greenstein mechanism assumes that INTERSTELLAR 
GRAINS are aligned via paramagnetic relaxation, which 
damps the components of a grain’s angular momentum 
perpendicular to B, gradually aligning the spin axis 
with the magnetic field direction. Although the original 
Davis—Greenstein theory considered only thermal spins, 
much weaker magnetic fields can align grains because of 
superthermal spin energies produced by ejection of Hz 
molecules from their formation sites on grains. Internal 
damping due to Barnett relaxation normally causes the 
grain to spin about its axis of greatest moment of inertia, 
so the long axis of the grain is oriented perpendicular to 
the field. 

However, there are other alignment mechanisms. 
One which may dominate paramagnetic relaxation in 
protostellar jet or wind regions is Gold alignment, in 
which gas streaming past the grains excites their angular 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


momenta perpendicular to the flow direction, causing the 
grains to tend to rotate with their long axes parallel to 
the flow. Unless there is reason to believe that some 
other process dominates, Davis—Greenstein alignment is 
assumed. 

Grain properties and the grain alignment mechanism 
are not understood in sufficient detail for field strengths to 
be reliably inferred, but observations of linear polarization 
trace the position angle of the component of B in the plane 
of the sky. 

Starlight passing through the interstellar medium 
will be linearly polarized owing to extinction by aligned 
interstellar grains along the line of sight, so long as 
the magnetic field is not completely random. Because 
Davis-Greenstein alignment produces the maximum 
extinction cross-section perpendicular to the magnetic 
field, extinction will be greater perpendicular to field 
than parallel to it. Hence, the position angle of the 
polarization ellipse of background starlight will be parallel 
to the magnetic field direction. On the other hand, 
when emission from dust grains is observed, the position 
angle of maximum emission will be perpendicular to the 
magnetic field. Thermal emission from linearly polarized 
dust grains at far-infrared and millimeter wavelengths 
may be used to map magnetic field morphologies. 


Spectral-line linear polarization 

Linear polarization may also arise in radio frequency 
spectral lines formed in the interstellar medium. This 
Goldreich-Kylafis effect may be used to probe magnetic 
field morphologies in molecular clouds. For a molecule 
with (say) levels with total angular momenta F = 1 and 
F = 0, in the presence of a magnetic field the degeneracy 
of magnetic sublevels will be removed and the level with 
F = 1 will be split into three sublevels. The three 
transitions will be polarized as usual for this situation, 
but so long as the three sublevels of the F = 1 state are 
populated equally, the net polarization is zero. If the line 
optical depth to the source is anisotropic, the radiation field 
will be anisotropic and the radiative rates between level 
F = Oand the three sublevels of F = 1 will be unequal. 
Thus, unequal populations of the three sublevels can be 
sustained, and net linear polarization will result. Since 
astrophysical sources are always anisotropic at some level, 
linear polarization of line emission is expected. The degree 
of polarization depends on the degree of anisotropy, the 
optical depth of the spectral line, the angles between the 
line of sight, the magnetic field, and the axis of symmetry 
of the velocity field, and the ratio of the collisional 
excitation rate to the radiative rate. The direction of the 
polarization can be either parallel or perpendicular to the 
magnetic field; therefore, care must be taken in inferring 
the direction of B. 


Tracers of B 

Faraday rotation 

A linearly polarized electromagnetic wave may be 
decomposed into two oppositely circularly polarized 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


waves. These two waves propagate through an interstellar 
medium that contains ions and magnetic fields with 
different phase velocities. The result is that the position 
angle of the linear polarization will rotate. This Faraday 
rotation produced by propagation through a path length 
L is given by 


3 


2nm2c? v2 


L 

Ay i By (z)ne(z) dz. 

Hence, observations of Faraday rotation of linearly 
polarized radiation (usually synchrotron radiation) may 
be used to infer the strength of the line-of-sight component 
of B if information about the electron density is known 
or assumed. Faraday rotation is generally quoted as a 
rotation measure, 


L 
RM = -| Byne dz. 
0 


Note the convention that a negative RM means B is 
pointed away from the observer, B > 0. 

In the special case of observations of PULSARS, 
information about the electron density may be obtained 
from the dispersion with radio frequency in the arrival 
time of radio pulses. The dispersion measure is given by 


L 
pm = | Ne dz. 
0 


Then the mean line-of-sight component of B is 


= RM 


This B, is a vector average along the line of sight and 
may be much smaller than the localized fields if there are 
reversals in field direction. 


Zeeman splitting 

If a spectral line forming region is permeated by a field 
B, the radiation is split by the normal ZEEMAN EFFECT into 
three separate frequencies, vy, = vp — Vz, Vz = vo and 
Vo+ = Vo + Vz, Where vy is the line frequency, vz = BZ and 
Z is the Zeeman sensitivity in Hz uG!. Fora magnetic 
field in the plane of the sky, the three Zeeman components 
are linearly polarized with the 2 component parallel to 
and the o components perpendicular to the magnetic field 
direction. For a magnetic field along the line of sight, 
I, = 0 and the J, are oppositely circularly polarized. If 
the magnetic field is parallel (antiparallel) to the direction 
of propagation of the radiation, /,. is right (left) circularly 
polarized. In the general case of arbitrary angle between 
the line of sight and the magnetic field, all three Zeeman 
components will be elliptically polarized. 

If B is sufficiently large, then vz ~ Av where Av 
is the line width. Then the Zeeman components may 
appear separated, and the full magnetic field strength can 
be derived directly from the measured vz. Generally vz « 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Av, and it is not possible to infer complete information 
about B from Zeeman observations. Although the Stokes 
parameters V, Q and U for the Zeeman components 
provide in principle full information about magnetic field 
strength and direction, in practice full information on B 
cannot be obtained owing to the extreme weakness of Q 
and U (typically about an order of magnitude weaker than 
V). The Stokes V spectra reveal the sign (i.e. direction) 
and magnitude of the line-of-sight component B|. That is, 
V = (d//dv)vz cos(@). By fitting the frequency derivative 
of the Stokes parameter J spectrum d//dv to the observed 
V spectrum, B, = vz cos(@)/Z may be inferred. 

For a large number of clouds whose magnetic fields 
are randomly oriented with respect to the observed line of 
sight, it is possible to infer statistically the mean correction 
to go from Bj to |B]. That is, 


3 Jo |Bl cos @ sino do 1 


l= 1 " 
fo? sin 0 do 2 


|Bl. 


In general, only those species with an unpaired outer 
electron will have a magnetic moment that scales with 
the Bohr magneton, Mg = eh/4amc = 14 Hz pG"t. 
For the 1420 MHz line of HI, Z = Mg. Molecular lines 
that are sensitive to the Zeeman effect have Z ~ Mg; for 
example, Z = 0.98 Hz pG"! for the 1667 MHz line of OH. 
Otherwise, the Zeeman effect will scale with the nuclear 
magneton, 1840 times smaller than Mg. Unfortunately, 
most molecules do not have large Zeeman splitting factors 
Z,so the possibilities for Zeeman observations are limited. 
Lines for which the Zeeman effect has been detected that 
have been used for measurements of interstellar magnetic 
fields are the 21 cm line of H I, 18 cm and 2 cm lines of 
OH, the 1.3 cm H,O maser line and the 3 mm lines of 
CN. Other possible Zeeman molecules that might become 
useful probes of interstellar magnetic fields include CH, 
CCS and SO. 


Magnetic field of the Milky Way 

Polarization of starlight produced by interstellar magnetic 
fields was discovered accidentally about 50 yr ago during a 
search for polarization produced in STELLAR ATMOSPHERES. It 
was clear that the interstellar medium was responsible for 
the observed polarization because its amount correlated 
with interstellar extinction. Dust grains aligned by 
magnetic fields produce the polarization. Polarization 
of background stars provides a useful technique for 
measuring the morphology of interstellar magnetic fields 
near the Sun. Optical and near-infrared polarization data 
now exist for thousands of stars. 

Figure 1 shows a plot of starlight polarizations for 
nearly 10000 stars. Each line represents the polarization 
measurement for a star; the length is proportional to 
the fractional polarization and the orientation is in the 
direction of maximum polarization, which is parallel to 
the magnetic field. These data show several important 
characteristics of the local interstellar magnetic field. First, 
for Galactic latitudes b within about 10° of the Galactic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


center 
local field 


Loop I 


antipode 


local field direction 


st 


Pepe siehg ae peer | 
150 


Perseus 


Figure 1. Starlight polarization defining the direction of the Galactic magnetic field near the Sun. The direction of the local spiral arm 
field, the Loop I interstellar bubble and star formation regions in Taurus, Perseus, Ophiuchus and Orion are marked. 


plane, the magnetic field is generally parallel to the plane 
of the Galaxy. Looking directly along the local spiral 
arm, toward Galactic longitudes of € ~ 80° and ¢ ~ 
260°, the polarization directions show convergence down 
the spiral arm. The polarization data suggest that the 
interstellar magnetic field is not heavily tangled on large 
spatial scales and lies in spiral arms. In principle it is 
possible to derive the ratio B,/B, from an analysis of the 
uniformity of the optical polarization data. The results are 
somewhat dependent on models that must be adopted for 
the analysis, but are reasonably self-consistent: B,/B, ~ 
0.7-1.0. 

At positions more than ~10° off the Galactic plane 
there is considerable small-scale structure. Positions 
in Taurus, Perseus, Ophiuchus and Orion correspond 
to massive molecular clouds undergoing active star 
formation; the magnetic field lines are obviously 
perturbed from the regular, large-scale pattern. Finally, 
at high Galactic latitude several local interstellar bubbles 
each produced by multiple supernovae may be seen. The 
most prominent is Loop I, whose walls are outlined by a 
loop of magnetic field lines with a radius of ~60°. 

Synchrotron emission may be used to infer the total 
(uniform and random) strength B, of the Galactic magnetic 
field. Maps of the Galaxy in radio synchrotron emission 
show spiral arms, implying that B is stronger in arm 
than in interarm regions. Derivation of the field strengths 
involves various assumptions and careful analysis—the 
best recent results are the following. Near the solar circle 
(R = 8.5 kpc is used here), B, ~ 6 wG in spiral arms and 
B, © 4 wG when averaged azimuthally, which includes 
arm and interarm regions. By scaling this azimuthal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


value by the observed increase in synchrotron emission 
with decreasing Galactic radius, at R = 4.0 kpc one finds 
B, © 8 wG. Near the solar circle the ratio of the uniform to 
the random magnetic field strength B,/B, ~ 0.5 from the 
ratio of the observed to the maximum possible synchrotron 
polarization. 

Synchrotron emission decreases with height above 
the Galactic plane. When modeled as a thin and thick 
disk with equal emission at the Galactic plane, the scale 
heights are about 0.2 and 1.8 kpc at the Sun. Also, 
the scale height increases with Galactic radius. Because 
synchrotron emission depends on B"*!, the scale height 
of B is significantly larger than that of the synchrotron 
emission. 

Faraday rotation of the linearly polarized radiation 
from pulsars and extragalactic RADIO SOURCES provides 
information about the strength of the interstellar magnetic 
field along the line of sight. Pulsar data give the mean 
field B, directly from the ratio RM/DM. However, B 
is a weighted mean, weighted by the electron density; 
this method therefore samples mainly the warm ionized 
component of the interstellar medium, which is believed to 
occupy a small fraction of the volume of interstellar space. 

The pulsar data show clear evidence for reversals 
in the magnetic field direction at Galactocentric radii 
corresponding roughly to interarm regions in the Galaxy. 
The field in the local spiral arm points in the direction 
of Galactic rotation, with reversals at R ~ 5.5, 8.1 and 
9.4 kpe. B, ~ 1.4 wG near the Sun, rising to ~3.5 wG 
in the Sagittarius arm and ~6.5 wG inside the second 
reversal radius (5.5 kpc). Note that these values are for 
the uniform component, By, only. Statistical analysis of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


deviations of B, from a uniform field or from comparisons 
of B, values from pulsars close together in the sky yields 
estimates of the strength of the random component of 
the magnetic field; the result is B. ~ 5 wG. Therefore, 
B,/B, © 0.3. 

The H I Zeeman effect may also be used to measure 
B, in diffuse interstellar gas. Extensive observations of 
truly randomly selected regions do not exist. One study 
of a large region in which RMs are consistently large and 
negative yielded many upper limits B,; ~ 7 wG, with 
detections at lower values when greater sensitivity was 
achieved. One position with B, ~ 12 ~G came from an HI 
filament probably produced by an interstellar shock which 
compressed both the gas and the field. Observations of the 
HI Zeeman effect toward well-known interstellar bubbles 
(Loop I, Loop II, the Eridanus bubble) yield By ~ 5-10 uG. 
The magnetic field has been enhanced by compression in 
the walls of the bubbles. When the H I Zeeman effect is 
detected in diffuse clouds, the observations yield typical 
values B, ~ 5-20 wG (although there are many upper 
limits By < 5 4G), with clouds of densities up to n(HI) ~ 
several hundred being sampled. Hence, there is very little 
increase in B with gas density for n < 10° cm™?. 

Differences in results derived from pulsar, optical 
polarization, H I Zeeman and synchrotron emission 
studies may be attributed to the different phases of 
the interstellar medium being sampled. Pulsars sample 
the warm ionized medium, optical polarization and 
HI Zeeman sample primarily the neutral medium, and 
synchrotron emission samples the entire volume. 

The central region of the MILKy way GALAXY has 
very strong magnetic fields, with strengths of several 
milligauss. | Evidence for strong fields comes from 
large-scale, linear filaments of radio emission, highly 
polarized radio continuum emission, polarized infrared 
emission, Zeeman measurements of H I and OH 
absorption, and anisotropic scattering of radio emission 
from small sources. Models of the Galactic center have a 
circumnuclear disk threaded by a poloidal field, with the 
rotation of the disk producing an azimuthal component. 


Magnetic fields in galaxies 

A problem in studying the interstellar magnetic field in 
the Milky Way galaxy is that we are inside it, which 
allows detailed studies of the local interstellar medium but 
makes global study difficult. Observations of synchrotron 
emission from external galaxies provide a picture of the 
large-scale interstellar magnetic fields in sPIRAL GALAXIES. 
Maps of the linear polarization of synchrotron radiation 
are maps of the ordered component of B,. In general 
magnetic field lines show a strong spiral structure. 
Sometimes the polarization maps define spiral structure 
even more clearly than tracers of material spiral arms, 
although often the magnetic spiral arms are found offset 
from the material arms. A possible reason for this is that 
magnetic fields in the densest parts of spiral arms are 
somewhat tangled or random owing to star formation or 
supernova activities, reducing the fractional polarization. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Downstream from the spiral density-wave shock, gas will 
be accelerated away from the shock in streaming motions, 
which will act to untangle magnetic field lines and increase 
the polarization. Hence, the direction of B, in spiral 
galaxies may be the best technique for study of these large- 
scale streaming motions in spiral galaxies. 

Although the magnetic fields in spiral galaxies are 
symmetric, there does not seem to be a single symmetry 
mode. In some an axisymmetric spiral arm pattern 
dominates with the magnetic field direction everywhere 
directed inwards along the spiral pattern. Others have 
a bisymmetric mode, with reversals in the direction of 
magnetic fields from one arm to the next, as seen in the 
Milky Way Galaxy. (It should be noted that only a few 
galaxies are classifiable in this way.) The strong spiral 
magnetic patterns are probably best explained by dynamo 
action in spiral galaxies. A typical value for the total 
magnetic field strength in galaxies is B, ~ 10 wG, with 
large uncertainties. 


Magnetic fields and star formation 

Magnetic fields may play two crucial roles in the star 
formation process—they can provide support against 
gravitational collapse of dense interstellar clouds and they 
can solve the problem of how angular momentum is 
transported away from collapsing protostellar cores. 

Observations of the field geometry provide significant 
empirical input to and tests of theories. Background 
starlight polarization observations show that large-scale 
fields in clouds are smooth, with little change in the vicinity 
of clumps or cores. For extinction Ay > 2 magnitudes, 
near-infrared observations make it possible to probe up to 
Ay ~ 40 magnitudes. The field morphologies in dense 
clouds and cores observed in this way seem to be the 
same as in the envelope regions. However, the percentage 
polarization does not seem to increase much beyond about 
Ay & 1.3 magnitudes, which suggests that the grains 
in dense clouds do not produce polarization and hence 
cannot be used to map magnetic field morphologies at 
large extinctions. 

Far-infrared and millimeter wavelength observations 
of thermal dust emission have proven to be the best 
technique for probing magnetic field morphology in 
dense interstellar clouds. Since the emission is generally 
optically thin, this technique samples material throughout 
dense molecular gas. However, sensitivity limits this 
technique to Ay > 20 magnitudes. The maps show that 
the polarization directions in dense molecular clouds are 
generally fairly uniform, at least on large spatial scales. 
Figure 2 shows far infrared polarization observations of 
B, in Orion Molecular Cloud 1 (OMC1). The typical 
percentage polarization is ~2%, although values up to 
~10% are observed. Analysis of the OMC1 data suggests 
that there is an ‘hourglass pinch’ to the field lines, as 
expected toward dense cores on theoretical grounds. At 
the higher angular resolution available with mm-wave 
arrays, more structure is seen. In particular, near the dense 
central core there is a change in position angle of almost 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


; q 
20 4 “ 
22 1 fo & 
B 3 
soz .N 
= pa - 5 
Cc ° 
2 | = 
oO | UD 
= QN 
9° i = 
a\ fe} 
2 26 2 
° 
0 = 
i 
—05°28) 4 


513365 33708 545 48° 42° 36° 308 
Right Ascension (1950) 


Figure 2. Geometry of the magnetic field in the OMC1 star 
formation region from 100 ym linearly polarized dust emission. 


90°, which may be due to a twisted magnetic field or to 
Gold alignment in the outflow from the core. However, 
the main geometry of the field is perpendicular to the 
minor axis of the cloud, which is expected if the tension of 
the uniform field is providing significant support against 
gravity. 

The crucial parameter for evaluating the importance 
of magnetic fields in star formation is the ratio of the 
mass to the magnetic flux, M/®g. Theoretical values for 
M/®, (see also MAGNETIC FIELDS INSTARS) come from detailed 
computer simulations of interstellar clouds threaded by 
magnetic fields. The critical value of M/®z is 


(M/® 38) critical ~ 1/(63 Gy. 


Clouds that are initially magnetically supercritical 
(M/®z > (M/®z)criticar) Will collapse on relatively short 
time scales unless there is some other support mecha- 
nism. If the magnetic field was insufficient to stop the 
initial collapse, its compression during collapse cannot 
bring the cloud into equilibrium and halt the collapse. 
On the other hand, an initially magnetically subcritical 
(M/®z < (M/®z)ectitical) Cloud will become unstable in its 
core owing to ambipolar diffusion. Only ions are frozen 
into the magnetic field, while the neutral material (by far 
the majority of the mass) can contract gravitationally un- 
affected directly by the magnetic field. However, neutrals 
will collide with ions in this process. This frictional force 
will provide support against gravity to the neutrals, but 
there will be a drift of neutrals into the core without a 
significant increase in the magnetic flux; this is ambipolar 
diffusion. Eventually M/®, in the core becomes super- 
critical, and dynamical collapse and star formation can 
proceed. 

M/®g can be determined empirically from the 
magnetic field strength and the column density. Since 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


log n(H,) 


Figure 3. Relationship between magnetic field strength and gas 
density in self-gravitating molecular clouds. 


M= 2.8N (H2)my x Aand Oz = BA, 


2.8N (H2)my(63 G)? 


(M/ Pz )observed 
(M/®8 )critical B 


where A is the surface area of a cloud over which N(H2) 
and B are determined. 

The role of magnetic fields may also be investigated 
with the virial theorem (ignoring possibly important terms 
such as surface pressure): 


W+2T+M=0 


where the gravitational, kinetic, and magnetic virial terms 
respectively are: 


W = —2aGM?/R 


—_ 3 2 
f= 3Mo 
M = 4b|BPR’. 


For the simple case of a uniform-density sphere, a = b = 1. 
A flattened, centrally condensed geometry will cause a > 
1. For magnetically critical simulation models, a ~ 1.2 
and b © 0.3. 

Measurements of magnetic field strengths in molec- 
ular clouds depend on detection (and sometimes map- 
ping) of the Zeeman effect in molecular lines (although 
when atomic hydrogen comes from photodissociation of 
Hp: near H II regions, the H I line may trace molecular 
gas). Most molecular Zeeman detections and sensitive 
limits have been in the 18 cm ground-state A doublet 
lines of OH. However, the OH radical probably does not 
trace densities above n(Hz) ~ 104 cm? in most cases. 
An exception is A doublet OH lines that arise in excited 
rotational states, which require high gas densities for col- 
lisional excitation. Recently, detections of the Zeeman ef- 
fect have been achieved toward the OMC1 and DR21(OH) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1 1 — 
ee 10% | 
eo it ] 31°14'00"- _ 
40" 4 
Flux < 4 
(Jy) | IRAS 4A 7 
L L J 13°40" 4 4 
fe) Ss | 
8 30" _ 
N 4 
r 4 i! 
Ux15 ae. 4 
\ 4 
\ 
13'20"L 4 . 
= ab X a) 
Qx15 a * | 
L J IRAS 4B Ses / } a 
Sy \ in 
aN / 4 20" — am 
—50 Y aN 6 Xu / \| 
3 oe N Se coed 
Cae ra | \. Be | 
13'00"E “4 | 
—50 0 50 L | L | a 1 1 L | L L it | !! 
Visr (km/s) 3°2971 28 3°29™108 3"297118 10° 
a(J2000) a(J2000) 


Figure 4. CO bipolar outflow in the NGC1333 IRAS4 star formation region. The geometry of the magnetic field is mapped by the 


linear polarization of dust continuum and CO spectral line emission. 


cores in the 3 mm lines of CN, which sample densities 
n(Hz) ~ 10°-§ em=3. 

To date, there have been 15 measurements of By in 
self-gravitating molecular clouds and an additional 12 
sensitive upper limits, mainly in extended dark clouds 
withn(H2) ~ 10° cm~°. All 27 results are shown in figure 3. 
The data show a clear correlation of B, with n(H2); the large 
scatter is due partially to the fact that only one component 
of B is observable. For n(H2) > 10° cm~%, the data are 
consistent with B « n'/?, a result in agreement with theory. 

A statistical analysis of the Zeeman results yields 
(M/®8) observed ~1- 2(M/® 8 )critical- Thus, magnetic fields 
are sufficiently strong to play a significant and perhaps 
crucial role in the support of molecular clouds and in their 
evolution. The analysis in terms of the virial theorem 
yields the result that kinetic and magnetic energies are 
approximately the same, and clouds are in approximate 
virial equilibrium. 

Gas velocities in molecular clouds are generally su- 
personic by a factor of a few but are approximately equal 
to the Alfvén velocity (B/(4xp)'”), which suggests that 
internal motions are due to MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC (MHD) 
waves. Although MHD waves might be expected to orga- 
nize supersonic motions and significantly lengthen the dis- 
sipation time scale, recent supercomputer simulations sug- 
gest that Alfvén waves will dissipate on a time scale not 
much longer than that of non-magnetic turbulence. The 
rate of star formation may be regulated by the ambipolar 
diffusion rate and by the rate of injection of mechanical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


energy into clouds. Photoionization could play an impor- 
tant role, since the ambipolar diffusion rate would depend 
strongly on the ionization rate. Despite the constant dis- 
sipation of the turbulent energy, it may be continuously 
re-generated by the winds of stars that form inside the 
clumps and by torsional Alfvén waves that also transport 
angular momentum outward. 

Theories of bipolar winds from YOUNG STELLAR OBJECTS 
often include a significant role for the magnetic field. 
Figure 4 shows an example of the use of linearly polarized 
spectral-line emission to map the geometry of magnetic 
fields in the CO bipolar flow from the NGC1333 IRAS4 
region. The flow is initially at a small angle to the field, 
but the magnetic field appears to deflect the flow so that it 
becomes parallel to the field. 


Future work 


Our understanding of the interstellar magnetic field and 
its role in the formation of interstellar clouds and in 
star formation is still very incomplete. New telescopes 
(such as the upgraded Arecibo telescope, the Green 
Bank telescope, the Atacama Large Millimeter Array and 
the Stratospheric Observatory For Infrared Astronomy) 
should produce an explosion of new and improved data 
during the next decade. Comparison of these data with the 
detailed simulations of the interstellar medium and of star 
formation regions that advances in computer technology 
are enabling should be a focus of future research. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
The techniques and results of polarization observations of 
the interstellar medium are reviewed in 


Roberge W G and Whittet D C B (ed) 1996 Polarimetry of 
the Interstellar Medium (ASP Conf. Ser. 97) 


A detailed description of the large-scale magnetic field 
of the Milky Way Galaxy is in one chapter of the above 
volume: 


Heiles C 1996 A comprehensive view of the Galactic 
magnetic field, especially near the Sun Polarimetry 
of the Interstellar Medium (ASP Conf. Ser. 97) 
ed W G Roberge and D C B Whitter 


A recent review of the methods and results of polarization 
observations of dust scattering and emission is 


Weintraub D A, Goodman A A and Akeson R L 2000 
Protostars and Planets IV ed V Mannings, A P Boss 
and SS Russell (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) in press 


The study of the OMC1 cloud from which figure 2 is taken 
is 


Schleuning D A 1998 Astrophys. J. 493 811 


The Zeeman effect and its application to the measurement 
of magnetic fields in interstellar clouds are described in 


Crutcher R M 1999 Astrophys. J. 520 706 
Crutcher R M et al 1993 Astrophys. J. 407 175 


An article that summarizes knowledge about large-scale 
magnetic fields in galaxies and the intergalactic medium 
and discusses theories about the origin of cosmic magnetic 
fields is 


Zweibel E G and Heiles C 1997 Nature 385 131 


Richard Crutcher 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interstellar Matter 


The enormous volume of space between the stars in the 
Milky Way Galaxy is filled with interstellar matter (ISM). 
The ISM plays a central role in the processes of STAR 
FORMATION and GALAXY EVOLUTION. Stars form from the ISM 
in dense molecular clouds. The radiant and mechanical 
energy produced by stars heats, ionizes, and produces 
structures in the ISM. Gradual or catastrophic mass loss 
from stars enriches the ISM in heavy elements and causes 
the composition, distribution, and physical state of the 
ISM to change as the galaxy evolves. Current studies 
of the ISM are aimed toward characterizing its basic 
properties, determining the physical processes that control 
these properties, and establishing the role the ISM plays 
in the evolution of the Galaxy. 

The existence of matter between the stars was first 
proposed by WILHELM STRUVE in 1847 based on an analysis 
of star counts which suggested that the number of stars per 
unit volume decreases with distance from the Sun. Struve 
proposed that the starlight was experiencing absorption 
proportional to distance. It was not until 1909 that 
Kapteyn realized the full significance of this interstellar 
extinction. Shortly later Barnard documented through 
direct imagery the irregular variations in the distribution 
of the absorbing matter. The identification of the source of 
the extinction with small particles of interstellar dust was 
finally accepted in the 1930s through the work of Trumpler 
and Stebbins, Huffer, and Whitford. 

Diffuse emission nebulae powered by O stars with 
T > 30000 K were the component of the ISM first observed 
spectroscopically by astronomers The spectrum of the 
brightest example, the Orion nebula, was recorded in 1863 
by Huggins. In the late 1920s Eddington, Zanstra and 
Bowen were able to show that such emission nebulae were 
clouds of ionized interstellar hydrogen containing He and 
trace amounts of heavier elements. 

Absorption by interstellar Ca* in the interstellar gas 
was first spectroscopically recorded by Hartmann in 1904. 
However, it was not until the early 1930s that Plaskett and 
Pearce obtained extensive surveys of Ca* absorption in 
a large number of stars and convincingly associated the 
absorption with gas between the stars. They showed that 
the strength of the Ca* absorption increased with distance 
and that the absorption line radial velocity varied with 
distance and direction according to that expected from a 
simple model of gas rotating in a disk galaxy. 

In more recent times the full diagnostic power of 
observations across the entire electromagnetic spectrum 
have been used to study emission and absorption 
produced by interstellar gas and dust in order to determine 
its composition, distribution, and physical state. 


Components and composition 

The ISM (gas + dust) in the solar vicinity has Population 
I element abundances. This has been established through 
abundance studies of the gas in diffuse emission nebulae 
(See GASEOUS NEBULAE), optical and ultraviolet absorption 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


line studies of gas in neutral hydrogen regions, and by 
inference from studies of the composition of matter in the 
atmospheres of young O and B stars that have recently 
formed from the ISM. The ISM gas phase composition by 
relative number of atoms is 91% H, 9% He, and a trace 
abundance of the heavier elements. 

Given the great abundance of H and He in the gas, 
much of the physics of the ISM involves interactions 
among these atoms, electrons, and photons. The H can 
exist as H°, Hy, or H* while the He can exist as He®, He*, 
or He?*. Absorption of radiation by H and He plays a 
dominant role in determining the nature of the average 
radiation field in interstellar space. In a neutral hydrogen 
region the strong H I absorption at the 13.6 eV Lyman 
edge results in an average radiation field resembling that 
of A and B type stars for 3 < E < 13.6 eV with a greatly 
reduced intensity for E > 13.6 eV from H I absorption. 
At energies between ~3 and 1 eV the interstellar radiation 
field is dominated by the light from G and K stars. 

The ionization state of the heavier elements in an HI 
REGION is determined by the ionization potential of the 
element compared to 13.6 eV. As a result, the abundant 
heavy elements listed in order of decreasing abundance O, 
C, Ne, N, Mg, Si, Fe, and S exist in the ionic states O°, C*, 
Ne’, N°, Mgt, Sit, Fet, and S*. In uirecions where the HI 
is photoionized by radiation from stars with T > 30000 K, 
the heavier elements are in higher states of ionization, e.g. 
O*, 07+, C?*, C3*, etc, with the actual ionic ratios controlled 
by the ionizing radiation field of the star. In the hot ISM 
where the gas is heated to T > 10° K by shock processes, 
the heavy elements exist in high states of ionization created 
by electron collisions. Therefore, elements such as O and 
C will exist as O°, O7*, C%, and C”, with the actual 
ionic ratios determined by the kinetic temperature of the 
electrons (see INTERSTELLAR CHEMISTRY). A study of these very 
different gas phases requires observations in the radio, 
infrared, optical, ultraviolet, extreme ultraviolet and x-ray 
regions of the spectrum. 

The gas phase abundances of HEAVY ELEMENTS in H I 
regions are reliably measured by ultraviolet absorption 
line spectroscopy toward hot stars. The line of sight 
column densities of H I and H» can be measured via 
the H I Lyman series absorption lines and the H, Lyman 
band absorption in the far-ultraviolet (see LYMAN ALPHA 
ABSORPTION). The metal line column densities can be 
determined from the many resonance line absorption 
transitions found in the ultraviolet. The results of these 
studies with the Copernicus Satellite (1972-1980) and 
more recently the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph 
(1990-1997) aboard the Hubble Space Telescope (1990- 
) reveal that many of the heavy elements have gas 
phase abundances substantially less than Population I 
abundances because of the incorporation of the heavy 
elements into solid particulate matter. This effect is 
referred to as element depletion. For sight lines through 
moderately dense clouds in the galactic disk, the highly 
refractory elements such as Fe, Cr, and Ni have gas phase 
abundances reduced by factors of 100 to 200 while for other 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


elements, such as S, P, and Zn, the gas phase abundances 
are only reduced by factors of several. Si, Mg, and Mn 
exhibit intermediate reduction factors ranging from 10 to 
30. 

A detailed study of elements both missing and 
present in the gas phase of the ISM provides important 
indirect information about the presence or absence of 
those elements in interstellar dust. It is found that 
there is a general progression toward increasing gas-phase 
abundances of the depleted elements from cool neutral 
clouds found in the galactic disk to warm neutral clouds 
in the disk to warm neutral clouds in the galactic halo at 
distances away from the mid-plane of up to 1 kpc. This 
progression provides information about the destruction 
of dust grains in those processes that transport matter 
between these different galactic regions. 

The INTERSTELLAR GRAINS can also be studied via 
their emission, scattering, and absorption properties. 
Approximately 1% of the mass of the ISM is in the form 
of interstellar dust. The most abundant particles consist 
of solid silicate grains and a separate carbon component 
which may be in the form of graphite grains. The 
silicates have been spectroscopically identified through 
infrared emission and absorption features at 9.7 and 18 wm 
while the graphite grains may be responsible for the 
217.5 nm interstellar extinction bump. The grains likely 
have a distribution of sizes ranging from very small up 
to several wm in diameter. In the denser interstellar 
regions the grains can accrete atoms which form mantles 
on the grain cores. In the densest regions, mantles 
of H,O ice are detected through an infrared absorption 
feature near 3.1 wm. The grains can affect the intensity 
of the interstellar radiation field though the extinction 
they produce, especially in dense interstellar regions. By 
locking up heavy elements from the gas the grains remove 
important coolants from the ISM. The grains also have 
significant roles in several interstellar processes including 
molecule formation and the heating of the gas through 
both molecule formation and photoelectric heating. The 
most abundant molecule observed in interstellar space, 
Hz, forms on the surfaces of grains. The dust also likely 
includes a population of very small grains, the PAHs or 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which consist of planar 
molecules of combined benzene rings with attached H 
atoms. These particles have nm sizes and may represent 
the dividing line between large molecules and small 
particles. The PAHs are the leading candidates for a 
number of infrared emission bands. 

High-energy (10°-10*° eV) cosmic rays exist in the 
space between the stars. Cosmic ray protons are most 
abundant with n(p) ~ 107!° cm™® and n(e)/n(p) = 
10-7. The cosmic ray electrons have lower abundances 
than protons because they lose their energy more rapidly 
than the protons through the production of galactic non- 
thermal synchrotron radiation. Cosmic rays are ~10° 
times over abundant in various light elements because of 
cosmic ray spallation collisions of protons with heavier 
nuclei. Although the cosmic rays have a very low particle 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


density, they can have substantial effects on the physical 
state of the thermal gas in the ISM through the processes of 
cosmic ray ionization and heating. Cosmic ray collisions 
with the gas also produce galactic y-rays. Cosmic rays 
interacting with the galactic magnetic field may have 
important dynamical consequences. For example, the 
pressure of cosmic rays may play a role in the support 
of the gas found in the galactic halo. 

The galactic general magnetic field in the solar region 
of the Galaxy has an average absolute strength of ~5 x 
10~° G. It contains an ordered component and an irregular 
component of roughly comparable strength. High-energy 
cosmic ray electrons spiraling in the galactic magnetic field 
produce non-thermal sYNCHROTRON RADIATION. Spinning 
dust grains are aligned by the magnetic field which leads 
to the observed interstellar polarization of starlight. The 
magnetic field has considerable dynamical effects since 
its pressure (B?/87) is comparable to the interstellar 
gas pressure. In dense interstellar regions the magnetic 
field strength is greatly amplified. Theories of the 
processes causing the collapse of an interstellar cloud into 
a protostar must involve a consideration of the dynamical 
consequences of the INTERSTELLAR MAGNETIC FIELD. On the 
larger scales, loop like galactic interstellar structures may 
be dynamically controlled by magnetic fields. 

The different interacting components of the ISM 
discussed above have comparable energy densities (and 
pressures). For example, the energy density of the ISM 
radiation field from 91.2 nm to 8 wm is ~0.5 eV cm, 
the cosmic rays have ~1.5 eV cm™, and B?/8z for a 
magnetic field with B = 5 x 10-° Gis 0.6 eV cm™. Gas 
motions associated with turbulence and waves in the ISM 
are estimated to have an energy density of ~1 eV cm7?. 
The different thermal phases of the gas discussed in the 
next section have P/k = nT ~ 3 x 10° cm? K which 
implies an energy density of 0.3 eV cm~*. The similarity 
of these energy densities (and pressures) is probably not 
a coincidence but is suggestive of a strong interaction and 
resulting energy and pressure equipartition among these 
different components of the ISM. 


Phases and physical conditions of the ISM 

The conditions in the ISM deviate very significantly from 
those found in a gas in thermal equilibrium. The mean 
energy density of the ISM radiation field is ~0.5 eV cm 
which corresponds to the energy density of a Planck black 
body distribution at T ~ 3K. However, the spectrum of the 
interstellar radiation field is produced by the integrated 
but diluted radiation from stars with temperatures ranging 
from ~3000 to ~30000 K. The extremely dilute nature 
and spectral hardness of this radiation field causes huge 
deviations from conditions found in thermal equilibrium. 
In the ISM, the populations of atomic and molecular 
energy levels and of different states of ionization will 
not be determined by the temperature of the gas but 
from the actual dominating processes for populating and 
depopulating the given state. The temperature assigned to 
gas in the ISM only refers to the fact the gas particles have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a distribution of velocity reliably described by a Maxwell-— 
Boltzmann distribution at a particular temperature. The 
existence of such a velocity distribution is caused by the 
overwhelming number of elastic compared to inelastic 
particle collisions in a gas consisting of mostly H and 
He. Thus, the temperatures given for various interstellar 
regions only refers to the kinetic temperature of the gas. 

The ISM of the Milky Way contains separate gas 
phases with kinetic temperatures that are cold (T ~ 10K), 
cool (100 K), warm (10* K) and hot (10° K). The different 
phases of the ISM are listed in table 1 with approximate 
properties given for each phase including the kinetic 
temperature, T(K), the representative physical density, 
n(cm~), the volume averaged density, (n(cm~°)), the 
exponential scale height above the galactic plane, h(kpc), 
and the very uncertain volume filling factor, f. Most of the 
mass of the ISM (~80%) is contained in the confined and 
extended components of the neutral gas. The extended 
component of the warm ionized gas contains ~15% of the 
mass and the very extended hot gas contributes ~3% to 
the mass. 

In molecular clouds the hydrogen is mostly molecular 
and cold (T ~ 10 K). The molecular clouds are traced 
by emission from CO and other molecules. Although 
the molecular clouds comprise a small fraction of the 
volume of the ISM, they are estimated to contain ~50% of 
the mass of the ISM. Molecular clouds are not normally 
considered a ‘phase’ of the ISM since they are not in 
pressure equilibrium with the more widely distributed 
gas. 

The cold neutral medium (CNM) contains H I and 
Hp and is studied via 21 cm H I emission and absorption, 
and ultraviolet absorption by H I, Hp, and various heavy 
elements. With a temperature of ~80 K and a physical 
density of ~40 atom cm™? the CNM occupies only ~3% of 
the volume of the ISM in the galactic disk. 

The warm neutral medium (WNM) produces H I 
21 cm emission but weak absorption. It can also be 
studied via ultraviolet absorption line spectroscopy. With 
T ~ 8000 K and n ~ 0.4 cm the WNM occupies a 
substantial fraction (~35%) of the volume of the ISM in 
the galactic disk. 

The warm ionized medium (WIM) has been studied 
through the optical emission lines of Ha, [N IT], and [S II] 
it produces. Observations of radio wave dispersion in the 
direction of pulsars yields a direct measure of the line-of- 
sight value of the electron column density in the WIM. 
With T ~ 8000 K and n ~ 0.2 cm™, the WIM occupies 
~25% of the volume of the gas in the disk of the Milky 
Way. The power (~10"! erg s~!) required to maintain the 
ionization of the WIM is comparable to the total power 
input of all galactic supernovae or ~15% of the ionizing 
radiation emitted by galactic O stars. 

The hot ionized medium (HIM) contains gas with 
T ~ 10°Kandn ~ 3x10 cm%. It is detected through its 
soft x-ray emission. Somewhat cooler hot gas associated 
with the HIM has been detected through highly ionized 
atomic absorption produced by O VI, N V, and CIV and by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


emission from C IV. The HIM has a very uncertain volume 
filling factor of 40 + 25%. 

The different gas phases probably exist in rough 
pressure equilibrium. Various techniques have been used 
to estimate the thermal pressure in the neutral phase of 
ISM. The pressures are most often reported as P/k = nT 
(cm~? K). In neutral interstellar regions containing C° a 
typical value of P/k is ~3 x 10° cm-3 K. However, there 
are large deviations from this typical value, particularly in 
regions overpressurized by shock waves from exploding 
stars or from the winds of hot stars. Pressures are 
substantially elevated in H II regions where relatively 
dense gas is rapidly heated to T ~ 8000 K by the O 
stars that have recently formed. Such overpressurized 
H II regions expand outward as the gas in them tries 
to achieve pressure equilibrium with the general ISM. In 
dense molecular regions pressures are found to be much 
larger as a result of the self-gravity of the gas. The pressure 
in the ionized gas at distances of ~1 kpc from the GALACTIC 
PLANE has been estimated to be ~3000 cm~? K. The rate of 
drop off of gas pressure at larger distances away from the 
galactic plane is not well determined. 

The total pressure produced by all the components 
of the ISM must be capable of supporting the galactic 
gas layer. At the galactic mid-plane that weight per 
unit area requires a total pressure, P/k, of approximately 
30000 cm-? K. The combined pressure contributions from 
the various components of the ISM (e.g. gas thermal 
pressure, magnetic pressure, cosmic ray pressure, gas 
turbulent pressure) must add up to this number. In regions 
of greatly elevated pressure such as in OB associations with 
frequent supernova explosions, the higher pressure may 
drive gas into the halo ina flow pattern sometimes referred 
to asa ‘galactic fountain’. In sucha flow, high temperature 
(T > 10° K) gas bursts out of the galactic plane into the 
halo, cools by adiabatic expansion, and eventually rains 
back onto the galactic disk as warm and cool infalling 
fountain clouds. 


General distribution 

The stirring of matter in the galactic disk by supernova 
explosions, stellar winds, cloud-cloud collisions and other 
processes causes the various phases of the ISM to extend 
different distances away from the plane of the Galaxy. 
The stratification of this ‘galactic atmosphere’ is roughly 
described by layers with exponential density distributions 
away from the galactic plane with scale heights h ~ 0.1 kpc 
for the cool clouds, ~0.4 kpc for the warm neutral gas, 
~1 kpc for the warm ionized gas, and ~5 kpc for the hot 
ionized gas. These scale heights have been determined by 
studying the fall off of N(X) sin |b|versus|z| where N(X) 
represents the column density of species X toward stars 
at galactic latitude b having different distances, z, away 
from the galactic plane. For cold neutral gas and warm 
neutral gas, ultraviolet observations of H I Lyman alpha 
and H; Lyman band absorption are used to obtain N(X). 
For the warm ionized medium, the observations are of 
pulsar dispersion measure which is proportional to the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Phases of the gaseous ISMt. 


Phase StateofH ~T(K) ~n(cm~9)  (n(cm73)) h(kpc) Ni (cm?) f 

Cold neutral medium (CNM) H°, Hy 80 40 11 0.1 2.110% 3% 
Warm neutral medium (WNM) _H® 8000 0.4 0.16 0.4 1.81079 35% 
Warm ionized medium (WIM) — Ht 8000 0.2 0.024 1 6.7x10!% 25% 

Hot ionized medium (HIM) Ht 10° 0.003 0.001 5 101° 40 + 25% 


+ Molecular clouds are not listed as a phase of the ISM since they are not in pressure equilibrium with the more diffuse 


gas. In molecular clouds the hydrogen is mostly molecular, T ~ 10 K, and n > 300 cm”. 


line of sight electron column density. The ~5 kpc extent 
of the hot phase has been traced by observations of highly 
ionized atoms such as C*+ and N* toward stars in the 
galactic disk and halo. The thick warm neutral gas layer 
is often called the Lockman layer while the warm ionized 
gas layer is called the Reynolds layer. 

The ISM gas density distribution in the Galaxy 
exhibits a radial dependence. The mid-plane densities of 
Hp in the ISM as traced by the CO molecule are greater 
for regions interior to the solar circle and appear to peak 
at a galactocentric distance R of approximately 5 kpc. In 
the outer Galaxy, the H I is observed to warp and flare. 
The warp is to positive values of b over the region / = 70- 
140° and to negative values of b over the region / = 240- 
300°. The warping and flaring in the outer Galaxy has been 
observed to extend over a region ~10 kpc thick. The radial 
extent of the neutral H I in the Galaxy is roughly 30 kpc or 
more. 


Structures 

The various kinds of structures found in the interstellar gas 
provide important information about the many physical 
processes affecting the ISM. In the disk of the Galaxy 
the cool interstellar matter has a highly irregular cloud- 
like structure. Information about the extents and sizes 
of these clouds can be inferred from observations of 
dust extinction toward large numbers of stars and from 
observations of interstellar atomic absorption lines toward 
stars. While clouds of many shapes and sizes probably 
exist, the extinction data yield information about the 
average properties of clouds containing dust. A summary 
of those properties is given in table 2. INTERSTELLAR 
ABSORPTION LINE studies confirm the existence of ~7 cool 
diffuse clouds kpc“! along the lines of sight to stars within 
several kpc of the Sun. Extreme examples of the large 
clouds are the molecular clouds which often trace regions 
of active star formation. Molecular clouds have masses in 
the range 10°-10° Mo. 

In addition to these clouds found in the mostly 
neutral gas, the ISM contains numerous structures which 
illustrate the direct interaction between stars and the ISM. 
These include the photoionized H II or diffuse nebulae 
which are found in star forming 0B ASSOCIATIONS and the 
associated REFLECTION NEBULAE which are evident when the 
stars illuminating the gas and dust are cooler than B2 
and therefore do not have adequate amounts of Lyman 
continuum radiation to ionize the gas. Other examples 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


3 


Table 2. Average properties of neutral interstellar clouds traced 
by dust. 


Diffuse clouds _ Large clouds 


(E(B —V)) 0.061 mag 0.29 mag 
Number (kpc!) 6.2 0.8 
Contribution to (n(H)) 0.7 cm-3 0.4 cm-3 
Diameter 4 pc 70 pe 

n(H) in cloud 40 cm~3 10 cm~3 
Mass for spherical cloud 50 Mo 6 x 104°Mo 


are the SUPERNOVA REMNANTS and. PLANETARY NEBULAE which 
trace the processes of violent and peaceful stellar death, 
respectively. The shock heating of the gas in the supernova 
remnants can create large volumes of hot gas that expands 
outward and eventually joins with the general ISM. 
The processes of both violent and peaceful stellar death 
provide a means to enrich the ISM in elements created at 
some stage in the interiors of the dying stars. 

Energetic events occurring in the disk can create 
HI shells and H I supershells. The extensions of these 
structures into the halo may produce structures called 
worms and galactic chimneys. Some of these structures 
mark the sites of OB associations where the combination 
of multiple stellar winds and multiple supernovae create 
over-pressurized regions which can in some cases feed 
hot gas into the halo and leave behind H I shells and 
supershells. 

The HI observed at intermediate velocity (|v| = 30- 
100 km s~') at high latitudes in the northern galactic 
hemisphere traces substantial amounts of gas in arch-like 
features. The high velocity H I clouds (|v| > 100 km s~') 
which cover ~20% of the sky trace gas with a number 
of different origins, including gas stripped out of the 
Magellanic Clouds through tidal interactions with the 
Milky Way, galactic fountain gas, and perhaps infalling 
intergalactic gas. The recent discovery that the extensive 
high velocity cloud Complex C has a metallicity of 0.09 + 
0.02 Solar implies that the galaxy may still be accreting 
low-metallicity material which could be a remnant of the 
formation of the Local Group of galaxies. 

In the galactic disk the ISM has a greater density 
in the galactic sPIRAL ARMS Which are waves of enhanced 
density that move through the gas and the stars of the disk. 
Local examples of these spiral arms in the Milky Way are 
clearly traced by the young stars of OB associations and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the molecular clouds from which the stars have recently 
formed. The three most prominent sprial arms near the 
Sun are the Perseus Arm, the Local Arm and the Sagittarius 
Arm. These three sprial arms have widths of ~1 kpc and 
are separated by ~1.5 kpc. In between the spiral arms, the 
interarm gas has a lower density and is more smoothly 
distributed. 

Near the galactic center there is a ~10° solar mass 
concentration of the ISM, mostly in the molecular form 
in an expanding ring of ~200 pc radius. This expanding 
structure may have its origins in the explosive release of 
energy from the galactic center or from the dynamical 
effects of a stellar bar. The ISM in this highly disturbed 
molecular ring has much more extreme properties than 
found elsewhere in the Galaxy. 


Controlling physical processes 

The physical state and distribution of the different 
components of the ISM are controlled by a number of 
physical processes. Identifying the dominant (controlling) 
processes is an important goal of studies of the ISM. 
In many interstellar situations it is assumed that the 
populations of ionic states or atomic and molecular energy 
levels are not changing with time. Under such ‘steady- 
state’ assumptions an identification of the dominating 
processes allows for a determination of the basic properties 
of the gas. However, in situations where the time evolution 
is rapid the steady-state assumption may be invalid, in 
which case it is necessary to follow the full time-dependent 
evolution of the gas. 

The ionization state of the interstellar gas in H I and 
H II regions is controlled by starlight photoionization 
balanced by radiative and dielectronic recombination. In 
H I regions the radiation is produced by the integrated 
radiation from stars which is strongly attenuated for E > 
13.6 eV by H I absorption. In an H II region one or more 
O stars are usually the dominant sources of the ionizing 
radiation. In the hot ISM the ionization is controlled by 
electron collisions followed by radiative and dielectronic 
recombination. 

The equilibrium abundances of molecules in the ISM 
are controlled by the dominating molecule production 
and destruction processes. The most abundant molecule, 
Hp, forms on the surfaces of grains and in diffuse 
clouds is destroyed by the absorption of far-UV radiation 
between 91.2 and 111 nm in the Lyman and Werner 
absorption bands. Following the absorption into an 
excited molecular electronic state, the excited H2 molecule 
undergoes radiative emission into a bound state of the 
ground electronic state or into the unbound vibrational 
continuum of the ground electronic state which results in 
dissociation. The dissociation process occurs ~10% of the 
time. Once the H; has formed, it can react with heavy 
atoms in various molecular reaction chains to form many 
of the ~100 different molecules found in dense interstellar 
clouds. The atom—molecule reaction process is greatly 
accelerated by the atomic ionization occurring in dense 
interstellar clouds penetrated by ionizing cosmic rays. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ion-molecule chemistry occurring in diffuse and dense 
clouds seems capable of explaining the existence of many 
of the molecules found in these clouds. In very dense 
interstellar molecular clouds the dissociating UV radiation 
is absent. This allows the molecular chemistry to proceed 
to the creation of very complex polyatomic molecules 
containing as many as 10-13 atoms. Interstellar grains 
also likely participate in the production of molecules other 
than H. For example, in addition to molecule production 
processes similar to the formation of Hz on grain surfaces, 
the exposure of a grain with a complex icy mantle toa harsh 
environment may lead to the ejection of various complex 
molecules from the matter in the surface layers. 

The equilibrium kinetic temperature of the gas is 
controlled by the important cooling and heating processes. 
In most interstellar regions the cooling is produced 
by collisional excitation of atomic fine structure levels 
followed by radiative deexcitation with the loss of the 
photon from the region. In H I regions electron or 
hydrogen collisional excitation of low lying states in C* 
and O° can lead to the production of the cooling transitions 
of C IL at 157 wm and O [at 204 and 76 um. In hotter H II 
regions where the colliding particles have more energy, 
the important cooling transitons occur as forbidden optical 
emission lines from Ot, O*+, and N*. In the H II regions 
surrounding hot stars, the dominant heating process is the 
difference in the relatively large kinetic energy liberated 
to the gas by ejected photoelectrons (mainly from H I) as 
compared with the energy of the recombining electrons. 
The heating processes are not as well understood for 
H I regions. Several possibilities include heating caused 
by the photoelectric ejection of rapidly moving electrons 
from grains, or the heating occurring as high-speed H) 
molecules are ejected from grain surfaces during the 
molecule formation process. In this ejection process a 
modest fraction of the H) energy of formation is available 
to eject the molecule from the grain with a substantial 
energy of motion. 


Theories of the physical state of the ISM 

Theories of the interstellar gas and dust in the galaxy must 
be able to explain the co-existence of the different observed 
phases of the ISM. Over certain ranges of conditions in the 
ISM, multiple gas phases can co-exist in rough pressure 
equilibrium. Multi-phase models of the ISM consider the 
various interactions occurring between the general ISM 
and the stars which form from the intersellar gas and 
subsequently heat and ionize the gas. Before the discovery 
of the hot ISM in the early 1970s, a two-phase model was 
developed by Field, Goldsmith, and Habing to explain the 
co-existence of a cool neutral phase with T ~ 10? K and 
a warm neutral phase with T ~ 10? K. This two-phase 
model of the ISM demonstrated that two thermally stable 
gas phases could exist at the same pressure, provided 
a thermally unstable phase occurred at an intermediate 
temperatures. With the discovery of the hot ISM with 
T ~ 10° K, the two-phase model of the ISM was extended 
into a three-phase model by McKee and Ostriker. In the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


three-phase model the dynamic third hot phase is created 
by the collective action of stellar winds and supernova 
explosions that shock heat large volumes of gas to high 
temperatures. This shock-heated high-temperature gas 
tries to achieve pressure equilibrium with the other gas 
phases and begins to cool by evaporating the matter 
contained in the warm and cool clouds. The hot gas can 
also cool by radiative emission and by adiabatic expansion 
into the halo, provided it can break out of the galactic 
plane. 

In the three-phase model of the ISM the warm ionized 
gas can be explained as a ionized transition region between 
the warm neutral phases and the hot phases. The 
importance of this component of the gas was not fully 
recognized when the three-phase models of the ISM were 
first introduced. Although the warm ionized medium 
produces quite faint Ha emission over most of the sky, 
it radiates a very large total power of ~10*! erg s-!, which 
is equivalent to the total power of all supernovae or ~15% 
the ionizing radiation produced by O stars. 

The three-phase model of the interstellar gas has 
been developed into a detailed theory involving the 
interactions among the different gas phases, luminous hot 
stars, and various types of supernova explosions. The self- 
gravitating molecular clouds are not considered a phase 
in the three-phase model of the ISM since the gas they 
contain is not in pressure equilibrium with the other gas 
phases. One of the most uncertain aspects of the three- 
phase model of the ISM involves our knowledge of relative 
filling factors and the overall importance of the different 
phases. Estimates of the average filling factor of the hot 
gas in the disk of the Milky Way unfortunately currently 
range from ~15% to ~65%. It is disturbing to conclude 
this overview of the ISM by saying that even in 1999 we 
do not know which phase of the ISM fills most of the space 
between the stars in the disk of the Milky Way. 


Bibliography 

The classic text book, Spitzer L 1978 Physical Processes in the 
Interstellar Medium (New York: John Wiley) continues 
to be the fundamental reference on the physics of the 
ISM. 

The text by Osterbrock D E 1989 Astrophysics of Gaseous 
Nebulae and Active Galactic Nuclei (Mill Valley: 
University Science Books) is the standard reference 
for the physics of interstellar gas in gaseous nebulae 
ionized by starlight or by collisional processes. 

Physical processes occurring in the ISM are the topic of 
a symposium held in Grand Teton National Park, 
1987 Interstellar Processes ed D J Hollenbach and 
HA Thronson Jr (Dordrecht: D Reidel) 

The evolution of the ISM is discussed in the Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific Symposium 1990 The Evolution of 
the Interstellar Medium ed L Blitz (San Francisco: ASP 
Conf. Series vol 12) 


Blair D Savage 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


A molecular cloud is a condensation of interstellar gas in 
which the atoms are bound together as molecules rather 
than existing as free atoms or ionized particles. All of 
interstellar and intergalactic space is filled with gas, albeit 
of low density compared with the best vacuums achievable 
in terrestrial laboratories. The state of interstellar gas is 
largely determined by its density and temperature, and 
molecular clouds are the coldest, densest phase of the 
interstellar medium. In a molecular cloud, the gas is 
typically overwhelmingly molecular with less than 1% in 
either the atomic or ionized states. 

Molecules in the interstellar medium are identified 
by characteristic emission (or absorption) lines in their 
spectra. The frequencies of these lines can usually be 
measured to better than one part in a million, and the 
probability of a misidentification when two or more 
lines from a single molecule are detected is vanishingly 
small. Molecules can rotate around or vibrate along the 
interatomic axes defined by the chemical bonds; torsional 
modes also exist. It is the transition from one rotational or 
vibrational state to another of individual molecules that 
gives rise to the spectral lines of a molecular gas. Because 
each molecule consists of different atoms in a unique 
geometry, the spectral lines from each molecule are unique. 
The rotational and vibrational transitions occur primarily 
in the infrared and radio portions of the electromagnetic 
spectrum; thus molecular clouds are detected primarily 
by infrared and radio telescopes. Most of the molecules 
detected in the interstellar medium to date have been 
identified from lines at millimeter wavelengths, the high- 
frequency end of the radio portion of the spectrum. 

Molecular clouds are the sites of all known sTAR 
FORMATION in the Milky Way, and observations of other 
galaxies imply that star formation takes place in molecular 
clouds everywhere in the universe. Thus the Sun and 
the solar system were formed in a molecular cloud long 
since dissipated. Molecular clouds exist throughout the 
Milky Way and are found in most sPIRAL GALAXIES, but are 
not abundant in ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES. Molecular clouds are 
found to very high REDsHIFTS, in one case when the universe 
was less than 10% of its current age. 


The state of the gas 

The characteristic temperatures of molecular clouds are 
generally quite low, ranging typically from 5 K to 300 K. 
Most of the gas in molecular clouds tends to be at the 
low end of this range; the higher end is observed only in 
regions where the gas is locally heated. The temperatures 
can be inferred from the ratios of the strengths of the 
spectral lines from rotational states at different energies. 
The lower the temperature of a cloud, the more slowly the 
molecules rotate on average, and the stronger are the lines 
from low-lying rotational energy states. A typical median 
temperature for a molecular cloud in the vicinity of the 
Sun is about 10 K. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Molecular clouds are composed overwhelmingly of 
molecular hydrogen gas, Hz; 99.99% of the molecules 
by number in a molecular cloud are hydrogen. The 
density within a typical molecular cloud ranges from 
about 10? cm? to about 10° cm™%, although higher 
densities are achieved in regions of active star formation. 
The median density of the molecular gas in a typical 
cloud near the Sun’s position in the Milky Way is about 
10° cm~*, much greater than the 0.3 cm~? median density 
of the ambient atomic gas. At the cold temperatures 
characteristic of most molecular clouds, H does not emit 
or absorb radiation; thus its density is usually inferred 
indirectly from the presence of trace constituents such as 
carbon monoxide (CO). Observations of trace molecules 
indicate that it is collisions with neutral particles that excite 
the molecules into higher rotational states, but atomic 
hydrogen is too underabundant to produce the observed 
spectral lines; only Hz is sufficiently abundant to produce 
the collisional excitation. Occasionally, a bright infrared 
source is observed in or behind a molecular cloud and 
the spectral lines of molecular hydrogen can be observed 
directly in absorption against the background source. In 
these cases, the quantity of molecular hydrogen observed 
is consistent with that inferred indirectly from the trace 
molecules. 

In all molecular clouds there is an admixture of dust, 
typically about 1% by mass. When the dust becomes 
opaque to the ambient ultraviolet radiation, photons 
energetic enough to destroy the chemical bonds between 
the atoms of the gas are effectively prevented from entering 
a cloud. The dust radiates energy efficiently in the 
infrared portion of the spectrum, a wavelength regime to 
which molecular clouds are relatively transparent except 
in the densest regions. Thus, when molecules collide 
with the dust, the energy of the collisions heats the dust 
particles which then emit infrared radiation that escapes 
the molecular cloud. The dust therefore acts as an efficient 
thermostat keeping the cloud cold. 


The formation of molecules in the interstellar 
medium 

At the cold temperatures typical of molecular clouds, 
molecular hydrogen cannot form as the result of two 
hydrogen atoms directly colliding and binding together, 
because the excess energy of the collision cannot be 
radiated away. This is due to the symmetrical nature 
of Hz which has no permanent electric dipole moment 
required for the radiation to take place. Thus H) is thought 
to form when hydrogen atoms attach themselves to the 
surfaces of the dust particles which are always present. 
The atoms migrate on the surface of the dust, bind together 
to form a hydrogen molecule, and the excess energy goes 
into heating the dust particle and ejecting the molecule 
from the surface. The dust thus plays a crucial role in 
the formation of molecular clouds: it provides the site 
for the formation of the Hz, it prevents the destructive 
ultraviolet radiation from breaking the chemical bonds 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Identified interstellar and circumstellar molecules: gas-phase species. (Credit: John Black and Lew Snyder) 


Diatomic  Triatomic 4atoms 6 atoms 9 atoms 
AIF C3 c-C3H C5H CH3C4H 
Alcl QH 1-C3H C5N CH3CH2CN 
Co (ore) C3N Cs5S (CH3)20 
CH QS C30 CoH, CH3CH2OH 
CHt CH? C3S CH3CN CsH 
CN CO2 GH CH3NC HC7N 
CO H3 HCCN CH30H 
CO* HCN HCNH* CH3SH 
CP HNC HNCO HC3NHt 
CS HCO HNCS HCOC2H 10 atoms 
H2 HCO* HOCOt HCONH? (CH3)2CO 
HCl HOC* H2CO 1-H2C4 CH3C4CN (?) 
HF Hcst H2CN 
KCl H20 H2CS 
NH HS H30¢t 7 atoms 
NO HNO NH3 CoH 11 atoms 
NS MgCN c-SiC3 CH2CHCN HC N 
NaCl MgNC c-CH2OCH2 
OH NH2 5 atoms CH3C2H 
PN N>2Ht Cs HC5N 
SO NoO C4H HCOCH3 13 atoms 
SO* NaCN C4Si NH2CH3 HCyN 
SiC OCS 1-C3H2 Cr 
SiN SO2 c-C3H» 
SiO c-SiC CH2CN 
SiS CH4 

HC3N 8 atoms 

HC,NC CH3C3N 

HCOOH = C6H2 

H2CHN C7H 

H2C20 HCOOCH3 

H2NCN CH3COOH 

H2COH* 

HNC3 

SiH, 


and dissociating the molecules, and it provides an effective 
temperature regulator that keeps the clouds cold. 

Molecular hydrogen is not the only species thought to 
form on the surfaces of interstellar dust. The abundances 
of molecules that contain many heavy atoms, such as the 
complex organic molecules (see table 1), are too large 
to have formed from gas-phase attachment of carbon, 
nitrogen and oxygen. An important chemical pathway 
is thus thought to occur on the surface of dust grains and 
reactions that require the presence of dust as a catalyst 
are known collectively as grain-surface chemistry (see also 
INTERSTELLAR GRAINS). 

Many other species, particularly molecules with only 
a few atoms, are thought to form directly in the gas phase 
without catalysis by dust. These are primarily through 
ion—molecule reactions, but reactions involving neutral 
radicals may also be important. A key ion—molecule 
reaction involves ionizing Hz by COsMIc RAYS energetic 
enough to penetrate a molecular cloud producing H} 
which can subsequently bind with another hydrogen 
atom. The resulting Hj ion is relatively abundant, 
highly reactive and the first step in forming many 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


other molecules through exchange interactions with C, 
N and O in the gas phase. Molecules thought to form 
through ion—molecule reactions are CO, CH, H2O and 
CHy. Other chemical pathways result from relatively 
high-temperature reactions that occur in shocks, such as 
those produced in supernova explosions, and from high 
ultraviolet radiation fields such as those that occur in 
photon-dominated regions close to O and early B stars and 
relatively transparent diffuse molecular clouds. 

The dust consists of molecules in the solid state and 
is composed primarily of atoms heavier than hydrogen, 
in the form of refractory (ie. temperature-stable) and 
volatile compounds. The refractory compounds are 
primarily oxides of magnesium and silicon, and carbon 
compounds such as graphite, amorphous carbon (soot) 
and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, large benzene- 
ring-based structures that contain admixtures of elements 
other than carbon. The volatile compounds on the dust 
surfaces are typically ices of water, ammonia, methane and 
other simple molecules that are composed of C, N, O and 
H. The dust particles are microscopic, with sizes that range 
up to about 1 wm (10~° m) in diameter. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


48 00 


30 fF 


49 00 F 


30 fF 


50 00 -F 


6 (2000) 


SO fF 


51 00 F 


20: je 


= 1322 00° = 


Eagle Nebula CO(1-—0) Integrated Intensity 


18 19 00 57 54 


51 48 45 42 


a (2000) 


Figure 1. Image of the region of active star formation in the Eagle Nebula showing columns of dust (dark regions) made with the 
Hubble Space Telescope. Overlaid are contours of emission from the CO molecule observed with the BIMA Array. Note how closely the 
CO contours match the locations of the dust. The CO traces the more abundant but unobservable H2 molecule. (Credit: Marc Pound.) 


The composition of molecular clouds 

Although molecular clouds are composed overwhelm- 
ingly of Hj, the molecule is not generally detectable for 
the same reason that the formation of H, from two gas- 
phase hydrogen atoms is prevented: the molecule lacks 
a permanent electric dipole moment. Other much less 
abundant molecules are, however, easily detected and the 
list of molecules detected in molecular clouds now totals 
about 120; a listing is given in table 1. These include 
carbon monoxide (CO), the most abundant molecule af- 
ter H2, water (H2O) and many commonly known inor- 
ganic molecules such as ammonia (NH3), hydrogen sul- 
fide (H2S), hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and common table 
salt (NaCl). The first organic molecule discovered in the 
interstellar medium was formaldehyde (H2CO) in 1968. 
Since then, many organic molecules have been detected 
including formic acid (HCOOH), methanol (CH30H) and 
ethanol (CH3CH2OH), proving that the formation of or- 
ganic molecules, including rather complex ones, occurs 
even in the relatively harsh conditions of interstellar space. 
Searches are now underway for glycine, the simplest of the 
amino acids, and buckminsterfullerene, Ceo. Spectral lines 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


consistent with origins in these and related molecules have 
already been detected, but positive identifications have not 
as yet been made. 

Table 1 shows that the overwhelming majority of 
molecules are composed of H, C, N and O. This is 
due in part to the relatively high abundance of these 
elements compared with others, but also because the 
molecules formed from other heavy elements tend to 
produce refractory compounds that reside in the dust 
particles. 

Because the density of the gas in molecular clouds is 
so low, highly reactive species such as radicals, molecules 
with unpaired electrons which have very low equilibrium 
abundances in terrestrial reactions, can be quite abundant 
in the interstellar medium. For example, OH, CH, 
CN are all easily detected. The radical HCO* was 
observed first in the interstellar medium and only later 
observed and confirmed in the laboratory. Some species 
such as HC;,N have never been detected in terrestrial 
laboratories; their presence is inferred from the rotational 
constants determined from one observed transition and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the detection of other transitions at precisely predicted 
frequencies determined from these constants. 

The abundance of CO is only 10-4 that of Hp, 
yet it produces extraordinarily bright spectral lines at 
wavelengths of 2.6 mm and 1.3 mm. High-energy 
transitions of this molecule have been detected into the 
far infrared portion of the spectrum from regions in which 
the temperature is inferred to be several hundred K. CO is 
amolecule that is excited at relatively modest densities and 
is even more tightly bound than H; consequently CO and 
Hp are thought to be largely cospatial. The CO thus serves 
as a tracer for the undetectable Hz. Knowledge about the 
distribution of molecular clouds in the Milky Way and in 
other galaxies comes primarily from observations of the 
CO molecule (see also Gas IN GALAXIES). CO is, however, 
almost always optically thick, and direct inferences of the 
H, content from CO observations must be done with some 
care. 


Masers 

In most molecular clouds, the higher the energy of a 
rotational state, the fewer the number of molecules that 
occupy that state. Occasionally, conditions can arise in 
which there are more molecules in the higher energy state 
than the lower one, resulting in a condition known as 
a population inversion. If the cloud is transparent to 
radiation with an energy equal to the difference in energy 
between the states with a population inversion, the higher- 
lying molecules can be stimulated to emit radiation at 
a rate much higher than they would spontaneously, as 
they do in a laser. Such a region is known as a maser, 
an acronym that stands for microwave amplification by 
stimulated emission of radiation. 

The radiation from regions within a molecular cloud 
that emit as masers can be extraordinarily bright; in fact the 
brightest known spectral lines in the radio portion of the 
spectrum come from interstellar masers. Many molecules 
have transitions that can behave as masers, but the most 
commonly observed ones are OH, H2O, SiO, H2CO and 
CH30H. The maser emission comes from regions that 
are typically quite small; for OH and H,O masers, these 
regions are only as large as the solar system. However, 
because they are so bright, they can be observed to very 
large distances. 

Masers have played an important role in astronomy 
because their motions make it possible to determine 
absolute distances with the aid of very long baseline 
interferometry (vLBI). For example, the only absolute 
determination of the distance to the center of the Milky 
Way has been done using statistical parallaxes of water 
masers in a molecular cloud, Sgr B2, thought to lie very 
close to the center. Similarly, the best measured absolute 
distance to another galaxy comes from a geometric 
distance measurement to the water masers in the disk 
of the galaxy NGC 4258. It is the extraordinary 
precision of VLBI positional measurements coupled with 
the very bright emission from the masers that make such 
determinations possible. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Properties of molecular clouds 


Molecular clouds in the Milky Way have masses that range 
from a few times the mass of the Sun (Mo), to about 
10°Mo; molecular clouds with masses greater than 10*Mo 
are known as giant molecular clouds (GMCs). Along with 
the GLOBULAR CLUSTERS of stars, GMCs are the most massive 
individual objects in the Milky Way. The numbers of 
molecular clouds by mass can be described as a power 
law with an exponent of —1.5 (dN /dM = NoM~'°), which 
implies that most of the mass in molecular clouds lies at 
the high-mass end: more than half the total mass of the 
molecular gas in the Milky Way resides in clouds with 
masses >10°M >. GMCs have typical diameters of about 
50 pe, but many are quite elongated and GMCs observed 
in the solar vicinity often have extents as large as 100 pc. 

GMCs are self-gravitating, i.e. they are held together 
by the mass of the molecular gas contained within them. 
This is inferred from the presence of star formation within 
GMCs, implying that at least part of a GMC must be self- 
gravitating, and from column density measurements that 
imply there is approximately enough gas to bind GMCs 
gravitationally. However, the best evidence that entire 
clouds are self-gravitating comes from measurements of 
the internal pressure within molecular clouds; these are 
invariably about 10 times the pressure of the ambient 
interstellar medium. If the clouds were not self- 
gravitating, they would rather quickly fly apart in about 
10 million years. 

Clouds with masses < about 10°M. are, however, 
often not self-gravitating. These clouds, known as high- 
latitude clouds (HLCs), were first found in abundance at 
large angles from the midplane of the Milky Way. They 
nevertheless lie at small distances from the plane as do 
all molecular clouds. These objects have now been found 
in profusion throughout the Galactic plane and, like the 
GMCs, have internal pressures much greater than the 
ambient pressure in the interstellar medium. However, 
unlike the GMCs, column density measurements show 
that the HLCs do not have enough mass to be self- 
gravitating, often by factors of 100 or more; and since 
their lifetimes must be very short their formation is a bit 
of a mystery. Presumably, they are formed in regions of 
relatively high interstellar pressure, perhaps in shocks; the 
ubiquity of these clouds implies that shocks are pervasive 
in the interstellar gas. 

Molecular clouds are very inhomogeneous objects; 
median densities within the emitting regions are an order 
of magnitude larger than the density averaged over the 
entire volume of the cloud. Apparently, molecular clouds 
are organized into relatively smooth clumps of turbulent 
gas with higher than average density which fill only about 
5-10% of the cloud volume. Stars form in the densest, 
most tightly gravitationally bound of these clumps, which 
are sometimes elongated into filaments. An alternative 
description suggests that the gas is organized in a fractal 
structure in which the distribution of density is the same 
regardless of the linear scale on which the cloud is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rosette Molecular Cloud 
Iso/l199 halftone, CO contours 


209 208 20/ 206 205 


Figure 2. The Rosette Nebula molecular cloud, a good example of a Giant Molecular Cloud, is shown in the white contours, which 
trace the emission from CO. The infrared radiation from nebula is shown in the greyscale image as the bright region to the right of the 
main body of the molecular cloud. The absence of molecules toward the bright nebula is due to the dissociation of the molecules by 
ultraviolet radiation from hot stars in the center of the nebula (not seen in this image). (Credit: Jon Williams and Leo Blitz.) 


Figure 3. The left-hand panel shows an optical image of the Whirlpool Galaxy, M51, together with the small companion galaxy NGC 
5195 in the upper left-hand portion of the image. The right-hand image shows the CO emission mapped with the BIMA Array from 
M51; the CO traces the molecular clouds in the galaxy. Note how tightly confined the CO emission is to the well-defined symmetric 
spiral arms in the galaxy. There is very little molecular gas between the spiral arms. (Credit: Stuart Vogel and the BIMA SONG 
collaboration.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 5 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 5055 


Figure 4. CO emission superimposed on an optical image of the flocculent spiral galaxy NGC 5055 mapped with the BIMA Array. The 
optical image shows only very short spiral arm segments. Although the CO emission shows evidence of some two-armed spiral 
structure, the spiral structure is much less pronounced than in M51. (Credit: Michele Thornley and the BIMA SONG Collaboration.) 


observed. The fractal description appears to be more 
appropriate for the diffuse parts of a molecular cloud. 

The formation process of GMCs is poorly understood. 
Although numerous mechanisms have been proposed, 
none has been shown to be primarily responsible for the 
formation of GMCs. In the disk of the Milky Way, it is 
thought that molecular clouds form by condensing from 
atomic hydrogen in regions where the atomic hydrogen 
has become self-gravitating and overdense; it has not been 
established what produces these regions of overdensity. 
Some other process, however, must be responsible for 
the formation of the small molecular clouds, the HLCs, 
because of their lack of self-gravity. 

The molecular clouds in the nucleus of the Galaxy 
probably form by yet some other process. Within about 
300 pc of the Galactic center, there is a strong concentration 
of molecular gas which has a surface density more than 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


100 times greater than that near the Sun. In this region, 
probably no more than about 1% of the neutral gas mass 
is atomic, and there is insufficient H I to condense into 
molecular clouds. The ambient gas pressure in this part 
of the Milky Way is almost 1000 times greater than that in 
the vicinity of the Sun, however, and it may be that gas 
clouds are stable at these pressures only if they are fully 
molecular. 

Once formed, GMCs produce stars almost immedi- 
ately. In the vicinity of the Sun only one GMC is known 
without intense star formation, and, in the Milky Way as 
a whole, no more than half of the GMCs are without mas- 
sive stars forming in their midst. The star formation within 
a GMC sows the seeds of its own destruction because the 
high mass stars are intense emitters of ultraviolet radiation 
which dissociates the molecules, turning them back into 
ionized and molecular gas. The process of destruction is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


quite rapid, and GMCs are thought to be transient objects 
with lifetimes no greater than about (30-50) 10° yr. The 
small HLCs are thought to live for even shorter times. An- 
other argument for the short lifetimes of molecular clouds 
comes from their strong confinement to SPIRAL ARMS, ob- 
served in the Milky Way and in other galaxies. The con- 
finement implies that the clouds cannot live longer than 
the time it takes to traverse a spiral arm, about 50 million 
years. A third observation from which the youth of molec- 
ular clouds is inferred shows that clusters of stars older 
than about 50 million years never have molecular gas as- 
sociated with them; clusters younger than about 20 million 
years always have associated molecular clouds. 

The internal structure of molecular clouds cannot be 
maintained without some source of energy injection into 
the clouds. Like stars, molecular clouds would all collapse 
under their own self-gravity if they were not supported 
by some means. Unlike stars, this support does not come 
from the temperature of the gas which is too low to produce 
the large widths of spectral lines observed throughout 
molecular clouds. The large line widths suggest rather 
that bulk motion of the gas, such as that from turbulence, is 
responsible for the line widths. However, such turbulence 
should decay ina very short time, typically less than 10° yh, 
unless there is some sort of energy that can maintain the 
turbulence within a cloud. 

Magnetic fields, known to be present from the 
polarization of the dust, from polarization in the spectral 
lines, and from the Zeeman splitting of the spectral lines in 
masers, are thought to provide the necessary support and 
mediate the energy injection into the clouds. However, 
the strengths of the magnetic fields have not yet been 
measured in the gas that makes up most of the mass of 
molecular clouds. Nevertheless, magnetic field strengths 
of about 10 wG are inferred, for which the measured 
line widths would be at or below the Alfvén velocity. 
The star formation in molecular clouds is accompanied 
by energetic outflow activity which provides enough 
energy to maintain the support of the molecular clouds. 
Furthermore, the magnetic fields within molecular clouds 
may be tied to the fields in the general interstellar medium, 
and the explosions that take place there (such as by 
SUPERNOVAE) may be able to transfer some of their energy 
to the molecular clouds along magnetic field lines. 


Star formation in molecular clouds 

All known star formation takes place in molecular clouds, 
and the overwhelming majority is known to take place in 
GMCs. This is not surprising since most of the molecular 
gas resides in GMCs, but star formation in low-mass 
molecular clouds also has been observed. A region of 
active star formation known as the Eagle Nebula is shown 
in figure 1; the molecular gas (traced by CO) is seen to be 
closely confined to the columns of dust. 

All stars younger than a few million years are either 
embedded within molecular clouds or close by, having 
recently been liberated from them. The youngest stars are 
still embedded within their nascent molecular clouds and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are optically obscured by the associated dust in the densest 
portions of a molecular cloud. These stars are not visible 
optically and can only be seen with INFRARED TELESCOPES. 
The most massive young stars, the O stars, form together 
with stars of lower mass and produce regions of highly 
ionized emission called H 1 REGIONS; the brightest of these 
are always found still associated with the molecular clouds 
from which the O stars formed. This radiation, along 
with ionizing winds from these O stars, can dissociate 
and ionize the molecular gas and is the likely cause of the 
dissolution of molecular clouds. 

An example of a molecular cloud—H II region 
combination is shown in figure 2, which shows the well- 
known ROSETTE NEBULA and its associated GMC. In the 
middle of the bright nebula are five O stars that provide the 
ionizing radiation causing the H II region to fluoresce. The 
mean density of the H II region is very nearly equal to the 
mean density of the molecular cloud and is considerably 
higher than the density of the surrounding gas. The 
molecular cloud was, therefore, presumably much larger 
and was ionized by the O stars in the nebula itself. Anew 
generation of stars is forming deep within the molecular 
cloud. 

GMCs have substructure, with most of the mass 
residing in clumps of gas which are manifested as well- 
defined regions within a GMC that have a coherent 
velocity, and are separated from other clumps both 
spatially and in velocity. The mean density within the 
clumps is typically about 500-1000 cm7?, and the mean 
density averaged over the volume of a GMC is only about 
50 cm73. Thus the clumps take up only about 5-10% of the 
volume of a GMC. Star formation takes place only in the 
clumps that are the most tightly gravitationally bound and, 
within these, only in the densest regions in the central parts 
of the clump. Within the clumps are yet denser regions 
knownas cores that give rise to individual stars or binaries. 
The degree to which the cores are separate entities from 
the clumps, and the way that the cores separate from the 
clumps, is a matter of current research. However, stars 
tend to form in groups, clusters or associations and, by 
implication, there must be many cores within a typical 
clump. 

Cores have typical densities of ~10°-10° cm~ and 
can be observed in a variety of molecules. Some cores 
already have stars or protostars (stars still in the process 
of formation) within them, but some appear to be in an 
earlier stage of formation and are starless. The cores that 
form low-mass stars (stars with masses comparable with 
the Sun) have masses comparable with what would be 
produced by a Jeans instability for gas at about 10 K. For 
such an instability to produce a star, however, the core 
must lose its magnetic support. This is thought to take 
place by ambipolar diffusion, diffusion of the magnetic 
field along the field lines, but other processes, such as 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION, may also play a role. Once collapse 
begins, it is thought to take place from the inside out, 
with the central regions collapsing first. Material with 
low angular momentum falls onto the central star, and 


3 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


material with a larger angular momentum is thought to 
forma disk. Observational evidence for disks around low- 
mass stars is quite conclusive. The disks are the material 
from which planets similar to our solar system form. The 
formation of a low-mass protostar also generally gives rise 
to jets which can sometimes be observed in the optical and 
infrared portions of the spectrum and resemble the jets 
seen in quasars and radio galaxies, but with much lower 
energies. These jets can accelerate the ambient molecular 
material forming bipolar outflows which are very common 
in regions of active star formation. These outflows may be 
the source of much of the support of molecular clouds. 

High-mass star formation is likely to proceed 
differently because, once the highest-mass stars form, 
they rapidly produce regions of ionized gas known as 
H II regions, which are energetic enough to destroy a 
molecular cloud. Thus it is generally supposed that the 
highest-mass stars appear only after the low-mass stars 
have substantially formed. The cores that form high-mass 
stars have not yet been conclusively identified, but this is 
likely to be the result of observational bias. High-mass star 
formation is thought to take place very rapidly, and once 
a high-mass protostar has formed it almost immediately 
affects the region in its vicinity. It therefore becomes 
difficult to disentangle the properties of pre-existing cores 
that form high-mass stars from the effects of a previously 
formed star. 


Molecular clouds in galaxies 

Molecules have been observed in galaxies beyond the 
Milky Way since 1975. The great distance of these 
galaxies makes it difficult to resolve individual molecular 
clouds in any but the nearest galaxies: the MAGELLANIC 
CLOUDS, M31 and M33. Nevertheless, much has been learned 
about molecular clouds in other galaxies, largely from 
observations of CO and a few other molecules such as 
HCN, CS, HO and OH. 

Spiral galaxies are known to be much more abundant 
in molecular gas than elliptical galaxies; only a handful 
of elliptical galaxies are known to have molecular gas. 
Elliptical galaxies are known to be gas poor in general, so 
the paucity of molecular gas is not surprising. IRREGULAR 
GALAXIES, although generally gas rich, generally have 
relatively weak CO lines, but, since these galaxies usually 
have a relatively low abundance of heavy elements, the 
paucity of CO may not be indicative of a relative absence 
of Hp. 

Spiral galaxies exhibit a plethora of morphologies in 
the molecular gas, with CO sometimes clearly outlining 
the spiral arms, as is seen in figure 3 for the galaxy M51, 
and sometimes no spiral arms are evident as is seen for 
NGC 5055 in figure 4. The surface density of molecular 
gas is sometimes seen to increase right into the nucleus, but 
sometimes the nucleus is devoid of molecular gas as is the 
case in M31. Galaxies which appear to be morphologically 
similar in the optical portion of the spectrum may have 
very different morphologies in the molecular gas. These 
differences have only recently been recognized because 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the resolution and sensitivity necessary to make high- 
resolution images of the molecular gas have only recently 
been achieved through millimeter-wave interferometry. 

By analogy with the Milky Way, stars in other galaxies 
are thought to form where the molecular gas is bright and 
therefore abundant. This is confirmed by the presence of 
HII regions and strong infrared radiation from embedded 
stars, both of which trace recent star formation, coincident 
with the molecular clouds in the galaxies. Although 
there are large variations of the star formation rate in the 
molecular gas both from galaxy to galaxy and even within 
a galaxy, there is generally a good correlation of indicators 
of star formation with molecular gas. 

In the nuclei of some galaxies known as STARBURST 
GALAXIES, the rate of star formation is 10-100 times the 
rate of star formation in a normal galaxy. All starbursts 
are rich in molecular gas and have large quantities of 
molecules such as HCN, CS and HCO’, all of which are 
indicators of relatively dense gas. Evidently, starbursts 
occur when extraordinarily large quantities of molecular 
gas are transported into the nucleus of a galaxy, which then 
becomes unstable to rapid star formation. In general, it is 
only possible to trace the formation of high-mass stars in 
these systems and the total star formation rate is generally 
inferred by assuming that the mix of stars that is formed 
is similar to that in the Milky Way. Starburst galaxies, 
and their spectacular cousins the ultraluminous galaxies, 
are usually the product of interactions and mergers of 
two galaxies. Simulations suggest that the molecular gas 
plunges into the center in the process of merging, which 
may explain how such a large quantity of gas is brought 
to the nucleus so quickly (Se GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND 
MERGERS). 

Galaxies also sometimes have ‘active’ nuclei, in which 
explosive events are thought to be energized by a BLACK 
HOLE. That is, in falling into a black hole, energy is 
liberated which can strongly heat gas to produce very 
high expansion velocities, highly excited atoms and jets 
of material expelled from the nucleus. One class of 
these galaxies is known as SEYFERT GALAXIES, after their 
discoverer, Carl Seyfert, the nuclei of which are thought 
to be surrounded by tori of molecular gas which provide 
the fuel for the nuclear activity. These tori, although 
widely expected, have not yet been observed because 
the resolution of the observations has not yet been 
available. The molecular clouds in the circumnuclear tori 
are probably quite different from the molecular clouds 
observed in the disk of the Milky Way. 

Molecular gas has also been observed toward the edge 
of the observable universe in some of the highest-redshift 
galaxies yet observed. One galaxy with a redshift of 4.7 is 
known to contain vast amounts of CO at a time that the 
universe was less than 10% of its current age. A number 
of galaxies with redshifts between 1 and 4.7 have been 
detected and there is a great deal of interest in both finding 
more GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT and observing them in detail. 
The detected galaxies exhibit huge bursts of star formation 
and can tell us a great deal about the early formation of 
stars and the evolution of galaxies. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Interstellar Molecular Clouds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Blitz L 1993 Giant molecular clouds Protostars and Planets 
III ed Levy and Lunine (Tuscon, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) p 125 

Blitz L et al 1993 The centre of the Milky Way Nature 361 
417 

Langer W D et al 2000 Chemical evolution of protostellar 
matter Protostars and Planets IV ed Mannings, Boss 
and Russell (Tuscon, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 
p97 

McKee C F 1999 The dynamical structure and evolution 
of giant molecular clouds The Origin of Stars and 
Planetary Systems ed Lada and Kylafis (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) p 29 

van Dishoek E F and Hogerheijde M R 1999 Models 
and observations of the chemistry near young stellar 
objects The Origin of Stars and Planetary Systems ed 
Lada and Kylafis (Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 97 

Williams J P, Blitz Land McKee C F 2000 The structure and 
evolution of molecular clouds: from clumps to cores 
to the IMF Protostars and Planets IV ed Mannings, Boss 
and Russell (Tuscon, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 
p97 


Leo Blitz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Intracluster Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Intracluster Medium 


With the expression ‘intracluster medium’ (ICM) one 
indicates the material other than ordinary galaxies present 
in clusters of galaxies. The presence of the ICM is inferred 
from direct observations and indirect evidence. In 1951, a 
famous paper by F zwicky on the morphology of the coma 
CLUSTER of galaxies in the northern hemisphere reported 
his discovery of a diffuse light in the region between 
galaxies belonging to the Coma cluster: ‘... vast and often 
very irregular swarms of stars and other matter exists in the 
spaces between the conventional spiral, elliptical, and irregular 
galaxies’. Following Zwicky’s initial discovery of the 
presence of an intragalactic matter made up from stars, 
in 1966 a source of x-rays was detected in the VIRGO CLUSTER 
and was followed by detections in the Perseus cluster and 
in the Coma cluster itself in 1971. Since then, several x- 
ray satellites have observed nearly hundreds of clusters 
showing that indeed they are bright sources of x-rays. 
The observations in the optical wavelengths and the x- 
ray detections indicate that the clusters of galaxies contain 
an ICM and this material is present in two phases: a 
diffuse stellar component, irregularly distributed, and 
a hot tenuous gas that fills the cluster more or less 
homogeneously. Indirect evidence for the presence of an 
unseen component in clusters of galaxies comes from the 
application of the virial theorem to the observed velocity 
dispersion of galaxies in clusters: for the cluster to be in 
equilibrium an additional component other than galaxies, 
the hot gas, and diffuse star light, must be present to keep 
the clusters bound. 


Properties and origin of the diffuse light 

The first observations of the diffuse light associated with 
the ICM in clusters of galaxies were based on photographic 
techniques, followed recently by observations with 
CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs). Several difficulties 
affected these earlier studies. Photographic plates do 
not have an homogeneous response through them (and 
this behavior cannot be accounted for during the data 
analysis as is done for images acquired with CCDs) and 
typically the surface brightness of the intracluster light 
is less than 1% of the night sky brightness. In addition 
there is scattered light from bright objects, the contribution 
from discrete sources—dwarf or irregular galaxies—below 
the detection limit, and clusters extend over large areas 
on the sky: nearby clusters such as Virgo or FORNAX 
cover an area of several square degrees (the image of the 
Moon or the Sun covers half a square degree on the sky) 
while linear detectors such as CCDs cover a much smaller 
area (of the order of hundreds of square arcminutes) and 
mosaicing is required. Furthermore, at the position of 
cluster centers one normally finds a giant elliptical galaxy 
with an extended halo of stars: these objects are classified 
as cDs, i.e. cluster dominant galaxies. In these cases it is 
difficult to disentangle the diffuse light associated with 
the halo of the cD galaxy and the ICM diffuse stellar 
component. The best estimate based on these observations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for the diffuse light component of the ICM is that its 
contribution is 10-50% of the total cluster light in galaxies, 
in a region between 200 h7! kpc and 450 h~! kpc from the 
central cD galaxy (here the HUBBLE CONSTANT is written as 
100 h-' km s~! Mpc). 

An alternative method for probing intracluster star 
light in the ICM is through the direct detection and 
measurements of the stars themselves. In the 1970s a line 
of attack to track down the debris making up the diffuse 
light in the ICM was to look for intergalactic supernovae, 
but these studies reported a negative answer for the Coma 
cluster, while an intergalactic supernova was detected in 
1981 in the Virgo cluster. In the 1980s another suggestion 
was that the cD galaxies in clusters might be surrounded by 
a population of globular clusters stripped from their parent 
galaxies: there are now suggestions that the pronounced 
globular cluster overabundance of some galaxies at the 
centers of galaxy clusters is best explained by assuming the 
existence of a population of intergalactic globular clusters. 

Very recent observations have shown that direct 
detection of individual stars in the ICM is possible. Studies 
of the ICM in the Virgo and Fornax clusters have detected 
several hundreds of point-like emissions from individual 
stars in their post-AGB phase of PLANETARY NEBULAE. The 
planetary nebulae are very easy to detect because their 
nebular outer shell encircling the central star emits nearly 
15% of the total energy from the central star in the [O TT] 
emission line at 5007 A: by simply taking an image through 
a narrow-band filter centered at the planetary nebulae 
redshifted [O III] emission and in its adiacent continuum, 
it has been possible to identify nearly a hundred planetary 
nebulae emissions in nearby clusters. Simulations based 
on the overall number of detected planetary nebulae 
emissions and the properties of their luminosity function 
in early-type galaxies indicate that the diffuse stellar 
component in the ICM can contribute up to 50% of the total 
light emitted by galaxies in the Virgo and Fornax clusters. 

Independent evidence for the presence of stars in 
the ICM comes from observations carried out with the 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. These observations have detected 
red-giant-branch stars (stars nearly 13 Gyr old) in a Virgo 
cluster field centered 235 kpc east of the galaxy NGC 4486, 
placed at the center of this cluster. The excess star number 
counts in this surveyed field with respect to a control field 
and calibrations based on well-known luminosity profiles 
of elliptical galaxies (which have a population with similar 
age and color to the intergalactic stars detected with the 
Hubble Space Telescope) indicate that the diffuse light in 
the ICM contributes nearly 10% of the stellar mass in Virgo 
cluster galaxies. 

The discrepancy between the detections based on the 
[O III] line emission from planetary nebulae, observed in 
the region of the Virgo cluster core, and the red number 
count excess may be related to a strong inhomogeneity 
in the distribution of the stellar component of the ICM. 
The detailed spatial distribution of this diffuse stellar 
component is not known yet on the Mpc scale (typical 
radius for a cluster of galaxies is nearly 3 Mpc), and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Intracluster Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


its distribution may be related to the origin of this ICM 
component itself. Tidal interactions between galaxies in 
a cluster are expected to be frequent and cause galaxies 
to lose a substantial fraction, 30-70%, of their stars 
to the cluster potential where they become the stellar 
component of the ICM. Because this diffuse component 
would then originate from tidal tails, one expects its spatial 
distribution to be quite inhomogeneous. The debris can be 
relaxed in the cluster core but the further out one goes, the 
more unrelaxed the population might become. 

Large CCDs, mosaiced detectors and observations 
with the Hubble Space Telescope will soon address these 
questions and give more information on the origin of this 
component of the ICM. The discovery of single stars in the 
ICM gives an opportunity to detect the local cluster mass- 
over-light ratio at the positions where they are identified, 
and have strong implications on the baryonic content of 
clusters and the origin of the hot gas phase in the ICM. 


Properties and origin of the hot gas 

The x-ray hot gas is the main ‘visible’ component of clusters 
of galaxies: its total mass varies from 1 (groups) to 7 (rich 
clusters) times the stellar mass present in cluster galaxies 
and it can reach up to 30% of the total cluster mass— 
visible plus dark matter. The gas mass in the ICM is also 
highly correlated with the luminosity from ellipticals and 
lenticulars present in the cluster. The total mass in the hot- 
gas component of the ICM ranges from 2 x 10’ to 5.2 x 104 
solar masses within a 3 Mpc radius: this corresponds very 
roughly to a gas density of 10-° atoms cm~°. The x-ray 
emission from galaxy clusters is generally interpreted as 
due to thermal bremsstrahlung in hot gas (gas temperature 
within 10’-10° K): the observations of the temperature 
profiles of the hot gas are consistent with the gas itself 
being in hydrostatic equilibrium, i.e. the gas pressure is 
balanced by the gravitational force generated by the mass 
distribution in the cluster. Poor clusters have low central 
density, low gas mass and low temperature, whereas rich 
clusters have high central density, high gas mass and high 
temperature. 

The hot emitting gas is enriched with heavy elements: 
x-ray satellite observations done in the late 1970s revealed 
the presence of heavy-element emission lines in the x-ray 
emission associated with clusters. The inferred iron 
abundance of the ICM seems to have an universal value, 
i.e. about 0.35 of the solar iron abundance. The detection of 
the iron lines in the x-ray spectra has shown that the gas is 
enriched in metals and has been processed, at least in part, 
into the stellar content of cluster galaxies. The general 
view is that the heavy elements in the ICM come from 
galaxies (mainly ellipticals and lenticulars) which eject 
gas through gas winds which are powered by supernova 
explosions. In fact the iron masses detected in the ICM 
are correlated with the luminosity of cluster early-type 
galaxies. It is interesting to compare the iron yield needed 
to reproduce the typical observed iron mass over stellar 
mass ratio in clusters. For a typical cluster, the value turns 
out to be 5x 10-3 whichis 5 times larger than that measured 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for the Milky Way galaxy: the conclusion is that one cannot 
account for the iron mass in the ICM using standard iron 
mass yield, i.e. that of our Galaxy. Astronomers are led to 
believe that there was a high supernova activity in cluster 
galaxies in the past, either a much higher past average 
SNI rate as compared with the present value observed 
in ellipticals (at least a factor 10) or a high SNII rate (as 
generated for istance by a flat initial mass function). 

Chemical evolution models, which makes use of 
bimodal star formation or a higher SNII rate, are able to 
predict the iron masses (typically of the order of 10’ solar 
masses) in the ICM, but the total ejected masses of gas are 
always an order of magnitude smaller than the observed 
ones. This would imply that the bulk of gas observed in the 
hot x-ray emitting component of the ICM has a primordial 
origin, i.e. it is pristine material produced during the big 
bang and was never used to form stars. The agreement 
between the prediction of the chemical evolution model 
for early-type galaxies and the observed heavy element 
content of the ICM is based on the assumption that there 
had been a complete mixing of the galactic heavy-element- 
enriched gas with the unprocessed ICM gas ona time scale 
shorter than the age of the universe. 

The recent discovery of massive compact halo objects 
(MACHOs) and the estimate of their total mass fraction 
in our galaxy halo may give an alternative explanation for 
the origin of the hot gas in the ICM. The latest observations 
indicate that MACHOs may constitute 30-80% of the total 
galactic halo mass, and, if one assumes that they are 
common components of all cluster galaxy halos and they 
are the remnants of an early population of stars that also 
lost 30% of their initial mass as gas to the ICM, then 
this mass loss from the stellar progenitors of MACHOs is 
potentially a very significant source of gas in groups and 
clusters (see also WIMPS AND MACHOS). 


Distribution of the hot diffuse gas 

The hot diffuse component of the ICM peaks at the 
center of the cluster and falls off with distance from the 
center, and the x-ray emission can be traced out to a 
distance of 3 Mpc. Recent observations carried out with 
the latest generation of x-ray satellites indicate that the 
hot gas in the ICM traces the hierarchical distribution 
of dark matter in clusters. Recent observations for the 
nearby Fornax cluster produced a gas density map and the 
temperature profile of the hot gas over an area of 0.5 square 
degrees, centered on the galaxy NGC 1399. Using this gas 
density map and the temperature profile in the hydrostatic 
equilibrium equation, the mass distribution is computed 
and the result shows the presence of a more concentrated 
dark matter distribution associated with the galaxy and 
a shallower mass distribution at larger radii associated 
with the cluster. Similar evidence is also found for the 
Virgo cluster. Such observations are crucial to establish the 
clustering properties of the dark matter, which are strongly 
dependent on its intrinsic nature. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Intracluster Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Additional components of the ICM 

The sum of the masses in cluster galaxies, stellar diffuse 
plus hot gas ICM components in clusters, can account 
for up to 30% of the gravitational mass needed to keep 
any clusters bound. Therefore an additional ‘unseen’ dark 
component is present in the ICM. Possible candidates for 
dark matter constituents are MACHO-like objects and 
remnants of massive stars, such as black holes, neutron 
stars or cool white dwarfs, but, particularly in the case 
of the dark component of the ICM, elementary particles 
or non-baryonic matter are important as dark matter 
candidates. In clusters of galaxies the ratio between the 
so-called ‘baryonic mass’ and total mass is near the limit 
imposed by nucleosynthesis constraints, based on the 
relative abundances of light elements such as deuterium, 
helium and lithium observed in our universe, and a 
cosmological model with Q)5 = 0.2. Therefore any 
additional dark components in clusters must be in some 
sort of non-baryonic form. 


Future developments 

The new x-ray observations made with the x-ray Asca 
satellite are indeed giving astronomers new insight into 
the properties of the hot-gas component of the ICM; 
the determination of the number counts of the stellar 
component of the ICM via large-format CCD images 
and observations with the new advanced camera on 
the Hubble Space Telescope will give the welcome 
opportunity to determine the local mass-over-light ratio 
of the ICM itself. These two complementary lines of work 
will help in understanding the mechanism which led to 
the formation of clusters, and therefore to galaxy and star 
formation within the cluster itself. The use of the most 
accurate temperature profiles and gas density distribution 
maps at high resolution will represent a powerful tool to 
determine the accurate cluster mass spectrum which is 
crucial for its implications for cosmological models and the 
determination of the average mass density of the universe. 


Bibliography 

Arnaboldi M et al 1996 The kinematic of planetary nebulae 
in the outer regions of NGC 4406 Astrophys. J. 472 145 

Arnaud M et al 1992 Some constraints on the origin of the 
iron enriched intra-cluster medium Astron. Astrophys. 
254 49 

Carlberg R G et al 1996 Galaxy cluster virial masses and Qo 
Astrophys. J. 462 32 

David L P 1997 The baryonic content of galaxies and 
clusters Astrophys. J. 484 L11 

Feldmeier J J, Ciardullo R and Jacoby G H 1998 Intracluster 
planetary nebulae in the Virgo cluster. I. Initial results 
Astrophys. J. 503 109 

Matteucci F and Vettolani G 1988 Chemical abundances 
in galaxy clusters: a theoretical approach Astron. 
Astrophys. 202 21 

Moore B et al 1996 Galaxy harrassment and the evolution 
of cluster galaxies Nature 379 613 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sarazin C L 1988 X-ray Emission from Cluster of Galaxies 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

White S D M, Navarro J F, Evrard A E and Frenk C S 1993 
The baryon content of galaxy clusters: a challange to 
cosmologiocal orthodoxy Nature 366 429 


Magda Arnaboldi 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lo: Plasma Torus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lo: Plasma Torus 


The discovery of the four largest moons of Jupiter (Io, 
EUROPA, GANYMEDE and CALLISTO) by GALILEO GALILEI in 
1610 was crucial to the rejection of the then prevalent 
theory that the Earth was at the center of the universe. In 
the following 350 years, several additional small satel- 
lites of Jupiter were discovered (see JUPITER: SATELLITES) 
but relatively little was learnt about the physical proper- 
ties of what are now called the Galilean satellites and 
nothing was known of their interaction with Jupiter and 
its magnetic field. A turning point occurred in 1964 when 
E K Bigg showed that radio emissions from Jupiter at 
decametric wavelengths (previously discovered by 
Franklin and Burke in 1950) were modulated by the 
orbital position of the innermost Galilean satellite, Io. 
The presence of radio emissions indicated that Jupiter 
had a significant magnetic field and the modulation by Io 
suggested a complex interaction between the magnetic 
field and the Galilean satellite (see JUPITER: MAGNETO- 
SPHERE, MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, SATELLITE INTERACTIONS). 

The next important discovery was made by R A 
Brown in 1972 who detected optical emission from a neu- 
tral sodium gas cloud surrounding Io and accompanying 
it in its orbit about Jupiter. Sodium atoms have two 
strong lines at visible wavelengths (589.0 nm and 589.6 
nm) which are excited by a resonance scattering mecha- 
nism. The Sun provides the light source in this case and 
the sodium neutrals scatter any light at the emission 
wavelengths they receive in their rest frame. Although 
the light source comes from only one direction (the Sun), 
the emission is essentially isotropic. At the rest wave- 
lengths of neutral sodium emission, the luminosity of the 
Sun is actually rather low because of deep FRAUNHOFER 
LINES. However, Io has an orbital velocity of 17.4 km s-1 
about Jupiter. The neutral sodium cloud accompanying 
Io in its orbit therefore sees the solar illumination 
Doppler shifted by up to about 0.02 nm (the Doppler 
shift being greatest when Io is at its greatest elongation 
from Jupiter as seen from the Sun). This is sufficient to 
provide a 10-fold modulation of the brightness of the 
sodium gas cloud surrounding Io depending upon the 
orbital phase of the satellite. 

The neutral sodium cloud is a further product of the 
interaction between Io and Jupiter’s magnetic field. Io 
orbits at a radial distance of 5.91 Jupiter radii (Rj) where 
1 R; is equivalent to 7.138x104 km. Jupiter’s magnetic 
field, which defines the rotation rate of Jupiter, has an 
angular velocity of 870.536° day—!. The magnetic field at 
Io’s orbit is completely dominated by Jupiter (i.e. there is 
no influence on the magnetic field strength from the solar 
wind interaction—this only becomes important at dis- 
tances greater than about 20 R; from the planet). Io itself 
may have a small intrinsic magnetic field but this 
remains unproven. The magnetic field lines of Jupiter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


co-rotate with the rotation of the planet. Therefore, at Io’s 
orbit, the field lines have a velocity of 74.2 km s-! and 
have a velocity with respect to Io of 56.8 km s~!. Ions pro- 
duced in Jupiter’s magnetic field are trapped and co- 
rotate with the magnetic field (this is a consequence of 
Faraday’s law). Hence, magnetospheric ions have a high 
relative velocity with respect to Io. Ions which impact the 
surface and/or atmosphere of the satellite have consid- 
erable energy which is used to eject fresh neutrals from 
Io. This sputtering process, with some minor modifica- 
tions, is still thought to be the principal mechanism by 
which material is removed from Io 25 years after it was 
first suggested by Matson et al. Recently, strong evidence 
has been presented suggesting that this sputtering 
process might be supplemented by direct removal of ions 
(produced by photoionization of SO, for example) from 
Io’s atmosphere by the co-rotating magnetic field. 

The flyby of Io by the voyAGER 1 spacecraft in 1979 
provided a huge leap in our knowledge of the Jupiter 
system. The main result was the discovery of active vol- 
canism (see IO: VOLCANISM AND GEOPHYSICS) which had 
been predicted by Peale, Cassen and Reynolds in an arti- 
cle in Nature published just five days before the flyby. 
Volcanism is a possible consequence of tidal forces acting 
on Io produced by an orbital resonance between Io, 
Europa and Ganymede. The surface of Io was observed 
to be almost craterless, indicating rapid resurfacing of 
the satellite resulting from the volcanism. The estimated 
resurfacing rate is around 0.1 mm per year. The remark- 
able colors on the surface indicated a predominance of 
sulfur and the satellite was shown to have a tenuous SO} 
atmosphere. In addition, the plasma in Jupiter’s magne- 
tosphere near the orbit of Io was shown to be dominated 
by sulfur and oxygen ions. The latter provided remark- 
able confirmation of the ground-based detection of emis- 
sion from St ions in Jupiter’s magnetosphere made by 
Kupo et al in 1975. This observation was controversial at 
the time because it appeared to contradict measurements 
made by the PIONEER 10 spacecraft which seemed to indi- 
cate a dense plasma dominated by protons. Ground- 
based observers prior to the Voyager 1 flyby consistently 
measured S+ emission appearing to come from a ring 
about Jupiter centered roughly on the orbit of Io. Electron 
densities could be determined by measuring the ratio of 
an St+ emission doublet at (671.6 nm and 673.1 nm) pro- 
duced by collisional excitation. Values between 1000 and 
10000 cm were consistently recorded—much lower 
than densities derived from Pioneer 10 measurements. 
Just prior to the Voyager 1 flyby, Pilcher and Morgan 
detected emission from O+ through its collisionally excit- 
ed doublet at a wavelength of 372.7 nm. 

The Voyager results completely vindicated the 
results from ground-based observations and gave a clear 
picture of the plasma environment near Io’s orbit. 
Plasma in Jupiter’s magnetosphere sputters material 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


lo: Plasma Torus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a 
2LasMA EauATOR/ ~~ 


/ 
SA TORUS 
WARM INNER TORUS 


L 
t 


JOVICENTRIC 5 
DISTANCE (R,) 


lo’s ORBIT 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram showing a section through the 
torus. The ‘plasma equator’ indicates the equilibrium position 
for ions in the torus. This plane is tilted by about 7° with respect 
to the rotation equator. The variations of ion density and tem- 
perature in the torus with Jovicentric distance are shown in the 
form of plots. The density peaks just inside Io’s orbit in a region 
referred to as the ‘warm inner torus’ (or sometimes ‘the ribbon’). 
The temperature peaks just outside Io’s orbit and decreases radi- 
ally outwards as the plasma expands into the middle magneto- 
sphere. Inside the warm inner torus, the plasma is cold. 
The regions have been widely separated in the diagram for 
emphasis. 


from the surface and/or atmosphere of Io, producing a 
series of neutral clouds. Neutral sodium is the most eas- 
ily detected from ground-based observation because it is 
a remarkably efficient scatterer of sunlight. However, it is 
only a trace element, making up around 5% of the neu- 
tral clouds. Sulfur and oxygen neutrals actually domi- 
nate the composition. Oxygen atoms have been detected 
from ground-based observations at 630.0 nm. Electrons 
in Jupiter’s magnetosphere interact with the neutrals to 
produce ions by electron impact ionization. The ions are 
then picked up by Jupiter’s co-rotating magnetic field. 
The ions are thus swept into a ring about Jupiter centered 
roughly on Io’s orbit. The ions diffuse both inwards and 
outwards from this ring to fill a torus-shaped volume in 
space which is called the Io plasma torus or ‘IPT’. 

The density, temperature and composition of the IPT 
vary strongly with the radial distance from Jupiter. 
Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of a section through 
the torus. 

Inside Io’s orbit the plasma is cool and the composi- 
tion is dominated by singly ionized species (mostly St+ 
and O+). The electron and ion temperatures, although 
not in equilibrium, rise rapidly between 5.4 Rj and 6.0 Rj. 
The higher-energy electrons give rise to a more highly 
ionized plasma and S2+ becomes the most numerous sul- 
fur ion around 5.8 Rj. The electron temperature continues 
to rise outside Io’s orbit and more highly ionized species 
are seen as one moves towards the middle magnetos- 
phere of Jupiter. The ion temperature, however, decreas- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


es due in part to the expansion of the plasma into the 
middle magnetosphere. The electron density reaches a 
maximum of around 3000 cm-3 at around 5.7 R;—just 
inside the orbit of Io. The estimated composition at 5.9 R; 
(at Io’s orbit) is estimated to be 14% St, 48% O+, 19% S2+, 
2% O2+, 2% S3+, 2% Nat, <2% SO*7. A 10% mixing ratio 
of protons is usually assumed but this is uncertain. The 
estimated mass of the IPT is around 2-106 tonne. 

The Voyager spacecraft provided only a snapshot of 
the conditions in the IPT during its flyby. Observations of 
the IPT using ground-based telescopes (e.g. the 
European Southern Observatory) and Earth-orbiting 
observatories (e.g. Hubble Space Telescope, International 
Ultraviolet Explorer, Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer, 
Infrared Space Observatory) have become the main tools 
in the investigation of the IPT since they provide both a 
synoptic view of the IPT and can be used to investigate 
the time variability of the IPT. All observable emissions 
are produced by collisional excitation and therefore the 
observed intensity in any emission line is proportional to 
the product of the electron density and the ion density 
integrated along the line of sight through the toroidal 
volume. Because Earth-based observers view the torus 


Io Sulfur Torus: One Rotation on 31 January, 1991 


Dawn! Ansa Dusk! Ansa 


(East) 


\ | 
Catalina Observatory 


I 
~ 
| 
| 


N.M. Schneider, J.T. Trauger 


Figure 2. A time-series of ground-based observations of the Io 
plasma torus. Jupiter is seen in the center of the frame. Jupiter 
rotates in 9.925 h. The Io torus oscillates over this time scale 
because the magnetic axis of Jupiter is tilted by 9.8° with respect 
to its spin axis. The ionized sulfur emission seen here also shows 
an east (left)—west (right) brightness asymmetry. Image courtesy 
of N M Schneider (University of Colorado) and J T Trauger 
UPL). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


lo: Plasma Torus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


roughly edge-on, the maximum emission is seen at the 
ansae (outer edges) of the IPT around 5.7 R; from Jupiter 
in projection (see figure 2) and decreases rapidly as the 
radial distance decreases. Most of our knowledge stems 
from observations of the ansae of the IPT over a rather 
limited radial distance from Jupiter (roughly 5.0-6.5 R)). 
The integrated emission from the IPT is around 4x1012 W 
with the strongest emissions being in the extreme ultra- 
violet. The 68.5 nm emission of S2+ is responsible for 5% 
of the emission from the IPT alone. 

Figure 2 shows how the IPT appears to wobble in a 
Jupiter-centered reference frame. Jupiter’s magnetic 
dipole is tilted by 9.8° with respect to the rotation axis. 
The equilibrium position for ions in a dipole magnetic 
field is the magnetic equator (where the magnetic mirror 
force becomes zero). However, Jupiter is rotating with 
high angular velocity and thus the centrifugal force on 
the ions has to be taken into account. As a result, the 
equilibrium position for the ions is at the so-called cen- 
trifugal equator which is between the rotational equator 
and the magnetic equator. The centrifugal equator is tilt- 
ed by about 7° with respect to the rotational equator. In a 
reference frame connected to Jupiter’s rotation axis, the 
IPT therefore appears to wobble with the ansae oscillat- 
ing up and down with an amplitude of about 1.4 R; (peak 
to peak). 

Another feature of figure 2 is that the IPT on the 
west of Jupiter (right) appears to be brighter than on the 
east (left). This feature was first recognized in Voyager 
data and is believed to be caused by the existence of an 
electric field which shifts the IPT slightly towards the 
east as seen from the Earth (Barbosa and Kivelson 1983). 
IPT ions in the east are therefore slightly further away 
from Jupiter than their counterparts in the west. Being 
further away in a dipole system, the ions are less con- 
fined and therefore less dense. Collisional excitation is 
strongly proportional to density and thus the east 
appears slightly fainter. 

The IPT is highly variable on several different time 
scales. A variability is seen in the brightness of the torus 
with a period equal to Jupiter’s rotation period (System 
Ill). The brightness modulation is anti-correlated with 
the ion temperature (Schneider and Trauger 1995). The 
mechanism producing this phenomenon is at present 
unknown. A second variation with a period roughly 3% 
longer than System III (sometimes referred to as System 
IV) is also evident and may be the result of long-lived 
density waves in the IPT (Roesler et al 1984). The torus is 
also variable on long time scales and can vary in bright- 
ness from year to year by up to a factor of 4. There is also 
some evidence that the flow past Io modifies the plasma 
parameters so that the brightness downstream of Io is 
slightly enhanced. 

New observations of Jupiter, its satellites and envi- 
rons have been made by Cassini, Galileo, the Hubble 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Space Telescope, the Chandra X-ray Observatory and 
Earth-based radio and optical telescopes during the 
CASSINI spacecraft’s flyby. The GALILEO spacecraft has 
been in orbit around Jupiter since December 1995 while 
Cassini observed Jupiter from 1 October 2000 to 31 
March 31 2001. Cassini made its closest approach on 30 
December 2000, at a distance of about 9.7 million kilo- 
meters (6 million miles). Data from the flyby observa- 
tions show that Io leaves a magnetic footprint on 
Jupiter’s upper atmosphere which appears as a spot of 
ultraviolet emission that remains fixed underneath Io as 
Jupiter rotates. The specific physical mechanisms 
responsible for generating these emissions are not well 
understood, but in general the spot seems to arise 
because of an electromagnetic interaction between 
Jupiter’s magnetic field and the plasma surrounding Io, 
driving currents of around 1 million amperes down 
through Jupiter’s ionosphere. Io’s magnetic footprint 
extends well beyond the immediate vicinity of Io’s 
flux-tube interaction with Jupiter, and much farther 
than predicted theoretically; the emission persists for 
several hours downstream. 

The Cassini spacecraft has also discovered a fast 
(greater than 103 kms-!) and hot magnetospheric neu- 
tral wind extending more than 0.5 au from Jupiter, and 
the presence of energetic neutral atoms (both hot and 
cold) that have been accelerated by the electric field in 
the solar wind. It is suggested that these atoms origi- 
nate in volcanic gases from Io, undergo significant evo- 
lution through various electromagnetic interactions, 
escape Jupiter’s magnetosphere and then populate the 
environment around the planet. Thus a ‘nebula’ is cre- 
ated that extends outwards over hundreds of Jovian 
radii. 


Bibliography 

Barbosa D D and Kivelson M G 1983 Dawn-—dusk electric 
field asymmetry of the Io plasma torus Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 10 210-3 

Brown R A 1974 Optical line emission from Io Exploration 
of the Planetary System ed A Woszczyk and C 
Iwaniszewska (Dordrecht: Reidel) pp 527-31 

Clarke J T et al February 2002 Ultraviolet emissions from 
the magnetic footprints of Io, Ganymede and 
Europa on Jupiter Nature 415 997-1000 

Dessler A J 1983 The Physics of the Jovian Magnetosphere 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Krimigis S M et al February 2002 A nebula of gases from 
Io surrounding Jupiter Nature 415 994-996 

Kupo I, Mekler Y and Eviatar A 1976 Detection of ionized 
sulphur in the Jovian magnetosphere Astrophys. J. 
205 L51-3 

Matson D L, Johnson T V and Fanale F P 1974 Sodium 
D-line emission from Io: Sputtering and resonant 
scattering hypotheses Astrophys. J. 192 L43-6 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


lo: Plasma Torus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nash D B, Carr M H, Gradie J, Hunten D M and Yoder 
C F 1986 Io Satellites ed J A Burns and M S Matthews 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Peale S J, Cassen P and Reynolds R T 1979 Melting of Io 
by tidal dissipation Science 203 892-4 

Pilcher C B and Morgan J S 1979 Detection of singly ion- 
ized oxygen around Jupiter Science 205 297-8 

Roesler F L, Scherb F and Oliversen R J 1984 Periodic 
intensity variation in [SII] 9531 A emission from the 
Jupiter plasma torus Geophys. Res. Lett. 11 128-30 

Schneider N M and Trauger J T 1995 The structure of the 
Io torus Astrophys. J. 450 450 

Spencer J R and Schneider N M 1996 Io on the eve of the 
Galileo mission Annu. Rev. Earth PI. Sci. 24 125-90 


Nicolas Thomas 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


lo: Volcanism and Geophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lo: Volcanism and Geophysics 


Io is the innermost of the four large Galilean satellites 
of Jupiter discovered by Galileo Galilei in 1610. Io’s 
mean radius (1821 km) and bulk density (3.53 g cm~%) 
are comparable with those of the Moon. However, long 
before the VOYAGER spacecraft encounters, it was apparent 
from Earth-based observations that Io is very different 
from the Moon: it has an unusual color and anomalous 
thermal properties, and it is surrounded by immense 
clouds of ions and neutral atoms. These observations were 
much better understood following the discovery of active 
volcanic plumes and hot spots on Io during the Voyager 1 
spacecraft encounter in 1979. The volcanism is driven by 
tidal heating, from periodic deformation of Io’s shape as 
it orbits massive JUPITER. 

Many Voyager-era investigators thought that Io’s 
active volcanism was dominated by sulfurous eruptions 
rather than the silicate volcanism seen in the inner 
solar system. More recent observations by Earth-based 
telescopes and the GALILEO MISSION (1995-1998+) have 
shown that the volcanism on Io is dominated by high- 
temperature eruptions of silicate lava. 

Gravity measurements from tracking of the Galileo 
spacecraft indicate that Io has a large iron or iron—iron 
sulfide core, constituting up to 20% of the satellite’s 
mass. The bulk density of Io, its rugged topography and 
models of satellite origin suggest that the bulk composition 
of the crust and mantle is silicate. However, the 
surface composition has been greatly altered by volcanic 
outgassing. Sulfur dioxide (SO,) has been positively 
identified both as a gas and as a surface frost. Elemental 
sulfur is considered a likely surface component on the 
basis of (1) the similarity of Io’s ultraviolet through near- 
infrared spectral reflectance to that of powdered sulfur 
and (2) the detection of sulfur ions in 10’s PLASMA ToRUS. The 
detections of clouds of Na and K around Io indicate that 
these elements must be present on the surface in some 
form. 


Tidal heating mechanisms and internal structure 
The importance of tidal heating in powering the enhanced 
heat flow and active volcanism of Io is widely accepted. 
All plausible non-tidal heat sources are about 2 orders of 
magnitude less energetic than the power output of Io (at 
least 10!4 W). Accretional heating can supply, at most, half 
the gravitational potential energy of Io; the power output, 
averaged over 4.5 billion years, is 5 x 10'! W. However, 
the accretional heat was probably removed by conduction 
or convection very early in Io’s history. Core formation 
can supply only a fraction of the maximum accretional 
energy, and it also is short lived. Radiogenic heating is a 
continuous process and is estimated to supply 5 x 10" W. 
Heating of the surface by an electrical current running 
between Io and Jupiter’s ionosphere provides a maximum 
power of 2 x 10" W, but an ionosphere is likely to divert 
most of the current around Io. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The basic tidal heating mechanism involves deforma- 
tion of Io into a triaxial ellipsoid by Jupiter’s gravitational 
field. Because Io’s orbit is eccentric, the satellite undergoes 
a periodic deformation. The dissipation also decreases Io’s 
orbital eccentricity, which is forced to remain non-zero by 
the orbital resonance between Io and Eurora. The total rate 
of tidal dissipation within Io depends on the internal struc- 
ture and material properties of both Io and Jupiter. In par- 
ticular, the transfer of orbital energy from Jupiter to Io is 
a consequence of the bulge raised on Jupiter by Io, and 
the rate of such transfer depends on Jupiter’s dissipation 
factor, but this value is poorly known. 

The mechanism of heat dissipation is intimately tied 
to Io’s internal structure. An early model, with ‘runaway’ 
melting of the interior and tidal energy dissipated within a 
thin, elastic lithosphere, now seems unlikely. Dissipation 
of all the tidal energy within the lithosphere requires 
that it be 8-18 km thick, and such a thin lithosphere is 
inconsistent with the presence of mountains more than 
10 km high (see below). The model may be modified 
by invoking a thicker lithosphere and heat transfer by 
volcanism rather than conduction, perhaps overlying 
crystal-rich magma rather than a fully molten interior. 
However, runaway melting might never have occurred 
if subsolidus convection removes the heat faster than it is 
added. Most workers consider Io to be a differentiated 
body with an iron-rich core, a solid mantle perhaps with 
an upper partly molten layer, overlain by a thick (30- 
100 km) lithosphere. Most of the tidal energy is probably 
dissipated by viscous or viscoelastic deformation below 
the lithosphere, and most of the heat is transported to the 
surface by silicate magmas. 


Geomorphology 

The morphology and surface markings on Io are almost 
entirely the result of volcanic processes, with the possible 
exception of the high mountains. Impact craters, the 
dominant landform on most solid planetary bodies, 
have not been observed on Io, despite the comet flux 
concentration by Jupiter’s gravity. The lack of impact 
craters indicates that the surface is very young, and 
is consistent with estimates of resurfacing by volcanic 
activity (~1 cm yr~'). The intense volcanism has resulted 
in a variety of surface features of three general categories: 
volcanic centers, mountains and plains (figure 1). 

Io is spotted by local dark markings that probably 
consist of recently erupted silicate lavas and marking 
active volcanic centers. Where picture resolution and 
illumination conditions permit discrimination of surface 
relief, many of these markings are seen to lie within 
depressions that resemble terrestrial calderas. Calderas 
have steep, scalloped walls, flat floors and smooth rims; 
they form by collapse over shallow magma chambers 
following eruption of volcanic materials. Dark markings 
may cover all or part of a caldera floor and adjacent 
regions. The calderas range from about 10 to 200 km in 
diameter and are as deep as ~2 km. Most calderas are not 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lo: Volcanism and Geophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Mosaic of Voyager images of Io at a scale of 

1 km/pixel. The landforms of Io include tall mountains, 
plateaus, calderas and layered plains. There are also color and 
albedo markings suggestive of lava flows and plume deposits. 


associated with an obvious edifice, but some low shield- 
shaped edifices with summit calderas are present. The 
steep caldera walls and association with high-temperature 
hot spots are inconsistent with the concept of a thick sulfur 
crust. Io’s crust is probably composed of silicate rocks, 
and the sulfurous materials form a relatively thin surface 
veneer as well as ground fluids at depth. 

Elongated sinuous markings like lava flows can be 
seen in many areas, especially when not confined within 
a caldera (figures 1 and 2). (The caldera floors may 
be covered by coalesced flows, so the flow margins are 
less apparent.) Most dark markings are sources of high- 
temperature hot spots consistent with ongoing eruptions 
of silicate lava. Thus, the dark areas are the sites of active 
volcanic vents, and there are about 100 such active centers 
on Io. The spectral reflectances of the dark materials 
are consistent with silicates containing magnesium-rich 
orthopyroxene, and with varying degrees of sulfurous 
coatings. Diffuse bright white, yellow and red markings 
in and around volcanic centers are common and may be 
the result of sulfurous fumarolic and plume activity. 

The second major class of surface feature is 
mountains, which typically have irregular outlines and 
rugged surfaces that appear tectonically disrupted. They 
may be as large as 600 km in basal diameter and 15 km 
high. The origin of these high mountains is not resolved. 
They may be degraded volcanoes, exposures of a silicate 
basement complex or uplifted (and sometimes tilted) 
crustal blocks. Most workers agree that the mountains 
must be dominantly silicate rather than sulfur, because 
sulfur does not have sufficient strength to support the 
observed relief. Although superposition relations are 
unclear, the mountains are generally considered to be 
the oldest materials exposed on Io’s surface, but higher- 
resolution images are required to confirm this hypothesis. 

Most of Io’s surface is covered by plains with little 
apparent relief. They have complex ALBeDo and color 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


patterns, and, where relief is discernible, they are often 
seen to be layered. The plains and their surface patterns 
may have been formed by a variety of materials and 
processes, including lava flows, deposition from plumes, 
condensation of volatiles and possibly pyroclastic flows. 


Volcanic plumes 

One of the most dramatic phenomena on the surface of 
Io is the active volcanic plumes. They erupt under condi- 
tions of pressure, temperature and gravity very different 
from those on Earth, and they are probably driven by SO, 
and/or sulfur in which multiple phase changes can occur, 
so the plume dynamics and thermodynamics are unlike 
those of terrestrial eruptions. The low gravity and espe- 
cially the very low atmospheric pressure on Io (~10~? bar) 
result in plumes up to 10* times larger on Io than would 
be produced by comparable eruptions on Earth (see voL- 
CANISM IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM). 

Nine eruption plumes were observed during the 
Voyager 1 encounter; eight of these were also observed 
4 months later by Voyager 2. Galileo has observed a total 
of 10 plumes as of mid-1998, four of which appear related 
to Voyager-era plumes, so there are a total of 15 volcanic 
centers with observed plumes. Ring-shaped surface 
deposits suggest that many other plumes have been 
recently active as well. Many of the plumes, such as that 
of Prometheus (figure 2), are 50-150 km high, long lived, 
deposit bright white material (probably SO, frost) and are 
associated with high-temperature hot spots. Prometheus 
and other plumes show signs of lateral migrations over 
time of up to 100 km. Pele’s plume is very different 
from Prometheus-type plumes, as it is very faint at visible 
wavelengths, up to 460 km high and deposits bright 
red material. The Pele hot spot is also unusual because 
it maintains an intense high-temperature component at 
surprisingly constant levels over long periods of time. 

The dominant volatiles driving explosive volcanism 
on Earth, H,O and CO,, seem to be highly depleted 
on Io. Discernible H,O or carbonate absorption bands 
are absent, and C has not been detected in Jupiter’s 
magnetosphere near Io (see JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE). H has 
been detected over Io’s poles, which may indicate the 
presence of magmatic HO or HS. Nevertheless, volatiles 
such as SO, or sulfur are thought to be the major species 
driving the explosive volcanism. 


Surface changes 

About 30 large-scale (tens of kilometers) surface changes 
are obvious from comparison of the Galileo images with 
those acquired by Voyager in 1979 (figure 2). These include 
new plume deposits of several colors, bright and dark 
flows, and caldera-floor materials. There have also been 
significant surface changes on Io during the Galileo mis- 
sion, such as a new 400 km diameter dark deposit around 
Pillan Patera (figure 3). While these surface changes are 
impressive, the number of large-scale changes observed 
in the 4 months between the Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 fly- 
bys in 1979 suggested that over 17 years the cumulative 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lo: Volcanism and Geophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Prometheus 


Voyager-1979 


limb 


Galileo-1996 


Figure 2. Three views of the active plume Prometheus. The left image shows the Prometheus region as seen by Voyager, and the 
middle view shows the same region seen by Galileo. There are new dark lava flows and the plume vent has moved about 70 km to the 
west. The right view shows the plume on the limb, against black sky, as seen by Galileo. Plume’s height is 75 km, and bright ring has a 


diameter of about 300 km. 


Figure 3. Two views of the Pele and Pillan volcanoes on Io, as seen by Galileo in the spring of 1997 (left) and fall of 1997 (right). The 
large ring is the fallout deposit of the 460 km high Pele plume. The eruption near Pillan Patera north-east of Pele produced the new 
dark deposits seen in the right-hand image, with a diameter of 400 km. 


changes would have been much more impressive. There 
are two reasons why this was not actually the case. First, 
the most widespread plume deposits are ephemeral and 
seem to fade away within a few years. Second, it appears 
that a large fraction of the volcanic activity is confined to 
repeated resurfacing of dark calderas and flow fields that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cover only a few per cent of Io’s surface. 


Hot spots 

Evidence for hot spots or thermal anomalies on Io was 
acquired years before the Voyager encounters, but it 
was not understood. Thermal infrared observations 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lo: Volcanism and Geophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Image of Io in eclipse (when Io is in Jupiter’s shadow). 
Small bright spots are high-temperature hot spots. The two 
brightest spots are due to Pele and Pillan (see figure 3). Pillan 
produced a very high-temperature hot spot, with lava 
temperatures exceeding 1700 K, probably because of the 
eruption of ultramafic lava from Io’s mantle. Diffuse glows from 
electronic excitation of gases highlight Io’s limb and active 
plumes. 


had revealed two curious relations. First, when Io is 
eclipsed by Jupiter (figure 4), its temperature falls as 
expected for a surface with low thermal inertia, but its 
minimum temperature is too high. Second, the infrared 
brightness temperature of Io is significantly higher at 
shorter wavelengths. After the Voyager 1 encounter and 
the discovery of active volcanism, these observations were 
understood as being due to hot spots with temperatures 
well above 150 K, the peak temperature of the surface 
if heated only by the distant Sun. More than 50 hot 
spots have detected by Voyager, Galileo and telescopic 
observers. Voyager could not detect small areas at 
temperatures higher than ~650 K because of limitations 
in sensitivity and wavelength coverage. Ground-based 
telescopic observers and Galileo have detected much 
higher temperatures, consistent with silicate volcanism. 

Observations by Galileo have confirmed that high- 
temperature hot spots are ubiquitous on Io. There are 
more than 40 volcanic centers that reveal temperatures 
well above those expected from sulfur volcanism. Perhaps 
most surprising, however, has been the discovery than 
at least a dozen of these centers are erupting lavas with 
temperatures exceeding 1500 K, the peak temperature 
of basaltic lavas erupting on Earth. The most likely 
explanation is that these lavas are ultramafic (magnesium- 
rich) silicates. 

The current eruption of ultramafic lavas raises 
questions about the composition of Io’s crust. The intense 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


volcanic activity, if it has persisted for at least a few per 
cent of geological time, should have strongly differentiated 
the silicates in Io. This differentiation, in the absence of 
remixing, should produce a ~50 km thick, low-density 
crust rich in the lighter elements common in silicate 
rocks such as sodium, potassium, silica and aluminum. 
However, the high-temperature lavas suggest that dense 
melts from the magnesium-rich mantle are reaching the 
surface, so vigorous mixing between the mantle and crust 
may produce a crust with a mafic composition. 

The best estimate of Io’s global hot-spot heat flow 
is 2.5 W m~, and Io’s total heat flow may be twice this 
value owing to conducted heat from recently emplaced 
lava flows. Therefore, the total energy loss from Io is 
probably from 2.5 to 5.0 W m~?, orders of magnitude 
greater than the average heat loss from Earth (0.08 W m~*) 
or from the Moon (0.02 W m~*). The maximum energy 
flow theoretically possible from tidal heating is 0.8 W m~? 
if steady state over the age of the solar system. Since 
Io’s current heat flow clearly exceeds this limit and is 
emanating from many separate volcanic centers, it seems 
likely that the rate of tidal dissipation and/or heat flow 
has varied over time. 


Global distribution of volcanism 


Active and inactive volcanic centers appear to be almost 
uniformly distributed over Io, but several types of volcanic 
activity are non-uniform. The active plumes clearly prefer 
the equatorial region, with 14 out of 15 erupting from 
within 30° of the equator. The persistently active hot spots 
(which must release the most heat) are also concentrated 
in the equatorial region. A field of bright vents seen in 
eclipse occurs over the sub-Jovian region, and a region of 
diffuse glow seen in eclipse at low resolution, suggests that 
a similar field may exist over the anti-Jovian region. The 
region of Io from longitude 240° to 360° has distinctive 
color and albedo patterns and the plumes in this region 
display a greater range of characteristics than plumes at 
other longitudes. 

The distribution of volcanism over Io’s surface can be 
expected to reveal something about the nature of heating 
within the interior. Because of the intense tidal heating 
and the apparently high temperatures in Io’s interior, 
convection should be the main internal mode of heat 
transfer. If tidal heating is predominantly in a partially 
molten layer (asthenosphere) of order 100 km thick, 
convection should occur globally in the asthenosphere 
with centers of upwelling and downwelling separated by a 
few hundred kilometers. Modeling indicates that the heat 
flow should be highest in the equatorial regions. Thus this 
model nicely explains the presence of active or recently 
active volcanic centers peppering the surface at several 
hundred kilometer intervals, and with an equatorial 
concentration of more energetic hot spots. The distribution 
of active plumes seems to follow the distribution of 
especially energetic volcanic centers, although plumes 
have not (yet) been seen at many of these centers. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lo: Volcanism and Geophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The major current exception to this uniform longi- 
tudinal pattern of heat flow is Loki Patera, an especially 
large dark-floored caldera which alone accounts for about 
a quarter of Io’s heat loss. The heat being radiated from 
Loki is an order of magnitude larger than the heat loss from 
all the Earth’s currently active hot spots. Tidal heating in 
the deep mantle would result in larger-scale convection 
perhaps with a relatively small number of mantle plumes 
spaced widely apart and carrying most of the deeply gen- 
erated heat. Perhaps this can explain the Loki anomaly. 


Future exploration 

Many important questions about Io remain unanswered. 
The Galileo spacecraft reached Jupiter and made a close 
flyby of Io in 1995, but a tape recorder anomaly precluded 
the acquisition of high-resolution images or spectra of 
Io. With the extended mission now in progress, the 
plan is to return to Io in late 1999. There will be two 
close flybys of Io, one a near-equatorial pass providing 
a close look at volcanoes such as Pele and Pillan, and the 
second a pass under the south pole to determine whether 
Io has a self-sustained magnetic field. Other key issues 
that will be addressed are (1) emplacement mechanisms 
and compositions of erupting lavas, (2) composition of 
the crust, (3) origins of the large mountains and other 
landforms, (4) dynamics of the plumes and (5) polar 
volatile compositions. 


Bibliography 

Belton M J S, West R A and Rahe J (eds) 1989 Time- 
Variable Phenomena in the Jovian System (NASA SP-494) 
(Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office) 

Burns J A and Matthews M S (eds) 1986 Satellites (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Johnson T V and Soderblom L A 1983 Io Sci. Am. 249 (6) 
56-67 

Keszthelyi Land McEwen A 1997 Magmatic differentiation 
of Io Icarus 130 437-48 

McEwen A Set al 1998 High-temperature silicate volcanism 
on Jupiter’s moon Io Science 281 87-90 

McEwen A S et al 1998 Active volcanism on Io as seen by 
Galileo SSI Icarus 135 181-219 

Morrison D (ed) 1982 Satellites of Jupiter (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) 

Spencer J R and Schneider N M 1996 Io on the eve of the 
Galileo mission Ann. Rev. Earth. Planet. Sci. 24 125-90 


Alfred S McEwen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lon 


Anatom that has a net electrical charge because it has lost, 
or gained, one or more electrons relative to the normal 
complement possessed by a neutral atom. The number 
of electrons in an ordinary, neutral, atom is the same as 
the number of positively charged protons in its nucleus. 
Compared to a neutral atom, a positive ion has fewer 
electrons (and a net positive charge) and a negative ion 
has more (and a net negative charge). The term ‘ion’ also 
applies to molecules and other groupings of atoms with a 
net electrical charge. 


See also: atom, electron, ionization, molecule, proton. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lonization 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lonization 


The process whereby atoms lose one or more electrons to 
become positively charged ions. Ionization will occur if an 
atom absorbs a sufficiently energetic photon or if it suffers 
a sufficiently violent collision. 

The minimum amount of energy needed to remove an 
electron to infinity from the ground state of a given atom 
is called the ionization potential, or ionization energy. For 
a hydrogen atom, with its single electron in the ground 
state (the lowest energy level of the atom), the ionization 
potential is 13.6 electronvolts (eV). If the electron is in a 
higher (excited) level, less energy is needed to remove it 
from the atom. In general, the ionization potential (IP) for 
an electron in excitation level n (n = 1 for the ground level, 
2 for the first excited level, and so on) of a hydrogen atom 
is given by IP = 13.6/ n? eV. Thus, for example, the energy 
required to remove an electron from the first excited level 
(n = 2) = 13.6/27 = 13.6/4 = 3.4 eV. Where an atom 
has two or more electrons, the ionization potential for the 
second and subsequent electrons is greater than for the 
first electron. For example, the ionization potentials for 
the first and second electrons in a helium atom are 24.6 eV 
and 54.4 eV respectively. Where the energy (£) absorbed 
by an electron exceeds the ionization potential (IP), the 
kinetic energy of the escaping electron is given by E — IP. 

An atom that has lost one electron is identified by 
the roman numeral II (the neutral atom, by I) or by the 
superscript +. For example, neutral hydrogen is denoted 
by HI and ionized hydrogen by HII or H*. Doubly 
ionized helium (helium that has lost both electrons) would 
be denoted by He III or He**. In many astrophysical 
situations, for example, in very high-temperature gases, 
very high ionization stages (i.e. atoms that have lost many 
electrons) are encountered, and the roman convention 
is normally used; for example, Fe XVI represents an 
iron atom that has been stripped of 15 out of its total 
complement of 26 electrons. Ions that retain at least 
one bound electron can absorb or emit radiation, so 
producing spectral lines (emission and absorption lines) 
that differ in wavelength from those produced by neutral 
atoms. Photons are also emitted when an ion captures, 
or recaptures, an electron (this process being called 
‘recombination’). 

Ionized gases are encountered in a wide variety of 
astrophysical situations; for example, in the interiors and 
atmospheres of stars, in luminous nebulae (glowing clouds 
that contain substantial quantities of ionized hydrogen 
and which, for that reason, are otherwise known as HII 
regions), or in high-temperature intergalactic gas. 


See also: absorption spectrum, atom, electron, electron- 
volt, emission spectrum, ion, photon, plasma, radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


IRIS (ESRO-2B) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


IRIS (ESRO-2B) 


European Space Research Organisation satellite, launched 
May 1968. Carried out studies of solar and cosmic x-rays, 
and solar particle emissions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Iris (Infrared Imaging Surveyor/Astro-F) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lris (Infrared Imaging 
Surveyor/Astro-F) 


Japanese infrared satellite scheduled for launch in 2003. 
Intended to carry out a sky survey and observations of 
individual sources. Will carry a 70 cm Ritchey—Chretien 
telescope and a hybrid cooling system with liquid helium 
and mechanical cooling. (See also AsTRO.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


lrish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Irish Astronomy 


This account of national astronomy in Ireland is 
given under four categories: (1) national astronomical 
observatories, (2) university and college departmental 
astronomy, (3) private astronomical observatories and 
individuals and (4) astronomical societies and groups. 
A short history of each establishment is followed by a 
report on its current status together with present research 
activities. The article is partly composed from published 
literature. 


National astronomical observatories 

Dunsink Observatory 

DUNSINK OBSERVATORY, the observatory of Trinity College 
Dublin, was founded in 1783. It was designed by the 
architect Graham Moyers according to principles laid 
down by Henry Ussher. Ussher was the first director of 
the new observatory, and he held office until his death in 
May 1790. 

Initial work at the Observatory included stellar and 
planetary positional astronomy using transit instruments 
by Jesse Ramsden and astronomical regulators by Arnold 
and Crosthwaite. Stellar positional astronomy was begun 
in Dublin by Henry Ussher on 1 January 1788. Ussher 
maintained a weather record from July 1786 to May 1790, 
and it was he who encouraged and guided the young (later 
Admiral Sir) Francis Beaufort. 

John Brinkley succeeded Ussher as Andrews’ Pro- 
fessor in December 1790, becoming Royal Astronomer in 
1792. The problem of measuring the distances of the stars 
occupied much of Brinkley’s time. The method used was 
to measure the apparent motion of nearby stars against 
the more distant stellar background utilizing the different 
viewing positions afforded by the annual motion of the 
Earth in its orbit around the Sun. 

Brinkley was followed in 1827 by Sir William Rowan 
Hamilton, then 21 yr of age, who held the post of Director 
until 1865. Internationally respected as a mathematical 
genius, Hamilton invented quaternions, an algebraic 
system with similarities to vector analysis. He scratched 
the following set of equations on a stone of Broome 
(Brougham) Bridge near Dublin on 16 October 1843: 


? =f =k? =ijk=-1. 


Various cyclic properties resulting from these equations 
also hold true and so with four pure numbers a quaternion 
may be formed as follows: 


q=atbi+cj+dk. 


A scalar is simply a quarternion with b = c = d = 0, 
while a vector is one with a = 0. Hamilton also made 
significant contributions in optics and mechanics, and 
predicted conical refraction. 

Robert Stawell Ball headed the Observatory from 1874 
until 1892, his main contribution being in the theory of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


screws dealing with the movements of a rigid body in three 
dimensions. 

Several later holders of the office of Director of Dun- 
sink Observatory were accomplished mathematicians: 
Charles Jasper Joly, Edmund Taylor Whittaker and Henry 
Crozier Plummer. Joly (1897-1906) wrote many articles 
on quaternions and edited Hamilton’s Elements of Quater- 
nions. He also compiled a zodiacal catalogue, that is a 
catalogue of stars lying in the ecliptic or apparent path of 
the Sun through the heavens. Whittaker (1906-12) wrote 
texts on Modern Analysis and Analytical Dynamics, while the 
future Prime Minister and President of Ireland, Eamon de 
Valera, attended lectures given by Whittaker. Plummer 
(1912-21) commenced the study of variable stars and star 
clusters, as well as writing the text An Introductory Treatise 
on Dynamical Astronomy. 

Following Plummer, Charles Martin was appointed 
acting Director in 1921 and occupied the position until 
1936. Dunsink Observatory then fell into abeyance, 
closing in 1937. However, in 1943, de Valera obtained 
government approval for the establishment of the School 
of Cosmic Physics in the recently constituted Dublin 
Institute for Advanced Studies (DIAS), and by 1947 
approval for the School was passed. By this time, 
Dunsink Observatory had been acquired by the State 
and, reopening in 1947 under the direction of Hermann 
Alexander Briick, became the astronomy section of the 
School of Cosmic Physics. 

Soon after reopening, a proposal was put forward 
by Eric Mervyn Lindsay (see below) to establish a large 
telescope in the southern hemisphere, the Armagh— 
Dunsink-Harvard (ADH) Telescope—a 36 in Baker- 
Schmidt later equipped with a 33 in diameter objective 
prism. Solar studies were also commenced at Dunsink 
with the erection of a vertical CASSEGRAIN TELESCOPE and 
concave grating spectrograph. Measurements of the 
solar ultraviolet spectrum between 310 and 360 nm 
were incorporated in the second revision of Rowland’s 
Preliminary Table. Stellar photoelectric photometry 
studies were initiated with the 28 in reflector in pulse- 
counting mode. A study of the interstellar absorption 
band at 443 nm was also undertaken. The scintillation, 
or twinkling, of the stars was also the subject of intensive 
study at this time. 

Briick resigned in 1957 to take up the posts 
of Astronomer Royal for Scotland and Professor of 
Astronomy in the University of Edinburgh. Mervyn 
Archdall Ellison succeeded to the Dunsink post in 1958, 
undertaking solar flare observations with Dunsink then 
becoming a world data center for such studies. 

Following Ellison’s untimely death in 1963, Patrick 
Arthur Wayman was appointed Director in 1964. In- 
vestigations of the southern sky included photometry of 
Magellanic Cloud cepheids. Solar system and extragalac- 
tic studies also became important branches of research 
with the appointment of Tao Kiang to the staff. Kiang 
studied ancient Chinese records of Comet Halley and the 
structure of the main asteroid belt lying between Mars and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lrish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter. Wayman retired in 1992 to be replaced by Evert 
J A Meurs, whose research interests include extragalactic 
astronomy, particularly active galactic nuclei (AGNs), star- 
burst galaxies and stellar evolution, large-scale structure 
and clusters of galaxies. The observational material now 
studied extends beyond the visible light band into higher 
(x-rays) as well as lower (infrared, radio) energy bands of 
the electromagnetic spectrum. 

The Governing Board of the School of Cosmic Physics 
recently decided to develop an interactive educational 
facility, particularly for the general public and school 
groups, which was opened in December 1997. The subject 
matter of the principal exhibits is inspired by the Junior 
Science Curriculum, providing an introduction to the 
astronomical world and highlighting the role of ‘Gravity in 
the Universe’. There is also the long-established program 
of Open Nights at the Observatory. 


Armagh Observatory 

ARMAGH OBSERVATORY was founded in 1790 by Richard 
Robinson, the Anglican Archbishop of Armagh and 
Primate of All Ireland, as part of a greater plan for 
the establishment of a University of Ulster in Armagh. 
The Rector of the parish of Kildress in Cookstown, Co 
Tyrone, James Archibald Hamilton, was appointed as the 
first Astronomer of the new observatory. Astronomical 
observations began in July 1793 with the timing of a 
transit of « Ophiuchi using a transit instrument and a 
clock by Alexander Waugh of Armagh. Meteorological 
observations commenced in December 1794 and, with the 
exception of the period 1825-33, have been carried out 
continuously to the present day. 

The early astronomical work consisted of transit 
observations for rating Thomas Earnshaw’s regulator, 
and determining longitude by lunar observations. An 
equatorially mounted telescope was commissioned from 
the firm of J & E Troughton and arrived in December 1795. 
Hamilton died in 1815 and was succeeded by William 
Davenport. He concentrated on transit observations and 
equatorial measurements, but took his life in 1823 in his 
study. 

A successful period in the observatory’s history then 
ensued with the appointment of the highly respected 
THOMAS ROMNEY ROBINSON. Receiving his early education 
in Belfast, Robinson, by the age of 12, had printed a 
book of his own poems, the proceeds from the sale of 
which enabled him to commence studies at Trinity College 
Dublin. Robinson acquired a new transit instrument 
(1827) and mural circle (1831) from Thomas Jones & Son. 
After 26 yr of arduous labour with these telescopes, he 
produced a star catalogue entitled Places of 5,345 Stars 
Observed at Armagh Observatory between the years 1828 and 
1854. For this catalogue, Robinson was awarded the Royal 
Medal of the Royal Society. 

In 1835, Armagh Observatory acquired a 15 in 
equatorially mounted, clock-driven REFLECTOR by THOMAS 
crusB of Dublin. This instrument also employed an 
18-point suspension system for supporting the primary 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


speculum metal mirror. Robinson had a keen interest 
in meteorology since his college days and was also the 
inventor of the Robinson cup-anemometer, a wind-speed 
measuring instrument, an early version of which, still 
installed at the Observatory, dates from 1870. Robinson 
died in 1882 at the age of 89 yr while still in office. He had 
headed the Observatory for 59 yr, the longest tenure for 
any observatory director. 

Robinson was succeeded by the Danish astronomer, 
JOHN LOUIS EMIL DREYER, famous historian of astronomy. Soon 
after arriving in Armagh, Dreyer began soliciting for the 
construction of a moderately large refractor as a memorial 
to his predecessor. The outcome was the erection of a 10 in 
Grubb REFRACTOR in 1885, and with it Dreyer confirmed 
some of his observations for his New General Catalogue of 
Nebulz and Clusters of Stars published in 1888, and the two 
Index Catalogues in 1895 and 1910. Another important 
text was his History of the Planetary Systems from Thales to 
Kepler (1906). Dreyer also edited the works of that earlier 
Danish astronomer, TYCHO BRAHE, publishing most of his 
Tycho work during his tenure at Armagh. Dreyer resigned 
the directorship of the Observatory in 1916 and moved to 
Oxford, there to continue his work. 

Joseph Alfred Hardcastle, a great-grandson of Sir 
William Herschel, was appointed director in 1917, but was 
taken ill while travelling to Armagh and had to stop the 
journey at his parents’ home where he died at the age of 
48. The following year, 1918, saw the appointment of the 
well-known telescope maker William Frederick Archdall 
Ellison. He held office until 1936. His son, Mervyn (see 
above), was Director of Dunsink Observatory from 1958 
to 1963. 

Astrong programme of observational astronomy was 
then initiated by Eric Mervyn Lindsay, Director from 
1937 until 1974. Lindsay’s vision was to see Armagh 
Observatory have access to a moderately large telescope 
at a good observing site. He approached the governments 
in Belfast and Dublin, as well as HARLOW SHAPLEY of the 
Harvard College Observatory with the view of setting up 
a telescope in the southern hemisphere. The result, after 
much negotiation, was the Armagh—Dunsink—Harvard 
(ADH) Baker—-Schmidt telescope, operating at the Boyden 
Observatory near Bloemfontein in South Africa from 1950 
until 1976. The two nearby galaxies, the Magellanic 
Clouds, were intensively studied by Armagh astronomers 
during this period. 

Lindsay was also responsible for the establishment 
of the Armagh Planetarium in the mid-1960s. The 
Planetarium was officially opened in 1968 with Patrick 
Moore as the first Director. It was Lindsay who, in 1948, 
secured a research position in Armagh for the Estonian- 
born astronomer ERNST JULIUS OPIK, who made fundamental 
contributions to various branches of astronomy, including 
solar system studies and stellar structure, and remained at 
Armagh until his retirement in 1981. 

Following Eric Lindsay’s death in 1974, Opik became 
acting Director until the appointment of Martin Jan Hugo 
de Groot in 1976. For the next two decades the Observatory 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lrish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


focused attention on the mechanisms underlying the 
ejection of mass from hot stars, and the atmospheric and 
surface activity of the Sun and stars. Following de Groot’s 
retirement in 1994, Mark Edward Bailey was appointed 
Director in 1995. 

Current research at Armagh concentrates on stellar 
astrophysics including star formation and astrophysical 
jets, solar system studies, extrasolar planetary systems, 
and solar system-terrestrial relationships. Stellar 
astrophysics problems being investigated include helium 
stars and the late stages of stellar evolution, star-spots and 
stellar activity, and the heating mechanisms of the Sun’s 
outer atmosphere corona. Spacecraft, such as YOHKOH 
(Japanese for Sunbeam) and the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory (SOHO), are being used in these solar studies, 
while solar system research includes the study of the 
formation and dynamics of comets and asteroids. Solar 
system-terrestrial studies are concentrated on how solar 
activity and interplanetary constituents affect the Earth’s 
climate. 

Armagh Observatory is one of the principal providers 
of astronomical research in Northern Ireland. In recent 
years, baseline support for its activities, together with 
those of the Armagh Planetarium, has come from the 
Department of Education Northern Ireland (now the 
Department of Culture, Arts and Leisure), while much of 
its research is funded through grants from the UK PARTICLE 
PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY RESEARCH COUNCIL. 


University and College Departmental Astronomy 
National University of Ireland 

University College Cork. The Crawford Observatory of 
University College Cork was built in the 1870s by Howard 
Grubb. Its general plan is in the form of a Gothic-style two- 
storey central section flanked by two single-storey east— 
west wings. Grubb was awarded a gold medal at the Paris 
Exhibition of 1878 for the design and construction of the 
main instrument, an 8 in refractor. The mounting was 
modified in the 1890s to incorporate a 13 in astrograph as 
well as the 8 in refractor. The transit circle, probably the 
best preserved in Ireland today, employed a novel design 
in that the declination scales were inscribed on glass and 
read with transmitted light. The Observatory, which is 
undergoing some renovation, also houses Grubb’s unique 
4 in siderostatic telescope designed primarily for solar 
spectroscopic research. 

Current astrophysical research includes investiga- 
tions into cosmic-ray showers, cosmic-ray bursts from 
supernovae, cataclysmic astrophysical events, and low- 
mass x-ray binaries. Other fields of study are in gamma- 
ray and neutrino astrophysics. Infrared, optical and x-ray 
observations of white dwarfs, neutron stars and black hole 
candidates are made using ground-based (Keck, Hawaii) 
and space-based (ROSAT) observatories. 

In addition, Hamiltonian quantum and other gravity 
theories, and mathematical aspects of supergravity, and 
super- and cosmic-string theory are investigated. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


University College Galway. Atmospheric physics. The 
studies of the Earth’s atmosphere include the greenhouse 
effect, ultraviolet radiation and air pollution. A field 
study at Mace Head, Co Galway, is part of the global 
environmental measurement program. 

Gamma-ray astronomy. This research group uses a 10m 
reflector on Mt Hopkins, Arizona, USA, for collecting faint 
Cherenkov light flashes produced in the upper atmosphere 
which have their origin in supernova remnants (SNRs) and 
AGNs. 

Optical astronomy. Research areas include high-speed 
optical photometry of pulsars and globular clusters and 
the use of adaptive optics and other image-sharpening 
techniques in large telescopes including laser guide stars. 


National University of Ireland at Maynooth. Stellar and 
planetary atmospheres. Collaborations with NASA's JET 
PROPULSION LABORATORY (JPL) on Lyman a emission from 
atomic hydrogen, excited by electrons, have provided 
input into stellar and planetary atmospheric models. 

Submillimeter astronomy. This includes studies of 
interstellar clouds in the Galaxy and other, active, galaxies. 
This group also participates in the Planck Surveyor 
Cosmic Microwave Background EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY 
(ESA) mission, scheduled for launch in 2005. 

Gamma-ray astronomy. This team uses the 10 m 
telescope of the Whipple Observatory in Arizona to 
detect extremely energetic radiation from galactic and 
extragalactic sources, mainly AGNs. 

Atmosphere. This involves study of the region 
80-250 km, especially the mesopause (80-100km), for 
nightglow emissions at optical and infrared wavelengths. 

Space Technology Ireland Ltd. Among the projects in 
which this group is at present involved are the design 
and construction of spacecraft instrumentation for Gravity 
Probe B (NASA), Phoenix (ESA), Mars Express (ESA) and 
Rosetta (ESA). Experiments currently returning data to 
the Space Technology Ireland (STIL) group are Ireland’s 
LION instrument on ESA’s SOHO Mission which was built 
at STIL and the WAVES instrument on NASA’s WIND 
Mission. 


Regional technical colleges 

Cork Institute of Technology. Current astrophysical re- 
search includes investigations into rapid variability in 
radioloud quasars and BL Lac objects and microvariability 
in both radioquiet and radio-intermediate quasars. Ob- 
servations are taken at multifrequencies in collaboration 
with international partners. Other fields of study include 
observations of low surface brightness galaxies and blue 
compact galaxies. Observations for the various programs 
are taken at La Palma, Calar Alto, SAAO and with the 
ASCA satellite. 


Galway—Mayo Institute of Technology. Astrophysics. This 
recent research initiative in astrophysics has been closely 
involved with the Whipple Gamma-ray Collaboration 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lrish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which operates an atmospheric Cherenkov imaging 
detector on Mt Hopkins, Arizona. The system comprises 
a 10 m optical reflector with an imager made of over 
300 photomultiplier tubes and is used to detect compact 
sources of very-high-energy cosmic gamma-rays from 
pulsars and AGNs. 


University College Dublin. 

Astronomical research. This includes star formation and 
the study of blue compact dwarf galaxies and aspects of 
galaxy formation. Recent work includes investigations of 
the emission mechanisms for TeV cosmic ray sources and 
gamma-ray bursters (GRBs) using NASA’s COMPTON GAMMA 
RAY OBSERVATORY, and searching for flaring and quiescent 
counterparts of these objects using optical and radio 
telescopes, such as the WESTERBORK SYNTHESIS RADIO TELESCOPE. 


Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies (DIAS) 

The DIAS was established in 1940 under the Institute 
for Advanced Studies Act of 1940 with two constituent 
Schools, Celtic Studies and Theoretical Physics. In 1947 
a third School, Cosmic Physics, was established, itself 
divided into three Sections, Astronomy, Astrophysics 
(formerly Cosmic Ray) and Geophysics. 

The central administration is located at 10 Burlington 
Road, Dublin 4, the Geophysics and Astrophysics Sections 
of the School of Cosmic Physics are at 5 Merrion Square, 
Dublin 2, and the Astronomy Section is located at Dunsink 
Observatory, Castleknock, Co Dublin. The DIAS is 
principally supported by an annual grant in aid from the 
State, and undertakes research and postgraduate student 
training. 

Current research interests in the Astrophysics Section 
include plasma astrophysics, especially particle accelera- 
tion theory, and outflow phenomena associated with star 
formation. The Astronomy Section concentrates on ad- 
vanced stages of stellar evolution and extragalactic x-ray 
astronomy. The School of Cosmic Physics has been in- 
volved in a number of space missions and is currently con- 
tributing to the optical monitor for INTEGRAL. Through 
the La Palma agreement it coordinates access to modern 
observational facilities. 


Queen's University Belfast 

Astronomical research is carried out at The Queen’s 
University of Belfast in the Astrophysics and Planetary 
Science (APS) Research Division of the School of 
Mathematics and Physics. Two experimental programs on 
the upper atmosphere (led by Sir David Bates) and solar 
physics (Dan Bradley) combined about 30 yr ago. The APS 
Division was born out of this merger. 

Initial activities of the group included the develop- 
ment of instrumentation for rocket and balloon flights 
and for ground-based telescopes. The current APS Divi- 
sion carries out observational astrophysics using ground- 
based optical and radio telescopes. Space observatories, 
such as SOHO, ISO and the Hubble Space Telescope, are 
also used extensively. The main thrust of the group is in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


astronomical spectroscopy and imaging in a number of ar- 
eas of Galactic astrophysics. These include studies of the 
Sun and other stars, the interstellar medium and gaseous 
nebulae. A solar system research group investigates the 
origin and distribution of comets and asteroids. The APS 
Division is also involved in vigorous undergraduate and 
postgraduate teaching programmes, with some students 
carrying out their research projects at the Armagh Obser- 
vatory. Queen’s University and Armagh Observatory to- 
gether form the Northern Ireland Node of the STARLINK 
computer network. 


Private observatories and individuals 

Birr Castle (Earl of Rosse) 

William Parsons, Lord Oxmantown, later THIRD EARL 
OF ROSSE (1841), was educated at Trinity College and 
Magdalen College Oxford graduating in mathematics in 
1822. He began telescope making in 1827, and completed 
a 72 in reflector in 1845 with which he discovered that 
year the spiral nature of the galaxy Messier 51 (M51, later 
named the Whirlpool galaxy) and similar structure the 
following year in the galaxy M99. Spectral studies of 
eleven nebulae were carried out using the giant reflector, 
known as the ‘Leviathan of Parsonstown’. William’s son, 
Laurence, later the FOURTH EARL OF ROSSE (1867), conducted 
lunar temperature measurements. Laurence’s brother, 
(later Sir) Charles, was the inventor of the steam turbine. 
Otto Boeddicker produced an elaborate naked-eye map of 
the Milky Way in 1892. Sir CHARLES PARSONS purchased the 
equipment of Sir Howard Grubb and established the firm 
of Grubb-Parsons in Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 


Markree Castle (E J Cooper) 

This observatory was founded in Sligo in 1831 by 
Edward Joshua Cooper. Cooper purchased a 13 in 
Cauchoix objective and mounted it on a wooden stand 
at Markree. At the time, this was the most powerful 
refracting achromatic telescope in the world. Other 
equipment belonging to Cooper was a Troughton transit 
instrument (1831), a meridian circle with 7 in telescope 
by Ertel (1839) and a comet seeker by Ertel (1842). In 
a ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY report dated 1851, Markree 
Observatory was described as ‘the most richly furnished 
private observatory then known’. Andrew Graham 
discovered the minor planet, (9) Metis, there in 1848, 
computing its orbit and analyzing its irregularities. A four- 
volume ecliptic star catalogue was also produced. The 
observatory ceased functioning in 1902. 


Daramona Observatory (W E Wilson) 

Founded in 1871 by William Edward Wilson in Streete, Co 
Westmeath, this observatory flourished until 1908. It was 
equipped with a 12 in Grubb reflector (1871) and a 24 in 
reflector with which the first photoelectric measurements 
of stars were made in 1895. The transits of stars were 
recorded by photography. A measurement of the effective 
temperature of the Sun was published in 1902. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Irish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Millbrook Observatory (J Birmingham) 

From 1866 until 1884, the observatory of John Birmingham 
was in operation near Tuam, Co Galway. Equipped with 
a 4.5 in refractor, Birmingham compiled a catalogue of 
red stars. He also made observations of variable stars, 
sunspots and meteor showers. 


Sherrington Observatory (W Erck) 

The observatory was established in Co Wicklow by 
Wentworth Erck and operated from 1877 until 1890. 
Instruments included an Alvan Clark 7.5 in refractor, 
formerly owned by Dawes, and a 15 in reflector. 
Studies undertaken comprised solar disk observations and 
measurements of the motion of Jupiter’s Great Red Spot. 


J E Gore's Observatory (1879-1910) 

John Ellard Gore founded his observatory first at 
Ballysodare, Co Sligo, then at 3 Northumberland Road, 
Dublin. His equipment included a 3 in refractor, and he 
produced a catalogue of variable stars, and a list of binary 
system orbits. 


W S Monck’s Observatory (1888-1915) 

William Stanley Monck’s observatory was situated at 
Earlsfort Terrace in Dublin. He employed a 7.5 in refractor 
and made the first photoelectric observations of planets. 
He came close to discovering the underlying nature of the 
diagram now named after Hertzsprung and Russell. 


Edgeworth K E (1880-1972) 

KENNETH ESSEX EDGEWORTH was born at Daramona House, a 
few years after his uncle W E Wilson had established his 
observatory there. Edgeworth had a military career, but he 
contributed to a wide variety of topics including electrical 
engineering, economics and astronomy. His main 
astronomical writings concerned the origin, structure and 
development of the solar system. In 1943, he predicted the 
existence of a large reservoir of potential comets occupying 
the region of space beyond the orbit of Neptune. An 
object, later named 1992 QB, was detected in this region in 
1992 by David Jewitt and Jane Luu. This trans-Neptunian 
object was in fact the first of the Edgeworth bodies to be 
identified. GERARD KUIPER also made a similar postulation 
concerning the region at the edge of the planetary system 
in 1951, and this part of the solar system is now referred 
to as the Kuiper belt or Edgeworth—Kuiper belt. 


Astronomical societies and groups 

The Irish Astronomical Society (IAS) 

The Irish Astronomical Society was founded in Dublin in 
1937, in the same year as Dunsink Observatory was closed. 
On 1 October 1937, Joseph MacDermott published a letter 
in the Dublin Evening Mail suggesting the formation of 
a popular Dublin Astronomical Society. A group of 12 
interested amateur astronomers responded to the letter 
and held a meeting in the Red Bank Restaurant. At that 
meeting, they formed the Irish Astronomical Society and 
appointed Mr MacDermott as Honorary Lecturer. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Society rented premises at 5 South Leinster Street and held 
its first Annual General Meeting at Jury’s Hotel, Dame 
Street, on 21 March 1938. Later, during the Second World 
War, the Society met at 3 Burgh Quay with Uinsionn S 
Deiseach as resident lecturer. 

From the 1950s onwards, many professional as- 
tronomers gave lectures to the Society, and by public ex- 
pression in the newspapers moves were started to make 
the Society more widespread. After consultation with 
the Society in Dublin, it was agreed that various Cen- 
tres should be established; the original IAS would now 
be the Dublin Centre of the IAS. Centres were established 
in Belfast (18 October 1946), Armagh (3 December 1946), 
Londonderry (4 November 1948), Clonmel, Cork and Gal- 
way. The Constitution and By-laws of the Society were 
formally adopted at the first council meeting at Armagh 
Observatory on 14 June 1947. A Council was in overall 
control of the Centres and comprised nominees from each 
Centre in addition to the Directors of Armagh and Dunsink 
Observatories. 

Most of these Centres gradually declined and by the 
early 1970s only Dublin and Belfast remained. A revision 
of the Constitution was proposed in 1970 and a meeting 
was called to be held in Dundalk in November 1971 to 
consider the proposed revision. Because of the civil unrest 
then prevailing in Northern Ireland, the Belfast Centre 
felt it was unwise to travel across the border and the 
meeting never took place. In 1974, the Belfast Centre 
proposed the setting up of an essentially new Society 
having its secretariat based at the Armagh Planetarium. 
Ata meeting of delegates in April 1974, the Dublin Centre 
succeeded in having this proposal rejected, but a short time 
later the Belfast Centre withdrew its affiliation with the 
Dublin Centre and created an independent organisation: 
the Irish Astronomical Association. Asa result, the Dublin 
Centre is now, once again, the Irish Astronomical Society, 
holding a regular program of meetings and lectures, with 
a secretariat at PO Box 2547, Dublin 14 (telephone 00-353- 
1-298-0181). Publication: Orbit. 


The Irish Astronomical Association (IAA) 

The Irish Astronomical Association came into being when 
the Belfast Centre of the Irish Astronomical Society 
withdrew its affiliation with the IAS in the season 1973-4 
(see previous section). The IAA was initially envisaged 
as an all-Ireland organization, with headquarters at the 
Armagh Planetarium and meetings to be held in both 
Belfast and Armagh. Nowadays, the Association is 
primarily active only in and around Belfast, although 
attracting members from the whole of Ireland, and it 
focuses its activities on a regular program of meetings 
and lectures. The IAA can be contacted c/o Mr R 
McLoughlin, 31 Manse Road, Ballygowan, Co Down, 
BT23 6HE. Publication: Stardust. 


Astronomy Ireland 
The most recent major amateur astronomical society to 
emerge in Ireland has been Astronomy Ireland, created 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


lrish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in July 1990. The organization concentrates on astronomy 
and space science. Two lectures are held in Dublin each 
month from September to April, given by professional 
and amateur astronomers. The headquarters of the 
organization is at PO Box 2888, Dublin 1. Publication: 
Astronomy & Space. 


Other societies 

Cork Astronomy Club, c/o Mr Charles Coughlan, 
12 Forest Ridge Crescent, Wilton, Cork (telephone 
00-353-21-543669). East Antrim Astronomical Society, 
c/o Mr John McConnell, 56 The Meadows, Glen 
Road, Maghaberry, Moira (telephone 028-9261-9936). 
Shannonside Astronomy Club, c/o Mr Mike Murphy, 
Newmarket-on-Fergus, Co Clare (telephone 00-353-61- 
368025). Tullamore Astronomical Society, c/o Mr 
Sean McKenna, 145 Ardan Vale, Tullamore, Co Offaly 
(telephone 00-353-506-41983). 


The Astronomical Science Group of Ireland (ASGI) 

The Astronomical Science Group of Ireland was formed in 
1974 as a collaborative forum for professional astronomers, 
physicists and technicians in both Northern Ireland 
and the Republic. The ASGI is currently an umbrella 
organization including members from all the observatories 
and university departments in which astronomical 
research is carried out, and also many of the smaller 
groups and societies. Meetings are held biannually in 
spring and autumn at each of the principal affiliated 
research institutions, in rotation. Financial support for 
the Group comes from an annual subscription from each 
of the affiliated groups or institutions, while the Group’s 
affairs are managed by a small executive, comprising a 
Chairperson and a Secretary. Some of the papers presented 
at the ASGI have been published in The Irish Astronomical 
Journal. 


Bibliography 

Beesley D E 1976 Formation of the Irish Astronomical 
Association Ir. Astron. J. 12 216 

Bennett J A 1990 Church, State and Astronomy in Ireland: 
200 Years of Armagh Observatory (The Armagh 
Observatory and The Institute of Irish Studies of The 
Queen’s University of Belfast) 

Butler C J 1986 Early photoelectric photometry in Dublin 
and Daramona Ir. Astron. J. 17 373-7 

Butler J 1994 Report on the Crawford Observatory to 
University College Cork, 11 pp 

Butler J and Hoskin M 1987 The archives of Armagh 
Observatory. J. Hist. Astron. 18 295-307 

Dixon S M 1892 The photo-electric effect of star-light 
Astron. Astrophys. 11 844 

Dreyer J L E 1883 An Historical Account of the Armagh 
Observatory (Liverpool: Henry Greenwood, Printers) 

Dreyer J L E 1890 New General Catalogue of Nebulze and 
Clusters of Stars Mem. R. Astron. Soc. 49 1-237 

Dreyer J LE 1895 Index Catalogue of Nebulz found in the 
years 1888-1894 Mem. R. Astron. Soc. 51 185-228 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dreyer J LE 1906 History of the Planetary Systems from Thales 
to Kepler (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
(Reprinted 1953 A History of Astronomy from Thales to 
Kepler (New York: Dover)) 

Dreyer J L E 1910 Second Index Catalogue of Nebulze and 
Clusters of Stars Mem. R. Astron. Soc. 59 105-98 

Erck W 1877 Description of an observatory erected at 
Sherrington, Bray Observatory 1 135-7 

Gore J E 1888 A revised catalogue of variable stars Proc. R. 
Ir. Acad. 17 97-150 

Gore J E 1890 A catalogue of binary stars for which orbits 
have been computed Proc. R. Ir. Acad. 17 571-99 

Graham A 1848 Discovery of minor planet (9) Metis Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 8 146 

Lindsay E M 1950 The Irish Astronomical Society Ir. Astron. 
jJ.11 

McFarland J 1996 Kenneth Essex Edgeworth—Victorian 
polymath and founder of the Kuiper belt? Vistas 
Astron. 40 343-54 

McKenna S M P 1967 Astronomy in Ireland from 1790 
Vistas Astron. 9 283-96 

Minchin G M 1895 The electrical measurement of starlight 
Proc. R. Soc. 58 142-54 

O’Connor J 1997-1998 A brief history of the Irish 
Astronomical Society Orbit 36-37 

Parsons C 1926 The Scientific Papers of William Parsons, Third 
Earl of Rosse (1800-1867) (Percy Lund, Humphries & 
Co Ltd. printers) 

Robinson T R 1850 Description of an improved anemo- 
meter for registering the direction of the wind, and 
the space which it traverses in given intervals of time 
Trans. R. Ir. Acad. 22 155-78, 3 plates 

Robinson T R 1859 Places of 5,345 Stars Observed from 1828 to 
1854, at the Armagh Observatory (Dublin: Alex. Thom 
& Sons) 

Ussher H 1787 An account of the observatory belonging to 
Trinity College, Dublin Trans. R. Ir. Acad. 1 3-21 
Wayman P A 1987 Dunsink Observatory 1785-1985. A 
Bicentennial History (Dublin Institute for Advanced 

Studies and the Royal Dublin Society) 

Wayman P A and de Groot M 1980 The Astronomical 
Science Group of Ireland 1974-1980 Ir. Astron. J. 14 
111-3 

Wilson W E 1900 Astronomical and Physical Researches made 
at Mr. Wilson's Observatory, Daramona, Westmeath 


John McFarland 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Iron Meteorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Iron Meteorite 


A meteorite composed mainly of nickel-iron, with traces 
of other metals; also referred to simply as an iron, and 
formerly known as a siderite. Irons account for over 6% of 
all known meteorite specimens. They are the easiest type 
to identify, being heavy, magnetic and rust-colored; their 
metallic sheen tarnishes quickly on the Earth’s surface, 
but otherwise irons show better resistance to weathering 
than do other meteorites. Iron meteorites are believed to 
have originated from the cores of asteroidal parent bodies 
which differentiated before being shattered by impact. 
They are divided into three main classes according to 
the crystal structure and nickel content of the nickel— 
iron: hexahedrites (4-6% nickel), octahedrites (6-12%) and 
ataxites (over 12%). When sectioned, etched and polished, 
hexahedrites reveal a fine rectangular grid of so-called 
Neumann lines; octahedrites display a hexagonal hatching 
known as the Widmanstatten pattern; while ataxites show 
no obvious characteristic. The largest known meteorites 
are irons. The two most massive are the Hoba (Namibia, 
ataxite, 60 tonnes) and Cape York (Greenland, octahedrite, 
58 tonnes total) meteorites. 


See also: Cape York meteorite, Hoba meteorite, Wid- 
manstatten pattern. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Irregular Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Irregular Galaxy 


A galaxy with an irregular appearance and no well-defined 
shape or structure. Irregular galaxies can be divided into 
two broad classes, designated Irr I and Irr II. Irr I galaxies 
contain many OB associations (clumps of hot, young, 
highly luminous stars) and HII regions (luminous clouds 
of ionized hydrogen that surround hot young stars) and 
significant quantities of gas (typically about 20% of the 
total mass is in the form of gas). Some of them contain 
hints of incipient spiral structure. Their masses range 
from about a hundred million (10%) solar masses to several 
billion (~3 x 10°) solar masses and their diameters from 
about 3000 to about 30000 light-years. Irr II galaxies 
are amorphous in general appearance and often contain 
substantial amounts of gas and dust. Some have distorted 
shapes that appear to have been caused by collisions, or 
close encounters, with other galaxies or by violent internal 
activity. 


Seealso: galaxy, Hubble classification, interacting galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes 


The largest optical telescope for astronomy in Western 
Europe stands on the rim of an extinct volcano at an 
altitude of approximately 2350 m on the island of La 
Palma, part of the Canary Islands archipelago. The 
4.2 m William Herschel Telescope, together with the 2.5m 
Isaac Newton Telescope and the 1.0 m Jacobus Kapteyn 
Telescope, form the Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes 
(ING). First scheduled use by astronomers started in May 
1984, and since then thousands of research projects have 
been carried out. Many ground-breaking discoveries 
have been made using these telescopes, such as the first 
detection of the optical afterglow of gamma-ray bursts, 
the discovery of black holes in binary star systems, and 
the study of supernova explosions in distant galaxies. 

The Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes aims to deliver 
an effective telescope operation and a coherent instrument 
development program to facilitate the execution of world- 
class astronomical research. The construction, operation, 
and development of the ING telescopes is the result 
of a collaboration between the United Kingdom, the 
Netherlands and Eire. The telescopes are operated on 
behalf of the UK Particle Physics and Astronomy Research 
Council and the Nederlands Organization for Scientific 
Research. The observatory site ‘Roque de los Muchachos’ 
is provided by Spain. The ING comprises approximately 
65 staff. 

For further information see 
http://www.ing.iac.es/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ishtar Terra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ishtar Terra 


One of the three large upland regions of Venus (the other 
two being Aphrodite Terra and Lada Terra), situated in 
the planet’s northern hemisphere and centered at 70.4°N, 
27.5 °E. In its greatest dimension it measures 5609 km. It 
takes its name from a Babylonian goddess of love. The 
western end of Ishtar Terra is dominated by the pear- 
shaped volcanic plateau Lakshmi Planum, 2343 km across. 
The plateau contains two large calderas, Colette Patera 
and Sacajawea Patera, and is bounded to the northwest 
and southwest by mountain ranges, named Akna Montes 
and Danu Montes respectively, and to the north and 
northeast by Frejya Montes. To the east of Lakshmi 
lies Maxwell Montes, the highest mountain range on the 
planet. The eastern end of Ishtar consists of Fortuna 
Tessera, a less elevated area covered with a complex of 
intersecting troughs and ridges. Fortuna, and the other 
tesserae to the north and west of Lakshmi, result from 
lateral compression, part of the complex deformations 
that occurred on Venus before the lava eruptions in 
surrounding lowland regions. 


See also: Maxwell Montes; Venus: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Islamic Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Islamic Astronomy 


With the advent of Islam in the seventh century, and the 
swift creation of the largest empire known to medieval 
man, the civilization that it produced was the expression 
of the intellectual potential of that sprawling empire which 
stretched from the Pyrenees in the west to the Central 
Asian steppes in the east and the Indian subcontinent in the 
southeast. The very vastness of this empire required for its 
administration new scientific and technological resources. 
Some of those resources were already available from more 
ancient civilizations, others had to be created afresh. 


The legacy from the past 

The more ancient sciences that the Islamic civilization 
could draw upon were the Greek, the Persian, the Indian 
and indirectly the more ancient Babylonian ones. But 
the Greek legacy was by far the most important, perhaps 
because of its coherence as it was articulated within the 
Aristotelian cosmological framework. It is not surprising, 
therefore, to find the Greek astronomical tradition exacting 
the lion’s share of the concerns of the Muslim scientists 
who began to forge their own tradition from the very 
dawn of their own civilization. The major astronomical 
texts that were resuscitated from the Greek tradition and 
were translated very early into Arabic—the lingua franca 
of the Islamic civilization—were essentially the three most 
important works of protemy (fl. AD 150): the Almagest, 
the Planetary Hypotheses, and the Handy Tables, the last 
being quickly superseded by the more up-to-date Islamic 
astronomical handbooks that pushed it out of circulation. 

The other two texts of Ptolemy received the full 
attention that they deserved at the hands of the Muslim 
astronomers. But even as they were being translated they 
were also critically assessed. In the earliest surviving 
translation of the Almagest, that which was completed in 
the year AD 829, we find attempts to correct the perceived 
mistakes of the Greek original, as in the case of the value 
of the synodic lunar month. 

But the Almagest contained other real mistakes, as 
we shall see. In it Ptolemy lays down the foundation 
of Greek astronomy starting with the basic cosmological 
and mathematical underpinnings of that astronomy, 
and proceeding to the observations of the phenomena 
themselves—always giving the mathematical models with 
which such phenomena could be saved, and the positions 
of the naked-eye planets that could be predicted. The 
most basic astronomical parameters of Greek astronomy 
are determined in this work. 

In the Planetary Hypotheses, Ptolemy went a step fur- 
ther, by modifying some of the parameters he had deter- 
mined in the Almagest, but most importantly by explicitly 
re-formulating the same Aristotelian cosmological princi- 
ples of Greek astronomy, which were only assumed in the 
Almagest. The motion of the same planets could now be 
materially accounted for by the motion of the real spher- 
ical bodies that were supposed to carry them. Further- 
more, Ptolemy even hoped to exhibit these motions with 
planetaria-like constructions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The reform of astronomy 

The sheer time that separated the translators of the 
Almagest from Ptolemy himself was sufficient to show 
some discrepancies between the original text and the 
observations the Muslim astronomers were conducting 
as they were translating. Parameters such as the rate of 
precession, the inclination of the ecliptic, the eccentricity 
of the solar orbit—and the resulting maximum solar 
equation, as well as the motion of the solar apogee 
(assumed fixed by Ptolemy)—were all found to be 
erroneous. To rectify the situation Muslim astronomers 
undertook new observation programs, built larger and 
more accurate instruments, and most importantly began 
to question the observational methods of Ptolemy that 
led to the errors in the first place. To give only one 
example, it was quickly realized, sometime during the 
early part of the ninth century, that Ptolemy’s method 
for determining the solar eccentricity which depended on 
the observation of the Sun at the solstices was in itself 
flawed, because the variation of the solar declination at 
those points was indeed very hard to observe with the 
instruments of late antiquity and medieval times. Hence 
a new observational method was devised in which the 
critical observations were conducted in the middle of the 
seasons where the same variation is much easier to detect. 
The new method immediately yielded the desired fruits, 
and from the ninth century onward one would rarely 
find an Arabic astronomical source that would quote the 
Ptolemaic parameters. Instead one finds the improved 
ones that were determined during Islamic times. 

On the level of instruments, in addition to building 
larger instruments, there were also developed new 
methods for perfecting older ones and for surpassing 
them in conception. Although the ASTROLABE was known 
from Greek times, new methods of projection were 
devised for the instrument as early as the ninth century 
which deployed new trigonometric techniques that were 
unknown from the Greek sources and are still essentially 
the same now. During the same period other mathematical 
fields such as algebra were also being re-formulated 
along lines that were not known from Greek times. The 
religious requirements that may have contributed to the re- 
formulation of such fields may have also given rise later 
on to new fields such as miqat (timekeeping) in which 
both spherical trigonometry and applied astronomy were 
brought to full maturity. The projection of astrolabes itself 
continued to be developed throughout Islamic times, and 
reached such heights that universal plates were later on 
devised that could be used anywhere on the globe. 

The determination of basic parameters that made the 
Ptolemaic Handy Tables quickly obsolete also gave rise to 
the construction of new astronomical handbooks which 
included mainly mean motion and equation tables. They 
continued to develop and to evolve into more useful and 
‘user-friendly’ tables throughout the Islamic period as 
well. 

Faced with a Greek astronomical legacy whose 
observable errors became widely known from the earliest 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Islamic Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Islamic times, the level of criticism directed at that 
legacy was also developed at the same pace. The same 
cosmological principles that were assumed in the Almagest, 
and enunciated more explicitly in the Planetary Hypotheses, 
when examined with a critical eye were also found to 
produce other theoretical problems of their own that 
were not considered in the Greek corpus. In essence 
those problems touched upon the very foundation of 
Greek astronomy, namely the principle of consistency 
between the accepted principles and the results derived 
therefrom. For example, it was quickly realized that 
although Ptolemy had stipulated in both the Almagest 
and the Planetary Hypotheses that he would follow the 
Aristotelian cosmology he then went on to violate it at 
almost every turn in those two books. These violations 
were noted very early on, and the first treatise that 
has survived in which such cosmological issues were 
discussed comes from the same first half of the ninth 
century. Other works were also motivated by the same 
concern. Collectively such works formed yet another 
new field that was not known in Greek, namely the field 
of ‘ilm al-hay’a, which focused mainly on the issue of 
consistency between the cosmological principles and the 
mathematical representations of those principles. For 
reasons that have to do with the general intellectual and 
religious environment of the time, the new discipline, 
‘ilm al-hay’a, also distinguished itself by steering away 
from the religiously condemned discipline of astrology, 
in which Greek astronomy was heavily mired, and at the 
same time devoted itself only to planetary theories without 
much emphasis on practical astronomy. From the very 
beginning, therefore, we note the emergence of an Islamic 
astronomy which was new in its conception, scope and 
philosophical foundation. 


Planetary theory in Islamic astronomy 
Nowhere were the inadequacies of Greek astronomy more 
pronounced than in the planetary theories that included 
them (see PLANETARY THEORY FROM EUDOXUS TO COPERNICUS). 
To take only one example of the gross violation of 
the principle of consistency, Ptolemy had accepted the 
Aristotelian cosmological principle of uniform circular 
motion for the celestial spheres, but then when he came 
to describe the motions of the particular planets, and the 
spheres that carried them while they moved so that they 
would not create void, he resorted to mathematical models 
which required for all the planets, with the exception of 
the Sun, the uniform motions of those physical spheres 
around axes that did not pass through their centers. That 
in itself is impossible, and thus all the results derived from 
such models, although mathematically feasible and able 
to produce rather reliable predictions for the positions of 
planets, were nevertheless cosmologically absurd. 
Beginning with the eleventh century, the criticism of 
these features of the Greek astronomical tradition became 
more focused and much more elaborate than before, thus 
producing books with such titles as Doubts Regarding 
Ptolemy, or Recapitulation in Regard to Ptolemy. In later 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


centuries, the same violations committed by Ptolemy 
began to be codified in separate books called Ishkalat 
(Problems, or Doubts). The natural result engendered 
by such systematic criticism was the production of 
alternative mathematical models that could at once be 
cosmologically feasible, account for the observations, i.e. 
save the phenomena, and still predict the positions of the 
planets with an accuracy as good as that predicted by 
Ptolemy if not better. 

In the same eleventh century new attempts at 
constructing new models that would meet those strict 
requirements were first conceived but without meeting 
with much success. However, in the centuries that 
followed this activity became the most prevalent activity, 
and one astronomer after another would expend great 
efforts to produce such new mathematical models. The 
new discipline dealing with these planetary theories, the 
‘ilm al-hay’a, was the natural home for such discussions. 


Thirteenth-century development 

The thirteenth century saw the establishment of one of 
the most elaborate astronomical institutions of medieval 
Islam, the Maragha Observatory, which was founded by 
the astronomer and first director Nasir al-Din al-Tisi 
(died 1274) in 1259, and his colleague who built the 
instruments for that observatory, Mu’ayyad al-Din al- 
"Urdi (1266), where they were both joined later by Tisi’s 
student Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi (1311) and collaborator 
Yahya b. Abi al-Shukr al-Maghribi (1286) and others. As 
a result, the activity of rebuilding planetary theories with 
new mathematical models that were not plagued by the 
inadequacies of the Greek models began to move to more 
sophisticated grounds. 

In their pursuit of such models, both Tusit and 
"Urdi had to devise new mathematical theorems and to 
reconfigure their own mathematical models in order to 
accomplish the required motions of the celestial spheres, 
always working with the same Ptolemaic assumption 
that those spheres had the same properties stipulated by 
Aristotelian cosmology. In figure 1, “Urdi’s lemma simply 
stipulated that if two lines, AG, DZ always formed equal 
angles with line AZ, either internally or externally, then 
the line GD joining their extremities would always be 
parallel to line AZ. When applied to the model of the 
upper planets as in figure 2, now marked by the line 
connections designated as ‘Urdi (Shirazi), that theorem 
will demonstrate that lines ZD and KL will always be 
parallel. This arrangement will then allow the epicyclic 
center of the planet Z to move uniformly around the 
center of its own sphere L, which in turn moves uniformly 
around the center of its own carrier K, which is placed 
from the observer at point Q at a distance equal to 
one and a half times the Ptolemaic eccentricity e. Note 
that in this arrangement, as required by the Aristotelian 
cosmology, all the spheres move in place around an axis 
that passes through their centers, unlike the Ptolemaic 
configuration, also illustrated in figure 2, where the sphere 
with center T moves uniformly around the equant D. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Islamic Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


D G 
E Bz A 


‘Urdt's Lemma 


Tust Couple 


Figure 1. Mathematical theorems for the motions of the celestial 
spheres: (a) Urdi’s lemma; (b) Tiisi couple. 


only violation of Aristotelian cosmology left is that the 
spheres proposed first by “Urdi, who was then followed 
by Shirazi, are still eccentric just as in the Ptolemaic model. 
But that is an easy hurdle to overcome for it can be 
assumed that the said eccentricity OK, if need be, could 
be substituted for by an epicycle and a concentric as was 
done by APoLLonius and Ptolemy after him when they 
demonstrated mathematically the equivalence between 
eccentric and epicyclic models. In fact, the connection 
designated in the same figure 2 with the name of the 
fourteenth century Damscene astronomer Ibn al-Shatir 
(1375) achieved just that. For, as it can be easily seen, all 
the connections proposed by this astronomer are strictly 
geocentric, as required by Aristotelian cosmology. His 
response to the deployment of epicycles, which could 
still be conceived as violating that cosmology, is that the 
epicycles of the largest planets are much smaller than some 
of the fixed stars and if Aristotle accepts that such fixed 
stars are made of the same element as the surrounding 
sphere that carries them then he would have to accept the 
same kind of composition in the heaven produced by the 
presence of such small epicycles. 

Finally, when the Sun is held fixed, and the Earth is 
allowed to move around it, as stipulated by Copernican 
astronomy, we note in figure 3 that the same theorem 
first proposed by ‘Urdi is still deployed to assure the 
parallelism of lines OD, NK and their equivalents in the 
Copernican model. The theorem employed by NicoLAus 
COPERNICUS Was not enunciated as a new theorem as was 
done by ‘Urdi, nor was it proven by Copernicus as was 
done by ‘Urdi, and had to wait until KEPLER wrote to 
Maestlin asking him about it where he received the proof 
with the response. 

Similarly, the theorem now called the Tuisi Couple 
(figure 1), which was first proposed in 1247 by Tisi, 
was also used by both Ibn al-Shatir and Copernicus in 
their account for the motions of the planet Mercury. The 
theorem itself stipulates that if two spheres AGB, and 
GHD, where the diameter AD is twice the length of GD, 
are made to move in sucha way as the bigger sphere moves 
in place at uniform speed and the smaller sphere moves 
in the opposite direction at twice that speed, then the 
original point of tangency H will oscillate back and forth 
along the diameter of the larger sphere, thereby creating 
linear motion out of uniform circular motion. Tiasi used 
that theorem to account for the motions of the Moon (not 
illustrated) and the upper planets as seen in figure 2. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Oo — 
Perigee 


Figure 2. Mathematical models applied to the motions of the 
upper planets. 


Ptolemy : 

———— Urdi 
ei Ibn al-Shatir \ Ke 
PIS aah Copernicus 


Figure 3. Comparison of the models of Ptolemy, Urdi, and Ibn 
al-Shattir with the Copernican model. 


With those two theorems being the only additions 
made by Copernicus to the Ptolemaic models (heliocen- 
tricity excepted) it becomes very clear that the mathemat- 
ical developments that were devised in the Islamic world 
were themselves the same ones deployed by Copernicus. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Islamic Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Islamic astronomy in the sixteenth century 

But by the sixteenth century, Muslim astronomers had 
finally come to realize that all those problems, when stated 
in the Ptolemaic—Aristotelian fashion, do not in fact have 
a unique mathematical solution. Figure 2 illustrates the 
mathematical equivalence of all the solutions proposed, 
and the person who apparently came to that realization 
was the same Khafri (1550) whose configuration for the 
upper planets is also illustrated in the same figure. 

This line of research which was pursued by Muslim 
astronomers in order to resolve the problems posed by 
the Greek astronomical tradition seems to have been 
the same line that was followed by Copernicus in the 
introduction to his Commentariolus (again heliocentricity 
excepted). From that perspective, it becomes very clear 
that the Islamic astronomical tradition, which seems to 
have been passed on to Europe during the Renaissance, 
was itself embedded in the much larger context of rejecting 
the Greek astronomical tradition, rather than preserving it 
as is often asserted. 


Bibliography 

Kennedy E S 1956 Survey of Islamic astronomical tables 
Trans. Am. Phil. Soc., new ser. 46 123-77 

King D 1987 Universal solutions in Islamic astronomy From 
Ancient Omens to Statistical Mechanics: Essays on the 
Exact Sciences Presented to Asger Aaboe (Acta Historica 
Scientiarum Naturalium et Medicinalium) vol 39, ed 
J L Berggren and B R Goldstein (Copenhagen: 
Bibliotheca Unversitatis Hauniensis) pp 121-32 

Saliba G 1994 A History of Arabic Astronomy: Planetary 
Theories During the Golden Age of Islam (New York: 
New York University Press) 

Saliba G 1996 Arabic planetary theories after the eleventh 
century Ab Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science 
(London: Routledge) pp 58-127 

Saliba G 1997 A redeployment of mathematics in 
a sixteenth-century Arabic critique of Ptolemaic 
astronomy Perspectives Arabes et Médiévales sur la 
Tradition Scientifique et Philosophique Grecque. Actes 
du Colloque de la Société Internationale d'Histoire des 
Sciences et de la Philosophie Arabe et Islamique (Paris, 31 
March-3 April 1993) ed A Hasnawi, A Elamrani-Jamal 
and M Aouad (Paris: Peeters) pp 105-22 

Sayili A 1960 The observatory in Islam Publications of The 
Turkish Historical Society ser. vii, no 38 

Swerdlow N 1973 The derivation and first draft of 
Copernicus’s Planetary Theory: a translation of the 
Commentariolus with commentary Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. 
117 423-512 


George Saliba 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Isotope 


Any of two or more forms of the same chemical element, 
the atomic nuclei of which contain the same number of 
protons (and therefore have the same atomic number) 
but different numbers of neutrons (and therefore have 
different mass numbers). For example, oxygen has three 
stable isotopes, oxygen-16, oxygen-17 and oxygen-18, 
denoted symbolically by 80, ‘20, and '3O, respectively 
(the subscript denotes atomic number and the superscript, 
mass number). Each nucleus contains 8 protons, together 
with 8, 9, or 10 neutrons, in the cases of oxygen-16, oxygen- 
17, and oxygen-18. Oxygen 16 comprises about 99.76% of 
naturally occurring oxygen. 


See also: atom, neutron, proton. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopes in the Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Isotopes in the Interstellar Medium 


ISOTOPES (or isotopomers) of the same chemical element 
have different atomic weights. The nuclei have different 
numbers of neutrons, but the same number of protons. 
For deuterium, *H or D, the nucleus consists of a proton 
and neutron; for helium the two stable isotopes are 7He 
and the much more abundant #He. NUCLEOSYNTHESIS has 
changed isotopic and element abundances in the big 
bang. Subsequently, there were further changes in STELLAR 
INTERIORS, NOVAE, SUPERNOVAE and COSMIC RAY interactions 
with interstellar (IS) material. This processing changes 
the abundance of light elements and isotopes; all elements 
heavier than lithium must have been produced in stars. 

It is generally accepted that the universe began with 
an explosive event, the big bang. About 100 s after the big 
bang, neutrons and protons produced primordial D, 5He, 
“He and “Li. In the standard big bang nucleosynthesis 
(SBBN) of the light elements, the most important parameter 
is the baryonic density, usually expressed as the baryon-to- 
photon ratio, n. After expanding and cooling, the ionized 
material recombined and then formed stars and galaxies. 
For stars of mass M > 0.08Mg, nucleosynthesis products 
are expelled into the interstellar medium (ISM). In the 
solar system and perhaps in the local interstellar medium 
(LISM), we can measure samples directly. Accurate IS 
abundances cannot be deduced from cosmic ray data 
since the sources and interaction histories are not known 
in sufficient detail. For regions far from the Sun, we 
can measure gas phase abundances using spectroscopy, 
but we cannot determine the constitution of dust grains. 
Abundance ratios of elements in the gas phase may be 
affected by differing amounts of condensation onto dust 
grains; however, such processes will not affect the ratios 
of isotopes. 

Measurements of ISM abundances allow us to con- 
strain the global effect of nucleosynthesis by ensembles 
of stars, while abundance determinations for the circum- 
stellar regions around individual stars allow us to investi- 
gate yields for a given object. In all stellar nucleosynthesis 
schemes, one must differentiate between primary and sec- 
ondary products. Primary products are those produced 
from H or He in a short time compared with the age of 
the galaxy, ~10'° yr. Secondaries are produced from pri- 
maries. Thus ’*C isa primary, while Cis asecondary. The 
abundance of secondaries grows with time relative to the 
abundance of primaries. The study of chemical evolution of 
galaxies allows us to trace the history of nucleosynthesis; 
models are constructed to account for the combined effects 
of nucleosynthesis in individual stars and the ejection of 
such material into the ISM as well as the conversion of ISM 
material into stars in the STAR FORMATION process. 

In this review, we will emphasize data for selected 
species and sketch the measurement processes and 
interpretations needed to obtain abundances. The light 
elements deserve special treatment because of their 
relation to the big bang. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Results for D, He and Li 

The light element abundances are especially interesting 
since these provide tests of big bang models and constrain 
baryon densities in the SBBN (figure 1). The SBBN 
products will be altered by stellar processing. Separating 
the effects of SBBN from stellar processing to determine 
the primordial abundances is a great challenge. We believe 
that stars always net destroy deuterium; *He and 7Li may 
be net produced, while *He is certainly net produced. 
Measurements show that *He makes up >20% of the mass 
of the universe; the other big bang products constitute 
a mass fraction of <10~*. Our Sun has a mass fraction 
of ~27% helium and 2% metals. Metals, designated as 
Z, are all elements heavier than helium. Most of the 
helium was produced in the big bang; when helium is 
produced in stars, metals are also produced (see CHEMICAL 
COMPOSITION OF STARS). Solar system metals were produced 
in earlier generations of stars, expelled into the ISM 
and incorporated in the protosolar nebula (see SOLAR 
SYSTEM: FORMATION). The solar system represents material 
not processed in the last 4.5 x 10° yr, while the ISM 
is more processed. Compared with both, high-redshift 
extragalactic material was not very processed since the big 
bang. 


Deuterium 
Measurements of Lyman series ultraviolet IS absorption 
lines in diffuse clouds toward intense background sources 
provide the most reliable D/H ratios. Most of the D 
and H in these clouds is atomic, that is D I and H I. 
Measurements of local gas have been obtained with the 
International Ultraviolet Observatory (IUE), Copernicus 
and Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Determinations of 
D/H ratios are limited by the small abundance of D 
relative to H and the small velocity shift caused by the 
different nuclear masses. The radial velocity of a D I 
feature must be separated from the corresponding H I 
feature by —82 km s-! and the line widths of H and D 
must be related. If thermally broadened, the DI linewidth 
must be equal to 0.7 times that of the corresponding H I 
feature which is corrected for saturation; if turbulence 
broadened the widths must be equal. The complexities 
of INTERSTELLAR CHEMISTRY preclude determinations of D/H 
ratios from measurements of deuterated molecules such 
as DCO? or DCN. Similarly, a detection of the A = 92 cm 
D I hyperfine transition in a molecular cloud will not 
bring information about the D/H ratio. More useful for 
D/H ratios might be measurements of rotational lines of 
the most abundant deuterated species, HD. However, one 
needs column densities of H2, which can be uncertain by 
factors of 2 or more. 

There are two interpretations of measured D/H ratios. 
In the first, there are significant deviations from the mean 
value. This interpretation is based on comparisons of HI 
and DI column densities for clouds along the same line of 
sight. In the second interpretation, there is a single D/H 
ratio. For the LISM, this is (1.50 + 0.10) x 10-5, with a 
lo error. This value and solar system ratios give lower 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopes in the Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


limits to the primordial D/H ratio. The optical depths of 
HI may be the limit to determinations of galactic D/H 
ratios. Further progress will come with the FUSE satellite, 
which will allow measurements of higher transitions to 
improve estimates of the optical depths of H I. FUSE will 
also extend measurements of the D/H ratios to regions 
of different stellar processing in the disk and halo of our 
galaxy and other nearby galaxies. 

For clouds with REDSHIFTS of ~2.5 or more, one can 
use Earth-bound optical telescopes to measure D I in the 
absorption line spectra of quasistellar objects. Accurate 
D/H ratios also require accurate H I column densities. 
These require accurate estimates of the optical depths of 
the HI lines. Large numbers of sources are needed to find 
unblended D I absorption, since sources with such ‘clean’ 
spectra constitute <2% of the total. Some observers found 
a ratio of ©2 x 10-4; this may be caused by blending of DI 
with blueshifted H I. The currently favored high-redshift 
(high Z’ in figure 1(b) and ‘early universe’ in table 1) ratio 
is D/H = (3.4+ 0.25) x 10-°. This ratio is consistent 
with current chemical evolution models, using accepted 
parameters. From the SBBN relation (figure 1), this ratio 
allows us to estimate an upper limit to the baryon density. 


Helium isotopes 

The spectroscopic abundance of neutral helium is difficult 
to measure. The most reliable ratios are based on lines 
emitted from regions ionized by high-mass stars, that is 
regions, or gas, ionized by the extremely hot remnants of 
evolved stars, PLANETARY NEBULAE (PNe). 


3He. Outside the solar system there are two sources of 
data for 7He/H ratios. The Solar Wind Ion Composition 
Spectrometer on the Ulysses spacecraft measures the 
abundance of *He and +He atoms. The velocities allow 
us to separate solar system from LISM abundances. The 
ratio is 3He/*He = (2.5*%7,) x 10-4. The quoted statistical 
error is 3 times the systemic error. 

The second ratio is based on radio measurements of 
the hyperfine transition from 3He* at 3.46 cm in regions 
and PNe. The hyperfine line is thermalized and optically 
thin. There is no 4He* line, since the *He* nucleus has no 
spin. Models which account for density structure in the 
ionized gas will raise the 3Het /H ratio; elaborate models 
give ratios up to a factor of 2 larger than homogeneous 
models. 

Standard stellar models predict that 1M. stars which 
are now PNe should be expelling large amounts of *He. 
Observations show that NGC 3242, a PNe with a 1M,5 
progenitor, has 100 times the 3He found in the ISM. If 
3He were produced in every 1Mj star passing through the 
RED GIANT phase just now, the ISM should show a ratio 
similar to NGC 3242. The most likely process destroying 
3He in solar-mass stars is extra mixing in the stellar 
interiors during the red giant phase. This brings 3He into 
deeper layers where temperatures are higher, enhancing 
destruction. To be consistent with ISM ratios, at least 70% 
of the 7He must be destroyed before the PN stage. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In figure 2 there is a gradient in the "C/C ratio 
with distance from the Galactic center. If much *He 
were produced in stars, STELLAR EVOLUTION models predict 
a *He/H gradient opposite to the *C/'°C gradient. The 
lack of a *He/H gradient supports the contention that not 
much *He is produced in stars, so that stellar processing 
has little effect on the He abundance. The average of the 
ISM data and Ulysses result is *He/H = (2.0+0.7) x 107°. 
This should be primordial. 


*He. The present measured abundance of helium is 
an upper limit to the primordial mass ratio, yp. Since 
the baryon-to-photon ratio, n, is only a weak function 
of the relative abundance of *He (see figure 1), even 
small uncertainties in yp have large effects on estimates 
of the baryon density (figure 1). Extragalactic optical 
observations are best for these determinations. 

Corrections of measurements to obtain primordial 
abundances must be empirical, since *He is produced in an 
ensemble of stars determined by an initial mass function, 
which may change with time and location. Also the star 
formation rate was certainly different in the past. One 
obtains an estimate of y, by assuming a linear relation 
between helium abundance and metallicity, Z (usually the 
O/H abundance ratio); the traditional value of this relation 
is Ay/AZ ~ 3. Extrapolating this relation of to zero 
metallicity, we can estimate yp. Measurements have been 
extended to a larger group of low metallicity, blue compact 
galaxies (BCGs). Previous data taken have been revised 
because some He* spectra were affected by unsuspected 
line absorption and because of biases in previous fits of Y 
versus metallicity. 

The best estimate of the primordial helium mass 
fraction, obtained for BCGs, is 0.242. An extrapolation 
to O/H = 0 gives yp = 0.244 + 0.002 while, for N/H = 0, 
Yp = 0.245 + 0.001. From the BCG data, we adopt a value 
Yp = 0.244 + 0.002. 


Lithium 

Liis very fragile, easily destroyed in deeper layers of even 
low-mass stars. Compared with ’Li, the °Li nucleus is 
more loosely bound, so is more easily destroyed by nuclear 
burning. The accepted conclusion is that °Li is produced 
by collisions of cosmic rays with atoms; 7Liis produced in 
SBBN, in spallation and in stellar nucleosynthesis. 

In the ISM, the ratio of 7Li/°Li is free from systematic 
effects. Toward ¢ Oph there are two velocity components 
in absorption with ratios of 8.6 + 0.8 and 1.4*53. Toward 
p Oph, the ratio is 11.1 + 2; toward ¢ Per, 5.5*14. These 
ratios indicate that there are actual differences. In addition, 
the solar system ratio, 12.3, is significantly different from 
those of ¢ Oph and ¢ Per. This indicates that the ISM is 
very inhomogeneous and the solar system formed from 
the ISM like that toward p Oph. 

For young low-mass stars, that is POPULATION I STARS, 
observations show a wide range of Li/H ratios. There is no 
general theory of Li processing in low-mass stars; one must 
use correlations based on observations. The best estimates 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopes in the Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of primordial Li abundances are based on observations of 
the older population of stars, that is POPULATION IT STARS. For 
these stars, Li abundances are rather constant for a wide 
range of T.¢ and are largely independent of metallicity 
(estimated from the abundance of iron); this has been 
referred to as the Spite plateau. The simplest explanation is 
that the mechanisms which destroy lithium in population 
I stars are absent in population II objects and that the Li in 
extreme population II stars is primordial. Newer results 
show that there is at least some Li destruction. There is also 
aslight increase of Liabundance with metallicity; this is the 
first direct evidence for stellar Li production. The average 
observed Li/H value, for upper and lower envelopes, is 
(1.16*%8) x 107'°. If there are unsuspected sources of 
destruction of Li, one can fit to the upper envelope to obtain 
the ratio Li, /H = (2.53%) x 107"? (see figure 1(b)). 


Summary and interpretation of light element abundances 

We plot the best estimates of primordial abundances 
versus the baryon-to-photon ratio yi in figure 1(b). For 
consistency, all the primordial abundances must give a 
single value of 79. From the data, there is a consistent 
model for ni = 4.7. One must use the 7Li/H ratio 
determined under the assumption that the upper envelope 
of the measurements is the best choice. The D/H value 
measured for high-redshift objects must be 3.4 x 107°, and 
the *He/H ratio must be nearly at the lower limit. The 
most critical test of SBBN rests with the *He/H ratio; if 
the BCG ratios were lowered by 10%, there would be an 
inconsistency with the D/H ratio. 

The best value of 7719 is 4.7. Because systematic errors 
dominate, we can only give a range of errors; 1719 is between 
2 and 5. For m9 = 4.7 and a microwave background 
temperature of 2.73 K, the baryonic mass density is 3.2 x 
10°! g cm~?. For a HUBBLE CONSTANT of 65 km s~! Mpc7', 
the density needed to halt the expansion of the universe 
is 25 times larger. Thus, baryons alone cannot halt this 
expansion. 


Results for CNO isotopes 

Isotope shifts of atomic spectra, caused by different nuclear 
masses, are sufficiently large for light elements, but 
not for heavier elements. These must be measured by 
molecular spectroscopy. A comparison of isotopomers 
might be affected by selective dissociation and chemical 
fractionation. Selective dissociation occurs when molecules 
are destroyed by spectral line radiation; the more 
abundant species may be self-shielded. Chemical 
fractionation arises from small differences in the different 
molecular zero-point vibration energies, related to mass 
and to the temperature of formation. The result is to 
enrich the heavier molecular species. If this were a large 
effect, the measured 1*CO/CO ratio would not represent 
the ’C/'8C ratio. The most reliable carbon isotope ratios 
are given by CH* measurements, because CH* is formed 
only at high temperatures. CH* lines are measured in the 
optical, so these ratios are restricted to the LISM. The best 
®CH*/SCH* ratio is 67 + 3. From radio astronomy data, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10° T 


10+ 


10°° 


10° 


RELATIVE ABUNDANCE ( X/H or yp ) 


A079) 


1 | roioiitl 1 1 rool 1 | yA Teas 
40°! 4 10 30 100 


0.26 


0.25 
Yp 0.24 


0.23 


TT QTitty wv 


“—7-— 
z\0 
a 
3 
i 
VT TTT 


-— 
wo 
TI 
nv Jt 
Rn 
(eo) 
a 
1 | 
| 


AVG OF _ 
ISM & LISM —] 


ss 

S 
© 
l 


UPPER ENVELOPE a 


T T/TAWOT 
rf 
Lull 


= 
° 
a 
° 
Tm 
L 
{ 
{ 
{ 
( 
{ 
\ 
ry 


a 
= uul 
fe) 


Figure 1. (a) The SBBN production scheme as a function of 1710, 
which is 10° times the baryon-to-photon ratio. The number 
ratios, X, refer to D, 7He and ’Li, the mass fraction, y, refers to 
“He. The curve for D is multiplied by 10 for clarity. (b) An 
expanded version of (a), showing the region of parameter space 
where the abundances of the elements are located. The shaded 
regions show where the data in table 1 are located. In the panel 
for D/H ratios, the leftward arrow indicates that the solar 
system and LISM ratios are lower limits to the primordial values. 
For D/H, ‘high Z’ refers to gas toward high-redshift quasars; the 
values for lower D/H ratios are from the solar system and LISM. 
For yp, the BCGs are blue compact galaxies. BCGs are essentially 
very large regions with low metallicity; thus their y values 
should be close to yp. The dashed curves show the uncertainties 
in the theoretical relations. 


the average of 13 sources in the LISM is *C/C = 69+ 6 
(table 2). The agreement of the CH* isotope ratio with 
these carbon isotope ratios from RADIO ASTRONOMY indicates 
that the combined effects of fractionation and selective 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopes in the Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Selected light element ratios. 


Early 

universe, 
Abundance Nearby BCGs or 
ratio Protosolar ISM population II stars 
(D/H) x 10° 2440.5 1.50 + 0.10 3.4+ 0.25 


(?He/*He) x 104 =—1.5+0.3 2.0 + 0.7 = 


Y 0.273-0.277 0.2604 


(“Li/H) x 101° - - 


t 0.018 0.244 + 0.002 
L1G s (average of all) 
2.5*4% (upper envelope) 


7Li/®Li 12.3 6.2;14toll1 - 


dissociation are small. On this basis, radio observations 
of CO and H,CO have been used to determine the ?C/8C 
ratio over the Galaxy. 

Nitrogen and oxygen are not affected by chemical 
fractionation. However, determinations of 4“N/°N or 
1eO/'8O ratios may be influenced, since these ratios 
are frequently measured as double ratios, HCN and 
HC"N. Then, one uses ratios from CO and H,CO to 
obtain the desired results. 


Carbon 

In figure 2(a) we plot the ISM isotope ratio ?C/%C 
determined from H2CO and CO as a function of Dec. 
These results show that nearly all the ratios obtained from 
HCO lie above those from CO. This is consistent with 
interstellar chemistry models. Molecular clouds near the 
Sun show a higher ratio than clouds in the inner part of 
the disk of our Galaxy, and the H2CO ratios have a larger 
scatter than ratios obtained from CO data. A least-squares 
unweighted fit to all of the data gives 


PC/BC = (7.54£1.9)Dec + (7.6 £ 12.9). 


The uncertainties are RMS values. There is a large scatter 
between the data and the fit. Some of this is due to 
errors, but there is evidence for actual source-to-source 
differences. If the solar system ratio, 89, represents the 
LISM 4.5 x 10° yr ago, the ratio has decreased by ~20%. 
Taking limits as actual values, optical studies of 191 
circumstellar envelopes give an average ratio of 18; radio 
data (table 2) gives an average of 40. The stellar production 
of '8C is diluted by a factor of >2 in the LISM. 

The ?C/C ratio is a measure of the primary to 
secondary processing. The C is thought to be produced 
on rapid time scales primarily via He burning in massive 
stars. The '°C is thought to be produced primarily via CNO 
processing of '7C seeds from earlier stellar generations. 
This occurs ona slower time scale primarily during the red 
giant phase in low- and intermediate-mass stars or novae. 
The ?C/'C ratio for the solar system is 89 (table 2). Asa 
function of time, °C is expected to increase with respect to 
”C, as with all secondary products. Thus, the ISM *C/8C 
ratio should be lower than the solar system value (table 2); 
this ratio is only about 20% above the isotope ratio in the 
LISM. Thus, over the last 4.5 x 10? yt, lower-mass stars 
have not produced a large amount of ‘°C in the LISM. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Nitrogen isotopes 

To obtain '4*N/N ratios from HCN and HCN data, 
2C/}8C ratios must be known. We take these from the fit 
to figure 2(a). Applying these results to the HCN data, we 
obtain the '4N/1N ratios plotted in figure 2(b): 


MN/N = (19.0 + 8.5) Dec + (288.6 + 65.1). 


The '4N/?N ratio in the solar system is 270. Near 
the Sun, the average is 388 + 32 (eight sources). From 
the fit, the value at 8.5 kpc is 450. Both values are 
consistent with an ~70% increase in this ratio since the 
formation of the solar system. The Galactic center region 
and the CARBON STAR IRC+10216 show high metallicities 
and 4N/'N ratios >500 (table 2). This gives support 
to the notion that 4N/15N ratios are directly correlated 
with metallicity. If these regions are typical, one expects 
an increase of '4N/°N ratios in the inner Galactic disk. 
However, the data show a somewhat lower value (table 2). 
Studies of HII REGIONS in the inner part of the Galactic disk 
have a higher metallicity. Thus, the chemical evolution of 
14N and °N in the inner disk must have been very different 
from that of the Galactic center, the well-known carbon star 
CW Leo (IRC+10216) or the LISM. These results can be 
explained if novae are the main contributors to '°N. The 
M4N/15N ratio in the LMC is ~100. This galaxy is metal 
poor; this result indicates that the production of '°N is 
primary and not secondary. 


Oxygen 

There are three stable oxygen isotopes. Usually, one 
obtains the '°O/!8O ratio from a double ratio; for 
figure 2(c), we used (H;?C'8O) /(H3°C'*O). To obtain a ratio 
involving only oxygen, one must use the carbon isotope 
ratios (figure 2(a)) to separate the contributions of carbon 
from oxygen. The isotope values are plotted in figure 2(c). 
The fit gives 


169 /'8O = (58.8 + 11.8) Dac + (37.1 + 82.6). 


The fit is surprisingly good. For five sources in the LISM, 
the average ratio is 557 + 30 (table 1). From the fit, the 
value at 8.5 kpc is 537, with large uncertainties. 

Ratios of %O to ’O show no gradient with Dec. 
The average value of this ratio is markedly below those 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopes in the Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Radio data for isotope ratios of heavier elements. 


Inner 
Galactic Galactic Solar Carbon Nuclei of 
Isotope ratio center disk LISM system stars galaxies 
PRe/BC ~20 5344 69 + 6 89 >30 >30 
MN/PN >600 320+30 388432 270 >515 - 
16Q/18O 250 327+32 557+30 490 320-1260 ~200 
>2700 
BO/’O 3.5+0.2 3640.2 36402 55 0.6-0.9 8 
<1 
32g 345 ~22 ~22 ~22 22 = = 
2953 /0Si 1.5 15 15 15 = - 


of the solar system, but is larger than the carbon star 
value. The average '°O/'8O ratio in the ISM near the 
Sun is comparable with that found in carbon stars, to 
within the errors. In the inner Galactic disk, the ratio 
is a factor of 2 lower; the value in the Galactic center 
is comparable. If the isotopes are formed in stars more 
massive than 10Mo, then !°O is a primary nucleosynthesis 
product, while 7O is secondary. The major production 
scheme for '8O is not certain. One expects a radial 
gradient in a primary/secondary ratio but not in a 
secondary/secondary ratio. The gradient observed in 
16O/'8O combined with the lack of a gradient in ®O/’O 
indicates that '8O is secondary. However, the observed 
160/180 ratio for the LISM, 557 + 30 (table 2), is larger 
than the solar system value, 490. This indicates an increase 
with time, whereas primary/secondary ratios should 
decrease with time. Thus, this model cannot reproduce the 
evolution of either ratio, from comparisons of solar system 
and LISM ratios. To explain both the temporal and the 
spatial behavior of ©O/'8O, one must assume that there 
is an unknown mechanism which has inhibited the %O 
production in the last few 10° yr. Since the nucleosynthesis 
of '8O is still not well understood, this is possible. As 
expected for a purely secondary/secondary ratio, there 
is no variation of %O/’O with Dec. Observations 
show a marked decrease in the *%O/'O ratio between 
the formation of the solar system and the present. So 
far, models have been based on the assumption that 
only massive stars produce 'O. If '7O is produced in 
low- and intermediate-mass stars, the '8O/!’O ratio is a 
secondary/secondary result, with '"O having a longer 
production time scale, i.e. more secondary than '8O. Then 
in the past few 10° yr, the abundance of '’O will grow faster 
than 180; this explains the decrease of the ratio with time. It 
is also possible that the solar system is not a representative 
sample of the ISM 4.5 x 10? yr ago. 


Sulfur, silicon, magnesium and aluminum isotopes 

For other isotopes, there are fewer data, as compared with 
CNO results. There is little or no variation in the °*S/*4S 
ratio with Dec. The ISM ratio agrees with the solar system 
value, so there seems to have been no change with time. 
Additional data show a **S/*S ratio of 24.4+5.0, a #S/*S 
ratio of 6.27 + 1.01 and *45/°°S of 115 + 17. The last ratio 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is lower than the solar system value of 200, so °°S may 
be a secondary product. This is expected on the basis of 
chemical evolution models and indicates good agreement. 
We take this (optimistically) as evidence for the correctness 
of both. 

In the solar system, the *Si/?°Si ratio is 19.7. For some 
sources it is certain that the optical depths of *8SiO lines 
are moderate, so there can be no direct determination of 
the 7°Si/?°Si from measurements of the rotational lines of 
SiO isotopomers. The isotopes *’Si and *°Si have been 
measured in the Galactic center region. To within the 
errors, the ratio agrees with that measured for the solar 
system. Thus, there appears to be no gradient in the 
29Si /°Si ratio with Dec. 

Radioactive nuclei which decay by y ray emission can 
be detected with satellites. These data refer to heavier 
elements ejected into the ISM by larger-mass stars, novae 
or supernovae. The most well-studied isotope is 7°A]; this 
might be produced during the red giant phase of lower- 
mass stars. 

The presence of *°Al in the ISM is detected by the y ray 
emission at 1.806 MeV, from the decay of 7°Al to the first 
excited state of **Mg. The mean half-life is 1.05 x 10° yr. 
If supernovae produced all of the 7°Al, there would be an 
overproduction of the stable isotope *”Al. It seems likely 
that 7°Al is formed in red giant stars. 

An excess of solar system 7°Mg in meteoritic samples 
had been interpreted as evidence that an enrichment 
of Al occurred shortly before the formation of the 
solar nebula. This may have been a result of triggered 
formation. A less likely interpretation is that °°Al was 
produced elsewhere and transported here. The rare 
stable isotopes of magnesium, Mg and *°Mg, have been 
measured in IRC+10216 using the molecule MgNC. The 
ratio of *Mg:>Mg:?°Mg was found to be 78:11:11, with a 
quoted error of +1. This result agrees with the terrestrial 
ratio of 79.0:10.0:11.0. 


Summary of isotopomers of heavier elements 

There is excellent evidence for a gradient in the C/C 
ratio with distance from the center of the Galaxy, Dec. 
There is evidence for source-to-source variations; for some 
ratios, the solar system value does not represent the 
average of the LISM at the time of formation. There is also 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopes in the Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


200 : 
126/136 (a) J 
150 | 
O re al 
° - 3 
~~ 100 Loo] 
O ae ( ) 7 
N O° O9-- 4 
7 ° . aon Bo ee | 
50 oS O & al 
Bam foie) 4 
oF ee 
b) J 
14) / 15) (b) 4 
2 600 ; 4 
7 a 
© - 5 00 ce ae | 
= O.--" 4 
i =~ 400 aor ° _ 
rs) Z _eg 77 6 52 00 29 el 
-E vt fe} ca 
one ° © 4 
2) 200 4 
Ro 7 
Ope te | Sau SL 
c) 7 
169 / 189 (Cc), : 
600 08 8 
© oe” OF 7 
~ 400 we + 
& see loo) 4 
ba O oe fe) aa 
200 wo mi 
Ro J 
4 4 


0 2 4 6 8 10 
GALACTOCENTRIC DISTANCE 


(KILOPARSEC) Dec 


Figure 2. Plots of isotope ratios as a function of distance from 
the Galactic center, Dec. The distance of the Sun from the center 
is 8.5 kpc. The lines are unweighted least-squares fits to the data. 
For carbon and oxygen ratios, the solar system values are shown 
as (©); for nitrogen, the value is the tip of the arrow. (a) Data for 
the 2C / 13C ratio, from CO and HCO. The ratios from CO data 
lie below those from H2CO. (b) Data for the *N/1N ratio, based 
mostly on double isotope ratios in the HCN molecule. (c) Data 
for the !©O/180 ratio, based on double isotope ratios in the 
H2CO molecule. The value at Dec is the average for the galactic 
center; the !4N/15N value is a lower limit. 


evidence for a gradient in the '°O/18O ratio and reasonable 
evidence for a *N/'°N gradient with Dec. The values of 
the oxygen ratio near the Sun and the nitrogen ratio in the 
inner Galaxy cannot be explained on the basis of current 
theories. Isotopomer studies of the nuclei of external 
galaxies are just beginning. These results can be important 
for an understanding of the star formation history in such 
objects. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 
The study of isotopomers is driven by data, so the most 
recent collections are the most useful. The results of a 
meeting held at the International Space Science Institute, 
Bern, were used extensively. These proceedings are 
contained in 


Prantzos N, Tosi M and von Steiger R (eds) 1998 Pri- 
mordial Nuclei and their Galactic Evolution (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

Prantzos N and Diehl R 1996 Phys. Rep. 267 1 


Studies of °Al and related topics are in a detailed recent 
review of isotopes is 


Wilson T L 1999 Rep. Prog. Phys. 62 145 
A review of the light element abundances is contained in 
Reeves H 1994 Rev. Mod. Phys. 66 193 


A compendium of solar system isotopomer data is given 
by 


Grevesse N et al 192? Cosmic Abundances (Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific Conf. Ser. 99) ed S S Holt and 
G Sonneborn (San Francisco: Astron. Soc. Pacific) 


Solar models with estimates of the protosolar helium mass 
fraction are given by 


Brun et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 506 913 
Circumstellar *C/C ratios are collected in 


Charbonnel C and do Nascimento J D 1998 Astron. 
Astrophys. 336 915 


Thomas L Wilson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopic Anomalies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Isotopic Anomalies 


Until the early 1970s, all models of solar system evolution 
assumed that the inner nebula underwent a_high- 
temperature stage, destroying all grains and thus erasing 
the entire presolar record: all solid bodies would have 
accreted from the cooling of this nebula, constituting 
a gaseous initial reservoir essentially homogeneous in 
composition (See SOLAR SYSTEM: FORMATION). 

This basic assumption was based on the observation 
that in all available material, terrestrial or extraterrestrial 
(lunar samples, meteorites), every element was measured 
with a fixed isotopic composition. Actually, some tiny 
differences were observed, but could be explained as 
resulting from known processes. Let us consider the case 
of the oxygen isotopes. Oxygen has three stable isotopes, 
QO , 0 and !8O,, with abundance ratios 99.76%, 0.04% 
and 0.2% respectively. If for example one compares the O 
isotopic ratios in water vapor and the liquid water from 
which it evaporated, one will find a systematic enrichment 
in light oxygen isotopes ('°O), and accordingly a depletion 
in heavier isotopes ('7O and 180), in the gas phase (the 
reverse being observed in the liquid). Moreover, this mass- 
dependent ‘fractionation’ process is such that, with respect 
to 16O, the depletion of '8O is 2 times higher than that 
of '7O. Thus, on a diagram where the '70/1°O variation, 
with respect to a given reference, is plotted against the 
8Q/1°O variation, all samples fall on a line (‘fractionation 
line’) with slope 1/2, which represents the ratio of mass 
differences: (17-16) /(18-16) (see figure 1). 

In 1969, two major events modified this view. First, 
the return of lunar samples from the APOLLO missions 
had forced all experimenters to drastically increase the 
sensitivity of their analytic tools, to allow measurements 
to be performed at a microscopic grain scale. Second, a 
very large ‘primitive’ meteorite, a carbonaceous CHONDRITE 
called the ALLENDE METEORITE, fell and was retrieved prior to 
any contamination. This meteorite contains millimeter- 
sized white inclusions imbedded in a dark silicate matrix. 
These inclusions are made of highly refractory minerals, 
that is very-high-temperature condensates. Although 
very difficult to measure on such a small scale, their 
O isotope contents were determined. Very surprisingly, 
they happened to be quite distinct from any other ever 
measured, including that of the Allende bulk matrix. 
Actually, they did not plot on the oxygen fractionation 
line, but rather on a line with slope 1, the proposed 
interpretation of which was as follows: these inclusions 
are mixtures of ‘normal’ grains (‘A’ on figure 1), condensed 
from the same isotopic reservoir as all other solar system 
material, and grains (‘B’) with oxygen atoms constituted 
of !©O only (no !7O and no 80). There is no known process, 
operating in the solar region, capable of producing a 
sample free of '7O and '8O if it contained originally a 
mixture of the three stable isotopes. This implies that 
the grains with pure '°O condensed prior to their being 
incorporated in the solar nebula, in an environment where 
no '’O and no '8O was present, and have been preserved 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


179 / 169 


B 186 / 169 


Figure 1. Isotropic diagram for oxygen. (After Clayton R N et al 
1973 Science 182 485-8 (© AAAS 1973).) 


since. A major consequence was derived: the thermal 
evolution of the early solar system did not entirely erase 
the memory of presolar events; it is possible to identify 
grains with isotopic content indicating their presolar 
origin. Thus, the !°O-rich phase could have been formed 
in a supernova envelope. 

‘Isotopic anomalies’ refer to such abundance ratios 
which cannot be accounted for by solar system processes 
acting on samples accreted in an initial homogeneous 
reservoir of ‘solar’ composition. They are relics of stellar 
environments where presolar grains formed prior to their 
incorporation in the protosolar nebula, preserving their 
original isotopic composition until their accretion in solar 
system objects. 

Another important isotopic anomaly, discovered soon 
after the pioneering O anomaly, is that of Mg. Mg has 
three stable isotopes, “Mg, Mg and *Mg, with relative 
abundances 79%, 10% and 11%. In some carbonaceous 
chondrites, the Mg isotopes have been measured with 
a slight Mg enrichment, found to be proportional to 
their *”Al/*4Mg ratio. The interpretation is as follows: Al 
contains at present only one stable isotope, 27 Al. However, 
models of STELLAR EVOLUTION show that a number of stars, 
in particular SUPERNOVAE, also synthesize some Al, an 
isotope which decays into *Mg with a half-life of 0.73 
million years. The excess of *°Mg in a grain would result 
from the in situ decay of *°Al. The discovery of excess °Mg 
in a grain would thus indicate that it condensed in a gas 
containing both ?”Al and 7°Al. 

The presence of ”°Al in the protosolar nebula would 
imply that the time between the synthesis of “Al, in a 
stellar environment, and its incorporation in the solar 
region and within the parent bodies of meteorites, is no 
more than a few million years: if not, all would have 
decayed, been homogenized in the gaseous nebula, and no 
anomalies would have been observed. In this very short 
time scale, considerably shorter than that of interstellar 
cloud collapse, a supernova would have exploded very 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Isotopic Anomalies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


close to the protosolar nebula, loading it with unstable 
isotopes such as Al. According to one model, this 
supernova, by its explosion, would have both driven the 
collapse of the presolar cloud, and injected some isotopes 
the decay of which could have served as the major energy 
source to initiate planetary evolution. 

Actually, these pioneering and fundamental inves- 
tigations triggered a huge development of experimental 
work, leading to the discovery of many more isotopic 
anomalies, sometimes identified at the level of individual 
micrometer-sized grains: indeed, one can state that inter- 
stellar grains have been isolated in the laboratory. Dif- 
ferent classes of such presolar grains, extracted from all 
major types of carbonaceous chondrites, have been iden- 
tified. They are all refractory enough in composition to 
have survived the inner solar system formation processes: 
so far, nanodiamonds (a few nm in size), SiC, graphite and 
corundum are the most numerous. 

When measured at grain level, much larger isotopic 
anomalies are found, with respect to the first analyses, 
which were performed on mixtures of presolar and solar 
grains. Moreover, in addition to *°Al, other short-lived 
isotopes have been discovered through excess of their 
daughter products: *!K (decayed from “Ca, with a half- 
life of 0.1 million years) and “Ca (from “Ti, with a half- 
life of only 48 yr). Although 7°Al and *'Ca could have 
been formed in different types of stars, such as supernovae, 
RED GIANT STARS (actually asymptotic giant branch) or WOLF- 
RAYET STARS, according to current nucleosynthesis models, 
“Ti seems to originate only from the explosive supernovae 
burning He: their carriers, when identified, are truly 
grains condensed in a supernova SN envelope, and 
preserved since. 

These examples illustrate the potential that a 
systematic study of isotopic anomalies has to describe 
the geography of the presolar stellar environment and the 
history of solar system formation from the collapse of the 
interstellar cloud to the accretion of protoplanetary bodies. 
It emphasizes the major role that microscopic analyses of 
extraterrestrial samples can play in astrophysics. 


Jean-Pierre Bibring 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Istituto di Radioastronomia, Bologna 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Istituto di Radioastronomia, Bologna 


The Istituto di Radioastronomia in Bologna is the main 
institute for research in radio astronomy in Italy. It 
conducts the study of the universe through radio waves 
and operates the Italian radio telescopes. 

The institute, founded in 1970 from a previously 
existing university laboratory, is operated and funded 
by the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR). The 
headquarters are located in Bologna, at the CNR Research 
Area, while the two observing stations are in Medicina 
(Bologna) and Noto (Siracusa, Sicily). 

The staff consists of about 55 people, including as- 
tronomers, electronic engineers—physicists, software spe- 
cialists, technical and administrative personnel. Addition- 
ally, 10 professors and researchers from the University of 
Bologna and the Observatory of Bologna, as well as many 
PhD students, post-doctorate fellows and undergraduate 
students, are affiliated with the institute. 

The institute operates three radio telescopes. The 
‘Croce del Nord’ radio telescope, in Medicina, is the largest 
transit instrument in the world, with its T-shaped arms of 
564 m and 640 m, respectively. Since it was built, in the 
early 1960s, it has produced two important radio source 
catalogs (known as B2 and B3), with data on more than 
30 000 objects. 

The two identical single-dish antennas, each 32 m 
in diameter, located in Medicina and Noto, built in 
the 1980s, have been designed to work in conjunction 
with other foreign telescopes with the very long baseline 
interferometry technique (VLBI). They are members of 
European networks for both astronomy and geodynamics, 
and participate in observations with radio telescopes 
belonging to the American network (VLBA), to other 
countries in the world, and in space (HALCA). The 
institute is member of the JOINT INSTITUTE FOR VLBI IN EUROPE 
(JIVE). 

A new large single-dish radio telescope, 64 m in 
diameter, is being built in Sardinia to increase the radio 
observing facilities, and to track interplanetary probes. 

The research activity of the institute is the study of the 
physics of radio galaxies and quasars, stars, the interstellar 
medium and cosmology. The institute has gained a high 
level of expertise in the technological field related to the 
instrumentation required for large radio telescopes. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.ira.bo.cnr.it/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Italian Space Agency (ASI) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Italian Space Agency (ASI) 


A government agency, founded in 1988, for the purpose 
of identifying, coordinating and managing Italian space 
programs. Under its five-year National Space Plan, 
ASI aims to promote, support and control the scientific, 
technological and commercial applications of space 
activities as well as to promote new technological 
capabilities in Italian aerospace industries. 

Under ASI’s leadership, Italy has been involved in 
a variety of space activities, including the International 
Space Station, Tethered Satellite, X-SAR (X-band Synthetic 
Aperture Radar) and Lageos (Laser-ranged geodetic 
satellite) programs. Cooperative scientific ventures 
include the Beppo-Sax x-ray satellite and the SAC-B 
satellite for the study of solar physics. 

ASI also promotes and supports Italian scientific 
and industrial participation in EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY 
programs, including Cassini-Huygens and Integral. 

For further information see 
http://www.asi.it/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ivory, Sir James (1765-1842) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ivory, Sir James (1765-1842) 


Mathematician, born in Dundee, Scotland. After a 
business career he became professor of mathematics at 
the Royal Military College, Great Marlow (which became 
Sandhurst). He retired early because of ill-health and 
devoted himself to mathematical research, particularly as 
applied to astronomical problems such as the gravitational 
attraction of ellipsoids, the shape of self-gravitating 
rotating fluid bodies, the orbits of comets and atmospheric 
refraction. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


James Clerk Maxwell Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


James Clerk Maxwell Telescope 


The 15 m diameter James Clark Maxwell Telescope 
(JCMT), the largest facility in the world designed 
specifically to operate in the submillimeter region of the 
spectrum, became operational in 1987. It is situated close 
to the summit of Mauna Kea, Hawaii, at an altitude of 
4092 m. 

The JCMT is operated by the Joint Astronomy Center 
in Hilo, Hawaii, on behalf of PPARC in the United 
Kingdom, the National Research Council of Canada and 
The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research. 

It is used to study a wide range of astronomical 
objects, including the Sun, comets, molecular clouds, 
galaxies, quasars and cosmic background radiation. On 
11 July 1991, JCMT became the largest telescope ever to 
observe a total solar eclipse. 

Its performance has been enhanced by the addition 
of SCUBA—the submillimeter common-user bolometer 
array—a camera and photometer which operates at 
millimeter and submillimeter wavelengths. SCUBA is 
cooled to 0.1 K and is the most sensitive and versatile of a 
new generation of imaging devices for the submillimeter 
region. Ithas two arrays of bolometric detectors. The long- 
wave array operates in the 750 and 850 wm atmospheric 
transmission windows, while the short-wave array is used 
for observations at 350 and 450 wm. 

SCUBA, which was designed and constructed by the 
ROYAL OBSERVATORY IN EDINBURGH in collaboration with Queen 
Mary and Westfield College, London, began observations 
in May 1997. Since then, discoveries include detection of 
a ring of dust particles around Epsilon Eridani; a distant 
galaxy hidden in dust; and possible new solar systems in 
formation around Vega and Fomalhaut. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.jach.hawaii.edu/JCMT/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jansky, Karl Guthe (1905-50) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jansky, Karl Guthe (1905-50) 


American radio engineer, founder of radioastronomy, 
employed by Bell Telephone Laboratories to reduce noise 
(‘static’) in shortwave transatlantic radiotelephony. Using 
a crudely directional, rotating shortwave receiver array 
operating at 20.5 MHz and 45 kHz, and nicknamed the 
Merry-Go-Round, he noticed a continuous interference 
which changed its strength over the course of the day. At 
first, he believed the noise was caused by the Sun, but it 
transpired that the time of the peak was shifting over the 
course of the year, and a partial solar eclipse in 1932 did not 
reduce the signal. He realized that the noise had a period of 
a sidereal day, not a solar day, and was associated with the 
Milky Way, particularly the direction of Sagittarius, where 
the Milky Way was brightest. This static being outside the 
control of radio engineering, he moved on to other work. 
In 1973 the radioastronomical unit of flux density (10~ 
watts per square meter per hertz) was named the jansky in 
his honor. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Janssen, Pierre Jules César (1824-1907) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Janssen, Pierre Jules César 
(1824-1907) 


Solar astronomer, born in Paris, founded and became head 
of the Astrophysical Observatory at Meudon, observed 
the bright line spectrum of a solar prominence in the 
total eclipse of 1868. The brightness of the emission 
lines suggested to him that they should be visible even 
outside an eclipse, and so they were (see also LOCKYER). 
Photographed the Sun (published in 1904 his Atlas de 
Photographies Solaries), discovered solar granulation (see 
also NASMYTH). ‘Once celestial photography was realized, 
the French astronomers divided the Universe among 
themselves: Janssen took the Sun, Loewy and Puiseux the 
Moon, and the brothers HENRY the stars’. Established a 
solar observatory on Mont Blanc. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Japanese Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Japanese Astronomy 


Astronomy in Japan has made rapid progress in the last 
two decades, placing Japan among the leaders in the field. 
Not only mm wave and x-ray astronomy since the 1980s 
but also the optical and infrared, gravitational wave and 
neutrino astronomy are now at the highest level in these 
fields. Astronomers are preparing ambitious future plans 
in both ground-based and space-borne astronomy, in spite 
of the many challenges that basic science in Japan faces. 


Historical view of Japanese astronomy 

Historically, astronomical research in Japan contributed 
little to the human understanding of the universe before 
World War II. In the Meiji era (1868-1912), Japan started 
introducing science and technology to catch up with the 
Western world. The government established faculties 
of engineering in universities as one of the earliest of 
such attempts in the world. However, most of the 
systematic and organized activities of basic sciences, 
including astronomy, started only after World War II. 

The Norikura Solar Corona Observatory, started in 
1950, and the OKAYAMA ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY With a 
188 cm optical telescope (1960) of Tokyo Astronomical 
Observatory (TAO) and other observatories produced 
only a few observational results of the highest quality 
during the period of the 1950s to 1970s. However, these 
observatories established a foundation for observational 
astronomy in Japan. The TAO was then with 
the University of Tokyo and reorganized in 1988 
as an interuniversity research institute, the NATIONAL 
ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY, JAPAN (NAOJ). The progress in 
theoretical research in Japan, on the other hand, was 
remarkable in this period. The brilliant works by 
Chushiro Hayashi on the early universe, stellar structure 
and origin of the solar system, Yoshihide Kozai in 
celestial mechanics and Satio Hayakawa in high-energy 
astrophysics were among memorable contributions to the 
theoretical astronomy and astrophysics of humankind. In 
particular, the systematic works on the formation of stars 
and the solar system by C Hayashi and his group had built 
a firm foundation in the field. 

In the 1960s small but extensive attempts started in 
radio, x-ray and infrared astronomy in Japan and grew 
rapidly throughout in the 1970s. It was in the 1980s that 
those efforts were rewarded with remarkable scientific and 
technological results. 


Developments in radio astronomy 

Solar radio observations in Japan started in the 1950s. 
The development of solar microwave interferometers by 
Haruo Tanaka was among the earliest in the field. The 
millimeter wave observations in Japan started in 1970 with 
a 6 m diameter telescope at Mitaka constructed by Kenji 
Akabane, Masaki Morimoto and their group. Their efforts 
led TAO to establish the NOBEYAMA RADIO OBSERVATORY (NRO) 
in 1982 with two top-level mm wave telescopes, the 45 m 
diameter telescope (the world’s largest mm wave telescope 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


until now) and the mm wave interferometer composed 
of five (a sixth added later) 10 m antennas with 570 m 
baseline. Norio Kaifu, Masato Ishiguro and their group 
led the construction and work on related developments 
such as high-precision antennas, acousto-optical radio 
spectrometer, Fourier correlation radio spectrometer, 
high-sensitivity SIS mixer receivers, closely cooperating 
with engineers from Japanese industries. Since its 
establishment the Nobeyama mm wave telescopes have 
been providing rich scientific results: detection of many 
exoticnew molecules in interstellar clouds, protoplanetary 
disks, evidence of supermassive black holes in galactic 
nuclei, to name a few, making Japan one of the leading 
countries in radio astronomy. 

Recently (1998) NRO succeeded in linking the 
45 m telescope with the array of six 10 m diameter 
antennas for a seven-element mm wave interferometer 
called RAINBOW. It will be the most sensitive mm 
wave interferometer for the time before the planned 
international project ALMA (mentioned below). Another 
facility of NRO is a radioheliograph, completed in 1992 
under the leadership of Shinzo Enome. The 84-element 
array of 80 cm diameter parabolas yields high-resolution 
radio images of the sun every second. 

NRO and Mizusawa Astrogeodesy Observatory of 
NAOJ had started the VLBI observations with other 
Japanese institutes and organized a domestic VLBI 
network (J-Net). In 1997 the VLBI group led by Hisashi 
Hirabayashi and his group launched the world’s first space 
VLBI satellite HARUKA as a collaboration among ISAS, 
NAOJ and overseas institutes. The launched 8 m diameter 
antenna is orbiting around the Earth to link with radio 
telescopes worldwide to form a 30000 km aperture radio 
telescope (VSOP). It was an engineering and logistical 
challenge, and recently VSOP has produced clear images 
of many energetic galactic nuclei with extremely high 
resolution of 0.1-1 marcsec, approaching a linear size 
about 100 times that of supermassive black holes. 

NRO, with its large mm wave telescopes, was the first 
top-level observational facility Japan had for astronomy. 
In the field of mm wave and sub-mm wave astronomy, 
university groups are now undertaking a number of small 
but excellent projects: a 4m diameter mm wave telescope 
of Nagoya University (located at Las Campanas, Chile), 
a 60 cm CO molecular line mapping telescope of the 
University of Tokyo (La Silla, Chile), a 1.2 m remote- 
operation sub-mm carbon atom line survey telescope of 
the University of Tokyo (atop Mt Fuji) etc, yielding a 
large amount of observational data for specific scientific 
subjects. 


Developments in x-ray astronomy 

HAKUCHO, the first Japanese x-ray satellite, was 
launched in 1979 by the INSTITUTE OF SPACE AND ASTRONAUTICAL 
sclENCE (ISAS) under the leadership of Minoru Oda. 
Subsequent series of ISAS x-ray satellites, TENMA (1983), 
GINGA (1989) and ASUKA (1993) under the leadership 
of Yasuo Tanaka and his group, with their rich scientific 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Japanese Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


results made Japanese x-ray astronomy one of the most 
productive in the world. Since the early identification of 
the x-ray source Sco-X1 with an evolved star using the 
balloon-borne x-ray telescope and the Okayama 188 cm 
telescope, efforts by ISAS and groups in universities in 
parallel with developments in space engineering have 
revealed the physics of dying stars and their energetic 
activities. ASUKA is a relatively small satellite (420 kg) 
but is actively continuing x-ray spectroscopic observations 
of various objects from star formation sites to clusters of 
galaxies in the very distant universe. 

Solar x-ray observations have also been made by a 
successful collaboration of x-ray astronomy at ISAS and 
traditional solar physics at TAO/NAOJ. YOKO, launched 
in 1991 following the first Japanese solar x-ray satellite 
HINOTORI (1981), has been providing a tremendous 
number of x-ray images of the Sun and contributed to 
understanding of the physical process of energetic solar 
flares (project leaders: Yoshiaki Ogawara and Yutaka 
Uchida). 

Recently ISAS developed the M-V rocket with a 
payload capability much higher than that of previous 
L-series rockets. The first launch of M-V was celebrated 
by the success of HARUKA/VSOP mentioned earlier. By 
using M-V, new astronomical projects such as Astro-E, IRIS 
and Solar-B are being promoted. Astro-E is a 1650 kg mass 
satellite with very high x-ray spectroscopic and imaging 
capabilities, to be launched in early 2000. Solar-B, a next- 
generation HINOTORY, is a 50 cm aperture optical solar 
telescope slated for 2004. IRIS is described below. 


Developments in optical and IR astronomy 
An 8.2 m aperture optical and IR telescope ‘Subaru’ atop 
Mauna Kea, Hawaii, started its test observations in early 
1999 and will be opened to the astronomical community 
in late 2000. It is one of the new-generation telescopes 
with a large active-support primary mirror housed in 
a turbulence-suppressed cylindrical enclosure and has 
seven observational instruments that cover ultraviolet 
to mid-infrared ranges. Its high performance was 
demonstrated by stellar images with a full width at half- 
maximum of 0.2 arcsec and a number of spectacular 
scientific results through the test observation period. The 
construction of the SUBARU TELESCOPE, led by Keiichi Kodaira 
and later by Norio Kaifu and their group, started in 1991 
as a9 yr project of optical and IR astronomers of Japan. 
Experience of Japanese optical astronomers has been 
mostly limited to the Okayama 188 cm telescope built in 
1960 and the Kiso 105 cm Schmidt camera built in 1974. 
Infrared astronomers studied through the pioneering 
construction of the Agematsu 1 m IR telescope (1973) and 
observations with overseas telescopes led by Haruyuki 
Okuda and Shuji Sato. To build an engineering and 
technical basis for optical and infrared astronomy, the 
Advanced Technology Center was established at Mitaka 
campus of NAOJ headquarters. Close cooperation with 
university groups and industries was also organized 
for preparation, basic design and construction of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


telescope and observing instruments. To overcome the 
lack of middle- to small-size modern telescopes and poor 
weather conditions in Japan, a 2 m IR telescope atop 
Haleakala, Hawaii, and a 1.2 m IR telescope in South 
Africa are being constructed by the University of Tokyo 
and by Nagoya University, respectively. Japan had never 
established a permanent governmental scientific facility 
abroad before the Subaru. NAOJ being a government 
organization, much effort was needed to overcome this 
hurdle and finally in 1997 the Subaru Telescope Facility 
was formally established in Big Island, Hawaii. Further 
progress toward internationalization is definitely needed 
for Japanese science and its future. 

The Subaru Telescope, equipped with adaptive optics 
and versatile observational instruments, together with 
other new-generation telescopes such as VLT and GEMINI 
will embark on new frontiers including direct observations 
of extra-solar-system planets, detection of many small 
icy planetesimals orbiting beyond Pluto, observations of 
mysterious galactic nuclei, dark matter, distant clusters of 
galaxies and the youngest celestial bodies in the expanding 
universe. 


Developments in other fields of astronomy and 
astrophysics 

Recent major developments of experimental research in 
astrophysics in Japan include neutrino and gravitational 
wave astronomy. Kamiokande’s neutrino detection from 
supernova SN1987A opened a new field of neutrino 
astrophysics. The Kamiokande (Kamioka, Japan) is a 
Cherenkov light detector initially built to detect proton 
decay (led by Masatoshi Koshiba and Yoji Totsuka). 
Because of the importance of neutrino observations, 
the Cosmic Ray Institute (CRI, University of Tokyo) 
constructed SUPER-KAMIOKANDE which is 10 times larger than 
Kamiokande with 50 kt of pure water in a tank 39 m 
in diameter and 41 m high, at the Kamioka site, 1 km 
underground. It confirmed the finite mass of the neutrino 
recently. 

TAMA-300 is a Japanese pilot project in gravitational 
astronomy led by Yoshihide Kozai and joint groups of 
NAOJ and other institutes. The 300 m long L-shaped 
interferometer of TAMA-300 at Mitaka started operation 
in 1999. Its high sensitivity would make TAMA-300 able 
to detect gravitational waves for the first time, if they have 
fortunate events such as that for Kamiokande. As 3-4 km 
scale gravitational telescopes, LIGO of USA and VIRGO of 
France-Italy are to be commissioned within a few years; 
the Japanese gravitational telescope group is working on 
a further upgrade of TAMA-300. 

AGASA, a large-aperture high-energy cosmic ray 
detector of CRI, is in operation at Akeno, Yamanashi, 
Japan. It aims to detect cosmic rays with extremely high 
energy (>10"° eV) and identify their origin, which is still 
unknown. 

Theoretical studies in Japan have kept their high level 
through the 1950s to the 1990s. The extensive studies of 
atmospheres of low-temperature stars by Takashi Tsuji, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Japanese Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the discovery of a mathematical solution for a rotating 
black hole by Akira Tominaga and Fumitaka Sato, the 
inflationary universe theory of Katsuhiko Sato and the 
theory of supernova explosions of Daiichiro Sugimoto and 
Kenichi Nomoto are examples of prominent contributions 
among many active theoretical studies in Japan. The 
availability of powerful computers is also providing a 
strong basis for theoretical work in Japan. 


Future plans 
Encouraged by this remarkable progress, Japanese as- 
tronomers are discussing their ambitious future facilities. 
An immediate project of Japanese ground-based astron- 
omy is LMSA, which was originally planned as a Japanese 
large mm and sub-mm array consisting of 50 antennas each 
10 m in diameter aimed at a wide range of study from 
planetary formation to cosmology. In 1994 LMSA was rec- 
ognized as the next national project strongly supported 
by the astronomical community of Japan and the search 
for a site started in parallel in Chilean dry plateaux. The 
4800 m elevation Pampa La Bola near the Atacama desert 
was selected as the best site. At present radio astronomers 
of Japan, USA and Europe are intensively discussing the 
consolidation of their similar projects: LMSA, MMA (USA) 
and LMA (Europe). The unified world array, ALMA, 
will be a challenging mm and sub-mm wave telescope 
with 100-element antennas and 10 km maximum base- 
line. Such an interferometer would enable humankind 
to obtain high-quality images of a variety of cosmic phe- 
nomena with spatial resolution of 0.01 arcsec. Compared 
with the current highest angular resolution of 0.1 arcsec of 
the Hubble Space Telescope and new-generation optical— 
IR telescopes, the images will be ten times sharper. The 
ALMA project will be an equally shared triple cooperation 
by Japan, USA and European countries with a total cost of 
the order of 1 billion dollars. Astronomers wish to start 
the operation before 2010. 

VERA (VLBI Exploration of Radio Astrometry) is 
a national plan for high-accuracy radio measurements 
of distances to stars throughout the Galaxy to obtain a 
‘3D map’ of the Galaxy for the first time. Mizusawa 
and the NRO VLBI group of NAOJ, collaborating with 
the University of Kagoshima and others, started the 
construction of VERA toward its operation within a 
few years, with possibilities of cooperation with Asian 
countries. A sensitive gravitational wave telescope with 
3 km baseline is being planned by groups at the University 
of Tokyo, NAOJ and other institutes. If coordinated with 
LIGO and VIRGO, it will provide information on the 
direction of gravitational wave sources. The Telescope 
Array project, a plan to extend the aperture for detecting 
extremely high-energy cosmic rays to 60 times that of 
AGASA, is being promoted by CRI under collaboration 
with the University of Utah, Australian groups and other 
universities. 

Space-borne astronomy is another major frontier for 
the future of Japanese astronomy. In addition to the 
above-mentioned plans Astro-E and Solar-B, ISAS will 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


launch the IR Imaging Surveyor (IRIS) in 2003 as the 
first Japanese infrared astronomy satellite. It is a survey- 
type 70 cm aperture telescope cooled by a hybrid system 
of liquid helium and a refrigerator with high-sensitivity 
imaging arrays covering near-IR to far-IR wavelengths. 
The enormous amount of high-quality IRIS images would 
also be effectively used by combining them with the IR 
observations from Subaru and equivalent ground-based 
IR telescopes. 

Even larger astronomical satellites using HII rockets 
developed by the NATIONAL SPACE DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
(NASDA) are being discussed. SELENE, a lunar orbiting 
explorer for lunar science, will be launched in 2004 as 
the first attempt. A second version of SELENE including 
pilot astronomical observations from the lunar surface 
is under consideration. As an extension of the HII 
program, astronomers have been discussing extensively 
various plans for a Japanese space telescope. The H2L2 
project is one such plan to launch a 3-4 m aperture 
cooled telescope to a Lagrange point for IR observations. 
The future of Japanese astronomy requires close and 
flexible cooperation among institutions such as NAOJ, 
ISAS, NASDA and CRI and universities. 


Challenges Japanese astronomy is facing 

Recent activities in astronomy and astrophysics, backed by 
a high level of industrial technology and economic power, 
have enabled Japan to advance and achieve considerably 
in this field of science. However, Japanese astronomy is 
still facing difficult situations compared with those in the 
USA and European countries. 

The numbers of Japanese astronomers and related 
institutes are extremely low. They are concentrated at 
two institutes (NAOJ and ISAS) and four departments at 
universities (Universities of Tokyo, Kyoto, Nagoya and 
Tohoku). The number of the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL 
UNION (I[AU) members per million population of Japan is 
only 2 and Japan is ranked roughly the 24th among the 
IAU member nations. Compared with about a dozen 
of the top-rank countries, Japan is struggling to achieve 
the same level of astronomy with 1/4-1/5 as many 
astronomers. Although astronomy is one of the most 
popular subjects among university students, the number 
of faculty positions for astronomy is very low even now 
and for the majority of students astronomy courses are 
not available. Such a situation partially comes from the 
inflexible system of Japanese universities. 

The operation of scientific organizations is also 
a subject for improvement. Employment, budget 
and accounting are tightly controlled by governmental 
regulations, which are often restrictive for scientific 
activities. It also causes difficulties in international 
cooperation or activities in different cultures and traditions 
of various countries. In 1998 the Japanese Parliament 
formally proposed an extensive reform of governmental 
organizations including national institutes, such as NAOJ 
and ISAS, and universities. The proposed plan includes 
possible improvements with respect to the difficulties 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Japanese Astronomy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Japanese basic science is facing. The future of Japanese 
astronomy toward the 21st century will depend greatly on 
the outcome of this innovation. 


Norio Kaifu 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Jeans, Sir James Hopwood (1877-1946) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jeans, Sir James Hopwood 
(1877-1946) 


Astrophysicist, born in Ormskirk, Lancashire, England, 
worked at Cambridge, Princeton and Mount Wilson 
Observatory, and retired early to devote himself to 
research. Like CHANDRASEKHAR, Jeans worked on physical 
problems such as thermodynamics, applying the physics 
to astronomy, and writing lucid accounts of the whole 
field in books such as The Dynamical Theory of Gases (1904), 
Theoretical Mechanics (1906) and Introduction to the Kinetic 
Theory of Gases (1940). He was a brilliant broadcaster and 
writer of popular astronomy, including the best-selling The 
Universe Around Us (1929), published at the time when the 
scale of the expanding universe was becoming clear. He 
proposed a tidal theory for the creation of the solar system, 
based on the hypothesis of a close approach of a star to 
the Sun, which drew out a cigar of material, from which 
condensed the planets. The Jeans length is the characteristic 
size of a cloud of gas that will collapse under its own 
gravitational attraction, into, say, a cluster of stars or an 
individual star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jeffreys, Sir Harold (1891-1989) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jeffreys, Sir Harold (1891-1989) 


Geophysicist and mathematician, born in Fatfield (near 
Durham), England, became Plumian professor at Cam- 
bridge, worked in many areas of science, including geo- 
physics, where he studied earthquakes, and was the first 
to conclude from the waves that earthquakes initiated that 
the Earth has a liquid core. In astronomy he studied the 
outer planets, proposing models for their structures. He 
also studied the origin of the solar system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 


Located in Pasadena, California, JPL is a research, 
development and flight center operated for Nasa by the 
California Institute of Technology. Its primary role is the 
exploration of the solar system through the use of robotic 
scientific spacecraft. JPL is also responsible to NASA for 
supporting research and advanced development related 
to flight projects. 

JPL was founded in the 1930s when Caltech professor 
Theodore von Karman conducted pioneering research into 
rocket propulsion in the area adjacent to the current site. 
From 1944 onwards, the laboratory conducted research for 
the US Army. In November 1957 it was selected to design 
and build the first American satellite. Data from the 14 kg 
Explorer 1 led to the discovery of the Van Allen radiation 
belts. 

On 3 December 1958, JPL was transferred to NASA. 
Since then, it has participated in almost all of the agency’s 
planetary missions, including the Ranger and Surveyor 
lunar projects, the Mariner series, the Viking missions 
to Mars, the Voyager missions to the outer solar system, 
the Magellan Venus radar mapper, Galileo and Cassini. 
Current projects include the series of Mars Surveyor 
missions and proposals to send spacecraft to Europa and 
Pluto. JPL was also the US manager of the IRAS project to 
map the infrared sky. 

In addition, JPL conducts studies of the Earth and 
its environment through satellites such as the Solar 
Mesosphere Explorer and Topex-Poseidon. A number of 
JPL experiments have been flown in the Shuttle payload 
bay, including several Shuttle imaging radar missions. 

The laboratory also designs and operates NASA’s 
Deep Space Network of antennas, which is used to 
communicate with lunar and interplanetary spacecraft. 

For further information see 
http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jodrell Bank Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jodrell Bank Observatory 


The Jodrell Bank Observatory is part of the University 
of Manchester and was founded by Bernard Lovell in 
December 1945. Its prime instrument, the 76 m, MK1 
radio-telescope, was completed in 1957. It was given a 
major upgrade in 1971 and is now known as the Lovell 
Telescope. In its early years it pioneered the technique of 
long baseline interferometry which led to the discovery 
of quasars. A major use now is in the study of pulsars. 
In 1964 a second 26 x 32 m telescope, the MK2, was 
completed. Given a new surface in 1987, it is now 
used as one element of the MERLIN VLBI NATIONAL FACILITY. 
Observations by the Lovell and MK2 telescopes led to 
the discovery of the first gravitational lens, the double 
quasar, and their study continues to form a major part 
of the research efforts of the observatory. It also operates 
a number of telescopes, including the Very Small Array, 
on Mount Teide, Tenerife, to study fluctuations in the 
cosmic microwave background, and is building receivers 
for the Planck Surveyor spacecraft to extend this work in 
the future. 
For further information see 

http://www.jb.man.ac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


John of Holywood [known as Sacrobosco] (c. 1200) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


John of Holywood [known as 
Sacrobosco] (c. 1200) 


Thirteenth century English translator who taught in Paris 
and provided students with a text-book on timekeeping, 
calculational methods and astronomy, the latter called 
The Sphere. A watered-down version of John of Seville’s 
translation of The Elements by AL-FARGHANI, it was the long- 
term, best-selling, standard textbook in astronomy until 
the seventeenth century (it was published in 200 editions 
in the age of printing), even if it was barely adequate. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Johnson Space Center ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Johnson Space Center 


The Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston is nasa’s lead 
center for the space shuttle and the International Space 
Station programs and for biomedical research. Areas of 
study include Earth sciences and solar system exploration, 
astromaterials and space medicine. About 14000 people, 
including 3000 civil servants, work at JSC. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.jsc.nasa.gov. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Johnson, Harold Lester (1921-80) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Johnson, Harold Lester (1921-80) 


Astronomical photometrist, born in Denver, CO, he had 
a peripatetic career at American observatories such as 
Lick, Lowell, Washburn, Yerkes, McDonald, Tucson, 
Tonanzintla and the National Observatory, Mexico. At 
Lick, Gerard Kron inspired Johnson to use his knowledge 
of electronics acquired in wartime service to establish the 
fundamental limits of photoelectric photometry. Using 
the newly developed photomultiplier, he established that 
there was an error of a magnitude (factor of two) in 
the standard magnitudes of the stars in Selected Areas, 
then used as the basis to determine the distances of 
galaxies. He worked with w w morcan, to establish new 
photoelectrically measured standards, now known as the 
Johnson—Morgan system, or the U, B, V system, the de 
facto international standard of stellar (and later, galactic) 
photometry, used to construct color-magnitude diagrams 
of clusters and galaxies. Johnson demonstrated how star 
clusters of different ages have characteristically different 
color-magnitude diagrams and, in particular, how the 
turn-off point, where stars begin to depart from the zero- 
age main sequence can be used to estimate fairly precisely 
the ages of the clusters. Johnson’s design of stellar 
photometer became the benchmark and it was replicated 
all around the world. In Texas, Johnson worked with 
Frank Low to extend the U, B, V system to the longer 
wavelengths of the near infrared, the R, I, J, K, L and 
N bands, providing a knowledge of the relative spectral 
distribution of star light from 0.3 to 10 microns, which 
he was able to calibrate to absolute flux. He was thus 
able to produce absolute energy curves for all sorts of 
important categories of stars: sub-dwarf stars, cepheids, 
M stars, carbon stars, infrared objects, even circumstellar 
shells and quasars. This important work provided the 
observational challenge for the theoretical modeling of a 
variety of astrophysical phenomena. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics (JILA) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Joint Institute for Laboratory 
Astrophysics (JILA) 


An institute run jointly by the University of Colorado and 
the US National Institutes for Standards and Technology 
(NIST)—formerly the National Bureau of Standards— 
since 1962. Located on the main campus of the University 
of Colorado at Boulder. 

JILA was originally established to study gaseous 
interactions and precision measurements. It has subse- 
quently expanded its mission to include the development 
of new measurement methods and standards, the im- 
provement of industrial competitiveness, and the educa- 
tion of graduate students in technology. 

JILA is a center for advanced theoretical and exper- 
imental research on subjects such as atomic interactions, 
spectroscopy, gravitational physics, radiative transfer and 
stellar interiors. 

Examples of cutting-edge technologies developed 
in the JILA laboratories include the world’s most 
precise laser, the coldest place in the universe, tools 
for manipulation of some of the smallest human-made 
objects in the world, ultrasensitive methods for vibration 
isolation, and state-of-the-art computer modeling of the 
Sun’s turbulence. 

Major areas of research include atomic and molecu- 
lar interactions, new states of matter (Bose-Einstein con- 
densates), cooling and trapping of matter, optical and 
laser physics, nonlinear optics and optical techniques, 
chemical physics, materials processing and semiconduc- 
tor fabrication, nanometrology, precision measurement, 
gravitational physics, stellar atmospheres, interstellar as- 
trophysics, solar physics and extragalactic astronomy. 

Astrophysical research within JILA covers much of 
modern astrophysics—the interstellar medium, the Sun, 
stellar atmospheres and coronas, supernovae, x-ray stars, 
active galaxies, extragalactic physics and cosmology. 

JILA astronomers are actively involved in a wide 
range of observational programs using leading ground- 
based facilities and major orbital observatories such as 
the Infrared Astronomical Satellite, the Hubble Space 
Telescope, the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory, the 
Rossi X-Ray Timing Explorer and Chandra. 

Traditional areas of interest include stellar atmos- 
pheres, and clusters of luminous stars, both in the galactic 
plane and in nearby starburst galaxies. Other major 
interests are the development of theoretical models to 
interpret the evolution of Supernova 1987A, and studies 
of cosmic x-ray sources. Extragalactic research activity 
focuses on the physics of interstellar matter, ‘starburst’ 
galaxies, infrared galaxies, the distribution of intergalactic 
gas, active galactic nuclei and quasars. 

For further information see 
http: / /jilawww.colorado.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Joint Institute for VLBI in Europe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Joint Institute for VLBI in Europe 


The Joint Institute for VLBI in Europe (JIVE) operates 
a purpose-built Data Processor for Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry (VLBI), comprehensively supporting the 
data analysis and processing requirements of the European 
VLBI Network (EVN). The EVN is an integrated array 
of radio telescopes spread throughout Europe and 
beyond, which conducts unique, high-resolution, radio 
astronomical observations of cosmic radio sources. JIVE 
was established in 1993 and is located in Dwingeloo, 
the Netherlands. JIVE is supported via national funding 
agencies. Its host institute is the Netherlands Foundation 
for Radio Astronomy. 

JIVE has played a leading role in the construction and 
development of a new generation of VLBI correlator, the 
MkIV. The MkIV, produced its ‘first fringes’ in July 1997, 
was formally inaugurated in October 1998 and produced 
its first astronomical image in April 1999. It began 
production correlation in October 1999. Research interests 
of the staff include: faint radio sources, supernova 
remnants, pulsar astrometry, maser emission around 
stars, gravitational lenses, active galactic nuclei and VLBI 
techniques (incuding space VLBI and polarization VLBI). 

For further information see 
http://www.nfra.nl/jive. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Joy, Alfred Harrison (1882-1973) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Joy, Alfred Harrison (1882-1973) 


Astrophysicist, staff member of Mount Wilson Observa- 
tory from 1915 for nearly 60 years, Joy worked on spec- 
troscopy and the determination of the radial velocities of 
stars. He used the results to find the absolute magnitudes 
of Cepheid variable stars (as a contribution to the determi- 
nation of the intergalactic distance scale), the distance of 
the galactic center and the Sun’s rate of revolution about 
it. During the observational study of dark clouds he iden- 
tified a population of irregular variable stars with chro- 
mospheric emission lines; these were named T Tauri stars 
after the bright prototype. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Julian Date (J.D.) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Julian Date (J.D.) 


Also known as the Julian period, the number of days, 
and the fraction of a day, which have elapsed since noon 
on 1 January, 4713 Bc. Thus 18.00 hours UT on 1 March 
1980 corresponds to J.D. 2 4444 3000.25. For certain 
purposes, for example, when analyzing the frequency with 
which events occur over long periods of time, it is most 
convenient to use this system of dating. The Julian period 
was proposed by Joseph Justus Scaliger in 1583 and named 
by him after his father, Julius Caesar Scaliger. 


See also: calendar, Universal Time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Juno 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Juno 


The third asteroid to be discovered, by Karl Harding 
in 1804, and so designated (3) Juno. Its diameter is 
268 km, and it orbits the Sun in the main asteroid belt at a 
mean distance of 2.67 AU (399 million km) in a period of 
4.36 years; the orbital inclination is 13°, and the eccentricity 
0.26. Juno rotates in 7.21 h. It is an S-type asteroid, with a 
reflectance spectrum indicating compositional similarities 
to stony-iron meteorites and ordinary chondrites; the 
albedo is quite high at 0.24. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter 


JAt 5.2 AU from the Sun (table 1), Jupiter is the closest 
and the most massive of the GIANT PLANETS, which extend 
in the outer solar system up to heliocentric distances of 
30 AU. Its mass amounts to 318 terrestrial masses, and its 
diameter is 11 times the terrestrial one (table 2). Like the 
other giant planets, Jupiter has a low density (1.31 
g cm’) which reflects its chemical composition, mostly 
dominated by hydrogen and helium. Jupiter has a fast 
rotation around its polar axis (9 h 55 min) which induces 
a characteristic structure of belts and zones, parallel to 
the equator. 


Table 1. Orbital characteristics of Jupiter. 


Semi-major axis of the orbit 5.202 AU 
Eccentricity 0.048 

Inclination over the ecliptic 1°18' 28” 
Sidereal period 11 yr 314.84 days 
Mean orbital velocity 13.06 km s-! 


Table 2. Physical characteristics of Jupiter. 


Equatorial diameter 142 796 km 

Equatorial diameter relative to the 

Earth 11.19 

Polar diameter 133 540 km 

Flattening 0.062 

Mass relative to the Earth 317.9 

Mean density 1.31 g cm3 

Surface gravity (at P = 1 bar) 24.8 m s2 

Surface gravity relative to Earth 2.64 

Escape velocity 59.64 km s-1 

Sidereal rotation 9h 50 min to 9h 56 min 

Inclination of equator versus orbital 

plane 3° 04! 

Albedo 0.45 

Main atmospheric composition H) (89%) 
He (11%) 
CH, (0.2%) 


Jupiter has a ring system and many satellites (see 
JUPITR: RINGS, JUPITER: SATELLITES). Its ring is very tenuous; 
the planet is surrounded by 39 satellites (discovered to 
date), including the four main ones known as the 
Galilean satellites (see figure 1). Another characteristic of 
Jupiter is its magnetosphere, more massive than those of 
the other giant planets, and comparable in some regards 
to the terrestrial magnetosphere (see JUPITER: MAGNETOS- 
PHERE, MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH). 

Our knowledge of Jupiter started with the beginning 
of telescopic observations, more than three centuries ago. 
Over the last three decades, considerable progress has 
come from space exploration, but also from the on-going 
technological developments of ground-based astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 1. Jupiter and the four Galilean satellites. This picture 
shows a combination of images from the Voyager 1 spacecraft as 
it encountered the Jovian system in March 1979. The Great Red 
Spot appears in the southern hemisphere of the Jovian disk. Io is 
the red satellite on the left, Europa is the white satellite at the 
center, Ganymede is left and Callisto is on the front. Jupiter and 
the four Galilean satellites were most probably formed together; 
this formation scenario is needed to account for the near- 
circular orbits of the Galilean satellites, all very close to the 
equatorial plane of Jupiter. 


The early observations 

As one of the brightest objects in the sky (visual magni- 
tude of -2.6 and angular diameter up to 44" at opposi- 
tion), Jupiter has been known from antiquity. Its 
astronomical observation started almost four centuries 
ago with the appearance of the first refractors and tele- 
scopes. Galileo is believed to be the first astronomer to 
have discovered, in 1610, the four large satellites orbiting 
the planet, known since that time as the Galilean satel- 
lites. A few decades later, the band and zone structure 
was identified; in 1664, Robert Hooke discovered the 
GREAT RED SPOT (GRS) which was then extensively studied 
by Cassini. A continuous monitoring of the planet has 
taken place since that time, showing in particular the sta- 
bility of the GRS for over three centuries. 

The development of spectroscopy, early in the twen- 
tieth century, allowed the first detection of some atmos- 
pheric compounds (methane and ammonia were discov- 
ered by Wildt in 1932), but hydrogen, the most abundant 
atmospheric constituent, although strongly suspected on 
theoretical bases, was not identified until 1960 (detection 
by Kiess and colleagues); helium, the second gas in terms 
of abundance, remained undetected until the space era. 
Since the 1970s, however, the development of ground- 
based infrared spectroscopy has led to the detection of 
more than a dozen atmospheric constituents, including 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


phosphine, germane, water vapour, ethane, acetylene 
and various isotopic species (see JUPITER: ATMOSPHERE). In 
July 1994, with the collision of comet Shoemaker—Levy—9 
with Jupiter, astronomers were given an exceptional 
opportunity to study in real time the response of a plan- 
etary atmosphere to a major meteoritic impact. The set of 
collisions induced strong stratospheric heating and the 
formation of new species, some of them remaining visi- 
ble for the following two years (see SHOEMAKER-LEVY 
9-JUPITER COLLISION). 

Another major result of the ground-based explo- 
ration of Jupiter was the early discovery, in the 1950s, of 
a strong radio emission, in the decimetric and decametric 
range. This non-thermal emission was interpreted as the 
signature of a strong magnetic field. The decimetric emis- 
sion was interpreted as synchrotron radiation of elec- 
trons orbiting along the radiation belts of Jupiter; this 
radiation is modulated by the motion of Jupiter’s inner 
Galilean satellite 10. The decametric radiation, character- 
ized by sporadic emissions, appears to be due to mag- 
netic outbursts and storms (see figure 2). 


The space exploration 

The first step in the space exploration of the Jovian sys- 
tem was its encounter by the Pioneer 10 and 11 space- 
craft, in 1973 and 1974 respectively. The PIONEER MISSIONS 


Great Red Spot I 
Noo : — SSTB 


Figure 2. Belts and zones in Jupiter. Their nomenclature is given 
in table 3. Temperature measurements recorded in the infrared 
range have shown that the belts exhibit higher temperatures 
than the zones. It is generally believed that zones are regions of 
ascending motion on top of which clouds form, while the belts 
are are cloud-free regions of descending currents. This analysis 
has been confirmed by the Galileo probe, which has entered a 
dry and cloud-free region in one of the hot spots of the NEB; 
however, Galileo observations have also demonstated that the 
Jovian circulation is more complex by far than this simple 
scheme, with considerable small-scale structure. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


provided the first high-resolution images of the atmos- 
pheric structure, and an in situ investigation of its mag- 
netosphere. But the space era really started in 1979 when 
the two VOYAGER spacecraft encountered the planet. Not 
only did the cameras reveal an unexpected variety and 
complexity in the cloud structures and their dynamics, 
but they also discovered the ring system of Jupiter, active 
volcanoes on Io (providing the first evidence for active 
volcanism outside the Earth), and a great diversity in the 
surfaces of the other Galilean satellites. The Voyager 
spacecraft also discovered other smaller satellites, bring- 
ing the list of known satellites to 16. 

The GALILEO MISSION, launched in 1989, arrived at 
Jupiter on December 7, 1995. Upon its arrival, a descent 
probe was sent into the Jovian atmosphere and provided 
data down to an atmospheric level at a pressure of 22 
bars. Since that time, the Galileo orbiter has extensively 
monitored the Jovian atmosphere and the Galilean satel- 
lites, providing a huge amount of information about the 
atmospheric structure, cloud evolution and dynamics, 
the satellite surfaces and the magnetospheric environ- 
ment. In particular, the analysis of images of EUROPA’s 
surface suggests a possible ocean of water below the 
water ice crust of Europa. In order to study more deeply 
the surface and subsurface of Europa, the Galileo mission 
has been extended into the Galileo Europa Mission 
(GEM). 

The CASSINI spacecraft, en route to Saturn, flew past 
Jupiter in 2000. Cassini observed Jupiter from 1 October 
2000 to 31 March 2001, making its closest approach on 30 
December 2000, at a distance of about 9.7 million kilome- 
ters (6 million miles). During the fly-by, new observa- 
tions of Jupiter, its satellites and environs were made by 
Cassini, Galileo, the Hubble Space Telescope, the 
Chandra X-ray Observatory and Earth-based radio and 
optical telescopes. 


Composition and structure 

Why is Jupiter mostly composed of light elements? Its 
low density can be explained in the light of the model 
which accounts for the formation of the two classes of 
planets, the telluric ones and the giants. It is now gener- 
ally believed that the solar system was formed from a 
protoplanetary disk which encountered the gravitational 
collapse of an unstable interstellar cloud submitted to 
accelerating rotation. The central part of the disk accret- 
ed into the proto-Sun, while planets were formed from 
the accretion of planetesimals made out of the disk mat- 
ter. 

At small heliocentric distances (Ry,<2 AU), the tem- 
perature was probably such that only metals and silicates 
could condense, giving birth to the cores of the telluric 
planets. However, at larger heliocentric distances, many 
more abundant molecules, like CO2, HyO, CH, or NH3, 
were present in solid form. These ices, added to the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


metals and silicates, contributed to solid cores which 
could be at least ten times more massive than the Earth. 
At this stage, the gravitational field of these cores became 
sufficient to accrete by gravitational collapse the sur- 
rounding gaseous nebula, mostly formed of hydrogen 
(75%) and helium (25%) as is all interstellar and cosmic 
material. As a result, the atmosphere of the giant planets 
reflects, to first order, the chemical composition of the 
primordial nebula which gave birth to the SOLAR SYSTEM, 
4.5 billion years ago. 

Because they were at further distances from the Sun, 
in a less dense part of the protoplanetary disk, the accre- 
tion process of the core probably took more time for 
URANUS and NEPTUNE than for Jupiter and Saturn. The 
accretion phase of the surrounding nebula may then 
have taken place at a time when the primordial gas was 
already partly swept away in the T-Tauri phase of the 
young Sun, and less primordial gas may have been avail- 
able. This scenario could explain why Uranus and 
Neptune have a very large fraction of their mass in their 
central core (probably 60 to 80%) as compared with 
Jupiter and Saturn (3 to 15%). 

For this reason, Jupiter, the most massive and 
gaseous of all giant planets, is a precious witness to the 
early stages of solar system history. The study of its ele- 
mental and isotopic composition can provide key diag- 
nostics on the chemical composition of the primordial 
solar nebula in the outer solar system at the time of the 
planets’ formation. The abundance of deuterium and 
helium are of special interest for this study. In addition, a 
comparative analysis of elemental and isotopic abun- 
dances on all giant planets is a valuable tool for under- 
standing the formation and evolutionary processes of 
these objects. 

From the similarity of the chemical composition of 
Jupiter with cosmic abundances, it is possible to see some 
analogy between the giant planet and the smallest stars; 
the main difference, however, is that the mass of Jupiter 
is only 0.1% of the solar mass, while the critical mass for 
star formation is about 8%. Below this threshold, the 
internal temperature is not sufficient to give rise to ther- 
monuclear reactions through which hydrogen is convert- 
ed into helium and later into other heavier elements. 
Jupiter, in this view, could be considered as a low-mass 
example of the class of ‘brown dwarfs’, those hypotheti- 
cal cold objects which are currently extensively searched 
for, as they might contribute to a significant part of the 
hidden mass of the Universe. 

As hydrogen is the main element of the Jovian 
atmosphere, most of the constituents are in reduced 
form: CHy, NH3, PH3, GeHy, AsH3 and H,O. HS, which 
had remained undetected from spectroscopic remote 
sensing observations, has been analysed by the mass 
spectrometer of the Galileo probe. Another class contains 
the hydrocarbons which are formed from the photodis- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


sociation of methane by the solar UV radiation (C)H3, 
CyHg...). A third class contains the isotopic species: HD, 
13CH4, CH3D, 12C13CH), 15NH3.... The ISO satellite has 
recently discovered the presence of gaseous HO and 
CO, in the stratosphere of Jupiter, as well as in those of 
the other giant planets and TITAN this oxygen source 
might originate from an interplanetary meteoritic flux or 
also partly from the giant planets’ icy satellites and rings. 

For over two decades, there have been repeated 
attempts, both from ground-based and space observa- 
tions, to determine the relative abundances of elements 
which are expected to be most abundant after hydrogen 
and helium, namely C, O, N, P and S. After many uncer- 
tain and sometimes contradictory results, the Galileo 
probe has given us important new information on the 
chemical composition of the lower atmosphere, at pres- 
sure levels up to 20 bars. From the present state of knowl- 
edge, it is now believed that in the deep troposphere, 
below the levels where condensation may take place, 
there is an enrichment in carbon, sulfur, phosphorus and 
nitrogen with respect to the solar value (there is no defi- 
nite result on a possible oxygen enrichment, because the 
region entered by the Galileo probe was especially dry, 
and not representative of the whole planet). This enrich- 
ment is most likely due to the ices contained in the core, 
which were probably mixed in the Jovian atmosphere in 
the heating phase generated by the collapse of the sur- 
rounding nebula around the Jovian core. It can be seen 
that the scenario of formation of the giant planets men- 
tioned above, called the ‘nucleation scenario’, receives 
strong support from the measurements of elemental 
abundances. It is also expected that the enrichment 
should increase with heliocentric distance as the relative 
mass of the core increases for the more distant giant plan- 
ets. This is indeed the case for methane, strongly 
enriched on Uranus and Neptune. 

The thermal vertical profile of Jupiter is character- 
ized by two main regions: in the troposphere, down to 
the interior, the heat is transferred by convection (as in 
stars) and the temperature decreases as the altitude 
increases, following an adiabatic gradient. The tempera- 
ture reaches a minimum of 110 K at the tropopause, 
where the pressure level is about 100 mbar. Above the 
tropopause, the temperature increases again with height, 
due to the absorption of the solar UV and near-IR flux by 
methane and aerosols; this is the statosphere where the 
energy is transferred by radiation. 

The region sounded in the visible and infrared range 
is mainly the upper troposphere and the lower stratos- 
phere, at pressures ranging mostly between a few bars 
and about 1 mbar; the UV radiation probes the Jovian 
stratosphere. In addition, the upper stratosphere is also 
probed at specific infrared wavelengths corresponding to 
ion or molecular transitions, where thermal emission 
probes the microbar pressure level. Some of the atmos- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter 


170K 
105 Pa 


104K 
2x 10!! Pa 
Metallic 


2+ 10K 
4.5 x 10!2 Pa 
:Rocky core (+ ice?) 


Figure 3. Model of the internal structure of Jupiter (after 
Stevenson 1982). Jupiter is believed to have formed from the 
gravitational collapse of primordial gas (mostly composed of 
hydrogen and helium) on a central core made of rock and ice 
having about 10 to 15 terrestrial masses, at an early point in the 
history of the solar system. The internal temperature may then 
have reached 105 K. The heat accumulated during the accretion 
phase has been continuously re-radiated to space since the ori- 
gin in a slow contracting phase. The central temperature today 
is believed to be 23000 K. Most of Jupiter’s interior is probably 
made of convective liquid metallic hydrogen. There may be no 
definite transition between the metallic hydrogen and the mole- 
cular hydrogen which overlays it. 


pheric species condense in the upper troposphere: from 
thermochemical calculations, NH3 is expected to con- 
dense at around 0.5 bar, and NH,SH and HO at lower 
levels; the NHg3 cloud is believed to be responsible for the 
white color of the planet observed in the visible range, 
especially in the zones. 

The internal structure of Jupiter is only known from 
indirect measurements and from theoretical modeling 
(see figure 3). The known parameters are the radius, 
mass and density, and the gravitational moments have 
been measured by the Voyager spacecrafts. Another 
important parameter is the internal energy of the planet, 
which was first discovered by Low and his colleagues 
from ground-based infrared measurements, and was 
later more accurately measured by the Voyager space- 
craft. Based on these observational constraints and on 
theoretical models, it is possible to estimate the pressure 
(50 to 100 Mbars) and the temperature (23000 K) at the 
center of the planet. It is currently believed that the inte- 
rior consists of a solid nucleus of about 10 to 15 terrestri- 
al masses, probably made of rocks and metals at the cen- 
ter, surrounded by a convective ocean of metallic hydro- 
gen, where the magnetic field of Jupiter is believed to be 
generated. It is likely that helium differentiation takes 
place in the liquid hydrogen, with helium droplets 
falling toward the center, as in the case of Saturn. The 
released energy probably contributes, with the planet’s 
contraction, to the observed internal energy of Jupiter. 
Above the metallic hydrogen ocean lies the molecular 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


hydrogen convective envelope. A powerful method for 
learning about the internal structure of Jupiter will be the 
measurement of the oscillation modes of the planet, as 
these oscillations are expected to probe its deep interior. 


Dynamics 

The internal energy source of Jupiter has important con- 
sequences for Jovian dynamics. The main features are the 
belt and zone structures induced by the fast rotation of a 
convective sphere (table 3). Spacecraft observations have 
shown that the zones are colder and cloudier than the 
belts; they are believed to be regions of ascending 
motion, while the belts, which are drier, are regions of 
subsidence. The Galileo probe, in December 1995, 
entered one of these dry regions, so that the atmospheric 
structure and composition retrieved from the probe data 
are probably not representative of the whole planet. 
Moreover, high-resolution images and spectroscopic 
observations from the Galileo orbiter have demonstrated 
that the Jovian circulation is much more complex than 
this simple zone/belt scheme, and that vertical motions 
also exist on a small scale. 


Table 3. Nomenclature of the Jovian belts and zones. 


Designation Definition Approximate 


latitude 
(degrees) 

NPR North polar region 47-90 
NNTB North-north temperate belt 43 
NTZ North temperate zone 35 
NTBn North temperate belt (northern 

component) 30 
NTBs North temperate belt (southern 

component) 23 
NTRZ North tropical zone 15-20 
NEBn North equatorial belt (northern 

component) 14 
NEBs North equatorial belt (southern 

component) 10 
EZn Equatorial zone (northern 

component) +3 
EB Equatorial belt 0 
EZs Equatorial zone (southern 

component) -3 
SEBn South equatorial belt (northern 

component) -10 
SEBs South equatorial belt (southern 

component) -19 
GRS Great Red Spot -22 
STRZ South tropical zone -25 
STB South temperate belt -29 
STZ South temperate zone -37 
WOS White oval south —35, -37 
SSTB South-south temperate belt -41 
SPR South polar region 45-90 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Coriolis forces induce zonal winds of opposite 
direction north and south of each zone, generating mul- 
tiple time-variable eddies. The biggest structure is the 
GRS, in the southern hemisphere, which is currently 
interpreted as a giant anticyclonic structure, i.e. a column 
of ascending motion; however, its stability for over three 
centuries is not understood at present. There are many 
other smaller eddies which were first observed with the 
Voyager cameras; these features have been monitored 
with the HST and with the camera of the Galileo orbiter. 
Most of them evolve rapidly with a time-scale of a few 
months. 

If the white color of the zones can be reasonably 
interpreted as NH; ice, the composition of the clouds 
and/or gases present in the eddies is still a puzzle, espe- 
cially in the case of the GRS. Its red color suggests the 
presence of phosphorus or sulfur compounds, but their 
chemical composition has not been identified yet. 


The Jovian magnetosphere 

Jupiter has at least three factors which favor the presence 
of a large magnetosphere: the presence of a liquid metal- 
lic interior, the fastest rotation and the largest size of all 
planets. Consequently, Jupiter has the largest magnetos- 
phere in the solar system. 

The Jovian magnetic field is believed to be generat- 
ed by the dynamo effect within the liquid metallic hydro- 
gen ocean which extends in Jupiter’s interior below 
about 0.75 Jovian radii down to the central core. 
Following the first identification from ground-based 
radio measurements, the planetary magnetic field was 
explored by Pioneer 11 in 1974, then the two Voyager 
spacecraft in 1979. The dipole moment, tilted by 10° with 
regard to the rotation axis, is almost 20 000 times the ter- 
restrial value; the intensity of the Jovian magnetic field at 
the equator is about 10 times the terrestrial value at the 
Earth’s surface; it is even about three times higher at the 
Jovian poles than at the equator. 

Due to the strong magnetic field, the fast rotation of 
the planet and the large heliocentric distance of the planet, 
the Jovian magnetosphere is extremely extended. Its struc- 
ture, however, shows considerable analogy with the 
Earth’s magnetosphere. It is characterized, in the sunward 
direction, by the presence of a shockwave, a magne- 
topause and a magnetosheath. A major difference from the 
Earth configuration is the presence of Io, the orbit of which 
crosses the Jovian radiation belts (see MAGNETOSPHERES: 
JUPITER, SATELLITE INTERACTIONS). In the antisolar direction, 
the magnetic tail extends almost up to Saturn’s orbit. 


Rings and satellites 

It has been believed for centuries that Saturn was the 
only giaant planet with a ring system In 1977, however, 
nine rings were discovered around Uranus from an air- 
borne stellar occultation experiment. Then, in 1979, a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


ring was fortuitously found around Jupiter on Voyager 1 
images, very close to the planet. Improved images were 
obtained a few months later using the Voyager 2 camera. 
Finally, in 1989, Voyager 2 confirmed the existence of a 
ring system around Neptune, also inferred from previ- 
ous ground-based occultation experiments. 

The Jovian ring is located in the planet’s equatorial 
plane. The first ring extends over about 5700 km, and its 
outer edge lies at about 57 000 km from the planet’s limb. 
Like Saturn’s ring, the ring is very thin, as its width does 
not exceed 1 km. This first ring is followed by another 
brighter one, which extends over 800 km, itself followed 
by a third ring, darker and very tenuous, made of 
micrometer-size particles, which extends up to three 
Jovian radii. The rings are likely to be made of dust and 
water ice. 

The satellites of Jupiter fall into three categories 
(table 4): the four big Galilean satellites, known since 
their discovery by Galileo in 1610, the four inner satel- 
lites Metis, Adrastea, Amalthea and Thebe, and the high 
outer satellites. Of the inner satellites, only Amathea was 
known prior to the Voyager exploration. They are all 
smaller than 100 km in diameter and irregular in shape, 
and the two closest to Jupiter, Metis and Adrastea, are 
associated with its ring system. The inner satellites, as 
well as the Galileans, are believed to have accreted from 
a protoplanetary disk surrounding the protoplanet 
Jupiter. In contrast the outer satellites, which all have 
orbits with eccentricities higher than 0.1 and inclinations 
larger than 20°, are most likely captured bodies, originat- 
ing from comets or from the family of Trojan asteroids. 


Table 4. The satellites of Jupiter. 


Name Sidereal Semi-major 
orb. period axis Diameter Density 
(days) (plan. rad.) (km) (g cm) 

Metis 0.294 1.80 (40) ? 
Adrastea 0.297 1.80 (30) ? 
Amalthea 0.489 2.52 270-170- 

150 ? 
Thebe 0.678 3.11 (80) ? 
Io 1.769 5.78 3632 3.53 
Europa 3.551 9.40 3138 2.97 
Ganymede 7.155 14.99 5262 1.94 
Callisto 16.689 26.33 4800 1.86 
Leda 240.0 156.0 2-14 ? 
Himalia 250.6 159.8 180 ? 
Lysithea 260.0 163.2 6-32 ? 
Elara 260.1 163.4 80 ? 
Ananke 631(r) 290.0 6-28 ? 
Carme 692(r) 313.0 8-40 ? 
Pasiphae —_735(r) 326.3 8-46 ? 
Sinope 758(r) 332.0 6-36 ? 


(r) = retrograde. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Galilean satellites 

Discovered by Galileo in 1610, the four Galilean satellites 
have played an important role in the history of astrono- 
my. In 1675, the Danish astronomer Ole Romer used their 
mutual eclipses and occultations, at conjunction and 
opposition, to show that light had a finite speed and to 
estimate its velocity. 

Together with Jupiter and its ring system, the four 
Galilean satellites represent a sort of replica of the solar 
system, ona smaller scale: they all have direct, nearly cir- 
cular orbits, very close to the Jovian equatorial plane; 
their densities decrease as their distance to Jupiter 
increases because, as in the case of the solar system, the 
lightest elements of the closest satellites have evaporated 
due to heating from Jupiter. The study of the four 
Galilean satellites has greatly benefited from the Galileo 
mission, devoted to their in-depth exploration until early 
2000. 

While the three other Galilean satellites are covered 
with water ice, lo, Jupiter’s innermost Galilean satellite is 
covered with sulfur and/or sulfur compounds which are 
responsible for its reddish color. One of the most impor- 
tant discoveries of Voyager was the first evidence for 
active volcanism on Io. The origin of this volcanism is 
internal heating caused by frictional dissipation of tidal 
energy generated by its orbital resonance with Europa. 
Its high density (3.5 g cm-) suggests an interior mostly 
made of silicates, as in the case of the Moon. Io has a very 
tenuous stable atmosphere of SO , with a surface pres- 
sure in the range of 4-30 nbars. In addition, material 
removed from Io’s surface (atoms of H, O, S, Na, K) is 
sent to space and supplies a torus surrounding Io’s orbit 
and containing neutral atoms and ions. 

Europa, the smallest Galilean satellite, shows a sur- 
face of pure water ice, with very few topographic fea- 
tures. What is remarkable on this surface is the net of lin- 
ear structures which covers the surface. High-resolution 
images of Galileo suggest that these structures could be 
due to the presence of liquid water below the icy crust, 
which would occasionally flow out as a geyser. If con- 
firmed, Europa would be the only object apart from 
Earth to have an ocean of liquid water at present. Below 
this ocean, the interior of Europa is likely to contain sili- 
cates. 

GANYMEDE, the third Galilean satellite, is the largest 
satellite of the solar system; it is even larger than MER- 
curY and PLuTO. The surface of Ganymede is dark, which 
implies, together with its density (1.94 g cm”), that the 
satellite is composed of water ice and silicates in roughly 
equal amounts. A major result from Galileo was the dis- 
covery of a magnetic field around Ganymede; its origin 
is currently unclear. 

Finally, CALLISTO, Jupiter’s outermost Galilean satel- 
lite, shows a heavily cratered surface, much older than 
the others. Being farther from Jupiter, Callisto probably 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


benefited from a weaker internal energy source, and its 
surface has thus remained unchanged over its history. 


Bibliography 

Hill, T W February 2002 Magnetic moments at Jupiter 
Nature 415 965-966 

Atreya S K, Pollack J B and Matthews M S (ed) 1989 
Origin and Evolution of Planetary and Satellite 
Atmospheres (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 

Belton M, West R and Rahe J (ed) 1989 Time-variable 
Phenomena in the Jovian System NASA Special 
Publication 494 

Gehrels T (ed) 1976 Jupiter (Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) 

Morrison D (ed) 1988 Satellites of Jupiter (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) 

Noll K S, Weaver H A and Feldman P D (ed) 1996 The 
Collision of Comet Shoemaker—Levy 9 and Jupiter 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Stevenson D J 1982 Interiors of the Giant Plants. Annual 
Review of Earth and Planetary Science 10 257-95 

1979 Mission to Jupiter and its satellites (Voyager 1 
encounter). Science 204 945-1008 

1996 Galileo at Jupiter: results from the probe. Science 272 
837-60 

1996 Galileo at Jupiter: results from the orbiter. Science 
274 377-412 

Thérése Encrenaz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter Atmosphere 


In many aspects, JUPITER is intermediate between a plan- 
et and a star. As a star, it is mainly composed of hydro- 
gen and helium, has an internal source of energy 
(although not from nuclear reactions) and has a convec- 
tive interior (at least in part). As a planet, it experiences 
cold temperatures, receives energy from solar radiation 
in its atmosphere and shows a cloud structure with mete- 
orological features different from but not dissimilar to 
those of the telluric planets. The scientific questions 
raised by investigations of Jupiter belong equally to both 
sides, stellar and planetary physics. On the planetary 
side, the comprehension of the meteorology of Jupiter 
remains a difficult challenge for atmospheric dynamics, 
for example. On the stellar side, the recent discovery of 
brown dwarfs, and extrasolar planets of comparable size 
(or even greater) (see EXTRASOLAR PLANETARY COMPANIONS 
AND BROWN DWARFS) shed new light on Jupiter, as the clos- 
est object to Earth in a new category of astronomical 
objects, which remain to be classified. Jupiter is not only 
the largest planet of the solar system, it is now viewed as 
a small object in the class of the extrasolar giant planets 
and brown dwarfs. It is at the bottom line of a classifica- 
tion starting from the gaseous planets, to the brown 
dwarfs and up to the stars themselves. However, con- 
trary to the far and inaccessible stars, Jupiter is close 
enough to be studied by interplanetary probes. The 
exploration of Jupiter environment started with the 
PIONEER 10 and 11 spacecraft in the years 1973-4, fol- 
lowed by VOYAGER 1 and 2 in 1979-80. Jupiter also 
received a visit from the Ulysses spacecraft en route to its 
polar orbit around the Sun, in 1992 (see SOLAR WIND: 
ULYSSES). Ulysses made measurements of some plasma 
properties, density and temperature of the electrons, for 
the first time outside the equatorial plane. Then, in 1995, 
the Galileo probe observations gave the first in situ mea- 
surements in a giant planet’s atmosphere, followed by 
remote sensing observations by the Galileo orbiter after 
1995 (see GALILEO MISSION TO JUPITER). Our knowledge of 
Jupiter has been deeply modified by these space mis- 
sions, together with the continued observations from 
ground-based telescopes with uninterrupted improve- 
ment in sensitivity and accuracy. Even if many 
unknowns remain on the giant planet, even if the reddish 
color of some of its clouds remains a mystery, our knowl- 
edge of Jupiter is now infinitely more detailed than 
before space exploration. The composition, cloud struc- 
ture and temperature structure have been measured or 
inferred, at least in general guidelines; the circulation is 
accurately characterized, even if not understood global- 
ly. Also, ideas on the formation of Jupiter are now more 
precise, even if, as usual, the new findings have also 
opened new and difficult questions for investigators of 
the 21st century. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Meteorology 

Even after the close observation of several space missions, 
the meteorology of Jupiter still keeps many of its myster- 
ies. Decades of painstaking telescopic observations by 
amateur and professional astronomers gave a first gener- 
al description of Jupiter’s wind system (figure 1): large 
zonal winds are permanently present and roughly corre- 
lated with the banded structure of the clouds (zones and 
belts, being the generic names of these white and dark 
bands). Jets alternate in prograde and retrograde direc- 
tion, producing the so-called differential rotation of the 
planet. The equator of Jupiter makes a full rotation in 9 h 
50 min 30 s (defining system I of longitude) while the 
midlatitudes rotate in 9 h 55 min 40 s (system II). A more 
accurate system of rotation is now used, in relation to the 
periodicity of the radio emission of Jupiter, itself related 
to the magnetic field. In system IIL, the sideral period of 
rotation is 9 h 55 min 30 s, and the winds, measured with 
reference to this system of longitude, reach about 120 m 
s-! at the cloud top at the equator (prograde). The differ- 
ential rotation is very stable temporally: only subtle vari- 
ations are seen between Voyager and Galileo in the wind 
profiles, mostly in the strongest jets, but the latitudes of 
the jets and their amplitude remain essentially constant. 
The depth of the wind system has long been debated, 
some astronomers favoring models with a thin atmos- 
pheric layer where winds are produced by the solar ener- 
gy deposition close to the clouds’ level, while others 
predicted a thick meteorology, with differential rotation 
extending into the interior, generated by the deep con- 
vection. The Galileo probe, sounding Jupiter at 6.57°N lat- 
itude, has observed strong winds down to the 22 bar 


Figure 1. Jupiter as observed from Hubble Space Telescope 
(October 1995). Credit NASA. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. A hot spot of Jupiter, as observed from the Galileo 
Orbiter on 17 December 1996. 


level, well below the upper meteorological layer: winds 
increase from 120 m s-! at the cloud level (1 bar level) to 
about 170 m s-! at 5 bar, and remain constant below. This 
observation seems to favor the models where the winds 
are supported by internal energy transport more than 
models with solar energy deposition, although the debate 
is still open, internal motions being possibly also driven 
by the deposition of energy in a thin upper boundary 
layer in other more recent models. 

Another peculiarity of Jupiter’s atmosphere is the 
morphology of its numerous spots. Among them, the 
most famous is the GREAT RED SPOT (GRS), observed dur- 
ing more than three centuries, since its discovery by 
Hooke in 1664. It is a large anticyclonic oval vortex, 
about 20000 km wide in the longitudinal direction, locat- 
ed in the southern tropical zone. New observations from 
Galileo have shown that the center of the GRS is rotating 
slower than its boundary, with even an apparent coun- 
terrotation of the core of the GRS. The cloud structure 
inside the GRS, deciphered by Galileo’s remote sensing 
instruments, shows a spiraling structure, with higher- 
altitude clouds at the core. Many numerical models of 
the GRS have been developed: the formation of large 
vortices is a general property often observed in turbulent 
rotating flows. In a recent model of turbulence, 
Sommeria ef al (1988) explain the stability of large vor- 
tices by a statistical formulation of the turbulence, defin- 
ing an analogy of the thermodynamics for the turbu- 
lence. This model is related to modern developments 
aimed at a global understanding of turbulence, one of the 
most difficult problems in physics. The observations of 
Jupiter therefore help to constrain such models, thanks to 
the observations of turbulent flows at scales inaccessible 
to laboratory experiments. 

There are many other interesting features in the 
Jovian meteorology such as the White Oval Spots 
(WOSs), three anticyclonic ovals, first observed in 1938 in 
the South Temperate Belt. In 1998 and again in 2000, as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


their separation was at a minimum, two of the WOSs 
merged into one, leaving only one WOS, a unique event 
in the meteorological history of Jupiter. Galileo has mea- 
sured the wind structure inside the WOSs, before and 
after the event, as well as the cyclonic structure between 
two oval spots. The most famous meteorological features 
in recent Jovian physics are the North Equatorial Belt Hot 
Spots (figure 2), because the Galileo probe unexpectedly 
descended directly inside one of them. These so-called 
‘hot spots’ are regions of low cloud opacity, where ther- 
mal emission from the deeper layers is directly transmit- 
ted, which give these spots a larger flux in thermal emis- 
sion at wavelengths where the atmospheric opacity is 
small enough for deeper soundings than in the cloud lay- 
ers, such as the 5 um spectral range. Hot spots have been 
observed from the ground since the beginning of 
infrared astronomy (Westphal, 1969). They were soon 
interpreted as relatively cloud-free regions. They are 
therefore dark in the visible, since the bright regions on 
Jupiter are the most cloudy. Radiative transfer calcula- 
tions have shown that the atmosphere of Jupiter can be 
sounded as deep as 6-8 bar at 5 um wavelength in hot 
spots, which is the deepest level sounded in the optical 
range. The dynamical formation of hot spots is still poor- 
ly understood: they seem connected to strong convective 
cells, the hot spots being a region of downward convec- 
tion, with strong vertical descent winds. The upper 
atmosphere is similarly aspired downwards, and the 
cloud particles are vaporized in the process, owing to the 
higher pressure-temperature encountered in the descent, 
leaving a very clear atmosphere. The downward flux of 
the atmosphere also explains the strong desiccation in 
condensed molecules, such as H»O, NH3 and H,S, which 
has been measured by the Galileo probe. The upward- 
convective regions of the atmosphere should, on the 
contrary, present high cloud opacity and a saturated 
abundance in condensable molecules, as the opposite 
processes would work. It has been suggested that the 
equatorial plumes, seen as large bright clouds in the 
equatorial region, could be identified with these upward 
cells: there is apparently a one-to-one association of 
plumes with the hot spots in pairs, as a visual inspection 
of the morphology of the North Equatorial Belt suggests. 
An interesting fact is that the plumes observed along the 
equator are regularly spaced, numbering 9-13, like the 
hot spots. The generation of the regular structure of 
plumes-hot spots could be due to a travelling wave in 
the atmosphere, called a Rossby wave (Ortiz 1999). 


Composition 

The composition of Jupiter in heavy elements gives 
important clues for the understanding of its formation. 
The Galileo probe measurements have shown an 
enrichment by a factor of 2-3, compared with the solar 
composition, in the following elements: C, S, Kr, Xe and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ar. The same is true for N, although the condensation of 
NH introduces more difficulties in the measurements, 
and therefore larger uncertainties, with a deep abun- 
dance found at about 3.6 times the solar composition in 
nitrogen. This is also supposed to be the case for oxygen, 
present in H,O on Jupiter, although the meteorological 
conditions in the hot spots where the probe descended 
were very desiccated and prevented any firm conclusion 
about the deep abundance of oxygen. Such enhance- 
ments are attributed to the scenario of formation of 
Jupiter from the solar nebula. First, the accretion of 
PLANETESIMALS (these small condensed objects, probably 
similar to comets or asteroids, are the elementary bricks 
of the solar system) forms a planetary core. When a core 
mass of about 10 Earth masses is reached, the proto- 
Jupiter begins to accrete the gas in the solar nebula, 
composed mainly of H» and He. Since the core does not 
contain the most volatile gases, degassed from the plan- 
etesimals, this mechanism can explain an enrichment in 
heavy elements, compared with hydrogen and helium. 
The case of helium is particular, because of interior 
processes, at depths where hydrogen is condensed in 
metallic form: the lack of miscibility of He in metallic Ho 
induces a phase separation of He droplets falling into the 
interior. As a result, He is depleted in the outer layers of 
the atmosphere, as is observed by Galileo, and the release 
of gravitational energy, contributes to the internal source. 
The depletion of neon is explained similarly by interior 
processes, by dissolution of neon in helium droplets. 
Depending on the temperature of the formation of plan- 
etesimals, several other elements could also be depleted, 
such as nitrogen (most of the nitrogen should be present 
in No, a very volatile gas). In Jupiter, a similar enhance- 
ment in nitrogen to that for the other elements is found: 
this implies a very low temperature for the formation of 
the planetesimals, of the order of 30 K only, much lower 
than the temperature at Jupiter’s orbit, which is of the 
order of 160 K, and lower also than the temperature in 
the region of formation of the Oort cloud comets, in the 
Uranus—Neptune region, of the order of 55 K. Two expla- 
nations are competing: either the planetesimals forming 
the core of Jupiter came from the outer limits of the solar 
nebula, with much lower temperatures than in the Jovian 
vicinity, or Jupiter itself was formed at a larger distance 
from the Sun than its present orbit, and migrated to its 
present position as a result of viscous damping in the 
early solar nebula. The latter hypothesis is now consid- 
ered seriously, after the discovery of extrasolar giant 
planets very close to their central star, a system which is 
considered to be impossible to form ina solar system for- 
mation scheme without migration of the protoplanet. 


Temperature and atmospheric structure 
Before the direct measurements by the Galileo probe, the 


temperature structure of Jupiter was measured with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


accuracy down to the 1 bar level only, from remote sens- 
ing ground- or space-based observations (stellar or radio 
occultation, infrared spectroscopy). The general features 
of the temperature structure were therefore already well 
known before Galileo, but only for the upper atmos- 
phere: at pressures greater than 0.6 bar, the temperature 
increases towards the interior. The temperature lapse 
rate is limited by the convective instability, which trans- 
ports the internal heat to the external layers. In the upper 
atmosphere, on the contrary, solar photons are absorbed 
by the atmospheric gases (Hz, CH4) and hazes. This 
upper atmosphere heating generates an increase of tem- 
perature in the upper atmosphere. The heating from 
above (by solar radiation) and from below (by convec- 
tion) induces the formation of a temperature minimum, 
at a level called the tropopause, which is situated on 
Jupiter at about 0.6 bar with a temperature of 110 K. The 
horizontal variations of temperature at the tropopause 
are usually low, of a few degrees kelvins for a given pres- 
sure level between equator and pole, except in some local 
areas such as the the GRS where larger temperature gra- 
dients have been found. The atmospheric structure of 
Jupiter has been measured accurately by the Galileo 
probe, at the location of the probe entry site, in a hot spot 
environment. Figure 3 shows the measured temperature 
profile. As anticipated by previous models (but never 
measured before), the tropospheric profile measured by 
Galileo is found to follow closely an adiabatic gradient, 
which corresponds to the maximum temperature gradi- 
ent supported by an atmosphere in a convective regime. 

The temperature profile in the upper atmosphere 
shows very distinctive and interesting features, with first 
strong heating above an isothermal region in the stratos- 
phere, and oscillations in the upper part of the profile, 
which are attributed to gravity waves (figure 3). Gravity 
waves are the analogs in a gaseous atmosphere of the 
waves seen at the surface of a lake. The importance of 


10710 


Jupiter! Galileo Temperature Profile’ 


Stratosphere 


2 B08 1000 
ey 


=i 
a) 
R8 
at 

ae) 
D 
a 
— 
fs 
=e 
ca) 


Figure 3. Temperature profile of Jupiter (after Seiff et al 1998 
J. Geophys. Res. 103 22857). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


these waves in PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES is due to the 
transport of heat and momentum they can dissipate in 
the upper stratosphere. They could provide the missing 
link between the transport of internal heat in the upper 
troposphere to the external, radiative layers. The propa- 
gation of gravity waves directly depends on the atmos- 
pheric thermal profile: they propagate only in the upper 
atmosphere, when the temperature gradient is lower 
than the adiabatic gradient, which corresponds to the 
region above about 0.6 bar. The strong heating seen in the 
thermal profile could be partly due to the dissipation of 
the large-amplitude gravity waves, seen in figure 3 as the 
oscillations in the upper part of the curve. 


Clouds 

Even though the origin of the colors of the clouds of 
Jupiter remains unknown, the Galileo measurements 
have given new insight into the atmospheric structure 
and the vertical disposition of the clouds (see also CLOUDS 
IN PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). The cloud structure revealed 
by the Galileo probe was very specific to the particular 
location of the probe entry site, within a hot spot area, 
and it is still difficult to reconcile the models for more 
typical regions on Jupiter, with the measurements in a 
very localized and particular region. The direct measure- 
ments by the probe revealed three cloud layers, vertical- 
ly separated: a first cloud around 0.5 bar, corresponding 
to the expected position of the ammonia cloud, a second 
cloud layer with a base at 1.34 bar, which could be the 
expected ammonium hydrosulfide cloud, and a detached 
cloud deeper at 1.6 bar which could be a thin water cloud 
consistent with the low water abundance found by the 
probe. To the surprise of the investigators, no deeper 
cloud layer was found, down to 22 bar, where the trans- 
mission from the probe stopped. There was no trace of 
the expected water cloud at 5 bar or below. For a solar 
composition (and a fortiori for a larger than solar abun- 
dance of oxygen), a ubiquitous HO cloud is expected to 
form on Jupiter. The observations by the orbiter have 
now been interpreted, and they extend the probe mea- 
surements to other places on Jupiter, with the difficulties 
inherent to remote sensing observations where vertical 
structures are not easily disentangled. Some observations 
by the orbiter have now convincingly proved the pres- 
ence of water clouds in several places. A deep and ubiq- 
uitous water cloud is out of range of the optical observa- 
tions, but in several places the water clouds are appar- 
ently transported upward by strong convection, up to 
observable levels. Such clouds, similar to the tropical 
convective clouds on Earth, are also associated with 
lightning and with water vapor abundance in the atmos- 
phere larger than in the hot spots. Observations by the 
Galileo Orbiter continue to study the cloud structure of 
Jupiter, progressing towards a global understanding of 
cloud variations between zones and belts of Jupiter. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


difference in cloud structure between belts and zones is 
interpreted as mostly due to a difference in opacity of the 
cloud layers. The composition of the cloud particles is 
not easily measured by remote sensing observations, and 
the Galileo probe had no instrument with the ability to 
measure the composition of cloud particles. The cloud 
composition is therefore mostly inferred from thermody- 
namics arguments and from the knowledge of the com- 
position of the gaseous atmosphere. The bright and 
white clouds observed in the Jovian belts are thought to 
be mostly composed of ammonia particles. It is never- 
theless quite plausible to have a mixture of cloud parti- 
cles in a given cloud layer, owing to the vigorous con- 
vection at work in many parts of the Jovian atmosphere. 
Water, ammonia and ammonium hydrosulfide could all 
be part of the upper cloud particles. The coloration of the 
belts can be caused by a small amount of chromophores, 
sulfur or phosphorus compounds being possible candi- 
dates for their composition. The clouds of Jupiter there- 
fore still keep many of their mysteries. 


Aurorae 

On Earth, a polar AURORA is observed when charged par- 
ticles from the solar wind precipitate into the atmos- 
phere, exciting the atmospheric molecules which then 
emit light by de-excitation processes. The charged parti- 
cles are guided along the magnetic field lines. The geom- 
etry of the magnetic field therefore also governs the loca- 
tion of the precipitation, mainly in the polar regions. On 
Jupiter, similar processes have been observed regularly 
since the first detection of polar emissions in H and H, by 
the INTERNATIONAL ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER satellite in 1979, 
followed by the Voyager observations in 1979 and 1980. 
The differences from the Earth’s aurorae are mainly due 
to the difference in atmospheric composition, with 
hydrogen dominating Jupiter’s atmosphere, instead of 
oxygen and nitrogen in the Earth’s atmosphere. The 
main atmospheric effects expected from the precipitation 
of charged particles are threefold: 


1. direct excitation of molecules, followed by de- 
excitation by emission of photons, 

2. thermal heating of the atmosphere, followed by 
enhanced thermal emission, and 

3. chemistry induced by charged particles in the 
atmosphere subject to the auroral precipitation. 


The UV emission observed since 1979 is due to elec- 
tronic transitions of Hz and H, and is relevant to the first 
mechanism. The primary particles coming from the mag- 
netosphere (high-energy electrons or ions, see JUPITER: 
MAGNETOSPHERE) decelerate into the atmosphere and pro- 
duce a large number of secondary electrons, which again 
excite the atmospheric molecules. These processes take 
place in the upper atmosphere, mainly between the 
nanobar and millibar pressure levels. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HST + STIS » WFP 


Jupiter Aurora 


PRC98-04 * ST Scl OPO * January 7, 1998 
J. Clarke (University of Michigan) and NASA 


Figure 4. Auroral emissions of Jupiter, observed from Hubble 
Space Telescope. A visible image of Jupiter is superimposed 
with ultraviolet polar regions images taken with the STIS UV 
imager of HST. 


Thermal emission of the atmosphere has also been 
observed in methane infrared emissions. Methane acts as 
the main radiator in the upper atmosphere of Jupiter. The 
energy deposited by charged particles is therefore main- 
ly radiated by methane, in particular from its strong 
band at 7.8 um. In the near infrared, emissions of a par- 
ticular ion, H3*, have also been observed by ground- 
based spectroscopy. This molecular ion is a very peculiar 
molecular assembly, with three protons linked by two 
electrons, and, because of its high reactivity, it is an 
important constituent of the ionosphere of hydrogen 
atmospheres. Its strong infrared emissions have been 
detected in the mid-infrared (2-4 uum). 

All these emissions have also been observed with 
imaging instruments, giving access to maps of the emis- 
sions and allowing us to correlate them with the geometry 
of the magnetic field (figure 4). Galileo observations have 
also observed emission in the visible wavelengths, on the 
night side of Jupiter, which are probably due to H2 emis- 
sions between electronically excited bands of Hj. These 
observations give the most detailed maps of the aurorae to 
date. The geometry of the magnetic field is beautifully 
visualized in these images, with a north magnetic pole 
shifted compared with the geographic pole and an auroral 
oval descending toward 60° latitudes for longitudes close 
to 180° and tangential to the north pole on the other side. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


890 nm 


CH, 


ee 


—— 


- >> 
"oe 
==. 


ll tm 
emt 


tll 


Figure 5. Jupiter observed at Pic du Midi (9 July 1996): left, 
image in broad red filter, showing the usual contrasts in the 
cloud structure; right, image in methane filter at 890 nm, 
enhancing the contrasts over the highest altitude clouds. The 
polar haze, the equatorial belt and the GRS are particularly 
prominent. 


Auroral precipitations may also have a role in the 
chemistry of the atmosphere of Jupiter. The polar 
regions of Jupiter are covered by a high-altitude haze, 
which is permanently present, and limited to the regions 
above 60° north and south. These hazes are best visual- 
ized in images taken in filters with strong atmospheric 
absorption (such as methane or hydrogen band filters), 
which are more sensitive to the upper atmospheric con- 
trasts (figure 5). The composition of this haze is still 
unknown, but a possibility is that it could be formed by 
heavy hydrocarbons formed from the chemistry of 
methane induced by charged particles. The formation of 
heavy hydrocarbons in a hydrogen-dominated atmos- 
phere is a very peculiar process, unique in the solar sys- 
tem, and it is therefore highly interesting for planetary 
modeling. 

New observations of Jupiter, its satellites and envi- 
rons have been made by Cassini, Galileo, the Hubble 
Space Telescope, the Chandra X-ray Observatory and 
Earth-based radio and optical telescopes during the 
CASSINI spacecraft’s flyby. The Galileo spacecraft has been 
in orbit around Jupiter since December 1995 while 
Cassini observed Jupiter from 1 October, 2000 to 31 
March, 2001. Cassini made its closest approach on 30 
December, 2000, at a distance of about 9.7 million kilo- 
meters (6 million miles). Data from the flyby observa- 
tions show that Io leaves a magnetic footprint on 
Jupiter’s upper atmosphere which appears as a spot of 
ultraviolet emission that remains fixed underneath Io as 
Jupiter rotates. The specific physical mechanisms respon- 
sible for generating these emissions are not well under- 
stood, but in general the spot seems to arise because of an 
electromagnetic interaction between Jupiter’s magnetic 
field and the plasma surrounding Io, driving currents of 
around 1 million amperes down through Jupiter’s ionos- 
phere. The other Galilean satellites may also leave foot- 
prints, and the presence or absence of such footprints 
should illuminate the underlying physical mechanism by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


revealing the strengths of the currents linking the satel- 
lites to Jupiter. 

Jupiter’s x-ray aurora has been thought to be excited 
by energetic sulfur and oxygen ions precipitating from 
the inner magnetosphere into the planet’s polar regions. 
High spatial resolution observations demonstrate that 
most of Jupiter’s northern auroral x-rays come from a hot 
spot located significantly poleward of the latitudes con- 
nected to the inner magnetosphere. The hot spot seems to 
be fixed in magnetic latitude and longitude and occurs in 
a region where anomalous infrared and ultraviolet emis- 
sions have also been observed. From the data it is 
inferred that the particles that excite the aurora originate 
in the outer magnetosphere. The hot spot x-rays pulsate 
with an approximately 45 min period, a period similar to 
that reported for high-latitude radio and energetic elec- 
tron bursts observed by near-Jupiter spacecraft. These 
results invalidate the idea that Jovian auroral x-ray emis- 
sions are mainly excited by steady precipitation of ener- 
getic heavy ions from the inner magnetosphere. Instead, 
the x-rays seem to result from currently unexplained 
processes in the outer magnetosphere that produce high- 
ly localized and highly variable emissions over an 
extremely wide range of wavelengths. 


From Jupiter to brown dwarfs 

The recent detection of brown dwarfs has placed Jupiter 
in a new perspective: Jupiter is not only the largest plan- 
et of the solar system, it is also now an intermediate step 
between planets and stars. Low-mass stars, known as 
brown dwarfs, have been detected with masses as low as 
10 Jupiter masses. An interesting question in the forma- 
tion of stars and planets is the question of the differences 
in composition which are expected as a result of different 
formation processes. Brown dwarfs are supposed to form 
from a central condensation in a nebula, but Jupiter, as all 
the planets, was formed within the solar nebula by accre- 
tion processes, starting from solid planetesimals. Since 
the planetesimal composition is depleted in the most 
volatile elements, they induce a planetary composition 
different from the nebula. Indeed, the composition of 
Jupiter is found to be enhanced in heavy elements. In 
stellar terminology, Jupiter is described as having a high 
metallicity, compared with the solar composition. On the 
other hand, a brown dwarf forming from its own nebula 
would be expected to have a composition mostly similar 
to its nebula. Nevertheless, it must be emphasized that 
many stars are formed in multiple systems, and the the- 
ory of formation of binary systems is not fully under- 
stood yet. The distinction between star and planetary for- 
mation may therefore be more complex than this simple 
description. When more measurements become available 
on brown dwarfs, and, it is hoped, on extrasolar giant 
planets, the measurement of metallicity will be a major 
point to discriminate between possible scenarios of for- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


mation. This is probably one of the most challenging 
problems for an understanding of the formation of giant 
planets. 


Bibliography 

Clarke J T et al February 2002 Ultraviolet emissions from 
the magnetic footprints of Ilo, Ganymede and 
Europa on Jupiter Nature 415 997-1000 

Gladstone G R et al February 2002 A pulsating auroral X- 
ray hot spot on Jupiter Nature 415 1000-1003 

1996 Science 272 837 et seq (Probe issue) 

J. Geophys. Res. 103 (special issue, September) 

1999 Planet. Space Sci. 47 (special issue) 


The following websites are also useful: 
Galileo mission: http: / / www.jpLnasa.gov/galileo 
Planetary Data System: 

http:/ / www.pds.nasa.gov/pds_home.html 


Pierre Drossart 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


Jupiter’s magnetosphere is the cavity surrounding the 
planet which contains and is controlled by Jupiter’s mag- 
netic field (figure 1). It reaches to a distance of ~60 Jupiter 
radii on the dayside of the planet (one Jupiter radius, Ry, 
is taken to be 71373 km), and extends into a long comet- 
like tail on the nightside which has a diameter of 
~300-400 Ry and a length of at least 3000 Ry. Jupiter’s field 
is confined to this cavity by SOLAR WIND PLASMA WAVES 
which flow away from the Sun throughout the solar sys- 
tem, and bound the magnetosphere on the outside. 
Because the solar wind is supermagnetosonic in the plan- 
et’s rest frame, a bow shock stands in the flow upstream 
from the cavity, at a distance of ~75 Ry on the dayside, 
across which the solar wind is slowed, compressed, and 
heated. The location of the boundary of the magnetos- 
phere, the magnetopause, is determined by the condition 
of pressure balance between the shocked solar wind plas- 
ma (termed the magnetosheath) on one side, and the 
magnetospheric plasma and field on the other. On the 
inside of the cavity, the magnetospheric magnetic field 
lines extend down into the ionosphere and upper atmos- 
phere (thermosphere) of the planet (see JUPITER: ATMOS- 
PHERE), such that the magnetosphere, ionosphere, and 
thermosphere are strongly coupled together. The plasma 
inside the magnetosphere contains contributions from 
both Jupiter’s ionosphere and the solar wind, consisting 
mainly of ionized hydrogen and helium, but by far the 
most important plasma source is the Galilean moon Io, 
which orbits deep inside the magnetosphere at a radial 
distance of 5.9 R, and liberates about 1 ton s-! of sulfur 


’ 
Z 


a 
Bowshock ,7 


Solar wind 4 


a ani is Tail lobe 
/Magnetosheatly” 
/ “7 
/ of 
t 
/ / 
tout 
1 t 
\ ‘ 
\ i 
\ < Middle Tail lobe 
a Y~ —Magnetosphere| 
a ! “ << 
oN Dayside outer >< 
a N 
S 
reins oct ere toro 


Figure 1. Sketch of Jupiter’s magnetosphere in the noon—mid- 
night meridian plane, with the Sun to the left and the solar wind 
blowing from left to right. The arrowed solid lines are the mag- 
netic field lines, while the dashed lines are the magnetopause 
and bow shock, as indicated. The dotted lines are plasma 
streamlines. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


dioxide gas (comparable to the production rate of an 
active comet). Consequently, the magnetospheric plasma 
is dominated by the presence of ions of sulfur and oxy- 
gen. The most important source of momentum and ener- 
gy for the magnetosphere is the planet’s rotation at a 
period of 9 h 55 min, such that the most important 
dynamics result from the presence of the Io plasma 
source deep within the rapidly rotating magnetosphere. 
However, as in the case of the EARTH’S MAGNETOSPHERE, 
solar wind coupling at the magnetopause may contribute 
significantly to the dynamics of the outer regions, and 
certainly to the formation and properties of the nightside 
magnetic tail. 


Discovery and exploration 

The discovery that Jupiter generates an intense magnetic 
field via dynamo currents flowing in its interior, was 
made in the 1950s from the observation that the planet is 
a source of radio emissions in the decametric (~10 MHz) 
and decimetric (~1 GHz) wave bands (see MAGNETO- 
SPHERES: JUPITER, RADIO EMISSIONS). The decimetric emis- 
sion is SYNCHROTRON RADIATION generated by gyrating 
energetic (~10 MeV) radiation belt electrons trapped by 
Jupiter’s magnetic field near the equatorial plane within 
a few R, of the planet. The spatial structure of this emis- 
sion and its variations with planetary rotation indicated 
that the magnetic field is dipolar in form, like the Earth’s, 
with the magnetic dipole axis tilted by ~10° relative to 
the planetary rotation axis. The POLARIZATION of the radi- 
ation, however, showed that the polarity of the field is 
opposite to Earth’s, with field lines running from the 
northern hemisphere of the planet, via the equatorial 
regions, to the southern hemisphere. Whilst this deci- 
metric emission is very steady in time, apart from a mod- 
ulation at the planetary rotation period, the decametric 
radiation is instead characteristically bursty, and varies 
in intensity over several orders of magnitude on time 
scales of the order of minutes, with an averaged power 
around a hundred times that of the decimetric emission. 
Although the first to be discovered, by Burke and 
Franklin in 1955, the details of the decametric mechanism 
remain to be understood in detail. However, it is thought 
to involve emissions at the cyclotron frequency from 
~keV electrons accelerated in the magnetosphere, which 
move along the magnetic field lines towards Jupiter’s 
ionosphere. The upper cut-off frequency of 40 MHz then 
corresponds to the cyclotron frequency of the highest 
field strength accessible to these particles over the Jovian 
poles, equivalent to 1.4-10-3 T. This remarkably large 
field is about twenty times the strength of the Earth’s 
polar field, despite the fact that Jupiter’s radius is more 
than ten times that of the Earth. In 1964, Bigg also dis- 
covered that part of the decametric emission is directly 
influenced by the position of Io, thus providing the first 
evidence of a complicated electrodynamic interaction 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


SJupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


between Io and the jovian magnetosphere—-ionosphere 
system. In 1974, Brown using ground-based optical 
observations also discovered the existence of a large 
cloud of neutral sodium atoms surrounding Io, which 
was followed in subsequent years by optical observa- 
tions of gas and plasma tori in the vicinity of Io’s orbit, 
composed of the atoms and ions of sulfur and oxygen. 
In situ exploration of Jupiter’s environment began in 
November-December 1973 with the fly-by of the NASA 
PIONEER 10 spacecraft, followed by Pioneer 11 in 1974, 
VOYAGER 1 and 2 in 1979, the European Space Agency’s 


ee | a 


Bow shock 


200 


Magnetopause 


100 


Y(Rp 


-100 


-200 


X (Ry) 


Figure 2. Trajectories of the five fly-by spacecraft relative to 
Jupiter, projected onto Jupiter’s orbital plane. X points towards 
the Sun and Y from dawn to dusk. P 10 and P 11 refer to Pioneers 
10 and 11, V 1 and V 2 to Voyagers 1 and 2, and U to Ulysses. 
Arrows are plotted in the direction of spacecraft motion on the 
outbound portions of the trajectories. Also plotted are the aver- 
age positions of the bow shock and magnetopause (adapted 
from D E Huddleston et al 1998 J. Geophys. Res. 103 20075-82). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


ULYSSES in 1992 (en route to the Sun’s polar regions; see 
SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES), culminating in the insertion into 
orbit of the NASA GALILEO MISSION spacecraft in 1995. At 
the time of writing only the results of the initial analyses 
of Galileo data are available, mainly concerning the inter- 
actions of the Galilean moons with the magnetospheric 
environment (see MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, SATELLITE 
INTERACTIONS). Most of the information described here, 
therefore, has been derived from the five earlier fly-by 
missions, augmented by radio and optical observations 
from Earth. The Pioneer spacecraft were instrumented 
principally to measure the jovian magnetic field and 
energetic particle environment at energies above ~1 MeV. 
The Voyager spacecraft made the first detailed in situ 
measurements of thermal plasmas at lower energies, at 
10-100s eV and 10-100s keV, and of plasma waves. 
Similar measurements were also made by Ulysses. The 
trajectories of these spacecraft are shown projected onto 
Jupiter’s orbital plane in figure 2, together with the loca- 
tions of nominal magnetopause and bow shock posi- 
tions. The X axis points towards the Sun, and the Y axis 
from dawn to dusk across the magnetosphere. It can be 
seen that all these spacecraft explored the pre-noon day- 
side magnetosphere on their inbound passes, and that 
Pioneers 10 and Voyagers 1 and 2 passed through the 
pre-dawn nightside sector outbound. All these trajectory 
segments were confined to the near-equatorial region. In 
contrast, Pioneer 11 passed out of the magnetosphere 
near noon at northern latitudes of ~33°, while Ulysses 
exited near to dusk at southerly latitudes of ~37°. Since 
the apoapsis of the Galileo spacecraft has also been con- 
fined mainly to the local time sector between midnight 
and dawn during the main phase of its mission, it can 
been seen that, while the dawn side of the magnetos- 
phere has received considerable observational study, the 
dusk side remains almost unexplored. 


Jupiter’s magnetic field 

Internal planetary field 

Although the main features of the magnetic field pro- 
duced by Jupiter’s internal currents were inferred from 
radio observations prior to the first measurements by 
spacecraft, in situ data are required for detailed charac- 
terization. A recent model based on fits to the fly-by data, 
constrained also by Earth-based observations of jovian 
auroral emissions associated with the magnetic footprint 
of Io, indicates a best-fit centered dipole axis which is 
inclined at 9.5° to Jupiter’s spin axis towards system III 
longitude 201°. The corresponding dipole moment is 
4.26-10+T Ry, such that the surface field is 0.4-10-3 T at 
the magnetic equator and approximately double that at 
the poles (neglecting the dynamical flattening of 
Jupiter’s figure which increases the dipole polar surface 
field to ~1.0-10-3 T). However, large quadrupole 
and octupole moments are also present which produce 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


significant asymmetries in the near-planet field, in par- 
ticular increasing the peak surface field in the northern 
polar regions to ~1.5-10-3, in agreement with the value 
obtained from the 40 MHz upper cut-off in the decamet- 
ric emission. 


Size of the magnetosphere 

Using the above value of the dipole moment, a simple 
estimate can be made of the expected size of the magne- 
tospheric cavity in the solar wind, based on pressure bal- 
ance across the magnetopause. If magnetospheric plasma 
pressure is neglected such that the internal pressure is 
wholly magnetic, and taking a nominal solar wind 
dynamic pressure of ~0.1 nPa at Jupiter’s orbit, a simple 
calculation shows that in the subsolar region (ie. in the 
equatorial region near noon) the boundary should lie at 
a distance of ~35 Ry. In contrast, the fly-by observations 
of the dayside magnetopause, suitably adjusted to take 
account of the outward flaring of the boundary away 
from noon (see figure 2), indicate a typical distance of 
~60 Rj. Furthermore, the response to variations in solar 
wind dynamic pressure indicates a much ‘squashier’ sys- 
tem than expected, with subsolar boundary positions 
varying between ~40 and ~80 Rj, indicating a position 
which varies inversely as the “or (1/5) power of the 
dynamic pressure, compared with the (1/6) power 
expected for a dipole magnetic field. The reason for the 
great inflation of the magnetosphere, and for its 
‘squashy’ nature, lies in the fact that (unlike Earth), the 
magnetospheric plasma makes a substantial contribution 
to the internal pressure, at least comparable to that made 
by the field. 


Inner magnetosphere 

The structure of the magnetic field within the cavity as 
revealed by spacecraft observations is indicated 
schematically in figure 1, which shows a sketch of the 


To Sun 


Dayside outer magnetosphere 


Middle magnetosphere 
_“ current sheet 


Magnetic tail 
current sheet 


(a) ON ae Seteeeae 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


field lines in the noon—midnight meridian plane. Four 
basic regions are identified, whose boundaries are 
defined by the magnetic field lines. The inner magnetos- 
phere is defined by the torus-shaped region of field lines 
which cross the equatorial plane within ~5 Ry of 
Jupiter’s center. The field in this region is essentially an 
undisturbed planetary field, which contains the radia- 
tion zone of synchrotron-emitting energetic electrons. 
This region is distinguished from the middle magnetos- 
phere, which bounds it on the outside, by the lack of sig- 
nificant electrical currents flowing in the plasma, such 
that the outer boundary of the region essentially coin- 
cides with the inner boundary of the Io plasma torus 
where strong equatorial currents begin. However, the 
inner region is affected by the fringing field of the latter 
currents, which produce a nearly uniform northward 
field in the inner region of strength ~200 nT. This field is 
directed opposite to the southward planetary field in the 
equatorial plane, but is much weaker than the latter, 
since even at ~5 Ry the equatorial dipole field is still 
3400 nT. 


Middle magnetosphere 

As indicated above, the middle magnetosphere is char- 
acterized by the presence of strong azimuthal (eastward) 
electric currents flowing in the plasma near the equator- 
ial plane whose magnetic effect distends the field lines 
outwards from the planet, as shown in figure 1. In the 
equatorial plane this region extends from the inner edge 
of the Io plasma torus at ~5 R, to an outer limit on the 
dayside which depends upon the degree of extension of 
the magnetosphere, and lies typically ~15 Ry inside the 
magnetopause. For a typical ~60 Ry; magnetopause 
position at noon, therefore, the outer edge of the middle 


North tail 
lobe 


Current sheet 


Dusk 


South tail 
lobe 


Figure 3. (a) Sketch of the current system in Jupiter’s magnetic 
equatorial plane, showing the eastward current of the middle 
magnetosphere region, which closes round the planet, and the 
dusk-to-dawn currents of the tail current sheet, which separates 
the tail lobes, and closes around the magnetopause. (b) Sketch of 
the field and current in a cross section through the tail, looking 
down the tail from the planet. The north tail lobe field points 
away from the planet (circled cross), while that of the southern 
lobe points towards the planet (circled dot). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


magnetosphere current sheet lies at ~45 Ry. On the night- 
side, the current sheet merges continuously into the cur- 
rent system of the magnetospheric tail. Figure 3(a) shows 
a sketch of the equatorial currents of the middle magne- 
tosphere which, to a first approximation, close 
azimuthally around the planet, and the adjacent equato- 
rial tail currents which flow from dusk to dawn across 
the system. The tail currents close north and south over 
the tail lobe magnetopause to form two D-shaped sole- 
noidal current systems back-to-back, as shown in the 
cross section in figure 3(b). The full thickness of the cur- 
rent sheet is ~5 Ry, and the current within it, and hence 
the perturbation field produced, falls with distance from 
the planet approximately as 1-15. The value of the expo- 
nent depends somewhat on distance and local time, but 
is in any case considerably smaller than the 1° depen- 
dence of the planetary dipole field. Consequently, while 
in the vicinity of Io’s orbit the perturbation fields of the 
current sheet are relatively small compared with the 
planetary field (as indicated above), such that the field 
lines remain basically dipolar in form, they become dom- 
inant at distances beyond ~15 Rj. In the latter region the 
low latitude field is thus characterized by strong radial 
fields which point outwards from the planet north of the 
current sheet, and inwards to the planet south of the 
sheet, as shown in figure 1. At the center of the current 
sheet the field is weak and points south. The total current 
flowing in the annular middle magnetosphere current 
sheet (excluding the tail system) is ~200 MA. 

Within ~30 Rj of the planet the current sheet is cen- 
tered close to the planetary dipole equatorial plane, tilt- 
ed at 9.5A° to Jupiter’s spin axis as indicated above. With 
increasing distance, however, the current sheet increas- 
ingly departs from this plane due to two effects. The first 
is that, as the dipole axis rotates around with the planet, 
the information about the rotation is communicated to 
the outer regions at a finite speed. Consequently, at a 
given distance from the planet the effective position of 
the dipole is increasingly retarded in azimuth relative to 
its true position. Within ~30 RJ the delays are insignifi- 
cant, but beyond this distance the effective information 
propagation speed is ~40 RJ h-1 (~750 km s-1), leading 
to observable delays. The second effect is the ‘hinging’ of 
the current sheet in the magnetic tail, where the plane of 
the sheet departs from the dipole equator and becomes 
aligned with the tail axis (defined by the flow of the solar 
wind), as shown in figure 1. This effect becomes apparent 
at down-tail distances beyond ~35 Rj. 


Outer magnetosphere 

The outer magnetosphere is a dayside region observed 
during the inbound passes of the fly-by spacecraft of 
uncertain local time extent, in which there is no evidence 
of an equatorial current sheet. Instead, the field in this 
region, although rather variable, points on average to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


south in the equatorial region, in the direction of the 
planetary equatorial field, and overlies the middle mag- 
netosphere closer to the planet. The region is thus bound- 
ed by the magnetopause on one side, and by the middle 
magnetosphere on the other. A TRANSITION REGION of dis- 
ordered field may occur between the outer and middle 
magnetosphere regions (particularly well marked on the 
inbound Ulysses pass), where the equatorial field under- 
goes sharp changes indicative of the presence of plasma 
current layers, but which are not ordered by magnetic 
latitude or planetary rotation period. The thickness of the 
outer magnetosphere in the equatorial region is ~15 Ry, 
and the average equatorial field strength varies between 
~5 and ~15 nT, depending on the degree of extension of 
the magnetosphere. In all cases, however, the field is sig- 
nificantly stronger than that of the planetary dipole, due 
to the fringing effect of the current sheet field. 


Magnetic tail 

The magnetic tail on the nightside of the planet consists of 
two tail lobes of oppositely directed flux where the field is 
relatively uniform and strong, pointing away from the 
planet in the northern lobe and towards the planet in the 
southern lobe, which are separated by the thin (few Rj) 
equatorial current sheet mentioned above, where the 
plasma carries the required electric current from dusk to 
dawn across the tail. Overall, the tail has an approximate- 
ly cylindrical shape with a diameter of ~300-400 Ry, such 
that the two lobes are D-shaped in cross section, as shown 
in figure 3(b). The field strength in the lobes falls with 
increasing distance as the tail expands in radius, reaching 
~2 nT at a down-tail distance of ~150 Ry as measured by 
Voyager 2 (see figure 2). By analogy with Earth, it seems 
probable that the tail is formed by MAGNETIC RECONNEC- 
TION at the dayside magnetopause between the interplan- 
etary and magnetospheric field, which results in the for- 
mation of open magnetic flux tubes which map from the 
planet’s polar cap, through the magnetopause, and into 
interplanetary space (figure 1). The flow of the solar wind 
then carries them onto the nightside of the planet, where 
they are stretched out to form the tail lobes. As they are 
stretched out down-tail, the open tubes slowly sink in 
towards the center plane of the tail, where they reconnect 
again within the current sheet, returning closed magnetic 
flux tubes, attached to Jupiter at both ends, back towards 
the planet. However, where the reconnection and return 
flow take places in the jovian tail is at present unknown. 
On the basis of this model we may estimate that the lobe 
field lines flow towards the current sheet at a speed of a 
few tens of km s-l, such that they remain ‘open’ for sev- 
eral Earth days. Consequently, the length of the tail (equal 
to the speed of the solar wind times the length of time for 
which lobe field lines remain open) will be several thou- 
sand R; (i.e. a few AU). The amount of magnetic flux in 
each lobe is ~4-10!! Wb, corresponding to a region of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


~10° latitude surrounding each magnetic pole at ionos- 
pheric heights. 


Bending of the field meridian planes 
For a pure dipole, field lines lie in planes of constant lon- 
gitude relative to the dipole axis. However, the planetary 
field lines at Jupiter are noticeably bent out of such 
meridian planes, associated with the existence of 
azimuthal fields directed either eastward (in the sense of 
planetary rotation) or westward around the magnetic 
axis. The bending of meridian planes is of interest 
because it provides information about the transfer of 
magnetic forces between one plasma region and another 
connected by the magnetic field. Two major effects are 
illustrated in figure 4(a), which shows a view looking 
down onto the jovian magnetosphere from above the 
northern pole, and shows field lines in two regimes of 
latitude mapping out from Jupiter’s ionosphere to the 
equatorial plane. The field lines in the high-latitude 
region mapping into the outer magnetosphere are bent 
away from noon and towards the tail as a consequence of 
the solar wind interaction, such that in the northern 
hemisphere (as shown) the perturbation fields are east- 
wards on the dusk side of the magnetosphere and west- 
ward on the dawn side (and vice versa in the southern 
hemisphere). The current system responsible is that of 
the magnetopause and tail (as sketched in figure 3(b)). 
At lower latitudes, however, the field lines mapping 
to the middle magnetosphere current sheet show a con- 
sistent sense of bending independent of local time (inso- 


To Sun 


Magnetopause 


Dusk Dawn 


far as it has been measured), with azimuthal fields which 
are westward above the current sheet (as shown), and 
eastward beneath it. This pattern of field bending is asso- 
ciated with a torque on the magnetospheric plasma 
which acts to spin it up towards the angular velocity of 
planetary rotation, i.e. it is associated with the transfer of 
angular momentum from the thermosphere / ionosphere 
to the magnetosphere, as will be discussed further below. 
The current system responsible is sketched in figure 4(b), 
and involves a radially outward current in the equatori- 
al plane which closes along magnetic field lines through 
equatorward currents flowing in the ionosphere. 
Typically, outside the current sheet the observed 
azimuthal field is a small fraction of the radial field, such 
that the radial currents are a correspondingly small frac- 
tion of the azimuthal current. Figure 4(a) shows that the 
two effects discussed here produce similar effects which 
are difficult to separate in the dawn magnetosphere 
where most observations have been made. However, the 
Ulysses observations at dusk demonstrate that the two 
effects are separately present, one dominant in the mid- 
dle magnetosphere, the other in the outer magnetos- 
phere. 


Jupiter’s plasma populations and their dynamics 
Sources of plasma mass and momentum 

The nature of the plasma dynamics in a planetary mag- 
netosphere depends on the nature of the plasma sources 
and sinks, and the nature of the transport processes 
which convey the plasma from the former to the latter. 
The plasma sources include the solar wind at the outer 
boundary and the planet’s ionosphere at the inner 
boundary, together with the surfaces and atmospheres of 
any moons that happen to orbit within the cavity. The 
sources of momentum include the antisunward flow of 
the solar wind on the outside, and the planet's rotation 


Figure 4. (a) Sketch of field lines emanating from the northern hemisphere of Jupiter projected onto the equatorial plane, showing the 
bending of the field lines out of meridian planes. High-latitude field lines mapping to the outer parts of the magnetosphere are bent 
away from noon by the interaction with the solar wind. The current system responsible is the magnetopause-tail system. Lower-lati- 
tude field lines mapping to the middle magnetosphere current sheet are bent consistently in the clockwise sense, associated with the 
transfer of anticlockwise planetary angular momentum from the thermosphere/ionosphere to the magnetosphere. (b) Sketch of the 
current system associated with planetary angular momentum transfer. The arrowed solid lines are magnetic field lines, and the dashed 
lines show the direction of current flow. The circled symbols marked B,, indicate the direction of the azimuthal perturbation magnet- 
ic field produced by these currents, out of the diagram north of the current sheet, and into the diagram south of the sheet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 5 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on the inside. Solar wind interaction at the boundary car- 
ries magnetospheric flux tubes from the dayside to the 
nightside in the outer regions of the magnetosphere, as 
discussed above in relation to the formation of the mag- 
netic tail, from which closed flux tubes eventually return 
flowing sunward through the central regions of the mag- 
netosphere. In the absence of such flows, the magnetos- 
pheric plasma and field will rotate with the planet, the 
angular momentum being transferred by ion—neutral col- 
lisions at the feet of the field lines in the lower ionos- 
phere. 

Brice and Ioannidis in 1970 were the first to consid- 
er the relative importance of these two flow systems at 
Jupiter. Flows of plasmas and embedded magnetic fields 
are associated with an electric field which is transverse to 
both the velocity vector V and to the magnetic field B, 
given by E =-V-B. The overall strength of a flow system 
can then be measured by the voltage associated with its 
electric field, since by Faraday’s law 1 V is equivalent to 
the transfer of 1 Wb s-! of magnetic flux embedded in the 
flow. The electric field associated with the solar wind dri- 
ven flow is directed from dusk to dawn across Jupiter’s 
magnetosphere, and by analogy with the Earth, the asso- 
ciated voltage can be estimated to be ~1 MV (ie. the 
transfer through this flow system of ~1 MWb s! from the 
dayside to the tail in the outer regions, and the return of 
the same amount, in the steady state, in the central 
regions). The electric field associated with rotation is 
directed radially outwards in the equatorial plane, and 
for rigid corotation with the planet (i.e. rotation with the 
same angular frequency as the planet) the associated 
voltage is ~400 MV. Rotation with the planet is thus by 
far the most important flow at Jupiter, although as indi- 
cated above, this statement does not preclude the domi- 
nance of solar wind driven effects in the outer regions 
and magnetotail. 

Estimates indicate that both the solar wind and the 
ionosphere represent sources of a few -1028 ion s-1 for 
Jupiter’s magnetosphere, consisting principally of 
hydrogen (i.e. protons, together, of course, with sufficient 
electrons to keep the gas electrically neutral overall). The 
corresponding mass sources are a few tens of kg s-l. The 
ionospheric source also uniquely provides molecular 
hydrogen ions, Ht) and Ht+3, as minor constituents, 
while the solar wind provides He?+ and traces of heavier 
ions such as carbon. The identification of all these species 
within the jovian plasma has confirmed the presence of 
both sources. The major discovery of the Voyager fly-bys, 
however, was that the jovian system is not dominated by 
a hydrogen plasma as had previously been anticipated, 
but by a sulfur and oxygen plasma which originates from 
the sulfur dioxide atmosphere of the volcanic moon Io, 
which orbits at a distance of 5.9 Ry. The source rate is esti- 
mated to be ~3-1028 ion s-1, similar to the solar wind and 
ionospheric sources, but because the ions are heavy, with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


a mean mass of ~21 amu, the corresponding mass source 
of ~1000 kg s-! is overwhelmingly dominant. The sodi- 
um source at Io, though easily visible in optical emission, 
is less than this by a factor of around a hundred, and is 
thus negligible in overall terms. Recent estimates indi- 
cate that the moon EUROPA, which orbits at a radial dis- 
tance of 9.4 Rj, is also a significant source of oxygen plas- 
ma originating from the surface water ice, with rates of 
~2-1027 ion s-! and corresponding mass rates of ~50 kg 
s-l. The plasma dynamics of Jupiter’s magnetosphere is 
therefore dominated by the consequences of the presence 
of strong heavy-ion sources lying deep within a rapidly 
rotating magnetosphere. 


The Io plasma torus 

The Io plasma which exists within Jupiter’s magnetos- 
phere originates principally from electron-impact ioniza- 
tion of the clouds of sulfur and oxygen atoms which orbit 
in the vicinity of Io, originating in the latter’s atmosphere 
(see 10: PLASMA TORUS). The density of these atoms peaks 
at a few tens of cm- near the orbit of Io, with oxygen 
being the more numerous species as expected from the 
sulfur dioxide source, and falls off by an order of magni- 
tude within ~1 Ry; on either side. These neutral particles 
orbit with Io at Keplerian speeds of ~17 km s~!, being 
influenced only by the gravitational force of Jupiter. 
When these atoms are ionized, however, the resulting 
ions and electrons suddenly sense the electromagnetic 
environment as well, that is to say the southward ~2000 
nT magnetic field of the planet, and the ~0.1 V m1 


QT tt GE ae a 


Z [R,] 
Oo 
Toot 


—2lLirrriiiiitiiiiiiiiitiiin irene ier anesce ae i poet 


4 5 6 7 8 g 
R {R] 


Figure 5. Contours of electron density in the Io plasma torus in 
the meridian plane, determined from Voyager 1 PLS data. The 
vertical scale is distance from the centrifugal equatorial plane, 
while the horizontal axis is distance from Jupiter’s spin axis, 
both in Ry. The numbers on the contours give the electron den- 
sity, equal to the ion charge density, in units of electrons cm-*. 
(Taken from F Bagenal et al 1997 Geophys. Res. Lett. 24 2119-22.) 
(Copyright 1997 by the American Geophysical Union.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


outward-directed electric field associated with the ~70 
km s7! flow of the near-corotating plasma. The effect of 
these fields is such as to cause the charged particles 
immediately to drift with the plasma at the corotation 
speed (they are ‘picked up’ by the plasma flow), and also 
to acquire a gyratory speed about the field lines equal to 
the difference between the corotation and Keplerian 
speeds, equal to ~55 km s-!. This corresponds to a ‘ther- 
mal’ energy of ~250 eV for oxygen ions and ~500 eV for 
sulfur, but only 0.01 eV for electrons. Subsequently, the 
ions are cooled by Coulomb collisions with the electrons, 
and the consequently heated electrons are cooled by col- 
lisional excitation of the low-lying energy levels of the 
ions, thus leading to the observed optical emission from 
the torus. 

The most detailed information about the low-energy 
plasma distribution which results from these processes 
was obtained during the inbound passage of Voyager 1. 
Figure 5 shows contours of electron density (equal to the 
ion charge density) which have been derived from these 
data. The principal population is the warm plasma torus 
which, in the equatorial plane, extends outwards from a 
jovicentric distance of ~5.6 Ry. The ions in this region con- 
sist of two populations, a suprathermal population of 
recently ionized few 100 eV particles (increasing in ener- 
gy with increasing distance, up to ~2 keV at ~10 Rj), com- 
prising ~10-20% of the population, and a cooled popula- 
tion with a temperature of ~60 eV (also increasing with 
distance up to ~300 eV at 10 Rj). The electron tempera- 
ture in this region is ~10 eV. In the inner part of the warm 
torus, within ~7.5 Ry, there are approximately equal num- 
bers of sulfur and oxygen ions, with the oxygen being 
principally O*, while the sulfur is roughly equally divid- 
ed between S* and S2+. Outside this distance, the plasma 
is richer in oxygen, possibly due to the Europa source, 
with roughly equal numbers of O*+ and O2+, and the den- 
sity of S3+ becomes comparable with those of S+ and S2+. 
Inside ~5.6 Rj the plasma cools precipitately to form the 
cold plasma torus near the equatorial plane at distances 
of ~5.0-5.4 Ry. The ion and electron temperatures in this 
region are just a few eV, and the composition is a some- 
what sulfur-rich combination of S+ and Ot. 

The distribution of the torus plasma along the field 
lines is determined by a balance between the plasma 
pressure force, the magnetic mirror force, the centrifugal 
force, the gravitational force due to Jupiter, and a field- 
parallel electric force which is required to ensure that the 
ion and electron charge densities are equal at all points. 
Apart from the latter, the most important physical effect 
is that the centrifugal force tends to compress the plasma 
at the centrifugal equator (the point of maximum dis- 
tance along a field line from the planetary spin axis), 
while this compression is resisted by the plasma pres- 
sure. In the warm torus, equilibrium is reached for a scale 
height along the field lines away from the equator (the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


distance over which the density falls by a factor of ~2.7) 
of ~1 Ry. In the cold torus, however, the scale height is 
reduced by the lower temperatures to ~0.3 Ry. 

The spatial structure of the torus plasma across the 
field lines reflects both the distribution of the atomic gas 
sources in the vicinity of the orbits of Io and Europa, 
together with the nature of the cross-field transport mech- 
anism. Because the outwardly directed centrifugal force 
on the plasma is dominant (being much greater, certainly, 
than the inward force of Jupiter’s gravity), flux tubes con- 
taining high-density plasma from the Io source will tend 
to ‘fall’ outwards to larger distances, restrained by the 
frictional drag of ion-neutral collisions at the feet of the 
field lines in the ionosphere. These flux tubes will be 
replaced by tubes containing lesser densities moving 
inwards, it being ultimately supposed, of course, that 
some mechanism (presently unknown) exists for empty- 
ing the flux tubes of their plasma content at large dis- 
tances. This picture explains the basic cross-field structure 
shown in figure 5, which is indicative of rapid transport 
of warm dense plasma away from Jupiter at distances 
beyond the neutral gas sources. However, the inward 
transport from those sources towards Jupiter is much 
weaker, such that the plasma has time to cool by radia- 
tion, collapses onto the centrifugal equator due to the 
reduced pressure, and then recombines, thus explaining 
the existence and properties of the cold torus population. 

Although the basic physical picture of outward radi- 
al transport of the torus plasma by centrifugally driven 
flux tube interchange thus seems clear, the details of the 
process are not yet determined, including basic time and 
spatial scales, and is simply parameterized in many theo- 
retical models by an empirically determined spatial diffu- 
sion coefficient. Observationally, the warm torus plasma 
is found to pervade the equatorial current sheet out to the 
outer boundary of the middle magnetosphere at several 
tens of Rj. Due principally to the expansion of the flux 
tubes, the equatorial ion/electron charge density falls 
from at peak of ~3000 cm- (during the Voyager 1 flyby) 
near the inner edge of the torus at ~5.7 Ry, to ~70 cm-3 at 
~10 Ry (as in figure 5), and down to ~0.1 cm- at several 
tens of Rj. The fraction of suprathermal particles in the 
population appears to increase with distance, however, 
such that the average energy also increases, rather than 
falling as expected for an expanding plasma. Typical val- 
ues are a few 100 eV. Sporadic enhancements of low-tem- 
perature plasma are also observed in the dayside outer 
magnetosphere, correlated with decreases in the strength 
of the magnetic field. We may conjecture that these repre- 
sent plasma fragments which have become detached 
from the middle magnetosphere current sheet. 


Hot plasma population 
The outwardly diffusing Io torus plasma is not, how- 
ever, the only population which is present in Jupiter’s 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


magnetosphere. Observations by the Voyager and 
Ulysses spacecraft have shown that a low-density but 
high-energy population is also present, consisting of 
roughly equal numbers of protons and heavy ions 
(mainly sulfur and oxygen). The number density and 
average energy of this population both increase on mov- 
ing towards the planet, before falling near the inner edge 
of the warm torus. In terms of the above discussion, we 
may picture this low-density population to be transport- 
ed radially inwards as the high-density torus plasma is 
transported radially outwards. Indeed, evidence has 
been found in Galileo data for sporadic localized inward 
injections of hot ions within the current sheet at dis- 
tances between ~10 and ~30 Ry. These injections have 
aspects in common with susstorMS at Earth, but at 
Jupiter they are not confined to the nightside but occur 
at all local times. Inward transport of this plasma results 
in compression and heating as observed, the energy 
required being derived ultimately from the outward 
‘falling’ torus plasma. The presence of the hot plasma 
thus acts partially to suppress this transport. 

The hot plasma density is much less than that of the 
warm torus plasma throughout the system, being ~10-2 
to 10-3 cm’? in the outer regions, increasing to perhaps 
~1 cm? in the inner part of the Io torus. These particles 
thus make little contribution to the overall mass or 
charge density compared with the low-energy plasma, 
except perhaps in the dayside outer magnetosphere. 
However, their average energy is sufficiently large that 
they make the dominant contribution to the plasma 
pressure at all points except for the innermost part of the 
warm torus where the extreme warm plasma density 
(figure 5) and the falling hot ion temperature combine to 
produce comparable warm and hot plasma pressures. In 
the outer part of the magnetosphere the hot ion temper- 
ature is a few tens of keV, with the distribution having a 
non-Maxwellian high-energy tail extending above 1 
MeV. The average energy then increases with decreasing 
distance, reaching a peak of ~2 MeV at ~7 Rj according 
to Voyager 1 measurements, before falling to ~100 keV 
inside Io’s orbit at 5.9 Rj. Electrons are also present with 
comparable energies but significantly lower densities, 
such that they make a smaller contribution to the pres- 
sure. It is these energetic particles in the inner part of the 
warm torus which form the source of the radiation belts 
within the inner magnetosphere. From the vicinity of 
Io’s orbit these particles are more slowly diffused 
inwards due to the presence of fluctuating electric fields 
driven by winds in the thermosphere, gaining further 
energy as they do so. This input is balanced in the steady 
state by particle flux and energy losses in the inner mag- 
netosphere which are due to wave-induced particle pre- 
cipitation into the atmosphere, absorption by ring mate- 
rial and moons, and (for electrons) synchrotron radia- 
tion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


A key feature of the hot ion population is that with- 
in the outer part of the middle magnetosphere its pres- 
sure is comparable with that of the magnetic field. As a 
consequence it ‘inflates’ the planetary field to form the 
current sheet structure observed in this region (figure 1), 
a process which also inflates the magnetosphere beyond 
the size expected for pressure balance between the solar 
wind and the planetary magnetic field alone, as dis- 
cussed above. The distended field lines then provide the 
inward force (the j-B Lorentz force of the azimuthal cur- 
rent) which in the steady state balances the outward 
pressure gradient of the hot plasma. The Io torus plasma 
also plays a role in current sheet formation, though a 
lesser one, since the field must also provide the inward 
force necessary to balance the centrifugal and pressure 
gradient forces of this population. With regard to the 
dominant hot plasma population, Voyager observations 
indicate that the equatorial pressure remains greater than 
that of the field throughout the outer part of the middle 
magnetosphere, while falling below that of the field 
inside ~10 Ry, due to the rapidly increasing strength of 
the dipole field. Consequently, as noted above, the per- 
turbation fields produced by the plasma at and inside 
these distances becomes smaller than the planetary field, 
such that the field geometry then assumes a quasi-dipo- 
lar form. 


Plasma flow and field bending 

Observations of the plasma flow within the middle mag- 
netosphere, extending outwards from the orbit of Io, gen- 
erally confirm a primary plasma flow in the sense of 
planetary rotation as discussed above. However, depar- 
tures from rigid corotation are observed which are due to 
two main effects. The first occurs in the main source 
region of the torus plasma in the vicinity of Io’s orbit, 
where neutral atoms are ionized and ‘picked-up’ by the 
plasma. Because ANGULAR MOMENTUM is continuously 
provided to the newly ionized particles, the plasma in 
this region rotates more slowly than for rigid corotation, 
by an amount which is just such that the ion—-neutral col- 
lisions in the lower ionosphere provide the required 
torque. Ground-based spectroscopic observations of the 
plasma, together with in situ data from Voyager 1, indi- 
cate that the plasma flow is slowed by ~4 km s-! ina ~2 
Ry-wide region centered near to Io’s orbit by this effect 
(the rigid corotation speed is 74 km s-!). Outside this 
region, near-rigid corotation is resumed. 

As the torus plasma diffuses radially outwards, 
however, angular momentum must again be continuous- 
ly added to maintain plasma rotation at near-rigid 
speeds. If no angular momentum is added, conservation 
of plasma angular momentum requires the azimuthal 
speed of the plasma to fall inversely as the distance from 
the spin axis, while for rigid corotation the speed must 
increase in direct proportion to this distance. In order to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


maintain near-rigid corotation of an equatorial outward- 
ly diffusing plasma, the angular momentum flux into the 
equatorial region must be constant, independent of dis- 
tance. For radial mass fluxes corresponding to the Io 
source, it turns out that in the inner part of the torus, the 
required angular momentum flux can be supplied by 
ion-neutral collisions in the lower ionosphere for only 
minimal departures of the flow from rigid corotation. In 
this region, therefore, the plasma very nearly rigidly 
corotates with the planet outside the source region. 
However, with increasing distance from the planet a 
given area of the equatorial plane becomes connected via 
the magnetic field to a decreasing area of the ionosphere, 
which is located nearer to the rotation axis. 
Consequently, the ionospheric torque ultimately 
becomes small even for large departures from corotation. 
Thus beyond a certain radial distance, depending on the 
Io mass flux and the ion-neutral friction in the ionos- 
phere, the azimuthal velocity is expected to break away 
from near-rigid corotation, to peak, and then to fall 
inversely with distance in the regime where the input of 
angular momentum becomes small. Voyager observa- 
tions indicate that the flow is near to that expected for 
rigid corotation to equatorial distances of ~20 Ry, where 
the azimuthal flow speed is ~200 km s-!, and falls below 
rigid corotation at larger equatorial distances. Voyager 
data for a relatively compressed magnetosphere indicate 
flows in the outer regions which do not fall with distance 


Main auroral oval 


as then expected, but rather remain at values which are a 
factor of ~2 lower than rigid corotation speeds. When the 
magnetosphere is more extended during intervals of low 
solar wind dynamic pressure, however, the flow speeds 
in the outer regions are rather lower than this relative to 
rigid corotation, as indicated by data from both Pioneer 
10 and Ulysses. 

We should mention that, while in the above discus- 
sion we have described the input of angular momentum 
from the planet as being due to ion-neutral collisions in 
the lower ionosphere, this angular momentum is actual- 
ly transmitted to the equatorial plasma via the bending 
of the field lines out of meridian planes which was 
shown in the inner part of figure 4(a), and whose current 
system is shown in figure 4(b). The j-B force associated 
with the radially outward current in the equatorial plane 
(into the diagram) acts to increase the speed of a sub- 
corotating equatorial plasma, while the j-B force of the 
closure currents in the ionosphere acts in the opposite 
direction as a drag force on the rotation of the thermos- 
phere. The corotation of the thermosphere is maintained 
to the extent allowed by viscous coupling to the corotat- 
ing denser atmosphere beneath. 

Flows in the outer magnetospheric regions are 
exceedingly uncertain at the present time. Outbound 
Voyager 2 measurements established the existence of a 
layer of plasma adjacent to the dawn tail magnetopause 
at ~150 Ry which was flowing antisunward, opposite to 


Polar emissions 


Ganymede and Europa signatures 


Figure 6. Ultraviolet image of the northern polar regions of Jupiter captured by the HST showing the main features of the auroral emis- 
sions as discussed in the text. Courtesy of John Clarke (University of Michigan) and NASA. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the direction of planetary rotation. The flow speed was 
~500 km s-! in a layer a few tens of Rj wide. The nature 
of the overall dynamics, however, concerning, e.g., the 
ultimate loss process for Io plasma, and the interaction 
between planetary and solar wind driven flows in the 
tail, are yet to be determined. 


Jovian auroral emissions 

Auroral emissions from the polar regions of Jupiter were 
first detected in the UV by two independent spacecraft 
missions: the International Ultra—Violet Explorer (1979) 
and the Voyager spacecraft (1979 and 1980). These par- 
ticular emissions result from direct excitation of atmos- 
pheric species by collisions with precipitating energetic 
magnetospheric electrons (see JUPITER: ATMOSPHERE). 
Auroral features were subsequently observed at various 
other wavelengths including the infrared (thermal emis- 
sions) and near-infrared (particularly from ionospheric 
H3+ ions). The IR aurora is excited by particle heating, or 
from Joule heating by large-scale current systems closing 
in the ionosphere. The auroral regions have also been 
associated with strong x-ray signatures, and furthermore 
are powerful sources of radio emissions. 

Since these early measurements, data of much high- 
er spatial and temporal resolution have become available 
both at visible wavelengths from the SSI instrument on 
the Galileo spacecraft, in the UV from the HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE (HST), in the infrared from Earth—based tele- 
scopes, as well as x-ray emissions from the CHANDRA 
x-ray observatory. These observations show that there 
are perhaps four main types of auroral emission. First is 
the Io footprint (IFT) emission, a ~1 MR emission which 
maps magnetically to the vicinity of the moon. There is 
also an auroral ‘tail’ stretching downstream of the IFT in 
the near-corotating flow. The Io related emissions are 
thus quite distinct from the other jovian auroral emis- 
sions, and are clearly visible in figure 6. It is understood 
that the corotational electric field which is developed by 
the relative motion between Io and the near-corotating 
magnetic field lines flowing past the satellite induces a 
potential difference of approximately 500 kV between the 
outer and inner faces of the moon. This potential is 
thoght to cause currents to flow from Io toward the 
ionosphere, both northward and southward, along the 
outer portion of the magnetic flux tube linking the satel- 
lite to the ionosphere. Return currents then flow along 
the inner portions of the flux tube towards Io. This circuit 
closed through the jovian ionosphere and also in the 
ionosphere of the moon, and is associated with the 
Io-controlled decametric radio emissions (see JUPITER: 
RADIO EMISSIONS). This ‘unipolar inductor’ model explains 
the spot of aurora associated with the upward directed 
portion of the current system (implying downward flow- 
ing electrons), i.e. the IFT, but does not explain the exis- 
tence of the ‘tail’ of auroral brightness downstream of Io 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


by as much as ~180°. However, recent work by Hill and 
Vasyliunas (2002) associates this downstream wake sig- 
nature with the plasma currents which are required to 
accelerate the newly injected plasma from Io up to 
approximate corotation with Jupiter. Recent images indi- 
cate that footprint and wake auroras are also associated 
with Europa and Ganymede, and it seems likely that 
these features are due to the same downtail mass—loss 
process. 

The second auroral component is the main auroral 
oval (MAO), which has been the subject of a plethora of 
reports recently. The MAO is the most significant emis- 
sion in terms of energy output, and takes the form of 
circumpolar bands around both the northern and south- 
ern magnetic poles, consistently observed in all the 
wavebands mentioned above. Although this emission is 
of variable width (on average ~500-1000 km) and inten- 
sity (up to a few MR), it appears to be essentially con- 
tinuous in local time, at dipole co—latitudes of ~16°, 
closer to the pole than the Io flux tube. It has been 
known for some time that this auroral region maps 
magnetically to the middle magnetosphere. Recently it 
has been suggested to be associated with the current 
system which maintains corotation of the equatorial 
plasma in the middle magnetosphere. Specifically the 
MAO is thought to be associated with the 
upward-directed field-aligned current at the inner 
edge of the magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling cur- 
rent circuit shown in figure 4(a). The former of the mod- 
els cited above proposes an empirical model of the 
aurora, using estimates of the angular velocity of the 
plasma in the equatorial plane and a suitable magnetic 
field model. An interesting consequence of this model is 
that one would then expect the auroral brightness to 
anti-correlate with the dynamic pressure of the 
upstream solar wind. As the magnetosphere contracts, 
the angular velocity increases due to conservation of 
angular momentum, the currents go down and the 
aurora dims; conversely as the magnetosphere expands, 
the angular velocity decreases, the currents go up and 
the aurora brightens. It is thought that the hectometric 
radio emissions would also follow this modulation, 
although recent observations show that at least part of 
this radio emission exhibits impulsive increases which 
correlate positively with shocks in the solar wind. 

The third component of the aurora is the high lati- 
tude diffuse emissions, which occur regularly and have a 
brightness of a few x 100 kR. These polar cap auroras are 
generally extended across the dusk side of the polar cap 
poleward of the MAO. At this time, a production mecha- 
nism for these emissions has not been suggested. More 
recent papers have also discussed a fourth feature which 
is seemingly a regular occurrence in the auroral regions. 
This feature appears consistently near magnetic local 
noon, and is reminiscent of the Earth’s polar cusp. This is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Jupiter: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


referred to as a ‘cusp-like’ feature, which was reported 
by to be rapidly evolving, very bright (up to ~40 MR) and 
localised near noon. This feature lies poleward of the 
MAO and therefore it is conjectured that it may be con- 
trolled by pressure and/or magnetic field changes in the 
upstream solar wind. However, the intensity of this fea- 
ture requires some form of acceleration mechanism, and 
could not be obtained simply by solar—wind particles 
flowing along open field lines (in the conventional 
‘cusp-like’ sense). 

The recent fly—by of Jupiter by the Cassini spacecraft 
en-route to Saturn (December, 2001), along with an 
intense HST campaign to complement Earth-based tele- 
scope observations, may help to unravel the response of 
the auroral regions to the upstream solar wind condi- 
tions monitored by Cassini. 


Bibliography 

Hill T W 2001 The jovian auroral oval J. Geophys. Res. 106 
8101 

Pallier L and R Prangé 2001 More about the structure of 
the high latitude jovian aurorae Planet. Space Sci. 49 
1159 

Southwood D J and M G Kivelson 2001 A new perspec- 
tive concerning the influence of the solar wind on 
the jovian magnetosphere J. Geophys. Res. 106 6123 

Cowley S W H and E J Bunce 2001 Origin of the main 
auroral oval in Jupiter’s coupled magnetosphere— 
ionosphere system Planet. Space Sci. 49 1067 

Waite J H Jr et al 2001 An auroral flare at Jupiter Nature 
410 787 

Gurnett DA et al February 2002 Control of Jupiter’s radio 
emission and aurorae by the solar wind Nature 415 
985 


Results from the Pioneer, Voyager, and Ulysses Jupiter 
fly-bys are summarized, respectively, in the following 
publications: 


Gehrels T 1976 Jupiter (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) p 1254 
Dessler A J (ed) 1983 Physics of the Jovian Magnetosphere 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 544 
1992 Ulysses at Jupiter, Science 257 1503-57 
S WH Cowley and E J Bunce 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


11 


Jupiter: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter: Rings 


The faint Jovian ring system was discovered in images 
taken by the spacecraft Voyager 1 in March 1979 and 
imaged in more detail by its sister craft Voyager 2 four 
months later. The density of these rings appears to be 
about a million times less than that of Saturn’s rings 
(See SATURN: RINGS). This explains why, situated so close 
to the bright planet, they had never been observed from 
the Earth. Pioneer 11, which flew by the planet five 
years before the VOYAGER MISSIONS, had observed sudden 
variations in the number of charged particles orbiting 
around Jupiter at certain distances from the planet. Some 
scientists suggested that the absorption of particles by a 
ring was a possibility. Five years later this hypothesis was 
proved to be correct! 

Within the diverse class of known PLANETARY RINGS, 
Jupiter’s ring structure represents one of the extremes. 
Along with Saturn’s E and G rings, it is among the 
most tenuous systems yet discovered. Such rings are of 
particular interest because the processes that dominate 
within them are very different to those in more substantial 
ring systems. Mutual collisions between particles are 
rare, and the particles making up these tenuous rings are 
expected to be dominated by electromagnetic effects and 
radiation drag forces. Small particles should also be short- 
lived in the high-radiation environment of Jupiter. 

In this article, the properties of the Jovian ring 
system are reviewed; emphasis is placed on the findings 
of the GALILEO MISSION, since this work refines several 
interpretations of Jupiter’s rings. 


Morphology 

The Jovian rings are the archetype of ethereal planetary 
rings: bands of very low optical depth containing 
micron-sized particles. This faint and diffuse ring 
system, as imaged by Voyager, consisted of three separate 
components: (1) a relatively bright narrow ring, referred 
as the main ring; (2) a vertically extended halo interior to 
the main ring; (3) a very tenuous ring, called the gossamer 
ring, exterior to the main ring. 

Spectacular images from the Galileo spacecraft 
changed this picture somewhat. Galileo has been orbiting 
Jupiter and its moons since 1996. The spacecraft took 
three dozen images of the rings and small moons during 
orbits of Jupiter in 1996, and as a result of much improved 
observations by this mission, we now know that the rings 
have the following properties. 


(1) The thin main ring is about 7000 km wide, extends 
between 1.71 and 1.81 Jovian radii (1 Rj} = 71399 km). 
The normal optical depth t is about 10-°. This ring has 
patchy (20-30%) brightness, with a maximum at 1.79 Ry 
and a minimum around 127 850 km in the vicinity of Metis 
(figure 1). 

(2) The thick toroidal halo (t = 10-°) extends inwards 
from the main rings at 1.71 Ry down to 1.4R;. Roughly 50% 
of the halo’s brightness originates from a region within 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


700 km of the equatorial plane, while the halo is visible up 
to 10000 km above and below the plane (figure 1). 

(3) The gossamer ring, previously seen only in one 
Voyager image, is in fact two faint rings (with t = 10-7) 
that are bounded by the orbits of the small ring-moons, 
Amalthea and Thebe (figure 2). The first, Amalthea’s 
gossamer ring, is visible between the main ring’s periphery 
and about 2.55R;, i.e. inwards of Thebe’s orbit. Very 
faint material continues past Thebe’s orbit to 3.5R;. The 
gossamer rings have thicknesses that are comparable to 
the maximum elevations of their bounding satellites above 
Jupiter’s equatorial plane. When viewed edge-on, the top 
and bottom edges of the gossamer rings are about two or 
three times brighter than the body of the rings. 


The composition of the ring particles could not 
be deduced from the Voyager images alone, ground- 
based observations are still very difficult, and the Galileo 
images are being analysed. However, to first order, 
we are concerned only to know whether the particles 
are made of ice or of rock (metal particles are unlikely 
on cosmochemical grounds). Because of the very short 
lifetime of micron-sized ice grains, it seems probable that 
the grains are rock rather than ice. Moreover, the small 
satellites closest to the ring are known to be rocky by 
virtue of their low albedo (see JUPITER: SATELLITES). This is also 
suggestive of a rock ring rather than an ice ring. Relative 
spectral reflectivity measurements show the ring material 
to be reddish, indicating that the rings could consist of 
small silicate grains. 


Nature and origin 

Particle lifetimes 

The particles making up the visible Jovian ring are quite 
tiny since the distribution of particle sizes shows a peak 
around 2 wm. Such micron-sized grains reside in the fierce 
magnetospheric environment (see JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE). 
Accordingly, sputtering by energetic ions and electrons can 
be effective in destroying ring particles because the ejection 
process is efficient and because large fluxes of energetic 
particles are found in Jupiter’s magnetosphere. Impacts 
by micrometeroids and other dust can also abruptly cause 
the demise of the rings. Elimination trough sublimation is 
not competitive on the non-icy materials at the distance of 
Jupiter from the Sun, but could be if instead the particles 
were water ice. The different lifetimes of a micron-sized 
grain in a Jovian ring against loss are summarized in 
table 1. 

While ring grains are eroded and destroyed, their 
orbits are expected to evolve secularly under the influence 
of drag forces (plasma drag dominates). Table 1 shows 
that evolution times are similar to lifetimes for erosion and 
destruction. 

Although none of these estimates is well determined 
because some pertinent parameters are not known 
accurately, the basic finding for Jupiter’s rings is 
inescapable: particle lifetimes are short (< 10?* years). 
The rings must be continually regenerated, by collisions 
with parent bodies, which may be the known small ring- 
moons or other unseen ones. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Main ring and halo system. Mosaic of images of Jupiter’s rings taken by the Galileo spacecraft. The planet is to the right of 
this mosaic. The two images have been processed to show (top panel) the out-of-plane halo and (bottom panel) the flat main ring. 


ee \ 


Gossamer \Rings 
Halo 


Main Ring 


Amalthea Adrastea 


——Thebe- 


Figure 2. The entire Jovian ring system and small inner satellite orbits. This schematic drawing depicts the major components of 
Jupiter’s rings and the four small satellites, Metis, Adrastea, Amalthea and Thebe. The relationship of the satellites’ orbits to the rings 


can be seen. (Courtesy of Jonathan Joseph, Cornell University.) 


The role of the known embedded satellites 

Arich family of satellites surrounds Jupiter. In particular, 
there are four small inner satellites close to Jupiter: moving 
radially outward from Jupiter, we see Metis (mean radius 
R = 20 km), Adrastea (R = 10 km), Amalthea (R = 
90 km) and Thebe (R = 50 km). Discovered in 1892 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by Edward Barnard, Amalthea was considered to be 
the closest satellite to Jupiter for 87 years, until three 
other satellites, of which two are now the closest, were 
discovered by the Voyager probes in 1979. 

Before the Galileo probe, it was still unclear what 
role, if any, was played by the satellites in the structure 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ATELEMSE.S 
Ss = 


S 
we AALS 


ORB > 


S INWAR® 


DEBRIS THROWN 
OFF FROM 
IMPACT 
WITH 
SATELLITE 


Figure 3. A graphic representation of the ring-forming process. When a meteoroid strikes one of the satellites, fine dust is thrown up, 
and gradually spirals inward toward the planet. (Courtesy of Jim Houghton.) 


Table 1. Characteristic times for minor non-icy grains in the 
Jovian rings. 


Process Lifetime (years) 
Loss 

Magnetospheric erosion 10°*! 
Meteoroid erosion 10°+1 
Evaporation 107 

Evolution 


Radiation forces 102-10° 


of the Jovian rings. But the unique morphology of the 
gossamer rings, as imaged by Galileo, can be generated 
only if the ring particles are collisional ejecta evolving 
radially inward from the satellites Amalthea and Thebe. 
The source of Jupiter’s ring system and how it works is 
described below and in figure 3. 

The environment of the small satellites closest to 
Jupiter is very hostile. Accordingly, their surfaces are 
exposed to hordes of energetic particles moving within 
the magnetosphere of the planet and to the bombardment 
by gas and dust particles originating in the volcanoes of 
Io, as well as by interplanetary meteoroids, or fragments 
of comets and asteroids, at speeds greatly magnified by 
Jupiter’s huge gravitational field. However, satellites can 
be either sources or sinks for rings, depending how much 
ejecta is created in an impact and what fraction of that 
ejecta has sufficient speed to escape. 

If the moon is too big, dust particles will not have 
enough velocity to escape the moon’s gravitational field. 
With diameters of a few tens of kilometers, the small 
Jovian moons are perfectly suited for the ejection of debris 
created by the meteoritic bombardment. Moreover, typical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


escape speeds from the satellites are many tens of ms™! for 
Amalthea and Thebe, and between 0-10 ms~! for Adrastea 
and Metis. These escape speeds are lower than the orbital 
speeds, so ejected particles enter orbits that are much like 
those of their source satellites, both in their distance from 
Jupiter and in their slight tilt relative to Jupiter’s equatorial 
plane. Due to Jupiter’s oblateness, the tilted orbits wobble 
back and forth in only a few months. After a few years, 
the orbits have smeared into a cylindrical band. Observed 
from near the equatorial plane, the band looks rectangular 
rather than the familiar elliptical arc seen on Saturn’s rings 
and Jupiter’s main ring. As the grains drift inward, the 
rectangle will brighten toward the planet, and will contain 
an embedded bright bow-tie shape because the drifting 
particles retain their initial orbital inclinations. 

Since ring-moons of 10 km radius are the most 
efficient source of collisional ejecta, the most obvious 
sources of the thin main ring are meteoritic impacts onto 
the satellites Adrastea and Metis. Note that each ring’s 
vertical thickness would be affected by the inclination 
of the orbits of the inner satellites, which are struck by 
meteoroids. Thebe’s inclination is the largest, Amalthea 
has a significant inclination, and Adrastea and Metis have 
no inclination. Thus, the thickness of each ring increases 
as you travel away from Jupiter. This also explains why 
the main ring is a thin ring. 


Formation of the halo 

The halo is probably composed of material that is evolving 
inward from the main ring. Over the time of an orbital 
revolution, the size of the typical particles shrinks since 
lifetimes are similar to evolution times, as shown in 
table 1. This explains why the visible halo grains are 
simultaneously closer to the planet and smaller than 
those of the main ring. Since the smaller grains are 
more susceptible to the electromagnetic forces, the halo 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


particles are some main ring particles that have been 
driven vertically by these electromagnetic forces. When 
halo orbits become highly distored, particles are lost in 
Jupiter. 


Conclusion 

In short, the Galileo probe’s findings showed the intimate 
relationship between the Jovian rings and the satellites 
orbiting within them. These rings should be regarded as 
one example of the broad class of faint planetary rings. The 
Gand E rings of Saturn certainly fall into this category, and 
the F ring shares some key characteristics. The dominant 
physical processes for diffuse rings are often different from 
those that apply to the denser rings of Saturn and Uranus 
(see also URANUS: RINGS). In particular, small particles last 
for limited times and so the rings must be continually 
regenerated if these rings are to be long-term members 
of the solar system. For the first time, scientists have 
identified the source and the nature of the Jovian ring 
material: dust blasted off the four small moons. The faint 
rings of the other giant planets (see e.g. NEPTUNE: RINGS) of 
the solar system are probably associated with many small 
moons, and it is expected that future spacecraft will reveal 
similar systems at Saturn and the other giant planets. 


Bibliography 

Greenberg R and Brahic A (eds) 1984 Planetary Rings 
(University of Arizona Press) 

Ockert-bell M E, Burns J A, Danbar I J, Thomas P C and 
Veverka J 1999 The structure of Jupiter’s ring system 
as revealed by the Galileo imaging experiment Icarus 
138 188 


Francois Poulet 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jupiter: Satellites 


As befitting the king of the planets, JUPITER is orbited by 
an entourage of at least 39 natural satellites in addition to 
its faint rings, intense radiation belts and occasional tem- 
porary visitors from Earth and the outer solar system. 
Named after Zeus’ lovers and other mythological com- 
panions, Jupiter’s moons can be divided into four groups 
on the basis of their sizes and orbits (table 1). Nearest the 
planet, four tiny inner moons lie embedded within 
Jupiter’s tenuous rings and are the likely sources of the 
dust-sized particles that make up the ring system. 
Farther out are the Galilean satellites, four large worlds 
comparable in size with the Earth’s Moon which vary 
systematically with distance from Jupiter in composition, 
appearance and geological activity. Two groups of cap- 
tured satellites occupy the outskirts of the Jupiter system. 
The first four of these outer moons orbit in the direction 
of Jupiter’s rotation, with orbits that are inclined at 
angles of 25°-29° to the planet’s equator. The outermost 
four have highly inclined retrograde orbits, opposite to 
Jupiter’s spin direction. In 2002, a team of astronomers 
discovered 11 new satellites by examining images taken 
in December 2001 and using later follow-up observa- 
tions. It is estimated the new-found natural satellites are 
each about two to four kilometers (one to two miles) in 
diameter, and were probably passing rocks captured by 
Jupiter’s gravity long ago. The satellites were formally 
announced by the International Astronomical Union on 
Circular No. 7900 (16 May 2002). 

The Galilean satellites are large enough to be easily 
seen with inexpensive binoculars, devices that are far 
superior to the primitive instruments with which the 


moons were discovered in 1610. GALILEO GALOLEI is cred- 
ited with first finding the four moons that bear his name 
and cited the existence of another gravitational center of 
movement in the universe as evidence to support the 
heretical hypothesis that the Earth and other planets 
revolved around the Sun. The Galilean satellites were 
also probably discovered independently by the German 
astronomer SIMON MARIUS, who named the moons on the 
basis of a suggestion by Johannes Kepler. Decades later, 
OLE ROMER of Denmark realized that the irregularities in 
the times of the eclipses of the Galilean satellites (used by 
mariners to determine longitude) were due to the chang- 
ing distance between Jupiter and the Earth, and used this 
to make the first determination of the speed of light. 
Apart from Amalthea, first seen by E Barnard (the dis- 
coverer of BARNARD’S STAR, the second closest system to 
the Sun), the remaining satellites eluded detection until 
the 20th century. Because of their small sizes and prox- 
imity to Jupiter, the inner satellites Metis, Adrastea and 
Thebe went unseen until the VOYAGER explorations in 
1979. Arriving four months apart on their way to the 
outer solar system, the two Voyager spacecraft also dis- 
covered Jupiter’s rings and gave us our first detailed 
views of Amalthea and the surfaces of the Galilean satel- 
lites, including glimpses of the violent volcanic activity 
on Io. 

Since December 1995, Jupiter has been orbited by an 
artificial satellite sent from Earth to study the planet and 
its rings, moons and magnetosphere. The GALILEO MISSION 
was launched in 1989 from the space shuttle Atlantis and 
took 6 yr to arrive at Jupiter following flybys of Venus, 
the Earth and two main-belt asteroids, Gaspra and Ida, 
the first such small bodies to be imaged by a spacecraft. 


Table 1. 
Orbital Orbital 
distance Orbital Orbital period Radius Mass 
Satellite (1000 km) eccentricity inclination (days) (km) (kg) Discoverer Date 
Metis 128 ~0 ~0 0.295 30x20x17 9.56x1016 Synnott 1979 
Adrastea 129 ~0 ~0 0.298 10x8x7 1.91x1016 Jewitt 1979 
Amalthea 181 0.003 0.40 0.498 125x73x64 7.17x1018 Barnard 1892 
Thebe 222 0.015 0.80 0.674 58x49x42 7.77x1017 Synnott 1979 
lo 422 0.004 0.04. 1.769 1818 8.94x1022 Galileo 1610 
Europa 671 0.009 0.47 3.551 1561 4.80x1022 Galileo 1610 
Ganymede 1070 0.002 0.21 7.155 2634 1.48x1023 Galileo 1610 
Callisto 1883 0.007 0.51 16.689 2408 1.081023 Galileo 1610 
Leda 11094 0.148 26.07 238.72 5 5.68x1015 Kowal 1974 
Himalia 11480 0.158 27.63 250.566 85 9.56x1018 Perrine 1904 
Lysithea 11720 0.107 29.02 259.22 12 7.77x1016 Nicholson 1938 
Elara 11737 0.207 24.77 259.652 40 7.77x1017 Perrine 1905 
Ananke 21200 0.167 147 631 (R) 10 3.82x1016 Nicholson 1951 
Carme 22600 0.207 164 692 (R) 15 9.56x1016 Nicholson 1938 
Pasiphae 23500 0.378 145 735 (R) 18 1.91x10!7 Melotte 1908 
Sinopé 23700 0.275 153 758 (R) 14 7.77x1016 Nicholson 1914 


Values for the outer moons are approximate. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The mission was made up of two components: a Jupiter 
probe, which entered the atmosphere of the giant planet 
and relayed the first direct measurements of its composi- 
tion, structure and dynamics, and an orbiter equipped 
with four remote sensing instruments sensitive to wave- 
lengths from the ultraviolet to the thermal infrared along 
with a battery of instruments for monitoring the charged 
particles, waves and fields of Jupiter’s space environ- 
ment. Galileo has produced a number of new insights 
about Jupiter’s satellites and rings, solving some of the 
mysteries arising from the Voyager data and presenting 
new puzzles. New observations of Jupiter’s satellites 
have also been made during the Cassini spacecraft’s 
flyby by Cassini, Galileo, the Hubble Space Telescope, 
the Chandra X-ray Observatory and Earth-based radio 
and optical telescopes. Cassini observed Jupiter from 1 
October 2000 to 31 March 2001. Observational results 
include data on interactions of the Galilean moons with 
Jupiter’s magnetic field. In the following sections we will 
summarize what has been learned so far from the space 
missions. 


Inner satellites 

With the exception of Amalthea, little was known about 
the small inner satellites of Jupiter prior to Galileo’s 
arrival other than their orbits. The innermost pair, Metis 
and Adrastea, both orbit at the edge of Jupiter’s brightest 
main ring at distances of 1.79 and 1.81 Jupiter radii (Rj) 
respectively from the center of the planet. Both lie within 
the Roche limit and would be disrupted by tidal forces if 
they had no internal strength. Their orbital periods are 
shorter (~7 h) than the period of Jupiter’s rotation (~10 
h); hence their orbits will gradually decay and they will 
ultimately fall into Jupiter. Unlike the other satellites, 
Metis and Adrastea orbit faster than Jupiter’s plasma 
sheet, the dense swarm of trapped charged particles that 
corotates with the Jovian magnetic field. In contrast, 
Amalthea at 2.54R,; and Thebe at 3.11R, have periods of 
about 12 and 16 h, respectively, and so they are overtak- 
en by the faster corotating charged particles. All of the 
inner satellites are thought to be in synchronous rotation, 
having spin periods the same as their orbital periods so 
that they keep the same face pointed towards Jupiter at 
all times. Their densities and bulk compositions are 
unknown. 

Distant imaging by Galileo allowed the shapes and 
sizes of the four inner satellites to be determined for the 
first time (see table 1 and figure 1) and also measured 
their colors and albedos. All are dark, red objects that 
become progressively redder with proximity to Jupiter. 
The coloration is similar to but darker than Io’s, and 
could be due to contamination by sulfur compounds 
drifting inwards from Io. The orbital leading hemi- 
spheres of the inner satellites are 25-35% brighter than 
the trailing hemispheres, and their leading sides are also 
less red than their trailing sides. It was first thought that 
Amalthea’s color dichotomy could be caused by charged 
particle implantation but, when the same hemispheric 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


\ 
Halo 
Main Ring 


Gossamer Rings 


Adrastea 


Amalthea 


Thebe 


és 


Thebe Adrastea 


Figure 1. The inner satellites of Jupiter. (Courtesy of Cornell 
University and NASA.) 


asymmetry was also found on Metis and Adrastea 
(where such implantation effects should be reversed), it 
was decided that the leading-trailing differences were 
due to impactors preferentially swept up on the moons’ 
leading sides as they move in their orbits around Jupiter. 
The irregular shapes of the inner satellites suggest histo- 
ries of bombardment and catastrophic disruption, and no 
geological features other than impact craters can be seen 
on their surfaces. 

Jupiter’s complex ring system is intimately related 
to the inner satellites (figure 1). Unlike the bright rings of 
Saturn, Jupiter’s dark rings are probably made up of 
non-ice materials (see JUPITER: RINGS). The main, most 
prominent, ring extends from Metis and Adrastea 
inwards to 1.72R, and is less than 30 km thick. Adrastea 
is located right at the edge of the main ring, while Metis 
orbits just within it. Reaching inwards from the main 
ring is the ‘halo’, a broad, diffuse cloud of charged dust 
particles levitated out of the equatorial plane by electro- 
magnetic forces. Exterior to the main ring are two faint 
‘gossamer’ rings trailing inwards from Amalthea and 
Thebe. The thickness of Thebe’s gossamer ring is the 
same as the height of Thebe’s orbital excursions above 
and below Jupiter’s equatorial plane. A similar corre- 
spondence exists between Amalthea’s orbit and the 
thickness of its gossamer ring. This confirms that the 
moons are the sources of the ring particles, probably 
debris kicked up by impacts. The ring particles are 
launched with orbital inclinations similar to their parent 
moons’ and likewise oscillate above and below the equa- 
torial plane. Because the particles spend less time on the 
equatorial plane than above or below, the gossamer rings 
have peculiar banded profiles, such that their margins 
appear brighter than the ring centers when viewed edge 
on. Metis and Adrastea appear to be the sources of the 
main ring. Interestingly, tiny Adrastea may contribute a 
greater share of ring particles than its larger companion. 
Adrastea is near the optimum size for shedding debris 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


from craters into space: smaller satellites present too lit- 
tle surface area for impactors to target, while larger satel- 
lites recapture more of their impact ejecta because of 
their greater gravity. The expected dynamical lifetime for 
ring particles is exceedingly short compared with the age 
of the Jupiter system, so the impact events that produced 
the currently observed particle population must have 
occurred relatively recently. 


Galilean satellites 

The Jupiter system is often likened to a miniature solar 
system because of the compositional gradation exhibited 
by its four largest moons (figure 2). Io (see below), the 
nearest to Jupiter of the four at 5.9R,, has a bulk density 
of 3.57 g cm’, corresponding to silicate rock and metal 
composition. EUROPA, at 9.4R;, has a bulk density of 2.97 g 
cm, suggestive of dominantly silicate composition 
despite its icy exterior. GANYMEDE and CALLISTO have den- 
sities indicative of ice-rock mixtures with at least 40% ice 
by mass. At 15R,, Ganymede’s density is 1.94 g cm 
while Callisto, the farthest satellite (26R,), has a density 
of only 1.86 g cm. This compositional gradation is 
thought to be primordial, caused by the condensation of 
refractory materials in the warm, interior portions of the 
proto-Jovian nebula and of more volatile ices in the cool- 
er outer reaches, in much the same way as the formation 
of planets in the solar system as a whole. Some of the 
compositional differences, particularly those seen on the 
surfaces of the satellites, may be due to geological activi- 
ty as well. Ganymede, Europa and especially Io are heat- 
ed by tidal flexing which powers their geological activi- 
ty, along with modest contributions from the decay of 
radioisotopes and electromagnetic induction. The tidal 
flexing is driven by the eccentricities of their orbits, 
which are forced by the 1:2:4 Laplace resonance of their 
orbital periods: each time Ganymede completes one orbit 
of Jupiter, Europa orbits exactly twice, while Io under- 
goes four revolutions. Without this resonance to sustain 
it, the orbit of any of the satellites would soon circularize. 
The orbits of all three moons are gradually migrating 
outwards and will soon (i.e. in a few hundred million 
years) encounter a resonance with Callisto, possibly 


Figure 2. The four Galilean satellites. (Courtesy of DLR and 
NASA.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 27. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


inducing activity on this geological late bloomer. Most of 
the energy dissipation in the satellite system takes place 
on Io, which as a consequence is the most active object in 
the solar system. 


lo 

Unique among solid objects in the solar system, Io’s sur- 
face is devoid of recognizable impact craters. The 
amount of geological resurfacing necessary to obscure 
craters at their estimated present rate of formation is 
enormous—more than 1 cm of burial per year over the 
entire satellite. An even larger rate of resurfacing is 
required to account for the present heat flow observed 
from the moon (more than 2 W m~): assuming that this 
heat is carried by molten silicates at their liquidus tem- 
peratures, new materials must erupt at a rate of about 10 
cm yr, globally averaged. Comparisons between Io’s 
appearance during the Voyager flybys and in Galileo pic- 
tures taken 20 yr later suggest that most of this resurfac- 
ing, over short time scales, is restricted to several dozen 
volcanic centers distributed more or less randomly 
around the globe. If so, the heat flow requires that fresh 
volcanic deposits tens of meters thick were emplaced in 
these active areas over the past two decades. 

Volcanoes on Io have diverse morphologies often 
markedly different from their counterparts on Earth and 
Mars (see VOLCANISM AND GEOPHYSICS). They range from 
vast lava lakes such as Loki, the source of much of Io’s 
thermal emission, to powerful plumes such as Pele that 
reach hundreds of kilometers in height and produce 
deposits large enough to be seen by the Hubble Space 
Telescope. Sulfur compounds such as SO, drive the 
plumes and paint Io’s surface a surprising array of 
muted red, yellow and white hues. The lavas themselves 
are dark and generally lack the cones characteristic of ter- 
restrial volcanoes. Galileo measured the thermal emis- 
sion of the lavas with two different instruments during 
times when the moon was in Jupiter’s shadow and found 
temperatures exceeding 1700 K, far hotter than the melt- 
ing point of sulfur or even common silicate rocks such as 
basalt. Either the lavas are superheated prior to eruption 
or they are made up of materials with very high melting 
points. Magnesium-rich ultramafic magmas of the sort 
that commonly erupted on the early Earth are likely 
candidates. Some evidence consistent with this interpre- 
tation was found in the form of spectral absorption 
features at a wavelength of about 0.9 um, which may 
indicate magnesium-rich silicate minerals such as 
orthopyroxene. The most persistent hot spots on Io seem 
to be located near the equator, consistent with models of 
tidal heating in the upper asthenosphere. Clusters of hot 
spots are found near the equator on both the Jupiter- 
facing (subjove) side and the side opposite Jupiter (anti- 
jove). 

Io is a major polluter of the Jupiter system and the 
source of dust streams and plasma particles that diffuse 
throughout the Jovian environment. Sulfurous deposits 
from Io discolor Europa as well as the inner satellites. An 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


escaping cloud of neutral sodium atoms surrounds Io as 
it orbits Jupiter (along with even larger quantities of sul- 
fur and oxygen, which are harder to see). Many of these 
atoms are subsequently ionized and swept up by the 
rotating Jovian magnetic field as it streams past Io. These 
electrons and ions make up a plasma torus that encircles 
Jupiter and wobbles up and down along with the Jovian 
magnetic field (which is inclined with respect to Jupiter’s 
rotation axis). Energetic ions from the torus reimpact Io 
and eject even more particles, making the plasma torus 
self-sustaining (see 10: PLASMA TORUS). The motion of 
Jupiter’s magnetic field past the conducting satellite also 
induces an electric potential across Io of some 400 000 V. 
Powered by this electrical generator, currents from Io 
modulate Jupiter’s radio emissions and produce bright 
visible and ultraviolet glows in the polar regions of the 
distant planet, known as the flux-tube footprints. The 
footprints are electrically connected to Io along magnetic 
field lines running from Jupiter’s high latitudes to the 
subjove and antijove points on Io’s equator. Galileo 
imaged bright blue optical emissions from plume gases 
at these locations on Io while the satellite was eclipsed by 
Jupiter. These visible aurorae are probably produced by 
the flow of electrons through SO, vented by volcanoes. 
Other eclipse emissions at red and green wavelengths are 
not localized at the plumes and are likely to be due to 
oxygen and sodium in Io’s tenuous atmosphere. In sun- 
light, a jet of neutral sodium can be seen escaping from 
Io in the direction away from Jupiter, apparently acceler- 
ated by the electric field and then neutralized by recom- 
bination. 


Europa 

Smallest of the Galilean moons, Europa was only dis- 
tantly imaged by the Voyager spacecraft and remained 
the least explored of the four until the Galileo mission. 
Nevertheless, the satellite generated a great deal of inter- 
est because of the speculation that its icy exterior may 
harbor a subsurface sea of liquid water. Like Io, Europa 
is heated by friction as its shape is tidally deformed dur- 
ing each orbit of Jupiter—not enough to replicate Io’s 
violent activity but perhaps enough to melt some of the 
ice and generate silicate volcanism on the sea floor. The 
Voyager investigators realized that its smooth, bright 
surface and paucity of recognizable impact craters indi- 
cated that the satellite was geologically young and 
ascribed its global system of lineaments (fractures, ridges 
and bands) to a thin ice shell overlying a ductile interior. 
On closer inspection by Galileo, Europa was revealed to 
have a variety of perplexing surface features that are 
unique in the solar system. 

Two major terrain types dominate Europa’s surface. 
Ridged plains are ubiquitous on the satellite and are 
made up of dense networks of crisscrossing lineaments 
with varying ages and orientations, testifying to a long 
history of tectonic activity. Concentrated near the equa- 
tor but found sporadically at higher latitudes are the so- 
called chaos regions, thermally disrupted areas where 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


the ridged plains have been erased by localized heating 
from below. The precise mechanisms by which these 
terrains formed are still hotly debated, and years of 
analysis and modeling will probably be needed before a 
consensus emerges. The most common landforms of the 
ridged plains are pairs of peculiar double ridges that 
often reach several hundred kilometers in length. They 
are typically 100-200 m high and less than 1 km across 
and are divided by a steep central valley. These ridge 
pairs appear to be part of a progression of tectonic fea- 
tures that begins with simple cracks in the ice surface. Icy 
material is deposited on the flanks of favorably oriented 
fractures by some cyclic process of extrusion and with- 
drawal, leaving ridge pairs with central valleys. As ridge 
pairs mature, their outer margins are darkened by as yet 
unidentified red-brown non-ice contaminants that dis- 
color the surrounding surfaces to distances of several 
kilometers from the brighter medial ridges, forming 
striped ‘triple bands’. Some ridges evolve into large, 
multiple-ridge sets composed of several individual ridge 
pairs, probably by repeated reactivation of crustal weak- 
nesses associated with the ridges. Other lineaments have 
little observable relief and instead appear to be dilation- 
al bands caused by crustal spreading. Older surface 
features that are broken by these dilational bands can fre- 
quently be matched up through cutting and pasting the 
digital images, by removing the dilational bands and 
joining together the pre-existing crust like pieces of a 
puzzle. Intermediate landforms with characteristics of 
both ridges and bands are also observed. Many of the 
ridges and bands (but not fractures) are also strike-slip 
faults, commonly displaying left-lateral displacement in 
the northern hemisphere and right-lateral displacement 
in the southern hemisphere. A particularly puzzling class 
of lineaments are the cycloids or ‘flexi’, features resem- 
bling cracks, ridges and bands but having curved paths 
that abruptly change direction at ~100 km intervals, 
yielding arcuate patterns with semicircular sections 
joined by angular cusps. 

Strong support for the notion of a subsurface ocean 
came from Galileo’s first closeup pictures of chaos 
regions. One such site on Europa’s trailing hemisphere, 
called Conamara, is an irregular depression about 100 
km wide characterized by the thorough destruction of 
much of the original surface structure and replacement 
by an irregular jumble of lowlying ice with a red-brown 
stain similar to that of the triple-band margins. The 
remaining plate-like blocks of surviving crust have shift- 
ed, rotated and tilted from their original positions. 
Studies of other thermally disrupted areas suggest that 
such crustal blocks may gradually disaggregate in place. 
Two theories have been developed to explain these fea- 
tures. The first suggests that the chaos regions are the 
sites of crustal thinning and melting, leaving the crustal 
blocks adrift on near-surface liquid water analogous to 
ice floes in the polar regions of Earth. The second sug- 
gests that portions of the cold, dense surface subsided 
into warmer, low-density ice upwelling from below via 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solid-state convection. Interestingly, many of the remain- 
ing crustal blocks in the Conamara chaos have large 
ridge sets and other heavy structures superimposed. 
Such heavy blocks should be among the first to founder 
if the surface were underlain by low-density ice; hence 
this observation is more consistent with the former 
explanation of the blocks as ‘icebergs’ floating on a high- 
er-density liquid substrate. 

The few impact craters scattered across Europa also 
suggest a thin ice crust. The largest (up to 50 km diame- 
ter) are flat, low structures surrounded by concentric 
fractures, tensional graben that may have formed as the 
ductile subsurface flowed to fill the newly created hole. 
The most recent large impact was Pwyll, a 26 km diame- 
ter crater on Europa’s trailing side that still possesses a 
prominent set of bright rays. Because of the bombard- 
ment of the surface by charged particles from the plasma 
sheet, these crater rays are expected to be removed by 
sputtering erosion over time scales as short as a few mil- 
lion years. The continuous ejecta from Pwyll forms a 
dark-brown, 40 km diameter splotch similar in color to 
the chaos regions and the margins of the triple bands. 
The most fascinating aspect of Pwyll is its near total lack 
of relief: it is no deeper than 200 m below the level of the 
surrounding surface. For comparison, similarly sized 
impacts on Ganymede typically excavated enormous 
cavities 2 km deep. Either the Pwyll impact penetrated 
through the ice crust and the crater was flooded with liq- 
uid at the time it formed or the topography has subse- 
quently slumped under its own weight by glacier-like 
flow. Europa’s surface is extremely cold, however — less 
than 130 K on the equator at noon—and ice is as stiff as 
rock at such frigid temperatures. Even if the flatness of 
Pwyll is due to solid-state flow, the short time scale for 
topographic relaxation seems to require that the ice in the 
shallow subsurface is quite warm, perhaps because it is 
in close contact with liquid water below. 

Theory is still struggling to keep pace with the flood 
of new data, but a picture of Europa as a world dominat- 
ed by the tides and torques of Jupiter is emerging from 
the Galileo observations. Europa’s tidal bulges wax and 
wane with an 85 h period owing to the changing distance 
between the moon and the planet, and also rock back and 
forth as they try to track Jupiter. As a result, the solid ice 
shell is subjected to stresses that change with both time 
and location as the shell stretches to accommodate 
Europa’s changing figure. One consequence of this tidal 
flexing is that any cracks that penetrate through the shell 
to a liquid layer below will be pulled apart and slammed 
shut again each 85 h Europan ‘day’, providing a possible 
mechanism for building the satellite’s unique ridge pairs. 
In some locations, the daily cycle starts as the fractures 
open and then the two sides begin to shear past one 
another in a transverse sense. Later in the day the stress- 
es reverse, closing the cracks and favoring transverse 
motion in the opposite direction. This reverse shear is 
ineffective, however, since the cracks are under compres- 
sion during this part of the cycle. The net effect is to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


ratchet the sides of the cracks past one another, forming 
strike-slip faults with mainly left-lateral displacements in 
the northern hemisphere and an opposite sense of motion 
in the south, just as observed. The most prominent exam- 
ple of this process on Europa may be Astypalaea Linea, an 
enormous strike-slip feature that rivals the San Andreas 
fault on Earth. The strange cycloidal lineaments are also 
thought to be due to the daily tides: a slowly opening 
crack should follow a curvilinear path across the surface 
as it tracks the changing tensional stress throughout the 
day, but the propagation ceases during the period when 
the local stress becomes compressional instead. Crack 
propagation resumes the next day when the stresses are 
again tensional, but by then the orientation of the local 
stress field has changed and the crack sets off in a new 
direction. The cusps of the cycloids, in this model, are the 
places where the crack propagation paused during the 
formation of these odd features. 

Another consequence of Europa’s eccentric orbit is 
that Jupiter exerts a torque on the satellite that makes 
Europa (or at least its outer shell) spin at a rate slightly 
faster than it orbits. As a result, the surface of the moon 
gradually shifts eastwards with respect to Jupiter over 
geological time. Europa’s non-synchronous rotation is 
too slow to be measured directly, but it has left its mark 
on the landscape. Galileo has explored several loca- 
tions where successive generations of lineaments over- 
print their predecessors at oblique angles, indicating 
systematic rotation of the local stress fields. The sense 
of rotation is clockwise in the northern hemisphere and 
anticlockwise in the south, consistent with the predic- 
tions of theory. The ice shell should stretch as it shifts 
over the tidal bulges, and indeed a zone of crustal 
extension is seen to the west of the anti-Jupiter point. 
(The Jupiter-facing side of Europa, where such exten- 
sion is also predicted to occur, has not yet been seen as 
of this writing.) The model also explains why some 
fractures may be dormant for extended periods and 
reactivated later when relocated to more favorable lon- 
gitudes. 

These theoretical arguments, if correct, imply the 
existence of a subsurface liquid layer in order to raise 
tides sufficient to fracture the ice shell and to decouple 
the crust from the rocky interior and allow it to rotate 
freely. Together with the evidence of localized heating 
and the suspected infall of organic materials from such 
sources as comets, the possibility of an ocean on Europa 
could have profound significance to the search for 
extraterrestrial life. Recognizing this, NASA is develop- 
ing a mission specifically designed to determine 
whether or not a subsurface sea exists on Europa. The 
Europa Orbiter spacecraft will directly detect any exten- 
sive ocean by taking the ‘pulse’ of the satellite (measur- 
ing its tidal amplitude using gravimetry and altimetry) 
and sounding the subsurface with radar and will also 
produce a global map of this intriguing moon and 
search for suitable landing sites and signs of present-day 
activity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ganymede 

Ganymede is the largest Galilean satellite and indeed 
the largest moon in the solar system. It is slightly bigger 
than Mercury, and would be considered a planet in its 
own right if not for the fact that it is in orbit about a 
larger world. Its interior is strongly differentiated into 
an iron-rich core, a silicate mantle and an icy crust 
much thicker than Europa’s. Close flybys of Ganymede 
by the Galileo spacecraft revealed an intrinsic magnetic 
field with a strength about 1% of Earth’s, suggesting 
that the satellite’s iron core is still molten. Hence we 
suspect that core formation may have taken place 
relatively recently, perhaps triggered by tidal heating 
within the last billion years or so. Such tidal heating is 
negligible today, but Ganymede may have passed 
through periods of intense heating as its orbit evolved 
prior to being captured into its present stable resonance 
with Europa and lo. During differentiation, the H,O 
and CO, ices buried deep within Ganymede floated up 
towards the surface, displaced by the heavier silicates 
and metal sinking into the interior. Water ice should 
have expanded as it decompressed and converted from 
higher-density phases into its familiar hexagonal form. 
The volume of the satellite would have increased as a 
consequence and the resulting global expansion proba- 
bly split Ganymede’s surface, replacing some of the 
ancient crust with lanes of younger material. This 
tumultuous history seems to be reflected in the geology 
of the satellite’s surface. 

Ganymede’s crust is divided into two major terrain 
types. Older areas such as Galileo Regio are dark and 
heavily cratered and may represent the moon’s primor- 
dial surface. Few tectonic features are found on these 
ancient terrains other than vague furrows probably 
formed by giant impacts. Craters on Ganymede display 
a remarkable diversity ranging from simple bowl 
shapes similar to their lunar counterparts, through flat- 
floored basins with curious central pits and domes, to 
ancient, flat circular structures called palimpsests that 
are scarcely recognizable as impact features and evi- 
dently formed while the moon’s interior was still warm 
and ductile. A few scalloped depressions in the ancient 
terrain may indicate early outpourings of liquids from 
the interior, the watery equivalent of volcanic magmas. 
Ganymede’s younger regions, in contrast, are brighter 
and show signs of intense tectonic deformation. These 
younger areas consist of narrow lanes of ‘grooved ter- 
rain’ tens of km wide and hundreds of km in length. 
Once suspected to be of volcanic origin, the grooved 
terrains were seen in closeup Galileo pictures to consist 
of closely spaced domino-style faults and graben 
indicative of crustal extension. At least two scales of tec- 
tonic deformation can be recognized in these regions: 
fine fractures spaced a few hundred meters apart, indi- 
cating brittle failure of the cold surface, are superim- 
posed on broad undulations with wavelengths of sever- 
al km, probably produced by ductile necking of the 
crust. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Ganymede’s high latitudes are decorated by bright 
frosty polar caps. These frosts are concentrated on the 
slopes that face away from the Sun and are probably 
derived from ice that sublimated away from the warmer 
equatorial areas. The polar regions may also be bright- 
ened by charged particles that spiral inwards along mag- 
netic field lines and stir up the surface on impact. 
Charged particles are probably responsible for 
Ganymede’s faint oxygen aurorae, observed near the 
poles at ultraviolet wavelengths. Ganymede’s tenuous 
atmosphere is made up mostly of hydrogen atoms flow- 
ing rapidly away from the moon, amounting to a total 
loss of millions of kg per year. The hydrogen gas is prob- 
ably derived from the dissociation of water ice on the 
surface of the satellite by charged particles and solar 
ultraviolet photons. The light H escapes, while the heav- 
ier O is left behind to form strong oxidants such as mol- 
ecular oxygen, ozone and hydrogen peroxide. 
Ganymede’s older regions are tinged by a dark non-ice 
contaminant that is distinct in color from Europa’s enig- 
matic red-brown stains but similar in appearance to 
Callisto. 


Callisto 

Only one of the Galilean satellites retains a surface 
unmodified by internal geological activity. Callisto 
appears to have passively recorded a history of bom- 
bardment by impactors. Unlike Io, Europa and 
Ganymede, Callisto is not trapped in an orbital reso- 
nance with its neighbors that forces tidal heating. 
Galileo gravity measurements indicate that Callisto’s 
interior is only slightly differentiated, largely 
unchanged from its initial accretionary mixture of rock 
and ice. Nevertheless, Galileo’s magnetometer recorded 
an induced magnetic signature from the satellite indi- 
cating the presence of an electrically conducting layer 
not far below the surface, such as subterranean brines. 
Callisto’s dark, battered surface is similar to the older 
terrains on Ganymede. Several of the latest large 
impacts took place on Callisto’s orbital leading side. The 
greatest was Valhalla, which produced a palimpsest 600 
km in diameter and a set of rings that nearly encircle an 
entire hemisphere. More recent impacts excavated 
bright, relatively clean ice from beneath the surface. 
Paradoxically, at subkilometer scales there are far fewer 
craters on Callisto than Ganymede. High-resolution pic- 
tures of Callisto show a smooth blanket of dark material 
instead of the pock-marked landscape expected from 
more distant vistas. Sublimation of CO, and H,O ices 
may be responsible for the dearth of small craters on 
Callisto. In many places the landscape appears to have 
been degraded by sublimation, leaving behind a lag of 
dark non-ice material that fills the topographic lows. 
The icy rims of several small craters have eroded into 
isolated knobs, while pits have been produced in other 
places by the removal of ice. Some initially circular 
craters have been deformed into irregular depressions, 
and several landslides of dark lag material extend from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Jupiter: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the less stable slopes of the eroding crater rims. The dark 
mantling material may have an external origin, perhaps 
deposited by impactors or debris that drifted inwards 
from the outer satellites. 
Outer satellites 
Little is known about the eight small moons that orbit 
beyond Callisto. At present even their sizes can be only 
roughly estimated, pending knowledge of their reflectiv- 
ities. Their orbits fall into two groups, both at odds with 
Jupiter’s rotation (figure 3). The innermost family (Leda, 
Himalia, Lysithea and Elara; names ending with the let- 
ter ‘a’) have dynamically young, prograde orbits that are 
steeply inclined with respect to Jupiter’s equatorial plane 
(table 1). The outer family (Ananke, Carme, Pasiphae 
and Sinopé; ending with ‘e’) orbit in the retrograde direc- 
tion, opposite to Jupiter’s rotation, and are so far away 
from Jupiter that their paths are strongly perturbed by 
the gravity of the Sun. All of these satellites are dark, red- 
dish objects that could conceivably contribute to the col- 
oration of Callisto and Ganymede, dusting the icy moons 
with debris derived from impacts. No spectral features 
diagnostic of their composition have yet been recognized 
on these satellites. The outer family satellites are some- 
what redder than the inner group, similar to the colors of 
the TROJAN ASTEROIDS. The distant Trojans are also gravi- 
tationally trapped by Jupiter, in stable points ahead of 
and behind Jupiter as it orbits about the Sun. The ranges 
of rotation periods and shapes (lightcurve amplitudes) of 
the satellites are similar to those of Trojan and main belt 
asteroids, suggesting comparable collisional histories. 
These two satellite families may be the fragments of 
larger parent bodies that shattered when they were grav- 
itationally captured by Jupiter. A vivid example of one 
such disruption was displayed recently by comet 
Shoemaker-Levy 9 when it ventured too near Jupiter and 
was torn to pieces by the tides (see SHOEMAKER-LEVY 
9-JUPITER COLLISION). Much more violent forces are 


Figure 3. The outer satellites of Jupiter. (Courtesy of G Hunt and 
P Moore 1981 Jupiter (London: Mitchell Beazley).) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


expected in the case of a satellite captured by gas drag 
after colliding with Jupiter’s atmosphere or protoplane- 
tary nebula. Such forces are capable of disrupting much 
stronger and larger objects like the parent bodies of the 
outer satellites. Perhaps some of the Pasiphae family 
fragments leaked out of the Jupiter system during the 
upheaval: the Trojans could be rogue satellites that 
escaped from Jupiter and were later recaptured. 
Evidence of past episodes of capture and catastrophic 
disruption can be seen on the surface of Callisto, which 
bears the scars of several impacts by Shoemaker-Levy 9- 
like objects as linear chains of impact craters found on 
the Jupiter-facing hemisphere. 


Web update (30 April 2003) 

Recent results from the Galileo spacecraft reveal Jupiter’s 
inner moon, Amalthea, has a very low density. Amalthea 
is apparently a loosely packed pile of rubble. The empty 
gaps between solid chunks likely take up more of the 
moon’s total volume than the solid pieces, and even the 
chunks are probably material that is not dense enough to 
fit some theories about the origin of Jupiter’s moons. 
Amalthea now seems more likely to be mostly rock with 
maybe a little ice, rather than a denser mix of rock and 
iron. 


Bibliography 

For a summary of Voyager results, see 

Morrison D ed 1982 Satellites of Jupiter (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) 

A pre-Galileo update is in 

Burns J A and Mathews M S ed 1986 Satellites (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


Initial analyses of the Galileo mission results are report- 
ed in 

1998 Icarus 135 (1) 

The relationship between the inner satellites and the 
rings is discussed by 

Ockert-Bell M et al. 1999 Icarus 138 188-213 


Recent observations of the outer satellites are reported by 
Luu J 1991 Astronomical Journal 102 1213-25 
Paul Geissler 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Kaiser, Frederik [Frederick] (1808-72) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kaiser, Frederik [Frederick] (1808-72) 


Dutch astronomer, director of Leiden Observatory, 
observer of double stars, the Milky Way and Mars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804) 


German philosopher, born in K6nigsberg, published his 
view of the universe in General History of Nature and 
Theory of the Heavens (1755) in which he presented his 
nebular hypothesis of the formation of the solar system. 
It was much like the present theory that the Sun and 
planets formed from the condensation of a rotating disc 
of interstellar material. Kant identified the Milky Way 
as a lens-shaped collection of stars in orbit around its 
center like the rings of Saturn, and as one of many ‘island 
universes’ (he coined the term). He suggested that the 
tides raised by the Moon were the reason why the Moon 
always presented the same face towards us, and that tidal 
friction was slowing the rotation of the Earth. Kant’s 
philosophy is described in Critique of Pure Reason. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kanzelhohe Solar Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kanzelhohe Solar Observatory 


The Kanzelhdhe Solar Observatory was founded during 
World War II and belongs to the Institute of Astronomy 
of the University of Graz. The site is located at 1400 m 
altitude near Villach in Austria and is very well suited 
for long-term studies of the Sun. Therefore it was 
selected as the only ground-based support observatory 
in Central Europe for satellite missions (SOHO). With a 
newly installed magneto-optical filter, high time cadences 
of solar magnetograms can be obtained. Sunspot numbers 
and flare patrols are submitted to the scientific community. 
For further information see 
http: / /www.solobskh.ac.at/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kapteyn Astronomical Institute 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kapteyn Astronomical Institute 


The Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of 
Groningen, the Netherlands, specializes in the areas of 
structure of galaxies and the universe and interactions 
between stars and the interstellar medium, using many 
national and international observing facilities all over 
the electromagnetic spectrum. Specific areas of research 
include the distribution and nature of dark matter in 
galaxies, gravitational lenses, molecular astrophysics and 
the large-scale structure of the universe. 

The Kapteyn Institute is located at the university 
campus (Zernike complex) on the outskirts of the city of 
Groningen in the northern part of the Netherlands. It was 
founded at the end of the eighteenth century by Jacobus 
Kapteyn as an ‘astronomical laboratory’, where plates 
taken elsewhere were measured and analysed. Kapteyn 
is the founder of modern research on galactic structure 
through star counts and the father of the famous ‘Plan of 
Selected Areas’. 

The Institute currently has about fifteen permanent 
scientific staff members and eight support personnel and 
on average about five postdoctoral fellows and twenty 
graduate students working on their PhD theses. In 
addition there are about fifty undergraduate students 
in astronomy. Funding comes mostly from the 
university with additional positions for temporary 
appointments (postdoctorates and graduate students) 
from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research 
NWO (the Research Council) and international funds such 
as from the European Commission. 

The Kapteyn Institute is part of the Netherlands 
Graduate School on Astronomy (NOVA) together with the 
three other major astronomy institutes at the universities 
of Amsterdam, Leiden and Utrecht. The Kapteyn 
Institute shares its building with part of the Netherlands 
Foundation for Space Research (SRON), which is funded 
by NWO and specializes in the building of instrumentation 
for astrophysical space facilities. 

Research at the Institute covers a broad range 
of topics, ranging from molecular astrophysics of the 
interstellar medium, late stages of stellar evolution, 
structure and dynamics of galaxies to large-scale structure 
of the universe. A major highlight of the work at the 
Institute concerns the distribution and nature of dark 
matter in galaxies, first through the observations of the 
rotation in spiral galaxies using the 12 cm spectral line 
of neutral hydrogen on the Westerbork Synthesis Radio 
Telescope and currently, at an increasing level, using 
various forms of gravitational lensing. 

Research facilities are all on the basis of national 
and international levels. On the Earth these include 
the WESTERBORK SYNTHESIS RADIO TELESCOPE and the associated 
European Network for Very Long Baseline Interferometry, 
the (UK-NL-Canada) JAMES CLERK MAXWELL TELESCOPE at 
millimeter wavelengths, optical and near-infrared facilties 
at the UK—NL Isaac NEWTON GROUP OF TELESCOPES at La Palma, 
Canary Islands and the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Chile. Through SRON and ESA, access is provided by a 
whole range of space facilities, of which the Hubble Space 
Telesope and the ESO Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) 
mission are currently the most important. 

For further information see 
http://www.astro.rug.nl. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kapteyn, Jacobus Cornelius (1851-1922) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kapteyn, Jacobus Cornelius 
(1851-1922) 


Dutch astronomer, who, at the University of Groningen, 
and with the aid of convicts from a prison nearby, 
measured photographic plates taken by Davin GILL at the 
Cape of Good Hope. He compiled a catalog of half a 
million southern stars, from which he derived values for 
the density of stars in space as a function of distance, 
brightness and spectral class, extending Herschel’s work 
(See HERSCHEL FAMILY). In the Kapteyn model of the Galaxy, he 
confirmed that the Galaxy was lens-shaped. However, his 
conclusion that the Sun was located near the center was 
an error caused by interstellar absorption which limited 
the distance that he could sample, in the same way that 
someone in a fog could believe there was nothing outside 
the circle that he could survey. Kapteyn went on to identify 
Selected Areas, in which he proposed that astronomers 
worldwide sample the faint stars and thus map the Galaxy. 
This project was undermined by the First World War, and 
was perhaps too big to be completed even in peacetime, 
but stimulated many individual discoveries. He measured 
the velocities of stars and discovered ‘star streaming’, 
which proved to be a manifestation of the rotation of 
the Galaxy. He discovered Kapteyn’s star, which has the 
second largest proper motion after BARNARD’s star. He 
successfully explained the expanding halo around Nova 
Persei, discovered by CHARLES DILLON PERRINE as a light echo, 
reflecting the nova flash from surrounding dust clouds. 
The Kapteyn telescope on La Palma is named after him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kapteyn’s Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kapteyn’s Star 


A faint red dwarf star (apparent magnitude 8.86, spectral 
type MOV), situated in the southern constellation of Pictor, 
about 12” north-west of Canopus. Discovered by the 
Dutch astronomer Jacobus Kapteyn (1851-1922) in 1897, 
it is notable for having the second largest proper motion 
known: its motion of 8.67” per annum is exceeded only by 
that of Barnard’s Star. It is also one of the closest stars to 
the Sun: 12.8 light-years distant, it has a parallax of 0.255” 
and its absolute magnitude is 10.9. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Karin Cluster ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Karin Cluster 


Group of some 40 known asteroids (including 832 Karin) 
which formed from the collisional breakup of a 25 km 
body some 6 million years ago. 


Bibliography 
Nesvorny D, Bottke W F, Dones L and Levison H F 2002 
Nature 417 720 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 1 


Keeler, James Edward (1857-1900) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Keeler, James Edward (1857-1900) 


Astronomer, born in La Salle, IL. In 1881 went with a 
pack train of mules, loaded with mirrors, telescopes and 
bolometers, to the 14495 foot summit of Mount Whitney, 
California (the highest elevation in the contiguous United 
States), to measure, undisturbed by the atmosphere, the 
infrared spectrum of the Sun and its flux, the ‘solar 
constant’. Became director of the Allegheny and Lick 
observatories, established that Saturn’s rings were not 
solid by showing that they rotated with motions which 
conformed to KEPLER’s law (as JAMES CLERK MAXWELL had 
predicted), implying that they consisted of meteoric 
particles in individual orbits. Founded the Astrophysical 
Journal in 1895 with GEORGE E HALE, in the first volume 
of which Keeler’s paper on Saturn’s rings appeared the 
month after he had taken the spectra! 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kepler 


Johannes Kepler (1571-1630) was arguably the most 
innovative astronomical theorist in the millennium and 
a half from Claudius proLemy’s Almagest (c. AD 150) to Isaac 
NEWTON’S Principia (1687). Before Kepler, planetary and 
lunar theory had consisted in combining circular motions, 
either strictly uniform or angularly uniform about an off- 
center ‘equant’ point, so as to ‘save the appearances’. 
The planets were taken to be perfect beings for whom 
the only thinkable motion was circular. Kepler changed 
all this by envisaging planets and satellites as bodies 
moving in orbits under the action of forces issuing from 
the central body. In the detailed working out of this 
dynamical conception, he arrived, with the crucial help of 
TYCHO BRAHE’s astronomical observations, and inspiration 
from WILLIAM GILBERT’S magnetic philosophy, at the rules 
for which he is famous: elliptical paths, each radius vector 
from Sun to planet sweeping out equal areas in equal times, 
with the periodic times of the several planets proportional 
to the 3/2 power of their mean solar distances. 

Since the eighteenth century these rules have been 
called ‘laws’. Were they empirical laws, verified with 
a specifiable precision? The truth is more complicated 
and more interesting. Kepler’s revolution can rightly 
be understood only in its historical context, with careful 
attention to his processes. 


Copernicanism 
From 1589 to 1594 Kepler attended the University of 
Tubingen, aiming to become a Lutheran pastor. An 
eager student, he ranged widely through the approved 
learning of his time. In theology he found the Lutheran 
doctrines of the bondage of the will and the Real Presence 
in the Eucharist indigestible, but kept his doubts to 
himself. He was attracted to Neoplatonic symbolism 
and to the writings of NICHOLAS OF cusA. Through the 
teaching of MICHAEL MASTLIN, professor of mathematics 
and astronomy, he became enamored of Copernicus’s 
heliocentric astronomy, though without access as yet 
to Copernicus’s The Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres 
(1543). The Tubingen theological faculty had prohibited 
the teaching of heliocentric astronomy as contrary to 
Holy Writ, but Mastlin privately helped a few exceptional 
students like Kepler to understand the kinematic economy 
of the heliocentric arrangement. 

Copernicus’s Revolutions had been published with 
a preface asserting the hypotheses of the work to be 
merely devices for accommodating the phenomena. This 
‘positivist’ preface, not in fact by NICOLAUS COPERNICUS but 
by ANDREAS OSIANDER Who had guided the book through the 
press, expressed a widely accepted view of astronomical 
hypotheses. The COPERNICAN SYSTEM contradicted both 
the literal sense of Scripture and the accepted theory of 
projectile motion. The kinematic economy of this system 
could be achieved otherwise, by the ‘geoheliocentric’ 
arrangement, in which the Earth remained at rest with 
the Moon and Sun circling about it, and the remaining 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


five planets circled about the Sun. Tycho Brahe was the 
leading proponent of this alternative system. 

Meanwhile, Copernicus got high marks for some- 
thing separate from his heliocentrism: the replacement of 
Ptolemy’s equant point by an epicyclic mechanism. The 
equant, according to Copernicus, by making motion on 
the circle non-uniform, violated a first principle of the as- 
tronomer’s art. His insistence on strictly uniform circular 
motions in astronomical theory was accepted by many late 
sixteenth-century astronomers, including Tycho. 

Kepler in his student days had not yet faced the 
difficulties of a detailed fitting of astronomical theory to 
observational data. What attracted him so powerfully to 
heliocentrism was the theological symbolism he saw in it. 
Nicholas of Cusa had portrayed the circle as an image of 
the Trinity: God the Father at the center, the Son at the 
periphery, the Holy Spirit in the relationship of center to 
periphery. For Kepler this Trinitarian image expanded to 
include the whole spherical world, with the Sun at the 
center and the stars at the periphery reflecting back the 
solar light. God in creating the world had created an image 
of Himself, and had placed the contemplative creature 
Man (also created in His image) on a moving planet, that 
he might, by calculating for his own displacement, discern 
the beautiful layout of the world. As Kepler later put it, 
travel is broadening. 


The cosmographic mystery 

Early in 1594 the position of mathematics teacher at 
a Protestant boys’ school in Graz, Austria, fell vacant, 
and the senate of the University of Tiibingen, asked to 
recommend a successor, chose the mathematically talented 
Kepler. This summons perturbed Kepler; he accepted it 
only with the proviso that he might later return to complete 
his theological studies. 

While teaching at Graz, Kepler made an astronomical 
discovery that brought renown and confirmed him in an 
astronomical career. He had been persistently seeking, 
he tells us, the causes of three things: the number of the 
planets, their distances from the Sun, and the periods 
of their motions. Euclid in his Elements demonstrates 
that there are just five regular convex polyhedra: cube, 
tetrahedron, dodecahedron, icosahedron and octahedron. 
Let spheres be circumscribed about and inscribed within 
each of these, and let these spheres be nested so that the 
in-sphere of one polyhedron is the circum-sphere of the 
next; then there will be six spheres in all, just as many as 
there are planets in the Copernican system. Moreover, 
if the polyhedra are taken in the order just given (and 
Kepler provided an a priori explanation for this order), 
then the radii of the spheres prove to be in astonishingly 
close agreement with the radii of the planetary orbits. 
Uncertainty remained as to the exact values of the orbital 
eccentricities, and therefore as to the thickness to be 
assigned to each sphere. Nevertheless, Kepler’s discovery 
of ana priori derivation of the number and distances of the 
planets impressed his teacher Mastlin, who helped him 
in preparing an account of it: the Cosmographic Mystery, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


published in March 1597. Kepler sent a copy to Tycho 
Brahe. 

The polyhedral hypothesis was a formal or aesthetic 
cause, plausible to Kepler because he believed that God in 
creating the world had made it beautiful for the delectation 
of the contemplative creature, Man. In the Cosmographic 
Mystery Kepler also considered the efficient cause of the 
planetary motions. He hypothesized it to be a moving 
soul (anima motrix) situated in the Sun, the efficacy of its 
causal action diminishing with distance. In confirmation 
whereof he showed that average linear speed was less 
for planets farther from the Sun, and the linear speed of 
each individual planet diminished as its solar distance 
increased. Kepler did not have our principle of inertia; 
he was assuming that speed was proportional to force, 
and that an immaterial virtue, issuing from the Sun and 
rotating with it, pushed the planets about. 

Meanwhile the Counter Reformation came to Inner 
Austria. In September 1598 the Protestant school in 
Graz was closed down and most Protestants were exiled. 
Kepler remained as district mathematician until August, 
1600, when he too was exiled for refusing to convert 
to Catholicism. Earlier in 1600 he had visited Tycho in 
Bohemia and agreed to assist him in preparing his works 
for publication. In October 1600 he arrived in Prague 
with his family, his future now totally dependent upon 
Tycho’s goodwill and sponsorship. In September 1601 
he was granted a stipend by the Emperor Rudolph II 
to collaborate with Tycho in assembling new planetary 
tables. On 24 October Tycho died, and two days later 
Kepler was appointed imperial mathematician in Tycho’s 
place. The 10 succeeding years in Prague would be among 
the most fruitful of his life. 


The Optical Part of Astronomy and The New 
Astronomy 

Kepler’s The Optical Part of Astronomy (1604) contained 
major new results for both optics and astronomy: the 
geometrical explanation of the formation of images 
through small apertures, as in the camera obscura (used 
in the observation of solar eclipses); the most accurate 
table of astronomical refractions yet to appear, based on 
a law of refraction closely approximating the sine law; the 
first enunciation of the inverse-square law for the intensity 
of illumination from a point source; the discovery of the 
formation of inverted images on the retina of the eye. In 
planetary theory the revolutionary work was Kepler’s New 
Astronomy (1609), a study of the motions of Mars. 

This book has the form of a narrative tracing Kepler’s 
journey in arriving at the elliptical orbit and area rule, but 
it is not strict history; Kepler used the narrative form in an 
effort to disarm hostile critics and persuade astronomers 
discomfited by the new ideas. Throughout he was guided 
by the conception of the Sun’s dynamical role as articulated 
in the Cosmographic Mystery. From this conception came 
his hypothesis that the orbit of Mars lay in a plane passing 
through the Sun’s center, with a constant inclination to 
the ecliptic; the complicated theories of the latitudes in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


earlier astronomy were thereby replaced by a simple, 
accurate predictive scheme. All earlier astronomers had 
reckoned the orbital eccentricities of the planets from 
the midpoint of the Earth’s orbit (the ‘mean Sun’), or in 
geocentric terms from the Earth’s center; Kepler wanted 
the eccentricities to be reckoned from the true Sun, and 
showed that observational data were not opposed. His 
further study of Mars’s motion in longitude yielded yet 
more innovative results. 

To know Mars’s motion about the Sun it was necessary 
to start from observations of Mars in opposition to the 
Sun, when the planet’s longitude as seen from the Earth 
is also its heliocentric longitude. Kepler had twelve such 
observations to work with, ten made by Tycho, two by 
himself. He assumed a circular path for the planet and 
an equant point, then by trial and error so determined the 
solar distances of the equant point and circle’s center as to 
obtain the best fit to four of the observed longitudes. With 
the circle’s radius as unit, the solar distance of the circle’s 
center proved to be 0.11332, and that of the equant 0.18564. 
Then he compared the theory’s predictions with all twelve 
observations. The largest deviation was 2'12”; the average 
deviation, 51”. The theory’s predictions were thus as 
accurate as the observations, but as Kepler next showed, 
it was false. He called it his “Vicarious Theory’: not the 
true theory, but accurately predicting Mars’ heliocentric 
longitudes. 

The theory was disproved by two sorts of observation 
of Mars near perihelion and near aphelion: Mars’ latitudes 
when in opposition, and its longitudes when Mars, Earth 
and Sun were no longer aligned. From the triangles 
involved he calculated Mars’s solar distances at aphelion 
and perihelion in terms of the Earth-Sun distance as unit. 
The midpoint of the line from perihelion to aphelion 
proved to be just halfway between the Sun and equant 
point, not 0.61 of the way as in the Vicarious Theory. If he 
altered the Vicarious Theory to agree with this ‘bisection 
of the eccentricity’, the altered theory erred by about 8’ in 
the ‘octants’ (at 45° from aphelion or perihelion). 

No equant theory, he concluded, and hence no 
Copernican epicyclic replacement for an equant theory, 
could yield true predictions where the orbital eccentricity 
was large. Therefore, Kepler argued, it was justifiable to 
resort to physics. Bisection of the eccentricity implies an 
inverse proportionality of speed to solar distance in the 
apsidal line. Was it not then the Sun’s virtue that moved 
the planets in their paths, with a strength that fell off with 
distance? 

Kepler actually spoke not of speeds but of ‘delays’ 
(morae). Assuming these to be proportional to solar 
distance, he undertook to allot times to each degree in 
the semicircle from aphelion to perihelion so that the 
times would add up to a half period. The area rule 
first emerged as a short cut: all the solar distances are 
contained in the areas swept out, so let the times be 
as these areas. Years later (in his Epitome of Copernican 
Astronomy, 1621) he would show that this rule meant an 
inverse proportionality of distance with the component of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the planet’s speed at right angles to the radius vector. In 
the New Astronomy his justification of the rule remained 
confused. 

Applying the area rule to the circular orbit, Kepler 
found it put the planet 8’ ahead at 45° from aphelion, and 8’ 
behind at 135° from aphelion: if area meant time, there was 
too much area in the middle longitudes. By triangulation 
Kepler verified that, indeed, the orbit came within the 
circle in the middle longitudes; it was oval. Concocting 
an epicyclic theory that yielded an oval orbit, he found the 
opposite kind of error: —8’ at 45°, +8’ at 135°. An elliptical 
orbit halving the difference would be just right. But why 
should the planet move in such an orbit? 

An explanation had to be found for the planet’s 
changing its solar distance. Kepler’s ultimate hypothesis 
was a quasi-magnetic mechanism in which the Sun’s 
surface was one pole of a magnet, and the two poles of the 
planet caused it to be alternately attracted and repelled, 
so as to librate sinusoidally along the radius vector. At 
first he imagined the orbit resulting from the libration 
would be ‘puffy-cheeked’, differing from the ellipse of 
the previous paragraph. In chapter 58 he claimed to 
refute the puffy-cheeked orbit from observation, and then 
reported that the libration and the ellipse could be made 
to agree, concluding that the orbit could only be a perfect 
ellipse. The latter statement has often been repeated by 
commentators. But Kepler’s empirical refutation of the 
puffy-cheeked orbit is obscure and cannot be right. His 
claim to have excluded all alternatives to the ellipse cannot 
stand. 

What was important for astronomy’s future, however, 
was that Kepler’s combination of ellipse and area rule 
led to the Rudolphine Tables (1627), planetary and lunar 
tables more accurate than any produced before. Kepler’s 
ephemerides (daily positions), published for the years from 
1617 to 1637, helped win converts to his tables. Not 
that Kepler’s hypothetical mechanisms, or his area rule, 
gained a following: astronomers publishing tables in 
mid-century—chiefly Ismael Boulliau, Vincent Wing and 
Thomas Street—used substitutes for the area rule that 
were computationally more convenient, while recognizing 
that they must nearly duplicate Kepler’s numbers. The 
elliptical orbit came to be widely accepted. 


Kepler’s harmonic law 

Kepler discovered his ‘third’ or ‘harmonic law’ in May 
1618, and announced it, without supplying empirical 
evidence, in his Harmonic of the World (1619). This 
latter work is Kepler’s final account of the geometrical 
harmonies adorning God’s creation. In Book IV of 
the Epitome of Copernican Astronomy (1621) he derived 
the harmonic law from efficient causes, assuming his 
pre-inertial dynamics plus monotonic variations of the 
volumes and densities of the planets with solar distance. 
By the 1630s, empirical evidence from improved telescopes 
had shown the monotonic variation of volume with 
distance to be untenable. In Kepler’s Rudolphine Tables 
the planetary distances were not in strict accordance with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the harmonic law; the first to make them so was JEREMIAH 
HORROCKS (1618?-41), and Thomas Streete followed this 
Horrocksian practice in his Astronomia Carolina (1661), 
from which Isaac Newton learned of it. 

Kepler’s other harmonic speculations were of no 
influence in later astronomy, yet have a certain kinship 
with supersymmetry and the anthropic principle in recent 
physics and cosmology. 

The sorrows and difficulties of Kepler’s last 18 
years—deaths of a wife and children, money problems, 
excommunication from the Lutheran Church, trial of his 
mother for witchcraft, etc-—can only increase our wonder 
in his remarkable journey of discovery. 


Bibliography 

Caspar M 1959 Kepler transl. C D Hellman (London: 
Abelard-Schuman) 

— 1990 Kepler revised edn transl. C D Hellman and 
O Gingerich (New York: Dover) 

Stephenson B 1987 Kepler’s Physical Astronomy (Berlin: 
Springer) 


Curtis Wilson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Laws 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kepler’s Laws 


Johannes KEPLER published his three laws in 1609 and 
1618 (table 1). Based on the very precise observations of 
Mars’ orbit made by Tycho Brahe, and developed in the 
Copernican system, they describe the shape of the orbit 
of the planets around the Sun as an ellipse (first law), 
explain how the planets move around the Sun (second 
law) and give a relationship between the extent of the 
orbit and its period (third law). 

Historically, these laws represented a strong and 
original improvement compared with the complicated 
system of epicycles derived by PTOLEMY. They permitted 
the calculation of much more precise astronomical tables. 
Furthermore, they introduced a revolutionary concept: a 
physical phenomenon can be simply expressed by a 
mathematical equation. Johannes Kepler stated his laws, 
which did not explain the physical cause of the 
trajectories and movements of the planets, before 
GALILEO GALILEI’s and Isaac NEWTON’s work. Actually, 
Kepler’s laws can be inferred from Newton’s laws. They 
apply in fact to any system including two objects in close 
gravitational interaction so that other gravitational fields 
can be neglected. That is the case for the solar system, 
dominated by a central massive object surrounded by 
smaller ones. When transposed to binary stars, to 
extrasolar systems or to any pairs of objects obeying the 
two-body interaction, the third law allows us to 
determine the total mass of the system. This point has 
therefore crucial consequences: the third law is a 
universal scale that makes it possible to remotely 
measure the mass of objects in the universe. 

The physical content of Kepler’s laws is explained 
first. For sake of simplicity, the solar system, to which 
Kepler applied his laws, is chosen as the standard case. 
Other systems are also considered, when the third law is 
examined. Kepler’s life and ideas are then jointly 
presented, in order to demonstrate the major steps of his 
work. The revolutionary ideas he introduced are 
compared with the previously existing astronomical 
systems. Finally, the physical content of the laws is 
examined according to the concept of integral quantities, 
and their limitation is presented. 


Table 1. Definition. 

e —_- First law: the path of each planet around the Sun is an 
ellipse, with the Sun at one of the foci 

e Second law: each planet moves in such a way along its 
orbit that a line drawn from the Sun to the planet sweeps 
equal area in equal amount of time 

e ~—- Third law: the ratio of the cube of the semimajor axis of 
orbit to the square of the orbital period is the same for all 
planets 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Kepler’s three laws 


Kepler’s first law 
e The path of each planet around the Sun is an ellipse, 
with the Sun at one of the foci. 


Kepler’s first law, purely geometric, describes the 
shape of the orbit as a very simple figure: the ellipse 
(table 2). An ellipse being a plane figure, this already 
constitutes a remarkable result. Thanks to TYCHO 
BRAHE’s observations, Kepler proved that planets moving 
in three-dimensional space follow a path included in a 
fixed plane. Astronomers before him only supposed this 
fact. Furthermore, Kepler was able to exhibit the exact 
shape of the trajectory as well as the role of the Sun. The 
Sun occupies one of the foci of the ellipse, the other 
focus and the center of the ellipse playing absolutely no 
part. According to the predominating position of the Sun, 
this first law confirmed the relevance of the COPERNICAN 
SYSTEM. 

The elliptical shape summarized the complicated and 
ad hoc accumulation of epicycles invented by the 
Greeks: in the trajectory plane, three orbital elements are 
enough to define an ellipse. The semimajor axis a and the 
eccentricity e give the extent and the oblateness of the 
trajectory (figure 1, figure 2, table 3); the direction of the 
major axis of the ellipse is determined by a further 
constant. 

Kepler’s first law, when defining the trajectory of a 
planet, remains, however, incomplete. The trajectory 
gives all the possible positions, but no time indications. 
The time dependence, crucial for the construction of 
astronomical ephemerides predicting the planetary 
positions, is given by the second law. 


Table 2. Conic sections. 


Eccentricity Conic section 
e=0 Circle 
0<e<l Ellipse 

e= Parabola 
e>l Hyperbola 


The orbit of an object in the gravitational field of another object 


is a conic section. The general mathematical form of conic 
trajectories expressed in polar coordinates (7,0) is r = p/(1 + e 
cos 9), with p the parameter of the conic section and e its 
eccentricity (see figure 7). The nature of the conic section 
depends on the value of the eccentricity. 

The trajectories of the eight planets of the solar system are 
nearly circular. The closest point to the Sun is the perihelion 
and the farthest the aphelion. Perihelion and aphelion, aligned 
with the focus, define the line of apses, or major axis. They are 
separated by a distance 2a, a being the semimajor axis, related 
to the parameter p and eccentricity e by a = p/(1 - e’) (figure 2). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Laws 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The trajectory of orbiting objects around the Sun is an 
ellipse, the Sun being located at one of the foci. The semimajor 
axis a is half of the distance between perihelion P and aphelion 
A; the distance between the center O and the focus F defines the 
eccentricity e: OF = ae. When considering objects orbiting the 
Earth, the closest and farthest points are respectively the perigee 
and apogee, and pericenter or apocenter in the general case. 
Small bodies in the solar system have usually greater 
eccentricities than the planets. For comets, the value of e is 
often very close to 1. 


M 


Figure 2. The sum of the distances between a given point of the 
ellipse and the two foci is constant and equal to 2a. 


Kepler’s second law 

e Each planet moves in such a way along its orbit that 
a line drawn from the Sun to the planet sweeps an 
equal area in an equal amount of time. 


The second law does not introduce the time 
dependence in a simple way, since, except in the 
particular case of a circular path, the position along the 
orbit cannot be expressed explicitly. It was therefore 
necessary for Kepler to consider not the position of the 
planet, but the area swept by the position vector around 
the Sun, in order to show that this area increases linearly 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with time (figure 3). The first step was to identify that a 
planet moves faster when closer to the Sun. The precise 
expression of this second law was carefully derived from 
the analysis of a very large amount of data concerning 
the position of Mars. In the first published version of this 
law, the discovery of the equal-area law was first derived 
from two false steps that by chance cancelled each other. 
Much later, Kepler gave an exact demonstration. 

In fact, this second law establishes the possibility of 
astronomical prediction: it makes it possible to follow 
step by step the progression of a planet along its orbit. 
According to his first and second laws, Kepler 
constructed timetables for the planets, which were used 
for more than one century. They were much more precise 
than the astronomical tables based on the PTOLEMAIC 
SYSTEM. For the first time, predictions concerning the 
declinations of the planets were made possible (actually, 
the Ptolemaic system was unable to predict the 
declinations of the planets). More than the novelty of the 
approach, the accuracy of the predictions ensured the 
success of Kepler’s laws. 


Kepler’s third law 

e The ratio of the cube of the semimajor axis of orbit 
to the square of the orbital period is the same for all 
planets. 


This third law introduces another concept compared 
with the two previous ones, which are restricted to one 
single object around the Sun. It gives a relation valid for 
all the objects orbiting the Sun. Kepler discovered the 
relation between the semimajor axis a of the orbit and the 
sidereal period 7. The ratio 7°/a’ is constant for all 
objects in the solar system orbiting the Sun (table 4). The 
introduction of sidereal rotation periods gave another 
argument in favor of a heliocentric view of the solar 
system, since sidereal periods are corrected for the 
Earth’s motion. 


Table 3. Orbital elements. 


The complete description of a planetary orbit results from six 


integration constants. These constants can be, for a numerical 
approach, the initial values of the radius and velocity vectors. In 
terms of integral quantities, one defines the angular momentum 
o and eccentricity vectors e, plus the perihelion time. For a 
geometric view of the problems, one defines six orbital 
elements: 
e —semimajor axis a 
e eccentricity e 
e inclination 7 compared with the ecliptic 
e longitude of the ascending node Q (the lines of nodes is at 
intersection of the ecliptic plane and the planetary orbital 
plane) 
e¢ argument of the perihelion o 
time of the perihelion t 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Laws 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The body orbiting around the Sun moves in such a 
way that equal areas are swept out in equal amounts of time. 
This relation implies that the velocity decreases with increasing 
distance to the Sun. The maximum velocity is reached at 
perihelion, and the minimum one at aphelion. 


Table 4. Semimajor axis and eccentricity. 


Planet a (AU) T (yr) e 

Mercury 0.3871 0.2408 0.2061 
Venus 0.7233 0.6152 0.0068 
Earth 1.0000 1.0000 0.0167 
Mars 1.5237 1.8809 0.0934 
Jupiter 5.2026 11.862 0.0483 
Saturn 9.5547 29.458 0.0560 
Uranus 19.2181 84.010 0.0461 
Neptune 30.1096 164.79 0.0097 


The precision of the measurements of the semimajor axis a and 


the revolution period 7 is in fact limited by the planetary 
interactions perturbing the central solar gravitational field. With 
a in astronomical units and T in years, the ratio T°/a’ is very 
close to 1 for all inner planets whose masses are negligible 
compared with the solar mass. It is about 0.999 for Jupiter, 
since the mass of this planet represents one-thousandth of the 
solar mass, and around 0.995 for the other outer planets, owing 
to perturbations. 


Kepler’s work did not explain the physical reason 
for this law. The inverse square law of gravitation 
discovered by Isaac Newton shows that the ratio T°/a’ is 
determined by the mass of the Sun. The exact formula 
introduces the total mass of the system, including the 
mass of the planet, which is in fact negligible compared 
with the mass of the Sun. 

The mathematical expression of Kepler’s third law 
becomes very simple provided that the semi-major axis is 
expressed in astronomical units and the orbital period in 
years. One astronomical unit (1 AU) represents by 
definition the semimajor axis of the Earth’s orbit 
(1.495 978 7 x 10'' m). Within this unit system, Kepler’s 
third law becomes, for any object belonging to the solar 
system, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


T- 


This relation allows us to determine the semimajor axis 
of the orbit, knowing its period, or vice versa. For 
example, the sidereal period of comet Halley being 76 yr 
on average, its semimajor axis is about 17.9 AU. 
According to Kepler’s second law, and taking into 
account that the cometary perihelion is close to the Sun, 
this comet spends most of its time as far from the Sun as 
Neptune’s orbit (figure 4). 


Extension of Kepler’s third law: mass 


determination 

Kepler’s third law offers the unique possibility to 
measure masses in the universe, when extended to binary 
systems. The constant which appears in this law is 
expressed as a function of the total mass m, + m, of both 
objects of the system and of the gravitational constant G 
(experimentally determined first by Henry Cavendish in 
1798): 


a> G(m +m) 


The orbital period 7 and semimajor axis a can be derived 
by direct or indirect measurements. Therefore, their 
observation in a binary system may provide the 
measurement of the total mass of the system. Further 
indications, if available, are necessary to determine 
independently the individual masses m, and mp. 

As previously, with distances expressed in 
astronomical units, time in years, and mass / in solar 
mass units, the third law becomes (with p = M/Mo and 
Mo the mass of the Sun): 


T? l 

ato 
As an example, the mass of the asteroid 45 Eugenia, 
surrounded by a small satellite discovered in 1998 at 
CFHT with ADAPTIVE OPTICS (figure 5) was derived from 
the orbital distance and period of this satellite, about 
respectively 1190 km (7.9 x 10° AU) and 4.7 days 
(0.0129 yr). This leads to a mass of about 3 x 107'*Mo, or 
6 x 10'* kg, for Eugenia. 


Historical overview 


Education 
According to himself, Johannes Kepler was born on 27 
December 1571 at 2:30 pm, after a pregnancy of 224 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Laws 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Illustration of an elliptical orbit with an eccentricity 
close to 1 (e = 0.967, as for comet Halley). The time interval 
between two consecutive diamonds is constant. 


ASTEROID 


Figure 5. The asteroid 45 Eugenia and its satellite, in a 
composed view of images taken with adaptive optics at the 
CFH Telescope. 


days, 9 h and 53 min, since he was conceived on 16 May 
at 4:37 am. This anecdote shows Kepler’s close 
attachment to numbers. During his childhood in Weil 
(today in Baden-Wirttemberg, Germany) in a disunited 
family, he endured a very weak constitution, suffering 
from recurrent gastric problems, as well as from myopia 
and polyopia. His father became a mercenary and did not 
take care of his family; his mother narrowly missed being 
burnt at the stake. By chance, as he early proved himself 
to be a prodigious child, Kepler benefitted from the 
performance-based educational system founded by the 
Dukes of Wiurttemberg. As Lutherians, they had 
promoted such a system in order to turn out the erudite 
clergy and the efficient administration they needed. 

Johannes Kepler’s education followed the classical 
steps: primary school, high school, seminary and finally 
university at Tiibingen in 1589. There, he learned Greek, 
Hebrew, dialectics, ethics and physics. He met Michael 
Maestlin, who taught mathematics and converted Kepler 
to the Copernican system. As a young student, Kepler 
was already convinced about the mathematical 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


superiority of the Copernican system compared with the 
Ptolemaic system. Maestlin derived from his 
observations of a comet in 1577 that only the Copernican 
system was able to define an adequate frame for the 
cometary orbit. 

Kepler, who intended to pursue a position in 
religious life, was finally allowed in 1591 to devote his 
attention to theology. However, he did not obtain his 
doctorate directly, since he accepted in 1594 a position of 
mathematicus in Graz, Styria, where he started teaching 
the basic of astronomy. He acceded to the status of 
imperial mathematician in 1601, but went on practicing 
astrology his whole life long. 

His first original work, Mysterium Cosmographicum 
(The Sense of the Universe), published in 1596, showed 
that, despite his encounter with the views of Copernicus, 
Kepler was bound by preconceived ideas derived from 
the Ptolemaic system. He considered the solar system as 
being governed by geometric relationships. He was 
convinced that all the objects moving in the sky had to be 
in harmony with divine secrets. Remarking that the 
known planets (from Mercury to Saturn, plus the Moon) 
were six (six being a perfect number since 6=1 + 2 + 3, 
namely the sum of all its divisors), he tried to find some 
trigonometrical relation between the distances of the 
planets to the Sun. Of course he failed. He also tried to 
organize the planetary orbits, ranged according to the 
heliocentric system, into the spheres inscribed in and 
circumscribed around the five regular polyhedra (figure 
6). The agreement with observed data was quite 
acceptable. 


Tycho Brahe’s observations 

In 1597, after a strong credit reduction following the 
death of the king, Tycho Brahe left his observatory in 
Denmark for Prague. Three years later, Kepler left his 
chair in Graz, because of the counter reformation and the 
persecution of Protestants. He accepted an invitation in 
Prague from Tycho Brahe and met him there. Their 
encounter proved to be very fruitful, despite tumultuous 
relationships because Brahe considered Kepler as an 
assistant instead of an equal. Tycho Brahe convinced 
Kepler to leave his numerological speculations. Kepler 
took Tycho’s observations, made with very precise 
instruments but naked eyes, into the highest 
consideration. However, he did not try to follow Tycho’s 
cosmological system with all planets orbiting the Sun but 
the Sun orbiting the Earth. 

When Kepler started his collaboration with Tycho 
Brahe, he benefitted from the observations and theory of 
Tycho and of his disciple Longomontanus. Kepler was 
first supposed to work on the Moon’s motion. However, 
he wished to work on the planetary eccentricities, and 
especially on Mars, since he was convinced, indeed 
rightly, that the orbit of Mars presented the strongest 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Laws 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 6. The five regular polyhedra and the planetary orbits. 
The orbit of the Earth is circumscribed by a perfect 
dodecahedron and a sphere containing the orbit of Mars, 
circumscribed by a tetrahedron and Jupiter’s orbit, 
circumscribed by a cube and Saturn’s orbit. Inscribing an 
icosahedron in the Earth’s orbital sphere gives Venus’s sphere, 
and then Mercury’s sphere is inscribed in an octahedron. 


eccentricity among the known _ planets—Mercury’s 
eccentricity is actually greater, but the observations of 
this planet so close to the Sun cannot reach the same 
precision. Kepler found unacceptable the differences in 
longitudes and the complete disagreement in declinations 
between the best theoretical expectations and the 
observations. The differences reached more than 8 
arcmin, compared with the 2 arcmin precision of Tycho’s 
observations. Therefore, Kepler decided to abandon the 
Ptolemaic system and its derivatives, composed of series 
of epicycles. He then had to search for a new model. 


Kepler’s work 

The fundamental novelty of his approach consists in the 
place devoted to the Sun. Contrary to Ptolemy, who 
considered the Earth as the unique point common to all 
planetary orbital planes, contrary to NICOLAUS 
COPERNICUS and to Tycho Brahe, who assigned this role, 
respectively, to the center of the Earth’s orbit or to the 
center of the Sun’s orbit, he calculated that the 
inclination of Mars’ orbit was unambiguously defined 
when considering that the planetary orbital plane contains 
the Sun. He estimated this inclination to be about 1°50’, 
comparable with the value accepted today: 1°51". 
According to this observational conclusion, Kepler was 
reinforced in the relevance of the heliocentric system: he 
had in fact discovered that the Sun defined the best frame 
for a precise dynamical analysis. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


He was aware, following the observations of Tycho 
Brahe, that the Earth does not move with a uniform 
speed, but slower or faster depending on the distance 
from the Sun. He recognized, and this constitutes the 
basis of his discovery, that the speed of the Earth at 
aphelion and perihelion is inversely proportional to the 
distance to the Sun at these points. He derived from these 
observations two false ideas that by chance cancelled— 
forces are inversely proportional to distances, but 
proportional to the velocity&mdash;and combined them 
in order to derive his second law. The second law was 
established first. Later, Kepler corrected his first form of 
the second law. He explained that not the velocity but its 
orthoradial component (perpendicular to the radius 
vector) is inversely proportional to the distance of the 
Sun. 

In order to establish the shape of Mars’ orbit, he 
made the assumption that the Earth orbit was circular, 
what is not too far from reality, despite his second law. 
The difference between the semimajor and semiminor 
axes of an ellipse is a second-order term of the 
eccentricity (figure 7). Nevertheless, it took him 8 yr to 
establish the laws, which became later Kepler’s first and 
second laws. They were published in 1609 in the 
Astronomia Nova (New Astronomy). The third law, which 
finally needed another 9 yr of work, was published by 
Kepler in 1618, in Harmonices Mundi (Harmony of the 
Universe). In 1627, 3 yr before his death, he published 
the Tabulae Rudolphinae, in honor of his protector, 
which presented the planetary ephemeris based on his 
three laws. 


A revolutionary approach 

Why did the geocentric system, devised by Claudius 
Ptolemy, survive almost 1500 yr, since it required more 
than 70 simultaneous circular motions to derive the 
movements of the inner objects of the solar system? It 
gave an accurate description enough of what could be 
observed with the instruments at that time. It was able to 
predict the future paths of the planets well enough, 
according to the standards of those times. The planetary 
declinations were not predicted, but physical reasons 
could make explain this: the progressions of the planets, 
etymologically wandering objects, differ intrinsically 
from the stellar regularity by their annual parallax and 
complex motions in right ascension. Furthermore, this 
system completely agreed with the philosophical and 
cosmogonical doctrines prevailing at the time. Celestial 
motions had to be expressed in terms of combinations of 
circles, since the circle and uniform circular motion 
represented harmony. The careful analysis which puts the 
Sun at the center of the solar system and considers the 
Earth as one of the planets shows that orbital motion can 
be formulated within an adequate theoretical frame but 
needs to abandon the apparent evidence that the Earth 
holds a central position. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Laws 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 7. Set of ellipses with the same semimajor axis a but 
varying eccentricities e (0, 0.1, 0.2,...,0.9). Ellipses with small 
eccentricity remain nearly circular, but clearly decentered with 
respect to the focus F. 


As described above, one cannot explain the role of 
Johannes Kepler in modern astronomy without reference 
to Nicolaus Copernicus and Tycho Brahe. Kepler was 
convinced of the superiority and perfection of the 
heliocentric theory, since that theory permitted in fact 
more harmony and simplicity than the previous view. He 
trusted in Tycho Brahe’s observations, being of course 
impressed by the precision achieved, 10 times better than 
previously. Kepler actually had an original attitude 
towards observational results. He tried for a while to 
explain the agency of the planetary orbits with pure 
geometric methods. Since such theories failed to 
accurately fit observational data, he was to abandon this 
view and searched in other directions. When attempting 
to account for observed facts with new mathematical 
concepts, he succeeded, and then explored this way. 
Thus, Kepler admitted the ontological difference between 
the ideal figure—the circle—and its physical 
representation—the ellipse. The 9 yr separating the first 
two laws and the third one indicate that his new approach 
was not an easy way. Let us remember that physical 
notions such as instantaneous speed or differential 
calculus had not yet been invented. 

Finally, Kepler’s work can be considered as a 
comerstone of physics and science during the 17th 
century. They were implicitly sustained by the following 
ingredients: 

e observed facts prevail over a priori philosophical or 
theoretical schemes; 

e the physical analysis needs to be conducted in an 
adequate reference frame; 

e mathematical equations allow us to give physical 
laws in a condensed form. 


These points must not induce the misinterpretation 
that Kepler’s work was linearly developed, without error, 
delusion or fallacy. The greatest success of Kepler is due 
to his intense calculations: he was able to explore in 
detail numerous directions and to finally chose the best 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


one. On the other hand, Kepler’s laws remain purely 
kinematic: they describe the motion of planets but do not 
explain the cause of the movement. After Johannes 
Kepler, Galileo Galilei stated the essential concept of 
inertial frame, and Isaac Newton realized the synthesis of 
dynamics laws. 


Beyond Kepler’s laws 


Implicit hypotheses 

Through a modern physical approach, Kepler’s laws are 
derived from the dynamics of a two-body system. The 
physics of such a system is based on the assumption that 
the two bodies are isolated and move under their mutual 
gravitational attraction. Thus, in the solar system, a given 
planet is supposed to only interact with the Sun, the 
perturbation due to the other planets being neglected. 
Kepler’s laws also implicitly assume that the mass of the 
planet is negligible compared with the mass of the Sun. 
To a first approximation, this is true: the mass of the Sun 
represents 1000 masses of Jupiter. In fact, Newton’s laws 
show that this second assumption can be relaxed. As 
soon as the two bodies remain isolated, their 
BARYCENTER furnishes a valid inertial frame. Then, 
instead of orbiting the Sun, the planet (the Sun as well) 
orbits the barycenter of the system. 


Integrals 

It is possible to express the content of Kepler’s laws in 

very different ways. Let us examine the two-body 

interaction in terms of constant physical quantities. 

e The two bodies being isolated, the total momentum 
of the system is constant. Then the frame based on 
the barycenter of the system is inertial. 

e The force between the two bodies being central, and 
always directed towards the barycenter of the 
system, the angular momentum is constant. The 
plane of the trajectory contains the barycenter of the 
system and is perpendicular to the angular 
momentum. 

e The gravitational interaction force deriving from a 
potential energy, the total mechanical energy of the 
system remains constant. The semimajor axis a 
depends only on the mechanical energy and not on 
the angular momentum. 

e Another constant term comes from the fact that the 
force varies as the inverse of the square of the 
distance. The direction of the eccentricity vector 
indicates the direction of the pericenter (figure 8); its 
norm is the eccentricity e. Bound states have a 
negative energy and e < 1: they correspond to 
elliptical trajectories. Diffusion states have e > 1 and 
a positive energy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Laws 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 8. The trajectory plane and the direction of the major 
axis defined by the angular momentum and eccentricity vectors. 


N-body interaction 

What happens when the two-body interaction is not 
sufficient to account for reality? The recent case of the 
capture of comet Shoemaker—Levy 9 by Jupiter and the 
collision of the cometary fragments with Jupiter in July 
1994 shows that the solar system is not only governed by 
the solar gravitational field. In a refined analysis, the 
perturbations due to the more massive bodies—especially 
the giant planets—are no longer negligible for long-term 
evolution, so that the two-body description, including 
only the central solar gravitational field, is invalid for an 
accurate description. The absence of any large object 
between Mars and Jupiter, the inclination of Uranus’s 
rotation axis, the resonance between the motions of 
Neptune and Pluto (the ratio of their orbital periods is 
exactly 2:3) and the planetary rings, indicate that 
interactions between multiple objects (called N-body 
interaction) play a major role in the long-term evolution 
and stability of the solar system. New tools have been 
developed for such problems, such as Lagrangian 
mechanics. However, numerical computations are 
necessary to carry out the solutions of the N-BODY 
PROBLEM. 


Bibliography 

Crombie A C 1952 Augustine to Galileo, the History of Science 
A.D 400-1650 (London: Falcon) 

Dreyer J L E 1953 A History from Thales to Kepler (New York: 
Dover) 

Misner C W, Thorne K S and Wheeler J A 1973 Gravitation 
(New York: Freeman) 

Verdet J-P 1993 Astronomie & Astrophysique: Textes 
Essentiels (Paris: Larousse) 

Wilson C 1972 How did Kepler discover his first two laws? Sci. 
Am. 226 92-106 


Benoit Mosser 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kepler’s Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kepler’s Star 


A supernova remnant in Ophiuchus, approximately 2.2° 
east of € Ophiuchi. The star was first seen in October 
1604 by Johannes Kepler (1571-1630), and described in 
his book De Stella Nova. It reached a maximum apparent 
magnitude of —2.5 and remained visible to the unaided eye 
for about a year. The records indicate that it was a type 
Ia supernova. Today the visible remnants comprise just a 
few faint filaments and knotted fragments of nebulosity, 
but it is a strong source at radio wavelengths, with the 
identification 3C 358. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Keyhole Nebula (NGC 3324) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Keyhole Nebula (NGC 3324) 


A dark nebula in the constellation Carina, position RA 10 h 
44.3™, dec. —59° 53’. It is seen in silhouette against the 
bright Eta Carinae Nebula. 


See: Eta Carinae Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Khayyam [al-Khayyam], Omar [Abu ol-Fath ebn- 
Ebrahim ‘Omar ol-Khayyami of Nishapur] (c. 1044—c. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3: SPO 
Khayyam [al-Khayyam], Omar [Abu 
ol-Fath ebn-Ebrahim ‘Omar 
ol-Khayyami of Nishapur] (c. 1044—c. 
1123) 


Poet, mathematician, astronomer, born in Nishapur, 
Persia (now Iran), to a family of Arabic tent makers (a 
translation of his name), an outstanding mathematician 
and astronomer. The Saljug Sultan, Malikshah Jalal al- 
Din, appointed him to the observatory at Ray around 
1074 to determine the solar calendar, as an aid to tax 
collection. Khayyam developed a calendar called AI- 
Tarikh-al-Jalali, which had an error of one day in 3770 
years (superior to the Georgian calendar with an error 
of 1 day in 3330 years). It was based on Khayyam’s 
amazingly accurate determination of the length of the year 
as 365.242199 days. The length of the year is currently 
365.242190 days, decreasing by about six units in the sixth 
decimal place over a century. Khayyam is best known as a 
result of Edward Fitzgerald’s translation in 1859 of nearly 
600 short four-line poems, the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, 
but versions of the verses in Persian literature pre-date 
Khayyam, and no-one knows which were written by him. 
The best known is the fateful quatrain: 


The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ, 
Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit 

Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line, 

Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kiddinu (340 Bc—?) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kiddinu (340 Bc-?) 


Head of an astronomical school in Babylon. He worked 
out the precession of the equinoxes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Kiepenheuer-Institut fur Sonnenphysik 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kiepenheuer-Institut fur 
Sonnenphysik 


The Kiepenheuer-Institut fiir Sonnenphysik (KIS) con- 
ducts experimental and theoretical investigations of physi- 
cal processes on and within the Sun. Its headquarters are in 
Freiburg, Germany. The number of employees (scientific, 
technical and administrative) is about forty. The institute 
was founded in 1943 by Karl-Otto Kiepenheuer and, since 
1978, it has borne the name of its founder. The KIS is a re- 
search institution of the State of Baden-Wiirttemberg. The 
main observing facility of the KIS is the vacuum tower tele- 
scope within the OBSERVATORIO DELTEIDE in Izafia on Tenerife, 
Spain. 
For further information see 

http://www.kis.uni-freiburg.de. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kinetic Theory of Gases 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kinetic Theory of Gases 


The theory, developed in the nineteenth century, notably 
by Rudolf Clausius (1822-88) and James Clerk Maxwell 
(1831-79), that the properties of a gas (temperature, 
pressure, etc) could be described in terms of the motions 
(and kinetic energy) of the molecules comprising the gases. 
The theory has wide implications in astrophysics. In 
particular, the perfect gas law, which relates the pressure, 
volume, temperature, and number of molecules in a gas, 
and which is fundamental to theoretical models of the 
interior of stars, is consistent with this theory. 


See also: atmospheric pressure, combustion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kirch, Christfried (1694-1740); and Kirch, Christine, 
his children 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kirch family 
Kirch, Gottfried (1639-1710) 


Kirch, Maria Margarethe, née 
Winckelmann (1670-1720) his wife 


Kirch, Christfried (1694-1740); and 
Kirch, Christine, his children 


A family of astronomers and calendar-makers. Gottfried 
Kirch was born in Guben (Germany) and acquired a 4 foot 
quadrant and some telescopes, making observations of 
comets, including the comet of 1680, apparently the first 
comet to be discovered with a telescope. He discovered 
the star chi Cygni to be variable and observed Mira. 
He became director at the Berlin observatory in 1700 
and began to prepare its calendars and ephemeredes. 
Christfried Kirch became director of the observatory 
himself in 1716. He observed star occultations, solar 
and lunar eclipses, Jupiter, Saturn and the comet of 
1723. Maria (born in Panitsch, Germany) became 
interested in astronomy through Christoph Arnold of 
Sommerfeld, the so-called ‘astronomical peasant’, a self- 
taught astronomer. In 1692, she married Gottfried, 
working with him regularly, making observations and 
especially doing calculations. She discovered the comet 
of 1702. After Gottfried’s death (1710), she continued 
to publish on her own, and when Christoph returned to 
Berlin, she worked with him too. Father, mother, son and 
daughter, Christine—the Kirch’s published astronomical 
ephemeredes essentially as a family business. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kircher, Athanasius (1602-80) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kircher, Athanasius (1602-80) 


Polymath, born in Geisa a.d. Ulster, Germany, became 
a Jesuit. After a succession of academic appointments, 
he took up independent studies. He wrote an enormous 
range of books and sold exclusive rights to publish them 
for a large sum of money, so he was perhaps the first 
scientist who was able to live from the sale of his books. 
He corresponded with prominent astronomers such as 
GB RICCIOLI, GD CASSINI and HEVELIUS and acted as a kind 
of bulletin board for their observations. In one book 
Kircher describes a fantastic voyage through space to 
discuss his theories of the solar system. Accompanied by 
the ‘music of the spheres’, the two protagonists travel to 
other worlds, and converse with the intelligent life forms 
they find there. Kircher’s philosophy was a blend of 
science and superstition combining empirical observation 
with magic and religion, foreshadowing popular science 
fantasy today. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kirchhoff, Gustav Robert (1824-87) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kirchhoff, Gustav Robert (1824-87) 


Born in Konigsberg, Prussia (now Kaliningrad, Russia), 
became professor of physics at Heidelberg where he 
collaborated with Bunsen, later professor in Berlin. With 
Kirchhoff’s laws of electricity he extended the work of 
Ohm. He worked on black-body radiation and spectrum 
analysis. With Kirchhoff's laws of radiation he explained 
the dark lines in the Sun’s spectrum as caused by 
absorption of particular wavelengths as light from a hot 
source passes through a cooler gas. He showed that a 
given element produced the same characteristic pattern 
of emission and absorption lines. This began the topic of 
stellar astrophysics, by which the composition, density, 
temperature and other physical conditions of a star’s 
atmosphere can be found. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kirkwood Gaps 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kirkwood Gaps 


Narrow regions in the asteroid belt where few or no 
asteroids are found. The gaps arise from orbital resonances 
with Jupiter: commensurabilities of the period of Jupiter 
with the period of an asteroid orbiting in a Kirkwood gap. 
Because of Jupiter’s dominant gravitational influence, an 
object orbiting in one of these gaps would sooner or later 
be perturbed into a different orbit. For example, there is a 
pronounced gap at 3.28 AU, because an asteroid orbiting at 
this distance would have a period exactly half of Jupiter’s. 
This orbit would be unstable, and the asteroid would 
soon be perturbed into a different one. This particular 
gap corresponds to a 2:1 commensurability and is often 
referred to as the 2:1 resonance; it marks the boundary 
between the Cybele group of asteroids and the outer edge 
of the main asteroid belt. Other gaps are found at other 
simple ratios of orbital periods, for example 3:1 and 5:2. 
However, at distances beyond about 3.5 AU the resonances 
correspond not to gaps but to groupings of asteroids: the 
Hilda group at the 3:2 resonance, for example. 

A similar mechanism is responsible for shaping 
planetary ring systems. For example, the Cassini division 
in Saturn’s rings corresponds to a 2:1 resonance with the 
orbit of the satellite Mimas, and ring particles at the outside 
of the A ring are in a 7:6 resonance with the co-orbital 
satellites Epimetheus and Janus. The connection between 
gaps and resonances was first pointed out in the mid- 
nineteenth century by Daniel Kirkwood. 


See also: asteroid belt. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kirkwood, Daniel (1814—95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kirkwood, Daniel (1814-95) 


Astronomer and mathematician, born in Harford, MD, 
became professor of mathematics at Delaware and at 
Indiana. He explained the structure of the distribution 
of asteroids in the asteroid belt as a result of the influence 
of Jupiter. If an asteroid resonates with Jupiter, i.e. has 
an orbital period that is a simple fraction (1/2, 2/3, ...) 
of the period of Jupiter, the repeated perturbation over 
time by Jupiter on the asteroid, when they have a close 
approach, ejects it into an eccentric, Earth-crossing orbit. 
The resulting lack of asteroids with these periods in the 
asteroid belt became known as Kirkwood gaps. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kitt Peak National Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kitt Peak National Observatory 


Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) is one of the 
cornerstones of the US system of publicly accessible 
astronomical facilities. Its two 4 m class telescopes are 
increasingly specialized towards wide-field applications 
that expand the discovery space for NASA missions and 
ground-based large-aperture telescopes. Time is awarded 
on the basis of scientific merit through a national system 
of peer review. 

The US National Science Foundation established 
KPNO in 1958 under the leadership of the AssocrATION 
OF UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH IN ASTRONOMY. The site is the 
summit of a desert mountain at 2100 m, located 85 km 
kilometers southwest of Tucson, Arizona, on the land of 
the Tohono O’odham Nation. It was selected for clear 
skies, good seeing and a weather pattern allowing access 
to the North Galactic Cap. 

KPNO offers time on three major telescopes: the 
Mayall 4 m; the modern 3.5 m WIYN telescope operated 
by the partnership of the Universities of Wisconsin, 
Indiana, Yale and the National Observatories; and the 
2.1m. Premier scientific instruments include an 8000 pixel- 
square CCD Mosaic imager at the 4m prime focus, a bench 
spectrograph coupled to the 1 degree focal surface by 100 
optical fibers at the WIYN, and a simultaneous four-color 
near-infrared imager at the 2.1 m. 

KPNO also acts as the site host for a number of 
major facilities, including telescopes of the NATIONALSOLAR 
OBSERVATORY, the NATIONAL RADIO ASTRONOMY OBSERVATORY, 
the University of Arizona and eight university-based 
consortia. 

For further information see 
http://www.noas.edu/kpno.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kleinmann—Low Nebula (KL Nebula) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kleinmann—Low Nebula (KL Nebula) 


An extended, dusty region of star formation behind the 
Orion Nebula, position RA 05" 35.2™, dec. —05° 22’, 
discovered in 1967 by Douglas Kleinmann and Frank Low. 
There are several discrete sources of infrared radiation, 
including the Becklin-Neugebauer object, thought to be 
young stars or protostars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Kolmogorov, Andrey Nikolayevich (1903-87) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kolmogorov, Andrey Nikolayevich 
(1903-87) 


Mathematician, born in Tambov, Tambov province, Russia, 
became professor in Moscow, developed probability 
theory, building it up from fundamental axioms, applied 
his work to turbulence (his theory is used in the study 
of stellar interiors) and dynamical systems in relation to 
planetary motion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Konkoly Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Konkoly Observatory 


Konkoly Observatory in Budapest is equipped with a 
1 m Ritchey—Chrétien—Coudé telescope, carrying out 
observational astronomical studies, mainly related to 
the physics of the variable stars, galactic structure, 
solar activity and the terrestrial upper atmosphere. 
These tasks imply operation of the internationally 
recognized observational network developed during the 
last three decades. A very important task—perhaps 
the most important one—is the development of the 
national astronomical information system, including the 
observatory’s library. 

The main areas of work include studies concerning 
the behavior of variable stars: investigation of multiple 
periodicity and period changes of pulsating variables, as 
well as research on stellar activity of various time-scales. 
Studies related to the galactic structure and physics of 
interstellar matter with an emphasis on the star-forming 
processes. Studies of the upper atmosphere of the Earth 
and Mars with space-borne equipment. Studies on solar 
activity, investigation of the problems of the problems of 
sunspots and prominences. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.konkoly.hu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Korff, Serge Alexander (1906-89) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Korff, Serge Alexander (1906-89) 


Astrophysicist, born in Helsinki, Finland, fled the Bolshe- 
viks and researched at Mount Wilson Observatory, Cal- 
Tech and New York University, investigated cosmic radi- 
ation, making observations from observatories, balloons 
and aircraft worldwide. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Korolyov [Koroljow], Sergej [Sergey, Sergei] Pavlovich 
[Pawlowitsch] (1907-66) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Korolyov [Koroljow], Sergej [Sergey, 
Sergei] Pavlovich [Pawlowitsch] 
(1907-66) 


Rocket designer, founder of the Soviet space program, 
born in Zhitomir, Russia. After pioneering experiments on 
rockets in Moscow, Korolyov fell foul of Stalin’s pogroms 
but was recalled from the stalags to make liquid-fuel rocket 
boosters for military aircraft. After the war he took over 
captured German V-2 missiles, and developed the Soviet 
Union’s first intercontinental ballistic missile. He directed 
the design, testing, construction and launching of the 
Vostok, Voskhod and Soyuz manned spacecraft as well as 
of the unmanned spacecraft in the Cosmos, Molniya and 
Zond series. His identity and his key work for Russia’s 
space program, as a Soviet analog to the USA’s VON BRAUN, 
were not known in the West until his death. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kraus, John (1910-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kraus, John (1910-) 


Radioastronomer, born in Ann Arbor, MI, became 
professor of electrical engineering and astronomy at Ohio 
State University, and director of the Ohio State-Ohio 
Wesleyan Radio Observatory. Author of widely used 
textbooks on radio techniques, he is the inventor of 
many types of radio antennas. Surveyed the radio sky 
at centimeter wavelengths, mapped and cataloged some 
20000 radio sources, including many quasars. Instigator 
of an extensive search for extraterrestrial artificial radio 
signals. The search serendipitously discovered natural 
narrow-band signals, interpreted as cold, isolated neutral 
hydrogen clouds, and in 1977 found the ‘WOW"’ signal 
(annotation by Jerry Ehman on the computer print- 
out) that, being celestial, narrow-band and intermittent, 
suggested an intelligent origin. However, the signal never 
recurred from that direction and is now attributed to a 
signal from a secret Earth-launched space probe, rather 
than a star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kroto, Sir Harold (1939-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kroto, Sir Harold (1939-) 


Spectroscopist, born ‘Krotoschiner’ in Wisbech, Cam- 
bridgeshire. Nobel prizewinner for chemistry (1996) with 
chemists Robert F Curl and Richard E Smalley ‘for their 
discovery of fullerenes’. Became professor at the Uni- 
versity of Sussex. Worked on microwave spectroscopy, 
measuring and calculating the spectra of small molecules. 
Although many such molecules do not exist naturally on 
Earth, they exist in space and can be detected by radioas- 
tronomy, both in stellar atmospheres and in interstellar 
gas clouds. Kroto was particularly interested in carbon- 
rich giant stars and had identified spectral lines in their 
atmospheres as long-chained molecules of carbon and ni- 
trogen, termed cyanopolyynes. To study their formation, 
he allied with physical chemists Smalley and Curl and they 
reproduced conditions in stellar atmospheres in labora- 
tory equipment. Studying the chain of events that might 
produce cyanopolyynes, they discovered carbon in clus- 
ters of 60 atoms arranged in a soccer ball-like structure 
called buckminsterfullerene, after the American architect 
R Buckminster Fuller, inventor of the geodesic dome. Like 
graphite and diamond, C-60 fullerene is expected to be a 
constituent of interstellar space, where it will become hy- 
drogenated by attached hydrogen atoms. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kuhn, Thomas S (1922-96) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kuhn, Thomas S (1922-96) 


Science historian, born in Cincinnati, OH. Developed a 
theory of scientific revolution which visualized science 
not as a steady progression of knowledge, but as ‘a series 
of peaceful interludes punctuated by intellectually violent 
revolutions’ in which one world view is suddenly replaced 
by another. For example, EINSTEIN’s theory of relativity 
overthrew Newton’s concepts of physics, and GALILEO’S 
legendary experiments banished the Aristotelian theory 
that bodies fell at a speed proportional to their weight. 
But scientists were not typically objective, free thinkers, 
Kahn claimed. They accepted and usually related their 
work to a paradigm, an archetypal solution to a problem. 
Thus, astronomers resisted, for a long time, research that 
challenged the paradigm of Ptolemy’s theory that the Sun 
revolves around the Earth, setting aside, for example, the 
work of ARISTARCHUS, who suggested as long ago as the 
third century Bc that the planets revolve around the Sun. It 
took nearly 2000 years before the Ptolemaic paradigm was 
suddenly replaced by the new paradigm of the scientific 
revolutionary, COPERNICUS. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kuiper Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kuiper Belt 


The trans-Neptunian solar system is now known to con- 
tain a vast population of icy bodies called the Kuiper 
Belt, first discovered by David Jewitt and Jane Luu in 
August of 1992. The discovery confirmed that the region 
immediately beyond the planets is not merely empty 
space but is instead richly populated with a vast reser- 
voir of fossil remnants from the original solar nebula. 
The enormous scientific potential of the Kuiper Belt was 
soon recognized and the belt is now the subject of inten- 
sive observational and dynamical studies. 

The interest in the Kuiper Belt originated with the 
problem of the origin of the short-period COMETS (comets 
with orbital periods shorter than 200 yr). Jan oorT proved 
in 1950 that the long-period comets (those comets with 
orbital periods longer than 200 yr) come from the oorr 
CLOUD, a spherical cloud with radius on the order of 
10000 AU. It was thus simply assumed that the short- 
period comets were somehow derived from the long- 
period comet population, perhaps through capture by 
the giant planets, primarily Jupiter. 

This assumption was cast in doubt in the 1970s, 
when Paul Joss pointed out that the probability of cap- 
ture of the long-period comets by Jupiter was too small 
to explain the observed number of short-period comets. 
Because of the limited computer power at the time, Joss’ 
result went largely unconfirmed until 1988, when the 
Canadian astronomers Martin Duncan, Tom Quinn and 
Scott Tremaine carried out computer simulations of the 
capture process of the long-period comets by the giant 
planets. They confirmed Joss’ result, but also found that, 
during capture, the orbital inclination distribution was 
roughly preserved. This means that, if the original popu- 
lation contained comets with high inclinations, the cap- 
tured population should also contain comets with high 
inclinations. This result agrees very well with observa- 
tions of the long-period comets: the Oort cloud is a 
spherical cloud, implying that the long-period comet 
inclinations should also be roughly spherical, which is 
indeed the case. However, the short-period comets most- 
ly have low-inclination orbits, inclined less than 30° from 
the ecliptic plane. The simulations’ results thus imply 
that a spherical cloud like the Oort cloud could not pro- 
duce a flat structure like the short-period comets; 
instead, a much better source would be a flat belt of 
comets in the outer solar system. This comet belt is now 
called the Kuiper Belt, after the Dutch astronomer 
Gerard KUIPER. 

This idea of a trans-Neptunian comet belt was actu- 
ally first mentioned in 1949 by an Irishman named 
Kenneth EDGEWorRTH, then elaborated upon by Gerard 
Kuiper in 1951. Their basic argument was that there was 
no a priori reason why the solar system should end 
abruptly at Neptune or Pluto. Perhaps large planets 
could not form beyond Neptune, but smaller bodies 
might be able to. Edgeworth and Kuiper thus envisioned 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


a population consisting of residual ‘PLANETESIMALS’ 
(small solid bodies) left over from the formation of the 
planetary system. Also, because of the low temperatures, 
it seemed likely that these distant objects would be ice 
rich, identical to comets. 

In 1987, shortly before Duncan, Quinn and Tremaine 
published their results, spurred on by the dramatic con- 
trast between the apparent emptiness of the outer solar 
system and the richly populated inner solar system 
(remember that Pluto was the only permanent solar sys- 
tem object known beyond Neptune at the time), Jewitt 
and Luu started a telescopic survey in order to address 
the question of the contents of the outer solar system. 
After five years of searching, they detected the first 
Kuiper Belt object (KBO), 1992 QB1, in August 1992. The 
Kuiper Belt has become the new frontier of the solar sys- 
tem. 

In 2002, astronomers determined that 2002 LM60, an 
icy Kuiper belt object dubbed Quaoar, by its discoverers, 
is the largest body found in the solar system since the 
discovery of Pluto 72 years ago. Quaoar (pronounced 
kwa-whar) is about half the size of Pluto. Like Pluto, 
Quaoar dwells in the Kuiper belt. It is the farthest object 
in the solar system ever to be resolved by a telescope. 
Quaoar is about 4 billion miles away from Earth, well 
over a billion miles farther away than Pluto. Unlike 
Pluto, its orbit around the Sun is circular, even more so 
than most of the planetary-class bodies in the solar sys- 
tem. Although smaller than Pluto, Quaoar is greater in 
volume than all the asteroids combined (though proba- 
bly only one-third the mass of the asteroid belt, because 
it is icy rather than rocky). Quaoar’s composition is 
thought to be largely ices mixed with rock, not unlike the 


65 5:4 4:3 7:3 3:2 3:3 21 
0.40 _4 
. eo ' 
oe - | 
0.30 po | 
v .. F 

a ye” | 
3 7 | 
€ L, “le Ld | 
B 0.20 ® | 
& a4 2% 
3 J | 
va e | 
/ ° . | 
4 Z Se “a | 
0.10 7 ° | 

¢ ° 

% 

/ e e 
ee . | 
/ .* | 
0.00 ‘ > xn OP } 
30 35 40 45 50 
Semi-major Axis, a [AU] 


Figure 1. Semimajor axis versus eccentricity for KBOs. Solid 
circles denote objects observed over at least 2 yr (secure orbits), 
empty circles objects observed only once (probably lost). Pluto is 
marked by X. Neptune is at a = 30 AU. The dashed curve marks 
a perihelion distance of 30 AU; objects above the line are 
Neptune crossers (i.e. orbits are unstable). Orbital elements com- 
puted by Brian Marsden. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Kuiper Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


makeup of a comet, though 100 million times greater in 
volume. 


Structure of the Kuiper Belt 

Neptune defines the inner edge of the Kuiper Belt. While 
the outer edge of the belt remains unknown, it is known 
that the belt extends at least as far as ~130 AU (see the 
section on scattered KBOs). Researchers have counted 
346 KBOs since they were first recognized in the early 
1990s, but, assuming a 4% albedo for the ones known, it 
is estimated that there are at least 70000 of them with 
diameters larger than 60 mi (100 km). The known KBOs 
are sufficient to give us a general idea of the radial dis- 
tribution of the belt, which is plotted in figure 1. It can be 
seen that the radial distribution of the belt is highly non- 
uniform. The region from Neptune to ~42 AU is empty 
owing to perturbations by the planet, except for a con- 
centration of objects at 39 AU, the location of the 3:2 
mean motion resonance of Neptune. Based on their 
dynamics, the known KBOs can be divided roughly into 
three distinct categories: the classical KBOs, the reso- 
nance KBOs and the scattered KBOs. 


Classical KBOs 

The classical KBOs are characterized by low-eccentricity, 
low-inclination orbits, suggesting that they formed 
directly from the solar nebula and have managed to pre- 
serve their primordial orbits. 


Resonance KBOs 

The Kuiper Belt contains a number of ‘mean motion res- 
onances’ with Neptune, regions where periodic pertur- 
bations by the planet have induced special dynamical 
properties restricted to the regions. An object in an m:n 
resonance would make n orbits around the Sun for every 
m orbits completed by the planet. For example, Pluto is 
in the 3:2 resonance (located at 39 AU), meaning that it 
completes 2 orbits for every 3 orbits completed by 
Neptune. Renu Malhotra showed that some of these res- 
onances are stable, which should lead to population 
enhancement inside the resonances, even if their imme- 
diate environs are unstable owing to Neptunian pertur- 
bations. However, the only resonance currently known to 
be densely populated is the 3:2 mean motion resonance. 
Just as the resonance protects Pluto from close encoun- 
ters with Neptune, it also protects other members of the 
resonance (now called ‘PLUTINos’ to highlight their 
dynamical similarity with Pluto). In view of the abun- 
dance of the Plutinos, Pluto is then best understood as 
the largest known KBO, rather than as a deviant planet. 
(It should be noted that Pluto may not be the only large 
body that formed in the Kuiper Belt: because of its strong 
similarities with Pluto, it is suspected that the Neptune 
satellite TRITON also originated in the Belt but has some- 
how been captured into an orbit around Neptune.) The 
apparent fraction of Plutinos among the known KBOs is 
roughly 35%, but this is an overestimate owing to sever- 
al observational biases (including the fact that the reso- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


nance lies near the inner edge of the Kuiper Belt, render- 
ing Plutinos easier to detect). The bias-corrected Plutino 
fraction is in fact closer to 10-20%, and the number of 
Plutinos larger than 100 km is ~30 000. The discovery of 
the Plutinos was completely unexpected, unpredicted by 
any theory. 

Given that objects inside 42 AU are quickly ejected 
by Neptune, the question is as to how the 3:2 resonance 
became populated. Malhotra proposed that the reso- 
nance became populated during the radial migration of 
the giant planets. It has long been known that, during the 
final stages of planet formation, the giant planets grew 
large enough to scatter away nearby planetesimals. 
During the scattering process the planets exchanged 
angular momentum with the planetesimals, but, because 
of their different masses, the exchange is different for 
each planet. The net effect was that Jupiter lost angular 
momentum and its orbit shrank, while the orbits of the 
other giant planets expanded outward. Neptune may 
have migrated as much as 5 AU outward from its origi- 
nal location. As Neptune moved outwards, its mean 
motion resonances also moved with it, sweeping through 
the planetesimal disk. Along its path the 3:2 resonance 
could have captured PLUTO-CHARON, along with the 
Plutinos. The resonance capture theory also predicts 
clear population enhancements at other resonances with 
a strong capture probability, such as the 2:1 resonance at 
48 AU. No 2:1 resonance KBO has been identified at this 
time but this may be due to the fact that the 2:1 resonance 
is significantly further away than the 3:2 resonance and 
its members would be much more difficult to detect. 
Malhotra pointed out that how many planetesimals these 
resonances succeeded in capturing depended on the 
migration rate of Neptune. A measurement of the relative 
resonance populations could thus provide an unantici- 
pated method to calculate the migration rate of Neptune. 
This is a scientific question previously thought to be out 
of the realm of direct observations. 


Scattered KBOs 

The third dynamical class in the Kuiper Belt, the scat- 
tered KBOs, possesses large, eccentric orbits and is exem- 
plified by the object 1996 TLy. (figure 2). Whereas the 
known classical KBOs are clustered inside 50 AU, with 
an eccentricitye = 0.59, and a semimajor axis a = 85 AU, 
1996 TL¢, reaches as far as 130 AU at aphelion. It is the 
only scattered KBO known thus far, but is most likely just 
the first detected of a much larger population of similar 
bodies. The scattered KBO population is estimated to 
contain ~10000 objects like 1996 TL¢,, with a total mass of 
~0.05 Meath contained between ~40 and 200 AU (1 
Mearth=6x10% kg is the mass of the Earth). Although this 
estimate is crude, there is little doubt that the Kuiper Belt 
extends much further than suspected. 

The origin of the scattered Kuiper Belt is unknown. 
One hypothesis posits that it is a natural product of the 
scattering process that produced the Oort cloud. The Oort 
cloud is believed to consist of planetesimals scattered by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Kuiper Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1999 CVjg\, 


— Ty 7 eT , 

Figure 2. Planar view of the outer solar system. The dense band 
of orbits refers to the best observed KBOs (including Pluto), 
while the large, eccentric orbits of 1996 TLy, 1999 CVj4s, 1999 
CY,,, and 1999 CF,,, extend far beyond the previously known 


118 
Kuiper Belt, and identify them as scattered KBOs. 


the giant planets (primarily Uranus and Neptune) when 
they nearly reached their full sizes. It is easy to imagine 
that perhaps not all the scattered planetesimals reached 
Oort cloud distances. Some perhaps were scattered to 
more intermediate distances, perhaps forming a radial 
distribution of material that bridges the gap from the 
planetary region to the Oort cloud. This scenario predicts 
that the outer solar system would be continuously popu- 
lated, with the classical Kuiper Belt just beyond the plan- 
ets, followed by the scattered Kuiper Belt which would 
extend all the way to the Oort cloud. 


Population statistics 

Thanks to ground-based surveys, the census of KBOs in 
the hundred kilometer range is now well established. 
The luminosity function of the Belt (inside the 30-50 AU 
region) can be obtained from the cumulative surface den- 
sity measured by recent ground-based surveys. Fitting 
the surface density with the power law 


log[S (77g)] = a(ttg — Hig) 


where 1m is the (red) magnitude at which the surface 
density S reaches 1°, and 10a gives the slope of the 
luminosity function. Fitting the ground-based data 
yields a@=0.58+0.05 and m)=23.27+0.11. In other words, 
there is 1 KBO° at red magnitude mp=23.3, increasing 
by ~4 per magnitude. The luminosity function outside 
20<mp<25 may be different, and remains to be assessed. 

The luminosity function provides a clue as to the 
size distribution in the Kuiper Belt, ie. how the popula- 
tion is divided into different size ranges. Assuming that 
KBOs obey a differential power law size distribution of 
the form n(r) dr:r-7 dr, where n(r) dr is the number of 
objects in the radius range from r to r+ dr, the ground- 
based observations are best fitted with q = 4. HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE observations suggest a larger q, but this result 
remains controversial. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Given the size distribution, it is possible to calculate 
the total mass provided that the minimum and maxi- 
mum radii of the distribution are also known. This is not 
the case for the Kuiper Belt, and an exact determination 
of the belt’s total mass has not been possible. The current 
assessment of the Kuiper Belt population can be summa- 
rized as follows. The total mass between 30 AU and 50 
AU is estimated at ~0.2M,.,,1h- There are no observations 
of the Kuiper Belt at larger distances, but the mass of the 
belt at larger distances has been roughly constrained by 
the dynamics of spacecraft and comets. If a massive belt 
existed at great distances, it would have affected the 
motion of spacecraft such as Pioneer 10 (currently at 67 
AU), VOYAGER 1 (65 AU) and Voyager 2 (51 AU) as well as 
the motion of comet Halley. The estimated upper limit is 
5Mearth Within 100 AU—well above the mass estimated 
from observations of the scattered Kuiper Belt (see sec- 
tion on scattered KBOs). 

This 0.2Mpath Mass inside 50 AU includes ~70 000 
objects larger than 100 km (in comparison, the asteroid 
belt contains ~230 asteroids larger than 100 km). Objects 
with radius <50 km are numerous but lie beyond the 
detection capabilities of most ground-based telescopes, 
while very large bodies (radius >250 km), although easi- 
ly detectable from the ground, are rare. Note that the 
known KBOs are much larger than the known short-peri- 
od comets (typical radius: 5-10 km), implying that the 
former cannot be the direct precursors of the latter. It has 
been postulated that the short-period comets were actu- 
ally collision fragments that were then ejected from the 
Belt. 

However, we must bear in mind that the Kuiper Belt 
has been much eroded dynamically since its formation, 
and the current population is but a remnant of the origi- 
nal population. From models that simulate the growth of 
KBOs, it is estimated that an original mass of ~10 Mga 
is needed to create the observed Kuiper Belt population. 


Short-period comets and Centaurs 

It is believed that the short-period comets originated in 
the Kuiper Belt, although it is not clear which part of the 
belt (the classical or scattered Kuiper Belt) is the main 
source. If comets originated as classical KBOs, these 
KBOs could have escaped from the belt in a slow ‘leak- 
age’ via close encounters with Neptune. The KBOs 
would maintain their stable orbits inside the Kuiper Belt 
for 3-4 billion years before suffering a close encounter 
with Neptune. Once a Kuiper Belt object encounters 
Neptune, it has a 33% chance of being scattered into a 
short-period comet orbit. Other (less likely) alternative 
fates include being ejected from the solar system or col- 
liding with the planets. 

The timescale to go from a Kuiper Belt orbit to an 
inner solar system orbit is about 10” yr. Thus, if the 
Kuiper Belt is continuously supplying short-period 
comets, one would expect to see ex-KBOs making their 
way into the inner solar system. The prime candidates 
for these ex-KBOs are the ‘CENTAURS’, objects whose 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Kuiper Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


orbits cross those of the giant planets. The Centaurs’ 
orbits are highly chaotic and it is apparent that their res- 
idence between the giant planets is only temporary. The 
transient nature of the Centaurs, and their location 
between the Kuiper Belt and the inner solar system, ren- 
ders them the best candidates for recent Kuiper Belt 
escapees that are perhaps now evolving into short- 
period comets. Seven Centaurs are known at the present 
time. Interestingly, the brightest Centaur, 2060 CHIRON, 
has been proven to be a comet, so there is no doubt that 
Centaurs are ice-rich bodies that can sublimate under the 
right conditions. The Centaurs are important because (1) 
they provide the missing dynamical link between the 
KBOs and the short-period comets and (2) they are much 
closer (brighter) than the typical KBOs, and therefore 
make much better targets for physical studies. 


Physical properties of KBOs 
The properties of KBOs are of intense interest since these 
bodies have changed relatively little since their time of 
formation in the solar nebula. Laboratory experiments 
predict that KBOs should have an ‘irradiation mantle’ 
produced by high-energy particle irradiation of surface 
ices. When carbon-containing ices (e.g. CH, or CO) are 
irradiated by the high-energy particles prevalent in inter- 
planetary space such as cosmic rays and solar wind par- 
ticles, this irradiation leads to the selective loss of hydro- 
gen in surface materials, while encouraging the forma- 
tion of carbon bonds. The irradiation thus alters the sur- 
face chemically and physically. Exactly how the color 
and reflectivity of the irradiated ice change with time 
depends on the specific composition and the irradiation 
flux. For example, cosmic rays are very energetic (10 
MeV-10 GeV range) and can penetrate several meters, 
whereas solar wind particles (<1 keV) can only penetrate 
depths ~1 um. The result is a dark, non-volatile solid 
residue that is rich in carbon compounds. After 4.5 bil- 
lion years, KBOs and Centaurs are thus expected to sport 
a thick non-volatile, organic-rich crust, dark owing to its 
high carbon abundance. Note that this non-volatile crust 
would have a composition quite different from the inte- 
rior, which is still pristine ice. The thick crust may sur- 
vive on the object’s first entry into the inner solar system. 
Ideally, optical and infrared spectra are needed in 
order to assess the surface composition of KBOs and con- 
firm or refute the irradiation mantle hypothesis. 
Unfortunately, physical properties of KBOs are extreme- 
ly difficult to obtain because of their faintness. Until 
recently, instead of spectra, astrononomers have had to 
rely on optical and near-infrared broadband colors for 
compositional information. Surprisingly, KBOs and 
Centaurs exhibit a wide range of optical colors, ranging 
from nearly neutral (i.e. all wavelengths are reflected 
equally) to very red (red wavelengths are preferentially 
reflected), which is unmatched by known comets and 
asteroids. In fact, KBOs and Centaurs possess the most 
extreme red colors seen among small solar system bod- 
ies. The large spread of colors suggests considerable 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


diversity in the materials present on the surfaces of 
KBOs. Interestingly, the very red optical spectrum of the 
Centaur 5145 Pholus has been reproduced with irradiat- 
ed ices containing a mixture of N, and CH,. The unique 
red colors suggest the presence of an indigenous surface 
material not seen closer to the Sun and are consistent 
with the irradiation mantle. 

The irradiation hypothesis predicts that irradiation 
mantles should exist on the surfaces of all KBOs, thus 
resulting in similar colors for all KBOs. The observations 
clearly indicate otherwise. Astronomers have not conclu- 
sively identified the cause of the color diversity, but two 
simple explanations have been suggested for the origin 
of the color diversity. One possible explanation is that 
KBOs possess intrinsically different compositions, and 
that the different colors are tracers of the compositional 
variations. This has been observed in the asteroid belt, 
where asteroids show different compositions that seem 
to be related to their sites and temperatures of formation. 
However, the KBOs, as far as we know, all formed more 
or less where they are now seen, implying formation 
temperatures in the range 40-50 K. It is hard to see how 
strong compositional differences might arise if there is 
little change in the formation temperature, but they 
might occur, and this is a possible interpretation of the 
data. Another possible explanation is that collisions in 
the Kuiper Belt might puncture the irradiation mantles 
on some objects, revealing fresh interior material, as well 
as showering nearby regions with impact debris. The 
freshly exposed crater and the impact debris would be 
unirradiated material, and thus should be of a different 
composition and less red than the irradiated mantle. The 
overall color of a particular KBO would then depend on 
how much of the surface area is covered by recently exca- 
vated craters. This is analogous to the resurfacing of the 
Moon, where recent impacts have deposited bright rays 
on the darker background material. This collision resur- 
facing hypothesis predicts albedo variations on the sur- 
face of KBOs, and a test of this prediction may soon be 
feasible with the largest telescopes. 

Besides this preliminary result on the surface com- 
position, little information is available about other prop- 
erties of KBOs. Attempts to measure their shapes and 
rotation periods have so far yielded inconclusive results. 


Origin of the Kuiper Belt 

From the apparent connection of the Kuiper Belt with so 
many solar system objects, it is clear that the belt played 
an important role in shaping the outer solar system. 
However, how did the belt form, and why did planetary 
accretion take the form of a large population of small 
bodies instead of a single large planet? The near-circular, 
low-inclination orbits of KBOs suggest in situ formation 
from the solar disk—this hypothesis has indeed been 
supported by dynamical simulations. Integrations of 
orbits beyond Neptune by Matt Holman, Jack Wisdom, 
Martin Duncan and Hal Levison showed that a belt of 
trans-Neptunian bodies formed at the beginning of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Kuiper Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solar system would survive for the age of the solar sys- 
tem. The implication is that the Kuiper Belt is simply a 
remnant fossil from the solar nebula that was left behind 
because it was not scattered away or incorporated into 
planets. All other solar system bodies (e.g. planets, aster- 
oids, known comets) have been heavily modified by 
solar heating or collisions over the age of the solar sys- 
tem. Stranded far beyond the planets, little has happened 
to KBOs since birth. Although their top surface layers 
have been modified by irradiation and collisions, in this 
case collisions are actually beneficial to astronomers in 
that they reveal the pristine interior ice. In other words, 
in the Kuiper Belt is the solar nebula 4.5 billion years on, 
and with its discovery astronomers now have the chance 
to make direct observations of the nebula itself. This is 
the main scientific appeal of the Kuiper Belt. 


Comparison with circumstellar disks 
Are circumstellar disks extrasolar Kuiper Belts? 
The recognition of our own Kuiper Belt leads us natural- 
ly to suspect that similar planetesimal structures might 
exist around other stars. It is now well known that dust 
disks are common around main-sequence stars, the most 
famous of which is the dust disk surrounding Pic, sus- 
pected to be a young planetary system. Dust in disks like 
B Pic’s is depleted by several destruction mechanisms 
such as radiation pressure, POYNTING-ROBERTSON drag 
and collisional destruction. If the dust is to be in steady 
state, it must be continuously replenished by some as yet 
unknown source. A simple and plausible source is colli- 
sional grinding between planetesimals in a Kuiper Belt. 
The discovery of the Kuiper Belt proves that, indeed, 
planetary accretion at large distances is more likely to 
take the form of numerous small bodies rather than a sin- 
gle large planet. Recent discoveries of extrasolar planets 
suggest that planetary accretion is not an uncommon 
phenomenon, further amplifying our interest in extraso- 
lar planetary systems. The obvious question then is 
whether we are observing an extrasolar Kuiper Belt in 
6 Pic. Put in another way, does the Kuiper Belt also 
include a dust disk? 


Kuiper Belt dust production rate 

KBOs in the 100 km diameter range are relatively rare in 
the belt and are not likely to collide with each other. 
However, these large bodies are likely to collide with the 
much more numerous small bodies, e.g. those in the 1 km 
radius range. If we extrapolate the current KBO census 
down to 1 km radius range, there would be ~10°-1019 of 
these small bodies. A crude estimate of the dust produc- 
tion rate through collisional grinding of these small pro- 
jectiles would be 400-4000 kg st. 

This dust would be subjected to several destruction 
mechanisms. Grains with radius between 0.05 and 0.5 
um would be blown out of the solar system by radiation 
pressure very quickly. Larger grains would spiral toward 
the Sun under the effect of the Poynting-Robertson force 
and solar wind drag on the timescale of a few x107 yr 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


(some 20% of this dust should reach the orbit of the 
Earth, but would be difficult to distinguish from aster- 
oidal dust). Finally, dust grains may also be destroyed by 
collisions with interstellar grains, or with other particles 
in the belt. Taking these destruction mechanisms into 
account, it would take on the order of 106 years to deplete 
the dust in the Kuiper Belt. 

The non-detection of Kuiper Belt dust by the 
infrared satellite cope placed an upper limit of 0.3Me,.n 
on the amount of dust present in the Kuiper Belt. More 
stringent constraints for the amount of dust in the Kuiper 
Belt come from spacecraft that have traveled through the 
Kuiper Belt itself, such as Voyager 1 and 2 and PIONEER 10 
(see the section on population statistics). Voyager 1 trav- 
eled north from the ecliptic, reaching an ecliptic latitude 
of +35°, while its twin Voyager 2 traveled southward and 
reached an ecliptic latitude of -34°. Both spacecraft 
detected numerous dust impacts that could only come 
from dust in the Kuiper Belt. Assuming that the Kuiper 
Belt is roughly 30° thick, and assuming an average dust 
grain size of 1 um in radius, the Voyager results imply 
that there is at present ~10-°M,,,+, Of dust in the Kuiper 
Belt. It is unlikely that such a small dust mass can be 
detected in the near future from any ground-based or 
near-Earth telescope. Another mass limit was obtained 
from Pioneer 10, which has spent more than a decade in 
the Kuiper Belt. Based on the fact that no dust impact 
damaged the spacecraft’s propellant tank, scientists esti- 
mated that the Kuiper Belt could not contain more than 
0.1Mg,atn in centimeter-size dust particles. 

The dust mass in the f Pic disk is very uncertain but, 
roughly, the amount of dust in § Pic contained in micron- 
size particles is ~3x103Mg,,.,, or 10000 times more dust 
than is currently contained in our Kuiper Belt. However, 
as was pointed out earlier, if the original Kuiper Belt pop- 
ulation is ~100 times larger than the current population, 
the dust content (which scales as the square of the num- 
ber of bodies) must have been ~10000 times larger. This 
suggests that the early Kuiper Belt (at the age of 100 mil- 
lion years or so) may have been much like the f Pic disk. 
Other indirect evidences exist which point toward this 
scenario. Recent HST images of the main sequence stars 
HD 141569 and HR 4796A clearly show the existence 
of dust rings (see URL http://oposite.stsci.edu/ 
pubinfo/pr/1999/03/pr-photos.html). In particular, HR 
4796A is surrounded by a ring 70 AU in radius, whose 
morphology is highly reminiscent of our Kuiper Belt. 
These observational and theoretical results support the 
hypothesis that many of the known disk systems can be 
identified with the Kuiper Belt, i.e., the Kuiper Belt is 
most likely a common phenomenon in stellar systems. 


The future of the Kuiper Belt 

What we have learned thus far about the Kuiper and its 
implications for the early solar system is only the tip of 
the iceberg. Although surveys have continuously iden- 
tified new KBOs since 1992, studying KBOs is quite a 
different story from finding them. Until recently, there 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Kuiper Belt 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


was little astronomers could do besides trying to 
increase the sample of known KBOs. However, the 
imminent arrival of a new generation of large (8 m—10 
m class) telescopes promises to galvanize the field by 
giving astronomers the capability to study these faint 
objects in detail. Kuiper Belt research is also given a 
great boost by new and on-going large sky surveys 
whose purpose is to find large, bright KBOs (red appar- 
ent magnitude 1p<22) suitable for detailed physical 
studies. For example, recent optical and near-infrared 
spectroscopic observations of the scattered KBO 1996 
TLes (the brightest KBO after Pluto and Charon) 
revealed a surface that is neutral in color and shows no 
sign of abundant ices as seen on Pluto. This rules out 
the possibility of a pure water ice surface on TL¢, 
although small amounts of other ices (including dirty 
water ice) cannot be ruled out. Obviously spectroscopic 
observations of many more KBOs are needed before 
astronomers can claim to understand the composition 
of the Kuiper Belt, but this goal is now in sight. 

To properly interpret the spectroscopic observations 
in terms of the molecules and grains that make up the 
KBO surfaces, astronomers will also have to rely on lab- 
oratory experiments that simulate (as best as technology 
allows) the environment of the Kuiper Belt. For example, 
the experiments should simulate the irradiation and 
photoprocessing of a wide variety of ices by ultraviolet 
photons. Similar experiments have been performed in 
the past, but the focus in the past had been on INTERSTEL- 
LAR GRAINS, whose source of irradiation is mainly high- 
energy cosmic ray particles. Such experiments will have 
to be modified to approximate the Kuiper Belt environ- 
ment. The results can then be compared with the exten- 
sive body of knowledge on interstellar grains, giving 
astronomers the unprecedented opportunity to observe 
the evolution of interstellar material as it is incorporated 
into a solar nebula. In short, Kuiper Belt research is in its 
nascent stage and its demands will push astronomical 
technology to the limit, but the potential reward is the 
answer to a question that has driven astronomers since 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


the days of Copernicus: how the solar system formed 
(see also ORIGIN OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM). 


Bibliography 

Chiang E and Brown M 1999 Astronomical Journal 118 
1411 

Dones L 1997 From Stardust to Planetesimals (Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific Conference Series vol 122) ed Y J 
Pendleton and A G G M Tielens (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) pp 347-65 

Jewitt D 1999 Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Science 
27 287 

Jewitt D, Luu J and Trujillo C 1998 Astronomical Journal 
115 2125 

Levison H and Duncan M 1997 Icarus 127 13 

Luu J X and Jewitt D C 1996 Scientific American 274 32 

Luu J X and Jewitt D C 1996 Astronomical Journal 112 2310 

Luu J, Marsden B, Jewitt D, Trujillo C, Hergenrother C, 
Chen J and Offutt W 1997 Nature 387 573 

Jane Luu 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Kuiper, Gerard Peter (1905-73) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kuiper, Gerard Peter (1905-73) 


First applicant of multidisciplinary techniques to the 
study of the solar system, i.e. the first planetary scientist, 
born in Harencarspel, Netherlands, educated at Leiden, 
and moved to the USA, becoming director of Yerkes 
Observatory and founding (1960) and directing the Lunar 
and Planetary Laboratory of the University of Arizona. 
Spectroscopically detected the methane atmosphere on 
Saturn’s satellite Titan and the carbon dioxide atmosphere 
of Mars. Discovered Miranda (fifth moon of Uranus), and 
Nereid (second moon of Neptune). Identified the belt of 
comet-like debris at edge of solar system (Kuiper’s belt; see 
also KENNETH EDGEWORTH). Selected the landing sites on the 
Moon for the Ranger probes and Apollo landings. The 
Kuiper Airborne Observatory for infrared astronomy (used 
extensively for remote sensing of the planets) was named 
for him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Kulik, Leonid (1883-1942) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kulik, Leonid (1883-1942) 


Russian meteorite researcher, trained as a forester. Led 
expeditions to investigate the Tunguska impact, published 
the accounts of flattened trees and small craters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Kuo Shou-Ching (1231-1316) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kuo Shou-Ching (1231-1316) 


Chinese astronomer, constructed at Linfen (Shansi) the 
‘Simplified Instrument’, a torquetum to observe the 
positions of the stars. It was so-called because it 
was equatorially mounted, and was thus able to omit 
some rotations and calculations which followed from 
the original Arab design, altazimuthally mounted. The 
instrument survives at Purple Mountain Observatory, 
having been moved to Nanjing in the Ming dynasty, 
when it had been forgotten that the change in latitude 
rendered it useless. According to JOSEPH NEEDHAM, 
the idea of this instrument was transmitted back 
through Arabic astronomy, via Gemma Frisius to Tycho 
Brahe, and influenced his instruments and concept of 
equatorial astronomy. Shou-Ching developed spherical 
trigonometry, as well as making a clockwork-driven 
celestial globe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lépaute, Nicole-Reine Etable, née de la Briére (1723-— 
88) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lépaute, Nicole-Reine Etable, née de 
la Briére (1723-88) 


French astronomer, aide to JOSEPH LALANDE calculating 
circumstances of an annular eclipse of the Sun visible 
in France and Europe. She worked on the predictions 
for the return of HALLEY’s Comet in 1759, including the 
perturbations by Jupiter and Saturn. She also assisted 
her husband, the royal clockmaker of France, making 
calculations such as the number of oscillations per unit 
time of pendulums of various lengths. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


La Condamine, Charles Marie de (1701-74) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


La Condamine, Charles Marie de 
(1701-74) 


Born in Paris, France, had an army career, was sent by 
the Académie Royale to Peru to measure the length of a 
degree of meridian at the equator, repeated (at Cayenne in 
Guyana) RICHER’s experiments on the variation of weights 
at different latitudes. Although a less gifted astronomer 
than Godin and a less reliable mathematician than BOUGUER 
(both his colleagues), he often received the major part of 
the credit for the expedition, because of his amiable nature 
and his talent as a writer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


La Hire, Philippe de [Philippe I] (1640-1718) and La 
Hire, Gabriel-Philippe de [Philippe II] (1677-19) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


La Hire, Philippe de [Philippe 1] 
(1640-1718) and La Hire, 
Gabriel-Philippe de [Philippe II] 
(1677-19) 


Astronomer, Philippe I was born in Paris, France, educated 
as an artist, taught mathematics and architecture, wrote 
on conic sections. He installed the first transit instrument 
in the Paris Observatory and produced tables giving 
the movements of the Sun, Moon and the planets. 
He conducted experiments in terrestrial magnetism 
and meteorology, surveyed the French coastline (with 
PICARD) and participated with his son in the geodesic 
measurements carried out by JACQUES CASSINI to extend the 
meridian of Paris north from Amiens to Dunkerque. His 
son, Philippe II, a dilettante and astronomer, born in Paris, 
lived and was educated at the Paris Observatory, assisting 
his father in observations. Father and son were accused 
of plagiarism by LE FEvrE after publishing ephemerides to 
which Le Fevre claimed authorship. Philippe II published 
on observational and physical astronomy but also dabbled 
in architecture, inventions and other natural sciences. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


La Plata Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


La Plata Observatory 


The most important event in the history of astronomy in 
Argentina 10 years after the foundation of the OBSERVATO- 
RIO ASTRONOMICO DE CORDOBA (1870), was the setting up of 
the Observatorio de La Plata (LPO) (see figures 1 and 2), 
officially founded on 22 November 1883. Its first Director 
was Navy Lieutenant Francisco Beuf, of French origin. 
Indeed, the LPO’s existence was set off by an invitation 
from the Observatory of Paris to prepare a 
French-Argentine expedition to Bragado, province of 
Buenos Aires, to observe the transit of Venus on 6 
December 1882. 

This expedition was equipped with a 21.6 cm tele- 
scope, chronometers, a portable meridian circle and 
meteorological instrumentation (incorporated soon after- 
wards into the Observatory). The LPO’s observational 
power was later increased with two transit circles (1886), 
a 10.5 cm altazimuth telescope, a 83 cm reflector (1890), a 
33 cm astrograph (1890), a 43 cm refractor (1894), a 
Repsold vertical circle, two Repsold transit instruments 
and a Zeiss comet finder. In 1887, LPO was incorporated 
to the ‘Carte du Ciel’ project (see ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES 
AND PUBLICATIONS) to observe the zone of the sky from 
—23° to -32° through a 33 cm standard astrograph which 
arrived in La Plata in 1890. 

In 1905, LPO became part of the National University of 
La Plata and its specific objectives widened to cover 
meteorological, seismic and magnetism studies. 

In 1911, Dr William J. Hussey, former director of the 
Ann Arbor Observatory in Michigan, became Director of 
LPO. He systematized research and incorporated LPO 
into the worldwide project of the Astronomisches 
Gesellschaft (1863) (see ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES AND 
PUBLICATIONS) of surveying all stars down to magnitude 
9 from —52° to -82° and, later, from —42° to -82°. It took 
25 years to complete this survey (positions of 33 300 
stars in six catalogues, A to F). Under Hussey’s director- 


Figure 1. The French-style main building of La Plata 
Observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 2. Reading room of La Plata Observatory library. 


ship extrameridian astronomy began. F. Aguilar, an 
engineer who equipped the Observatory with a spectro- 
graph, took over afterwards. Aguilar was then replaced 
by the German astronomer JOHANNES HARTMANN in 
1920 who continued Hussey’s work, developing a 
theory on novae and discovering that the minor planet 
Eros is a non-spherical rotating body. In 1927 Dr B. H. 
Dawson, a Michigan graduate, started observing visual 
double stars and, on 8 November 1942, he discovered 
Vela’s nova. 

During Aguilar’s second period as director (1934— 
1943), Dr A. Wilkens (who started celestial mechanics 
studies) and H. Wilkens (stellar statistics) — both 
German, Dr R. Cesco and Dr E. Gaviola joined LPO staff. 
Dr A. Wilkens and R. Platzeck together with J. Sahade 
and C. Cesco undertook the measurement of stellar tem- 
peratures in double systems. Dr Livio Gratton and Dr P. 
Sconzo — both Italian — also joined the staff. The former 
led research on binary, Cepheid and giant K-type stars, 
while the latter started an observational program to 
refine the orbits of asteroids, many of them having been 
discovered then. In 1935, LPO offered PhD degrees in 
astronomy for the first time in the country. 

By the 1950s Dr Jorge Sahade (IAU president 1985- 
1988) recommended the acquisition of a 2.15 m telescope 
like that to be installed in Kitt Peak by the ASSOCIATION OF 
UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH IN ASTRONOMY. Surprisingly 
enough, the telescope was acquired but it saw first 
light in 1986 when, through an agreement among the 
Universities of La Plata, Cérdoba and San Juan and 
the Research National Council (CONICET), it was set 
up in Calingasta Valley (province of San Juan), becoming 
a national observing facility: the Leoncito Astronomical 
Complex, CASLEO (see SOUTH AMERICAN ASTRONOMY). 

Binary statistics and systematic spectroscopy in open 
clusters started by the end of the 1950s, conducted by Dr 
C. Jaschek (later on, Director of STRASBOURG OBSERVATORY 
and the CDS). By the 1960s the construction of a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


La Plata Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


photometer allowed Dr A. Feinstein to perform photo- 
metric observations on southern open clusters. 

In 1971 LPO installed a Danjon astrolabe in Rio 
Grande, Tierra del Fuego, through an agreement 
between the University of La Plata, CONICET, Tierra del 
Fuego Government and the Navy Hydrology Service. 
Again via agreement with the Navy Hydrology Service 
and the Navy Observatory of Washington, a zenithal 
photographic tube was also installed in the Navy Base of 
Punta Indio, province of Buenos Aires. LPO discontin- 
ued astronomical observations in the 1970s because of 
city-light pollution. Since then, observational facilities 
have been provided by Chilean observatories and 
CASLEO. 

Today — as ever since 1905 — research and the teach- 
ing of astronomy are the LPO’s main objectives. It plays 
a leading role in the Argentine part of the GEMINI pro- 
ject and most of its members actively collaborate with 
researchers all over the world. Over 55 staff members 
are working on a variety of topics including galactic 
dynamics, celestial mechanics, stellar evolution, radio- 
astronomy and extragalactic reference systems. Recently, 
a vigorous GPS development has taken place. Funds for 
research are mainly provided by official agencies such as 
CONICET. 

Ruben Vazquez 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Laboratory and Space Measurements of the Effects of 
Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Laboratory and Space Measurements 
of the Effects of Gravity 


Early philosophers such as Aristotle tried to describe the 
motion of bodies in the Earth’s vicinity with concepts 
that confused the topics of dynamics (the motion of a 
body under any external force) with the nature of the 
force (gravitation) itself. The teaching that followed this 
doctrine lasted until the mid 1600s when difficulties were 
becoming apparent in explaining, for example, the motion 
of arrows whose velocity continued after the force that 
caused their motion was removed. GALILEO GALILEI [1] 
began experiments in Pisa to investigate the dynamics of 
material bodies and the properties of motion under what 
is now known to be the gravitational force. Galileo was 
successful in showing that much of Aristotle’s dogma was 
contrary to carefully observed experiments. This work 
inspired NEWTON [2] to apply the mathematics of calculus 
to problems of celestial mechanics such as the apparent 
motion of comets. Newton was able to separate the laws of 
dynamics from those of gravitation, both of which he was 
able to describe in simple mathematics with high precision. 

The dynamics of a particle of mass M, moving under 
an external force, F, was described by the vector equation 
for the acceleration A as 


F=MA. 


It was Newton’s conjecture that the acceleration, and 
not the velocity as the Aristotelians had taught, was 
proportional to the force. This provided the key to 
understanding dynamics. 

Newtonian gravity was encapsulated in the expres- 
sion for the gravitational force of attraction, F, between 
two masses, M;, Mp separated by a distance r: 


GMM: 
F=-———. 


r2 


The constant G was determined experimentally by 
Cavendish [3] and others [4] to be (in modern SI units) 
6.67 x 10°" N m? kg’. 

Both Newton and Galileo were aware that if a 
body were moving under the influence of a gravitational 
force (rather than any other kind of force, such as 
electromagnetism for example) then the mass of that 
body would appear twice in the calculation of the 
resulting acceleration since the gravitational force is 
directly proportional to the mass (the ‘gravitational mass’), 
and the acceleration is inversely proportional to the mass 
(the ‘inertial’ mass). If every object had the property that its 
‘gravitational mass’ is exactly proportional to its ‘inertial 
mass’, then these two values for the mass would cancel 
and all objects would have the same acceleration, and 
therefore the same velocity, in an identical gravitational 
field. Galileo observed this to be true in a number 
of experiments and Newton systematically explored the 
equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass for different 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


materials in a series of experiments with pendula of 
different composition. There was (and is now) no 
explanation in Newtonian theory of why there are these 
two separate roles for mass, and several experiments of 
exquisite precision were carried out in the late 1800s by 
Edtv6s and others to see if the equivalence broke down at 
some level of precision. 

The mathematical statement of the ‘Law’ of gravita- 
tion permitted the accurate calculation of planetary posi- 
tions, which observations confirmed to the highest preci- 
sion available. The first deficiencies in this approach began 
to emerge in 1845 [5] with observations of the slightly el- 
liptical orbit of Mercury, the planet closest to the Sun and 
therefore the object orbiting in the highest gravitational 
potential of all the planets. As measurement techniques 
became more accurate and the baseline for the observation 
of the secular change in Mercury’s orbit became longer and 
the orbit therefore determined more precisely, the discrep- 
ancy became increasingly uncomfortable for Newtonian 
gravity, despite the fact that the simple inverse square law 
provides extremely accurate descriptions of most phenom- 
ena. 

Following the success of EINSTEIN’s ‘Special Theory 
of Relativity’ [6] in explaining the null result of the 
Michelson—Morley experiment to measure the effect of the 
Earth’s supposed velocity through an Aether, the next step 
was to incorporate gravitation within a relativistic theory. 
This Einstein did with his ‘General Theory’ in 1916 [7]. At 
low velocities and small gravitational potentials the new 
theory had to be consistent with Newtonian gravity in 
predicting the motion of objects. Rather than leave the 
equivalence principle as an uncomfortable experimental 
fact, Einstein raised it to be the underlying concept which 
illuminated the radical thinking behind his new theory. 
He proposed that the gravitation was to be understood as 
a curvature of spacetime created by the presence of mass. 
Matter moved in this curved spaceTIME in response to the 
local curvature. Every object in a particular gravitational 
field experienced the same curvature and hence all objects 
moved with the same acceleration. The equivalence of 
inertial and gravitational mass is therefore implicit in 
the structure of general relativity, and the ‘equivalence 
principle’ needs no explanation or resolution. 

General relativity cannot yet be understood as the 
final theory of gravity (see also GENERAL RELATIVITY AND 
GRAVITATION). The theory has had remarkable success in 
naturally accounting for the precession of the perihelion 
of Mercury and predicting the displacement of stellar 
images close to the Sun but the accuracy to which it has 
been tested is only a few parts in ten thousand. The 
most unsatisfactory aspect of the theory is the complete 
incompatibility with the, now accurately tested, theory of 
QUANTUM MECHANICS. It is this unresolved problem that is 
motivating both theorists and experimentalists to test the 
theoretical predictions of general relativity to higher and 
higher precision in the search for clues as to where progress 
can best be made in unifying gravitation with the other 
fundamental forces of nature. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Laboratory and Space Measurements of the Effects of 
Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. A torsion balance. 


Expressed in terms of Newtonian theory, laboratory 
tests focus on the accuracy of the inverse square law, 
the value of the gravitational constant, G, and its time 
derivative, together with evidence that the equivalence 
principle breaks down at some level of accuracy or 
for some sets of materials. The dependence of the 
gravitational force on distance, r raised to the power 
—2, is appropriate for a truly long-range force, and this 
implies that any particle postulated as mediating the 
force (the ‘graviton’) must necessarily have zero mass, 
exactly similar to the case of the photon as the mediator 
of the electromagnetic force. Tests of the accuracy of 
the inverse square law therefore provide limits on the 
mass of the graviton. Since general relativity uses the 
concept of curved spacetime with metric tensors as the 
mathematical interface between matter and curvature, an 
expansion of the metric tensor can be made in terms 
of parameters which express the small deviations from 
the special relativistic metric in flat spacetime. This 
Parameterized Post Newtonian (PPN) metric can be used 
to analyze experiments whose outcome thereby places 
limits on the various PPN [8] parameters. 


Laboratory tests 
The gravitational force is extremely weak, nearly forty 
factors of ten weaker than the electromagnetic force. As a 
result the gravitational constant is very difficult to measure 
to high precision. Other factors, such as the inability 
to shield stray gravitational fields from test masses, 
make the design and execution of laboratory experiments 
extremely taxing. Astronomical measurements provide 
high precision in terms of the dynamics of orbits, but 
the quantity determined is actually the product of the 
gravitational constant and the mass of the central object, a 
number that cannot be determined independently. Most 
accurate determinations of G use a torsion balance [9] as 
shown in figure 1. 

A fibre with a known torsional constant suspends a 
balanced pair of test masses. Two methods of executing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the measurement are used, the force measurement and 
the period measurement. In the former, the rotational 
position of the beam is measured with no source masses 
close to the test masses which are suspended from the 
balance. The source masses are moved into the required 
position with respect to the test masses. As a result of the 
gravitational force the beam rotates about the torsional 
axis. A known external force is then used to rotate the 
beam back to its original position. Accurate measurements 
of the source masses, the test masses and their separation 
then permits the determination of G in terms of absolute 
units. The period method requires the determination 
of the period of torsional oscillation of the beam both 
when the source masses are in position and when they are 
absent. This method of determining G has the advantage 
that various parameters which are difficult to measure 
accurately, cancel out in comparing the two periods. This 
method is not so sensitive to drifts of the apparatus, 
and time measurements are always more accurate than 
measurements of angular position because nonlinearity 
in the detector has much less effect. The difficulties are 
that the long measurement times place the experiment at 
risk of substantial environmental changes during the data 
taking and the nonlinear effects of small oscillations can 
affect the determination of the oscillation maxima. The 
outcome of these measurements over a period of 150- 
200 years is that the constant of gravitation is known only 
to an accuracy of a few parts in 10000: a very poor level 
of accuracy compared with other fundamental physical 
constants. Some part of this inaccuracy lies in the difficulty 
of determining in an absolute sense the mass and geometry 
of the test masses used as the source of the gravitational 
force. If the unification of physical forces occurs at the 
theoretical level, it may well be important to have accurate 
values for these fundamental constants to test the validity 
of any proposed unification scheme, and this motivates 
efforts to measure G. 


Space and ground tests of general relativity and 
the equivalence principle 

A direct prediction of general relativity is that clocks 
will be affected by the gravitational potential in which 
they are located, as measured by observers located at 
infinite distance from any gravitating masses. The first 
demonstration of this effect was published by Pound and 
Rebka [10,11], using the Méssbauer effect to generate 
a very narrow absorption line as the detector of the 
frequency shift. The resulting reduction in frequency 
(redshift) of the °’Fe gamma rays from a source at the 
top of a tower some 20 metres high was exactly in 
accordance with Einstein’s prediction. This experiment 
is now interpreted as a demonstration of the equivalence 
principle, to a reasonably high degree (about 1%), though 
not to the accuracy already achieved by E6tvés and 
colleagues. In 1979 Vessot and Levine [12] repeated 
the gravitational redshift experiment in space using a 
hydrogen maser on a Scout rocket. The result again 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Laboratory and Space Measurements of the Effects of 
Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A0 = 6.6 s/yr 
(geodetic) 


guide star 


AO = 0.042 s/yr 
(frame-dragging) 


Figure 2. Schematic representation of the ‘laboratory test’ to be performed by Gravity Probe B. 


agreed with the predictions of Einstein’s general theory 
of relativity to about one part in 104. 

Since the equivalence principle lies at the very 
foundations of general relativity, various schemes have 
been devised to extend the accuracy beyond that possible 
on the ground. Worden [13] has proposed an experiment 
which, in principle, repeats Galileo’s famous Tower of 
Pisa comparison of the rate of fall of masses of different 
composition. The generic name for the experiment is STEP, 
the Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle. The two 
test masses are made as concentric cylinders which can 
slide along, without touching, a linear superconducting 
bearing. The axis of the bearing is maintained in the plane 
of the orbit and fixed in inertial space. When the axis is 
pointing towards the Earth the two masses are attracted in 
that direction and the experimental apparatus can measure 
the relative motion of the masses to about one part in 
10'8. Space provides an excellent environment for such 
precision experiments. The high vacuum and cryogenic 
requirements can be met with modern technology, and the 
absence of interfering gravity gradient signals is extremely 
important. 

A number of subtle effects were predicted by 
the general theory of relativity [14] and these include 
departures of spinning particles from simple motions, and 
more complex behaviour of spinning particles orbiting 
spinning masses. Beyond description by Newtonian 
dynamics, these effects are related to the properties of 
‘parallel transport’ in a curved space and the dragging 
of the local spacetime coordinate system by the spinning 
central mass. Observation of such motions would 
test much more of the detailed mathematical structure 
of general relativity than is possible simply from the 
motion of non-spinning test particles. The precision 
required to test general relativity by searching for, and 
measuring, these non-Newtonian effects has been beyond 
the available technology until the 1980s. The development 
of cryogenics, low noise electronics, quantum detectors 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and space platforms has now brought general relativity 
within the grasp of experimental physics although the 
techniques required are some of the most challenging uses 
of modern technology. The GRAVITY PROBE B experiment [15] 
sets out to perform the first ‘laboratory test’ of the general 
relativistic equations for spinning particles and is shown 
diagramatically in figure 2 (see also GENERAL RELATIVITY: 
SOLAR SYSTEM EXPERIMENTS). 

This is due for launch in 2001 on a NASA rocket 
which will place the cryogenic payload in a polar orbit 
at an altitude above the Earth of 650 km. In the 
experimental package a spinning rotor is used as the test 
particle. Manufactured with exquisite precision to avoid 
disturbing forces created by any imperfections, the rotor 
is set spinning in such a way that the angle between its 
rotational axis and the fixed stars can be measured as 
the experiment proceeds. According to general relativity 
the spin axis should move slowly with respect to the 
coordinate frame defined by the stars due to two effects. 
The Fermi-Walker transport of the spin vector in space 
curved by the presence of the Earth will cause a drift of 
the spin axis by 6.6 arcseconds per year in the plane of 
the orbit. In addition to this, the spin of the Earth drags 
the coordinate frame around in such a way that there is a 
motion perpendicular to the orbit of 0.042 arcseconds per 
year, and the experiment is planned to measure this latter 
effect to an accuracy of about 1%. 


Conclusions 

By extending the laboratory into space, tests of our 
understanding of the gravitational force can be made with 
a precision which should, eventually, point the way to a 
resolution of the incompatibility of general relativity and 
quantum mechanics. 


Bibliography 
[1] Ronan C A 1974 Galileo (London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicholson) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Laboratory and Space Measurements of the Effects of 
Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


[2] Newton I 1686 Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathe- 
matica (London) 
[3] Cavendish H 1798 Experiments to determine the 
density of the Earth Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 88 469-526 
[4] Poynting J H 1891 On the determination of the mean 
density of the Earth and the gravitational constant 
by means of a common balance Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
A 182 565-656 
[5] Le Verrier UJ J 1859 C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris 49 379 
[6] Einstein A 1905 Ann. Phys., Lpz. 17 891 
[7] Einstein A 1916 Ann. Phys., Lpz. 49 769 
[8] Will C M 1993 Theory and Experiment in Gravitational 
Physics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
[9] Chen Y T and Cook A 1993 Gravitational Experiments in 
the Laboratory (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 
[10] Pound R V and Rebka G A 1960 Apparent weight of 
photons Phys. Rev. Lett. 4 337-41 
[11] Pound R V, Rebka G A and Snider J L 1960 Effects of 
gravity on gamma radiation Phys. Rev. B 140 778- 
803 
[12] Vessot R F and Levine M W 1979 A test of the 
equivalence principle using a space borne clock 
J. Gen. Rel. Grav. 10 181-204 
[13] Worden P W 1978 Equivalence principle test in Earth 
orbit Acta Astronautica 5 27-42 
[14] Schiff L I 1960 Possible new experimental tests of 
general relativity Phys. Rev. Lett. 4 215 
[15] Turneaure J P et al 1986 The Gravity Probe B 
relativity gyroscope experiment: approach to a 
flight mission Proc. 4th Marcel Grossman Meeting on 
General Relativity ed R Ruffinin (Elsevier) pp 411-64 


The following references provide more general reading: 


Pais A 1982 Subtle is the Lord: The Science and Life of Albert 
Einstein (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Kenyon I R 1990 General Relativity (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 

Schutz B F 1985 A First Course in General Relativity 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


AM Cruise 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lacaille 9352 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lacaille 9352 


A red dwarf star (spectral type M2-M3V) of apparent 
magnitude 7.35, situated in the constellation Piscis 
Austrinus, close to the border with Sculptor and about 6° 
south of Fomalhaut. It is the ninth closest star, at a distance 
of 10.7 light-years, parallax 0.304”; its absolute magnitude 
is 9.8. It is especially significant for having the fourth 
largest known proper motion, 6.896” per annum. Stars 
of such high proper motion are of great value in studies 
of stellar distribution, and especially of star streaming and 
galactic rotation. Unfortunately they are very few—only 
45 star systems are known with annual proper motions 
greater than 2”, all within a radius of 96 light-years of the 
Sun. They range in apparent magnitude from —0.05 to 
13.31; only 14 are visible with the unaided eye. They are 
reasonably well distributed around the sky, but this is a 
regrettably small number of points of reference on which 
to construct a model of stellar motions. Thus apparently 
insignificant stars such as Lacaille 9352 play a major role 
in astronomical research. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lacaille, Abbé Nicholas [Nicolas] Louis de (1713-62) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lacaille, Abbé Nicholas [Nicolas] 
Louis de (1713-62) 


Astronomer, born in Rumigny, France. From 1750 to 1754 
he led an expedition to the Cape of Good Hope, where 
he was the first to measure the curvature of the Earth 
in South Africa, and, with a small telescope, compiled 
a still-used catalogue of nearly 10000 southern stars. 
In the course of his survey he discovered and listed 
50 nebulous objects (eight are now regarded as non- 
existent). He classified his objects in three categories, 
foreshadowing the modern astrophysical interpretation: 
Lacaille I: nebulae; Lacaille II: nebulous star clusters; 
Lacaille III; nebulous stars. In his Atlas, he named 15 
southern constellations unseen by classical astronomers: 
Antlia, Caelum, Circinus, Fornax, Horologium, Mensa, 
Microscopium, Norma, Octans, Pictor, Pyxis, Reticulum, 
Sculptor, Telescopium, and renamed the constellation 
Musca. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lacerta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lacerta 


(the Lizard; abbrev. Lac, gen. Lacertae; area 201 sq. deg.) 
A northern constellation which lies between Cygnus and 
Andromeda, and culminates at midnight in late August. 
It was introduced by the astronomer Johannes Hevelius 
(1611-87) of Danzig (Gdansk), who included it in his 
atlas Firmamentum Sobiescianum sive Uranographia of 1687. 
Hevelius also gave it the alternative name of Stellio 
(the Stellion—a newt with star-like dorsal spots found 
along the Mediterranean coast), but this was seldom 
used. A few years earlier, in 1679, the French architect 
and celestial cartographer Augustin Royer had depicted 
a new constellation Sceptrum (the Sceptre—representing 
the French sceptre and hand of justice, in honor of Louis 
XIV), which culminated directly overhead as seen from 
Paris, in approximately the same position, but this was 
not widely accepted and was soon replaced by Hevelius’ 
Lacerta. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Lacerta are a Lacertae, magnitude 3.8, and 1 
Lacertae, magnitude 4.1. The Milky Way cuts across the 
northern part of Lacerta and the constellation contains 
several open star clusters, including NGC 7243, which 
consists of several dozen stars of magnitude 8.5 or fainter. 
Also in Lacerta is BL Lacertae, the variable nucleus (range 
12.4-17.2) of a distant elliptical galaxy and the type object 
of its class. 


See also: BL Lacertae objects. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lada Terra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lada Terra 


One of the three large upland regions of Venus (the other 
two being Aphrodite Terra and Ishtar Terra), situated in 
the planet’s southern hemisphere and centered at 54.4°S, 
17.5 °W. In its greatest dimension it measures 8614 km. It 
takes its name froma Slavic goddess of love. Like the other 
upland regions, Lada Terra is covered with tesserae: criss- 
crossing troughs and ridges. Lada is less elevated than the 
other main upland regions, and though extensive is less 
clearly delineated. It lacks the prominent peaks and rifts 
that characterize the others. 


See also: Venus: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lagoon Nebula (M8, NGC 6523) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lagoon Nebula (M8, NGC 6523) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Sagittarius, 
position RA 18 h 03.8™, dec. —24° 23’. At sixth magnitude 
and measuring 90’ by 40’ it is one of the most prominent 
nebulae in the sky. A bright feature in the central region is 
known from its shape as the Hourglass Nebula. It contains 
the star cluster NGC 6530, and is illuminated by a pair 
of blue giant stars, 7 and 9 Sagittarii. The lanes of dark 
nebulosity that cross the Lagoon are what give it its name. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lagrange, Joseph-Louis (1736-13) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lagrange, Joseph-Louis (1736-13) 


Mathematician, born in Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia 
in Turin, Sardinia-Piedmont (now Italy), in a family of 
modest means. As he said: ‘If I had been rich, I probably 
would not have devoted myself to mathematics’. Contrast 
with GERHARD HERZBERG. As a young man, he published 
work on the calculus of variations, developed a theory 
of dynamics based on the principle of least action, fluid 
mechanics (where he introduced the Lagrangian function) 
and the orbits of the Moon, Jupiter, its moons and 
Saturn. A protégé of EULER, he succeeded him as director 
of mathematics at the Berlin Academy of Science, and 
worked with him on the three-body problem, the motion 
of the Moon, perturbations of the orbits of comets by 
the planets, the stability of the solar system and other 
mathematical problems. At the age of 51 he moved to 
Paris, where he was acclaimed as a French mathematician 
through the publication of Mécanique Analytique. This 
work summarized all the work done in the field of 
mechanics since the time of NEWTON, using differential 
equations to transform mechanics into the branch of 
mathematical analysis that it is today. He was threatened 
by the events of the Reign of Terror, being vulnerable as a 
foreigner, but was saved by the intervention of Lavoisier, 
who himself came under suspicion and was guillotined. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lagrangian Points 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lagrangian Points 


Five neutral points (points at which an object experiences 
no net gravitational force), in the combined gravitational 
field of two massive bodies which are orbiting their center 
of mass, at which an object of much smaller mass can exist 
in equilibrium. They are so named because Joseph-Louis 
Lagrange in 1772 was the first to find them as solutions to 
a restricted case of the three-body problem. Three of the 
points lie on a line joining the centers of the two massive 
bodies, M; and M2, assumed for simplicity to be in circular 
orbits. The inner Lagrangian point, denoted by Ly, lies 
between M, and Mb, while L, and L3, the outer Lagrangian 
points, lie on either side. The other two Lagrangian points, 
L, and Ls, are in the orbit of Mz about My, respectively 60° 
ahead of and behind Mj in its orbit. Ly and L; therefore 
form equilateral triangles with M; and Mj. Abody at Li, Ly 
or Lg isin unstable equilibrium, very prone to gravitational 
perturbations, but a body at I, or Ls is less prone to 
perturbations and has long-term orbital stability. 

In practice, the situation is complicated by the 
ellipticity of real orbits and the presence of gravitational 
perturbations. In the solar system the best example of 
bodies in stable orbits at Lagrangian points are the Trojan 
asteroids at the Ly and Ls points of Jupiter’s orbit around 
the Sun. Perturbations by the other planets, notably 
Saturn, make each Trojan oscillate back and forth between 
points about 45° and 80° ahead of or behind Jupiter. One 
Martian Trojan is known, orbiting near Mars’s Ls point. 
A halo orbit is an orbit around a Lagrangian point. The 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) was placed 
in a halo orbit around the Earth’s inner Lagrangian point, 
L,, between the Earth and the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lalande, Joseph-Jér6me Lefrangais de (1732-1807) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lalande, Joseph-Jérome Lefrancais 
de (1732-1807) 


Astronomer, born in Bourg-en-Bresse, France. In what 
was one of the first internationally coordinated scientific 
campaigns, to determine the Moon’s parallax, he was 
sent in 1752 to Berlin by the French Académie des 
Sciences. Other astronomers took up positions at six other 
sites located on more or less the same meridian from 
Stockholm to the Cape (where Lalande’s colleague LACAILLE 
was located). They observed the Moon (and indeed 
Mars) simultaneously against its background of stars, 
and, knowing their mutual distance (in kilometers), they 
were able to use the method of triangulation in order to 
determine the Moon’s distance. He edited La Connaissance 
des Temps the French almanac, and became professor of 
astronomy in the Collége de France, and later director of 
the Paris Observatory. His chief work is Traité d’Astronomie 
(1764), and he also produced a comprehensive star catalog, 
recording the planet Neptune on two occasions before its 
discovery without recognizing that it was not a star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lambert, Johann Heinrich (1728-77) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lambert, Johann Heinrich (1728-77) 


Mathematical physicist, born in Mulhouse, Alsace, France, 
proved that pi is irrational, devised techniques for 
photometry (the lambert, the unit of light intensity, is 
named after him). He wrote on non-Euclidean geometry, 
the theory of cartography, and perspective in art. Lambert’s 
problem in orbital dynamics is: given a planet A at a given 
time and planet B at a later time, with what velocity 
to launch a projectile to get from A to B by orbiting 
under the influence of the Sun? This is the fundamental 
question of interplanetary space travel. When asked by 
King Frederick IT in which science he was most proficient, 
Lambert claimed: ‘All’! 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lamont, Johann von (1805-79) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lamont, Johann von (1805-79) 


Astronomer, born in Braemar, Aberdeenshire, Scotland, 
took German nationality, and became professor of 
astronomy at Munich. Determined the orbits of moons 
of Saturn and Uranus, worked on terrestrial magnetism, 
writing a handbook on the subject (1849); discovered that 
the magnetic field of the Earth fluctuates in a period of 
10 years. Von Lamont recorded Neptune on at least three 
occasions over a four-day period just before its discovery 
by Galle, and perhaps should have recognized its motion, 
but did not. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Langren [Langrenus], Michael Florent van [Michael 
Florentius] (c. 1600-75) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Langren [Langrenus], Michael Florent 
van [Michael Florentius] (c. 1600-75) 


‘Spherographer’, i.e. astronomer, cartographer, geogra- 
pher and engineer, born in Amsterdam (probably), into 
a prominent Belgian family of map- and globe-makers. 
Tried to determine longitude by predicting phenomena 
on the Moon (such as the illumination and shadowing of 
lunar mountains) that could be observed from all points of 
the Earth and used as clocks. In the course of this work, he 
prepared lunar maps, including views of the Moon on a 
daily basis in its cycle. In the hope of patronage, he named 
the lunar features with the names of prominent figures, 
such as Pope Innocent X, and royalty. The Infanta Isabelle 
Claire Eugenie appears three times: a mountain Eugeniae 
(in Mare Belgicum), Mare Eugenianum, and a mountain 
Isabellae (in Mare Eugenianum). Became ‘Mathematician 
and Cosmographer’ to King Philip IV of Spain. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lansberge, Philip van [Lansbergen, Philips] (1561—- 
1632) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lansberge, Philip van [Lansbergen, 
Philips] (1561-1632) 


Minister, born in Ghent, Belgium, publishing books on 
mathematics and astronomy, in which he supported 
Copernican theories. However, he could not believe 
in non-circular planetary motions and did not accept 
KEPLER’S theory of elliptical planetary motion, publishing 
astronomical tables which he hoped (in vain) would 
support COPERNICUS over Kepler. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Laplace, Pierre-Simon (1749-1827) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Laplace, Pierre-Simon (1749-1827) 


Celestial mechanician, born in Beaumont-en-Auge, Nor- 
mandy, France, became professor of mathematics at the 
Ecole Militaire in Paris, examining the cadet Napoleon 
Bonaparte. This position made Laplace well known to 
people in positions of power, which he opportunistically 
exploited, becoming, under Napoleon, Minister of the In- 
terior (Napoleon soon removed him from office ‘because 
he brought the spirit of the infinitely small into the gov- 
ernment’.) He researched probability theory, the calcu- 
lus, and celestial mechanics. His work was interrupted 
by the Reign of Terror. Even though, wisely, self-exiled 
from Paris, Laplace, as a member of the metrication com- 
mittee of the Académie des Sciences was consulted about 
rationalization of the calendar and metrication of angles 
and did not demur with the Revolutionary proposals, al- 
though he knew they were impractical and even incorrect. 
As more stable times returned, Laplace became head of 
the Paris Observatory, and was criticized for ‘neglecting 
all the observations except those needed for his formulas’. 
He presented the Laplace nebular hypothesis in Exposition du 
Systeme du Monde (1796), that viewed the solar system as 
originating from a large, flattened, slowly rotating cloud 
of hot gas. He also expressed another remarkably mod- 
ern view, of the impact of comets on the Earth: ‘The small 
probability of collision of the Earth and acomet can become 
very great in adding over a long sequence of centuries. It is 
easy to picture the effects of this impact on the Earth. The 
axis and the motion of rotation have changed, the seas 
abandoning their old position. .., a large part of men and 
animals drowned in this universal deluge, or destroyed by 
the violent tremor imparted to the terrestrial globe’. The 
Exposition was an introduction for Laplace’s most impor- 
tant, five-volume work Traité du Mécanique Céleste, which 
set up the differential equations of dynamics, solving them 
to describe the motion, including the orbits of the plan- 
ets, the rotation and shape of the Earth and the tides. The 
book contains what is now called Laplace’s equation (in fact, 
known earlier). Laplace explained that ‘I have sought to 
establish that the phenomena of nature can be reduced in 
the last analysis to actions at a distance between molecule 
and molecule, and that the consideration of these actions 
must serve as the basis of the mathematical theory of these 
phenomena’. In Laplace’s later work Théorie Analytique des 
Probabilités, and with this philosophy in mind, he applied 
probability theory to errors in observations, the determina- 
tion of the masses of Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus, surveying 
and geodesy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large Binocular Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Large Binocular Telescope 


The Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) project is a collabora- 
tion to build a twin interferometric telescope between insti- 
tutions in Arizona, Germany, Italy and Ohio. Arizona in- 
cludes astronomers at the University of Arizona, Arizona 
State University and Northern Arizona University. Ger- 
many is represented by the LBT Beteiligungsgesellschaft 
which is composed of the Max-Planck-Institut fiir As- 
tronomie in Heidelberg, Landesstenwarte Heidelberg, the 
Max-Planck-Institut fiir Radioastronomie in Bonn, the 
Max-Planck-Institut fiir Extraterrestrische Physik in Mu- 
nich and the Astrophysikalisches Institut Potsdam. The 
Italian astronomical community is represented by the Os- 
servatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri in Florence. Partners at 
individual institutions include Ohio State University in 
Columbus, the University of Notre Dame and the Research 
Corporation in Tucson. 

The two 8.4 m borosilicate honeycomb primary 
mirrors for LBT are being cast at the STEWARD OBSERVATORY 
Mirror Laboratory. The baseline optical configuration 
of LBT includes adaptive infrared f/15 secondaries of a 
Gregorian design. The interferometric focus combining 
the light from the two 8.4 m primaries will reimage the two 
folded Gregorian focal planes to three central locations. 
The telescope structure is being fabricated in Italy. After 
pre-erection in the factory, it will be shipped to Arizona 
towards the end of 2000. The enclosure is being built on 
Mount Graham in southeast Arizona. 

For further information see 
http:/ /medusa.as.arizona.edu/lbtwww/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large Hot Subdwarfs and Extreme Horizontal Branch 
Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Large Hot Subdwarfs and Extreme 
Horizontal Branch Stars 


The hot subdwarf stars were first identified by their 
extremely blue colors in early field and cluster color- 
select photometric surveys (Humason and Zwicky 
1947). Spectroscopic studies soon followed (Miinch 
1958, Greenstein 1965). From the cluster studies, it was 
quickly recognized that hot subdwarfs must have lower 
luminosities than main sequence stars of the same blue 
color, ie. O and B stars, and it was Greenstein who 
first labeled them ‘hot subdwarfs’. They were divided 
into subdwarf O (sdO) and subdwarf B (sdB) classes 
based on their spectral features, with the hotter sdO stars 
showing strong He II 4 4686 absorption and very weak or 
absent He I absorption, while, in the cooler sdB stars, the 
He II feature was lacking or very weak, and the neutral 
helium lines showed a broad range of strengths. Model 
atmosphere analyses of their spectra have confirmed their 
high effective temperatures and surface gravities, and their 
smaller radii and luminosities. 

In recent years, the sdB stars have become firmly 
identified with the horizontal branch (HB) phase of post- 
main-sequence stellar evolution, in which stars derive 
their energy from the burning of helium into carbon (see 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS). The relationship is seen most 
clearly in metal-poor globular clusters (GC), where the 
cluster blue horizontal branch (BHB) stars often are seen to 
have an extended blue ‘tail’, or extended horizontal branch 
(EHB). However, not all metal-poor clusters exhibit this 
phenomenon, and the existence or absence of blue tails in 
GC HBs is a mystery which could be strongly connected 
to the process that forms sdBs. Pairs of clusters such 
as M3-M13 (famous so-called ‘second parameter’ pairs) 
are important for learning about the origin of sdB stars. 
A review is given by Moehler (1999). Photometrically 
and spectroscopically, the cluster EHB stars are found 
to be indistinguishable from their field sdB counterparts. 
In this article, the sdB and EHB designations are used 
interchangeably. 

To set the stage for a discussion of the sdB stars, 
we first briefly review the main evolutionary stages of 
intermediate-mass stars, i.e. those with initial masses of 
about (1-8)Mo. These stars ultimately will end their lives 
as white dwarfs (WDs). We take as a representative 
example a star having an initial mass equal to that of our 
own Sun, with the reminder that initially more massive 
stars will evolve on shorter timescales. 


Evolution of intermediate-mass stars 

Stellar birth and early evolution 

Stars begin their lives as contracting condensations in 
massive clouds of gas and dust. Their compressed 
central regions eventually become hot and dense enough 
for hydrogen to undergo nuclear fusion reactions that 
transform it into helium, liberating vast amounts of energy 
in the process. After central hydrogen ignition, the star 
settles into its first stable stage of STELLAR EVOLUTION, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hydrogen-burning main sequence. Our own Sun is in 
this stage, which for stars having a similar initial mass 
lasts for some 10!° yr. In the central 10% of the mass 
(the core), the temperature and density are high enough 
to sustain nuclear burning reactions, and hydrogen is 
steadily converted into helium. The energy is released 
both as light and as kinetic energy of the gas particles (that 
is, as heat), both of which serve to stabilize the collapse 
of the star against its own self-gravity. At the end of the 
main sequence phase, the available hydrogen in the core is 
completely converted into inert helium. The core material 
is not hot or dense enough to initiate helium burning, and, 
lacking a source of fuel, fusion reactions within the core 
cease. 


Red giant branch evolution 

Without the continuing generation of heat and pressure 
from the now-extinct fusion reactions, the stellar core can 
no longer support itself against its own gravitational pull, 
and it begins a slow, steady contraction, becoming even 
hotter and denser as it does so. For intermediate-mass 
stars like the Sun, the core is ultimately able to stabilize 
itself owing to the onset of quantum-mechanical electron 
degeneracy, which provides the pressure necessary to 
balance the star’s self-gravity. Hydrogen does continue 
to burn in a thin shell around the now-degenerate 0.1M > 
inert helium core, and the star enters the red giant branch 
(RGB) stage of evolution (See RED GIANT STARS). 

The RGB is so named because the extremely high 
temperatures at the surface of the core drive shell hydrogen 
burning at an even higher luminosity than the previous 
stage of core hydrogen burning. The increased energy 
flow causes the outer, hydrogen-rich envelope to expand 
and cool, and hence the star moves up and to the right in 
the H-R diagram. As shell hydrogen burning continues 
to add helium to the core, the peculiar properties of the 
degenerate matter result in the core shrinking as the mass 
grows. The core grows even hotter as a result, shell 
hydrogen burning proceeds at an even faster rate, and the 
stellar luminosity rises even further. The star thus steadily 
‘ascends’ the RGB as the core continues to grow in mass. 
The star remains in this stage of evolution for about 10° yr, 
ie. about 10% of the time it spends on the main sequence. 
We note that the termination of this phase of evolution is 
not determined by the exhaustion of a nuclear fuel as it 
was at the end of the main sequence phase, but rather by 
the ignition of a new nuclear fuel, helium. 


Horizontal branch evolution 

When the inert, degenerate helium core mass reaches 
~(0.45—-0.50) Mo, the temperature and density become high 
enough to initiate a second stage of nuclear burning— 
the so-called ‘triple-alpha’ (3a) process—wherein three 
helium nuclei are fused to a single nucleus of carbon. The 
re-ignition of the central ‘furnace’ provides sufficient heat 
and pressure to lift the electron degeneracy and return the 
core material to a ‘normal’ condition, where the pressure is 
determined through an ideal gas equation of state. The star 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large Hot Subdwarfs and Extreme Horizontal Branch 
Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


once again is able to hold gravity at bay, and it commences 
a second stable phase of energy production through the 
fusion of helium to carbon in the core. Hydrogen continues 
to burn in a shell surrounding the helium-burning core, 
with each energy source providing approximately half of 
the star’s total luminosity. This phase of evolution has 
been termed the ‘horizontal branch’ (HB), since the V 
magnitude of stars in this phase is about the same for a 
broad range of effective temperatures (To). This results 
in a flat or horizontal distribution in the H-R diagram, at 
least for all but the hottest blue HB stars. HB stars remain 
in this stage of evolution for about 108 yr, ie. about 10% of 
the time they spend on the RGB. At the end of the HB phase, 
helium is exhausted in the core, having been converted to 
carbon and oxygen, the latter having been produced by a 
capture onto carbon. 

Subsequent evolution through the asymptotic red 
giant branch and PLANETARY NEBULA phases, and the star’s 
final WHITE DwaRF phase, are discussed elsewhere in this 
encyclopedia. 


Observational characteristics of EHB stars 
Optical colors and spectra 
In EHB stars, the optical broadband colors are quite blue, 
B-—V ~ —0.3,U—B ~ —1.0,so that the detection efficiency 
is very high in ultraviolet-excess color surveys. However, 
a significant fraction (15-20%) of hot subdwarfs are 
found in binaries with bright main sequence or subgiant 
companions which redden the optical colors. The optical 
spectra are characterized by blue continuua, with broad, 
shallow hydrogen and diffuse helium absorption lines 
(compared with main sequence B stars). As previously 
noted, the distinction between the sdO and sdB subclasses 
of hot subdwarfs has been based on the presence and 
strength of the H, He I and He II absorption lines. 
Recently, Jeffery et al (1997) carried out spectroscopy 
of hot subdwarfs previously classified as ‘helium-rich 
subdwarf B stars’ from low-resolution spectra. They 
found a wider range in He II/He I and He/H ratios than 
previously found in the class. Their revised classification 
scheme for helium-rich hot subdwarfs is based on higher- 
resolution, high signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) spectra and 
can be extended to include all hot subdwarfs with spectra 
dominated by H, He I or He II. 


Ultraviolet spectra and abundances 

The ultraviolet (UV) spectra of sdB stars show numerous 
photospheric lines of heavy elements with high excitation, 
such as N III, C IV, Si IV and others, usually very 
sharp compared with the lines of hydrogen and helium. 
Additional weak, very sharp features are seen in the optical 
spectra at very high dispersion and S/N. The elemental 
abundances are modified by diffusion and, possibly, mass- 
loss processes in the hot, higher-gravity atmospheres, with 
helium typically underabundant, and with carbon and 
silicon underabundant. Nitrogen usually appears normal. 
The modified abundance patterns obscure relationships 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between sdBs and their progenitor stars and make their 
evolutionary history more difficult to establish. 

The photometric and spectroscopic observational 
history of hot subdwarfs is rich, if brief; a summary is 
given by Saffer and Liebert (1995). 


Astrophysical properties 

Atmospheric parameters 

In the first comprehensive analysis of hot subdwarfs, 
Greenstein and Sargent (1974) found that most sdB stars 
fell into a Ter range of 25 000-35 000 K and had a range of 
surface gravities log g between 5 and 6. They argued that 
the HB and EHB stars had similar structures, with helium- 
burning cores and hydrogen-rich envelopes. The EHB 
stars, however, had such thin envelopes (S0.01M.) that 
they could not sustain a hydrogen-burning shell, which in 
normal HB stars produces approximately half of the stellar 
luminosity. 

The Palomar Green (PG) Survey (Green et al 1986) 
revealed large numbers of hot subluminous stars. The 
new, large sample prompted fresh analyses to determine 
effective temperatures, surface gravities and chemical 
abundances (e.g. Moehler et al 1990, Saffer et al 1994, 
Saffer and Liebert 1995 among others; see Saffer 
and Liebert 1995 for a summary). Complementary 
programs in the southern hemisphere, the Edinburgh— 
Cape (EC) and Hamburg Schmidt (HS) surveys, have 
also identified large numbers of hot subdwarfs at high 
galactic latitudes (see also BLUE STARS AT HIGH GALACTIC 
LATITUDES). The compilation of Kilkenny ef al (1988) lists 
1225 spectroscopically identified hot subdwarfs, many 
of which now have estimated temperatures and surface 
gravities from modern model atmosphere analyses. The 
addition of hot subdwarfs from the EC and HS surveys 
will undoubtedly significantly increase these numbers. 


Evolutionary status 

Modern theoretical evolutionary calculations of HB and 
EHB sequences make predictions of effective temperatures 
and surface gravities for a range of core and envelope 
masses (Sweigart 1987, Caloi 1989, Dorman et al 1993). 
Comparisons with observational estimates for both the 
field sdB stars and globular cluster EHB stars indicate that 
the bulk have a very narrow range of helium core masses 
near 0.5Mj and very thin hydrogen-rich envelope masses 
Mew < 0.01Mo. 

Figure 1 shows the distribution of a large-scale 
spectroscopic survey of high-latitude B stars in the Tog— 
log g plane, where the open symbols represent the 
high-gravity subdwarfs (Saffer et al 1997). The helium 
abundance is indicated by the type of symbol, being 
strongly depleted, mildly depleted, normal or enhanced 
for open circles, triangles, squares or stars, respectively. 
The filled symbols represent halo B-type star candidates. 
Proceeding from low to high surface gravity, the two solid 
curves are post-AGB evolutionary sequences labeled with 
the core mass (Sch6nberner 1983), the dot-dashed curve is 
the population I zero-age main sequence (ZAMS) (Allen 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large Hot Subdwarfs and Extreme Horizontal Branch 
Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1973), the diagonally curving dashed and dotted lines 
are 0.5M, core helium-burning HB stars with varying 
overlying hydrogen-rich envelope masses (Sweigart 1987, 
Caloi 1989), and the solid, nearly horizontal curve at 
log g 2 6.0 is the helium ZAMS (Paczynski 1971). The 
latter is labeled with the mass of the helium-burning core 
(see HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM, POPULATION I STARS). The 
undulating curves lying between the post-AGB and HB 
tracks are post-core helium exhaustion stars where helium 
burning continues in a shell around an inert carbon— 
oxygen core (Caloi 1989). 

The theoretical sequences also show that following 
the exhaustion of helium in the core, EHB stars are unable 
to ascend the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) because 
their thin hydrogen envelopes cannot sustain a hydrogen- 
burning shell. Instead, they move to higher temperatures 
and luminosities for durations of about 10% of their core- 
helium-burning lifetimes, as they undergo helium shell 
flashes in the region of the H-R diagram occupied by the 
sdO stars. Thus, at least some of the sdO stars appear to 
be the direct descendents of the EHB stars. Some low- 
mass post-AGB evolutionary tracks also pass through the 
sdO region (Schénberner 1983), and mergers of pairs of He 
WDs also may produce sdO stars (Bailyn and Iben 1989). 


Chemical abundances 

Detailed calculations of radiative acceleration on helium 
and heavier elements suggest that some elements can be 
supported against gravitational settling in the hot, high- 
gravity atmospheres of sdB stars (Lamontagne et al 1985, 
1987, Michaud et al 1985, 1989; Bergeron et al 1988; see 
also CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF STARS). Observations generally 
support this picture, as hot subdwarfs do show markedly 
non-solar chemical abundance distributions, presumably 
as the result of diffusion processes (see also SOLAR 
ABUNDANCES). However, the observed detailed abundance 
patterns are generally not in agreement with theoretical 
predictions. For example, silicon is predicted to be 
supported in sdB stars but is found to be underabundant, 
and helium should be extremely depleted (so that helium 
absorption lines should not be detectable) but in general is 
found to be underabundant only by a factor of 10. These 
results suggest that other particle transport processes, such 
as a weak stellar wind, operate in subdwarf atmospheres. 
A review is given by Fontaine and Chayer (1997), and 
previous abundance analyses from UV spectroscopy have 
been reviewed by Heber (1998). 


The EC 14026 stars 

In 1997 anew class of pulsating star was discovered. These 
stars, designated the EC 14026 stars after the prototype, are 
pulsating subdwarfB stars with Tog ~ 35000 Kand log g ~ 
6.0. The multiperiodic oscillations have periods P ~ 120- 
500 s and amplitudes typically less than 1%. Photometric 
surveys have thus far identified 18 pulsators. Their spectra 
reveal that several of the hot subdwarfs are binary, having 
a cooler main sequence or subgiant F or G type star. 
Apparently constant stars mingle with the pulsators, so 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that there is no well-defined instability strip. This poses a 
significant challenge to the Fe opacity bump mechanism 
proposed to drive the oscillations (Charpinet et al 1997). 
Indeed, new abundances for pulsating sdB stars derived 
from high-resolution Keck spectra (Heber et al 1999, 2000) 
strengthen the conclusion that the iron abundance is 
not the sole discriminating factor for pulsation driving. 
Identification of the modes of oscillation and the driving 
mechanism will lead to an improved asteroseismological 
understanding of hot subdwarfs and to better estimates 
of their masses, rotation rates, physical structure and 
chemical compositions. 


EHB distances, scale height and midplane density 

The distribution of EHB stars in the H-R diagram suggests 
a mass of 0.5Mo, and reddening along the line of sight is 
estimated by comparing the observed and theoretically 
predicted colors. Combined with the stellar mass and 
reddening, the derived EHB effective temperatures and 
surface gravities lead to estimates of heights above the 
GALACTIC PLANE (z = dsinb) of 1-3 kpc. Assuming an 
exponentially decreasing density with increasing height 
above the Galactic plane, early scale height estimates 
were made using samples with relatively bright limiting 
magnitudes. The derived scale height z) ranged from 
180 to 240 pc, indicating membership in the old disk 
population. Saffer and Liebert (1995) used a deeper, more 
complete high-latitude sample to derive z) = 500 pc, 
implying that the population is significantly older than 
the bulk of the stars in the old part of the thin disk. Most 
recently, Mitchell (1998) used a faint (V < 18), pencil-beam 
sample of field sdB stars to show that a substantial fraction 
of sdB stars fainter than the limiting magnitudes of the 
large color-select surveys (PG, EC, HS) belong to the halo 
population and not that of the old disk. de Boer et al (1997) 
studied the orbits of relatively bright sdB stars (V < 14.5), 
finding many eccentric orbits. However, none of the stars 
could be positively halo objects, probably because of the 
bright limiting magnitude of their sample. 

The Kitt Peak Downes Survey (KPD; Downes 1986) 
in the Galactic plane, similar to the PG Survey both 
in color-excess criteria and in limiting magnitude, also 
identified large numbers of hot subdwarfs. The sample 
is especially well suited for the determination of the EHB 
midplane space density. Using a V/ Vmax analysis, Saffer 
and Liebert (1995) estimated the field EHB space density to 
be no = 7.5 x 107” pe~*, compared with previous estimates 
of 1.5-2 x 10° and 4 x 10°. Assuming a core helium- 
burning lifetime t = 1.5 x 10° yr, the EHB birthrate is 
then b = no/t = 5 x 10° pe? yr-'. Current estimates 
of the local white dwarf birthrate range from 0.5 x 10? 
to 2 x 10-” pce~? yr“!, that is, the contribution to the local 
white dwarf birthrate from the EHB channel is just 0.25- 
1%, compared with previous estimates of about 2%. 


Origins and subsequent evolution 
The suggestion that hot subdwarf stars might produce 
the significant amounts of far-ultraviolet (FUV) flux seen 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large Hot Subdwarfs and Extreme Horizontal Branch 
Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


wo 
2) 


raw Se 


On 
© 


6.0 


45000 40000 35000 30000 25000 20000 15000 


rT 


[ 


10000 


eff 


Figure 1. Distribution of a large-scale spectroscopic survey of high-latitude B stars: see text for details. 


in many ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES (e.g. Dorman et al 1995) 
as well as their ubiquitous presence in the field have 
motivated numerous studies to determine their origins. 
Any proposed mechanisms must be able to reproduce the 
inferred physical structure of the EHB stars, namely, a 
helium-burning core of ~0.5Mo, and avery thin (<0.01Mo,) 
hydrogen-rich envelope. The key problem is how to 
achieve the critical mass for core-helium ignition while at 
the same time removing virtually all of the hydrogen-rich 
envelope. 

In metal-poor globular clusters, Reimer’s mass loss 
in single RGB stars can plausibly remove upwards of 
0.3M, from the hydrogen-rich envelope. In such a 
stellar population, this is sufficient to completely strip the 
envelope of the RGB progenitors (low-mass turn-off stars) 
by the time their cores grow to the critical helium-ignition 
mass on the RGB. This scenario is more problematic in 
the field and in younger, more metal-rich GLOBULAR and 
GALACTIC OPEN CLUSTERS, Where the turn-off mass is higher. 
Some success has been achieved for stars with extremely 
high metallicities and/or helium abundances. 

Alternatively, in CLOSE BINARY STARS, ROCHE LOBE Over- 
flow could easily strip the envelope. Mengel et al (1976) 
first investigated this scenario and successfully produced 
ENB stars, but only for a very narrow range of initial stellar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


masses and orbital separations. For very close initial sep- 
arations, the envelope is stripped before the helium core 
grows to ignition mass, leaving a helium WD. For wide 
initial separations, helium ignition occurs while a substan- 
tial envelope mass remains, producing a normal HB star. 
Liebert et al (1994) found the range of orbital separations 
producing EHB stars in this scenario to be too narrow to ex- 
plain the HB morphology of the metal-rich Galactic cluster 
NGC 6791. 

Recent studies of field sdB stars imply a large binary 
fraction, as revealed both by composite colors and by high- 
precision radial velocity variations. Green and Chaboyer 
(1998) showed that sdB stars can be distingushed by their 
spectroscopic and kinematic properties. Some ~15-20% 
of field sdB stars have composite spectra indicating the 
presence of a cool companion. These either do not vary or 
have small radial velocity variations indicative of binaries 
with wide separations (a few AU). A second group of 
~45-50% of the field sdB stars have large radial velocity 
variations with characteristic timescales of days. These 
have no obvious visible companions, which are assumed 
to be WDs. Rarely, the invisible companions are detected 
through eclipses or reflection effects. The remaining ~35% 
of field sdBs are apparently single. 

Provided that most field sdB stars are the counterparts 
of the GC EHB stars, their fate seems certain. Since they 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large Hot Subdwarfs and Extreme Horizontal Branch 
Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


cannot add to their 0.5M, cores in a subsequent AGB 
phase, after the short-lived post-EHB phase they seem 
destined to directly enter the WD cooling sequence, albeit 
with CO core masses of ~0.5Mo, about 0.1Mo less than the 
average WD. As noted previously, the sdB stars contribute 
only a very minor fraction to the total WD birthrate. 


Unsolved problems 

Much progress has been made in the last decade toward 
the understanding of the astrophysical properties and 
evolutionary histories of the sdB/EHB stars. The 
understanding of several key issues remains elusive. 

(1) How are hot subdwarfs formed? Evidence 
increasingly points to a close binary evolution connection, 
but the details are still sparse. Acomprehensive theoretical 
investigation of close binary Roche lobe overflow and 
envelope stripping over a wide range of initial stellar 
masses and initial separations is needed. No such 
investigation has been undertaken since that of Mengel 
et al (1976). Infrared observations of the apparently single 
population of field sdB stars would confirm or rule out 
the existence of low-mass secondaries hitherto undetected. 
These results would have significant implications for 
the outcome of the common-envelope phase which all 
sufficiently close systems must undergo. 

(2) Theoretical predictions of the detailed abundance 
distributions in sdB photospheres remain at odds with 
the observations. New generations of model atmosphere 
codes that self-consistently take elemental diffusion and 
stellar winds into account in calculating the atmospheric 
structure are now available and should shed new light on 
this persistent problem. A description of these new codes 
is given by Dreizler (1999). 

(3) The pulsating sdB stars offer a new and 
exciting asteroseismological window into sdB STELLAR 
INTERIORS. Detailed abundance distributions of the iron- 
group elements may help solve the current conundrum 
of the existence of constant stars in the same temperature 
and gravity ranges as known pulsators. Iron itself, the 
suspected opacity source for the driving mechanism, does 
not seem to be the discriminating factor. 


Bibliography 

Allen C W 1973 Astrophysical Quantities (London: Athlone) 

Bailyn C D and Iben I Jr 1989 Astrophys. J. 347 L21 

Bergeron P, Wesemael F, Michaud G and Fontaine G 1988 
Astrophys. J. 332 964 

Caloi V 1989 Astron. Astrophys. 221 27 

Charpinet S, Fontaine G, Brassard P, Chayer P, Rogers F J, 
Iglesias C A and Dorman B 1997 Astrophys. J. 483 L123 

de Boer K S, Aguilar Sanchez Y, Altmann M, Geffert M, 
Odenkirchen M, Schmidt J H K and Colin J 1997 
Astron. Astrophys. 327 577 

Dorman B, O’Connell R W and Rood R T 1995 Astrophys. J. 
442 105 

Dorman B, Rood R T and O’Connell R W 1993 Astrophys. J. 
419 596 

Downes R A 1986 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 61 569 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dreizler S 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 352 632 

Fontaine G and Chayer P 1997 3rd Conf. on Faint Blue Stars 
ed AG D Philip et al (Davis) p 169 

Green E M and Chaboyer B C 1998 Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 
193 102.13 

Green R F, Schmidt M and Liebert J 1986 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 
61 305 

Greenstein J L 1965 Galactic Structure, Stars and Stellar 
Systems vol V, ed A Blaauw and M Schmidt (Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press) p 361 

Greenstein J L and Sargent AI 1974 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 28 
157 

Heber U 1998 Ultraviolet Astrophysics Beyond the IUE 
Final Archive (ESA SP 413) ed W Wamsteker, 
R Gonzalez Riestra and B Harris (ESA) p 195 

Heber U, Reid I N and Werner K 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 
348 L25 

Heber U, Reid I N and Werner K 2000 Acta Astronomica 8 
in press 

Humason M L and Zwicky F 1947 Astrophys. J. 105 85 

Jeffery C S, Drilling J S, Harrison P M, Heber U and 
Moehler S 1997 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 125 501 

Kilkenny D, Heber U and Drilling J S 1988 SAAO Circular 
12 

Lamontagne R, Wesemael F and Fontaine G 1987 
Astrophys. J. 318 844 

Lamontagne R, Wesemael F, Fontaine G and Sion E M 1985 
Astrophys. J. 299 496 

Liebert J, Saffer R A and Green E M 1994 Astron. J. 107 1408 

Mengel J G, Norris J and Gross P G 1976 Astrophys. J. 204 

488 

Michaud G, Bergeron P, Heber U and Wesemael F 1989 

Astrophys. J. 338 417 

Michaud G, Bergeron P, Wesemael F and Fontaine G 1985 

Astrophys. J. 299 741 

Mitchell K J 1998 Astrophys. J. 494 256 

Moehler S 1999 Rev. Mod. Astrophys. 12 281 

Moehler S, Heber U and de Boer KS 1990 Astron. Astrophys. 

239 265 

Miinch G 1958 Astrophys. J. 127 642 

Paczynski B 1971 Acta Astronomica 21 1 

Saffer R A and Liebert J 1995 Proc. 9th European Workshop 
on White Dwarfs ed D Koester and K Werner (Berlin: 
Springer) p 221 

Saffer R, Bergeron P, Koester D and Liebert J 1994 
Astrophys. J. 432 351 

Saffer R A, Keenan F P, Hambly N C, Dufton P L and 
Liebert J 1997 Astrophys. J. 491 172 

Schénberner D 1983 Astrophys. J. 272 708 

Sweigart A V 1987 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 65 95 


Rex A Saffer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large Magellanic Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Large Magellanic Cloud 


The larger of two nearby companions of the Milky Way 
Galaxy that can be seen with the naked eye in the southern 
hemisphere sky and which are named after the Portuguese 
navigator, Ferdinand Magellan, who observed them in 
1519 during his circumnavigation of the world. Located in 
the constellation of Dorado, at a distance of about 170000 
light-years, the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) has an 
overall diameter of about 35000 light-years and contains 
about 10!° stars. Its overall mass is between one-tenth 
and one-twentieth of that of the Milky Way Galaxy. It 
was originally classified as an irregular galaxy (of type 
Irr I in the Hubble classification), but, because it has a 
conspicuous central bar and shows hints of what may 
be an incipient spiral arm, it is now considered to be an 
irregular barred spiral, the prototype of a class designated 
‘Sm’. It contains the Tarantula Nebula, a huge HII region, 
with a diameter of about 900 light-years, which surrounds 
a vigorous star-forming region, and is one of the largest 
HII regions known. The LMC, which contains numerous 
clouds of gas and dust, young star clusters and supernova 
remnants, appears to be experiencing a major bout of star 
formation that was probably triggered by the effects of a 
close encounter with the Milky Way a few billion years 
ago. 


See also: barred spiral galaxy, H II regions, irregular 
galaxy, Local Group, Milky Way Galaxy, nebula, Small 
Magellanic Cloud, spiral arms, Tarantula Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large-Scale Plasma Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Large-Scale Plasma Dynamics 


Most of the universe is occupied by gas that is electrically 
neutral but more or less fully ionized, i.e. PLASMA, and 
permeated by a magnetic field B on a large scale 
L. The plasma, driven by the energy of the stars, is 
in a remarkably active, and often suprathermal, state. 
The coronal mass ejection from the Sun is an example 
of the active state, while the million degree corona 
of the Sun is an example of the suprathermal state, 
giving rise to the dynamical expansion that produces 
the supersonic SOLAR WIND sweeping out through the 
solar system. The interstellar gas is powerfully agitated 
by the intense heating around massive HIGH LUMINOSITY 
sTARS. Expanding SUPERNOVA shells and the CRAB NEBULA are 
examples of dynamical states, whose shock fronts heat 
the gas throughout large volumes of interstellar space to 
suprathermal temperatures of 10° K or more, causing the 
gas to expand up out of the gaseous disk of the Galaxy to 
contribute to the galactic halo. So a proper formulation 
of the dynamics of a magnetized plasma is essential for 
understanding the activity of the Sun and other stars and 
of the Galaxy. 

Ina tenuous fully ionized gas the individual electrons 
and ions gyrate around the magnetic field while being 
scattered by electrostatic interactions with their neighbors. 
The cyclotron frequency of the gyration is 2 = gB/Mc 
for a particle with mass M and charge q. The cyclotron 
radius R is w,/Q where w, is the velocity of the particle 
perpendicular to the magnetic field. The electric field of an 
individual particle is screened off by its neighbors beyond 
the characteristic Debye length D = (kT/42Ne?)'/? ina 
plasma with temperature T and number density N. The 
effective mean free path for both electrons and ions is 
approximately (Spitzer 1956) 


a. 2x 10°T? a 
~ NIn(1.2 x 10!73/2/N1/2) 


This article examines the large-scale bulk dynamics of such 
plasmas and fields. 

With rare exceptions the plasma beneath the surface 
of a star is collision dominated (A < R), and the electric 
current density j required by Ampére’s law, 


4nj=cVxB 


is pushed through the plasma by the electric field E’ 
in the local frame of reference of the moving plasma, 
where j = oE’ and the conductivity o is approximately 
2 x 10’ T°? s for ionized hydrogen. The electric field 
E’ in the frame of the plasma moving with velocity wu is 
related to the fields E and B in the laboratory frame by 
the Lorentz transformation 


uxB 


Cc 


E'=E+ 


on neglecting terms second order in u/c. The current 
density is automatically regulated to satisfy Ampére’s law 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


because of the rapid growth of the electric field, 


ae Vx B-A4nj 

ages x B-4Anj 
in the direction of any current deficit, with the energy 
coming from the magnetic field through the induction 
equation 0B/dt = —c V x E. Thus E’ continually evolves 
with changing u and B so that E’ = cV x B/4so. The 
energy flow in the frame of the large-scale bulk motion 
of the plasma is always from the field into the current, 
as a consequence of the nonvanishing resistivity, and the 
large-scale dynamics is described by the familiar induction 
and momentum equations of MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS, with 
V x E’ in the induction equation providing the resistive 
diffusion of B. 

In contrast, the mean free path A in extended 
stellar atmospheres, in the solar wind, in planetary 
magnetospheres and in interstellar space (excluding cold 
dense molecular clouds) is generally large compared with 
the cyclotron radius R, so the electrons and ions gyrate 
relatively freely in the magnetic field. The large-scale 
bulk velocity u of the plasma represents the local mean 
momentum per unit mass of the individual electrons and 
ions. The velocity w of a particle relative to the mean 
motion u represents the thermal velocity, which has zero 
mean when summed over the local particles. 

Consider, then, the bulk dynamics of a plasma and 
magnetic field in the limit that interparticle collisions can 
be neglected (A >> R) and the electrons and ions gyrate 
freely in the large-scale magnetic field B. The particle 
pressure p, perpendicular to B is isotropic about the 
direction of B as a consequence of the cyclotron motion 


w,,and 
1 


where the sum is over all particles in unit volume. The 
pressure p, parallel to B is given by 


P= So Muy 


where the sum is again over unit volume, and w 
represents the thermal velocity parallel to B. It should 
be noted that p, and p, are not necessarily equal 
in a collisionless plasma (see COLLISIONLESS PROCESSES IN 
ASTROPHYSICAL PLASMAS). However, thermal anisotropy and 
any strong electron conduction velocity (relative to the 
ions) generally excite plasma oscillations that scatter the 
particles, pulling the thermal motions toward isotropy 
(p; ~ p.). Thus, for instance, in the high-speed 
tenuous solar wind the anisotropic expansion maintains a 
measurable but limited thermal anisotropy. On the other 
hand, no significant anisotropy is expected in the quasi- 
static corona close to the Sun. 

Now the bulk velocity of a tenuous plasma with mass 
density p is described by the momentum equation 


dpu; 
or 


) 
= an | Pa + Mjx + Rix) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large-Scale Plasma Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with 
dp = OpU 
ot OX, 


where pj, is the pressure tensor, with diagonal terms 
p and p,. Off-diagonal terms represent viscosity, if it 
is relevant. The Maxwell stress tensor Mj, is the usual 
—S jx B?/8r +B , B,/40, representing the isotropic pressure 
B*/8x and the tension B?/4z in the direction of the field. 
The Reynolds stress tensor Rjx is —pujux, representing 
compressive stress in the direction of the velocity. That 
is to say, p jx is the momentum flux of the thermal motions 
and —R;, is the momentum flux of the bulk motion. 
This form of the momentum equation follows directly 
from application of Gauss’ theorem to the net momentum 
transport into a fixed volume V with dimensions small 
compared with L but sufficiently large that NV > 1. 


=0 


Individual particle motions 

To proceed further, consider the motion of an individual 
ion or electron, described by a mass M and charge q. 
With L > R it is sufficient to use the guiding center 
approximation, in which the particle moves primarily 
in a circle with cyclotron radius R = Mw c/qB « L. 
The center of the circle—the guiding center—slides freely 
along the field while it drifts slowly across the field as 
a consequence of the large-scale variation of the field. 
The cyclotron motion represents a mean electric current 
qQ/2x around the perimeter of the area x R?, providing 
a diamagnetic dipole moment » = Mw’/2B that is a 
constant of the motion for each particle in the limit of 
large L/R. The diamagnetic moment repels the particle 
from regions of strong field with a force 0 B/ds along the 
field, where s represents distance along the field. Thus the 
motion w) parallel to B is described by 


dw _ 0B 


dt as 

It should be noted that in a plasma with isotropic thermal 
motions (p; = p.) this repulsion from a converging field 
exactly compensates for the particle concentrating effect 
(Nw)/B)0B/ds of the converging field. When p, > pj, 
the net effect is to push the plasma away from the regions 
of strong field, whereas, when p, < pj, the converging 
field lines enhance the plasma in regions of strong field. 
The isotropic plasma maintains a uniform density along 
the field, for the reason given. 

Consider the force F perpendicular to B applied to 
the particle. The initial effect is to accelerate the particle in 
the direction of F. That motion provides a Lorentz force 
and a drift velocity W in the direction F x B, so that the 
Lorentz force gW x B/c opposes F’. The acceleration of the 
particle falls to zero when W reaches the value cB x F'/q B* 
and its Lorentz force cancels the applied F. The total 
displacement & in the direction of F is (Mc"/q*B’)F such 
that the impulse gé x B/c is equal to the final transverse 
momentum MW. 

In the presence of an electric field E, the force is 
F = qE, and the final velocity across the magnetic field is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the electric drift velocity u, = cE x B/B? independent of 
the charge and mass of the particle. Every ion and electron 
takes up the velocity u,,so that E, = —u x B/c and the 
plasma moves in the frame of reference in which there is no 
electric field, E', = 0. Thus u represents the bulk motion of 
the plasma, and the electric field E in the laboratory frame 
arises because the electric field in the frame of reference 
of the plasma is zero. Thus the value of E depends on 
the arbitrary choice of the laboratory frame of reference 
relative to the plasma motion. 

Consider, then, the electric field E, in the direction 
of B. In the presence of strong unequal electron and 
ion thermal anisotropies, E prevents any significant 
separation of ions and electrons along the field, so that 
potential differences as large as the thermal energy are 
theoretically possible. However, in the large-scale slowly 
evolving plasma there is generally little or no anisotropy, 
as a consequence of the small-scale plasma instabilities 
driven by any anisotropy. Therefore, generally E can be 
neglected, with the result that E = —u x B/c and the 
Faraday induction equation becomes the familiar MHD 
induction equation 

as =Vx (ux B) 

ot 
stating that the magnetic field is carried bodily with the 
bulk motion u of the plasma in the frame of reference in 
which there is no electric field. 

On the other hand, in the presence of small scales 
and transient conditions, arising in shock fronts, flare 
current sheets, auroral filaments and sheets, and in the 
terrestrial magnetopause, there may be substantial Ej, 
with interesting and important dissipation and diffusion 
not found in the large-scale plasma and field. 


Particle drifts 

Returning to the guiding center approximation to 
investigate the individual particle motion, note that the 
magnetic field B is assumed to vary over the large scale L. 
The direction of the field may vary along the field, so that 
the thermal motion w) of the guiding center along the field 
introduces a centrifugal force F = M wi K , Where K is the 
curvature of the field line through the guiding center. The 
result is the curvature drift 


Muye 


Uc = 7B! 


Bx[(B-V)BI. 


Then the magnitude of the field may vary in a direction 
perpendicular to the field, so that the cyclotron motion 
experiences a stronger field on one side of the circle than 
the other, producing the gradient drift 

_ Muic B? 


Ug = 2g Bt xV>- 


The bulk acceleration du/dt provides an inertial force 
F = M du/dt, producing the polarization drift 
Mc du 


= —Bx —. 
i q B dt 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large-Scale Plasma Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Note that u, and u, are small O(R/L), and u, is small 
O(R/L)(u*/w?) compared with w, so that in the limit of 
small R/L the bulk motion reduces to wu. 

Now all three of these drift motions depend on the 
sign of the charge g. Hence they provide an electric 
current, with density 


. c Pi- Pi, du 
=—B Vpit+(B-V)B——— +p— 
JL = Fp | Pit ) Rp °F 
on taking into account the several geometrical factors. 
The obvious question is whether j, satisfies Ampére’s 
law. Noting that (V x B), can be written as B x [(V x 
B) x B]/B*, Ampére’s law becomes 


du P| — PL (VxB)xB 
Bx [eget V ap HB-¥) RP =0 
requiring that 
du, B? 1 P\— Pi 
=-V = (Be Bll a 
Oa (m+ 5) +l )Bl, (> Rp 


for any acceleration perpendicular to B. This expression 
is recognizable as Newton’s equation for the bulk motion 
u perpendicular to the magnetic field B. The term 
(p\ — p.)/B? represents the net centrifugal force of the 
excess field-aligned particle motion along the curved lines 
of B. In the common case of near thermal isotropy it 
can be neglected, and the momentum equations take the 
same form as with a classical fluid. The essential point is 
that Ampére’s law is automatically satisfied by a plasma 
(Parker 1957). 

The special case of bulk motion u, parallel to a 
stationary (0/dt = 0) field B is described by the equation 


a. (9A — — OpPy , Pi — pi OB 
0) t Uu| Uu|| => t < 
ot Chy Os B os 


where the term in the anisotropy pj — p. is a consequence 
of the net diamagnetic moment jz of each particle and 
the convergence of the field lines. The equation for 
conservation of particles is 


The electric current j, required by the torsion (V x B), 
arises from a weak EF, acting on the particles moving along 
B, particularly those for which w) > w,. 


General considerations 

These calculations show the mutual consistency of the 
equations of Newton and Maxwell, established long ago 
by Poynting’s theorems. The MHD equations are the 
expression of Newton and Maxwell for the large-scale bulk 
motion of both dense and tenuous plasmas. The MHD 
induction equation applies to any fluid that cannot support 
an electric field E’ in its own frame of reference. No other 
assumption is involved. Then note that at each point in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


space the mechanical gyrations of the electrons and ions in 
the inhomogeneous magnetic field automatically supply 
the j, required by Ampére’s law. Thus the electric current 
is a local phenomenon and does not form an electric 
circuit, in which an emf at any one location affects the 
current everywhere around the circuit. Each local region 
creates its own current in exact conformity to Ampére’s 
law and is uninfluenced, except through the eventual 
consequences of the momentum equation, by what is 
happening elsewhere around the current path. Thus the 
large-scale bulk motion of a plasma is a dynamical contest 
between the inertia and pressure gradients of the plasma 
and the Maxwell stresses in the magnetic field carried with 
the plasma. 

The electric current is a passive quantity, locally 
defined, and contains negligible energy and stress. The 
kinetic energy of the electron conduction velocity is small 
O(c*/L*@;) compared with the magnetic free energy 
associated with the electric current, where , is the 
electron plasma frequency. Electron inertia comes into 
the picture only in rapid variations and in intense current 
sheets in fields with small scales. The MHD equations can 
be written in terms of j and E, of course, by replacing u 
with the electric drift velocity cE x B/B* and expressing B 
in terms of j through the Biot-Savart integral. The result 
is a largely intractable global integro-differential equation 
because of the physical remoteness of j and E from the 
primary variables u and B. 

Note that the divergence of the Poynting vector cE x 
B/4scan be written as —(9/dt) B?/82 — u+ F, where F;, is 
the Lorentz force (V x B) x B/4z. Expressed in terms of u 
the Poynting vector can be written u B?/4z, representing 
the convective transport of magnetic enthalpy B?/4z. 
Thus we can write the energy equation 


0 ( B? B? 

ar (=) +V-> (5) +u:-F, =0. 
Now if Coulomb interactions (collisions) between particles 
are introduced, there is a frictional drag between the 
electron and ion motions, opposing their relative motion 
required by Ampére’s law, and leading to a small electric 
field 5E’ in the frame of reference of the plasma. The 
bulk motion of the plasma is not affected by 5E’ because 
6E’ exerts no average force on the particles, its effect 
being cancelled by the frictional drag that requires its 
introduction. However, —c V x SE’ must be added to the 
right-hand side of the induction equation where it appears 
as a diffusion term, allowing the field to spread out slowly 
relative to the bulk flow u. Resistive diffusion is treated in 
the article MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS and is often negligible 
in large-scale flows. 

There remains the problem of determining the 
pressure of the dynamical plasma. In the simple case 
that the thermal motions are approximately isotropic the 
pressure may vary adiabatically, d(p/p”)/dt = 0, unless 
there is significant RADIATIVE TRANSFER or strong thermal 
conduction. In that case a suitable energy equation must 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Large-Scale Plasma Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


be used to determine the varying temperature of the gas. 
The polytropic variation d(p/p*)/dt = 0 is a device that is 
sometimes used to represent the pressure—density relation 
through monotonic compression or expansion, with the 
parameter a chosen to approximate the actual net heating 
or cooling. 

If the variations of the anisotropic plasma are 
adiabatic, the Chew-Goldberger-Low approximation 
may be useful. It is based on the transverse invariant 
= Mw‘ /2B and the longitudinal invariant A = hwy, 
where h represents the varying scale of the field in the 
direction of the field as a consequence of longitudinal 
compression. Conservation of magnetic flux in a flux 
bundle with cross section S requires that SB be constant, 
while conservation of particles in the tube requires that Shp 
be constant. Relating p, to and p, to A, it follows that 


d (pi\_ d (pB =) 
dt\pB)” dt\ pi J 


There are, of course, more complicated situations where a 
complete simultaneous solution with the Boltzmann equa- 
tion may be required. 

Finally, there are substantial regions of planetary 
ionospheres, stellar photospheres and cold dense inter- 
stellar gas clouds in which the gas is only slightly ionized, 
leaving a massive background of neutral atoms that is col- 
lisionally coupled to the ions and electrons. This does not 
alter the basic dynamical principles outlined above, but 
the dissipation terms become more complicated. The Hall 
and Pedersen effects are introduced. The ions and elec- 
trons collide mainly with neutral atoms rather than with 
each other. If there are few enough ions and electrons, the 
Lorentz force of the field, exerted on the ions and electrons, 
may drive the ions and electrons through the neutral atoms 
fairly rapidly, representing the Pedersen effect and some- 
times referred to as ambipolar diffusion. The non-dissipative 
Hall effect in the large-scale bulk motion is large compared 
with the resistive diffusion to the degree that the mean free 
path of the electrons exceeds their cyclotron radius. The 
Pedersen effect exceeds the Hall effect to the degree that the 
mean free path of the ions exceeds their cyclotron radius. 


Bibliography 

Chew G F, Goldberger M L and Low F E 1956 The 
Boltzmann equation and the one fluid hydrodynamic 
equation in the absence of collisions Proc. R. Soc. A236 
112 

Parker E N 1957 Newtonian development of the dynamical 
properties of ionized gases of low density Phys. Rev. 
109 924 

Parker E N 1996 The alternative paradigm in magneto- 
spheric physics J. Geophys. Res. 101 10587 

Schindler K, Hesse M and Birn J 1991 Magnetic field- 
aligned electric potentials in non-ideal plasma flows 
Astrophys. J. 380 293 

Spitzer L 1956 Physics of Fully Ionized Gases (New York: 
Interscience) 


Eugene N Parker 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Larmor, Joseph (1857-1942) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Larmor, Joseph (1857-1942) 


Physicist, born in Magheragall, County Antrim, Ireland, 
became Lucasian professor in Cambridge, working on 
electricity, dynamics and thermodynamics, and especially 
the ether, the postulated material which pervades space 
and in which electromagnetic radiation travels. Finding 
no evidence that the ether existed, he was led to some of 
the results inherent in EINSTEIN’s theory of relativity, giving 
an explanation of the FITZGERALD contraction independently 
of LORENTZ. He calculated the energy radiating from an 
accelerating electron and the splitting of spectral lines ina 
magnetic field. Larmor’s name is used in connection with 
Larmor precession, the spinning of an electron in a strong 
magnetic field, with the electron said to oscillate at the 
Larmor frequency. Poised at the divide between Newtonian 
and Einsteinian physics, he could not quite bring himself 
to believe in relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Las Campanas Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Las Campanas Observatory 


One of the large observatories in Chile, Las Campanas 
Observatory, is located at the southern edge of the Atacama 
Desert. The local conditions make Las Campanas an ideal 
site for optical and infrared observations. Las Campanas is 
the main observational facility of the CARNEGIE OBSERVATORIES 
and has been active since 1971. Funding for the operation 
of Las Campanas is provided by The Carnegie Institution 
of Washington, a private not-for-profit organization. 

Currently functioning telescopes include the 2.5 m 
du Pont and the 1 m Swope telescopes, while the 6.5 m 
telescopes of the Magellan Project are currently under 
construction. The first of these two technologically new 
instruments will go into operation in early 2000, while 
the second telescope will go into operation in 2002. 
The Magellan Project is a joint enterprise with Harvard 
University, MIT, University of Michigan and University of 
Arizona. The Universities of Warsaw (Poland), Nagoya 
(Japan) and Birmingham (UK) operate other telescopes at 
Las Campanas. 

Various imaging, photometric and spectroscopic 
instruments are available at Las Campanas and a suite 
of new generation instruments are being built by the 
partners, for the Magellan telescopes. 

Among many fundamental contributions, observa- 
tions at Las Campanas have provided insight to problems 
like the Great Attractor, the Las Campanas redshift survey, 
the universe at high redshift, the age and distance scale of 
the universe, the structure and chemical composition of 
our own galaxy, the Galactic Bulge, etc. The supernova 
1987A was discovered on a photographic plate obtained 
at Las Campanas. 

For further information see 
http://www.ociw.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lassell, William (1799-1880) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lassell, William (1799-1880) 


Born in Bolton, England. A wealthy businessman 
(a Liverpool brewer), Lassell built progressively larger 
reflecting telescopes. His innovation was to have them 
made not in the Herschelian tradition of wood and 
altazimuthally mounted but with massive, strong iron 
frames, equatorially mounted on high-quality bearings. 
He commissioned engineer /astronomer JAMES NASMYTH, to 
make his 24 in telescope, witha fine machine-figured 500 Ib 
speculum mirror. According to family tradition, Lassell 
missed using the telescope, erected at his house ‘Starfield’, 
to discover Neptune, a letter communicating ADAMS’ 
predicted position having been accidentally destroyed by 
a too zealous maid. When the coordinates of ‘Leverrier’s 
planet’, discovered 23 September 1864, were published 
in The Times Lassell found it and saw that not only did 
Neptune reveal a distinct disc, but it had a satellite, Triton. 
Lassell also thought it had a ring, like Saturn, but this 
turned out to be a feature of a maladjusted mirror support 
system. Lassell went on to discover two moons around 
Uranus (Ariel and Umbriel) and co-discovered with BoND 
the eighth moon of Saturn (Hyperion). He moved his 24 in 
telescope to the clear skies of Malta and built his 48 in 
telescope there, making a particularly fine study of the 
Orion nebula. The success of this instrument inspired later 
generations of astronomers to travel to prime locations 
(like La Palma and Hawaii) to set up their observatories. 
The 24 in telescope is being reconstructed in Liverpool. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lasser, David (1902-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lasser, David (1902-) 


Science fiction editor and union organizer, born in 
Baltimore, MD, founded the American Interplanetary 
Society, the first organization in the USA to deal with 
space travel. Wrote an influential book, The Conquest of 
Space (1931). Derided in Congress as ‘not only a radical 
but a crackpot, with mental delusions we can travel to the 
Moon’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lavanha, Joao Baptista (1550-1624) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lavanha, Joao Baptista (1550-1624) 


Navigator, born in Portugal, became chief engineer to 
Philip II, and taught mathematics to sailors, publishing 
a text Regimento Nautico, and developing instruments 
for navigation, including astrolabes, quadrants and 
compasses. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


LDEF (Long Duration Exposure Facility) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


LDEF (Long Duration Exposure 
Facility) 


Large NASA satellite deployed from the Space Shuttle 
on 7 April 1984. Intended to expose materials and 
experiments to open space for one year. Recovery 
was delayed by the Challenger disaster until 11 January 
1989. Carried 57 science and technology experiments to 
measure the effects of atomic oxygen, space radiation, 
micrometeoroids, man-made debris, vacuum and other 
space-related phenomena on more than 10000 test 
specimens. Flew in a gravity-gradient stabilized orbit, 
which gave unique information on the nature and 
direction of approach of cosmic debris. One meteoroid 
experiment recorded the direction and precise time of 
occurrence of more than 15000 impacts. Also the 
first satellite to detect beta meteoroids—minute particles 
accelerated by solar radiation. Impacts on LDEF’s trailing 
edge showed for the first time that debris particles exist in 
elliptical orbits. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Le Fevre [Le Fevre; LeFebvre], Jean (1652-1706) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Le Fevre [Le Fevre; LeFebvre], Jean 
(1652-1706) 


Born in Lisieux, France, became an associate of JEAN 
PICARD and PHILIPPE DE LA HIRE, became a member of the 
Académie des Sciences and worked on rather routine 
work calculating ephemeredes, and surveying. Le Fevre 
accused La Hire of stealing his tables after Philippe de 
La Hire published Tabulae Astronomicae in 1687. In 1701, 
resentful at not having been named official publisher 
of ephemerides to the Académie, Le Fevre published a 
preface to Connaissances des Temps attacking Philippe’s son, 
GABRIEL-PHILIPPE DE LA HIRE. The preface was replaced on 
government orders and Pontchartrain, La Hire’s protector, 
led a campaign that resulted in Le Fevre being expelled 
from the Académie. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Le Gentil de la Galaziere, Guillaume-Joseph- 
Hyacinthe-Jean-Baptiste (1725-92) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Le Gentil de la Galaziere, Guillaume- 
Joseph-Hyacinthe-Jean-Baptiste 
(1725-92) 

Discovered M32, the Andromeda galaxy’s companion 
galaxy, also discovered the gaseous nebula M8, the Lagoon 


nebula (independently of FLAMSTEED) and M36 and M38 
(See ODIERNA). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leavitt, Henrietta Swan (1868-1921) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leavitt, Henrietta Swan (1868-1921) 


Astronomer, born in Lancaster, MA. Became a volunteer 
and then staff member of the Harvard College Observa- 
tory. Directed by PICKERING to work on variable stars in 
the Magellanic Clouds, measuring their brightness on re- 
peated exposures on photographic plates. Set up stan- 
dards of photographic magnitudes (brightness) of stars 
that were accepted worldwide under the name of the ‘Har- 
vard Standard’, and could be used as comparisons to mea- 
sure the magnitudes of other stars. Discovered the relation 
between the period and luminosity of classical Cepheid 
variable stars. This period—luminosity (P-L) relation made 
possible measurements of the distances of clusters and 
galaxies from the Earth and thus the scale of the universe. 
Leavitt’s P-L relation was re-calibrated and used by the 
Hubble Space Telescope to determine the Hubble constant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Legendre, Adrien-Marie (1752-1833) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Legendre, Adrien-Marie (1752-1833) 


Mathematician, born in Paris (or Toulouse), France, into 
a rich family. Studied mathematics, and carried out 
independent research studying the gravitational attraction 
of ellipsoidal masses (by which could be modeled rotating 
planets or stars), during which he introduced what are 
now known as Legendre functions. This work brought him 
membership of the Académie des Sciences. He continued 
research on celestial mechanics and mathematics, and 
worked on a triangulation survey between the Paris and 
Greenwich observatories to measure the Earth. He was 
a member of the committee of the Académie des Sciences 
to standardize weights and measures. He lost his wealth 
in the Revolution in 1793, but nevertheless, with the 
support of his new wife, he continued scientific work. 
He published a book describing how to determine the 
orbit of a comet, under simplifying assumptions, and 
giving the least squares method of fitting a curve to the 
data. Gauss reinvented the least squares method in 1809, 
acknowledging that it had appeared in Legendre’s book, 
but still claiming priority, something which Legendre 
found hard to forgive. He made a political blunder in 
1824 by not supporting the government's candidate in an 
election, lost his pension and died in poverty. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leiden Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leiden Observatory 


The Leiden Observatory (Sterrewacht Leiden) was 
founded in 1633 and is the oldest university astronomy 
department in the world. It is part of the Faculty of 
Mathematics and Natural Sciences of Leiden University. 

The research program at Leiden concentrates on the 
formation and evolution of stars and galaxies. This 
research makes use of international optical, infrared 
submillimeter and radio telescopes, as well as theoretical 
analysis and interdisciplinary laboratory experiments. 
The goal of the educational program is to train students 
as independent researchers and problem solvers for 
careers both as professional astronomers and as leaders of 
industry. The educational program is broad and accessible 
to English and/or Dutch speaking students. 

Leiden Observatory is an internationally oriented 
institute, having diverse collaborations with astronomers 
in Europe, the USA and elsewhere. The institute is 
a member of the European Association for Research 
in Astronomy (EARA), a network of top institutes in 
Cambridge, UK, Paris, Munich and Tenerife, and of the 
Netherlands Research School for Astronomy (NOVA). It 
hosts the Sackler Laboratory for Astrophysics and the 
NOVA-ESO Expertise Center for VLTI (a center for optical 
interferometry). 

During the twentieth century Leiden Observatory has 
been associated with and produced many outstanding as- 
tronomers, including Willem De Sitter, Einar Hertzsprung, 
Jan Hendrik Oort and Hendrik van de Hulst. Leiden Ob- 
servatory was the cradle of Dutch radio astronomy, where 
the Dwingeloo and Westerbork radio telescopes were de- 
signed and developed. In 1944 van de Hulst predicted 
that galactic neutral hydrogen should radiate an observ- 
able spectral line at 21 cm in the radio. Subsequently 21 cm 
observations became a fundamental tool in galactic and 
extragalactic research. The Netherlands Foundation for 
Radio Astronomy was founded in Leiden by Jan Oort and 
was located at Leiden Observatory until 1974, when it was 
moved to Dwingeloo. 

At present Leiden Observatory has a permanent 
scientific staff of seventeen, four technical support staff 
and two administrative support staff. In addition, there 
are about eleven post-doctorate positions, thirty-two PhD 
candidates and fifty undergraduate students. 

For further information see 
http://www.strw.leidenuniv.nl. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lemaitre, Abbé Georges Edouard (1894-1966) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lemaitre, Abbé Georges Edouard 
(1894-1966) 


Priest, civil engineer and astrophysicist, born in Charleroi, 
Belgium, became professor of the theory of relativity at 
Louvain, researched on cosmic rays and the three-body 
problem. Proposed (1927) independently of FRIEDMANN, 
an evolving cosmological model in general relativity. This 
mathematical solution to the EINSTEIN equations, sought but 
not discovered by Einstein, indicated that the universe had 
begun in a ‘Big Bang’, and originated from a dense mass 
concentration which Lemaitre envisaged as a primeval 
atom. HUBBLE’s discovery of the expansion of the galaxies 
immediately gave credibility to this theory of the origin of 
the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lemonnier, Pierre Charles (1715-99) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lemonnier, Pierre Charles (1715-99) 


Astronomer, born in Paris, surveyed the figure of 
the Earth in the Arctic Circle, and made 12 pre- 
discovery observations of Uranus but didn’t follow up his 
observations and thus missed recognizing it as a planet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lenticular Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lenticular Galaxy 


A lens-shaped galaxy that has a central bulge and disk but 
no spiral arms. Lenticular galaxies, which are denoted by 
‘SO’ or ‘SBO’ in the Hubble classification scheme, appear 
to be intermediate in type between elliptical and spiral 
galaxies. They are flatter than the flattest ellipticals (‘E7’ 
ellipticals) but show no signs of spiral structure in their 
disks. It is possible that they may be spiral galaxies that 
have been stripped of their gas and dust. 


See also: barred spiral galaxy, elliptical galaxies, Hubble 
classification, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leo 


(the Lion; abbrev. Leo, gen. Leonis; area 947 sq. deg.) 
A northern zodiacal constellation which lies between 
Cancer and Virgo, and culminates at midnight in early 
March. It represents the Nemean lion that, in Greek 
mythology, Hercules killed as the first of his 12 labors. Its 
brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) 
in the Almagest. 

A large, conspicuous constellation, Leo is easily 
recognized by the asterism of the Sickle, a back-to-front 
question mark formed by six of its brightest stars. At 
the base of the Sickle is a Leonis (Regulus), magnitude 
1.4. The next brightest stars in the constellation are 6 
Leonis (Denebola), magnitude 2.1, y Leonis (Algieba), a 
binary with orange (K1) and yellow (G7) components, 
magnitudes 2.5 and 3.6, separation 4.6”, period about 600 
years, and 6 Leonis (Zosma), magnitude 2.6. There are 
eight other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. Other 
interesting stars include R Leonis, a Mira-type variable 
(range 4.4-11.3, period about 310 days), X Leonis, a U 
Geminorum star (range 11.1-15.7, mean period about 16.9 
days), and Wolf 359 (CN Leonis—a UV Ceti star, range 
11.5-17.1), which, at a distance of 7.8 light-years, is the 
third closest star to the Sun. 

Other interesting objects in Leo include the ninth- 
magnitude spiral galaxies M65 (NGC 3623), M66 (NGC 
3627), M95 (NGC 3351), M96 (NGC 3368) and M105 (NGC 
3379), the first two and latter three of which appear 
close together in the sky. There are also many fainter 
galaxies, including the dwarf spheroidal galaxies Leo I 
(tenth magnitude) and Leo II (twelfth magnitude), which 
are members of the Local Group. 

The Leonid meteor shower appears to radiate from 
close to y Leonis. 


See also: Leonids, Regulus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leo Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leo Group 


The constellation LEO contains a rich concentration of 
galaxies, including five Messier objects. The Leo Group 
is the nearest group of galaxies with both giant ellipticals 
and spirals, which makes it valuable for tests of the 
extragalactic distance scale. The region also harbors two 
remarkable intergalactic features: a long stream of stars 
and gas that has been pulled from a sPIRAL GALAXY by 
gravitational tides and an enormous ring of intergalactic 
gas the origin of which remains a puzzle. 


Nomenclature, extent and mass 

The distribution of galaxies in Leo reveals a significant 
enhancement of bright galaxies within the boundaries 
shown in figure 1. These galaxies also lie within a narrow 
REDSHIFT range: more than 100 have measured redshifts in 
the range 500 km s"! < cz < 1700 kms", while none 
has a smaller redshift and only two have redshifts up to 
1000 km s~! higher. This concentration of galaxies between 
about 7 and 25 Mpc is usually called the Leo Cloud, which 
is a combination of the nearer Leo I Cloud (sometimes 
described as a ‘spur’ off of the supergalactic plane) and 
several groups constituting the more distant Leo II Cloud. 
The Leo I Cloud can be subdivided further into two groups 
of galaxies usually labeled by their brightest members as 
the ‘M66 Group’ and the ‘M96 Group’ (see MESSIER OBJECTS). 
The term ‘Leo Group’ sometimes refers to a combination 
of the M66 and M9 groups, but in more recent literature it 
generally refers to the M96 Group alone. The M66 Group 
is also frequently called the ‘Leo Triplet’ because of the 
three bright galaxies at its core. 

Since the distances to most galaxies have not been 
measured with high precision, it is often difficult to 
determine the physical relationship of galaxies seen close 
together on the sky. Early group-identification methods 
had only a small number of redshifts available, so they 
relied heavily on visual clues such as the angular sizes 
of the galaxies and of the morphological features within 
them. These methods yielded the basic breakdown of 
groups in the region that is described above and which has 
been confirmed by independent distance measurements as 
described later. 

Redshift information actually confused questions of 
membership for a period of time because of the problem 
of separating a galaxy’s Hubble expansion redshift from 
its Doppler shift due to local dynamical motions. For 
example, percolation and hierarchical group-identification 
methods search for neighboring galaxies on the basis of 
their angular and redshift separation, building chains of 
associations from which groups are identified. These 
methods become confused by the Leo region’s high density 
of sources because nearer galaxies with a local dynamical 
velocity directed away from us and more distant galaxies 
with a velocity toward us can have similar total redshifts. 

The distance-determination problem is exacerbated in 
the Leo region because of its proximity to the VIRGO CLUSTER. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


20° =] 
4 a 
8°; . * % | 
S a: ; a ‘. - A 
S164, 
aul 
ics A a A 
S147) NGcs628 a2 ae | 
~ [| Mes of 
ss mes ROM109 > e 
o . M9695 
OF L : L : | ’. 1 | 
11°30" 11215" 11°00" 10°45" 
a(J2000) 


Figure 1. Galaxies in the Leo region with redshifts 

500 km s~! < cz < 1700 kms“. Circles indicate likely members 
of the M96 Group; squares, the M66 Group (Leo Triplet); 
triangles, members of the background Leo II Cloud. Symbol 
sizes are proportional to the angular diameter of the galaxy. 


While the Leo Cloud is outside of the Virgo Cluster’s turn- 
around radius, the cosmic expansion in the region has been 
slowed so that the range of redshifts is smaller than would 
be expected for the depth of the region. 

Depending on which galaxies are assumed to be 
members of a group, estimates of the group mass vary 
dramatically. Mass-to-light ratios ranging from about 
30Mo5/Lo to 300Mo/Lo have been claimed for the Leo 
Group. The highest values result when galaxies from 
the Leo I and II Clouds are grouped together. However, 
independent distance measurements indicate that the Leo 
Iand II Clouds are at distinctly different distances. Based 
on narrower definitions for inclusion in groups, the lower 
mass-to-light ratios appear more accurate. 


Distance laboratory 

Independent methods for determining distances are im- 
portant in extragalactic astronomy because local dynam- 
ical motions may make expansion distances inaccurate. 
Groups of galaxies provide an important testing ground 
for distance methods, allowing examination of their relia- 
bility and accuracy. The Leo Group has beena special focus 
of distance studies because it includes early- and late-type 
galaxies and is near enough to permit detailed observa- 
tions. In addition, M105 (NGC 3379) has been studied 
heavily as a prototype of surface-brightness distributions 
within elliptical galaxies, and both M95 and M9 are part 
of the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE key project on the extragalac- 
tic distance scale. M96 even cooperated with the distance 
studies by producing a type Ia supernova in 1998. 

There is a serious difficulty in comparing and cross- 
calibrating distance methods. Most are applicable to either 
early- or late-type galaxies, but galaxies tend to separate 
morphologically, with early-type galaxies residing in 
dense clusters, and late-type galaxies in the field. Thus the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leo Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Distances determined for the five major galaxies in the M96 group. The method is labeled in the left-hand column, and the 
distances in Mpc are listed under each galaxy. The galaxies’ morphological types and absolute magnitudes are listed below their NGC 


and Messier catalog numbers. 


M96 M105 M95 

NGC 3368 NGC 3379 NGC 3351 NGC 3384 NGC 3377 
Distance SAB(rs)ab E11 SB(r)b SB(s)0— E5-6 
technique —20.8 —19.8 —19.7 —19.2 —18.9 
Cepheid variables 11.9408 10.1+0.9 
Type Ia supernovae 10.4 + 0.8 
SB fluctuations 9.4+ 0.7 9.5+ 0.8 9.7+0.8 
PN luminosity function 96+0.7  10.1+40.7 10.440.7  106+0.8 
Red giant branch tip 11.0+0.7 
Tully-Fisher method 10.2+ 1.4 9.8414 
Faber—Jackson method 8.74£1.2 9.04 1.7 12.64 2.8 


diverse collection of galaxies in the M96 Group provides an 
unusual opportunity to cross-calibrate distance methods. 

The distance of the M96 Group also presents a way 
for estimating the HUBBLE CONSTANT. Since M105 is a giant 
elliptical, the same distance method can be used for 
it as for ellipticals in distant clusters, and an accurate 
relative distance determined. The M96 Group is itself 
too nearby and its redshift too strongly influenced by the 
Virgo cluster to provide an accurate expansion/ distance 
ratio directly. Relative distances determined for member 
elliptical galaxies in the COMA CLUSTER indicate that it is 
approximately 9.5 times farther away than M105. Thus the 
M96 Group distance implies a Coma Cluster distance, and 
the Coma Cluster redshift provides an accurate measure of 
the expansion. Current estimates of the relative distance 
of the M96 Group and Coma Cluster indicate that Hy) ~ 
750 km s-!/dyse. 

Table 1 lists some of the distance methods that have 
been applied to the five primary galaxies in the M96 Group. 
The uncertainties associated with each distance are not 
all determined by consistent procedures and are probably 
only indicative of the relative accuracy within that distance 
method. Overall, the distances indicate that the group is at 
approximately 10.2+0.2 Mpc based ona weighted average 
of these measurements. 

Cepheid variables permit some of the most accurate 
distance determinations using the well-calibrated periods 
and luminosities of Cepheids in the Local Group (see 
CEPHEID PERIOD-LUMINOSITY RELATION). The value of M96’s 
distance using this method is slightly discrepant with 
other distance estimates. Since only seven Cepheids were 
measured in this galaxy and reddening corrections are 
uncertain, this value may not be as accurate as expected. 

The type Ia supernova 1998BU in M96 provides a 
direct link to another high-accuracy distance standard. 
Type Ia suPERNOVAE are important because their peak 
brightness is an excellent ‘standard candle’ that can be 
used over cosmological distances. However, few of 
these supernovae have been seen in nearby galaxies 
that have other high-quality distance estimates. One 
of the difficulties in estimating this type of distance is 
determining the extinction due to foreground dust. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reddening of this supernova is quite large, producing 
about 1.66 magnitudes of extinction at B-band. Assuming 
a peak SN Ia absolute magnitude of B = —19.38 yields a 
distance in excellent agreement with most other methods, 
although slightly lower than for the Cepheids in M96. It 
should be noted that different research groups estimate a 
range of peak SN Ja magnitudes both brighter and fainter 
than this value. 

The surface-brightness (SB) fluctuation technique 
uses the statistical variation in the number and brightness 
of stars along different lines of sight through a 
galaxy to estimate its distance. The values in the 
table are determined from ground-based observations. 
Individual observers generally derive consistent results 
for galaxies within the group, but discrepancies are 
present between different observers and between ground- 
based and Hubble Space Telescope determinations. The 
uncertainties listed in the table partially account for these 
discrepancies. Recent re-examination of these and other 
galaxies in the M96 Group indicates that the mean group 
distance determined using this method is probably closer 
to 10.7 + 0.3 Mpc. 

The PLANETARY NEBULA (PN) luminosity function uses 
the observed steep cutoff in PN counts at high luminosities 
to estimate a distance. The luminosity of the cutoff is 
effectively a standard candle. The technique has been 
applied to the early-type galaxies in the group, as well 
as the bulge of M96, with excellent consistency. Another 
good luminosity standard has been detected in M105 with 
the Hubble Space Telescope: stars at the tip of the red giant 
branch. This provides another independent distance in 
excellent agreement with the other methods. 

Table 1 also lists older results using less accurate 
methods, which are nonetheless important because of their 
wide applicability. The TULLY-FISHER method relates spiral 
galaxies’ rotation speed to their luminosity; similarly, the 
Faber-Jackson method relates the velocity dispersion in 
early-type galaxies to their luminosity. These values are 
less accurate, but their overall agreement with the other 
methods is very good. 

The distance to the M96 Group has also been 
estimated using the globular cluster luminosity function, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leo Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Other probable members of the M96 Group. 


Name Type Absolute magnitude 
NGC 3489 SAB(s)dm —18.9 
NGC 3412 SB(s)0° —18.7 
NGC 3299 SAB(s)dm —16.9 
DDO 88 SAB(s)m —15.9 
UGC 5812 Sm —15.2 
CGCG 65-86  dS0 —14.3 
Leo dw A Im —11.1 


applied to a combined sample of globular clusters around 
both NGC 3377 and NGC 3379, yielding a distance of 
10.7 + 2.2 Mpc. Several other methods have also been 
applied, using the Leo Group to calibrate the technique, 
and hence the distances are not independent of the values 
listed here. 

In addition to the five galaxies listed in table 1, several 
fainter galaxies currently believed to be part of the M96 
Group are known at present, including one extremely 
faint dwarf (Leo dw A) discovered during mapping of 
hydrogen gas in the group. Table 2 lists these other 
probable members. 

The angular distance between the M66 and M96 
Groups indicates they are separated by no less than 
1.5 Mpc, so they are probably not part of the same 
group. Furthermore, the M66 Group is usually estimated 
to be about 25% closer than the M96 Group based on 
comparisons of the Tully—Fisher distances; however, tidal 
disturbances in the Leo Triplet galaxies may degrade the 
accuracy of these estimates. The distance estimate for the 
type Ia supernova, SN1989B, in M66 (NGC 3627), suggests 
the distance may actually be similar to the M96 Group’s. 

A type Ia supernova (1967C) has also been detected in 
NGC 3389 in the background Leo IT Cloud. This galaxy has 
a redshift (cz = 1300 km s~) only slightly larger than that 
of the M96 Group (mean cz = 950 kms~') and is separated 
by only a few arcminutes from M105 and NGC 3384. The 
angular and redshift proximities were suggestive that it 
might be a member of the M96 Group, but the supernova 
distance is more than 2 times larger than the M96 Group’s 
distance. 


Intergalactic features 

The Leo I Cloud contains two remarkable intergalactic 
features. The M96 Group contains intergalactic hydrogen 
loosely distributed along an elliptical orbit around M105 
and NGC 3384, which are near the center of the group 
(figure 2). This ‘ring’ of intergalactic gas is about 225 kpc 
in diameter and contains about 2 x 10°M. of neutral 
hydrogen. Searches for emission at all other wavelengths 
have been unsuccessful, leaving open the possibility that 
this gas is primordial. 

The ring of gas was discovered in 1983 by chance 
during ‘blank-sky’ calibration of observations made of a 
galaxy in the region. Initial observations uncovered only 
the denser part of the ring between M105 and M96. This 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


#ucc 3412 


NGC 3384 . 


Figure 2. The ring of intergalactic gas in the M96 Group. This is 
a composite of the optical image from the second Palomar Sky 
Survey and a gray-scale image depicting the strength of neutral 
hydrogen emission measured at 21 cm using the Arecibo radio 
telescope. The intergalactic gas appears to be orbiting the pair of 
galaxies at the center of the image. 


prompted early speculation that the gas might be the result 
of a Spitzer—Baade collision in which NGC 3384 and M96 
collided head-on, stripping NGC 3384 of all of its gas and 
M96 of a fraction of its gas while the stellar disks passed 
through each other. Later observations revealed the ring 
shape of the gas distribution, and the kinematics of the 
gas indicates it is in an elliptical orbit around the pair of 
galaxies M105 and NGC 3384. 

Aspur of gas extends south from the ring toward M96, 
suggesting a tidal interaction with M96. There is no direct 
indication from optical or radio observations that the outer 
portion of M96 is tidally disturbed, so it seems unlikely that 
the intergalactic gas was stripped from it. Alternatively, 
the intergalactic gas may come from a disrupted gas-rich 
dwarf. However, for the gas to become distributed at 
points all around the ring by differential rotation, several 
orbits after the initial event would be required. Since the 
orbital period for the ring is about 4 x 10° yr, this timescale 
approaches the age of the universe, so it remains plausible 
that this gas is remnant material from the time of the 
galaxies’ formation. 

Another extragalactic feature is found in the M66 
Group. In 1956, zwickxy noted a faint plume of optical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leo Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


, NGC 3628 

. . % y ee . 

Sate rele ner : M65) 
eaten fy ang Mek i ee. 


i ool ae: ed 


Figure 3. The Leo Triplet of galaxies. Kinematic models indicate 
that M66 passed by NGC 3628, causing a long tidal plume to be 
drawn out of NGC 3628. The plume extends east of NGC 3628 
almost 100 kpc. This negative of the optical image is from the 
second Palomar Sky Survey; it is highly ‘stretched’ to bring out 
low surface brightness features. 


emission outside NGC 3628 (figure 3). At the time, 
there was considerable interest in the possibility that 
these features were galaxies in the process of formation. 
Modern observations and models suggest instead that 
such features are produced when galaxies suffer close 
encounters. 

The plume extends about 100 kpc east of NGC 3628 
and is one of the largest tidal features known. Studies 
at various wavelengths indicate the presence of stars, gas 
and dust in similar proportions as would be found in 
the outer disk of a spiral galaxy. Models indicate that 
M66 passed close by NGC 3628, and the encounter was 
in a prograde direction for NGC 3628 but retrograde for 
M66. As a result, the outer material in NGC 3628 was 
sped up into much larger orbits while that in M66 became 
more tightly bound. Both galaxies show morphological 
indications of disturbance in their outer regions where 
the low surface brightness emission is distorted. The far 
end of the plume appears to have a large enough velocity 
to become unbound from NGC 3628 and may eventually 
have an appearance similar to a dwarf galaxy. 


Bibliography 
The groups in the Leo region were originally outlined by 


de Vaucouleurs G 1975 Nearby groups of galaxies Galaxies 
and the Universe ed A Sandage et al (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press) pp 557-600 


de Vaucouleurs’ divisions have held up remarkably 
well through the years even though there was relatively 
little distance or redshift information when the chapter 
was written in 1965. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The distances of Leo Group galaxies are the subject of 
intensive research at present. A 1997 paper that reviews 
many of the techniques employed is 


Graham J A et al 1997 The Hubble Space Telescope 
extragalactic distance scale key project. VII. The 
discovery of Cepheids in the Leo I Group galaxy NGC 
3351 Astrophys. J. 477 535 


Work on the 1998 supernova in M96 is not yet 
published, but several new papers re-examining the 
distance scale in Leo can be expected. 

Discoveries about the intergalactic ring of gas in Leo 
are reviewed by 


Schneider S E 1989 Neutral hydrogen in the M96 Group: 
the galaxies and the intergalactic ring Astrophys. J. 343 
94 


A popular article from 1984 discusses early investiga- 
tions of the intergalactic ring and other intergalactic fea- 


tures, including the tidal feature in the Leo Triplet: 


1984 Between the galaxies Am. Sci. 72 574 


Stephen E Schneider 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leo Minor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leo Minor 


(the Lesser Lion; abbrev. LMi, gen. Leonis Minoris; area 
232 sq.deg.) A northern constellation which lies between 
Ursa Major and Leo, and culminates at midnight in late 
February. It was introduced by the astronomer Johannes 
Hevelius (1611-87) of Danzig (Gdansk), who included it 
in his atlas Firmamentum Sobiescianum sive Uranographia of 
1687. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Leo Minor are 46 Leonis, magnitude 3.8, and 
B Leonis, a very close binary with yellow (G8 and 
F8) components, magnitudes 4.4 and 6.1, separation 
0.2”. Interesting objects include NGC 3245, an eleventh- 
magnitude lenticular galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) 


Painter, inventor and polymath, born in Vinci (near 
Empolia), Italy. Although astronomy does not figure 
large in Leonardo’s works, he realized the possibility of 
constructing a telescope (‘making glasses to see the Moon 
enlarged’). He suggested that ’... in order to observe the 
nature of the planets, open the roof and bring the image 
of a single planet onto the base of a concave mirror. The 
image of the planet reflected by the base will show the 
surface of the planet much magnified’. He understood 
how the Moon shone by reflected sunlight and he correctly 
explained the ‘old Moon in the new Moon’s arms’ as 
reflected light from the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leonids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leonids 


A periodic meteor shower that takes place in November. 
The radiant lies in the constellation Leo. Some debris 
from the parent comet, 55P/Tempel—Tuttle, has spread 
around the orbit to produce a meteor stream that gives 
modest activity, with an average zenithal hourly rate of 10 
in most years. But the greatest concentration of meteoroids 
remains near the comet. So when the comet returns to 
perihelion every 33 years there is potential storm activity, 
particularly if the Earth passes the descending node of 
the stream’s orbit shortly after the comet has. In 1966, 
for example, some observers estimated that rates were 
as high as 200000 per hour in one 40 min period. Not 
every return of Tempel-Tuttle produces storm activity. 
Following the great storms of 1799, 1833 and 1866, there 
was little more than average activity in 1900 and 1933. In 
1999 the shower peaked at around 1500 per hour over a 
2h period. The main Leonid swarm (sometimes called the 
ortho-Leonids) is thought to consist of a number of dense 
ribbons of meteoroids in a sheaf-like configuration. A 
storm would then occur only if the Earth intersects one of 
these ribbons. Tempel—Tuttle’s retrograde orbit gives the 
incoming meteoroids a high relative velocity, producing 
very fast meteors. There are records of Leonid storms 
going back over a thousand years. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leptons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leptons 


Particles that are not acted on by the strong nuclear force 
and which are not built of quarks. Leptons have no 
internal structure and cannot be broken down into smaller 
component particles. The leptons are the electron, the 
muon, the tau (or tauon), and the three types of neutrino, 
together with their antiparticles. The muon and tau are 
negatively charged particles that appear to be heavier 
analogs of the electron, the mass of the muon (105.6 MeV) 
being 200 times that of the electron, and the mass of 
the tau (1.78 GeV) being about 3500 times greater than 
that of the electron. Neutrinos are particles with zero 
electrical charge and zero, or exceedingly small, mass. 
The electron and its associated neutrino (the electron- 
neutrino), together with two types of quark (the ‘up’ and 
‘down’ quarks), and their antiparticles, constitute a family 
of particles called the ‘first generation’. The muon and the 
muon-neutrino form part of the second generation, the tau 
and tau-neutrino being members of the third generation. 


See also: electron, electronvolt, elementary particles, fun- 
damental forces, fundamental particles, mass, neutrinos, 
quark, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lepus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lepus 


(the Hare; abbrev. Lep, gen. Leporis; area 290 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Orion and 
Columba, and culminates at midnight in mid-December. 
It is sometimes said to be the quarry of Canis Major, one 
of the two dogs of Orion (the Hunter). The brightest stars 
of Lepus were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the 
Almagest. 

Asmall constellation, the brightest stars in Lepus are 
a Leporis (Arneb), magnitude 2.6, and 6 Leporis (Nihal), 
a close binary with a yellow (G5) primary, magnitude 
2.8, and a much fainter, magnitude 7.3, companion. 
There are six other stars brighter than fourth magnitude, 
including the double star y Leporis, which has pale yellow 
(F6) and orange (K2) components, magnitudes 3.6 and 
6.2, separation 97”, that share the same common proper 
motion and radial velocity. Other interesting objects 
include R Leporis, a Mira-type variable star (range 5.5— 
11.7, period about 427 days), sometimes called ‘Hind’s 
crimson star’ after the British astronomer John Russell 
Hind (1823-95), who remarked on its deep red color, NGC 
2017, a small group of six associated stars (magnitude 
6.4-12.4), two of which are binaries, IC 418, a ninth- 
magnitude planetary nebula, and M79 (NGC 1904), an 
eighth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lescarbault, Edmond 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lescarbault, Edmond 


French country doctor living in Orgenes. Claimed that on 
26 March 1859 he had watched for an hour the passage 
of something across the solar disc that matched URBAIN 
LEVERRIER’S Calculations for the hypothetical planet Vulcan. 
Leverrier, co-predictor with apAms of Neptune from the 
deviations of Uranus from its orbit, tried to repeat his 
earlier success by attributing deviations of Mercury from 
its orbit to an intra-Mercurial planet, Vulcan, or more 
than one planet. Max wotF had found photographs of a 
number of circular spots on the Sun, which could also 
be interpreted as isolated observations of solar transits 
of a planet inside the orbit of the Earth. LEVERRIER 
investigated Lescarbault’s claims and was shown some 
figures recorded on prescription paper, covered with 
grease and laudanum. Surprisingly, he accepted the 
observations and assimilated them into an orbit of Vulcan. 
He mobilized French astronomers into a search for Vulcan 
during the solar eclipse of 1860—no intra-Mercurial 
planets were found. Other round spots on the Sun were 
independently photographed at Greenwich and Madrid, 
at about the time of a possible transit of Vulcan, but when 
Leverrier predicted that there would be a transit of Vulcan 
across the Sun on 22 March 1877 nothing was seen. J C 
Watson and Lewis Swift (1820-1913) claimed to see small 
planets (at different positions) near the Sun during the total 
solar eclipse of 1878 but at the 1929 eclipse ERWIN FREUNDLICH 
found nothing. In 1916, ALBERT EINSTEIN published his 
general theory of relativity, which explained the deviations 
in the motions of Mercury as anon-Newtonian effect called 
the advancement of perihelion, and the need for Vulcan 
disappeared. The reported sightings were misidentified 
sunspots (Wolf, Weber), misidentified stars (Watson and 
Swift) and accidental sightings of small asteroids or Sun- 
grazing comets passing inside Earth’s orbit (Lescarbault). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leucippus (f1. fifth century Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leucippus (fl. fifth century Bc) 


Philosopher, born in Miletus, Asia Minor. Virtually 
nothing is known of his life, except that he was the founder 
of Atomism, developed by his disciple Democritus and 
accessibly presented by Lucretius in De Rerum Natura. 
Essentially Atomism is a theory to explain change. Atoms 
are microscopic particles and are permanent. They move 
in the permanent framework of space and alter their 
arrangements—appearances change. It is a recognizably 
scientific theory. Leucippus is credited with two books, 
The Great World System and On the Mind, but his theories 
and writings are not reliably separable from those of 
Democritus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Leuschner, Armin Otto (1868-1953) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leuschner, Armin Otto (1868-1953) 


Astronomer and teacher, born in Detroit, grew up in 
Germany, and returned to the USA to lead the astronomy 
department of the University of California at Berkeley. 
His research was in celestial mechanics and he calculated 
orbits of asteroids and comets, developing a technique that 
succeeded even when based on observations of a rapidly 
moving Earth-grazing object. He was highly regarded as 
a teacher. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Leverrier [Le Verrier], Urbain Jean Joseph (1811-77) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Leverrier [Le Verrier], Urbain Jean 
Joseph (1811-77) 


Celestial mechanician, born in Saint-L6, France. Worked at 
the Paris Observatory, under ArAco. Later became director 
where his drive for efficiency and for total control over 
the staff made him unpopular, particularly his diktat that 
‘One should not read in the papers the names of assistant 
astronomers who made discoveries, when the credit 
belongs exclusively to the director under whose orders 
they work. Young astronomers should of course receive 
thanks and a medal for each discovery’. Staff unrest was 
brought to the attention of the government, and Leverrier 
was removed from the post. He was later reinstated under 
the authority of a directing council. Leverrier had found 
fame as a young man when Arago had suggested that 
he calculate the position of Neptune from irregularities 
in Uranus’s orbit (see also ADAMS). Neptune was found 
at the predicted place by the German astronomer GALLE. 
Leverrier attempted to repeat his success with Neptune by 
examining a discrepancy in the motion in the perihelion of 
Mercury, and attributed this to an intra-Mercurial planet, 
which he called Vulcan (see EDMOND LESCARBAULT). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Levi ben Gerson (1288-1344) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Levi ben Gerson (1288-1344) 


Philosopher, therologian and astronomer, born in Bagnols, 
Gard, France. Invented Jacob’s staff, an instrument to 
measure the angles between stars. It is a staff with square 
cross-section, about 1 m long, with perforated cross-pieces 
which slide along the staff. The end of the staff is held 
at the eye and the cross-piece slid along until the two 
ends fit within the two stars being measured. The staff 
is calibrated and engraved with the tangent of the angle of 
separation, so that the angle can be read from the position 
of the cross-piece. Levi observed solar and lunar eclipses 
in 1337, giving explanations, and made other astronomical 
observations of the Moon, Sun and planets using a camera 
obscura. He wrote that the Milky Way shines by the 
reflected light of the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lexell, Anders John (1740-84) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lexell, Anders John (1740-84) 


Finnish astronomer, born in Abé, became professor of 
mathematics at St Petersburg, one of the first to prove that 
Uranus was a planet (rather than a comet), by computing 
its orbit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ley, Willy (1906-69) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ley, Willy (1906-69) 


Rocket scientist, writer, born in Berlin, Germany. Inspired 
by reading a work by the space pioneer, HERMANN OBERTH, 
Ley founded the German Society for Space Travel (1927), 
enrolled WERNHER VON BRAUN, and helped develop the 
liquid-fuel rocket. Fled to the USA, and became a science 
writer, including science fiction and film scripts. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Libra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Libra 


(the Scales; abbrev. Lib, gen. Librae; area 538 sq. deg.) 
Asouthern zodiacal constellation which lies between Virgo 
and Ophiuchus, and culminates at midnight in early 
May. The brightest stars of Libra were regarded by the 
ancient Greeks as comprising the constellation Chelae (the 
Claws—of the Scorpion) and were cataloged as such by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. The name Libra 
was introduced by the Romans in the first century Bc to 
reflect the fact that, at that time, the Sun was in Libra at the 
autumnal equinox, when day and night are of the same 
length (in balance), though this idea may date back to the 
Sumerians of 2000 BC. Libra is the only inanimate object 
among the zodiacal constellations. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Libra are 6 Librae (Zubeneschamali, from 
the Arabic for ‘the northern claw’—of the Scorpion), 
magnitude 2.6, and a Librae (Zubenelgenubi, ‘the 
southern claw’), a wide double star with bluish-white (A3) 
and pale yellow (F4) components, magnitudes 2.8 and 5.2, 
separation 231”, that share the same proper motion, and 
a third, unseen companion which revolves around the 
former. There are four other stars brighter than fourth 
magnitude. Another interesting star is 1 Librae, a multiple 
system consisting of two close binaries separated by 
58”, one consisting of two bluish-white (B9) components, 
magnitudes 5.1 and 5.6, separation 0.1”, period 22.4 years, 
and a third, unseen companion, the other consisting of 
two much fainter components, of magnitudes 10.5 and 
11.2v, separation 1.9”. Other interesting objects include the 
Algol-type variable star 6 Librae (range 4.9-5.9, period 2.33 
days) and NGC 5897, a ninth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Libration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Libration 


An oscillation of a celestial object about some mean 
position. The term is used most often in connection with 
the Moon, to describe a number of effects which cause the 
hemisphere presented to an observer on the Earth to vary 
slightly as the Moon proceeds around its orbit. Over time, 
the Moon appears to rock slightly from side to side, and 
to nod slightly up and down. Although the Moon has 
synchronous rotation, rotating on its axis in the same time 
as it takes to orbit the Earth, the different types of libration 
make it possible for 59% of the Moon’s surface to be visible 
over the course of a period of 30 years or so. The effect of 
libration is to make surface features near the Moon’s limb 
sometimes extremely foreshortened, sometimes easier to 
observe. 

The main types of libration are those termed geometric 
librations, which arise from the features of the Moon 
being observed from different angles at different times. 
The Moon has an elliptical orbit, in which its orbital 
velocity varies; this, combined with its constant rate of 
axial rotation, leads to libration in longitude. At perigee 
and apogee, when closest and farthest from the Earth 
respectively, the Moon presents its average east-west 
aspect to the Earth, but between these two positions we 
can see farther round its western or eastern limb. The 
difference amounts to a wobble of 7° 45’. Libration in 
latitude arises from the Moon’s orbital plane being inclined 
to the plane of the ecliptic, and to a lesser extent from 
the slight inclination of the Moon’s equator to its orbital 
plane. For various positions in its orbit we can therefore 
see more of one or other of the polar regions. This effect 
amounts to +5° 9’. A lesser effect is diurnal libration, 
a result of the Earth’s rotation changing the observer’s 
position, so that we can see a little more of the eastern 
or western limb when the Moon is rising or setting. This 
effect is greatest for an observer on the equator, where it 
contributes 57’. As opposed to geometrical libration there 
is also physical libration, a consequence of small variations 
of the Moon’s orbit caused by its slightly irregular shape. 
Physical libration amounts to just 2’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lick Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lick Observatory 


Lick Observatory, located on Mount Hamilton 30 km 
east of San Jose, California, at an elevation of 1280 m, 
serves astronomers from throughout the University of 
California system. It is administered by University of 
California Observatories /Lick Observatory, which has its 
headquarters on the Santa Cruz campus. This multi- 
campus research unit also serves as the University of 
California liaison with the w MKECK OBSERVATORY. UCO/Lick 
provides the technical facilities and staff to design and 
fabricate state-of-the-art instrumentation. 

Lick has seven major research telescopes. The original 
observatory building houses the 110-year-old 36 in (0.9 m) 
refractor, the second largest in the world, as well as a 1m 
reflector. Also on the mountain is a 0.5 m twin astrograph 
and a 0.75 robotic telescope. The largest telescope is the 
3 m Shane reflector. 

The research undertaken at Lick spans the diverse 
interests of University of California astronomers. In 1892, 
using the 36 in refractor, E E Barnard discovered Jupiter’s 
fifth moon, the first found since Galileo. Today, Lick 
continues that tradition. The Shane reflector, coupled to 
the Hamilton high-dispersion echelle spectrograph, has 
become the world’s premier planet finder. Other on-going 
programs include supernova searches, adaptive optics 
development and inertial proper motions of stars. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.ucolick.org. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Life on Other Worlds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Life on Other Worlds 


Life on other worlds refers to the existence of life in 
any form beyond the Earth. The study of life on other 
worlds, known today as exobiology, bioastronomy or 
astrobiology, uses the concepts and techniques of modern 
astronomy, biology and biochemistry to illuminate the 
origin, evolution and distribution of life in the universe. 
Recent historical scholarship has shown, however, that 
long before the birth of modern science, the question 
was examined in the context of the ‘plurality of worlds’ 
tradition dating back to the ancient Greeks. An important 
finding of this scholarship is that the idea was often 
elaborated not in haphazard fashion by marginal figures 
but in the context of the science (or natural philosophy) of 
its time, by leading thinkers, who framed their ideas as a 
serious debate over substantive issues. 

During the 20th century life on other worlds has 
become part of the larger concept of cosmic evolution, 
the theory that the entire universe is evolving, and that 
its ultimate end products are not merely planets, stars 
and galaxies, but life, mind and intelligence. The result 
is a ‘biological universe’ rather than a purely physical 
universe. By its very nature an answer to the question 
of life on other worlds is extremely difficult. However, 
because it bears so strongly on the problem of humanity’s 
place in the universe, the answer is one of the most sought- 
after in the history of science. The debate over life on 
other worlds is therefore a study of science attempting to 
answer an extremely important question at the limits of its 
capabilities. This article covers the history of that debate; 
the current study of life in the universe is covered in the 
article on EXOBIOLOGY. 


The classical plurality of worlds tradition 

The question of life on other worlds began with Greek 
cosmology, was sustained by medieval commentaries on 
Aristotle and was transformed by the Copernican theory in 
the 16th century. In its original meaning the term ‘world’ 
meant not a planetary world but the entire kosmos, the 
visible universe that the Greek atomists believed to be a 
result of the chance collision of atoms and that Aristotle 
theorized was an ordered set of concentric spheres, with 
the Earth at the center and the sphere of the fixed stars at 
its outer periphery. In the Greek atomist view, expounded 
in the 4th and 5th centuries BC by Leucippus, Democritus 
and Epicurus, an infinite number of worlds (aperoi kosmot) 
existed completely beyond the human senses. However, 
such worlds were not beyond human reasoning; because 
the infinite number of atoms could not all have been used 
in our finite world, the atomists deduced that other worlds, 
some of them inhabited, must be created in like manner. 
This doctrine was eventually spread throughout Europe 
by the Roman poet LucrETIUS (ca 99-55 BC), who reiterated 
that other worlds must exist ‘since there is illimitable space 
in every direction, and since seeds innumerable in number 
and unfathomable in sum are flying about in many ways 
driven in everlasting movement’. The concept of infinite 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


worlds was therefore driven by the physical principles of 
the atomist cosmology. 

In the same way, the physical principles of ARISTOTLE 
(383-322 BC) were diametrically opposed to an infinite 
number of worlds. In Aristotle’s cosmology the Earth was 
not only the physical center of the nested spheres, it was 
also the center of motion. According to Aristotle’s doctrine 
of natural motion and place as expressed in his De caelo 
(On the Heavens), everything in the cosmos moved with 
respect to that single center—the element earth toward 
Earth, the element fire away from Earth, while air and 
water assumed intermediate places. If there were more 
than one world, the elements of earth and fire would have 
more than one natural place toward which to move, a 
physical and logical contradiction. Only one world (in 
the sense of kosmos) could exist. 

While the treatise of Lucretius was lost until the 15th 
century, Aristotle’s De caelo was transmitted to the Latin 
West in the 12th century. In the context of Christianity 
the question of a plurality of worlds (plures mundi) was 
the subject of repeated commentary, most notably in 
connection with the issue of God’s omnipotence. The issue 
for the Scholastic tradition was whether God could create 
other worlds if he wished. Gradually over the course of 
the 13th and 14th centuries the answer evolved from the 
assertion that God could suspend natural law to create 
other worlds to the affirmation of the possible existence of 
more than one center of motion, and therefore more than 
one world. In reality, however, the medieval Scholastics 
did not believe that God had created a plurality of worlds. 

However, it was not the medieval Scholastic tradition 
that gave birth to the modern discussion of life on other 
worlds. That distinction belongs to the heliocentric theory 
of CopERNicus, which made the Earth a planet and the 
planets potential Earths. The De revolutionibus (1543) 
altered the meaning of ‘world’ from cosmos to planet, 
where each planet was a center of motion and a world 
of its own. The question was exactly how similar to the 
Earth were the planets, an issue that could be explored 
more scientifically with the invention of the telescope 
and that has been the driving force for much planetary 
research ever since. Already in the first announcement 
of his observations with the telescope in Siderius nuncius 
(Sidereal Messenger, 1610), GALILEO noted that the surface 
of the Moon was ‘not unlike the face of the Earth’ and 
that its bright parts might represent land and its darker 
parts water. In the same year, KEPLER conjectured that one 
large and particularly circular lunar crater might be an 
artificial construction of lunar inhabitants. Bishop JOHN 
WILKINS, in his Discovery of a World in the Moone (1638), made 
a broader case for lunar inhabitants, and began to address 
the religious implications. 

It did not take long for the question of other solar 
systems to be broached. As early as 1584 the Dominican 
monk GIORDANO BRUNO had argued for an infinite number 
of planetary systems in De l’infinito universo e mondi 
(On the Infinite Universe and Worlds). Although an 
avowed Copernican, Bruno based his reasoning largely 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Life on Other Worlds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Frontispiece to the 1821 French edition of Fontenelle’s 
Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes, depicting the plurality of 
solar systems. A similar image adorned the many editions of 
this work, including the first edition in 1686, graphically 
spreading the idea of many solar systems. 


on metaphysical arguments such as the unity of the 
universe. His burning at the stake in 1600 by the 
Roman Inquisition, driven not so much because of his 
belief in an infinite number of worlds as for his other 
‘heresies’, nevertheless had a chilling effect on those 
who would speculate on life on other worlds. Thus 
the French philosopher RENE DESCARTES, greatly influenced 
by a revived atomism, offered in Principia philosophiae 
(Philosophical Principles, 1644) a mechanical philosophy 
in which a universe full of atoms necessarily formed 
vortices, systems analagous to our solar system, around 
every star. Although Descartes himself was careful to 
avoid speculation about inhabited planets, in his Entretiens 
sur la pluralité des mondes (Conversations on the Plurality 
of Worlds, 1686) the French Cartesian Bernard le Bovier 
de Fontenelle spread this idea of a plurality of inhabited 
solar systems (figure 1). It was also espoused in a similar 
context in the Cosmotheoros (1698) of the Dutch astronomer 
CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS. Thus it was through the Cartesian 
cosmology that the idea of other solar systems first became 
ingrained in European consciousness. 

Within 50 years of its inception the Cartesian world 
view was swept away by the Newtonian system, set forth 
in NEWTON’S Principia Mathematica (1687). In the Newtonian 
world view solar systems did not form by necessity; 
indeed under Newtonian laws of gravitation the whole 
question has proved to be one of the greatest complexity 
until the present day. Although they could not resolve 
the question of other solar systems by the laws of nature, 
however, Newtonians were anxious to keep a role for God 
in the universe, and latched on to the plurality of worlds 
doctrine as a component of natural theology, arguing that 
a universe full of life demonstrated the magnificence and 
omnipotence of God. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


During the 18th and 19th centuries little progress 
was made in characterizing the nature of other planets, 
and even less in determining whether there might be 
other solar systems. Much of the discussion may be 
seen as a struggle of the idea of other worlds with 
Christianity; although the Newtonians had reconciled 
other worlds with theism via natural theology, the 
doctrines of Christianity were another matter. Three 
choices existed in this struggle: reject other worlds, reject 
Christianity or reconcile the two. Historically, all three of 
these possibilities came to pass, as described in detail in 
Michael Crowe’s The Extraterrestrial Life Debate, 1750-1900 
(1986). 


The modern tradition: cosmic evolution and life 
on other worlds 

The modern study of life in the universe is intimately 
connected to the idea of cosmic evolution. Despite the 
tentative acceptance of Darwin’s theory of evolution in 
the biological realm, at the beginning of the century the 
universe itself was believed to be static. This was certainly 
the position of A R Wallace, co-founder with Darwin of 
the theory of natural selection. His universe, as described 
in Man’s Place in the Universe: A Study of the Results of 
Scientific Research in Relation to the Unity or Plurality of 
Worlds (1903), was not only static but also only 3600 light 
years in diameter, with the Earth still situated near the 
center of the Galaxy. In this view of the universe, shared 
by many astronomers of the day, Wallace argued that 
there were no other inhabited worlds and that humanity 
was the supreme creature. Gradually over the course of 
the century biological evolution was extended to cosmic 
evolution (figure 2), whereby the entire universe, some 15 
billion light years in extent, existed in a state of constant 
change ending in abundant life and intelligence. This is 
one of the most profound changes in world view of the 
20th century. The basic tenets (although not the ultimate 
products) of cosmic evolution have been confirmed by 
astrophysics, the science whereby the physical nature of 
celestial bodies may be determined. 

The 20th century debate over other worlds focused 
first on the solar system, specifically the planet Mars. 
Mars dominated the extraterrestrial life debate for much 
of the century, progressing from the search for intelligence 
to searches for vegetation, organic molecules and finally 
fossils. PERCIVAL LOWELL lauched the first great Martian 
debate with his claim in 1895 that he had visually detected 
linear markings on Mars that he interpreted as artificial 
constructions (canals), built by Martians to channel water 
on their dying planet. Lowell’s Mars was therefore 
the epitome of planetary evolution. A lengthy debate 
ensued among astronomers, and not until 1909 did the 
French astronomer ANTONIADI resolve the ‘canals’ into dark 
patches. Not everyone was satisfied even with that 
evidence, and we know today that very few of the canals 
have any physical basis. The search for vegetation was the 
focus from 1924 into the 1960s, based on changes in dark 
patches on Mars, supported by spectroscopic evidence 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Life on Other Worlds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


COSMIC 


THE ‘BIG BANG’ 


Galaxies Pop. El 
Form Stars 
in the Generate 

‘Darkness the 
of the Heavy 
Deep. Eiements 


Universe 
or Pre- 
Craatlon 


EVOLUTION 


Oldest 
Micro 
Fossils 
With 
Rocky 
Planets 


Sex Appears 


Firat Animale 


Billions of Years Ago 


Figure 2. Cosmic evolution, as depicted in this NASA drawing, encompasses events from the Big Bang to intelligence. 


in the late 1950s. Such evidence spurred on the space 
age exploration for life on Mars, culminating with the 
VIKING landers in 1976. Those landers detected no organic 
molecules down to parts per billion at the two landing 
sites. In the wake of this surprising result, the search 
languished for two decades until the announcement in 
1996 of possible fossils in a Martian meteorite found in 
the Antarctic. Even here, with samples in hand, the 
evidence was open to interpretation and the sample subject 
to contamination. 

The problem of evidence and interpretation, a 
constant theme of the 20th century extraterrestrial life 
debate, is also evident in the search for other solar 
systems. The ‘nebular hypothesis’ of Laplace, based on 
Newtonian gravitation, held that our solar system was 
formed by condensation from a rotating cloud of gas 
and dust. If so, solar systems should be a common 
byproduct of stellar evolution, a process in which the 
star forms at the center and debris coalesces into planets. 
This theory was challenged early in the 20th century, 
first by the Chamberlin—Moulton hypothesis and then the 
Jeans-Jeffreys hypothesis, both of which had the solar 
system forming as a result of a very rare encounter 
between two stars in which material pulled out of the 
stars formed the planets. However, technical difficulties 
doomed both theories; by the 1940s a modified nebular 
hypothesis came into favor, and by the 1950s Harvard 
astronomer Harlow Shapley could posit the existence of 
billions of planets. Moreover, the 1940s saw the first 
observational claims for extrasolar planets, by Kaj Strand 
and Erik Holmberg, followed by Peter van de Kamp’s 
claims for Barnard’s Star in 1963. These observations, 
based on extremely small gravitational perturbations of 
the parent star by the supposed planets, were questionable 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and subsequently proven spurious, and not until 1995 
was there confirmation of a planet around a Sun-like star, 
known as 51 Pegasi. Again, the detection was indirect, 
using a spectroscopic method to detect the ‘Doppler effect’ 
as the star was tugged back and forth by the planet. Since 
then, more than a dozen planets have been confirmed 
outside our solar system (see EXOPLANETS). As in the case for 
Mars, an important lesson is that, despite the difficulties, 
in the end progress is made. 

The existence of planets is only a necessary, not 
a sufficient, condition for life. Planets must have the 
right conditions for life to originate, and the origins 
of life are therefore very important to the question 
of life on other worlds (see LIFE: ORIGINS AND POSSIBLE 
DISTRIBUTION IN THE UNIVERSE). It is hampered by our lack 
of knowledge of how life originated on Earth. During 
the century three distinct hypotheses have been proposed. 
Following Darwin’s suggestion of life originating in a 
‘warm little pond’, in the 1920s A I Oparin, J B S 
Haldane and their followers proposed life’s origin in a 
soup of dilute chemicals. The Miller-Urey experiment in 
1953, and numerous experiments on prebiotic chemistry 
under assumed primitive Earth conditions, have been the 
mainstay of origins of life research during the century. 
An alternative theory, the panspermia hypothesis, was 
championed by Arrhenius at the beginning of the century 
and refined by others at its end. It claimed that life came 
in some form from outer space, a claim reinforced by the 
discovery of possible fossil life in the Martian meteorite. 
At the very end of the century, with the discovery of 
bacteria existing under extreme conditions of temperature, 
pressure and acidity, a third theory gained ground: the 
idea of life originating underground in a ‘deep biosphere’, 
and gradually emerging on the surface as conditions 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Life on Other Worlds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


improved. With such new discoveries, the field of origin 
of life was poised to make good progress in the 21st 
century, especially with NASA’s renewed committment to 
astrobiology. 

The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) 
attempted to leapfrog all other arguments by detecting 
a signal, usually at radio wavelengths, produced by 
intelligence. Frank Drake undertook the first such search 
with an 85 foot radio telescope at Green Bank, West 
Virginia, in 1960. Since then numerous searches have 
been undertaken with increasingly sophisticated signal 
detectors, processing millions of channels simultaneously. 
Even so, most searches have only reached 100 light years 
and have utilized only a few of the billions of channels 
possible. The sett instiruTE’s Project Phoenix, University 
of California’s Project SERENDIP and Harvard’s BETA 
Project are three of the most important SETI searches now 
underway. 

The theory that life is abundant in the universe is 
sufficiently comprehensive to qualify as a world view, 
with the same status as the Copernican and Darwinian 
world views. The idea of the ‘biological universe’, or 
the ‘biophysical cosmology’, as such a world view places 
the debate in proper perspective in the history of science. 
As with other world views, the biological universe bears 
heavily on humanity’s place in the universe, and therefore 
arouses passionate debate. Like them, it deals with a basic 
property of the universe and like them it is testable: the 
Viking landers were local tests of the world view, and SETI 
is a more far-reaching test. Finally, like other world views 
the idea of a biological universe has found expression in 
popular culture, in this case chiefly in the form of debate 
over unidentified flying objects, and in science fiction, 
which incorporates the alien as one of its major themes. As 
the latest subject in the venerable search for our place in 
the universe, the question of the biological universe shows 
no signs of abating. 


Bibliography 

Crowe M 1986 The Extraterrestrial Life Debate, 1750-1900: 
The Idea of a Plurality of Worlds from Kant to Lowell 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Dick S J 1982 Plurality of Worlds: The Origins of the 
Extraterrestrial Life Debate from Democritus to Kant 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Dick S J 1996 The Biological Universe: The Twentieth Century 
Extraterrestrial Life Debate and the Limits of Science 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Dick S J 1998 Life on Other Worlds (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Guthke K S 1990 The Last Frontier: Imagining Other Worlds, 
from the Copernican Revolution to Modern Science Fiction 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press) 

Shklovskii I S and Sagan C 1966 Intelligent Life in the 
Universe (San Francisco, CA: Holden Day) 


Steven Dick 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Life: Origins and Possible 
Distribution in the Universe 


On Earth, life probably originated in liquid water with 
chemical systems capable of transferring their molecular 
information via self-replication and also to evolve by 
mutation. Unfortunately, the direct clues which may help 
chemists to identify the molecules which participated in 
the emergence of life on Earth about 4 billion years ago 
have been erased by plate tectonics, the permanent pres- 
ence of running water, the unshielded solar ultraviolet 
radiation and by oxygen produced by life. By analogy 
with contemporary life, it is generally believed that prim- 
itive life originated from the processing by liquid water 
of reduced organic molecules mainly built of carbon, 
hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen atoms. Organic matter 
might have been formed in the primitive Earth atmos- 
phere or in hydrothermal vents. A large fraction of prebi- 
otic organic molecules might have been brought by 
extraterrestrial meteoritic and cometary dust grains 
decelerated by the atmosphere. Any celestial body har- 
bouring permanent liquid water may therefore accumu- 
late the ingredients which generated life on the primitive 
Earth. The possibility that life might have evolved on 
early Mars when water existed on the surface marks it as 
a prime candidate in a search for bacterial life beyond 
Earth. Europa has an icy carapace. However, cryovol- 
canic flows at the surface point to a possible water sub- 
surface region which might harbor a basic life form. The 
atmosphere and surface components of Titan is also of 
interest to exobiology for the insight into a hydrocarbon- 
rich living world. One-handed complex molecules and 
preferential isotopic fractionation of carbon, common to 
all terrestrial life forms, can be used as basic indicators 
when searching for life beyond Earth. 


Origins of terrestrial life 

Water 

It is generally thought that life on Earth emerged in liq- 
uid water. For this reason, water is considered as one of 
the prerequisites for life to appear and evolve on a plan- 
et. In contemporary living systems, water participates as 
a solvent in the organization of biopolymers in three- 
dimensional structures and as a chemical reactant in 
most of the biochemical pathways. Hydrogen bonds are 
formed between water molecules and organic molecules 
providing that the latter contain -OH, -NH, -SH groups 
in addition to carbon and hydrogen. As a consequence of 
this affinity many CHONS organic molecules are soluble 
in water. Hydrocarbons cannot form hydrogen bonds 
with water molecules and are consequently insoluble in 
water. Abiotic organic molecules can be divided into two 
families: hydrocarbons and CHONS-containing mole- 
cules. When brought into the presence of liquid water, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


hydrocarbons try to escape the water molecules while 
CHONS have some affinity for water, especially those 
which bear ionizable groups. When these two species are 
forced to coexist within the same molecules, the duality 
generates interesting topologies. When they are separat- 
ed by long distances—such as in fatty acids or phospho- 
lipids—micelles, vesicles or liposomes are formed due to 
clustering of the hydrophobic groups. Over short dis- 
tances, hydrophobic and ionizable groups generate chain 
conformations which depend strongly on the sequence 
ie. the distribution of the group along the chains. 

Water molecules are widespread in the universe as 
grains of solid ice or as very dilute water vapor. Liquid 
water is a fleeting substance which can persist only above 
0 °C and at pressures higher than 6 mbar. Therefore, the 
size of a planet and its distance from the star are two basic 
characteristics that will determine the presence of liquid 
water. If a planet is too small, like Mercury or the Moon, 
it will not be able to retain any atmosphere and, therefore, 
liquid water. If the planet is too close to the star, the mean 
temperature rises due to starlight intensity. Any sea water 
present would evaporate delivering large amounts of 
water vapor to the atmosphere thus contributing to the 
GREENHOUSE EFFECT. Such a positive feedback loop could 
lead to a runaway greenhouse: all of the surface water 
would be transferred to the upper atmosphere where 


\ 7 NN 
gh a | H NSN H—H 
H H nitrogen hydrogen 
Level I water -ammonia 
i 
O=C=0 c=0 H—C—H 
carbon dioxide — carbon monoxide i 
| methane 
H 
Level II \c=o H—C==N 
H~ hydrogen cyanide 
formaldehyde 
H H. H 
N 
H. | ff 
N—C—C NWA 
Level III H” | Nou HV | 
H™ | N~ ~H 
H H 
amino acid ademine 


(nucleic acid base) 


Scheme 1. The build-up of prebiotic molecules. Simple gaseous 
molecules like Hj, Nx, HO, NH3, CO, CO, (Level I) require a 
supply of energy (UV, heat, lightning, cosmic rays, shock waves) 
to react with each other. They generate compounds like hydro- 
gen cyanide and formaldehyde which store chemical energy in 
their double and triple bonds (Level II). These multiple bonded 
molecules react spontaneously in liquid water to form prebiotic 
molecules like amino acids or nucleic acid bases (Level III). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


photodissociation by ultraviolet light would break the 
molecules down into hydrogen, escaping into space, and 
oxygen combining to the crust. If a planet is far from the 
star, it may host liquid water providing that it can main- 
tain a constant greenhouse atmosphere. However, water 
would provoke its own disappearance. The atmospheric 
greenhouse gas, CO, for instance, would be dissolved in 
the oceans and finally trapped as insoluble carbonates by 
rock-weathering. This negative feedback would lower the 
surface pressure and the temperature to an extent where 
water would be largely frozen. The size of the Earth and 
its distance from the Sun are such that the planet never 
experienced either a runaway greenhouse or a divergent 
glaciation. 


Terrestrial production of reduced organic molecules 

Oparin suggested that the small reduced organic 
molecules needed for primitive life were formed in a 
primitive atmosphere dominated by methane (see 
scheme 1). 

The idea was tested in the laboratory by Miller 
(1998) when he exposed a mixture of methane, ammonia, 
hydrogen and water to electric discharges. In his initial 
experiment, he obtained four of the twenty naturally 
occuring amino acids (table 1), via the intermediary for- 
mation of hydrogen cyanide and formaldehyde. Miller’s 
laboratory synthesis of amino acids occurs efficiently 
when a reducing gas mixture containing significant 
amounts of hydrogen is used. 


Table 1. Twenty amino acids are used by living systems to build up proteins. Seventeen have been obtained in the laboratory under 
primitive Earth-simulating conditions (arginine, histidine and lysine are still missing). Eight of them (glycine, alanine, valine, 


isoleucine, leucine, proline, aspartic acid and glutamic acid) are present in the Murchison meteorite. 


OOH OOH Goon OOH OOH 
HeN—C—-H rane GaN Ge aia neds 
H CH; CH GH, CH, 
H3C” CH HsC” “CHa-CHs y.c_duy cu, 
glycine alanine valine isoleucine leucine 
COOH COOH COOH OOH COOH 
un—G-H H2N—C—-H HaN—-H HeaN—C—-H HN ¢-H 
ep He lech. He CH 
OH HO CHs COOH CHe 
oon 
proline serine threonine aspartic acid glutamic acid 
week gone COOH ion oo 
H2N—C—H H2N—C—H H2N—C—H scl H2N—C—-H 
du, bu, du, He bu, 
bh be bo He ban 
$ NH2 fe) Gia 
CH; NH, nH 
c 
HoN~ SNH 
cysteine methionine asparagine glutamine arginine 
COOH COOH COOH COOH ae 
BS Gt HaN—G-H HoN--C—H H2N—G—H hae Gene 
CHa CHe CHa CHe 
H 
qe A _~ 
bs Ly N 
H2 ‘MH MH 
NH2 H 
lysine histidine phenylalanine tyrosine tryptophane 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


However, the true composition of primitive EARTH'S 
ATMOSPHERE remains difficult to define. The source of the 
primitive terrestrial atmosphere can be found in a com- 
bination of the volatiles CO2, Nz, H2O, trapped in the 
rocks that made the bulk of the planet’s mass (internal 
reservoir) and a late accreting veneer of extraterrestrial 
material (external reservoir). The formation of the inter- 
nal reservoir is a natural consequence of the ACCRETION of 
the planet. A late-accreting veneer of volatile-rich mete- 
orites and comets may have contributed to replace the 
atmosphere produced by the planet’s early accretion, 
which was subsequently blown off by the giant impact 
between the Earth and a Mars-sized planetary embryo 
which generated the Moon and caused the early atmos- 
phere massive hydrodynamic loss. The abundance and 
isotopic ratios of noble gases neon, argon, krypton and 
xenon suggest that meteorites alone or in combination 
with planetary rocks could not have produced the 
Earth’s entire volatile inventory and that a significant 
contribution from icy PLANETESIMALS was required (Owen 
1998). 

The discovery of sugar and several related organic 
compounds in two carbonaceous meteorites (which con- 
tain carbon as one of their important constituents) in 
2002 suggests another fundamental building block of life 
on Earth may have come from outer space. Other organ- 
ic, carbon-based compounds that play major roles in life 
on Earth, such as amino acids and carboxylic acids, have 
previously been found in meteorites, but no sugars. 
Sugars and the closely related compounds recently dis- 
covered collectively called polyols, are critical to all 
known life forms. They act as components of the nucleic 
acids RNA and DNA, constituents of cell membranes 
and cellular energy sources. A small sugar called dihy- 
droxyacetone and several sugar—like substances, known 
as sugar acids and sugar alcohols, have been identified in 
a study of the Murchison and Murray meteorites. All 
these are important for life today. One sugar alcohol, 
glycerol (also known as glycerin), that is used by all con- 
temporary cells to build cell walls has also been found. In 
addition, preliminary evidence of other compounds that 
may contain larger sugars critical in cellular metabolism, 
such as glucose have been discovered. 

Water in contact with the olivine of ultramafic rock 
is reduced to molecular hydrogen (H2) with the con- 
comitant oxidation of Fell. The molecular hydrogen 
formed may be combined at high temperature with CO, 
for the abiotic formation of organic compounds such as 
hydrocarbons and fatty acids through Fischer-Tropsch 
type (FIT) synthesis. The analyses of fluids from the 
peridotite-hosted Rainbow hydrothermal field on the 
Mid-Atlantic Ridge indicate de novo synthesis of 
linear saturated hydrocarbons. The chain length of the 
hydrocarbons is between 16 and 29 carbon atoms. The 
discovery of FTT reactions in ultramafic hydrothermal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


systems on Earth provides an alternative pathway for 
the formation of early membranes and the origin of life. 

The surface temperature of the early Earth was very 
much dependent upon the partial pressure of CO) in the 
atmosphere. The dominant view in recent years has been 
that the early atmosphere was a weakly reducing mix- 
ture of CO2, Nx, and H2O, combined with lesser amounts 
of CO and Hp) (Kasting and Brown 1998). An efficient 
greenhouse effect induced by a high CO, partial pressure 
was the most likely mechanism capable of compensating 
for the faint young Sun, the luminosity of which was 
about 30% lower than today. The dominant sink for 
atmospheric CO, was silicate weathering on land and 
subsequent formation and deposition of carbonate sedi- 
ments in the ocean. However, a negative feedback sys- 
tem probably maintained the Earth’s surface tempera- 
ture above freezing: if the temperature were to drop 
below freezing, silicate weathering would slow down 
and volcanic CO, would accumulate in the atmosphere. 
The CO, partial pressure could have been as high as 10 
bar prior to the emergence of the continents because of 
limited silicate weathering and continental carbonate 
rocks storage. Under these conditions, the early Earth 
could have been as hot as 85 °C. Recent analysis of 
samarium /neodymium ratios in the ancient zircons indi- 
cate that the continent grew rapidly, so a dense CO) 
atmosphere may have been restricted to the first few 
hundred millions of years of the Earth’s history. 

In a weakly reducing gas mixture of COz, No, and 
HO, the production of amino acids appears to be very 
limited. More recently, Wachterhauser (1998) suggested 
that the carbon source for life was carbon dioxide. The 
energy source required to reduce carbon dioxide was 
provided by the oxidative formation of pyrite (FeS>) 
from troilite (FeS) and hydrogen sulfide. Pyrite has posi- 
tive surface charges and bonds the products of carbon 
dioxide reduction, giving rise to a two-dimensional reac- 
tion system, a surface metabolism. Experimental labora- 
tory work is about to legitimate this new hypothesis. 

Deep-sea hydrothermal systems may also represent 
likely environments for the synthesis of prebiotic organ- 
ic molecules and perhaps for primitive life (Stetter 1998). 
Experiments have been carried out in order to test 
whether amino acids can be formed under conditions 
simulating the hydrothermal vents (Holm and 
Andersson 1998). 


Extraterrestrial delivery of organic molecules to Earth 

CoMETS show substantial organic material. According to 
Delsemme’s analysis (1998), Comet Halley dust particles 
ejected from the nucleus contains 14% organic carbon by 
mass. About 30% of cometary grains are dominated by 
light elements C, H, O, N and 35% are close in composition 
to carbonaceous chondrites. Among the molecules identi- 
fied in comets are hydrogen cyanide and formaldehyde. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mirror 
H H 
Ca 
NHo 2 yf > -ACOOHIHOOCEE- . NoH 
oH HAC 
L-alanine D-alanine 


Figure 1. Each amino acid—with the exception of glycine—is 
asymmetrical and exists under two non-superimposable mirror 
images called enantiomers L and D. Only L enantiomers are 
found in proteins. 


The presence of purines, pyrimidines and formaldehyde 
polymers has also been infered from the fragments ana- 
lyzed by Giotto Picca and Vega Puma mass spectrometers. 
However, there is no direct identification of the complex 
organic molecules present in the dust grains and in the 
cometary nucleus. Many chemical species of interest for 
exobiology have been detected in Comet Hyakutake in 
1996, including ammonia, methane, acetylene (CH,), ace- 
tonitrile (CH3CN) and hydrogen isocyanide (HNC) (Irvine 
etal 1996). In addition to hydrogen cyanide and formalde- 
hyde (HjCO), seen in several earlier comets, Comet 
Hale—Bopp was also shown to contain methane, acetylene, 
formic acid (HCOOH), acetonitrile, hydrogen isocyanide, 
isocyanic acid (HNCO), cyanoacetylene (HC3N3) and thio- 
formaldehyde (HjCS). Cometary grains might, therefore, 
have been an important source of organic molecules deliv- 
ered to the primitive Earth. 

The study of METEORITES, particularly the carbona- 
ceous chondrites that contain up to 5% by weight of 
organic matter, has allowed close examination of 
extraterrestrial organic material delivered to the Earth. 
Eight proteinaceous amino acids have been identified in 
the Murchison meteorite among more than 70 amino 
acids (Cronin 1998). These amino acids are asymmetric 
and the two-handedness L and D are generally found in 
equal proportions. 

However, Cronin and Pizzarello recently found 
excesses of L enantiomers of about 9% for non-protein 
amino. The presence of L-enantiomeric excesses in the 
Murchison meteorite suggests an extraterrestrial asym- 
metric synthesis of amino acids, asymmetry which is pre- 
served inside the meteorite. These excesses may help to 
understand the emergence of one-handed (homochiral) 
life. For example, proteins are built up with twenty dif- 
ferent amino acids (table 1). Each amino acid, with the 
exception of glycine, exists in two enantiomeric forms L 
and D but proteins use only L ones (see figure 1). Proteins 
adopt asymmetrical rigid geometries, a-helices and 
B-sheets, which play a key role in the catalytic activity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Homochirality is now believed to be not just a conse- 
quence of life, but also a prerequisite for life, because 
stereoregular structures such as protein 6-sheets do not 
form with mixtures of amino acids of both handedness. 
The excess of one-handed amino acids found in the 
Murchison meteorite may result from the processing of 
the organic mantles of interstellar grains by circularly 
polarized synchrotron radiation from a neutron star rem- 
nant of a supernova. Strong infrared circular polarization 
resulting from dust scattering in reflection nebulae in the 
Orion OMC-1 star-formation region has ben recently 
observed. Circular polarization at shorter wavelengths 
might have been important in inducing chiral asymme- 
try in interstellar organic molecules that could be subse- 
quently delivered to the early Earth. Whether the 
extraterrestrial organic material collected on Earth bear 
witness to the interstellar organic chemistry is still 
unknown and we really need to gain more information 
about the different steps between interstellar medium 
(ISM)—where more than 100 molecules, the bulk of them 
organic, have been detected so far by radioastronomers 
(Irvine 1998)—and the Earth in order to better under- 
stand the global ISM—comets—planets ecosystem from an 
exobiology point of view. 

Dust collection, both above the terrestrial atmosphere 
and in the Greenland and Antarctica ice sheet (Maurette 
1998), shows that the Earth captures interplanetary dust as 
MICROMETEORITES at a rate of about 50-100 tons per day. 
About 99% of this mass is carried by micrometeorites in 
the 50-500 um size range. This value is about 2000 times 
higher than the most reliable estimate of the meteorite 
flux, i.e. about 0.03 tons per day. This amazing dominance 


base (adenine) 


ribose sugar 


phosphate group 


Figure 2. Nucleotides are the building blocks of nucleic acids. 
Each nucleotide is composed of a phosphate group, four differ- 
ent heterocyclic bases and a ribose sugar. The bases can be 
reconstructed in the laboratory under primitive Earth-simulat- 
ing conditions. They are also present in the Murchison mete- 
orites. The spontaneous formation of the ribose sugar is still an 
unsolved challenge. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Interstellar and circumstellar molecules. (From W M Irvine 1998 Origins Life Evol. Biosphere 28 365-83 updated June 1999.) 


2 atoms 3 atoms 4 atoms 5 atoms 
Hy CH CH C,H 

CG CH, 1-C3H C3H> 
CH HCN c-C3H H,CCC 
CHt HNC NH3 HCOOH 
CN HCO HNCO CH,CO 
CO HCOt+ HOCO* HC3N 
CS HOC+ HCNH+ CH,CN 
OH N,H* HNCS NH,CN 
NH NH, C3N CH,NH 
NO H,O C30 CH, 

NS HCS+ H,CS SiH,* 
SiC* H,S C35 C,Si* 
SiO OCS HCCN C;* 

SiS N,O H,O0+ HCCNC 
SiN* SO, H,CN HNCCC 
SO SiC,* H,CO HCO,Ht 
HCl CS c-SiC; 

CP* C,0 

SO+ C3* 

NaCl* MgNC* 

AICI* MgCN* 

KCl* NaCN* 

AIF* HNO 

PN H3* 

CO* 

SiH? 

HF? 


* Detected only in stellar envelopes. 
? Tentative detection. 
c- and I-: cyclic and linear molecules, respectively. 


of micrometeorites already suggests their possible role in 
delivering complex organics to the early Earth 4.2-3.9 Gyr 
ago when the micrometeorite flux was enhanced by a fac- 
tor of 1000. In the Antarctic micrometeorites, a high per- 
centage of unmelted chondritic micrometeorites from 50 
to 100 um in size has been observed, indicating that a large 
fraction crossed the terrestrial atmosphere without drastic 
thermal treatment. In this size range, the carbonaceous 
micrometeorites represent 80% of the samples and contain 
2% of carbon, on average. They might have brought about 
1020 ¢ of carbon over a period of 300 million years corre- 
sponding to the late terrestrial bombardment phase. This 
delivery represents more carbon than that engaged in the 
surficial biomass, i.e. about 1018 g. Amino acids such as a- 
amino isobutyric acid have been recently identified in 
these Antarctic micrometeorites. These grains also contain 
a high proportion of metallic sulfides, oxides and clay 
minerals which belong to various classes of catalysts. In 
addition to the carbonaceous matter, micrometeorites 
might also have delivered a rich variety of catalysts, hav- 
ing perhaps acquired specific crystallographic properties 
during their synthesis in the microgravity environment of 
the early solar nebula. They may have functioned as tiny 
chondritic chemical reactors when reaching oceanic 
water. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


6 atoms 7 atoms 28 atoms 
C,H,* CoH CH3COOH 
H,CCCC HC5N HCOOCH; 
CH30H CH,CHCN CH3C3N 
CH,CN CH3C,H C,H* 
CH3NC CH3CHO CH3C,H 
CH35H CH3NH, CH30CH3 
NH,CHO c-CH,OCH, CH;CH,CN 
Cs5H CH3CH,OH 
HC3HO HC;N 
HC3NH* CH3C,CN? 
C5N CH3COCH; 

HC,N 

CsH 

H Ce 

HC,,N 

(C>H5)20? 


Primitive cellular life 

By analogy with contemporary living systems, it was 
first generally believed that primitive life emerged as a 
cell-like organized system thus requiring, at least, 
boundary molecules able to isolate the system from the 
aqueous environment (membrane), catalytic molecules 
providing the basic chemical work of the cell (enzymes) 
and informative molecules allowing the storage and the 
transfer of the information needed for replication (RNA). 


Boundary molecules 

Fatty acids are known to form vesicles when the hydro- 
carbon chains contain more than ten carbon atoms. Such 
vesicle-forming fatty acids have been identified in the 
Murchison meteorite. However, the membranes obtained 
with these simple amphiphiles are not stable over a broad 
range of conditions. Stable lipids can be obtained by con- 
densing fatty acids with glycerol or with glycerol phos- 
phate, thus mimicking the sf contemporary phospho- 
lipids. Primitive membranes could initially have also been 
formed by simple isoprene derivatives (Deamer 1998). 


Catalytic molecules 
Most of the catalytic chemical reactions in a living cell are 
achieved by proteinaceous enzymes made of 20 different 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


homochiral L-amino acids. Amino acids were most like- 
ly available on the primitive Earth as complex mixtures. 
The number of condensing agents capable to assemble 
amino acids into peptides in water is restricted, especial- 
ly when looking for prebiotically plausible compounds. 
Carbodiimides, RRN=C=N-R, can be used in water pro- 
viding a careful choice of the substituent R and of exper- 
imental conditions. The simplest carbodiimide, H-N=C 
=N-H, can be considered as a transposed form of 
cyanamide NH,-CN which is present in interstellar 
medium. In water, cyanamide forms a dimer, dicyandi- 
amide, which is as active as carbodiimides to form pep- 
tides. However, the reactions are very slow and did not 
proceed beyond the tetrapeptide. Diaminomaleonitrile, 
the tetramer of HCN, has been found to form diglycine 
in 3.1% yield. 

Clays and salts can also be used to condense amino 
acids in water. Amino acid adenylate anhydrides con- 
dense readily in the presence of montmorillonite. When 
subjecting mixtures of glycine and kaolinite to wet-dry 
and 25 °C-94 °C temperature fluctuations, the formation 
of oligopeptides up to five glycines long has been 
observed. The drying/wetting cycle procedure was 
extended to alanine in the presence of silica, alumina and 
smectic clays. Mutual catalysis of amino acids in the salt- 
induced peptide formation reaction has been demon- 
strated for the case of glycine / alanine. Efficient mineral- 
catalyzed (hydroxylapatite, illite clay) condensation of 
amino acids into long peptides have been recently 
reported (Ferris 1998). 

Thermal condensation of amino acids has been 
described by Fox. He has shown that dry mixtures of 
amino acids polymerize when heated at 130 °C to give 
‘proteinoids’. In the presence of polyphosphates, the 
temperature can be decreased to 60 °C. High molecular 
weights were obtained when an excess of acidic or basic 
amino acids are present. In aqueous solutions, the pro- 
teinoids aggregate spontaneously in microspheres of 1-2 
um, presenting an interface resembling the lipid bilayers 
of living cells. The microspheres increase slowly in size 
from dissolved proteinoids and are sometimes able to 
bud and to divide. These microspheres are described as 
catalyzing the decomposition of glucose and work as 
esterases and peroxydases. The main advantage of pro- 
teinoids is their organization into particles but they rep- 
resent a dramatic increase in complexity. When heating a 
mixture of selected L-amino acids, the resulting conden- 
sate is only 50% peptidic, the peptidic fraction is racem- 
ized, the peptide linkages are ambiguous since they 
include the a, Band y functions of the dicarboxylic amino 
acids and the sequences are multiple although not com- 
pletely random. 

According to De Duve, the first peptides appeared 
via thioesters. Chemical reactions capable to selectively 
condense the protein amino acids at the expenses of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


non-protein ones have been described. Helical and sheet 
structures can be modeled with the aid of only two dif- 
ferent amino acids, one hydrophobic, the second 
hydrophilic. Polypeptides with alternating hydrophobic 
and hydrophilic residues adopt a water-soluble f-sheet 
geometry because of hydrophobic side-chain clustering. 
Due to the formation of f sheet, alternating sequences 
gain a good resistance toward chemical degradation. 
Aggregation of alternating sequences into f sheets is pos- 
sible only with all-L or all-D polypeptides. When 
hydrophobic and hydrophilic amino acids coexist within 
the same polypeptide chain, the duality generates inter- 
esting topologies such as stereoselective and _ ther- 
mostable (-sheet structures. Short peptides have also 
been shown to exhibit catalytic properties (De Duve 
1998). 


Informative molecules 

In contemporary living systems, hereditary memory is 
stored in nucleic acids built up with bases (purine and 
pyrimidine), sugars (ribose for RNA, deoxyribose for 
DNA) and phosphate groups. 

The accumulation of significant quantities of natural 
RNA nucleotides does nor appear as a plausible chemical 
event on the primitive Earth (Schwartz 1998). Purines are 
easily obtained from hydrogen cyanide or by submitting 
reduced gas mixtures to electric discharges. No pyrimi- 
dine synthesis from electric discharges has been pub- 
lished so far whereas hydrogen cyanide affords only 
very small amounts of the base. Condensation of 
formaldehyde leads to ribose among a large number of 
other sugars. The synthesis of purine nucleosides (the 
covalent combination of purine and ribose) and of 
nucleotides have been achieved by heating the compo- 
nents at the solid state. The yields are very low and the 
reactions are not regioselective. Interestingly, efficient 
clay-catalyzed condensation of nucleotides into 
oligomers up to 55 monomers long have been recently 
reported (Ferris 1998). 

The synthesis of oligonucleotides is much more effi- 
cient in the presence of a preformed pyrimidine-rich 
polynucleotide acting as a template. Non-enzymatic 
replication has been demonstrated by Orgel and his co- 
workers. The preformed chains align the nucleotides by 
base pairing to form helical structures which bring the 
reacting groups in close vicinity. 

The prebiotic synthesis of oligonucleotides remains 
an unsolved challenge. Each step of the chemical path- 
way has been achieved in the laboratory but the desired 
product is never dominant. It is always contaminated 
with by-products which are wastes or even poisons. 
Chemists have considered early living systems using 
simpler informative molecules. The ribose sugar has 
been replaced by glycerol for the backbone build up. The 
chemistry of these simplified informative molecules does 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


not appear much easier. The straightforward and selec- 
tive formation of ribose diphosphates from glycolalde- 
hyde phosphate suggests that pyranosyI-RNA may have 
been involved in the early forms of life. Intense experi- 
mental work is presently run in Eschenmoser’s laborato- 
ry along this new avenue (Schwartz 1998). 


Primitive life only based on RNA? 

Cech found that some RNA, the ribozymes, are able to act 
as catalytic molecules (James and Ellington 1998). For 
example, they increase the rate of hydrolysis of oligori- 
bonucleotides. They act also as polymerization templates 
since chains up to 30 monomers long can be obtained 
starting from a pentanucleotide. Since this primary dis- 
covery, the catalytic spectrum of these ribozymes have 
been considerably enlarged by directed test tube molecu- 
lar evolution experiments initiated in Joyce’s and 
Szostak’s laboratories. Since RNAs have been shown to 
be able to act simultaneously as informative and catalytic 
molecules, RNA has been considered as the first living 
system on the primitive Earth (RNA world) because they 
can be at the same time genotypes and phenotypes and 
can fulfill the basic cycle of life consisting of self-replica- 
tion/mutation/selection. One should, however, remem- 
ber that their synthesis under prebiotic conditions 
remains an unsolved challenge. It seems unlikely that 
life started with RNA molecules because these molecules 
are not simple enough. The RNA world appears as 
an episode in the evolution of life before the appearance 
of cellular microbes rather than as the birth of life. 
Chemists are now tempted to consider that primitive self- 
replicating systems must have used simpler information- 
al molecules than biological nucleic acids or their analogs. 
Since self-replication is, by definition, autocatalysis, they 
are searching for simple autocatalytic molecules capable 
of mutation selection. Rebek and co-workers have used 
nucleic base-like A-B templates able to form hydrogen- 
bonded ternary complexes with individual A and B sub- 
units and to catalyse the synthesis of new A-B molecules 
(Burmeister 1998). These experiments are illuminating 
examples of autocatalysis but they do not yet address the 
problem of self-replication of long linear sequences. Von 
Kiedrowski showed that simple A-B molecules unrelated 
to nucleotides can provide exponentially replicating auto- 
catalytic models. Luisi has demonstrated beautiful exam- 
ples of autocatalytic micelle growth. However, these auto- 
catalytic systems do not really store hereditary memory 
and cannot therefore evolve by natural selection. 


Geological records of primitive life 

The geological record also provides important informa- 
tion. The isotopic signatures of the organic carbon of the 
Greenland metasediments bring indirect evidence that 
life may be 3.85 billion years old. Schidlowski has com- 
piled the carbon isotopic composition of over 1600 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


samples of fossil kerogen (a complex organic macromol- 
ecule produced from the debris of biological matter) with 
carbonates in the same sedimentary rocks. The organic 
matter has an average 6!SC of —25+7%o, whereas the car- 
bonate varies by no more than about %o around a mean 
of %o (6!3C expresses the permil deviation of the 8C/12C 
ratio of the sample relative to that of a conventional stan- 
dard, the carbonate skeleton of a fossil cephalopod which 
has a 18C/12C ratio of 0.0112). The ca 25-30% shift is 
taken as an indication that biosynthesis by photosynthet- 
ic organisms was involved. In fact, this offset is now 
taken to be one of the most powerful indications that life 
on Earth was active nearly 3.9 Gyr ago because the sam- 
ple suite encompases specimens right across the geolog- 
ic timescale. Some organic matter in ancient sediments 
has been measured as being even more enriched in the 
light isotope of carbon which would suggest involve- 
ment of methane-utilizing organisms. This conclusion is 
fully consistent with the remarkable diversity of the 
3.465 billion year old fossilized microflora (Schopf 1998). 

Were the first replicators based on autocatalysis, on 
thioester chemistry, on organic molecules adsorbed on 
pyrite? This exciting question is still open. A major prob- 
lem lies in the fact that we remain ignorant of the true 
historical facts on Earth from the time when life started. 


Life beyond Earth 

The main constituents of terrestrial life, i.e. water and 
organic molecules, are widespread in the universe. 
Primary organic chemistry is very active in interstellar 
space. So far, 83 different organic molecules have been 
identified by RADIOASTRONOMY. 

The most important identifications for prebiotic 
chemistry are probably are hydrogen cyanide, formalde- 
hyde and cyanamide. Although there is little basis for 
speculating that interstellar organic molecules arrived 
intact at the prebiotic Earth’s surface, there is growing 
interest in the possibility that interstellar molecules may 
be preserved intact in comets and in altered form in car- 
bonaceous meteorites. 

The molecules which allowed the emergence of ter- 
restrial life appear to be universal. On Earth, they were 
subjected to a given set of pressure and temperature con- 
straints. Do similar constraints exist elsewhere? 


Life on Mars? 

MARS mapping by Mariner 9 and Viking 1 and 2 
revealed channels resembling dry river beds. Three 
major classes of channels were identified: (i) dendritic 
runoff channels and valleys primarily associated with 
cratered terrain older than 3.8 Gyr and which are gen- 
erally associated with fluvial water erosion; (ii) outflow 
channels suggestive of large-volume flows in cata- 
clysmic events; (iii) fretted channels which are steep- 
walled with smooth flat floors suggestive of erosion by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


debris flows (McKay 1998). The inventory of the total 
amount of water that may have existed on the surface of 
Mars is difficult to estimate and varies from some 
meters to several hundred meters. The climatic condi- 
tions required for the formation of the valley networks 
are also poorly understood. The most plausible expla- 
nation is a relatively thick CO, atmosphere (1-5 bar) in 
the early history of Mars, giving rise to a greenhouse 
effect which would have allowed for mean global sur- 
face temperature to remain above the freezing point of 
water. Carr suggested recently that the valley networks, 
like the fretted channels, formed mainly by mass wast- 
ing, aided by groundwater seepage into the mass-wast- 
ed debris, between 3.8 and 3.7 Gyr ago. Therefore, it is 
generally considered that liquid water has been restrict- 
ed to the very early stages of Martian history. By about 
3.8 Gyr ago, most of the atmospheric CO) was probably 
irreversibly lost due to carbonate formation and pres- 
sure and temperature declined. However, the presence 
of extensive coastlines at the border of the northern 
lowlands where the Valles flow supports the presence 
of a large ocean in the northern hemisphere. This north- 
ern ocean could possibly have been active in epochs as 
young as Middle Amazonian, 500 million years ago. On 
the other hand, several features suggest the intermittent 
presence of water on the surface of Mars. Outflow chan- 
nels have been active in Maja and Ares Valles (Late 
Hesperian), in Kasei and Mangala Valles (Early 
Amazonian) and at Elysim (Middle Amazonian). 
Lacustrine deposits show the same range of age. 

The early histories of Mars and Earth clearly show 
similarities. Geological observations collected from 
Martian orbiters suggest that liquid water was once sta- 
ble on the Mars surface, attesting to the presence of an 
atmosphere capable of deccelerating carbonaceous 
micrometeorites. Therefore, chemical evolution may 
have been possible on Mars. The Viking 1 and 2 lander 
missions were designed to address the question of 
extant life on Mars. Three experiments were selected to 
detect metabolic activity such as photosynthesis, nutri- 
tion and respiration of potential microbial soil commu- 
nities. The results were ambiguous since, although ‘pos- 
itive’ results were obtained, no organic carbon was 
found in the Martian soil by gas chromatography—mass 
spectrometry. It was concluded that the most plausible 
explanation for these results was the presence, at the 
Martian surface, of highly reactive oxidants like H,O, 
which would have been photochemically produced in 
the atmosphere. The Viking lander could not sample 
soils below 6 cm and therefore the depth of this appar- 
ently organic-free and oxidizing layer is unknown. It has 
been estimated that the depth of diffusion for HO, is 
less than 3 m. Direct photolytic processes can also be 
responsible for the dearth of organics at the Martian sur- 
face. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The alpha proton x-ray spectrometer (APXS) on 
board the rover of the Mars Pathfinder mission in 1997 
measured the chemical composition of six soils and five 
rocks at the Ares Vallis landing site. Some rocks are sim- 
ilar to terrestrial andesites but it is not certain that these 
rocks are igneous. The texture of other rocks are difficult 
to interpret and might be sedimentary or metamorphic. 

Although the Viking missions were disappointing in 
the first instance for EXOBIOLOGY, in the long run the pro- 
gramme has proven extremely beneficial for the investi- 
gation of the possibility of life on Mars. Prior to Viking it 
had been apparent that there was a small group of mete- 
orites, all of igneous origin, called SNC METEORITES (after 
their type specimens Shergotty, Nakhla and Chassigny) 
that had comparatively young crystallization ages equal 
to or less than 1.3 Gyr. One of these meteorites, EETA 
79001, was found on Antarctica in 1979. It had, trapped 
within glass pockets, gas which both compositionally 
and isotopically matched, in all respects, the make-up of 
the Martian atmosphere as measured by the mass spec- 
trometer utilized for assessing the soil for the presence of 
organic compounds. The data provide a very strong 
argument that at least that particular SNC meteorite 
comes for Mars, thus supporting the circumstantial con- 
clusion that materials of a young age must have derived 
from a planetary-sized body. There are now twelve SNC 
meteorites known in total; others were found more 
recently on the Antarctic Ice Cap including one of much 
older age, ALH 84001. They can be all shown to be relat- 
ed by comparing their oxygen isotopic compositions. 
Only these twelve specimens (out of a total of ca 20000 
meteorites) define a correlation line of slope one half on 
a plot of 6!8O versus 6!70 with 6!70 = 0.321+0.013%p, i.e. 
displaced from the Earth reference line. 

The two SNC meteorites EETA79001 and ALH84001 
supply new and highly interesting information. A sub- 
sample of EETA79001 excavated from deep within the 
meteorite has been subjected to stepped-combustion. 
The CO, release from 200 °C to 400 °C suggests the pres- 
ence of organic molecules. The carbon is enriched in 12C 
with 618C of about —27%o. The difference between organ- 
ic matter and carbonates in Martian meteorites is greater 
than the shift seen on Earth which could also be indica- 
tive of biosynthesis but some as yet unknown reason 
cannot be ruled out. McKay et al (1996) reported the 
presence of PAHs, carbonates globules and ovoid fea- 
tures which may represent a signature of relic biogenic 
activity on Mars but today this biological interpretation 
has almost been abandoned. 

Even if the evidence for ancient life in ALH84001 is 
not established, the two Martian meteorites show the 
presence of organic molecules, suggesting that the ingre- 
dients required for the emergence of a primitive life may 
have been present on the surface of Mars. Therefore, it is 
tempting to consider that microorganisms may have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


developed on Mars until liquid water disappeared. Since 
Mars probably had no plate tectonics and since liquid 
water seems to have disappeared from the Mars surface 
very early, the Martian sub-surface perhaps keeps a 
frozen record of the very early forms of a terrestrial-like 
life. American, Japanese and European space agencies 
have planned a very intensive exploration of Mars. 
Exobiology interests are included especially in the analy- 
sis of samples from sites where the environmental condi- 
tions may have been favorable for the preservation of 
evidence of possible prebiotic or biotic processes. The 
NASA program included Mars Polar Lander (launched 
in January 1999, but failed in December 1999) which was 
intended to land near the southern polar ice cap and ana- 
lyze some soil samples. Mars 2001 Lander/ Rover, to be 
launched in April 2001, will deliver a small instrumented 
rover ‘Marie-Curie’ similar to Sojourner for in situ analy- 
ses. Mars 2003 Lander / Rover (Spring 2003) will deliver a 
more sophisticated rover for sample analysis and acqui- 
sition as part of the NASA-CNES Mars 05 Sample Return 
mission. The Martian samples collected both in 2003 and 
2005 will be sent into low Martian orbit by two distinct 
mini-rockets and finally brought back to Earth in 2008. 
ESA has led a study to design a multi-user integrated 
suite of instruments for the search for evidence of life on 
Mars. The priority has been given to the in situ organic 
and isotopic analysis of samples obtained by subsurface 
core drilling. The multi-user package is expected to be 
mounted on the 2005 Mars Sample return lander. A first 
version of the ESA Mars Exobiology integrated package 
could be launched in June 2003 as part of the ESA Mars 
Express mission. 


Life within Europa’s ocean? 

EUROPA appears as one of the most enigmatic of the 
Galilean satellites. With a mean density of about 3.0 g 
cm-3, the Jovian satellite should be dominated by rocks. 
Ground-based spectroscopy, combined with gravity 
data, suggests that the satellite has an icy crust roughly 
150 km thick and a rocky interior. The Voyager images 
showed very few impact craters on Europa’s surface, 
indicating recent, and probably continuing, resurfacing 
by cryovolcanic and tectonic processes. The Voyager 
spacecraft also revealed that Europa’s surface is crossed 
by numerous intersecting ridges and dark bands. It has 
been suggested that Europa’s thin outer ice shell might 
be separated from the silicate interior by a liquid water 
layer, prevented from freezing by tidal heating as the 
result of the variation of the gravitational field across the 
body of the satellite. Heat transfer from the core to the 
bottom of the ocean, similar to thermal vents in terres- 
trial oceans, is another possible source of thermal ener- 
gy. Although the existence of such an ocean is still uncer- 
tain, the last images from Galileo showing evidence for 
mobile icebergs support the presence of liquid water at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


shallow depths below the surface, either today, or at 
some time in the past (Carr et al 1998). If liquid water is 
present within Europa, it is quite possible that it 
includes organic matter derived from thermal vents. 
Terrestrial-like prebiotic organic chemistry and primi- 
tive life may therefore have developed in Europa’s 
ocean. If Europa maintained tidal and/or hydrothermal 
activity in its subsurface until now, it is possible that 
bacterial activity is still present. Thus, the possibility of 
an extraterrestrial life present in the hypothetical ocean 
of Europa must be seriously considered. The most likely 
sites for extant life would be at hydrothermal vents 
below the most recently resurfaced area. To study this 
directly would require making a borehole through the 
ice in order to deploy a robotic submersible. On the 
other hand, biological processes in and around 
hydrothermal vents could produce biomarkers that 
would be erupted as traces in cryovolcanic eruptions and 
thereby be available at the surface for in situ analysis or 
sample return. Mineral nutrients delivered through cryo- 
volcanic eruption would make the same locations the best 
candidates for photosynthetic life. 


What about Titan? 

TITAN’s atmosphere was revealed mainly by the Voyager 
1 mission in 1980, which yielded the bulk composition 
(90% molecular nitrogen and about 1-8% methane). 
Also, a great number of trace constituents were 
observed in the form of hydrocarbons (acetylene, 
ethane, ethylene, etc), nitriles (HCN, CyN2, HC3N) and 
oxygen compounds (CO and CO). Titan is the only 
other object in our solar system to bear a resemblance to 
our own planet in terms of atmospheric pressure (1.5 
bar) and carbon/nitrogen chemistry (Raulin 1998). It 
represents, therefore, a natural laboratory to study the 
formation of complex organic molecules on a planetary 
scale and over geological times. The ISO satellite has 
recently detected tiny amounts of water vapour in the 
higher atmosphere, but Titan’s surface temperatures (94 
K) are much too low to allow the presence of liquid 
water. Although liquid water is totally absent, the satel- 
lite provides a unique milieu to study, in situ, the prod- 
ucts of the fundamental physical and chemical interac- 
tions driving a planetary organic chemistry. Titan also 
serves as a reference laboratory to study, by default, the 
role of liquid water in exobiology. 

The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft launched in 
October 1997 will arrive in the vicinity of Saturn in 2004 
and perform several flybys of Titan making spectroscop- 
ic, imaging, radar and other measurements. A descent 
probe will penetrate the atmosphere and will systemati- 
cally study the organic chemistry in Titan’s geofluid. 
During 150 min, in situ measurements will provide 
detailed analysis of the organics present in the air, in the 
aerosols and at the surface. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Arguments in favor of universal life 

Arguments can be taken from the study of the origins of 
terrestrial life. Terrestrial life probably appeared between 4 
and 3.8 billion years ago when some organic molecules 
processed by liquid water began to transfer their chemical 
information and to evolve by making a few accidental 
transfer errors. Schematically, the prebiotic condition can 
be compared to spare pieces of a robot. By chance, some 
pieces assembled to form a robot capable of assembling 
other spare pieces to form a second identical robot, etc. 
Sometimes, a minor error in the building generated more 
efficient robots. The number of pieces required for the first 
robot is still unknown. The pieces have been erased by 
plate tectonics, the permanent presence of liquid water, 
the unshielded solar ultraviolet radiation and by life itself. 
If the number was small, life must arise on any body pre- 
senting environmental conditions similar to those which 
prevailed on the primitive Earth because simple chemistry 
is reproducible. If the number of pieces was large, then life 
is probably a very rare event, perhaps restricted to our 
planet. The idea of a primordial simplicity is supported by 
chemists who found that the spontaneous formation of the 
RNA sugar ribose under prebiotic conditions is very diffi- 
cult. They consider now that primitive life was probably 
simpler than a cell and even than RNA. A simple self- 
replicating system was probably more robust and offered 
better chances to resist cataclysmic impacts which might 
have periodically sterilized the Earth during heavy bom- 
bardment. A simple primitive life would be more easily 
extrapolatable to another celestial body. 

Biologists have shown that bacterial life can survive 
under extreme conditions. Life has continued to develop 
very well in water which is very acidic, alkaline, or is a 
strong brine solution. It has also survived and flourished 
in water at high pressure and at temperatures above 
100 °C (Stetter 1998). A flourishing biosphere has been 
discovered a kilometer deep below the surface of the 
Earth. Even the space environment is not so harmful. The 
idea that life could migrate in space, known as pansper- 
mia, was originally put forward by Richter and 
Arrhenius. Recent discoveries have given new support to 
this idea. These are: (i) the identification of meteorites of 
lunar and probably also of Martian origin; (ii) the proba- 
bility of small particles reaching escape velocities by the 
impact of large meteorites on a planet; (iii) the ability of 
bacterial spores to survive the shock waves of a simulat- 
ed meteorite impact; (iv) the high UV resistance of 
microorganisms at the low temperature of deep space; 
(v) the high survival rate of bacterial spores over extend- 
ed periods in space, provided they are shielded against 
the intense solar ultraviolet radiation or are coated by a 
mantle of absorbing material which attenuates the solar 
UV radiation (Horneck 1995). Panspermia will not tell us 
how life started in another star system but may con- 
tribute to distribute life in the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Delivery of extraterrestrial organic molecules is of spe- 
cial interest since it can still be studied today. Such an 
import process in the early Earth only required an atmos- 
phere to decelerate the particles. Such an atmosphere exist- 
ed 3.8 billion years ago as documented by geological clues 
including the Greenland sediments. We have clear evi- 
dence that water existed in substantial amounts on the sur- 
face of Mars at some earlier epoch, attesting to the presence 
of an atmosphere capable of decelerating micrometeorites. 
Therefore, primitive life might also have developed on 
Mars. How long water was present at the surface is 
unknown. Nor do we know if water still exists in subsur- 
face aquifers, although there are clear indications of the 
existence of large permafrost regions and of old water 
flows out of associated areas. Given the discovery of a 
flourishing biosphere even a kilometer deep below the sur- 
face of the Earth, it would be possible that a similar vast 
microbial community could still be present below the sur- 
face of Mars, having long ago retreated into that ecological 
niche following the disappearance of the surface water 
environment. The possibility that life may have evolved on 
Mars during an early period when water existed on the 
surface and that life may still exist deep below the surface, 
marks it as a prime candidate in a search for life beyond the 
Earth. Finding an extinct terrestrial-like life on Mars would 
be a major discovery. It would indicate that terrestrial life 
started with a rather simple set of autocatalytic molecules. 
If, by a stroke of good fortune, it could be shown that the 
Martian life used D-amino acids, for example, this would 
exclude any ancient panspermia from Mars to the Earth 
and would leave the sign of terrestrial homochirality to a 
pure chance event. Within the solar system, Europa may 
have an ocean of liquid water beneath its icy crust as sug- 
gested by data and theory. If submarine volcanism exists 
on Europa, the question arises of whether such activity 
could support life as in volcano-hydrothermal sites on the 
Earth’s seafloor. New planets have been recently discov- 
ered beyond the solar system (see EXOPLANETS by Jean 
Schneider). How to detect extrasolar life on these planets 
will probably be a formidable challenge for astronomers 
and radioastronomers in the next century. The detection of 
water and ozone (an easy detectable telltale signature of 
oxygen) in the atmosphere will be a strong indication but 
not an absolute proof. The detection of an electromagnetic 
signal (the SETI programme) would be more convincing 
but probably more problematic. Such discoveries would 
overjoy chemists, who suspect that life is universal because 
organic molecules and water are universal, but who need 
experimental proof to claim it. 


Bibliography 

Holm N Gand Charlou J L Initial indications of abiotic 
formation of hydrocarbons in the Rainbow _ ultra- 
mafic hydrothermal system, Mid-Atlantic Ridge 
Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 191 1-8 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Life: Origins and Possible Distribution in the Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cooper et al December, 2001 Carbonaceous Meteorites as 
a Source of Sugar-related Organic Compounds for 
the Early Earth Nature 

Burmeister J 1998 Self-replication and autocatalysis The 
Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the 
Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 295-312 

Carr M H et al 1998 Evidence for a subsurface ocean on 
Europa Nature 39 363-5 

Cronin J R 1998 Organic molecules on the early Earth. 
Clues from the origin of the Solar System: mete- 
orites The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces 
of the Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 119-46 

Deamer D W 1998 Membrane compartments in prebiotic 
evolution The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling 
Pieces of the Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 189-205 

DeDuve C 1998 Possible starts for primitive life. Clues 
from present-day biology: the thioester world The 
Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the 
Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 219-36 

Delsemme A H 1998 Cosmic origin of the biosphere The 
Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the 
Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 100-18 

Ferris J P 1998 Catalyzed RNA synthesis for the RNA 
world The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces 
of the Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 255-68 

Holm N G and Andersson E M 1998 Organic molecules 
on the early Earth: hydrothermal systems The 
Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the 
Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 86-99 

Horneck G 1995 Exobiology, the study of the origin, evo- 
lution and distribution of life within the context of 
cosmic evolution: a review Planet. Space Sci. 43 
189-217 

Irvine W M 1998 Extraterrestrial organic matter: a review 
Origins Life Evol. Biosphere 28 365-83 

Irvine W M et al 1996 Spectroscopic evidence for inter- 
stellar ices in Comet Hyakutake Nature 383 418-20 

James K D and Ellington A D 1998 Catalysis in the RNA 
world The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces 
of the Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 269-94 

Kasting J F and L L Brown 1998 The early atmosphere as 
a source of biogenic compounds The Molecular 
Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the Puzzle ed 
A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
pp 35-56 

McKay C P 1998 Life on Mars The Molecular Origins of 
Life: Assembling Pieces of the Puzzle ed A Brack 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 
386-406 

McKay D S, Gibson E K, Thomas-Keprta K L, Vali H, 
Romanek C S, Clemett S J, Chellier X D F, Maechling 
C Rand Zare R N 1996 Search for past life on Mars: 
possible relic biogenic activity in martian meteorite 
ALH 84001 Science 273 924-30 

Maurette M 1998 Micrometeorites The Molecular Origins 
of Life: Assembling Pieces of the Puzzle ed A Brack 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 
147-86 

Miller S L 1998 The endogenous synthesis of organic 
compounds The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling 
Pieces of the Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 59-85 

Owen T C 1998 The origin of the atmosphere The 
Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the 
Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 13-34 

Raulin F 1998 Titan The Molecular Origins of Life: 
Assembling Pieces of the Puzzle ed A Brack 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 
365-85 

Schopf J W 1998 Tracing the roots of the universal tree of 
life The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of 
the Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 336-62 

Schwartz A W 1998 Origins of the RNA world The 
Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the 
Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 237-54 

Stetter K O 1998 Hyperthermophiles and their possible 
role as ancestors of modern life The Molecular 
Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces of the Puzzle ed A 
Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 
315-35 

Wachterhauser G 1998 Origin of life in an iron-sulfur 
world The Molecular Origins of Life: Assembling Pieces 
of the Puzzle ed A Brack (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 206-18 

A Brack 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


11 


Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Light 


Electromagnetic radiation of those wavelengths to which 
the human eye responds, i.e. from just below 400 
nanometers (4 x 10~” m, 0.4 microns, or 4000 angstroms) to 
just over 700 nm. Different wavelengths within this range 
correspond to different colors as perceived by the eye. In 
order of decreasing wavelength are red, orange, yellow, 
green, blue, indigo, and violet. Wavelengths shorter than 
visible are referred to as ultraviolet, wavelengths longer 
than red are infrared. Light may also be regarded as 
particles, or photons, the longer-wavelength radiation 
corresponding to lower-energy photons. 

In common with other types of electromagnetic 
radiation, light travels in a vacuum at a speed of about 
300 000 km s~!. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


The early universe was hot and dense behaving as a cosmic 
nuclear reactor during the first 20 min of its evolution. It 
was, however, a ‘defective’ nuclear reactor, expanding and 
cooling very rapidly. As a result, only a handful of the 
lightest nuclides were synthesized before the density and 
temperature dropped too low for the nuclear reaction rates 
to compete with the universal expansion rate (See UNIVERSE: 
THERMAL HIsToRY). After hydrogen ('H = protons) the next 
most abundant element to emerge from the Big Bang is 
helium (He = alpha particles). Isotopes of these nuclides 
(deuterium and helium-3) are the next most abundant 
primordially. Then there is a large gap to the much 
lower abundance of lithium-7. The relative abundances 
of all other primordially-produced nuclei are very low, 
much smaller than their locally observed (or, currently 
observable) abundances. After a brief description of the 
early evolution of the universe emphasizing those aspects 
most relevant to primordial, or ‘big bang’ nucleosynthesis 
(BBN), the predicted abundances of the light nuclides will 
be presented as a function of the one ‘free’ parameter 
(in the simplest, ‘standard’ model: SBBN), the nucleon 
(or ‘baryon’) abundance. Then, each element will 
be considered in turn in a confrontation between the 
predictions of SBBN and the observational data. At present 
(summer 1999) there is remarkable agreement between 
the SBBN predictions of the abundances of four nuclides 
(D, He, *He and ’Li) and their primordial abundances 
inferred from the observations. However, there are some 
hints that this concordance of the hot big bang model 
may be imperfect, so we will also explore some variations 
on the theme of the standard model with regard to their 
modifications of the predicted primordial abundances of 
the light elements. 

In the simplest, standard, hot big bang model the 
currently observed large-scale isotropy and homogeneity 
of the universe is assumed to apply during earlier epochs 
in its evolution (see COSMOLOGY: STANDARD MODEL). Given the 
currently observed universal expansion and the matter 
and radiation (CBR: ‘cosmic background radiation’, the 
2.7 K ‘black body radiation’) content, it is a straightforward 
application of classical physics to extrapolate back to 
earlier epochs in the history of the universe (see COSMIC 
MICROWAVE BACKGROUND). At a time of order 0.1 s after the 
expansion began the universe was filled with a hot, dense 
plasma of particles. The most abundant were photons, 
electron—positron pairs, particle-antiparticle pairs of all 
known ‘flavors’ of neutrinos (ve, v, and v,) and trace 
amounts of neutrons and protons (‘nucleons’ or ‘baryons’). 
At such early times the thermal energy of these particles 
was very high, of order a few MeV. With the exception 
of the nucleons, it is known or assumed that all the 
other particles present were extremely relativistic at this 
time. Given their high energies (and velocities close to, 
or exactly equal to, the speed of light) and high densities, 
the electroweak interactions among these particles were 
sufficiently rapid to have established thermal equilibrium. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


As a result, the numbers and distributions (of momentum 
and energy) of all these particles are accurately predicted 
by well-known physics. 


Nucleosynthesis in the early universe 

The primordial yields of light elements are determined 
by the competition between the expansion rate of the 
universe (the Hubble parameter H) and the rates of 
the weak and nuclear reactions (See HUBBLE CONSTANT). 
It is the weak interaction, interconverting neutrons and 
protons, that largely determines the amount of 4He which 
may be synthesized, while detailed nuclear reaction rates 
regulate the production (and destruction) of the other light 
elements. In the standard model of cosmology the early 
expansion rate is fixed by the total energy density p, 


H? = 82Gp/3 (1) 


where G is Newton’s gravitational constant. In the 
standard model of particle physics the early energy density 
is dominated by the lightest, relativistic particles. For the 
epoch when the universe is a few tenths of a second old 
and older, and the temperature is less than a few MeV, 


P= py t+ Pet Nip, (2) 


where py, Pe and p, are the energy densities in photons, 
electrons and positrons, and massless neutrinos and 
antineutrinos (one species), respectively; N, is the number 
of massless (or, very light: m, « 1 MeV) neutrino species 
which, in standard BBN, is exactly 3. In considering 
variations on the theme of the standard model, it is 
useful to allow N, to differ from 3 to account for the 
presence of ‘new’ particles and/or any suppression of the 
standard particles (e.g. if the r neutrino should havea large 
mass). Since the energy density in relativistic particles 
scales as the fourth power of the temperature, the early 
expansion rate scales as the square of the temperature 
with a coefficient that depends on the number of different 
relativistic species. The more such species, the faster the 
universe expands, the earlier (higher temperature) will the 
weak and nuclear reactions drop out of equilibrium. It is 
useful to write the total energy density in terms of the 
photon energy density and g, the equivalent number of 
relativistic degrees of freedom (i.e. helicity states, modulo 
the different contributions to the energy density from 
fermions and bosons), 


P= (g/2)py. (3) 


In the standard model at T ~ 1 MeV, gem = 43/4. 
Account may be taken of additional degrees of freedom 
by comparing their contribution to p with that of one 
additional light neutrino species: 


Ap = ptor — Psm = AN, py. (4) 


If the early energy density deviates from that of the 
standard model, the early expansion rate (or, equivalently, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the age at a fixed temperature) will change as well. The 
‘speed-up’ factor € = H/ Hs may be related to AN, by 


€ = (p/psm)” = (1+7 AN, /43)"”. (5) 


As we will see shortly, the 4He abundance is very 
sensitive to the early expansion rate while the abundances 
of the other light nuclides depend mainly on the nuclear 
reaction rates which scale with the nucleon (baryon) 
density. Since the baryon density is always changing 
as the universe expands, it is convenient to distinguish 
between models with different baryon densities using a 
dimensionless parameter which either is conserved or, 
changes in a known and calculable fashion. From the 
very early universe until now the number of baryons in 
a comoving volume has been preserved and the same is 
roughly true for photons since the end of BBN. Therefore, 
the ratio of number densities of baryons (ng) and photons 
(n,) provides just such a measure of the universal baryon 
abundance: 

1 =(ne/ny)o — mo = 107. (6) 
The universal density of photons at present (throughout 
this article the present epoch is indicated by the subscript 
‘0’) is dominated by those in the CBR (for Typ = 2.73 K, 
nyo = 412 cm”) so that the baryon density parameter 
QB = (pB/Pc)o, the ratio of the present baryon density 
(pg) to the present critical density (p,), may be related to 
n and the present value of the Hubble parameter Hp = 
100h km s~' Mpc", 


mo = 273Qzgh?. (7) 


It should be noted that prior to electron—positron 
annihilation there were fewer photons in every comoving 
volume (by a factor very close to 4/11); this is 
automatically accounted for in all numerical BBN codes. 
Itis simply a matter of consensus and convenience that the 
baryon abundance is quoted in terms of its present value. 

In SBBN (i.e. N, = 3) the abundances of the light 
nuclides synthesized primordially depend on only one 
‘free’ parameter, n. SBBN is thus ‘overconstrained’ since 
one value (or, a narrow range of values set by the 
observational and theoretical reaction rate uncertainties) 
of must account consistently for the primordial 
abundances of D, *He, *He and 7Li. At the same time 
this value or range of 7 must be consistent with current 
estimates of (or, bounds to) the present baryon density. 
For these reasons BBN is one of the key pillars supporting 
the edifice of the standard model of cosmology and it is the 
only one which offers a glimpse of the earliest evolution 
of the universe. In the following we will first identify 
the key landmarks in the first 20 min in the evolution of 
the universe in order to identify the physical processes 
responsible for determining the primordial abundances 
of the light nuclides. Then, after presenting the SBBN 
predictions (as a function of 7; see figure 1) we will review 
the current status of the observational data, as well as the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


TTT rn T1111 T1441 T1111 


TTT 
3 
iil 


SHe 


Figure 1. The predicted primordial abundances as a function of 
n. Yp is the 4He mass fraction while y2p, y3p, y7p are the number 


density ratios to hydrogen of D, 7He and *He respectively. 


steps necessary in order to go from ‘here and now’ to ‘there 
and then’ when using the data to infer the true primordial 
abundances. Then we will be in a position to assess the 
consistency of the standard model. 


Weak equilibrium and the *He abundance 
Consider now those early epochs when the universe was 
only a few tenths of a second old and the radiation 
filling it was at a temperature (thermal energy) of a few 
MeV. According to the standard model, at those early 
times the universe was a hot, dense ‘soup’ of relativistic 
particles (photons, e* pairs, three ‘flavors’ (e, w, tT) of 
neutrino-antineutrino pairs) along with a trace amount 
(at the level of a few parts in 10°) of neutrons and 
protons. At such high temperatures and densities both the 
weak and the nuclear reaction rates are sufficiently rapid 
(compared with the early universe expansion rate) that all 
particles have come to equilibrium. A key consequence 
of equilibrium is that the earlier history of the evolution 
of the universe is irrelevant for an understanding of 
BBN. When the temperature drops below a few MeV the 
weakly interacting neutrinos effectively decouple from the 
photons and e* pairs, but they still play an important role 
in regulating the neutron-to-proton ratio. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


At high temperatures, neutrons and protons are 
continuously interconverting via the weak interactions: 
nt+eoptintye<@epte,andne pte +i. 
When the interconversion rate is faster than the expansion 
rate, the neutron-to-proton ratio tracks its equilibrium 
value, decreasing exponentially with temperature (n/p = 
e4"/T, where Am = 1.29 MeV is the neutron-proton 
mass difference). A comparison of the weak rates with the 
universal expansion rate reveals that equilibrium may be 
maintained until the temperature drops below ~0.8 MeV. 
When the interconversion rate becomes less than the 
expansion rate, the n/p ratio effectively ‘freezes out’ (at 
a value of ~1/6), thereafter decreasing slowly, mainly as a 
result of free neutron decay. 

Although n/p freeze-out occurs at a temperature 
below the deuterium binding energy, Eg = 2.2 MeV, 
the first link in the nucleosynthetic chain, p+n — 
D+ y, is ineffective in jump-starting BBN since the 
photodestruction rate of deuterium (« n, e~"8/") is much 
larger than the deuterium production rate (« ng) owing 
to the very large universal photon-to-baryon ratio (2107). 
Thus, the universe must ‘wait’ until there are so few 
sufficiently energetic photons that deuterium becomes 
effectively stable against photodissociation. This occurs 
for temperatures 280 keV, at which time neutrons are 
rapidly incorporated into *He with an efficiency of 
99.99%. This efficiency is driven by the tight binding 
of the *He nucleus, along with the roadblock to further 
nucleosynthesis imposed by the absence of a stable nucleus 
at mass 5. By this time (T 2 80 keV), the n/p ratio 
has dropped to ~1/7, and simple counting (2 neutrons 
in every He nucleus) yields an estimated primordial *He 
mass fraction 
mw 20/P) 


~ 25; 
1l+n/p oes (8) 


P 
As a result of its large binding energy and the gap at mass 
5, the primordial abundance of *He is relatively insensitive 
to the nuclear reaction rates and, therefore, to the baryon 
abundance (yn). As may be seen in figure 1, while 7 varies by 
orders of magnitude, the predicted 4He mass fraction, Yp, 
changes by factors of only a few. Indeed, for 1 < no < 10, 
0.22 < Yp < 0.25. As may be seen in figures 1 and 2, there 
is a very slight increase in ¥Y, with n. This is mainly due 
to BBN beginning earlier, when there are more neutrons 
available to form *+He, if the baryon-to-photon ratio is 
higher. The increase in Y, with n is logarithmic; over most 
of the interesting range in n, AY, © 0.01 An/n. 

The *He abundance is, however, sensitive to the 
competition between the universal expansion rate (H) 
and the weak interaction rate (interconverting neutrons 
and protons). If the early universe should expand 
faster than predicted for the standard model, the weak 
interactions will drop out of equilibrium earlier, at a higher 
temperature, when the n/p ratio is higher. In this case, 
more neutrons will be available to be incorporated into 
*He and Y, will increase. Numerical calculations show 
that, for a modest speed-up (AN, < 1), AY, © 0.013 AN,. 
Hence, constraints on Y, (and n) lead directly to bounds on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.26 


0.25 


0.24 


0.23 


0.22 + A 


0.21 


No 


Figure 2. The predicted He abundance (solid curve) and the 20 
theoretical uncertainty [2]. The horizontal lines show the range 
indicated by the observational data. 


AN, and on particle physics beyond the standard model 
[1]. 

It should be noted that the uncertainty in the BBN- 
predicted mass fraction of He is very small and almost 
entirely dominated by the (small) uncertainty in the n—p 
interconversion rates. These rates may be ‘normalized’ 
through the neutron lifetime, t,, whose current standard 
value is 887 + 2 s (actually, 886.7 + 1.9 s). To very 
good accuracy, a 1 s uncertainty in 1, corresponds to 
an uncertainty in Y, of order 2 x 10-*. At this tiny 
level of uncertainty it is important to include finite-mass, 
zero- and finite-temperature radiative corrections, and 
Coulomb corrections to the weak rates. However, within 
the last few years it has emerged that the largest error 
in the BBN-prediction of ¥, was due to a too large time- 
step in the numerical code. With this now under control, 
it is estimated that the residual theoretical uncertainty 
(in addition to that from the uncertainty in t,) is of the 
order of 2 parts in 10*. Indeed, a comparison of two 
major, independent BBN codes reveals agreement in the 
predicted values of Y, to 0.0001 + 0.0001 over the entire 
range 1 < m9 < 10. In figure 2 is shown the BBN-predicted 
*He mass fraction, Yp, as a function of n; the thickness of 
the band is the +2o theoretical uncertainty. For njo 2 2 
the 1o theoretical uncertainty in Y, is <6 x 10~*. As we 
will soon see, the current observational uncertainties in Y, 
are much larger (see, also, figure 2). 


Deuterium—the ideal baryometer 

As may be seen in figure 1, the deuterium abundance (the 
ratio, by number, of deuterium to hydrogen: hereinafter, 
(D/H)p = yzp) isa monotonic, rapidly decreasing function 
of the baryon abundance n. The reason for this behavior is 
easily understood. Once BBN begins in earnest, when the 
temperature drops below ~80 keV, D is rapidly burned 
to 9H, °He and *He. The higher the baryon abundance, 
the faster the burning and the less D survives. For 719 in 
the ‘interesting’ range 1-10, yop decreases with the ~1.6 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


D/H 


No 


Figure 3. The predicted D/H abundance (solid curve) and the 
2o theoretical uncertainty [2]. The horizontal lines show the 
range indicated by the observational data for both high D/H 
(upper two lines) and low D/H (lower two lines). 


power of n. As a result, a 10% error in yop corresponds 
to only a 6% error in 7. This strong dependence of y2p 
on 719, combined with the simplicity of the evolution of 
D/H in the epochs following BBN, is responsible for the 
unique role of deuterium as a baryometer [3]. Because 
almost all the relevant reaction cross sections are measured 
in the laboratory at energies comparable with those of 
BBN, the theoretical uncertainties in the BBN-predicted 
abundance of deuterium is quite small, 8-10% for most of 
the interesting 7 range shown in figure 3. 

Deuterium and helium-4 are complementary, forming 
the crucial link in testing the consistency of BBN in the 
standard model. While the primordial D abundance 
is very sensitive to the baryon density, the primordial 
“He abundance is relatively insensitive to 7. Deuterium 
provides a bound on the universal baryon density while 
helium-4 constrains the early expansion rate of the 
universe, offering bounds on particle physics beyond the 
standard model. 


Helium-3—complicated evolution 
As may be seen in figure 1, the predicted primordial 
abundance of *He behaves similarly to that of D, 
decreasing monotonically with n. Again, the reason is 
the same: *He is being burned to the more tightly bound 
nucleus “He. The higher the nucleon abundance, the faster 
the burning and the less 3He survives. In contrast to the 
behavior of D/H versus n, the decrease of 7He/H with 
increasing 7 is much slower. This is simply a reflection 
of the much tighter binding of 5He compared with D. 
Although the BBN predictions for the abundance of 3He 
have similarly small uncertainties (8-10%) to those of D, 
it is much more difficult to exploit the observations of 
3He to test and constrain BBN. The complication is the 
evolutionary history of the 3He abundance since BBN. 
Although any deuterium cycled through stars is 
burned to *He during the stars’ pre-main-sequence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


evolution, *He will survive in the cooler stellar exteriors 
while being destroyed in the hotter interiors. For the 
more abundant lower-mass stars which are cooler, a larger 
fraction of prestellar 7He (along with the *He produced 
from prestellar D) survives. Indeed, for sufficiently low- 
mass stars (less than a few solar masses) incomplete 
burning actually leads to a buildup of newly synthesized 
3He (to be contrasted with the prestellar D and *He) which 
may—or may not—be returned to the interstellar medium. 
In fact, some PLANETARY NEBULAE are observed to be highly 
enriched in *He. So, the evolution of *He is complex 
with stellar destruction competing with primordial and 
stellar production. Indeed, if all low-mass stars were as 
prolific producers of *He as indicated by some planetary 
nebulae, the solar system and local interstellar medium 
abundances of *He should far exceed those inferred from 
observations. Thus, at least some low-mass stars must be 
net destroyers of *He. Given this necessarily complex and 
uncertain picture of production, destruction and survival, 
it is difficult to use current observational data to infer 
the primordial abundance of *He. Unless and until *He 
is observed in high-redshift (i.e. early universe), low- 
metallicity (ie. nearly unevolved) systems, it will provide 
only a weak check on the consistency of BBN. 


Lithium-7- the lithium valley 

The trend of the BBN-predicted primordial abundance of 
lithium (almost entirely ’Li) with 7 is more ‘interesting’ 
than that of the other light nuclides (see figures 1 and 4). 
The ‘lithium valley’, centered near 119 * 2-3, is the result 
of the competition between production and destruction in 
the two paths to mass 7 synthesis. At relatively low baryon 
abundance (7719 < 2) mass 7 is mainly synthesized as’Livia 
35H +*He > 7Li+ y. As the baryon abundance increases at 
low n, ’Liis destroyed rapidly by (p, y)2a reactions, hence 
the decrease in (Li/H)p = y7p withincreasing 7 seen (at low 
n) in figures 1 and 4. Were this the only route to primordial 
synthesis of mass 7, this monotonic trend would continue, 
similar to those for D and *He. However, mass 7 may 
also be synthesized via 7He + *He — 7Be + y. The 7Be 
will later capture an electron to become ’Li. This channel 
is very important because it is much easier to destroy Li 
than’Be. Asaresult, for relatively high baryon abundance 
(m0 Z 3) the latter channel dominates mass 7 production 
and y7p increases with increasing 7. 

As may been seen in figure 4, the BBN-predicted 
uncertainties for yzp are much larger than those for D, 3He 
or *He. In the interval 1 < 1) < 10 the lo uncertainties 
are typically ~20%, although in a narrow range of n near 
the bottom of the ‘valley’ they are somewhat smaller (~12- 
15%). 


From here and now to there and then 

To test the consistency of SBBN requires that we confront 
the predictions with the primordial abundances of the 
light nuclides which, however, are not observed but, 
rather, are inferred from observations. The path from the 
observational data to the primordial abundances is long 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Li/H 


Nio 


Figure 4. The predicted ’Li abundance (solid curve) and the 20 
theoretical uncertainty [2]. The horizontal lines show the range 
indicated by the observational data. 


and twisted and often fraught with peril. In addition 
to the usual statistical and systematic uncertainties, it is 
crucial to forge a connection from ‘here and now’ to ‘there 
and then’, i.e. to relate the derived abundances to their 
primordial values. It is indeed fortunate that each of 
the key elements is observed in different astrophysical 
sites using very different astronomical techniques. Also, 
the corrections for chemical evolution differ among them 
and, even more important, they can be minimized. For 
example, deuterium (and hydrogen) is mainly observed in 
cool, neutral gas (so-called HI REGIONS) via UV absorption 
from the atomic ground state (the Lyman series), while 
radio telescopes allow helium-3 to be studied utilizing 
the analog of the hydrogen 21 cm line for singly ionized 
3He in regions of hot, ionized gas (so called H II regions). 
Helium-4 is probed using the emission from its optical 
recombination lines formed in H II regions. In contrast, 
lithium is observed in the absorption spectra of warm, 
low-mass halo stars. With such different sites, with 
the mix of absorption-emission, and with the variety of 
telescopes and different detectors involved, the possibility 
of correlated errors biasing the comparison with the 
predictions of BBN is unlikely. This favorable situation 
extends to the obligatory evolutionary corrections. 
For example, although until recently observations of 
deuterium were limited to the solar system and the 
Galaxy, mandating uncertain evolutionary corrections to 
infer the pregalactic abundance, the Keck and HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPES have begun to open the window to deuterium 
in high-redshift, low-metallicity, nearly primordial regions 
(Lyman-a clouds). Observations of *He in chemically 
unevolved, low-metallicity (~1/50 of solar) extragalactic 
H II regions permit the evolutionary correction to be 
reduced to the level of the statistical uncertainties. The 
abundances of lithium inferred from observations of 
the very metal-poor halo stars (one-thousandth of solar 
abundance and even lower) require almost no correction 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for chemical evolution. On the other hand, as noted earlier, 
the status of helium-3 is in contrast to that of the other 
light elements. For this reason, 3He will not be used 
quantitatively in this article. 

The currently very favorable observational and 
evolutionary situation for the nuclides produced during 
BBN is counterbalanced by the likely presence of 
systematic errors in the path from observations to 
primordial abundances. By their very nature, such errors 
are difficult—if not impossible—to quantify. In the key 
case of deuterium there is a very limited set of the most 
useful data. As a result, and although cosmological 
abundance determinations have taken their place in the 
current ‘precision’ era of cosmology, it is far from clear that 
the present abundance determinations are truly ‘accurate’. 
Thus, the usual caveat emptor applies to any conclusions 
drawn from the subsequent comparison between the 
predictions and the data. With this caution in mind the 
current status of the data will be surveyed in order to infer 
‘reasonable’ ranges for the primordial abundances of the 
key light elements. 


Deuterium 

Since deuterium is completely burned away whenever it 
is cycled through stars, and there are no astrophysical 
sites capable of producing deuterium in anywhere near 
its observed abundance [3], any D abundance derived 
from observational data provides a lower bound to its 
primordial abundance. Thus, without having to correct 
for Galactic evolution, the “‘here-and-now’ deuterium 
abundance inferred from UV observations along 12 lines 
of sight in the local interstellar medium (LISM) bounds 
the ‘there-and-then’ primordial abundance from below 
((D/H)p = (D/H)ysy, = (1.5 + 0.1) x 107%). As may be 
seen from figures 1 and 2, any lower bound to primordial 
D will provide an upper bound to the baryon-to-photon 
ratio [4]. 

Solar system observations of *He permit an indepen- 
dent, albeit indirect, determination of the pre-solar-system 
deuterium abundance [5]. This estimate of the Galac- 
tic abundance some 4.5 Gyr ago, while somewhat higher 
than the LISM value, has a larger uncertainty (D/H = 
(2.1£0.5) x 10~ [6]). Within the uncertainty it is consistent 
with the LISM value suggesting there has been only mod- 
est destruction of deuterium in the last 4.5 Gyr. There is 
also a recent measurement of deuterium in the atmosphere 
of Jupiter using the Galileo Probe Mass Spectrometer [7] 
(D/H = (2.6 £ 0.7) x 1075 (see GALILEO MISSION TO JUPITER)). 

To further exploit the solar system and/or LISM 
deuterium determinations to constrain or estimate the 
primordial abundance would require corrections for 
the Galactic evolution of D; see GALACTIC EVOLUTION. 
Although the simplicity of the evolution of deuterium (it 
is only destroyed) suggests that such correction might 
be very nearly independent of the details of specific 
chemical evolution models, large differences remain 
between different estimates. It is therefore fortunate that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


data on D/H in high-redshift (nearly primordial), low- 
metallicity (nearly unevolved) Lyman-a absorbers have 
become available in recent years [8,9]. It is expected 
that such systems still retain their original, primordial 
deuterium, undiluted by the deuterium-depleted debris 
of any significant stellar evolution. That is the good 
news. The bad news is that, at present, D abundance 
determinations are claimed for only three such systems, 
and that the abundances inferred for two of them (along 
with a limit to the abundance for a third) appear to 
be inconsistent with the abundance estimated for the 
remaining one. Here we have a prime illustration 
of ‘precise’, but possibly inaccurate, cosmological data. 
Indeed, there is a serious obstacle inherent to using 
absorption spectra to measure the deuterium abundance 
since the isotope-shifted deuterium absorption lines are 
indistinguishable from the corresponding lines in suitably 
velocity-shifted (—81 km s7') hydrogen. Such ‘interlopers’ 
may have been responsible for some of the early claims 
[8] of a ‘high’ deuterium abundance [10]. Indeed, an 
interloper may be responsible for the one surviving high- 
D claim [11]. At present it seems that only three good 
candidates for nearly primordial deuterium have emerged 
from ground- and space-based observations. It may 
be premature to constrain cosmology on the basis of 
such sparse data. Nonetheless, the two ‘low-D’ systems 
suggest a primordial deuterium abundance consistent 
with estimates of the pre-Galactic value inferred from 
LISM and solar system data ((D/H)p = (3.4£0.25) x 10° 
[12]). To illustrate the confrontation of cosmological theory 
with observational data, this D abundance will be adopted 
in the following. However, the consequences of choosing 
the ‘high-D’ abundance ((D/H)p = (20 + 5) x 10-5 [11]) 
will also be discussed. 


Helium-4 

As the second most abundant nuclide in the universe (after 
hydrogen), the abundance of *He can be determined to 
high accuracy at sites throughout the universe. However, 
as stars evolve they burn hydrogen to helium and the 
*He in the debris of sTELLAR EVOLUTION contaminates any 
primordial “He. Since any attempt to correct for stellar 
evolution will be inherently uncertain, it is sensible 
to concentrate on the data from low-metallicity sites. 
Extragalactic regions of hot, ionized gas (H II regions) 
provide such sites, where the helium is revealed via 
emission lines formed when singly and doubly ionized 
helium recombines. As with deuterium, current data 
provide ambiguous estimates of the primordial helium 
abundance. Since the differences (AY = 0.010) are larger 
than the statistical uncertainties (S+0.003), systematic 
errors probably dominate. Among the currently most 
likely sources of such errors are uncertain corrections for 
collisional excitation in helium, uncertain corrections for 
unseen neutral helium and/or hydrogen, and underlying 
stellar absorption (leading to an underestimate of the 
true strength of the helium emission lines). In contrast, 
since the most metal poor of the observed regions have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


metallicities of order 1/50—1/30 of solar, the extrapolation 
from the lowest-metallicity regions to truly primordial 
introduces an uncertainty no larger than the statistical 
error. 

Using published data [13,14] for 40 low-metallicity 
regions, one group [15] finds Yp = 0.234 + 0.003. 
In contrast, from an independent data set of 45 low- 
metallicity regions another group [16] infers Yp = 0.244 + 
0.002. Clearly, these results are statistically inconsistent. 
It is crucial that high priority be assigned to further H II 
region observations to estimate or avoid the systematic 
errors. Until then, since the error budget for Yp is 
probably dominated by systematic rather than statistical 
uncertainties, in what follows a generous range for Y, will 
be adopted: 0.228 < Yp < 0.248. 


Lithium-7 

Cosmologically interesting lithium is observed in the 
spectra of nearly 100 very metal poor halo stars [17, 18] 
(See GALACTIC METAL-POOR HALO). These stars are so metal 
poor they provide a sample of more nearly primordial 
material than anything observed anywhere else in the 
universe; the most metal-poor among them have heavy- 
element abundances less than one-thousandth of the 
solar metallicity. However, these halo stars are also 
the oldest objects in the Galaxy and, as such, have 
had the most time to modify their surface abundances. 
So, even though any correction for Galactic evolution 
modifying their lithium abundances may be smaller than 
the statistical uncertainties of a given measurement, the 
systematic uncertainty associated with the dilution and/or 
destruction of surface lithium in these very old stars could 
dominate the error budget. There could be additional 
errors associated with the modeling of the surface layers 
of these cool, low-metallicity, low-mass stars needed to 
derive abundances from absorption-line spectra. It is also 
possible that some of the Li observed in these stars is 
non-primordial (e.g. that some of the observed Li may 
have been produced post-BBN by spallation reactions (the 
breakup of C, N and O nuclei into nuclei of Li, Be and B) 
or fusion reactions (@ + a to form °Li and Li) in cosmic- 
ray collisions with gas in the ISM). In a recent analysis 
[19], it is argued that as much as ~0.2 dex of the observed 
lithium abundance, A(Li) = 12+log(Li/H), could be post- 
primordial in origin. 

The very large data set of lithium abundances 
measured in the warmer (T > 5800 K), more metal- 
poor ([Fe/H] < —1.3) halo stars defines a plateau (the 
‘Spite-plateau’ [17]) in the lithium abundance-metallicity 
plane. Depending on the choice of stellar-temperature 
scale and stellar atmosphere model, the abundance level 
of the plateau is A(Li) = 2.2 + 0.1, with very little 
dispersion in abundances around this plateau value. The 
small dispersion provides an important constraint on 
models which attempt to connect the present surface 
lithium abundances in these stars to the original lithium 
abundance in the gas out of which these stars were formed 
some 10-15 Gyr ago. ‘Standard’ (i.e. non-rotating) stellar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


models predict almost no lithium depletion and, therefore, 
are consistent with no dispersion about the Spite plateau. 
Although early work on mixing in models of rotating stars 
was very uncertain, recently stellar models have been 
constructed which reproduce the angular momentum 
evolution observed for the much younger, low-mass open 
cluster stars. These models have been applied to the study 
of lithium depletion in main sequence halo stars. A well- 
defined lithium plateau with modest scatter and a small 
population of ‘outliers’ (overdepleted stars), consistent 
with the current data, is predicted for depletion factors 
between 0.2 dex and 0.4 dex [20]. 

To err on the side of caution, a generous range 
for the plateau abundance, 2.1 < A(Li) < 2.3, is 
adopted. If depletion is absent, this range is consistent 
with the primordial lithium ‘valley’ (see figure 4). For 
depletion >0.2 dex, the consistent primordial lithium 
abundances bifurcate and move up into the ‘foothills’, 
although a non-negligible contribution from post-BBN 
lithium could move the primordial abundance back down 
again (figure 4). 


Confrontation of theory with data 

In the context of the ‘standard’ model (three families 
of massless, or light, two-component neutrinos), the 
predictions of BBN (SBBN) depend on only one free 
parameter, the nucleon-to-photon ratio 7. The key test of 
the standard, hot, big bang cosmology is to assess whether 
there exists a unique value or range of n for which the 
predictions of the primordial abundances are consistent 
with the light-element abundances inferred from the 
observational data. From a statistical point of view it 
might be preferable to perform a simultaneous fit of the 
inferred primordial abundances of D, *He, “He and ’Li to 
the SBBN predictions. In this manner the ‘best fit’ n, along 
with its probability distribution may be found, and the 
‘goodness of fit’ assessed [21]. However, since systematic 
uncertainties most likely dominate observational errors at 
present, the value of this approach is compromised. An 
alternative approach is adopted here. 

As emphasized earlier, deuterium is an ideal 
baryometer. As a first step the primordial abundance 
of deuterium inferred from observations at high redshift 
will be compared with the SBBN prediction to identify a 
consistent range for n. Then, given this range, the SBBN 
abundances of “He and ’Li are predicted and these are 
compared with the corresponding primordial abundances 
derived from the observational data. The challenge is to 
see whether the D-identified range for 7 leads to consistent 
predictions for “He and ’Li. Recall that, because of its 
complicated evolutionary history, it is difficult to use 
3He to test and constrain SBBN. Furthermore, another 
consistency test is to compare the SBBN-inferred 7 range 
with the present baryon density derived from non-BBN 
observations and theory. Is our model for the very early 
evolution of the universe consistent with the present 
universe? 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


From the two well-observed, high-redshift absorption 
line systems with ‘low D’, the estimate adopted for the 
primordial D abundance is (D/H)p = (2.9 — 4.0) x 
10-5 (see figure 3). Also shown for comparison in 
figure 3 is the allowed range of the primordial deuterium 
abundance suggested by the ‘high-D’ abundance inferred 
from observations of one lower-redshift absorption-line 
system. With allowance for the ~8% uncertainty in the 
theoretically predicted abundance, the favored range (low 
D) for n is quite narrow: 719 = 5.1 + 0.36. It is clear from 
figure 4 that, for the baryon abundance in this range, the 
BBN-predicted lithium abundance is entirely consistent 
with the Spite plateau value, even if the plateau were 
raised by ~0.2 dex to allow for modest stellar destruction— 
dilution or lowered by a similar amount owing to post- 
BBN production. For this narrow range in 7 the predicted 
*He mass fraction varies very little. For mio © 5, AY, &© 
0.010 An/n, so that, including the error in the predicted 
abundance, Y, = 0.247 + 0.001. As may be verified 
from figure 2, this is within (albeit at the high end of) 
the range allowed by the data from the low-metallicity, 
extragalactic H II regions. Given the current uncertainties 
in the primordial abundances, SBBN is consistent with 
‘low-D, high-n’. 

The significance of this concordance cannot be 
underestimated. A glance at figure 1 provides a reminder 
of the enormous ranges for the predicted primordial 
abundances. That the simplest hot, big bang cosmological 
model can account for (‘predict’) three independent 
abundances (four with *He; although *He has not been 
employed in this comparison, its predicted abundance is 
consistent with extant observational data) by adjusting 
only one free parameter (7) is a striking success. The 
theory, which is in principle falsifiable, has passed the 
test. It need not have. Indeed, future observational 
data coupled to better understanding of systematic errors 
may provide new challenges. For example, if in the 
future it should be determined that the primordial helium 
mass fraction were lower than Y, = 0.245, this would 
be inconsistent (within the errors) with the ‘low-D, high- 
n’ range derived above. Similarly, if the best estimate 
for the D-determined 7 range changed, the comparison 
performed above should be repeated. With this in mind, 
what of the ‘high-D, low-n’ range which has been set aside 
in the current comparison? 

If, in contrast to the deuterium abundance adopted 
above, the true value were higher, (D/H)p = (10- 
30) x 10-°, the SBBN-favored range in 7 would be lower 
(see figure 3). Accounting for the ~8% uncertainty in 
the theoretically predicted abundance, ny = 1.7 + 0.28. 
Inspection of figures 2-4 reveals that, as long as mio 2 1.1- 
1.3, consistency with *He and 7Li can be obtained. Hence, 
for ‘high D’ as well, the standard model passes the key 
cosmological test. 


Comparison of BBN with non-BBN baryon density estimates 
Having established the internal consistency of primordial 
nucleosynthesis in the standard model, it is necessary to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


proceed to the next key test. Does the nucleon abundance 
inferred from processes which occurred during the first 
thousand seconds of the evolution of the universe agree 
with estimates—bounds to the nucleon density in the 
present universe? 

It is a daunting task to attempt to inventory the 
baryons in the universe. Since many (most?) baryons may 
be ‘dark’, such approaches can best set lower bounds to the 
present ratio of baryons to photons. One such estimate 
[22] suggests a very weak lower bound on 7 of no > 
0.25, entirely consistent with the BBN estimates above. 
Others [23] have used more subjective (although cautious) 
estimates of the uncertainties, finding a much higher lower 
bound to the global budget of baryons: 119 > 1.5, which is 
still consistent with the ‘low-n’ range identified using the 
high-D results. 

A possible challenge to the ‘low-n’ case comes from 
an analysis [24] which employed observational constraints 
on the Hubble parameter, the age of the universe, 
the structure-formation ‘shape’ parameter and the x-ray 
cluster gas fraction to provide non-BBN constraints on the 
present density of baryons, finding that 719 > 5 may be 
favored over 19 < 2. Even so, a significant low-n, high-D 
range still survives. 


Cosmology constrains particle physics 

Limits on particle physics beyond its standard model 
are mostly sensitive to the bounds imposed on the *He 
abundance (see also STANDARD MODEL OF PARTICLE PHYSICS). AS 
described earlier, the *He abundance is predominantly 
determined by the neutron-to-proton ratio just prior 
to nucleosynthesis. This ratio is determined by the 
competition between the weak interaction rates and the 
universal expansion rate. The latter can be modified 
from its standard model prediction by the presence of 
‘new’ particles beyond those known or expected on the 
basis of the standard model of particle physics. For 
example, additional neutrino ‘flavors’ (AN, > 0), or other 
new particles, would increase the total energy density 
of the universe, thus increasing the expansion rate (see 
equations (4) and (5)), leaving more neutrons to form more 
“He. For AN, sufficiently small, the predicted primordial 
helium abundance scales nearly linearly with AN,: AY ~ 
0.013 AN,. Asa result, an upper bound to Y, coupled with 
a lower bound to n (since Y, increases with increasing 
baryon abundance) will lead to an upper bound to AN, 
and a constraint on particle physics [1]. 

The constraints on N, = 3+ AN, as a function of 
the baryon-to-photon ratio n are shown in figure 5. For 
‘low D, high n’ there is little room for any ‘extra’ particles: 
AN, < 0.3. This would eliminate a new neutrino flavor 
(AN, = 1) or a new scalar particle (AN, = 4/7) provided 
they were massless or light (m « 1 MeV) and interacted 
at least as strongly as the ‘ordinary’ neutrinos. In contrast, 
much weaker constraints are found for ‘high D, low n’ 
where N, as large as 5 (AN, < 2) may be allowed (see 
figure 5). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1,=887 § 


Lo-D 


0.228 < Y,,, < 0.248 


ee eee eee See pe eee eee eee ee eee ee eee ee 
' 
' 
1 
i) 
i) 
[a ee a ee Se ee 
1 
' 
' 
i) 
1 
i) 
i) 
i} 


Figure 5. The number of equivalent massless neutrinos 

N, =3+ AN, (see equation (4)) as a function of 7. The region 
allowed by an assumed primordial “He mass fraction in the 
range 0.228-0.248 lies between the two solid curves. The vertical 
bands bounded by the dashed lines show generous bounds on 7 
from ‘high’ and ‘low’ deuterium. 


Summary 

The standard, hot, big bang cosmological model is simple 
(assuming isotropy, homogeneity, Newtonian—Einsteinian 
gravity, standard particle physics, etc) and, probably, 
simplistic. In broad brush it offers a remarkably successful 
framework for understanding observations of the present 
and recent universe. It may seem hubris to expect that 
this model could provide a realistic description of the 
universe during the first 20 min or so in its evolution when 
the temperature and density were enormously larger than 
today. According to the standard model, during these 
first 20 min the entire universe was a nuclear reactor, 
turning neutrons and protons into the light nuclides. This 
prediction presents the opportunity to use observations 
here and now to test the theory there and then. As 
described in this article, SBBN predicts observable 
primordial abundances for just four light nuclides, D, 
3He, *He and ’Li, as a function of only one adjustable 
parameter, y, the nucleon-to-photon ratio, which is a 
measure of the universal baryon abundance. Even though 
it is currently difficult to use the extant observational 
data to bound the primordial abundance of 3He, SBBN is 
still overconstrained, yielding three predicted abundances 
for one free parameter. Furthermore, the baryon density 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Element Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


inferred from SBBN must be consistent with that derived 
from observations of the present universe. Given the many 
possibilities that SBBN could be falsified by the empirical 
data, it is a remarkable success of the standard model 
that there is consistency between theory and observations 
provided that there are a few billion photons (most of them 
in the 2.7 K CBR) for every neutron or proton (nucleon) in 
the universe. 

This success establishes primordial nucleosynthesis 
as one of the main pillars of our standard model of 
cosmology, providing the only probe of the physical 
universe during its very early evolution. Alternative 
theories of gravity and/or particle physics must now be 
tested against the impressive success of SBBN. 


Bibliography 


[1] Steigman G, Schramm D N and Gunn J 1977 Phys. 
Lett. B 66 202 
[2] Hata N, Scherrer R J, Steigman G, Thomas D and 
Walker T P 1996 Astrophys. J. 458 637 
[3] Epstein R, Lattimer J and Schramm D N 1976 Nature 
263 198 
[4] Reeves H, Audouze J, Fowler W and Schramm D N 
1976 Astrophys. J. 179 909 
Geiss J and Reeves H 1972 Astron. Astrophys. 18 126 
Geiss J and Gloeckler G 1998 Space Sci. Rev. 84 239 
Mahaffy P R et al 1998 Space Sci. Rev. 84 251 
Carswell R F, Rauch M, Weymann R J, Cooke AJ and 
Webb J K 1994 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 268 L1 
Songaila A, Cowie L L, Hogan C and Rugers M 1994 
Nature 368 599 
[9] Tytler D, Fan X-M and Burles S 1996 Nature 381 207 
Burles S and Tytler D 1996 Astrophys. J. 460 584 
Burles S and Tytler D 1998 Astrophys. J. 499 699 
Burles S and Tytler D 1998 Astrophys. J. 507 732 
Burles S, Kirkman D and Tytler D 1999 Astrophys. J. 
519 18 
[10] Steigman G 1994 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 269 53 
[11] Webb J K, Carswell R F, Lanzetta K M, Ferlet R, 
Lemoine M, Vidal-Madjar A and Bowen D V 1997 
Nature 388 250 
Tytler D, Burles S, Lu L, Fan X M, Wolfe A and 
Savage B D 1999 Astron. J. 117 63 
[12] Burles S and Tytler D 1998 Proc. 2nd Oak Ridge Symp. 
Atomic and Nuclear Astrophysics ed P Mezzacappa 
(Bristol: Institute of Physics Publishing) p 113 
[13] Pagel B E J, Simonson E A, Terlevich R J and 
Edmunds M 1992 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 255 325 
[14] Skillman E and Kennicutt R C 1993 Astrophys. J. 411 
655 
Skillman E, Terlevich R J, Kennicutt R C, Garnett DR 
and Terlevich E 1994 Astrophys. J. 431 172 
[15] Olive K Aand Steigman G 1995 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 97 
49 
[16] Izotov Y I and Thuan T X 1998 Astrophys. J. 500 188 
[17] Spite F and Spite M 1982 Astron. Astrophys. 115 357 
Spite M, Maillard J P and Spite F 1984 Astron. 
Astrophys. 141 56 


[5 
[6 
[7 
[ 


SE 


8 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spite F and Spite M 1986 Astron. Astrophys. 163 140 
Hobbs LM and Duncan D K 1987 Astrophys. J. 317 796 
Rebolo R, Molaro P and Beckman J E 1988 Astron. 
Astrophys. 192 192 
Spite M, Spite F, Peterson R C and Chaffee F H Jr 1987 
Astron. Astrophys. 172 L9 
Rebolo R, Beckman J E and Molaro P 1987 Astron. 
Astrophys. 172 L17 
Hobbs L M and Pilachowski C 1988 Astrophys. J. 326 
L23 
Hobbs L M and Thorburn J A 1991 Astrophys. J. 375 
116 
Thorburn J A 1992 Astrophys. J. 399 L83 
Pilachowski C A, Sneden C and Booth J 1993 
Astrophys. J. 407 699 
Hobbs L and Thorburn J 1994 Astrophys. J. 428 L25 
Thorburn J A and Beers T C 1993 Astrophys. J. 404 L13 
Spite F and Spite M 1993 Astron. Astrophys. 279 L9 
Norris J E, Ryan S G and Stringfellow G S 1994 
Astrophys. J. 423 386 
[18] Ryan §S, Norris J and Beers T 1999 Astrophys. J. 523 654 
[19] Ryan S, Beers T, Olive K A, Fields B D and Norris J 
2000 Astrophys. J. 530 L57 
[20] Pinsonneault M H, Walker T P, Steigman G and 
Narayanan V K 1999 Astrophys. J 527 180 
[21] Hata N, Scherrer R J, Steigman G, Thomas D and 
Walker T P 1996 Astrophys. J. 458 637 
[22] Persic M and Salucci P 1992 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
258 14P 
[23] Fukugita M, Hogan C J and Peebles P J E 1998 
Astrophys. J. 503 518 
[24] Steigman G, Hata N and Felten J E 1999 Astrophys. J. 
510 564 


Gary Steigman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light Year (I.y.) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Light Year (I.y.) 


A unit of distance measurement equal to the distance 
traveled by a ray of light in vacuo in one year. Since light 
travels at a speed of 299 792 458 m s~! (186 282 miles s~), 
this distance is equivalent to 9.46 x 10” km (i.e. 9.46 million 
million km) or 63240 astronomical units. The unit is 
commonly used to express large distances in the universe 
and represents the time taken for a ray of light to cross 
these distances. Approximately 3.262 light-years equal 
one parsec. 


See also: light. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Light-Gathering Power (Light Grasp) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Light-Gathering Power (Light Grasp) 


A measure of the amount of light collected and brought 
to a focus by a telescope. The amount of light collected is 
proportional to the surface area of the collector (objective 
or primary mirror) and so is proportional to the square of 
the aperture. For example, a telescope with an aperture 
of 2 m will collect four times as much light as a telescope 
with an aperture of 1 m. 

The pupil of the dark-adapted human eye has an 
aperture of about 7 mm (0.007 m). Relative to the dark- 
adapted human eye, a telescope of aperture D (expressed 
in meters), has a light grasp, G = D?/(0.007)? ~ 20 000D?. 
For example, each of the two Keck telescopes (the largest 
single-mirror telescopes in the world) has an aperture of 
10 mand a light grasp of 20000 x (10)? = 2000 000. 


See also: aperture, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Limb ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Limb 


The edge of a celestial body which appears as a disk, either 
to the naked eye or telescopically. As the body moves 
across the sky, the ‘leading’ part of the limb is termed the 
preceding limb, and the opposite, ‘lagging’ part the following 
limb. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lindblad, Bertil (1895-1965) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lindblad, Bertil (1895-1965) 


Swedish astronomer, became director of the Stockholm 
Observatory. He studied the velocities of stars, including 
dynamics of star clusters. He realized that if the Sun 
and stars were in orbit around the Galaxy, it must be 
rotating and the stars nearer to the galactic center must 
be rotating faster than those away from it, just as, in the 
solar system, the inner planets move faster than the outer 
ones. Stars that were not rotating around the Galaxy 
must be plunging in and out through the middle of the 
Galaxy. Thus he showed that the Galaxy was divided 
into several subsystems rotating about the same axis, each 
subsystem having its own rotation rate and degree of 
flattening. The ‘high-velocity’ stars are actually moving 
slowly, not around the Galaxy but through its center, and 
the Sun is moving quickly through them, at right angles 
to their radial motion. By considering the stars in orbit, 
Lindblad was able to determine an approximate distance 
to the center of the Galaxy, estimate the galactic mass and 
the period of the Sun’s orbit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lipperhey [Lippershey], Hans [Jan] (1570?-1619) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lipperhey [Lippershey], Hans [Jan] 
(1570?-1619) 


Spectacle-maker, born in Wesel (Germany), settled 
in Middelburg, the capital of Zeeland, Netherlands, 
apparently the inventor of the telescope. Lipperhey 
applied for a patent. A letter of the government of Zeeland 
to its delegation to the States General of the Netherlands, 
dated 25 September 1608, instructs them to help the bearer, 
‘who claims to have a certain device by means of which 
all things at a very great distance can be seen as if they 
were nearby, by looking through glasses, which he claims 
to be a new invention’. The patent application, the first 
record of a telescope (although not the first of an idea of 
a telescope), was turned down because the device could 
not be kept a secret. Other claimants to the invention 
appeared immediately afterwards in the Netherlands, 
including Jacob Metius of Alkmaar, and Sacharias Janssen, 
like Lipperhey also a spectacle-maker in Middelburg. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lithuanian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lithuanian Astronomy 


Lithuanian folklore, archaic calendars and terminology 
show that Lithuanians were interested in astronomy 
from ancient times. A lot of celestial bodies have names 
of Lithuanian origin that are not related to widely 
accepted ancient Greek mythology. For example, the 
Milky Way is named ‘Pauksciu Takas’ (literally the way of 
birds), the constellation of the Great Bear ‘Didieji Grizulo 
Ratai’ (literally the great pole cart), the open cluster of 
Pleiades ‘Sietynas’ (literally the sieve), the planet Jupiter 
‘Indraja’, etc. 

Development of modern science in Lithuania began 
with establishment of Vilnius University in 1579, 10 years 
after formation of the Polish-Lithuanian Common- 
wealth. The beginning of astronomical research could be 
related to mathematician Oswald Krtiger who brought 
the first telescope and started the first astronomical obser- 
vations in Vilnius. The book ‘Illustriora theoremata et prob- 
lemata mathematica ex opticis geometria astronomia ...’ by 
Joanes Rudomina Dusiatski (1633), Kriiger’s student, was 
one of the university’s first publications devoted to 
astronomy. In this book Galileo’s telescope and observa- 
tions of planets made in Vilnius were described. 
However, internal conflicts and foreign invasion in the 
middle of the 17th century ruined the country’s economy 
and suspended further development of science. The 
revival in the study of science including astronomy began 
in the middle of the 18th century. In 1753 the 
Astronomical Observatory of Vilnius University was 
established by Thomas Zebrowski. Premises for the 
observatory were built atop of the three-floor university 
building. The golden age of astronomy began when 
Marcin Odlianicki Poczobut was appointed the director 
of Astronomical Observatory in 1764 and remained in this 
position for more than 40 years. He considerably enlarged 
the observatory and acquired a lot of new books and 
instruments. Among them we should mention a transit 
instrument, a mural quadrant, a heliometer and three 
achromatic refractors. Poczobut and his students were 
diligent and skilful observers. They obtained a lot of 
observational data. They observed lunar and solar 
eclipses, positions of asteroids, planets and comets. The 
most important data of that period were observations of 
Mercury that Jerome J. de Lalande used for calculations of 
Mercury’s orbit. These observational programs were con- 
tinued by Poczobut’s successors up to the 19th century. 

The Polish—Lithuanian Commonwealth declined as 
a political power during the 18th century. Following 
three partitions the old state ceased to exist in 1795. The 
largest part of ethnic Lithuania including Vilnius passed 
to Russia. The university continued its activities without 
much interference. However, repressions followed the 
uprising of 1830-1831 against the Russian regime. In 
1832 Vilnius University was closed. The observatory was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


entrusted to the Academy of Sciences of St Petersburg 
and continued its activities. Eventually, positions of 
astronomers at the observatory were taken over by 
Russian astronomers, mainly from Pulkovo Observatory. 
The new staff were not interested in astrometric observa- 
tions and made a progressive decision to go over to 
astrophysics, a new field of astronomy at that time. For 
the astrophysical research new instruments were pur- 
chased, among them were a Merz spectroscope, a visual 
Schwerd’s photometer and a photoheliograph. The first 
successful photographs of the Sun obtained in 1868 stim- 
ulated further observations of the Sun and monitoring of 
the solar activity. In addition, spectroscopic studies of the 
Sun and photometric observations of stars were carried 
out. Unfortunately, in 1876 a fire broke out at the obser- 
vatory, causing heavy damage. The observatory did not 
receive means for refurbishment and five years later it 
was closed. The library and instruments were transferred 
to Pulkovo Observatory and other institutions of Russia. 
Revival of astronomy was possible only in the period 
between World Wars I and II. Then the larger part of eth- 
nic Lithuania became independent with a temporary 
capital Kaunas. Poland occupied the smaller part of it 
including the old capital Vilnius. By 1920 Vilnius 
University was reopened and the Astronomical 
Observatory began its activities. In the following decade 
new observatory buildings at the outskirts of Vilnius 
were built and new instruments were purchased. Among 
these were two 15 cm Zeiss astrographs and a 48 cm tele- 
scope. The research was mainly concentrated on investi- 
gation of variable stars and on stellar statistics. 

An astronomical observatory was established in 
Kaunas University in 1928. It was equipped with several 
small telescopes. The observatory planned to build a 
large telescope and purchased a 63 cm mirror for that 
purpose. However, the beginning of World War IT and 
subsequent political alterations discontinued activities of 
the observatory. By the beginning of World War II 
Lithuania was incorporated into the Soviet Union until 
recovery of its independence in 1990. 

After World War II activities of astronomers 
resumed at Vilnius University. Eventually, a new astro- 
nomical center at the Institute of Physics and Mathemat- 
ics of the Academy of Sciences emerged. The postwar 
generation of astronomers concentrated on applications 
of stellar photometry for investigation of physical prop- 
erties of stars and galactic structure. They studied the 
properties of the UBV photometric system and made 
some proposals for its revision. Later, they devised a new 
seven-color photometric system under Vytautas Straizys. 
The colors and the mean wavelengths of the Vilnius pho- 
tometric system are as follows: U, 345 nm; P, 374 nm; X, 
405 nm; Y, 466 nm; Z, 516 nm; V, 544 nm; S, 655 nm. This 
system enables temperatures, luminosities, metallicities 
and reddenings of various kinds of stars to be derived. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Lithuanian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Recently, the Vilnius photometric system was combined 
with colors of the Stromgren system and a new Stromvil 
photometric system proposed. In the period 1968-1980 
two observing stations were built, one at Moletai 
(Lithuania) and another at Maidanak Mountain (Central 
Asia, Uzbekistan). Moletai was equipped with 1.65 m 
and 63 cm reflectors and a 35 cm Maksutov telescope. At 
the Maidanak observing site 1 m and 48 cm telescopes 
were installed . The telescopes were mainly used for stel- 
lar photometry. After the disintegration of the Soviet 
Union and re-establishment of independent Lithuania 
the telescopes of the Maidanak Observatory were taken 
over by the Academy of Science of Uzbekistan. At the 
present time astronomical research is carried out in two 
universities, Vilnius University and Vilnius Pedagogical 
University, as well as in two institutes, the Institute of 
Theoretical Physics and Astronomy and the Institute of 
Physics. The main research fields are physical properties 
of stars and interstellar matter, the structure and evolu- 
tion of the galaxy, structure and evolution of stellar sys- 
tems, and design of astronomical instrumentation. The 
Bulletin of Vilnius Astronomical Observatory was published 
in 1957-1992. The international quarterly journal Baltic 
Astronomy has been published since 1992. 


Bibliography 
http://www.astro.lt/ 


Jokubas Sudzius 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Little Dumbbell Nebula (M76, NGC 650-51) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Little Dumbbell Nebula (M76, NGC 
650-51) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Perseus, position 
RA 01° 42.3™, dec. +51° 34’. At eleventh magnitude and 
measuring 2’ by 1’ it looks something like a miniature 
version of the Dumbbell Nebula (M27). Each of the two 
lobes has a separate NGC number. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Liu Xin (first century Bc-first century AD) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Liu Xin (first century Bc—first century 
AD) 


Astronomer to the Chinese war-lord Wang Mang. A hun- 
dred years before Ptolemy he constructed astronomical ta- 
bles, and listed 1080 stars in six magnitude categories. He 
determined the year to be 365.2502 days. In ap 4, he orga- 
nized a national congress on the modern scale, attended 
by 1000 scientists. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Liverpool John Moores University Astrophysics Re- 
search Institute 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Liverpool John Moores University 
Astrophysics Research Institute 


Astrophysics at Liverpool John Moores University contin- 
ues a tradition of astronomical endeavor on Merseyside 
that stretches back nearly 400 years. The Astrophysics Re- 
search Unit (ARI) is now located in a new, purpose-built 
building on the Mersey riverfront. Its primary objective 
is to undertake world-class research, allied to innovative 
teaching and wider educational projects. It is supported 
by University, Research Council and European funds and 
is the home of the Liverpool Telescope (LT) project. 

The LT is the world’s largest robotic telescope and will 
be fully operational as a UK national research facility in the 
Canaries in 2000. It has been designed and constructed by 
the university-owned company, Telescope Technologies 
Ltd, who are sited next to the ARI, and who are currently 
building several other large telescopes. The ARI runs 
a unique joint degree program in astrophysics with the 
University of Liverpool; a pioneering distance-learning 
course (with students all over the world), and a schools’ 
program in science, technology and IT focused on access 
to the Liverpool Telescope. 

For further information see 
www livjm.ac.uk/astro/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lobate Scarp 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lobate Scarp 


A long, sinuous cliff-like feature consisting of a series 
of connected lobes. They are found chiefly on Mercury, 
where they are interpreted as thrust faults caused by 
compressive forces. They vary from 20 to 500 km in length 
and from a few hundred meters to 2 km in height. Their 
planet-wide distribution is taken as evidence of a global 
shrinking early in Mercury’s history when the mantle 
and core cooled and contracted, and the crust ‘puckered’. 
One of the longest is Discovery Rupes, which crosses 
craters; others are found in the Caloris Basin. The global 
contraction must therefore have happened after the era of 
major cratering, which ended about 3.9 billion years ago. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Local Group 


Not long after EDWIN HUBBLE established that galaxies are 
‘island universes’ similar to our home galaxy, the MILKy 
way, he realized that a few of these external galaxies are 
considerably closer to us than any others. In 1936 he 
first coined the term ‘Local Group’ in his famous book 
The Realm of the Nebulae to identify our nearest galactic 
neighbors. More than 60 yr later, the galaxies of the 
Local Group remain particularly important to astronomers 
because their proximity allows us to obtain our most 
detailed views of the properties of normal galaxies beyond 
our own. These nearby systems also provide our clearest 
views of how galaxies interact with one another in the 
relatively small volume of space of the Local Group. 

The brightest members of the Local Group are so close 
to us that on a clear, dark night away from city lights it is 
possible to see them with the unaided eye: in the southern 
hemisphere the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC) and sMALL 
MAGELLANIC CLOUD (SMC) shine brightly, while in the north 
the ANDROMEDA and TRIANGULUM GALAXY can be seen as faint 
smudges of light in the sky. These two galaxies are, in fact, 
the most distant objects visible with the naked eye. From 
both hemispheres, the gossamer glow of the Milky Way 
reveals the presence of billions of stars spread throughout 
the thin disk of our home galaxy. These five galaxies 
constitute the most luminous and massive members of the 
Local Group. 

Although the existence, if not the true nature, of 
the five naked-eye Local Group galaxies and the Milky 
Way has been known to humans since antiquity, the first 
member identified telescopically was Messier 32 (more 
typically referred to as m32) by G-J Le Gentil in 1749. 
Since then, astronomers have steadily identified additional 
members of the Local Group. By the time Hubble first 
introduced the concept of the Local Group in 1936, he was 
able to list 11 galaxies that he considered to be members of 
the group. At present (1999), 43 galaxies can be catalogued 
as probable members of the Local Group; these systems are 
listed in table 1 along with the dates of discovery for each. 
Remarkably, more Local Group members have been found 
in the past 30 yr than in all previous human history. Also, 
the era of discovery is almost certainly not over as future 
surveys uncover more members or as new nearby galaxies 
are found serendipitously. 

Why are the galaxies of the Local Group so difficult to 
identify? The principal reason is that, apart from our Milky 
Way Galaxy and the large Andromeda and Triangulum 
galaxies (known also as M31 and 33, respectively), the 
known members of the Local Group are DWARF GALAXIES. By 
definition, these systems have low intrinsic luminosities. 
They usually also exhibit very low surface brightness 
(See LOW SURFACE BRIGHTNESSES GALAXIES). This property is a 
measure of how spread out the galaxy’s light is on the sky. 
In the case of nearly every dwarf galaxy member of the 
Local Group, the surface brightnesses are lower than that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the night sky, lending them a ghostly appearance and 
making them very difficult to detect, even at close range’. 

Much of the recent success in finding new Local 
Group members is due to the availability of the many large- 
scale photographic surveys of the sky carried out since the 
seminal Palomar Sky Survey of the 1950s. Soon after these 
surveys were begun, visual searches of the photographic 
plates identified new nearby galaxies. Starting in the 
1970s, automated measurements and analyses of the plates 
from these surveys helped uncover nearly all of the most 
recently discovered Local Group members. However, 
even the most complete optical survey cannot find all of 
the galaxies in the sky. For example, searches for galaxies 
near the bright band of the Milky Way itself are severely 
hindered by the high stellar density in this part of the 
sky and by the clouds of gas and dust within the plane 
of our Galaxy. This INTERSTELLAR MATTER effectively blocks 
all optical light from distant objects, making it impossible 
to find galaxies lurking in the background. Ongoing and 
planned surveys in the infrared and radio wavelengths can 
penetrate the haze of the Milky Way by detecting radiation 
that is unaffected by dust obscuration. These searches are 
almost certain to reveal several new Local Group members 
in coming years. 

Another complication in producing a complete census 
of the Local Group is the uncertainty involved with 
defining the group’s boundary. The best way to establish 
this is to determine which local galaxies are gravitationally 
bound to one another. Since M31 and the Milky Way 
dominate the mass of all probable Local Group members, 
this process requires a good estimate of the masses of 
these two giant galaxies (see below). In addition, we 
need accurate information on the distances and motions 
of individual candidate Local Group galaxies to determine 
whether they are physically bound to the M31-Milky Way 
system. Table 1 lists the 43 galaxies that appear to be likely 
members of the Local Group based on this approach. 

Although well defined, this method of identifying and 
counting members of the Local Group is highly uncertain. 
For example, apart from a few of the nearest galaxies, we 
cannot measure the PROPER MOTION—the angular movement 
across the sky—of external galaxies. A galaxy that may 
be moving towards or away from us at a moderate speed 
may be moving very rapidly across our line of sight. Thus, 
some of the galaxies in the table that we believe are bound 
to the Local Group may actually only be ‘passing through 
the neighborhood’. A second problem is that distances 
to local galaxies are notoriously difficult to determine 
reliably. Methods that work for the Magellanic Clouds 
may not be applicable to other nearby galaxies, and vice 


1 Unlike the apparent brightness of a galaxy, the surface 
brightness of an extended object does not change as a function 
of distance—at least for distances up to a few hundred million 
light-years. This makes low-surface-brightness galaxies difficult 
to detect anywhere. Consequently, a very large number of low- 
surface-brightness galaxies may still remain hidden throughout 
the universe, enough possibly to fundamentally change our views 
of the distribution and numbers of galaxies in the universe. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Galaxies of the Local Group. 


Year of RA Declination Distance Luminosity | Mass 

Galaxy Other name discovery (2000) (2000) Type Subgroup = (Mly) Vr (10°Lo) (10°Mo) 
M31 NGC 224 - 00h42.7™ —- +41° 16’ SbI-II M31 2.5 3.4 25000 700 000 
Milky Way - 1745.7™ — —29° 01’ Sbe MW 0.03 - 8 300 350 000 
M33 NGC 598 = 01533.9" — +30° 40’ SclI-IIl M31 2.7 5.9 3.000 30.000 
LMC = 05'23.6™ —69° 45’ IrrITI-IV MW 0.16 0.4 2100 20 000 
SMC NGC 292 = 00'52.7™ = —72° 50’ IrrIV-V MW 0.19 2.0 580 1000 
WLM DDO 221 923 0oro2.0" = —15° 28’ IrrIV-V LGC 3.0 0.4 500 150 
M32 NGC 221 749 00'42.7™  — +40° 52’ E2 M31 2.6 8.1 380 2120 
NGC 205 M110 864 00h40.4™ = +41° 41’ E5p/dSph-N M31 2.6 8.1 370 740 
NGC 3109 DDO 236 864 10"03.1™ — —26° 10’ IrrIV-V N3109 4.1 9.9 160 6550 
IC 10 UGC 192 895 00'20.4" — +59° 18’ dirr M31 2.7 16 160 1580 
NGC 185 UGC 396 864 00°39.0" — +48° 20’ dSph/dE3p M31 2.0 9.1 130 130 
NGC 147 DDO 3 864 00'33.2™  _ +48° 31’ dSph/dE5 M31 23 9.4 130 110 
NGC 6822 DDO 209 864 19h44.9™ 14° 48’ IrrIV-V LGC 1.6 9.1 94 1640 
IC 5152 895 22h02.7" 51° 18" dirr LGC Be 1.2 70 400 
IC 1613, DDO 8 906 01"04.9" — +02° 08" IrrV M31 23 9.6 64 795 
Sextans A DDO 75 942 1oh11.1™ = —04° 43’ dIrr N3109 4.7 1.3 56 395 
Sextans B DDO 70 955 10'00.0" — +05° 20 dirr N3109 44 1.4 41 885 
Sagittarius 994 18'55.1" — —30° 29’ dSph-N MW 0.08 4.0 18 - 
Fornax 938 02'40.0" —34° 27’ dSph MW 0.45 7.6 16 68 
Pegasus DDO 216 958 2328.6" — +14° 45/ dirr/dSph LGC ab ad) 12 58 
EGB 0427+63 UGCA92 984 04532.0" — +63° 36! dirr M31 4.2 3.9 9.1. 7 
SagDIG UKS1927-177 977 19'30.0" = —17° 41’ dirr LGC 3.4 30 6.9 9.6 
And VII Cassiopeia 998 2326.5" — +50° 42’ dSph M31 20 52 ne a 
UKS2323-326 UGCA 438 978 236265"  —32° 23’ dirr LGC 4.3 3.8 5.3 - 

Leo I DDO 74 955 10808.5" = +12° 19’ dSph MW 0.81 0.1 4.8 Be 
And I 972 00'45.7™ —- +38° 00! dSph M31 2.6 2.8 4.7 7 

GR 8 DDO 155 956 12558.7™ = +14° 13 dirr GR8 49 4.4 3.4 7.6 
Leo A DDO 69 942 09'59.4™ — +30° 45’ dirr MW 22 2.8 3.0 11 
And II 972 0116.5" = +33° 26! dSph M31 17 2.7 24 - 
Sculptor 938 0100.2" — —33° 43 dSph MW 0.26 8.5 2.2 6.4 
Antlia 985 10°04.1" = —27° 20' dIrr/dSph N3109 4.1 4.8 L7 12 
And VI Peg dSph 998 2351.7" — +24° 36’ dSph M31 2.7 4.1 14 = 

LGS3 Pisces 978 01503.9" — +21° 53’ dirr/dSph M31 2.6 4.3 13 13 
And III 972 00835.3"  — +36° 31’ dSph M31 25 4.2 11 - 

And V 998 01510.3" —- +47° 38’ dSph M31 2.6 5.0 1.0 - 
Phoenix 976 o1h51.1™ = —44° 27’ dIrr/dSph MW 14 3.2 0.9 33 
DDO 210 Aquarius 959 20'46.8™ = —12° 51’ dirr/dSph LGC 2.6 4.7 0.8 5.4 
Tucana 985 22h41.8"  —64° 25’ dSph LGC 2.9 5.2 0.6 - 

Leo II DDO 93 950 11513.5™ +22° 09! dSph MW 0.66 2.0 0.6 of 
Sextans 990 10°13.1™ — —01° 37’ dSph MW 0.28 0.3 0.5 19 
Carina 977 06h41.6™  —50° 58’ dSph MW 0.33 0.9 0.4 13 
Ursa Minor DDO 199 955 15'99.2™ — +67° 13’ dSph MW 0.21 0.3 0.3 2 
Draco DDO 208 955 17520.3" — +57° 55’ dSph MW 0.27 0.9 0.3 22 


versa. It is quite common that galaxies once believed to be 
Local Group members are later removed from the list of 
members as we refine our estimates of their distances and 
motions. Indeed, two of the galaxies Hubble first proposed 
to be Local Group members are now known to be located 
much further away. Thus we can not only expect additions 
to the table of Local Group members as new galaxies are 
discovered but also subtractions from the list as we learn 
that some of the galaxies are not members after all. 


Global properties of the galaxies of the Local 
Group 

The individual galaxies of the Local Group span a large 
range of basic properties. The luminosities of Local Group 
galaxies range from a minimum of about 250000 times 
the luminosity of the suN, to a maximum of more than 
20 billion times the luminosity of the Sun, a range of a 
factor of 75 000. It is also clear that the galaxies of the Local 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Group span a very large range in size even though their 
extreme dimensions are impossible to determine precisely. 
The smallest systems in the Local Group are approximately 
1000 ly in diameter, while the luminous parts of the giant 
galaxies M31 and the Milky Way span over 100 000 ly from 
end to end. This range is comparable with the size range 
exhibited by mammals, from the tiny bumblebee bat to 
the blue whale. Figure 1 illustrates the relative sizes of the 
visible portions of most of the Local Group galaxies. 
Virtually every major galaxy type is represented in 
the Local Group. M31, the Milky Way and M33 are all 
examples of SPIRAL GALAXIES, but each represents a slightly 
different subclass of this family of galaxies. M31, for 
example, exhibits a prominent central bulge and well- 
defined spiral arms throughout the thin disk of the galaxy; 
it is classified as an Sb galaxy (see GALAXIES: CLASSIFICATION). 
M33 has a very weak, possibly non-existent central bulge 
and very poorly defined spiral arms; it is an Sc galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Milty Way Galaxy 


Figure 1. A family portrait of many of the members of the Local Group. The galaxies are shown to scale and to roughly the correct 
range of relative brightness. The Milky Way is shown as it may appear to a viewer located outside the galaxy. This montage was 


produced by Bruno Binggeli of the University of Basel. 


Although it is clear that the Milky Way is a spiral galaxy— 
the thin structure of the Milky Way and the existence of a 
concentration of stars and GLOBULAR CLUSTERS towards the 
constellation Sagittarius all confirm this classification—the 
specific spiral subtype is extremely difficult to determine 
reliably from our unfavorable vantage point inside the 
Galaxy. Various indirect indicators suggest that our 
Galaxy can be classified as an Sbe galaxy, intermediate 
between the properties described for M31 and M33. Some 
recent studies at radio, infrared and optical wavelengths 
also suggest that our Galaxy contains an elongated central 
bar composed of old, metal-rich stars. If true, then the 
Milky Way is an example of a BARRED SPIRAL GALAXY, and its 
specific subtype is SBbc, where the upper-case “B’ denotes 
abarred system. All three galaxies are typically considered 
‘giant’ spirals, despite the fact that M33 is only about 
10% as luminous or massive as M31. By comparison, our 
Galaxy is about half as luminous and massive as M31. 
All the remaining galaxies of the Local Group are 
dwarf systems of various types. The galaxies that exhibit 
the most variation in appearance and in their global 
properties are the DWARF IRREGULAR GALAXIES. The most 
massive example of this type of galaxy in the Local Group 
is the LMC, one of the satellites of the Milky Way and 
the second closest external galaxy to the Sun. The LMC 
is a massive dwarf, and its global properties place it 
near the ill-defined boundary separating dwarf irregular 
galaxies from small spirals. Careful studies reveal features 
in the LMC normally found in spiral galaxies, such as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a central bar-like concentration of older stars, and some 
evidence of indistinct spiral arms. The LMC’s companion, 
the SMC, is a true irregular with little sign of large-scale 
structure. The remaining irregular galaxies of the Local 
Group are identified in the table. All of these systems are 
substantially smaller and less luminous than the LMC. 

The principal reason that dIrr galaxies appear to 
have such chaotic structures is that they typically form 
stars in small clumps called associations embedded within 
the galaxies. Because young stars are typically very 
luminous, they are often the most prominent stars seen 
in optical images of these types of dwarf galaxies. If the 
star-forming regions are irregularly distributed—and they 
usually are—they give a strong impression that the entire 
galaxy has a highly distorted, chaotic overall structure. 
Figure 2 illustrates the appearance of a dwarf irregular 
galaxy Sextans A, both from a ground-based image and 
from an image taken with the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. The 
luminous young blue and red stars are distributed non- 
uniformly, lending this galaxy its highly disorganized 
appearance. 

This apparent lack of large-scale organization in dIrr 
galaxies is somewhat of an illusion produced by the 
luminous young stars that generally make up a minority of 
the total stellar population of such galaxies. Observations 
in the red and infrared are most sensitive to the light 
output of the dominant population of old and middle- 
aged stars in these galaxies. When astronomers try to 
determine the distribution of these oldest stars, even the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. (Left panel) A ground-based color image of the Local Group irregular galaxy Sextans A. The entire central region of the 
galaxy is included. Notice how the bright clumps in the body of the galaxy are dominated by blue-white stars. Such stars are very hot 
and young objects indicating that these clumps are regions of relatively recent star formation in the galaxy. This image was taken by 
Diedre Hunter of Lowell Observatory. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 9. (Right panel) An image of the central region of 
Sextans A obtained with the Hubble Space Telescope. In this image the individual stars in the clump located to the left of the galaxy’s 
center in the left-hand panel are now easily apparent. Note too how red stars are more common away away from the bright clump of 
blue stars; these redder stars trace star formation in the galaxy long ago and show clearly that star formation has gone on over an 
extended period in Sextans A. This complex spatial and temporal star formation history is common for most of the dwarfs of the Local 
Group, especially the irregular galaxies. The HST photograph was provided by Robbie Dohm-Palmer of the University of Minnesota 
and the University of Michigan. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 10. 


most irregular dwarfs exhibit a much smoother, more 
symmetric appearance. An analogy is the surface of a pot 
of slowly boiling soup: although bubbles erupt at different 
locations at different times, the overall distribution of the 
soup is relatively uniform. The active star-forming regions 
of irregulars correspond to the bubbles: very prominent 
when active, but short lived and all interspersed in a more 
uniform medium. 

With the striking exception of the Magellanic Clouds, 
the dIrr galaxies of the Local Group tend to be found far 
from the two large galaxies (M31 and the Milky Way) of the 
Local Group. A few of the least luminous dwarf irregulars 
are also among the most metal-poor galaxies known. 
Because stars produce heavy elements which they then 
eject back into the interstellar medium at the ends of their 
lives, the low abundances of such elements in the smaller 
dwarfs suggest that these galaxies are relatively pristine, 
unevolved systems. These galaxies may be forming stars 
in large quantities for the first time in their lives. As such, 
these galaxies are invaluable ‘living fossils’ that can tell us 
of the properties of gas and stars in the early universe. 

One particularly interesting Local Group irregular 
galaxy is IC 10. This galaxy is forming stars at an 
unsustainably rapid rate. If it were to continue it would 
soon exhaust its raw materials for making stars (gas and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dust) in only a few million years. The implication is that 
unless it started out with an astoundingly large reservoir 
of gas from which to form stars, IC 10 has probably been 
caught during a particularly active—but short-lived— 
phase in its star-formation history. Such galaxies that 
appear to form stars at unsustainably high rates are known 
aS STARBURST GALAXIES. IC 10 is probably the closest example 
ofa true starburst galaxy, although one active region of star 
formation in the LMC—the 30 Doradus Region—exhibits 
similar characteristics on a subgalactic scale. 

The remaining dwarfs of the Local Group are 
ellipsoidal systems. These galaxies are characterized by 
a roughly circular or elliptical outline on the sky, and by a 
smooth, centrally concentrated distribution of light. One 
of these, M32, is considered to be an example of a true 
DWARF ELLIPTICAL GALAXY. As such, it represents the low- 
luminosity end of the very large family of elliptical galaxies 
which includes some of the largest, most luminous and 
most massive individual galaxies known. M32 is also 
noteworthy because it appears to harbor a massive BLACK 
HOLE in its extremely bright nucleus, it may be a unique 
local example of a galaxy with no ancient stars and, as 
a companion of M31, it shows distortions that indicate a 
strong gravitational interaction with its massive parent. 

The remaining ellipsoidal Local Group galaxies are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


known as DWARF SPHEROIDAL GALAXIES (or dSph galaxies). 
About half of all galaxies in the Local Group are of 
this type and they are apparently similarly common 
in other groups and clusters. Consequently, these 
dim, unassuming galaxies probably represent the most 
common type of galaxy in the entire universe. Within 
the Local Group, dSph galaxies are typically found in 
the company of a larger parent galaxy. For example, 
of the 13 close companions of the Milky Way, nine are 
dSph satellites. Virtually all the remaining dSph galaxies 
of the Local Group are found near M31. The most 
luminous dSph galaxy, NGC205, is a highly distorted 
companion of M31 (figure 3). The two lowest-luminosity 
galaxies known are dSph companions of the Milky Way: 
the Draco and Ursa Minor systems. These galaxies 
emit less light than some individual globular clusters— 
massive, compact star clusters typically found within 
extended halos surrounding elliptical, spiral and larger 
dwarf galaxies (see HALO, GALACTIC). Nevertheless, the large 
dimensions and large masses (most in the form of matter 
that we cannot see directly) of galaxies such as Draco 
and Ursa Minor distinguish them from the more compact 
clusters. 

Five of the dwarf galaxies of the Local Group are 
difficult to classify as ellipsoidal or irregular systems 
because they exhibit some of the properties of both. These 
‘transition’ galaxies may represent the late stages of star- 
formation episodes in dwarf irregulars fortuitously caught 
during the period when the youngest stars begin to fade 
from prominence. This picture is consistent with the star- 
formation histories we measure for transition systems and 
with the growing evidence that dSph and dlrr galaxies 
have undergone complicated star-formation histories over 
the entire lifetime of the universe. A few hundred million 
years after periods of active star formation, a dSph galaxy 
that may initially have looked like a dIrr system could 
become a transition galaxy. This intimate relation between 
dIrr and dSph galaxies in which ‘transition’ systems act 
as a ‘missing’ evolutionary link remains controversial. 
Nonetheless, there is little doubt that some dSph galaxies 
looked a lot like low-luminosity dlrr systems at some 
point(s) in the past. 

Galaxies are not the only inhabitants of intergalactic 
space within the Local Group. There is growing evidence 
of the existence of isolated clouds of gas, usually in the 
form of neutral hydrogen, distributed throughout the 
group. This material may represent gas expelled from 
other galaxies or may correspond to primordial matter 
that has yet to collapse into small stellar systems such as 
globular clusters or dwarf galaxies. Some remote globular 
star clusters could plausibly be ‘free-floating’ members 
of the Local Group that were ejected from their parent 
galaxies during past interactions of individual galaxies 
within the group. 

One prominent class of normal galaxy is not found 
within the Local Group: giant elliptical galaxies. This is 
not entirely surprising; since large ellipticals are relatively 
rare in the local universe, we would have been ‘lucky’ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. An image of NGC 205, a dwarf spheroidal companion 
of M31. The bright galaxy to the lower right of the figure is M31 
itself. Note how close to the larger galaxy NGC 205 appears to 
be and how the outer extent of NGC 205 appears distorted from 
the smooth elliptical shape apparent near the galaxy core. This 
distortion is due to the strong tides that are induced in NGC 205 
during its close passage to its much larger parent, M31. M32 and 
the Sagittarius dwarf also show evidence of tidal disruption by 
M31 and the Milky Way, respectively. The Magellanic Clouds 
show clear evidence of tidal distortion due to mutual 
interactions over the past few billion years. This image was 
obtained by Paul Harding, Heather Morrison and Anne Fry of 
Case Western Reserve University. 


to find one closeby. Moreover, giant ellipticals tend to 
be found in regions with a high density of galaxies, a 
manifestation of the so-called GALAXY MORPHOLOGY-DENSITY 
RELATION. Because the Local Group is a loose, low-density 
collection of galaxies, it would have been unusual— 
although not impossible—for it to contain one or more big 
elliptical galaxies. The nearest giant elliptical galaxy to us 
is probably Marrel1. The slightly more distant Centaurus A 
(NGC 5128) is somewhat easier to study because it is not 
located so close to the Milky Way in the sky and suffers 
far less obscuration by interstellar dust in the plane of our 
Galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The motions of galaxies within the Local Group 
The motions of galaxies in the Local Group appear 
to violate HUBBLE’S LAW that the universe is uniformly 
expanding. The reason for this has to do with the 
definition of the Local Group as the collection of nearby 
galaxies that are gravitationally bound to one another. 
Just as the planets of the solar system do not appear 
to be expanding away from us because they are bound 
to the Sun, the mutual attraction of galaxies within the 
Local Group has overcome the universal expansion in our 
immediate neighborhood. The most striking example of 
this is M31, which is currently approaching our galaxy at 
nearly 50 km s-!: if on a true collision course, the two 
galaxies will meet in about 8-10 billion years. More likely, 
M31 and the Milky Way make up a binary system in which 
the two galaxies orbit their common center of gravity. 
Inevitably, tidal effects will cause the two galaxies to merge 
into one giant system at some time in the distant future. 
Many of the other galaxies of the Local Group also exhibit 
motions towards us, signifying that they too are either in 
orbit about the Milky Way or currently moving along orbits 
about M31 or other Local Group galaxies that cause them 
to move towards us at the present time. In all of these cases, 
the orbital motions are larger than the universal expansion 
velocities we would expect to measure for such nearby 
galaxies based on Hubble’s law. 

The mutual attraction of M31 and the Milky Way can 
be used to estimate the mass of the Local Group. Much 
as a ball thrown in the air first rises, stops and then falls, 
M31 and the Milky Way are now falling towards each other 
after their initial movement apart after the Bic BANG. If one 
measures the relative velocities and locations of the two 
galaxies and one estimates how long it has been since 
they were together—essentially the age of the universe 
estimated from the Hubble constant or from the ages of 
the oldest stars—it is possible to estimate the combined 
mass of M31 and the Milky Way. This sort of analysis was 
first carried out by F D Kahn and L Woltjer in 1959. Modern 
applications of this technique reveal that the combined 
mass of M31 and the Milky Way is in the range between 500 
billion and 2 trillion times the mass of the Sun. Because 
virtually all the matter of the Local Group is located in 
these two giant spiral galaxies, this is also our best estimate 
of the total mass of the group. 

As massive as the Local Group is, the total light output 
of all of the galaxies in the group M31 and the Milky Way 
is equivalent to ‘only’ 30 billion times the luminosity of 
the Sun. This is unusual because for normal stars the ratio 
of their mass (in units of the mass of Sun, or 2 x 10°” kg) 
and their luminosity (also in units of the luminosity of the 
Sun, or 4 x 107° W) is around 1. For the Local Group the 
ratio is much higher, approximately 50. This suggests that 
the group is dominated by ‘DARK MATTER’ which contributes 
to the local gravitational field but remains invisible at any 
wavelength of ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION. The large mass- 
to-light ratio of the Local Group implies that only 2-5% 
of the total matter in the group is visible to us through 
emitted or reflected radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


We can also measure the masses of Local Group 
galaxies individually by determining the range of 
velocities of individual stars and gas clouds that orbit 
within individual systems. So long as Newton’s law 
of gravity remains valid over the physical scales of the 
galaxies, astronomers find that Local Group galaxies 
typically exhibit mass-to-light ratios in the range 3-100 
(see table 1). Thus, the dark matter within the Local 
Group is not spread out uniformly throughout the group, 
but is instead concentrated about the individual galaxies 
we detect optically. This suggests that possibility that the 
Local Group may contain some nearby examples of ‘dark’ 
galaxies consisting of only dark matter with no luminous 
material. No such systems have been detected yet. The 
dwarf galaxies of the Local Group do offer one important 
clue about the nature of dark matter. Certain types of dark 
matter that have been postulated in the past—in particular 
NEUTRINOS—cannot account for the surprisingly high mass 
densities required to account for the total masses of these 
small galaxies. 


The distribution of galaxies within the Local 
Group 

Figure 4 shows a stereoscopic picture of the Local Group. 
It is quite clear from this three-dimensional image of the 
Local Group that the group’s volume is not uniformly 
filled with galaxies. Instead, most of the galaxies appear to 
congregate into three clumps; the remaining galaxies are 
spread out into a larger ‘cloud’ of galaxies that occupies a 
large fraction of the total volume of the Local Group. The 
smaller ‘subgroups’ correspond to M31 and its satellites, 
the Milky Way and its companions, and the ‘NGC3109 
subgroup’ comprising five small galaxies that are well 
separated from M31 and the Milky Way. The galaxies 
of the more extended cloud—the so-called ‘Local Group 
Cloud’—are not obviously associated with any single 
larger galaxy. Table 1 lists the subgroup with which each 
Local Group galaxy is most likely associated. 

In general, each subgroup corresponds to a set of 
gravitationally bound galaxies. The 13 satellites of the 
Milky Way, for example, are all likely to be in orbit about 
our Galaxy while M31 maintains a similar stable of small 
companion galaxies. This situation is analogous to the 
moons that orbit individual planets of the Solar System: 
although Jupiter and Saturn orbit the Sun, both planets 
possess their own large families of bound satellites. In the 
case of the Local Group, the subgroups are weakly bound 
together, and there is evidence that some satellites may 
be occasionally ‘swapped’ from one subgroup to another. 
For example, some models of the dynamical evolution of 
the Local Group suggest that the Magellanic Clouds and 
perhaps the Leo I dSph galaxy may have first formed near 
M31, but are now satellites of our Galaxy. 

Some Local Group galaxies show unmistakable signs 
of strong mutual gravitational interactions. As noted 
above, the Milky Way and M31 have overcome the initial 
expansion and are now falling in towards one another. 
The close companions of M31—NGC 205 and M32—both 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


GR8 


EGB N3109 


LGS 11613 


WLM 15152 


UKS 


Figure 4. (Top panel) A stereo map of the Local Group showing its approximate three-dimensional structure. The view is from a point 
located about 7 million ly directly in front of the Sun’s current motion about the center of the Milky Way. The large cross near the 
center of each panel denotes the position of the Milky Way, while the large off-center cross is M31. The smaller cross represents M33. 
The open squares show the locations of the dwarf ellipticals and dwarf spheroidal galaxies; the solid squares denote the dwarf 
irregulars; and the small xs are the transition galaxies. The MW, M31 and NGC 3109 groups are easily visible; the latter is on the ‘far’ 
side of the figure. The large diffuse ‘bubble’ of galaxies extending to the lower right and towards the viewer is the Local Group Cloud. 
(Lower panel) A guide to the identities of individual galaxies in the stereo image. The systems are denoted with abbreviations that 
should—in conjunction with the names listed in table 1—uniquely define each galaxy. The galaxies closest to M31 and the Milky Way 
are not identified in order to minimize confusion in those crowded regions of the figure. 


show global distortions that may be due to strong tidal 
effects induced by their close passage to their parent galaxy 
(figure 3 shows the distortions induced in NGC 205 by 
its close passage by M31). The Magellanic Clouds reveal 
considerable evidence that they too have interacted in 
the past. For example, the MAGELLANIC STREAM is a long 
arc of neutral gas that was probably ejected from one or 
both of the Clouds as they passed close to one another 
and passed the Milky Way. Because the SMC is the least 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


massive component of the interacting pair, it has suffered 
the most. One clear sign of this is the fact that the SMC is 
elongated significantly along our line of sight, resembling 
a cigar whose long axis is roughly pointed towards us. 
This elongation reflects the stretching of the galaxy as it is 
literally pulled apart by its abusive neighbor. Detailed 
models of the dynamical evolution of the Magellanic 
Clouds indicate that they will both fall into the Milky Way 
in the next few billion years. Although the Clouds will be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Local Group 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


completely disrupted in the process, even the much-larger 
Milky Way will be affected as its disk is puffed up by the 
energy injected by the infalling dwarfs. 

Perhaps the most spectacular example of an interac- 
tion within the Local Group involves the Sagittarius dSph 
galaxy. Discovered only in 1994, the SAGITTARIUS DWARF 
GALAXY is now known to be the closest galaxy to the Milky 
Way. Sadly for Sagittarius, this is too close, and the dwarf 
is being severely torn apart by the gravitational tidal forces 
exerted on it by our much more massive Galaxy. A clear 
indication that this process has already begun is the fact 
that Sagittarius has been stretched along a long arc that 
currently is known to extend nearly all of the way around 
the sky. Like the Magellanic Clouds, Sagittarius does not 
have long to live as a separate galaxy before it too is com- 
pletely disrupted and merges into the main body of the 
Milky Way. 


Cosmological implications of the Local Group 
Although most studies of the origin of the universe focus 
on radiation coming from extremely distant galaxies, the 
Local Group also plays a critical role in cosmological 
studies. For example, with the advent of large ground- 
based and space-based telescopes and the use of high- 
sensitivity electronic detectors, it has become possible 
to measure the complete fossil record of star formation 
in many of the galaxies of the Local Group. These 
investigations provide a critical point of comparison with 
studies aimed at understanding how galaxies formed in 
the first place by studying objects detectable at the edge of 
the visible universe. So far, observations of Local Group 
systems reveal that normal galaxies have formed stars in 
unexpectedly complex and varied ways. Some nearby 
dwarf spheroidal galaxies are composed almost entirely 
of ancient stars formed soon after the big bang, but most 
of these galaxies formed large numbers of stars over long 
periods of time extending as recently as the past few 
hundred million years. The dwarf irregulars continue to 
form stars today, in some cases perhaps for the first time. 
Astronomers are just now beginning to try to reconcile 
these detailed observations of Local Group galaxies with 
studies of larger numbers of extremely remote galaxies. 

The Local Group also offers insights into the question 
of whether small galaxies have merged over time to 
form larger systems such as M31, the Milky Way or the 
Magellanic Clouds. Some of the mergers can be studied 
today such as the disruption of the Sagittarius dwarf and 
the interactions of the Magellanic Clouds and our Galaxy 
described above. However, most mergers that led to the 
formation of larger galaxies must have occurred long ago 
when the universe was still quite young; we are only now 
beginning to understand how to disentangle evidence of 
these past encounters within our own Galaxy. The merger 
histories of Local Group galaxies will eventually shed new 
light on the conditions of the early universe and on the 
nature of the dark matter that helped drive the formation 
of galaxies in the first place. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


On an even larger scale, the Local Group itself 
seems to interact significantly with other nearby groups of 
galaxies. One of these, the Sculptor Group, appears to be 
strongly elongated along a line projecting back to the Local 
Group. Because our group is considerably more massive, 
it is probable that the gravitational force of the Local 
Group has significantly distorted the Sculptor Group. One 
result of this interaction is the lack of a clear boundary 
between the Sculptor Group and our own. Some galaxies 
traditionally associated with Sculptor are occasionally 
catalogued with the Local Group and vice versa. Unlike 
the Local Group, Sculptor lacks any giant galaxies, but 
does contain a number of lower-luminosity spirals and 
many dwarf galaxies. On roughly the opposite side of 
the sky the M81—Maffei Group represents another nearby 
concentration of galaxies that may have a significant 
effect on the evolution and internal motions of the Local 
Group. Unlike the Sculptor Group, the M81—Maffei Group 
contains some giant galaxies, including the large spiral 
M81 and the elliptical galaxy Maffei 1. As with the 
Sculptor Group, some of the galaxies assigned to the M81-— 
Maffei Group have been considered at times to be Local 
Group members and vice versa. On top of the interactions 
with neighboring groups, the Local Group is also ‘falling’ 
into the nearby virco CLusTER of galaxies. The attempt 
to understand the details and implications of these local 
interactions and large scale motions remains a very active 
field of modern research. 


Bibliography 

Hodge P 200 An Atlas of Local Group Galaxies (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) (an atlas of photographs of all Local Group 
galaxies) 

Mateo M 1998 Dwarf galaxies of the Local Group Ann. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 435-506 (a recent technical 
review of the Local Group) 

Sandage A and Bedke J 1994 The Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies 
(Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution) (stunning 
photographs of many galaxies including most of the 
brighter members of the Local Group) 

van den Bergh S 2000 The Galaxies of the Local Group 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) (a galaxy- 
by-galaxy description of the Local Group; many 
historical comments included) 


All of these contain many additional references. 


Mario L Mateo 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lockyer, Joseph Norman (1836-1920) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lockyer, Joseph Norman (1836-1920) 


Civil servant, professor at the Solar Physics Observatory, 
Kensington (later moved to Cambridge), born in Rugby, 
Warwickshire, England. Attracted to astronomy by an 
observation of the annular solar eclipse of 1858, erected an 
observatory at his home in Hampstead, observed Mars. 
Lockyer showed spectroscopically that phenomena seen 
during a total eclipse (such as the prominences) could be 
seen in daytime on the Sun and were not lunar phenomena. 
These conclusions were simultaneous with conclusions 
by JULES JANSSEN, and were reported to the same meeting 
of the Académie des Sciences, which offered the pair a 
medal (in contrast to the squabble over precedence in 
Neptune’s discovery, see JOHN ADAMS). Lockyer identified 
all the emissions in the solar spectrum except for one 
spectral line near the sodium emission. He suggested 
that the line was due to a new element which he named 
‘helium’ after the Greek, helios, for Sun. Helium was 
isolated on the Earth 25 years later by William Ramsay 
(1895), and Lockyer was knighted. Lockyer founded 
Nature, a new journal dedicated to the natural sciences 
and continuing to this day. While on holiday in Greece 
he noticed that temples were oriented east-west and 
connected this alignment to sunrise at their foundation. 
He extended this thought to temples in Egypt and found 
an alignment corresponding to midsummer sunset in the 
main axis of the Great Temple of Amon-Re at Karnak. 
Other alignments were apparently connected with Sirius. 
At Stonehenge he hypothesized that the midsummer Sun 
rose originally over Heel stone, and calculated back to 
determine when it would have done so, to establish the 
date when Stonehenge was built. Although his work is 
regarded as incorrect, Lockyer’s belief in the astronomical 
purposes of Stonehenge and other stone circles was the 
impetus behind this kind of research in the twentieth 
century (see GERALD HAWKINS) and he was thus the founder 
of astroarchaeology. He built the Hill Observatory, later 
the Norman Lockyer Observatory (Sidmouth, Devon), just 
before his death; itis still operational, with an active society 
of astronomers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Logan, James (1674-1751) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Logan, James (1674-1751) 


American civil servant, born in Lurgan, County Armagh, 
Ireland, emigrated (1699) to Pennsylvania to work for 
William Penn, and became one of the first men of science 
in the colonies. Took up mathematics, hybridized corn, 
invented the Conestoga wagon, got his own telescope, 
worked on the aberration of lenses, observed the heavens, 
and wrote a commentary on HALLEY’s lunar tables. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lohrmann, Wilhelm Gotthelf (1796-1840) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lohrmann, Wilhelm Gotthelf 
(1796-1840) 


Surveyor and amateur astronomer, born in Dresden, 
he was the second selenographer (after TOBIAS MAYER) to 
make and publish a lunar map based on quantitative 
measurements and geometric calculations, rather than 
merging eye-sketches. Lohmann’s map was based on a 
diameter of the Moon of about a meter, over five times the 
diameter of Mayer’s. He was helped and encouraged by 
CARL GAUSS and J ENCKE. Publication of the atlas (Topography 
of the Visible Surface of the Moon), including over 7000 
craters, started in 1824 but was a protracted process, 
slowed by Lohrmann’s failing eyesight, and not completed 
(supervised by Julius Schmidt) until 38 years after his 
death. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lomonosov, Mikhail V (1711-65) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lomonosov, Mikhail V (1711-65) 


Russian chemist and astronomer. Studied aurorae, and 
in 1761 observed the transit of Venus, concluding from 
the back-illuminated edge of the planetary disk that it 
had an atmosphere. Introduced Copernicanism and 
Newtonianism into Russia. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Long-period Comet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Long-period Comet 


Acomet whose period is more than 200 years. Comets with 
periods of less than 200 years are termed periodic comets or 
short-period comets. Long-period comets are also ‘periodic’, 
but a comet can be incontrovertibly classified as periodic 
only when it has been observed on at least two returns; the 
choice of 200 years as a cut-off is traditional, but arbitrary. 
It happens that no comet calculated to have a period of 
over 200 years has yet been observed to return since its 
discovery. The first to do so will be Comet Peters (C/1857 
Ol), expected to return in 2092. In the system of cometary 
designations introduced in 1995, ‘C/’ is the prefix assigned 
to long-period comets. 

Long-period comets show a much greater spread of 
orbital inclinations than do short-period comets. Many 
have very long periods indeed, and some appear to be 
on open, hyperbolic orbits. However, when the apparent 
orbits of long-period comets round the Sun (osculating 
heliocentric orbits) are referred instead to the center of 
mass of the solar system (to yield barycentric orbits), they 
are all found to be elliptical, once allowance is made 
for planetary perturbations and non-gravitational forces. 
About one-third of all long-period comets are found to 
have periods close to a million years, corresponding to 
aphelia of rather less than 50000 AU, while the periods 
of the other two-thirds are fairly evenly spread between a 
million years and 200 years. The million-year peak points 
to the origin of these comets in the Oort Cloud. 


See also: comets, non-gravitational force, Oort Cloud, 
short-period comet, solar system: nomenclature. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon (1853-1928) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon (1853-1928) 


Born in Arnhem, Netherlands, became professor of 
mathematical physics at Leiden University. Nobel 
prizewinner 1902, jointly with PIETER ZEEMAN, for his 
mathematical theory of the electron demonstrating the 
effect of a strong magnetic field on wavelength of the light 
produced by an atom (this was before the discovery of 
the electron). Lorentz’s name is commemorated in the 
FitzGerald—Lorentz contraction, which is a reduction in the 
length of an object at relativistic speeds, and formed the 
basis of EINSTEIN’s special theory of relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lovell, Alfred Charles Bernard [Sir Bernard] (1913-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lovell, Alfred Charles Bernard [Sir 
Bernard] (1913-) 


Physicist and astronomer, born in Oldland Common, 
Gloucestershire, England. Worked on cosmic rays at 
Manchester, researched radar in the Second World War, 
and afterwards with Js HEY procured an ex-army mobile 
radar unit used to detect V-2 rockets and attempted to 
detect cosmic ray showers with it. Interference from 
the electric trams at Manchester displaced the work to 
the university’s botanical research station at Jodrell Bank 
(now the Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories), where 
he found that echoes came from the ionized trails of 
meteors, particularly the Giacobinid display of October 
1946. With JA Clegg, he laboriously built a 218 foot 
diameter wire-bowl parabolic transit telescope, used by 
Hanbury Brown and Hazard to detect M31. This showed 
the advantage of a large fully steerable telescope, and 
Lovell became the driving force behind the construction 
of the 250 foot diameter Mark 1 Jodrell Bank Telescope, 
completed by engineer HC Husband in 1957. Subject 
to painful allegations about its cost-overruns during its 
construction, the Mark 1 telescope was thrust into public 
view and rescued from ignominy that year by receiving 
signals from Sputnik, and American space vehicles. Lovell 
was knighted in 1961. He used the telescope to track and 
monitor flaring variable radio stars. Lovell has written 
many popular books on astronomy, radio astronomy in 
particular. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Low Surface Brightness Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Low Surface Brightness Galaxies 


Low surface brightness (LSB) galaxies are galaxies that 
emit much less light per area than normal galaxies. 
Because of their lower contrast with the night sky they are 
hard to find, and hence their contribution to the general 
galaxy population has long been underestimated. 

Galaxies with low surface brightnesses are hard to 
find because the night sky is never black. Scattered 
sunlight coming from dust inside and outside our 
atmosphere, air-glow, street lights, faint Galactic and 
extra-Galactic sources all illuminate the sky. This 
foreground and background glare acts as a filter that only 
lets us see a part of the total galaxy population. 

Compare this with the example of a person sitting 
inside a brightly lit room at night. This person will have 
trouble seeing what is happening outside because of the 
bright reflections of the room in the windows. Only the 
brightest objects (e.g. headlights of cars) will be easily 
visible. Headlights of bicycles, or pedestrians will be very 
hard to make out, even though they may dominate the 
traffic outside. The bright reflections thus filter out large 
parts of the total population. 

In more practical terms, selection effects caused by 
the brightness of the night sky have made astronomers 
only give attention to those galaxies that were most easily 
observed. The underlying reason for these selection 
effects is that galaxy catalogs are usually created using 
certain isophotal diameter and/or magnitude limits (with 
an additional implicit surface brightness limit). The 
brightness of the night sky ensures that galaxies of a 
certain fixed luminosity look largest, and are thus most 
easily seen, if their central surface brightness has some 
intermediate ‘optimum’ value. If they have higher surface 
brightnesses they look too compact and resemble stars; 
with lower surface brightnesses they are difficult to 
distinguish from the night sky. 

Diameter- or magnitude-limited catalogs thus mainly 
contain galaxies with a narrow range in central surface 
brightnesses. They will be biased and incomplete for 
galaxies with central surface brightnesses other than the 
‘optimum’ value. 

In the following, galaxies that are not affected 
by selection effects and that have an optimum value 
for detection are called ‘high surface brightness’ (HSB) 
galaxies. For all practical purposes these can be equated 
to the well-known sPIRAL GALAXIES that define the Hubble 
sequence. The dimmer galaxies that are affected by 
selection effects are called LSB galaxies. Examples are 
shown in figure 1. 


Selection effects 

The best way to get a feeling for the severity of 
selection effects is by discussing a practical example. 
We will discuss five different types of model galaxies, 
which approximately span the currently known range in 
structural properties of DISK GALAXIES. All are assumed to be 
pure exponential disks, with central surface brightnesses 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e : 
T 
+ 
? = 
’ + ~~ 

Po er 1 
i * = a 
7 ii 
i i. 

r 
7 . 

- 

* = * 
* . 
= i} S 
a 

al = 
t 

a 
7 4 
= 


Figure 1. An HSB galaxy (NGC 2403, left panel) and an LSB 
galaxy (UGC 128, right panel) with identical luminosities, 
shown at the same physical scale, and observed with the same 
instrument. As the light of the LSB galaxy is much more spread 
out it is harder to distinguish from the glare of the night sky. 


Ho and scale lengths h as given in table 1. Four of these 
galaxies (A, B, C and D) have identical luminosities Mg = 
—21. The fifth one, E, is equal in size to galaxy B, but 2.5 
mag ora factor of 10 fainter. It is furthermore assumed that 
all five types are spread through space homogeneously 
and in equal numbers. In each volume element there are 
therefore an equal number of different types of galaxies. 
We will now ‘observe’ these galaxies and create a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Low Surface Brightness Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Contribution of various galaxy types in diameter-limited catalog. 


Type’ M. Re OS pot Dmax® Fraction 

A —21.0 0.5 16.0 60 0.09 Compact HSB 
B —21.0 5.0 21.0 125 0.72 Normal HSB 
Cc —21.0 25.0 24.5 76 0.18 Big LSB 

D —21.0 50.0 260 — 0.00 Giant LSB 

E —18.5 5.0 23.5 30 0.01 Normal LSB 


4 Type of galaxy. ® Absolute magnitude. ° Scale length in kpc. 

4 Central surface brightness in mag arcsec~?. ° Maximum distance 
in Mpc where galaxy is included in catalog. ‘ Fraction of cataloged 
galaxies that will be of this type. 


diameter-limited catalog. The condition for inclusion in 
the catalog will be that the diameter of the 25 mag arcsec~* 
isophote Dj; must be larger than 1 arcmin. It is obvious 
that galaxies at large distances will look smaller than those 
nearby. Therefore, as we examine each type of galaxy and 
move it to increasingly larger distances, its Dy; willat some 
point become less than 1 arcmin, and consequently it will 
no longer be included in the catalog. The distance where 
galaxies of a certain type drop out of the catalog is given 
in table 1: galaxy A will drop out of the sample at 60 Mpc; 
galaxy B will be in the sample out to distances of 125 Mpc; 
galaxy C out to 76 Mpc. Galaxy D has no D2 diameter 
and will never be taken up in the catalog. Finally, galaxy 
E will be seen only out to 30 Mpc. 

Galaxies of type B correspond to normal HSB galaxies, 
while type E represents typical LSB galaxies. Type C is 
a big LSB galaxy. Types A and D are in practice rare. 
Cataloged HSB galaxies (such as B) can be detected in 
a volume 72 times larger than the volume in which LSB 
galaxies (such as E) can be detected. Assuming that 
all types of galaxies are spread equally through space, 
the corresponding volumes cataloged galaxies occupy 
show that the catalog will be severely dominated by 
HSB galaxies of type B and will lead to the conclusion 
that almost three-quarters of the total galaxy population 
consists of type B. Only an apparently insignificant 1% of 
the galaxies in the catalog are of type E. Furthermore, we 
would not even know that giant galaxies, such as type D, 
existed. On the basis of these results we would conclude 
that three-quarters of the observed galaxy population had 
a constant central surface brightness. 

To correct for these effects we must therefore realize 
that every LSB galaxy that is cataloged represents a 
large number of uncataloged LSB galaxies. This means 
that we must assign to every galaxy a weight inversely 
proportional to the volume in which it is included in the 
catalog. Hence, if we try to reconstruct the true galaxy 
population from this diameter-limited catalog, every LSB 
galaxy of type E must receive a weight 72 times larger 
than a galaxy of type B. Note though that we still would 
not be able to say anything about type D. These volume- 
correction factors are crucial for our understanding of LSB 
galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0 


log[$(u,)] 


ae 


Mo 


Figure 2. The number density of galaxies plotted versus central 
surface brightness. There is a large excess of galaxies at the LSB 
side of Freeman’s value. 


History 

Selection effects and their possible consequences did not 
receive much attention until 3 decades ago. Before 
that only incidental references appeared in the literature. 
HUBBLE noted in 1936 that intrinsically faint galaxies will 
be detectable to much smaller distances than intrinsically 
bright galaxies and are consequently distributed through 
a much smaller volume of space. Thus ‘intrinsically 
bright nebulz greatly outnumber the faint ones among 
nebulze with a given apparent luminosity’. In 1938 sHAPLEY 
announced the discovery of two intrinsically faint LSB 
galaxies, and in 1965 Arp showed that most galaxies 
then investigated occupied only a very narrow strip in 
a luminosity—diameter diagram; implying that they have 
almost identical surface brightnesses. 

This last conclusion was explicitly derived by 
Freeman in 1970 who noted that 28 galaxies out of his 
sample of 36 had disks with central surface brightnesses 
in the range yu? 21.65 + 0.3 mag arcsec"*. Taken 
at face-value, this result had important implications for 
theories of GALAXY STRUCTURE and EVOLUTION. Freeman’s law 
requires that either all galaxies have identical mass surface 
densities coupled with just a small spread in their mass- 
to-light ratios or that STAR FORMATION history, age, angular 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Low Surface Brightness Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. LSB galaxy F563-1. This false-color image is a combination of optical, 21 cm radio and 6563 A Ha spectral-line observations. 
The red false colors show the stars in LSB galaxy F563-1 observed though a red filter. Blue false colors show the extent of the large and 
diffuse disk of neutral hydrogen surrounding the optical galaxy. The green—yellow dots in the center are observed in the light of the 
Ha spectral line at 6563 A, showing the few star formation regions in this galaxy. The red and yellow dots surrounding the galaxy are 
foreground stars. The gas and stars in this galaxy represent a mass of a few billion solar masses, yet this is only a small fraction of the 
mass of the huge dark matter halo that surrounds this galaxy. This galaxy is at a distance of 45 Mpc or 147 million light-years. The 
diameter of the neutral hydrogen disk is 43 kpc or some 140 thousand light-years. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 12. 


momentum and mass all conspire to produce a constant 
central surface brightness 

Disney in 1976 showed that selection effects could 
cause Freeman’s law and suggested that there might be 
many galaxies of both high and low surface brightness 
(‘crouching giants’) hidden below the night sky. The 
discovery in 1987 of the giant LSB galaxy Malin-1 put LSB 
galaxies in the limelight. This extremely large and massive 
LSB galaxy was discovered accidentally during a survey 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for small LSB galaxies in the virco cLusterR. Malin-1 has a 
central disk surface brightness 4 mag arcsec~* fainter than 
Freeman’s value, yet it has a scale length of tens of kpc, 
a luminosity Mg ~ —22 and an H I mass of slightly less 
than 10"\M,. This did show that LSB galaxies were not 
necessarily small and faint dwarf galaxies. 

Careful searches on photographic survey plates then 
started turning up LSB galaxies in large numbers. These 
galaxies were mostly of late type and rich in hydrogen. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Low Surface Brightness Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


After correction for various selection effects one of the 
conclusions was that the space density of LSB galaxies at 
o = 23 is approximately 10° times higher than predicted 
by Freeman’s law (figure 2). 

The currently known LSB galaxies (25 < j19(B) < 23) 
may make up 30-50% of the total galaxy population. 


Properties 
The properties of LSB galaxies can be summarized as 
follows. 

They are more gas rich than HSB galaxies. One of 
the probable reasons they have lower surface brightnesses 
is because their gas surface densities are well below 
the critical threshold density for star formation. LSB 
galaxies thus have very low star formation rates. Although 
following the large-scale structure of galaxies, they are 
locally more isolated than other galaxies. 

Investigations of the colors of LSB galaxies showed 
that they were bluer than normal late-type galaxies. 
Combined with the low metallicities found in H Il REGIONS 
this implies a sporadic star formation rate, ruling out the 
notion of LSB galaxies as ‘faded disks’. LSB galaxies 
are not normal galaxies which have stopped forming 
stars and are now fading away. Instead, they are likely 
to be slowly evolving. The contrast of the few young 
stars with the old background population, or, in other 
words, the rate of current star formation rate and average 
past star formation rate are much higher than in normal 
HSB late-type galaxies. A small amount of recent star 
formation (as observed) is already enough to make the 
colors significantly bluer. 

Synthesis observation in the neutral hydrogen 21 cm 
line (see figure 3) confirmed this unevolved picture: LSB 
galaxies have extended gas disks with low gas surface 
densities, and high My;/L ratios. Despite the low surface 
densities the gas component is usually dynamically more 
important than the stellar component. 

LSB galaxies are on the same TULLY-FISHER RELATION aS 
HSB galaxies. This requires a subtle interplay between the 
central luminosity surface density X» and the total mass- 
to-light ratio M/L. As the Tully—Fisher relation can be 
written as L[Zo(M/L)] « V4, the product Xo(M/L) must 
be constant for all galaxies on the Tully—Fisher relation. 
LSB galaxies must have higher mass-to-light ratios than 
normal galaxies. 

The rotation curves of LSB galaxies showed that 
this was indeed the case. LSB galaxies are DARK MATTER 
dominated almost all the way into their centers. The 
rotation curves rise less steeply than those of HSB galaxies. 
The halos of LSB galaxies are likely to be of lower 
density than those of HSB galaxies. The large dark 
matter dominance makes the stellar disks of LSB galaxies 
extremely stable, making it possible for the disk to exist 
at such low surface densities. The low metallicities make 
cooling difficult, so that a molecular component, where 
stars are formed, is difficult to realize. LSB galaxies can be 
said to be trapped in their current evolutionary state. Even 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


external influences, like interactions, might not be enough 
to significantly speed up the evolution of LSB galaxies. 
The above results apply to blue LSB galaxies that 
have been discovered in photographic plates. Recent 
CCD surveys (see also DETECTION OF FAINT OBJECTS) have 
started turning up a class of red LSB galaxies, showing 
that even the deep photographic plates suffered from 
selection effects. However, not enough is known about 
these red LSB galaxies to be able to say whether they are a 
cosmologically significant component of faded galaxies. 


Importance 

The single most important reason for studying LSB 
galaxies is that no representative sample of nearby galaxies 
has yet been compiled, cataloged and investigated. If 
a large population of hitherto unseen objects exists, the 
true extent of galaxy properties may be much larger than 
assumed. 

Furthermore, investigations of individual LSB galax- 
ies show that they form an alternative track of galaxy evo- 
lution, free from the instabilities and interactions that have 
shaped the Hubble sequence. They give us the opportu- 
nity to study unevolved galaxies in great detail. 


Bibliography 
Two good reviews on which this article has largely been 
based and which contain all relevant references are 


Bothun G D, Impey C and McGaughS $ 1997 Low-surface- 
brightness galaxies: hidden galaxies revealed Publ. 
Astron. Soc. Pac. 109 745-58 

Impey C and Bothun G D 1997 Low surface brightness 
galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 267-307 


Erwin de Blok 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lowell Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lowell Observatory 


Lowell Observatory, founded in 1894 by Percival Lowell, 
is one of the largest independent, privately managed 
observatories in the world. Endowed by its founder, 
Lowell Observatory continues today as a private research 
institution dedicated to the study of astronomy. The 
large redshifts of galaxies were discovered by Lowell 
astronomer Vesto M Slipher. In 1930, Clyde Tombaugh 
discovered Pluto at Lowell Observatory. 

Today, Lowell Observatory has a staff of 50, 
including 20 astronomers. The Observatory operates eight 
telescopes: four at its original campus on Mars Hill and 
four at a dark-sky site on Anderson Mesa, southeast 
of Flagstaff, Arizona. Lowell is a partner with the us 
NAVAL OBSERVATORY and the Naval Research Laboratory in 
the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer (NPOI) at 
Anderson Mesa and with Boston University in the shared 
use and development of Lowell’s 72 in (1.8 m) Perkins 
Telescope. 

The Observatory is engaged in research spanning 
many areas in modern astronomy and astrophysics, while 
maintaining its traditional emphasis on study of the solar 
system. In addition to funds from the original endowment, 
a significant component of the Observatory’s support is 
from federal grants and contracts. 

For further information see 
http://www.lowell.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lowell, Percival (1855-1916) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lowell, Percival (1855-1916) 


Businessman, traveler, diplomat and, eventually, as- 
tronomer, born in Boston, MA, into a distinguished family 
(younger brother a president of Harvard University, sister 
awriter). His boyhood interest in astronomy revived at the 
age of 37, when after correspondence with WILLIAM H PICK- 
ERING they set up an expedition to observe the 1894 Mars 
opposition from the clear skies of Arizona. They founded 
the Lowell Observatory at Flagstaff, seen as a ‘speculative, 
highly sensational and idiosyncratic project’ to study the 
solar system as ‘an investigation into the condition of life 
on other worlds, including ... their habitability by beings 
like or unlike man’. Lowell had, unobjectively, already 
made up his mind about the implications of SCHIAPARELLI’S 
identification of a network of canali on Mars: ‘The most 
self-evident explanation from the markings themselves is 
probably the true one; namely, that in them we are look- 
ing upon the result of the work of some sort of intelli- 
gent beings’. Lowell studied Mars for 15 years, noting the 
spring-time dark band around the south pole, described 
as a ‘ring of antarctic ocean’, which fed the green ‘vege- 
tation’ of the dark areas. He drew Mars in exquisite and 
imaginary detail, covering its map with a network of hun- 
dreds of straight ‘canals’ intersecting in ‘oases’. According 
to JAMES KEELER, Writing to GEORGE HALE (co-editors of the As- 
trophysical Journal) Lowell’s papers were written in a ‘dog- 
matic and amateurish style’, and ‘he draws no line between 
what he sees and what he infers’, an opinion which led to 
the Astrophysical Journal refusing to publish any of Low- 
ell’s submissions. Lowell used the last eight years of his 
life to search for a trans-Neptunian planet, having anal- 
ysed the orbit of Uranus and found discrepancies even 
after allowance for Neptune. He was unable to find the 
planet, but his search was continued after his death by 
CLYDE TOMBAUGH at Flagstaff, with Pluto discovered in 1930. 
The first two letters of Pluto, and the symbol for the planet, 
are Percival Lowell’s initials. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lucretius (95-55 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lucretius (95-55 Bc) 


Roman poet and philosopher. His major work is the 
atomist poem De Rerum Natura (On the Nature of Things), 
popularizing the work of DeMocrITUS and EPICURUS. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Luminosity Function of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Luminosity Function of Galaxies 


The definition of the (optical) luminosity function (LF) 
of galaxies follows those of other astronomical objects 
such as stars or globular clusters. It is the number of 
galaxies that exist in a given volume of space having a 
given luminosity. Thereby, ‘luminosity’ generally means 
a total magnitude in any photometric passband U, B, V, 
R, I, etc. However, because of the spectral sensitivity of 
photographic plates which were classically and still are 
used for LF studies most of our knowledge is based on 
B- and R-band photometry. More recent work utilizes 
modern wide-field CCD cameras and infrared detectors 
to explore the LF of galaxies at other wavelengths. 

Galaxies span a large range in total visual luminosity. 
At the extreme ends we find huge stellar systems with 
Lz ~ 5 x 10!°Lo (Mg ~ —22) such as the giant elliptical 
galaxy Messier 87 in the nearby virco CLUSTER and the 
5 x 10° times fainter dwarf elliptical galaxies Draco and 
Ursa Minor in the LocAL Group with integrated blue light 
emission Mg ~ —7.5 comparable with a single massive 
main-sequence star. 

The LF of galaxies is an important observational 
ingredient for cosmology as well as for galaxy formation 
and_ evolution. It holds fundamental information 
about (i) the power spectrum of the primordial density 
fluctuations, (ii) the physical processes that convert 
mass into light, e.g. gravitational collapse, cooling and 
star formation, and (iii) the mechanisms that destroy— 
generate galaxies or change their morphology such as 
tidal interaction, merging and ram pressure stripping. 
As such the LF is essential to interpret the huge 
apparent population of faint blue galaxies discovered at 
intermediate redshift (z ~ 0.5), to estimate the luminosity 
and baryonic densities of the universe and to test models of 
galaxy formation and evolution, e.g. the popular concept 
of ‘biased galaxy formation’. Often the quality of a theory 
is assessed on how well the shape of the observed LF can 
be explained. 

In the following we give a short historical overview 
about the discovery of the LF of galaxies and provide 
details of various observing techniques. We further 
explain the main features of a typical LF and discuss 
why nature makes LFs drawn from different parts of the 
universe not always look the same. We conclude with 
some remarks on crucial issues that are important for a 
deeper understanding of the LF of galaxies in the future. 


A historical retrospect 

The first result on the LF was published by Edwin 
Hubble in the mid-1930s initiated by the evidence that 
the velocity-apparent magnitude relation for the Shapley— 
Ames galaxies studied by Milton Humason exhibit only 
a small scatter. Interpreted in the context of a linear 
expansion of the universe, i.e. velocity proportional to 
distances (HUBBLE LAW), these observations meant that 
the width of the absolute magnitude distribution, i.e 
the LF, of these galaxies was also small. Hubble’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


results, although they lacked precision, suggested a 
Gaussian profile centered at Mg ~ -—18 and o ~ 
0.9 mag. There seemed to be upper and lower limits 
for galaxy luminosities. In 1942, the validity of a 
bell-shaped form for the LF was called in question 
by Fritz Zwicky who predicted from thermodynamical 
considerations (principle of conservation of energy, virial 
theorem and Boltzmann principle) the existence of a large 
number of low-mass, faint dwarf galaxies in the universe 
and consequently a steeply rising LF towards fainter 
luminosities. Even though most of these dwarfs remained 
undetected at that time, Zwicky’s idea received some 
support from discoveries of very faint dwarf galaxies in 
the Local Group. 

These apparently controversial historical results 
exemplify the problems LF research encounters: selection 
bias and incompleteness. Hubble’s primary goal was to 
measure redshifts and hence he had to concentrate on high 
surface brightness galaxies: ELLIPTICALS (E), LENTICULARS (SO) 
and spiRALSs (Sp). In this way the numerically dominant 
galaxy types in the universe, which we know today are 
the hardly visible low surface brightness DWARF IRREGULAR 
(dIrr) and DWARF ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES (dE), did not contribute 
to his consideration. Zwicky’s theoretical result, on 
the other hand, found assistance from a spatially well- 
defined galaxy aggregate where the number of known 
dwarf galaxies was small but steadily increasing with 
time. Hence the Local Group catalogue reflected the actual 
situation much better. 


Cluster versus field 

When searching for galaxies across a photographic plate 
the eye is quickly caught by galaxy clusters which 
exhibit a high density contrast against the general field. 
Because of their nature clusters are the best places to 
perform LF studies. They inherit many hundreds of 
galaxies of all different morphological types which are all 
located in a small volume of space. Hence the cluster 
distance D, averaged over a fair number of individual 
known galaxy distances, can be used to convert apparent 
magnitudes m of all cluster members into luminosities 
(M = m — 5 log[D(Mpc)] — 25). The identification 
of cluster members against background and foreground 
objects requires the cluster to be well isolated in real 
and velocity space to keep contamination by non-cluster 
galaxies minimal. The bright E, SO and Sp galaxies are 
identified based on velocity data and/or morphological 
criteria. At fainter luminosities most galaxies are dwarfs 
for which velocities are not easily accessible. The numbers 
of these galaxies are estimated statistically by comparing 
galaxy counts in a cluster with an adjacent reference 
field. The excess in the measured cluster LF is assigned 
to the cluster population. However, the heterogeneous 
distribution of field galaxies makes this procedure difficult 
and a matter of dispute. Alternatively, the unique 
morphological appearance of dwarf galaxies, in particular 
dE galaxies, provides an excellent tool to decide which 
object belongs to a cluster. The drawback with this method 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luminosity Function of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is the requirement for galaxy images of high angular 
resolution, which technically restricts the application to 
the closest clusters. 

The field LF is much more difficult to measure. 
About 80% of all galaxies reside outside of rich clusters 
where galaxy densities are down by a factor of 100-1000. 
Large volumes must be surveyed to obtain representative 
samples of objects. Panoramic and pencil-beam surveys 
are carried out for this purpose using long integration 
times to reach low surface brightness galaxies and bright 
stellar systems at larger distances. Redshifts (velocities) 
are the backbone for field LF studies as they provide 
the important distance information. Employing the 
velocity as a distance indicator becomes possible because 
gravitationally induced peculiar velocities are mostly 
absent in the field and thus observed velocities are closely 
linked to the Hubble flow (the general expansion of 
the universe), although corrections for large-scale bulk 
motions are still required. Field surveys have generally an 
apparent magnitude limit owing to the sensitivity limits 
of the spectrographs. This means that intrinsically bright 
galaxies always predominate in galaxy samples as they 
are visible over large distances. To fainter luminosities 
the surveyed volumes shrink substantially and the galaxy 
numbers drop significantly. For instance the detection 
volume for the Small Magellanic Cloud is 4000 times 
smaller than for M87 just because of the difference in 
their total magnitudes. At that level inhomogeneities 
in the three-dimensional galaxy distribution do not 
always average out and can cause biases in the data 
(See DISTRIBUTION OF GALAXIES, CLUSTERS AND SUPERCLUSTERS). 
Various sophisticated methods exist to estimate the LF 
from a magnitude-limited galaxy sample (the 1/ Vmax, C 
and STY methods to name the most important ones), 
however the substantial corrections at the faint end of the 
LF make the shape in any case highly uncertain. 


Overall and type-specific LFs 

Since 1970 more than 100 cluster and field studies 
contributed to reveal the overall signature of the LF (see 
figure 1): after an exponential rise at Mg ~ —22 (Hy = 
50 km st hereafter) the LF turns off at a characteristic 
luminosity L* (total magnitude M*), which is sometimes 
referred to as the ‘knee’, and follows a power law at fainter 
luminosities. The most popular parameterization to fit the 
data was proposed by Schechter in 1976: 


G(L) AL = o"(L/L*)* exp(-L/L") A(L/L") (1) 


with the normalization parameter ¢*, or equivalently in 
magnitudes 


$(M) dM = (0.41n10)¢*10°4" +) 
x exp[—10°4""—" ] dm. 
Thereby the faint-end slope is given by —(1 + @), ie. 


decreasing for a > —1, flat for a = —1 and increasing 
for a < —1. The integral of equation (1) yields the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


IOS. ot, =a ik. a 


Virgo ie | = 


= - = 


 (M) F Fornax 
10 — seg =] 
f ee | 
aie ace =| 
=a | oe 
E Centaurus | 
10 L ae J 


T TTT 
\ 
x. 


Figure 1. Data from the three clusters Virgo, Fornax and 
Centaurus (histograms) illustrate the diversity in observed 
cluster LFs. By chance Virgo is exceptionally well fitted by the 
Schechter form (dashed curve), whereas the local features in the 
LFs of Fornax and Centaurus remain unresolved. The shaded 
areas indicate the sample incompleteness intervals. 


total number of galaxies in a given volume in space 
whose luminosities are brighter than L: N(> L) = 
ee @(L') dL’ = ¢*y(1+a, L/L*). Their total luminosity is 
Lio(> L) = fe L'@(L') dL’ = $*L*y(2 +a, L/L*), where 
y is the incomplete gamma function. 

The Schechter function describes reasonably well the 
observed cluster LFs (see figure 1). Mismatches occur at 
the bright end owing to the presence of overluminous 
cluster members or if the LF is rich in local features. 
Nevertheless, the apparent good agreement led to the 
suggestion that the values Mj ~ —21.0 (about the total 
magnitude of the Andromeda galaxy) and a ~ —1.25 
might be of physical significance. However, this idea was 
not further supported by subsequent deeper surveys of 
clusters of various densities, richnesses, morphological 
classes or evolutionary stages which found a wide range 
of faint-end slopes (—2.2 < a < —0.9). It was also noticed 
that the Schechter parameters are strongly correlated 
and vary significantly with the depth of a survey. The 
latter means that the same cluster population analyzed 
to different magnitude limits will not necessarily give the 
same Schechter parameters. Robust solutions cannot be 
expected above Mz ~ —14. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luminosity Function of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In contrast to clusters where the signature of the 
environment is still imprinted on the data, the LF for field 
populations (including groups) gave quite a consistent 
picture with Mj ~ —21.0 and a flat LF down to Mz ~ 
—17. However, it is not very surprising after the previous 
remark that this result has been revised in recent years 
by deeper redshift surveys (Mgjimn ~ —15) reporting on 
prominent deviations from a flat LF (-1.3 < a < —0.7). 
The disturbing point now is the observed scatter in a. 
Wouldn’t we expect a well defined, unique asymptotic 
behavior of the field LF if averaged over a cosmological 
meaningful volume? This discrepancy has to be resolved 
in order to understand possible selection biases in the data, 
limitations of incompleteness corrections and eventually 
real differences in the dwarf-to-giant ratio for a given 
survey area. 

After learning about all the differences between the 
LFs of high- and low-density regions and even among 
various clusters hope is dwindling that the observed 
spectrum of LFs can be reduced to a common denominator. 
However, on looking more carefully one immediate 
explanation comes into mind: the galaxy type mixture 
which intimately correlates with the environmental 
density. This phenomenon encompasses (1) the well- 
known GALAXY MORPHOLOGY-DENSITY RELATION: early-type 
galaxies (E, S0, dE) preponderate in the high-density 
regions whereas late-type galaxies (Sp, dIrr) dominate the 
intercluster medium, i.e. groups and field, and (2) the 
observation that the dwarf-to-giant ratio is correlated with 
the local density. These trends automatically open the 
question on the LFs of individual morphological galaxy 
types. 

Our knowledge on the type-specific LFs is still in 
its infancy. Work started in the 1980s with first results 
on the Coma cluster, followed by extensive studies of 
the three nearby clusters Virgo, Fornax and Centaurus. 
Based on detailed morphological information the above- 
mentioned five main galaxy families could be studied 
individually. The results suggest that the type-specific 
LFs are very different but that each, except the dIrr LF, 
show little or no variation from one cluster to the other. 
The classical Hubble types E, SO and Sp exhibit bell- 
shaped LFs; they exist only above a certain threshold 
luminosity. Dwarf galaxies are less luminous than the 
giants and govern completely the overall LF for galaxies 
fainter than Mg ~ —16. The large populations of dE 
galaxies in clusters show a steep Schechter-like LF with 
a mean a of —1.4. The most puzzling LF is that of 
the dIrrs with a values between —1.3 and —0.3. The 
large scatter may have its origin in the definition of the 
dIrr class that encompasses hardly visible low surface 
brightness galaxies (Im) with no or very little recent star 
formation activity and bright compact starburst galaxies 
(BCD). Difficulties in detecting the faintest members of the 
family can introduce selection biases to the data. However, 
density-dependent mechanisms that trigger star formation 
would also affect the LF of these gas-rich dwarfs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The morphological resolution of field galaxies is not as 
accurate as for nearby cluster galaxies owing to the larger 
distances involved. Spectra are used instead to subdivide 
galaxies according to their level of star formation, a 
quantity that is closely related to the basic branches of 
early-type (E, SO, dE) and late-type (Sp, dIrr) galaxies at 
the present epoch. Recent deep-redshift surveys of many 
thousand galaxies in the redshift range 0 < z < 1 sampled 
the type-specific LFs in the field as faint as Mg = —15. The 
results are qualitatively consistent with Gaussian profiles 
for the E-SO, and Sp galaxies and with steep LFs for 
dEs and dlrrs. It is interesting to note that an apparent 
steep dlIrr LF at that magnitude limit is not necessarily 
in contradiction with an asymptotic value a = —1 as 
illustrated in figure 2 (see ‘Extreme Field’). The large 
number of dIrrs scales a flat dIrr LF upwards leading to a 
steep slope at Mg = —15. 

The evidence for invariant type-specific LFs offers for 
the first time a semi-empirical tool to explore the behavior 
of the overall LF as a function of the environment. For 
this purpose the five type-specific LFs as found in three 
clusters (table 1) are weighted with observed and, in the 
case of the ‘Extreme Field’, hypothetic type mixtures to 
generate synthetic overall LFs. Similarly to working with 
the same ingredients but using different recipes so that the 
result is either a cake or a custard, this approach produces 
the whole range of observed LFs (see figure 2) from 
rich, dense clusters like Coma and loosely concentrated 
systems like Virgo to groups and the field. The very 
different characteristics of LFs from clusters to the field are 
explained satisfactorily with this method, which clearly 
indicates the importance of the type mixture and type- 
specific LFs for the understanding of the overall LF. 


Table 1. Analytical functions and parameters that represent 
good first-order approximations for observed type-specific LFs 
in galaxy clusters. The faint-end slope for dIrrs is assumed to be 
—1 owing to the lack of conclusive empirical results. 


E Gauss gp = —18.3 eae _ = 
SO Gauss bp =—-189 o=11 

Sp Gauss Wp = 183 o=14 

dIrr Schechter MZ =-16.2 a=-1 

dE Schechter MZ =-17.8 a=-14 


Summary and prospects 

Generally speaking there is a good understanding of 
the optical LF of galaxies down to a luminosity Mg ~ 
—16 but unfortunately this is still far away from the 
complete picture. The most basic detail is that the LF 
is the sum over separate LFs for the individual galaxy 
types. There are two major components in the overall 
LF which have been effectively discovered by Hubble 
and Zwicky. The first component consists of the three 
families of high surface brightness galaxies E, SO and 
Sp. The second component is made up by the dwarfs, 
low surface brightness galaxies which are intrinsically 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luminosity Function of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


100 SO a ao ep Z 
E ar + ee 
F Coma (10/13/2/0/75) t i 
[ ZA £ q 
Y + eee 
a L 
10 - / dE + q 
E are + J 
L 77°80 7% + | 
[ Ph pS af 1 
[ i F ‘ + 
S 
®(M) Le 7“; E | SP \\ - = 
is Ve YEE Ss \ + 7 
a. ot ae E ; 
ay Oli rere af aetoad fem Ati 
100 F — a 
t Groups (3/6/62/26/3) + Extreme Field PRES) aaa e 
[ es y 1 
| ae 0 4 
Z re see dirr 
10 E iol Sp Te dirr = ae J 
E Y \ ao Sp \ q 
t y iN t LS | 
L ii / \ “Tt / \ J 
/ Pe. ol ~ QE / \ 
Te Po tele SOC eae a / A q 
E / ae ned \ a l \ J 
[ - S \ ae J 
Veneer (hpesNey fi pe Li [i as [iN TG 
~22 ~20 -18 -16 -14 ~22 ~20 -18 -16 -14 
M (mag) 


Figure 2. Synthetic overall LFs (solid curves) for four different environments with the galaxy type mixtures (E:S0:Sp:dIrr:dE) indicated 
as percentages. The contributions of the five main morphological types are the dashed curves. 


fainter than the giants and fully control the asymptotic 
behaviour of the LF in all environments. This can be either 
a steep or moderate—flat power law depending on the local 
galaxy density. Due to the very different nature of the 
two components, many clusters (e.g. Fornax, Centaurus, 
Coma, Abell 963), some groups (e.g. Antlia) and field 
populations exhibit a prominent dip in their LFs at the 
transition luminosity Mg ~ —17.5. 

Fundamentally we would like to fully understand 
the formation and evolution of galaxies. Results on 
the LF clearly indicate that this goal cannot be achieved 
by treating the phenomenon ‘galaxy’ as unity. Rather, 
the various morphological types have to be studied 
individually. From cluster work first evidence emerges 
that the LFs for E, SO and Sp at the present epoch have 
well-defined Gaussian profiles which are unaffected by 
the environment. The same appears to be true for the 
LF of dE galaxies which follows a steep Schechter profile 
to all known luminosity limits. For the dIrr LF we are 
still lacking conclusive results as the situation is far more 
complex. There are some physical arguments against a 
single LF for dIrrs in clusters. Overall, more detailed LF 
studies in the local universe and at different redshifts, 
i.e. time epochs, are desperately needed, focusing on 
the separation of the morphological components in a 
consistent way. These results will reveal the significance 
of time and environmentally induced physical processes 
for the evolution of galaxies. 

Another key issue is the variation of the morpholog- 
ical mixture with galaxy density and the dwarf-to-giant 
ratio in particular. Most current cosmological theories pre- 
dict that, as the universe expands, galaxies clump together 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to form groups, which in turn merge together to form clus- 
ters. These ‘bottom-up’ scenarios have difficulties in ex- 
plaining the high dwarf-to-giant ratio in clusters compared 
with the lower fraction in groups and the field. Where is 
this ‘excess’ of cluster dwarfs coming from? That ques- 
tion is fundamentally related to the space density of dIrrs 
which is not very well known as the faintest members of 
these dwarfs may remain undetected in the optical. How- 
ever, this situation is going to change with systematic sur- 
veys of the local universe in neutral hydrogen (H J). dirrs 
contain a substantial amount of HI gas and thus become 
‘visible’ by their radio emission at 21 cm. Another advan- 
tage of H I surveys over optical work is that each galaxy 
is automatically tagged with its distance via the H I veloc- 
ity. Preliminary results for nearby groups from ongoing 
H I surveys (e.g. HIPASS) are very promising. Many new 
group members have been discovered in H I but all have 
faint optical counterparts. Firstly this means that the aver- 
age number of dIrrs and the dwarf-to-giant ratio in groups 
are higher than estimated to date. Secondly, the H I mass- 
to-light ratio for dIrrs is not increasing with fainter lumi- 
nosities. The missed fraction of dIrrs per magnitude unit 
appears to be small which gives us greater confidence in 
the optical results. 


Bibliography 

Books: 

Binney J and Merrifield M 1998 Galactic Astronomy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Silk J 1989 The Big Bang (New York: Freeman) 


Journal articles: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luminosity Function of Galaxies ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Binggeli B, Sandage A and Tammann G A 1988 The 
luminosity function of galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 26 509 

Dressler A 1984 The evolution of galaxies in clusters Ann. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 22 185 


Helmut Jerjen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Luminous Blue Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Luminous Blue Variables 


Luminous Blue Variable stars (LBVs) are among the 
most luminous hot stars in galaxies. They show very 
irregular and unpredictable brightness variations. The 
typical timescale of the variations is of the order of a few 
years and the visual brightness of the star can vary by 
about a magnitude. Some LBVs have suffered very large 
eruptions. LBVs represent a short critical phase in the 
evolution of very massive stars (see also STELLAREVOLUTION). 

LBVs are highly unstable, very luminous stars. They 
are recognized by their strange variability on many 
timescales. The most characteristic variations show 
brightenings or fadings by a factor of two or three over 
a period of years. Some LBVs are changing all the time; 
others go through phases of about constant brightness 
that may last ten years before they start changing again. 
Observations with satellites have shown that when these 
stars are faint in visual light, they are bright in UV radiation 
and vice versa. This shows that the variations are due to 
changes in the radius and surface temperature of the stars. 
During the visually faint phases, the stars are relatively 
hot and small. When they are visually bright their surface 
temperature drops but their radius increases by a factor 
between two and ten. The reason for these changes is still 
unknown. 

Several LBVs have been observed to go through large 
eruptions, when they brighten by as much as a factor of 
100. Such eruptions are rare and may occur only once 
every few thousand years. During an eruption the LBV 
ejects a large amount of mass, of the order of the total mass 
of the Sun. The most famous LBV is the star n Carinae 
(ETA CARINAE), which had an eruption in late 1830s, when it 
suddenly became one of the brightest stars in the Southern 
sky. The star is now surrounded by a magnificant bipolar 
NEBULA consisting of the gas ejected during the eruption. 

LBVs are very rare: there are only five confirmed 
LBVs in our Galaxy and a few tens in other galaxies. This 
is because they represent a relatively short phase in the life 
of the most massive stars. Yet, this phase is critical for the 
evolution of these stars: the large mass loss of the LBVs 
prevents the massive stars from becoming red supergiants. 
After the LBV phase they have lost so much mass that they 
evolve directly into very hot helium-rich stars (the woLr- 
RAYET STARS). 


Two special LBVs 

P Cygni 

The star P Cygni was discovered in the constellation 
of Cygnus the swan in August 1600 by the Dutch 
cartographer Bleau, when it suddenly appeared at a place 
where no star had been visible before. The star remained 
bright for many years and then slowly faded untill it was 
invisible to the naked eye. In 1655 it brightened again for 
a few years but was invisible during the late 1600s. Now 
the star can be seen with the naked eye (at magnitude 4.9). 
From the distance of the star, 6000 light-years away, and 
from the brightness in visual and ultraviolet light, it is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The nebula around the Luminous Blue Variable 
n Carinae is the result of the large eruption in the mid 1800s. 
This image was taken with the Hubble Space Telescope. 


concluded that the star has a radius of 76 solar radii, a 
surface temperature of 19 000 K and a mass of about 30 
times that of the Sun. 

The historic light curve shows that since 1700 the star 
has been slowly brightening at a rate of 15% per century. 
This is interpreted as a very slow expansion of the star due 
to its evolution from blue to yellow supergiant. P Cygni is 
surrounded by a very faint nebula, which is the result of 
the ejection during the large eruption in 1600. The nebula 
was ejected wih a velocity of 140 kms7!. 


n Carinae 

The most dramatic brightness variations of any LBV is 
shown by 7 Car. During the eruption in the period of 
1837 to 1860 the star was the brightest star in the Southern 
sky, despite its large distance of about 8000 light-years. 
At maximum, the star reached a luminosity of 30 million 
times that of the Sun. It faded rapidly after the eruption, 
because it was obscured by the dust that had been formed 
in the ejected material. Since the mid-1900s the star has 
gradually brightened in visual light as the extinction by 
dust decreases. 

n Car is surrounded by a spectacular nebula 
consisting of gas and dust ejected during the large eruption 
(figure 1). The nebula has a double-lobed structure, with 
an expansion velocity of about 30 km s-! near the center 
to 1000 km —! at the outer edge. The total amount of mass 
in the nebula is about ten times the mass of the Sun. The 
typical bipolar structure is not explained: it could be due 
to the fact that 7 Car may have a companion star nearby, 
or due to rapid rotation of the star. Unfortunately the star 
itself is hidden in the central region of this nebula. The 
star can only be studied through its light reflected from 
the dust cloud surrounding it. This has shown that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luminous Blue Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on ee 
Some 
Pn 


8.5 ——F —— 
1970 72 74 76 78 80 
9.0;— 
en r e 
7 ® 
$ fT oe 
3 e 
Bre 395) °e ; 
o 
& [ 7 e 
10.0 |— 
S Dor 
10.5 \ f L 1 f ! 
0 2000 4000 


6000 8000 10000 


Julian date — 2440000 


Figure 2. The light curve of the LBV S Doradus in visual light between 1975 and 1992. Bright is up, faint is down. An increase of one 


magnitude corresponds to a decrease in brightness by a factor 2.51. 


central object varies in emission lines, especially those of 
hydrogen and neutral helium, with a period of 5.52 years. 
This suggests that the central object is in fact a BINARY SYSTEM 
consisting of two stars of about 80 solar masses orbiting 
each other at a distance of about 20 astronomical units. 
The binarity may have been responsible for shaping the 
bipolar nebula. 


The light variations of LBVs 
The light curves of LBVs are highly irregular and 
unpredictable. A typical light curve of the LBV star 
S Doradus is shown in figure 2. 

Three types of light variations can de distinguished 
in the light curves of LBVs: 


(a) Short time variations on a timescale of months with 
an amplitude of 0.1 to 0.3 magnitudes (the little 
wiggles near the deep point of the curve of figure 
2). 

(b) Typical LBV variations on a timescale of years with 
an amplitude of about 0.5 to 1 magnitude (the large 
dips and peaks in figure 2). 

(c) Large eruptions that have been observed in P Cygni 
and n Carinae, but not in S Doradus. The presence of 
nebulae around LBVs indicates that most, if not all, 
LBVs go through large eruptions, and that these may 
occur every few thousand years. 


The short time variations are caused by NON-RADIAL 
STELLAR PULSATIONS. Normal hot supergiants show the same 
type of pulsations (sometimes called a Cygni variations). 
The much larger typical LBV variations (sometimes called 
S Doradus variations) are due to some unknown instability 
inside the star that makes the radius grow and shrink in 
an irregular way by up to a factor of ten. During these 
variations the total luminosity of the star remains almost 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


constant but the light is redistributed in the visual and 
the ultraviolet. This means that as the radius expands, 
the surface of the star gets cooler, and so the color of the 
star gets redder and the spectral type changes from early- 
B to A-type. These changes are indeed observed during 
the light variations. The origin of the large eruptions is 
unknown. It may be related to the fact that the stars 
are so luminous that the outward directed force due to 
radiation pressure is almost as large as the inward directed 
gravitational force. In that case the net attracting force 
inside the star can be so small that even minor disturbances 
can create a large instability. 


Basic properties 

The basic properties of well studied LBVs are listed in 
table 1. This list contains the five confirmed Galactic LBVs 
and five LBVs in the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD. 


Luminosities 

LBVs are very luminous with a luminosity, L, between 
260000 and 3400000 times that of the Sun. The 
luminosity of the LBVs remains almost constant during 
their variations in visual brightness and in color. 


Surface temperatures 

The effective temperatures, Tos, of LBVs vary with the 
visual brightness. At visual maximum the stars have a 
temperature of about 8000-9000 K. At visual minimum the 
LBVs are much hotter, from 30 000 K for the most luminous 
ones to 10 000 K for the least luminous LBVs. The changes 
in temperature are correlated with the visual brightness 
variations. The larger the visual brightness variations, 
the larger the temperature differences. This is because 
the decrease in visual light is compensated by an increase 
in the ultraviolet light as the star becomes hotter. The 
stars 1 Carinae and P Cygni, which do not show typical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luminous Blue Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. The basic properties of LBVs in the Galaxy and in the Large Magellanic Cloud. 


Name System Distance Luminosity = Tor Radius Nebula 
(pc) (Lo) (K) (Ro) 

n Carinae Galaxy 2600 3.400 000 20000-30000 150-70 yes 
AG Carinae Galaxy 6100 1200000 9000-30000 450-40 yes 
R127 LMC 51000 1200 000 8500-30000 500-40 yes 
R143 LMC 51000 790 000 8500-20000 400-70 no 
P Cygni Galaxy 1800 720 000 19000 80 yes 
S Doradus LMC 51000 650 000 8000-22000 400-60 no 
HR Carinae Galaxy 5000 290 000 14000 90 yes 
HD 160529 Galaxy 290 000 8000-11000 280-150 no 
R110 LMC 51000 290.000 7600-10000 300-180 no 
R71 LMC 51000 260 000 9000-14000 200-90 yes 


LBV variations with amplitudes of about a magnitude, 
also show little temperature variation, except during their 
historic large eruptions. 


Radii 

The radius of LBVs varies with the effective temperature. 
High temperatures correspond to small radii and vice 
versa. During the hot and visually faint phase the radius 
is typically between 40 and 100 solar radii (except for 
HD 160529 and R110). During the cool and visually bright 
phase the radius is typically a few hundred solar radii. 
This is in agreement with the almost constant luminosity 
of the LBVs during their variations, which implies that the 
radius is approximately proportional to Te 


Masses 

The masses of LBVs are not well known. The high 
luminosity of the stars indicates that their original mass 
is in the range from 40 solar masses for the least luminous 
LBVs, like HD 160529, R110 and R71, to 100 solar masses 
for the most luminous ones like AG Carinae and R127. 
The star 1 Carinae is by far the most luminous and 
most massive one with an estimated initial mass of 150 
solar masses. The actual (present day) mass of the 
LBVs is considerably smaller than their initial mass. The 
nebulae around many the LBVs show that they have 
lost a significant fraction of their initial mass already. 
Evolutionary calculations suggest that the masses of LBVs 
are between 40% and 75% of their original mass. 


Spectra 

The spectra of LBVs change with their photometric 
variations and their temperature variations. When the 
stars are visually faint the spectrum is typically that of 
an early-B supergiant. When the stars are visually bright 
their spectrum is that of an A-type supergiant. The studies 
of the spectral lines show that the atmospheres of LBVs are 
enriched in helium and nitrogen and depleted in carbon 
and oxygen, compared with normal stars. 

The visual spectrum of LBVs is dominated by spectral 
lines with ‘P Cygni profiles’ consisting of an emission 
component and a blue-shifted absorption component. The 
wavelength shift of the absorption component is due to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Doppler effect and indicates an outflow velocity of several 
hundred kms~!. The strength of the lines and the outflow 
velocity show that the LBVs are losing mass at a rate of 
about 2 x 10-5 to 6 x 10-> solar masses per year. The mass 
loss rate of n Carinae is much higher and of the order of 
10-3 solar masses per year. 


Nebulae around LBVs 


Almost all LBVs are surrounded by nebulae which are due 
to large eruptions in the past. The diameters of the nebulae 
are typically of the order of 0.2—2 parsec and the expansion 
velocity is between 25 and 100 kms~!. The LBV n Carinae 
is an exception, as it shows different velocities from about 
100 to 1000 kms! in different knots. The dynamical age 
Tayn Of LBV nebulae can be derived from their radius and 
outflow velocity: tayn = Tnep/v. The dynamical ages of 
the LBV nebulae are in the range 5000-50 000 years. The 
nebula of 7 Carinae has a dynamical age of 150 years and 
that of P Cygni has an age of 400 years, both in agreement 
with the observed historic large eruptions. 


The evolutionary connection 


The evolutionary stage of the LBVs can be derived 
from their location in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM 
shown in figure 3. The stars make horizontal excursions 
in this diagram, due to the variations in radius and 
temperature at constant luminosity. The stars are close 
to the Humphreys—Davidson limit. This is the empirically 
determined luminosity upper limit in the Hertzsprung— 
Russell diagram. No stars brighter than this limit (except 
LBVs) have been found in the Milky Way or in other 
galaxies (See HIGH-LUMINOSITY STARS). 

The location of the LBVs in the Hertzsprung—Russell 
diagram shows that the stars are in a post-main sequence 
evolutionary phase. The stars get their energy from helium 
fusion in the center. The increased helium and nitrogen 
abundance in their atmospheres is due to the fact that the 
original hydrogen-rich layers have been expelled, partly 
by mass loss when the star was still on the main sequence, 
and partly in the large eruptions. The helium and nitrogen 
enriched layers were formed by hydrogen fusion via the 
CNO cycle in the convective core of the star. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luminous Blue Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


65E e @7 Car _| 
M/Mo 4 
[ 120 4 | 
bc} \ 
4 L 100 4+ ¢ >) R 127 4 
a \ es a oe 7 
J gob 35 (| a AG Car a 
eo G - > R143 4 
L \ iS; op Cyg — J ‘Se Dor nse 
| 60 + J 
\ 
5.5- HR ae : m ae on =| 
\ QO Spo al 
400 4 : ° R71 
[ \ | 
L \ 4 
5.0 ee a (ee a da a ee Hl 
5.0 4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2 4.0 3.8 3.6 
log Ter (K) 


Figure 3. The location of the LBVs in the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram. Because the stars are variable they cover a range of effective 
temperatures. The full curve is the main sequence with the masses predicted by evolution theory indicated. The dashed line is the 
Humphreys—Davidson limit. Filled and open circles indicate LBVs in our Galaxy and in the Large Magellanic Cloud respectively. 


The average duration of the LBV phase has been 
derived in a statistical way from a comparison between 
the numbers of LBVs and the numbers of other stars in 
the same range of initial masses. This shows that the LBV 
phase typically lasts a few times 10* years. With a typical 
mass loss rate of about 4 x 10-5 solar masses per year 
and the ejection of a few solar masses per large eruption 
every few thousand years, the total mass lost during the 
LBV phase can amount to a few tens of solar masses. The 
LBV phase ends when the star has ejected almost all of its 
hydrogen-rich material. The star then evolves into a hot 
helium-rich star, ie. a Wolf—Rayet star. 


Unsolved problems 

Since the discovery of the large eruptions of P Cygni and 
n Carinae, their cause has been a great mystery. Several 
suggestions have been made: 


(a) an instability due to a possibly fast rotating core, 

(b) a geyser-type of instability due to the ionization of 
hydrogen in a critical layer, 

a ‘strange-mode instability’ due to the coupling of 
several pulsation modes, or 

large radiation pressure at a critical temperature zone 
in the star due to the iron opacity. 


(c) 
(d) 


None of these theories can correctly predict the properties 
such as temperature, radius and luminosity of the stars for 
which the eruptions have been observed, nor the ejected 
amount of mass or the shapes of the nebulae. 

The origin of the more common LBV variations with 
a size of a few magnitudes is also not understood. It is 
known that they are due to large variations in stellar radius 
by about a factor of ten or so. Originally it was assumed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that the increase in radius is due to a sudden increase in the 
mass loss rate, which results in an opaque wind that makes 
the star appear to be larger. However, recent studies have 
shown that the winds of LBVs are not opaque and that the 
changes in radius must be due to some instability below 
the photosphere of the star. The instability is probably 
due to the large radiation pressure and the resulting small 
effective attraction in the outer layers of the star. The 
stellar layers are then only loosely bound to the star so that 
even small disturbances can have large effects. It has been 
suggested that the large eruptions are simply the extremes 
of the typical LBV variations. 


Bibliography 
The observations and properties of LBVs have been 
discussed in the review paper: 


Humphreys R M and Davidson K 1994 The Luminous Blue 
Variables: Astrophysical Geysers Publ. Astron. Soc. 
Pacific 106 1025 


Reviews on specific properties of LBVs, their evolution 
and their variability can be found in the proceedings of 
conferences that were specially devoted to these stars: 


Davidson K, Moffat A and Lamers H J G L M (ed) 
1989 Physics of Luminous Blue Variables (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

Nota A and Lamers H J GL M (ed) 1997 Luminous Blue 
Variables: Massive Stars in Transition (Astron. Soc. 
Pacific Conf. Series, vol 120) 


Henny J G LM Lamers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luna ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Luna 


Series of Soviet automated Moon missions launched 1959- 
76. Lunas 16, 20 and 24 were successful sample return 
missions. Lunas 17 and 21 carried the first automated 
Moon rovers, known as Lunokhods 1 and 2. (See also 
LUNOKHOD.) Luna 3 returned the first pictures of the lunar 
far side. Lunar 9 sent back the first pictures from the 
Moon’s surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lunar Orbiter ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lunar Orbiter 


Series of five NASA Moon-orbiting spacecraft, launched 
1966-67. Designed to map potential APoLLo landing sites. 
Perturbations in the orbit of Lunar Orbiter 1 provided 
the first data on lunar mass concentrations (mascons) and 
associated gravity anomalies. Used to create the first 
detailed lunar atlas, with spatial resolution down to 1 m. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lunar Prospector ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lunar Prospector 


NASA Discovery mission, launched in January 1998. 
Designed to spend one year in orbit around the Moon. 
Carried a neutron spectrometer which gave strong 
indications of water ice in shadowed craters at both 
lunar poles. Also gave high resolution gravity data and 
returned information on the composition of the lunar crust. 
Lowered into a 30 km altitude orbit in January 1999 on 
completion of its primary mission. The extended mission 
was due to end in July 1999. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lunar Transient Phenomenon (LTP) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lunar Transient Phenomenon (LTP) 


A purported localized and short-lived change in the 
appearance of a feature on the surface of the Moon. 
LTPs tend to be reported by amateur observers of the 
Moon. They take various forms, including temporary 
colorations, usually red; bright flashes, visible especially 
in shadows or on the night side; extended cloudy patches; 
and obscurations of normally visible features. 

Permanent changes to lunar features reported before 
the days of close-range photography from spacecraft 
are now discounted, being ascribed to deficiencies in 
mapping, observational error, or wishful thinking. A 
celebrated instance was the announcement in 1866 by 
Julius Schmidt that the crater Linné, described by previous 
observers as a small, deep pit, had vanished, to be replaced 
by a white patch. Modern photographs show Linné as a 
small crater of standard morphology, surrounded by light- 
colored ejecta. 

Temporary changes reported more recently may be 
genuine, but they remain controversial. In 1958 the 
Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev spotted a red glow 
at the center of the crater Alphonsus, and obtained a 
spectrum which showed emissions of molecular carbon 
which he claimed was evidence of a volcanic emission. 
The observation was not corroborated, and evaluation was 
clouded by Cold War mistrust. Lack of corroboration 
remains a problem, as LTPs are usually seen by a single 
observer, and not photographed. 

Unequivocal sightings of LTPs could be evidence that 
the Moon is not the geologically inert body it is generally 
held to be. There is a connection between LIPs and 
moonquakes—seismic tremors detected by instruments 
left on the Moon during the Apollo missions that originate 
near the crust/mantle boundary. Both phenomena are 
more common when the Moon is at perigee. The 
suggestion is that tidal flexing is triggering the release of 
gas or dust. It is possible that brief LTPs are caused by the 
impact of small meteorites. 


See also: Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lunar-A ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lunar-A 


Japanese lunar orbiter, scheduled for launch in 2003. 
Intended to fire three penetrators 1-3 m into the 
lunar surface to detect Moonquakes and measure soil 
temperature. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lund Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lund Observatory 


Lund Observatory is part of Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden, active in astronomy since 1668. The past 
century featured stellar statistics (C V L Charlier) and 
(extra)galactic studies (K Lundmark, who produced a 
Milky-Way panorama in the 1950s). Current projects 
include stellar astrophysics, space astrometry, design of 
large optical and radio telescopes, and involvement in 
various international observatories. 
For further information see 

http://www.astro.lu.se/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lunokhod ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lunokhod 


Two Soviet Moon rovers, the first automated roving 
vehicles to operate on another world. Operated from 
Earth by remote control. Carried stereo cameras, laser 
reflector, magnetometer, x-ray spectrometer and cosmic 
ray detector. Lunokhod 1 was launched on board Luna 
17 in November 1970. It landed on Mare Imbrium and 
operated for 322 days, covering 10.5 km. Lunokhod 2 was 
launched on board Luna 21 in January 1973. It landed to 
the east of Mare Serenitatis and operated for four months, 
covering 37 km. (See also LUNA.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lupus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lupus 


(the Wolf; abbrev. Lup, gen. Lupi; area 334 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Centaurus 
and Scorpius, and culminates at midnight in early May. 
It has long been associated with a wild animal, though 
the identification with a wolf dates from comparatively 
recent times. It is usually shown on early celestial charts 
as a wolf impaled on a thyrsus (staff) held by Chiron, the 
centaur, represented by the neighboring constellation of 
Centaurus. The brightest stars of Lupus were cataloged 
by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A small but not inconspicuous constellation, over- 
shadowed by Centaurus to the west, the brightest stars 
in Lupus are a Lupi, magnitude 2.3, 6 Lupi, magnitude 
2.7,and y Lupi, a very close binary with bluish-white (B2) 
components, magnitudes 3.5 and 3.6 (combined magni- 
tude 2.8), separation 0.8”. There are ten other stars of mag- 
nitude 4.0 or brighter. Other interesting binaries include 
€ Lupi, which has bluish-white (A3 and B9) components, 
magnitudes 5.1 and 5.6, separation 10.4”, and yz Lupi, a 
triple system consisting of a close pair of bluish-white (B7) 
components, magnitudes 5.0 and 5.1 (combined magni- 
tude 4.3), separation 1.1”, and a third, bluish-white (A2) 
component, magnitude 7.2, separation 23”. Other inter- 
esting objects include NGC 5822, an open cluster of more 
than 100 stars between ninth and twelfth magnitude, and 
NGC 5986, a ninth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Luyten, Willem Jacob (1899-1994) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Luyten, Willem Jacob (1899-1994) 


American astronomer, worked at the University of 
Minnesota, determining proper motions of more than 
120 000 stars, as a means of finding nearby or high-velocity 
stars, and determining their distances. He repeated the 
Palomar Observatory Sky Survey, building an automated 
computerized plate-measuring machine to compare it 
with the earlier survey, and thus determined the proper 
motions of 400000 more. With these data he discovered 
the great majority of the white dwarfs known. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Lyman Alpha Absorption: The Damped Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lyman Alpha Absorption: The 
Damped Systems 


Damped Lya absorption systems are high column density 
gaseous objects that are detected in the spectra of 
background quasars on the basis of neutral hydrogen 
Lya absorption lines broadened by radiation damping 
to large rest-frame equivalent widths. The damped Lya 
absorption systems are of particular interest because (1) 
they can be identified to very large REDsHIFTS, (2) they 
dominate the mass density of neutral gas in the universe, 
containing at redshifts z ~ 3-5 a comoving mass density of 
neutral gas roughly comparable to the mass density of stars 
in present-day galaxies, and (3) they are predominantly 
neutral, allowing for heavy element abundances to be 
measured without the need of applying large ionization 
corrections. Many, most, or all damped Lya absorption 
systems probably arise in the central parts of ordinary 
galaxies, although the exact relationship between damped 
Lya absorption systems and galaxies is not yet firmly 
established. 

It has been known since the late 1960s that the rest- 
frame ultraviolet spectra of HIGH-REDSHIFT QUASARS exhibit 
large numbers of discrete, isolated, narrow absorption 
lines. It was very quickly noted that the rate of incidence 
of these absorption lines is much larger at wavelengths 
shortward of the quasar Lyw emission lines than at 
wavelengths longward of the quasar Lya emission lines. 
The reason is that almost all of the absorption lines at 
wavelengths shortward of the quasar Lya emission lines 
are Lya (or perhaps Lyf, Lyy, or higher-order Lyman 
transition) absorption lines produced by cosmologically 
distributed gaseous material that by chance intervenes 
along the lines of sight to the background quasars, at 
redshifts less than those of the background quasars. 
Collectively, the absorption lines that occur at wavelengths 
shortward of the quasar Lyaw emission lines are known as 
the ‘LYMAN ALPHA FOREST’, because they give the impression 
of a thick forest of absorption that blankets the rest-frame 
ultraviolet spectra of high-redshift quasars. 

The vast majority of the Lya-forest absorption lines 
are of extremely low neutral hydrogen column density— 
typically N = 10-105 cm~?. But a very small minority 
of the Lya-forest absorption lines are of much higher 
neutral hydrogen column density—ranging up to nearly 
N = 10% cm. At neutral hydrogen column densities 
exceeding N ~ 2 x 10” cm™, the Lya absorption line 
profiles are optically thick in the radiation damping wings, 
and the Lya absorption lines occur on the damped part 
of the curve of growth. For this reason, the highest 
neutral hydrogen column density Lya-forest absorption 
lines are known as ‘damped Lye absorption lines’, and 
the redshift complexes of absorption lines (consisting of 
Lya and higher-order Lyman transitions as well as various 
heavy element transitions) associated with damped Lya 
absorption lines are known as ‘damped Ly absorption 
systems’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The column density threshold that distinguishes high 
column density damped Lya absorption systems from 
lower column density Lya-forest absorption systems is 
usually taken to be N = 2 x 10° cm. Although 
there is no particular physical significance that can be 
ascribed to this value, itis nevertheless a convenient choice 
because (1) absorption lines arising from such large neutral 
hydrogen column densities occur on the damped part of 
the curve of growth for any value of the velocity dispersion 
satisfying o < 100 kms“! (which in practice includes all 
quasar absorption line systems) and (2) it corresponds to 
the isophotal sensitivity threshold of the 21 cm neutral 
hydrogen survey of nearby galaxies conducted by Bosma 
in 1981, thus allowing for straightforward comparison 
of properties of damped Lya absorption systems with 
properties of present-day galaxies. For present-day sPIRAL 
GALAXIES, for example, the Bosma radius (or the radius at 
which the gaseous disk reaches a neutral hydrogen column 
density threshold of N = 2 x 10”° cm~*) extends to roughly 
1.8 times the Holmberg radius (or the radius at which the 
stellar disk reaches the surface brightness of the night sky). 

For Lya absorption lines on the damped part 
of the curve of growth, the relationship between 
neutral hydrogen column density N and rest-frame Lya 
equivalent width W is approximately given by 


N 2 
ae (1) 
2 x 1029 cm? 10A 


A column density threshold N = 2 x 10% cm? 
thus corresponds to a rest-frame Lya equivalent width 
threshold W = 10 A. In practice, damped Lya absorption 
systems are identified on the basis of observed-frame 
equivalent width limited surveys for damped Lya 
absorption lines. At high redshifts, even the lowest 
column density damped Lya absorption systems give 
rise to Ly absorption lines of observed-frame equivalent 
widths of many tens of Aand are easily detected in spectra 
of relatively low spectral resolution and signal-to-noise 
ratio. Roughly 1000 quasars have so far been surveyed 
for damped Lye absorption lines, from which roughly 
100 damped Lya absorption systems have so far been 
identified, at redshifts ranging from z ~ 0 through 5. 

At high redshifts, the observed rate of incidence of 
damped Lya absorption systems is significantly larger 
than the predicted rate of incidence of damped Lya 
absorption systems, under the assumptions that the 
absorption systems arise within the Bosma radii of 
spiral galaxies and that galaxies are fixed in comoving 
coordinates. The exact factor by which the observed rate of 
incidence exceeds the predicted rate of incidence depends 
on the choice of cosmological model, but could be as 
large as © 2 for plausible cosmological parameters. This 
important result has been interpreted as suggesting that 
the gaseous disks of spiral galaxies were larger or more 
numerous in the past. 

In more or less all cases that have so far been 
examined, the damped Lya absorption systems exhibit 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Absorption: The Damped Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


heavy element absorption lines from abundant low- 
ionization species, including transitions of C II, O I, Mg II, 
Si II and Fe II. In many (but not all) cases that have so 
far been examined, the damped Ly absorption systems 
also exhibit heavy element absorption lines from abundant 
high-ionization species, including transitions of C IV and 
Si IV. The low- and high-ionization line profiles appear 
to be kinematically distinct, suggesting a multiple phase 
structure of the absorbing regions. In spectra of high 
spectral resolution and signal-to-noise ratio, damped Lya 
absorption systems also exhibit heavy element absorption 
lines from low-abundance species, including transitions of 
Ti IL, Cr II, Ni Il and Zn II. These low-abundance species 
are of particular importance for measuring heavy element 
abundances. 


Neutral gas content 

The most important property of the damped Lya 
absorption systems is that they dominate the mass density 
of neutral gas in the universe, containing at redshifts 
z * 3-5 a comoving mass density of neutral gas roughly 
comparable to the mass density of stars in present-day 
galaxies. Because stars form from neutral (rather than 
ionized) gas, this has the important implication that the 
damped Lya absorption systems trace the bulk of material 
available for STAR FORMATION to high redshifts. 

It is straightforward to show that the comoving mass 
density of neutral gas follows directly from observations 
of damped Lya absorption systems, without regard to the 
geometry of the absorbing regions. Consider a population 
of absorption systems of some given neutral hydrogen 
column density No and rate of incidence n(z) per line of 
sight intercepted at redshift z over some redshift interval 
dz or cosmic time interval dt. The proper mass density of 
neutral hydrogen contributed by the absorbers is obtained 
by taking the product n(z)dz (which gives the mean 
number of absorption systems intercepted by a line of sight 
over the redshift interval dz), multiplying by the column 
density No (which then gives the mean column density 
traversed by a line of sight over the redshift interval dz), 
multiplying by the mass of the hydrogen atom my (which 
then gives the mean mass column density of a line of sight 
over the redshift interval dz), and dividing by c dt, where 
c is the speed of light. 

The comoving mass density of neutral gas is then 
formed by multiplying by a factor w = 1/(1— Y) © 0.33 to 
allow fora helium abundance Y = 0.25 (by mass), dividing 
by (1 + z)° to allow for the expansion of the universe, 
and dividing by the current critical density pcit to yield 
a dimensionless mass density parameter Q,. The result is 
the comoving mass density of neutral gas in units of the 
current critical density. 

In practice, the comoving mass density of neutral 
gas is determined not for absorption systems of some 
given neutral hydrogen column density No but for 
absorption systems that span a range of neutral hydrogen 
column densities. The distribution of neutral hydrogen 
column densities is characterized by the column density 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


distribution function f (N), which is defined in such a way 
that the f(N)dNdX is the number of absorption systems 
intercepted per line of sight with neutral hydrogen column 
density in the interval N to N + dN and in the absorption 
distance interval dX. In terms of the column density 
distribution function, the mass density parameter is given 


by 


Hy umy 
Os - C Perit oe NIAMS @) 
where Nmin and Nmax are the minimum and maximum 
neutral hydrogen column density limits, respectively, and 
Hb is the HUBBLE CONSTANT. 

Over the range of neutral hydrogen column densities 
that have yet been measured, the column density 
distribution function of the damped Lya absorption 
systems is well represented by a power-law form as 


f(N) = BN? (3) 


where the power-law index is measured to be 6 ~ 1.6. For 
such a shallow column density distribution function, the 
mass density parameter of equation (2) formally diverges 
as Nmax — 00, indicating that f(N) must steepen at 
some sufficiently large neutral hydrogen column density. 
This steepening has not yet been measured. To obtain a 
convergent result, equation (2) is usually evaluated with 
Nmax Set equal to the largest observed neutral hydrogen 
column density, which at high redshifts approaches 
Nmax = 10” cm~?. Uncertainty of the shape of the high 
column density end of the column density distribution 
function is the major uncertainty of Qg. 

At redshifts z ~ 3-5, evaluation of equation (2) yields 
a mass density parameter Q, ~ 2 x 10° h7', where 
h is the Hubble constant in units of 100 km s7! Mpc"! 
and where the exact value depends on the choice of 
cosmological model. This is equal to within observational 
uncertainty to the mass density parameter of stars in 
present-day galaxies, which is determined by multiplying 
the luminosity density of the nearby universe by the 
mean mass-to-light ratio of the stars that dominate the 
luminosities of galaxies. This very important result has 
been interpreted as indicating that high-redshift damped 
Lya absorption systems are the progenitors of present- 
day galaxies, i.e. that the gaseous content of high-redshift 
damped Lya absorption systems is gradually converted 
into the stellar content of present-day galaxies. It is unclear 
whether a systematic decrease in Q, with decreasing 
redshift—treflecting the conversion of gas into stars with 
time—has yet been measured. 


Heavy element abundances 

Another important property of the damped Lya absorp- 
tion systems is that they are predominantly neutral, allow- 
ing for heavy element abundances to be measured with- 
out the need of applying large ionization corrections. In 
particular, because the absorbing regions are self-shielded 
against ionizing radiation by high column density gas, 
neutral hydrogen and singly-ionized heavy elements (of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Absorption: The Damped Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


elements with first ionization potentials less than one Ryd- 
berg) are the dominant ionization species. Gas-phase 
heavy element abundances are therefore obtained simply 
by dividing column densities of singly-ionized heavy ele- 
ment species by column densities of neutral hydrogen. 

Absorption lines from low-abundance singly-ionized 
species, including transitions of Ti II, Cr II, Ni II and 
Zn Il, are of particular importance because they are usually 
unsaturated (or only mildly saturated), allowing accurate 
column densities to be measured. For several reasons, 
most attention has so far been focused on transitions of 
Zn Iland Cr II. In the interstellar medium of the Galaxy, Zn 
is not highly depleted onto dust grains, suggesting that the 
gas-phase abundance of Zn indicates the true abundance 
of Zn. In contrast, in the interstellar medium of the Galaxy, 
Cr is highly depleted onto dust grains, suggesting that the 
gas-phase abundance ratio of Zn to Cr is an indicator of the 
presence or absence of dust. Hence a single measurement 
of Zn II and Cr II column densities can simultaneously 
provide information about heavy element abundances and 
dust content. 

At high redshifts (z ~ 3), Zn II and Cr II column 
densities of several dozen damped Lya absorption systems 
have so far been measured. Results of these measurements 
indicate that the mean heavy element abundances are 
~ 0.1 times solar values, witha dispersion of a factor of two 
or three about this value. (Heavy element abundances of 
high-redshift damped Lya absorption systems range from 
~ 0.01 times solar values to ~ 0.5 times solar values.) 
The Zn to Cr abundance ratios suggest the presence of 
modest amounts of dust, although it is not exactly clear 
what values the undepleted abundances should take on— 
especially of Zn. 

At low redshifts (z < 1.6), Zn II and Cr I column 
densities of only a few damped Lya absorption systems 
have so far been measured. It is especially striking 
that there is no pronounced trend for heavy element 
abundances to increase with decreasing redshift, and in 
particular no trend for heavy element abundances to 
approach solar values at redshifts z ~ 0, as would be 
expected under scenarios of ‘cosmic’ chemical evolution 
due to the conversion of gas into stars. It is not yet clear 
how to interpret these results. 


Relationship with galaxies 

The most important outstanding issue regarding the 
damped Lya absorption systems concerns their relation- 
ship with galaxies. Although the circumstantial evidence 
linking damped Lya absorption systems with galaxies is 
substantial, attempts to observationally establish a direct 
relationship between damped Lya absorption systems and 
galaxies have met with only limited success. Galaxies re- 
sponsible for a small number of damped Lya absorption 
systems have been identified, at both low and high red- 
shifts. But galaxies responsible for other damped Lya ab- 
sorption systems have eluded identification, some despite 
very substantial effort. So while it is known that at least 
some damped Lya absorption systems arise in galaxies, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


it is not known what range of properties (in terms, for 
example, of morphological type, luminosity, and surface 
brightness) are spanned by the absorbing galaxies, or even 
whether all damped Lya absorption systems arise in galax- 
ies. 

Part of the difficulty is that the high neutral hydrogen 
column densities of damped Lya absorption systems 
imply small impact parameters to the lines of sight, and 
it is difficult to identify faint galaxies at small angular 
separations to bright quasars. Recent advances in ADAPTIVE 
optics technology may finally allow progress in this area. 

Understanding the relationship between damped Lyaw 
absorption systems and galaxies is probably the key 
to interpreting the heavy element abundance results. 
Measurements of damped Lya absorption systems probe 
truly cosmic quantities in a way that measurements of 
few other classes of objects can do. The neutral hydrogen 
and heavy element content of the high-redshift universe— 
which is established on the basis of a uniform collection 
of measurements of damped Lya absorption systems— 
is far more completely and homogeneously determined 
than the neutral hydrogen and heavy element content of 
the nearby universe—which is established on the basis 
of a diverse collection of visible- and radio-wavelength 
observations of gas, stars, and H II regions. Establishing 
the relationship between damped Lya absorption systems 
and galaxies could well lead to surprises about where 
much of the neutral gas and heavy element content of 
galaxies reside. 


Bibliography 

Lanzetta K M, Wolfe A M and Turnshek D A 1995 The IUE 
survey for damped Lya and Lyman-limit absorption 
systems: evolution of the gaseous content of the 
universe Astrophys. J. 440 435 

Lanzetta K M, Wolfe A M, Turnshek D A, Lu L, McMahon 
R Gand Hazard C 1991 A new spectroscopic survey 
for damped Lya absorption lines from high-redshift 
galaxies Astrophys. J. 375 1 

Prochaska J X and Wolfe A M 2000 Metallicity evolution in 
the early universe Astrophys. J. 533 5 

Storrie-Lombardi L J, McMahon R G and Irwin M J 1996 
Evolution of neutral gas at high redshift: implications 
for the epoch of galaxy formation Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 283 79 

Wolfe A M, Turnshek D A, Smith H E and Cohen R D 1986 
Astrophys. J. Suppl. 61 249 


Kenneth M Lanzetta 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


The Lyman alpha forest is an absorption phenomenon seen 
in the spectra of high redshift QSOs and galaxies (figure 
1). It is the only direct observational evidence we have of 
the existence and properties of the general INTERGALACTIC 
MEDIUM, and, as we have reason to believe, of most of the 
baryonic matter contents of the universe. 

On its way to us the light of a bright, distant 
QSO passes through intervening intergalactic gas and 
through gas clouds associated with foreground galaxies. 
Absorption by the gas modifies the spectra of the 
background objects and imprints a record of the gas 
clouds’ physical and chemical states on the observed 
background QSO and galaxy spectra. The whole 
arrangement is reminiscent of a giant cosmic slide 
projector, where a QSO plays the role of the light bulb, 
and the intervening gas clouds are the slides, changing the 
colors of the light source by absorbing parts of the (white) 
spectrum. 

The name ‘Lyman a forest’ refers to the appearance 
of the optical QSO spectra, which show a forest of 
hundreds of sharp absorption lines, mostly from the 
neutral hydrogen (HI) Lyman a line, superimposed on the 
more smoothly varying QSO continuum (figure 2). Almost 
all the lines in the Lyman a forest correspond to the same 
atomic transition (which at 1215.67 A is in the ultraviolet 
wavelength region). The phenomenon was first observed 
in the optical waveband (~ 4000-9000 A) implying that the 
gas clouds causing the absorption are highly redshifted by 
the Hubble expansion. The absorption systems appear 
spread out into a ‘forest’ of lines because each line is 
redshifted by a different amount in proportion to the 
absorbing cloud’s distance from us. The stronger ones 
among the absorption systems do show further spectral 
signatures in addition to their Lya line: higher-order 
Lyman series lines begin to be detectable for absorption 
systems with Lya close to saturation. Clouds with H I 
column densities larger than N ~ 10!” cm™ start showing 
a discontinuity due to continuous absorption at a rest 
frame wavelength 912 A, beyond the limit of the Lyman 
series. These ‘Lyman limit systems’ occupy a column 
density regime where a gas cloud starts shielding itself 
against ionizing radiation from the outside. Clouds with 
even higher column densities (NV > 10! cm~?) exhibit 
the damping wings caused by the internal finite lifetime 
of the Lya transition. The gas in these ‘damped Lya’ 
systems (See LYMAN ALPHA ABSORPTION: THE DAMPED SYSTEMS) iS 
almost completely self-shielded and mostly neutral. Most 
absorption systems with N > 10'4° cm~? also show metal 
absorption lines (triply ionized carbon and silicon, and 
some other common elements and ionization stages). For 
that reason the higher column density systems are usually 
referred to as ‘metal’ or ‘heavy element’ systems. Here 
we are concerned only with the low column density gas, 
ie., those absorption systems where the Lya line is not 
saturated, which we will refer to as the Lyw forest proper. 
There definitely is an overlap between metal systems and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Lya forest systems in this restricted definition, but we 
have theoretical reasons to believe that there is a genuine 
dichotomy between intergalactic gas (represented by the 
Lya forest), even if partly polluted by metals, and the 
invariably metal-enriched higher column density systems, 
thought to be related to galaxies. 

Lya forest absorption systems have now been 
observed from REDSHIFT zero (with UV satellites) up to the 
highest redshifts at which background light sources (QSOs 
and galaxies) can still be found (currently z ~ 5-6). 


The Gunn-Peterson effect: where does the 
absorption come from? 

Lya forest absorption in a QSO spectrum was predicted 
and first detected by Gunn and Peterson (1965). The 
basic idea is as follows: going back in time an increasing 
fraction of the total baryonic mass of the universe must 
be in the form of gas. The absorption cross-section of 
the Lya line of neutral hydrogen is large enough that 
even if only a small fraction of the total mass of the 
universe were in the form of H I the redshifted Lyaw 
lines should completely absorb a part of the spectrum 
of any background light source. The absorption should 
essentially assume the shape of an absorption trough 
in a QSO spectrum, extending blueward from the Lyaw 
emission of the QSO. This particular absorption pattern is 
referred to in the literature as the ‘Gunn-Peterson effect’. 
Gunn and Peterson did detect such a trough but the light 
of the QSO was not completely absorbed and there was 
some residual light left in the spectral region in question. 
The relative weakness of the absorption could mean two 
things: (a) there is little hydrogen left in intergalactic space 
and by the time the Lya forest is observed most of the 
matter has already condensed into galaxies. Or (b) most 
of the hydrogen is notin neutral form, where it can produce 
Lye absorption, but is fully ionized. 

QSO surveys (See QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: SURVEYS) later 
showed that the second possibility is more important: 
the combined ionizing radiation output from all known 
QSOs at high redshift amounts to a UV radiation field 
probably strong enough to keep most of the baryonic 
matter in the universe highly ionized—i.e., if the baryons 
are predominantly in the form of a more or less 
homogeneously distributed gas. 

This conclusion is based on the assumption that 
the gas is in approximate photoionization equilibrium 
with the cosmic UV background field, ie., the rate of 
recombinations of electrons with protons to form neutral 
hydrogen balances the rate of ionizations from the ground 
state of HI, 

nenpa(T) = nl. (1) 


Here I is the rate of photoionizations per neutral hydrogen 
atom, caused by the hydrogen-ionizing portion of the UV 
background field. The quantities ne, ny; and np refer to the 
number densities of electrons, neutral hydrogen atoms, 
and protons (= ionized hydrogen), respectively. 

Later observations of QSOs with higher spectral 
resolution (< a few hundred km s7!) showed that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


g : 
AEA WRN ern i 


Figure 1. High resolution spectrum of the Lya forest part of a redshift 3.63 QSO, taken with the HIRES spectrograph on the Keck 10 m 
telescope in Hawaii. The plot shows the flux of the QSO in arbitrary units versus the observed wavelength in units of Angstroms. The 
noise level can be judged from the longer wavelength wing of the broad, intrinsic Lya emission line of the QSO (near 5650 A). All of 
the ragged features are high redshift absorption lines. Most of the lines between the QSO’s Lyw and Lyf emission lines (the humps at 
5650 and 4750 A) are due to Lya absorption by intervening gas. The actual rate of incidence of absorbers decreases towards shorter 
wavelengths (lower redshifts). Nevertheless, the line density increases to the blue because higher order absorption lines from the 
Lyman series appear and overlap randomly with Lya lines of systems at lower redshift. 


2000 3000 4000 


1000 


Oo 


Pitot pS pak Sis Whe Ge ep a jane pe cE hve se . . rim 
5160 5165 5170 5175 5180 5185 5190 


Q1422+231A (Flux) [mul] 


Figure 2. Detailed section of the previous spectrum. The image 
shows a number of absorption lines all corresponding to the 
neutral hydrogen (H I) Lya 1215.67 A transition. Lines close to 
saturation (= zero flux in the line center) have neutral hydrogen 
column density typically around N ~ 10'? cm-?, 
corresponding to a gas density enhanced by roughly an order of 
magnitude with respect to the mean density of the universe. The 
mean redshift of the stretch shown is z = 3.248. The spectral 
region extends over 3480 km s~!. For a flat 2 = 1 universe this 
corresponds to a spatial extent of approximately 9.6 h~! Mpc 
along the line-of-sight. 


what appeared as a smooth absorption ‘trough’ to 
earlier observers is in fact a ragged ‘forest’ of hundreds 
of individual absorption lines. In other words, the 
distribution of neutral hydrogen in the universe is 
inhomogeneous on scales down to the width of a typical 
Lya line (see below). The degree of clumpiness appears 
magnified by the absorption pattern in the QSO spectra, 
because the residual (= unabsorbed) portion of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


QSO’s flux J « e~* depends exponentially on the Lyaw 
optical depth t, which itself depends almost quadratically 
on the gas density (or the electron density n,; for a 
highly ionized gas at constant temperature). Thus small 
density fluctuations produce enhanced fluctuations in the 
optical depth. The Lya forest absorption is observed 
in velocity space, and a convergent velocity field (e.g., 
a collapsing gas cloud) could also produce absorption 
‘lines’. Caustics in velocity space may form if several gas 
volume elements are moving at the same velocity relative 
to the observer. Indeed, if Lya clouds are produced by 
gravitational collapse, both overdense regions and infall 
should contribute to an absorption line. 

Spectroscopy of the Ly line is an incredibly sensitive 
method to detect baryonic matter at any redshift. The 
photoionization cross section of neutral hydrogen is so 
large that an extremely tenuous gas at or below the 
mean density of the universe can be detected easily 
in absorption. The method of choice for studying the 
Lya forest is optical high resolution spectroscopy, with a 
spectral resolution Ai./2 > 30 000 sufficient to resolve Lya 
lines thermally broadened by the photoionization heating 
from the UV background. With 8 m class telescopes, a 
spectrum of a QSO suitable for further analysis of the Lya 
forest absorption can be obtained within a few hours of 
observing time. 


Basic observational properties of Lya absorbers 

Early models of Lya absorption systems envisaged the 
absorption lines as arising from discrete ‘clouds’ of gas 
in intergalactic space. The clouds would be analoguous to 
galaxies, but the gas densities appeared too tenuous and 
too highly ionized to give rise to star formation. Moreover, 
the average clustering of the lines in velocity space was 
too weak for the clouds to be related directly to galaxies. 
Thus the gas giving rise to Lya absorption systems came 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to be referred to as ‘Lya clouds’ or ‘intergalactic clouds’, 
to distinguish it from gas associated with galaxies. It it 
is worth keeping in mind that even the term ‘cloud’ does 
already imply a prejudice as to the spatial distribution of 
the gas. 

Before the advent of cosmogonies dominated by 
DARK MATTER (Which could have supplied the gravitational 
attraction necessary to hold together the gas), it was 
thought more likely that the intergalactic clouds would 
be confined by the pressure of an even hotter and more 
tenuous intercloud medium. In this model, a cloud 
would be homogeneous, static or slowly expanding and, 
at least for some of its lifetime, in thermal photoionization 
equilibrium with the UV background. 

Such an object has a simple observational signature in 
absorption. With only the intrinsic atomic line width of the 
Lye transition and purely thermal motions contributing 
to the absorption line broadening, an individual line 
profile consists of a convolution of a Lorentzian resonance 
curve and a Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution. 
The result is a so-called Voigt profile. Each such profile 
is fully specified by only 3 parameters: its position 
in velocity space (redshift), its column density (i.e. the 
number of neutral hydrogen atoms per unit area), and its 
line width (traditionally expressed in terms of the Doppler 
parameter b = /20, where o is the standard deviation 
of the Maxwellian velocity distribution). The Lya forest 
as a whole can then be characterized in terms of the 
distribution functions of these three quantities. 


Column densities 

Let us define d\’/dN as the number of absorption lines, 
dN, per unit redshift with an HI column density between 
N and N + dN. This function tells us how likely it is for 
our line-of-sight to a background QSO to intersect a cloud 
with a given HI column density N. Observationally, for 
HI column densities N spanning the amazing range from 
10’? to 107 cm~ the distribution was found to be well- 
parametrized by a single power law in column density, 


ay «x N71, 


an (2) 


To give an idea of the normalization, there are hundreds 
of unsaturated lines (NV < 10'*° cm~’) per unit redshift 
but, typically, less than one damped Lya system (N > 
107! cm~?). For comparison, a QSO spectrum at redshift 
3 covers Az ~ 0.6 of the Lya forest (between the QSO 
redshift and the redshift corresponding to the onset of the 
Ly8 series). 


The distribution of absorption systems in velocity space 

We may consider two limiting cases. (a) The distribution 
of absorbers over very large (Gigaparsec) scales; this is 
is equivalent to a distribution in time or redshift, as the 
universe changes considerably during the time it takes a 
light ray to traverse a Gigaparsec. (b) The distribution 
on small (Megaparsec) scales; here we expect local 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


astrophysics (gravity, galactic outflows, nearby sources of 
ionizing radiation) to affect the clustering of the lines in 
velocity space. 

(a) The evolution of the number of absorption lines V with 
time or redshift z (and with a column density above a 
certain threshold) traditionally has been approximated by 
a power-law in (1 + z), 


ast ax (1+z)”. (3) 
dz 

For a universe where Lya clouds are non-evolving, 0 < 
y < 1/2, depending on the cosmological model. With 
the observational baseline now extending from the local 
universe out to redshift five it has become clear that y is 
not constant with time. In the local universe (z ~ 0) up to 
redshift ~ 1.5, y is consistent with the above no-evolution 
values. However, beyond redshift z ~ 1.5 there is a sharp 
increase in the number of absorption lines, with y rising 
up toa value y ~ 5 by redshift z ~ 4. 

There is a general trend for the number of absorption 
lines to increase with redshift, but in any individual QSO 
spectrum there is a relative lack of absorption systems close 
to the redshift of the QSO. This so-called ‘proximity effect’ 
has been ascribed to the ionizing radiation produced by the 
QSO itself, which reduces the neutral hydrogen fraction for 
gas close to the QSO. The effect can be used to measure the 
strength of the ionizing background radiation: consider a 
point at a distance from the QSO, where the number of Lya 
systems has declined by half as compared to the average 
line density in the Lya forest. At this point the intensity of 
ionizing radiation from the QSO must equal the intensity 
of the general UV background. Knowing the luminosity of 
the QSO we can compute the flux at that point, and thus, 
the intensity of the ionizing background. This method, 
though fraught with many uncertainties, has yielded the 
first measurement of the ionizing UV background. 


(b) The small-scale distribution of absorption lines in 
velocity space along the line-of-sight, often referred to 
as ‘clustering’, has yielded only limited information 
about the nature of the Lya forest systems. If the 
clustering is measured with the same methods used 
for galaxy surveys, namely by applying the two-point- 
correlation function to discrete absorption lines, there is 
a significant signal only for the highest column density 
(N > 10'° cm~*) systems. These stronger absorption lines 
are invariably accompanied by absorption from heavier 
elements (carbon, silicon, oxygen, iron in various stages 
of ionization), so the high column density clouds must 
in some way be more closely associated with galaxies as 
the production sites of the metals. The observed stronger 
clustering of this gas may arise when gas clouds move in 
a galactic gravitational potential well, or they may just 
reflect stellar ejecta in the interstellar medium of those 
galaxies. However, most of the Lya forest consists of 
weaker lines, which do not cluster along the line-of-sight 
appreciably. Gas densities inferred for the weaker lines 
are likely to be much lower than for galaxies. If gravity is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the main structure forming agent it is not very surprising 
that lower density regions are clustered more weakly. 

Searches for voids in the Lya forest similar to those 
seen in the spatial distribution of galaxies have been 
equally unsuccessful, implying again that most Lya 
absorption systems are more homogeneously distributed 
in space than galaxies. 


Absorption line widths 

The width of an absorption line is a measure of the 
total velocity distribution in the gas. Both microscopic 
(thermal motion) and macroscopic processes (turbulence, 
bulk flows, broadening of an extended object by the 
Hubble expansion) may contribute to the line profile. 
Without an a priori theory about line formation the total 
width b of the line profile can only be used as an upper 
limit to the width due to any individual process. As an 
example, the Doppler parameter of a thermally broadened 
absorption line with an additional Gaussian contribution 
describing turbulence in the gas is given exactly by 


b=/——+ be (4) 


where T is the temperature of the gas, k is Boltzmann’s 
constant, m is the mass of the hydrogen atom, and Dy is 
the turbulent contribution to the Doppler parameter. 

At redshift ~ 3 observations show the Doppler 
parameters b to be distributed according to a Gaussian 
with a mean b between 25 and 30 km s“!, and a cutoff bout 


below about 19 km s“!, ie., 
dn (b — by? 
nae & exp (= for b = Deut (5) 
= 0 for b < beu, (6) 


This analytic relation gives a good description of the 
actual distribution. Doppler parameters below the cutoff 
are very rare, but there appears to be a weak non-Gaussian 
tail towards larger Doppler parameters. The parameters 
of the distribution quoted vary somewhat among different 
researchers, but there is agreement in that the line widths 
at higher redshifts (3.5-4.5) are lower by perhaps 25% . 

If the broadening were purely thermal then typical 
b values as discussed above would correspond to upper 
limits on the gas temperature T < 3-5 x 10? K. 


Size, density, and ionization state of Lya clouds 

Absorption line studies suffer from the limitation that in 
general only one-dimensional information along the line- 
of-sight is available. From the absorption line itself we 
measure the temperature and column density of the gas, 
and from observations of the QSO luminosity function 
we can compute an estimate of the ionizing background 
radiation, but to obtain the density and the ionized fraction 
of the gas an additional independent estimate of the size 
of the absorbing gas cloud is needed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Observations of close lines-of-sight to groups of QSOs 
or to multiple images of gravitationally lensed QSOs can 
restore to some degree the missing second dimension 
and provide a measurement of the cloud sizes, at least 
as projected in the plane of the sky. Imagine that we 
had two lines of sight with a known separation. For 
Lya ‘clouds’ with a given size, some of the clouds will 
intersect both lines-of-sight, others only one of them. Ina 
statistical sense, the typical size of Lyaw forest absorbers can 
be determined from the numbers of ‘hits’ and ‘misses’, i.e., 
from knowing how often an absorption system seen in one 
of the lines-of-sight also appears in the second one. Such 
estimates have yielded astonishingly large transverse sizes 
on the order of 0.1-1 Mpc proper separation. These sizes 
enable us to compute rough estimates of the ionization 
fraction and density of the gas. 

Assuming that the neutral fraction x of hydrogen is 
determined by photoionization equilibrium (cf equation 
(1)), we have 


T —0.35 I —0.5 
= 3.9 x 1076 
a ee (sax) (sax) 


N 0.5 D -0.5 
ole i eae 7 
. (ar) €. =) / 


where T is the gas temperature in K, / is the intensity of 
the ionizing UV background in units of ergs Hz“! sr! s~1 
cm’, N the H I column density in cm~, and D the 
thickness of the cloud (or the path length of our line of 
sight through it). 

Likewise, the total number density of the gas (the 
number of protons per cm’) is given by 


: ; ; T 0.35 1 \8 
n=x  ND~ =8.3 x 10 (555) (sax) 


N 0.5 D —0.5 
« (aa) (rm) =) 


This is about four orders of magnitude less dense than 
the gas in the disk of our Galaxy. Even if the clouds 
are not spherical but flattened (so they would appear 
more extended across than along the line-of-sight) the 
conclusion is inescapable that the gas is highly ionized 
and the density in the typical cloud is within a factor of a 
few from the mean density of the universe, far less than 
the average density in a galaxy. 


The intergalactic medium as a cosmic fluid 

So far we have used only simple astrophysical arguments 
to infer the basic physical properties of the Lyw absorbers, 
without explicit reference to a model of structure 
formation. The decomposition into Voigt profiles had 
originally been justified by the assumption that Lya 
absorption systems are discrete, pressure-confined gas 
clouds in hydrostatic, thermal and ionization equilibrium, 
floating in intergalactic space. This picture provided 
an analytically tractable model which made a host of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observationally testable predictions, several of which 
unfortunately contradicted the observational evidence. 
For example, the large range in column densities observed, 
and the evolution of the number of absorption systems 
with redshift are difficult to reproduce in that model. 
Moreover, observations of the spectral shape of the cosmic 
microwave background radiation with the COBE satellite 
have provided arguments against the existence of a hot 
intercloud medium necessary to provide the confinement 
pressure for the Lyw clouds. 

The pressure-confinement model finally fell from 
grace because of its lack of a convincing theory of the 
formation of the cloudlets, and the rise (in popularity) 
of structure formation cosmogonies dominated by the 
presence of large amounts of weakly interacting dark 
matter. The gravitational collapse of dark matter would 
have trapped large amounts of baryonic gas as well. The 
most popular, cold dark matter (CDM) structure formation 
scenario predicts a large abundance of collapsed CDM 
halos with individual masses too small to form stars and 
turn into galaxies. Warm photoionized intergalactic gas 
sinks into these ‘mini’-halos or accretes onto dark matter 
filaments and sheets. The thermal gas pressure prevents 
the gas from further collapse; relatively stable gaseous 
configurations are formed. These structures are visible 
only in absorption since there are no stars which could 
produce any light. 

A breakthrough in cosmology occured in the early 
1990s when hydrodynamic cosmological simulations 
became available. As far as the comparison with data 
is concerned the hydrodynamics simulations represent 
an advance over pure dark matter (so-called N-body) 
simulations, as they attempt to directly predict observable 
astrophysical quantities. The hydro-codes include, in 
a simplified way, gas dynamics, elementary radiative 
processes, heating and cooling, and some schematic stellar 
feedback, all of which are essential to an understanding of 
the formation of structure for ordinary (baryonic) matter 
like galaxies, stars and intergalactic gas clouds. The 
ultimate hope of the hydro-simulations is to reproduce 
realistic galaxies, but at the current level of detail and 
spatial resolution possible the intergalactic medium with 
its simple physics is perhaps the most promising target for 
quantitative modelling. 


The cosmic web 

If the underlying cosmological picture (a universe 
dominated by cold dark matter) is correct, then the hydro- 
simulations are telling us that the spatial distribution and 
physical state of the Lyaw forest gas is more complex than 
previously thought. The gas is arranged in filaments 
and sheets, in what has been called the ‘cosmic web’, 
closely tracing the dark matter distribution on large scales 
(figure 3). Low column density absorption systems (N < 
10'* cm~*) are associated with sheet-like structures or 
pancakes of gas (length scale ~ a few hundred kpc to 
1 Mpc proper). The gas accretes through weak shocks 
(developing a double humped temperature profile), and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Cosmological hydro-simulation: projection of the 
baryonic density distribution in a simulated box at z = 3 (same 
spatial extent as for figure 2) showing the ‘cosmic web’ 
filamentary structure of the Lyw forest (image courtesy Michael 
Norman, University of Illinois). 


settles in a dense, central cooling layer, presumably to 
form stars in some of the denser regions. At the lowest 
column densities gas remains unshocked and just bounces 
back because of the hydrostatic pressure. The gas is 
partly confined by dark matter gravity and partly by ram- 
pressure. Higher column density clouds arise in more 
filamentary structures, with column density contours of 
N ~ 10'4 cm™ extending continuously and at relatively 
constant thickness (~ 40-100 kpc proper) over Mpc 
distances. With increasing column density the absorber 
geometry becomes rounder; column density contours at 
N = 10'%cm~ invariably are spherical. Such absorbers 
more closely correspond to the aforementioned minihalos; 
there the enclosed gas column is high enough to make the 
absorption system appear as a Lyman limit or damped Lya 
system. Looking at the higher column density, optically 
thick gas on scales of several Mpc one gets a somewhat 
different impression of chains of mini- or larger halos, 
lining up like pearls on a string, quite similar to the 
structure seen in N-body simulations of the dark matter 
distribution. To produce as much absorption as observed, 
a large fraction of all baryons (80-90%) is required to reside 
in the low column density Lya forest, mostly in the column 
density range 104 < N < 10° cm™. 

In general this theoretical picture very well repro- 
duces the observational properties mentioned earlier. The 
column density distribution is in excellent agreement, as 
are the large transverse sizes measured in projection, and 
the clustering along the line-of-sight. In this model the 
rapid evolution of the number of the absorption systems 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with redshift is largely a consequence of the expansion of 
the gas with the Hubble flow. The statistical distribution 
of the flux level J = e~ in the Lya forest is extremely well 
matched by these models, as can be seen from a compar- 
ison of the observed distribution with one from a simu- 
lated ACDM universe (figure 4). The spatial correlations 
as evident from the flux power-spectrum are equally well 
reproduced. The most complex piece of observational in- 
formation, the distribution of Doppler parameters is quali- 
tatively understood, but as it depends ona variety of initial 
conditions (epoch of reionization, baryonic density of the 
universe, cosmological model) and possible stellar energy 
feedback, several of these parameters need to be tuned 
carefully to get acceptable quantitative agreement. 

Perhaps most importantly, the successes of the hydro- 
models show that the majority of the Lya absorbers are 
consistent with being low density condensations formed 
by gravitational collapse of the intergalactic medium. In 
this picture the gas seen as Lya forest is the original 
reservoir of matter from which galaxies are condensing. 

Conversely, the success in reproducing the observa- 
tions of the Lyaw forest provides perhaps the best obser- 
vational evidence for hierarchical structure formation we 
have to date. 


Cosmology with the Lya forest 
Most of the intergalactic gas observed at high redshift 
has experienced only mild gravitational collapse. A 
typical region of space has undergone little processing 
other than heating by photoionization and compression, 
in competition with adiabatic cooling by the Hubble 
expansion. It turns out that the weaker, unsaturated 
absorption lines (NV < 10'* cm7’) are still on or near 
the linear regime of gravitational collapse. Even for 
lines close to saturation the overdensities with respect 
to the mean density of the universe are less than about 
a factor 6 ~ 10-15. On spatial scales on the order of 
one Mpc and larger where the thermal pressure of the 
gas is not important the intergalactic medium traces the 
underlying mass distribution much more closely than the 
stellar light of galaxies observed in emission. This fact 
and the simple astrophysics involved should make the 
intergalactic medium an ideal cosmological laboratory. 
Recently there have been various attempts at tapping 
the cosmological potential of the Lya forest. The link 
between the observable appearance of the Lya forest 
and the various cosmological input parameters can be 
described approximately by the Gunn-—Peterson relation 
for the H I optical depth t, generalized to include an 
inhomogenous density and velocity field. As long as the 
gas is highly ionized and in photoionization equilibrium 
(not necessarily thermal equilibrium), and the gas is 
unshocked, the optical depth for Lya absorption at redshift 
z is proportional to 


T(z) x 


Soe” ( H(0) ee 
r hso H(z) 


2 a P AU pec -1 
x (2) (1 +z) (: + ae (9) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This equation relates the optical depth to the mean 
baryonic density (in gas) in units of the critical density, 
Q,, the Hubble constant at redshift z, H(z), the average 
gas temperature 7, the proper baryon density p, the 
photoionization rate [, and the gradient of the local 
peculiar velocity dv,../dr along the line-of-sight. A 
further convolution with a Voigt profile is necessary to 
include the proper thermal velocity broadening. The 
exponent a (a = 2 for an isothermal gas) takes account 
of the fact that in denser regions of the universe the 
gas is typically warmer because it is more effectively 
heated by photoionization, but a also depends on the 
reionization history of the gas and the amount of adiabatic 
expansion/compression. Values of w ~ 1.6-1.8 are given 
in the literature. 

To turn this relation into a complete description of 
the observed Lya forest, cosmology has to predict the 
cosmic density and velocity fields, the fraction of the 
closure density in the form of gas, the equation of state 
of the intergalactic medium, and the ionizing radiation 
field. Measuring cosmological parameters then boils 
down to creating Lya forest spectra according to a given 
cosmological prescription, and iterating with varying 
input parameters until good agreement between observed 
and predicted properties is obtained. At the time of writing 
these techniques are just beginning to be explored, but it 
has become obvious that there are at least three main areas 
to benefit from such studies. 

From equation (9) the optical depth is directly 
proportional to the ratio (Q,/3,)*/T'. In other words, a 
higher density produces stronger absorption, but a higher 
photoionization rate reduces the neutral fraction of the gas 
and decreases the absorption. With a suitable hypothesis 
for or an independent measurement of the photoionization 
rate I (e.g. estimating the density of ionizing photons from 
QSO surveys) the baryon density 2) of the universe may 
be constrained. 

The ‘equation of state’ of the intergalactic medium, 
as the statistical distribution of the gas volume elements 
in temperature-density (T — e) space has become known, 
has a more complex and subtle influence on the optical 
depth distribution: a change in the slope dT/dp changes 
the value of the temperature of a given volume element 
and thus the recombination coefficient a(T), the neutral 
fraction and column density, and the absorption line 
width. It appears that the distribution of the Lya forest 
lines in Doppler parameter—column density (b — N) space 
is a distorted map of the density—temperature relation, and 
can be used to constrain the latter. T(o), in turn, contains 
information on the epoch of reionization and reheating 
and on the sources of ionizing radiation. 

Finally, it is clear that the fluctuation properties 
(amplitude, spatial correlation) of the density p and 
peculiar velocity vpec fields propagate through to the 
optical depth (cf equation (9)). At least in the regime 
where the Lya lines are strong enough to be detected but 
not yet too strong to be saturated, the spectra provide a 
record of the initial conditions of gravitational structure 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T Li T T T T 
observed 
ACDM: °seeecacheted sence es 
co | 4 
o 
c 
2 
a 35<z< 45 
eet + 25<2< 35 4 
2S 
0 15<z<2.5 
oO 
= a8 
cI 
a 
Ext 4 
30° 
pas ae 
fo} 
° 


) 0.2 0.4 


0.6 0.8 1 


flux decrement D = 1 — flux 


Figure 4. Observed and simulated statistical distributions of the absorbed flux level in the Lya forest, for three different mean 
redshifts. The solid lines show the distribution for a sample of QSOs observed with the Keck telescope, the dotted lines are from a 
simulation of a ACDM universe (performed by Renyue Cen et al at Princeton University). The good agreement in the shape of the 
distributions lends observational support to the Lya forest being a by-product of hierarchical structure formation. 


formation. In principle the Lya forest spectra can be 
inverted to provide a measurement of the power spectrum 
shape and amplitude of the initial fluctuations. 


The helium Lya forest 

We conclude with a glance at one of the most intriguing 
new topics of research, the Lyaw forest absorption due 
to singly ionized helium (He II). The He II forest has 
only recently become acessible as the transition is in 
the far ultraviolet (304 A) and even if redshifted out to 
z ~ 3 still needs to be observed with a UV spectrograph 
from space. In addition, it is very difficult to find a 
QSO with its UV continuum intact, as the Lyman limit 
continuum absorption from higher redshift systems tends 
to obliterate the far UV in most QSOs. Nevertheless, there 
are potentially big scientific rewards to be gained: (1) since 
He II and H I have different ionization potentials, looking 
at the ratio of the column densities from their respective 
Lya forests one can constrain the shape of the UV spectrum 
ionizing the two species. (2) Helium and hydrogen atomic 
masses differ sufficiently that a comparison of the Doppler 
parameters of both can measure the amount of non- 
thermal line broadening. (3) The first observations of 
He II forests are showing that He II ionization appears 
to be patchy and not fully developed by redshift 3-4. This 
observation could help us to understand how and when 
the universe was first ionized. 

There are many other topics related to the rapidly 
growing field of QSO absorption lines for which we refer 
the interested reader to the literature given below (see also 
QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: INTERVENING ABSORPTION LINES; INTRINSIC 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


AGN ABSORPTION LINES). These include metal absorption 
systems in general, and the correspondence between 
absorption systems and various galactic or interstellar 
environments, as seen in local galaxies. Damped Lya 
systems, the absorbers most relevant to high redshift 
galaxy formation, are treated in the separate article LYMAN 
ALPHA ABSORPTION: THE DAMPED SYSTEMS. 


Bibliography 
Reviews of the subject at a level accessible to students, and 
detailed references to the literature are given in 


Weymann R J, Carswell R F and Smith M G 1981 
Absorption lines in the spectra of quasistellar objects 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 19 41 

Rauch M 1998 The Lyman Alpha Forest in the spectra of 
QSOs Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 267 


The scientific literature on the subject begins with the first 
measurement of the Gunn-—Peterson effect, published as 


Gunn J E and Peterson B A 1965 On the density of neutral 
hydrogen in intergalactic space Astrophys. J. 142 1633 


A number of conference proceedings give very useful 
overviews at a somewhat more technical level than the 
reviews; they are indispensible as guides to the many 
topics related to QSO absorption lines which could not 
be treated here: 


Blades J C, Turnshek D A and Norman C (eds) 1988 
QSO Absorption Lines: Probing the Universe (Proc. QSO 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyman Alpha Forest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Absorption Line Meeting, Baltimore 1987) (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Meylan G (ed) 1995 QSO Absorption Lines (Proc. ESO 
Workshop, November 21-24, 1994) (Berlin: Springer) 

Petitjean P and Charlot S 1997 Structure and Evolution of the 
Intergalactic Medium from QSO Absorption Lines (Proc. 
13th IAP Astrophysics Colloquium) (Paris: Editions 
Frontiéres) 


Recent work on cosmological applications of the Lya forest 
is discussed in articles by Weinberg et al, Hui, Haehnelt and 
Nusser in 


Banday A J, Sheth R K and Da Costa L N (eds) 1999 
Evolution of Large Scale Structure from Recombination to 
Garching (Proc. MPA-Garching Cosmology Conference) 
(Enschede: PrintPartners Ipskamp) 


Michael Rauch 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lynx 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lynx 


(the Lynx; abbrev. Lyn, gen. Lyncis; area 545 sq. deg.) 
A northern constellation which lies between Ursa Major 
and Auriga, and culminates at midnight in late January. 
It was introduced by the astronomer Johannes Hevelius 
(1611-87) of Danzig (Gdansk), who included it in his 
atlas Firmamentum Sobiescianum sive Uranographia of 1687. 
An inconspicuous constellation, Hevelius (who distrusted 
telescopic sights for stellar observations) called it Lynx 
because, he wrote, one would have to be lynx-eyed to see it! 

The brightest stars in Lynx are a Lyncis, magnitude 
3.1, 38 Lyncis, a binary with bluish-white (A3 and A4) 
components, magnitudes 3.9 and 6.6, separation 2.7”, the 
latter of which has an unseen companion, and HR 3579, 
magnitude 4.0. Another interesting multiple star system 
is 12 Lyncis, which consists of a close pair of bluish-white 
(A2) components, magnitudes 5.4 and 6.0, separation 1.7”, 
period about 700 years, and a third component, magnitude 
7.1, separation 8”. Other interesting objects include NGC 
2419, a tenth-magnitude globular cluster remarkable for its 
remoteness from the halo of globular clusters surrounding 
the Galaxy (its being further away than the Magellanic 
Clouds), and NGC 2683, a tenth-magnitude spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyot, Bernard Ferdinand (1897-1952) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lyot, Bernard Ferdinand (1897-1952) 


Astronomer, born in Paris, worked at the Paris Obser- 
vatory at Meudon, invented the coronagraph, a device 
that creates an artificial eclipse in a telescope and allows 
the Sun’s corona to be observed at any time. With it he 
recorded the spectrum of the corona in new detail, and the 
first time-lapse pictures of solar prominences. Invented 
the Lyot filter, a birefringent interference filter made of al- 
ternating layers of polaroid and calcite plates. With a pho- 
toelectric polarimeter of unprecedented accuracy, he also 
pioneered the astronomical study of the polarization of 
light reflected from the surface of the Moon and of the 
planets, finding that the lunar surface behaves like vol- 
canic dust and that Mars has sandstorms. Lyot’s name is 
commemorated in the Télescope National Bernard Lyot of the 
Pic du Midi Observatory in the Pyrenees. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyra 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lyra 


(the Lyre; abbrev. Lyr, gen. Lyrae; area 286 sq. deg.) 
Anorthern constellation which lies between Hercules and 
Cygnus, and culminates at midnight in early July. It is an 
ancient constellation pattern, which was associated with 
an eagle or vulture in the Indian subcontinent and Arab 
countries, and with the mythical lyre invented by Hermes 
and given by Apollo to Orpheus in ancient Greece. Its 
brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) 
in the Almagest. 

A small but conspicuous constellation, Lyra is easily 
recognized by virtue of a Lyrae (Vega), which at 
magnitude 0.0 is the fifth brightest star in the sky and 
from northern temperate latitudes is almost immediately 
overhead on summer evenings, when together with 
a Aquilae (Altair) and a Cygni (Deneb) it makes up the 
asterism of the Summer Triangle. Other bright stars 
include y Lyrae (Sulafat), magnitude 3.3, and 6 Lyrae 
(Sheliak), a multiple system consisting of an eclipsing 
binary (range 3.25-4.36, period 12.91 days) and two 
widely separated fainter stars, magnitudes 7.2 and 9.9v, 
separations 46” and 86”, the brighter component of which 
also has an unseen companion. There are no other 
stars brighter than fourth magnitude. Other interesting 
stars include « Lyrae, the so-called ‘Double Double’, 
which consists of two close binaries, ¢!, with bluish- 
white (A4 and F1) components, magnitudes 5.1 and 6.0, 
separation 2.5”, and «7, also with bluish-white (A8 and 
FO) components, magnitudes 5.1 and 5.4, separation 2.3”, 
themselves separated by 209”, and RR Lyrae, the brightest 
known member of a class of pulsating variables (range 
7.06-8.12, period 0.57 day). 

Other interesting objects in Lyra include M57 (NGC 
6720, the Ring Nebula), a ninth-magnitude planetary 
nebula, and M56 (NGC 6779), an eighth-magnitude 
globular cluster. 

The Lyrid meteor shower (sometimes called the April 
Lyrids to distinguish it from a lesser shower that occurs in 
June) appears to radiate from a point to the south-west of 
Vega. 


See also: Epsilon Lyrae, Lyrids, Ring Nebula, RR Lyrae 
stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Lyrids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lyrids 


A meteor shower that takes place in April, sometimes 
known as the April Lyrids. The radiant lies in the 
constellation Lyra, close to the border with Hercules, 
near the star Vega. There are occasional outbursts, most 
recently in 1982, where the usual peak zenithal hourly 
rate of 10-15 increases to 100 or more. The parent comet, 
C/1861 G1 Thatcher, has the longest period (415 years) of 
any comet known to be associated with a meteor shower. 
Its high orbital inclination of 80° means that the meteor 
stream is little affected by planetary perturbations, and 
Lyrid activity therefore shows a long-term constancy. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mastlin, Michael (1550-1631) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mastlin, Michael (1550-1631) 


Born in Géppingen, Germany, taught by, and an assistant 
to, PETER APIAN, became professor of astronomy at Tubingen, 
where he taught the Copernican as well as the Ptolemaic 
system. He taught KEPLER, and helped him to publish his 
first work, Mysterium Cosmographicum (1596). He made 
his own astronomical instruments. He was one of the 
first three or four astronomers to see in Cassiopeia what 
is now called tycHo’s supernova, the new star of 1572. He 
determined that it had no motion over the night by holding 
a thread between two stars, with the nova on the same line, 
and was not therefore a comet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mobius, August Ferdinand (1790-1868) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mobius, August Ferdinand 
(1790-1868) 


Mathematician, born in Schulpforta, Saxony (now 
Germany), studied astronomy under Gauss, and wrote 
his doctoral thesis on ‘The occultation of fixed stars by 
planets’. Became professor of astronomy at Leipzig, 
rebuilt its observatory, and wrote on astronomy and 
celestial mechanics, this work being overshadowed by 
his imaginative mathematical work on mapmaking and 
analytical geometry (eponymous mathematical items 
include a M6bius net, a Mobius function, and the one- 
sided surface called the Mobius strip). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Madler, Johann Heinrich von (1794-1874) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Madler, Johann Heinrich von 
(1794-1874) 


German astronomer, observed the Moon and drew with 
WILHELM BEER a map of the Moon (1837). Became director 
of the Dorpat Observatory (Estonia). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mégantic Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Megantic Astronomical Observatory 


The Mont Mégantic Observatory is operated by the 
Université de Montréal. It is located 250 km east of 
Montreal, on the summit of the highest mountain in 
Quebec, at an altitude of 1111 m. Its 1.6 m diameter 
Ritchey—Chrétien telescope is used for observations at 
visible and near-infrared wavelengths. 

The telescope is used for imaging, spectroscopy 
and polarimetry at visible wavelengths. An infrared 
camera is also available, though it is often ‘borrowed’ by 
astronomers who observe with the CANADA-FRANCE-HAWAII 
TELESCOPE. There is also a meteorological station on the site. 

For further information see 
http://www.astro.umontreal.ca/omm/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M1 


M1 is the famous CRAB NEBULA in Taurus, one of the most 
celebrated objects in the sky, the remains of a supernova 
seen to explode in ap 1054. Messier stumbled across it in 
1758 while following a comet that passed through Taurus; 
he described the nebula as ‘elongated like the flame of 
a candle’. However, it had already been discovered by 
an English astronomer, John Bevis, in 1731. M1 lies just 
over a degree northwest of Zeta Tauri and is an eighth- 
magnitude patch measuring about 8 by 6 arc minutes in 
apparent size; its true dimensions are about 11 by 7.5 light- 
years. Its popular name comes from a description by Lord 
Rosse, who observed filaments extending from it like the 
pincers of a crab. At its center is a sixteenth-magnitude 
neutron star, the Crab pulsar; this is the compressed core 
of the star that exploded. M1 lies about 6500 light-years 
away. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M10 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M10 


M10 is a globular cluster in the constellation Ophiuchus 
(the star 30 Ophiuchi is just 1 degree to the east-southeast). 
It was discovered by Messier who did not resolve any stars 
because itis fairly compressed. It has a diameter of 70 light- 
years but its bright core is only half that size. Its visual 
brighness is 6.7 mag and it displays a slight flattening 
(ellipticity E1). The distance to the Sun is about 13400 
light-years (with some sources quoting values up to 16 300 
light-years). 

M10 was investigated for variable stars by Baade but 
only contains three to four of them and has hence not been 
investigated in great detail by astronomers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M100 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M100 


M100 is one of the largest spiral galaxies in the Virgo 
Cluster, its true size being similar to that of the Andromeda 
Galaxy, M31. It lies in Coma Berenices, completing a 
triangle around the star 6 Comae Berenices with M98 and 
M99, all of which were discovered by Mechain on the same 
fruitful night in March 1781. Although M100 is cataloged 
as of ninth magnitude, roughly twice as bright as M98 
and M949, it is no easier to see visually than those galaxies 
because its light is spread over a greater area, resulting in 
a low surface brightness. It is classified as type Sc. Lord 
Rosse was the first to see its spiral arms, in 1850. Allan 
Sandage has concluded that the two main arms are about 
3000 light-years thick, twice the thickness of the arms 
in our own Galaxy. An asymmetry in the shape of the 
spiral arms seems to be to gravitational disturbance by a 
nearby dwarf elliptical galaxy, NGC 4322, in a smaller- 
scale version of the interaction between the Whirlpool 
Galaxy, M51, and its companion. Four supernovae have 
been seen here, in 1901, 1914, 1959 and 1979. The 1979 
event was unusually bright, reaching a peak of eleventh 
magnitude; the following year, radio emission from its 
remnant was picked up by astronomers using the Very 
Large Array, the first time an extragalactic supernova had 
been detected at radio wavelengths. Infrared images of 
M100 taken in 1995 showed the existence of a short bar 
across the galaxy’s center, ending in two short arms that 
curve in the opposite direction to the outer spiral arms. 
At the tips of these arms are areas of star formation, part 
of ring of star formation about 1500 light-years from the 
galaxy’s core that shows up on images taken at ultraviolet 
wavelengths. This finding is consistent with photographs 
which show that the color of the galaxy’s core is similar 
to that of the spiral arms,suggesting recent star formation 
in the region which may be another consequence of the 
interaction with the nearby dwarf. M100 has figured 
prominently in attempts to measure the distance scale 
of the universe, on account of its eminence in the Virgo 
cluster. Observations of 20 Cepheid variables in its spiral 
arms with the Hubble Space Telescope led to an accurate 
determination of its distance (and hence that of the Virgo 
Cluster) at 56 + 6 million light-years, announced in 1994. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M101 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M101 


M101 is a grand spiral galaxy in Ursa Major, located 
5.5 degrees north of Eta Ursae Majoris, the star at the 
end of the handle of the Plough (or Big Dipper). It 
was discovered in March 1781 by Mechain and added 
by Messier to his list at the last minute without having 
checked it. M101 is classified as of type Sc, meaning that 
its arms are loosely wound, and they show beautifully 
on long-exposure photographs. Surprisingly, the galaxy 
can be detected as a pale, rounded disk with binoculars 
but no details will be visible without a telescope. The 
brightest clouds of hydrogen in the spiral arms have 
their own NGC numbers, notably NGC 5461 and 5462 
in the longest arm on the galaxy’s western side. Three 
supernovae have been detected, in 1909, 1951 and 1970. 
M101 is surrounded by a family of about eight small 
satellite galaxies. Ultraviolet observations in 1981 showed 
ripples of star formation extending eastwards from M101 
towards one of these satellites, the irregular dwarf galaxy 
NGC 5477, another example of interactions affecting a 
galaxy’s size and structure. From observation of Cepheid 
variables, M101 is around 25 million light-years away. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M102 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M102 


M102 is a duplicate observation of M101, an error due 
to Mechain. He originally reported it in 1781 to Messier 
who included it on trust in his third and final list without 
checking, as he also did with M101 and M103. However, 
Mechain admitted his mistake in a letter to Bernoulli two 
years later, and so M102 is now regarded as non-existent. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M103 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M103 


M103 is an open cluster in Cassiopeia, about 1 degree 
northeast of Delta Cassiopeiae, discovered by Mechain in 
1781. As with M101 and M102 Messier did not check it 
before inclusion; had he done so, it seems likely that he 
would also have spotted the larger and far more comet- 
like open cluster NGC 663 1.5 degrees to the northeast. 
Both these clusters are members of the Cassiopeia OB8 
association. Admiral Smyth described M103 as a fan- 
shaped group, and estimated it to have about 20 members 
easily detectable in his telescope, the four brightest ranging 
from seventh to ninth magnitude. The brightest of these, 
which is actually a neat double divisible in small apertures, 
is now known to lie in the foreground and hence is not a 
true member at all. According to modern measurements, 
the cluster lies just over 8000 light-years away and has an 
age of around 30 million years. M103 was the last object 
in Messier’s third and final list of objects; the subsequent 
objects were added later by others. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M104 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M104 


M104 is a spiral galaxy on the border of Virgo and 
Corvus, popularly termed the SOMBRERO GALAXY because of 
its resemblance to a wide-brimmed Mexican hat. M104 is a 
spiral galaxy of type Sa (or possibly intermediate between 
Sa and Sb), seen only about 6 degrees from edge-on. It was 
discovered by Mechain, and added by hand to Messier’s 
own copy of the printed version of his catalog. In 1921 
the French astronomer C Flammarion suggested adding it 
officially to the Messier list as M104, and the suggestion 
has been generally accepted. Photographs show a large 
central bulge surrounded by a swarm of globular clusters 
and crossed by a dark lane of dust in the plane of the 
galaxy; this dark lane seems to have been first detected by 
William Herschel. Although lying in Virgo, the Sombrero 
is probably not a member of the Virgo Cluster but is 
somewhat closer to us, about 35 million light-years away. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M105 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M105 


M105 is an elliptical galaxy in Leo about 1 degree to the 
north of M95 and M96 with which it forms a triangle; 
it is also physically associated with that pair, all three 
being part of a sparse cluster known as the Leo group 
of galaxies. It was discovered in 1781 by Mechain and 
was mentioned in his letter to J Bernoulli in which he 
admitted the duplication of M101 and M102. Although 
Messier apparently never saw this object for himself, in 
1947 it was identified as NGC 3379 by Helen Sawyer Hogg 
who proposed its adoption as M105. It is classified as type 
E1, meaning it is almost perfectly round. M105 has two 
smaller and fainter companions: NGC 3384, an elliptical, 
and NGC 3389, a spiral. Radio observations at 21 cm 
wavelength published in 1989 showed the existence of a 
ring of hydrogen gas over 600 000 light-years wide orbiting 
M105 and NGC 3384. There are no signs of any stars 
or even dust in this ring, suggesting that it is composed 
entirely of primordial hydrogen left over from the Big Bang 
that never became part of any galaxy. In addition, nearby 
M9 seems to be interacting with the ring and capturing 
some of the gas. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M106 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M106 


M106 is a spiral galaxy in Canes Venatici just over a degree 
and a half south of the fifth-magnitude star 3 Canum 
Venaticorum. At eighth magnitude it is fairly easily within 
reach of small telescopes. Mechain discovered it in 1781 
and mentioned it in the same letter to Bernoulli as his 
discovery of the objects now known as M105 and M107. 
In 1947 it was identified as NGC 4258 by Helen Sawyer 
Hogg, who proposed its adoption as M106. It is classed 
as type Sb but shows signs of distortion in its spiral 
arms. Since it is tilted steeply to our line of sight, the full 
extent of the disturbance is difficult to judge. From radio 
observations of the velocities of water masers orbiting the 
galaxy’s nucleus, astronomers have deduced the existence 
of a central body less than a light year across with a mass 
of around 36 million Suns—in other words, a probable 
massive black hole. One supernova, 1981K, has so far 
been seen to erupt in M106. Estimates of the galaxy’s 
distance range from about 23 to nearly 30 million light- 
years, depending on the technique used. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M107 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M107 


M107 is a globular cluster in Ophiuchus, about 2.75 de- 
grees south of Zeta Ophiuchi. Like M105 and M106 it was 
discovered by Mechain but was apparently never seen by 
Messier. In 1947 Helen Sawyer Hogg identified it as being 
NGC 6171 and suggested it as an addition to the Messier 
catalog with the designation M107. Visually it appears rel- 
atively sparse by comparison with other globulars, cover- 
ing about one-third the apparent diameter of the full Moon 
but appearing only of eighth magnitude. Its distance is 
around 19000 light years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M108 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M108 


M108 is a spiral galaxy in Ursa Major, located one-third 
of the way from M97 (the Owl Nebula) to Beta Ursae 
Majoris. Messier referred to it in his catalog in a note on 
M97, saying that it lay nearby, but since its position had 
not been determined he never included it as a separate 
entry. Like so many objects, it seems to have been first 
pointed out to him by Mechain. In 1960 the American 
historian O Gingerich identified this object as NGC 3556 
and proposed calling it M108. Itis usually classified as type 
Sc but G de Vaucouleurs regarded it as a barred spiral. In 
fact its true shape is difficult to ascertain since it is seen 
nearly edge-on and has a patchy appearance caused by 
dark clouds of dust. Radio observations, made with the 
Very Large Array and announced in 1997, have revealed 
the existence of an invisible shell of hydrogen gas 21000 
light-years across extending from the eastern side of the 
galaxy. The origin of this shell remains a puzzle; one 
possibility is that it is the shock wave from the eruption of a 
huge cluster of supernovae millions of years ago. In recent 
times it has been the site of only one observed supernova, 
1969B. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M109 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M109 


M109 is a barred spiral galaxy in Ursa Major, lying 
0.66 degrees east of Gamma Ursae Majoris in the bowl 
of the Plough (or Big Dipper). As with M108, it was 
mentioned by Messier in his note on M97 but was 
not identified with a known galaxy until 1960, when 
O Gingerich concluded that it was the same as NGC 3992. 
M109 is classified as midway in type between SBb and 
SBc. Much of its central region shows an emission-line 
spectrum due to ionized gas, evidence of unusual activity 
in its nucleus and placing it among the type of galaxies 
known as ‘liners’. M109 has been the site of one observed 
supernova, 1956A. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M11 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M11 


M11 is an open or galactic cluster in Scutum (2 degrees west 
and a bit south of n Scuti). It has a very interesting arrow- 
shaped outline in its densest part and a V-shaped group of 
stars ahead of the arrow. This prompted Admiral Smyth 
to describe it as a ‘flight of wild ducks’ and it is therefore 
sometimes known as the ‘wild duck’ cluster. The German 
astronomer Gottfried Kirch first discovered the cluster in 
1681. 

M11 contains 2900 stars within a diameter of about 
15 light-years. For an open cluster it is very rich and 
compact, with stars in the central regions separated on 
average by just 1 light-year. Five hundred of these stars 
are brighter than 14 mag and the overall brightness of the 
cluster is 6.3 mag. The distance to the Sun is about 6000 
light-years, i.e. it is probably not a condensation in the 
Scutum star cloud against which it appears but closer to 
us. The cluster is sometimes thought to be comparatively 
young at 250 million years but some sources also quote 
double that value. Support for a higher age comes from 
the relative abundance of yellow and red giants of absolute 
magnitude of —1 (i.e. comparatively faint old stars). In fact, 
M11 has more yellow giants than most open clusters and 
is similar to M67 in that respect. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M110 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M110 


M110 is the second of two small elliptical galaxies near 
the Andromeda Galaxy, both of which can be seen 
through small telescopes. Messier cataloged the first 
companion of M31 as M32, but strangely never included 
the second on his list, even though he showed M31 with 
both companions in a drawing in 1807 and claimed to 
have discovered it in 1773. Until 1966 it was known 
solely as NGC 205, when the English amateur astronomer 
K Glyn Jones proposed adding it as M110, the final Messier 
object. M110 lies over 1 degree northwest of M31 and 
although it is larger than M32 it is more difficult to see, 
having a lower surface brightness. It is classified as type 
E5 or E6, meaning that it is considerably elongated in 
shape. Two unusual aspects of M110 are the existence of 
dust clouds and clusters of young stars near its center, not 
normally encountered in elliptical galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M12 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M12 


M12 is a globular cluster in Ophiuchus close to M10 but 
slightly larger, fainter and much less concentrated towards 
the center. It was discovered by Charles Messier, but 
William Herschel was the first to resolve it into stars in 
1783. 

The cluster has a diameter of about 100 light-years and 
is at a distance of about 19 000 light-years from the Sun. It 
is a very loose cluster and was at one point even thought 
to be an intermediate type between globular and galactic 
cluster (this was before it was discovered that the two 
types of cluster are completely different in age and stellar 
population). It has a visual brightness of 6.7 mag and a 
diameter of 100 light-years. Allan Sandage investigated 
the cluster for variables and found only 13. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M13 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M13 


M13 is a globular cluster in Hercules (2.5 degrees south 
of 7 Herculis), the ‘Great Hercules Globular Cluster’ 
discovered by Edmund Halley in 1714 who noted that ‘it 
shows itself to the naked eye when the sky is serene and the 
Moon absent’. It was first resolved by William Herschel 
and has since been the target of much professional and 
amateur interest, mainly because it is very bright and 
easily observable from the northern hemisphere. 

M13 is a fairly open cluster, almost perfectly circular 
in outline, with a diameter of 150 light-years, a visual 
brightness of 5.8 mag and over half a million stars. At its 
center the stars are 500 times more concentrated than they 
are in the solar neighborhood. Its age was estimated by 
Arp to be 14 billion years (1962). The high latitude of the 
cluster leads to a large major axis of its orbit which means 
that it spent most of its long life ata great distance from the 
disruptive tidal effects of the Galactic Center—hence the 
great concentration of stars and its almost perfect shape. 
Its distance to the Sun is 22800 light-years as measured 
from its variables (slightly higher from radial velocity 
measurements). Like M3 it contains one hot, young, blue 
star (Barnard no 29) whose presence in this old cluster 
cannot easily be explained. It also contains 15 variable 
stars and four apparently star-poor regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M14 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M14 


M14 is a galactic cluster in Ophiuchus, discovered by 
Messier and first resolved into component stars by William 
Herschel in 1783. It has a diameter of 55 light-years and 
lacks a dense central concentration. The outline is slightly 
flattened (ellipticity type E1) and its visual brightness is 
7.6 mag. The distance to the Sun is approximately 27 400 
light-years. 

M14 is relatively rich in variable stars, 70 having been 
discovered so far. Of particular interest is a nova (16 mag) 
that appeared in this cluster between 21 and 28 June 1938 
but was not discovered until 1964 when Amelia Wehlau 
of the University of Western Ontario found it during a 
search of photographic plates taken by Helen Sawyer 
Hogg between 1932 and 1963. It was only the second nova 
to appear in a globular cluster (the first being in M80 in 
1860) and the first ever to be photographed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M15 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M15 


M15 isa globular cluster in Pegasus (close to € Pegasi), first 
discovered by Jean Dominique Maraldi on 7 September 
1746. It was resolved into stars by William Herschel. 

This is another very rich and old globular cluster. It 
has a diameter of 88 light-years and its superdense core is 
undergoing collapse. This often features in the dynamic 
evolution of globular clusters: of the 147 in the Milky Way, 
21 have a collapsed core (such as, e.g., M30 and M70) and 
there are eight more candidates. In the case of M15 it is not 
entirely clear whether the core has collapsed simply under 
its own gravity or whether there is a supermassive object 
at the center resembling the objects thought to be at the 
centers of galactic nuclei. The Hubble Space Telescope 
has therefore recently taken pictures of the dense core. 
By measuring the velocities of the central stars it will be 
possible to resolve this question. 

The age of the cluster was estimated at 12 billion years. 
It has a visual brightness of 6.2 mag and is at a distance of 
around 32000 light-years. 

M15 is the third richest cluster in terms of variables: 
112 have been discovered so far, one of which is a 
classical (type II) Cepheid. It also contains nine pulsars, 
one of which seems a component of a neutron star 
binary. Systems of neutron-plus-neutron star binaries 
are particularly interesting because they exhibit strongly 
general relativistic effects, such as significant perihelion 
shifts, effects on passing light and gravitational waves 
which carry away rotational energy and lead to a slowing- 
down of the pulsar frequency as well as of the orbital 
period. It is also the first cluster in which a planetary 
nebula could be identified, and in 1988 an x-ray source 
was found to be a normal-plus-neutron star binary system 
with a period of 9h. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M16 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M16 


M16 is an open cluster in the constellation Serpens, 
associated with the EAGLE NEBULA (1 degree north and 
2.5 degrees west of y Scuti). It was discovered by de 
Chéseaux in 1746 as a ‘cluster of stars’ and sits on the next 
inner spiral arm of the galaxy away from us next to M17. 

M16 is in many ways similar to the Lagoon Nebula 
M8. The cluster formed from the gas of the Eagle Nebula 
and its bright young stars now light it up. The nebula 
exhibits ongoing star formation in the dark ‘elephant 
trunks’ visible to the north. It also contains the black 
globules that are collapsing protostellar clouds (mainly 
to the southeast). The Hubble Space Telescope has taken 
many detailed pictures of this particularly beautiful object. 

The star cluster is one of the intrinsically most 
luminous with an absolute magnitude of —8.21. It has a 
diameter of 7 arc min at a distance of 7000 light-years and 
a visual brightness of 6.4 magnitudes. Its age has been 
estimated at 5.5 million years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M17 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M17 


M17 is a diffuse nebula in Sagittarius variously known as 
the Omega, Swan, Horseshoe or Lobster Nebula. It was 
discovered by de Chéseaux in 1746 and is a neighbor to 
M16. 

The diameter of its brightest part is about 15 light- 
years but the low-luminosity and dark material extends 
to a size of at least 40 light-years. Like many nebulae, it 
consists of bright filaments and dark, obscuring matter and 
star formation has either only recently stopped or is still 
proceeding in its center. A cluster of about 35 bright but 
obscured stars is embedded in it and the nebula shines by 
re-emitting the light absorbed from these stars. The mass 
of the brightest gas has been estimated to be about 800 solar 
masses (much more than in the otherwise comparable 
Orion Nebula, M42). The main difference between this 
nebula and M8 and M16 is the difference in its absorption 
regions: M17 contains a large amount of dark, obscuring 
material, more so than either of the other two nebulae. 

Its distance to the Sun is between 5 and 6000 light- 
years. The nebula is a radio source in 9.4 cm and has been 
shown to have a 29%-polarized infrared emission. This 
might indicate the existence of ‘bipolar nebulae’ or lobes 
of scattering material in the polar regions. A twin-lobed 
radio source extending from the central infrared cluster 
has also been detected. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M18 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M18 


M18 is an open cluster in Sagittarius discovered by Messier 
as a ‘cluster of small stars’. It lies between M17 and M24. 

The cluster contains about 20 members and has an 
angular diameter of 9 arcmin. Its visual magnitude is 
7.5 which makes it one of the looser and poorer clusters. 
Correspondingly, it has not received much attention from 
scientists to date. Its distance from the Sun has been 
estimated at 4900 light-years but that value is disputed 
with some sources quoting up to 6000 or less than 4000 
light-years. M18 is generally considered to be quite young 
(32 million years). Its hottest stars are of type B3 (i.e. very 
hot and young) but it contains bright yellow and orange 
as well as blue stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M19 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M19 


M19 is a globular cluster in Ophiuchus, discovered by 
Messier but first resolved by William Herschel in 1784. It 
can easily be located at 8 degrees due east of Antares and 
embedded in the Milky Way. 

It is at a distance of 27 000 light years (4600 light-years 
from the Galactic Center), has a diameter of 25 light-years 
and a visual brightness of 6.8 mag. M19 is the most oblate 
of the known globular clusters with an ellipticity E3-E4. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M2 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M2 


M2 is a bright globular cluster in Aquarius forming an 
almost right-angled triangle to the north with a and 
B Aquarii. It was first mentioned by Jean Dominique 
Maraldi in 1746 but independently rediscovered by 
Charles Messier who described it as anebula without stars. 
William Herschel was the first to resolve the stars. M2 
is a rich and compact globular cluster with 150000 stars 
within a diameter of about 150 light-years and witha slight 
ellipticity (type El, meaning it is almost perfectly round). 
Its visual brightness is 6.5 mag and its distance from the 
Sun is 36000 light-years (ie. well beyond the Galactic 
Center)—but there is some doubt about this number, with 
some sources setting the distance at around 50000 light- 
years. The age of the cluster has been determined at 13 
billion years. 

Compared with other globular clusters, M2 has a 
relatively low number of variable stars: so far, 21 variables 
have been detected, most of which are RR Lyrae stars 
with periods of less than a day, but there are also three 
classical (type II) Cepheids with periods between 15 and 
19 days and one RV Tauri star with a period of 67 days. 
The cluster’s brightest stars are red and yellow giants of 
14.1 mag (absolute magnitude —3.0). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M20 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M20 


M20 is a diffuse nebula in Sagittarius known as the ‘TRIFID 
NEBULA’ because of its three-lobed appearance. It is situated 
roughly 2 degrees northwest of M8. Messier described 
a ‘cluster of stars’, William Herschel assigned different 
numbers to different parts of the object and John Herschel 
was the first to use the term ‘trifid’. 

M20 is a typical emission nebula where young hot 
stars at the center excite the gas of the surrounding nebula 
which then de-excites by emitting a reddish glow. It is 
itself surrounded by a blue reflection nebula particularly 
conspicuous to the north. The three-part division is due 
to dark obscuring filaments between the bright nebulae. 
It has a diameter of 30 light-years and a distance of 2200- 
7600 light-years from the Sun. Its visual brightness is 9 to 
6.8 mag—the range of values deriving from the fact that 
the overall brightness is hard to detect in this object whose 
central region is dominated by a few very bright stars. The 
brightest of these are a triple system consisting of three 
very hot and four fainter members. Like M8 and M42, 
M20 is a radio source at 9.4 cm. This relatively short- 
wavelength radiation indicates that the source must be 
thermal emission and the temperature of the nebula has 
been calculated from this to be about 10000 K. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M21 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M21 


M21 is a young open cluster in Sagittarius, close to but not 
associated with the Trifid Nebula (M20). It was discovered 
in 1764 by Messier who described it as a ‘star cluster near 
M20’. 

The cluster has about 100 probable member stars, 
some of which are early B-type stars and the reddening 
through interstellar dust is comparatively low. For that 
reason, M21 lends itself to star formation studies and to 
the calibration of distance indicators (not having to worry 
about the reddening is always an advantage for that). 
However, research interest in this cluster has been quite 
low and itis one of the few young open clusters still lacking 
a detailed study. Its age is commonly thought to be about 
8 million years and its distance is set at 4300 light-years. 
There is some controversy associated with this number, 
however, and it is not entirely clear whether M20 or M21 
is closer to us. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M22 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M22 


M22 is a rich, old globular cluster in Sagittarius, very 
bright (5.1 mag) and fairly close (about 10 000 light-years) 
but only 1 degree out of the ecliptic. Its vincinity to the 
ecliptic plane is both an advantage and a disadvantage: 
it often appears in conjunction with planets and was 
discovered in 1665 (the first globular cluster recorded) 
by the German astronomer Abraham Ihle while he was 
observing Saturn. But since itis viewed along a line of sight 
passing through the galactic disk and bulge, the cluster is 
heavily reddened (i.e. the light from the cluster is shifted 
into the red end of the spectrum by scattering off dust 
grains) and so basic parameters like age and metallicity 
are difficult to determine exactly. In the case of M22, they 
are still somewhat uncertain, with the age being normally 
set at about 12 billion years. 

Because of its brightness, the cluster has had a rich 
observational history, appearing in the lists of Halley, 
Lacaille, le Gentil and de Chéseaux before being included 
in Messier’s catalog. William Herschel was the first 
to resolve it into its constituent stars and in 1959, M22 
was one of the very first clusters for which a color— 
magnitude diagram was obtained. More recently, it has 
been investigated for variable and other exotic types of 
star: 32 variables and one planetary nebula have been 
found so far and since 1992 three possible CH stars (a very 
exotic type of binary, rare in clusters, see also M14) have 
been identified. The cluster is potentially very interesting 
because it is indicative of conditions in the very early 
protogalaxy, but because of the problems mentioned above 
(mainly the reddening) it has not yet been extensively 
studied. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M23 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M23 


M23 is a very poor, loose open cluster in Sagittarius (one 
of Messier’s original discoveries) with boundaries that are 
difficult to define. So far, 150 stars within a linear diameter 
of about 15 light-years have been shown to be members. 
The cluster is old for an open cluster (about 300 million 
years) and is thought to have spent a large fraction of its 
lifetime in the gas-poor regions between the spiral arms of 
our Galaxy. It can therefore be used to test theories about 
the effect of gas-rich and gas-poor environments on stellar 
evolution and a recent study on M23 indicates that the 
environment does not greatly influence the metallicity of 
stars after they have formed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M24 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M24 


M24 was discovered by Messier in 1764 as a ‘star cluster’. 
It is not, however, a real cluster but simply a patch 
of the Milky Way that is seen through a tunnel in the 
otherwise obscuring interstellar dust and therefore looks 
like a cluster. This patch is visible to the naked eye two- 
thirds of the way between y Scuti and yu Sagittarii. It has 
an average magnitude of 4.6. 

A dim open cluster can be detected inside the star 
cloud (NGC 6603) which in some cases is identified with 
the Messier object. This is wrong, however, since Messier 
clearly described the cloud rather than the dim (11 mag) 
cluster. 

The interstellar medium has a tendency to accumulate 
in huge clouds about 25 light-years across. Small windows 
in these clouds are important for our understanding of 
galactic structure since they allow us to study material that 
would normally be obscured. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M25 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M25 


M25 is an intermediate-age (90 million years) open cluster 
in Sagittarius that was discovered by de Chéseaux in 1746. 
It has a visual magnitude of 6.5 and is conspicuous even 
with normal binoculars. Because of its relatively small 
distance (about 2000 light-years) and the comparative ease 
with which it can be observed, it was one of the first 
used for studies of variable stars. In 1960, Allan Sandage 
identified its one Cepheid variable, U Sagittarii, and 
used it to calibrate the period—magnitude relationships for 
Cepheids. Since then, however, clusters richer in variables 
have been identified and interest in M25 has waned. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M26 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M26 


M26 is an open cluster in the constellation Scutum, 
an apparent neighbor to M11. It was possibly seen 
by Le Gentil before 1750, but Messier discovered it 
independently in 1764 and noted that it was ‘not 
distinguished in 3.5 foot telescope’. 

Of the 90 confirmed members of this cluster, 25 
are very bright but no extensive studies into the stellar 
population or the range of masses have been conducted so 
far. In fact, M26 is one of the least observed objects in the 
Messier catalog with its latest research paper published 
in 1940 (when its age was determined to be about 90 
million years and its distance 5000 light-years). Its most 
distinguishing feature is an apparent ring of low stellar 
density around the center. Ina region of diameter 3 arcmin 
(cluster diameter 15 arcmin) the density of stars is about 
13% less than in the adjacent areas. This is now thought to 
be caused by dust extinction. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M27 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M27 


M27 is a planetary nebula in Vulpecula also known as 
the ‘DUMBBELL NEBULA’ because of its shape. It was the first 
planetary nebula to be discovered (Messier, 12 July 1764), 
and even though it is neither the largest nor the brightest, 
it is the easiest to observe: larger planetary nebulae tend 
to be fainter and brighter ones tend to be small. 

The nebula was created about 3000 to 4000 years ago 
when a giant star blew off its outer layers. It is therefore 
still expanding at a rate of 6.8 arc seconds per year and the 
central star (the remaining core of the giant) is a hot, blue 
subdwarf dwarf with a temperature of 85000 K (spectral 
type O7) with possibly a faint yellow companion. This star 
emits light mostly in the non-visible parts of the spectrum, 
which is then absorbed and re-emitted by the nebula in 
the visible (predominantly in one green spectral line). The 
distance to the planetary nebula is difficult to determine 
(a common problem for these objects): values proposed 
range from 400 to 3500 light-years. But if the distance is 
taken to be 1200 light-years then the central star has an 
intrinsic luminosity of one-third of the solar luminosity 
and the nebula as a whole emits 100 solar luminosities 
entirely in the visible part of the spectrum. This gives it an 
apparent magnitude of 7.4 (i.e. it is not visible to the naked 
eye). The angular diameter of the nebula’s brightest part 
is 6 arcmin and the dumbbell shape is due to us observing 
the nebula from its equatorial plane. If we saw it from one 
of the poles, it would look ring-shaped, more like M57. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M28 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M28 


M28 is a rich, dense globular cluster in Sagittarius. It was 
discovered by Messier as a ‘nebula containing no star’ and 
first resolved into its component stars by William Herschel. 

As for most of the dense globular clusters, M28 is 
interesting mainly because of its variable stars and because 
of its binary star systems. The evolution of binaries in 
rich environments has received a lot of attention recently, 
as they seem less common in these clusters than they 
are predicted to be. On the other hand, the more exotic 
varieties of binary systems (such as neutron star binaries) 
seem particularly frequent in the cores of rich clusters. 

In 1987 a millisecond pulsar was discovered in M28 
(the second to be found in a globular cluster after the 
discovery of the pulsar in M4). It rotates over 2000 times 
faster than the Crab pulsar (once every 11 milliseconds). 
Periods as short as this are thought to be produced 
by interaction with a binary companion, and in 1997 
an x-ray burst in M28 was interpreted to be evidence 
for the neutron star slowly accreting material from that 
companion. Interest in M28 since then has mainly centered 
on its x-ray activity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M29 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M29 


M29 is a very young, open cluster in Cygnus. It was 
discovered by Messier in 1764 and is particularly highly 
obscured by interstellar material. It has been estimated 
that in the line of sight to M29, the interstellar dust is 1000 
times more dense than usual. Scattering of the cluster light 
leads to an overall reddening and dimming together with 
ahigh polarization. These effects make it difficult to gauge 
how much light and which color is really emitted by the 
member stars, and hence their age and distance is difficult 
to determine. 

Within correspondingly large error bars, M29 is 
thought to be young (i.e. below 10 million years) and only 
about 4000 light-years away. It contains one variable of y 
Cas type and several more suspected variables, and some 
investigation into its three binary systems and the hot stars 
in the cluster have been done, but these studies are all 
rendered difficult by the uncertainties associated with the 
fundamental parameters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M3 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M3 


M3 isa very rich globular cluster in the constellation Canes 
Venatici. It was the first original discovery by Messier 
and probably the object that sparked his systematic search 
for nebulae and clusters. It has approximately 500000 
member stars within a diameter of 300 light-years and is 
with a visual brightness of 6.5 mag one of the brightest 
clusters in the northern hemisphere. Its distance to the Sun 
is about 30600 light-years and its age has been estimated 
at 6.5 billion years. 

M3 is a very well-studied globular cluster partly 
because it contains more variable stars than any other. So 
far, 212 have been counted and 186 periods determined. 
The brighter stars are of remarkably uniform magnitude 
and there is one very hot, young, blue star (discovered 
by Allan Sandage) whose presence in this old cluster 
continues to be a mystery (see also M13). Current theories 
propose that the young star might have been captured 
relatively recently by the gravitational attraction of the 
cluster as a whole. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M30 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M30 


M30, like M15, M70 and possibly M62, is an old globular 
cluster (in Capricornus) whose central core has undergone 
gravitational collapse. It was discovered by Messier 
in 1764 but has only been very actively studied since 
about 1994 when it was discovered that the luminosity 
function of the cluster does not agree with the function 
shape derived from standard stellar evolution models. 
M30 has therefore become a test case for the study of 
the modification of stellar populations in dense collapsed 
regions. 

Overall the light emitted by the cluster is much more 
blue than would be expected for an object this age. It 
has a higher frequency of blue stragglers (blue, hot main 
sequence stars which seem too young to be in such an old 
cluster) in the core than other globular clusters (48 have 
been identified so far), which supports the theory that they 
are formed by star or binary mergers. Additionally, the 
core is thought to be unusually poor in red giants, but so 
far no theory has been able to successfully explain this. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M31: The Old Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M31: The Old Stellar Populations 


M31 (the Andromeda nebula) is a large highly inclined 
spiral galaxy about 1.4 times as luminous as our Galaxy. 
The Milky Way and M31 are the two dominant members of 
the Local Group of galaxies. The proximity of M31 (about 
770 kpc from the Sun) allows its stellar populations to be 
studied in some detail with the Hubble Space Telescope 
and large ground-based telescopes. M31 contains all the 
usual ingredients of a spiral of intermediate (Sb) Hubble 
type: atomic, molecular and ionized gas, dust, dark matter 
and stars of all ages. For the study of stellar populations, 
however, M31’s oldest stars are of particular interest, 
because they show some very significant differences, as a 
population, from the oldest stars of our Galaxy. Although 
we do not yet fully understand the reasons for these 
differences, they surely came about through differences 
in the processes by which these two large galaxies formed 
in the early universe. 


The bulges of M31 and the Milky Way 

In the Milky Way, the disk stars are all younger than about 
10 Gyr. The oldest stars (ages up to about 14 Gyr) are 
found in the spheroidal components of the Galaxy, i.e. the 
bulge and the very diffuse stellar halo which extends out 
to at least 100 kpc from the galactic center. These old non- 
disk components, the bulge and the stellar halo, are often 
discussed together, although their origin may be quite 
different. 

The structure of the spheroidal component was 
established by dynamical processes, like the merging 
of clumps of gas and dark matter and the dynamical 
instabilities of flat disks, which began at the same time 
as the oldest stars were forming. So its structure and 
its old stellar population are intimately related. It 
is interesting therefore to contrast the structure of the 
spheroidal components of M31 and the Galaxy before we 
go on to discuss their stellar content. 

The bulge of M31 is relatively large, about 25% of the 
mass of the disk, while for our Galaxy the corresponding 
fraction is about 15%. Although these fractions are 
not so different, the bulges of M31 and our Galaxy are 
structurally different and typical of large and small bulges 
respectively. The M31 bulge has the spheroidal shape and 
the characteristic radial dependence of surface brightness 
that is seen in most large bulges. Its surface brightness 
I(r) follows the empirical de Vaucouleurs law log /(r) « 
—r4 from a radius of 200 pce out to beyond 20 kpc. 
From dynamical theory, this r'/* law is associated with 
the violent relaxation process, in which rapid changes of 
the gravitational field statistically redistribute the orbital 
energies and angular momenta of the stars. The stellar 
system that emerges from this redistribution has the 
characteristic r!/4 surface brightness distribution. Such 
rapid changes of the gravitational field come about, for 
example, as clumps of matter interact and merge to form 
the early bulge. The compression of gas in these same 
mergers is believed to set off the first bursts of star 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


formation that produced the stars which we now see as 
the old stellar population of M31. 

The bulge of the Milky Way is very different. Its 
smaller bulge is seen edge-on and shows a box-like shape, 
with a surface brightness distribution that is exponential 
with radius. This kind of structure is common for small 
edge-on bulges. From studying the motions of gas in 
our Galaxy and in other galaxies with bulges that appear 
boxy when seen edge-on, we know that these bulges 
would not appear round and symmetric when viewed 
from above. The boxy shape is dynamically associated 
with an asymmetric bar-like structure. These small bar- 
bulges are believed to form from the disks of the parent 
galaxies, through the instability of the rotating disk. This 
is likely to be a much more quiescent process than the 
violent merging that led to the formation of the larger r'/* 
bulges. 

In comparing the bulges of M31 and the Galaxy, it 
seems likely that the different dynamical histories of these 
two bulges would lead to different star formation histories. 
We might expect the violent early merger processes in M31 
to be associated with rapid star formation and chemical 
evolution, with chemically enriched stars flung out to large 
distances by the violent dynamical relaxation. On the 
other hand, in the inner regions of our Galaxy, the star 
formation and bulge formation appear to have occurred 
in a more sedate disk-like environment; the bulge itself 
formed out of the disk, and the stars of the bulge would 
remain confined to the inner regions of the Galaxy. 

The differences between the old stellar populations of 
M31 and the Galaxy are most readily studied by observing 
individual stars in globular clusters and in the outer 
regions of the diffuse stellar populations in these two 
galaxies. 


The halos of M31 and the Galaxy 
First we compare the stellar populations of the globular 
star clusters in M31 and the Galaxy which have now been 
studied in great detail. Their stellar color-magnitude 
diagrams (CMDs) and integrated spectra give estimates 
of chemical abundances and ages. In most of their 
properties, the clusters in the two galaxies are alike. The 
stellar populations within individual clusters of the same 
chemical abundance are similar, as are the distributions 
of luminosity of the clusters in the two cluster systems 
and the radial distributions of the clusters within their 
parent galaxy. The M31 and Galactic globular clusters 
cover a similar range of chemical abundance, with the 
outer clusters of M31 being marginally more metal-rich 
than their Galactic counterparts’. 

Despite the similarities in the properties of the 
globular clusters of M31 and the Galaxy, the metallicity 
distributions in the diffuse (i.e. non-cluster) stellar halos 


1 Here ‘metal’ means all elements heavier than He, and is 
often denoted generically as Fe: metal abundance is usually 
expressed in terms of the (Fe/H) ratio as [Fe/H] = log, (stellar 
Fe/H)/(solar Fe/H). For example, a low metal abundance of 
[Fe/H] = —2 corresponds to 0.01 of the solar value. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M31: The Old Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MW Halo Stars 


M31 clusters 


10 > Yy : 


Wish ZL ] 


1 0 
[Fe/H 


o be Mir 


Ly 


Figure 1. Comparison of metallicity distributions of the M31 
halo field stars (hatched) and the M31 globular clusters (adapted 
from Durrell et al (1994)). The bar at the top left indicates the 
metallicity range of the halo field stars in the Galaxy. The M31 
halo stars are much more metal-rich than the Galactic halo stars, 
although the metallicity distributions for the globular clusters in 
M31 and in the Galaxy are similar. 


of the Galaxy and M31 are strikingly different. For our 
Galaxy, most halo stars have metallicities [Fe/H] < —1, 
with a mean of about —1.6. For the outer bulge or halo of 
M31, CMDs are now available for many fields at distances 
between about 7 and 40 kpc from the center. All of these 
studies show that the M31 halo stars cover a very wide 
range of metallicities, from near-solar down to metallicities 
[Fe/H] < —2, but the mean metallicity is about —0.6, much 
higher than for the halo of the Galaxy. This holds true 
even at the largest radius in M31. Figure 1 shows the 
marked difference between the metallicity distributions 
of the stellar halo and the globular clusters of M31. For 
comparison, the range of metallicities for the Milky Way 
halo stars is also shown. 


Conclusion 

What are we to make of the similarities and differences in 
the stellar populations illustrated in figure 1? The globular 
clusters in M31 and the Galaxy have similar distributions 
of metallicity, while the outer stellar halo of M31 is much 
more metal rich than its Galactic counterpart. These are 
all old stellar populations, so the origin of the differences 
will be found in the details of how these galaxies formed, 
and this is still poorly understood. 

Some useful clues are emerging about the nature of 
the globular clusters. The violent environment of present- 
day merging galaxies is seen to produce large numbers of 
young globular-like star clusters. This suggests that the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


old clusters of our Galaxy and M31 formed in the very 
early phase of galaxy formation, as clumps of matter were 
merging together to build the galaxy and the chemical 
enrichment was proceeding rapidly through massive star 
formation triggered by the merging. 

When we compare the diffuse halos of M31 and the 
Galaxy, the similarity ends. The two halos are chemically 
very different, and we must conclude that they formed 
along quite different paths. At this time, it seems likely that 
in M31’s outer regions we are seeing chemically enriched 
stars that were scattered out to large radii as part of the 
violent formation of its r'/* bulge. On the other hand, the 
halo and bulge of our Galaxy appear to be chemically and 
dynamically distinct. The Galactic bulge rotates and is 
relatively metal-rich, like the M31 halo stars in figure 1, 
while the halo shows no significant rotation and is metal- 
poor. Following the seminal work of Searle and Zinn 
(1978), it is now widely believed that the metal-poor stellar 
halo of our Galaxy is just the debris of small metal-poor 
satellite galaxies that were accreted and tidally disrupted 
by our Galaxy. The tidally disrupting Sagittarius dwarf 
galaxy shows that this process of accretion and halo- 
building is still going on in our Galaxy. 

For more background on M31, see the articles on 
the ANDROMEDA GALAXY and on the LOCAL GRouP in this 
encyclopedia. 

See also the article on the GALACTIC METAL-POOR HALO. 

For current opinions on mergers and the formation 
and properties of globular clusters, see the articles on 
GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS, ON GLOBULAR CLUSTERS, 
ON GLOBULAR CLUSTER SYSTEMS IN NORMAL GALAXIES, and on 
GLOBULAR CLUSTER SYSTEMS IN INTERACTING GALAXIES. 


Bibliography 

For more details on the chemical abundance distribution 
in the halo of M31, see 

Durrell P et al 1994 Astron.J. 108 2114 


For the article that started the current view of the formation 
of the galactic halo, see 


Searle Land Zinn R 1978 Astrophys.J. 225 357 


Ken Freeman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M32 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M32 


M32 is an elliptical galaxy (type E2) in Andromeda, a 
dwarf companion to the Andromeda galaxy M31. It was 
the first elliptical galaxy to be discovered (Le Gentil, 
1749). Its proximity (725 kpc) allowed its outer regions 
to be resolved into stars by the first generation of large 
optical telescopes (Baade 1944). Dynamically, it is 
thought to be dominated by a central supermassive object 
(similar to the nucleus of M31). 

M32 is in many ways a very unusual object. 
Compared with other dwarf galaxies of the same absolute 
brightness, its central surface brightness is four orders of 
magnitude higher and its core radius three orders of 
magnitude smaller. It is therefore sometimes referred to 
as a ‘compact’ elliptical to distinguish it from ‘dwarf 
ellipticals. Only a very few similar objects have been 
found, and none is as extreme. Additionally, its nucleus 
seems to be several billion years younger and more 
metal-rich than the outer regions: excess radiation in the 
ultraviolet indicates a hot, young stellar component in the 
core (figure 1). This is unexpected since elliptical 
galaxies are generally thought to be older than spirals and 
to have finished star formation long ago. 

These peculiarities, coupled to the fact that M32 and 
M110 are the closest elliptical galaxies and therefore our 
best chance to study such objects, have led to M32 being 
the target for a variety of studies. So far, no single theory 
has been advanced that could explain all of the galaxy’s 
puzzling characteristics. 


Figure 1. The local group galaxy M32, imaged in the UV 
(1450-3500 A) with the Space Telescope Imaging 
Spectrograph of the Hubble Space Telescope. From Brown et al 
2000, © The Astrophysical Journal, reproduced with 
permission. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M33 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M33 


M33 isa spiral galaxy in Triangulum, an apparent neighbor 
to and possibly distant companion of M31. Itis of type Scd, 
ie. a late (advanced in its evolution) spiral without a bar 
ora central black hole, and small compared with the Milky 
Way and M31 (as all galaxies in the Local Group are small 
compared with these). The Milky Way and M31 are giant 
spirals whereas M33 is closer to what is thought to be the 
average size for a spiral galaxy. 

It was discovered by Hodierna before 1654 and 
independently rediscovered by Messier in 1764. M32 
is visible to the naked eye under exceptionally good 
conditions just south of the line joining w Trianguli to B 
Andromedae. 

The distance to this galaxy is 3 million light-years. It 
has a diameter of about 50 000 light-years (half of that of the 
Milky Way) although faint outliers are supposed to extend 
out much further (more than 60000 light-years). Its mass 
is between 10 and 14 billion solar masses (luminous matter 
only—the size of the dark matter halo of all close galaxies 
is still a matter of much research and controversy). 

The most striking feature of M33 are the pronounced 
spiral arms which include globular clusters and popula- 
tion II stars as well as large regions of ionized hydrogen 
(HI). In particular there is one H I region which is roughly 
1500 light-years in diameter and so clearly visible as a knot 
in the spiral arm that it has its own number in Herschel’s 
catalog. It is the largest known H II region, has a spec- 
trum similar to the Orion nebula (M42) and contains over 
200 hot, massive, young stars. In addition, there are over 
80 diffuse emission nebulae in the spiral arms (visible as 
knots) and some ongoing star formation in the main disk. 
M33 is therefore a good target for the study of star forma- 
tion in an entire galaxy. 

The globular clusters in its halo are quite different 
from the Milky Way globular clusters and seem to be 
several billion years younger. So far, there is no satisfactory 
explanation for this phenomenon. Its overall stellar 
population, on the other hand, does not show any obvious 
irregularities. No supernovae have yet been observed 
but several supernova remnants. One hundred and 
twelve variables have been identified: amongst them four 
novae, 25 Cepheids and one eclipsing x-ray pulsar (i.e. a 
neutron star with some binary companion of possibly quite 
considerable mass). The rest of the variables are mostly RR 
Lyrae stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M34 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M34 


M34 is an open cluster in Perseus just north of the 
straight line between Algol (8 Persei) to y Andromedae. 
Because of its great angular diameter (35 arcmin, larger 
than the full Moon) and its relatively high apparent 
magnitude (5.5) it is easily visible to the naked eye. It 
was first discovered by Hodierna before 1654 and later 
independently rediscovered by Messier. 

The cluster is fairly loose with only about 100 stars 
inside the diameter (translating to 14 light-years at a 
distance of 14000 light-years). Its age has been estimated 
at about 250 million years, which puts M34 just between 
the Pleiades (70 million years) and the Hyades (800 million 
years)—two of the best studied open clusters in the sky. 
It can therefore be used for comparison studies of the 
evolution of chromospheric activity, rotational velocity 
and lithium abundance in solar-type stars which are 
common in all three clusters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M35 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M35 


M35 is a rich open cluster in Gemini (in the direction of the 
galactic anticenter). It is of roughly intermediate (but not 
very well determined) age and is visible to the naked eye 
under good conditions (5.3 mag). 

M35 was probably first discovered by de Chéseaux in 
1746: he mentioned a ‘star cluster above the northern feet 
of Gemini’. More recently, because of its high luminosity, 
the large angular diameter (28 arcmin) and its small 
distance (about 800 pc), it has been one of the most 
frequently photographed objects in the catalog. Pictures 
of this cluster taken over the last 100 years can be used for 
extensive study of the cluster members’ proper motions 
and hence a lot of recent research has centered on the 
comparison of its internal motion to the predictions for 
the dynamical evolution of open clusters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M36 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M36 


M36 is an open cluster in Auriga and the first of a set 
of three (true neighbors) in the southern part of that 
constellation (the other two are M37 and M38). All of these 
were first discovered by Hodierna before 1654. 

Amongst the roughly 60 members of M36 are many 
rapidly rotating stars very similar to the stars found in the 
Pleiades cluster M45. The cluster does not contain any red 
giants (unlike its neighbors M37 and M38) and is therefore 
thought to be very young, i.e. only about 25 million years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M37 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M37 


M37 is the brightest of the open clusters forming the group 
of three in Auriga (see also M36, M38). It has a visible 
magnitude of 6.2, is therefore not visible to the naked eye. 
Its diameter is about 20-25 light-years and with over 500 
members it is one of the richer open clusters. It contains 
at least 12 red giants and is estimated to be about 300 
million years old, i.e. it is a pretty evolved type of open 
cluster. There is some suggestion from radial velocity 
measurements of the member stars, that it is contracting 
slowly. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M38 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M38 


M38 is the faintest of the three open clusters in Auriga. 
It forms a distinctive z- or cross-shape and contains 
approximately 150 stars. Of these, only one is a yellow 
giant and the age of the cluster has been estimated at 
about 220 million years. Because of this age and its proper 
motion it has been suggested that this cluster is in a binary 
association with the open cluster NGC 1907 but this has 
yet to be conclusively proven. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M39 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M39 


M339 is a sparse open cluster in Cygnus, and even though 
Messier independently discovered it in 1764, its visual 
magnitude of 5.2 and extended size (32 arcmin, larger than 
the full Moon) makes it likely that it had been observed 
previously. There are claims that Le Gentil identified it in 
1750 but they are doubtful, since he did not leave a good 
position, and there are suggestions that Aristotle described 
the cluster as early as 325 Bc. 

M39 is thought to have about 81 member stars, but 
they are difficult to identify since the same area is very 
rich in faint Milky Way stars. These members are all main 
sequence with no stars that have spectral type earlier (i.e. 
hotter) than A, and the cluster has been dated to about 230 
to 300 million years. Its small distance (about 300 pc) and 
large size make it an easy object to study, and recent interest 
has concentrated on the cluster’s dynamical evolution and 
on comparing its stellar population to other clusters of the 
same age and metallicity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M4 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M4 


M4 is a very loose globular cluster in Scorpius and the 
nearest globular cluster to the Sun. It was discovered 
around 1745 by Philippe de Chéseaux but remained 
unpublished (de Chéseaux included a list of nebulous 
objects in a letter to a friend; eight of these objects were 
original discoveries but he never published them and so 
they were not generally known to his contemporaries). It 
is a very open (or loose) cluster with a distinct bar-like 
structure, about 10300 member stars, and a diameter of 
about 55 light-years. At its distance of 7000 light-years 
that means that the angular diameter is close to that of the 
full Moon. It is not as conspicuous as could be expected 
from this, however, since it is heavily obscured by dust 
(the e Ophiuchi dust complex is nearby). Nevertheless, it 
can be detected with the naked eye about 1.3 degrees west 
of Antares. 

M4 includes 43 variable stars and in 1987 the first 
millisecond pulsar was discovered amongst its members. 
It has a period of 3 ms and is therefore 10 times faster 
than the Crab pulsar (see M1)—periods as short as this 
are now thought to be produced by some interaction with 
a binary companion. The Hubble Space Telescope has 
taken pictures of some of the 40000 white dwarves that 
the cluster is predicted to contain. Analysis of these 
pictures will allow important conclusions to be drawn 
about the cooling rate of white dwarves which is crucial 
for the determination of the Galaxy’s age from white dwarf 
temperatures. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M40 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M40 


M40 is a fluke in Messier’s list of nebulous objects since 
it is a double star in Ursa Major, also known as Winnecke 
4. Messier noted its position when he was looking for a 
nebula reported by Hevelius in the same region (probably 
because he thought Hevelius might have mistaken this 
double star for a nebula). Hevelius had described a ‘supra 
tergum nebulosa’, a nebula above the back (of Ursa Major), 
but this is likely to be a mistake, since none has ever been 
found in the region, and even the double star is some way 
from the position described. 

The double star has two components, a primary of 
spectral type GO (same type as the Sun but four times 
brighter) and a secondary of spectral type F8 (slightly 
hotter). Its distance has been recently determined by the 
Hipparcos satellite to be 510 light-years. Many published 
versions of Messier’s catalog leave out this object since it 
does not fit with the rest of the list. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M41 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M41 


M41 is a poor, nearby open cluster in Canis Maior. It 
is, with a visible magnitude of 4.6, comparatively bright, 
and there have been suggestions that it was first recorded 
by Aristotle in 325 sc. If this were true, M41 would be 
the faintest object recorded in antiquity. However, the 
reference is not entirely clear. It is clear that the cluster 
was both included in Hodierna’s list of nebulous objects 
(16654) and recorded by Flamsteed in 1702. 

For a poor open cluster, M41 has a remarkably 
rich population of unusual stars. The percentage of 
binary systems is thought to be as high as 40% from 
spectroscopic evidence. Additionally, there are several 
luminous red giants, some of which are suspected of 
low-level variability, and two confirmed white dwarfs. 
Research has very much concentrated on these exotic stars 
but studies of the cluster are still hampered by the fact 
that its basic parameters (age and distance) have not so 
far been satisfactorily determined. The literature quotes 
age determinations between 30 and 200 million years with 
the uncertainty due to the fact that the exact amount of 
reddening for this cluster has been difficult to pin down. 
Starlight will be scattered off the interstellar dust and thus 
be shifted into the red part of the spectrum, making the 
emitting stars look both older and fainter than they really 
are. To correct for this effect, it is important to have some 
idea of the amount of interstellar dust in the line of sight 
and this is not always easy to determine. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M42 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M42 


M42 is better known as the ORION NEBULA. It is a huge 
(four times the area of the full Moon), bright (4 mag) 
diffuse nebula which constitutes the main part of a still 
larger cloud extending well over half the constellation of 
Orion. This cloud also contains M43, Barnard’s Loop, the 
Horsehead Nebula and the reflection nebula around M87. 

As a whole, the nebula is similar to other diffuse 
nebulae but it is the brightest and the star formation region 
closest to Earth. It harbors at its center one of the youngest 
known clusters, the Trapezium cluster. Its stars light up the 
nebula (consisting of pure ionized hydrogen in the central 
regions and some gas and dust in the outer parts) with 
the starlight partly reflected and partly absorbed and re- 
emitted. Because of its great luminosity, rich structure 
can be discerned in the nebula even with conventional 
telescopes, and detailed investigation with the Hubble 
Space Telescope has recently uncovered such details as 
disks of dust and gas forming around and interacting with 
the bright stars. These are thought to be the beginnings of 
planetary systems. 

At its northern end, the nebula is divided into two 
parts by a prominent dust lane. Messier assigned an extra 
number (M43) to the smaller part. 

As would be expected for sucha bright object, M42 has 
a rich history in recorded astronomy from Ptolemy (who 
cataloged the Trapezium cluster if not the nebula itself) 
via the French lawyer and amateur astronomer Nicholas- 
Claude Fabri de Peiresc (1610), Christian Huygens (1684), 
Hodierna (before 1654, he produced the first drawing) and 
Charles Messier. 

Considering that Messier’s list concentrated mainly 
on faint, nebulous, not well known or even unknown 
objects, it is surprising that he chose to include the objects 
M42 to M45 which are all bright and were well known 
at his time. He recorded them in a single night (4 March 
1769) and it has been suggested that their only function 
was to bring the number of objects in the first published 
version of his catalog (submitted 1771, published 1774) up 
to 45—possibly simply to beat the number (42) included 
in Lacaille’s 1755 catalog of southern objects. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M43 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M43 


M43 is a part of the Orion nebula (M42) separated from 
the main body by a dust lane and sometimes referred to 
as ‘de Mairan’s nebula’. It was first discovered in 1733 
by de Mairan as a ‘brilliance surrounding a star’ and 
consists primarily of a relatively dust free region of ionized 
hydrogen (H II) and its centrally located exciting star (NU 
Orionis). Dust mixed with gas lying along or outside the 
near circular boundary of M43 is important for the energy 
balance in the region. The Orion A complex consisting of 
M42 and M43 is the best studied H II region in our galaxy, 
but work has mainly focused on the central parts and the 
conditions in the outer gas are not well understood. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M44 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M44 


M44 is the ‘Beehive’ or ‘Praesepe’ (= manger) open cluster 
in Cancer. Like M42 and M43, this is a very bright (3.5 mag) 
object known since antiquity. It was first resolved into its 
component stars by Galileo and contains approximately 
350 members. In many ways, such as direction of motion 
and age (about 700 million years), it is strikingly similar to 
the nearby Hyades cluster and it has been suggested that 
both clusters originated in one gaseous cloud. Their x-ray 
properties are very different, however, possibly because of 
differences in their binary populations. 

Praesepe contains at least four blue stragglers and 
several 5 Scuti stars. The cluster is particularly suited for 
studies of these stars because of its well-known age and 
metallicity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M45 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M45 


M45 is better known as the Pleiades, a young open 
cluster in Taurus. Again, this is a very bright (1.6 mag) 
object known since antiquity. The Pleiades are sometimes 
referred to as the ‘Seven Sisters’ since that is the number 
of stars normally visible to the naked eye. In Greek 
mythology these represent Pleione and her daughters with 
Atlas: Alcyone, Asterope (a double star), Electra, Maia, 
Merope, Taygeta and Celaeno. Ona very good night more 
than 12 of the over 500 mostly faint stars that constitute 
the cluster can be visible. 

The Pleiades were first mentioned by Hesiod (1000 
Bc) but there are also references in the Odyssey (Homer) 
the Bible and countless other recordings. The name could 
either derive from Pleione, one of the brighter stars and 
the mythological mother of the seven sisters, or from the 
Greek word for ‘to sail’, since it was during the months that 
the Pleiades were visible in the sky that the Mediterranean 
was Safe for Greek sailors. 

The cluster itself is fairly young (70 million years), 
consists of a few bright and many faint stars but has 
such low density that its expected lifetime is not much 
more than another 250 million years. The bright stars 
are embedded in nebulous material that reflects the light 
from them. The brightest of these reflection nebulae is 
around Merope but they were only discovered from the 
second half of the nineteenth century onwards, when long- 
exposure photography became available. More recently 
still, the bright stars were found to rotate rapidly. Pleione 
ejected a gas shell in 1938-52, an event that was predicted 
from the rotation by O Struwe. 

Since then, the cluster has been shown to contain a 
very high number of dwarf members: amongst these are 
22 binary systems, three triples and an unusual number 
of white dwarfs. Their presence in such a young cluster 
has still not been explained. Additionally, brown dwarfs 
were found in 1995: these are objects with masses between 
those of stars and planets and had only been theoretically 
predicted to exist before they were observed in the Pleiades 
cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M46 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M46 


M46 is a moderately rich open cluster in Puppis, in a 
direction where interstellar distinction is unusually small. 
It was the first object discovered by Messier after he 
presented the original version of his list (M1 to M45) to the 
Academy. It has a total population of over 500 stars and 
its age has been estimated at 300 million years. It contains 
several red giants and three eclipsing binaries but has not 
been at the center of much research so far. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M47 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M47 


M47 is an open cluster in Puppis, first recorded (before 
1654) by Hodierna. It was independently rediscovered by 
Messier on 19 February 1771, but he made a sign error 
when computing its position and so it was considered 
a ‘missing object’ (i.e. possibly spurious) until Oswald 
Thomas clarified Messier’s mistake in 1934. It has to 
be emphasized again that Messier’s list, unlike many of 
the earlier compilations, contains very few mistakes and 
no spurious objects. Consequently, the confidence in 
Messier was such that this wrong position survived into 
the General Catalog by John Herschel who remarked that: 
‘This cluster has not since been observed. It is probably a 
very loose and poor one’. 

Under good conditions, M47 is visible to the naked 
eye (5.2 mag). It is a loose, young (78 million years) cluster 
of bright stars that resembles the Pleiades in its overall 
stellar population and it can therefore be used for studies 
comparing the stellar evolution as a function of mass in 
different clusters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M48 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M48 


M48 is another ‘missing object’ (see also M47). The open 
cluster in Hydra was recorded by Messier on 19 February 
1771 but an error in the data reduction resulted in a 
wrong position. The error was cleared up and the correct 
object identified by T F Morris in 1959. In the meantime, 
the cluster was independently rediscovered by Caroline 
Herschel. It has an angular diameter of 54 arcmin and 
a visual magnitude of 5.5 and can therefore be observed 
with the naked eye under good conditions. The cluster 
contains about 80 stars but membership is still not entirely 
clear and it is thought to be about 300 million years old. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M49 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M49 


M49 is the brightest elliptical galaxy in Virgo. It was 
discovered by Messier on 19 February 1771 and was the 
first member of the huge Virgo cluster of galaxies to be 
recorded, later followed by two more giant ellipticals 
(M60, M87). It is less dense than M87 and more yellow 
overall than most galaxies in the cluster. 

Ellipticals are galaxies thought to be in a late stage 
of their evolution and M49 contains no gas, dust, or star- 
forming systems but around 6000 globular clusters. These 
are particularly interesting because they can be shown 
to fall very strictly into two different age groups. Some 
theories of galactic evolution predict a large fraction of 
ellipticals to have been formed by the merging of spiral 
galaxies, which would naturally produce a younger and 
an older population of globular clusters within the same 
elliptical. Ongoing studies of the dynamics attempt to 
determine whether they are consistent with this picture. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M5 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M5 


M5 isa globular cluster in Serpens Caput halfway between 
Arcturus and Antares and 0.5 degrees north of 5 Serpentis. 
It was discovered by the German astronomer Gottfried 
Kirch in May 1702 but independently rediscovered by 
Messier in 1764 (Kirch did not publish his discovery). 
With a diameter of 130 light-years it is the largest of 
Messier’s globular clusters (although larger ones have 
since been discovered) and unusually asymmetrical. Its 
visual brightness is 5.6 mag and its age has been estimated 
at 13 billion years. Its distance from the Sun is 22 800 light- 
years. 

M5 contains 105 variables the brightest of which can 
be seen 3 arc minutes southwest of the cluster’s centre with 
simple 25 x 100 binoculars. A dwarf nova was discovered 
in 1981. Dwarf novae are small stars that ignite due to 
the accretion of material from a binary companion. These 
events are more rare than supernovae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M50 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M50 


M50 is a young, open cluster in Monoceros. It was 
discovered in 1772 by Charles Messier but there is a 
possible earlier recording by G D Cassini. 

The cluster has an age of about 100 million years and 
about 200 stars in the main body. Some of these are red 
and yellow giants but studies of the evolution of high-mass 
stars have not so far included this cluster. The distance has 
been estimated to be about 940 pc. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M51 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M51 


M51, the WHIRLPOOL GALAXY in the constellation Canes 
Venatici, was discovered by Charles Messier on 13 October 
1773, when observing a comet. Ithas a visual magnitude of 
only 8.4 and is hence difficult to observe as light pollution 
makes it easily fade into the background. Nevertheless, 
Lord Rosse in 1845 recognized its spiral structure and it is 
therefore the first spiral galaxy that was identified as such. 
M51 has been classified as Sc, a so-called ‘grand design’ 
spiral whose spiral arms can be traced through almost 
three revolutions. It is the dominating member of a small 
group of galaxies (also including M63) at a distance of 
about 9.6 Mpc (37 million light-years). Interactions with its 
close companion galaxy NGC 5195 have possibly caused 
the strong spiral structure. 

The nucleus of this galaxy is heavily obscured by 
dust but the presence of an AGN (active galactic nucleus) 
is strongly suggested by the point source of hard x-rays 
within it. On the evidence of this and on the basis of 
optical emission lines, the galaxy was classified as Seyfert 
2 or LINER (low-ionization nuclear emission-line region— 
a type of AGN) and most current research on the galaxy 
centers on the properties of its AGN. 

Additionally, the denser parts of the galaxy have been 
shown by the ISO satellite to harbor star-forming regions 
and in 1994 a supernova of type Ic was found by the 
amateur astronomers Jerry Armstrong and Tim Puckett. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M52 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M52 


M52 is a comparatively rich but poorly studied open 
cluster in Cassiopeia. Its visual magnitude is 7.3 
and it extends over 13’ but is situated in a region of 
high interestellar absorption which causes a non-uniform 
reddending across the cluster and renders determination 
of its age and distance very difficult. Its distance has 
been variously given as 25 or 150 Mpc and its age is 
thought to be around 35 million years (or much older 
with another distance). The cluster contains 193 probable 
member stars amongst which there are two potential 5- 
Scuti variables (one of which was confirmed in 1998), three 
slowly pulsating B stars and one eclipsing binary. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M53 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M53 


M53 is a metal-poor (ie. old), moderately compact 
globular cluster in Coma Berenices, belonging to the outer 
halo of our galaxy. Itis—within uncertainties—identical in 
age to M92 and very richin variable stars. M53 has a visible 
magnitude of 7.6 and a distance of about 56 000 light-years 
from us or 60000 light-years from the Galactic Center. 
There is little or no foreground reddening so the distance 
is reasonably well determined. The cluster contains 47 
known RR Lyrae stars and about 114 blue stragglers in a 
strikingly bimodal radial distribution similar to M3. 

Clusters in the outer halo are particularly interesting 
for the study of the formation of our galaxy since they are 
believed in some cases to be older than the galaxy itself 
(see for example M54). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M54 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M54 


The globular cluster M54 in the constellation Sagittarius 
was discovered by Charles Messier on 24 July 1778 and 
is hence the first extragalactic globular cluster ever to be 
recorded. It was not until 1994, however, that it was shown 
not to be a member of our Galaxy but of a very nearby 
dwarf galaxy SagDEG (the Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical 
Galaxy), one of four globular clusters in that galaxy and 
possibly its nucleus. It has a visual magnitude of 7.6 and 
since it is at a distance of slightly over 80000 light-years 
this makes it one of the most luminous globular clusters 
known, second only to w Centauri. It has a metal-poor 
blue horizontal branch typical of old globular clusters 
and contains 82 known variables, the majority of which 
are RR Lyrae. An accurate age analysis has so far not 
been possible, but it is thought to be between 0.5 and 1.5 
billion years older than M68 and M5 (i.e. about 11 billion 
years) which would make it significantly older than other 
member clusters and around 3 billion years older than the 
field (i.e. the non-cluster stars of our Galaxy). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M55 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M55 


M55 is a large, loose globular cluster in the constellation 
Sagittarius with a visual magnitude of 6.3 and a diameter 
of 19’. It was discovered by Lacaille between 1751 and 1752 
when he was observing in South Africa but it is difficult 
to see from the northern hemisphere. Although Messier 
first looked for it in 1764 he only found it in 1778. M55 is 
a halo cluster with a high galactic latitude, which means 
there is little extinction from dust in the galactic plane and 
its size and luminosity therefore make it a good object for 
photometric study. It has an extremely blue horizontal 
branch and its age is thought to be around 14.5 billion 
years. If this age determination is correct it can be used 
to put a lower limit on the age of the universe which is 
thought to be between 10 and 20 billion years. Particularly 
interesting is its population of 74 blue stragglers, some 
of which are thought to be members of binary systems. 
To confirm this would be an important test for current 
theories of blue straggler formation, most of which involve 
binary systems. 

M55 also contains a low-luminosity x-ray source 
discovered by the ROSAT satellite. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M56 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M56 


M56 is a globular cluster in Lyra in a good position for 
northern hemisphere observers. It has a visual magnitude 
of 8.3 and an angular diameter of 7.1’ (about 60 light-years 
at a distance of about 31600 light-years). The cluster is 
not particularly rich and its low galactic latitude means 
that the region is strongly contaminated by field stars (i.e. 
membership of stars to the cluster is somewhat difficult to 
establish). It contains two RR Lyrae variable stars, one BL 
Her, one RV Tauri and three red variables (note that this 
is the latest count: Helen Sawyer Hogg in the 1940s found 
12 variables, among which was a Cepheid that might not 
be a member). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M57 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M57 


M57, the ‘RING NEBULA’, is a planetary nebula in the 
constellation Lyra. It was discovered by Antoine Darquier 
de Pellepax and is now considered the prototype planetary 
nebula in the northern summer sky, even though William 
Herschel, who invented the term, did not consider M57 a 
planetary nebula. It consists of a hot (100 000 K) central star 
surrounded by a ring of dust and gas which is probably 
some sort of torus and would look similar to the dumbbell 
nebula M27 if it could be viewed from its equatorial 
plane. Planetary nebulae are thought to form when an old 
giant blows off its outer layers, which in this case must 
have happened in some sort of polar or bimodal form 
since we are seeing the torus rather than a shell. Recent 
Hubble images of M57 show subarcsecond dust globules— 
probably bits of the old star’s shell. The hot core left over 
after the explosion ionizes the gas around it which re-emits 
the energy in a very few lines (this is very common for 
planetary nebulae, see also, for example, the description 
of M27): from the innermost parts of the nebula outwards 
these are UV radiation, forbidden lines of ionized O and 
N, and red hydrogen lines. The ongoing chemistry in 
the nebula is likely to be dominated by photodissociation, 
shocks and ion—molecule reactions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M58 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M58 


M58 is a bright, barred spiral galaxy in Virgo, one of the 
brightest in the Virgo cluster and one of only four barred 
spirals in Messier’s catalog (the others are M91, M95 and 
M109). It has excited considerable recent research interest 
mainly because of indications of an active galactic nucleus 
(AGN). It was classified as a Seyfert 1.9 or a LINER (low- 
ionization nuclear emission-line regions—a type of low- 
luminosity AGN) since it has a flat-spectrum radio core 
(i.e. the core emits equally across all radio frequencies— 
this indicates some very high-energy processes) and a 
point-like x-ray source at its nucleus. However, the 
LINER ionization source is not clear and the energetics 
of the nucleus are difficult to explain by current models. 
The latest attempts center around the possible existence 
of some sort of ionized accretion disk around the x-ray 
source. 

The galaxy is at a distance of 60 million light-years, has 
visual magnitude 9.7 and contains two recent supernovae 
(18 January 1988, type II; 28 June 1989, type I) which 
represent the other big focus of research in this galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M59 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M59 


M59 is an early-type (ie. old) elliptical galaxy in the 
constellation Virgo and a member of the Virgo cluster (the 
nearest cluster of galaxies, much larger than our own Local 
Group). It is considerably less luminous than M49, M60 
and M87 but still one of the brighter elliptical galaxies in 
the cluster. M59 contains around 2000 globular clusters, 
easily 10 times more than the Milky Way but much fewer 
than the three giants above. The galaxy’s most interesting 
feature is its disk component: there are two basic types 
of elliptical galaxies, one disky, more regular and one 
irregular, boxy, usually radio-loud with x-ray activity 
indicating recent mergers. Disk components are thought 
to be caused by flattening through rotational velocity and 
hence the recent work on M59 has concentrated on its 
internal dynamics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M6 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M6 


Mé is one of two prominent open clusters in Scorpius 
positioned in the ‘stinger’ at the end of the scorpion’s 
tail. Unlike nearby M7, which is seen against a backdrop 
of rich Milky Way starfields, the surroundings of M6 are 
relatively star-free. Both clusters are visible to the naked 
eye as hazy spots but it seems that the first person to 
establish the true nature of M6 was the Swiss astronomer 
de CheSeaux around 1745 before Messier rediscovered it 
in 1764. The stars of M6 form a shape reminiscent of the 
outline of a butterfly, from which comes its popular name 
the Butterfly Cluster. In one of the ‘wings’ lies its brightest 
member, BM Scorpii, an orange giant that varies between 
about fifth and seventh magnitude every 27 months or so. 
M6 appears somewhat smaller and fainter than M7 since 
it lies at roughly twice the distance, 1600 light-years. Its 
age, though, is only about half as great, some 80 million 
years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M60 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M60 


M60 is a giant elliptical galaxy in the Virgo cluster (see 
also the mention under M59). It has a diameter of 120000 
light-years and an intrinsic luminosity of about 60 million 
solar luminosities. M60 contains around 5100 globular 
clusters (for comparison the Milky Way has about 150). 
These clusters have been studied intensively since they 
are very interesting for the formation history of elliptical 
galaxies: the color of the clusters and their positions in the 
halo gives some clues as to the heavy-element enrichment 
process during formation. 

M60 is also interesting dynamically: arguments from 
internal dynamics require a central black hole of 10° solar 
masses. This fits with theories of galaxy formation which 
predict that all large ellipticals should host black holes left 
over from an earlier quasar phase. 

In the radio part of the electromagnetic spectrum 
M60 possesses weak jets and radio lobes also indicating 
an active nucleus. Additionally, its spectrum possibly 
indicates that star formation was going on until fairly 
recently which would be highly unusual for such an old 
galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M61 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M61 


M61 is a barred spiral galaxy in Virgo—another large 
member of the Virgo cluster. It was discovered by Oriani 
on 5 May 1779 when following a comet. Incidentally, 
Messier also saw it that night but mistook it for the comet 
(he was to make the same mistake twice more before he 
realized that the object did not move and included it in 
his catalog six years later). The galaxy is at a distance of 
about 60 million light-years and has a visual magnitude of 
9.7. Its core remains unresolved but recent HST pictures 
showed a nuclear spiral structure of the massive star- 
forming regions. It is thought that the bar accumulates 
gas in the nuclear regions, produces the star-forming rings 
and might eventually generate or feed an AGN. 

Three supernovae have been observed in M61: 1926A, 
19611 and 1964F. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M62 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M62 


Mé2 is a globular cluster in Ophiuchus which Messier 
discovered in 1771 but for which he determined an 
accurate position only in 1779 (hence the relatively high 
number in the catalog). It is at a distance of 21500 light- 
years from the Sun, and has a visual magnitude of 6.5. 
Its distance from the galactic center is only about 6100 
light-years and hence its irregular shape is probably due 
to deformation by galactic tides. It is very similar to M19, 
its apparent neighbor, in size and magnitude. Research 
interest in this cluster has centered on its 89 variable stars. 
These are mostly RR Lyrae and 74 periods have been 
determined. It is interesting to note that M19, in spite of 
its similarity, only has four variable stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M63 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M63 


The ‘Sunflower’ spiral galaxy M63 in Canes Venatici was 
discovered by Messier’s collaborator Pierre Mechain, on 
14June 1779. Itis ina physical group with M51 and several 
smaller galaxies and represents the archetypical example 
of the class of galaxies known as ‘flocculent spirals’. In 
these galaxies, the visible spiral structure is patchy and 
localized, formed by low-amplitude density waves. It is 
not clear whether they are simply weak counterparts to 
the grand-design spirals or whether they are dynamically 
different. M63 exhibits a weak two-arm structure in the 
near-infrared and structures similar to the giant molecular 
associations of the grand design spirals M51 and M100 
have been detected. 

M63 also has a mildly active nucleus and a supernova 
was observed in May 1971. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M64 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M64 


M64 is a spiral galaxy in Coma Berenices sometimes called 
the ‘BLACK EYE’ or (‘Sleeping Beauty’) galaxy, because of 
the conspicuous dark dust structure near its center. It is 
at a distance of roughly 12 million light-years but close 
to the Virgo cluster, which makes its recession velocity 
almost certainly dominated by infall (and hence renders 
the distance uncertain). M64 has attracted a lot of interest 
because of its very unusual dynamic structure: it has an 
inner disk of gas and stars and a counter-rotating outer 
disk which is mostly gas. The dust lanes of the ‘black 
eye’ are in the inner disk. The two disks are coplanar to 
about 7 degrees. The transition region between them is 
not in a steady state and contains vigorous star formation. 
Originally, it was thought that this bizarre two-disk system 
was produced by the accretion of a companion galaxy, 
but even that model does not fully explain the dynamic 
behavior and it also fails to explain why systems like these 
are so very rare (only three galaxies with counter-rotating 
disks have been discovered so far). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M65 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M65 


M65 is a spiral galaxy in Leo, part of the Leo triplet which 
consists of M65, M66 and NGC 3628. Its distance has 
variously been determined as 6.7 Mpc (de Vaucouleurs 
1975) and 23.4 Mpc (Sandage and Tamman 1975) but the 
lower value is generally considered more likely since it 
seems more consistent with H I studies. The galaxy 
shows a prominent dust lane on the facing edge with 
some possible star-formation regions close to it. The 
stellar population in the disk is smooth and old. The 
triplet system is very tightly gravitationally bound (see 
also the description of M66) but that does not seem to 
have had any effect on the star formation rates of any of 
the member galaxies. Equally, the spiral arms of M65 have 
remained tightly wound so far, without any indication of 
tidal disruption. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M66 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M66 


M66 is a spiral galaxy in Leo and also part of the Leo 
triplet consisting of M65, M66 and NGC 3628. The close 
association between this galaxy and NGC 3628 could be 
responsible for the disturbed nature of the entire system. 
M66 is larger than M65 without a well-defined central 
bulge and very deformed spiral arms. A tidal tail extends 
from NGC 3628 into the direction of M65 and the two 
galaxies are linked by a bridge of neutral hydrogen. This 
clearly indicates a recent close encounter which is thought 
to have triggered some unusual dynamic processes in M66, 
such as the central concentration of stellar and gas mass 
and the formation of a gaseous bar. This bar causes an 
efficient radial mass accretion across the entire disk and 
the galaxy is thought by some to be evolving into an 
AGN (active galactic nucleus). It has an H;/H: mass ratio 
that is close to Seyfert galaxies and seems to be currently 
undergoing at least a weak form of nuclear starburst. 

Three recent supernovae have been observed in M66: 
1973R, 1989B and 1997bs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M67 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M67 


M67 is an old open cluster in Cancer, the oldest in Messier’s 
catalog at about 4 billion years and still one of the oldest 
known. It is well studied since it is comparatively rich 
for an open cluster, at a distance of only 4000 light-years 
from the Sun and with a high galactic latitude (i.e. there 
is little reddening or dust extinction). The population 
of M67 (around 500 stars, at least 38% of which are 
binaries) serves as a paradigm for studies of structure 
and evolution of population I solar-age stars, just as 
Hyades and Pleiades do for younger objects. It has a very 
well developed population of red giants and some blue 
stragglers (a further indication that the phenomenon of 
blue stragglers—hot, young stars in a predominantly old 
population—is in some way connected to a high incidence 
of binary associations). 

M67 has also been used for extensive comparisons of 
the evolution of cluster and field stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M68 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M68 


M68 is a very metal-poor globular cluster in Hydra, very 
similar to M30. It is a large and loosely spread object at 
high galactic latitude and has been studied mainly for its 
age and its metallicity. It is thought to be around 13 billion 
years old (i.e. identical in age, within the errors, to M15), 
but the exact metallicity is difficult to determine since the 
indicators lose sensitivity at the low end. However, it is 
not quite metal-poor enough to consist of population III 
(i.e. primordial) stars. 

The stellar population of M68 is predominantly old 
with a gap in the horizontal branch of the HR-diagram 
very similar to that in M15: the eight bluest stars are clearly 
separated from the remainder of the horizontal branch. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M69 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M69 


M69 is a metal-rich, globular cluster in Sagittarius, which 
was originally thought to be a ‘disk’ cluster, i.e. a member 
of the subsystem of globular clusters in the galactic disk. 
However, the distinction between disk and halo clusters 
is controversial and never very clear. M69 can also be 
regarded as a halo cluster with a very eccentric orbit. 
Additionally, it has the age and metallicity of a typical halo 
cluster. 

The cluster was discovered by Lacaille. Messier first 
missed it in 1764 (the object is small and faint and becomes 
more difficult to observe further north) but found it with 
a better telescope in 1780. It has a bright and compact 
core with eight known variables. A possible (but still 
unconfirmed) cataclysmic binary was discovered in 1986. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M7 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M7 


M7 is an open or galactic cluster in the constellation 
Scorpius. It is easily visible with the unaided eye some 
degrees northeast of Shaula (A Scorpii) and was first 
mentioned by Ptolemy in Ap 130 (his mention might also 
include the nearby M6). Hence the cluster is often referred 
to as ‘Ptolemy’s Cluster’. It was included in the published 
lists of nebulous and stellar objects by Hodierna (around 
1654—counted 30 stars), Halley (1678) and by the Abbé de 
la Caille (1755—counted ‘15 or 20’ stars). 

M7 contains about 80 stars of magnitudes greater 
than 10 (the brightest is a yellow giant). Its overall visual 
brightness is 4 mag and its diameter is 18 light-years. The 
age was estimated at 220 million years (note that Koelbloed 
gives a much lower value of 70 million years) and the 
distance to the Sun as 800 light-years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M70 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M70 


M70 is a globular cluster in Sagittarius at a distance of 
about 28000 light-years. It has a southern declination 
and is therefore difficult to observe from the northern 
hemisphere but it is a bit more luminous and bigger than 
its apparent neighbor M69. For a globular cluster it is of 
only intermediate metallicity and it has a very pronounced 
blue straggler sequence. The far-UV light is smoothly 
distributed and not dominated by a single bright star, it is 
therefore not entirely clear what causes the strong emission 
in that region. There are only 10 variable stars, all of which 
are RR Lyrae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M71 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M71 


M71 is an unusual globular cluster in Sagitta in that it is 
very metal rich (only M69 is richer) and very sparse. For 
a long time its classification was undetermined between a 
sparse globular cluster and a very dense open cluster. It is, 
however, now generally thought to be a globular cluster. 
Its second unusual feature is its very low-eccentricity orbit. 
Globular clusters usually move around the galactic plane 
in the halo, but there is a population of metal-rich clusters 
which are concentrated close to the plane. M71 belongs to 
these and has been studied carefully in order to gain more 
insight into the process of cluster formation. Interestingly, 
its stars seem to have a very varied abundance of some 
of the heavier elements which might indicate that the gas 
from which they were formed was not properly mixed. 
Unlike most globular clusters, M71 has only a very few 
variables. Eight have been identified so far, none of which 
are of the common RR Lyrae type. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M72 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M72 


M72 is a globular cluster in Aquarius, not very concen- 
trated, quite distant but intrinsically very luminous. It 
hosts 42 known variable stars and is part of asmall group of 
globular clusters together with NGC 6584, NGC 6864, M75 
and others. This group has been the focus of some interest 
since it has a high apparent retrograde motion around the 
galactic center. The significance of a group of apparent ret- 
rograde clusters lies in the hypothesis that clusters of the 
galactic halo formed in relatively large satellite galaxies 
which subsequently merged with the Galaxy to become 
the galactic halo. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M73 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M73 


M73 is an asterism of four stars which was recorded by 
Messier only as a help for the determination of the position 
of M72 (which is 1.5 degrees to the west). It is not entirely 
clear whether the group is a real cluster rather than a mere 
asterism. E M Arnal classified it as an open cluster in 1979, 
but this assertion does not seem to have been checked. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M74 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M74 


M74 is a spiral galaxy in Pisces with a linear diameter of 
95 000 light-years (i.e. of roughly the size of the Milky Way) 
and a visual magnitude of 9.4. In many ways, this is a 
prototypical ‘grand design’ spiral. Its arms are about 1000 
light-years broad, it has a very small and bright nucleus 
and is particularly beautiful on photographs because it is 
face-on. As well as its normal appearance, however, it 
has been shown to have a very extended disk of neutral 
hydrogen with a complex velocity structure (ie. it is 
slightly warped). The velocity field in the outer disk is 
inconsistent with differential rotation in a flat disk. The 
galaxy also exhibits some irregularities in its otherwise 
smooth and regular spiral arms. A recent merger event 
(or recent merger events) has been postulated to explain 
this behavior but no suitable candidate can be discerned 
in the vicinity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M75 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M75 


M75 is a globular cluster in Sagittarius at a distance of 
57700 light-years (i.e. beyond the Galactic Center). It is 
compact and has a very high luminosity (about 160000 
solar luminosities). It is a member of the same group 
as M72 and therefore has an apparently retrograde orbit 
around the Galactic Center. Like most globular clusters 
with a high degree of concentration and a relatively high 
metallicity, it has a fair number of variable stars (10 RR 
Lyrae, six with known periods) and some radio sources. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M76 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M76 


M76isa planetary nebula in Perseus, often called the ‘LITTLE 
DUMBBELL NEBULA’ (or the ‘Cork’ or ‘Butterfly’ Nebula). It 
was assigned two NGC numbers since it was originally 
thought to be two distinct objects. Like most nebulae, it 
has a very ill-defined distance: estimates range from 1700 
to 15000 light-years. The bright part consists of a slightly 
elliptical ring that is pointing towards the observer (i.e. it 
is viewed nearly edge-on). Attached to that ring are two 
inner lobes (the wings of the butterfly) and fainter outer 
lobes which move at a much lower expansion velocity. 
Additionally, there is a polar cap on the southeast side, 
which has a higher expansion velocity again. The nature 
of these outer lobes and the polar cap remains unknown, 
but it is generally thought that the nebula was probably 
formed by some interaction of stellar winds. The central 
star has been identified and has a temperature of about 
60000 K. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M77 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M77 


M/7 is a spiral galaxy in Cetus, at a distance of about 
60 million light-years and with a diameter of between 
120000 and 170000 light-years. It belongs to the class of 
galaxies known as ‘Seyfert galaxies’, i.e. it has a brilliant 
nucleus with intense star-forming activity in a disk around 
it, an emission-line spectrum and fairly faint spiral arms. 
Seyfert galaxies themselves are a particular type of AGN 
(active galactic nucleus) galaxy. Most of these have (or 
are thought to have) a supermassive accreting object at 
the center that powers the intense luminosity of the object. 
In the case of M77 this object is thought to have about 
10’ solar masses. Recent research interest has mostly 
centered around the central object and the star-formation 
activity in the disk. M77 has the most luminous water- 
vapour maser yet reported (350 solar luminosities) which 
indicates an ongoing burst of star formation. But because 
of its brightness, proximity and favorable orientation, the 
galaxy in general provides a good laboratory for studying 
the Seyfert nucleus, inner disk and circumnuclear ring. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M78 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M78 


M7f8 is a reflection nebulosity seen against the Lynds 1630 
dark cloud and appears to be associated with the Orion 
complex. It contains many bright, hot B stars which 
are probably very young and about 45 variables have 
been identified in or near the nebula. For this reason, 
M7F8 is also sometimes referred to as a ‘young embedded 
cluster’ and has been important for the study of stellar 
evolution. Its visual structure is dominated by a band of 
dark obscuration that delineates the northern edge of the 
nebula. It resembles a faint comet. Its distance has been 
estimated at 1600 light-years and its visual magnitude is 
8.3. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M79 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M79 


M79 is a globular cluster in Lepus, at a distance of 
about 41100 light-years. It is moderately metal-poor 
(metallicity comparable to M13) but has an extremely 
blue horizontal branch and generally shows more UV 
bright objects than would be expected for such a cluster. 
It has been speculated that there could be kinematic 
processes changing the stellar evolution and M79 is 
sometimes regarded as a possible instance of core collapse 
because of the irregularity of its profile and the fairly high 
concentration. It is slightly elliptical and contains seven 
known variables. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M8 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ms 


M68 is a diffuse nebula also known as the ‘LAGOON NEBULA’ 
because of the dark band separating it into two bright 
parts. The nebula is associated with an open star cluster 
(NGC 6530) which can be seen with the naked eye in 
the constellation Sagittarius to the southeast of the bright 
nebula M20. The cluster was first discovered by Flamsteed 
around 1680 (he was the first Astronomer Royal and 
published a star catalog Historia Coelestis Britannica in 
1712). The French Astronomer Le Gentil described the 
nebula in 1747. 

The open cluster was created by star formation by the 
collapsing gas in the nebula and most of the interest in this 
object centers on the fact that star formation can still be seen 
to occur. The nebula is rich in substructures, notably the 
dark globules (which are collapsing protostellar clouds) 
and the recently discovered twisted-rope structures which 
are possibly tornado-like phenomena caused by the large 
difference in temperature between the hot surface and the 
cold interior of the clouds combined with the pressure of 
starlight. Within its brightest part, there is a region known 
as the ‘HOURGLASS NEBULA’ where star formation appears to 
take place currently. The bright emission of this part (and 
the emission in the rest of the nebula) is caused by the gas 
re-emitting radiation that was absorbed from the very hot 
young stars. The open cluster contains between 50 and 
100 of these with a large number of irregular variable stars 
such as ‘flare’ stars (type UV Ceti). Its age is estimated 
to be just 2 million years. The nebula has a diameter of 
140 light-years and is about 5200 light-years away from 
the Sun. Its visual brightness is 6.0 mag and it also emits 
radio waves in the 9.4 cm band. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ms0 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ms0 


M80 is a globular cluster in Scorpius that is unusual for 
two reasons (which may be related). In May 1860 a 
dwarf nova occurred in the cluster possibly caused by 
a cataclysmic variable. Dwarf novae are rare events in 
globular clusters (see also M14). M80 also has the largest 
and most concentrated population of blue straggler stars 
(which are now thought to bea late stage in the evolution of 
a close binary system) ever observed in a galactic globular 
cluster. This may suggest that it is in a transient dynamical 
state during which stellar interactions are delaying the 
core-collapse process. 

The distance to M80 is not very well determined and 
varies between 27000 and 36000 light-years. Its visual 
magnitude is 7.3 and its diameter is 8.9’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M81 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M81 


M81 is an early-type spiral galaxy with a prominent bulge 
and well-defined arms. It is sometimes also known as 
‘Bode’s Galaxy’; it is very bright, and can under good 
conditions be seen with the naked eye in the constellation 
Ursa Major. Together with M82 it forms a small group 
and there are some indications that the two have had 
a close encounter in the past (M82 seems to have been 
affected more—its shape is more irregular than that of 
M81). With a distance of only 12 million light-years, M81 
isa fairly nearby galaxy and has therefore been extensively 
observed. It has a dense and unresolved core which emits 
strongly in the radio waveband as well as hosting an x-ray 
source. This, together with other indications, such as low- 
ionization emission lines, has led to the conclusion that the 
core of M81 must also host a low-luminosity AGN (active 
galactic nucleus). As is usual with these phenomena, the 
details of the object generating the power in the center are 
not well understood. Butitis clear that M81 shows features 
similar to a weak Seyfert galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M82: The Starburst Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M82: The Starburst Galaxy 


The nearby irregular galaxy M82 drew the attention 
of observers decades ago owing to its spectacular 
appearance, which suggested that it was an ‘exploding’ 
galaxy. The appearance of an explosion derives from the 
consequences of the enormous amounts of star formation 
activity in this galaxy. Intense star formation events in 
the central regions of galaxies, known as the starburst 
phenomenon, may be a common part of galaxy evolution, 
so the study of M82, the prototypical STARBURST GALAXY, is 
of particular importance. The STAR FORMATION is associated 
with a very rich interstellar medium with large amounts 
of molecular gas, dust and ionized gas as well as x-ray- 
emitting plasma. These are extremely unusual conditions 
in a galaxy, which raises the question of its origin as well 
as of its evolution and eventual fate. 

The galaxy M82 is a disk galaxy several times smaller 
than the Milky Way and in one of the closest groups 
(3.6 Mpc), whose three brightest members are M81, M82 
and NGC 3077. There appears to have been a tidal 
interaction between the members of the group that has 
torn neutral hydrogen from the outer parts of M81 and 
M82. This interaction, which took place about 108 yr ago, 
has perturbed the inner part of M82, probably producing 
the stellar bar in the bulge region. The presence of the bar 
and the tidal disturbance of the gaseous disk have led to 
the inflow of gas from the disk to the central 1 kpc of the 
galaxy. This buildup of gas occurred fairly quickly and it 
led to a period of rapid star formation that has occurred 
in a relatively small region. The energy released by the 
multitude of massive stars produced a superbubble of hot 
gas that has broken out of the disk and is flowing rapidly 
away from the galaxy. 


Central star formation activity 

The most direct evidence for star formation comes from 
the identification of the many young STAR CLUSTERS in the 
central region. Many of these star formation regions are 
obscured by dust, but, despite this limitation, HUBBLE SPACE 
TELESCOPE imaging reveals nearly 100 star clusters which 
have a typical size of 3 pc and a typical luminosity of 
several million solar luminosities, which exceeds that of 
any of the famous star formation regions in the Milky 
Way and even the most luminous star-forming cluster 
in the Large Magellanic Clouds. These star clusters are 
so dense that they are most similar to GLOBULAR CLUSTERS, 
although in these environments they will most likely 
become tidally disrupted rather than becoming long-lived 
gravitationally bound units. These clusters can occur in 
associations, with at least 45 such clusters found in one 
region alone. The optical observations set a lower limit to 
the actual number of clusters since dust extinction hides 
many clusters. Observations at some wavelengths are 
not affected by dust extinction, such as radio continuum 
and line observations. The continuum observations are 
sensitive to some of the SUPERNOVAE that occur, which 
should be associated with the young star clusters, but none 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the radio supernovae coincides with an optical cluster. 
If the radio supernovae are randomly distributed in young 
star clusters, then the lack of coincidence with the optical 
clusters implies that they must be associated with optically 
obscured star clusters. These obscured star clusters would 
have to be 20-40 times more common than the optically 
visible clusters in order to satisfy the statistical result that 
the supernovae do not coincide with visible clusters. 

The rate of star formation and the length of time 
over which the starburst has occurred are not determined 
by direct studies of the star clusters, but rather from 
the studies of the emission by the interstellar medium. 
Of the total luminosity produced by M82, 84% is 
emitted at wavelengths longward of 3 4m, and this is 
dominated by reemission from dust. The dust absorbs the 
ultraviolet light from the young stars and it is heated to 
a temperature of about 45 K. At this temperature, most 
dust grains emit like black bodies or gray bodies with 
a peak emissivity at about 60 wm. Some smaller dust 
grains are heated to higher temperatures owing to non- 
equilibrium effects, emitting at wavelengths as short as a 
few microns. However, the smallest dust components, the 
poly-aromatic hydrocarbons, are probably destroyed by 
the intense ultraviolet radiation field, since their infrared 
spectral signatures are absent. 

Because of the heavy obscuration in the optical region, 
the infrared lines are the most useful diagnostics of the 
conditions within the star-forming region because the 
optical depth in the 50-157 ym range is less than 0.1. Both 
moderate-ionization lines ({[O III] 4 51.8 wm, A 88.4 wm, 
[N IY] 4 57.3 wm) and low-ionization lines ([O I] 4 63.2 4m, 
A 145.5 wm, [C II] A 157.7 wm) have been measured 
by the Kuiper Airborne Observatory as well as by the 
Infrared Space Observatory. The moderate ionization lines 
are typical of H II REGIONS, so their luminosities and the 
line ratios give direct insight into the number of ionizing 
photons as well as the photon-to-gas density ratio. Strong 
low-ionization lines are not found in classical H II regions, 
but they are typical of photodissociation regions, where the 
ionizing radiation is dissociating the molecular gas and 
heating it, eventually becoming part of the H II region. 
Models for this emission indicate a star formation rate of 
10M, yr! and a relatively young age for the starburst, (3— 
5) x 10° yr, and a mass of young stars of 10°Mo. Several 
factors, such as the dynamics within the core and the 
superwind of the starburst, point to an age several times 
greater ((1-2) x 10’ yr), and this longer age is probably the 
more reliable one. This longer age can be reconciled with 
the age inferred from the star formation rate if the young 
star clusters have an excess of high-mass stars (a flatter 
initial mass function), although this point is controversial. 
The star formation rate emphasizes the extreme nature of 
the starburst phenomenon: about 3 times the total star 
formation rate of the Milky Way occurs within just a few 
hundred parsecs of the center of M82, 10-4 of the surface 
area of the Milky Way. 

The stars are forming from the plentiful molecular 
gas in the core, which has been the subject of numerous 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M82: The Starburst Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


studies, both with single dish and synthesis array 
telescopes and in several transitions of a variety of 
molecules. These studies indicate that there is about 
2 x 10°M. of molecular gas in an irregular ring that is 
in circular or elliptical orbit about the center of the galaxy. 
The star formation efficiency for this gas has been quite 
high, about 30%, given the estimate for the mass of young 
stars, 10°M,>, and roughly 30 times higher than the typical 
star formation efficiency in the disk of the Milky Way. 

The ensemble of young stars has several effects on 
the environment from which they formed. In addition 
to the photodissociation and H II regions produced by 
the ultraviolet photons, stellar winds and supernovae 
are extremely important in shaping the interstellar gas. 
Fast stellar winds from massive stars will create a hot 
bubble in a uniform medium along the lines of the 
classic superbubble scenario. At the end of the life of a 
massive star, the supernova event deposits about 3 times 
as much energy as the fast wind, eventually dominating 
the dynamics. The supernova rate is estimated to be about 
one supernova every 10 yr, 3-10 times greater than that for 
the entire Milky Way, but confined to this relatively small 
region. The frequency of supernovae is large enough that it 
is appropriate to treat the energy deposition as an input of 
energy that is smooth in time. To follow the response of the 
gas to this energy input, numerical hydrodynamic models 
have been used, assuming a locally uniform medium with 
a decreasing density out of the disk. These models show 
that, in the early stages, a spherical hot bubble develops, 
but, as the bubble size becomes comparable with the disk 
thickness, it begins to elongate perpendicularly to the disk, 
along the direction of the steepest density gradient. As the 
shock proceeds along the density gradient, it changes from 
a decelerating shock to an accelerating one. For the usual 
decelerating shock, the dense shell that has been formed 
is stable, but, with an accelerating shock, the dense shell is 
subject to the growth of Rayleigh—Taylor instabilities and 
it breaks up. This leads to the rapid outflow of material 
from the galaxy, discussed below. 

Various aspects of this hydrodynamic phenomenon 
are seen at several wavelengths, both in the active star- 
forming region as well as in the flow extending from 
the disk. In the position-velocity diagram for '*CO(1- 
0, 2-1), ®CO(1-0) and 8CO(1-0), there is an absence of 
emission at +45 kms~! fora region about 80 pc in diameter 
(figure 1). These observations indicate the presence of a 
ring of expanding molecular gas of radius 65 pc around a 
region where the molecular gas has been destroyed. The 
destruction of the molecular gas was probably due to a 
combination of ionizing photons, fast stellar winds and 
supernovae, but the expansion velocity of the molecular 
gas is probably due to the supernova shocks. There is 
also an absence of radio continuum emission in a region 
roughly coincident with the CO hole, although there is the 
possibility that free-free absorption by the ionized gas has 
dimmed the radio continuum. 

The x-ray emission reveals only three point sources in 
the central region, none of which is coincident with any of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


D [pc] D [pc] 
50 50 so op 50 
asq OT RSS TT 
L major_axis -———_s fMimor axis | 
t mith 
200 4 
150 el | 


Vv Isr [km 3] 


100 


wri.’ | pw 


affset ["'] 


offset ["] 


Figure 1. Position—velocity diagrams for the *CO(J = 1-0) 
transition along the major and minor axes of M82. The intensity 
in the line is proportional to the darkness, so the light region in 
the center indicates a hole in the molecular distribution 
surrounded by an expanding molecular ring (from Weiss et al 
1999 Astron. Astrophys. 345 L23). 


the radio point sources or the optical clusters. However, 
x-rays are dominated by more diffuse emission, which 
is brightest in the central region and most likely fills the 
central hole in the molecular gas. This emission appears 
to consist of multiple components with emission lines, 
and one decomposition consists of a hard, a medium and 
a soft component. The soft and possibly the medium 
component are probably emission from a hot plasma of 
temperature 0.3 keV and 1.0 keV. The presence of the line 
emission from eight different elements (from asca) plus 
the diffuse nature of the emission (from RosAT) indicate 
that the radiation is produced by hot dilute gas (density 
of ~0.1 cm™3, temperature of 10’ K), although of subsolar 
metallicity. The metallicity of the stars in M82 is subsolar, 
as expected for a modest-size galaxy, but the metallicity of 
the gas was expected to be considerably greater owing to 
the many supernovae that have occurred. Determination 
of the metallicity in the x-ray-emitting gas with ASCA is 
not simple because of multiple temperature components 
and unresolved point sources. Yet it is unlikely that 
the metallicities are grossly in error, with the largest 
metallicities occurring for S and Si (0.4-0.5 of the solar 
value), while Ne and Mg have abundances near 0.2 of 
the solar value and O, N and Fe have metallicities less 
than 0.1 of the solar value. These abundance ratios are 
perplexing, since they do not correspond to those expected 
from either type of supernova, and it will be interesting to 
see whether the combination of high spatial resolution and 
good spectroscopy (from the CHANDRA X-RAY OBSERVATORY) 
will confirm the abundances. 

Finally, the x-ray observations require a hard 
component (approximately 14 keV if it is a thermal 
plasma), which is found to vary on a timescale of days 
and has a luminosity that can approach 10"! erg s~!. This 
seemed unlikely to have a stellar origin, and this led to 
the suggestion that a supermassive compact object was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M82: The Starburst Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


present, such as a black hole, with a mass in excess of 
500M, if it emits below the Eddington luminosity. This 
might be thought of as a tiny ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS, 
possibly activated by the abundant gas in the central 
region. From energetic considerations, this nuclear source 
has little influence on the development of the starburst, 
which has a bolometric luminosity that is 3 orders of 
magnitude greater (8 x 10 erg s~'). The infrared line 
ratios also are sensitive to the presence of an active 
galactic nucleus, whose hard radiation will produce high 
excitation lines. However, the observed ratio of the 
high- to medium-excitation lines is particularly low in 
M82 (there is only an upper limit to [Ne V]/[Ne II]), 
confirming that an active galactic nucleus is either absent 
or unimportant. Insight into the presence of a central 
black hole will be provided by the new generation of x-ray 
telescopes, and Chandra observed M82 during the first few 
months of operation. X-ray emission from a strong central 
component was not discovered, confirming the absence of 
a strongly emitting active galactic nucleus and indicating 
that the hard emission is most likely caused by another 
mechanism. 


The superwind 

The outflow of gas from the star-forming region is 
observed in several wavebands and it was expected from 
models as well. The first indication of an outflow came 
from the study of colors and emission line images in the 
1960s, where filaments were seen aligned with the minor 
axis and extending to at least 3 kpc from the center of the 
galaxy. These initial studies included spectroscopy of the 
emission line filaments, which clearly showed recession 
velocities from the galaxy of hundreds of km s-!, with 
the exact value depending on the adopted inclination 
correction, which is substantial since the minor axis of the 
galaxy is only 8°-9° from the plane of the sky. Whereas 
many of the basic elements were identified in these 
observations, more detailed optical emission line studies 
along with x-ray investigations have given greater insight 
into the phenomenon. 

Optical emission line studies have been carried out 
with Fabry—Pérot observations, long-slit spectroscopy and 
narrow-band imaging. These efforts reveal that the 
outflow on either side of the galaxy is not quite aligned 
with the minor axis and has a deprojected outflow velocity 
of 500-800 km s~!. For lines of sight through these 
outflow regions, the emission lines are bimodal, which 
is interpreted as the near and far sides of the outflow 
region (lobes or cones) expanding laterally with a velocity 
of about 150 km s~!. Close to the galaxy, the emission 
lines are generally of low ionization, consistent with 
photoionization from the hot stars in the galaxy. However, 
in the outer region (beyond 1 kpc), the relative strength of 
high-ionization lines increases, such as that from [O III], 
which is unexpected for photoionization, but consistent 
with collisional ionization from shocks. Beyond 3 kpc, the 
optical emission line gas becomes generally undetectable, 
with the exception of a filament 11 kpc from the galaxy and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


69:50}-—* 


69:45-— - 


8(2000) 


69:40 -— 


09:57 09:56 09:55 
(2000) 


Figure 2. An image of M82 taken in the light of the hydrogen 
line Ha. The ‘donut’ on the upper left is an artifact of the 
corrective optics. The Ha filaments that extend upward from the 
center trace the breakout and the outflow of the superwind. The 
Ha cap to the top of the figure is 11 kpc from the galaxy and is 
probably produced by an impact between the superwind and 
tidal debris, present before the starburst event (from Devine and 
Bally 1999 Astrophys. J. 510 197). 


with an orientation that is nearly at right-angles to the flow 
direction (see figure 2). The most likely explanation for this 
filament is that it represents the interaction of the outflow 
of material with the cold gas that has been torn from M82 
and M81 in their tidal interaction. The strongest support 
for this interpretation comes from the x-ray observations 
(the PSPC on ROSAT), which are coincident with the 
optical emission. The shock interaction between the 
outflowing gas and slow-moving tidal debris would lead 
to both the production of soft x-rays and optical emission 
line excitation. From the temperature of the x-ray emission 
(10’ K), a velocity of 800 kms“! is inferred, which is similar 
to that inferred from the optical emission lines closer to 
the galaxy. With this velocity and the projected distance, a 
minimum timescale of 14 x 10° yr is inferred for the time 
since the breakout of gas from the nuclear region. 

The x-ray emission (from ROSAT) is coincident with 
the optical emission line gas in the inner region, but 
it extends beyond the optical emission, being visible 
to about 6 kpc on both sides of the galaxy (plus the 
additional separated emission 11 kpc from the galaxy on 
one side) (see figure 3). The temperature of the extended 
flow regions is approximately 0.5 keV (6 x 10° K), with 
only a weak decrease in the temperature with distance 
along the outflow (from 0.6 keV to 0.4 keV). This is a 
critical measurement for understanding the flow, since, 
if adiabatic expansion controlled the temperature of the 
gas as it flowed outward, the temperature would drop far 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M82: The Starburst Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M82: Optical and PSPC 


+69°50' 


+69°45' 


Declination 


+69°40' 


+69°35' 


1 n 4 1 t 1 | 1 1 re i L i 1 1 1 1 n ‘4 
9"57 9"56 9"55 9h54 
Right Ascension 


Figure 3. Contours of the x-ray intensity, obtained with the 
PSPC on ROSAT (0.1-2.4 keV, 30” resolution), is superimposed 
upon an optical image of M82. The intense emission from the 
central region is from the hot gas, while the extended emission 
perpendicular to the disk, due to the superwind, probably 
results from an interaction between the superwind and halo gas 
(from Strickland, Ponman and Stevens 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 
320 387). 


more rapidly than is observed. The alternative model that 
has developed posits that a gaseous halo surrounds M82 
prior to the starburst event. Following the breakout of the 
hot gas from the disk of the galaxy, the superwind of hot 
gas shocks with the halo gas, converting kinetic energy to 
thermal energy. In this picture, the thermal energy carried 
by the outflowing gas is unimportant compared with its 
kinetic energy, which is not subject to adiabatic losses. This 
also helps to solve the metallicity problem, since most of 
the emission originates in gas that is characteristic of the 
pre-starburst supernova, which, for a low-mass galaxy like 
M82, is subsolar. 

In addition to the interaction of the hot gas with 
a halo environment is the issue of whether the outflow 
entrains gas, such as for the region close to the galaxy. A 
determination of the mass flux of the superwind places 
it at several times greater than that expected from the 
ensemble of supernovae, suggesting that there has been 
‘mass loading’ of the flow. In this context, mass loading 
is the process whereby mass is added to the superwind 
by processes other than the normal shock heating of 
gas by supernova blast waves. Mass loading is most 
likely to occur in one of two ways: by the conductive 
evaporation of cold clouds or by turbulent mixing of cold 
gas into the hot flow. Conditions are also favorable for 
conductive evaporation to occur because we know that 
plentiful molecular gas is close to the hot x-ray-emitting 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gas. However, efficient conductive evaporation requires 
magnetic fields that are simply connected between the 
hot and cold phases, and whether this criterion is met is 
unknown. Conditions are suitable for turbulent mixing 
because there is a large differential velocity between the 
cold gas and the hot superwind. This will lead to 
the growth of Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities, producing 
tongues of cold gas that will mix with the hot gas (shocks 
will accompany this process). In this case, it remains to be 
seen whether the rate at which gas can be mixed into the 
flow is adequate. 

A final issue is whether the superwind will eventually 
fall back to the galaxy or whether it will escape the 
gravitational field of M82 and become part of the 
intergalactic medium. The characteristic rotational 
velocity of M82 is only 100 km s-!, and it is declining 
with radius, so the escape velocity is unlikely to be greater 
than 200-300 km s7!, which is significantly less than 
the velocity of the superwind, 500-800 km s~!. In the 
outermost region of the wind, 11 kpc from M82, the 
escape velocity is probably only 50-150 km s~!, so even 
the cold shocked material is unlikely to be bound to the 
galaxy. These comparisons indicate that the superwind 
will remain unbound to the galaxy and will pollute the 
surrounding medium. If starburst events are common in 
galaxies, this will be an important means of enriching the 
intergalactic medium. 


Future directions 
The nearest starburst galaxies, M82 and NGC 253, have 
been fundamental to our understanding of the starburst 
phenomenon, and we look to further studies to settle 
the outstanding questions. One of the central issues 
is how the star formation is initiated. Although star 
formation is occurring in the disk of M82 on kpc scale, 
it is extremely elevated in the central region, where it has 
evacuated a hole in the molecular disk. This star formation 
may propagate outward by creating high-pressure hot 
x-ray-emitting gas that compresses the cold molecular 
gas. Current observations show that conditions exist 
for this to take place, in which case we should see a 
progression in the age of star clusters as a function of 
radius in the nuclear region. The detection of these 
star clusters will require high-angular observations in the 
infrared region in order to reduce the extinction. This 
will require observations from NICMOS on the Hubble 
Space Telescope and subsequent observations with the 
Next Generation Space Telescope (see INSTRUMENTATION: 
NEXT GENERATION SPACE TELESCOPE). Also, these observations 
will identify star clusters that are obscured at optical 
wavelengths, permitting us to determine whether the 
radio supernovae are indeed associated with star clusters. 
These observations should help resolve the issue of 
whether the star formation produces relatively high 
numbers of high-mass stars. 

Regarding the superwind, there are several outstand- 
ing problems that will be addressed with the x-ray tele- 
scopes Chandra and the X-RAY MULTL-MIRROR MISSION (XMM). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M82: The Starburst Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The central region is tremendously complex, containing 
point sources, line and continuum emission from hot gas, 
along with partial absorption by cold gas of widely varying 
column densities. The high angular resolution of Chandra 
will be essential in separating these aspects of the emission 
and determining the basic conditions in the hot gas, such 
as the temperature, pressure and metallicity. These obser- 
vations will help us to understand the role that the hot gas 
has in triggering further star formation in the center and 
in transforming the cold molecular environment into a hot 
x-ray emitting medium. Another issue is the degree of en- 
trainment of material in the superwind flow, which would 
produce a metallicity gradient along the flow, and this will 
probably best be determined by XMM observations, since 
sensitivity rather than angular resolution is paramount. 
Finally, the extent of the wind and its effect on polluting the 
local environment is an important but challenging issue. 
The maximum observable extent of the x-ray superwind 
will be measured by XMM, but that determination may 
be limited by the low surface brightness of the emission 
relative to the background. Nevertheless, the future of 
the field will be very exciting and major advances should 
occur in the next few years. 


Bibliography 

The literature is extremely extensive for M82, so I have 

chosen some of the most recent publications in their areas, 

which reference the important works that preceded them. 
The star clusters that are seen in the central region are 

discussed by 


O’Connell et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 446 L1 


The molecular content in the galaxy and the molecular 
superbubble are discussed by 


Weiss et al 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 345 L23 


The x-ray imaging and temperature studies are thoroughly 
described by 


Strickland D K, Ponman T J and Stevens I R 1997 Astron. 
Astrophys. 320 378 


Models for the breakout and the superwind may be found 
in 


Suchkov et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 463 528 


Joel N Bregman 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M83 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M83 


M83 isa spiral galaxy of type SABc (i.e. itis an intermediate 
type between a barred spiral and a normal spiral galaxy) 
in Hydra (sometimes referred to as the ‘Pinwheel Galaxy’). 
It was fist discovered by Lacaille during the time he spent 
at the Cape of Good Hope (1751-2) and is therefore the 
first galaxy beyond the Local Group to be discovered. 
Its distance is estimated at 15 million light-years, which 
makes it also the nearest barred spiral. 

M83 is a typical example of what is known as a 
‘starburst galaxy’. Starbursts are areas having very high 
star formation rates caused by the fast transformation of 
gas, the violent interaction of stars with the interstellar 
medium through ionizing fronts, stellar winds and the 
high rate of supernovae associated with a young stellar 
population. The origin of the phenomenon is not well 
understood but it is important for galaxy evolution. 
Most starbursts are associated with AGN (active galactic 
nuclei) as well as high-density gas and a non-symmetric 
gravitational potential usually due to a bar or an 
interacting galaxy. M83 is typical in that it has a bar as 
well as a suspected AGN. 

Together with NGC 5128 and NGC 5253, M83 forms 
a small group. Both of these other galaxies are peculiar, 
which may indicate a previous interaction. Six supernovae 
have been reported so far—more than in any other Messier 
object. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M84 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M84 


M84 is a lenticular galaxy in Virgo at a distance of 
approximately 60 million light-years. It is populated by 
old yellow stars and has a system of globular clusters 
(much less dense than that of M87). It also has a rapidly 
rotating nuclear gas disk and hosts an AGN (active galactic 
nucleus) that is most likely powered by a supermassive 
(3108 solar masses) central object. This object emits two 
small but conspicuous jets in the radio wavelength. Three 
supernovae have been reported so far. 

Probably because of its greater distance, M84 is not 
particularly well studied. Most recent research interest has 
been concerned with the study of the supernovae rather 
than with the AGN. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M85 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M85 


M85 is an early-type lenticular galaxy in Coma Berenices, 
the northernmost member of the Virgo cluster. It has a 
distance of approximately 60 million light-years and is 
very similar to M84 in many respects: it also has an old 
yellow population and a fairly luminous disk. 

The most interesting aspect of M85 is its x-ray 
properties. Unlike most of the other early-type Virgo 
galaxies, it is very faint in x-rays and its spectrum seems 
to consist of two parts—a hard (i.e. more energetic) part 
possibly caused by a population of evolved stellar sources 
such as low-mass x-ray binaries, and a soft (i.e. less 
energetic) part that may be due to hot interstellar medium. 
This is unusual because the x-ray spectrum of a galaxy 
like this is normally dominated by emission from the 
interstellar medium. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M86 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M86 


M86 isa lenticular or elliptical (classification is not entirely 
clear) galaxy in Virgo, one of the largest in the Virgo cluster. 
It has a conspicuous system of faint globular clusters and a 
very small dwarf companion. Since it lies at the heart of the 
Virgo cluster, its light is actually blue-shifted with respect 
to us (i.e. the galaxy is moving towards us), probably due 
to infall into the Virgo group from the far side. 

M86 has a faint plume of x-ray emission extending out 
from the optical shape of the galaxy. It has been speculated 
that this is due to ram pressure of the intercluster medium 
which is stripping the galaxy of its gas. In addition to 
the plume, a faint optical distortion has been detected, 
probably due to star formation caused by cooling in the 
hot gas that is being stripped. This has caused a great 
amount of interest in the galaxy since it offers a rare chance 
to observe star formation in a cooling flow environment. 
M86 forms a small group together with M84. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M87: The Massive Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M87: The Massive Galaxy 


Messier 87 (NGC 4486) is a giant elliptical galaxy which 
dominates the core of the nearby viRGOCLUSTER of galaxies at 
a distance of about 16 Mpc from the Sun. Itis the archetypal 
example of the class of brightest cluster galaxies which 
dominate the centers of many rich concentrated clusters 
and, with a total visual magnitude of about 9.6, it is about 
4 times brighter than our own Milky Way Galaxy would 
appear at the same distance. In addition to a striking 
visual appearance (see figure 1), it is also famous as the 
host galaxy of the bright radio source virco a and the 
spectacular jet associated with its active galactic nucleus 
(see M87: THE NUCLEUS AND JET). M87 is in fact not the most 
luminous galaxy in the Virgo cluster; the bright elliptical 
Messier 49 (NGC 4472) located some 4.5° away is ~0.2 
magnitudes (22%) brighter. However, M87 is the centrally 
dominant galaxy, and it is this privileged position which 
has made it the subject of many different studies. 

Like most ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES, M87 exhibits a smooth 
distribution of light decreasing rapidly away from the 
center. Near the middle it appears almost round, but 
on very deep images it looks noticeably flattened with an 
apparent axial ratio of about 0.6. The intrinsic shapes of 
elliptical galaxies are difficult to determine and, unlike 
spiral galaxies, most do not contain extended disks of 
rotationally supported cold hydrogen gas with which to 
determine their masses. From an observational point of 
view, therefore, the question of whether elliptical galaxies 
are surrounded by massive halos of DARK MATTER like their 
disk galaxy counterparts is still open to debate (see also 
DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES). 

There are three main methods which have been used 
to constrain the extended mass distributions in elliptical 
galaxies such as M87. These are (i) analysis of the 
mean streaming motions and velocity dispersions of the 
integrated starlight, (ii) the use of globular clusters as 
tracers of the gravitational potential and (iii) the analysis of 
temperature and brightness profiles for hot x-ray emitting 
gas surounding the galaxy. 


Stellar kinematics 

Spectroscopic studies of the integrated light from galaxies 
can yield important information on the motions of stars 
within the galaxy, from analysis of the positions, widths 
and shapes of absorption features in the spectra. For 
nearly spherical galaxies such as M87, the interpretation 
of these kinematical data in terms of a dynamical model is 
usually carried out within the framework of the spherically 
symmetric Jeans equation: 


GM(r) 


1d(po2)  , Bo? 
+ a 2 


2 = 
p dr r r 


where p(r) is the three-dimensional density of stars at 
a distance r from the centre of the galaxy, o,(r) is the 
root mean square random velocity (known as the velocity 
dispersion) in the radial direction, B(r) = 1 — 02/0? 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The massive galaxy M87. The swarm of pointlike 
objects surrounding the galaxy are its rich population of 
globular clusters. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 36. 


is the velocity anisotropy which measures the relative 
importance of radial and tangential random motions and 
M(r)is the total (luminous and dark) mass enclosed within 
radius r. Unfortunately this problem is underdetermined, 
given the number of observable properties, and some 
assumptions need to be made. The simplest of these is 
to assume that the random motions at any point within 
the galaxy are isotropic, when f = 0. Early observations 
of the core of M87 revealed a velocity dispersion profile 
which rose toward the center, a feature that was initially 
attributed to the presence of a massive BLACK HOLE. 
However, it was soon demonstrated that models without 
a central point mass were equally acceptable if the velocity 
dispersions became radially elongated towards the center. 
In fact, the most recent stellar kinematical data reveal 
that the velocity dispersion increases only slowly within 
the inner few arcseconds of M87. ‘To reconcile these 
observations with the 3 x 10’?Mo black hole inferred from 
Hubble Space Telescope studies of ionized gas within 1” of 
the center requires that the stellar orbits in this region are in 
fact nearly circular. This has been interpreted as evidence 
that the center of M87 once contained a binary black 
hole which preferentially depletes stars on low-angular- 
momentum orbits via three-body encounters, leaving a 
largely tangential velocity dispersion. 

Outside the core, the velocity dispersion continues 
to fall steadily with increasing radial distance. However, 
the stellar absorption-line spectra are very hard to observe 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M87: The Massive Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radius (kpc) 


Figure 2. Enclosed mass as a function of radius from the center 
of M87. Open circles show the estimates from integrated light 
studies, filled circles from the globular clusters and open squares 
from the hot x-ray gas. The dotted curve shows a constant M/L 
model for the mass distribution due to the stellar halo. The 
dashed line shows a model fit to the extended dark halo whose 
density profile has been derived from cosmological N-body 
simulations. The total mass profile is shown by the solid curve. 


with useful signal-to-noise beyond r ~ 2’ (10 kpc for a 
Virgo distance of 16 Mpc), even though the integrated 
light profile can be followed to beyond 100 kpc. The best 
estimate of the total stellar mass in M87 is M ~ 4x 10"M, 
within 10 kpc of the center. 

A useful measure of the presence of dark matter in 
galaxies is the ‘mass-to-light’ (M/L) ratio between the 
luminosity due to stars (at some particular wavelength) 
and the inferred mass. For M87 the V-band mass-to-light 
ratio derived from integrated light studies is M/L ~ 10 
times that of the Sun. This is close to the upper end of 
the range of M/L values seen in other elliptical galaxies; 
extrapolating out to the limits of the stellar halo assuming 
aconstant M/L ratio (i.e. that the mass in the halo traces the 
starlight) would imply a total mass for the M87 galaxy of 
M ~ 9x10" Mo (figure 2). While the central black hole has 
amass which is clearly negligible on these scales, it can still 
affect the global structure of the galaxy via the scattering 
and redistribution of stellar orbits on rare passages close 
to the galaxy nucleus. 


Globular clusters 

At radii beyond about 10 kpc, there are two independent 
methods to constrain the global mass distribution of M87. 
The first uses kinematical studies of the large population 
of GLOBULAR CLUSTERS Which surrounds M87 (see figure 1) 
as test particles to probe the associated gravitational 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


potential. Globular clusters are compact star clusters of 
~10° stars which are found ubiquitously in all types of 
galaxy, but M87 is atypical in having an unusually large 
population of more than 10000 clusters. Although their 
combined masses contribute only a few per cent of the 
total mass of the halo, because of their relatively bright 
magnitudes (more than 50% of the M87 clusters have 
an apparent magnitude brighter than m, ~ 23.5) their 
radial velocities can be obtained using large ground-based 
telescopes. Spectroscopic studies have now been made of 
more than 200 clusters around M87. The most striking 
result of these measurements is that the velocity dispersion 
of the globular clusters increases with radius. Dynamical 
analyses of the kinematics of the globular cluster system 
can be made using simple projected mass estimators 
or using the Jeans equation. Both of these methods 
indicate that M87 is surrounded by an extended dark 
halo with an enclosed mass which increases approximately 
as M(<r) ~r'”. The inferred mass-to-light ratio in solar 
units ranges from M/L ~ 10 atr = 10 kpc to M/L ~ 50 at 
r = 30 kpe. 


X-ray gas 

Very extended x-ray emission from hot T ~ 10’ K 
gas around M87 has been detected with the Position 
Sensitive Proportional Counter (PSPC) on the ROSAT 
x-ray satellite. Assuming that the gas is a single- 
phase medium in hydrostatic equilibrium, and that 
the underlying gravitational potential is spherically 
symmetric, the mass distribution in the halo can be 
obtained uniquely from the run of x-ray surface brightness 
and temperature with radius. Although the x-ray emission 
can be detected out to over 300 kpc from the centre of M87, 
temperature estimates can only be derived for the central 
200 kpc. The density and temperature of the gas are related 
to the mass distribution by 


krT (5 log ne 
M(<r)= 


d log T 
d logr 


Gump d log r 

where ys is the mean molecular weight of the gas 
which depends weakly on its chemical composition, 
ne is the electron density and the physical constants 
have their usual meanings. The electron density can 
be obtained straightforwardly from the x-ray surface 
brightness distribution. Obtaining the temperature profile 
is more problematic, but useful limits can be obtained 
from the energy sensitivity of the PSPC detectors. Single- 
temperature fits to T(r) indicate that the temperature 
rises from kT ~ 1.5 keV at the center to kT ~ 4 keV 
at 200 kpc. The implied mass distribution is shown in 
figure 2 and agrees well with that determined from the 
globular cluster kinematics where they overlap, rising to 
M(< r) ~ 10%Mp within r = 100 kpc. Although more 
recent temperature measurements with the ASCA satellite 
indicate that the x-ray halo probably contains more than 
one temperature component, the close agreement between 
the mass distributions derived from these two methods, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M87: The Massive Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which rely on different physical assumptions, suggests 
that the uncertainties are unlikely to be large. Less than 
5% of this mass is due to the x-ray emitting gas itself, the 
remainder residing in a dark matter halo. 


Conclusions 

M§87 is one of the best-studied elliptical galaxies and a good 
test case for formation theories of brightest cluster galaxies. 
The rise in the globular cluster velocity dispersion profile 
and the temperature and density profiles of the x-ray gas 
both indicate that the mass density is dominated by a 
dark halo component beyond r ~ 10 kpc. Whether such 
extensive dark matter halos are ubiquitous in elliptical 
galaxies, particular those outside of rich clusters, is an 
open question, since the position of M87 at the center of 
the Virgo cluster makes it difficult to separate the galaxy 
halo potential from that of the Virgo cluster as a whole. 
Studies of the global gravitational potential of the Virgo 
cluster using galaxy radial velocities suggest that the mass 
distribution continues to rise steeply as shown in figure 2 
out to at least r ~ 1 Mpc. 


Bibliography 

Cohen J G and Rhyzov A 1997 The dynamics of the M87 
globular cluster system Astrophys. J. 486 230-41 

McLaughlin D E 1999 Evidence in Virgo for the Universal 
Dark Matter Halo Astrophys. J. 512 L9-12 

Nulsen P E J and Bohringer H 1995 A ROSAT 
determination of the mass of the Central Virgo 
Cluster Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 274 1093-106 


Ray M Sharples 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M87: The Nucleus and Jet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M87: The Nucleus and Jet 


The giant elliptical galaxy M87 at the center of the virco 
CLUSTER is one of the clearest and nearest examples of an 
ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS (AGN) and therefore has been the 
subject of a large number of studies over the last three 
decades (see also M87: THE MASSIVE GALAXY). The discovery by 
Curtis (1918) of an extended prominence emanating from 
what appeared to be an otherwise normal ELLIPTICAL GALAXY 
remained little more than a curiosity until Baade and 
Minkowski (1954) carried out the first thorough studies 
of what is now known as the M87 optical jet. The 
proposal by Blandford and Rees (1974) that jets must 
play a fundamental role in transporting energy from 
the nuclear energy source to the extended and distant 
radio lobes established a sound physical underpinning 
to further investigations of the AGN phenomenon. The 
presence of massive BLACK HOLES at the center of galaxies 
is widely believed to be the common origin of the AGN 
phenomenon. The black hole model is very appealing 
because it provides an efficient mechanism that converts 
gravitational energy, via accretion, into radiation within a 
very small volume as required by the rapid variability of 
the large energy output of AGNs (e.g. Blandford 1991). 

The AGN standard model comprises a central black 
hole, with mass in the range ~(10°-10’) Mo, surrounded 
by an ACCRETION DISK that releases gravitational energy. 
The radiation is emitted thermally at the local blackbody 
temperature and is identified with the ‘blue bump’, which 
accounts for the majority of the bolometric luminosity 
in the AGNs. The disk possesses an active corona, 
where infrared SYNCHROTRON RADIATION is emitted along 
with thermal bremsstrahlung x-rays. The host galaxy 
supplies this disk with gas at a rate that reflects its 
star formation history and, possibly, its overall mass, 
thereby accounting for the observed luminosity evolution. 
Broad emission lines originate homogeneously in small 
gas clouds of density ~10° cm™* and size ~1 AU in 
random virial orbits about the central continuum source. 
Plasma jets are emitted perpendicular to the disk. At 
larger radii, the material forms an obscuring torus of cold 
molecular gas. Orientation effects of this torus to the 
line of sight naturally account for the differences between 
some of the different classes of AGNs. While this broad 
picture has been supported and refined by a number of 
observations, direct evidence for the existence of accretion 
disks around SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES is sparse and 
detailed measurements of their physical characteristics are 
conspicuous by their absence. 


The black hole in M87 

Ground-based observations of M87 first revealed the 
presence of a cusplike region in its radial light profile 
accompanied by a rapid rise in the stellar velocity 
dispersion and led to the suggestion that it contained 
a massive black hole (Young et al 1978, Sargent et al 
1978). Stellar dynamical models of elliptical galaxies 
showed, however, that these velocity dispersion rises did 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


not necessarily imply the presence of a black hole but 
could instead be a consequence of an anisotropic velocity 
dispersion tensor in the central 100 pc of a triaxial elliptical 
potential. Considerable controversy has surrounded this 
and numerous other attempts to verify the existence of the 
black hole in M87 and other nearby giant ellipticals using 
ground-based stellar dynamical studies. 

One of the major goals of the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE 
(HST) has been to establish or refute the existence of 
black holes in active galaxies by probing the dynamics 
of AGNs at much smaller radii than can be achieved 
from the ground. HST emission line imagery of M87 has 
led to the discovery of a small-scale disk of ionized gas 
surrounding its nucleus which is oriented approximately 
perpendicularly to the synchrotron jet. This disk is also 
observed in both the optical and the UV continuum. 
Similar gaseous disks have also been found in the nuclei 
of anumber of other massive galaxies, e.g. Cen A. Work by 
Macchetto and collaborators (1997) using the Faint Object 
Camera (FOC) on the HST has shown unambiguously for 
the first time that there is a thin Keplerian disk extending 
to a distance of at least 1” or 73 pc from the center. By 
measuring the rotation curve from 1” (73 pc) down to 0.06 
(3.5 pc) they could derive a number of key parameters for 
the disk, notably a central mass concentration of (3.2 + 
0.9) x 10? Mo within a sphere of less than 3.5 pc radius and 
an inclination of the disk to the line of sight of 41°, and 
showed that the most likely and simplest explanation for 
this huge mass is that it is a supermassive black hole. 


The extended disk 

At distances of 1’—2”, or 73-146 pc, the disk morphology 
shows a three-arm spiral pattern and at larger distances 
yet the gaseous structure becomes less and less organized 
until it appears to connect with an extended (17” or 1200 pc) 
system of filaments which show prominent emission 
notably in Ha. This prompted Sparks and collaborators 
(1993) to suggest a causal relationship between the 
extended filaments and the inner disk and propose that 
the filaments are streamers of gas flowing away from the 
nucleus, rather than falling into it. To date this scenario 
has had some supporting evidence from measurements of 
blueshifted broad absorption lines in the nuclear spectrum, 
which can be interpreted as implying both turbulence 
and an outflow of material away from the nucleus. A 
possible model to explain these lines and the observed 
emission line filaments is that they are the result of a bi- 
directional wind generated in the accretion disk; this wind 
also removes angular momentum from the disk to allow 
accretion through the disk onto the black hole. 


The jet 

Emanating from the nucleus is the jet which shows 
considerable structure, with a sequence of bright features 
reaching ~25 arcsec from the galaxy center. A counterjet 
is not detected either at optical or at radio wavelengths, 
although imaging polarization measurements of the 
south-eastern radio lobe (Sparks et al 1991) found a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M87: The Nucleus and Jet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M87 Jet -- HST Faint Object Camera (342nm, epoch 1994) 
I oA B Cc 


Nucleus D E F 


Figure 1. HST FOC image of the jet observed at wavelength 342 nm in 1994 with 0.03 arcsec resolution. Each image is a mosaic of three 
different FOC pointings. The three panels show the same image at different contrast settings. Knots are labeled with usual letter 


designations. 


polarized counterlobe, thus providing evidence for the 
existence of an invisible counterjet. Within observational 
limitations it has been recognized that the detailed 
morphology of the jet is similar in the radio and optical 
bands and consistent with those in the infrared and x-ray 
bands. visi mapping shows the nucleus to have an 
asymmetric, complex ‘core-jet’ structure extending ~0.2 
arcsec and subluminal motion with velocity ~0.3c has been 
detected for a bright component in the nuclear jet. The 
jet is highly polarized and it is generally accepted that it 
emits through the synchrotron process. A fundamental 
question posed by the observations of the jet is where the 
synchrotron-radiating electrons are accelerated. Are they 
accelerated in the nucleus and transported to the sites of 
the emission? The very short lifetimes of the electrons 
emitting in the optical to x-ray regions in a uniformly filled 
jet compared with the light travel time from the nucleus 
to the end of the observed jet appears to rule this out 
and suggest that in situ particle reacceleration occurs in 
locations along the jet. 

High-resolution images of the jet taken in the UV 
with the FOC reveal a wealth of details. Figure 1 shows 
the entire jet as seen by the FOC at 0.03 arcsec resolution 
(~2.4 pce). Many structural details of the classical knots 
are readily apparent, as are many new compact structures. 
The first 200 pe of the jet-—roughly the region between 
the nucleus and knot D—appears as a narrow chain of 
numerous bright, unresolved knots. The opening angle of 
the jet as defined by this chain of features is extremely 
narrow, less than about 1°, whereas a value near 6.5° 
is apparent for the rest of the jet beyond knot D. There 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are additional compact features between knots D and E, 
as well as bright, slightly resolved condensations (scale 
~0.1 arcsec) throughout the knots D, E, Fand I of the ‘inner’ 
jet. 

The FOC images also reveal many fine structures 
within the knots that are apparent for the first time. 
Knot A, in particular, is the brightest knot in the jet and 
is thought to represent a shock in flow. The eastern edge 
of knot A also shows several faint structures which are 
symmetric about the jet axis and which must be related to 
the impending ‘shock’ in the bulk flow at knot A. There is 
a faint ‘bar’ of emission centered on the jet axis and very 
nearly perpendicular to it; this is a shock in the high-speed 
flow at the jet center. There are also faint ‘fans’ of emission 
that start at the jet edge adjacent to the bar and then trail 
inwards towards the jet axis and a faint loop or ‘cap’ of 
emission precisely on the jet axis before the brightest region 
of knot A. These features are all related to shocking of the 
bulk flow at knot A, and represent conical sheets seen in 
projection, and are similar to those predicted in numerical 
models. 

A comparison of the FOC and VLA (VERY LARGE ARRAY) 
images taken at nearly the same epoch in 1994 reveals 
systematic differences all along the jet. In the radio image, 
there is faint diffuse emission which appears to fill the 
jet from the nucleus to knot A and defines the edges of a 
cone with an opening angle of about 6.5°. While traces of 
interknot emission are also present in the FOC image, it 
is much fainter relative to the knot emission. In addition, 
the optical emission in the knots is more condensed along 
the jet axis. There are other detailed differences in knot 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M87: The Nucleus and Jet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apparent Speeds in Region HST-1 


\ 


6.0c 


Figure 2. Sequence of HST FOC images of jet region HST-1 
which is located about 1 arcsec from the nucleus. The images are 
observed at A = 342 nm at epochs August 1994, July 1995, and 
July 1996. The slanting lines connect features between epochs, 
with apparent speeds given in units in c, the velocity of light. 


structure, especially in and around knot E. The optical 
images show a bright pair of condensations in knot E, 
but these are only a relatively faint region in the radio 
image. Similarly there is a pair of unresolved features in 
the optical image between knots D and E, which again are 
not apparent in the radio image. 


Polarimetry 


High levels of polarization are a key characteristic of 
synchrotron radiation. POLARIMETRY provides clues to the 
direction of the magnetic field within the jet and hence is 
one of the most important diagnostics for deciphering its 
structure. The radio polarization has been well studied 
and it was found that the field is primarily parallel to the 
jet axis, except in the bright transverse features in knots A 
and C, where the B field runs along the transverse feature 
(i.e. normal to the jet axis). The parallel field in most of 
the jet can be understood as arising from shearing of a 
random field, while the perpendicular fields could arise 
from compression at shocks. 

Optical polarimetry is especially interesting, because 
it can potentially tell us about the three-dimensional 
structure of the jet (Perlman et al 1999). The optical 
emission is more concentrated on the jet axis, and hence it 
provides an opportunity to obtain information about the 
magnetic structure at different depths within the jet. We 
observed typical fractional polarizations that are in the 
range from 30% to 50% and are comparable with those 
in the radio band. The magnetic field is generally aligned 
along the jet, except in the bright transverse features in 
knots A and C, and at the upstream ends of HST-1 and 
knot D, where the field runs perpendicular to the jet axis. 
There is evidence for radio—optical polarization differences 
in knot Eand in the knot A ‘bar’ region which are attributed 
to radial structure in the jet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Proper motion 

A5 yr search for secular variations in the jet—including 
structural changes, flux variations, proper motions and 
changes in polarization—is under way (Biretta et al 
1999). This work can give important clues to the velocity 
field within jets, about which very little is known from 
direct observation. Monitoring with the VLA at radio 
frequencies has detected motion in much of the jet with 
apparent speeds averaging near 0.5c. The very fastest 
regions of these wavelengths are in knot D and appear 
to move outward with speeds near 2.5c. At optical 
wavelengths one of the most active regions in the jet is 
the complex of compact knots about 1” (73 pc) from the 
nucleus designated HST-1. Figure 2 shows a sequence of 
FOC images from 1994 to 1996. The complex contains a 
bright eastern component which moves outward slowly 
(0.4c) and which appears to emit bright compact knots at 
speeds in the range from 4c to 6c. The emitted components 
rise and fade within 1 yr. The eastern component is a 
slow-moving disturbance or shock in the flow, while the 
fast components are representative of the jet fluid speed. 
Similar speeds are seen in knot D (figure 3), with measured 
outward velocities in the range from 2.6c to 5.0c, and there 
is rapid fading (half-life <1 yr) in features FOC3 and FOC4, 
which are located just east of knot D. The large speeds have 
a number of interesting implications within the context 
of the standard relativistic beaming model. The largest 
speeds give the strongest constraints, and the observed 
speed of up to 6c implies motion with typical Lorentz 
factors 6 = 18° and y = 12, which are quite consistent with 
those predicted by the unified models for FR-I sources. 


Conclusions 

The study of the jet and nuclear regions of M87 has 
provided an unprecedented laboratory to test many of 
the recurrent theories of AGN and will continue to give 
us important clues for the understanding of the relevant 
physical processes. 


Bibliography 

Baade W and Minkowski R 1954 Astrophys. J. 119 215 

Biretta J A, Sparks W B and Macchetto F D 1999 Astrophys. 
J. 520 621 

Blandford R D 1991 Proc. Heidelberg Conf. Physics of AGN 
ed W J Duschi and SJ Wagner (Berlin: Springer) p 3 

Blandford R D and Rees M J 1974 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
169 395 

Curtis H D 1918 Publ. Lick Observatory 13 31 

Macchetto F R, Marconi A, Axon D E, Capetti A, Sparks W 
B and Crane 1997 Astrophys. J. 489 579 

Perlman ES, BirettaJ A, Zhou F, Sparks W B and Macchetto 
F D 1990 Astron. J. 117 2185 

Sargent W L W, Young P J, Boksenberg A, Shortridge K, 
Lynds C R and Hartwick F D A 1978 Astrophys. J. 221 
731 

Sparks W B, Ford H C and Kinney A L 1993 Astrophys. J. 
413 531 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M87: The Nucleus and Jet ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M87 Jet -- KnotD Motion/ Evolution -- HST/FOC 342 nm 


Nucleus D E F I A B Cc ——— 


Aug 94 


July 95 


Aug 96 


Figure 3. Knot D region at three epochs. Top panel shows entire jet to provide orientation; lower panels show knot D at three epochs 
with two different contrast settings. Arrows are at fixed locations relative to galaxy nucleus and can be used to judge motions. 
Features DE and DM (labeled) move outward at 4c-5c, while FOC3 and FOC4 fade from view. 


Sparks W B, Fraix-Burnet D, Macchetto F D and Owen D 
N 1991 Nature 355 804 

Young P J, Westphal J A, Kristian J, Wilson G P and 
Landauer F T 1978 Astrophys. J. 221 721 


D Macchetto 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


M88 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M88 


M88 is a spiral galaxy in Coma Berenices at a distance 
of between 12 and 17 Mpc. It is also a member of 
the Virgo cluster. The galaxy falls into the category of 
flocculent spirals, which means that it has a stochastic 
spiral structure in its stellar disk with a faint two-arm 
structure in the infrared indicating a possible underlying 
density wave. Its most interesting feature is the chemically 
decoupled nucleus, i.e. the galaxy has a chemically 
distinct, metal-rich nucleus of a distinctly different age 
from the bulge. Additionally, the observation of secondary 
star-formation bursts may indicate the existence of several 
more chemically distinct stellar subsystems. The origin of 
this phenomenon is not known. 
In 1999 a supernova was observed in M88. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M89 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M89 


M839 is an elliptical galaxy in Virgo at a distance of about 
60 million light-years. It is a member of the Virgo cluster. 

In the optical, M89 does not show any unusual 
features but in the radio wavelengths it has a faint 
enveloping structure as well as a jetlike extension reaching 
about 10’ out from the center. The radio core is of low 
luminosity but variable. It also emits strongly in the UV— 
UV light is usually associated with direct non-thermal 
radiation or dust heated by stars, but both of these are 
absent from the optical data. So far, no theory has been 
proposed that could explain all of these features, but the 
Hubble Space Telescope recently discovered a very small 
AGN (active galactic nucleus) at the center of this galaxy. 
It is thought to be a modest accretion event onto a black 
hole and represents the faintest AGN known so far. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mg 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M9 


M9 is a globular cluster in the constellation of Ophiuchus 
(3 degrees south and 2 degrees east from 7 Ophiuchi), only 
5500 light years from the Galactic Center. It has a visual 
brightness of 7.3 mag which is partly because of its great 
distance from the Sun (26 000 light-years) but also because 
it lies at the edge of a dark nebula and is hence dimmed by 
dust to the north and west. The cluster is slightly elliptical 
in outline and has a diameter of 49 light-years. 

Walter Baade investigated M9 for variable stars and 
found just 13, 10 of which have periods around 2.4 days. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M90 


M90 is one of the larger spirals in the Virgo cluster but it 
has little mass. It also has one of the largest velocities of 
approach of all the Messier objects and may possibly be in 
the process of escaping from the Virgo cluster. Its spiral 
arms are tightly wound and smooth but, unusually for a 
spiral, there is no ongoing star formation in the arms but 
only in the inner disk region. The galaxy may currently be 
evolving into a state similar to M64. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


M91 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M91 


M91 in Coma Berenices was long regarded as one of the 
‘missing’ Messier objects, since nothing nebulous could 
be seen near its listed position. It was even suggested that 
Messier had really seen a comet at this position in March 
1781 but not recognized its true nature. In 1969 a Texan 
amateur, William C Williams, gave what is now accepted 
as the probable answer: Messier originally measured the 
position of this object through his telescope by reference 
to M89, but when he came to write up his observations 
he mistakenly applied the correction to the coordinates 
of M58, another galaxy in this area. The resulting position 
coincides with that of NGC 4548, a tenth-magnitude barred 
spiral which would have been within reach of Messier’s 
telescope. If M91 is indeed the same as NGC 4548, it is 
a member of the Virgo cluster, but is fairly unremarkable 
visually in small amateur instruments. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M92 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M92 


M92 is an exceptionally ancient globular cluster in 
Hercules which would be better known if it were not 
overshadowed by M13. It was discovered by Johann Bode 
in 1777 and rediscovered in 1781 by Messier, although 
since it is bright enough to be just visible to the naked 
eye under ideal conditions it is surprising that it was 
not recognized earlier. As in most globulars, almost all 
the known variables in M92 are short-period pulsating 
variables of the RR Lyrae type, although in this case there is 
also a rarity: an eclipsing binary of W Ursae Majoris type. 
A study of M92 by H Arp, W Baum and A Sandage found 
that the most luminous members of the cluster are red 
giants with absolute magnitudes of around —3. Visually, in 
small instruments, M92 has a very condensed center with 
a surrounding coma like the head of a comet. Analysis 
of results from the Hipparcos satellite gives a distance for 
M922 of about 29 000 light-years, slightly farther than M13, 
and an estimated age of 14 billion years, making it the 
oldest globular known. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M93 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M93 


M93 is an open cluster situated almost exactly on the 
galactic equator in Puppis. Of sixth magnitude, it is at 
the limit of naked-eye visibility and is easily detectable 
with binoculars, near third-magnitude Xi Puppis. It is 
elongated, and through small telescopes appears shaped 
somewhat like the tip of a knife, although Admiral 
Smyth called it starfish-shaped. M93 was discovered by 
Messier in March 1781, and described by him as a ‘cluster 
of small [ie. faint] stars without nebulosity’. Modern 
measurements identify the brightest stars as blue giants of 
eighth magnitude, among a total of some 60 stars covering 
a diameter of about 18 arc minutes. However, it is difficult 
to determine how far the outer reaches really do extend; 
published diameters for the cluster range from only 8 arc 
minutes (Messier’s own estimate) up to 24 arc minutes. 
Modern distance determinations put the cluster at 3600 
light-years from us, giving it a true diameter of about 20 
light-years, and its age is some 300 million years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M94 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M94 


M94 is a spiral galaxy in Canes Venatici, lying just north 
of a line between Alpha and Beta Canum Venaticorum. 
The galaxy is presented almost face-on to us and in small 
telescopes appears almost perfectly rounded with a bright 
nucleus; Admiral Smyth understandably called it ‘comet- 
like’. It is classified as midway between type Sa and Sb, 
meaning that its arms are quite tightly wound. Small 
telescopes reveal traces of its spiral arms,which contain 
many patchy dust clouds in their inner regions. Ultra- 
violet observations have revealed a ring of star formation 
over 7000 light-years in diameter around this galaxy’s core. 
Long-exposure photographs with large instruments reveal 
an outer ring of light as well, both rings providing evidence 
for past activity in the galaxy. M94 was discovered in 
March 1781 by Mechain, as were all the subsequent objects 
in Messier’s catalog. M94 is around 15 million light years 
away. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M95 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M95 


M95 is a barred spiral galaxy in Leo, under the body of the 
lion about a third of the way from Alpha to Beta Leonis. 
It was discovered in March 1781 by Mechain but at tenth 
magnitude is faint and difficult for small telescopes. M95 
is presented almost face-on to us, displaying a central bar 
and tightly wrapped spiral arms that together create the 
shape of a Greek theta. M95 forms a pair with nearby 
M96, usually regarded as lying around 25 million light- 
years away, although observations with the Hubble Space 
Telescope in 1995 suggest a distance about 50% greater. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M96 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M96 


M9 is a spiral galaxy in Leo, lying about two-thirds 
of a degree to the east of M95. Like that galaxy, it 
was discovered in March 1781 by Mechain and was 
then checked by Messier before inclusion in his catalog. 
Visually, it appears rounded with a bright center and 
traces of spiral arms; it is classified as type Sa. A 
supernova of type Ia erupted within it in 1998. M96 lies 
at a similar distance to M95, although estimates of the 
distances are discrepant. A figure of around 25 million 
light-years has usually been adopted, but observations of 
Cepheid variables in M96 with the Hubble Space Telescope 
have yielded a distance closer to 40 million light-years. 
Whatever the true distance, these galaxies, and M105 to 
the north, are seemingly part of a small cluster, the Leo 
Galaxy Group, that also includes M65 and M66. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M97 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M97 


M97 is a planetary nebula in Ursa Major, lying just south 
of the bow] of the Big Dipper, 2.25 degrees from Beta Ursae 
Majoris. This nebula was discovered in February 1781 
by Mechain, who noted it was difficult to see; modern 
observers estimate it as either tenth or eleventh magnitude, 
placing it among the faintest objects in Messier’s catalog. 
Lord Rosse in 1848 named it the OWL NEBULA because 
its rounded outline with two dark patches gave the 
impression of an owl’s face. Rosse claimed at the time 
that a star was visible in each cavity, like a pair of eyes, but 
the fainter of these subsequently vanished; perhaps it was 
nota true star at all but a brighter knot of nebulosity. There 
is, though, a central star, listed variously as fourteenth or 
sixteenth magnitude, which is the source of the nebula’s 
gas. Visually through small telescopes the Owl appears 
as a pale, grey disk larger than Jupiter, although larger 
instruments (and long-exposure photographs) reveal a 
greenish colour. As with all planetary nebulae its distance 
is uncertain, but is probably in the region of 1500 light- 
years, somewhat more distant than M27 but still among 
the closest planetaries to us. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M98 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M98 


M98 is a spiral galaxy in southern Coma Berenices, 
just 0.5 degrees from the fifth-magnitude star 6 Comae 
Berenices. It was a Mechain discovery, in March 1781. M98 
is a spiral galaxy of intermediate type lying nearly edge-on 
to us, as a result of which it appears extremely elongated 
in shape, about four times longer than it is wide. William 
Herschel in 1783 declared that ‘its feeble branches extend 
above a quarter of a degree’, although only large telescopes 
will show it this big; in amateur instruments its length will 
be about half as large as Herschel saw it, and the nucleus 
appears star-like. Although lying in Coma, M98 is actually 
a member of the Virgo Cluster. One surprising aspect is 
that it shows not a redshift but a blueshift, indicating it 
is moving towards us at a relative speed of 140 km st. 
In fact, it is not the only Virgo cluster member to show a 
blueshift, nor does it have the largest value; rather,these 
discordant figures demonstrate that there is a wide range 
of motions among the individual members of large clusters 
such as that in Virgo. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


M99 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


M99 


M99 is a spiral galaxy in Coma Berenices. It was another 
Mechain discovery in March 1781, on the opposite side 
of the fifth-magnitude star 6 Comae Berenices from M98, 
but the two galaxies are of quite different appearance. 
Whereas M98 is edge-on to us, M99 is turned almost face- 
on so that it appears rounded in small instruments. It 
is classified as type Sc. Unusually, it seems to possess 
three spiral arms (a symmetrical two is the most common 
arrangement), although these will be visible only in larger 
apertures or on long-exposure photographs. They were 
first seen by Lord Rosse in 1848, making this the second 
galaxy in which spiral structure was definitely detected 
(M51 was the first), although of course at that time the 
true nature of galaxies was not recognized. M99 has been 
the site of three known supernovae, in 1967, 1972 and 1986. 
In contrast with M98, which shows a small blueshift, M99 
has one of the largest redshifts of any galaxy in the Virgo 
Cluster, 2400 km s7!. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mach, Ernst (1838-1916) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mach, Ernst (1838-1916) 


Moravian/ Austrian physicist, scientist/philosopher, the 
basis of whose natural philosophy was that all knowledge 
is a matter of experiments, indeed sensations, so that 
‘laws of nature’ are summaries of experience provided by 
fallible senses. EINSTEIN, who had been taught by Mach, 
was very influenced by this perspective and developed 
the theory of relativity, expressing much the same 
thing by incorporating the speed of light into concepts 
of simultaneity, etc. Mach’s Principle is a philosophical 
statement that in some way the properties of a body are 
influenced by the properties of all the other bodies of 
the universe. This is not easy to interpret scientifically, 
but the principle influenced Einstein’s concept of space- 
time. Contrary to Einstein’s belief that he had produced 
the theory of general relativity in conformance with this 
principle, WILLEM DE SITTER found solutions to Einstein’s 
field equations in the absence of matter, i.e. no matter exists 
other than the test body, but it does have inertia. Mach also 
worked on acoustics, and the ratio of a body’s speed to the 
speed of sound is known as the Mach number. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maclaurin, Colin (1698-1746) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maclaurin, Colin (1698-1746) 


Born in Kilmodan, Argyllshire, Scotland, became profes- 
sor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh and 
worked on the theory of tides, the impact of bodies, and in 
1742 published his Treatise of Fluxions, the first systematic 
exposition of NEWTON’s methods. Its influence was nega- 
tive in that it prolonged the currency of Newton’s geomet- 
ric approach to calculus rather than the algebraic analysis 
developed on the continent. In the book, he used the spe- 
cial case of Taylor’s series now named the Maclaurin series. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Maclear, Thomas (1794-1879) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maclear, Thomas (1794—1879) 


Irish astronomer, verified Henderson’s parallax of alpha 
Centauri. Trained as a doctor in England, Maclear was 
an amateur astronomer who became an FRS on the basis 
of his contributions to astronomy, and then was 
appointed to the Royal Observatory at the Cape of Good 
Hope, where he was Director from 1834 to 1870 (see 
SOUTH AFRICAN ASTRONOMY). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maffei 1 and 2 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maffei 1 and 2 


Two relatively nearby galaxies which lie so close to the 
plane of the Milky Way that they are almost completely 
obscured by interstellar dust. They were discovered in 
1968 as a result of infrared observations conducted by the 
Italian astronomer, Paulo Maffei. Maffei I appears to be 
an elliptical galaxy, located at a distance of about 330000 
light-years. Maffei 2 is a spiral galaxy that lies at a distance 
of some 15 million light-years. 


See also: elliptical galaxies, infrared astronomy, interstel- 
lar absorption lines, Milky Way Galaxy, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magellan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magellan 


Highly successful NASA Venus orbiter, launched from 
Space Shuttle Atlantis in May 1989. Arrived at Venus 
in August 1990. Used synthetic aperture radar to map 
98% of the surface of Venus at 120-300 m resolution and 
provided global altimetry data. Revealed more than 1000 
impact craters and 1100 volcanic features. Also discovered 
sinuous valleys, and unique geological structures known 
as coronae and arachnoids. Precision radio tracking of the 
spacecraft measured Venus’ gravitational field. Entered 
the planet’s atmosphere in October 1994. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magellan, Ferdinand (14807-1521) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magellan, Ferdinand (1480?-1521) 


Portuguese explorer, whose crew brought back from 
his voyages into the southern hemisphere news of the 
existence of what became known as the Magellanic clouds. 
At first, they were conceived as two fragments of the Milky 
Way that had somehow come loose, but now are known 
to be the two nearest galaxies to our own. The Magellan 
spacecraft to Venus commemorates his explorations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Magellanic Clouds: Interstellar Phenomena 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magellanic Clouds: Interstellar 
Phenomena 


The LARGE and SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUDS are two naked-eye 
IRREGULAR GALAXIES in the southern sky. Extending over 
~7° x 7°, the Large Magellanic Cloud has a prominent 
stellar bar superposed on a disk, which is tilted by about 
40° with respect to the sky. The Small Magellanic Cloud, 
~4° x 3°, has a bar-like structure, with its long axis 
stretched along the line of sight. The Large and Small 
Magellanic Clouds are at distances of 50 kpc and 60 kpc, 
respectively, and are believed to be satellite galaxies of our 
MILKY way. Their masses, 2 x 10!°M, and 2 x 10°Mo, are 
much smaller than the mass of the Milky Way, a few times 
10" Mo. 

The Magellanic Clouds are close enough to each 
other and close enough to the Milky Way that tidal 
interactions have significantly altered the distribution 
of their masses. Tidal interactions are responsible for 
the formation of the stellar bar in the Large Magellanic 
Cloud as well as the elongated geometry of the Small 
Magellanic Cloud. A large-scale neutral hydrogen (H I) 
map of the Magellanic Clouds (figure 1) shows that tidal 
interactions have produced not only the Magellanic Bridge 
between the two galaxies, but also the MAGELLANIC STREAM 
trailing behind the Small Magellanic Cloud and a Leading 
Arm in the opposite direction. The Magellanic Clouds 
cannot be considered as independent galaxies; they form 
a ‘Magellanic System’. 


Figure 1. A neutral hydrogen view of the Large Magellanic 
Cloud (on the left) and the Small Magellanic Cloud (on the 
right). The gas connecting the two galaxies forms the Magellanic 
Bridge. The start of the Magellanic Stream can be seen above the 
Small Magnellanic Cloud. This image was obtained with the 
Parkes multibeam receiver of the Australia Telescope. Image 
courtesy of R Haynes et al. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


\ ‘P i 
9 2 . 
> ; % * 
2 a A 
° % 3 He «- 
-9 % 7 


Figure 2. (Top) Ha image of the Large Magellanic Cloud 
showing the 10‘ K ionized interstellar gas. The main body of the 
Large Magellanic Cloud is 7° x 7°. The brightest nebula is the 
giant H II region 30 Doradus. Shells of various sizes are clearly 
seen. (Bottom) HI 21 cm line image of the Large Magellanic 
Cloud with the same field of view. The Ha image was taken 
with M Bessell’s CCD camera at Siding Spring Observatory. The 
HI map was obtained with the Australia Telescope Compact 
Array and the Parkes 64 m Radio Telesope. Image courtesy of 

S Kim et al. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magellanic Clouds: Interstellar Phenomena 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supergiant shell a ~ a, 
LMC-3 : 
© Pg a 


30 Doradus Pg 


SNR * 
DEM L 299° 


Supergiant shell % 6 


LMC-2 a ‘ 


SNR 7 
DEM L 316 


es ‘es 
a 
. 
. 
Supergiant shell . 
LMC-3 SS 
ann aap 30 Doradus 
é Av star ® jf ‘ ® Jar 
Supergiant shell + 
LMC-2 . 
ze “3? 30 Dor C 
ee oe P 
SNR, ~. SN1987A ™ SNR 
34Q5693 ‘~ ss 0528-692 
" loneycom| 
Ktar SNR 
% ° 
SNR _ 7 SNR 
DEM L 316 LMC X-1 N132D 
° 
SNR. 
. 0534-699 


Figure 3. (Top) Ha image of a portion of the Large Magellanic 
Cloud centered on the 30 Doradus complex. (Bottom) Soft x-ray 
image of the same region in the 0.1-2.0 keV band. The field of 
view is 140’ x 110’. Diffuse x-ray emission is clearly detected in 
supernova remants, some superbubbles, the giant H II region 

30 Dor and two supergiant shells. The Ha image was taken with 
the Curtis Schmidt Telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American 
Observatory. The x-ray image was a mosaic of observations 
made with the High Resolution Imager on board the ROSAT 
x-ray satellite (R6entgen Satellite). 


Interstellar shells 

The Magellanic Clouds are active in STAR FORMATION and 
contain large numbers of massive stars. Massive stars 
ionize the ambient interstellar medium via their ultraviolet 
radiation and dynamically interact with the ambient 
medium via fast stellar winds and supernova blasts. The 
dynamical interactions sweep the ambient interstellar gas 
into dense shells that are best seen in Ha images (figure 2). 
The wide variety of interstellar shells in the Magellanic 
Clouds are formed by the following mechanisms. (1) 
Single massive stars blow ‘bubbles’ during their lifetime 
and form SUPERNOVA REMNANTS eventually. These shells 
usually have sizes of a few to a few tens of parsecs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(2) Massive stars in an OB ASSOCIATION collectively produce 
‘superbubbles’ in the interstellar medium, and their sizes 
are a few tens of to a couple of hundred parsecs. (3) When 
multiple generations of star formation have taken place 
close to one another, an interstellar ‘hole’ or a ‘supergiant 
shell’ with a diameter as large as 1000 pc may form. 

The Large Magellanic Cloud has ~40 known 
supernova remnants, including the young remnant of SN 
1987A, ~20 superbubbles around OB associations and 
10 supergiant shells. The Small Magellanic Cloud has 
fewer interstellar shells; for example, it has ~15 known 
supernova remnants, and only one supergiant shell has 
been identified. The Magellanic Clouds are the only 
galaxies where superbubbles and supergiant shells can be 
studied comprehensively, as both the physical conditions 
of the shells and their underlying massive stellar content 
can be resolved and studied in great detail (see also 
MAGELLANIC CLOUDS: STAR POPULATIONS). 


Multiphase interstellar medium 

The interaction between massive stars and the interstellar 
medium produces shock-heated gas at a few 10° K. 
The mixture of hot ionized gas and cooler ionized and 
neutral gas forms a multiple-phase structure within the 
interstellar medium. The Magellanic Clouds provide 
ideal laboratories to study the multiphase interstellar 
medium because of their proximity, low extinction and 
small inclination angle. 

The Ha image and the HI 21 cm line map of the Large 
Magellanic Cloud show vastly different morphologies 
(figure 2). The ionized warm gas is distributed near recent 
star-forming regions, while the neutral atomic gas shows 
fossil shell structures accumulated from previous epochs 
of star formation. 

The distribution of the hot ionized gas relative to 
the cooler gas is revealed by comparisons of soft x-ray 
images with Ha images (figure 3). The distribution of 
the hot ionized gas has a good correspondence to that 
of the cooler ionized gas, or star formation regions. Hot 
ionized gas is present in supernova remnants, the giant 
H II region 30 Doradus, superbubbles, supergiant shells 
and the unbounded fields. It is conceivable that the 
hot ionized gas was initially produced and confined in 
the central cavities of interstellar shells. The hot gas 
can be injected into the halo, if a shell is larger than 
the scale height of the gas disk, e.g. a supergiant shell. 
The hot gas may escape the shell interior if the ambient 
medium is inhomogeneous and a breakout occurs. These 
mechanisms can satisfactorily explain the distribution of 
the hot ionized gas with respect to the cooler gas. 

Most of the mass of the interstellar medium is in the 
neutral components. The Large and Small Magellanic 
Clouds have H I masses of 7 x 108M, and 6.5 x 10°Mo, 
and molecular H, masses of 1.4 x 10®°M, and 3 x 
10’ Mo, respectively. The molecular H, masses may be 
somewhat uncertain because they are derived from CO 
observations and the conversion factors from CO to H) for 
the Magellanic Clouds are not well known because of their 
lower metallicities and higher ultraviolet radiation field. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magellanic Clouds: Interstellar Phenomena ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Chu Y-H, Suntzeff N, Hesser J and Bohlender D (eds) 1999 
New Views of the Magellanic Clouds (IAU Symposium 
No 190) (Publications of the Astronomical Society of 
the Pacific) 

Westerlund B E 1997 The Magellanic Clouds (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


You-Hua Chu 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Magellanic Clouds: Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magellanic Clouds: Stellar 
Populations 


The Magellanic Clouds (figure 1) have long been seen as 
the prototypical young STELLAR POPULATION. The presence of 
young GLOBULAR CLUSTERS in the Clouds spoke to southern 
hemisphere observers of the opportunity to study close up 
processes which have not occurred in the Milky Way for a 
long time. Young globulars are also seen in other gas-rich, 
highly disturbed environments, such as merging galaxies 
(Holtzman et al 1996; Brodie et al 1998). 


The history of star formation 

The Hubble Space Telescope has opened up the main 
sequence in the Magellanic Clouds for detailed study. The 
pioneering work of Gallagher et al (1996) (see figure 2), 
followed by Holtzman et al (1997), yields a good fit with a 
three-epoch STAR FORMATION history, an initial burst, middle 
age and a recent burst of star formation. Sufficient main 
sequence is exposed by the WFPC2 to show that a power 
law initial mass function (IMF) is a satisfactory fit with 
dn/dm = m~* and 2 < s < 3, similar to the closest fit in 
the solar neighborhood. The upper end of the IMF and its 
high-mass cutoff has been investigated by Massey (1999). 

The recent burst began approximately 3 Gyr ago, 
which may be compared with the orbital timescale of the 
LMC, 1.3 Gyr (Gardiner et al 1994). Multiple LMC fields 
have now been studied (Geha et al 1998) and broadly 
similar results are seen in all. The star formation history 
of the LMC as a whole is being studied by Harris et al 
(1999). Olsen (1999) finds that the star formation history 
of the inner region of the LMC may be more steady. The 
situation in the SMC is discussed by Hatzidimitriou (1999). 

In its cluster formation history the LMC seems to 
have experienced a quieter middle age according to Da 
Costa (1999). However, possibly the middle-aged clusters 
(Sarajedini 1998) were formed and have simply failed to 
survive. A catalog of Magellanic Cloud associations is 
provided by Bica et al (1999). Comparing the LMC with 
IC 1613, van den Bergh (1998) draws a distinction between 
the cluster and field star formation histories. 

The Magellanic Clouds have long been the best 
laboratory for the study of young sTaR CLustERS. An update 
on this work is provided by Grebel et al (1999). A natural 
connection can be made between the young clusters and 
large molecular clouds which reach 2 x 10° solar masses 
in the NANTEN CO survey (Fukui et al 1999). 


Kinematics 

Details of the stellar kinematics of the Magellanic Clouds 
pale before the wealth of detail now available on the 
kinematics of the gas by Kim et al (1998, 1999) from the 
Australia Telescope Compact Array and from the Parkes 
telescope (see also Putman et al 1998). However, a tracer of 
the intermediate-age population is provided by the CARBON 
sTARS (Kunkel et al 1997), which show a cool rotating disk 
with a circular velocity of approximately 60 km s~!. The 
cluster kinematics is discussed by Schommer et al (1992) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The Large and Small Magellanic Clouds imaged by 
M Bessell with a 3 in camera mounted on the 16 in telescope at 
Siding Spring Observatory. 


and the cluster also forms a simple disk. The stars are too 
sparse to provide useful age resolution. 


Chemistry 

The star formation history of the LMC which we have just 
described together with the assumptions of the simple 
model of chemical enrichment predict Z(t), the time 
evolution of the metallicity, which is in quite satisfactory 
agreement with observations (Dopita et al 1997). The 
present-day stellar abundances are analyzed for Cepheids 
by Luck et al (1998) and by Smith (1999). Da Costa and 
Hatzidimitriou (1998) trace the chemical evolution of the 
SMC and find that the simple model is satisfactory. A 
detailed chemical evolution model is presented by de 
Freitas Pacheco (1998). A bursting model by Pagel and 
Tautvaisiene (1998) fits the data very well. An added 
complication has been introduced by Da Costa (1999), who 
notes a radial abundance gradient in the LMC’s old star 
clusters. 


Surveys 

Recent surveys have enriched our knowledge of the 
Magellanic Clouds. The principal stellar surveys include 
the EROS and MACHO MIcROLENSING surveys, which have 
yielded a particularly fine harvest of VARIABLE STARS (Alcock 
et al 1999; Beaulieu et al 1999), and the photometric survey 
of Zaritsky (1999). 


Bibliography 

Alcock C et al 1999 Astron. J. 117 920 

Beaulieu J P et al 1999 New Views of the Magellanic Clouds: 
TAU Symp. 190 (ASP Conf. Ser.) ed Y H Chu, J Hesser 
and N Suntzeff, p 313 

Bica E et al 1999 Astron. J. 117 238 

Brodie J et al 1998 Astron. J. 116 691 

Da Costa G S$ 1999 New Views of the Magellanic Clouds: [AU 
Symp. 190 (ASP Conf. Ser.) ed Y H Chu, J Hesser and 
N Suntzeff, p 397 

Da Costa G and Hatzidimitriou D 1998 Astron. J. 115 1934 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magellanic Clouds: Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(F555W-F814W), 


-5 E 1.5 
as a a a a 


+ -2 


20 | 
2 r = 
8 22 |— g 
2 | 2 

24 | 

26 | 

se 

28 |— 


| | | {+ pt | i 7 oa | f= i= | =f ae ree | 10 
-5 ) 5 1 1.5 2 
(F555W-F814W) 


Figure 2. Color-magnitude diagram of a WFPC2 field near NGC 
1866 in the LMC from Holtzman et al (1997). Stars in the 
Hertzsprung gap (i.e. between the main sequence and the giant 
branch) between magnitudes 20.5 and 22 show the history of 
star formation from 1 to 10 billion years ago. 


de Freitas Pacheco J 1998 Astron. J. 116 1701 

Dopita M et al 1997 Astrophys. ]. 474 188 

Fukui Y et al 1999 Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 51 (NANTEN 
special issue) 

Gallagher J et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 466 732 

Gardiner L et al 1994 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 266 567 

Geha M et al 1998 Astron. J. 115 1045 

Grebel E, Zaritsky D, Harris J and Thompson I 1999 New 
Views of the Magellanic Clouds: IAU Symp. 190 (ASP 
Conf. Ser.) ed Y H Chu, J Hesser and N Suntzeff, p 405 

Harris J, Zaritsky D, Grebel E and Thompson I 1999 New 
Views of the Magellanic Clouds: IAU Symp. 190 (ASP 
Conf. Ser.) ed Y H Chu, J Hesser and N Suntzeff, p 347 

Hatzidimitriou D 1999 New Views of the Magellanic Clouds: 
IAU Symp. 190 (ASP Conf. Ser.) ed Y H Chu, J Hesser 
and N Suntzeff, p 299 

Holtzman J et al 1996 Astron. J. 112 416 

—1997 Astron. J. 113 656 

Kim S et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 503 674 

——1999 New Views of the Magellanic Clouds: IAU Symp. 190 
(ASP Conf. Ser.) ed Y H Chu, J Hesser and N Suntzeff, 
p 101 

Kunkel W et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 488 L129 

Luck E et al 1998 Astron. J. 115 605 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Massey P 1999 New Views of the Magellanic Clouds: [AU 
Symp. 190 (ASP Conf. Ser.) ed YH Chu, J Hesser and 
N Suntzeff, p 173 

Olsen K 1999 Astron. J. 117 2244 

Pagel B and Tautvaisiene G 1998 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
299 535 

Putman M et al 1998 Nature 394 752 

Sarajedini A 1998 Astron. J. 116 738 

Schommer R et al 1992 Astron. J. 103 447 

Smith V 1999 New Views of the Magellanic Clouds: [AU 
Symp. 190 (ASP Conf. Ser.) ed Y H Chu, J Hesser and 
N Suntzeff, p 259 

van den Bergh S 1998 Astrophys. J. 507 L39 

Zaritsky D 1999 Astron. J. 118 2824 


For additional reading see 


Chu Y H, Hesser J and Suntzeff N (ed) 1999 New Views of 
the Magellanic Clouds: LAU Symp. 109 (ASP Conf. Ser.) 


Jeremy Mould 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magellanic Stream 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magellanic Stream 


The Magellanic Stream (MS), which covers an arc of more 
than 90° across the sky, is a thin band of neutral hydrogen 
(HJ). It is basically continuous, although there are at least 
six separate regions within the stream where the particle 
density is visibly enhanced. One end of the MS appears to 
be connected with the LARGE and SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUDS, 
with the other end trailing away from them (see also 
MAGELLANIC CLOUDS: INTERSTELLAR PHENOMENA). Even though 
the MS is very close to our Galaxy, at least as far as 
extragalactic distances are concerned, the process through 
which it originated is still widely debated. 

While it seems most likely that the MS is the result 
of gravitational interactions (See GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND 
MERGERS), several viable mechanisms exist which could 
theoretically produce such a feature. One of the major 
difficulties in determining the origin of the MS is that the 
exact distance is not known. Another is that while some 
theories are capable of explaining certain aspects of the 
MS, there is no theory that can completely reproduce all 
observed features. Two proposed mechanisms that have 
each been studied in detail are ram-pressure stripping and 
tidal stripping. 

There are observed properties of the MS and its 
surroundings that support the ram-pressure model. First, 
the edges of the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds on the 
opposite side of the stream are well defined, as if they are 
interacting with a gaseous medium through which they 
are passing. Also, the end of the MS most distant from the 
Magellanic Clouds has a RADIAL VELOCITY component 200 
kilometers per second different from that of the clouds, 
while the end apparently connected to the clouds does not 
show this discrepancy. The radial velocity component for 
the MS, for the most part, shows a smooth and continuous 
variance between its two ends, as it should if it were 
the result of ram-pressure stripping. Finally, it has been 
proposed that the observed clumpy regions within the 
stream represent regions of gas that lost varying amounts 
of ANGULAR MOMENTUM through the stripping process. 

On the other hand, computer simulations have been 
performed to examine the tidal stripping model that bear 
striking resemblance to observations. This simulated 
stream shows positional agreement with the observed 
stream, as well as appropriate values for the total mass 
and radial velocity profile. One difficulty with this model, 
however, is that theoretically a second stream which leads 
the Magellanic Clouds should also be produced, but is not 
observed. While additional regions of neutral hydrogen 
have been detected in the vicinity of the Magellanic 
Clouds, it is unclear that any of these should be interpreted 
as a leading arm. Another difficulty is that stars as well 
as gas should be affected by tidal forces, while no obvious 
stellar component has been detected in the MS. 


Bibliography 

Gardiner L T and Noguchi M 1996 N-body simulations 
of the Small Magellanic Cloud and the Magellanic 
Stream Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 278 191-208 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Moore B and Davis M 1994 The origin of the Magellanic 
Stream Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 270 209-21 


Robert Mohr 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnenus [Magnen, Magnien], Johann Chrysostom 
(c. 1590-c. 1679) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnenus [Magnen, Magnien], 
Johann Chrysostom (c. 1590—c. 1679) 


Physician, born in Luxeuil, Burgundy, became professor 
of medicine and philosophy at Pavia, Italy, an astrologer, 
who revived atomism, establishing a viable alternative 
to Aristotelian philosophy and paving the way for the 
modern scientific view as expressed by GALILEO. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Magnetars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetars 


A magnetar (contraction of ‘magnetic star’) is a NEUTRON 
STAR for which the magnetic field energy exceeds all other 
sources of energy, including rotation. In most cases, this 
implies a magnetic field strength of approximately 104 G, 
which would make magnetars the objects with the most 
intense magnetic fields known. Magnetars were initially 
proposed to explain the properties of the soft gamma 
repeaters (SGRs) (Thompson and Duncan, 1995). SGRs 
are sources of short, repeating, super-Eddington bursts of 
y-rays (up to ~100 keV). Three are known to exist in our 
Galaxy (SGR1900+14, SGR1806-20, and SGR1627-41), 
and a fourth is apparently in the Large Magellanic Cloud 
(SGR0525-66). (These designations come from their ini- 
tially determined positions in right ascension and decli- 
nation; in some cases, however, subsequent refinements 
of the positions have taken place. By convention, the des- 
ignations have not been changed to reflect this.) Their 
locations and possible associations with supernova rem- 
nants suggest that they are neutron stars. The SGRs 
undergo sporadic periods of bursting activity, punctuated 
by long quiescent intervals. Occasionally (perhaps every 
century) they emit very intense giant bursts of y-radiation 
up to energies of several MeV, whose intensities at Earth 
are greater than those of any other cosmic source (Hurley 
et al, 1999). The magnetar model postulates that the ener- 
gy source for all of these outbursts is an intense magnetic 
field which stresses the neutron star crust and causes it to 
crack, exciting Alfvén waves and energizing electrons in 
the neutron star’s magnetosphere. Small cracks explain 
the frequent, less intense bursts, while global cracking 
and magnetic field reconnection are responsible for the 
giant bursts. The SGRs are all quiescent, steady sources of 
low-energy x-radiation (2-10 keV). In several cases, clear 
evidence is seen for periodic emission, either of quiescent 
x-rays, or of the bursting y-rays. The periods are in the 
range 5-8 s and, in the magnetar model, are explained by 
the presence of hot spots on the neutron star surface, with 
magnetic field dissipation and neutron star crustal stress 
as the heating source. Experimental evidence for the exis- 
tence of superstrong magnetic fields comes from observa- 
tions of the spin-down of the SGRs, deduced from the 
low-energy x-rays (Kouveliotou et al, 1998). The interpre- 
tation of these observations is that, similarly to the radio 
pulsars, the neutron star is losing energy by dipole radia- 
tion from its magnetic field. 


Bibliography 

Hurley K, Cline T, Mazets E et al 1999 A giant periodic 
flare from the soft gamma-ray repeater SGR1900+14 
Nature 397 41 

Kouveliotou C, Dieters S, Strohmayer T et al 1998 An X- 
ray pulsar with a superstrong magnetic field in the 
soft gamma-ray repeater SGR1806-20 Nature 393 235 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Paczynski B 1992 GB 790305 as a very strongly magne- 
tized neutron star Acta Astronomica 42 145 
Thompson C and Duncan R 1995 The soft gamma 
repeaters as very strongly magnetized neutron 
stars. I. Radiative mechanism for outbursts Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 275 255 
Kevin Hurley 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Buoyancy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetic Buoyancy 


‘Magnetic buoyancy’ is a term that is applied to 
two related, though definitely distinct, phenomena. 
This article is concerned with magnetic buoyancy as 
a mechanism for destabilizing atmospheres containing 
magnetic fields that are in mechanical equilibrium. The 
term is also applied to the buoyancy of an isolated tube 
of magnetic field; it is however important to note that this 
latter phenomenon is not a manifestation of an instability, 
but rather of a lack of equilibrium. Instability driven by 
magnetic buoyancy is likely to be an important mechanism 
in the disruption of any large-scale magnetic field. In 
particular, it is the most probable cause of the break-up 
of the Sun’s large-scale toroidal field, posited to lie at the 
base of the convection zone (See SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
ZONE). 


The basic instability mechanism 

The simplest way of understanding magnetic buoyancy as 
an instability mechanism is to consider an atmosphere in 
hydrostatic equilibrium with a unidirectional, horizontal 
magnetic field that depends only on height, z. The 
equation of magnetohydrostatic balance is then 


= ( +=)= (1) 
dz \? Quo) pe: 


Suppose that a small parcel of gas (and magnetic field) 
is raised slowly, without any bending of the field lines, 
an infinitesimal distance from a height z to z + dz; denote 
changes within the gas parcel by ‘5’ and changes in the 
atmosphere external to the parcel by ‘d’. 

Conservation of mass and magnetic flux of the parcel 
lead to the relation 


5B bp 
B = ns (2) 
p 
Conservation of specific entropy of the parcel gives 
6p 5p 
—=y— (3) 
Pp p 


where y is the ratio of specific heats. Maintaining the total 
pressure balance between the parcel and its surroundings 
implies that 

BEE ef Oe (4) 

Ko Ho 

Instability occurs if, on displacement, the parcel is less 
dense than its surroundings (i.e. 50 < dg) and hence 
continues to rise. Manipulation of equations (2), (3) and 
(4) leads to the following local criterion for magnetic 
buoyancy instability: 


ép t+ 


Bed 
n 
Lop dz 


B d 
( ) > — In(pp”). (5) 
p dz 


The left-hand side represents the potentially destabilizing 
influence of the magnetic field, fields that decrease with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


height making the gas top-heavy to some extent; the right- 
hand side is a measure of the convective stability (or 
instability) of the atmosphere. From the point of view 
of magnetic buoyancy instabilities, the interesting case is 
when the atmosphere is convectively stable (i.e., the right- 
hand side of inequality (5) is positive), any instability thus 
being driven by the magnetic field. 


Further effects 

The instability criterion (5) was derived under the most 
simplifying assumptions possible—no bending of the field 
lines, no diffusion and no rotation. In this section we 
shall consider how the instability mechanism is affected 
by such considerations, all of which are important in an 
astrophysical context. 


Three-dimensional instability 

When fully three-dimensional motions are considered, 
the change in the instability mechanism is quite subtle. 
On the one hand, bending of the field lines entails 
work against magnetic tension; this though becomes 
arbitrarily small as the wavelength in the direction of 
the imposed field becomes arbitrarily long. On the other 
hand—and not so obviously—three-dimensional motions 
can reduce the work done against magnetic pressure. 
The basic idea is that instability occurs by the release 
of gravitational potential energy, this being induced by 
horizontal variations in the density, and hence, also, 
in the gas pressure. For the two-dimensional modes 
considered above, in which the field lines remain straight 
(so-called interchange modes), gas pressure and magnetic 
pressure are inextricably linked; it is impossible to do work 
against gas pressure, necessary for producing density 
variations, without incurring the penalty of doing work 
against magnetic pressure. However, this constraint is 
relaxed by irrotational flows that, though compressible, 
are essentially solenoidal in the plane perpendicular to 
the imposed field; such motions can generate density 
fluctuations without having to do work against magnetic 
pressure. As a consequence, the local criterion for 
instability to three-dimensional modes is 


d d 
——— In(B) > — In(pp”). (6) 
Hop dz dz 


Thus it is the gradient in B that is now the key destabilizing 
ingredient, compared to a gradient in B/p for interchange 
modes (cf (5)). For two-dimensional motions in the plane 
of the field (the ‘opposite’ case to interchange modes), 
geometrical constraints lead to a more stringent instability 
criterion than that given by (6). 


The role of diffusion 

We have so far considered the instability for ideal 
(diffusionless) MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS. In reality, however, 
the instability will be influenced by the diffusion of 
magnetic field and heat, and by viscosity (denoted by n, 
« and v respectively). In the soLaR INTERIOR the molecular 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Buoyancy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


values of the diffusivities satisfy the inequalities v <n « 
k. In the absence of rotation, viscosity acts merely as a 
damping mechanism; we shall therefore concentrate here 
on the role of 7 and « and set v = 0. For simplicity we 
shall only consider the instability of interchange modes. 
The diffusive modification to the instability criterion (5) is 
given by 


2 
aod in(=) ce reread (7) 
Mop dz p yedz 

It can be seen clearly how instability is facilitated by small 

values of n (that help maintain the destabilizing magnetic 

field gradient) and large values of « (that act to erode the 

stabilizing entropy gradient). 

Diffusive effects also lead to qualitatively new 
behavior in the form of oscillatory instabilities (ie. the 
growth rate s = s, + is; with s, > 0 and s; # 0). The 
criterion for such an instability (again with v = 0) is given 


by 
B? n\ d =) 
1 + 1 
mr 4 2 dz “(2 


kod 
> nm+ k)> +=-In(pp”) (8) 
& ky 


dz 


where k, and k are the horizontal and total wavenumbers. 
The most interesting feature of (8) is the occurrence of 
instability, for n/« < y —1, with —dIn(B/p)/dz negative, a 
situation that at first sight one would imagine to be stable. 
Unsurprisingly, the mechanism behind the instability is 
very different to that discussed above. However, itis again 
instructive to consider a small upward displacement of a 
tube of magnetic flux. From the analysis leading to (5) it 
follows that if —dIn(B/e)/dz < 0 then a displaced parcel 
will be denser than its surroundings and will fall. The 
crucial element though is that the raised parcel may be 
hotter than its surroundings; thermal diffusion will then 
allow the passage of heat from parcel to surroundings, 
with the possibility that when the tube returns to its 
initial height it is cooler, and hence denser, than it was 
originally. If this is the case, it will thus ‘overshoot’ on the 
downward side, with repetition of this process leading to 
an oscillatory instability. 


Incorporating rotation 

Since magnetic buoyancy is envisaged as being the 
mechanism responsible for the instability of the solar 
toroidal field, it is obviously important to consider the 
role played by rotation. Interchange modes—which may 
be regarded as the cartesian analogue of axisymmetric 
modes ina spherical system—are strongly stabilized by the 
angular momentum constraint imposed by rotation. Thus, 
in systems where rotation is of any significance, three- 
dimensional modes are strongly favored. Furthermore, 
rotation provides a distinct orientation to the system, with 
the consequence that instability occurs in the form of 
travelling waves. In general, for a rotating, diffusive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


system it is not possible to extract the stability criteria 
analytically; however, various limiting cases do provide 
explicit results. For example, when rotation is rapid, 
and when gravity, rotation and the imposed magnetic 
field are mutually orthogonal (i.e. a toroidal field at 
the equator) then ideal (diffusionless) three-dimensional 
travelling waves are unstable when 


Bed 
n 
Mop dz 


B d 
( ) > —In(pp”). (9) 
p dz 


Coincidentally, this is identical to (5), the criterion for 
interchange modes in the absence of rotation. 


Discontinuous fields 

Allof the instability criteria above have addressed the issue 
of the instability of a smoothly varying magnetic field. A 
related problem—and one that shows magnetic buoyancy 
instability in its starkest form—is that of the instability of 
discontinuous magnetic fields. If a slab of magnetic field 
is embedded in an otherwise field-free atmosphere then 
the magnetic pressure, and hence also the gas pressure, 
must be discontinuous at the boundaries of the field. If 
the temperature is assumed to be continuous (though this 
is not crucial), then the density at the boundaries of the 
slab must also be discontinuous. At the upper interface 
the density jump is destabilizing, with (lighter) magnetic 
gas supporting (heavier) non-magnetic gas; the gas here 
is genuinely top-heavy and the resulting instability is 
of a Rayleigh-Taylor type. (By contrast, at the lower 
boundary the density jump is stabilizing.) There is no 
instability criterion as such, all locally top-heavy equilibria 
being unstable, at least in the absence of diffusion. For a 
conventional (non-magnetic) Rayleigh-Taylor instability, 
the preferred mode (in the sense of maximizing the 
growth rate) has, in the absence of diffusion, infinitesimal 
horizontal scales. The presence of a magnetic field changes 
this picture; small scales are preferred in the direction 
perpendicular to the field, longer scales in the direction 
along the field. Indeed, once the field is sufficiently strong, 
interchange modes are preferred. 


The nonlinear evolution 

The most exciting recent work on magnetic buoyancy 
instability has been in the study of its nonlinear evolution. 
In the context of the SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD, one of the 
most important questions is whether a large-scale ordered 
field can break up into smaller-scale field concentrations 
of the form that might be conveyed to the surface 
to produce ACTIVE REGIONS. Much of the work on the 
nonlinear development of magnetic buoyancy instabilities 
has considered an initial state of a slab of uniform, 
unidirectional, horizontal magnetic field in a field-free 
atmosphere (leading to magnetic Rayleigh-Taylor type 
instabilities) and we shall only discuss this case here. 
It is instructive first to consider the constrained two- 
dimensional (interchange) evolution before considering 
the fully three-dimensional case. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Buoyancy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Evolution of the magnetic field for an interchange 
mode at three diferent times. The field lines are directed into the 
page. Initially the field occupies the region 0.2 < z < 0.4. 


Interchange modes 

As mentioned above, instability results from the destabi- 
lizing density jump at the upper magnetic interface. The 
rise of the buoyant magnetic gas and the fall of the overly- 
ing denser, non-magnetic gas, results in a shear flow cen- 
tered on the (moving) magnetic interface. This in turn 
leads to a secondary Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, which 
wraps the gas into concentrated patches of vorticity and 
gives the magnetic field the mushroom shape character- 
istic of certain Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities (see figures 1 
and 2). The subsequent development of the instability is 
governed, to a large extent, by the interaction of these vor- 
tices. The key interactions turn out to be between vortices 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. The vorticity corresponding to figure 1(b). Dark (light) 
shades depict positive (negative) vorticity, with a clockwise 
(anticlockwise) circulation. It can be seen that the vorticity is 
concentrated at the mushroom boundaries. 


Figure 3. Isosurface of the magnetic field strength for the 
three-dimensional evolution. Initially the field lines are solely 
into the page. The cross-sectional cut reveals the mushroom 
structure perpendicular to the initial field direction. In the third 
direction, the field has developed undulations as a result of the 
Crow instability of parallel vortices of opposite sign. 


on neighboring mushrooms—rather than those between 
vortices on the same mushroom—with the result that the 
vortices, and their associated magnetic field, are pulled 
downwards. What is surprising is that the vortex inter- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Buoyancy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


actions are sufficiently strong as to be able to overcome 
the intrinsic buoyancy of the magnetic field. As a con- 
sequence, there is no wholesale rise of the magnetic field; 
indeed, pockets of fairly strong field are carried down even 
below the original lower boundary of the field (figure 1(c)). 


Three-dimensional modes 

Even when the motions are completely unconstrained, 
the instability initially evolves in an essentially two- 
dimensional manner, as described above. Strong vortices 
are again formed, as a result of a secondary Kelvin— 
Helmholtz instability, with the vorticity predominantly 
parallel (or antiparallel) to the initial field. It is in 
the subsequent vorticity-driven phase that the two- and 
three-dimensional cases differ strongly. The dominant 
interactions are again between vortices on neighboring 
mushrooms. However, whereas for interchange modes 
this leads to a predominantly downward advection of the 
vortices, in three dimensions the interactions are such as 
to drive a further instability, resulting in undulations along 
the vortices. This instability mechanism (known as the 
crow instability) is precisely that which can sometimes 
be observed in the interacting trailing vortices of aircraft. 
Since the magnetic field is closely tied to the fluid, the 
buckling of the vortices causes a corresponding arched 
structure in the magnetic field (figure 3). Such a 
mechanism may be of significance in the development 
of longitudinal variation in the emerging solar magnetic 
field. 


Future research 

This article has concentrated on the fundamental proper- 
ties of magnetic buoyancy instabilities, an understanding 
of which has come from the study of fairly straightfor- 
ward equilibrium configurations. Future research, which 
will undoubtedly concentrate predominantly on the non- 
linear behavior, will seek to explain the role of magnetic 
buoyancy instability in a somewhat broader context. For 
example, in the solar interior, where magnetic buoyancy 
is believed to be responsible for the disruption and escape 
of the predominantly toroidal field, the influence on the 
instability of a poloidal field component, of a strong shear, 
and of the overlying convection, must all be considered. 


Bibliography 

Acheson D J 1979 Instability by magnetic buoyancy Solar 
Physics 62 23-50 

Hughes D W 1991 Magnetic buoyancy Advances in Solar 
System Magnetohydrodynamics ed E R Priest and A W 
Hood (Cambridge: CUP) pp 77-104 

Hughes D W and Proctor M R E 1988 Magnetic fields in 
the solar convection zone: magnetoconvection and 
magnetic buoyancy Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 20 187-223 

Matthews P C, Hughes D W and Proctor M R E 1995 
Magnetic buoyancy, vorticity, and three-dimensional 
flux-tube formation Astrophys. J. 448 938-41 

Parker E N 1979 Cosmical Magnetic Fields (Oxford: 
Clarendon) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


David W Hughes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


Magnetism—the force that deflects the needle of a 
compass—and magnetic fields have been found in some 
hundreds of stars during the past 50 yr. Magnetic fields 
have been detected in T Tauri stars and other pre-main- 
sequence stars, several types of main sequence stars, white 
dwarfs and neutron stars. We now know a number of 
methods by which such magnetic fields may be detected, 
we are in the process of learning more about how they are 
distributed over stellar surfaces, and we understand some 
of the ways in which these fields reflect—and sometimes 
influence—the evolution of the stars which possess them. 

The first stellar magnetic fields were detected in 
sunspots (see SUNSPOT MAGNETIC FIELDS) in the Sun by George 
Ellery Hale in 1908. Almost forty years later, in 1947, the 
first magnetic field in a star other than the Sun was found 
by Horace W Babcock, who discovered a magnetic field in 
the star 78 Virginis, a ‘chemically peculiar’ main sequence 
star (see STELLAR EVOLUTION) about twice as massive as the 
Sun. Magnetic fields are now known in perhaps 200 other 
A and B stars of the middle main sequence, all of which 
are, like 78 Vir, chemically peculiar (which means that 
they have very unusual surface chemical compositions). 
In such stars the fields are generally found to be roughly 
dipolar in form; in other words, they have an overall 
structure reminiscent of that of a simple bar magnet or of 
the Earth’s magnetic field, with a north and a south pole, 
between which the the magnetic force (as represented by 
magnetic lines of force) points along loops connecting one 
pole to the other. The typical field strength of such stars— 
over the whole stellar surface—is of the order of 1000 G 
(0.1 T), some 3000 times greater than the strength of the 
Earth’s surface field, and about as strong as the magnetic 
field of a good permanent horseshoe magnet. 

The discovery of PULSARS in 1967 by Jocelyn Bell 
Burnell and Anthony Hewish was soon recognized to 
be both the discovery of NEUTRON sTaRS and of magnetic 
fields in such stars. The pulsed radio radiation emitted 
by these spinning, magnetized neutron stars is still almost 
the only means for detecting single neutron stars. The 
roughly dipolar fields of neutron stars are initially of the 
order of 10!7-10'° G (108-10? T) and then seem to decay 
in strength by about a factor of 100. Most or all neutron 
stars thus appear to be formed initially with fields about 
10'° times stronger than are found in the magnetic middle 
main sequence stars. 

Three years later the first magnetic field was detected 
in a WHITE DWARF by James Kemp, John Swedlund, John 
Landstreet and Roger Angel. Fields are now known in 
about 50 other white dwarfs. These fields range from about 
10° to 10° G (10-10° T) in strength, roughly a factor of 10* 
stronger than those of middle main sequence stars. The 
white dwarf fields also appear to be approximately dipolar 
in structure. Unlike neutron stars, only a few per cent of 
all white dwarfs have detectable magnetic fields. 

The first magnetic fields in stars of the lower main 
sequence were detected in 1980 by Richard Robinson, Pete 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Worden and Jack Harvey. Fields are now known in more 
than 50 cool stars, mostly rather young, active stars, or 
in stars in which a companion enforces rapid rotation 
(see the SOLAR-STELLAR CONNECTION). Recently, fields have 
been found in a few PRE-MAIN-SEQUENCE STARS and. T TAURI 
stars. In cool stars, the fields detected have very different 
distributions over the stellar surface from those of the 
stellar types already described. Instead of simple, roughly 
dipolar structure, these fields seem to occur in forms more 
like giant sunspots, or in patches on the stellar surface that 
may resemble solar active regions. The field strengths are 
typically of the order of 10° G (0.1 T), while the fraction 
of the stellar surface covered is typically only of order 
20-50%. 

Unlike the fields of middle main sequence stars, 
white dwarfs and neutron stars, all of which are observed 
to change in structure only very slowly with time, the 
distribution of magnetic flux on the surface of a lower main 
sequence star usually changes substantially in a period of 
weeks or months. It is generally supposed that, in the 
cool stars, the fields observed are generated by a dynamo 
process operating in the convective outer envelope of 
the star, while the more stable fields of middle main 
sequence stars, white dwarfs and neutron stars are ‘fossil 
fields’—large-scale fields produced during an earlier stage 
of evolution, and subsequently frozen into the highly 
electrically conductive matter of the star. In this article 
we will focus on the fields of middle main sequence stars 
and of white dwarfs, leaving those of solar-type stars and 
of neutron stars to other articles. 


Methods of detecting stellar magnetic fields 

Basic physics 

Most of the magnetic fields detected in main sequence 
and white dwarf stars are found by detecting the ZEEMAN 
EFFECT in the stellar spectrum. This effect splits each 
energy level of an atom in a magnetic field into several 
magnetic substates, leading to a number of effects that can 
in favorable cases be detected. 

When placed in an external magnetic field, a state i 
of an atom with energy £; and total angular momentum 
quantum number J splits into 2J + 1 magnetic substates 
equally spaced in energy, with a spacing which varies from 
one atomic level to another. Transitions between level i 
and another level f of energy Ey are characterized by the 
frequency vj, = (Ey — E;)/h when no magnetic field is 
present. When a field B is applied, the splitting of the 
lower and upper energy levels by the magnetic field leads 
to the splitting of the spectral line associated with this 
transition into three closely spaced group of lines. These 
groups arise because most atomic transitions allow the 
magnetic quantum number M to change by —1, 0, or 1. 
The AM = M; — M; = 0 group, called 2 components, 
are distributed symmetrically about vj. The two groups 
of lines with AM = +1, called o components, are shifted 
systematically to frequencies above and below v;-, with 
the AM = +1 group on one side and the AM = —1 group 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on the other. The typical separation between the mz and 
one of the o groups is 


Akg = 2eBi /4amc* 


where g is a number of order 1 which varies from one 
transition to another. In familiar units, the splitting is 


Adp(nm) = 4.67 x 10-°gB(kG)A(um)*. 


Thus a field of 1 kG (0.1 T) leads to a 2-0 separation of the 
order of 0.001 nm at 500 nm = 0.5 wm. 

The z and o groups of lines are polarized. If the 
magnetic field is transverse to the line of sight, the z 
components (in emission) are linearly polarized parallel 
to the applied field and the o components are linearly 
polarized in the orthogonal direction. If the field is parallel 
to the line of sight, the x components are suppressed and 
the two groups of o components have opposite circular 
polarizations. 

When the magnetic field strength is strong enough (of 
order 10° G) that the perturbation of the atom by the field 
is larger than the spin-orbit perturbation, the relatively 
complex Zeeman effect is superseded by the Paschen—Back 
effect, which leads essentially to splitting of all lines into 
simple triplets. A field of order 10° G results in a significant 
quadratic Zeeman effect, which systematically shifts lines 
of large upper principal quantum number n, relative to 
lines of smaller n;. As a field of order 10’ G is reached 
and the magnetic interaction energy becomes comparable 
with the Coulomb energy of the atomic electrical field, the 
atomic spectrum of any atom, even H, becomes extremely 
complicated. 

At fields above about 10° G, another magnetic effect 
occurs that is very useful for detection of fields in white 
dwarfs: polarization of continuum radiation. The broad- 
band light from a star with a field strength of this order 
is circularly polarized, essentially because the field forces 
electrons to spiral about field lines in a preferred direction. 
For still larger fields, broad-band linear polarization can 
also occur. 


Field measurement methods 

The splitting, shifting and polarization of spectral lines 
by the Zeeman, Paschen-Back and quadratic Zeeman 
effects, and the occurrence of continuum polarization 
for sufficiently large fields, have provided astrophysicists 
with a number of methods of detecting and measuring 
magnetic fields in stars. 

The most straightforward of these methods is useful 
for stars that have a very small projected equatorial 
rotational velocity veg sini and hence sharp spectral lines. 
In this case, one can directly observe the splitting of 
spectral lines into components if the field is of the order of 
a few kilogauss or more in main sequence stars, or about 
10° G in white dwarfs. The separation of the observed 
line components provides a direct measurement of the 
modulus of the magnetic field averaged over the surface 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the star, a quantity called the mean field modulus, B,, 
as shown in figure 1. 

The polarization introduced into spectral lines by 
magnetic splitting provides a second powerful method of 
field detection. This method depends on the fact that, in 
a magnetic field with a significant component along the 
line of sight, the o components on one side of the line 
center absorb circularly polarized light of one sense of 
polarization, while the o components on the other side 
of line center absorb the opposite circular polarization. If 
we observe the stellar spectrum through polarizers that 
pass each of the two senses of circular polarization, the 
absorption lines in one of the two circularly polarized 
spectra are not at precisely the same wavelengths as the 
same lines in the other polarized spectrum, because of the 
small wavelength difference between the two sets of o 
components. The presence of a field can be detected by 
this shift in the position of spectral lines between spectra 
observed in right- and left-circularly polarized light, or 
equivalently in the spectrum formed by the difference of 
the two spectra divided by their sum, as shown in the left- 
hand panel in figure 2. 

The fact that, in the presence of a magnetic field 
transverse to the line of sight, the absorption by the 
mz components is orthogonally polarized with respect 
to the polarization of the o components leads to a 
similar effect when a spectrum is observed through linear 
polarizers oriented parallel to and perpendicular to the 
field direction, as seen in the right-hand panel of figure 2. 
In general, the observable effect in linear polarization is 
considerably smaller than in circular polarization. 

Detection of the polarization effects from a stellar 
magnetic field is possible only if there are substantial 
regions on the stellar surface over which the field does 
not change direction too much. Clearly, a field structure in 
which many small tubes of magnetic flux directed out of 
the star are closely mixed in with small tubes of inward- 
directed flux will lead to no net polarization, as the effects 
of adjacent oppositely directed flux tubes will cancel. On 
the other hand, the detection of circular polarization, 
which is not readily produced in line profiles by other 
mechanisms, is a very robust indicator of the presence of a 
field. Furthermore, very small levels of polarization (0.1% 
or even 0.01%) can be measured reliably. The result is 
that circular polarization methods, which measure what is 
called the ‘mean longitudinal field’ B,, provide much more 
sensitivity to weak but geometrically simple magnetic 
fields than methods that depend on studying line profiles. 
In the best cases, By values as small as tens of gauss can 
presently be detected. 


Magnetic fields in middle main sequence 
(‘peculiar A’) stars 

The oblique rotator 

Magnetic fields are detected in middle main sequence 
stars (stars of between about 2 and 10 times the mass 
of the Sun, which are burning hydrogen in their cores) 
both by the detection of circular polarization in spectral 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


bed 
a 


Normalized flux 
° 
a 


S 
> 


0.2 


Aa 6146 6148 


6150 6152 6164 


Figure 1. A portion of the spectrum of the very slowly rotating magnetic Ap star HD 94660 (the spectrum at the top of the figure), 
showing splitting of spectral lines by a magnetic field of B, ~ 6400 G. Below the stellar spectrum is a schematic diagram of the Zeeman 
splitting pattern of several strong stellar spectral lines. Each of the vertical lines above and below the line at intensity 0.4 (respectively 
x and o components) represents one Zeeman component; the position of each component is calculated for a field of 6400 G, and the 
height of each line is proportional to the strength of that component. The ion responsible for each strong line is identified at the bottom 
of the figure. (From G Mathys 1990 Astron. Astrophys. 232 151, reproduced by permission of Astronomy and Astrophysics.) 


lines and by observing Zeeman splitting of spectral lines 
in stars with small veqsini values. All well-confirmed 
detections of fields in middle main sequence stars are in 
members of a class of stars known as ‘chemically peculiar 
A stars’, often called Ap (or Bp) stars (see also PULSATING 
AND CHEMICALLY PECULIAR UPPER MAIN SEQUENCE STARS). These 
stars have long been known to have (sometimes very) 
anomalous atmospheric chemical composition compared 
with the Sun. Their chemistry is typically characterized 
by unusually large amounts of chemical elements such 
as Sr, Cr, Eu and other rare earths, Si and (only in the 
most massive Bp stars) He. Most of these stars also have 
unusually small amounts of a few elements as well, often 
He and O. The elements which are anomalous depend 
systematically on the mass of the star. It appears that 
all chemically peculiar stars having the same general 
chemical anomalies as the known magnetic stars probably 
have fields. 

A first question about the magnetic middle main se- 
quence stars (I will call them ‘magnetic Ap stars’) is that of 
determining the geometry of the magnetic field over the 
stellar surface. This cannot be determined by directly ob- 
serving the disks of such stars, of course; they are much too 
small in angular size for direct imaging. We must use other 
kinds of information to deduce the magnetic geometry. 

The magnetic Ap stars are in most cases observed to 
vary periodically in apparent brightness, in the strengths 
and profiles of some or most spectral lines, and in the 
measured components of the magnetic field. All these 
quantities are generally observed to vary with the same 
period. The period of variations is typically in the range 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1-10 days, although periods as short as 0.5 days and as 
long as some decades or known. An example is shown in 
figure 3. 

An important clue to the origin of the variations 
is furnished by the observed fact that the value of the 
projected rotational velocity veg sini is closely correlated 
with the period of variation. Large values of veg sini are 
only found for stars with short periods and, the longer the 
period, the smaller the values of veqsini are. The facts 
that the observed periods are found with an enormous 
range of values and that the periods are closely related to 
the projected rotational velocities clearly indicate that the 
observed variations are due to the rotation of the magnetic 
Ap star. Variation in the average magnetic field indicates 
that the star must have a magnetic field that varies from 
one place to another at the surface, either in strength 
or in inclination or both. Thus, when we see mainly 
magnetic field lines directed towards the observer, we 
measure a large value of B,, but, when the field lines 
are mainly perpendicular to the line of sight, B, is small. 
The variations in spectral line intensity and shape indicate 
that the relative abundances of various chemical elements 
vary from one place on the star to another. When we are 
looking at a part of the star in which some element (such 
as He) is relatively abundant, the spectral lines are strong 
and deep; when we look at a different part of the star 
which has relatively less He, the spectral lines are weaker. 
The variations in surface chemistry in turn influence the 
amount of light emitted at various wavelengths and lead 
to the variations observed in brightness as the star rotates. 

We observe that the value of B, of a magnetic Ap star 
generally varies in a fairly sinusoidal fashion. When we 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


INTENSITY 


INTENSITY 


POLARIZATION 


WAVELENGTH 


Figure 2. Effects of a magnetic field on the line profile and 
polarization of stellar spectral lines. The panels show 
schematically the effect of a magnetic field with the Zeeman 
pattern displayed in (a) for a field parallel to the line of sight 
(left) and perpendicular to it (right). (b) The change in the line 
from the non-magnetic case (dotted) to the magnetic case (solid) 
for Zeeman splitting comparable with the Doppler width of the 
spectral line. (c) The absorption line in left- and right-circular 
polarization (left) and in linear polarization parallel to and 
perpendicular to the stellar field (right). (d) The net circular (left) 
and linear (right) polarization in the line. (From D J Landstreet 
1980 Astron. J. 85 611, reproduced by permission of the American 
Astronomical Society.) 


try to reproduce this behavior by calculating the variations 
expected from various simple models of the field geometry, 
we find that this observation is consistent with the idea 
that the structure of the magnetic field over the surface of 
the star is in the general form of a dipole, typically inclined 
(oblique) to the rotation axis of the star by some fairly large 
angle. As the star rotates, we thus usually see one pole of 
the dipolar distribution, and then the other. This model is 
known as the ‘oblique rotator model’. 

Astronomers are also actively working to use 
observed spectrum variations to deduce the distributions 
of different chemical elements over the surface of the 
star. Often the models that fit the observations have a 
distribution of the elements that is roughly axisymmetric 
around the axis of the magnetic dipole. Itis not uncommon 
to find very large differences in the fractional abundances 
of some elements over the stellar surface; in some cases 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


i. Longitudinal magnetic field k 


0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 
Rotational phase 


Figure 3. Variations of the massive magnetic Bp star HD 184927 
(whose most striking abundance peculiarity is a considerable 
excess of atmospheric He) with a period of 9.53 days. The 
horizontal axis gives time in phase units (fractions of one cycle 
from the periodically repeating time when the helium spectral 
line intensities are strongest). The three panels show (from top to 
bottom) the mean longitudinal field in kilogauss, the strength of 
one helium line in arbitrary units and the brightness of the star 
(in magnitudes) seen through a narrow (Strémgren) ultraviolet 
filter. (From G A Wade et al 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 320 172, 
reproduced by permission of Astronomy and Astrophysics.) 


there may be more than 100 times more atoms of some 
elements per unit volume of gas in one part of the star’s 
atmosphere than in another part. 


Origin of the observed magnetic fields and of the chemical 
anomalies 

Astronomers generally accept two possible origins for 
observed stellar fields. One is that a field may be generated 
by the interplay between convection (boiling motions of 
the gas) in the outer layers of a star and the overall 
rotation of the star. These motions may act as a dynamo 
in the highly conducting outer layers of a star, producing 
a complex and time-varying field. This mechanism seems 
to be the cause of the magnetic field observed in the Sun. 
In spite of much theoretical effort, such dynamo fields are 
still not well understood. 

The second possible origin is that the field is the result 
of the collapse of a huge gas cloud to form a tiny star, 
trapping in the partly ionized, electrically conducting gas 
some small fraction of the weak galactic magnetic field. As 
the field lines of the galactic field are squeezed together, the 
strength of the entrained field is amplified by a very large 
factor. Thus, the observed fields of the magnetic Ap stars 
may be ‘fossil’ magnetic fields. This is not as unreasonable 
an idea as may at first appear. Owing to the very large bulk 
and high electrical conductivity of a star, a field formed in 
this way would take a very long time, of the order of 10" yr, 
to decay. This is longer than the main sequence lifetime 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of a middle main sequence star, and so a fossil field could 
easily persist throughout the life of such a star. 

The absence of any long-term changes in the observed 
magnetic field strengths of magnetic Ap stars (such as 
the solar activity cycle), other than the periodic variations 
caused by stellar rotation, and the simple overall geometry 
deduced for these fields, suggests that they are probably 
fossil fields rather than dynamo-generated ones. This 
view is supported by the lack of any obvious means of 
generating a large dynamo field in a star that may be 
rotating 100 times slower than the Sun and that has almost 
no convection in its outer layers. 

The presence of remarkable chemical peculiarities in 
these magnetic stars also requires an explanation. In fact, 
this is not quite as anomalous as it seems. The lower- 
mass stars of the main sequence (M < 2M.) show quite 
homogeneous abundance patterns, with overall content 
of ‘heavy elements’ (everything heavier than He) that 
depends only on the age of the star. (Older low-mass 
stars, formed when the universe was less rich in the 
elements synthesized in many generations of supernova 
explosions, have less of all heavy elements than younger 
stars.) Very massive main sequence stars (MV > 10M,) 
lose mass rapidly, and this ensures that their surfaces 
reveal their bulk composition which, because of their 
very short main sequence lifetimes, is essentially that of 
the contemporary interstellar material from which they 
form. The intermediate-mass stars, among which the 
magnetic Ap stars are found, almost all exhibit some 
degree of chemical individuality. In most A and B stars 
the variations are no more than some tens of per cent of 
excess or deficiency compared with other similar stars, 
but several other families of stars (mostly slowly rotating 
and apparently non-magnetic stars) are known in which 
certain deficiencies or enhancements can reach much 
larger values. ‘Metallic-line A’ (Am) stars often have 10 
times less Ca and Sc than other main sequence stars of 
similar mass, and 10 times more of some rare earths. 
‘Mercury—manganese’ (HgMn) stars have enhancements 
of some elements by factors of from order 10? (V, Mn, Ga) 
up to 10° or more (Eu, Pt, Hg). The abundance anomalies 
of the magnetic Ap stars are simply some of the most 
spectacular types of anomaly in a mass range filled with 
variety. 

These chemical abundance anomalies are generally 
believed to be confined to the atmospheres and outer 
envelopes of intermediate-mass stars, rather than being 
representative of the bulk chemical composition of these 
stars, for several reasons. First, the wide variety of 
observed compositions, in stars all of which formed 
relatively recently in galactic history, does not correspond 
to any similar variety of compositions in the interstellar 
clouds which form stars, or in other young stars of low 
or high mass. Furthermore, the extremes of anomaly are 
so great (factors of 10° or more) that it is not possible to 
imagine any way in which star formation could have led 
to gas clouds with such peculiar composition. Instead, 
we believe that the observed chemical anomalies are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


essentially surface phenomena, due to powerful processes 
that separate elements, raising some into the atmosphere 
while others sink out of sight. 

The main sorting process leading to chemical 
anomalies is microscopic diffusion of atoms of low- 
abundance elements, relative to the dominant hydrogen 
of the stellar gas. Under the influence of gravity, elements 
with higher atomic mass than hydrogen tend to sink into 
the interior of the star. In a sufficiently stable atmosphere, 
this process would eventually lead to an exterior layer 
made up only of hydrogen, as is actually observed in many 
white dwarfs. However, there are competing processes. 
One of the most important is the outward force felt 
by atoms and ions which can absorb photons of many 
wavelengths from the outward flow of radiation through 
the star. This absorption imparts an outward acceleration 
to such ions and lifts them up to higher levels in the 
stellar envelope. Thus, the overall effect of diffusion is 
to allow some elements to sink in the atmosphere under 
the dominant influence of gravity, while others are lifted 
towards the surface by radiation. 

These sorting processes compete with various mixing 
processes such as convection. Thus, because the outer 
layers of low-mass main sequence stars are strongly 
convective, all sorting processes are strongly inhibited, 
and these Sun-like stars exhibit very similar compositions. 

In contrast, the main sequence stars of intermediate 
mass are precisely the stars with sufficiently stable 
atmospheres to allow diffusion to sort the chemical 
elements, at least to some extent. Rapid rotation is capable 
of generating slow mixing currents, and so the more 
rapidly rotating A and B stars have only modestly sorted 
surface chemistries. Most of the more peculiar middle 
main sequence stars are slowly rotating. The magnetic Ap 
stars have the additional feature that the presence of the 
magnetic field rather strongly inhibits mixing motions in 
the outer layers. The chemical peculiarities of the magnetic 
Ap stars are simply a particularly strongly developed 
aspect of a characteristic found in all stars in this mass 
range. 


Magnetic fields in white dwarfs 

Observations and modelling 

Magnetic fields are detected in white dwarfs by the same 
methods used for magnetic Ap stars, namely by direct 
observation of magnetic splitting of spectral lines and by 
observation of circular polarization in line wings. Fields 
are also detected by means of the continuum polarization 
produced by fields of more than about 10° G. The deduced 
fields range in strength from about 10° up to 10° G. At the 
low end of this range, the spectrum of a white dwarf is 
hardly perturbed at all by the field. For fields in the range 
from about 10° to 3 x 10’ G, splitting of familiar spectral 
lines is easily seen. For still larger fields, the wavelengths 
and shapes of spectral lines are so strongly altered by the 
field that the spectrum is not recognizably related to that 
of any non-magnetic white dwarf. The spectrum of one 
magnetic white dwarf is shown in figure 4. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


o 
120 ~ 
2 
o 
Cc 
so < 
4 
2 
40 8 
& 
6 
5 
= 
4 
Ss 
S 
2 3 
& 
& 
5 2 
®o 
= o> 
a 1 +4 x 
i= 
a 
0 0 ® 
N 
cI 
“1 & 
G 
-2 2 
_~ 140 2 
3 6 
v 
a 
7 
a 
wo 
€ 
2 150 


4000 6000 8000 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 4. The flux and polarization spectrum of the magnetic 
white dwarf GD 229, which has a field of order 10? G. The 
lowest curve shows the wavelength variation of the flux, the 
second lowest of circular polarization, the third lowest the 
percentage linear polarization and the top the position angle of 
linear polarization. 


The polarization and/or line splitting is observed to 
be variable in about one-quarter of the known magnetic 
white dwarfs. Observed variations are periodic, with 
periods in the range from about 1 h to 20 days. These 
periods are so long compared with any reasonable 
oscillation period of a white dwarf that they must be 
rotation periods, and so we are again quickly led to the 
oblique rotator model for the variations. The observed 
variations in the magnetic field strength and in spectral line 
shapes are again interpreted as simply being due to the fact 
that we see a magnetic field that is inclined to the stellar 
rotation axis from different directions as the star rotates. 
The fact that most magnetic white dwarfs do not vary may 
imply that, in most magnetic white dwarfs, the magnetic 
field is axisymmetric about the rotation axis or possibly 
that most magnetic white dwarfs rotate with periods of 
decades or more. 

Modelling of observed spectra and their variations 
is possible if the fields are not too large, say not much 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


more than about 3 x 10’ G. Modelling of such fields leads 
to deduced magnetic field geometries that are roughly 
dipolar, like the fields of magnetic Ap stars. For stronger 
fields, the main difficulties come from the complex and 
uncertain behavior of even simple atoms such as H in the 
presence of fields so strong that they influence the motion 
of the electron(s) as strongly as the central Coulomb 
attraction of the atomic nucleus. The observations of 
spectra of white dwarfs with fields of 108 G or more are 
in reasonable accord with the results of atomic physics 
calculations, but no detailed modelling has yet been 
possible. 

Fields as small as about 10 kG could be detected 
in most white dwarfs. Surveys of many white dwarfs 
to about this level of precision have shown that the 
great majority of white dwarfs do not possess detectable 
magnetic fields. About 4% of the total population of 
white dwarfs have fields, with about equal probabilities 
per decade of field strength over the range 10°-10° G. 


Origin of white dwarf fields 

Trying to understand the origin of the fields observed 
in white dwarfs presents us with substantial challenges. 
There are no obvious mechanisms for producing large- 
scale, ordered, static fields in either magnetic Ap stars or 
white dwarfs after they are formed. We observe that a 
small fraction of middle main sequence stars, and of white 
dwarfs, have magnetic fields large enough to detect, in 
the range 10?-10° G on the main sequence and 10°-10’ G 
in white dwarfs. The observed magnetic Ap fields may 
be due to magnetic flux retention during star formation, 
and the fields of white dwarfs could be due to the further 
retention of that same flux as magnetic Ap stars collapse 
to become white dwarfs. This hypothesis is consistent 
to some extent with the relative values of observed field 
strength, since, if the magnetic flux ® threading a star’s 
equator is retained during a collapse, the magnetic field 
strength will increase as 


Bx ®/R? 


where R is the stellar radius. Thus the decrease in radius 
by a factor of 10* as a star becomes a white dwarf could 
lead to a field strength increase by a factor of 10+, about the 
difference observed between the ranges of field strength on 
the main sequence and among white dwarfs. However, 
this does not explain how that magnetic flux is retained 
in the evolution stages between the main sequence and 
white dwarf stages; the intervening giant state is expected 
to be largely convective, which might be expected to expel 
much of the magnetic flux in a star. Furthermore, this idea 
does not explain why the largest (10°-10° G) fields are as 
common as fields 10° times smaller; on the main sequence 
the largest fields are a modest tail on a distribution that is 
very strongly peaked around fields of less than 10° G. 
Magnetic fields in neutron stars present us with 
further challenges. It appears that almost all neutron stars 
have fields of the order of 10'°-10'° G. Again, these are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Fields in Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


about the fields that would be expected by magnetic flux 
retention from the main sequence. However, if this is the 
origin of magnetic fields in neutron stars, why do almost all 
neutron stars have large fields, while only a small fraction 
of white dwarfs have large fields? This question is made 
still more puzzling by the fact that virtually no magnetic 
main sequence stars are known in the mass range that is 
expected to evolve eventually to neutron stars. 


Bibliography 

Chanmugam G 1992 Magnetic fields of degenerate stars 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30 143-84 

Dworetsky M M, Castelli F and Faraggiana R 1993 Peculiar 
versus Normal Phenomena in A-type and Related Stars 
(San Francisco, CA: Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific) 

Landstreet J D 1992 Magnetic fields at the surfaces of stars 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 4 35-77 

North P, Schnell J and Ziziovsky J 1998 Proc. 26th Meet. and 
Workshop of the European Working Group on CP Stars, 
Contrib. Astron. Obs. Skalnaté Pleso 27 (3) 

Schmidt G D 1995 White dwarfs as magnetic stars Rev. 
Mod. Astron. 8 147-62 


John D Landstreet 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Helicity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetic Helicity 


Magnetic helicity measures structural properties of a 
magnetic field such as twist, shear, linking and braiding. It 
is conserved in the limit of infinite electrical conductivity. 
In a PLASMA with high conductivity (magnetic Reynolds 
number R,, > 1) reconnection preserves magnetic helicity 
to an excellent approximation. 

Magnetic helicity has proven to be a valuable tool 
for both observers and theorists. It provides a common 
measure of topological structure. Thus the net twist of 
field lines within a CORONAL Loop and the net shear of a 
coronal arcade can be directly compared. Its conservation 
provides a constraint on the evolution of a magnetic 
field. For example, suppose a field undergoes a series of 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTIONS. Each reconnection takes energy 
away from the field. If this process continues until no 
more energy is available, then the final state will have the 
minimum possible energy given the magnetic helicity and 
the boundary conditions. This process is known as Taylor 
relaxation; the final state is generally a linear FORCE-FREE 
MAGNETIC FIELD. 

A field region with large magnetic helicity, whether 
or not it is force free, stores substantial amounts of energy 
and exerts pressure on its surroundings. If a region of 
the solar corona begins to build up excessive helicity, then 
the surrounding fields and plasmas may not be able to 
confine it. A SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION may then release 
the excess helicity and energy into the SOLAR WIND. 


Magnetic helicity and field topology 

Early in the 19th century Gauss discovered an integral 
which measures the linking of two curves. He employed 
this integral first to describe the paths of asteroids whose 
orbits link the Earth’s orbit and later to study linked 
electrical circuits. For two closed directional curves the 
linking number L counts how many times one curve 
passes through the other (see figure 1). One way of 
calculating L without integration involves looking at a 
drawing of the curves, i.e. a projection onto a plane, and 
examining the places where one curve crosses over the 
other. For each crossing, orient the drawing so that the 
overlying curve points to the right. Assign the crossing 
the number +1 if the underlying curve points upwards and 
—1 if it points downwards. The linking number L equals 
one-half the sum of these numbers over all crossings. 

The magnetic helicity inside a region V is, in essence, 
the sum of linking numbers over all pairs of field lines 
within V. To begin with, consider a magnetic field 
consisting of N tubes of magnetic flux. For now, assume 
that each tube closes upon itself within V. Each tube 
has flux F;,i = 1,...,N, and tubes i and j have linking 
number L;;. Then the helicity 
N N 
K=))) Lj RF. (1) 
= 


i jal 


The diagonal terms L;;F? measure linking of field lines 
within the same tube. If the field lines in tube i all twist 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Two linked magnetic tubes with linking number L = 3. 


about a central axis then a typical field line makes L;; turns 
about the axis. 

Note the analogy with magnetic inductance: the 
energy of N circuits carrying currents f,...,/y is 
proportional to 7, poe Mijli1;, where Mj; is a self- 
inductance and Mj; is a mutual inductance. Thus we may 
call L;; F? the self-helicity of tube i and 2L;; F; F; the mutual 
helicity between tubes i and j. 

A magnetic surface is a surface S where the normal 
component of the magnetic field vanishes, B - i|s = 0. If 
V is bounded by such a surface, then the magnetic field 
is called closed: as no field line can escape through S, 
each line must close upon itself or come arbitrarily close 
to doing so. Thus to an approximation the field can be 
described by a collection of N closed flux tubes. In the limit 
N —> o the approximation becomes exact; meanwhile the 
double-sum expression for K turns into a double integral 


ky= | A-Bav 
v 


where 


ee 1 (2 — 2’) x B(x’) dv’. 
An Jy ja’ — a> 


The vector potential A(x) satisfies V x A = B; the 
above integral form also satisfies V- A = 0. A gauge 
transformation A > A+V¢@ will not change K, provided 
that V is bounded by a magnetic surface. The magnetic 
helicity of open fields will be defined below. 

Care must be taken if V is multiply connected, i.e. 
has a hole like a doughnut. In this case there are vector 
fields G where V x G = 0 but G ¥ V¢ for any single- 
valued function ¢. (For example if ¢ represents angle 
in polar coordinates then it is not single valued.) Gauge 
transformations A — A + G will indeed change K. 


Other helicities 

Given any two divergence-free vector fields V and W 
(V-V = V-W = 0) we can define a helicity integral 
which measures their mutual linking. Assume here that 
V is all of space or that its boundary S provides a closed 
surface for both fields (V- nls = W+ nls = 0). Their 
helicity is then defined by 


A(V,W) = Ah(W,V) = / Ay: Wdv (2) 
y 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Helicity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SA 

SSA 

TSS Ss 
Sea 


Figure 2. A loop linking a closed tube. 


where V x Ay = V. For example Ky = Ay(B, B). 

Suppose Y contains a fluid with flow velocity v. If 
V and W are transported by v without diffusion (e.g. 
dV /dt = V x (vx V)) then their helicity will be conserved, 
dHy(V, W)/dt = 0. Thus Ky is conserved in an infinitely 
conducting plasma. Similarly, a fluid with zero viscosity 
transports the vorticity w = V x v without diffusion; the 
flow thus conserves the kinetic helicity 


Ay (a, w) = i v-wduv. 
v 


The general helicity formula (2) is linear in each term, 
e.g. 


Ay (aV, + V2, W) = ay (Vi, W) + Ay (V2, W). 


Magnetic helicity in an open volume 
A vector field V in a volume VY with boundary S is open 
if some of its flux crosses the boundary, ie. V - fils 4 0 
somewhere on S. The concept of linking will now be 
extended from closed fields to open fields. We first note 
that a closed curve may link an open curve, as in figure 
2. Similarly, if V is open, but W is closed, then we may 
still employ the formula (2) to measure the linking of V 
and W. Here the vector potential in the integral must 
always refer to the open field to ensure gauge invariance. 
(By Stokes’ theorem the line integral of Ay about a closed 
field line of W, i.e. f Ay -W|W|7' dé, equals the net flux 
of V linked by the W line. Integrating over the W flux 
leads to equation(2).) 

Our strategy for measuring the magnetic helicity of 
an open magnetic field B will be to decompose B into a 
closed field and an open field with minimal structure, then 
sum the self- and mutual helicities of these fields. Of the 
many possible fields inside V consistent with the boundary 
flux B-n|s, one unique field minimizes the total magnetic 
energy: the potential field P where V x P = 0. This 
field has zero current inside V; its source currents must 
exist outside of V or as surface currents in S. Owing to its 
unique properties, we choose P to be our open field. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


We decompose B into the sum of the potential field 
P and the closed field 


Bu=B-P — Ba-fils =0. 


Then 


Ky = Ay(B, B) 
= Ay(B., Ba) + 2Hy(P, Bau) + Hy(P, P). 


The first two terms measure the self-linking of a closed 
field and the mutual linking between an open and a closed 
field. Both of these are well defined by equation (2). 
Unfortunately, the last term cannot be defined by equation 
(2) without ambiguity. The accepted procedure simply 
assigns the value 0 to Ay(P,P). A similar procedure 
assigns zero voltage to Earth in an electrical circuit. As 
the potential field P occupies the minimum energy state 
of V, the assignment of zero helicity is natural. With this 
definition the helicity becomes 


Ky = [ (A+ Ap) -(B— Pav. (3) 
v 


Helicity dissipation 
Suppose the boundary flux B- is is fixed. Then no helicity 
can cross the boundary and the helicity can only change 
as a result of dissipation (see next section for transfer of 
helicity across boundaries). We will use Ohm’s law to 
express the electric field in terms of the electric current 
and the magnetic diffusivity, FE = nJ. 

From the definition of K, (equation (3)) and 
Maxwell’s equations 


—— =-2 J-Bav. 
dt fo 


Note that the magnetic energy is proportional to Wy = 
J, B’ dv with dissipation |dW;/dt| = 2 f,nJ? dV. Thus, 
using a Schwarz inequality, 
1/2 
ig (4 


In order to apply this inequality to reconnection 
events, define a length scale L = |Ky|/Wy. This length 
is comparable with the size of the volume if the magnetic 
field has significant helical structure. For example, a 
linear force-free field inside a spherical magnetic surface 
of radius R has L * 0.31R. A dissipation time ty can 
now be defined as ty = L*/n. Consider an arbitrary 
reconnection or dissipation process occurring over a time 
At in an isolated volume. Integrating equation (4) over 


time gives 
At 1/2 
= < (=) (5) 
Td 


Thus for any fast reconnection event (At « 1), AK 
will be negligible. For flares in the solar corona with 


dt 


dw, 
dt 


= (20 Wy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Helicity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Two crossed loops. 


At © 1000s, L © 10° km and n © 10~° km? s7! we find 
ty © 10" s,and|AK/K| <3x10-°. Inpractice, even these 
small limits significantly overestimate AK, as they make 
no assumptions about the reconnection geometry. As a 
crude estimate, if we assume that reconnection takes place 
only in a small fraction € of the total volume then we can 
effectively replace by €n and ty by ty/e. Then the bound 
(5) on AK has an additional factor €1/. 


Helicity transport 

In this section we ignore dissipation and consider the 
transport of helicity across a boundary S due to fluid 
motions. Let v be the fluid velocity. Also recall that Ap 
is a vector potential for P. Inside Y, let A p be the unique 
vector potential satisfying V- Ap = 0, Ap- fi|s = 0. Then 
one can show that 


v= 2plAp -v)B —(Ap- B)V]- dS. 
dt 5 


The first term measures the effect of motions parallel to 
the boundary, whereas the second measures the effect of 
motion across the boundary. 

If Sis the plane z = 0 and V = {z > 0}, then one finds 


a 1 B.(2’) ~ 
Ap(a) = = | el) 4 ds 
S r 


20 


where r = x — 2 and Oy = 2 x @is the angular direction 
at x about the integration point x’. For example, suppose 
the flux through z = 0 consists of two flux tubes of flux 
F,, F, centered at x, and x2. Suppose these tubes rotate 
with angular velocities w; and wz. Also suppose that 
the tubes move about each other with angular velocity 


d612/dt = [v(a1) — v(x2)] - Aca’. Then 


dines A ( do 


w,F? + WFP +252 am) 3 (6) 


dt 2n d 
The first two terms describe the twisting of individual 


tubes, while the final term describes mutual braiding. 


Helicity of coronal loops 

The helicity transport equations often greatly simplify 
calculations. The helicity of a field depends only on its 
present geometry and ignores its past history. To illustrate, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


we calculate the mutual helicity of two coronal loops (see 
figure 3). For simplicity, let the corona be the upper half- 
space {z > 0}. The photospheric (z = 0) ends of the loops 
are assumed to be small and located at the points xj, «| for 
loop 1 and x3, and a; for loop 2. Here B, > Oat x} and x}. 
Also, if the loops cross over each other when viewed from 
above, then let the upper loop be loop 1. Finally, let 6),2— 
be the angle of the line segment from a7 to x;, measured 
with respect to the x-axis. 

Construct the field by first placing loop 2 in its present 
position, but with loop 1 at infinity. This configuration has 
zero mutual helicity. Next move loop 1 into place, using 
equation (6) to measure the helicity change. Because we 
are moving the upper loop, none of the angles change by 
more than z. The result is (ignoring the self-helicities due 
to twist) 


_ hr 
ae. 


Ky 


(O142— + A124 — P1424 — A1-2-). 


Addition of helicities 


Suppose we divide space into two regions V, and V, with 
boundary S. For example, S could be the solar photosphere, 
with VY, the solar interior and V2 the corona. Let the 
magnetic field B = B, in VY; and B = Bz in v2. We 
will notate this as B = [B,, B.]. We wish to compare 
the helicity integrated over all space 


K(B)= K((Bi, Ba) = [ A-Bav 


with the helicities Ky, and Ky, of the regions V, and V. 
The corresponding potential fields V; and V2 are P, 
and P,. One can show that 


Ky, = K((Bi, Bo]) — K([P,, Bo). (7) 


Thus Ky, represents the helicity K of all space measured 
relative to that of the field with zero current in Vj, i.e. 
K ([P, Bz]). As Ky, can also be calculated using equation 
(3), which only integrates over V), Ky, is independent of 
the exterior field Bp. 

Similarly, we may calculate Ky, as 


Ky, = K([P,, B2]) — K (Pi, P2)) (8) 


where we have exercised our freedom to choose the 
exterior field to be P, without changing the result. 
Summing equations (7) and (8) gives us the addition 
formula 


Ky, + Ky, = K([Bi, Bo]) — K([Pi, Po). 
Note that the field [P,, P)] is not potential; it has surface 


currents on S. The last term always vanishes when the 
boundary S is a plane or a sphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Helicity ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Berger M A and Field G B 1984 The topological properties 
of magnetic helicity J. Fluid Mech. 147 133-48 

Marsh G E 1996 Force-Free Magnetic Fields: Solutions, Topol- 
ogy, and Applications (Singapore: World Scientific) 

Moffatt H K, Zaslavsky G M, Comte P and Tabor M (eds) 
1992 Topological Aspects of the Dynamics of Fluids and 
Plasmas (NATO ASI Series 218) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Ricca R Land Berger M A 1996 Topological ideas and fluid 
mechanics Phys. Today (December) 28-34 


Mitchell A Berger 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Magnetic Reconnection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetic Reconnection 


Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental dynamical 
process in highly conductive plasmas. It can be regarded 
as the process that removes the following difficulty. On 
typical dynamical time scales a sufficiently hot spatially 
extended pLasma behaves approximately as an ideal fluid 
in the sense that resistive effects are ignorable. As 
a consequence, the magnetic field is ‘frozen’ to the 
plasma motion and magnetic topology is conserved. 
This sets strong limitations on the accessible dynamical 
states. Large-scale magnetic flux tubes, which are strongly 
stretched out by the plasma pressure, as for instance 
observed in PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES Or in stellar CORONAS, 
would be unable to release large amounts of their energy 
and return to a correspondingly relaxed state, as long as 
the plasma is trapped in the flux tubes. In other words, 
efficient transformation of magnetic to kinetic energy 
would largely be ruled out in ideal plasmas. There would 
be no obvious process that could counteract the generation 
of magnetic flux by dynamo processes and the magnetic 
fields in many space and astrophysical situations would 
grow secularly. Also, plasmas with magnetic fields of 
different origin would not be able to mix. Beginning 
in the late 1950s, several authors, including P A Sweet, 
E N Parker, H E Petschek and J W Dungey, introduced 
magnetic reconnection as the central process allowing 
for efficient magnetic to kinetic energy conversion in 
SOLAR FLARES and for interaction between the magnetized 
interplanetary medium and the MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH. 

How does reconnection circumvent the difficulty 
associated with frozen-in magnetic fields? Resistive 
dissipation is more effective the more the electric current is 
localized to regions with a small spatial scale length. Thus, 
in reconnection a small-scale structure is generated insome 
region, such that there the constraint of ideal dynamics 
is broken. The interesting aspect is that a local non- 
ideality can have a global effect. Under such circumstances 
highly conducting plasma structures are able to transform 
magnetic to kinetic energy in an efficient way and the 
magnetic topology can change. According to a major line 
of present thinking, this is what happens in solar flares 
or magnetospheric substorms, and possibly in many other 
plasma processes in the universe. 


Basic model 

The formal description of reconnection requires the 
choice of a dynamical model. Here we confine the 
discussion to magnetohydrodynamics, where we allow 
for a finite resistivity (resistive MHD or ‘RMHD’) as the 
only non-ideal transport process. The corresponding basic 
equations consist of a combination of fluid dynamics and 
electrodynamics: 


ap 
—+V- =0 1 
ay (pv) (1) 
ov . 
Pa FRO VOR CNP ASD (2) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


E+vx B=j/o (3) 
de 
Pa as Cc) aan Oa a es (4) 
vise 2 88 (5) 
ot 
Vx B= pioj (6) 
V-B=0. (7) 


Here, p, v, p, j, B, E, o', e and po denote 
respectively mass density, velocity, pressure, current 
density, magnetic field, electric field, resistivity, plasma 
energy density and vacuum permeability (see the article 
ON MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS). Here we mention only the fact 
that the equations (1)—(7) imply the conservation of energy. 
The balance of mechanical and electromagnetic energy, 
respectively, take the form 


a ( pv pu . 

a(S aulev.((Sruep v)=i-k (8) 
a ( B 
ot 210 


Adding these two equations gives conservation of energy 


v. (Tex B)=-j-8. (9) 


Ho 


pv 1 
+V-(—vt+(ut+p)u+—Ex B)]=0. (10) 
2 Ho 


For some purposes it has proved useful to impose the 
condition of incompressibility on the flow velocity 


V-v=0 (11) 


replacing (4). This simplifies the problem significantly. 
It should, however, be kept in mind that for an 
incompressible flow, an energy conservation law of the 
form of (10) is not available. However, mass conservation 
and momentum balance are still described appropriately. 

In a resistive fluid the importance of resistivity is 
measured by the Lundquist number 


L 
te (12) 
UT] 


where va = B/./fipp is the Alfvén velocity, 7 = (497)! the 
magnetic diffusivity and L a typical (global) scale length. 
Alternatively, one uses the magnetic reynolds number 
Rn = vL/n, where the Alfvén velocity is replaced by a 
typical plasma velocity v. (In the literature the expression 
‘magnetic Reynolds number’ frequently is also used for 
the quantity S.) Large values of S or R,,, which are typical 
for space and astrophysical plasmas, correspond to small 
resistive effects. In the limit of large S or R,,, the terms 
involving resistivity can be neglected (unless singularities 
form) and equations (1)—(7) reduce to the equations of ideal 
magnetohydrodynamics (IMHD). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Reconnection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ie 
z Vp»Bo 
et 


TT 


oe 
ee ee A) | 


ee so 

Inflow Tr 

a | v.B, _V>,B, rr 
Diffusion z Out- 


8 region 
— A 


TT 


Figure 1. Qualitative pattern of two-dimensional reconnection. 


Importantly, IMHD implies conservation of magnetic 
field line topology. In IMHD this fact can also be 
expressed by the property that two plasma elements 
that are connected by a magnetic field line at one time 
are connected by a magnetic field line at any later time 
(magnetic line conservation). Furthermore, the magnetic 
flux through an arbitrary contour transported by the 
plasma velocity field is also conserved. These properties 
provide the quantitative background for the dynamical 
constraints of IMHD mentioned above. In particular, 
they imply that large-scale topological reconfigurations of 
the magnetic field structure, as assumed to be associated 
with stellar and magnetospheric activity, are ruled out. 
In the following, we summarize in what sense magnetic 
reconnection resolves that dilemma and what is known at 
present about that process. 


Two-dimensional reconnection 

The simplest geometry in which reconnection may be 
described has two spatial dimensions, requiring the 
presence of an ignorable coordinate in three-dimensional 
physical space. In this section Cartesian coordinates x, y, z 
are used and it is assumed that the physical quantities are 
independent of z. We will first consider steady states and 
then introduce time dependence. 


Steady-state reconnection 

The basic configuration of two-dimensional steady-state 
reconnection is shown in figure 1. All field quantities are 
independent of time. Also, the magnetic field B and the 
plasma velocity v are assumed to lie in the x, y-plane, 
while for the electric field a non-vanishing z-component 
is admitted. The plasma is highly ideal such that the 
Lundquist number S (12) is much larger than 1. 

To obtain an efficient conversion of magnetic to 
kinetic energy (along the trajectories of fluid elements) it 
is appropriate to assume a stagnation-type flow field v 
and oppositely directed magnetic fields in the upper and 
lower part of the inflow region (figure 1). The magnetic 
field vanishes at the origin (neutral point); viewed three- 
dimensionally a neutral line (line on which B = 0) extends 
along the z-axis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Since S is large, for a smooth plasma flow 
with maximum gradients associated with the global 
length scale L the frozen-in condition would not allow 
annihilation of magnetic flux to any significant extent. 
This difficulty is avoided by the presence of a ‘diffusion 
region’ near the neutral line, where the resistive term j/o 
in Ohm’s law is much larger than in the approximately 
ideal environment (‘external region’), typically by an 
enhancement of j,. The diffusion region has length scales 
6 and A (figure 1) with L > A > 6. A locally defined 
Lundquist number, where L is replaced by 6 in (12) 
can be considerably smaller than the global Lundquist 
number, indicating that in the diffusion region resistive 
diffusion can play an important role. There, the plasma 
and magnetic fields may decouple effectively, so that field 
annihilation along the fluid path becomes possible. 

Under the present conditions (5) implies that E£, is a 
positive constant, say Ej. The presence of the diffusion 
region allows for a non-vanishing value of Eo, because 
otherwise (i.e. under ideal conditions with j/o negligible) 
the z-component of equation (3) would require E, = 0 at 
the neutral point, such that Ey would have to vanish. 

Another important property of the present geometry 
(shown in figure 1) is that 0B,/dx > 0B,/dy or j, > 0. 
Therefore, E+ j = Eoj, > 0 holds, which by (8) or 
(9) implies that magnetic energy is converted to kinetic 
energy. In fact, from (8) one finds 


a (v utp 
ae (5 + - ) >0 (13) 
where (1) was used assuming that pv # 0, and s denotes 
the arc length of the trajectory of the plasma element 
(increasing in the direction of v). Note that the thermal part 
on the left-hand side of (13) is enthalpy per unit mass rather 
than internal energy per unit mass, because the work done 
by the pressure force is included. 

For a discussion of the consequences of mass and 
momentum conservation we specialize the resistive MHD 
equations (1)-(7) further, using the incompressibility 
condition (11) with constant density pp instead of (4). Then 
the resistive RMHD equations for a steady state assume the 
form 


pu:-Vu=—-Vp+jxB (14) 
Ey + vx B-e, = j./o (15) 
V-v=0 (16) 

(V x B) +e: = woj. (17) 
V-B=0. (18) 


Quantities in the outer inflow region will be 
characterized by their magnitudes at the point (xo, 0) 
where the positive x-axis crosses the boundary, and are 
labeled by the subscript zero, in particular (in addition to 
po, Eo) 


Po = P(x0,9), Bo = By(x0,0), v9 = —vx (x0, 0) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Reconnection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(vp and Bo are indicated in figure 1). Analogously, the 
subscripts ‘1’ and ‘2’ refer to the center inflow and outflow 
points on the boundary of the diffusion region (figure 1) 
and the subscript ‘nl’ is used for quantities on the neutral 
line. 

Keeping the shape of the boundary fixed, except for 
the global scale length L, it can be expected that under 
the present conditions 9, po, vo, By, L and o is a set of 
control parameters. Note, however, that in view of the 
nonlinearity of the problem a solution is not guaranteed 
for arbitrary parameter choices. 

To disregard configurations that are merely the result 
of a similarity transformation, it is of interest to note that 
from these parameters three independent dimensionless 
quantities may be formed, which are conveniently chosen 
as ‘ 

Mo = a So = ae Bo = HOPS 

ao n Bo 

where apo is the (inflow) Alfvén velocity Bo/,/jo0p0. The 
earlier discussion of steady-state reconnection in the 
literature largely ignores the parameter fy. This seems 
justified if By is negligibly small or if pressure is constant 
in the external region. (It is only the gradient of the 
pressure that counts.) Then, reconnection is a two- 
parameter process, for instance described by Mo and Sp. 
The parameter Mp is regarded as of particular interest and 
is usually called reconnection rate. It measures the velocity 
with which the plasma enters the region of consideration 
(normalized by the local Alfvén velocity). The so-defined 
reconnection rate should not be confused with the rate of 
magnetic flux reconnection, which is defined by the rate 
at which flux conservation is violated in the reconnection 
process, which, in the present case, is given by the electric 
field component EF, along the neutral line, which equals 
Eo => v0 Bo. 

There is no fully satisfactory analytical treatment 
of the system of equations (14)-(18). There are 
solutions for the external (ideal) region and solutions 
for the diffusion region, based on singular asymptotic 
expansions. However, a rigorous matching of such 
solutions has not yet been achieved. In this situation one 
introduces intuitive assumptions or simplifications. Much 
of the discussion in the literature is based on the following 
approximate picture. 

Consistent with j, > 0, let us assume that the aspect 
ratio « = A/6 is large compared to 1, that derivatives 
with respect to x are large compared with derivatives 
with respect to y and that |B,| « Bo. Pressure is treated 
as constant in the external region. Then approximate 
relations are obtained in the following way: 

Condition of incompressibility (11): 


(19) 


vyA = U26. 


x-component of momentum balance (14) at y = 0: 


5, — Pni- 
0 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


y-component of momentum balance at x = 0, ignoring B,: 


2 v9? 
2 


+ p2 = Pni- 
Ohm’s law: 
Eo = v, By = U2 Bo =. Jni/O- 


Ampeére’s law (6) (replacing the derivative by a difference 


quotient) 
‘ By 
in = —. 
mw pod 
Combining these equations and using that, in view of 
the assumptions, p2 = p1 = fo, P1 = P2 = po one obtains 


Ww =a (20) 
eS 
Mey 2) 
Mo \B 
A S1Bo 
= . 23 
Lo SoBy 22) 


This system of equations has to be completed by 
an equation for the ratio By/B, which requires a more 
complete solution of equations (14)—(18). In the absence of 
such a solution one introduces an additional condition as 
an ad hoc assumption, or from the external solution alone, 
or on the basis of numerical computations. We give three 
examples. 


(a) Sweet-Parker model. Here it is assumed that the 
diffusion region is a thin extended structure such that 
A becomes of the order of L. For simplicity, let us set 
A = L. The external region is largely homogeneous 
such that approximately B; = By and S; = Sp. Under 
these conditions, (21) gives the reconnection rate as 


1 

VS0 
This rate is generally regarded as too low to be 
relevant for typical conditions in stellar atmospheres 
and space plasmas because of their large Lundquist 
numbers. 

(b) Petschek’s model. In this model it is assumed that 
A < L. In that case, it is necessary to consider the 
presence of slow-mode shock waves (here in the limit 
of incompressibility) which implies that B; may be 
considerably smaller than By. Approximately, one 
finds B,/By = 1 — 4Mo/(x In(R,,)). The maximum 
reconnection rate occurs near B,/By = 1/2, such that 


My = 


x 1 


Mo < =-——. 
8 In Rng 


Typically this reconnection rate is considerably larger 
than that of the Sweet—Parker process. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Reconnection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oly 


GL 0 
(a) (b) ar) 


Figure 2. Numerical solutions of equations (25) and (26) with 
w=Aando=D) by Biskamp. In (b) and (c) the Lundquist 
number of (a) is increased by factors of 2 and 4, respectively 
(from Biskamp 1986). 


(c) Further reconnection models. Several authors (e.g. W 
1Axford, BUO Sonnerup, E R Priest, T G Forbes) have 
generalized the models by Sweet and Parker and by 
Petschek in various respects. The most general are the 
fast reconnection models of Priest and Forbes. They 
included electrical currents in the external region and 
obtained a description that contains the Sweet—Parker 
and Petschek models as particular cases. 


For numerical studies (as for other purposes) it is 
convenient to represent v and B by single flux functions 
D(x,y) and A(x, y). This is possible because of the 
vanishing divergence of both fields and the absence of z- 
components, 

B=VAxe, v=VDxe,. (24) 
Then, one eliminates the electric current density by using 
(17), and the pressure by taking the curl of the momentum 
equation. The remaining equations of the system (14)-(18) 
are usually written in non-dimensional form (here non- 
dimensional quantities carry the hat-label), such that A is 
normalized by BoL, the velocity potential D by ajpL and 
coordinates by L 


[AD, D] = [AA, A] (25) 


M -[A, D] = —— AA. (26) 


For functions f(x, y), g(x, y) the symbol [f, g] is defined 
by 


If, gl = Bat Ase: AL A, . 


Equations (25) and (26) have been solved numerically for a 
variety of boundary conditions by several groups. Figure 2 
shows, for example, a result by Biskamp, demonstrating 
that a Sweet—Parker current sheet rapidly develops for 
increasing So. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Magnetic field lines of the unperturbed Harris sheet 
(upper panel) and the linear tearing mode (lower panel). 


Time-dependent reconnection 

Although, historically, steady-state reconnection has been 
given great deal of attention, it seems that in many 
cases magnetic reconnection occurs as a time-dependent 
process. Several features of steady-state reconnection are 
also present in typical time-dependent (two-dimensional) 
cases, such as a neutral line and an associated stagnation- 
flow pattern. This analogy is particularly close for driven 
reconnection, where—as in steady states—the plasma 
inflow is determined by boundary conditions. 

A qualitatively different case arises when reconnec- 
tion occurs as an unstable process. The prototype of an in- 
stability involving reconnection is the tearing mode (sug- 
gested by H P Furth, J Killeen and M N Rosenbluth). A 
plane current sheet located in an infinite domain under- 
goes spontaneous formation of magnetic islands (figure 3). 
Resistivity plays a similar role as in steady states: it is im- 
portant only in regions of strong current concentration. 
Assuming that the unperturbed configuration does not in- 
volve such concentrations, it can be described in the limit 
of S — oo. The classical example is the Harris sheet, where 
the unperturbed magnetic field B, the flux function A and 
the plasma pressure p are given (in dimensionless form) 


by 


B=-tanh(x)ey, A=In(cosh(x)), p= 


cosh” (x) 
which is a static solution of (25) and (26) for infinite S. 
The instability generates the required current concen- 
tration spontaneously. The dynamical evolution is de- 
scribed by equations (25) and (26), if generalized to in- 
clude time dependence. In view of the time dependence, 
it is appropriate to derive the electric field from the time 
dependence of the flux function A, rather than from an 
electric potential. In dimensionless form one obtains the 
following linearized equations for the perturbations ¢ and 
w of the velocity potential D and the flux function A 
ae = [Aa, A] + [AA, a] (27) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Reconnection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


da 1 
as 54a IA. v1 (28) 


Choosing modes of the form 


w(ix,y,t= vO) eiaytat 


with a corresponding expression for ¢, (27) and (28) 
give two ordinary differential equations for wv and ¢. 
These equations are solved analytically by a singular 
perturbation method for the regime 


1 2 2 
—~<lql<1, |g*|«a’ <1. 


RY 


The essential aspect is the occurrence of a thin region 
around y = 0 of width e = (q/(a?S))'4, where the 
current density becomes large. Using appropriate scaling 
in this region and in the external region, one finds explicit 
solutions to lowest significant order in «. The matching 
condition determines the dispersion relation, i.e. g as a 
function of a 


__ VET A) 


2: 2: 
zeae w)(1 — 22) 


where 


The tearing mode develops a series of magnetic islands 
with corresponding X-type and O-type neutral lines 
(figure 3). The local structure near the X-line resembles 
the steady-state reconnection pattern of figure 1. 

For the reconnection processes associated with solar 
flares and magnetospheric substorms (See MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS) more realistic two- and_three- 
dimensional models have been developed (pioneered by 
J Birn, A Otto, T G Forbes, Z Mikic and others). Figure 3 
gives a qualitative sketch of the magnetic field structure 
as it develops with time. The original equilibrium 
configuration becomes unstable by a process which is a 
generalization of the tearing mode shown in figure 3. 
During its nonlinear evolution a plasmoid forms, which 
grows, becomes accelerated and eventually leaves the 
system, carrying a substantial amount of energy that was 
stored in the original equilibrium. Processes of this kind 
have been suggested to be relevant for magnetospheric 
substorms, solar flares and SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS. 
For the magnetosphere it is believed that the onset of the 
non-ideal (e.g. resistive) process is related to the formation 
of a thin current sheet late in phase (a) in figure 4. 

In the case of three-dimensional modeling one 
encounters new aspects, as compared with reconnection 
in two dimensions, which are discussed in the following 
section. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. Plasmoid formation and ejection in a stretched 
magnetic field configuration. 


Three-dimensional reconnection 

The two-dimensional models discussed so far seem to be 
realistic for reconnection occurring in three-dimensional 
space only if the z-dependence is small and if the extent of 
the reconnection region along the perpendicular direction 
(z-direction) is large enough that effects of the edges can 
be neglected. Moreover, it requires that magnetic flux of 
exactly opposite direction is convected along the x-axis 
into the reconnection region. Each of these assumptions 
is doubtful, and so a generalization with a component 
of the magnetic field along the invariant direction is 
required which allows for magnetic flux to approach the 
reconnection region with a non-vanishing z-component. 
This is most simply realized by adding a constant B,- 
component in the model given by equations (14)—(18). This 
requires an additional (£,, E,) component of the electric 
field, which has the form of a gradient (V(B,D) for the 
representation of v given in equation (24)). It therefore 
does not destroy the stationarity of these models nor does 
it modify the momentum equation. 

Although the additional B,-component seems to be a 
minor modification, it gives rise to several fundamental 
questions about the notion of reconnection. In two 
dimensions (B, = 0) reconnection is usually defined by 
the existence of an X-type neutral point and a flow of 
stagnation type which transports magnetic flux across 
the separatrices, i.e. the field lines which end at the 
neutral point and separate the magnetic flux of the inflow 
and outflow regions (see figure 1). With the additional 
B, component, the former neutral line of the two- 
dimensional models now becomes an ordinary magnetic 
field line and the former separatrices, or separatrix 
surfaces, respectively, do not exist anymore or, if the notion 
of a separatrix is applied to the projection of the field 
onto the plane perpendicular to the field line, they are 
not unique. (The latter can be shown by the example 
B = (y, x, 1), where every field line possesses separatrices 
in this sense, i.e. has an X-type magnetic field in the plane 
perpendicular to the field line.) These difficulties become 
even more serious for fully three-dimensional magnetic 
fields without translational invariance. Several methods 
have been proposed to solve these difficulties of localizing 
and defining reconnection. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Reconnection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. (a) Sketch of a breakdown of magnetic line 
conservation at a localized non-ideal region Dr. Two plasma 
elements (small spheres) which originally share a field line end 
up on different field lines. (b) Topology of field lines in the 
vicinity of an A-type generic null, showing the spine (ya) and 
the fan (Xa); B-type nulls have reversed field directions (from 
Lau and Finn 1990). 


First, it is tempting to use the plasma flow in 
addition to the structure of the magnetic field to identify 
reconnection. However, this quantity is not independent 
of the frame of reference used, and for instance the location 
of the stagnation point depends on the observer. In another 
approach Hesse and Schindler therefore used the original 
meaning of reconnection, i.e. a breakdown of magnetic 
field line conservation (first suggested by Axford). They 
introduced the notion of general magnetic reconnection to 
occur if 


[#4540 (29) 


where the integral is evaluated for field lines passing 
through a localized non-ideal region Dg embedded in an 
otherwise ideal plasma (see figure 5). The criterion (29) is 
sufficient for a breakdown of magnetic line conservation, 
provided all magnetic field lines start and end in the ideal 
region outside Dr. This is a consequence of the general 
form of magnetic field line conservation 


Of —v x (wx B)= 3B (30) 
where w is the transport velocity of the field lines, which 
can be identified with the plasma velocity v in the ideal 
region but may differ from it in non-ideal processes. 
Equation (30) implies B - VA = 0, and therefore A is 
constant on magnetic field lines. Moreover, in the ideal 
region we have w = v and A = 0 and hence A = 0 across 
De as well. In this case equation (30) together with the 
induction equation implies 


E+wxB=vVw (31) 


and therefore f Eds = 0 along all magnetic field lines, 
because VW vanishes in the ideal region so that W is 
constant outside Dr. A non-vanishing integral (equation 
(29)) therefore requires a breakdown of magnetic line 
conservation. Vice versa, if f E-ds = 0 holds for all 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic field lines crossing Dr, the potential YW can be 
integrated within Dz from 


E-ez, =VWV-e, (32) 
and the field line velocity, given by 
w =(E x B)/B’ (33) 


with E = E — VW, exists provided there is no magnetic 
null within Dr. In this case (29) is also necessary for a 
breakdown of magnetic line conservation. 


Magnetic null points 
The existence of w given by (33) is critical if there are 
magnetic nulls within Dr. Using E = —Vg — oA fora 


given evolution of an electromagnetic field, (32) can be 
restated by the existence of a potential ¢ = yg + Y with 


0A 


B-Vé=—-B-— 


(34) 
where A is a vector potential for B. Given the potential ¢ 
on a surface crossed only by non-recurring field lines this 
condition defines ¢ along these field lines. This method, 
called potential mapping, does not necessarily lead to a 
smooth potential ¢ if field lines from separated regions 
join at magnetic nulls. For instance, smooth boundary 
conditions on ¢ given for all field lines entering a surface 
enclosing the null, may lead to discontinuities of g, and 
if the boundary is part of the ideal region the condition 
on @ corresponds to boundary conditions on the plasma 
velocity v. Therefore, Greene, followed by Lau and Finn, 
argued that in an almost-ideal plasma magnetic nulls are 
the site where non-ideal terms, especially the resistive term 
in Ohm’s law, become important, and hence a breakdown 
of magnetic field line conservation may take place. 

Magnetic nulls can be classified in terms of the 
eigenvalues of the tensor VB. They have either one real 
and two complex conjugated eigenvalues or three real 
eigenvalues. For the latter case they are called type A for 
(+ — —) signs of the eigenvalues and type B for (— + +) 
(see figure 5). The eigenvectors of the complex conjugated 
eigenvalues, or of the real eigenvalues with the same sign, 
span a magnetic surface called the fan surface by Priest and 
Titov. The third eigenvector defines the spine as shown in 
figure 5. In the the case of more than one magnetic null 
the fan surfaces of an A-type and B-type null intersect at a 
structurally stable magnetic field line called separator. It 
can be shown that this field line is also a potential site of 
reconnection due to discontinuities in ¢ or singularities of 
w for corresponding boundary conditions. 

The topological structure of magnetic nulls led Priest 
and Titov to propose two additional mechanisms of 
reconnection called spine and fan reconnection. They 
showed that certain prescribed motions of the field lines 
on a surface enclosing the null produce singular field line 
velocities according to equation (33), and hence require 
a breakdown of field line conservation. In spine and fan 
reconnection the current tends to concentrate along the the 
spine and fan respectively. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetic Reconnection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reconnection without nulls 

Magnetic nulls are not the only places where magnetic 
reconnection may occur. For instance if equation (34) is 
integrated over a closed field line with a non-vanishing 
contribution of the right-hand side, one finds that the 
potential g may not exist and therefore processes breaking 
the magnetic line conservation have to be present. This 
is also reflected by the criterion (29) which does not 
require nulls. For a non-vanishing magnetic field the 
method of potential mapping always leads to a smooth 
potential ¢ and transport velocity w. However, the 
latter might be very large, much higher than the Alfvén 
velocity, which excludes under realistic conditions an ideal 
evolution. This may happen, as noted by Priest, Forbes 
and Demoulin, in layer-like regions where the potential 
mapping or mapping of foot points of field lines shows 
strong gradients and which are therefore called magnetic 
flipping layers or quasi-separatrix layers. 

While the method of potential or field line mapping 
aims at finding potential sites of reconnection and thus 
adds to the general criterion (29) certain conditions 
on the structure of the magnetic field, Hornig gave a 
more restricted definition of reconnection by generalizing 
the observation that in two dimension the field line 
velocity w has a singularity at the X-point. A covariant 
description shows that this singularity is a special type 
of null of the corresponding four-vector field W*. This 
property is structurally stable in the transition from two 
to three dimensions, where now the site of reconnection 
is determined by a line of finite length along which wt 
vanishes. Within this definition it is in particular possible 
to distinguish a simple local slippage of plasma relative to 
the field lines, which also may satisfy (29) but which is not 
usually called reconnection, from reconnection itself. 

Another aspect of reconnection is the dynamics of 
MAGNETIC HELICITY. While in two dimensions the source 
of magnetic helicity (-2E - B) vanishes, this is not 
necessarily the case in three dimensions. Hence magnetic 
reconnection in three dimensions does not necessarily 
conserve magnetic helicity. 


Collisionless reconnection 

Magnetic reconnection can also occur in the absence 
of a collisional resistivity. Collisionless reconnection 
processes are based on non-ideal terms that in a more 
refined macroscopic picture appear on the right-hand 
side of Ohm’s law (3) in addition to the resistive term. 
For instance, a current-driven microinstability may lead 
to fluctuations that on the macroscopic level have an 
effect similar to resistivity based on particle collisions. 
Also, resonant wave-particle interaction, off-diagonal 
terms of the electron pressure tensor or electron inertia 
have been suggested for magnetic reconnection. The 
final assessment of the role that each of these processes 
plays in reconnection requires a full three-dimensional 
kinetic description. Although such a kinetic point of 
view is crucial for the understanding of the small-scale 
plasma physics of reconnection, it less crucial for the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


overall dynamics, which in many of its features seems 
to be largely independent of the type and details of 
the non-ideal process. Thus, even highly collisionless 
reconnection processes, as for instance occurring in the 
Earth’s magnetosphere, have been successfully simulated 
by using asimple resistive model of the form (3). Often, the 
resistivity is empirically adapted, for instance by spatial 
localization or by introducing an ad hoc dependence of 7 on 
the electric current density. The formation of thin current 
sheets in the pre-reconnection dynamics seems to play an 
important role in the onset of collisionless reconnection 
processes. 


Bibliography 

Biskamp D 1993 Nonlinear Magnetohydrodynamics (Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Parker E N 1979 Cosmical Magnetic Fields (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press) 

Priest E R and Forbes T G 1999 Magnetic Reconnection 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Tsinganos K C (ed) 1996 Solar and Astrophysical Magnetohy- 
drodynamic Flows (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Vasyliunas V M 1975 Theoretical models of magnetic field 
line merging Rev. Geophys. Space Phys. 13 303 


Karl Schindler and Gunnar Hornig 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetohydrodynamic Instabilities 


Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) stability theory deter- 
mines whether a given PLASMA equilibrium configuration 
will either remain unchanged or evolve dynamically, in re- 
sponse to a general initial disturbance. If there is an initial 
disturbance whose amplitude subsequently grows in time, 
then the plasma is unstable, otherwise the plasma is sta- 
ble. In addition, if the initial destabilizing disturbance has 
a small amplitude (normally referred to as infinitesimally 
small), then the plasma is linearly unstable and linear the- 
ory is appropriate. However, if the initial amplitude has a 
finite magnitude, then it is nonlinearly unstable. In many 
physical applications the plasma switches from a stable 
configuration to an unstable one as some parameter or 
property of the equilibrium exceeds a critical value. When 
the critical value is reached, the plasma is at marginal sta- 
bility. 

Many of the various solar phenomena can be 
understood by considering the typical timescales of the 
various physical processes in the solar corona. This is 
shown in table 1 and discussed in the subsequent sections. 


Table 1. Typical timescales, in seconds, for the physical 
processes in the solar corona assuming B = 100G,/ =5 x 10” m, 
p = 8.36 x 10-3 kg m-3 and T = 2 x 10° K. R is the gas constant. 


Physical process Symbol Definition Timescale (s) 
Alfvén TA L/up/B 5 

Sound ee L//RT 200 
Conduction Teond pl?/ KT 600 
Radiation Trad p/p-Q(T) 3000 
Diffusion Ta P?/n 2.5 x 10! 


In this article a brief description of the equilibrium 
state is presented, followed by an introduction to the 
various methods used to assess the stability properties of 
the plasma. Next we describe ideal and non-ideal MHD 
instabilities before discussing some particular effects of 
coronal magnetic fields that penetrate the dense SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE. 


MHD equilibrium 
The basic MHD equilibrium equations are 


Vp=jx B+pg (1) 


for magnetic equilibrium. A non-uniform magnetic field, 
ie. 7 4 0, can create current driven instabilities such as 
the MHD kink instability. An adverse density profile and 
the gravity term can drive Rayleigh-Taylor modes and the 
pressure gradient can drive localized modes. In addition 
to the force balance equation (1), the equilibrium magnetic 
field and plasma must satisfy 


1 
V-B=0 j=—-VxB (2) 
Ww 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and an energy equation. For most situations this is taken 
as the adiabatic energy equation with 


p =const p”. 


For thermal instabilities a more appropriate energy 
equation, instead of the adiabatic equation, must be used, 
including thermal conduction, optically thin radiation 
(o’Q(T)) and some form of coronal heating. Hence, 
thermal equilibrium is described by 


V-(kVT) = L(p,T) = Q(T) — H. (3) 


« is the thermal conductivity tensor, but in a magnetized 
plasma this is dominated by the component parallel to the 
magnetic field, «,. It has a strong temperature dependence 
and is expressed as x = 107" T°? Wm7!K~". Lis the total 
loss function, including the coronal heating term, H, and 
Q(T) isnormally approximated by a piecewise continuous 
function of the form 


1 it ae a 


where x and a@ are constants dependent on the 
temperature. These are given in table 2. Finally, 
the temperature is coupled to the pressure and density 
through the gas law 


p=pRT 
where FR is the gas constant. 


Table 2. The constants used in the radiative loss function 
Q(T) =xT*’ Wm? ke. (From Cook et al (1989).) 


T x a 
T > 10° 715x107 0 
10° <7 <10% 1.25 x 10% ~—2.5 
10° < T < 10° 1.25x10" 0 
104 < T < 10° 3.93 x 103 11 


Stability methods 

The energy method 

The linear stability of a given equilibrium can be tested 
using three different methods. If it is important to know 
whether a plasma is either stable or unstable, an energy 
method (Bernstein et al 1954) can be used. The sign of 
the perturbed potential energy, 5W, integrated over the 
volume of the plasma determines stability. 5W is defined 
by 


1 
-5 fe-reav (a) 
and 


6W > 0 for all € = stability 
6W <0 for one allowable € = instability. (5) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


F(é) is the linearized force given by 


FE) =VE-Vp+ypv-é) 
+ (Vx Vx (€ x B)) x B/u 
+ (Vx B)x Vx (é x B)/u 


—V-(pé)g. (6) 


The displacement € must be continuous and satisfy the 
boundary conditions. The advantage of this method 
is that it is possible to prove instability by choosing a 
trial displacement that makes 5W negative. This gives a 
necessary condition for stability. In addition, it is possible 
to rearrange the energy integral into two terms, one a 
positive definite term and the other a simpler integral. 
Minimizing this second integral and showing that it is 
positive gives a sufficient condition for stability. Thus, 
simple bounds on the stability threshold can be obtained. 


The normal mode method 

Assuming a time dependence of the form e, the 
linearized MHD equations reduced to an eigenvalue 
problem of the form 


—w°é = F(&), 


for the eigenvalue w. If all values of w are positive then 
the plasma is stable but if there exists one wo” = —o? 
that is negative, then the plasma is unstable. Here w is 
the frequency of oscillation of a stable wave and a is the 
growth rate of an unstable mode. The spectrum of the 
system is complicated by the existence of a continuous 
spectrum for w” as wellas the discrete spectrum of modes. 


The initial value method 

A final approach is to treat the equations as an initial value 
problem and time advance the equations numerically. If 
the initial disturbance is sufficiently general, then the most 
unstable mode will grow and eventually dominate the 
solution. This approach is frequently used as a forerunner 
to a full nonlinear simulation. Whichever approach 
is used, it is important that a complete description 
of the linear stability properties of the equilibrium is 
obtained before detailed (and time-consuming) nonlinear 
calculations are carried out. 


Rayleigh-Taylor instability 
The Rayleigh-Taylor instability occurs when gravity 
interacts with an adverse density gradient. Imagine two 
plasmas of uniform densities p; inz > 0 (region 1) and p in 
z < 0 (region 2), separated by an interface at z = 0. Using 
a normal mode analysis with disturbances of the form 
f(.z0 = f(z)”, matching the two solutions in the 
separate regions, z > 0 and z < 0, and using continuity of 
both the normal velocity and the perturbed total pressure 
at the perturbed interface, the incompressible dispersion 
relation is obtained as 

o = pease. (7) 

2+ P1 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


P, Py 


Figure 1. The streamlines for the Rayleigh-Taylor instability are 
shown. The unperturbed interface at z = 0 is shown as a thick 
dashed line and the perturbed interface as the thick full curve 


Notice that the plasma is unstable when p; > 2, ie. 
heavy plasma overlies light, and that the fastest growing 
instability occurs for k — oo. Thus, the wavelengths are 
extremely small when the plasma is unstable. The form of 
the instability is shown in figure 1. 

The inclusion of a uniform magnetic field at an angle 6 
to the x-direction modifies this result giving the dispersion 
relation as 


= 2 (kB cos 6)" 
Sp PERE, 2 ( yo 


wo = (8) 
P2otPr EL pr2t pr 


The second term on the right-hand side represents the 
effect of magnetic tension that is introduced when the 
perturbation bends the fieldlines. When 6 = 0, then the 
magnetic field stabilizes the Rayleigh-Taylor mode if the 
wavenumber satisfies 


§l 
k > >—(1 — po). 9 
ea 5p? Pl 2) (9) 
Note that if 6 = 2/2 so that 
k-B=kBcosé=0 


the magnetic field does not influence the Rayleigh— 
Taylor mode at all. This condition appears in many 
stability criteria. Further information about gravitational 
instabilities is given in the article on MAGNETIC BUOYANCY. 

Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities are expected whenever 
dense plasma overlies light plasma. A classic example of 
this type of situation occurs at the lower edge of a SOLAR 
PROMINENCE. Here the dense plasma is supported against 
gravity by the Lorentz force. There is normally a fairly 
clear lower edge to prominences so the Rayleigh-Taylor 
instability must be inhibited possibly by either magnetic 
shear or photospheric line-tying effects. 


Magnetic instabilities 
Magnetic instabilities are best described by the example of 
cylindrically symmetric magnetic fields. In this case, (1) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


reduces to 


d B? B 

dr (> * oe a 
where the azimuthal and axial components of the magnetic 
field are B,(r) and B,(r) respectively and the gas pressure 
is p(r). The left-hand side is the total pressure gradient 
and the right-hand side is the magnetic tension. Since 
the equilibrium only depends on the radial coordinate, all 
perturbations can be Fourier analyzed in the form 


f(r t) = f(r ler (11) 


and the linearized equations reduce to a set of ordinary 
differential equations. 


Low-m, global modes 

The nature of the mode is defined by the value of the 
azimuthal wavenumber m. m = 0 is the sausage mode 
and m = 1 is the kink mode. The form of these 
perturbations is shown in figure 2. In both cases the 
regions of strong magnetic field force the plasma towards 
the regions of weak magnetic field and so reinforce the 
plasma displacement. However, it is important to note 
that the kink mode instability is the only mode that actually 
displaces the magnetic axis. 

The exponential term has constant amplitude along 
the helix defined by m6 + kz = constant. The pitch of the 
disturbance matches the pitch of the equilibrium magnetic 
field when es 

Bo BS Boek BU: (12) 


This condition is satisfied at a particular radius, r,, the 
radius of a mode rational surface, and corresponds to a 
singularity in the ideal MHD, marginal stability equations 
when a = 0. 


Inertial line-tying 

The stability of solar coronal magnetic fields is strongly 
influenced by the effect of the very dense photosphere. 
Imagine an Alfvén wave propagating down from the 
corona. When it reaches the photospheric level there 
is a large increase in density of a factor of 10° and the 
wave is almost totally reflected. In a similar manner, 
a slow MHD wave is also reflected. The photosphere 
provides a strong stabilizing effect, called inertial line- 
tying, and the simplest way to model this is to assume 
that all components of the displacement (or equivalently 
the velocity) are zero at the photospheric ends of the 
fieldlines. This means that the wavenumber along the 
magnetic fieldline is not only discretized but, because the 
components of the displacement are out of phase with 
each other, also couples Fourier components together. An 
individual Fourier mode does not satisfy the boundary 
conditions and so many modes must be included. 

In periodic configurations the first modes to become 
unstable are incompressible modes. This can be 
understood, since if some of the available energy is 
used in compressing the plasma then there is less to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


WEAK WEAK 
\ ff vie a 


Figure 2. The displacements for (a) the sausage mode and (b) the 
kink mode. 


drive the instabilities. Thus, contracting the plasma as 
in figure 2(a) means that the plasma will flow towards 
the expanding regions, otherwise the plasma will be 
compressed. However, the line-tying conditions prevent 
this flow and so the most unstable line-tied plasma 
disturbances are usually compressible. 


High-m, localized modes 

High m values for the azimuthal wavenumber produce 
modes that are strongly localized about a particular radius. 
These modes are driven by an adverse pressure gradient 
and are unstable, in the absence of line-tying, if Suydam’s 
criterion holds, namely 


B2 1\2 2Qup' 
= (5) esol aeerg (13) 
4\q r 


where gq = r B,/ Bg gives a measure of the shear in the field. 
Line-tying modifies this result by adding two stabilizing 
effects due to field line tension and compression. The 
condition for instability is now 


B2 1\2 2up' B2 B2 
ay r (5) + A ie + a3 + a4 bed als <0 (14) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where the constants, a;, are defined in De Bruyne and Hood 
(1989). 


Resistive instabilities 

In ideal MHD the magnetic fieldlines are frozen into 
the plasma and hence retain their topological identity. 
However, once resistivity is included, fieldlines can diffuse 
through the plasma, allowing them to break and reconnect. 
Thus, new topological configurations can be accessed that 
were prohibited under ideal MHD. In cases where the new 
configurations have a lower magnetic energy, there are 
resistive instabilities that are driven by this available free 
magnetic energy. These new instabilities grow at a rate 
that is slower than the rates for ideal modes but faster than 
pure diffusion. In general, they have a growth rate that is 
related to a hybrid of the Alfvén and diffusion timescales, 
Ta and ty as defined in table 1. The main resistive mode in 
the solar corona is the tearing mode with a growth rate 


2/5 aoe (15) 


Oo XT, 
The resistive modes are localized about the mode rational 
surfaces that occur in ideal MHD, marginal stability (w? = 
0) when 


m 


k- B= —Bj+kB, =0. 


r 
The nonlinear development of the tearing mode can lead 
to steady MAGNETIC RECONNECTION. 

The sudden eruption of a solar FLARE suggests 
that the initial instability is due to an ideal MHD 
instability. However, the release of magnetic energy 
requires resistivity. Driving the field lines together 
in response to an ideal MHD instability means that 
reconnection and energy release can occur ona much faster 
timescale than the tearing mode timescale. 


Thermal instabilities 


The form of the optically thin plasma radiation in the 
solar corona and other astrophysical plasmas can drive 
thermal instabilities, also called radiative modes and 
condensation modes. The shape of an analytic fit to 
the optically thin radiation is shown in figure 3 as a 
function of the temperature at both constant density and 
constant pressure. Note that for the case of constant 
pressure the radiation decreases for temperatures in the 
range 10* K to 10’ K. Thus, if the temperature in the 
corona decreases due to a perturbation, then the radiation 
will increase causing the plasma to cool further (Parker 
1957). This thermal runaway will continue until the 
temperature drops below 10 K, which is incidentally the 
typical temperature of prominences. Thermal instabilities 
can be understood by examining the linearized energy 
equation. Two distinct forms of the thermal instability 
arise depending on the ratio of the sound travel time, t,, 
to the radiative timescale, Tag. If t, K Traq, the thermal 
instability evolves isobarically. For a uniform equilibrium 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and perturbations of the form f(x,t) = e*"**", the 
dispersion relation for the isobaric thermal mode is 


BY 7 = 
v= ( oe Pp @ ») a6) 


Tcond Trad 


where the timescales are defined in table 1 and a is given 
in table 2. The isochoric limit, when t, >> Traa, gives 


R22 72 
(k- By? 1 ay, a7) 


(v Y ( B Tcond Trad 
Physically, these modes can be understood as follows. In 
the isobaric limit any thermal disturbances evolve much 
more slowly than the propagation of pressure variations. 
So sound waves can propagate to equalize the pressure 
changes before the temperature can evolve significantly. 
Hence, the modes evolve at constant pressure. This is the 
case at coronal temperatures. In the isochoric limit the 
thermal instability evolves so quickly that there is no time 
for sound waves to propagate away from the instability 
region. Thus, flows cannot be set up to equalize the 
pressure and so the density cannot change. Thus, the 
instability evolves at constant density. 

Thermal instabilities are one mechanism proposed for 
the formation of cool, dense solar prominences. The hot 
corona begins to condense and a siphon flow sucks plasma 
from the CHROMOSPHERE into the corona in order to equalize 
the pressure. 


Onset of convection 

A plasma heated from below becomes unstable to 
convection when the temperature gradient exceeds a 
critical value. Neglecting all the dissipation mechanisms 
initially and the magnetic field, we can analyze the 
linearized MHD equations for an equilibrium pressure 
and density satisfying hydrostatic balance, the ideal gas 
law and a prescribed temperature profile T(z), where z is 
the vertical coordinate. The local criterion for the onset of 
convection occurs when the temperature gradient exceeds 
the adiabatic value. Thus, instability sets in when 


d / p 

— | — 0 18 

dz e i. oo 
so that entropy decreases with height. 
expressed as 


This may be 


— <-“__—_. (19) 


Thus, if the temperature decreases at a faster rate, then 
convective motions set in. (See the article on MAGNETIC 
BUOYANCY for a description of the instability and the 
inclusion of a magnetic field.) 

The inclusion of dissipation, through viscosity and 
thermal conduction, severly complicates the stability 
analysis and analytical progress can be made by using 
the Boussinesq approximation. Here sound waves are 
filtered out and density variations are only included in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


\d) 
20 
177 J 
4 5 6 / 
log(T) 
(b) 
12 
10h J 
“ oar ante 1 
ie [ “as | 
= ot SK J 
5 [ | 
o 
cS AR \ | 
\ 
2 D \ 4 
4 6 7 
log(T) 


Figure 3. The optically thin radiation is approximated as a 
piecewise continuous function of temperature. The figures show 
the behavior of radiation against temperature at (a) constant 
density and (b) constant pressure. Note the logarithmic scales. 


the gravitational term, as p = po(1 + w7\), where T; is 
the perturbed temperature and a is the volume expansion 
coefficient. For the vertical velocity perturbation of the 
form 

v(x, y, Zt) = Vee elt”) sin az 


where d is the depth of the layer, stability depends on the 
value of the Rayleigh number 


oes. (20) 


KV 


k is the thermal conductivity, v is the kinematic viscosity 
and AT is the temperature difference between the top and 
bottom of the layer. Setting o = Oin the dispersion relation 
gives the relation between Ra and the wavenumber k, 
defined by k* = k} + kj + x*/d*, for marginal stability. 
Instability occurs if Ra exceeds the critical value Ra* = 
27x*/4. The marginal stability curve is shown in figure 4 
and the streamlines, showing the cellular pattern of the 
plasma flow, are illustrated in figure 5. 

White light images of the photosphere show 
granulation patterns giving clear evidence of convection. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The marginal stability curve where k is the total 
wavenumber and Ra is the Rayleigh number. 


z=0 


Figure 5. The streamlines for the convective motions that arises 
when the temperature gradient is large enough. 


Larger scales of convection also occur, giving rise to 
supergranules and giant cells. 


Kelvin-Helmholtz instability 

The Kelvin-Helmholtz instability arises when there is a 
horizontal shear flow, U(z), and the plasma density is 
stratified due to gravity. The classical Kelvin-Helmholtz 
instability is best illustrated for two plasmas of uniform 
density and uniform horizontal flows separated by an 
interface. The incompressible, linear equations are 
expressed in terms of the vertical velocity and solved. 
Assuming perturbations of the form 


v.=V. elkx—on) Fkz 


where in region 1, z > 0, the upper sign is used and in 
region 2, z < 0, the lower sign is used. The two regions 
are matched at the perturbed interface using continuity of 
pressure and continuity of the normal displacement, &., 


where 
f= 
= @—kU- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Instabilities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The dispersion relation is 
pi(@ — kU;)? + p2(@ — kU>)? = kg(p2 — p1) (21) 
and the plasma is unstable if 


& (p35 — p}) 


(Uz — U,)? > k 
P2P1 


(22) 


Thus, if k is sufficiently large, there is always a Kelvin— 
Helmholtz instability for any difference in the background 
flow speeds. Obviously, viscosity will stabilize these short- 
wavelength instabilities. 

Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities are likely to occur 
between the fast and slow plasma flows in the SOLAR 
WIND. In addition, the field lines separating the open field 
regions of CORONAL HOLES and the closed field regions of 
ACTIVE REGIONS will also experience these flow induced 
instabilities. 


Bibliography 

Bernstein I, Frieman E, Kruskal M and Kusrud R 1954 Proc. 
R. Soc. A 244 17 

Cook J W, Cheng C-C, Jacobs V L and Antiochos S K 1989 
Astrophys. J. 338 1176-83 

De Bruyne P and Hood A W 1989 Simple tests for the ideal 
MHD stability of line-tied coronal magnetic fields 
Solar Phys. 119 87-106 

Parker E N 1957 Astrophys. J. 117 431 


Alan Hood 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetohydrodynamic Waves 


Magnetohydrodynamic waves are found in a wide vari- 
ety of astrophysical plasmas. They have been measured in 
plasma fusion devices and detected in the MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH, the SOLAR WIND and a number of magnetic struc- 
tures seen in the Sun’s atmosphere. In space plasmas their 
detection is often indirect, by matching measured prop- 
erties (such as propagation speed or pressure variation) 
with theoretically deduced properties and correlations, al- 
though the magnetosphere and solar wind provide di- 
rect in situ measurements. A complication in the iden- 
tification of magnetohydrodynamic waves in space plas- 
mas has been the realization that generally such plasmas 
are strongly inhomogeneous, structured by magnetism, 
plasma density and temperature variations, or by plasma 
flows. This strong inhomogeneity brings about compli- 
cations in the description of magnetohydrodynamic wave 
phenomena, with magnetic flux tubes and plasma flow 
tubes being of special interest. In the solar atmosphere, 
SUNSPOTS, SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES, CORONAL 
Loops and POLAR PLUMES are examples of flux tube structure, 
and oscillatory phenomena have been detected in all of 
them. Oscillations have also been detected in SOLAR PROMI- 
NENCES and generated by SOLAR FLARES. 

Waves are the way in which information in a medium 
may be communicated from one region to another. In a 
gas communication can be achieved by sound waves, in 
the form of compressions and rarefactions of the medium 
which propagate at the sound speed c,. For an ideal gas 
with equilibrium pressure po and density po the sound 
speed in a medium is given by 


YPo 1/2 
= (“) (1) 
Po 


where y is the ratio of specific heats. Magnetism 
introduces an additional speed, determined by the 
strength Bp of the magnetic field and the plasma density pp. 
This so-called Alfvén speed va is defined by 


B2 \2 
VA = (=) (2) 
L-po 


where yz is the magnetic permeability of the medium. 
These two speeds determine the nature of wave 
propagation in magnetohydrodynamics. 

The speeds c, and va that characterize sound and 
magnetic effects are conveniently supplemented by the 
introduction of two further speeds, a slow speed c and 
a fast speed c;, defined by 


Cr = C+ 0%. (3) 
The slow speed is evidently both sub-sonic and sub- 
Alfvénic; the fast speed c; is super-sonic and super- 


Alfvénic. The slow speed c, proves to be of particular 
significance in magnetic flux tubes and is accordingly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sometimes referred to as the tube speed, although it is not 
the only speed of special significance in flux tubes (see 
below). The four speeds c, cs, va and cy arise in various 
ways in the description of magnetohydrodynamic wave 
phenomena, and their magnitudes may vary dramatically 
from application to application. For example, ina 2x 10° K 
solar corona with a magnetic field strength of 10? G the 
sound speed is about 200 km s7! and the Alfvén speed 
about 10° km s~', whereas in a solar photospheric flux 
tube both these speeds fall to about 10 km s-!. The 
corresponding slow and fast speeds in the solar coronal 
illustration are 196 km s~! and 1020 km s~!, whereas in 
the photospheric flux tube these speeds are 7 km st and 
14 km s“!, respectively. 

The distinctive feature of a magnetohydrodynamic 
plasma is that, in addition to compressive disturbances, 
the magnetoacoustic waves with their affinity to sound 
waves, there arises the possibility of a wave which 
propagates without compressing the plasma, driven 
purely by magnetic tension forces. This is the Alfvén 
wave, named in honour of the 1970 Nobel Laureate Hannes 
Alfvén (1908-1995) who first described the wave in 1942 
and made fundamental contributions to the foundations 
of magnetohydrodynamics. Alfvén waves are closely 
analogous to the familiar transverse waves of an elastic 
string, the magnetic field providing the tension force that 
determines (together with the string or plasma density) 
the speed of propagation of the wave. The magnetic 
field in a plasma is also able to provide another force, 
akin to the plasma pressure; this is the magnetic pressure, 
Bo’/2u N m-?. Overall the field provides magnetic 
pressure forces that resist any tendency to compress 
the plasma (acting in addition to the plasma pressure) 
and magnetic tension forces which act to straighten any 
distortions in the magnetic field. The tension force gives 
rise to the Alfvén wave; the magnetic pressure force gives 
rise to slow and fast magnetoacoustic waves. Broadly, 
the fast magnetoacoustic wave results when the magnetic 
pressure force acts in unison with the plasma pressure 
force; the slow magnetoacoustic wave results when these 
two pressure forces act in opposition. 

To describe magnetohydrodynamic waves in detail 
it is necessary to examine the equations of ideal 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS. We consider an inhomogeneous 
medium because it allows a description of waves in the 
important case of a magnetic flux tube but also includes, as 
a special case, the classical problem of waves in a uniform 
medium. Consider, then, a basic state in which there is an 
applied unidirectional magnetic field By = Boz aligned 
with the z-axis in an appropriate coordinate system. In 
equilibrium the plasma density is po, the temperature Tp, 
the pressure pp and the field strength Bo. These quantities 
may all vary in a direction perpendicular to the applied 
magnetic field; equilibrium is achieved by requiring that 


B2 
grad (» + st) =0 (4) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


showing that any spatial variations in magnetic pressure 
are balanced by corresponding variations in plasma 
pressure. The case of a uniform medium corresponds to 
taking Bo, po, To and pp all constant. 

We consider isentropic (or adiabatic) disturbances 
governed by the equations of ideal magnetohydrodynam- 
ics. Denote by p and p the pressure and density perturba- 
tions of an ideal plasma with ratio of specific heats y (usu- 
ally taken to be 5/3). The perturbed magnetic (induction) 
field is B and the fluid motion is v. To examine small- 
amplitude linear disturbances about this equilibrium, it 
is convenient to introduce the perturbation in total pres- 
sure, pr: 


1 
Pr=pt reas (5) 


Then, splitting the velocity field v into components 
perpendicular and parallel to the applied magnetic field, 
so that v = v, + v,2Z, the linearized equations of ideal 
magnetohydrodynamics yield 


a2 j a2 apr 
mo (53 hoe) 0. rv. (2) <0 (6) 
a > 8 (apr 
. oop S = 0 7 
(Fs “ 53) - cr Oz ( ot ) 7) 
a dv, : 
— = POvAG — poc? div v. (8) 


This system of coupled partial differential equations 
determines the relationship between the flow v and 
the total pressure variation pr. The operator V, 
denotes the component of the gradient operator that 
acts perpendicular to the applied magnetic field (i.e. 
perpendicular to the z-axis). Notice the occurrence of 
the four speeds c, cs, va and cz, each a function of the 
coordinates perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. 
It may be noted that equations (7) and (8) combine to 
give 
2 
a = ox (div v). (9) 
The absence of magnetic effects in this equation is simply a 
reflection of the fact that magnetic forces act perpendicular 
to the magnetic field and so have no effect on motions 
along the field. 


Uniform medium 

In the case of a uniform medium, Bo, po, To and pp are 
all constants and so are the basic speeds c,, cs, va and 
ct. This allows a relatively straightforward reduction of 
equations (6)-(8). It proves convenient to work in terms of 
the compressibility A = div v. Then A satisfies the fourth- 
order wave equation 


ata a a 
ree (c2 + VAaav A + CUAgaV A =0 (10) 


involving the three-dimensional Laplacian v2. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Since the medium is uniform and unbounded we may 
Fourier analyse equation (10) in a Cartesian coordinate 
system (with position vector r = (x, y, z)), writing 


A(x, y, Z, t) = Ao exp i(wt — k-r) (11) 


where Aj is the amplitude (a constant), w the frequency 
and k = (k,,k,,k,) the wavevector of the disturbance; 
other variables (e.g. flow v and field B) are represented 
similarly. The Laplacian operator becomes 


where k = (k; + kj + k2)'? is the magnitude of the 
wavevector. Then, for Ay 4 0, equation (10) yields 


wo — (C2 + vq)’ + coUAkek? = 0. (12) 


This is the dispersion relation for magnetoacoustic waves; 
it relates the wave frequency w to the wavevector k, thus 
describing the propagation. 

The dispersion relation (12) may be solved to give the 
phase speed c (= w/k). In terms of the angle ¢ that the 
wavevector k makes with the applied magnetic field Bo, 
with k, = k cos ¢, we obtain 


1 fora a 
C= xo Et - seo) } (13) 
Cf 


The smaller root (corresponding to the — sign) is the slow 
magnetoacoustic wave, and the larger root (corresponding 
to the + sign) is the fast magnetoacoustic wave. The waves 
are compressive (since A # 0) and so involve density, 
pressure and temperature variations—as do sound waves. 
Unlike sound waves, magnetoacoustic waves exhibit 
anisotropic propagation, their phase speeds depending on 
the angle of propagation to the applied magnetic field; this 
is simply a reflection of the directionality that an applied 
magnetic field imposes on a plasma. When propagation 
is along the applied magnetic field Bo, so that ¢ = 0, then 
c? = c? or vy. When propagation is perpendicular to the 
applied magnetic field, so that ¢ = 2/2, thenc? = Oorc?;in 
other words, the slow wave is unable to propagate across 
the magnetic field, whereas the fast wave propagates with 
the speed c;. This is the greatest speed that the fast wave 
can achieve; at any other angle its speed lies below c; and 
above (or equal to) the greater of c, and va. The phase 
speed of the slow wave is always less than or equal to the 
smaller of c, and va. 

Magnetoacoustic waves are compressive but distur- 
bances that are incompressible (A = 0)—producing no 
changes in plasma density of an element moving with the 
fluid—are also permitted and in fact provide a distinct 
form of wave motion. This is the Alfvén wave with dis- 
persion relation 

wo =k v4 (14) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


giving a phase speed c according to 
c? = v4 cos’ @. (15) 


Evidently, then, the phase speed of an Alfvén wave cannot 
exceed the Alfvén speed, va. Moreover, like the slow wave, 
the Alfvén wave is unable to propagate across the magnetic 
field, since »? = 0 when ¢ = x/2. The Alfvén wave 
involves no motions along the magnetic field (v, = 0) and 
no variations in plasma density (¢ = 0), pressure (p = 0), 
temperature or total pressure (pr = 0). Thus the Alfvén 
wave is a transverse wave that propagates incompressibly, 
involving no changes in plasma density or pressure. 

Altogether, then, we see that in the presence of an 
applied magnetic field there are three waves available 
to the medium, the Alfvén wave and the fast and slow 
magnetoacoustic waves. All three waves exhibit a degree 
of anisotropic propagation but this is most marked in 
the Alfvén wave and the slow wave, neither of which 
can propagate orthogonally to the applied magnetic field; 
the fast wave is only weakly anisotropic and achieves 
its greatest phase speed (c = cr) when propagating 
perpendicularly to the applied magnetic field. The 
anisotropy exhibited by magnetohydrodynamic waves is 
in sharp contrast to the isotropic behavior of sound waves 
in an uniform medium, this simply being a reflection of 
the directionality imposed by a magnetic field. 

The behavior of the magnetohydrodynamic wave 
speeds is conveniently represented in a diagram by 
plotting the phase speed c as a function of propagation 
angle ¢, using a polar coordinate (c, ¢) representation; see 
figure 1. 

Related to the information provided in the phase 
speed plot is the behavior of the group velocity cg of a 
wave, defined by 

dw 
Cg => Dk < 
The group velocity of a wave is the velocity with which 
energy (and information) is propagated by the wave. For 
the Alfvén wave equation (16) gives simply cg = vaZ, 
showing that an Alfvén wave propagates energy and 
information along the applied magnetic field, whatever 
the direction of the wave itself. The group velocity for 
magnetoacoustic waves is more complicated to obtain 
and is usually displayed in diagrammatic form, showing 
a plot of the group speed cg = |c,| as a function of 
propagation angle; see figure 2. Again, note the highly 
anistropic behavior of the slow wave which is confined 
to propagating energy close to the applied magnetic field, 
whereas the fast wave propagates energy approximately 
isotropically in all directions. 


(16) 


Magnetically structured media 

The nonuniform media generally encountered in space 
plasmas may frequently be modeled in terms of a 
magnetically structured plasma. Structuring may be in 
the magnetic field, plasma density or temperature, or 
through the presence of plasma flows. Both Cartesian and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


o=1/2 


lc, 
-2c, |. 
Figure 1. Phase speed diagram for magnetohydrodynamic 
waves, showing the phase speed c(¢) (in units of the sound 
speed cs) as a function of the angle ¢ of propagation to the 
applied magnetic field, for the case va > Cs. 
2c, [ 
sue fast 
c, F 
ee oe cee eee eee Meee ee mere oo ce 
-2c, | -C, L c, 2c, 
-c, fF 
-2c, 


Figure 2. Group speed diagram for magnetoacoustic waves, 
showing the group speed cg(@) (in units of the sound speed cs) 
as a function of the angle ¢ of propagation to the applied 
magnetic field, for the case va > cs. 


cylindrical coordinate representations are possible. The 
cylindrical form is particularly interesting in view of the 
wide-spread occurrence of flux tube structures. Returning 
to equations (6)-(8), we express them in cylindrical 
coordinates (r, 0, z), writing v = (v;, U9, vz). Equation (6) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


then yields 
2 », @ 3? pr 
po(r) (= v4 (7) =) ty as 0 (17) 
2 , a 1 @ py 
= 18 
Pate) (Fe Oza) "6 * 7 30 at (18) 


These equations may be reduced to ordinary differential 
equations by writing 


v, (7, 8, Z,t) = v,(r) exp i(wt +n — k,z) (19) 


for mode number n = 0,1, 2,.... The resulting equations 
may be manipulated to yield the equation 


d po(r)[k2 v4 (r) —-w]lid fins 
dr [m2(r) +n?/r2] rr dr es 
= polr)(Ku4 (7) — vu, (20) 


for v,, with m? given by 


(k2c2 — aw) (kev, —’) 


2 
m = 
©) (2 + vac? — @) 


Equation (20) is sometimes called the Hain-Liist equation. 
The differential equation satisfied by pr is also of 


interest: 
D9. 2 1d ( 1 <*) 
pole valr) — @ iF dr po(r) (k2 v5 (r) — we. dr 
2 
= (m2e) + 4) pr. (21) 


Equations (20) and (21) possess singularities at wo” = 
kev, and w* = k?c?, where the leading coefficients 
of the differential equations vanish; these singularities 
generate the Alfvén continuum and the slow continuum, 
respectively. The presence of these singularities is an 
indication of a number of interesting effects connected 
with the phenomenon of resonant absorption, of particular 
interest in the question of solar CORONALHEATING MECHANISMS 
and in the absorption of p-modes in sunspots. 

There is a simple solution of equations (8), (17) 
and (18) that we may note immediately. If 0/00 = 0, 
corresponding to symmetric disturbances of the tube, then 
equation (18) reduces to 


(22) 


This is a torsional Alfvén wave which propagates torsional 
oscillations vg with the local value of the Alfvén speed 
va(r). Equation (22) illustrates the phenomenon of phase 
mixing of Alfvén waves, whereby a wave rapidly becomes 
highly corrugated with large radial gradients building up 
in vg. The buildup of such large gradients is important 
for the damping of magnetohydrodynamic waves because 
ordinarily the Alfvén wave in particular is difficult to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


damp. In a uniform medium the Alfvén wave may 
propagate vast distances before it is significantly damped 
by ohmic or viscous processes. However, with phase 
mixing or resonant absorption operating damping is 
considerably more efficient. 
We may illustrate phase mixing by noting that the 
solution 
Ug = vo sin k,[z = va(r)t] (23) 


of the Alfvén wave equation (22) gives a wave of 
amplitude vo, and |vg| < vo at all times. However, the 
radial gradient du,/dr of the motion grows in amplitude 
linearly in time ¢, for 


“te = —vituok, cos k,[z — va(r)t] (24) 
where v/, denotes the slope of the Alfvén speed profile. 
Thus |dvg/dr| grows secularly on a timescale of 1/v4. 
This phase mixing timescale can be very short. For 
example, ina coronal loop where the Alfvén speed changes 
from say 2000 km s-! in the loop to 1000 km s-! in 
the loop’s immediate environment, across a distance of 
500 km, the phase mixing timescale is 0.5 s. The result 
of such phase mixing—and resonant absorption achieves 
similar results—is that wave damping may occur in 
significantly shorter times or distances than is the case for 
magnetohydrodynamic waves in a uniform medium. In 
fact, an estimate of wave damping for an Alfvén wave 
undergoing phase mixing in a medium with Alfvén speed 
gradient v), gives a damping length (the distance a wave 
travels before its amplitude is reduced by a factor e, or 37%, 
of its initial value) of order (603 /w?v'.’v)'/3. The cube root 
dependence means that damping lengths in a structured 
medium are considerably shorter than those in a uniform 
medium. For the coronal conditions illustrated above (and 
taking v to be 2 x 10"' m? s~), the damping length for a 
wave of period 100s is about 104 km. Such considerations 
are important in the question of coronal heating. 


Flux tube waves 

Magnetic flux tubes, regions of magnetic field that are 
distinguished from one another through plasma density or 
temperature, magnetic field strength or plasma flow, are of 
particular interest. Two types of flux tube have received 
detailed study: the isolated flux tube of magnetic field 
embedded in a field-free medium and the magnetically 
embedded tube of dense plasma in a magnetic medium. 
The isolated tube finds specific application in the solar 
photospheric tube (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX 
TuBES) and the embedded tube has application to the solar 
wind and the solar coronal loop. 

Consider again equations (20) and (21), examining the 
specific case of a flux tube of radius a, field strength By and 
plasma density p9 embedded in a magnetic environment 
with field strength B. and plasma density pe: 


po, T<a 
Pe, >a. 


Bo, r<a 
Be, r>a 


potr) = | (25) 


Bin =| 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The equilibrium state of a magnetic flux tube of 
radius a, field strength By and plasma density pp embedded in a 
magnetized plasma of field strength B. and plasma density pe. 


The tube is in magnetostatic pressure balance with its 
surroundings (see equation (4)). The Alfvén, sound and 
slow speeds within the tube are va, cs and c,, and their 
values in the external medium are vac, Ce and Cie (see 
figure 3). The case of an isolated tube embedded in 
a field-free environment corresponds to setting B. = 
0 (so that vae = 0), but for magnetically embedded 
tubes in a strongly magnetized plasma (i.e. a plasma in 
which the Alfvén speeds exceed the sound speeds) the 
field strengths By and B, are generally comparable and, 
moreoveT, VAe, VA >> Ce; Cs- 

For the equilibrium (25) the differential equation (21) 
may be solved for pry in terms of Bessel functions J, (nor) 
inr <aand K,(mer) inr > a, with the result 


J) (na) Ki (mea) 
k2 2 _ 2 n = k2 2 o 2 n 26 
Delk2Vg6 NF Goay poke va, es en (26) 
where 
2 TEE — BG) 
°  (c2 + v5) (w? — kc?) 
and 


4 (k2c2 _ wo) (k2 U4. —’) 


© (c2 + v3.) (kK202, — w?) 

Equation (26) is the dispersion relation for flux tube waves, 
describing magnetoacoustic waves in a uniform magnetic 
flux tube; it applies for waves that are confined to the tube, 
requiring that m. > 0. The integer n that arises (through 
the Fourier analysis in equation (19)) in the description of 
tube waves defines the geometry of the vibrating tube. 
The case n = 0 corresponds to a symmetric pulsation 
of the tube, with its axis remaining undisturbed, and is 
commonly referred to as the sausage wave (or mode). The 
case n = 1 describes the kink mode, which involves lateral 
displacements of the tube (maintaining a circular cross- 
section) with the axis of the tube resembling a wriggling 
snake; the plasma in the neighborhood of the tube is also 
disturbed. There are also fluting modes (n > 2), which 
leave the axis of the tube undisturbed but distort the tube 
boundary. See figure 4. 

The restriction me > 0 imposed on the flux tube 
dispersion relation means that the amplitude of a wave 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


n>1 


Figure 4. The modes of oscillation of a flux tube, showing the 
sausage (n = 0), kink (n = 1) and fluting (n > 2) waves. 


body 


surface 


Figure 5. Surface and body waves in a flux tube. Surface waves 
are largely confined to the region near the boundary of the tube 
whereas body waves occupy the whole of the tube. 


declines with radius r (>a), so that far from the tube 
there is no appreciable disturbance. Inside the tube 
(for r < a) the disturbance is oscillatory if ni > 0 
or nonoscillatory (evanescent) if ni < 0. Modes that 
inside the tube are oscillatory in r are called body waves, 
because they disturb the whole of the interior of a tube. 
Waves that have an evanescent form inside and outside 
the tube are called surface waves, since they are mainly 
confined to the region near the boundary of the tube. 
See figure 5. Magnetoacoustic surface waves may also 
exist on a simple planar interface between two magnetized 
plasmas. Finally, we note that just as there are both slow 
and fast magnetoacoustic waves in a uniform medium, 
there are slow and fast tube waves, and these may be 
body or surface modes of the sausage, kink or fluting 
form. Moreover, the presence of the tube radius a in the 
dispersion relation means that, unlike magnetoacoustic 
waves in a uniform unbounded medium (equation (12)), 
the phase speed c (=w/k,) of a tube wave depends on its 
wavelength (27/k,): tube waves are dispersive. 

Two speeds prove to be of special significance in 
magnetic flux tubes: the slow speed c of the tube and 
a mean Alfvén speed c,, defined by 


Po VA + Pe Vie (27) 


Pies 
CK 
Po + Pe 


The speeds c and cy, are important in both isolated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamic Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and magnetically embedded (photospheric and coronal) 
tubes. The speed c, is called the kink speed, and it 
is the speed with which the kink mode of oscillation 
propagates for waves that are much longer than a tube 
radius (k,a < 1). The speed c, is associated with both slow 
body and slow surface waves. The slow surface wave is of 
particular interest in isolated flux tubes. We may illustrate 
these speeds for a strongly magnetized plasma and for a 
photospheric flux tube. In a strongly magnetized plasma 
suchas the solar corona (for which Alfvén speeds are much 
larger than sound speeds), the slow speed is close to the 
sound speed inside the tube. For a high-density (9) >> pe) 
strongly magnetized plasma (with By ~ B,) the kink speed 
is V2v,, and so is some 40% higher than the tube’s Alfvén 
speed. By contrast, in a photospheric tube with py © p./2 
and va © Cg, the tube speed c, is about va / /2 and the kink 
speed c, is about vu, / 73, so both speeds are well below the 
Alfvén speed. 


Ducted waves 

For a strongly magnetized plasma the dispersion 
relation (26) possesses two sets of modes, namely fast and 
slow body waves. There are no surface (ni < 0) waves. 
Both sets of modes are dispersive, with the fast waves 
being strongly dispersive. An interesting aspect of these 
waves is that the fast body waves occur only if vac > va. 
Thus fast body waves occur in regions of low Alfvén speed 
which typically correspond to regions of high plasma 
density; this is the usual circumstance in coronal loops. 
Regions of low Alfvén speed in strongly magnetized 
plasmas provide wave guides for fast magnetoacoustic 
waves. It is interesting to report that fast kink mode 
oscillations in coronal loops have been identified by the 
TRACE spacecraft. 

There are close analogies here between the behavior 
of fast magnetoacoustic body modes in a strongly 
magnetized plasma and Love waves in the Earth’s crust 
and Pekeris sound waves in an internal ocean layer; 
consequently, fast sausage waves are sometimes referred 
to as magnetic Pekeris waves and fast kink waves as 
magnetic Love waves. The distinctive dispersive wave 
signature they produce when impulsively excited has 
received interest because of its possible importance in the 
interpretation of oscillations detected in the corona at radio 
wavelengths. In particular, an impulsively generated fast 
body wave produces a signature which consists of three 
parts: a low-amplitude periodic phase, followed by a 
larger amplitude quasi-periodic phase, and finally a decay 
phase. The shortest timescales in the motions are those in 
the quasi-periodic phase. An estimate of the timescale t 
in the periodic phase is provided by 

20a 
T= 
JOVA 
where jo (=2.40) denotes the first zero of the Bessel 
function Jo. For a tube of radius a = 10° km and Alfvén 
speed va = 10° km s7! this produces a timescale of 
about 1 s. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Nonlinear waves 

Magnetohydrodynamic waves may become nonlinear, 
having amplitudes that are too large to permit a linear 
treatment. Many of the MHD waves detected in the 
solar wind and waves generated by a solar flare—and 
seen to rapidly propagate out across the solar disk—are 
nonlinear. Alfvén waves provide an exact solution of 
the nonlinear MHD equations. Nonlinearity frequently 
leads to wave amplitude growth and steepening, just as 
an ocean wave undergoes such changes on approaching 
the shore line. Shock waves are nonlinear waves with 
profiles that are particularly sharp—discontinuities in the 
ideal case—and across which dissipative processes act to 
balance nonlinearity. Conservation relations (total energy, 
mass, momentum, etc) determine the character of the 
shock wave. In keeping with the existence of both slow 
and fast magnetoacoustic waves, both slow shocks and fast 
shocks may occur. Slow shocks may arise in photospheric 
flux tubes and in the solar wind, and are also invoked in 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION theories; fast shocks would seem 
to be implicated in observed blast waves generated by a 
solar flare. When dispersive effects are important, as in 
magnetic flux tubes, solitons may occur; solitons are waves 
that propagate nonlinearly preserving their basic shape, 
even after interactions with other nonlinear waves, and 
achieving a balance between nonlinearity and dispersion. 
There are theoretical grounds for believing that solitons 
may occur in the Sun (see, for example, SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC 
MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES: THEORY). 


Bibliography 

Goedbloed J P 1983 Lecture Notes in Magnetohydrodynamics 
(Rijnhuizen Report 83-145) (Assoc. Euratom—FOM) 
pp 289 

Goossens M 1991 MHD Waves and wave heating 
in nonuniform plasmas Advances in Solar System 
Magnetohydrodynamics ed E R Priest and A W Hood 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 137 

Roberts B 1991 Magnetohydrodynamic waves in the 
Sun Advances in Solar System Magnetohydrodynamics 
ed ER Priest and AW Hood (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) p 105 

Roberts B 1992 Magnetohydrodynamic waves in struc- 
tured magnetic fields Sunspots: Theory and Obser- 
vations ed J H Thomas and N O Weiss (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) p 303 

Tu C-Y and Marsch E 1995 MHD Structures, Waves and 
Turbulence in the Solar Wind (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
pp 210 

Wright A N 1994 MHD theory of magnetic pulsations 
Physical Signatures of Magnetospheric Boundary Layer 
Processes ed J A Holtet and A Egeland (Norwell: 
Kluwer) p 329 


B Roberts 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


Magnetohydrodynamics (or MHD for short) is the study 
of the interaction between a magnetic field and a plasma 
treated as a continuous medium (e.g. Cowling 1957, 
Roberts 1967, Priest 1982, 1994). Most of the universe is not 
a normal gas but is instead a plasma. We are all familiar 
on Earth with the three states of matter (solid, liquid and 
gas). You change from one state to another (such as ice 
to water) by heating, and if you raise the temperature of 
gas sufficiently it changes to the fourth state of matter, 
namely plasma. In the plasma state the atoms have split 
into positive ions and negative electrons, which can flow 
around freely, so the gas becomes electrically conducting 
and a current can flow. (MHD can also be used to describe 
the behavior of an electrically conducting liquid.) 

Many dynamical processes in the universe are caused 
by the subtle nonlinear relationship between a magnetic 
field and a plasma. In a normal gas such as the air we 
breathe, there is virtually no interaction with a magnetic 
field. But in a plasma the extremely close coupling with 
the magnetic field means that whatever the plasma is 
doing intimately affects the magnetic field and vice versa. 
Indeed, on Earth we are in an extremely unusual part of the 
cosmos, a tiny island of solid, liquid and gas. But, as soon 
as we go up to the ionosphere, the plasma universe begins, 
including the region between Earth and Sun, the whole of 
the Sun itself, as well as the interstellar and intergalactic 
media and the stars and galaxies contained in them. 

In MHD we are not concerned with individual 
particles but treat the plasma as a continuous medium. 
It builds partly on electromagnetism and partly on fluid 
mechanics. The assumption of a continuous medium is 
valid for length-scales much larger than the mean-free path 
for particle collisions 


2: -1 
T n 
‘ae 00( z) (a =) ae 


which is typically 3 cm in the solar chromosphere and 
30 km in the solar corona. 
The magnetic field has several physical effects: 


(a) It exerts a force, which may accelerate plasma or 
create structure. 

(b) It stores energy, which may later be released as, for 
example, a solar eruption or a solar flare. 

(c) It acts as a thermal blanket, which, when wrapped 
around a cool solar prominence, say, may protect it 
from the surrounding corona. 

(d) It channels fast particles and plasma. 

(e) It drives instabilities and supports waves. 


MHD is important in a wide variety of cosmic 
phenomena. The different aspects of MHD are described 
in the articles that follow and the applications are 
discussed in many of the articles throughout the 
encyclopedia, notably in those about the Sun, where 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a FE 
Figure 1. Segment of a magnetic flux tube. 
8 & & 


MHD phenomena are widespread. In this introductory 
article, we first describe a magnetic flux tube and then 
introduce the fundamental equations. Particular attention 
is given to the induction equation and the Lorentz force 
with which a magnetic field acts on a plasma. Then we 
describe the force balance of a plasma at rest, known 
as magnetohydrostatics, and mention briefly the possible 
wave modes and instabilities. 


Magnetic flux tubes 
Amagnetic field line is a curve such that the tangent at any 
point is in the direction of the magnetic field. Its equation, 
for a two-dimensional magnetic field having components 
(B,, By), is 

dy By 

dx B, 
or dx/B, = dy/B, = dz/B, in three dimensions. 

A magnetic flux tube is the surface generated by 
the set of magnetic field lines which intersect a simple 
closed curve. Flux tubes are the building blocks of a 
magnetic configuration, but they must not be thought of 
as independent isolated structures. 

The strength (F) of a flux tube is the amount of 
magnetic flux crossing a section (S), i.e. 


r= [B-ads. 


Consider a finite segment of a flux tube bounded 
by plane sections S; and S) (figure 1). There is no flux 
across the walls of the tube, and so physically, if no flux 
is created inside the tube, the flux (F,) entering through 
section S; equals the flux (F2) leaving through section S$. 
In other words, the strength (F) is constant along the tube. 
Mathematically, integrating over the whole surface (Sy) 
of the segment of the tube between S; and S) gives, since 
B. dS vanishes on the curved part 


B-dS= B-dS+ 


Sy Sy Sy 


B-dS=—-F,+ Fy 


where F; is the flux from left to right and, on Sy, dS is in 
the direction of the outwards normal. However, the Gauss 
divergence theorem gives 


B-ds= | v-Bdv =0 
Sy Vv 


since V - B = 0. Thus F, = F) as required, and therefore 
V - B = 0 implies that no flux is indeed created and the 
strength is constant along the flux tube. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Field lines for the magnetic field (B,, By) = (y, x). 


If the cross-sectional area (A) of a flux tube is small, 
then F ~ BA. Thus, as the magnetic field lines become 
closer together, so A becomes smaller and, since F is 
constant, B increases in value, and vice versa. 

When sketching field lines from expressions for the 
field components there are three stages: 


(a) Evaluate the expressions for the field lines and sketch 
a typical one. 

(b) Decide the directions of the arrows. 

(c) Decide the spacings of other field lines. 


Thus, for example, if B, = y and B, = x, the field 
lines are given by dy/dx = x/y or y? — x? = constant. 
When the constant is zero we obtain the two field lines 
(y = +x) through the origin (called separatrices); when 
the constant is positive (negative) we have branches of 
a rectangular hyperbola intersecting the y-axis (x-axis). 
From the orientations of the axes in figure 2 we have 
decided that the positive directions are to the right and 
upward; thus, for instance, on the positive x-axis the field 
is simply B, = x, which is positive and so the arrow is 
directed upwards. Also, as one moves out along the x-axis 
the magnitude of the field increases and so the field lines 
become more closely spaced. The origin is a special point, 
an X-type neutral point, where the field vanishes and the 
topology of nearby magnetic field lines is hyperbolic; it 
represents a weak spot in a configuration where magnetic 
energy tends to be released after the formation of a current 
sheet. 


Fundamental equations 

The MHD equations are a unification of the equations of 
slow electromagnetism and fluid mechanics. Maxwell’s 
equations are 


dD 
0B 
Ve Se V-D=p, (2) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where B = wH,D = cE and j and p, are the 
electric current and charge densities present in the plasma. 
(Sometimes a subscript 0 is placed on y and €.) 

Here H is the magnetic field, B is the magnetic induction 
(although we shall loosely refer to it as the magnetic field), 
pt the magnetic permeability of free space, E the electric field, 
D the electric displacement, € the permittivity of free space, 
pc the charge density, j the electric current density. These are 
supplemented by Ohm’s law 


E=j/o (3) 


where o is the electrical conductivity. 
The equations of fluid mechanics for a perfect gas, on 
the other hand, are 


du 


—=-V 4 
Pa P (4a) 
© + pV-v=0 (4b) 

p=RpT (Ac) 


and an energy equation (see below), where p is the plasma 
density (the mass per unit volume), uv the plasma velocity, p 
the plasma pressure, T the temperature, R the gas constant. 
The operator d/dt = 0/dt + v- V is the total (or material) 
derivative and represents the time rate of change moving 
with an element of plasma, in contrast to 0/dt which 
represents the time rate of change at a fixed point of space. 

Equation (4a) is the equation of motion, which says 
that the mass times acceleration of a moving element of 
plasma equals the sum of the forces acting on the element. 
Here we have included just the pressure gradient (— Vp). 
Equation (4b) is the equation of mass continuity and is simply 
a mathematical expression of the physical fact that no 
plasma is being created or destroyed: thus, if for example 
mass is flowing outwards away from an element (so that 
the flow is ‘diverging’ and the divergence V - v is positive), 
then the density of the element must be decreasing so 
that from (4b) do/dt must be negative. Equation (4c) is 
the perfect gas law, stating that the pressure of a plasma is 
proportional to its density and temperature. In principle 
(4a) determines the velocity v, (4b) the density p, while 
(4c) and an energy equation determine the pressure p and 
temperature T. 

The (internal) energy equation may be written 


d 
p+ pV -v=V-(n-VI)—Q, +9, 


where 
Pp 


e= ——_ 
(y—-De 
is the internal energy density, « is the thermal conductivity 


tensor, Q, is the heating by viscous dissipation, Q, is the 
radiative energy loss and y is the ratio of specific heats. In 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


many astrophysical and solar applications the (optically 
thin) radiative loss term can be expressed as 


Q, = p’ Q(T) 


where Q(T) is a function describing the temperature 
variation of the radiative loss. 

In a neutral gas the electromagnetic (1)-(3) and 
fluid dynamic (4) equations are decoupled and so the 
electromagnetic and fluid properties are independent. 
However, in MHD we modify the above equations in four 
ways: 


(a) A plasma feels an extra force, the so-called Lorentz 
force (j x B), which is added on to the right-hand 
side of (4a). It is this term which couples the fluid 
equations to the electromagnetic equations. It is well 
known that an element dl of wire carrying a current J 
ina magnetic field feels a force J dl x B perpendicular 
to the wire and to the field, and so it is natural that a 
plasma element of volume dV carrying a current of 
density j per unit volume should feel a force 7 dV x B. 

(b) The presence of the electric current adds an ohmic 
heating term (j”/o) to the energy equation. 

(c) Ohm’s law states that the electric field in a frame 
moving with the plasma is proportional to the 
current, but the total electric field on moving plasma 
is E+v x B, where E is the field seen in a frame 
where the observer is at rest, so (3) is modified by 
adding v x B to the left-hand side. This too couples 
the electromagnetic equations to the fluid equations. 

(d) We consider processes with plasma and wave speeds 
much slower than the speed of light (v < c), so that 
the displacement current (0.D/dt) in (1) is negligible. 
This in turn means that we don’t need to consider 
V-D= p, since it just determines p, if needed. 


There are at least a dozen different approximations 
that are commonly used for the MHD system of equations. 
Some of the more well-known ones are: incompressibility 
(when p is constant following the motion or V - v = 0), 
which requires that the flow speed be much smaller than 
the sound speed and Alfvén speed; a steady state (0/dt = 0 
for all variables); the Boussinesq approximation (filtering 
out sound waves by including density variations only 
in the gravitational term in the equation of motion); an 
isothermal state (when T = constant); an ideal MHD state 
(when 7 = v = 0, R, = R. = ©, see below); an 
inviscid state (when the viscous effects are negligible); 
an irrotational (potential) flow (when the vorticity, V x 
v, vanishes); an isentropic state (when the entropy is 
constant); a force-free field (j x B = 0); a potential 
magnetic field (j = 0); a strong magnetic field (8 « 1); 
a weak magnetic field (8 >> 1, where f is defined by 
equation (15) below); a supersonic flow regime (plasma 
velocity larger than sound speed); a subsonic flow regime 
(velocity smaller than sound speed). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Validity of MHD in collisionless plasmas 

Many cosmic plasmas are collisionless, where the mean 
free-path for binary collisions between particles is much 
greater than the characteristic length-scale of the system. 
MHD ignores particle interactions, and so the reader may 
at first think that it is of little use in collisionless plasmas. 
In practice, however, MHD and its two-fluid variants often 
describe the behavior of collisionless plasmas surprisingly 
well. For instance, the solar wind beyond 10 solar radii 
is completely collisionless, but MHD models describe 
its global velocity, temperature and density quite well, 
including such time-dependent aspects as shock waves, 
stream interactions and turbulence. In principle, the 
appropriate theory for collisionless plasmas is kinetic 
plasma theory derived from Vlasov’s equation. However, 
due to its mathematical complexity, it is rarely used 
to construct a global model of the solar wind and is 
instead confined mainly to calculating effective transport 
coefficients and modeling localized effects such as shock 
structure. 

MHD has been successful in describing collisionless 
plasmas for several reasons. Firstly, conservation of 
mass, momentum and energy are principles common 
to both ideal MHD and collisionless systems. It is 
only when dissipation processes are considered that 
classical MHD becomes problematical. Secondly, ionized 
particles undergo a gyro-motion about the magnetic field 
which prevents them from traveling unimpeded in the 
direction perpendicular to the field. Thus, long-range 
interactions occur only along the field, while short-range 
interactions across the field may be described by MHD-like 
equations. Finally, many plasmas are perturbed by waves 
which interact with particle motion, even along the field, 
scattering them in all directions and so re-introducing 
some form of ‘effective’ collisionality. 

In ideal MHD the magnetic field is frozen to the 
plasma, but this is also a natural consequence of gyro- 
motion in a collisionless plasma whenever the E x B drift 
of the gyro-centers dominates all other drifts. Thus, if a 
collisionless plasma contains particles undergoing gyro- 
motion and the E x B drift dominates, it will obey the 
ideal MHD Ohm’s law. 

The MHD Lorentz force (j x B) is recovered in a 
collisionless plasma whenever the particle gyro-velocity 
is much smaller than the speed of light. When the Lorentz 
force on individual particles is added together it gives a 
net force per unit volume of 


F=p,.E+jxB 


where p, is the electric charge density. However, the ratio 
of the two terms on the right is 


2 
leE| [VY 
lj x Bl c 


which is much less than unity when the particle speed 
(V) is non-relativistic. In other words, p.E is usually 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


negligible compared with the (j x B) force for the low- 
energy particles. 

In a collisionless plasma, the most important new 
effect arises in the pressure and viscous terms in the 
momentum equation, since the gas pressure is generally 
anisotropic relative to the magnetic field. The plasma 
exerts a pressure (p;) along the field which is usually 
different from the pressure (p,) perpendicular to the field. 
Similarly, the viscous stress tensor is also anisotropic and 
dependent on the magnetic field. If p,; and p, can be 
expressed in terms of the local bulk properties of the 
plasma, then the MHD equations can still be applied by 
just adding the appropriate forms of the pressure and 
viscous stress tensors. 

In a collisionless plasma equation (6a) in the next 
section is replaced by the generalized Ohm’s law. For a 
fully ionized plasma it takes the form 


E=-vxB+L4 “(2 veiein) 4 aa 

o ne*\ dt ne ne 
where vj and jv are dyadic tensors and p, is the electron 
stress tensor. The first term on the left-hand side of this 
equation is the convective electric field, while the second 
term is the field associated with Ohmic dissipation caused 
by electron-ion collisions. The next three terms describe 
the effects of electron inertia, while the penultimate term is 
the Hall effect and the last term includes the electron gyro- 
viscosity. Fora partially ionized plasma, collisions between 
charged particles and neutrals lead also to ambipolar 
diffusion. 


Induction equation 
With the above assumptions, equations (1)—(3) become 


jJ=Vx B/u (5a) 
ae =-VxE (5b) 
ot 
E=-vx B+t+j/o (6a) 
where 
V-B=0 (6b) 


We may therefore eliminate j and E by substituting for 7 
from (5a) in (6a) and for E from (6a) in (5b), with the result 
that 9B/dt = Vx (vx B)—nV x (Vx B), where n = 1/(uo) 
is the magnetic diffusivity, here assumed uniform. By 
expanding out the triple vector product in the last term 
and using (6b), we obtain finally 


0B 
op VX @X B)+nV'B (7) 
which is known as the induction equation. 
This is the basic equation for the magnetic behavior 
in MHD: it determines B once v is known. In 
electromagnetism the electric current and electric field 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are primary variables, with the current driven by electric 
fields, and then the magnetic field is a secondary variable 
produced by currents. However, in MHD the basic 
physics is quite different, since the plasma velocity (v) and 
magnetic field (B) are the primary variables, determined 
by the induction equation and the equation of motion, 
while the resulting current (7) and electric field (FE) are 
secondary and may be deduced from (5a) and (6a) if 
required. 

If Vo, Lo are typical velocity and length-scale, the ratio 
of the first to the second term on the right-hand side of (7) 
is, in order of magnitude, the magnetic Reynolds number 


LoV. 
| eens 
n 


Thus, for example, in a solar active region where n ~ 
1m? s!, Ly © 10° m, Vo © 10* ms7! we find R,, ~ 10° 
and so the second term on the right of (7) is completely 
negligible. In turn, equation (6a) reduces to E = —v x B 
to a very high degree of approximation. This is the case 
in almost all of the solar atmosphere, indeed in almost all 
of the universe—the only exception is in regions (such as 
current sheets) where the length-scale is extremely small, 
so small that R,, < 1 and the second term on the right of 
(7) becomes important. 
If Rn « 1, the induction equation reduces to 


—=nV’B (8) 


and so B is governed by a diffusion equation, which 
implies that field variations (irregularities) on a scale Lo 
diffuse away on a time-scale of 


i 
[g-= 


which is obtained simply by equating the orders of 
magnitude of both sides of (8). The corresponding speed 
at which they diffuse is 


fos ee 
tT ee iy 


With 7 ~ 1m’ s“!, the decay time for a sunspot is 
(with Lo = 10° m) 10” sec = 30000 yr, so that the 
process whereby sunspots disappear in a few days cannot 
just be diffusion (and is probably instead decaying by 
the convection away from the spot of many small flux 
tubes). Similarly, the diffusion time for a magnetic field 
pervading the Sun as a whole (with Lo = 7 x 10° m) is 
5 x 10!” s = 10'° yr. This is of the order of the age of the 
universe, so a magnetic field in a star at its formation has 
not had time to diffuse much. 

Consider, for example, a one-dimensional magnetic 
field (B(x, t)y) satisfying 


dB so 2B 
=n (9) 


Or ax? 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The magnetic field (B) in a diffusing one-dimensional 
current sheet as a function of distance (x) for times t = 0, ft, fo. 


and suppose that initially the field is B(x,0) = Bo for 
x > 0 and B(—x,0) = —B(x,0), as shown in figure 3. 
Physically, what do we expect to happen? Since (9) has 
the form of a heat conduction equation and we know that 
heat tends to flow from a hot region to a cool one and 
smooth out a temperature gradient, we expect the same 
diffusive process to occur for our magnetic field and for 
the initially steep magnetic gradient at x = 0 to smooth 
out, as shown in figure 3. 

Mathematically, the required solution of (9) turns out 
to be, in terms of the error function (erf(&)) 


x 2Bo x//(Ant) = 

B(x, t)h= ner] le [ e du. 
This solution does indeed have the form shown in figure 3 
and it may be verified a posteriori by substituting back into 
(9). The resulting field lines diffuse through the plasma 
and cancel at x = 0. 

The main reason for variations in R,, from one 
phenomenon to another is variations in the appropriate 
length-scale (Lo). If R,, >> 1, the induction equation 


becomes 
0B 


—=V~x (vx B) 
ot 
and Ohm’s law reduces to E + v x B = 0 s0 that the 
total electric field in a frame of reference moving with the 
plasma vanishes. Then, if we consider a curve C (bounding 
a surface S) which is moving with the plasma, ina time dt 
an element ds of C sweeps out an element of area v dt x ds. 
The rate of change (d/dr { B- dS) of magnetic flux through 
C then consists of two parts, namely 


[ ase [Bev x as, 
s Ot c 


As C moves, so the flux changes partly because the 
magnetic field is changing with time (the first term) and 
partly because of the motion of the boundary (the second 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


—_—_> \ 
& | 
plasma 
motion —_ Cy 
— > 
ip) 


plasma 
motion 


— > 


Cy 
‘ 
ty 
a Py ‘K — >> 
/\ 
Po O*K 
Ee a 


(0) 


Figure 4. (a) Magnetic flux conservation—if a curve C is 
distorted into C2 by a plasma motion, the flux through C, at 
equals the flux through C2 at 2. (b) Magnetic field line 
conservation—if plasma elements P; and P) lie on a field line at 
t, then they will lie on the same line at fz. 


term). Then, by putting B-v x ds = —v x B-ds and 
applying Stokes’ theorem to the second term, we obtain 


d 0B 
¢ [ 2-as= [ (B-vxexm)-as 


which vanishes in the present approximation. 

Thus, the total magnetic flux through C remains 
constant as it moves with the plasma. In other words 
we have proved magnetic flux conservation (figure 4(a)). 
It follows that plasma elements that form a flux tube 
initially do so at all later times (figure 4(a)). There is 
also magnetic field line conservation (or conservation 
of magnetic connectivity), namely that, if two plasma 
elements lie on a field line initially they will always do 
so (figure 4(b)). At t = t1, say, suppose elements P; and P 
lie on a field line, which may be defined as the intersection 
of two flux tubes. Then, at some later time (t = f2) by 
magnetic flux conservation P; and P will still lie on both 
tubes, and so they will lie on the field line defined by 
their intersection. We interpret the above results by saying 
that the magnetic field lines move with the plasma—we 
say that they are frozen into the plasma—and plasma can 
move freely along field lines, but in motion perpendicular 
to them they are dragged with the plasma or vice versa. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Lorentz force 

One equation relating our fundamental variables v and 
B is the induction equation; the other is the equation of 
motion, whose most common form is 


du . 
pa PTE XB (10) 
although other forces such as viscous or gravitational 
may sometimes be important too. The term —V>p is the 
plasma pressure gradient: it acts from regions of high 
plasma pressure to low pressure and is perpendicular to 
the isobars (curves of constant pressure). 

The magnetic force (j x B) is perpendicular to the 
magnetic field, and so any plasma acceleration parallel to 
the magnetic field must be caused by other forces. By 
substituting for 7 from Ampére’s law (5a) and using an 
identity for the triple vector product, we can write it as 


jx B=(Vx B)x B/u=(B-V)——-V{— J. 
a 2u 


The two terms on the right-hand side have important 
physical interpretations. Since the second term has the 
same form as —V p, we can say that it represents the effect 
of a magnetic pressure of magnitude B?/(2y). It gives a force 
when B? varies with position, and the direction of the force 
is from regions of high magnetic pressure to low magnetic 
pressure. 

The first term represents the effect of a magnetic tension 
parallel to the magnetic field of magnitude B?/ per unit 
area. It gives a force when the field lines are curved, just 
like an elastic band or rope. By writing B = Bs in terms 
of the unit vector ($) along the magnetic field, the tension 
term ((B + V)B/j) may be written 


Bd (Bs) B? ds 
—— = 8 
pds uds wds 


BdB, Ben d/B, 
= t s 
MR ds \2u 


where 7 is the principal normal and R is the radius 
of curvature. The second term on the right of this 
equation is irrelevant, since it cancels with the component 
of —V(B?/2) parallel to B, as it must since j x B is 
perpendicular to B. However, the first term on the right 
is the magnetic tension term, which shows that when the 
radius of curvature is small the tension force is large. 

Thus, we have shown that the magnetic force has two 
distinct effects: the magnetic pressure tries to compress the 
plasma and produces a net force if B varies with position; 
the magnetic tension tends to make the field lines shorten 
themselves like elastic bands and gives a net force if the 
field lines are curved. 

As an example, consider the field with components 
B, = y, B, = x, with X-type field lines shown in figure 5(a). 
Ata point on the positive x-axis, the curvature of the field 
lines suggest a magnetic tension force to the right, while 
the fact that the magnetic pressure is increasing (like x”) 
away from the origin suggests a magnetic pressure force 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


y 
Magnetic 
Pressure 
Force 
— x 
Magnetic 
Tension 
Force 
(a) 
Magnetic 


Pressure Force 


Magnetic 
Tension Force 
(b) 


Figure 5. Magnetic forces due to the fields (2) B = y# + xy and 
(bt) B=ré. 


to the left. However, from the field lines alone, it is not 
evident which dominates. Now 


B ) C) yr XX, x. Y. 
(B-V)—=|y—+x gt+—y)=—-a+-y 
Le dx dyJ\ uw pb wo ph 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which becomes x%/ on the x-axis and so does indeed act 
away form the origin. Also, the magnetic pressure force is 


B2 2: 2 
Vv __yv xo+y 2 ve ae 
2u 2u im a 


which becomes —x#/j on the x-axis and so does act 
towards the origin. We find therefore that the tension and 
pressure forces are in precise balance, as they must be since 
the electric current is 


fal (= . a 5 
WN Ox dy 
and so the Lorentz force 7 x B vanishes everywhere. 
Also, consider next the field B = r6, for which the 
field lines are the circles r = constant, becoming more 
closely spaced as one moves outwards (figure 5(b)). Thus, 


physically the magnetic tension and pressure forces are 
expected both to act inwards. Mathematically, we find the 


magnetic pressure force is 
r 2 r 
V = 
2u a 


o( =] 7 


which does indeed act inwards. Also, the magnetic tension 


B_ (Bj) 9\(B6\_ a (ré 
won (rin) e) Ge) 


and now r/ does not vary with 6 but 6 does! In fact 
06/00 = —f and so (B- V)B/u = —rf/p, which again 
acts inwards, as expected. 


» 


Magnetohydrostatics 
Consider the equation of motion when pressure, magnetic 
and gravitational forces are acting 


d 
p= =-Vp+ix B+pg (11) 
where 
J=VXx B/u. (12) 


If Lo, vo, Lo/vo are typical values for the length-scale, 
plasma velocity and time-scale respectively, the order of 
magnitude of the current from (12) is jo = Bo/uLo. Then, 
in terms of the typical density (9), pressure (po) and 
magnetic field (Bo), the sizes of each term in equation (11) 
are povp/Lo, Po/ Lo, Bo/uLo, Pog, respectively. 

Now, provided the magnetic term is of the same order 
as the largest force term, we have force balance if the first 
term is much smaller than the third, namely 

2 By _ > 
cs Lpo m4 
where v, is known as the Alfvén speed. Then (11) reduces 
to the equation for magnetohydrostatic force balance 


0=-Vp+jx Btpg (13) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where j = V x B/u, V- B=Oand p = p/(RT). 
In this equation, when gravity is negligible we have 
magnetostatic balance 


0=-Vp+jxB (14) 


if the fourth term in (11) is much smaller than the third, 
namely Lo « Bi/(upog) = 2H/f, where 


io els 


H = = 
Pos &§ 


is the pressure scale-height and 


Po 
B= (15) 
Bs/(2u) 
in the plasma beta, namely the ratio of plasma to magnetic 


pressure. 
In turn, in (14) the magnetic force dominates if26 < 1, 
and then (14) reduces further to the equation 


jxB=0 (16) 


for a FORCE-FREE MAGNETIC FIELD, in which the magnetic field 
is in equilibrium with itself under a balance between 
magnetic pressure and magnetic tension forces. 

Suppose now that gravity is directed vertically 
downwards in the negative z-direction (g = —gz). Then 
the component of (13) parallel to a particular magnetic field 
line is 0 = —dp/ds — pg cos6, where s is measured along 
the field, or, since ds cos 6 = dz, we have 0 = —dp/dz—pg. 
After putting p = p(RT)~' this becomes 


which may be integrated to give 


Zz 


&§ 
= poexp| — —_ dz 
P= Po P( RT 


where pp is the pressure at the base (z = 0) of the field 
line. If the variation (T (z)) of the temperature with height 
is known, this determines the pressure and therefore the 
density. 

If, in particular, the temperature is uniform (T = Tp) 
then 

pape 

so that the pressure (and density) decrease exponentially 
with height, with the scale-height H being the vertical 
distance over which the pressure falls off by a factor e. 

Down in the solar photosphere, where J) = 6000 K, 
the scale-height is about 150 km or less and so, over for 
instance a vertical distance of 1.5 Mm, the pressure and 
density would fall off by a factor of e!? ~ 20000. By 
contrast, in the solar corona where Ty = 2 x 10° K, say, 
the scale-height is about 100 Mm, and so the density falls 
off much more slowly. Indeed, for many purposes, in the 
corona we can neglect the effect of gravity, i.e. when the 
vertical scales of interest are 100 Mm or less. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Potential fields 

If the pressure gradient and gravitational force are 
negligible, (16) holds and a particular case of interest is 
when the current vanishes, so that 


Vx B=0 (17) 


where 
V-B=0. (18) 


Equation (17) may be satisfied identically by putting B = 
Vy and then (18) gives Laplace’s equation 


Vey =0. 


Thus, many of the general results of potential theory may 
be applied and the magnetic field is said to be current-free 
or potential. 


Magnetic reconnection 

MAGNETIC RECONNECTION is a fundamental process in a 
plasma, whereby the magnetic connectivity of plasma 
elements changes and magnetic energy is converted into 
other forms such as heat, kinetic energy and fast-particle 
energy. It involves a localized breakdown of ideal MHD 
in a small region due to, for example, resistive effects. It is 
responsible for many dynamic processes in the universe, 
such as SOLAR FLARES and GEOMAGNETIC STORMs and probably 
solar coronal heating (See CORONAL HEATING MECHANISMS). 


Magnetic helicity 
For a perfectly conducting plasma in a closed volume (V), 
the MAGNETIC HELICITY is 


k= | a-Bav 
Vv 


where B = V x A, and the state of minimum energy for 
fixed K is a linear force-free field. K is a measure of the 
sum of the twist and the linkage of flux tubes. Thus, for 
two linked tubes 


K = @,F7 + @.F3 +2LF,/ 


where ©, and ©, are the twists of the two tubes F), F> their 
magnetic fluxes and L the linking number. Reconnection 
can convert linkage helicity to twist helicity, but it produces 
only a small change in the total helicity in a plasma of large 
global magnetic Reynolds number. 


Magnetohydrodynamic waves and shock waves 
In a gas there are sound waves which propagate equally 
in all directions at the sound speed 


1/2 
. Y Po 
Cc; = | — : 
Po 
In a plasma there are also waves, but they are of several 


types. Waves are very important in the solar atmosphere 
and throughout the cosmos. For example, they may be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


seen propagating out of sunspots or away from large solar 
flares. They are also a prime candidate for heating the solar 
atmosphere. 

In MHD there is an incompressible mode known as 
the Alfvén wave, which propagates at the Alfvén speed 
along the magnetic field. Also, there are two compressible 
modes known as slow and fast magnetoacoustic waves, 
which propagate slower and faster respectively than the 
Alfvén speed. These MHD waves have propagation 
characteristics that depend on the direction of propagation 
relative to the magnetic field. 

Small-amplitude sound waves propagate without 
change of shape, but when the amplitude is finite the crest 
can move faster than its trough, causing a progressive 
steepening. Ultimately, the gradients become so large 
that dissipation becomes important, and a steady shock 
wave shape may be attained with a balance between the 
steepening effect of the nonlinear convective term and the 
broadening effect of dissipation. The dissipation inside 
the shock front converts the energy being carried by the 
wave gradually into heat. The effect of the passage of the 
shock is to compress and heat the gas. 

In MHD the slow magnetoacoustic wave can steepen 
to form a slow-mode shock and the fast wave to form a 
fast-mode shock. 


Magnetohydrodynamic instabilities 

Equilibrium magnetic fields in the universe can go 
sometimes unstable to a wide variety of instabilities. 
Sometimes the effect is to create fine-scale structure and at 
other times it is to produce dynamic events such as solar 
flares and dramatic eruptions from the Sun called soLaR 
CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS. The two main ways of analysing 
stability are by investigating the natural (or normal) modes 
of variation or by an energy (or variational) method. 

The instabilities that commonly occur include: the 
Rayleigh-Taylor instability, when heavy fluid is supported 
above light fluid; kink instability or sausage instability of 
a magnetic flux tube when its twist is too large; resistive 
instability such as the tearing-mode instability of a current 
sheet or a sheared structure; convective instability of a 
plasma that is heated sufficiently from below; and flow 
instabilities that occur when the shear in a flow is too great 
(such as the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability and in accretion 
discs the Balbus—Hawley instability). 


Conclusion 
It is important to recognize that magnetohydrodynamics 
builds on the tools of both fluid dynamics and 
electromagnetism, but it possesses many new features that 
are present in neither. Furthermore, it is advisable to 
build both a physical and mathematical understanding of 
magnetic field behavior, since they both complement one 
another and together give a deeper understanding than 
either alone. 

In the following articles, various aspects and 
applications of MHD theory are developed in detail. In 
a companion article, Parker describes the key physical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


processes involved in LARGE-SCALE PLASMA DYNAMICS. Then 
basic DYNAMO THEORY for the generation and maintenance 
of cosmical magnetic fields is developed by Moffatt and 
in particular for the GEODYNAMO by Proctor and for solar 
and stellar dynamos by Rosner. Then several important 
aspects of MHD theory are described, including ForRCE- 
FREE MAGNETIC FIELDS (Low), MAGNETIC HELICITY (Berger) and 
MHD WAVES (Roberts). The theory for MHD INSTABILITIES is 
set up by Hood and applied in particular to MAGNETIC 
BUOYANCY by Hughes and to MHD: MAGNETOCONVECTION by 
Cattaneo. The key process of MAGNETIC RECONNECTION 
is reviewed by Schindler and Hérnig and its role in 
MHD: MAGNETIC RECONNECTION AND TURBULENCE is described 
by Matthaeus. Finally, two astrophysical environments 
where MHD plays a crucial role are discussed, namely 
the MHD OF ACCRETION DIsks by Brandenburg and the MHD OF 
ASTROPHYSICAL WINDS by Heyvaerts. 


Acknowledgments 

We are most grateful to colleagues in St Andrews and 
Durham and to Jean Heyvaerts and Karl Schindler for 
helpful comments. 


Bibliography 

Cowling T G 1957 Magnetohydrodynamics (New York: 
Interscience) 

Priest E R 1982 Solar Magnetohydrodynamics (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) 

Priest E R 1994 Magnetohydrodynamics Plasma Astro- 
physics ed J G Kirk, DB Melrose and E R Priest (Berlin: 
Springer) pp 1-112 

Priest E R and Forbes T G 2000 Magnetic Reconnection: 
MHD Theory and Applications (Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press) 

Roberts P H 1967 An Introduction to Magnetohydrodynamics 
(London: Longman) 


Eric R Priest and Terry G Forbes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Accretion 
Disks 


An ACCRETION DISK is a flat formation of gas and dust 
rotating about a central object and accreting matter 
inwards by transporting angular momentum outwards, 
so that the centrifugal support is gradually removed 
from the fluid parcels. There are three main classes 
of accretion disks: (i) disks around accreting compact 
stars (white dwarfs, neutron stars or black holes) in 
binary systems, (ii) disks around protostars and (iii) disks 
around active galactic nuclei. In several cases the 
existence of disks has been verified observationally with 
the Hubble Space Telescope. Images can be found 
at http://wwwsstsci.edu/pubinfo/pictures.html. An 
example of an image of a disk around a young stellar object 
together with an associated jet is given in figure 1. 
Accretion disks form because matter generally has 
angular momentum and therefore cannot fall directly onto 
the central object. In the disk midplane the gravitational 
acceleration, GM/R*, at distance R from the central 
object of mass M is balanced mainly by the centrifugal 
acceleration, Q7R. Here G is the gravitational constant 
and Q is the angular velocity. Except in a few systems 
the disk mass is negligible and so this balance leads to the 
rotation law 
Q(R) = (GM/R*)'? (1) 


which is essentially Kepler’s third law. In the vertical 
direction, ie. parallel to the rotation axis, gravity is 
balanced by a pressure gradient, so that the mass is 
concentrated towards the midplane. There is usually some 
energy dissipation caused by turbulence and magnetic 
fields. The heat released during this process can be 
radiated away at the two disk surfaces. The corresponding 
removal of rotational energy causes matter gradually to 
spiral towards the central object. Large-scale fields and 
winds from the disk surfaces can also remove angular 
momentum from the disk, and would thus contribute to 
the accretion mechanism directly. 

Accretion disks around young stellar objects are only 
transient phenomena because they provide essentially just 
a waiting queue for matter before it can fall onto the central 
object. The disk will disappear once all the available 
material has been consumed, which could be after about 
10” yr in the case of protostellar disks. 


Energy conversion in disks 

The kinetic and potential energy of accreted matter in 
the disk is constantly being converted into heat and 
then radiation by dissipative processes. In disks around 
neutron stars or white dwarfs the luminosity of the disk 
can by far exceed the luminosity of the central object. The 
total orbital energy per unit mass is $(RQ)? —GM/R= 
- 5 GM/R. The mass accretion rate M is controlled by the 
rate of dissipation, giving a disk luminosity of 


_ GMM 


L= Ta (2) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


disc, hidden by dust 


gaseous extensions 


y <<“ scattering light 


one 


1000 AU 


Figure 1. Image of a disk around a young stellar object together 
with a jet emanating from the disk center along the rotation axis. 
The length of the horizontal bar is 1.5 x 10! km. (Adapted from 
Burrows et al (1996).) 


This formula is essentially independent of the efficiency of 
the mechanism that accomplishes the energy conversion. 
If the central object is a white dwarf or a neutron star there 
will be a boundary layer at the star’s surface, where as 
much energy can be dissipated as in the disk itself. 

Equation (2) assumes that all the heat is radiated 
away instantaneously. In recent years it has been found 
that in some disks the luminosity is much lower, because 
significant amounts of energy can be advected radially 
towards the center. If the central object is a black hole 
the advected energy may never appear as radiation. 

In the case of a black hole at the center the disk 
can extend down to three Schwarzschild radii, i.e. rmin = 
6GM_/c’, or less in the case of rotating black holes (c is the 
speed of light). The energy that is released by an accreted 
mass m is iGM m/Tmin. Using for rmin the expression 
above, this becomes nmc*, where n © 0.1 is an efficiency 
factor relative to the maximum possible value permitted 
by Einstein’s famous formula E = mc*. Note that the 
efficiency of hydrogen fusion in stars is only n = 0.007. For 
this reason the rate of energy release by accretion, nM, 
of a disk around a supermassive black hole of 108 solar 
masses with M of a few solar masses per year can be as 
large as 10*° W. This is believed to be the mechanism that 
powers quasars. 


The role of magnetic fields 

In the absence of turbulence a purely laminar shear motion 
would be totally insufficient to explain the dissipation 
and corresponding heat release of real disks. Thus, 
turbulence is necessary to produce small enough scales 
where microscopic viscosity and ohmic diffusion can act 
to dissipate kinetic and magnetic energy into heat. 

It has been a long-standing debate as to what causes 
turbulence in disks. In the absence of magnetic fields 
differentially rotating disks are unstable when the specific 
angular momentum, QR?, increases inwards (Rayleigh’s 
criterion). Indeed, purely hydrodynamic mechanisms 
such as (nonlinear) instabilities and convection have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


proved unsuccessful so far. Numerical work and 
theoretical arguments indicate that nonlinear instabilities 
do not operate in astrophysical disks and that convection 
produces accretion torques that are probably even of the 
wrong sign; furthermore, this process would not be self- 
sustained. For a comprehensive review of those issues 
see Balbus and Hawley (1998). The issue of purely 
hydrodynamical instabilities is not fully settled, however, 
because this would require direct simulations at Reynolds 
numbers of at least 10 000, which cannot be achieved with 
present computers. 

In the presence of magnetic fields, however, there 
is a powerful linear instability, the magneto-rotational 
instability, which prevents the gas flow in the disk from 
being laminar. In 1991 Balbus and Hawley pointed out its 
importance in driving turbulence in accretion disks. Their 
papers have spawned a lot of work attempting to quantify 
the properties of the resulting turbulence and the related 
angular momentum transport. The magneto-rotational (or 
Balbus—Hawley) instability is a consequence of the shear, 
which causes a destabilization of the slow magnetosonic 
waves. The instability exists regardless of the orientation 
of the magnetic field. In the special case of a magnetic field 
parallel to the rotation axis the instability is axisymmetric. 

In the absence of magnetic fields, or when the 
electrical conductivity is too low to make the magnetic 
field important, the disk would be purely hydrodynamic, 
in which case rotation would have a strongly stabilizing 
effect. Still, variation of the angular velocity in the 
vertical direction would lead to a linear hydrodynamic 
instability, but its growth rate is much smaller than that 
of the magneto-rotational instability. The vertical shear 
instability could be important if the conductivity is low. 


The magneto-rotational instability 

The magneto-rotational instability exists already in an 
incompressible, unstratified fluid that is differentially 
rotating provided that the shear parameter 


qg=-dInQ/dInR (3) 


is positive. For thin accretion disks we have q = +3/2; see 
equation (1). In that case the dispersion relation is 


wo — w (24k? +27) + ARP (VAR? — 37) =0 (4) 


where va = B/(uop)'/? is the Alfvén speed, B is the 
vertical field strength, p is the unperturbed density, uo is 
the permeability, k is the wavenumber along the magnetic 
field and w is the frequency. There are two solutions for 
w”, an upper branch corresponding to Alfvén waves and a 
lower branch corresponding to slow magnetosonic waves. 
The fast magnetosonic waves have been filtered out by the 
assumption of incompressibility. On the lower branch wo 
becomes negative when 


va < V3Q/k. (5) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


6 1 1 
5 3 
4 4 
cS 3 Alfven E 
Se waves j 
a 2 3 
1 Slow magnetosonic : 


Figure 2. Dispersion relation for slow magnetosonic and Alfvén 
waves in an incompressible medium. For Alfvén waves @” is 
always positive. However, for not too large values of k the slow 
magnetosonic waves become unstable when v3 k? < 392,50 

w* <0, that is w is imaginary. 


In that case w is purely imaginary and small perturbations 
grow exponentially with a maximum growth rate 


max(Im w) = 3Q (6) 
at scale € = 27/Kmax, Where 
Kmax © Q/va. (7) 


It is clear from equation (5) that the instability works only 
if the field is not too strong. The largest possible field 
strength depends on the smallest admissible k, i.e. the 
largest scale available to the system. One such scale would 
be the disk height. 

The disk is formally unstable even in the limit of 
vanishing magnetic field strength, va — 0. However, 
maximum growth would then occur for perturbations 
whose scale would become progressively smaller, as given 
by equation (7). At larger scales the growth of the 
instability would be so slow that viscous effects would 
render the instability irrelevant for driving hydromagnetic 
turbulence. 

In figure 2 we have plotted the two branches of the 
dispersion relation, equation (4), corresponding to slow 
magnetosonic and Alfvén waves. There are also the 
fast magnetosonic waves that result if the assumption of 
incompressibility is relaxed (see Balbus and Hawley 1998). 
However, when the sound speed c, is much larger than 
va, the two lower branches are nearly independent of the 
neglect of the fast magnetosonic branch. 

There is a mechanical analogue to the magneto- 
rotational instability, which can be helpful in understand- 
ing the nature of the instability. The following example 
applies to the nonaxisymmetric case that is relevant in the 
presence of a toroidal magnetic field. Consider two par- 
ticles, A and B, on a gravitationally bound orbit around 
a central object (figure 3). Assume that the two parti- 
cles have the same distance from the central object but 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


restoring force 


acceleration brings 
A’ to an outer orbit 


outer orbit is slower 
-> further departure 


Figure 3. Mechanical analogue of the magneto-rotational 
instability. 


are separated azimuthally by a small amount. Interesting 
behavior occurs when the two particles are coupled elas- 
tically. Assume that the particle at position A is perturbed 
to position A’. The separation between the two particles 
is then increased and there is a restoring force trying to 
return the particle to its original position. This accelerates 
the particle from A’ back towards A. However, this leads 
to a gain in its angular momentum which then forces the 
particle onto an outer orbit. There, however, the orbital 
speed is slower, see equation (1), so the particle will sep- 
arate from its original position A even further. This is the 
cause of an instability. 

There are some parallels with the phenomenon of 
tidal disruption of a star passing near a black hole. In that 
example the restoring force is the gravitational attraction 
that holds the star together. In the case of the magneto- 
rotational instability the restoring force is the magnetic 
tension force. If the field is too strong, however, the 
fluid parcels stay in their original position, suppressing 
the instability. 

If the conductivity in the disk is poor, there will be 
significant slippage between the field and the fluid. The 
magneto-rotational instability ceases when the collision 
frequency of neutral atoms with ions becomes less than 
the rotational frequency. This can happen in some parts of 
protostellar disks which have temperatures below 1000 K. 
At those temperatures the degree of ionization is very low 
and the fraction of charge carriers can be as small as 10-7°. 
In the protosolar nebula, out of which the solar system was 
formed, this may have been the case in a broad ring near 
the Earth’s orbit. 


Intrinsic magnetism of disks 

It has long been suspected and now been confirmed by 
local simulations of rotating shear flow that the resulting 
turbulence is capable of maintaining the field by DYNAMo 
action. (See Schramkowski and Torkelsson (1996) for a 
review.) Dynamo action is a process by which kinetic 
energy can be converted into magnetic energy. In disks the 
energy comes from the kinetic energy in the shear. Most 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ohmic heat viscous heat 


instabilities 


magnetic 
field 


keplerian 


shear 


Figure 4. The energy in the Keplerian shear motion is converted 
into thermal energy via ohmic and viscous heating. Magnetic 
fields are needed as a catalyst to keep the system turbulent. 


of it goes into the magnetic field which, in turn, keeps the 
instability going, thereby feeding the turbulence. All the 
energy that is removed from the shear is constantly being 
dissipated (see figure 4). In that sense the magnetic field 
acts effectively like a catalyst that enables kinetic energy to 
be tapped from the shear motion and then to be released 
as heat and radiation via viscous and ohmic heating. 

The magnetic fields can contribute directly to exerting 
a torque that leads to an accretion flow and to angular 
momentum transport outwards. Any radial field 
component, Br, will be sheared out by the differential 
rotation. This enhances the azimuthal field component, 
By. The resulting torque, which is proportional to the 
product Br By, is such that there is an inward mass flow in 
the disk and an outward transport of angular momentum. 
If the field was perfectly frozen into the gas (no magnetic 
diffusion) the field lines would eventually be parallel to 
the flow and would have no effect. 

The strength of the dynamo-supported magnetic field 
is limited by various nonlinear feedbacks. On the one 
hand, when the field is too strong the magneto-rotational 
instability is suppressed, see equation (5), but there are 
other mechanisms, such as magnetic buoyancy, which can 
also limit the field strength. 

A nondimensional measure for the total stress is 


a = (puguy — BrBg/to)/(P) (8) 


which is found from numerical simulations to be typically 
between 0.01 and 0.1. Here, u is the velocity, and p is the 
pressure. The precise value of « depends on the magnetic 
field strength, which may vary with time. Furthermore, 
since the gas pressure drops faster with height than the 
magnetic field, « can increase away from the midplane; 
see equation (8). However, there are at present no global 
simulations that include the region far outside the disk, 
where the field must eventually fall off. 

Knowing the value of @ the radial disk structure can 
be calculated in closed form, by neglecting the vertical disk 
structure. In terms of the accretion rate M the vertically 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Accretion Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


integrated disk density, © = f p dz, is given as a function 
of radius by 


D © 20000 -3/°M75'°M,*R,°" kgm (9) 


where a_» = a/10-?, Mi3 = M/10'¥ kgs“!, M; is the central 
mass in solar masses and Rs = R/10° m (e.g. Campbell 
1997). 

The disk structure is not always steady. In fact, in 
some parameter regimes, for example where ionization 
and recombination become important, the disk can 
become viscously unstable and undergo limit cycle 
oscillations (CATACLYSMIC BINARIES). Similar phenomena are 
also known to occur in disks around young stars. In 
that case the steady solution would still be described by 
an equation similar to equation (9), but with different 
coefficient and exponents, because of the different 
radiative processes involved. 


External magnetic fields 

External magnetic fields are maintained by currents 
outside the disk, for example by currents in the central 
object (typically a neutron star or a white dwarf, but not 
a black hole), or in the environment in which the disk is 
embedded (molecular cloud or host galaxy). 

If the magnetic field comes from a star at the center, 
angular momentum can be transferred to the star from 
those parts of the disk whose local angular velocity exceeds 
the stellar angular velocity. This is the case inside the 
corotation radius, i.e. the radius where the angular velocity 
of the disk coincides with that of the star. If the part of 
the disk inside the corotation radius contains sufficient 
angular momentum, this process can lead to a noticeable 
spin-up of the central star itself. Otherwise, if the disk does 
notextend sufficiently far inside the corotation radius most 
of the field lines of the star couple with the slowly rotating 
outer parts of the disk which then leads to spin-down of 
the star. It is often difficult to say whether spin-up or spin- 
down will occur; this depends on the field strength and 
field geometry that results from the presence of a central 
star with a magnetic field, all of which affect the precise 
location of the inner radius of the disk. Indeed, there are 
stars where spin-up and spin-down phases are observed 
to alternate on a timescale of months and years. This could 
be explained by changes of the location of the inner edge 
of the disk. 

The star’s magnetic field increases sharply towards 
the star (as r~? for a dipole field) and the strong field 
in the inner parts causes the disk to disrupt. The 
precise disruption mechanism and hence the precise 
location of the inner disk radius are still controversial. 
Possible mechanisms include a viscous instability of the 
disk (Campbell 1997) or simply a loss of hydrostatic 
equilibrium. Somewhere near that radius the field will also 
become too strong for the magneto-rotational instability to 
operate; see equation (5). Near the inner edge of the disk 
gas is thought to be channelled along the stellar magnetic 
field lines towards the central star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Outflows and jets 

The outer layers, away from the disk midplane, 
are probably heated by MAGNETIC RECONNECTION (Joule 
dissipation). This plausibly leads to the formation of a 
hot corona. As in the Sun, this layer can then no longer be 
in hydrostatic equilibrium and therefore some gas must be 
blown off continuously in the form of a wind. Large-scale 
magnetic fields can also directly contribute to accelerating 
outflows. This may be possible if there is a large-scale 
poloidal field tilted away from the rotation axis by at 
least 30°. In that case the component of the centrifugal 
force along the field will dominate over the corresponding 
component of the gravity force and so gas can be driven 
along field lines away from the disk. 

At larger distances from the disk surface these 
outflows are seen to be strongly collimated towards the 
rotation axis. There is at present no clear consensus as 
to what causes this collimation into jets (see ASTROPHYSICAL 
jets). Perhaps the most plausible mechanism is based on 
magnetic forces, in particular the radially inward pointing 
component of the Lorentz force (i.e. the hoop stress), 
which results from the presence of a strong toroidal 
field. This toroidal field is partly advected from the disk 
by a slow wind and partly generated just outside the 
jet by shearing the poloidal field. Today most models 
assume an externally maintained magnetic field. It is still 
unclear whether dynamo-generated magnetic fields can 
be responsible for the launching and collimation of a jet. 
Other topics of current research concern the variability and 
knottedness of jets. 


Bibliography 

Balbus S A and Hawley J F 1991 A powerful local shear 
instability in weakly magnetized disks. I. Linear 
analysis Astrophys. J. 376 214-22 

Balbus S A and Hawley J F 1998 Instability, turbulence, and 
enhanced transport in accretion disks Rev. Mod. Phys. 
70 1-53 

Burrows CJ et al 1996 Hubble Space Telescope observations 
of the disk and jet of HH 30 Astrophys. J. 473 437-51 

Campbell C G 1997 Magnetohydrodynamics in Binary Stars 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Schramkowski G P and Torkelsson U 1996 Magnetohydro- 
dynamic instabilities and turbulence in accretion 
disks Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 7 55-96 


Axel Brandenburg 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Astrophysical Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetohydrodynamics of 
Astrophysical Winds 


Stellar mass loss became an issue when Parker (1958) 
first introduced the concept of the solar wind. Such 
a thermal wind results from coronal heating processes 
indirectly associated with the existence of a convection 
zone, also responsible, with rotation, for the star’s 
dynamo action (see articles on SOLAR WIND: THEORY, CORONAL 
HEATING MECHANISMS, SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE and 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES). So, mass loss of this type 
also exists for a large class of main sequence stars. 
Magnetized winds affect, by Lorentz torques, the angular 
momentum budget of the rotating objects from which they 
emanate. The rotation of solar-type stars at their formation 
is much larger than that of the Sun, although not close 
to the break-up velocity (at which the centrifugal force 
balances gravity at the equator). By this mechanism, a 
single star emitting an MHD wind progressively spins 
down. Its rotation-associated activity declines in time, as 
is in fact observed (see article on SOLAR-STELLAR CONNECTION). 
Stars of a type earlier than F2 which have no such activity 
remain fast rotators when aging, as observed. For active 
stars in synchronized binary systems, such as RS CVn, 
the loss of spin angular momentum by wind emission 
is converted into a loss of orbital angular momentum, 
which, unlike single stars, causes them to spin up and 
become more active, as observed. Newly born solar- 
type stars of the T Tauri class rotate typically at only one- 
tenth of their break-up velocity (Bertout 1989). Some spin- 
down mechanism must be active during the protostellar 
accretion phase, probably also due to winds emanating 
from the star and from the protostellar accretion disk. The 
structure of MHD winds has been first explored by a priori 
assuming some shape for the flow surfaces (Weber and 
Davis 1967). Pulsar winds called for relativistic extensions 
of these studies (Michel,1969 Goldreich and Julian 1970). 
In the past two decades new objects have been discovered 
which emit winds which are so strongly directive as to 
be named jets. Relativistic bulk velocities are reached in 
some of these flows, associated with active galactic nuclei 
or galactic micro-quasars (see article on JETS). Most often 
the jet phenomenon is associated with accretion, i.e. the 
capture of external material by intense gravitational pull to 
some central, usually compact, object. These jetting winds 
raised again the question of the two-dimensional structure 
of MHD flows and of wind acceleration mechanisms, by 
MHD or other forces. 


Angular momentum and accretion 

Accretion cannot proceed as direct fall to the accreting 
object because the matter to be accreted initially possesses 
too much angular momentum. In the absence of angular 
momentum loss, each plasma element would simply orbit 
the accreting object without ever falling on it. It is crucial 
to the accretion process that at least part of this gas gets 
rid of excess angular momentum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In friction between neighboring orbiting gas elements 
one gas parcel loses and the other gains angular 
momentum. The one which loses descends on an orbit 
closer to the accreting object, while the other recedes to a 
broader one. Viscosity due to friction between atoms is 
by far insufficient to achieve observed accretion rates but 
instabilities in the disk, mediated by a weak magnetic field, 
have been shown to supply turbulence causing a large 
enough equivalent viscous effect (Balbus and Hawley 
1991). A gaseous turbulent disk orbiting the accreting 
object forms. In its inner regions matter slowly spirals 
down to the center (Shakura and Sunyaev 1973) while 
the disk’s outskirts slowly expand as a growing reservoir 
of angular momentum. Tidal torques from a companion 
eventually limit this growth. 

An alternative possibility is that winds or jets convey 
the excess angular momentum of accreting matter to 
infinity. The process is similar to the one which torques 
down stars which emit a wind. 


How are winds and jets propelled? 

The solar wind is accelerated by the pressure of the hot 
solar corona. The innermost regions of some accretion 
disks may be very hot too and emit a wind that could 
be made directive by hydrodynamical interaction with an 
anisotropic environment, such as the disk itself. Flow 
refraction at oblique radiative shocks could add to this 
effect for forming bipolar anisotropic outflows (Mellema 
and Frank 1997), but the most extreme focusing is unlikely 
to be of a purely hydrodynamic origin. 

The intense radiation field in the environment of 
some of these objects could cause radiative acceleration. 
For the radiative force on a completely ionized plasma 
to exceed the gravitational one, the luminosity of the 
radiating object should exceed a rather high threshold 
proportional to its mass, the Eddington luminosity. This, 
however, does not seem to be the actual situation for 
most active galactic nuclei. Intense radiation could still 
efficiently boost a leptonic component of the plasma to 
relativistic bulk velocities in jets where such motions and 
high-energy radiation are observed. More on this can be 
read in papers by O’Dell (1981), Dermer and Schlickeiser 
(1993) and Markowith et al (1995). 

The Lorentz force density j x B, j being the electric 
current density and B the magnetic field, could very well 
play a role in plasma acceleration, as discussed below. 
In relativistic dynamics, ignored here for simplicity, the 
electric force density should be considered as well. 


Stationary, axisymmetric MHD flows 

Magnetized plasma winds are often discussed assuming 
axisymmetry, stationarity and perfect MHD. The basic 
concepts of MHD are reviewed in the article on 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS. If, as is often envisaged, the 
wind source is an accretion disk, it should be effectively 
dissipative, for otherwise the magnetic flux threading the 
disk would be advected with the accreting matter and 
pile up near the accreting object or in it. The necessary 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Astrophysical Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


oN A magnetic surface. 
Its equation is A(r,z) = a 


A magnetic 


field line 
A flow line of the wind 


The wind source, in this case a 
rapidly rotating accretion disk 


Figure 1. Geometry of a stationary, axisymmetric MHD flow. 


magnetic diffusivity could be provided by some form of 
turbulence or, in partially ionized plasmas, by ambipolar 
diffusion (K6nigl 1989). 


General properties 

In axisymmetric and stationary MHD flows, field lines 
lie on axially symmetric surfaces, the magnetic surfaces, 
with equation A(r,z) = a in cylindrical coordinates r, 
og, z. A(r,z) is the flux through the circle of radius r 
centered on the axis at position z. Each value of a defines 
one such surface. Stationarity and perfect MHD imply 
that the plasma flow lies on magnetic surfaces. This 
geometry is represented in figure 1. The fluid velocity is 
the superposition of a field-aligned motion and of a rigid- 
body rotation of the magnetic surface, at angular velocity 
Q(a). The ratio of mass flux to magnetic flux is a constant, 
a(a), on a surface a. The motion also conserves the ratios, 
E(a) and L(a), of total energy and angular momentum 
flux to mass flux. There is a magnetic contribution to 
these quantities since the energy flux has a Poynting part, 
while the azimuthal component of the Lorentz force exerts 
a torque on the plasma. If a polytropic approximation 
is made to the actual thermal energy balance, the ratio 
P/p” = Q(a) is also constant on each magnetic surface. 
The rates of mass, energy and angular momentum loss 
in the wind are integrals from pole to equator of a(a), 
a(a)E(a) and a(a)L(a). It is important to note that 
the specific angular momentum per escaping particle, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


L(a), can be significantly larger that the specific angular 
momentum of the matter at the root of the magnetic surface 
a on the wind source, situated, say, at an axial distance 
ro(a), which is almost exactly QrG. The Alfvén radius 
on magnetic surface a, defined by ri (a) = L(a)/Q(a), is 
the effective lever arm of escaping matter, typically the 
distance up to which the magnetic field remains strong 
enough to impose corotation of escaping plasma with the 
wind source. For strong enough magnetization it may be 
larger than ro, the loss of angular momentum of the wind 
source being then dominated by the torques exerted by 
electric currents induced in the wind. This is how single 
stars with a convection zone, and thus dynamo action and 
winds, can be spun down. A calculation of this evolution 
is, however, difficult because it involves the time history 
of the star’s magnetic flux and of the distribution with a 
of ra(a). There are two ways by which the magnetic field 
can accelerate the plasma in the wind zone. One is by 
centrifuging it away, the other is by the upward push of 
the magnetic pressure of the azimuthal field. 


Centrifugally driven winds 

For perfect MHD conditions, magnetic field lines behave 
like rigid structures wherever the magnetic energy density 
exceeds the kinetic and rotational energies. Regions on 
a field line where such conditions are met are closer 
to the source than the Alfvén point. In a rest frame 
accompanying the rotation of a given magnetic field line, 
the constrained plasma elements can glide on the ‘rigid’ 
field lines like beads ona wire in response to the centrifugal 
force and gravitational pull. The combined force density 
vanishes on the accretion disk surface if the latter is 
in Keplerian rotation and the net field-aligned force is 
oriented outwards if the angle of the meridional field 
with the direction of the axis exceeds 30°. Under these 
conditions a plasma flow can be centrifugally driven along 
the field lines threading the accretion disk (Blandford and 
Payne 1982). An exactly similar process at the surface 
of a star is not possible because this would imply that it 
rotates near breakup, but some gas pressure could push the 
plasma over the initial potential barrier, the flow becoming 
centrifugally driven further out. It takes adequate plasma 
conditions in the disk for favorable conditions for such 
acceleration to be realized at the disk’s surface. If the 
field is too stiff or the magnetic diffusivity too large, the 
poloidal field lines cannot be sufficiently bent to meet the 
minimum ‘launching angle’. If the field is too flexible, 
plasma cannot be efficiently centrifuged away. Detailed 
analysis has shown that, for this whole process to work, 
the plasma f parameter in the disk should be of order unity, 
and the disk magnetic Reynolds number based on radius 
and radial accretion velocity should be much larger than 
unity (Ferreira and Pelletier 1993; Li 1995). It is not yet 
known whether such conditions can indeed be achieved. 


Coiled spring acceleration 
When the magnetic field is not dynamically dominant, 
inertia bends the field lines backwards to rotation and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Astrophysical Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


an azimuthal field component appears. The vertical 
component of the associated Lorentz force is opposite 
to the gradient of Bs and can lift the plasma up if this 
quantity decreases with altitude. This is the ‘plasma 
gun’ force (Contopoulos 1995), which can be described 
also pictorially as the force exerted by a coiled spring: 
a field line, which is more ‘coiled’ where By is larger, 
acts as a locally overtwisted spring which pushes on 
the plasma to relax its stresses. Since By, is zero, by 
symmetry, on the equatorial plane of the disk, this 
force has an unfavorable sense there, pinching the disk’s 
plasma. Favorable conditions would usually be met 
further away from the source, past the Alfvén point, 
where this effect may provide continued acceleration 
relaying the centrifugal force described above. For the 
‘coiled spring’ force to be effective close to the disk’s 
surface, the Alfvén point must be close to it, which means 
that the field needs to be relatively weak, as opposed 
to the situation where centrifugal acceleration operates. 
Numerical calculations have proved the effectiveness of 
this process although possibly in an intrinsically time- 
dependent regime (Shibata and Uchida 1986; Ouyed and 
Pudritz 1997). 


MHD torque and accretion 

The Lorentz force has an azimuthal part which exerts a 
torque on the plasma. When B, is an even function of 
z, it acts close to the disk’s equatorial plane to decelerate 
the rotation. The angular momentum extracted from the 
disk’s plasma is transferred to the outflowing wind which 
brings it to infinity. Plasma ejection thus appears as a 
means of getting rid of the excess angular momentum 
of accreting matter, a fraction of it being diverted out 
for ejection. Accretion and ejection then form together 
a self-consistent global machine in which the accretion 
flow causes wind ejection, while the torque exerted by the 
wind on the disk allows accretion to proceed. This can be 
achieved at the expense of a minor mass loss if the specific 
angular momentum of escaping wind material is much 
greater than the specific angular momentum of accreting 
material, which implies that the Alfvén radius ra is much 
larger than the radial distance rp of the foot point of the 
field line in the disk. Centrifugally driven winds would 
meet this requirement more easily. The mechanical energy 
lost by accreting matter in wind-driven accretion, unlike in 
viscosity-driven accretion, does not reappear on the spot 
as radiation due to local dissipation but mostly escapes 
as wind kinetic energy, undetectable until its eventual 
dissipation at intermediate or terminal shocks. 


What focuses jets? 

Evidence for focusing 

There is considerable direct evidence for focusing of 
mass ejection from active galactic nuclei as well as from 
galactic microquasars (see article on Jets). Young stellar 
objects in the protostellar evolution stage also have 
anisotropic outflows which come in the form of weakly 
collimated molecular outflows, with a much faster and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


more focused central stream visible in optical lines (Mundt 
1985) and containing Herbig Haro objects which are cold 
condensations formed in these flows. Outflows from 
planetary nebulae also show, in a rather large subclass, 
considerable evidence for focused outflows (Livio 1997). 


The hoop stress 

By which physical mechanisms can such winds be 
turned into well-focused outflows? The extreme focusing 
observed in jets from active galactic nuclei and similar 
objects of stellar size calls for some explanation that 
could be sought in MHD forces. Indeed, one particular 
component of the Lorentz force, i x By, which is radial, 
should have the required sign for focusing, for it can be 
expressed in terms of the total current J(r, z) through the 
circle of radius r centered at the point z on the z-axis as 
(—po/2nr)Jj., which is indeed negative, hence pinching, 
if J and j, are of the same sign. Since j, is the surface 
density of J, this must necessarily be so in at least some 
central part of the flow. 


The transfield equation 

Assuming stationarity, axisymmetry and perfect MHD the 
shapes of the magnetic surfaces, and flow surfaces, are 
determined by the projection of the equation of motion 
perpendicular to them. The resulting transfield equation 
(Okamoto 1978) is a partial differential equation for the 
function A(r, z) which also involves the density p(r, z). All 
other quantities can be eliminated using the first integrals 
provided by the other MHD equations which integrate 
once, and so would it be for p itself if the Bernoulli 
equation, expressing conservation of the total specific 
energy E(a), were explicitly solvable for p in terms of |V A| 
and A. A transfield—Bernoulli system can be established 
not only in classical MHD but also for special relativistic 
flows and for flows in a Kerr space-time appropriate for 
describing general relativistic effects near rotating black 
holes (Beskin 1997; Camenzind 1986). The transfield 
equation is of second order, linear in the second-order 
derivatives of A(r, z) but non-linear in the function and its 
first derivatives. Its properties depend on the ratio of fluid 
velocity to characteristic propagation speeds, described 
in the article on magnetohydrodynamic waves. It is 
singular at the Alfvén surface, the locus of points where the 
meridional flow velocity vp equals the meridional Alfvén 
speed, at the slow critical surface, the locus where vp equals 
the slow-mode speed in its direction, and at the fast critical 
surface, the locus where vp equals the fast-mode speed. 
The latter two surfaces are associated with singularities of 
the Bernoulli equation, regular solutions of which require 
special conditions to be satisfied at these surfaces. They 
determine those first integrals which are not simply given 
by boundary conditions (Weber and Davis 1967; Heyvaerts 
and Norman 1989). The character of the second-order 
derivative part of the equation changes from elliptic to 
hyperbolic at the cusp surface, from hyperbolic to elliptic 
at the slow surface and from elliptic to hyperbolic again at 
the fast surface. In each hyperbolic region, a double set of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Astrophysical Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


characteristics can be defined in the meridian plane. It has 
been shown that one such set has a limiting characteristic, 
a line to which characteristics of the considered family 
become tangent. The limiting characteristics represent 
the border of one region of the hyperbolic domain which 
cannot communicate with the other one by the considered 
mode. In particular, the fast limiting characteristic surface, 
not the fast critical surface, is the boundary at which MHD 
influence of the downstream regions on the upstream ones 
is shut off. 


Asymptotics 

The asymptotics of MHD flow, as expressed by the 
transfield-Bernoulli system, must be studied to see 
whether indeed the hoop stress causes its progressive 
alignment with the polar axis. General exact results 
have been obtained for polytropic flows (Heyvaerts and 
Norman 1989). An upper bound on the value of r|VA| 
in the asymptotic domain is obtained from the obvious 
requirement that the Poynting flux cannot exceed the 
total energy flux, which has been used to prove that, as 
r approaches infinity following a magnetic surface, z/r 
can only approach a non-zero limit or diverge. Far from 
the polar axis in the asymptotic domain the potentially 
dominant force perpendicular to magnetic surfaces is 
the hoop stress, except in the vicinity of exceptional 
magnetic surfaces where it must vanish and can therefore 
not dominate over other forces (Heyvaerts and Norman 
1997). The asymptotic form of the transfield equation 
simply reduces to the statement that, except in thin 
boundary layers, the hoop stress vanishes. Between 
these boundary layers, the total asymptotic meridional 
electric current enclosed in the magnetic surface, J.(a), 
becomes a constant J. independent of a, implying a 
vanishing meridional current density. If J. is zero the 
quantity z/r diverges following magnetic surfaces which 
asymptotically become nested paraboloids. If, on the other 
hand, J.. is non-zero, no current can flow between pairs 
of magnetic surfaces on which r can approach infinity. It 
must flow insome central core consisting of asymptotically 
cylindrical magnetic surfaces on which r remains finite. 
The current which reaches infinity in this peri-axial core 
returns to the wind source through one of the boundary 
layers forming around those magnetic surfaces on which 
the meridional field, and therefore also the azimuthal field 
which is derived by inertial bending from it, vanishes. 
For a dipolar type of symmetry, the equatorial plane is 
one such exceptional surface. At precisely these surfaces, 
the hoop stress vanishes while it competes with opposing 
forces, such as pressure, in their close neighborhood. Such 
regions have the structure of a sheet pinch, as observed in 
the solar wind (Thomas and Smith 1981). It then seems that 
hoop stresses indeed have the potential to focus efficiently 
the rotating plasma stream and to turn asymptotically the 
wind into a very directive jet. This idea is also supported 
by numerical simulations (Sakurai 1985; Ustyugova et al 
1995) and exact analytical solutions for several different 
types of self-similar flow (Blandford and Payne 1982; Chan 
and Henriksen 1980; Tsinganos and Sauty 1992). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Stability issues 

Numerical studies have revealed that the flow regime 
may in fact not be stationary at all, even when the 
mass inflow and its rotation are kept constant at the 
boundary of the computing domain. Ouyed and Pudritz 
(1997) have shown examples of such behavior for flows 
propelled by the toroidal field coiling. When the back- 
reaction of angular momentum extraction on the wind 
source is taken into account, the system has been found 
to enter an unstable collapse behavior (Matsumoto et al 
1996). Therefore the question of stability of such flows is 
particularly relevant. 

Axisymmetric MHD wind flows exhibit shear 
motions and carry electric currents, features which are 
known tobe potential sources of instabilities (see the article 
ON MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC INSTABILITIES). This important 
issue has been addressed up to now in simplified 
geometries. Differential axial motions could drive Kelvin 
Helmholtz (KH) instabilities, causing friction and mixing 
between the focused wind and the neighboring medium. 
The linear stability of different geometries to this type of 
perturbation has been rather comprehensively discussed 
(Birkinshaw 1991), also with an axial uniform magnetic 
field. Body modes, which affect the whole plasma in the 
jetting wind, appear to be typical of these supersonic flows 
and are found to be unstable on a length-scale of order 
a Mach number of times the jet diameter. High density 
in the fast-jetting wind or a strong axial field reduce the 
instability which may even be quenched for small enough 
B parameters. In current-carrying jetting winds, MHD 
instabilities, such as the kink one, are likely to develop 
because the toroidal component tends to grow much 
larger than the poloidal one and the Kruskal-Shafranoff 
instability criterion, that the field coils more than one turn 
about the axis, is easily satisfied even on a relatively short 
length along the axis. The growth rates of these modes 
depend on the radial current profile and can be smaller 
than (Appl and Camenzind 1992) or comparable with 
those of KH modes. However, the most significant issue 
concerning instabilities is their non-linear evolution. It 
may either lead to small-scale turbulence, giving rise to 
an effectively dissipative flow which may still retain its 
global organized character, or cause a large-scale change 
of the fluid motion. It appears that the KH instability 
of a magnetized medium tends to smooth out the axial 
velocity profile forming a turbulent transition layer around 
the jetting wind (Malagoli et al 1996; Min 1997) and that 
reconnection phenomena take place in this layer, leading 
to dynamical alignment between field and flow vectors 
(Jones et al 1997). It is suspected that the development 
of the kink MHD mode would affect the efficiency of the 
confinement by the hoop stress forces, having the effect 
of limiting the ratio of the toroidal to poloidal field to a 
value of a few (Eichler 1993). Exactly how much depends 
on the elastic current profile. This would induce effective 
dissipation, the energy that would be otherwise stored in 
the form of azimuthal fields being ultimately transformed 
into pressure which opposes efficient collimation by the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics of Astrophysical Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hoop stress. The poloidal field could then become, in 
the wind acceleration zone, the most significant agent for 
collimation which would then be ballistically conserved 
(Spruit et al 1997). 


Bibliography 

ApplS and Camenzind M 1992 Astron. Astrophys. 256 354— 
70 

Balbus S and Hawley J 1991 Astrophys. J. 376 214-33 

Bertout C 1989 Ann.Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 27 351 

Beskin V 1997 Phys. Uspekhi 40 (7) 659 

Birkinshaw M 1991 Beams and Jets in Astrophysics 
ed P A Hughes (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) p 279 

Blandford R and Payne D 1982 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
199 883-903 

Camenzind M 1986 Astron. Astrophys. 156 137-51 

Chan K and Henriksen R 1980 Astrophys. J. 241 534-51 

Contopoulos J 1995 Astron. Astrophys. 450 616-27 

Dermer C and Schlickeiser R 1993 Astrophys. J. 416 458-84 

Eichler D 1993 Astrophys. J. 419 111-6 

Ferreira J and Pelletier G 1993 Astron. Astrophys. 276 625-36 

Goldreich P and Julian W 1970 Astrophys. J. 160 971-7 

Heyvaerts J and Norman C 1989, Astrophys. J. 347 1055-81 

Heyvaerts J and Norman C 1997 IAU Symp 182 
ed B Reypurth and C Bertout (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
pp 275-90 

Jones T, Gaalaas J, Ryu D and Frank A 1997 Astrophys. J. 
482 230-44 

Konig] A 1989 Astrophys. J. 342 208-23 

Li Z Y 1995 Astrophys. J. 444 848-60 

Livio M 1997 Space Sci. Rev. 82 389-406 

Malagoli A, Bodo G and Rosner R 1996 Astrophys. J. 456 

708-16 

Markowith A, Henri G and Pelletier G 1995 Mon. Not. R. 

Astron. Soc. 277 681— 99 

Matsumoto R, Uchida Y, Hirose 5, Shibata K, Hayashi M, 

Ferrari A, Bodo G and Norman C 1996 Astrophys. J. 

461 115-26 

Mellema G and Frank A 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 292 

795-807 

Michel F C 1969 Astrophys. J. 158 727-39 

Min K W 1997 Astrophys. J. 482 733-46 

Mundt R 1985 Protostars and Planets II (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 414-33 

O'Dell S 1981 Astrophys. J. 243 L147-9 

Okamoto I 1978 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 185 69-108 

Ouyed R and Pudritz R 1997 Astrophys. J. 484 794-809 

Parker E 1958 Astrophys. J. 128 664-76 

Sakurai T 1985, Astron. Astrophys. 152 121-9 

Shakura N and Sunyaev R 1973 Astron. Astrophys. 24 
337-55 

Shibata K and Uchida Y 1986 Publ. Astron. Soc. Jap. 38 
631-60 

Spruit H, Foglizzo T and Stehle R 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 288 333-42 

Thomas B and Smith E 1981 J. Geophys. Res. 86 11 105-10 

Tsinganos K and Sauty C 1992 Astron. Astrophys. 255 405-19 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ustyugova G V, Koldoba A V, Romanova M M, 
Chechetkin V M and Lovelace R 1995 Astrophys. J. 
439 L39-42 

Weber D and Davis L 1967 Astrophys. J. 148 217-27 


J] Heyvaerts 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics: Magnetic Reconnection and 
Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetohydrodynamics: Magnetic 
Reconnection and Turbulence 


Magnetic reconnection is a distinctive dynamical phenom- 
ena by which neighboring parcels of magnetized plasma 
communicate with one another. It is thought to to be im- 
portant in the dynamics of SOLAR FLARES, and in the magne- 
topause and tail regions of the magnetosphere (see MAGNE- 
TOSPHERE OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE; GEOMAGNETIC TAIL). Recon- 
nection is also thought to be an important element of low 
frequency plasma turbulence in the SOLAR WIND, the inter- 
stellar medium and in other astrophysical plasmas. Recon- 
nection may influence heating, plasma flows and transport 
of charged particles including cosmic Rays. 

Examples of MAGNETIC RECONNECTION are typically 
portrayed in highly idealized contexts. For example, 
special assumptions are made regarding the choice of a 
model for plasma dynamics, e.g. MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS 
(MHD), as well as imposition of steady-state conditions. 
Other assumptions are often made regarding geometrical 
symmetries, including reduction to a two-dimensional 
(2D) model, or assumption of reflectional symmetry in 
quadrants about the X-type NEUTRAL PoINT around which 
reconnection activity is centered. All of these are perfectly 
reasonable special cases to be employed in demonstrations 
of the essential physics of reconnection. | However, 
reconnection can also occur in situations that are unsteady 
in time, and that are much less ordered than in the simplest 
models. Fluctuations in MHD variables (see soLAR WIND 
TURBULENCE) are likely to occur in relatively messy ‘real’ 
scenarios that involve reconnection, and can be expected 
to have significant effects on the reconnection process. 
Reconnection occurs readily as one facet of complex MHD 
activity, and it appears to be an essential feature of MHD 
turbulence. 


Models and broad definition 

The traditional 2D models of reconnection (Sweet-— 
Parker and Petschek models) describe a set of dynamical 
phenomena that occur when blobs of plasma containing 
oppositely directed magnetic field B are either pressed 
together or encounter each other spontaneously. Since 
there is a region of low field strength between the blobs, 
there is an excess magnetic pressure outside the central 
region that drives plasma towards the boundary between 
the blobs, at a point determined by a perturbation. This 
pressure causes the plasma to flow toward the center with 
a speed V,, as illustrated in figure 1. If the plasma has high 
electrical conductivity, magnetic flux conservation implies 
that steep gradients of magnetic field are produced. In the 
standard models the process is assumed to be laminar and 
steady, in which case the approach of the blobs is limited 
by the rate at which magnetic flux can diffuse across a 
thin region, called the reconnection zone. This causes 
annihilation of matching contributions from positive and 
negative flux regions. This merging process relaxes the 
magnetic flux constraint and allows the field lines to 
‘break’ and ‘reconnect’. New magnetic islands form as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Diagram of two-dimensional magnetic fields in a 
reconnection configuration. The central reconnection zone 
contains an X-type neutral point. Inflow towards the 
reconnection zone at speed Vjn is suggested by arrows in the 
strong field regions at the top and bottom. Outflow at Vout in 
weak field regions is also suggested. 


plasma flows outward at a speed Vout towards the region 
between the blobs, sometimes called the weak field region. 
The flow pattern is illustrated in figure 1. The key features 
of the traditional laminar picture of reconnection are: (a) 
the approach of blobs containing opposite-signed field, (b) 
production of steep magnetic gradients, i.e. high electric 
current densities, between the blobs, (c) inflow limited by 
magnetic diffusivity, and (d) steady outflow at Vou = Va 
the Alfvén speed computed in the inflow or strong-field 
regions. 

Change in topology of field lines is an important by- 
product of the process. The rate at which topology change 
occurs, and the rate of Ohmic heating in the reconnection 
zone, is limited by the rate at which diffusivity can act to 
relax the limitations of flux conservation. 

Most of the essential features of the traditional 
laminar reconnection picture remain useful in three 
dimensions, and when turbulent fluctuations are present. 
However, when reconnection is part of a complex MHD 
flow, carefully controlled smooth conditions far from 
the reconnection zone are not relevant any longer. The 
process may not commence from an equilibrium as is 
often assumed in reconnection models that invoke linear 
instabilities such as the tearing mode. In addition, there 
are many additional possibilities for types of encounters 
of plasma blobs in three dimensions, so a more general 
characterization of reconnection is needed. A widely 
accepted definition is that magnetic reconnection occurs 
in a plasma whenever an electric field FE, is present along 
a magnetic separator, that is, along a line of intersection 
of two separatrix surfaces that divide space into different 
magnetic cells. The separator is commonly referred to 
as the reconnection line, the X-line or the null line. This 
definition is useful for both laminar and turbulent models 
of reconnection. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics: Magnetic Reconnection and 
Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Map of magnetic field vectors near an active 
reconnection zone in the SSX experiment. Arrow length is 
proportional to local field strength, with longer arrows ~1 kG. 
The Alfvén speed is 10” cm s~1. Although there is an overall 
X-type topology, there is evidence for multiple X-points (and at 
least one small island or “‘bubble’) near the reconnection zone. 
(Courtesy of M Brown and the SSX experimental team.) 


Turbulent magnetic reconnection 

The idealized constructs of smooth and steady magnetic 
islands undergoing laminar reconnection are easily 
extended to allow less symmetric and more active 
configurations. Figure 1 was intentionally constructed 
to be not quite fully symmetric. Simulations of MHD 
indicate that these types of magnetic configurations tend 
to experience complex undulations, involving non-steady 
induced electric fields that can be quite large compared 
with the E, expected from laminar reconnection models. 
Fluctuations in the large-scale reconnection fields can vary 
in space and time in accord with the MHD equations, 
producing broad-band turbulence in and around the 
region of reconnection activity. In more complex cases 
in which reconnection activity is expected to occur, it may 
exhibit much more complex properties than in its laminar 
form. The reconnection geometry becomes non-steady 
and distorted. 

Figure 2 shows an example of what is perhaps 
a more realistic reconnection geometry, using data 
taken from the SSX spheromak laboratory experiment 
at Swarthmore College. In SSX, two blobs of MHD 
scale plasma, or plasmoids, encounter each other under 
controlled, but not extremely symmetric or steady 
conditions. Experimental diagnostics indicate that 
reconnection occurs. Characteristic flows are detected, 
as suggested in figure 2, as well as changes in magnetic 
topology. 

It may be quite a bit easier in astrophysical contexts for 
reconnection to arise in the presence of fluctuations than it 
would be in their absence. Distinctive effects that might be 
expected in a turbulent reconnection scenario include the 
possible production of multiple X-type neutral points in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the reconnection zone, or the production of steep gradients 
and broadband fluctuations through a spectral cascade. 


MHD turbulence 

There is a strong similarity between MHD equations and 
the equations of hydrodynamics. Thus one expects that 
the complex dynamical motions associated with fluid 
turbulence at high Reynolds numbers should have a 
counterpart in the behavior of the fluid MHD plasma. 
In fact, observations of plasmas in the corona, the 
interstellar medium and the solar wind, as well as many 
laboratory plasma devices, bear out this expectation. 
MHD turbulence is also studied using accurate numerical 
simulation methods up to large-scale Reynolds numbers 
of a few thousand. A Reynolds number, usually defined as 
R = LVo/v, with L and Vo respectively the characteristic 
length and speed, and v the kinematic viscosity, is 
a measure of the typical strength of nonlinear effects 
compared with dissipative effects. When R is large, 
complex nonlinear motions give rise to the irregular 
motions associated with turbulence, and a cascade of 
energy from large to small scales. In MHD the magnetic 
Reynolds number, R,, = VoL/n, for resistivity n, should 
be large as well, if the turbulence is to involve magnetic 
fluctuations as well as velocity fluctuations. 

An interesting analogy exists between the dynamical 
behavior of the magnetic field in MHD and of the vorticity 
Q = Vxv. The magnetic field obeys the induction 
equation. The equation for the evolution of the vorticity 
can be obtained formally from_ the induction equation 
under the replacements B > (2 and 7 — v. Thus the 
dynamics of the magnetic field in MHD are similar to the 
dynamics of the vorticity in ordinary hydrodynamics. The 
analogy is not perfect because the vorticity is related to 
the velocity v which appears in its dynamical equation, 
whereas the magnetic field is not related to the velocity 
v that appears in the right-hand side of its dynamical 
equation. 

This analogy is particularly interesting from the point 
if view of magnetic reconnection, because it points towards 
an analogy with the phenomenon of ‘vortex reconnection’. 
Vortex lines must ‘break and reconnect’ in order that 
vortices interact and merge. The vortex merger that results 
from this process is familiar in stirred cups of coffee, and 
in weather maps, and is associated with the production of 
large eddies from small ones. This occurs at the same time 
as smaller eddies are generated from large ones due to the 
cascade of energy to small scales. 

MHD simulations indicate that reconnection, and 
associated magnetic flux tube merger or coalescence, are 
very typical in MHD turbulence. Figure 3 shows plots 
of magnetic field lines and intensity plots of electric 
current density for a simulation of two-dimensional MHD 
turbulence, shown at a time t = 6 characteristic times 
from the randomly generated initial state. It is apparent 
that of the many close magnetic islands in the top 
panel, many pairs are experiencing reconnection and 
merger. The current intensity shows the signature of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics: Magnetic Reconnection and 
Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


500 y 


300 


200 | 


oh 


0 100 200 300 400 500 


Figure 3. Magnetic field lines (contour lines) and electric current 
density (gray intensity scale) for a spectral method simulation of 
two-dimensional MHD turbulence at R,, = 2000, at time t = 4 
nonlinear times from the initial state. Reconnection zones have 
formed between a number of adjacent islands that are 
coalescing, triggering localized non-steady reconnection activity 
throughout the periodic simulation box. Reconnection is an 
essential feature of the cascade process in MHD turbulence. 


intense filamentation of current at X-type neutral points 
in the center of small, non-steady reconnection zones 
lying between the merging islands. Although not shown, 
the plasma velocity near these X-points also has the 
characteristic reconnection pattern of inflow and outflow 
near these regions, but the flow is very irregular and 
turbulent in general. 


Turbulent dissipation and coherent structures 
The effects associated with turbulence near a reconnection 
zone lead to a higher effective resistivity, called a 
turbulent resistivity or turbulent magnetic diffusivity. 
This is a property of MHD turbulence in general and is 
directly related to the analogous phenomenon of turbulent 
viscosity in hydrodynamic turbulence. (Note that 
turbulent resistivity may be supplemented by so-called 
anomalous resistivity associated with plasma instabilities 
of non-fluid, kinetic origin.) In general turbulence 
is expected to increase both the rate of reconnection 
and the rate of energy dissipation relative to estimates 
based upon laminar theories. Turbulence near an active 
reconnection zone also induces non-steady fluctuations in 
the measurable MHD variables, rendering more complex 
the plasma flow, electric field and magnetic field associated 
with reconnection. 

As a consequence of turbulent reconnection, energy 
is directly cascaded to small scales, producing turbulent 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


heating through a direct cascade. At the same time, larger 
magnetic field structures are produced through merger 
of magnetic islands, sometimes called an inverse cascade. 
The transfer of a significant amount of magnetic excitation 
to large scales is sometimes discussed in terms of negative 
temperature statistical mechanics, or the phenomenon of 
‘self-organization.’ The characteristic structures of MHD 
reconnection, magnetic islands at the larger scales, and 
electric current filaments at small scales, can be thought 
of as preferred MHD coherent structures, and are possible 
sources of intermittency in plasma dynamics at MHD fluid 
scales. 


Bibliography 

Biskamp D 1993 Nonlinear Magnetohydrodynamics (New 
York: Cambridge University Press) 

Frisch U 1995 Turbulence (New York: 
University Press) 

Matthaeus W and Lamkin S 1986 Turbulent magnetic 
reconnection Phys. Fluids 29 2513 

Parker E 1979 Cosmical Magnetic Fields (Oxford: Claren- 
don) 


Cambridge 


William Matthaeus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics: Magnetoconvection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetohydrodynamics: 
Magnetoconvection 


Convective motions occur naturally in layers of fluid 
heated from below. In the Sun turbulent convection carries 
most of the luminosity over the outer 30% by radius of 
the star. Because of the high electrical conductivity of the 
solar plasma convective motions interact with magnetic 
fields. The modified form of convection that occurs in 
a conducting fluid when externally imposed magnetic 
fields are present is referred to as magnetoconvection. The 
interaction of convection and magnetic fields is believed 
to be responsible for such diverse phenomena as the 
darkness of sunspots, the oscillation of SUNSPOT PENUMBRAE, 
the formation of the magnetic network (see CHROMOSPHERE: 
NETWORK), and the amplification of magnetic fields in SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES. 

The nature of the interaction between convective 
motions and magnetic fields depends on several physical 
parameters. Of particular importance is the strength of 
magnetic forces relative to the strength of the convective 
driving due to buoyancy. If magnetic forces are strong 
the convection can be greatly inhibited or in extreme cases 
even suppressed. If, on the other hand, magnetic forces 
are weak, the magnetic field can be strongly distorted 
by the motions. It is customary to organize the study 
of magnetoconvection into different regimes defined by 
the vigour of the resulting motions. The linear regime 
studies the conditions under which buoyancy forces just 
overcome magnetic forces and the convection develops 
to infinitesimal amplitude. In the weakly nonlinear regime 
the amplitude of the convection is assumed to be small 
but still of sufficient magnitude to lead to appreciable 
nonlinear effects. In the fully nonlinear regime the motions 
are vigorous, possibly even turbulent, and there is a strong 
interaction between the convection and magnetic fields. 


The linear regime 

The conditions under which infinitesimal convection 
develops can be simply estimated by considering the 
forces acting on a fluid parcel displaced vertically a 
small distance 5z from its equilibrium position in a 
superadiabatic atmosphere. A small fluid element will 
experience a destabilizing buoyancy force of magnitude 
gpaAédz, where g is the acceleration due to gravity, p the 
fluid density, a the coefficient of thermal expansion and 
A the local temperature gradient. If the displacement 
causes a distortion of wavelength ¢ in an otherwise 
uniform ambient magnetic field, there will be a magnetic 
restoring force of magnitude B*5z/j19€?, where B is the 
field intensity and po is the magnetic permeability. If 
the buoyancy force exceeds the restoring force the fluid 
element once displaced will continue to move and a 
state of overturning convection will develop. If, on the 
other hand, the magnetic restoring force is stronger than 
buoyancy the parcel will eventually return to its initial 
equilibrium position. Both buoyancy and magnetic forces 
are weakened by diffusion at rates proportional to x, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


thermal diffusivity, and 7, the magnetic diffusivity. If 
k > n, buoyancy forces will be weakened more rapidly 
than magnetic forces and the fluid parcel will return to 
its equilibrium position with a greater velocity than that 
with which it left it, thus causing the fluid element to 
overshoot. In this case the convection develops as a 
growing oscillation. This form of instability, often called 
overstability, is characteristic of a broad class of systems— 
doubly diffusive systems—where stabilizing and restoring 
agents diffuse at different rates. 

Some of these ideas can be made more quantitative 
by considering the development of convection in a layer 
of Boussinesq fluid (Chandrasekhar 1961). The strength 
of the destabilizing buoyancy force and the stabilizing 
magnetic force can measured by the Rayleigh number R 
and the Chandrasekhar number Q defined by 


Ad! B2a? 
eee and Q = —o— (1) 
Kv Mopnv 


R 


where v is the kinematic viscosity and d is the vertical 
extent of the layer. Overturning convection develops 
when the Rayleigh number exceed a critical value R® 
given by 

RO = Rot CiQ (2) 


where Rp is the critical Rayleigh number for the onset of 
convection in the absence of magnetic effects and C, is a 
constant that depends on boundary conditions and on the 
geometry of the system. As we mentioned earlier, if 7 < k 
overstability is also possible provided the magnetic field is 
strong enough. The critical Rayleigh number for the onset 
of growing oscillations has the form 


R© = Ro ze C2) + C3Q (3) 


where the constants C, and C3 depend as before on 
boundary conditions and geometry, but now also on the 
diffusivities. In most cases R© < R© so that overstability, 
if possible, is the first type of instability to develop ina fluid 
layer as the temperature gradient is gradually increased. 


The weakly nonlinear regime 

The weakly nonlinear regime describes magnetoconvec- 
tion when the amplitude of the motions is small but finite. 
The existence of both overturning and oscillatory forms 
of convection gives rise to a rich and complex set of possi- 
ble dynamical behaviors. The primary objective of weakly 
nonlinear theory is to classify these possibilities in terms of 
amplitude equations and their associated bifurcation diagrams 
(see, for instance, Guckenheimer and Holmes 1983). 

The simplest type of amplitude equation describes the 
behavior of small amplitude solutions when the bifurcation 
parameter, for instance the Rayleigh number, is near its 
critical value for the onset of overturning convection. The 
dynamical behavior for typical initial conditions can be 
described by 

a=sat+ya> (4) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics: Magnetoconvection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


amplitude 2 


Figure 1. Bifurcation diagram describing the behavior of small 
amplitude solutions. The ordinate measures the (square) of the 
amplitude of the solutions, the abscissa the magnitude of the 
bifurcation parameter. Solid and dashed lines correspond to 
stable and unstable solutions respectively. ¢ = 0 is a bifurcation 
point where branches of solutions are created or destroyed. 


where ¢ = (R — R®)/R®. With this notation « = 0 
corresponds to a bifurcation point where branches of 
solutions are either created or destroyed. Here y depends 
on the physical parameters specifying the problem and 
determines the stability of these solutions. If y < 0 small 
amplitude solutions are stable and weak initial conditions 
develop into convective motions with a characteristic 
amplitude of /e/[y|. If y > 0 small amplitude solutions 
are unstable and weak initial conditions develop to large 
amplitude. These two cases are represented schematically 
by the two bifurcation diagrams in figure 1. 

More complicated diagrams can be used to represent 
more complex situations. For instance, the interplay be- 
tween overturning and oscillatory convection is described 
by the diagram in figure 2. In this case the static solution 
(no motion) becomes unstable to oscillatory convection at 
R = R®. Abranch of unstable overturning convection is 
destroyed at R = R® so that no small amplitude solutions 
exist for R > R®. For Rmin < R < R© convection is pos- 
sible at large but not at small amplitude. As R approaches 
R®™ the period of the oscillations increases, eventually to 
become infinite at R = R® where the branch of oscilla- 
tory solutions collides with the unstable branch of over- 
turning convection. In the vicinity of such points, called 
homoclinic points, solutions can become aperiodic and even 
chaotic. Other complex dynamical behavior is possible in 
(horizontally) unbounded domains where the possibility 
of oscillatory convection leads to solutions in the form of 
traveling, modulated and pulsating waves. 

All these different dynamical possibilities can be 
described by amplitude equations analogous to, but in 
general more complex than, (4) (see, for instance, Proctor 
and Weiss 1982). Formally such equations are only 
valid when the amplitude of the motion is small, but in 
many circumstances the predictions of weakly nonlinear 
theory appear to remain qualitatively correct even when 
the solutions grow to larger amplitudes. Thus weakly 
nonlinear theory is often used as a starting point for 
the systematic study of magnetoconvection in the fully 
nonlinear regime. 


The fully nonlinear regime 
The study of the interaction of large amplitude convection 
with an externally imposed magnetic field divides 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


large amp. 


amplitude” 
7 


Figure 2. Bifurcation diagram describing the relationship 
between various branches of solutions. Solid and dashed lines 
correspond to stable and unstable solutions respectively. 


naturally into two approaches, kinematic and dynamical. 
Kinematic theory can be regarded as the limiting case of 
magnetoconvection for very weak fields. In this limit 
the Lorentz force can be neglected and the momentum 
equation decouples from the induction equation. — It 
is then possible to study the induction equation alone 
for prescribed velocity fields. In the dynamical regime 
the Lorentz force is important and the induction and 
momentum equations must be solved simultaneously. 
Because of the difficulties in obtaining analytical solutions 
in this regime, dynamical theory has particularly benefited 
from numerical work. 

The most important parameter in kinematic theory 
is the magnetic Reynolds number, Rm = Ud/n, where U is 
a characteristic amplitude of the velocity. It measures the 
relative efficiencies of convective to diffusive processes, i.e. 
the time it takes to diffuse the magnetic field over a distance 
d divided by the time it takes to advect the magnetic field 
over the same distance. The magnetic Reynolds number 
is huge in most astrophysical circumstances. 

The simplest kinematic problem considers the 
structure of a unidirectional field near a stagnation 
point flow. If the velocity is axisymmetric and given 
in cylindrical coordinates (r,z) by the stream function 
®(r,z) = Ur*z then the steady-state magnetic field has 
a Gaussian profile of the form 

B.(r) = B* exp(—$Rmr*) BY = 4 BoRm (5) 
where Bo is the amplitude of an initial uniform field. 
This shows that the steady state is determined by a 
balance between advection and diffusion which occurs 
when the magnetic field is concentrated on structures 
with characteristic scale of order R;/*._ More realistic 
calculations show that in general the magnetic field is 
amplified by straining motions and expelled from regions 
of closed circulation. 

The above example shows that within kinematic 
theory magnetic fields can be amplified arbitrarily 
provided Rm is arbitrarily large. In a realistic situation 
one expects an eventual breakdown of the kinematic 
assumption and a modification of the velocity due to the 
action of the Lorentz force. Of direct physical interest 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetohydrodynamics: Magnetoconvection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gaussian 


kinematic 


Bo 


Figure 3. Limits of kinematic amplification. Peak field B* as a 
function of initial filed Bp. After Galloway and Moore (1979). 


is the determination of the strongest field that can be 
obtained by convective amplification. In particular, how 
it compares with an equipartition field, i.e. one whose 
energy density is comparable to the kinetic energy density. 
For very weak initial fields the above example indicates 
that the maximum field strength B* ~ BoRm for a 
nearly axisymmetric configuration. For very strong initial 
fields linear theory predicts that the convection becomes 
suppressed, in which case B* = Bp. It is reasonable to 
assume that the maximum value is obtained for some 
intermediate value of Bo. 

We envisage a sequence of experiments where 
convection at a fixed Rayleigh number develops in the 
presence of an initially uniform field of strength By. Ineach 
experiment B* is the maximum field strength obtained 
in the final steady or statistically stationary state. The 
behavior of B* as a function of Bp is shown schematically in 
figure 3. For weak initial fields B* increases linearly with 
Bo, the slope of the line being precisely Rn. Eventually 
the curve turns over when the vorticity generated by 
magnetic curvature forces becomes comparable to the 
vorticity generated by horizontal temperature gradients. 
At this point B* attains its maximum value Bmax given by 


2 ? 

Brnax oe log(Rm) (v/n). (6) 
To the right of the peak B* decreases slowly with By and the 
magnetic field profile remains approximately Gaussian. 
For stronger initial fields the convection is no longer 
capable of confining the magnetic field and B* decreases 
more rapidly with Bo. If Bo is increased further there 
is a transition to oscillatory convection terminating with 
the eventual suppression of the motions. Clearly the 
above considerations suggest that convective motions can 
indeed amplify magnetic fields to values exceeding the 
equipartition strength U provided that the ratio v/n is 
sufficiently large. 

If compressibility becomes important the above 
arguments must be modified. In particular, another critical 
field strength B., must be considered corresponding to 
a magnetic field whose pressure is comparable to the 
thermodynamic pressure of the ambient fluid. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


significance of Bey can be appreciated by noting that 
an isolated flux tube of this strength in thermal and 
mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings must be 
evacuated. There is substantial numerical evidence 
that partially evacuated flux structures can indeed be 
generated by convective processes in strongly stratified 
layers. It is as yet unclear whether the extreme case of a 
completely empty tube can be maintained by convection. 


Bibliography 

Chandrasekhar S 1961 Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic 
Stability (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Galloway D J and Moore D R 1979 Axisymmetric 
convection in the presence of a magnetic field 
Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn. 12 73-105 

Guckenheimer J and Holmes P 1983 Nonlinear Oscillations, 
Dynamical Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector Fields 
(New York: Springer) 

Proctor M R E and Weiss N O 1982 Magnetoconvection 
Rep. Prog. Phys. 45 1317-79 


Fausto Cattaneo 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Bow Shock 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Bow Shock 


The bow shock (figure 1) is the nonlinear wave which 
stands in the soLaR WIND flow upstream of the Earth’s 
magnetosphere, at which the solar wind plasma is heated 
and decelerated in preparation for diversion around the 
magnetosphere. The dissipation processes at the shock 
depend on the properties of a collisionless plasma and lead 
to a rich range of energetic particles and plasma waves. 


Why and where? 

In an ordinary gas, a shock wave forms when an obstacle 
is placed in a flow which is supersonic, i.e. the relative 
speed between flow and obstacle is greater than the sound 
speed. For example, a supersonic aircraft has an associated 
shock wave. In a pLasma, such as the solar wind, the 
situation is complicated by the existence of other wave 
modes in addition to sound waves. However, the principle 
remains true, and the solar wind flow speed is greater 
than the sound speed and the Alfvén speed, so that a 
plasma shock is formed, owing to the obstacle created by 
the MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH. 

Shock waves can arise in a number of different 
situations in astrophysics. For example, an explosive 
event may generate supersonic flows which impact the 
surrounding gas, and this leads to a blast shock wave, 
where there is a limited amount of energy associated 
with the shock (e.g. SUPERNOVA REMNANT OF SOLAR FLARE). In 
the case of the magnetized planets in the solar system, 
the magnetosphere presents an essentially impermeable 
obstacle (see PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES), and a steady 
shock wave is formed which stands at a relatively constant 
distance from the planet in the upstream flow. This is 
called a bow shock, in analogy to the bow wave in water 
ahead of a ship. 

What is a shock wave? It is a wave through which the 
plasma flows, and in doing so it increases its characteristic 
wave speed (e.g. sound speed). This is accomplished by an 
increase in the temperature, and a corresponding decrease 
in the flow speed, so that the sound speed increases 
relative to the flow speed. The shock wave is thus the 
transition from supersonic flow upstream to subsonic flow 
downstream. The shock acts to transform some of the 
kinetic energy of the upstream flow into an increase in 
the thermal energy of the downstream flow. There is no 
return to the initial upstream state of the flow, so there also 
has to be an increase in the entropy of the flow at the shock 
(i.e. dissipation) so that the changes there are irreversible. 

Now consider a supersonic flow. By definition sound 
waves produced by a source are immediately swept 
downstream; they cannot propagate upstream against 
the flow. An obstacle in a supersonic flow, without a 
bow shock, could never disturb the upstream flow so 
that it is diverted around the obstacle. The necessary 
deflection must be accomplished by pressure-like forces, 
which are communicated into the upstream flow to warn, 
as it were, the incoming plasma that there is an obstacle 
ahead. However, such forces are the same as the restoring 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


forces that lead to the characteristic wave modes of the 
plasma. For example, in sound waves the restoring force 
is provided by the particle pressure, and hence the pressure 
force can only be propagated at the speed of sound. Thus, 
in order for the obstacle to affect the flow upstream, 
there must be a surrounding layer of subsonic flow (the 
magnetosheath), and it is this that the bow shock provides. 

At the bow shock the magnetic field, density and 
temperature all increase as the solar wind transits the 
shock. This is similar to what happens in a fast 
magnetosonic wave (i.e. fast-mode MHD wave). Thus the 
bow shock is an example of a fast-mode collisionless shock, 
and the governing characteristic wave speed is that of the 
fast magnetosonic wave. 

In an ordinary gas the dissipation necessary at a shock 
is provided by collisions between the gas molecules, so that 
the width of the shock is associated with the dissipational 
scale length which is of the order of the collision 
mean free path. In space plasmas the mean free path 
between collisions is so large that the system is essentially 
collisionless. Consequently the dissipation is supplied by 
plasma processes related to the gradients at the shock, 
particularly changes in the electric and magnetic field. The 
plasma shock processes consequently govern the width 
and internal structure of the shock layer. The Earth’s bow 
shock has a width of between roughly 100 km and 1000 km, 
depending on the shock and plasma parameters. 

The bow shock surrounds the magnetosphere on its 
upstream side, and is about 15Rz from the Earth at the 
‘nose’ of bow shock, i.e. at the subsolar point. However, 
the position of the shock is highly variable (from 12R, 
to 20R-) and depends on the solar wind parameters, most 
importantly the ram pressure. The shock position changes 
on the time scale of minutes in response to changes in 
the solar wind, and the motion of the shock can be in the 
range 10-100 km s-!. One important consequence is that 
observations of the bow shock are usually due to the shock 
moving over a spacecraft, rather than to the motion of the 
spacecraft around its orbit. The motion of the shock allows 
a translation from a time series of measurements to a cross- 
section through the shock giving its spatial structure. This 
can obviously become impossible if the shock is unsteady. 

The overall shape of the bow shock has been 
investigated by collating large sets of shock crossings 
determined from measurements of the magnetic field. 
Most models used to fit the observations are cylindrically 
symmetric conic sections (i.e. the surface generated by 
rotating a parabola or hyperbola around its symmetry 
axis), with suitable scaling to take into account variation 
of the solar wind ram pressure. Locating the bow shock 
at any given time is not yet a precise operation, since the 
magnetospheric obstacle is not rigid, but also responds 
to changes in the solar wind pressure and magnetic field 
orientation. 

The bow shock is important for different reasons. The 
solar wind flow is processed by the shock before it hits the 
magnetosphere, so the coupling between solar wind and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Bow Shock 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Electron lon 
foreshock 


Bimr 


foreshock 


15 20 25 


10 


1 
55" 22"00" 05™ 


Bow shock 


Figure 1. A schematic view of the Earth’s bow shock in the equatorial plane. The direction of the upstream solar wind flow is indicated 
by Vsw. The upstream IMF direction for typical solar wind conditions is shown by three representative field lines, including the 
tangent field line which defines the upstream edge of the foreshock. For clarity the field lines are shown ending at the bow shock; in 
reality they pass into the magnetosheath and drape around the magnetosphere. The regions of quasi-perpendicular and quasi-parallel 
shock regimes are indicated. Examples of the corresponding different types of shock crossing are shown as time series of the magnetic 
field magnitude in nT (data from ISEE spacecraft—see www.igpp.ucla.edu). The typical zones of the electron and ion foreshocks are 


shown upstream of the bow shock. 


magnetosphere is mediated by the shock and its down- 
stream region (the magnetosheath). More importantly the 
bow shock is an accessible example of an astrophysical 
shock in a collisionless plasma. Such shocks are believed 
to be common in a wide range of astrophysical situations, 
and the Earth’s bow shock allows us to study in detail 
shock processes such as dissipation, wave generation and 
particle acceleration. A spacecraft crossing the shock takes 
between seconds and minutes, and in that time instrumen- 
tation can record the electric and magnetic fields and par- 
ticle distribution functions at high resolution. This has 
allowed an analysis of the plasma processes producing 
the necessary dissipation at the shock and how these pro- 
cesses, and hence the shock structure, are controlled by 
variations in the solar wind parameters. Observations of 
the bow shock show that it is a rich source of waves and 
energetic particles, and in situ observations have provided 
something like a plasma laboratory, so that much of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


physics of collisionless shocks has been deciphered. 


Different kinds of shock 


From the earliest spacecraft observations it became clear 
that there are different types of collisionless shock, and 
that these correspond to different solar wind parameters 
(See SOLAR WIND SHOCK WAVES AND DISCONTINUITIES). These 
parameters include the speed, density and temperature, 
but also, and most importantly, the direction of the 
upstream interplanetary magnetic field (IMF). Observed 
crossings of the bow shock are generally divided into two 
broad classes, depending on the so-called shock normal 
angle 6z,, between the upstream magnetic field and the 
normal vector to the shock surface. If the magnetic field 
upstream of the shock is more nearly perpendicular to the 
shock normal (i.e. parallel to the shock surface) then the 
shock is called quasi-perpendicular. If the field is more 
parallel to the shock normal, then the shock is termed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Bow Shock 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


quasi-parallel. Usually the dividing line between these 
two classes is taken as 45°, so that a quasi-perpendicular 
shock has 63, > 45°, and a quasi-parallel shock has 62, < 
45°. The dividing line is slightly arbitrary, it is sometimes 
difficult to accurately assign a value of 63, in the case of a 
quasi-parallel shock. There are other divisions to be made 
when categorizing shock crossings. The Mach number 
(the ratio of the upstream flow speed normal to the shock 
to the characteristic wave speed) also plays an important 
role. For typical solar wind conditions the bow shock has 
a high Mach number (e.g. an Alfvén Mach number 5-10). 

Quasi-perpendicular and quasi-parallel shocks have 
very different structures, as is evident from, for example, 
profiles of the magnetic field through a shock crossing. 
Quasi-perpendicular shocks have a single sharp gradient, 
relatively smooth upstream flow, although with waves in 
the downstream region caused by the shock. Such shocks 
most closely resemble the laminar flow discontinuity that 
would be expected at an ordinary gas shock. Quasi- 
parallel shocks are much more convoluted: the shock 
transition is embedded in large amplitude waves both 
upstream and downstream, and it is often very difficult 
to assign an exact moment for the shock crossing. The 
shock crossing appears much thicker than in the quasi- 
perpendicular shock, but even within the extended quasi- 
parallel shock transition one can find abrupt changes with 
sharp gradients similar to the quasi-perpendicular shock. 
The presence of waves in the solar wind upstream of 
the quasi-parallel shock can make it difficult to assign an 
accurate value for the 03, of the shock, since the waves 
are convected into the shock by the flow and produce an 
ever-changing shock normal angle. 

As discussed above, the bow shock forms a curved 
surface shrouding the Earth’s magnetosphere, and the 
interplanetary field, over the scale length of the bow 
shock, is typically uniform. Consequently, the shock 
normal angle varies over the surface of the bow shock, and 
the locations of quasi-perpendicular and quasi-parallel 
portions of the bow shock are controlled by the direction of 
the IMF. Thus, observationally, as well as rapid traversals 
of the shock because of its motion in response to changing 
solar wind ram pressure, the type of the shock crossing 
can change because of changes in the IMF direction. 

The fundamental differences in structure between the 
major shock classes can be explained by the effect of the 
magnetic field geometry on the motion of particles (mainly 
protons) at, and immediately upstream of, the shock. The 
two important components of particle motion are motion 
along and gyration perpendicular to the field direction. 
At a high Mach number shock, such as the bow shock, 
the magnetic field increases by a factor of about four, 
from upstream to downstream, although peaks at the 
shock ramp itself can be greater. The field jump at such 
shocks can produce reflection of some of the protons in the 
incoming flow. This process depends completely on the 
kinetic properties of forces on individual protons, and so 
can never be included properly ina fluid model of a plasma 
shock. Ion reflection seems to be a ubiquitous property of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


high Mach number shocks, irrespective of their 4g, value. 
Ion reflection is observed using particle instruments which 
can measure not just particle density but also the particle 
velocity space by simultaneously recording particle energy 
and arrival direction. 

The ion reflection process occurs at the location of high 
gradient in the field and is approximately specular, i.e. the 
component of velocity normal to the shock is reversed. The 
resultant velocity has components away from the shock 
along the magnetic field direction, and also, importantly, 
perpendicular to the field. The latter produces gyrational 
motion with a gyroradius of the order of 500 km, which is 
greater than the thickness of the shock ramp. 

Ata quasi-perpendicular shock the field lines are near 
parallel to the shock surface, so that motion along the 
field does not lead to rapid escape from the shock. At 
the same time the gyromotion about the field forces the 
ions to return to the shock ramp, where, on their second 
encounter, they are likely to pass into the downstream 
region. On the other hand, at a quasi-parallel shock the 
field-aligned motion can help guide any reflected ions 
away from the shock ramp before their gyration brings 
them back. Similar arguments show that particle motion 
across the shock, from downstream to upstream against 
the flow, is much more likely to occur at quasi-parallel 
shocks than at quasi-perpendicular shocks. 

These fundamentally different behaviors, re-encount- 
er with the shock or escape from it, lead to different 
(collisionless) heating mechanisms at the different types 
of shock. At the quasi-perpendicular shock the reflected- 
gyrating ions which re-encounter the shock pass into the 
downstream region where they contribute most of the ion 
heating. In effect, the reflection process provides a direct 
conversion, for a small fraction (~15%) of the incoming 
ions, from upstream kinetic (flow) energy to downstream 
thermal (gyrating) energy. As described this process is not 
true dissipation, but the large temperature anisotropy of 
the gyrating ions makes the plasma unstable to a number of 
different wave modes (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: WAVES). 
These waves scatter and isotropize the ions leading to true 
dissipation. 


The foreshock 

Before we consider thermalization at the quasi-parallel 
shock, there is a unique feature of collisionless shocks to 
be described. The argument concerning the 6, control of 
escape from the shock actually depends on the velocity 
of the particles concerned. If a particle has sufficiently 
high velocity at even the quasi-perpendicular shock, i.e. 
if its motion away from the shock along the field is 
faster than the speed at which the field line is convected 
into the shock, then it will be able to escape into the 
region upstream of the shock. By the various mechanisms 
of shock acceleration the bow shock does produce both 
energetic electrons and ions, and with sufficient velocities 
to stream ahead of the shock. The region upstream of the 
shock populated by energetic particles and their related 
waves, is termed the foreshock. Because the energetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Bow Shock 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


populations have unstable velocity space distributions 
(e.g. beam like) they can drive a wide range of plasma 
waves from electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies 
(80 kHz), through electrostatic Langmuir waves (40 kHz), 
down to low-frequency MHD-like waves (50 mHz). 

The foreshock only exists because of the collisionless 
nature of the solar wind, and the various wave types and 
energetic particles present there can only be explained 
using kinetic, as opposed to fluid, theories (see SOLAR WIND: 
KINETIC PROPERTIES). Furthermore, the foreshock is vital to 
understanding several basic phenomena at the bow shock 
itself, such as particle acceleration and, in the case of the 
quasi-parallel shock, even the shock structure. It can be 
seen that in some ways the existence of the foreshock 
undermines our discussion of the shock location as the 
limit of an obstacle’s influence in the upstream flow. 
The velocities of the energetic particles are greater than 
the wave speeds of the plasma. On the other hand, 
the associated energy densities within the foreshock are 
small enough that the solar wind flow is only slightly 
affected. Indeed, if the foreshock were to strongly affect 
the incoming flow, then the position and nature of the 
bow shock would be changed drastically, which would 
feedback to the characteristics of the shock. 

The foreshock has definite regions within it character- 
ized by different energetic particle populations and asso- 
ciated waves (See SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES). The up- 
stream edge of the foreshock is the surface everywhere 
parallel to the solar wind magnetic field and tangential 
to the bow shock surface. The foreshock does not extend 
indefinitely upstream, since particles are eventually scat- 
tered and coupled to the solar wind flow. The foreshock 
global morphology is organized by the IMF direction, the 
bow shock shape, and, crucially, particle cross-field drift 
relative to particle parallel velocity. Particles energized 
at the shock with high speeds will tend to more closely 
follow a field line parallel to the tangent field line. This 
leads to a velocity filter which organizes the foreshock 
spatially, so that one can distinguish an electron foreshock 
and an ion foreshock. In each case one expects, and sees, 
the fastest beams occurring on the upstream edge. Elec- 
tron distributions vary from energetic beams (up to 100 
keV) near the upstream edge to a backstreaming heat flux 
deeper in the foreshock. Ion distributions vary from field- 
aligned beams (with temperatures similar to that of the 
solar wind), through ‘intermediate’, to ‘diffuse’ ions with 
near-isotropic velocity space distributions, with energies 
up to several hundred keV. 

The coupling between the shock and foreshock is vital 
to understanding how the quasi-parallel shock manages 
to heat the incoming flow. Out of this understanding has 
developed what is known as a ‘cyclic reformation’ model. 
Because of the quasi-parallel field geometry, and lack 
of collisions, particles with moderate energies can easily 
stream away in front of the shock. Once there they can 
excite plasma instabilities, creating a region of interacting 
waves and particles. Since the flow is, by definition, faster 
than the most important wave speeds, the majority of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


waves in the foreshock must eventually be convected by 
the flow into, and through, the shock itself. Based on 
simulations and observations, high Mach number quasi- 
parallel shocks have a highly dynamic structure which 
alternates between a sharp transition in the field (and 
correspondingly the thermalization) and a longer, more 
gradual transition. This alternation cycles in time and is 
linked to the convection of upstream waves (generated 
by foreshock ions) into the shock layer, which modifies 
the local shock normal angle. Furthermore, periodic 
bursts of reflected ions (with ~20% the incident density) 
are observed within the shock structure. These reflected 
ions appear to be specularly reflected out of the incident 
distribution. It is the interaction of the foreshock waves, 
as they are swept into the shock, with the reflected ions 
which forms one part of the reformation cycle mechanism. 
This model can be taken further by admitting that that the 
upstream waves, which control the shock structure, are 
only coherent over a certain scale length. Consequently, it 
had been suggested that the idea of a single shock surface, 
in the quasi-parallel regime, has to be abandoned, and that 
different parts of the bow shock are at different stages in 
the cycle from abrupt to extended transition. 


D Burgess 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


Magnetospheric convection is the process whereby ions and 
electrons are transported throughout the magnetosphere, 
the region of space dominated by the Earth’s magnetic 
field (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH). Throughout much of 
the magnetosphere, the ions and electrons travel together 
with the same velocity perpendicular to the magnetic 
field; this is called the convection velocity u and is given 
numerically by uz; = [E x B]/B?, where the local 
magnetic and electric fields are B and E, respectively. In 
the absence of time variations and significant magnetic- 
field-aligned electric fields, magnetospheric convection 
patterns can be deduced from electric-field patterns in 
the ionosphere. At high energies and in regions of large 
field gradients, however, particles also exhibit energy- and 
charge-dependent drifts, such that they move at field- 
perpendicular speeds significantly different from the local 
convection velocity. 


Particle motions 
Drift velocities 
The motion of a charged particle in magnetic and electric 
fields can be resolved into several components, with 
fundamental time constants relevant to each. The 
magnetic, or Lorentz, force is given by F = qu x B, where 
the particle velocity perpendicular to the field line is v, 
and the particle charge (including sign) is given by q. 
This force results in a gyromotion of particles around the 
field line: the particle moves in circles around the field 
line. The particle’s velocity parallel to the field line v, is 
unchanged by the Lorentz force, so that the net motion 
is a helix around the field line. The angular frequency 
of this circular motion is called the gyrofrequency w, given 
by qB/m, where m is the particle mass. The radius of 
curvature of this gyromotion is called the gyroradius and 
is given by v,/w. , where the velocity perpendicular to 
the field line is v,. Electrons move in a right-hand sense 
around the field direction, and ions in a left-hand sense. 
This is typically the fastest temporal scale and shortest 
spatial scale for plasma motion, and, so long as the electric 
and magnetic fields do not change on these scales, leads 
to a conservation of particle magnetic moment mv’?, /2B. 
Because of the strength of the Lorentz force, any other 
external force perpendicular to the magnetic field does 
not result in a free acceleration along that force direction, 
but instead results in a particle drift uy perpendicular 
to both the magnetic field and the external force: ug = 
(Fix, X B)/qB?. This drift can be visualized to result 
from changes in the gyroradius of the particle during one 
cycle (figure 1(top)). During the part of the cycle where 
the particle is moving along the force, its perpendicular 
velocity and therefore its gyroradius is increasing; during 
the other half of the cycle, the particle moves opposite 
to the external force and its velocity is decreasing. This 
leads to a cycloidal motion that is the sum of the simple 
circular motion plus a steady drift given by uz. The center 
of curvature of the circular motion is called the guiding 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Electric Field (E x B) Drift 


Electric nae} (OO*% path 


electron path 


fo) Magnetic Field 
(out of page) 


Gradient Drift 
electron path 


\s 6 


: A low energy 


VB ro) 


gradient 
high energy 


Figure 1. Top: drifts from external forces result in a drift 
perpendicular to the magnetic field and the force. In the case of 
the electric field, the drift is an E x B drift. Bottom: gradients in 
the field magnitude also result in particle drift, with the fastest 
drift for higher-energy particles. 


center. Thus the particle motion can be thought of as the 
sum of the circular gyration plus the drift motion of the 
guiding center. For the case where the external force is 
from a large-scale electric field E, the drift velocity is given 
by ug =[E x B]/B’. 

Since the electric-field drift is neither mass, energy, 
nor charge dependent, it represents the drift of the entire 
low-energy plasma population and is called the convection 
velocity or E x B drift. A flux tube is a set of field lines which 
cross a particular area. Consider the set of particles which 
all have their guiding centers on the field line in the center 
ofa flux tube. Since all of these particles drift together, their 
guiding centers permanently remain on the same field 
line as each other. Therefore, you can imagine the entire 
magnetic flux tube and its associated particles moving as a 
unit. This is the idea of frozen-in-flux, which was developed 
by HANNES ALFVEN. This approximation breaks down if 
the magnetic field changes topology (as by reconnection, 
see MAGNETIC RECONNECTION) or if electric fields along the 
magnetic field accelerate particles along the field line, but 
it is a useful way to visualize the large-scale motion of 
low-energy plasma. 

If there is no electric field aligned along the magnetic 
field (£,), and if the fields are steady state, then 
each magnetic-field line is an equipotential. Thus 
perpendicular electric fields at high altitudes are simply 
mapped to electric fields at low altitudes and the motion 
of the plasma at the high-altitude end of the field 
line is reflected in the motion of the plasma in the 
ionosphere. Each flow path is an equipotential in steady- 
state conditions. 

The second periodic motion of a particle trapped in 
the Earth’s magnetic field is its bounce motion from one 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vsw — 


Y T 


U 


Figure 2. Schematic of magnetic reconnection. The Sun is to the left. Two southward-pointing solar-wind field lines separated in the Y 
direction have a potential drop across them, with line zy (gray, in background) at a higher potential than ZY (in foreground). When 
those field lines connect to the Earth’s field at the dayside X-line (HL), the potential drop aA is mapped to HL and from thence down 
to the ionosphere (pq). This electric field sets the ionosphere in motion. As the solar wind convects from a to b to c to d, the 
ionospheric feet of those field lines move antisunward as well. The open fields reconnect at the tail X-line (FN), which maps to the 
ionosphere as line rs. The newly closed field lines convect back sunward (not shown) to complete the cycle. 


hemisphere to the other. The particle, preserving its first 
adiabatic invariant (the magnetic moment mv? /2B) and its 
total energy mv? /2, increases its pitch angle a(= sin! v, /v) 
as it travels towards the Earth from the equatorial plane. 
When its pitch angle reaches 90°, the particle’s parallel 
velocity goes to zero then reverses. The particle mirrors 
and returns to the other hemisphere. The integral of the 
parallel velocity along a bounce path leads to the second 
adiabatic invariant, which is also conserved if the fields 
change slowly compared to the bounce period. 


Energy-dependent drifts 

Higher-energy particles have energy-dependent drifts in 
addition to their convection velocity. Gradient drift is 
a result of a change in magnetic-field strength over the 
course of one gyration (figure 1(bottom)), in a manner 
similar to E x B drift (figure 1(top)). The effect is to 
move high-energy particles along a contour of constant 
field strength. Similarly, if the particles move along 
a curved field line, the centrifugal force also leads to 
a particle drift. In the Earth’s equatorial plane, both 
gradient and curvature drifts lead to westward drift of 
ions and eastward drift of electrons. The drifts are given 
by u, = (mv; Bx VB) /2q B° for the gradient drift, and u, = 
—(mv; R x B)/R?qB? (where R is the radius of curvature 
of the field line) for the curvature drift. These charge- 
dependent drifts lead to a westward current circling the 
Earth, the ring current (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RING 
CURRENT). Since the drift velocity depends on the energy 
of the particles, it can be shown that the intensity of 
the ring current is proportional to the energy density of 
the particles in the ring current. Since the gradient drift 
is perpendicular to the field gradient, energetic particles 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


trapped in the equatorial plane move along contours of 
constant B. The drift cycle around the Earth leads toa third 
adiabatic invariant, which is less frequently conserved 
(because it requires field constancy on the timescale of a 
drift period, which is minutes to hours, depending on the 
energy of the particle and its distance from Earth). Again, 
the motion of the guiding center is a useful concept for 
following particle trajectories. However, because of the 
larger gyroradii of energetic particles, a particle can be lost 
from the magnetosphere even if its guiding center remains 
inside. 


Steady-state convection 

Corotation 

Near the Earth, the low-energy plasma motion is 
dominated by corotation. Collisional drag between the 
ionosphere and the neutral atmosphere sets up currents 
which create an electric field which brings the less 
massive magnetospheric plasma into flow equilibrium 
with the neutral atmosphere. Mapping the electric field 
from the ionosphere to the magnetosphere then results 
in the inner-magnetosphere low-energy plasma (the 
plasmasphere) drifting around the Earth counterclockwise 
once per 24 h (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMASPHERE). 
In rotation-dominated magnetospheres such as Jupiter’s, 
partial corotation is observed essentially throughout the 
magnetosphere, although significant slippage occurs in 
the outer magnetosphere, and near the orbit of the 
satellite Io where the ionization rate is large (see JUPITER: 
MAGNETOSPHERE). In Earth’s magnetosphere, however, 
corotation only dominates close to the Earth (within about 
4-6 R,z). The convection electric field from corotation is 
given by Eo, = —(Q x r) x B, where 2 is the angular 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


frequency of the Earth and r the radius vector to the 
location in question. 


Solar-wind-driven convection 

Although the motion of cold plasma trapped near the 
Earth is dominated by corotation, the motion of the bulk 
of the magnetosphere is determined by its large-scale 
interaction with the soLaR winD. The Earth’s magnetic 
field has a defined outer boundary, the magnetopause (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE). The solar wind 
flowing past the magnetosphere sets up a convective 
flow inside the magnetosphere, so that the regions of the 
magnetosphere just inside the boundary flow antisunward 
(i.e. in the same direction as the neighboring solar wind), 
and the plasmas deeper in the magnetosphere have a 
return sunward flow. 

This antisunward motion can either be driven by 
quasi-viscous forces at the magnetopause (e.g. diffusion 
of particles across the boundary or momentum transfer 
by large-amplitude Kelvin-Helmholtz surface waves), or 
by magnetic reconnection. Magnetic reconnection is the 
process whereby plasma flows across a boundary between 
regimes of different magnetic topology. In the case of 
the Earth, dayside (northward pointing) closed field lines 
become connected. to southward-pointing interplanetary 
magnetic field lines, with a transfer of flux across the 
boundary (figure 2). The mapping of the solar-wind 
electric field throughout the magnetosphere leads to 
a large-scale convection pattern with a dawn-to-dusk 
electric field (figure 3). The reconnection model has 
had spectacular successes in predicting the variation of 
the convection speed and direction as a function of 
interplanetary conditions (see below), and is considered 
the dominant form of solar-wind interaction. MHD 
models of the magnetosphere, with their numerical 
resistivity, naturally yield both forms of interaction 
process. 


Combined flows 

The simplest models of convection merely added the ex- 
ternally driven convection electric field vectorially to the 
corotation electric field. However, it can be shown that, 
in steady conditions, electric charges on the inner edge 
of the plasma sheet shield the inner magnetosphere from 
the solar-wind-driven convection. In times of changing 
convection, however, this external convection electric field 
penetrates more easily. In times of increasing convection, 
the outer parts of the plasmasphere can be stripped off and 
convect to the dayside magnetopause, creating tongues of 
plasma. The combined flow is shown in the bottom panel 
of figure 3. 


Convection for southward IMF 

This transport of plasma across the magnetopause 
boundary in an open geometry requires an electric field 
along the x line. The integral of E along the x 
line, sometimes called the dayside reconnection rate Rp, 
represents the rate at which closed dayside flux becomes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


"eens 
eT EPP 
suennens 


sissuiiceneannntaa jacana yeicbbd aaaaaiaitnensnesessnssies siatutenntiats 


puneenenenenennen a 
a ae Tae 


", 


on *, 

asus 

rt meta, Me 
te, 


Figure 3. Schematic of convection in the ionosphere (top) and 
the corresponding flow paths in the equatorial plane (middle). 
The flow paths intersect the magnetopause at the dayside (HL) 
and nightside (FN) x-lines, which map to the ionosphere at pq 
and rs, respectively. A small convection cell from viscosity is 
shown on the edges of the middle panel. Adding in the 
corotation electric field and the plasma sheet shielding yields the 
bottom convection pattern. 


‘open’, or interconnected to the interplanetary magnetic 
field. The dayside x line is shown as HL in figures 2 and 
3, with H at the higher potential. 

Similarly, the flux transfer rate across the nightside 
portion of the x line, denoted by Ry, represents the rate at 
which open magnetic flux is closed. This x line is shown as 
FN in figures 2 and 3. Over a long time average, (Rp) must 
equal (RN), but the two instantaneous rates frequently dif- 
fer. When Rp > Ry, the amount of open flux increases 
and thus the size of the polar cap (the footprint of the open 
field line region in the ionosphere) increases. Magnetic en- 
ergy stored in the tail likewise increases. When Ry > Rp, 
open flux in the magnetotail closes and the polar cap size 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Electric Potential 


By=-7nT Bz=7nT 


-22 Oo MLT 21 


By=-10nT Bz=0 


-34 


Oo MLT 32 


618 


-42 Oo MLT 30 
By=-7nT Bz=-7nT 


By =OnT Bz=10nT 


By=OnT Bz=-10nT 


By = 7nT,, Bz = 7 nT 


O MLT 


By = 10nT,,Bz=0 


oO MLT Oo MLT 30 


By=7nT Bz=-7 nT 


-60 -50 


-40 -30 -20 -10 -3 


3 10 20 30 40 50 60 k¥ 


Figure 4. Ionospheric convection patterns for various orientations of the IMF (adapted from Weimer D R 1996 Geophys. Res. Lett. 23 
2549-52). In each case the view is from above the Earth’s north magnetic pole and the Sun is towards the top. The minimum and 


maximum potential for each case is shown at the bottom. 


decreases. The magnetic energy is released in a substorm 
(See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). In a steady state, 
Rp = Ry = ® pc, the electric potential drop across the an- 
tisunward flowing part of the ionosphere. This polar cap 
potential drop ®,,. thus characterizes the global rate of con- 
vection, both in the ionosphere and in the magnetosphere. 
Polar cap potentials range from a minimum near 20 kV in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


quiet times to 200 kV, or more in very active times, with a 
median value near 50 kV. 

In the ionosphere, the flow lines (which are 
equipotentials) form closed contours and a convection 
pattern can be discerned, with generally antisunward flow 
on the field lines inside the polar cap (connected to the 
antisunward-flowing solar wind), with sunward return 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Schematic of reconnection of the Earth’s field (light 
lines) with an IMF with a positive B, component (heavy lines; 
view from the sun). The merging line (not shown) runs from C 
to D across the dayside. Newly interconnected field lines 
(shown dashed) are dragged tailward by the solar wind. Tension 
in the field lines (A—a) and (B-b) causes the flow to cross noon 
from dawn to dusk in the northern hemisphere and from dusk to 
dawn in the southern hemisphere (open arrows). 


Figure 6. Four-cell convection pattern frequently observed for 
strongly northward IMF. In this case four spacecraft passes 
confirmed the location and orientation of the convection cells. 
(Adapted from Maynard N C et al 1998 J. Geophys. Res. 103 
29-46). 


flow on closed field lines at lower latitudes (figure 3). The 
integral of the electric field around the polar cap boundary 
must (by Faraday’s law) equal the negative time change of 
the magnetic flux enclosed. Since the Earth’s magnetic 
field is constant, then the integral of the electric field 
around the boundary in the Earth’s frame of reference 
must be zero and the convection pattern will look like 
closed flow contours, even in times when the merging rates 
differs between the dayside and the nightside. This flow 
pattern changes in strength and skew with the magnitude 
and orientation of the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF). 
The larger the southward (negative B,) component of the 
IMF, the larger the polar cap potential drop. One typically 
uses a Geocentric Solar Magnetospheric (GSM) coordinate 
system for the IMF. The +xgsm axis is defined as pointing 
from the Earth to the Sun; the +z axis points generally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


towards the ecliptic north, but is tilted so that the Earth’s 
dipole is in the x-zc¢gm plane; and the ycsm axis completes 
a right-hand system, with positive y pointing generally 
opposite to the Earth’s orbital motion. 

The very strong dependence of the potential on the 
IMF B, is the most compelling evidence for magnetic 
merging being the dominant form of momentum transfer 
from the solar wind to the magnetosphere. Empirical 
studies also indicate a background potential drop 
(5-15 keV) that is not related to B, but does appear to 
depend on the solar-wind velocity squared. This may 
indicate a small diffusive or turbulent momentum transfer 
across the magnetopause, or it may just indicate that the 
best functional form for the merging momentum transfer 
has not yet been found. 


By, effects 

The effect of the y component (dawn-dusk) of the IMF 
is to skew the flow pattern from dawn to dusk, with the 
flow asymmetry opposite in opposite hemispheres. In 
the northern hemisphere, for example, for IMF B, > 0, 
the dayside flow in the polar cap crosses noon from the 
dusk side to the dawn side, making the antisunward flow 
strongest near the dawn polar cap boundary. Just below 
the polar cap boundary, in the closed field regions, the flow 
is eastward. 

For B,<0 (or for B,>0 in the southern hemisphere), 
the flow is in the opposite sense: towards dusk below 
the polar cap boundary, and towards dawn above it. 
Convection patterns for various orientations of the IMF 
are shown in figure 4. These patterns, from fits to 
low-altitude electric-field measurements, are similar to 
those compiled from ionospheric flow measurements 
or ionospheric magnetic-field perturbations. However, 
being fitted functions to many passes of spacecraft data, 
they have smaller gradients than are typically observed in 
a single spacecraft pass. 

The dawn-dusk asymmetry of the flow can be best 
explained in terms of the field tension resulting from 
interconnection with the IMF (figure 5). The dayside x-line 
is tilted along the current direction so that the component 
of the IMF along the x-line is constant as the magnetopause 
is traversed. Since the reconnected field line has one end in 
the duskside magnetosheath and its footpoint in the dawn 
ionosphere, the foot is dragged duskward. 

Most published convection patterns (as in figure 4) 
are given with the Earth’s rotation subtracted. This 
leads to a less-cluttered plot, since the equipotentials at 
low latitudes are dominated by corotation. The plasma 
sheet shielding effect (see above) means that convection 
patterns with corotation subtracted generally do not 
extend below about 55° invariant latitude. The lack of 
convection below 50° is useful in calibrating electric field 
and velocity measurements, which can suffer minor offsets 
from modest pointing errors. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vsw — 
Z 


Figure 7. Reconnection of northward-pointing IMF field lines (YZ and yz) with the tail field lines tailward of the cusp. The 
magnetosheath flow causes the IMF to bend, having a tendency to follow the curvature of the magnetopause (TA and ta). Dipole tilt or 
the x-component of the IMF will favor reconnection in one hemisphere or another (here shown in the north). After reconnection at the 
x-line FN, dusk to dawn electric field in the magnetosphere gets mapped down to the ionosphere, creating sunward flow on the 
dayside. Tension then swings the flow to the dawn or dusk, depending on the sign of B,. (Gray field lines are farther away; black field 


lines are closer). 


Convection for northward IMF 

In times of northward IMF, the polar cap convection is 
more complicated. Since the dayside reconnection rate 
Rp decreases, the polar cap has a tendency to shrink. 
Furthermore, since less magnetic flux connects to the 
solar wind, the electric potential across the polar cap also 
decreases. Effects of the y component of the IMF (see 
above) become more pronounced. 

The most dramatic difference from southward IMF 
conditions is the appearance within the polar cap of 
substantial regions of sunward flow. If the IMF B, is 
large, the polar cap convection can exhibit a single large 
convection cell with, e.g., sunward flow on the dawn side 
and antisunward flow on the dusk side, as occurs for B, 
large and negative in the northern hemisphere (see figure 
4). When the northward component of the IMF is larger 
than the B, component, the convection can show a four- 
cell pattern: there is a central pair of cells with sunward 
flow in the central part of the polar cap and antisunward 
flow around the edges, which is similar to but opposite 
in sense to the normal convection pattern, and lower 
latitude cells of the normal sense. Although the driving 
mechanism for this kind of convection is still controversial, 
the existence of the pattern is well established, both by 
multiple spacecraft passes (e.g. figure 6) or from arrays of 
velocity measurements from ground-based radar. 

The driving mechanism for the higher-latitude 
reverse cell is considered to be ‘reverse reconnection’: 
connection of high-latitude field lines with the IMF 
tailward of the magnetospheric cusps (figure 7) (see also 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: DAYSIDE CUSP). Reconnection can 
occur in just one hemisphere (as is shown here), or in more 
unlikely circumstances, can occur in both hemispheres 
simultaneously, leading to the creation of newly closed 
magnetic flux. In addition, there exists a lower-latitude 
pair of cells in the forward sense (antisunward at higher 
latitudes) which persists even when the higher-latitude 
cells reverse direction. The driving mechanism for 
these lower-latitude cells could either be small-scale 
magnetopause reconnection, closure of open field lines (in 
cases where Ry > Rp), or quasi-viscous processes at the 
magnetopause. 


Time-dependent convection 

Increasing reconnection 

The difference between the dayside and nightside merging 
rate results in an expansion (if Rp > Ry) or contraction 
(if Rp < Ry) of the open field region, while maintaining 
closed flow contours in the ionosphere. The merging 
rate is the integral of the electric field along the x-line 
in the moving frame of reference. The difference between 
the electric field in the x-line’s frame of reference and in 
the Earth’s frame of reference is just vp, x B, where vp, is 
the speed of the polar cap boundary in the Earth’s frame 
of reference. 

The dayside convection pattern is observed to change 
very rapidly in response to changes in the IMF, with the 
information propagating to the ground at approximately 
the Alfvén speed (a few minutes from the magnetopause). 
The changes in the dayside flow get communicated to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Convection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the nightside portion of the ionosphere more slowly 
(5-10 min), but still significantly faster than the convection 
time from the dayside to the nightside along the 
magnetopause (30-60 min). 

During times of increasing reconnection, the shield- 
ing currents do not have time to be set up and strong sun- 
ward flows can be observed at relatively low latitudes. It 
is in these times that plasmas in the outer portions of the 
plasmasphere can be stripped away. 


Bursty bulk flows 

Nightside reconnection results in newly-closed field lines 
which then shorten and move earthward. The flows in 
the magnetotail are observed to be unsteady, however, 
with short (~ 1 min) bursts of rapid flow separated by 
several minutes of slow flow. The sunward flow in the 
magnetotail may be choked off because, as the flux tube 
travels earthward, its volume decreases and the plasma 
pressure inside increases. This leads to a back pressure 
retarding the flow. 


Decreasing reconnection 

After a northward turning of the IMF, the dayside 
reconnection rate is smaller than the nightside rate. 
The flow across the nightside X-line need not stop 
immediately, however, and the polar cap boundary 
retreats poleward. Open magnetotail flux becomes closed. 
Northward turnings of the IMF have frequently been 
associated with the expansion onset of substorm, but the 
cause of that association has not been proven. 

If the convection is decreasing, the pre-existing 
shielding currents are too strong for the new convection 
pattern, and an overshielding condition can occur. This 
can result in significant antisunward flows at low latitudes 
until a new steady state is established. This effect (plus 
the effect of continuing nightside reconnection) may be 
a significant driver of the lower-latitude cells observed 
during northward IMF conditions (see figure 7). 


Summary 

The convection of plasmas in the Earth’s magnetosphere 
is becoming better understood, both from a theoretical 
standpoint and from in situ measurements. However, 
the magnetosphere is rarely steady in space or in time, 
and the effects of rapid time variations on the merging 
rate are still not well understood. By using multiple 
spacecraft measurements, coordinating with arrays of 
velocity measurements from ground-based radars, we can 
begin to elucidate better the changes in the convection in 
response to both changes in the IMF and from internal 
changes such as substorms. 


Patricia Reiff 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Dayside Cusp 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Dayside 
Cusp 


The magnetospheric cusps are the dayside, polar regions 
of the magnetosphere that have the first direct magnetic 
connection to interplanetary space as the SOLAR WIND 
flows past the magnetosphere. This direct magnetic 
connection allows solar wind and magnetosheath particles 
and energy to enter the magnetosphere, beginning the 
complex coupling between interplanetary space and 
Earth’s environment. Because the solar wind that is 
continuously flowing toward Earth is highly variable, 
the cusps are dynamic regions, changing abruptly as 
the driving forces in the solar wind change. The 
magnetospheric cusps provide an important window 
to interplanetary space, and a natural laboratory to 
investigate the coupling of mass, momentum and energy 
from the flowing solar wind into Earth’s magnetosphere, 
ionosphere and upper atmosphere. 

The magnetospheric cusps extend from the dayside 
magnetopause into the northern and the southern polar 
regions of Earth (figure 1; see also figure 1(a) of 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH). The location of the cusps and their 
properties depend strongly on the interaction occurring on 
the magnetopause between the flowing magnetosheath on 
its outer surface and the magnetosphere that is confined 
within. The dominant process that facilitates the linkage 
across. the magnetopause is MAGNETIC RECONNECTION. 
If magnetic reconnection were not occurring on the 
magnetopause, i.e. if the magnetosphere were ‘closed’, 
the magnetospheric magnetic field would lie tangent to 
the magnetopause everywhere along its inner surface. 
The magnetic field over this entire surface would trace 
to a vanishingly small region at the magnetic poles. 
Consequently, any plasma that crossed the magnetopause 
and flowed into the magnetosphere along the magnetic 
field would be focused into these narrow regions at the 
northern and the southern poles. The occurrence of 
magnetic reconnection on the magnetopause causes the 
magnetic field to cross the magnetopause over much of 
its surface, leading to a much broader volume in the 
polar regions into which the magnetosheath plasma will 
flow. The rate of reconnection and its location on the 
magnetopause will determine the energy transfer and the 
breadth of the polar regions into which magnetosheath 
plasma will penetrate, as well as the properties of this 
penetrating plasma. 

Much of what we know about the cusp has been 
obtained from instruments on orbiting satellites, on 
sounding rockets and from ground instrumentation. 
Satellites and rockets are used to measure directly the 
magnetosheath and magnetospheric plasma and fields, 
while ground instruments measure the effects of the 
precipitating plasma and of the interconnection with the 
solar wind on the ionosphere and upper atmosphere. 
The observed low-altitude effects include dayside aurora, 
acceleration of the ionosphere and neutral atmosphere and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Location of the cusps in the magnetosphere. The cusps 
extend from the high-latitude ionosphere and upper atmosphere 
out to the dayside magnetopause. In the case when Earth’s 
magnetic field is interconnected with interplanetary space, the 
magnetosheath and magnetospheric plasma freely mix across 
the open magnetopause (arrows crossing magnetopause). 


heating of ionospheric plasma that then flows out and 
populates the magnetosphere. 


The properties of the cusp are described here by 
considering the case in which the interplanetary magnetic 
field (IMF) is directed southward. Under these conditions, 
the solar wind drives the magnetospheric and ionospheric 
plasma mainly in the anti-Sunward direction, and the 
dominant source of cusp plasma is the low-latitude 
dayside magnetosheath. For different orientations of 
the solar wind magnetic field, the magnetosphere and 
ionosphere are pulled in different directions, and the 
location where the cusp is connected to the magnetopause 
varies. Since the IMF is typically quite variable, the cusp 
regions at any given time can be rather complex, reflecting 
a history of competing forces and magnetosheath source 
properties. 


When the IMF is southward and reconnection oc- 
curs at low latitudes on the equatorial magnetopause, 
the Earth’s high-latitude magnetic field becomes inter- 
connected with the low-latitude magnetosheath (figure 1). 
These interconnected field lines extend from Earth out to 
the high-speed solar wind in interplanetary space. As a 
consequence of the interconnection of the field lines across 
the magnetopause, the magnetosheath plasma flows freely 
into the magnetosphere, and the magnetospheric plasma 
escapes out into the magnetosheath and eventually to in- 
terplanetary space. This interchange of plasma across the 
magnetopause is illustrated with the arrows in figure 1. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Dayside Cusp 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observing the cusp 

Inside the magnetosphere, the entering magnetosheath 
plasma and the escaping magnetospheric plasma can be 
clearly identified. This is due in part to the different 
densities and temperatures of the plasma on either side 
of the magnetopause, and in part to the different mass 
composition in the two regions. The plasma in the 
outer dayside magnetosphere typically has a low density 
(<1 cm~) and a high temperature (~108 K). In the dayside 
magnetosheath, the density is considerably higher (1- 
100 cm~3), and the temperature is lower (10°-10’ K). 
Consequently, when a satellite moving from low to high 
latitudes within the magnetosphere crosses the boundary 
between open and closed field lines, it will detect the 
entering magnetosheath plasma at the lower energies, 
below about 1 keV for the electrons and below about 
10 keV for the ions. There will also be an abrupt decrease 
in the higher-energy magnetospheric plasma above these 
approximate energies. The plasma mass composition is 
also used to distinguish plasma of direct solar wind origin 
from plasma of ionospheric origin. Mass composition 
experiments detect the presence of helium nuclei (alpha 
particles) in the cusp with density of a few per cent of the 
hydrogen density. The relative abundance observed in 
the cusp matches well the relative abundance in the solar 
wind and magnetosheath, but is considerably higher than 
the relative abundance in the closed magnetic field portion 
of the outer magnetosphere. 

An example of a crossing through the cusp made by 
NASA’s potaR satellite is shown in figure 2, obtained from 
the Hydra Electron and Ion Hot Plasma Instrument. A 
segment from the orbit of Polar is shown on the right of the 
figure. Over this 3 h time period, the satellite moved from 
low latitudes to high latitudes, remaining near local noon. 
At the end of this time period, Polar was located roughly 
over the geomagnetic pole. The gray intensity indicates 
electron (upper panel) and ion (lower panel) count rates as 
functions of particle energy for energies ranging froma few 
eV to about 20 keV. The ions measured here are primarily 
protons, with a small contribution coming from other 
higher-mass species. Dark regions indicate low count 
rates, and light regions indicate high count rates. The 
locations and energies where the count rates are below a 
threshold level of the instrument are indicated with white. 

The transition from closed to open magnetic field lines 
can be clearly seen in figure 2 at approximately 16:48 UT. 
Prior to this time, Polar detected high-energy electrons 
and ions on the closed magnetospheric field lines, up 
to the highest energies measured. When the boundary 
between open and closed field lines was crossed, the dense, 
lower-energy electrons and ions that originated in the 
magnetosheath were abruptly observed, and the highest- 
energy particles were seen to no longer be present. The 
cusp is the region in the magnetosphere, observed on this 
crossing between approximately 16:48 UT and 18:00 UT, 
where the magnetosheath plasma has entered across the 
dayside magnetopause and filled a funnel-shaped region 
of the magnetosphere that extends down to the ionosphere 
and upper atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spatial and temporal variability of the cusp 

The cusp, which is defined primarily by the density and 
average energy of its plasma, is observed to be localized 
in latitude and in longitude, and exhibits spatial and 
temporal structure. The spatial structure is primarily due 
to the large-scale magnetospheric convection and to the 
large-scale spatial characteristics of the magnetosheath 
and of the magnetopause. The temporal variability of 
the cusp is due primarily to temporal changes in the 
rate and location of magnetic reconnection on the dayside 
magnetopause. 

One of the most consistently observed spatial features 
of the cusp is the variation of the average energy of the 
plasma with latitude. As can be seen in figure 2, the cusp 
ions are concentrated at high energies near the boundary 
between open and closed field lines (at lower latitudes), 
and the average energy decreases as the spacecraft moves 
to higher latitudes. This dependence of particle energy on 
latitude arises from the evolution of the plasma following 
magnetic reconnection. The spatial dependence of the 
cusp plasma depends on three main effects: (a) the travel 
time required for the entering magnetosheath plasma 
to penetrate into the magnetosphere after reconnection 
occurs; (b) the changes in the magnetosheath plasma 
as it flows over the dayside magnetopause; and (c) the 
spatial dependence of plasma acceleration that occurs 
when plasma crosses the magnetopause current sheet. 

The large-scale magnetospheric convection driven by 
reconnection on the dayside magnetopause carries the 
newly interconnected magnetic field and plasma to higher 
latitudes over the polar regions and eventually deep into 
the magnetotail. This flow is directed perpendicular to the 
magnetic field, and carries all plasma along at a common 
convection speed. As time progresses, the magnetopause 
crossing point of a given magnetic field line moves to 
higher latitudes and eventually far down the tail. 

When reconnection first occurs, the magnetosheath 
electrons and ions begin to flow into the magnetosphere 
across the magnetopause. As the particles travel along 
the magnetic field toward the ionosphere, the large-scale 
convection carries the plasma and the magnetic field to 
higher latitudes. Consequently, the particles that have 
very high velocities parallel to the magnetic field will 
quickly penetrate deep into the magnetosphere prior to 
appreciable convection to higher latitudes. Particles with 
low parallel velocities will penetrate more slowly into the 
magnetosphere, and therefore will be convected to higher 
latitudes in the time required for them to penetrate a given 
distance into the magnetosphere. 

Therefore, at the low-latitude edge of the cusp, ie. on 
magnetic field lines that reconnected only a brief time ago, 
the only magnetosheath particles that can be observed are 
those that have a sufficiently high parallel velocity to reach 
the observation locations in the time since reconnection of 
the field line occurred. As an observer moves to higher 
latitudes, ie. onto magnetic field lines that reconnected 
progressively longer ago, magnetosheath plasma with 
progressively lower energies will be observed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Dayside Cusp 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


POLAR /HYDRA 


Electron Energy (eV) 


Ion Energy (eV) 


16:00 17:00 18:00 


Universal Time (hr:mn) 


April 24, 1996 


19:00 


Figure 2. Segment of the orbit of the NASA Polar satellite (right) and electron (upper) and ion (lower) measurements obtained from 
the Hydra instrument on board the Polar satellite (left). Dark shades indicates low particle fluxes, light shades indicate high particle 
fluxes, and the white areas indicate where the particle fluxes are below a threshold level. The cusp is the region of intense, localized 
particle fluxes observed at the lower and intermediate energies for electrons and ions, respectively; in this case after 16.47 UT. 


Another factor that contributes to the plasma 
characteristics in the cusp is the spatial structure of the 
magnetosheath, which is the dominant source population 
for the cusp plasma. At the Sunward-most point of the 
magnetopause, the magnetosheath is highly compressed, 
with a high density, a high temperature and a small 
flow velocity. As the magnetosheath then expands and 
flows over the magnetosphere, its density and temperature 
decrease and its velocity increases, eventually rejoining the 
high-speed solar wind far down tail. Therefore, when the 
reconnected field lines cross the magnetopause near its 
Sunward-most location, the magnetosheath plasma that 
flows into the cusp will have its highest densities and 
temperatures. As the plasma convects away from the 
reconnection site and the magnetopause crossing point of 
the field line moves to higher latitudes, the magnetosheath 
source plasma will have a lower density and temperature 
and higher flow velocity that eventually becomes directed 
away from the cusp. Consequently, the density and 
temperature of plasma entering the cusp will be lower at 
the higher latitudes, as seen in figure 2. 

As the magnetosheath accelerates around the magne- 
tosphere, it eventually becomes supersonic, with its down- 
tail bulk flow speed becoming much larger than the ther- 
mal speed of the ions. Within the thermal distribution 
of the ion velocities, only a very small number of ions will 
then have velocities directed back toward Earth. Although 
the high-latitude magnetospheric field lines are still inter- 
connected with the magnetosheath, which still has an ap- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


preciable density and temperature, no magnetosheath ions 
will be detected deep within the magnetosphere on these 
field lines. This effect contributes to the disappearance of 
the magnetosheath ions at high latitudes. 

Finally, the spatial characteristics of the cusps 
are affected to some extent by the acceleration of 
the magnetosheath plasma as it crosses the open 
magnetopause. The acceleration that particles receive 
is related to the strength and relative orientation 
of the electrical current and the electric field at 
the magnetopause. On the low-latitude dayside 
magnetopause, the current is parallel to the large- 
scale electric field (see figure 1(d) of MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH), causing the particles to be accelerated and 
gain energy as they cross the magnetopause. At high 
latitudes, the magnetopause current reverses direction, 
becoming anti-parallel to the large-scale electric field. 
Particles that cross the magnetopause at these locations 
will be decelerated. This acceleration and deceleration 
across the magnetopause tends to enhance the entry of 
magnetosheath plasma in the low-latitude portion of the 
cusp, and inhibit magnetosheath entry at high latitudes. 

Note, however, that even in the absence of 
magnetosheath ions, the magnetosheath electrons are 
detected continuously throughout the cusp and polar cap 
on the open field lines. Because the electrons have much 
higher speeds than the ions, due to their smaller mass, the 
electron thermal speed remains higher than the tailward 
magnetosheath bulk flow speed. The thermal distribution 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Dayside Cusp 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of magnetosheath electrons will, therefore, always contain 
a large fraction of the total electron density with velocities 
directed earthward along the interconnected magnetic 
field. Because the magnetosheath electrons entering 
the magnetosphere are flowing into a region where 
magnetosheath ions do not have access, the charge balance 
must be accomplished by a background population of 
magnetospheric ions, probably of ionospheric origin. 
Some deceleration of the electrons is likely to occur 
at the magnetopause to maintain charge balance with 
the less dense background ions. The steady entry of 
magnetosheath electrons throughout the entire open polar 
cap is referred to as polar rain. Polar rain electrons are a 
direct tracer of the solar wind electrons that flow rapidly 
along the magnetic field and freely penetrate into the open 
magnetosphere. 

The cusp has been described so far as a steady 
region, whose properties depend on location within the 
region. The cusp, however, is a dynamic region that 
responds rapidly to the changing solar wind conditions 
and to the rate of energy coupling between the solar 
wind and the magnetosphere. Because of the direct 
link between the cusp and the dayside magnetopause, 
the measurements in the cusp are valuable for studying 
magnetic reconnection and its role in energy transfer 
processes in the magnetosphere as well as more generally 
in space and laboratory plasma. 

With steady reconnection, the spatial structure 
measured by a satellite passing through the cusp should 
progress smoothly as it moves from low to high latitudes, 
as described above. At each new latitude, the plasma 
will have slightly different characteristics, reflecting the 
slightly different time that the magnetic field line has 
been open to magnetosheath plasma entry. When the 
reconnection rate is not steady, there will be regions in the 
cusp which underwent reconnection some time ago that 
directly neighbor regions that only recently reconnected. 
In this case, there will be discontinuous jumps in the 
observed cusp plasma between two spatially contiguous 
regions reflecting an abrupt change in the length of time 
that the magnetic field lines have been open. The changes 
in the plasma characteristics across these jumps have been 
used to estimate quantitatively the variations in rate of 
reconnection. It has been found that reconnection often 
occurs in short bursts, of order 1 min or less, separated by 
roughly 10 min. 


Issues for the future 

The cusp is a dynamic region in the magnetosphere 
that directly connects the flowing solar wind with 
Earth’s ionosphere and upper atmosphere. Although the 
dominant processes that form the cusp and determine its 
interaction with neighboring regions are understood at 
a basic level, many important issues remain unresolved. 
One important feature of the cusp is that the observed 
plasma often shows considerably more spatial and/or 
temporal structure than the basic picture presented here 
can describe. For example, measurements of the cusp 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


particles, such as those illustrated in figure 2, at times 
show multiple, overlapping bands of particles, rather than 
a single band. It is not known what processes at the 
magnetopause or within the magnetosphere cause this 
structuring in energy. Also, the measurements typically 
become more complex as a spacecraft moves away from 
local noon. It is often unclear if the cusp particles 
crossed the magnetopause on open magnetic field lines, 
resulting from reconnection, or if they crossed closed 
magnetic field lines through some other process. Finally, 
from measurements by a single satellite, there is always 
an ambiguity between temporal and spatial changes 
as a region is traversed. The properties of magnetic 
reconnection or the structure of the magnetopause and 
magnetosheath that are inferred from cusp measurements 
depend critically on our ability to differentiate temporal 
and spatial variability. These issues are topics for 
future research, where multisatellite missions, theoretical 
analyses and numerical simulations will play key roles in 
advancing our understanding of the cusps. 


T G Onsager 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Storms and 
Solar Wind Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: 
Geomagnetic Storms and Solar Wind 
Origins 

In the mid-1800s extraordinary disturbances accompanied 
by a great decrease in the horizontal component of the 
Earth’s magnetic field were termed ‘GEOMAGNETIC STORMS’, 
or simply ‘magnetic storms’. The challenge facing modern 
space physics in understanding the electromagnetic 
structure and dynamics of the solar-terrestrial plasma 
environment originated historically in the study of 
geomagnetic storms. The effects of geomagnetic storms 
in the ionosphere and thermosphere are the result 
of energy inputs from a chain of processes involving 
kinetic, chemical and electrodynamic coupling between 
the magnetosphere, ionosphere and thermosphere. The 
importance of predicting magnetic storms lies not only in 
its ‘academic’ value in tracing the way the magnetosphere 
and ionosphere extract solar wind energy, but also in 
its practical aspects, influencing human and societal 
problems such as the effects on communications and 
satellite anomalies. 

Geomagnetic storms are multifaceted phenomena 
that originate at the Sun and occur in the solar wind, 
the magnetosphere, the ionosphere and the thermosphere. 
What causes storms, how is the ring current formed 
and intensified during magnetic storms, what are the 
effects of the storm in the ionosphere, how do changes in 
the magnetosphere-ionosphere system affect the Earth’s 
upper atmosphere, and how can we predict the occurrence 
and intensity of the storms? These are some of the major 
questions relating to magnetic storms (Kamide et al 1998, 
Tsurutani et al 1997). Magnetic storms must be understood 
as a chain of processes from the Sun to the Earth when 
considering the many different aspects of magnetic storms 
and testing different scenarios on the cause-and-effect 
relationship of a variety of magnetic storm phenomena. 


What is a geomagnetic storm? 
Geomagnetic storms at low latitudes 
Geomagnetic storms were first detected by using ground 
magnetograms. The characteristic signature of a magnetic 
storm is a depression in the magnetic field lasting more 
than some tens of hours. This depression is caused by the 
ring current in the magnetosphere encircling the Earth and 
flowing westward at a geocentric distance of 2-7 Ry (where 
Rg is the Earth’s radius) (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RING 
CURRENT). A general picture of a typical magnetic storm is 
shown in figure 1 in terms of variations in the Dst index 
constructed from H component magnetograms at low and 
middle latitudes, where H is the horizontal component 
of the Earth’s vector magnetic field. Note that Dst is 
the average of magnetic perturbations at mid- and low- 
latitude stations distributed in longitude. 

A geomagnetic storm customarily involves three 
phases, beginning with a sudden increase in the H 
component (storm sudden commencement or SSC), 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Initial Main 
phase phase 


Recovery 
phase 


SSC 


FLOR e a acre eee ee a ne ee no 
0 Storm time 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of a typical geomagnetic storm in 
terms of the Dst index. For the definition of the initial, main and 
recovery phases, see text. 


followed by a period of arbitrary length in which the 
elevated field does not change very much. This period 
is called the initial phase. The sudden increase in the 
geomagnetic field is caused by an interplanetary shock. 
The initial phase is followed by the main phase where 
the development of a depressed H component occurs, 
enduring over a period of a few to several hours. The 
storm typically concludes with a slow recovery toward the 
pre-storm level over hours to tens of hours, i.e. the recovery 
phase. 


Energy of the ring current 
The occurrence of a magnetic storm can most clearly be 
identified by the existence of the main phase, during 
which the magnetic field on the Earth’s surface is 
significantly depressed. The depression has a strong 
latitudinal dependence, being maximum at the equator 
and minimum at the poles. The intensity of a magnetic 
storm is commonly defined by the minimum Dst value, 
or the maximum depressed Dst magnitude, at the main 
phase. The depression of the magnetic field during the 
main phase is explained as the effect of the ring current in 
the magnetosphere. The ring current is carried primarily 
by energetic (20-200 keV) ions (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH). During the recovery phase, the ring current decays 
due to charge exchange, Coulomb interaction and wave— 
particle interaction processes in the volume of space 
occupied by the ring current particles. 

The magnitude of a magnetic storm, measured by the 
Dst index, is approximated by the total energy of ring 
current particles, E, through the so-called Dessler-Parker— 
Sckopke relationship: 


Dst* /By = 2E/3Em 


where Dst* is the Dst value after a correction for 
magnetopause currents due to solar wind pressure, Bo is 
the magnetic field at the equator on the Earth’s surface 
and E,(= 8 x 10!” J) is the total magnetic energy of 
the geomagnetic field outside the Earth. Note that Dst 
includes the magnetic effects not only of the symmetric 
ring current but of other currents, such as ionospheric, 
field-aligned and tail currents. According to the above 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Storms and 
Solar Wind Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


relationship, the Dst value is, to a first approximation, 
linearly proportional to the total energy of the ring current 
particles. This is the reason why the Dst index is used 
practically as a measure of the intensity of geomagnetic 
storms. 

What is the minimum level in Dst is required for a 
geomagnetic storm? In fact, assigning a threshold serves 
only an operational purpose in arranging ‘storm-time’ 
data and has no physical basis. Small storms can be 
substorms (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). It is 
understood that intense storms are those with the peak 
Dst value of —100 nT or less. 


Geomagnetic storms at high latitudes 

During a magnetic storm, defined by the magnetic depres- 
sion at low and mid latitudes, intense substorms take place 
successively at high latitudes. Amagnetospheric substorm 
is a transient phenomenon initiated on the night side of the 
Earth in which a significant amount of energy is deposited 
into the auroral ionosphere and the inner magnetosphere 
(Rostoker et al 1980). Abasic question remains unanswered 
involving whether a magnetic storm is a superposition of 
intense substorms, each of which constitutes an elemen- 
tary storm. That is, it is not clear whether the occurrence 
of substorms is a necessary condition for a magnetic storm 
or merely coincidental (Siscoe 1997). 


Magnetic storms in interplanetary space 

When spacecraft observations of solar wind properties 
became available, it was discovered that the solar wind 
magnetic field, i.e. the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF), 
plays a major role in generating magnetic storms. The 
primary cause of magnetic storms is an intense, long- 
duration, southward IMF. In fact it became possible 
to model successfully the growth of the ring current 
using, as input, only the dawn-dusk component of the 
interplanetary electric field in the ecliptic plane normal to 
the Sun—Earth line. By that time it was recognized that an 
SSC is not a necessary condition for a storm to occur, and 
hence the initial phase is not an essential feature. The only 
essential feature of a geomagnetic storm is the significant 
development of a ring current and its subsequent decay. 
Note also that if an interplanetary shock is not followed 
by southward magnetic fields, the sudden increase in the 
geomagnetic field is called an SI (sudden impulse). 


Solar origins of geomagnetic storms 

Ithas long been known that geomagnetic storms start at the 
Sun. In fact, geomagnetic storms begin when disturbances 
in the solar wind reach the Earth’s magnetosphere. 
Solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are the 
most energetic of various types of coronal disturbances, 
although a number of geomagnetic storms are also 
generated by CORONAL HOLES. 

It is important to understand how CMEs are created 
at the Sun and how they interact with interplanetary 
structures. Considerable uncertainties exist, however, 
regarding their magnetic configuration, which must play 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a key role in unveiling the physics for different sizes 
of interplanetary CMEs (ICMEs) and such changes as 
the dimming of coronal features, which is known to be 
crucial for generating intense geomagnetic storms. One 
of the major problems is that it is difficult at present to 
visualize the three-dimensional structure of CMEs and 
the corresponding magnetic field lines extending into 
interplanetary space. 


Flares and CMEs 

The dominant solar events that occur near the maximum 
sunspot phase of the solar cycle are impulsive ejecta, 
often called solar flares and CMEs, although how these 
two elements of solar activity are interrelated is not well 
understood (see SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS). 
CMEs, distinct particle and field structures with field 
orientations not generally favoring the typical spiral 
equatorial orientation, are most numerous near the solar 
maximum and have been demonstrated to cause major 
geomagnetic storms at that phase of the solar cycle, and at 
other phases as well. 

These events occur on a wide variety of spatial scales 
and have a variety of speeds, but the ones that are 
most effective in creating magnetic storms are statistically 
shown to be rapid, with speeds exceeding the ambient 
wind speed, so that a forward shock is formed. The fast 
ejecta are in general associated with flares. There are three 
essential features of CMEs near the Sun: bright outer loops, 
a dark region and filamentary structures near the coronal 
base. It is not well understood, however, whether all these 
propagate efficiently into interplanetary space. 


Coronal holes 
During the declining phase of the solar cycle, another 
type of solar event is shown to dominate, in which the 
coronal holes emerge from polar regions and extend into, 
and sometimes far across, the equatorial regions. Coronal 
holes represent low-temperature regions and the areas of 
‘open’ magnetic field lines. Fast (750-800 km s~'), tenuous 
plasma is continuously emitted from these solar regions. 
When the coronal holes expand effectively toward the 
equator during the declining phase of the solar cycle, high- 
speed streams escaping from them create geomagnetic 
storms. Because these hole regions are long-lived and 
evolve relatively slowly, they appear to ‘corotate’ with the 
Sun over a 27 day period as observed from Earth, leading 
to the so-called recurrent geomagnetic storms. 


Solar wind causes of geomagnetic storms 

The causes of geomagnetic storms are strong dawn-to- 
dusk electric fields in the solar wind, which directly 
transport solar wind energy into the magnetosphere, 
driving plasma convection in the magnetosphere. These 
electric fields are caused by a combination of two factors: 
solar wind velocity and the southward IMF. Of the two, 
the southward field is probably more important because 
of its greater variability, while the solar wind velocity is 
empirically found to be a minor factor. Solar wind ram 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Storms and 
Solar Wind Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


driver gas \draping 


shock 
compression 


shock 


Figure 2. Schematic diagram of regions of intense interplanetary 
magnetic fields in solar ejecta typically seen near solar 
maximum. After Tsurutani and Gonzalez (J. Atmos. Terr. Phys. 
57 1369 (1995)). 


pressure is also important in ring current energization. The 
specific circumstances or solar wind conditions typically 
leading to enhanced dawn-dusk electric fields (a B, 
magnitude greater than 10 nT) of substantial duration 
(longer than 3 h) were identified to generate intense 
geomagnetic storms. There can be a variety of causes of 
enhanced southward IMF of long duration in the high- 
speed stream region. 


Solar ejecta 
Figure 2 shows schematically the regions of possible 
intense IMF of such solar ejecta, i.e. driver gas, detected at 
1 AU. Asa fast plasma and field structure propagates from 
the Sun through interplanetary space, it tends to compress 
the slower plasma ahead, creating a ‘sheath’ between the 
shock and the interplanetary manifestation of the ejecta. 
The sheath fields leading the rapid ejecta often contain 
substantial north-south field components, possibly due 
to compression and draping of the ambient IMF over 
the ICMEs. Both the remnant fields and plasma in the 
ejecta proper and those of the sheath can generate intense 
geomagnetic storms, if the IMF is directed southward. 
Most ‘geoeffective’ ICMEs, giving rise to the largest 
geomagnetic storms, are magnetic clouds, a subset of 
ejecta characterized by high IMF magnitude, low field 
variance and large-scale coherent field rotations, often 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


including large north-south components. This high- 
field region is typically a low-6 (~0.1) plasma, where B 
is defined as the ratio of plasma pressure to magnetic 
pressure. The field reversals within magnetic clouds 
feature magnetic field reconnection with the Earth’s 
field during the period of the southward field and a 
lack of reconnection during the northward field. The 
storm initial phase is caused by increased ram pressure 
behind the fast shock. The higher plasma density 
and higher velocity combine to form a much larger 
solar wind ram pressure. This pressure compresses the 
Earth’s magnetosphere considerably, increasing the field 
magnitude near the equator. Since interplanetary shocks 
are thin discontinuities, they create an abrupt onset of the 
initial phase, which has been called an SSC. 

If there are large-amplitude, long-duration south- 
ward field intervals in either the sheath or the ejecta proper, 
a main phase will follow. The storm recovery usually 
begins as the magnetic field in the magnetic clouds be- 
comes less southward and gradually rotates to a north- 
ward direction. However, there is no guarantee that south- 
ward magnetic field events will follow the shock, and 
therefore a storm main phase may not follow the shock. 

There are numerous mechanisms that can lead to 
north-south variations in the sheath, such as shock 
compression and draping around the ejecta (see figure 2). 
Intense southward fields can be found in each of the ejecta 
itself and the sheath. When they are found in both regions 
simultaneously, the resultant geomagnetic storm should 
have a two-step main phase. 


Corotating interaction region 

If a coronal hole is at lower latitudes, the Earth’s 
magnetosphere will be bathed in this stream once each 
solar rotation. High-speed streams emanating from the 
coronal hole can create a geomagnetic storm. Typically 
the solar wind containing low-speed (less than 400 km s~!) 
and high-density (tens x 10° of particles /m*) streams lies 
ahead of the fast stream in interplanetary space. The 
interaction of the rapid stream with the slow stream ahead 
tends to create a plasma and field compression. This 
is called a corotating interaction region (CIR; see SOLAR 
WIND: COROTATING INTERACTION REGIONS). CIRs are bounded on 
the leading and trailing edges by forward- and reverse- 
propagating compressional waves respectively. 

Figure 3 shows schematically the formation of CIRs in 
which magnetic field fluctuations are present in the high- 
speed stream proper. The magnetic fields of the lower 
speed tend to be more curved and those of the higher speed 
more radial. The stream-stream interface (IF) is formed at 
the boundary between the rapid and slow-speed plasmas. 
CIRs are characterized normally by intense magnetic fields 
that reach 30 nT. 

A 27 day modulation in geomagnetic activity has 
been noted since the nineteenth century. This periodicity 
was later discovered to arise from high-speed solar wind 
streams originating in coronal holes. Although the 
high-speed wind from coronal holes generally carries 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Storms and 
Solar Wind Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


slow 


stream fast 


stream 


Figure 3. Schematics of the formation of corotating interaction 
regions (CIRs) during the declining phase of the solar cycle. The 
interaction between a high-speed stream (B) and a slow-speed 
stream (A) are shown together with the CIR (shaded). The 
forward shock (FS), interface surface (IF) and reverse shock (RS) 
are also indicated. After Tsurutani et al (Geophys. Res. Lett. 22 
3397 (1995)). 


relatively low field magnitude and a radial orientation 
not conductive to production of steady and substantial 
north-south fields, CIRs resulting from the interaction 
of this rapid wind with slower, denser streamer wind 
produce geoeffective field compressions and deflections. 
Geomagnetic storms associated with CIR-like plasma 
signatures generally lack the sudden commencements. 
These storms are termed gradual geomagnetic storms. 


Enhancement/modulation effects of geomagnetic 
storms 

One remarkable characteristic of the solar wind escaping 
from coronal holes is the presence of continuous Alfvénic 
activity, consisting of large-amplitude, quasi-periodic 
fluctuations in the IMF orientation with periods from tens 
of minutes to a few hours. This activity is generally in 
phase with similar fluctuations in the solar wind flow 
direction. Thus, in the interplanetary medium following 
CIRs, the southward field components associated with 
these Alfvén waves cause reconnection with the Earth’s 
magnetic field and small injections of plasma into the inner 
magnetosphere. Because of such persistent substorm 
activity, prolonged recovery phases of the storms will 
result. Events of this type are known as ‘high-intensity, 
long-duration, continuous auroral electrojet (AE) activity’ 
(HILDCAA) events. The average north-south (B,) 
component in HILDCAA intervals is nearly zero, but 
the induced reconnection in the magnetospheric response 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


results in a continuous occurrence of substorms of almost 
equal intensity. 

Another mechanism which can modulate storm 
activity is based on the simple geometric mapping from 
the solar equatorial system, in which the prevailing IMF 
is ordered, into a magnetospheric system which then 
orders the magnetospheric response. This mapping, from 
GSEQ (solar equatorial) to GSM (solar magnetospheric) 
coordinates, was described by Russell and McPherron 
(1973). The result of the offsets between the solar 
equatorial, ecliptic and terrestrial rotational planes is to 
create a modulation in the rotation from the transverse 
solar equatorial IMF component (GSEQ B,) into the north— 
south field in the magnetospheric system (GSM B,). The 
tilt of the terrestrial dipole adds a diurnal component as 
well. The combined effect is such that negative GSEQ 
B,, corresponding to the ‘toward sector’ IMF, maps most 
directly to negative GSM B, at 2200 UT on 5 April, while 
positive GSEQ B, (‘away sector’) maps most directly to 
negative GSM B, at 1000 UT on 5 October. 

This modulation, called the Russell-—McPherron effect 
(see section on solar cycle distribution below), has 
been shown to increase in amplitude with increasing 
activity thresholds and to persist even for very disturbed 
geomagnetic conditions. Figure 4 shows a seasonal 
variation of the number of intense storms with clear 
maxima at the equinoxes. 


Storm/substorm relationships 

Successive occurrence of substorms 

Intense substorms occur frequently during the main 
phase of magnetic storms. Many researchers believe, 
or tacitly assume, that magnetic storms develop as a 
result of the frequent occurrence of substorms. There 
are certainly good reasons to believe that a geomagnetic 
storm consists of intense substorms. During episodes 
of substorm activity, energy can be deposited into the 
inner magnetosphere, leading to the formation of the 
so-called partial ring current, which is connected to the 
substorm electrojet through field-aligned currents. If 
intense substorms occur successively when the effects of 
previous substorms still remain in terms of the partial 
ring current, the local time extent of that partial ring 
current could increase and evolve into a complete ring. 
In other words, an individual substorm may cause only 
a ‘mini’ ring current, but if substorms occur frequently 
enough, the injected ring current particles accumulate in 
the trapping region, forming the symmetrical ring current 
asa geomagnetic storm. 

Is the successive occurrence of many intense 
substorms a necessary condition for a magnetic storm? 
We should refocus on the question of why some large 
substorms are associated with significant increases in 
the ring current, while other equally large substorms 
have little effect on it. The main question which 
then arises regarding the storm/substorm relationship 
involves the nature of the physical processes which 
lead to the growth of the ring current during magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Storms and 
Solar Wind Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hours of Data 


500 


Dst <-50 nT 
—e— Dst <-100 


400 


300 


200 


Sunspot Number 
200 


Sunspot Number 


160 


120 


80 


CYCLE 21 


200 


Storms with Ost <~100 


Number of Occurrences per Year 


"GY 
y 
7 
] 
] 
y 


K$Q GK WW '"i 


KK 


WY 


SS 


SS 


s 


Sunspot Number 


1985 


Figure 5. (a) Yearly averaged number of hours with Dst less than —100 nT (solid curve with diamonds), and with Dst less than —50 nT, 
divided by 5 (dashed curve). Yearly averaged sunspot number (heavy curve) for the interval 1972-96 is also shown. After Kamide et al 
(J. Geophys. Res. 103 17705 (1998)). (b) Dual-peak distribution of intense geomagnetic storms (peak Dst less than —100 nT) for solar 


cycle 21. After Gonzalez et al (Planet. Space Sci. 38 181 (1990)). 


storms. Substorms were in some way thought to be 
responsible for the growth of the ring current. In fact, 
early studies of ‘injections’ of energetic particles into the 
inner magnetosphere suggested that the occurrence of 
substorms led to the acceleration of particles to energies 
which allowed them to be effective current carriers in 
the ring current. However, it later became clear that the 
storm-time ring current was carried by energetic ions with 
energies typically in excess of several tens of keV. The 
question of how ring current particles attain their energies 
and whether substorm disturbances play an integral role 


in that process is still open. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ring current composition 

Questions continue with regard to the formation, 
population and composition of the ring current during 
magnetic storms, as well as the loss mechanism of ring 
current particles during the storm recovery phase that 
sometimes takes only several hours, but occasionally 
several weeks. The relative importance of the solar wind 
and the ionosphere as the origin of ring current ions in the 
20-200 keV energy range seems to have been identified 
recently. The ionospheric component has been shown to be 
most abundant during the main phase of intense magnetic 
storms. This implies that ionospheric ions are accelerated 
upward by parallel electric fields or by perpendicular 
heating (involving plasma waves) leading to ion conic 
distributions, both of which are associated with the onset 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Storms and 
Solar Wind Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SEASONAL VARIATION OF MAGNETIC STORMS: 1975-1966 
T 


NORMALIZED NUMBER OF INTENSE STORMS PER MONTH 


MONTH 


Figure 4. Seasonal distribution of intense geomagnetic storms 
(peak Dst less than —100 nT) for the interval 1975-86. The 
normalized number of these storms per month is given. After 
Gonzalez and Tsurutani (Eruptive Solar Flares pp 277-86 (Berlin: 
Springer) (1992)). 


of substorm expansion. 

Observations of field-aligned ionospheric ions indi- 
cate that injection occurs over a broad range of geocen- 
tric distances. These ions are trapped through an efficient 
magnetospheric process, becoming the main contributors 
to the storm-time ring current. Therefore, the successive 
occurrence of intense substorms appears to be a necessary 
condition for the main phase of magnetic storms. This in 
fact supports the classical notion that a magnetic storm 
consists of continual substorm activity. 

On the other hand, an enhanced solar wind electric 
field of sufficient duration directly drives magnetospheric 
convection, which, in turn, enhances the ring current 
at the same time. Substorms are often triggered in the 
course of this process of extraction of power from the 
solar wind required to build up the storm-time ring 
current. In this scenario, the action of substorm activity 
is merely a byproduct of the overall energy process in the 
magnetosphere-polar ionosphere coupling. 

Although the ring current as expressed by Dst can be 
reproduced mainly by changes in the large-scale electric 
field driven by southward IMF, the role of substorms is 
an issue suitable for further study in quantitative detail. 
In other words, the relationship between substorms and 
storms is currently poorly understood, and therefore basic 
questions remain unanswered regarding the hypothesis 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of whether a magnetic storm represents a superposition of 
intense substorms. 


Solar cycle distribution of geomagnetic activity 
ICMEs and CIRs are considered the primary causes of 
the enhanced duskward electric fields in the solar wind 
driving geomagnetic storms, while HILDCAAs and the 
Russell—McPherron effect can be modifiers which do not 
produce storms without an ICME or CIR, but enhance 
storms once they are generated. In reality, however, these 
four mechanisms couple differently from event to event, 
and even within a geomagnetic storm, from phase to 
phase. For example, the enhanced field in shocked solar 
wind can map to evena stronger or weaker southward IMF 
in GSM coordinates, depending on different seasons. This 
may be called the ‘post-shock Russell-McPherron effect’. 
CIRs with a southward IMF can also be effective when the 
time of year is favorable. 

ICMEs and CIRs as the primary drivers for strong 
geomagnetic storms may explain the strong dependence 
of geomagnetic activity on the solar cycle. Within a solar 
cycle, there are two peaks in geomagnetic activity, one 
somewhat before and the other following solar maximum. 
For two solar cycles, figure 5(a) shows the yearly averaged 
sunspot number and the hours when Dst < —50 and 
—100 nT. It is clear that the number of intense magnetic 
storms measured by the intervals of low Dst follow the 
sunspot cycle faithfully at the beginning and toward the 
ending of the solar cycle, but have pronounced dips during 
the years of solar maximum (near 1980 and 1990). The 
occurrence rate of ICME is shown to follow the sunspot 
cycle, while strong CIRs are most predominant during 
the declining phase due to the presence of large polar 
coronal holes extending into lower latitudes. Thus, a 
simple superposition of occurrence rates of rapid ICMEs 
and strong CIRs might well produce the double-peaked 
pattern of figure 5(a). Figure 5(b) is another example of 
such a dual-peak distribution, but only for solar cycle 21. 

Another statistical trend in geomagnetic activity is its 
modulation in accordance with the 22-year cycle (Cliver 
et al 1996). The average levels in overall geomagnetic 
activity are shown to be highest during the rising phase 
of odd-numbered sunspot cycles and during the declining 
phase of even cycles. These ‘double-solar-cycle’ variations 
can have the following two sources: the first is a 
combination of the Russell-—McPherron effect and the 
heliographic latitude dependence of the IMF strength, as 
well as the solar magnetic polarity. The second is an 
intrinsic difference in large-scale solar magnetic fields, 
manifested as changes in the solar wind between odd and 
even cycles. The odd- and even-numbered cycles have 
some differences in average solar wind speed profiles. 
A variety of evidence exists for systematic differences 
in solar properties between even and odd cycles. It 
must be noted, however, that studies to date have used 
the aa index due to its availability for over 100 years. 
The aa index reflects geomagnetic activity at sub-auroral 
latitudes. Evidence for a 22 year period in such an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Storms and 
Solar Wind Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


index does not necessarily guarantee similar modulation 
in geomagnetic storm activity. 


Space weather predictions 

Throughout Earth and human history, people have stood 
in awe of the wildly changing colors and forms of auroras, 
which occur most frequently during geomagnetic storms 
(see AURORA). ‘Space weather’ refers to conditions in the 
solar wind, magnetosphere, ionosphere and atmosphere 
that can influence the reliability of space and ground- 
based technological systems. In other words, the aurora 
is one of the end results of space weather. Our reliance 
on technological systems, such as spacecraft missions, 
power systems, navigation systems and communications, 
is growing, and these systems are shown to be vulnerable 
to the unpredictability of space weather conditions. In 
fact, the risks for disruption of satellite operations, 
communications and power grids on the ground could 
be minimized if reliable forecasts of space weather were 
possible. Studies have already begun aimed at predicting 
the sequence of extreme conditions that occur in the solar— 
terrestrial coupling system. 

Space weather plays an ever-increasing role in our 
society as human beings develop more and more delicate 
technologies in space and on Earth (see SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL 
CONNECTION: SPACE WEATHER PREDICTIONS). In view of the 
crucial effects of geomagnetic storms on such human- 
societal systems as radio communications and satellite 
drag, there is a strong need for prediction schemes to 
be continually upgraded. It is essential to integrate our 
observation and modelling efforts in the space weather 
project. 

The goal of space weather studies is to be able to 
predict the occurrence of intense geomagnetic storms. 
How does one monitor the intensity of geomagnetic 
storms? Their intensity is commonly defined by the 
minimum Dst value during the magnetic storm, which 
is equivalent to the maximum Dst magnitude at the main 
phase. It may be natural to assume that when a major 
event is observed near the Earth, something major is also 
occurring throughout the chain of processes from the Sun 
to the Earth, seriously affecting the space surrounding 
the Earth. Is this assumption really correct in magnetic 
storms? Is a large disturbance in the interplanetary 
structure really necessary to generate a major magnetic 
storm? Is it meaningful to rely on the minimum Dst value 
to define the storm intensity? 

During the largest magnetic storms, the main phase 
often goes through two steps. That is, well before the 
Dst decrease has fully recovered to its pre-storm level, 
a succeeding decrease tends to occur. If this is truly the 
case, the largest magnetic storms consist merely of two 
medium-size storms. In other words, what is perhaps 
needed in generating an intense magnetic storm are two 
separate regions of southward IMF in an interplanetary 
structure. One of the most important factors in generating 
intense magnetic storms is perhaps the slow decay rate of 
the ring current. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Cliver E W, Boriakoff V and Bounar 1996 The 22-yr cycle of 
geomagnetic and solar wind activity J. Geophys. Res. 
101 27 091-109 

Kamide Y et al 1998 Current understanding of magnetic 
storms: storm-substorm relationships J Geophys. Res. 
103 17 705-28 

Rostoker G et al Magnetospheric substorms: definition and 
signatures 1980 J. Geophys. Res. 85 1663-8 

Russell C T and McPherron R L 1973 Semiannual variation 
of geomagnetic activity J. Geophys. Res. 78 92-108 

Siscoe G L 1997 Big storms make little storms Nature 390 
448-9 

Tsurutani B T, Gonzalez W D, Kamide Y and Arballo J K 
1997 Magnetic Storms (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) 


Y Kamide 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Tail 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: 
Geomagnetic Tail 


The geomagnetic tail is an elongated region of the 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH extending from the near-Earth 
space in the antisunward direction. It acts as a giant 
energy reservoir for the magnetosphere and is therefore 
an important participant in dynamic processes such as 
GEOMAGNETIC STORMS and substorms (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH: SUBSTORMS). 

The geomagnetic tail has a roughly cylindrical shape 
with two D-shaped lobes which contain strong magnetic 
fields and cool plasma lying back to back with a region 
of hot plasma and weak magnetic field between. The 
geomagnetic tail extends far beyond the lunar orbit, at 
least out to 1.5 million km from the Earth, and has 
a diameter of about 0.3 million km. The magnetic 
field points toward the Earth in the northern lobe and 
away from the Earth in the southern lobe. The field 
magnitude decreases from about 100 nT at the inner edge 
of the geomagnetic tail (at 40000 km from the Earth) 
to about 10 nT reached around 600000 km from the 
Earth; tailward of that distance the field magnitude is 
almost constant at about 10 nT. These antiparallel fields 
in the tail lobes are supported by a cross-tail current 
sheet embedded in a thicker plasma sheet roughly in the 
equatorial plane (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMA SHEET). 
The average electric field is about 0.3 mV min magnitude 
and oriented in the dawn-to-dusk direction across the 
geomagnetic tail. The plasmas enter the tail either 
from the solar wind or from the Earth’s ionized upper 
atmosphere, the ionosphere, and are in continuous large- 
scale convective motion under the electromagnetic forces 
(See SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: COUPLING BETWEEN SOLAR 
WIND, MAGNETOSPHERE, IONOSPHERE, AND NEUTRAL ATMOSPHERE, 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: CONVECTION). 

The solar wind energy enters the magnetosphere at a 
variable rate proportional to the solar wind velocity and 
interplanetary magnetic field direction. When the inter- 
planetary magnetic field points southward (opposite to 
the magnetospheric field), magnetic reconnection opens 
the magnetosphere allowing for energy, flux and momen- 
tum transfer from the solar wind to the magnetosphere. 
When the interplanetary field points northward, the mag- 
netosphere is closed and the energy transfer to the magne- 
tosphere is much reduced. During periods of southward 
interplanetary field, energy extracted from the solar wind 
is stored in the geomagnetic tail in the form of magnetic 
field energy and later explosively released in a sequence of 
events known as a magnetospheric susstorM. During sub- 
storms, MAGNETIC RECONNECTION is initiated at the center of 
the geomagnetic tail about 150 000 km from the Earth. Asa 
consequence, a portion of the plasma sheet tailward of this 
distance is ejected from the magnetosphere in a magnet- 
ically confined plasma bubble, a plasmoid (see figure 1). 
This sequence lasts 2-4 h during which about 10! J of 
energy flows through the geomagnetic tail. The magne- 
tosphere is continuously in a dynamic state, where this 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


energy storage-release cycle is repeated on average 4-5 
times per day. The substorm process is analogous to a 
dripping faucet where water (energy) is constantly fed to 
the water drop (geomagnetic tail), the drop grows until it 
falls (plasmoid ejection) and when more water is added 
the drop starts to grow again. 

The formation of a geomagnetic tail is a characteristic 
of the planet-solar wind interaction: each of the solar 
system planets has a PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERE and a tail. 
Furthermore, even smaller bodies with active plasma 
environments such as comets have a tail, although in 
the case of comets the magnetic forces are weak and the 
dynamics governed by the ion motion is quite different. 


Structure of the geomagnetic tail 

Magnetic fields 

The structure of the geomagnetic tail is governed by 
the magnetospheric magnetic field. In the near-Earth 
region (inside 7Re, 1Rg ~ 6400 km), the magnetic field 
is dominated by the nearly dipolar internal geomagnetic 
field (giving about 30000 nT at the Earth’s surface at the 
equator). Further away, the magnetospheric magnetic 
field is a combination of the internal field and a magnetic 
field created by extraterrestrial current systems induced 
by the interaction of the solar wind and interplanetary 
magnetic field with the internal geomagnetic field. The 
solar wind pressure compresses the dipole field on the 
dayside. Magnetic reconnection alters the connectivity of 
the field lines in the polar caps creating a class of ‘open’ 
field lines, which are connected to the Earth only at one 
end. These open field lines created on the dayside are 
carried downstream in the solar wind flow and stretched 
into the antiparallel field structure of the tail lobes. The 
lobe field lines are separated by a cross-tail current sheet. 
Within the current sheet, at about 100 Rg from the Earth in 
the tailward direction, there is another quasi-permanent 
reconnection region called the distant neutral line. Here 
the lobe field lines are again reconnected creating ‘closed’ 
field lines (connected to the Earth at both ends) Earthward 
of the neutral line and ‘solar wind’ field lines (completely 
disconnected from the Earth) tailward of the neutral line. 
This magnetic field topology is a permanent structure in 
the geomagnetic tail. 

The Earth’s orbital motion causes a small aberration 
from the Sun—Earth line in the solar wind velocity direction 
in an Earth-based coordinate system; the geomagnetic tail 
is aligned along the velocity direction, on average 4° from 
the Sun-Earth line. The Earth’s dipole axis is tilted 11° 
relative to the rotation axis and the rotation axis is tilted 
23° relative to the ecliptic plane normal. Therefore, the 
orientation of the dipole axis varies between +35° during 
the year (pointing toward the Sun during the northern 
hemisphere summer and away from the Sun during the 
northern hemisphere winter) and +11° daily owing to 
the Earth’s rotation. Because the inner magnetosphere 
current systems follow the dipole motions, the center of 
the cross-tail current sheet is (3-4) Rg below the Sun—Earth 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Tail ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


INTERPLANETARY MAGNETOPAUSE 
FIELD 


FAT __"_100Re_—r—> DISTANT NEUTRAL LINE 


GROWTH PHASE: ENERGY LOADING 


( 
oe 


EG 


THIN CURRENT SHEET 


EXPANSION ONSET 


NEAR-EARTH NEUTRAL LINE 


EXPANSION PHASE: ENERGY DISSIPATION 


RECOVERY PHASE 


TAILWARD MOVING PLASMOID 


Figure 1. A noon—midnight meridian cut of the geomagnetic tail during northern hemisphere summer (dipole tilt angle toward the 
Sun). Reconfiguration of the magnetosphere during the substorm process is shown in the sequence. The most important plasma 
regions are shown in the top panel. The solid lines depict the magnetic field lines; the dark gray shading shows the plasma sheet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Tail 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


line during the northern hemisphere winter and above the 
Sun-—Earth line during the northern summer. 

During periods of northward interplanetary magnetic 
field, magnetic reconnection occurs at high latitudes pole- 
ward of the cusps reconfiguring already open magnetic 
field lines. When the interplanetary field has a com- 
ponent also in the cross-tail direction, reconnection oc- 
curs predominantly in two quadrants of the geomagnetic 
tail (northern dawn and southern dusk for dawn-to-dusk 
directed interplanetary field) and the reconnected solar 
wind field lines exert a tangential stress on the lobe field 
lines (proportional to the field component tangential to the 
magnetopause). This leads to twisting of the magnetotail 
such that the plasma sheet is at an angle with respect to the 
equatorial plane. During periods of southward interplan- 
etary field, the twisting is weaker because the tangential 
stress in the reconnection-dominated quadrants is smaller. 
The effects of the interplanetary field are larger in the dis- 
tant tail where the lobe field strength is smaller. 

The large-scale extraterrestrial current systems are 
permanent features of the geomagnetic tail but are 
highly variable both in intensity and location (see 
figure 2). Additional, temporary current systems form 
during dynamic processes. The cross-tail current in the 
geomagnetic tail flows in the dawn-to-dusk direction 
and is closed by currents along the magnetospheric 
boundary, the magnetopause (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
MAGNETOPAUSE). Typical current densities are 10-100 nA m~* 
in the inner tail (at 15Rg) and 1 nA m~” in the distant 
tail, the total current is roughly 2-3 MA. The ring current 
encircles the Earth near the equatorial plane in the inner 
magnetosphere (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RING CURRENT). 
The current density is less than 1 nA m7 during quiet 
times and 1-10 nA m7? during geomagnetic storms; 
the total current varies between 0.1 and 5 MA. Two 
large-scale magnetic-field-aligned current systems couple 
the magnetosphere and the ionosphere. The region 1 
currents flow at high auroral latitudes, originating from 
magnetospheric boundaries and from the geomagnetic 
tail. These currents flow toward the ionosphere in 
the morning sector and away from the ionosphere in 
the evening sector. The region 2 currents flow at 
subauroral latitudes from the morning-sector ionosphere 
to the equatorial geomagnetic tail and from the tail to the 
evening-sector ionosphere. These currents carry roughly 
1-3 MA; the current density is a few pA m~ at the 
ionospheric altitudes and 3 orders of magnitude lower 
in the geomagnetic tail. The most important temporary 
current system is the substorm current wedge, which 
connects the geomagnetic tail and the auroral ionosphere 
during the substorm expansive phase carrying roughly 
1 MA. 


Electric fields 

The solar wind—magnetosphere interaction induces an 
electric field in the dawn-to-dusk direction. The plasma 
at low altitudes in the plasmasphere co-rotates with the 
Earth, which gives rise to an electric field pointing radially 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


inward (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMASPHERE). The 
combination of these two components gives the large-scale 
tail electric field typically about 0.1-0.5 mV m7}, being 
larger during dynamically active periods (southward 
interplanetary magnetic field) and smaller during quiet 
times (northward interplanetary field). In addition to that, 
electric fields induced by the magnetic field configuration 
changes (Faraday’s law V x E = —dB/dt), intense 
and strongly fluctuating small-scale electric fields, and a 
variety of plasma waves are present in the geomagnetic 
tail. 


Plasmas 

The geomagnetic tail has two plasma sources, the 
solar wind and the dense ionosphere. Both source 
populations are very cold: the plasma temperature in 
the solar wind is around 10 eV (1 eV corresponds to 
11600 K), and in the ionosphere about 0.1 eV. The solar 
wind plasma (or actually plasma in the magnetosheath 
between the magnetopause and the bow shock) enters 
the magnetosphere via dayside reconnection; a portion of 
the particles enter through the magnetospheric boundaries 
also along the geomagnetic tail. In this plasma mantle, the 
cold plasma flows tailward typically at about 200 km sl 
(somewhat slower than in the adjacent magnetosheath) 
and drifts across the tail lobes at a speed of about 20 km st 
toward the plasma sheet. The ionospheric plasma rises 
both from the polar cap and from the auroral regions; 
especially the dayside cusp region is an effective source 
for magnetospheric plasma (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
DAYSIDE Cusp). In the distant tail, the solar wind source 
dominates. The accelerated ionospheric particles form an 
important source for the >15 keV inner-tail population 
especially during geomagnetically active times. 

The combination of the electric and magnetic fields 
in the geomagnetic tail controls the large-scale plasma 
motions. In the tail lobes, the dawn-to-dusk electric 
field and Sun-Earth-directed magnetic field cause the 
plasma to drift toward the plasma sheet. Plasmas in 
the tail lobes and plasma mantle are cool; their energies 
are below a few hundred eV and densities less than 0.1 
particles cm-°. Within the plasma sheet, the magnetic 
field is predominantly northward and the plasma convects 
Earthward. As the electric field is parallel to the cross- 
tail current, the plasma is energized (j - E > 0) to form 
the plasma sheet population whose mean energy is a few 
keV and average density a few particles cm-~*. Between 
the lobe and the plasma sheet, the plasma sheet boundary 
layer is characterized by anisotropic plasma distributions 
and multiply streaming plasma components. In the inner 
magnetosphere, the outer van Allen radiation belt hosts 
a population of high-energy (tens of keV to several MeV) 
electrons, and the ring current consists of energetic ions 
(tens to hundreds of keV). These ions are mostly protons 
but also heavier elements such as ionospheric oxygen and 
helium and alpha particles from the solar wind are present 
especially during periods of high magnetospheric activity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Tail 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


current 


Magneto 
current 


current 


Figure 2. Magnetospheric current systems and a three-dimensional view of the inner magnetosphere and geomagnetic tail. The 
enlargement of the Earth shows the connectivity of the current systems to the auroral ionosphere. 


At the Earthward end, the geomagnetic tail field lines 
all connect to the high-latitude portion of the Earth’s 
dipolar field. The closed plasma sheet field lines connect 
to the auroral regions encircling the polar caps. Hence, the 
plasma sheet is the source region for the particles (mainly 
electrons) creating auroral light as they collide with the 
atmospheric atoms. The lobe field lines are magnetically 
connected to the polar caps poleward of the auroral ovals. 


Dynamics of the geomagnetic tail 
The geomagnetic tail is a remarkably stable and coherent 
structure, with distinct plasma regions identifiable from 
observations out to the distance of 240Rg covered by in 
situ measurements. Current sheets, such as the cross-tail 
current sheet, are often the locations where instabilities 
can grow in space plasmas, and this is the case also for the 
geomagnetic tail. However, the magnetic field component 
normal to the cross-tail current sheet stabilizes the system 
under most circumstances so that significant energy input 
is required before large-scale instabilities can grow. 
During the basic dynamic cycle in the magnetosphere, 
the magnetospheric substorm, energy stored in the 
geomagnetic tail is dissipated by a reconfiguration process. 
The process is initiated by a localized growth of a 
microinstability within the cross-tail current sheet and 
quickly expands so that its effects are observable over 
a large portion of the magnetosphere. Therefore, the 
substorm is a global reconfiguration process in the 
magnetosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The repetition and intensity of the dynamic cycles are 
controlled by the rate of energy input from the solar wind 
roughly given by « = 10’V B?(7Rx)? sin*(0.50), where V 
is the solar wind velocity, B the interplanetary magnetic 
field and tan(@) = By/Bz. Correlation analyses using 
solar wind velocity, interplanetary magnetic field and a 
magnetic activity indicator (AL) derived from ground- 
based magnetometer data show that the correlation 
between VBsourh and AL has two peaks, one at 20 
min corresponding to the direct solar wind driving of 
magnetospheric convection and another broad peak at 1h 
corresponding to the substorm-associated strong energy 
dissipation in the geomagnetic tail. 

Although the substorm energy comes from the solar 
wind, the location and time of the instability onset leading 
to the global reconfiguration are controlled by internal 
tail processes. The changing boundary conditions and 
magnetic field configuration lead to the formation of a 
thin current sheet that extends from the inner geomagnetic 
tail ((8-10)Re) out to at least (20-30)Rg. This current 
sheet has a thickness of only a few hundred km, and the 
magnetic field component normal to the current sheet is 
very small, only a few nT. Such a thin current sheet is a 
required precondition before the microinstability leading 
to the substorm expansion phase can grow. The instability 
evolves like a tearing-type process breaking the magnetic 
topology and has a growth time of only a fraction of 
a minute. The details of the microphysical instability 
process are as yet unknown. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Geomagnetic Tail 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The substorm cycle begins with energy extraction 
from the solar wind via dayside reconnection at a rate of 
10"! W and its storage in the tail magnetic energy. This 
substorm growth phase typically lasts about 1 h giving 
about 10'° J of energy to the tail. Magnetic reconnection 
at a newly formed near-Earth neutral line (20-30) Re from 
the Earth initiates the reconfiguration process, which leads 
to disruption of the inner tail current sheet, consequent 
decrease in the lobe magnetic field (Ampére’s law V x B = 
oj) and the formation of a plasmoid or, more generally, 
a flux rope, which is ejected from the geomagnetic tail 
in the antisunward direction (see figure 1). Because 
the reconfiguration process is limited in the cross-tail 
direction, the plasma jets Earthward at a speed higher 
than the convection velocity on either side. The flow 
shear creates a pair of field-aligned current sheets, where 
the current flows to the ionosphere in the morning-side 
leg and out of the ionosphere in the evening-side leg. 
This is the substorm current wedge. The stored energy 
is dissipated during these processes, which typically 
last about 30 min (substorm expansion phase). After 
that, the energy dissipation ceases and the neutral line 
moves tailward to replace the distant neutral line. The 
magnetosphere recovers its original state during a slow 
process of rebuilding the cross-tail current. 

The structure and dynamics of the geomagnetic tail 
have been probed by several spacecraft since the beginning 
of the space age. The first measurements were made by the 
EXPLORER spacecraft in the early 1960s. These were followed 
by aseries of ten Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP) 
spacecraft during the 1960s and early 1970s. The first 
measurements from the distant geomagnetic tail were 
obtained from PIONEERS 7 and 8, which crossed the tail at 
distances of 1000 Rg and 500 Rg, respectively. A more 
detailed picture of the dynamics was given by the three 
INTERNATIONAL SUN-EARTH EXPLORER (ISEE) spacecraft in the 
late 1970s and early part of the 1980s. While ISEE 1 and 
ISEE 2 had apogees at 22 Rg, ISEE 3 was located for part of 
its lifetime in the distant geomagnetic tail probing it out to 
220 Rg. The International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) 
program in the 1990s is a joint effort between all the major 
space agencies. While there are several spacecraft probing 
various regions of the geospace, the most important for 
the study of the geomagnetic tail has been the INTERBALL 
tail probe reaching out to 30 Rg and ceortatL, which has 
covered the tail from 220 Rg inward to about 10 Rg in great 
detail. 


Bibliography 

Nishida A, Baker D N and Cowley S W H 1998 New Per- 
spectives of the Earth’s Magnetotail (Geophysical Mono- 
graph Series) (Washington, DC: American Geophysi- 
cal Union) 


Tuija I Pulkkinen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Magnetopause 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: 
Magnetopause 


The magnetopause is the location where the external 
PLASMA and magnetic field pressure of the magnetosheath 
balance the internal plasma and magnetic field pressure 
of the MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH. It is usually considered 
the boundary of the magnetosphere. The magnetic 
field orientation changes across the boundary from 
its magnetosheath to its magnetospheric orientation, 
implying that this boundary is a current sheet. While 
pressure balance and changes in the orientation of the 
magnetic field at a current sheet are relatively simple 
concepts, the structure of the Earth’s magnetopause is 
complicated because the plasmas on both sides of the 
discontinuity are magnetized. 

For typical soLar WIND conditions, the distance from 
the center of the Earth to the magnetopause along the 
Earth-Sun line, called the subsolar distance, is about 
10 times the radius of the Earth, or 10 Earth radii 
(approximately 64000 km). The shape of this boundary 
can be approximated by an ellipsoid of revolution 
about the Earth-Sun line with the magnetopause at the 
terminator about 50% further from the Earth than it is at 
the subsolar point. In the magnetotail, this approximation 
is not accurate. The magnetopause does not converge 
in this region; rather it extends many hundreds of Earth 
radii in the direction away from the Sun. Figure 1 is 
a cut through the magnetosphere in the noon—midnight 
meridian plane, showing the magnetopause. As discussed 
below, the magnetopause shown in figure 1 is called a 
‘closed’ magnetopause because there are no magnetic field 
lines crossing the boundary. 

Since the magnetopause is in pressure balance, 
changes in the internal or external pressure will cause 
the location and shape of this boundary to change. The 
solar wind dynamic pressure (that is, the solar wind mass 
density times the square of the solar wind velocity) is 
far from constant. This dynamic pressure is converted 
to plasma thermal pressure and magnetic field pressure 
in the magnetosheath. Thus, variations in the solar 
wind dynamic pressure cause the magnetopause to move 
toward and away from the Earth. The subsolar distance 
can move in to about half its nominal distance for 
extremely high solar wind pressure and can move out to 
about twice its nominal distance for extremely low solar 
wind pressure. 

A magnetopause was hypothesized long before 
spacecraft observed it and measured many of its 
properties. In 1931, Sydney Chapman and Vincenzo 
Ferraro suggested that a charge-neutral plasma (composed 
of ions and electrons) ejected from the Sun during 
magnetic storms would envelop the Earth. Because 
the medium surrounding the Earth is a good electrical 
conductor, the plasma from the Sun would not penetrate 
the Earth’s magnetic field. Instead, the plasma (and 
magnetic field) from the Sun would pile up and be swept 
around the Earth’s magnetic field, forming the boundary 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Magnetopas® 


Solar Wind 
Magnetic 
Field 


Solar Wind 


WV Earth's Magnetic 
)) Field in the 
= b Magnetosphere 


Figure 1. The Earth’s magnetopause is the location where the 
pressure of the solar wind and the internal pressure of the 
Earth’s magnetosphere balance. This magnetopause is closed so 
that no magnetic field lines cross the boundary and the plasmas 
on either side do not intermix. 


that is now known as the magnetopause. In effect, a 
current system would be set up on the magnetopause 
surface which would shield the planetary magnetic field 
from the interplanetary plasma. Chapman and Ferraro 
were attempting to explain the initial decrease in the 
Earth’s magnetic field during magnetic storms which were 
known to be associated with solar activity. They believed 
that the plasma ejected from the Sun was intermittent and 
that it did not contain a magnetic field (thus, the magnetic 
pressure external to the magnetopause was zero). It is 
now known that the charge-neutral plasma from the Sun 
(the solar wind) is unsteady but not intermittent and does 
contain a magnetic field. The continuous solar wind and 
the presence of the magnetic field in the solar wind (see 
SOLAR WIND: MAGNETIC FIELD) have important implications for 
the structure of the magnetopause beyond what Chapman 
and Ferraro envisioned. However, their pioneering work 
on the magnetopause was significant and is a good starting 
point for understanding this complex boundary. 

As a first approximation, the structure of the 
magnetopause can be investigated by neglecting the 
internal plasma in the magnetosphere and neglecting 
the external magnetic field in the solar wind. The first 
assumption is a reasonable approximation because the 
internal plasma pressure is about 5-10 times lower than 
the external plasma pressure. The second assumption has 
more profound implications discussed below. 

In this first approximation, the external, unmagne- 
tized plasma pressure is balanced by the internal magnetic 
field pressure. If the external plasma has zero tempera- 
ture, then the balance occurs between the external dynamic 
pressure (i.e. the plasma density and bulk flow velocity) 
and the internal magnetic field. In this case, the unmagne- 
tized ions and electrons impinge on the magnetic field and 
are completely turned around. Because the ions are more 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Magnetopause 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


massive than the electrons, they penetrate slightly further 
into the Earth’s magnetic field. This charge separation 
produces an electric field which self-consistently turns the 
ions and electrons around. Throughout this process, the 
external plasma pressure and the internal magnetic field 
pressure must balance. This relatively simple description 
of the magnetopause was formulated and solved analyt- 
ically before the first observations of the Earth’s magne- 
topause. It predicts a relatively thin current layer which 
is of the order of the geometric mean of the electron and 
ion gyroradii (for typical conditions in the magnetosheath, 
this mean is approximately the ion gyroradius or approxi- 
mately 50-100 km). It also predicts that there is no transfer 
of plasma across this thin layer since all plasma incident 
on the layer is ejected. 

While neglecting the presence of a plasma in the 
magnetosphere has an effect on the structure of the 
magnetopause, especially at the flanks or sides of the 
magnetopause, the major difference between this simple 
approximation and the Earth’s magnetopause is that it 
neglects the external magnetic field in the magnetosheath. 
Although the magnetic field in the magnetosheath is 
weaker than its magnetospheric counterpart, it is the 
presence of this magnetic field that causes most of 
the interesting phenomena associated with the Earth’s 
magnetopause. 

The next simplest approximation of the magne- 
topause is to assume that it is a tangential discontinu- 
ity. The magnetic field may undergo an arbitrary rota- 
tion across this type of discontinuity but no magnetic field 
lines cross the discontinuity and the plasma on either side 
of this magnetic field rotation does not intermix. Plasma 
intermixing is not allowed across a tangential discontinu- 
ity because, under ideal MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD), 
the magnetic field is ‘frozen in’ the plasma and a group 
of ions or electrons that share a common field line never 
share that field line with another group of ions or elec- 
trons on an adjacent field line. Since no magnetic field 
lines thread the boundary and the plasma on either side of 
the discontinuity cannot intermix, the magnetopause (and 
magnetosphere) is considered ‘closed’. A closed magne- 
topause has the magnetic topology in figure 1. Once again, 
the total pressure on either side of the tangential discon- 
tinuity must balance. At the location where the magnetic 
field rotates, plasma can move along the discontinuity by 
executing particle orbits in the layer. By virtue of the dif- 
ferent orbits for ions and electrons, this particle motion 
constitutes a current which self-consistently maintains the 
layer. The thickness of this structure can be of the order of 
anion gyroradius (or approximately 50-100 km, for typical 
conditions in the magnetosheath). Spacecraft observations 
indicate that, at least at times and over some limited areas, 
the magnetopause has the characteristics of a tangential 
discontinuity. 

In the 1970s, as spacecraft observations became more 
detailed, it became clear that solar wind plasma regularly 
crossed the Earth’s magnetopause. In particular, solar 
wind plasma was found ina layer approximately 3000 km 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


thick inside the magnetopause. This layer is much 
thicker than a tangential discontinuity magnetopause 
that has a thickness of about 100 km. It thus became 
important to understand how this magnetized plasma 
crossed a magnetic boundary and what the implications 
were for the structure of the boundary. One suggestion 
was that the plasma diffused across the tangential 
discontinuity. In a magnetized plasma this diffusion must 
occur ‘anomalously’ through the action of waves which 
disrupt the regular particle motion about the magnetic 
field, thus breaking the ‘frozen-in’ condition. Another 
way to produce this diffusion would be growth of an 
instability such as the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability caused 
by shear flows of the plasma at the magnetopause. 
If the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability were to grow to 
saturation amplitudes and enter a non-linear phase, 
plasma elements on two sides of the magnetopause could 
intermix. Spacecraft observations of waves and shear 
flows at the magnetopause held promise for anomalous 
diffusion. This subject is still controversial, but the 
observed wave amplitudes now appear to be insufficient 
to produce substantial anomalous diffusion necessary to 
match the observations of solar wind plasma crossing 
the magnetopause. Similarly, most shear flows at the 
magnetopause do not appear to be large enough to drive 
the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability to saturation. 

In 1961 James Dungey suggested that a breakdown of 
the frozen-in condition of ideal magnetohydrodynamics 
would cause the solar wind and terrestrial magnetic 
fields to diffuse into a region and interconnect. He 
developed these ideas from work on solar magnetic 
field interconnection (or reconnection) but realized that 
conditions favorable for MAGNETIC RECONNECTION could 
occur when (and where) the magnetic field in the 
magnetosheath was directed opposite the terrestrial 
magnetic field. Under magnetohydrodynamics (outside 
the small region where the diffusion and interconnection 
occurs), the tangential discontinuity magnetopause would 
decompose into a series of MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES, 
each performing a change in the plasma or magnetic field 
parameters that is required for the transition between the 
solar wind and magnetosheath conditions. Despite this 
complex structure, the total pressure remains constant 
through each wave front and the ‘magnetopause’ is still 
a balance between external and internal total pressure. 

Computer simulations that consider kinetic effects in 
the plasma (as opposed to MHD theory which treats the 
plasma as a fluid or fluids) indicate that some of these 
waves merge or change characteristics, so that, at least 
to a reasonably good approximation, the magnetopause 
during reconnection has the properties of a rotational 
discontinuity. The primary differences between tangential 
and rotational discontinuities are that magnetic field lines 
thread a rotational discontinuity and the plasma on either 
side can cross this type of discontinuity. Across a rotational 
discontinuity, the mass, momentum and energy densities 
are conserved. These conservation laws give rise to a 
series of jump conditions for the density, velocity and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Magnetopause 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


magnetopause ——— 


Solar Wind 
Magnetic 
Field 


Solar Wind f 


\ 


\ / Earths Magnetic 
(@ E Field in the 
q\ Magnetosphere 


Figure 2. An open magnetopause where reconnection is 
occurring in the subsolar region. The magnetopause is still the 
location where the solar wind and magnetospheric pressures 
balance but magnetic field lines thread the boundary and 
plasmas on either side can intermix. 


energy across the discontinuity. For example, the mass 
density and the normal velocity must be conserved across 
the discontinuity. Under certain assumptions, the jump 
conditions can be tested at the Earth’s magnetopause. 
These tests reveal that the magnetopause is often a 
rotational discontinuity. 

The magnetopause structure when magnetic recon- 
nection occurs is significantly different from the magne- 
topause in figure 1. Figure 2 is a cut through the mag- 
netosphere in the noon—midnight meridian plane, show- 
ing the magnetopause when reconnection is occurring in 
the subsolar region. Magnetosheath and magnetospheric 
magnetic field lines interconnect in a relatively small re- 
gion (called the diffusion region) near the subsolar point. 
The diffusion region is very small compared with the mag- 
netopause and, as a consequence, the probability that a 
spacecraft will cross through the diffusion region is also 
small. Even if a spacecraft crossed through the region, 
it might not be recognized since the distinction between 
this region and the magnetopause outside of the diffusion 
region is relatively subtle and only now beginning to be 
understood from a theoretical standpoint. 

Under the action of the magnetosheath plasma flow 
around the magnetosphere and the magnetic field line 
tension that is released in the reconnection process, these 
interconnected magnetic field lines convect away from 
the diffusion region toward the magnetotail. More 
magnetic field lines convect and reconnect in the diffusion 
region, continuing the process. Thus, figure 2 is a 
snapshot in time where the magnetopause can be traced 
through the rotation of the magnetic field from its 
magnetospheric to its magnetosheath orientation. Because 
of the interconnection of the magnetic field and the 
intermixing of the plasma, the magnetopause in figure 2 is 
described as an ‘open’ magnetopause. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Although the magnetopause structures in figures 1 
and 2 are significantly different, there are some features 
that these discontinuities have in common. The first 
feature is that the magnetopause is the location where 
the magnetic field changes from its magnetosheath 
orientation to its magnetospheric orientation. For the 
closed magnetopause in figure 1, the magnetic field 
rotates in a plane tangential to the magnetopause from 
its magnetosheath to its magnetospheric orientation and 
no magnetic field lines thread the boundary. For the open 
magnetopause in figure 2, the magnetic field undergoes 
the same rotation tangential to the magnetopause, but 
there is also a small component of the magnetic field that 
threads the boundary. 

The second feature that remains in common with 
all magnetopause structures is that the total magnetic 
field and plasma pressure remains constant across the 
boundary. For the closed magnetopause in figure 1, 
the internal pressure of the magnetosphere deflects the 
incoming magnetosheath plasma around what is in effect 
an impervious obstacle. For the open magnetopause in 
figure 2, this deflection still occurs but the obstacle is 
no longer impervious. Only about 1% of the plasma 
crosses the open magnetopause in figure 2. However, this 
transfer of plasma has a profound effect on the structure 
and dynamics of the Earth’s magnetosphere. Further 
information on the magnetopause can be obtained from 
the book entitled Physics of the Magnetopause (Song et al 
1995). 


Bibliography 

Chapman 5S and Ferraro V C A 1931 A new theory of 
magnetic storms: part I—the initial phase Terr. Magn. 
Atmos. Electr. 36 77-97 

Dungey]J W 1961 Interplanetary field and the auroral zones 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 6 47 

Song P, Sonnerup B U O and Thomsen M F (ed) 1995 The 
Physics of the Magnetopause (Geophysical Monograph 90) 
(Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union) 


Stephen A Fuselier 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasma Sheet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasma 
Sheet 


The plasma sheet is a slab of hot plasma in the equatorial 
region of the geomagnetic tail, and carries the cross- 
tail (dawn-to-dusk) current that supports the oppositely 
directed magnetic fields of the tail lobes (see MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC TAIL). The plasma sheet and the 
embedded current sheet are clearly present to distances 
of at least 1.5 million km away from the Earth. 

The existence of the current sheet was inferred 
immediately after the discovery of the geomagnetic tail 
by the IMP-1 satellite in 1964; the magnetic field directions 
are nearly antiparallel between the northern and southern 
lobes. It was also inferred that the current sheet must be 
filled with hot plasmas to sustain the magnetic pressure in 
the lobe. The lobe field magnitude is typically ~20 nT at 
a distance of 30 Rg (Earth radii; 1Re ~ 6378 km), and the 
distance dependence is given by ~124x~°4, where x is the 
downtail distance (in units of Rg) from the Earth. 

Later observations have revealed that the plasma 
temperature and number density in the central plasma 
sheet are typically of order ~keV and ~10° m7, 
respectively. The magnetic field inside the plasma sheet 
is weaker and more variable than in the lobe. However, 
it is still consistent with being oppositely directed in the 
northern (B, > 0) and southern (B, < 0) parts and 
separated by a neutral sheet (B, = 0), where B, is the 
magnetic field component in the Sun—Earth direction and 
positive toward the Sun. Towards the neutral sheet, the 
field magnitude decreases and plasma pressure increases, 
and thus the central plasma sheet is characterized by a 
high-6 plasma (6 > 1), where £ is the ratio of thermal 
to magnetic pressure. Usually ions make the major 
contribution to the pressure and to the cross-tail current 
associated with the pressure gradient. 

The half-thickness of plasma sheet is a few Re near 
the tail center and becomes thicker towards the dawn and 
dusk flanks. It can be clearly identified from the adjacent 
regions by differences in the magnetic field and plasma 
properties. Across the boundary from the lobe to plasma 
sheet, the 6 value jumps from <1 to a fraction of unity. 
Energetic ion beams are often observed to stream along 
the magnetic field lines in a layer (called the plasma sheet 
boundary layer) just outside of this transition. Inside 
the plasma sheet, plasma flow properties are highly 
variable with speeds ranging from <50 km s™! (stagnant) 
to >1000 km s~!. However, the flow directions are 
consistently associated with characteristic magnetic field 
variations; it is sunward in association with northward 
B,, and antisunward with southward B,. This coherent 
flow property represents convection in the plasma sheet. 
On the average, the convection is directed earthward 
in the near-Earth region, while it is tailward in the 
distant tail. This feature is well understood in terms of 
magnetic reconnection occurring in the neutral sheet of 
the geomagnetic tail. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In the near-Earth region, the plasma sheet is 
magnetically connected to the Earth at high latitudes, and 
particles that can penetrate to low altitudes lose energy 
through interactions with the dense atmosphere, causing 
auroral emissions. On the other hand, some of the plasma 
sheet particles are injected into the ring current region 
during storms and substorms. Therefore the plasma sheet 
is the source of the auroral particles as well as of the 
ring current (see also GEOMAGNETIC STORM, MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH: RING CURRENT, MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). 


Magnetic reconnection in the plasma sheet 

The structure and dynamics in the plasma sheet are 
basically understood in terms of MAGNETIC RECONNECTION, 
in which an X-line (neutral line) is formed in the dawn- 
dusk direction. As shown in the upper panel of figure 1, 
‘Petschek’ reconnection leads to the formation of four 
distinct boundaries (slow shocks). The upper and 
lower regions represent the northern and southern lobes, 
respectively, where cold plasmas are convected toward 
the neutral line, while in two separate regions inside 
the boundaries hot plasmas flow out earthward on the 
earthward (left-hand) side and tailward on the tailward 
(right-hand) side of the neutral line. The earthward and 
tailward flows are accompanied by northward (B, > 0) 
and southward (B, < 0) magnetic fields, respectively. 
Hence the plasma flows carry magnetic flux, and the 
resultant convection electric field is directed dawn to 
dusk on both sides of the neutral line. Statistically, the 
neutral line is formed at distances of ~140R~ down the 
tail, which is called a ‘distant’ neutral line. The convection 
electric field is of the order of 0.1 mV m7! on the average. 
The field lines on the earthward side are closed, with 
both feet connected to the ionosphere at high latitudes 
in the northern and southern hemispheres, while on the 
tailward side both ends are connected to the interplanetary 
magnetic field (IMF). 

In addition to the distant neutral line, magnetic 
reconnection is initiated explosively at a time close to 
substorm onset in the near-Earth region (20-30 Rg). The 
resultant neutral line is called a ‘near-Earth’ neutral line 
(NENL). The NENL formation is required to dissipate 
magnetic energy stored in the tail lobes during the 
substorm growth phase because the reconnection rate 
in the distant tail is generally too slow to balance the 
enhanced reconnection on the dayside under continuously 
southward IMF. In the growth phase, the magnetic field 
configuration becomes tail like and the current sheet 
becomes thinner in a wide region of the geomagnetic tail. 
Then, magnetic reconnection commences somewhere in 
an extremely thin sheet near the central axis of the tail. 
The plasma sheet on the tailward side of the NENL, which 
was originally convecting earthward with closed field 
lines, forms a plasmoid with a magnetic island, or flux 
ropes, which is expelled down the tail. On the earthward 
side, high-speed earthward flows transport northward 
magnetic flux towards the Earth, which contributes to 
‘dipolarization’ of the magnetic field near the Earth. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasma Sheet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


plasma flow 


magnetic field 


SLOW SHOCK 


magnetic field 


de Hoffmann Teller frame 


backstreaming 

ions 
magnetic mirror 
reflected ions 


electron 
flat top 
distribution 


\" 


REGION 


cold ion heating 3-20% 


electron heat flux 
eakeoe Tw. 
ge cold ions 


SLOW MODE SHOCK 


downstream hot ions 


STREAM 


UP 


~20 C/O; up 


2-8 C/Opj up 
cold ion deceleration 


cold ion heating 80-97% 
electron acceleration 


DOWNSTREAM 


Figure 1. A schematic structure of ‘Petschek’ reconnection and slow-mode shocks in the Earth’s magnetotail. 


Recent in situ plasma measurements on satellites have 
revealed characteristic features in the particle distribution 
functions associated with magnetic reconnection. Com- 
parison of the observed data with results from computer 
experiments has enabled us to understand them qualita- 
tively and quantitatively. Magnetic reconnection and the 
associated particle heating processes are topics of current 


research in space physics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Plasmoid 

A plasmoid is created initially near the center of the 
geomagnetic tail at distances of 20-30 Re by magnetic 
reconnection at a time close to substorm onset, as described 
above. The magnetic reconnection of open (lobe) field 
lines leads to a configuration change from originally 
closed field lines to a magnetic island, or flux ropes, 
on the tailward side of the neutral line. Since it is no 
longer connected magnetically to the Earth, the plasmoid 
can freely propagate down the tail (see also figure 1 in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasma Sheet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC TAIL). The tailward 
propagation velocity is ~300 km s! in the near-Earth 
region, subsequently accelerating to ~700 km s-! at 
~100 Rg downtail. Then, it slows down to ~500 km s7!. It 
is noted that the initial tailward speed is only a fraction of 
the lobe Alfvén velocity, but, beyond ~100Rg, it becomes 
comparable with, or a little lower than, the Alfvén velocity 
in the ambient lobe region. The plasmoid is initially 
confined in a narrow region near the tail axis, but it 
expands during the tailward propagation, until at ~100R_ 
the dawn-—dusk extent reaches the magnetopause, while 
the length (in the Sun—Earth direction) reaches several tens 
of Rg. 


Plasma sheet boundary layer 

Energetic ion beams are often observed to stream along 
the magnetic field direction near the plasma sheet—lobe 
boundary. This region is called the plasma sheet boundary 
layer (PSBL). In the near-Earth region, these energetic field- 
aligned beams are directed earthward and precipitate into 
the ionosphere near the poleward boundary of the auroral 
oval on the night side. A part of them are reflected back 
to the tail by the magnetic mirror force and constitute 
counterstreaming beams. While it is generally interpreted 
in terms of current sheet acceleration for the near-Earth 
observations, their generation mechanism is most likely to 
be associated with magnetic reconnection. Beyond several 
tens of Rg down the tail, they are observed just outside of a 
region in which the f value jumps from < 1 toa fraction of 
unity. They often coexist with cold ions of the lobe origin. 
This is a fore-shock region of the slow shocks formed by 
magnetic reconnection. 


Slow shocks 

With the formation of an X-type neutral line, cold plasmas 
in the lobes are convected toward the plasma sheet with the 
E x B drift under the action of the dawn-to-dusk electric 
field. The velocity of a slow-mode wave approaches zero 
as the propagation direction becomes perpendicular to 
the magnetic field. Therefore the plasma flow becomes 
supersonic with respect to the slow-mode wave in the 
vicinity of the X-type neutral line, even when the inflow 
velocity of the plasma is small. As a result, the collision of 
plasmas flowing from the northern and southern lobes is 
expected to give rise to slow shocks. The lower panel in 
figure 1 shows a schematic view of the structure of a slow- 
mode shock in the Earth’s magnetotail. On entering the 
plasma sheet, cold plasmas are heated and accelerated by 
the slow shock. In the fore-shock region, backstreaming 
energetic ions and incident cold ions coexist, and the cold 
ions are preheated before crossing the slow shock. These 
features are evidenced in the geomagnetic tail by recent 
spacecraft observations (although there are a considerable 
number of other cases in which the slow-shock condition 
cannot be satisfied). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Current sheet acceleration 

Let us consider the motion of a single particle near the 
neutral sheet under the cross-tail (dawn-to-dusk) electric 
field in a tail-like magnetic field configuration, in which 
the magnetic field magnitude decreases toward the neutral 
sheet. As they approach the neutral sheet owing to the 
E x B drift, particles are largely accelerated by the cross- 
tail electric field and begin to meander in the dawn—dusk 
direction (duskward for ions and dawnward for electrons) 
near the neutral sheet. They are further accelerated to 
higher energies with the meandering cycles. This is called 
current sheet acceleration. 

This process may generally occur everywhere in the 
neutral sheet with the dawn-to-dusk electric field, but it 
appears most prominently in a thin current sheet near the 
diffusion region of magnetic reconnection. Recent in situ 
observations from satellites have revealed the existence 
of non-gyrotropic ion distribution functions as evidence 
of the acceleration in the thin current sheet, of which the 
thickness is estimated as ~ 1000 km (< 500 km in extreme 
cases), that is comparable with, or smaller than, a typical 
ion Larmor radius. 


Sources of the plasma sheet 
Potential sources of the plasma sheet are the solar wind and 
the Earth’s ionosphere. According to the reconnection— 
convection model, the solar wind (magnetosheath) plasma 
enters the magnetosphere via dayside reconnection and 
is transported to the mantle region in the geomagnetic 
tail. It also continues to enter the mantle at the open-tail 
magnetopause. Then a portion of the mantle plasma is 
convected into the plasma sheet. (See also MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH: CONVECTION, MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC 
Tail for the reconnection-convection model.) Plasmas 
(especially ions) in the topside ionosphere are energized so 
as to escape both from the polar cap and from the auroral 
region. Particles escaping from the dayside cusp and the 
polar cap are transported along magnetic field lines to 
the mantle and lobe region, and trace similar trajectories 
to those of solar wind origin. Upflowing ion beams 
accelerated above the auroral oval are directly injected into 
the near-Earth plasma sheet. Generally the ionospheric 
plasma makes a significant contribution to the near-Earth 
plasma sheet during geomagnetically active times, while 
the solar wind plasma is usually the major source. 
Although the structure and dynamics are reasonably 
interpreted in terms of the reconnection process, it is still 
a matter of controversy whether this process is always 
the most important for plasma supply to the plasma 
sheet population. In the plasma sheet, there is a general 
tendency for the density to increase and the temperature 
to decrease as geomagnetic activity drops to a quiescent 
level. This may suggest that a diffusive process in the flank 
magnetopause is more effectively transporting cold dense 
solar wind plasma directly into the plasma sheet during 
quiet times, in which case the reconnection process may 
be considered to be less effective. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasma Sheet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It should be noted that the ion temperature in the 
plasma sheet is several times higher than the solar wind 
kinetic energy (~1 keV) and several orders of magnitude 
higher than the temperature of the ionospheric plasma. 
The temperature of the lobe plasma just outside the 
plasma sheet is as low as several tens of eV, while the ion 
temperature in the central plasma sheet is typically around 
several keV, and the electron temperature is 1/4-1/7 of 
the ion temperature. Efficient heating processes must 
take place across the plasma sheet-lobe boundary and 
inside the plasma sheet. Possible candidates are the slow 
shocks at the plasma sheet boundary, the current sheet 
acceleration and the resistive dissipation in the magnetic 
diffusion region, but their quantitative assessment is yet 
to be done in future work. 


Bibliography 
See papers in the special section on magnetotail dynamics 
in J. Geophys. Res. 103 (A3). For example: 


Hoshino M, Mukai T, Yamamoto T and Kokubun S 1998 
Ion dynamics in magnetic reconnection: comparison 
between numerical simulation and geotail observa- 
tions J. Geophys. Res. 103 4509-30 

Ieda A et al 1998 Statistical analysis of the plasmoid 
evolution with geotail observations J. Geophys. Res. 
103 4453-65 

Nagai T et al 1998 Structure and dynamics of magnetic 
reconnection for substorm onsets with geotail 
observations J. Geophys. Res. 103 4419-40 

Nishida A, Baker D N and Cowley S W H 1998 New 
Perspectives of the Earth’s Magnetotail (Geophysical 
Monograph Series 105) (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) 

Nishida A, Mukai T, Yamamoto T, Kokubun S and 
Maezawa K 1998 A unified model of the magnetotail 
convection in geomagnetically quiet and active times 
J. Geophys. Res. 103 4409-18 


Toshifumi Mukai 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasmasphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: 
Plasmasphere 


The plasmasphere is a torus of cold, dense plasma 
encircling the Earth that usually exhibits a very sharp 
edge at a distance ranging between 2 and about 6 Earth 
radii in the equatorial plane. Figure 1 is a simplified 
diagram of the plasmasphere as viewed from the Sun, 
showing some of its main features: the plasmapause, the 
main body of the plasmasphere, the dusk-bulge region 
and a detached plasma region outside the main body 
of the plasmasphere. The plasmasphere is essentially 
an upward extension of the medium-to-low-latitude 
ionosphere, formed as ionospheric ions flow upwards 
from their creation points at low altitudes to fill the relative 
vacuum of space surrounding the Earth. The sharp 
edge called the plasmapause was entirely unexpected. 
Here densities drop by a factor of 10-100 in a relatively 
short distance. The plasmapause was discovered in 
1963 nearly simultaneously by Konstantin Gringauz in 
the Soviet Union, using lunar rocket observations of the 
thermal plasma, and by Donald Carpenter in the United 
States, observing very low frequency plasma waves called 
whistlers. 

These whistlers, generated by lightning flashes, 
propagated between northern and southern hemispheres 
along geomagnetic field lines on both sides of the 
plasmapause. 

The plasma density ranges from 10* cm~* just 
above the topside ionosphere at ~1000 km altitude to 
107-10 cm~* within and 10-10% cm~? just outside the 
plasmapause in the equatorial plane. The average radius 
of the plasmasphere varies in response to changing 
SOLAR-WIND conditions. In addition, the plasmasphere 
extends to larger radial distance in the afternoon—dusk 
sector in a region termed the dusk bulge. These two 
characteristic features of the plasmasphere have been very 
successfully explained by considering the influences of the 
magnetospheric electric fields on plasma drifts. Erosion 
of the plasmasphere in the dusk sector appears to produce 
outlying structures that may be attached plumes or high- 
density regions completely detached from the main body 
of the plasmasphere. 


3 


Plasmaspheric composition and temperature 

The plasmasphere is composed mostly of protons and 
for this reason was originally called the protonosphere. 
The base of the plasmasphere is taken as the altitude 
(~1000 km) at which protons replace oxygen as the 
dominant species in the ionospheric plasma. Small 
amounts of helium and oxygen ions (1-5% oxygen and 
2-20% helium) as well as trace amounts of singly charged 
nitrogen and deuterium and doubly charged helium 
and oxygen ions are also found in the plasmasphere. 
Satellite observations indicate that, on occasion, an 
enhanced torus of heavy ions (O* and O**) appears in the 
outer plasmasphere in the region of a newly established 
plasmapause. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ion temperatures in the plasmasphere are generally 
between 0.5 eV and several eV (1 eV = 11700 K). In the 
outer plasmasphere, temperatures are, for the most part, 
anticorrelated with the density changes, rising sharply as 
the densities decline, moving toward the plasmapause 
and beyond. It is not clear whether ion and electron 
temperatures are in equilibrium in the outer plasmasphere. 
In fact, observations suggest that ion temperatures may 
exceed electron temperatures in this region. In the outer 
plasmasphere, the cold plasma temperature varies with 
magnetic and solar activity, reflecting the corresponding 
changes in its heat sources. One of the major heat sources 
is the terrestrial ring current, which is also found in this 
region of space (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RING CURRENT). 
The energetic plasma of the ring current overlaps the outer 
regions of the plasmasphere and dusk bulge, transferring 
energy to the thermal plasma through Coulomb collisions, 
and the damping of plasma waves. The time dependence 
of this energy transfer, its variation with solar and 
magnetic activity and its relationship to the changing 
composition and energy characteristics of the ring current 
are key areas of research at the present time. 


The structure of the plasmasphere 

Cold plasmas, such as those that form the plasmasphere, 
are strongly influenced by the large-scale electric field 
in the magnetosphere. This electric field drives a 
circulation of magnetic field lines and cold plasmas along 
trajectories that approximately coincide with electric field 
equipotentials. The large scale electric field in the inner 
magnetosphere originates from the superposition of two 
major sources: (1) the corotation electric field, resulting 
from the Earth’s rotation, which points radial inward at all 
local times, and (2) the convection electric field, generated 
by the solar-wind—magnetosphere interaction, assumed to 
be constant and directed from dawn to dusk throughout 
the entire region. Figure 2 shows electric potential patterns 
(and thus cold plasma drift trajectories) from each of 
these sources along with the combined potential from 
their superposition. The electric potential patterns are 
drawn in the magnetospheric equatorial plane with the 
Sun to the bottom of the figure. In steady state, the 
plasmapause corresponds to the boundary between the 
closed drift paths encircling the Earth and the open drift 
paths moving plasma from the magnetotail to the dayside 
magnetopause (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE). 
Within the plasmasphere, magnetic field lines, that confine 
the plasma, approximately rotate with the Earth allowing 
high densities to build up. Outside the plasmasphere, the 
circulation of magnetic field lines is influenced strongly 
by the convection electric field. The resultant trajectories 
of these external field lines no longer enclose the Earth. 
Magnetic field lines external to the plasmasphere convect 
to the magnetopause boundary on the dayside of the 
Earth, sweeping their burden of upflowing ionospheric 
plasma out of the magnetosphere. On these field lines, 
a buildup of upflowing plasma from the ionosphere, 
comparable to that achieved within the plasmasphere, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasmasphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earth’s 
rotation 


Geomagnetic field lines 
rotate with Earth 


~4 Earth Radii 


Detached 
Plasma Region Or 
Plasma Tail 


~6 - 7 Earth Radii 


Figure 1. View from the Sun of the Earth’s plasmasphere. The plasmasphere is a torus-shaped region of cold, dense plasma 


surrounding the Earth in the near-space environment that has a very sharp edge called the plasmapause at equatorial distances of 4-6 
Earth radii. It is essentially an extension of the ionosphere to high altitudes. The plasmasphere bulges out to greater radial distances on 
the dusk side of the Earth due to the nature of the plasma drift paths. However the dusk bulge region appears to be a separate region 
from the main body of the plasmasphere. Within the dusk bulge region, the plasma contains many structures, which may by blobs of 
plasma detached from the main body of the plasmasphere or plumes of plasma still attached by thin tails in another local time sector. 


cannot occur. This difference in field-line circulation 
patterns accounts for the significant density difference 
between the plasmasphere and the so-called plasma 
trough region beyond. Solar-wind-generated electric 
fields vary continuously in strength while the corotation 
electric field remains constant to a first approximation. 
Since the size and shape of the plasmasphere depend upon 
the interplay of these electric fields, the mean radius of 
the plasmapause tends to diminish as the strength of the 
convection field increases. 

In steady state, the dawn—dusk asymmetry in the drift 
paths produces an observed extension of the plasmasphere 
to larger radial distances on the dusk side, called the dusk- 
bulge region. However steady state is rarely achieved 
in practice. Erosion of the outer plasmasphere occurs 
with timescales of the order of a day and refilling takes 
several to 10 d. The solar wind, the source of the 
convection electric field, does not remain constant for 
such long periods. Although large-scale plasmaspheric 
features are explained to some extent by the potential 
patterns given in figure 2, inner magnetospheric electric 
fields are seldom this simple and plasmaspheric features 
exhibit interesting smaller-scale structures. The key 
process that complicates this picture is the tendency 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for energetic ions drifting at the inner edge of the 
plasma sheet to create electric fields through charge 
separation that shield the convection electric field from 
regions inwards of their location (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH: PLASMA SHEET). Recent satellite observations indicate 
that the inner magnetosphere electric fields have quite 
complicated spatial distributions as a consequence of 
shielding. | Models indicate that shielding is time- 
dependent (being noticeable after 10 min but taking 
several hours to complete) and not always effective. 
Because of these properties, the electric field penetrates 
very close to Earth at times, and complicated electric field 
patterns are created in the region of the outer plasmasphere 
and plasmapause. 

The dusk bulge region is also rather more complicated 
than the steady-state picture implies. Observations 
indicate that the main plasmasphere is nearly circular, 
with only a slight bulge near dusk. During periods of 
enhanced convection activity, erosion of the plasmasphere 
in the dusk sector appears to produce outlying structures. 
It is not clear from satellite data whether these structures 
are plumes, which extend from the dusk region, or 
are completely detached from the main plasmasphere. 
Meanwhile, a new plasmasphere boundary is formed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasmasphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Convection 
| | 
E 


é 
a Ay 
Sneropa* 


Corotation 


Dawn Dusk 


Figure 2. Lines of constant electric potential are shown looking 
down on the Earth in the equatorial plane with the Sun at the 
bottom. Since cold plasma moves along constant equipotentials 
in the magnetosphere, these lines also represent plasma drift 
paths. In this simplified representation (which nonetheless 
captures the most important elements of plasmaspheric 
structure), the pattern of the drift paths is determined by the 
superposition of two key large scale electric fields: the 
convection and corotation electric fields. The convection electric 
field is directed from dawn to dusk (left to right above) and has 
constant amplitude throughout the inner magnetosphere in this 
simplified model. It is produced by the 
solar-wind—magnetosphere interaction and drives plasma from 
the night side to the dayside magnetopause boundary. The 
corotation electric field points radially inward toward the Earth 
at all local times and forces cold plasma to approximately move 
with the Earth as it rotates. The superposition of the potentials 
from these two fields produces the combined pattern. In steady 
state, the boundary between open and closed drift paths is the 
plasmapause. A pronounced dawn—dusk asymmetry, seen in the 
drift paths, is responsible for the dusk bulge region of the 
plasmasphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Filed 
State 


Erosion 
(~1 day) 


Refilling Process 
{~2.5 to 8 days) 


10 00 10 20 3.0 
Log Electron Densty form) 


Figure 3. Model view of the plasmasphere during erosion and 
recovery, looking down on the Earth in the equatorial plane, 
with the Sun to the left. The plasmasphere is initially completely 
filled and in equilibrium with the underlying ionosphere (left 
panel). During erosion the convection electric field is enhanced 
which causes the boundary between closed drift paths, that 
encircle the Earth, and open drift paths, that move plasma to the 
dayside magnetopause boundary, to move inward. Plasma that 
was initially on closed drift paths now finds itself on open drift 
paths. This plasma is stripped off the plasmasphere and swept to 
the magnetopause boundary layers (center panel). As magnetic 
activity quietens, the convection electric field weakens and the 
open/closed drift path boundary moves outward. Newly 
corotating but empty plasma regions begin to refill immediately 
as plasma moves upward along field lines from the ionosphere 
(right panel). The circles mark the radial distance every 0.5 Earth 
radii moving outward from the center of the Earth. 


closer to the Earth on the nightside under the influence 
of the enhanced convection electric field (by mechanisms 
yet to be observed). In a fashion similar to that of 
a lathe, the new nightside boundary radius appears to 
be communicated to the dayside and eventually to the 
dusk sector through approximate rotation of the affected 
nightside regions with the Earth, leading (statistically) to 
a roughly circular condition of the main plasmasphere. 
Finally, the difference in field-line circulation patterns, 
which accounts for the significant density difference 
between the plasmasphere and the so-called plasma 
trough region beyond, does not necessarily explain the 
abruptness of the density change at the plasmapause that is 
often observed. The mechanisms at work in plasmasphere 
boundary formation remain a topic of research. 


Erosion and recovery of the plasmasphere 

The plasmasphere goes through continuous cycles of 
erosion and recovery. Figure 3 is a simulation of one such 
cycle. When the convection electric field strengthens, the 
region of closed trajectories encircling the Earth decreases 
in size. The plasmapause, which roughly marks the 
outermost boundary of this region of closed trajectories, 
moves inward. Thermal plasma, formerly trapped on 
closed trajectories, now finds itself on open drift paths. 
It is peeled off the plasmasphere and moved along open 
drift paths, to be lost at the magnetopause boundary. 
The number of ions lost from outside a newly formed 
plasmapause boundary, that has moved inward from a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Plasmasphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


distance of 5 to 3.5 Earth radii, is of the order of 1 x 
10%. When the convection electric field weakens, the 
plasmapause moves outward again trapping a relatively 
empty plasma region on corotating drift paths. Refilling 
of this region from the ionosphere, through magnetic- 
field-aligned plasma flows, begins immediately. The time 
required to build up high plasma densities in the outer 
plasmasphere through this refilling process, increases with 
radial distance because of the accompanying increase in 
the volume enclosed by the magnetic field lines. Refilling 
times range from ~1 d at 2.5 Earth radii to ~8 d at 4 Earth 
radii. Asa result of this radial increase in refilling times, the 
plasmasphere tends to behave as if it were separated into 
two distinct regions: an inner region which is completely 
refilled on short timescales, and an outer region which 
is almost always in the process of refilling but never 
quite reaches equilibrium before the next erosion episode 
begins. Time-varying electric fields further complicate 
this process by producing plumes of plasma still attached 
to the main body of the plasmasphere that extend from 
the dusk plasmasphere to the dayside magnetopause 
boundary. In addition, numerous small-scale regions of 
enhanced density are observed between the plasmasphere 
and the magnetopause in the dusk region during times 
of enhanced activity. There is evidence to suggest that 
these cold plasma structures remain trapped for extended 
periods, presumably on open drift paths, implying that 
the processes by which plasma is swept out of the dayside 
magnetopause are not fully understood. There is also 
new evidence from whistler wave observations to suggest 
that plasmapause formation may partly involve a process 
that dumps plasma (~50% of the amount lost at the 
magnetopause) from the corotating outer portions of the 
eroded plasmasphere into the underlying ionosphere. The 
roles of instabilities in enhancing losses of plasma at the 
plasmapause boundary and in creating irregular plasma 
structures have not yet been resolved. 

Recent interest has focused on the response of 
the plasmasphere to induction electric fields that occur 
during magnetic substorms (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
SUBSTORMS). These induction fields can sometimes be even 
stronger than convection electric fields generated by 
the interaction between the solar wind and the Earth’s 
magnetosphere. They are produced by reconfigurations 
of the Earth’s magnetotail. During the growth phase of 
substorms, magnetic field lines become more stretched 
producing induction fields that are directed eastward 
opposite in direction to the westward convection electric 
field. When substorm onset occurs, the Earth’s 
magnetotail field lines snap back into a more dipolar 
configuration producing induction fields that point 
westward and add to the convection electric field 
(See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC TAIL). These 
fluctuations in the large-scale electric field play a role in 
the production of detached plasma regions and turbulence 
in the outer plasmasphere. 

There is still one additional source of electric fields 
in the inner magnetosphere that has a strong influence on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the dynamics and structure of the plasmasphere. Neutral- 
atmospheric winds, through collisions, drive ions across 
magnetic field lines, creating electric fields. These electric 
fields which are generated in the ionosphere map out 
along magnetic field lines to high altitudes and alter 
the potential pattern in the magnetosphere and with 
it the cold plasma drift paths. There are three major 
sources of neutral winds that are important in altering 
magnetospheric electric fields, including (1) solar heating 
which maximizes on the dayside at the subsolar point 
and drives winds antisunward from the dayside to the 
nightside, (2) weather disturbances and topology at the 
Earth’s surface which drive gravity waves that propagate 
upward to the ionosphere, and (3) auroral heating which 
drives gravity waves towards the equator from the polar 
regions. Electric fields from each of these neutral-wind 
systems impact the large-scale electric field in the vicinity 
of the outer plasmasphere and plasmapause region. The 
interplay between plasmaspheric erosion and refilling 
during disturbed periods and the neutral-wind system is 
not yet fully understood. Progress in realistic modeling of 
the plasmasphere requires a complete description of the 
inner magnetosphere and its coupling to the ionosphere— 
neutral-atmosphere system as well as to the geomagnetic 
tail. 


Bibliography 

Carpenter D L and Lemaire J 1997 Erosion and recovery 
of the plasmasphere in the plasmapause region Space 
Sci. Rev. 80 153-79 

Lemaire J F and Gringauz K 11998 The Earth’s Plasmasphere 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Moldwin M B 1997 Outer plasmaspheric plasma proper- 
ties: What we know from satellite data Space Sci. Rev. 
80 181-98 

Wolf R A and Spiro R W 1997 Numerical modeling of 
the ring current and plasmasphere Space Sci. Rev. 80 
199-216 


Janet Kozyra 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Radiation Belts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Radiation 
Belts 


The Van Allen radiation belts, first discovered by the 
EXPLORER I satellite in 1958, consist of charged particles in 
orbits determined by the Earth’s magnetic field (see VAN 
ALLEN BELTS). The Earth’s magnetic field is approximately 
a dipole, see figure 1. Both electrons and ions which 
make up the radiation belts have typical energies of one 
million electron volts (1 MeV), and execute three different 
types of periodic (oscillatory) motion about the magnetic 
field. They gyrate about magnetic field lines at the 
electron cyclotron frequency, @ = gB/m, which depends 
on the local magnetic field strength, decreasing like 1/r? 
for a dipole. Those with finite velocity parallel to the 
Earth’s magnetic field bounce between hemispheres with 
a frequency which is proportional to their parallel velocity, 
and inversely proportional to the length of magnetic field 
lines. Lastly, they drift around the Earth with a frequency 
which is proportional to their perpendicular energy, and 
inversely proportional to the length of magnetic field line 
about which they gyrate. 


Source and loss processes 
There are two separate zones of electrons, called the inner 
and outer zone, while radiation belt protons have only 
an inner zone on average. Heavier ions of atmospheric 
and SOLAR WIND origin, notably oxygen and helium, 
contribute to the radiation belts; however their percentage 
of composition is small. Another recently discovered 
component comes from the trapping of cosmic rays which 
enter the magnetosphere singly charged, become stripped 
of outer electrons as they interact with the neutral 
atmosphere, and trapped by the Earth’s magnetic field. 
This so-called ANOMALOUS COSMIC RAY belt contains helium, 
nitrogen, oxygen and neon nuclei. The primary source 
of inner zone protons comes from the decay of neutrons 
produced by cosmic rays scattered off the atmosphere. 
This process is called cosmic ray albedo neutron decay 
(CRAND), and produces electrons as well as protons as 
a neutron decays with a 10.5 min half-life. Neutrons 
produced by scattering of energetic cosmic rays off the 
atmosphere are themselves energetic (MeV range), and 
most of their energy goes into the proton in the decay 
process, while the electron is emitted in a random direction 
with a few hundred keV energy. These electrons can, like 
the protons, be trapped by the Earth’s magnetic field, but 
they are inadequate as a source of MeV electrons in either 
inner or outer zones. A loss process due to the interaction 
of electrons with electromagnetic waves, described below, 
is responsible for the existence of two separate zones for 
electrons. This loss mechanism becomes comparable to the 
rate at which electrons are supplied to the region around 
3 Rg geocentric distance in the magnetic equatorial plane, 
producing a slot region between inner and outer zones (see 
review by Walt (1996)). 

The source of electrons for both inner and outer 
zones is primarily at larger radial distances, outside 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the orbit of geosynchronous spacecraft which orbit the 
Earth at a radial distance of 6.6 Re with a period of 
24 h. A major storage region for plasma or ionized 
gas consisting primarily of electrons and protons in the 
magnetosphere is the plasma sheet in the geomagnetic 
tail (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMA SHEET; GEOMAGNETIC 
TAIL). The Earth’s magnetic field is stretched into a long 
windsock in the anti-sunward direction by momentum 
coupling of solar wind flow past the magnetosphere, 
with a reversal of the magnetic field from outward 
in the southern hemispheric tail lobe to inward or 
earthward in the northern. There is a balance of 
magnetic and kinetic particle pressure, described by the 
equations of MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD), which leads 
to confinement of plasma sheet electrons and ions in 
the region of magnetic field reversal where the magnetic 
pressure is weakest. Some of this plasma originates in 
the solar wind, making its way into the magnetosphere in 
the tail region where the magnetic field is weak, where 
plasma of solar wind origin is identifiable by different 
ion mass and charge states from protons. Another 
source of plasma is the Earth’s ionosphere. Plasmasheet 
electrons have an average energy ~600 eV, with ion 
energies typically greater by a factor of seven. Both 
solar wind flow and MHD flows in the magnetosphere 
impart greater energy to ions because of their greater mass 
(scaling as 5mv°), with electrons and ions drifting together 
transverse to the magnetic field B in most regions of the 
magnetosphere. Both charge species are energized as 
they are transported earthward by the two-cell convection 
that provides return flow towards Earth in the central 
tail region, driven by anti-sunward flow at the boundary 
(See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH, figure 1). In detail, processes 
such as reconnection of oppositely directed magnetic field 
lines in the tail impart magnetic field-aligned flow and 
thermal kinetic energy to the plasma, and play a role 
in large-scale reconfiguration of the magnetotail, from 
a stretched-stressed shape to a more dipolar shape, 
called substorms (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). 
Impulsive electron and ion injection at geosynchronous 
orbit due to substorms is well documented, and provides 
a major outer boundary source for energetic particles in 
the inner magnetosphere, along with steady, sunward 
convection. This is the main source for radiation belt 
electrons, as well as the low energy ion population in 
the 100 keV energy range which makes up the Earth’s 
ring current (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RING CURRENT). The 
latter is well distinguished from the proton radiation belts 
by energy, radial location with maximum flux around 4 Rg 
geocentric, and an outer versus inner boundary origin. 
There is an approximate constant of motion associated 
with each type of periodic particle motion: gyro, bounce 
and longitudinal drift. These are called adiabatic invariants, 
and the first conserves the magnetic moment of a particle, 
which is the product of the equivalent current carried by a 
particle gyrating about a magnetic field line times the area 
enclosed by the orbit. The second invariant is proportional 
to the parallel momentum, mass times parallel velocity, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Radiation Belts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(8) Outer Van Allen Belt 


[] Trapped ACR (Interstellar matter) 


(0) Inner Van Allen Belt 
(9 Energetic Secondary lons 


Figure 1. Dipole representation of the Earth’s magnetic field showing proton inner zone, inner and outer zone electron radiation belts, 
and the anomalous cosmic ray component. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 34. 


© 
MROROMOMC) 
© © © 


KQQo7 
Waled Le 5 
eC ©. 6 5 B wnnnnongngooas 


Figure 2. Drift of a gyrating particle in a non-uniform magnetic field directed out of the page. Radial (earthward) gradient points up, 
ions drift westward and electrons eastward due to changing magnetic field strength across their gyro orbits. 


and the length of the magnetic field line along which 
bounce motion is executed. The third invariant is the 
magnetic flux enclosed by a complete longitudinal drift 
path, which is the integral of the magnetic field times 
the area enclosed, f B da. The principal mechanism for 
energizing radiation belt electrons as they are transported 
radially inward involves conservation of the first and 
second adiabatic invariants. Thus, as an electron gyrating 
about a magnetic field line moves earthward in the 
convection flow indicated in figure 1, into a region 
of increasing magnetic field strength, its perpendicular 
energy must increase in order to conserve the first adiabatic 
invariant. A charged particle’s longitudinal drift in the 
radial magnetic field gradient of a dipole field depends on 
the sign of the charge, as shown in figure 2, providing the 
source of the ring current as well as radiation belt particle 
longitudinal drifts, with ions drifting westward and 
electrons eastward. Fluctuations in electric and magnetic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fields, e.g. due to low frequency MHD waves, give rise to 
radial diffusion of charged particles represented by their 
distribution f in velocity and position, which on average 
transports particles from their source to loss region. This 
process can be described by a diffusion equation of the 
form 


when the radial motion is so small, while the particle is 
interacting with a fluctuating electric or magnetic field, 
that one can neglect the change in its longitudinal drift 
velocity. Particles are assumed to be uniformly distributed 
in longitude, and remain so during the diffusion process. 
Neither of these assumptions is valid during a substorm 
injection, nor during the compression of the outer 
boundary of the magnetosphere by an interplanetary 
shock wave which originates from the Sun. A third 
implicit assumption is that, while particle distributions 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Radiation Belts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


can be expressed as functions of the six dimensions of 
velocity and position coordinates, diffusion in velocity and 
position are decoupled processes. The latter is often a good 
assumption, because radial diffusion occurs on the timescale 
of the drift period, while velocity diffusion occurs on 
the timescale of particle bounce and gyromotion. Under 
these assumptions, the following two radial diffusion 
coefficients have been calculated for fluctuations in the 
magnetic and electric field, respectively: 


2 (5 2 R210 
Dine (3) ge Marte Pa (ait) (1) 
0 
- L® n 
Diy (L, Varift) = 8R2Be 2 PCL, NV) v=varitt* (2) 


These coefficients are written as functions of the 
surface magnetic field strength at the Earth’s equator, 
By = 0.3 G, the geocentric radial distance at the equator 
L in units of earth radius Rg, the power spectrum P, 
of the asymmetric part of the magnetic perturbation 
at the particle longitudinal drift frequency Varig, and 
the nth Fourier component of the global electric field 
perturbation P,, for magnetic and electric field-driven 
radial diffusion, respectively. While the magnetic diffusion 
coefficient is written for equatorially confined particles, and 
is substantially reduced for those in bounce motion off 
the equator, the electric diffusion coefficient is independent 
of the equatorial pitch angle of a particle, which is the 
angle between the velocity vector and the magnetic field 
at the equator. Electric field-driven diffusion tends to 
predominate in transporting particles to the low L values 
of the radiation belt flux peaks inside geosynchronous 
orbit. Diffusion coefficients which include both theoretical 
calculations of the power spectral functions P, and 
calculations based on local measurements of P, all 
decrease rapidly with decreasing L because of the strong 
L dependence in (1) and (2). There is substantial spread, 
but all have the behavior that diffusion times are greater 
than a day into L = 4. 

The primary loss processes for radiation belt particles 
are collisions with the neutral atmosphere and interaction 
with right (left) hand circularly polarized electromagnetic 
waves which propagate along the magnetic field such 
that an electron (ion) sees the rotating electric field vector 
of the wave remain constant at its gyrofrequency. This 
electric field can then cause particle diffusion in velocity 
which changes either the particle’s energy, pitch angle, 
or both. Particles which diffuse toward more parallel 
motion will strike the atmosphere and be collisionally 
lost, e.g. via charge exchange with a neutral. Thus 
diffusion in velocity space acts to move particles away 
from more perpendicular pitch angles, which result from 
increasing their perpendicular velocity as they diffuse 
radially inward in the Earth’s magnetic field, toward 
pitch angles with increased collisional interaction with 
the neutral atmosphere. This type of wave-particle 
interaction sets a theoretical limit on the flux of radiation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


belt particles called the stable trapping limit, since the 
velocity space diffusion coefficient is proportional to wave 
power near the electron and ion gyrofrequencies and 
harmonics, which in turn is proportional to the density 
of particles and gradients in velocity space away from the 
peak at 90° to the magnetic field. This mechanism has been 
generalized to nonparallel propagation, and was highly 
successful in explaining the electron slot region which 
separates the inner and outer radiation belt zones. 


Non-diffusive processes 

The preceding, steady-state view of radiation belt 
processes has been accepted for three decades, and shown 
to be successful in predicting particle flux levels during 
geomagnetically quiet periods. However, it was learned 
during the 1989-91 maximum in solar suNsPorT activity 
that there are significant deviations from this quiescent 
picture. For example, on 24 March 1991, an interplanetary 
shock initiated by a coronal mass ejection (CME) at the 
Sun, a global scale detachment of plasma from the outer 
atmosphere or corona of the Sun (see SOLAR CORONAL MASS 
EJECTION), impacted the Earth’s magnetosphere at a velocity 
estimated to be as high as 1400 km s-t and compressed the 
outer boundary of the magnetosphere inside the orbit of 
geosynchronous spacecraft for several hours. This impact 
launched an MHD pulse called a magnetosonic wave, which 
spread around the flanks of the magnetosphere at a speed 
comparable to the drift velocity of outer zone electrons 
between geosynchronous orbit and L = 9-10. Electrons 
drifting eastward synchronously with the wave pulse 
saw an approximately constant azimuthal electric field, 
which follows from Faraday’s law and the time-dependent 
compression of the Earth’s dayside magnetic field. This 
electric field transported electrons resonant with the pulse 
radially inward in the direction of E x B, forming a flux 
peak at L = 2.5, normally the slot region, with an energy 
peak at 13 MeV. Electron fluxes increased in this region 
by several orders of magnitude, and remained elevated 
for well over a year. Simultaneously, solar energetic 
protons which originate both at the Sun during the 
coronal mass ejection, and are accelerated by interaction 
with the interplanetary shock as it propagates toward the 
magnetosphere, formed a new, trapped proton radiation 
belt, when they were accelerated inward by the same 
azimuthal electric field which formed the new electron 
belt. While the March 1991 event produced the largest 
radiation belt perturbation of the Sunspot Cycle 22 solar 
maximum (1989-91), others were seen which require a 
similar explanation that violates the steady-state radial 
diffusion assumptions. 

Another important type of variability in outer zone 
electron fluxes is associated with high speed solar wind 
stream interactions with the magnetosphere. As far 
back as 1965, during the first minimum in sunspot 
activity following the solar maximum of the International 
Geophysical Year, the Explorer 26 satellite observed 
regular monthly injections and decay in outer zone 
electron fluxes which were later confirmed to be correlated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Radiation Belts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with high speed solar wind flows. A correlation was also 
noted with southward orientation of the interplanetary 
magnetic field (IMF), which in figure 1 (MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH) is seen to favor enhanced reconnection of the 
solar wind magnetic field with the Earth’s northward 
field at low latitudes on the dayside. Southward IMF 
enhances the coupling of solar wind flow energy which 
drives convection and substorm activity internally to the 
magnetosphere. The regularity of outer zone electron 
flux variation seen at sunspot minimum is due to the 
orderly structure of the solar current sheet, associated 
with solar wind outflow from the heliomagnetic equator 
which may cross the Earth’s orbit once or twice per solar 
rotation. Superimposed upon such recurrent behavior are 
CMEs, which become more prevalent approaching sunspot 
maximum when solar activity in general increases. CMEs 
can produce a detached plasma region with large-scale 
organized helical magnetic field structure called a magnetic 
cloud, carried radially outward by the ambient solar wind 
flow. Magnetic clouds impacting the magnetosphere can 
provide an extended period of southward IMF favorable 
to enhanced convection and substorm injection of plasma 
sheet particles into the inner magnetosphere. Such a 
sequence of events was evident for the 6-11 January 
1997 magnetic cloud interaction with the magnetosphere, 
which produced prolonged substorm activity, increase 
in the ring current which identifies a geomagnetic storm, 
and significant enhancement of outer zone electron fluxes 
(See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC STORMS AND SOLAR 
WIND ORIGINS). An increase in relativistic electron fluxes 
by several orders of magnitude around L = 4 was 
observed on the timescale of a few hours, which cannot 
be explained by radial diffusion. Observations of ultra low 
frequency (ULF) oscillations in the mHz frequency range, 
which corresponds to the longitudinal drift frequency of 
hundred keV electrons at geosynchronous orbit and MeV 
electrons at L = 4, suggest that drift-resonant acceleration 
by the electric field associated with these ULF oscillations 
may play an important role in transporting the electrons 
radially inward on the timescale of a few electron drift 
periods. 

A dynamic view of the radiation belts is necessary 
to explain the variations in particle fluxes by orders of 
magnitude which can occur on a timescale of minutes 
to hours, modifying integrated fluxes to which spacecraft 
are exposed over much longer periods. New multipoint 
spacecraft and ground-based diagnostics and computer 
modelling are expected to greatly alter the static view 
of the radiation belts shown in figure 1, and provide 
radiation belt environment forecasting capability (space 
weather prediction) of importance to satellite systems and 
manned presence in space. 


Bibliography 

Hudson M K, Elkington S R, Lyon J G, Marchenko V A, 
Roth I, Temerin M, Blake J B, Gussenhoven M S 
and Wygant J R 1997 Simulations of radiation belt 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


formation during storm sudden commencements J. 
Geopphys. Res. 102 14.087-102 

Hudson M K, Elkington S R, Lyon J G, Marchenko V A, 
Roth I, Temerin M and Gussenhoven M S 1996 
MHD/particle simulations of radiation belt forma- 
tion during a storm sudden commencement Radiation 
Belts Models and Standards ed J F Lamaire, D Heynd- 
erickx and D N Baker (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) pp 57-62 

Hudson M K, Elkington S R, Lyon J G, Goodrich G C 
and Rosenberg T J 1999 Simulation of radiation belt 
dynamics driven by solar wind variations Sun—Earth 
Plasma Connections ed J L Burch, R L Carovillano 
and S K Antiochos (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) pp 171-2 

Hughes W J 1995 The magnetopause, magnetotail and 
magnetic reconnection Introduction to Space Physics 
ed M K Kivelson and C T Russell (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 227-87 

Walt M 1996 Source and loss processes for radiation 
belt particles Radiation Belts Models and Standards 
(Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union) 
pp 1-13 

Wolf R A 1995 Magnetospheric configuration Introduction 
to Space Physics (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 288-329 


Mary K Hudson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Ring Current 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Ring 
Current 


The ring current consists of energetic positive ions that 
drift westward through the Earth’s inner magnetosphere. 
That ring of westward current causes a southward 
perturbation in the magnetic field on the Earth’s surface. 
The ring current is always present, but it intensifies during 
a magnetic storm. 


The discovery of the ring current 

In the nineteenth century, scientists noticed that the 
horizontal magnetic field strength occasionally decreases 
over most of the Earth, often after times when strong 
activity has been observed on the solar surface. It seemed 
as if the Earth sat within a great ring of westward current 
that strengthened during times of intense solar activity. 
Thus the idea of an Earth-centered ring current arose long 
before the space age and long before the development 
of modern plasma physics. However, in those early 
days, there was no sure way to determine how electrical 
current could flow through the space beyond the Earth’s 
atmosphere. 

A ‘magnetic storm’ is defined by a worldwide 
decrease in the horizontal magnetic field strength on the 
Earth. Nowadays, the effect is quantified in terms of 
the Dst (storm disturbance) magnetic index, which is an 
average of the northward magnetic perturbation observed 
at several low-latitude ground stations, with effects of 
quiet-time neutral winds carefully subtracted. In a typical 
magnetic storm, the Dst index decreases sharply over a 
period of a few hours, indicating a strengthening of the 
ring current. This period of decrease is called the ‘main 
phase’ of the storm. Ina very large storm, the total decrease 
in Dst can be as much as 600 nT (nanoteslas), about 2% 
of the Earth’s total field strength at low latitudes. In the 
‘recovery phase’ of the storm, which typically lasts a day 
(or several days for very large storms), the index returns 
to its normal level (near zero). 

In the first half of the twentieth century, theoretical 
calculations and laboratory experiments clarified how 
charged particles should be expected to move in the 
dipolar field of the Earth. The early pioneers in the 
field were Kristian Birkeland and Carl Stormer and 
later Hannes Alfvén and Sydney Chapman. They 
demonstrated that particles with energies below about 100 
million electron volts (MeV) could easily be trapped in the 
Earth’s nearly dipolar magnetic field. A charged particle 
executes a spiral motion about a field line, as shown in 
figure 1. As a charged particle moves toward the Earth 
along a dipole field line, its motion parallel to the field 
gradually slows as it encounters stronger and stronger 
fields. The field-aligned velocity eventually reverses, as if 
the particle were reflected from a mirror. Then the particle 
heads back out into the magnetosphere and towards the 
other pole of the Earth, where it is similarly reflected. 
The particle thus executes a nearly periodic motion along 
the field line, between ‘mirror points’ in the northern 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Mirror point 


Plasma sheet 


Figure 1. The geometry of the ring current. The shaded regions 
are in the equatorial plane. The southern hemisphere is not 
shown. 


and southern hemispheres. It also drifts very slowly 
from one field line to another, with negative particles 
(electrons) drifting east around the Earth and positive ions 
drifting west. The eastward drift of negative particles 
and westward drift of positives leads to a net westward 
electrical current around the Earth. Theorists naturally 
identified this westward current as the ring current that 
had been inferred from ground measurements. 

Early in the space age, Alexander Dessler, Eugene 
Parker and Norbert Sckopke demonstrated that the 
magnetic perturbation near the Earth caused by a charged 
particle moving in a dipole magnetic field is a constant 
times the particle energy, independent of how far the 
particle is from the Earth. Thus the Dst index provides an 
estimate of the total energy of all of the charged particles 
trapped in the magnetic field. A typical magnetic storm 
with Dst = —100 nT corresponds to a ring-current energy 
of 4 x 10! J. 

Spacecraft observation of the particles that carry 
the bulk of the ring current proved to be non-trivial, 
and comprehensive measurement of their properties even 
more so. Neither of the first two major particle populations 
discovered in the inner magnetosphere had enough total 
energy to explain the ring current. The first population to 
be discovered was the Van Allen radiation belt particles 
with energies above 1 MeV (see VAN ALLEN BELTS), but 
those were insufficiently numerous. The second was the 
plasmasphere, which includes a huge number of particles; 
but with less than an electron volt of energy per particle 
it also proved insufficient to explain the ring current (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMASPHERE). By the late 1960s, 
however, spacecraft measurements made by Louis A Frank 
and collaborators at the University of lowa began to detect 
a particle population that had sufficient energy density 
to explain the observed magnetic perturbations. Their 
observations and those of succeeding spacecraft flown in 
the early 1970s showed that the ring current was carried 
primarily by ions in the energy range from a few keV to 
a few hundred keV. The ions occupy field lines that cross 
the equatorial plane between about 2.5 and 7 Earth radii 
from the Earth’s center. Of course, these ring current ions 
are accompanied by a nearly equal number of electrons, to 
maintain charge neutrality, but most of those neutralizing 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Ring Current 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


electrons are less energetic and produce a current that is 
proportionately weaker. 

The chemical composition of the ring current also 
held a surprise. The instruments that first discovered 
the ring current particles could not distinguish between 
different ion species, but most scientists assumed that the 
particles were hydrogen ions (i.e. protons), the dominant 
component of the solar wind (see SOLAR WIND COMPOSITION). 
However, when the composition of the ring current was 
actually measured, the truth turned out to be different. 
The lower-energy part of the ring current turned out to be 
predominantly O* ions, while the high-energy part was 
mostly H*. The solar wind contains virtually no O*, which, 
however, is a major component of the ionosphere. Thus it 
became clear that a large fraction of the ring current ions 
come from the Earth and not from the solar wind. 


The source of the ring current 

The most obvious source of ring current particles is the 
plasma sheet, the hot (kilovolt) plasma that occupies the 
equatorial region of the magnetosphere beyond the ring 
current (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMA SHEET). The 
plasma sheet is the source of the aurora. Like the ring 
current, the plasma sheet contains both H* and O* ions, 
but the ratio of O* to H* decreases with distance from 
the Earth. Convection causes plasma sheet particles to 
drift Sun-ward from the magnetotail and divert around the 
Earth (see figure 2.) In the near-Earth region, westward 
gradient drift dominates the motion of most ions above 
about 10 keV, and the particles are trapped in Earth-circling 
orbits. The separatrix between the two types of trajectories 
is called the ‘Alfvén layer’. The particles that lie inside the 
separatrix and are trapped around the Earth are generally 
identified as ring current particles, while those on open 
trajectories are identified as plasma sheet particles. 

The Alfvén layer, which separates convection- 
dominated trajectories from gradient-drift-dominated 
trajectories, is not stationary in time. It moves toward the 
Earth in times of strong convection and away from the 
Earth in quiet times, as indicated in the right half of figure 
2. A brief period of strong convection brings plasma sheet 
ions close to the Earth on the night side. If the convection 
weakens again by the time the particles drift to the day 
side, they remain on trapped orbits about the Earth. This 
kind of event, in which fresh plasma sheet particles are 
added to the trapped ring current, is called an ‘injection’. 

A second source of the ring current is the underlying 
ionosphere. Ions are observed flowing up along field 
lines from the ionosphere to the magnetosphere. Some 
of these upflowing ions have energies not much greater 
than the thermal energy of particles in the underlying 
ionosphere, i.e. less than an ELECTRON VOLT. However, 
intense electrical currents that flow along auroral-zone 
field lines generate plasma waves that heat the ions. 
Electric fields that accelerate electrons downward to 
produce bright auroral forms also accelerate ionospheric 
ions upward. Consequently, some ionospheric ions 
are accelerated to kilovolt energies on their way to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetosphere, and some of them become part of the ring 
current. 


Ring current loss mechanisms 


Overall, the most important loss mechanism for ring- 
current ions is charge exchange with neutral atoms in 
the Earth’s exosphere, sometimes called the hydrogen 
geocorona, the outermost part of the neutral atmosphere. 
The crucial reactions are 


Ht+H->H+H* 


Ot+H—>O+H*. 


A kilovolt H* or O* ion captures an electron from a 
hydrogen atom of the Earth’s exosphere, which typically 
has an energy much less than 1 eV, producing a kilovolt 
neutral atom and an ion of very low energy. The energetic 
neutral travels off in a straight line and, in most cases, 
leaves the Earth’s environment entirely. The low-energy 
ion remains trapped in the inner magnetosphere but, 
because of its low energy, makes a negligible contribution 
to the ring current. 

Charge exchange lifetimes increase rapidly with 
distance from the Earth, because the density of the 
exosphere decreases rapidly with distance from the planet. 
Charge-exchange lifetimes in the ring current region range 
from hours near the Earth to weeks in the outer region. 
The recovery phase of a storm, in which the Dst index 
recovers back to its pre-storm level over period of 1-3 
days, is usually attributed to charge-exchange loss of ring 
current ions. 

There are several other loss mechanisms: 


(a) Convection to the dayside magnetopause. Periods of 
enhanced convection can sweep ring current particles 
Sun-ward to the magnetopause, even as they bring 
fresh particles in. 

(b) Coulomb scattering. Ring current ions gradually 
lose energy by collisions with low-energy electrons, 
particularly within the plasmasphere where the 
electron density is high. This loss process is 
particularly important for the lowest-energy ring 
current ions. 

(c) Pitch-angle scattering. Interactions with high- 
frequency waves can scatter a ring current ion. If 
the scattering results in a velocity that is very nearly 
parallel to the magnetic field, it may move the 
particle’s mirror point to such low altitude that the 
ion is lost by collisions in the dense part of the 
atmosphere. Whether or not this loss mechanism is 
strong enough to have a major effect on the total loss 
rate for ring current ions is a matter of current debate 
and study. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Ring Current 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Alfvén layer 


eit 
Ring current 


q) 


Plasma sheet 


Alfvén layer for strong convection 


Alfvén layer for weak convection 


Figure 2. Drift trajectories of energetic ions in the equatorial plane of the Earth’s magnetosphere. The Sun is to the left, the tail to the 
right. The left diagram shows drift paths. The drift motion is a combination of Sun-ward convection, which dominates far from the 
Earth, and westward (clockwise) gradient drift, which dominates near Earth. The right diagram shows how the regime of closed drift 


paths shrinks in times of strong convection. 


Relationship of the ring current to the rest of the 
magnetosphere 

The overall magnetic configuration of the magnetosphere 
can be substantially affected by the ring current. In a 
magnetic storm, the particle pressure in the ring current 
region becomes comparable to the magnetic pressure, 
and the magnetic field is substantially inflated. The 
magnetic connection between the ionosphere and the 
magnetosphere is thus altered: a field line from a given 
latitude in the ionosphere extends further from Earth when 
the ring current is strong. This change in the magnetic 
field allows the aurora, which normally lies on field lines 
connected to the plasma sheet, to be seen at lower latitudes. 

The ring current also affects the distribution of the 
convection electric field. Particularly during times of 
strong convection, and thus particularly in the main phase 
of amagnetic storm, the ring current does not flow entirely 
on closed loops in the magnetosphere. There is often 
a partial ring centered in the pre-midnight sector, with 
its ends connected to the conducting ionosphere through 
magnetic-field-aligned currents. A current down into a 
region of the ionosphere causes it to charge positively, 
whereas a region of upward current charges negatively. 
Thus partial rings of current in the magnetosphere affect 
ionospheric currents and electric fields. 

A matter of current debate is the relationship between 
magnetic storms and magnetospheric substorms (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). The substorm is a brief 
but intense disturbance in the magnetosphere—ionosphere 
system. It is centered on the night side of the Earth, in 
the plasma sheet and auroral ionosphere. Typically, a few 
large substorms occur during the main phase of any large 
magnetic storm. 

The geosynchronous orbit, where a spacecraft orbital 
velocity is the same as the rotation rate of the Earth, 
lies at 6.6 Earth radii from the center of the Earth. It is 
home to many operating spacecraft, some of which carry 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


particle detectors. That orbit typically lies close to the 
Alfvén layer and affords a good view of particle injections. 
Nearly every magnetospheric substorm injects some fresh 
particles into the geosynchronous orbit region. However, 
most substorms do not occur within magnetic storms. In 
other words, every substorm injects fresh particles into 
the inner magnetosphere, but most do not cause a lasting 
enhancement of the ring current. It is not clear whether 
the substorm is essential to the injection of the storm-time 
ring current. 


Bibliography 

Chen M W, Schulz M and Lyons L R 1997 Modeling 
of ring current formation and decay: a review 
Magnetic Storms ed B T Tsurutani, J K Arballo, 
W D Gonzalez and Y Kamide (Washington, DC: 
American Geophysical Union) pp 173-86 

Williams D J 1987 The Earth’s ring current: present 
situation and future thrusts Phys. Scr. T18 140-51 


Richard Wolf 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: 
Substorms 


The term magnetospheric substorm is used to describe a 
host of phenomena which occur as a result of the transfer 
of momentum and energy from the SOLAR WIND into the 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH and subsequently into the 
ionosphere and upper atmosphere. The word ‘substorm’ 
was initially used in the early part of the 1960s to portray 
rapid and repeatable variations of the polar magnetic 
field during magnetic storms. In order to characterize the 
overall phenomenology of auroral disturbances, the term 
was modified to auroral substorm, before becoming 
more widely incorporated as the magnetospheric 
substorm in the 1970s. The study of magnetospheric 
substorms has tended to attract controversy and this 
remains the case currently. At the moment there are a 
number of aspects of magnetospheric substorms on 
which there is general consensus within the scientific 
community and this article deals with those aspects 
before moving to the more controversial aspects. 

The AURORA is caused by the precipitation into the 
ionosphere of particles, with energies up to 10 keV or 
more, and is extremely dynamic during auroral 
substorms. The original description of an auroral 
substorm derived from the development of auroral 
activity based on the analysis of data from arrays of all- 
sky cameras deployed around the auroral oval during the 
International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957. A 
schematic representation of the development of an 
auroral substorm as portrayed in 1964 is given in figure 
1. The quiet state (figure 1, panel A) consists of multiple 
arcs on the nightside drifting equatorward. A sudden 
brightening of the equatorward-most arc (figure 1, panel 
B) represents the onset of the expansion phase of the 
auroral substorm. Thereafter, the auroral activity moves 
westward, poleward and eastward (figure 1, panel C) 
forming a broad region of bright and dynamic auroral 
activity in the midnight sector, often known as the 
auroral bulge. As the auroral activity within the bulge 
continues to move westward, the westward edge of the 
bulge becomes deformed with a sharp kink developing, 
which is called the westward travelling surge, WTS 
(figure 1, panel D). Auroral activity continues throughout 
60 min or so after the onset (figure 1, panels D and E), 
including the formation of auroral forms called omega 
bands at the eastern edge of the bright aurora (figure 1, 
panel D). Eventually, when the auroral activity has 
reached its most poleward extent, it starts to decline and 
the luminosity decreases, representing the start of the 
recovery phase (figure 1, panel F). During this time quiet 
auroral arcs reappear near the equatorward part of the 
active region, while the luminosity in the poleward part 
of the active region disappears. Also the high latitude 
edge of the substorm-disturbed region moves equator- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


C %s5-6 MIN 


€. 20 MIN-IHA 


# Yel-27 4A TeZ~3 HR 

FowsA 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of six stages in the 
development of an auroral substorm as determined from all-sky 
camera data (from Akasofu 1964). 


ward and recovery is then complete when the polar cap, 
the region within the auroral oval, has shrunk in size and 
auroral activity has moved to high latitudes. Figure 2 
represents a series of six images taken by the VIS Earth 
Camera from the POLAR spacecraft on 12 January 1997. 
This series of images illustrates the global auroral 
activity associated with a magnetospheric substorm 
starting from the quiet auroral oval at 0658 UT to the 
maximum extent of the auroral emission at 0833 UT. 
Research, partly based upon global images of the aurora 
from space such as those in figure 2, has led to 
refinements to the picture of auroral activity described 
above which will be discussed later. 

It is now generally accepted that a magnetospheric 
substorm comprises three separate phases: the 
growth, expansion and recovery phases. The growth 
phase is generally an interval of energy transfer 
from the solar wind and subsequent storage in the 
tail of the magnetosphere together with a small amount 
of dissipation in the ionosphere. This phase was not 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


VIS Earth Camera 
12 Jan 1997 (97/012) 


06:58:01 UT 130.4 nm 


08:05:58 UT 130.4nm 


08:13:59 UT 


130.4 nm 08:32:55 UT 3 130.4 nm 


Visible Imaging System/POLAR 
The University of lowa 


Figure 2. A series of six images from the VIS Earth Camera (Frank et a/ 1995) on the Polar spacecraft. The images have been 


supplied by Professor L A Frank and Dr J B Sigwarth. 


considered part of the original auroral substorm, and is 
the interval prior to panel B in figure 1. The expansion 
phase is an interval when energy stored in the tail is 
explosively released, with some energy appearing in the 
ionosphere, some in the ring current and some being lost 
to the solar wind. The onset of the expansion phase 
occurs at the time of panel B in figure | and continues 
through to panel F. Finally, the recovery phase is an 
interval when the magnetosphere-ionosphere system 
relaxes back to a quiescent state. By describing the 
associated phenomena, we now consider each of these 
phases in turn. 


Substorm phases 

The interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) is convected 
away from the Sun with the solar wind, varying in 
magnitude and direction as it is transported. The growth 
phase of the magnetospheric substorm is considered to 
begin with the onset of southward interplanetary 
magnetic field (IMF) at the dayside magnetopause. This 
leads to MAGNETIC RECONNECTION between the IMF and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the geomagnetic field, thereby creating open magnetic 
flux which is connected at one end to the Earth and at the 
other to the solar-wind plasma. This newly opened 
magnetic flux is transported by the motion of the solar 
wind into the magnetotail where it is added to the lobes 
(see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC TAIL). In 
this way, magnetic energy, B’/2u19 per volume, is stored 
in the tail as the lobe magnetic field intensity increases. 
The region of the ionosphere, which is threaded by open 
flux, is termed the polar cap. Ionospheric flow is 
stimulated by the transport of open flux from the dayside 
into the tail and the polar cap also expands. If the IMF 
remains southward for an extended period of time, for 
example several tens of minutes, then ionospheric flows 
continue to be stimulated and the polar cap continues to 
expand, thereby also moving the auroral oval to lower 
latitudes. This global convection process is the directly 
driven part of the magnetospheric substorm and some 
energy is dissipated in the ionosphere, mainly via Joule 
heating of the ionospheric plasma. In the nightside 
ionosphere the auroral forms tend to be quiescent and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


relatively stable. There is one dynamic auroral feature 
which takes the form of equatorward moving arcs. These 
arcs begin their equatorward drift close to the border 
between the auroral oval and the polar cap, and several 
can be seen during the interval of the growth phase. 

A further consequence of the addition of magnetic 
flux in the tail is the re-orientation of the magnetic field 
in the near-Earth tail, for example at geostationary orbit, 
where the field becomes less dipolar-like and more like 
the stretched mid and far tail field. This re-orientation 
results from the formation and subsequent intensification 
of a thin current sheet in the inner magnetosphere, the 
cross-tail current. Another signature at geostationary 
orbit is the reduction of particle fluxes, especially in the 
energy range 30-300 keV. This reduction in particle 
fluxes is caused by the 90°pitch angle particles, which 
drift through the nightside during this time, moving 
closer to the Earth. Small pitch angle particles are less 
affected and the resultant pitch angle distribution 
becomes elongated, and is often referred to as ‘cigar- 
like’. This particular signature normally occurs in the late 
growth phase, some 10 min or so prior to the expansion 
phase onset. Further down the tail the stretching of the 
field caused by the addition of magnetic flux into the tail 
lobes results in plasma sheet thinning (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMA SHEET). The growth 
phase, as defined by the interval from the southward 
turning of the IMF to the expansion phase onset, 
normally lasts between 30-60 min. 

The expansion phase of the magnetospheric 
substorm is normally accepted as starting with the 
brightening of the equatorward-most auroral arc in the 
nightside ionosphere. This brightening begins in a 
localized region near midnight and propagates along the 
length of the arc both westwards and eastwards at phase 
velocities of up to 10 km s’'. This is then followed by a 
poleward expansion of the auroral luminosity at speeds 
of typically a few hundred m s"'. This is known as the 
auroral break-up because of the rapid deformation of the 
original quiet arc. The poleward expansion forms the 
auroral feature known as the auroral bulge and the 
westward motion of the western edge of the bulge 
develops the WTS, as discussed earlier, which has a 
westward phase velocity of ~1 kms! and may ultimately 
reach the dusk meridian. This original concept of the 
WTS, however, seems not to apply when considered 
carefully. Based upon high time resolution auroral 
images taken by the UV imager on the Viking spacecraft, 
it seems that the WTS is not a single surge form which 
propagates but is more likely a series of new surge forms 
which appear to the west of previously formed regions. 
In fact, each individual surge form does not appear to 
propagate far from the meridian on which it was initiated. 
Eastern motion of the auroral activity at the eastern part 
of the substorm active region can also occur but is in 
general less distinctive. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Also at the expansion phase onset a wave, called a Pi 
2 pulsation, occurs. This wave has a frequency between 
5-25 mHz, equivalent to a period range of 200-40 s, and 
is normally of order 10 mHz, a period of 100 s, and lasts 
for a few cycles whilst decaying in amplitude. The Pi 2 
pulsation is primarily a nightside feature which can be 
seen over a wide range of local times, sometimes around 
to noon, and at latitudes from the auroral zone to the 
equator although it is most well defined at mid latitudes. 
The ‘global’ nature of the wave allows it to be considered 
as an ideal timing indicator for substorm onset in the 
event of no auroral observations, at least to times of order 
1 min. These waves result from an impulsive change in 


the geomagnetic tail which causes a fast 
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) wave to _ propagate 
throughout the tail (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC 


WAVES). This wave couples to a cavity mode inside the 
plasmasphere causing the well-defined mid-latitude 
signature. 

At the same time as the development of the enhanced 
luminosity associated with the auroral break-up, ground 
magnetic perturbations are also observed which occur as 
a result of enhanced currents flowing in the ionosphere, 
termed auroral electrojets. These magnetic deflections 
are typically several hundred nT but during particularly 
intense intervals of current flow, can reach up to 
2000 nT. Note the magnitude of the field at Earth’s 
surface is typically 50 000 nT. With increasing time, 
there may be subsequent intensifications of the auroral 
activity, usually to the west of the original break-up, 
resulting in further enhancements of the current, and a 
poleward motion of the luminosity and current, often 
apparently in a stepwise manner rather than a smoothly 
varying way. At the time the poleward motion of the 
luminosity stops and the auroral region is at its widest, 
the expansion phase is said to have ended and the 
recovery phase begins. The enhanced auroral luminosity 
and the enhanced electrojets are a consequence of a 
change in the flux and energy spectrum of the 
precipitating electrons into the ionosphere. There are 
more particles with a harder spectrum resulting not only 
in increased luminosity but also in enhancements in 
electron density at lower altitudes, sometimes down to 
less than 100 km. A further characteristic signature 
caused by this change in particle precipitation is the 
absorption of radio waves in the MHz frequency band. 

Most spacecraft observations in the magnetosphere 
during the expansion phase have been made at 
geosynchronous orbit. Here there are two typical 
signatures of onset, one being the dispersionless, in 
energy, injection of electrons and ions in the energy 
range 30-300 keV, the other the dipolarization of the 
magnetic field. Dispersionless injections of particles tend 
to occur in a limited local time sector near midnight. All 
energies appear at the spacecraft at the same time. 
Subsequently electrons and ions are subject to forces due 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to the gradient and curvature of the near-dipolar magnetic 
field in the inner magnetosphere which cause the 
particles to drift around the Earth, electrons to the east 
and ions to the west. Thus a_ spacecraft at 
geosynchronous orbit located several hours or more away 
from midnight will observe enhancements in the particle 
fluxes which are dispersed in energy, with higher energy 
particles reaching the spacecraft before lower energy 
particles. The magnetic field re-orientation, called the 
dipolarization, is also a characteristic signature of the 
early expansion phase. Again this feature is initially 
limited in local time extent in the tail, although there is 
evidence for expansion to west and east during the 
expansion phase in a stepwise manner. A_ further 
reproducible signature of the expansion phase onset in 
space is the onset of a burst of AURORAL KILOMETRIC 
RADIATION (AKR). This radiation, which typically occurs 
in the frequency band 200-500 kHz, is generated on the 
field lines of discrete aurora typically 1.5—3R_ above the 
auroral ionosphere and results from the electron 
cyclotron maser instability which is induced by energetic 
electrons. 

The recovery phase is perhaps the hardest to 
characterize of the three phases. During this interval the 
system returns to a quiescent state. However, there are 
still optical features such as omega bands which are 
present and moving, in general eastwards. A double oval 
is also seen to form when the luminosity in the centre of 
the oval decreases, creating two bands of enhanced 
luminosity at the equatorward and poleward edges of the 
oval. The optical luminosity is reducing along with the 
electrojet currents, but decay times can be relatively long, 
of the order of 30—60 min, since particles are still present 
and drifting in the magnetosphere and consequently 
precipitating into the ionosphere. Ultimately, however, 
the system returns to a state which is similar to that prior 
to the onset of the growth phase. The timescales for the 
three phases are typically 30-60 min (growth), 1-2 h 
(expansion) and 30-60 min (recovery). The situation may 
become more complex if the IMF varies on timescales 
which are longer than those described above. 

The phenomena that are observed during each of the 
three phases have been described above. Typically these 
observations have been made on the ground or at 
geosynchronous orbit. There have been other space 
observations as well but these will be mainly discussed 
below as we describe various models for the expansion 
phase of the substorm. It is this part of the substorm 
process that attracts most of the current debate. 


Substorm current wedge 

Apart from the auroral activity described earlier which 
occurs during the substorm, there are also characteristic 
magnetic signatures which appear during the expansion 
phase in particular. The auroral electrojets have already 
been mentioned, but the westward electrojet forms part of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


one of the universally accepted features of substorms, the 
substorm current wedge (figure 3). At expansion phase 
onset the cross tail current is diverted along magnetic 
field lines into the ionosphere where the enhanced 
current flows as the westward electrojet before flowing 
out of the ionosphere back into the tail. The diversion of 
the cross tail current changes the stretched tail field 
configuration observed at geostationary orbit near 
midnight during the growth phase and results in the 
dipolarization of the field. The current wedge consists 
then of two field aligned currents (FAC), downward to 
the Earth in the east and upward from the Earth in the 
west. The upward current is generally believed to be 
colocated with the western edge of the auroral activity 
and is intimately related to the WTS. Each surge form 
which is part of the WTS as it evolves has an upward 
FAC at its core with a circulating Hall current in the 
region surrounding the core. While there is a downward 
FAC in the volume surrounding the surge, there is 
generally a preference for downward current in the east 
to connect to the upward FAC by the westward electrojet. 
This wedge of current has characteristic magnetic 
signatures at mid-latitudes which are termed magnetic 
bays because of the similarity of the time varying 
magnetic field to coastal bays on a map. The north-south 
component of the field has perturbations which are 
positive, i.e. has a northward direction, at longitudes 
within the current wedge, since the direction of the 
magnetic field perturbation due to the currents is in the 
northward direction. The east-west component has a 
positive bay, i.e. in an eastward direction, on the western 
half and a negative bay at the eastern half. The east-west 
component bays are maximum at longitudes which 
coincide with the field-aligned currents. The SCW is 
closely related to the Pi 2 pulsations which occur at 
expansion phase onset and the waves are seen as a high- 
frequency response on the lower frequency bay variation. 
This current system is occasionally referred to as the DP- 
1 current (disturbance polar type 1) and is an expansion 
Field-ofigned 


currents 


Figure 3. A schematic representation of the substorm current 
wedge (from Clauer and McPherron 1974). (Copyright 1974 by 
the American Geophysical Union.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


phase signature alone. The DP-2 current is the current 
system which develops during the growth phase and is 
equivalent to the ionospheric flow which is stimulated by 
reconnection processes at the dayside magnetopause. 


Substorm models 

The first model proposed to explain many of the 
observations of magnetospheric substorms is the near- 
earth neutral line (NENL) model. Here the cause of the 
expansion phase onset is magnetic reconnection of closed 
magnetic field lines in the tail which originally thread the 
plasma sheet forming a neutral line in the near-Earth tail. 
Consequently the process which powers the substorm 
expansion is reconnection. Figure 4 illustrates the 
original version of the NENL which demonstrates 
schematically the changes in the magnetotail occurring 
during substorms. The panels in figure 4 are cuts along 
the midnight meridian plane of the magnetotail. The 
onset of reconnection in the tail at a new neutral line, N' 
(figure 4, panel 2) follows from the growth phase 
thinning of the plasma sheet. Initially, the NENL is of 
limited azimuthal extent and, as reconnection continues, 
newly reconnected magnetic field lines form an island of 
plasma tailward of the neutral line which is disconnected 


a en ME? 
TS ae tt ON 


ae 
» as “ 


from the Earth (figure 4, panels 3 and 4). Plasma flows 
into the neutral line from above and below and out from 
the neutral line in both earthward and tailward directions. 
Ultimately, open magnetic flux of the tail lobes begins to 
reconnect (figure 4, panels 5—8) and the island of plasma 
forms a plasmoid which then, free from restraining 
forces, travels down the geomagnetic tail and is ejected 
into the solar wind. The timescale for reconnection to 
‘eat’ through the plasma sheet is believed to be of the 
order of 5—15 min. The formation of the NENL interrupts 
the cross-tail current, which had intensified during the 
growth phase, causing the near-Earth magnetic field to 
adopt a more dipolar-like orientation, the dipolarization. 
The current system that results is the substorm current 
wedge. The radial position of the onset of reconnection in 
the geomagnetic tail has been debated often. The key 
signatures that are used to identify the existence of a 
NENL are southward-directed magnetic field and 
tailward flow. The evidence from a number of studies, 
involving data from several different spacecraft, suggests 
that these signatures are not seen in the tail at radial 
distances less than 19R; from the Earth. Recent work 
with the GEOTAIL spacecraft indicates that tailward flows 


Goa77 
“teseewe tt 
LE ILL LL 


Figure 4. A schematic representation of the changes in the tail configuration during the substorm. This is the near-Earth neutral line 


model (see Hones 1979). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are seen predominantly between 20-30 Ry down tail and, 
interestingly, mainly pre-midnight. Furthermore, these 
flows occur within +5 min of a Pi 2 pulsation observed 
on the ground and last on average between 7—9 min. 

The location of the onset of reconnection at 
expansion phase onset some 20-30 R_ downtail does not 
appear to be consistent with a number of ground 
observations, which indicate that the auroral break-up 
maps to between 6-10 R_ downtail. These observations 
include the location of the initial disruption in the auroral 
forms at the equatorward-most auroral arc. Also, 
equatorward-drifting arcs are seen to continue to drift 
after the onset of the expansion phase, as identified either 
by Pi 2 pulsations or by auroral break-ups. Then the 
auroral arc which breaks up is seen to occur close to the 
location of latitudes where long period ULF waves are 
observed which imply both closed field lines and ones 
which will allow the formation of standing waves on 
them. This latter point implies that the magnetic field 
which maps from the auroral break-up into the tail is not 
as stretched as suggested in the NENL model. Thus, 
reconnection may not be the only process involved in the 
substorm expansion phase onset. 

One proposal to overcome these difficulties is that 
the reconnection region in the tail does not connect 
magnetically with the auroral arc which brightens at 
expansion phase onset. If the onset of reconnection in the 
tail at some 20-30 R_ downtail is the start of expansion 
phase onset, earthward flows of plasma would result. 
This earthward flow would be reduced as it enters the 
near-Earth tail as a result of the increase in the magnetic 
field. Convection breaking, as this process is termed, 
leads to magnetic flux pile up, dipolarization, the 
formation of the substorm current wedge and energetic 
particle precipitation (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
CONVECTION). These signatures then propagate tailward 
down the tail. This proposal leads to the conclusion that 
the auroral break-up, or expansion phase onset in the 
ionosphere, does not occur at the same time as the onset 
of the expansion phase in the tail. 

The current sheet disruption (CSD) model is an 
alternative to the NENL model which is proposed to 
explain the expansion phase onset. In this model, the thin 
current sheet still develops in the inner magnetosphere 
during the growth phase. A combination of lower hybrid 
waves, produced by streaming non-adiabatic ions 
interacting with adiabatic electrons, and the lower hybrid 
drift instability at the density gradient on the boundary of 
the plasma sheet produces anomalous resistivity which 
disrupts the cross-tail current, thereby resulting in the 
substorm current wedge. A further key difference from 
the NENL model is that disruption of the tail current 
begins close to geostationary orbit and then expands 
radially earthward and tailward. In fact it has been 
proposed that a rarefaction wave is launched downtail 
reducing the B, component in the magnetotail and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


inducing plasma sheet thinning. Ultimately these effects 
induce reconnection in the tail which leads to the 
subsequent formation of the plasmoid. Thus closure of 
open magnetic flux is not necessary for expansion phase 
onset in the CSD model, although it does occur at some 
time later. 

Another class of model considers the effects of the 
ionosphere on the magnetotail, through the action of field 
aligned currents, and such models have been termed 
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling (MIC) models. In 
such models, changes in the ionospheric conductivity 
influence the tail through positive feedback processes, 
leading to expansion phase onset. By including 
reconnection in the tail, a globally integrated substorm 
(GIS) model has been developed. 

In summary, although there is good agreement on 
the signatures of the expansion phase, there is no such 
agreement on the cause of the expansion phase onset. 
There are a number of models for this element of the 
substorm process, each of which predicts certain 
expansion phase signatures. A general consensus, or 
unified theory, still eludes us however and is a major 
challenge over the next few years. 


Multiple onsets and pseudo break-ups 

The discussion above is based upon many observations, 
but in general relates to what are termed isolated 
substorms. There are two aspects of such events which 
have not been covered. During most substorms the 
expansion phase does not continue in a smooth manner 
which would imply a continuous release of stored energy. 
Rather, following the initial auroral break-up, there are a 
series of intensifications of auroral luminosity, 
enhancements of the westward electrojet and Pi 2 
pulsations which imply that the stored energy is released 
impulsively. Such multiple intensifications have a typical 
timescale of 10-15 min. The auroral luminosity appears 
generally to the west and poleward of the initial 
intensification which is in general separate from the 
stepwise motion of the WTS. Furthermore, the enhanced 
ionospheric currents also appear poleward of the initial 
location. There is also evidence from mid-latitude 
magnetograms that the western FAC of the SCW moves 
westward. These intensifications continue throughout the 
expansion phase, ceasing only when the aurora and 
currents reach their poleward-most location. A second 
feature of substorms which has become apparent is the 
so-called pseudo break-up. Such events occur during the 
growth phase of the substorm. They have most of the 
characteristics of an auroral expansion phase, for 
example auroral brightening, Pi 2 __ pulsations, 
enhancements of the electrojet current, but the brightened 
aurora does not appear to expand poleward and westward 
and after a few minutes simply fades away. It appears 
therefore that processes which lead to expansion phase 
onset are in some way quenched. How this happens 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


remains uncertain, although the various paradigms 
discussed above require different physical mechanisms 
for such quenching to take place. 

A typical substorm will include a growth phase, an 
expansion phase and a recovery phase and such a 
description is adequate under conditions where the IMF 
B, does not remain south for longer than the typical 
length of those three phases, of the order of 3 h. 
However, it is possible that the IMF will in fact remain 
southwards for longer than this interval. In such a case it 
is entirely possible that substorms will occur when there 
does not appear to be a separate growth phase, i.e. the 
expansion phase of the second substorm will occur at 
some time during the recovery phase of the first 
substorm. Also, the auroral oval can continue to expand 
equatorward in a global sense during the expansion 
phase. Of course the main physics of the growth phase, 
i.e. energy storage, is continuing to take place if the IMF 
remains southward. 


Modular approach to auroral activity 

Auroral activity is central to the substorm process. The 
original definition of the auroral substorm was based 
upon records from a network of all-sky cameras based 
around the auroral zone. Subsequent developments in 
spacecraft instrumentation provided images of part of, or 
the whole, auroral oval at good temporal and spatial 
resolution. Based on data from one such satellite, Viking, 
certain researchers have put forward an alternative 
approach to considering the auroral substorm. This 
approach stems from the considerable variety which can 
be identified in auroral activity during the various phases 
of the substorm, such that no two substorms are exactly 
alike. The proposal is that certain cycles of auroral 
activity, modules, couple together to provide the global 
auroral substorm. The cycles of activity represent the 
response in the ionosphere to different magnetospheric 
processes coupling in a repeatable manner. 

The approach proposed divides the auroral activity 
into primary and secondary auroral modules. The 
primary auroral modules represent the fundamental 
characteristics necessary for a complete description of the 
global auroral activity within a substorm. Such modules 
are also important as they represent timing indicators for 
other observations. Separate auroral forms occur but 
these secondary auroral modules do not exist 
independently of the primary modules. There is 
uncertainty in the time and location at which these 
secondary auroral modules appear such that they are not 
easily included in the framework of a magnetospheric 
substorm. Here we consider only the primary modules. 

The first primary module is auroral growth and 
dayside patterns and effectively represents the auroral 
activity during the growth phase. This is something of a 
departure from the original auroral substorm which did 
not include any growth phase signatures. Such auroral 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


activations are most probably directly driven by the solar 
wind. The next time marker or module is auroral onset. 
In this modular approach there is no difference accorded 
to break-up and pseudo break-up since the event may or 
may not develop into a major disturbance. Whether it 
does or not depends upon its coupling to other modules. 
However, if the third module, the auroral bulge, 
develops, then the onset is considered to be an expansion 
phase onset. The fourth module is the double oval and its 
variations. During the expansion phase the auroral 
activity moves poleward. A double oval occurs when the 
auroral luminosity in the centre of the broad substorm 
oval decays, when both the equatorward-most activity 
and poleward-most activity are seen to behave 
independently, the implication being that different parts 
of the magnetosphere are responding independently. The 
final module consists of polar arcs which were originally 
thought to be independent of the substorm process, since 
it was thought that they disappeared at expansion phase 
onset. However, it has been demonstrated that they can 
occur throughout the substorm phases, and often are seen 
to intensify during the expansion phase onset. 
Furthermore, it seems that there is evidence that such 
arcs can occur on both open and closed magnetic field 
lines. 

Some of the key features of the original auroral 
substorm, such as the westward travelling surge and 
omega bands, do not appear as primary auroral modules. 
They are, however, secondary modules, and therefore 
represent refinements to the basic model. 


External triggering of substorms 

The models proposed above for expansion phase onset all 
advocate an internal instability as being responsible for 
the explosive release of energy. There is an alternative 
suggestion, however, that this need not be the case and 
that substorm expansion phase onset may in fact be 
triggered by changes in the IMF. This proposal is based 
upon the empirical evidence of both case studies and 
statistical analyses that a significant positive turning of 
the IMF occurs at the time of expansion phase onset. 
Reductions in the IMF 8B, component may also 
apparently trigger substorms. The proposed mechanism 
for this triggering is a reduction in the electric field 
imposed on the magnetosphere by the solar wind, 
although the physical link is, at the moment, 
controversial. The delay between the northward turning 
and the expansions phase onset is very short—a few 
minutes. 


Magnetic indices 

The study of substorms has been aided by the use of 
magnetic indices. Such indices are used to provide a 
summary of the magnetic variations over a period of 
time. They can also be used to investigate physical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Substorms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Onset: ‘Begin Recovery 


! Intensttications 


Fletd (nT) 


: Growth Expanalon ' Fiscovery 

wz 0} (i4tO4: | 1197 

11054-4124 i 
10 11 $2 13 


Universal Time 
Figure 5. The AU and AL magnetic indices for a well-studied 
substorm demonstrating the three phases of a substorm (from 
McPherron and Manka 1985). (Copyright 1985 by the 
American Geophysical Union.) 


processes and in terms of substorm behaviour the auroral 
electrojet indices are perhaps the most widely used. The 
AE indices are determined from the north-south 
component of 12 stations which are approximately 
equally spaced in longitude around the auroral regions. 
The AU and AL indices represent the upper and lower 
envelopes of the north-south components of these 12 
stations, i.e. the maximum and minimum deflections at 
any given time. Since the magnetic variations are caused 
by the ionospheric currents, they should represent the 
behaviour of these currents during the various phases of 
the substorm. An example of the AU and AL indices for 
one particular event is given in figure 5. In this example, 
an isolated substorm comprising of the three phases is 
described. The growth phase appears to be mainly 
observed by the AU index, while the largest deflection in 
the AL index takes place in the expansion phase, during 
which there are intensifications of the electrojet currents. 
The recovery phase is represented by the return of the AL 
index to lower values, but there are still significant 
enhancements which may occur during this phase in the 
AU index. 


Bibliography 

Akasofu S I 1964 The development of the auroral substorm 
Planet. Space Sci. 12 273 

Baker D N, Pulkkinen T I, Angelopoulos V, Baumjohann W 
and McPherron R L 1996 Neutral line model of substorms: 
past results and present view J. Geophys. Res. 101 12 975 

Clauer C R and McPherron R L 1974 Mapping the local time- 
universal time development of magnetospheric substorms 
using mid-latitude magnetic observations J. Geophys. Res. 
79 2811 

Frank A L et al 1995 The visible imaging system for the Polar 
spacecraft Space Sci. Rev. 71 297 

Hones E W Jr 1979 Plasma flow in the magnetotail and its 
implications for substorm theories Dynamics of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Magnetosphere ed S 1 Akasofu (New York: D Reidel) p 
545 

Lui A T Y 1996 Current disruption in the earth&rsquo;s 
magnetosphere: observations and models J. Geophys. Res. 
101 13 067 

Lyons L R 1996 Substorms: fundamental observational 
features, distinction from other disturbances, and external 
triggering J. Geophys. Res. 101 13 011 

McPherron R L 1995 Magnetospheric dynamics Introduction to 
Space Physics ed M G Kivelson and C T Russell 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 400 

McPherron R L and Manka R H 1985 Dynamics of the 1054 
UT, March 22, 1979 substorm event: CDAW-6 J. 
Geophys. Res. 90 1175 

Rostoker G 1996 Phenomenology and physics of magneto- 
spheric substorms J. Geophys. Res. 101 12 955 


Mark Lester 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


Waves are oscillations with respect to an equilibrium 
position of a given quantity, w being the angular frequency 
of the oscillation. Here we are concerned with magnetic 
and electric field oscillations, the electromagnetic and 
electrostatic waves. Two main reasons lead us to 
study such waves in the magnetosphere, their role in 
the dynamics of the particles with which they interact 
and the remote diagnosis of magnetospheric plasma 
parameters. 

One important characteristic of the magnetospheric 
plasma is that it is collisionless. In such a medium the 
waves that are mostly generated by the free energy of the 
particle distribution functions are the means to relax this 
free energy. Waves, once amplified, can heat particles, 
permit exchange of energy between different populations 
of particles and precipitate magnetospheric particles into 
the atmosphere. 

Two regions are particularly favorable for the 
generation of waves, the equatorial region of the 
magnetosphere where most of the energetic particles are 
concentrated owing to the convection electric field and 
the auroral field lines, where particles originating from 
the ionosphere, outer magnetosphere and the solar wind 
are accelerated (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: CONVECTION, 
SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: COUPLING BETWEEN SOLAR WIND, 
MAGNETOSPHERE, IONOSPHERE, AND NEUTRAL ATMOSPHERE). 

Magnetospheric waves were first observed on the 
ground. In situ measurements by spacecraft have helped 
in understanding the origin of these waves and permitted 
new observations of waves that cannot propagate to the 
ground, in particular electrostatic waves. 

The different kinds of magnetospheric waves can be 
organized by their frequency range, ultralow frequency 
(ULF, up to 5 Hz), extremely low frequency (ELF, 5 Hz— 
3 kHz), very low frequency (VLF, 3-30 kHz) and low 
frequency (LF, 30-300 kHz). We are not concerned with 
frequencies above this range. An overview of the location 
in the various regions of the magnetosphere of the different 
types of waves is given in figure 1. 

Before describing and interpreting the different 
observations, a summary of the main wave modes and 
a short description of some wave-particle interaction 
processes are needed to understand how these modes can 
be amplified and interact with particles. 


Principal wave modes in the magnetospheric 
plasma 

The different wave modes must satisfy the Maxwell 
equations, the equations of motion of the particles and 
conservation laws. The solutions for monochromatic 
propagating plane waves can be written as E = Ey exp[i(k- 
r — at)], Eo being the wave amplitude, w the angular 
frequency, and k the wavevector in which direction 
the wave propagates. All linear fluctuations, or small- 
amplitude fluctuations with respect to the equilibrium, can 
be represented as superpositions of these eigenmodes. In 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


plasmas, there can be both transverse electromagnetic and 
longitudinal electrostatic waves, the wave components 
being either mainly perpendicular or parallel to the 
wave propagation vector k, respectively. Contrary to 
vacuum where a continuum of electromagnetic waves can 
propagate, in plasmas only some frequency windows are 
possible, which are represented on figure 2, in the (w, k) 
plane. 


MHD approach 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC (MHD) theory allows the investi- 
gation of wave propagation modes in the limit w « Qi, 
where Q; is the proton gyrofrequency—typically 1 Hz, for 
an infinite homogeneous medium. The linearization of the 
plasma equations in such conditions leads to a dispersion 
relation that has three solutions. These three modes have 
different polarizations, the perturbation being either in a 
plane perpendicular to the geomagnetic field By or with 
a magnetic component parallel to By (compressional). In 
what follows, parallel (||) and perpendicular (L) refer to 
Bo. 

The shear Alfvén mode or Alfvén mode (also known 
as the toroidal mode) has the simplest dispersion relation: 


o= ky Va (1) 


where k, is the parallel component of k, Va is the Alfvén 
velocity (Va = B/(uop)/7), 40 is the magnetic permittivity 
of free space and p is the mass density of the plasma. 

The two other modes are the fast magnetosonic 
mode (the compressional or poloidal mode) and the slow 
magnetosonic mode (which has also a compressional 
component). Their dispersion relations do not have simple 
expressions; they depend on both the Alfvén and the 
sound velocities, and on their direction of propagation. 

The slow mode cannot propagate in cold plasma and 
is rapidly damped for high temperature, and thus most 
often only the two other modes are considered (figure 2(a)). 
The ULF fluctuations whose frequency satisfies w <« Q\ are 
identified with these modes. 


Electromagnetic modes at higher frequencies 

When considering higher frequencies, it is necessary to 
modify the equations. A first step is to add new terms 
to the Ohm’s law equation which take into account the 
movement of both electrons and ions (i.e. a bi-fluid model), 
the new system of equations then being called the Hall 
MHD equations. The kinetic approach is more general, 
taking into account the velocity distribution function 
of particles. This is used to calculate possible wave 
amplification or damping and/or consider the effect of 
a hot plasma population. The principal wave modes 
thus obtained for different conditions are represented in 
figures 2(b)-2(e). The different modes depend on both the 
direction of propagation k and the corresponding values 
of the characteristic frequencies: the gyrofrequencies Q) 
(linked to the magnetic field amplitude) and the plasma 
frequencies pie (linked to the plasma density). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ESCAPING 
CONTINUUM 


1ON CYCLOTRON WAVES 
AURORAL FIELD LINE TURBULENCE 
AURORAL KILOMETRIC RADIATION 


TRAPPED 
CONTINUUM 


AKR 


Tall ELECTROSTATIC NOE 
~* |" | AURORAL FIELD LINE TURBULENCE 

MAGNETIC NOISE BURSTS. 
PHISS.. . ’ oe 


* _” FIELB ALIGNED . 


De te CURRENTS - 


MAGNE TOPAUSE! 


s PLASMASPHERE » PLASMAPAUSE 


Figure 1. Types of magnetospheric plasma waves and regions of occurrence in a noon—midnight meridian plane cross section of the 


Earth’s magnetosphere. 


The most frequent situation encountered in the 
magnetosphere is the so-called dense plasma or weak 
magnetic field approximation, where Q.<pe (figures 2(b) 
and 2(c) for parallel and perpendicular propagation). For 
w < Q, there is a left-hand-polarized mode and up to Q. a 
right-handed-polarized mode (called the whistler mode), 
whose low-frequency limits are the shear Alfvén and 
magnetosonic modes respectively. At higher frequencies 
there are two modes @,, and wr, on each side of the plasma 
frequency for small kj; at the limit ky = 0, it is a kind of 
ZEEMAN EFFECT, @L,.R = Wp + Q,/2. The plasma frequency 
Mpe is an electrostatic mode. Figure 2(c) gives the modes in 
the perpendicular propagation. The polarization modes 
in this case are either ordinary or extraordinary, meaning 
that the electric component of the wave is either parallel 
to Bo or rotating in a plane perpendicular to By. Note 
in this case the presence of new characteristic frequencies 
or resonances, the lower hybrid and the upper hybrid 
resonances (@py © (2eQ;)!* and wun = One + 92). The 
forbidden frequency ranges for the different modes are 
indicated by dark vertical lines on the left of each plot. 

In the auroral zones there are regions of very low 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


density. The possible modes in this case are given in 
figures 2(d) and 2(e). The modes are the same as in the 
previous case, but the possible frequency windows are 
different. 


Electrostatic modes above the electron gyrofrequency 
Electrostatic waves have their electric component parallel 
to k, being longitudinal. Among them, the plasma 
frequency propagates at k, (parallel to Bo). Using the 
kinetic theory and modeling the plasma by a Maxwellian 
distribution function it is possible to find electrostatic 
modes with k,. These Bernstein modes only exist at 
frequencies above the electron gyrofrequency (figure 2(f)). 
The behavior of the dispersion relations (one curve 
between each electron gyroharmonics) is different below 
and above wun. Above wun the dispersion relations 
present maxima corresponding to a null group velocity 
(V, = dw/dk), at frequencies denoted by F4. 


Some wave-particle interaction mechanisms 
The modes described before, except the Bernstein modes, 
are possible propagation modes in a cold magnetoplasma. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


6 a a Na a 


RV, 10; 


kVth,/Q. 


R: right-hand polarized L ; left-hand polarized P : plasma oscillation 
Conditions applying in the auroral regions: Q4 < Op. < Qe 


OLa 


ky 


R: right-hand polarized L : left-hand polarized P : plasma oscillation ©: ordinary mode X extraordinary mode 
Conditions applying in the equatorial magnetosphere: dense plasma 0. <0». 


ky ka 


O: ordinary mode X : extraordinary mode 


d e 


Figure 2. The different wave modes relevant to the magnetosphere in the w, k plane (dispersion relations). (a) MHD modes: there are 
two modes for cold plasma conditions (dotted curves), fast magnetosonic and shear Alfvén modes from left to right, and three for 
warm plasma, fast magnetosonic, shear Alfvén and slow magnetosonic modes from left to right. The dispersion relations are given for 
a propagation angle between k and Bo of 60°.(b)-(e): Electromagnetic modes in cold plasma, for a single ion species. Black vertical 
lines correspond to forbidden propagation. (b), (c) correspond to dense plasma or weak magnetic field (Qe < (wp), which applies in the 
equatorial magnetosphere, for () parallel and (c) perpendicular propagation. (d), (e) correspond to Qi < wp < Qe which applies in 
most parts of the auroral zones, for (d) parallel and (e) perpendicular propagation. (f) The electrostatic Bernstein modes: the 
frequencies of the dispersion relations’ maxima above wyp are called Fg. 


In practice, the cold plasma approximation is often valid, 
considering that the hot particles are far less numerous 
than the cold plasma particles, the latter sustaining the 
propagation of the waves. Nevertheless, in order to be 
amplified waves need some source of energy: that is 
mostly provided—at least in a linear phase—by the free 
energy of the particles, the ‘hot’ particles. To calculate 
the amplification of the waves it is necessary to take into 
account the particle distribution function, in a kinetic 
treatment, starting from the Vlasov equation. 

The exchange of energy between given waves and 
particles will depend on the possible matching between 
characteristic particles and wave velocities. This matching 
is called resonance; some resonances are described below. 


Landau resonance—introduction to particle trapping 
The Landau resonance is a collisionless interaction 


between a longitudinal plasma wave and particles whose 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


velocity is nearly equal to the wave phase velocity. The 
resonance condition is 


Vies = W/k. (2) 


This was first studied by Landau for electrostatic waves 
propagating ina homogeneous plasma without a magnetic 
field. By neglecting the temperature of the plasma and 
considering the ions at rest, one finds the dispersion 
relation @ © Ope. 

The wave growth rate y is obtained from the 
linearized Vlasov equation, where the wave amplitude E is 
E = Ejexp(yt) and f is the particle distribution function, 
for Vres = @/k > 0: 


¥ = (1/2)(@2,/P)Af/I0|yaut- 


The important point is that the sign of the growth rate 
depends of the slope of the distribution function: if there 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A 1 


ODD MODE {s. 


ee 


1** HARMONIC 


A 


EVEN MODE i 
Bo 


ND ' 
2°” HARMONIC 1 


Le | 


H: ANTIPARALLEL 


A f(v) 


VR= o/k 


DIFFUSION 
CURVE 


LOSS CONE 


Vil 


Se rant 


> 


Seer 


H: PARALLEL D: ANTIPARALLEL 


D: PARALLEL 


Figure 3. Schematic of wave—particle interaction processes. (a) Landau resonance. Landau damping at left, Landau amplification and 
formation of a plateau at right. Vp is the wave phase velocity. (b) Gyroresonance interaction. Particle diffuses along the diffusion curve 
where the particle energy is constant in the reference frame of the wave Vy (see text). (c) Schematic of the fundamental (top part) and 
second harmonic (bottom part) oscillations of geomagnetic field lines. Shown from left to right are the oscillation along the field line, 
the amplitude along the field line of the poloidal (B,) and toroidal (B,) components in a meridian plane, the projection in the meridian 
plane and a three-dimensional view of the azimuthal component. A and B are the ionospheric footprints of the field lines. The full 
curves represent the equilibrium state and the broken curves the oscillations. 


are more particles at velocity v = Vi., + Av than particles 
at v = Vies — Av, then on average particles can give energy 
to the waves, the slope of the distribution function being 
positive (for the case of positive velocities). 

In a Maxwellian plasma, df/dv < 0, and the particles 
take energy from the wave, damping them. This is 
called Landau damping (figure 3(a), left-hand side). In 
the opposite case, the wave can take energy from the 
particles and is amplified. This is what happens when 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the distribution function has some warm component (e.g. 
a beam) superimposed on the thermal or Maxwellian 
distribution. The amplification can continue until the 
evolution of the distribution function forms a plateau, the 
slope then being equal to zero (figure 3(a), right-hand side). 
This effect is called quasi-linear diffusion. 

The particles that are resonating, or in phase, with 
the wave are first accelerated and then decelerated as 
they move through the wave structure. In the frame of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


reference of the wave they oscillate in the wave potential 
well. If the particles suffer many oscillations, they are 
trapped. The higher the wave amplitude, the stronger 
is the trapping effect. The trapping frequency is wr = 
(qkE/m)'/?; the trapping time for one oscillation is tr 
1/oy. 

The Landau effect, damping or amplification, 
dominates as long as t, = 1/y < tr. Trapping, a non- 
linear phenomenon, can stop the energy exchange; on 
average, therefore, it cancels out the Landau effect. 

Similar interactions can apply in a magnetized 
plasma. Trapping may exist for electromagnetic mono- 
chromatic waves with a frequency wr = (kv,qb;/m)", 
where b; is the magnetic wave amplitude and v, the 
perpendicular particle velocity. 


Gyroresonant interactions—an example of quasi-linear diffu- 
sion 

Fora plasma ina uniform magnetic field the wave—particle 
interaction can take place through gyroresonance. This 
means that, in the frame of reference linked to the parallel 
velocity of the particle, the particle rotates around the 
magnetic field at the same angular velocity as the wave, 
or a multiple of it. The resonance condition is 


o— kv =NQ (3) 


where N is aninteger. The mostimportant cases is N = +1; 
N = Ois the Landau resonance. 

We consider the gyroresonance condition (3) with 
N = —1, for which the particle and the wave propagate 
in opposite directions: 


Va = vy = (@ — Q,6)/Ky. (4) 


Electrons resonate with right-hand-polarized waves and 
protons with left-hand-polarized waves. 

Because of its resonance with the warm particles, the 
wave amplitude b can grow, b = bye”, where bo is the 
initial wave amplitude, y the growth rate and t the time. To 
calculate the growth rate, the distribution function of the 
warm population susceptible to resonance with the waves 
has to be taken into account in the dispersion relation. 
The solution of the dispersion relation for the angular 
frequency is complex, w = w, + iy, where 


y « n(Vr)[A(VR) — Ac] (6) 


A(Va) & f (@f/84) dali 


and 
Ac = @/(Qie — @). 


In these expressions n(Vg) is the relative number of 
resonating particles, A and Ac the particle anisotropy and 
the critical anisotropy respectively and a is the pitch angle 
(angle between the direction of the particle velocity and 
the magnetic field). The wave will grow if y is positive, 
which implies that A has to exceed the critical anisotropy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ac. In general the anisotropy depends on Vg, so y varies 
with the frequency through equation (4). A is positive if 
df/da is positive, i.e. if the perpendicular temperature T, 
exceeds the parallel temperature 7). In the special case of a 
bi-Maxwellian distribution function, A = T, /T,—1. As for 
Landau resonance, the slope of the distribution function is 
important, A representing the free energy to amplify the 
waves. 

The above expression for the growth rate corresponds 
to the linear phase: the waves cannot grow indefinitely; 
some non-linear process will stop their amplification. One 
process that applies to wide-band wave spectra is quasi- 
linear diffusion. The waves can diffuse the particles both 
in pitch angle and in energy, i.e. reducing the pitch angle 
in order to diminish the anisotropy and diminishing the 
particle energy respectively, the diffusion in pitch angle 
being the most important effect. This is schematically 
shown in figure 3(b), where the particle constant-energy 
curve and the diffusion curve are drawn, the particle 
energy being constant in the reference frame of the wave 
on the diffusion curve. One can see that the pitch angle 
diffusion is faster than the energy diffusion. The diffusion 
coefficient is proportional to the wave power b?. The 
quasi-linear pitch angle diffusion limits the anisotropy and 
precipitates the particles into the atmosphere (particles 
that enter the loss cone). 


Bounce resonance 

Until now we have considered a homogeneous magnetic 
field. For a slightly inhomogeneous magnetic field on the 
gyroradius scale, as is the case for the dipolar geomagnetic 
field, there are other periodicities (or characteristic 
frequencies) in the particle movement, t (wp) the bounce 
period (frequency) and tq (wg) the drift period (frequency). 
The bounce period is the time for the particle to oscillate 
back and forth along a field line from one hemisphere to 
the other between magnetic mirror points, and the drift 
period is the time for particles to drift in azimuth around 
the Earth. The bounce resonance condition is 


wo — Nog = tap (6) 


where N is aninteger and w/N the east-west angular phase 
velocity of the wave. Poloidal waves are amplified by 
taking energy from energetic protons. The resonance will 
correspond to a breakdown of one or more of the particle’s 
adiabatic invariants, the magnetic moment invariant and 
the longitudinal invariant. The exchange of energy is 


dW/dL = qo/N BoR;/L?. 


The resonant particles will diffuse in W, L space, 
where W is the energy and L the McIlwain parameter. 


ULF waves 

Ultralow-frequency waves (from 600 to 0.2 s periods) 
have been studied for many years by means of ground- 
based magnetometers. ULF waves are separated into 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Classification of ULF pulsations. 


Period (s) 
Pel 0.2-5 
Pc2 5-10 
Pc3 10-45 
Pc4 45-150 
Pc5 = 150-600 
Pil 1-40 
Pi2 40-150 


continuous (Pc) and irregular (Pi) pulsations, classified in 
each category, according to their period (table 1). 

ULF waves comprise propagating waves and stand- 
ing oscillations. The latter, in the Pc3-5 range, are mainly 
resonances of the Earth’s geomagnetic field lines. 


Pc3-5: field line resonances; fundamental and harmonics 
Pulsations in the 10-600 s period range have been observed 
on the ground for many decades and more recently 
by spacecraft. Much work has been devoted to both 
observations and theoretical interpretations. Because of 
the large spatial scale of the phenomenon, it is not easy 
to put together all the observations needed. While Pc3- 
5 waves cover the 1.5-100 mHz range, a given event 
has a quasi-sinusoidal behavior, with a narrow frequency 
bandwidth. 

From combined results of many statistical and case 
studies of spacecraft data and ground measurements, 
these observations can be organized into four main 
classes: fundamental-mode toroidal resonances, harmonic 
toroidal resonances, radially polarized pulsations and 
compressional low-frequency pulsations. 

A field line resonance can be understood as an 
excitation of the magnetic field line by some mechanism, 
the field line being considered as a string whose two 
ends are anchored in the ionosphere. As for strings, 
the oscillation can be either the fundamental or a higher 
harmonic. The possible resonance frequencies are 


w = aN(Va)/€ (7) 


where N is an integer, (Va) is the average Alfvén velocity 
over the field line and ¢ is the length of the field 
line. The field line resonances are usually interpreted in 
terms of standing Alfvén waves. These waves generally 
have toroidal and poloidal components. The poloidal 
component is in the direction of the principal normal of 
the magnetic field B, and the toroidal component is in the 
azimuthal direction B,. In figure 3(c) the first harmonic 
(top part) and the second harmonic (bottom part) of a 
field line oscillation are drawn. At left, the modulus of 
the field oscillation is plotted; the second panel gives the 
amplitude along the field line of the poloidal and toroidal 
components. The third column gives the projection in the 
meridian plane and the last one a three-dimensional view 
of the azimuthal component. A and B are the ionospheric 
footprints of the field lines. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The azimuthally polarized (toroidal) Pc5 pulsations 
are observed predominantly at dawn and at dusk for a 
large range of L values. The amplitude of the azimuthal 
component is weak at the geomagnetic equator and 
increases with the latitude. The period of the oscillation 
increases with L value (or radial distance from the Earth). 
These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that 
they are the fundamental of the field line oscillations: the 
magnetic component of the odd mode is null at the equator, 
the amplitude of its oscillation increasing along the field 
line and reaching a maximum at the ionosphere, the period 
of the oscillation increasing as the length of the field line 
increases (larger L value). It is identified as a shear Alfvén 
mode. The facts that the maximum occurrence is on 
the flank of the magnetosphere and that the maximum 
amplitude and occurrence rate are observed for the larger 
L values (L > 8) indicate that these Alfvén waves are 
excited by surface waves at the magnetopause owing to 
the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE). The latter waves propagate from 
noon toward both dawn and dusk. 

Higher-frequency regular pulsations (Pc3), also 
azimuthally polarized and observed both on the ground 
and in space, are the most common Pc activity on the day 
side, from 06:00 to 16:00 magnetic local time (MLT), with 
an abrupt cutoff at those MLIs. Spectrogram displays 
of such waves show equally spaced monochromatic 
frequencies. They are interpreted as harmonics of the 
field line resonances, the even modes showing a maximum 
amplitude in the vicinity of the geomagnetic equator. 
The uniformity of occurrence and amplitude of the 
harmonics with radial distance needs to be explained, 
with respect to the source of excitation. Different external 
sources have been invoked, linked to interplanetary 
activity, waves coming from the magnetosheath and global 
magnetospheric compressions. 

Second-harmonic radially polarized oscillations of 
the field lines are observed in the dusk and night sides 
of the magnetosphere. They are believed to be amplified 
by the bounce resonance interaction with ions of some keV. 


Storm-time Pc5 waves 

The so-called storm-time Pc5 waves seem to be substorm- 
associated pulsations, detected mainly in the dusk sector 
near the equatorial region and associated with energetic 
particle injections (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). 
The drifting energetic ions, among other possibilities, may 
be responsible for their amplification. 


Pcl or pearl: a way to transfer energy from magnetospheric 
protons to ionospheric particles 

Ground-based study of Pcl waves intensified when 
magnetometer chains multiplied and geomagnetically 
conjugated stations started to operate. The name ‘pearls’ 
comes from their waveform time displays, looking like 
a succession of pearls. Pcl waves are mostly observed 
during quiet to moderately active periods, at3.5 < L <7, 
at about 1 Hz. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1 Mea 


= 


Fn 
is 
ce 
2 
5 
é ‘4 . : 
1-0 (0) 5 Time(s) t0 (ce) #2 (a) 


0 5 o 10 time (s) 0 i] 


Figure 4. Different examples of dynamic spectra of magnetospheric waves. All are magnetic components, except for the bottom one 
which is a dynamic spectrum of wave electric components. At the top are schematics of a (a) pearl, (b) an iregular pulsation of 
decreasing period (IPDP) and (c) a short irregular pulsation (SIP). Just below (d) the schematic of an atmosphere and of the resulting 
whistlers are shown (e)-(g). (2) An example of hiss (broad-band noise) at the top of which are chorus elements; the gap in frequency 
between the two chorus series is at about half the electron gyrofrequency. (i) An example of continuum radiation. (7) An example of 
different electrostatic waves observed at the equator: Fpe, (n + 1/2) Fee, Fq frequencies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The spectral analysis of pearls reveals an important 
characteristic: after a rather monochromatic start, a 
pearl’s frequency spectrum broadens into a succession 
of dispersive rising tones, separated by a period T of 
the order of 2 min (figure 4(a)). The occurrence at 
geomagnetically conjugate stations (i.e. located at the two 
footprints of the same field line) is shifted in time by 
T/2. The observations are consistent with generation 
by gyroresonance between left-handed waves and ring 
current energetic protons in the equatorial magnetosphere, 
the waves propagating back and forth along closed 
magnetic field lines. T is the wave propagation time 
between two hemispheres. From the dispersion observed 
on the ground and the repetition period, the L value and 
cold plasma density in the generation region at the equator 
can be inferred. From the initial frequency of the events 
and the variation with time of the dispersion, combined 
with theoretical results on wave amplification (equation 
(5)), characteristics of the resonating particles have been 
inferred. The frequency spread is interpreted as being 
due to new waves generated by the trapping of protons 
in the potential well of the initial wave, giving rise to side 
bands. 

In situ measurements performed in the equatorial 
region, around L = 6.6, were surprising. The expected 
structure separated by a well-defined repetition period 
was not observed. In those magnetospheric regions there 
is an abundance of some 1—2% of cold helium ions. This 
induces new characteristic frequencies at one of which 
the mode of propagation of Pcl changes: the waves are 
focused in a restricted region of the magnetosphere and 
the time resolution could not resolve the fine structure, 
if present, for waves above the helium gyrofrequency. 
Waves below this frequency can propagate to the ground, 
and in simultaneous ground-spacecraft data the presence 
of fine structure has been observed at both locations. 

These observations have confirmed the amplification 
of Pcl waves by energetic protons and their diffusion 
into the atmosphere. They have also shown that, in the 
presence of ionospheric helium ions, the waves transfer 
via non-linear processes some of the proton free energy 
to electrons and helium ions of ionospheric origin. The 
waves in this collisionless plasma thermalize particles. A 
diagram of the different processes involved is given in 
figure 5. 


Irregular pulsations of decreasing period: a signature of drifting 
protons? 

IPDPs, Pil pulsations, are observed on the ground in 
the evening sector for about 1 h, after substorm onset. 
They consist of a rather wide band of noise whose central 
frequency increases with time. A schematic of their 
dynamic spectra is given in figure 4(b). The variation of 
the frequency has been related to the displacement of the 
inner boundary of the radiation belts during substorm. 
The association of IPDPs with proton auroras and their 
westward drift at a velocity compatible with the proton 
drift at medium energies (<100 keV) are in favor of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


generation of IPDPs by protons. The combined radial and 
westward drifts of energetic protons under the combined 
action of the convection electric field, which is reinforced 
during substorms, and magnetic field gradient drift 
explain the displacement of the interaction region. One 
of the effects of the convection on particles is to increase 
their anisotropy, favoring wave generation, which in turn 
precipitates protons into the atmosphere. Correlated wave 
measurements in space only show monochromatic waves: 
at a given L value, only one limited frequency range is 
emitted, whereas waves observed on the ground come 
from different L shells. 

From the IPDPs frequency increase, an estimate of the 
intensity of the convection electric field can be inferred, 
leading to some tens of mV m™!, a value compatible with 
other E field measurements. 


Short irregular pulsations: a field-aligned current signature 
Short-time Pil pulsations, called SIPs, cover a rather wide 
frequency range (figure 4(c)). They are mainly observed on 
the ground during active periods, their intensity being at 
a maximum in the auroral zone. Spacecraft observations 
have shown that SIPs observed in the night sector were 
signatures of field-aligned currents moving quickly in the 
vicinity of the spacecraft during a substorm. The most 
intense are correlated with the change of configuration 
of the geomagnetic field, the dipolarization, signature 
of a substorm onset. These observations and deduced 
quantities (a drift velocity of = 70 kms“! in the east-west 
direction, and a current intensity = a few 10-° A m~”) are 
in good agreement with the so-called current disruption 
model of substorm onset. The signature of the currents 
is sometimes accompanied by some higher-frequency 
turbulence. 

On the ground, SIPs are also observed on the day side. 
Are they a signature of field-aligned current there too? 


Pi2: signature of substorm onset 

Pi2 magnetic pulsations, of longer period than Pil (40- 
150 s), mostly appear at substorm onset. They are 
interpreted as the signature of disruption of cross tail 
current at substorm onset, diverted down along the 
magnetic field lines. Current then flows in the ionosphere 
and returns to the tail along magnetic field lines, 
transported along the field lines by shear Alfvén waves. 
The Pi2s are more clearly seen at ground mid-latitude 
stations. The analysis of Pi2s simultaneously recorded 
at different stations permits remote determination of 
substorm onset local time. 


Whistler mode waves in the equatorial 
magnetosphere 

Whistler waves, described below, propagate in the right- 
hand mode, in the frequency range of some hundred 
Hz to some kHz, at sonic frequencies, below the 
electron gyrofrequency. Those propagating parallel to the 
geomagnetic field lines have been observed on the ground, 
over many decades, since 1930. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MAGNETOSPHERIC 
ENERGETIC 


PROTONS 
(~ 30 keV) 
T '>Ty 


Electrostatic 
ELF waves 


// acceleration 
~20-— 100 eV 


IONOSPHERIC 
THERMAL 
ELECTRONS 


(~ leV) 


peewee eee eee ee 


ULF ICW’s 


f~Fre+ 


Pitch angle diffusion 
Precipitation into the atmosphere 


+ acceleration 
~100 eV 


IONOSPHERIC 
THERMAL 
HELIUM IONS 


(~ 1eV) 


Figure 5. Schematic of the series of wave—particle interaction processes implied in relation to Pcl waves in a multi-ion plasma: an 
example of the role of waves in the dynamics of magnetospheric particles. In the equatorial magnetosphere, the anisotropic energetic 
magnetospheric protons (some 10 keV) amplify ion cyclotron waves that precipitate those protons into the atmosphere by quasi-linear 
diffusion. In the presence of thermal helium ions originating from the ionosphere, new characteristic frequencies appear. This allows, 
by non-linear effects, heating of these thermal helium ions and thermal electrons, also of ionospheric origin. The accelerated electrons 


amplify new electrostatic waves. 


Whistlers: 
parameters 
Lightning discharges are short impulses that excite a wide 
frequency range of electromagnetic waves. The induced 
electromagnetic waves propagate from the atmosphere 
into the ionosphere along a field line and then into the 
magnetosphere on slightly overdense ducts, in the right- 
hand mode (figures 4(d)-4(g); figure 4(d) shows their 
trajectory in a meridian plane). Their group velocity V,, 
or propagation velocity, depends on the frequency; the 
frequency corresponding to the minimum group velocity 
is called the nose frequency, Fn (see figures 4(e)-4(g)). 
They can be observed on the ground in the opposite 
hemisphere using a radio receiver (figures 4(e) and 4(g)). 
The sound thus obtained, generally a falling tone, gave 
their name to such waves, whistlers. They can also 
be observed on board spacecraft (figure 4(f)). A given 
emission can propagate back and forth along a field line, as 
can be seen on the schematic spectrograms (figures 4(e)- 
4(g)). Similarly to what is done with pearls, from these 
dispersion characteristics and from the time delay between 
the successive hops information on the plasma traversed 
can be inferred. With some reasonable hypothesis for 
waves propagating inside the plasmasphere (dipolar 
magnetic field, cold and dense plasma), it can be shown 


a diagnostic tool for equatorial magnetosphere 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that the nose frequency Fy = 0.4Freeq, Free,eq being 
the equatorial electron gyrofrequency, allowing one to 
determine L. The density at the equator is determined by 
the propagation time t, % (Meeq)!/?. For frequencies above 
Fy the cold plasma hypothesis is no longer valid, and, from 
the observed deviation from this, the electron temperature 
can be inferred. When the dawn-—dusk electric field varies, 
inducing a change in the plasmapause position, the electric 
field can be deduced from the variation of L with time. 


Hiss: a way to regulate the radiation belt electron flux 
Hiss is a very common phenomenon in the near-Earth 
magnetosphere, outside and inside the plasmasphere, 
predominantly inside the plasmasphere (plasmaspheric 
hiss). It is a rather broad-band stationary electromagnetic 
emission, some hundred Hz wide, in the frequency 
range from 100 Hz to some kHz. In situ observations 
have confirmed that hiss is the result of a gyroresonant 
interaction with electrons in the energy range from some 
keV to some tens of keV. The low-frequency part of 
figure 4(1) is an example of hiss. 

Spacecraft measurements have allowed a comparison 
of wave spectra with the experimental growth rate y 
calculated by means of the electron distribution functions. 
The growth rate y (relation (5)) maximizes at the wave 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spectrum peak. Calculation of the anisotropy has 
confirmed that the quasi-linear diffusion of particles by 
the amplified waves was efficient: A > Ac when hiss is 
present, and A is very close to Ac when the amplitude, and 
thus the diffusion, is strong. The role of hiss in diffusing 
the particles into the atmosphere, thus limiting the flux of 
electrons in the radiation belts, has been confirmed. 


Chorus: an example of non-linear effects 

The peculiarity of chorus is its spectral shape, a succession 
of quasi-monochromatic rising tones (or sometimes falling 
tones), spaced in time by some hundred of ms. Their 
frequency range lies from some 100 Hz to some kHz, 
at higher frequencies than hiss. Figure 4(h) gives an 
example of simultaneous observation of hiss and chorus; 
the gap between the two series of chorus elements is at 
about half the local gyrofrequency. They are preferentially 
generated after substorms, when new energetic electrons 
are injected and drift eastward around Earth, and are 
observed outside the plasmasphere at dawn and on the 
dayside. Chorus generation in its initial phase is due to 
gyroresonant interaction between whistler mode waves 
and electrons (some keV). Their spectral shapes are due 
to non-linear effects, whose starting point may be the 
monochromatic structures, evidenced in the concomitant 
hiss, observed just below the frequency of chorus elements. 
Interpretation of chorus fine structure is a topic of research. 
Trapping of the electrons by the monochromatic waves 
and detrapping by the inhomogeneity in the geomagnetic 
field are being considered. One difficulty is in measuring 
the electron distribution function with time resolution 
as chorus elements. Globally, chorus participates in the 
precipitation of electrons into the atmosphere. 


Waves observed above the electron gyrofrequency 
in the equatorial magnetosphere 

Above the electron gyrofrequency Fe, numbers of wave 
types are observed in the equatorial magnetosphere 
(figure 4(/)). The full set of Bernstein mode waves is 
observed: electrostatic electron cyclotron harmonic (ECH) 
waves between the electron gyroharmonics below Fun, 
Fux waves and waves at the F, frequencies (figure 2(f)). 
As can be seen from figures 2(b) and 2(c), there is a wide 
forbidden frequency range for the electromagnetic mode 
between Fre and Fe; it is not surprising that observed 
waves in this range are electrostatic, electromagnetic 
waves being at and above Fux. 


Electrostatic electron cyclotron harmonic waves at (n+1/2) Fee! 
a source for the diffuse auroras? 

Electrostatic ECH waves are a common feature of the 
equatorial magnetosphere, just outside the plasmasphere, 
in an L value range of field lines having their footprint 
in the auroral zone (~6-7). They are confined in the 
equatorial region, amplified by 100 eV to some keV 
electrons whose distribution function is of the loss cone 
type, containing regions where df/dv, > 0, created by 
the convection of the plasma from the tail toward the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Earth. The lowest harmonic ((3/2) Fre) is the strongest 
and the most often present. From the first case studies 
ECH waves were thought to be responsible for the 
diffuse auroras as a result of pitch angle diffusion into 
the loss cone. Statistical studies have shown that the 
required amplitude to provoke strong diffusion of 1 keV 
electrons (~ 2 mV m~') was only reached 2% of the time, 
while diffuse auroras are a permanent feature. (3/2) Fee 
waves cannot be the only cause of diffuse auroras. A 
complementary mechanism has to be found. The higher 
harmonics (n > 1) being inefficient in diffusion, other 
candidates are proposed to precipitate these electrons, 
such as an acceleration by field-aligned currents or a 
diffusion by chorus. Figure 4(j) gives an example of 
multiple (n + 1/2)Fce waves observed in the equatorial 
magnetosphere. 


Fuu and Fy 

The natural lines at the upper hybrid frequency Fun and 
at Fy frequencies are weak, the most intense being in 
the close vicinity of Fun (or Fpe, as it is very difficult to 
experimentally differentiate Fyy and Fpe for large Frye/ Fee 
values). A very weak line at F,. should always be present, 
reflecting the fluctuation of the electrons due to their 
thermal agitation, which maximizes very close to Fy. but 
is often hidden either by the lack of sensitivity of the 
instruments or by stronger emissions. When observable it 
is a tool to determine the plasma properties: the spectrum 
peak gives the plasma frequency (and thus the density) 
and its width gives the thermal temperature of electrons. 
Sometimes the Fup emission becomes very intense and 
broadens, amplified by a loss cone distribution function 
of some 100 eV electrons. Figure 4(/) gives an example of 
weak F,’s and of Fp. emission, first rather intense and then 
of weak amplitude. 


Non-thermal continuum radiation 

The electromagnetic non-thermal ‘continuum’ radiation 
is observed in the 5-100 kHz frequency range, above 
the local plasma frequency. It is observed in two 
forms, a series of discrete lines and a smooth continuum 
(figure 4(i)), hence its name. If emitted above the solar 
wind electron plasma frequency (~ 20 kHz), it can escape 
out of the magnetosphere, the escaping continuum. It 
is highly structured in frequency, composed of narrow- 
band lines. If generated below the solar wind plasma 
frequency, it is trapped in the magnetosphere. The 
different emissions are mixed and superimposed after 
multiple reflections, forming a broad-band continuum. 
Sources at the plasmapause have been deduced from 
multispacecraft measurements. Observations in the tail 
suggest that the plasma sheet boundary layer and/or the 
magnetopause can also be source regions. 

The exact generation mechanism of the non-thermal 
‘continuum’ is still under debate. Whereas it is generally 
admitted that the starting point is an electrostatic emission 
around Fyy originating in density gradients, different 
processes are proposed to convert the electrostatic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


emission into an electromagnetic one. Linear conversion, 
possible in density gradients, is probably inefficient 
(~1%). Non-linear coupling is more efficient, such as the 
coalescence of Fuy waves with low-frequency electrostatic 
waves to form the electromagnetic emission or the decay 
of the Fun wave into the electromagnetic wave and a low- 
frequency wave. 


Auroral emissions 

Among the wave-particle interactions in the auroral zone, 
the most striking effects are related to the processes which 
accelerate ionospheric ions toward the magnetosphere, 
the generation of radio emissions and the possible role of 
auroral waves in the acceleration of electrons which cause 
visible auroras. 


AKR: a radio source 

The Earth is a strong radio source that has been discovered 
by high-altitude Earth-orbiting spacecraft. The emission 
is generated in the auroral night side region, in the 
50-700 kHz frequency range, at altitudes varying between 
5000 and 10000 km. The emission is powerful (10’-10° W) 
and is called auroral (or terrestrial) kilometric radiation 
(AKR or TKR). The plasma frequency of the dense 
ionospheric layers below this altitude is much higher than 
the AKR frequency and acts as a cutoff frequency for the 
radio emission; thus it is not observed on the ground. 
The occurrence of AKR is correlated with auroras and 
accelerated electrons, thought to be the source of AKR, 
by the cyclotron maser instability (see AURORAL KILOMETRIC 
RADIATION). 


Other auroral emissions: a way to accelerate electrons and 
ionospheric ions 

As well as AKR, many kinds of waves are observed in 
the auroral zone. To account for the acceleration of 
various particle species, a combination of different wave— 
particle interaction mechanisms has to be considered. The 
complete picture of the roles of the different waves has not 
yet been obtained. 

From ground observations, very little was known 
about auroral waves as compared with subsequent 
progress made as a result of rockets and polar orbiting 
spacecraft. The auroral acceleration region of particles 
is located between 65° and 75° geomagnetic latitude at 
an altitude between 1000 and 25000 km. The parallel 
electric field in this region corresponds to a potential drop 
of 1-10 kV. How the waves participate in the build up of the 
parallel electric field is one of the main questions. A field- 
aligned electric field can be produced by the separation 
between electrons and ions due to the difference in their 
mirroring point along a field line but also by waves, 
since parallel electric field are associated with kinetic 
Alfvén waves. Small-scale localized solitary structures can 
add up to produce a significant potential drop. Oxygen 
electromagnetic ion cyclotron waves can also accelerate 
electrons. All these phenomena can contribute to down- 
going electron acceleration. Up-going observed electron 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


acceleration can be achieved by fluctuating parallel electric 
fields at about 1 Hz or by an interaction with lower hybrid 
resonance (LHR) waves. 

The positive parallel slope in the distribution function 
of accelerated electrons can generate different kinds of 
observed waves: auroral hiss, LHR waves, plasma waves 
or upper hybrid resonance (UHR) waves (see figure 2(d) 
and (e)). 

An important source of magnetospheric particles is 
the outflow of ionospheric ions. Before escaping, the ions 
are accelerated perpendicularly to the field line and then 
they move upward under the action of the mirror force, or 
conservation of the first adiabatic invariant: when the ion 
reaches higher altitudes its parallel energy increases at the 
expense of its perpendicular energy, as the field strength 
decreases. The heating can be significant from a few eV 
to about 100 eV. However, how are the ions accelerated 
perpendicularly to the magnetic field? Different observed 
waves are candidates; electrostatic ion cyclotron waves 
(EICWs) or LHR waves, amplified by electrons, when 
very intense can collapse into small-scale structures that 
could accelerate ions. It is also proposed that down-going 
Alfvén waves suffer a mode conversion to ion cyclotron 
waves when the Alfvén wave frequency matches the ion 
gyrofrequency (for either H* or O*) leading to a resonant 
absorption that heats the ions. This conversion mode can 
occur in a multi-ion component plasma, which is the case 
in the auroral region. As these heated ions move along the 
field line they interact with waves at different frequencies, 
the local ion frequency varying as the geomagnetic field 
does, causing broad-band electromagnetic waves. A 
statistical study correlating wave and ion measurements 
has shown that most of the oxygen outflow is correlated 
with broad-band electromagnetic ULF-ELF waves for all 
local time sectors. 


Conclusion and perspectives 

Not all magnetospheric waves have been described, in 
particular those occurring at the magnetopause, in the 
cusp region or in the tail. The near-equatorial region 
has been rather well explored and the global role of the 
waves and wave-particle interactions has been pretty well 
understood, although some non-linear processes remain to 
be elucidated. The corresponding importance of different 
processes occurring in the auroral regions is still to be 
established. Furthermore, it remains for us to understand 
the physical processes by which solar wind particles enter 
into the magnetosphere and the role of waves in such 
processes. This is one of the aims of the CLUSTER project 
to be launched in 2000. Its four identical spacecraft will 
successively fly through the key regions that are the polar 
cusp, the magnetopause and the tail. Its three-dimensional 
configuration will allow us to separate temporal and 
spatial effects, derive differential quantities such as div 
and curl, and in particular locate wave source regions, 
determine k vector distribution functions and establish 
wave polarization. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Magnetosphere of Earth: Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Definitions 

Alfvén velocity. Vx = B/(uop)'/?; wo is the magnetic 
permittivity of free space and p is the mass density of the 
plasma; V, can also be written Va = cQ/ap. 

Frequency. F = w/2x, w being the wave pulsation or 
angular frequency. @ is commonly used for various 
relations, dispersion relations and velocities. For observed 
waves, in Hz, F is more often used. 

Gyrofrequency. This is the angular velocity of the charged 
particles in the presence of a magnetic field, in the plane 
perpendicular to the magnetic field: Qi. = gieB/Mie — 
(Fa, Fee), where q, m are the charge, mass of the considered 
species and B is the intensity of the magnetic field ; a useful 
relation is Foe (in Hz) = 28B (B innT). 

Gyroradius. Radius of gyration of the charged particle: 
rg = V1 /|Qie| = mv, /|q|B. 

Group velocity. Vz = dw/dk, gives the direction of the wave 
energy flow. 

L-value or MclIlwain parameter. L characterizes a magnetic 
field line L = R/Rg at the equator, R being the geocentric 
distance and Rg the Earth radius. 

Loss cone—first adiabatic invariant. je = mv{/2B is 
the magnetic moment of the particle (ratio between the 
perpendicular energy of the particle and the magnetic 
field). This quantity can often be considered as constant 
and is called the first adiabatic invariant. Combined with 
the conservation of the particle energy along its trajectory, 
one obtains sin? a/ sin? a2 = Bi/Bo. A particle mirror on 
the field line at the point where its pitch angle a = 90°, 
being then trapped on this field line. If the point is too 
low (in the atmosphere), the particle is lost by collision. 
The corresponding equatorial angle range for which the 
particles are lost is called the loss cone. 

Lower hybrid resonance (LHR). oy © (QeQi)/? for one ion 
species. 

Phase velocity. V, = wk/k’, direction of propagation and 
speed of the wave front, parallel to k 

Pitch angle. Angle between the particle velocity and the 
direction of the geomagnetic field Bo, usually called a. 
Plasma frequency. pie = (NieG?./Mieb0)!” — Foe, Fpi, i or 
e referring to ions or electrons and ¢9 being the vacuum 
dielectric constant; a useful relation is Fy. (in kHz) =9ny/ 
(n, in particles cm~*). 

Spectrogram. This is a visualization in three dimensions of 
the time evolution of the waves in a frequency-time plane. 
The time is the abscissa, the ordinate is the frequency and 
the amplitude is given by the intensity of the signal, either 
in a gray scale or in color. At each time, it is the result of a 
Fourier transform of the waveform signal. 

Upper hybrid resonance (UHR). wy = (@,, + 22)". 


Bibliography 

Anderson B J, Engebretson M J, Rounds S R, Zanetti L J 
and Potemra T A 1990 A statistical study of Pc3-5 
pulsations observed by the Ampte/CCE magnetic 
fields experiment 1. Occurrence distributions J. Geo- 
phys. Res. 95 10 495-523 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


André M 1997 Waves and wave-particle interactions in the 
auroral region J. Atmos. Terr. Phys. 59 1687-712 
Baumjohan W and Treuman R A 1997 Basic Space Plasma 

Physics (London: Imperial College Press) 

Belmont G, Fontaine D and Canu P 1983 Are equatorial 
electron cyclotron waves responsible for diffuse 
auroral electron precipitation? J. Geophys. Res. 88 
9163-70 

Helliwell R A 1965 Whistlers and Related Ionospheric 
Phenomena (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press) 

Kennel C F and Petschek H E 1966 Limit on stably trapped 
particle fluxes J. Geophys. Res. 771 1-28 

Kurth W S, Gurnett D A and Anderson R R 1981 Escaping 
nonthermal continuum J. Geophys. Res. 86 5519-31 

Lester M, Hughes W J and Singer H J 1983 Polarization 
patterns of Pi2 magnetic pulsations and the substorm 
current wedge J. Geophys. Res. 88 7958-68 

Orr D 1973 Magnetic pulsations within the magneto- 
sphere: a review J. Atmos. Terr. Phys. 35 1-50 

Sazhin SS and Hayakawa M 1992 Magnetospheric chorus 
emissions: a review Planet. Space Sci. 40 681-97 

Sazhin S S, Hayakawa M and Bullough K 1992 Whistler 
diagnostics of magnetospheric parameters: a review 
Ann. Geophys. 10 293-308 

Solomon J, Cornilleau-Wehrlin N, Korth A and Kremser G 
1989 Generation of ELF electromagnetic waves 
and diffusion of energetic electrons in steady and 
non-steady situations in the Earth’s magnetosphere 
Plasma Waves and Instabilities at Comets and in 
Magnetospheres (Geophysical Monograph 53) ed B T 
Tsurutani and H Oya pp 119-33 

Southwood D J 1981 Low frequency pulsation generation 
by energetic particles ULF Pulsations in the Magneto- 
sphere ed D J Southwood (Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Stix T H 1992 Waves in Plasmas (New York: American 
Institute of Physics) 

Treuman R A and Baumjohan W 1997 Advanced Space 
Plasma Physics (London: Imperial College Press) 
Young D T, Perraut S, Roux A, de Villedary C, Gendrin R, 
Korth A, Kremser G and Jones D 1981 Wave-particle 
interactions near Qye+ observed on GEOS 1 and 
2.1. Propagation of ion cyclotron waves in He*-rich 

plasma J. Geophys. Res 86 6755-72 


Nicole Cornilleau-Wehrlin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Radio Emissions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Radio 
Emissions 


The magnetosphere of Jupiter (see JUPITER: MAGNETO- 
SPHERE) is an immense particle accelerator, allowing free 
electrons in it to reach kilo- to mega-electron-volt ener- 
gies (keV to MeV). These energetic electrons, moving 
along and circling around Jovian magnetic field lines, 
produce intense electromagnetic emissions all over the 
radio range, with wavelengths ranging from millimeters 
to tens of kilometers. 

Among the dozen or so Jovian radio components, 
we emphasize here the synchrotron radiation from ener- 
getic (MeV) particle belts in the decimeter range, and the 
cyclotron radiation from keV electrons in high magnetic 
latitude regions (auroral field lines, and those linked to 
the Io-Jupiter electrodynamic circuit (see MAGNETO- 
SPHERES: JUPITER, SATELLITE INTERACTIONS)). 


Discovery and observations of Jovian radio 
emissions 

Between 1955 and 1958, radio emissions from Jupiter 
were discovered using ground-based radiotelescopes, at 
frequencies between 10 and 5000 MHz (wavelengths 
between 30 m and 6 cm). These emissions are extremely 
intense: if they had a thermal origin, the source tempera- 
tures should be ~104-105 K at 6 cm, and 1018 K at 30 m! 
The latter are so unphysically high that these radio emis- 
sions were attributed to non-thermal mechanisms, 
involving the motion of free electrons in a magnetic field. 
This was the first inference of a magnetic field, and hence 
a magnetosphere, for a planet other than Earth. These 
interpretations were confirmed by high-frequency radio 
maps like that of figure 1, and by in situ measurements of 
the magnetic field and charged particles around Jupiter 
by the Pioneer 10 and 11 and Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft 


Figure 1. Map of decimeter radio emission (DIM) around Jupiter 
at a wavelength of 22 cm. The synchrotron emission originates 
from electron populations near the equator and at high lati- 
tudes, and dominates the thermal emission from the planetary 
disk. The brightness asymmetry between the two ansas comes 
from the non-dipolar character of the Jovian magnetic field. 
(From Leblanc Y et al 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 319 274-81.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


in the 1970s. At the same time, the Earth’s magnetos- 
phere and auroral radio emissions were discovered (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH, MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
WAVES and MAGNETOSPHERE: AURORAL KILOMETRIC RADIA- 
TION), and in the 1980s Voyager 1 and 2 revealed the mag- 
netic fields, magnetospheres and radio emissions of 
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune (see SATURN: MAGNETO- 
SPHERE, URANUS AND NEPTUNE: ATMOSPHERES, IONOSPHERES 
AND MAGNETOSPHERES). 

Jovian radio emissions have been studied from the 
ground since 1955, at frequencies 210 MHz, with various 
centimeter/decimeter wavelength antennas, as well as 
decameter arrays (table 1). At lower frequencies, the 
Earth’s ionosphere reflects radio waves, and observa- 
tions have been performed from space with experiments 
on board near-Earth spacecraft (RAE 1 and 2 in low Earth 
orbit, and Wind at the L1 Lagrange point), space probes 
which flew by Jupiter (Voyager 1 and 2 in 1979 and 
Ulysses in 1992), and a Jupiter orbiter (Galileo, in orbit 
since 1995). These various instruments measured the 
radio emission intensity and polarization, and their vari- 
ations versus time and frequency. 

At frequencies below a few hundred MHz, the angu- 
lar resolution (A/D, with A the radio wavelength, and D 
the antenna dimension, typically <100-1000 m) becomes 
very poor, and no direct information can be obtained 
on the radio source locations. Those must then be 


Lizanus, 


Nephine 


Flux density at ~4 AU (ly) 


o4 t 10 qa0 1a = {e00e 
Frequency (}4Hz) 


Figure 2. Spectra of Jovian radio components (bold lines) and 
auroral kilometric radiations from the other giant planets and 
the Earth (light lines). Average emission levels are sketched as 
they would be detected from the minimum Earth-Jupiter dis- 
tance (~4.2 AU). Peak flux densities may exceed the displayed 
one by up to one order of magnitude, and Jovian S burst fluxes 
may reach 107 Jy (1 Jy = 1 jansky = 10-26 W m Hz-!). The low- 
frequency limit of DAM control by Io is somewhere between 1 
and 3 MHz. (Adapted from Zarka 1998.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Radio Emissions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Some key properties of Jovian radio magnetospheric components. 


Component Frequency range Source location Beaming 
Thermal 210 GHz Atmosphere Isotropic 
DIM <100 MHz Radiation belts Mostly LB 
—~10 GHz (Van Allen) 
Non-lo A few MHz Along auroral Hollow beam 
— 40 MHz field 
DAM lines at large angle/B 
(Ag~67°-75°) 
Io DAM A few MHz Along Io and Io’s_ Hollow beam 
(L bursts / — 40 MHz torus field lines _ at large angle/B 
S bursts) (Aap~65°) (70°-80°) 
HOM 200 kHz > Along auroral Hollow beam at 
a few MHz field lines 30°-90°/ B 
(Agx68°-72°) 
bKOM ~10 kHz Along auroral Hollow beam at 
—>300 kHz field lines 30°-80°/B 
(up tol MHz) = (Ag=70°-75°) 
nKOM ~50 kHz Plasma Broad filled 
200 kHz inhomogeneities 
in Io’s plasma 
torus pattern, 
around radial 
direction 
QP bursts/ A few kHz > Auroral? ? 
non-thermal 50/700 kHz Magnetopause? ? 
continuum 


Power Emission process Discovered/observed by 
<109 W below Thermal GB/HF 
10 GHz 
>109-1010 W Synchrotron GB/HF 
1010-100 W Cyclotron- GB/LF 
maser Voyagers 
Up to 10" W Cyclotron- GB/LF 
maser (?) Voyagers, Wind 
109-1010 W Cyclotron-maser _ Voyagers, Ulysses, 
Galileo 
108-109 W Cyclotron-maser _ Voyagers, Ulysses, 
Galileo 
~108 W Upper hybrid or — Voyagers, Ulysses, 
plasma Galileo 
frequency? 
107-108 W Cyclotron- Voyagers 
maser? Ulysses 
Conversion? 


GB/HF = ground-based high-frequency (centimeter /decimeter wavelength) antennas, including the Very Large Array in New Mexico, 


the Arecibo radiotelescope in Puerto Rico, etc. 


GB/LF = ground-based low-frequency (decameter) arrays in Nangay (France), Kharkov (Ukraine) or Gainesville (Florida). 


Ap = magnetic latitude (the Jovian dipole field makes a tilt of 9.6° relative to the rotation axis). 
DIM = decimeter; DAM = decameter; HOM = hectometer; bKOM = broadband kilometer; nRKOM = narrowband kilometer; QP = quasi- 


periodic. 


determined indirectly. The only exception is Ulysses, 
whose radio experiment was able to measure the direc- 
tion of arrival of incoming radio waves, although only 
below 1 MHz. 

However, while the spectrum of thermal and 
decimeter emissions (figure 2 and table 1) is very stable 
in time, it becomes very sporadic and structured in the 
frequency-time plane at lower frequencies, and gains 
several orders of magnitude in intensity below 40 MHz. 
It is thus possible to build frequency-time images of 
intensity or polarization variations, with high signal-to- 
noise ratio. These ‘dynamic spectra’ permit us to follow 
the rapid variations of emission characteristics (down to 
a few milliseconds) with a good spectral resolution 
(down to a few kHz or less) over a broad spectral 
domain, and these constitute the main tool compensating 
for the dramatic lack of angular resolution at long wave- 
lengths. Figure 3(a) displays a typical dynamic spectrum 
of low-frequency Jovian radio emissions recorded by 
Voyager 2 in the kilometer-to-decameter wavelength 
range, during one complete rotation of the planet (9 h 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


55.5 min). Figure 3(b) is a dynamic spectrum recorded 
from the ground (in Nangay), displaying the fine tempo- 
ral structure of decameter emissions named ‘S’ bursts (‘S’ 
stands for ‘short’). 


Characteristics of Jovian radio components 

Almost a dozen Jovian magnetospheric radio compo- 
nents have been identified in some 40 years of ground- 
based and spacecraft observations (see Carr et al 1983, 
Zarka 1998 and references therein). This number is larg- 
er than for any other magnetized planet, and Jovian 
emissions also reach higher intensities. This is mainly 
due to the intense, quasi-dipolar Jovian magnetic field, 
together with the fact that most planetary radio emis- 
sions are cyclotron emissions: the larger amplitude |B| 
of the near-surface magnetic field at Jupiter ((4.3-14) 
-10-+ T, compared with <1-10- T for the other planets) 
corresponds to higher electron cyclotron frequencies (f,, 
=e|B|/2zm,, with e the charge of the electron and m, its 
mass). The large Jovian magnetic dipole moment also 
creates a huge magnetospheric cavity in the solar wind, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Radio Emissions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with a radius varying between 60 and 120 Jovian radii. 
The solar wind ram pressure (or kinetic energy flux) thus 
provides a large input power on this magnetospheric 
obstacle (~1015 W), a fraction of which feeds electron 
acceleration. Jupiter’s rapid rotation is also an effective 
energy source. Finally, large numbers of accelerated elec- 
trons converge towards the magnetic poles along auroral 
field lines or are trapped within Van Allen ‘radiation’ 
(actually energetic particle) belts (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH: RADIATION BELTS), where they produce intense 
radio waves. 

In addition, the plasma populating every other 
PLANETARY ATMOSPHERE comes from the solar wind or the 
planet’s ionosphere, whereas a third important source 
exists at Jupiter: the satellite lo, whose volcanism 
produces a dense plasma torus around its orbit (see 10: 
PLASMA TORUS). An electrodynamic circuit forms from the 
interaction of Io with the Jovian magnetic field, driving 
strong currents and leading to electron precipitation 
towards Jupiter and intense radio emissions in the 
decameter wavelength range. 

The exact number of radio components of truly dis- 
tinct origin is not known because some of them may be 
different manifestations of the same source and/or phe- 


é VOYAGER 2 Jupiter 


30 


a a 

= 
= DAM = 
= 20 = 
> > 
5 e 
=I 10 2 
3 3 
LL LL 


90 180 270 360 
CML (°) from 79/07/16, 0119 


Jovian Radio Components 


ine) 
fs 


22} 


1) 
[o) 


nomenon, for example over different frequency ranges. 
Table 1 is an up-to-date list of some key properties of 
these radio components. Their average spectra, as they 
would be detected from the minimum Earth-Jupiter dis- 
tance (~4.2 AU), are plotted on figure 2, while figure 3(c) 
sketches how these various emissions appear in the fre- 
quency-time plane. Figure 4 sketches the corresponding 
radio source locations in the Jovian magnetosphere. 
Detailed information can be found in Rucker et al (1997) 
and Zarka (1998). 


Auroral radio components 

Part of the decameter emission (DAM) is strongly related 
to the satellite Io (the Io DAM component), i.e. it is 
observed only for specific configurations of 
Io-Jupiter-observer, and the rest is independent of Io 
(non-Io DAM). Both Io and non-Io DAM emissions are 
structured in ‘arcs’ in the frequency-time plane (figure 
3(a)), and various modulations and fringes may affect 
them, due to diffraction by plasma inhomogeneities near 
Jupiter or in the interplanetary medium. Arc shapes have 
been explained in terms of the complex topology of the 
near-surface Jovian magnetic field (non-dipolar terms) 
and of the non-isotropic directivity of the emission. The 


S-bursts 
10- 
ae DAM arcs 
= ~« 9h 55.5m 
= HOM 
iF 
g 
6) bKOM 
=] 
fey 
2 
i 0.1 nKOM — 


Time or CML 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


> 


Figure 3. Dynamic spectra of Jovian radio 
emissions. (a) L bursts observed by Voyager 2 
during one Jovian rotation, in two linear fre- 
quency bands (0-1.3 MHz and 1.3-40 MHz). 
Abscissae are labeled in Jupiter’s Central 
Meridian Longitude system. Increasing dark- 
ness indicates increasing intensity. (b) S bursts 
observed at the Nancay decameter array dur- 
ing 1 s with 3 ms/spectrum resolution. (c) 
General sketch of the dynamic spectra of all 


Jovian radio components. 
QP-bursts 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Radio Emissions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nKOM 


UV Aurora 


+ S-bursts 


QP-bursts ? 


Figure 4. Radio source locations in Jupiter’s internal magnetos- 
phere and Io plasma torus. The nKOM is emitted in ~70° wide 
beams from quasi-point sources in the torus, while the auroral 
emissions (b KOM, HOM, DAM and possibly QP bursts) are pro- 
duced near the local gyrofrequency and beamed in hollow cones 
with axes aligned with the high latitude magnetic field lines. 
Arrows indicate field lines along which energetic electron pre- 
cipitation is known to occur. 


hectometer component (HOM), independent of Io, is 
thought to be the low-frequency extent of non-lo DAM. 
Its source and that of bKOM have been directly located 
by Ulysses. The broadband kilometer (bKOM) source 
overlaps with that of HOM, but these components 
appear distinct on dynamic spectra (figures 3(a), (c)). 
They may have the same generation mechanism, driven 
by different sources of energetic electrons. 

DAM, HOM and bKOM constitute the Jovian auro- 
ral (high magnetic latitude) emissions, in many respects 
similar to Earth’s auroral kilometric radiation. They are 
generated between the Jovian surface and a few plane- 
tary radii above it, along field lines at the footprints of 
which the precipitated electrons generate UV, visible and 
IR auroras. lo DAM is linked to the Io-Jupiter current 
system, and can be considered as a secondary ‘auroral’ 
source, at a slightly lower latitude than non-Ilo DAM. 

The low-frequency part of the Jovian radio spec- 
trum, between a few kHz and a few tens of kHz, had 
been attributed after Voyager flybys to non-thermal 
continuum radiation generated at the dayside magne- 
topause. Ulysses observations attributed at least part of 
it to the merging of the low-frequency part of ubiqui- 
tous bursts recurring with quasi-periods (QP) of 15 to 
40 min. Their origin is unclear, but they may be auroral 
too. 


Time variations 

DIM to bKOM components are strongly modulated by 
the planetary rotation (9 h 55 min 23.7 s), due to their 
non-isotropic directivity. Actually, magnetospheric radio 
emissions are the only means to determine the rotation 
rate of the giant planet’s interior, where the magnetic 
field originates, through the thick cloud layers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The narrowband kilometer component (nKOM) lags 
the planetary rotation by a few per cent, due to its origin 
in Io’s torus, whose plasma is not in perfect co-rotation 
with the planet. 

Fluctuations of the solar wind parameters (ram pres- 
sure, density, velocity and magnetic field) induce modu- 
lations of the bKOM, HOM, non-Io DAM, and possibly 
OP bursts, but do not affect lo DAM. This is expected 
because the radio sources of all these components are in 
‘external’ regions of the magnetosphere, while that of Io 
DAM is along field lines connected to Io’s torus, in the 
inner magnetosphere. But solar wind variations also 
modulate the occurrence of nKOM, although it originates 
from the torus itself. The penetration of the solar wind 
influence there remains to be explained. 

Finally, lo DAM is observed with two strikingly dif- 
ferent morphologies: it may consist, like non-lo DAM, of 
slowly varying emissions (‘L’ bursts on timescales of 
minutes; ‘L’ stands for ‘long’; figure 3(a)), or consist of a 
series of S bursts (each lasting a few tens of milliseconds; 
figure 3(b)). These two morphologies correspond to dif- 
ferent regimes of energy release, and possibly to different 
generation mechanisms. 


Ganymede’s radio emissions 

In addition to the above Jovian components, Galileo 
observations revealed the existence of the magnetos- 
phere and radio emissions of the satellite GANYMEDE 
(Gurnett et al 1996), thus providing evidence of a hierar- 
chical organization of embedded magnetospheres in the 
solar system. Ganymede radio emissions are not auroral, 
but appear similar to the continuum radiation from plan- 
etary magnetospheres. The observed energetic particle 
environment of Ganymede, and the periodic reconnec- 
tion of its magnetic field with that of Jupiter, suggests 
that it might control some Jovian radio emissions in a 
similar but probably less prominent way than Io. 


Generation mechanisms and acceleration 
processes 

The generation of all magnetospheric radio emissions 
(except nKOM) requires energetic electrons moving in a 
magnetic field. The intensity and polarization of the 
radio components are the main constraints permitting us 
to identify the generation mechanism (Goldstein and 
Goertz 1983). 

The moderate intensity and linear polarization of 
DIM indicate a synchrotron emission process, non-ther- 
mal but incoherent (where the intensity produced by 
each electron adds up to form the total emission). 
Detailed maps as in figure 1 have been successfully mod- 
eled using an isotropic and an equatorial, trapped elec- 
tron distribution. The decimeter (DIM) emission is much 
weaker or non-existent at the other giant planets because 
of energetic particle absorption by the rings. The Jovian 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Radio Emissions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


DIM was enhanced for several weeks after the collision 
of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter in 1994. 

The circular or elliptical polarization of DAM, HOM 
and bKOM, and their extremely high intensities, rather 
require a coherent, maser-like emission mechanism. 
Ulysses measurements definitely proved that these radio 
emissions are produced close to the local electron 
cyclotron frequency, f,,, at each point along auroral mag- 
netic field lines, on the so-called extraordinary propaga- 
tion mode. This confirmed the cyclotron-maser mecha- 
nism as the best candidate for their generation. This 
mechanism consists of coherent generation at the 
cyclotron frequency by unstable electron populations 
containing free energy susceptible to amplify waves, in 
the form of an excess of electrons with high velocity per- 
pendicular to the local magnetic field. The elliptical 
polarization of DAM implies that the plasma density 
within the radio sources is extremely low (possibly <5 
cm-3), which is a favourable condition for the cyclotron- 
maser mechanism. 

Electron acceleration processes are not yet firmly 
identified. Magnetospheric compressions, observed by 
Ulysses, may lead to the so-called ‘Fermi’ and ‘betatron’ 
acceleration of electrons trapped on magnetic field lines. 
After several Jovian rotations, electrons may thus reach 
the MeV energies required by the synchrotron generation 
of DIM. Auroral emissions require rapid acceleration 
processes, which include magnetic reconnection in the 
magnetotail, parallel electric fields (observed in Earth’s 
auroral regions and near Io’s magnetic flux tube), and 
heating by low-frequency plasma waves (observed by 
Ulysses near Io’s torus, or possibly originating from the 
current disk in the case of QP bursts). Parallel electric 
fields may be electrostatic or non-stationary (so-called 
Alfvén waves). The latter are thought to be generated by 
the interaction between Io and the Jovian magnetic field 
(lo-Jupiter electrodynamic circuit). 

Multispectral (UV/IR/radio) studies of the ‘Io’ 
auroral source permit estimates of the energy of precipi- 
tated particles and allow us to compute an energy bud- 
get: ~1012 W are dissipated in each hemisphere by the 
Io-Jupiter circuit, mostly in the form of Alfvén waves 
converting into electron acceleration (keV to tens of keV); 
the latter precipitate into an area of ~105 km? in the 
Jovian ionosphere, producing (2-3)-10!9 W in the IR and 
UV ranges, and up to 109 W above the ionosphere in the 
DAM radio range. The S bursts are so intense that the 
cyclotron-maser mechanism might be not efficient 
enough. 

Finally, nKOM was shown by Ulysses to be generat- 
ed by discrete sources in Io’s torus at the local electron 
plasma frequency (proportional to the square root of the 
electron density) or upper hybrid frequency (the square 
root of the sum of the squares of the electron plasma and 
cyclotron frequencies). These sources might be density 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


inhomogeneities, waxing and waning with time (in rela- 
tion to solar wind fluctuations). The specific radio gener- 
ation mechanism has not yet been identified. 


Interest of the study of Jovian radio emissions 
and perspectives 

Although representing a small fraction (~10-5) of the 
input solar wind power on the magnetospheric cross sec- 
tion, radio emissions (together with auroral UV and IR 
emissions) are essential for remote sensing studies. Their 
intensity, polarization and frequency-time structure are 
directly linked to the topology of the Jovian magnetic 
field and energetic electron distributions at the radio 
sources, which can thus be remotely monitored. The 
knowledge gained in understanding the generation of 
Jovian radio emissions will be applied to other distant 
radio sources (solar, stellar), that no spacecraft can reach. 
Extrapolating the fact that Jovian DAM is the most 
intense radio emission in the solar system, it appears 
interesting to search for exoplanets through their possi- 
ble magnetospheric radio emissions. 


Web Update (31 July 2002) 

New observations of Jupiter, its satellites and environs 
have been made by Cassini, Galileo, the Hubble Space 
Telescope, the Chandra X-ray Observatory and 
Earth-based radio and optical telescopes during the 
CASSINI spacecraft’s flyby . The Galileo spacecraft has 
been in orbit around Jupiter since December 1995 while 
Cassini observed Jupiter from October 1, 2000 to March 
31, 2001. Cassini made its closest approach on December 
30, 2000, at a distance of about 9.7 million kilometers (6 
million miles). 

Radio emissions from Jupiter are believed to be gen- 
erated along the high-latitude magnetic field lines by the 
same electrons that produce the aurorae, and both the 
radio emission in the hectometric frequency range and 
the aurorae vary considerably. Simultaneous observa- 
tions using the Cassini and Galileo spacecraft of hecto- 
metric radio emissions and extreme ultraviolet auroral 
emissions from Jupiter show that both of these emissions 
are triggered by interplanetary shocks propagating out- 
ward from the Sun. When such a shock arrives at Jupiter, 
it seems to cause a major compression and reconfigura- 
tion of the magnetosphere, which produces strong elec- 
tric fields and therefore electron acceleration along the 
auroral field lines, similar to the processes that occur dur- 
ing geomagnetic storms at the Earth. 

Ground-based observations have shown that 
Jupiter is a two-component source of microwave radio 
emission: thermal atmospheric emission and synchro- 
tron emission from energetic electrons spiraling in 
Jupiter’s magnetic field. Observations of 13.8 GHz syn- 
chrotron emission collected during the Cassini fly—-by 
confirm the presence of electrons with energies up to 50 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Radio Emissions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MeV. These energetic electrons may be repeatedly accel- 
erated through an interaction with plasma waves, which 
can transfer energy into the electrons. Preliminary com- 
parison of the data with model results suggests that elec- 
trons with energies of less than 20 MeV are more numer- 
ous than previously believed. The most widely accepted 
theory postulates that the relativistic electrons originate 
in the solar wind or in the outer Jovian magnetosphere 
and diffuse inward, gaining energy through conserva- 
tion of the first and second adiabatic invariants. This can 
account for electrons with energies around 10 MeV near 
the peak of the synchrotron zone. However, additional 
acceleration mechanisms are required to explain higher 
energies. 


References 
Nature, 28 Feb. 2002 415 987-991 


Web Update references 

Gurnett D A et al February 2002 Control of Jupiter’s radio 
emission and aurorae by the solar wind Nature 415 
985-987 

Bolton S J et al February 2002 Ultra—relativistic electrons 
in Jupiter’s radiation belts Nature 415 987-991 


Bibliography 

Carr T D, Desch M D and Alexander J K 1983 
Phenomenology of magnetospheric radio emissions 
Physics of the Jovian Magnetosphere ed A J Dessler 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 
226-84 

Goldstein M L and Goertz C K 1983 Theories of radio 
emissions and plasma waves Physics of the Jovian 
Magnetosphere ed A J Dessler (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 317-52 

Gurnett D A, Kurth W S, Roux A, Bolton S J and Kennel 
C F 1996 Evidence for a magnetosphere at 
Ganymede from plasma wave observations by the 
Galileo spacecraft Nature 384 535-7 

Rucker H O, Bauer S J and Lecacheux A (ed) 1997 
Planetary Radio Emissions IV (Vienna: Austrian 
Academy of Science Press) 

Zarka P 1998 Auroral radio emissions at the outer plan- 
ets: observations and theories J. Geophys. Res.-Planet 
103 20159-94 

Philippe Zarka 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Satellite Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Satellite 
Interactions 


Most of the satellites of Jupiter, notably the large Galilean 
satellites Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto (see JUPITER: 
SATELLITES), Orbit deep inside the magnetosphere of Jupiter 
(See JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE) and are therefore immersed in 
the flow of magnetospheric plasma (made of a mixture of 
electrons and ions) and subjected to an interaction with 
the strong Jovian magnetic field. These interactions have 
dramatic consequences for the Jovian magnetosphere, the 
satellites of Jupiter and even the ionosphere of Jupiter, 
particularly in the case of the innermost large satellite Io. 

Since during the first three decades of research in 
this area, observations of this interaction were available 
only for Io, ideas were initially developed for this case. 
The early history of this case began with the discovery 
of the control of radio emissions from Jupiter by Io (see 
MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, RADIO EMISSIONS). It was followed by 
first attempts to physically explain these observations. The 
next important step was the discovery of an ionosphere 
of Io by the PIONEER 10 spacecraft. A more advanced 
understanding was developed in response to ground- 
based observations and the many significant results of 
the VOYAGER MISSION. The GALILEO MISSION has revealed that 
all four of the Galilean satellites show interactions with 
significantly different features and a challenging diversity 
of physical processes. 


The Io effect and the unipolar inductor model 

In 1964 the so-called Io effect was discovered by using 
data on the radio emissions from Jupiter in the decametric 
range of wavelengths (several tens of meters). It was 
found that the radio emissions are strongly controlled 
by the orbital position of the satellite Io with respect 
to the observer. It was generally concluded that an 
electrodynamic interaction of Io with the Jovian magnetic 
field was responsible for the Io effect. The simple idea of 
the unipolar inductor model of this interaction is shown 
in figure 1, where Io is shown much larger than in reality 
for clarity. The unipolar inductor model starts from the 
idea that the plasma and magnetic field are rotating rigidly 
with Jupiter with a velocity at the orbit of lo which exceeds 
the orbital velocity by about 57 km s-!. An observer at 
rest with respect to Io then observes a motional electric 
field directed outward from Jupiter. Across the diameter 
of Io this electric field corresponds to a voltage of about 
500000 V applied to Io. This voltage arises much in the 
same way as in an electric generator, where electric wires 
are moved across a magnetic field. This voltage then drives 
a current system first through Io, as shown in figure 1. 
The current circuit is then continued along the magnetic 
field lines which can be viewed as highly conducting 
wires. The circuit is finally closed by currents through 
the Jovian ionosphere perpendicular to the magnetic field. 
When the currents pass through the Jovian ionosphere 
a ‘hot spot’ is expected to form as a consequence of the 
electric heating and precipitation of energetic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


MAGNETIC FIELD LINES 


Yor 
eta J 


INCIDENT 
4 FLOW VELOCITY 


i & 


NORTHERN 
“HOTSPOT ye 


SOUTHERN 


"HOT SPOT 500000 VOLTS 


Figure 1. Principle of the unipolar inductor model (not to scale). 
The corotating plasma flows towards Io into the plane of the 
drawing. The voltage drop is based on realistic magnetic fields. 


The center of this hot spot is defined by the footpoints of the 
magnetic field lines passing through Io in this simplified 
picture. Early estimates yielded currents of 1 MA in 
each branch of the current system based on a voltage of 
700000 V across Io using a somewhat too high magnetic 
field of Jupiter at that time. The unipolar inductor model 
also involved the idea that electrons accelerated along the 
magnetic field lines provide the energy for the emission 
of radio waves. The frequency of the radio emissions 
was associated with the local electron cyclotron (or gyro) 
frequency (the frequency of the gyro motion of electrons 
around the magnetic field), an idea which is basically 
accepted today. In this initial work the current was 
assumed to be closed through the conducting interior of Io. 
This unrealistic assumption was later replaced by current 
closure through a conducting ionosphere of Io, which was 
discovered by a radio occultation experiment on the first 
spacecraft that explored Jupiter, ie. Pioneer 10 in 1973. 
This discovery of an ionosphere implied the existence of 
a neutral atmosphere around Io. Another far-reaching 
discovery was the ground-based observation of clouds of 
neutral gas like sodium atoms with Io as the source. 


The Voyager encounters and the Alfvén wing 
model 

The Voyager flybys at Jupiter in 1979 yielded a number 
of important new observational results, which better 
defined the problem, but also sparked a number of new 
theoretical ideas, which led to a much more mature picture 
of Io’s electrodynamic interaction. An SO, atmosphere 
was discovered in the infrared which provided an initial 
definition of the neutral atmosphere as the basis of the 
ionosphere discovered by Pioneer 10 and confirmed much 
later by the Galileo spacecraft. This highly dynamic 
neutral atmosphere which was later investigated by the 
Ultraviolet Explorer and the Hubble Space Telescope 
(HST) is basically due to volcanic activity on Io driven 
by tidal friction in its interior. Another discovery by 
Voyager was the Io plasma torus (see 10: PLASMA TORUS), 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Satellite Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a population of plasma mostly composed of sulfur and 
oxygen ions, originating from Io and forming a torus at 
the radial distance of Io from Jupiter and trapped in the 
Jovian magnetic field. The high plasma densities in the 
torus with electron concentrations of several 1000 cm~? 
at the center of the torus and the energy balance of the 
torus requires mass loss rates from Io of about 1 ton San 
This makes Io comparable to a comet of intermediate gas 
production at 1 AU. In contrast to the comets in orbit 
around the Sun (see SOLAR WIND: INTERACTION WITH COMETS) 
Io is moving through its own ion tail. This is because the 
torus plasma is moving at the fast rotation rate of Jupiter, 
thereby overtaking slowly moving Io all the time. Thus 
plasma leaving Io through its wake is reencountered on 
the front side approximately a rotation later. Io is thus the 
major source of plasma mass in Jupiter’s magnetosphere. 

The huge densities (for the magnetospheres of the 
outer planets) also imply a large inertia of the plasma 
flow incident on Io. This requires an improvement of the 
unipolar inductor model described above. The unipolar 
inductor model must be replaced by the more general 
and more accurate Alfvén wing model. This is based on 
the radiation of Alfvén waves (See MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC 
waves) by the satellite. This radiation of Alvén waves 
is similar to the establishment of a bow shock by a 
supersonic aircraft. In contrast to the sound waves 
forming a bow shock, the Alfvén waves are restricted to 
move parallel or antiparallel to the magnetic field for an 
observer in the rest frame of the magnetospheric plasma. 
Figure 2 schematically shows the formation of Alfvén 
wings in the rest frame of Io. Because of the velocity of 
the magnetospheric plasma the wings are inclined with 
respect to the unperturbed magnetic field of Jupiter. The 
northern and southern Alfvén wings distort the magnetic 
field due to their currents. During the flyby of Voyager 1 at 
Io the Alfvén wing signature was identified successfully, 
indicating currents of about 3 MA in one branch of the 
wing. Figure 2 also illustrates that the Alfvén wings must 
be reflected either by the ionosphere of Jupiter or at the 
torus boundary. The reflected Alfvén wave must pass 
behind Io on its way to the opposite hemisphere. If it 
passes far behind Io there is no feedback of the Alfvén 
wave on Io. If Io has not moved very far before the 
reflected Alfvén wave returns, there will be an interaction 
of the reflected Alfvén wave with Io. In the extreme 
case that the reflected Alfvén waves pass through Io’s 
ionosphere several times, the unipolar inductor model 
is obtained as an extreme case of very close coupling of 
the Jovian ionosphere and Io’s atmosphere-ionosphere 
system. Figure 2 also suggests that a large number of 
reflected wing portions may trail the satellite. These 
reflected wings have also been proposed as the explanation 
for another significant discovery by Voyager, i.e. the 
discovery of multiple arcs in frequency-time diagrams 
of the decametric radio emissions. The Alfvén wing 
configuration is expected to vary in response to changes in 
torus density and the magnetic latitude of Io describing its 
position in the torus. It varies between the pure Alfvén 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wing picture without feedback to a configuration with 
some features of the unipolar inductor model. The plasma 
flow through Io’s atmosphere and its electric conductivity 
are determined by a number of processes of atomic and 
molecular physics. These are referred to as ion pick-up, 
charge exchange and elastic collisons. In the wake region 
there is an excess of plasma leaving Io’s environment 
(relative to the incoming plasma), thereby forming an ion 
tail. The flow also drags neutral atoms and molecules 
away to feed the neutral clouds referred to above. These 
processes describe the loss of mass from Io to be replaced 
by volcanism. 


Advanced Earth-based observations and the 
Galileo mission 
The description of the interaction between Io and the 
Jovian magnetosphere includes a ‘hot spot’. It has been 
described above as the footpoint of the disturbance system 
radiated by Io parallel and antiparallel to the magnetic 
field toward the Jovian ionosphere. Observations of 
this footpoint contain important diagnostic information 
on the nature of this disturbance system and also the 
Jovian magnetic field. First observations of the footpoint 
were obtained in the infrared in 1993 and with increasing 
sensitivity by the HST in recent years. The Io-related 
disturbance system consists of a ‘bright spot’ with a wake 
trailing the spot over a large part of a circle around Jupiter. 
A new leap forward in our knowledge on the 
magnetospheric interaction of the Galilean satellites came 
through the many encounters of the Galileo orbiter with 
the satellites which is continuing at the time of writing. On 
7 December 1995 the Galileo spacecraft passed through the 
wake of Io at an altitude of 900 km. The main features of the 
observations were the detection of a deep dip in magnetic 
field magnitude, an almost stagnant ionospheric plasma 
near closest approach, and a system of plasma waves 
which are at least partly due to the pick-up of ions of Ionian 
origin. The higher torus density during this encounter 
compared with conditions observed by Voyager in 1979 
suggest a somewhat stronger interaction than at that time. 
It has been suggested that the observations may require 
the presence of an internal magnetic field although it is not 
clear yet whether the disturbances in the magnetoplasma 
around Io really require such a field. During the Galileo 
encounter at Io peculiar distributions of electron beams 
in the energy range from 15 keV to above 140 keV parallel 
and antiparallel to the magnetic field were observed which 
can be considered the first direct evidence for acceleration 
processes due to the magnetospheric interaction of Io. 
They are also of appreciable interest for the mechanisms 
generating radio emissions from Jupiter’s environment. 
Until recently there was no observational evidence 
for the nature of the interaction between the three 
Galilean satellites outside Io, ie. Europa, Ganymede 
and Callisto, and the Jovian magnetosphere. The 
situation was changed by the HST observations of an 
oxygen atmosphere of Europa just before the arrival 
of Galileo at Jupiter. In the meantime there is also 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Satellite Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


JOVIAN BACKGROUND 
MAGNETIC FIELD | | | 


ALFVEN WINGS 
IO 


— 


NORTHERN \ 


JOVIAN IONOSPHERE 
(MOVING) 


i 


SOUTHERN 
JOVIAN IONOSPHERE 


7. 777777777 -=(MOVING) 
=> 


Figure 2. Idealized sketch of the Alfvén wing system generated by Io viewed in the rest frame at Io. In this frame the magnetospheric 
plasma and the ionosphere of Jupiter are moving toward the right. Reflected wings are shown with reflections at the torus boundary, 


ionosphere of Jupiter and repetitions thereof. 


evidence for an oxygen atmosphere on Ganymede and 
a CO, atmosphere on Callisto. Without any further 
information this suggests the following scenario for these 
satellites. Photoionization and collisional ionization by 
magnetospheric electrons produce ionospheres, which 
interact with the magnetosphere of Jupiter via the general 
Alfvén wing model as explained above. A substantial 
difference with the case of Io exists, however. The neutral 
atmosphere must be maintained against the loss processes 
due to the magnetospheric interaction in the absence of 
the violent volcanism at Io. For Europa the idea has 
been developed that sputtering by magnetospheric ions 
generates the observed oxygen atmosphere. A similar idea 
might be applied to Ganymede and Callisto. 

It came as a complete surprise that Ganymede 
possesses a substantial internal magnetic dipole field, 
possibly of dynamo (see DYNAMO THEORY) origin. With an 
equatorial surface field of the dipole of 750 nT roughly 
antiparallel to the satellite’s spin axis, Ganymede is 
surrounded by its own magnetosphere which itself is 
embedded in the huge Jovian magnetosphere. Broad 
Alfvén wings are radiated northward and southward 
from the polar caps of Ganymede’s magnetosphere. An 
idealized sketch is shown in figure 3. The magnetosphere 
has closed field regions at low and intermediate latitudes. 

The magnetospheric interaction with the remaining 
satellites Europa and Callisto cannot be explained by the 
unmodified Alfvén wing model, as the flyby observations 
show. To explain the observations a magnetic field 
of internal origin is required again. However, the 
observations particularly at Callisto show that a dipole 
moment fixed to the satellite does not explain the 
observations. The only alternative is an internal field due 
to electromagnetic induction generating eddy currents. 
Such an internal field requires an electrically conducting 
interior of the satellite, which may be provided by 
subsurface oceans with high electric conductivity due to 
leaching of salts. The eddy currents are excited because 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ALFVEN WING REGION 


GANYMEDE'S 
MAGNETOSPHERE 


Figure 3. The magnetosphere of Ganymede inside the 
magnetosphere of Jupiter (not to scale) 


the Jovian magnetic field has a time varying component 
at each satellite, which is due to the tilt of the Jovian 
dipole moment with respect to the spin axis of Jupiter. The 
induced fields provide a component of field perturbations 
which has in principle to be assessed at all satellites. 


Bibliography 

Hill T W, Dessler A J and Goertz C K 1983 The Io 
Jupiter interaction Physics of the Jovian Magnetosphere 
ed AJ Dessler (Cambridge: CUP) pp 365-72 

Khurana K K, Kivelson M G, Stevenson D J, Schubert G, 
Russell C T, Walker R J, Joy S and Polanskey C 1998 
Induced magnetic fields as evidence for subsurface 
oceans in Europa and Callisto Nature 395 777-80 

Kivelson M G, Khurana K K, Russell C T, Walker R J, 
Warnecke J, Coroniti F V, Polanskey C, Southwood DJ 
and Schubert G 1996 Discovery of Ganymede’s 
magnetic field by the Galileo spacecraft Nature 384 
537-41 

Neubauer F M 1998 The sub-Alfvénic interaction of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Jupiter, Satellite Interactions ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the Galilean satellites with the Jovian ionosphere 
J. Geophys. Res. 103 19 843-66 


Fritz Neubauer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Magnetospheres: Plasma-Ring/Dust Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetospheres: Plasma-Ring/Dust 
Interactions 


Dust particles in space are often immersed in plasmas 
and UV radiation and, consequently, carry electrostatic 
charges. The motion of small micron- and submicron- 
sized charged grains can be influenced or even dominated 
by electric and magnetic fields in addition to gravity, 
drag and radiation pressure. Dust particles in plasmas 
are unusual charge carriers. They are many orders 
of magnitude heavier than any other plasma particles 
(electrons and ions) and they can have time-dependent 
charges many orders of magnitude larger (negative or 
positive). Small grains act as plasma probes since their 
charging and dynamics are set by the plasma environment. 

Figure 1 shows one of the most unexpected findings 
of the Voyagers at SATURN, the sporadically appearing, 
radially expanding dust clouds above the dense B-ring 
(see also SATURN: RINGS). The ‘spokes’ consist of charged 
submicron-sized dust particles that are lofted above the 
rings due to electromagnetic forces (Mendis et al 1984). 
Meteorites bombarding the rings generate plasma clouds 
that rapidly drift away from the synchronous orbit (the 
distance where the rotation rate of the planet matches 
the Kepler orbital rate) and lift off submicron-sized grains 
from the ring plane as they move above the rings. Each 
dust particle follows an approximate Kepler orbit so that 
grains in the cloud closer to Saturn move faster. As ‘spokes’ 
age the Kepler shear results in an increasing tilt and the 
contrast between the dust cloud and the ring diminishes. 

The ‘spokes’ were the first evidence that, contrary 
to general belief, gravity alone cannot explain all 
of the complex dynamics in PLANETARY RINGS. The 
ring/halo region and the dust streams at Jupiter and 
the E-ring at Saturn are other examples where the 
magnetospheric plasma environment shapes the size and 
spatial distribution of small dust particles. 


Electrostatic charging of dust in plasmas 
The electrical charge of a dust grain, Q, changes due to the 
currents reaching its surface 


dQ 
drt =e le (1) 


where J; represent various electric currents. Electron and 
ion collection, and secondary and photoelectron emission 
currents, dominate dust charging in most space plasmas 
(Whipple 1981). All of these currents are functions 
of the plasma properties (density, composition, energy 
distribution) and also the properties of the dust grain 
(size, velocity, composition, surface roughness). As a dust 
grain collects charges it changes the electrostatic potential 
distribution in its environment. A grain that initially 
collects more electrons than ions develops a negative 
potential well that enhances the ion flux and lowers 
the electron flux reaching its surface. The electrostatic 
surface potential of a grain that balances these fluxes is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the equilibrium potential. For an isolated dust grain, with 
radius a, the surface potential can be easily related to the 
net charge, @ = Q/a, resulting in 


Q. ~ 70064, (2) 


where Q, is the number of extra/missing electrons, dy is 
the surface potential measured in volts and a, is the radius 
of the grain in microns. 

In a case where the electron and ion thermal currents 
are the only charging currents, the equilibrium potential 
of a grain in a plasma where the electron and ion 
temperatures (7, = T, = T) are the same is 


kT 
eq ae —pB— (3) 
e 


where, for example, 6 = 2.5, 3.6 and 3.9 for H*, O* and 
S* plasma respectively. At this grain potential Je(¢eq) = 
Ji(beq). InakT = 1eV hydrogen plasma ¢eg = —2.5 V, and 
a1 wmradius particle will collect approximately 1800 extra 
electrons. Because of the statistical nature of the collection 
currents, charges fluctuate around their equilibrium value 
and the electron and ion fluxes balance only on average. 
The electrons and ions bombarding a grain that is in charge 
equilibrium might recombine on the surface and return to 
the plasma as neutral particles. 

Electrostatic charging can change the physical 
characteristics of the dust particles. For example, the 
electrostatic tension might overcome the tensile strength 
of a grain, resulting in chipping off protruding fingers or 
even full disruption (Griin et al 1984). 

The presence of dust can alter the properties of any 
plasma environment acting as a source or sink for its 
density, momentum and energy. In a low-density region, 
for example, photo- and secondary electron production 
might become an important plasma source. Similarly, 
energetic plasma particles can sputter off atoms and 
molecules from dust grains, changing the density as well 
as the composition of the plasma environment (Johnson 
1990). 

In fact, if the presence of dust significantly alters the 
plasma density the charging equations for a single dust 
particle discussed above are no longer valid. In the case 
of significant plasma depletion (Qng ~ enp, where nq is 
the density of the dust grains with a mono-dispersed size 
distribution for simplicity, Q is the charge calculated for a 
single grain and np is the plasma density) the charge of a 
dust particle in a cloud of other dust particles is reduced. 

Often grains traverse regions where the plasma 
parameters change rapidly and the grains do not accom- 
modate quickly enough to assume their equilibrium po- 
tential. Charged dust grains in PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES 
can rapidly trade energy and angular momentum with the 
electric and magnetic fields due to their time-dependent 
electrostatic charges. Hence, the evolution of the spatial 
distribution of small dust particles is often shaped by the 
plasma environment. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Plasma-Ring/Dust Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Image of Saturn’s rings taken by Voyager 2 showing 
‘spokes’, the dark radial markings. 


The simultaneous integration of the current balance 
and the equation of motion represent the basic approach 
of ‘gravito-electrodynamics’, that considers the motion of 
charged dust grains where electrodynamic forces are just 
as important as gravity. 


Dynamics of charged dust 

The equation of motion of a charged dust grain (of mass 
m and charge Q) using an inertial coordinate system fixed 
to the planet’s center, is 


#= 26% B+ EB) — Kr (4) 
m r 


where r is the grain’s position vector, B is the magnetic 
field, and w equals the gravitational constant times the 
planet’s mass. For an infinite conductivity magnetosphere 
that rigidly co-rotates with the planet with a rotation rate 
of Q, E. = (rx Q) x Bis the co-rotational electric field. On 
the right-hand side there could be other terms describing 
forces due to satellites, higher-order terms in the planet’s 
gravitational field, radiation pressure, and plasma and 
neutral drag forces, for example. 

The magnetic fields of Jupiter (J) and Saturn (S) can 
be approximated as that of a simple dipole located at 
the center with its magnetic moment aligned with the 
rotation axis of the planet (ignoring, for the moment, the 
10° tilt between the rotation axis and the dipole moment of 
Jupiter). In the equatorial plane of a dipole B = Bo(R/ r), 
where By is the magnetic field at the surface and R is 
the radius of the planet (B} = 4.2, BS = 0.21 G and 
Ry =7.1 x 10*, Rs = 6 x 10* km). The magnetic field lines 
pierce the equatorial plane at right angles pointing anti- 
parallel to Q. The resulting co-rotating electric field points 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


radially outward with an amplitude of E. = Eo(R/ r)* 
(E) = 5.8 x 10-5, ES = 2.4 10-6 Vm!). The force acting 
on dust particles associated with the co-rotational electric 
field also depends on their charge, Fg = QE.. The charge 
in turn, as discussed above, is a function of the plasma 
environment, the material properties of the grain and its 
charge. 

For an average density of p = 1 g cm’ the ratio of 
the electrostatic force to gravity 


Fe/ Fo = agya,? (5) 


(a) ~ 6x 10-3, a5 ~ 5x 10-4). In the typical range of —50 < 
gy < +10, for particles with a, >> 1, electrostatic forces 
represent a perturbation only and these grains follow 
approximate Kepler orbits. On the other hand, particles 
with a, « 1 can be dominated by electromagnetic forces 
and gravity becomes a perturbation. Below we discuss 
examples of observations that can be best explained by 
recognizing electromagnetic effects coupling dust and 
plasma in the magnetospheres of Jupiter and Saturn 
(Horanyi 1996) (see also JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE, SATURN: 
MAGNETOSPHERE). 


Jupiter’s ring 

Jupiter’s faint ring, similarly to Saturn’s E-ring, provides 
an opportunity to study forces acting on single dust 
particles, as collisions and self-gravity do not hide single- 
particle dynamics. 

The Jovian ring system has a complex spatial structure 
(see JUPITER: RINGS). The main ring is located at 1.71R; <r < 
1.81R,; with an optical depth t ~ 10-5. The main ring 
consists of ‘large bodies’ in the cm—km size range that are 
responsible for the charged particle absorption detected 
by Pioneer 11 and also a large population of small dust 
particles in the 0.1 < a < 100 wm size range. At its 
inner edge the main ring suddenly turns into a vertically 
extended, toroidal halo with a maximum scale height of 
3000 km. The halo comprises small dust grains with a 
similar size distribution to the dust population of the main 
ring. The size distribution of the dust in the main ring and 
in the halo appears to follow a power-law size distribution 
n(a) da ~ a~’ da with y = 2.5+0.5. The third component 
of the ring system is a much fainter outward extension 
of the main ring that reaches near the orbit of the moon 
Amalthea at 2.54.R). 

The plasma environment of the ring is likely to 
be dominated by photoelectrons escaping from Jupiter’s 
ionosphere. Close to Jupiter (r < 3R,) the expected 
equilibrium potential of the dust particles ¢., > 0 and, due 
to the decreasing contribution of the ionospheric electrons 
at larger distances, d¢.4/dr > 0. This radial dependence of 
$eq can be responsible for much of the observed structure 
of the Jovian ring by causing very fast transport from the 
ring to the atmosphere. 

An alternative model is based on resonances with 
the higher-order terms in Jupiter’s magnetic field. This 
model requires slow transport of the ring material in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Plasma-Ring/Dust Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radius (Ry) 
1.243 14415 16 47 18 +9 20 


Halo Contours 
FOS 20691.27 praca 


10 


o 


Elevation ({0°km) 


‘. 
oO 


80 100 120 140 
Rodius (103km) 
(a) 


Radius {R 
4 a4 2 1. 


1.2 1, 


8 2.0 


(10° km) 


Elevation 


80 90 100 110 120 130 140 
Radius (10° km) 


(0) 


Figure 2. (a) The intensity contours, based on a Voyager image, 
of a halo slice reprojected into a rectangular coordinate frame. 
(b) The calculated contour plots of the normalized brightness 
distribution. The contour levels are (as in a) 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.25 
and 0.5. The model calculation reproduces the optical depth and 
the size and spatial distribution of dust in this region. 


order to induce the observed vertical extent via trapping 
in resonances. The 3D spatial structure predicted by 
these models is quite different. However, the VOYAGER 
observations were not sufficient to restrict 3D models and 
did not allow for the detection of any time-dependent 
behavior. 

In figure 2, the structure seen by Voyager was 
modeled by following a large number of particles 
generated via bombardment of the bigger boulders in the 
main ring and transported towards Jupiter’s atmosphere. 
The ‘tilted’ nature of the Jovian magnetic field results in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


out-of-the-ring-plane forces and torques. Particles moving 
around the equatorial plane will ‘see’ a component of 
the magnetic field, B\, that is parallel to the equatorial 
plane periodically changing its orientation. Particles on 
a prograde (counter-clockwise) trajectory experience a 
Lorentz force pushing them above (below) the ring plane 
as they cross the sectors where B, points toward (away 
from) Jupiter. This effect will force particles onto orbits 
with increasing inclinations explaining the large vertical 
extent of the halo. 


Dust streams from Jupiter 

Jupiter was first recognized as a source of dust particles 
during Ulysses’ encounter with the planet in 1992 as very 
high-speed intermittent streams of very small grains were 
discovered (see SOLAR WIND: ULyssES). The first estimates 
for the mass and velocity of these stream particles were 
uncertain since the detector was not calibrated in the 
suggested size and velocity range. Similar fluxes were 
seen with the identical dust detector on board the GALILEO 
MISSION TO JUPITER. 

The suggested mechanism to eject dust particles from 
within the Jovian magnetosphere recognizes that grains 
can become positively charged to ~+3 V near the moon Io. 
Once a grain charges positively it will be accelerated by 
the outward-pointing co-rotational electric field and leave 
Jupiter’s magnetosphere. Outside the magnetosphere the 
azimuthal component of the solar wind magnetic field 
periodically accelerates the dust particles ejected from 
Jupiter toward and away from the ecliptic plane. This 
can explain the intermittent nature of the observed dust 
streams since both Ulysses and Galileo stayed in the 
ecliptic plane on their approach to Jupiter. 

In fact, the detailed analysis of the propagation of 
the stream of dust particles in the solar wind led to the 
recognition that they must be much smaller in size and 
move much faster than first suggested. The best estimate 
for the size range of the dust grains seen by Ulysses is 
0.005 < a, < 0.015 with velocity v > 100 kms“. 

Positively charged particles escaping from the 
volcanoes of Io are accelerated outward and gain energy, 
W, from the co-rotating electric field 


50Ry 
W= EQdr ~2 x 10-8a, J (6) 
6Ry 


where the lower limit of the integral is the location of Io 
and the upper limit is the approximate size of Jupiter’s 
magnetosphere. Ignoring gravity, the work done by the 
electric field is the kinetic energy of the ejected dust 
particle; its exit velocity at the outer boundary of the 
magnetosphere can be estimated as 


Vexit X = kms”. (7) 
ay 
According to this model, particles in the size range of 
0.005 < a, < 0.015 are expected to stream out of the Jovian 
magnetosphere with velocities in the range of 200 < vVexit < 
600 km s“!, in agreement with the observations. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Plasma-Ring/Dust Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturn’s E-ring 


This faint ring extends from 3 to 8Rs with a sharp peak 
in its optical depth (r ~ 10~°) at the orbit of ENCELADUS 
at r ~ 4Rs. The suggested particle size distribution to 
explain the wavelength dependence of the brightness in 
this region is surprisingly narrow, concentrated around 
1+0.3 um. The vertical extent of the ring has a minimum 
at Enceladus. 

If the gravitational potential due to a central body 
changes as 1/r (Kepler problem) or r? orbits remain closed 
(i.e. the orientation of an eccentric orbit remains fixed in 
space). Any additional forces due to charging or higher- 
order terms in the planet’s gravitational field, for example, 
result in orbital precession. 

At Saturn the angular rate at which the pericenter 
(longitude of closest approach to the planet) of an orbit 
(with semimajor axis ax) of a grain moves due to its electric 
charge is 


by Rs : —1 
53 (= ) deg day (8) 


7 


and the rate of change due to oblateness (equatorial bulge) 


R 2 R 3.5 
ay = Sox: (=) ~ 50 (=) deg day’ (9) 


aK 


where wx is the Kepler angular rate and J is the coefficient 
of the second-order term in the spherical expansion of 
Jupiter’s gravitational field. For charged grains the net 
pericenter motion, wy +a, can be positive, negative or even 
zero depending on the particle’s size, charge and location 
in the magnetosphere. 

Solar radiation pressure causes periodic changes in 
the angular momentum and hence orbital eccentricity of 
a dust particle in orbit around Saturn. The maximum 
eccentricity solar radiation pressure can induce is 


Cmax ~ pe ae (10) 
2(wyg + a) 


where h and f are the specific (i.e. per unit mass) angular 
momentum and acceleration due to radiation pressure. 
In the plasma environment at the E-ring, the 
characteristic surface potential of the dust particles is 
expected to be in the range of —8 < ¢, < —4 resulting ina 
near cancellation of the precession for a, ~ 1 grains. Due 
to continuous bombardment by micrometeorites and the 
E-ring particles themselves, Enceladus is the likely source 
of particles with a range of sizes. The magnetosphere 
selects particles with a, ~ 1 and forces them to follow 
highly eccentric orbits. Smaller or bigger particles will stay 
close to the orbit of their source. The vertical structure of 
this ring is caused by the out-of-the-ring-plane component 
of the radiation pressure. In figure 3 many of the observed 
features are captured using computer simulations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


rg OD yam 


- 


Loser toreetoeritdipiptiig ily 
1 2 a 4 5 6 ? 


reyprerryr rrr pr rrr yt 


ata 
sneer 


rs 
aged 


TrvvyprrrtTyitqtyTy 


Seemed 


potia 
rf) Re 


Figure 3. A scatter diagram of the simulated E-ring shown in 
cylindrical coordinates (r, Z), from randomly sampled orbits of 
0.5 (top), 1(middle) and 1.5 wm (bottom) radius particles. 


Future studies 

Since December 1995 the Galileo spacecraft—now an 
artificial satellite of Jupiter—has been returning in 
situ and remote-sensing data from Jupiter’s dusty 
magnetosphere. New Galileo images reveal much 
more detail about the ring/halo region and indicate 
time-dependent azimuthal asymmetries and large radial 
variations. Azimuthal brightness differences are likely to 
be related to short lifetimes, since Kepler shear would 
swiftly wash them away. Most likely, these features 
are related to the stochastic production of new material 
in the ring via meteoroid bombardment. The Galileo 
data—especially images taken while crossing the ring 
plane—are expected to show in great detail the spatial 
structure and size distribution of dust in the ring/halo 
region. New measurements in the Io plasma torus 
will help understanding of the charging history and 
subsequent energization and ejection of dust streams from 
the magnetosphere. 

The CASSINI MISSION launched in October 1997 will reach 
Saturn in July 2004. Its cameras, plasma and dust detectors 
will monitor the activity of the ‘spokes’ and show in detail 
the spatial and size distribution of dust throughout its ring 
system. These and other missions to comets, the Moon 
or any other object in our solar system will find other 
examples, where observations will only be explained by 
recognizing dust-plasma interactions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnetospheres: Plasma-Ring/Dust Interactions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Grtin E, Morfill G E and Mendis D A 1984 Dust-— 
magnetosphere interactions Planetary Rings 
ed R Greenberg and A Brahic (Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) pp 275-332 

Horanyi M 1996 Charged dust dynamics in the solar 
system Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 383-418 

Johnson R E 1990 Energetic Charged Particle Interactions 
with Atmospheres and Surfaces (Physics and Chemistry 
in Space 19) (Berlin: Springer) 

Mendis D A, Hill J R, Ip W H, Goertz C K, and Griin E 
1984 Electromagnetic processes in the ring system 
of saturn Saturn ed T Gehrels and M S Matthews 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 546-89 

Whipple E C 1981 Potential of surfaces in space Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 44 1197-250 


Mihdly Horanyi 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnification 


When a telescope is used visually, its magnification is the 
ratio of the angular diameter of the image as seen by the eye 
to the angle subtended by the object when viewed directly 
without the aid of the telescope. The magnification, or 
magnifying power, of a telescope (M) is given by the ratio 
of the focal length of the objective or mirror (F,) to the 
focal length of the eyepiece (Fe) (ie. M = Fo/Fe). For 
example, a telescope with a focal length of 2 m (2000 mm), 
used with an eyepiece of focal length 20 mm, would have 
a magnification of 2000/20 = 100. The same telescope 
used with an eyepiece of 10 mm focal length would have 
a magnification of 2000/10 = 200. 

The magnification of a telescope is also equivalent 
to the ratio of the aperture of the collector (objective or 
primary mirror) to the diameter of the exit pupil (the 
image of the collector produced by the eyepiece). If all the 
light collected by the telescope is to enter the observer’s 
eye, the exit pupil must be no larger than the diameter 
of the dark-adapted eye (about 0.007 m). To achieve this, 
with a telescope of aperture D (meters), the magnification 
should be at least D/0.007 ~ 140D (i.e. about 140 for a 
telescope of 1 m aperture, or about 14 for a telescope of 
0.1 m aperture). The maximum practicable magnification 
is limited by factors such as image contrast (the higher 
the magnification, the fainter the image) and by ‘seeing’ 
conditions (turbulence in the Earth’s atmosphere causes 
sources to twinkle, shimmer and shake; this affects the 
quality of the image). For small and moderate-sized 
telescopes an approximate guide to the highest practicable 
magnification that is likely to give usable images is about 
20 per centimeter of aperture (e.g. about 200 for a telescope 
of 10 cm aperture). In practice, it is seldom worthwhile to 
use magnifications greater than 200-300. 


See also: aperture, Barlow lens, eyepiece, exit pupil, focal 
length, objective lens, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric 
Systems 


More than any other aspects of astronomy, the subjects 
of magnitude scales and photometric systems are 
encumbered by history. The intensity of light from 
stars and other cosmic objects is usually expressed in 
magnitudes, an inverse logarithmic scale that confuses 
physicists who work in SI units, but that is practical for 
astronomers. The apparent magnitude of an object is a 
measure of the intensity of radiation within a particular 
wavelength interval received from that object at the Earth. 
The absolute magnitude is the magnitude that the object 
would have were it situated at a distance of 10 parsecs 
(pe, about 32.6 light-years (ly)) from the Sun. The relation 
between apparent magnitude m and absolute magnitude 
M ism—M = 5logd-—5, where the distance d is in parsecs. 

The total energy, integrated over all wavelengths, 
received at the Earth from an object is also expressed 
as a magnitude, the bolometric magnitude. The 
difference between the bolometric magnitude My 1, and 
the magnitude ma in bandpass A is called the bolometric 
correction BC,. BC without a qualifier normally refers to 
the correction to the visual magnitude; BC or BCy. The 
zero point of the bolometric magnitude scale is usually 
set by adopting Mp.\(Sun) = 4.75, which implies BCgy, = 
—0.07. 

Early astronomers compared star with star, a 
procedure that still retains great benefits. The surface 
temperatures of common stars range from 30000 K down 
to 3000 K, and their apparent brightnesses cover a range of 
almost a factor of 10'°, from the sky background upwards 
(this range does not include the Sun). The majority of 
stars are constant in total light output and in temperature 
and as no laboratory lamps have energy distributions 
very similar to those observed in stars it is natural that 
astronomers seek to use the standard candles in the sky. 
Photometric systems represent attempts to define standard 
bandpasses and sets of standard sources, measured with 
these bandpasses, that are well distributed about the whole 
sky. Different photometric systems measure different 
wavelength bands. All photometric systems enable the 
measurement of relative fluxes, from which can be inferred 
particular properties (such as temperature) of the emitting 
object, but different systems claim to doit more precisely or 
more efficiently than other systems. Some of the systems 
were developed and modified by different astronomers 
over many years and the literature contains confusing 
versions and calibrations. Some people have despaired 
that it is too confusing and have suggested that we should 
start again with a well-defined ultimate system, but recent 
analysis has shown that modern versions of the existing 
photometric systems can be placed on a firm quantitative 
basis and that more care with passband matching will 
ensure that precise and astrophysically valid data can be 
derived from existing, although imperfect, systems. 

Several recent large-scale astronomical projects are 
providing significant new magnitudes for large numbers 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of a wide range of astronomical objects. Firstly, the 
gravitational lensing projects, such as MACHO, EROS, 
OGLE and AGAPE, are identifying a range of variable 
stars and measuring light curves in the GALACTIC BULGE 
and the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS; secondly, wide-field survey 
projects, such as the SLOAN DIGITALSKY SURVEY, are measuring 
the magnitudes of all objects above a certain brightness 
in the northern sky. Finally, the remarkable astrometric 
satellite HIPPARCOS measured extremely precise magnitudes 
for more than 118000 stars, mostly brighter than 9th 
magnitude, over the whole sky and from outside the 
atmosphere. These projects are indicative of the quality 
and quantity of data that are becoming available and 
that will be a great challenge for standard magnitude 
calibrations. 


The magnitude scale of Hipparchus; the intensity 
scale of Pogson 

In the earliest recorded star catalog, HIPPARCHUS (2nd 
century BC) divided the stars in the sky into six groups. 
Twenty of the brightest stars that could be seen were 
called first-magnitude stars and those at the limit of 
visibility were called sixth-magnitude stars. Intermediate- 
brightness stars were put in intermediate magnitude 
classes. In the 18th century, astronomers were using 
telescopes and had begun to measure the light intensities 
of stars by closing down the telescope aperture until 
the image of the star under study just disappeared (the 
disappearance aperture). By taking the ratio of the 
squares of the disappearance apertures of two different 
stars, the relative intensity of the stars’ light could be 
calculated. This was the beginning of astronomical 
visual photometry. Norman R Pogson (in 1856) at 
the Radcliffe Observatory compared his measurements 
of stellar brightness with stellar magnitudes given in 
contemporary star catalogs (such as those of Stephen 
Groombridge and the zone observations of Friedrich 
Argelander and Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel) and suggested 
the simple relationship m = 5loga + 9.2 to relate the 
magnitude m of a star and the disappearance aperture 
a (in inches). This relation implies a coefficient of 2.5 
for the relation between magnitude and the logarithm 
of the intensity as J] « a’. Around that time, Gustav 
Theodor Fechner and Wilhelm Edward Weber (1859) were 
investigating the response of the eye to light and proposed 
the following psychophysical law: m — mg = slog//Io, 
where m is a perceived brightness and the constant s 
defines the scale. Pogson’s work implied a scale of —2.50 
for astronomical visual (eye) photometry, and we thereby 
have the basis for the inverse logarithmic scale. There was 
continuing disagreement concerning the adoption of this 
exact scale of 2.5 and it was not until almost 30 yr later, 
after the Harvard photometry results were published in 
1884, that adoption was ensured. The constant mo, which 
defines the zero point, has undergone much refinement 
since Pogson’s estimate and was officially set by the 
specified visual magnitudes of stars in the ‘north polar 
sequence’. The early photometry catalogs are based on 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


this sequence but the magnitude scale today is established 
by the contemporary whole-sky photometric standard star 
catalogs. 


New magnitudes from new detectors 

Technological advances over the last 100 yr have 
provided a series of light detectors to supplement the 
eye. These detectors, in general, respond differently 
to light of different wavelengths from the eye; that is, 
they are more sensitive to blue light or to red light 
than is the eye. The advent of photography in the 
late 19th century revolutionized astronomy, as did the 
introduction of photomultiplier tubes with their light- 
sensitive photocathodes in the mid-20th century and 
sensors such as silicon charge-coupled devices (CCDs) and 
infrared detectors over the last 20 yr. Light intensities, or 
magnitudes, measured with these new detectors naturally 
differ from the visual magnitudes and depend on the 
color of the star. Initially, there was only the difference 
between visual magnitudes and ‘blue’ photographic 
magnitudes to be considered, but several factors resulted 
in a proliferation of different passbands and photometric 
systems: the extension of photographic and photocathode 
sensitivities to a wider wavelength range, the use of 
colored glass filters and interference filters to sample the 
starlight in narrower bands within the total wavelength 
sensitivity range of the detectors and, more recently, the 
requirements of survey instruments to provide maximum 
sensitivity for the detection of faint objects. 


Rationale for multicolor photometry 

Much photometry of astronomical objects is carried 
out in order to measure the apparent total brightness 
of objects and their relative brightnesses at different 
wavelengths, that is, their energy distributions. It is 
possible to characterize the temperatures of most objects 
from the overall shapes of their energy distributions. It 
is also possible to infer the metal content of stars from 
depressions in their energy distributions at particular 
wavelengths. These depressions (absorption lines) are 
due to the absorption of flux, principally by Fe and Ti 
(which have very rich line spectra), Ca, Mg and the 
molecules CN and CH (which have very strong lines in 
the blue-violet region of cool stars). There are many 
other molecular absorption bands (such as TiO, CO and 
H20) that depress the continuum in very cool stars; such 
molecular features are also used to provide information 
on the temperature, chemical composition and luminosity. 
The energy distributions of galaxies and star clusters can 
be analyzed to extract the relative numbers of different 
kinds of stars making up these composite objects. REDSHIFTS 
of very distant galaxies and quasi-stellar objects can also 
be measured from the positions of depressions or peaks in 
their energy distributions. These are called photometric 
redshifts and have been used very successfully with data 
from the Hubble Space Telescope and the Sloan Digital Sky 
Survey. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Multicolor photometry is best thought of as very- 
low-dispersion spectroscopy. The entire high-resolution 
spectrum of a star or other cosmic object contains a 
large amount of information, but, when dealing with 
extremely faint objects or with large numbers of objects, 
it is a great advantage to measure a small number 
of wavelength bands in as short a time as possible. 
Such a minimal technique is invaluable if it enables the 
derivation of many of the same parameters obtainable 
from a complete (and very redundant) description of 
the spectrum. A great deal of effort therefore has gone 
into accurately measuring and calibrating colors and 
depressions in terms of temperatures, metal abundances 
and other parameters, and investigating which of 
competing minimal descriptions of a star’s spectrum is 
the most accurate or most practical. 

Finally, GRAVITATIONAL LENSING results in changes in 
the brightness of the object independently of the color 
measured. Most intrinsically variable stars, however, have 
different amplitudes in red and blue light. Consequently, 
gravitational MICROLENSING surveys are efficiently carried 
out by splitting the light between a blue and a red channel 
for simultaneous direct comparison. Equal-amplitude 
variations in blue and red channels imply a lensing event, 
not a variable star. 


Photometric systems: natural and standard 

Alight detector, a telescope, a set of filters and a method of 
correcting for atmospheric extinction make up a natural 
photometric system. Each observer therefore has their 
own natural system. The standard system is indirectly 
defined by a list of standard magnitudes and colors that 
have been measured for a set of typical stars, using the 
natural system of the originator. These are often called 
the primary standards. Later lists comprising more stars 
and fainter stars but based on the primary standards 
are called secondary standards. However, in the case 
of all photometric systems, recently published secondary 
standards effectively redefine the standard system because 
they tend to be more accurately measured than the primary 
lists and to represent contemporary detectors, filters and 
practice. 

The term ‘color’ is an abbreviation for color index, 
which is the difference between the apparent magnitudes 
in two different spectral regions. Photometry results have 
generally been published as a series of colors and a single 
magnitude. The zero points of many color systems are set 
so that a Lyrae (Vega) has zero colors. In the southern 
hemisphere (where Vega is inaccessible) and often also 
in the north, the zero point is set by requiring that an 
ensemble of unreddened AO stars have colors of zero 
magnitude. (See also STELLAR PHOTOMETRY.) 


The original standard systems 

The most influential of the early works of photoelectric 
photometry were the broadband Johnson UBVRI and Kron 
RI systems, which covered the wavelength region between 
310 and 900 nm (3100 and 9000 A). The natural systems of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Harold L Johnson and of Gerald E Kron and coworkers 
served as ‘standard’ systems for many other users who 
attempted with varying success (owing to differences in 
detectors, filters, telescopes and techniques) to duplicate 
the originators’ natural systems. That is, using their own 
detectors and filters, astronomers measured stars from 
the Johnson and Kron lists and linearly transformed their 
natural magnitudes and colors to be the same as the 
Johnson and Kron colors and magnitudes. They then 
applied those same linear coefficients to transform the 
colors and magnitudes of unknown stars onto the Johnson 
or Kron system. The original blue and yellow filters 
were chosen by Johnson from readily available glasses 
so that when used with the 1P21 photomultiplier tube 
they approximated the ordinary blue (B) photographic 
response (~436 nm) and the visual (V) response (~545 nm). 
A more violet magnitude U (~367 nm), which is useful 
for very hot stars, was obtained by using a common 
violet glass. In retrospect, these choices should have 
been based more on astrophysics and less on glass 
availability, but so much work has been done in this UBV 
system that the weight of history ensured its continuation. 
Intercomparison of much of the published broadband 
photometry (in particular, photometry carried out more 
than 15 yr ago) often shows scatter of more than 0.03 
magnitudes, but more recent photometry obtained using 
better equipment, better matched natural systems and 
better secondary standard stars agrees to better than 0.01 
magnitude, or 1%. 

The 1P21 phototube was a remarkable invention and 
its high blue sensitivity dominated the development of 
photometric systems for over 30 yr. There were red- 
sensitive devices available but observations were made 
only for bright stars because for many years these devices 
were much less sensitive, noisier and less reliable than 
the 1P21. In the mid-1970s new detector materials 
became available; in particular, the gallium arsenide 
and multialkali phototubes, which provided high (>15% 
quantum efficiency) sensitivity between 300 and 860 
nm, and the infrared-sensitive InSb (indium antimonide) 
photodiodes together with low-noise preamplifiers, which 
revolutionized photometry between 1000 and 4000 nm. 
Both developments enabled photometry to be done on 
faint stars that had hitherto been the sole province of the 
blue-sensitive detectors. Photometry done with the new 
red-sensitive tubes was placed on either the Kron or the 
Johnson standard system, again with mixed success, and 
it has only been in the last 10 yr that AW J Cousins’ RI ‘near- 
natural’ standard system (based on the Kron system) has 
gained widespread acceptance. Ithas also been very useful 
that the Cousins system’s R (~638 nm) and I (~797 nm) 
bands are similar to the contemporary photographic R and 
I bands. 

Johnson also introduced the infrared alphabetic 
JKLMN (approximately 1.22, 2.19, 3.45, 4.75 and 10.4 4m) 
system in the mid-1960s, using PbS (lead sulfide) 
detectors and bolometers. The water vapor in the 
Earth’s atmosphere defines a series of wavelength bands 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(windows) through which observations from the ground 
can be made; Johnson used interference filters (and, 
unfortunately, the atmospheric H2O absorption bands) to 
define what he called the J, K, L, M and N bands. Ian 
S Glass, in his early observations with an InSb detector, 
used the additional band H (~1.63 4m), between I and 
K, and in his choice of filters attempted to match the other 
Johnson bands. All infrared observers have proceeded ina 
similar fashion and have concentrated mainly on copying 
the Johnson K magnitude scale. Identical detectors 
have been used but a range of slightly different filters 
and observatory altitudes have produced subtly different 
systems. The publication of sufficient numbers of stars 
in common from the different natural systems has helped 
delineate the differences, and transformations between the 
systems are now quite reliable. 


Passbands or response functions 

The most important specifications of a photometric system 
are the passbands or response functions of its magnitudes. 
For a variety of reasons, technical and historical, the 
passbands of the original broadband photometric systems 
have not been known with certainty and this has inhibited 
close matching of natural systems and has prevented 
computation of accurate synthetic colors from theoretical 
spectra. The recent availability of spectrophotometry 
for many stars combined with the increased precision 
of second-generation photometric catalogs has, however, 
enabled the passbands to be derived indirectly by 
computing synthetic colors from spectrophotometry of 
stars with well-defined standard colors and adjusting the 
passbands until the computed and standard catalog colors 
agree. This technique has enabled the passbands of the 
major systems to be well defined, which in turn has 
permitted filters to be designed that still will result in good 
passband matches with a variety of detectors. In addition, 
when it is not possible to match passbands exactly with 
some detectors, such as photographic plates, it is possible 
to predict accurately the differences between photographic 
and photoelectric magnitudes by computing the synthetic 
magnitudes using the different passbands. 

In figure 1 the normalized passbands of the Johnson- 
Cousins UBVRI system are shown plus an added Z band 
for CCD observations. The F, (flux per unit frequency 
interval) spectrum of an AO star is shown for orientation. 
Table 1 lists the effective wavelengths A, the approximate 
bandwidth Ai, which is the full width at half-maximum 
of the passband, and the absolute calibration of the 
UBVRIJHKL system, based on the flux of Vega, for a zero- 
magnitude AO star. Note that the effective wavelengths of 
the broad bands change with the color of the objects. The 
effective wavelengths listed are for an AO star. 


Other photometric systems 

Real or perceived drawbacks in existing photometric 
systems (the UBV system in particular) stimulated the 
design of other photometric systems better suited for 
measuring temperatures, metal-line blanketing, effective 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Johnson—Cousins—Glass UBVRIJHKLM system. 


U B Vv R I J H K L M 
ett (nm) 367 436 545 638 797 1220 1630 2190 3450 4750 
AA (nm) 66 94 85 160 149 213 307 39 472 460 
F, (V =0) 10-8" Wem-* Hz!) 1790 4063 33636.-S 3064. Ss 2416 »=:1589 += 1020 640 285 154 


Table 2. Effective wavelengths (nm) and FWHM bandpasses (nm) for selected photoelectric systems. 


eff Ax Neff Ax eft Ax 
Geneva U 350 47 WalravenW 323.3 15.4 Washington C 391 110 
B 424 76 U- 361.6 = 22.8 M 509 105 
By 402 38 L 383.5 21.9 Ti 633 80 
By 448 41 B 427.7 49.0 Tz 805 150 
Vv 551-67 VV =540.6 = 70.3 
V1 541 44 
G 578 47 
Stromgren u 349 30 DDO35 349.0 38.3 Thuan-Gunnu 353 40 
v 411 19 38 381.5 33.0 v 398 40 
b 467 18 41 416.6 8.3 g 493 70 
y 547-23 42 425.7 7.3 r 655 90 
By 489 15 45 451.7 7.6 
Bn 486 3 48 488.6 18.6 


1.00 7 


0.80 


ah 


0.60 


oe \ ain | \{~ 


\ a 

| mn | \N\ 

| | \ 
ANA 


800 


Normalized response 


\ 
— 


0.20 


se en ee (ea 


oe ee 


oii 


900 ~=-1000 


0.00 
300 700 
ee nm 


Figure 1. The passbands of the standard UBVRI system. 


gravity and interstellar reddening. Some of these systems 
used broad bands comparable with the UBVRI system, 
while others used narrower bands defined by different 
mixes of glass filters or interference filters. Effective 
wavelengths and other specifications of some of the better- 
known systems are given in table 2 and are discussed 
below. 


Geneva and Walraven systems 

Difficulties with matching natural systems have been 
eliminated by the strategy employed by proponents of the 
Geneva (UBB, B,VV;G) and Walraven (VBLUW) systems. 
The latter takes its name from Th and J H Walraven. These 
multiband photometric systems are supervised by small 
groups who control the instrumentation and supervise 
the data reduction and calibration. The colors have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


been well calibrated in terms of gravity, temperature and 
abundance. Such closed systems have excellent precision 
but not necessarily greater than that possible from the open 
Cousins UBVRI system with careful bandpass matching. 


Washington system 

This CMT,T2 system was devised to use the wideband 
sensitivity of the extended-red detectors, to improve the 
sensitivity of blue—violet colors to metallicity and gather 
more violet light in cool stars and to try to separate the 
effects of CN from other metal lines. We have found that 
the violet C band is a very useful metallicity indicator for 
faint K giants but that the M band contains little more 
information than does V; T; and T, have no advantages 
over R and I. The minimal CVI system is very useful for 
metal-weak K stars. 


Stromgren four-color system 

The uvby system was devised by Bengt Strémgren to 
measure better the Balmer discontinuity, the metallicity 
and the temperature of A, B and F stars. The bands 
are essentially separate unlike the UBV bands, which 
overlap. The u band is completely below the Balmer 
jump; v measures the flux near 400 nm, a region with 
much absorption due to metal hnes; b is centered near 
460 nm and is affected much less than B by metal-line 
blanketing; y is essentially a narrower V band. The u filter 
is colored glass, the others are interference filters. Two 
special indices are derived: m, = (v — b) — (b — y), which 
measures metallicity, and c; = (u — v) — (v — y), which 
measures the Balmer discontinuity. The index b — y, like 
B — V,is used primarily as a temperature indicator. The 
system is capable of very high precision but, unfortunately, 
errors in the width of v filters manufactured some years 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ago resulted in nonstandard filters being supplied to many 
users. Since then, published photometry has exhibited 
some systematic differences in c; and m1, and there are 
difficulties in computing these colors from theoretical 
spectra, particularly for cool stars. Recent standard 
catalogs of new and more homogeneous observations are 
of high precision and internal consistency and it should 
now be possible to define better the v band. Two additional 
interference filters (15 and 3 nm wide) centered on the Hf 
line are often used together with the four colors. The 
H8 index is used to derive luminosities in B stars and 
reddening in F and G stars. The Stro6mgren system was 
the first photometric system devised to measure specific 
stellar features. Because of the short-wavelength baseline 
of its four color filters, 1% photometry at least is required 
to utilize the system’s advantages over the UBVRI system. 


DDO (35, 38, 41, 42, 45, 48) system 

This system (also built around the sensitivity of the 1P21 
photomultiplier) was designed for the analysis of G and K 
dwarfs and giants. The 35 filter is the u filter of the four- 
color system; the 38 filter is also a glass filter and better 
measures metal blanketing than the v filter, being further to 
the violet and wider; 41 measures the CN band; 42, 45 and 
48 are continuum filters. The color 35-38 (the 3538 index) 
measures the Balmer jump, 3842 measures the metallicity 
and 4245 and 4548 are used for gravity and temperature 
measurements. By restricting the measurements to the 
blue spectral region, complicated corrections for spectral 
line blanketing are necessary to derive temperatures and 
gravities. Good results, especially for faint K dwarfs, can 
be obtained by using V — J or R — J as the temperature 
indicator. Because of the narrow bandwidth of some of the 
filters, the DDO (David Dunlap Observatory) system has 
been mainly restricted to relatively bright stars. 


Thuan—Gunn system 

The uvgr system of Trinh Xuan Thuan and James E Gunn 
was devised in the mid-1970s from the UBVR system for 
use with an S20 photocathode detector and in order to 
avoid the strong mercury emission lines from city lights 
and [O J] lines in the night sky. The g and r bands are of 
similar width to the V and R bands whereas the u and v 
bands are about half the width of the U and B bands. The 
g—r color has a longer baseline than V — R but transforms 
well. 


Photographic systems 

Originally photographic emulsions were only sensitive 
to light blueward of 490 nm. These were the O 
emulsions. Different chemical sensitizing shifted the red 
sensitivity cutoff to longer wavelengths: G 580 nm, D 
650 nm, F 700 nm and N 880 nm, approximately. By 
using blue-cutoff glass filters and the red cutoff of the 
emulsions, various photographic passbands were made. 
Photographic U used a violet filter for both blue and red 
cutoffs. Attempts were made to convert the photographic 
colors onto the photoelectric UBVR system but these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


were not often very accurate because of limitations in 
iris photometry and poor matches of the bandpasses. In 
recent years, astronomical photography has undergone 
a renaissance caused, first, by the development of 
new fine-grain emulsions (Kodak I]aJ, IaF and more 
recently TechPan) and the utilization of methods of 
greatly increasing the sensitivities of the J, F and TechPan 
emulsions (using hydrogen gas) and of the N emulsions 
(using silver nitrate solution) and, second, by the use 
of new scanning microdensitometers and better methods 
of intensity calibration. Averages of several wide-field 
Schmidt camera plates or higher scale prime-focus plates 
can now produce photometry to a few per cent to very faint 
limits. Theoretical investigation of bandpasses enables 
better filter design for bandpass matching or predicts 
the relevant transformations and systematic differences 
between photoelectric and photographic photometry. 
Photographic photometry these days is usually restricted 
to attempted matches to the Johnson U and B or the 
Thuan-Gunn g systems using IIIaJ plates, to Cousins R 
or Thuan-—Gunn r using II]aF plates, and to Cousins I 
using IVN plates. Direct photographic calibration from 
step wedges is usually supplemented by direct magnitude 
measurements of stars in each field using a CCD array. 


CCD photometric systems 
The high quantum efficiency of CCDs and their inherent 
linearity have made them the detectors of choice in recent 
years for most areas of photometry. Unfortunately, the 
advantages of the CCDs were initially not fully attained 
because some users paid insufficient care to define their 
passbands and to standardizing their photometry. This 
resulted in internally precise results but an inability to 
relate these results with much confidence to the standard 
system data or to theoretically derived magnitudes and 
colors. Astronomers now realize the importance of 
matching their CCD passbands to standard passbands or 
deriving accurate passbands for their natural systems to 
enable them to be calibrated using synthetic photometry. 
The standard BVRI system can easily be realized with 
thinned CCDs and colored glass filters but the U system 
is more problematical owing to the lower UV response of 
many CCDs. The Z band, between I and J, is also now 
often added to CCD UBVRI-based systems. 


The HST WFPC2 photometric system 

The Wide Field Planetary Camera (WFPC2) on the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE has a suite of interference filters that cover 
both the space UV and the optical spectrum. Although 
not identical to the well-established UBVRI and uvby 
systems, there are passbands that are quite similar. A 
lot of attention has been given to calibrating the WFPC2 
system both from actual ground-based observations where 
possible and from synthetic photometry so that excellent 
transformations are possible to the older standard systems 
and reliable temperature calibrations can be made from 
model atmosphere fluxes. Figure 2 shows some of the 
WFPC2 bandpasses. Table 3 lists effective wavelengths 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 3. Effective wavelengths (nm) and FWHM bandpasses (nm) for CCD-based systems. 


eft Aetp AA ett Aeft AA hett Aese AA 
HST 336 334 339 47 HIPBr 421 439 70 SDSS u’ 356 360 64 
439 430 443 71 Vr 526 542 100 g’ 475 500 135 
450 451 477 107 Hp 517 595 230 r’ 620 632 137 
555 532 559 147 i 761 772 154 
675 667 675 127 UBVB 436 464 94 z! 907 907 147 
814 788 805 147 V 545 558 85 EROS BE1 485 506 109 
R 641 666 160 RE1 657 679 191 
MACHOB 519 543 144 I 791 799 143 BE2 539 575 190 
R 682 700 178 Z 909 906 96 RE2 767 796 260 
1.00 >a eT TT 77 aie EL T\ bb i lbsbal 1.00 fF 
L | Ie *\ i { a L J 
Lf | | J L J 
0.80 | | \ 4 0.80 |- ca 
o i | | \ o 
z L} | \ M\ : Z i : 
Beaty \| || : eel ; 
8 060 | \ bs 4 & 0.60 |- 4 
aS) H | \ | | 7 a) T 7 
8 | /\ | a 8 L 1 
0.40 [7 | | | | N 2 0.40 =] 
Zz Ek | | : Z é i 
0.207 \f| | | | | | + 0.20 |- FJ 
bP ov aa ib 4 | : F 
0.00 ee Ad ! | ! \ encase | ef ep] | ! \ phe | 0.00 i 
300 400 500 600 700 800 900 400 500 600 700 800 


Wavelength nm 


Figure 2. Some of the passbands of the HST photometric system. 


(for an AO and MO star) and FWHM of some of the HST 
passbands and those of the other CCD systems discussed 
below. 


The Hipparcos and Tycho photometric systems 


The ESA Astrometric Satellite, Hipparcos, used three 
independent photometric detectors. The main Hipparcos 
passband (H,) corresponded primarily to the spectral 
response of the 520 photocathode of the image dissector 
scanner combined with the transmission of the optics. 
The Tycho photometric data were derived from the star 
trackers and measured magnitudes in Br and Vr, with 
passbands somewhat similar to standard B and V. Figure 3 
shows the Hipparcos and Tycho passbands in relation 
to the standard BVR passbands. The large width of the 
H, passband results in significant systematic differences 
between the H, magnitudes and standard V magnitudes, 
depending on reddening, metallicity and luminosity. 
Nevertheless, the extremely high precision H, magnitudes 
(~0.0015) and the lower but still good precision (~0.012) 
for the Tycho V7 magnitudes combined with the whole-sky 
coverage make these catalogs an invaluable resource, not 
only for measurements of individual stars, but for enabling 
intercomparisons to be made between and within ground- 
based photometric systems. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Wavelength nm 


Figure 3. The Hipparcos passbands in comparison with the 
standard BVR passbands. Hp is shown by the thickest line, Br 
and V7 are shown by the medium thick lines and BVR are 
shown by the thin lines. 


100 PoagT TTT TTI Fy alc Ge alsa! met 
Lf | | aa [ [ | 
E | \ | ( || | 4 
g 020 L [ \| a 
S ls allt oe | 1 | 4 
faly L | | { i |) a 
$060) | / | | I 4 
e cl lf | | I i 
if if 
= 0.40 7 | | | || 
ee EL | | | [| | 
° L| || {| | a 
a F i I | | i] 
0.20 FF \ | || | | a 
Hi | I\ || / | 7 
H | a | | } | 4 
Perry dered oe cere net Cen te ee ele ee 
300 400 500 600 700 800 900 ~=1000 


Wavelength nm 


Figure 4. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey passbands. 


The Sloan Digital Sky Survey photometric system 
This photometric system comprises five color bands (u’, 
g’, 1’, i’ and z’) that divide the entire CCD sensitivity range 
between the atmospheric UV cutoff near 300 nm and the 
CCD cutoff near 1100 nm. The passbands, related to those 
of the Thuan—Gunn system, and shown in figure 4, are 
essentially nonoverlapping and most are wider than those 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Magnitude Scales and Photometric Systems 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the UBVRI system, ensuring high efficiency for faint 
object detection. For ease of transformation into other 
systems or duplication of the system by others, it would 
have been better were the bands to have overlapped more 
with a less rectangular profile but the system itself will be 
very well defined by observations made with a duplicate 
detector and filters on a separate telescope. Unlike most 
other photometric systems, the zero points of the SDSS 
system have been placed on the spectrophotometric AB 
magnitude system defined by the absolute fluxes of four 
F subdwarfs. The passbands are essentially filter defined 
and in general have blue edges defined by a colored glass 
and red edges by a short-pass interference coating (see 
FILTERS). 


Gravitational lensing projects 

The MACHO photometric system 

The MACHO project for monitoring gravitational mi- 
crolensing events utilizes simultaneous CCD imaging in 
two passbands by sharing the light between two cameras 
using a dichroic beam splitter. The blue and red bands are 
further limited using an interference filter on the red side 
and the sensitivity cutoff of the thick CCDs on the blue 
side. The blue band approximates a broad blue-shifted V 
band while the red band approximates the R band. Good 
transformations are possible to the VR system and reliable 
calibrations are possible using synthetic photometry. As 
well as detecting many microlensing events, the MACHO 
project has provided unique and invaluable data on vari- 
able stars in the Magellanic Clouds and the Galactic Bulge. 


The EROS photometric system 

The EROS1 observations were taken consecutively 
through two broadband filters Bg and Rg that produced 
respectively passbands midway between B and V and 
R and I. Two different sets of filters were used during 
the course of the observations and the Bg — Rg colors 
were transformed into V-I. EROS2, like MACHO, has 
two cameras and the light is divided using a dichroic 
beamsplitter. The division is made at a redder wavelength 
(~650 nm) than for the EROS1 system and the EROS2 blue 
band more resembles the Hipparcos passband. 


Michael Bessell 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maidanak Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maidanak Observatory 


Located on Mount Maidanak in Uzbekistan. The most 
important instrument is a 1.5 m telescope designed for 
high-resolution imaging. 

Until 1991, several republics of the former Soviet 
Union had their observatories at Maidanak. The Moscow 
Sternberg Astronomical Institute was the most powerful 
co-owner of Mount Maidanak. 

After the fall of the USSR, the facility became the 
property of the Ulugh Beg Astronomical Institute in 
Tashkent. Economic difficulties have not allowed the 
observatory to be fully used and maintained. However, 
astronomers from the Sternberg Astronomical Institute 
(Moscow), the Astronomical Observatory of Kharkov 
University (Ukraine), and the Ulugh Astronomical 
Institute continue to use Maidanak Observatory and the 
1.5 m telescope. 

Grants from the Maidanak Foundation in Scandinavia 
are the main source of funds. These permit astronomers 
to cover their travel expenses, to make observations and 
to maintain the instruments. 

For further information see 
http://www.maidanak.org/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Major Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Major Planets 


A collective term for the largest planetary bodies in the 
solar system: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Pluto, included in this 
category since its discovery in 1930, was found in the 1970s 
and 1980s to be smaller and less massive than seven of 
the solar system’s planetary satellites, and just over twice 
the size of the largest asteroid, Ceres. In the 1980s and 
1990s, calls for Pluto’s demotion from major planet status 
led to a number of attempts to define ‘major planet’ more 
closely. Arbitrary size limits (diameters of 1000 km or 
2000 km, excluding Ceres but including Pluto) or mass 
limits (similarly set so as to exclude Ceres but include 
Pluto) have been proposed. An alternative suggestion is 
that a body should be called a major planet if it is large 
enough for its own gravity to have overcome the structural 
strength of its material and made it roughly spherical (this 
definition would admit not only Pluto and Ceres, but also 
other large asteroids). Another criterion defines a major 
planet as a body whose gravitational influence extends 
over a particular range of distance from the Sun. By most 
versions of this definition, both Ceres and Pluto are denied 
major planet status. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maksutov Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maksutov Telescope 


A modification of the Schmidt telescope devised in 
the early 1940s by D D Maksutov, in Moscow and, 
independently, by A A Bouwers, in Holland. The 
Maksutov uses a thin concave meniscus lens, located 
at the front of the telescope tube, to compensate for 
the spherical aberration (an optical defect) that would 
otherwise be introduced by its concave spherical primary 
mirror. Because the lens is thin, it has negligible chromatic 
aberration. The convex side of the meniscus lens, which 
itself has a spherical curve, faces towards the primary 
mirror. Because its corrector lens can be placed closer to 
the focus than that of a conventional Schmidt, a Maksutov 
is shorter and more compact than a Schmidt is. Like 
the Schmidt, the Maksutov has a low focal ratio and a 
wide field of view, which makes it particularly useful as a 
photographic survey instrument. 

As with the Schmidt, the Maksutov has a curved focal 
plane, which lies inside the instrument. Consequently, 
in its original form, it can be used only for photography 
and cannot be used for visual observations. It can be 
adapted for visual observation by introducing a small 
secondary mirror that reflects light to a focus at the side 
of the tube (Matsutov—Newtonian) or, through a hole in 
the primary mirror, to a focus at the rear of the tube 
(Maksutov—Cassegrain). In the Maksutov—Cassegrain 
design, the secondary mirror can be figured as a small 
central reflective surface on the rear of the meniscus lens. 


See also: Cassegrain telescope, field of view, focal ratio, 
focus, mirror, Newtonian telescope, Schmidt telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maksutov, Dmitri Dmitievich (1896-1964) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maksutov, Dmitri Dmitievich 
(1896-1964) 


Soviet optician and telescope maker. After fighting in 
the Russian Revolution and the First World War, he 
worked on astronomical optics at Odessa, Moscow and 
Pulkovo, and invented the Maksutov telescope. The design 
is a development of the Schmidt telescope, replacing the 
aspheric lens with a negative meniscus lens with spherical 
surfaces which are easier to make. The telescope tube is 
also more compact, with consequential financial savings. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Malin, David (20th century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Malin, David (20th century) 


Lancashire-born astrophotographer, used the Anglo- 
Australian Telescope and the UK Schmidt Telescope to 
create spectacular, beautiful and educative photographs 
of celestial objects, based on techniques developed to 
suit the fine-grain, sensitive, high-information content 
photographic material used for scientific pictures. His 
technique of unsharp masking filters out the diffuse 
content of the picture (to make it possible to see delicate 
detail within bright areas of nebulae and galaxies). His 
implementation of JAMES CLERK MAXWELL’s technique of 
three-color addition combines three separate black and 
white pictures obtained through different colored filters 
(to give true color pictures revealing the broad spectral 
differences in the features and thus the astrophysical 
interest). Influential best-selling author and dynamic 
lecturer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Malmquist Bias and Completeness Limits 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Malmquist Bias and Completeness 
Limits 
Many problems in observational astronomy concern a par- 
ticular statistical distribution function of some quantity 
such as the number of objects with some attribute, x. Ex- 
amples of x would include parallax, apparent magnitude, 
absolute magnitude, linear separation of binary stars, stel- 
lar mass, galaxy mass, x-ray luminosity, the occurrence fre- 
quency of novae and supernovae, distances to stars from 
measured parallaxes, Cepheid distances to galaxies, etc, all 
when the relevant data are sampled in some specified way. 
The precepts used in the sampling, such as limits on appar- 
ent magnitudes, or the way the parallax stars were chosen, 
or the period limits that were put on the observed Cepheid 
period—luminosity relations usually determine the form of 
the observed frequency distribution and how it differs from 
the true, unbiased, distribution. The problem of recover- 
ing the true underlying distribution from the various dif- 
ferent observed distributions is a fundamental subject of 
statistical astronomy. 

To set a basis for the discussion of observational 
selection bias, we mention two of the many examples that 
illustrate the problem: 


(a) The Yale Bright Star Catalog in its latest edition (the 
fourth) lists much information on the 9110 stars 
brighter than V = 6.5 apparent magnitude over the 
sky. The distribution of absolute magnitudes of the 
entries is highly biased toward giant and supergiant 
stars; the limit of V = 6.5 apparent magnitude is so 
bright that no intrinsically faint late M dwarfs are 
listed. The reason is that for an intrinsically faint 
star with an absolute magnitude say of My = +10 
to make the catalog, the apparent magnitude limit 
of V = 6.5 requires that its distance modulus be 
m—M = —3.5, ora distance of 2 parsecs. The number 
of stars with such a small distance is nil. To reach 
any significant number of M dwarfs would require 
the apparent magnitude limit of the catalog to be 
fainter than V = 10 if it were to encompass a more 
representative distance of greater than 10 parsecs for 
stars with absolute magnitude +10. 

(b) Consider the opposite case of the apparent distribu- 
tion of absolute magnitudes of stars in a catalog that 
is complete in a fixed volume of space, say within 25 par- 
secs of the Sun. One such catalog is by the staff of the 
Royal Observatory (Woolley et al 1970). The intrin- 
sically faint stars that are missing in the Bright Star 
Catalog appear in large numbers in the Nearby Star 
Catalog, while the intrinsically bright stars are now 
missing. Their space density is simply so low that 
the volume of space within 25 parsecs is too small 
to include even one. The distant-limited Nearby Star 
Catalog is biased in the opposite way from the Bright 
Star Catalog. 


It is obvious that to obtain an unbiased luminosity 
function (i.e. the true distribution of the number of stars 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


at absolute magnitude M in an interval of M + dM and 
M — dM per unit volume) one must combine in some 
way both catalogs, each biased at opposite ends of the 
true luminosity function. This can be done by sampling 
the flux-limited listings in the Bright Star Catalog to fainter 
apparent magnitudes and by increasing the spatial volume 
sampled in the distance-limited Nearby Star Catalog. But 
even then selection effects remain, caused by the fact 
that there will still be limits of completeness, although 
widened, that must be corrected for. 

These examples of the two different biases due to 
observational selection contain many of the elements of 
general bias problems in statistical astronomy. The most 
famous of such problems is that of the Malmquist bias. It 
appears as the difference in the mean absolute magnitude, 
(M)r, of a set of objects that are chosen in a flux- 
limited way (i.e. complete to a given apparent magnitude) 
compared with (M)p,, for the same class of object chosen 
to be complete within a given volume of space. 

The purpose of this article is to explain why the 
Malmquist bias exists, to describe how to identify it in 
any given sample of objects (stars or galaxies), to show a 
method of how to correct for it in statistical investigations, 
and to show how to identify the distance-limited subset of 
the complete flux-limited data that defines the true, bias 
free, distribution function. 


An early example of how an observational limit 
on radio flux produced a highly biased 
distribution of intrinsic luminosities of radio 
sources 

As soon as the early positions of RADIO SOURCES became 
accurate enough in the early 1960s to mount optical 
identification programs, it became evident that most of 
the radio sources were intrinsically bright early type (E) 
galaxies. Distances to these galaxies could be obtained 
from their optically measured REDsHIFTS using the linear 
Hubble expansion law with an assumed value of the HUBBLE 
CONSTANT. Absolute radio power could be calculated using 
the distances and the observed radio fluxes. 

The result was the curious strong correlation of 
absolute radio power, Lr, with redshift shown in figure 1. 
Plotted as ordinate is the intrinsic radio power (erg s“! 
over the frequency range of 10” to 10° Hz). The abscissa 
is the distance modulus (based on a Hubble constant of 
50 km s7! Mpc"') calculated from the redshift of each 
source. 

The apparent increase of Lp with increasing redshift 
has a close z? dependence. This drastic increase of 
absolute radio luminosity (by six orders of magnitude) 
with distance (squared) could have been interpreted as 
a real increase in radio power with look-back time (i.e. an 
evolutionary effect) until it is realized that the apparent 
correlation is in fact due to the flux limitation of the radio 
catalogs. Note the lines of constant radio flux of 1, 3 and 
10 janskys. 

The explanation of this being due to the flux limitation 
was soon proved by adding a fainter sample of the optical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Malmquist Bias and Completeness Limits 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.003 fexe)] 0.03 


6 3C OSS 
4C QSS 
PKS OSS 
OTHER OSS 
RADIO GAL 


28 32 36 


z 
O10 030 1.00 3 6 10 
| Jo 3 
So, es [Pea eee oe 
Ae 
| s ot 
5 oo” & Pail 
| a“ 
oa 
2: 2.88 
ra a | 
40 44 48 


Figure 1. Relation between absolute radio power, Lr, over a band width from 10” to 10!° Hz and redshift (distance) for flux-limited 
data from various radio catalogs. The apparent correlation is due to the selection bias caused by the bright flux limitation in the relevant 
radio catalogs and the existence of a very broad intrinsic radio power luminosity function. (Diagram from Astrophys. J. 178 25 1972.) 


identifications to flux levels that soon reached 0.01 janskys, 
fully 100 times fainter in radio flux than the data in figure 1. 
The resulting diagram then filled the triangular region 
at the lower right half of figure 1. Clearly, the radio 
luminosity function is extremely broad, covering power 
limits between 10” and 10* ergs s~!, and is also so steep 
that the spatial volume sampled at small redshifts is too 
small to include even one of the most powerful sources 
at such small distance moduli. Note the similarity of this 
selection effect to that of the Bright Star Catalog. 


Figure 1 has the form of what is called a Spaenhauer 
diagram in the current bias literature. Its use is powerful, 
first as a diagnostic to identify the presence of bias, and 
then as an aid to devise methods of correction. Bias in any 
data sample can always be proved using such a diagram 
by adding a fainter sample to see if the bias disappears 
at the original bright limit but reappears with the same 
pattern near the limit of the fainter sample. 


The Spaenhauer diagram approach is not the only 
method to discover and to correct for observational 
selection bias. A powerful parallel method, useful 
for example in the problem of bias in the TULLY-FISHER 
RELATION for distance determination, is that of ‘normalized 
distances’ (Teerikorpi 1997). That reference describes the 
development by a Franco-Finnish group on the analysis of 
data that are germane for the extragalactic distance scale. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The Malmquist bias 

What is the bias? 

Consider the properties of Spaenhauer diagrams that 
are used here to explain the Malmquist bias in flux- 
limited data sets. For the demonstration we use data 
for galaxies from the flux-limited revised Shapley—Ames 
Catalog of Bright Galaxies (the RSA), although the same 
general bias properties apply to many other types of flux- 
limited distributions in statistical astronomy. 

It is known that the general luminosity function 
over all galaxy types is very broad, spanning the range 
of absolute magnitudes from My = —23 to —14 (see 
LUMINOSITY FUNCTION OF GALAXIES). A Spaenhauer diagram 
using such a large intrinsic dispersion would resemble the 
‘open’ diagram of figure 1. A more ‘closed’ diagram is 
obtained by treating a subsample of the complete galaxy 
data by restricting the discussion to specific Hubble types 
and van den Bergh luminosity classes where the individual 
type and class-specific luminosity functions have much 
smaller intrinsic dispersions. 

Figure 2 shows a typical Spaenhauer diagram of the 
‘closed’ type where the intrinsic dispersions are fairly 
small. Absolute magnitude, calculated from the known 
redshifts (assuming Ho = 50 km s? Mpc"') is the 
ordinate. Log redshift is the abscissa. The data are 
from the complete set of Sc galaxies of van den Bergh 
luminosity class I (see GALAXIES: CLASSIFICATION) as listed 
in the RSA. This catalog contains the all-sky sample 
of galaxies brighter than apparent magnitude B = 13. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Malmquist Bias and Completeness Limits 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


AS IF Ho = 50 FOR ALL GALAXIES 


220 
ol 
tT 


Mg. 


3.0 


3.4 3.8 4.2 


LOG v?° 


Figure 2. Top: The apparent correlation of redshift and the absolute magnitudes (Hp = 50) of ScI galaxies in the flux-limited RSA 
catalog. Bottom: Same as top but with the limit lines of the Spaenhauer configuration superposed. The apparent correlation in the top 
panel is due to selection bias. The faint end of the luminosity function to the right of the vertical line is progressively cut away at 


increasingly large redshifts. 


Because it is a flux-limited catalog, it has the same bias 
properties as the Bright Star Catalog described earlier. 
Intrinsically faint galaxies are underrepresented relative 
to an unbiased (true) distribution (per unit volume) in its 
absolute magnitude distribution. 

The Malmquist bias is defined as the difference in 
absolute magnitude between the flux-limited and distance- 
limited distributions. How is it detected? How is it 
calculated and corrected for? 

The top panel of figure 2 shows that the mean absolute 
magnitude of the sample becomes progressively brighter 
with increasing distance in the same way as for the radio 
sources in figure 1. As in figure 1, there is a sharp lower 
bound to the distribution caused in both diagrams by the 
flux-limit of each catalog; 1 jansky in figure 1 and near the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


effective apparent magnitude limit of B = 12.5 for the RSA 
(the nominal limit of B = 13 is made brighter here by the 
correction for internal absorption that has been applied to 
the data). 

The straight-line flux limit at B = 12.5 is drawn in 
the bottom panel of figure 2. The upper and lower curved 
envelope lines are the theoretical expectation loci for one 
galaxy to be detected in the sample. These envelope 
lines are from a calculation using an assumed Gaussian 
luminosity function with a fixed dispersion of 0.7 mag, 
and individual volume elements enclosed within redshift 
(distance) limits of v + dv/2 and v — dv/2 for a uniform 
density distribution of objects. (The shape of the envelope 
lines is independent of the value assumed for the Hubble 
constant.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Malmquist Bias and Completeness Limits 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ite T 


220 
T 


Mp?! AS IF H,= 50 FOR ALL GALAXIES 


LOG vg?° 


Figure 3. Same as figure 2 but with a fainter sample of ScI galaxies added to a flux limit of B = 15. This figure illustrates how adding a 
fainter sample decides between a real variation of (M) with distance versus the effect of bias in any given flux-limited data set. 


A family of Spaenhauer envelopes can be computed 
for different dispersions. Also, different forms of 
luminosity functions (ie. non-Gaussian) can be assumed 
to make any number of different sets of templates. The set 
of Gaussian templates used here is described by Sandage 
(1994). 

The vertical line in figure 2 is put at the junction of the 
lower curved envelope line and the flux limit line at B = 
12.5. The part of the Spaenhauer configuration that is to the 
left (smaller distances) of the vertical line is the distance- 
limited subset of the complete data. There is no bias in this 
region because the sampling of the luminosity function is 
complete. However, all data to the right of the vertical line 
are progressively biased at progressively larger distances 
because the luminosity function is progressively cut from 
the sample by the flux-limit line. The mean absolute 
magnitudes calculated in vertical strips of velocity width 
dv to the right of the vertical line become brighter with 
increasing distance. This is the detailed bias property of 
any flux-limited sample. 

The classical Malmquist bias is defined as the integral 
of this detailed effect, integrated over the complete data 
set. Clearly, the mean absolute magnitude of the distance- 
limited subset (all galaxies to the left of the vertical line 
in figure 2) is the magnitude of the apex point shown by 
the arrow. This magnitude is fainter than the average 
magnitude of all the points in the complete data set, i.e. 
taken over the total sample in the top panel of figure 2. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


As stated above, the difference between the distance- 
limited mean absolute magnitude and the average over 
the complete data set is defined as the Malmquist bias as 
he originally calculated it in 1920. 

The calculation of this ‘integrated’ Malmquist bias is a 
straightforward problem in statistical astronomy. Modern 
derivations can be found in Mihalas and Binney (1968) and 
Sandage (1995). The formal equation is 


(M)pt — (M)py = (rms)?A(m)~! dA(m)/ din 


where DLand FL refer to distance-limited and flux-limited 
mean absolute magnitude, A(m) is the number of objects at 
m in interval dm, and dA(m)/dm is the slope of the growth 
of A(m) with m at m. For a uniform space distribution, 
log A(m) grows as 0.6m and the Malmquist correction is 
clearly 

(M)p. — (M) py = 1.382 (rms)?. 


How to detect the bias 

The infallible signature of bias in any sample is an apparent 
brightening of the individual absolute magnitudes with 
increasing distance in a flux-limited sample. If the effect 
is due to bias, the bias can be proved by plotting a 
Spaenhauer diagram (i.e. M versus distance). To test 
that the correlation is due to bias rather than say due to 
‘evolution’, we need only to add a fainter sample. If the 
effect is due to bias, the effect will disappear at bright 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Malmquist Bias and Completeness Limits 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


magnitude and will reappear at the limiting magnitude 
of the fainter sample. 

This proof for bias in the Scl flux-limited distributions 
in figure 2 is made in figure 3 where a fainter sample to 
the magnitude limit B = 15 is added for ScI galaxies. 
The extended Spaenhauer configuration also fits the added 
data. The distance-limited unbiased portion of the data 
is now increased to a redshift of log v = 3.55, but the 
distribution begins to become biased again (the faint part 
of the luminosity function drops out for larger redshifts), 
but now at larger redshifts in the added fainter sample. 

Detailed correction for the bias must either be made at 
every redshift interval by accounting for the brightening at 
every redshift, or by restricting the sample to the distance- 
limited subset of the data to the left of the vertical lines in 
figures 2 and 3. 

Malmquist bias in a more subtle form is also present 
in flux-limited samples that use the Tully—Fisher relation 
for distance determination. A large literature exists, an 
introduction to which can be had in the review article by 
Teerikorpi (1997), and in the bias series of papers of which 
Sandage (1994) is the first. 


Other types of bias similar to Malmquist 

Other important types of bias problems in statistical 
astronomy are central to many calibration problems. They 
can only be mentioned here, with literature citations given 
in the bibliography. 


Bias in trigonometric parallax data sets 

Selection procedures for sets of trigonometric parallax data 
determine the bias characteristics of the resulting parallax 
database. The problem can be seen in its progressive 
development by reading the following references in the 
order Eddington (1940), Wallerstein (1967), West (1969), 
Lutz and Kelker (1973), Hanson (1979). Other references 
to the problem are listed therein. It is an extremely 
important problem in using trigonometric PARALLAXES to 
calibrate the absolute magnitudes of many different types 
of objects such as subdwarfs, for example, with the 
resulting distances to the system of globular clusters. 


Bias in Cepheid distances using the P-L relation 

Because the CEPHEID PERIOD-LUMINOSITY RELATION has an 
intrinsic dispersion in absolute magnitude at a given 
period due to the finite width of the instability strip in 
the HR diagram, bias is present at the faint end because 
all discovery programs are flux-limited. The method to 
detect and correct for the bias is given in Sandage (1988). 


Bibliography 

Eddington A S 1940 The correction of statistics for 
accidental error Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 100 354 

Hanson RB 1979 A practical method to improve luminosity 
calibrations from trigonometric parallaxes Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 186 875 

Lutz T E and Kelker D H 1973 On the use of 
small trigonometric parallaxes for the calibration of 
luminosity systems Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 85 573 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Mihalas D and Binney J 1968 Galactic Astronomy (San 
Francisco: Freeman) ch 4 

Sandage A 1988 Cepheids as distance indicators when used 
near their detection limit Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 100 
938 

Sandage A 1994 Bias properties of extragalactic distance 
indicators I: the Hubble constant does not increase 
outward Astrophys. J. 430 1 (the first of a series of 
papers on bias problems) 

Sandage A 1995 Practical cosmology: inventing the past 
The Deep Universe (Saas-Fee 23rd Advanced Course) ed 
B Binggeli and R Buser (Berlin: Springer) chs 4, 10 

Teerikorpi P 1997 Observational selection bias affecting the 
determination of the extragalactic distance scale Ann. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 101 

Wallerstein G 1967 On the use of small parallaxes for 
calibration purposes Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 79 317 

West R M 1969 On the calibration of My (K) for giants by 
means of trigonometric parallaxes Astron. Astrophys. 
31 

Woolley R et al 1970 Catalogue of stars within 25 parsecs 
of the Sun Royal Observatory Annals no 5 


Allan Sandage 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Malmquist, Gunnar (1893-1982) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Malmquist, Gunnar (1893-1982) 


Swedish astronomer, worked on statistical astronomy, for 
example the populations of stars in the Galaxy. The 
Malmquist bias is a statistical effect by which the fainter 
members of a population are more represented in a 
brightness-limited sample than they should be—there are 
more of them to cross by accidental measuring error above 
the cut-off line than there are above the limit to fall below. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mantle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mantle 


The Earth’s mantle is composed of a thick layer of solid 
rock extending from the molten alloy of iron which is the 
Earth’s core, 2891 km below the surface, to the so-called 
Mohorovicic discontinuity or Moho, a few kilometers 
below the surface. Roughly, it can be considered as a 
succession of spherical concentric shells which are, from 
the shallower to the deeper: the lithospheric mantle (from 
the Moho to 80 km), the upper mantle (from a low velocity 
zone below the lithosphere to 400 km), the transition zone 
(from 400 to 660 km), the lower mantle (670 to 2800 km) 
and the D” (thermal and/or compositional layer above 
the core). The increases in temperature and pressure 
with depth are responsible for this layering which mainly 
follows the mineralogical phase changes of olivine, the 
main mineral component of mantle rocks. However, at the 
present state-of-the-art we cannot definitively preclude the 
possibility of compositional changes with depth. Actually, 
the Earth’s mantle is much more complex than a simple 
succession of concentric layers. For short time scales, it 
behaves like a perfect solid, transmitting seismic elastic 
waves with almost no attenuation while for geological 
time scales it behaves like a very viscous fluid. The 
original accretion energy and the still active long-life 
radioactive elements act as a powerful energy supply 
which animates the mantle engine: thermal convection. 
The convective motions within the mantle are ultimately 
responsible for the surface plate tectonics, the generation 
of oceanic lithosphere at mid-oceanic ridges and for the 
return of lithospheric plates to the mantle at subduction 
zones. These water-rich sinking plates which have cooled 
at the Earth’s surface for hundreds of millions of years 
interact with the hot mantle to generate subduction zone 
volcanism. Their final fate, either to be reincorporated into 
the upper mantle or to sink deep into the lower mantle 
and feed the D” zone, is still vigorously debated within 
the geophysical community (see also EARTH’S INTERIOR). 


A short history 

The Earth’s mantle is inacessible to direct observations. 
Our technologically sophisticated civilization remains 
defeated by the huge pressures and high temperatures 
which are prevalent even at depths as shallow as a 
few kilometers. Thus, the deepest drilling experiments 
have rapidly encountered technical problems due to the 
increase in temperature with depth (roughly 30 °C per 
kilometer within the continental crust). Until now, no 
drilling experiment has succeeded in penetrating all the 
way through the Earth’s continental or oceanic CRUST. 
The Moho, which separates the crust from the mantle, is 
roughly 30 km below the surface of the continental crust 
but only at 6 km below the surface of the oceanic crust. This 
seismic discontinuity, which is due to the sudden increase 
in the density of the rocks, characteristic of the mantle, has 
taken its name from A Mohorovicic, who was the first to 
detect it in 1907 in the Balkans. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The only direct access that scientists can have to 
mantle rocks is the very rare ophiolitic or kimberlitic 
outcrops which have been brought to the surface by 
tectonic or volcanic events. The ophiolites form groups 
of mafic and ultra-mafic rocks ranging from basalt to 
peridotite which have been obducted onto continental 
crust. This phenomenon occurs when a piece of oceanic 
lithosphere is carried along during the closure of an 
OcEAN and is piled onto continental crust. When they 
are denuded by erosion, outcrops may expose, as is the 
case in Oman, the whole sequence of lithospheric plate 
rocks from the pillow lava of the oceanic crust to the upper 
mantle material below the Moho. The kimberlites are very 
different in nature. They are composed of peridotite rocks 
set intrusively by violent volcanic eruptions from deep 
upper mantle into the continental crust. 

Too deep to observe directly, the interior of the Earth 
has been explored recently by the use of simulations which 
have allowed scientists to construct a model step by step. 

The thickness of the Earth’s mantle (2.88 x 10° m), its 
mass (4.043 x 104 kg) and the ranges of the characteristic 
times of physical phenomena which affect it (from 
fractions of a second for seismic wave propagation to 
billions years for continental drift), make its behavior 
difficult for us to understand without the help of high- 
accuracy metrology. It has only been during the 20th 
century that improvements in mathematics, physics, 
chemical sciences and, more recently, the advent of the 
computer, have allowed significant progress to be made. 

Eratosthenes was the first to measure the radius of 
the Earth around 250 BC. Newton proposed in 1687 that 
the Earth is an ellipsoid with flattening of 1/230. In 1736 
the French Academy of Sciences organized two scientific 
expeditions in Laponia (directed by A Clairaut and 
PLde Maupertuis) and in Peru (Directed by P Bouguer and 
Charles de la Condamine), which confirmed the flattening 
of the Earth. In 1798, Lord Cavendish proposed an 
experiment to weigh the Earth and found a mean density 
of 5.5 x 10° kg m’. This value, which is roughly twice the 
density of surface rocks, implied that there was an increase 
in density with depth. In 1838, William Hopkins, Profesor 
at Cambridge University, took account of the two modes of 
heat transfer—conduction and convection—and proposed 
three possibilities for the internal structure of the Earth: a 
thin crust overlying a molten Earth, a thick crust and a solid 
core separated by molten rocks and an entirely solid Earth. 
The thin crust model was refuted by part of the scientific 
community, which reasonably argued that such a liquid 
layer would have been subject to huge tidal effects by the 
Moon and the Sun, which would have broken the crust. 
On the other hand, astronomical considerations about the 
moment of inertia of the Earth also suggested an increase 
in the density of material near the center of the Earth. This 
proposal was in agreement with meteorite composition 
that required a silicate mantle overlying a denser iron core. 
However, at the end of the 19th century, the inaccessibility 
of the Earth resulted in some highly speculative inferences 
about the internal structures of the Earth and the mantle. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mantle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


©) Seismic event 


Lower mantle 


Outer core 


Figure 1. The energy released by seismic events propagates within the Earth’s interior and therefore through the mantle as P-waves 
and S-waves. When encountering obstacles or discontinuities these waves may bounce, be converted from one type to the other, be 
transmitted through the interfaces or be split. A ‘PS’-wave starts from the focus of a seismic event as a P-wave, it propagates through 
the mantle, bounces under the Earth’s surface and continues its journey through mantle as an S-wave. The c in ScS, denotes the 
reflection of an S-wave on the core surface. K is used for transmission within the core, as for SKS. In this case the S-wave is converted to 
a P-wave at the core-mantle boundary (CMB), transmitted as a P-wave within the core and is converted back to an S-wave on reaching 
the mantle. The study of these different wave propagations, the arrival times of which are known to be a function of the surface 
angular distance of the recording station to the epicenter, allows information to be deduced about its particular path within the mantle. 


The elastic mantle 

The real birth of modern geophysics occurred with the 
fortunate detection of a Japanese earthquake in Potsdam 
on 18 April 1889. Anew science was born that would allow 
scientists to explore the deepest parts of the Earth and to 
compare the results of observations with models. 

The energy released by an earthquake propagates 
through the deep Earth as elastic waves for which 
propagation properties depend intimately on the density, 
compressibility and rigidity of the medium. Encountering 
discontinuities or obstacles, the compressive waves (P- 
waves) or shear waves (S-waves) can bounce, be converted 
from one type to the other, be transmitted or be split. 
During the first few decades of seismological study, 
scientists learned to recognize the different types of waves 
from the times they took to travel from the earthquake 
focus to recording stations. They defined a nomenclature 
for these waves according to their propagation within the 
Earth. Figure 1 shows the different paths of the simplest 
P- and S-waves within the mantle and their names. 

The analysis of arrival times of waves at at least 
four independent recording stations allows retrieval (if a 
velocity law is assumed along the path) of the origin time 
and the geographical location of the epicenter (the point 
located at the surface above the focus of the earthquake). 
Conversely, the knowledge of the initial parameters of 
earthquakes has allowed the velocity models inside the 
mantle to be refined. During the first two decades of 
the 20th century, the core, the inner-core, and the main 
discontinuities of the mantle were discovered. Radial 
models of the interior properties of the Earth have been 
regularly improved, leading to the so-called preliminary 
reference earth model (PREM) which was published by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dziewonski and Anderson in 1981 (figure 2). This model 
gives the evolution of the gross Earth properties with 
depth (density, pressure, compressibility, P- and S-wave 
velocities). The propagation of S-waves in the mantle 
proves that it is composed of solid rock (S-waves disappear 
in the liquid outer core but reappear in the inner core). 
From the evolution of density with depth it is easy to 
conclude that the mantle is composed of compressible 
rock. However, density discontinuities (and therefore 
wave velocity discontinuities) do exist in the PREM, 
mainly at 670 and at 400 km below the crust and at the 
Moho level (or from more recent estimations, 660 and 
410 km). The two deepest discontinuities bound the 
transition zone that separates the upper mantle from the 
lower mantle (below 660 km). A question which is still 
debated amongst geophysicists is: do these sharp density 
jumps correspond to compositional discontinuities or to 
phase changes in the mineralogical structure of the silicate 
rocks composing the Earth’s mantle? 


Mantle composition 

The Earth is a part of the solar system in which the planets 
and the Sun have been built by the collapse of a nebula and 
the ACCRETION of planetesimals. The MeTEoriTES, which still 
regularly fall on the surface of the Earth, are a surviving 
witness to those early times. Meteorites can be classified 
into three main categories: irons or siderites, which are 
made principally of native metal; stones or aerolites which 
contain mainly silicate rocks but little metal; and stony 
irons or siderolites which contain abundant silicates and 
metals. The stone meteorites (CHONDRITES) represent 86% 
of the meteorite population and are thought to have a 
chemically primitive composition. The chondrites are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mantle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Velocity (km/sec), density, (g/cm) 


! 
4000 6000 


Depth (km) 


Figure 2. The PREM gives the evolution of density, pressure, 
compressibility and mean seismic velocity for P- and S-waves 
within the Earth’s interior. P- and S-waves do exist within the 
mantle while S-waves do not propagate within the core because 
of its liquid state but reappear in the inner core. 


chemically similar but differ by the presence of volatile 
components (CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITES) or by their iron 
content and the ratio of oxidized to metallic iron (ordinary 
or enstatite chondrites). Table 1, which gives the relative 
distribution of the main silicate minerals in chondrites, 
shows that olivine is the most abundant mineral. During 
the accretion phase of the Earth, the conversion of kinetic 
and gravitational energy into thermal energy raised the 
temperature above the melting point and induced the 
segregation of an olivine rich mantle floating above a 
denser Ni-Fe rich core. Thus, the composition of the 
Earth, and therefore of its mantle, is broadly chondritic 
even though it does not exactly match any one particular 
type of chondrite. 


Table 1. Normative mineralogy of ordinary chondrites. 


Species Highiron Low iron 
Olivine 36.2 47.0 
Hypersthene 24.5 22.7 
Diopside 4.0 4.6 
Feldspar 10.0 10.7 
Apatite 0.6 0.6 
Chromite 0.6 0.6 
Illmenite 0.2 0.2 
Troilite 5.3 6.1 
Ni-Fe 18.6 7. 


From these considerations, scientists have proposed 
dividing the Earth into three reservoirs: the bulk silicate 
Earth (primitive mantle), the depleted mantle and the 
bulk Earth (the core, the mantle and the crust). Several 
compositions have been estimated for the silicate portion 
of the Earth, based on meteorites and on samples of 
upper mantle and crustal rocks. The pyrolite, defined 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Olivine phase diagram 
30 1 


: Pv + Mw 


25 4 


20 +4 


Pressure (GPa) 


Solidus 
i Ol (a) 


1200 1500 1800 2100 2400 2700 


Temperature (K) 


Figure 3. Stability diagram of the olivine mineral phase as a 
function of temperature and pressure. The Clapeyron slope is 
the slope of the phase stability in a temperature—pressure 
diagram. Transitions from @ to 6 phases and from £ to y phases 
are exothermic (positive Clapeyron slope) while the transition 
from y phase to perovskite and magnesiowustite is endothermic 
(negative Clapeyron slope). 


by A E Ringwood from complementary composition of 
melts and residual mantle material, is one of the mixtures 
representative of the Earth’s mantle rocks which are now 
used to study the behavior of mantle material (see the 
review by Horton E Newsom in Ahrens (1995)). 


Mantle mineralogy 

Besides olivine, the main silicate minerals in the 
upper mantle are orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, garnet, 
illmenite and chromite. As the stability of these minerals is 
only achieved at limited pressure and temperature ranges 
(see figure 3), the mineralogy of mantle rocks changes 
with depth, due to solid—-solid phase changes. The elastic 
properties of the rocks are therefore very sensitive to the 
phase changes of olivine, which induce clear signatures 
on the seismic velocity profiles. These discontinuities 
at depths of around 410 and 660 km correspond to the 
transition from a to B forms of olivine minerals and to the 
transition of the spinel phase of olivine to perovskite and 
magnesiowustite minerals. 

High-pressure experiments, which are now con- 
ducted with multi-anvil presses and with diamond-anvil 
presses, allow the study of the temperature—pressure sta- 
bility domains of olivine. This apparatus consist of a thin 
sample of rock between two diamonds, heated with a laser 
device. It is then possible to reach pressures correspond- 
ing to the outer core pressure. The main problems en- 
countered concern the small size of the samples and the 
actual control of the temperature and pressure during the 
experiment. Nevertheless, it has been possible to draw 
the Clapeyron slopes of the olivine mineral phase changes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mantle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Clapeyron slope marks the boundary of the phase ex- 
istence domain in a temperature—pressure diagram. The 
agreement between mineralogical studies and seismically 
recorded discontinuities has proved the implication of the 
olivine phase changes in the mantle discontinuities nature 
of the rock mantle phase changes. However, this cannot 
preclude that a part of the discontinuity may also arise 
from a compositional change. It is important to note that 
the a to f olivine phase change, at a depth of 410 km, is 
characterized by a positive Clapeyron slope (exothermic 
reaction), while the transition from y-spinel to perovskite, 
at a depth of 660 km, displays a negative Clapeyron slope 
(endothermic behavior). These values of the Clapeyron 
slopes will strongly influence the dynamics of convection 
currents within the mantle. 


Thermal state of the mantle 

Scientists still use direct methods to measure the 
temperature inside the Earth. However, the stability 
domains of olivine minerals give reference points to fix 
the temperature at phase change levels. Thus, according 
to the Clapeyron slope of the y-spinel to perovskite phase 
change, the mean temperature at a depth of 660 km is 
around 1900 to 2000 K. Similarly, the temperature around 
410 km should be close to 1600 K. From geochemical 
considerations, the rate of partial melting observed near 
the mid-oceanic ridge basalts leads to a temperature of 
1400 K under the lithospheric plates. Temperatures can be 
extrapolated downward through the mantle on the basis of 
an adiabatic increase which should rise about 1000° above 
the CMB temperature. On the other hand, recent progress 
in high-pressure and high-temperature experiments allow 
the behavior of iron in physical conditions close to those 
prevailing within the Earth’s core to be studied. At the 
inner core boundary, under the effects of pressure, the core 
material reaches a transition from liquid to solid which 
is proved by the reappearance of S-wave propagation. 
Unfortunately, uncertainties about the actual composition 
of the core and about the effects the alloy has on the 
decrease of the crystallization temperature, lead to quite 
important uncertainties in the determination of the inner 
core temperature. It may be around 6000 K for pure 
iron, but extrapolation towards the surface suggests a 
temperature of around 4000 K at the CMB, approximately 
1000 K for the effect of the alloy on the crystallization 
temperature and 1000 K for the adiabatic decompression 
through the outer core. In this case, the temperature 
jump at the CMB could be a few hundred degrees to a 
thousand degrees. These results are in agreement with 
the presence of a low velocity layer at the CMB, the D” 
layer, in the seismological Earth models. The thickness 
of this layer varies from a few hundred kilometers in 
some areas to places where it seems disappear. The high 
thermal gradients in such a thin layer may induce partial 
melting for sinking material and may be a good place to 
generate new rising plumes through the mantle. Many 
in the geophysical community believe that it is the final 
destination of sinking slabs and the origin of the hot spot 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


volcanism. This could explain the particular signature 
of the oceanic island basalts which are more primitive in 
character than the depleted mid ocean ridge basalts. 


The fluid mantle 

For short time scales such as the time taken for the passage 
of an earthquake wave through the Earth, the Earth’s 
mantle rocks behave as perfect solids with a very weak 
attenuation of seismic energy. Thus, the most powerful 
earthquakes generate free oscillations and long-period 
surface waves which may last for several hours or even 
days. This perfect elastic behavior does not occur when 
the characteristic times of the events are comparable with 
geological time scales. This is well illustrated by the 
observation of post-glacial rebound which is occuring 
today following the melting of the ice sheets which covered 
the old Canadian and Fenno-scandien cratons during the 
last glacial period. The relaxation of constraints due to the 
disappearance of the ice loads on the continent provokes, a 
few tens of thousand years later, a visco-elastic rebound of 
the surfaces; these are currently rising by a few millimeters 
a year. These post-glacial rebounds can be detected from 
coastline evolution and from gravitational anomalies. 
Numerous models have been proposed to quantify these 
trends based both on the elastic (explaining the reaction to 
unloading) and the viscous behavior (explaining the time 
delay) of the mantle. The comparison of these models 
with geological observations make it possible to estimate a 
viscosity of 10° to 10% Po for the mantle, which is no longer 
considered as a solid but as a very viscous fluid. This 
viscosity is so high that it is impossible to make laboratory 
deformation experiments on rocks. For much longer times 
such as those of continental formation and drift (several 
million to several billion years) it is possible to consider 
the mantle as a perfect fluid. The continents, for which 
the mean density is lower, float on the mantle like icebergs 
in water. They display deep cold roots, which may reach 
several hundreds of kilometers within the mantle. They 
are dragged along by the deep mantle motions and have 
supported several episodes of accretion and dispersion of 
supercontinents during the history of the Earth. 


The convective mantle 

At the beginning of the history of the Earth, around 4.55 
billion years ago, a phase of intense planetoid accretion 
occurred which continued for approximately 100 million 
years. During this phase, the kinetic energy of the 
accreting masses was transformed into heat that caused 
the whole planet to melt and the gravitational segregation 
of iron to create the core. A significant proportion of that 
heat is retained within the Earth’s mantle and is currently 
still escaping. World-wide heat flow measurements at the 
surface of the Earth have shown that the flux dissipated by 
the mantle is approximately 42 x 10!* W. This is roughly 
twice the heat release which would be expected from the 
radioactive disintegration of the four remaining long-life 
radioactive elements (*°K, *°U, #°U and **Th). However, 
silicate rocks conduct heat badly (a simple calculation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mantle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


shows that it would take approximately 40 billion years 
to cross the entire mantle by conduction). Therefore, a 
large proportion of the heat which accumulated during 
the Earth’s accretion, and also that which is continuously 
produced by RADIOACTIVITY, is available to drive convection 
within the mantle by inducing density anomalies through 
thermal expansion. The effects of these density anomalies 
are counteracted by the adiabatic cooling, the thermal 
dissipation of heat to the surrounding fluid and the 
viscous friction. All these effects are gathered into one 
dimensionless number: the Rayleigh number. 

This quantity is representative of the geometrical 
aspects of a fluid layer but also of the thermodynamical 
and mechanical properties of the fluid. When the Rayleigh 
number is lower than a critical value, heat only escapes 
from the fluid layer by conduction. However, when 
the Rayleigh number is higher than the critical value, 
the fluid cannot stay at rest. Convection starts and 
proceeds to evacuate heat much more efficiently than 
conduction. It is possible to calculate the Rayleigh number 
of the mantle by considering the values of the physical 
parameters revealed by seismology, and the viscosity 
value obtained from post-glacial rebound. The over- 
adiabatic temperature and the internal heating can be 
estimated from composition, mineralogical studies and 
heat flux measurements. The value finally obtained 
for the Rayleigh number is around 10°, that is to say 
several thousand times higher than the critical value. 
Therefore, the Earth’s mantle cannot stay at rest but 
is churned by the very efficient motions of convection. 
The technological improvements to computers have 
allowed the development of more and more sophisticated 
numerical models of mantle convection which have 
recently concluded that the mantle is not only convecting 
but that this convection is highly chaotic. 


Effects of the phase changes on mantle convection 
The two main discontinuities in the Earth’s mantle at 
depths of 410 km and 660 km will influence the structure of 
the convection currents which are crossing them. Indeed 
the density jumps, due to phase changes, are locally 
much stronger than the density anomalies due to thermal 
expansion. When a sinking convection current (i.e. a 
current colder than the surrounding material) encounters 
the endothermic phase change at a depth of 660 km, its 
low temperature implies that the phase change will occur 
deeper than the mean depth of the discontinuity, according 
to the negative Clapeyron slope. Then, the upper mantle 
material may be blocked in the light phase, and its sinking 
buoyancy may be too weak to reach the actual phase 
change level. In this case, the sinking current may be 
unable to cross the discontinuity that may separate upper 
and lower mantle into independent convective systems. 
The reverse situation is analogous for rising currents 
(i.e. a current hotter than the surrounding material) 
which attempt to cross an endothermic discontinuity from 
below. Conversely, when a sinking current encounters 
an exothermic discontinuity, as at a depth of 410 km, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


phase change occurs at lower pressure and the fluid easily 
reaches the actual transition level. 

Figure 4 shows the effects of such an endothermic 
phase change on the structure of convection. In panel 
(a), the Clapeyron slope is set to zero (ie. no phase 
change) and the convection can cross the discontinuity 
without difficulty. In panel (c), the phase change is set 
to —4 x 10° Pa K“!, the convection currents are blocked at 
the discontinuity which can no longer be crossed by the 
fluid. The most interesting case is given in panel (b); there 
the Clapeyron slope has been set to —2 x 10° Pa K™! (this 
value is very close to the experimental value for the spinel- 
perovskite phase change). Fluid accumulates for a while 
at the discontinuity and when the threshold is crossed 
sudden and violent avalanches begin which draw huge 
quantities of matter from the upper to the lower mantle. 
This effect, which occurs for a Clapeyron slope close to that 
of mantle rock, has been found to be a common feature 
for a very broad range of geophysical and geometrical 
parameters (Brunet and Machetel 1998). 


Evidence for mantle convection 
Theoretical studies of fluid mechanics are therefore able 
to describe the chaotic behavior and global structure 
of convection within the mantle. This phenomenon is 
the huge engine which is responsible for the large-scale 
tectonic motions that are observed at the Earth’s surface. 
Nowadays, the connection between the lithospheric plate 
motions and mantle convection have to be more accurately 
studied in order to be quantified. Indeed, the lithospheric 
plates are much more rigid than the underlying mantle and 
cannot be rigorously taken into account by the numerical 
models of convection which assume a fluid behavior for 
the mantle. The continuous generation of lithosphere at 
the mid-ocean ridges, its journey at the Earth’s surface 
and its return to the mantle at subduction zones cannot 
be understood without the churning of matter induced 
by mantle convection. Similarly, continental drift and 
the cyclic creation and dispersion of supercontinents 
necessitate mechanisms of comparable amplitudes within 
the mantle to those which are observed at the surface. 
The chaotic thermal anomalies, induced by mantle 
convection, result in local density and temperature 
anomalies within the mantle which affect the velocity 
of wave propagation mainly through the rigidity of the 
rocks. Therefore, a cold anomaly induces a positive 
velocity anomaly and, conversely, a high temperature 
creates a slow zone. On the basis of radial seismic 
Earth models (e.g. PREM), seismologists have been able 
to calculate local departure to mean values, thanks not 
only to the improvement in seismological networks but 
also to improvements in computer performance which 
have allowed the treatment of more numerous data 
and more complex computations. To reach this goal, 
the Earth has been decomposed into small cells for 
which a global inversion of all the ray paths is used 
to calculate local velocity. It would be tempting to 
consider that this procedure will give us a detailed map 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mantle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Isocontours of stream functions (left part of the spheres) and temperature fields (right part of the spheres) for a model mantle 
with endothermic phase change at 670 km. When the Clapeyron slope is set to 0, no influence of the phase change can be deciphered 
on the global mantle circulation (panel a). With a Clapeyron slope of —4 x 10° Pa K~!, the endothermic phase change prevents 
convection from crossing the discontinuity that results in a two-layered convection between lower and upper-mantle (panel c). With a 
Clapeyron slope close to the value given par mineralogical studies (2 x 10° Pa K~), a partly layered regime prevails with occurrence 


of mantle avalanches (panel b). 


of the temperature field within the mantle. Unfortunately, 
seismic sources are not evenly distributed on the surface 
of the Earth; they are concentrated mainly at plate borders 
leaving large areas of oceanic plates without seismic 
sources. Furthermore, seismic stations are, for obvious 
commodity and maintenance reasons, mainly installed 
on continents that are better able to cover the northern 
hemisphere. Additionally, the interpretation of seismic 
velocity anomalies in terms of temperature is only an 
approximation since other effects such as anisotropy or 
compositional anomalies may affect the wave velocity. 
Therefore, the tomographical studies only give a rough 
(but improving continuously) idea of the thermal structure 
of the mantle. Up to now the results do not allow 
conclusions to be drawn either for two-layer convection, 
whole layer convection or partly layered convection 
within the Earth’s mantle. Figure 5 gives the result of a 
tomographical study by Van der Hilst and Seno (1993). 
It seems from the most recent seismological results that 
certain slabs can cross the endothermic discontinuity at a 
depth of 660 km, as in the Mariana Trench, whilst others 
bend at this discontinuity without crossing it. 

The convective thermal anomalies also induce 
perturbations of the gravity field of the Earth. Indeed, 
a rising convection current corresponds to the rising 
of hot, and therefore lighter, material that results in a 
negative density anomaly. However, the thermal effects 
of convection cannot be separated from the dynamical 
effects of the convection currents on the surface and 
discontinuity topographies. The strength of the rising 
currents pushes and deforms the surface leading to an 
opposite effect on gravity (creation of a positive density 
anomaly). Furthermore, for a rising convection current 
crossing the entire mantle, the surface would be deflected 
upward, resulting in a positive density anomaly; the 
660 km discontinuity would also be deflected upward, but 
the 400 km exothermic discontinuity would be deflected 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1345km 


2089km 


Figure 5. 


downward. The compensation of these effects at different 
depths depends strongly on the viscosity contrasts, 
which are assumed between the different parts of the 
mantle. This quantity remains very badly constrained. 
The relationship between the global gravity field and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mantle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


convection will strongly depend on the global structure 
of convection, which may not extend over the whole 
thickness of the mantle. 


Avalanches and large scale tectonic features 
Recent numerical models of mantle convection, based 
on the existence of mantle avalanche phenomena, have 
been used to propose self-consistent mechanisms for large- 
scale tectonic features such as huge volcanic events, the 
world-wide increase of basalts generated at mid-oceanic 
ridges, periods of low-reversal of the magnetic fields, the 
pulsation of super-continents, and the brutal acceleration 
of continental motions (as for India during its journey 
toward Eurasia). The avalanches are characterized by 
the accumulation at the 660 km discontinuity of sinking 
cold material, which are not immediately able to cross 
the discontinuity. When the avalanche starts (figure 6), a 
brutal transfer of matter occurs from the upper to the lower 
mantle. This sinking matter is compensated by return 
flows from the lower mantle into the upper one. While the 
avalanches are localized on the sphere, these return flows 
imply huge world-wide arrivals of hot lower mantle near 
the surface that may induce faster and more efficient dorsal 
evacuation of heat. The cold material sinking during an 
avalanche is colder and therefore more viscous than the 
surrounding material. It quickly reaches the core surface 
where it sweeps the hot, less viscous material into very 
high unstable temperature anomalies which may start as 
vigorous new plumes toward the surface. These plumes 
cross the lower mantle to spread at shallow depth under 
the surface. The low-viscosity zones which are created 
may lubricate the motion of the converging continents 
above the avalanche inspiration. At the same time, the 
arrival of cold material at the core surface increases the heat 
transfer from the core to the mantle, which may increase 
the stability of the convective structure into the outer core 
and to stabilize the dynamo. 


Conclusions 

Our knowledge of the Earth’s mantle has progressed 
rapidly over recent decades thanks to improvements in 
metrology, seismology and computing power. However, it 
is not yet known whether convection in the Earth’s mantle 
occurs in cells that extend throughout the entire depth 
of the mantle, or if convection in the upper and lower 
mantle is separated. A mixed situation could prevail with 
partial layering of the mantle. The more and more accurate 
seismic tomography results describe a complex situation 
with no general rules but a strong sensitivity to the local 
constraints of global plate motion. The slabs either bend 
at the 660 km discontinuity or cross it deep into the lower 
mantle. A slow cooling has decreased the Earth’s internal 
temperature since the Archean era. Geochemical studies 
of lavas show that it may have reached a few hundred 
degrees, which may have changed the global regime of 
convection from layering to whole mantle convection. 
This trend, if it were confirmed by future studies, would 
imply that at least for a period, an avalanche regime might 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 6. Evolution of the temperature field of a model mantle 
during an avalanche. If their existence is confirmed, such 
phenomena may be invoked to explain most of the large- scale 
tectonic features and in particular the apparent pulsation of 
supercontinents at the Earth’s surface. This figure is 
reproduced as Color Plate 35. 


have occurred. Such a possibility could have provided 
a mechanism powerful enough to have gathered and 
dispersed the supercontinents several times during the 
Earth’s history. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bibliography 
Ahrens T J 1995 (ed) Global Earth Physics, a Handbook 
of Physical Constants (Washington: American 
Geophysics Union) p 376 
7 


Mantle ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Anderson D L 1989 Theory of the Earth (Oxford: 
Blackwell) p 366 

Brunet D and Machetel P 1998 Large-scale tectonic 
features induced by mantle avalanches with phase, 
temperature, and pressure lateral variations of 
viscosity J. Geophys. Res. 103 4929-45 

Machetel P and Weber P 1991 Intermittent layered 
convection in a model mantle with an endothermic 
phase change at 670 km Nature 350 55-7 

Van der Hilst R and Tetsuzo S 1993 Effect of relative plate 
motion on the deep structure and penetration depth 
of slabs below the Izu-Bonin and Mariana island arcs 
Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 120 395-407 


Philippe Machetel 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Maraldi, Jean-Dominique [Giovanni, Maraldi II] (1709- 
88) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maraldi, Jean-Dominique [Giovanni, 
Maraldi II] (1709-88) 


Italian-French astronomer. Observed the planets, 
discovered two globular clusters in 1746, M15 and M2. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mare (pl: maria) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mare (pl: maria) 


A dark lunar plain. The name, which is Latin for ‘sea’, was 
first used on maps of the Moon in the seventeenth century, 
when astronomers believed the Moon to be Earthlike, and 
that the light and dark areas were land (sometimes called 
‘terrae’) and water. In fact the maria are composed of 
basalt, solidified lava which erupted between 3 and 4 
billion years ago after the Moon had suffered large impacts 
which weakened or, in some cases, penetrated its crust. 
“Mare’ has become so well established that it is retained in 
lunar nomenclature. The maria range in size from huge 
lava floodplains such as Oceanus Procellarum (2568 km 
across) and the large impact features Mare Orientale and 
Mare Imbrium, down to the 150 km Mare Anguis. Maria 
are much more prevalent on the Moon’s nearside; on the 
farside the crust is thicker and withstood impacts better. 
They are smooth areas with few craters: by the time they 
had formed the great episode of cratering was over, and 
they bear the scars only of recent impacts, which in the 
past 3 billion years have been much less frequent. 

The term ‘mare’ was also formerly used for dark 
regions on Mars (e.g., Mare Tyrrhenum, named after 
the Tyrrhenian Sea, between Italy and Sicily), which 
in the nineteenth century were also assumed to be 
‘seas’. However, in general they do not correspond to 
topographic features, and are now used only on albedo 
maps (showing areas that appear light and dark) of the 
planet. 


See also: Imbrium basin, Orientale basin, solar system: 
nomenclature. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mariner Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mariner Missions 


Mariner was the name given to the earliest set of 
American space missions to explore the planets and to the 
spacecraft developed to carry them out. The missions were 
planned and executed by the JET PROPULSION LABORATORY 
(JPL) of the California Institute of Technology, which had 
been designated by the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) as its lead center for planetary 
missions. 


Birth Pangs of the Planetary Program—1960-1962 
In January 1959, shortly after NASA had been established 
and JPL had become affiliated with it, the laboratory 
proposed a program of space missions that contemplated 
sending two spacecraft to VENUS and two to MARS at each 
opportunity starting in 1960. With some modifications, 
this program was adopted by NASA and titled veca. In 
the next few months, as it became clear that launch-vehicle 
development was falling short of expectations, Vega was 
canceled and replaced by less ambitious programs— 
RANGER for lunar and Mariner for planetary missions. The 
Mariner program, approved by NASA in July 1960, would 
be carried out by a series of increasingly capable spacecraft, 
beginning with Mariner A to fly by Venus in 1962 and 
Mariner B for missions to Venus and Mars (possibly with 
landers) beginning in 1964. The spacecraft were to be 
launched by the Atlas—Centaur launch system. 

Considerable progress was made at JPLin developing 
the spacecraft and the missions for Mariners A and B, 
including the scientific payloads and the teams of scientists 
to implement them, but the development of the Centaur 
upper-stage rocket ran into continual problems so that 
Mariner A was canceled in August 1961. To replace it, JPL 
proposed to use a simpler Ranger-type spacecraft on top 
of the Atlas-Agena launch system for the first observation 
of Venus. The scientific payload would have to be severely 
curtailed. In recognition of its Ranger heritage, the project 
was called Mariner R. 

Mariner 1 was launched from Cape Canaveral on 
22 July 1962. A small error in the launch-guidance 
equations in the computer onboard the Atlas caused it to 
fly erratically, and it was destroyed by the range safety 
officer after 290 s. 

The features of Mariner spacecraft are summarized in 
table 1. 


Mariner 2 to Venus—1961-1963 

The identical Mariner 2 spacecraft was launched on 27 
August, and it carried out its mission by flying by Venus 
on 22 December at a distance of 34762 km. It carried 
a payload of only six scientific instruments weighing 
only 18 kg, but each of them operated essentially as 
intended. The Microwave Radiometer measured the 
temperature of the planet surface to be about 425°C 
and the Infrared Radiometer registered the cloud-top 
temperature as —35°C. 


Mariner Missions © Kluwer Academic Publishers 1997 


The other experiments operated continuously during 
most of the flight, providing the first long-duration 
monitoring of conditions in interplanetary space. The 
Micrometeorite Detector registered the impacts of dust 
particles, detecting only two. The Charged-Particle 
Experiment monitored cosmic rays. The Magnetometer 
Experiment monitored the interplanetary field. The Solar- 
Wind Experiment determined for the first time the density, 
velocity, temperature and composition of the plasma 
streaming out from the solar corona. 

The spacecraft continued to operate nearly faultlessly 
for 21 days beyond Venus encounter (130 days total) out 
to 87.4 million km from Earth. It thus demonstrated the 
efficiency of its three-axis stabilized design, its capability 
of effective two-way communication with Earth over vast 
distances with a transmitter power of only 3 W and the 
ability of the Deep Space Network for precise tracking 
throughout the flight. It was the most successful space 
mission in history up to that time. 


Mariner 4 to Mars—1962-1965 

The Mariner B mission was originally authorized in July 
1960 for a landing on Venus or Mars in 1964. In February 
1961 the Venus lander was dropped from consideration, 
but in April 1962 it was reinstated, and the Mars landing 
was dropped. In May 1963 the Mars landing was 
postponed until 1966 and redesignated Mariners E and F, 
and these were effectively canceled in July 1964. This sad 
history resulted from the troubles with the Atlas—Centaur. 

Meanwhile, a much less ambitious Mars flyby 
mission, called Mariner C, with a spacecraft barely half 
the weight of Mariner B, was proposed in midsummer 
1962, approved in March 1963 and ready for launch by the 
Atlas—Agena in November 1964. The launch of Mariner 3 
on 5 November appeared normal, but the signal of solar- 
panel deployment was not received, and communication 
ceased as the battery ran down. It was soon determined 
that the nose cone (appropriately called the ‘shroud’) had 
failed to jettison. This information prompted a frantic 
effort to design and fabricate a new shroud in the three 
weeks before the launch period closed. 

Mariner 4 was launched on 28 November 1964 and 
flew by Mars on 14 July 1965 at a range of 9844 km, 
taking a sequence of 21 photographs of the surface. The 
mission revealed two very important new facts: (1) that 
the surface was covered with impact craters; (2) that the 
atmosphere was mainly carbon dioxide at a pressure of 
less than 7 mbar. The latter was determined by the 
Radio Occultation Experiment, which had not even been 
accepted as part of the mission until after launch. The 
other scientific experiments were three to detect charged 
particle radiation, a Solar Plasma Probe, a Magnetometer 
and a Cosmic Dust Detector. 


Mariner 5 to Venus—1965-1967 

A project to revisit Venus with a spare Mariner 4 spacecraft 
was authorized in December 1965, and Mariner 5 was 
launched on 14 June 1967. It flew past Venus at 10151 km 


1 


Mariner Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Mariner spacecraft. 


Mass Science payload Datarate Data storage 

Spacecraft Target (kg) (kg) (bits s~!) (megabits) 
Mariner 2 Venus 203 18 8.33 0 

Mariner 4 Mars 261 16 33.3 5.24 
Mariner 5 Venus 245 10 33.3 1 
Mariners 6,7 Mars 413 58 670 195 

Mariner 9 Mars 998 63 16 200 180 

Mariner 10 Mercury 534 78 117 600 180 


* This includes 466 kg of propellant to put the spacecraft into Mars orbit. 


from the center on 19 October and successfully conducted 
seven experiments, one day after the Soviet Venera 4 had 
dropped on the surface a landing capsule that failed to 
provide any data. 

The Plasma Probe (1), the Magnetometer (2) and 
the Energetic Particle Detectors (3) were designed to 
investigate the interaction between the planet and the 
interplanetary plasma. They determined that the magnetic 
field of Venus (if any) is much weaker than the Earth’s 
and too weak to hold off the solar wind and produce 
an Earth-like magnetosphere. However, when the solar 
wind reaches the top of the atmosphere it is deflected 
by the ionosphere so that it flows around the planet 
without touching the surface. The Ultraviolet Photometer 
(4) found large quantities of hydrogen in the upper 
atmosphere at a very low temperature, but no oxygen was 
detectable. 

Three experiments utilized the radio links to and 
from the spacecraft. The S-band Occultation Experiment 
(5), by analysing the downlink signal, obtained profiles 
of refractivity, temperature, density and pressure in 
the neutral atmosphere and of electron density in 
the ionosphere. These data demonstrated that the 
temperature was 475°C and the pressure was 90 atm at 
the surface. The Dual-Frequency Occultation Experiment 
(6), using two radio transmissions from Earth that 
were analysed on the spacecraft, obtained very detailed 
information on the ionosphere. Range and Doppler 
tracking of the spacecraft provided the Celestial Mechanics 
Experiment (7), which determined the masses of Venus 
and the Moon with unprecedented accuracy. 


Mariners 6 and 7 to Mars—1965-1969 

For the 1969 missions to Mars, the availability of the Atlas— 
Centaur launch system made possible major increases in 
the size and sophistication of the spacecraft and their 
scientific payloads. Mariner 6 was launched on 25 
February and its twin, Mariner 7, on 27 March; they flew 
by the planet on 31 July and 5 August, respectively. Each 
spacecraft carried two vidicon cameras—wide angle and 
narrow angle—and a much higher data transmission rate 
provided 200 times the picture data of Mariner 4. The 
two spacecraft acquired 143 pictures before encounter that 
showed the entire visible disk or a considerable fraction of 
it and 59 pictures near encounter that covered small areas, 
about half of which had resolutions of 0.2 km or better. 


Mariner Missions © Kluwer Academic Publishers 1997 


All the close-up pictures were in the southern hemisphere 
and, although they covered only about 10% of the surface, 
they did reveal some new surface features and laid to rest 
the myth of the Martian canals. Later missions, however, 
showed that most of the interesting features of Mars had 
been missed or misinterpreted. 

The Infrared Radiometer measured a temperature 
of 150 K on the south polar cap, indicating it to 
be carbon dioxide ice and not water ice. The 
Ultraviolet Spectrometers on both spacecraft detected 
carbon monoxide in the atmosphere but, surprisingly, saw 
no trace of nitrogen. The Radio Occultation Experiment 
confirmed the Mariner 4 finding on the atmospheric 
pressure and detected an ionosphere. The Celestial 
Mechanics Experiment measured the planet’s mass with 
unprecedented precision. 


Mariner 9 to Mars—1968-1972 

For the next Mars opportunity in 1971, the plan was 
for a dual-spacecraft orbiting mission that promised a 
large increase in information over the three earlier flybys. 
However, on 8 May the Centaur booster failed to boost 
Mariner 8 into orbit. Mariner 9, successfully launched on 
30 May, arrived at Mars on 14 November to find the planet 
shrouded by the most intense global dust storm that had 
ever been observed. Settling into its intended orbit, the 
spacecraft simply waited out the storm, which had cleared 
by March, and in 349 days of operation it achieved virtually 
all of the objectives of the dual mission. 

Mariner 9 revolutionized our understanding of Mars. 
The camera returned 7329 photographs and 54 billion data 
bits—27 times as much as the three preceding missions. 
It discovered many volcanoes, including OLYMPUS MONS, 
27 km tall, an enormous system of deep canyons, dubbed 
VALLES MARINERIS, that stretch about one-quarter of the way 
around the planet, a plethora of channels of five different 
types, many of them appearing to be ancient river beds, 
numerous evidences of eolian erosion and deposition, a 
variety of meteorological phenomena and many other 
things. 

The Infrared Radiometer Experiment measured the 
thermal inertia of the surface over much of the planet 
and found the surfaces of PHOBOS AND DEIMOS to be very 
poor thermal conductors. The Infrared Spectrometer 
Experiment detected carbon dioxide, water, dust and ice 
crystals in the atmosphere, monitored the atmospheric 


Z 


Mariner Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


temperature and determined the atmospheric pressure 
at numerous points. The Ultraviolet Spectrometer 
Experiment measured the atmospheric pressure over 
much of the surface, thus determining the relative altitude 
in many places, and measured ozone and atomic hydrogen 
in the atmosphere. 

The S-band Occultation Experiment, with more than 
300 occultations to analyze, made many measurements 
of the atmospheric temperature profile, the surface 
pressure, and the electron density in the ionosphere. The 
Celestial Mechanics Experiment, by analyzing the metric 
information in the tracking data, determined a more 
accurate description of the gravity field of the planet, 
improved the ephemeris of Mars by an order of magnitude, 
and obtained topographic data with a precision of 100 m. 


Mariner 10 to Venus and Mercury—1969-1975 

A mission to MERCURY was authorized by NASA in 
December 1969. For the first time in the Mariner program, 
the spacecraft was not to be built by JPL in house, and the 
Boeing Corporation won the contract to build it. Mariner 
10 was put on a course to Venus by an Atlas—Centaur 
rocket on 3 November 1973 and flew by the planet on 5 
February 1974 at just the proper location to be deflected 
by the gravitational field into an orbit to Mercury. This 
was the first employment of the ‘gravity-assist’ technique 
of interplanetary navigation. Mariner passed Mercury on 
29 March at a distance of 703 km and was deflected into 
a new orbit that took it around the Sun in 176 days and 
back to Mercury at intervals of exactly two Mercurian 
years. The second encounter occurred on 21 September 
at about 50000 km, the larger distance being chosen 
to extend the photographic coverage at good viewing 
angles. The third, on 16 March 1975, was targeted to 
the dark side of the planet at 327 km altitude in order to 
maximize the information about the magnetic field and the 
magnetosphere. 

Mariner 10 exhausted its attitude-control gas supply 
on 24 March 1975, and the spacecraft transmitter was 
turned off for the last time, terminating the mission after 
506 days and nearly 1.6 billion kilometers of travel. 

Mariner 10 was the most complex and sophisticated 
of all the Mariner spacecraft, and its mission achieved 
many space firsts. It was the first mission to visit two 
planets and to fly by the same planet three times. It 
was the first to return photographs in real time instead 
of storing them, as the tape recorder failed before the 
second Mercury encounter. Rotatable solar panels were 
used for the first time to maintain their temperature and 
power output through the large change in solar distance. 
‘Solar sailing’ was attempted and used successfully for 
the first time, as the positions of the solar panels and 
the high-gain antenna were manipulated to maintain the 
orientation of the spacecraft by radiation pressure without 
the expenditure of attitude-control gas; this technique 
made the third encounter possible. Optical navigation 
was employed for the first time as the cameras provided 
the angles between Mercury and stars. The Celestial 


Mariner Missions © Kluwer Academic Publishers 1997 


Mechanics Experiment had available, for the first time, 
radio signals in both X- and S-band. 

The TV camera was equipped with two CASSEGRAIN 
TELESCOPES to provide high- and low-resolution pictures 
and a filter wheel to permit photography in several 
wavelength bands, including the ultraviolet. It returned 
more than 1000 pictures of Earth and Moon, 3500 pictures 
of Venus and 3700 pictures of Mercury, a small number of 
which had resolution as small as 134 m. They provided 
very detailed coverage of the clouds of Venus (made 
possible by the ultraviolet sensitivity of the cameras) 
and the surface of Mercury. The motion of the clouds 
appeared to indicate that the primary circulation pattern 
on Venus is vertical upward motion at the subsolar point 
and subsidence over the poles. 

Mercury was found to look generally like the Moon, 
but with some distinctly non-lunar features, including 
large scarps or cliffs nearly 3 km high and as much as 
500 km long, probably indicative of crustal shrinkage. The 
density of small craters was surprisingly similar to that 
on the Moon and Mars, implying that all these planets 
received similar intensities of meteorite bombardment, 
contrary to earlier assumptions. 

A major and unexpected discovery was an intrinsic 
magnetic field, which, although about 60 times weaker 
than Earth’s, was sufficient to produce a bow shock and a 
magnetosphere that was a miniature copy of Earth’s. 

The scientific payload included also a Radio Science 
Experiment, a Solar Plasma Experiment, a Charged 
Particle Telescope, an Infrared Radiometer and two 
Ultraviolet Spectrometers. One of these was designed 
for detecting planetary airglow; the other, intended for 
sounding Mercury’s atmosphere by looking at the sun as it 
was occulted, also made observations on Comet Kohoutek 
and the Gum Nebula. It detected a very sparse atmosphere 
of helium on Mercury. Surface temperature extremes 
of 90 K and 460 K were measured by the radiometer. 
The Radio Science Experiment measured the diameter 
and mass of Mercury with unprecedented precision and 
detected no trace of an ionosphere. 

The exploration of the solar system, ably initiated 
by the Mariner series, was continued by spacecraft called 
VIKING and. VOYAGER. 


Bibliography 

The scientific results of each successful mission were 
reported during and after the mission by papers in Science 
and Journal of Geophysical Research. 


Ezell E C and Ezell L N 1984 On Mars: Exploration of 
the Red Planet, 1958-1978 Scientific Publication 4212 
(Washington, DC: NASA) 

Koppes C R 1982 JPL and the American Space Program (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press) 

Snyder C W and Moroz V I 1992 Spacecraft exploration 
of Mars Mars ed H H Kieffer, B M Jakosky, C W 
Snyder and M S Matthews (Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) ch 3, pp 71-119 


Conway W Snyder 


3 


Marius [Mayr], Simon (1573-1624) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Marius [Mayr], Simon (1573-1624) 


Astronomer, born in Gunzenhausen, Bavaria, Germany, 
competitor of GaLiLeo. Educated in astronomy and 
meteorology, he was appointed mathematician of the 
Margrave of Ansbach in 1601, printing an annual almanac 
as part of his duties. Went to Prague to study with TycHo 
BRAHE, moved to Padua to study medicine. Observed 
the nova of 1604 with BALDESSAR CAPRA and helped Capra 
published a book on it. Capra lost his reputation by 
flagrantly plagiarizing a manuscript by Galileo and was 
expelled from the university. The scandal tainted Marius, 
who moved back to Ansbach where he learned in 1609 
from an artillery officer, Freiherr Hans Philip Fuchs, that 
a Dutchman had tried to sell him a telescope. Marius 
grasped the concept and realized it with a telescope which 
he used to observe Jupiter. He claimed in a book of 
1614, Mundus lovialis Anno M.DC.IX Detectus Ope Perspicilli 
Belgici (The Jovian World, discovered in 1609 by means of 
the Dutch Telescope), that he had first observed Jupiter’s 
moons in December 1609, a month before Galileo. The 
claim infuriated Galileo, coming from someone involved 
in an earlier theft of Galileo’s work, and especially as there 
were unresolved inconsistencies in the observations and 
dates. Whatever the truth of that matter, Marius’s names 
for the satellites stuck. Mundus Iovialis contains Marius’ 
telescopic observation of M31, the Andromeda nebula, 
something that he independently discovered, although it 
had been observed around AD 905 and documented in aD 
964 by the Persian astronomer AL-suFI, in his Book of Fixed 
Stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars 


Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun and the most 
Earth-like. Its radius is only half that of the Earth, it is sig- 
nificantly colder and has a much thinner atmosphere 
(table 1). However, the Martian environment is the most 
similar to the terrestrial one in the solar system: most 
atmospheric and geologic processes have their equiva- 
lent on our planet, for instance the global atmospheric 
circulation and the volcanic processes. One of the major 
differences is related to the absence of liquid water at the 
surface in the present conditions, although there is much 
evidence that liquid water existed in the past. 

Initial data from NASA’s Mars Odyssey gamma ray 
spectrometer instrument suite has been used to detect 
hydrogen, which indicates the presence of water ice in 
the upper meter (three feet) of soil in a large region sur- 
rounding the planet’s south pole. The amount of hydro- 
gen detected indicates 20 to 50% ice by mass in the lower 
layer. Because rock has a greater density than ice, this 
amount is more than 50% water ice by volume. 

Mars is one of the brightest objects in the sky and 
therefore has been known since the earliest antiquity. 
Because of its distinct red color, strong brightness and 
strange movement in the sky, it has often been associated 
with death or war by the oldest civilizations; its modern 
name is actually that of the Roman god of war. 
Historically, the observation of Mars has often triggered 
important astronomical progress. This is still true in the 
modern era, since Mars has been the target of more than 
30 spacecraft as of this writing. The reasons for this situ- 
ation are not only that Mars is the most accessible planet 
but also that it has the most Earth-like environment and 


Table 1. Mars’ main characteristics. 


Mars Earth 
Mass 6.4185-1023 kg 59.75-1075 kg 
Mean radius 3389.92 km 6 388 km 
Mean density 3.9335 g cm-3 5.52 g cm 
Moment of inertia —_ 0.366240.0017 0.3308 
Semimajor axis 227.94-10° km 149.6-10° km 
Eccentricity 0.0934. 0.0167 
Orbital period 686.98 Earth days 365.256 Earth days 
Sinodic period 779.94 Earth days — 
Rotational period 24.6229 h 23.9345 h 
Obliquity 25.19° 23.45° 
Equatorial surface 
gravity 3.727 m s* 9.78 ms? 
Equatorial escape 
velocity 5.027 km s-1 11.18 km s-! 
Mean atmospheric 
pressure 5.6 mbar 1013 mbar 
Mean surface , 
temperature 63 A°C 13°C 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


is probably the most favorable location for the develop- 
ment of life in the solar system: although the current con- 
ditions at the surface are actually very hostile to life, this 
was almost certainly different in a distant past. Mars is 
therefore likely to become the first planet where humans 
will go, although this still appears a rather distant issue. 

The two satellites of Mars are also interesting 
objects. They were discovered only in the late 19th cen- 
tury because of their very small size and proximity to 
Mars. Both satellites are very dark and have a very low 
density, indicating that they are most probably captured 
asteroids (see PHOBOS AND DEIMOS). Because of their 
orbital position around Mars, they are the most easily 
accessed objects of this type, although they probably suf- 
fer processes that are not common on other asteroids, in 
particular higher impact fluxes. 


Observations and space exploration 
The physical study of Mars began with the invention of 
the telescope at the beginning of the 17th century. Galileo 
first demonstrated the spherical shape of the planet from 
his telescopic observations. Some 70 yr later, Christiaan 
Huygens and G D Cassini had recognized the main char- 
acteristics of the planet (see MARS: SURFACE). The study of 
Mars improved very quickly at the end of the 19th cen- 
tury, when the progress of optical instruments made it 
possible to observe the high variability of the surface and 
atmosphere. However, it was only in the 1950s that 
atmospheric studies really developed, and many incor- 
rect ideas were widely accepted at the beginning of the 
space era (see MARS: ATMOSPHERE). The first synthesis of 
modern observations was published by G de 
Vaucouleurs in 1954; it was generally considered at this 
time that the atmosphere was mainly composed of nitro- 
gen, with a total pressure of 85 mbar—15 times the actu- 
al value—and that, although chlorophyll plants were cer- 
tainly absent, surface variations could be due to the sea- 
sonal growth of lichen at the surface. Mars is therefore a 
dramatic example of how space exploration completely 
changed our perception of the solar system (see SOLAR 
SYSTEM: EXPLORATION). The earliest attempt to visit Mars 
was made by the Soviet Union in 1960. After six failures 
on the US and Soviet sides, Mariner 4 (see MARINER MIS- 
SIONS) finally returned images of Mars in 1965, during the 
first flyby of another planet. The results of the mission 
were actually surprising, since the oldest terrains resem- 
bled the Moon much more than the Earth—a view con- 
firmed during the next flybys by Mariner 6 and 7 in 1969. 
Mariner 9, the first spacecraft orbiting Mars in 1971, 
produced the first systematic mapping and analysis of 
the atmosphere. These data allowed us to obtain a full 
view of Mars’ complexity, in particular concerning the 
surface characteristics of the planet and its very complex 
geologic history. In 1976 Viking (see VIKING MISSION), a 
very complete mission consisting of two orbiters and two 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. View of Mars acquired in June 1998 by Mars Global 
Surveyor, taken from low orbit, centered on northern Tharsis. 
Olmypus Mons is left of center and Ascraeus Mons at the lower 
right. Olympus Mons is about 550 km across. The image was 
taken during northern winter; clouds and haze can be seen to 
the north (up) above Olympus Mons. The morning terminator 
runs left of Olympus Mons. (Mars Global Surveyor image 
MRPS88925.) 


landers, was successfully delivered to Mars and per- 
formed observations until 1982. Most of our current 
knowledge of Mars is still derived from the analysis of 
these data. Other, more limited, results were acquired by 
Mars 2 and 3 (1971), Mars 4, 5 and 6 (1973), Phobos 2 
(1989), and Mars Pathfinder (1997). After the failures of 
two major missions (Mars Observer in 1992 and Mars-96 
in 1996), the exploration of Mars was revived with the 
launch of Mars Global Surveyor (NASA) (figure 1 and 
figure 2) in 1996 and the approval of the Mars Express 
mission (ESA), which should complete the phase of glob- 
al characterization of the planet. The next major step will 
focus on in situ analyses, most notably with the Mars 
sample return project (NASA-CNES-ASI) scheduled for 
the period 2003-8. 

Another, unexpected source of data concerning 
Mars was identified in the early 1980s. Several volcanic 
meteorites (called the SNC METEORITES) were identified as 
Martian in origin because of their young crystallization 
ages (150 My-1.3 Gy) and particular isotopic ratios simi- 
lar to the Martian atmosphere. There are currently 13 
SNC meteorites in collections that are thought to have 
been ejected during large impact events. The analysis of 
these rocks has helped put very strong constraints on the 
evolution of Mars, notably concerning its formation. 
They are not as useful as collected samples, however, 
because their source area is unknown and because we do 
not know to what extent they are typical of the Martian 
rocks. 


Dynamics and climate 

The movement of Mars in the sky is spectacular since, 
like all external planets, it has a retrograde motion when 
it approaches Earth at its closest distance. In the case of 
Mars the variation of the apparent speed is very quick, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


km 


aie 2 
180° 240° 


Figure 2. Topographic map of the equatorial regions of Mars, 
retrieved from radar measurements by Mars Global Surveyor 
(Mercator projection). The vertical acuracy is approximately 5 
m. Obvious on the map are the hemispheric dichotomy, with 
cratered highlands in the south and younger low plains in the 
north, the Tharsis and Elysium domes at 260° and 150° longi- 
tude, the giant volcanoes of Tharsis, Olympus Mons (18°N, 
228°E) and Elysium Mons (25°N, 150°E), Valles Marineris and 
the outflow channels (0°N, 340°E), and the two large basins in 
the southern hemisphere, Argyre (50°S, 320°E) and Hellas 
(45°N, 110°E) has been interpreted as further evidence for a pos- 
sible ancient seafloor from these data. (Credit: NASA-MOLA 
Science Team.) 


and the magnitude of this movement is much more 
marked than for Jupiter or Saturn. The very large varia- 
tion of Mars’ brightness with distance from Earth (about 
a factor of 50) was one of the major drawbacks of the 
antique geocentric system. In the modern period, the pre- 
cise observations of Mars by Tycho Brahe led Kepler to 
state his laws of planetary motion, and in particular to 
reject the old assumption that planetary orbits are circu- 
lar—indeed, Mars has by far the largest eccentricity 
among the ‘regular’ planets. 

This orbital particularity has a deep impact on the 
Martian climate: there is a marked difference in seasonal 
length between the two hemispheres, with a longer and 
colder winter in the south at present, resulting in compo- 
sitional differences between the polar caps, with a per- 
manent water-ice cap exposed only in the north. This sit- 
uation reverses every 25000 yr, which may have induced 
large climatic variations in the past. On a time scale of 
10 Myr, the periodic variations of obliquity (15°-35°) 
probably govern the climatic change, by changing the 
magnitude of seasonal effects. On longer time scales, 
these variations are chaotic and obliquity may range 
between 0° and 60°. This situation is unique among ter- 
restrial planets, because Mars has not been stabilized by 
a massive satellite, like the Earth-Moon system, or by 
tidal dissipation like Mercury or Venus. As a conse- 
quence, Mars may have suffered very different climatic 
environments in the distant past, with a very different 
repartition of volatiles between the main reservoirs 
(polar caps, regolith, permafrost, atmosphere and possi- 
ble water bodies). Indeed, the morphologic evidence 
suggests that liquid water ran at the surface not only at 
the end of the period of heavy bombardment when the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


atmosphere was thicker (3.8 Gyr ago) but also much 
more recently during several different episodes. In both 
cases, this would have required higher surface tempera- 
tures than at present, and therefore a GREENHOUSE EFFECT 
with larger atmospheric pressures. This is specially true 
during the early stages of the solar system (see ORIGIN OF 
THE SOLAR SYSTEM): according to stellar evolution models 
the Sun was 30% dimmer than it is today, so that the CO, 
pressure had to be at least 2-3 bar to permit such tem- 
peratures, which is consistent with estimates of planetary 
outgassing (see PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). However, one 
of the main issues concerning the evolution of Mars is 
related to the stability of the primordial atmosphere and 
to the transition to a colder, lower-pressure environment. 
Another controversial topic concerns the possible exis- 
tence of lakes or oceans during later episodes of climatic 
warming. 


Internal structure and composition 

Although the Viking landers were equipped with two 
seismometers, these experiments provided very few 
results about the internal structure of Mars. Most ideas in 
this field are derived from orbiting spacecraft and from 
the composition of SNC meteorites. 

Mars, like the other terrestrial planets, is probably 
divided into a crust, mantle and core (see PLANETARY INTE- 
Riors). The thickness and density of the core can be con- 
strained from the knowledge of mass, radius and 
moment of inertia of the planet, with a rather large 
uncertainty. Although Mars Pathfinder measured the 
moment of inertia with a sufficient accuracy in 1997, two 
models are compatible with the current data: Mars could 
possess either a small core of high density (a core of iron 
would represent 15% of the planet’s mass for a radius of 
1300 km), or a large low-density core (a mixture of sulfur 
and iron representing 25% of the planet’s mass for a 
radius of 2000 km). The first model is more similar to the 
Earth’s core, but studies of the SNC meteorites’ composi- 
tion rather suggest a large fraction of nickel (~45%) and 
sulfur (~12%) in the core. The latter figure, while uncer- 
tain, is important because a high fraction of sulfur would 
slow down the solidification rate of the core through geo- 
logic times. The lack of strong magnetic field on a global 
scale implies that the core is not convecting and is there- 
fore either completely solid or liquid. A magnetic field 
does exist at the surface, however, which was perhaps 
induced by a past planetary field, suggesting that a 
dynamo effect has existed, but stopped at a certain time 
as the core became solid and stably stratified. 

The mantle thickness is estimated to be between 
1500 and 2100 km, depending on the core properties. 
Globally, Mars is richer than Earth in Fe and poorer in Al. 
The mantle itself is traditionally divided into an upper 
and a lower mantle, the limit corresponding to the 
olivine-spinel phase transition. The upper mantle is esti- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


mated to be 900-1100 km thick and to be mainly com- 
posed of olivine and orthopyroxenes plus clinopyrox- 
enes at moderate depth, like on Earth. The amount of 
water is estimated to be between 0.004% and 1% in mass. 
In the lower mantle, olivine is replaced by spinel and 
orthopyroxene by majorite. Other, higher-pressure phase 
transitions (e.g. f-spinel to y-spinel) may occur in the 
lower mantle, depending on the core size and composi- 
tion, and on temperature at the base of the mantle. The 
spinel—perovskite transition may have been present only 
early in the history of the planet, when mantle tempera- 
tures were higher. 

The mantle is covered by a crust with significantly 
lower density, the thickness of which is poorly con- 
strained (it depends on the density difference between 
the crust and the mantle). Estimates of the mean crustal 
thickness vary between 28-40 km and 150 km. Large spa- 
tial variations exist anyhow, with minimal and maximal 
values beneath the Hellas basin and the Tharsis dome 
respectively (8-10 km and up to 70 km in the first model 
mentioned). The hemispheric asymmetry is interpreted 
as related to a thickening of the crust under the southern 
highlands. The SNC meteorites suggest that the crust is 
primarily basaltic in composition, although a material 
similar to that of the terrestrial continents or the lunar 
highlands may exist. 


Formation and thermal evolution 

Mars has accumulated from planetesimals with compo- 
sition slightly different from the Earth. Models of the 
primitive nebula and SNC meteorites’ composition sug- 
gest that the material was richer in iron and volatile ele- 
ments than the Earth. Consequently, Mars’ interior 
would have been richer in water initially. Most out- 
gassing probably took place very early when the heat 
flow was very high (prior to 4.2 Gyr ago), contributing to 
the early atmosphere. 

The isotopic and elemental ratios measured in the 
SNC meteorites demonstrate that core formation hap- 
pened very early and was finished just after accretion 
4.6 Gyr ago. This implies that accretional heating alone 
was large enough to melt all the material very early, like 
on Earth and Venus, so that Mars was initially hot and 
differentiated. This is in strong contrast with previous 
ideas concerning the thermal history of Mars, where heat- 
ing was assumed to result mostly from radiogenic activi- 
ty, therefore taking place after accretion and much more 
slowly. Consequently, the initial thermal profile was 
assumed to be of the present kind, ie. temperature 
decreased with increasing distance from the center. 
Another very large amount of energy was released dur- 
ing core formation itself as the denser materials sank to 
the center, enough to heat the whole planet by about 
300 K. As a consequence, mantle convection was very 
active during the first few 100 Myr, producing substantial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


volcanic activity at the surface. It has been proposed that 
the Martian surface was completely melted in the early 
times and was covered by a magma ocean like 
the Moon. The estimated heat flow decreased from 
200-400 mW m- after formation to ~150 mW m- at the 
end of the heavy bombardment and to ~30 mW m2 
today. An important topic in future space missions is 
actually to measure the present heat flow to better con- 
strain the evolution models. 

During differentiation, as the core formed, metallic 
iron reacted with water in the interior to form iron 
oxides, and a massive hydrogen loss probably accompa- 
nied this process. The different models and estimates dis- 
agree on the amount of water left in the mantle and sur- 
face at the end of the heavy bombardment, i.e. at the time 
when the oldest terrains formed. However, the equiva- 
lent of several hundred meters of water precipitated on 
the surface seems required to explain the erosional fea- 
tures observed. 

After most of the heat was dissipated to space, man- 
tle convection slowed down and volcanic activity was 
restricted to local areas. The internal structure of the 
planet was not modified, except for a slow thickening of 
the lithosphere (the external and most rigid shell) as the 
planet cooled down; the present thickness is estimated to 
be ~120 km. Rapid interior cooling was accompanied by 
a global contraction, which produced the wrinkle ridges 
observed in oldest terrains. The dense atmosphere which 
is assumed at the time when oldest terrains were 
exposed probably dissipated at the same period, as a 
consequence of the end of widespread volcanic activity. 
Volcanism was then restricted to discrete areas of the sur- 
face, in particular to the domes of Tharsis and Elysium. 


West Longitude 


a ) TT 

-1500 1) 1500 
Figure 3. Map of the magnetic field in the southern hemisphere, 
measured by Mars Global Surveyor in 1999. The global magnet- 
ic field itself is much smaller than the Earth’s, but significant 
magnetic anomalies were measured in the old terrains of the 
southern hemisphere. The strongest anomalies form stripes of 
alternating polarities ~1000 km long and 200 km wide, which 
are oriented east-west. They are thought to be fossils of a past 
planetary field that would have stopped early in the history of 
the planet. The stripes could result from occasional reversals of 
the magnetic field, like on Earth, suggesting lateral motions of 
the surface materials on early Mars. (Credit: NASA.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Constraints on structure and evolution 

After a long controversy during the 1970s and 1980s, the 
first detailed measurements of the magnetic field were 
performed by Mars Global Surveyor in 1999 (figure 3). No 
global field was detected, but strong magnetic anomalies 
were observed in the highlands of the southern hemi- 
sphere. This remnant magnetism is thought to have been 
induced in surface materials at a time when the planet 
had a global magnetic field related to a dynamo effect, 
and therefore had a convective core. Younger plains in the 
northern hemisphere show no evidence of magnetism, 
suggesting that the dynamo had stopped when the hemi- 
spheric dichotomy formed, and that these regions suf- 
fered major heating (either from impacts or from volcan- 
ism) that obliterated all remnant magnetic signature. In 
the south, magnetic anomalies display a regular pattern 
of stripes with alternating polarity. The stripes are ~1000 
km long and 200 km wide and are oriented east—west, 
presenting a similarity to magnetic patterns observed on 
the terrestrial seafloors. It has been proposed that these 
anomalies are traces of successive reversals of the polari- 
ty of the early magnetic field which were trapped in sur- 
face materials drifting over the mantle. This would imply 
that some form of lateral plate tectonics had been active in 
the southern hemisphere of Mars just after surface forma- 
tion and had stopped when the northern plains formed. 
However, the Martian surface is globally dominated by 
extensional tectonics rather than plate tectonics, so that 
this possible process, if it really occurred, stopped early in 
the history of the planet. 

Modeling shows that the mantle convection is dom- 
inated by deep upwelling in the form of cylindrical 
plumes, similar to the terrestrial hot spots. In contrast, 
sheet-like, shallow upwelling similar to terrestrial plate 
tectonics cannot occur on Mars at present because of the 
thick lithosphere. Convection models can be run with 
different temperature profiles inside the planet. When 
most of the mantle heating comes from below (hot core), 
a larger number of plumes is produced (from 6 to 15 
when using reasonable profiles for Mars). The presence 
of phase transitions of olivine appears to be an important 
factor in the plumes’ geometry. They act to merge the 
plumes and reduce their number, and to concentrate 
their energy, and therefore models using these phase 
transitions give a better match of the general characteris- 
tics of the Martian surface. Some of these plumes would 
have a prominent surface expression in the surface 
topography and volcanic flux. This mechanism could 
explain the origin of the two major volcanic domes of 
Mars (Tharsis and Elysium) and of the hemispheric 
dichotomy. In the latter case, a very small core size (20% 
of the radius) is required to produce a strong asymmetry, 
so that the dichotomy, if related to mantle convection, 
should have formed very early, contemporaneously with 
core formation and accretion; alternatively, the dichoto- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


my could be related to a giant impact after the end of the 
heavy bombardment. Concerning the two volcanic cen- 
ters, they are likely to be the results of strong mantle 
plumes beneath the two regions. Because there are only 
two such regions at the surface, they probably formed 
early in the history of the planet when the heat flow was 
largest. 


Biology and search for life 
Although the idea that some form of life probably 
existed on Mars was widely accepted at the end of the 
19th century, this view changed with the first studies of 
the atmosphere, which demonstrated that Mars is a cold 
planet with a rather unfavorable environment. The pic- 
ture of an Earth-like Mars itself did not survive the first 
flyby by Mariner 4; the 22 close-up pictures transmitted 
by the spacecraft were acquired in the old terrains, and 
showed only very craterized areas, much more similar to 
the Moon than to the Earth. In addition, the first spectro- 
scopic measurements at high resolution showed that the 
present atmosphere is too thin to allow for liquid water 
or to protect the surface from the ultraviolet radiation. 

The situation changed again with the first complete 
mapping in 1971 by Mariner 9. It indicated that Mars had 
once been a very active planet and that water had run on 
the surface, possibly forming lakes or even transient 
oceans. In these conditions, it was possible that a complex 
prebiotic chemistry had developed in the distant past or 
even that life had originated on Mars. If so, there was a 
possibility that it had survived the worsening conditions, 
so that the search for extant life was one of the main goals 
of the Viking mission in 1976. Three biology experiments 
were embarked on the Viking landers to test whether bio- 
logical activity was still detectable at the surface. All 
results are consistent with simple oxidation reactions in 
inorganic materials, although some results were consid- 
ered marginally positive at first and are not completely 
understood today. There is a general agreement as to the 
results of the Viking biological experiments, that no bio- 
logical process has been caught in action. These do not 
imply, however, that ancient Martian life could not have 
survived in particular places where more favorable con- 
ditions would have lasted longer, if it ever existed. 

The debate was renewed in 1996 when the group of 
D McKay announced that it had found possible evidence 
of fossil life in one of the SNC meteorites, called ALH 
84001 (figure 4). The possible fossils are very primitive 
bacteria, i.e. monocelled organisms with no nuclei, that 
would have lived ~3.6 Gyr ago. The meteorite was found 
in Antarctica in 1984 and was identified as Martian in ori- 
gin because of the composition of its gaseous inclusions; 
however, it differs from other SNC meteorites by its age, 
being much older than the others (44.5 Gyr, versus 
1.3 Gyr). It was ejected from Mars by a meteoritic impact 
16 Myr ago, and fell on Earth about 13000 yr ago. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 4. Electron microscope image of ALH 84001, one of the 
SNC meteorites. The globules of carbonates present in this 
essentially volcanic rock contain very small, elongated struc- 
tures similar in size and shape to modern terrestrial bacteria 
(their sizes range from 20 to 100 nm). Although 100 times small- 
er than organisms that were widespread on Earth 3.5 Gyr ago, 
these structures have been tentatively interpreted as fossils of 
primitive Martian bacteria, although other teams have proposed 
different interpretations. (Credit: Science + NASA.) 


Although essentially basaltic, it contains small globules 
of magnesium carbonates than were probably formed in 
liquid water about 3.6 Gyr ago. At this time, the Martian 
atmosphere was probably much thicker than today and 
valley networks formed in the southern highlands, sug- 
gesting abundant liquid water at the surface. 

In 2001, high-resolution pictures taken by the Mars 
Orbiter Camera on NASA's Mars Global Surveyor space- 
craft show distinct, thick layers of rock within craters and 
other depressions, suggesting that they may have 
formed in lakes or shallow seas. Such layered rock struc- 
tures where there were once lakes are common on Earth. 
The pancake-like layers of sediment have compressed 
and cemented to form a rock record of the planet's histo- 
ry. The regions of sedimentary layers on Mars are spread 
out and scattered around the planet. They are most com- 
mon within impact craters of Western Arabia Terra, the 
inter-crater plains of northern Terra Meridiani, the 
chasms of the Valles Marineris, and parts of the north- 
eastern Hellas Basin rim. 

D McKay’s group identified three types of peculiar 
objects inside the carbonate grains. They consist of small 
structures resembling terrestrial bacteria, small mineral 
grains similar to those produced by bacteria on Earth 
and organic compounds (polycyclic aromatic hydrocar- 
bons (PAHs)) that resemble the decay products of bacte- 
ria on Earth. All these structures could have a different 
origin not related to life, but taken together they were 
considered as strong evidence for ancient life, although 
not conclusive proof. Three years later, and after a large 
mobilization of the scientific community on this topic, 
the issue is very uncertain. ALH 84001 is certainly the 
most studied rock in the world, and all the observations 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are on the edge of what can be done with the current 
techniques and instruments; in particular, the possible 
fossils are only ~100 nm long—this is actually from very 
different fossils of bacteria that lived at the same time on 
Earth, which were 100 times larger although similar in 
shape. Some of the structures observed are definitely not 
related to measurement artifacts, but it has not been 
demonstrated that the structures mentioned above are 
not terrestrial pollutants that entered the meteorite after 
its fall, although there is still no consensus as to their 
Martian origin. The weakest point in the demonstration 
is probably related to what is not observed: in particular 
there is no observation of bacterial growth or reproduc- 
tion, and nothing looking like cell walls. 

Apart from its proper interest, the study of hypo- 
thetical early Martian life would be of primordial interest 
to understand how life developed on Earth. The two 
planets were in many ways similar during their early 
years, so that the same processes should have acted on 
the two planets. There are very few traces of the early 
stages of life on Earth, because most of the older rocks 
have been recycled by plate tectonics or destroyed by 
erosion. Even if life has never developed on Mars, the 
study of prebiotic chemistry would give precious clues 
as to the apparition of terrestrial life. 

The search for extant life is still a priority for future 
missions to Mars. The relatively recent discovery of life 
in very hostile environments on Earth, such as hot sub- 
marine springs or dry deserts in Antarctica, is actually a 
strong indication that life can survive in extreme condi- 
tions. Although the most favorable locations on Mars are 
not known, three ingredients seem required to maintain 
life: liquid water, protection from the solar UV flux and 
some source of energy. Accordingly, the most favorable 
locations include older volcanic vents, possible lacus- 
trine deposits in the canyons, hydrothermal deposits, 
and high-latitude water-rich deposits where transient 
liquid water may still exist today inside the regolith. 
Liquid water probably also exists at the base of the per- 
mafrost, where the geothermal flux melts the ice in the 
ground. In all cases, living organisms would preferably 
dwell underground, at depths large enough to protect 
them from the UV flux. 


Conclusion: main issues 

There have been two main phases in the history of Mars. 
The first billion years were characterized by high internal 
temperatures, vigorous mantle convection, high heat 
flow, intense volcanic activity and perhaps a significant 
magnetic field. Volcanic activity probably helped to 
maintain a thick atmosphere of CO,, and several hun- 
dred meters of liquid water were apparently available at 
the surface to shape the valley networks in the oldest ter- 
rains. Then, as accretional and differentiation heat dissi- 
pated, and as radiogenic heating decreased, the whole 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


planet cooled down very quickly. Mantle convection 
slowed down, the magnetic field froze as the core proba- 
bly became less convective and atmospheric recycling 
became inefficient, so that the total pressure became too 
low to sustain high temperatures and liquid water. This 
major change took place shortly after the end of the 
heavy bombardment period, 3.8 Gyr ago. 

Although Mars now appears as an old, exhausted 
planet with only marginal geologic activity, there are 
numerous hints of large climate changes in a much more 
recent period. Variations of obliquity probably result in 
major climatic changes by governing the magnitude of 
seasonal effects. In the long run, these variations are 
chaotic and may have produced episodes of hot climate, 
when liquid water could have formed lakes or even 
oceans in more or less stable conditions. 

NASA’s Global Surveyor has revealed images which 
suggests the Martian climate is changing significantly, 
even today. The observations were made during a full 
Martian year, 687 Earth days and show that pits— 
often referred to as the ‘Swiss cheese’ terrain—at the 
southern polar ice cap of Mars have dramatically 
increased in diameter, indicating the material has evapo- 
rated rapidly compared to last year. Images of the south 
polar cap taken in 1999 were compared with images of 
the same locations taken in 2001, and it was discovered 
that pits had enlarged, mesas had shrunk, and small 
buttes had vanished. In all, the scarps that enclose the 
pits and bound the mesas and buttes retreated about 3 m 
in one Martian year. This rapid retreat of polar scarps can 
only occur if the ice is frozen carbon dioxide (dry ice). 
Retreat of scarps made of water ice is much slower and 
would not have been measurable from one Martian year 
to the next. 

Early Mars was apparently very similar to early 
Earth, so that the study of the red planet can give useful 
hints about the Earth’s evolution. In particular, the issue 
of prebiotic chemistry and the origin of terrestrial life 
could be addressed by the future Mars exploration pro- 
gram. Other major questions arise, especially concern- 
ing the evolution of the atmosphere and climate, the 
internal structure and the formation of the surface. 
These questions can be answered by understanding the 
types of rocks present at the surface and in the mantle, 
the absolute age of the surface regions, the distribution 
of volatiles, the history of volcanic activity and heat 
flow, the origin of the hemispheric dichotomy and 
Tharsis and their relationship with mantle convection, 
and by comparisons with other solar system bodies. 
These issues can be addressed by combining remote 
sensing observations, in situ analyses and laboratory 
studies of returned samples. Remote sensing is expected 
to provide a global knowledge of mineralogic and ele- 
mental composition related to morphology and a better 
map of the remnant magnetic field and of the gravity 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


field, so as to better constrain the geologic evolution and 
processes that shaped the surface; in addition, it should 
help identify the most promising landing sites. 
Concerning in situ measurements, a seismic network 
and a set of small meteorological stations are among the 
highest priorities, together with rock analyses and bio- 
logic experiments. Finally, only laboratory studies of 
Martian samples will provide the opportunity to deter- 
mine the absolute ages and detailed composition. These 
points will constitute the bulk of the on-going Mars 
exploration program that will culminate with a sample 
return. 


Bibliography 

Beatty J, Petersen C and Chaikin A 1999 The New Solar 
System 4th edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Carr M 1996 Water on Mars (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) 

Cattermole P 1992 Mars (London: Chapman & Hall) 

Kieffer H H et al (eds) 1993 Mars (Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) (review papers concerning nearly 
all aspects of Mars, mostly at professional level; the 
first chapters present a very good review of histori- 
cal observations and previous syntheses up to the 
late 1980s) 

Sheehan W 1996 The Planet Mars: a History of Observation 
and Discovery (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) (accessible to the general reader, very well 
documented) 

Spohn T, Sohl F and Breuer D 1998 Mars Astron. 
Astrophys. Rev. 8 181-236 (mainly focused on inter- 
nal structure and bulk composition) 

Weissman P, McFadden L-A and Johnson T 1999 
Encyclopedia of the Solar System (New York: 
Academic) 

Stéphane Erard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars 


Series of Soviet spacecraft designed to return data about 
the planet Mars 1960-74. After several launch failures, 
Mars 1 successfully left Earth orbit in 1962 but contact was 
lost en route. Mars 2 and 3 arrived during the 1971 global 
duststorm which obscured the planet’s surface, so no 
useful pictures were obtained. They also carried landers 
and the first automated planetary roving vehicles, but 
these either crashed or failed to operate in the duststorm 
conditions. Mars 4 failed to go into orbit around the 
planet in 1974. Some images were returned by Mars 4 
and 5 orbiters. Atmospheric data were returned during 
descent of the Mars 6 lander, but contact was lost prior 
to touchdown. The Mars 7 lander missed the planet by 
1300 km. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars Express ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars Express 


Mars orbiter proposed by the European Space Agency. 
Expected to launch in 2003. May carry a small British- 
led lander called Beagle-2 which will search for life by 
burrowing under rocks and analysing soil samples. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mars Global Surveyor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars Global Surveyor 


NASA Mars orbiter. Launched November 1996, arrived 
at Mars in September 1997. Carries an advanced camera 
system to map the planet at high resolution, a thermal- 
emission spectrometer and two magnetometers. 
Discovered regional magnetic fields and mapped global 
topography. Prime mapping mission, delayed when a 
faulty solar array prevented aerobraking, began in March 
1999. 


Breaking News Update (30 April 2002) 
NASA’s Global Surveyor has revealed images which 
suggests the Martian climate is changing significantly, 
even today. The observations were made during a full 
Martian year, 687 Earth days and show that pits—often 
referred to as the ‘Swiss cheese’ terrain—at the southern 
polar ice cap of Mars have dramatically increased in 
diameter, indicating the material has evaporated rapidly 
compared to last year. Images of the south polar cap 
taken in 1999 were compared with images of the same 
locations taken in 2001, and it was discovered that pits 
had enlarged, mesas had shrunk, and small buttes had 
vanished. In all, the scarps that enclose the pits and 
bound the mesas and buttes retreated about 3 m in one 
Martian year. This rapid retreat of polar scarps can only 
occur if the ice is frozen carbon dioxide (dry ice). Retreat 
of scarps made of water ice is much slower and would 
not have been measurable from one Martian year to the 
next. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars Odyssey 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars Odyssey 


Mars Odyssey is part of NASA’s Mars Exploration 
Program, a long-term effort of robotic exploration of the 
red planet. 2001 Mars Odyssey was launched on 7 April 
2001 and arrived at Mars on 24 October 2001, 02:30 
Universal Time. Firing of the main engine slowed the 
spacecraft’s speed and allowed it to be captured by Mars’ 
gravity into an elliptical orbit around the planet. 
Aerobraking—using atmospheric drag on the spacecraft— 
has reduced the long, highly elliptical orbit into a shorter, 2 
h circular orbit of approximately 400 km (about 250 miles) 
altitude for the mission’s science data collection. 

Mars Odyssey has begun its science mapping mis- 
sion, turning its science instruments towards Mars on 
Monday, 18 February, 2002. Odyssey’s primary science 
mission will continue through to July 2004. The primary 
mission objective is to map the amount and distribution 
of chemical elements and minerals that make up the 
Martian surface, including hydrogen (most likely in the 
form of water ice in the shallow subsurface of Mars). It 
will also record the radiation environment in low Mars 
orbit to determine the radiation-related risk to any future 
human explorers. 

The three primary instruments carried by 2001 Mars 
Odyssey are as follows: 


THEMIS (Thermal Emission Imaging System), for deter- 
mining the distribution of minerals, particularly those 
that can only form in the presence of water; 

GRS (Gamma Ray Spectrometer), for determining the 
presence of 20 chemical elements on the surface of 
Mars; 

MARIE (Mars Radiation Environment Experiment), for 
studying the radiation environment. 


During and after its science mission, the Odyssey 
orbiter will also support other missions in the Mars 
Exploration Program. It will provide the communica- 
tions relay for US and international landers, including 
the next mission in NASA’s Mars Program, the Mars 
Exploration Rovers to be launched in 2003. Scientists and 
engineers will also use Odyssey data to identify potential 
landing sites for future Mars missions. 

One of the first images returned by the Mars Odyssey 
was a thermal infrared image of the Martian southern 
hemisphere that captured the polar carbon dioxide ice cap 
at a temperature of about -120 °C (-184 °F). The image, 
taken as part of the calibration process for the instrument, 
shows the nighttime temperatures of Mars, demonstrating 
the ‘night-vision’ ability of the camera system to observe 
Mars, even when the surface is in darkness. 

The Martian Radiation Environment Experiment 
(MARIE) began gathering science data on 13 March, 
2002, after communications were successfully re- 
established with the instrument. Engineers had been 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


working since late February, 2002, trying a variety of 
techniques to communicate with the instrument, which 
stopped working in August, 2001. The results of their 
tests indicate the problem may be related to a memory 
error in the onboard software of the radiation instru- 
ment. 

Initial science data from the spacecraft suggests pos- 
sible identification of significant amounts of frozen 
water. The gamma ray spectrometer instrument suite has 
been used to detect hydrogen, which indicates the pres- 
ence of water ice in the upper meter (three feet) of soil in 
a large region surrounding the planet’s south pole. The 
amount of hydrogen detected indicates 20-50% ice by 
mass in the lower layer. Because rock has a greater den- 
sity than ice, this amount is more than 50% water ice by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


volume. 
Bibliography 
The 2001 Mars Odyssey Home Page is at 
http:/ / mars.jpl.nasa.gov/ odyssey / index.html 
Pam Spence 
1 


Mars Pathfinder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars Pathfinder 


First of NASA’s Discovery missions. Launched in 
December 1996 and arrived at Mars on 4 July 1997. Mainly 
intended as a technology demonstration mission. Used 
airbags to cushion the landing on Mars. The Carl Sagan 
Memorial station returned images of an ancient flood 
plain in Ares Vallis. The 10 kg Sojourner rover used an 
x-ray spectrometer to study the composition of rocks and 
travelled about 100 metres. Relayed an unprecedented 2.3 
gigabits of data, including 16 500 images from the lander’s 
camera, 550 images from the rover camera, 16 chemical 
analyses of rocks and soil, and 8.5 million measurements of 
atmospheric pressure, temperature and wind. Operations 
ceased after 83 days on 27 September 1997. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars Surveyor 2001 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars Surveyor 2001 


Two NASA missions to explore Mars, originally due for 
launch in April 2001 but now postponed. The orbiter will 
carry a high-resolution infrared imaging spectrometer and 
a gamma ray spectrometer to map surface composition 
and hydrogen in the soil. The lander will carry an infrared 
spectrometer and a small roving vehicle with a robotic 
arm to collect soil samples, a radiation environment 
experiment and a plant to make liquid oxygen from the 
atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars: Atmosphere 


The atmosphere of MARS is much thinner than the 
terrestrial one. However, even the simplest visual 
telescopic observations show a set of atmospheric events 
such as seasonal exchange of material between polar 
caps, temporal appearance of clouds and changes of 
visibility of dark regions on the disk of the planet. In 
1947 the prominent CO, bands in the near-infrared part 
of the Martian spectrum were identified. Later, after 
1960, weak bands of H,O, CO and O, were also 
discovered. The Doppler shift was used to separate 
Martian H,O and O, lines from much stronger terrestrial 
ones. Flights of spacecraft to Mars opened new 
possibilities of bringing instruments close to the planet 
and even onto its surface. Remote sensing measurements 
were made initially from fly-by spacecraft (Mariner 4 in 
1965, Mariner 6 and 7 in 1969) and later from orbits 
(Mariner 9 and Mars 3 in 1971-2, Mars 5 in 1974, 
Viking 1 and 2 in 1976-80, Phobos 2 in 1989, Mars 
Global Surveyor since 1997). In situ studies were 
fulfilled by means of descender/landers: Mars 6 in 1976, 
Viking 1 in 1976-82, Viking 2 in 1976-80 and Mars 
Pathfinder in 1997. Measurements from the orbit 
included TV imaging, spectrometry (by nadir and limb 
viewing), radio occultation (a method of sounding of 
planetary atmospheres using Earth based measurements 
of a radio signal emitted by a spacecraft when it 
approaches or leaves the limb of the planet; the 
phaseshift and attenuation due to refraction appears by 
the passage of radio waves through the ionosphere and 
troposphere), photometry and IR radiometry. In situ 
chemical composition and meteorological measurements 
were provided by means of instruments on the landers. 
All these observations not only revealed the current 
Martian atmosphere, but also suggested that in the long 
past Mars possibly had a denser atmosphere, warmer 
climate and open water on the surface. The history of 
water on Mars is one of the most interesting problems in 
solar system studies. It is directly connected with the 
possible presence of life on Mars, at least in the distant 
past (see EXOBIOLOGY, LIFE ON OTHER WORLDS). The 
book by Kieffer et al (1992) may be recommended as a 
comprehensive source for professional use. 


Chemical and isotopic composition 

The most abundant gaseous components of the Martian 
atmosphere are carbon dioxide (its volume mixing 
ratio—tratio of the number density of the given gas to the 
full number density—is 95%); nitrogen (2.7%) and argon 
(1.6%). The average column abundance of CO, is ~80 m 
atm, about 20 times more than in EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE. 
Column abundance is the amount of gas above 1 cm* of 
the surface in units of cm atm or m atm. Column 
abundance in cm atm equals the number of molecules in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the column divided by Loschmidt’s number (= 2.687 x 
10'° cm). Other identified gases are so-called minor or 
trace constituents: oxygen (0.13%), carbon monoxide 
(0.07%), water vapor (0-0.1%), ozone (0-0.2 x 10*%), 
helium (1.1 x 10%), neon (2.5 x 10%), krypton (0.2 x 
10 *%) and xenon (0.08 x 10*%). The average molecular 
weight is equal to 43.4 amu below the level of the 
homopause (~125 km on Mars). (The homopause level H; 
is the height where values of two diffusion coefficients, 
eddy and molecular, are equal. It divides the atmosphere 
into two parts, the homosphere, below H,, and the 
heterosphere, above H,. Eddy diffusion dominates in the 
homosphere. All gases are well mixed there. The average 
molecular weight is constant, and its value should be 
used in barometric formula. In the heterosphere every gas 
follows its own barometric equation. Consequently, light 
gases like H and He are the main constituents of the outer 
parts of the upper atmosphere (>500 km).) 

The average HO column abundance is ~1 cm atm. 
This is equivalent to a ~10 pum layer of precipitated water 
covering the whole surface of the planet. On recent Mars 
almost all water is hidden in permafrost, polar caps and 
hydrated minerals. The atmosphere is extremely dry. The 
abundance of water vapor varies with latitude, season, 
time of day and from place to place, mainly due to 
condensation/sublimation and  adsorption/desorbtion 
processes. Latitudinal and seasonal variations according 
to measurements from VIKING | and 2 orbiters are 
presented in figure 1. Asymmetry between south and 
north polar regions is clearly visible there: during the 
summer the residual north polar cap sublimes and the 
H,O abundance above the northern polar region reaches 
the maximum (~90 um of precipitated water) in 
difference from the southern cap. The probable reason is 
that southern cap saves some quantity of CO, condensate 
even in summer time. The vertical H,O distribution has 
not been thoroughly studied. 

Some data were obtained in the PHOBOS mission. 
They showed that the mixing ratio decreases from about 
0.01% at heights of 15-20 km to 3 x 10*% at 30-40 km. 
The duration of these observations was short (~1 month 
during northern spring) and limited by near equatorial 
regions. 

Ozone on Mars was identified initially at the polar 
regions, but later it was also found at low latitudes, 
although with much lower abundance. These 
observations were made with UV spectrometers installed 
on board spacecraft and the ozone band near 0.27 um 
was used. Recently, successful measurements have also 
been made from Earth in the IR band at 9.6 um using 
heterodyne spectrometry, a super high-resolution 
spectrometric technique using a mixing of detected 
radiation with a laser beam at very close frequency, the 
radio frequency signal being measured on the output. A 
global average mixing ratio of 1.7 x 10~* has been found. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Latitude 


90 180 270 


360 90 
Ls 


Figure 1. Water vapour cycle on Mars according to measurements from Viking orbiters: column water abundance (in um of 
precipitated water) as a function of season and latitude. The absorption band at 1.38 tm was used in the observations. Seasonal 
longitude L, is given along the x-axis. L, = 0° corresponds to the northern spring equinox, 90° to northern summer. These 
observations covered more than full Martian year (=686 terrestrials days). Local variations along areographic longitudes and daily 
variations also exist, but they were averaged in this presentation. Shaded areas indicate no observations, and smooth curves are the 
latitude poleward of which the Sun will not rise above the horizon (Jakosky and Farmer 1982).(Copyright 1982 by the American 


Geophysical Union.) 


There are also observations from the Hubble Space 
Telescope in the UV. 

The only in situ measurements of gases in the 
Martian atmosphere have been provided by means of 
mass spectrometers aboard Viking 1 and Viking 2 
landers. An example of the mass spectra obtained is 
shown in figure 2(a). The most important achievement 
was the identification of noble gases (Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe) and 
their isotopes. It was found that abundance of their non- 
radiogenic isotopes per unit of mass is a factor of 100 
less than on Earth (figure 2(5)). It was found also that 
'4N/'°N and H/D ratios are lower on Mars than on Earth 
(twice for nitrogen and six times for hydrogen). These 
differences are consistent with the idea about the 
primordial Martian atmosphere being more dense than 
the recent one. The Martian isotope composition of noble 
gases is so specific that about dozen meteorites (SNC 
METEORITES) showing the same composition of captured 
gases are seriously believed to have originated from 
Mars. 


Temperatures, pressures, winds 

The globally/annually averaged surface temperature of 
Mars is ~210 K. This is only about 4 K more than Mars 
would have without atmosphere. So the GREENHOUSE 
EFFECT (a warming of the planet arising due to the lower 
opacity of the atmosphere for the solar radiation than for 
the planetary one; quantitatively it may be described by 
the difference AT =T, — T., where T, is the globally 
averaged surface temperature, 7, is the effective 
temperature of the planet (= the temperature of a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


blackbody that would radiate the same flux as the 
planet)—on the Earth AT = 38 K, about 10 times more 
than on Mars) is much weaker on Mars than on Earth due 
to the thinner atmosphere. The minimum surface 
temperature is about 145 K; it is achieved in the polar 
regions during winter, and the atmospheric CO) is 
partially transformed there to the solid phase. The 
maximum temperature (in middle latitudes at summer 
noon) reaches ~300 K. 

The globally/annually averaged pressure near the 
surface of Mars is ~5.6 mbar. Surface pressure varies 
with seasons and amplitude by ~25% (figure 3). This is 
mostly due to a global variation in the mass of the 
atmosphere resulting from seasonal condensation and 
sublimation processes of the carbon dioxide in polar 
regions and, locally, to the effect of the general 
circulation. The average tropospheric scale height (the 
vertical scale corresponding to a pressure decrease by a 
factor of e) on Mars is ~10 km, near to the terrestrial 
value (8 km). The local pressure depends drastically upon 
topography (see MARS: SURFACE). For instance, the 
highest point on the planet (the huge volcano Olympus 
Mons) is some 25 km above zero level, the lowest 
(Hellas Planitia) about 6 km below. 

A typical vertical profile of the Martian atmosphere is 
shown in figure 4. It is colder than the terrestrial atmosphere 
at all heights. In general the vertical structure of both 
atmospheres can be divided into three main regions: low 
atmosphere, middle atmosphere (mesosphere) and upper 
atmosphere (thermosphere). The mesosphere is the region of 
minimum temperature. Here is the sink for the thermal energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


00 6824) BBC 126 127 129 199 133-125 137 
me ——_—» 


198 


107 


108 


G-Chondti| | 
TUReL Gunton 


10? 


Abundance {¢m’/g) 


192 


101 


19? 


10° 
82x 6 


Figure 2. Noble gases on Mars. (a) Examples of mass spectra 
obtained by Viking landers, Kr (on the right) and Xe (on the 
left). (b) Comparison of abundance of non-radiogenic isotopes 
of noble gases in the atmosphere of Mars with the same on 
Earth, Venus, the Sun and in the material of chondrites (Owen 
and Bar-Nun 1995). Two conclusions follow from the results 
presented here: (a) Mars is more depleted in volatiles than the 
Earth and (b) the relative abundance of Kr and Xe isotopes 
corresponds neither to C- nor to H-chondrites. 


20Ne Ar bala 


flux coming from the surface and the troposphere (heated 
by solar visible and near-IR radiation) and also from the 
thermosphere (heated by solar extreme UV radiation). A 
key component of the mesospheric thermal balance is the 
absorption of solar near-IR radiation by CO». There are 
some important qualitative differences between Martian 
and terrestrial atmospheres: (a) the most abundant 
Martian atmospheric gas (CO) participates in 
condensation/sublimation processes, (6) diurnal 
temperature variations near the surface of Mars reach 
~100 K, (c) there is no temperature maximum inside the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Martian middle atmosphere (on Earth such a maximum is 
created by ozone), (d) the influence of the aerosols on 
atmospheric heating is stronger on Mars, (e) unlike on 
Earth, the redistribution of heat by evaporation and 
condensation of water is negligible on Mars. Diurnal 
temperature variations in the Martian atmosphere are 
large below a few kilometers, but relatively small higher 
up. The amplitude of diurnal variations in the troposphere 
and mesosphere depends on the aerosol content. During 
dust storms the upper part of the troposphere and 
mesosphere are warmer, and daily variations are stronger 
than under ordinary conditions. 

Horizontal differences in temperature lead to 
differences in pressure, but they are smoothed by winds. 
Winds transfer heat together with air masses. This 
influences local temperature profiles. Also the dust can 
be lifted from the surface and change its solar heating. 
Condensation is another way of forming aerosols, also 
with a feedback effect on temperatures. Winds are 
strongly affected by topography. /n situ measurements by 
Viking landers showed wind velocities from 1 to 10 ms"! 
at a height of 1.6 m with prominent diurnal and seasonal 
variations. The daily maximum was observed often near 
12 h local solar time. Maximal wind speeds were 
observed during periods of GDS (great dust storm—see 
below). Only indirect estimates are available for larger 
heights. They are based mainly on temperature profiles 
retrieved from results of IR sounding. Zonal wind 
velocities estimated in this way sometimes reach 20-100 
ms! at heights of 5 to 40 km. The meteorological 
packages on Viking and MARS PATHFINDER landers 
recorded daily variations of surface pressure and wind 
well explained by atmospheric thermal tides (figure 5). 

On Earth the equatorial excess of heat obtained from 
Sun is transferred by atmospheric motion to the poles and 
leaves the planet as thermal IR radiation. The Coriolis 
force reduces the atmospheric flow from the meridional 
direction to the zonal, creating a zonally symmetric or 
Hadley regime of circulation. The general circulation on 
Mars is somewhat different. First, because the 
atmosphere of Mars is very thin (and the thermal inertia 
of the surface is low, especially compared with Earth’s 
oceans) the Martian ground is never far from from 
radiative equilibrium: the transport of heat by the 
atmosphere does not change the radiative balance as 
strongly as on Earth. Second, during most seasons except 
around the equinoxes, one hemisphere is usually warmer 
than the other, and the circulation tends to occur from 
one hemisphere to the other. In particular, around the 
summer solstice, mean surface temperatures are indeed 
highest in the summer polar region, with a monotonic 
decrease toward the winter pole. As the consequence, the 
Hadley circulation is then characterized by one unique 
and intense cell between summer hemisphere and winter 
hemisphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Surface pressure {mbar} 


\F Et Wy Tt Ay TT AD TT 
PL ped | peti | petit | LL 


1673 42 2676 


Sols 


Figure 3. Seasonal changes of surface pressure on Mars. Sols (along the x-axis) are solar Martian days). These data were obtained 
from meteorological measurements by Viking landers. One of them (Viking 1) worked for about 6 Earth years and 4 months. 


Altitude (km) 


100 150 206 250 
Temperature {K) 


Figure 4. Schematic presentation of the vertical temperature 
profile in the Martian atmosphere, based mainly on in situ 
measurements during descent of Mars 6, Viking 1, Viking 2 and 
Pathfinder landing probes. 1 is the troposphere, a lower part of 
the atmosphere with large negative temperature gradient, 2 is 
the tropopause, 3 is the mesosphere, 4 is the homopause and 5 
is the upper atmosphere. The inset illustrates the character of 
daily variations of the temperature profile in the boundary layer 
(the lowest part of the atmosphere where its motions are 
influenced by interaction with the surface; the rest of the 
atmosphere above this layer is treated as the ‘free atmosphere’), 
predicted theoretically. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Pressure {mbar} 


0 6 12 18 24 
Mars local time fh) 


Figure 5. Example of surface pressure measurements by the 
Pathfinder lander (1997): diurnal pressure cycles for sols 9 and 
19, illustrating the observed day-to-day changes in the diurnal 
pressure cycle and allowing for details of the daily pressure 
variation. The general shape of the curves is explained by 
superposition of diurnal and semidiurnal waves occurring due 
to atmospheric thermal tides. 


In Hadley circulation lines of flow go around the 
whole planet almost along parallels with a much smaller 
meridional component, at least at low levels. Pure 
zonally symmetric circulation may transfer only a limited 
quantity of heat, and is replaced or added to by wave 
circulation if this limit is reached. Lines of flow in a 
wave regime oscillate a few times between high and low 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


latitudes going around the planet (‘transient baroclinic 
waves’), wind speeds are higher and more variable and a 
large meridional component may appear. General 
circulation models (GCM) developed for Mars show that 
the observed wind pattern during most of the Martian 
year is more consistent with a zonally symmetric regime 
than is the terrestrial atmospheric circulation. (General 
circulation models are computational tools for the 
prediction of 3D wind patterns on the planet. Inputs are 
the thermal properties of the atmosphere and surface, 
incoming fluxes, surface topography, etc. Using 
hydrodynamic equations the model provides a time- 
dependent picture of atmospheric motion. Space and time 
resolution is restricted of course by computational 
possibilities.) However, travelling atmospheric waves are 
known to be prominent and regular in northern mid- 
latitudes during the fall and the winter. Variabilities in 
suspended dust content produce time variability 
(interannual, seasonal, local, diurnal) in atmospheric 
circulation and also in thermal structure. 


Aerosols 

There are two main types of Martian aerosol: dust and 
water ice particles. A mixed composition is also possible: 
a layer of a condensate around a mineral nucleus. 
Chemical composition of the dust particles should be the 
same as that of the surface regolith, although the size 
distribution can be different. At high altitudes and at high 
latitudes in winter solid CO, particles may appear due to 
local decreases of the atmospheric temperature to the 
condensation level. 

Mineral aerosol (dust) formations can be divided 
into two main subclasses: (a) constant haze, (b) dust 
storm clouds. There is no sharp boundary between 
classes. Dust storms appear as a local rise of constant 
haze opacity and disappear leaving constant haze. 

The average optical depth (=the natural logarithm of 
transmission) of the constant haze varies between 0.1 and 
0.5 with a characteristic time scale of a few years. There 
is also a seasonal trend with the appearance of much 
denser cloud cover with an optical depth up to 6 during 
great dust storms (figure 6). The atmosphere is when it 
contains more dust and colder when the dust dissipates. 
The number density of the constant haze dust particles 
near the surface is about n = 1-2 cm™. Their single 
scattering ALBEDO (the ratio of omni-directional 
scattering flux to the incident flux of parallel rays (like 
the spherical albedo of a planet)) is ~0.86 at wavelengths 
between 0.55 and 0.6 um and decreases to 0.63 near 
0.32 um. Corresponding values of the imaginary part of 
the refractive index m are ~0.005 and 0.015. They are 
compatible with the presence of a few per cent of 
materials like Fe,O; in silicate particles. Typical values 
of mean particle radius in the constant haze are 1.5— 
2.5 um. Observations of the vertical distribution of dust 
in the constant haze were made in experiments on the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Phobos mission. They showed that the aerosol scale 
height is 10-11 km below 15-20 km, almost the same as 
the gaseous scale height, meaning that dust is well mixed 
in the lower atmosphere. 

A few subclasses of condensate aerosol formations 
were observed: (a) ice haze near the surface, (b) high- 
altitude layers, (c) mountain clouds, (d) polar hood. Ice 
haze appears near the surface at night due to a significant 
decrease in temperature within a narrow (of the order of 
1 km) layer near the surface. The typical optical 
thickness is of the order of 0.1 and depends on the local 
abundance of water vapor. In the morning the ice 
particles evaporate and their net effect is clearly visible 
as an a.m.—p.m. opacity difference. Several seasonal 
peaks of this difference were observed. 

Condensation of water vapour at high altitudes 
results in the appearance of thin (few km) layers with an 
optical depth between 0.005 and 0.05. Such layers were 
observed at heights between 25 and 75 km in the visible, 
ultraviolet and thermal IR wavelengths. There are also a 
lot of TV observations of ‘mountain’ clouds, mainly 
around huge Tharsis volcanoes, but very few 
determinations of their optical depth. 


Great dust storms 

During the northern winter two different dynamic 
regimes have been observed in various years: in the first 
case great dust storms (GDS) cover nearly all the planet; 
in the second regime no great storm occurs, but strong 
winds produce dust lift in confined regions. Maximal 
wind speeds are observed during periods of GDS. A lot 
of dust fills the Martian atmosphere at low and moderate 
latitudes when a GDS happens. GDS arise when the 
planet is near perihelion (summer in the southern 
hemisphere) and consist of one, two or even three peaks 
covering up to 150 days. Sometimes local dust storms are 
observed on Mars. There is no terrestrial analogue of 
Martian GDS, but local dust storms occur on Earth also 
(in deserts). So, mechanisms of dust storm generation on 
both planets may have common details. Their study on 
Mars can be useful for understanding such events on 
Earth. 

Mechanisms of development and decay of great dust 
storms are not well understood. However, on the 
qualitative level, the sequence of events may be 
described as follows. There is a threshold wind velocity 
that is necessary to lift up small particles from the 
surface. This threshold is reached only within some 
narrow limits of seasonal and local conditions. 
Laboratory experiments show that it is not the smallest 
but the relatively big (of the order of 100 tm) particles 
that are lifted first. However, they themselves fall very 
soon and disrupt the surface of much smaller particles. 
Soon the general number of lifted particles rises to a level 
sufficient to cause substantial obscuration, and to cool the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


90 120 150 180 210 240 


Ah Td \I! 


62.774 


Aftemoon visible optical depth t 


90 120 150 180 210 240 


(1 | la | 


270 300 330 


360/0 30 60 90 


x-x t, Viking Lander imaging 


(Colburn af af 1989) 


@ First year 
¥ upper bounds 
a& bower bounds 


+f Second year 


% «derived from 
VL1 pressure data 
{Zurek 1981} 


270 300 330 
Areocentric longituce /, 


Figure 6. Seasonal trend of the optical depth of dust on Mars according to Viking | and 2 data. Two wide spikes correspond to great 
dust storms. The initial appearence or detection of observed regional dust clouds, hazes or obscurations (vertical lines) and of planet- 
encircling dust sorms (arrows) are indicated at the top of the upper panel. 


atmosphere near the surface and heat it at some 
kilometers. Local wind speeds rise on the boundaries of 
this ‘storm nucleus’ and they expand rapidly. In a few 
days this originally small nucleus transforms to planetary 
encircling dust cloud cover. Then the temperature 
differences disappear and nothing supports higher wind 
speeds. The decay stage comes: particles lifted to a 
height of some tens of kilometers set down gradually, 
separating by sizes. Particles of 10 um reach the surface 
in a few days and | um particles in a few months. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Upper atmosphere and ionosphere 

The temperature of the uppermost levels of the Martian 
atmosphere (‘thermosphere’, above 120 km) depends on 
the solar activity; its average value is about 210 K, 
minimum 135 K and maximum 310 K. The reason for 
this variability is that the thermosphere is heated by 
extreme solar UV radiation which is strong during solar 
maximum and much weaker near the minimum of the 
solar activity cycle. The chemical composition of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


upper atmosphere of Mars above a height of about 125 
km (homopause) varies with height due to separation by 
molecular weight of its different components. However, 
CO, dominates up to a height of about 200 km at the 
average thermospheric temperature. Atomic oxygen (O) 
dominates between 200 and 400 km and atomic hydrogen 
(H) above 400 km. As a result the outer atmosphere of 
Mars consists of hydrogen, and sometimes even the name 
‘hydrogen corona’ is used. It was observed in the La line 
up to 20 000 km from the planet. Earth and Venus have 
the same sort of H corona but less expanded due to the 
higher gravitational field (see VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). 

The height of the exobase is about 200 km. 
Hydrogen atoms continuously leave the Martian 
atmosphere above these levels; a flux of about 3 x 10"! 
atoms/m” s"' has been estimated. This corresponds to the 
loss of 1 m of water layer during 4 billion years of 
Martian geological history. 

Ions appear in the upper atmosphere due to 
absorption of solar extreme UV radiation. Primary CO, 
ions are replaced by O, ions due to a set of reactions, and 
O, ions dominate in the Martian ionosphere. The daily 
peak electronic number density n, is about 10° cm™ at 
heights from 110 to 145 km, depending on the Sun zenith 
angle. At night time a peak n, =5 x 10° cm™ at a height 
of 110 km was found. The intrinsic magnetic field of 
Mars is very weak and does not protect the ionosphere 
from the impact of the solar wind. It influences the shape 
of the ionosphere profile and creates some induced 
magnetic field which overlaps the intrinsic one, and 
substantially masking it. 


The long-term atmosphere/surface 
interaction; origin and evolution of the 


atmosphere 

Mars is more depleted in volatiles than is Earth. 
However, the terrestrial atmosphere contains only a small 
part of the total inventory of volatiles. Almost all the 
water is in the liquid phase and carbon dioxide is hidden 
in carbonates. So, we may suppose that the full amount 
of volatiles appearing on Mars during its geological 
history is much more than in the recent gaseous 
atmosphere. There are no open reservoirs of liquid water 
on recent Mars, so POLAR CAPS and permafrost play the 
same role as the terrestrial oceans. Only rough estimates 
are possible. They lead to values of an equivalent water 
layer of the order of 100 m. Seasonal polar caps contain 
up to about one-third of the atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
However, much more may be buried in the residual 
permanent southern cap. Also Martian soil (working as a 
cryogenic pump) may adsorb a substantial amount of 
water and even carbon dioxide. Chemical weathering 
may also bound part some of the water in minerals. If 
open water reservoirs existed in the distant geological 
past, then the process of transformation of silicates to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


carbonates could be effective. So, the search of 
carbonates on Mars may give an important key to the 
history of the Martian volatiles. 

The recent surface pressure on Mars is very close to 
the triple point of water. If carbon dioxide slowly enters 
the atmosphere due to volcanic outgassing, then this 
puzzling coincidence may be explained by the tempory 
appearance of liquid water, when the surface pressure 
exceeds the triple point value. It switches on the process 
of silicate to carbonate transformation, rapidly removing 
the excess of carbon dioxide. 

In general, there are three types of processes that 
were (or can be) involved in the formation and the 
evolution of the Martian atmosphere: (A) supplying 
volatile (sources), (B) removing them (sinks), (C) 
reversible processes that work in both directions 
depending on conditions. Type A processes are: (1) 
trapping of gases bound in planetesimals from which 
Mars was composed during accretion; (2) fast release of 
these gases by impacts immediately during accretion (a 
catastrophic outgassing); (3) slow outgassing of planetary 
interiors over billions of years; (4) trapping of gases from 
the proto-planetary nebula directly; (5) cometary 
impacts; (6) solar wind implantation. Process (1) 
probably worked but the destiny of trapped gases is under 
question. They could be released by processes (2) or (3) 
predominantly. Some years ago experts preferred process 
(3), later process (2). Direct trapping from the nebula was 
never recognized as really important. But processes (1)— 
(4) all suppose that Martian volatiles came originally 
from the primary nebula. However, a very different 
scenario was also possible: the whole primordial 
atmosphere of Mars was removed by a huge single 
impact and then process (5) created a new atmosphere. 
Owen and Bar-Nun (1995) proposed some arguments for 
this based on the composition of SNC meteorites. The 
importance of process (6) is not clear, maybe it could be 
checked by measurements of Ne isotopic ratios. 

Type B processes are: (1) impactory blow-off; (2) 
thermal escape (H and He) (Escape is process of the loss 
of lighter and faster atoms from the upper atmosphere. 
Such atoms may go out if their velocity is sufficient to 
enable them to leave the gravitational field of the planet 
and they are at a height where the probability of collision 
with other atoms is small (above the exobase, the height 
where free path length equals to the scale height); (3) 
non-thermal escape (oxygen); (4) solar wind blow-off; 
(5) chemical weathering. It is difficult to observe a flux 
of escaping materials directly. However, such a flux was 
measured for oxygen ions during the Phobos mission. An 
important example of chemical weathering is the binding 
of water in Martian minerals. Another may be silicate to 
carbonate transformation and formation of sedimentary 
rocks when and if open water existed on Mars. 

Type C processes are: (1) polar cap formation; (2) 
permafrost formation; (3) atmosphere/soil exchange. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Water is involved in all three, carbon dioxide in (1). 
These processes are influenced by different sorts of 
insolation changes including seasonal and long-term (as 
solar constant trend) changes, effects of oscillations of 
equatorial inclination and _ orbital — evolution. 
Atmosphere/soil exchange acts even within a daily cycle. 

The Martian atmosphere is breathing even now, 
seasonally and from year to year. Much greater changes 
in the distant past may be anticipated. There are two sorts 
of evidence for this: (a) clear traces of liquid water 
activity on the surface and (b) isotopic ratios (N and Ar) 
showing that a significant part of the atmosphere was lost 
during evolution of the planet. At least two geological 
epochs of fluvial activity are supposed: earlier with the 
formation of valley systems and later with the formation 
of outflow channels. The first epoch was definitely 
warmer than now, the second maybe not. Carr (1996) 
estimates that the average thickness of the water layer 
may have been 500-1000 m on ancient Mars during the 
hypothetical ‘Mars paradise’ period. 


Bibliography 

Carr M H 1996 Water on Mars (New York: Oxford University 
Press) 

Jakosky B M and Farmer C B 1982 The seasonal and global 
behavior of water vapor in the Mars atmosphere: complete 
global results of the Viking atmospheric water detector 
experiment J. Geophys. Res. 87 2999-3019 

Kieffer H H, Jakosky, B M, Snyder C W, and Matthews M S 
(ed) 1992 Mars (Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona 
Press) 

Owen T and Bar-Nun A 1995 Comets, impacts and 
atmospheres Icarus 215-26 

Schofield J T, Barnes J R, Crisp D, Haberle R M, Larsen S, 
Magalhaes J A, Murphy J R, Seiff A and Wilson G 1997 
The Mars Pathfinder atmospheric structure 
investigation/meteorology (ASI/MET) experiment Science 
278 1752-8 


Vassili Moroz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars: Climate History 


Unravelling the climate history of Mars is one of the 
main challenges in understanding the planet’s evolution. 
There is substantial evidence for change in the climate 
and the inventory of volatiles through time. This evi- 
dence points to an early environment in which water was 
either more stable or more abundant at the surface than 
it is today and to processes of supply of volatiles to the 
atmosphere (see MARS: ATMOSPHERE) and their removal 
from it that are able to explain this shift in climate. 
Determining the forces behind the changing climate, par- 
ticularly the relationship between the atmosphere, water 
at the surface and water in the crust, is important for 
understanding the planet as a whole. In addition, the 
potential for life to have existed in the past, or even 
today, is strongly governed by the occurrence of liquid 
water and its history over time. 

The climate system of Mars is inherently complex, 
involving physical and chemical processes within the deep 
interior, the CRUST, the surface, the atmosphere and the 
upper atmosphere and interactions with the solar wind 
(figure 1). Our goal is to integrate observations and mea- 
surements pertinent to each of these areas into a coherent 
view of Martian climate and its evolution. We will focus on 
recent results from the MARS GLOBAL SURVEYOR mission and 
from ongoing analyses of the Martian meteorites and will 
emphasize observations that provide the strongest con- 
straints rather than describing what is merely plausible. 


The present-day atmosphere and climate 
The Martian atmosphere consists predominantly of CO2, 
with a total atmospheric pressure averaging about 6 


3 Seger - view a 
j py] and ote j 
Sts bo spaces 


fimpacs ujeceion 
C= 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram showing the interconnected nature 
of the Martian climate system and the relationship between 
climate and various processes from the deep interior to the 
upper atmosphere. Arrows indicate how one region affects 
another, with the arrow pointing towards the processes or area 
being affected; two-headed arrows indicate mutual interactions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mbar (6 hPa), about 0.6% of the Earth’s atmospheric pres- 
sure. The atmosphere also contains N2 and Ar at a level 
of 1-3%, lesser amounts of H2O, CO and QO: and addi- 
tional gases in trace amounts (Owen 1992). 

Water vapour is present in the atmosphere, with a 
typical partial pressure of 10-3 mbar. This corresponds to 
about 10-3 g H2O residing above each square centimetre, 
equivalent to a condensed layer about 10 m thick if it all 
precipitated onto the surface; the water content of the 
Earth’s atmosphere, in contrast, is about 104 times 
greater. The atmospheric water content varies in a man- 
ner that is consistent with seasonal supply and removal 
from the polar caps, exchange with water adsorbed in the 
near-surface regolith and global transport by means of 
winds (Jakosky and Haberle 1992). 

Temperatures average about 220 K globally, well 
below the melting temperature of ice and lower than the 
eutectic freezing temperature of most salt-rich brines. 
Even though surface temperatures rise above 273 K over 
large regions near the equator and near noon, liquid 
water still would not be stable. It could exist as a tran- 
sient phase, but would quickly evaporate into the rela- 
tively dry atmosphere and eventually freeze out at the 
colder high latitudes (Jakosky and Haberle 1992). 

Mars’ north polar region is covered with CO ice 
during winter, which sublimes away and leaves a resid- 
ual summertime deposit of water ice. The south cap is 
covered year round by CO; frost but almost certainly has 
water ice mixed in or beneath it (Jakosky and Haberle 
1992). The axial obliquity, the tilt of the polar axis with 
respect to the normal to the orbital plane (currently 
25.2°), varies on timescales of 10°-10° yr. On longer 
timescales, it is chaotic and may have been as low as 0° 
or as high as 60° in the past few million years. At high 
obliquity, polar summertime temperatures may increase 
markedly and substantial amounts of water ice may sub- 
limate into the atmosphere. Exchange of this water 
between the north and south polar caps, modulated by 
the changing eccentricity and season of perihelion, is 
probably responsible for the formation and evolution of 
layered deposits in the polar regions (Jakosky and 
Haberle 1992). 


Nature of the earliest atmosphere and climate 

The observable surface record of Mars’ geological histo- 
ry spans 4 billion years (Gyr). The oldest, most heavily 
cratered surfaces are thought to be about 4.0 Gyr old and 
the youngest are possibly less than 100 million years 
(Myr) old (Hartmann and Neukum in press; Hartmann et 
al 1981). Evidence pertaining to the ancient climate is 
inferred from processes that shaped the surface during 
the Noachian epoch, which ended when the cratering 
rate declined dramatically between 3.8 and 3.5 Gyr ago 
(Hartmann and Neukum in press). (Figure 2 summarizes 
the history and timing of processes involved in Martian 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Early Middle & Late 


- : Amazonian 
Noachian Noachian 


Hesperian 
Magnetic field 

protection of 

atmosphere 


Formation of 
bulk of Tharsis 


High erosion 


rates 


Formation of + impact supply Catastrophic 
major impact =| of volatiles outflow channels 
basins H | 
4.6 4.0 Sat 1.0 0 


Time (Gyr before present) 


Figure 2. Schematic diagram showing the time history of the 
Martian volatile system. The 4.6 Gyr history of Mars is divided 
up into the major geological epochs that have been identified 
and processes that occur within each epoch are indicated. Note 
that the timeline is not a linear scale. Some climate-related 
processes are not shown (including recent polar-cap behaviour 
and the occurrence of possible crater lakes). Absolute ages 
marking the boundary between epochs are estimated based on 
the recent revision of cratering chronology (Hartmann and 
Neukum in press). 


climate evolution.) Although atmospheric gas undoubt- 
edly was present before 4.0 Gyr and was removed in part 
from the atmosphere by various processes, we focus here 
on processes that postdated the onset of the visible geo- 
logical record. 

The ancient Martian surfaces contain geological fea- 
tures that indicate that the early climate was different. 
Dendritic networks of valleys seem similar to those 
formed by run-off of surface water on the Earth, 
although the areal density of tributaries is typically 
lower. There is debate about the relative roles of surface 
run-off, sapping by release of subsurface water and dis- 
charge of water from hydrothermal systems in forming 
the valleys. However, there is general agreement that 
water must have flowed at the surface in order to form 
these features and that their dendritic character and typ- 
ically V-shaped cross-section requires a gradual rather 
than catastrophic formation process (Carr 1996). 

Erosion rates in general were substantially greater 
during the Noachian. This can be seen easily on ancient 
impact craters. The largest craters and basins are severe- 
ly degraded; ejecta deposits, crater rims and central 
peaks have all been removed and a paucity of craters 
smaller than about 15 km diameter suggests that they 
have been removed in their entirety. Some partially 
degraded craters have fluting and scalloping along the 
interior rim that suggests erosion by flowing surface 
water. Estimated erosion rates were more than 1000 times 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


larger than in subsequent epochs and approach values 
appropriate for drier regions on Earth (Carr 1996). 

Additional evidence for a shift to a colder, drier 
climate at the end of the Noachian is provided by the ini- 
tiation of U-shaped valley forms at the downstream ends 
of V-shaped valleys, suggesting an evolution of valley- 
forming erosional mechanisms from water related to 
ice related. This period of U-shaped valley formation and 
valley network evolution in general, ended rapidly at the 
end of the Noachian or early in the Hesperian. 

Together, these features strongly suggest that liquid 
water was present during the Noachian and flowed over 
the surface and that the climate must have been such that 
water was either more stable or more abundant at the 
surface than it is at present. Such a climate is thought to 
have required warmer surface temperatures produced 
by substantial greenhouse warming (see GREENHOUSE 
EFFECT). Although the climate must have been ‘warmer’ 
and ‘wetter’, there is no consensus as to what tempera- 
tures would have been required, what the greenhouse 
gas would have been or how much water would have to 
have been at the surface or in the atmosphere (Squyres 
and Kasting 1994). If CO. were the greenhouse gas, up to 
several bars pressure would have been required to 
produce the necessary warming. A warmer climate is 
indicated even if valley network formation involved sub- 
surface hydrothermal processes, as flow at the surface 
and gradual erosion require a warmer climate indepen- 
dent of the original source of the liquid water. 


Connections between ancient climate and early 
geology 
Other events also were taking place during the Noachian 
period that would have affected climate. The planet was 
being bombarded by impacting ASTEROIDS or PLANETESI- 
MALS, it was creating its main division into a southern 
highlands and a northern lowlands (which is reflected 
today as the ancient and younger terrains respectively) 
and volcanism was forming the major Tharsis province 
on which sit many of the large volcanoes. 

The formation of Tharsis was recognized only recent- 
ly as occurring largely in the Noachian (Phillips et al 2001). 
The heavy loading of the lithosphere, due to the domi- 
nantly magmatic formation of the Tharsis rise, resulted in 
a global warping of the surface (Phillips et al 2001). Many 
of the ancient valley networks are seen to preferentially fol- 
low the slopes that resulted from the formation of Tharsis 
or, in at least one location (Margaritifer Sinus), are of the 
same age as those that do. This indicates that emplacement 
of Tharsis must have been nearly complete while the large- 
ly Noachian valley networks were still forming. Although 
much of the surface in Tharsis is sparsely cratered and 
therefore relatively young, indicating that resurfacing of 
Tharsis continued throughout Martian history, the bulk of 
the volume of Tharsis must be old (Phillips et al 2001). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The volcanic magma from which Tharsis formed 
probably contained substantial quantities of both water 
and CO> that would have been released, providing input 
of gases to the atmosphere and possibly contributing to 
an early, thicker atmosphere. Geochemical analysis of the 
Martian METEORITES, for example, suggests a water con- 
tent of as much as 1.8% by weight. Thus, the timing of 
valley network formation may be more than coinciden- 
tal. Tharsis volcanism may have supplied gases that 
helped maintain a climate conducive to weathering and 
erosion and the cessation of volcanism may have allowed 
other processes to begin removal of much of the atmos- 
phere (see below) (Phillips et al 2001). 

There is another compelling connection between 
Tharsis and the history of water. The lithospheric defor- 
mation due to the weight of Tharsis created a depression 
or trough encircling it at a radius of about 5000 km 
(figure 3(a)). Most of the large-scale geological features 
related to surface water are concentrated in this trough 
(Phillips et al 2001). This includes the large-scale 
drainages that flow northward from the Argyre basin (at 
50° S latitude) and the catastrophic flood channels that 
emanate from the eastern end of Valles Marineris and 
flow north into the Chryse basin and into the northern 
lowlands. Argyre, for example, seems to have been filled 
with water, which subsequently overflowed the rim and 
flowed northward. Although the catastrophic flooding 


arses. ie 


occurred episodically throughout Martian history, the 
source and flow regions concentrate in the Tharsis 
trough. This relationship suggests a long-lasting connec- 
tion between the geological and geophysical history of 
Mars and the release, availability and geological effects 
of liquid water. However, some anomalies exist, such as 
the paucity of similar features in the western branch of 
the circum-Tharsis trough and the ill-defined nature of 
processes, other than simple structural control of water 
pathways, that would provide a causal connection 
between the trough and the release of crustal water. 
Finally, we note an apparent correlation between 
the regions on which crustal remanent magnetic fields 
are imprinted and areas on which valley networks are 
identified (figure 4). The magnetic anomalies presum- 
ably retain an imprint of a global-scale intrinsic magnet- 
ic field from an early time in Martian history (Acufia et al 
1999). Exceptions to the correlation include the large- 
scale magnetic anomalies occurring in discrete bands in 
the high southern latitudes, where valley networks may 
have never formed because of climate constraints and 
Margaritifer Sinus, where stripping of the surface may 
have removed the valleys without removing enough 
material to eliminate the magnetic anomalies. If genuine, 
this correlation may reflect a coincidence in timing of 
the formation of both the valleys and the magnetic 
anomalies or in the geographic location of subsequent 


b 


Figure 3. Topography (Smith et al 1999) of Tharsis rise and Tharsis trough (Phillips et al 2001). (a) Topography, which has been satu- 
rated at 5 km, with pole-to-pole slope (Smith et al 1999) removed. Image is centred on 260° E longitude and view is from 10° north of 
equator. Outflow channel locations are marked by ‘OC’. (b) Channel detail in Chryse and Acidalia Planitiae (0°-60° N, 300°-0° E, 
Mercator projection; elevation range is —3.9 to 0 km). (c) The inlier Acidalia Mensa (‘AM’), whose southern and eastern boundaries are 
channels (Mercator projection; elevation range is —3.0 to -1.5 km). Eastern channel extends northwards of 50° N. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nT 


Figure 4. Comparison of Martian magnetic field, topography and 
valley network locations. (a) Radial component of the Martian 
magnetic field at an altitude of 200 km (after Purucker et al 2000). 
Values saturated at 100 nT. Sinusoidal projection to 47.5° lati- 
tude. (b) Topographic map of Mars (after Smith et al 1999), satu- 
rated at 5 km elevation and locations of valley network systems. 
Database is limited to latitudes less than 47.5°, which is the 
approximate limit of valley network distribution. Features indi- 
cated are the Tharsis rise (TR), global dichotomy boundary 
(GDB), northwestern Arabia Terra (NWAT), southwestern Tharsis 
trough (SWTT) and Hellas—Argyre disruption zone (HADZ). TR, 
NWAT, SWTT and the area north of GDB are regions of valley net- 
work exclusion by erosion and/or deposition and cannot be 
judged for the level of correlation of valley networks with anom- 
alies in the remanent magnetic field. Likewise, TR, HADZ and the 
area north of GDB are regions of magnetic field exclusion by the 
presence of post-main-field crustal ages or crustal disruption 
(Acufia et al 1999). (c) Valley networks and features in (b) super- 
posed on magnetic anomaly map. 


alteration processes. Alternatively, it may involve a 
cause-and-effect relationship, in which valleys could rep- 
resent the surface manifestation of hydrothermal sys- 
tems driven by subsurface volcanism that thermally 
induced the creation of the localized remanent fields. 
However, as neither the mechanism of formation of the 
magnetic anomalies nor that of their removal (if they 
ever were distributed globally) is understood, such con- 
nections are speculative at best. 


Evolution of the Noachian atmosphere 

What processes might have caused the inferred 
changes in Noachian climate, what sinks were avail- 
able for atmospheric gases during this epoch and can 
we infer the degree to which each process acted? These 
are especially important issues, as the output of the 
Sun was some 30% less 4 Gyr ago than it is today, mak- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ing the maintenance of an early warmer climate more 
difficult. 

Impact of large asteroids through the Noachian 
epoch would have ejected gas in the atmosphere to 
space. Although inherently capable of removing large 
amounts of atmosphere, only those impacts occurring 
since the time of the onset of the geological record would 
have resulted in climate change that can be inferred from 
that record (Brain and Jakosky 1998). We know how 
many impacts occurred, based on the number of large 
craters and impact basins seen on the ancient terrain and 
can readily extrapolate to impacts on areas subsequently 
buried. Combined, impacts are likely to have ejected 
about 50-90% of the atmosphere present in the early 
epoch (Brain and Jakosky 1998). This fraction probably is 
an upper limit, as some volatiles (such as water) might 
not have resided exclusively in the atmosphere at this 
time or might have been outgassed late in the epoch. 

Recent measurements of surface elevation have 
allowed identification of previously unknown impact 
basins buried below a relatively thin veneer in both the 
southern highlands and the northern plains. The buried 
craters in the northern plains have similar abundance to 
the craters in the southern highlands and justify the 
extrapolation of southern-hemisphere craters to a global 
inventory. The buried southern-highlands craters pre- 
date the geological evidence pertaining to the early cli- 
mate, so those impacts would not have contributed to the 
changes in climate and should not be counted in sum- 
ming up atmospheric loss. 

Impacts of volatile-rich objects can supply new 
volatiles to Mars as well as remove them from the atmos- 
phere. In particular, the analysis of isotope ratios of 
heavy noble gases in the atmospheres of Earth and Mars 
suggests that much of the planets’ volatiles could have 
been supplied by comets. However, the relative roles of 
supply and removal of volatiles by impacts are 
unknown. 

The impingement of the solar wind can strip gases 
directly from the upper atmosphere. Both atom-on-atom 
collisions that eject individual molecules (pick-up-ion 
sputtering) and hydrodynamic collisions that could strip 
off large volumes of gas en masse would have been 
important. However, theoretical models of these process- 
es are exceedingly uncertain even at the present epoch 
and extrapolating to past epochs when the solar wind 
and solar ultraviolet radiation were more intense com- 
pounds the uncertainties. However, two observations of 
the present-day atmosphere indicate that these processes 
were significant. First, in situ. measurements of the ener- 
gy spectrum of ionospheric electrons distinguish 
between ionization of gases in the upper atmosphere and 
those from the incoming solar wind. The morphology of 
discrete regions of solar-wind versus planetary electrons 
requires that large masses of upper atmosphere are being 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Martian isotope ratios and atmosphere loss* 


Isotope ratio Measured valuet Amount lost to space (%)f 


D/H 5 -60-74 
38Ar /36Ar 13 —50-90 
BC /12C 1.05-1.07 50-90 
15N /4N 1.7 ~90 

18Q /16O 1.025 —25-50 


*Values taken from Leshin 2000, Krasnopolsky 2000, Jakosky and 
Leshin 2001, Romanek et al 1994, Watson et al 1997 and Jalosky 
and Jones 1997 and references therein. 

tValue estimated, observed or derived for Martian atmosphere relative 
to terrestrial. 

$Calculated assuming Rayleigh fractionation. D/H range includes 
uncertainty in escape processes. Other ranges are based on uncertain 
timing of outgassing relative to escape. 


stripped off en masse. Second, isotopic measurements 
indicate that such stripping has occurred and has been 
significant. The lighter isotopes of each atom are 
enriched relative to the heavier ones at the top of the 
atmosphere by diffusive separation (for example, !2C rel- 
ative to 8C, 4N to 15N or 36Ar to 38Ar) and will be prefer- 
entially removed to space. Consequently, the gas remain- 
ing in the atmosphere becomes enriched in the heavier 
isotope. This enrichment pattern is observed consistently 
in the modern atmosphere. For example, the ratio 
38Ar/3¢Ar is 30% greater on Mars than elsewhere in the 
solar system and nitrogen and carbon also show enrich- 
ments (table 1). This enrichment indicates loss of 
between about 50% and 90% of the atmospheric species 
to space, with the actual loss probably tending towards 
the higher values (Jakosky et al 1994). 

In addition, compared with terrestrial values, 
Martian water shows a five-fold enrichment of D relative 
to H (see Table 1). The lighter H atom can escape ther- 
mally to space more readily than D, so the considerable 
enrichment of observed D requires the loss of substantial 
quantities of hydrogen to space. The hydrogen comes 
from water, with the oxygen from water probably also 
being lost to space. The inferred water loss depends on 
the relative supply rates of H and D to the upper atmos- 
phere, their relative escape rates and the initial D/H ratio 
on Mars. Recent analysis of Martian meteorites suggests 
that the initial D/H value on Mars was twice the terres- 
trial value (Leshin 2000); in addition, there has been a 
spectroscopic detection of upper-atmospheric D and a 
revision of atmospheric reaction rates. Although the ini- 
tial interpretation was that about 90% of Martian water 
had been lost to space, the current understanding sug- 
gests loss of about two-thirds of the water. 

The observed isotopic enrichments indicate the frac- 
tion of each species that has been lost but not the total 
amount lost. Atmospheric gases exchange with the 
regolith and polar caps, so the fraction lost actually rep- 
resents that lost from the combined atmospheric plus 
non-atmospheric reservoir. In addition, different por- 
tions of the polar ice, for example, may exchange with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the atmosphere on different timescales and outgassing of 
juvenile gas at later times will affect the isotope ratios. 
The absolute loss rates to space are uncertain today and 
may have varied through time, so although we can be 
confident that loss of substantial volatiles to space has 
occurred, we are uncertain as to how much has been lost, 
where it came from or exactly how much has been left 
behind. (Although the losses of H and O are related and 
one would expect the isotopic fractionation of D/H to be 
related to that of 180/!6O, oxygen has an additional 
reservoir with which it can exchange — minerals in the 
crust — so that the connection is likely to be complex.) 

Whereas stripping by the solar wind of upper- 
atmospheric gases will change the isotope ratios, 
removal by impact will not. Impacts remove the gas from 
the entire atmospheric column and thereby remove all 
isotopes with equal efficiency. Thus, the fractions of gas 
lost by these two processes add together. For example, if 
each indicates loss of 90%, these represent a different 90% 
and they sum up to a net loss of 99% of the atmospheric 
gas. In addition, the two loss processes probably operat- 
ed at different times, with impact erosion probably being 
most important early in the Noachian when impact rates 
were highest and solar-wind stripping occurring late in 
the Noachian or into the Hesperian. 

CO, can be removed from the atmosphere in the 
presence of liquid water to form carbonate minerals on 
the surface or in the subsurface. This process occurs on 
Earth, where gaseous CO: dissolves in the oceans, com- 
bines with calcium ions weathered from the continents 
and forms deposits of calcite in limestone. If SO2 was an 
early greenhouse gas, it might have formed crustal sul- 
phate minerals. Carbonates have been found in the 
Martian meteorites and have been shown to be indige- 
nous to Mars. However, carbonate and sulphate minerals 
have not been detected in sufficient quantities that, if 
released in gaseous form, they could provide enough 
greenhouse warming to explain the early environment 
(Christensen et al in press). The COz from a several-bar 
atmosphere would form a global equivalent layer of car- 
bonates perhaps a hundred metres thick; were this dis- 
tributed throughout the entire volume of the crust, per- 
haps carried there by circulating groundwater, it might 
not be detectable at the surface. Thus, the extent to which 
carbonate minerals could be a sink for gases from an 
early atmosphere remains uncertain. 

However, processes do exist that together can 
account for loss of an early thicker atmosphere. 
Theoretical models of the timing of volatile loss suggest 
that these processes can account quantitatively for the 
inferred change in climate, but they are not unique (Brain 
and Jakosky 1998). Two measurements, however, pro- 
vide supporting evidence. 

First, gas trapped in the Martian meteorite 
ALH84001 may represent a direct sample of the ancient 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


atmosphere. Measurements of nitrogen and argon 
isotopes indicate that this gas is essentially unfractionat- 
ed, meaning that most of the isotope-fractionating loss to 
space through solar-wind stripping had not yet occurred 
(Mathew and Marti 2001). Isotopic measurements of the 
gas Xe indicate that it was trapped into the rock 3.9 Gyr 
ago. If the Xe and lighter gases were incorporated into 
the rock at the same time and represent a sample of the 
Martian atmosphere from that epoch, they provide a key 
time constraint on atmospheric loss (the bulk of the loss 
to space must have postdated 3.9 Gyr). However, 
although the gases most plausibly came from the atmos- 
phere and were incorporated into the rock at that time, 
there are concerns related to their uncertain carrier with- 
in the meteorite and to the presumed non-juvenile nature 
of the gases, such that the interpretation is not unique. 

Second, measurements of localized remanent mag- 
netic anomalies detected on Mars today (Acufia et al 
1999) provide information on the timing of the shut-off of 
an intrinsic magnetic field. A substantial global magnetic 
field would cause the solar wind to stand off from the 
planet, limiting its ability to strip off the atmosphere. In 
addition, local magnetic anomalies each have the ability 
to protect the local atmosphere, such that the atmosphere 
of a planet covered entirely by such anomalies also 
would be relatively well protected. Thus, the shut-off of 
an intrinsic magnetic field and the ‘erasure’ of local 
remanent magnetic anomalies in the crust, if they ever 
were distributed globally, would have allowed the turn- 
on of the stripping of the atmosphere by the solar wind. 

The history of the magnetic field and the timing of 
its shut-off is extremely uncertain (see MARS: CORE AND 
MAGNETISM). Most of the remanent magnetic anomalies 
occur in the ancient terrain, indicating that Mars had a 
substantial intrinsic magnetic field and that it turned off 
relatively early in Martian history (Acufia et al 1999). 
Suggestion of a late turn-on of the global magnetic field 
is at odds with magnetization found in carbonate glob- 
ules in ALH84001, which indicates that a Martian geody- 
namo was active 4 Gyr ago or earlier. A few younger 
areas also have remanent fields, although there is a gen- 
eral absence of magnetic anomalies associated with 
Hesperian and Amazonian volcanics, adding to the con- 
fusion. It is clear, however, that an intrinsic magnetic 
field was most strongly connected to the Noachian epoch 
and very much less so to later epochs. It may not be pos- 
sible to resolve the timing issues more clearly, as it is 
uncertain what the carrier of the remanent magnetic 
fields is, whether remanent anomalies were originally 
distributed globally and, if they were, what process 
would have erased them. 

If the turn-off of the magnetic field and the erasure 
of localized magnetic anomalies allowed the solar wind 
to begin to strip species out of the atmosphere, then this 
atmospheric loss would have begun during the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Noachian or early Hesperian. The turn-on of atmospher- 
ic loss would have been complete only when a substan- 
tial fraction of local anomalies had been destroyed. This 
may not have happened prior to the substantial volcan- 
ism associated with Tharsis and the subsequent 
Hesperian era. 

Together, the isotopic and magnetic-field evidence 
indicates, but does not prove, that the bulk of solar-wind 
stripping to space occurred subsequent to 3.9 Gyr and 
that the turn-on of loss occurred sometime between the 
Middle Noachian and the Early Hesperian. Loss by solar- 
wind stripping seems to have been roughly contempora- 
neous with the change in climate inferred from geology, 
with the main changes in climate coinciding with the end 
of the Noachian. 


Evidence for liquid water in later epochs 

There is substantial evidence that liquid water has been 
present within the Martian crust up to the present. 
Evidence comes from geological features seen on the sur- 
face as well as from geochemical analyses. 

Catastrophic outflow channels provide compelling 
evidence that liquid water was released from within the 
crust, flowed over the surface and drained into the 
northern lowlands (see Carr 1996). As these floods 
involved large quantities of water released catastrophi- 
cally, with water able to flow substantial distances 
before freezing, they could occur even in the present 
cold climate (Carr 1996). They do indicate, however, that 
liquid water must have been present within the crust. 
Other eroding agents have been suggested, including 
liquid CO,, SO3, volcanic lava, ice, debris flows and the 
wind. In particular, the similarity of some of the Martian 
channels to volcanic channels and the ability of the wind 
to weather and erode substantial amounts of material, 
have recently been highlighted, along with the difficulty 
of reaching unique conclusions about the eroding fluid 
from morphology alone. However, water or water-filled 
debris flows remain the most plausible candidates and 
require the fewest extrapolations. Although the 
observed floods seem to have drained only about 10% of 
the surface, connected largely to the Tharsis trough, 
there is no reason to think that crustal water was not dis- 
tributed globally. 

The Martian meteorites contain weathering prod- 
ucts, produced when liquid water was present, filling 
cracks and voids in the rock. These include carbonate 
deposits at levels of several per cent in ALH84001, as 
well as trace amounts of carbonates and the mineral 
iddingsite (which forms from weathering of basalt in the 
presence of liquid water) in several of the other mete- 
orites. Detailed microstratigraphy shows that the 
deposits were present before the rocks were ejected from 
the Martian subsurface, providing direct evidence that 
liquid water circulated through the Martian crust. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Indirect geochemical evidence for liquid water in 
the crust comes from measurements of various isotope 
ratios within these weathering products. They contain 
enhanced D/H, 8C/?C, 5N/4N and 38Ar/3¢Ar ratios. 
Enhancement of each of these ratios is best explained as 
having resulted from atmospheric processes involving 
preferential escape of the lighter isotopes to space (as dis- 
cussed earlier). This requires that these gases once 
resided in the atmosphere, were left behind as a residu- 
um of loss to space and were subsequently incorporated 
into the crust. Circulation of groundwater between the 
surface and the crust provides the best means for 
exchange of these gases, again suggesting the presence of 
liquid water (Jakosky and Jones 1997; Watson et al 1994). 

While the carbonates in ALH84001 were probably 
precipitated from liquid water about 3.9 Gyr ago, water 
also must have been present much more recently. The 
other Martian meteorites are all much younger rocks, 
having crystallized between about 170 Myr and 1.3 Gyr 
and also contain weathering deposits (McSween 1994). 
Thus, crustal water must have been present within the 
past billion years. Radiogenic dates for the weathering 
products in the Lafayette meteorite indicate deposition 
around 650 Myr ago or even more recently. 

Several locations on the surface show spectroscopic 
evidence for the presence of coarse-grained haematite, 
probably formed in association with liquid water 
(Christensen et al 2000). The haematite may have been 
deposited from water released from volcanic intrusions 
or driven by subsurface hydrothermal or aqueous sys- 
tems (Christensen et al 2000), although some could have 
formed by volcanic processes not requiring water. One of 
the occurrences is in Aram Chaos, a feature attributed to 
the release of subsurface water and not connected to vol- 
canism. A second, larger location is in Western Terra 
Meridiani, located at about 0° latitude and 0° longitude 
thought to have formed at depth and been exposed sub- 
sequently by erosion (Christensen et al 2000). 

Liquid water also may have been present within the 
near-surface crust very recently, based on the presence of 
pristine gullies on the exposed walls of impact craters 
and valleys (Malin and Edgett 2000). These are identical 
in size, shape and appearance to gullies on Earth carved 
by liquid water seeping from aquifers on exposed scarps. 
Liquid CO, has been suggested as a possible eroding 
agent, based on the similarity of the depth of seeping to 
that at which the overburden pressure equals the CO2 
liquefaction pressure. However, the absence of a viable 
charge or recharge mechanism for liquid CO2 and the 
inability of CO2 to discharge as a liquid under Martian 
conditions preclude its role as a significant erosive agent. 
Rather, liquid water is much more plausible geologically 
(see Malin and Edgett 2000). Recent calculations of the 
stability of liquid water in the crust and of the ability of 
cyclical oscillations in temperature to freeze and release 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


water, suggest that this is a viable mechanism (Mellon 
and Phillips in press). There is no means to uniquely 
determine the age of the features, but they are unweath- 
ered and gully debris overlies features such as sand 
dunes that are themselves thought to be extremely 
young. If these interpretations are correct, liquid water 
has been present within a few hundred metres of the sur- 
face within the past few million years and may reside 
there today (Malin and Edgett 2000). 

There also is geological evidence for liquid water at 
the surface, possibly during the later epochs of Martian 
history. Most intriguing is the evidence for standing lakes 
within impact craters and the Valles Marineris canyon 
system (Carr 1996). Potential crater lakes are identified by 
the presence of channels flowing into and/or out of the 
craters, providing a source or sink for water. Some 
deposits within craters have an appearance similar to 
deltas, sedimentary terraces and shorelines, as might be 
formed by flowing water. Although most of the craters 
themselves are relatively old, the age of the lakebed 
deposits is uncertain. There are few craters on the lakebed 
deposits, which indicates either that they are very young 
or that they were buried for long periods and were 
exhumed very recently (Malin and Edgett 2001); strati- 
graphic relationships of layered sedimentary deposits 
within Valles Marineris suggest an old age despite the 
absence of craters (Malin and Edgett 2001). Well-defined 
layering within these deposits supports the idea of stand- 
ing water, although layered lakebed deposits cannot be 
distinguished uniquely from windblown sediments 
(Malin and Edgett 2001). However, even if these sedi- 
ments were windblown, they would have required either 
liquid water at least in trace amounts or water ice that 
might be stable at other epochs in order to cement the 
grains together to form coherent layers. 

The catastrophic outflow channels all drain into the 
northern lowlands (Carr 1996). Possible shoreline fea- 
tures have been identified, suggesting that the water may 
have accumulated in the lowlands to form a large, long- 
lived body of water (that is, an ocean). The crudely con- 
stant elevation of the innermost of the two main pro- 
posed shorelines and the extreme smoothness of the low- 
lands are held to be consistent with the presence of an 
ocean. However, the proposed shoreline features are not 
visible in recent high-resolution images and thus cannot 
be ascribed with certainty to wave action at an ocean 
boundary. Features described originally as ‘high stands’ 
or shorelines created by a retreating ocean are now rec- 
ognized as being wrinkle ridges of tectonic derivation. 
These ridges underlie the Vastitas Borealis formation, a 
deposit that may in part be sedimentary in origin. 

The smoothness of the lowlands (Smith et al 1999) 
may have resulted from fluvially transported sedi- 
ments associated with channel emplacement during 
the Hesperian; such a process allows but does not 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. View of topography (from Smith et al 1999) looking 
towards the southeast in Margaritifer Sinus region. Area is 30° x 
30° in size and there is 12 vertical exaggeration in topography. 
Pole-to-pole slope has been removed in topography to empha- 
size regional variations. The prominent depression in the centre 
of the image is Parana basin, a possible site of lake sediments; it 
is drained by a prominent channel (Loire Vallis) that descends 
northwesterly into the Tharsis trough (foreground). Higher ele- 
vations (red shades) are Early- and Middle-Noachian plateau 
materials. Yellow, green and blue/grey shades of lower eleva- 
tions represent widespread erosion events in the Late Noachian 
that removed 1.5 x 10° km? of Early /Middle-Noachian material 
from this region. Erosional remnants of older material occur in 
isolated mesas. (Image courtesy of B Hynek.) 


require the presence of an ocean. Erosion of material in 
the Margaritifer Sinus region and an adjacent area in 
northwestern Arabia Terra may have provided a signif- 
icant source of sediments. About a kilometre of mater- 
ial seems to have been stripped away during the Late 
Noachian and geological evidence points to erosion by 
liquid water (figure 5). The resulting debris could have 
filled the northern plains to a depth of about 100 m 
north of 30° N. The corresponding equivalent depth of 
water necessary to transport this sediment would have 
been several times the sediment volume. Whether or 
not this resulted in a Late Noachian ocean would have 
depended on the relative rates of erosion and of water 
removal by ground infiltration, evaporation and so on. 
Linear gravity anomalies trending northward from 
Chryse Planitia may be indicative of early channels 
buried in the northern plains, analogous to the main 
catastrophic flood channels seen to the east of Valles 
Marineris (Zuber et al 2000). These could be Noachian- 
era pathways that moved water and sediment from the 
southern highlands to the northern lowlands. 

In addition, the Hesperian outflow flood channels 
can be traced northward into Acidalia Planitia. There, 
they converge into a basin (not presently closed) with 
an area 6 x 105 km’, south of the high-standing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Noachian inlier Acidalia Mensa at 45° N latitude (figure 
3(b)). Acidalia Mensa itself has erosional boundaries on 
the south and east that are channels (figure 3(c)) and 
may at one time have formed a natural barrier to water 
flow. This region of channel convergence coincides 
closely with one of two main occurrences of kilometre- 
scale polygonally fractured terrain. The origin of polyg- 
onally fractured terrain is controversial, but many of the 
processes proposed involve water. Thus, it is likely that 
water (and thus sediments) were carried far into the 
northern lowlands during the Hesperian, perhaps form- 
ing lakes. The region of channel convergence in 
Acidalia Planitia may mark the largest possible extent 
of any standing bodies of surface water. If there ever 
was a Hesperian northern ‘ocean’, it may have been 
more of a large lake about the size of the Caspian Sea (4 
x 105 km2). 


Synthesis of the observations and interpretations 
It is clear that there are a number of strong constraints on 
the history of water on Mars. They tell us that water was 
present at the surface early in the planet’s history and 
within the crust throughout time. They also allow us to 
construct a self-consistent scenario of the history of 
Martian volatiles and climate, although such a scenario is 
not unique. 

The history of Martian volatiles involved the fol- 
lowing (see figure 2). 

Most of the earliest atmosphere of Mars was lost 
during the Early Noachian by impact erosion and 
hydrodynamic escape. A secondary atmosphere was 
created by water and CO: released to the atmosphere as 
a direct result of Tharsis volcanism and this may have 
had a strong influence on climate. It is likely that 
volatiles were also released by non-Tharsis Noachian 
volcanism presumed to have been responsible for form- 
ing the ancient highland crust. Water and CO2 were lost 
from the surface and atmosphere system to space, to the 
polar caps and to carbonate deposits within the crust. 
There is compelling evidence for the existence of each of 
these sinks, as described above, although it is not possi- 
ble at this time to determine uniquely the relative or 
absolute importance of each. There is a coincidence in 
the timing of major events in Martian history. The 
decrease in the impact rate at the end of heavy bom- 
bardment, the formation of the bulk of the Tharsis con- 
struct by magmatism, the decline in the intensity or 
existence of an intrinsic magnetic field, the change in 
climate inferred from the morphological characteristics 
of the surface and the loss of substantial volatiles to 
space all occurred at nearly the same time and marked 
the end of the Noachian epoch about 3.7 Gyr ago. Many 
of these events are likely to have been causally connect- 
ed to each other, although some of the similarity in tim- 
ing may be coincidental. However, the loss of atmos- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


pheric protection by the shutdown of the global mag- 
netic field and the decline in the rate of Tharsis volcan- 
ism at the end of the Noachian probably both were 
instrumental in the major shift in climate as inferred 
from the geological record. There has been a reservoir of 
crustal liquid water throughout Martian history, contin- 
uing possibly to the present. This reservoir has 
exchanged, at various times and to various degrees, 
with water at the surface and in the atmosphere. We 
have little information as to how much water is con- 
tained in this reservoir today, but it is likely to be sub- 
stantial, globally distributed and readily accessible to 
the surface in some places. 

New measurements from both planned and poten- 
tial missions will allow us both to test the above 
hypotheses and to further constrain the processes that 
have taken place. Although the list of relevant observa- 
tions is long, some measurements will be key to impr ov- 
ing our understanding. These include determining the 
present-day isotope ratios of the climate-related species 
(H, C, O and N) and the noble gases, sampling rocks 
over a broad age spectrum and determining the abun- 
dance of weathering products and the isotope ratios of 
gases contained within them, continuing the search for 
evidence for trapped carbonate or sulphate minerals 
within the crust, especially in rocks previously under- 
ground and now exposed at the surface, and continuing 
to explore the morphology of the surface for evidence of 
climate-related processes. 

Discoveries made in the past decade have had a 
tremendous impact on our understanding of the history 
of Martian water, volatiles and climate. Analysis of the 
Martian meteorites and the measurements made from 
the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft in particular have 
been key to progress in this area. Unravelling the history 
of Martian volatiles and climate will be central to 
addressing in a meaningful way the potential for Martian 
life and to interpreting results obtained specifically to 
look for evidence of present or past life. 


Acknowledgements 

We thank C. Leovy, S. Stewart, L. Leshin, M. Mellon, H. 
Frey, P. Withers, B. Hynek, K. Harrison, W. Hartmann 
and the MOLAscience team for valuable discussions and 
for providing preprints of their manuscripts. We also 
thank J. Head, R. Haberle and C. Leovy for detailed 
reviews of our manuscript. This research was supported 
by the Mars Global Surveyor Project and the NASA 
Planetary Geology and Geophysics Program. 

This article is a modified version of a previously 
published article: Nature 412 237-44 (2001). Reproduced 
by courtesy of Nature [http://www.nature.com/cgi- 
taf/DynaPage.taf? file=/nature /journal/v412/n6843/abs 
/412237a0_fs.html] 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Acufia M H et al 1999 Global distribution of crustal mag- 
netism discovered by the Mars Global Surveyor 
MAG/ER experiment Science 284 790-3 

Brain D A and Jakosky B M 1998 Atmospheric loss since 
the onset of the martian geologic record: combined 
role of impact erosion and sputtering J. Geophys. Res. 
103 22689-94 

Carr M H 1996 Water on Mars (New York: Oxford 
University Press) 

Christensen P R et al 2000 Detection of crystalline 
hematite mineralization on Mars by the Thermal 
Emission Spectrometer: evidence for near-surface 
water J. Geophys. Res. 105 9623-42 

Christensen P R et al in press Mars Global Surveyor 
Thermal Emission Spectrometer experiment: inves- 
tigation, description and surface science results J. 
Geophys. Res. 

Hartmann W K and Neukum G in press Cratering 
chronology and the evolution of Mars Space Sci. Rev. 

Hartmann W K et al 1981 Basaltic Volcanism on the 
Terrestrial Planets ed Basaltic Volcanism Study 
Project (New York: Pergamon) pp 1049-127 

Jakosky B M and Haberle R M 1992 Mars ed H H Kieffer, B 
M Jakosky, C W Snyder and M S Matthews (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 969-1016 

Jakosky B M and Jones J H 1997 The history of Martian 
volatiles Rev. Geophys. 35 1-16 

Jakosky B M, Pepin R O, Johnson R E and Fox J L 1984 
Mars atmospheric loss and isotopic fractionation by 
solar-wind-induced sputtering and photochemical 
escape Icarus 111 271-88 

Leshin L A 2000 Insights into Martian water reservoirs 
from analyses of Martian meteorite QUE94201 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 27 2017-20 (2000) 

Malin M C and Edgett K S 2000 Evidence for recent 

ground water seepage and surface runoff on Mars 

Science 288 2330-35 

Malin M C and Edgett K S 2001 Sedimentary rocks of 

early Mars Science 290 1927-37 

Mathew K J and Marti K 2001 Early evolution of Martian 

volatiles: nitrogen and noble gas components in 

ALH84001 and Chassigny J. Geophys. Res. 106 1401-22 

McSween H Y Jr 1994 What we have learned about Mars 

from SNC meteorites Meteoritics 29 757-79 

Mellon M T and Phillips R J in press Recent gullies on 
Mars and the source of liquid water 

Owen T 1992 Mars ed H H Kieffer, B M Jakosky, C W 
Snyder and M S Matthews (Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) pp 818-34 

Phillips R J et al 2001 Ancient geodynamics and global- 
scale hydrology on Mars Science 291 2587-91 

Purucker M et al 2000 An altitude-normalized magnetic 
map of Mars and its interpretation Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 27 2449-52 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Climate History ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Smith D E et al 1999 The global topography of Mars and 
implications for surface evolution Science 284 
1495-1503 

Squyres S W and Kasting J F 1994 Early Mars: how warm 
and how wet? Science 265 744-9 

Watson L L, Hutcheon I D, Epstein S and Stolper E M 
1994 Water on Mars: clues from deuterium /hydro- 
gen and water contents of hydrous phases in SNC 
meteorites Science 265 86-90 

Zuber M T et al 2000 Internal structure and early thermal 
evolution of Mars from Mars Global Surveyor 
topography and gravity Science 287 1788-93 


Bruce H Jakosky and Roger J Phillips 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


The existence of the MARTIAN CORE, which has been 
accepted for many decades, is interesting for several rea- 
sons. First, its size and composition tell us about Mars as 
a whole — its constituents and provenance. Second, its 
antiquity tells us about early conditions on Mars; we 
believe that the core formed early, and this requires that 
Mars had a hot beginning. Third, this core is the likely 
source of a magnetic field for some part of Mars' history, 
probably the earliest part, just as Earth's core is the 
source of the current geomagnetic field. Fourth, the field 
may have influenced the early climate through its influ- 
ence on atmospheric escape. It could also have affected 
the environment for early life on Mars. Fifth, the heat 
flow from the core may have fed mantle plumes and 
influenced volcanic activity, much as hot spots such as 
Hawaii are thought to be fed by core heat flow on Earth. 
Sixth, a core, if partly or entirely liquid, influences rota- 
tional dynamics, just as (for example) changes in length 
of day are influenced by Earth's liquid core. 

Mars is built from roughly the same ingredients as 
Earth: silicates and oxides of magnesium and iron, as 
well as metallic iron (alloyed with various constituents). 
When we refer to a core for the terrestrial planets 
Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, we mean a central 
region that is rich in metallic iron. Because this material 
is about twice as dense as the silicates and oxides making 
up the CRUST and MANTLE, its presence as a core is 
revealed through its influence on the mean density of the 
planet and through its effect on the moment of inertia. 
Old measurements of gravity and more recent geodetic 
data from Pathfinder (Folkner et al 1997) reveal that the 
mean moment of inertia for Mars is 0.365MR2, where M 
is the mass of Mars and R is its mean radius. Together 


aE Chie of variate Picierana 


la POG hn be aoushy 


$0 lon hin macetinh 


ba irre nthe 


Co rasacimeg 6 


may bes Lay 


bquid citer oon 


co EE err 
isonet in. Earth] 


Figure 1. Cutaway view of the Martian interior 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with the Martian mean density of 3.93 g cmr, this sug- 
gests a model of Mars that is not too different from a 
scale model of Earth (that is, similar ingredients, distrib- 
uted similarly). The Martian core is proportionately a lit- 
tle smaller than Earth’s core, and proportionately more 
iron is found in the mantle (in oxides or silicates). As we 
do not know the composition of the core we cannot be 
certain about core size, but a core radius of around 1 
300-1500 km (depth to core of 1900-2100 km) is indicat- 
ed. Figure 1 shows a simple interior structure of Mars. 
Bertka and Fei (Bertka and Fei 1998) suggest a composi- 
tion for Mars that is different from partly devolatilized 
primitive METEORITES. 

Far less is known about the Martian core than 
Earth's core because we lack seismological evidence or 
geodetic data of sufficient precision. In particular, we do 
not know whether the core is entirely liquid, partly lig- 
uid (like Earth) or entirely solid, although there are indi- 
rect arguments against an entirely solid core. Fortunately, 
because Mars is at lower pressures than Earth, and so is 
more accessible to high-pressure experiment, it is possi- 
ble to assess the likely phase composition for the core. 


Core formation 
It is widely accepted that terrestrial planetary cores owe 
their existence to a process of gravitational separation of 
mostly liquid, immiscible iron from the (partly) solid sil- 
icates. The supporting arguments are partly physical 
(Stevenson 1990), but increasingly geochemical. 
Although we have no samples of either the core of Earth 
or the core of Mars, we do have rocks that are probably 
indicative of mantle composition. For Mars, these are the 
very limited yet highly important SNC METEORITES (for 
shergottites, nakhilites and chassignites). As on Earth, 
these igneous rocks show a striking depletion of ‘iron- 
loving elements’ (called siderophiles) whose extraction 
testifies to the conditions of core formation (Righter, 
Hervig and Kring 1998). Isotopic data (Chen and 
Wasserburg 1986, Lee and Halliday 1997) also suggest 
that this core-forming event was early in Mars’ history. 
These data, together with physical modelling, sug- 
gest a scenario similar to the following. Mars accumulat- 
ed from smaller bodies over a period of perhaps as long 
as 100 million yr (Myr), but possibly much shorter, 
around 4.5-4.6 billion yr (Gyr) ago (Wetherill 1994, 
Chambers and Wetherill 1998). Isotopic evidence is com- 
patible with a very short accretion time, suggesting that 
Mars might even have been a runaway, isolated embryo 
rather than a slowly accumulated body like Earth. In this 
accretional process, the impacting bodies may have 
already had iron cores, but the energetics of the impact 
events would have caused extensive melting and mixing 
of the immiscible metallic iron and silicate /oxide compo- 
nents, allowing chemical re-equilibration on a small scale 
(centimetres to metres) (Stevenson 1990). A substantial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mass of the impacting bodies may have been in the form 
of giant impacts (bodies of the order of the mass of Earth’s 
Moon), but even much smaller bodies can bury a great 
deal of heat at depth. The energy of gravitational forma- 
tion of Mars is roughly 0.6GM/R per unit mass, where G 
is the gravitational constant. If all this were converted into 
heat it would be sufficient to heat the Mars-forming mate- 
rial to several thousand degrees Celsius above the melt- 
ing point and, even with the loss of heat by radiation, a 
magma ocean is likely. This ocean might be transient (sur- 
viving for a brief period after each giant impact) or it 
might be sustained by a dense steam atmosphere, but in 
either case it will define the conditions of most of the core 
formation. 

Although not as hot or at such high pressure as the 
likely conditions that formed Earth's core (Righter, 
Hervig and Kring 1998), the lower gravity on Mars 
would still permit a thick magma ocean. Metallic iron 
can settle as droplets in a convecting magma ocean, to 
accumulate as large blobs (‘diapirs’) that then ascend by 
Stokes flow through the possibly more viscous and high- 
pressure deep mantle. In this scenario, the core might ini- 
tially be either a few hundred degrees Celsius hotter than 
the mantle (if the energy of core formation is retained 
substantially within the iron) or the same temperature as 
the deep mantle (if efficient thermal equilibration takes 
place). Much of the Martian crust (particularly that pre- 
served in the south) may have formed in this very earli- 
est epoch. 


Figure 2. Radial magnetic field at 200 km altitude, based on data 
collected by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft. The southern 


hemisphere exhibits the largest field anomalies. Notice that the 
opposite hemisphere has field anomalies that are typically an 
order of magnitude smaller and exhibit less coherent spatial 
structure. These maps were prepared by M. Purucker, Goddard 
Space Flight Center. They are in Lambert azimuthal equidistant 
projection and were published (in a different projection) in 
Purucker et al 2000. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Martian magnetism 

Mars, unlike Earth, has no global dipole magnetic field. 
The Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft confirmed this but 
also found strong, spatially variable magnetic fields at 
altitudes of 200 km down to closest approach of 110 km 
(Acufia et al 1999, Connerny 1999). Figure 2 shows hemi- 
spherical maps of the radial field normalized to a con- 
stant 200 km altitude. The fields are measured below 
much of the Martian ionosphere and much of the power 
in their spatial variability is at length scales comparable 
with the distance from the surface. ‘Inversion’ of these 
data is non-unique, but the source of the field must be 
confined to the outermost several tens of kilometres of 
the crust (and possibly confined to an even thinner 
layer). A deeper layer or source of currents could not pro- 
vide the observed spatial structure, except with physical- 
ly implausible assumptions. The inferred crustal magne- 
tizations are up to 10-30 A m~!, an order of magnitude 
higher than the strongest magnetizations typically 
encountered in Earth rocks, and even these values are 
underestimates if one were to require thinner magne- 
tized layers or incoherent magnetization directions. 
Given the large amounts of magnetized crust required, it 
seems very likely that the magnetization is thermal rema- 
nence acquired during the last time the rocks cooled 
through the blocking temperature, for example following 
dike injection. Most of these cooling events took place at 
a time when a large global field was present. (‘Most’ 
rather than ‘all’ is appropriate here, because the surface 
magnetizations are so large that it is possible for crustal 
rock to be substantially magnetized through cooling in 
the presence of other crustal fields, rather than a global 
field.) Other origins of the magnetization (for example, 
due to impact, as suggested for the Moon) are conceiv- 
able in principle, but seem insufficient given the magni- 
tude of the requirements. 

There is great interest in the meaning of the spatial 
pattern of magnetization, including possible lineations 
that suggest an analogy to plate tectonically (see TECTON- 
Ics) derived lineations of magnetization on Earth's ocean 
floor, but the current constant-altitude (that is, constant- 
resolution) maps do not provide strong support for these 
speculations. Models of the crustal magnetization suggest 
that the Martian field may have undergone reversals. 

It seems likely that Mars requires at least one (and 
preferably several) of the following: high abundance of 
appropriate magnetic materials (for example, magnetite), 
a particularly favourable magnetic mineralization (for 
example, single domains), large volumes of crust that are 
coherently magnetized and/or an unusually large field 
in which the magnetization was acquired. 

The fact that Mars did have a global magnetic 
field for one or more periods in its early history sug- 
gests that it once had an active core dynamo, the 
process responsible for Earth's current field. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


strongest magnetizations are observed in the ancient 
southern highlands of Mars, which pre-date 4 Gyr. The 
antiquity of these regions is inferred by the (imprecise) 
method of crater counts. However, not all ancient crust 
on Mars produces large magnetic fields at the space- 
craft altitude, and not all younger crust is devoid of 
magnetization. This prevents firm conclusions being 
made about the timing of acquisition of magnetization 
and hence the timing of a postulated Martian core 
dynamo. 

Schubert et al (Schubert, Russell and Moore 2000) 
have suggested a later (post 4.0 Gyr) period of magneti- 
zation, which would indicate a later period of dynamo 
activity. However, some arguments point towards 
ancient (4.2 Gyr or earlier) acquisition. First, as noted by 
Acufia et al (Acufia, 1999), the ancient impact structure 
Hellas (believed to be at least 4 Gyr old) lacks any mag- 
netic signature and seems to be surrounded by a region 
with very little coherent magnetization. This is a plausi- 
ble outcome were the impact to have occurred when 
Mars possessed no global magnetic field. It is not a plau- 
sible outcome if the southern crust were subsequently 
reheated and then cooled to acquire magnetization dur- 
ing a later epoch in which a global field was active. 
Second, it is difficult to imagine any physically plausible 
scenario in which large provinces of the southern crust 
were extensively heated later in Mars’ history without 
producing some surficial difference in appearance from 
those regions that were not so treated. This argument is 
supported by the recognition that huge volumes of crust 
are required to explain the observed magnetization, 
rather than some thin layer of possibly remagnetized 
material. In particular, revived igneous activity generat- 
ing new crust would certainly disrupt these terrains 
because of the large amounts required. Third, evidence 
from the ancient Martian meteorite ALH84001 suggests 
that its magnetization was acquired at 4.0 Gyr or even 
earlier. 

A region that lacks large magnetic fields at the 
spacecraft altitude might still consist of crust that 
formed in the presence of a global magnetic field. For 
example, the magnetization may be spatially incoher- 
ent, the cooling history may have favoured multido- 
main magnetite or less favourable mineralization, or 
the field may have been reversing more rapidly. 
Moreover, the early rapid pace of planetary evolution 
means that regions in the south that seem to be of the 
same age may nonetheless differ in age by 100 Myr and 
thus cooled in a different magnetic field, even though 
their surface appearance and crater density seem to be 
identical. Last but not least, ancient crust may underlay 
younger crust in some northern localities, thereby 
allowing preservation of a (relatively weak and patchy) 
magnetization, even when the surface age postdates 
any global field. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A Martian dynamo? 

The dynamo mechanism is much studied but still imper- 
fectly understood, despite recent advances in numerical 
simulation. In particular, we do not know the conditions 
sufficient for the existence of a planetary dynamo. 
Because we can only speculate about early conditions on 
Mars, the problem of inferring or predicting the history 
of a Martian dynamo is indeed formidable. Earth's 
dynamo is also imperfectly understood, although it is 
thought that it arises from convection driven largely by 
inner-core growth (Stevenson, Spohn and Schubert 
1983). 

If a dynamo exists, then it is likely that the expected 
field magnitude B inside the region of field generation is 
given by the Elsasser number of order unity. This implies 
B ~ (2pQ/o)!/2, where p is the fluid density, Q is the plan- 
etary rotation rate and o is the electrical conductivity. For 
the Martian core, this yields ~10-3 tesla, but because this 
is the same prediction as for present Earth, the predicted 
palaeofield at the surface of Mars is indistinguishable (at 
the level of this crude argument) from the present field at 
Earth’s surface. Dynamo theory admits weaker fields as 
possible solutions, but it does not admit fields substan- 
tially larger than B ~ (2pQ/o)!/2. Despite suggestions to 
the contrary (Stevenson, Spohn and Schubert 1983), there 
is no theoretical basis at present for the idea that the field 
scales in some direct way with the energy source, so that 
it might undergo slow decline over geological time or 
large changes arising from inner-core nucleation. 

One speculative explanation for the origin of mag- 
netization on Mars is that the field was generated in a 
magma ocean. Plausible numbers are a characteristic 
fluid velocity v of 10-1 ms-! (because of very high heat 
flows at that time), a characteristic length scale L of 106m 
and a magnetic diffusivity of 104 m2 s~ (possibly appro- 
priate to high-temperature and high-pressure silicate 
melts), which together give a magnetic Reynolds number 
Rm of 10. This is marginal at best, but would be attractive 
because large fields are predicted (0.01-0.1 T at the 
Martian surface). The extremely high observed magneti- 
zations might then be explained, although a core 
dynamo is more plausible. 


Thermal or compositional convection? 

If one accepts that core convection is needed, then a 
probable necessary condition for a dynamo is the pres- 
ence of convection. In terrestrial planets (including 
Earth), the criterion for core convection is difficult to sat- 
isfy. The reason for this is that the natural scale for core 
heat flows is such that this heat can probably be carried 
by conduction at a temperature gradient that is stably 
stratified (that is, it inhibits convection). To obtain core 
convection, one must appeal to unusually large heat 
flows or the development of an inner core. In either case, 
the core must be cooling. To appreciate this argument, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


consider first the simple case of no inner core. 
Convection will occur provided that the heat flux within 
the core exceeds that which is carried by conduction 
along an adiabat: 


Frotal> Feond.ad=kaT¢/Cp thermal convection 


where k is the thermal conductivity, a is the coefficient of 
thermal expansion, T is the temperature, g is the gravita- 
tional acceleration and C, is the specific heat at constant 
pressure. These parameters are all slowly varying within a 
core (if T is close to being adiabatically distributed), except 
for g, which is approximately linear in radius 1, the dis- 
tance from the planet centre. If the core is simply cooling 
and releasing the stored sensible heat (provided by gravi- 
ty during planetary accretion), then the total heat flux is 
also linear in 1: Fiotai(t)=— pCpr(dT-/dt)/3, where T; is the 
mean core temperature and t is time. It is unlikely that the 
core contains significant radioactive heat sources (even 
less likely than Earth, where one can always appeal to 
unknown, very high pressure effects). Consequently, if 
thermal convection ceases to operate in the outer part of 
the core, then it will also cease to operate at about the same 
time elsewhere in the core. 

If the core is cooling and the central temperature 
drops below the liquidus for the core alloy, then an 
inner core will nucleate. In Earth, we know from seis- 
mic evidence that the core is ~10% less dense than pure 
iron, and many suggestions have been offered for the 
identity of the light elements that are mixed with the 
iron. At the lower pressures relevant to Mars, the dom- 
inant light element may be sulphur (Bertka and Fei 
1998). For sulphur abundances that are less than cos- 
mic relative to iron, as cosmochemical arguments sug- 
gest, the inner core will be nearly pure iron (with some 
nickel) and the sulphur will be entirely in the outer 
core. The introduction of this light element into the 
fluid of the lowermost core will tend to promote con- 
vection and cause mixing throughout all or most of the 
outer core, provided that the cooling is sufficiently fast. 
Latent heat release at the inner-core—outer-core bound- 
ary will also contribute to the likelihood of convection. 
However, inner-core growth permits outer-core con- 
vection even when the heat flow through the 
core-mantle boundary is less (perhaps much less) than 
the heat carried by conduction along an adiabat. In this 
regime (possibly that occupied by Earth), the tempera- 
ture gradient is very slightly less steep than adiabatic 
and the compositional convection carries heat down- 
wards. The total heat flux is still outwards, of course, as 
the heat carried by conduction is large. This state is 
possible because the buoyancy release associated with 
the compositional change exceeds the work done 
against the unfavourable thermal stratification. Unlike 
thermal convection, compositional convection may not 
cease everywhere throughout the core at a single 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


epoch. This argument is modified in detail but not in 
general outline, should the core include a light element 
that does not exhibit eutectic behaviour (for example, 
silicon) as well as the (universally expected) comple- 
ment of sulphur. 


Required cooling rates 

For plausible choices of parameters, the cooling rate of 
the core must exceed about 80 K Gyr! to obtain thermal 
convection. However, this estimate is uncertain by per- 
haps as much as a factor of 2. The required cooling rate 
in the presence of a growing inner core is much smaller, 
by a factor of several (Stevenson 1983), but has not been 
studied in detail for Mars. As a consequence, models 
with an inner core will tend to sustain a dynamo for a 
long time, perhaps even to the present day, unless there 
is something unusual about the thermal history (as sug- 
gested below). The overlying mantle determines the 
cooling rate. Indeed, it is the mantle that determines 
whether a terrestrial planet has core convection and 
whether it can have a dynamo. 

It is also possible that the sufficient condition for a 
dynamo is not far removed from the necessary condition 
for the presence of any convection (Stevenson 1983). 
Simple scaling laws for convection (compatible with the 
philosophy of Kolmogorov turbulence and known to 
astrophysicists as mixing length theory) suggest that v ~ 
0.1(Feonv/p)!/3, where p is the fluid density and Feonv is the 
convective heat flux (or its compositional equivalent 
when the convection is driven by compositional density 
differences). I define 


e= Feonv/ Feond.ad = (Frotal —Fond.ad) /Feond.ad 


Substitution above shows immediately that for plausible 
parameters in the Martian core (L ~ 106m, 4 ~ 1m2s-1, p 
~ 104 kg m3), Rm may be large even if ¢ «1. That is, the 
heat flow has to only slightly exceed that for any convec- 
tion in order to reach that for convection of sufficient 
vigour to sustain a dynamo. This claim must be tested by 
further numerical work. It is conceivable, but difficult 
energetically, for a dynamo to function for e <0 (for 
example, because of baroclinic instabilities and thermal 
winds arising from horizontal temperature gradients 
that are caused by lateral differences in heat flow 
through the core-mantle boundary). Even in this case, 
one would expect that a dynamo requires || «1, as the 
vertical motions would otherwise be strongly sup- 
pressed and this inhibits dynamo activity. Alternatives to 
convective driving (for example precession) still require 
the core to be close to adiabatic and thus do not escape 
the constraints discussed above. 

In conclusion, if the mantle cools fast enough (or is 
cool enough to allow inner-core nucleation) then a 
dynamo occurs, but if the mantle is too hot or fails to cool 
then there is no dynamo. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Riononical hr oocling Peclgar es cocci) Pea | ech; 
(oer ee a ceca boc: OG COMvecBon sions 
hil bq) Gone, cosecting Ine) Go nner ons, mo chTanol 


Cala oes 
dicuech 


lined owe 
Pal 
ioneionicad he ccend ney rca Bio 
wit chagrin fd 
Anti Ie Ben an) Equi oir omnes 
Convacting, Sone ional 


Citar ome bean mcs bo 
Tien io sushain cham 


Prousnids ny 
cee ed 4 
PP Leiba Recast cece lear 
Ane Gans: cons Gora 
and darn 


Plas berorcs pages 
Gone Conese Ges, 
no china 


Figure 3. Possible scenarios of Martian core evolution: (a) high- 
sulphur model; (b) low-sulphur model; (c) plate-tectonic model 
(works for all sulphur contents). 


Possible histories of the Martian core 

Three possible scenarios for the history of the Martian 
dynamo are presented in figure 3. The first is the sim- 
plest: the planet starts out very hot and cools quickly at 
first. The core remains completely liquid throughout. As 
the cooling rate declines, a point is reached at which the 
heat flow out of the core can be accommodated by con- 
duction alone. At that epoch, the dynamo turns off (in a 
very short time geologically, perhaps as little as a few 
thousand years) and no further field generation is possi- 
ble, provided that an inner core never develops. This 
model requires that the core of Mars is sulphur rich, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


perhaps 10% or more by mass. It also requires tuning of 
the parameters so that the dynamo turns off as early in 
Mars' history as some arguments suggest. Most pub- 
lished models are of this kind. 

The second scenario is almost the antithesis of the 
first. It has not been modelled in detail, although it is 
implicit in the early work of Young and Schubert 
(Young and Schubert 1974), who considered the possi- 
bility of complete core freezing. In this model, the sul- 
phur content for the core is sufficiently low that an 
inner core develops early and grows rapidly. The liquid 
outer core becomes progressively more sulphur rich 
and evolves towards the eutectic composition. The 
experimental data (Fei, Bertka and Finger 1997) yield a 
eutectic of around 1400 K at the top of the core. For real- 
istic models of Mars’ mantle convection (Nimmo and 
Stevenson 2000), the expected present-day core—mantle 
boundary temperature is at least 1850 K, so there is no 
prospect that the outer core will completely freeze. 
However, it is conceivable that the outer core will 
become sufficiently thin that dynamo activity can no 
longer be sustained. This would seem implausible 
based on simple scaling arguments, but it might be the 
state that Mercury currently occupies. It probably 
requires a lower sulphur content of the Martian core 
than most would consider plausible, perhaps no more 
than a few per cent (even less than typical estimates for 
Earth). Further dynamo simulations are needed to test 
this hypothesis. 

The third scenario invokes a change in mantle 
convection to trigger the death of the Martian dynamo 
(Nimmo and Stevenson 2000). It is assumed that early 
Mars had mobile lid convection in which the lithos- 
phere could be recycled. On Earth, this is accomplished 
by plate tectonics, and this could also be the case on 
Mars (Sleep 1994). (It is, however, the recycling of the 
lithosphere that matters, not the form of the recycling; 
so there is no need to assume that Mars did exactly 
what Earth does.) At some time, perhaps after only a 
few hundred million years, this process ceased and 
Mars evolved slowly into the stagnant lid regime that 
it (and all terrestrial bodies except Earth) currently 
occupies. If this regime follows one of lithospheric 
recycling, then the mantle must heat up, because the 
elimination of heat is less efficient. In other words, the 
coldest time for the Martian mantle was early in Mars’ 
history, despite the inexorable monotonic decline of 
radioactive heat sources in the mantle and the crust. 
This scenario has the advantage that it may work for all 
possible sulphur contents in the core, as the presence of 
an inner core will not drive a dynamo if the mantle 
minimum temperature was reached early in Mars’ his- 
tory. An inner core drives a dynamo only while it is 
growing, and it can grow only if the core is cooling. 
One problem with this scenario is that it invokes an ad 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hoc timing for the cessation of ‘plate tectonics’; it also 
implies the ability for Mars to be volcanically active 
throughout geological time. 

In all these scenarios, the beginning of dynamo 
activity may be delayed after Mars’ accretion until a 
thermal boundary layer builds up in the lowermost 
mantle, depending on the uncertainty in the initial 
temperature difference between the core and mantle. 
However, this is unlikely to produce a delay of more 
than 100 Myr. 

There may be other scenarios not yet considered. 
Unfortunately, none of these scenarios can be tested with 
great confidence because the parameters that define their 
chronologies are not known with sufficient accuracy. 
However, the presence or absence or size of the inner 
core is clearly a crucial variable and may eventually be 
determined by a combination of geodesy and seismolo- 
gy. Numerical dynamo modelling will also be important 
in the coming years. 


Consequences of the Martian core and dynamo 
Core cooling dictates the presence of a thermal boundary 
layer at the base of the overlying mantle. Plumes can 
detach from this layer and may be a cause of hot-spot 
volcanism. Harder and Christensen (Harder and 
Christensen 1996) have proposed that Mars may be ina 
regime where a single plume dominates because of the 
effect of a major endothermic phase transition near the 
base of the Martian mantle (the same phase transition 
that defines the upper-mantle-lower-mantle boundary 
on Earth). This plume might be stable for a long period 
of time, perhaps billions of years, and may be responsi- 
ble for the Tharsis volcanic province. This hypothesis 
provides the exciting prospect of linking core thermal 
history with Martian volcanic history. However, it leaves 
unanswered several questions. If the core heat flow is so 
low (as required by the absence of a dynamo throughout 
much of Mars’ history), then is it reasonable to suppose 
that it is responsible for the dominant volcanic activity 
on Mars? Why would a deep-seated plume happen to 
produce volcanism at a location just northward of the 
principal geological feature (the crustal dichotomy)? 
Why is the plume so stable? Perhaps the answer to 
Tharsis lies nearer the surface of Mars rather than in the 
core history. 

The history of the atmosphere (Brain and Jakosky 
1998) (see MARS: ATMOSPHERE) may also be influenced by 
the magnetic field history through the effect of the field 
on atmospheric sputtering. The history of Martian mag- 
netism might even be linked to the history of life on 
Mars. Perhaps the strongest argument for a biological 
effect in ALH84001 lies in the single-domain magnetite 
grains, whose presence in biological organisms is useful 
only while Mars has a field. This might also push 
Martian magnetism back to the earliest epoch. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The future 

Although Martian core studies can benefit from work in 
all areas of planetary science (including geochemistry), 
the greatest contribution is likely to arise from seismo- 
logical and geodetic efforts. In particular, the Mars 
Netlander mission and subsequent follow-ups are likely 
to have the greatest role. It may also be essential to better 
characterize the surface magnetization, something that 
no currently funded mission can do. We can also look 
forward to exciting developments in our understanding 
of dynamos. Mars' core is at least as interesting as Earth's 
core for our general understanding of planet evolution. 
This article is a modified version of a previously pub- 
lished article: Nature 412 214-19 (2001). Reproduced by 
courtesy of Nature [http://www.nature.com/cgi-taf/ 
DynaPage.taf?file=/nature/journal/v412/n6843/abs/ 
412214a0_fs.html] 


Bibliography 

Acufia M H, et al 1999 Global distribution of crustal mag- 
netization discovered by the Mars Global Surveyer 
MAG/ER experiment Science 284 790-3 

Bertka C M and Fei Y W 1998 Implications of Mars 
Pathfinder data for the accretion history of the ter- 
restrial planets Science 281 1838-40 

Brain D A and Jakosky B M 1998 Atmospheric loss since 
the onset of the Martian geologic record: combined 
role of impact erosion and sputtering J. Geophys. Res. 
103 22689-94 

Chambers J E and Wetherill G W 1998 Making the terres- 
trial planets: N-body integrations of planetary 
embryos in three dimensions Icarus 136 304-27 

Chen J H and Wasserburg G J 1986 Formation ages and 
evolution of Shergotty and its parent planet from 
U-Th-Pb systematics Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 50 
955-68 

Connerney J E P et al 1999 Magnetic lineations in the 
ancient crust of Mars Science 284 794-8 

Fei YW, Bertka C W and Finger LW 1997 High-pressure 
iron-sulfur compound Fe3S2 and melting relations 
in the Fe-FeS system Science 275 1621-3 

Folkner W N, Yoder C F, Yuan D N, Standish E M and 
Preston R A 1997 Interior structure and seasonal 
mass redistribution of Mars from radio tracking of 
Mars Pathfinder Science 278 1749-52 

Harder H and Christensen U R 1996 A one-plume model 
of Martian mantle convection Nature 380 507-9 

Lee D C and Halliday A N 1997 Core formation on Mars 
and differentiated asteroids Nature 388 854-7 

Nimmo F and Stevenson D J 2000 Influence of early plate 
tectonics on the thermal evolution and magnetic 
field of Mars J. Geophys. Res. 105 11969-79 

Purucker M et al 2000 An altitude-normalized magnetic 
map of Mars and its interpretation Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 27 2449-52 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Core and Magnetism 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Righter K, Hervig R Land Kring D A 1998 Accretion and 
core formation on Mars: molybdenum contents of 
melt inclusion glasses in three SNC meteorites 
Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 62 2167-77 

Schubert G, Russell C T and Moore W B 2000 Timing of 
the Martian dynamo Nature 408 666-7 

Sleep N H 1994 Martian plate tectonics J. Geophys. Res. 99 
5639-55 

Stevenson D J 1983 Planetary magnetic fields Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 46 555-620 

Stevenson D J, Spohn T and Schubert G 1983 Magnetism 
and thermal evolution of the terrestrial planets 
Icarus 54 466-89 

Stevenson D J 1990 Origin of the Earth ed H E Newsom 
and J E Jones (New York: Oxford Univiversity Press) 
pp 231-50 

Wetherill G W 1994 Provenance of the terrestrial planets 
Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 58 4513-20 

Young R E and Schubert G 1974 Temperatures inside 
Mars: is the core liquid or solid? Geophys. Res. Lett. 1 
157-9 


David J Stevenson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars: Surface 


Like all bodies of the solar system, Mars initially experi- 
enced a period of heavy meteoritic bombardment that 
ended about 3.8 Gyr ago. The planet has remained geo- 
logically active much longer than Mercury or the Moon, 
and volcanism and tectonics have continued into a rela- 
tively recent past. However, activity was never efficient 
enough to conceal completely the previous stages of evo- 
lution; because of the small amount of energy available 
to reshape the surface, a large part of the ancient surface 
is preserved that dates back to the period of heavy bom- 
bardment, and the Martian surface presents a sort of cat- 
alog of the successive steps in planetary evolution. In the 
framework of comparative planetology, Mars represents 
the intermediate situation between the Moon and 
Mercury on the one hand and Venus and the Earth on the 
other hand. It is therefore a key element to understand 
the evolution of telluric bodies. In addition, Mars is prob- 
ably the most favorable location in the solar system for 
the development of a prebiotic chemistry, or even for the 
development of life. These two elements explain why 
Mars has always been a favored target for space explo- 
ration. It is also the most accessible body in the solar sys- 
tem after the Moon, requiring only a 9 month journey 
with a new launch opportunity every 26 months. As we 
will see, the study of the surface leads to the inventory of 
volatile elements, so it is closely related to that of the 
atmosphere, and gives fascinating hindsight into the past 
climatic environments. 


Historical perspective 

Detailed observations of the surface became possible 
only half a century after GALILEO GALILEI first observed 
Mars around the year 1610, thanks to the progress of 
optical instruments. By the end of the 17th century 
Christiaan HUYGENS and G D cassini had produced the 
first drawings of Mars, determined the rotation period 
(24 h 40 min) from permanent markings on the surface 
and identified the polar caps. The most important subse- 
quent observations were performed by Filippo Maraldi 
(from 1672 to 1719), W HERSCHEL (1777-1783) and J E 
Schroeter (from 1785 to 1802). By the mid-19th century, 
the main characteristics of the planet were known; the 
occurrence of atmospheric phenomena was recognized, 
together with the presence of dark and bright markings 
at the surface, and polar caps with large seasonal varia- 
tions. The first attempt to compile a complete map was 
made by W BEER and J H MADLER in 1840. At this time, the 
dark areas were generally thought to be seas, following 
an assumption of W Herschel. Emmanuel Liais made the 
suggestion, in 1860, that they could be large patches of 
vegetation, thus explaining the changes in hue and 
brightness; this idea was widely accepted by the end of 
the century. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The modern era began with the close opposition of 
1877, when G SCHIAPARELLI drew the first map based on 
precise measurements of surface features. The resulting 
map was much more detailed than any previous one, 
with old ‘continents’ resolved as intricated series of 
‘islands’ and ‘bays’, so Schiaparelli had to abandon the 
feature names in use and introduced the foundation of 
modern nomenclature. This map was also the first one to 
report numerous ‘canals’. Canals, previously mentioned 
by SECCHI and DAWES, were the first features reported on 
Mars with no terrestrial equivalent. They remained at the 
center of discussions about the Martian surface and hab- 
itability for several decades, mainly because of their 
interpretation by Percival LOWELL as artificial construc- 
tions. Although this interpretation was always debated, a 
majority of Mars observers (including C FLAMMARION, O 
von STRUVE, W Holden, W PICKERING, ...) were convinced 
of the reality of the canals. It was only after E ANTONIADI’s 
observations in 1909 that canals were largely recognized 
as an interpretation of a very subtle surface structure 
through the constantly moving terrestrial atmosphere; 
however, the matter was definitively settled only with 
the first spacecraft observations in the 1960s. 

Planetary astronomy was relatively neglected in the 
US after the First World War, partly because of the long 
and sterile controversy about the Martian canals, but it 
remained vivid in Europe. Along with continuing 
detailed observations (mainly by Antoniadi, Focas, 
Maggini, SLIPHER, ...), this period saw the first conclusive 
physical studies of the planet. The classical assumption 
that Mars was covered with seas did not survive the first 
atmospheric studies (1920-1950): both pressure and tem- 
perature are too low to permit the existence of liquid 
water. Concerning the surface, polarimetric studies in the 
1940s (B Lyot, A Dolffus) suggested that the bright areas 
are covered by mineral dust with composition dominat- 
ed by iron oxides; hydrated oxides were actually 
observed in 1964 by infrared spectroscopy (V Moroz). 
The assumption that dark areas are covered with vegeta- 
tion was severely challenged by spectroscopic measure- 
ments in the 1950s (Sharonov, Sinton, Vaucouleurs, 
Kuiper, ...) and more so by radar observations in the 
early 1960s (Goldstein and Gilmore, Kotelnikov) that 
yielded the first topographic measurements. 

The emerging picture of Mars at the eve of the space 
era was very different from the conceptions of Lowell 
and Flammarion and resembled the modern view. 
However, the first close-up images, returned by Mariner 
4 in 1965, surprised all Mars observers: the surface 
appeared much more Moon-like than Earth-like. Craters 
were never observed from the ground and seldom con- 
sidered, and they appeared to be the most prominent 
surface features. Although Mariners 6 and 7 in 1969 con- 
firmed this new view of Mars, they also evidenced more 
evolved processes in chaotic terrains and uncratered 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. This view of Mars was taken with HST’s Wide Field 
Planetary Camera-2 (WFPC2) on 10 March 1997, just before 
opposition, when Mars was about 100 million km from the Earth. 
The resolution is 22 km at the disk center. The image shows the 
planet during the transition between spring and summer in the 
northern hemisphere. The annual north polar carbon dioxide ice 
cap is rapidly sublimating, revealing the much smaller perma- 
nent water ice cap, along with a few nearby detached regions of 
surface frost. Bright water ice clouds can be seen in the giant 
impact basin, Hellas (near bottom of the image). The largest 
impact craters can be seen on such images (e.g. Schiaparelli on 
the left). The dark region at the center is Syrtis Major, a low vol- 
canic shield. (David Crisp and the WFPC2 Science Team (Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory / California Institute of Technology).) 


plains, but missed the more characteristic areas of the 
planet (see MARINER MISSIONS). The whole complexity of 
Mars became apparent only in 1971 with the first fully 
successful orbital spacecraft, Mariner 9. The VIKING 
MISSION, which consisted of two orbiters and two landers, 
was then operated for 6 yr (1976-1982). Limited but 
important additional information was provided by Mars 
4 and 5 (1973-1974), PHoBOS-2 (1989) and MARS PATH- 
FINDER (1997). 

The main body of our current knowledge of the 
Martian surface still derives from Viking observations. 
Most of this information is related to surface morpholo- 
gy however, not directly to composition; even the geo- 
logical maps are actually based on photointerpretation, 
while the nature of the soils is still poorly known. In this 
respect, two other sources of information are particular- 
ly important: SNC METEORITES, thought to come from 
Mars, and telescopic spectral observations in the near- 
infrared (pioneered in the 1960s by Moroz, Adams, and 
McCord). SNC meteorites provide direct compositional 
information but are not as useful as collected samples, 
since their source areas are unknown. High spatial reso- 
lution spectroscopy is less conclusive but provides the 
opportunity to understand the relationship between 
morphology and mineralogical composition over large 
areas, thus hinting at the processes that shaped the sur- 
face and at their succession in time. 


Major features and main processes 

Physiography 

The most striking features on Mars, as seen from the 
ground, are the opposition between bright and dark 


MARS TOPOGRAPHY 


Figure 2. Topographic map of Mars. Derived from USGS, processed by Tayfun Oner. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Five giant volcanoes are present on the surface of 
Mars, including Olympus Mons, the largest known volcano in 
the solar system. It is 27 km high and 550 km at its base, and the 
caldera is 90 km across and ~3 km deep. The volcano is sur- 
rounded by an outward-facing cliff up to 6 km high, recovered 
in places by lava flows. The plains surrounding the volcano are 
covered by the ridged and grooved ‘aureole’ of the volcano, 
extending 700 km to the northwest. The origin of the aureole is 
controversial: it may be related to gravitation-induced sliding of 
material from the flanks of an ancestral volcano or to a pyro- 
clastic phase in the volcano’s history. The small density of 
craters implies that the last periods of activity are relatively 
recent. (Mosaic of Viking images, NASA.) 


areas, and variations in colors (figure 1). The orbital view 
is rather different, because local contrast is dominated by 


shadows, so that relief becomes apparent. The major 
morphological features consist of the following. 


There is a topographic and physiognomic asymmetry 
between hemispheres, often referred to as the Martian 
‘dichotomy’ (figure 2). Old, densely cratered high- 
lands are concentrated in the south, and younger low 
volcanic plains in the north. The difference in altitude 
is on the order of 3 km in general. 

A broad topographic bulge, Tharsis, is centered at the 
equator. This region is 8000 km wide and 10 km high 
and is covered by both old and young terrains. This 
structure has no equivalent in the solar system. It is 
surmounted by three huge volcanoes rising another 
15 km or so in altitude. 

There are five enormous volcanoes, three of which are 
aligned on top of Tharsis and another one (Elysium 
Mons) is on a smaller bulge. The fifth one, Olympus 
Mons (figure 3), is the largest volcano in the solar sys- 
tem and rests in a low plain. It reaches 27 km at its 
highest point. The five giant volcanoes are built from 
fluid basaltic lavas and are similar in type to the 
Hawaii volcanoes. 

A huge canyon system, Valles Marineris, extends east- 
ward from Tharsis along the equator (figure 4). The 
complex is 4000 km long, and reaches 600 km wide 
and 7 km deep in its central part. The canyons appear 
to be related to faulting and constraints that followed 
Tharsis formation. 

Channels tens of kilometers wide and hundreds long 
exist, similar to those produced on Earth by cata- 
strophic flooding (figure 5). Most of them originate in 
the chaotic terrains east of Valles Marineris, cross the 
old terrains and merge with the low plains at 45° N. 


Figure 4. Synoptic view of Valles Marineris, the great canyon of Mars. The scene shows the entire canyon system, over 3000 km long 
and averaging 8 km deep, extending from Noctis Labyrinthus, the arcuate system of graben on top of the Tharsis bulge, to the chaot- 
ic terrains to the east. The connected chasmata of Valles Marineris originated as tectonic structures, and have later been modified by 
other processes, most notably mass wasting. The central and eastern parts contain layered materials and evidences of erosion by liq- 
uid water. Huge channels began from Valles Marineris and from adjacent canyons and ran north. Many of the channels flowed north 
into Chryse Basin, which contains the Viking Lander 1 and Mars Pathfinder sites. (Mosaic of Viking medium-resolution images in 
black and white and low-resolution images in color, Mercator projection.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 3 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Chaotic terrains and outflow channels are concentrat- 
ed east of Valles Marineris. This image shows a 300 km long por- 
tion of Ravi Vallis. Like many other channels, Ravi Vallis 
orginates in a closed depression with no apparent tributaries, 
suggesting that the water was released under great pressure 
from beneath a confining layer of frozen ground. As the water 
was released and flowed away the overlying surface collapsed; 
three such regions of collapsed material (chaotic terrains) are 
seen in this image, connected by a channel whose floor was 
scoured by the flowing water. Structures in these channels indi- 
cate that they were carved by liquid water moving at high flow 
rates. Ravi Vallis connects with a system of channels that ulti- 
mately flowed northward into the Chryse Basin. A small crater 
(~10 km diameter) with fluidized ejecta can be seen at the bot- 
tom of the image. (Viking mosaic from the Mars Digital Image 
Map, image processing by Brian Fessler, Lunar and Planetary 
Institute.) 


e Polar deposits are 2-3 km thick with very thin layer- 
ing (<20 m), cut by spiraling valleys. In the north they 
are surrounded by a vast, uncratered, dune field. 


Although most of these constructs have their equivalent 
on Earth, they reach enormous dimensions on Mars. 
Conversely, some of the major terrestrial features do not 
have their counterpart on Mars, in particular folded 
mountains and mid-ocean ridges; sedimentary deposits 
are rare compared with the Earth, while 60% of the pre- 
sent surface is made of volcanic materials. These charac- 
teristics derive directly from the largest two differences 
between Mars and the Earth: their size (Mars’ radius is 
only about half the Earth’s, and its mass is one-tenth) and 
their distance to the Sun (Mars is 1.52 times further). 


Main processes 

Because of the smaller size the internal temperature of 
Mars never reached that of the Earth, and cooling was 
also more effective. In these conditions, the crust thick- 
ened and stabilized early in the history of the planet so 
that plate tectonics, the most effective resurfacing process 
on Earth, never developed on Mars. Therefore, very old 
terrains still compose a large part of the present Martian 
surface: the cratered highlands formed 3.8 Gyr ago, when 
impacts were the dominant process in the solar system, 
and are globally well preserved. The enormous size of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Martian volcanoes is another consequence of the absence 
of plate tectonics: all the material accumulates on the 
same spot, instead of building series of constructs as the 
plate shifts above the magma source, like in the Hawaii 
islands. There is evidence that the volcanoes have accu- 
mulated during a long part of Mars history but their sur- 
faces exhibit very few craters, implying that the last erup- 
tive events are relatively recent (~100 Myr?). Other types 
of volcanoes exist on Mars, in particular small domes and 
wide low-relief shields (paterae) composed mostly of ash 
deposits; most plains were also formed by successive 
deposits of lava flows all along the history of the planet. 
Although the period of volcanic activity was much longer 
than on the Moon, volcanism is probably exhausted 
today. Overall, it was the most widespread and effective 
process that contributed to the formation of the surface 
after the period of heavy bombardment. 

The small size of Mars has resulted in a short period 
of geological activity and gas recycling, and the large Sun 
distance has not permitted a runaway greenhouse effect 
like that on Venus (see GREENHOUSE EFFECT). The combi- 
nation of these has resulted in an atmosphere thinner 
than the Earth’s and indirectly in a lower surface tem- 
perature and hence in different evolution processes. In 
particular, liquid water is unstable at the present time, so 
the most active surface processes on Earth (weathering, 
aqueous erosion and sedimentation) are only marginal 
on Mars. For this reason relief created by volcanism, tec- 
tonics or impacts remains largely unmodified, and con- 
siderable relief exists on Mars despite the small size of 
the planet: the overall altitude dynamic reaches 37 km, 
twice the Earth value. The only regulation is provided by 
the capacity of the crust to sustain the corresponding 
load, which explains the importance of fracture systems 
(in particular around Tharsis). On the other hand, the 
lack of liquid water also has resulted in limited sedimen- 
tary processes. Instead, the surface currently evolves 
mainly under the influence of winds and, to a lesser 
extent, landslides. Winds related to seasonal sublimation 
and condensation of atmospheric CO) on the polar caps 
are strong enough to cut the spiraling valleys in the polar 
deposits and form dunes fields at high latitudes. The 
polar deposits are successions of layers of ice and dust 
with proportions related to climatic variations; the 
absence of craters in these terrains implies that they are 
constantly modified at the present time. Other wind- 
related features include erosional and depositional 
streaks behind craters and erosional forms at lower lati- 
tudes (yardangs). Active dust deposition occurs in the 
northern hemisphere, with net south-to-north transport; 
this pattern is probably reversed on various time scales 
because of periodic changes in obliquity and eccentricity 
(see SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: SHORT-TERM AND 
LONG-TERM CLIMATE VARIABILITY). The dust currently 
seems to be remobilized from southern areas rather than 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


formed from erosion of fresh surfaces, so that the fine 
materials are generally thought to be homogenized on a 
global scale and decoupled from the bedrock. Variations 
of surfaces markings observed from the ground are 
mostly due to aeolian transport of fines. 

Aeolian processes appear to have been significant all 
along the history of Mars. However, there are numerous 
indications that other processes were active in a more or 
less distant past, in particular those related to liquid 
water and water ice, providing important clues about 
former climatic conditions and the degree of chemical 
and perhaps biological evolution. 

In 2001, high-resolution pictures taken by the Mars 
Orbiter Camera on NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor space- 
craft show distinct, thick layers of rock within craters and 
other depressions, suggesting that they may have 
formed in lakes or shallow seas. Such layered rock struc- 
tures where there were once lakes are common on Earth. 
The pancake-like layers of sediment have compressed 
and cemented to form a rock record of the planet’s histo- 
ry. The regions of sedimentary layers on Mars are spread 
out and scattered around the planet. They are most com- 
mon within impact craters of Western Arabia Terra, the 


Figure 6. Nanedi Vallis is an example of valley running in the 
old cratered plains (Xanthe Terra). The left image was acquired 
by Viking and shows the context: this kind of valley, mostly 
found in the older terrains, is thought to have formed in a dis- 
tant past under the action of liquid water. The right image was 
taken by the Mars Global Surveyor high-resolution camera. The 
picture covers an area 9.8 km by 18.5 km; the resolution is 12 m. 
The valley is about 2.5 km wide. Weathered debris are seen 
along the floor and terraces are present within the valley (near 
the top of the frame). Terraces and the small internal channel 
(also seen near the top of the frame) suggest continual fluid flow 
and downcutting. The valley has later evolved by mass wasting. 
(Malin Space Science Systems / NASA.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


inter-crater plains of northern Terra Meridiani, the 
chasms of the Valles Marineris, and parts of the north- 
eastern Hellas Basin rim. 

Although Martian highlands are very similar to 
lunar ones, these areas are significantly more evolved on 
Mars: they are dissected by valley networks and include 
smooth areas and craters with smoothed shapes. These 
differences reflect later evolution under the action of ero- 
sive processes and highland volcanism in the early stages 
of the planet’s history. Valleys (figure 6) are particularly 
interesting since they imply the presence of running 
water at the surface in early times, and consequently a 
very different climate with higher temperature and pres- 
sure. At latitudes higher than 40°, highland craters are 
more rounded and degraded, and all escarpments are 
surrounded by lobate debris aprons, suggesting relax- 
ation of soils with a large water ice content (permafrost). 
This is consistent with present climatic conditions, where 
underground water ice is potentially stable at high lati- 
tudes but not near the equator; accordingly, this process 
could still be active nowadays. Initial data from NASA’s 
Mars Odyssey gamma ray spectrometer instrument suite 
has been used to detect hydrogen, which indicates the 


Nae 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 7. Rampart craters represent a special cratering style 
found only on Mars: the ejecta deposits consist of one or sever- 
al sheets with either rounded or lobate contours, sometimes 
ending with a pedestal escarpment. The 18 km crater Yuty in 
this figure exhibits overlapping ejecta sheets with complex 
lobate forms. This type of ejecta morphology is found mostly 
equatorward of 40°, whereas circular ejecta sheets are frequent 
poleward of 30°. Rampart craters are believed to form when the 
impacting object rapidly melts subsurface ice. The presence of 
liquid water in the ejected material allows it to flow along the 
surface, giving the ejecta blanket its characteristic, fluidized 
appearance. The spatial distribution of rampart craters of a 
given size permits to map the depth of the permafrost. (Viking 
Orbiter image 3A07.) 


presence of water ice in the upper meter (three feet) of 
soil in a large region surrounding the planet’s south pole. 
The amount of hydrogen detected indicates 20 to 50% ice 
by mass in the lower layer. Because rock has a greater 
density than ice, this amount is more than 50% water ice 
by volume. 

Martian craters have another unique particularity: 
many of them have ejecta blankets lobate in form, clearly 
due to fluidized materials (figure 7). Although they may 
result from interactions with the atmosphere during bal- 
listic emplacement, these shapes are better explained by 
impacts in soils with high water content, with ejecta 
emplaced as radially directed surface flows. Other glacial 
forms exist in particular at high latitudes, including 
thermokarst, patterned grounds, pingos and ridges simi- 
lar to glacial moraines. These forms suggest that ice has 
played an important role in the evolution of the surface; 
they also put constraints on the distribution of ground ice 
along the planet's history. 

Other major landforms related to water are found in 
the canyons, chaotic terrains and outflow channels. 
Outflow channels are morphologically different from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


highland valleys and much younger. Some of them orig- 
inate in closed collapse zones, which suggests that they 
are related to sudden discharges of underground water 
under pressure. Typical forms are present in the chan- 
nels, in particular streamlined islands and scour marks, 
that are reminiscent of catastrophic flood features on 
Earth such as the Channeled Scablands, Washington 
state, although on a much larger scale. The eastern and 
central parts of Valles Marineris contain thick layered ter- 
rains that were extensively eroded after deposition (fig- 
ure 8). There is evidence that the layered terrains formed 
under ice-covered lakes filling the canyons; the water 
could have been released to the eastern chaotic terrains 
and channels during catastrophic events (landslides, 
impacts, ...). Several episodes of filling and release of 
such lakes may have occurred in the canyons. However, 
various hypotheses have been proposed to explain the 
evolution of Valles Marineris on the basis of orbital 
images, and a knowledge of rock composition (volcanic 
versus sedimentary origin) is required to choose among 
them. The presence of lakes at low latitudes, even under 
a frozen surface, could imply an important change in cli- 
matic conditions in a relatively recent past. A much more 
speculative topic concerns the existence of an ocean in 
the distant past: it has been suggested on the basis of 
Viking images that the contact between highlands and 
plains in the northern hemisphere is an ancient shoreline 
contemporaneous with the layered deposits and outflow 


Figure 8. Oblique view of Candor and Ophir Chasmata in cen- 
tral Valles Marineris, from the east. The divide between the two 
canyons is a remnant of the plateau in which the canyons are 
cut. This part of the canyon was filled with materials that were 
later deeply eroded. Two different kinds of layering are visible 
in the image: in the canyon walls (successive episods of volcan- 
ism that formed the plains) and in the mesa-like formations 
inside the canyon (possible lacustrine deposits). The 
north-south direction and the gap between the two canyons 
may indicate drainage of material by catastrophic release of 
water. A variety of processes have contributed to the present 
landscape, including tectonics (the canyon itself), mass wasting 
(canyon walls, top right), wind (the fluted slopes of the layered 
terrains) and perhaps water and volcanism (layered terrains and 
canyon floors). (Composite of high-resolution black-and-white 
images from Viking 1 and color images from Viking 2. Image 
processing by Jody Swann, Tammy Becker and Alfred McEwen, 
USGS Flagstaff.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


channels. Radar observations from MARS GLOBAL SURVEY- 
oR show that the possible contact line is close to an 
equipotential surface (as expected from a sea level) and 
that the terrains are very smooth below this level, thus 
supporting the idea of an ancient ocean. 


Volatiles inventory and past climates 

There is a striking paradox in the extent of water-related 
landscapes and the present amount of water in the 
atmosphere, which is equivalent to a layer of ~15 um 
precipitated on the surface. In contrast, a layer about 500 
m thick seems to be required to form the valley net- 
works observed in the highlands (versus 3000 m present 
on the Earth). This estimate conflicts with much smaller 
quantities derived from planetary formation models and 
noble-gas measurements (10-100 m) but seems more 
reliable. Hence, most of the water has been stored in sur- 
face reservoirs for several billion years or has escaped 
the planet at the end of the heavy bombardment period. 


The residual polar caps and the regolith can store only a 
small amount of water. Conversely, the permafrost 
could retain up to several hundred meters of water, 
although no realistic estimates can be made of the actu- 
al amount tied up this way. At present, the water stored 
in the reservoirs can be released in the atmosphere only 
if the temperature is high enough, which is possible only 
if a sufficient amount of greenhouse gases, namely CO;, 
is present. 

Accordingly, periods of large water erosion indicate 
high temperature and high atmospheric pressure. The 
CO) pressure necessary to maintain liquid water on 
Mars is consistent with estimates of outgassing and is on 
the order of 1-5 bar. In such a situation, similar to the 
present Earth’s, atmospheric CO, is continually deplet- 
ed by formation of carbonate minerals in liquid water 
and refurbished by recycling of buried rocks through 
volcanic and tectonic processes. This process is ultimate- 
ly controlled by the planetary heat flow. In the absence 


Table 1. Tentative chronology of surface evolution. 


Epoch Absolute age range (Gyr) Events Main processes _ Proportion of 
Hartmann—Tanaka Neukum—Wide present surface (Yo) 
Late Amazonian 0.25-0.0 0.7-0.0 Aeolian resurfacing Aeolian 7 
Final activity of Tharsis volcanoes 
Final evolution of Valles Marineris 
Middle Amazonian — 0.7—0.25 2.5-0.7 Polar layered deposits Volcanic 8 
Outflow channels are still active Aeolian 
Periglacial 
Early Amazonian 1.8-0.7 3.55-2.5 Late volcanic plains Volcanic 11 
Erosion of layered terrains in Valles 
Marineris 
Late Hesperian 3.1-1.8 3.7-3.55 Giant volcanoes Volcanic 19 
Relatively hot climate? Liquid water Fluvial 
may be stable or metastable Periglacial 
Layered terrains in Valles Marineris 
Outflow channels and chaotic terrains 
Early Hesperian 3.5-3.1 3.8-3.7 Important development of Tharsis Volcanic 16 
and Elysium 
Earliest central-vent volcanism 
(highland paterae) 
First volcanic plains 
Development of Valles Marineris 
Late Noachian 3.85-3.5 4.3-3.8 Hot and humid climate? Then Volcanic (flood) 12 
dissipation of early atmosphere and Fluvial 
cooling 
Highland valleys, fluvial resurfacing 
Highland volcanism 
Middle Noachian 3.92-3.85 4.5-4.3 Early development of Tharsis Impact 24 
Highland formation and large basins _ Volcanic (flood) 
Formation of megaregolith and 
sediments 
Early Noachian 4.6-3.92 4.6-4.5 Planetary formation Impact 4 


First mantle differentiation 


Volcanic (flood) 


Outgassing of early atmosphere 


Absolute ages are given according to the two time scale models indicated (Hartmann-Tanaka, Neukum-Wise). Adapted from Tanaka 


et al 1993 in Kieffer et al (1993). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of plate tectonics CO recycling was never very effective 
on Mars, but the early warm and wet period could have 
lasted hundreds of millions of years, and could have 
favored rapid chemical reactions, possibly leading to 
biological evolution. With the secular reduction of the 
heat flow, this mechanism slowed down: recycling of 
CO, became less efficient, pressure and temperature 
decreased to the freezing point of water, water was 
stored mainly as ice under the surface, the remaining 
CO, was trapped in surface carbonates by slower 
processes, and to a lesser extent adsorbed in the regolith 
and frozen in the polar caps. The above model is largely 
theoretical, however; an alternate model states that the 
dense CO, atmosphere was dissipated during large- 
impact events, in which case carbonates would not have 
formed in large quantities (see MARS: ATMOSPHERE and 
PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). For this reason an estimate of 
the abundance of carbonates, which have not been posi- 
tively identified either on the surface or in the airborne 
dust so far, would give important constraints on the evo- 
lution of the primitive atmosphere. 


Geological history 

Ages of planetary surfaces are estimated through crater 
counts by comparison with lunar terrains, whose ages 
are known precisely from the Apollo samples (see 
CRATERS). Transposing this kind of dating to Mars 
involves making a hypothesis on the meteoritic flux, so 
that absolute ages will remain very uncertain until sam- 
ples are returned from Mars. However, the relative age of 
the terrains can be estimated from photointerpretation 
alone. The time scale is divided in three main systems, 
Noachian, Hesperian and Amazonian, and eight subsys- 
tems. Table 1 summarizes the chronology of surface evo- 
lution. 


Close view 

The view from the surface is currently known only by 
images returned by the three American landers, Viking 
Landers 1 and 2 and Mars Pathfinder (figure 9). The two 


Viking landing sites were selected on the basis of mini- 
mal surface roughness inferred from the orbital images 
and are very similar to one another. They mostly consist 
of rocks standing in a layer of fine debris; VL1 site is less 
monotonous, with large patches of fines accumulating in 
dunes from place to place. Rocks range from centimeters 
to meters in size and are in general angular; they are 
thought to be ejectas excavated by nearby impacts. Dust 
particles are less than 10 um in size but often aggregate 
in clods looking like rocks. The two Viking landers 
observed slow movements of the dust layer during their 
two Martian years of functioning, but little evidence for 
evolution of the rocks although climatic variations are 
large. In contrast, the Mars Pathfinder landing site was 
selected for its geological interest: it is located in an out- 
flow channel east of Valles Marineris, and hence it was 
hoped to contain materials coming from different source 
regions. Although it is very similar to the previous two 
sites the landscape shows some possible evidences of 
flood but mainly demonstrates again that wind has been 
the major process at least in these areas for a huge period 
of time. Most of the rocks are volcanic in origin, but some 
rocks at the Pathfinder landing site show faint evidence 
of layering, consistent with a sedimentary origin. 

All three landers performed basic chemical analyses 
of the surface materials. Viking landers analyzed the dust 
and the duricrust, while Pathfinder’s robot, Sojourner, 
also analyzed rocks. Martian soils are consistent with 
weathering products of basalts, although they are richer 
in Fe and Mg, and poorer in K, than most terrestrial 
basalts; the most probable mineralogical compositions 
are mixtures of clays and ferric oxides. Duricrust samples 
have higher S content than the loose fines, suggesting 
formation by evaporation of salt-rich solutions, with sul- 
fates as the cementing agent. All soils are very similar at 
the three landing sites, with high degrees of oxidation 
and high magnetic properties. Pathfinder rocks have 
composition similar to terrestrial andesites, with relative- 
ly high silicon contents. These rocks are obviously not 
representative of the diversity of Martian rocks, since 


Figure 9. Enhanced image from Mars Pathfinder. The image is a mosaic of 300 camera images covering 360° of azimuth and elevations 
from approximately 4° above the horizon to 45° below it. Dark and bright rocks and bright soils are visible in the image. Dark rocks 
have elemental composition indicating more silica-rich basaltic andesite. These rocks are typically the small boulders and intermedi- 
ate-sized cobbles at the Pathfinder site. Bright rocks have elemental spectra indicating basaltic compositions. These rocks are typical- 
ly larger than 1 m in diameter and many display morphologies suggestive of flood deposition. Bright soils have a strongly reddened 
spectrum indicative of oxidized ferric minerals. Other materials are also apparent, including pink rocks with morphology indicating 
a cemented or rock-like structure. This material may be a chemically cemented hardpan that underlies much of the Pathfinder site. 
(Local solar time increases nearly continuously from about 10:00 at the right-hand edge to about 12:00 at the left.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


they are compositionally different from the dust, and 
have a much higher Al content. 

Mineralogical and chemical compositions are dis- 
tinct: for a given chemical composition, mineral forma- 
tion depends strongly on the thermodynamical condi- 
tions, and minerals are therefore very useful indicators of 
past environments and formation processes. No miner- 
alogical analysis has been performed at the surface so far, 
so the most direct source of information in this regard is 
provided by the SNC meteorites. These meteorites are 
believed to be igneous Martian rocks ejected during 
impacts, based on their young crystallization ages and 
close match between their gaseous inclusions and the 
Martian atmosphere. SNCs are not as informative as sam- 
ples collected in situ would be, since there is no precise 
knowledge of their origin and thus little understanding of 
how representative they are of Martian crustal materials. 
These meteorites can be grouped in three large families, a 
younger one composed of basaltic rocks dominated by 
two pyroxene mixtures (Shergotty, Zagami, ... formed 
~180 Myr ago) and an older one dominated by Ca-rich 
pyroxenes and olivine, with very low concentrations of Al 
(Chassigny, Nakhla, ...formed ~1.3 Gyr ago); ALH84001 
is much older (~4.5 Gyr) and has a different origin. These 
three groups apparently have been ejected during three 
different impact events, possibly from the Tharsis region. 
Like materials analyzed in situ, all SNCs are richer in Fe 
than the terrestrial crust, probably reflecting a higher FeO 
content of the Martian mantle. In contrast with the rocks 
analyzed by Pathfinder, the SNCs are all poor in Al; hence 
they derive from an Al-depleted source region and 
probably formed later, but at least 1.3 Gyr ago. 
Compositionally, the global dust could derive from a mix- 
ture of Mg-poor SNCs (Nakhla, Shergotty, ...) and rocks 
observed at the Pathfinder site. The occurrence of carbon- 
ates in SNC meteorites, together with a few ground-based 
observations at high spectral resolution, suggests that 
these minerals are indeed the major crustal sink for prim- 
itive CO). Alternatively, carbonates and other salts could 
have formed in restricted areas where volcanic activity 
resulted in a temperature high enough to maintain liquid 
water at the surface (hydrothermal springs). Globules of 
carbonates contained in ALH84001 were also presented 
as a possible byproduct of ancient life on Mars: micro- 
scopic shapes included in these globules were tentatively 
interpreted as fossil bacteria that lived on Mars 1.4-3.6 
Gyr ago. 


Global surface units 

The surface exhibits marked contrast with respect to 
many observational parameters. Morphological units are 
commonly interpreted as geological provinces. Surface 
units defined by other measurements do not necessarily 
correlate with them, owing to the thickness of the layer 
scanned by different methods: visible and near-infrared 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


spectroscopy analyzes the first few microns only and 
gives information on mobile materials, crusts, veneers. 
Mid-infrared and radar measurements penetrate to a 
deeper layer, from which rock abundance can be estimat- 
ed. Multiple observations at different wavelengths help 
us in understanding the composition and physical state 
of the materials present on the surface. 

As viewed from the ground, the major opposition is 
between bright and dark regions, with the polar caps 
constituting a third type. In violet to green light, these 
soils are equally dark (geometric albedo ~5%) and the 
surface is almost completely featureless. At longer wave- 
length, the contrast increases very rapidly and reaches a 
factor of 4 in the near-infrared (from 0.7 to 2.7 um). All 
soils are actually very red in color, the greenish hue 
reported by 19th century observers being mostly a con- 
trast effect. Seasonal color variations are largely due to 
scattering by airborne dust and are related to dust 
storms. At higher spatial resolution, another type of unit 
with intermediate reflectance and color can be recog- 
nized on Viking and HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE images. This 
unit includes bright crater rims and dark patches, so it 
was first interpreted as a mixture of dark and bright 
materials; it is currently interpreted as bright materials 
indurated by local processes. The Viking cameras have 
also shown a small-scale variability within dark areas, 
while bright regions are more uniform. 

Other important information is provided by mid- 
infrared radiometry and radar observations, from which 
thermal inertia and rock abundances can be derived. 
Rock abundances estimated this way have been con- 
firmed at the Pathfinder site. Four main units have been 
identified on the basis of all these physical properties at 
latitudes lower than 60°. 


e Bright, fine materials are interpreted as loose dust. 
The corresponding areas are regions of active dust 
accumulation several meters thick (e.g. Amazonis, 
Arabia). 

e Dark, coarse materials are interpreted as exposed 
rocks with constant deposition and removal of a thin 
dust layer (e.g. Acidalia, SYRTIS MAJOR). In some areas, 
however, this unit seems to correspond to accumula- 
tion of dark sands. 

e Intermediate materials with high thermal inertia are 
interpreted as indurated surfaces (cemented dust). 

e Bright materials with high thermal inertia are inter- 
preted as areas of limited dust accumulation. Both 
Viking landing sites are located in such regions, which 
are rather uncommon (e.g. Chryse Planitia, Elysium 
Planitia). 


Most units appear relatively young and active, indicat- 
ing that the upper surface is continually being 
reworked, in particular by aeolian processes and duri- 
crust formation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Concerning composition, the most effective method 
to retrieve information on a global scale is by infrared 
imaging spectroscopy in the 0.6-20 um range. Minerals, 
and therefore rocks, can be identified from their infrared 
spectra even at modest spectral resolution. Conversely, 
high spatial resolution is critical to detect materials of 
limited exposures, e.g. produced by local processes; on 
Mars, mineralogical interpretation is also complicated by 
atmospheric absorption and scattering and by mixing of 
surface features in absorption and emission above 4 um. 
Overall, the spectra of every region can be matched by 
more or less oxidized basalts, so that spectral character- 
istics are dominated by ferromagnesian (‘mafic’) volcanic 
materials and their alteration products. Bright regions 
are spectrally very homogeneous and are dominated by 
subtle features of hydrated ferric oxides, while dark 
areas have spectra typical of ferrous absorptions in mafic 
minerals such as pyroxenes and exhibit a greater vari- 
ability. This is consistent with the interpretation that 
bright regions are covered by a thick layer of weathered 
dust mixed at the planetary scale, while dark areas have 
large bedrock exposures and are contaminated at various 
levels by bright materials. 

The freshest dark equatorial regions have spectral 
characteristics indicating a volcanic mineralogy domi- 
nated by two pyroxenes with high and low calcium con- 
tent (perhaps augite and pigeonite), similar to the 
basaltic SNC meteorites (e.g. Shergotty, Zagami). The 
range of ages for these regions indicates that the SNC 
analyses are relevant to large regions of Mars and to a 
large lapse of time (3.0-0.13 Gyr). Such materials are not 
common on the Earth’s surface and are probably derived 
from a source region depleted in Al relative to the 
hypothesized original mantle composition. An interpre- 
tation of these observations is that a primary planetary 
differentiation occurred very early in the history of Mars 
(4.5 Gyr) and that the mantle reservoirs have not been 
remixed since. The depletion in Al could be explained by 
the presence of a crust enriched in Al, perhaps similar to 
the lunar highlands; such rocks were actually observed 
at the Pathfinder site, but their source area is unknown. 
The occurrence of significant amounts of olivine in dark 
areas would be inconsistent with the idea of an early dif- 
ferentiation. Although detection of olivine-rich materials 
was claimed in the past, these observations are not con- 
firmed by recent data. Instead, most of the second-order 
variations are explained by small amounts of dust and 
perhaps thin alteration coatings of ferric materials on the 
rocks themselves. 

In bright areas, the only mineral phase that has been 
positively identified so far is hematite, an iron oxide. 
Spectral features are subdued and indicate a low degree 
of crystallization in most areas, so that hematite is 
thought to occur mainly as extremely fine-grained, or 
nanophase, particles; furthermore, all bright regions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


have deep hydration bands, corresponding to an 
adsorbed- or bound-water abundance of ~1% with local 
and temporal variations. These materials are clearly 
alteration products of mafic minerals exposed in the dark 
areas; the present rate of weathering and dust formation 
is unknown but is certainly small, and hence most bright 
materials were probably formed in a distant past. The 
‘classical’ rock analogs for bright regions are palagonites, 
which are formed by alteration of mafic volcanic glasses 
under low temperature, often by interaction with water 
ice. Spectral properties of palagonites are dominated in 
the near-infrared by nanophase hematite, although it is 
only a minor component dispersed in a silicate-clay 
matrix that can include other salts, such as sulfates. 
Overall, large amounts of palagonites are consistent with 
spectral observations, in situ analyses, thermodynamical 
considerations and composition of SNC meteorites. Most 
of this material could have formed during volcanic erup- 
tions through a thick permafrost. The unusual magnetic 
properties measured by the landers may indicate signifi- 
cant amounts of maghemite, an iron oxide. Airborne 
dust, which should be compositionally similar to the 
bright surface materials, has been observed chiefly in the 
mid-infrared; its spectrum in this domain is more consis- 
tent with iron-rich clays. 

Subtle local variations are observed in bright 
regions, indicating that some bright materials are not 
remobilized and mixed. Most of these variations are 
ascribed to differences in particle size or degree of crys- 
tallization, but some small areas could have high con- 
centrations of other alteration materials: smectite clays, 
oxyhydroxides, iron sulfates, chlorides, hydrous carbon- 
ates, .... These minerals are potentially very helpful indi- 
cators of past climates, since they are the major sinks for 
HO, CO, and other volatile components such as nitro- 
gen. Some of them have been tentatively detected in the 
airborne dust, but their spatial distributions and proper- 
ties must be known to improve our knowledge of the 
surface evolution. Similarly, ‘anomalous’ dark materials 
provide important hints about the major puzzles con- 
cerning the surface. In particular, an unusual material 
observed in the layered deposits of Valles Marineris, 
with both mafic and hydration characteristics, suggests 
that hydrovolcanism was an important factor in the 
development of these areas. 


Conclusion 

Our present perception of Mars results mostly from the 
Viking mission, analyses of the SNC meteorites and 
ground-based spectral observations. Large gaps remain 
in our current understanding of the planet, however, 
while Mars is a key factor in the study of the solar sys- 
tem’s evolution; in addition, the Martian origin of the 
SNCs is not definitely demonstrated although a large 
part of the present ideas concerning Mars derive from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Mars: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


their study. Some of the most important open questions 
are related to chronology, composition and volatiles 
inventory: there is no absolute dating of the terrains; the 
amount of volatiles outgassed and the current reservoirs 
are unknown; the present rate of alteration and the main 
period of dust production are unknown. All these ques- 
tions would be best addressed by collecting samples in 
well-characterized locations on the surface and by high- 
resolution orbital observations of particular areas such as 
hydrothermal deposits. The canyon walls also provide a 
natural traverse in the successive volcanic materials 
accumulated in the plains and a unique opportunity to 
probe the sequence of event leading to surface formation. 

Other questions relevant to the geological evolution 
include the following. What are the current and past heat 
flows? How and when did the Tharsis bulge form? What 
is the history of Valles Marineris (its relations with 
Tharsis, nature of the layered deposits, extent of volcanic 
processes, fate of the materials evacuated)? Were there 
lakes or even oceans on Mars (when, and what is their 
relation to the channels)? How long did the warm and 
wet period last? What was the extent of prebiotic evolu- 
tion, if at all? In this regard, the study of Mars could help 
understand the first stages of life’s evolution on Earth. 

NASA’s Global Surveyor has revealed images which 
suggests the Martian climate is changing significantly, 
even today. The observations were made during a full 
Martian year, 687 Earth days and show that pits—often 
referred to as the ‘Swiss cheese’ terrain—at the southern 
polar ice cap of Mars have dramatically increased in 
diameter, indicating the material has evaporated rapidly 
compared to last year. Images of the south polar cap 
taken in 1999 were compared with images of the same 
locations taken in 2001, and it was discovered that pits 
had enlarged, mesas had shrunk, and small buttes had 
vanished. In all, the scarps that enclose the pits and 
bound the mesas and buttes retreated about 3 m in one 
Martian year. This rapid retreat of polar scarps can only 
occur if the ice is frozen carbon dioxide (dry ice). Retreat 
of scarps made of water ice is much slower and would 
not have been measurable from one Martian year to the 
next. 

Some of these issues will be addressed by the on- 
going Mars Surveyor program (NASA), the MARS EXPRESS 
mission (ESA), and the future Mars sample return pro- 
gram (NASA-CNES (see SOLAR SYSTEM: EXPLORATION)). I 
situ analyses and sample return should be performed in 
different geological settings, and their results extended 
to the whole surface by means of orbital remote sensing. 
Even in the space era, however, ground-based observa- 
tions remain important. Large orbital observatories like 
HST and ISO, or the NGST project, have not changed this 
situation radically, since they are limited by observation- 
al schedules and solar pointing constraints. In a threefold 
approach where spacecraft yield exceptionally detailed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


but exceptionally rare data, and spaceborne observato- 
ries provide high resolution at limited viewing geometry 
on a year-to-year basis, ground- based observation is still 
the only method to monitor quick processes on Mars and 
to clarify the context for future spaceborne observations. 


Bibliography 

Beatty J and Chaikin A 1990 The New Solar System 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Carr M 1996 Water on Mars (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) 

Cattermole P 1992 Mars (London: Chapman & Hall) 

Kieffer et al (eds) 1993 Mars (Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) (review papers concerning nearly all 
aspects of Mars, mostly at professional level; the 
first chapters present a very good review of histori- 
cal observations and previous synthesis up to the 
late 1980s) 

Sheehan W 1996 The Planet Mars: A History of Observation 
and Discovery (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) (accessible to the general reader, very well 
documented) 

Stéphane Erard 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


11 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mars: Water and the Martian 
Landscape 


Over the past 30 yr, the water-generated landforms and 
landscapes of Mars have been revealed in increasing 
detail by a succession of spacecraft missions. Recent data 
from the Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) mission confirm 
the view that brief episodes of water-related activity, 
including glaciation, punctuated the geological history of 
Mars. The most recent of these episodes seems to have 
occurred within the past 10 million years. These new 
results are anomalous with regard to the prevailing view 
that the Martian surface has been continuously extreme- 
ly cold and dry, much as it is today, for the past 3.9 billion 
years. Interpretations of the new data are controversial, 
but explaining the anomalies in a consistent manner 
leads to potentially fruitful hypotheses for understand- 
ing the evolution of Mars in relation to Earth. 

When the Mariner 9 spacecraft (see MARINER MIS- 
SIONS) went into orbit on 14 November 1971, the surface 
of Mars was shrouded in a global dust storm. 
Fortunately, by March of 1972, the atmosphere cleared 
and the true complexity of the Mars landscape was 
finally revealed to the spacecraft’s vidicon cameras. In 
addition to the immense volcanoes of Tharsis, there was 


s ag =y : Boal , 
fe- 

* . “os 

Figure 1. Glaciated terrain east of Hellas Planitia, at 

latitude 42° S, longitude 252° W. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


a great equatorial canyon system, Valles Marineris, 
named for the discovery spacecraft. Most remarkable, 
however, were sinuous channels and valleys, from 
whose morphology it was inferred that water had once 
flowed on the surface of this now dry, unearthly cold 
planet. The late Harold Masursky, science team leader 
for the vidicon imaging experiment, wrote in 1973 
(Masursky 1973): 


The possible fluviatile channels may record 
episodes when water was much more abun- 
dant in the atmosphere than it is at present. 
Planet-wide warmer interglacial periods 
would release not only the water locked in the 
polar caps but also that frozen in the subsur- 
face as permafrost. Similar warmer and colder 
periods also are characteristic of terrestrial his- 
tory. 


Although intended primarily as support to landers seek- 
ing evidence of Martian life, the Viking orbiters (see 
VIKING MISSION) of the late 1970s returned 52603 images of 
Mars, most of them at much higher resolution than the 
7329 images returned by Mariner 9. The pictures with the 
highest resolution have a pixel spacing of 7.5 m, although 
most frames resolve to several tens of metres. Viking 
orbiter images (figure 1) provided the basis for an under- 
standing of water and landscape that prevailed until the 
past few years. 

In 1997, MGS spacecraft was inserted into Mars’ 
orbit, but a variety of problems prevented it from achiev- 
ing a circular mapping orbit until 19 February 1999. Two 
instruments are particularly relevant to the scientific 
study of the Mars landscape. The Mars Orbiter Camera 
(MOC) achieves a resolution of 1.4 m per pixel, but the 
required high data volume limits scenes to a kilometre or 
so in width at the highest resolutions. The Mars Orbiter 
Laser Altimeter (MOLA) maps the topography of Mars 
with a precision better than 10 m (Smith et al 1999). 
Together these instruments provide new data for study- 
ing Mars’ landforms (figure 2), although human reason- 
ing about those landforms remains a matter of long- 
standing scientific experience. 

The study of Earth-like planetary surfaces—geomor- 
phology—is not a disjointed collection of observational 
facts solely with which to test, or against which to con- 
strain, theoretical models. Rather, such scientific inquiry 
proceeds from the informed colligation of landform 
observations to the discovery of consistency and coher- 
ence and, ultimately, to consilience in the theoretical 
accounting (explanation) of those observations. The key 
element of this inquiry is the formulation of one or more 
working hypotheses, which are most often suggested 
(but not proved) by analogies of form and context among 
landscapes of known origin and those under scrutiny. In 
the retroductive inferences of geomorphology, analogy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


serves merely to suggest fruitful working hypotheses, 
thereby leading to completely new theories that bind 
together any newly discovered facts. Mars’ landscape 
provides particularly stimulating opportunities to prac- 
tise geomorphological reasoning, generating hypotheses 
that may initially strike some researchers as outrageous. 
Nevertheless, it is the productive pursuit of such 
hypotheses that leads ultimately to new understanding, 
not only of Mars, but also of Earth itself. 

The surface of Mars is today extremely cold and 
dry. The atmosphere at the land surface is over 100 times 
less dense than that of Earth and it holds only minuscule 
amounts of water vapour. For the present obliquity (tilt 
of the planet's rotational axis with respect to the orbital 
plane) of 25°, the residual north polar ice cap sublimates 
water in the northern spring-summer and the vapour 
moves to and condenses at south polar areas, a pattern 
that may reverse in northern autumn—winter (Kieffer, 
Jakosky, Snyder and Matthews 1992). Given its minor 
role in comparison with that on Earth, it is not surpris- 
ing that on present-day Mars, water is replaced by wind 
as the most continuously active surface-modifying 
process. 

In stark contrast to the current environment, howev- 
er, numerous landforms provide signs, or indicators, of 
extensive past activity of water and ice on the Martian 
surface (see MARS: CLIMATE HISTORY). From the densities of 
impact craters on the various terrains it is possible to 
work out a chronology for this activity, such that Mars is 
divided stratigraphically into ancient heavily cratered 
uplands that formed prior to about 3.5 billion years ago 
(the Noachian epoch), intermediate cratered plains (the 
Hesperian epoch) and more lightly cratered areas (the 
Amazonian epoch). Water and ice were active on the 
surface during all these periods. The mode, timing and 
long-term cycling of water in surficial processes are the 
phenomena to be considered from the various signs of 
activity. 


Signs of subsurface water and ice 

Landforms indicative of ground ice in permafrost 
(perennially frozen ground) on Mars have been known 
since the early flyby missions of the 1960s. Images from 
Viking orbiters provided an overwhelming list of per- 
mafrost and ground-ice indicators, including various 
kinds of patterned ground, thermokarst, hillslope fea- 
tures and mass-movement phenomena. Although origi- 
nally attributed to permafrost processes, the immense 
polygons, 3-20 km across, of the northern Mars plains 
are much larger than the contraction-crack polygons 
typical of terrestrial permafrost terrains. These features 
are now explained variously as the tectonic uplift of 
basin floors, perhaps following removal of load from an 
overlying standing body of water, or as the result of 
Rayleigh convection driven by unstable density or tem- 
perature gradients in a catastrophic flood deposit posi- 
tioned over frozen ground (Lane and Christensen 2000). 
Recently acquired very high-resolution MOC imagery 
reveals extensive areas of the northern plains and south- 
ern highlands of Mars, notably on crater floors (figure 3), 
where small-scale contraction-crack polygons, tens or 
hundreds of metres across, cover the landscape (Seibert 
and Kargel 2001). This polygonal terrain, which closely 
mimics the ice-wedge polygonal terrains of terrestrial 
permafrost areas, is essentially uncratered, indicating a 
surprisingly youthful phase of water-related activity on 
Mars. 

Viking pictures revealed that many Martian craters 
have a unique morphology, different from that observed 
elsewhere in the solar system. Ejecta surrounding these 
craters are layered and each layer has an outer edge ter- 
minating in a low ridge or escarpment. Named ‘rampart 
craters’, the flow-ejecta morphology most likely repre- 
sents the incorporation of groundwater and ground ice, 
although atmospheric effects on ejecta emplacement may 
also be important. Thus, layered ejecta morphologies can 


Figure 2. High-resolution MOC image of a fluvial channel system at latitude 7.9° N, longitude 205.8° W, south of Cerberus Rupes 
(MOC image M21-01914). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


he ure 
a) 


eas ST eae 4 
Figure 3. Large contraction-crack polygons developed on the 


floor of a northern-plains crater at approximately 67.5° N, 312.5° 
W (MOC image M01-00294). 


be used to characterize the past presence of water in 
various Martian terrains. 

First revealed by Mariner 9, the long and complex 
volcanic history of Mars contains a wealth of examples of 
interactions among volcanism, ice and water. Much as in 
the Pleistocene landscapes of Iceland, Martian volcanism 
has produced features interpreted as table mountains 
built up on products of subice eruptions, outburst flood 
channels and extensive pyroclastic landscapes. Some of 
the youngest volcanic landscapes occur in the Cerberus 
Rupes and Marte Vallis region (Hartmann and Berman 
2000), where cataclysmic flood channels and volcanic 
lava flows occur in close spatial and temporal associa- 
tion. Even Olympus Mons, one of the largest known vol- 
cano constructs, has a morphology interpreted by some 
to be indicative of water/ice volcanic interactions. Its 
huge aureole deposits, extending 1000 km, may repre- 
sent immense submarine landslides, similar to those of 
Earth’s Hawaiian Islands. 

Initial data from NASA’s Mars Odyssey spacecraft 
suggests possible identification of significant amounts of 
frozen water in the upper meter (three feet) of soil in a 
large region surrounding the planet’s south pole. The 
gamma ray spectrometer instrument suite has been used 
to detect hydrogen, which indicates the presence of 
water ice. The amount of hydrogen detected indicates 20 
to 50 percent ice by mass in the lower layer. Because rock 
has a greater density than ice, this amount is more than 
50 percent water ice by volume. 


Signs of surface water 
The heavily cratered Martian highlands are locally dis- 
sected by integrated networks of tributaries with widths 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


of about 10 km or less and lengths from <5 km to nearly 
1000 km. Drainage densities are generally much lower 
than for terrestrial valley networks, although an interest- 
ing set of valleys on Martian volcanoes is more similar to 
terrestrial valleys in their general morphology and 
degree of terrain dissection. Among the other important 
morphological attributes of Martian valley networks are 
the following: theatre-like valley heads, prominent struc- 
tural control, low junction angles, quasi-parallel patterns, 
hanging valleys, irregular widening and narrowing and 
indistinct terminal areas. In general, this assemblage of 
features seems best explained by groundwater sapping 
processes (Gulick 2001), excellent examples of which 
occur in the sandstone terrains of the Colorado plateau 
and in parts of the Hawaiian Islands. 

Although most of the networks occur in the heavily 
cratered terrains of Mars, as many as 25-35% of the val- 
leys may be Hesperian or Amazonian in age. Moreover, 
MOC images show that some valleys, which formed 
early in Mars’ history, were later reactivated by smaller 
flows—a discovery that had been expected from Viking 
data. Another observation, the localized development 
and incomplete dissection of upland areas by valleys, is 
reinforced by the lack of fine-scale tributaries to valleys 
observed at MOC resolution. Explanations for such rela- 
tionships remain contentious, with lack of precipitation 
as only one of several alternatives, others of which 
include the probable high infiltration capacities of the 
Martian surfaces, the burial of small-scale features 
beneath mantling deposits and the local hydrothermal 
and/or snowmelt processes (Gulick 2001). 

Many valley networks have orientations consistent 
with the effects of surface deformation by extensive vol- 
canic loading at Tharsis, inferred to have occurred by late 
Noachian time (Phillips et al 2001). These networks occur 
in heavily cratered terrains that show evidence of exten- 
sive erosion during the Noachian. The average rates for 
this presumed water erosion are estimated at 102-104 
mm per 106 yr, which are comparable with the lower 
range of terrestrial values. However, post-Noachian rates 
are estimated at only 10-!-10-2 mm per 10° years 
(Golombek and Bridges 2000). This discrepancy led some 
researchers to postulate an epoch of late Noachian cli- 
mate conducive to water erosion, followed by post- 
Noachian conditions that precluded such erosion (Carr 
1999). However, if post-Noachian aqueous erosion 
episodes are limited to very short episodes, then the 
average post-Noachian erosion will yield the same rate 
as calculated. 

The term ‘channel’ is properly restricted to one class 
of Martian trough-like landforms that display at least 
some evidence for large-scale fluid flow on their floors. 
The principal landform of interest here is the outflow 
channel, which shows evidence of flows emanating from 
zones of regional collapse known as ‘chaotic terrain’. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Oblique view of topographic data from the MOLA 
showing downstream portions of the outflow channel Kasei 
Vallis. 


Martian outflow channels are immense (figure 4), as 
much as 150 km wide and 2000 km in length. It was rec- 
ognized shortly after their discovery that they possessed 
a suite of bedforms and morphological relationships sim- 
ilar to what is exhibited in the ‘Channeled Scabland’, a 
terrestrial landscape created by Pleistocene glacially 
related cataclysmic flooding in the northwestern coter- 
minous United States. 

At their largest scale, the outflow channels are 
broadly anastomosing and split by residual uplands, or 
‘islands’, of pre-flood-modified terrain (figure 2). The 
channels have low sinuosity and high width—-depth 
ratios. Pronounced flow expansions and constrictions 
occur, as do prominent divide crossings, hanging valleys 
and structural control of erosion. At a finer scale, stream- 
lining of the residual uplands is very well developed, as 
are longitudinal grooves, inner channels, cataract com- 
plexes, scabland and bar complexes. Although a variety 
of other fluid-flow systems have been invoked to explain 
these features, the whole assemblage of these landforms 
is best explained by cataclysmic flood processes, with 
particular analogy to the origin of the Channeled 
Scabland. Nevertheless, it is also recognized that some 
important differences derive from the peculiar Martian 
environment, notably its lower gravitational accelera- 
tion, its much lower atmospheric pressure and its pre- 
vailing subfreezing temperature in comparison with 
Earth. These special conditions on Mars would influence 
such factors as sediment transport mechanics, cavitation 
and ice formation, debris flow and possible large-scale 
ice processes in the channels (Lucchitta 2001). 

The sizes of Martian outflow channels imply 
immense discharges of water, exceeding any known flood 
flows on Earth (figure 5). The calculated peak-flow mag- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


nitudes are comparable with those of the high-discharge 
western boundary currents of Earth’s world ocean, such 
as the Gulf Stream, the Kuroshio and the Agulhas (Baker 
in press). These currents are integral to Earth’s climate 
system, distributing heat poleward from equatorial lati- 
tudes. Major disruption of Earth’s circulation pattern pro- 
vides an endogenetic model for large-scale terrestrial cli- 
mate change. By analogy, Mars’ 
climate could have been impacted by the megaflood dis- 
charges transferring water and heat from the equatorial 
Tharsis volcanic province to the northern plains of the 
planet. Outflow activity was probably initiated in the 
Noachian and outflow events occurred during the early 
Hesperian, the late Hesperian/early Amazonian (Ivanov 
and Head 2001) and, surprisingly, during the past 10 mil- 
lion years (Hartmann and Berman 2000). The latter floods 
occurred in the Marte Vallis—Cerberus Rupes region and 
the Tharsis area. Thus, principal fluvial events (and pos- 
sibly associated climate change) occurred right up to most 
recent Martian history. Alternatively, however, outflow 
channel events are considered to be random outbursts 
from a progressively thickening cryo-sphere. 

Integral to the controversy over post-Noachian 
water-related climate change on Mars is the lack of 
understanding of how such immense discharges can be 
released from the Martian subsurface. The role of the 
cryosphere seems important, perhaps for generating 
pressurized aquifer confinement (Carr 2000). Dike 
emplacement and penetration of the ice-rich cryosphere 
(Head and Wilson 2001), pressurized volcanic influences 
on fracture systems and decompression of gas hydrates 
deep in the crust (Komatsu ef al 2000) are other possible 
factors in the cataclysmic release of outburst floods. 

The largest outflow channels delivered their 
immense discharges to the northern plains of Mars. 


Gibraltar 
= = — = = 


Dover 


Missoula 
Bosporus Altai (Rathdrum) Mississippi 
5 x 105 2x 107 5 x 105 3x 104 


Figure 5. Comparison of simplified channel cross-sections 
for cataclysmic flood channels on Mars (upper two channels) 
and Earth (lower channels). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Evidence of temporary inundation of the northern plains 
was recognized on the basis of Viking data and some 
aspects of the inundation hypothesis are consistent with 
new results from the MOLA instrument (Head et al 1999). 
These include the extreme topographic smoothness of 
the northern plains, the apparent burial of wrinkle 
ridges, correlation of basin topography with landforms 
of likely aqueous origin, gradation of outflow-channel 
floors to ancient inundation levels, consistency of 
inundation volumes with possible Mars water balances 
and some correspondence of one of the possible shore- 
line levels to a deformed ancient equipotential surface 
(Head et al 1999). However, landforms interpreted as 
diagnostic of shoreline processes are not confirmed by 
detailed study of MOC imagery. Named ‘Oceanus 
Borealis’, the northern-plains inundation remains contro- 
versial as to its size, age (or ages), persistence and 
episodic formation. Other interpretations of the north- 
ern-plains inundation include the emplacement of mas- 
sive debris flows, effects of glaciation and a complex lay- 
ering of both ice- and water-laid deposits (Clifford and 
Parker in press). 

Evidence for past lakes abounds in numerous impact 
craters on Mars. Most of the lakes formed in the Upper 
Hesperian and Lower Amazonian. Lacustrine terraces 
and Gilbert-type deltas indicate that the lakes must have 
persisted for 103 to 104 yr (Ori, Marinangeli and Baliva 
2000). Standing water in lakes for such timescales 
requires a major change in climate from present-day con- 
ditions, although ice-covered lakes could persist for con- 
siderable time at current conditions or for those associat- 
ed with the range of variation in Mars’ orbital parameters. 
The relationships at the Gale Crater palaeolake are partic- 
ularly interesting because of extensive work indicating a 
relatively young age. However, the first interpretation of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


MOC images claimed that the Gale Crater deposits and 
all Martian lake deposits were Noachian in age. This 
ancient age designation was even applied to extensive 
sedimentary deposits in the Valles Marineris, an interpre- 
tation that has been strongly challenged following public 
release of the images (Weitz 2001). Ironically, the claim of 
a Noachian age for the deposits requires their extensive 
exhumation late in Martian history in order to account for 
the lack of impact craters on the exposed surfaces. Such a 
presumed erosion event would require even more 
extreme Martian climate change than would the aqueous 
emplacement of the deposits that many investigators 
originally associated with post-Noachian lacustrine activ- 
ity (Ori, Marinangeli and Baliva 2000). This important sci- 
entific controversy continues. 

Perhaps the most striking discoveries made from 
MOC images are the very young, relatively small-scale 
debris-flow gullies (figure 6), initially explained as the 
result of groundwater seepage and subsequent surface 
run-off (Malin and Edgett 2000). The gullies have mor- 
phologies essentially identical to those that are common 
on terrestrial hillslopes in periglacial environments 
(Costard et al 2001), such as coastal Greenland, Iceland, 
Svalbad and arctic Canada. On Earth, initiation of debris 
flow occurs when soil water saturation follows surface 
melting of snow cover or ground ice. Remarkably, the 
Mars gullies generated debris-flow deposits that are 
superimposed on aeolian bedforms and on small-scale 
contraction-crack polygons (Malin and Edgett 2000), all 
of which are uncratered. Thus, the various age indicators 
show the gullies and debris flows to be extremely young, 
probably active within the past several million years of 
Mars’ history. 

The profound implications of a recent Earth-like ori- 
gin for the young gullies led some researchers to seek 


SEE 


Figure 6. MOC image (M09-04718) of 
small gullies and other hillslope fea- 
tures in the central peak area of Hale 
Crater (latitude 36° S, longitude 37° W). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


50 
40 
30 
20 
10 r 
D9 oO 273 
2 
a 260 
i] 
S . 
= -20 250 
s 
E -30 ; 240 
s 
= 
5 -40 
§ 230 
3 
= -50 220 
Mall 7, 210 
-70 se 
-80 
#50 190 
-90 
#60 180 
-100 
010 100 300 500 1,000 2,000 


Mean annual precipitation (mm) 


Figure 7. Morphogenetic regions for climate-related landforms 
on Earth. 


alternative mechanisms that might generate debris flows 
on Mars. Ideally, the modelled processes should be able 
to occur in the current cold, dry environment. For exam- 
ple, the existence of CO2-vapour-supported debris flows 
might, in theory, permit build-up of a liquid-CO, aquifer 
behind a near-surface dry-ice barrier that is subsequent- 
ly breached by heating. In one extreme scenario, Mars is 
hypothesized as both currently being and always having 
been an extreme cryogenic world in which water 
behaves largely as a solid mineral and nearly all mani- 
festations of fluid-flow phenomena involve CO, gas or 
liquid (Hoffman 2000). This ‘white Mars’ model postu- 
lates a history of mean temperatures continuously lower 
than those prevailing today. 


Signs of glacial ice 

Given that periglacial landscapes on Earth involve warmer 
climatic conditions than do glacial landscapes (figure 7), it 
is interesting that glacial interpretations of Martian land- 
forms have generally been more controversial than have 
periglacial interpretations. A strong case was made for the 
contribution of glacial processes to the origin of landforms 
associated with certain outflow channels and both glacial 
and flood outflow processes can operate together or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


sequentially in large-scale channel morphogenesis 
(Costard and Baker 2001). Nevertheless, the scale of the 
presumed climate changes occurring late in Mars’ history 
that would have been necessary to account for glaciation 
led many researchers to express extreme scepticism with 
regard to any glacial interpretation. 

The most intricate assemblages of glacial landforms 
are hypothesized to explain landscapes in the mountain- 
ous uplands adjacent to the Argyre and Hellas impact 
basins. Local alpine glacial sculpture in the Charitum 
Montes, south of Argyre at latitude 57° S, includes 
cirques, horns, aretes, grooves and V-shaped valley 
troughs. Many of the cirques and troughs seem to be 
occupied by extant or relict rock glaciers or debris-cov- 
ered glaciers (see discussion below). The adjacent floor of 
Argyre Planitia has landforms that can be interpreted as 
moraines, drumlins, esker-like ridges, kettles, outwash 
plains and glaciolacustrine plains. 

The esker-like ridges (figure 8), which are 10-200 
km long, have proven to be a source of lively controver- 
sy at professional meetings. Taken as individual land- 
forms, these sinuous ridges have been variously 
explained as sand dunes, inverted stream valley fills, 
igneous or clastic dikes, lake beach ridges, mudflow lev- 
ees and the wrinkle ridges generated by deep-seated 
faults. MOC images of the Argyre Planitia sinuous 
ridges (figure 9) reveal apparent sedimentary strata, 
boulders and discontinuous ridges, with heights of 


Figure 8. Esker-like ridges in southern Argyre Planitia (latitude 
56° S, longitude 40° W). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10-100 m and widths of 200-2000 m. Together with the 
associated glacial landforms, the esker interpretation 
seems to provide a consistent hypothesis explaining all 
relevant observations. 

Even more prominent esker-like ridges are associat- 
ed with the Hesperian-aged Dorsa Argentea Formation 
at latitudes 75-80° S. Numerous morphological similari- 
ties show these ridges to be similar to terrestrial eskers 
(Head and Hallet 2001). The eskers seem to have been 
produced by the meltback of ice-rich deposits, perhaps 
deriving from an extensive south polar ice cap in the 
middle (Hesperian) portion of Mars’ history (Head and 
Pratt in press). The drainage from this ice cap was carried 
through prominent valleys to the Argyre impact basin, 
where it constituted a temporary lake. 

MOC images of lineated valley fills in the northern 
fretted terrain and valleys draining to Hellas, plus 
images of the lobate debris aprons in uplands near Hellas 
(figure 1) and Argyre, show features interpreted to repre- 
sent very recent glacial flow. These include crevasse-like 
fracture concentrations and medial moraines displaying 
glacier-like patterns of tributary convergence and down- 
valley flow. The surfaces of the lineated valley fills and 
lobate debris aprons are uncratered, indicating likely 
emplacement within the past several million years. 
MOLA profiles of lobate debris aprons in Deuteronilus 
Mensae (latitude 40° N) and Protonilus Mensae (latitude 
46° N) reveal shapes best explained by solid-state defor- 
mation of ice hundreds of metres thick (Mangold and 
Allemand 2001). However, at current Mars surface tem- 
peratures and very low accumulation rates (<1 cm yr), 
flow rates for these large ice masses would be so slow 
that they could not be produced on the timescale of 
106-107 yr implied by their uncratered surfaces. Because 


the hypothesized glaciers are associated with outwash 
and other water-drainage landforms, higher past tem- 
peratures are implied and these could achieve Earth-like 
strain rates in the deforming ice. 

One school of glacial geomorphological thought 
holds that a continuum exists on Earth from true glaciers 
to debris-covered glaciers and then to remobilized talus 
or till. The last phenomena would certainly be classed as 
rock glaciers, which another geomorphological school 
holds strictly to be permafrost phenomena. The prevail- 
ing hypothesis for the Mars lineated valley fills and 
lobate debris aprons follows the permafrost theory in its 
claim that deformation is achieved in ground ice that 
cements slope-derived debris. In contrast, following the 
continuum theory, one can hypothesize that recently 
active, true Martian glaciers carved the V-shaped 
troughs, cirques, aretes and other landforms of local 
highland terrains. These ancient glaciers would have had 
large accumulation areas, requiring atmospheric trans- 
port of water to the site and a net surplus of input from 
snow to offset losses by sublimation and meltwater run- 
off. 

When climate shifted to more adverse conditions, 
such that input of snow no longer exceeded losses, the 
glaciers wasted back. However, debris accumulating on 
the now extensive ablation zone would have greatly 
reduced sublimation loss. Moreover, if temperatures also 
fell, meltwater loss would cease. The resulting debris- 
covered glacier might still have had a very small accu- 
mulation zone at its head and this could sustain contin- 
ued flow of ice at very low rates, as observed in rock 
glaciers on Earth. 

For the extremely cold conditions that currently pre- 
vail on Mars, debris-covered ice would have sublimation 


Figure 9. Portion of MOC image MOO-01511 showing detail of esker-like ridge in southern Argyre Planitia (figure 8). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cyclic and episodic change on Mars 


Juttlovw 


Figure 10. A genetic model, presented in an early form in 1991, predicts both long-term (108-109 yr) and short-term 
(103-104 yr) aspects of a global Martian hydrological cycle. The episodic inundation of the northern plains of Mars is one 
component of the short-term portion of the cycle. The hypothesis explains the phenomenally long epochs of post-heavy- 
bombardment time during which the Mars surface clearly had extremely cold and dry conditions similar to those pre- 
vailing today. The alteration of this prevailing condition with quasi-, stable, short-duration warmer (cool) and wetter con- 
ditions explains many young landforms that require such conditions, including glaciated terrain, crater lakes, melting of 
permafrost and other water-related landforms that occur throughout Mars’ history. Internal planetary heat could have 
provided the trigger for the massive outflows that transformed Martian climate during the geologically short epochs of 
climatic change. Superimposed on the long-term monotonic decline in mantle heat flux for Mars, one can predict short 
episodes of higher heat flux to the surface. These episodes of higher heat flow seem consistent with the magmatic and 
tectonic (see TECTONICS) history of Mars (Anderson et al 2001). The huge floods would have acted to initiate climate 
change through release of CO,, leading to greenhouse warming. During the short-duration thermal episodes of cata- 
clysmic outflow, a temporary cool-wet climate would prevail. Water that evaporated off a transient ‘ocean’ would be 
transferred to uplands, including the Tharsis volcanoes and portions of the southern highlands, where precipitation as 
snow would promote the growth of glaciers. However, such a cool—wet climate is inherently unstable for Mars. Water 
from the evaporating ocean would be lost to storage in highland glaciers and through infiltration into the porous litholo- 
gies of the Martian surface. This would lead to the demise of warm conditions owing to the progressive loss of CO, 
through dissolved gas in infiltrating acidic water and through silicate weathering carrying bicarbonate into the subsur- 
face by infiltration. Subsequent underground carbonate deposition would then release CO, to the groundwater, which 
would become trapped beneath an ice-cemented permafrost zone. The latter develops as the greenhouse effect declines, 
because of atmospheric loss of water and CO, over a timescale of 103-105 yr. A concurrent decline in planetary heat flow 
following the triggering peak episode, would lead to a downward-extending permafrost zone that would progressively 
incorporate the recharging water and groundwater. As the permafrost extended downward into the stability field for CO, 
clathrate, this gas hydrate would accumulate above the gas-charged groundwater. Thus, the underground sequestering 
of clathrate, gas-charged groundwater and carbonate cements constitute the long-term reservoir for carbon on Mars. 
Only occasionally, and for relatively short duration, is carbon transferred to the atmosphere, as greenhouse-promoting 
CO, during cataclysmic ocean-forming episodes triggered by pulses of high heat flow. The whole process would be 
cyclic as illustrated in the diagrams. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 8 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rates as low as 10> cm yr~! (Carr 1990). Thus, even very 
small accumulation rates over small areas might sustain 
a positive net mass balance, although flow rates would 
be extremely low ina glacier at a mean annual tempera- 
ture of —75 °C (the current condition on Mars at about 45° 
latitude). Of course, present water precipitation at this 
latitude is effectively zero and water condensation 
occurs today primarily at near-polar latitudes. 

The current mean annual temperature at Vostok on 
the East Antarctic Ice Sheet is -57 °C and the accumula- 
tion rate is only 2 cm yr-l. During the Last Glacial 
Maximum, ice-core data indicate that mean annual tem- 
peratures may have been as much as 20 °C colder and 
accumulation rates may have been less than 1 cm yr! 
(Mulvaney et al 2000). These conditions are very close to 
those on Mars today (figure 7), although Earth atmos- 
pheric pressures are, of course, much higher. In Beacon 
Valley, part of the Dry Valley region of Antarctica, pre- 
cipitation is currently less than 1 cm yr-! water equiva- 
lent and the mean annual temperature is -35 °C. The area 
is icefree, but relict glacial ice occurs beneath a 0.5 m 
debris cover that is dated at 8.1 million years (Myr) old. 
The indicated sublimation rate is 10-5 cm yr!, the same 
rate noted above for debris-covered ice on Mars. With 
present-day conditions on Mars so close to those in parts 
of Antarctica (figure 7), it is reasonable to invoke a cli- 
mate-change scenario to explain the observed glacial 
phenomena. 

Temperatures achieved during the Last Glacial 
Maximum are representative only of Earth’s most recent 
glacial epoch, the Late Cenozoic. Earlier periods of pro- 
longed, extensive glaciations (megaglaciations) of Earth 
occurred in the Late Palaeozoic (260-340 Myr ago), Late 
Devonian/Early Carboniferous (350-360 Myr ago), 
Ordovician/Silurian (430-450 Myr ago), Late Proterozoic 
(500-900 Myr ago), Early Proterozoic (about 2200-2400 
Myr ago) and Archaean (2910-2990 Myr ago). The Late 
Proterozoic glaciation is particularly enigmatic, as there is 
evidence that Earth may have switched into Mars-like ice- 
house conditions by freezing the surface of the global 
ocean. The extreme glaciation is explained alternatively as 
a result of a huge change in planetary obliquity or as a run- 
away cooling that terminates cataclysmically with a super- 
greenhouse build-up caused by volcanism (Hoffman and 
Schrag in press). The rapid melting of ice and weathering 
of the land surface lead to carbonate precipitation in the 
ocean, thereby terminating the super-greenhouse. 

The glacial epochs of Earth are explained by two 
classes of theoretical models: external and internal. 
External causes include the orbital parameters, axial tilt 
(obliquity), precession and eccentricity, all of which acted 
as the ‘pacemaker’ of Pleistocene glaciations. Internal 
causes include the role of conveyor-belt oceanic circula- 
tion and the arrangement of continental relief on the 
planet. For Mars, it is possible to imagine an internal sce- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


nario capable of explaining the diverse observations 
summarized in this paper (see figure 10), although there 
have been many objections raised to an earlier version of 
this model. Alternatively, the complex variability of 
Mars’ obliquity over long timescales may be able to 
mobilize water in ways that will explain relatively recent 
manifestations of glacial action, lakes and fluvial gullies 
and the melting of near-surface ground ice. 

Is it possible, as a theoretical matter of pure physics, 
that the numerous Martian landscapes, temporal associ- 
ations of landforms and proximal-to-distal relation- 
ships—all analogous to water-generated process—form 
relationships on Earth—could have been produced by a 
fluid that mimics the behaviour of water? For appropri- 
ate relationships with temperature and pressure, CO, is 
a possible candidate for achieving the necessary physical 
behaviour (Hoffman, 2000). Moreover, the CO hypothe- 
sis is parsimonious in the sense of being capable of gen- 
erating flow phenomena for the current near-surface 
environment of Mars. If Mars, unlike Earth, were not 
perturbed over geological time by major epochs of cli- 
mate change, then a perpetual ‘white Mars’ might well 
occur. Nevertheless, it would be remarkable that this 
white Mars landscape evolved locally to generate sur- 
prisingly detailed copies of what on Earth is readily pro- 
duced by the long-term action of water and ice. It is also 
a measure of simplicity in a hypothesis that the most nat- 
ural explanation, in this case an aqueous origin, tends to 
accord with greater consistency with the observed phe- 
nomena. 

In choosing to explore the consequences of a 
water-based explanation for Mars’ geomorphology and 
the associated implications for both ancient and very 
recent climate change, one is not assured of easily 
testable hypotheses. The extensive hydrosphere 
implied by past aqueous activity on Mars may only be 
extant as ground ice in the thick permafrost zone and 
as underlying groundwater. Yet, this is the type of envi- 
ronment in which the extremophile progenitors of 
Earth’s biosphere probably evolved. Indeed, early 
Mars provided an arguably better habitat for the incep- 
tion and incubation of early life than did early Earth. 
Episodic, brief episodes of aqueous activity on the 
Martian surface may have exposed this biosphere to 
produce possible fossil indicators of its existence. More 
speculatively, a deep subsurface biosphere containing 
methanogenic archaea could have produced methane 
that accumulated beneath a growing Martian cryos- 
phere. The result could destabilize the Martian cryos- 
phere (see figure 10) and perhaps change the climate on 
short timescales. 

Ultimately in geomorphological investigation, one 
chooses the working hypothesis that is most fruitful with 
regard to connection to other lines of scientific inquiry, 
while still providing consistency and coherence in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


explaining the whole complex of available observations. 
The water-generated landforms and landscapes of Mars 
have proven especially difficult to unite under a single 
working hypothesis. Nevertheless, whatever explanation 
one chooses as a working hypothesis, its roots in the 
complex detail of Mars’ landscape features ensure that it 
will provide a highly probable basis for further produc- 
tive inquiry. 


Acknowledgements 
NASA provided partial support for the research. 


This article is a modified version of a previously pub- 
lished article: Nature 412 228-36 (2001). Reproduced by 
courtesy of Nature. 
[http://www.nature.com/cgi-taf/DynaPage. 
taf?file=/nature /journal / v412/n6843 / abs /412237a0_fs. 
html</] 


Bibliography 

Anderson R C et al 2001 Primary centers and secondary 
concentrations of tectonic activity through time in 
the western hemisphere of Mars J. Geophys. Res. 106 
20 563-20 586 

Baker V R 2002 High-energy megafloods: planetary settings 
and sedimentary dynamics in Flood and Megaflood 
Deposits: Recent and Ancient Examples ed I P Martini, 
V R Baker and M Garzon (International Association 
for Sedimentol. Spec. Publ. Spec. Publ. No.32 3-15 
(Int. Assoc. Sedimentology) 

Carr M H 1990 D/H on Mars: effects of floods volcanism 
impacts and polar processes Icarus 87 21027 

Carr M H 1999 Retention of an atmosphere on early Mars 
J. Geophys. Res. 104 21897-21909 

Carr M H 2000 Martian oceans valleys and climate 
Astron. Geophys. 41 3.20-3.26 

Clifford S M and Parker T J in press The evolution of the 
Martian hydrosphere: implications for the fate of a 
primordial ocean and the current state of the north- 
ern plains Icarus 

Costard F et al 2001 Debris flows on Mars: Analogy with 
terrestrial periglacial environment and climatic 
implications Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf. XXXII Abstr. 
1534 http:/ /www.lpi.usra.edu/ meetings /lpsc2001 

Costard F and Baker V R 2001 Thermokarst landforms 
and processes in Ares Vallis Mars Geomorphology 37 
287-301 

Golombek M P and Bridges N T 2000 Erosion rates on 
Mars and implications for climate change: con- 
straints from the Pathfinder landing site J. Geophys. 
Res. 105 1841-53 

Gulick V C 2001 Origin of the valley networks on Mars: 
a hydrological perspective Geomorphology 37 241-68 

Hartmann W K and Berman D C 2000 Elysium Planitia 
lava flows: crater count chronology and geological 
implications J. Geophys. Res. 105 15011—25 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Head J W III et al 1999 Possible ancient oceans on Mars: 
evidence from Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter Data 
Science 286 2134-37 

Head J W III and Wilson L 2001 Mars: geologic setting 
of magma/H,0O interactions Lunar Planet Sci. Conf. 
XXXII Abstr. 1215 http: //www.lpi.usra.edu/meet- 
ings/lpsc2001/ pdf /1215.pdf 

Head J W III and Hallet B 2001 Origin of sinuous ridges 
in the Dorsa Argentea Formation: new observations 
and tests of the esker hypothesis Lunar Planet. Sci. 32 
Abstr. No. 1373 

Head J W III and Pratt S in press Extensive Hesperian- 
aged south polar ice sheet on Mars: evidence for 
massive melting and retreat and lateral flow and 
ponding of meltwater J. Geophys. Res. 

Hoffman N 2000 White Mars: anew model for Mars’ sur- 
face and atmosphere based on CO) Icarus 146 
326-42 

Hoffman P F and Schrag D P in press The Snowball Earth 
hypothesis: theory observations and tests Terra Nova 

Ivanov M A and Head J W 2001 Chryse Planitia Mars: 
topographic configuration outflow channel continu- 
ity and sequence and tests for hypothesized ancient 
bodies of water using Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter 
(MOLA) data J. Geophys. Res. 106 3275-95 

Jakosky B M and Haberle R M 1992 Mars ed H H Kieffer, 
B M Jakosky, C W Snyder and M S Matthews 
969-1016 (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 

Komatsu G. et al 2000 A chaotic terrain formation 
hypothesis: explosive outgas and outflow by disso- 
ciation of clathrate on Mars Lunar Planet Sci. Conf. 
XXXI Abstr. 1434 http:/ / www.lpi-usra.edu/meet 

Lane M D and Christensen P R 2000 Convection in a cat- 
astrophic flood deposit as the mechanism for the 
giant polygons on Mars J. Geophys. Res. 105 
17617-27 

Lucchitta B K 2001 Antarctic ice streams and outflow 
channels on Mars Geophys. Res. Lett. 28 403-06 

Malin M C and Edgett K S Evidence for recent ground- 

water seepage and surface runoff on Mars Science 

288 2330-35 

Mangold N and Allemand P 2001 Topographic analysis 

of features related to ice on Mars Geophys. Res. Lett. 

28 407-10 

Masursky H 1973 An overview of geologic results from 

Mariner 9 J. Geophys. Res. 78 4037-47 

Mulvaney R R et al 2000 The transition from the last 
glacial period in inland and near-coastal Antarctica 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 27 2673-76 

Ori G G, Marinangeli L and Baliva A 2000 Terraces and 
Gilbert-type deltas in crater lakes in Ismenius Lacus 
and Memnonia (Mars) J. Geophys. Res. 105 17629-41 

Phillips R J et al 2001 Ancient geodynamics and global 
scale hydrology on Mars Science 291 2587-91 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Mars: Water and the Martian Landscape 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Seibert N M and Kargel J S 2001 Small-scale Martian 
polygons: liquid surface water Geophys. Res. Lett. 28 
899-902 

Smith D E et al 1999 The global topography of Mars and 
implications for surface evolution Science 284 
1495-1502 

Weitz C M et al 2001 The interior layered deposits of 
Valles Marineris: layering erosional processes and 
age relationships Lunar Planet. Sci. 32 Abstr. No. 
1629 

Victor R Baker 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


11 


Marshall Space Flight Center 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Marshall Space Flight Center 


nasa’s George C Marshall Space Flight Center is located in 
Huntsville, Alabama. It is the agency’s leading center for 
space transportation and propulsion development. The 
Saturn launch vehicles used in the Apollo Moon program 
were designed and developed here. Today, it provides 
the solid rocket boosters, main engines and external tank 
for the Space Shuttle. Apart from upgrades to these 
systems, Marshall engineers are designing future concepts 
for reusable, low-cost space transportation. 

The Marshall Space Flight Center is also an important 
center for research into microgravity, space physics and 
astrophysics. One of its most important recent programs 
is the Chandra X-ray Observatory (formerly known as 
AXAF). 

For further information see 
http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maskelyne, Nevil (1732-1811) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maskelyne, Nevil (1732-1811) 


Astronomer Royal, born in London, England, his interest 
in astronomy had begun after seeing the eclipse of 1748. 
After a mathematics education at Cambridge, he was sent 
by the Royal Society in 1761 to St Helena to observe 
the transit of Venus. In 1764 he traveled to Barbados, 
testing JOHN HARRISON’s chronometer, and was appointed 
Astronomer Royal on his return. He initiated publication 
of the Nautical Almanac in 1766. Following BouGUER and 
LACONDAMINE, he proposed an experiment for determining 
the Earth’s density with the use of a plumb line, whose 
plumb-bob was attracted sideways by the gravitational 
pull of a mountain. He carried out the experiment in 
1774 on Schiehallion, a mountain in Perthshire, Scotland, 
chosen because it was a regular conical shape and its 
volume could be calculated accurately. He determined 
that the Earth’s density is approximately 4.5 times that of 
water. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mason, Charles (1730-87) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mason, Charles (1730-87) 


English astronomer, an assistant at the Royal Observatory, 
Greenwich, he went with JEREMIAH DIXON to the Cape of 
Good Hope to observe the transit of Venus in 1761. Dixon 
and Mason were engaged to survey the boundary between 
Maryland and Pennsylvania, and reached a point 224 miles 
west of the Delaware River, but stopped work due to 
hostile Indians. The boundary was given the name Mason— 
Dixon line. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mass 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mass 


Ameasure of the amount of matter in a body or of its inertia 
(the extent to which it resists acceleration when a force is 
applied to it). 

The mass of a body, when regarded as a measure of 
the amount of matter contained within it, is one of the 
factors that determines the strength of its gravitational 
field. In Newtonian gravitation, the magnitude of the 
mutual gravitational attraction (F,) between two bodies, 
of masses m and M respectively, separated by distance r, 
is given by F, = GmM/r?, where G is the gravitational 
constant. Mass, in this context, is called ‘gravitational 
mass’. 

Mass also appears as a constant of proportionality in 
Newton’s third law of motion (the law of inertia), which 
describes the acceleration (a) experienced by a body when 
acted on by a force (F). This law is commonly written as 
F = ma, or a = F/m, where m, in this context, is called 
‘inertial mass’ (the acceleration produced by a given force 
is inversely proportional to the mass of the body to which 
that force is applied). Inertial and gravitational mass are 
assumed to be identical. Although this assumption has 
been confirmed experimentally to a very high degree of 
precision, it remains a theoretical assumption. 

The mass of a body when measured in a frame of 
reference in which that body is stationary is its ‘rest- 
mass’. According to the special theory of relativity, the 
mass of a moving object is greater than its rest-mass and 
tends towards an infinite value as the velocity approaches 
very close to the speed of light. This theory also asserts 
that mass and energy are equivalent and interchangeable, 
the relationship between mass (m) and energy (£) being 
E = mc’, where c denotes the speed of light. The total 
mass-energy of an isolated system (i.e. the sum of the total 
mass and total energy in that system) is a constant. 

The unit of mass in the SI (International) system is 
the kilogram (kg). Particle physicists tend to use the 
term ‘mass’ to describe the quantity of energy (£) that is 
equivalent to a subatomic particle of mass m (E = mc’), 
and quote ‘masses’ in terms of energy units (electronvolts). 
Strictly speaking, however, the mass of an elementary 
particle is its equivalent energy divided by the square of 
the speed of light (E/c?). For example, the ‘mass’ of a 
proton is often quoted as 938.3 MeV. In conventional units, 
the mass of a proton (=938.3 MeV/c’) is 1.6725 x 10?” kg. 


Seealso: electronvolt, energy, gravitation, inertia, matter, 
proton, special relativity, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Massey, Harrie Stewart Wilson (1908-83) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Massey, Harrie Stewart Wilson 
(1908-83) 


Australian-born British space physicist, became professor 
at University College London. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Matter 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Matter 


Physical substance that occupies finite volumes of space 
and which has mass. Bulk quantities of matter can exist in 
any of the following states: solid, liquid, gas or plasma. 
On the microscopic scale, matter exists as molecules, 
atoms, ions, subatomic particles or elementary particles. 
Because of the equivalence of mass and energy, which is a 
consequence of the special theory of relativity, matter may 
be considered as a particular form of energy. 

Allbuta tiny fraction of each atom’s mass is contained 
within its central nucleus, which is composed of protons 
and neutrons (the nucleus is surrounded by a cloud of 
much lighter electrons). Because protons and neutrons 
belong to a class of particles called baryons, normal matter 
is often referred to as ‘baryonic matter’. In addition to 
luminous matter (the stuff of which stars are composed), 
which is detectable by the radiation that it emits, the 
universe appears to contain substantial quantities of dark 
matter that emits no discernible radiation and which is 
detectable only through its gravitational influence. There 
are theoretical grounds to suggest that part of the dark 
matter may be ‘non-baryonic’ (composed of hypothesized 
particles that are not baryons). 


See also: atom, baryons, elementary particles, hadrons, 
ion, leptons, mass, molecule, neutron, plasma, proton, 
special relativity, subatomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maunder, E W (1851-1928) and Maunder, Mrs A S D 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maunder, E W (1851-1928) and 
Maunder, Mrs AS D 


Solar astronomers. Maunder became assistant for 
spectroscopic and solar observations at the Royal 
Observatory, Greenwich under GEORGE AIRY, aided by his 
wife. In 1890, while studying the numbers of sunspots 
over a 300 year time-span he noticed the scarcity of 
spots in the period 1645-1715. This so-called Maunder 
minimum was confirmed by Jack Eddy (1976) to be a real 
effect rather than simply a scarcity of observations, by 
a reduction of carbon-14 in old tree rings at the same 
time (carbon-14 production in the Earth’s atmosphere 
is modulated by solar activity). In 1904 invented the 
‘butterfly diagram’ of sunspots, showing the solar latitude 
at which sunspots appear as a function of time. The spots 
show a progressive drift with the phase of the solar cycle 
(Sporer law). At the beginning of the solar cycle, spots 
tend to appear at latitudes 35 degrees N and S. Their 
number increases and their latitude tends to decrease as 
the cycle moves on, so that at solar maximum the many 
spots appear at intermediate latitudes (15 degrees north 
and south). At the next solar minimum, spots of the 
old cycle are equatorial, while spots of the new cycle 
are starting to appear at latitudes 35 degrees again. The 
plot of this phenomenon has the shape of a butterfly’s 
wings. Maunder also researched into the history of the 
constellations, for example he calculated the date of origin 
of the classical constellations at 2700 Bc by considerations 
of the effects of precession on the constellation figures. 
As an evaluation of the reality of the ‘canals of Mars’, he 
carried out experiments on how random unresolved spots 
tended to be subjectively viewed as linear features. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maupertuis, Pierre Louis Moreau de (1698-1759) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maupertuis, Pierre Louis Moreau de 
(1698-1759) 


Mathematician, born in Saint Malo, France, published 
on mathematics, geography, and astronomy, introduced 
NEWTON’S theory of gravitation in France. He developed 
his theory of dynamics with the principle of least action, 
a way to determine the orbit of a body by a minimization 
technique. As a unifying principle, he though that it could 
be a proof of the existence of God. He went to Lapland in 
1736 to determine the flattening of the Earth at the poles 
into an oblate spheroid, as predicted by Newton. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maurolico [Marul, Marol], Francesco (1494-1575) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maurolico [Marul, Marol], Francesco 
(1494-1575) 


Born in Messina, Italy, became a Benedictine and acted 
in several civil posts in Sicily. He observed the nova of 
1572, now known as ‘TYCHO’s supernova’, and wrote new 
editions of classical Greek mathematics, most published 
after his death. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Max-Planck-Institut fur Astronomie 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Max-Planck-Institut fur Astronomie 


Founded by the Senate of the Max Planck Society in 1967, 
it is one of 68 Max-Planck-Institutes in Germany. The 
Max-Planck-Institut fiir Astronomie has its headquarters 
in Heidelberg, where new buildings were erected between 
1971 and 1975 on a 5.2 hectare site alongside the State 
Observatory. 

The staff of approximately 150 includes engineers and 
other technicians as well as about 30 astronomers. They 
cover a broad spectrum of expertise including laboratory 
physics, informatics, electronics, instrument-making and 
photography. It is also an institute of higher education for 
students of astronomy and physics, and for apprentices in 
instrument-making and information electronics. 

The Institute also operates the CALAR ALTO OBSERVATORY 
in southern Spain as well as conducting research in 
astronomy and _ astrophysics. Studies include star 
formation, extragalactic objects, astrophysical theory and 
instrumentation development. 

Asmall station with a 50 cm telescope is also operated 
on the 2350 m high Gamsberg, a table mountain on 
the western edge of the Kalahari desert in Namibia. 
Thousands of photometric measurements on stars of the 
southern Milky Way have been carried out from this site. 

Since 1984, the Institute has also loaned a 2.2 m 
telescope to the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY at La Silla. 
Under the 25 year agreement, astronomers of the Max 
Planck Society are permitted sole use of the telescope for 
25 per cent of the observing time. 

For further information see 
http://www.mpia-hd.mpg.de/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Max-Planck-Institut fur Astrophysik 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Max-Planck-Institut fur Astrophysik 


The Max-Planck-Institut fiir Astrophysik, now located in 
the town of Garching north of Munich in Germany, is 
one of the more than 70 autonomous research institutes 
of the Max-Planck-Gesellschaft. It was founded in 1958 
under the direction of Ludwig Biermann as part of the 
Max-Planck-Institut fiir Physik und Astrophysik, directed 
at that time by Werner Heisenberg. In 1979, when the 
headquarters of the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY (ESO) 
came to Garching, the Institute also moved to its present 
location. It is now led by a board of three directors. 

Research at the Institute is devoted to a broad range 
of topics in theoretical astrophysics. Major concentrations 
of interest lie in the areas of stellar evolution, stellar 
atmospheres, supernova physics, astrophysical fluid 
dynamics, high-energy astrophysics, galaxy structure 
and evolution, the large-scale structure of the universe 
and cosmology. While most of the Institute’s research 
addresses theoretical issues, the neighboring institutes on 
the campus of Garching (ESO and the MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT 
FUR EXTRATERRESTRISCHE PHYSIK) provide complementary 
expertise on observationally oriented astrophysics, and 
there are many collaborative projects with them. 

At any given time the Institute has about 30 scientists 
working on long-term positions, up to 10 foreign visitors 
brought in by various programs, and about 20 graduate 
students, mostly enrolled for degrees in one of the two 
large universities in Munich. Several of the senior staff 
members have affiliations with these universities. 

For further information see 
http://www.mpa-garching.mpa.de. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Max-Planck-Institut fur Extraterrestrische Physik 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Max-Planck-Institut fur 
Extraterrestrische Physik 


The Max-Planck-Institut fiir Extraterrestrische Physik 
(MPE) is one of the world’s leading institutes dealing 
with space physics and astrophysics. The main activities 
are in infrared, x-ray and y-ray astronomy and space- 
plasma physics, and extend to colloidal plasma physics. 
The institute is primarily involved in developing novel 
instruments and using them for performing observations 
and measurements. This is supplemented by theoretical 
activities. Major projects are Helios, AMPTE, Cluster, ISO, 
Sofia, First, Rosat, Chandra, XMM, COS-B, CGRO and 
Integral. 

The institute, which is located in Garching near 
Munich in Germany, was founded in 1963. Today it 
comprises about 150 scientists and about 250 other staff 
members. Apart from physical laboratories, the institute 
has its own workshop, an integration and test facility for 
space experiments, a test facility (Panter) for calibration 
of x-ray telescopes and it runs a semiconductor laboratory 
as a collaborative enterprise with the Max-Planck-Institut 
fiir Physik in Munich. The MPE receives institutional 
support from the Max-Planck Society and project funds 
from government institutions (BMBF, DLR and DFG). The 
research activities are often carried out as cooperative 
projects together with research institutes and universities 
within and outside Germany, in particular with ESA and 
NASA, but also with national agencies. 

For further information see 
http://www.mpe-garching.mpg.de/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Max-Planck-Institut fur Radioastronomie 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Max-Planck-Institut fur 
Radioastronomie 


Founded in 1966, the Max-Planck-Institut ftir Radioas- 
tronomie in Bonn is one of the centers for radio astronom- 
ical research in Germany. Main fields of research include 
the interstellar medium of our own and external galaxies, 
cosmic magnetic fields, pulsars, star formation, late stages 
of stellar evolution, active galactic nuclei, theoretical high- 
energy astrophysics, and observational cosmology. Instru- 
mentation for centimeter and (sub)millimeter wavelength 
observations and for optical and infrared interferometry is 
developed in-house. The institute operates the EFFELSBERG 
100 m RADIO TELESCOPE, Which frequently takes part in Very 
Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) observations. The 
10 m Heinrich-Hertz Telescope on Mount Graham, Ari- 
zona, a facility for work at submillimeter wavelengths, is 
operated jointly with the University of Arizona’s STEWARD 
OBSERVATORY. 
For further information see 

http://www.mpifr-bonn.mpg.de/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maxwell Montes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maxwell Montes 


The highest mountain range on Venus, situated in the 
upland region Ishtar Terra, and centered at 65.2 °N, 3.3 °E. 
It extends for 797 km, and contains the highest point on the 
planet, nearly 12 km above Venus’s average surface level 
(comparable in this respect to Earth’s Mount Everest). It is 
the only Venusian feature to bear a male name, honoring 
James Clerk Maxwell. The range showed up prominently 
in early radar surveys as a ‘radar-bright’ region. It was 
given its name in 1970, before the convention of assigning 
female names was adopted; because the name had become 
well established it was allowed to survive. 

The western slopes are very steep (35°), while to 
the east the descent is more gentle, toward the region 
known as Fortuna Tessera; the range itself is a complex 
of compressive faulting and folding. The steepness and 
height could point to a relatively recent formation, or it 
could mean that the underlying crust is thicker or stronger, 
or even that the rocks in this region are of lower than 
average density. The radar brightness of Maxwell Montes 
is thought to indicate that its peaks are covered with a 
thin deposit of a radar-reflective material similar to the 
mineral pyrite, which on Venus can exist in solid form only 
at high altitudes, where the pressure and temperature are 
low enough. To the east of the range is the 105 km diameter 
double-ringed impact crater Cleopatra. 


See also: Venus: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Maxwell, James Clerk (1831-79) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maxwell, James Clerk (1831-79) 


Born in Edinburgh, Scotland, worked at Cambridge 
on electric and magnetic fields and their interrelation. 
Entered a prize-winning essay for a competition on 
the subject ‘The Motion of Saturn’s Rings’ and showed 
that the rings could be stable only if they consisted 
of numerous small solid particles in Keplerian motion 
with the inner edge moving faster than the outer edge. 
GEORGE AIRY, a competition judge, wrote that it was one 
of the most remarkable applications of mathematics to 
physics that he had ever seen. Maxwell worked on 
the perception of color, inventing the three-color process 
used, for example by DaviD MALIN in astrophotography. 
At King’s College, London, Maxwell proposed that light 
is an electromagnetic phenomenon and worked on the 
kinetic theory of gases, showing that temperatures and 
heat involved the motion of molecules and that the velocity 
distribution of molecules was ‘Maxwellian’. In 1871 he 
became the first Cavendish Professor of Physics, and wrote 
a Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism which unified what 
appeared to be two separate forces into one set of four 
partial differential equations, now known as Maxwell’s 
equations. The James Clerk Maxwell Telescope in Hawaii is 
named for him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mayan Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mayan Astronomy 


The Mayas of Mexico, Belize, Guatemala and Honduras 
developed an urban civilization in the tropical rain forests. 
In their cities are many monuments, mainly stone, which 
contain accounts of their rulers’ families, conquests, 
sacrifices, rituals and building programs. These are 
integrated into an elaborate calendrical system, which 
gives dates to the day. We also have pottery, painted 
with elaborate scenes, often with dates and depictions 
of the cosmic interaction of deities, and four books have 
survived. It was thought that each day was ruled by many 
separate deities, gods of numbers, gods of day names, 
gods of months and years, and others. The fate of each 
day was determined by the interaction of these gods in 
numerological and astronomically determined patterns. 

The Mayas’ knowledge of astronomy allowed them 
to calculate eclipses and planetary movements over 
thousands of years. Some inscriptions include calculations 
over many millions of years. These seem to be 
combinations of numerology and astronomy. Whereas we 
would say that the tropical year during the time that the 
Mayas flourished was 365.24258 days, the Mayas gave 
dates indicating that 29 periods of 18980 days equaled 
1508 Maya years of 365 days and that this corresponded to 
1507 tropical years. This calculation would require about 
70000 yr to accumulate a full day of error. Much longer 
calculations imply much greater precision although not 
necessarily greater accuracy. The greater the length of time 
specified, the higher the precision which is being claimed. 
Some such calculations involved periods substantially 
greater than the present geologically estimated age of the 
Earth. 


The Maya calender 

There were three major components of the CALENDAR: 
a tzolkin (a period of 260 days—20 repetitions of the 
numbers from 1 to 13 and 13 repetitions of a series of 20 
named days); a ‘year’ of 18 named months of 20 days each 
plus a set of 5 days referred to by various euphemisms; 
an account of the number of days from a specified date 
in the past which served as an era base. The combination 
of the 365 day year with the 260 day sequence resulted 
in a repetition of the same combination after 18980 days 
(73 x 260 = 52 x 365). This combination is called a 
Calendar Round and was found throughout Mesoamerica 
(the cultural area which shows a large grouping of similar 
traits—most of the non-Mayan peoples of Mesoamerica 
were in modern Mexico). 


Astronomical observations 

We have almost no direct evidence of observational 
techniques. There are indications that observers posted at 
fixed points at fixed times of the year, such as EQUINOXES 
or soxstices, checked solar and planetary observations, 
often using a fixed alignment defined by two buildings 
or a building and a mountain peak or low point on 
a distant horizon. The Mayas had concave mirrors of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


obsidian (a naturally occurring volcanic glass, often black 
or green). Such a mirror could have been used directly 
as a reflecting telescope. This not only would have 
made fainter objects visible but would have permitted 
observations substantially closer to the Sun at sunrise and 
sunset. At Teotihuacan in highland Mexico, light from the 
Pleiades was projected onto a floor, apparently through a 
long tubular opening, causing a substantial enlargement 
(this technique is incorporated into any camera obscura in 
our own culture). Each dot of light from the 11 brightest 
stars of the Pleiades was marked on the floor by identical 
images of a jaguar, drawn by connecting 11 dots forming 
tiny maps of the Pleiades. These ‘maps’ or star diagrams 
are essentially elaborations of the so-called ‘ball and link’ 
designs (attested later among the Aztecs) in which solid 
line ‘links’ connect circular star markers (‘balls’). Although 
no similar observational technique is attested for the 
Mayas, the amount of shared astronomy, calendrics and 
cosmology is such that it seems very probable that they 
shared the technique, particularly since there is a ‘Maya 
quarter’ at Teotihuacan. 

The Mayas deliberately built some structures in 
such a way that the interaction of light and shadow 
created striking visual effects at specified times of the 
tropical year (i.e. the year measured from the spring 
equinox in 0° of the sign of Aries). At Chichen Itza, 
in Yucatan, there is a four-sided ‘pyramid’, with 91 
steps on each side, which is associated with Kukulcan, 
the Feathered Snake. The balustrades are carved as 
gigantic feathered rattle-snakes, head down. At the 
equinoxes, shadows cast on the balustrades by different 
levels or stages of the pyramid create the illusion that 
the giant snakes are descending the stairs. Feathered 
snakes were primarily identified with Venus at the time 
when this monument was erected, although I have argued 
for an earlier identification with Mercury. This may 
suggest a particular Venus phenomenon which occurred 
at a particular spring equinox. Despite this equinoctial 
connnection, the building itself is aligned to the rising 
point of the Sun at the summer solstice and to its setting 
point at the winter solstice. 

At Palenque, in Chiapas, an image of an old black 
god with an owl in his headdress is the last monument 
to be lit by the descending Sun at the winter solstice. 
I have suggested that he is a personification of Saturn, 
and that he rules the night, so that we may suppose 
that this was intended to mark a particular date when 
Saturn was visible in the east at sunset on a winter 
solstice. I have postulated that the calendar names of 
Mesoamerican deities, like those of human beings, were 
marked from the day of their ‘birth’, apparently usually 
identified as conjunction with the Sun for planets and as 
equinoxes or solstices for the Sun. In the case of the Moon, 
identification with particular eclipse intervals and series 
seems to have been usual. I have further argued that all 
calendar names were calculated from a single calendar 
round date, the date 12 Lanat on new year’s day, the 
first of Pop. This date was about 3500 yr in the past 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mayan Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


when the Maya first began erecting monuments, as will 
be explained. My interpretation of the calendar names of 
the gods has not been widely accepted, but neither has 
it been formally criticized and rejected, nor has anyone 
proposed a coherent alternative. To the extent that it is 
accepted, the Maya seem to have been interested in all 
the visible planets both in their movements relative to the 
sun and relative to the asterisms, or star groups which the 
Maya recognized. They were deeply interested in ECLIPSES 
of the Sun and of the Moon, and particularly interested in 
associating planetary movements with eclipses. 

Deities might appear in human form or as animals, 
from the lowly centipede representing the high god 
Itzamna, to the deer representing the Sun and the rabbit 
representing the Moon. An example which clearly 
integrates these varied concepts is a representation of a 
heron with the head of a black god incorporated into the 
body and the glyph for ‘star’ attached. I think that it may 
be a representation of Jupiter. 


Dates on inscriptions 

Returning to the inscriptions, dates are normally given by 
five numbers counted from 4 Ahao 8 Cumku, previously 
mentioned, and followed by the resultant calendar round 
date. Thus the date 9.16.4.10.8 12 Lamat 1 Muan means 
that 9 baktuns (9 x 400 tuns of 365 days each, that is, 
9 x 144000 = 1296000 days), 16 katuns (16 x 20 tuns; 
16 x 7200 = 115 200), 4 tuns (4 x 360 = 1440), 10 uinals of 
20 days each—10 x 20 = 200 and 8 days passed (from the 
era base 4 Ahau 8 Cumku to 12 Lamat 1 Muan). 

In an inscription of Palenque, a god is said to have 
been born on the date 1.18.5.4.0 1 Ahau 13 Mac. This is 
probably an implicit reference to a date 9.11.3.2.0 1 Ahau 
13 Mac which fell during the lifetime of those who put 
up the inscription. The interval between 1.18.5.4.0 and 
9.11.3.2.0 is 58 calendar rounds. The period of 29 calendar 
rounds and its multiples (2 x 29 = 58) appears in a 
number of inscriptions. The astronomical characteristics 
of this period are very interesting. It consists of 1508 years 
of 365 days which is equivalent to 1507 tropical years 
with a minimal error which would amount to a day in 
about 70000 yr. The double interval used here is 3016 
Maya years, equivalent to 3014 tropical years or 1100840 
days. We do not know the precise parameters used by the 
Mayas in any of their calculations except as these may be 
derived from the calculations themselves. The Maya used 
a minimal period of 2920 days to relate Venus and the year 
since 8 x 365 = 2920 and 5 approximate Venus periods of 
584 days each also equal 2920 days. The Maya day name 
of Saturn is 13 Cimi which implies 378 days for the synodic 
period of Saturn. These factors suggest connections 
between Venus, Saturn and the tropical year, since 2920 x 
377 is 1100 840 days, and that the day 1.18.5.3.6 13 Cimi 19 
Keh, 14 days earlier than 1.18.5.4.0 1 Ahau 13 Mac, is also 
given here as the birth of a god, the so-called ‘Jaguar-Baby’, 
one of twin heroes. Comparative mythology suggests that 
‘Jaguar-Baby’ was the half- brother of a deity with water 
associations and that he ultimately replaced his Jaguar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


father as the opponent of youthful heroes. I assume that 
‘Jaguar-Baby’ is Saturn. 

One of the most apparent relationships between 
history and astronomy in the Mayan inscriptions is the not 
uncommon use of a star glyph with a place-name glyph 
to indicate that the place has been conquered. It has been 
suggested that these conquests occurred when Venus was 
at greatest elongation, but the statistical evidence for the 
view that Venus was at any specified or specifiable position 
at all the dates concerned is not strong and other planets 
may also be involved. 


Astronomy in the codices 

This brings us to the astronomical evidence found in the 
Maya books. These are called the Dresden, Madrid, Paris 
and Grolier codices. It has recently been determined that 
the Madrid codex was written after the Spaniards had 
arrived in the New World, but there is no trace of Spanish 
culture in the manuscript. The city names of the first three 
codices have to do with their present locations and nothing 
to do with their content. Many books were destroyed 
when the Spaniards conquered the Maya area, but most 
scholars at the present time recognize four surviving Maya 
documents which are pre-Spanish in content. The pre- 
Columbian books and maps of Mesoamerica are usually 
called codices, although Latin codices were bound books 
and these are not. The most information comes from the 
astronomical tables of the Dresden codex. The Venus table 
and the table of lunations and their relationships to eclipses 
are accepted by virtually all Mayanists. There is also a table 
of Mars accepted by a substantial minority of scholars and 
structurally similar tables which I think refer to Mercury, 
Jupiter and Saturn. In all cases, there is a date in the distant 
past (somewhat before the Maya era base), then an interval 
and a date during the Maya Classical Period or somewhat 
later. This is followed by a multiplication table of factors 
relevant to astronomy and divination for the particular 
planet, including apparent correction factors. We have a 
table of mean motion for the particular planet, sometimes 
divided in ways which seem unusual to modern Western 
scholars. Before discussing individual tables, it should be 
pointed out that the Maya era base is occasionally referred 
to as 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 8 Cumku counting 13 baktuns or 
5200 tuns from a previous era base. This is comparable 
with our saying that the Christian era base of AD 1 is 
equivalent to the year 754 of the era base counted from 
the foundation of Rome. Many early scholars thought 
that this meant that a new era base would begin every 
time the count reached 13 baktuns. We know that the 
Maya used 20 baktuns to make one of the next higher 
unit (called by Mayanists a pictun) and we know that they 
also used completely different era bases such as 9 Kan 12 
Kayab, which was about 30 000 yr before 13.0.0.0.0 4 Ahau 
8 Cumku according to the most likely interpretation of the 
data. There is, therefore, no reason to think that the end 
of 13 baktuns from a previous era base would necessarily 
begin a new world age or era. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mayan Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In the case of the Venus table, the beginning date 
was a day 1 Ahau 18 Kayab falling 2200 days before the 
usual Maya era base, at a date which might be written 
12.19.13.16.0 (counted from the previous implicit era base). 
From this there was a count forward of 9.9.16.0.0 to a date 
9.9.9.16.0 1 Ahau 18 Kayab. The interval can be analyzed 
as 3744 years of 365 days, 2340 conventional Venus rounds 
of 584 days and 72 calendar rounds. This is 3741 tropical 
years and 189 days. It is also 2340 true Venus rounds 
and 189 days. Hence the true relationship of the Sun and 
Venus would have been the same at both ends of the table 
but shifted about half a year in the seasons. It is usually 
supposed that the ending date was approximately in step 
with reality and the beginning was badly off but it seems 
strange that they would back-calculate to a base which 
they knew was grossly in error. The multiplication table 
starts with 2920 days (5 x 584 = 8 x 365) going from an 
implicit 1 Ahau to a specified Ahau. It continues with 
multiples of 584 by 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55 
and 60, the last reaching 6 Ahau. It is just possible that 
the initial 5 Venus cycles are counted from, rather than to, 
the recorded 9 Ahau, in which case 5 Venus cycles after 
6 Ahau would reach 1 Ahau after 2 calendar rounds. We 
then have a reference to 9100 days reaching 1 Ahau. Read 
as it stands, this would be 35 x 260 days, which is not a 
Venus interval and has usually been regarded as an error. 
Lounsbury (1990) regarded it as a correction mechanism 
over 80 calendar rounds. This is certainly more likely than 
any alternative yet proposed but the specific mechanism 
suggested involves corrections which seem to me unlikely 
to have been applied as Lounsbury thought. The table then 
gives 57 x 118 and 317 multiples of 584, all of which reach 
1 Ahau, before reverting to the 65 x 584 which restores 1 
Ahau, then giving 130 x 195 and 260 x 584. 

This is followed by a mean (synodic) motion of Venus 
in 5 sections each totalling 584 days and subdivided into 
236, 90, 250 and 8 days. There are three sets of Venus 
intervals given, creating essentially three tables in one. 
The base of the top set is 1 Ahau 13 Mac, the base of 
the second set is 1 Ahau 18 Kayab (the CR date reached 
by the introduction) and the base of the third set is 1 
Ahau 3 Xul. The relationship between these tables is 
much disputed. Lounsbury’s analysis of the relationship 
between the multiplication table (interpreted as giving 
various calculations for corrections) and the three-in-one 
table led him to suggest a date of 11.0.3.1.0 1 Ahau 13 Mac 
for the top set and a still later date of 11.5.2.0.0 1 Ahau 3 Xul 
for the bottom set. However, the verbal affix -ah is found in 
all entries in the 18 Kayab and 3 Xul tables and all but one 
page (46) of the 13 Mac table. This should mean that the 
tables are referring to past events, except for part of the 13 
Mac table. It seems to be much more likely that the implicit 
date 9.11.3.2.0 1 Ahau 13 Mac at Palenque in association 
with apparent Venus calculations is the intended date here 
as well. That date is 11960 days after 9.9.9.16.0 1 Ahau 
18 Kayab (generally accepted as the intended base for the 
middle set) which is, in turn, 9360 days later than 9.8.3.16.0 
1 Ahau 3 Xul. Lounsbury rejects these dates because of a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


priori assumptions as to how corrections should be applied 
and the value of common factors. He also assumes all 
relevant factors of the Venus table are directly related to 
Venus. I assume, on the other hand, that an important 
factor of the tables was to relate Venus to other planetary 
phenomenon, to the tropical year and to eclipses. In this 
case, an interest in eclipses may be involved, since 11 960 
days is the length of the Maya eclipse table (32 x 3 years) 
and 9360 seems to be the second most important eclipse 
interval. This need not imply that any of the Venus table 
dates were actually eclipse dates, but rather that certain 
Venus phenomena might serve as markers for eclipses. 
This naturally leads to a discussion of the Dresden 
eclipse table. The introductory date falls 8 days after 
the Maya era base. The usual calculations appear, only 
partly understood, and then the table. This consists of 
69 eclipse syzygies, each with an accompanying text, and 
with 10 pictures—in all cases except the table end, these 
pictures follow an interval of 148 days, rather than the 
normal interval of 177 days (6 lunations) (or occasionally 
178 days). The base of the table is the date 9.16.4.10.8 12 
Lamat 1 Muan. I have suggested that the calendar names 
of Mesoamerican deities are the dates reached by a count 
forward of a relevant astronomical interval from the base 
12.8.19.0.8 12 Lamat 1 Pop (of the previous era). In this 
case, a count forward of 11 960 days reaches 12.10.12.4.8 12 
Lamat 1 Muan, which I identify as the calendar name of 
the eclipse table god. The day 12 Lamat is associated with 
eclipses in the Paris and Madrid codices and the highland 
Mexican Borgia codex names an old Moon god as 12 Rabbit, 
the equivalent of 12 Lamat. Ifa standardized table of 11 960 
days was used as I think, then the Dresden table base should 
be a multiple of 11960 days from 12.8.19.0.8 12 Lamat 1 
Pop and a multiple of calendar rounds from 12.10.12.4.8 
12 Lamat 1 Muan. The least common denominator of 
the two intervals is 48 calendar rounds, which is the 
equivalent of 73 eclipse table lengths (6.1.5.4.0 or 873 080 
days). It turned out that the first common occurrence 
was at 5.11.17.8.8 12 Lamat 1 Muan and the second at 
11.13.2.12.8. 12 Lamat 1 Muan, thus passing over the 
entire period of the Classic Maya. However, an alternative 
occurred to me. If one counted 9360 days of the proto- 
table, one would reach 12.11.18.4.8 12 Lamat 11 Mol. If 
one then counted forward by multiples of 11 960 days one 
would reach 12 Lamat 1 Muan after 50 repetitions of the 
table at 3.14.19.6.8 12 Lamat 1 Muan (32 calendar rounds 
from 12.10.12.4.8 12 Lamat 1 Muan). If one then counts 
forward 48 calendar rounds, one reaches 9.16.4.10.8 12 
Lamat 1 Muan; the total interval would be 80 calendar 
rounds plus 11960 days or 124 eclipse table lengths plus 
9360 days (10.12.11.0.0 or 1530360 days). The efficacy of 
that base would then depend in part on the accuracy of the 
original back calculation and the table itself would serve 
as a measuring stick against actually observed eclipses 
(which could theoretically be off by many days or even 
months). Using modern parameters they would be 41 
days off on node passage and 45 days off on lunations, 
but we do not know what parameters they were using. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mayan Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It may be noted that the interval from 9.11.3.2.0 1 Ahau 
13 Mac to 9.16.4.10.8 12 Lamat 1 Muan is 5.1.8.8 or 36528 
days. This is about 40 days short of an eclipse interval 
and might suggest that 9.11.3.2.0 was actually an eclipse 
if the eclipse table base was removed from reality by an 
equivalent amount. 

The first eclipse of the table after 12 Lamat fell on a 
day 7 Snake, which is the name of a well-known Aztec 
goddess, Chicomecoatl (Seven Snake). The day 7 Snake is 
also associated with eclipse syzygy imagery in the Madrid 
codex. The day associated with the first picture in the 
table is 7 Oc and the associated picture shows a death god 
on a throne of bones. Again, the Madrid codex shows a 
similar throne of bones with a column of dates including 
7 Oc. The so-called ‘saros’ interval of 6585 days from 12 
Lamat reaches 7 Ix or 7 Jaguar, said in highland Mexico 
to be a name for the gourd. The decapitated head of the 
Sun God was hung in a gourd tree and changed into a 
gourd. Pottery scenes and sculptures frequently depict 
the decapitation of the Sun God or Moon Goddess and 
associated dates suggest eclipses. Perhaps all the gourds in 
the tree represent previous eclipses. Only a constant back 
and forth between iconography and calendrical arithmetic 
will ultimately allow us to understand Mayan astronomy 
and the role it played in the culture. In the Madrid codex 
there are two cases in which there is a reference to two 
solar eclipses relative to a single date. In one case, this 
seems to be 13 tuns after 12 Lamat (13 x 360 = 4680 days). 
This interval is the ideal short interval to go from a solar 
eclipse at the node to a lunar eclipse at the node. The latter 
would be midway between two solar eclipses, one in the 
far north and one in the far south, neither visible to the 
Mayas. This suggests at least a minimal concept of the 
geometry involved and a clear concept that eclipses were 
occurring even when they were not locally visible. 

The table of Mars was satisfactorily identified by 
Willson in 1924 but was long doubted. More recently, 
work of the Bricher has again made it acceptable to many 
scholars, although there are still doubters. I have argued 
for tables of Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn, still not widely 
accepted, despite their similarity to the other tables. The 
stone coffin of Pacal at Palenque has a series of sequential 
designs which Thomas Barthel identified as symbols of the 
planets in their Eurasian and African week-day order. This 
seems to me correct. 


Maya constellations 

Our knowledge of Mayan CONSTELLATIONS is still very 
minimal but increasing. The tail of the Rattlesnake is 
identified with the Pleiades, their Scorpion constellation 
with ours and Orion’s Belt with a turtle. The hearth stones 
ruled by the Fire God are nearby. Ihave suggested that the 
sequence of Mesoamerican day names represents ASTERISMS 
recognized by the Mayas, but this does not give us very 
clear definitions. There are problems with other suggested 
sequences. Some asterisms are still identified by modern 
Mayan groups. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The correlation problem 

Finally, mention should be made of the problem of 
correlating the Maya chronology with our own. This is 
usually defined by a correlation constant which matches 
the era base with a particular Julian Day number. Thus 
the widely accepted Thompson correlation matches the 
era base with JD 584285. I think that this correlation is 
certainly wrong, disagreeing with colonial and historical 
evidence, with the archaeology and with the astronomy. 
Recently, Bryan Wells has proposed alternate correlations 
at 660205 or 660208, the latter being independently 
suggested by Andreas Fuls. I have found strong historical 
evidence supporting Wells against my own proposal of 
663310. No yet-proposed correlation agrees well with 
my interpretation of the Dresden eclipse table. The 
chronological control of a correct correlation is necessary 
in order to understand Mayan astronomy with any clarity. 
In my view, we still do not have reasonable certainty 
about any of the more than 100 proposed correlations, 
but the Wells correlation is far superior to that proposed 
by Thompson. Mayan astronomy was complex and 
sophisticated but it used principles which often differ 
strikingly from ours, and we still have much work to do. 


Bibliography 

Justeson J S 1989 Ancient Maya ethnoastronomy: an 
overview of hieroglyphic sources ed A P Aveni 
World Archeoastronomy (Cambridge: University of 
Cambridge Press) 

Kelley D H 1980 Astronomical identities of the Mesoamer- 
ican gods J. Hist. Astron. 9 (Archeoastronomy Supple- 
ment 2) S1-54 

Lounsbury F G 1978 Maya numeration, computation 
and calendrical astronomy Dictionary of Scientific 
Biography vol 15 (New York: Scribner’s) pp 759-818 


David Kelley 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mayer, Tobias (1723-62) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mayer, Tobias (1723-62) 


Mathematician, born in Marbach, Wiirttemberg, Germany, 
who, self-taught, discovered the libration (back and forth 
oscillation on its axis) of the Moon, which won him 
the chair of mathematics at Gottingen. Made the first 
accurately measured map of the Moon. Attempted to 
formulate predictions of the motion of the Sun and Moon 
as a means to determine longitude at sea, sent them to 
the British government, which posthumously awarded his 
widow the sum of £3000. MASKELYNE described the work in 
the first issue of the Nautical Almanac, complimenting their 
accuracy (they could be used to determine longitude to 
within a degree, or 60 nautical miles error). Maskelyne 
noted that ‘The Difficulty and Length of the necessary 
Calculations seem the only Obstacles to hinder them from 
becoming of general Use’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


McCrea, William Hunter (1904-98) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


McCrea, William Hunter (1904—98) 


Theoretical astronomer, relativist and cosmologist, be- 
came professor at the University of Sussex. Very influential 
as a teacher of the principles of cosmology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


McDonald Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


McDonald Observatory 


McDonald Observatory, located in West Texas near Fort 
Davis, is the astronomical observatory of the University 
of Texas at Austin. Discoveries at McDonald 
Observatory include water vapor on Mars, the abundance 
of rare-earth chemical elements in stars, the discovery of 
planets circling around nearby stars and the use of the 
measurements of rapid oscillations in the brightness of 
white dwarf stars to deduce their ages. 

Telescopes at McDonald Observatory include the 
9.2 m (diameter) Hobby—Eberly Telescope (HET) whose 
partners include (with Texas), Pennsylvania State 
University, Stanford University, the Ludwig Maximilians 
University in Munich and the Georg-August University 
in Géttingen, Germany. The HET came into operation in 
1999 and specializes in astronomical spectroscopy. The 
other telescopes are owned exclusively by Texas and 
include the 2.7 m Harlan Smith Telescope, the 2.1 m Otto 
Struve Telescope and the 0.7 m, wide-field survey 
telescope. In addition, McDonald operates a 0.7 m laser- 
ranging telescope which measures the distance to 
reflectors on the Moon. 

McDonald Observatory has a staff of 100 people 
located in Austin and at the Observatory. The operating 
funds for the Observatory come from the State of Texas, 
the University of Texas at Austin and from private and 
corporate benefactors. McDonald Observatory has an 
extensive set of public information programs including 
StarDate (English), Universo (Spanish) and Sternzeit 
(German) radio programs, StarDate magazine and a 
visitor center at the observatory. A new visitor center 
with extensive exhibits and displays in Spanish and 
English will be open in late 2001. The new visitor center, 
at the observatory, is open every day except Christmas 
Day, Thanksgiving Day, and New Year’s Day. 

For further information see 


http://www.as.utexas.edu/mcdonald/mcdonald.html 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


MDM Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MDM Observatory 


MDM Observatory was founded by the University of 
Michigan, Dartmouth College and the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Current operating partners 
include Michigan, Dartmouth, MIT, Ohio State University 
and Columbia University. The observatory is located on 
the southwest ridge of the KITT PEAK NATIONAL OBSERVATORY 
near Tucson, Arizona. It operates the 2.4 m Hiltner 
Telescope and the 1.3 m McGraw-Hill Telescope. 
For further information see 

http://www.astro.lsa.umich.edu/obs/mdm/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mean Solar Time 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mean Solar Time 


The time system in use for most civil and many 
astronomical purposes and based on the motion of 
a hypothetical object called the mean Sun, the right 
ascension of which increases from day to day at a uniform 
rate. The local mean time is defined to be the local hour 
angle of the mean Sun plus 12 h. Greenwich mean time is 
taken as the standard for reference; the term Universal 
Time (UT) is synonymous with Greenwich mean time 
(GMT). 


See also: apparent solar time, equation of time, Universal 
Time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Measuring Machines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Measuring Machines 


Astronomy is basically an observational science, rather 
than an experimental one, and the development and 
advancement of the subject has relied heavily on surveys 
of the sky at optical wavelengths to expand our 
knowledge of the observable universe. To date all of 
the major all-sky optical surveys have been carried out 
using photographic plates taken on wide-angle SCHMIDT 
TELESCOPES. Of particular note are the northern hemisphere 
surveys undertaken by the Palomar Schmidt telescope, 
and the southern hemisphere surveys using the ESO 
Schmidt telescope in Chile and the UK Schmidt telescope 
(UKST) in Australia. These surveys form a_ basic 
foundation of observational astronomy playing a similar 
role to cartographic maps of the Earth’s surface. 

Formerly, this photographic survey material could 
only be studied visually with the aid of low-power 
binocular microscopes. Even with large teams of 
dedicated observers only a minute fraction of the available 
wealth of information present on the survey plates could 
be mined. Objective, quantitative studies were difficult 
in many cases and impossible in most. However, in 
the late 1970s and early 1980s the advent of fast optical 
micro densitometers, or measuring machines, capable 
of automatically digitizing and routinely analyzing the 
enormous information content of these survey plates, 
revolutionized optical astronomy, placing it firmly at the 
forefront of the computer age. By routinely processing the 
4 Gbytes of information on a Schmidt plate in a matter 
of a few hours, these machines opened up new areas of 
quantitative survey astronomy. Around 2000 such plates 
are needed to cover the whole sky in one passband. Add 
another passband, or two, to provide colour information 
and possibly different epoch observations to open up 
proper motion and variability studies, not to mention 
special plates for specific studies, and the total data volume 
becomes well over a staggering 50 Tbytes. 

This ability to digest huge volumes of information 
(see also SOFTWARE: DIGITALSKY SURVEYS) and produce the sort 
of numbers astronomers are really interested in, such as 
position, magnitude, colour, star or galaxy and so on, is 
the key to the success of the measuring machine era. Most 
of the area on a survey plate belongs to the smoothly 
varying sky background and hence can be accurately 
represented using much lower-resolution sampling. Faint 
images and all stellar images are reducible to simple 
descriptors such as those above. It is only the handful of 
bright galaxies where more detailed mapping is required. 
These straightforward concepts have been exploited by the 
measuring machine community to significantly compress 
the original data volume by factors of typically x 100 with 
little or no loss of pertinent information. Nowadays, it 
is common practice among astronomers to use the world 
wide web (WWW) to dial up arbitrary parts of the sky and 
be presented with catalogs of objects and two-dimensional 
pictures. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The initial breakthrough came in the 1950s, when 
Peter Fellgett proposed a machine that could look for and 
measure images automatically. It was called GALAXY 
and used a ‘flying spot’ produced by a cathode ray 
tube (CRT). When the image of a star on the plate 
blocked off the light from the CRT the machine registered 
an object and measured its position using an analogue 
implementation of a maximum likelihood (i.e. optimal) 
centering algorithm. GALAXY, completed in 1968 at the 
Royal Observatory Edinburgh (ROE) by Vincent Reddish, 
represented a significant advance over previous efforts, 
but it was still very slow. It could process 1000 stars per 
hour but, as each survey-grade Schmidt plate contains well 
over 250000 stars, measuring a complete plate still took 
an impracticably long time. Furthermore, as GALAXY 
was designed to do stellar astrometry only, much of the 
information content of the plates was still untapped. 

GALAXY’s successor, COSMOS, also based on a 
CRT-illuminated flying spot, was commissioned at the 
ROE in the late 1970s. Unlike GALAXY, COSMOS was 
designed to digitize first, prior to performing image 
detection and analysis, and took about a day to process 
each plate completely. In this way, both stellar and galaxy 
images could be detected and parameters describing 
their position, intensity and morphology readily derived. 
COSMOS has been used to construct digital maps and 
catalogs of many UKST plates including the complete 
Southern BJ sky survey and these are available on the 
WWW. COSMOS was retired in 1993 and has recently been 
superseded by Super COSMOS, a multichannel system 
based on a linear CCD and xenon arc lamp source. 
Telecentric optics helps to control the scattered light. 
The X-Y table is a modification of a commercial off-the- 
shelf system and represents the current state-of-the-art in 
accurate (few tenths of a micron) positional measurement. 
At the same time, the sampling interval, in this case 10 wm, 
and the processing speed have been enhanced such that a 
complete Schmidt plate has a turnround time of some 3 h. 
Programs for SuperCOMOS include rescanning the UKST 
BJ survey plates, incorporating the UKST OR and I survey 
plates and measuring the second epoch Palomar sky 
survey plates (POSSII) of the northern hemisphere. Both 
digital maps and image catalogs will be made available 
over the WWW. 

Meanwhile back in Cambridge, also in the 1970s, 
Ed Kibblewhite, an electronics graduate, started work 
on a different system, the APM machine. Kibblewhite’s 
breakthrough was to use a laser beam to scan the plate 
and a series of high-speed special-purpose computers to 
analyze the data in real time. An acousto-optic deflector 
generates the ‘flying spot’, or multichannel parallelism, 
necessary for fast scanning, by using a sound wave of 
varying frequency to diffract parts of the incident laser 
beam. The plate is held on a massive X—Y table which 
moves under the laser beam and the scanner samples the 
plate 250 000 times per second with a positional accuracy 
of a few tenths of amicron. The APM has been used to scan 
the first epoch Palomar sky survey plates (POSSI) of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Measuring Machines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


northern hemisphere and the UKST BJ, OR and I survey 
plates. Catalogs for these plates are available on-line for 
fields at GALACTIC LATITUDES further than 20° from the plane. 

In the US, Willem Luyten had pioneered the use of a 
manual BLINK COMPARATOR for locating stars of high proper 
motion. This early work culminated in the publication 
of measured proper motions of 94263 stars that form 
the Bruce Proper Motion Survey, which he finished in 
1937. This work continued and Luyten went on using 
the blink comparator to measure the proper motions 
of about 100000 other stars. However, as this work 
extended to ever fainter stars, measurement by hand 
became too difficult. As a result, he and the Control Data 
Corporation designed a new fully automated computer- 
controlled blink machine based on laser optics, which 
was constructed in the late 1960s. This machine was 
specifically designed to do accurate astrometry and played 
a major role in the production of Luyten’s Palomar proper 
motion catalogs. 

After a major electronic upgrade in the 1980s under 
the direction of Roberta Humphries, this rather specialized 
machine was renamed the APS and was used on a wide- 
ranging program to digitize the POSSI red and blue sky 
survey plates. The APS is based on a laser spot deflected 
with a rotating prism and is capable of scanning two plates 
simultaneously in a few hours. Current projects include 
remeasuring the Luyten proper motion red survey plates 
and incorporation of catalogs based on POSSII. All the 
catalogs are available on the WWW. 

Similar astrometric measurements using manually 
operated machines had also been undertaken at Lick 
Observatory as part of the Lick Proper Motion program. 
These culminated in the development of the Lick 
Automatic Measuring Engine (LAME) by Vasilevskis and 
Popov in 1966. Approximate positions of targets were 
read from punched cards, and used to drive the plate 
carriage to within 50-100 ym of the target. Photometric 
and astrometric measurements were made and recorded 
on a new card, with an iris being used for photometry 
and a spinning-sector scanner for centering. Initially 
LAME required frequent operator intervention, but later 
modifications to the electronics and computer system in 
the early 1970s greatly enhanced the efficiency and degree 
of automation, enabling the goals of the Lick Proper 
Motion program to be achieved. 

Throughout all this, the main difference in focus 
between UK and US effort in measuring machine 
development was that GALAXY was the forerunner for a 
series of general-purpose machines in Britain, while in the 
US measuring machines were used solely for astrometry 
until the latter half of the 1980s (see also ASTROMETRY: 
HISTORY). 

One of the main drivers for the latter-day expansion 
of measuring machine effort in the US was the mission 
requirement for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), for 
a catalog of acquisition and guidance stars covering 
the whole sky down to roughly 15th magnitude in the 
visual (see also ASTROMETRY WITH HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In order to guarantee this objective Barry Lasker at the 
Space Telescope Science Institute (STSci), in Baltimore, 
initiated a program using two PDS micro densitometers 
to scan the Palomar Quick V survey and the UKST BJ 
survey. This catalog was made widely available to the 
astronomical community and has become the mainstay for 
ground-based telescope acquisition and guidance systems 
too. PDS machines are classical single-channel two- 
microscope instruments and, although slow compared 
with the other measuring machines previously mentioned, 
have the advantage of superior dynamic range. However, 
by digitizing the survey plates ata more modest resolution, 
and by being operated around the clock, they were able 
to digitize the whole sky prior to the launch of HST. In 
addition to the Guide star catalog, digitized maps of the 
whole sky were also made available for the first time. The 
STSci PDS systems were recently upgraded to include laser 
illumination and an acousto-optic deflector to provide a 
small number of channels, a compromise hedging between 
control of scattered light (a problem in all flying spot 
scanners) and increase of scanning speed. The upgraded 
system is being used to measure the UKST OR and POSSII 
survey plates. All the data, including digitized maps and 
object catalogs, are being made available on the WWW for 
public access. 

The only other major system that is scanning large 
amounts of sky survey plates is Monet’s PMM machine 
at the US Naval Observatory, Flagstaff. This machine 
is based on two-dimensional CCD cameras and features 
extensive software to correct for astrometric field effects in 
the individual footprint scans from each CCD camera. The 
PMM is capable of scanning four plates simultaneously 
in a few hours and has been used to measure all of the 
POSSI, UKST and POSSII blue and red survey plates, 
as well as a special set of short exposure plates in the 
north made on the same grid to improve the astrometric 
reference frame. Although the main goal of the project 
Was a NeW ASTROMETRIC SURVEY, an all-sky object catalog 
with magnitude and color information for over 500 million 
objects to the limiting depths of the plates, is available on 
request. 

The future of photographic sky survey material is 
guaranteed by the past. Although the current generation 
of all-sky survey material is based on photographic plates, 
the new large-format mosaic CCD cameras are performing 
the next generation of optical sky surveys to much deeper 
limits. However, the historic record provided by a century 
of photographic plates is invaluable and ensures that both 
archival plates in addition to sky survey plates will have 
a strong role to play in the foreseeable future. 


Bibliography 
A good introductory general reference is 


Lasker B M 1995 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 107 763 


Mike Irwin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Media 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Media 


Astronomy is one of the sciences that can be experienced 
by everyone. The skies can be seen directly by all, 
and it is possible through disciplined observation for 
everyone to make contributions to current science, e.g. 
through observations of variable stars, comets, etc. An 
enhanced view of the sky is available through incredibly 
beautiful images from the Hubble Space Telescope (see 
http:/ /oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/subject.html) and large 
ground-based instruments, such as the Anglo-Australian 
Telescope (see http:/ /www.aao.gov.au/images.html). 

Astronomy is mind expanding. The large distances, 
the effects of the connection between distance and time 
past (‘look-back’), contemplation of the origin of the 
planets, the Sun, the stars and the Universe, the possibility 
that there are planets similar to the Earth elsewhere in 
space: amazing thoughts like these provoke wonder and 
excitement (See ART AND LITERATURE). 

Thus astronomy is one of the most popular sciences, 
and is represented strongly in the information media, such 
as newspapers and broadcasting. 

Astronomy is also connected with the adventure of 
space travel. It was possible to follow on TV the landings 
on the Moon made by the Apollo astronauts, and the 
later flights of the Space Shuttle. NEIL ARMSTRONG’s ‘one 
small step’ onto the bleak rocks of the lunar Sea of 
Tranquillity was watched by many millions of viewers, 
world wide. Through the internet, very large numbers of 
people indeed followed the landing of Mars Pathfinder 
and the explorations by its rover Sojourner. Under its 
Administrator Dan Goldin, NASA has put an emphasis 
on a scientific return to the tax-payers of the USA who 
finance the NASA program, and there has thus been a rise 
in the opportunities for public participation in NASA space 
missions. The European Space Agency is increasing its 
emphasis on the public understanding of science. 

Sound broadcasting does not have the immediacy of 
appeal of television, but is better suited to convey the ideas 
of astronomy. The superlatives of distance, time, size and 
energy appeal directly to the imagination but can best be 
conveyed through words. 

A pioneer ‘broadcast astronomer’ in the UK was Sir 
JAMES JEANS (1877-1946). Midway in his academic career 
he was invited to write a popular book and produced 
The Universe Around Us (1929), which was an immediate 
success. He was soon invited to make a series of radio 
broadcasts, and these too were so well received that the rest 
of his career was concerned largely with the popularization 
of astronomy. Other early broadcasters included Sir 
ARTHUR EDDINGTON (1882-1944) and Guy Porter, of the Royal 
Observatory, Greenwich. FRED HOYLE’s The Nature of the 
Universe (c 1955) was an influential BBC radio series that 
developed a reputation for the steady-state theory of the 
origin of the universe that still survives, although the 
theory itself is moribund. 

The BBC’s The Sky at Night television series began in 
1957, presented by PATRICK MOORE; the programs have been 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


broadcast late at night every four weeks since that time, 
and are said to be the longest-running TV series in Britain 
apart from the news. The series has given a large number 
of astronomers access to an audience of 2 or 3 million in the 
UK to whom they can directly communicate their work, as 
well as developing a large number of astronomical media 
‘experts’. There have also been various other shorter-lived 
series, on all networks, particularly the BBC channels and 
Channel 4. 

In the United States, CARL SAGAN’s Cosmos television 
program attracted a vast following. The Discovery 
channel in the USA broadcasts many astronomy programs. 
In France, the annual Nuit des Etoiles devotes a whole 
evening to astronomy and space, with segments of the 
program originating from across the country. Curiously, 
no country other than Britain has produced a regular 
television series like The Sky at Night, certainly not one 
of comparable length. 

In presenting a scientific program, there has to 
be a compromise between the overtechnical and the 
oversimple approach. Therefore, the facts have to be given 
clearly without any impression of ‘talking down’ and to 
go into more detail means that the script writer and the 
presenter have to be highly skilled. Confusing programs 
tend to turn viewers away from science. 

Ideas and images combine in the printed media, both 
in book form and in journals, magazines and newspapers. 
Newspapers carry predictions of astronomical phenom- 
ena, lunar phases, star charts, etc, as well as news re- 
ports on astronomical advances. In France, NICOLAS CAMILLE 
FLAMMARION (1842-1925) was especially noteworthy as a 
pioneer popularizer of astronomy through these forms, 
including many lavishly illustrated books (for example 
L’Astronomie Populaire) and a journal L’Astronomie, which 
he founded with the Société Astronomique de France in 
1897 and which is still published. In the United States, the 
magazine Sky and Telescope, the largest-circulation astro- 
nomical magazine (circulation 125 000) traces its history to 
a four-page bulletin called the Amateur Astronomer, begun 
in 1929 and absorbed by a monthly magazine called The 
Sky started 1935 by the Hayden Planetarium. The Sky went 
independent in 1941 and merged with The Telescope, which 
had first appeared as a quarterly magazine in March 1931. 
In Britain, Astronomy Now has a circulation between 25 000 
and 30000. 

Astronomical and space stories in the press are second 
only to stories about human biology in attracting public 
interest. In Britain, the decade of the 1990s has seen in 
magazines and newspapers an increase in the proportion 
of articles about astronomy. The rate of increase relative 
to the volume of published material is some 10% per year. 
This rise has been associated with a rise in enrolment in 
university courses in astronomy, doubling over a decade, 
and an increasing number of universities offering such 
courses (about half of British universities do so). There 
is evidence from surveys in Britain that an interest by 
young people in astronomy and space plays a key role 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Media 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in attracting undergraduates into university studies of 
science and technology in general. 

The world geographic distribution of institutes 
for astronomy, observatories, planetaria, astronomical 
societies and astronomical publishers is given by André 
Heck (http: //vizier.u-strasbg.fr/~heck/aamaps.htm; see 
also A Heck Astronomy Now August 1998). The Eastern 
and the Western United States and Japan, the Netherlands, 
central European countries and the rest of Europe have 
a strong density of astronomical interest. France has a 
strong centralization of research in the Paris area (which 
has the highest concentration in the world of astronomy 
organizations). By contrast, the distribution of interest 
in astronomy in the USA and the UK is broadly based 
and follows the population distribution, particularly the 
astronomical societies. The London area is a world centre 
for global astronomical publishing. 

The Royal Astronomical Society (http: / / www.ras.org 
.uk/ras/press/press.htm) and the American Astronomi- 
cal Society maintain press offices that regularly issue press 
releases on scientific stories of astronomical interest. The 
take-up is by editors who are keen to balance the diet of 
serious political news, disturbing crimes and tragic acci- 
dents, which they feel obliged to cover, with more opti- 
mistic stories. 

The key to the continued production of successful 
press releases includes above all the maintenance of 
scientific integrity, but there are additional factors which 
help the press take up a science story. There should be 
some national or local interest in it; it is helpful if one of the 
scientists is someone with whom the reader can identify. 
The international nature of science is helpful in getting 
an astronomical story published in many countries. In 
general, press interest increases with size of expenditure— 
the more money, the more important. Journalists are 
also influenced by the availability of scientists for follow- 
up interviews—each journalist looks for his/her unique 
‘angle’ to the story via direct contact. 

Pictures, especially color pictures, help produce a 
favorable editorial decision to publish. Such a decision 
is made by the scientifically uninformed, and an editor 
can be swayed by a picture (or an animation, in the 
case of TV). If the story contains a superlative (biggest, 
furthest, most massive, . . .) or a fancy name or picturesque 
metaphor, it is also more likely to be published. A widely 
reported astronomical press release in 1998 in the UK was 
about a rather technical study of peanut-shaped bipolar 
instabilities in star distributions within rotating barred 
spiral galaxies. This is not promising material for a 
popular scientific press release. Its take-up was due to 
the inspired label on the press release, using the name of 
a chocolate-nut confection, and referring to the ‘Snickers 
hypothesis’, that there is a peanut in every bar. It was 
possible to combine the scientific integrity of the work with 
enjoyment, and this is the essence of the presentation of 
astronomy in the information media. 


Paul Murdin and Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Medieval Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Medieval Cosmology 


During the early Middle Ages (ca 500 to ca 1130) scholars 
with an interest in cosmology had little useful and 
dependable literature. They relied heavily on a partial 
Latin translation of PLATO’s Timaeus by Chalcidius (4th 
century AD), and on a series of encyclopedic treatises 
associated with the names of Pliny the Elder (ca AD 23- 
79), Seneca (4 BC-AD 65), Macrobius (fl 5th century AD), 
Martianus Capella (ca 365-440), Cassiodorus (ca 480-ca 
575), Isidore of Seville (ca 560-636) and Venerable Bede 
(672-735). Even if we add certain works of the church 
fathers, especially St Basil (ca 330-379) and St Augustine 
(354-430), the cosmology embedded in all of these treatises 
was meager and insubstantial. Beginning in the 12th 
century, this changed dramatically when a large number 
of Greek and Arabic scientific treatises were translated into 
Latin, thus laying the foundation for the development of 
early modern science in the 17th century. 

During the late Middle Ages, cosmology was not 
an independent discipline, but a branch of natural 
philosophy, a subject taught at the medieval universities, 
which had come into existence by 1200. Medieval 
cosmology was derived primarily from the natural 
philosophy of ARISTOTLE (ca 384-322 BC), the great Greek 
philosopher and scientist. Cosmology was also dependent 
on mathematical astronomy, which was associated with 
the name of Claudius rroLemy (ca 100-ca 170). The works of 
Aristotle relevant to cosmology, and the works of Ptolemy 
relevant to astronomy, were unknown in Western Europe 
until the second half of 12th century, following their 
translations into Latin from Greek and Arabic. 

The large body of cosmological literature produced 
in the Middle Ages derives largely from questions that 
medieval natural philosophers drew from Aristotle’s 
books on natural philosophy, especially his treatise On the 
Heavens. Nicole orEsME (ca 1320-1382), a famous natural 
philosopher and theologian, discussed the following 
questions in his treatise on Aristotle’s On the Heavens: 


Whether it is possible that several worlds exist. 

Whether the heaven is of another nature than inferior 
things. 

Whether all the stars receive their light from the Sun 
or [whether] some [stars produce light] in themselves. 

Whether the entire Earth always rests. 


Responses to these, and hundreds of similar, questions, 
posed over the centuries, formed the basis of medieval cos- 
mology. There were also straightforward commentaries 
on Aristotle’s works, together with questions and com- 
mentaries on a widely used 13th century work by JOHN OF 
HOLYWOOD, titled Treatise on the Sphere. 


Aristotle and Christianity 

The introduction of Aristotle’s works posed a dilemma 
for medieval natural philosophers. From the Bible, they 
learned that the world was created by a divine power, 
who would eventually destroy it. From Aristotle’s On 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Heavens came a powerful contrary message: the 
world could not have had a beginning and could never 
come to an end. Aristotle’s conviction that the world 
was without beginning or end conflicted with the basic 
Christian belief that our unique world was divinely 
created and of temporal duration. Indeed, by the early 
13th century, it was accepted dogma in Latin Christendom 
that the world was created out of nothing (ex nihilo). 
Reactions to Aristotle’s claims for eternity varied. Some, 
like St Bonaventure (1221-1274), were convinced that the 
temporal creation of the world was demonstrable. By 
contrast, Thomas Aquinas (ca 1225-1274) held that logical 
argument and evidence favored neither judgment. In his 
view, there was no contradiction in the possibility that God 
could have willed the existence of the world without a 
temporal beginning, making it both created and eternal. 

The creation account in Genesis compelled Christian 
cosmologists to explain biblical claims. How, for example, 
does the heaven (caelum), or firmament, created on the 
first day, differ from the heaven (caelum) created on the 
second day? How does the light created on the first day 
compare with the light created on the fourth day? How 
could plants come forth on the third day when the Sun, 
whose warmth and light are required, was not created until 
the fourth day? What are the waters above and below the 
firmament? The various solutions to these questions were 
proposed in terms of contemporary Aristotelian physics 
and cosmology. 


Can anything exist beyond our finite cosmos? 
Most natural philosophers believed the world was a finite 
sphere. Did anything lie beyond it? Aristotle had argued 
that it was impossible for bodies, motions, places, time 
and vacuum to exist outside of our finite cosmos. To 
Christians, Aristotle’s argument implied that not even 
God could create these things, and therefore He could not 
create other worlds beyond ours. Aristotle’s arguments 
were viewed as placing constraints on God’s absolute 
power to do as He pleased. In 1277, the Bishop of Paris 
condemned 219 articles that were deemed theologically 
offensive and unacceptable. Many of them were directed 
against Aristotle and his followers. One of the condemned 
articles claimed that God could not make other worlds. 
To repudiate Aristotle’s claim, scholastic authors showed, 
by a variety of arguments, that identical and distinct 
worlds—and this type was most frequently discussed— 
could exist simultaneously. Many insisted that each of 
these identical worlds could exist as a self-contained, 
independent, closed system with its own center and 
circumference, thus rejecting Aristotle’s argument for the 
existence of a unique center and circumference from which 
he had inferred a unique spherical world. The possibility 
of other worlds led to further challenges to Aristotle’s 
authority. What Aristotle had deemed impossible was 
shown to be possible and intelligible. 

Not all extracosmic entities were merely possible. 
One was real. On theological grounds, Thomas 
Bradwardine (ca 1290-1349), and a few other theologians, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Medieval Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


assumed the existence of a real, infinite space beyond our 
world, a space Bradwardine identified with God’s infinite, 
omnipresent immensity. Because God was a being devoid 
of dimensions, the theologians who identified infinite 
void space with God’s omnipresent immensity followed 
Bradwardine and also characterized that space as without 
extension. Bradwardine’s ideas about space and God 
form an integral part of the history of spatial conceptions 
between the late 16th and 18th centuries, the period of the 
scientific revolution. 


The celestial region of the cosmos 

Aristotle divided the world into two radically different 
parts: (1) a celestial region of stars, planets and orbs that 
ranged from the Moon to the sphere of the fixed stars, 
and beyond, and was composed of a special ether, or fifth 
element; (2) a sublunar realm immediately below, ranging 
from the concave surface of the lunar orb to the center of 
the Earth and encompassing four elements—fire, air, water 
and earth—and the bodies compounded of them. 

The celestial region, which is the part that will be 
described here, consisted of stars, planets and the orbs that 
carried them around the heavens. They were all made of 
the same transparent ether, which was assumed indivisible 
and incorruptible. Although the transparent orbs were 
invisible, the stars and planets were visible, because they 
were highly concentrated regions of ether that reflected 
light to Earthly observers. Most scholars assumed that the 
stars and planets received their light from the Sun and then 
transmitted that light to the Earth. Some further suggested 
that the planets were also weakly self-luminous. Both 
planets and stars were regarded as spherically shaped. 

In what was a virtually self-evident truth, derived 
ultimately from Aristotle, the celestial bodies were 
believed to govern the behavior of material things in the 
terrestrial region below the lunar orb. Not only was 
this the basis of astrology, but it played an important 
role in natural philosophy. The influence of the celestial 
bodies was accomplished by their motions, by light 
transmitted from their bodies and by general influences 
that were invoked to explain many otherwise inexplicable 
phenomena (for example, the formation of metals within 
the depths of the Earth, magnetism and the tides caused 
by the Moon). 

Natural philosophers were agreed on the existence of 
seven planets and the fixed stars. Without the detection of 
parallax, the order of celestial bodies was made on non- 
astronomical grounds. Since the planets moved against 
the background of the stars, the latter were assumed 
farthest from the Earth and equidistant from it. The 
superior planets—Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars—were ranked 
by their sidereal periods in that order. Because Venus and 
Mercury always remained in the vicinity of the Sun, the 
order of these three planets was not determinable except 
by non-astronomical arguments. Most followed Ptolemy’s 
arrangement and located the Sun, Venus and Mercury 
in descending order, followed by the Moon. Because of 
its life-giving properties, the Sun was regarded as the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


largest, noblest and most important planet. Counting 
upward from the Moon or downward from Saturn, the 
Sun occupied the fourth, or middle, position and was 
perceived as a ‘wise king in the middle of his kingdom’ 
or as the ‘heart in the middle of the body’. 


The celestial spheres 

Although to the naked eye it appeared that planets were 
self-moved, like fish in water or birds in air, natural 
philosophers denied appearances and assumed, with 
Aristotle and Ptolemy, that each planet was embedded 
in a single transparent, invisible, ethereal sphere, which 
carried it around. Similarly the stars, which always 
remained at fixed intervals from each other, were located 
on a single sphere, which carried them around. Not 
only was each planet assigned a single sphere, but each 
motion of each planet—daily motion, sidereal motion, 
motion in latitude, etc—was also assigned its own orb. 
Although Ptolemy and Aristotle assumed that each planet 
was attached to a single sphere, both employed a plurality 
of spheres to account for the resultant motion of each 
planet. By assigning one orb to each motion of a planet, 
both Aristotle and Ptolemy were compelled to assign 
multiple orbs to each planet. Aristotle assigned as many 
as 55 for all the planets, while Ptolemy assigned as many 
as 41. 

Aristotle’s spheres, however, differed from Ptolemy’s. 
Aristotle’s orbs were concentric with respect to the Earth, 
which lay at the center of the world, whereas Ptolemy’s 
were basically eccentric. This meant that the centers 
of the planetary orbits were geometric points that did 
not coincide with the Earth’s center, which was assumed 
identical with the geometric center of the world. It 
followed that the planets orbited around centers other than 
the Earth’s center, a clear violation of Aristotle’s dictum 
that all planetary orbs move around the Earth’s center. 
It became apparent that Aristotle’s concentric orbs could 
not account for observed variations in the distances of 
the planets and that Ptolemy’s eccentrics and epicycles, 
which had been devised to cope with that problem, 
could. Natural philosophers confronted a dilemma: either 
adopt Aristotle’s concentric system with the Earth serving 
as the center of all planetary orbits, but abandon any 
attempt to account for variation in planetary distances, or 
adopt Ptolemy’s system of eccentrics and account for the 
variation of planetary distances, but yield up the central 
tenet of Aristotle’s natural philosophy, namely that the 
Earth is the sole center of planetary orbits. 

Medieval natural philosophers adopted a compro- 
mise that retained both concentricity and eccentricity. It 
was a compromise that had already been made by Ptolemy 
(in his Hypotheses of the Planets) and hinged on a distinc- 
tion between the concept of a ‘total orb’ (orbis totalis) anda 
‘partial orb’ (orbis partialis), to use medieval terminology. 
The ‘total orb’ is a concentric orb whose center is the cen- 
ter of the Earth, whereas a ‘partial orb’ is an eccentric orb 
whose center is a geometric point lying outside the cen- 
ter of the world. The concentric total orb contains within 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Medieval Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


B 


Figure 1. Representation of the Moon’s concentric, eccentric and 
epicyclic orbs as described in Roger Bacon’s Opus tertium in 
Duhem P (ed) 1909 Un fragment inédit de l’Opus Tertium de Roger 
Bacon précedé d'une étude sur ce fragment (Florence: Collegium S. 
Bonaventurae) p 129. 


its concave and convex surfaces at least three partial orbs, 
one of which, the eccentric deferent, carries an epicycle in 
which a planet is embedded. (In figure 1, which represents 
the Moon, the three partial orbs lie in the spaces between 
ADBC and AGFE, AGFE and HNKM, and HNKM and 
OQKP.) In this way, Ptolemy’s eccentric orbs were encom- 
passed and encircled by the surfaces of Aristotle’s concen- 
tric orbs. 

The number of celestial orbs could thus be determined 
in two different ways: either as the totality of concentric, 
or ‘total’, orbs or as the totality of eccentric, or ‘partial’, 
orbs. Aristotelian natural philosophers were interested 
in the former and rarely in the latter. In fact, the most 
popular question in medieval cosmology was about the 
number of spheres. The response required a count of total, 
or concentric, orbs. The answers to this question varied 
anywhere from 8 to 11 (see figure 2). Eight concentric 
orbs represented the seven planets and the sphere of the 
fixed stars. However, as many as three different motions 
were assigned to the sphere of the fixed stars (the daily 
motion, precession and a motion called trepidation that 
turned out to be non-existent). Applying the principle 
that a single sphere must be assigned to each distinct 
celestial motion, two additional spheres, plus an immobile 
empyrean sphere, were usually added for a total of 11. No 
celestial bodies were embedded in these three invisible 
orbs. 

The eighth to eleventh orbs had important scriptural 
associations. The biblical firmament was most frequently 
identified with the eighth sphere of the fixed stars. Early in 
the history of Christianity, the waters above the firmament 
were conceived as crystalline, a term that was sometimes 
thought of as applying to fluid waters, and sometimes to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cweYREAN SPHEpe 


Figure 2. The order of the celestial orbs in the medieval cosmos. 
Reprinted from Grant E 1977 Physical Science in the Middle Ages 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 72. 


waters that were congealed and hard, like a crystal. The 
crystalline orb was usually located above the firmament 
and was identified with a starless ninth sphere and 
occasionally with both the ninth and tenth spheres. The 
outermost orb of the universe was the empyrean sphere, 
which, in contrast to the perpetually moving orbs it 
enclosed, was immobile. It was conceived as ‘the dwelling 
place of God and the elect’, a place filled with the purest 
light. If the number of mobile orbs was n, the empyrean 
orb was always numbered n + 1. 

Medieval natural philosophers frequently asked: 
what caused the orbs to move? Most believed that each orb 
was assigned an immaterial, spiritual intelligence distinct 
and separate from the orb it moved. Intelligences, often 
identified with angels, were conceived as voluntary agents 
divinely endowed with inexhaustible powers to move 
their respective orbs with uniform circular motion. Not 
all scholastics invoked intelligences. Asmall minority held 
that God created the orbs with an intrinsic power for self- 
motion. John BuRIDAN (ca 1295-ca 1358) even invoked a 
divinely impressed force, or impetus, that enabled the orbs 
to move forever through a celestial ether that was assumed 
to offer no resistance to their motion. 

The status of the Earth at the center of the world 
was much debated. John Buridan held that the Earth’s 
center of gravity was always changing as a consequence 
of geological alterations of the Earth’s surface. These 
alterations caused the Earth to move continually with 
small movements as it sought to bring its center of 
gravity into coincidence with the geometric center of 
the universe. Buridan and Nicole Oresme contemplated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Medieval Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a more radical motion of the Earth when they asked 
whether the daily rotation of the heavens might not 
actually derive from a daily axial rotation of the Earth. 
For different reasons, they both eventually rejected this 
alternative, but were agreed that, on the assumption of the 
immobility of the heavens, the Earth’s daily rotation saved 
the astronomical phenomena just as well as the traditional 
opinion. NICOLAUS COPERNICUS (1473-1543) found their 
arguments in favor of an axially rotating Earth worthy of 
inclusion in defense of his heliocentric system, in which 
the Earth is assigned both a daily rotation and an annual 
motion around the Sun. 

By modern standards, the medieval cosmos was 
miniscule. In a popular 13th century astronomical treatise 
by Campanus of Novara, the distance from the center of 
the Earth to the concave surface of the fixed stars, which 
was the outermost orb that contained celestial bodies, was 
given as approximately 73 million miles. The lunar orb 
was only 108 000 miles from the Earth, while the Sun was 
approximately 4 million miles away. 

Medieval, Aristotelian cosmology remained func- 
tional until the end of the 17th century, by which time 
the efforts of Copernicus, TYCHO BRAHE, GALILEO GALILEI, KE- 
PLER and NEWTON had produced a new cosmology, which 
rendered the old obsolete and irrelevant. 


Bibliography 

Benjamin F S Jr and Toomer G J (ed and transl) 1971 
Campanus of Novara and Medieval Planetary Theory: 
Theorica Planetarum (Madison, WI: University of 
Wisconsin Press) 

Grant E 1994 Planets, Stars and Orbs: The Medieval Cosmos 
1200-1687 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

McCluskey S C 1998 Astronomies and Cultures in Early 
Medieval Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Edward Grant 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Menelaus of Alexandria (c. 70-c. 130) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Menelaus of Alexandria (c. 70—c. 130) 


Greek mathematician, born in Alexandria, Egypt (pos- 
sibly), wrote many books, of which only one, Sphaer- 
ica, on spherical astronomy, has survived, and includ- 
ing Menelaus Theorem, on a property of spherical trian- 
gles. PTOLEMY mentions astronomical observations made 
by Menelaus in Rome in the year 98. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mensa 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mensa 


(the Table; abbrev. Men, gen. Mensae; area 153 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Hydrus and 
Volans, and culminates at midnight in mid-December. It 
was named Mons Mensae (Table Mountain) by the French 
astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted 
the southern sky from the Cape of Good Hope, South 
Africa, in 1751-2, as the presence of the southern portion 
of the Large Magellanic Cloud in the northern part of 
the constellation reminded him of cloud enveloping the 
summit of Table Mountain. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Mensa is of magnitude 5.1. Interesting objects 
include NGC 1841, an eleventh-magnitude globular 
cluster, and IC 2051, an eleventh-magnitude spiral galaxy. 


See also: Large Magellanic Cloud. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Menzel, Donald (1901-76) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Menzel, Donald (1901-76) 


Solar astrophysicist, born in Florence, CO, became director 
of Harvard Observatory. Successful popular author of 
astronomy books. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Merak ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Merak 


The star 6 Ursae Majoris, apparent magnitude 2.34, one 
of the leading pair of stars in the Plough known as ‘the 
Pointers’. The Arabic name means ‘the Loin’ (of the Bear). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mercator, Gerardus [Gerhard Kremer] (1512-94) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mercator, Gerardus [Gerhard Kremer] 
(1512-94) 


Cartographer (‘cosmographer’), born in Rupelmonde, 
Flanders (now Belgium), studied mathematics, its 
applications to geography and astronomy, and how to 
make scientific instruments. Constructed terrestrial and 
celestial globes. Was charged with heresy, a result 
of suspicion aroused by his travel to collect data for 
maps, and was imprisoned for several months, after 
which charges were dropped. Invented the Mercator map 
projection (1569) which has perpendicular longitudes and 
latitudes, and an expansion towards the poles, such that 
the bearing from one place to another can be found by 
a protractor, without the use of spherical trigonometry 
(a development of an earlier Chinese discovery). He 
published a comprehensive geographical ‘atlas’ (he was 
the first to use the word in this way). His break 
with PTOLEMY was as important for geography as was 
Copernicus’s for astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mercury 


Mercury is the innermost and second smallest planet in 
the solar system (Pluto is smaller). It has no known 
satellites. To date, MARINER 10 is the only spacecraft 
that has explored the planet. It flew past Mercury on 
29 March and 21 September 1974, and on 16 March 1975. 
Mariner 10 imaged only about 45% of the surface at 
an average resolution of about 1 km, and less than 1% 
at resolutions between about 100 to 500 meters. This 
coverage and resolution is comparable to telescopic Earth- 
based coverage and resolution of the Moon before the 
advent of space flight. The Mariner 10 data, however, 
are still our best source of detailed information on 
the planet. As a consequence, there are still many 
uncertainties and questions concerning the history and 
evolution of Mercury. However, recent ground-based 
observations have provided information on the radar and 
microwave characteristics of its surface, discovered new 
constituents in its exosphere, and helped constrain its 
surface composition. Because of its close proximity to the 
Sun, missions to Mercury are extremely difficult; more so 
than to the outer solar system. However, a new mission 
to Mercury called MESSENGER is scheduled for launch in 
2004. It will make one flyby of Earth, two of Venus and 
two of Mercury before going into Mercury orbit in 2009. 
This mission will provide vital new information on this 
poorly known planet. Mercury missions are also being 
considered by the European and Japanese space agencies. 


General characteristics 

Mercury’s diameter is only 4878 km, but it has a relatively 
large mass of 3.301 x 10% kg. Because of its large mass 
in relation to its volume, Mercury has an exceptionally 
high mean density of 5.44 g cm~°. The manner in which it 
reflects light is very similar to the way light is reflected by 
the Moon. Mercury is covered with a REGOLITH consisting of 
fragmental material derived from the impact of meteoroids 
over billions of years. Mercury’s surface is heavily 
cratered with smooth planes filling and surrounding large 
impact basins. Long lobate scarps traverse the surface for 
hundreds of kilometres, and large expanses of intercrater 
plains (the most extensive terrain type) fill regions between 
clusters of craters in the highlands. A terrain consisting 
of large blocks and linear troughs occurs antipodal to the 
CALORIS BASIN. Although Mercury superficially resembles 
the Moon, there are major differences which set it apart 
from the Moon, and all other planets and satellites in the 
solar system. 


Motion and temperature 

Mercury has the most eccentric (0.205) and inclined 
(7 degrees) orbit of any planet except Pluto. Although its 
average distance from the Sun is 0.3871 AU (5.79 x 10” km), 
its large eccentricity results in a distance varying from 
0.3075 AU (4.6 x 10” km) at perihelion to 0.4667 AU 
(6.98 x 10” km) at aphelion. Consequently, Mercury’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


orbital velocity averages 47.6 km s-!, but varies from 


56.6 km s“! at perihelion to 38.7 km s~! at aphelion. 

Mercury’s rotation period is 58.646 Earth days and 
its orbital period is 87.969 Earth days. Therefore, it has 
a unique 3:2 resonant relationship between its rotational 
and orbital periods. It turns exactly three times on its axis 
for every two orbits around the Sun. This resonance was 
apparently acquired over time as the natural consequence 
of the dissipative processes of tidal friction and the relative 
motion between a solid mantle and a liquid core. Because 
of this resonance, a solar day (sunrise to sunrise) lasts 
two Mercurian years or 176 Earth days. The obliquity of 
Mercury is close to 0° and, therefore, it does not experience 
seasons. Consequently, the polar regions never receive the 
direct rays of sunlight and are always frigid compared to 
very hot sunlit equatorial regions. 

Another effect of the 3:2 resonance between the 
rotational and orbital periods is that the same hemisphere 
always faces the Sun at alternate perihelion passages. The 
hemisphere facing the Sun at one perihelion will rotate one 
and a half times by the next perihelion, placing it directly 
facing the Sun again. Another consequence of the 3:2 
resonance is that an observer on Mercury (depending on 
location) would witness either a double sunrise, a double 
sunset, or the Sun would backtrack in the sky at noon 
during perihelion passage. Near perihelion Mercury’s 
orbital velocity is so great compared to its rotation rate 
that it controls the Sun’s apparent motion in the sky as 
viewed from Mercury. 

Because Mercury is so close to the Sun, has no 
insulating atmosphere, and has such a long solar day, it 
experiences the greatest range (day to night) in surface 
temperatures (635 K) of any planet or satellite in the solar 
system. Its maximum surface temperature is about 725 K 
at perihelion on the equator, but drops to about 90 K at 
night. 


Exosphere 

Mercury has an extremely tenuous atmosphere with 
a surface pressure a trillion times less than Earth’s. 
The number density of atoms at the surface is only 
10° atoms cm~ for the known constituents. Itis, therefore, 
an exosphere where atoms rarely collide; their interaction 
is primarily with the surface. Mariner 10’s ultraviolet 
spectrometer identified hydrogen, helium and oxygen, 
and set upper limits on the abundance of argon. The 
hydrogen and helium are probably derived largely from 
the solar wind, although a portion of the helium may 
be of radiogenic origin and some hydrogen could result 
from the photodissociation of H,O. The interaction of 
high-energy particles with surface materials may liberate 
enough oxygen to be its principal source, but breakdown of 
water vapor molecules by sunlight could also be a possible 
source. 

In 1985-86, Earth-based telescopic observations 
detected sodium and potassium in the exosphere. Both 
sodium and potassium have highly variable abundances 
(10*-10° Na atoms cm~? and 100-10* K atoms cm~°) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


near the surface on time scales of hours to years. Their 
abundances also vary between day and night by a factor 
of about 5, the day side being greater. The temperature 
of the gas is about 500 K, but a hotter more extended Na 
coma sometimes exists. 

Although both sodium and potassium are probably 
derived from the surface of Mercury, the mechanism by 
which they are supplied is not well understood. They 
could be released from sodium- and potassium-bearing 
minerals by their interaction with solar radiation, or by 
impact vaporization of micrometeoroid material. Both 
sodium and potassium show day-to-day changes in their 
global distribution. 


Polar deposits 

In 1991, high resolution, full disk radar images of Mercury 
were obtained from both the Arecibo and the linked 
Goldstone-Very Large Array radar facilities. The radar 
signals show very high reflectivities and polarization 
ratios centered on the poles of Mercury. Mariner 10 
images of Mercury’s polar regions show cratered surfaces 
where ice could be concentrated in permanently shadowed 
portions of the craters, and the radar studies show that 
the anomalies are indeed concentrated in the permanently 
shadowed portions of these polar craters. Because the 
obliquity of Mercury is near 0 degrees, it does not 
experience seasons, and therefore, temperatures in the 
polar regions should be <135 K. In permanently shaded 
polar areas the temperatures should be less than 112 K, and 
water ice should be stable to evaporation on time scales 
of billions of years. If the deposits are water ice, then 
they could originate from comet or water-rich asteroid 
impacts that released the water to be cold-trapped in 
the permanently shadowed craters. Because comets and 
asteroids also impact the Moon, similar deposits would be 
expected to occur in the permanently shadowed regions 
of lunar craters. Indeed, the Lunar Prospector mission did 
detect water ice in these regions of the Moon. 


Interior and magnetic field 
Mercury’s internal structure is unique in the solar system. 
It also imposes severe constraints on any proposed origin 
of the planet. Mercury’s mean density of 5.44 g cm~? is 
only slightly less than Earth’s (5.52 g cm™%), and larger 
than Venus’ (5.25 g cm~°). Because of Earth’s large internal 
pressures, however, its uncompressed density is only 
4.4 g cm? compared to Mercury’s uncompressed density 
of 5.3 g cm™°. This means that Mercury contains a much 
larger fraction of iron than any other planet or satellite 
in the solar system. If this iron is concentrated in a core, 
then the core must be about 75% of the planet diameter, or 
some 42% of its volume. Thus, its silicate mantle and crust 
is only about 600 km thick. For comparison, Earth’s iron 
core is only 54% of its diameter, or just 16% of its volume. 
Mercury is the only other terrestrial planet, aside 
from Earth, with a significant magnetic field. Mariner 10 
discovered that Mercury has a global intrinsic dipole 
magnetic field, but it is not well characterized because 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the spacecraft only made two passes through the field. 
The magnitude of the dipole moment is about 330 nT, or 
over 1000 times smaller than Earth’s. Although relatively 
weak, the field has sufficient strength to hold off the 
solar wind, creating a bow shock, a magnetosheath, and 
a magnetosphere (see MERCURY: MAGNETOSPHERE). Because of 
the weaker field, Mercury occupies a much larger fraction 
of the volume of its magnetosphere than do other planets, 
and the solar wind actually reaches the surface at times 
of highest solar activity. The size of the magnetosphere is 
about 7.5 times smaller than Earth’s. Also, because of the 
small size of Mercury’s magnetosphere, magnetic events 
happen more rapidly and repeat more often than in Earth’s 
magnetosphere. 

Although other models may be possible, the 
maintenance of terrestrial planet magnetic fields is thought 
to require an electrically conducting fluid outer core 
surrounding a solid inner core. Therefore, Mercury’s 
dipole magnetic field suggests that Mercury currently has 
a fluid outer core of unknown thickness. Thermal history 
models indicate that Mercury’s core should have solidified 
long ago unless there was some way of maintaining high 
core temperatures throughout geological history. The 
preferred way is to lower the melting point of the core 
material by adding a light alloying element. Sulfur is 
considered to be the most likely candidate. If sulfur 
is the alloying element, then Mercury probably contains 
between 0.2 and 7% sulfur in its core in order to have an 
outer fluid portion at the present time. 


Geology and composition 

In general, the surface of Mercury can be divided into four 
major terrains: (1) heavily cratered regions, (2) intercrater 
plains, (3) smooth plains, and (4) hilly and lineated terrain. 
Other relatively minor units have been identified, such 
as ejecta deposits exterior to the Caloris basin and other 
large impact craTERS. The heavily cratered uplands record 
the period of late heavy meteoroid bombardment that 
ended about 3.8 billion years ago. In the heavily cratered 
terrain on Mercury there is an increasing paucity of craters 
with decreasing crater diameter relative to heavily cratered 
terrain on the Moon. This paucity of craters is probably 
due to obliteration of the smaller craters by emplacement 
of intercrater plains during this period of late heavy 
bombardment. The crater population superimposed on 
the smooth plains within and surrounding the Caloris 
basin shows a same size distribution but at a much lower 
crater density. This suggests that unlike the lunar maria 
the Caloris smooth plains formed near the end of late 
heavy bombardment. 

Fresh impact craters on Mercury exhibit similar 
morphologies as those on the other terrestrial planets. 
Small craters are bowl-shaped, but with increasing size 
they develop central peaks, flat floors, and terraces on 
their inner walls. The transition from simple (bowl- 
shaped) to complex (central peak and terraces) craters is 
about 10 km. At diameters between about 130 to 310 km 
mercurian craters have an interior concentric ring, and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Photomosaic of the 1300 km diameter Caloris impact 
basin showing the highly ridged and fractured nature of its floor. 


at diameters larger than about 300 km they may have 
multiple inner rings. The freshest craters have extensive 
ray systems, some of which extend for distances over 
1000 km. For a given rim diameter the radial extent of 
mercurian continuous ejecta is uniformly smaller by a 
factor of about 0.65 than that for the Moon. Furthermore, 
the maximum density of secondary impact craters occurs 
closer to the crater rim than for similar-sized lunar craters. 
All of these differences are probably due to the larger 
surface gravity of Mercury (3.70 m s~*) compared to the 
Moon (1.62 ms”). 

The largest relatively fresh impact feature seen by 
Mariner 10 is the 1300 km diameter Caloris basin. The floor 
structure consists of closely spaced ridges and troughs 
arranged in both a concentric and radial pattern (figure 1). 
The ridges are probably due to compression, while the 
troughs are probably tensional graben that post-date the 
ridges. This pattern may have been caused by subsidence 
and subsequent uplift of the basin floor. 

Directly opposite the Caloris basin (the antipodal 
point) is the unusual hilly and lineated terrain that disrupts 
pre-existing landforms, particularly crater rims (figure 2). 
Stratigraphic relationships suggest that the age of this 
terrain is the same as the Caloris basin. The hilly and 
lineated terrain is thought to be the result of seismic 
waves generated by the Caloris impact and focused at the 
antipodal region. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. A portion of the hilly and lineated terrain antipodal to 
the Caloris impact basin. The image is 543 km across. 


Mercury’s two plains units have been interpreted 
as lava plains. The older intercrater plains are the 
most extensive terrain on Mercury (figures 3(a) and 3(b)). 
They have probably been responsible for obliterating a 
significant number of craters as evidenced by the paucity 
of craters less than about 40 km diameter compared to the 
highlands of the Moon. Intercrater plains were emplaced 
over a range of ages contemporaneous with the period 
of late heavy bombardment. They are thought to be 
volcanic plains erupted through a fractured crust. They 
are probably about 4.0 to 4.2 billion years old. 

The younger smooth plains are primarily associated 
with large impact basins. They also fill smaller basins 
and large craters. The largest occurrence of smooth plains 
fill and surround the Caloris basin, and occupy a large 
circular area in the north polar region that is probably an 
old impact basin about 1500 km in diameter. They are 
similar in morphology and mode of occurrence to the lunar 
maria, and, therefore, they are interpreted to be lava flows 
erupted relatively late in mercurian history. They may 
have an average age of about 3.8 billion years as indicated 
by crater densities. If so, they are, in general, older than 
the lunar maria. 

Three large radar-bright anomalies have been iden- 
tified on the unimaged side of Mercury. One of these is 
similar to the radar signature of a fresh impact crater, and 
another has a radar signature unlike any other in the so- 
lar system. However, the third radar anomaly has a more 
or less structureless radar-bright halo (500 km diameter) 
and a radar-dark center (70 km diameter). This is similar 
to the radar signatures of large shield volcanoes on Venus 
and Mars. If this radar feature is indeed a shield volcano, 
then it is as large as Mons Olympus on Mars. Furthermore, 
the fact that it is bright means it is relatively fresh, other- 
wise it would not give a radar signature. If this feature is, 
indeed, a relatively fresh shield volcano, then the history 
of Mercury is probably radically different than previously 
believed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. (a) Mercury as viewed by Mariner 10 on its first approach in March, 1974. (b) Mercury’s opposite hemisphere viewed by 
Mariner 10 as it left the planet on the first encounter. 


Mercury’s tectonic framework consists of a system of 
compressive thrust faults called lobate scarps. Individual 
scarps vary in length from about 20 km to over 500 km, 
and have heights from a few 100 m to about 3 km. They 
have a random spatial and azimuthal distribution over 
the imaged half of the planet and presumably occur on 
a global scale. This suggests that Mercury was subjected 
to global compressive stresses. The only occurrences of 
features indicative of tensile stresses are localized fractures 
associated with the floor of the Caloris basin and at its 
antipode, both of which are the direct or indirect result 
of the Caloris impact. Stratigraphic evidence indicates 
that the system of thrust faults post-dates the formation of 
intercrater plains and formed relatively late in mercurian 
history. This tectonic framework was probably caused by 
crustal shortening resulting from a decrease in the planet 
radius due to cooling of the planet. The amount of radius 
decrease is estimated to have been about 2 km. 

Very little is known about the surface composition of 
Mercury. Recalibration and color ratioing of Mariner 10 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


images have been used to derive the FeO abundance, the 
opaque mineral content, and the soil maturity over the 
region viewed by Mariner 10. The probably volcanic 
smooth plains have a FeO content of <6% by weight, 
which is similar to the rest of the planet imaged by 
Mariner 10. The surface of Mercury, therefore, may have 
a more homogeneous distribution of elements affecting 
color (e.g. more alkali plagioclase) than does the Moon. 
At least the smooth plains may be low iron or alkali 
basalts. There are some dark blue, low albedo, and 
high opaque mineral regions with diffuse boundaries that 
may be associated with fractures. These areas could 
be more mafic volcanic pyroclastic deposits. The bright 
rayed craters on Mercury have a very low opaque mineral 
index that may indicate the craters have excavated into 
an anothositic crust similar to that on the Moon. Earth- 
based spectroscopic measurements suggest that Mercury’s 
surface is low in titanium and iron compared to the 
surface of the Moon. This is consistent with Mercury’s 
lower ultraviolet reflectivity and smaller albedo contrast. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This has been interpreted to mean that Mercury’s surface 
is largely devoid of basalt, but it could also mean that the 
basalts only have a low iron content or are fluid alkali 
basalts. 


Geological history 

Mercury’s earliest history is very uncertain. The earliest 
events are the formation of intercrater plains (>4 billion 
years ago) during the period of late heavy bombardment. 
These plains may have been erupted through fractures 
caused by large impacts in a thin lithosphere. Near the 
end of late heavy bombardment the Caloris basin was 
formed by a large impact that caused the hilly and lineated 
terrain from seismic waves focused at the antipodal region. 
Further eruption of lava within and surrounding the 
Caloris and other large basins formed the smooth plains 
about 3.8 billion years ago. The system of thrust faults 
formed after the intercrater plains, and resulted in a radius 
decrease of about 2 km. The volcanic history is very 
uncertain. If the radar anomaly on the unseen side is truly 
arelatively fresh shield volcano then the unimaged portion 
of Mercury may have a totally different volcanic history 
from the imaged side. We will have to await the results of 
the MESSENGER mission to fully evaluate the history of 
Mercury. 


Origin 

The origin of Mercury and how it acquired such a large 
fraction of iron compared to the other terrestrial planets 
is not well determined. Three hypotheses have been put 
forward to explain the enormous iron core. One involves 
an enrichment of iron due to mechanical and dynamical 
accretion processes in the inner-most part of the solar 
system. Another proposes that intense bombardment 
by solar electromagnetic and corpuscular radiation in 
the earliest phases of the Sun’s evolution vaporized and 
drove off much of the silicate fraction of Mercury leaving 
the core intact. A third proposes a planet-sized object 
impacted Mercury and essentially blasted away much of 
the planet's silicate mantle leaving the core largely intact. 
Discriminating between these hypotheses may be possible 
from the chemical make-up of the surface because each 
one predicts a different composition. MESSENGER is 
designed to measure the composition of Mercury’s surface 
so it may be possible to answer this vital question in the 
near future. 


Robert G Strom 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mercury: Magnetosphere 


Among the major discoveries made by the MARINER 10 
mission to the inner planets was the existence of an 
intrinsic magnetic field at Mercury with a dipole moment 
of ~ 300 nT Ry, This magnetic field is sufficient to 
stand off the solar wind at an altitude of about 1 Rm (ie. 
~2439 km). Hence, Mercury possesses a ‘magnetosphere’ 
from which the solar wind plasma is largely excluded and 
within which the motion of charged particles is controlled 
by the planetary magnetic field. Despite its small size 
relative to the magnetospheres of the other planets (see 
PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES), a Mercury orbiter mission is 
a high priority for the space physics community. The 
primary reason for this great interest is that Mercury, 
unlike all the other planets visited thus far, lacks a 
significant atmosphere; only a vestigial exosphere is 
present (MERCURY). This results in a unique situation where 
the magnetosphere interacts directly with the outer layer 
of the planetary crust (i.e. the regolith). At all of the other 
planets the topmost regions of their atmospheres become 
ionized by solar radiation to form ionospheres. These 
planetary ionospheres then couple to electrodynamically 
to their magnetospheres or, in the case of the weakly 
magnetized Venus and Mars, directly to the solar wind. 
This magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling is mediated 
largely through field-aligned currents (FACs) flowing 
along the magnetic field lines linking the magnetosphere 
and the high-latitude ionosphere. Mercury is unique in 
that it is expected that FACs will be very short lived due 
to the low electrical conductivity of the regolith. 

Furthermore, at the Earth it has been shown that the 
outflow of neutral atmospheric species to great altitudes is 
an important source of magnetospheric plasma (following 
ionization) whose composition may influence subsequent 
magnetotail dynamics. However, the dominant source of 
plasma for most of the terrestrial magnetosphere is the 
‘leakage’ of solar wind across the magnetopause and more 
direct entry through the northern and southern cusps. 
Although Mariner 10 did not return plasma composition 
measurements, the Hermean magnetosphere should be 
ideal for measuring the manner and rate of solar wind 
plasma entry due to the lack of strong internal atmospheric 
sources. Finally, the solar wind conditions experienced by 
Mercury as it orbits the Sun at 0.31 to 0.47 AU are quite 
different from those typically encountered by the Earth. 
This may allow for new understanding of the external 
factors affecting the transfer of mass, momentum and 
energy from the solar wind to planetary magnetospheres. 
This article provides a brief overview of what is now 
known about Mercury’s magnetosphere and why it is a 
priority target for future planetary missions. 


Mariner 10 encounters 

Following its launch on 2 November 1973, the Mariner 
10 spacecraft executed three close encounters with the 
planet Mercury on 29 March 1974, 21 September 1974, 
and 16 March 1975. The first encounter was targeted 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


MARINER 10 


MARCH 29, 1974 


0 
20:35 20:40 20:45 20:50 20:55 
UT 


Figure 1. The Mariner 10 magnetic field observations (1.2 s 
averages) taken during the first encounter are displayed in 
Mercury centered solar ecliptic coordinates. In this system the 
Xme axis is directed toward the Sun and the Yyg axis is in the 
plane of the ecliptic, perpendicular to Xyg and directed 
oppositely from the direction of planetary orbital motion. The 
ZmeE axis completes the right-handed orthogonal system and is 
positive toward the north. Magnetopause, dipolarization and 
field-aligned current signatures in the observations are labeled. 
(From Slavin et al (1997).) 


to pass through the wake of the planet in order to 
determine its interaction with the solar wind. The closest 
approach to the surface of the planet occurred over the 
post-midnight equatorial region at an altitude of about 
700 km. Figure 1 displays 1.2 s averages of the magnetic 
fields observed during the first Mariner 10 encounter in 
Mercury-centered solar ecliptic coordinates. The intensity 
of the magnetic field observed by Mariner 10 peaked near 
closest approach at just under 100 nT. This maximum is due 
to the increased contribution from the planetary magnetic 
field which varies as the inverse third power of the distance 
from the planet. The second encounter passed well 
upstream of the planet to return dayside images and did 
not allow observations of the magnetosphere. The third 
encounter was intended to achieve higher latitudes and 
lower altitudes in order to confirm the intrinsic nature of 
the magnetic field. This effort was successful with a closest 
approach altitude of only 327 km near local midnight 
at ~68° N latitude and a peak measured magnetic field 
intensity of ~400 nT. 


Magnetospheric structure 

Both of Mariner 10’s magnetospheric traversals began and 
ended with the magnetic field and plasma investigations 
observing clear magnetopause boundaries (see MAGNETO- 
SPHERE OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE). The magnetopause is the 
current layer formed by the interaction between the solar 
wind plasma and a planetary magnetic field. The magne- 
topause current layer confines most of the magnetic flux 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MAGNETOSHEATH 


MAGNETOPAUSE 


NORTH LOBE 


SOLAR WIND 


5 PLASMA 


SHEET 


MAGNETOSHEATH 


SOUTH LOBE 


MAGNETOPAUSE 


DIAMETER OF THE EARTH 


Figure 2. A schematic view of Mercury’s magnetosphere as glimpsed by Mariner 10 with its primary regions, some representative 
magnetic field lines, and the tail current system labelled. Note that the regions typically occupied by radiation belts and the 
plasmasphere at the Earth are taken up by the planet in this miniature magnetosphere. 


tubes rooted in the planet to the magnetospheric cavity. 
Vertical broken lines in figure 1 mark the inbound and 
outbound magnetopause crossings as well as the point of 
closest approach (CA) to the planet. Across the magne- 
topause current layer the magnetic field rotates in direction 
to its magnetospheric orientation and increases in magni- 
tude until it is in equilibrium with the external solar wind 
pressure. The entry of Mariner 10 into the near-tail (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC TAIL) of this magneto- 
sphere is apparent in the tail-like nature of the magnetic 
field with B, >> By, B, just inside the magnetopause dur- 
ing the first inbound passage. 

Analysis of the Hermean magnetopause using the 
data sets collected by Mariner 10 has revealed some 
differences from what is usually observed at Earth. For 
example, the higher solar wind plasma density at 0.3- 
0.5 AU produces solar wind ram pressure that are about 
four to ten times greater than at the Earth. This results 
in higher magnetopause current densities and stronger 
magnetic fields inside the magnetopause at Mercury than 
are observed elsewhere in the solar system. The low 
altitude of the dayside magnetopause at Mercury has 
provoked much interest as to whether this boundary ever 
intersects the planetary surface and exposes it to direct 
impingement by the solar wind. Simple compression 
of the magnetopause by solar pressure enhancements 
would probably cause this to happen if it were not for 
the induction currents which are expected to be driven 
deep within the planet to oppose such changes in the 
magnetic field. However, this induction effect will, at 
times, be countered by the ‘erosion’ of magnetic flux tubes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by reconnection (See MAGNETIC RECONNECTION) at the dayside 
magnetopause. The net result of dayside reconnection is 
to remove flux tubes from the dayside magnetosphere, 
where they participate in standing-off the solar wind, and 
transport them into the magnetotail. In addition, it has 
been suggested that the reconnection rate at Mercury may 
be enhanced by the low Alfvén Mach numbers in the solar 
wind at 0.3 to 0.5 AU. Ultimately, the balance between 
these competing effects, induction and erosion, will rest 
in the actual nature of the electrical conductivity profiles 
in the planetary interior and the efficiency of the magnetic 
reconnection at the magnetopause. 

During the outbound portion of the first Mariner 10 
encounter the magnetic field variations were extremely 
dynamic. These large-amplitude variations in the 
field intensity and direction have a number of sources. 
The large dip in magnetic field strength just after 
closest approach coincided with the spacecraft becoming 
immersed in a hot plasma sheet (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH: PLASMA SHEET). These observations are consistent 
with the spacecraft abruptly transitioning from the 
magnetic field pressure-dominated lobes to the plasma 
pressure-dominated plasma sheet. In addition, there 
are large-amplitude variations in the B, field component 
in figure 1 around 20:51 UT. This magnetic field 
signature is well known to magnetospheric scientists 
and can be readily interpreted as being due to the 
spacecraft traversing several quasi-planar field-aligned 
current sheets. Given the Mariner 10 trajectory, the main 
gradient in B, from negative to positive is indicative of 
an upward FAC being traversed by the spacecraft. This 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


upward current sheet is largely balanced by two less 
intense downward current sheets seen just before and after 
the central upward current sheet. At Earth the occurrence 
of such multiple current sheets is particularly common 
over the nightside auroral oval during geomagnetically 
disturbed intervals. These currents are the primary 
means by which the magnetosphere transmits energy and 
momentum to the ionosphere, or in the case of Mercury, 
the regolith. Given the expectation of a highly electrically 
resistive regolith at Mercury, field-aligned currents will 
probably be very short lived and hence, only transient 
features of the Hermean magnetosphere. 

Based on the Mariner 10 measurements, and 
terrestrial-style extrapolation, figure 2 depicts our present 
image of Mercury’s magnetosphere; included are the 
primary regions, sample magnetic field lines, and the tail 
current system. Concerning the physical dimensions of 
this small magnetosphere, it was noted by the original 
flight investigators that a scaling in which 1Ry at 
Mercury corresponds to ~6R_ at Earth produces good 
correspondence between the boundaries and regions at 
these two planets. Hence, the ~2Ry distance from the 
center of Mercury to the subsolar magnetopause maps 
to about 12Rg at the Earth which is, indeed, similar 
to the average terrestrial magnetopause nose distance 
of 10-11Rg. More importantly, the surface of Mercury 
would correspond roughly to geosynchronous distance 
within Earth’s magnetosphere. This scaling rules out 
the possibility of a plasmasphere even if the planet 
possessed the atmospheric plasma source and the rotation 
rate to create such a region. (Mercury’s rotational 
and orbital periods are 59 and 88 days, respectively.) 
Trapped radiation belts such as are found in the terrestrial 
magnetosphere at distances of 2-4Rg, are also impossible. 
Finally, the observed near-tail diameter of 4-5Ry scales 
to about 24-30R_ which is somewhat less than the typical 
near-tail diameter at Earth of 30-40Rg. The reason for this 
discrepancy in this Earth-based scaling is the higher ratio 
of static to dynamic pressure in the solar wind at Mercury’s 
orbit. The higher static solar wind pressures reduce the 
diameter of the tail relative to the subsolar magnetopause 
radius which is determined largely by the dynamic or 
‘ram’ pressure. 


Magnetospheric substorms 

Asubstorm is a magnetosphere-wide disturbance which in- 
volves the conversion of large amounts of electromagnetic 
energy, either drawn directly from the solar wind or first 
stored in magnetic fields of the tail lobes, into plasma sheet 
heating, high-speed bulk plasma flows, energetic particle 
acceleration, and field-aligned currents which transfer en- 
ergy to the planetary ionosphere, or at Mercury, to the re- 
golith (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). The energy 
conversion mechanism is magnetic reconnection between 
the oppositely directed magnetic fields of the tail lobes in 
much the same manner as is thought to occur in solar flares. 
The understanding of the reconnection process and how 
it is influenced by both local plasma conditions in the tail 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and electrodynamic coupling to the rest of the magneto- 
sphere and the ionosphere, or regolith at Mercury, is one 
of the overarching objectives of magnetospheric physics 
research. 

Less than 1 min after Mariner 10 entered the 
plasma sheet during the first encounter, i.e. beginning 
around 20:48 UT, it detected a sharp increase in the 
B, field component. As displayed in figure 3, the 
initial sudden B, increase and subsequent quasi-periodic 
increases are all coincident with strong enhancements in 
the flux of >35 keV electrons observed by the Mariner 10 
cosmic ray telescopes. This energetic particle signature, 
and several weaker events observed later in the same 
pass, have been widely interpreted as evidence for 
substorm activity. Analyses of the energetic particle and 
magnetic field signatures for this interval have led to 
the conclusion that this Mariner 10 event is qualitatively 
identical to the substorm energetic particle injections 
and magnetic field dipolarizations observed at altitudes 
between geosynchronous orbit and the inner edge of 
the plasma sheet at the Earth. However, there are 
issues surrounding how a magnetosphere with such 
small dimensions compared with the relevant charged 
particle Larmor radii can be such a copious source of 
energetic particles. More complete energetic particle 
measurements to be returned by future missions to this 
planet may yield important clues to how the most energetic 
charged particles are accelerated in the tails of planetary 
magnetospheres. 

The very short duration of the substorm signatures at 
Mercury, about 1 min as compared with 1-2 h at the Earth, 
is also of fundamental interest. Although much remains 
to be understood concerning substorm processes, it is 
clear that they correspond to intervals of greatly enhanced 
magnetospheric convection which leads to the dissipation 
of large amounts of magnetic energy drawn from the tail 
lobes. It has been argued that the temporal scale of isolated 
substorms at the Earth is determined by the time necessary 
for plasma to convect across the polar cap or, equivalently, 
from the magnetopause down to the plasma sheet where 
reconnection can take place. It has been estimated, using 
typical solar wind and magnetotail parameters, that the 
time necessary to ‘cycle’ all of the flux in the tail lobes 
at the Earth is, indeed, close to the typical duration of a 
substorm, i.e. ~1-2 h. 

For Mercury, corresponding convection time con- 
stants of a few minutes have been calculated in agreement 
with the Mariner 10 measurements. The brevity of the con- 
vection time constant at Mercury is due largely to the small 
tail radius and relatively intense —V x B electric fields 
present in the solar wind at 0.3 to 0.5 AU. Furthermore, it 
must be noted that at Earth the dawn-to-dusk magneto- 
spheric electric field is typically only 10-20 per cent of the 
total electric potential drop available from the solar wind. 
However, for Mercury it has been argued that the elec- 
tric potential drop across the magnetosphere should more 
closely approach the maximum available potential drop 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


—+ 7 ——— T y T 
3s 
a2 
zz 1 
oy 
4 1 
sé 
wow i 
uy ' 
gs : 
' 
1 
' 
' 
' 
. 1 ean yyy Say e pee: 
an 6 Sees a ae eda ig 7 aren 1 hl ie 
i We aot 
b t ' 
= p—t—+—4 Hp ht a 
BZ : ' ' ' 1 t 
bs) ! 1 \ 1 ' ' \ ' \ 
ms Foe ae cae ae a ee i 
$$ ptt 
wy 2 rte a ee Pd 1 
0 { t u ! fe 
ieee may t rr . ise 4 
pt tt tt tt 
{ H 1 1 ' it i t 
Bo 1 beeen athe bef 
1 
-20 ‘ pet iene : 
L 1 oo 1 1 reas ay a i é gt Nha ty 1 yeaa | joan ot Yuma 4 
2047-42 48 5a 2048-00 06 212 218 24 30 36 :42 8 54 2049:00 06 
H20 D088 Y1974 
(seconds) 


Figure 3. Highest sample rate measurements of the Mariner 10 energetic electron (>35 keV) flux (0.6 s resolution) and magnetic field 
(0.04 s resolution) are displayed for the substorm dipolarization event observed during the first encounter. (From Christon et al (1987).) 


than is possible at other planets. The reason is that con- 
ducting ionospheres at the other planets act to ‘short-out’ a 
portion of this electric field that the solar wind is attempt- 
ing to impose across the magnetosphere and, therefore, 
limit the intensity of the internal magnetospheric electric 
field. Hence, a determination of the factors responsible 
for the short substorm time scale at Mercury may be very 
important for our general understanding of electric fields 
and convection in all planetary magnetospheres. 


Summary 

From the preceding discussion, it can be seen that 
Mercury’s miniature magnetosphere offers a unique 
testing ground for theories regarding many important 
processes. In particular, the very tenuous nature of its 
atmosphere implies that internal plasma sources are far 
less significant than at Earth or any of the other known 
magnetospheres. This fact should make Mercury ideal 
for quantitative modeling of how and to what degree 
solar wind plasma enters terrestrial-type magnetospheres. 
Mercury’s relative proximity to the Sun also exposes 
this magnetosphere to solar wind conditions which are 
relatively rare at 1 AU. In particular, it has been suggested 
that the lower Alfvénic Mach numbers and stronger 
interplanetary magnetic fields at 0.3 to 0.5 AU will result 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in higher dayside reconnection rates and more intense 
large-scale magnetospheric electric fields than at the Earth. 
Hence, measurements at Mercury could also be pivotal 
to the testing of existing models of reconnection and 
electrodynamic coupling between the various regions of 
the magnetosphere. Observations from a future Mercury 
orbiter mission should also lead to great improvement in 
our understanding and modeling capability with respect 
to magnetospheric substorms. With durations at Mercury 
of only about 1 min, it should be possible to observe huge 
numbers of complete substorms at a variety of different 
locations throughout the magnetosphere in a relatively 
short time. Such a data set would be especially beneficial in 
the testing of substorm theories with respect to the role of 
electrodynamic ‘feed-back’ between the region at the foot 
of the magnetospheric flux tubes and convection in the 
magnetotail. Indeed, this small magnetosphere may offer 
our only opportunity to observe electrodynamic coupling 
in the asymptotic limit of a magnetosphere rooted in a 
relatively non-conducting planetary regolith. 


Bibliography 
Baker D N, Simpson J A and Eraker J H 1986 A model 
of impulsive acceleration and transport of energetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mercury: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


particles in Mercury’s magnetosphere J. Geophys. Res. 
91 742 

Christon S P, Feynman J and Slavin J A 1987 Dy- 
namic substorm injections: similar magnetospheric 
phenomena at Earth and Mercury Magnetotail Physics 
ed AT Y Lui (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univer- 
sity Press) pp 393-400 

Connerney J E P and Ness N F 1988 The magnetosphere 
of Mercury Mercury ed C Chapman (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 494-513 

Russell C T, Baker D N and Slavin J A 1988 The 
magnetosphere of Mercury Mercury ed C Chapman 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 514-61 

SlavinJ A, Owen CJ, Connerney J E P and Christon S P 1997 
Mariner 10 observations of field-aligned currents at 
Mercury Planet. Space Sci. 45 133 


James A Slavin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meridian 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meridian 


Agreat circle on the Earth’s surface, running perpendicular 
to the equator and passing through the north and south 
poles. To an observer located at a particular position on the 
Earth, the meridian represents his north-south line. The 
Greenwich meridian (i.e. the meridian passing through 
the Old Greenwich Observatory) is taken as the zero of 
longitude measurement; thus the longitude of a point 
on the Earth’s surface is the angle (measured parallel to 
the equator) between the Greenwich meridian and the 
meridian passing through that point. 

For purposes of astronomical position and time 
measurement, the meridian is taken to be a circle on 
the celestial sphere passing through the north and south 
celestial poles and the observer’s zenith; i.e. for an 
observer on the Earth’s surface, the celestial meridian is 
the projection of his terrestrial meridian onto the celestial 
sphere. 

The term ‘central meridian’ refers to the line joining 
the north and south poles of a planet that crosses the center 
of the visible disk of that planet. (The Greenwich meridian 
is also known as the ‘prime meridian’.) 


Seealso: great circle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


MERLIN/VLBI National Facility 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MERLIN/VLBI National Facility 


The Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network 
(MERLIN) is a unique synthesis radio telescope which 
was originally developed by the University of Manchester 
in the late 1970s and came into operation in 1980. 
After further development, in 1993 it formally became a 
National Facility operated by the University of Manchester 
on behalf of the UK partICLE PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY RESEARCH 
couNcIL. MERLIN operates in discrete wavelength bands 
within the range 2 m to 1 cm and has corresponding 
angular resolutions ranging from 1.4 arcsec to 8 milliarcsec. 
At its prime operating wavelength of 6 cm, it has 
a resolution which matches that of the Hubble Space 
Telescope. In addition to its normal self-contained 
operations, it is regularly used in conjunction with the 
European Very Long Baseline Interferometry Network 
(EVN) to provide angular resolution up to a few hundred 
microarcsec. MERLIN is used for the study of a wide 
range of astronomical subjects, including stellar formation, 
interstellar material, nebulae, active stars, supernovae, 
external galaxies, and quasars and active galaxies at 
the extremities of the known universe. It was the first 
instrument to resolve the outflow of material from novae 
within the Galaxy and to resolve the shells of supernovae 
in external galaxies. It has played a key role in the 
discovery of approximately twenty gravitational lenses 
and in the establishment of the coordinate frame of the 
Hubble Deep Field. 
For further information see 

http://www.jb.man.ac.uk/merlin/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Merrill, Paul Willard (1887-1961) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Merrill, Paul Willard (1887-1961) 


Astronomer, staff-member of the Mount Wilson Obser- 
vatory, spectroscopist who studied variable stars. He 
identified the element technetium in an S-type star R An- 
dromedae. The atoms of this element have no stable nu- 
clear isotopes, so the element must have been made within 
the last million years, although the star was much older. 
The discovery proved that the element must have been 
made recently in the star. The process by which it was 
made was identified by B2FH (see w FOWLER) as the ‘s- 
process’ of nucleosynthesis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mersenne, Marin (1588-1648) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mersenne, Marin (1588-1648) 


Born in Oize in Maine, France, joined the order of the 
Minims. The name signifies that the Minims regard 
themselves as the least (minimzi) of all the religious orders, 
and this encapsulates Mersenne’s self-effacing status in 
science. His own scientific work was modest, but he 
corresponded with numerous other eminent scientists and 
acted as a bulletin board among scientists and a scientific 
commentator at a time when there were no scientific 
journals. He defended pescartes and GALILEO against 
criticism. He proposed the use of the pendulum as a 
timing device to HUYGENS, inspiring him to invent the 
pendulum clock. He published Les Méchanique de Galilée, to 
promulgate Galileo’s lectures on mechanics. He translated 
parts of Galileo’s Dialogo and his Discorsi into French 
disseminating Galileo’s work in Europe outside Italy. 
After his death letters in his cell were found from nearly a 
hundred correspondents including Fermat, Huygens, Pell, 
Galileo and Torricelli. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meshchersky, Ivan Vsevolodovich (1859-1935) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meshchersky, Ivan Vsevolodovich 
(1859-1935) 


Born in Arkhangelsk, Russia, studied mechanics, in 
particular the motion of bodies of variable mass, applying 
this to the doubtful case of comets. But his work formed 
the basis to calculate the case of rocket flight, developed 
after 1945. He was the first to study the inverse problem of 
determining the loss of mass from knowledge of the orbit 
and the forces. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mesons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mesons 


Particles that are composed of a quark and an antiquark. 
Mesons are short-lived particles that decay rapidly into 
leptons or photons either directly, or by first decaying into 
other types of meson. Their masses range from about 15% 
of the mass of a proton, in the case of the pion (pi-meson), 
to more than ten times the mass of a proton. Their mean 
lifetimes range from 2.6 x 10-8 s, in the case of the positively 
charged and negatively charged pions (neutral pions have 
lifetimes of about 10~"* s) to less than 10~”° s, in the case 
of the heaviest mesons. 

Although the first meson (the pion) was not 
discovered experimentally until 1947, the existence of a 
particle of this kind had been proposed in 1935 by the 
Japanese physicist, Hideki Yukawa (1907-81), in order to 
explain how the strong nuclear force could be conveyed 
between protons and neutrons in an atomic nucleus. At 
the scale of an atomic nucleus, the pion may be regarded 
as the ‘force-carrying’ particle of the strong nuclear force. 
However, because the pion is composed of quarks, it is not 
a genuinely elementary (or ‘fundamental’) particle. At the 
fundamental level, the strong force is conveyed between 
quarks by particles called gluons. 


See also: antimatter, atom, cosmic rays, elementary 
particles, fundamental forces, fundamental particles, 
gauge bosons, hadrons, leptons, photon, quark. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


MESSENGER (Mercury Surface, Space Environment, 
Geochemistry and Ranging Mission) 


MESSENGER (Mercury Surface, 
Space Environment, Geochemistry 
and Ranging Mission) 


NASA Discovery mission, scheduled for launch in 2004. 
Intended to fly past Mercury twice in 2008, then enter 
orbit around the planet in September 2009. Planned to 
map the entire planet and study the magnetosphere and 
composition of its thin atmosphere. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Messier Catalog 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Messier Catalog 


In the eighteenth century the French astronomer, Charles 
Messier (1730-1817), drew up a catalog of 109 of the 
brighter nebulae, clusters and galaxies. Objects in this 
catalog are denoted by the letter M followed by a number, 
for example, M31 is the Andromeda Galaxy. Messier’s 
prime interest was comets. His purpose was to make 
comet hunting easier by tabulating permanent deep-sky 
objects that could be mistaken for comets. He published 
a preliminary list of 45 such objects in 1771 and compiled 
the bulk of his catalog 10 years later. The catalog is still 
a valuable guide to amateur astronomers, although it has 
been superseded by the New General Catalog (NGC) and 
modern astro-physically based catalogs. 


See also: Fundamental catalogs, Index Catalog, M1 to 
M110, New General Catalog. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Messier, Charles (1730-1817) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Messier, Charles (1730-1817) 


Comet seeker, nebula avoider, born in Badonvillier, 
Lorraine, France, became interested in astronomy as a 
child. Went to Paris, employed by JOSEPH-NICOLAS DELISLE 
to search for Comet Halley on the 1757 return. While 
doing so, he discovered a comet-like patch in Taurus on 
the comet’s expected path. The patch did not move, 
and he later identified it as a nebula (now known as 
the Crab Nebula), earlier found by JouN Bevis. Messier 
decided to make a list of nebulous objects that simulate 
comets, with Bevis’s nebula the first entry, M1. While 
discovering two comets in 1763-4, he recorded two more 
nebulae, M2 (previously discovered by Maraldi) and 
M3 (the unresolved globular cluster, his first original 
nebular discovery). He undertook systematic searches for 
comets and nebulae, and searched the literature. This 
eventually brought his catalog to 110 (some entries are 
spurious), of which 42 objects were discovered by himself. 
After 1781, the year of Herschel’s discovery of a new 
planet (which Messier himself observed), his strategy 
seems to have changed, adding few entries to his catalog 
although maintaining his comet search. Perhaps he knew 
of Herschel’s survey (See HERSCHEL FAMILY), with superior 
instrumentation. Messier lost his position in the ‘Year 
of Terror’ in 1793-4, but resumed observing afterwards, 
bringing his total score of comets to 19, 13 being original 
and 6 being independent co-discoveries. In his old age, 
Messier accepted the Legion of Honor from Napoleon, but 
disgraced himself in front of his colleagues by publishing 
an astrological memoir identifying the great comet of 1769 
with Napoleon, born that year. This was, as Admiral 
Smyth put it, ‘The last comet put astrologically before the 
public by an orthodox astronomer’. The Messier Catalog 
(with the letter ‘M’ identifying entries in the list) stands as 
the fitting memorial to a lifetime’s astronomical work, its 
nomenclature used daily by astronomers throughout the 
world. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteor Crater 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteor Crater 


A terrestrial impact crater 55 km east of Flagstaff, in the 
Arizona desert, discovered in 1891. Its several alternative 
names include Barringer Crater, after Daniel M Barringer, 
who in the 1930s was the first to investigate it and the 
first to suggest its extraterrestrial origin. Meteor Crater 
has an average diameter of 1.2 km, the floor is 180 m 
below ground level and the rim is 30-45 m high. It is 
estimated to have been produced 50000 years ago by the 
impact of an iron meteorite about 40 m across with a mass 
in the region of 250000 tonnes. The energy of the blast 
produced by the impact, which excavated 175000 tonnes 
of limestone, would have been 20 megatonnes or more. 
Thousands of meteoritic nickel—iron fragments have been 
found at distances up to 7 km from the crater, suggesting 
that the incoming body fragmented shortly before impact. 
Excavations have revealed no masses of nickel-iron below 
the crater floor, and the main crater-forming mass of the 
asteroid is assumed to have vaporized. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteor Shower 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteor Shower 


The appearance in the sky, at a particular time of the year, 
of higher-than-average numbers of meteors, all appearing 
to emanate from a specific point on the celestial sphere 
known as the radiant. Most showers are named after 
the constellation in which the radiant lies, by adding the 
suffix ‘-id’: the Lyrid shower, or Lyrids, for example, have 
their radiant in the constellation Lyra. The Quandrantid 
shower is named after the obsolete constellation Quadrans 
Muralis, now part of Bodtes. Where there is more than one 
radiant in a constellation the showers are distinguished by 
adding the Bayer letter of a bright star near the radiant, as 
for example with the Delta Aquarids and Eta Aquarids. 
A few showers are named after their parent comets—the 
comets that produced the meteor streams—for example 
the Giacobinids, after Comet 21P/Giacobini—Zinner. 

A shower occurs when the Earth intersects a meteor 
stream. The activity of a shower, which is calculated as 
a quantity called the zenithal hourly rate (ZHR), lasts for 
as long as the Earth is passing through the stream, and 
peaks where the stream is at its most concentrated. Young, 
tight meteor streams tend to produce showers of short 
duration which build quickly to a high peak ZHR and 
then tail off sharply. Older, more evolved streams which 
have spread either side of the primary orbit are of longer 
overall duration, building slowly to a more modest ZHR 
and fading slowly thereafter. 

The 10 or so most active showers, with a ZHR of 
about 10 or more, are known as major showers. There 
are dozens of less active, minor showers. table 1 gives 
details for the most active major showers (where there is 
more than one radiant, the position given is that of the 
main one). In the great majority of cases the parent body 
of a meteor shower is a comet. A rare exception is the 
Geminid shower, which is associated with the asteroid 
(3200) Phaethon. The connection between a meteor stream 
and its parent body is established by correspondences 
between the orbital elements of each. 

Meteors that belong to showers are called shower 
meteors, as distinct from sporadic meteors, which are 
produced by meteoroids that donot come from identifiable 
meteor streams. Annual showers are those whose ZHRs 
normally vary little from one year to the next, being 
produced by meteor streams in which the meteoroids are 
evenly spread around the orbit. Meteor streams in which 
the meteoroids are concentrated in a swarm in one part 
of the orbit give rise to periodic showers, which are highly 
active only in years when the Earth intersects the swarm, 
and show little or no activity in other years. Details of 
two periodic showers, the Leonids and the Giacobinids, 
are given in table 1. 


See also: meteoroid, meteor storm, meteor stream, 
radiant, sporadic meteor, zenithal hourly rate. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteor Shower ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Principal annual and periodic meteor showers. 


Position of radiant 
at maximum 


Date of Max. 
Shower RA Dec. Duration maximum ZHR Parent body 
Quadrantids 15" 28" ~=—50° 1-6 Jan 3-4 Jan 120 96P /Machholz* 
Lyrids 18" 00" 32° 19-25 Apr 21 Apr 15 C/1861 G1 Thatcher 
Eta Aquarids 22> 20" —1° 24 Apr-20 May 5 May 50 1P/Halley 
Delta Aquarids 22° 36™ —17° 15 Jul-20 Aug 29 Jul 25 Unknown 
Perseids 03" 04™ 58° 25 Jul-20 Aug 12-13 Aug 80 109P/Swift-Tuttle 
Giacobinids 17" 23™ 57° 7-10 Oct 8 Oct oe 21P/Giacobini-—Zinner 
Orionids 06" 24™ 15° 15 Oct-2 Nov 20-22 Oct 30 1P/Halley 
Taurids 03" 44™ 14° 15 Oct-25 Nov 3Nov 10 2P/Encke 
Leonids 10" 08™ = 22° 15-20 Nov 17 Nov ges 55P/Tempel-Tuttle 
Geminids 07" 26" = 32° 7-15 Dec 13 Dec 120 (3200) Phaethon 


* The association with this comet is uncertain. 
** Outbursts possible every 12 or 13 years. Up to 450 per hour in 1933. 
** Possibility of storm activity every 33 years. May have reached 200000 per hour in 1833. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Meteor Storm 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteor Storm 


An intense burst of meteor activity of short duration 
(typically about an hour) associated with a periodic meteor 
shower. A meteor storm occurs when the Earth passes 
through a meteor swarm or a concentrated ribbon of 
debris recently shed by a comet. There is no generally 
agreed quantitative definition of what constitutes storm- 
level activity, but an hourly rate of 1000 is a reasonable 
lower limit. Meteor storms are rare events, those produced 
by the Leonid shower being the best known. The 
Leonid maximum of 16/17 November 1966 produced the 
highest documented storm levels of modern times, with 
an estimated hourly rate of 200000 over a 40 min period. 
Some annual meteor showers occasionally show sharp 
rises above their normal hourly rates; such outbursts are 
sometimes called substorms. 


See also: Leonids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteor Stream 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteor Stream 


Acontinuous ribbon of meteoroids in a closed orbit around 
the Sun. (The more correct term meteoroid stream is 
seldom used.) A meteor stream consists of dust particles 
shed by a comet on its perihelion passages which have 
gradually spread around the comet’s orbit. When the 
Earth passes through a meteor stream, there is a meteor 
shower when up to about 100 meteors per hour may be 
seen. Most of the debris from young comets remains 
bunched together over a small arc of the orbit in what 
is known as a meteor swarm. When the Earth passes 
through a swarm the result is a meteor storm, with many 
thousands of meteors per hour. As a meteor stream ages, 
and the meteoroids spread round the orbit, the stream 
assumes the shape of an elliptical toroid. Within the stream 
there may be filaments containing a greater concentration 
of meteoroids shed by the parent comet on its most 
recent circuits of the Sun. The evolution of individual 
filaments and the stream as a whole may be affected by 
planetary perturbations, of both the meteoroids and the 
parent comet, and the structure of a meteor stream can 
grow increasingly complex. Eventually, under repeated 
perturbations, a meteor stream will disperse to the point 
where the concentration of meteoroids is reduced to that 
of the interplanetary dust. 


See also: interplanetary dust, meteor shower, meteor 
storm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteorites 


A meteorite is a natural solid object of extraterrestrial ori- 
gin, fallen onto the surface of the Earth. Whatever its 
provenance, it has to traverse the atmosphere of our 
planet at high speed, which gives rise to a brief luminous 
phenomenon, called a METEOR. This modifies its shape, 
size and external aspect, but leaves the interior part 
intact. Hence the scientific interest of meteorites: they 
give us the opportunity to study worlds that we have not 
reached yet. Twenty-six meteorites are widely believed 
to be samples of the planet MARs. Around twenty-one 
others come from the Moon, from regions that have not 
been sampled by the Apollo nor the Luna missions, 
including probably the far side. The overwhelming 
majority of the meteorites are fragments of ASTEROIDS, the 
tiny planets that orbit the Sun between Mars and Jupiter. 
This has allowed us to study the geology and past evo- 
lution of these very diverse small bodies for many 
decades, while their exploration by space probes is only 
at its very beginning, and no sample from any of them 
will be brought back before 2007. But the interest in mete- 
orites is more general: because of their small sizes, many 
of their parent asteroids did not experience the geologi- 
cal processes which have reprocessed all the materials of 
the large planets like Earth, Mars, or even the Moon. 
Although some of them have also gone through signifi- 
cant geological reprocessing, most meteorites are thus 
samples of ‘primitive matter’ (the only ones we have at 
our disposal up to now, if we include the smallest ones, 
micrometeorites or INTERPLANETARY DUST particles) which 
keep memories of the sequence of physico-chemical 
processes which gave birth to the SOLAR sysTEM, 4.5 bil- 
lion years ago. Meteorites have allowed us to study the 
composition and structure of the materials from which 
the planets were made, and to establish the age of the 
solar system. In 1987, rare and tiny crystals were isolated 
from meteorites, which were made in the environment of 
other stars, before the birth of the Sun, giving us direct 
access to the nuclear processes which take place in stars 
and lead to the synthesis of the chemical elements. 
Although rare phenomena, meteorite falls have been 
known since antiquity. Various explanations were 
advanced, including ejection from volcanoes or transport 
by violent winds, but by the end of the 17th century, the 
most widely accepted one was that meteorites were 
formed in the atmosphere, by the action of lightning on 
mysterious exhalations from the Earth’s interior. Hence 
the name ‘meteoric stones’ (stones from the atmosphere) 
which later gave ‘meteorites’. At the beginning of the 
18th century, scientists realized that this was unreason- 
able but, because of the view they had of the universe, 
they could not imagine that stones could come from 
beyond the atmosphere. Unable to find a sound explana- 
tion of the phenomenon, they simply ignored it. For the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


whole of the 18th century, the official scientific opinion 
was that stones which were said to have fallen from the 
sky were in fact ordinary stones, which had been hit by 
lightning on the ground. Only at the end of the 18th cen- 
tury, after several widely witnessed falls in various coun- 
tries, analyses of meteoric stones by the English chemist 
Howard, and the publication of a visionary book by the 
German physicist Chladni, did meteorite falls start to 
gain official recognition again. In 1803, after the historic 
fall of some 2000 stones near the city of L’Aigle, in north- 
western France, and the report on it made by the physi- 
cist Biot, no doubt remained. Meteoritics, the science of 
meteorites, was launched. However, the idea that pre- 
vailed then was that meteorites were ejected from lunar 
volcanoes, and it was not for several decades that the 
ideas of Chladni, close to the modern ideas on the origin 
of meteorites, were generally accepted. 


Meteorite falls 

The fall of a meteorite is a rare but impressive show. As 
the meteoroid (the initial arriving cosmic body) reaches 
the top of the atmosphere, friction against the air decel- 
erates it and the conversion of kinetic energy to heat can 
raise the temperature of the bolide surface and of the sur- 
rounding air to several thousand Kelvin. The characteris- 
tics of a fall depend on the velocity and mass of the mete- 
oroid, the orientation of its trajectory, and the density 
and strength of its material. The lower the mass, the more 
efficient the air drag. Small particles, in the millimeter 
size range, are stopped in the upper atmosphere and the 
corresponding meteors do not last more than a fraction 
of a second: these are the familiar ‘shooting stars’. Larger 
masses penetrate deeper into the atmosphere and make a 
longer and more spectacular show, in particular in the 
case of meteorite-producing events. The initial velocity 
in this case is generally about 15-20 km s-!. A fireball 
appears at a height of about 100 km. The outermost part 
of the bolide matter is melted, vaporized and ejected, 
leaving a trail of vapor, dust and ionized atoms. The 
mass of the meteoroid thus decreases continuously, a 
process known as ablation. In addition, because of the 
very strong tensions to which it is submitted the bolide 
very often breaks into several, or sometimes thousands 
of fragments. At a height of about 20 km, the velocity has 
been so much reduced—it is now about 3 km s~!—that 
incandescence can no longer be maintained, ablation 
ceases and the fireball switches off. In general, no more 
than 10 s have elapsed since it appeared, but in excep- 
tional cases (nearly horizontal trajectories) it can be seen 
for up to about 40 s. The trajectory now bends over to 
nearly vertical, and the meteorite finally reaches the 
ground with its velocity of free fall (one or a few hundred 
ms7!). If fragmentation occurred in flight, the larger frag- 
ments, being less efficiently braked, travel farther, so that 
the fragments are found distributed on an elliptical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. A few fragments of the L’Aigle meteorite, which fell in 
1803. It can be seen on the broken fragment at the bottom left 
that the heat-affected zone, the black fusion crust, is extremely 
thin. The largest fragment is approximately 10 cm long. (Photo 
courtesy of G Segerer, MNHN.) 


strewnfield, with the largest fragments at one end and 
the smallest ones at the other. Meteorite falls are accom- 
panied by sound phenomena. Sonic booms are heard 
after the disappearance of the fireball, but generally 
before the landing of the meteorite. Rumbles follow, with 
those produced in the lowest part of the trajectory arriv- 
ing first. 

Because of this fiery arrival, meteorites have a typi- 
cal aspect: their surface is black, smooth, with rounded 
angles (figure 1). However, as the fall is so short, and the 
heat generated is in large part carried away by the vapor- 
ized material and the surrounding air, the interior of the 
meteorite suffers fortunately very little: the black vitri- 
fied pellicle that surrounds it, called the fusion crust, is 
not usually thicker than a fraction of a mm. A few mm 
away from the fusion crust, the meteoritic materials are 
essentially unaffected by the fall. 

The largest known meteorite, the Hoba meteorite, 
found in Namibia, has a mass of about 60 tons. Much big- 
ger meteorites are little decelerated in the atmosphere, 
which leads to catastrophic issues. Stony meteorites in 
the size range 10-100 m explode in the atmosphere; the 
higher the mass and the mechanical strength, the lower 
the height of the explosion. Such events occur about 8 
times per year, without being noticed from the ground. 
This is probably what happened on 30 June 1908 above 
the region of the river Tunguska, in Siberia, but in this 
case, the explosion took place low enough to destroy 
approximately 2000 km? of forest. Still larger stony mete- 
orites, and iron meteorites over ~10 m, reach the ground 
with almost their original velocity. Most of their enor- 
mous kinetic energy transforms into heat and they are 
entirely vaporized upon impact, together with a much 
larger quantity of target rock, leading to the formation of 
an impact CRATER. Some 150 of these craters are known 
on Earth, and many more on all solid bodies, from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Mercury to the satellites of Uranus, making impact cra- 
tering a major geological process in the solar system. The 
largest known crater on Earth, the Chicxulub crater in 
Mexico with a diameter of ~200 km, resulted from the 
impact of a meteorite about 10 km in size, 65 Myr ago. 
There is no doubt that such large impacts cause ecologi- 
cal catastrophes on the scale of the whole planet. 65 Myr 
ago is the time of the Cretaceous—Tertiary boundary cri- 
sis, when a large fraction of the then-living species, 
including the dinosaurs, disappeared. 


Composition and classification 

Depending on their structure and composition, mete- 
orites are classified into different classes and groups. This 
is not just of academic interest, but is aimed at decipher- 
ing their various origins. The traditional classification 
sorted meteorites into stony, iron and stony-iron mete- 
orites. Although this purely descriptive classification can 
still be convenient, it is now preferred to make the major 
separation between differentiated and non-differentiated 
meteorites. Differentiation is the process by which melt- 
ed rocks separate into different phases having different 
compositions. The Earth is a differentiated planet: it is 
composed of a metallic iron core, surrounded by a rocky 
mantle and a rocky crust. Thus, no single sample is rep- 
resentative of the global composition of the Earth. 
Moreover, melting not only induced modifications of the 
chemical composition of the original materials from 
which the Earth was built, it also erased their structures. 
This is true for all large planets, including the Moon. 
Non-differentiated meteorites—also called CHONDRITES— 
have not been melted in the tiny planets they come from, 
so that they keep memories of the materials of the solar 
nebula, the gas and dust cloud from which the solar sys- 
tem was born. They can thus be considered as witnesses 
of the birth of the solar system. Differentiated meteorites 
are very diverse, but they have all experienced extensive 
melting on their parent planets. They have lost to a large 
extent memories of nebular processes, but are useful to 
study planetary processes, in particular those which took 
place on small planets in the early solar system. The var- 
ious meteorite classes and groups, which are designated 
by names or symbols, are summarized in table 1. Some 
groups (CK, CR, CH, R chondrites, Acapulcoites- 
Lodranites, Brachinites) have been introduced fairly 
recently, and a few peculiar meteorites which do not fit 
into existing groups have been omitted. 


Non-differentiated meteorites 

Chondrites are remarkable in that their chemical compo- 
sition is very similar to that of the Sun, except for the 
most volatile elements. Subtle differences have led us to 
sort them into various groups, as shown in table 1, each 
of them probably corresponding to at least one parent 
asteroid. The CI carbonaceous chondrites are believed to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Meteorite classification. 


Non-differentiated meteorites 


Differentiated meteorites 


FF Class Group Group Class FF 
Cl IAB, IC, IIAB, IIC, 
CM IID, UE, IF, WIAB, pace 5 
CO IIICD, IIE, INF, 
4 Camppnacsous CV IVA, IVB, others 
chondrites CK Pallasites 0.4 
CR Mesosiderites 0.7 
CH Eucrites . 
<1 R Diogenites Basaltic 6 
. LE Howardites achondrites 
79 Ordinary L Angrites <1 
chondrites H Ureilites 0.5 
15 Enstatite EL Aubrites Enstatite 1 
chondrites EII Achondrites 
Anorthosites Lunar “4 
Basalts meteorites 
Shergottites 
Nakhlites Martian 05 
Chassigny meteorites 
Others 
Acapulcoites a 
Lodranites Primitive <1 
Brachinites achondrites 


FF: fall frequency (%) 


be the most primitive of all chondrites, those whose com- 
position most closely reflects that of the solar nebula. 
Figure 2 shows a comparison between the chemical 
abundances measured in CI chondrites and in the solar 
photosphere. Each point corresponds to an element; a 
few points have been labeled with the element symbol. 
The line corresponds to equality between solar and chon- 
dritic abundances. The agreement is excellent over 9 
orders of magnitude, except for H, He and other rare 
gases (not plotted), C, N, and O, all volatile elements 
which have been only partly incorporated into solid bod- 
ies, and for Li, which is destroyed by nuclear reactions in 
the sun. As CI chondrite abundances are measured with 
a greater precision than those of the solar photosphere 
and for a larger number of elements, they form the basis 
for the standard solar system abundances. 

Most chondrites are made of silicates, iron-nickel 
alloys (Fe-Ni) and iron sulfide (troilite, FeS). The most 
common silicates are olivine ([Fe,Mg])SiO,), pyroxene 
([Fe,Mg]SiO3), and feldspar (solid solution of 
[Na, K]AISiz0g and CaAl2SizOg). Many other minerals 
have been identified in chondrites, but usually only in 
minor amounts. In the most primitive chondrites, miner- 
als occur as small crystals, arranged in more or less 
spherical structures, with diameters in the range 50 um 
to several mm, called chondrules (see figure 3). The space 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


between chondrules is filled by a matrix made of very 
fine grains (<1 um) of similar minerals. 

Chemical groups of chondrites differ, in particular, 
by their oxidation state, which is most conveniently 
revealed by the chemical form of iron. In table 1, chon- 
drite groups are arranged in roughly decreasing order of 
degree of oxidation from top to bottom. Carbonaceous 
chondrites are the most oxidized: many do not contain 
any Fe-Ni metal, all Fe is in oxidized form, in silicates or 
other minerals. Enstatite chondrites are the most 
reduced: they contain large amounts of Fe-Ni metal, but 
almost no Fe in their silicate which is nearly exclusively 
enstatite, a purely magnesian pyroxene (MgSiOs). 
Ordinary chondrites are intermediate, with Fe-Ni alloy 
content increasing from LL to L to H. These differences 
probably reflect different local conditions in the solar 
nebula at formation time. 

Although chondrites have a primitive chemical 
composition, they have nevertheless experienced various 
amounts of planetary processing. To account for this, 
they have been sorted into 6 petrologic types. Types 3-6 
correspond to increasing effects of thermal metamor- 
phism, i.e. moderate transformations due to temperature 
increases soon after accretion of their parent asteroids. 
Type 3s are the least affected: their minerals have vari- 
able compositions, in particular the Fe/(Fe+Mg) ratio 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10° 


10° 


Cl chondrite abundances 


1 10° 108 10° 10° 

Solar abundances 
Figure 2. Comparison of element abundances in CI chondrites 
with those in the solar photosphere, normalized to Si=10°. The 
line is for perfect correspondence. A few points are labeled 


with the symbol of the corresponding element. Note the loga- 
rithmic scale. 


varies among silicates, they are said to be unequilibrated 
chondrites; chondrules are abundant and sharply 
defined (figure 3). Type 6s are the most metamorphosed: 
their minerals have uniform compositions, they are equi- 
librated chondrites; the chondrule texture has been 
almost entirely erased by recrystallization, chondrules 
can hardly be recognized in these chondrites. Types 1 
and 2 correspond to negligible planetary thermal pro- 
cessing, but considerable effects of alteration by water on 
the parent asteroids. Type 1 chondrites, the most primi- 
tive from a chemical point of view, are almost entirely 
composed of very fine-grained hydrous minerals, in par- 
ticular phyllosilicates analogous to clay minerals found 
on Earth, which are the products of aqueous alteration of 
anhydrous silicates. Chondrules are totally absent from 
these chondrites, but it is not known whether they never 
existed there, or were destroyed by the action of water. 
Not all petrologic types are represented in the various 
chemical groups. For instance, there are no types 1 and 2 
among the ordinary and enstatite chondrites, CIs are 
mostly type 1, CMs are mostly type 2, CVs and COs are 
type 3. 

Chondrule textures imply that they formed as small, 
independent melted droplets (figure 4). Simulation 
experiments closely reproduce these textures and sug- 
gest formation temperatures in the range 1550-1900°C, 
and heating times of seconds to hours. However, the 
physical phenomenon responsible for the (transient) 
energy inputs necessary to make chondrules is still 
unknown, although many have been suggested. Most of 
the hypotheses refer to processes taking place in the solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 3. The H3 chondrite Sainte Rose is almost entirely made 
of chondrules of various textures and sizes. Sample is 2.8 cm 
long. (Photo courtesy of C Caillet, MNHN.) 


nebula, but planetary processes, a priori less probable, are 
periodically revived. This ignorance is all the more irri- 
tating in that the high abundance of chondrites (85% of 
all meteorite falls) and the high proportion of chondrules 
in chondritic matter (up to 80% in ordinary chondrites) 
strongly suggest—but do not prove—that chondrule for- 
mation was a common process and one of those which 
most affected the solid matter of the early solar system. 
Let us mention two of the most recently developed mod- 
els of chondrule formation: the shock model and the x- 
wind model. In the former, solid chondrule precursors 
are melted by friction with the gas accelerated to super- 
sonic speeds by shock waves propagating within the 
solar nebula. The model accounts for the thermal history 
of chondrules as inferred from observations and experi- 
ments as well as for some other properties of chondrules. 
The origin of the shocks remains an open question, 
although the proponents of the model suggest gravita- 
tional instabilities in the disk. In the x-wind model, 


Figure 4. A chondrule (circular, left) and a Ca-Al-rich inclusion 
(CAI, right) in the Allende CV3 chondrite. These structures once 
formed independently in the solar nebula. The black back- 
ground is the fine grained matrix. Width of photo 1 mm. (Photo 
courtesy of M Bourot-Denise, MNHN.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


chondrules are melted by impulsive protosolar flares at 
the inner edge of the accretion disk, close to the protosun, 
and launched to planetary distances by an x-wind out- 
flow. This model is in a large part based on observations 
of young stellar objects. It offers explanations not only 
for a number of properties of the chondrules themselves 
but for more general characteristics of the chondrites (see 
below). It has not been shown, however, that it can match 
the chondrule thermal history in detail. 

Refractory inclusions are another important type of 
structure formed at high temperatures (figure 4). They 
are found in most carbonaceous chondrites, especially in 
CV3s where they are the largest (few mm to cm), and, 
rarely, in ordinary and enstatite chondrites. They are 
assemblages of refractory, Ca- and Al-bearing minerals 
and are designated for that reason calctum-aluminum- 
rich inclusions (CAIs). CAIs appear to be the first solids 
to have formed in the solar system, and they keep mem- 
ories of events which took place before the birth of the 
Sun, in the form of ISOTOPIC ANOMALIES for many ele- 
ments, as will be discussed below. They were made by 
condensation and/or evaporation in the very first 
instants of the solar system. In the x-wind model, CAIs 
are formed by a mechanism similar to chondrules, but 
closer to the Sun, and they are heated for longer times, 
including during transport in the x-wind. As a conse- 
quence, many elements evaporate, leaving a refractory 
residue rich in calcium and aluminum oxides and sili- 
cates. 

Carbon is present in small amounts in all chondrites, 
and represents up to about 4.5% by mass of the CI and 
CM chondrites, the most carbon-rich of all. In these chon- 
drites C is mainly in organic matter, the most abundant 
form of which is a poorly characterized macromolecular 
component, but many molecules are also present, such as 
aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, carboxylic and 
amino acids, etc. Isotopic analyses of hydrogen in this 
organic matter show that it is strongly enriched in its 
heavy isotope, deuterium (2H or D), which is difficult to 
explain by processes that have taken place in the solar 
system. This suggests that at least part of this organic 
matter is of interstellar origin, i.e. was synthesized in the 
interstellar medium before the birth of the Sun, and was 
thereafter incorporated into the materials of the solar 
nebula, and survived up to now in some meteorites. It is 
well known that ion-molecule reactions that occur at low 
temperatures in interstellar molecular clouds can yield 
considerable hydrogen isotope fractionation, and indeed 
D-rich molecules have been detected in the interstellar 
medium. 

The presence in meteorites of complex organic mol- 
ecules, in particular amino acids that serve to build pro- 
teins, have led to some speculation about their possible 
role in the emergence of life on Earth. It would have been 
simpler to start making the complex molecules necessary 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


for life from already existing complex molecules coming 
from space than from the carbon dioxide and nitrogen of 
the primitive Earth atmosphere. Asymmetric molecules 
like amino acids possess two forms (two enantiomers), 
right-handed (R) and left-handed (L), which are mirror 
images of one another. Biological synthesis only pro- 
duces the L molecules, while non-biological syntheses 
lead to a mixture of the two in equal quantities. This lat- 
ter case applies to most meteoritic organic matter. 
However, evidences have been found of excesses of the L 
enantiomer in several meteoric amino acids. These find- 
ings need to be scrutinized as terrestrial contamination is 
an enormous problem for these analyses. Excesses of 34% 
for L-alanine and 54% for L-glutamic acid in the 
Murchison (CM2) chondrite, associated with non-terres- 
trial isotopic ratios of carbon and nitrogen, have been 
reported by one group, but have not been confirmed by 
others. Small (1-9.2%) L-enantiomer excesses were found 
recently in six amino-acids in the Murchison and Murray 
(CM2) chondrites. These amino-acids are absent or rare 
in the terrestrial biosphere, thus virtually eliminating the 
possibility of terrestrial contamination. If confirmed, this 
could be considered as supporting the hypothesis of 
extraterrestrial organic matter being at the origin of life. 

The discovery, in 2001, of sugar and several related 
organic compounds in the same two carbonaceous chon- 
drites suggests another fundamental building block of 
life on Earth may have come from outer space. Sugars 
and the closely related compounds collectively called 
polyols, are critical to all known life forms. They act as 
components of the nucleic acids RNA and DNA, con- 
stituents of cell membranes and cellular energy sources. 
Asmall sugar called dihydroxyacetone and several sugar 
acids and sugar alcohols, have been identified in 
Murchison and Murray. All these are important for life 
today. One sugar alcohol, glycerol, that is used by all con- 
temporary cells to build cell walls has also been found. In 
addition, preliminary evidence of other compounds that 
may contain larger sugars critical in cellular metabolism, 
such as glucose has been discovered. 


Differentiated meteorites 

Unlike chondrites, differentiated meteorites have com- 
positions widely different from that of the Sun. They 
result from total or partial melting of their parent aster- 
oids, followed by a sequence of fractional crystalliza- 
tion. The extreme case is iron meteorites, which are 
made of only two major elements: iron and nickel. They 
consist of Fe—-Ni alloys, with variable amounts of inclu- 
sions of iron sulfide, graphite, silicates and other min- 
erals. On the basis of the concentrations of Ni and 
minor elements (especially Ga, Ge and Ir), they are sort- 
ed into 13 groups (table 1) corresponding to different 
parent asteroids, but many (~13%) do not fit into any of 
these groups. Most iron meteorites are believed to be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


fragments of metallic cores resulting from extensive 
early melting of asteroids. 

Pallasites are made of Fe-Ni and centimeter-sized 
crystals of olivine in about equal proportions. They prob- 
ably originate from the interface between the metallic 
core and the rocky mantle of differentiated asteroids. 
Eucrites, diogenites and howardites are collectively 
known as basaltic achondrites, because they resemble a 
basalt (lava) crystallization sequence. Eucrites are made 
of pyroxene and feldspar, diogenites of pyroxene, and 
howardites of agglomerated fragments of eucrites and 
diogenites. They are magmatic rocks ejected from the 
crust of a differentiated asteroid. As discussed below, 
there is evidence that this asteroid is 4 Vesta. 
Mesosiderites are irregular mixtures of Fe-Ni metal and 
of silicates similar to those found in eucrites and diogen- 
ites. They are thought to result from a collision involving 
a metallic and a silicate asteroid. Angrites are a very 
small group of magmatic meteorites which crystallized 
very early in the solar system history and are most prob- 
ably from a parent body different from that of the 
eucrites. Ureilites are distinguished from all other achon- 
drites by their high carbon content (1.5-3%). Their origin 
is far from clear; various hypotheses include differentia- 
tion of a carbonaceous asteroid and/or an asteroid colli- 
sion. Aubrites consist almost entirely of enstatite. They 
have a magmatic texture, but are almost surely related 
to the enstatite chondrites. The rare Acapulcoites— 
Lodranites and Brachinites are often referred to as prim- 
itive achondrites, although they are quite different from 
each other (the former are Fe—-Ni metal-rich, the latter 
almost entirely made of olivine). In spite of a magmatic 
texture, they have a nearly chondritic composition. The 
lunar origin of some 21 achondrites has been established 
beyond any doubt by comparison with the lunar samples 
returned by the Apollo and Luna missions. These mete- 
orites comprise both anorthosites from the lunar high- 
lands and basalts from the lunar maria. 


Meteorites from Mars 

As no sample taken from Mars has yet been brought to 
Earth, the origin of the Martian meteorites (also called 
SNCs) cannot be considered as definitely established, but 
little doubt remains. These meteorites first attracted 
attention by their very young age (which does not apply 
to a more recent find) that pointed to an origin from a 
large planet, as will be discussed in the next section. 
Gases trapped in vitreous inclusions in two of them 
exactly match the composition of the Martian atmos- 
phere, as measured by the Viking probes that landed on 
Mars in 1976. More isotopic and chemical data also sup- 
port a Martian origin. In 1996, it was claimed that evi- 
dence for past life activity on Mars had been discovered 
in the Martian meteorite ALH84001. The claim was based 
on several findings including organic matter (polycyclic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


aromatic hydrocarbons, PAHs), associations of very 
small grains of iron sulfides and iron oxide, as are pro- 
duced by bacteria on Earth, and tiny ‘worms’ about 0.1 
um long, resembling nanobacteria. None of these obser- 
vations was really compelling by itself, but altogether 
they could be taken as evidence for primitive life on early 
Mars. Since then, a number of studies have suggested 
other interpretations of the observations, including cont- 
amination from the Antarctic ice where the meteorite has 
been collected, and artifacts due to sample preparation. 
The question is not settled, but it is clear that it has not 
been proven yet that life was ever present on Mars, and 
that it will be extremely difficult to do so. 


Relation with asteroid classes 

Reflectance spectroscopy not only provides information 
on the mineralogical composition of asteroid surfaces, it 
also allows a direct comparison between meteorites and 
asteroids. On the basis of their spectral characteristics in 
the visible and infrared wavelengths, asteroids have been 
sorted into some 16 classes. Similarities have been noted 
for a long time between the spectra of some asteroid class- 
es and laboratory spectra obtained on various powdered 
meteorites, establishing possible genetic links between 
asteroid and meteorite classes. For instance M asteroids 
have been linked either to iron meteorites or enstatite 
chondrites, and C asteroids to CI and CM chondrites. 

A longstanding issue has been that the ordinary 
chondrites, which make up 80% of all meteorite falls on 
Earth, have no spectral equivalent in the asteroid belt. 
Data acquired during the fly-by of S asteroids Gaspra 
and Ida by the Galileo spacecraft suggest a solution: local 
spectral variations tend to demonstrate that an ill- 
defined space weathering process is operating that mod- 
ifies the spectral properties of asteroid surfaces. Younger 
terrains have spectra closer to those of ordinary chon- 
drites than older ones. More can be learned on this sub- 
ject from the data acquired by the NEAR-Shoemaker 
spacecraft during its orbital rendezvous with the S aster- 
oid Eros from February 2000 to February 2001. Gamma- 
ray, x-ray, visible and mid infrared spectra recorded by 
diverse instruments on-board NEAR yield information 
on the chemistry and mineralogy of Eros surface. The 
data are far from being as precise and complete as labo- 
ratory data, and there are some inconsistencies, which 
can be due to a number of causes, for instance the fact 
that, depending on the instrument, the detected photons 
came from Eros surface layers of different thickness (100 
um for the x-ray spectrometer, several tens of cm for the 
gamma-ray spectrometer). There is no unambiguous 
match with any known group of meteorites. 
Nevertheless, considering the inferred chemistry (rela- 
tive abundances of O, Mg, Al, Si, K, Ca, Fe) and mineral- 
ogy (presence of olivine and pyroxene, the former being 
more abundant), and taking into account other factors 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


such as the high spectral homogeneity of Eros, the mea- 
sured values of its density (2.67 g cm-3) and albedo 
(0.27), the data are overall most consistent with Eros 
being analogous to ordinary chondrites. A more precise 
correspondence is not possible, as the x-ray composition 
favors a link with the H chondrites while the infrared 
data are more in favor of LL chondrites. Some of the 
observations (apparently variable Fe /Si abundance ratio, 
depletion of sulfur with respect to ordinary chondrites) 
imply that the surface composition of the asteroid has 
been altered by a range of processes, e.g. impact-related 
partial melting and migration of metal and sulfide. In 
any case, it now appears probable that at least part of the 
S asteroids, the most numerous in the inner asteroid belt, 
are related to ordinary chondrites. 

Most striking is the resemblance between spectra of 
basaltic achondrites and that of Vesta. The hypothesis 
that Vesta is the parent body of these meteorites has 
received strong support from two recent discoveries. 
Firstly, some 20 small asteroids (<10 km in diameter) 
with spectra similar to that of Vesta have been found in 
the main belt. Their orbits are distributed between that of 
Vesta and the 3:1 RESONANCE, a region where asteroid 
orbits are unstable and which is believed to be a source 
of meteorites. Secondly, Hubble Space Telescope images 
have revealed a huge impact crater (460 km in diameter) 
on Vesta. This crater may well be the site of origin of both 
the small Vesta-like asteroids and the basaltic achon- 
drites. 


Meteorite ages 
Different ages can be defined for meteorites, depending 
on the method used for the determination. 


Crystallization age —age of the solar system 

The clock used to determine the age of a rock is general- 
ly a couple of isotopes present in the rock, one of which 
is produced by the radioactive decay of the other, for 
instance 87Rb-87Sr, 40K-40A1,238U-206Pp, etc. The trans- 
formation of the parent isotope (P) into the daughter iso- 
tope (D) follows a law whose time dependence is well 
established: 


Np (#)=Np(#)(e*-1) 


where Np(t) is the number of atoms of D produced at 
time t, Np(t) is the number of remaining atoms of P, and 
d is the decay constant of P. By measuring Np and Np, 
one can thus determine the time ft, called the age of the 
rock. This is just complicated by the fact that one has to 
take into account the quantity of D initially present at 
t=0, but there are technical solutions to this problem. 
Now what does t=0 mean, in other words, when did the 
clock start? The clock started at the closure of the system, 
i.e. at the time when no more addition or removal of 
either P or D occurred in the sample studied, except for 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


what is due to radioactive decay. This happened when 
the temperature of the sample became low enough to 
prevent atomic diffusion. The (crystallization) age of a 
rock is thus the time elapsed since its temperature passed 
below the closure temperature of the system. 

The CAIs mentioned above are present in primitive 
meteorites, whose temperature always remained low. 
Their age is thus the time elapsed since the end of the 
high-temperature event in which they formed. Using the 
U-Pb clock, an age of 4.566 Gyr has been determined, 
with an uncertainty of only 2 Myr. No older material has 
been found, and this age of 4.566 Gyr is taken as the age 
of the solar system. As all terrestrial rocks have been 
heated after the formation of the Earth, they are all 
younger than their planet: the oldest ones have an age of 
only 3.8 Gyr. Chondrites have ages between 4.56 and 4.50 
Gyr, which reflects moderate variations of their thermal 
histories in their parent asteroids. The ages of the differ- 
entiated meteorites vary between 4.56 and 4.45 Gyr, 
which shows that the thermal activity of their parent 
bodies, although more intense than that of the chondrit- 
ic asteroids, occurred at about the same time, very early 
in the solar system history. The first Martian meteorites 
studied had very young ages, around 1.3 Gyr. As no 
asteroid was still hot at such a recent time, the conclusion 
was inescapable: these meteorites had to come from a 
large planet that could still have magmatic activity as 
recently as 1.3 Gyr ago. 


Exposure age 

When a meteoroid is extracted from its parent body, it 
starts being exposed to irradiation by cosmic rays, from 
which it was protected before by overlying rocks. 
Energetic cosmic ray particles induce nuclear reactions in 
the meteoroid within the first few meters below the sur- 
face, breaking atomic nuclei and creating new ones, 
called cosmogenic nuclides. This irradiation stops when 
the meteorite reaches the surface of the Earth, whose 
atmosphere protects it against cosmic rays. A measure- 
ment of the amount of cosmogenic nuclides, for instance 
21Ne, yields the duration of the exposure, i.e. the time it 
took the meteorite to travel from its parent body to the 
Earth. Typical exposure ages of chondrites are 1-100 Myr, 
those of irons extend to more than 2 Gyr. 


Terrestrial age 

As cosmic ray irradiation stops upon arrival on Earth, 
radioactive cosmogenic nuclides decay within a meteorite 
without being produced any more. A comparison of their 
concentration in a collected meteorite with that normally 
found in a fresh fall gives the time elapsed since arrival on 
Earth, called the terrestrial age. 14C and °6Cl have conve- 
nient half-lives for this kind of measurement (5700 yr and 
0.3 Myr, respectively). Terrestrial ages up to 1 Myr have 
been determined for meteorites collected in Antarctica. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Isotopic anomalies and presolar grains 

CAIs not only are the oldest solar system solids, they 
extend their memory to before the birth of the Sun. In 
1976, isotopically anomalous magnesium was found in 
Al-rich minerals from CAIs of the Allende carbonaceous 
chondrite: there was an excess of 26Mg of up to a few per 
cent with respect to the normal composition of Mg. In 
addition, this excess was correlated with the Al/Mg 
ratio. The explanation is that, when these minerals 
formed, they incorporated, together with the stable iso- 
tope 27Al, the radioactive isotope 2Al. The decay of 26Al 
to 26Mg produced the observed excess. 26Al is thought to 
be synthesized in supernova explosions. As its half-life is 
only 0.73 Myz, the inferred initial 26Al/27Al ratio in the 
CAIs has been interpreted as implying that a supernova 
exploded in the vicinity of the molecular cloud that was 
to become the solar system, no more than a few million 
years before formation of the CAIs. This interpretation 
was strengthened by later discoveries of evidence for in- 
situ decay of other short lived radioactivities (53Mn, 
41Ca). 

This was the generally accepted picture until very 
recently, when evidence was found for in-situ decay of 
10Be in a CAI from the Allende chondrite. !9Be, as other 
isotopes of the light elements Li, Be and B, is not pro- 
duced in stellar nucleosynthesis. It is made by high ener- 
gy nuclear reactions (spallation reactions) between galac- 
tic cosmic ray particles and the interstellar medium. 
However, the quantity of !°Be inferred to be so produced 
in an interstellar cloud falls short of explaining that 
found in the Allende CAI by two orders of magnitude, 
and !0Be needs to be made in the solar nebula itself. The 
x-wind model provides a natural framework for that: the 
protosolar flares that melt the CAIs also irradiate their 
materials with energetic particles capable of inducing 
spallation reactions. 26Al and other short lived nuclides 
can also be made by spallation. With specific, but not 
unreasonable assumptions, it seems possible to account 
for all short lived radioactivities at the levels detected in 
CAIs. In this model, of course, the need for a late super- 
nova disappears. Moreover, the lower amount of 2°A] ini- 
tially present in chondrules compared to CAIs, interpret- 
ed in the supernova model as due to a time difference of 
a few Myr between CAI and chondrule formation, 
results in the x-wind model from their different forma- 
tion site: chondrules are made slightly farther away from 
the Sun than CAIs, at a place where the higher gas pres- 
sure partially shields them from the protosolar energetic 
particles. The question of supernova or not supernova 
needs further study, but it is clearly among one of the 
most fundamental questions to answer in meteoritics 
and related astrophysics at the present time. 

Anomalous isotopic compositions had already been 
found for oxygen in CAIs in 1973. Here, the anomalies 
could not be explained by the decay of a radioactive iso- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


tope. Moreover, it turned out that it was not possible to 
define a normal solar system isotopic composition of O, 
because it was different in all analyzed bodies. Indeed, 
every meteorite group listed in table 1 (hence every par- 
ent body) has its own oxygen isotopic composition. Even 
though this is not well understood, it offers an addition- 
al powerful tool for meteorite classification. Oxygen iso- 
tope data support an origin from the same parent body 
for all Martian meteorites. The identical O isotopic com- 
position in enstatite chondrites and enstatite achondrites 
confirms what their mineralogy suggests, that they are 
somehow related. 

This isotopic variability is generally interpreted in 
terms of the existence, in the solar nebula, of two oxygen 
reservoirs, one 16O-rich (probably dust), the other 160- 
poor (probably gas). Thus, contrary to what has long 
been believed, the solar nebula was not thoroughly 
homogenized. This was confirmed later by the discovery 
of isotopic anomalies for many other elements (Si, Ca, Ti, 
Cr, Sr, Ba, Nd, Sm), implying that various nucleosynthet- 
ic components issued from different stellar sources 
escaped homogenization and were preserved with their 
own isotopic characteristics until they were incorporated 
into forming CAIs. 

However fascinating these isotopic anomalies may 
be, there is no doubt that CAIs were produced in the 
solar system, and that individual isotopic components 
were mixed and diluted in the process. Hence the rather 
low magnitude of these anomalies: a few per cent at 
most. In 1987, things changed with the discovery in car- 
bonaceous chondrites of nanometer-sized presolar crys- 
tals of diamond, i.e. diamonds made in stellar environ- 
ments prior to the formation of the solar system, which 
managed to find their way to the solar nebula and to 
survive up to now in primitive chondrites. Diamonds 
were soon followed by larger presolar silicon carbide 
(SiC, figure 5), graphite, titanium carbide, silicon nitride, 
and corundum (A1,03). These grains are big enough (up 
to a few um) to be analyzed individually with an ion 
microprobe. The isotopic compositions of their major 
elements, as well as those of all analyzed minor or trace 
elements, are very different from the solar system com- 
position. For instance, the 12C/18C ratio, which is equal 
to 89 in the solar system, varies from 2 to 7000 in preso- 
lar graphite grains; the 160/180 ratio, 500 in the solar 
system, varies from 200 to 40000 in presolar corundum 
grains. Comparison with stellar observation data and 
with models of stellar nucleosynthesis allows us to iden- 
tify the stellar sources of the grains. Apparently, many 
stars provided dust grains to the solar system. Most SiC 
and corundum grains originate from red giant and 
asymptotic giant branch stars; diamond, some of the 
graphite and a small fraction of SiC probably come from 
supernova(e). The study of presolar grains has quickly 
expanded to become a field of its own, a new branch of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


8330 


SKY 12,008 


Figure 5. A presolar silicon carbide grain from the Murchison 
CM2 chondrite, seen in the scanning electron microscope. It 
probably formed around an AGB star. Scale bar 1 um. (Photo 
courtesy of S Amari, Washington University.) 


laboratory astrophysics, whose achievements were just 
unimaginable fifteen years ago. More discoveries are to 
come. In particular, for experimental reasons, attention 
has mainly focused up to now on carbonaceous grains. 
It is conceivable that many presolar oxide grains are still 
hiding within the oxygen-rich solar system matter, but 
could be soon unveiled. Not all observations are 
explained, in particular concerning graphite grains. In 
addition, large isotopic anomalies have been found in 
meteorites and interplanetary dust particles for some 
elements (H, N), suggesting an interstellar origin, but 
the carrier phases of these anomalies are not known yet. 
On the other hand, doubts have been raised recently 
about the presolar nature of the nanodiamonds, as these 
have been found to be absent in interplanetary dust par- 
ticles believed to come from comets. Comets are expect- 
ed to be at least as rich in presolar grains as asteroids. A 
lower abundance of diamonds in comet samples could 
mean that at least part of the diamonds formed in the 
solar system. These are just a few of the questions that 
remain to be solved. 


Bibliography 

Bernatowicz T and Zinner E (eds) 1997 Astrophysical 
Implications of the Laboratory Study of Presolar 
Materials (New York: American Institute of Physics) 

Cooper G et al 2001 Carbonaceous meteorites as a source 
of sugar-related organic compounds for the early 
Earth Nature 414 879-883 

Hewins R H, Jones R H and Scott E R D (eds) 1996 
Chondrules and the Protoplanetary Disk (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Kerridge J F and Matthews M S (eds) 1988 Meteorites and 
the Early Solar System (Tucson: University of Arizona 
Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Pieters CM and McFadden L A 1994 Meteorite and aster- 
oid reflectance spectroscopy: Clues to early Solar 
System processes Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 22 
457-97 

Zinner E 1998 Stellar nucleosynthesis and the isotopic 
composition of presolar grains from primitive mete- 
orites Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 26 147-88 

Claude Perron 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites from Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteorites from Mars 


The SNC METEORITES, named after the initials of the first 
discovered members (Shergotty, Nakhla and Chassigny), 
are a group of stony meteorites that are thought to come 
from Mars, rather than the asteroid belt. They are all 
igneous rocks (i.e. formed by crystallizing from molten 
material) and are distinguished from other meteorites by 
their ages, which are as low as 165 million years old. A 
young age implies formation on a body that was still 
active (that is, not totally cooled and solidified) well after 
the initial aggregation of the solar system about 4560 mil- 
lion years ago. In other words, the SNCs must originate 
from a planet-sized body, not an asteroid. There are sev- 
eral reasons why the planet from which they originated 
is almost certainly Mars. 


How do we know that the meteorites come from 
Mars? 

On the basis of their young crystallization ages, the SNC 
meteorites were recognized as different from asteroidal 
meteorites long before their Martian origin was accepted. 
It was suggested that the meteorites might actually be 
terrestrial, or from the Moon, but there are convincing 
counterarguments for both of these possibilities. 
Impactors frequently hit the Earth, so it could be argued 
that the SNC meteorites were broken from the Earth’s 
surface with insufficient energy to escape totally. The 
counter-argument to this is that all oxygen-bearing rocks 
from the Earth show a characteristic variation in compo- 
sition of the three stable oxygen isotopes (see figure 1). 
Data from the SNCs also fall on a single line indicating 
that they all come from the same planet, but, because this 
line is displaced from that for terrestrial samples, the 
SNCs cannot come from the Earth. 

The Moon is heavily cratered and was also consid- 
ered a possible source object for SNC meteorites. 
However, the Apollo and Luna samples returned direct- 
ly from the Moon are so different in age and composition 
from the SNCs that the latter cannot be from the Moon. 

The specific observations that linked SNC mete- 
orites to Mars came with analysis of gases trapped 
within one of the samples, the Antarctic meteorite 
named Elephant Moraine (EET) A79001. This meteorite 
contains inclusions of black glass scattered throughout 
its mass. The glass was formed by shock melting of 
mineral grains, presumably during the impact event 
that lofted the meteorite from the surface of its parent 
body. Analysis of gas trapped within the glass during 
the impact shock shows that it is identical in composi- 
tion to that of the atmosphere on Mars (as measured by 
the Viking landers in 1976; see figure 2). The only way 
that this could happen is if EET A79001 came from 
Mars. Since (on the basis of their oxygen isotopic com- 
position) all the other SNC meteorites come from the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


T T T 
3.0 F 
Martian Fractional Line > 
o rae 
(e) ee 
~25- ao" 
ve) Pk 
ia ° Terrestrial Fractional Line 
20 Pos H I 
3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 


818 O (%o) 


Figure 1. The oxygen isotopic composition of SNC meteorites 
(adapted from Franchi et al, 1999). 


same parent as EET A79001, then they too must come 
from Mars. 


What are the SNC meteorites? 

The SNCs are named after the type specimens of the 
three original subgroups. Collection of additional 
Martian meteorites from Antarctica and the Sahara 
Desert has extended the number of subgroups to five. 
The subgroups are rocks that formed in different loca- 
tions at or below the Martian surface. The groups have 
different mineralogies and chemistries and cannot all 
have come from a single impact event. At least three 


18 T T T T T T T T T T T T T T 


Species abundance 
(log no. of particles cms) 


Martian atmosphere 


10 12 14 16 18 
Glass from EETA 79001 


Figure 2. Comparison of the composition of Mars’ atmosphere 
with gas trapped in the shergottite EETA 79001 (after Pepin, 
1985). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteorites from Mars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


craters, with minimum diameters of about 12 km, are 
required to produce the variety of Martian meteorite 
types. 

The shergottites are silicate rocks that are now fur- 
ther divided into two subgroups, with different forma- 
tion localities. One group is of fine-grained rocks that 
originated in a lava flow, while the other is of more 
coarse-grained rocks that cooled deeper below the 
Martian surface. The shergottites have crystallization 
ages of between 165 and 450 Myr. At least two 
cratering events ejected shergottites from Mars into 
space; these events happened in much more recent times, 
0.5-3 million years ago. 

The nakhlites are almost unshocked rocks that 
formed at or near the Martian surface in a thick flow. 
They solidified from melts about 1.3 billion years ago, 
and were ejected from the planet about 10-12 million 
years ago. The meteorites have been altered by weather- 
ing on Mars’ surface, leading to the production of 
secondary minerals (clays, carbonates and sulfates) asso- 
ciated with which are low concentrations of Martian 
organic material. It has thus been suggested that 
nakhlites might contain evidence for a Martian bios- 
phere. 

Chassigny is the only member of its subgroup. It is 
almost completely composed of the iron and magnesium 
silicate mineral olivine, and it crystallized below the 
Martian surface about 1.3 billion years ago. 

Like Chassigny, Allan Hills 84001 (ALH 84001) is the 
only member of its subgroup. It is the oldest of all the 
Martian meteorites, having crystallized about 4500 mil- 
lion years ago. It has had a long and complex history of 
shock and thermal metamorphism and also contains car- 
bonate minerals, indicating that at some stage in its his- 
tory it has been in contact with Martian water. Since few 
hydrated minerals (such as are found in clays on Earth) 
have been identified among the alteration products in 
ALH 84001, it has been proposed that the carbonates 
were produced at the surface of Mars in a region of 
restricted water flow, such as an evaporating pool of 
brine. 


Are there microfossils in Allan Hills 84001? 

Throughout ALH 84001 there are patches of bright 
orange carbonates, up to a few millimeters across. A team 
in the USA, led by Dr David McKay from NASA in 
Houston, Texas, studied ALH 84001. They found tiny 
structures in the carbonates that looked like fossilized 
bacteria. Associated with the carbonates were organic 
compounds. Although some of the organics are probably 
terrestrial contamination, a proportion is Martian. Also 
present in ALH 84001 are crystals of an iron-rich mineral 
called magnetite. Magnetite can be produced by bacteria. 
In 1996, McKay’s team reported that the shapes, with 
their associated organic compounds and magnetite 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


grains, were probably fossilized Martian bacteria. This 
conclusion has not been widely accepted; however, the 
report of possible fossils in a meteorite from Mars has 
inspired much research and re-ignited the debate about 
life on Mars. 


Bibliography 

Franchi I A, Wright I P, Sexton AS and Pillinger C T 1999 
The oxygen-isotopic composition of Earth and Mars 
Meteorit. Planet. Sci. 34 657-661 

McKay D S, Gibson E K Jr, Thomas-Keprta K L, Vali H, 
Romanek C S, Clemett S J, Chillier X D F, Maechling 
C Rand Zare R N 1996 Search for past life on Mars: 
possible relic biogenic activity in Martian meteorite 
ALH84001 Science 273, 924-930 

McSween H Y Jr 1994 What we have learned about Mars 
from SNC meteorites Meteoritics 29, 757-779 

Meyer C Mars Meteorite Compendium 

http:/ /curator.jsc.nasa.gov /antmet/mmc/mmce.html 

Nyquist L E, Bogard D D, Shih C-Y, Greshake A, St6ffler 
D and Eugster O 2001 Ages and geologic histories of 
Martian meteorites Space Sci. Rev. 96 105-164 

Pepin R O 1985 Evidence of Martian origins Nature 317, 
473-475 


Monica M. Grady 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Meteoroid 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteoroid 


A piece of debris from a larger parent body, pursuing 
its own orbit around the Sun, which has the potential 
to strike the Earth and produce a meteor or meteorite. 
There is no agreed dividing line between a meteoroid and 
a small asteroid, but by ‘meteoroid’ is usually meant a 
sub-meter sized particle. A typical meteoroid is roughly 
5 mm in size with a density of about 0.2 g cm-?. 
Such low-density meteoroids are dust particles shed by 
comets, and are spread around cometary orbits in meteor 
streams. When these friable particles strike the Earth’s 
atmosphere, they are rapidly ablated and burn up entirely, 
the friction of their passage producing a brief luminescent 
trail visible as a meteor. Higher-density meteoroids 
(about 2 g cm”°) originate from collisions suffered by 
asteroids. Their higher structural integrity enables them, 
if of sufficient size, to survive their passage through the 
Earth’s atmosphere and penetrate to the surface as a 
meteorite. 


See also: meteors, meteorites, meteor stream, near-Earth 
asteroids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Meteors 


Meteors are transient luminous phenomena visible in the 
night sky and popularly called shooting stars. They are 
caused by small solid cosmic bodies called meteoroids. 
Meteoroids enter the atmosphere of the Earth with 
cosmic velocities of several tens of kilometers per second, 
evaporate and radiate typically at about 90 km above the 
surface. Most meteoroids are products of disintegration 
of COMETS and ASTEROIDS but a small percentage may be of 
interstellar origin. Meteoroids producing typical meteors 
visible to the naked eye are only few millimeters across. 

Meteors brighter than the planet Venus are called 
FIREBALLS OF BOLIDES. Some fireballs may be brighter than 
the full Moon and in rare occasions a fireball may be 
visible also during the daytime. Such bright events 
are caused by meter-sized meteoroids. Fragments of 
sufficiently large and sufficiently strong meteoroids can 
survive the atmospheric passage and can reach the ground 
aS METEORITES. However, it is not true that the brighter the 
fireball the larger is the meteorite that is produced. 

Most meteors come from random directions. These 
are called sporadic meteors. In certain periods of year, 
however, meteors coming from the same direction on 
parallel trajectories and with almost identical velocities 
appear. This phenomenon is called a METEOR SHOWER and 
the meteors are called shower meteors. All meteors of a 
particular shower have a common origin in one parent 
body, in most cases a comet. The meteoroids released 
from a comet spread along the comet trajectory and form 
a meteoroid stream. The encounter of the Earth with 
a meteoroid stream produces the meteor shower. The 
direction the meteors come from is called the radiant. 
The apparent paths on the sky of all meteors of a shower 
intersect in the radiant. 

Extremely rich meteor showers are called METEOR 
storMs. Meteor storms are rare phenomena occurring a few 
times per century and lasting only a few hours. Bright 
fireballs and meteor storms belong to the most impressive 
astronomical phenomena observable by the naked eye. 


Terminology 


meteor: luminous phenomenon in the sky, shooting star 


meteoroid: cosmic body 0.01 mm-10 m in size; meteoroids 
produce meteors as they enter the atmosphere 


meteorite: any meteoroid remnant which survived the 
atmospheric flight and reached the ground 


Meteor investigation 

Meteor astronomy, as a science, started in 1833. On 
13 November of that year, a meteor storm was widely 
observed in Northern America. Although meteor storms 
had been observed before—there are records in Chinese, 
Japanese and European chronicles—they were considered 
as solely atmospheric effects. During the 1833 storm, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


scientists noted that the apparent point of emergence of 
the meteors, i.e. the radiant, remained fixed relatively to 
the stars in the constellation of Leo during the storm. This 
pointed out the cosmic origin of meteors. The storm was 
named the Leonids (see figure 1). The radiant was then 
recognized also for less impressive annual meteor showers 
such as the PERsEIDS. The relation to comets was established 
in 1867 when Schiaparelli showed that the Perseid stream 
has a similar orbit to comet Swift-Tuttle. Subsequently, the 
parent comets of several other streams were also identified. 

The connection of fireballs (see figure 2) and 
meteorites had also not been recognized for long time. In 
1794 CHLADNI argued for a cosmic origin of stones falling 
from the heavens; nevertheless, his idea was accepted only 
at the beginning of the 19th century. 

During most of the 19th century meteor observations 
were restricted to visual methods. The first meteor 
photograph was obtained by Weinek in Prague in 1885 
during the Andromedid meteor storm. In 1897 PICKERING 
in Harvard captured by chance the first photographic 
meteor spectrum. The first successful program of meteor 
spectrophotography was started by Blajko in Moscow in 
1904. Photography proved to be a very successful method 
of meteor investigation. Wide-field cameras can be open 
for hours and wait for a passage of a sufficiently bright 
meteor. The reduction of photographs from two stations 
provides the meteor’s trajectory. The first meteorite fall 
was photographed by Ceplecha in 1959—the Pribram 
meteorite became the first meteorite with a reliably known 
orbit. 

The advancement of electronics during World War II 
opened the way for radar observation of meteors. The 
abnormal radio echoes observed by military radars were 
proved to be due to meteors. Meteors form ionization 
trails in the atmosphere which reflect radio waves. Meteor 
radioastronomy was developed in JODRELLBANK OBSERVATORY 
by Lovett and his colleagues. The radar technique enables 
meteors to be observed also during cloudy weather and 
during daytime. 

In the 1970s a television technique started to be used 
for both direct and spectral meteor observations. The 
sensitivity of TV systems is higher than photographic 
sensitivity but the resolution is lower. More recently, 
atmospheric lidars have been used to detect distinct trails 
of heavy atoms deposited in the upper atmosphere by 
meteors. 

The description of effects of meteoroids on the 
atmosphere of the Earth is one motive of meteor 
studies. Years ago, meteors even served as probes for 
determining the atmospheric density at large altitudes. 
This is now better done by rockets. The main goal 
of meteor astronomy, however, is gathering information 
on meteoroids themselves: their mechanical properties, 
chemical composition, abundance and distribution in the 
solar system, size distribution etc. Meteoroids represent 
samples of their parent bodies, asteroids and comets and 
testify to the history and evolution of the solar system. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Guided all-sky photograph of the 1998 Leonid meteor shower. About 150 meteors can be seen on the picture. The radiant in 
the constellation of Leo is clearly recognizable. The exposure lasted for 4 h (23:33-03:37 UT on 16-17 November 1998). Courtesy: 


Astronomical Observatory Modra, Slovakia. 


Meteor atmospheric interaction 

The process of meteoroid entry into the atmosphere has 
several phases. The first phase is preheating, which occurs 
at the heights about 300-100 km above the Earth’s surface. 
The surface of the meteoroid is heated by the impacts 
of air molecules. The duration of this phase is from 
several seconds to tens of seconds. There is no time to 
heat the body through; the interior remains cool, except 
for meteoroids smaller than 1 mm which can be heated 
completely. 

After the temperature of the surface reaches 2200- 
2600 K, ablation, i.e. mass loss, starts. This occurs at 
heights of 80-130 km, depending on meteoroid velocity, 
size and material. Ablation can take the form of melting, 
evaporation and fragmentation of the meteoroid, and all 
these processes can act simultaneously. A hot gaseous 
envelope from the ablated material and air is formed. The 
radiation of the gases produces the meteor phenomenon. 
The duration is typically 0.1-10 s. As well as losing 
mass the meteoroid is also decelerated. Deceleration is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


important for larger meteoroids deep in the atmosphere. 
Recently, meteor radiation up to heights of 200 km was 
discovered. The mechanism of this high altitude radiation 
is not known. 

The ablation ceases at a velocity of ~3 km s-!— 
there is not enough energy to heat the body. If the body 
is decelerated to this velocity without being completely 
disintegrated, it continues its flight without ablation and 
radiation. This phase is called dark flight and takes 
several minutes. The meteorite is further decelerated 
and falls by free fall to the surface. The motion is, 
however, influenced by atmospheric winds. Dark flight 
starts usually somewhere below a height of 30 km. 

Typical meteorites of mass 0.01-10 kg impact the 
surface with velocities of 10-100 m s~'. The direction 
at the impact does not reflect the original direction of 
the meteor; this information is completely lost during the 
dark flight. Impact creates a pit comparable in size with 
the meteorite. An explosive impact occurs for very large 
meteoroids which have not succeeded in being decelerated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. All-sky photograph of a bright fireball EN 220495. The total exposure time was 7 h. The fireball lasted for about 5 s and was 
brighter than the full Moon. The fireball image has been interrupted by a rotating shutter which enables the fireball velocity to be 


measured. Photograph: Ond¥ejov Observatory, Czech Republic. 


before reaching surface (no dark flight). An impact crater 
much larger than the body itself is then formed. 

Bodies smaller than about 0.01 mm suffer no ablation 
and produce no meteors. Such small particles are called 
dust, not meteoroids. Dust particles are decelerated 
during the preheating phase and do not reach the 
temperature necessary for ablation. The heat is radiated 
out and the particles sediment gradually to the surface. 
They can be collected in the upper atmosphere as 
INTERPLANETARY DUST particles (IDPs). 

In the upper size range, the terminological boundary 
between meteoroids and asteroids is rather arbitrary. A 
10 m diameter can be used as the dividing value. This 
nearly corresponds to the largest bodies observed so far 
during their interaction with the Earth’s atmosphere and 
at the same time to the smallest bodies observed in space 
in reflected sunlight. 

Meteor brightness is usually given in magnitudes 
as determined by comparison with stars. The absolute 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnitude is the magnitude as seen from a distance of 
100 km. The meteor light curve is the meteor brightness 
displayed as a function of time or other quantity (e.g. 
height). A meteor flare is a sudden increase of brightness. 
The duration of flares is usually between 0.01 and 0.1 s. 
A meteor wake is a ‘tail’ of radiation behind the meteor 
‘head’. The wake is easily observed in bright fireballs 
which often have a ‘comet-like’ appearance in part of their 
trajectory. The length of the wake may reach a few km. A 
meteor train is the radiation left in the meteor path after 
the meteor’s disappearance (an afterglow). The visibility 
of a train may reach 1 h in exceptional cases. 


Meteor trajectories and orbits 

Meteor trajectories can be considered as straight lines 
during the few seconds of the ablation phase. Only for long 
fireballs on nearly horizontal trajectories can the curvature 
due to gravity become significant. The orientation of the 
trajectory is described by the equatorial coordinates of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


apparent radiant wz,5z. Another important parameter 
is the meteor velocity, which, however, changes owing 
to atmospheric drag. By an extrapolation, the pre- 
atmospheric velocity, v.., can be determined. 

The heliocentric orbit of a meteoroid before it 
encountered the Earth can be computed from az, 5x and 
Uso. Since the meteor is observed from the surface of 
the rotating Earth, the observed velocity must be firstly 
corrected for this effect which is called diurnal aberration. 
The second effect is the zenith attraction which is due to 
the Earth’s gravity. Gravity accelerates the meteoroid and 
bends its trajectory, attracting the radiant to the zenith. The 
corrected radiant and velocity are called geocentric radiant 
and velocity. They express the meteoroid velocity vector 
relative to the Earth’s center as it would be without the 
Earth’s gravity. Subtracting the Earth’s orbital velocity, the 
meteoroid heliocentric velocity vector is obtained. From 
this vector and the position of the Earth at the time of 
collision, the meteoroid heliocentric orbit is computed. 

The minimum meteor initial velocity is 11.2 km s~ 
which is equal to the escape velocity from the Earth. The 
meteoroid would be accelerated to this velocity even if the 
geocentric velocity were zero. The maximum velocity for 
a meteoroid on a bound heliocentric orbit is 73.5 km s~. 
This is given by the maximum meteoroid heliocentric 
velocity (42.4 km s~'), the maximum Earth orbital velocity 
(30.2 km s~') and the gravitational acceleration. 

The absolute majority of the meteoroids encountering 
the Earth move in elliptical heliocentric orbits and are 
therefore members of our solar system. No interstellar 
meteoroid has been confirmed among bright photographic 
meteors. There are indications that about 1% of faint 
television meteors (produced by meteoroids of the mass of 
the order of 0.1 mg) are interstellar and that the proportion 
of interstellar meteoroids may be even higher among much 
fainter radar meteors. 

The distribution of radiants of sporadic meteors on 
the sky is not isotropic. Five radiant concentrations were 
identified in radar and photographic surveys. They are 
called the Helion, Antihelion, Apex, Northern Toroidal 
and Southern Toroidal sources. The first three lie near 
the ecliptic, at about 20°, 160° and 90° west from the Sun, 
respectively. The toroidal sources lie at +60° and —60° 
from the ecliptic, above and below the apex. The existence 
of the sources reflects the distribution of meteoroid 
orbits. The Helion and Antihelion sources are produced 
by low-inclination prograde meteoroids with significant 
eccentricity, originating from asteroids and short-period 
comets. The Apex source is produced by retrograde orbits 
similar to those of long-period comets. The origin of the 
toroidal sources is less understood. The corresponding 
orbits are prograde with high inclination (60°). 

Of particular interest are the precise trajectories 
and orbits of meteorite-dropping fireballs with recovered 
meteorites. There are only four such cases. The falls 
of meteorites Piibram, Lost City and Innisfree were 
photographed and Peekskill was recorded by video 
cameras. The data are given in table 1. All meteorites 


1 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are ordinary CHONDRITES and the orbits suggest their origin 
in the asteroid belt. 

Above the sporadic background, meteoroid streams 
can be recognized. There is no problem in recognizing 
compact major streams like the Perseids. The existence of 
low-activity streams with non-distinctive orbits is more 
difficult to establish. Various criteria which combine 
the orbital elements and provide a measure of orbital 
similarity have been proposed. The most widespread is 
the so-called D-criterion (see p 135 of Ceplecha et al 1998). 
The D-criterion is also used to relate the meteoroid orbits 
to the orbit of a suspected parent body. 


Meteor counts 

Meteor counts provide information on distribution of 
meteoroids in the solar system and on the structure of 
meteoroid streams. 


Meteor showers 

The traditional measure of meteor shower activity is 
the ZENITH HOURLY RATE (ZHR). It is defined as number 
of meteors observable by one visual observer with the 
radiant in the zenith under standard conditions. ‘Standard 
conditions’ means the limiting magnitude for stars is 6.5. 
If the radiant lies at an elevation h above the horizon, the 
ZHR can be computed from the observed hourly rate HR 
by the formula ZHR = HR/sin” h, where the empirical 
value of the exponent y is 1.4. If the limiting magnitude is 
different, the correction depends on the shower magnitude 
distribution index x defined as x = n(m+1)/n(m), where 
n(m) is the number of meteors of magnitude m. The 
correction is ZHR = HR y*°>-', where L is the actual 
limiting magnitude. 

A list of the most pronounced annual showers is given 
in table 2. The typical maximum ZHR and the duration 
of noticeable activity (ZHR > 3) are given. The Arietids 
are a daytime shower observable only by radar. The 
magnitude distribution index is lower in most showers 
than in sporadic meteors (where x = 3.4). The radiant 
coordinates are given for the time of maximum. The 
radiant positions drift owing to a systematic change of 
curvature of heliocentric orbits. Except for GEMINIDs, the 
known parent bodies of meteor showers are comets. It is 
not clear whether Phaeton, the parent body of Geminids, 
is anormal asteroid or an extinct comet. 

In addition to the regular annual activity, meteor 
outbursts occur from time to time. They include 
exceptional activity of annual showers, observed in Lyris, 
Perseids and especially LEONIDs, as well as the notable 
appearance of showers which show only negligible or no 
activity in normal years. The outbursts are often related 
to the passage of the parent comet near the Earth’s orbit. 
However, outbursts occurred also when the parent comet 
was far from the inner solar system. Extremely strong 
outbursts (ZHR > 1000) are called meteor storms. Meteor 
outbursts and storms are caused by compact filaments 
of meteoroids and their duration is typically only few 
hours. The showers which produced meteor storms in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. The observed meteorite falls. 


Fireball characteristics 


Heliocentric orbit 


Voo Moo ZR M he Mey a i o Q qd 
Meteorite (kms~!) (kg) (deg) (mag) (km) (kg) (AU) e (deg) (deg) (deg) (AU) 
Pribram 20.9 3500 47 -19 (13) 5.8 2.40 0.671 10.5 241.7 17.1 0.789 
Lost City 14.2 160 52 —12 20 173 1.66 0.417 12.0 161.0 283.0 0.967 
Innisfree 14.5 30 22 —12 20 46 1.87 0.473 12.3 178.0 316.8 0.986 
Peekskill 14.7 1300 86 (-15) (30) 124 1.49 0.41 49 308.0 17.0 0.886 


Uoo, initial velocity; moo, initial mass; zr, angle to vertical; M, absolute magnitude; hz, end height; m-,, total mass of 
recovered meteorites; a, semimajor axis; e, eccentricity; i, inclination; w, argument of perihelion; Q, longitude of the 


ascending node; q, perihelion distance. 


Table 2. The most active annual meteor showers. 


Radiant 

Maximum Duration ZHR Velocity 
Name date (days) maximum x Parent body a 6 (km s~') 
Quadrantids 4 January 4 130 2.5 P/Machholz ? 232 +45 43 
Lyrids 22 April 6 15 2.7. P/Thatcher 272 +33 49 
n-Aquarids 6 May 25 40 2.7. P/Halley 338 -1 66 
Arietids 8 June 20 50 2.7. P/Machholz ? 45 +423 38 
6-AquaridsS 29 July 15 10 3.3. P/Machholz ? 339-17 43 
Perseids 13 August 30 80 2.5  P/Swift-Tuttle 44 +58 61 
Orionids 22 October 15 25 3.1 P/Halley 95 +16 67 
Taurids 3November 30 10 2.3. P/Encke 48 +18 30 
Leonids 17 November 6 20 34  P/Tempel-Tuttle 153 +22 71 
Geminids 14 December 10 90 2.6 (3200) Phaeton 112. «+32 = (336 


last 200 yr were Leonids (1799, 1833, 1866, 1966, 1999), 
Andromedids (1872, 1885) and Draconids (1933, 1946). 
The 1966 Leonids reached a ZHR of 144000 according to 
some (uncertain) reports. 

The year-to-year observation of the activity of meteor 
showers provides information on the distribution of 
meteoroids along the cometary orbits and, consequently, 
on the ejection processes from comets. The storms are 
probably related to the cometary dust trails observed in 
infrared light. 


Influx of sporadic meteors 

Typical hourly rates of sporadic meteors are 5-10. Because 
of the geometric conditions, more meteors can be seen in 
morning hours than in evening hours (a diurnal variation). 
About 700000 zero magnitude meteors appear on the 
entire Earth every day. 

Sporadic meteors are the major source of cosmic 
material on the Earth. After relating the meteor brightness 
and other observable quantities to the meteoroid mass, the 
influx of meteoroids of various masses can be computed. 
By adding the information on interplanetary dust and 
NEAR-EARTH ASTEROIDS, this could be done for the mass range 
10-7!-10'° kg. On average, 1.5 x 10° kg of cosmic material 
hits the Earth per year. However, ina typical year only half 
of this mass arrives. The second half comes from the bodies 
with masses of the order of 10'*-10'° kg (asteroids several 
km in diameter) which impact only once in 10’ years. The 
second most important bodies for the mass influx are those 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the mass range 10°-10° kg (mostly cometary bodies 
~10 m in diameter) with several impacts per year. 

The distribution of meteoroids with mass is unequal 
and no single population index (or magnitude distribution 
index) can be applied to the whole interval (figure 3). 
This suggests that several sources of sporadic meteoroids 
are present. The third most important source is the 
dust. Meteors in the visual range represent only a minor 
constituent in terms of mass influx. This may change 
during short periods of meteor showers and storms. 


Evolution of meteoroid streams 
Although the parent body of the Geminid meteoroid 
stream, Phaeton, does not show any cometary activity, 
typical meteoroid streams are formed by comets. An 
asteroidal stream can be produced by a collision among 
asteroids but a powerful collision is rare event and 
only minor streams are usually formed by asteroidal 
collisions. Acometary stream can be formed by a complete 
disintegration of a comet (like COMET BIELA formed the 
Andromedids) but most streams have been formed less 
dramatically during the normal cometary activity. 
Cometary nuclei are composed by ices and dust 
grains. Solar radiation causes the ices to sublime, 
especially near the comet perihelion. The released gas flow 
also carries solid grains. The grains achieve a speed up 
to tens of meters per second relative to the nucleus. They 
then move independently on their own heliocentric orbits. 
However, since the relative speed is much lower than the 
comet orbital velocity, the meteoroid orbits remain similar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


log dm_ [kg/earth/year/d(log m)] 
8 


B 


~ 


fos) 


poer tii toyig 


oa 


c= 


ive) 


av) 
bisitig 


1 1 a a 


20 15 10 5 0 5 10 15 
log m_ [kg] 


Figure 3. Influx of sporadic meteoroids given in terms of mass 
per order of mass interval per entire Earth’s surface per year as a 
function of the mass. The four maxima correspond (from the left 
to the right) to dust, visual meteors, 10 m cometary bodies and 
km sized asteroids. A newer but unconfirmed calibration for 
dust is given as curve B. Courtesy: Z Ceplecha. 


to the orbit of the parent comet and a well-defined stream 
is formed. Because of small differences in semimajor axes 
and thus in the orbital periods, the meteoroids gradually 
spread along the cometary orbit. 

The sizes of particles in a stream formed this way 
are limited. Small particles are subject to solar radiation 
pressure. Grains of the size of the order of 0.1 wm 
are expelled from the solar system. The orbits of 
somewhat larger dust particles are modified by the 
RADIATION PRESSURE and by the POYNTING-ROBERTSON EFFECT 
and a mass segregation within the stream may occur this 
way. On the other hand, meteoroids larger than several 
centimeters are too heavy to be carried by the gas outflow 
against the comet’s gravity and are therefore not present 
in streams formed this way. 

In addition to the radiation pressure, both the mete- 
oroids and the parent comet are subject to gravitational 
perturbations by planets. This leads to gradual disper- 
sion of the stream into sporadic background. The age of 
the current meteoroid streams is of the order of 104 yr only. 
Their masses are comparable with the masses of the parent 
comets. Mutual collisions among meteoroids are another 
effect which leads to the stream dispersion. 

The precession of the whole stream can shift the 
ascending and descending nodes. Any associated meteor 
showers may then appear or disappear in course of several 
centuries. This is the case of Geminids which evolve very 
rapidly. If the orbital evolution of the parent body is 
complicated, a whole complex of streams can be formed 
leading to several showers with quite different orbits. This 
scenario was proposed for comet Machholz 1 with eight 
possible showers associated, including the Quadrantids. 


Classification of meteors 
One possible classification is into sporadic and shower 
meteors. However, meteors differ also in their physical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


aspects. The most rigorous physical classification is 
based on the ablation coefficient o (for definition see the 
section ‘Meteor physics’), fragmentation events or spectra. 
However, simple quantities such as meteor beginning and 
end heights can be also used to reveal meteoroid structural 
classes. 

The photographic and television meteors of normal 
brightness (meteoroids up to about 0.1 kg) have been 
classified according to the height of the beginning of 
the luminous trajectory. The height, when normalized 
to the same initial velocity and incidence angle, shows 
differences up to 30 km, corresponding to a factor of 
50 in the air density. This reflects the differences in 
the material properties (heat conductivity, heat capacity, 
density, radiation emissivity). For larger meteoroids (i.e. 
fireballs), the end height, normalized to the same velocity, 
angle and mass, proved to be a better discrimination 
factor. The penetration ability differences are up to a factor 
of several hundreds when expressed in terms of the air 
density. 

Four main types of fireballs can be recognized. 
Their typical heights, ablation coefficients and densities 
are given in table 3. The ablation coefficient can be 
derived directly for sufficiently well-observed fireballs. 
The meteoroid bulk density is more difficult to derive 
and the values given in table 3 are only statistical. The 
assignment of stones (ordinary chondrites) to the most 
compact type I was confirmed by the photographed falls 
of three meteorites. ACHONDRITES may also belong to this 
type. The connection between types III and comets is 
confirmed by the fact that the members of typical cometary 
meteor showers belong to these types. There is no 
special type for iron meteoroids. Because of their high 
thermal conductivity, iron meteoroids have high ablation 
coefficients (between types II and IIIA). This is partly 
compensated by higher density and the end heights are 
therefore comparable with those of type II fireballs. 

Iron meteoroids are best recognized from meteor 
spectra. Also achondrites can be distinguished by their 
spectra. On the other hand, chondrites and cometary 
meteoroids show similar spectra because they have 
similar chemical composition despite their very different 
structure. 


Meteor physics 


In this section we review the basics of the so-called physical 
theory of meteors. The theory is mainly used to derive 
meteoroid properties, such as initial velocity and mass, 
ablation properties, composition etc, from observations. 
The observations provide meteor position and brightness 
as a function of time and, in some cases, the spectrum of 
the radiation, the intensity and duration of a radar echo 
or other data. Another approach is numerical modeling of 
meteors using hydrocodes. Because of the complexity of 
the problem, these methods provided only partial success 
and are not discussed here in more detail. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 3. Classification of fireballs. 


(s* km~?) 


h B he oO 
Type (km) (km) 
I 80 30 0.015 
Il 90 45 0.04 


TIA 100 60 0.10 
TNB 110 70 0.25 


Pad Assigned 

(gem?) material 

3.7 Stony 

2.0 Carbonaceous 
~0.8 Cometary 
0.3 Soft cometary 


hz, beginning height of meteors (vo9 = 25 km s-'); hg, end height 
of fireballs (v9. = 25kms~!, moo = 10 kg); 0, ablation coefficient; 


pa, bulk density. 


Dynamics and fragmentation 

We start with a brief description of the theory of motion 
of a single ablating body. The body (meteoroid) is 
characterized at each point of the trajectory by its mass m, 
head cross-section S, density og and velocity v. The density 
of the atmosphere at that point is p, t is time. The motion 
and ablation of the body are governed by two equations, 
the drag equation, 


m— = —T'Spv? (1) 


and the mass-loss equation 


dm Sov? 


Here I is the drag coefficient, Q is the energy necessary 
for ablation of a unit mass of the meteoroid (Q * (2- 
8) x 10° J kg“) and A is the heat transfer coefficient. 
In principle [ can be greater than unity owing to the 
reactive impulse of reflected and evaporated molecules. 
A is always less than unity, because the energy is 
consumed also for other purposes, such as heating of 
the surrounding atmosphere and the evaporated material, 
radiation, ionization, sonic waves etc. The acceleration 
due to Earth’s gravity is neglected in the above equations. 

To solve the equations, new quantities are introduced: 
the ablation coefficient o = A/2PQ, the shape factor 
A = S/V?3 = Sm," (A is a dimensionless quantity; 
for a sphere A = 1.21) and the shape-density coefficient 
K =TAp;,"”. The drag and mass-loss equations can be 
then rewritten: 


d 
= = —Kpm '3y? (3) 
d 
. = —Kopmv°. (4) 


The solution is obtained by assuming constant o and 
K. One integral is obtained by dividing both equations 
and integrating: 
=(1/2)o (v3.—v?) (5) 


M=Myve 


where i1.0, Vso are the mass and velocity at the beginning 
of the ablation phase. The ablation coefficient o is an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


important parameter describing the meteoroid mass-loss 
ability. 

Equation (5) relates mass to velocity but does not 
tell us anything about the change of velocity with time. 
The complete solution can be obtained by means of 
exponential integral functions and can be found in the 
specialist literature. The solution is important because 
observational data (length as a function of time) can be 
fitted to the resulting functions by optimizing four free 
parameters. The most important parameters obtained are 
the ablation coefficient, o, the initial velocity, v., and 
the combination Km;!/°. Assuming a typical value for 
TA (&1.1) and density p,, the initial mass m. can be 
estimated. Equation (5) can be used to compute mass 
change during the flight. The mass determined this way is 
called dynamic mass. Alternatively, if mass is determined 
from photometry, the density p, can be computed also 
independently. 

The single-body theory is only an approximation. 
There is much observational evidence that meteoroids are 
subject to severe fragmentation during their atmospheric 
penetration. In the case of the Peekskill fireball, 
70 fragments are directly visible on one still photograph. 
More than 1000 meteorites were recovered from a single 
fireball in Mbale, Uganda, in 1992. 

A sudden fragmentation changes the dynamics 
abruptly because of abrupt change of mass. The 
single-body theory cannot be used. Nevertheless, one 
fragmentation point can be found by a sophisticated 
procedure. It was found that fragmentation occurs in 
most cases under a dynamic pressure less than 1.2 MPa. 
In contrast, the mechanical strength of most meteorites 
is higher than 10 MPa. The structure of meteoroids 
seems therefore to be strongly affected by the collisions in 
interplanetary space causing large-scale inhomogeneities. 

As well as sudden fragmentation events, continuous 
fragmentation prevails in some meteoroids, especially 
of types IITA, IIIB. Continuous fragmentation can be 
considered as a mode of ablation and is included in the 
ablation coefficient. In fact, fragmentation is the most 
effective ablation process. 


Flow regimes 

From the aerodynamic point of view three basic flow 
regimes can be distinguished. They are classified 
according to the Knudsen number Kn, which is the ratio 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Meteors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the mean free path of molecules in the vicinity of 
a meteoroid, L, and the characteristic dimensions of 
the meteoroid, R: Kn = L/R. In the free molecule 
regime (Kn > 1) the body suffers direct impacts of 
individual molecules and the collisions among molecules 
are negligible. In the transition flow regime (Kn ~ 1) the 
molecular collisions are non-negligible and a shock wave 
is formed in front of the meteoroid. In the continuum flow 
regime (Kn < 1) air behaves as a continuum, the shock 
wave is strong and sonic booms are produced. 


Radiation and spectra 

During the meteoroid interaction with the atmosphere, 
part of its kinetic energy is transformed into radiation. This 
statement leads to the conventional luminous equation: 


v? dm 
Il=-t 0 di (6) 
Here J is the meteor luminosity and 1 is the luminous 
efficiency, ie. the quantity expressing which part of the 
energy is transformed into radiation. Only the energy loss 
due to mass loss is considered; the equation neglects the 
loss of kinetic energy due to dv/dt, which is smaller in 
most cases. 

The units of J and t represent some problem. If / is 
given in absolute units (erg s~! or W), t is dimensionless. 
If the meteor brightness is measured in magnitudes M, the 
intensity is defined as J] = 10-°4” and the commonly used 
units for t are 0 mag erg! Ss. 

The luminous efficiency depends on meteoroid 
velocity and mass. The actual values are still uncertain. 
The preferred values for 100 kg bodies are about 4% for 
v = 20kms-! and about 2% for v = 10kms~!. For smaller 
bodies the efficiencies are significantly lower. For high 
velocities the efficiencies are even more uncertain. Usually 
it is assumed that 1 is directly proportional to v. A zero 
magnitude meteor may be produced by a 0.5 g meteoroid 
at 20 km s“! or a 0.02 g meteoroid at 60 km s"!. 

The integration of meteor light curves using the lumi- 
nous equation provides the initial meteoroid photometric 
mass. In some cases the dynamic and photometric masses 
do not agree, indicating that our knowledge of fragmenta- 
tion processes and radiation mechanisms is not complete. 

More insight into meteor radiation is provided by 
meteor spectroscopy. Meteor spectra consist primarily 
of emission lines and molecular bands. Most of them 
belong to hot vapors of the meteoroid. The strongest 
lines are usually those of Na, Mg, Ca, Fe, Mn, Cr, Si and 
atmospheric N and O. The continuous thermal radiation 
of the meteoroid surface is negligible in most cases. In 
extremely bright fireballs (mag —20), thermal continuous 
radiation of the vapors becomes significant. 

In the first approximation, meteor spectra can be fitted 
by a model assuming local thermal equilibrium in the hot 
gaseous envelope. However, two spectral components 
are present, one with excitation temperatures of 3500- 
5000 K and one of about 10000 K. The high-temperature 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


component is much stronger in fast meteors. The spectra 
of meteor wakes are far from thermal equilibrium. Little 
is known about meteor trains. 

Meteor spectra can be used to derive the approximate 
composition of the vapors. The vapor composition 
does not always directly reflect the composition of the 
meteoroid. The refractory elements are not efficiently 
vaporized, especially in slow meteors. This suggests 
that melting is the main ablation process. Nevertheless, 
the main compositional classes of meteoroids can be 
recognized from meteor spectra. See the section 
‘Classification of meteors’. 


Ionization 

The collisions among evaporated meteoric atoms and 
atmospheric atoms and molecules cause ionization of 
atoms and molecules. The ionized trail persists for some 
time after the meteor disappearance. The linear electron 
density a (cm~') is supposed to be proportional to the 
meteoroid mass loss rate: 


a= us sly (7) 
pv dt 

Here ys is the mean mass of meteoric atoms and # is 
ionization coefficient which is defined as the number of 
free electrons produced by one evaporated atom. The 
ionization coefficient depends strongly on velocity; the 
dependence £ ~ v*° has been derived, with B ~ 0.01 
for v = 20 kms! and 6 © 1 forv = 70kms"!. 

Reflections from ionized trails are observed by meteor 
radars. The reflection lasts as long as the electron density 
is larger than some critical value (which is dependent on 
radar wavelength). Electron density gradually decreases 
owing to electron diffusion. For long-duration trails 
(>10 s), other effects are also important, in particular the 
attachment of free electrons to neutral particles. Direct 
recombination is slow. 

The radar reflection occurs not only from the ionized 
trail but in exceptional cases also directly from a moving 
source, probably from the vicinity of the meteoroid. This 
phenomenon is called head echo and is still unexplained. 


Bibliography 

Bronshten V A 1983 Physics of Meteoric Phenomena 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Ceplecha Z, Borovitka J, Elford W G, ReVelle D O, 
Hawkes R L, Porubéan V and Simek M 1998 Meteor 
phenomena and bodies Space Sci. Rev. 84 327-471 


Jiri Borovicka 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Metonic Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Metonic Cycle 


An interval of 19 years after which the phases of the Moon 
recur on the same days of the year, which appears to have 
been discovered in or around 433 sc by the Greek natural 
philosopher Meton (c. 460 Bc—?), and about 50 years later by 
the Babylonians. This occurs because 235 lunar months is 
almost exactly equal to 19 tropical years (235 lunar months 
is equivalent to 6939.689 days, whereas 19 tropical years is 
equal to 6939.602 days, a discrepancy of about two hours). 
Meton divided the 19 years into 12 years of 12 months and 
7 years of 13 months. The Metonic cycle was used by the 
Greeks and Babylonians as a reference against which to 
make adjustments to the calendar and provided the basis 
of the rules for determining the date of Easter. 


See also: calendar, month, year. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Metos of Athens (c. 440 Bc—?) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Metos of Athens (c. 440 Bc—?) 


Greek astronomer, perhaps born and certainly active in 
Athens. Made the first recorded attempt to reconcile the 
lunar and solar calendars. In 432 Bc he made observations 
in Athens of the year and the month. His length for the 
year was just 1/76 of a day too long. Since the Earth, 
the Moon and the Sun are independent bodies with quite 
arbitrary periods, attempts to fit together days (Earth’s 
rotation period), months (the lunar orbital period) and the 
year (the period of the solar orbit) never quite work, so 
that for example the year is not a whole number of days. 
Metos discovered that, over a longer length of time, there 
almost was a fit between the Moon and the Sun, namely 
that 235 lunar months (6939.69 days) made up just about 
19 tropical years (6939.60 days). This means that after 235 
months, the synchronism of the solar and lunar calendars 
repeats itself and the phases of the Moon recur on the same 
dates. This became known as the Metonic cycle and was 
adopted from 330 Bc as the basis for the Greek calendar 
until the introduction of the Julian calendar in 46 Bc. Since 
the Metonic cycle is almost equal to 20 eclipse years, 6932.4 
days, it is possible for a series (four or five) lunar eclipses to 
occur on the same dates 19 years apart. CALLIPPUS found an 
even more exact fit between the lunar and solar calendars 
after four Metonic cycles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Michell, John (1724-93) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Michell, John (1724-93) 


Cleric, geologist and astronomer, born apparently 
in Nottingham, England. | Cambridge-educated and 
professor of geology there, invented the idea of black 
holes in a speculative lecture to the Royal Society in 
1783 about the gravitational attraction on light in the 
vicinity of the Sun, or a body more massive than the Sun. 
Calculated that a body some 500 times the diameter of the 
Sun (and the same density, so 100 million solar masses 
and the size of Jupiter’s orbit) would attract light such 
that it could not escape from the Sun’s surface without 
travelling faster than light did (according to Romer’s value). 
Michell’s calculation was based on the now obsolete 
corpuscular theory of light (that light is made of particles 
and can be attracted gravitationally), but his speculation 
contains all the essential ideas behind black holes. Michell 
also showed by statistical methods (which he initiated) 
that many of the double stars cataloged for example 
by Herschel (see HERSCHEL FAMILY) were truly associated 
and gravitationally bound together. He proposed the 
experiment with a torsion balance actually carried out 
by HENRY CAVENDISH to weigh the Earth by determining 
the gravitational constant G. Demonstrated the inverse 
square law between magnetic poles, demonstrated light 
pressure by the deflection of a thin suspended copper 
sheet, worked on earthquakes and seismology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Michelson, Albert (1852-1931) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Michelson, Albert (1852-1931) 


German-American physicist, invented the Michelson- 
Morley interferometer to detect, with MorRLEY, the motion of 
the Earth through the ether, but found that irrespective 
of the orientation of the interferometer, no motion could 
be detected. This was explained by the Fitzgerald— 
Lorentz contraction, and was a foundation for Einstein’s 
theory of special relativity. Michelson went on to 
apply interferometry to astronomy by mounting an 
interferometer on a steel beam on the 100 in Mount Wilson 
telescope, measuring the diameters of six stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Michelson—Morley Experiment 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Michelson—Morley Experiment 


A celebrated experiment carried out by A A Michelson 
(1852-1931) in 1881 and by Michelson together with 
Edward Morley (1838-1923) in 1887, which attempted 
and failed to detect the motion of the Earth through the 
ether. The basis of the experiment was that if a beam of 
light traveled a known distance in the direction in which 
the Earth was supposed to be moving through the ether, 
and another beam traveled the same distance at right 
angles to this direction then, if light moved at a constant 
velocity through the ether, the two beams should take 
different times to cover the distance. The failure to detect 
any difference is accounted for by the special theory of 
relativity. 


See also: ether, special relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Michigan Radio Astronomy Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Michigan Radio Astronomy 
Observatory 


Located in Ann Arbor, close to the University of Michigan 
campus. The primary instrument at the observatory is 
a 26 m diameter parabolic reflector with an 11 m focal 
length. This telescope was constructed in 1958, under 
contract from the Office of Naval Research. Since 1968, 
the research and operation of the observatory have been 
supported jointly by the National Science Foundation and 
the University of Michigan. 

The 26 m telescope is used to study total flux density 
and linear polarization from active extragalactic objects. 
The discovery that such objects vary in brightness with 
time-scales of weeks to a few years was made using 
the Michigan instrument in 1964-5, and the discovery of 
variability in polarization followed in 1966. 

Current research at the observatory is focused on 
understanding the physical conditions in the relativistic 
flows in jets and on investigating the relationship between 
variations in the radio wavelength and the behavior of the 
radiation in other regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.astro.lsa.umich.edu/obs/radiotel/ 
radiotel.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microchannel Plate Detectors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Microchannel Plate Detectors 


Microchannel plates (MCPs) are imaging electron multi- 
pliers of high gain which have been widely used in space 
astronomy from the visible to the x-ray and in space plasma 
analysis. MCPs are, in fact, the archetypal detectors for 
space science: fast, compact, low-mass, low-power de- 
vices with a wavelength response extending from the op- 
tical to the x-ray, coupled with high sensitivity to ions and 
electrons. 


Technology 

The origin of these detectors can be traced to 1930, to 
P T Farnsworth’s US patent for a continuous-dynode 
electron multiplier-—an evacuated hollow tube whose 
internal surface is coated with a resistive material of high 
secondary electron yield and along which a large (~kV) 
potential difference is applied. When ionizing radiation 
strikes the inside wall of the tube, low-energy (~eV) 
electrons emitted from the surface are accelerated down 
the channel by the applied electric field. If these electrons 
gain sufficient energy from the field before next striking 
the wall, they may each promote more than one secondary 
electron into the vacuum and an avalanche may develop. 

The first practical embodiments of this concept were 
in the US, UK and USSR in the early 1960s. Single-channel 
channel electron multipliers (CEMs) with ~1 mm bores 
were fabricated from, among other materials, reduced lead 
(or lead—bismuth) silicate glasses containing significant 
weight fractions of the alkali metals (Cs, K, Na, Li). The 
channels of these CEMs were curved in order to give 
high electron gains (10’-10% for bias voltages of 3 kV) 
while suppressing unwanted afterpulses from positive 
ion feedback. The operating pressure for CEMs and 
MCPs is typically 10-° mbar. With the addition of an 
input cone to increase collecting area, CEMs were very 
rapidly adopted for use in space science—as detectors at 
the foci of paraboloidal x-ray and EUV concentrators on 
the CopeRNicus (1972) and Apollo—Soyuz (1976) missions 
and, in particular, as detectors for positive ion and electron 
analyzers, an instrumental niche they occupy to the 
present day. 

The first MCPs were simply arrays of straight- 
channel CEMs bonded together using a low-melting 
point solder glass. By the late 1960s, however, in a 
development driven by the military need for night vision 
image intensifiers, the modern ‘two-draw’ etchable core 
process, with its similarity to fiber optic production 
technology, had evolved (variants on this process include 
‘hollow’ and ‘triple’ drawing). A bar of acid-soluble 
core glass is inserted into a hollow tube of cladding 
glass and the composite billet pulled down through a 
vertical oven heated above the softening point of the 
glasses. The billet (and hence the final microchannel) is 
usually circular in cross-section, although square channels 
are required for MCP optics (below). The ~1 mm 
fiber emerging from the bottom of the oven is cut into 
lengths which are then stacked into a hexagonal or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


square former to create a multifiber. This multifiber 
is again drawn down, cut, stacked and pressure fused 
at high temperature to produce a boule or block from 
which MCP blanks of the appropriate thickness can be 
sliced. The blanks are then acid etched to produce 
the open channel structure. The embryonic channel 
plate is then chemically treated in order to establish the 
appropriate channel resistivity and secondary electron 
yield coefficient and, finally, nickel alloy (Nichrome or 
Inconel) electrodes are vacuum evaporated onto the front 
and rear faces, connecting all ~10’ channels—each one 
capable of acting as an independent photomultiplier 
tube—in parallel. The finished channel walls have a glass 
composition which varies with depth: in particular, a 
silica-like surface layer some 100-500 A thick overlays 
a thicker semiconducting lead-rich layer. The former 
layer controls the secondary electron yield and, hence, 
the quantum efficiency and gain; the latter layer, in which 
conduction takes place by a hopping mechanism, controls 
the multiplier current supply and, hence, the gain-versus- 
count rate characteristic. The very small volume of the 
active layer also makes MCPs intrinsically radiation hard 
in a space environment. 

Since the linear gain in a continuous-dynode 
multiplier depends only on the length-to-diameter ratio 
of the channels (typically 40:1 in night vision MCPs), not 
explicitly on channel diameter, MCPs can be fabricated 
with very small pores—leading to imaging detectors of 
very high spatial resolution. Since the pulse transit time 
in a 0.5 mm long channel, biased to 1000 V, is of order 
100 ps, MCP detectors are also intrinsically fast, a property 
used to great advantage in time-of-flight space plasma 
analyzers. The pore diameter in state-of-the-art MCPs is 
6 xm, while the open area fraction is typically around 
65%. The imaging area of an MCP may now approach 
100 cm?—as in the cHANpRA High Resolution Camera (see 
table 1). Formats include circular, square, rectangular 
and annular (for readout of hemispherical charged particle 
analysers). MCPs with either convex or concave surface 
profiles have been produced to match the focal surfaces of 
EUV and UV telescopes and spectrometers. Radioisotope- 
free ‘low-noise’ MCP glasses have been formulated, which 
lack the internal beta-induced background of standard 
compositions containing K and/or Rb. By varying the 
production process, the resistance of a 25 mm diameter 
MCP can be as high as 1 GQ or as low as 100 kQ. Low- 
resistance (high-current) MCPs are of great interest for 
high count rate applications but, because MCP glass has 
the negative temperature coefficient (around —1%°C7') 
characteristic of a semiconductor, low-resistance plates 
are susceptible to ‘thermal runaway’ which may lead 
to the local melting of the channel matrix. Very-low- 
resistance MCPs must be heat-sunk to a conducting anode 
if they are to be operated stably. Despite its flexibility, 
however, the two-draw process is costly, complex and 
close to the end of its technical evolution: for example, 
the production of large-area glass MCPs with channels 
much smaller in diameter than 6 zm will be extremely 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microchannel Plate Detectors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


challenging. The long-term future of MCP fabrication may 
well lie in micromachining, using reactive ion etching or 
other techniques to produce precisely dimensioned arrays 
of small channels in Si wafers. Micromachining would 
provide, in principle, better control of resistivity, better 
high-vacuum compatibility (new glass MCPs copiously 
outgas water vapor) and the ability to provide ‘one-off’ 
formats at relatively low cost. The first attempt to fabricate 
such ‘alternative technology’ Si MCPs was, however, as 
long ago as 1977; alternative CEM technologies have 
been successfully based on both ceramics and conducting 
polymers. 


Photocathodes 

The intrinsic quantum efficiency of bare glass MCPs in 
the ‘open window’ soft x-ray and EUV bands is rather 
low (~5-15%) and varies strongly with angle of photon 
incidence to the channel axis. Alkali halides such as CsI 
or KBr are therefore thermally evaporated onto the input 
surface of the MCP to produce substantial enhancements 
in efficiency. At 120 A, the detection efficiency may reach 
70% for a CslI-coated plate preceded by an open mesh 
biased slightly more negative than the input face itself. 
This ‘repeller grid’ allows events from the interchannel 
web to be counted by returning low-energy secondary 
electrons to their plane of emission, where they may enter 
a channel and initiate an avalanche. Alkali halide coatings 
may also be used to increase the electron or positive ion 
detection efficiency of MCP detectors for use in plasma 
analyzers. 

In the optical and far-ultraviolet (FUV) bands, MCP- 
based detectors are sealed vacuum tubes. The semitrans- 
parent photocathode is deposited on a transparent sub- 
strate (borosilicate glass or fiber optic faceplate for the op- 
tical band; quartz or sapphire for the FUV). Photoelectrons 
emitted from the cathode are accelerated towards the MCP, 
which acts as an electron detector, not as a direct photon 
detector. Photocathodes for the optical are generally anti- 
monized multialkalis such as S20 (NazKCsSb) with a peak 
efficiency of 20% and a response extending out to a wave- 
length of 0.9 wm. CsTe is also employed in sealed inten- 
sifiers for the blue end of the visible spectrum. Negative 
electron affinity materials such as GalnAs or GaAs, with an 
extended infrared response but very severe tube vacuum 
requirements, have found limited use in ground-based as- 
tronomy. 


Readout 

In space astronomy, MCP detectors are usually based 
on the ion-feedback-free chevron (two MCPs with offset 
channel axes and an interplate gap between them—an 
arrangement first developed c 1970 (see figure 1)) or 
Z-stack (three plates in contact) configurations. The 
output pulse height distribution (PHD) of a single 
MCP is generally quasi-exponential, placing a severe 
requirement on the dynamic range of subsequent 
processing electronics. The PHD of a multi-stage detector 
composed of plates with individual length-to-diameter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


X- rays 
| 
: UVIS 
$ M 
' 
¢ 
MCP! 


aod 
4G 


MCP2 


4 


4 


ANT 


PSR 


Figure 1. Schematic view of avalanche propagation in a 
two-stage ‘chevron’ MCP x-ray detector. The channels of the 
rear plate (MCP2) are biased at an angle (6°-15°) to those of the 
front plate (MCP1) in order to stop positive ions generated at the 
output end propagating back to the entrance surface and 
initiating afterpulses. PSR, position-sensitive readout; 

UVIS, UV-ion shield composed of metalized plastic; M, mesh. 
Typically, the applied potential differences Vr and Vp are 

~1500 V. For electron detection, the front plate input face is held 
at ground and the PSR at high positive potential. 


ratio of 80:1 or 120:1, however, is peaked with a modal 
gain of ~10’ (0.625 pC/pulse). A large number of signal 
location techniques have been developed to encode the 
position of the MCP charge cloud at the output of the 
final plate in the stack. Readout methods may be either 
electrically or optically coupled. In the latter category, 
commonly used in detectors for visible wavelengths, 
the output charge cloud is accelerated through a large 
potential difference and allowed to strike a phosphor 
screen. The light spot from the phosphor is then 
channelled via a fiber optic faceplate onto a silicon charge 
coupled device (CCD) or charge injection device (CID). By 
using a fiber optic with a suitable taper ratio, a small CCD 
can be used to encode a much larger MCP input surface. 
Suitable interpolation algorithms allow the centroid of the 
light flash (and hence the photon arrival position) to be 
found to much better than one CCD pixel width, allowing 
images to be formed which clearly show the microchannel 
pore structure. 

Electrical readout elements are generally based on 
(a) charge division in a resistive sheet, as in the EXOSAT 
CMA and rosat Wide Field Camera detectors, (b) charge 
partition among a pattern of conducting elements, for 
example the wedge-and-strip anodes used in the MCP 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microchannel Plate Detectors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. MCP detectors. 


Mission (launch date) Instrument Comments References 
Einstein Observatory High Resolution Provided first high- Kellogg E et al 
(1978) Imager (HRI) resolution images in x-ray 1976 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 47 
astronomy 282 
EXOSAT (1983) Channel Multiplier Focal plane detector for Taylor B et al 1981 Space Sci. 
Array (CMA) small soft x-ray telescopes Rev. 30 479 
Rosat (1990) High Resolution Upgraded copy of Einstein Zombeck M V et al 1995 
Imager (HRI) HRI detector, used in Proc. SPIE 2518 304 
pointed mode observations 
with Rosat x-ray observatory 
Wide Field Camera EUV (60-140 A) detector, input Barstow M A and Sansom A 1990 
(WFC) surface spherically curved Proc. SPIE 1344 244 
to match telescope focal 
surface 
Extreme Ultraviolet = Seven individual survey Vallerga J V et al 1994 
Explorer (EUVE) (1992) and spectrometer detectors Proc. SPIE 2280 57 
operating in the EUV 
ALEXIS (1992) = Spherically curved Priedhorsky W C et al 1993 
detectors at foci of normal IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 40 
incidence multilayer optics 863 
optimized for 133 174 and 
188 A 
SOHO (1996) UVCS Delay line detector Siegmund O H W et al 
observing solar corona out 1995 Proc. SPIE 2518 344 
to 10 solar radii in Ly a 
and O VI bands 
SUMER Delay line detector As UVCS 
viewing solar atmosphere 
in 500-1600 A band 
Hubble Space Telescope STIS MAMA detector for Space Joseph C et al 1994 
Telescope Imaging Proc. SPIE 2282 116 
Spectrometer 
COS Cosmic Origins http:/ /www.ozma.ssl.berkeley.edu 
Spectrograph—delay line 
detector for 2002 HST 
refurbishment mission 
Chandra (1999) High Resolution Large area imager 93 x 93 http:/ /hea-www.harvard.edu/HRC 


Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic 
Explorer (FUSE) (1999) 


Camera (HRC-I and 
HRC-S) 


mm/ area, spectrometer 


readout detector 300 x 20 
mm’; Radioisotope-free 
glass 

170 x 12 mm? delay line 
detector with 18 «~m 
spatial resolution, working 
in the 900-1200 A band 


/HomePage.html 


As COS 


detectors on the EUVE satellite, or (c) timing of the charge 
pulses at the ends of a delay line, as in the detectors 
on the FUSE mission. Because, crudely, it is simpler to 
measure a time interval to high precision than it is to 
digitize a charge to the same precision, delay line readout 
generally delivers higher spatial resolution (<10 zm) at 
higher count rates (>100 kHz). More complex position 
encoding methods use the coincidence counting of pulses 
on orthogonal strips, as in the Multi Anode Microchannel 
Array (MAMA) detector in the STIS instrument on the 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. Here, 2M amplifier—discriminator 
chains encode M? pixel addresses. The crossed grid 
charge collector used on the Chandra High Resolution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Camera detectors uses orthogonal grids of fine wires 
to intercept the charge cloud emanating from the rear 
MCP of a chevron pair. The wires of each grid are 
terminated by a resistive line subdivided by many (64 per 
axis) preamplifier inputs. The x or y location of the x- 
ray interaction is found by taking appropriate ratios of 
the charges measured by neighboring preamplifier ‘taps’. 
M-fold partitioning of the encoder axis means that the 
position signal executes its full dynamic range over a 
distance L/M, where L is the side length of the image 
field, allowing high resolution (<25 wm) to be obtained 
over large (L = 10 cm) image areas for modest levels of 
signal digitization. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microchannel Plate Detectors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Flight instruments 

Table 1 describes a number of MCP detectors flown on 
major space astronomy missions for the UV, EUV and x-ray 
wavebands. 


Microchannel plate x-ray optics 

Uniquely, MCP structures can function not only as 
detectors but also as focusing optics for the UV, EUV and 
x-ray bands. The operation of MCP x-ray optics was first 
described by researchers at CSIRO and the University of 
Melbourne in 1989 and the first images with square-pore 
MCPs were reported by the University of Leicester in 1993. 
MCP optics operate by grazing incidence reflection from 
the internal channel walls. Currently, the best angular 
resolution for the central component of the cruciform focus 
is about 5 arcmin. MCPs potentially provide important 
advantages over conventional x-ray optics because of 
their very low mass-to-effective area ratio and very large 
(in principle, 42 sr) fields of view. Applications now 
being studied include an imaging all-sky monitor (the 
so-called lobster eye telescope) for the 0.1-3 keV band, a 
hard x-ray telescope for the 2-60 keV band, imaging x-ray 
fluorescence spectrometers for the surface geochemistry of 
airless inner solar system bodies and a wide field-of-view 
aurora imager for the 1300-1600 A band. 


Bibliography 

Detailed technical reviews of MCP detector operation are 
given by 

Wiza J L 1979 Nucl. Instrum. Methods 162 587 

and by 

Fraser G W 1984 Nucl. Instrum. Methods 221 115 


Up-to-date information on novel MCP detectors 
and optics can be found on the website maintained 
by the Experimental Astrophysics Group, University 
of California, Berkeley (see Table 1 entry for COS) 
and the University of Leicester Space Research Centre 
(http: / /wwwssrc.le.ac.uk). 


G W Fraser 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microlensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Microlensing 


Microlensing refers to the special case of GRAVITATIONAL 
LENSING where the multiple images produced are too close 
together on the sky to be observed as separate images. 
However, the lensing can still be detected because these 
multiple images appear as a single object of increased 
apparent brightness. Although this is not detectable in a 
one-off observation (since we do not know the ‘normal’ 
brightness of the source), with the passage of time the 
lens moves across the Earth-source line and the amount of 
brightening changes. Typically the source will appear to 
brighten, reach a maximum and then fade symmetrically 
back to normal over the course of a few weeks or months; 
this is called a ‘microlensing event’. 

The major application of microlensing, suggested by 
Paczynski in 1986, is in the search for the DARKMATTER which 
is strongly believed to exist from rotation curves of spiral 
galaxies etc. Since the lensing effect depends only on lens 
mass, it can be used to search for very faint or invisible 
objects such as brown dwarfs, neutron stars, old white 
dwarfs or black holes, which might make up the dark 
matter. These are collectively known as massive compact 
halo objects or MACHOs, in contrast to the hypothetical 
weakly interacting massive particles or WIMPs. 

To understand the basics of microlensing, consider 
a small massive object (the lens) situated exactly on the 
line of sight from Earth to a background star and consider 
a number of light rays radiating from the star passing 
the lens at different distances and being bent towards the 
lens. Since the bending angle for a light ray increases with 
decreasing distance from the lens, it is clear that there is a 
unique ‘miss distance’ such that the ray will be deflected 
just enough to hit the Earth; this distance is called the 
Einstein radius. By rotational symmetry about the Earth— 
star axis, an observer on Earth with perfect resolution 
would see the star lensed into an annulus centered on 
its ‘true’ position, called an Einstein ring. As the lens is 
moved slightly off the line of sight (e.g. by 0.1 Einstein 
ring radii), the Einstein ring splits into two banana-shaped 
arcs, one on the same side of the lens as the source, one on 
the opposite side. As the lens moves further off (more 
than 1 Einstein radius), the arcs become more circular, the 
‘opposite-side’ arc fades very rapidly and the ‘same-side’ 
arc turns into a slightly deflected and nearly circular image 
of the star. Figure 1 illustrates a sequence of such images 
for a typical microlensing event. 

Although the perfect alignment giving the Einstein 
ring will rarely occur in practice, it is still a very important 
concept because the size of the hypothetical Einstein ring 
sets the length scale over which substantial brightening 
will occur. As we will see, for a typical lens in our 
Galaxy the radius of the Einstein ring rg is roughly 
8(M/M.)"? AU (astronomical units), where M is the lens 
mass. Knowing this scale allows us to understand most of 
the general characteristics of microlensing: it is extremely 
small compared with the typical distance to a lens, so 
the angular separation of the two images will be too 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Microlensing image configuration 


N T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T 
oa A. i 
/ y aN 
on r / 7 o \ \ a 
5 [ ‘ (es = a ' ] 
Ee Kaegseee  aodébooddoaodeooosoedchdodos thud 
6 OF | wre * ny 4 
pie t : " x % j 4 
“ L \ “ /, J 
on L \ # J, 4 
a \ ee 
SF S ae | 
a 7 Le o Sa 4 
“ f fin pe ie pag ge pte J 
—2 —1 O 1 2 


x offset from lens (4,) 


Figure 1. A microlensing event seen at ‘perfect’ resolution. The 
axes show angular offsets on the sky from the lens (central dot) 
in units of the Einstein angle; the dashed circle is the Einstein 
ring. The series of small open circles shows the ‘true’ source 
position at successive timesteps. For each source position, there 
are two images (solid blobs) collinear with the lens and source, 
as indicated by the dotted line; the arrows illustrate their motion. 


small to resolve, hence the ‘micro’lensing. However, it 
is considerably larger than either the size of a star or the 
size of aMACHO, so we can usually approximate the lens 
and source as pointlike, which leads to a simple prediction 
for the lightcurve shape. Also, rg is very small compared 
with the typical separation of objects in the Galaxy, which 
implies that microlensing will be a very rare phenomenon. 
Another notable feature is that rg is proportional to the 
square root of the lens mass. This means that the area of 
sky ‘covered’ by a lens (at fixed distance) is proportional 
to its mass, so the total fraction of sky covered depends 
only on the total mass density in lenses, not the individual 
lens masses. This fraction is called the ‘optical depth’ rt, 
and is ~10~° for Galactic microlensing. The duration for a 
microlensing event is given by the time for the lens to move 
by 2rg relative to the Earth-star line; for typical Galactic 
speeds of 200 km s“!, this is ~130 days x (M/Mo)'”. 

For perfect alignment, simple geometry gives the 
(small) deflection angle of the light ray meeting Earth 
asa = rg/Doa + re/Dis, where Dg is the observer—lens 
distance, Dj); is the lens—source distance etc. Requiring this 
to equal the general relativity deflection, a = 4GM/ Cre, 
we obtain 


4GM DD, \°° 
rE= — : 
: ce Dos 


The angular Einstein radius is just 6g = rg/Do. If we now 
introduce a small offset of the lens by a distance b from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microlensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnification 


Time (r, / vy) 


Figure 2. Microlensing event lightcurves (magnification versus 
time) for six values of the impact parameter 

Umin = 0.0, 0.2,..., 1.0 as labelled. Time is in units of the 
Einstein radius crossing time rg/v,. The inset illustrates the 
Einstein ring (dotted circle) and the source paths relative to the 
lens (dot) for the six curves. 


the Earth-source line, ie. an angle B = b/Dg, a simple 
generalization gives the two image angular positions 
(relative to the lens) as 


6s. = 0.5[6 + (B* + 408)"/”]. 


Since lensing preserves surface brightness, the magnifi- 
cation A; of each image is given by the ratio of image to 
source areas, which for a ‘small’ source and any axisym- 
metric lens is just 


Fora point lens, this leads to a total observed magnification 
as the sum of the two image magnifications, 


Py EN eee (1) 
OSE ~~ u(u2 + 4)1/2 


where u = £/6¢ = b/rg is the misalignment in units of the 
Einstein radius. This behaves as A ~ u~! for u < 0.5, so 
the magnification may be large, but as A © 1 + 2u ~4 for 
u = 2, so the magnification rapidly becomes negligible 
at large u. For uniform motions, we will have u(t) = 
{u2,+[v1 (t—to)/re]°}'/? where v, is the transverse velocity 
of the lens relative to the line of sight and umin is the 
value of u at closest approach, which occurs at time fo. 
Substituting this into equation (1) gives the lightcurve A(t); 
some examples are shown in figure 2. 


Observations of microlensing 
To search for microlensing by MACHOs, since it is so 
rare we need millions of source stars and they should 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be far enough away to give a good path length for 
lensing, but not so far away that the individual stars 
are faint. The obvious targets for dark-matter lenses are 
the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC) and SMALL MAGELLANIC 
cLouD (SMC), the largest of our Milky Way’s many satellite 
galaxies, since the sight line to them passes mainly 
through the Galactic halo. The Galactic bulge is also 
an interesting target, although here because of the high 
stellar density the microlensing should be mainly due to 
intervening faint stars rather than dark matter. Around 
1991, several teams of astronomers called MACHO, EROS 
and OGLE began large projects using wide-field 1 m class 
telescopes to search for microlensing events. The novel 
feature of these experiments is their massive data volume, 
requiring large amounts of disk and tape storage and 
special high-speed photometry programs. The expected 
number of microlensing events is much smaller than 
the fraction of intrinsic variable stars, but fortunately 
microlensing has many strong ‘signatures’ that are distinct 
from all previously known types of variable star: the most 
important is the ‘uniqueness’, i.e. any given star should 
be microlensed at most once in a human lifetime, while 
almost all variable stars are periodic or quasi-periodic. 
Also, most events should have a symmetrical shape as 
in figure 2, and they should be achromatic (the source’s 
color should not change during the event), since lensing is 
independent of wavelength. 

The MACHO, EROS and OGLE teams announced 
their first candidate microlensing events near simultane- 
ously in late 1993 (figure 3). Since then, they have ac- 
cumulated much more extensive datasets, and completed 
detailed calculations of their microlensing detection effi- 
ciency as a function of event duration; thus a number of 
general results have become clear. 


(i) Hundreds of events have been observed towards 
the Galactic bulge. They are distributed ‘randomly’ 
across the color-magnitude diagram, and their distri- 
bution of peak magnifications matches the theoretical 
prediction, which provides a very convincing check 
that microlensing works as predicted and that the ex- 
periments can detect it. The event rate towards the 
bulge is greater than initially predicted by Galactic 
models, favoring a barred structure for the Galaxy. 
The distribution of timescales is consistent with most 
of the lenses being low-mass stars as expected and 
can provide constraints on the stellar mass function 
at low masses. 

(ii) Towards the Magellanic Clouds, no ‘short’ events 
(timescales from a few hours up to 20 days) have 
been seen by any group. This places strong limits 
on ‘Jupiters’ in the dark halo: specifically, compact 
objects in the mass range 10~°-0.05 solar masses 
contribute less than 10% of the dark matter around 
our Galaxy. This is a very important result, as 
these objects were previously thought to be the most 
plausible form of baryonic dark matter, and (for 
masses below 0.01 solar masses) they would have 
been virtually impossible to detect directly. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microlensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


79004/46356 


400 420 440 460 
days from 2 Jan 1992 


Figure 3. The first LMC microlensing candidate from the 
MACHO project. (Expanded view: 6 yr of constant data are 
outside the plot). Upper and middle panels show brightness 
versus time in blue and red passbands respectively, in units of 
the baseline value. Points with error bars are observations, the 
curve is the best microlensing fit. The lower panel shows the 
ratio of red/blue flux, illustrating the lack of color change. 


(iii) Approximately 18 events with durations 30-200 days 
have been observed towards the Magellanic Clouds. 
The implied optical depth is well above expectation 
from ‘known’ stars, and is roughly 1/3 of the value 
expected (t * 5 x 107’) for an all- MACHO dark 
halo. The relatively long durations imply lens masses 
of roughly 0.3-0.7 solar mass, which is a puzzle as 
discussed below. 

(iv) Many events are now detected in real time and 
announced on the world-wide web. This enables 
more frequent monitoring of ongoing events, giving 
more precise tests of the shape. This has attracted 
considerable interest since, where the lens is a 
low-mass star (probably the case for most of the 
events towards the Galactic bulge), a planet around 
the lens star may give rise to a short-duration 
‘blip’ superimposed on the smooth microlensing 
lightcurve: this method is potentially sensitive to 
low-mass planets down to a few Earth masses, 
below the range accessible to radial-velocity planet 
searches. Two groups called PLANET and MPS are 
now searching for this effect. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Current questions in microlensing 

The nature of the objects giving rise to the lensing towards 
the Magellanic Clouds is a significant puzzle at present; 
the inferred lens masses are well above 0.1M 6, which 
means that they cannot be ordinary hydrogen-burning 
stars in a spherical halo, as these would be visible in 
large numbers in deep images, e.g. the Hubble Deep Field. 
There are two classes of solution: either the lenses are 
in the halo but are much fainter, e.g. old white dwarfs 
or possibly primordial black holes, or they are low-mass 
stars but in a non-halo population, i.e. preferentially 
concentrated in the foreground of the LMC. The white- 
dwarf solution has significant problems associated with 
early metal production but has received some support 
recently from a possible detection of proper motions of 
faint objects in the HUBBLE DEEP FIELD. Various classes of non- 
halo population have been proposed, e.g. a ‘thick’ LMC 
disk, a small dwarf galaxy projected in front of the LMC, a 
warped Milky Way disk etc, but several searches for such 
populations have been negative. 

There are several ways of testing these possibilities: 
one is to measure distances to individual lenses. In a 
‘standard’ microlensing event as in figure 2 it is impossible 
to measure the lens distance since the one physical 
parameter (event duration) depends on three unknowns, 
the lens mass, distance and transverse velocity. However, 
as proposed by Gould and others, a small fraction of 
observed events should deviate from the standard shape 
for one of several reasons: the non-uniform motion of the 
Earth, the finite size of the source, a binary lens etc. In 
these cases we can obtain an additional observable which 
constrains the location of the lens. At present there are 
only one or two such cases for Magellanic Cloud lensing. 
Future satellite observations may help to measure lens 
distances, either by measuring the ‘parallax’ effect or the 
small centroid shift during the event. 

Another active area is the search for microlensing to- 
wards the ANDROMEDA GALAXY, M31. This is considerably 
more challenging since the greater distance means that 
there are multiple unresolved stars per resolution element, 
and sophisticated image differencing techniques are nec- 
essary. However, it has the advantage that microlens- 
ing from M31’s own halo will produce substantially more 
events towards the far side of M31’s disk than towards the 
near side, owing to the nearly edge-on inclination. Two 
groups called AGAPE and MEGA have done pilot stud- 
ies and are currently undertaking large-scale searches to- 
wards M31. 


Cosmological microlensing 

Although microlensing within the LocaLcroup is the main 
application at present, microlensing of ‘point’ sources 
at cosmological distances (e.g. quasars, supernovae or 
gamma-ray bursts) may also be observable. In the case of a 
quasar lensed into multiple images by a foreground galaxy, 
the individual stars in the galaxy may act as microlenses. 
Here the microlensing appears as brightness changes 
unique to one image of the multiplet (after correcting for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microlensing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the time delay); in this case the optical depth is typically 
close to unity (because the surface density must be of order 
the ‘critical’ surface density to produce multiple imaging), 
so the interpretation of the lightcurve is complex. Other 
searches are in progress for microlensing of quasars behind 
the viRGO CLUSTER by dark objects in the cluster, and the Next 
Generation Space Telescope should be easily able to detect 
microlensing of stars in the Virgo galaxy M87. 


Bibliography 
The first candidate microlensing events from MACHO and 
EROS appeared back to back in 


Alcock et al 1993 Nature 365 621 
Aubourg et al 1993 Nature 365 623 


A large review of Local Group microlensing is given by 
Paczynski B 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 419 


A shorter review concentrating on recent results from the 
MACHO team is by 


Sutherland W 1999 Rev. Mod. Phys. 71 421 


Anexample of the current state of the art, measuring a lens 
distance with very detailed lightcurve data is in 


Alcock C et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 518 44 


Searches on NASA ADS or xxx.lanl.gov for the various 
team acronyms should locate recent papers. 


Will Sutherland 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Micrometeorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Micrometeorite 


An interplanetary dust particle or a particle ablated 
from a meteoroid during its passage through the Earth’s 
atmosphere that has not itself burnt up in the atmosphere 
as a meteor. Particles below a mass of around 1 pg 
are slowed by collisions with molecules in the upper 
atmosphere to a speed at which further collisions 
impart insufficient energy for ablation to occur. Such 
particles drift down and eventually settle on the surface. 
Micrometeorites have been recovered from cores of 
sediments drilled from the ocean floor and from the 
Antarctic ice, and from rainwater. They can also be 
collected before they reach the ground by high-flying 
airplanes. Interplanetary dust particles recovered from the 
atmosphere are sometimes called Brownlee particles after 
Donald E Brownlee, who was the first to investigate them 
systematically. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Microscopium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Microscopium 


(the Microscope; abbrev. Mic, gen. Microscopii; area 
210 sq. deg.) A southern constellation which lies between 
Sagittarius and Piscis Austrinus/Grus, and culminates at 
midnight in early August. It was introduced by the French 
astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted 
the southern sky in 1751-2. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Microscopium are y and ¢ Microscopii, both of 
magnitude 4.7. Interesting objects include a Microscopii, 
magnitude 4.9, which has a fainter companion, magnitude 
9.8, separation 20.5”, and NGC 6925, an eleventh- 
magnitude spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mid-Infrared Instrumentation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mid-Infrared Instrumentation 


These astronomical instruments are designed to sense 
radiation at mid-infrared (also known as_ thermal) 
wavelengths (5-30 jm). Mid-infrared instruments 
operating from ground-based telescopes are limited in 
sensitivity by the large thermal background from the sky 
and also the telescope itself but enjoy the spatial resolution 
benefits provided by large ground-based telescopes. 
Space-based mid-infrared instruments are not limited by 
the atmospheric background but can suffer from lack of 
spatial resolution owing to the smaller telescope apertures 
available to these instruments. 


The mid-infrared spectral region 

The infrared (IR) region of the radiation spectrum covers 
the wavelengths longward of the visible region (~0.7 4m) 
and short of the microwave region. The infrared region 
is further subdivided into three regions: the near-infrared 
(0.7—5 zm) the mid-infrared (5-30 wm) and the far infrared 
(30-few hundred zm). In some applications (particularly 
military infrared devices) the infrared region is divided 
into the short-wave infrared (SWIR, 1-2 4m), mid-wave 
infrared (MWIR, 3-5 zm) and long-wave infrared (LWIR, 
8-12 wm). 

The mid-infrared region is largely synonymous with 
the thermal infrared, meaning the spectral region where 
thermal radiation from room temperature type bodies 
(around 300 K) dominates. The thermal radiation is the 
radiation emitted by all bodies, because of their own 
heat, and is characterized by the Planck function. For 
objects of temperatures around 300 K, the peak of the 
black body curve (see BLACK-BODY RADIATION) lies at 10 wm 
in wavelength. 


Atmospheric bands and transmission 

The transparency of the atmosphere defines a number 
of bands. This is because atmospheric gases, especially 
H,O and COQO,, are efficient absorbers of infrared 
radiation at certain wavelengths. These absorption bands 
define ‘windows’ of relative transparency through the 
atmosphere. In the mid-infrared region these bands lie at 
3-5 um, 8-13 wm and 16-22 wm, although the 8-13 wm 
band is by far the ‘cleanest’, ie. most free from extra 
absorption bands. Froma high, dry mountain observatory 
the best part of the 8-13 zm window, near 10.5 mis about 
95% transparent. At the edges of the window it is closer 
to 50-70%, before falling to 0% transmission outside of the 
windows. 


Thermal backgrounds 

At mid-infrared wavelengths, all terrestrial bodies are 
radiating copiously. This is true of the sky and also the 
telescope and instrument itself. The fact that the sky is 50- 
95% transmissive in the atmospheric windows also means 
that the sky is between 50% and 5% emissive. Similarly, 
the aluminized mirrors of the telescope emit between 1% 
and 5% of a black body at the telescope temperature. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dirtier the mirror, the larger the emission. The spider 
vanes and any part of the telescope structure ‘visible’ to 
the instrument radiate as near-perfect black bodies. All 
these sources combine to provide a large background flux 
of infrared photons on the infrared detector. The photon 
shot noise arising from this background radiation sets the 
background limit to the detector sensitivity. Except at 
very high resolutions the background ‘noise’ dominates 
all other sources of noise such as detector read noise and 
dark current. 

To reduce the background emission from the telescope 
itself, INFRARED TELESCOPES typically have no optical baffling 
(which radiates at thermal wavelengths), they maintain 
a low emissivity mirror surface by regular cleaning and 
aluminizing, and employ an undersized secondary mirror 
so that no part of the telescope structure is visible to the 
infrared detector. 

For a typical broad-band imaging situation, using 
a 4 m class telescope, clear and cold sky, and a pixel 
field of view of 1 arcsec, then the background from sky 
and telescope is around 10°-10"" photoelectrons s~'. The 
astronomical source, however, will be many orders of 
magnitude (around 10~°) fainter than the background. 
Extraction of the signal from the background and the 
background photon shot noise is the key problem for 
ground-based mid-INFRARED ASTRONOMY. 


Observatories 

To minimize the sky background, the best mid-infrared 
observing sites are located atop high, dry mountains 
(see also OBSERVATORIES AND THEIR LOCATION). Probably the 
best mid-infrared site in the world is the Mauna Kea 
observatory in Hawaii, at 4200 m elevation. Here the 
telescope is above a significant fraction of the Earth’s 
atmosphere and IR-absorbing gases, and in particular 
it is above 90% of the atmospheric water vapor. The 
reduced atmospheric temperature and background and 
improved transmission mean that system sensitivities are 
significantly improved. Comparable sites are also found 
in the Atacama desert in Chile, although they are not quite 
as high. 


Chopping 
With the advent of large-format, staring detectors at near- 
infrared wavelengths the practice of chopping has largely 
disappeared from such instruments, but at mid-infrared 
wavelengths the background is sufficiently large and the 
background due to the sky is sufficiently variable that 
‘sky chopping’ is still generally necessary. Chopping 
provides a form of background subtraction that is very 
effective and particularly removes the effect of high- 
frequency fluctuations in the sky background. These 
fluctuations generally take the form of turbulence which 
presents regions of slightly different temperature and/or 
transparency to the detector on very short timescales (i.e. 
subhertz rates). 

Chopping involves wobbling the secondary mirror of 
the telescope to present alternate views to the detector, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mid-Infrared Instrumentation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


firstly with source plus background, and then with 
background alone. The difference of these two images 
leaves source only. 

As the background flux compared with the source is 
reduced, the requirement for chopping diminishes. So for 
observations involving very high spectral resolutions, or 
where the sky is very clear and temperatures low (e.g. 
South Pole or space), background chopping is usually not 
required. 


Diffraction limit and seeing 

At mid-infrared wavelengths the spatial resolution we can 
obtain with current-generation telescopes (i.e. up to 10 m 
diameter) is limited not so much by atmospheric SEEING 
as in the visible and near-infrared regions but rather by 
the diffraction limit of the telescope itself. The diffraction 
limit at 10 ~m for a 4 m telescope is on the order of half 
an arcsecond. For most instruments the diffraction limit 
determines the pixel scale so as to just sample the point 
spread function (PSF). This means that the point source 
sensitivity increases as the square of the aperture (D7) in 
the critically sampled diffraction limited case, but in the 
seeing limited case increases as the diameter (D) only. 

At 10 wm the seeing is about one-half of that at visible 
wavelengths. At the best observing sites the median seeing 
is typically half an arcsecond in the visible, or one-quarter 
arcsecond in the mid-infrared. So, except for the largest 
telescopes or the lesser observing sites, the atmospheric 
seeing is usually dominated by the diffraction limit. 


Detector sensitivity 

It is very difficult to quote system sensitivities, because 
the actual sensitivity achieved depends so much on the 
operating configurations (spectral resolution, pixel size, 
detector type, telescope size and emissivity, atmospheric 
background and temperature, weather etc). If we adopt a 
fairly standard imaging format, however, it is possible to 
provide some indicative numbers, from which different 
situations can be scaled. Using a 4 m IR optimized 
telescope at a good observatory site, a good detector 
with quantum efficiency around 25%, a pixel size of 
0.25 arcsec? and a broad-band filter 8-13 wm then a 
sensitivity figure of around 1-2 mJy arcsec™* (1o)~' ho! 
should be achievable (the flux density unit Jansky is 
defined by 1 Jy = 10-7 W m~? Hz"!). Sensitivity limits 
for various mid-infrared instruments available at large 
observatories are usually available at the observatory web 
site. 


Detectors for use in the mid-infrared 

Si photon detectors 

The majority of detectors used for mid-infrared astronomy 
fall into the class of doped-silicon photon detectors. In 
these devices an incident photon causes an electron to 
shift from the valence band to the conduction band of the 
semiconductor, leaving a mobile electron in the conduction 
band and hole in the valence band. The electron-hole 
pair can then be sensed using a suitable bias circuit. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


efficiency with which the detector layer converts incident 
photons to photoelectrons is called the detector quantum 
efficiency (n). The quantum efficiency is dependent on 
the detector material, its doping and also thickness, and is 
typically in the range 10-25%. 

The drawback with these detectors is that the band- 
gap energy is low enough that thermally generated 
electrons (dark current) in the detector itself are excited 
into the conduction band. At room temperature the dark 
current would swamp photoelectrons, and so the detector 
has to be cooled. The longer the wavelength to which the 
detector needs to operate the colder it needs to be, and 
temperatures of 4-12 K are typical. 

As in the visible and near-infrared wavelength 
regions, mid-infrared astronomy is being revolutionized 
by the advent of large format staring focal plane arrays 
(FPAs). The background from the sky and telescope is 
large enough that detectors, even with well depths of 
10°-10’ electrons, still need to be read out at frame rates 
between 200 and 400 frames s~! for broad-band imaging. 
These high readout rates and the low required operating 
temperatures have served to limit detector sizes to just a 
few hundred pixels square. The most common detectors 
today have 128 x 128 pixels, generally with between two 
and four readout channels. Currently under development, 
or shipping in limited quantities for testing, are 256 x 256 
element and 320 x 240 element arrays. 

As of today there are only two major manufacturers 
of astronomy-grade large-format mid-INFRARED ARRAYS, 
Boeing (until recently made by Rockwell International) 
and the Santa Barbara Research Center (SBRC, formerly 
owned by Hughes, but recently acquired by Raytheon). 
A small number of detectors are also made by LETI 
of France, Amber Engineering, USA, Aerojet, USA, and 
some others, but these detectors are rarely competitive for 
astronomical applications compared with the SBRC and 
Boeing offerings. 


Bolometers 

Bolometers are devices that respond to changes in heat, 
rather than directly detecting the photoelectron. To do 
this the bolometer has a load that absorbs the incident 
radiation and a sensing circuit that detects the change in 
a physical property of the load (e.g. conductivity) as the 
temperature changes. These detectors have the advantage 
of operating over a very wide wavelength range but the 
response times of these detectors tends to be slow. In 
principle these devices do not require cooling to operate 
(cf photon detectors) although in practice some cooling is 
almost always employed in astronomical applications to 
improve the sensitivity. In spite of some difficulties these 
detectors can be extremely sensitive and were the mainstay 
of mid-infrared astronomy before the development of 
photon detectors and focal plane arrays. 


Instruments 

While instruments for use at mid-infrared wavelengths are 
varied they all have some common aspects. Most mid- 
infrared instruments cool the detector to temperatures 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mid-Infrared Instrumentation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


between 4 and 20 K. In addition, however, most 
instruments also cool their complete optical assembly to 
reduce background emission from the optics themselves. 
This is taken to the extreme for space- and airborne 
instruments where the telescope itself is also cooled. 
Traditionally these instruments were cooled with liquid 
nitrogen (77 K) and liquid helium (4.2 K). Lately, however, 
two-stage closed-cycle coolers have become more readily 
available and for many applications have become the 
cooling system of choice. 

Mid-infrared instruments also use reflective optics in 
preference to refractive optics wherever possible. This 
is because reflective optics are achromatic and have high 
reflectivities compared with the transmission of refractive 
optics. This is not to say that refractive optics are never 
used, but reflective are preferable. 

In the past mid-infrared instruments have usually 
been single-purpose instruments for imaging (see INFRARED 
IMAGERS), low-resolution spectroscopy, high-resolution 
spectroscopy or polarimetry. As the large observatories 
have begun to provide facility mid-infrared instruments, 
however, very sophisticated multifunction instruments 
have been developed. The most ambitious of these 
programs are probably the VISIR instrument for the 
European Southern Observatory, Very large Telescope 
(ESO VLT 8 m) and Michelle for the United Kingdom 
Infrared Telescope (UKIRT 4 m) which will later be used on 
the Gemini 8 m North telescope. Each of these instruments 
combines broad- and narrow-band imaging with low-, 
medium- and high-resolution echelle spectroscopy. In 
each case these instruments also provide polarimetry 
capabilities. 


Space-based and airborne mid-infrared 
instruments 

Ground-based infrared astronomy is severely limited by 
the background emission produced by the atmosphere. 
These problems can be completely circumvented by 
placing the telescope and instrument in Earth orbit. If the 
telescope itself is cooled, then the sensitivity of the system 
is limited only by the size of the telescope that can be 
launched into orbit and the natural scene background. For 
space-based instruments the sensitivity limit is generally 
provided by the emission from small interplanetary dust 
grains heated by the Sun in our own solar system. To 
achieve the ultimate in sensitivity one needs to place a 
mid-infrared instrument beyond the orbit of Jupiter where 
the emission from interplanetary dust grains becomes 
negligible. Without the limitation of the atmosphere, mid- 
infrared instruments in space are not restricted to the 
atmospheric bands as are instruments on the ground, and 
whole new regions of the spectrum become available for 
study. 

Major contributions to the progress of mid-infrared 
astronomy were made by the INFRARED ASTRONOMY SATELLITE 
(IRAS) launched in 1983 and the Infrared Space Obser- 
vatory (ISO) launched in 1995. IRAS performed an all-sky 
survey at mid—far-infrared wavelengths while ISO acted as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a space observatory facility providing imaging and spec- 
troscopic capability from around 2.5 wm to 240 wm. The 
next major space facility will be the SPACE INFRARED TELESCOPE 
FACILITY (SIRTF), currently scheduled for launch in 2001. 
The Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST) scheduled 
for launch in 2007 may also carry some mid-infrared in- 
struments (see SPACE INSTRUMENTATION: NEXT GENERATION SPACE 
TELESCOPE). 

One problem for space-based mid-infrared astron- 
omy is that the need to cool instruments (using liquid 
cryogens) means that mission lifetimes tend to be limited 
to between 1 and 2 yr depending on the amount of cryo- 
gen carried. The limited launch weight, size and cooling 
requirements limit the aperture size of the infrared tele- 
scope (IRAS and ISO both used 60 cm class telescopes). 
The smaller telescope limits light-gathering power, but in 
addition the diffraction limit of such telescopes is large 
(3-4 arcsec at 10 wm and 35 arcsec at 100 wm). This means 
that the spatial resolution that can be achieved with such 
instruments is comparatively low. So space-based and 
ground-based instruments will always be complementary: 
space-based observations provide access to the full spec- 
trum, without the troublesome effects of the atmosphere, 
whereas ground-based instruments provide spatial reso- 
lution and sometimes sensitivity owing to their large aper- 
tures, but in their limited operating regions. 

As a compromise between ground- and space-based 
mid-infrared astronomy, there is the option to place the 
infrared telescope at high altitude. This can be done by 
balloon (up to 100000 ft) or aircraft which reach up to 
40000 ft. At these altitudes the environment is much like 
that for space instruments, but at a lower cost and with 
more versatility. Although balloon-borne instruments 
were common in the early days of IR astronomy, the cost, 
short flight duration and high risk of such ventures has 
seen a decline in their use in favour of aircraft. The 
NASA Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) was a 90 cm 
cryogenically cooled telescope mounted in a Lockheed 
C141 Starlifter. It operated very successfully with a variety 
of mid- and far-infrared instruments until 1995 when the 
aircraft was decommissioned. The KAO is soon to be 
replaced by the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared 
Astronomy (SOFIA), which will carry a 2.5 m telescope 
aboard a Boeing 747 jet. 


Bibliography 

Crawford D and Craine R 1994 Instrumentation in 
astronomy VIII SPIE 2198 

Fowler A 1993 Infrared detectors and instrumentation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SPIE 1946 
Fowler A 1998 Infrared astronomical instrumentation SPIE 
3354 
Craig H Smith 
3 


Milankovitch, [Milankovié] Milutin (1879-1958) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Milankovitch, [Milankovic] Milutin 
(1879-1958) 


Yugoslav mathematician and astronomer who, starting in 
1912, showed how the radiation received by the Earth 
varies cyclically as the Earth’s orbit varies. There are 
three significant Milankovitch cycles: the eccentricity of the 
Earth’s orbit varies from more elliptical to more circular 
with a period of the order of 100000 years; the obliquity 
of the Earth’s axis oscillates between two extremes with 
a period of 41000 years; and the spin axis precesses with 
a 23000 year cycle. Palaeoclimatic oscillations with these 
periods have been discovered in data from deep sea cores 
dating back 6 million years, which measured global ice 
volume (indicated by oxygen isotopes in fossil organisms) 
and fluctuating productivity in surface waters (indicated 
by calcium carbonate sedimentation), and which thus 
correlate with the Ice Ages. Although Milankovitch cycles 
are named after Milankovitch, his ideas were pre-dated by 
Joseph Adhemar (1842) and James Croll (1875). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Milky Way Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Milky Way Galaxy 


The galaxy (i.e. assemblage of stars, gas and dust) of 
which the Sun is a member. Also known as the Galaxy, it 
is a disk-shaped system, with a diameter of between 
80 000 and 100 000 light-years and a thickness of about 
2000 light-years, that contains more than a hundred 
billion (10'') stars. The core, or nucleus, of the Galaxy is 
surrounded by an ellipsoidal central bulge, containing 
relatively closely spaced stars, that measures some 
15 000 light-years in diameter and about 6000 light-years 
in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the disk. 
Surrounding the bulge and extending in a near spherical 
distribution above and below the galactic plane (the plane 
of the disk) is the galactic halo. The halo contains about 
200 globular clusters (near-spherical clusters that contain 
between 10 000 and 1 000 000 stars) and an extremely 
thinly scattered population of individual stars. 

The Sun is located just over half way out from the 
center to the edge of the disk, estimates of its distance 
from the center ranging from about 22 000 to about 
29 000 light-years, with 25 000 light-years being a 
reasonable working value. In common with other stars, 
the Sun revolves round the galactic center. The orbital 
velocity of the Sun is about 220 km s" and its orbital 
period is about 225 million years. Overall, the Galaxy 
exhibits differential rotation, stars and gas clouds closer 
to the center having shorter orbital periods than those that 
are located further out. 

Stars in the Galaxy are divided into two principal 
categories, or populations, Population II stars being old 
stars that formed early in the history of the Galaxy and 
population I stars being second, or later, generation stars 
that formed from gas clouds that had been seeded with 
heavier elements generated in, and expelled from, earlier 
generations of stars. The halo is composed of Population 
II objects and the disk, where clouds of gas and dust are 
concentrated and where ongoing star formation is taking 
place, is dominated by Population I objects. The central 
bulge contains both populations but its light output is 
dominated by radiation from old red giants. 

Clouds of dust in the galactic plane absorb starlight 
and prevent optical astronomers from seeing the galactic 
center, but infrared and radio wavelengths are largely 
unaffected. Near-infrared observations have shown that 
the stars in the central bulge are arranged in an elongated 
bar, about twice as long as it is wide, that is seen nearly 
end on from the present location of the solar system. The 
exact center, or nucleus, of the Galaxy coincides with a 
strong source of radio emission, called Sagittarius A*, 
that is less than 15 astronomical units in diameter (i.e. is 
smaller than the diameter of the orbit of Saturn). 
Observations of the speeds at which clouds of ionized gas 
are revolving round the galactic center imply that several 
million solar masses of material are concentrated within a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


region of about one light-year in radius. Since only about 
half of this mass can be accounted for by stars, it seems 
likely that the balance (about 2.5 million solar masses) is 
contained in a central black hole and that accretion onto 
this black hole is the underlying source of the energy 
radiated by Sagittarius A*. 

In 2001, NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, 
detected a sudden x-ray flare while observing Sgr A*. In 
a few minutes, the source brightened dramatically, 
eventually reaching a level 45 times brighter than before 
the flare. After about three hours, the x-ray intensity 
rapidly declined to the pre-flare level. The rapid rise and 
fall of the x-rays from this outburst are compelling 
evidence that the x-ray emission is coming from matter 
falling into a supermassive black hole. Given the 
extremely accurate position, it is highly unlikely that the 
flare is due to an unrelated contaminating source such as 
an x-ray binary system. 

Like many other galaxies, the Milky Way Galaxy 
has a spiral structure. Within its disk, bright young stars, 
nebulae, and clouds of gas and dust are concentrated into 
curved ‘arms’ that appear to radiate from the central 
bulge in a spiral pattern. The Galaxy’s spiral pattern 
consists of several major arms and a number of shorter 
segments, one of which—the Orion arm, or ‘spur’— 
contains the Sun and the Orion star-forming region. 

The Milky Way Galaxy derives its name from the 
Milky Way, a misty band of starlight that stretches across 
the sky and which may be seen with the unaided eye on a 
clear dark night. The Milky Way represents the combined 
light of millions upon millions of stars concentrated close 
to the galactic plane. 


See also: barred spiral galaxy, galaxy, galaxy: structure, 
halo, galactic, Hubble classification, galactic nucleus, 
Orion arm, spiral arms, spiral galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Millikan, Robert Andrews (1868-1953) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Millikan, Robert Andrews (1868-1953) 


Physicist, born in Morrison, IL, Nobel prizewinner (1923) 
for his determination of the charge on the electron 
by Millikan’s oil-drop experiment, and confirmation of 
Einstein’s quantum photoelectric theory. Coined the term 
‘cosmic rays’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Millimeter and Submillimeter Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Millimeter and Submillimeter 
Astronomy 


The millimeter wavelength band extends from 4 = 4mm 
(v = 75 GHz) to 1 mm (300 GHz) while the submillimeter 
band extends from 1 mm to 100 wm (3 THz). The sub- 
mm band is rather unexplored because of the need to 
construct large efficient telescopes and sensitive detectors. 
It is equally important to select excellent sites to reduce 
the pervasive absorption by the Earth’s atmosphere. To a 
lesser degree, these challenges also affect mm astronomy. 
Usually the emission from astronomical objects in the mm 
and sub-mm wavelength range is small compared with 
that in the meter and centimeter wavelength ranges where 
intense non-thermal synchrotron emission is common 
or in the mid- and near-infrared or optical wavelength 
ranges, where thermal radiation from hot sources is 
found. Studies in the mm and sub-mm ranges cover 
a wide range of topics: (1) the physics and chemistry 
of the interstellar medium (ISM), especially the structure 
and content of INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR CLOUDS, (2) star 
formation, (3) the interaction of stars with molecular 
clouds, especially during the very early and very late 
phases of stellar evolution, (4) the distribution of molecular 
clouds (and neutral carbon) in external galaxies and high- 
redshift objects and (5) studies of solar system objects. 
Investigations of the 2.73 K background are also important 
but specialized. 

Spectral line radiation from molecular hydrogen is 
rare since H) has no permanent dipole moment. Thus, 
extraordinary excitation conditions are needed. The 
properties of molecular clouds are traced using abundant 
polar molecules such as carbon monoxide, CO. In the mm 
and sub-mm wavelength ranges, small linear molecules 
have rotational transitions, while atomic and ionized 
carbon have fine-structure lines. In addition to gas, clouds 
contain dust grains which contain much of the silicon and 
carbon. Dust grains emit broadband thermal emission 
which increases at shorter wavelengths where these grains 
radiate more efficiently. The surfaces of cold grains are 
covered with condensed atoms and molecules. 

There is a sudden transition from neutral atomic 
hydrogen, HI to H; from competition between destruction 
by the interstellar radiation field and production on grain 
surfaces. The envelopes of molecular clouds consist of 
neutral hydrogen, H I, and ionized or neutral carbon, with 
molecules in cloud cores. 


A short history 

Observations started with broadband continuum mea- 
surements of emission from the Sun, planets and a few 
quasi-stellar objects. Molecular spectroscopy provided a 
great impetus for mm and sub-mm astronomy. Radio 
spectroscopy of molecules began with the detection of 
the OH radical at a wavelength of 4 = 18 cm in 1963. 
These molecules were thought to exist in H1 REGIONS. In 
1968 the detection of ammonia, NH3, and water vapor, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


both at 1.3 cm, was made with the Berkeley 6 m tele- 
scope. In 1969, formaldehyde, H2CO, was discovered with 
the National Radio Astronomy Observatory’s (NRAO’s) 
140 ft telescope at 6 cm. The structures of HyCO and NH3 
are rather complex, and the abundances are rather small. 
The most widespread polar molecule, CO, was detected 
at 2.6 mm in 1970 with the NRAO’‘s 36 ft telescope. Af- 
ter the discovery of CO, there was a rapid increase in the 
number of interstellar molecules, because radiation pro- 
cesses are more efficient at shorter wavelengths and be- 
cause there are a larger number of spectral lines in the mil- 
limeter and submillimeter wavelength ranges. As of 1999, 
120 molecules have been found in the ISM; the heaviest 
molecule is HC;,N. 


Technical considerations 
From diffraction theory, the angular resolution, 0, is 


@=1.2A/D 


where D is the telescope size and 4 the wavelength. Fora 
10 m diameter telescope, at A = 3mm, @ = 80". Intensities 
are expressed in terms of temperatures, in the Rayleigh— 
Jeans limit: ; 

MI, 
io Ok (1) 
where k is Boltzmann’s constant. J, is the intensity at 
frequency v in units of W Hz7! m~ sr“! and T is the 
‘brightness temperature’. For thermal emission from 
planets, T is the surface temperature diluted by the ratio 
of source to beam size broadened by the source. In most 
cases, T is not related to a physical source temperature. In 
terms of /, the flux density is 


nae / 1, dQ. (2) 


The solid-angle integration is usually over the beam; if the 
source size exceeds the telescope beam size, the integration 
is over the source. Combining equations (1) and (2), we 
have 


2k 
Sy = STV AQ. (3) 
r 
The power received is 
Pi = 55, Ace B (4) 


where Age is the effective area and B is the bandwidth. 


Receivers 

For A > 0.3 mm, the most efficient receivers for spectral 
lines are heterodyne systems. In such coherent receivers, 
the signal is converted from the sky wavelength to a longer 
wavelength at which the signal is amplified. Such systems 
have a wavelength resolution, A/AA > 10°. In the 1960s, 
receiver noise temperatures, T,,, were ~5000 K at 3 mm; 
now, typical values are <100 K. The ultimate limit for noise 
in a coherent receiver is hv/k; practical limits are a few 
times larger. The first conversion is usually performed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Millimeter and Submillimeter Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in a mixer. The first mixers were uncooled Schottky 
devices. Since the 1980s, mixers have junctions which 
are quantum mechanical superconducting—insulating— 
superconducting (SIS) sandwiches. SIS mixers are much 
more sensitive and require less local oscillator power than 
classical Schottky devices; SIS mixers must be cooled to 
4K. All such receivers are tunable over a large wavelength 
range. The development of SIS REcEIvERs in the millimeter 
and sub-mm range has been led by the Caltech Sub-mm 
Observatory (CSO) and in the millimeter range by NRAO. 
Other active SIS development groups are at Harvard- 
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CfA), IRAM and 
Koln University. From the physics of junction materials, 
there is a short-wavelength limit to the operation of SIS 
devices. For spectral line measurements at wavelengths 
at A < 0.3 mm, a new device, the hot-electron bolometer, 
which has no such limit, has been developed. The 
first successful astronomical measurements with HEBs 
were carried out by the CfA group on the Heinrich 
Hertz 10 m Sub-mm Telescope (HHT) in 1998. At» > 
3 mm high electron mobility transistors are becoming 
standard, while, at 1 > 2.6 mm, monolithic indium 
phosphide microwave transistor amplifiers are now being 
used on the 16-beam receiver array (SEQUOIA) installed 
on the University of Massachusetts 14 m telescope. Only 
SEQUOIA and the eight-beam SIS array installed on the 
NRAO 12 m telescope have thus far produced published 
results; all other millimeter heterodyne systems with 
competitive noise temperatures are single-beam devices. 

Bolometers are incoherent receivers; these are 
preferred for single-dish measurements of broadband 
continuum radiation at 4 < 2mm. As with heterodyne 
receivers, the sensitivity of bolometers has improved 
greatly since the 1960s. Bolometer sensitivity is given 
as noise equivalent power (NEP) in W Hz7'/?. For 
practical bolometer systems, background noise, including 
noise from warm telescope surfaces, the ground and 
atmosphere, is the limiting factor. A good value of 
NEP is 3 x 10°” W Hz-'¥?. For 4 < 0.3 mm, 
a combination of bolometer detectors and Fabry—Pérot 
filters can be effectively used for spectroscopy. In contrast 
to heterodyne systems, a number of bolometer array 
receivers are installed on telescopes. The largest is SCUBA, 
an 81-beam system on the James Clerk Maxwell 15 m 
Telescope (JCMT) in Hawaii. 

The RMS receiver noise in kelvins is 


ATs _ ANEP 
(Bt)? ~~ 2k Bri?" 


ATrus = (5) 
The constant A is a function of system and data-taking 
parameters (usually A ~ 2), B is the bandwidth in Hz 
and t is integration time in s. The value of B is limited to 
one-third of the linewidth for spectral line measurements. 
For continuum measurements, B can be much larger. 
The value used for 7;,, is corrected for absorption of the 
signal in the Earth’s atmosphere and the emission from 
the Earth’s atmosphere and telescope losses. Depending 
on weather, the value of T,,, can exceed the receiver noise 
temperature, T,, by large factors. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Telescopes 

For a RADIO TELESCOPE to be effective, the surface accuracy 
must be <0.1 of the shortest wavelength measured. Larger 
radio telescopes have surfaces consisting of individual 
panels which must be adjusted. The limit to the 
effective operation of all single telescopes is set by surface 
deformations and pointing errors. Some of the mm 
telescopes, with diameters of 14 m and one with 20 m, 
were built in radomes. The two largest millimeter 
telescopes, the 30 m, operated by IRAM, and the 45 m in 
Nobeyama, Japan, are in the open, as will be the 50 m 
‘Large Millimeter Telescope’ (LMT) being constructed 
near Mexico City. The LMT is designed to be the most 
advanced single-dish design, useful up to 345 GHz. The 
construction of open-air telescopes is in part economic; 
enclosures could cost as much as the telescope itself. 
The most important improvement in the design of large 
single dishes has been homology, a scheme in which a 
paraboloid freely deforms but the shape is maintained. 
The remaining systematic effects are the influence of wind 
and temperature gradients in the structure which give rise 
to differential thermal expansion in the structure. The first 
radio large telescopes built with high accuracy surfaces 
of low-expansion material, carbon-fiber-reinforced plastic, 


were the IRAM 15 m interferometer antennas on Plateauations 


Telescope (SEST) telescope, at La Silla, Chile, and the HHT. 
The surface accuracy of the HHT shows that RMS surface 
accuracies of 12 wm are possible. The 10.4 m diameter 
telescope of the CSO and the 15 m JCMT are sub-mm 
telescopes on Mauma Kea, Hawaii, an excellent site. The 
CSO and JCMT were put into operation in the late 1980s 
and have produced a great deal of science. Both are 
constructed of aluminum and are housed in astronomical 
dome-like shelters. 

Sub-mm measurements are also made from aircraft. 
The Kuiper Airborne Observatory provided such an 
opportunity with a 91 cm diameter paraboloid. The 
follow-up facility, SOFIA, will have a 2.5 m diameter 
mirror. At normal flight altitude, 14 km, the water 
vapor content is extremely low. Thus, SOFIA can be 
used for measurements at wavelengths at which the 
atmosphere is opaque from ground-based sites. The 
Sub-mm Wavelength Astronomy Satellite has detected 
emission from the ground-state transition of H 

20, at 
0.55 mm, but has not detected emission from O2. In 
the future are the Far-Infra~-Red-Satellite-Telescope and 
Satellite-Infra-Red-Telescope-Facility. 

Single telescopes have a fixed relation of Aes and 6 
whereas interferometer systems do not (see equations (1)- 
(4)). Present interferometer systems consist of n < 11 
elements, each of a moderate diameter. INTERFEROMETERS 
consist of a number of parabolic antennas, each equipped 
with one or more coherent receivers. The receiver outputs 
are combined to produce a response corresponding to 
the maximum angular resolution determined by the 
ratio of the wavelength to the largest separation of the 
elements, projected in the source direction. Emission 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Millimeter and Submillimeter Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rer | ae ee | eT 


TRANSMISSION (%) 
o 
a 


0 Jat 4 tas ee a) ce ey UM eT ee 


aba chy 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 
FREQUENCY (GHz) 


Figure 1. A plot of the transmission through the Earth’s 
atmosphere for the mm and sub-mm wavelength ranges, for a 
column density of atmospheric water vapor of 1 mm. For an 
atmospheric optical depth t, the transmission is e~*. (Adapted 
from Phillips and Keene (1992).) 


from structures with angular sizes larger than the angle 
corresponding to the closest separation of the antennas 
is not recorded. This is the ‘smooth structure’ in a 
source. Such information can be recovered by combining 
the interferometer output with data taken using a large 
single telescope. Interferometers provide higher angular 
resolutions and positional accuracies than single-dish 
telescopes. For a fixed collecting area bandwidth, and 
v, the temperature (but not the flux density) uncertainty 
of an interferometer is worse than that for a single 
telescope with the same angular resolution. The first mm- 
wave interferometer, at the Berkeley Radio Astronomy 
Laboratory, consisted of two 6 m antennas. In the mm 
range, there are four systems: The Berkeley—Illinois— 
Maryland association (BIMA) array near Hat Creek, CA, 
the Caltech Owens Valley Interferometer (OVRO) near 
Bishop, CA, the Nobeyama Array in Japan and the 
IRAM array on Plateau de Bure, France. A number of 
high dynamic range, high-sensitivity images have been 
produced by the BIMA, OVRO and IRAM arrays. In 
addition, the 10 m CSO and 15 m JCMT telescopes 
are occasionally used as a sub-mm interferometer. To 
obtain even higher angular resolutions, experiments 
have been carried out using the technique of very long 
baseline interferometry at 3 mm and 1.3 mm. Finally, 
a dedicated sub-mm array consisting of eight 6 m 
dishes has been under construction by the Smithsonian 
Astrophysical Observatory and the Academica Sinica 
Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Taiwan, on 
Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The sensitivity and imaging quality 
of interferometer systems can be improved by an array 
with many large antennas on an excellent site. This is the 
rationale of the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) 
project, to be built in Chile at 5 km elevation, by NRAO 
and ESO. ALMA is planned to have n > 60 elements and a 
total Agg > 104 m*. The results to be obtained with ALMA 
may revolutionize all of astronomy. 


Atmospheric effects 

Millimeter and especially sub-mm observing sites are 
selected to minimize the effect of weather on the 
observations. Signals are absorbed by O; and HO vapor. 
The scale height of HO vapor is ~2 km, while that of Oz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is ~8 km, so the influence of H,O should be reduced at 
high altitudes. See figure 1 for a plot of transmissions. At 
860 GHz (A = 0.35 mm), even the very best sites on Earth 
are useful only a small percentage of the time. 


Observing techniques 

Because the signal levels are small compared with 
atmospheric or receiver noise, all measurements must 
be made by taking the difference of two signals. For 
spectral line measurements, one uses compared data 
taken at two different positions or frequencies; for 
continuum measurements there is a rapid switching by 
movements of the telescope subreflector or by wobbling 
a flat mirror. The time intervals are determined by 
instabilities in the receiver and atmosphere. A technique 
of slow scanning of the telescope is the normal data-taking 
mode for continuum measurements. For spectral line 
measurements this has been called ‘on-the-fly’ mapping. 
The data are taken rapidly, before weather or telescope 
characteristics can change. This greatly increases the 
reliability of spectral line images and efficiency of data 
taking. 

‘Chopper wheel’ calibrations are the norm for spectral 
line measurements. In the simplest version of this method, 
measurements are made of a room-temperature absorber 
and the atmosphere; with models, these allow an estimate 
of the atmospheric emission and hence the absorption. A 
more complete characterization of the atmosphere requires 
a ‘tipping curve’, which involves measurements at a 
number of elevations. The data are corrected for the 
absorption and usually for telescope efficiencies to give 
intensities (usually in the form of temperatures) for a 
perfect telescope outside the atmosphere. Additional 
calibration steps involve measurements of sources of 
known intensity, then scaling the data taken. For 
interferometry, the measurements of a source and known 
source or ‘calibrator’ are interspersed in time. It is 
assumed that the system performance varies smoothly 
between calibrations and the corrections obtained are 
applied to the source measurements. 


Astronomical considerations 
Spectral lines 
In figure 2 we show the energy level diagrams for CO, 
neutral carbon, C I, and ionized carbon, C II; the energy, 
E, above the ground state is in kelvins, from E = kT. 
Allowed dipole transitions occur with a unit change in 
the angular momentum quantum number AJ = +1. 
For the CO molecule low-J transitions are frequently 
thermalized, so the kinetic temperature, 7, characterizes 
the populations. Measurements of CO allow good 
estimates of the column density of H, since CO can be 
excited at low H) densities, since the excitation is close to 
local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) and since there is 
a large abundance relative to Hp. 

If the radiation arises from an isothermal layer 
much larger than the telescope beam, one can obtain 
a fairly realistic estimate of kinetic temperatures and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Millimeter and Submillimeter Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CO Cl Cll 
J= 
120 |— 6 
E/k(K) 
100 ;— 434 um = 
*P aio 
80 ;— 5 = 
520um 3 
60/—- 4 Re s 
158 um 
370 
40 650 um bm _| 
3 3 
oa 867 um P, 
I 9 = 
4 1.3mm 609m 
2.6mm 3 2 
o 0 Po Puj2 = 


Figure 2. The first few rotational energy levels of selected 
species. In the ISM, carbon monoxide, CO, is the most abundant 
molecule with a permanent dipole moment. Also shown are 
fine-structure transitions of neutral carbon, C I, and ionized 
carbon, C II. 


CO column densities using an LTE analysis. Rotational 
lines of #C!°O are usually optically thick; then peak 
line temperature T equals 7, the kinetic temperature. 
To obtain column densities without models of molecular 
clouds, one must use rarer, stable isotopes of CO. In LTE, 
the total population, N, can be obtained from the (optically 
thin) J = 1-0 line of ®C1*O: 


T { t8(v) du 


N(total) °° = 2.6 x 10 ap 53/T) 


(6) 


where the column density N (total) °° is in cm™, the 
linewidth v in kms“! and T in K. If the line optical depth, 
tS < 1,718 = TS. If tr > 1, we must use the line 
of C'8O; the expression is very nearly the same. Such 
estimates are usually realistic for cooler clouds (T, < 20K). 
To obtain the column density of Hz, one assumes an 
isotopic ratio and that the CO-to-H), ratio is 10-4; the latter 
value is usually reasonable. 

In addition to estimates of column densities, one can 
estimate local H2 densities, n(H2), from the ratio of column 
density to cloud size to obtain the local density. This leads 
to a lower limit for n(H2) since clouds have small-scale 
structure or ‘clumping’. If energy levels are populated 
by collisions with Hz molecules, the density needed to 
balance decay out of a level is n*. Setting the collision rate 
equal to the decay rate, we have n*ov = A. If the optical 
depth of the line is t > 1, the analysis becomes more 
complex. In the Sobolev or large velocity gradient (LVG) 
approximation, one assumes that the molecular cloud has 
a velocity gradient V ~ r. In the LVG model, the value 
of the A coefficient is replaced by A/t. For a multiline 
analysis of a species, including the fall-off above and below 
the maximum intensity, one can solve for both 7, and Hz 
density (see figure 3). 

From LVG calculations applied to optically thin 
transitions of carbon monoxide, there is a simple relation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between total column density and the J = 2-1 line, which 
is valid for a wide range of kinetic temperatures and H) 
densities. Large-scale surveys of "CO and CO J =1> 0 
lines in the disk of our Galaxy show that line shapes and 
intensity ratios along lines of sight are remarkably similar. 
Since CO lines are optically thin, the CO integrated line 
intensities must measure mass, even though rt! >> 1. This 
can be explained if clouds are in virial equilibrium and 
consist of a large number of small subthermally excited 
clumps. An exact relation between the integrated intensity 
of the J = 1 — 0 line and column density of H) has 
been determined empirically for the disk. This approach 
has been often used for molecular mass determinations 
in external galaxies. However, there are exceptions to this 
relation: the conversion factor for the galactic center is 1/7 
of the factor used for the disk, and the conversion factor 
appears to differ from galaxy to galaxy. 


Dust emission 

Another method to determine Hz column densities is 
to use broadband dust emission. The dust intensities 
rise rapidly with frequency, and measurements made 
with large bandwidths lead to very small values of 
ATgms (See equation (5)). One drawback to continuum 
measurements is line-of-sight confusion, since there is no 
velocity information. The quantitative relation between 
Tdust and N(Hz) is calibrated by the measurement of 
emission and extinction toward NGC 7023. The optical 
extinction has been converted into a column density of 
hydrogen using the standard gas-to-dust relation (see 
Mathis 1990). Ifhv «kT, 


S, 4 


N(H) = 1. rs 
CRN oe a aca 


(7) 


S, is in Jy, source FWHP size, 0, in arcseconds and A in 
pum. N(H) is the column density of hydrogen in all forms, 
incm~. The value of metallicity is Z (for the Sun, Z.). The 
factor b accounts for changes in grain sizes. For moderate 
densities, b = 1.9; for very dense gas, b = 3.4, but a wider 
range is likely. If the uncertainties in equation (7) can be 
reduced, dust measurements could rival molecular line 
determinations of mass estimates. Images of dust emission 
show more structure than images of spectral lines; the 
explanation for this is not clear, thus far. 


A summary of scientific results 
It is estimated that there are ~5000 giant molecular clouds 
in our galaxy. These each have masses of ~10°Mo; these 
are probably cloud complexes with, on average, n(H2) ~ 
10* cm~$ and 7, * 20 K. Dark dust clouds have larger 
densities and 7, = 10 K. Clouds are assumed to be 
gravitationally stable and may have a fractal structure. For 
the Galactic disk inside the solar circle, the masses in H I 
and Hp are about equal. Outside the solar circle, the mass 
of H lis ~6 times that of Hp. 

In most clouds, Avj;2, the FWHP linewidths, are 
found to be supersonic. There are some exceptions, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Millimeter and Submillimeter Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


V(TeraHz) 1.15 2.30 3.45 4.61 
: I I m T T y 


10° 


Intensity (watts m-2sr-1) 


Figure 3. A plot of CO line intensities for the Orion KL source. 
The dashed curve is a plot of populations for LTE, while the 
solid curve is an LVG calculation for T, = 750 K, 

N(Hp) = 2.8 x 107! cm~?, n(H2) = 2.7 x 10° cm~3. The 
difference in the curves is caused by the faster decays from 
higher J levels. With measurements at frequencies above and 
below the maximum, one can determine both n(H2) and Ty 
(Watson et al 1985 Astrophys. J. 298 316). 


such as the denser cores of dark clouds. Large-scale 
organized motions, such as rotation, or large-scale collapse 
are ruled out from observations. It is unlikely that 
magnetohydrodynamic waves cause most of the line 
broadening. The linewidths could be caused by outflows 
from embedded objects, such as young stars, or by the 
conversion of large-scale motions such as galactic rotation 
into smaller-scale turbulence. These motions cause shock 
waves which give rise to broader lines. Theoretical 
studies show that there are two types of shocks: ‘J’ or 
jump shocks and ‘C’ or continuous shocks. J-shocks 
locally heat the gas and this leads to the dissociation of 
molecules. This will change the chemistry of the cloud 
greatly. C-shocks are cushioned by larger magnetic fields 
and cause less dissociation. Sub-mm line ratios provide a 
diagnostic which allows one to differentiate between these 
types of shocks. For J-shocks, there is a large amount 
of emission from ions. For C-shocks, the emission is 
primarily molecular and neutral carbon, but little ionic 
emission. For a complete understanding, studies of CO, 
C land C II are needed (energy level diagrams in figure 2). 

The most well-studied Galactic sources are as follows: 
(1) IRC+10216, a circumstellar envelope of the red giant 
star CW Leo, ~150 pc from the Sun; (2) the Orion KLregion, 
at 500 pe, 45” NW of the Trapezium cluster of stars which 
ionize the Orion H II region, with FWHP 10”, Tiin = 165 K 
and n(H2) = 10’ cm; (3) the dark cloud center TMC- 
1 in Taurus, with Tyn = 10 K and n(Hz) ~ 10* cm? 
at 160 pc; (4) Sgr B2, a complex of dense Hz clouds and 
HII regions at 8.2 kpc, near the center of our Galaxy; (5) 
Sgr A, the galactic center itself. In addition, there are a 
number of well-studied external galaxies. The group is 
inhomogeneous for anumber of observational reasons; the 
objects are Arp 220, IC342, M82, M51 and NGC 253. In the 
mm range, all of these were first mapped to a resolution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of ~12” in a number of lines with single dishes. Later 
the brighter lines were imaged with interferometers down 
to resolutions of ~2”. References to data are given in the 
bibliography. See especially references in the Protostars and 
Planets series. 

INTERSTELLAR CHEMISTRY involves non-equilibrium, non- 
terrestrial processes. At typical densities, neutral— 
neutral gas-phase reactions are too slow to form complex 
molecules in ~10° yr. Rather, the formation involves 
ion—molecule chemistry. Hydrogen and helium ions are 
produced by cosmic rays. The H* forms Hj or charge 
exchanges with C or O atoms. The reaction rates for 
ion-molecule reactions are >10° times faster than neutral 
reactions. This explains the abundance of molecules such 
as CO or OH in dark clouds. JIon—molecule reactions 
also play a large role in the formation of molecules 
in the envelopes of low-mass stars in the red giant 
phase. As a rule of thumb, hydrogen-poor molecules with 
unsaturated bonds are gas-phase, ion—molecule products, 
while molecules with saturated bonds are thought to be 
produced on grains and released into the ISM. 

Important goals of mm and sub-mm astronomy are 
to determine collapse criteria for molecular clouds and to 
search for individual collapse objects. Stars must form 
from molecular clouds, because of the close spatial and 
physical associations. Models for collapse begin with sizes 
of 10'° cm, continuing to pre-planetary disk sizes 10'* cm 
around the resulting star. At present, mm and sub-mm 
instrumentation limits us to nearby objects which could 
be imaged on scales <10!° cm. After many searches, a 
number of candidate objects have been found. These 
are mostly in dark dust clouds where low-mass stars are 
expected to form. The collapse signature is based on 
a model where the cloud center has higher temperature 
and density and where the collapse motions exceed the 
thermal motions. The measurements of optically thick 
lines, such as carbon monosulfide, %C**S, will show a 
narrow absorption feature (from gas in the outer part of 
region). This locates the center of the emission profile. 
If the cloud is collapsing, the blueshifted portion of this 
profile has a larger intensity than the redshifted portion, 
since the radiation from hotter blueshifted gas passes 
through the redshifted gas without being absorbed. The 
redshifted radiation from equally hot gas is absorbed by 
cooler gas at nearly the same velocity. Thus the blue wing 
arises closer to the warmer gas. If the cloud is expanding, 
the redshifted portion is more intense. A measurement of 
the rarer isotope '*C**S must show no narrow absorption 
feature or asymmetry. 

An important aspect of molecular cloud physics 
involves cooling. There are theoretical models, but these 
are complex even in idealized cases. Surveys of mm and 
sub-mm spectral line data allow direct tests of the cooling 
processes by mapping the intensities of the lines of CO, 
which dominates cooling at lower densities, and HO, 
which should dominate at higher densities. At the highest 
densities, one expects that hydrides will provide most of 
the cooling. Measurements of the CO lines from J = 1 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Millimeter and Submillimeter Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to 20, H»O transitions and lines from the more abundant 
hydrides are needed to experimentally determine the heat 
flow from clouds. 

Fundamental to the sTAR-FORMATION process is the 
outflow phase. This occurs shortly after the core of the 
star forms. Excess material is expelled in the form of a 
bipolar high-velocity stream of material which is mainly 
molecular. Such outflowing material has been traced in 
mm wavelength lines of CO and other molecules. The 
central object in this phase is a YOUNG STELLAR OBJECT (YSO). 
Surrounding the YSO is usually a dense disk of material, 
perpendicular to the direction of the bipolar outflow; 
outflows may be driven by magnetic forces. 

A completely different type of outflow occurs at the 
end of the main sequence life of stars of roughly a few solar 
masses. These asymptotic giant branch stars or red giants 
are referred to as mass loss stars. Many have been traced 
in CO lines. The outflow velocities are ~30 km s~!. The 
mass loss mechanism is thought to be radiation pressure 
on dust grains, which drags the gas. The moderate velocity 
flows are sometimes accompanied by flows with velocities 
larger than 100 km s-!. This material should be hotter and 
may be atomic rather than molecular. If so, atomic lines 
of carbon or oxygen might supplement the information 
based on CO or shock tracers such as SiO to trace these 
flows. 

In PHOTODISSOCIATION REGIONS, the molecules are close to 
a source of ultraviolet radiation which alters the chemistry 
and heat balance. The most obvious change is that C II and 
C I become much more abundant. The layer containing C 
I may extend to a depth which is a significant fraction of 
the width of the PDR. The most well known PDR is the 
‘Orion bar’, to the SE of the Orion H II region. 

Sub-mm spectroscopy of galaxies is likely to reveal 
warmer regions of exceptional star-forming or shock 
activity. Since most galaxies are compact, high angular 
resolution is needed. Some have moderately intense lines, 
so can be imaged with interferometers. For most, the 
emission is usually weak, so lower-resolution data are 
taken with single telescopes, so far. The most studied 
galaxy in the mm and sub-mm is Messier 82. It has 
long since been established that ms2 has warm molecular 
gas; there are HHT maps over a few arcminutes in the 
J = 7-6 line of CO which arises from an energy level 
156 K above ground. Thus, there must be very widespread 
emission from warm molecular gas; details of the heating 
processes are not fully understood. Another interesting 
object is the galaxy Centaurus A (see NGC 5128/CENTAURUS 
A). The nucleus is an intense continuum emitter even in 
the sub-mm wavelength range, so that species such as 
hydrides might be detected in absorption. Another fruitful 
case study is the face-on spiral IC342, thought to be an 
analog of our Milky Way. Studies will allow a comparison 
of global properties of these sources. At redshifts >4, CO 
lines have been detected in the mm wavelength range. In 
the future, the detection of redshifted lines of molecules, 
C II and OI would extend chemistry studies to the early 
universe. See the results summarized by Combes and 
Wiklind (1998). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Combes and Wiklind 1998 Highly Redshifted Radio Lines 
(Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conf. Ser. 156) ed 
C L Carili et al 

Mathis 1990 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 28 41 


A good reference for sub-mm studies is 


Genzel R 1991 Galactic Interstellar Medium ed W B Burton 
et al (Heidelberg: Springer) 


For the fundamentals of radio astronomy and mm line 
studies of molecular clouds, see 


Rohlfs and Wilson 1996 Tools of Radio Astronomy 
(Heidelberg: Springer) 


Arecent review of mm and sub-mm interferometric results 
and techniques is 


Sargent Al and Welch WJ 1993 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
31 297 


Sub-mm work is reviewed by 
Phillips T G and Keene J 1992 Proc. IEEE 80 1662 
Scientific results are summarized in 


Levy E Hand Lunine J I (ed) 1993 Protostars and Planets III 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Hartquist T W and Williams D A (ed) 1998 The Molecular 
Astrophysics of Stars and Galaxies (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 


Thomas L Wilson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mills, Bernard Yarnton (1920-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mills, Bernard Yarnton (1920-) 


Australian engineer and astronomer, born near Sydney, 
and worked with the Australian CSIR Division of 
Radiophysics. He measured the position of Cygnus A 
and identified a faint nebulosity as its origin, confirmed 
by a more accurate position by F. G. Smith and 200 in 
photographs by w BAADE and R MINKOWSKI showing Cygnus 
A as a peculiar galaxy. Mills built a cross-type radio 
interferometer at the Fleurs Field Station: the two arrays in 
the N-S and E-W arms produced intersecting fan beams 
which were switched in and out of phase and made 
a narrow pencil beam at their intersection which could 
position radio sources accurately. He constructed the 
Mills cross (1954) which operated at 85 MHz and had 
1500 foot arms, with which he mapped the Magellanic 
clouds and conducted source surveys. Mills led the 
group that constructed the Molonglo Cross, an instrument 
with one mile arms operating at 408 MHz, built in 1967 
and converted in 1981 to a synthesis telescope. Mills 
discovered the Vela pulsar at the center of the Vela 
supernova remnant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Milne, Edward Arthur (1896-1950) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Milne, Edward Arthur (1896—1950) 


Astrophysicist, born in Hull, Yorkshire, England, became 
Rouse Ball Professor at Oxford. Milne’s theoretical work 
on stellar atmospheres led to the determination of the 
temperatures of stars of the different spectral classes 
and the calculation of limb darkening (the decrease of 
brightness across the face of a star from center to edge). 
Milne also showed how molecules escape from stellar and 
planetary atmospheres. He developed a new form of 
relativity called kinematic relativity, based on attractive 
general philosphical ideas. He also suggested that the 
‘constants’ of physics (such as G) changed over the life 
of the universe. Neither of these propositions is accepted. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mimas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mimas 


The innermost of Saturn’s mid-sized icy satellites, 
discovered in 1789 by William Herschel. It orbits the 
planet at a distance of 186000 km, within the tenuous 
E ring and near its inner boundary. Mimas is a heavily 
cratered world, with many craters overlapping. With one 
exception they are less than 30 km across. The exception 
is Herschel (named to honor the satellite’s discoverer), 
whose diameter of 130 km is nearly a third of the satellite’s 
diameter, 400 km. Like other mid-sized satellites of Saturn, 
Mimas may have been destroyed and reassembled itself 
in the era of heavy bombardment 4 billion years ago. 
Its density of 1200 kg m~° indicates that its composition 
is largely of water ice. Mimas’s proximity to Saturn’s 
ring system gives it a controlling influence: it keeps the 
Cassini Division clear, for example, and is responsible for 
‘corrugations’ in the A ring. 


Seealso: Saturn: satellites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mineur, Henri (1899-1954) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mineur, Henri (1899-1954) 


Born in Lille, France, worked at the Paris Observatory, 
discovered the retrograde rotation of the system of 
globular clusters around the Galaxy, due to the fact 
that they are stationary while the Sun moves prograde. 
Discovered the error in the period—luminosity law for 
Cepheid variable stars, on which the cosmological distance 
scale is based. Mineur founded and was the first director 
of the Institute d’Astrophysique in Paris. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Minkowski, Hermann (1864—1909) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Minkowski, Hermann (1864-1909) 


Born in Alexotas, Russian Empire (now Kaunas, Lithua- 
nia), became professor at the University of Gottingen, 
worked on the mathematics of the theory of relativity. Us- 
ing tensor calculus he cast the work of LORENTZ and EINSTEIN 
into the form of a four-dimensional non-Euclidean space, 
now known as Minkowski space. This ‘space-time contin- 
uum’ provided the framework on which Einstein devel- 
oped the general theory of relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Minkowski, Rudolph Leo Bernhard (1895-1976) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Minkowski, Rudolph Leo Bernhard 
(1895-1976) 


Born in Strassburg, Germany, worked on atomic 
spectroscopy at Hamburg and had to flee the Nazi 
persecution, joined WALTER BAADE on the Mount Wilson 
Observatory staff, where he began to apply spectroscopy 
to astronomy. He investigated nebulae, including 
supernova remnants, especially the Crab nebula. He 
classified supernovae into Types I and II, leading to 
their identification as two similar implosions in different 
kinds of stars. He headed the National Geographic 
Society-Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (POSS) which 
photographed the entire northern sky with the Palomar 
48 in Schmidt Telescope. With Walter Baade he optically 
identified many of the early radio sources, including 
Cygnus A. In 1960, on his very last observing night with 
the 200 in Palomar Telescope, he found a galaxy (3C 295) 
with the then highest redshift, a record which stood for 
15 years. After he made the discovery, the night was 
declared overcast and the occasion toasted in whisky. He 
discovered Comet 1950b and a small, faint, provocatively 
shaped nebula is named Minkowski’s footprint. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Minnaert, Marcel Gilles Jozef (1893-1970) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Minnaert, Marcel Gilles Jozef 
(1893-1970) 


Belgian physicist, became professor of physics in 
Utrecht in the Netherlands. Worked on the solar 
spectrum, published a definitive analysis as the Utrecht 
Atlas. Developed the ‘curve of growth method’ to 
analyse stellar spectra. His most enduring book is a 
wonderful explanation of beautiful and interesting natural 
phenomena called Light and Color in the Open Air. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mira 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mira 


The star o Ceti, a red giant, is believed to have been 
the first variable star ever discovered. It is the type- 
star of the most common class of long-period pulsating 
variables, which are usually described as Mira-type stars. 
Its variability was first recorded by the German theologian 
David Fabricius (1564-1617) in 1596, and was first studied 
in detail about 40 years later. It is visible to the unaided 
eye for only about four months around each maximum, 
and is a telescopic object for the next seven months— 
hence Fabricius initially believing it to be a nova. This 
was of course before the invention of the telescope, so 
Mira was a star which was then invisible for some two- 
thirds of the time. It was for many years the only known 
case of a star varying in brightness. This behavior gave 
rise to the name Mira (‘Wonderful’), which is attributed 
to Johann Hevelius (1611-87). Despite its long absences it 
was recorded by Johann Bayer (1572-1625), who showed 
it as a fourth-magnitude star in his Uranometria star atlas 
of 1603. 

Mira’s period is variable, but averages 331.96 days 
(about 11 months). The rise from minimum to maximum 
is significantly faster than the fall, usually taking about 110 
days. There is some evidence from speckle interferometry 
that Mira is subject to sudden large variations in diameter 
at particular wavelengths. The spectral type varies during 
the light-cycle, between M5e and M9e. Its apparent 
magnitude at maximum is typically 3.0, but can be 
anywhere in the range 2.0-5.0; minima usually lie between 
8.5 and 9.5, but can be as low as 10.1. The star has a parallax 
of 0.008”, and is at a distance of about 420 light-years. 
Its absolute magnitude is difficult to calculate with any 
precision, but is probably about 1.0. 

Mira has a close binary companion, the white dwarf 
VZ Ceti, which is believed to accrete material from Mira’s 
stellar wind. The existence of this faint (thirteenth- 
magnitude) companion was predicted in 1920 by J H 
Joy (1882-1973) of the Mount Wilson Observatory, from 
periodic variations in Mira’s spectrum. VZ Ceti is visible 
only at times when Mira itself is very faint; it was first 
detected optically with the 36 inch refractor at the Lick 
Observatory in 1923 by the great double-star observer RG 
Aitken (1864-1951); the separation was then about 0.9”. 

Mira is probably the most thoroughly observed of 
all variable stars; every maximum since 1638 has been 
recorded. More than 4000 Mira-type variables are now 
known. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mira Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mira Variables 


Mira variables are cool, giant, pulsating stars with periods 
in the range ~100 to ~500 days. The range extends to 
~2000 days if we include OH/IR variables which are 
generally too faint (due to their low temperatures and to 
dust shell obscuration) to be readily detected at optical 
wavelengths and have been mainly found either from their 
OH-maser emission at radio wavelengths or in the infrared 
where they are bright. One reason for the importance 
of Miras in modern astrophysics is that they are low- 
mass stars in the last, and most luminous, phase of their 
evolution, before they eject their outer layers as planetary 
nebula shells (see also STELLAR EVOLUTION). Miras are also 
important as standard candles for estimating distances 
within our Galaxy (e.g. the distance from the Sun to center 
of the Galaxy) and also the distances to nearby galaxies 
(e.g. the Magellanic Clouds). Matter is being lost from 
the surfaces of Miras into space in a way that is not yet 
fully understood. Nor do we precisely understand how 
the solid grains present in this outflow are formed. 

o Ceti, known as ‘Mira’ (the wonderful), was the first 
star to have been recorded as variable other than novae 
or supernovae. It was first noted by David Fasrictus in 
1596, though the fact that it varies in light with a period of 
about 332 days was not known until the mid-seventeenth 
century. Its period and light range are typical of this type 
of star. In the mean it varies from a visual magnitude of 3.4 
at maximum, to 9.3 at minimum but the light curve does 
not repeat exactly from cycle to cycle and it can at times 
rise to a magnitude of 2.0 and decline as faint as 10.1 mag. 

Red (ie. cool) giant and supergiant variables 
constitute a large and rather heterogeneous group of 
objects. The Mira class is restricted to cool stars (surface 
temperatures lower than ~3500 to 3000 K) with well 
defined periods and with visual light ranges of 2.5 mag 
or more (light ranges of 6 mag or more, as in o Cet 
itself, are common). Whilst the minimum light amplitude 
for membership of this class is rather arbitrary it does 
in fact result in the selection of a group of objects with 
relatively well defined physical properties. The large 
light range in the visual region is partly due to the low 
surface temperatures of the stars. For most Miras the 
maximum in the energy distribution is in the infrared 
near 1.6 wm. At such wavelengths the light range is 
usually much less (typically 1.0 mag or less). Since the 
visual region is in the short-wavelength tail of the energy 
distribution, a small change in the surface temperature 
makes a large difference to the visual brightness. In 
addition the molecular absorption bands, which dominate 
the visual region of Mira spectra, strengthen as the surface 
temperature periodically decreases during the pulsation 
cycle and their blocking effect further increases the visual 
light range. Because most of the energy of normal Miras 
is radiated in the near infrared between 1.0 and 3.0 wm, 
measurements in this region of the spectrum can be used to 
estimate the bolometric (i.e. the total) luminosity of the star. 
There are nearly 6000 Miras or probable Miras currently 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


listed in the General Catalogue of Variable Stars (4th edition 
1985-1990). But in most parts of the sky only the relatively 
bright Miras have been so far discovered. 


Mira atmospheres 

Miras can be grouped into three broad classes according 
to the chemical composition of their atmospheres. In 
the largest class (M-type Miras), the spectrum in the 
optical region is dominated by absorption bands of the 
TiO molecule. In the S-type Miras absorption bands of 
ZrO dominate the optical spectrum, though often with 
strong TiO bands as well. These two classes are grouped 
together as O-rich Miras (or O-Miras). In the third class (C- 
type or C-Miras) the spectra are dominated by molecules 
containing carbon (C; etc). Most of the carbon and oxygen 
in the atmospheres of all these stars is locked up in the 
stable molecule CO. If there is an excess of oxygen in 
the atmosphere, the Mira is O-type, if there is an excess 
of carbon it is of C-type. Both this difference and the 
difference between the two classes of O-Miras are due 
to differing amounts of ‘dredge-up’ that the stars have 
undergone. ‘Dredge-up’ is the convective mixing into 
the upper atmosphere of the star of material that has 
undergone nuclear processing in its interior. Atomic 
absorption lines due to the unstable element technetium, 
which does not occur naturally on the Earth and was first 
produced in the laboratory in 1937, were found in some 
S-type Miras in 1951. The half-life of its most stable isotope 
is 4 x 10° years and the isotope produced by the nuclear 
s-process (Tc), the predicted production mechanism in 
these stars, has a half-life of only 2 x 10° years. This 
was an important early indication that nuclear processing 
and the production of complex nuclei take place in some 
stars, with the processed material being dredged up into 
the atmosphere. Technetium lines have been subsequently 
found in many O- and C-Miras and semiregular variables. 

Lines of the absorption bands of the CO molecule can 
be observed in infrared spectra of Miras. The variation in 
the radial velocity of CO lines of relatively high excitation 
potential which are formed deep in the atmosphere of the 
star demonstrates that once per pulsation cycle a shock 
wave is generated which moves outwards through the 
stellar atmosphere. Doubling of these absorption lines 
at certain pulsation phases shows that as one such shock 
wave is dying out in the higher atmosphere another is 
being generated lower down. These observations strongly 
indicate that the variation of Mira stars is due toa pulsation 
mechanism of some kind. For self-sustaining pulsation 
one requires there to be a layer in the star which will act 
as an ‘Eddington’ valve, absorbing energy when the star 
contracts and releasing it when the star expands. In the 
case of Miras this is probably a region in which hydrogen 
is ionized on compression, recombination and release of 
energy taking place on expansion. 

A characteristic of Mira variables as distinct from 
most lower-amplitude red variables is that they have 
emission lines of the hydrogen Balmer series in their 
spectra (see HYDROGEN SPECTRUM). The intensity of these 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mira Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lines varies systematically in the pulsation period of the 
star. Most workers believe that the lines are excited by 
the shock waves just discussed. When first observed, 
as the brightness of the star increases towards maximum 
light, the lines have very unusual relative intensities (Hd 
much stronger than Hy for instance). This is due to the 
emission being excited by the shock deep in the stellar 
atmosphere. The line strengths are thus greatly modified 
by absorption in the outer atmosphere (e.g. by molecules 
of TiO). As the pulsation cycle proceeds, the shock wave 
moves outwards through the atmosphere and the emission 
lines which are generated suffer less from the effects of 
overlying absorption. Many of the well studied Miras also 
show, at certain phases in their pulsation cycle, emission 
lines of neutral and ionized metals (e.g. lines of Fe I, Fe 
II, Mg I, Si I, In I) and even forbidden lines (i.e. lines with 
very low transition probabilities) of ionized iron ([Fe IT] 
lines). The relative intensities of the metallic emission 
lines in Mira spectra are quite unlike that seen in other 
astronomical or laboratory sources. Certain lines of Fe I, 
Tiland Zr I, for instance, are abnormally strong compared 
with other lines of the same element. These lines are 
excited by fluorescence. This depends on the chance 
coincidence of a resonance line (that is one whose lower 
energy level is the ground state) of the element concerned 
with a strong emission line of another element. Most 
of the relevant coincidences are in the ultraviolet. Thus 
long before it was possible to observe Miras from above 
the Earth’s atmosphere it was clear from observations of 
the fluorescent lines of other elements, seen in the optical 
region, that the lines of ionized magnesium (Mg II) at 
2800 A must be strongly in emission in some Miras. 

The atmospheres of Miras are very extended. A 
clear indication of this came when the angular diameters 
of Miras measured in the visual and in the infrared 
by lunar occultation techniques were compared. For a 
given O-Mira such as R Leo the diameter at ~2 ym is 
about half that in the visual. Later it became possible to 
measure the variation of the angular diameters of Miras 
with wavelength using interferometric techniques. In 
the visible region, the angular diameter of o Cet was 
then found to vary by large amounts (up to a factor of 
two) depending on whether the observation was made at 
the wavelength of a strong absorption band of the TiO 
molecule where the opacity of the atmosphere is very high 
or just outside the band where the opacity is much lower 
and where, therefore, we are seeing much deeper into the 
atmosphere. Thus whilst for most stars the depth of the 
atmosphere is only a small fraction of the stellar diameter, 
in the case of Miras the atmosphere occupies most of the 
star. Evidently the whole concept of ‘a diameter’ becomes 
rather vague in these circumstances and different values 
may well be appropriate for different purposes. Diameters 
are needed to compare Miras with the theoretical models 
of these stars and for a discussion of Mira pulsations. In 
both these cases the diameter is taken to be that measured 
in the wavelength range in which most of the energy 
of the star is being radiated (in the infrared at about 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Reictive DEC (mas) 
so 


-50 


50 it] ~50 
Relative RA (mas) 


Figure 1. An aperture synthesis image of R Cas showing its 
non-circular profile (from Haniff 1995). 


1.6 wm). At this wavelength, models suggest that one is 
measuring the diameter of the stellar photosphere. From 
Miras with measured angular diameters and parallaxes 
one can estimate that a Mira of period 300 days has a linear 
diameter of ~ 400Ro (about the distance of Mars from the 
Sun). The diameters are even larger at longer periods. 

In recent years it has become possible to reconstruct 
the images of Miras from interferometric (aperture 
synthesis) measurements. In several cases (e.g. figure 1) 
the reconstructed image at optical wavelengths is non- 
circular. This result applies to the outer region of the 
atmosphere which, as just discussed, is the region seen 
at optical wavelengths. It is not yet clear whether it also 
applies to deeper layers such as seen in the infrared. Three 
possibilities have been suggested to explain this result: 
(a) flattening of the outer atmosphere due to rotation; (b) 
non-radial pulsation of the star; (c) large star spots on the 
stellar surface which are not fully resolved with current 
instrumentation and lead to an apparent non-circular 
profile for the star. The last of these possibilities has 
generally been favored, mainly because the atmospheres 
of cool red giants, in general, are expected to contain large 
convection cells and in these circumstances large over-hot 
or over-cool regions on the surface might be anticipated. 
The limited amount of work that has so far been carried 
out also indicates that the diameter of the outer regions (as 
seen in the visible) can vary ina manner unconnected with 
pulsation. In attempting to explain these results it has to 
be borne in mind that the outer regions are very tenuous 
and possibly consist of rising and falling clouds with little 
or no material between them. 


The circumstellar region, mass loss, grain 
formation 

One reason why the structure of the outer atmosphere 
of Miras is of importance is that it is relevant to 
understanding the process by which Miras lose mass. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mira Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mass loss is clearly a key factor in attempting to 
understand this stage of stellar evolution, and, when 
properly understood it will lead to a full understanding 
of how solid grains are formed in the circumstellar 
environment. At the present time we have only 
a rudimentary idea of how this process takes place. 
Remarkably, laboratory studies of small inclusions in 
some meteorites show them to have the same relative 
abundances of certain isotopes as those predicted for 
Mira atmospheres, suggesting that some grains in these 
meteorites come from Mira outflows. 

Miras are losing mass at rates which are typically in 
the range from ~10~” to ~3 x 10-°Mg yr™!. For extreme 
OH/IR Miras the rate can be as high as ~10~*Mo yr“. 
It has not yet been possible to predict mass-loss rates 
theoretically. However, observations indicate that the 
rate is related to the star’s pulsation since it is correlated 
with both the period and the pulsation amplitude. It is 
generally believed that pulsation raises (gaseous) matter 
sufficiently above the star that condensation into grains 
can take place. The concentration of matter into clouds 
in the atmosphere as mentioned above will clearly aid the 
process of grain formation. Once formed, the grains are 
then driven from the star by radiation pressure, dragging 
gas with them. 

The dust round O-Miras is probably composed 
mainly of silicates whilst that around C-Miras is, probably, 
generally composed of carbon or carbon-rich compounds. 
Some C-Miras show large decreases in visual and near- 
infrared brightnesses on time scales of some thousands 
of days (i.e. in a time long compared with the pulsation 
period). These declines in brightness may be similar 
to dust obscuration events of the RCB type. Thus the 
dust formation process may be episodic or non-uniform 
over the stellar surface, possibly connected with clouds in 
the stellar atmosphere. It seems likely that similar, non- 
uniform dust formation takes place in the circumstellar 
envelopes of O-Miras. In this case, though, it is likely to be 
less obvious in optical observations since, mass for mass, 
silicate grains of a given size have a much lower opacity 
in this region than carbon grains. However, temporal 
changes in the dust shell of 0 Cet itself are known from 
interferometric studies in the infrared (at 11 wm) and 
strongly suggest that the circumstellar dust is concentrated 
into clouds. 

The full complexity of the circumstellar environment 
of Miras is best seen in the OH/IR stars. These are long- 
period O-rich Miras many of which were first detected in 
surveys for objects showing the 18 cm emission lines of 
the OH molecule. Such lines are emitted by maser action. 
These objects are usually very faint at optical wavelengths 
due to heavy circumstellar dust obscuration and probably 
also to the low temperature of the central star. They 
tend to be bright at far-infrared wavelengths (at 10 wm 
and longer wavelengths). This infrared radiation comes 
from the circumstellar dust heated by the underlying star 
whose periodic light variations it therefore tends to follow. 
Besides thermal emission from dust, these objects also 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


show thermal emission from some molecules (e.g. mm and 
sub-mm lines of CO and SiO) and maser emission from 
others (HO, OH, SiO). 

Interferometric studies of Mira itself in the infrared 
(11 um) show that dust formation takes place within 
about two stellar radii of the surface of the star (with 
the photospheric (infrared) diameter of the star defined 
as above). Observations of other Miras show that SiO 
masers are also excited at about this distance from the 
star’s surface—that is, in a shell whose radius is only about 
50 per cent greater than that of the outer radius of the star’s 
atmosphere as observed at visual wavelengths. Since a 
typical Mira of period 350 days has a photospheric radius 
of ~450 solar radii (~3 x 103 cm), the inner radius of the 
dust shell and the radius of the ring of SiO masers is of 
order 10'* cm. H,O masers are typically of order 10° cm 
from the center of the star and the OH masers another 
factor of about ten further away. CO is formed deep in the 
atmosphere of the star, and provided one has sufficient 
sensitivity, thermal emission from this molecule can be 
detected in the outflowing gas and dust mixture up to 
the point where all the CO has been photodissociated by 
interstellar ultraviolet radiation. This extent will evidently 
depend on the mass loss rate and on the speed of the 
outflow. Observed outer radii of the thermal CO emission 
around Miras are typically 10° to 10'” cm and thus have 
large angular extent for the nearer Miras, e.g. an angular 
diameter of ~14 arcsec for o Cet. 

OH masers have been detected from a large number 
of Miras and OH/IR Miras. The lines are generally double 
peaked. The two peaks come from the front and back of a 
(presumed) spherical shell expanding at ~10 to 20 kms’. 
The OH emission is stimulated by infrared radiation from 
the heated dust and so varies in the period of the star. 
There is a time delay (typically 10 to 100 days) between 
the intensity variations of the two peaks in the spectrum 
line due to the light travel time across the shell. Since in 
some cases this shell can also be resolved as a ring in the 
plane of the sky, one can use the time delay together with 
the angular diameter of the ring to determine the distance 
of the source, provided one assumes spherical symmetry. 

Circumstellar masers of most extreme OH/IR Miras 
project on the sky as circular rings and thus do suggest 
overall spherical symmetry for these objects. For less 
extreme Miras there is considerable evidence that the 
outflow from the star can be aspherical and also that 
the outflowing matter is concentrated into clouds. For 
instance the fluorescent emission of the KI resonance line 
7699 A is highly asymmetrical around Miras, as is the 
CO thermal emission. Optical polarization measurements 
indicate that there must be asymmetrical scattering by 
the grains in the dust shell. In O-Miras the H,O maser 
distribution on the plane of the sky can be asymmetric and 
inanO-Mira suchas R Cas the individual OH masers show 
that the mass loss is clumped on a scale small compared 
with the OH shell radius and is intrinsically chaotic with 
the clumps retaining their identity as they move outwards. 
These results, together with the apparent non-circular 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mira Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(J-K), 


Figure 2. The giant branch of 47 Tuc together with Miras from 
various clusters; crosses, Miras; triangles, 47 Tuc non-Mira 
variables; open circles, 47 Tuc AGB stars; filled circles, 47 Tuc 
RGB stars (from Feast and Whitelock 1987). 


profiles of the outer atmosphere of O-Miras, the RCB-like 
declines of some C-Miras and other evidence, which was 
mentioned above, suggest that overdense, or unusually 
cool, regions (clumps, clouds) in the upper atmosphere 
of the star may be important in the mass-loss and grain 
formation process. 

The circumstellar environment of C-Miras has been 
somewhat less well studied than that of O-Miras. 
However, CW Leo, also known as IRC + 10216, a C-Mira 
with a pulsation period of 630 days, has a shell in which 
infrared, mm and sub-mm studies have revealed thermal 
emission lines from more than 40 different chemical 
compounds. Some of these are quite complex (e.g. HCyN) 
and the object is important for our understanding of 
circumstellar chemistry. 


Evolution, pulsation 

The evolutionary state of O-Miras is perhaps best shown 
by those short-period Miras which are members of 
relatively metal-rich GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. Low-mass stars 
such as those in globular clusters evolve off the main 
sequence and climb the red giant branch (RGB). From 
the top of the RGB they drop to the horizontal branch 
and then climb through the red-giant region again on the 
asymptotic giant branch (AGB). Figure 2 shows a color-— 
magnitude diagram with the known cluster Miras together 
with the RGB/AGB of 47 Tuc, a globular cluster which 
contains three Miras. Miras are evidently the brightest 
and coolest of the stars in the clusters in which they occur. 
Their luminosities are above the predicted maximum for 
RGB stars (at least for periods greater than about 160 
days). They are thus at the tip of the AGB. After this 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stage they are expected to eject their atmospheres and 
become planetary nebulas. Near the top of the AGB, 
stars begin the process of thermal pulsing during which 
they burn helium and hydrogen alternately in a nuclear 
active zone. This zone surrounds an inert core which is 
essentially a white dwarf of about the same size as the 
Earth. The Miras belong to this thermal pulsing stage, and 
it seems likely that stars only manifest Mira characteristics 
during the brighter phases of each thermal cycle. A star 
may thus become a Mira several times, although this is 
not yet certain. Between these times it would probably 
be a low-amplitude semiregular variable such as can be 
seen marked in figure 2. A thermal pulse is initiated 
once every ~10° years in a solar mass star by a helium 
flash (a thermonuclear runaway) which lasts ~500 years. 
During this relatively short period the structure of the star 
changes significantly and one might anticipate changes in 
the pulsation period due to this. Whilst any long-term 
changes in the periods of most Miras are very small, a 
few, e.g. R Hya, R Aql, W Dra and BH Cru, show good 
evidence for significant changes. Thus the period of R 
Hya has changed from ~500 days in 1700 to 388 days at 
the present time. It seems likely that these rare objects are 
currently undergoing helium flashes. 

The occurrence of short-period Miras in globular 
clusters (e.g. three Miras with periods near 200 days in 47 
Tuc) shows that Miras at these periods must be old objects 
with initial masses near solar. The data from globular 
clusters are limited but they indicate that when there is 
more than one Mira in a cluster their periods are close to 
one another. There is also a relation between the periods 
of Miras in clusters and the cluster metallicity, the period 
being longer in higher-metallicity clusters. Unfortunately 
it has not been possible to test this period—metallicity 
relation for Miras in the general field. The reason 
for this is that although it is possible to classify Miras 
spectroscopically into the three broad chemical groups (M, 
S and C) noted above, their atmospheres are so complex 
that so far no satisfactory detailed analyses for chemical 
abundance have been made. However, the galactic 
kinematics of Miras in the general field are correlated 
with their periods allowing a classification according to 
POPULATION. The short period ~200 day stars belong to 
an old, thick disk or intermediate-halo population as 
expected since some Miras of this period occur in relatively 
metal-rich globular clusters. Longer period Miras belong 
to populations which are more metal-rich and/or younger. 
Thus the sequence of Mira periods is a sequence of the end 
points of AGB branches of different ages and/or chemical 
abundances. It seems likely that the 1000-2000 day OH/IR 
Miras simply continue this sequence to larger mass stars 
(perhaps to stars of initial mass ~4Mo). This is, however, 
still uncertain, partly because the central stars of these 
objects are obscured from view by their thick circumstellar 
shells and so cannot be adequately studied. 

The above discussion refers to O-Miras. The place of 
C-Miras in stellar evolution is less certain. Some at least 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mira Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The period—luminosity relation for Miras in the LMC. 
Ordinate, apparent magnitude at K (2.2 wm); abscissa, log of the 
period in days; filled circles, O-Miras; crosses, C-Miras: open 
circles, long-period Miras of uncertain status (from Feast et al 
1989). 


probably evolve from O-rich Miras as a result of dredge-up 
processes without a significant change of period. 

Miras in the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC), where 
they are all at closely the same distance from us, show well 
defined linear relations between bolometric or infrared 
magnitude and log P for periods between ~100 days and 
~400 days. The relations for O- and C-Miras are almost 
the same at 2.2 zm (K-band) (figure 3) and only slightly 
different in bolometric luminosity. The scatter about the 
relations is very small (only 0.13 mag about the O-Mira 
relation at K). This small scatter is a reason for suggesting 
that Miras may occur only at the brighter phases of a 
thermal pulse. The absolute magnitudes of the Miras (i.e. 
the zero point of the Mira period—luminosity (PL) relation) 
can be obtained in the following ways: by adopting 
a distance to the LMC (e.g. as derived from Cepheid 
variables); by using the distance of globular clusters 
which contain Miras; by using the absolute magnitudes 
of main-sequence companions to Miras in visual binary 
systems; or by using the trigonometrical parallaxes of 
Miras (the Hipparcos astrometry satellite has provided a 
set of such measures). Infrared color differences between 
O-Miras of the same period in the LMC and the Galaxy 
suggest that the period—metallicity relation may not be 
the same everywhere and such a difference may imply 
slight differences in luminosity at the same period. The 
bolometric luminosity of a Mira with a period of 200 days 
is about 4000 times that of the Sun and that of a 400 day 
Mira about 9000 times the Sun’s. 

Once the absolute magnitude, and hence the distance, 
of a Mira is known this can be combined with an angular 
diameter to give a linear diameter. The presence of short- 
period O-Miras in globular clusters as well as the galactic 
kinematics of O-Miras show thatat least those with periods 
of about a year or less have masses near that of the Sun. 
One can then use this fact together with the linear diameter 
and the period to deduce the mode in which Miras pulsate. 
Good agreement is found in this way with the theoretical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


predictions for pulsation in the first overtone. This, 
however, remains a controversial result, mainly because 
theoretical predictions of shock waves strong enough to 
excite the observed emission lines discussed above seem 
to require a smaller, hotter star and this would then 
be pulsating in the fundamental mode. That the topic 
has remained controversial is partly due to uncertainties 
in the definition of the diameter, as discussed earlier, 
and also to uncertainty in the theoretical predictions of 
both pulsation and shock wave production. There is 
evidence for multimode behavior in a few Miras. In such 
cases the light curve shows evidence of the superposition 
of two or more periodicities. In principle the period 
ratios of the excited modes allow mode identification but 
the theoretical predictions depend on the model of the 
atmosphere which is adopted. The resolution of these 
problems will no doubt lead to a deeper understanding 
of the complex atmospheres of Miras. 

The progenitors of Miras are clear in the case of the 
shorter period Miras that occur in globular clusters, at 
least if we adopt the standard picture of stars evolving 
along the AGB to higher luminosities and lower surface 
temperatures. As figure 2 shows, variability sets in 
as one ascends the AGB, first as irregular or low- 
amplitude semiregular variations and then as Mira-type 
pulsations. In a period—absolute magnitude diagram 
the low-amplitude semiregular variables evolve along the 
‘Whitelock’ relation of figure 4 with increasing luminosity, 
period and pulsation amplitude, finally reaching the top 
of the AGB as Miras on the Mira PL relation. It is presumed 
that longer-period Miras which evolve from more massive 
or more metal-rich stars do so in an analogous way. 
Neither the mass loss of Miras nor their further evolution 
is fully understood, though the stars are widely believed 
to eject their outer layers as planetary nebulae. 


Mira binaries, red supergiant variables 

A number of Miras are known in interacting binary 
systems. SYMBIOTIC STARS generally show a rich emission 
spectrum of relatively high excitation, believed to be 
energized by the infall of gas from the Mira onto a disk 
round a compact companion. The nearest such system 
contains the Mira R Aqr (period = 387 days) and is 
resolved as a bipolar nebula on the plane of the sky. In 
some symbiotics (e.g. RR Tel, period = 387 days) the 
presence of a Mira in the system is not obvious from 
optical observations but the variable dominates the light 
of the system in the infrared. o Cet itself is transferring 
mass to a white dwarf companion and this variable 
should perhaps be regarded as a marginal member of the 
symbiotic class. QX Pup (also denoted by OH0739 — 14 
or OH231.8 + 4.2, depending on whether one specifies 
the star by equatorial or galactic coordinates) is a 700 
day Mira in a complex bipolar nebula showing high- 
velocity outflows (at ~200 km s~'). It does not show the 
characteristic symbiotic emission line spectrum, but this 
Mira too seems likely to be part of an interacting binary 
system. The QX Pup system is sometimes known as the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mira Variables 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MIRA 


@ 47 Tuc 
a NGC 5927 
® NGC 6712 


log P 


Figure 4. The absolute bolometric magnitude plotted against log period in days for semiregular (SR) and Mira variables in metal-rich 
globular clusters. The Mira PL relation is shown. The SRs define a line of shallower slope (the Whitelock relation) (from Feast 1989). 


Calabash Nebula (from its shape) or the Rotten Egg Nebula 
(from the great strength of emission lines of H2S and other 
sulfur compounds in its mm spectrum). 

There is a rare class of supergiant red variables which 
like the Miras show a rather regular periodicity in their 
light variations and these are sometimes confused with 
the Miras. They tend to have periods greater than about 
400 days and lower light amplitudes than the Miras. They 
are also about two magnitudes brighter than Miras but 
have been much less well investigated. They are known 
in our Galaxy, the Magellanic Clouds and some have been 
found in the spiral galaxy M33. Evidence for a period— 
luminosity relation has been found. These objects are 
believed to be massive (progenitor mass > 9Mo), core 
helium-burning stars. It is conventional to refer to such 
objects as supergiants whilst Miras and other stars on 
the AGB are termed giants. This convention holds even 
though the spectra of some Miras place them in luminosity 
classes II or I (i.e. they are spectroscopically classed as 
supergiants.). 


Current research 

Infrared, radio and interferometric techniques are cur- 
rently leading to an understanding of the complex atmo- 
spheres of Miras, their circumstellar environment, and the 
way these are related to stellar pulsation. One aim is to 
determine the mechanisms of mass loss and grain forma- 
tion, neither of which are properly understood at present. 
The final ejection of the outer layers of a Mira, probably as 
a planetary nebula, is a crucial phase of stellar evolution 
about which even less is known. 

The importance of Miras as distance indicators within 
our own Galaxy and in extragalactic systems is being 
increasingly realized. For instance Miras are present 
in large numbers in the central bulge of our Galaxy 
and studies of these stars at optical, infrared and radio 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wavelengths have already made important contributions 
to our understanding of the composition, kinematics and 
structure of the bulge, including its bar-like shape. They 
have also enabled an estimate to be made of the distance 
to the galactic center. Since Mira periods are related to the 
stellar population to which they belong, they are valuable 
indicators of galactic evolution. 

Miras are very luminous in the near infrared and it 
is anticipated that large numbers of them will be found 
in infrared sky surveys such as that of the European 
consortium DENIS and of the American consortium 
2MASS, both of which began in the late 1990s. The colors 
of Miras measured in the infrared are distinctive and 
allow such stars to be recognized even before variability 
studies are made. Follow-up studies of Miras discovered 
in the surveys should lead to major improvements in our 
understanding of both stellar and galactic evolution. 


Bibliography 

Feast M 1989 The Use of Pulsating Stars in Fundamental 
Problems of Astronomy ed E G Schmidt (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) p 205 

Feast M and Whitelock P A 1987 Late Stages of Stellar 
Evolution eds S Kwok and S R Pottasch (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) p 33 

Feast M W, Glass I S, Whitelock P A and Catchpole R M 
1989 Mon. Not. Roy. Ast. Soc. 241 375 

Haniff C 1995 Astrophysical Applications of Stellar Pulsation, 
Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. Ser. vol 83, eds RS Stobie and 
P A Whitelock (San Francisco: Astronomical Society 
of the Pacific) p 277 


Michael Feast 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Miranda 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Miranda 


Miranda is the smallest of URANUs’ five major satellites 
and one of the most unusual objects in the SOLAR SYSTEM. 
Miranda is such a small world, only about 470 kilometers 
(300 miles) in diameter, that it was not discovered until 
1948 by the American astronomer GERARD P KUIPER. Very 
little more could be learned about Miranda until the 
VOYAGER 2 spacecraft flew through the Uranian system 
in 1986. Because of navigation requirements to give 
Voyager 2 the gravitational assist necessary to send it on to 
Neptune, the spacecraft passed closer to Miranda than any 
other large object in the Uranian system. The targeting of 
Voyager 2 near Miranda was viewed by most planetary 
scientists as an unexciting necessity, since all evidence 
indicated that Miranda would be only an uninteresting, 
heavily cratered object. 

As it turned out, Miranda became the great surprise of 
the encounter. It is indeed a small object, but its surface is 
incredibly diverse. The expected heavily cratered terrain is 
present, but the surface is also criss-crossed by a network 
of rift-like canyons more characteristic of a much larger 
object. And, most intriguingly, set amidst the craters 
and canyons are three large geologically modified patches 
called ‘coronae’, unlike any other feature seen elsewhere 
in the solar system (figure 1). 

All three of the coronae have sharply defined 
boundaries, with surface topographies and textures quite 
different from the cratered terrain. All three have very 
few superposed craters, indicating that they formed later 
than, and on top of, the heavily cratered terrain. Yet each 
corona is unique in detail. The largest of the coronae, 
named Arden, consists of a set of concentric light and dark 
bands and looks something like a great oval racetrack. The 
outermost ‘lane’ in the racetrack is one of the huge canyons. 
The corona over the South Pole, named Inverness, also has 
light and dark areas, but the pattern is more rectangular 
than Arden’s. The surface of Inverness is also covered 
by sets of low, parallel ridges arranged in a roughly 
rectangular pattern. The third corona, named Elsinore, 
appears uniformly gray in the images. Its surface is 
covered by parallel sets of low ridges and troughs like 
Inverness’, but the pattern is oval, like Arden’s. 

Canyons on Miranda occur over a wide range of 
sizes, but the most prominent are typically 50-60 km wide, 
6-8 km deep and hundreds of km long. A few of the 
canyons appear smooth and ‘softened’ by age or overlying 
material, but most appear rugged and fresh. The walls 
of many of the fresh canyons consist of a series of steep, 
smooth slopes arranged like tilted steps from canyon floor 
to rim. However, some canyon walls, like Verona Rupes 
off the northeast corner of Inverness, consist of a single 
magnificent step from floor to rim. 

Even the population of cRaTeRs on Miranda is 
somewhat unusual. On most objects in the solar system, 
craters range in appearance from fresh and crisp to old and 
worn down, with all stages of preservation in between. On 
Miranda some craters appear fresh and some appear worn, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. This picture of Miranda is a mosaic of the best images 
obtained by Voyager 2 in 1986. The projection is orthographic, 
with the South Pole at the center. The surface shows an 
incredible variety of features: the heavily cratered terrain at left; 
large canyons cutting across the surface, including Verona Rupes 
at right; and the three coronae, Arden at the bottom, Inverness at 
center, and Elsinore at the top of the image. (NASA photograph.) 


but there are almost none in between. Most of the large 
craters on the cratered terrain appear worn down while 
the smaller craters on both the cratered terrain and the 
coronae are sharp and fresh. 

The unusual and unexpected collection of features 
on Miranda has prompted a number of competing 
explanations for their origin. One early suggestion, based 
on the theoretical idea that small objects near large planets 
like Uranus should have been blasted apart many times 
by incoming PLANETESIMALS, was that Miranda had been 
catastrophically shattered into many large pieces after it 
had partially melted into dark rock-rich and light ice-rich 
layers. The shattered pieces then fell back together in 
random order, with darker fragments formerly in the deep 
interior forming the coronae now visible on the surface. 
An extension on this idea was that the canyons had been 
formed as rock-rich chunks and had slowly sunk back to 
Miranda’s center, stressing and breaking the surface. 

Subsequent detailed analysis of the canyon networks 
led to their interpretation as cracks or rifts formed by 
stretching of the surface, which in turn was caused by 
upwelling of material from below. The appearance of the 
coronal materials—particularly the different brightness of 
distinct features (especially in Inverness, see figure 2), the 
morphology of the surface ridges, and the lobed and flow- 
like edges—led to their interpretation as huge deposits 
of lava-like material that flowed out onto the cratered 
surface, filling low spots and spilling out on top of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Miranda 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. This picture taken by Voyager 2 in 1986 shows portions 
of Elsinore Corona at upper right, and Inverness Coronae at 
lower left. A strip of ancient cratered terrain separates them. 
Note how the coronal materials appear to have flowed over the 
older cratered surface. (NASA photograph.) 


cratered terrain. Both the inferred surface stretching and 
the volcanism can be accounted for by heating, thermal 
expansion and partial melting deep in Miranda’s interior. 
The problem is in understanding how sufficiently high 
temperatures to cause such extensive geologic activity can 
occur in as small a body as Miranda. Ideas accounting 
for the apparently excessive heating include episodes of 
tidal heating, or the presence of an outer layer of material 
with a very low thermal conductivity, leading to enhanced 
insulation of the normal internal radioactive heat source. 
This interpretation does not exclude the idea that Miranda 
had been blasted apart early in its history, but the present 
surface features do not appear to result from such an event. 

Miranda is an icy body. Spectral analysis of its 
reflected light shows the presence of water ice on its 
surface. Miranda’s density of 1.15 gcm™? indicates that 
its interior is also made mostly of water ice with a 
small fraction of rocky material. Miranda’s density is 
somewhat smaller than the densities of its sister satellites 
(See URANUS), implying that Miranda might have a smaller 
fraction of rocky material in its interior than its neighbors. 
Alternatively, Miranda’s outer layers could be more 
porous than its larger neighbors’. 

If the coronal materials are indeed formed by 
eruptions of lava-like materials, they indicate the presence 
of at least small amounts of ices other than water ice. 
‘Lavas’ on Miranda would not be made of liquid rock 
as on Earth, but of liquid water. However, the putative 
lava deposits on Miranda are up to a kilometer thick and 
have surface ridges and curved edges indicative of a lava 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with high viscosity. Pure water has a low viscosity, but 
mixtures of water with such compounds as ammonia and 
methanol do have sufficiently high viscosities to form 
the coronal features. Such icy mixtures also have very 
low melting points, making melting on small bodies like 
Miranda easier. Ices of compounds such as methanol have 
been detected on other icy bodies in the outer solar system, 
so they could be present on Miranda (see VOLCANISM IN THE 
SOLAR SYSTEM). Such icy lava would erupt onto Miranda’s 
surface with temperatures near —120 °C and freeze down 
to Miranda’s average surface temperature near —190 °C. 
At this temperature, water ice is as stiff as rock on Earth 
and will form permanent features. 


Bibliography 
General geology: 


Croft S K and Soderblom LA 1991 Geology of the Uranian 
Satellites Uranus ed J T Bergstrahl and MS Matthews 
(Tuscon, AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 561-628 


Competing hypotheses: 


Greenberg R, Croft S K, Janes D M, Kargel J S, Lebofsky L 
A, Lunine J I, Maricalis R L, Melosh H J, Ojakangas 
G W and Strom R G 1991 Miranda Uranus ed 
J T Bergstrahl and M S Matthews (Tuscon, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 693-735 


Latest geologic interpretation: 


Pappalardo R T, Reynolds S J and Greenly R 1997 
Extensional tilt blocks on Miranda: evidence for an 
upwelling origin of Arden Corona J. Geophys. Res. 102 
13 369-79 


Steven K Croft 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mirror 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mirror 


An optical component from which light is reflected. 
Because light is reflected from the front surface of an 
astronomical mirror, it does not have to travel through the 
material of which the mirror is made. An astronomical 
mirror usually consists of a suitably shaped substrate 
(the body of the mirror) on which a thin layer of 
highly reflective metal, such as silver or aluminum, is 
deposited. The substrate is normally a material with a very 
low coefficient of expansion which, therefore, expands 
and contracts as little as possible when its temperature 
changes, typical materials being Pyrex (a low-expansion 
glass), quartz or ceramics. 

Telescopes other than optical telescopes (e.g. for x- 
rays or radio) use mirrors (or reflectors) in analogous ways; 
however, the materials of the substrate and reflecting 
surface are adapted to the properties of the radiation. 

Ina reflecting telescope, light is collected and brought 
to a focus by a concave ‘primary’ mirror, the size of the 
image formed at its focal plane being proportional to the 
focal length of the mirror (the distance between the surface 
of the mirror and the focus). In most reflecting systems, the 
converging cone of light from the primary is intercepted 
by a smaller secondary mirror. If the secondary mirror is 
flat, it reflects the converging cone of light to a different 
position without changing its angle of convergence and 
without altering the focal length of the instrument. For 
example, in the Newtonian design, a flat secondary reflects 
light to a focal position at the side of the telescope tube. 
In other designs, the front face of the secondary is curved 
and changes the angle at which light rays are converging, 
thereby altering the effective focal length of the telescope. 
In the Gregorian and Cassegrain designs, the secondary 
reflects light back down the telescope tube, through a 
hole in the center of the primary mirror, to a new focal 
position. The Gregorian uses a concave secondary, the 
surface of which has an elliptical cross-section, whereas the 
Cassegrain (and its derivatives) uses a convex secondary 
with a hyperbolic curve. 

If the surface of a mirror has a spherical curve, it will 
be unable to focus parallel rays striking different parts of 
its surface to the same focal point (this defect is called 
‘spherical aberration’). Most reflecting telescopes use 
paraboloidal primary mirrors (mirrors in which the cross 
section of the surface is part of a parabola) to overcome 
this problem. However, paraboloidal mirrors produce 
crisp, sharp images only in the central parts of their fields 
of view, images towards the edges of the field suffering 
from another defect called coma. The Ritchey—Chrétien 
design (a development of the Cassegrain), which produces 
good-quality images across most of its field of view, has a 
hyperboloidal primary and a hyperboloidal secondary. 


See also: Cassegrain telescope, Gregorian telescope, focal 
length, focus, Newtonian telescope, reflector, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mitchell, Maria (1818-89) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mitchell, Maria (1818-89) 


First woman astronomer in America, born in Nantucket, 
MA, became librarian of its Atheneum Library, helped her 
father in his amateur observatory. In 1847, independently 
discovered a comet named Miss Mitchell's Comet, and 
became a ‘computer’ at the US Nautical Almanac Office, 
calculating the motion of Venus. After a European 
tour, she was presented with a telescope bought with 
money collected by American women. Became professor 
of astronomy and director of the observatory at the 
newly opened Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New 
York, photographing Jupiter, Saturn and the stars, and 
furthering women’s education. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mizar and Alcor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mizar and Alcor 


Mizar (Arabic, ‘the Girdle’) is the name given to ¢ Ursae 
Majoris, the center star in the handle of the Plough, by 
J J Scaliger (1540-1609). The star was formerly known 
as Merak or Mirak, from the Arabic Al Marakk—‘the 
Loin’ (of the bear). This duplicated the name given to 
another star, 6 Ursae Majoris, which may account for 
Scaliger’s introducing a new name. Mizar is an interesting 
multiple star system, but is perhaps best known for its 
pairing with Alcor (‘the Rider’). Fourth-magnitude Alcor 
is separated from second-magnitude Mizar by 11.82’ at 
position angle 72°, and is thus an easy naked-eye double. 
In ancient Arabia, where it was often referred to as Suha, 
‘the Forgotten [or Lost or Neglected] One’, it was regarded 
as a test of acute vision. This suggests that it may have 
brightened over the past few centuries. 

Mizar is a main-sequence star of apparent magnitude 
2.23 and spectral type A2V; with a parallax of 0.042” it is 
78 light-years distant. Its absolute magnitude is 0.3. It is 
believed to be the first binary system ever discovered, in 
1650 by Giovanni Riccioli (1598-1671). In 1889 its brighter 
component also became the first spectroscopic binary to 
be announced, following the discovery by Anna C Maury 
(1866-1952) of the Harvard College Observatory that 
the absorption lines in its spectrum alternately appeared 
double and single, with a period of 20.5 days. The 
spectroscopic binary, separation about 0.01”, was first 
resolved telescopically in 1925 by F G Pease (1881-1938), 
using a 20 foot beam interferometer attached to the 100 inch 
reflector at the Mount Wilson Observatory—an epoch- 
making instrument devised by Albert Michelson (1852- 
1931), with which the first stellar diameters were also 
measured. The components of the spectroscopic binary 
are now designated ¢ UMa A and B. The secondary star of 
the main binary system, designated ¢ UMa C, is a similar 
main-sequence star of spectral type A7Vm and apparent 
magnitude 3.85. It is separated from ¢ UMa AB by 14.4” 
at position angle 152°. This component is itself also a 
spectroscopic binary, with a period of 175.5 days. 

Alcor (80 UMa) is a white main-sequence dwarf, 
spectral type A5V, apparent magnitude 3.99. It is a little 
more distant than Mizar at 81 light-years (parallax 0.040"), 
but may be a distant member of the same gravitational 
system. Its absolute magnitude is 2.0. All these stars are 
part of the Ursa Major moving cluster, having similar and 
approximately parallel proper motions. 

In 1722 an eighth-magnitude star, between and a little 
to the south of Mizar and Alcor, was discovered by J G 
Liebknecht (fl. 1720), a little-known German professor 
of mathematics and theology. He was observing with 
a simple refracting telescope of poor quality, and his 
inadequate measurements of the star’s position led him 
to conclude erroneously that the object was a planet, 
which he named ‘Sidus Ludoviciana’, after the Landgrave 
Ludwig of Hessen-Darmstadt. The name was copied in 
many subsequent atlases, a rare distinction for such a faint 
and unimportant star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Molecule 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Molecule 


The smallest particle of achemical compound that can exist 
by itself and which has all the chemical properties of that 
compound. A molecule consists of two or more atoms, of 
the same elements or of different elements, linked together 
by chemical bonds. It may be described by its molecular 
formula. For example, O2 denotes a molecule consisting 
of two oxygen atoms (this is the form in which most of the 
oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere exists), and O3 denotes a 
molecule consisting of three oxygen atoms (this particular 
form of oxygen is called ozone). A molecule of water (a 
compound), which consists of two hydrogen atoms and 
an oxygen atom bonded together, is denoted by H20, a 
molecule of carbon dioxide (one carbon atom joined to 
two oxygen atoms) by CO), and so on. 

The molecular mass (often referred to as ‘molecular 
weight’) of a molecule is its mass expressed in atomic mass 
units and is equivalent to the sum of the atomic masses of 
all its constituent atoms. In round figures, the molecular 
mass of a diatomic (two atom) oxygen molecule is 16 (the 
atomic mass of oxygen being 8), the molecular mass of 
water is 10 (the atomic mass of hydrogen being 1) and the 
molecular mass of carbon dioxide is 28 (the atomic mass of 
carbon being 12). In practice, atomic and molecular masses 
differ slightly from precise integral values. Molecules 
range in size and mass from simple diatomic molecules 
such as H> to macromolecules with molecular masses of 
more than 10000. 

Amolecule has a physical size and shape that depends 
on the separation and relative orientation of its constituent 
atomic nuclei. Consequently, it exhibits three types of 
discrete (quantized) energy levels and transitions (changes 
between levels): electronic transitions, which involve 
changes between energy states in the shared cloud of 
electrons that surrounds its constituent atomic nuclei; 
vibrational transitions between its various permitted 
states of vibration (these involve the separations between 
nuclei); and rotational transitions, which involve discrete 
changes in the way in which the molecule rotates around 
various axes. Each of these kinds of transition is 
accompanied by the emission or absorption of radiation 
of a specific wavelength, the three classes of molecular 
transition giving rise to large numbers of lines, many of 
which overlap to produce broad bands in the resulting 
spectra. Through studies of their emission and absorption 
spectra, astronomers have identified more than a hundred 
species of molecule in the interstellar medium. 


See also: absorption spectrum, atom, emission spectrum, 
interstellar molecular clouds, ion, quantum mechanics, 
radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Molonglo Observatory Synthesis Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Molonglo Observatory Synthesis 
Telescope 


Australian radio telescope, located near Canberra and 
operated by the University of Sydney. A large Mills 
Cross radio interferometer was built there in 1966. One 
arm of the cross has been converted into the Molonglo 
Observatory Synthesis Telescope (MOST). 

MOST consists of two cylindrical 778 m x 12 m 
paraboloids, 15 m apart and aligned east-west. The 
telescope is steered by mechanical rotation of the 
cylindrical paraboloids about their long axis, and by 
phasing the feed elements along the arms. The resulting 
system can follow a sky field for +6 h if it lies south of 
declination —30°. 

For further information see 
http://www.physics.usyd.edu.au/astrop/most/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Molyneux, William (1656-98) and Molyneux, Samuel 
(1689-1728) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Molyneux, William (1656-98) and 
Molyneux, Samuel (1689-1728) 


William was an optical physicist, born in Dublin, 
independently wealthy and an English government 
official in Ireland, studied optics and published Dioptrica 
Nova (1692). He obtained a telescope from FLAMSTEED and 
made astronomical observations, but while his private 
correspondence with Flamsteed and HALLEY was extensive 
he never published in astronomy. His second son, Samuel, 
a prosperous English amateur astronomer, attempted with 
JAMES BRADLEY to measure the parallax of Gamma Draconis 
with a ‘zenith sector’, i.e. a telescope (in this case mounted 
on the chimney stack of Molyneux’s house) looking at 
stars directly overhead. They found an impossibly large 
angular shift (up to 40 arcseconds), with the wrong phase 
characteristics. This turned out to be not parallax but ‘the 
aberration of light’ due to the combination of the Earth’s 
orbital velocity (changing throughout the year) with the 
incoming velocity of light from the star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Molyneux, William (1656-98) and Molyneux, Samuel 
(1689-1728) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Molyneux, William (1656-98) and 
Molyneux, Samuel (1689-1728) 


William was an optical physicist, born in Dublin, 
independently wealthy and an English government 
official in Ireland, studied optics and published Dioptrica 
Nova (1692). He obtained a telescope from FLAMSTEED and 
made astronomical observations, but while his private 
correspondence with Flamsteed and HALLEY was extensive 
he never published in astronomy. His second son, Samuel, 
a prosperous English amateur astronomer, attempted with 
JAMES BRADLEY to measure the parallax of Gamma Draconis 
with a ‘zenith sector’, i.e. a telescope (in this case mounted 
on the chimney stack of Molyneux’s house) looking at 
stars directly overhead. They found an impossibly large 
angular shift (up to 40 arcseconds), with the wrong phase 
characteristics. This turned out to be not parallax but ‘the 
aberration of light’ due to the combination of the Earth’s 
orbital velocity (changing throughout the year) with the 
incoming velocity of light from the star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Monoceros 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Monoceros 


(the Unicorn; abbrev. Mon, gen. Monocerotis; area 
482 sq. deg.) An equatorial constellation which lies 
between Orion and Hydra, and culminates at midnight 
in early January. It is usually considered to have been 
introduced by the Dutch theologian and geographer 
Petrus Plancius, who included it on a celestial globe in 
1613, though some authorities regard it as older than this. 

An inconspicuous constellation, the brightest star in 
Monoceros, 6 Monocerotis (combined magnitude 3.8), is 
actually a multiple system consisting of three bluish-white 
(B3) components, magnitudes 4.5, 5.2 and 5.6, separation 
7.2" and 10.1” from the primary, which also has an 
unseen companion. Other bright stars are a Monocerotis, 
magnitude 3.9, and y Monocerotis, magnitude 4.0. Other 
interesting stars include Plaskett’s Star, a sixth-magnitude 
spectroscopic binary whose components are among the 
most massive stars known, the variables U Monocerotis 
(range 6.1-8.8), an RV Tauri star, and R Monocerotis 
(range 11.0-13.8), a T Tauri star which is enveloped in 
and illuminates NGC 2261 (Hubble’s Variable Nebula, a 
Herbig—Haro object), and A0620-00, a possible three-solar- 
mass black hole. 

Monoceros is crossed by the Milky Way and contains 
several bright open star clusters, including: NGC 2264, 
a large triangular-shaped cluster of over a 100 stars, 
including a couple of dozen of eighth or ninth magnitude 
and also 15 Monocerotis (also knownas S Mon., magnitude 
4.7v), at the southern end (apex) of which lies the dark 
Cone Nebula; NGC 2232, a group of a couple of dozen 
stars, many of sixth to eighth magnitude, surrounding 
10 Monocerotis (magnitude 5.1); NGC 2244, another large 
cluster, including a dozen or so sixth to ninth magnitude 
stars, embedded in the Rosette Nebula (NGC 2237-9, 
2246), a diffuse emission nebula; and M50 (NGC 2323), 
a rich group of several dozen stars fainter than eighth 
magnitude. The few galaxies known are relatively small 
and faint. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Montanari, Geminiano (1633-87) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Montanari, Geminiano (1633-87) 


Italian scientist, born in Modena, practised law in Vienna. 
Returned to Italy to Modena as court philosopher and 
mathematician, where he was taught by Count Cornelio 
Malvasia, with whom he went to Bologna and became 
professor of mathematics at the university. Montanari 
made a map of the Moon for Malvasia’s ephemeredes 
of 1662, developing a telescope reticule to make the 
observations; he published ephemeredes himself in 1665. 
He studied variable stars (discovering the variability of 
Algol), observed comets, waged war on astrology, made 
excellent lenses and developed a machine he called a 
‘sferologio’ that showed all of the movements of the 
heavenly bodies like an orrery. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Month 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Month 


A unit of time based on the motion of the Moon around 
the Earth. The synodic (or lunar) month is the mean time 
interval between two successive new moons (i.e. the time 
taken for the Moon to pass through its cycle of phases) and 
is equal to 29.53059 mean solar days. Because the synodic 
month (the basis of the lunar calendar) is not equal to a 
whole number of days, the calendar month is rounded 
to a whole number of days, as follows: 30 days in April, 
June, September and November, 28 days in February (29 
in a leap year), and 31 days in all other months. 

Other definitions of the month include the following. 
The sidereal month (duration, 27.32166 days) is the 
time taken for the Moon to move through an angle 
of 360° relative to the background (‘fixed’) stars. The 
anomalistic month is the time interval (27.55455 days) 
between successive passages of the Moon through perigee. 
The tropical month (27.32158 days) is the time interval 
between two successive conjunctions of the Moon with 
the vernal equinox. The nodical (or draconic) month 
(27.21222 days) is the time interval between successive 
passages of the Moon through the ascending node of its 
orbit. 


See also: calendar, equinox, node, orbital elements, 
sidereal period, synodic period. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moon 


The Moon, our closest neighbor in the universe, has a 
specific relationship with humanity. It is by far the 
brightest object of the night sky. The encounter of the 
Sun and the Moon during solar ECLIPSES strikingly 
demonstrates the similarity in the angular diameter of 
these two celestial bodies. As queen of the night, the 
Moon, together with the Sun, has been integrated into the 
system of symbols and religions of all early civilizations. 
Because of the obvious link with biological rhythms, the 
Moon was nearly everywhere associated with a goddess, 
the lunar ‘yin’ providing the balance with the solar 
‘yang’. It was given a particularly important role in 
Manichaeism (the ‘religion of light’, from the 3rd to the 
14th century), departing souls migrating from the Earth 
to the Moon during the waxing phase before being 
transferred to the Sun during the waning phase. Countless 
pages have been written on the role of the Moon in art, 
literature, music and culture in general. Most ancient 
civilizations had CALENDARS which were either lunar 
(such as the Jewish or Muslim calendars) or lunisolar 
(such as the Roman calendar which evolved into the 
Gregorian calendar now widely in use). Because of the 
importance of calendars for agricultural societies and that 
of eclipses as portents of dire events, observations of the 
Moon and predictions of its motion were central to the 
early development of astronomy, possibly back to 
prehistoric times. 

The Earth-Moon system is unique in the solar 
system with its ratio of less than 4 between the sizes of 
the planet and its satellite, and, as seen from afar by 
departing space probes, it can indeed be considered as a 
double planet (figure 1). Pluto with its satellite Charon (a 
factor of 2 in size) are now considered as the two largest 
members of the Kuiper belt of small outer solar system 
bodies, even though the International Astronomical 
Union has maintained the formal status of Pluto as the 
ninth planet. Because of the large mass of the Moon and 
its proximity to the Earth, lunar tides are nearly three 
times larger than solar tides. The orbit of the Moon is 
quite different from that of other large satellites (with the 
exception of Triton, around Neptune), which are nearly 
circular and lie in the equatorial plane of their primaries. 
One of the major scientific questions associated with the 
Moon is therefore that of the origin of the Earth-Moon 
system, which has only recently made significant 
progress. 

In the first section, the history of lunar astronomy 
will be presented, concluding with the status of lunar 
science in the middle of the 20th century, before the 
beginning of the space era. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The double planetary system of the Earth and the 
Moon observed by the Galileo spacecraft departing to Jupiter. 
When compared with the Earth, this image demonstrates that 
the Moon, which looks so bright in the night sky, is actually 
quite dark. 


The second section will focus on the role of the 
Moon as the major goal of the first 15 yr of space 
programs, with the pivotal date of 21 July 1969 when 
Neil Armstrong was the first human being to set a 
footprint on another planetary body during the historic 
flight of Apollo 11. After the last Soviet lunar mission, in 
1976, the Moon was left alone for nearly 20 yr. The 
major breakthroughs in lunar science which resulted from 
this period of intense activity will be reviewed. The 
return to Earth of lunar samples has revealed the 
chronology of the geological history of the Moon, to the 
extent that, during its first billion years, it is better known 
than that of the Earth itself. 

In the third section, the giant impact model for the 
origin of the Earth-Moon system will be presented. Its 
formulation in the early 1980s resulted from combining 
the wealth of information provided by the space missions 
with advances in dynamical modelling. 

These new ideas contributed to the renewed interest 
in lunar exploration initiated by the American missions 
Clementine (1994) and Lunar Prospector (1998-99) and 
presented in the last section on the recent past and future 
prospects of lunar science. The future of lunar 
exploration is yet uncertain, with a series of increasingly 
ambitious missions which could lead to a permanent 
manned outpost on the Moon before 2030. 


The Moon in the history of astronomy 
The Moon was undeniably, together with the Sun, the 
prime target of NAKED-EYE ASTRONOMY, possibly as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


early as the stone age (astronomical relationships have 
been claimed for most major megalithic monuments, in 
particular Stonehenge) and definitely from the beginning 
of historical times, in Chaldea, Egypt, China or 
Mesoamerica. It was immediately evident that the Moon 
always turns the same side towards the Earth, which 
means that both its rotation period and its orbital period 
are tidally locked at 27.3 days. The variations of the 
orbital velocity along the slightly elliptical lunar orbit 
lead to an apparent back and forth rotation of the Moon 
as seen from the Earth which is called the libration. 
When taking into account the inclination of the rotation 
axis, slightly less than 60% of the lunar surface can be 
observed from the Earth. The familiar cycle of PHASES OF 
THE MOON (new Moon, first quarter, full Moon, last 
quarter) is linked to the angle between the directions of 
the Moon and the Sun, which repeats every 29.53 days 
(the lunar month). With the naked eye, one can readily 
distinguish the bright zones (the highlands) from the dark 
zones (the mare), the latter covering less than 35% of the 
visible regions. In central and eastern regions, the dark 
zones appear nearly circular, with diameters of up to 


Nec Homines Lunam incolunt. 


VHLOCI AK, 


NLL IGERA PRONOMENCLATYR 


1100 km (Mare Imbrium). On the western side, they 
merge into the vast Oceanus Procellarum. 

The Moon was the first celestial body observed by 
Galileo with a telescope in 1609, an event which marked 
the beginning of modern ground-based astronomy. He 
immediately identified countless round features, the lunar 
CRATERS. Forty years later, the major features of the near 
side had been revealed with the names which are still in 
use today (figure 2). Ray craters such as Tycho had been 
observed, with bright lines extending radially over 
thousands of kilometers. The nearly instantaneous 
disappearance of occulted stars demonstrated that the 
Moon has no atmosphere. Spatial resolution for lunar 
observations is essentially limited by atmospheric 
turbulence to a few km at ground level, down to | km at 
high altitudes. The Moon, a bright extended source, did 
not benefit from the race to larger and larger mirrors 
which was essential in the development of galactic and 
extragalactic astronomy. The major advances of the 19th 
century were the identification of tectonic features and 
lava flows on MARE. 


I'NARL sa 
in Lunanv Migrant 


ET LIBRATIONE L 
- Nec Anu 


x py rainy 
Le 
z A * Pirmicun 
> ; 
i cs 
ZL 
mac 


Figure 2. Map of the visible face drawn by Grimaldi and Riccioli in 1651, a bare 40 yr after the first telescope observations by 
Galileo. The two circles mark the limits of the regions which can be observed owing to the lunar librations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Orbital and physical characteristics of the Moon. 


Semimajor axis 384 400 km 
Eccentricity 0.0549 
Inclination on the ecliptic 5.15° 
Radius 1740 km 
Density 3.34 


Mass ratio with respect to the Earth 1/81 


The dynamical characteristics of the Moon were in 
the forefront of the development of celestial dynamics in 
the 18th and 19th centuries, with applications to 
astronomical navigation. The characteristics of the orbit 
of the Moon (table 1) were determined with an accuracy 
which made possible the development of the theory of 
perturbations. The influence of the Sun slowly modifies 
the position of the nodes (intersections of the lunar orbit 
plane with the orbit plane of the Earth) as well as that of 
the pericenter. The angular size of the Moon is 10% 
smaller at apogee than at perigee, where it can 
completely mask the Sun (total eclipse) if they are on the 
same line (hence with the Moon at one of the nodes). 
There is a remarkable triple coincidence between 223 
lunar months, 239 returns to the pericenter and 242 
returns to the ascending node, all within half an hour of 
6585.33 days. This explains the repetition of eclipses 
with similar characteristics over an 18 yr cycle, with a 
shift in longitude of 120° (one-third of a day). The eclipse 
cycle is called the SAROS, a Chaldean word, even though 
it is now considered unlikely that it was recognized at 
such an early stage. Tidal dissipation within the Earth’s 
mantle and oceans leads to a long-term evolution of the 
orbit of the Moon, which slowly drifts away from the 
Earth. The present and past rate of this long-term motion 
was a critical missing parameter when attempts were 
made to retrace this evolution backwards, so as to 
address the issue of the origin of the Earth-Moon system. 

The major questions of lunar science were still open 
in the middle of the 20th century. Even the origin of 
ubiquitous features such as the lunar craters was a matter 
of controversy between proponents of volcanic and 
impact processes. Theories on the origin of the Moon 
covered all possibilities (or so it seemed at that time): 
ejection of a liquid ‘droplet’ from a rapidly rotating 
young Earth (fission theory), capture of the Moon by the 
Earth or accretion of the Moon from PLANETESIMALS 
orbiting the Earth. All three had critical flaws. 


e Hydrodynamic instability of the Earth before the 
fission requires a total angular momentum of the 
Earth—Moon system twice as large as that which is 
observed and does not lead to extremely asymmetric 
partitions (1:81) as demonstrated by the nuclear 
fission ‘liquid drop’ analog (uranium splits into 
daughter nuclei with mass ratios of at most 2 to 1). 
Furthermore, the initial orbit would have been 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


equatorial, with no plausible evolution path to the 
present orbit. 

e No plausible dissipation process was proposed to 
shed the excess energy of a proto-Moon approaching 
the Earth, which constitutes a major difficulty for the 
capture hypothesis. 

e Accretion in orbit, a smaller-scale version of the 
Kant—Laplace condensation theory, results in the so- 
called ‘regular’ satellite systems (such as that of 
Jupiter and Saturn), in the equatorial plane of their 
primaries and with very small eccentricities, which is 
not the case of the Moon. The low density of the 
Moon when compared with the Earth represented a 
major problem if these two bodies formed from the 
same reservoir of planetesimals. 


There was also no information on the ages of lunar 
features. No transient events were observed, and, because 
of its small size and density, it was widely considered 
that the Moon cooled more rapidly than the Earth and 
was now a dead world. This hypothesis was to be proven 
correct by lunar sample geochronology. 


The Moon and the early phases of 


exploration of the solar system 

The Moon, with its proximity and public appeal, was the 
obvious first target for spaceflight beyond low Earth 
orbit. Indeed, only 2 yr elapsed from the first Sputnik to 
the Soviet lunar probe which crashed on the lunar 
surface. A major breakthrough was obtained with the first 
lunar fly-by by Lunar 3, in 1959, which revealed a far 
side almost entirely covered by highlands (figure 3). The 
pace of events became quite frantic after the decision by 
J F Kennedy in 1961 to land a man on the Moon in less 
than 10 yr. This initiated the ‘race to the Moon’ as a way 
to demonstrate the American technological leadership. 
Only 3 yr separate the first soft lander (Luna 9, a Soviet 
mission, in 1966) from the historic landing of Apollo 11, 
in July 1969 (table 2). In 1972, the last of the six Apollo 
flights left the Moon, and this intensive phase of lunar 
exploration came to a halt in 1976, when the last 
automated Soviet sample return mission left Mare 
Cristum. The science results from this gigantic effort 
have provided a quantum jump in our understanding of 
the Moon and its history. 

A global photographic coverage was obtained with 
polar orbiters, with high-resolution images of the 
potential landing sites. This demonstrated the impact 
origin of most, if not all, lunar craters, from the similarity 
to explosion craters and the circular ‘ripples’ around 
major basins such as ORIENTALE BASIN. The observation 
of craters at all scales from basins down to a few 
micrometers explained the formation of a ubiquitous 
layer of debris 5—10 m thick, the lunar REGOLITH (figure 
4), mainly constituted of very small grains (a few 10 ttm) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. This historic image obtained by the Luna 3 probe in 
1959 revealed a far side dominated by highlands (bright 
regions). 


Table 2. Main lunar exploration missions from 1959 to 1976. 


Luna 3 (USSR) October 1959 


Luna 9 (USSR) January 1966 First soft lander 
Lunar Orbiter 4 (USA) May 1967 

Surveyor 1, 5, 6 (USA) 1966-68 Soft landers 
Lunokhod 1, 2 (USSR) 1970, 1973 


Luna 16 (USSR) 
Luna 20 (USSR) 
Luna 24 (USSR) 


September 1970 
February 1972 
August 1976 


The Apollo program (USA) 


Apollo 11 July 1969 
Apollo 12 November 1969 
Apollo 14 January 1971 
Apollo 15 July 1971 
(20 km) 
Apollo 16 April 1972 
Apollo 17 December 1972 


First images of the far side 
Photocartography from a polar orbit 


Remotely controlled rovers (10-40 km) 

Automated sample return (Mare Fecunditatis) 

Automated sample return (Apollonius highlands) 

Automated sample return (Mare Crisium); 2 m deep drill core 


First manned landing (Mare Tranquilitatis) 

Oceanus Procellarum 

Fra Mauro formation (SE of Procellarum) 

Hadley (Mare-highland contact zone); First deep drill core, first manned rover 


Descartes (highlands); deep drill core, rover 
Taurus—Littrow (Mare-highland contact zone); field geology (H Schmitt), 35 km 


explored, deepest drill core (3.2 m) 


but also including rocks of all sizes. The accurate 
determination of the gravity field and altimetry over the 
low-latitude regions combined with the seismic active 
and passive experiments provided information on the 
internal structure of the Moon: either no core or a very 
small core (at most a few hundred km in radius), a thick 
mantle and then a crust which is much thinner on the near 
side (60 km) than on the far side (100 km). The minor 
contribution of the core to the total mass means that the 
Moon has about half as much iron as the Earth, a major 
constraint on formation models. Positive gravity 
anomalies below basins, the mascons, confirmed the 
impact origin hypothesis. Magnetometers revealed that 
the Moon had no dipolar field but observed local crustal 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fields with widely varying orientations. The origin of 
these fossil fields is still controversial (frozen ancient 
dipolar field, induction) and this question is linked to the 
existence and actual size of a possible lunar core. 

The major justification for the large Apollo budgets 
(up to several per cent of the US GIP in the peak years) 
was definitely political with military undertones. The 
goal of the first Apollo flights was quite literally to 
display the flag, not to do science, and the first astronauts 
had little or no scientific training. As a result, many 
samples from Apollo 11 and 12 were collected without 
adequate documentation, such as taking a photograph 
before picking up a rock, to know which face was 
exposed to space. After the political goals had been 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


reached, and after the scientists pointed out the 
consequences of mishandling the sampling process, a 
science team was put together for the Apollo 13 flight to 
instruct and support the astronauts. Of course, this 
mission is more widely known for its dramatic rescue 
effort after an explosion in the service module half-way 
to the Moon than as a breakthrough for the role of 
science in the program. The last four Apollo flights were 
science oriented, with much larger and_better- 
documented sets of samples. Apart from sampling, the 
astronauts performed a wide range of scientific 
investigations, including the first European space 
experiment, a solar wind collector. The set of instruments 
left on the surface remained operational years after the 
departure of the astronauts. One can quote the important 
results from seismometers on the internal structure or the 
heat flux experiment, which provided the global content 
of long-lived radionuclides (potassium, uranium and 
thorium) in the lunar interior after nearly 4 yr of 
integration to screen out the diurnal and annual cycles. 

Overall, nearly 400 kg of samples were obtained 
from nine different sites: the six Apollo sites, but also 
three automated Soviet sample return missions, which 
brought back a few hundred grams of samples, a 
technological feat which is only now being planned for 
Mars. Lunar sample analyses played a key role in a 
revolution in analytical techniques which not only 
benefited planetary sciences but had important 
technological spin-offs: textural, elemental and isotopic 
analyses which required grams were performed on 
micrograms with the development of the electron 
microscopes, ion probes, mass spectrometers and x-ray 
analysers. When applied to METEORITES, these new 
techniques revealed the isotopic anomalies which provide 
the basis for the most recent theories of the formation of 
the solar system. 


The lunar geologic history 

The determination of an absolute age scale for the lunar 
geologic history was the most important result of sample 
analyses. Chronometers were developed on the basis of 
the radioactive decay of uranium to lead, rubidium to 
strontium and potassium to argon. Argon is a gas, so that 
the latter age fixes the last shock event in the history of 
the sample, which can be different from the age of 
formation of the rock. These analyses demonstrated that 
the formation of the Moon was nearly simultaneous with 
that of the Earth, 4.55 billion years ago. After at most 
200 million years, the differentiation between a possible 
small core, a mantle and a crust was complete. Over 
nearly 500 million years, the Moon (and hence also the 
Earth) was submitted to an intense bombardment as the 
newly formed planetary bodies swept out the left-over 
planetesimals in the inner solar system. This period 
resulted in the formation of giant impact basins, hundreds 
of km in diameter and tens of km in depth, with fractures 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the underlying crust, while the surface was thoroughly 
pockmarked by overlapping craters. All the ‘mountains’ 
on the Moon (up to 8 km high) result from the 
accumulation of debris or the rebound of the lunar crust 
associated with the formation of basins. The far side, still 
dominated by highlands, gives a good idea of what the 
whole lunar surface looked like 4 billion years ago 
(figure 5). 

In the meantime, heat from radioactive decay was 
accumulating slowly in the lunar interior. From 4 to 3 
billion years ago, melted mantle material was able to 
escape through the fractures of the crust as gigantic lava 
flows to fill out the basins and form the lunar maria. This 
was much easier on the near side than on the far side, 
where the crust was twice as thick, which explains the 
near absence of maria on the far side. As on the Earth, 
the lava flows from the mantle are much darker than 
crustal material, which explains why mare are darker 
than highlands (which are already rather dark, with a 
maximum albedo of 20%). The cooling of lava flows led 
to the formation of specific features such as faults, domes 
and valleys (figure 6). 

Another important result of high-precision isotopic 
analyses was the discovery that the Earth and Moon were 
formed from a single isotopic reservoir, different from 
that of the parent bodies of meteorites. The minerals 
constituting the Moon also show similarities to those of 
corresponding units on the Earth. However, the content 
of volatile elements is much lower: hydrogen is nearly 
absent (the Moon is most likely the driest place in the 
solar system) and potassium, abundant in terrestrial 
granites, is replaced in the lunar crust by calcium, a much 
more refractory element. 


Figure 4. The Apollo 17 landing site. The fine-grained lunar 
regolith has a very smooth relief and contains only a small 
fraction of rocks. The footprints of the astronaut (forefront) will 
remain visible for millions of years. The tiny figure of the 
astronaut in this profoundly alien landscape is a striking 
illustration of the magnitude of the Apollo endeavor as well as 
the true scale of humanity in the universe. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. The highlands (here on the far side) have a chaotic 
landscape resulting from superimposed craters of all sizes. 
Complex structures such as terraces and central peaks can be 
observed in the youngest of these craters, such as crater King 
(right of center, with the lobster-shaped central peak). 


i 


Figure 6. The Apollo 15 landing site lies at the eastern edge of 
the Imbrium basin. Lavas from the center of Imbrium (upper 
left) filled out the basin up to the first concentric ridges of the 
rim of the basin (lower right). The sinuous Hadley rille (valley) 
most likely resulted from the collapse of an oversize lava tube. 
Tectonic features such as faults were formed by the cooling and 
relaxation of the lava fills. 


Over the last 3 billion years, the role of internal 
processes was very small. At that stage, there were no 
planetesimals left in the inner solar system. Later impacts 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


resulted from a small steady-state influx of impactors 
from the ASTEROID BELT and the KUIPER BELT due to 
gravitational perturbations. The surface of lunar maria 
has therefore remained very flat (the mean slope is only a 
few degrees). The main outcome of this secondary 
bombardment has been the formation of sparse fresh 
craters (the most recent large one is TYCHO, a few 
hundred million years old) and that of the lunar regolith 
from the slow grinding effect of small micrometeoroids. 
The relative age of surface units can be determined from 
crater counts, calibrating on the age of the nine sampled 
regions. The resulting evolution is extremely slow: the 
footprints left by the Apollo astronauts may well outlast 
humanity with a lifetime of a few million years. The 
absence of an atmosphere means that the main alteration 
effects of the surface result from the implantation of solar 
particles and micrometeoroid impacts. This slow 
evolution is called ‘maturity’, with an increase in glass 
content (up to 50%) and a decrease of the albedo. Rays 
are formed by the bright fresh material thrown out by 
recent craters and they slowly fade out as maturity 
increases. 

The mare regolith constitutes an invaluable source of 
information on the history of dust and particle fluxes in 
the inner solar system. As there is no atmosphere, the 
surface is directly exposed to the interplanetary medium. 
The solidifying lavas provided a clean plate more than 3 
billion years ago, which registered the effects of particle 
fluxes and micrometeoroids in a dust layer only 5-10 m 
thick. The 3.2 m deep drill core obtained during the 
Apollo 17 mission gives access to 1.7 billion years of 
history of the interplanetary medium (solar activity, 
asteroidal and cometary dust, galactic cosmic rays). For 
comparison, a 4 km deep ice core in the Antarctic 
corresponds to a few 100 000 yr of history. This unique 
lunar record should be fully exploited in the future with 
dedicated new cores extending to the base of the regolith. 


The origin of the Earth—Moon system 
The tremendous leap in knowledge of the Apollo period 
did not immediately lead to a widely accepted model for 
the formation of the Moon. The similarity between the 
Earth and Moon in terms of trace element and isotopic 
compositions was considered by geochemists as 
overwhelming evidence in favor of the fission 
hypothesis. However, laser echoes using corner reflectors 
on surface modules allowed the recession rate of the 
Moon to be measured with precision (4 cm yr’'). Isotopic 
analysis techniques were also used to follow the growth 
pattern of corals over time, which constrains the number 
of days and lunar months per year in the distant past. 
Integrating this evolution backwards in time led to a 
highly elliptic and inclined orbit, totally incompatible 
with fission. 

The major breakthrough occurred in the early 1980s: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e the development of chaotic dynamics showed that 
the orbits of planetary bodies can be stable for 
millions of years and then evolve rapidly as a result 
of perturbations by Jupiter and Saturn, hence making 
possible giant collisions in the early solar system; 

e 3D_ hydrodynamic simulations which became 
possible with supercomputers demonstrated that a 
likely outcome of the off-center impact of a Mars- 
sized body with the Earth was the ejection of part of 
the mantles of the impactor and the proto-Earth into 
orbit, while the iron-rich cores fused. 


This ‘giant impact’ model combines elements of all 
three of the original models: It involves a body formed 
somewhere else in the solar system (capture), then 
ejection of part of the outer layers of the transiently 
merged impactor and proto-Earth (fission), then accretion 
in orbit of the ejected material. When compared with the 
fission model, the giant impact model leads naturally to a 
highly inclined and eccentric early orbit, providing for 
the first time a dynamical solution consistent with the 
geochemical evidence. A few years later, numerical 
models for the condensation of the solar nebula resulted 
in 20 or more large planetary bodies, so that giant 
impacts are actually needed to trim down the number of 
planets. The giant impact model is now widely accepted, 
even though numerous details have to be sorted out (e.g. 
possible intermediate stages with smaller objects orbiting 
the Earth). This is a true Sherlock Holmes outcome, the 
far-fetched becoming plausible after all the obvious 
candidates had been eliminated. 

Recent simulations (Canup and Asphaug 2001) of 
potential moon-forming impacts have identified a class of 
impacts that yield an iron-poor Moon, as well as the 
current masses and angular momentum of the Earth— 
Moon system. This class of impacts involves a smaller— 
and thus more likely—object than previously considered 
viable, and suggests that the Moon formed near the very 
end of Earth’s accumulation, in contrast to previous 
simulations that required the impact to occur when the 
Earth was only about half formed. 

Chaotic dynamical behaviors have another important 
implication for the Earth-Moon system: the inclination of 
the rotation axis of the Earth could increase to 60° or 
more if the Moon was not there to stabilize its evolution, 
with devastating consequences for the weather, each pole 
alternately facing the Sun. It can therefore be argued that 
the apparition of life on our planet required the presence 
of a large satellite such as the Moon. 


The renewed interest in the Moon and the 
future of the lunar exploration program 
During nearly 20 yr, the Moon was left aside by 
PLANETARY EXPLORATION. This led to a paradox: the 
Moon is indeed the only planetary body other than the 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Earth for which the complete sequence leading from 
reconnaissance to complete mapping, surface stations and 
rovers and eventually sample returns had been achieved. 
However, the very short timescale and the focus on a 
manned landing resulted in major gaps in the remote 
sensing and sampling programs, with a major bias in 
favor of the maria in the central regions of the near side, 
the most logical landing sites. Only two of the nine 
sampling sites (Apollo 16 and Luna 20) are in highlands, 
which cover nearly 80% of the lunar surface. For obvious 
communication reasons, all the Apollo sites are close to 
the center of the near side, and the highest latitude which 
was reached is 25° (Apollo 15). Only a few per cent of 
the surface were imaged at high resolution or were 
observed with chemical and mineralogical remote 
sensing analysis techniques. Furthermore, these 
techniques made major advances from 1970 to 1990, 
with improved detectors in the infrared, x-ray and 
gamma-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

The developments on the origin of the Moon 
confirmed the need for a better understanding of the 
global composition, a critical parameter for fine-tuning 
the giant impact model. This requires determining the 
contribution of a possible core to the total iron content 
and the chemical and mineralogical composition over the 
whole surface. Constraints can then be obtained by 
running petrological models which test how a given 
initial composition can lead to the observed abundances 
of minerals. 

This renewed scientific interest benefited from two 
factors. By the early 1990s, missions to other planetary 
bodies had reduced the gap in knowledge, so that the 
Moon no longer appeared as the privileged child of the 
solar system family. More importantly, there was a major 
shift of policy within NASA, from highly complex and 
costly programs such as Galileo (Jupiter) and Cassini— 
Huygens (Saturn and Titan) to much smaller and more 
frequent missions, which could benefit from the major 
advances in miniaturization resulting from the ‘Star 
Wars’ program. The Moon was an ideal target for this so- 
called ‘faster, better, cheaper’ approach, with its small 
launcher requirements, short travel time and easy 
communications with the Earth. Similar strategies have 
been initiated by the European Space Agency (ESA) and 
Japan (unfortunately, the collapse of the Soviet Union led 
to a stand-by of the Russian planetary exploration 
program). 

The lunar exploration program restarted on this new 
basis in 1994, with the CLEMENTINE mission (USA), 
which was to a large extent a spin-off of a militarily 
oriented technological effort. This small satellite (100 kg) 
carried three cameras with 11 channels from the visible 
to the near infrared and a laser altimeter. Its scientific 
return is quite significant. Clementine discovered the 
largest lunar basin, Aitken, covering most of the southern 
far side (figure 7). It provided the first multicolor database 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 7. Topographic map of the Moon obtained by the laser 
altimeter of Clementine. Altitudes range from —12 km (dark 
blue) to +10 km (red). This map is centered on the far side 
(longitude 180°), which has a higher elevation and thicker crust 
than the near side. These observations revealed the largest lunar 
basin, Aitken, 1800 km in diameter, covering a large fraction of 
the southern far side. The thick far side crust prevented lavas 
from filling up this enormous basin, contrarily to similar 
features on the near side. 


for the whole lunar surface, showing that the ‘dry’ basins 
of the far side were slightly contaminated by basaltic 
minerals: lava flows have indeed occurred, but were not 
quite able to reach the surface, expanding within and 
below the crust. Clementine also observed polar regions 
which are always in shadow, providing possible cold 
traps for volatile species such as water. 

A second small polar satellite, LUNAR PROSPECTOR, 
was launched in early 1998. It provided the first complete 
coverage with a gamma-ray and neutron spectrometer as 
well as a state-of-the-art magnetometer. The observation 
of hydrogen trapped near the lunar poles may be linked 
to deposits of ice crystals in the permanently shadowed 
polar craters, although this interpretation is still 
controversial. If this is confirmed (e.g. by radar 
sounding) it opens important scientific prospects: such 
water deposits would then be likely to be provided by 
cometary impacts on the Moon, so that a core in the polar 
regolith could give access to the isotopic composition of 
volatiles from thousands of comets. In the final stage of 
the Lunar Prospector mission, the orbit was lowered to an 
altitude of 10 km, which gave unprecendented 
information on the gravity field. At this altitude, the orbit 
is not stable, and the inevitable impact was targeted near 
the south pole. This failed to give direct evidence for 
water deposits, but the expected signal was extremely 
marginal. 

These discoveries showed that the Moon has quite a 
few surprises still in store. The next approved mission is 
LUNAR A, a Japanese mission with two penetrators 
equipped with seismometers dedicated to the question of 
the lunar core. This mission was originally planned for 
1996, but development problems have delayed it until 
2001 or 2002. The Japanese are also planning a very 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ambitious mission, SELENE, which was scheduled for 
2003, but the problems with Lunar A may lead to a shift 
to a later date. A small ESA mission, SMART-1, will be 
launched in 2002, mainly as a technological test for a 
new ion propulsion system. It will provide new high- 
resolution images, the first comprehensive coverage with 
an x-ray spectrometer, a chemical analysis instrument 
which has a better spatial resolution than the gamma-ray 
spectrometer of Lunar Prospector, and the first medium- 
resolution IR spectra from lunar orbit, a key constraint on 
the mineralogical composition. 

No discussion of the future of lunar exploration 
would be complete without mentioning the lunar base 
issue. The Moon is the obvious stepping stone for human 
exploration of the solar system, and countless studies 
have been made on establishing and maintaining a 
permanent habitat on the lunar surface. Such an endeavor 
is within reach of present technology, but it requires 
financial commitments in the scale of those of the Apollo 
program or the International Space Station. Similarly to 
these two programs, a lunar base can only be decided on 
a political basis, with science as a fringe benefit. Many 
scientific objectives can be reached much more cheaply 
by automated missions, with capabilities enhanced by the 
advances in on-board autonomy. The main potential 
benefit of a lunar base is a new lunar sampling program 
from medium to high latitudes, highlands or the far side, 
with deeper drill cores (10 m) giving access to 4 billion 
years of history of solar activity and the interplanetary 
medium. Samples from permanently shadowed polar 
regions would provide the final answer to the question of 
polar ices, so as to address the diversity and evolution 
over time of cometary impacts in the inner solar system. 
The timescale for a lunar base program is still highly 
uncertain. However, it would be surprising if it was not 
initiated before 2030, if space exploration worldwide is 
to retain any momentum. 


Bibliography 

Canup R M and Asphaug E 2001 Nature 412 708-12 

Murray C and Cox C B 1989 Apollo: the Race to the Moon 
(New York: Simon and Shuster) 

Spudis P 1996 The Once and Future Moon (Smithsonian 
Institution Press) 

Wilhelms D E 1993 To a Rocky Moon: a Geologist’s History of 
Lunar Exploration (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 


Yves Langevin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon Maps 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moon Maps 


The Moon is our closest natural neighbor in space. Its mean 
distance from us is a mere 239000 miles, and it has to 
all intents and purposes no atmosphere, so that there is 
nothing to veil its surface. Even with the naked eye a great 
deal can be seen, and it is easy to make out the broad dark 
plains, still known— misleadingly—as seas (maria). So far 
as is known, the first map of the Moon was drawn early 
in the 17th century by wILuiaM GILBERT, physician to Queen 
Elizabeth I, who is best remembered today as a pioneer 
investigator of magnetic phenomena. Of course he had 
no telescope, but the main maria can be identified easily 
enough. 

The next map—and the first to be produced with 
telescopic aid—was drawn in 1609 by THOMAS HARRIOT, in 
England. Harriot, one-time tutor to Sir Walter Raleigh, 
was one of the first to use a telescope for astronomical 
work, and certainly he preceded Galileo, even though he 
never followed it up (he died in 1621). Harriot showed 
not only the principal maria, but also some of the craters 
and mountain ranges. One of his contemporaries was 
Sir William Lower, a Welsh baronet who seems to have 
obtained one of the early telescopes and looked at the 
Moon. His description of the lunar world was certainly 
graphic: he compared it with a tart which his cook had 
made—‘there some bright stuffe, there some dark, and so 
confused lie all over’. 

GALILEO began his telescopic work in the winter of 
1609-1610, and used his primitive optick tube to make 
a whole series of dramatic discoveries. The Moon, he 
wrote, was ‘full of inequalitie, uneven, full of hollows 
and protuberances, just like the surface of the Earth itself, 
which is varied everywhere by lofty mountains and deep 
valleys’. Frankly, his lunar map was not as good as 
Harriot’s, but he did make a scientific effort to measure 
the heights of the lunar mountains, and his results were of 
the right order. 

The next major advance came in 1647, and was due to 
HEVELIUS, a city councillor of Danzig (the modern Gdansk) 
in Poland. Hevelius built an observatory on the roof of his 
house, and equipped it with the best telescopes available. 
He compiled a lunar map, showing considerable detail, 
and made the first attempt to name the lunar features. For 
example, the crater which we now call Copernicus was his 
‘Etna’, while the dark-floored crater Plato was ‘the Greater 
Black Lake’. The system never became popular, and was 
soon superseded by that of Giovanni RIccIOLI, who drew a 
new lunar map in 1651—based largely on the observations 
of his pupil, Grimaldi—and introduced many of the names 
which we still use today. Riccioli’s method was to name 
the craters after famous personalities, usually—although 
not always—astronomers; Hevelius’ geographical names 
were largely replaced, and only a few survive (such as 
the Alps and the Apennines). Riccioli gave the dark areas 
romantic titles, such as the Mare Imbrium (Sea of Rains) 
and the Mare Tranquillitatis (Sea of Tranquillity). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Obviously, the system had its drawbacks. Ricciolihad 
no faith in the Copernican system and was convinced that 
the Earth is the center of the universe; therefore Copernicus 
was ‘flung into the Ocean of Storms’, although admittedly 
his crater is one of the most magnificent on the Moon 
and is the center of a system of bright rays. Predictably, 
Riccioli named two very large, dark-floored plains after 
Grimaldi and himself. Later scientists came off second- 
best; Newton, for example, was allotted a crater in the far 
south which is both large and deep, but so foreshortened 
that from Earth it is none too easy to identify at all. 

The next important lunar map was that of Tosias 
MAYER, published posthumously in 1775. It was much 
smaller than that of Riccioli, a mere 8 in across, but it was 
reasonably accurate, and Mayer was the first to introduce 
a system of coordinates, the equivalent of latitude and 
longitude on the Moon. Unlike Hevelius, Riccioli and 
most of his predecessors he drew his map with south at the 
top, which is the way in which most telescopic observers 
see it—provided, of course, that they live in the northern 
hemisphere of the Earth. 

Mayer was followed by JOHANN HIERONYMUS SCHROTER, 
who was never a professional astronomer—he was chief 
magistrate of the little town of Lilienthal, near Bremen 
in Germany—but may be said to be the first of the 
really great lunar observers. He made a large number 
of drawings and was responsible for many discoveries; 
for example, he was the first to show the lunar rills or 
clefts clearly, and his measurements of the heights of lunar 
mountains were better than Galileo’s. Unfortunately, all 
his unpublished observations were destroyed in 1814, 
when the French invaded Germany, sacked Lilienthal and 
plundered Schréter’s brass-tubed telescopes, which they 
believed to be gold. 

The mantle of Schroter fell upon three of his 
countrymen: WILHELM LOHRMANN, WILHELM BEER and JOHANN 
VON MADLER. Wilhelm Lohrmann, a Dresden land surveyor, 
set out to compile a really large, accurate lunar map. The 
first sections were published in 1824, and were amazingly 
good. Unfortunately his eyesight failed him, and he had 
to give up. 

Next came the superb work by Beer and Madler. 
Using the modest 33 in Fraunhofer REFRACTOR at Beer’s 
private observatory, near Berlin, they studied the Moon 
intensively for over 10 years, finally producing a map 
which was the basis for all later studies right up to the 
start of the space age. They followed it up with a book, 
Der Mond, which contains a full description of the entire 
visible surface and extended Riccioli’s nomenclature. It 
appeared in 1838, and made a tremendous impact— 
and, surprisingly, actually held selenography up to some 
extent. Their map was regarded as definitive; the Moon is 
virtually changeless, so why observe it further? 

Luckily there was one astronomer, Julius Schmidt, 
who did not agree. He was German by birth, but became 
Director of the Athens Observatory, and spent much of 
his life in Greece. He not only revised and completed 
Lohrmann’s map, but also produced one of his own. It 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon Maps 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


was 74 in across, and stands up well when compared with 
modern charts. 

During his observational work, Schmidt made the 
startling announcement that a small formation, Linné in 
the Mare Serenitatis (Sea of Serenity) had changed in form 
since the time of Beer and Madler; they had described it as 
a small, deep crater, but Schmidt drew it as a white patch. 
The ‘Linné affair’ caused a great deal of discussion. In 
fact it seems quite definite that no change occurred there, 
but attention was drawn back to the Moon, and other 
charts were drawn up. The first important British chart 
was by Edmund Nevill, who wrote under the name of 
Neison. His book The Moon, published in 1876, contained 
a map based on Madler’s, with a description of every 
named formation. Neison was only 25 years old when 
his book appeared; curiously, he did very little more lunar 
work after 1882, when he went to South Africa to become 
director of the new observatory at Natal. Neison died in 
1938, in retirement at Eastbourne in Sussex. 

Systematic lunar observation was carried out around 
this time by the short-lived Selenigraphical Society, and, 
from 1890, by the Lunar Section of the British Astronomical 
Association. Meanwhile, photography was coming to the 
fore. Good photographs were obtained by pioneers such 
as J A Whipple and Warren de la Rue, and in the last 
decade of the 19th century Loewy and Puiseux, in Paris, 
produced an excellent series of plates covering the whole 
of the visible surface; subsequently, all lunar mapping 
was photographically based. In 1904 w H PICKERING, one 
of the few professional astronomers of the time to take a 
real interest in the Moon, issued a lunar atlas in which 
each region of the Moon was shown under five different 
conditions of illumination. 

Amateur work flourished during the first half of the 
20th century, with good maps by T G Elger and Walter 
Goodacre (successive Directors of the Lunar Section of the 
British Astronomical Association) and then by H P Wilkins, 
whose map was 300 in in diameter. In 1935 an ‘official’ map 
was published by the International Astronomical Union, 
drawn by W H Wesley and M A Blagg, but it was not 
a real success, and was defective near the Moon’s limb, 
where the ‘libration regions’ are highly foreshortened. The 
obvious next step was to produce a complete photographic 
chart, similar to Pickering’s but on a larger scale. This 
was attempted by G P Kuiper and his colleagues in the 
United States; it appeared in 1959. It was based on the 
best photographs available, but even so it did not meet all 
the requirements, and over-enlargement led to blurring of 
many features, particularly those near the lunar limb. 

Then, after 1957, space research methods began to 
take over, and this caused a minor upheaval in procedure. 
Previously lunar maps had been printed with south at the 
top and west to the left (so that the well-formed Mare 
Crisium was near the western limb). The rocket men 
wanted to put north at the top. Finally, there was a debate 
in the International Astronomical Union, and the ‘north- 
toppers’ won the day; at the same time east and west were 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reversed, so that Mare Crisium is now near the eastern 
limb!. 

The first images of the Moon’s far side, which is 
always turned away from the Earth, were obtained by 
the Russian spacecraft Lunik (or Luna) 3 in October 1959. 
Blurred and lacking in detail though they were, judged 
by modern standards, they represented a tremendous 
technical triumph. Craters, mountains and ray systems 
were detected, although one feature believed to be a lofty 
range, and even given an appropriate name (the Soviet 
Mountains) turned out to be nothing more than a ray, so 
that the name was tactfully deleted from later charts. 

Once the Americans had announced plans for a 
manned landing before 1970, energetic efforts at mapping 
the surface were made. The Ranger probes crash landed, 
sending back pictures immediately before impact; the 
Surveyors made controlled landings, and these results, 
together with those of the Russian soft-landers, finally 
disproved the theory that the lunar surface was covered 
with a deep layer of dust. Then, between August 1966 
and early 1968, the five United States Orbiters were put 
into closed paths around the Moon and sent back detailed 
photographs of both the Earth-turned and the averted 
hemispheres. By the end of the Orbiter program it was 
fair to say that the entire Moon had been surveyed in 
considerable detail. 

Since then there have been several photographic 
probes, notably Clementine (launched January 1994) and 
Prospector (January 1998). These covered the polar 
regions of the Moon, which had not been mapped as 
accurately as the rest of the surface, and also sent back vast 
amounts of miscellaneous data. Of course, there have also 
been the observations made by the Apollo astronauts— 
and only the crews of Apollo 8 and 10-17 have actually 
had direct views of those regions which are always turned 
away from the Earth. 

The one negative factor is that for various reasons— 
some of them financial—not all the Orbiter and Apollo 
photographs have yet been fully analysed. Much work 
remains to be done. There is, of course, no secrecy; all the 
images are made freely available to serious researchers—it 
is purely a matter of time and money. 

The story of lunar mapping goes back a long way. 
It may be said to have started with the naked-eye chart 
by Gilbert, almost 300 years ago; then came the pioneer 
telescopic work, and the more detailed maps of the 18th 
and 19th centuries, many of them due to the work of 
amateurs; there followed the photographic atlases and, 
finally, the definitive maps drawn up from the spacecraft 
images. 

It is interesting to look back at a comment made in 
1840 by FRANCOIS ARAGO, the leading French astronomer of 
the time. Arago was, very understandably, enthusiastic 
about photography, and said ‘In this way we will be able to 


4 Piquantly, the Mare Orientale—the Eastern Sea—is now on the 
western limb. I have a connection here, because I was the first to 
show it—in 1939—and also proposed its name—PM. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moon Maps ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


accomplish one of the most difficult tasks in astronomy— 
mapping the Moon—in a few minutes’. Arago’s timescale 
was wrong; we had to wait until the last part of our own 
century, but by now charting the Moon is to all intents and 
purposes complete. 


Bibliography 

Whittaker E A 1999 Naming and Mapping the Moon 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Wilhems E 1993 To a Rocky Moon (Tuscon, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Moore, Francis (1657-c. 1715) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moore, Francis (1657—c. 1715) 


Astrologer, born in Bridgnorth, Shropshire. In 1700 he 
began to publish Vox Stellarum (Voice of the Stars), which 
under the name Old Moore’s Almanac still attempts to 
predict annually the events of the following year. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Moore, Jonas (1627-79) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moore, Jonas (1627-79) 


Born in Whitelee in Pendle Forest, Lancashire, became 
mathematics tutor to the Duke of York, brother of the 
future King Charles II, but lost this job through court 
intrigue; lived in London as a teacher of mathematics, 
and as a successful surveyor. He published text-books, 
and became Surveyor-General of the Ordnance, when he 
was knighted. His own career was thus more worthy than 
brilliant. Where he enters the history of astronomy as a 
first magnitude star is in his strong support of mathematics 
and astronomy. It was his support that got FLAMSTEED 
not only astronomical equipment and a degree from 
Cambridge University, but also an invitation to report as 
an expert witness to a commission, and to the King himself, 
on recently proposed methods to determine longitude. 
Moore then led the delegation that persuaded the King to 
set up the Royal Observatory at Greenwich in 1674 and to 
give Flamsteed the job as its first director. Moore provided 
Flamsteed with two clocks and a 7-foot sextant, which he 
used until 1688. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moore, Patrick Alfred Caldwell (1923-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moore, Patrick Alfred Caldwell (1923-) 


Colorful British amateur astronomer, prolific writer, 
ubiquitous broadcaster and enthusiastic musician. Since 
1957 he has presented monthly the BBC television program 
The Sky at Night, the longest-running such program 
with the exception of the news. He has published 
approximately one book per year of his life. His 
astronomical work has been in observations of the Moon 
and planets; his greatest impact has been inspiring a 
generation of British children to astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moreton Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moreton Waves 


‘Moreton waves’, named for the observer who popular- 
ized them, are a solar phenomenon also known in scien- 
tific literature as ‘Moreton—Ramsey waves’, ‘flare waves’, 
‘flare-associated waves’, ‘MHD blast waves’, ‘chromo- 
spheric shock fronts’ and various other combinations of 
terms which connote violently propagating impulsive dis- 
turbances. It is unclear whether all of the observations 
to which these terms have been applied pertain to a sin- 
gle physical phenomenon: there has perhaps been some 
overlap between the observations and the assumed phys- 
ical properties of the observed occurrence. 

Moreton waves (figure 1) are ideally observed in 
the wings of H alpha and appear as semicircular fronts 
propagating at speeds ranging from several hundred to 
over a thousand km s7!. They form an arc, or ‘brow 
shape’, which can span up to 180°. Extrapolating the speed 
and locations of the arc indicates that the phenomenon’s 
origin intersects well with the impulsive phase of the 
associated H alpha flare (if the flare exhibits an impulsive 
phase) (See SOLAR FLARES: IMPULSIVE PHASE). However, the arc 
may not form or may not be observable until it is tens 
of megameters from the flaring region, and subsequently 
can propagate to distances exceeding 100 Mm. The high 
speeds and distances of propagation, plus the associated 
radio and energetic particle observations, provided strong 
evidence of a coronal, rather than a chromospheric, origin. 
The H alpha manifestation of the wave is assumed to 
be the ‘ground track’ or ‘skirt’ of a three-dimensional 
disturbance. 

The red- and blueshifts of the front propagating on 
the solar disk into the wings of H alpha appear to indicate 
evidence of chromospheric depression (and subsequent 
relaxation) as the wave propagates. The thin arc-shaped 
structure of the wave, the assumed force which would be 
required to cause depression in chromospheric features 
and their association with type II radio bursts (see SOLAR 
FLARES: RADIO BURSTS), led observers to conclude that these 
were shock waves or ‘blast waves’ initiated by the flare. 

The ‘ideal’ observations of Moreton waves, however, 
may not represent all of the actual events observed. 
Although the ‘depression’ interpretation fitted some 
observations well, some other ‘wave’ observations did 
not exhibit strong Doppler shifts in H alpha, and 
some of these ‘waves’ were best observed in emission 
at the H alpha line center. Furthermore, some 
observations consisted of additional emission superposed 
on pre-existing structures, instead of the temporary 
enhancement of a feature due to a compressional 
disturbance propagating through it. It was concluded 
that these additional observations were best explained as 
ejecta moving above the CHROMOSPHERE. The ejecta, which 
could be SOLAR PROMINENCES or other moving material, 
could display speeds and structure comparable with those 
of the prototypical Moreton waves. Had this not been 
the case, perhaps these observations would have been 
considered as a phenomenon separate from Moreton 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


waves. However, the wave observations consisting of 
ejecta and those consisting of depression fronts could 
also be two aspects of the same phenomenon, and 
some observations indicate this. The shock wave front 
could be observed in emission while its impact on 
the chromosphere could be seen in the depression of 
chromospheric features. 

Several other observations have also been tentatively 
classed as Moreton waves. Before direct observations 
of wave disturbances were obtained in 1960, observers 
determined that there was evidence that a flare could 
initiate another flare or the abrupt activation or oscillation 
of a filament. Radio observations and the eventual 
observation of Moreton wave transients in the CORONA 
suggested a means of communication between the causal 
event and the affected region. Therefore, sudden filament 
activity, additional flaring and transient chromospheric 
brightenings have been identified as wave-associated 
effects. The inferred speeds of a wave transient (frequently 
lacking the actual observation of a wave), propagating 
between a flaring region and an initiated observable 
phenomenon, could exceed 4000 km s-!. In the absence 
of supporting wave or radio burst observations, some of 
these measurements could fall under suspicion of being 
coincidental and not associative. 

Recent observations by the Extreme Ultraviolet 
Imaging Telescope (EIT) on the sono spacecraft have 
provided unambiguous evidence (figure 2) for large-scale 
coronal impulses initiated during the early stage of a flare 
and coronal mass ejection. These waves are typically of 
lower amplitude than the Moreton wave shown in figure 1, 
can extend 360° surrounding the initiating region and 
usually propagate passively through the corona, leaving 
no observable signs of alteration. It is unclear whether 
these impulses observed by EIT correspond to the low- 
amplitude (and hence unobservable in H alpha) limit 
of Moreton wave phenomena or whether these waves 
have a different nature entirely. Other evidence of 
impulsive wave phenomena was recorded in white light 
coronagraph data as early as Skylab, and observations 
from the Mauna Loa Solar Observatory have indicated 
fast-moving disturbances moving in excess of several 
hundred km s~! in the 10830 A He I data. 

A clearer understanding of the various phenomena 
which have been classified as Moreton waves relies 
on more thorough observations and an_ increased 
understanding of their initiation mechanism. Solar flares 
and coronal mass ejections are magnetic reconfigurations 
utilized by the solar corona to liberate excess magnetic 
energy (See SOLAR FLARES: RELATION TO CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS). 
In expelling flux and mass via a coronal mass ejection, 
however, the corona frequently undergoes an additional 
reconfiguration in the form of a solar flare. For this reason, 
it is extremely difficult to extricate the actual driver or 
cause of Moreton waves. 

A coronal mass ejection will deliver an impulse to 
the surrounding corona as the ejection propagates and 
expands. Some of the SOHO observations have given 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moreton Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) 


(c) 


Figure 1. (a) H alpha chromospheric image of a Moreton wave at 02:47 UT on 24 September 1997, (b) SOHO/EIT 195 A (dominated by 
an Fe XII emission line) coronal image of the wave at 02:49 UT and (c) H alpha image of the wave at 02:50 UT. The speed of the wave 
varied spatially and temporally, ranging from 250 to over 600 km s~!. The flaring active region is visible in all three images. H alpha 


images courtesy of Barry Reynolds, Perth, Australia. 


Figure 2. (2) SOHO/EIT 195 A image of the Sun on 12 May 1997 
at 05:24 UT. (b) SOHO/EIT image at 05:07 UT with the pre-event 
image at 04:34 UT digitally subtracted from it. White (black) 
regions denote increase (decrease) in emission. The dark regions 
near the active region visible in both images are darkened 
regions associated with a coronal mass ejection. The bright 
circular ring of emission outside the darkened regions in the 
right-hand image corresponds to an increase in emission 
propagating at 250 kms7?. 


evidence that some of the wave transients are driven by 
this effect. However, as mentioned previously, the timing 
and origin of H alpha Moreton wave observations coincide 
well with H alpha observations of flares. Because our 
current understanding of solar flares has advanced beyond 
the interpretation of ‘massive bomb-like explosions’, the 
wave initiation mechanism is unclear. Possible candidates 
are radiation pressure, rapid thermal expansion and 
accelerated particle drivers. 


Bibliography 

Athay R G and Moreton G E 1961 Astrophys. J. 133 935 

Meyer F 1968 Structure and Development of Solar Active 
Regions (IAU Symp. vol 35) ed K O Kiepenheuer, 
pp 458-89 

Moreton G E 1961 Sky Telesc. 21 145 

Smith S F and Harvey K L 1971 Physics of the Solar Corona 
ed CJ Macris, pp 156-67 

Zirin H 1988 Astrophysics of the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


B J Thompson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Morgan, William Wilson (1906-94) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Morgan, William Wilson (1906-94) 


American astronomer, staff member of the Yerkes Obser- 
vatory, with Philip Keenan introduced stellar luminosity 
classes and the Morgan—Keenan (MK) classification scheme 
of stars based on the appearance of their spectra. With 
his students Donald E Osterbrock and Stewart Sharpless, 
he discovered the two nearest spiral arms in the Galaxy 
by mapping the distribution of bright O- and B-type stars 
whose distances were derived from their spectral classifi- 
cation. Morgan presented the paper in Cleveland in 1951 
to tumultuous applause, unusual in a scientific conference. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Morin, Jean-Baptiste (1583-1656) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Morin, Jean-Baptiste (1583-1656) 


Doctor, alchemist and astrologer, born in Villefranche, 
Beaujolais, France, became professor of mathematics at the 
Collége Royal, published a defense of arISTOTLE, attacked 
GALILEO, being convinced that the Earth was fixed in 
space. Morin proposed an impractical method to solve 
the longitude problem, based on measuring absolute 
time by the position of the Moon. He put the method 
in for a prize, and disputed for years the adjudication 
committee’s negative verdict. Attacked Descartes, and his 
philosophy. A disputatious reactionary, he unsurprisingly 
was alienated from the scientific community. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Morley, Edward (1838-1923) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Morley, Edward (1838-1923) 


American chemist who collaborated with ALBERT MICHELSON 
in the Michelson—Morley experiment. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Morning Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Morning Star 


A name given to Venus when it is visible in the east in the 
pre-dawnsky. Ancient astronomers believed that morning 
and evening apparitions of Venus were of two different 
planets; the morning planet was given the name Phosphor, 
or Phosphorus. As the morning star, Venus is moving from 
inferior conduction (when it lies between the Earth and 
the Sun) to superior conjunction (behind the Sun), and is 
visible for longest when it reaches the position known as 
greatest elongation west, when its angular separation from 
the Sun is greatest. The name ‘morning star’ is sometimes 
given to morning apparitions of Mercury. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moulton, Forest Ray (1872-1952) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moulton, Forest Ray (1872-1952) 


Mathematical astronomer, born in Le Roy, MI, became 
professor at the University of Chicago. Proposed 
(with THOMAS CHAMBERLIN) the planetesimal hypothesis, 
explaining the origins of the solar system. Provided the 
crucial theoretical underpinning of BARRINGER’s theory of 
the origin of the Arizona meteor crater. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Mount Graham International Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mount Graham International 
Observatory 


The Mount Graham International Observatory at an 
elevation of 3200 m, is located near Safford, Arizona. The 
observatory specializes in advanced technology telescopic 
facilities that can benefit from the low water vapor and 
sharp images of the site, and its easy access. The 
observatory is operated by the University of Arizona. The 
10 m diameter Heinrich Hertz Sub-millimeter Telescope 
(SMT) is a joint project of Arizona and the MAX-PLANCK- 
INSTITUT FUR RADIOASTRONOMIE, Germany. The adjustment of 
the carbon fiber telescope surface has surpassed its goal 
of 15 microns rms. The Vatican Observatory/Arizona 
Lennon telescope has a 1.8 m f/1 primary figured to 17 nm 
rms. The third and largest telescope is the 2 x 8.4 (f/1.14) 
LARGE BINOCULAR TELESCOPE (LBT). It is a partnership between 
Arizona, Ohio, Italy (Arcetri), Germany and the Research 
Corporation. The LBT is now under construction and is 
expected to begin operation in 2002. 
For further information see 
http:/ /medusa.as.arizona.edu/graham/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mount John University Observatory, New Zealand 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mount John University Observatory, 
New Zealand 


The observatory specializes in the observation of variable 
stars and binary stars by photometry and spectroscopy, 
especially using a high-dispersion échelle spectrograph. 
It is located in the center of New Zealand’s South Island, 
at latitude 44 °S. Mount John is owned and operated by the 
Department of Physics and Astronomy of the University 
of Canterbury. It was founded in 1965 and currently there 
are a 1 m and two 61 cm reflecting telescopes. There are 
four resident staff at the observatory and three academic 
astronomers at the university site in Christchurch. A major 
collaboration with Nagoya and Auckland universities, the 
MOA project, is to study gravitational microlensing by 
CCD photometry. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.mjuo.canterbury.ac.nz/mjuo. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mount Stromlo and Siding Springs Observatories 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mount Stromlo and Siding Springs 
Observatories 


Mount Stromlo and Siding Spring Observatories 
(MSSSO) are the astronomical observatories of the 
Australian National University. The facilities at Mount 
Stromlo Observatory were originally established as the 
Commonwealth Solar Observatory which commenced 
operation in the Australian Capital Territory in 1924. 
Expansion after the Second World War saw Mount 
Stromlo Observatory move into stellar astrophysics, and 
in 1957 it joined the ANU’s Research School of Physical 
Sciences. Development of Canberra led to the establish- 
ment of a dark sky observatory at Siding Spring (SSO) 
west of Coonabarabran in New South Wales in 1964. Ten 
years later SSO became the host of the ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN 
OBSERVATORY with its 4 m and Schmidt telescopes. 

The Observatories’ major facility is the ANU 2.3 m 
telescope, opened in 1984. The telescope is a Cassegrain 
and Nasmyth alt-azimuth under full software control, 
capable of optical and infrared imaging and _ spec- 
troscopy. A 1 m telescope is used for imaging, and there 
are smaller facilities too. At Mount Stromlo Observatory 
the ANU has a 1.9 m telescope with an excellent Coudé 
spectrograph and the 1.3 m Great Melbourne Telescope, 
which is fully automated and used for survey projects, 
such as the MACHO project. The MACHO project in 
1993 recorded the first detection of gravitational 
microlensing, and over the following six years sought the 
density of massive compact halo objects by observing the 
Large Magellanic Cloud and the Galactic nuclear bulge. 
The project was a collaboration with two US universi- 
ties / laboratories. 

The academic staff of the ANU’s Research School of 
Astronomy and Astrophysics is based at Mount Stromlo 
Observatory. The School supports a graduate program, 
offering a PhD in Astronomy and Astrophysics. Mount 
Stromlo is also the site of a satellite laser ranging facility, 
operated for the Australian government, and the Stromlo 
Exploratory, an astronomy visitor center and interactive 
science center. The ANU’s engineering facilities for 
astronomical instrumentation are also concentrated at 
Mount Stromlo. The engineering group has built all of 
the current instrumentation for MSSSO and does exter- 
nal work for, e.g., the Anglo-Australian Observatory and 
the International Gemini Project. 

Siding Spring Observatory also hosts the University 
of New South Wales patrol telescope. The Uppsala tele- 
scope is currently carrying out a Near Earth Object sur- 
vey for the University of Arizona and NASA. At SSO the 
ANU operates a lodge for visiting astronomers and 
workshops for telescope maintenance and site upkeep. 


Web update (30 April 2003) 

In January 2003, the Mount Stromlo Observatory was 
largely destroyed by bushfires which ravaged Canberra. 
The fires destroyed four telescopes, the equipment work- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


shop, eight houses which had been occupied by staff and 
an administration building. Preliminary estimates have 
valued the losses at more than $20 million. From a histo- 
ry of astronomy perspective this is a major catastrophe, 
as the following historically-significant telescopes were 
lost: the 74-in (Grubb-Parsons) Reflector, the 50-in Great 
Melbourne Telescope, the 30-in Reynolds Reflector, the 9- 
in Oddie Refractor, the Solar Telescope and the 26-in 
Yale-Columbia Refractor. In addition to its telescopes, the 
Observatory’s library was destroyed, along with the 
Melbourne Observatory archives. 
For further information see 
http: / /msowww.anu.edu.au / 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Mount Wilson Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mount Wilson Observatory 


Mount Wilson Observatory, located in the San Gabriel 
Mountains near Pasadena, California, was founded in 1904 
by George Ellery Hale with financial support from Andrew 
Carnegie. In the 1920s and 1930s, working at the 2.5 m 
Hooker telescope, Edwin Hubble made two of the most 
important discoveries in the history of astronomy: first, 
that ‘nebulae’ are actually island universes—galaxies— 
each with billions of stars; second, that these galaxies are 
moving away from us in all directions, resulting in an 
expanding universe. This second discovery became the 
basis for the ‘Big Bang’ theory of the origin of the universe. 

In 1992, under a formal agreement between the 
Mount Wilson Institute and the Carnegie Institution of 
Washington, Mount Wilson Institute assumed complete 
responsibility for the funding and operation of the 
observatory. 

The mission of the Mount Wilson Institute (MWIJ) is to 
maintain, manage and operate Mount Wilson Observatory 
for research, education and other projects in the field of 
astronomy. Among the institutions conducting research 
at the observatory in 1999 are the Harvard-Smithsonian 
Center for Astrophysics, UCLA, UC Berkeley, USC, Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, Georgia State University and the 
University of Illinois. These guest research programs are 
funded and managed by the respective institutions, which 
pay a fee to MWI to defray the cost of site maintenance. 

Mount Wilson Observatory facilities include the 2.5 m 
Hooker telescope; the 1.5 m telescope; the Georgia State 
University CHARA interferometer array, consisting of six 
1 m telescopes arranged in a 350 m diameter configuration; 
the UC Berkeley Infrared Spatial Interferometer; the 45 m 
and 18 m solar tower telescopes; the Snow horizontal solar 
telescope; and the 60 cm and 35 cm remotely controlled 
telescopes, used by the Telescopes in Education (TIE) 
program for education and student research. A residence 
facility is maintained for the use of visiting astronomers. 

The recent completion of an adaptive optics system on 
the 2.5 m Hooker Telescope has enabled this instrument to 
produce the sharpest images in the visible-light portion 
of the spectrum ever obtained by any telescope in the 
history of ground-based astronomy, achieving a resolution 
of 0.06 arcseconds. This is comparable to what would be 
obtained if the telescope were placed in space. 

Mount Wilson’s calm atmosphere result in the best 
‘seeing’, i.e. natural sharpness and quality of its telescope 
images, in North America. This superb seeing is 
one of the reasons for the world-class performance 
of the 2.5 m adaptive optics system. It also led to 
selection of Mount Wilson as the site for Georgia State 
University’s interferometer—the most powerful visible- 
light interferometer in the world, capable of a resolution 
of 0.0002 arcseconds. 

For further information see 
http://www.mtwilson.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mouton, Gabriel (1618-94) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mouton, Gabriel (1618-94) 


Cleric, born in Lyon, France, observed the apparent 
diameter of the Sun and Moon as a measurement of 
their changing distance and an aid to understanding their 
orbits, published Observationes Diametrorum Solis et Lunae 
Apparentium (1670), studied interpolation, produced tables 
of logarithmic sines and cosines, and proposed the metric 
system, with a standard linear measurement based on the 
circumference of the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Moving Groups 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moving Groups 


A moving group is a set of stars which have similar 
velocities and have a common origin, or, aS EDDINGTON 
stated, 


Since some thousands of proper motions are 

available, it must be possible, if we take 
almost any star, to select a number of others 
the motions of which agree with its motion 
approximately. ... Clearly the agreement 
of the motions is no proof of association, 
unless there is some further condition which 
indicates that the coincidence is in some way 
remarkable. 


The stars in a moving group are coeval, have the same 
chemical composition as the parental cloud and share 
the same space motion to within the internal velocity 
dispersion of the group. The space configuration of these 
stars is not restricted to any form. Some examples of 
moving groups are: GALACTIC OPEN CLUSTERS, OB and T 
Tauri associations and GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. The common 
space motion of moving-group members allows a clean 
identification of these stars. As a result moving groups 
have always been important in studies regarding sTAR 
FORMATION, STELLAR EVOLUTION, and the UNIVERSAL DISTANCE 
SCALE. 


Selection methods 

Traditionally, stars in moving groups were selected 
using measurements of PROPER MOTIONS: the angular 
displacements of stars on the sky per unit of time. Because 
moving-group stars have similar space velocities they also 
have similar proper motions. Figure 1 illustrates the power 
of this approach. The top left panel shows the distribution 
of proper motions in the field of the globular cluster NGC 
6397. There are two separate concentrations of stars, one 
being the cluster members (for practical purposes centered 
in the frame), the other being the field star population. 
Figure 1 shows three color-magnitude diagrams (CMDs): 
(left panel) CMD of all stars in the field, (middle panel) 
CMD of the moving-group stars and (right panel) CMD 
of the field stars. The simple selection criterion used 
in figure 1 already results in a clean CMD which can 
be studied to test theoretical models for stellar structure 
and evolution and to use them to derive the age and 
chemical composition of the moving group. Some more 
sophisticated methods to select moving groups will be 
discussed below. 


Vector point diagram method 

A diagram such as the top left panel of figure 1, in which 
the two proper-motion components of stars in a field are 
plotted versus each other, is usually referred to as a vector 
point diagram. A moving group in the field will reveal 
itself as an overdensity in this diagram. The vector point 
diagram selection method tries to fit the distribution of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


proper motions of the field star population and that of the 
cluster stars assuming that both can be represented by a 
smooth function, generally taken to be a two-dimensional 
Gaussian. For each star the fitted Gaussian of the field 
and the moving group can be evaluated at its measured 
proper motion; the ratio of ‘moving-group Gaussian to 
field-plus-moving-group Gaussian’ then determines the 
membership probability of a star (see figure 2). 

The vector point diagram method works best if the 
spread in proper motions of the moving-group stars is 
small, so that they stand out clearly against the broader 
field star distribution. This spread in proper motions 
in the vector point diagram depends on (i) the internal 
velocity dispersion of the moving-group stars, (ii) the 
observational errors on the proper motions and (iii) the 
perspective effect, which causes the proper motions of 
stars with the same space velocity but different positions 
in the field to be different (since they are viewed from 
different directions). As a result, this method is optimally 
suited for moving groups which cover only a small 
fraction of the sky, typically less than ~10 square degrees 
(depending on proper motion errors and internal velocity 
dispersion). Many such studies have been carried out in 
the past century, by comparing the stellar positions on 
photographic plates taken at different epochs. For moving 
groups which have larger angular sizes the perspective 
effect will wash out the concentration in the vector point 
diagram, and other selection methods are needed. 


Convergent point method 

The convergent point method exploits the perspective 
effect discussed above. An important characteristic of the 
perspective effect, although it creates a different proper 
motion for each star, is that the proper motions of moving- 
group stars will all be directed towards one point on 
the sky. This point is called the convergent point (see 
figure 2). This convergence of the proper motions is 
analogous to the fact that the two tracks of a rail-line 
appear to converge in the distance. Stars can easily be 
selected by determining whether their proper motions 
point towards the convergent point or not (see figure 2; 
also note the two stars that are non-members). Although 
selecting the moving-group stars is relatively easy, finding 
the convergent point is more difficult. Various versions 
of the convergent point method use different algorithms 
for finding the convergent point. They all require some 
numerical minimization process to search for groups of 
stars whose proper motions converge towards one point 
on the sky. 


Three-dimensional velocity methods 

The previous two methods select moving-group stars 
based on proper motions and positions. | However, 
the preferred way to select moving-group stars is to 
search in velocity space directly. To calculate a three- 
dimensional velocity of a star, its position, proper motion, 
distance (or PARALLAX) and RADIAL VELOCITY are needed. 
The distance of a star is required to convert the proper 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moving Groups 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


all stars members non-members 
Popo ee | a Tat Peg a a Ts TTY 
: 05 F {ost : 
L 0 : of z 
-0.5 F 4 -0.5 F - 
eee cerca era ers eared rm cere Earl Bas 

-0.5 0 0.5 -0.5 0 0.5 
ea) Ee ee A Ba | APRs Rees RAR aaa ERE PEPE EERE TEN 
16 - we 7 16 7 16 - 4 
fF 1 : 1 
18 - 7 18 4 18 4 
20 - 5 20 4 20 - 4 
22 5 225 5 22 a) 
24 - 5 24 - an 24 - 4 
26 7 26 - 7 26 4 
rer eerie ere re re L : tard retin erated bane cre 
-1 0 1 2 3 4 -1 0 2 3 4 -1 0 1 2 3 4 


Figure 1. Vector point diagrams (top) and color-magnitude diagrams (bottom) for the globular cluster NGC 6397. All measurements 
were taken with the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE over a period of 32 months. The left panels show all stars in the field of view of the cluster. 
The middle panels show the cluster stars; they have been selected based on their proper motions. The right panels show the remaining 
field stars after selecting the cluster. Note that after the selection of the cluster stars the white dwarf sequence (bottom left of middle 
panel) becomes apparent as a separate feature in the globular cluster color-magnitude diagram. The proper-motion zero point is 
chosen as the mean motion of the cluster stars. The proper-motion scale is the displacement in WFC (Wide Field Camera of the Hubble 
Space Telescope) pixels (1 pixel is 37.5 mas yr~!). Adapted from King et al (1998 Astrophys. J. 492 L37-L40). 


motion into the tangential velocity. The combination 
of the two components of the tangential velocity and 
the radial velocity then provides the three-dimensional 
(space) velocity of a star. 

Many schemes have been developed to select moving- 
group stars using their three-dimensional velocities. 
The common denominator of all these methods is that 
they search for stars whose velocities are, within the 
measurement errors and internal velocity dispersion, 
equal to each other. The differences between the various 
three-dimensional velocity methods stem mostly from the 
differences in available data (e.g. catalog and accuracy of 
the data) used in the member selection. Most of these 
methods rely on computationally intensive numerical 
algorithms. 


Moving groups and their astrophysical 
importance 

Several types of moving groups will be discussed below: 
open clusters, OB associations, globular clusters and halo 
streamers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Open clusters 

Open clusters are gravitationally bound groups of stars, 
found in the Galactic disk. The small tidal radius (~10 pc), 
combined with the small internal velocity dispersion (a 
few tenths of km s~'), allows an easy selection of the 
members based on radial velocities or proper motions, e.g. 
with the vector point diagram method. The number of 
stars in an open cluster varies between a few dozen to 
several thousands. 

The nearest open cluster, the Hyades, is located at 
~45 pc from the Sun; several other clusters, including 
the Pleiades, have distances on the order of 100 pc. The 
proximity of these clusters allows the acquisition of high- 
quality data. Besides easy membership selection, this 
results in well-defined main sequences in the HERTZSPRUNG- 
RUSSELL DIAGRAM, free of contamination by field stars. These 
main sequences and other measurements are used to refine 
and extend the theory of the internal constitution of the 
stars. The effects of stellar evolution can also be studied 
because the ages of observed open clusters vary between 
a few million years to a few billion years. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moving Groups 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


membership = group/(field+group) 


—_ =: group 


field 


proper motion 


52) 


convergent point 


Figure 2. Schematic representation of the vector point diagram method (top): the Gaussians (here represented as one-dimensional) 
fitted to the proper motion distribution of the field (dark gray) and the cluster stars (light gray) are evaluated at a specific proper 
motion, i.e. the measured proper motion of a star. The ratio of the value of the moving-group Gaussian and the 
field-plus-moving-group Gaussian determines the membership probability for each star. Schematic representation of the convergent 
point method (bottom): stars whose proper motion is directed towards the convergent point are considered members. 


Under the assumption that the unevolved parts of the 
main sequences of open clusters are identical, the distances 
of the clusters can be determined once the distance to 
one of them is known. The displacement between the 
main sequences of two clusters, corrected for interstellar 
extinction and for differences in metal abundance, is 
determined by their difference in distance (or distance 
modulus). For this reason open clusters, the Hyades open 
cluster in particular, have long been used as the main 
calibrator of the distance scale in the universe. 


OB associations 

OB associations are gravitationally unbound groups of 
typically a few thousand stars in the Galactic disk, 
including a number of early spectral type (O and B stars). 
The name OB association was introduced by the Russian 
astronomer AMBARTSUMIAN in 1947. He noted that these 
groups were unbound, based on their average density, 
and concluded that they therefore must be young; any 
unbound structure would have been disrupted under 
influence of the Galactic tidal field on a time scale of 
~50 million years. This conclusion was later supported 
by the theoretical insight, based on stellar evolution— 
structure theory, that early type (or massive) stars must be 
young. Further evidence for the youth of these groups was 
furnished by the discovery of star-forming INTERSTELLAR 
MOLECULAR CLOUDS nearby OB associations. 

The main interest in the study of OB associations is 
to understand star formation in general and high-mass 
star formation in particular. It is thought that the majority 
of stars in the Galactic disk formed in OB associations. 
Therefore, studying these groups and their properties, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


such as the initial mass function or binary population, 
is of great importance in the understanding of stars and 
their evolution in general. Furthermore, the study of 
OB associations reveals properties of the Milky Way disk: 
the bright O and B stars trace the density distibution of 
the GALACTIC THIN DISK and in particular outline the spiral 
structure (OB associations generally form in or near spiral 
arms). 

Similar groups containing only low-mass young stars 
have also been discovered. These are usually referred to 
as T associations, because of the presence of T TAURI STARS. 
A well-known example is the Taurus—Auriga association. 

Identifying OB and T association members is more 
difficult than selecting open cluster members. Because 
associations are unbound they expand and can form large 
(30-100 pc) structures of which the closest ones (Sco OB2 
at ~130 pc) cover almost 1000 square degrees on the sky. 
Association members can thus only be identified using a 
convergent point method or a three-dimensional velocity 
method. Using photographic techniques for measuring 
proper motions of sufficient accuracy over such large areas 
proved to be nearly impossible. However, the globally 
accurate proper motions and parallaxes provided recently 
by the Hipparcos satellite allowed a reliable member 
selection for over a dozen nearby associations. 


Globular clusters 
Globular clusters are dense conglomerations of 10°- 
10° stars. They have a typical tidal radius of 50- 
100 pe. The Milky Way contains nearly 150 of these 
clusters, distributed throughout the Galactic halo (see 
HALO, GALACTIC). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Moving Groups 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Globular clusters played a crucial role in our view 
of the UNIVERSE. Based on the distribution of the visible 
globular clusters sHaPLey concluded, in the 1920s, that the 
universe was 100 kpc in size and that the Sun was located 
15 kpc from the center of the system of globular clusters. 
This enlarged the universe of KAPTEYN, the accepted model 
of the universe at the time, by a factor of 10 and put the 
Sun in a non-central position. 

Globular clusters still play a key role in the 
understanding of our Galaxy, although not concerning its 
size, but rather its formation. They are the oldest objects 
(~12 billion years) in the Galaxy and were presumably the 
first objects to form. Studying them gives information on 
the processes governing the formation of galaxies. They 
also provide valuable information on stellar evolution and 
structure theories and are ideal laboratories to test theories 
of STELLAR DYNAMICS in high-density environments. 

Although the stellar density in globular clusters is 
very high, so that the cluster stands out against the 
background stars, member selection based on proper 
motions is still necessary to remove field stars from the 
sample (as illustrated in figure 1). 


Halo streamers 

The term ‘halo streamers’ is used for the tidal debris of 
small galaxies, e.g. galaxies the size of the SMALL and LARGE 
MAGELLANIC CLOuDS, which have fallen into the halo of the 
Galaxy. When this happens stars are stripped off the 
satellite galaxy owing to the tidal forces exerted by the 
Milky Way. These stripped stars then follow their own 
orbit in the galactic halo. This tidal debris generally forms 
long arcs, sometimes more than 360° on the sky (cf the 
MAGELLANIC STREAM and the SAGITTARIUS DWARF GALAXY). 

Halo streamers are not moving groups in the sense 
of the definition given at the beginning of this article 
(they do not have the same space velocity), but stars 
belonging to these streams can be selected based on 
velocity information. The energy and angular momentum 
(integrals of motion) of these stars are nearly the same as 
for the infalling satellite galaxy. Thus instead of looking for 
stars with similar three-dimensional velocities, stars with 
similar integrals of motion can be identified as belonging 
to the same group. This approach can, in principle, also 
be applied to ‘normal’ moving groups. 

The main reason for studying halo streamers and 
infalling satellite galaxies is to study the process of 
GALAXY FORMATION. How structure formation in the universe 
took place is still an open question. Did the small 
structures form first and did they subsequently form 
bigger structures (hierarchical structure formation) or 
were the big structures the first to form and did the 
smaller structures form later? By studying the Galactic 
halo and looking for halo streamers the questions about 
the formation and evolution of the halo of our Galaxy 
(and the Galaxy itself) may be answered (see also UNIVERSE: 
SIMULATIONS OF STRUCTURE AND GALAXY FORMATION. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Conclusions 

The most important characteristic of a moving group is 
that the common space motion of the stars in such a 
group allows one to identify a set of stars which have 
similar ages and a similar formation history. Future 
astrometric satellites such as FAME and in particular 
GAIA will provide globally accurate proper motions (and 
radial velocities) with vastly improved accuracies, which 
will allow identification of moving groups and streamers 
not only in the solar neighbourhood but throughout the 
Galactic disk and halo, and will also allow measurement 
of the internal motions within these groups and structures. 
The physical characteristics of these moving groups then 
serve as tests for theories of star formation, stellar 
structure, stellar evolution, stellar dynamics and galaxy 
formation. 


Bibliography 
Starting points into the literature can be found in 


Binney J and Merrifield M 1998 Galactic Astronomy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

de Zeeuw P T et al 1999 A Hipparcos census of the nearby 
OB associations Astron. J. 117 354-99 


P T de Zeeuw, R Hoogerwerf and J H J de Bruijne 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mullard Radio Astronomy 
Observatory 


The Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory (MRAO) is 
operated by the Astrophysics Group of the Department of 
Physics at the Cavendish Laboratory. The observatory is 
located 8 km south-west of Cambridge at Lord’s Bridge 
and was established in 1957 through the generosity of 
Mullard Limited with support from the Science Research 
Council. Current work is supported by the PARTICLE PHYSICS 
AND ASTRONOMY RESEARCH COUNCIL. The observatory is famed 
for the pioneering sky surveys of Sir Martin Ryle, who 
invented the technique of aperture synthesis, and for the 
discovery of pulsars by Antony Hewish and his student 
Jocelyn Bell in 1967. These contributions were recognized 
by the award of the 1974 Nobel prize for physics to Ryle 
and Hewish. 

Instruments currently in operation include the 
Ryle Telescope, an array of eight parabolic dishes on 
a 5 km baseline, originally built in 1971 for high- 
resolution imaging of radio galaxies and quasars. It 
has been upgraded for mapping faint structures in the 
cosmic microwave background caused by the Sunyaev— 
Zel'dovich effect in nearby galaxy clusters and proto- 
clusters at high redshift. Mapping the microwave 
background to detect primordial density fluctuations 
of cosmological significance has been achieved with a 
prototype Cosmic Anisotropy Telescope (CAT) and this 
has led to the design of a more advanced instrument, 
the Very Small Array (VSA) soon to be commisioned 
on Tenerife; this is a joint project with JODRELL BANK 
and INSTITUTO DE ASTROFISICA DE CANARIAS. Milliarc second 
resolution at optical wavelengths for imaging stellar disks 
has been achieved with the Cambridge Optical Aperture 
Synthesis Telescope (COAST). Pioneered by John Baldwin, 
the COAST array of five mirrors on baselines up to 100 m 
will hopefully be succeeded by a Large Optical Array 
(LOA) now being designed for a site with clearer skies. 
At the other end of the spectrum, sky surveys at the 
low frequency of 151 MHz have been made with the 
Cambridge Low Frequency Synthesis Telescope (CLFST). 
This array of 60 tracking Yagi antennas provides 776 
baselines up to 4.5 km simultaneously. 

In addition to operations at MRAO the Astrophysics 
Group is developing instrumentation for the JAMES CLERK 
MAXWELL TELESCOPE (JCMT) on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. MRAO 
was closely involved with the design and construction 
of the JCMT, built jointly by the UK, Canada and the 
Netherlands, and is currently developing a submillimeter 
wavelength ‘camera’, a focal plane array of detectors for 
imaging large areas of sky. 

The Astrophysics Group has a total staff (scientific, 
technical and administrative) of 68, plus 38 research 
students, and is engaged in a wide variety of observational, 
technical and theoretical projects. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.mrao.cam.ac.uk. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Mullard Space Science Laboratory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mullard Space Science Laboratory 


The Mullard Space Science Laboratory (MSSL) is located in 
the Surrey Hills about 65 km to the southwest of London. 
It forms the major element of the Department of Space and 
Climate Physics, University College London. 

The department undertakes research into climate 
physics, high-energy astrophysics, solar physics, space 
plasma physics and photon and particle detection systems. 
As the UK’s largest university space physics institute, 
it includes professionally staffed electronic, mechanical 
and software engineering groups and has designed and 
built instruments for more than 30 orbiting spacecraft 
and 200 sounding rockets. Missions in which MSSL has 
participated include Giotto, Cluster, Cassini and XMM. 

For further information see 
http://www.mssl.ucl.ac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Multiple Mirror Telescope Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Multiple Mirror Telescope 
Observatory 


At the time of its dedication in 1979, the 4.5 m Multiple 
Mirror Telescope (MMT) was the third largest optical 
telescope in the world. It featured so many ambitious 
design innovations that its completion heralded the 
beginning of the current generation of telescope design. 
The MMT was decommissioned in March 1998, and was 
replaced in March 1999 with a 6.5 m single-primary 
telescope. 

The 4.5 m MMT was the first large optical telescope 
to incorporate multiple, lightweight primary mirrors in a 
common mount, a rotating building instead of a dome, 
active secondary mirror control during all observations, a 
high-performance altitude—azimuth mount and detailed 
finite element analysis of the telescope’s structure during 
the design process. The telescope was a very successful 
research tool, fueling nearly 1000 scientific publications. 

Studies carried out in Arizona in the mid-1980s 
showed that a 6.5 m primary mirror with a focal ratio of 
fil.4 or less could be installed in the MMT building. 
When it was shown that such a telescope could have a 
substantial field of view, the interest of Smithsonian 
astronomers was aroused. A letter of intent to carry out 
such a project sealed the fate of the 4.5 m telescope in 
1988. The successful casting (1992) and polishing (1997) 
of the first 6.5 m, f /1.25 primary in the STEWARD 
OBSERVATORY Mirror Laboratory triggered the 
decommissioning of the old telescope in 1998. 

The new telescope was dedicated in May 2000 and 
scientific observations began the following month. The 
successful conversion of the MMT is ongoing. The first 
of three secondary mirrors has been installed. The new 
telescope has already improved the observatory’s 
capabilities significantly. Notably, the telescope now has 
more than double the light-gathering power of its 
predecessor and two reflections have been removed from 
the optical path, Two new secondaries will be 
commissioned in 2001. The first, a 1.7 m mirror, will 
increase the angular field of view by a factor of 15 (to 1°) 
and the areal field by a factor of 225. The second, a 0.7 
m deformable mirror, will provide a two-reflection, 
thermally clean adaptive focus. 

Located at the 2600 m summit of Mount Hopkins, 
approximately 65 km south of Tucson, Arizona, the 
MMT Observatory is a facility of the University of 
Arizona and the Smithsonian Institution. It is staffed by 
approximately 20 full-time personnel and is funded 
jointly by its two parent institutions. Observing time is 
used by scientists at the University of Arizona, Arizona 
State University, Northern Arizona University and the 
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. A significant 
amount of time is also made available to members of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


international astronomical community through a public 
access programme. 

For further information see 
http://sculptor.as.arizona.edu/foltz/www/mmt.html. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Multiple Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Multiple Star 


Any star system that comprises three or more components 
that are physically linked, ie. that have a common 
gravitational field. It has been estimated that about 30% of 
all binary systems are actually triple; systems with more 
component stars are much rarer. A very few systems 
are known that have as many as six known components; 
Castor and the Trapezium at the heart of the Orion Nebula 
are the best-known examples. 

Many triple star systems comprise a close binary 
pair and a much more distant (and often less massive) 
companion. The a Centauri system is of this type. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Multiple Stellar Systems: Types and Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Multiple Stellar Systems: Types and 
Stability 


A multiple stellar system is a gravitationally bound group 
of two or more stars. This rather broad definition 
includes binary, triple, quadruple and larger stellar 
systems, all the way up to star clusters and galaxies. 
It is useful to subdivide this diverse aggregation into 
three categories: binary stars, hierarchical systems, and 
non-hierarchical systems. Binary stars are explained 
at great length elsewhere in this encyclopedia, and so 
will not be discussed here (see BINARY STARS: OVERVIEW). 
Hierarchical stellar systems can be broken down into 
physically separate subgroups of stars that orbit each 
other in approximately Keplerian fashion. These systems 
can be completely described by a combination of 
individual stellar parameters, such as STELLAR MASSES, and 
relationships between pairs and other subgroups of stars, 
such as mass ratios, semimajor axes and eccentricities. 
This is in contrast with non-hierarchical systems, such 
aS STAR CLUSTERS, Which are best described by statistical 
quantities, such as central density, core radius, velocity 
dispersion, mass function, binary frequency and total 
mass. 


Observed systems 


Multiple stellar systems are ubiquitous. For example, 
among the stars within 17 light-years of the Sun in Alan 
Batten’s 1999 catalog of the nearest stars, there are 38 single 
stars (including the Sun), 12 binaries and 4 systems of three 
or more stars. The frequency of triple and larger systems 
is 
N. >triple 

Neingle + Npinary f Ny triple 


I >triple = (1) 
and exceeds 7% for the 54 systems within 17 light-years. 
This is consistent with estimates of 5—15% in the literature 
for larger samples. Extrapolating this to the ~10" stars in 
the entire Galaxy yields a total of ~10!° systems of three 
or more stars. 

Famous multiple stellar systems include Castor (a 
Gem), which has six components, a and Proxima Cen, 
which is at least a triple system, and PSR B1620-26, a pulsar 
in a triple system in the globular cluster M4. All three 
display a hierarchical structure. 

Essentially all of the systems of three to seven stars 
in the catalog of 612 multiples compiled by Tokovinin are 
hierarchical, and much of the research on multiple systems 
has focused on the hierarchical variety. Apart from 
some special situations, non-hierarchical stellar systems 
are dynamically unstable. Such systems will reassemble 
into stable hierarchical configurations on timescales that 
are relatively short compared with the stellar evolutionary 
timescale, and stars will often be ejected in the process (see 
STELLAR EVOLUTION). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Binary Triple 


“=~ 
ee ® 

A 
Figure 1. Schematic and ‘mobile’ diagrams for binary and 


hierarchical triple systems. A hierarchical triple system consists 
of two Keplerian orbits. 


7 ™ 
eo @ 
YY 


A B 


Some examples of hierarchies 

It is useful to have a picture in mind of the structure 
of hierarchical stellar systems. Figure 1 shows a binary 
system and a hierarchical triple system. The latter can be 
broken down into two Keplerian orbits. The close pair of 
stars is called the inner pair and their orbit is called the 
inner orbit. The orbit of the third star about the inner pair 
is called the outer orbit. Figure 2 shows two hierarchical 
quadruple systems, and both can be broken down into 
three Keplerian orbits. Hierarchical systems of higher N 
can be broken down into N — 1 Keplerian orbits. Unlike 
the idealized systems shown in the figures, real systems are 
made up of eccentric and non-coplanar orbits, and stars of 
unequal mass, and interactions between the stars cause 
departures from Keplerian orbits. 


Instabilities 

Multiple stellar systems are subject to several kinds of 
instabilities. For example, non-hierarchical systems are 
dynamically unstable; they will rearrange themselves into 
stable hierarchical configurations and will often eject stars 
in the process. Most stability studies have focused on this, 
but there are additional instabilities. Close encounters in 
non-hierarchical stellar systems can result in stellar tidal 
interactions, physical collisions and mergers. The merger 
process may be assisted by the emission of gravitational 
radiation, especially when compact objects are involved. 
Also, stellar evolution of the individual components can 
result in significant mass loss from those components and 
mass transfer to other components. This can affect the 
stability of the system. Finally, external influences, such 
as intrusive encounters by stars, can also be the cause of 
dynamical instability in multiple stellar systems. 


Stability of isolated systems of point masses 
The literature on the stability of isolated systems of three 
point masses is quite extensive. A great deal of effort has 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Multiple Stellar Systems: Types and Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quadruple Systems 


D 
C 


A B A B C OD 


Figure 2. Schematic and ‘mobile’ diagrams for hierarchical 
quadruple systems. A hierarchical quadruple system consists of 
three Keplerian orbits. 


gone into studying THREE-BODY PROBLEMS via a technique 
that was introduced in the 1870s by George Hill, and is 
described nicely by Szebehely and Zare. The method is 
based on c?H in the two-body approximation, where c 
is the angular momentum of the system and H is the 
total orbital energy. If c?H < (c’H)ait, then the inner 
pair is permanently isolated from the outer body. This 
guarantees stability, since otherwise interactions between 
the third body and the inner pair can result in exchanges 
and ejections. The critical value, (c?H) it, is calculated for 
a configuration that is borderline stable, such as when all 
three bodies remain on a line as they orbit each other. The 
stability criterion in the case of coplanar circular prograde 
orbits and equal-mass stars reduces to douter/Ginner Z 3. 
Application of the 7H criterion to the real triple systems 
in the sky indicates that the observed systems are all quite 
stable. 

At least as much effort has gone into investigations 
of the stability of three-body systems through numerical 
integrations, which is perhaps the most effective way to 
study the problem. In N-body simulations, the initial 
conditions decide the outcome, and therefore the task is 
reduced to identifying those initial conditions which lead 
to stable systems and those which do not. 

The numerical integrations reveal that many close 
stellar encounters occur in non-hierarchical systems, and 
this ultimately results in the ejection of one of the three 
bodies, usually the body with the smallest mass. Ejection 
often takes place following a close ‘triple’ encounter, which 
is when the eventual escaper approaches the center of mass 
of the three-body system as the other two bodies move 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


away from it. The result is that the deceleration felt by the 
escaping body as it moves away from the center of mass 
is less than the acceleration the body felt as it approached 
the center of mass, leaving the body with sufficient velocity 
to escape from the other two. Additional results are that 
systems with high angular momentum are more stable 
than those with low angular momentum, retrograde inner 
and outer orbits are more stable than prograde orbits and 
systems with circular outer orbits are more stable than 
those with eccentric outer orbits. 

There are many empirical formulae in the literature 
for the stability of triple systems, and those of Eggleton and 
Kiseleva are given here as an example. These are based on 
a large number of numerical experiments of triple systems 
with a variety of orbital eccentricities and inclinations, 
and component masses. They correspond to n-stability 
for n 2 2, which is the persistence of the hierarchical 
configuration for 10” times the period of the outer orbit. 
Systems with an initial period ratio, Xo, exceeding Xj" 
are stable, where 


; 1/3 1 ; 
(xminye? — ( fou 7 Ain ymin (2) 
1+ out 1- Gout 
and 
er a7! 22 14 ge —1 
(% ) ee 1/3 1/3 1/3 1/3 (3) 


Jout 1+ Jout qin Jout +1 


where gin = 71/m2 > 1 and dour = (m1 + m2)/mz3 are the 
inner and outer mass ratios. 

It has been mathematically proven that a three- 
body system cannot remain bound for all time if it was 
previously unbound. That is, a temporary triple system 
created by a collision between a binary and a single star 
cannot last forever. Ultimately one component will be 
ejected, probably the least massive one, although it could 
be any of the three. A binary-binary collision can, on 
the other hand, create a stable three-body system via 
the ejection of one star that carries away with it enough 
binding energy to allow the other three to remain bound 
indefinitely in a hierarchical configuration. 

In comparison with three-body systems, far less has 
been written on the stability of systems consisting of four 
or more stars. Non-hierarchical four-body systems can 
decay into (1) a binary plus two single stars, (2) two 
binaries and (3) a stable triple plus a single star. There 
are currently no empirical formulae for the stability of 
four-body or larger systems. There are, however, many 
statistical results from numerical integrations regarding 
the properties of the break-up products. High-velocity 
escapers from the decay of small-N stellar systems can 
account for some of the OB runaway stars observed in 
our Galaxy (See STELLAR N-BODY SYSTEM: DISSIPATION). Kiseleva 
and collaborators found that 1% of all escapers from such 
systems have speeds greater than 30 km s7!. Sterzik 
and Durisen successfully fit the speed distribution of the 
escapers from N = 3, 4 and 5 stellar systems to analytic 
distributions derived for zero-angular-momentum initial 
conditions. They also found that the binding energies, Ez, 
of the remnant binaries follow an |E3|~”” distribution. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Multiple Stellar Systems: Types and Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finite stellar sizes 

Close encounters in non-hierarchical stellar systems can 
result in stellar tidal interactions, physical collisions and 
mergers. For example, if two main-sequence stars pass 
within a distance of twice the sum of their radii, then tidal 
effects will cause the pair to merge into a larger main- 
sequence star, which may be observable as a BLUESTRAGGLER. 
This mechanism can quickly decrease the number of 
stars in a non-hierarchical stellar system by one or more. 
Blue stragglers can be produced by the binary-single 
and binary-binary interactions that occur in the cores of 
star clusters. Finite stellar sizes also limit the maximum 
possible speeds of runaway stars ejected from small-N 
stellar systems, since it is the interactions with the closest 
encounters that avoid mergers which result in the highest 
ejection speeds. 

Tidal effects in the inner pair of a hierarchical 
triple system can affect its stability. Circularization and 
synchronization are difficult to achieve in the inner pair, 
as tidal friction tends to circularize the inner orbit, while 
the presence of the third star does the opposite. Slower 
than synchronized rotations in the inner pair of three-body 
systems increase stability by shrinking the inner orbit, 
while faster than synchronized rotation decreases stability 
by expanding the orbit. 

Angular momentum in three-body systems can be 
transported from the inner orbit to the outer orbit, and 
this may be a way of producing short-period binaries. 
There is observational evidence for an excess of distant 
companions to contact binaries compared with other 
types of binaries, which provides some support for this 
mechanism. If the contact binary eventually merges into 
a blue straggler, then the hierarchical triple system is 
reduced to a binary. 


Stellar evolution 

Mass loss from stars and mass transfer between stars 
in a multiple stellar system due to stellar evolution can 
significantly affect the stability of the system (i.e. the 
criterion given by equations (2) and (3) can change if the 
masses change). For example, slow mass loss from the 
outer component can improve the stability by gradually 
increasing the distance of the outer component from the 
inner pair of the system. Of course, too much mass 
loss, especially the essentially instantaneous mass loss 
that results from a supernova explosion, will unbind the 
system, so this represents a form of instability. Mass 
transfer between the inner components will also have an 
effect, albeit small, on the system stability, according to 
equations (2) and (3). 


Systems in star clusters 

The connection between multiple stellar systems and 
star clusters is intimate, as a star cluster is essentially a 
very large non-hierarchical multiple stellar system, and 
the endpoint of the dynamical evolution of a cluster 
is probably several small-N multiple stellar systems. 
Multiple stellar systems are created within star clusters 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


via gravitational encounters between binaries and other 
stars. Subsequent exchange interactions tend to replace 
the component stars of multiple stellar systems with more 
massive ones and increase the system binding energy. 
Strong interactions can even kick the systems out of 
the cluster. The hierarchical triple system containing 
the pulsar PSR B1620-26 in the globular cluster M4 
was probably formed by a binary-binary interaction. 
Continual encounters with stars in M4 will alter this 
system, and limit its stability. 


Black hole triple systems 

Multiple stellar systems consisting of SUPERMASSIVE BLACK 
HOLES are possible. If most galaxies contain central black 
holes, then galaxy mergers will inevitably produce binary 
black holes, since dynamical friction will guarantee that 
the holes will sink to the center of the merged galaxy and 
find each other. A subsequent merger with another galaxy 
has the potential to produce a triple (or larger) black hole 
system. Whether the third black hole can get close to the 
inner pair of black holes before the latter merge owing 
to dynamical friction and the emission of gravitational 
radiation depends on v,, the root-mean-square velocity 
of stars at the center of the merged galaxy. Makino’s 
calculations indicate that the binary black hole probably 
will not have merged before the third hole reaches the 
center if vu. < 200 kms“! and that the binary probably 
will have merged by the time the third hole arrives if 
v. > 600 kms7!. The observed v, in real galaxies span this 
range, so probably both outcomes happen. If the third 
black hole arrives at the center of the merged galaxy to 
find a binary black hole already there, then the resulting 
binary-single interaction may eject one of the black holes 
from the galaxy. 


Bibliography 
Observed systems 


Batten A H 1998 The nearest stars Observer’s Handbook 1999 
of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada ed R Bishop 
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press) pp 234-8 

Tokovinin AA 1997 MSC—a catalogue of physical multiple 
stars Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 124 75-84 


Stability of triple systems: 


Anosova J P and Orlov V V 1992 The types of motion 
in hierarchical and non-hierarchical triple systems: 
numerical experiments Astron. Astrophys. 260 473-84 

Eggleton P and Kiseleva L 1995 An empirical condition for 
stability of hierarchical triple systems Astrophys. J. 455 
640-5 

Ge Y-C and Leng X 1992 An alternative deduction of 
the Hill-type surfaces of the spatial 3-body problem 
Celest. Mech. Dyn. Astron. 53 233-54 

Szebehely V and Zare K 1977 Stability of classical triplets 
and of their hierarchy Astron. Astrophys. 58 145-52 


Stability of larger-N systems 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Multiple Stellar Systems: Types and Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kiseleva L G, Colin J, Dauphole B and Eggleton P 
1998 High-velocity stars from decay of small stellar 
systems Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 301 759-66 

Sterzik M F and Durisen R H 1998 The dynamic decay 
of young few-body stellar systems. I. The effect of a 
mass spectrum for N = 3, 4 and 5 Astron. Astrophys. 
339 95-112 


Finite stellar sizes 


Kiseleva L G, Eggleton P P and Mikkola S 1998 Tidal 
friction in triple stars Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 300 
292-302 

Leonard P J T 1995 Merged dynamically ejected OB 
runaway stars Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 227 1080-6 

Leonard P J T 1996 The implications of the binary 
properties of the M67 blue stragglers Astrophys. J. 470 
521-7 


Stellar evolution 


Orlov V V, Petrova A V and Ivanova N S 1996 The effect 
of stellar wind on the stability of triple systems Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 281 1326-32 


Systems in star clusters 


McMillan S, Hut P and Makino J 1991 Star cluster 
evolution with primordial binaries. II. Detailed 
analysis Astrophys. J. 372 111-24 

Sigurdsson S 1995 Assessing the environmental impact of 
PSR B1620-26 in M4 Astrophys. J. 452 323-31 


Black hole triple systems 


Makino J 1997 Merging of galaxies with central black holes. 
II. Evolution of the black hole binary and the structure 
of the core Astrophys. J. 478 58-65 

Valtonen M J, Mikkola S and Pietilla H 1995 Burrau’s three- 
body problem in the post-Newtonian approximation 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 273 751-4 


Peter J] T Leonard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Musca 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Musca 


(the Fly; abbrev. Mus, gen. Muscae; area 138 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Carina and 
Circinus, and culminates at midnight in late March. It was 
first shown on Petrus Plancius’ celestial globe of c. 1598 as 
Apis Indica (the Indian Bee), though it is usually attributed 
to the Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also 
known as Petrus Theodorus) and Frederick de Houtman, 
who charted that part of the southern sky in 1595-7. It was 
named Musca Australis (the Southern Fly) by the French 
astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted 
the southern sky in 1751-2 (at which time there was also 
anow defunct constellation Musca Borealis, the Northern 
Fly). The shortened form was adopted by the IAU in 1922. 

A small but not inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Musca are a Muscae, magnitude 2.7, 
and 6 Muscae, a close binary with bluish-white (B2) 
components, magnitudes 3.5 and 4.0, separation 1.2”. 
There are three other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. 
Other interesting objects include NGC 5189, a tenth- 
magnitude planetary nebula of irregular structure, and 
two seventh-magnitude globular clusters, NGC 4372 and 
4833, the former of which is partially obscured by dark 
nebulosity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Muses-C (Mu-launched Space Engineering Satellite) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Muses-C (Mu-launched Space 
Engineering Satellite) 


Japanese-US sample return mission to asteroid Nereus 
(1989ML). Scheduled for launch in early 2002. Intended 
as a technology demonstration mission. A US-built 
nanorover will image the surface and collect three samples 
for return to Earth. Other technologies to be tested include 
use of solar powered electrical propulsion system and 
autonomous navigation and guidance. The mission will 
last four years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nadir ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nadir 


The point on the celestial sphere diametrically opposite to 
the zenith and directly below the observer. 


See also: celestial sphere, zenith. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Naked-eye Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Naked-eye Astronomy 


It is often assumed that to take a real interest in astronomy 
means acquiring a large and expensive telescope. This 
is emphatically not the case. Binoculars are relatively 
cheap, and are of great value astronomically (see BINOCULAR 
ASTRONOMY). But even with the naked eye there is much to 
see, and much to be learned. After all, telescopes were 
not invented until less than 400 years ago, and all the 
knowledge acquired in previous years depended upon the 
naked eye alone. 

Probably the very first step after acquiring a 
preliminary knowledge of the main facts is to learn how 
to identify the constellations (figure 1). The stars become 
so much more interesting when you know which is which, 
and there is no real difficulty here, because the stars always 
remain in the same relative positions (their individual or 
proper motions are too slight to be noticed except over 
periods of many lifetimes). Moreover, it is seldom or 
never possible to see more than 2500 naked-eye stars 
at any one time, and the main constellations stand out 
clearly. A few nights’ observation is enough to grain a 
working knowledge of the brightest patterns—that is to 
say, the stars of the first, second and third magnitudes. 
(The magnitude scale works in the manner of a golfer’s 
handicap, with the brightest stars having the lowest 
magnitudes. The faintest stars normally visible without 
an optical aid are of magnitude 6.) 

The best procedure is to select a few constellations 
which are immediately obvious, and use these are ‘guides’ 
to the rest. In the northern hemisphere, the two best guides 
are URSA MAJOR (the Great Bear) and orion. Ursa Major is so 
far north in the sky that as seen from latitudes similar to 
those of Britain it never sets, and remains well above the 
horizon even when at its lowest; Orion, which is crossed 
by the celestial equator, is out of view during the middle 
of the year, when it is above the horizon only during 
daylight. From countries well south of the Earth’s equator, 
such as Australia and New Zealand, Ursa Major is more 
or less inaccessible, though Orion can be seen from every 
inhabited country. However, there are other conspicuous 
‘guides’ in the far south, and most people living in the 
southern hemisphere can readily identify the Southern 
Cross. 

Consider first Ursa Major, with the seven fairly bright 
stars which make up the pattern known popularly as the 
Plough or, in America, as the Big Zipper. Two of these 
stars show the way to potaris, the Pole Star in Ursa Minor 
(the Little Bear), which lies within one degree of the north 
celestial pole, and which therefore seems to remain almost 
motionless in the sky, with the entire celestial sphere 
turning round it once in 24 hours. The ‘handle’ of the 
Plough shows the way to Arcturus, the brilliant orange 
star in the constellation of Bodtes, the Hersdman, and so 
on. Orion is an even better guide when it is visible, because 
its stars are much brighter than those of Ursa Major; thus 
the three stars of the ‘Belt’ point southward to Sirius, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


SNK DENEB 
a x Cassiopeia 


SE VEGA 
‘ Algol 


‘, > POLARIS sot 
} Ursa Minor Perseus 


KOCAB ; 


Avge CAPELLA 


Ursa Major - Megs, 
’ ‘ “*+.3Mz CASTOR 
3K ARCTURUS : 
: ‘ POLLUX 
: i: Leo 
: i> f 
Pa REGULUS 


Ursa Major 


MEGREZ 


MIZAR ALIOTH 


ALKAID 


Figure 1. 


most brilliant star in the sky, and northward to Aldebaran, 
the red star in the constellation of Taurus (the Bull). 

Only the planets seem to wander around the sky. 
They keep to the Zodiac, and most are easy to recognize. 
Venus and Jupiter are always much brighter than any star; 
Mars is characterized by its strong red colour, and Mercury 
is always so near the Sun in th sky that it will probably 
not be seen unless deliberately sought. Only Saturn looks 
deceptively like a fairly bright star. The positions of the 
planets for any time can be looked up in astronomical 
ALMANACS or periodicals; and as soon as they have been 
identified they will easily be found again. 

The Moon is much the closest natural body in the 
sky, and it has virtually no atmosphere, so that its surface 
features are always sharp and clear-cut. With the naked 
eye it is easy to see the outlines of the main dark areas, 
still miscalled seas (Latin, maria) even though there has 
never been any water in them (figure 2). Really keen- 
sighted persons can also make out indications of some of 
the mountain ranges, notably the Lunar Apennines, which 
form part of the boundary of the huge Mare Imbrium (Sea 
of Showers). 

The Moon has no light of its own, and depends upon 
reflecting the rays of the Sun. At some full moons— 
they is to say, when the Sun, Earth and Moon are lined 
up—the Moon passes into the cone of shadow cast by the 
Earth; its direct supply of sunlight is cut off, and the Moon 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Naked-eye Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Naked-eye view of the full moon: 1, Mare Frigoris (Sea 
of Cold); 2, Mare Imbrium (Sea of Showers)’ 3, Mare Serenitatis 
(Sea of Serenity); 4, Mare Crisium (Sea of Crises); 5, Mare 
Tranquillitatis (Sea of Tranquillity); 6, Oceanus Procellarum 
(Ocean of Storms); 7, Mare Foecunditatis (Sea of Fertility); 

8, Mare Nectaris (Sea of Nectar); 9, Mare Humorum (Sea of 
Humours); 10, Mare Nubium (Sea of Clouds). 


turns a dim, often coppery colour until it passes out of 
the shadow again. Lunar Ecuipses do not happen at every 
full moon, because the Moon’s orbit is appreciably tilted, 
and most full moons avoid the cone of shadow; eclipses 
may be either total or partial. Not all eclipses are equally 
‘dark’; everything depends upon conditions in the Earth’s 
upper atmosphere, through which all sunlight reaching 
the eclipsed Moon has to pass. On some occasions the 
eclipsed Moon becomes so faint that it is difficult to see at 
all. 

Another interesting phenomenon can be seen when 
the Moon isa slender crescent. The ‘dark’ side can usually 
be seen shining faintly. This is due to light reflected on to 
the Moon from the Earth, and is therefore known as the 
EARTHSHINE. 

Naked-eye observations of the Sun can be dangerous; 
it is unwise to stare directly, even when the Sun is low 
over the horizon and looks deceptively mild and harmless. 
Now and then sunspots become large enough to be seen 
with the naked eye, but a dark filter should always be used. 
(Never use binoculars or a telescope for direct observation 
of the Sun, even with a filter; see SUN: SAFE OBSERVATION.) The 
Sun has a fairly regular cycle of activity; maxima occur 
about every 11 years. The next maximum is due around 
2000-2001, so that naked-eye spots may be expected now 
and then. 

Near maximum activity, electrified particles from the 
Sun cascade down into the Earth’s upper atmosphere, 
producing the lovely glows known as auroras or polar 
lights—auroras borealis in the northern hemisphere, aurora 
australis in the southern. Because they are electrically 
charged, the particles tend to spiral down in the regions 
of the magnetic poles. Thus a dark night in, say, North 
Norway will very probably be lit by an aurora, but from 
Southern England displays are much less common, and 
from regions near the Earth’s equator they are very rare 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


indeed (though it is on record that an aurora was once 
seen from Singapore’). 

Auroras may take many forms. Some are mere glows; 
others may produce vivid colours, with rays, curtains and 
‘coronas’, shifting and changing in brightness constantly. 
A mahjor auroral display is a magnificent sight, and 
is of course ideally suited to photography. Amateur 
observations of auroras are of real value, and are collected 
and correlated by local and national astronomical societies. 

When the Sun is setting, a brilliant green flash may 
occasionally be seen as the last segment of the solar disk 
passes below the horizon. This ‘green flash’ is a purely 
atmospheric phenomenon, and is very uncommon; a very 
clear horizon is essential, preferably over the sea. Much 
more common are solar and lunar haloes, luminous rings 
round the Sun or the full Moon. These are due to very 
high ice-crystal cloud at well over 20 000 feet above ground 
level. They can be quite spectacular. 

A solar eclipse occurs when he new moon passes 
directly between the Sun and the Earth, blotting out the 
brilliant solar dsisk for a brief period. Eclipses of the Sun 
may be either total, partial or annular. During a total 
eclipse the entire brilliant disk of the Sun is hidden, and 
the solar atmosphere flashes into view; for a brief period— 
never as long as eight minutes, usually much less; the 
naked-eye observer can see the solar CHROMOSPHERE, the 
red glowing masses of hydrogen once called red flames 
and now known as prominences, and the glorious pearly 
corOoNA, Which extends outward from the eclipsed Sun. 
A total eclipse is probably the most magnificent sight in 
all Nature (figure 3), but the Moon’s shadow is only just 
long enough to touch the Earth, so that as seen from any 
particular locality total eclipses are rare; from England, 
the total eclipse of 11 August 1999 was the last until 2090. 
During totality it is quite safe to look directly at the Sun, 
without any dark filter, but even a small segment of the 
brilliant disk remaining visible means that the dangers 
return. It is only too easy to damage one’s eyesight. 
Partial eclipses are much less interesting, since the Sun’s 
surroundings cannot be seen. If exactly alignment occurs 
when the Moon is in the far part of its orbit, it cannot cover 
the Sun completely, and a ring of sunlight is left showing 
round the dark mass of the Moon; this is an annular eclipse 
(Latin annulus, a ring). 

Observations of METEORS are best made with the 
naked eye, and here the amateur observer can carry out 
work of real importance (see also AMATEUR-PROFESSIONAL 
COLLABORATION IN ASTRONOMY). Meteors are cometary débris. 
As a comet moves along in its orbit, it leave a dusty 
‘trail’ behind it; when the Earth passes through such a 
tail it collects many particles, and the result is a shower 
of shooting stars. Many meteor showers occur each year; 
the most reliable shower is that of the Perseids, seen from 
late July through to mid August. The average meteor is 
smaller than a grain of sand, so that what we see is not 
the particle itself, but the effects which it produces in the 
atmosphere as it burns away. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Naked-eye Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. 


Because the meteors in a shower are moving through 
space in parallel paths, they seem to issue from one 
particular region of the sky; thus the August meteors 
come from the direction of the constellation Perseus, hence 
their name. Other showers are much less predictable; the 
Leonids, of 17 November, are usually sparse, but may 
at times produce true ‘meteor storms’, as in 1966, when 
it was said that meteors rained down from the sky like 
snow flakes’ for a few hours. There may also be sporadic 
meteors, not connected with any showers, which may 
appear from any direction at any moment. 

The naked-eye meteor observer can make useful 
observations simply by counting the numbers of meteors 
seen over definite periods. To plot their paths, the best 
method is to hold a rule up again the star background, 
noting the points where the meteor is first and last seen, 
and then drawing the track ona chart; the radiant position 
will soon become evident. For this work, a sound 
knowledge of the constellations is of course needed. 

Naked-eye COMETS are not common, though they 
do appear sometimes: comets Hyakutake (1996) and 
Hale-Bopp (1997) have been two recent examples. The 
periodical comets, which return regularly, are in general 
too faint to be seen without optical aid. Even Halley’s 
Comet, which returns every 76 years and can become very 
bright indeed, was inconspicuous at its last return in 1986; 
unfortunately it will be no better at its next return, that of 
2061. 

Finally, what about naked-eye observations of the 
stars? They are of different colours; some are white, some 
bluish and some orange or red. Thus in Orion the two 
leaders, Betelgeuse and Rigel, are quite different. The 
warm orange of Betelgeuse contrasts sharply with the 
glittering whiteness of Rigel. Stars twinkle only because 
their light is disturbed as it comes to us by way of the 
Earth’s atmosphere; a star such as Sirius will twinkle 
strongly, and will seem to flash various colours of the 
rainbow, even though Sirius is in fact a pure white star. A 
star near the zenith or overhead point will twinkle much 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


less than a star which is lower down in the sky, because 
its light is coming to us by way of a thinner shell of 
atmosphere. 

Most stars shine steadily for year after year, century 
after century, but there are some which do not; these are 
the VARIABLE STARS. One such star is Betelgeuse in Orion, 
which is well advanced in its evolution and has become 
unstable; it swells and shrinks, changing its output as it 
does so. At times it may be almost as bright as Rigel, while 
at others it is more comparable with Aldebaran. Another 
variable is Mira in Cetus (the Whale), which can rise to the 
second magnitude—as bright as the Pole Star—but which 
remains below naked-eye visibility for much of the year; 
it reaches maximum about every 331 days (the period is 
not constant). Algol, in Perseus, fades by more than a 
magnitude every 2.3 days, remaining faint for a mere 20 
minutes before recovering, not because it is intrinsically 
variable but because it is regularly eclipsed by a darker 
companion passed in front of it. Naked-eye observers can 
follow the changes in these variable stars, by comparing 
them with nearby stars which are constant in brightness. 

Occasionally a star will flare up where no naked- 
eye star has been seen before. This is termed a Nova. 
Nova means ‘new’, but a nova is not in fact a new star 
at all; what happens is that a formerly dim star suffers 
a tremendous outburst, and flares up to many times its 
normal brilliancy before fading back to obscurity. Novae 
cannot be predicted, and several have been discovered 
by naked-eye observers. One nova, seen in 1918 in the 
constellation of Aquila, briefly outshone every star in the 
sky apart from Sirius, but has now become a very faint 
telescopic object. 

It is clear, then, that there is much to be seen in the 
skies, even without any optical equipment. the naked-eye 
observer will always find plenty to occupy their attention. 


Patrick Moore 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nangay Radio Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nangay Radio Observatory 


The Nancgay Radio Observatory has the largest radio 
telescopes in France. Founded in 1952, it is located 
200 km south of Paris and is operated by the Paris 
Observatory, in association with the CNRS, and co- 
financed by the ‘Région Centre’. A technical staff of 50 
operates the site. Its main instruments are: the decimetric 
telescope, with the equivalent surface of a 94 m diameter 
dish used for 21 cm H I and 18 cm OH spectral line 
observation of comets, evolved stars and galaxies as well 
as pulsar observations; the radioheliograph, a 43 element 
interferometer dedicated to solar corona observations at 
metric wavelength; the decametric array of 144 elements 
operating at 3-30 m wavelength for studies of Jupiter and 
the Sun. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.obs-nancay.fr/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Napier [Napeir, Nepair, Nepeir, Neper, Napare, Naper, 
Naipper], John [Jhone] (1550-1617) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Napier [Napeir, Nepair, Nepeir, Neper, 
Napare, Naper, Naipper], John 
[Jhone] (1550-1617) 


Born in Merchiston Castle, Edinburgh, Scotland, educated 
in protestant theology at St Andrews University, and on 
the continent of Europe (Paris, Italy and the Netherlands). 
Invented logarithms, formulae used in solving spherical 
triangles (Napier’s analogies) and Napier’s bones, an ‘analog 
computer’ used for multiplying dividing and taking 
square and cube roots. Logarithms were a breakthrough 
for the astronomical calculation of planetary and cometary 
orbits to the large number of decimal places that high 
precision required, and Napier himself wrote of his 
motivation to invent them: ‘Seeing there is nothing (right 
well-beloved Students of the Mathematics) that is so 
troublesome to mathematical practice, nor that doth more 
molest and hinder calculators, than the multiplications, 
divisions, square and cubical extractions of great numbers, 
which besides the tedious expense of time are for the most 
part subject to many slippery errors, I began therefore 
to consider in my mind by what certain and ready art 
I might remove those hindrances’. It was through the 
use of logarithms that KEPLER was able to reduce BRAHE’S 
observations, determine his laws and pave the way for 
Newton’s theory of gravitation. LAPLACE wrote that 
logarithms, ‘by shortening labor, doubled the life of the 
astronomer’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Narlikar, Jayant Vishnu (1938-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Narlikar, Jayant Vishnu (1938—) 


Theoretical astronomer, born in Kolhapur, Maharashtra, 
India, became professor at the Tata Institute of Fundamen- 
tal Research. Worked with FRED HOYLE on the steady state 
theory of the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


NASA 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NASA 


The guiding principles for US exploration of air and space 
have remained remarkably consistent for more than 80 
years. In 1915, Congress created an organization that 
would ‘supervise and direct the scientific study of the 
problems of flight, with a view to their practical solutions’. 
That organization, the National Advisory Committee for 
Aeronautics (NACA), evolved into NASA four decades 
later. 

In 1958, NASA was established and the journey begun 
in 1915 has been continued by aviators, astronauts and 
robotic spacecraft from the dunes of Kitty Hawk to the 
edge of the atmosphere and to the surface of the Moon 
and Mars. American spacecraft have explored more than 
60 worlds in our solar system, while methodically peering 
back in space and time to reveal many of the secrets of the 
universe. 

NASA employs 18500 civil servants and generates 
thousands of high-tech jobs in the private sector. The 
Agency operates nine Field Centers, the contractor- 
operated Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Wallops Flight 
Facility. The Fiscal Year 2000 NASA budget is $13.6 billion. 

NASA provides a variety of on-line services via the 
Internet. The URL's listed below provide key information 
about each of the topics. In addition, photographs, 
scientific and technical information, news releases and 
organizational data are accessible through a number of 
World Wide Web sites. Other key starting points for 
exploring NASA on the ‘net’ are listed below. 


e NASA’s main web site is: 
http:/ /www.nasa.gov 
e The NASA public affairs web site is: 
http://www.nasa.gov/hqpao/hqpao_ home.html 
e The Administrator’s speeches web site is: 
http:/ /www.nasa.gov/bios/goldin_ speeches.html 
e The NASA astronaut biographies web site is: 
http:/ /wwwjsc.nasa.gov/Bios/ 
e The International Space Station web site is: 
http://station.nasa.gov / 
e The Hubble Space Telescope web site is: 
http://oposite.stsci.edu/1998/19 
e The Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), 
used to shed light on La Nifia, web site is: 
http:/ /www.eorc.nasda.go.jp /TRMM 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NASA Infrared Telescope Facility 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NASA Infrared Telescope Facility 


The NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF) is the 
principal observatory in the world dedicated to solar 
system astronomy; 50% of the observing time is 
specifically reserved for such observations. It is a 3 m 
telescope located at 4145 m on the summit of Mauna 
Kea, on the island of Hawaii. It has been operated 
for NASA by the University of Hawaii’s Institute for 
Astronomy since it opened in 1979. It is optimized for 
infrared observations and has imaging and spectroscopic 
instrumentation covering the region; active optics also 
provide very high angular resolution. 
For further information see 
http: / /irtf.ifa.hawaii.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201-74) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201-74) 


Astrologer, astronomer and mathematician, born in Tus, 
Khorasan (now Iran), astrologer to the Isma’ili governor 
Nasir ad-Din ‘Abd ar-Rahim. Captured and imprisoned 
in Alamut, in a fortress which was the headquarters of 
the terrorist Assassins, he betrayed the defenses to the 
invading Mongols. He was rewarded by IIkhanid dynast 
Hulagu with an observatory, built with Chinese assistance 
at Meragha in 1262, and fitted out with instruments 
some of which were designed by al-Tusi himself. He 
used them in a 12-year program to observe planetary 
movements, and published the I/khanic Tables of planetary 
and star positions. Al-Tusi wrote about astronomical 
instruments, translated and commentated on classical 
works and researched into trigonometry. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nasmyth Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nasmyth Telescope 


An altazimuth reflecting telescope with relatively stable 
platforms for mounting heavy, large, delicate or develop- 
mental equipment which cannot be, or has not been, engi- 
neered to cope with attitude changes during the tracking 
of a star. The optical configuration is the Cassegrain type, 
with a primary and secondary mirror, and an additional 
third flat mirror mounted at the intersection of the altitude 
and azimuth axes. The third, plane mirror, known as the 
‘Nasmyth flat’, reflects the light beam from the secondary 
mirror through a right angle, along the altitude axis, and 
through an altitude bearing to a focus at the side of the tele- 
scope. Analysis equipment is supported at the Nasmyth 
focus on a platform mounted on the pillar that supports 
the altitude bearing. The Nasmyth platform rotates on the 
azimuth bearing, typically relatively slowly at a speed of 
one revolution per day (more during the transit of a target 
star across the meridian), but remains horizontal. The Nas- 
myth flat can be turned about the optical axis to switch the 
light beam of the telescope from one bearing to the other, so 
a Nasmyth telescope usually has two Nasmyth platforms. 
The William Herschel Telescope on La Palma is a Nasmyth 
design. The Gemini telescope project considered and re- 
jected the Nasmyth design in order to avoid the thermal 
effects of the third mirror and its support mechanism in 
the light beam. 

James Nasmyth was an English mechanical engineer 
and gentleman astronomer who invented this telescope 
configuration in his less agile later years as a means to 
provide a convenient viewing arrangement, in which he 
sat on one of the platforms and viewed the sky comfortably 
through an eyepiece at the altitude bearing. 


See also: Altazimuth mounting; Cassegrain telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nasmyth, James (1808-90) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nasmyth, James (1808-90) 


Engineer, born in Edinburgh, invented the steam hammer 
and many other devices in mechanical engineering 
especially for canal working. A childhood interest 
in astronomy meant that he maintained an interest in 
astronomical instruments in his professional engineering 
career, making two conventional small telescopes for 
himself, and visiting stRUVE during a visit to St Petersburg, 
for example. He made speculum mirrors and telescopes 
for WILLIAM LASSELL, WARREN DE LA RUE, and himself. The 
largest telescope which he made in 1845 had a 20 in mirror, 
and had a novel mechanical design, which ‘brought the 
stars down to him’. It was an altazimuthally mounted 
Cassegrain-type, but a third mirror in the optical path 
reflected the light out of the telescope tube along the 
altitude axis. This arrangement is called a Nasmyth 
telescope mounting, and is used on all large modern 
telescopes. Nasmyth sat comfortably and stably with his 
eye at the center of the altitude bearing, operating handles 
to move himself and the telescope in azimuth, and to 
move the telescope in altitude, making his observations 
of the Moon and the Sun. On the Sun he observed, during 
occasional moments of superb seeing, what he termed 
a ‘willow leaf’ pattern; this appears to have been the 
discovery of solar granulation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


National Astronomical Observatory, Japan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


National Astronomical Observatory, 
Japan 


The National Astronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ) 
was founded in 1988, integrating the Tokyo Astronomical 
Observatory of the University of Tokyo, the International 
Latitude Observatory of Mizusawa, and the solar radio 
group of the Research Institute of Atmospherics, Nagoya 
University. It is an inter-university research institute 
for astronomy under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of 
Education, Science, Sports and Culture. The headquarters 
is located in Mitaka near Tokyo. It has six division groups, 
and the scientific coverage is quite wide, ranging from 
geodesy to radio astronomy, even including the research 
and development of gravitational-wave detectors. Some 
groups are participating in joint space science missions 
such as the solar x-ray telescope (Yohkoh), radio telescope 
(Halka). 

A total of about 300 permanent staff are working 
in NAOJ. There are nine ground-based research facili- 
ties: Mizusawa Astrogeodynamics Observatory; Norikura 
Solar Observatory; Okayama Astrophysical Observatory; 
Dodaira Astronomical Observatory; Nobeyama Solar Ra- 
dio Observatory; Nobeyama Cosmic Radio Observatory; 
Astronomical Data Analysis Center; Advanced Technol- 
ogy Center; Public Relations Center; World Solar Data 
Center; and Subaru Telescope Hawaii Facility, which is the 
overseas facility having an 8 m optical/infrared telescope 
‘Subaru’ on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. 

Since April 1992 NAOJ has been participating in the 
Department of Astronomical Science, School of Mathemat- 
ical and Physical Science, the Graduate University for Ad- 
vanced Studies, and fulfilling the responsibilities of post- 
graduate education. 

For further information see 
http://www.nao.ac.jp/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


National Centre for Radio Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


National Centre for Radio 
Astrophysics 


India’s National Centre for Radio Astrophysics (NCRA), 
located on the Pune University Campus, is part of the 
TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH. At Khodad, 80 km 
from Pune, NCRA has set up the Giant Metrewave Radio 
Telescope (GMRT), the world’s largest telescope operating 
at meter wavelengths. GMRT consists of 30 fully steerable 
dishes of 45 m diameter, spread over a 25 km area. 
Another meter-wavelength facility operated by NCRA is 
the Ooty Radio Telescope (ORT), a unique 530 x 30 m 
steerable parabolic cylinder located along a hill slope in 
southern India. NCRA has about 20 astronomers, 30 
engineers and other technical and support staff. NCRA’s 
research activities are mainly in the areas of: cosmology 
and extragalactic sources like radio galaxies, quasars etc; 
galactic sources including pulsars, supernovae remnants, 
etc; Sun and solar wind; and the interstellar medium. 
For further information see 
http://ncra.tifr.res.in/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO), Tuc- 
son 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


National Radio Astronomy 
Observatory (NRAO), Tucson 


One of the radioastronomy facilities funded by the US 
National Science Foundation, and operated under cooper- 
ative agreement by Associated Universities, Incorporated. 
Located in Tucson on the campus of the University of 
Arizona. 

The NRAO operates and maintains a 12 m telescope 
on Kitt Peak, 80 km southwest of Tucson, for astronomical 
observations at millimeter wavelengths. It is the only 
millimeter-wavelength telescope in the US operated full- 
time as a national facility. 

Originally known as the 36 Foot Telescope, the 
instrument was responsible for the birth of millimeter- 
wavelength molecular astronomy. Dozens of molecular 
species in the interstellar medium were first detected at 
Tucson. 

In 1984, the telescope’s reflecting surface and surface 
support structure were replaced and the 36 Foot was 
renamed the 12 Meter. Current research covers studies 
of molecular clouds and galactic star formation, evolved 
stars, astrochemistry and external galaxies. 

Engineers at NRAO Tucson are also involved in 
development and support for the ATACAMA LARGE MILLIMETER 
ARRAY (ALMA). 

For further information see 
http://www.tuc.nrao.edu/Tucson.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


National Research Council ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


National Research Council 


The National Research Council of Canada (NRC) has the 
Parliamentary mandate ‘to operate and administer any 
astronomical observatories established by the Govern- 
ment of Canada’. NRC exercises this mandate through 
its HERZBERG INSTITUTE OF ASTROPHYSICS, Which provides astro- 
nomical facilities, and related infrastructure and services 
to university scientists and their students. NRC also pro- 
vides a time service through its Institute of National Mea- 
surement Standards. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.nrc.ca. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


National Solar Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


National Solar Observatory 


The National Solar Observatory (NSO) operates several 
solar telescopes on Sacramento Peak in Sunspot, New 
Mexico, on Kitt Peak near Tucson, Arizona, and ina global 
network with six sites around the world. These telescopes 
provide unique capabilities and have an unsurpassed 
wealth of focal plane instrumentation available, including 
the first solar adaptive optics system. The NSO mission 
is to provide state-of-the-art telescope facilities to the 
solar community and to conduct pioneering research in 
solar physics. Highlights include the discovery of solar 
filigree (small magnetic flux tubes), elucidation of the 
global nature of the solar five-minute oscillations, and 
mapping of the interior structure of the Sun. The world’s 
first and best-instrumented vacuum tower telescope, the 
76 cm Richard B Dunn Solar Telescope, the Evans Coronal 
Facility (40 cm coronagraph), and Hilltop flare patrol 
are located at Sacramento Peak. The McMath-Pierce, 
located on Kitt Peak, is the world’s largest (1.5 m) solar 
telescope and it is the premier facility for infrared studies 
of the Sun. The Kitt Peak Vacuum Tower Telescope 
makes daily magnetic maps of the entire visible solar 
disk. The six GLOBAL OSCILLATION NETWORK GROUP telescopes 
continuously measure solar oscillations. Research at the 
NSO concentrates on the nature of solar convection and 
magnetism, the origins of solar activity and variability, 
the structure and heating of the solar corona, and the 
interior structure of the Sun. The NSO was founded in 
1983 by merging the solar programs at Sacramento Peak 
Observatory (1949) with those at Kitt Peak (1950). Most 
of the funding for the NSO comes from the National 
Science Foundation, with contributions from the USAF 
and NASA. 
For further information see 
http: / /www.nso.noao.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


National Space Development Agency, Japan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


National Space Development Agency, 
Japan 


The National Space Development Agency (NASDA) was 
established by the Japanese government in 1969 to act 
as the nucleus for the development of space exploration 
and to promote the peaceful use of space and its practical 
applications. 

The agency’s headquarters are in Tokyo, but it also 
operates launch facilities at Tanegashima Space Center 
in Kagoshima and tracking stations at Katsuura, Masuda 
(Kagoshima) and Okinawa. Its main test laboratories and 
operations buildings are located at Tsukuba Space Center. 

NASDA is responsible for the development of 
communications, meteorological and Earth observation 
satellites, such as the Engineering Test Satellite series. 
A number of NASDA experiments and astronauts have 
flown on the Space Shuttle. Future plans include 
the addition of the Japanese Experiment Module to 
the International Space Station. It also oversees the 
development of launch vehicles, such as the H-II rocket 
and the Hope-X experimental spaceplane. 

NASDA carries out studies into future development 
and utilization of the Moon and planets, including research 
into development of materials for use on the Moon and into 
planetary orbiters and robotic surface explorers. The first 
practical example of this will be the Selene lunar orbiter— 
lander mission, a joint project with the INSTITUTE OF SPACE 
AND ASTRONAUTICAL SCIENCE. 

For further information see 
http://www.nasda.go.jp/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Navigation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Navigation 


Navigation is the knowledge required to sail a ship 
between two known points by the shortest appropriate 
way, and in the least possible time. Coastal navigation 
is practised within sight of the coast, and orientation is 
provided by local data such as the coastline, knowledge 
of conspicuous landmarks, and the water depth. Oceanic 
navigation, by contrast, is possible only by observation 
of celestial bodies. Here, a distinction should be made 
between the passive use of astronomical knowledge based 
purely on what was visible in the sky, and the active use 
of scientific instruments and astronomical EPHEMERIDES. 


Navigation by observation of the Sun and stars 
The level of astronomical knowledge of the Babylonians, 
Phoenicians, Greeks and Arabs is well documented, but 
although it is probable that such knowledge was used 
to improve the navigation of seafarers, little is known 
about the actual transfer of information between the 
two disciplines in Antiquity and the early Middle Ages. 
Seafarers of these peoples were mainly coastal navigators, 
but they covered large distances and sometimes ventured 
beyond the sight of land, especially in the enclosed and 
therefore relatively safe Mediterranean. The first seaman 
whom we are told steered by stars is Odysseus. At one 
stage of his imaginary voyage, he had to keep the stars 
of the Great Bear on his left hand, night after night: 
the method of steering by horizon stars. A star was 
observed shortly after rising (or before setting) and used 
as a compass direction. After a while, the next rising 
(or setting) star that had similar amplitude was used to 
steer by in the same way, and thus the ship was held 
on the same course. A simple way of finding latitude 
at night which was used in the Mediterranean, was by 
observation of zenith stars. Seafarers memorized which 
star was overhead in a particular port. By observing the 
star’s position during their voyage they could see if they 
were to the north or the south of their destination, and 
adjust their course accordingly. 

During daytime the position of the Sun was observed 
and used for orientation. Culmination indicated south (or 
north), while in low latitudes sunrise and sunset pointed 
to two other major compass directions, east and west. In 
northern latitudes the Pole Star, although some degrees 
off the celestial North Pole, also indicated north when 
observed in combination with the Great Bear. Even south 
of the equator experienced seafarers could, at least for a 
while, continue to use the Great Bear to locate north. The 
Pole Star was also used to determine latitude by means of a 
primitive finger system. Around AD 650, Arabs, who were 
experienced in finding their way in the desert by observing 
stars, used a compass rose of which the points were named 
after the rising and setting of fixed stars. 

The Vikings, when crossing large stretches of ocean, 
used the Pole Star for orientation at night, and the Sun 
during daytime. They probably also used these celestial 
bodies for setting out their courses. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Because of the great distances from the continents and 
between the islands, the inhabitants of the Pacific had to 
sail large stretches of water beyond the sight of land. Early 
documentary evidence about their history is extremely 
sparse, but information that European voyagers collected 
from the eighteenth century onwards suggests that Pacific 
islanders used the Sun for their orientation and steering. 
Like Mediterranean seamen they steered by horizon stars 
and used zenith stars for reaching the latitude of their 
destination. 


The dawn of astronomical navigation 

When, in the fifteenth century, the Portuguese embarked 
on voyages along the west coast of Africa their courses 
were generally north-south. They found their latitude by 
observing the Pole Star at night, and during daytime the 
Sun’s altitude at noon. Beyond the equator, which was 
reached by 1474, it was no longer possible to observe the 
Pole Star. Although the Southern Cross had been seen 
by Portuguese seamen as early as 1454, it was found that 
there was no southern Pole Star. This led them to attempt 
to improve the method of finding latitude from the Sun 
at noon. Accordingly, the astronomer Abraham Zacuto of 
Salamanca and his pupil José Vizinho compiled the first 
day-to-day declination tables of the sun, the Regimento do 
Astrolabio e do Quadrante. When Columbus sailed towards 
America in 1492, he was supplied with such tables in 
manuscript. It has been suggested that the first printed 
edition appeared in 1495, but the only known printed copy 
dates from about 1509. 

The ongoing maritime expansion of both Portugal 
and Spain called for cooperation between astronomers and 
navigators. Scientific instruments that had traditionally 
been astronomers’ tools were adapted for navigational 
purposes. The mariner’s ASTROLABE was developed out 
of the astronomical astrolabe, probably around 1445, 
and was employed to measure angular altitudes. The 
astronomer’s cross-staff (used to measure the angular 
separation between celestial bodies) underwent the same 
transformation, perhaps by the German-born astronomer 
Martin Behaim, and was used as a navigating instrument 
after about 1515. Astronomers were involved in teaching 
and examining navigators, and they were also responsible 
for providing navigational instruments and correcting 
charts. Stimulated by commercial successes, Portugal and 
Spain created institutions that were centers of astronomy, 
cartography and navigation. The Casa de Guinea e India was 
established in Lisbon, the Casa de Contratacion in Seville. 

After the Atlantic Ocean was crossed in 1492, and the 
Indian Ocean in 1497, east-west courses were sailed more 
frequently, and there was an increasing need to measure 
longitude with accuracy. The difference in longitude 
between two places is of course equivalent to the difference 
in local time. In 1494 Columbus tried to find his longitude 
in the New World from observing a lunar eclipse, and 
comparing the local time of its occurrence with the time 
predicted for its occurrence in Spain. The effort failed 
because of the inaccuracy of the prediction, a consequence 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Navigation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of imperfect knowledge of the Moon’s motion. Martin 
de Magellan’s astrologer Andrés de San Martin in 1519 
unsuccessfully tried to find the longitude in South America 
by conjunction of the Moon and Jupiter; failure was 
similarly the result of errors in the predicted astronomical 
ephemeris. 

The Nuremberg astronomer Johann WERNER, in 1514, 
was probably the first to suggest that longitude could 
be determined by measuring lunar distances, the angle 
between the Moon and a fixed star. The Moon moves 
relatively rapidly across the sky, and at a given time the 
angle between the Moon and a given star is virtually 
the same for every observer who can see them both. 
The angle between the Moon and a number of stars can 
be calculated ahead for certain dates and times, for a 
standard meridian. An observer measuring such an angle 
would compare the result, and his local time, with the 
predicted angle and time. When the angles were the 
same, the difference between the two times would provide 
the difference in longitude between the observer and the 
standard meridian. Werner’s method is feasible, but until 
the second half of the eighteenth century it was technically 
impossible to develop the required instruments and lunar 
tables. 


Astronomy in navigation 

In 1598, as the attempts to solve the question of longitude 
had so far failed, the Spanish king offered a considerable 
prize for anyone who devised a practical solution. This 
example was soon followed by the Dutch States-General, 
the governments of France and Venice, and in 1714 by the 
British Parliament. Many claims resulted, one of them 
from GALILEO GALILEI, who proposed that the eclipses and 
occultations of Jupiter’s satellites could provide a solution, 
as they are visible at the same instant for every observer. 
For his proposal Galileo received a gold chain from the 
Dutch States-General in 1636; nevertheless, it was hardly 
possible to observe Jupiter’s satellites from the deck of a 
moving vessel. Lunar eclipse observations to determine 
longitude were carried out successfully by Edmond HALLEY 
at sea near the Cape of Good Hope in 1719, and on land by 
Captain James Cook in Canada in 1766; but lunar eclipses 
are rare events. 

The method of lunar distances called for an accurate 
and manageable observing instrument, an accurate 
mathematical theory of the lunar motion, and accurate 
tables of the positions of the fixed stars. Important steps 
towards the third of these goals were taken with the 
founding of the OBSERVATOIRE DE PARIS in 1667 and the ROYAL 
OBSERVATORY, GREENWICH in 1675. Both were commissioned 
to rectify the existing tables of stars to help solve the 
problem of longitude at sea. The Paris Observatory was 
the first institution to publish tables of astronomical data 
for navigation, such as the daily celestial positions of 
the Sun, Moon and planets, and the Right Ascension 
of stars. These appeared in the Connaisance de Temps, 
for the first time in 1678. From 1761 onwards the 
Connaisance also contained lunar tables, accurate lunar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


tables having been calculated for the first time a few 
years previously by the German mathematician Tobias 
MayeR. The British Astronomer Royal, Nevil MASKELYNE, 
became the driving force behind the Nautical Almanac and 
Astronomical Ephemeris, which first appeared in 1765, for 
the years 1767-9, and also contained lunar tables. Around 
the time Mayer calculated his tables, the requirement for 
accurate observing instruments was also fulfilled, with the 
development of the sextant, and later the reflecting circle. 

The lunar method was soon firmly established as a 
reliable way of determining longitude at sea. Cook was 
among the first to apply it, in New Zealand in 1769, using 
the first edition of the Nautical Almanac. For many years 
this method, which was strongly promoted by Maskelyne, 
competed with that of finding longitude by use of a 
chronometer. The Astronomer Royal strongly believed 
that the astronomical solution was the only accurate 
answer to the longitude question, and opposed the 
‘mechanical’ one. Eventually, however, the chronometer 
won, once the required horological technology had been 
developed, for it was immeasurably simpler to use than the 
method of lunar distances. Nevertheless, lunar distances 
remained in use throughout the nineteenth century, and 
until 1907 the necessary tables were published annually in 
the Nautical Almanac. The method was used at sea by those 
who could not afford an expensive chronometer, and also 
for checking the rate of chronometers before radio time 
signals were introduced around 1904. 

Once the solution for the longitude problem had been 
found, astronomers became less involved with naviga- 
tion. Astronomical ephemerides, however, remained in- 
dispensable to navigation, and the nautical almanacs that 
were annually published in various seafaring countries 
were of course compiled by astronomers. 

Meanwhile there had been parallel improvements 
in methods of determining latitude. In the eighteenth 
century the Dutch teacher of navigation, Cornelis Douwes, 
developed a method of double altitudes by which latitude 
could be found without restriction to the traditional noon 
observation. This method was improved in the nineteenth 
century, when position line navigation gradually also 
came into use. This is the name for various ways by 
which, through astronomical observation and subsequent 
calculation, a ship’s position could be found at almost 
any time of the day. Various methods were developed 
by which a single observation of the sun or a star 
would result in a position line being drawn on the 
chart. The intersection of several such lines, taken from 
different stars, provided an accurate position. Most of 
these methods were developed by merchant or naval 
seamen; but occasionally astronomers were involved, 
among them the Frenchman Yvon Villarceau who, in the 
1860s, helped develop a method which was named ‘La 
nouvelle navigation astronomique’. By the end of the 
century celestial navigation had reached the level at which 
it would remain until long after the Second World War. It 
was adapted for aviation, and seamen and aviators found 
their position by taking observations of the Sun, selected 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Navigation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars, the planets and (occasionally) of the Moon, and 
the use of a nautical almanac. Matters changed when 
satellite navigation was introduced, in the late 1970s. A 
position could then be obtained instantly, almost as often 
as one wished, and it was far more accurate than celestial 
navigation. In the 1980s and 1990s global positioning 
systems became cheaper and easier to obtain, and the 
use of satellites started to replace sextants and nautical 
almanacs. The first sign that astronomy and navigation 
will soon part company altogether came from the United 
States Naval Institute in Annapolis. There, in 1998, it was 
decided to abandon altogether the teaching of celestial 
navigation. Future American naval officers, when crossing 
an ocean, will have to rely entirely on satellites and 
computers. 


Bibliography 

Cotter C H 1968 A History of Nautical Astronomy (London: 
Hollis and Carter) 

Hourani G F 1951 Arab Seafaring in the Indian Ocean 
in Ancient and Early Medieval Times (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press) (2nd edn 1995) 

Lewis D 1972 We, the Navigators: The Ancient Art 
of Landfinding in the Pacific (Canberra: Australian 
National University Press) 

Schnall U 1975 Navigation der Wikinger: Nautische Probleme 
der Wikingerzeit im Spiegel der schriftlichen Quellen 
(Oldenburg and Hamburg: Gerhard Stalling) 

Taylor E G R 1956 The Haven-Finding Art: A History of 
Navigation from Odysseus to Captain Cook (London: 
Hollis and Carter) 

Williams J E D 1992 From Sails to Satellites. The Origin and 
Development of Navigational Science (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 


Willem F J Morzer Bruyns 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


n-Body Problem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


n-Body Problem 


Calculations involving the gravitational interaction of an 
arbitrary number (n, greater than two) of masses. The 
motion of two bodies is easily analyzed but there are 
no general solutions for three or more bodies interacting. 
Solutions do exist for particular cases but these take vast 
amounts of computation. Examples are the restricted 
three-body problem to determine the effect of Jupiter’s 
perturbations of the asteroids and the use of successive 
approximations of series solutions to sequentially add the 
effects of smaller and smaller perturbations for the motion 
of the Moon. Examples requiring the solution of the 
n-body problem include the motion of a space probe in 
the solar system and the orbits of stars within a cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NEAR Shoemaker 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NEAR Shoemaker 


The Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR 
Shoemaker) mission is the first mission to orbit one of the 
ASTEROIDS. NEAR, a spacecraft of NASA’s new Discovery 
program was launched successfully on 17 February 1996 
ona looping 3 yr trajectory to EROS, one of the NEAR-EARTH 
ASTEROIDS (NEAS). Starting on 14 February 2000, NEAR 
undertook a 1 yr investigation in orbit around Eros. On 
12 February 2001, the mission was terminated with a 
controlled descent to the surface in order to provide 
extremely high-resolution images. On its way to Eros the 
NEAR spacecraft passed within 1225 km of asteroid 253 
Mathilde on 27 June 1997. The spacecraft carried five 
science instruments: a multispectral imager (MSI), a 
near-infrared spectrometer (NIS), an x-ray and y-ray 
spectrometer (XGRS), a magnetometer (MAG), and a 
laser range finder (NLR). A sixth investigation consisted 
of analyzing the radio signals of the spacecraft telemetry 
to measure the effects of the gravitational attraction of 
the two asteroid targets in order to determine their mass- 
es. On its year-long orbital study of Eros, NEAR gave 
unprecedented views of the asteroid surface with the 
highest-resolution images obtained so far for a small 
body. 


Introduction 

The NEAR Shoemaker mission is the first space mission to 
an NEA. It was named in honor of the late Eugene M. 
Shoemaker, a pioneer in the study of asteroid and comet 
impacts on Earth and other planets. NEAs are a dynami- 
cally young population of objects having orbits close to the 
Earth’s. The general idea on the NEAs’ origin is that these 
objects are efficiently removed from other regions of the 
solar system by collisions and subsequent gravitational 
interactions with the planets on a time-scale of 10°-108 yr. 
Since the NEAs have unstable orbits, a continuous resup- 
ply of new objects is needed. In fact, some of them can 
come from the main belt and some can be derived from 
dead or dormant comets. It is believed that most METE- 
ORITES are collisional fragments of NEAs, but the mete- 
orites may be a biased and incomplete sample of the 
materials actually found in NEAs. About 2000 near-Earth 
objects (NEOs) of all sizes are currently known, but the 
entire population contains perhaps 1000 objects with 
diameters larger than 1 km. These objects, thought to be 
similar in many ways to the ancient planetesimal swarms 
that accreted to form the planets, are interesting and high- 
ly accessible targets for scientific research. They carry 
records of the solar system’s birth and the geological evo- 
lution of small bodies in the interplanetary region. Their 


Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous - Journey to Eros 


Fly by Earth at 
335 miles altitude 
& 28,497 mph 
1/23/98 


Launch 
2/17/96 


Eros Arrival 
2/14/00 


(433) Eros Orbit 


Figure 1. NEAR mission trajectory. Credit: NASA. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Deep Space 
Maneuver 1 


NEAR 
Trajectory 


Deep Space 
Maneuver 2 
1/3/99 


Fly by Asteroid Eros at — 
2,378 miles & 2,158 mph 
12/23/98 


99-0354-02 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


NEAR Shoemaker 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gallium arsenide 


1.5-m antenna solar panels 


100-Ib thruster 


Figure 2. Spacecraft configuration. The solar panels and the 
fixed high-gain antenna are mounted on the forward deck. The 
MAG is on the high-gain antenna feed. The other instruments 
are mounted around the spacecraft adapter. From left to right, 
they are MSI, NIS, NLR and XGRS. Credit: NASA. 


relations with comets, main belt asteroids and meteorites 
will clarify the links among these small bodies. Because 
collisions of NEOs with Earth pose a finite hazard to life, 
the exploration of these objects is particularly urgent. They 
may also serve as resources for use by future human 
exploration missions. 


Mission design 

NEAR was launched on a Delta II-7925 rocket into a 2 yr 
Earth-gravity assist trajectory (figure 1). The spacecraft 
passed, during its 23 month orbital loop around the Sun, 
close to the asteroid 253 Mathilde. NEAR carried out a 
close flyby (at 460 km) with the Earth on 22 January 1998 
to obtain a gravity assist to change the orbital inclination. 
NEAR was originally planned to rendezvous with Eros 
in January 1999, but it did not complete its rendezvous 
burn on schedule, and the ground controllers lost all con- 
tact with the spacecraft for 27 h. NEAR was recovered 
and performed a first flyby of Eros on 23 December 1998. 
NEAR executed another flyby of Eros on 14 February 
2000, and began its year-long orbital mission the same 
day. 


Spacecraft and instruments 

The NEAR spacecraft (figure 2) is a solar-powered, three- 
axis-stabilized spacecraft with a 1.7 m2 base. The mass is 
468 kg (805 kg including propellant). NEAR uses X-band 
telemetry to the NASA Deep Space Network. The space- 
craft structure is composed of aluminum honeycomb 
decks connected to eight aluminum honeycomb side 
panels. On the outside of the forward deck there are a 
fixed X-band high gain antenna of 1.5 m diameter, four 
fixed solar panels and the solar x-ray monitor system. 
The NIS has a scan mirror that allows it to look more 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


than 90° away from the common boresight. The space- 
craft carries a complement of six science instruments: 
MSI, NIS, XGRS, MAG and NLR, in addition to a radio 
science investigation. The MAG is mounted on top of the 
high-gain antenna feed where it is exposed to the mini- 
mum level of spacecraft-generated magnetic fields. The 
remaining instruments (MSI, NIS, NLR, XGRS) are all 
mounted on the outside of the aft deck. They are on fixed 
mounts and are co-aligned to view a common boresight 
direction. 


MSI 

MSI is a 537 pixel x 244 pixel charge-coupled device cam- 
era with five-element refractive telescope, radiation hard 
refractive optics. The telescope is f/3.4 with a 168 mm 
focal length. The imager provides a field of view of 2.25° 
x 2.9° with a pixel resolution of 95 nrad x 161 nrad. The 
spectral range covers from 400 to 1100 nm. A filter wheel 
has seven spectral filters (450, 550, 760, 900, 950, 1000, 
1050 nm). The main goal of the MSI was to determine the 
mineralogical and morphological characteristics of the 
surface at high spatial resolution. 


NIS 

NIS is a scanning spectrometer which covers the near- 
infrared wavelength region 800-2600 nm with 64 spectral 
channels. The NIS slit has two fields of view: 0.38° x 0.76° 
and 0.76° x 0.76°. A gold scan mirror that rotates over an 
angle of 140° controls the direction of viewing. Spectral 
images can be built up by a combination of spacecraft 
motion and the scan mirror. NIS has a gold calibration 
target that can be placed to provide a quantitative, in- 
flight spectral calibration. The InGaAs (indium-gallium 
arsenide) focal plane array does not require cooling to 
liquid nitrogen temperature to achieve a high signal-to- 
noise ratio. NIS was very important for studying the sur- 
face composition and, in particular, in determining the 
distribution and abundance of the asteroid surface min- 
erals, such as olivine and pyroxene. 


XGRS 

XGRS consists of two sensors: an x-ray fluorescence spec- 
trometer and a y-ray spectrometer. Redundant solar 
monitors are used to determine the incident solar x-ray 
spectrum. The x-ray fluorescence experiment uses three 
gas-filled proportional counters to cover x-rays in the 
energy range from 1 to 10 keV. The x-ray spectrometer 
detects the x-ray line emissions excited by solar x-rays 
from major elements of the surface. The y-ray spectrome- 
ter uses a body-mounted Nal scintillator and a BGO (bis- 
muth germanate) anticoincidence shield that define a 45° 
field of view. It detects characteristic y-rays in the 0.3-10 
MeV range emitted from specific elements in the surface. 
The XGRS is the primary experiment for determining 
surface/near-surface element composition of the aster- 
oid 433 Eros. In fact x-rays are emitted from the surface 
(less than a millimeter deep) while y-rays tend to probe 
deeper material, up to about 10 cm in depth. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


NEAR Shoemaker 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MAG 

MAG is a fluxgate magnetometer that uses ring core sen- 
sors made of highly magnetically permeable material. 
The sensor is mounted approximately 1 m from the main 
spacecraft bus, on the high-gain antenna feed support. 
MAG conducted the first close-up search for coherent 
body-wide magnetism at an asteroid. This search was 
motivated by the ambiguous evidence of magnetic sig- 
natures detected during the Galileo flybys of Gaspra and 
Ida. 


NLR 

NLR is an incoherent, direct-detection laser altimeter. 
NLR uses a chromium-neodymium-yttrium—aluminum 
garnet (Cr-Nd-YAG) solid-state laser and a compact 
reflecting telescope. The transmitter generates a brief 
laser impulse, and the instrument measures the time 
required for the light to reach the asteroid and return. It 
measured the distance from the spacecraft to the asteroid 
surface. 


Radio science 

There are no dedicated radio science (RS) instruments. 
The radio transponder allows the spacecraft’s position 
and velocity to be determined in inertial space. This X- 
band transponder operates at 8438 MHz and is capable 
of determining the spacecraft’s radial velocity to better 
than 0.1 mm s—! when the data are properly calibrated. 
The coherent X-band transponder on NEAR was used to 
conduct an RS investigation by measuring the Doppler 
shift due to the spacecraft radial velocity component rel- 
ative to the Earth. Accurate measurements of the 
Doppler shift allowed us to determine the gravity field 
and therefore the mass of the asteroid. Despite the NEAR 
mission being part of the Discovery program, which is 
synonymous with its being fast and cheap, the instru- 
ments were the results of many technical innovations. 
The x-ray instrument, the y-ray detector system, the NLR 
and the InGaAs focal plane array for NIS all flew in space 
for the first time. 


Scientific objectives 

The primary objectives of the NEAR Shoemaker mission 
were the rendezvous with an NEA, and to achieve orbit 
around it to conduct the first scientific exploration of an 
object of this population. NEAR flew past Eros on 14 
February 2000 at a closest approach distance of 300 km, 
continued the mission through several altitude orbits 
and spent 6 months in a 35 km orbit. The spacecraft 
passed successfully within 1200 km of the main belt 253 
Mathilde on 27 June 1997. The measurement objectives of 
the mission were to determine (1) the bulk properties 
(size, shape, mass, density, gravity field and spin orien- 
tation), (2) the surface properties (elemental and miner- 
alogical composition, geology, morphology, and texture), 
(3) the internal properties (search for heterogeneity and 
magnetic field) and (4) to search for possible satellites. 
All this information was important to characterize the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Figure 3. This mosaic image of Mathilde is constructed from 
four images acquired when NEAR was at a distance of 2400 km. 
Details as small as 380 m can be observed. The surface exhibits 
many large craters, including the deeply shadowed one at the 
center. Credit: NASA. 


physical and chemical properties of the target asteroids 
to study their mineralogical composition, to better 
understand the relationship between comets, asteroids 
and meteorites, and to improve the understanding of the 
boundary conditions of the processes that governed the 
formation and early evolution of the planets. 


Mathilde flyby 

On its way to Eros the NEAR spacecraft passed within 
1225 km of the asteroid 253 Mathilde on 27 June 1997 at 
a velocity of 9.9 km s“!. During the encounter with this C- 
type carbon-rich asteroid, NEAR was at 1.99 AU from the 
Sun, and because the solar panels were built to provide 
adequate power for the Eros rendezvous at closer solar 
distances, only the MSI was turned on. NEAR does not 
have a movable instrument platform and the whole 
spacecraft had to be turned to point the camera. NEAR 
took spectacular images and determined Mathilde’s 
mass to an accuracy of about 5%. The spacecraft 
approached Mathilde looking close to the direction of the 
Sun (at an approaching phase of about 140°). The imag- 
ing sequence started 5 min before closest approach, 
obtaining a resolution of about 500 m. The highest reso- 
lution (160 m) was obtained at a distance of 1225 km 
(closest approach), when the phase angle was close to 
90°. Then the imaging sequence continued for another 20 
min, obtaining images at a phase angle of about 40°. 
During this time multicolor images with the seven color 
filters were obtained. Mathilde was on about 330 of the 
534 MSI frames obtained. Because of the very slow rota- 
tional period of Mathilde (17.4 days), only roughly half 
of its surface was seen (figure 3) during the 25 min of the 
imaging coverage. The determined size dimensions sup- 
posing a triaxial ellipsoid shape are 66 km x 48 km x 46 
km with a volume of 78000 pee km3. On the 50% of the 
surface imaged by the spacecraft there are five craters 
with diameters between 19 and 33 km. A total of 91 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


NEAR Shoemaker 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


craters have been identified and 70 have a diameter larg- 
er than 0.6 km. Analysis of the Mathilde craters shows 
that those craters larger than 5 km exceed the empirical 
equilibrium densities seen elsewhere in the solar system 
and that the largest craters are near the geometric satura- 
tion limit (see CRATERS). The similarity of the densities of 
small craters on Mathilde and IDA suggests similar ages 
for the surfaces; in the case of Ida, the age has been esti- 
mated at 1-2 billion yr. The crater ages depend on the 
estimation of the collisional strengths of asteroids, but in 
the case of Mathilde the preservation of giant craters and 
the low density of the interiors do not allow us to esti- 
mate the asteroid’s collision age in a reliable way. The 
crater morphology and actual evidence of downslope 
movement on crater walls indicate that the surface of 
Mathilde is covered with regolith, indicating some reten- 
tion of ejecta produced during crater events. An ALBEDO 
between 0.035 and 0.050 has been determined. The 
NEAR colors (between 400 and 1100 nm) show similar 
results to those previously obtained by ground-based 
telescopic observations, matching the CM meteorite 
Murchison, and showing no variations of albedo. On the 
basis of the volume determined by images (78000 750"0 
km) and the mass determined by the RS instrument 
((1.024+ 0.058)x1017 kg), a mean density of 1.1-1.5 g cm-3 
has been determined. The density is less than half of that 
measured for CM meteorites, indicating a porous or 
underdense structure for the interior of Mathilde. Several 
hypotheses have been produced to explain this low den- 
sity, such as water ice in the interior, a rubble pile struc- 
ture, etc. It is also possible that C-type objects consist of 
unprocessed primitive material and the low density, in 
some sense, may be a primordial signature. About 200 
images were taken during the closest approach to cover 
the sky around Mathilde at a distance between 300 and 
600 km (10-20 radii) to search for possible satellites. The 
existence of a satellite could explain the low spin. No 
objects have been found down to a limit of 40 m across. 
The NEAR’s photometric observations at Mathilde con- 
firm that the ground-based methods used to determine 
the albedos and global photometric properties of distant 
asteroids are reliable. 


Main results on Eros 

Images from the MSI as well as near-infrared, x-ray, laser 
and radar measurements have been returned from 
NEAR during its orbital mission around Eros. MSI 
images were obtained at much higher resolution (~5 m/ 
pixel) than available for any other asteroids and at even 
higher resolutions (couple of cm/pixel) during landing 
descent. In addition, y-ray data were obtained at the 
landing site. 

The asteroid 433 Eros, discovered in 1898, was clas- 
sified as a typical S-type (silicate-rich) asteroid with a 
rotational period of 5.27 h but few details on its compo- 
sition were available from ground-based observations. 
Eros has shown an irregular, curved shape with dimen- 
sions of 34.4 km x 11.2 km x 11.2 km, slightly smaller than 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Figure 4. This image of 433 Eros was acquired on 12 February 
2000 by NEAR’s MSI. The largest depression, Himeros (about 9 
km across), is visible in the center top of Eros. Credit: NASA. 


previously estimated from the ground (figure 4). The 
images show chains of craters, numerous blocks, grooves 
and long ridges, e.g. the Rahe dorsum that extends for 
several kilometers across the surface. Almost all the fea- 
tures on Eros were named after famous historical and fic- 
tional lovers from a sampling of different cultures. The 
name of the largest feature, Himeros, comes from Greek 
mythology. Himeros, an attendant of the god Eros, per- 
sonifies the longing of love. 

These features, and other data, suggest that Eros is a 
consolidated body rather than an agglomerate of loosely 
bound, much smaller components. Huge tectonic fea- 
tures are found, which cannot occur in the absence of 
material strength. Steep slopes are found, where uncon- 
solidated material would be expected to slide off. Many 
craters have shapes that indicate the influence of materi- 
al strength in their formation, such as the square craters 
shown in figure 5. The rubble pile structure—e.g. an 
agglomerate of smaller component bodies bound mostly 
by gravity—has been inferred for many asteroids, but it 
does not apply to Eros. Its irregular, peanut shape hous- 
es a homogeneous internal structure. Although Eros is 
consolidated, the ubiquitous fabric of ridges and grooves 
suggests an extensively fractured interior. 


Composition 

The infrared spectrometer showed variations in the min- 
eral composition such as pyroxene, olivine and iron- 
bearing minerals. The first x-ray results revealed the 
presence of magnesium, iron, silicon and also aluminum 
and calcium. Both x-ray data and near-infrared spectra 
are most consistent with a primitive, largely undifferen- 
tiated composition for Eros. Eros, as an undifferentiated 
body, is made of material that has been scarcely altered 
since the beginning of the solar system, and probably 
since before the formation of the Earth. The relative pro- 
portions of rock-forming elements in Eros are similar to 
those found in the Sun itself. Eros was never subjected to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


NEAR Shoemaker 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Squared craters on Eros: an example of a structurally 
controlled feature consistent with Eros as a consolidated body. 
This image was taken on 26 April 2000, when NEAR Shoemaker 
was 50 km above the surface. Credit: NASA. 


the melting and the separation into compositionally dis- 
tinct layers that Earth, Mercury, Venus and Mars have all 
experienced (see DIFFERENTIATION). X-ray measurements 
probing the uppermost 100 um of surface material 
showed that abundances of Ca, Al, Mg, Fe and Si are con- 
sistent with compositions of either ordinary chondrites 
or certain primitive achondrites. However, there is a 
marked depletion of S compared with expectations for 
these meteorite types. This could be due either to 
removal of a small fraction of partial melt (which would 
imply that Eros is primitive achondritic) or to 
devolatilization of a thin surface layer by impacts. 

Using ground-based Doppler and range measure- 
ments—and by tracking surface landmarks—scientists 
have determined that the asteroid’s mass is (6.687 + 
0.003) x 1015 kg and density is 2.67 + 0.03 g cm-3, which is 
about the average density of Earth’s crust but is less than 
the average bulk density of ordinary chondritic mete- 
orites, indicating that bulk Eros is significantly porous 
and/or highly fractured, but not to the same extent as 
Mathilde. The density is relatively uniform throughout 
the asteroid. There is a small center-of-mass offset with 
respect to the center of the asteroid’s image that may 
indicate an underdense regolith layer of up to 100 m 
depth. 


Craters and rocks 

As with other asteroids, craters, almost certainly of 
impact origin, characterize the surface morphology of 
Eros. The three largest depressions are Himeros (about 9 
km across), Shoemaker (7.6 km) and Psyche (5.3 km). The 
presence of a large number of craters indicates a rather 
old object. Many large craters have bright albedo features 
on their interior walls. The morphological and spectral 
properties of these features, associated with steep slopes, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Figure 6. Details of Eros’ surface. From upper left to lower right, 
the images show Eros’ featured surface at increasing resolution. 
Blocks are ubiquitous on Eros. The image at upper left was 
taken on 27 January of a point 13.5 km away and shows a pond- 
ed deposit inside the crater; the one at the upper right was taken 
on 26 January from 11.1 km away. Signs of blocks partly buried 
by regolith are apparent. Each upper scene is about 550 m 
across. The image at bottom left was taken on 26 January from 
4.9 km away, and the bottom right image was taken on 28 
January from a similar distance. Each lower scene is about 230 
m across. Credit: NASA. 


are consistent with a darkened, space-weathered materi- 
al that slides down crater walls exposing brighter, less 
weathered underlying material. The space weathering 
process alters the asteroid regolith which, exposed to the 
interplanetary environment (micrometeorite impact, 
solar wind, cosmic rays,...), progressively changes color 
with time. The asteroid surface appears darker and its 
reflectance spectrum is redder (with much weaker 
absorption bands) than the spectrum of its constituent 
rocks. It has been known that such processes are respon- 
sible for altering the lunar regolith and data analyses 
from Galileo’s Ida encounter have provided convincing 
evidence that the space-weathering process is operating 
on Ida. However, thorough investigations of spectral 
properties of these processed materials suggest that 
space weathering affects the regoliths on Eros and the 
Moon differently, perhaps because of differences in grav- 
ity or location in the solar system. 

Flyover images have revealed a profusion of blocks 
up to 150 m across (see figure 6). These rocks are believed 
to have been produced as ejecta blocks from large craters. 
Most of these rocks were inside the Shoemaker crater, 
positioned near one end of the potato-shaped asteroid. 
The positions and orientations of the blocks indicate that 
most of them originated from the relatively young 
Shoemaker crater. Blocks have shapes ranging from 
angular to rounded and clodlike. Aprons of debris at the 
base of some of the larger blocks indicate that varying 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


NEAR Shoemaker 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


degrees of erosion exist at the surface of the asteroid, 
whose origin is not clear. 


Ponded deposits 

Another one of the big surprises scientists found from 
NEAR’s highest-resolution mapping is that Eros’ surface 
appears to have a global cover of regolith, i.e. surface 
dust and debris. It is estimated to be tens of meters in 
depth. The surface appears to be blanketed with a fine 
material, some of which has created flat deposits, partic- 
ularly in depressions, such as craters. These fine deposits 
appear to have been sorted from the upper portion of the 
asteroid’s regolith. These so-called ‘ponded’ deposits are 
intriguing because of their extremely smooth and flat 
surfaces. Their slightly bluish color may be attributed to 
the optical properties of submicrometer particles. The 
probe landed in one of these ponds, revealing its contents 
to be like dry cement (see figure 6). Ponds have not been 
seen on any other solar system objects and their origin is 
not clear. Some researchers hypothesized that the ponds 
formed after seismic shaking or by electrostatic levita- 
tion. For the latter effect, particles can build up photo- 
electric charges with long exposure to the Sun, and this 
charge might separate out finer particles. 

Eros has a stable rotation and an escape velocity that 
ranges from 3.1 to 17.2 m s-!, which would allow a base- 
ball thrown from its surface to leave forever. The acceler- 
ation of gravity on the surface of Eros varies from 2.3 to 
5.5 mm s~, thousands of times smaller than on Earth. A 
person who weighs 70 kg on Earth would weigh from 16 
to 39 g on Eros. 

No satellites down to a limiting size of 50 m have 
been observed. Another negative result was the lack of 
magnetization of Eros. Even the close look-up at the 
landing site showed no evidence for an intrinsic magnet- 
ic field, which is a surprising result. Indeed, most mete- 
orites, including chondrites, are much more magnetized 
than Eros. 


Conclusion 

NEAR provided the first ever close-up look at an asteroid 
and has increased drastically our knowledge of primitive 
bodies in the solar system. The spectacular images and 
surprising results that the spacecraft returned have start- 
ed to answer the many questions we had about Eros and 
asteroids but they also revealed new mysteries that scien- 
tists will explore for years to come. A lot of work remains 
to be done with the wealth of data returned by NEAR. 


Bibliography 

Bell J and Mitton J 2002 Asteroid Rendezvous: NEAR 
Shoemaker’s Adventures at Eros (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Cheng A F, et al 2001 Laser altimetry of small-scale fea- 
tures on 433 Eros from NEAR-Shoemaker Science 
292 488 

Cheng A F 2003 Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous: 
Mission Summary. Asteroid III book (pp. 351-366) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Robinson M S, Thomas P C, Veverka J, Murchie S and 
Carcich B 2001 The nature of ponded deposits on 
Eros Nature 413 396 

Thomas P C, Veverka J, Robinson M S and Murchie S 
2001 Shoemaker crater as the source of most ejecta 
blocks on the asteroid 433 Eros Nature 413 394 

Veverka J, et al 1997 NEAR’s flyby of Mathilde: the first 
look at a C-type asteroid Science 278 2109 

Veverka J, et al 2001 Imaging of small-scale features on 
433 Eros from NEAR: evidence for a complex 
regolith Science 292 484 

Veverka J, et al 2001 The landing of the NEAR-Shoemaker 
spacecraft on asteroid 433 Eros Nature 413 390 

Alain Doressoundiram 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Nearby Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nearby Groups of Galaxies 


Groups of galaxies are gravitationally bound aggregates 
of tens of galaxies, like the LocAL Group (LG), the home 
of our MILKY way GALAXY. What we call a ‘nearby’ group 
has to be sufficiently close such that the group can be 
studied, in terms of structure and contents, with similar 
(but of course always inferior) detail as the LG. This is 
roughly met by groups lying in the Local Supercluster—a 
flattened metagalactic structure of galaxies approximately 
120 million light-years (40 Mpc) across and centered 
on the virco cluster. The LG is in the outskirts of this 
system. There may be more than 100 groups in the 
local supercluster, but this is impossible to pin down 
exactly, as the identification, or definition, of a group gets 
increasingly difficult with increasing distance: faint group 
members are harder to detect at greater distances and there 
is increasing confusion due to projection effects (several 
groups can be projected on top of each other along the line 
of sight). 

Some of the more conspicuous nearby groups were 
undoubtedly known already to the early workers in 
extragalactic astronomy, like E Hubble and H Shapley. 
But it really was Gerard de Vaucouleurs, in the 1960s, 
who made the first successful attempt to disentangle 
the essential supergalactic systems (groups, clouds and 
clusters) from the sparse data on the distribution of nearby 
galaxies available at the time. His work is still a major 
reference in the field, and his nomenclature was largely 
adopted. 

Here we confine ourselves to the six groups of galaxies 
that are found within a distance of 10 Mpc (or 30 million 
light-years), excluding the LG. These most nearby groups 
are of course also the best-studied ones. They are described 
here one by one. Some of the groups, like the M81 Group 
and the Cen A Group, are fairly rich (several times the LG) 
and dense, with clear signs of galaxy interaction. The M101 
Group, on the other hand, is very poor: itis asa single giant 
galaxy with a swarm of dwarf satellites. Others still (CVn 
I and Sculptor) are even denied the title of a group, they 
are regions of slightly enhanced galaxy density without 
appreciable internal motion, called ‘clouds’. Finally, there 
isa large group (IC 342/Maffei) behind the dust absorption 
band of the Milky Way. Most of its fainter members 
may still be hidden from our view. But more surprising 
than the structural variety of the groups is perhaps their 
external interconnectedness. It seems that the groups 
are embedded in a coherent supergalactic structure. For 
example, the LG cannot strictly be separated from the 
Sculptor Cloud; and there may be other ‘cloudy’ bridges 
between the groups. 


The neighborhood of the Local Group 

The distribution of galaxies in the universe is highly non- 
uniform. On a scale of about 100 Mpc one finds a sponge- 
like network of ‘filaments’ and ‘sheets’ of galaxies, with 
rich CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES typically lying at the vertices of 
these structures. The sheets and filaments are dynamically 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cold (non-virialized) systems whose internal structure is 
probably fractal, with (still non-virialized) subsystems on 
any scale being called ‘clouds’. Embedded in the cold 
clouds of predominantly late-type galaxies (spraL and 
IRREGULAR GALAXIES) are—as ‘hot spots’—dynamically more 
virialized groups and loose clusters of galaxies. These, 
depending on density, may contain an appreciable fraction 
of early-type galaxies (ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES, SOs). 

Our home sheet is the Local Supercluster, whose 
primary hot spotis the loose Virgo cluster. Our home cloud 
is the ‘Coma-Sculptor Cloud’, and our home group is of 
course the Local Group (LG). The Coma-Sculptor Cloud is 
a cigar-shaped feature of length 15 Mpc, stretching from 
Sculptor in the anti-Virgo direction all the way to the Coma 
I Cluster, which is roughly in the direction of Virgo at 
D = 15 Mpc. Several known nearby groups belong, like 
the LG, to the greater environment of the Coma-Sculptor 
Cloud. Others seem to be connected with neighboring 
clouds. There are apparently no isolated groups. 

Due to this embedding of the groups and also their 
internal substructure, a clear-cut definition of even a 
nearby group (in fact, even the LG!) is very difficult 
to attain. A primary factor is the absolute magnitude 
down to which galaxies are recorded. At very faint levels 
every giant galaxy will have a swarm of bound dwarf 
companions and could therefore be regarded as a group 
of its own (like the Milky Way Galaxy with its MAGELLANIC 
CLOUDS and DWARF SPHEROIDAL Satellites). So the definition 
of a group is, to a large extent, a matter of convention. 


Groups within 10 Mpc distance 

Our most complete knowledge of the LG neighborhood is 
confined to objects less distant than 10 Mpc from the Milky 
Way Galaxy. Around 300 (mostly dwarf) galaxies are at 
present known to lie in this volume. Their sky distribution 
is shown in figure 1. The strong concentration of the 
galaxies towards the supergalactic plane, the symmetry 
plane of the local supercluster, is striking. Roughly 70% of 
the galaxies appear to be members of a small number of 
groups; but the remaining ‘field galaxies’ are unlikely to be 
isolated but will be members of the embedding cloud(s). 
Six groups, excluding the LG, are conventionally adopted. 
Two of these, Sculptor and CVn I, have from the beginning 
(i.e. from de Vaucouleurs’ pioneering study) been known 
to be rather clouds. As well-distinct nearby supergalactic 
structures they are treated here along with the other, real 
groups. 

Figure 2 shows the spatial distribution of the galaxies 
projected onto the supergalactic plane. The cloud nature of 
Scl and CVn I—by their large extension—is obvious; both 
appear as mere substructures of the Coma-Sculptor Cloud. 
Aclear separation between the LG and the Sculptor Cloud 
is almost impossible and perhaps also not physically 
meaningful. 

In the following the six major nearby groups and 
clouds are briefly described in some detail. The order is 
by supergalactic longitude. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nearby Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


go° 
60° 
i {\ SSB 
FEASTS Mil 30° 
Pacers 
A if w 
bee : a cvnl Wa IC 342 
an | le aa Bee ge NS | | 4 ae ig an : 
be | Veet [7 | TOSS Se ° 
Loe EPL LIM 8h; 
: SA _ tu ] Hy poe Le “30° 
A 
2702 \ 180°/ - 90° “60° 


-90° 


Figure 1. Sky distribution, in supergalactic coordinates, of all galaxies known within a distance of 10 Mpc. Approximate boundaries of 
the main groups in this volume, as well as the position of the Virgo Cluster, are indicated. The galactic zone of avoidance (|b| < 15°) is 
delineated with a heavy line. Large dots, giant galaxies (Mg > —18); small dots, dwarf galaxies (Mg < —18). 


Figure 2. Spatial distribution, projected onto the supergalactic 
plane, of all galaxies lying closer than 10 Mpc. The Milky Way 
Galaxy is at the center, with the zone of avoidance as indicated 
by the double sector (|b| < 15°). The orientation is also given by 
the direction to the Virgo Cluster. Approximate boundaries of 
the main groups and clouds, including the Local Group, are 
indicated. Large and small dots as in figure 1. This plot should 
not be taken as a true map, but rather as a schematic, as most 
distances used here are rough estimates only. 


IC 342/Maffei Group 

This galaxy group is named after the Italian astronomer 
Paolo Maffei who by chance, in the late 1960s, discovered 
two of its brightest members on a near-infrared-sensitive 
Schmidt plate. As it later turned out, Maffei discovered 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the tip of an iceberg whose extension and depth remain 
largely unexplored even today. What we now call the 
IC 342/Maffei Group is a fairly massive galaxy group at 
a distance of ~3.5 Mpc which, unfortunately, happens to 
lie entirely in the zone of avoidance of our Galaxy (see 
figure 1). This means that all of its member galaxies are 
very heavily obscured by dust absorption, with a dimming 
of up to 10 (!) magnitudes in the visual. Thus the 
galaxies are essentially invisible in the optical, but as dust 
extinction is less severe at longer wavelengths, they may be 
detected in the near-infrared and radio wave bands. One 
of the main constituents of the group, Dwingeloo 1, was 
discovered as late as 1994. Without galactic absorption, 
Dw 1 would indeed be one of the 10 largest spiral galaxies 
in the sky. 

The four brightest members of the group are IC 342 
(of Hubble type Scd), Maffei I (elliptical), Maffei II (SBb), 
and Dw 1 (SBb). In luminosity they are comparable to our 
Galaxy and M31. Nine further, fainter galaxies, mostly 
of the dwarf irregular type, add up to a total of 13 group 
members identified so far. Clearly, there must be many 
more dwarf members of the group still awaiting discovery. 
The mean distance of the group has been controversial 
until recently, which is not surprising given the enormous 
amount of dust absorption. Early estimates placed the 
group at ~2 Mpc distance, i.e. just barely beyond the 
classical confines of the LG. If true, this would have had 
strong consequences for the dynamics of the LG. The 
mean distance favored at present, 3 to 3.5 Mpc, is more 
comforting in this respect. However, the zone of avoidance 
of our Galaxy may harbor more surprises! 


M81 Group 
The M81 Group is the ‘classical’ nearby group in the 
Northern hemisphere, lying at high latitudes in Ursa Major 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nearby Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(the Big Dipper). Itis about two or three times as rich as the 
LG: around 40 members and possible members have been 
found so far down to a Mg © —11 (note that the faintest LG 
members have about —7). The mean distance of the group 
is ~4 Mpc. There are five giant members in the core region: 
M81, the well known Sb spiral galaxy; M82, equally well 
known for its peculiar, amorphous appearance which 
is caused by its STARBURST activity; NGC3077, again an 
amorphous; and the late spirals NGC 2976 (Sd) and IC 2574 
(Sm). These galaxies (with the exception of IC 2574) have 
been observed to be embedded in a huge, dynamically 
complex cloud of neutral hydrogen. This—and probably 
the starburst activity of M82 as well—must be taken as a 
sign of ongoing interaction. The core region of the group 
is indeed rather dense, which, by way of the MORPHOLOGY- 
DENSITY RELATION GALAXY, is also suggested by the presence of 
a fair number of bright DWARFELLIPTICALS. Notwithstanding, 
the majority of group members are faint dwarf irregulars 
which tend to lie more in the outskirts of the group. Very 
faint dwarf spheroidals of the type known in our vicinity 
have not yet been (but may soon be) detected around M81. 

Studies of the M81 Group are traditionally hampered 
by a strong mixing of Galactic and extragalactic features. 
Here the problem is not dust obscuration but the presence 
of Galactic ‘cirrus’ (REFLECTION NEBULAE) and HIGH-VELOCITY 
cLoups in the region. Deep optical exposures reveil a 
disturbing criss-cross of cirrus on top of the galaxies. There 
are low-surface brightness objects whose nature (Galactic 
versus extragalactic, i.e. cirrus versus dwarf M81 Group 
members) is still unclear. 


M101 Group 

The M101 Group is probably the poorest group of all 
(including our LG). The group is completely dominated 
by M101 itself, a beautiful giant Sc spiral at a distance of 
7 Mpc (which can be regarded as group distance). The 
second-ranked group member is already three magnitudes 
fainter than M101. Only about 12 members and possible 
members of the group are known to date, half of which 
lie very close to M101 and can therefore be considered 
as M101 satellites. With one exception they are all of the 
late spiral (Sd, Sm) and irregular (Im) type. One peculiar 
feature of the group is its LUMINOSITY FUNCTION OF GALAXIES: 
the population of very faint and diffuse dwarf galaxies 
(elliptical or irregular), which is so frequent elsewhere, 
is apparently simply missing here (the faintest member 
known is as bright as Mg ~ —14). Deep Schmidt searches 
and a recent blind radio survey have not resulted in a 
single new member of the group. However, it has to be 
acknowledged that the M101 group is the most distant one 
considered here. Future surveys of increased sensitivity 
will likely uncover the sought for exponential rise of the 
luminosity function. 


Canes Venatici (CVn) I Cloud 

What is called the Canes Venatici (CVn) I Cloud 
covers a huge area of sky. There is no obvious 
concentration of bright galaxies, which would be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


characteristic of a group, yet the roughly 30 or 40 spirals 
and irregulars in the area clearly belong together because 
they have similar velocities and (by implication) distances. 
G De Vaucouleurs rightly called the feature a cloud. The 
brightest (possible) cloud members are M64 in the South 
and M94 in the North, both Sab spirals of roughly 
Milky Way Galaxy luminosity. But these giants are well 
separated from each other and almost isolated. The 
most conspicuous (gravitationally bound?) clumping of 
galaxies in the cloud, near NGC 4214, involves about 
ten late-type spirals (Sd, Sm) and irregulars (Im) whose 
brightest members are not much brighter than the LARGE 
MAGELLANIC CLOUD. The lack of early-type galaxies is a clear 
sign of low galaxy density and is typical for clouds. 

From the velocities of CVn Imembers one has inferred 
a prolonged structure of the cloud, roughly aligned with 
our line of sight. Direct distance measurements based on 
the brightest resolved blue stars in CVn I irregulars give 
2.3 to 8 Mpc as distance range, i.e. depth of CVn I. 

The whole CVn region is very complex. There are 
several clouds and groups/clusters projected on top of 
each other. Slightly to the North (in the mean) there is 
the CVn II cloud which is more distant but may simply 
be the extension of CVn I backwards to greater distances, 
merging with the UMa cloud in the North and the Coma I 
cluster in the South. 


Centaurus A Group 

The Centaurus A (Cen A) Group is the Southern analog 
of the M81 Group. It is equally rich and dense, with 
40 members known at present, it is equally distant, with 
D = 4Mpce, and there are also a number of giant galaxies, 
some of which show signs of strong interaction. The 
‘padrone’ of the group is of course the famous peculiar 
galaxy and strong radio source Cen A (NGC 5128): it is the 
nearest giant elliptical, the nearest merger, and the nearest 
ACTIVE GALAXY (AGN) at the same time. 

The other giant group members (Mg > —18) are 
M83, a magnificent Sc spiral galaxy, NGC 4945 (also Sc), 
and NGC 5068 (SBc). Other bright members of the group 
include NGC 5102 (SO) and NGC 5253 (Im). About 20 
faint dwarf irregular and 10 dwarf elliptical members are 
known in addition. The group shows clear substructure, 
essentially a double structure (like the LG)—defined by 
the main clump around Cen A in the South, and a smaller 
subclump around M83 in the North. Both giant galaxies 
possess extended swarms of dwarf galaxy satellites. The 
dwarf ellipticals tend to be clustered around Cen A, 
as expected from the morphology-density relation of 
galaxies. The two hot spots of the group, the Cen A 
and M83 subclumps, are embedded in an oddly triangle- 
shaped cloud of dwarf irregulars. 


Sculptor (Scl) Cloud 

The Sculptor, or ‘South Polar’ Cloud (as it is sometimes 
called for its unique position in the southern sky), is the 
most nearby supergalactic structure beyond the LG. It is 
a prolate feature of length 3 Mpc and thickness 1 Mpc, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nearby Groups of Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which we see pole-on because we are situated near one 
of its ends. Owing to the low mean galaxy density, there 
are no real giant, Milky Way-type galaxies, but one finds 
a handful of bright late-type spirals (Sc, Sd) plus about 15 
fainter dwarf irregulars and 5 dwarf spheroidals. 

The 28 Scl members known at present seem to fall 
into three or four (gravitationally bound?) subclumps, 
centered on NGC 300 (Sc) and NGC55 (Sc) at the near 
side (D < 2 Mpc); NGC 247 (Sc) and NGC 253 (Sc, the 
most nearby starburst galaxy) at D ~ 2.7 Mpc; NGC 45 
(Scd) and NGC 59 (dwarf S0) at D > 4 Mpc; and possibly 
NGC 7793 (Sd) at D ~ 3 Mpc. But not all Scl members 
are companions to these bright main members; the dwarf 
irregulars are dispersed in the whole cloud. 

It has always been noted that the distribution of 
LG members is rather asymmetric, with an extended 
population of Southern dwarf members out to D ~ 
1.5 Mpc, in the direction of Sculptor (like WLM, Tucana, 
Pegasus, IC 5152, et al). It now appears that these galaxies 
form a perfect bridge to the Scl Cloud, which means that 
the LG can be regarded as the major subclump (hot spot) in 
an extended ‘Sculptor-LG Cloud’ of dimension 6 x 2 Mpc 
(see figure 2), which itself is part of the very large ‘Coma- 
Sculptor Cloud’. The consequences of this new picture for 
the dynamics of the Local Group have yet to be explored. 


Bibliography 

De Vaucouleurs G 1975 Nearby groups of galaxies Stars 
and Stellar Systems. XI. Galaxies and the Universe ed 
A Sandage, M Sandage and J Kristian (Chicago: 
Chicago University Press) p 552 

Karachentsev I 1996 The Local Group in comparison with 
other nearby groups of galaxies Astron. Astrophys. 305 
33 

Schmidt K-H and Boller T 1992 Nearby galaxies 
Astron. Nachr. 313 189 (part I), 329 (part II) 

Tully R B and Fisher J R 1987 Nearby Galaxies Atlas 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Bruno Binggeli 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Near-Earth Asteroids (NEAs) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Near-Earth Asteroids (NEAs) 


Asteroids whose orbits bring them into the inner solar sys- 
tem, by definition those with perihelion distances of less 
than 1.3 AU. They are also known as Earth-approaching 
asteroids; the term near-Earth object (NEO) is sometimes 
used in recognition that some of these objects are cometary 
in origin. There are three classes of NEA: Amor asteroids, 
Apollo asteroids and Aten asteroids. As of April 2000 the 
numbers known in each class were 450, 464 and 75, respec- 
tively. Amor asteroids are defined as those with a perihelion 
distance between 1.017 AU (the Earth’s aphelion distance) 
and 1.3 AU, and are named after the 1 km diameter aster- 
oid (1221) Amor. The largest are (1036) Ganymed, at 40 
km, and (433) Eros, at 35x13 km; Eros was the first to be 
found and is the most studied, having been orbited by the 
NEAR Shoemaker probe. Apollo asteroids are defined as 
those with a perihelion distance less than 1.017 AU and 
semi-major axis greater than 1 AU. They are named after 
the 1.5 km diameter asteroid (1862) Apollo; the largest is 
the 8 km diameter (1866) Sisyphus. These two groups are 
sometimes classified together as Apollo—Amor objects. Aten 
asteroids are defined as those whose semi-major axis is less 
than 1 AU, and are named after the 1 km diameter aster- 
oid 2062 Aten. The terms Mars-crossing, Earth-crossing and 
Venus-crossing are used for asteroids which intersect the 
orbit of a particular planet. 

Three-quarters of NEAs are thought to be asteroids 
perturbed inwards from the main asteroid belt. The 
mechanism is believed to be based on chaotic dynamics 
near the Kirkwood gap corresponding to a 3:1 resonance 
with Jupiter. The others are thought to be extinct comet 
nuclei. The lifetime of NEAs is probably not much more 
than 10 million years, their likely fate collision with one 
of the terrestrial planets or gravitational ejection from the 
inner solar system via a close encounter. That objects con- 
tinue to collide with terrestrial planets is evidenced by, 
for example, the geologically very recent Meteor Crater 
on Earth. In 1980 the Spacewatch Program was instituted 
to track down what have become known as potentially 
hazardous asteroids (PHAs): the closest-approaching 
NEAs that are considered to be large enough that an 
impact of one of them with Earth would endanger 
human civilization. Attempts to quantify the likelihood 
of future Earth impacts of PHAs suggest that a civiliza- 
tion-threatening event might occur once in several 
hundred thousand years—in other words, the odds of 
such an occurrence in a given century are several thou- 
sand to one. Estimates of the population of NEAs suggest 
that there may be 2000 bodies of 1 km or more, and 
100000 larger than 100 m. Objects of 100 m or less would 
cause local damage, as in the Tunguska event of 1908, 
while objects of around 10 m would burn up during their 
passage through the atmosphere. The closest recorded 
approach was 104700 km by the 9 m diameter 1994 XM}; 
for a 100 m plus object, the record is held by 1996 JA, (220 
m) at 448 800 km. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Two asteroids hit the news in 2002 because of their 
predicted close approach to the Earth. On 9 July 2002, 
MIT astronomers discovered 2002 NT7, a 2 km-wide 
space rock in a curious orbit. Unlike most asteroids, 
which circle the Sun in the plane of the planets, 2002 NT7 
follows a path that is tilted at 42°. It spends most of its 
time far above or below the rest of the solar system. 
Every 2.29 years, the asteroid plunges through the inner 
solar system not far from Earth’s orbit. Researchers cal- 
culated there was a chance that 2002 NT7 might hit our 
planet on 1 February 2019. This made headline news, 
worrying some members of the public. What was not 
reported was that the odds of impact are 1 in 250000. 

On 14 July, astronomers discovered 2002 NY40. This 
asteroid measures about 0.800 km across, and follows an 
orbit that ranges from the asteroid belt to the inner solar 
system. Its closest approach was on 18 August 2002, 
passing only 1.3 times farther away than the Moon, and 
being visible through binoculars. 

See also: KIRKWOOD GAPS, METEOR CRATER, NEAR SHOE- 
MAKER, TUNGUSKA EVENT. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Nebula 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nebula 


A diffuse aggregation of interstellar matter, mostly gas 
but often also containing dust grains. The name (Latin 
for ‘cloud’) is applied to a variety of objects, visible 
either because they are bright and seen against the 
dark background sky or because they are dark and 
seen in silhouette against a brighter background object. 
The term is also used to describe objects that have a 
similar appearance when observed in wavebands outside 
the visible region, in the infrared for example. Until 
the later 1800s, a ‘nebula’ was any fuzzy patch that 
telescopes were incapable of separating into component 
stars. Spectroscopy demonstrated that some were indeed 
gaseous, and not unresolvable star clusters; others, that 
were found to lie well outside the Milky Way, and 
subsequently found to be other galaxies, were originally 
referred to as ‘extragalactic nebulae’. 

Bright nebulae may be either emission nebulae or 
reflection nebulae. Emission nebulae are self-luminous. 
Most shine because the gas from which they are composed 
is ionized by ultraviolet radiation from a nearby star; 
examples are H II regions and planetary nebulae. Other 
mechanisms include synchrotron radiation, responsible 
for the emission of light from supernova remnants such 
as the Crab Nebula. Reflection nebulae are cool clouds of 
dust and gas; the dust scatters the light of nearby stars. 
An example is the nebulosity surrounding the stars of 
the Pleiades and other star clusters, and many reflection 
nebulae are the remnants of the interstellar matter from 
which a cluster of stars was born. Dark nebulae are 
also known as absorption nebulae: they absorb light 
from nearby sources. The light is re-emitted as infrared 
radiation or scattered, making the nebulae appear dark. A 
famous example is the Horsehead Nebula. 

Other uses of the term include protoplanetary nebula 
(also called a protoplanetary disk), for the cloud of matter 
around a newly formed star from which planets form 
(and also applied to an early stage in the development 
of a planetary nebula), and solar nebula, for the cloud of 
interstellar matter from which the Sun and the solar system 
formed. 


See: dark nebulae, gaseous nebulae, H II regions, 
interstellar matter, interstellar molecular clouds, planetary 
nebulae, reflection nebulae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Needham, Joseph (1900-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Needham, Joseph (1900-95) 


Historian of science, he was educated at Gonville and 
Caius College, Cambridge, where he eventually became 
Master. A friendship with three young Chinese researchers 
in Cambridge inspired him to learn Chinese, and during 
the Second World War he was posted to Chongqing, 
where he became acquainted with Chinese achievements 
in science and technology, and was astonished. This 
inspired him to devote the rest of his life to research his 
massive work on Science and Civilization in China, including 
its astronomical history. Amongst the high points were 
the first recorded observation of sunspots, invention of 
quantitative cartography and the Mercator projection, pre- 
discovery of the solar wind through observation of comet 
tails, invention of equatorially-mounted astronomical 
instruments (see KUO SHOU-CHING), and observation of 
novae, supernovae, comets, auroras, meteors and other 
phenomena. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neptune 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neptune 


Orbiting the Sun in 164.79 years, at a mean distance of 
30.06 AU (4.50x109 km), Neptune is the outermost of the 
four GIANT PLANETS. Its orbit is nearly circular (eccentrici- 
ty 0.009) and inclined to the Earth’s orbit plane by only 
1.77°. Neptune’s outer atmosphere, like those of the other 
giant planets, is composed predominantly of molecular 
hydrogen and helium with traces of methane (CH,). Yet 
Neptune, together with URANUS, forms a distinct subclass 
of ice-rich Jovian planets. Most of the planet’s mass is in 
the form of ‘ices’, primarily water, with possibly a ‘rock’ 
component. Despite its remoteness, Neptune’s atmos- 
phere is one of the most dynamically active in the outer 
solar system. Small bright clouds evolve with a timescale 
shorter than a day while large dark spots, slowly moving 
and oscillating in shape, persist for months. In the upper 
atmosphere, photolysis of methane initiates a suite of 
photochemical reactions producing heavier hydrocar- 
bons and condensation hazes. Neptune possesses a large 
and complex magnetic field, much like that on Uranus, 
with a magnetic dipole offset from the planet’s center 
and tilted by 47° to the spin axis. 


Basic data 

Table 1 presents basic physical data about Neptune, with 
some comparison with the Earth (@). Uranus and 
Neptune are similar in mass (14.53 and 17.14 Earth mass- 
es respectively), radius (25560 and 24760 km respective- 
ly), and mean density (1.27 and 1.64 g cm- respectively). 
They are smaller, less massive, and denser than the 
‘inner’ pair of giant planets, Jupiter and Saturn. 

The interior of the planet rotates in 16.11 h, slightly 
more rapidly than Uranus. This rotation is responsible 
for the slight flattening (or oblateness) of the planet of 
1.7%, the polar radius at 1 bar being 420 km smaller than 
the equatorial radius. 

The equatorial plane of Neptune is tilted by 29.6° to 
the orbit, causing significant seasonal variations of inso- 
lation. Neptune emits 2.6 times more energy than it 
absorbs from the Sun. Reflecting 29% of the incident 
sunlight, its equilibrium temperature, without any 
additional heat source, would be 46.7 K. The effective 
temperature, related to the total energy emitted by the 
planet, is significantly larger (59.3 K). The excess emis- 
sion is due to the presence of a substantial source of inter- 


Table 1. Neptune's physical parameters 
Mass 1.024x102 kg (17.14 ®) 


Equatorial radius at 1 bar 24 760 km (3.88 ®) 
Equatorial gravity at 1 bar 10.9 m s? (1.11 @) 
Oblateness 0.017 

Rotation period 16.11h (0.673 ®) 
Obliquity of rotation axis 29.6° 

Effective temperature 59.3 K 

Bolometric Bond albedo 0.29 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


nal heat, as is the case in Jupiter and Saturn but not in 
Uranus. This internal heat flow is thought to derive from 
cooling of Neptune’s hot interior. 


Discovery and exploration 

Neptune was first observed and identified as a planet in 
September 1846. The quest for Neptune actually began in 
1781 when WILLIAM HERSCHEL accidentally discovered 
Uranus. Soon after it was recognized as a planet, it 
became clear that Uranus’ orbit was ‘irregular’ and per- 
turbed by some unidentified influence. Around 1834 
came the first suggestions that a trans-Uranian planet 
might be causing the deviation from Uranus’ predicted 
orbit. Independently, two astronomers, JOHN COUCH 
ADAMS from Cambridge University Observatory and 
Urbain Jean JOSEPH LE VERRIER from Paris Observatory, 
tackled the problem of the irregularities in the motion of 
Uranus. By 1845, both ended with very consistent pre- 
dictions for the position of the disturbing planet. J C 
Adams wrote to JAMES CHALLIS, professor of astronomy, 
who in turn contacted George Airy, director of the ROYAL 
OBSERVATORY, GREENWICH, to conduct a search for the 
expected planet. His request, however, did not receive 
immediate attention. It was only in June 1846, on receiv- 
ing a memoir from Le Verrier, that Airy decided to 
launch into the search and asked Challis to urgently 
undertake the observations. With no good map of the rel- 
evant sky area, the survey went on very slowly and 
Challis soon lost faith. On 18 September 1846, Le Verrier 
decided to contact Johann Gottfried Galle from Berlin 
Observatory, asking him to search at the position he had 
predicted. On 23 September, the same day he received Le 
Verrier’s letter, JOHANN GALLE, assisted by a young stu- 
dent HEINRICH D’ARREST, turned the telescope to the 
expected position. On checking the stars in the field with 
the recent Berlin Academy’s Star Atlas, Galle and 
D’Arrest very soon noticed an object not in the catalog. 
The hunt was over: Neptune had been discovered with- 
in 1° of its calculated position. This brilliant discovery, 
based purely on calculations of orbital perturbations, 
marked the triumph of celestial mechanics. 

With a visual magnitude of 7.8, Neptune is too faint 
to be seen by the naked eye. Through a telescope, it 
appears as a bluish disk with an angular diameter of 2.3 
arcsec at mean opposition. Photographic spectroscopy 
at the beginning of the century allowed the detection of 
absorption bands of methane (CH,). The presence of 
hydrogen (H,), the main atmospheric constituent, was 
only demonstrated in 1952 for all the giant planets. In 
the 1970s, spectrophotometric observations of the visi- 
ble and near-infrared spectrum of Neptune yielded a 
first determination of the CH, abundance and of the 
pressure level of the upper haze layer. Emission bands 
from ethane (C,H,) and acetylene (C,H,) were also 
detected. The development of infrared astronomy 
allowed observers to measure the thermal radiation 
emitted by Neptune and to infer the existence of a large 
internal heat source. Numerous photometric observa- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tions in the near-infrared region established that the 
atmosphere of Neptune shows large temporal varia- 
tions on timescales from hours to years. Direct imaging 
of Neptune using sensitive CCD cameras revealed the 
presence of discrete clouds rotating in the prograde 
direction, i.e. in the same sense as the orbital revolution. 
In the early 1980s, the presence of rings around 
Neptune was sought through stellar OCCULTATION tech- 
niques. After a perplexing series of positive and nega- 
tive detections, a partial occultation was simultaneous- 
ly detected in 1984 by independent telescopes on one 
side of the planet only. As a result, the presence of ‘ring 
arcs’ around Neptune was proposed. 

But most of what we know about Neptune and its 
environment comes from the VOYAGER 2 flyby in August 
1989. Thousands of images were recorded and observa- 
tions were conducted in the visible, infrared, ultraviolet, 
and at centimeter wavelengths. Voyager images revealed 
the presence of prominent cloud systems including an 
Earth-sized ‘Great Dark Spot’. Wind speeds were mea- 
sured over most of the planet from tracking of cloud 
motions. The radio science experiment and ultraviolet 
solar occultations yielded vertical profiles of temperature 
at selected locations on the planet. The temperature field 
was mapped in the upper troposphere and lower stratos- 
phere. The mixing ratio of helium (He) was determined 
as well as the abundance profiles of the main hydrocar- 
bons in the stratosphere. The magnetic field experiment 
discovered a strong and complex magnetic field and an 
associated magnetosphere. The rotation period of the 
interior was determined from the periodicity of radio 
bursts emitted by Neptune. Broad and narrow rings cir- 
cling the planet were observed, with the outermost hav- 
ing optically thicker arc segments (see NEPTUNE: RINGS). 
Six new moons were discovered with diameters between 
50 and 400 km (see NEPTUNE: MINOR SATELLITES). Voyager’s 
observations of TRITON, Neptune’s largest satellite, 
revealed a geologically young surface, a covering of sea- 
sonal ice over the polar regions, a thin nitrogen (N,) 
atmosphere with traces of methane (CH,), and active 
geyser-like plumes. 

Our knowledge of Neptune’s atmosphere continued 
to grow beyond the wealth of data harvested by the 
Voyager spacecraft. Hubble Space Telescope (HST) imag- 
ing of Neptune in 1994-96 revealed changes in atmos- 
pheric features (dark spots and bright clouds) over that 
period. In addition, the pattern of zonal bands was dif- 
ferent from that at the time of the Voyager encounter. 
Observations at large radiotelescopes yielded detections 
of two new compounds (hydrogen cyanide HCN, and 
carbon monoxide CO) in the stratosphere of Neptune. In 
1997, the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) orbiting the 
Earth recorded the solar reflected and thermal emission 
spectra of Neptune. These high spectral resolution obser- 
vations led to the first detections of water vapor (H,O) 
and carbon dioxide (CO,) in the upper atmosphere; 
methyl! radicals (CH3), direct products of methane pho- 
tolysis, were also observed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Atmosphere 

Current theoretical models suggest that the atmosphere 
of Neptune extends down to about 3500 km below the 1 
bar level, up to a pressure of ~100 kbar, and overlies a 
denser fluid comprising mainly water, methane and 
ammonia. The mass of this outer layer, between 0.5 and 
1 Earth mass, is a small fraction of the total mass of 
Neptune, in contrast to the gas-rich JUPITER and SATURN. 
Only a tiny fraction of Neptune’s atmosphere, the upper 
100 bar, is accessible to observations by remote sensors. 


Thermal structure 
Figure 1 shows a mean vertical profile of temperature in 
Neptune’s atmosphere. In the lower atmosphere—the 
troposphere—the temperature increases with depth and 
with increasing pressure. The temperature minimum, 
located near the 0.1 bar level, defines the tropopause. 
This is the base of the stratosphere, where temperature 
increases with altitude. Above the stratosphere, at pres- 
sure levels less than ~0.1 microbar, lies the thermosphere. 
The temperature profile in the troposphere and 
stratosphere mostly results from a balance between heat- 
ing by the internal heat source and the sunlight absorbed 
and cooling by infrared thermal emission at wavelengths 
longer than ~7 um. Deeper than ~0.5 bar, the dominant 
energy transport mechanism is convection and the lapse 
rate follows an ‘adiabat’, i.e., 


dint oR 


dinp C, 

where T is temperature, p is pressure, C,, is the molar spe- 
cific heat of the atmosphere and R the gas constant. 
Above this level, the atmosphere is more transparent, 
radiation dominates over convection, and the lapse 
rate is smaller than the adiabatic one. The ‘temperature 
inversion’ above the 0.1 bar level is due to the presence 
of various heat sources in the stratosphere, including 
absorption of solar energy by methane gas and 
cloud/haze particules. 

Tropospheric temperatures on Neptune and Uranus 
are very similar despite Neptune’s greater remoteness. 
The reason for this is the presence of a large internal heat 


1 qo oor 
— 800 
i THERMOSPHERE + 700 
10° |- 4 


Figure 1. Vertical 

| profile of temperature 
108 ~ 40° on Neptune as a 
function of 
atmospheric pressure 
and altitude above 
the 1 bar level. The 
location of clouds or 
hazes derived from 
thermochemical 
oy | calculations and 

y < won le | assumed abundances 


10° + ~ 
ae ee 100 
TROPOSPHERE 


a — _29 Of constituents is 


age pba ty Se 


100 300 indicated. 


STRATOSPHERE 300 


s 


10° 


Pressure (bar) 
S 
(wx) epnIniy 


Hydrocarbon haze 


=1 
10" |-|TROPOPAUSE, 
( Se 
ice 
Has 
ice 


ES el 


200 
Temperature (K) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


flow on Neptune that nearly compensates for the reduc- 
tion in solar heating from Uranus to Neptune. The slope 
of the temperature profile shows a small change near 1.9 
bar. This corresponds to the region where methane con- 
denses and forms haze particles. The change in the lapse 
rate results from the release of latent heat that accompa- 
nies methane condensation. 

A striking feature of Neptune’s thermal structure is 
the existence of a relatively warm stratosphere. The tem- 
perature reaches ~120 K at the 1 mbar level, increasing 
up to 170-180 K in the range 10-0.3 ubar. This is higher 
than observed in Uranus’ stratosphere even though 
Neptune receives 60% less sunlight. This feature may be 
partly explained by the enhanced solar heating on 
Neptune due to the larger methane abundance and pos- 
sibly to stratospheric aerosols that are optically thicker. 
Radiative heating, however, seems to be insufficient to 
support the warm temperatures observed and an addi- 
tional non-radiative heating mechanism may be 
required. A possibility is the dissipation of GRAVITATIONAL 
WAVES propagating upward into the stratosphere. 

At the base of the thermosphere, the temperature 
rises steeply to reach ~750 K near 10-5ubar. This rise is 
caused by the downward transport of heat through mol- 
ecular conduction. The source(s) of this high-altitude 
heating is not yet clearly identified. Some proposed 
mechanisms are dissipation of gravity waves, electron 
precipitation from the magnetosphere, Joule heating gen- 
erated by the atmospheric motion in the magnetic field, 
or collision of supersonic jets generated by the auroral 
energy deposition (see AURORA). 


Composition 

Neptune’s atmosphere is primarily molecular hydrogen 
(H,) and helium (He). Hydrogen is present in both the 
symmetric (ortho) and antisymmetric (para) states—rela- 
tive to the spin of the two protons—with an ortho/para 
abundance ratio consistent with thermodynamic equilib- 
rium. The He mole fraction lies between 16 and 22%. The 
lower part of this range is compatible with the estimated 
abundance of He in the presolar nebula from which 
Neptune formed 4.6 billion years ago. Deuterium (D), the 
heavier isotope of hydrogen (H), is enriched in 
Neptune’s atmosphere. The D/H ratio is inferred to be 
0.5-1x10-4, higher than the value in the primordial solar 
gas. This enhancement is due to incorporation of deu- 
terium-rich ices during the formation of the planet (see 
below). 

Beyond these two light elements, Neptune’s observ- 
able atmosphere contains methane. The CH, mole frac- 
tion is about 2% in the 3 bar region. This corresponds to 
a ~30-fold carbon enhancement over the solar carbon-to- 
hydrogen ratio, thought to be representative of the preso- 
lar nebula (see discussion below). Absorption of sunlight 
at red wavelengths by methane is at least partly respon- 
sible for the bluish appearance of the planet. Above the 
1.9 bar level (T~93 K), the methane abundance is severe- 
ly depleted by condensation processes. The CH, abun- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


dance is then limited by the saturation law in the upper 
troposphere and decreases with altitude as temperature 
decreases. At the temperature minimum of ~53 K 
reached near 0.1 bar, the saturated CH, mole fraction is 
~1x10+. As methane is carried upward through this ‘cold 
trap’, one would expect the stratospheric mole fraction 
not to exceed 10~. This is not the case and a mixing ratio 
ten times larger (~10-3) is measured in the lower stratos- 
phere. This situation, contrasting with Uranus’ atmos- 
phere, is discussed later. 

A small amount of carbon is also in the form of car- 
bon monoxide (CO). The CO mixing ratio of about 1x10 
is orders of magnitude larger than expected from ther- 
mochemical equilibrium at Neptune’s cold observable 
levels. Its presence is very likely due to rapid convective 
transport from the deep hot interior where it is stable. 

Microwave measurements indicate that, in contrast 
to Jupiter and Saturn, ammonia (NH;) is severely deplet- 
ed in Neptune (and Uranus) down to at least the 30 bar 
pressure level. This is at first glance surprising, consider- 
ing the large enrichment observed in carbon and the fact 
that both C- and N-bearing ices were probably present in 
the planetesimals that accreted to form Neptune. The 
most likely explanation is that NH; is removed by chem- 
ical reaction with H,S (hydrogen sulfide) to form NH,SH 
crystals. This, however, requires that H,S is more abun- 
dant than NH;, and consequently that the S/N ratio is at 
least five times larger than in the Sun. If H,S is, like CHy, 
enriched by a factor of 30 relative to the solar abundance 
ratio while NH; has a solar abundance ratio, the NH,SH 
cloud should form near the 40 bar level and the corre- 
sponding gas profiles then provide a satisfactory inter- 
pretation of Neptune’s microwave spectrum. An alter- 
nate possibility is that most of the nitrogen is in the form 
of N, rather than NH3. 

Due to the low atmospheric temperatures, water 
(H,O) condenses out even deeper and cannot be probed 
by remote-sensing observations. 


Photochemistry 
In the upper stratosphere, methane undergoes photolysis 
due to ultraviolet radiation from both the Sun and the 
local interstellar medium. CH, photodissociation pro- 
duces CH, CH, and CH; radicals. Subsequent reaction 
schemes of various complexity yield a suite of hydrocar- 
bons, ethane (C,H) and acetylene (C,H;) being the most 
abundant. These compounds slowly diffuse down to the 
lower (colder) stratosphere, where they are lost by con- 
densation. Hydrocarbon ice particles eventually fall 
through the tropopause and the warmer troposphere, 
where they sublimate and are recycled into methane in 
the deep hot layers. The C,H, and C,H, mole fractions 
near the 0.1 mbar level are about 2x10 and 1x10” 
respectively. Neptune’s carbon cycle is illustrated in fig- 
ure 2. 

A tiny fraction of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is pre- 
sent in the stratosphere of Neptune. HCN production is 
initiated by the reaction between CH; radicals and N 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SOLAR + INTERSTELLAR METEOROIDS 
External 
UV FLUX 
E> 
TRITON 
HO 
rrr : 
ass | Horo, bopceaRno ae 
sxxcnon | —OHEMET CAR i 


Stratosphere 
DARKENED 
SUBLIMATION 
HYDROCARBON Pe P evOROCARBON) 
DIFFUSION ICES CHEMISTRY ios 


SEDIMENTATION 


SUBLIMATION 


feyDROCARRON 
GASES co 


CONVECTION \ 


Tans TARGE 
Internal ae pe oIRFUSION 


properties FRACTION 


CONVECTION 
Troposphere: 


+> 
i<q— 
3 


HEAT SOURCE 


Figure 2. Chemical and physical processes governing the carbon 
cycle on Neptune. Methane is delivered to the stratosphere by 
convective plumes that form near the condensation region in the 
troposphere. Methane photodissociation in the upper atmos- 
phere produces heavier hydrocarbons that diffuse downward to 
the lower stratosphere, where they condense out. Hydrocarbon 
ice particles then fall into the warmer troposphere, where they 
sublimate. Deeper in the atmosphere, hydrocarbon gases are 
pyrolized back to methane. 


atoms. Two possible sources of N atoms can be envis- 
aged: escape from Triton’s atmosphere, or galactic cos- 
mic ray impact on N, supplied from the deep interior via 
rapid vertical mixing. The HCN mole fraction is ~1x10-9 
in the mbar region; condensation near the 2-3 mbar level 
drastically reduces its abundance at greater depths. 

Neptune’s upper atmosphere also contains small 
amounts of oxygen-bearing compounds having an exter- 
nal origin: water vapor (H,O) and carbon dioxide (CO) 
with column densities of ~3 and 8x10!4 molecules /cm2 
respectively. Water probably originates from the continu- 
ous infall of interplanetary dust and meteoroids rich in 
water ice and silicates. The equivalent of a few liters of 
water falling every second on the planet is enough to 
explain the observed quantities. Carbon dioxide may 
have the same origin, as the infalling meteoroids proba- 
bly contain CO, ice. Another possible source is the reac- 
tion of CO, present in Neptune’s atmosphere, with OH 
radicals formed from the photolysis of H,O. 


Clouds and hazes 

Formation of condensation clouds in the troposphere of 
Neptune is expected, considering the atmospheric tem- 
perature profile and the presence of various volatile 
gases. From thermochemical modeling, a solution cloud 
of liquid water with dissolved H,S and NH; is predicted 
to form at pressure levels of one or a few hundred bars 
depending on the H,O abundance. Moving upward, a 
water ice cloud is expected around 50 bar (T~270 K). 
Near 40 bar (T~250 K), reaction of NH, and H,S produces 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


a cloud of NH,SH solid particles. The amount of H,S in 
excess of NH, thus not incorporated in the NH,SH 
cloud, is expected to condense out at ~5 bar (T~150 K). 
Methane, more volatile, forms the uppermost cloud layer 
in the troposphere with a condensation level at 1.5 bar 
(T~80 K). It should be noted that the precise location, 
thickness and vertical extent of the cloud layers in 
Neptune are in fact rather uncertain due to unknowns in 
the atmospheric composition and to the important role of 
cloud microphysics and dynamical motions (see CLOUDS 
IN PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). 

How does this cloud model correlate with actual 
observations of Neptune’s atmosphere? Near-infrared 
spectroscopy and imaging indicate that the bottom of the 
visible atmosphere is at a pressure of about 3-4 bar and 
thus probaby corresponds to the top of the optically thick 
H,S cloud. Above this background, the CH, cloud 
appears to be very thin on a planet average, with an opti- 
cal depth as low as ~0.05 in the red. Neptune’s atmos- 
phere is not, however, homogeneous and shows a variety 
of light and dark features (see below). Some prominent 
bright cloud features are likely made of CH, particles 
near the 1 bar level. Dark ovals (figure 3) can be inter- 
preted as holes in the H,S cloud cover. 

In the stratosphere, gases formed from CH, photo- 
chemistry in the microbar region are expected to con- 
dense out to form a haze as they diffuse downward. 
Ethane is probably the main constituent of the ‘photo- 
chemical’ haze (75% by mass), with the remainder pro- 
vided by heavier hydrocarbons. The haze top, associated 
with the condensation level, is located at 10-15 mbar. On 
a disk-average basis, the mean stratospheric haze burden 
is 1-2 ug cm. It is substantially lower in the equatorial 
region. This haze is composed of sub-micron particles 
which absorb the ultraviolet radiation from the Sun very 
efficiently. Linear cloud streaks observed by the Voyager 
spacecraft in the north have been associated with 
enhanced wisps of hydrocarbon ice particles. 


Dynamic meteorology 
Neptune has some of the fastest winds measured on any 
planet, despite the small amount of energy received from 
the Sun. The circulation pattern is characterized by large 
retrograde (westward) winds at the equator transitioning 
to prograde (eastward) winds poleward of ~50°. Wind 
speeds measured at the cloud tops vary from 400 m s~! at 
the equator to 250 m s-lat -70° latitude. The zonal wind 
structure is similar to that found on Uranus and much 
simpler than on Jupiter or Saturn. It corresponds to a 
nearly uniform value of the angular momentum for air 
parcels aloft over the planet. The observed zonal winds 
are probably forced by a system of symmetric zonal jets 
deeply rooted in the atmosphere (yet not in the interior). 
The amplitude of the winds decays with altitude because 
of eddy viscosity. 

The temperature field in the upper troposphere 
shows a maximum at the equator, minima at mid-lati- 
tudes (~50°) and a rise towards the poles. The latitudinal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Image of Neptune taken by the Voyager 2 spacecraft 
in August 1989. The Great Dark Spot (GDS) accompanied by 
cirrus-like clouds is prominent. The ‘Scooter’, a small bright 
cloud feature, is visible to the lower left. Below the Scooter lies 
another dark spot (DS2) with a bright core (NASA/JPL). 


contrast amounts to 3 K near 0.5 bar, 5 K at the 
tropopause (0.1 bar), and seems to persist in the stratos- 
phere (~10 K around 0.2 mbar). The mid-latitude cool 
regions are thought to result from upwelling causing adi- 
abatic expansion and cooling. Conversely, subsidence in 
the equatorial region and at the poles produces atmos- 
pheric heating and higher temperatures. The meridional 
velocities associated with this flow are small, of order 1 
cm s-!. The latitudinal temperature gradients and merid- 
ional circulation are in fact associated with the frictional 
damping of the zonal winds, as required by geostrophic 
balance. 

Neptune’s atmosphere is visually very active. The 
most remarkable feature revealed by the Voyager images 
is the Great Dark Spot (GDS), a dark oval spot in the 
southern hemisphere (Fig. 3). Between January and 
August 1989, the GDS moved steadily equatorward from 
-27 to -17° latitude. Like most of the Jovian vortices (see 
JUPITER: ATMOSPHERE), it is an anticyclone—a high-pres- 
sure center. The GDS was oscillating with an eight-day 
period, its latitudinal size varying between 12000 and 
18000 km and its longitudinal size between 5200 and 
7400 km. The source that was maintaining the GDS, 
given that some dissipation must occur, is unknown. 
Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in 
1994 showed that the GDS had disappeared or faded 
away. A second large dark spot (DS2) was present during 
the Voyager flyby at about -50° latitude. It was 5200 km 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


wide in longitude (~20°) and 2600 km high in latitude 
(~6°). This spot had a bright central core which was 
showing strong convective activity. The latitude and lon- 
gitude of DS2 oscillated with a 36-day period. In 1994 a 
new spot (GDS-94), similar in size to the GDS, was 
reported in the northern hemisphere at 31° latitude. It 
was still present at the same latitude eleven months later. 

The dark spots GDS and GDS-94 are accompanied 
by bright cloud features which are probably composed of 
condensed methane. The GDS companion, located at its 
southern border, changed markedly over several hours 
(figure 4). In 1995 the bright companion of GDS-94 was 
located northward of the spot whereas, in 1994, a large 
complex of cloud features extended from slightly north 
of the spot almost to the equator. Near -41° latitude, a 
bright long-lived feature, named ‘Scooter’, was observed 
by Voyager. Relatively small (3° in latitude and 7.5° in 
longitude), it consists of many bright east-west streaks 
which change on timescales of days; its shape itself 
varies from rectangular to triangular. The Scooter is 
located beneath the methane cloud top, deeper in the 
atmosphere than the bright companions of the GDSs. In 
addition, numerous transient bright features were 
observed by both Voyager and the HST. In particular, the 
South Polar Feature (SPF), between the latitudes —68° 
and —74°, was a very active region at the time of the 
Voyager encounter, showing many short-lived linear 
cloud features. 

A low-contrast zonal (banded) pattern is also visible 
on Neptune. The zonal structure present from 1994 to 


Figure 4. Cloud evolution in the region of the Great Dark Spot 
(GDS). Panels are separated by 18 hours. The bright cirrus-like 
clouds of Neptune change rapidly, forming and dissipating over 
periods of several to tens of hours (NASA/JPL). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1996 differed from that in 1989. The prominent dark band 
seen by Voyager between —40° and —-68° was weaker and 
narrower (—55° to —70°) in 1994-1996. 

Other evidence of activity is the presence of a signif- 
icant abundance of methane in the stratosphere, an order 
of magnitude larger than allowed from diffusion through 
the ‘cold trap’ (see above). It is thought that convective 
penetration conveys methane in the form of ice crystals 
from the condensation region in the troposphere (~1.5 
bar) upward to the lower stratosphere (~0.05 bar) where 
they can sublimate and contribute to enhancing the 
methane mixing ratio (figure 2). In ascending plumes 
(several km in diameter) uplifted above the cloud base or 
supersaturated in methane, buoyant moist convection 
could transport a significant fraction of the condensed 
methane at least up to the tropopause. Eddy diffusion 
may further raise the small CH, particles into the subli- 
mation region. The delivery of methane to the stratos- 
phere must be of the order of 1000 kg s-! to balance 
photochemical losses. 

Neptune is a surprisingly active planet considering 
the weakness of the solar energy available to power the 
wind system and meteorology. It is possible that the low 
level of insolation actually reduces the source of small- 
scale turbulence and thus of dissipation. The low fric- 
tional losses then allow strong zonal winds to build up 
and the large dark vortices to persist. 


Interior and formation 

At pressures higher than 100 kbar, beneath the hydrogen- 
rich envelope, lies the denser interior of Neptune. Most 
plausibly, it is mainly composed of the abundant ‘ices’ 
H,O, CH, and possibly NH3. Although these molecules 
are not in the solid state in Neptune’s interior, they are 
referred to as ‘ices’ because they were in the form of ice 
in the outer solar nebula, unlike hydrogen and helium. 
The interior probably includes a significant fraction of 
‘rocks’ (~25% by mass), mostly silicates and iron, and 
also some hydrogen and helium. The temperature 
increases inwards from 2000 K at 0.1 Mbar to 8000 K at 
the center, where the pressure is ~8 Mbar. There is no evi- 
dence for a differentiated rocky core at the center 
although a small one comprising at most 1 Earth mass is 
possible. 

Unlike Jupiter and Saturn, most of the mass in 
Neptune (80-90%) is in the form of ‘ice’ and ‘rock’ rather 
than hydrogen and helium. The reason lies in the way 
the giant planets formed. In the outskirts of the solar neb- 
ula, dynamical times were longer and the surface densi- 
ty of grains was smaller than closer to the Sun. Neptune 
thus took longer to accrete a massive core than did the 
other giant planets, and did not have the time to trap 
gravitationally a large envelope of gaseous hydrogen 
and helium before the nebula was dispersed (see SOLAR 
SYSTEM: FORMATION). It might even have been difficult to 
pull out the observed amount of hydrogen and helium 
directly from the nebula. These gases might then have 
been initially trapped in large ice-rich planetesimals and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


incorporated into Neptune in the final stages of plane- 
tary growth, after dispersal of the nebula. 

The enrichment of Neptune’s outer atmosphere in 
deuterium (D) and heavy elements (C, S...) is a signature 
of the pre-eminence of ices in the planet. It may originate 
from icy D-rich planetesimals accreted during the last 
stages of planetary formation, slowed down and dis- 
solved in the outer envelope before reaching the interior. 
It is also possible that the enrichment results from subse- 
quent mixing between the ice-rich interior and the outer 
hydrogen-helium atmosphere. 

Neptune’s intrinsic heat flow amounts to 0.4 W m-, 
that is 1.6 times the solar flux absorbed. Transport of heat 
from the hot interior by convection and radiation is 
responsible for this energy source and for cooling of the 
planet since its formation. This behavior contrasts with 
Uranus, for which only an upper limit of 0.09 W m? was 
derived, indicating that the deep-seated heat is no longer 
transported outwards. Part of the difference in heat flows 
is due to the fact that Uranus is closer to the Sun so that 
escape of internal heat is hampered. Compositional strat- 
ification, inhibiting convective transport, might also 
involve a larger fraction of the interior in Uranus than in 
Neptune. 

The magnetic field of Neptune (see below) is proba- 
bly due to convective motions deep in the interior. At the 
temperatures and pressures relevant to Neptune’s interi- 
or, a fluid of ice composition is partly ionized and disso- 
ciated and presents some electrical conductivity. 
Considering the velocities expected for convective 
motions, a dynamo can be sustained and magnetic field 
generated. It is possible that the dynamo-generating 
region is limited to a relatively thin shell (20% of the 
radius) where the conductivity is high enough, whilst 
convection is not inhibited by stable stratification. 


Magnetic field and plasma 

Neptune has a substantial magnetic field with a magnet- 
ic dipole tilted from the axis of rotation by 47° and offset 
0.55 Neptune radii (Ry) from the planet’s center (figure 
5). These characteristics are rather similar to those at 
Uranus. The dipole representation of the field is valid 
typically at distances of 3 to 20 Ry. Higher-order multi- 
pole moments are very significant and affect the magnet- 
ic field at shorter distances. The field magnitude at 1 Ry 
varies on the planet between 0.1 and 0.8 G; it is smaller in 
the northern hemisphere than in the southern. 

A consequence of the large tilt of the magnetic dipole 
moment is that the internal configuration of the magne- 
tosphere changes rapidly as the planet rotates in the solar 
wind. The interaction of the solar wind with Neptune’s 
magnetosphere produces a bow shock 35 Ry ahead of the 
planet. The solar wind plasma is slowed to subsonic 
speeds and traverses the turbulent magnetosheath as it 
flows around the magnetopause. The latter, located at 26 
Ry sunward from the planet, marks the outer boundary 
for the pre-eminence of Neptune’s own magnetic field. 
This transition region is a rotational discontinuity across 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ROTATION 
AXIS 


MAGNETIC 
EQUATOR_. 


Figure 5. Configuration of Neptune’s magnetic field lines. The 
magnetic field can be represented to first order by a dipole tilt- 
ed by 47° from the axis of rotation and offset 0.55 Neptune radii. 
(This figure is adapted from Ness N F, Acufia M H, Burlaga L F, 
Connerney J E P, Lepping R P and Neubauer F M 1989 Magnetic 
fields at Neptune Science 246 1473-8.) 


which the field direction changes by ~45°, allowing some 
plasma to flow from the magnetosheath to the magnetos- 
phere. The magnetotail extends to great distances in the 
anti-sunward direction. 

Triton is the main source of magnetospheric plasma. 
It is created as neutral atoms escape Triton’s thin atmos- 
phere and are ionized in the magnetosphere. Neptune’s 
atmosphere may also be a source of neutral H feeding the 
magnetospheric plasma. The dominant ions are N+ and 
H+. A maximum density of 2 ions/cm? was found by the 
Voyager spacecraft near closest approach to Neptune. 
This is the lowest plasma number density of all four 
giant planets. The N* ion temperature is about 100 eV 
(10° K) outside 5 Ry and 700 eV (8x10° K) near Neptune. 
The protons H+ have about the same thermal speed as 
the N+ ions and, being less massive, much smaller tem- 
peratures. 

Plasma is removed by transport mechanisms at the 
same rate it is produced from the Triton source. This 
transport is rapid and may occur through an organized 
convection system and/or by diffusion resulting from 
stochastic changes in the electric field. Such changes are 
induced by changes in the atmospheric winds which 
occur in the planet’s ionosphere. Plasma is eventually 
lost near the planet. Possible loss mechanisms are charge 
exchange within an extended neutral cloud around 
Neptune, ion precipitation into Neptune’s atmosphere, 
and absorption by rings as the charged particles move 
planetward. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Weak auroral emissions have been detected by 
Voyager on the night side of Neptune: a diffuse emission 
spanning a wide range of latitudes and a more localized 
emitting region near the south magnetic pole. It has 
been suggested that the diffuse emission originates from 
photoelectrons produced on the day side by the solar 
flux and transported to the night side along the magnet- 
ic field lines. Another possibility is the direct precipita- 
tion of trapped particles drifting around the planet into a 
region of anomalously low magnetic field. This region is 
very extended due to the particular geometry of 
Neptune’s magnetic field. The second emission is more 
consistent with usual auroral morphology and is proba- 
bly associated with precipitation of trapped particles 
near the south magnetic pole. An aurora is also expected 
to occur near the north pole. The total power radiated by 
these auroral processes is ~5x107 W. The much larger 
magnetospheric input power required to produce the 
auroras may derive from Neptune’s rotational energy or 
from the solar wind through relatively complex mecha- 
nisms. 

Weak radio emissions have been detected on 
Neptune, strikingly similar to those seen on Uranus. 
They appear strongly controlled by the rotation of the 
magnetic field and hardly influenced by solar wind vari- 
ations. Their analysis provides the most accurate mea- 
surement of Neptune’s interior rotation period (16 h 06m 
30 s). The mechanisms generating these emissions are not 
well understood. They may originate from regions of low 
plasma density (‘cavities’), or from continuous or impul- 
sive injection of energetic electrons in the auroral regions. 


Web update (30 April 2003) 

Three previously unknown moons of Neptune have been 
discovered, boosting the number of known satellites of 
the gas giant to eleven. These moons are the first to be 
discovered orbiting Neptune since the Voyager II flyby in 
1989, and the first discovered from a ground-based tele- 
scope since 1949. The new satellites were a challenge to 
detect because they are only about 30-40 km (18-24 mi) in 
size. Their small size and distance from the Sun prevent 
the satellites from shining any brighter than 25th magni- 
tude, about 100 million times fainter than can be seen 
with the unaided eye. To locate these new moons, an 
innovative technique was used with the 4.0-meter Blanco 
telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American 
Observatory, Chile, and the 3.6-meter Canada-France- 
Hawaii Telescope, Hawaii. Multiple exposures of the sky 
surrounding the planet Neptune were taken. After digi- 
tally tracking the motion of the planet as it moved across 
the sky, many frames were added together to boost the 
signal of any faint objects. Since the planet’s motion was 
tracked, stars showed up in the final combined image as 
streaks of light, while the moons accompanying the plan- 
et appeared as points of light. It now appears that each 
giant planet’s irregular satellite population is the result 
of an ancient collision between a former moon and a 
passing comet or asteroid. These collisional encounters 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


result in the ejection of parts of the original parent moon 
and the production of families of satellites. 


Bibliography 
Cruikshank D P (ed) and 78 collaborating authors 1995 
Neptune and Triton (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 
Lunine J 11993 The atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune 
Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 31 217-63 

Bruno Bézard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 8 


Neptune: Minor Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neptune: Minor Satellites 


All but one of Neptune’s minor satellites orbit within or 
just outside its ring system; the exception is the distant 
object Nereid. Some of them are better described as ‘mid- 
sized’ rather than ‘minor’, but are included under this 
heading as little is known of them. The inner four, with 
approximate diameters, are Naiad (60 km), Thalassa (80 
km), Despina (150 km) and Galatea (160 km). The first 
three lie within the Le Verrier ring, to which Despina 
appears to act as an inner shepherd. All four were dis- 
covered during the Voyager 2 flyby in 1989. Diameters of 
the other satellites are rather more certain. The next, 
Larissa (195 km), was discovered in 1981 by Harold 
Reitsema when it occulted a star; it acts as an inner shep- 
herd to the Adams ring. Proteus, orbiting outside the 
ring system at 118000 km, is Neptune’s second-largest 
satellite, after Triton. It is a rather blocky object, measur- 
ing about 435 by 400 km, and is a dark, heavily cratered 
body; the largest crater, named Pharos, is some 250 km 
across. It is another Voyager discovery. The outermost 
satellite, Nereid, orbiting at an average distance of 5.5 
million km, has the most eccentric orbit of any known 
planetary satellite, at 0.753. It was discovered in 1948 by 
Gerard Kuiper, and has a diameter of 340 km. It may be 
a captured object, or it may have been perturbed into this 
orbit when Triton was captured (if indeed it was). 


Web update (30 April 2003) 

Three previously unknown moons of Neptune have been 
discovered, boosting the number of known satellites of 
the gas giant to eleven. These moons are the first to be dis- 
covered orbiting Neptune since the Voyager II flyby in 
1989, and the first discovered from a ground-based tele- 
scope since 1949. The new satellites were a challenge to 
detect because they are only about 30-40 km (18-24 mi) in 
size. Their small size and distance from the Sun prevent 
the satellites from shining any brighter than 25th magni- 
tude, about 100 million times fainter than can be seen 
with the unaided eye. To locate these new moons, an 
innovative technique was used with the 4.0 m Blanco tele- 
scope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, 
Chile, and the 3.6 m Canada-France—Hawaii Telescope, 
Hawaii. Multiple exposures of the sky surrounding the 
planet Neptune were taken. After digitally tracking the 
motion of the planet as it moved across the sky, many 
frames were added together to boost the signal of any 
faint objects. Since the planet’s motion was tracked, stars 
showed up in the final combined image as streaks of light, 
while the moons accompanying the planet appeared as 
points of light. It now appears that each giant planet’s 
irregular satellite population is the result of an ancient 
collision between a former moon and a passing comet or 
asteroid. These collisional encounters result in the ejection 
of parts of the original parent moon and the production of 
families of satellites. 

See also: NEPTUNE: RINGS, TRITON. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Neptune: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neptune: Rings 


NEPTUNE, the outermost of the giant planets, has held out 
against ring observers the longest. This planet, 25000 km 
in radius, orbits at about four and a half billion km from 
the Sun. Its apparent diameter on the celestial sphere is a 
little larger than two arcseconds, which makes it difficult 
to detect by ground-based telescopes. Unknown until 25 
years ago, the rings of Neptune present key dynamical 
problems not currently understood. Indeed, the presence 
of puzzling arcs among the rings of Neptune place this 
ring system in a class by itself. In this article, we review 
the observations of Neptune’s rings attempting, as much 
as possible, to provide a description sufficiently broad that 
it may serve to elucidate the possible links between rings 
and satellites. 


Discovery 

Stellar OCCULTATIONS provide a powerful tool with which 
to detect and study the material surrounding a planet. 
An occultation observation consists of the measurement 
of the signal of a star as it approaches and then 
disappears behind the planet during its apparent motion 
on the celestial sphere. The variations in the strength 
of the signal as the star nears occultation provide 
information on the presence or absence of material 
around the planet. In July 1984, observations at three 
telescopes in the European Southern Observatory and 
the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory recorded 
the near-simultaneous occultation of a bright star by 
a semi-transparent object 15 km in width and at least 
100 km long. The dip was observed on one side 
indicating that Neptune had a ring, but also that it was 
incomplete! This discovery led NASA to reprogram 
observations of Neptune’s environment by the VOYAGER 
spacecraft, both to learn more about its ring system 
and also to avoid collisions with its circumplanetary 
material. Voyager 2 encountered Neptune in 1989 and 
its instruments succesfully collected data on Neptune’s 
rings and satellites. As the initial detection suggested, 
Neptune’s rings are ina class by themselves. The presence 
of ring-arcs has been particularly puzzling. Such arcs 
would not remain azimuthally limited for very long, 
unless actively confined, but would spread into a full 
ring. Many models have been proposed to account for the 
occurrence of ring arcs. Before reviewing these models, 
let us describe the surprising and varied morphology of 
Neptune’s rings. 


Morphology 

Neptune’s ring system comprises four dusty narrow rings, 
as well as low-optical-depth dust extended over broad 
regions. Because of the large fractional abundance of fine, 
micron-sized ‘dust’, the rings are best imaged at moderate 
to high phase angles (the angle formed by the line from the 
Sun to the ring and the line from the ring to the observer) 
such that the presence of fine material is brought out by 
DIFFRACTION. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Rings of Neptune. Mosaic of two images of Neptune’s 
rings taken by Voyager spacecraft in 1989. The two bright rings 
(the inner le Verrier and the outer Adams) are clearly visible. 
During this period, the bright ring arcs in the Adams ring are not 
visible. Other discrete structures are also visible like the 
innermost ring Galle and the broad ring extending from the le 
Verrier ring towards Adams. 


The Adams ring, which houses the ring arcs, is the 
outermost ring at a radius of 62932.57 + 0.02 km from 
Neptune. Also clearly visible in figure 1, is the narrow 
le Verrier ring at 53200 + 20 km. In between the two 
outer bright rings lies Lassell, a broad ring, ~ 4000 km, 
extending from the le Verrier ring and out to the narrow 
ring Arago. Further in, at an orbital radius of 42000 km, 
lies the broad ring (~ 2000 km) Galle. Finally, a very faint 
and narrow feature, not visible in figure 1, appears to orbit 
at the same distance as the satellite Galatea, ~ 980 km 
interior to the Adam’s ring. It is at present unknown 
whether or not a sheet of low optical depth extends from 
the innermost ring to the planet. 

The arcs in the Adams ring are the most striking 
example of longitudinal structure in Neptune’s rings, and 
perhaps of any PLANETARY RING (see also JUPITER: RINGS, SATURN: 
RINGS, URANUS: RINGS). In figure 2 the three arcs named 
Liberté, Egalité and Fraternité can be seen. They span a 
region of ~ 40 degrees in longitude. There are, in fact, 
at least two more arcs, and Egalité itself is composed 
of two distinct arcs. These features are believed to be 
clumps of material denser than the average ring particle 
density found in the Adams ring as a whole. The radially 
integrated brightness of the Adams ring is observed to 
vary by about a factor of three, from a maximum near and 
between the arcs toa minimum far from the arc region. The 
arcs themselves exhibit clumping and structure on scales 
< 10 degrees, perhaps resulting from the accumulation of 
dust-sized particles around bigger particles which might 
provide the source of the dust through collisions. 

Voyager’s passage through the ring plane was used 
to place an upper limit of < 30 km on the vertical extent 
of the le Verrier and Adams rings. The limit of the 
vertical extent for one of the arc regions is < 110 km. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neptune: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Neptune’s arcs from Voyager. The inner ring, le Verrier, 
is uniform, but the outer ring, Adams, contains three main arcs: 
from the bottom to the top, Liberté, Egalité and Fraternité. 


Further information about the vertical extent from Voyager 
measurements shows that dust is present throughout the 
Neptune system, even over Neptune’s north pole. 

From Voyager photometry the optical depth for the 
arcs (which measures the degree of extinction of light 
passing through them) is of the order of 0.1, consistent 
with occultation observations. For the narrow continuous 
rings the optical depths depend on the ring widths used 
to calculate them. The optical depth for the Adams ring 
is ~ 0.004, and for the le Verrier ring it is ~ 0.002. Both 
the Lassell and Galle rings are consistent with an optical 
depth of the order of ~ 0.0001. Uncertainties in the particle 
size distribution make it difficult to calculate dust fractions 
for any ring. The problem is exacerbated in the case 
of the Lassell and Galle rings by the large uncertainties 
in the low-phase-angle measurements of their scattering 
properties. Adopting large particle albedos and particle 
size distribution, the fraction of dust in the arcs, as well as 
the Adams and le Verrier rings, appears to be comparable 
with that observed for Saturn’s F ring. 

The physical and chemical nature of the ring particles 
is still unknown, mostly because the Voyager spacecraft 
did not carry a spectrometer, in particular one that 
operated in the infrared, which would have allowed 
detection of the absorption band of ices and silicates. 
However, the study of light diffused by the rings points 
to a composition of ‘dirty ice’, perhaps with silicates or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


some carbon bearing material. 


Arc confinement 

As soon as Neptune’s arcs were discovered, efforts were 
made to try to understand how they could be azimuthally 
confined. It was soon realized that unless actively ‘herded’ 
the arcs would spread into a complete ring in a matter 
of years. This is due to the differential rate of rotation 
around Neptune between those particles located in the 
inner part of the arc, and those located in the outer part; 
the latter, being more distant from Neptune, have slightly 
lower orbital velocities. While one may think that particle 
self-gravity could counteract this spread, the particles are 
too small for their gravity to play a significant role. 

One possible solution to this conundrum involves 
satellite confinement in the neighborhood of specific 
equilibrium locations named Lagrange points. A close 
analog to such a configuration exists elsewhere in the 
solar system: a family of asteroids, called the TROJAN 
ASTEROIDS, are kept in orbit around Jupiter’s Lagrange 
points; however, there is the important distinction that 
rings are a collisional system. Since Lagrange points 
correspond to local energy maxima, energy dissipation 
should lead to the eventual decay away from these 
locations. As a result, for this model to work it would 
require the presence of yet another (undiscovered) satellite 
to counteract the dissipation of energy due to inelastic 
collisions between ring particles. 

An alternative model uses two distinct resonances by 
one single satellite simultaneously at work to produce ring 
arcs. For a resonance to take place there needs to be a 
matching of frequencies; in this context, one possibility is 
for the orbital period of the ring particles and the satellite 
to be related by a ratio of integers (i.e. a given number of 
revolutions by the ring particles corresponds to an integer 
number of revolutions by the satellite). But for objects 
orbiting an oblate (slightly non-spherical) planet there are 
other possibilities; in sucha case, the frequency with which 
they move in and out of the orbital plane (if inclined), 
and in and out of their orbital radius (if eccentric), is 
distinct from the frequency with which they revolve 
around the planet. This gives rise to a panoply of possible 
resonance conditions which can result in complicated 
dynamical phenomena. A model that uses two different 
kinds of resonances to explain ring arcs received some 
support when analysis of Voyager data found that a 42:43 
eccentricity resonance with the satellite Galatea could be 
controlling the ring’s radial excursions. At the same 
time, its 42:43 inclination resonance (Galatea orbits at a 
slight inclination inside the Adams ring) could prevent 
the arc from spreading azimuthally. This model places 
very stringent conditions on the relative radial locations of 
the ring and the satellite resonance. While it is clear that 
Galatea plays a role in shaping the Adams ring, it remains 
uncertain whether its resonances are directly responsible 
for arc confinement. In the first place, the number and 
location of the arcs does not appear to correspond to what 
one would expect on the basis of the resonance model. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neptune: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Also, the first ground-based images of the arcs taken in 
1999 have improved the orbital parameters for this ring 
system, and have shown that the mean semi-major axis 
of the arcs is located outside the region defined by the 
corotation inclination resonance with Galatea. If true, this 
calls into question the role of Galatea in confining the arcs. 

It is possible that, taken together, the observations 
indicate that the presence of larger librating particles, 
which provide the source of (at most) partially confined 
dust, controls the locations of the ring arcs. Then dust 
escaping from the arcs would populate first the Adams 
ring (which might explain the variable opacity for this 
ring), and possibly other inner rings as well. This sourcing 
mechanism also appears to be a good candidate to explain 
the presence of dust at the same orbital radius occupied 
by Galatea. But this, as well as other models, will have 
to be tested by further observation and theory if we are to 
understand this challenging ring system. 


Conclusion 

Ever since rings were first discovered, and later identified 
as disks of material nowhere touching the planet, 
astronomers have grown accustomed to celestial objects 
which come in two basic shapes: spheres and disks. The 
prospect of coming to grips with a system distinct from 
these two groups, in that it breaks the azimuthal symmetry 
we have come to expect, is too tantalizing for astronomers 
to resist. Whether these structures have more to tell us 
with regard to the formation of satellites, the longevity of 
ring systems in general, or the nature and composition of 
solar system objects, it is clear that the sheer challenge of 
Neptune’s ring system will keep astronomers coming back 
for more for a long time to come. 


Bibliography 
Porco C et al 1998 Neptune’s ring system Neptune and Triton 


ed D Cruikshank (University of Arizona Press) pp 
703-804 


Ignacio Mosqueira and Francois Poulet 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutral Point 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neutral Point 


A point in space at which an object (strictly, a point 
mass—a theoretical particle with mass but no volume) 
would experience no net gravitational force. The simplest 
circumstance in which such a point could exist would be 
between two motionless masses, and it would lie on a line 
joining their centers of mass, closer to the larger mass. 
In the universe all masses are in motion relative to one 
another; in these circumstances neutral points do exist, but 
calculating their positions for the combined gravitational 
fields of a number of bodies is less straightforward. For 
the simplest case of two massive bodies in circular orbits 
around their center of mass, there are five neutral points, 
known as the Lagrangian points. These points remain 
fixed with respect to the two bodies. 


See: Lagrangian points. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrino Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neutrino Astronomy 


The Sun generates energy deep in its core by nuclear fusion 
processes. A SUPERNOVA (of type II) explodes and blows 
off the entire star by gravitational energy liberated when 
the central core collapses. These interesting phenomena of 
energy generation can never be observed with visible light 
or any other electromagnetic waves. The places where 
these phenomena take place are buried deep in dense 
material and the created heat is quickly thermalized before 
it comes out of the stellar surface. Relevant information is 
lost during thermal equilibration. 

Nevertheless, one may want to observationally probe 
the deep interior of the Sun or the gravitational collapse 
in the supernova core. One then has to find electrically 
neutral particles that have guaranteed straight travel paths 
in space. They obviously have to be produced in the 
regions and should not participate in thermal equilibration 
in order to bring the desired information. NEUTRINOS are 
exactly the particles that possess these features. Neutrinos 
are produced in nuclear processes, but interact with matter 
so weakly that as soon as they are created they leave the 
region with very nearly the speed of light as their mass is 
very small. 

The universe about 1 s after the big bang had a 
temperature as high as the core of a supernova, and 
light particles such as electrons and positrons were in 
thermal equilibrium. Cosmic expansion in the meantime 
cooled down the universe and lowered the energy density. 
Electrons and positrons then annihilated, disappeared and 
created photons and neutrinos. These relic neutrinos 
should exist in the present universe and have important 
information on the early universe. 

COSMIC RAYS are accelerated somewhere in our Galaxy 
or, if they are very energetic, perhaps in distant active 
galaxies, too. The extremely energetic cosmic rays (above 
10° eV) might even be produced by the decay of exotic 
objects created in the early universe and floating around 
even at the present, whose existence is conjectured in 
grand unified theories of elementary particles. Cosmic 
rays bend in galactic or intergalactic magnetic fields and 
cannot be traced back to their birthplaces. Even to this 
day, we do not know for sure where cosmic rays are 
actually born. Cosmic rays may interact with the medium 
surrounding the acceleration region and produce mesons, 
which decay in a short time and produce neutrinos. 
Neutrinos then escape freely to open space and may reach 
Earth with fruitful information. 

Neutrino astronomy is used to study the central 
engines of the Sun and supernova, to identify the origin 
of cosmic rays and to study the very early universe. 
Astronomical neutrinos can also be used as beams useful 
for investigating neutrino properties, such as mass and 
mixing. Indeed, only after having completed the study of 
neutrino properties can one begin real neutrino astronomy. 

Neutrinos from the Sun were first observed by R Davis 
Jr in the Homestake gold mine in the late 1960s. The 
experiment is still going on 30 yr after the initial operation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Since then four other experiments have joined this field 
and two more are coming into operation in the near future. 
All five experiments did observe solar neutrinos, thus 
confirming that the Sun is actually generating energy by 
nuclear fusion processes (See SOLAR INTERIOR: NEUTRINOS). The 
reason why this field is still so active even now is that 
there are serious discrepancies between observations and 
expectations. What the experiments observed is only 30- 
60% of what the standard solar model predicts. It would 
be shocking if the Sun were not working as theory tells 
us, because all life on Earth depends on stable solar heat 
generation. The so-called solar neutrino problem has not 
been completely solved. The most popular idea is not that 
the solar engine works with an efficiency of only 30-60% 
but that the ‘deficit’ of solar neutrinos is caused by neutrino 
oscillations, namely electron neutrinos that are produced 
in the Sun are converted to a different kind of neutrino, 
probably muon neutrinos, either in the solar interior or 
on the way to Earth. Muon neutrinos are impossible or 
difficult to observe, hence leading to an apparent deficit of 
solar neutrinos. This idea will be tested by new-generation 
experiments in the near future. 

23 February 1987 will be remembered as the day 
when a real instance of the gravitational collapse and the 
subsequent birth of a NEUTRON STAR were first observed 
with neutrinos. Two large water Cherenkov detectors, 
Kamiokande and IMB, observed 11 and eight neutrino 
events, respectively. Although the observed neutrinos 
were few, these observations beautifully demonstrated 
that the underlying theory of the explosion of a type II 
supernova is correct, namely that the explosion was 
initiated by the gravitational collapse and the total energy 
released was about 3 x 10° erg, which roughly corresponds 
to 500xsolar luminosity x 4.6 billion years. 

These are the only successful observations of 
astronomical neutrinos. Large under-ice and under-water 
detectors are being built and tested for high-energy cosmic 
ray neutrinos with energies above 10” eV. It will still 
take several more years before these neutrinos are first 
observed. 

There is absolutely no idea how to detect relic 
neutrinos born in the early universe. They are expected 
to have an average energy of only 0.000 17 eV which is too 
low to have a meaningful interaction probability (cross 
section) with matter. 


What neutrinos are 
Particle physics tells us that the ELEMENTARY PARTICLES (or 
simply called particles) are classified in four types: up- 
quark (u), down-quark (d), electron (e) and electron 
neutrino (v.). These particles are said to form a family. 
Three families have in fact been found in nature and hence 
there are 12 elementary particles altogether. They are listed 
in table 1. Three neutrino species are called the electron 
neutrino (ve), muon neutrino (v,), and tau neutrino (v;), 
corresponding to charged counterparts, electron (e), muon 
() and tau lepton (zt), respectively. 

The unique characteristics of neutrinos are as follows. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrino Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Table of elementary particles. Rows in the second 
column correspond to u-quark, d-quark, electron and electron 
neutrino. They are classified by electric charge. The columns 
correspond to families. Families are distinguished only by the 
masses of the particles. 


Charge 

2/3 u c t 
-1/3 ds b 
-1 e LL t 

0 Ve Vu Vr 


@ They are electrically neutral and fly straight even in the 
presence of magnetic fields. 


@ Only weak forces act on neutrinos and hence they have 
a great ability to penetrate matter. 


e Neutrinos are produced in high-temperature and high- 
density environments such as the center of stars and 
easily escape out of the star and reach Earth, bringing 
information on nuclear processes, energy generation etc 
at the production site. 


e Great penetrability in turn makes neutrino detection 
quite difficult and the target size of a detector should 
be as large as possible. 


Solar neutrinos 
According to the standard solar model the central 
temperature and density of the Sun are about 15 million 
kelvins (kT ~ 14 keV) and 150 g cm”, respectively. 
These conditions allow protons to overcome the repelling 
force from their positive charges (Coulomb barrier) and to 
initiate nuclear reactions. 

The following nuclear fusion processes are taking 
place in the Sun: 


ptp—dtet+y, (1) 

d+p— *Het+y (2) 

5He + °He —> *He + 2p (3) 

or 

5He + tHe —> 7Bet+y (4) 

"Bete —> 7Li+v, (5) 

"Be +p —> ®Bry (6) 

8B —> 5Be* +e* + ve. (7) 


The product 7Li further reacts with a proton and 
produces two “He. The product ®Be* immediately decays 
into two *He also. The reaction chain is now complete. 
One can see that electron neutrinos are produced by 
weak interactions (equation (1) and equation (5)) and 
a weak decay (equation (7)). These neutrinos are 
called pp neutrinos, ’Be neutrinos and °B neutrinos, 
respectively. pp and 8B neutrinos have continuous energy 
spectra approximately given as E?E.pe, where Ey, E. 
and p, are neutrino energy, positron energy and positron 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


momentum, respectively. E, is given by Q — E., where Q 
is the available energy for the neutrino+positron pair (Q 
value); the maximum E, are 0.42 MeV and 15 MeV for pp 
and ®B neutrinos, respectively. ’Be neutrinos have a line 
spectrum as equation (5) is a two-body reaction. Their 
energy is either 0.86 MeV (90%) or 0.38 MeV (10%). 

The standard solar model calculates the neutrino flux 
on Earth from each source. The fluxes obviously depend 
on the temperature, density of each chemical element, 
thermal conduction of the surrounding medium, etc. The 
calculated fluxes are enormous: 5.9+0.06 x 10! cm~* s-1, 
0.48 + 0.04 x 10° cm~? s“! and 5.2*4.2 x 10° cm~? s7! for 
pp, ’Be and °B neutrinos, respectively. 

Neutrinos have to be detected on Earth. In general 
particle detectors utilize particles’ electric charge to 
produce observable signals. Neutral particles such as 
neutrinos must first interact with target particles and 
produce charged particles that produce signals. For solar 
neutrinos the following reactions have been used: 


Ve t+e@> —> e@ + Ve (8) 
Ve + 7Cl —> ee + Ar (9) 
ve + Ga —> e + Ge. (10) 


In water Cherenkov experiments, Kamiokande and 
Super-Kamiokande (figure 1), water is the target material 
and electrons emitted from reaction (8) are detected. Only 
electrons with E, > 5.5 MeV are detected owing to 
severe background problems. Thus the experiment is 
sensitive only to 8B neutrinos. For the latter two reactions, 
the end products *’Ar and 7!Ge are extracted by the 
radiochemical technique and their numbers counted. The 
pioneering experiment Homestake used reaction (9) with 
a threshold energy of 0.81 MeV, and was thus sensitive to 
7Be and §B neutrinos, and subsequent SAGE and GALLEX 
experiments adopted reaction (10) with a threshold energy 
of 0.23 MeV, sensitive to pp, ’Be and §B neutrinos. 

The observational results are surprising. All five 
experiments observed much fewer neutrinos than what 
the standard solar model predicts. If one takes the ratio 
of observed to predicted numbers, the results were 0.27 + 
0.02, 0.42 + 0.06, 0.47 + 0.015, 0.56 + 0.06, 0.50 + 0.09 for 
Homestake, Kamiokande, Super-Kamiokande, GALLEX 
and SAGE, respectively. 

These serious discrepancies are called the solar 
neutrino problem and its solution has not been found 
yet, although neutrino oscillation is the most likely clue. 
Super-Kamiokande and coming experiments, SNO and 
BOREXINO, will challenge the problem further. 


Supermova neutrinos 
The theory of the type II supernova explosion can be 
summarized as follows. 

Astar with mass larger than 8Mo (solar mass) rapidly 
burns out its nuclear fuels. Nuclear ashes form an 
onionskin-like structure: the iron core at the center, then 
successively silicon, oxygen, neon, carbon, helium layers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrino Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


electronics hut 


DLE 


tole 


FS 


SU PE RKAM | OKAN DE INSTITUTE FOR COSMIC RAY RESEARCH UNIVERSITY OF TOKYO 


ean REE TRICE tar en ape 


i 


to ENTRANCE 
control room 


Mt. IKENOYAMA 


4 


NIKKEN SEKKE! 
Perera wert 


Figure 1. The Super-Kamiokande detector. It consists of inner and outer parts, each of which contains 32000 tons and 18 000 tons of 
pure water, surrounded by 11 200 50 cm diameter photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) and 1800 20 cm diameter PMTs, respectively. A 
charged particle moving faster than the speed of light in water emits blue light named after the discoverer P Cherenkov with an 
opening angle of about 42°. The energy, direction and type of the particle are determined by measuring the arrival time, intensity and 
ring pattern of the Cherenkov light. The Super-Kamiokande experiment discovered the finite mass of neutrinos from detailed 


observation of atmospheric neutrinos. 


and the hydrogen layer at the outermost layer. The central 
iron core becomes unstable when its mass exceeds the 
Chandrasekhar mass (~1.4Mj) and eventually collapses 
gravitationally. The central core is pressurized by falling 
matter, stiffened and bounces back. How large the bounce 
is depends on the elasticity or equation of state of the 
matter. The temperature rises above 100 billion kelvins 
(kT ~ 10 MeV) and the inverse beta decay process sets in: 


pte —> nt. (11) 


An electron neutrino burst of about 10 ms duration 
thus follows. It is called a neutronization burst and 
signals the real onset of the supernova explosion. A 
neutron-rich high-density ball forms which is called a 
proto-neutron star as it will later become a neutron star. 
The matter density is now above 10" g cm™, which is 
high enough that even neutrinos frequently interact 
with matter and are trapped inside. Neutrinos are in 
approximate thermal equilibrium with electrons, protons 
and neutrons. Neutrinos of all kinds now evaporate from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the surface of the neutron-rich, high-density sphere called 
a neutrinosphere, the radius of which was initially several 
tens of km. The underlying process for neutrino emission 
is the thermal one: 


et +e° > yf td; (12) 
where v; denotes any of the three neutrino species and 
p; its antineutrino. The hot proto-neutron star quickly 
cools down with a time scale of about 5 s, where neutrino 
and antineutrino pairs carry off thermal energy. Note 
that the proto-neutron star is still surrounded by thick 
falling matter. Hence heat cannot be transported by 
electromagnetic waves. The proto-neutron star shrinks 
to a radius of about 10 km and the density reaches 
~10" ¢ cm“, at which neutrons are packed in contact with 
each other. It has become a neutron star. The reverse shock 
produced at the core bounce, and probably the reheat 
caused by the outgoing neutrinos, later blow off the whole 
star and the explosion becomes optically visible, thus the 
birth of a supernova. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrino Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The total energy carried off by neutrinos, the 
luminosity, is equal to the gravitational potential of a 
neutron star with radius R ~ 10 km and mass M ~ 1.4Mo: 


3 GM? 
| 


ale 3 x 10° erg. (13) 


The neutrino energy distribution approximately 
follows the Fermi-—Dirac distribution, 


dN, > gmc E? 1 


de Can oplE = are 1D? 


where E, T and R are the neutrino energy, temperature 
and radius of the neutrinosphere, respectively. g(= 1) is 
the helicity weight of the neutrino, 1 the chemical potential 
and D the distance to the supernova. The average neutrino 
energy is, for zero chemical potential, (E) ~ 3.15kT. 

The cross sections satisfy the following inequalities: 
Oy, > Fig > Oy, = O, > G3, = O%,. Neutrinos with 
a smaller cross section can leave the proto-neutron star 
at the denser and deeper region where the temperature 
is higher. The average energy of those neutrinos is thus 
higher. According to calculations, (E,,) ~ 10 MeV, (Ej.) ~ 
15 MeV and (£,,,) ~ 20 MeV. It was also found that 
the luminosity is equipartitioned among neutrino species, 
Ly, SY Li, as Ly, & Li, =, Ly, x L5,- 

Neutrinos from SUPERNOVA 1987A (SN1987A) were 
observed using the following reactions which took place 
in the detector water: 


be+p—>e*t+n (15) 


vj+e > v+e— (16) 


where v; is any of the neutrino species, and emitted e* 
and e~ were detected. However, the cross section of 
equation (15) is almost 100 times larger than that of the 
elastic scattering (equation (16)), and hence almost all of 
the observed events were due to v,. There was no clear 
evidence that elastic-scattering events (equation (16)) had 
been detected. 

Assume that the radius of the neutrinosphere R is 
constant in time while its temperature T behaves like 
T = Ty exp(—t/4t). The factor 4 was introduced in order 
for the luminosity L, to take the form exp(—t/t), since the 
luminosity is proportional to T?. 

The combined Kamiokande and IMB data have been 
analyzed with an assumption that = 0 in equation (14). 
The results are 

kTy = 4.5°55 MeV 


CSA 25ts 
R= 2377 km 
L;, =5*% x 10” erg. 


L;, was calculated from 


dN 
L;, = | E——-4nD°dE,d 
fe / didee 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where D = 50 kpc was assumed and dN,,/dE dt is given 
by equation (14). 

Note that the total neutrino luminosity Lio is given 
as Liot = 6L;,, which leads to 


Liot = 3°53 x 10% erg. 


This is in excellent agreement with the naive expectation 
of equation (13). The cooling time t and the temperature 
T) are also quite reasonable. Thus the observations 
of SN1987A beautifully confirmed the basic part of the 
supernova theory. 

More data are obviously needed for further studies 
of the gravitational collapse. The new detector, SUPER 
KAMIOKANDE, Which is 15 times larger than Kamiokande, 
has been in operation since 1996. If the next supernova 
occurs at a distance of 10 kpc, i.e. close to the Galactic 
center, Super-Kamiokande will observe 4000 »v. events 
(by equation (15)) and about 250 elastic events (by 
equation (16)). Super-Kamiokande may be able to see 
about 10 neutronization-burst events, too. The only 
question is now when the next supernova will happen. 


High-energy cosmic ray neutrinos 

The CRAB NEBULA is known to emit gamma rays with 
energies larger than 10” eV (TeV gamma rays). The energy 
spectrum was measured and found to obey a power law 
with a spectral index close to 2. Detailed studies together 
with other wavelength data revealed that TeV gamma rays 
are most likely produced by the inverse Compton process, 
namely collision of high-energy electrons (<10" eV) with 
synchrotron photons or microwave background photons. 
Several other putsars have also been found as TeV gamma 
ray sources. Their production mechanism is considered 
to be the same as that for Crab Nebula. Nonthermal 
x-ray emission was found at the expanding shell of a 
supernova remnant SN1006. These x-rays are presumably 
synchrotron photons radiated by high-energy electrons 
(<10'8 eV). TeV gamma rays were indeed found coming 
exactly from the same shell, indicating again that the 
inverse Compton process is responsible. TeV gamma rays 
are also coming from extragalactic objects, BL Lac sources 
Mkn421 (redshift 0.031) and Mkn501 (redshift 0.032). Their 
production mechanism is not clear but is presumably the 
inverse Compton process, too. 

Hence acceleration sites of high-energy electrons have 
been identified. However, where are protons and other 
nuclei then accelerated? We know that they are dominant 
components of cosmic rays and moreover we know that 
their energies extend beyond 10° eV. The acceleration site 
may be surrounded by intense photons or toa lesser extent 
a thick gas, i.e. optically thick, so that TeV gamma rays 
may have been absorbed before escaping the acceleration 
region. If this is the case, one expects the site to be a strong 
source of neutrinos, whose energies may extend as high as 
10'” eV. Production processes of neutrinos are 


pty—a7*4+n (17) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrino Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ht —> wt Vy (18) 
pw —> vd, t+e* + ve (19) 


where y is an ambient photon. Muon neutrinos and 
electron neutrinos are produced with a ratio of 2 to 1. 

The flux of these neutrinos is estimated by assuming 
that observed TeV gamma rays are produced not by the 
inverse Compton process but by the nuclear processes, 
namely, corresponding to equation (17), 


pty—r°+p (20) 


wo —>yty. (21) 


By estimating somehow the optical thickness, one can 
relate the gamma ray flux to that of neutrinos. These 
estimates are, however, quite uncertain owing to the 
poorly known optical thickness. The energy spectrum is 
expected to obey a power law with a spectral index of 
about 2, the same as for gamma rays. The estimated fluxes 
of v,+d,, F,, are, for E, > 1TeV, F, ~ 10°’ cms"! TeV! 
for AGN 3C279 and F, ~ 10-"! cm-~? s~! TeV-! for Mkn421 
and 3C273. These numbers may be quite optimistic and 
could be smaller by several orders of magnitude. 

Muon neutrinos from astronomical objects interact 
with rock in Earth and produce muons: 


Vu tN moter. (22) 


Detection of astronomical muon neutrinos adopts this 
reaction. A large-area muon detector is deployed deep 
underground in order to reduce the atmospheric muon 
background. Rock beneath the detector is the target. A 
high-energy muon produced in the rock travels a long 
distance upward, approximately E,,/(2 MeV) g cm”, 
reaches the detector and is detected. Downward-going 
muons are completely swamped by atmospheric muons 
and cannot be detected. In order to overcome the 
huge background of atmospheric neutrinos, which are 
produced by cosmic rays in the atmosphere associated 
with atmospheric muons, a high-energy threshold must 
be set, say 1 TeV-100 TeV, depending on what objects are 
to be observed. A rough estimate of the observed rate is 


0.5 events(E, >1TeV) F,(= 1 TeV) 


N, ; 
10-2 cm? s-! 


bh 


2 
105 m? yr a 


The largest detector under test is the AMANDA-B 
(figure 2) detector which is located 1500 m under Antarctic 
ice. The detector has cylindrical shape with 120 m radius 
and 400 m height. Cherenkov light emitted in the ice is 
detected with a number of photomultipliers. AMANDA- 
B may still be too small. There is a plan to enlarge it to a 
size of 1 km’, and underwater projects of similar size are 
being seriously considered. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Depth 
—— surface 
—— 50m snow layer 
60m 
Soe 
—— 810m 
—— 1000m 
200 m 
=< 120m 
—=__ 


— 150m 


—L 2350 m ‘7 


AMANDA as of 1998 
Eiffel Tower as comparison 


zoomed in on 
AMANDA-A (top) 
AMANDA-B10 (bottom) 


zoomed in on one 


(true scaling) optical module (OM) 


Figure 2. The AMANDA-B detector. A number of optical 
modules (20 cm diameter photomultipliers) are deployed within 
a volume 120 m in diameter and 400 m high. A high-energy 
upward-going muon produced by a cosmic ray muon neutrino 
in the rock passes through the region and emits Cherenkov light 
which is detected by optical modules. The direction and energy 
are obtained by measuring arrival time and intensity of the 
Cherenkov light. It could be extended to a km? detector. 


Relic neutrinos 

In the hot and dense universe up to about 1 s after the big 
bang, electrons and neutrinos were in thermal equilibrium. 
They were interacting each other, 


e+e. <> 0; +0; (24) 


where v; is a neutrino of any kind. 

Surprisingly, the environment at that time was much 
more modest than that in the core of the supernova. The 
temperature was 10 billion kelvins (kT ~ 1 MeV), which 
is about 5 times lower, and the energy (or mass) density 
was almost 9 orders of magnitude less than those of a hot 
neutron star. 

The universe expanded rapidly and hence cooled 
down (see UNIVERSE: THERMAL HISTORY). The thermal equi- 
librium could not hold and eventually the reaction from 
right to left of equation (24) ceased. Neutrinos were left 
behind in the universe and their energies became lower 
and lower until the present day. Electrons and positrons 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrino Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rapidly annihilated into two photons whose energies were 
also redshifted to a wavelength of a few mm. These pho- 
tons are called the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND (CMB) 
and detailed studies are being carried out. Relic neutrinos 
and photons obey Fermi—Dirac and Planck distributions, 
respectively. The number densities are 


6) 


= 3 
my = 1555s kD) (25) 
3 
ny = 2 (kT, (26) 


where ¢(3)/2* = 0.121.... The neutrino number density 
corresponds to one species only. There is a simple relation 
between the two temperatures, 


T; a\ie 
7 =(3) = 0.714. (27) 


The CMB temperature was measured to be 2.74 K. 
Hence n, = 420 cm~? which is in good agreement with 
measurement. The neutrino temperature and number 
density per species should therefore be 1.96 K (0.000 17 eV) 
and n, = 115 cm“, respectively. 

These relic neutrinos must exist in the present 
universe. Recently the Super-Kamiokande experiment 
has discovered the finite neutrino mass from a detailed 
study of atmospheric neutrinos. However, the experiment 
is sensitive only to the mass-squared difference, not to 
each mass value. The measured value is Am? (= m7, — 
m,) = (1.5-6) x 107° eV*. From this the tau neutrino 
mass is constrained as m,, > 0.04 eV, which is much 
larger than the temperature 0.000 17 eV. Thus the relic tau 
neutrinos should be nonrelativistic. Their velocity is about 
300 km s~! which is determined from other astronomical 
factors such as the Earth’s motion in the Galaxy. 

The neutrino mass could be as large as a few eV. 
If this is the case, the relic neutrinos are the hot dark 
matter component and could significantly contribute to 
the energy density of the universe. 

There is at present no idea how to detect such low- 
energy neutrinos. 


Bibliography 
General review: 


Totsuka Y 1992 Rep. Prog. Phys. 55 377 
High-energy cosmic ray neutrinos: 

Gaisser T K, Halzen F and Stanev T 1995 Phys. Rep. 258 173 
Solar neutrinos and SN1987A: 


Bahcall J N 1989 Neutrino Astrophysics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Neutrino physics and neutrino astronomy: 
Winter K (ed) 1991 Neutrino Physics (Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Recent results on neutrino physics and astrophysics: 


Suzuki Y (ed) 1999 Proc. 18th Int. Conf. on Neutrino Physics 
and Astrophysics (Amsterdam: Elsevier) 


Yoji Totsuka 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neutrinos 


Neutrinos are electrically neutral ELEMENTARY PARTICLES 
which experience only the weak nuclear force and 
gravity. Their existence was introduced as a hypothesis by 
Wolfgang Pauli in 1930 to explain the apparent violation of 
energy conservation in radioactive beta decay. Chadwick 
had discovered in 1914 that the energy spectrum of 
electrons emitted in beta decay was not monoenergetic but 
continuous, from zero to the maximum energy allowed 
by the energy balance. Pauli’s hypothesis assumed 
that a neutral particle was emitted together with the 
electron. This neutral particle had never been observed; 
a calculation of its interaction probability with matter by 
Bethe and Peierls gave a mean free path for absorption 
of thousands of light years in lead. In the opinion of 
physicists in the 1930s it was therefore undetectable, a 
ghost. 

ENRICO FERMI Cast these ideas of Pauli into a theory of 
beta decay: he introduced a revolutionary new concept in 
his theory by treating the electron and the neutrino, both 
spin 1/2 particles, as fields which are created together, in 
analogy to the creation of a photon in nuclear transitions. 
Later this was called the Fermi interaction. The agreement 
between calculated and measured beta spectra and decay 
rates was excellent. The mass of the neutrino was 
apparently smaller than the electron mass. 

Does the neutrino exist as a particle? It took nearly 
30 yr to answer this question. The problem of the 
small absorption cross-section required a high-intensity 
neutrino source and a very massive detector which would 
identify the absorption of the antineutrino by a proton, 
Le. bop — e'n, producing a positron and a neutron. 
After World War II high-power nuclear reactors were 
available which produce a flux of 10'° }. cm™ s~! at 
a distance of 10 m from the core. Reines, Cowan and 
collaborators built a detector of 200 ton target mass 
which detected the annihilation of the positron into 
two prompt 0.5 MeV photons and the capture of the 
neutron in cadmium dissolved in water, producing several 
photons after a characteristic delay of about 5 ys. This 
signature discriminated against background induced by 
NEUTRONS, PHOTONS and cosmic RAYS. The measured capture 
rate agreed with the theoretical cross-section within the 
rather large uncertainty of the calculated antineutrino 
flux. In 1956 they obtained evidence that the neutrino is 
indeed a particle. Five years later, in 1962, Ledermann, 
Schwartz and Steinberger discovered a second neutrino, 
the muon-neutrino. They invented a new research tool, a 
neutrino beam, by intercepting the 20 GeV proton beam of 
the Brookhaven National Laboratory Synchrotron with a 
target plate. Positively charged pions are selected by the 
fringing field of the accelerator; in flight a fraction of a 
few per cent decay into a muon and a neutrino before they 
are absorbed by a 5.5 m thick steel wall. The muons were 
brought to rest by ionization loss in the steel wall. Only 
neutrinos pass through the wall. They interact with matter 
in the detector. What kind of neutrino appears in the decay 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of a pion into a muon? The detector was designed to 
discriminate between electron-neutrinos which produce 
electrons and muon-neutrinos which produce muons in 
the absorption process by a neutron. All 30 single-track 
events observed had a muon. It was concluded that 
neutrinos exist in families. Today we know that a third 
neutrino flavor, the tau-neutrino, exists. 

A very sensitive measurement of the number of 
neutrino flavors was performed at the e*e~ collider LEP 
at CERN. From a measurement of the resonance shape of 
the Z, a mediator of the neutral current weak interaction, 
discovered at CERN in 1983, the number of neutrino 
flavors with mass lighter than one-half the Z mass (90 GeV) 
was determined to be 


N, = 2.998 + 0.029. 


There are three light neutrinos in nature and three QUARKS. 

The method of the neutrino beam created a new 
area of research called neutrino physics which provided 
a rich harvest. Because of the point-like nature of 
the neutrino interaction they are ideal probes. In a 
bubble chamber exposed to a neutrino beam at CERN 
(Geneva, Switzerland) it was observed that the interaction 
probability of neutrinos increased with energy. This 
observation was attributed to a point-like substructure of 
matter, due to the quarks which compose the nucleons. 
The number of quarks per nucleon was found to be three 
by comparing the interaction probability of neutrinos and 
electrons, in agreement with the quark model of matter 
proposed by Gell-Mann, the proton being composed of 
two u (up) quarks and one d (down) quark, the neutron of 
two d quarks and one u quark. About 50% of the neutrino 
interactions in matter do not take place on quarks. These 
interactions with matter take place on another constituent, 
the gluon which binds the quarks in matter. It was found 
that gluons produce a virtual sea of quark—antiquark pairs. 
Measurements with neutrino and antineutrino beams led 
to a quantitative analysis of the quark and antiquark 
structure of matter. A special class of events induced by 
high-energy neutrinos was found to contain two muons in 
the final state, a leading muon of negative charge in muon- 
neutrino interactions and a positively charged muon, in 
general of lower energy, produced at the hadron vertex. 
The second muon is a decay product of a heavy quark 
called the charmed or c quark. It is produced by the fusion 
of a virtual W particle, the mediator of the charged current 
weak interaction, and either the s quark or the d quark. 
The transition of a d quark to a c quark is reduced by 
the Cabibbo angle, compensating nearly for the smaller 
presence of s quarks in the sea and producing almost equal 
contributions. In antineutrino interactions an antiquark 
fuses with a virtual W* particle to produce a ¢ quark with 
decays into .~ and a K® and an anti-neutrino. 

A detailed study of these processes led to the 
experimental determination of the quark mixing matrix 
which has 3 x 3 elements. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In neutrino events observed in the Gargamelle 
bubblechamber in 1973 a new phenomenon was discov- 
ered, a new weak interaction of neutral currents. The 
observation of muon-neutrino-induced events without a 
muon in the final state was the experimental evidence. 
Initially events of two kinds were observed, the elastic 
scattering of an anti-muon-neutrino on an electron and 
events in which all charged tracks were identified to be 
hadrons either by visible interactions or by decays. Soon 
afterwards the process was identified in general, inclusive 
reactions. The interaction is mediated by a neutral heavy 
boson, the Z, which was discovered at CERN, together 
with the charged boson W, in 1984 by C Rubbia and S van 
der Meer. A new theory of the weak and the electromag- 
netic interactions formulated by S Weinberg, S Glashow 
and A Salam unifies the description of these forces (see 
GRAND UNIFIED THEORY). The neutral current weak interac- 
tion is due to a mixing of the charged current weak interac- 
tion and the electromagnetic interaction. The mixing is de- 
scribed by an angle, the electroweak mixing angle, which 
was determined experimentally from the ratio of neutral 
and charged current weak interaction cross-sections. The 
value of this mixing parameter is related to the ratio of the 
W and the Z masses. The early measurements of the mix- 
ing parameter in neutrino experiments led to a prediction 
of these masses (Mw ~ 82 GeV, Mz ~ 90 GeV) which was 
later confirmed by the direct measurements of the masses. 

This agreement was an important confirmation of the 
unified theory of the electroweak interaction. Even more 
precise measurements were obtained at the e*e™ colliders 
operating at the Z mass. This new theory made real 
progress compared with the Fermi theory. The unification 
is achieved by a renormalizable gauge theory which gives 
finite results for higher-order calculations, whereas in the 
Fermi theory these calculations lead to divergent results. 
Hence, the progress is tremendous. 

The transformation properties of the fermions, 
leptons and quarks are given by their doublet structure. 
There are three lepton doublets and three quark doublets 
each with an ‘up’ state of weak isospin +1 and a ‘down’ 
state with weak isospin —1. Local gauge symmetry 
requires this structure. 

Experimentally they can be verified by neutrino— 
electron scattering and by e*e™ elastic scattering. v,,e and 
vee scattering and v,e and i.e scattering determine two 
coupling solutions; ete™ elastic scattering determines eight 
cones of coupling values. One solution is found to be 
common, it is the one which determines that the electron is 
the downstate with respect to the neutrino, as predicted by 
local gauge symmetry. The measurements of v,e and v,e 
scattering have been performed in the high-flux neutrino 
beam at CERN; those of e*e~ elastic scattering have been 
performed at LEP. 


Astrophysics 

The reaction which fuses four hydrogen nuclei to helium 
by the weak interaction is the main energy source of the 
Sun and of similar stars. Two neutrinos are emitted in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


this reaction. On Earth 10!° neutrinos cm~* s~! arrive on 


average. Other reactions involve beryllium and boron. 
The flux of neutrinos from the Sun has been studied using 
three different neutrino detection reactions and techniques 
(See SOLAR INTERIOR: NEUTRINOS): 


(1) Cl +v. > e7 + *” Ar, threshold E, > 814 keV; 
(2) Ga+ ve > e” Ge, threshold E, > 233 keV; 


(3) vee scattering, detection of the electron by Cerenkov 
radiation in water; E:nreshola Of detection >7.5 MeV. 


Method (1) was used to record solar neutrinos over 
~20 yr. It is the first experimental confirmation of 
neutrinos from the Sun. The measured neutrino flux is 
a factor of 3 smaller than the calculated flux. Only 8B 
neutrinos are detected. Method (2) is detecting neutrinos 
from hydrogen fusion and from ’Be and from *B. The 
measured flux is a factor of 2 smaller than the calculated 
flux. 

Method (3) can reconstruct the direction of the inci- 
dent neutrino and is adding the important confirmation 
that the detected neutrinos indeed come from the Sun. Is 
the missing flux due to a deficiency of the calculation? 
The °B neutrino flux varies with the 18th power of the 
temperature in the center of the Sun. Alternatively, is it 
due to a new property of neutrinos which changes their 
identity over the distance to the Earth? If they ‘oscillate’ 
into muon-, tau- or so-called sterile neutrinos they cannot 
be detected by any of these methods. Combining the re- 
sults of the three methods and adding the constraint of 
the total solar luminosity, one can determine the different 
fluxes separately. One solution gives a strong suppres- 
sion of 7Be neutrinos, assuming the standard solar model 
is correct. Such a suppression is predicted by a resonance 
in the transition of v. > v,; owing to the interaction of 
Ve With electrons in the Sun the effective mass of the ve 
crosses the mass of v,. This level crossing leads to a reso- 
nant transition ve > v,. This matter-enhanced oscillation 
is, however, not supported by the present observation of 
the day/night ratio in method (3). If matter-enhanced os- 
cillations were at work in the Sun it would enhance the v, 
flux when the Earth is between the detector and the Sun. 
Small changes in the energy spectrum of solar neutrinos 
resulting from matter-enhanced oscillation have not been 
detected either. The question of why solar neutrinos are 
missing cannot be answered at present. 

The gravitational collapse of massive stars with a core 
of more than 1.5 solar masses at the end of the burning of 
light elements up to Fe is called a supernova. At the high 
density reached in the collapse electrons are squeezed into 
protons, producing a neutron core and neutrinos. The 
potential energy liberated by the collapse of 10° erg is 
radiated mainly by neutrinos. The radiation of neutrinos 
was first detected for a supernova observed in 1987 (see 
SUPERNOVA 19874). 

Twenty neutrino events were detected by Cerenkov 
radiation of the recoiling electron from v, scattering in 
water. This rate of neutrino events is in good agreement 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with a theory of supernova collapse elaborated by Bethe. 
The burst of neutrinos lasted for 10-15 s. The two detectors 
which confirmed each other, one in a mine in the USA and 
the other in a mine in Japan (See NEUTRINO ASTRONOMY), were 
originally designed to search for proton decay. 


Neutrino oscillation 

No other phenomenon has been searched for more 
intensively. This hypothetical process due to the mixing 
of different neutrino states was invented by Bruno 
Pontecorvo and by Z Maki in 1958 and in 1967 to explain 
the lack of solar neutrinos. Neutrinos propagate as 
mass eigenstates. If the propagation states have different 
masses, quantum mechanical interference leads to the 
disappearance of one neutrino flavor and the appearance 
of another. The oscillation length depends on the 
difference of the squares of the masses of the eigenstates 
and the fraction of neutrino flavor disappearing or 
appearing on the strength of mixing. A3 x 3 mixing matrix 
describes all possible phenomena. As a theory of flavor 
mixing does not exist no predictions of neutrino masses 
and mixing can be made. 

The first convincing observation, a disappearance of 
muon-neutrinos of atmospheric origin, was reported in 
1998 by a Japanese group using a large water Cerenkov 
counter (40000 ton) in an underground mine in Japan 
(Kamioka). Atmospheric neutrinos are born in the decay 
of pions produced by primary cosmic rays in the Earth’s 
atmosphere in the ratio of two muon-neutrinos to one 
electron-neutrino. Because of the isotropic flux of primary 
cosmic rays, up- and down-going neutrinos are expected 
to have equal rates to within 1-2%. The Japanese 
experiment observed a strong up-down asymmetry; 
nearly 50% of the up-going neutrinos were missing. The 
mean disappearance length was estimated to be ~4000 km 
at 1 GeV, corresponding to a difference of mass squares of 
3 x 10-3 eV? or a mass difference of ~0.05 eV. The mixing 
appears to be maximal. 

The appearance of the corresponding number of 
neutrinos of another flavor, supposedly tau-neutrinos, has 
not yet been observed. The water Cerenkov detector 
cannot identify them. A new experiment has to be built 
to make this observation. It will use a muon-neutrino 
beam from the CERN SPS and will be located in the Gran 
Sasso underground laboratory near Rome at a distance of 
730 km. It is planned to start in the year 2005. 


Open questions 
The phenomenon of a finite neutrino mass cannot be 
described within the standard model of electroweak 
interaction. The theory has to be extended to a larger 
symmetry scheme. The most puzzling feature observed is 
the nearly maximal mixing of flavors in the case of v,, > v, 
oscillation. This does not seem to be the case for ve > v; 
oscillation. A mass difference has not yet been observed 
for these flavors. 

Since neutrinos have a finite mass they can also have 
a magnetic dipole moment which remains to be detected. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The cosmological consequences of the finite neutrino mass 
have still to be elaborated. 


Bibliography 


Winter K (ed) 2000 Neutrino Physics 2nd edn (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Klaus Winter 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutron 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neutron 


An uncharged subatomic particle that is composed of 
three quarks. With a mass of 1.6748 x 10°?” kg (which 
is equivalent to a rest-mass energy of 939.6 MeV), it is 
slightly heavier than the proton. It has an intrinsic angular 
momentum, or spin, of 1/2 (in units of the Planck constant, 
h, divided by 2z:). 

The neutron is a nucleon, one of the two basic 
constituents of all atomic nuclei apart from the normal 
form of hydrogen (which consists of a single proton). The 
total number of protons and neutrons in an atomic nucleus 
defines its mass number. An isolated neutron decays into 
a proton, an electron and an antineutrino on average after 
about 15 minutes, this process being called ‘beta decay’. 
This process is responsible for the most common form of 
radioactivity (beta radioactivity), in which the emission of 
an electron and antineutrino accompanies the conversion 
of a bound neutron into a proton. This changes the 
atomic number of the nucleus (and therefore changes, or 
‘transmutes’, it into a nucleus of a different element) but 
leaves the mass number unchanged. In many other nuclei, 
a bound neutron is a stable, long-lived, particle. 


See also: antimatter, atom, baryons, electron, electron- 
volt, hadrons, isotope, neutrinos, quark, radioactivity, sub- 
atomic particles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neutron Stars 


Neutron stars are small compact stars with densities 
comparable to that inside nuclei, py) = 2.8 x 10'* g em™, 


and radii R ~ 10-15 km. They consist predominantly of 
NEUTRONS and a few percent of PROTONS and 
ELECTRONS. These huge neutron-rich ‘nuclei’ are bound 
by gravitation and require a minimum neutron star mass 


of ~0.1M.. Above a maximum (Chandrasekhar) mass of 


order 2-3M. neutron stars are unstable towards 
gravitational collapse to BLACK HOLES. 


Neutron stars are formed in type II or Ib SUPERNOVA 


explosions when massive stars (MV => 10Mo) run out of 
nuclear fuel after burning for millions of years. When the 
iron core in the center of the aging stars exceeds its 


Chandrasekhar mass, ~1.5Mo, the star undergoes 
gravitational collapse in just seconds and suffers violent 
death. Gravitational and kinetic energy of the order ~10°° 
ergs is released mainly by neutrino emission that blows 
off the outer layers. Only ~1% of the energy is actually 
seen in a brilliant burst, the supernova. Measurements of 
isotopic abundances of various elements (7- and _s- 
processes) give some insight into the densities and 
temperatures during certain stages of the explosion in 
which all heavier elements in the universe were made. 
Supernova explosions occur at a rate of one to three per 
century in our Galaxy. Historically, the Crab supernova 
was first recorded by the Chinese in AD 1054, and could 
be seen in daylight. The discovery in 1967 of a rotating 
neutron star (a radio pulsar) in the CRAB NEBULA 
supernova remnant confirmed the 1933 hypothesis of 
Baade and Zwicky, formulated a year after Chadwick 
discovered the neutron, that neutron stars are formed in 
supernova explosions. In our Galaxy astrophysicists 
expect a large abundance, ~10°, of neutron stars but they 
only manifest themselves if powered by rotation, 
accretion, nuclear power or residual heat. 

Radio PULSARS were first discovered by Bell and 
Hewish in 1967 and extensive searches have led to ~1200 
known pulsars at present. Pulsars are rotation powered 
neutron stars where the magnetic B and rotational Q axes 


Table 1. Properties of a typical neutron star. 
Mass M 


~1.4Mo 
Radius R 10-15 km 
Central densities Pe ~10'° gem? 
Moment of inertia J ~10° g cm™ 
Rotation period P. 0.0015-8.5 s 
Spin down P ~10' 
Magnetic fields B ~10"G 
Temperatures T <5x10°K 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are misaligned by an angle 8. Consequently they emit 
dipole radiation in the form of radio waves that appear to 
pulse on and off like a lighthouse beacon as the pulsar 
beam sweeps across the Earth with the spin frequency of 
the neutron star. The rotational energy loss for dipole 
radiation is 


B? R®s2* sin* 6 
6c7 
(1) 


where the moment of inertia for a typical neutron star is 
I~10* g cm”. The radio pulses are extremely regular with 
periods in the range 1.5 ms < P <8.5 s and the pulsars are 
spinning down slowly with period derivatives of the 


order P ~ 10°-107!. The pulsar age is from equation 


(1) given by ¢ = P/2P and the magnetic field 
B~10"G(P x 10'°P s"')!”. The resulting magnetic fields 


of the order of B ~ 10’ G are independently confirmed 
by cyclotron absorption lines found in x-ray spectra. 
Most pulsars are old (~10 million years) and slowly 
rotating with relatively small period derivatives. In a (P, 


P ) diagram they cluster around P ~ 1 s and P ~ 10°". 
A few young pulsars, e.g. those such as the CRAB and 
VELA PULSARS, have short periods and large period 
derivatives. 

The nearest known neutron star, RXJ185635-3754, 
located in the southern constellation Corona Australis, 
was imaged by the Hubble Space Telescope in 2001. Its 
distance is estimated by parallax at only 200 light years. 
From its black body spectrum, a surface temperature of 
half a million Kelvin is found, and from its flux a radius 
of order 10 km is inferred. Circumstantial evidence 
indicates that it was born in a supernova explosion a 
million years ago. Such an age and surface temperature is 
compatible with standard cooling predictions. 

Binary pulsars were discovered by Hulse and Taylor 
in 1973. They form a distinct subclass of mainly 
millisecond radio pulsars with periods 1.56 ms < P < 
100ms. The period derivatives are very small 
corresponding to very small magnetic fields B~10*- 
10'°G. They are believed to be old recycled pulsars, 
which have been spun up by mass ACCRETION. In this 
process the magnetic fields of the pulsars have decayed. 
After the recycling the spun-up millisecond pulsars are 
expected to emit radio waves for billions of years. About 
30—more than half of the known millisecond pulsars— 
are found in BINARY STARS where the companion is either 
a WHITE DWARF or a neutron star. Six double neutron 
stars are known so far. By measuring the inward 
spiralling or orbital decay one can determine many 
parameters in the binary systems such as the neutron star 
and companion masses, orbital periods and period 
derivatives, orbital distances and inclination. Parameters 
are overdetermined and provide a test of general 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


relativity to an unprecedented accuracy. The PERIASTRON 
advance in PSR 1913 + 16 is 4.2° per year as compared 
with 43 arcseconds per century for Mercury, which was 
originally used by Einstein to test his theory of general 
relativity. Binary neutron stars all have masses in the 


narrow range 1.35+0.07Mo. This number is suspiciously 
close to the Chandrasekhar mass of the iron core, Mo, = 


1.5Mo, when subtracting the gravitational energy loss, 
~GM’/R~0.1M, that dissappears by neutrino emission in 
the collapse. 

X-ray pulsars and X-RAY BURSTERS are accretion 
powered neutron stars (see figure 1). Almost 200 have 
been discovered within the last three decades by satellite 
borne x-ray detectors. The orbital period has been 
determined for about 60 of these X-RAY BINARIES. The x- 
ray pulsars and bursters are believed to be neutron stars 


accreting from high-mass (VM 2 10Mo) and low mass (Mv 


S 1.2Mo) companions respectively. The former systems 
are fed by wind accretion whereas the latter are the result 
of ROCHE-LOBE overflow from a giant companion star. 
The x-ray pulses are most probably due to strong 
accretion on the magnetic poles emitting x-rays (as 
northern lights) with orbital frequency. The x-ray bursts 
are due to slow accretion spreading all over the neutron 
star surface before igniting in a thermonuclear flash. The 
resulting burst time-scales depend on accretion rates 
rather than orbital periods. One bursting pulsar has 
recently been discovered. The radiation from x-ray 
bursters is not blackbody and therefore only upper limits 
on temperatures can be extracted from observed 
luminosities in most cases. Masses are less accurately 
measured than for binary pulsars but a few, for example, 


the x-ray pulsars Vela X-1 (M = (1.9+0.2)Mo) and the x- 
ray burster Cygnus X-2, seem to be heavier than the 
binary pulsars which could be due to accretion. 

Recently, a subclass of half a dozen anomalous x-ray 
pulsars have been discovered. They are slowly rotating, 
P~10 s, but rapidly slowing down. This requires huge 
magnetic fields of B~10"* G and they have appropriately 


spin axis 


magnetic pole 


accretion disk 


infalling gas 


Figure 1. An accreting neutron star with misaligned spin and 
magnetic axes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


been named ‘magnetars’. Four gamma-ray repeaters 
discovered so far are also slowly rotating. The anomalous 
x-ray pulsars, and probably also the gamma-ray 
repeaters, appear to reside inside SUPERNOVA REMNANTS. 
Together they constitute just as many galactic neutron 
star candidates inside supernova remnants as the radio 
pulsars—in spite of the extensive searches for the latter. 
Of the ~1200 discovered radio pulsars only about ~10 are 
associated with the 220 known supernova remnants. 
Quasi-periodic oscillations (QPO) have very recently 
been discovered in low-mass x-ray binaries. QPOs 
provide a promising new method for determining masses 
and radii of neutron stars. The QPO are brightness 
oscillations in the x-ray luminosity. In many systems 
twokHz QPO peaks appear with frequencies that 
increase with accretion but with almost constant 
frequency difference. The pair is most likely the orbital 
frequency of accreting matter in Keplerian orbits around 
the neutron star and its beat frequency with the neutron 
star spin. In the case of 4U 1820-30 the accretion may 
have been tracked to its innermost stable orbit, since the 
QPO frequency displays a distinct saturation with 
accretion rate. From the corresponding maximum 
frequency Vopo = 1060 Hz, one deduces a neutron star 


mass of M = 2.25Mo. The existence of such heavy 
neutron stars would restrict the equation of state for 
neutron star matter severely. 

X-ray bursts are thermonuclear explosions of 
accreted matter on the surface of neutron stars. After 
accumulating hydrogen on the surface for hours, the 
pressure and temperature become sufficient to trigger a 
runaway thermonuclear explosion seen as an x-ray burst. 
The energy involved is of the order of typical nuclear 
binding energies, ~7 MeV per hydrogen atom. Slow 
accretion from a small mass companion generates a 
continuous background of x-rays. Each nucleon radiates 


its gravitational energy of ~m,GM/R ~ 200 MeV. The 
burst energy is therefore only about a per cent of the time 
integrated background but is released in only a few 
seconds. In the case of 4U 1728-34 x-ray modulation due 
to the neutron star spin frequency of 364 Hz has been 
found. It decreases, however, to 362 Hz during the first 
1-2 s of the burst. A simple explanation is that the 
thermonuclear explosion elevates the surface of the 
neutron star. Conserving angular momentum, L o MR’v, 


leads to a decrease in rotation by Av/v =~ —2AR/R. With a 
frequency change of Av ~ —2 Hz and typical neutron star 
radius of order R ~ 10 km, an elevation of order AR ~ 
20m is found, which is roughly in agreement with 
expectations but much less than on Earth due to the much 
stronger gravitational fields on neutron stars. 


The structure of a typical 1.4Mo> mass neutron star is 
to first approximation a ~1 km thick crust and a nuclear 
liquid in the interior. At terrestrial densities the ground 
state of matter consists of *°Fe nuclei in a solid body- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


centered cubic lattice and electrons. With increasing 
density, the atomic cores begin to overlap and matter 
becomes pressure ionized. At a density ~10° times 
terrestrial density, or of order 10° g cm”, electrons 
become relativistic. At a density of about 10’ g cm°® it 
becomes energetically favorable to reduce the number of 
electrons by electron capture, converting protons to 
neutrons and form “Ni. At higher densities, the 
equilibrium nuclei become even more neutron rich, and 
eventually, at a density of about 4 x 10'' g cm’, all 
bound neutron levels in nuclei are occupied, and neutrons 
‘drip’. The inner crust consists of neutron-rich nuclei 
embedded in a gas of neutrons and relativistic electrons. 
As densities approach the density of nuclear matter the 
nuclei may merge into intricate rod-, plate- and bubble- 
like structures. The sizes of the structures are determined 
by a competition between Coulomb and surface energies. 
The inner crust terminates at a density close to nuclear 


matter density at p ~ 2 x 10'* g cm™%, where the 
transition to a spatially uniform state occurs which is 
believed to be a superfluid (see figure 2). 

In the core of neutron stars many other problems 
arise. The basic difficulty in predicting neutron star 
properties is that matter at supernuclear densities is not 
well understood. There are a number of possible states 
for matter. The simplest is a uniform liquid of neutrons 
and protons in f-equilibrium, with a neutralizing 
background of negative charge from electrons, and, when 
the electron chemical potential exceeds the muon rest 
mass, also muons. There could be other particles present, 
such as hyperons. Another class of possibilities is Bose 
condensation of mesons, either pions or kaons. Yet 
another is quark matter, in which the nucleons are broken 
down into quarks. To make progress it is necessary to 
develop a better understanding of many aspects of 
physics (see e.g. PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS). One is the 
basic interactions between hadrons. While two-particle 
interactions between nucleons are well characterized 
from scattering data, the corresponding interactions for 
strange particles are less secure. Knowledge of many- 
body interactions is much more rudimentary. 

The equation of state (EoS) of dense matter, e.g. 
pressure versus energy density P(e), can therefore only 
be calculated reliably up to a few times normal nuclear 
saturation densities by using measured nucleon—nucleon 
scattering data and binding energies and saturation 
density of nuclei. At higher densities causality provides 
some constraint on the EoS. Given the EoS, the structure 
of non-rotating neutron stars can be calculated from the 
Oppenheimer—Volkoff equation 


dP GliPtelm+4rr’P) 
dr r(1—2Gm/r) 


(2) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Outer crust: nuclei 


Inner crust: nuclei + neutron gas 
Rod- and plate-like structures 


Uniform nuclear matter 

Pion, Kaon or Hyperon 
condensates? 

Quark matter? 


Droplets 
ods 
Plates 


~O0.3km ~0.6km 


~10 km 


Figure 2. Schematic cross section of a neutron star. Possible 
components are listed, and estimates of radial dimensions are 
drawn (not to scale). 


where m(r) = 4n| e(r)r” dr’. Rotation was included by 
0 


Hartle. The maximum (Chandrasekhar) mass is expected 


to be below ~2.5Mo depending on the stiffness of the 
nuclear EoS, but it could be lower if phase transitions 
take place. Observations of large neutron star masses of 


order ~2.3M > would therefore restrict the equation of 
state (EoS) severely for dense matter. 

Glitches are sudden speed-ups in the rotation rate 
observed in a number of younger pulsars, e.g. the Crab 
and Vela. Glitches occur due to quakes in solid structures 
such as the crust, superfluid vortices or possibly a quark 
matter lattice in the core. As the rotating neutron star 
gradually slows down and becomes less deformed, the 
rigid component is strained and eventually cracks/quakes 
and changes its structure towards being more spherical. 
The moment of inertia of the rigid component, /,, 
decreases abruptly and its rotation and pulsar frequency 
increase due to angular momentum conservation 
resulting in a glitch, AQ/Q ~ 10°-10°, which slowly 
relaxes on a time scale of days as the rigid and fluid 
components approach a common rotational frequency. 

Surface temperatures may provide information about 
the interiors and thermal evolution of neutron stars. In 
recent years much effort has been devoted to measuring 
neutron star temperatures, especially with the Einstein 
Observatory and ROSAT. Neutron stars are born with 
interior temperatures of the order of 10'* K, but cool 
rapidly via neutrino emission to temperatures of the order 


of 10'° K within minutes and $10° K in 10° yr. The only 
information on neutron star temperatures stems from 
surface temperatures observed in x-ray or UV bands. 
Most observations are for pulsars, and it is unclear how 
much of the observed radiation is due to pulsar 
phenomena, to a synchrotron-emitting nebula or to the 
neutron star itself. Surface temperatures of neutron stars 
have been measured in a few cases or upper limits have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Neutron Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


been set. These seem to be compatible with predictions 
from standard modified URCA cooling processes. Non- 
rotating and non-accreting neutron stars are virtually 
undetectable but the Hubble Space Telescope has 
observed one single thermally radiating neutron star RX 


J185635-3754. Its surface temperature is T ~ 6 x 10° K 


= 50 eV and its distance is less than 120 pc from Earth. 
Circumstantial evidence indicates a distance of ~80 pc 
which leads to a neutron star radius of 12-13 km in good 
agreement with modern EoS. 

Gamma ray bursters (GRB) have recently been 
associated with afterglows from which very high 
REDSHIFTS (z = 1) could be determined. An enormous 
energy output of E~10°° ergs can be inferred, if 
isotropically emitted, but there is evidence for beaming 
or jets and the GRB therefore ‘only’ requires a total 
energy of E~10°' ergs in gamma rays. Candidates for 
such violent events include neutron star mergers or, as 
indicated by recent observations of coinciding 
supemovae, a special class of type Ic supernova 
(hypernovae) where cores collapse to black holes. 

NEUTRINO and GRAVITATIONAL WAVE detectors on 
Earth will look into the formation and cores of neutron 
stars. LIGO will be able to detect gravitational waves 
from core collapse in supernova and coalescence of 
binary neutron stars. Neutrinos carry away ~99% of the 
energy in supernova explosions and their abundance, 
timing and spectra reveal detailed information about the 
explosion and the proto-neutron star. Nineteen neutrinos 
were detected from SN-1987A in the Large Magellanic 
Cloud. Modern neutrino detectors should catch several 
thousand neutrinos from future supernovae in our galaxy 
or the neighboring Magellanic Clouds. 

The future of neutron stars looks bright as new 
windows are about to open. A new fleet of x- and 
gamma-ray satellites will be launched. With upgraded 
ground-based observatories and detectors new classes of 
neutron stars will be discovered and our understanding of 
neutron star properties will be improved. 


Bibliography 
Shapiro S L and Teukolsky S A 1983 Black Holes, White 
Dwarfs and Neutron Stars (New York: Wiley) 


Henning Heiselberg 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


New General Catalog of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars 
(NGC) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


New General Catalog of Nebulae and 
Clusters of Stars (NGC) 


A basic reference list of star clusters, nebulas and galaxies 
compiled in 1888 by Danish astronomer Johan Ludvig Emil 
Dreyer. Dreyer worked at the Armagh Observatory in 
Northern Ireland. Here he based his work on lists made 
earlier by the Herschel family of British astronomers and 
John Herschel’s General Catalog of Nebulae, published 
in 1864. Dreyer included 7840 celestial objects. He 
later extended the list by 5386 objects with his first and 
second Index Catalogs (IC), published in 1895 and 1908 
respectively. With these supplements the NGC covers 
the entire sky, although many objects visible with modern 
instruments are not listed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Newcomb, Simon (1835-1909) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Newcomb, Simon (1835-1909) 


Mathematical astronomer, born in Wallace, Nova Scotia, 
Canada, moved with his family to Maryland and self- 
studied mathematics. Worked at the US Nautical Almanac 
Office (then in Cambridge, MA), studied at Harvard, 
and was appointed to the US Naval Observatory at 
Washington, DC, becoming director. In his own words, 
because of the ‘confusion which pervaded the whole 
system of exact astronomy, arising from the diversity of 
the fundamental data made use of by the astronomers of 
foreign countries and various institutions in their work’ 
he started ‘a systematic determination of the constants of 
astronomy from the best existing data, a reinvestigation of 
the theories of the celestial motions, and the preparation 
of tables, formulae, and precepts for the construction 
of ephemeredes, and for other applications of the same 
results’. He thus used careful measurements of stellar 
and planetary positions to compute formulae for their 
future motions, with an analysis of the constants in the 
formulae (such as the masses of the Sun, Moon and 
planets), and the speed of light. This set in train a 
century of astronomical activity focused in the work 
of the International Astronomical Union to define the 
astronomical constants. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Newton 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Newton 


Isaac Newton (1642-1727) is known pre-eminently for 
discoveries in mathematics (binomial theorem and 
fundamental theorem of the calculus), optics (the 
heterogeneity of white light) and mechanics (laws of 
motion and universal gravitation). Not undisputed 
are some questions of priority and how in detail to 
characterize these achievements. Beyond question, 
however, is the foundational character of Newton’s chief 
works for all later physical science: his Principia (editions 
in 1687, 1713 and 1726) and Opticks (English editions 
in 1704 and 1717, Latin editions in 1706 and 1719). 
Various understandings of Newton’s methodology played 
an important role in Enlightenment thought. 

Newton’s paternal forebears were illiterate Lin- 
colnshire yeomen. His grandfather, prospering, pur- 
chased Woolsthorpe Manor. His father on inheriting the 
estate married Hannah Ayscough, then died six months 
later before his son Isaac was born. When Isaac was three, 
his mother remarried and went to live with her new hus- 
band, the Rev. Barnabas Smith, leaving Isaac till age ten 
(when Smith also died) in the care of his maternal grand- 
mother at Woolsthorpe. Newton’s boyhood was lonely 
and punctuated by fits of anger against his mother and 
step-father. Neurotic isolation remained characteristic into 
his middle years. 

Between ages 12 and 17 Newton attended grammar 
school in Grantham, becoming fluent in Latin. Put then 
to managing the Woolsthorpe estate, he was a disaster, 
interested only in bookish learning. His mother at length 
relented, sending him back to Grantham to prepare for 
university entrance. He matriculated at Trinity College, 
Cambridge, in July 1661. 

The Cambridge curriculum was a moribund Aris- 
totelianism, but Newton’s solitary reading by 1664 had 
led him beyond the prescribed course to GALILEO’s Dia- 
logue, DESCARTES’ Principia, Walter Charleton’s epitome of 
Gassendi’s writings, and other proponents of new philos- 
ophy. He discovered the new mathematics in Schooten’s 
second Latin edition of Descartes’ Geometry and in John 
Wallis’s Arithmetic of Infinites. 

Despite the aberrancy of his studies, Newton in 1664 
was elected scholar at Trinity, and in 1667 Minor Fellow, 
then Major Fellow in 1668. In 1669 Isaac Barrow saw to it 
that Newton became his successor as Lucasian Professor 
of Mathematics. To continue as a Fellow required taking 
holy orders within seven years, but study of Scripture and 
the Church Fathers convinced Newton that the Trinity was 
a hoax. By royal dispensation, obtained through Isaac 
Barrow’s intercession, he was freed from the requirement. 
Newton would remain in Cambridge till 1696 when he 
moved to London to become Warden of the Mint, then 
Master of the Mint in late 1699; he resigned his Trinity 
College fellowship and professorial chair in 1701. His 
scientifically most fruitful years were over. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Newton’s discoveries in mathematics 

Newton’s most intense study of the new mathematics 
began sometime in 1664, and lasted until November 1665, 
by which time he had made his principal discoveries. 
Quickly he assimilated the central insight of DESCARTES’ 
Geometry: curves were to be understood through their 
equations. He reduced to formula Descartes’ method of 
finding a tangent to a curve (it involved constructing the 
normal). He then considered normals at two nearby points 
on the curve with abscissas x and x + 0. The limiting 
position of the intersection of the two normals as o went to 
zero gave the center of curvature, and thence the radius of 
curvature—a result beyond anything in the texts he was 
studying. 

Wallis’s Arithmetic of Infinites introduced him to the 
definite integral, an area under a curve between fixed 
ordinates, computed by dividing the area into infinitesimal 
rectangles and summing them as an infinite series. 
Newton made the upper limits variable, and so arrived 
at indefinite integrals, for instance (in our symbolism): 


/ yas =f xe dx = x4/4. 
0 0 


Wallis often solved problems by a kind of induction, 
and Newton used just such a process in solving one of 
the problems Wallis had posed: to find the area under 
a circle, that is, to integrate {(1 — x*)"dx where n is 
1/2. If n were a positive integer the integral would be 
obtainable by expanding the binomial and integrating the 
resulting polynomial term by term. The successive terms 
of the integral in this case, Newton observed, are given 
by multiplying x, —x°/3, x°/5, —x’/7, etc, respectively 
by the successive binomial coefficients. Discerning the 
rule by which the binomial coefficients are produced, and 
extending it to the cases in which n = 1/2, 3/2, 5/2, 
etc, Newton obtained the integrals { (1 — x*)" dx for these 
fractional values of n as infinite series; thus for n = 1/2 the 
integral is 


1x + (1/2)(—x3/3) + (—1/8)(x°/5) +++. 


In this manner all radicals could be integrated. Here and 
elsewhere Newton intuited general rules and illustrated 
them in specific examples, without strictly demonstrating 
them or expressing them in a general symbolism. 

Dissatisfied with the concept of infinitesimals, 
Newton shifted to a kinematic view: areas were swept out 
by a moving ordinate, its length giving the momentary 
rate of areal increase. Likewise, a curve could be viewed 
as produced by a moving point, the tangent at a point 
being determined by the limiting ratio of the component 
speeds in the x and y directions. To these ‘speeds’ in the 
production of an area or curve Newton gave the name 
‘fluxions’. The determination of the tangent now appeared 
as the inverse of the finding of an area under a curve. This 
inverse relation is the fundamental theorem of the calculus. 
Here again, Newton illustrated the theorem in examples 
without expressing it in a general symbolism. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Newton 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


After mid-November 1665, Newton’s interest in 
mathematics lapsed. In autumn 1666 he produced a 
summary of his discoveries, and in 1669, at Barrow’s 
urging, he set himself to producing a full-fledged treatise 
on his methods of series and fluxions. Fatefully, he 
abandoned the unfinished treatise in 1671, apparently 
overcome by fear of criticisms that publication could bring. 
The incomplete treatise was not published until after his 
death. 


Newton’s optical discoveries 
Newton’s work in optics began in early 1666 when he 
obtained a prism ‘to try the celebrated Phaenomena of 
Colours’. Descartes, Boyle and Hooke had taken color 
to be a modification of white light—the traditional view. 
Newton’s understanding of color grew gradually, in 
tandem with experiments. A circular beam of white 
light, on passing through the prism, gave an elongated 
spectrum, implying different refractions of its different 
parts. Other experiments showed the separate rays to 
have unalterable degrees of refrangibility. These rays 
on being recombined gave white light. White light was 
thus a mixture composed of individual rays of constant 
refrangibility. 

Newton devoted his first series of professorial lectures 
(in 1670) to the theory of colors. The phenomena implied, 
he believed, the corpuscularity of light: he saw no way 
in which a wave theory could agree with distinctive 
natures in the rays. HOOKE in his Micrographia (1665) 
had investigated the colors of thin films, and Newton 
now carried Hooke’s investigation further, determining 
the varying thickness of the film between a spherical 
lens and a plate glass to hundredths of an inch, and 
thereby establishing a periodicity associated with the 
successive rings of color and darkness that presented 
themselves (‘Newton’s rings’). He attempted to explain 
the periodicity as due to vibrations set up in the aether by 
the impact of the light corpuscles; the aether at the second 
interface between glass and air was thus put into ‘alternate 
fits of easy reflection and refraction’. 

By his own labor Newton designed and constructed 
a reflecting telescope. Completed in early 1669, it was 
six inches long, magnified 40 times, and was free of the 
chromatic aberration affecting refractors. Newton showed 
it off in Cambridge; word of it spread to London. Members 
of the Royal Society asked to see it, and in late 1671 Barrow 
presented it to the Society. It caused a sensation. Flattered, 
Newton agreed to provide an account of his theory and 
experiments. His ‘New Theory about Light and Colors’ 
appeared in the Philosophical Transactions in February 1672. 

With this, his first publication, Newton’s worst 
fears came true. The force of his experiments was 
not understood. Hooke took his main point to be the 
corpuscular nature of light, and was unpersuaded by 
Newton’s attempt to separate the issues of corpuscularity 
and heterogeneity. When HuycEns referred to the theory 
as ‘an hypothesis’, Newton bridled. Most wearying of 
all were the objections and experimental incompetence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of three English Jesuits in Liege. By 1678 Newton had 
had enough. Now immersed in alchemical experiments, 
he wanted no part in further controversy. Only after his 
death, he said, would his further writings be published. 


Newton on the laws of motion and gravitation 
Newton’s study of the laws of impact began in the mid- 
1660s. From Descartes he accepted the law of inertia: 
bodies persist in their state of rest or motion unless 
acted upon by an exterior cause. Descartes’ rules of 
impact, derived by a priori thinking, were contradicted by 
experiments; Newton by thought and experiment derived 
correct rules. The center of mass of two bodies must 
move uniformly whether they impact or not. Implicit here 
was the equality and oppositeness of action and reaction, 
and the constancy of the ratio of the inertias or masses 
determining how the two bodies exchanged or shared 
speeds. Unlike Descartes, Newton took account of the 
vectorial character of the motions. He verified his rules in 
both inelastic and elastic impacts. 

In the same period, Newton quantified Descartes’ 
concept of the ‘endeavor to recede’ of a body whirled 
in circular motion. The acceleration, which Newton like 
Descartes thought of as radially outward, was v?/r = 
4x?r/T?, where v is the body’s linear speed, r its distance 
from the center and T its period of circulation. In Streete’s 
Astronomia Carolina (1661), Newton had met with Kepler’s 
harmonic law for the planets, T? « r3, and this substituted 
into the formula showed the ‘endeavor to recede’ of the 
planets to vary inversely as the squares of their mean solar 
distances. 

Like most of his contemporaries, Newton during the 
1660s and 1670s conceived the planets to be borne about 
in a Sun-centered vortex of aether, and the Moon to be 
borne in a smaller, Earth-centered vortex. To balance 
the endeavor to recede developed in these circulations, 
he imagined a subtler variety of aether rushing into 
the central body. This aether might serve, in the solar 
case, as fuel to conserve the Sun’s shining, and in the 
terrestrial case, after chemical transformation within the 
Earth’s body, as nutriment for living things. All things, 
he proposed, may be composed of different kinds of 
aether that transform into one another: ‘Nature is a 
great circulatory worker’. In a paper sent to the Royal 
Society (though not for publication) in late 1675, Newton 
cited numerous phenomena in support of this aethereal 
philosophy. 

In November 1679 Hooke as a secretary of the Royal 
Society sought to engage Newton in correspondence, and 
asked him, in particular, what he thought of Hooke’s idea 
of ‘compounding the celestial motions of the planets of 
a direct motion by the tangent & an attractive motion 
towards the central body’. This idea had emerged for 
CHRISTOPHER WREN and Hooke out of their reflections on 
GILBERT’S magnetic philosophy. There is no clear evidence 
that Newton had seriously entertained it before. 

In perhaps August 1684 HALLEY visited Newton in 
Cambridge to ask what path a planet would follow if 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Newton 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


subject to an inverse-square force toward the Sun. By 
now the inverse-square variation of the solar force was 
accepted by Wren, Hooke and others as deducible from 
Huygens’ formula for centrifugal force (published in 1673 
and equivalent to Newton’s unpublished formula) and the 
Keplerian rule T? « r°. Newton reportedly answered 
‘an ellipse!’, and promised to produce a demonstration. 
His response, sent to the Royal Society in November, was 
a small treatise On the motion of bodies in gyres, giving 
quantitative expression to Hooke’s conception of orbital 
motion. A centripetal force, Newton showed, implies 
equable description of areas. Given the proportionality 
of time to area, he derived a formula for the planet’s 
instantaneous radial acceleration. Applying this to an 
elliptical orbit with center of force in a focus, he showed 
that the force would be inverse square—the converse of the 
theorem he had promised. “Therefore the major planets 
revolve in ellipses having a focus in the centre of the 
Sun...’. The logic was less than clear. 

In the next two and a half years the small treatise 
expanded into the 510 pages of the Principia. But a critical 
threshold of substantiation had first to be crossed: ‘Now 
I am upon this subject I would gladly know the bottom 
of it before I publish my papers’ (Newton to FLAMSTEED, 
12 January 1685). Flamsteed’s data for the satellites of 
Jupiter helped: their periods and distances (measured by 
micrometer) were as exactly in accord with the T? « r° 
rule ‘as it is possible for our senses to determine’. Taking 
the inverse-square law to be universally exact, Newton 
could compare the absolute attractive powers of the Sun 
and the planets having satellites (Jupiter, Saturn, Earth), 
by comparing the accelerations they would produce in 
satellites at a fixed distance. Identifying the attractive 
powers with the masses, Newton found that the center 
of mass or gravity of the system fell within the Sun or 
remained close to it, thus demonstrating the Copernican 
system a priori. 

In another basic confirmation of his ‘mathematical 
way’, Newton carried out the earliest version of what 
is now called the ‘Edtvés experiment’. In contrast to 
the changes of motion produced in impacts, gravitational 
accelerations appeared to be independent of the masses of 
the bodies accelerated; implying a proportionality of mass 
to gravitational force. Using pendulums with bobs of nine 
different materials (gold, silver, lead, glass, etc), Newton 
tested this proportionality, and found it to hold to within 
one part in a thousand. Hence aethereal mechanisms for 
gravity could be dismissed. 

Newton’s method demanded universalization of any 
rule found to hold in all known cases; results thus arrived 
at, however, were subject to correction or refutation from 
further experiments or observations. The law of universal 
gravitation had therefore to be tested unendingly. In an 
analysis of the three-body problem (Principia I.66) Newton 
derived qualitatively all the known inequalities of the 
Moon, and claimed to derive the tides and the precession 
of the equinoxes (the latter two derivations were flawed). 
Newton’s procedure for fitting orbits to comets enabled 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Halley to predict the return of Halley’s comet in 1759. 
In the late nineteenth century the anomalous precession 
of Mercury’s perihelion was at length recognized as 
requiring modification of Newton’s law; Einstein in 1915 
accounted for the anomaly by his Theory of General 
Relativity. 

Newton failed to generate a following of applied 
mathematicians able competently to pursue the testing of 
his theory. His mathematical methods, partly geometrical 
and partly algebraic, were too various and special to lend 
themselves to successful imitation. Wrongheadedly and 
fiercely Newton and Leibniz wasted energy charging each 
other with plagiarism in the invention of the calculus. 
The systematic attack on the THREE-BODY PROBLEM would 
come only after Newton’s death, when EULER combined 
Leibnizian symbolic mathematics with the calculus of 
trigonometric functions that Newton had known. The 
resulting science, known today by LaPLaAce’s name for 
it, CELESTIAL MECHANICS, led to new mathematics and 
eventually to new understandings of the scope and limits 
of rational mechanics; but its agenda had been set by 
Newton’s Principia. 


Bibliography 

Brackenbridge J B 1995 The Key to Newton's Dynamics 
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press) 

De Gandt F 1995 Force and Geometry in Newton's Principia 
transl. C Wilson (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press) 

Densmore D 1995 Newton's Principia: The Central Argument 
(Santa Fe, NM: Green Lion) 

Westfall R S 1980 Never at Rest (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Wilson C 1989 The Newtonian achievement in astronomy 
Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the Rise 
of Astrophysics, Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 233- 
74 


Curtis Wilson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Newton Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Newton Mission 


The European Space Agency’s long-term plan for its sci- 
ence program is called ‘Horizons 2000’ and is designed to 
provide a balanced combination of satellite missions in 
astronomy, space science and fundamental physics. One 
of the cornerstones of this program is the XMM-Newton 
x-ray observatory, launched on 10 December 1999 from 
the European spaceport in French Guyana on the first 
commercial flight of the Ariane 5 rocket. In order to 
observe x-rays from astronomical objects it is necessary 
to be above the Earth’s atmosphere since this absorbs 
incident x-rays. XMM-Newton was launched into a 
highly eccentric orbit, which takes the satellite once 
around the Earth every 48 h. The reason for this highly 
eccentric, long-duration, orbit is that it allows for long 
and uninterrupted observations (which are often 
required in x-ray astronomy) free of the radiation belts 
around the Earth. XMM-Newton cannot operate within 
the radiation belts since they disturb the measurements 
and can even damage some of the sensitive instrumenta- 
tion (if left unprotected). 

Originally, XMM-Newton was called the ‘High- 
Throughput Imaging X-ray Spectroscopy Mission’, 
which accurately describes its capabilities. ‘High 
throughput’ is provided by the three largest x-ray tele- 
scopes ever flown in space. Each telescope consists of 58 
tightly nested grazing-incidence x-ray mirrors with a 
focal length of 7.5 m. Grazing-incidence optics are neces- 
sary because most materials simply absorb x-rays, rather 
than reflecting them, and only at very small incidence 
angles will ultrasmooth gold reflect x-rays. The mirrors 
focus the x-rays with a precision of about 15 arcsec which 
accounts for the ‘imaging’. The ‘spectroscopy’ is provid- 
ed by the instruments on board XMM-Newton: 


EPIC — European Photon Imaging Camera (principal 
investigator, Dr M. Turner, Leicester University, UK); 

RGS — Reflection Grating Spectrometer (principal inves- 
tigator, Dr A. Brinkman, SRON, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands); 

OM — Optical Monitor (principal investigator, Professor 
K. Mason, MSSL, UCL, UK). 


The EPIC instrument provides the medium spectral 
resolution and simultaneous imaging capability through 
three cameras using two different technologies. The 
EPIC-MOS is geared towards lower energies, while 
EPIC-PN excels at unparalleled throughput and timing 
capabilities, especially at higher (5-10 keV) x-ray ener- 
gies. The RGS is a dispersive instrument (much like a 
prism is for visible light), which provides medium- to 
high-resolution dispersive spectroscopy only. The con- 
cept of grazing incidence has once more been applied 
here in two arrays, each consisting of 182 grating plates, 
mounted behind two of the three x-ray telescopes. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


co-aligned Optical Monitor provides the capability to 
observe the x-ray sources at visual and ultraviolet wave- 
lengths, a concept that has proven its worth in the past. 
It is one of the great strengths of the XMM-Newton 
observatory that all of the above instruments work in 
parallel. 

The first results from the XMM-Newton 
Observatory have seriously changed our understanding 
of many astrophysical sources of x-rays: from the extrac- 
tion of energy from a black hole, through the distribution 
and state of the hot gas pervading clusters of galaxies to 
the accretion disks of material swirling around collapsed 
stars. It is clear that XMM-Newton is paving the way in 
x-ray imaging spectroscopy, so much so that astronomers 
are already seriously thinking about the potential succes- 
sor which is called XEUS. This will be even larger than 
XMM-Newton, able to observe the first massive black 
holes as they were formed when the universe was only a 
small fraction of its current age. 


Web update (31 July 2002) 
New results from the XMM-Newton suggest a superno- 
va was responsible for the gamma-ray burst that 
occurred on 11 December 2001. Observing the afterglow 
of the gamma-ray burst GRB 011211, XMM-Newton has 
produced the first ever evidence of the presence of chem- 
ical elements which were the unmistakable remnants of a 
supernova explosion which had occurred just a few days 
before. The observations revealed two important facts: 
first, the material in the source was moving quickly 
towards Earth, at a tenth percent of the speed of light; 
and second, chemical analysis of this material showed 
that it had to be the remnant of a supernova explosion. 
Gamma-ray bursts are the most powerful explosions 
ever detected in the universe. So far there has been no 
conclusive evidence to prove what causes them. Until 
now, there have been two prime suspects for what makes 
gamma-ray bursts: the collision of neutron stars—dead, 
ultra-dense stars—or the death of very massive stars in 
supernova explosions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Newton’s Laws of Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Newton’s Laws of Motion 


Laws governing the motion of all bodies which were set 
out by Isaac Newton (1642-1727) in 1687. They form the 
basis of Newtonian mechanics. The three laws are as 
follows: 

First law. Every body continues in a state of rest or 
uniform motion in a straight line unless acted upon by a 
force. 

Second law. If a body is acted upon by an 
external force, it accelerates, the acceleration being directly 
proportional to the force and inversely proportional to 
the mass of the body; the acceleration takes place in the 
direction of the force. This may be expressed as the rate 
of change of momentum of a body is proportional to the 
applied force. This can be written as: 


F=ma 


where F is the applied force, m is the mass of the body and 
a the acceleration. 

Third law. To every action there is an equal and 
opposite reaction; in other words, if a force acts on one 
body an equal and opposite force must act on another body. 
For example, a person standing on the Earth is pressing 
down on its surface with a force equal to his weight; the 
Earth’s surface in resisting this force (so preventing the 
person from falling towards the center of the Earth) exerts 
a reaction, an upward force equal to that person’s weight. 

The essence of some of these laws was appreciated 
by other workers prior to and contemporary with Newton 
(e.g. Galilieo), but he was the first fully to appreciate and 
to formalize them. Newton’s laws of motion express a 
completely different point of view from the earlier belief 
that force is necessary to maintain motion; in Newtonian 
theory force is only required to change the state of motion 
of a body. 


Seealso: gravitation, weight. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Newtonian Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Newtonian Telescope 


Areflecting telescope in which the converging cone of light 
from a concave parabolic primary mirror is reflected to the 
side of the telescope tube by a small flat mirror set at an 
angle of 45° to the optical axis. The light is brought to a 
focus at the side of the tube, at the opposite end of the tube 
from the primary mirror, and this is where the eyepiece 
is located. Originally devised by Isaac Newton (1642- 
1727), who built the first working reflecting telescope to 
this design in 1668, this optical system is still widely used 
today in small reflecting telescopes, since the observer’s 
head does not block incoming light. The design is less 
practical when the telescope focal length is large, say larger 
than a person’s height. 

Newton’s first reflector had an aperture of 2.5 cm 
(1 inch) and its mirrors were made from speculum metal 
(an alloy of various metals, predominantly copper and 
tin) which, even when freshly polished, reflected no more 
than 60% of the incident light. With two such mirrors, 
a tiny aperture, and a magnification of about 25 times, it 
produced very faint images. Furthermore, because the 
curve of its primary mirror was spherical rather than 
parabolic, it suffered from an optical defect called spherical 
aberration. 


Seealso: aperture, focal length, mirror, reflector, spherical 
aberration, telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Next Generation Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Next Generation Space Telescope 


The Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST) will be an 
8 m class deployable, radiatively cooled telescope, 
optimized for the 1-5 wm band, with zodiacal 
background limited sensitivity from 0.6 to 10 pm or 
longer, operating for 10 yr near the Earth—Sun second 
LAGRANGIAN POINT (L2). It will be a general-purpose 
observatory, operated by the SPACE TELESCOPE SCIENCE 
INSTITUTE (STScI) for competitively selected observers 
from the international astronomy community. NASA, the 
European Space Agency (ESA) and the Canadian Space 
Agency (CSA) will build NGST, with construction to 
start in 2004 and a planned launch of 2009. 

NGST will be able to observe the first generations of 
stars and galaxies, including individual starburst regions, 
protogalactic fragments and supernovae out to REDSHIFTS 
of z = 5—20. NGST will resolve individual stars in nearby 
galaxies, penetrate dust clouds around local star-forming 
regions and discover thousands of isolated substellar and 
KUIPER BELT objects. 


NGST science goals 

The primary science goals for NGST have been 
generated by the astronomical community through 
reports to NASA headquarters and science working group 
studies. Although NGST will be a general-purpose 
observatory capable of a variety of investigations, several 
types of observational problems are being examined in 
detail to help design the mission. The following sections 
highlight these programs. 


The origin and evolution of galaxies 

Motivated by the spectacular success of the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) in pioneering the exploration of 
high-redshift (z > 1) galaxies and clusters, the HST & 
Beyond Committee foresaw the enormous potential of a 
scientific successor to HST, optimized for the near 
infrared (NIR, 1-5 um). Such an instrument would be 
especially powerful in studying the origin and evolution 
of galaxies. In 2008, NGST will be poised to complete 
our understanding of the formation and early evolution of 
galaxies such as the Milky Way by doing the following. 


e The earliest phases of star and galaxy formation— 
the end of the ‘dark ages’—will be detected (figure 
1). This requires superb NIR sensitivity (> | nJy (1.0 
x 10°° W m® Hz’), 1-5 pm) in deep-broadband 
imaging (in a ~10° s exposure). 

e = The first galactic substructures larger than individual 
star clusters (whose diameters are typically ~300 pc 
(~9 x 10'° km) for 0.5 < z < 5.0) will be resolved. 
This requires HST-like resolution in the NIR (~0.060 
arcsec at 2 [m). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e The fundamental properties of individual galaxies 
will be quantitatively measured. This will be enabled 
by emission-line and absorption-line spectroscopy, 
with broad spectral coverage and low-to-moderate 
spectral resolution (R = A/5A): R ~ 300 (0.6—-5.0 um) 
for redshift confirmation, cluster membership and 
ages of stellar populations; R ~ 1000 (0.6—5.0 um or 
longer) for star formation rates, metallicity and 
reddening; R ~ 3000 (1.0-10 um) for dynamics 
(mass). 

e Dust-enshrouded regions hiding massive _ star 
formation or active galactic nuclei during the epoch 
of greatest star formation to a minimum of z~2 will 
be detected and diagnosed. 


The structure and chemical enrichment of the 
universe 

The geometry and structure of the universe, as well as its 
history of element formation, are intimately related to the 
formation of galaxies. Future microwave telescope 
missions will measure the power spectrum of the COSMIC 
MICROWAVE BACKGROUND (CMB) at z ~ 1300 and, using 
standard models, will provide or constrain important 
cosmological constants. NGST will play a powerful 
complementary role in determining the distribution of 
mass and light on small scales. Large MICROLENSING 
imaging surveys will use the wide field, superb angular 
resolution and excellent 0.6—5.0 um sensitivity of NGST to 
measure the mass structure of the universe at z = 1-5 on 
scales smaller than those probed by CMB measurements 
from space or possible from the ground or HST. 


10°7 


10-8 
> 
— | 9 
>! 
c 
=. 
wv 10-10 
— 
ra 
190-1! 
lMyrs for 10°° yr 
0° Mat 10° yr 
10 12 ' ‘ 1 


Wavelength (\1m) 


Figure 1. The sensitivity of an NGST deep field (10° s in 30% 
bandwidths, 100 detection). Also indicated are the spectra of 
starburst regions (10° solar masses (2 x 10°° kg) in 10° yr) and 
established populations (10° solar masses at 1 Gyr age) at 
various redshifts (Q, = 0.2). Comparable sensitivities also are 
shown for the Hubble Deep Field (HDF) using NICMOS. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Next Generation Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Expected science programs include the following. 


e The dark matter halos of galaxies to redshifts of z~5 
will be weighed statistically by deep imaging of 
selected fields. 

e The growth of galaxy clusters to redshifts of z ~ 1-3 
will be measured using multicolor deep imaging of 
selected high-redshift clusters and protoclusters 
discovered in other surveys. 

e The statistical properties of the distribution of matter 
on scales of 1-10 Mpc (~3 x 10'*° km) can be 
found from wide-area, high-resolution NGST 
imaging surveys (>1 deg’). 


These imaging programs are comparable in depth and 
required field of view with those used for the study of 
GALAXY EVOLUTION. Such surveys also provide an 
excellent method for discovering type Ia and type II 
SUPERNOVAE at redshifts in the range 1 < z < 5. 
Measuring the rates and galactic associations of type Ia 
and type II supernovae will provide an independent 
assessment of the history of element production. We 
expect that NGST will be crucial in extending the 
observations of type Ia supernovae beyond z~0.9 to z~5. 
Only at the higher redshifts is it possible to distinguish 
between the behavior of type Ia supernovae with 
cosmologies involving only Ho, QO, and [ and models 
with significant supernova evolution or smoothly 
distributed gray obscuration. Such data will provide 
measurements of the cosmological parameters, which are 
independent of and complementary to those derived from 
the CMB missions. 


The processes of star and planet formation 

The potential studies in this arena are essentially limitless 
and depend crucially on the available spectral resolutions 
and mid-infrared (MIR; defined here as ~5 um <1 < ~30 
uum) wavelength coverage. Examples include the 
following. 


e = The infall and outflow processes through which stars 
are built and their final masses determined will be 
characterized. MIR spectroscopy will diagnose the 
accretion shocks in protostellar systems, while NIR 
imaging will reveal outflow shocks and jets near 
their source, with a resolution of ~2 astronomical 
units (~300 million kilometers). 

e = The structure and evolution of circumstellar material 
will be traced, from the massive envelopes of class 0 
protostars to the protoplanetary disks of pre-main- 
sequence stars, and finally to the dissipation of these 
disks into mature debris disks of main sequence 
stars. NIR and MIR spectroscopy of gas and dust 
features, their excitation and their radial variation 
within the circumstellar region will permit study of 
the growth of dust grains toward planetesimals, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


chemical processing of disk gas and the disk 
dissipation mechanisms that define the time 
available for planet formation. 

e = Substellar objects will be detected and characterized. 
Ground-based sky surveys and adaptive optics 
programs are now beginning to discover significant 
numbers of isolated and companion brown dwarf 
stars. However, these observations will be limited to 
the bright (high mass—low age) end of the substellar 
luminosity function and to wide binary companions. 
NGST will have the needed combination of high 
angular resolution, high sensitivity and a stable PSF 
for high-contrast imaging of faint substellar 
companions in planetary orbits. Observations at 5 
uum with a graded-mask coronagraph would be able 
to directly detect planets with Jupiter’s mass, age and 
orbital semimajor axis in more than 90% of the 
single stars within 8 pc (2.4 x 10'* km) of the Sun 
(>50 systems). By detecting planetary photons 
directly, NGST could provide the first opportunity to 
spectrally characterize exoplanet atmospheres. 


NGST mission concept 

The science goals for NGST require a telescope with 
high sensitivity covering the wavelength range from 0.6 
to 10 um with capability out to 28 um, and with NIR 
angular resolution comparable with that of HST at visible 
wavelengths. Industry and NASA have studied several 
mission architectures. While they differ in details the 
concepts share an overall similar design. For simplicity, 
the NASA version, referred to as the Reference 
Architecture, is discussed here. Figure 2 shows the 
observatory and its main components: the Optical 
Telescope Assembly (OTA), the Integrated Science 
Instruments Module (ISIM) and the Spacecraft Support 
Module (SSM). Details for the Reference Architecture 
may be found in the book Visiting a Time When Galaxies 
Were Young. 


The optical telescope assembly 
The Reference Architecture optical configuration is a 
three-mirror anastigmat that provides a real, accessible 
pupil and permits a relatively fast primary mirror to 
minimize telescope length. This design provides 
excellent imaging over a field of more than 20 arcmin 
with achievable alignment tolerances. A real pupil 
permits the use of a deformable mirror (DM) for 
wavefront correction and a fast-steering mirror for fine 
pointing using image compensation. The primary mirror 
is a compact 8 m diameter segmented aperture. It is 
composed of a central mirror segment, with a diameter of 
3.3 m, surrounded by eight petals. 

The Reference Architecture mirror is made of 
beryllium, thermally controlled with very-low-power 
heaters so that its figure remains insensitive to rapid or 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Next Generation Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sec ndary Mirror 


Instrument Module 


Figure 2. The elements of the Reference Architecture concept. 


large positioning slews. The areal density of the primary 
mirror assembly (mirror, actuators and backup structure) 
is 13 kg m~. This represents over an order of magnitude 
improvement over the HST mirror areal density. The DM 
provides a design margin for figure errors in the primary 
mirror, including those due to gravity release, thermal 
gradients or edge effects. 

Unlike telescopes such as HST that are launched 
fully assembled, NGST must be able to compensate for 
errors in deployment position, long-term dimensional 
changes and on-orbit thermal variations. Optics are 
aligned and phased by observing the image of a star and 
deriving mirror position corrections. Wavefront errors are 
determined by obtaining defocused star images and 
analyzing the image with a ‘phase retrieval’ computer 
algorithm. 


The Reference Architecture Integrated Science 

Instrument Module 

The ISIM consists of a cryogenic instrument module 

integrated with the OTA, and processors, software and 

other electronics located in the Spacecraft Support 

Module. The ISIM provides the structure, environment 

and data handling for several science instruments. 

This ISIM design is illustrative and is not intended to 
define NGST’s final complement of instruments. The 
Reference Architecture instrument suite includes the 
following. 

e An NIR camera covers 0.6—5 tum, critically sampled 
at 2 um. Efficient surveying capability, as well as 
guiding requirements, set the field at about 4 arcmin 
x 4 arcmin, apportioned over four subcameras each 2 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


arcmin on a side. The NIR detectors (InSb or thinned 
HgCdTe) are radiatively cooled to 30 K. 

e An NIR multi-object spectrometer, with spectral 
resolutions of 300 and 3000 and a spatial resolution 
of 100 marcsec, covers a field of 3 arcmin x 3 
arcmin. Multi-object capability is enabled by an 
array of 2048° micromirrors used to form a reflective 
slit mask, directing light into or away from the 
spectrometer. 

e An MIR camera-spectrometer covers a field of 2 
arcmin x 2 arcmin with a spectral range of 5—28 um 
using a | K x | K Si:As array as detector and a long- 
slit cross-dispersed grism. Its spectral resolution is 
~10°. The camera employs a selection of slits and a 
no-slit option to enable direct imaging with filters. 
The MIR detector is cooled to 6 K by a miniaturized 
reverse turbo-Brayton cooler; open-cycle solid 
hydrogen cooling has been identified as a viable 
alternative. 


Passive cooling and thermal control 

NGST designs solve the problem of cooling to the 
cryogenic temperatures required for NIR and MIR 
operation passively by (a) protecting the observatory 
from the Sun with a multilayer shield, (b) using a 
heliocentric orbit to decrease the Earth’s thermal input 
and (c) configuring the telescope to have a large area 
exposed to space to improve radiative cooling. 

To make the thermal emissivity negligible compared 
with the zodiacal light, the back of the sunshield must be 
below 100 K. This is accomplished by adding five low- 
emissivity layers behind the surface of the shield facing 
the Sun. The main optics then reach very low 
temperatures (<40 K) and do not contribute significantly 
to the overall emissivity of the observatory. 


Sky coverage 

The observatory can be pitched +25° off the sunline and 
rolled 360° about the sunline. The portion of the sky 
accessible is a 50° wide spherical band centered 20° away 
from the perpendicular to the sunline. This represents 
~40% of the entire sky. Full sky coverage is achieved in 
slightly less than 6 months. At any time, any target in the 
accessible zone can be tracked for a minimum of 7 
weeks. 


Launch and orbit 

The overall mass of the Reference Observatory NGST is 
approximately 3300 kg, within the capability of an Atlas 
IIAS or the next generation of medium launchers (EELV 
Medium). Deployment of the OTA occurs soon after 
launch, before the sunshield is deployed, while all the 
mechanisms are still relatively warm. Optics alignment 
can then begin, followed by science calibration as the 
telescope cools. The halo orbit at L2 is reached about 3 
months later. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Next Generation Space Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Science and mission operations 

NGST’s Science and Mission Operations will be simple 
and efficient because of the telescope’s location at L2. 
Operations for NGST will be based on an optimized 
long-range observing plan that consists of sequenced 
science programs ranging from large imaging surveys, 
often with pre-planned spectroscopic follow-ups, to 
intensive studies of individual objects. 


Discovery potential 

NGST will be an observatory with enormous discovery 
potential both at 0.6—-10 wm and at longer wavelengths. 
This is illustrated in figure 3, which shows the time to 
achieve a broadband, high-resolution wide-field image 
with a variety of facilities: NGST, HST, GEMINI 
OBSERVATORY (representing IR-optimized ground-based 
8 m telescopes) and SPACE INFRARED TELESCOPE 
FACILITY (SIRTF). NGST enjoys a_ significant 
background advantage over the ground at ll 
wavelengths, a larger field of view over which high- 
resolution images can be obtained (4 arcmin x 4 arcmin 
assumed) and a significant aperture advantage over 
SIRTF. The shorter times required to achieve a given 
threshold sensitivity can translate into larger fields 
observed (more targets) or greater sensitivities. 

At wavelengths between 2.2 and 10 um, NGST is 
many orders of magnitude faster than any other planned 
facility. In practice, it will have sensitivities several 
orders of magnitude better than even SIRTF because of 
source confusion in very deep observations. In this 
regard, SIRTF is a superb instrument for surveys of 10- 
100 square degrees. NGST is best used for deeper 
observations of smaller pre-selected fields. At 
wavelengths longer than 10 um, NGST will surpass 
SIRTF by an order of magnitude in sensitivity despite a 
much higher MIR background. For NIR and MIR 
spectroscopy, it will be unsurpassed between 0.9 and 
28 um (28 wm is the cutoff for Si:As detectors) because 
NGST’s thermal background is much reduced at high 
spectral resolution. 

The ‘uniqueness space’ for NGST is defined relative 
to the many large ground-based telescopes that will be 
operating by 2009. The criterion is that NGST be at least 
100 times faster than an optimally operated and equipped 
8 m telescope with laser guide stars and adaptive optics. 
In the NIR, the NGST imaging uniqueness space is very 
large. For moderate spectral resolution 2D spectroscopy 
the effects of detector noise significantly narrow the 
uniqueness space. At this resolution and detector dark 
current, ~0.02 e pixel s', NGST is no longer 
background limited in the visible or NIR ( < 4 pm). For 
spectroscopy of single faint targets, for instance, NGST 
would be used primarily in the NIR (+0.9 pm). For high- 
resolution spectroscopy in the visible and J(1.25 um) 
and K(2.2 um) bands (R > 5000) or for visible imaging of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lhe 


NGST 
DISCOVERY 
SPACE 


100 hr 


107 hr 


Time to make an observation 


Gemini 


10° hr 
lum 10 um 
Wavelength 
Figure 3. NGST Discovery Space: the relative speed of 
broadband NGST high-resolution, wide-field imaging 


compared with other observatories (HST, ACS, NICMOS, 
Gemini and SIRTF). 


large fields with 0.4 arcsec resolution, large ground- 
based telescopes are competitive with NGST. This is 
where the large telescopes planned for the next decade 
will make major contributions. 

It is instructive to consider the relative power of 
NGST compared with that of HST. HST is currently 
unique in the windowed ultraviolet (0.1—0.3 um, a factor 
of 3 in wavelength). It has comparable sensitivity but 
superior resolution over ground-based telescopes in the 
visible and NIR (0.3-1.8 um, a factor of 6). NGST will 
have 10-100 times more imaging sensitivity than HST 
and superior resolution at 2.5 um (a factor of 4 or 
comparable with HST at 0.6 um). It will be unique in 
imaging and spectroscopy from 2.5 to 28 um (a factor of 
10 in wavelength). It is clear from this simple analysis 
that NGST will have at least as great an impact on 
astronomy as HST. 


Bibliogaphy 

Dressler A (ed) 1996 HST and Beyond Exploration and the 
Search for Origins: a Vision for Ultraviolet-Optical-— 
Infrared Space Astronomy (Association of Universities for 
Research in Astronomy) 

Stockman H S (ed) 1997 Next Generation Space Telescope 
Visiting a Time When Galaxies Were Young (Association 
of Universities for Research in Astronomy) 


Eric Smith 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 1068: Prototypical Seyfert 2 Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 1068: Prototypical Seyfert 2 
Galaxy 


NGC 1068 is a nearby spiral galaxy which harbors 
the prototypical example of a Seyfert type 2 nucleus. 
However, all evidence points to the conclusion that its 
active nucleus is completely hidden to our view by dense 
obscuring material. If we could see NGC 1068 along 
an unobscured line of sight it would appear radically 
different. This unveils the importance of orientation of 
the observable properties of ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI. The 
extended emission line region in NGC 1068 bears a strong 
morphological connection with the radio emitting plasma. 
This close association suggests that nuclear outflows play 
a fundamental role in the origin of narrow line regions in 
SEYFERT GALAXIES. 


Basic data 

NGC 1068 is an early type, BARRED SPIRAL GALAXY located in 
the Cetus—Aries group. It lies very close to the celestial 
equator and this makes it visible from both hemispheres 
(RA 02"42" 40.711° DEC-00700"47.81°, J2000). Its 
recessional velocity is 1148 + 5 km s~! which corresponds, 
after correction for the Virgocentric infall and adopting 
Hy = 75 km s7! Mpc", to a distance of 14.4 Mpc. At this 
distance an angular separation of 1” translates to 72 pc. 
NGC 1068 is very bright over the whole electromagnetic 
spectrum. For this reason, and for its many peculiarities, 
it belongs to several catalogs of galaxies. Table 1 lists the 
most common aliases for NGC 1068. 


Table 1. NGC 1068 aliases 


Messier 77. UGC 2188 
ARP 37 TRAS 02401-0013 
3C 71 PKS 0240-00 


The optical appearance of NGC 1068 is dominated 
by a 13 kpc oval bulge elongated on a NS orientation 
from which originate two spiral arms (see figure 1). The 
most vigorous star formation, however, occurs in a ring- 
like region with a diameter of ~2 kpc (see figures 2(a) 
and 2(b)). On a smaller scale HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) 
observations shown a bright compact knot which stands 
out from the diffuse emission of the central regions of the 
stellar bulge (see figure 2(c)). Active star formation is often 
associated with nuclear activity in Seyfert galaxies (see the 
article on STARBURST GALAXIES). Several absorption features 
forma filamentary spiral-like structure around the nucleus 
and a dust lane (extending over ~180 x 35 pc) is projected 
just south of the brightest knot. 

Infrared images reveal a quite different morphology. 
In particular they are dominated by the presence of a 
conspicuous stellar bar which extends over ~3 kpc along 
position angle ~50°. Furthermore, a bright central source 
is also seen at these longer wavelengths but, as will be 
discussed later, it is not coincident with the optical knot. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Digital Sky Survey optical image of NGC 1068. The 
field of view is 10 x 10 arcmin. 


NGC 1068 hosts one of the most studied active 
galactic nuclei (AGN) in the sky. It is the first object 
listed in the original discovery paper by seyFERT containing 
galaxies with strong ultraviolet excess and in this sense 
it represents the prototypical Seyfert galaxy. Its optical 
spectrum is characterized by prominent emission lines. 
Since permitted and forbidden lines share a similar width 
(~1000 km s~') NGC 1068 is classified as a Seyfert type 2 
galaxy (as opposed to Seyfert type I in which permitted 
lines are broader than the forbidden ones). Ground-based 
studies have shown that the region where the narrow 
emission lines are produced is extended and covers several 
arcsec north of the nucleus. Deep spectroscopy and 
imaging also revealed a much fainter and more extended 
(50 arcsec) emission line region with a well defined conical 
morphology. 

A bright radio source (16 Jy at 178 MHz) is also asso- 
ciated with NGC 1068. The radio emission is dominated 
by a central component which, in high resolution images, 
reveals a jet-like morphology originating from the nucleus 
and extending towards the north. Two radio lobes form a 
bipolar structure which extends over ~15”. 


NGC 1068 harbors a hidden active nucleus 

Since the discovery of significant optical POLARIZATION in 
Seyfert nuclei the study of their polarized flux has proved 
to be a powerful tool for probing the properties and the 
geometry of their inner regions. 

Three astrophysical processes are known to produce 
polarized emission: synchrotron radiation, transmission 
of light through aligned dust particles, and scattering. 
However, in Seyfert galaxies, synchrotron radiation at 
optical wavelength is negligible and dichroic transmission 
has a relatively low efficiency and thus cannot account for 
the high degree of polarization observed (as high as 60%) 
in NGC 1068. Conversely, when a photon is scattered 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 1068: Prototypical Seyfert 2 Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(4) 


(©) 


Figure 2. NGC 1068 as seen by HST: (a) Visual continuum, (b) Ha emission line image showing the 2 kpc ring of star formation, 
(c) innermost nuclear regions of NGC 1068. Fields of view are 50 arcsec for (a) and (b) and 15 arcsec for (c). 


it acquires a net linear polarization which, for a right 
angle scattering, can be as high as 100%. This indicates 
that scattering is the dominant polarization mechanism in 
Seyfert galaxies. The degree of polarization in NGC 1068, 
after correction for the starlight contribution, is essentially 
constant (~16%) over the UV and optical wavelength 
range. This strongly argues that electrons, whose 
scattering cross section is independent of wavelength, 
represent the dominant scattering medium, at least in the 
innermost nuclear regions. 

Polarization observations represent a unique tool to 
distinguish scattered light from light produced in situ. 
In particular, optical spectropolarimetry revealed that the 
spectrum of the polarized light of NGC 1068 is radically 
different from that observed in traditional spectroscopic 
observations. The polarized spectrum of NGC 1068 closely 
reproduces the spectrum of a type I Seyfert galaxies with 
the presence of broad permitted hydrogen and iron lines. 
The simplest interpretation is that NGC 1068 harbors a 
Seyfert Inucleus which is hidden to our view by obscuring 
material, probably arranged in a torus or on a highly 
warped disk. The minimum vertical height of the torus 
is set by the requirement that the whole region in which 
the broad lines are produced must be covered, ~0.1-1 pc. 
Light produced from the nucleus can reach us only after 
it has been scattered into our line of sight and is therefore 
polarized. 

Imaging polarimetry has been particularly useful to 
confirm this scenario (See POLARIMETRY: IMAGING POLARIME- 
TRY). From two-dimensional mapping of polarized light it 
is possible to derive the location of the illuminating sources 
and of the scattering medium. In fact, the plane of polar- 
ization is perpendicular to the direction of the last free 
path before the scattering and this enable us to trace this 
path back to the source of illumination. The polarization 
vectors are thus expected to be tangential to circles drawn 
around the nucleus and to form a centro-symmetric pat- 
tern. This behavior has been indeed clearly observed in 
NGC 1068 which, in this sense, can be described as a giant 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


REFLECTION NEBULA. By modeling such a pattern it is possi- 
ble to accurately locate the hidden nucleus as the center of 
the polarization circles. In agreement with the proposed 
unified model, there appears to be no visible counterpart 
at this location since the nucleus is not seen directly. Con- 
versely, the hidden nucleus lies at the center of the nuclear 
dust lane which probably mark the location of the obscur- 
ing torus. 

The distribution of polarized light also provides 
evidence that the nuclear radiation field is anisotropic, as 
expected if the torus intercepts the nuclear light over a 
substantial solid angle. Indeed, the polarized emission 
is concentrated within a region which cover an angle 
of ~70° as seen from the nucleus. This is reminiscent 
of the conical distribution of the large-scale ionized gas. 
The torus is ‘shading’ a large portion of the galaxy from 
the illumination of the nuclear radiation field. While in the 
optical the scattering nebula and the emission line region is 
strongly asymmetric and essentially only the northeastern 
side is visible (as well as the extended line emission), at IR 
wavelengths they are clearly seen also on the southwestern 
quadrant. 

The strongest direct evidence in favor of the presence 
of dense obscuring nuclear material comes from high 
resolution interferometric radio observations. When 
looked at with a resolution of 0.002”(~1.5 pc) the radio 
component closest to the hidden nucleus shows an 
elongated morphology, approximately 20 mas in size, 
oriented perpendicularly to the radio jet. Its radio spectrum 
is well accounted for as thermal emission from hot ionized 
gas at a temperature of 10° degrees. However, water 
maser emission has been detected associated to the same 
physical region and this requires the presence of warm 
(~400 K) high density (~10°-10"°) gas. These two results, 
combined, point to the idea that we are indeed seeing the 
inner portion of an edge-on dense disk or torus. 


Is the NGC 1068 active nucleus hidden at all wavelengths? 
As already discussed the nucleus is completely obscured 
from ultraviolet to optical wavelengths. The region of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 1068: Prototypical Seyfert 2 Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio-lobe 
edge 


—<—______ 


6" 3" 


Low ioniz. 


High ioniz. halo 
core 


Low ioniz. te 
halo 


Hidden nucleus 


Figure 3. Schematic representation of the various components of the NLR and other features of interest in NGC 1068 overlaid on 
Ha+[N II] HST images. The black circle indicates the location of the hidden nucleus. 


brightest optical emission is located ~20 pc north of the 
hidden nucleus as determined by imaging polarimetry 
and radio observations. In the near-infrared, where dust 
extinction is less severe, there is a compact central source 
(smaller than 2 pc) coincident to the location of the nucleus. 
However, this emission is produced by the hot dust located 
in the innermost regions of the obscuring torus rather than 
by the nucleus itself. This is confirmed by the lack of 
detection of infrared permitted broad lines which, if the 
nucleus was seen directly at these wavelengths, should 
be associated with the nuclear emission as in the case 
of Seyfert I galaxies. Similarly, radio observations of 
the nuclear region do not show the presence of radio 
continuum emission near the center of the torus. 

X-ray observations seem to represent our best chance 
to see the nucleus directly. In fact, the amount of material 
needed to absorb the x-ray emission is much larger that in 
the optical band, particularly in the hard x-ray band (~2- 
10 keV) where a gas column density of the order of Ny ~ 
10 atom cm~ is needed. As a comparison, in the optical 
band a column density of ~5 x 107! atom cm™ produces an 
absorption depth of 1 and typical galactic column densities 
are ~107! atom cm~?. Indeed, NGC 1068 is a strong x-ray 
emitter and its hard x-ray spectrum is similar to those of 
Seyfert I with one important exception: no variability is 
seen over a timescale of 10 yr. Another puzzling result 
is that the x-ray spectrum does not show the effects of 
significant absorption; if we were seeing the x-ray nucleus, 
these high-energy photons should cross the same material 
which is responsible for the obscuration in the optical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and infrared bands, and thus produce easily detectable 
absorption features. These results can be understood 
if the x-ray nuclear emission is not seen directly but is 
scattered, similar to what is seen in the optical. In this 
picture the scattering region is not affected by absorption 
from the nuclear torus and it is extended so that the 
intrinsic variability of the incident nuclear continuum 
is smoothed out. In support of this interpretation the 
hard x-ray spectrum of NGC 1068, and in particular 
the prominent iron emission lines, can be successfully 
modeled by scattering over a combination of neutral and 
ionized reflectors. Recent observations moved the limit 
in photon energy at which only the scattered component 
can be seen, to ~100 keV, consequently increasing the 
minimum column density of the torus to ~107° atom cm~?. 

We can conclude that we have no direct view of the 
nucleus of NGC 1068 but only through a small fraction 
of nuclear light which is scattered or reprocessed into our 
line of sight. Interestingly, the detection of scattered light 
implies that light can escape the nuclear regions, although 
not in our direction. If we could see NGC 1068 from 
these unobscured lines of sight it will probably look like 
an ordinary Seyfert I galaxy. 

The key relevance of these obserations of NGC 1068 
is that they clearly show that the properties of an active 
galaxy depend critically on its orientation. This prompted 
the development of a unified model for Seyfert galaxies in 
which the two Seyfert classes are intrinsically identical and 
differ only for their orientation with respect to the observer 
and this scheme is now proving to be widely applicable 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 1068: Prototypical Seyfert 2 Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


also to other classes of AGN. 


The origin of the emission line region in NGC 
1068 

The large-scale distribution of line-emitting gas in NGC 
1068 shows a sharp conical morphology, clearly indicative 
of illumination from an anisotropic source of ionizing 
photons. Recent HST imaging shown that such a cone-like 
morphology is also seen on a smaller scale, ~4 arcsec, but 
the axis of symmetry of this inner ‘cone’ is rotated some 30° 
clockwise from the outer one. The changing orientation 
with distance suggests that the gas does not fill uniformly 
the region illuminated by the nucleus. 

In this respect, particularly intriguing is the relation- 
ship between the emission-line region and the radio emis- 
sion (see figure 3). The inner radio jet lies in a region 
of relatively low optical emission and is surrounded by 
most prominent line-emitting clouds. Similarly, ona larger 
scale, a network of line-emission filaments completely en- 
velop the northeastern radio-lobe. These results can be 
understood as due to the interaction between the outflow- 
ing radio plasma and the surrounding medium: in this 
scenario the outflowing plasma is sweeping, compressing 
and heating the interstellar gas. As a result of this inter- 
action and compression the gas takes the form of dense 
shells and the line emission is highly enhanced along the 
edges of the radio-jet and lobes. 

Strong support to this scenario comes from the 
velocity field of the narrow line region (NLR). Within 
0.5 arcsec of the radio-jet the emission lines are 
kinematically disturbed and split into two components 
whose velocity separation is 1500 km s“!, while the 
filaments associated with the radio lobe are redshifted 
by 300 km s7!. This is clearly a consequence of the 
acceleration of the ionized gas driven by the expansion 
of the radio plasma. 

The radio outflow might also be important for the 
ionization properties of the gas. In fact, the material 
along the radio-jet is in a much higher ionization state 
than the remaining of the NLR. Because the electron 
density is substantially larger in this region compared to 
the surrounding gas, these results can only be explained 
if there is a more intense ionizing continuum associated 
with the jet. This can be accomplished in a variety of 
ways which include an intrinsically anisotropic nuclear 
radiation field but also the presence of a local ionization 
source such as thermal emission from hot gas heated by 
the interaction with the radio-jet. 

It therefore appears that the morphology of line- 
emitting region in NGC 1068 is dominated by the 
presence of a radio outflow, which sets the distribution 
of ionized gas, rather than to the anisotropy of the nuclear 
illuminating source and it may also play a crucial role in 
determining its ionization properties. 


Bibliography 


In 1996, a four-day workshop was dedicated to the 
discussion of the latest results on NGC 1068. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


proceedings of this meeting, published in 1997 in the 
248th volume of Astrophysics and Space Science, provide 
a valuable source of additional information and further 
reading on this galaxy. 


A Capetti 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 4151 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 4151 


NGC 4151 is one of the nearest and brightest active 
galaxies, being among the original six ‘Seyfert’ galaxies 
singled out by Carl Seyfert in 1947 for the unusually strong, 
broad emission lines in their spectra (see SEYFERT GALAXIES). 
NGC 4151’s rather anonymous designation as the 4151st 
entry in Dreyer’s 1888 New General Catalogue belies its 
prominence in modern astronomical studies. Its proximity 
and brightness make possible detailed observations with 
good spatial resolution using a wide variety of techniques 
across the entire electromagnetic spectrum from the 
radio through the gamma ray. These observations have 
provided valuable insights into the general workings of all 
active galaxies (see ACTIVE GALAXIES: OVERVIEW, QUASISTELLAR 
OBJECTS: OVERVIEW and ACTIVE GALAXIES: OBSERVATIONS). 

NGC 4151 is located in the constellation Canes 
Venatici (the Hunting Dogs), and it is visible through 
a modest-size telescope in the northern spring sky. As 
shown in figure 1, it is a spiral galaxy with a moderately 
bright bulge (Sab on the Hubble classification sequence). 
The most prominent feature of its visual appearance, 
however, is the bright, point-like nucleus that is the center 
of activity. The whole galaxy has an integrated visual 
magnitude of 10.8, and 35% of this light is emitted by the 
nucleus itself. 

Modern surveys have catalogued thousands of 
Seyfert galaxies, and astronomers have subdivided these 
unusual galaxies into two major classes. The nuclei of 
Seyfert 1 galaxies display unusually broad emission lines 
as well as some narrower lines. (These ‘narrow’ lines are 
typically much broader than the emission lines seen in 
normal galaxies or Galactic nebulae.) In Seyfert 2 galaxies, 
all the emission lines have similar widths comparable to 
the narrow lines in Seyfert 1s. The nuclear spectrum of 
NGC 4151 displays both broad lines and unusually strong 
narrow lines, and occasionally the broad lines are so faint 
that they are difficult to see. It is therefore often classified 
in an intermediate category, ‘Seyfert 1.5’. 

Owing to the expansion of the universe, NGC 4151 
is receding from us at a velocity (relative to the Sun) of 
cz = 995 km s7!, as measured by the neutral hydrogen 
gas that fills its galactic disk. For a Hubble constant of 
65 km s“! Mpc"!, this places it at a distance of 15 Mpc, 
or 50 million light years. At this distance, features 0.1 arc 
seconds across, capable of being resolved by the Hubble 
Space Telescope (HST), span a physical distance of 7.4 pc, 
or 24 light years. 


Visual appearance 

NGC 4151 has a visual size of 4.5 x 6.3 arc minutes, 
bounded by a set of outer spiral arms that merge into a 
faint ring. The plane of the spiral disk is inclined to our line 
of sight by 21°, and the major axis of the disk is oriented at 
a position angle of 26°. As is usual for active galaxies, the 
nuclear light is bluer than that of the surrounding galaxy. 
The galaxy has an integrated color of B — V = 0.73, while 
the nucleus has B — V = 0.58. Spectra of the nucleus 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Visible light image of NGC 4151 from the Digital Sky 
Survey. The image covers an area of 160 x 160 square arc 
seconds on the sky. 


Figure 2. Emission-line image of NGC 4151 in the light of [O III] 
obtained with WFPC2 on HST. The image size is 15 x 12 square 
arc seconds. 


reveal broad emission lines and a non-stellar, power law 
continuum, but, depending on the size of the aperture 
used, galactic starlight is seen in varying degrees as well. 
HST images of NGC 4151 resolve the narrow-line 
emission in the nuclear region on the sub-arc second 
scale. As shown in figure 2, its morphology is biconical, 
similar to that seen in Seyfert 2 galaxies (like the prototype 
NGC 1068). The cones have an opening angle of 75°, and 
they are oriented at a position angle of 60° on the sky. 
Long-slit spectroscopy of this emission using the Space 
Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) on HST shows that 
the gas is outflowing from the nuclear region. Images with 
ground-based telescopes trace the narrow-line emission in 
filaments extending up to 30 arc seconds from the nucleus. 
This is often called the ‘extended narrow-line region.’ 


Ultraviolet properties 
At shorter ultraviolet wavelengths, the starlight of the 
galaxy proper in NGC 4151 nearly disappears, and its 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 4151 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a 8p Lya 4 
| J 
ot L | CIV 4 
in } | | 

n 
ny [ | | | 
‘g 25 | | 
0 t | |L’2, Le | 
[ MM J 
a Af NV SiIV+OIV] \ | | Hell | 
: / | | NIV] /| | | O11] Nu] | 
a | | | ‘| Wy | | 
fo) af / \ | 

Rwal \, a \ | | 
ey wt ‘I | {emery ph pete Mam nT | gat by | 
! yey Wy : i ea 
x sit ! | | | ‘ Sill | | wees 
— git Sill 1 
ae | ; OI CII SilV CIV. Fell ANID T 
+ SVI PIV CIIl CIII* NV ®@ 4 
Witt 1 J 

Gos sap EH agi pe fe a ye ye Sg ee 
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 3. Far-ultraviolet spectrum of NGC 4151 obtained with the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope during the Astro-2 mission. 


appearance is completely dominated by the bright, point- 
like nucleus. As in visible light, the nuclear spectrum 
shows a non-stellar continuum and prominent broad 
absorption lines. This spectrum, shown in figure 3, is 
similar to that seen in other Seyfert 1 galaxies (and in 
quasars) except for one unusual characteristic, which is 
the strong, complex assortment of absorption lines. While 
weak UV absorption lines are seen to be common in HST 
spectra of Seyfert galaxies, these are usually restricted to 
the transitions of highly ionized atoms and the Lyman 
a transition of hydrogen. In NGC 4151 absorption lines 
are associated with nearly all ionization levels, and they 
are particularly strong, broad (200-300 km s~'), and blue 
shifted, indicating that the absorbing gas is outflowing 
from the nucleus. 


X-ray characteristics 

At x-ray energies, NGC 4151 is one of the brightest sources 
in the sky outside our own Galaxy. The 2-10 keV x-ray flux 
is variable on time scales as short as days, and it roughly 
averages 2.5 x 107! ergs cm? s"1. This corresponds to a 
luminosity of 7 x 10% ergs s~!, making NGC 4151 one of 
the intrinsically least luminous Seyfert galaxies. The x-ray 
emission is dominated by the point-like nucleus, but there 
is some surrounding faint extended emission. 

The x-ray spectrum of NGC 4151 is complex, and it 
displays a variety of features that have both illuminated 
and puzzled our understanding of active galaxies. The 2— 
10 keV spectrum is dominated by a power law continuum 
showing strong, variable absorption at energies below 4 
keV. The power law continues to higher x-ray energies 
before showing an exponential cutoff beyond 100 keV. A 
strong 6.4 keV emission line attributed to Fe Ka emission 
is also present. 

The most unusual aspect of the low-energy absorption 
is that x-ray emission is still visible at low energies at levels 
above what would be predicted by simple absorption by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cold gas at the required column densities of ~ 10°? cm~?. 


When this was first noticed in observations obtained with 
the Solid State Spectrometer on the Einstein Observatory, it 
was interpreted as ‘partial covering’ of the x-ray source by 
the absorbing material, as might happen when a myriad 
of individual small clouds each obscured only a small 
portion of the x-ray emitting region, thereby allowing 
some of the x-ray flux to leak through holes between the 
clouds. More recent and detailed x-ray observations with 
the Japanese ASCA satellite show that the excess emission 
is more complex. Matching the observations requires 
the absorbing material to be partially ionized, thereby 
making it more transparent at x-ray energies, having a 
small percentage of the original x-rays scattered into our 
line of sight, and adding a soft thermal component at 
energies below 0.7 keV. In this model the ionized absorber 
could also serve as the scattering medium as well as the 
source of the soft thermal emission. 

The shape of the hard x-ray spectrum and the presence 
of the iron emission line are signals of Compton x-ray 
reflection. This type of emission is generally seen in Seyfert 
galaxies, and it arises when the primary x-ray source 
illuminates surrounding colder material covering a large 
solid angle, such as an accretion disk (See ACCRETION DISKS). 
The Fe Ka emission shows both a narrow component 
as well as one that is relativistically broadened with 
the shape expected for material in an accretion disk 
orbiting the central black hole. Once the effects of the 
Compton reflection are taken into account, the intrinsic 
x-ray spectrum can be modeled as the emission produced 
when a hot (60 keV), optically thick plasma cloud Compton 
scatters low-energy seed photons. A natural source for 
these low-energy photons is the ultraviolet and optical 
radiation from the outer portions of the accretion disk. 
Thus Compton scattering is operating in two regimes and 
in two separate locations here—first, at high temperatures 
in the production of the primary x-rays, and second, in the 
reflection of those x-rays from cold surrounding material. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 4151 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio morphology 

Among active galaxies, NGC 4151 belongs to the class 
known as ‘radio quiet.’ Radio quiet doesn’t mean radio 
invisible, however. At radio wavelengths, NGC 4151 also 
displays unusual activity compared to a normal galaxy. 
The nuclear region has a total radio flux of 145 mJy at 
6 cm (5 GHz). This is resolved on arc-second scales into a 
two-sided radio jet oriented at a position angle of 77° and 
extending about two arc seconds from the nucleus. The 
radio core coincident with the nucleus is itself extended, 
and it is resolved with very long baseline interferometry 
(VLBI) into an elongated structure that is misaligned with 
the larger scale radio jet, but at an orientation (position 
angle 57°) that is nearly aligned with the biconical narrow- 
line region imaged with HST. 


Unified models 
Unified models that link the Seyfert 1 and Seyfert 2 classes 
of active galaxies rely on a combination of geometrical 
factors to explain the disparate appearance of what are 
intrinsically identical objects (See ACTIVE GALAXIES: UNIFIED 
MODEL). The basic Seyfert galaxy of either type has a 
‘central engine’ in which material accreting onto a central 
black hole generates the radiation that we see and which 
illuminates the surrounding material in the host galaxy. 
Fast-moving gas clouds near the central engine emit the 
characteristic broad lines seen in Seyfert 1 galaxies; this is 
called the ‘broad-line region’. Slower moving clouds at 
distances of 10-100 pc in the ‘narrow-line region’ produce 
the narrower lines typical of Seyfert 2 galaxies. An opaque 
ring, or torus, surrounds the central engine and the broad- 
line region. This torus blocks radiation from escaping 
in its plane. Thus, the narrow-line region is illuminated 
by radiation that has been collimated into two opposing 
cones. In Seyfert 2 galaxies, our line of sight lies in the 
plane of the torus. Our view of the central engine and 
broad-line region is blocked, and what we see is dominated 
by the extended, conically shaped narrow-line region. In 
contrast, our view of Seyfert 1 galaxies is from above the 
plane of the torus, where we have a clear line of sight to 
the broad-line region and the central engine. Since our 
line of sight lies within the cone of collimated radiation, 
any extended narrow-line structure has a symmetrical 
distribution about the point-like nucleus rather then the 
twin cones often seen in Seyfert 2s. In addition, the 
brilliance of the radiation from the nuclear region often 
makes the much fainter narrow-line clouds difficult to see. 
The appearance of NGC 4151 presents a challenge to 
the simple unified model outlined above. The biconical 
narrow-line region imaged with HST and shown in figure 
2 is typical of what one would expect in a Seyfert 2 galaxy, 
and it implies that our line of sight lies in the shadow 
of whatever structure is collimating the radiation. Yet, 
we clearly have a direct view of the central engine and 
broad-line region since the broad lines characteristic of a 
Seyfert 1 are prominent in its optical and UV spectra. Thus 
the collimation cannot be provided by an optically thick 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


torus. Two possible explanations have been discussed in 
the literature. 

The narrow-line region can still take on the 
appearance of a cone if the illuminated material lies in 
a thin plane parallel to the disk of the galaxy rather than 
uniformly filling the conical region of collimated nuclear 
radiation. Since the conical structure has sharp edges that 
can be traced down to distances less than 0.5 arc second 
from the nucleus, the plane must be no thicker than 35 
pe and have sharp upper and lower boundaries. The 
virtue of this explanation is that the difference between 
the observed axis of the ionization cone and the radio jet is 
simply due toa projection effect. There are two difficulties, 
however. First, the ionization cone must have an intrinsic 
opening angle of 130°, much higher than the ~ 90° inferred 
for other Seyferts. Second, the vertical distribution of the 
gas is unusually thin compared to our own Galaxy, and 
it must be sharply bounded rather than have a smooth 
vertical gradient. 

The other alternative notes that while our line of 
sight to the central engine in NGC 4151 is fairly clear, 
it is not completely unobstructed. The x-ray spectrum 
shows heavy (but partial) low-energy absorption, and the 
UV and optical spectrum is rich in absorption features, 
including an optically thick Lyman limit. These absorption 
features are unusual for Seyfert 1 galaxies, and they are 
only found in those Seyfert 1s in which a biconical narrow- 
line region is visible. (NGC 3516 is the only other known 
case.) A slight modification of the unified model in which 
the obscuring torus is surrounded with a thin atmosphere 
can explain the absorption features and the biconical 
appearance of the narrow-line region. The gas in this 
atmosphere will be photoionized by the central source, and 
radiation pressure may drive it in an outflowing wind as 
seen in the high luminosity broad absorption-line quasars. 
This can produce the blue-shifted, ionized UV absorption 
features. For lines of sight through the atmosphere in 
which the total column density is ~ 107! cm~, the view 
is clear at all wavelengths longer than the Lyman limit 
of neutral hydrogen (912 A), but it is optically thick 
throughout the ionizing UV and into the soft x-ray region 
of the spectrum. This atmosphere can then effectively 
collimate the ionizing radiation and still provide a clear 
line of sight to the central regions. One can then explain 
the unusual characteristics of NGC 4151 within the context 
of unified models by simply requiring a special line of sight 
for this unique object. 


Bibliography 

HST imaging of NGC 4151 and opposing viewpoints of 
its implications for unified models of Seyfert galaxies are 
presented by 


Evans I N et al 1993 Astrophys. J. 417 82 
Boksenberg A et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 440 151 


Recent radio imaging of NGC 4151 is tied into this debate 
by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 4151 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pedlar A et al 1993 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 263 471 


The ultraviolet spectrum of NGC 4151 and the implications 
of the absorbing gas for collimating the ionizing radiation 
are discussed by 


Kriss G A et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 454 L7 


The original paper on the soft x-ray spectrum of 
NGC 4151 and the ‘leaky’ absorber can be found in 


Holt S S et al 1980 Astrophys. J. 241 L13 
More recent x-ray observations are discussed by 
Weaver K A et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 436 L27 


The relativistically broadened iron line in NGC 4151 is 
shown by 


Yaqoob T et al 1995 Astrophys. J. 453 L81 


The x-ray though y-ray spectrum of NGC 4151 and models 
for its formation are discussed by 


Zdziarski A A, Johnson W N and Magdziarz P 1996 Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 283 193 


Gerard A Kriss 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 5128/Centaurus A: 150 Years of Wonder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 5128/Centaurus A: 150 Years of 
Wonder 


Just over 150 years ago, in 1847, Sir John Herschel saw 
in the southern sky ‘a most wonderful object ... cut 
asunder ... by a broad obscure band’ (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). 
At the time, there was no clue as to the nature of this 
celestial object. It took well over half a century for 
observational astronomy to advance to the point where 
it could hypothesize that it was extra-galactic, and only 
in the last 50 years have advances in radio, infra-red, x- 
ray, y-ray and optical astronomy permitted us to think we 
understand this unusual and visually spectacular object. 

We now know it as the galaxy NGC 5128. We know 
that its dominant visual feature is a dust lane, a large, edge- 
on disk of gas and dust around the galaxy, with areas 
of recent star formation, thought to have resulted from 
a past merger with another galaxy—updating the very 
early model for the morphology of a collision between 
two ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES. We know that it is a strong radio 
source, and hosts an ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEUS (AGN) which 
is a powerful source of emission at many wavelengths— 
AGN are thought to be SUPER-MASSIVE BLACK HOLES, accreting 
interstellar material from the host galaxy. In fact, we 
more commonly use its radio designation CENTAURUS A. 
Finally, we also know that Centaurus A is not unique. 
There are untold numbers of galaxies with significant dust 
lanes and features; dust is thought to play a major role 
in the evolution of galaxies and in star formation. We 
know that mergers play a major role in galaxy evolution 
and star formation. And we know that there is a broad 
variety of nuclear activity in galaxies, that massive black 
holes may be present at the centers of most, if not all, 
galaxies, that mergers may also be related to the presence 
of nuclear activity and/or massive black holes, and that 
nuclear activity may in turn affect star formation. 

The phenomena we see in Centaurus A are thus, 
in fact, quite common, and Centaurus A is likely 
representative of many galaxies. Much of its uniqueness, 
and its spectacular appearance, arises from its proximity 
to us. At a distance of 3.5 Mpc, it is one of the 
nearest galaxies outside the LocALGRoup—the nearest giant 
elliptical galaxy, the nearest radio galaxy, the nearest active 
galactic nucleus, and the nearest example of a recent 
merger. The unprecedented detail potentially visible in 
Centaurus A due to its proximity allows us to learn more 
about all these phenomena: it should be an excellent 
laboratory for investigating the nature of active galactic 
nuclei, of radio and x-ray jets, of mergers, and of the 
relation among these phenomena. But in one of nature’s 
perversities, the very dust lane which gives the galaxy its 
spectacular appearance also blocks visible investigations 
of the nuclear region. We must rely on all of modern 
astronomy’s observational tools to understand this object. 


The galaxy as a whole—its optical appearance 
Optically, NGC 5128 appears as an elliptical galaxy with 
a dark lane cutting through the central region (figure 1). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The obvious visual image stretches out some 5-10 arcmin, 
although intensity contours can be traced several times 
further out. Kinematic studies and dynamic modeling 
suggest a triaxial geometry. Estimates for the distance 
to NGC 5128 have varied though the years, ranging up 
to 8 Mpc, but it is now widely accepted to be between 3 
and 3.5 Mpc away; we use the value of 3.5 Mpc—11 or 
12 million light years away. At this distance, one arcsec 
corresponds to 17 pc; an arcmin is just about a kpc. 

If we ignore the dust lane and inner region, NGC 5128 
actually appears visually as a fairly normal giant elliptical 
galaxy. Most of the light comes from an older stellar 
population, and the light distribution follows a de 
Vaucouleurs law. The integrated visual magnitude of 
about 7 makes it one of the brightest galaxies in the sky, 
even without compensating for the obscuring dust lane 
(the intrinsic magnitude is ~ — 22). Outside the dust lane, 
the light has an R-I color ~0.7, average for an elliptical. 
Inside the dust lane, the color varies generally from 0.9 
to 1.5, with occasional higher peaks. Correcting for the 
estimated extinction reveals a relatively smooth brightness 
distribution, confirmed by near-infrared observations 
which are less affected by the dust. Within the dust lane, 
polarized red and infrared emission is seen, with spatially 
variable polarized intensity proportional to extinction, 
but with a relatively constant position angle of ~110°. 
This suggests that the POLARIZATION is caused by dichroic 
transmission through aligned dust grains. The highest 
polarization region at the center has a different angle 
and coincides with a flatter spectrum compact knot, 
interpreted as a scattering knot very close to the active 
nucleus. 

In the outer regions, NGC 5128 has a faint blue shell 
structure. These shells are interpreted as being caused 
by a galaxy merger—a small, gas and dust-rich disk 
galaxy colliding with the existing giant elliptical galaxy 
some 108-10 yr ago. The outer shells are debris of the 
intruder galaxy—stars and gas stripped from the small 
galaxy during the interaction. The blue color suggests the 
shells include new stars formed as a result of the collision. 
Neutral hydrogen is also seen near the shells. 

The dust lane itself comprises the remaining gas and 
dust of the tidally disrupted incoming galaxy, having 
formed a disk around the center of the original giant 
elliptical galaxy. Molecular (e.g. CO, HCO*, HCN), Ha, 
and H I kinematic mapping of the dust lane in emission 
and absorption are well modeled by a warped, twisted 
gas disk around the nucleus, viewed nearly edge-on. 
This disk, with a projected width of approximately an 
arcmin, effectively obscures the nucleus and the inner half- 
kiloparsec of the galaxy in the optical. The outer parts of 
the warped disk reflect the orbital plane of the incoming 
galaxy, the inner portion having settled into a principal 
plane of the elliptical galaxy. Sub-millimeter and recent 
ISO mid-infrared observations (See INFRARED SPACE MISSIONS) 
have shown a 5 kpc structure along and within the dust 
lane, symmetrical around the nucleus. This structure 
resembles a barred spiral associated with the thin disk 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 5128/Centaurus A: 150 Years of Wonder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Deep visible light image of NGC 5128, showing the large (50’ ~ 50 kpc) low-luminosity extent of the elliptical galaxy, the 


bright bulge, and the warped dustlane. 


formed by tidal debris; itis, perhaps, related to the transfer 
of material into the central region around the AGN. 


Associated with the edges of the dust lane are 
young blue stars, stellar associations, globular clusters, 
and H II regions. Early HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (WFPC1) 
observations revealed some 74 sources above detection 
limits (23.0, 22.6 in R, I) along the northern edge of the 
dust lane, much larger than the density in neighboring 
parts of the galaxy. The luminosities of many of these 
objects exceed that expected for single stars, and many 
were resolved on the several parsec scale. A large 
color dispersion, with many blue objects dominated by 
spectral type A or earlier stars, is consistent with recent 
The blue stars, 
stellar associations and globular clusters, also studied with 
HST/WFPC2, indicate that new stars were likely formed 
along the dust lane as a result of the merger. 


star formation along the dust lane. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The active galaxy—Centaurus A in radio, x-rays 
and infrared 
Centaurus A was one of the earliest powerful discrete 
radio sources discovered, and is, of course, the nearest 
of the giant RADIO GALAXIES (see figure 2). It was the 
identification of NGC 5128 with Centaurus A in 1949 
that sparked interest in the galaxy, suggesting that it was 
indeed an unusual object. One of the well-known early 
optical images of the galaxy was labeled ‘NGC5128— 
peculiar galaxy, source of radio noise’. Baade and 
Minkowski confirmed its extragalactic nature by radial 
velocity measurements in 1954. Early radio observations 
revealed giant outer lobes on a scale of several degrees 
and intermediate and smaller scale structure down to the 
scale of several arcmin. It was only in 1980, however, that 
high resolution observations with the VLA revealed the 
detailed morphology of the inner lobes, nucleus and jet 
(see below). 

The nucleus itself, although invisible in the optical, 
has by now been studied for years via radio, x-ray, gamma 
ray, infrared, and mm observations. It was one of the first 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 5128/Centaurus A: 150 Years of Wonder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-40 T : r, T 


1° (60 kpe) 


otf + 


aL 


a 
. 
— 


Declination (1950) 


* 
5, 

o 

——+* 


* 
4 
_— 


746°} 


aT 


n 1 _ 
ham 20m wh” 
Right ascension (1950) 


wa 


X 950 


otive Decl, (milllorcsec) 


Rel 


93/07/03, | 
8.4 GHz | 


10 mas (0.17 pe) | 


10" (170 pe) 


Figure 2. Radio structure of Centaurus A on scales of 6° down to milliarcsec, a dynamic range of several million. 


active galactic nuclei identified, even before we recognized 
AGN as a major category of astrophysical phenomena. A 
strong x-ray source was found in the vicinity of Centaurus 
Ain 1970. The x-ray source was confirmed to be associated 
with the nucleus of the galaxy by UHURU and ANS. Its 
luminosity is about 10” erg s~', not particularly unusual 
for AGN. It shows a simple power law spectrum in the few 
keV to tens of keV range, similar to that of Seyferts seen 
in the same energy range. Strong absorption is seen at 
low x-ray energies, historically thought to derive from the 
optically obscuring dust lane, but now better interpreted 
via the so-called standard model of AGN, in which we are 
looking through a dense accretion torus around a black 
hole. OSSE gamma-ray data show a slightly flatter power 
law out to 120 keV, and other gamma-ray observations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


have shown some steepening again at higher energies. Fe 
K-line emission has been detected by ASCA, consistent 
with reprocessing by the 107? H cm~ column, and some 
other Ha lines are seen at lower x-ray energies, suggesting 
scattering and fluorescence in a thinner, cooler medium 
outside the nucleus. An infrared hotspot was reported as 
the nucleus in 1971, but modern observations reveal a lot 
of structure in the nuclear region (see below). 

When x-ray imaging with the Einstein Observatory 
became possible in 1979, a jet and other diffuse features 
were discovered in addition to the nucleus. The 
spectacular jet was the first such discovered via its x-ray 
emission, and only subsequently studied in radio with the 
VLA. Extended x-ray emission on the scale of the galaxy as 
a whole, at the level of about 10°°-10 erg s~', originally 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 5128/Centaurus A: 150 Years of Wonder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Upper panel: HST WFPC2 image of the core of NGC 5128. Note the bright young stars along the edge of the dustlane. Lower 
left: HST NICMOS image of the ionized gas at the nucleus of the galaxy. Lower right: Schematic model of the hot gas disk around the 


active nucleus and the radio/x-ray jet. 


hypothesized as inverse Compton emission from the radio 
lobes, was later found to be common in other galaxies, 
and is likely due to emission from hot gas produced by 
stellar mass loss. Ridges of x-ray emission parallel to 
but outside the dust lane have been interpreted as being 
associated with the young population in the disk of the 
galaxy, possibly the integrated emission of massive x-ray 
binaries. 

The radio source in general, and the jet in particular, 
is not unusual. The large-scale structure is typical of 
the large class of medium power, double-lobed radio 
sources, although the presence of both inner and outer 
sets of lobes suggests at least two different epochs of 
radio activity. Possibly related to this, the symmetry 
axis changes progressively from the outer to inner lobes, 
and in to the observed jet, suggesting changes in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


jet direction over time, caused, perhaps, by precession. 
The jet morphology is rather similar to that of ms7, 
with constant opening angle and knots, having an inner 
core and an outer halo. The nucleus has an inverted 
spectrum (a = —0.55), and jet shows a synchrotron 
spectrum, steepening slightly with distance (a ~ 0.48 > 
0.72 — 0.86 in the lobe) and with rather good correlation 
between radio and x-ray morphology in the inner 
knots, suggesting that the x-ray emission might also be 
synchrotron. Unfortunately, x-ray spatial and spectral 
resolution has not yet been adequate to unambiguously 
distinguish among synchrotron, thermal, and inverse 
Compton emission mechanisms. A synchrotron model 
would require continuous re-acceleration of electrons to 
replenish their energy, since the x-ray emitting electron 
lifetimes would only be ~50 yr or less, far less than the light 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 5128/Centaurus A: 150 Years of Wonder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. NGC 5128 = Centaurus A. The inner radio lobes and jet (blue outline, stretching from lower right to upper left) and the high 
resolution HST true-color image (central regions), superimposed on the ground-based, lower resolution visible light image. This 


figure is reproduced as Color Plate 37. 


travel time along the jet. Then again, in a perverse ‘catch 
22’ of nature, if there is indeed re-acceleration, we might 
also expect to see shocks, which could in turn produce 
thermal x-rays. 

In addition to the jet components seen in x-rays, 
there are also several radio components within 1-5” of the 
nucleus, a viBI jet on the scale of 100-150 mas, showing 
sub-luminal motion, and a VLBI counterjet. The VLBI 
observations, on the one parsec scale, are consistent 
with Centaurus A being an FRII source; the jet is not 
relativistically beamed toward us—it is close to the plane 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the sky. VLBA observations limit the size of the nucleus 
to ~0.5 mas ~0.01 pe ~10 light days, the smallest known 
extragalactic radio source. X-ray variability suggests an 
even smaller size, since the source is known to vary on 
scales ranging down to less than a day. 

Optical emission from the jet has been variously 
reported through the years at different places in the galaxy. 
There are indeed faint blue filaments of line-emitting 
gas and stars about 8’ from the nucleus along the line 
of the jet, but outside the radio lobe. These suggest 
jet interaction with the interstellar medium, but are not 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


NGC 5128/Centaurus A: 150 Years of Wonder 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


directly correlated to specific x-ray /radio features. There 
is also a faint linear optical feature along the position angle 
of the jet near the nucleus seen by HST, but there have 
been no confirmed detections of optical counterparts to 
any radio or x-ray knots. 


The active galactic nucleus—a black hole 
The proximity of this nearest active galaxy, in which 1” 
corresponds to only 17 pc, presents the expectation that it 
would be a good test bed to explore the standard model 
for AGNs at the parsec scale. Nonetheless, the obscuring 
dust lane, with its high extinction, has hindered high 
resolution studies of the innermost regions around the 
presumed BLACK HOLE. X-ray spectroscopy has suggested 
the presence of thermal components near the nucleus 
in addition to the highly cut-off, non-thermal emission 
from the nucleus itself, and AXAF is expected to further 
improve our understanding of the high energy emissions 
from the AGN. High resolution imaging and spectroscopy 
in the near-infrared, made possible by HST and by the 
new generation of ground-based 8 m telescopes, are 
rapidly remedying our lack of insight into the immediate 
environment of the massive black hole, as we write. HST 
has produced diffraction-limited images in U, V, I, Hand K 
bands, and HST and VLT are likely to soon produce spectra 
with spatial resolutions on the 0.1” scale in R through K. 
HST/WFPC2 visible light images have not only 
revealed new detail of the morphology within the dust 
lane, but have finally revealed the unresolved nucleus in 
V and I (see figure 3). HST/NICMOS near-infrared images 
also show the nucleus and extended galaxy emission, 
but in addition reveal an elongated ionized structure, 
interpreted as a gas disk emitting in Paschen a and [Fe 
I1]A1.643 wm. This inclined disk is approximately 20 pc 
in radius and roughly perpendicular to the larger dust 
lane, perhaps on another principal plane of the galaxy. 
Notably, the disk is not perpendicular to the jet, despite 
the fact that the standard model suggests that the central 
torus around a black hole would be perpendicular to a jet. 
The ionized feature is thought to be an extended ACCRETION 
DISK, aligned with the gravitational potential of the galaxy, 
perhaps transferring material from the dust lane and the 
barred structure seen in the mid-infrared into the dense 
torus around the black hole at the center. Ground-based 
near-infrared spectroscopy has revealed broadened lines 
at the nucleus in the 1-2.5 wm range, likely dominated by 
the integrated emission from this disk, leading to hopes 
that we will indeed be able to use HST or the 8 m telescopes 
to map the velocity structure in the disk, measure the mass 
of the black hole, and perhaps better understand the details 
of the accretion process itself (see figure 4). 


Summary 

NGC 5128—Centaurus A—is indeed a wondrous object, 
as first noted more than 150 years ago. We now know 
that its wonder goes far beyond its visual appearance. 
It gives us a close-up look at a number of astrophysical 
phenomena which are fundamental to our current world 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


view of the universe and its evolution: the nature of 
AGNSs and the presence of super-massive black holes at the 
centers of galaxies; the role of mergers in star formation, 
in the building of elliptical galaxies, and in the presence 
of activity in galaxies; and the presence of dust and its 
relation to all these processes. The spectacular appearance 
is due merely to its proximity and orientation—it is 
otherwise representative of a large class of giant elliptical 
galaxies with nuclear activity. It illustrates the fact that 
the nearest objects of a class often do not initially fit 
into canonical models—their proximity allows us to see 
far more detail and more strictly test standard models 
and interpretations of phenomena derived from observing 
more distant objects, seen with fuzzier vision. Our 
growing understanding of our close neighbor Centaurus A 
will allow us to extrapolate our understanding to galaxies 
at much greater distances and ages, gaining new insight 
into the evolution of galaxies and of the universe. 

The author gratefully thanks Anton Koekemoer for 
help in preparing this article. 


Bibliography 

Israel F 1998 Centaurus A—NGC5128 Astron. Astrophys. 
Rev. 8 237 

Marconi A et al 1999 Unveiling the active nucleus of 
Centaurus A Astrophys. J. at press 


E J Schreier 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nicholas of Cusa [Nicolaus Cryffts, Chrypffs or Krebs, 
Nicolaus de Cusa, Cusanus] (1401-64) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nicholas of Cusa [Nicolaus Cryffts, 
Chrypffs or Krebs, Nicolaus de Cusa, 
Cusanus] (1401-64) 


Cardinal and philosopher, born in Cues or Cusa, Germany. 
He studied at Heidleberg and Padua, and became a 
cardinal in 1448. He marks the end of the philosophy of 
the Middle Ages. In his writing on astronomy, he denied 
the finitude of the world and its enclosure by crystal walls, 
suggesting instead that the universe was ‘interminate’— 
‘without boundaries’—and that the Earth therefore cannot 
be at the center of the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nicholson, Seth Barnes (1891-1963) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nicholson, Seth Barnes (1891-1963) 


Astronomer, born in Springfield, IL, joined the staff of 
the Mount Wilson Observatory. While photographing 
the recently discovered eighth moon of Jupiter with the 
36 in Crossley reflector, he discovered the ninth, whose 
orbit he computed. He discovered three more of Jupiter’s 
satellites, as well as a Trojan asteroid. He observed the 
Sun, including its sunspot activity and magnetism. With 
Edison Pettit he used a thermocouple to measure the 
temperature of the Moon (illuminated and eclipsed) and 
the planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nicolaus Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nicolaus Copernicus 


Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) was a Polish astronomer 
whose De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium (1543) was 
the final achievement under the agenda of the ancient 
Greek astronomers and—by its claim that the Earth orbits 
the Sun—provided a major contribution to the later 
development of a dynamics of inertial motion. 

Mainstream Greek astronomy conceived the universe 
as being bounded by the spherical heavens, in the 
midst of which was the spherical (and motionless) 
Earth. Astronomers attempted to ‘save the appearances’ 
(to reproduce the observed movements) of the planets 
by means of calculations based on geometrical models 
centered on the Earth; these models comprised circles on 
whose circumferences the center of another circle, or the 
planet in question, moved (PLANETARY THEORY FROM EUDOXUS 
TO COPERNICUS). Since Venus (for example) orbits the Sun 
which appears to us to orbit the Earth, and since the orbits 
are in each case not very different from circles and the 
speeds of the two bodies not very far from uniform, a 
model of the motion of Venus in which the planet moves on 
a circle whose center moves uniformly in a circular though 
somewhat eccentric orbit about the Earth can give an 
encouraging first approximation to the observed behavior 
of Venus. On the other hand, the desire for accuracy (on 
the part of astronomers and astrologers alike) guaranteed 
that no such model, nor any elaboration of it, would ever 
prove completely satisfactory: there would always be an 
incentive to develop and refine further. 

In the second century AD, PTOLEMY in his Almagest 
and elsewhere had developed models that came near 
to saving the appearances. However, in these models 
Ptolemy had found it necessary to introduce non-uniform 
motion, namely motion that appeared uniform when 
viewed from an off-center ‘equant’ point that we recognize 
as analogous to the empty focus in a Keplerian ellipse. 
This violated a fundamental truth about the cosmos, and 
so brought about a rift between natural philosophers 
interested in understanding the universe and astronomers 
glad to have models that, whatever their defects, gave 
good predictions. 

Another limitation of the Ptolemaic models was their 
ad hoc character. In the Almagest, which was to dominate 
astronomy for 14 centuries, Ptolemy used devices that had 
no rationale other than that they worked. Thus, faced 
with the observed fact that Venus and Mercury are never 
seen far from the Sun, he simply required the centers of 
the models for Venus and Mercury to be aligned with 
the mean Sun, without offering any explanation of why 
this should be so. Furthermore, in the Almagest Ptolemy 
made no attempt to combine the individual models into a 
unified system with a common scale. In the Renaissance, 
when both Aristotle’s concentric nested spheres model 
was recovered, and the competing detailed mechanisms 
of Ptolemy understood, an integrated and intellectually 
satisfying picture of the cosmos became once more an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


important desideratum, and this came to be seen as a 
serious defect. 

By the fifteenth century, Latin scholars were in the 
later stages of assimilating the achievement of Ptolemy, 
as mediated and elaborated by Islamic astronomers (see 
ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY). They recognized that the Western 
planetary tables based on the Almagest and named for 
the thirteenth-century Alfonso X of Castile, were of good, 
though by no means perfect, accuracy. On the other hand, 
Ptolemy’s use of the equant violated a basic truth of natural 
philosophy, and his failure in the Almagest to offer an 
intellectually satisfying view of the cosmos as a whole was 
becoming increasingly troubling. 

The man who developed geometrical models that 
more than matched Ptolemy’s in predictive accuracy and 
achieved this without resorting to equants, and who 
also provided an elegant and convincing picture of the 
cosmos, was born in Torun on the Vistula on 19 February 
1473. Nicolaus Copernicus was the son of a prosperous 
merchant who died a decade or so after his son’s birth. 
Copernicus then came under the protection of his uncle, 
who was to become bishop of Warmia in 1489. From 1491 
to 1495 Copernicus studied at Cracow, where his purchases 
included a volume of the Alfonsine Tables. In 1495 his 
uncle obtained for him a canonry of the chapter of Warmia 
(a position that did not necessitate his being ordained 
priest), but he did not formally take up the post until 1497. 
In 1496 he enrolled at Bologna, the leading university for 
law, where he studied both canon and civil law, though 
he resided with the professor of astronomy. In 1497 and 
(twice) in 1500 he made astronomical observations that he 
was later to use in his major publication, and about 1500 
he is reported to have lectured in Rome on astronomy. In 
1501, after Copernicus had returned to Poland, the chapter 
agreed to his studying medicine at Padua for two years. 
This done, he again returned to Poland, where he was to 
remain for the rest of his life. At first he became personal 
physician and administrative assistant to his bishop uncle, 
but in 1510 he moved to Frauenberg, the headquarters of 
the chapter. 

Meanwhile Copernicus’s interests in astronomy 
had developed, and somewhere he had encountered 
the planetary theory of the Islamic astronomers of 
Maragha, elements of which were to appear in his own 
mature planetary models, to the wonderment of modern 
historians. The catalog of the library of a Cracow professor 
dated 1 May 1514 contains an entry, ‘Next a quire of six 
leaves of a Theorica maintaining that the Earth moves while 
the Sun is at rest’, and this must refer to a copy of the little 
treatise that Copernicus was circulating anonymously and 
in manuscript and is known as the Commentariolus. Its 
modern editor thinks it ‘may have been written in a 
momentary burst of enthusiasm, perhaps immediately 
upon devising the heliocentric theory’. 

Already in this sketch we encounter the problem 
that would bedevil the later acceptance of his developed 
theory: he was attempting two different tasks, the 
promulgation of a new cosmology in which the Earth was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nicolaus Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in orbit about the Sun, and the provision for mathematical 
astronomers of a new set of planetary models purged of 
the equant, that philosophically suspect device employed 
by Ptolemy. 

Of his great De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium 
Libri VI (Six Books on the Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres), which eventually appeared in 1543, only the 
first 10 chapters of Book I, or about 6% of the whole, 
were dedicated to cosmology. The remaining 94% 
was densely mathematical and inpenetrable to all but a 
handful of specialists. These specialists would for the 
most part focus on what interested them and ignore the 
preliminary cosmology, while the many who might have 
debated the cosmology would pass by so forbidding a 
volume—especially since (as we shall see) an anonymous 
preface explained that the motion of the Earth was 
proposed merely as a mathematical device to facilitate 
computational accuracy. 

The problematic nature of this assertion, that the book 
was intended merely to save the appearances, would have 
been clear to anyone willing to master its contents; but, 
as Copernicus was well aware, it was indeed formally 
impossible, simply by means of applied geometry, to 
demonstrate the motion of the Earth. Only when Kepler 
taught astronomers to think dynamically would it become 
clear that the Sun must be the focus of the planetary system. 
All Copernicus could do was to argue that the harmony 
and simplicity of the heliocentric vision was convincing, 
and not only to him but to anyone who shared Plato’s sense 
of cosmic beauty. 

The planets had worried Greek astronomers not only 
by moving against the background of the ‘fixed’ stars— 
which was bad enough—but by coming to a halt from 
time to time and temporarily reversing their direction 
of movement. But on the heliocentric approach such 
retrogressions were to be expected; indeed, it would be 
worrying if they did not occur. For if the Earth is one 
of several planets orbiting the Sun, then we will expect 
the Earth from time to time to overtake each of the outer 
planets, and the outer planet will then appear to retrogress, 
not because it is in fact moving backwards, but because 
the Earth is moving forwards faster. We will expect this to 
occur when the outer planet is in opposition to the Sun— 
and in fact this is exactly what we observe. Similarly, when 
the Earth is overtaken by an inner planet, the planet will 
appear to reverse its normal direction; and this will happen 
when it is in inferior conjunction with the Sun. 

A problem with Ptolemaic astronomy had been that 
while Saturn was slower than Jupiter in circuiting the sky, 
and therefore was plausibly further away, while Mars was 
quicker and therefore nearer, the Sun, Venus and Mercury 
all took one year to go round against the background of the 
stars; the order of their respective distances from Earth was 
therefore moot. In other words, in Ptolemaic astronomy 
even the very order of the planets was open to debate. But 
on the heliocentric view, not only the order of the planets 
but the actual radii of their orbits could be determined. If 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


we observe the angle Sun—Earth—Venus (and Sun—Earth— 
Mercury) when the planets are at maximum elongation 
from the Sun, then elementary trigonometry will give us 
the radii of their orbits as fractions of an astronomical unit. 
Observations of the outer planets can likewise yield the 
radii of their orbits, and in this way we can envision a 
true system of the planets, which we may depict with the 
(basic) orbits all drawn to scale. 

Furthermore, the annual period of the Sun, Venus 
and Mercury was revealed as no more than a reflection 
of the annual period of the Earth: Venus and Mercury had 
quite different periods which could now be determined. 
It then emerged that the order of the planets by distance 
exactly matched the order of the planets by period—not a 
formal proof of the heliocentric hypothesis, but thoroughly 
persuasive to those of a certain cast of mind. Indeed, 
given this geometry it was easy to predict just when 
a planet would appear to stop its forward movement, 
and when it would subsequently resume this forward 
movement once more: the phenomena that had given 
the ‘wandering stars’ their name had been shown to be 
thoroughly lawlike and amenable to prediction, no more 
than a natural consequence of the Earth’s status as one 
planet among several. 

The merits of a heliocentric cosmology are sketched 
in the Commentariolus. The author also offers geometrical 
models for the motions of the various planets, in longitude 
and in latitude. The models for longitude are modified 
from the Maragha models, but referred to the center of 
the Earth’s orbit, while those for latitude derive more 
directly from Ptolemy. These models are no more than 
outline, and would require elaboration before becoming 
the basis for computations of sufficient accuracy. The 
parameters involved in this elaboration would depend 
upon observations to be made when the planets concerned 
were in particular configurations, and the opportunities 
for such observations would be spread over many years. 

Copernicus’s interest in astronomy had to take second 
place to his duties as a canon. So for three years, and later 
for a part of a fourth, he was Administrator of Benefices, 
required to travel throughout the chapter’s estates 
collecting revenues and administering justice. During 
these three years he drew up a set of recommendations for 
the reform of the coinage, whose debasement he ranked 
as a disaster alongside civil strife, disease and famine. For 
much of 1523 he was Administrator General of the diocese 
between the death of one bishop and the appointment of 
his successor. 

Furthermore, he lived in troubled times; and even in 
the rare intervals of peace his medical skills were much 
in demand. But by about 1530 the necessary astronomical 
observations for the determination of parameters had been 
made, and soon his treatise was taking shape. By the 
middle 1530s he was able to compute an almanac (now 
lost), as a demonstration that the heliocentric approach 
was more than empty rhetoric. By 1539 the work was 
essentially complete, and in May of that year he allowed 
sight of it to a young visitor, Georg Joachim RHETICUS 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nicolaus Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(1514-74). Rheticus was a professor of mathematics at 
the University of Wittenberg, and he brought with him 
as gifts a number of mathematical and astronomical books 
that had been published in Nuremberg by Johann Petreius. 
By this time, despite Copernicus’s isolation, word of his 
astronomical work had spread in the German-speaking 
world, and even as far as Rome, and Rheticus’s curiosity 
had been aroused. Copernicus allowed Rheticus to 
summarize his treatise in a Narratio Prima, or First Account, 
which appeared in 1540. By then the elderly canon was 
revising his work for publication, while Petreius had 
indicated a strong interest in being the publisher. 

In October 1541 Rheticus returned to Wittenberg to 
resume his teaching, and he either took Copernicus’s 
manuscript with him or had it sent to him soon thereafter. 
In May 1542 Rheticus was able to deliver the fair copy 
to Petreius, and in the coming months he corrected the 
proofs, until he was appointed to a post at Leipzig. The 
task of seeing the book through the press then passed 
to a Lutheran clergyman, ANDREAS OSIANDER, Who took it 
upon himself to forestall criticism of Copernicus by adding 
an unsigned preface to say that the motion of the Earth 
was not being proposed as a truth of nature but merely 
for purposes of calculation. Rheticus was involved in 
an attempt to persuade the Nuremberg town council to 
compel Petreius to issue a corrected edition in which 
Copernicus’s true position on the question was clearly 
stated, but this failed, and the misleading preface was 
taken to be the author’s until KEPLER revealed Osiander’s 
role after the turn of the century. 

Late in 1542, Copernicus suffered a cerebral hemor- 
rhage and paralysis of his right side, but he lingered on 
until 24 May of the following year. We are told he received 
the final pages of De Revolutionibus on the day of his death; 
but if so, he would hardly have been aware of it. 

For the remainder of the century Copernicus’s treatise 
was mined by mathematical astronomers for the ingenuity 
of its planetary models. Not until 1596 did Kepler publish 
an unabashedly heliocentric cosmology, and not until 1610 
did GauILEo’s telescopic observations lead him to embark 
on a reform of physics that would make it possible for 
Earth-dwellers to accept the notion that they inhabited a 
spinning, orbiting planet without feeling any sensation of 
movement. 


Bibliography 

Duncan A M (trans) 1976 Copernicus: On the Revolutions 
of the Heavenly Spheres (Newton Abbot: David & 
Charles) 

Gingerich O 1983 Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Kepler The 
Great Ideas Today: 1983 (Chicago: Encyclopaedia 
Britannica) pp 137-80 

Rosen E 1959 Three Copernican Treatises revised edn (New 
York: Dover) 

Swerdlow N 1973 The derivation and first draft of 
Copernicus’s Planetary Theory: a translation of the 
Commentariolus with commentary Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. 
117 (6) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Swerdlow N M and Neugebauer O 1984 Mathematical 
Astronomy in Copernicus’s De Revolutionibus (New 
York: Springer) 


Owen Gingerich and Michael Hoskin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical 
Center 


Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center is the largest 
astronomical institution in Poland, located in Warsaw and 
founded in 1956. At present it is a government-funded 
research institute supervised by the Polish Academy of 
Sciences and licensed by the government of Poland to 
award PhD and doctor habilitatus degrees in astronomy 
and astrophysics. In September 1999 staff included 
21 senior scientists with permanent or tenure-track 
positions; 13 post-doctorates; 16 PhD students. The main 
research fields are theory and observations of binary stars; 
stellar structure and pulsations; stellar atmospheres and 
circumstellar matter; cosmology and large-scale structure 
of the universe. 

A PhD program in astronomy and astrophysics is 
taught and there is international cooperation with various 
observational projects: Integral (a gamma-ray telescope 
to be launched in 2001); SALT (South-African Large 
Telescope) and WET (Whole Earth Telescope); French— 
Polish program Jumelage (collaboration in theoretical 
astrophysics). Main achievements are the structure of and 
mechanisms operating in cataclysmic binaries; evolution 
of single and binary stars; theory of thick accretion disks; 
helioseismological models of the Sun’s interior; limits on 
the equation of state of neutron stars; Compton reflection 
in AGNs. 

For further information see 
http://www.camk.edu.pl. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Niels Bohr Institute for Astronomy, Physics and 


2 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
Geophysics 


Niels Bohr Institute for Astronomy, 
Physics and Geophysics 


NBIfAFG is located at Blegdamsvej 17, DK-2100 Copen- 
hagen, Denmark. NBIfAFG has four physics departments 
including COPENHAGEN UNIVERSITY ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY 
(CUAO). 

For further information see 
http://www.nbi.dk/NBIfAFG 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Nitrogen (N) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nitrogen (N) 


The element that is the principal constituent of the Earth’s 
atmosphere (making up, at ground level, 78.08% by 
volume). By number of atoms, it is the fifth most 
abundant element in the universe (by mass, it is seventh). 
The chemical symbol for nitrogen is N, and its normal 
molecular form, N2 (ie. a molecule made up of two 
nitrogen atoms). Its atomic mass is most commonly 14 
and its atomic number is 7. Although nitrogen makes 
up the major part of the Earth’s atmosphere, it comprises 
only 3.5% of the atmosphere of Venus and 2.7% of the 
atmosphere of Mars. 


See also: cosmic abundance of elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nobel Prize Winners in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nobel Prize Winners in Astronomy 


One of the greatest honours which can be bestowed upon 
any human being is the Nobel Prize. It is named after 
Alfred Nobel, a Swedish physicist who was particularly 
noted for his work on explosives. Nobel was born in 
1833, and had a long and successful career, so that, when 
he died, on 10 December 1896, he left a large sum of 
money. This was to be put into a trust to establish an 
annual prize to those who, in the preceding year, shall have 
conferred the greatest benefit on mankind; there were to 
be prizes for physics, chemistry, physiology or medicine, 
literature and peace. Note that there was to be no specific 
Nobel prize for astronomy, but it is impossible to separate 
astronomy from any other branch of science, and several 
Nobel laureates have earned their prizes for work which 
is mainly astronomical. 

The decisions are made by four institutions, three 
Swedish and one Norwegian; the prize involves a gold 
medal, a diploma and a sum of money. 

The first prizes were awarded in 1901, five years 
after Alfred Nobel’s death. An early laureate was SVANTE 
AUGUST ARRHENIUS, a Swedish chemist (1859-1927). The 
citation read that he received the prize ‘in recognition of the 
extraordinary services he has rendered to the advancement 
of chemistry by his electrolytic theory of dissociation’, but 
he was also very much concerned with astronomy; he 
studied cosmic physics, and was particularly concerned 
with radiation pressure on comet tails. He also put 
forward the ‘panspermia’ theory, according to which life 
on Earth did not originate here, but was brought to our 
world by a meteorite. The theory never gained wide 
acceptance, and neither has a much more modern theory, 
due to Sir Fred Hoyle and Chandra Wickramasinghe, that 
life was brought here via comets. However, it caused a 
great deal of discussion, and in his own field Arrhenius 
certainly deserved the Nobel Prize. 

In 1907 the Physics Prize went to ALBERT A MICHELSON 
(1852-1931), German by birth but who spent most of his 
career in America. He was awarded the prize for his 
work on designing optical instruments and carrying out 
experiments with them. He is best remembered for his 
part in the Michelson—Morley experiment, in which it was 
demonstrated that the velocity of light is constant and 
is independent of the Earth’s motion in space—a result 
which finally disproved the existence of the hypothetical 
‘aether’, a medium which was supposed to permeate all 
space. He also designed an interferometer, which was 
used with the Mount Wilson 100 in reflector to make the 
first direct measurements of the angular diameters of some 
nearby giant stars such as Betelgeuse. 

Obviously we cannot forget ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879- 
1955), widely and justifiably regarded as the world’s 
greatest mathematician since Newton. In 1905, while still 
working at the Patent Office at Berne in Switzerland, he 
published three theoretical papers—and in retrospect any 
one of these was good enough to earn a Nobel Prize. 
In 1915 he produced his general theory of relativity, on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which all subsequent work has been based. He was finally 
awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1921. 

It seems strange that Einstein had to wait several 
years for this recognition, but an even longer delay was 
experienced by the two American physicists ARNO PENZIAS 
(1933-) and ROBERT WOODROW WILSON (1936-), who shared 
the 1978 Physics Prize with the Russian, Peter Kapitsa. 
The story here goes back for more than a dozen years. 

It began with some theoretical work in the United 
States by R HDICKE, who was investigating the very early 
stages of the universe. According to the ‘big bang’ theory, 
the universe as we know it came into existence around 
12000 million years ago; space, time and matter were 
created simultaneously. (One cannot ask what happened 
before the big bang, because if time started at this moment 
there was no ‘before’.)' The temperature at this moment 
was of the order of 10° K, but cooling was rapid, and 
3 min after the big bang the temperature was down 
to a few thousand million kelvins. By now, according 
to Dicke’s calculations, the overall temperature of the 
universe should have fallen to 3 K—that is to say, 3 degrees 
above absolute zero, the coldest temperature that there can 
possibly be (—273 °C). In this case, a background radiation 
should be detectable at radio wavelengths. 

Meanwhile, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson had 
been carrying out work with a specially built radio 
telescope, not to search for any background radiation but 
for quite different reasons. They found a steady, persistent 
signal coming from all directions and could not explain it; 
for a time they even put it down to pigeon droppings in 
the antenna of their radio telescope. When Dicke learned 
about this, it took very little time to establish that what 
Penzias and Wilson had found was in fact the expected 
radiation—the last remnant of the big bang. There can 
be little doubt that this was one of the most important 
cosmological discoveries of the 20th century, and it finally 
disposed of the steady-state or continuous creation theory, 
according to which the universe has always existed and 
will exist for ever. 

The Austrian physicist VICTOR FRANZ HESS (1883-1964) 
shared the 1936 Physics Prize with CARL D ANDERSON. Hess’ 
main contribution to science was his discovery of cosmic 
rays, in 1911-1912. He was then at the university of Vienna, 
specializing in studies of the upper atmosphere, and he 
made ten balloon ascents, establishing for the first time that 
cosmic rays are bombarding the Earth from all directions 
all the time (in fact the name is misleading; cosmic rays are 
not rays atall, but atomic particles). In modern times many 
cosmic ray satellites have been launched, and cosmic ray 
astronomy has become of immense importance, but it all 
dates back to the balloon ascents made by Hess. 

Another early investigator of cosmic rays was Arthur 
Holly Compton (1892-1962), professor of physics at the 
University of Chicago. He discovered what is now 
known as the Compton effect—the interaction between 


1 The term ‘big bang’ was scornfully introduced much later by 
Sir Fred Hoyle, who does not believe in the theory. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nobel Prize Winners in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a photon and a charged particle, so that the photon is 
scattered with lower energy and the particle is given 
extra energy. Compton shared the 1927 Nobel Physics 
Prize with Charles Wilson. The important Gamma-Ray 
Observatory satellite (GRO), launched on 5 April 1991, was 
named the Compton Observatory in his honor. 

Several physics laureates have carried out work 
which is of vital importance in astronomy as well as in 
other branches of science, for example Professor Patrick 
Blackett (1948), Sir John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton 
(1951) and Pavel Cerenkov (1958). In the field of what may 
be called pure astronomy, we must note HANS BETHE (1906— 
). For many years the source of stellar energy was not 
known, initially it was thought that a star shone because 
it was slowly contracting, and then came a theory that 
atomic particles were simply annihilating each other with 
the release of energy. The key to the whole problem was 
found by Bethe in 1939—it is said that he actually worked 
it out during a train journey between Washington and 
Cornell University. The essential ‘fuel’ of a normal star 
is hydrogen. Deep inside the star, where the temperatures 
are very high and the pressures are immense, nuclei of 
hydrogen are combining to form nuclei of helium; it takes 
four hydrogen nuclei to make one nucleus of helium, 
and in the process a little energy is set free and a little 
mass is lost. (In the case of the Sun, the mass loss 
amounts to 4000000 tons s7!; fortunately there is plenty 
of material left.) The process is not straightforward, and 
Bethe worked out a whole series of reactions on which 
future investigations have been based. His Nobel Prize 
for Physics did not come until 1967, a lapse of over a 
quarter of a century, so that one can hardly accuse the 
Nobel Committees of being over-hasty. (It is only fair to 
add that similar work was carried out at around the same 
time by GEORGE GAMOW.) 

Two more pioneers in studies of stellar evolution 
shared the Nobel Physics Prize in 1983; the Indian astro- 
physicist SUBRAHMANYAN CHANDRASEKHAR (1910-1995) and 
WILLIAM A FOWLER (1911-1995). At one stage Chandrasekhar 
came into conflict of ideas with sik ARTHUR EDDINGTON, the 
great British astrophysicist. A star such as the Sun will 
end its main career by collapsing into the white dwarf 
condition—that is to say it will become very small and 
very dense, as the companion of Sirius is at present. Chan- 
drasekhar calculated that if the mass of the star is more 
than 1.4 times that of the Sun, a white dwarf cannot be 
formed, and the whole evolutionary sequence will be dif- 
ferent. Eddington disagreed, but it is now known that 
Chandrasekhar was right, and the value of 1.4 times the 
mass of the Sun is still known as the Chandrasekhar limit. 

In 1967 a team of radio astronomers at Cambridge 
University (England), led by Professor A HEWISH, was 
carrying out a sky survey with a special form of radio 
telescope which, it was said, looked rather like a collection 
of barbers’ poles. One member of the team was a graduate 
student, JOCELYN BELL (now Professor Jocelyn Bell Burnell). 
Examining the records, she found a weak radio source 
which was fluctuating so quickly and so regularly that it 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


seemed to be ‘ticking’. For a while it disappeared, but then 
returned. At first it was regarded with scepticism and 
was dismissed either as instrumental fault or terrestrial 
interference, but eventually it was found to be real, and it 
had to be explained. It was even suggested that it might be 
an artificial transmission from an alien civilization far out 
in the Galaxy—and this was treated so seriously that no 
official announcement of the discovery was made until the 
LGM or little green men theory had been discounted. It is 
now known that the object was a rapidly rotating neutron 
star. As it spins, it sends out pulses of radio energy and is 
therefore known as a pulsar. Pulsars are now known to be 
very common, and a few have been optically identified; 
for example the Crab Nebula, known to be the remnant 
of the supernova seen in 1054, contains a pulsar which is 
seen optically as a very faint, flashing object. 

In 1974 Hewish, leader of the team, shared the 
Nobel Prize for Physics with another outstanding radio 
astronomer, SIR MARTIN RYLE (who was also Astronomer 
Royal). That Hewish and Ryle deserved the prize is not 
in doubt, although it was also suggested that recognition 
should also have been given to Jocelyn Bell as the actual 
discoverer of the first pulsar. 

Pulsars were again to the fore in 1993, when the 
Nobel Prize for Physics went jointly to RUSSELL HULSE and 
JOSEPH TAYLOR, of Princeton University, for their discovery 
of binary pulsars. In a system of this sort there are two 
pulsars, separated by a distance of only a few million 
miles. Each component is around 6 miles in diameter, 
but is as massive as the Sun, and they are so close that 
their movements can give valuable clues as to the nature 
of gravitation, attributed by Einstein to the curvature of 
space-time close to very massive bodies. 

These are only a few of the Nobel laureates who 
have made outstanding contributions to astronomy. Yet 
there are also some notable omissions, and of these two 
are particularly curious. EDWIN HUBBLE, the American 
astronomer who was the first to prove that the so-called 
‘spiral nebulae’ are outer galaxies, and who was also the 
first to show that the universe is expanding, never received 
a Nobel Prize; the Hubble Space Telescope is, of course, 
named after him. Neither did Sir BERNARD LOVELL, who 
masterminded the 250 foot radio telescope at Jodrell Bank 
in Cheshire (England). One could also advance the claims 
of Sir Arthur Eddington, HARLOW SHAPLEY (who made the 
first good measurements of the size of the Galaxy), GEORGE 
ELLERY HALE (who was responsible for the world’s first really 
large reflecting telescopes) and the first radio astronomer, 
KARL JANSKY. Like the 20th century Nobel laureates, they 
will not be forgotten. 


Patrick Moore 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nobeyama Radio Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nobeyama Radio Observatory 


Nobeyama Radio Observatory has telescopes at millimeter 
and submillimeter wavelengths. It was established in 1982 
as an observatory of Tokyo Astronomical Observatory 
(NATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY, JAPAN since 1987), and 
operates the 45 m telescope, Nobeyama Millimeter Array, 
and Radioheliograph. High-resolution images of star 
forming regions and molecular clouds have revealed 
many aspects of first stages of stellar evolution, chemical 
evolution of molecular clouds, and galaxy evolution. 
Activities of very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) 
made it possible to realize the first space VLBI mission 
VSOP, and discover one of the most reliable black hole 
candidates in NGC 4258. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.nro.nao.ac.jp /index-e.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Node 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Node 


Either of the points at which an orbit intersects a reference 
plane. On the celestial sphere, a node is either of the points 
at which the great circle representing the orbital plane 
intersects the great circle corresponding to the reference 
plane (usually the ecliptic or the celestial equator). In 
the context of planetary motion, the reference plane is the 
ecliptic. The point at which the orbiting body crosses the 
reference plane from south to north is called the ascending 
node, and the point at which it crosses from north to south, 
the descending node. The line joining the two nodes, 
which is the line of intersection between the orbital plane 
and the reference plane, is called the line of nodes. 

In the case of the Moon, the gravitational influence of 
the Sun causes the line of nodes to rotate slowly around 
the Earth in a westerly direction, this motion being called 
the regression of the line of nodes. The line of the nodes 
of the lunar orbit makes one complete circuit of the Earth 
in 18.61 years. 


See also: celestial equator, celestial sphere, ecliptic, great 
circle, orbit, orbital elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Non-gravitational Force 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Non-gravitational Force 


A force which is not gravitational in origin that acts on 
a celestial body to alter its orbit. The term is used 
in connection with comets, in which the outgassing of 
volatile material through vents leading to the surface of 
the nucleus can give rise to jets. Strong jets can behave 
as rockets and alter comets’ orbits, in much the same way 
as the gravitational perturbations to which they are also 
susceptible. Such non-gravitational forces are believed 
to have changed the orbit of Comet 109P/Swift-Tuttle, 
which was calculated on its observation in 1862 to have 
a period of 120 years, but did not return until 1992. The 
Poynting—Robertson effect may also be regarded as a non- 
gravitational force. 


See also: Poynting—Robertson effect, Comet Swift-Tuttle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Non-radial Stellar Pulsations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Non-radial Stellar Pulsations 


Non-radial STELLAR PULSATIONS are complex, non-radially 
(non-spherically) symmetric pulsations of a star in which 
part of the stellar surface moves outward (expands) 
while other parts of the stellar surface move inward 
(contract). Therefore, differential changes (displacements) 
in state variables (e.g., pressure, temperature) would 
follow the expansion and compression of different regions 
and would have positive values in some areas and 
negative values in others. There exists a wave equation 
for non-radial oscillations, just as in radial oscillations. 
Moreover, the angular variation of solutions is represented 
in terms of spherical harmonics as is the case with 
other important physical equations, e.g., the Schrodinger 
equation, Laplace’s equation and others. The non-radial 
patterns are characterized by two integers, / and m, and 
correspond to the real parts of the spherical harmonic 
functions, Y/"(6, @), where / is a non-negative integer, m 
is equal to any of the 2/ + 1 integers between —/ and /, and 
6 and ¢ are the polar and azimuthal angles, respectively. 
The spherical harmonics are defined as 


21+1(1—m)! 
4x (1+m)! 


1/2 
Y;"(@, 6) = (-1)” ( ) P;"(cos@)e'”"*®. (1) 
Thus, the patterns can be described by / nodal circles, 
where the radial displacement (Sr) = 0, with |m| of 
these circles passing through the poles of the star and the 
remainder parallel to the star’s equator. For / = m = 0, 
the pulsation is purely radial. 

Since physical information is propagated with 
the velocity of small amplitude (sound) waves, non- 
radial pulsations correspond to sound waves travelling 
horizontally as well as radially, producing waves that 
travel around the star. Since pressure provides the 
restoring force for sound waves, then pulsations of this 
type are known as p-modes. The p-modes, as with radial 
modes of pulsation, undergo most of their motion near the 
stellar surface. The non-radial p-modes have their largest 
relative displacements, 5r/R, in the outer envelope of a 
star. 

The other major class of non-radial stellar pulsations 
are the g-modes or gravity modes. Here, gravity is the 
source of the restoring force for these modes, which are 
produced by internal gravity waves. These oscillations 
are intimately related to the buoyancy of the stellar gas 
since they involve small blobs of material exhibiting small 
pressure and density variations and are largely transverse 
in their physical dsplacement. Accordingly, g-modes 
can be understood by considering the displacement of a 
gas bubble from its equilibrium position upward by an 
amount dr. If the motion occurs sufficiently slowly that 
its pressure remains the same as the ambient pressure 
and if its motion is adiabatic (no heat exchange with the 
surrounding gas), then the net restoring force per unit 
volume is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where P is the pressure, p is the gas density, y is the ratio of 
specific heats, g is the gravitational acceleration (GM,/r’) 
and dr is the displacement. 

If the quantity in the parentheses in (2) is positive, 
then the gas is unstable toward convection. The bubble 
will continue to rise. If the quantity in parentheses 
is negative, then the bubble will sink back toward its 
equilibrium position. The restoring force is proportional to 
the displacement and the bubble will execute oscillations 
about its equilibrium position in the form of simple 
harmonic motion. The force per unit mass or acceleration 
is given by 


vo 1d 1 
a =-Wedr = (LP - 2) ear (3) 


where JN is the angular frequency of the bubble about 
its equilibrium position and is called the Brunt—Vaisala 


frequency: 
1 1d 
N= ( - =) 8 (4) 


The frequency of a g-mode is determined by the average 
value of N in the regions of the star where the oscillations 
are most energetic. 

The g-modes involve significant movement of the gas 
in the deep interior of the star whereas the p-modes have 
their greatest motion near the stellar surface. The use of 
these modes as probes of the STELLAR INTERIOR and surface 
layers underlies stellar seismology. 


Bibliography 
One of the classic technical works on non-radial pulsation 
theory is: 


Ledoux P and Walraven Th 1958 Variable Stars Handbuch 
der Physik vol 51 (Berlin: Springer) 


Outstanding introductions to the subject at the advanced 
undergraduate or graduate level are found in: 


Collins G W 1989 The Fundamentals of Stellar Astrophysics 
(New York: W H Freeman) 

Ostlie D A and Carroll B W 1996 An Introduction to Modern 
Astrophysics (New York: Addison-Wesley) 


Other excellent technical reviews are found in: 


Cox J P 1976 Non-radial oscillations of stars: theories and 
observations Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 14 247 
Pesnell W D 1990 Non-radial, non-adiabatic stellar 

pulsations Astrophys. J. 363 227 
Dziembowski W 1984 Theory and application of stellar 
seismology Adv. Space Res. 4 143 


Edward M Sion 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nordic Optical Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nordic Optical Telescope 


The Nordic Optical Telescope (NOT) is a 2.56 m, (Super) 
Ritchey—Chrétien, altitude-azimuth telescope with an ac- 
tively controlled primary mirror sited at 2400 m on the 
Roque de Los Muchachos, La Palma, Canary Islands, 
Spain. It was built by Denmark, Finland, Norway and 
Sweden, achieving first light in 1988. Iceland joined the 
association in 1997. Its twelve on-site astronomers, stu- 
dents and technical staff use and maintain the telescope, 
develop new instrumentation, and provide support to vis- 
iting astronomers. Core instruments on the Cassegrain- 
only telescope are a high-resolution imager (HiRAC) and 
a faint-object spectrographic camera (ALFOSC), a pho- 
topolarimeter (TurPol) and a high-resolution spectrograph 
(SOFIN). An infrared spectrographic camera (NOTCam) 
will be commissioned in 2000. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.not.iac.es/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Norma 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Norma 


(the Level; abbrev. Nor, gen. Normae; area 165 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies in the Milky Way 
between Lupus and Ara, and culminates at midnight in 
mid-May. It was named Norma et Regula (the Level and 
Square) by the French astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille 
(1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751-2. The 
shortened form was adopted by the IAU in 1922. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Norma is y* Normae, magnitude 4.0, which forms a 
naked-eye double with y! Normae, magnitude 5.0. Other 
interesting objects include « Normae, a wide binary with 
components of magnitudes 4.8 and 7.5, separation 23”, the 
Mira-type stars T Normae (range 6.2-13.6, period about 
241 days) and R Normae (range 6.5-13.9, period about 
507 days), NGC 6067, an open cluster of more than 100 
stars fainter than eighth magnitude, NGC 6087, another 
open cluster, which contains about 40 stars between sixth 
and tenth magnitude (including the Cepheid variable 
S Normae, range 6.12-6.77, period 9.75 days), and NGC 
5946, a tenth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


North America Nebula (NGC 7000) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


North America Nebula (NGC 7000) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Cygnus, position 
RA 20" 58.8™, dec. +44° 20’. It is large, measuring 120’ 
by 100’. In outline it bears a strong resemblance to the 
North American continent, delineated by surrounding 
dark nebulae, including one known appropriately as the 
Gulf of Mexico. NGC 7000’s main source of illumination 
is believed to be the hot blue star HR 8023. The adjacent 
Pelican Nebula is part of the same nebulosity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


North American Indian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


North American Indian Astronomy 


As one distinguished astronomer observed more than 20 
years ago, North American Indian astronomy seems to 
hold a particular fascination for the North American 
audience ‘who now occupies the land once held by a race 
of people so long regarded as distant noble savages’ 
(Aveni 1980, p294). This interest has been both sustained 
and expanded on in the last decade or so, particularly in 
the case of those indigenous people who, in historic 
times (c.1600-1900), occupied the very heartland of 
North America — the Plains Indians. 

This is a land of sun, wind and vast grasslands, 
stretching from north to south more than 3000 km from 
the Saskatchewan River in Canada almost to the Rio 
Grande in Mexico. The western and eastern boundaries 
are approximately those of the foothills of the Rocky 
Mountains and the Mississippi—Missouri valleys. In all, 
the region encompasses an area of some 2.5 million 
km2. 

During the 18th and 19th centuries, when contact 
was first made with the white man, the Great Plains were 
largely dominated by Siouan and Algonquian linguistic 
groups although others, such as Uto-Aztecan and 
Athapaskan, were also represented. In the northern part 
of the region (now Alberta, Saskatchewan and Montana) 
lived such tribes as the Blackfeet, Cree, Plains Ojibwa 
and Gros Ventre; to their south (present-day Wyoming, 
southern Montana and the Dakotas) were the Sioux, 
Cheyenne, Crow, Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara; the 
Southern Plains (present-day Texas, Nebraska and 
Oklahoma) were occupied by the Comanche, Kiowa, 
Wichita and Pawnee. Most of these tribes had migrated 
into the region after the introduction of the horse by the 
Spaniards in the southwest and of the gun by the English 
and French in the northeast — a gradual process which 
started in about 1650. It brought together peoples of great 
diversity of background and history — not least the way 
their ancestors incorporated astronomical knowledge 
into their culture. 

There is considerable evidence which suggests that 
many tribal groups who occupied the various cultural 
areas of North America (it is convenient to consider nine 
cultural areas in North America, north of Mexico; see 
Sturtevant and Taylor 1991) and led largely sedentary 
lifestyles did accurate timing relating to planting and 
harvesting by observation of the regular celestial events. 
Hunters and gatherers, however — and this would 
include the Plains Indians — put more emphasis on use 
of the changing sky largely to order ritual and religious 
activities. 

Other phenomena, such as comets, solar and lunar 
eclipses, meteor showers as well as terrestrial events — 
the thunder and lightning in particular — were not infre- 
quently incorporated in religious and ceremonial activi- 
ties. Symbols of such phenomena also adorned artefacts 
of various kinds. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The North American Indians, however, viewed the 
canopy of complex stellar patterns which nightly unfold- 
ed above them (in an ever changing but largely cyclic 
pattern) somewhat differently to the professional 
astronomer. Sophisticated reflective, refractive and radio 
instrumentation tends to sample but relatively small 
regions of the sky. In contrast, naked eye astronomy, as 
practiced by American Indians, led to the idea of con- 
structing accurate calendars or patterns which could give 
order to planting and harvesting, hunting, ceremonial, 
ritual and religion. 

A common form of religious activities throughout 
the Americas — and indeed a theme common to all 
humanity — was annual renewal ceremonials. Many 
were complex, lasting for several days, even weeks. 
There is considerable evidence that astronomical phe- 
nomena played an important role in many of them. 

For example, scholars who have documented the 
lifeways of the Mahicans (these are probably the 
Mohicans of James Fenimore Cooper; they were an 
Algonquian-speaking group who, in ancient times, occu- 
pied the Hudson River Valley of present-day Vermont) 
recorded that they traditionally enacted a complex world 
renewal ceremonial which commenced at signals from 
the sky. The changing sky patterns associated with the 
constellation Ursa Major was viewed as an annual celes- 
tial bear hunt. Four of the stars defined the body of the 
bear while three stars that form the handle of the Dipper 
represented waiting hunters, the star Alcor being their 
dog. This ‘cosmic bear’ was observed to revolve around 
the North Star and then, in spring, seen to leave his den 
— the Corona Borealis. It was now followed by seven 
stars representing hunters, the original three being joined 
by stars from Boétes and Arcturus. Throughout the sum- 
mer, this bear was trailed and then finally slain in the 
autumn. The seasonal reddening of the forest foliage was 
attributed to this sky hunt, the red tinting due to that of 
the slain bear, and the mantle of early winter snow was 
some of the bear’s grease, tried out by the star hunters. 

The ceremonials were held at night within a special 
structure — the Big House, Xwate’k’an, which itself was 
replete in sky symbolism. Thus, the constellation Ursa 
Major was represented on the floor of the house. The fur- 
nishings and positions of officials corresponded to the 
positions of the stars in the constellation, while the 
movements and acts of the performers paralleled those 
of the stars. In turn, the Xwate’k’an was said to represent 
the universe. This renewal ceremonial commenced again 
the following spring when bear once more emerged from 
his celestial den. 

Further west, in what is now present-day Nebraska, 
the Pawnee — particularly one branch of the tribe known 
as the Skidi — were much governed by the panorama of 
the changing sky. When the villages of the various 
Pawnee bands assembled for annual ceremonials, they 
arranged themselves according to the place of their stars 
in the sky and nothing on Earth could move without 
evoking the power of the heavens. The whole ‘Spring 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


North American Indian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Awakening’ could not be undertaken without reference 
to the position of the stars to guide the time relating to 
the commencement of the appropriate ceremonials. The 
earth lodge itself acted as a type of astronomical obser- 
vatory, the priests viewing the sky through both the 
smoke hole and the oriented entrance way. 

Astronomical and cyclic patterns were documented 
and understood by the tribal intellectuals and woven 
into mythology, religion and ceremonial. Thus, Morning 
Star, Opirikus — almost certainly Mars — was viewed as 
the leader of men who travelled with his brother, the 
Sun, to the land of the western stars in an attempt to 
overcome the power of the Moon. Credited with helping 
the creation of the universe and the fathering of the 
human race, Morning Star utilizes the power of sacred 
bundles (housed within the ceremonial lodges) to over- 
come the obstacles which Moon puts in his way and is 
thus able to enter the woman-star village. This aspect of 
Pawnee mythology was clearly based on accurate and 
detailed observations of the sky. 

Such mythology and religious concepts, however, 
led to one sinister ritual. Because of his favours to 
mankind, and particularly to the Pawnee themselves, 
Opirikus demanded human sacrifice — the Morning Star 
Ceremonial. Tribal priests stated that the sacrifice not 
only ensured continued abundant crops and game but 
also, perhaps more than anything, was an acknowledge- 
ment of a celestial heritage and essential to the well- 
being of the tribe — although not all agreed. 

While the record relating to the sky watchers’ craft is 
far less complete for tribes north of Mexico, much signif- 
icant evidence is scattered within the historical and 
anthropological literature. Here, there are references 
made by North American Indians to the nature of grav- 
itational forces and the Milky Way, to meteor showers, 
eclipses of the Sun and Moon and the images of the lunar 
landscape. Star groups, such as the Great Bear and 
Pleiades, the diurnal motion of stars across the sky and 
the heliacal rising of such stars as Aldebaren and Sirius 
figured as calendrical markers for ceremonial. 

Some tribes, such as the Pawnee and Lakota, did star 
maps as well as recognizing certain geographical features 
as a mirror of the sky. Others used stone alignments as 
markers to identify the directions of set or rise of certain 
celestial bodies; all this, and almost certainly much more. 

As such data are drawn together and analysed, they 
will surely demonstrate that astronomical phenomena 
were, not surprisingly, an important component of the 
indigenous Americans’ culture. (This is partly based on 
Taylor (2000 and 2001, in press). Iam indebted to both 
Paul Murdin and Patrick Moore for their encouragement 
for me to give consideration of the astronomical know]l- 
edge of the North American Indian, in the course of my 
researches in American ethnology.) 


Bibliography 


Aveni A F 1980 Skywatchers of Ancient Mexico (Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sturtevant W C and Taylor C 1991 The Native Americans 
(London: Salamander) 

Taylor C 2000 Astronomy of the Plains Indians 2001 
Yearbook of Astronomy ed P Moore (London: 
Macmillan) pp147-61 

Taylor C in press Guided by the stars? The Big Horn 
medicine wheel in northern Wyoming 2002 Yearbook 
of Astronomy ed P Moore (London: Macmillan) 


Colin Taylor 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Nostradamus (1503-66) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nostradamus (1503-66) 


Doctor, astrologer, born in St Rémy, France. Took on 
the role of a prophet and wrote Centuries, a collection 
of predictions in rhyme (1555-8). The predictions are 
expressed in obscure and enigmatic terms, which are both 
difficult to interpret and open to many interpretations, and 
so can be interpreted as successful prophesies, including 
what Catherine of Medici interpreted as the manner of 
death in a jousting tournament of her husband King Henry 
II. At the royal court in France, this brought their author a 
fame that continues today as notoriety. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nova V1974 Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nova V1974 Cygni 


A nova outburst is the second most violent explosion that 
can occur in a galaxy. It is exceeded in violence only 
by a SUPERNOVA explosion, but a nova occurs much more 
frequently so that astronomers expect a bright naked eye 
nova to appear in our skies every few years. In a day 
or two a nova can go from an intrinsic brightness much 
fainter than that of the Sun to more than 10 000 times that 
of the Sun. At the same time it is ejecting an amount of 
gas that exceeds the mass of the Earth at speeds of up 
to 5000 km s~!. The gas ejected into space by the nova 
explosion will then mix with other gas in the interstellar 
medium (ISM) and eventually become part of a new solar 
system. There is evidence that our own solar system 
contains material that was once ejected in anova explosion. 


Evolution at ultraviolet wavelengths 

V1974 Cygni was first seen as a naked eye star on the 
morning of 19 February 1992 and rapidly climbed to 
a peak brightness of about 4th magnitude. Because 
of its brightness, it was studied by more telescopes at 
more wavelengths than any nova before or since. The 
first spectra were obtained in the ultraviolet with the 
INTERNATIONAL ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER Satellite (IUE). They 
covered the wavelength range from 1150-3300 A. They 
were unlike any previous IUE nova spectra obtained 
early in the outburst. While energy was being emitted 
throughout the ultraviolet, there was an increasing 
amount of energy at longer wavelengths. Analysis of 
these spectra showed that the nova had been caught in 
the ‘fireball’ phase when the hot dense material ejected 
by the explosion is in its first cooling phase. Because 
the gas was cooling, the amount of energy emitted at 
ultraviolet wavelengths decreased and by the second day 
of observations, it had dropped by a factor of 10. The rapid 
decline in ultraviolet light is caused by the temperature 
of the hot, highly ionized, expanding material dropping 
below 30000 K. The ultraviolet data show that the nova 
had reached this temperature at the time of the first IUE 
observations. Below this temperature, the electrons start to 
recombine with the ions and form both neutral and singly 
ionized atoms of the iron group elements (among others) 
which are capable of blocking the ultraviolet light through 
tens of millions of individual absorption lines. 

It is the gas becoming opaque in the ultraviolet 
which forces the radiation from the nova to emerge at 
optical and infrared wavelengths and then become bright 
in the optical. This is the time that a nova, typically, 
is first discovered. Luckily, V1974 Cyg was caught 
before maximum brightness in the optical. By the time 
V1974 Cyg reached maximum brightness in the optical, its 
temperature had declined to below 15000 K and it was 
emitting most of its energy in the optical and infrared, not 
the ultraviolet. This phase did not last long and within 
a few days the optical brightness started to decline. This 
decline is caused by the continuing drop in density as the 
ejected gases expand and the outermost layers gradually 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


become transparent. The increasing transparency allows 
us to see deeper into the gas, where the material is hotter, 
and thus the decline in optical light goes hand-in-hand 
with an increase in ultraviolet light. Over the next two 
months of IUE observations, the ultraviolet brightness 
of V1974 Cyg increased to the levels seen on the first 
spectra. This result demonstrated that the energy radiated 
by the underlying star had remained virtually constant 
during this time. This period of the nova outburst is 
designated as the ‘constant bolometric luminosity phase’ 
and its existence was an early prediction of the theoretical 
simulations of the nova outburst. 


Evolution at x-ray wavelengths 

Further evidence that the heat from the underlying layers 
was getting through the ejected material came from 
observations in April 1992 with Rosat, a joint German-— 
British-US x-ray satellite launched in 1990. The first 
observations showed that the nova was faint in x-rays but 
in a series of observations done over the next 12 months it 
steadily brightened. It was later realized that ROSAT had 
detected the underlying hot object which was gradually 
appearing through the expanding shell of gas ejected by 
the explosion. By July 1993, V1974 Cyg had become one 
of the brightest objects in the low-energy x-ray sky. It was 
emitting nearly as much energy in x-rays as it had in the 
optical and ultraviolet a year earlier in the outburst. The 
ROSAT observations thus provided important new data on 
the constant bolometric luminosity phase of the outburst. 
It then began to fade rapidly and by December 1993 it had 
become too faint to observe with ROSAT. 


Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope 
V1974 Cyg was also observed a number of times with 
various instruments on the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST). 
Analyses of the first HST observations showed that the 
nova had not ejected material in a smooth uniform sphere 
but rather that the expanding gas had formed a large 
number of dense knots inside a lower density, more rapidly 
expanding gas. The ejected gas was distributed in a non- 
spherical hollow shell with a thickness of order 30-50% 
of the outer radius. In a second set of observations, it 
was found that the same knots were still visible and were 
moving at approximately the same speeds as when first 
seen seven months earlier. However, the fast moving, 
low density, material had largely vanished. This means 
that the HST observations were now seeing completely 
through the ejected gas. As the gaseous debris from the 
explosion expanded, it thinned and continued to clear so 
that it became possible to see completely through it to the 
underlying object on which the explosion took place. It 
then became possible to study the structure of this object 
and determine the cause of the explosion. 


Cause of the nova outburst 

Studies of V1974 Cyg after the explosion showed that it has 
the same structure as all other novae and the entire class 
of stars designated ‘cataclysmic variables.’ More than 40 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nova V1974 Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


years ago it was demonstrated that novae are CLOSE BINARY 
STAR systems with one component a white dwarf and the 
other component a larger, cooler star. The two stars have 
orbital periods of a few hours, about 2 h for V1974 Cyg, so 
that tidal forces of the WHITE DwaRF are sufficient to cause 
material to be stripped off the larger star. Because the 
binary is rotating rapidly, the gas forced off the cooler star 
forms a torus of gas around the white dwarf called an 
ACCRETION DISK. The gas slowly spirals through the accretion 
disk and ultimately falls onto the surface of the white 
dwarf. Over many thousands of years the gas flowing 
from the companion, through the accretion disk, lands on 
the white dwarf star where it is compressed and heated 
by the continuous accretion of more and more material. 
It is the gradually thickening layer of accreted gas on 
the surface of the white dwarf that provides the fuel for 
the explosion. It was also realized later that the accreted 
material must be mixed with the core material of the white 
dwarf since such gas is observed in the ejected gas. 

The detailed calculations of the consequences of this 
accretion plus mixing process show that, if sufficient 
material falls onto the white dwarf, then compressional 
heating alone can cause the temperatures in the accreted 
gas to reach to 10’ K or higher. At this temperature, 
hydrogen nuclear fusion reactions begin in this material 
and, because fusion is occurring on a white dwarf, the 
reactions quickly increase to high temperatures, just as ina 
terrestrial hydrogen bomb. This type of explosion is called 
a thermonuclear runaway (TNR). The white dwarf must 
accrete about 100 times the mass of the Earth before the 
temperature in the newly added material can grow to the 
temperatures required for initiating the TNR. By this time, 
the density in this layer will exceed 10000 g cm7!. Under 
these conditions the hydrogen nuclei fuse into helium and 
release energy via the carbon, nitrogen and oxygen (CNO) 
cycle. 

Since carbon and oxygen are catalysts in the CNO 
cycle, the higher the percentage of carbon or oxygen in the 
nuclear fusion region, the greater the energy production 
and the greater the ultimate violence of the explosion. 
Since the accreted layers mix with the core material of 
the white dwarf, which is mostly carbon and oxygen, a 
violent explosion is guaranteed. One concern was that 
the heat from the nuclear fusion should cause the outer 
layers to expand and cool and prevent an explosion from 
occurring. That this does not happen was explained by 
numerical calculations which showed that the gas at the 
bottom of the accreted layers had become degenerate. 

A degenerate gas is so dense that the pressure comes 
from the inability of electrons to interpenetrate each other 
and, unlike an ordinary gas, the temperature does not play 
much of a role in determining the pressure. The gas can 
still become hot, but it cannot expand as one would expect 
if the gas were normal. It is also known that the speed at 
which the CNO nuclear reactions occurs depends on the 
temperature to a very high power (between 16 and 18). 
Thus, even a small increase in temperature can cause a 
tremendous increase in the speed of the reactions between 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the hydrogen nuclei and the CNO nuclei. This increase 
in speed of the reactions acts to release heat even more 
rapidly into the gas. As long as the region where nuclear 
fusion is occurring does not expand and cool, the rate 
of energy release must rise. This is a vicious cycle; as 
the temperature increases, the rate of energy release into 
the layers also increases, which in turn causes a rise in 
temperature and more energy to be produced. 

Something new happens when the temperature in the 
nuclear fusion region grows to values above 30 x 10° K. 
Nuclear energy is being produced so rapidly that the rate 
of energy transport by radiation is insufficient to carry 
the heat away from the region of peak nuclear fusion 
deep in the accreted layers. Even though the material 
is degenerate it can still become buoyant and it starts to 
mix with the zones above it. This is called convection. 
As the temperature grows from the continuous release 
of nuclear energy deep within the accreted layers, the 
newly formed convective region grows toward the surface 
carrying both heat and the products of the nuclear fusion 
reactions. Since the accreted material mixes with core 
material at some timeduring the explosion, convection 
then mixes core material to the surface. Thus, one of the 
predictions was that, when these layers were blown into 
space by the explosion, they would carry both white dwarf 
core gas and the nuclear reaction products along with 
the accreted layers. This prediction could be tested since 
once the ejected material became sufficiently dispersed, it 
would be possible to analyse it and determine its chemical 
composition. If this gas actually showed that core material 
were present, then the analysis would tell astronomers not 
only what happened inside the white dwarf star during 
the explosion but also shed light on the prior evolution of 
the white dwarf. This prediction has been verified by a 
number of recent studies. 


Production of radioactive isotopes 

Other calculations predict that two important nuclear 
ISOTOPES Were produced during the explosion on V1974 
Cyg. The first is an isotope of sodium, “Na, and the 
second is an isotope of aluminum, 7°Al. Each of these is 
radioactive with a distinct y-ray signature and a relatively 
short half-life. The importance of *Al is twofold. First, its 
decay product, *°Mg, is found in some classes of meteorites 
and suggests that material has been found that has existed 
virtually unchanged since before the formation of the solar 
system. It is also thought possible that the heat produced 
by the decay of the aluminum isotope could be responsible 
for heating the asteroids and other small bodies early in the 
evolution of the solar system. Second, the y-rays produced 
by the decay of *°Al have been seen throughout the Galaxy 
by both the sOLAR MAXIMUM MISSION and by the COMPTON 
GAMMA RAY OBSERVATORY. The source of the interstellar 7°Al 
is not known, but novae are one candidate. The existence 
of novae that eject large amounts of aluminum has now 
been verified by observational studies of V1974 Cygni. 
Unfortunately, one can only determine the total amount 
of aluminum, not the isotopic abundance in the ejected 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nova V1974 Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


material. 7*Na, the other radioactive isotope produced in 
the explosion, should have been detected by the Compton 
Gamma Ray Observatory. It pointed at it in September 
1993, however, but no y-rays were detected. Since other 
studies have shown that the nova is at a distance of 2000— 
4000 ps, it may have been too far to be detected in y-rays 
since theoretical studies imply that a reasonable limit to 
detection is about 1000 ps. 

Finally, this nova has provided the most important 
and complete datasets ever obtained for a nova in outburst 
and it is still sufficiently bright that it is continuing to be 
observed by astronomers using both observatories in space 
and on the Earth. 


Bibliography 

Gehrz R D, Truran J W, Williams R E and Starrfield 
S 1998 Theoretical and observational studies of 
the contributions of galactic classical novae to the 
interstellar medium Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 110 3 

Shore S N, Starrfield S, Ake T B and Hauschildt P H 1997 
Spatially resolved spectra of Nova V1974 Cygni 1992 
with the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph 
Astrophys. J. 490 393 

Starrfield S, Gehrz R D and Truran J W 1997 Dust 
formation and nucleosynthesis in novae Astrophysical 
Implications of the Laboratory Study of Presolar Grains 
AIP Conf. Proc. 402 ed T Bernatowicz and E Zinner 
(American Institute of Physics) pp 203-36 

Starrfield S and Shore S N 1994 Nova Cygni 1992: nova of 
the century Sky and Telescope 87 2-25 

Starrfield S and Shore S N 1995 The birth and death of 
Nova V1974 Cygni Sci. Am. Jan. 76-81 

Starrfield S, Truran J W, Wiescher M and Sparks W M 
1998 Evolutionary sequences for V1974 Cyg using 
new nuclear reaction rates and opacities Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 296 502-21 


Sumner Starrfield 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Novae 


A nova, short for nova stella (new star), is a star that 
brightens suddenly several hundred- to a million-fold, 
remains bright for a few days to several months and then 
returns to its former, low luminosity. The spectrum, too, 
changes considerably along with the changing luminosity. 
The eruption is recurrent, although for most novae the 
time elapsed between outbursts is thousands to tens 
of thousands of years, and hence only one outburst is 
recorded. These are often referred to as classical novae, 
to be distinguished from recurrent novae that erupt at 
intervals of tens of years, so that a number of such 
outbursts have been recorded for each. Nova outbursts are 
accompanied by mass ejection and the formation of nova 
shells, which slowly disperse into the interstellar medium. 
Although the term ‘nova’ refers to the VARIABLE STAR that 
undergoes temporary explosive eruptions, it is sometimes 
used to designate the outburst itself (as in the case of 
SUPERNOVAE). Thus terms such as prenova, post-nova, or 
nova progenitor are quite common. 


Historical record 

In ancient times, novae were classed with the guest stars, 
which also included supernovae, as well as comets, all 
transient objects. Early observations of such objects were 
made mostly in the Far East—China, Japan and Korea— 
where professional astronomers (astrologers, in fact) were 
employed by rulers to constantly watch the sky for signs 
of impending dangers. Meanwhile, ancient and even 
medieval Europe showed little interest in these temporary 
stars, which were in marked conflict with the dominant 
Aristotelian doctrine of a perfect, immutable celestial 
sphere. Detailed records from China go back to about 
200 BC; in Korea and Japan, regular observations began 
around AD 800. While comets were quite early suspected 
and then recognized as being a separate class of objects, 
the distinction of novae from supernovae was made only 
in the 1930s, when it was realized that the two differed 
in maximal brightness by about 6 orders of magnitude. 
As novae spend most of their time in the quiescent, low- 
luminosity state, old novae are difficult to detect; the oldest 
nova that has been recovered was discovered in 1670 in the 
constellation Vulpecula. 

By the early 1960s ample observational evidence 
had accumulated, mainly through the work of Robert 
Kraft, indicating that novae were invariably members of 
close binary systems (See CATACLYSMIC BINARIES: CLASSICALAND 
RECURRENT NOVAE). The nova companion was found to be a 
low-mass main sequence star. Observations of novae after 
eruption, and in a few cases prior to eruption, showed 
them to be hot compact stars. Mass estimates, albeit scarce 
and uncertain, suggested that the erupting stars were 
WHITE Dwakrrs. This led to the hypothesis that the RED DWARF 
companion is extended enough (i.e. fills its ROCHE LOBE) to 
allow mass transfer to the hotter star (through the inner 
Lagrangian point of the binary system’s gravitational 
field). Indeed, in some cases, a rapidly rotating region, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


+ 4 v603 Aql 50 days ; 
___S0days 


T T 
XX Tau 


= cave * =} 
! Eu Sct \~ my 


V732 Sgr 


Pr T Aur 


Figure 1. Light curves of (top) very fast, (middle) moderate and 
(bottom) slow novae. Abscissae are marked at intervals of 

10 days and ordinates at intervals of 1 magnitude. (Adapted 
from Payne-Gaposhkin (1957).) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


identified as an ACCRETION DISK, was detected around the 
hot star. 

Thus, novae appear to be hot white dwarf members 
of close binary systems, which accrete matter from a cool 
red dwarf companion. This sets the scene for the theory 
that explains the outburst mechanism, its many distinctive 
features and its consequences. 


Observations 

Rate and distribution 

Around the turn of the 20th century, the number of 
nova discoveries rose considerably, but since then it has 
remained fairly constant, at an average of ~4 Galactic 
novae yr-'. There appear to be two populations of 
novae: disk novae, observed in the solar neighborhood, 
which are brighter and evenly distributed, and bulge 
novae, concentrated towards the Galactic center with a 
larger scale height, which are fainter and have a generally 
slower outburst development. One should note that the 
bulge novae are subject to severe observational selection 
(interstellar extinction, etc). The true Galactic nova rate 
is estimated at ~40 + 20 yr-!. For comparison, the nova 
population of the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) consists 
almost exclusively of disk novae, while in spiral galaxy 
M31 (Andromeda), mainly the novae in the pronounced 
bulge are observed. The established nova rate in M31 is 
about 30 yr. Much lower rates are derived for M33, 
about 5 yr“!, and for the LMC, about 2 yr~!. Considering 
the galactic rate of nova outbursts on the one hand and 
the restrictive requirements for a system to undergo a 
nova outburst on the other, one arrives at the inevitable 
conclusion that nova outbursts must recur in the same 
system a great many times, as was realized already in 
the late 1930s. Most of the time, however, is spent in 
quiescence, while the white dwarf accretes mass from its 
companion. 


Light curves and spectra 

Early studies of novae already revealed that they 
varied considerably in the rate of evolution after 
maximum. Following Dean McLaughlin, novae are 
classified according to the time of decline from maximum 
light, usually by 3 magnitudes, denoted by t;. Thus 
three—and sometimes five—speed classes are identified: 
very fast novae, with tj < 10 days, slow novae with 
t3 = 100 days and one to three intermediate classes 
in between. However, these are not physically distinct 
classes of objects, but rather convenient groupings; the 
variation of ft; is continuous. 

Light curves of novae belonging to different classes 
are shown in figure 1 and a characteristic spectral evolution 
is illustrated in figure 2. Several stages, distinguished 
by optical brightness variations and typical spectra, may 
be identified in the evolution of a nova outburst. Their 
characterization, dating back to the work of McLaughlin 
in the early 1940s, has remained practically unchanged to 
this day. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) The prenova stage is characterized by weak bright- 
ness variations and the spectrum of a hot star. There 
appears to be a small increase in (visual) luminosity 
1-15 yr prior to eruption. 

(b) The premaximum stage consists of a steep rise to 
maximum visual brightness and has a characteristic 
premaximum spectrum: a strong blue continuum, 
blueshifted absorption lines and weak or absent 
emission lines. The line shifts indicate lower 
velocities than those observed after maximum. The 
evolution of the blueshifted absorption line spectrum 
indicates an expanding and cooling photosphere. 
During final expansion towards maximum, the 
photospheric temperature declines rapidly, reaching 
values down to 9000-4000 K for different novae. 
Spectral types are B to A and sometimes F. Three 
successive phases are generally distinguished: the 
initial rise that usually lasts for a day or two, the brief 
premaximum halt, which in a few cases may extend 
to months, and the quick final rise. 

(c) The maximum stage includes the early decline with 
the appearance of the principal spectrum, soon 
followed by the diffuse enhanced spectrum. The 
optical maximum is defined by the peak in the 
optical light curve. Near maximum and during early 
decline, nova colors are similar to those of bright 
supergiants. The luminosity in most novae remains 
constant for some time after maximum light. This 
is confirmed by observations in the UV, where the 
radiation maximum of the hot photosphere is located, 
and, in the presence of dust, by IR measurements of 
re-radiated light from dust grains that form at the 
outer edge of the expanding nova shell. The principal 
spectrum is characterized by strong P Cygni lines 
superimposed on a relatively cool and very strong 
continuum, which soon starts fading, shifting into 
the blue. Emission lines of hydrogen and metals 
in low ionization stages are strong. Their complex 
profiles suggest that material has been ejected in 
blobs, cloudlets or rings. Particle velocities deduced 
from the blueshifts lie in the range of a few to 
several hundred km s~! for slow novae and around a 
thousand kms"! for fastnovae. The diffuse enhanced 
spectrum appears 1 or 2 days after maximum in fast 
novae and 1 or 2 weeks after maximum in slow ones. 
Itis characterized by diffuse emission and absorption 
lines of abundant elements, such as C, N, O, Si, S and 
Ne. The line strengths of some elements suggest high 
abundances. The derived velocities are high and the 
large line widths indicate large velocity dispersions. 

(d) The transition stage, during which the decline con- 
tinues, is characterized by the Orion spectrum, line 
flaring and coronal lines. Magnitude measurements 
during this period reveal a smooth decline, or oscil- 
lations with typical timescales of the order of days or 
a deep decline with a possible recovery after a few 
weeks. The decline is attributed to the formation of 
dust and the light loss is due to absorption. The color 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a a a a Oe a 0 
ie a Dec 02-98 | 
. <=, 
ee A g s all 
r in = S 4 
i Z, q =| _| 
Z 3 zi 
& hui MWA fs wt pal 1 
a = 7 a aa 
Z Zz Nov 02-19 (UT) | 
a = al 
: - | : 
Ec A = 7 
Fs Ni WW / g Z 
cea x | 
oS 
‘0 ‘ney vf f | \ ys 7 
me a Peay all 
= = Vy ot 
~ 1988 Oct 15-09 (UT) 7] 
_ - | _| 
— Hy =x 6S > a a 
Z idk nl 2 ego F ¢¥ a2 8 | 
a \ al ge = Z 3 | 
OP wa =8 2 = s 4 
eh A y | ae we | £ # | 
7 2 i , | 
L Mf mA a 
WN ap MTNA Nae 2 
|__ ; a \y 4 wi =| 
relivitiritirritrrr tired ti ti tt 
3400 3600 3800 4000 4200 4400 4600 4800 5000 5200 5400 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. Illustration of the evolution of a nova spectrum (Nova LMC 1988 No 2, a very fast nova with t) ~ 5 days): (bottom) 1.34 days 
after maximum, showing the principal and diffuse-enhanced spectrum; (middle) 19.44 days after maximum—a typical Orion 
spectrum; (top) 50.23 days after maximum, showing an early nebular spectrum. The ordinate is an arbitrarily normalized flux. (From 
Sekiguchi K, Kilkenny D, Winkler H and Doyle J G 1989 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 241 827.) 


(f) 


effects of dust absorption are complex and require 
different particle sizes at different times. As the ex- 
panding shell grows optically thin, the photosphere 
recedes towards deeper and hotter regions. Velocities 
derived from the broad spectral lines are even higher 
than before. An even stronger sign for a thinning at- 
mosphere is the advent of forbidden lines. Infrared 
spectra of some novae at this stage are dominated by 
strong coronal lines. 

The nebular stage that follows is characterized by 
forbidden lines. The nova has now become fainter 
by several magnitudes. The photosphere is small and 
radiates mainly in the UV and x spectral ranges. The 
nebula that has formed around the nova is clumpy; 
its mass is estimated to be of order (10-°-10~*) Mo. 
The post-nova or quiescence stage is reached when 
the nova returns to its pre-outburst appearance. 
Photometric and spectroscopic observations indicate 
that the accretion disk has been regenerated. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ejecta now appear as a resolved shell made of 
numerous blobs, as shown in figure 3 for two novae. 
It also appears that different parts of the ejecta have 
noticeable abundance differences. Observations in 
the UV range by the IUE satellite and, for a few 
novae, in the x-ray range, first by the EXOSAT 
satellite and later by ROSAT, indicate that the hot star 
remains luminous for several years after outburst. 
Furthermore, a correlation emerges between the 
decline time of the UV luminosity and the time span 
of the much earlier decline of the visual luminosity 
(t3). On observational grounds, little can be said 
concerning timescales of more than a hundred years, 
with the possible exceptions of two old novae that 
have been recovered, CK Vul of 1670 and WY Sge of 
1783, both very faint. 


Despite the similarity in spectral and brightness 


evolution, novae exhibit an overwhelming variety of 
properties, which may differ by orders of magnitude 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


20 


10 


-10 


0 
oie Taig eo Dalgeg el lege dao gi) yr oo 


20 


-20 


-20 
T 


-10 0 10 20 
T 


40 


oS 


i=} 
Toa L L L q 


40 


-40 


Figure 3. Ha images of two nova shells: (top) DQ Her and (bottom) RR Pic, exhibiting the typical, highly clumpy, structure. The right 
panels are contour plots obtained by removing the elliptically symmetric component. Axes are marked in arcsec. (From O’Brien T J 
and Slavin A J 1996 Cataclysmic Variables and Related Objects ed A Evans and J H Wood (Dordrecht: Kluwer).) 


between one nova class and another, and even between 
individual novae within the same class. These must be 
accounted for by the nova theory. 


Theory 

The outburst mechanism 

Theoretical studies of the nova outburst started with the 
work of Evry Schatzman in the late 1940s and 1950s, in 
which explosive hydrogen burning was first proposed as 
the triggering mechanism. Hydrogen accretion onto a 
white dwarf and the ensuing unstable burning under con- 
ditions of electron degeneracy were first studied by Leon 
Mestel in 1952. It is noteworthy that all this preceded 
the discovery that novae were members of binary sys- 
tems. More than 20 yr later, it became commonly accepted 
that classical nova outbursts result from explosive hydro- 
gen burning—thermonuclear runaways—on the surfaces 
of white dwarfs that are accreting hydrogen-rich mate- 
rial from red dwarf (late-type) companions in close binary 
systems. The process is cyclic, with the greatest part of 
the cycle spent in quiescence. A quite detailed picture of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the evolution of such cyclic outbursts emerges from the 
numerous theoretical studies—numerical hydrodynami- 
cal evolutionary calculations—that have been carried out 
since the late 1960s. 

The material gradually accumulating on the white 
dwarf’s surface becomes compressed and the electrons 
at the bottom of the accreted envelope become partially 
degenerate. At the same time the temperature at the 
bottom of the hydrogen-rich envelope rises. When it 
reaches 2 x 10’ K, hydrogen is ignited in a thin shell by 
the CNO nuclear reaction cycle. The energy released raises 
the temperature further, but since the degeneracy pressure 
is insensitive to temperature, no expansion and cooling 
results and the temperature keeps rising exponentially, 
boosting the nuclear reaction rates in a runaway process. 
However, above about 10° K, the CNO cycle rate is 
limited by the decay rates of 6*-unstable nuclei, which are 
temperature independent. In addition, the temperature 
becomes sufficiently high for the degeneracy to be lifted, 
turning the gas into an ideal one. The runaway is 
thus quenched: the shell expands, while the burning 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


temperature starts dropping after having reached a few 
10° K. Following ignition, a convective region forms 
just above the thin shell source and extends towards 
the surface. Convection mixes the 6*-unstable nuclei 
throughout the envelope and brings fresh CNO nuclei into 
the burning shell, until the unstable isotopes prevail over 
the extent of the envelope. Energy generation continues, 
supplied by the decay of the 6*-unstable nuclei. Heat 
absorption now results in rapid expansion and cooling of 
the accreted envelope. 

During the runaway, the white dwarf’s luminosity 
rises until it attains—or even surpasses briefly—the 
Eddington critical luminosity, Leaq = 4%cGMya/«, where 
Mwa is the star’s mass and x is the photospheric opacity. 
When the star reaches bolometric maximum, its radius 
is still relatively small and its surface still hot; hence 
it radiates mostly in the UV or even EUV. A relatively 
long phase of constant bolometric luminosity, a luminosity 
plateau, ensues. The rapid expansion of the envelope 
proceeds now at constant, close to critical, luminosity. 
Hydrostatic equilibrium cannot be achieved; instead, mass 
is driven out by radiation pressure in an optically thick 
wind. The importance of radiation pressure for the 
ejection of matter by novae was first recognized by William 
McCrea, as early as 1937. The idea was later pursued 
in a vast number of analytical and numerical studies of 
optically thick steady winds. These calculations yield 
velocities of the expanding material, mass loss rates and 
the total ejected mass. Expansion velocities vary between 
a few hundred km s~! for slow novae to a few thousand 
km s!, for very fast ones. 

The optical maximum is obtained when the maxi- 
mal photospheric radius is reached, of order 100Ro, cor- 
responding to effective temperatures of several thousand 
kelvins. Thereafter, when the envelope becomes highly 
diluted, and the opacity drops, the photosphere recedes 
through the expanding mass; its radius decreases, while 
the effective temperature rises. Thus the evolution traces 
a double horizontal path in the H-R diagram, from high to 
low effective temperatures and back, as shown in figure 4. 

When most of the envelope has been ejected, mass loss 
comes to an end. The small remnant shell on the white 
dwarf’s surface contracts and then starts cooling slowly. 
Hydrogen burning continues, in thermal equilibrium, 
with the nuclear and bolometric luminosities both slowly 
declining, now at constant radius. When almost all of the 
hydrogen in the remnant shell has turned into helium, 
nuclear burning ceases and the white dwarf returns to 
its pre-outburst state. The decline takes roughly one 
to several years and the white dwarf remains almost 
unaffected by the outburst that has taken place. Accretion 
resumes towards the next outburst and a new nova cycle 
begins. 


The quiescent state 

The mass transferred from the red dwarf carries 
substantial ANGULAR MOMENTUM. Therefore, it does not settle 
immediately on the surface of the white dwarf, but forms 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


js) 


Magnitude 
A 
2% 


1 


S) 
I 
x 


Z BC 


CF 


Zz” AB (pre—nova): 
lg yr 
(nova rise): 


7 hr 


BE (mass loss): 


81 days 


CD (visual t,): 


Se days 


(bolom. t,): 


0.6 yr 


Figure 4. Illustration of the nova evolution pattern in the H-R 
diagram, as obtained from model calculations. Bolometric and 
visual magnitudes are indicated. Significant evolutionary 
landmarks are labeled. (Adapted from Kovetz (1998).) 


a ring around it, which is spread by viscosity into a disk. 
Accreting material spirals in through the disk, releasing 
gravitational energy, which is processed and radiated 
by the disk. The disk luminosity—essentially, accretion 
luminosity of order GMyaM/Rwa, Where Rwg is the radius 
of the accreting white dwarf and M is the accretion rate— 
dominates the luminosities of both binary components 
between outbursts. Thus the visible spectrum is the 
featureless blue continuum of the accretion disk, typical 
of cataclysmic variables in general. 

From the space density of cataclysmic variables 
obtained in galactic surveys, of order 10-° pc~?, combined 
with the galactic rate of nova outbursts, an upper limit 
of about 10° yr is derived for the recurrence time. This 
demands, in turn, high mass transfer rates, which are 
incompatible with those inferred from nova theory. A 
solution to this apparent conflict is a variable mass 
transfer rate between outbursts: a high rate for tens to 
hundreds of years after outburst, which declines thereafter 
to lower values maintained for most of the quiescent 
state, and increases again centuries to decades prior to a 
new outburst. During the low state novae would escape 
luminosity-limited surveys. Thus nova systems are more 
numerous than they appear to be, but they erupt at much 
longer intervals. The very low luminosity of the oldest 
known novae, the relatively high luminosity of post- and 
prenovae, and the declining luminosity of decades-old 
novae support this theory. 

The mass transfer rate is determined by the extent of 
Roche lobe overflow by the mass-donating star and may 
change when either the Roche lobe radius or the star’s 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


radius change. Such changes are believed to be caused 
by several factors. Because of the mass lost by the binary 
system, the binary components are driven apart slightly 
during an outburst. The increased Roche lobe radius 
should result in a diminished mass transfer rate, but this 
effect is delayed so long as the companion star, irradiated 
by the hot nova, swells to some extent in order to get rid of 
the surplus luminosity. Eventually, as the nova fades away 
and the companion star contracts back to its equilibrium 
radius, the mass transfer rate does decline and remains low 
for a long time, between a few 10° yr and ~10° yr. During 
this long ‘hibernation’ phase the binary components are 
driven closer again owing to angular momentum losses 
caused by gravitational radiation or magnetic braking by 
a stellar wind. Thus the mass transfer rate increases again, 
leading to a new eruption. 


General estimates 

The large variation in observed nova features is attributed 
by the theory to differences in the values of three 
basic parameters that characterize the binary system: 
the mass of the accreting white dwarf, its internal 
temperature, which is a measure of the system’s age, 
and the mass transfer rate, which is determined by 
the mass of the companion star and by the binary 
separation (orbital period). Remarkably, varying these 
parameters within acceptable limits reproduces roughly 
the entire range of observed properties. Furthermore, 
correlations are obtained between # and the peak 
luminosity, the expansion velocity and the decline time of 
the bolometric luminosity, compatible with those derived 
from observations. Nevertheless, the stage where all the 
properties of a particular observed nova can be reproduced 
by one model has not yet been reached. 

Despite the complexity of nova outbursts, some 
simple relations between the basic nova parameters and 
quantities that characterize the development of such 
outbursts may be obtained from analytical considerations. 
It has been shown, for example, that a thermonuclear 
runaway occurs when the pressure at the base of the 
accreted envelope—essentially, the degeneracy pressure 
of electrons—exceeds a critical value Pai: of order a few 
times 10'° N m”?. Since the envelope, of mass Mmeny, has 
negligible thickness, 


GM. dMNeny 

Perit © ee (1) 
4 Ri 

For a white dwarf, the radius and mass are correlated; a 

simple relation, Rwa « M.y 2 holds for Mya < 0.5Mo, 


leading, with equation (1), to 
-7/3 
ee ae Oa (2) 
For larger white dwarf masses, Ryq decreases much more 
strongly with increasing M,,q. Thus massive white dwarfs 


require considerably smaller accreted envelopes in order 
to erupt. This conclusion has further consequences. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


outburst recurrence time is given by P = Meny/ M and, as 
the mass accretion rate M is independent of M,,4, outbursts 
are more frequent on massive white dwarfs than on low- 
mass ones. In addition, since the companion’s mass is 
another independent parameter, massive white dwarfs 
undergo, on average, a larger number of outbursts than 
low-mass ones. This results in a strong observational 
selection effect: the probability of discovering massive 
novae is higher, although they are not necessarily more 
numerous. 

The luminosity at outburst is close to Lgaa, which 
is proportional to Mya. Since the Mya range is rather 
restricted, and since outbursts on massive white dwarfs 
are statistically favored, one should expect a narrow range 
of variation for the luminosities of novae in eruption. 
This should turn novae into reliable distance indicators 
(see below). During quiescence, the luminosity is that of 
accretion. Hence the outburst’s bolometric amplitude A 
(in magnitudes) may be estimated by 


M 
A® 2.5log Get] (3) 
4mcRwa (Mwa) 


which yields, roughly, the observed range of ~7 to ~16. 
The ejected mass mg may be estimated by assuming 
that it is supported against gravity at the star’s surface—at 
the extended radius R—by the radiation pressure Praq = 
5ar", where a is the radiation constant. Thus, mjg = 
Ar R* Prag, Where g is the gravitational acceleration at the 
surface. Substituting the effective temperature for T and 


the Eddington luminosity for L, 


AncG My 
4x R2o Té, = L = — (4) 


leads to 


(5) 


The range obtained—between ~10-°Mo and a few 
10-4M.— overlaps with that resulting from the indepen- 
dent estimate (1) and agrees with masses determined both 
observationally and by evolutionary calculations. 

The energy required to power a nova outburst may 
be estimated as follows: the radiated energy is roughly 
the Eddington luminosity multiplied by the duration of an 
outburst, typically several weeks, which yields ~5 x 10°’ J, 
and the kinetic energy of the expanding shell is ~2.5 x 
10°” J, assuming a shell mass of 10-*Mo and an average 
velocity of 500 km s-!. However, both are negligible 
compared with the energy required to remove the shell 
from the deep gravitational potential well of the white 
dwarf, which is of order 10° J. This energy is supplied by 
nuclear burning of a fraction a of the accreted hydrogen- 
rich envelope mass, which may be estimated by 


GMwa 


Rwa 


~aXQ (6) 


where X is the hydrogen mass fraction in the accreted 
matter, typically 0.7, and Q is the energy released per gram 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Nova properties and abundances. 


) 


Nova Year (days) (km s') xX MG Z Cc N O Ne, etc 
V1370 Aql 1982 13 2800 0.053 0.088 0.859 0.035 0.14 0.051 0.633 
T Aur 1891 100 655 0.47 0.40 0.13 0.079 0.051 

V842 Cen 1986 48 1200 0.41 0.23 0.36 0.12 0.21 0.030 0.0047 
V693 CrA 1981 12 2210 0.29 0.32 0.39 0.0046 0.080 0.12 0.186 
V1500 Cyg 1975 3.6 1180 0.57 0.27 0.16 0.058 0.041 0.050 0.010 
V1668Cyg 1978 23 1300 0.45 0.23 0.32 0.047 0.14 0.13 0.0068 
HR Del 1967 230 550 0.44 0.48 0.077 0.027 0.047 0.0030 
DQ Her 1934 94 350 0.31 0.31 0.38 0.056 0.13 0.20 0.007 
V827 Her 1987 55 1000 0.36 0.29 0.35 0.087 0.24 0.016 0.0028 
GQ Mus 1983 40 535 0.27 0.32 0.41 0.016 0.19 0.19 0.010 
V2214Oph 1988 73 500 0.34 0.26 0.40 0.31 0.060 0.032 
RR Pic 1925 150 475 0.53 0.43 0.043 0.0039 0.022 0.0058 0.011 
PW Vul 1984 147 285 0.54 0.28 0.18 0.032 0.11 0.038 0.0008 
QU Vul 1984 40 ? 0.44 0.46 0.10 0.0014 0.015 0.038 0.0447 
QV Vul 1987 60 700 0.68 0.27 0.053 0.010 0.041 0.0020 
Sun 0.71 0.27 0.0019 0.0031 0.001 0.0097 0.0052 


of burnt hydrogen, 6 x 10 J kg-!. This yields a © 5%, 
which means that only a very small fraction of the accreted 
matter must be burnt in order to power the outburst. 


The composition of nova ejecta—observation and 
theory 

Characteristic abundances 

The fact that nova ejecta exhibit unusual abundance 
features has long been recognized. Recent determinations 
of heavy-element abundances in the ejecta of classical 
novae have been based either on emission line analyses 
during decline or on analyses of resolved shells of older 
novae. The main characteristics of the nova ejecta 
composition derived from observations, as given in table 1, 
are as follows. (a) Allnovae show some degree of He-CNO 
enrichment. (b) There is simultaneous enrichment of He 
and CNO and/or ONeMg. (c) No apparent correlation 
is found between the helium mass fraction Y and the 
heavy-element mass fraction Z. (d) According to their 
neon content, novae may be roughly divided into two 
categories: those with a modest neon abundance, in 
spite of a considerable enrichment in CNO nuclei, and 
those which appear to have a very high abundance of 
neon and heavier elements. Although the theoretical 
prediction of significantly enriched ejecta preceded the 
actual observation, the enrichment mechanism has eluded 
astronomers for quite a long time. 


Sources of enrichment 

In principle, there are three possible sources for the 
unusual composition: (a) the accreted matter itself is rich 
in He, CNO and heavier isotopes; (b) heavy elements are 
synthesized during outburst; (c) core material is dredged 
up into the accreted hydrogen-rich matter. The first 
possibility is highly unlikely, the donor being a K or M 
main sequence star. In fact, no stars are known with 
outer layers of the nova ejecta composition. Regarding 
the second, the energy required to power a nova outburst 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in all its aspects is readily supplied, as shown above, 
by burning a tiny fraction of the accreted mass, and 
temperatures are not high enough to produce elements 
heavier than helium. Hence there remains the possibility 
of mixing of white dwarf material with the accreted mass. 
Two mechanisms have been suggested: (1) diffusion of 
hydrogen into the core, which causes ignition to take 
place below the core boundary and results in convective 
mixing of core material lying above the ignition radius into 
the envelope; (2) turbulent mixing due to shear-induced 
instabilities at the boundary between the white dwarf 
and the accreted material. Both may be supplemented 
by convective overshoot during the initial phases of the 
runaway. 

At the onset of an outburst, the nova progenitor 
consists of two parts—core and envelope. The burning 
front separating them is located at the depth reached by 
the downward-diffusing hydrogen during the accretion 
phase in the diffusion scenario, or at the bottom of the 
unstable, turbulent layer, in the shear-mixing scenario. 
The explosive ignition of hydrogen leads to the formation 
of a convective zone that sweeps the entire envelope. 
Thus, regardless of the element distribution prior to 
outburst, the convective envelope’s composition becomes 
well mixed before any matter is ejected. Hence observed 
abundances do not bear direct witness to the mixing 
mechanism, but they reflect the composition of the white 
dwarf. Accordingly, two types of white dwarf appear to be 
involved in nova outbursts: carbon—oxygen white dwarfs, 
in which carbon and oxygen are in roughly equal mass 
fractions, and oxygen-neon—magnesium white dwarfs, 
for which relative abundances are less certain. STELLAR 
EVOLUTION theory predicts that the latter must have larger 
masses than the former. 

The source of helium excess may be either a helium- 
rich outer layer of the white dwarf progenitor—a relic of 
its early evolutionary stages—or the hydrogen-exhausted 
envelope remnant of a previous nova outburst. Since 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


helium and heavier-element enrichments are concomitant, 
the helium layer overlying the white dwarf core cannot be 
too thick. Thus, even if the white dwarf was originally 
formed with a relatively thick helium mantle, this mantle 
was eroded during the first nova outbursts. Hence the 
common helium source for the ejecta is the helium-rich 
remnant that forms during the decline phase of each 
nova outburst, to be destroyed and reformed in the next. 
The cyclic evolution and composition changes of a nova 
outburst are sketched in figure 5. The fact that helium 
and heavy-element enrichments have different sources 
explains the lack of correlation between them. 


Nuclear processing 

At outburst, temperatures exceed 10° K and densities are 
of order 10” kg m~°. Under such conditions, the hydrogen 
burning reaction chain is 


*C(p, vy) °N(p, v)4O(B*, v)4N(p, vy) O(B*, v) PN 
ramifying into 

SN(p, a)?C 

or 


5SN(p, y) Ow, y)"F(Bt, v)”O(p, a)4N. 


Its characteristic timescale is limited by the lifetimes of 
3N (863 s), *O (102 s), 'O (176 s) and '’F (93 s), which 
become the most abundant heavy isotopes in the nova 
envelope. Their decay products, °C, “N, '°N and 10, 
are thus greatly enhanced compared with the equilibrium 
CNO cycle abundances characteristic of solar composition. 

The rate at which novae return mass to the interstellar 
medium may be estimated from the typical nova rate of 
about 20 yr! per galaxy multiplied by the average ejected 
mass per outburst, ~10-*Mo, yielding ~0.002M, yr}. 
This is about 50 times less than the rate corresponding 
to supernovae and over 200 times less than that 
corresponding to red giants and supergiants. Thus novae 
are significant contributors to interstellar abundances 
only for those isotopes which are enhanced by NUCLEAR 
PROCESSING more than 100 times compared with solar 
values. This is, indeed, the case for the rarer C, N and 
O isotopes. Consequently, novae have been repeatedly 
invoked as sources of the rarer isotopes, although their 
contribution to the dominant isotopes appears to be 
negligible (with the possible exception of !4N). Isotopic 
ratios obtained from model calculations show that °C/?C 
and O/'°O are higher than solar by large factors for 
all parameter combinations, while °N/™N is higher for 
some and lower for others. Consequently, novae are 
also considered potential 'N sources in the interstellar 
medium, since this does not necessarily imply N 
production in too large amounts. 

Despite the high temperatures attained at outburst, 
the only abundant species in the ejecta of carbon—oxygen 
nova models are the isotopes of C, N and O. Neon 
production is entirely insignificant. Hence, it appears 
that the only way to obtain any neon in the ejecta would 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be to have it present in the white dwarf’s composition. 
Indeed, carbon-oxygen white dwarfs formed in close 
binary systems do contain a few per cent of neon, in 
agreement with the amount indicated by observations. 

In the case of novae occurring on oxygen—neon— 
magnesium white dwarfs, hydrogen burning proceeds 
through the NaMg reaction chain, 


°Ne(p, y)"!Na(p, y)”*Mg(B*, v)*Na(p, y)>Mg(6*, v) 
3Na(p, a)?°Ne 


and the MgAI reaction chain, 


4Me(p, vy) AL(B*, v)>Mg(p, y)*°Al(p, v7)?” Si(B*, v) 
27 Al(p, a)*Mg 


which yield substantial abundances of the radioactive 
species Na and **Al. These isotopes have much longer 
lifetimes than the CNO radioactive isotopes, and hence 
they are live in the nova ejecta and in the dust grains 
that form in the shell. They are responsible, at least 
in part, for the enrichments in *Ne and 7Mg—their 
decay products—that have been identified in meteoritic 
inclusions, believed to be representative of the primordial 
solar nebula composition. Moreover, 26Al has been 
detected in the Galaxy through the 1.809 MeV y-ray line 
and novae are considered potential sources of this isotope, 
competing with supernovae and red giants. 


Novae as distance indicators 


Novae are extremely luminous at optical wavelengths, 
brighter than Cepheids and surpassed only by super- 
novae, and they are about a hundred times more frequent 
than supernovae. They are therefore easy to detect in ex- 
ternal galaxies, certainly within the Local Group, and po- 
tentially beyond. In particular, the constant luminosity 
maintained during part of the outburst can be used as a 
standard candle; if moderate to slow novae are considered, 
the magnitude variation among different novae does not 
exceed 1 magnitude. 

The notorious property of nova outbursts is the 
apparent correlation between the maximum magnitude 
attained at outburst and the rate of decline, or more 
precisely, the time of decline by 3 magnitudes, 3 (or, 
sometimes, by 2 magnitudes, tf), a relationship that was 
already pointed out by Fritz Zwicky in 1936 and was first 
calibrated by McLaughlin in 1945. Since then, great effort 
has been devoted to the absolute calibration of this relation, 
which has became known as the maximum magnitude 
versus rate of decline (MMRD) relationship. The MMRD 
is considered a reliable distance indicator, in spite of 
the relatively large scatter of points, which results from 
observations and is expected from the theoretical point of 
view. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
THE NOVA CYCLE 
Quiescence Outburst Decline 
(H-He-CNO)o mass loss 
rr x re 
accretion 


Macc 


Mrem 


Mecore 
k—>| 


co 
(O Ne Mg) 


(O Ne Mg) 


Menv 


co 
(O Ne Mg) 


Figure 5. Schematic illustration of a nova cycle, focusing on composition changes caused by mixing, convection, nuclear burning. The 
white dwarf’s mass mixed into the nova envelope is denoted more; the remnant envelope mass after completion of mass ejection is 


denoted mem. 


Bibliography 
An extensive account of Galactic novae, including a 
detailed catalogue, is given in 


Payne-Gaposhkin C 1957 The Galactic Novae (Amsterdam: 
North-Holland) 


and more recently in 


Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


The most comprehensive catalogue of Galactic 
classical novae (and similar objects) to date, including 
finding charts, has been compiled by 


Duerbeck H W 1987 A Reference Catalogue and Atlas of 
Galactic Novae (Dordrecht: Reidel) 


Collections of articles and reviews on novae may be 
found in 


Bode M Fand Evans A (ed) 1989 Classical Novae (New York: 
Wiley) 

Cassatella A and Viotti R (ed) 1991 Physics of Classical Novae 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Nussbaumer H and Orr A (ed) 1994 Interacting Binaries 
(Berlin: Springer) 


as well as in numerous reviews and proceedings of 
conferences devoted to the broader class of cataclysmic 
variables. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The instability leading to nova outbursts was studied 
analytically by 


Fujimoto Y F 1982 Astrophys. J. 257 752, 767 
Paczynski B 1983 Astrophys. J. 264 282 


The first numerical simulation of hydrogen burning 
on the surface of white dwarf was performed by 


Giannone P and Weigert A 1967 Z. Astrophys. 67 41 


followed by detailed numerical evolutionary calculations 
of nova outbursts carried out by 


Starrfield S, Sparks W M and Truran J W 1974 Astrophys. J. 
192 647 
——1974 Astrophys. J]. Suppl. 28 247 


who were also the first to investigate outbursts on ONeMg 
white dwarfs: 


Starrfield S, Sparks W M and Truran J W 1986 Astrophys. J. 
Lett. 303 L5 


The ‘hibernation’ scenario for nova systems was 
proposed by 


Shara M M, Livio M, Moffat A M and Orio M 1986 
Astrophys. J. 311 163 


following the extensive survey of novae—within cata- 
clysmic variables—carried out by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Novae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Patterson J 1984 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 54 443 


The diffusion—-convection mechanism for heavy- 
element enrichment in nova ejecta was proposed by 


Prialnik D and Kovetz A 1984 Astrophys. J. 281 367 


who were also the first to explore the entire nova parameter 
space by multicycle evolutionary calculations: 


Prialnik D and Kovetz A 1995 Astrophys. J. 445 789 
Kovetz A and Prialnik D 1997 Astrophys. J. 477 356 


Shear mixing resulting from accretion onto a rotating 
white dwarf was first proposed by 


Kippenhahn R and Thomas H-C 1978 Astron. Astrophys. 63 
265 


Nova winds, first studied by 
Bath G and Shaviv G 1976 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 175 305 
have been widely investigated, particularly by 
Kato M and Hachisu I 1994 Astrophys. J. 437 802 


The outburst and wind were first calculated self- 
consistently by 


Kovetz A 1998 Astrophys. J. 495 401 


The first three-dimensional calculation of a nova 
outburst was performed by 


Kercek A, Hillebrandt W and Truran J W 1999 Astron. 
Astrophys. 345 831 


Dina Prialnik 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Nozomi (Planet-B) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nozomi (Planet-B) 


Japanese mission to orbit Mars, launched in July 1998. 
Initially placed into a gravity assist orbit around the Earth 
and Moon. Carries instruments provided by Canada, 
Sweden, Germany and the United States. Intended to 
map the planet’s surface, study the Martian atmosphere 
and the interaction of Mars with the solar wind. Arrival 
at Mars delayed until at least December 2003 after an 
engine malfunction necessitated an unscheduled course 
correction and heavy fuel consumption on leaving Earth 
orbit. Nozomi means ‘hope’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nufhez Salaciense, Pedro [Nunes, Pedro; Nonius, 


Petrus] (1502-78) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nunez Salaciense, Pedro [Nunes, 
Pedro; Nonius, Petrus] (1502-78) 


Doctor, philosopher and navigator, born in Alcacer do Sal, 
Portugal, holding professorial appointments at Lisbon and 
Coimbra, where he taught navigation during the heyday 
of the Portuguese world exploration, appointed Royal 
Cosmographer. Invented a vernier scale for measuring 
fractional parts of a degree on a quadrant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


For over a century it has been known that atomic nuclei 
can undergo radioactive decay. These decays can be 
induced by the strong, weak or electromagnetic interaction 
in the case of excited nuclei. Those nuclear decays which 
proceed via the weak interaction are the beta decays. 
‘Beta’ originally referred to electrons, but these decays 
can involve electrons or positrons, and either electron 
neutrinos or antineutrinos. The term beta decay covers 
all nuclear decays in which the charge number Z of the 
nucleus X for a constant mass number A changes by one 
unit. This includes the following decay processes: 


B decay : eax — ZY +e +0, (1) 
B* decay : 4X — BY +e +e (2) 
electron capture : e+ 4X—> 4,Y+y. (3) 


The most elementary beta decay process is the free neutron 
decay, in which a neutron decays into a proton, an electron 
and an antineutrino 


n— ptetVe, (4) 


or, on the quark level, a d quark decays into a u quark, an 
electron and an antineutrino 


d— u+et+De. (5) 


From a perturbation theory point of view, beta decay 
is a first-order effect of the classical theory. In the 
Glashow-Weinberg-Salam (GWS) theory, in which the 
pointlike current-current interaction is replaced by a 
boson exchange interaction, beta decay is a second-order 
effect. 

Innuclear beta decay it is first and foremost possible to 
investigate the mass spectrum of the neutrino state which 
couples to the electron. The electron energy spectrum 
of an allowed transition is modified by a finite (Dirac or 
Majorana) neutrino mass. At present the investigations 
of tritium decay give the sharpest model-independent 
limits on the electron neutrino mass, of 2.8 eV (at 95% c.1.) 
(Weinheimer 2000, Lobashev 2000). 

Even though the mechanism of £ decay at the nucleon 
(respectively quark) level is in principle understood, 
only quite recently did it become possible to produce 
a quantitatively satisfactory description of the 6 decay 
processes of atomic nuclei (Klapdor 1983, 1986, Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus 1991, Staudt et al 1990, Staudt and Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus 1992, Hirsch et al 1992, 1993, Homma 
et al 1996). This is because the nucleus is a complex 
many-particle system, in which residual interactions of 
various types may lead to collective excitations, which 
can have a massive effect on the 6 decay properties. 
The distribution of the 6 strength in the daughter 
nucleus determines not only the f half-lives, and the 
rates for B-delayed particle emission (neutron or proton 
and fission) but also the shape of the emitted electron 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(positron) and (anti)neutrino spectra. The ability to 
calculate these quantities is of central importance to 
numerous applications in nuclear physics and neighboring 
disciplines such as astrophysics, particle physics and also 
nuclear engineering (see table 1). Some examples are 
(for details we refer to Klapdor (1983, 1986), Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus (1991, 1998, 1999), Grotz and Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus (1990), Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and Staudt 
(1995, 1998)): 


Table 1. Nuclear beta decay and its links with some 
fundamental problems in nuclear, particle and astrophysics, and 
nuclear engineering (from Grotz and Klapdor-Kleingrothaus 
(1990), Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and Staudt (1995, 1998)). 


Neutrino mass On, BA) 
Neutrino oscillations (Ain,_) \ Particle 
(Reactor experiments) physics 
Right-handed weak currents (7) 


B half-lives 


Fission barriers far from /3-stability line 


| Nuclear 
Synthesis of elements in thermonuclear | physics 
processes: 

Existence of super-heavy nuclei 


Nuclear /3-strength 
distribution 


Synthesis of elements in the universe 
{r-process) 


Age of the universe (— 2,,) + Astrophysics 


Cosmology 
Detection of solar and galactic neutrinos 
Decay heat of nuclear reactors 

Reactor kinetics 


} Nuclear technology 


Nuclear physics. Investigation of the nuclear structure 
of nuclei far from stability; determination of the fission 
barriers of nuclei from f-delayed fission; understanding 
the production of transuranic elements by thermonuclear 
devices; calculation of the electron and antineutrino 
spectra in nuclear reactors, originating from 6 decay of 
the around 1000 fission products (important for neutrino 
oscillation experiments). 

Particle Physics. Calculation of BfB-decay matrix 
elements as a prerequisite for determination of the 
neutrino mass and other particle theory parameters 
from measured decay rates (see below and also PARTICLE 
ASTROPHYSICS). 

Astrophysics. Understanding the development of 
stars, particularly the gravitational collapse of heavy stars 
and the synthesis of elements in the r process; determining 
the age of the galaxy from cosmochronometers; response 
function of gallium detectors (and others) in solar neutrino 
detection. Stars shine because of the weak interaction 
involving either the pp reaction to form deuterium, or in 
the case of CNO burning, because of nuclear beta (actually 
positron) decays. 

A precise knowledge of the beta decay of neutron- 
rich nuclei is crucial for the understanding of the r-process 
(Klapdor 1983, 1986, Klapdor-Kleingrothaus 1991). Both 
the element distribution on the r-path, and the result- 
ing element distribution of stable elements—and of the 
cosmochronometers—are sensitive to the beta decay prop- 
erties (half-lives, beta-delayed rates) of the neutron-rich 
nuclei involved in the process (about 6000 nuclei between 
the beta stability line and the neutron drip line (see fig- 
ure 1)). The rates for beta-delayed fission determine where 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the r-process breaks off at high mass number A, and also 
influence the production rate of heavy nuclei. On the ba- 
sis of microscopic calculations of the beta decay properties 
(since the early 1980s) of all of these nuclei for the first time 
reliable ages of the Galaxy and the universe were obtained 
with the method of cosmochronology (Klapdor 1983, 1986, 
Klapdor-Kleingrothaus 1991), which hinted more than ten 
years ago at a non-vanishing COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT A 
(Klapdor and Grotz 1986). These hints were confirmed 
in 1998 by observation of high-redshift SUPERNOVAE of type 
Ia in the Supernova Cosmology Project. 


120 


100 


Se Miran particle? 
Prot ES Gh att Fon 
eet astahiit BASEl ve 


Strait ofSu 
radioactivify 


Reactor physics. Calculation of the residual heat 
released in the 6 decay of fission products on switching 
off reactors. 

It is a second order effect of the classical theory 
(fourth order in the GWS theory), namely double beta 
decay, which yields—besides proton decay—perhaps the 
most promising possibilities to probe physics beyond the 
standard model of particle physics (figure 2). 

The investigation of double beta decay is indispens- 
able to solve one of the fundamental questions of all unified 
theories of modern particle physics, that of neutrino mass 
and nature. Double beta decay is the only process allow- 
ing an answer to the question: is the neutrino a Dirac or 

? Also, it is the common opinion of theo- 
ot the neutrino mass ma- 
neutgiaxa oscillation experiments 
at Pheri coe plone bast but requires in addition a 
Y ‘doupk bated ecay experiment. 

bi¢-beteareay, in which exchange 
Pars nucleons triggers their 
ptectons, was discussed first 
aaa has not been observed 
mber conservation, and, 
ber B minus lepton 
eats, Which would imply 


N gutzinola; 5 
Of a nas ivesfeutrinO6pebres 


ee at 
= rae 
Stitt ate te te att ste cues 


tified Models of particle 
s.] The decay rate is 


Shyrstes—ptrectictwtatotatre ere Scr 


Sa go Proportiqnai tear eftecive Hemiin ma: uared, 
‘0 60 QO Pe sO 489 Neutrons ‘ ee Stare 


WwW a mperpo O O 


ectifferent neutrino mass 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of element synthesis by rapid neutron cafphrd HATES Les) (from Grotz and. Klapdor-Kleingrothaus (1990), 


Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and Staudt (1995, 1998)). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(my) = Yi miUG. (6) 


respecting the possibility of the electron neutrino to be a 
mixed state (mass matrix not diagonal in the flavor space) 


|v.) = > Ueilvs) (7) 


U is the (unitary) neutrino mixing matrix. 

Consequently double beta decay yields important 
information on the parameters of the neutrino mass and 
mixing matrix. The information from double beta decay 
is particularly important to fix the absolute neutrino mass 
scale, since neutrino oscillation experiments measure only 
differences between mass eigenstates. 

There are worldwide several double beta experiments 
running looking for this type of decay for various nuclei 
(figure 3). The Heidelberg—Moscow experiment is by far 
the most sensitive one at present, and also for the next 
few years (figure 3 and see Klapdor-Kleingrothaus (1998, 
1999)). 

The team from the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear 
Physics in Heidelberg and the Kurchatov Institute 
in Moscow constructed a set-up of five high-purity 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Galaxy formation 


Recombination 
Relic radiation decouples (CBR) 


Matter domination 


Nucleosynthesis 


Quark-hadron transition 


Electroweak phase transition 


The Particle Desert 
Axions, supersymmetry? 


Grand unification transition 
Inflation, baryogensis, 
monopole, cosmic strings, etc.? 


The Planck epoch 


The quantum gravity barrier 


t=400,000 years 
T=3000 K (1 eV) 


CMB (MAP&PLANCK) 


LHC Range 
R,SUSY 
Leptoquarks, Compositeness 


m,<0.2eV 


| DARK MATTER SEARCH 


m,<0.001eV 


OvBB range 


VEP,VLI 


Figure 2. Energy (time) scales in the early universe where double beta decay can contribute to the related particle physics research. For 
the (light) neutrino masses the scale is indicated for the right-handed heavy counterparts according to the see-saw mechanism. 


germanium detectors enriched in the isotope germanium- 
76 to 86% (natural abundance 7.8%) of total mass of 
11.5 kg. This results in the largest source strength ever 
used in a double beta decay experiment. The set-up is 
operated in a heavy shielding under 1500 meters of rock 
(corresponding to 3500 m of water shielding) in the Gran 
Sasso Underground Laboratory in Italy. The background 
level reached by the experiment is the lowest worldwide 
for this kind of experiment—0.06 events per year and 
kilogram of detector mass in the energy range of the 
expected double beta decay signal, which would be a 
peak in the spectrum produced by the decay electrons, 
at 2038 keV. 

In almost 10 years of measurement, the Heidelberg— 
Moscow team has obtained a lower limit for the half- 
life of neutrinoless double beta decay of germanium-76 
of several 10% years. This is the world record under 
all running investigations. With the deduced limit for 
the Majorana neutrino mass of 0.27 eV, the Heidelberg— 
Moscow experiment is not only the first one exploring 
the sub-eV range of the neutrino mass, but also enters 
in a range of values, which has stringent consequences 
for neutrino mass models and for cosmological models 
assuming neutrinos as hot DARK MATTER in the universe (see 
figure 4 and Klapdor-Kleingrothaus et al 2000a). 

For example, in degenerate neutrino mass models, in 
which the neutrino mass eigenstates have very close 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


values, the above value (and even a more conservative 
value of 0.35 eV) excludes models with cold and hot dark 
matter (CHDM models), and also those including a non- 
vanishing cosmological constant A (ACHDM models) 
for the case of the small mixing angle solution of the 
solar neutrino problem. (Minakata 1997, Adhikari et 
al 2000, Ellis and Lola 1999, Georgi and Glashow 2000, 
Yasuda 1999). This result is consistent with the recent 
disfavoring of the small mixing angle solution for the 
solar neutrino problem as reported by SUPER-KAMIOKANDE 
(Suzuki 2000, see also Gonzales-Garcia 2000). Assuming 
the best fits of the large mixing angle solution or the 
vacuum oscillation solutions, still CHDM models are 
excluded, while ACHDM models are still marginally 
possible (requiring (m) = 0.15-0.30 eV). In the case of 
inverse hierarchical neutrino mass scenarios, with only 
two neutrinos contributing to hot dark matter, only ACDM 
models with a small Hubble constant h = 0.5 are 
marginally not yet excluded. 

Already now, still assuming the small angle solution 
of the solar neutrino problem to be valid, the experiment 
would rule out almost the whole range of sensitivity 
of the future satellite experiments MAP and PLANCK 
for cosmological models of the above types involving 
neutrinos as hot dark matter (see figure 4). Figure 4 
also demonstrates that, combined with the neutrino 
oscillation results obtained in the recent solar and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


= 10% GENIUS 
ee : 
27 : 
a : 136 
HEIDELBERG-: i ‘Xe in 
MOSCOW : iad LAND” 
ai NEMO3 = 2015? 
2005 ? Ab 
107 10 kg ae ; 
: Caltech- 
iis ‘Neuchatel 
24 ah 
10 
ELEGANT ELEGANT : Milino 
3 VI i (68%) TeO, L oe 
10 &, : UCI TPC Kiev 
Peking : : (68%) 
a2 | (76%) | 
- a 
Box BC, Ge Ge se Mo 140 N6Cq 130pg B6y_ 1364 150 
(a) 
> 
md 
g& GENIUS KAMLAND 
0.01. + - 136Xe in 
CUORE liquid 
HEIDELBERG: NEMO 3 20152 scintillator 
MOSCOW : 2005? 2010 ? 
oe | 1999! a , UCI 
: Poe we, TPC 
: Milano! Caltech- : 1.6 kg 
a ELEGANT ; TeO, eter | * 
1 r ELEGANT ' ' : : 
‘ UCI TPC es 2008 - 
és &, . (68%) " ev . * 
Beijing : ' 68%) * ' 
(16%) : ' : 
10 + : : 5 


Boa Bea Ge “Ge *Se 


100 100 116 13074 136 1364, 150. 
Mo “Mo “Cd Xe ~ Xe ~Nd 


(b) 


Figure 3. Present situation, 2000, and expectation for the near future and beyond, of the most promising 6f-experiments concerning 
accessible half-life (a) and neutrino mass limits (b). The light-shaded parts of the bars correspond to the present status, the dark parts 
of the bars to expectations for running experiments, dashed lines to experiments under construction and dash-dotted lines to proposed 


experiments. 


atmospheric neutrino oscillation experiments (see also 
SOLAR INTERIOR: NEUTRINOS) and with precise determinations 
of cosmological parameters, double beta decay is 
obviously the only way to obtain precise informations 
about the neutrino mixing and the absolute mass scale 
in partially degenerate and degenerate neutrino mass 
scenarios. 

Looking into four-neutrino scenarios, including in 
addition to the three known neutrino flavours a fourth 
‘sterile’ neutrino, there are as shown recently by Giunti 
et al, Bilenky et al, and others, only two schemes that 
can accommodate the results of all neutrino oscillation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


experiments (including the Los Alamos experiment 
LSND). The first of these two scenarios is ruled out by 
the Heidelberg—Moscow experiment. 

An application of the extremely low background 
of the germanium double beta detectors is to search 
for cold dark matter in the form of WIMPs (weakly 
interacting massive particles; see WIMPS AND MACHOS) which 
are expected to populate the halo of our Galaxy. They 
could be looked for by elastic scattering off the Ge nuclei 
and the following ionization by the recoiling nucleus in 
the double beta decay detectors. The deposited energy 
for neutralinos with masses between 10 GeV and 1 TeV 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3vHDM 


i (c') pombe sanaeenen se meeenam 
O80 poe CHD 20:65". =0:2 


<m>=0. 98 ev eVMIAP/PLANCK + capes HeO. 


<m>=0.] ¢ 
10 


<m>= O0: “é 


10) beeen 
Amupatage! 02 02 


0.4 0.5 


06 #07 08 O09 1 


Figure 4. Isomass lines for the effective neutrino mass (m) measured in double beta decay in the mo-sin? (20) plane for the case of a 
degenerate three-neutrino scenario with mass mg. Also shown are the best fits for CHDM and ACHDM for different values of the Hubble 
constant, the sensitivity of MAP/PLANCK combined with SDSS, and the regions of the MSW LMA and of the vacuum oscillation 
solutions of the solar neutrino problem. The Heidelberg—Moscow experiment excludes already most of the cosmological models and 
also, assuming the MSW SMA solution, almost the whole range of sensitivity of the future satellite experiments MAP and PLANCK for 
cosmological models involving neutrinos as hot dark matter (from Klapdor-Kleingrothaus et al 2000a). 


is below 100 keV. The best current limits on WIMP 
nucleon cross sections come from the DAMA experiment, 
from the CDMS experiment and from the Heidelberg— 
Moscow experiment, the latter experiment yielding the 
most stringent limits for using raw data without pulse 
shape analysis. All of these experiments at present just 
marginally touch only the upper part of the parameter 
space predicted for neutralinos as cold dark matter. A 
huge increase in sensitivity could be expected from the 
future double beta (and dark matter) detector GENIUS 
(see Klapdor-Kleingrothaus (1997, 1998, 1999), Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus and Hirsch 1997, Klapdor-Kleingrothaus et 
al (1999a, 2000a)). 

In addition to the information on the neutrino 
mass, double beta decay experiments, and in particular 
the Heidelberg—Moscow experiment yield already now 
information on beyond standard model physics on the 
TeV scale, where new physics could be expected. This 
is possible since the AL = 2 process of neutrinoless 
double beta decay could occur in any lepton-number 
violating theory, so, e.g. by exchange of supersymmetric 
particles like neutralinos, gluinos, sleptons, etc, and thus 
the process would yield information on the underlying 
theories and on properties of the involved particles. This 
has been realized in the last 10-15 years only (see Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus (1998, 1999), Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and 
Pas (1998) and Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and Krivosheina 
(2000)). It is important to note, and has been proved 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


theoretically already in the early 1980s by Schechter and 
Valle, that independent of the mechanism underlying the 
double beta decay, its occurrence always would imply a 
nonvanishing Majorana neutrino mass. 

The half-life limit measured in the Heidelberg— 
Moscow experiment yields a lower limit on the mass of 
a superheavy left-handed neutrino of M > 8 x 10° GeV, 
a limit which could be reached only by a far-future 
2 TeV linear electron-electron collider. It yields further 
an upper limit on the Yukawa coupling A‘,, in the R- 
parity breaking part of the superpotential of the minimal 
supersymmetric standard model (MSSM), which is more 
stringent than present limits from the TEVATRON and 
HERA colliders, and which immediately excluded the 
possibility of squarks of first generation being produced 
in the recently discussed high-Q squared events at HERA. 

The Heidelberg—Moscow result also restricts strin- 
gently products of higher generation Yukawa couplings, 
it yields the sharpest limits for a Majorana-type mass of 
the sneutrino, the supersymmetric partner of the neu- 
trino, sets limits to compositeness (assuming a substruc- 
ture of quarks and leptons), which are, as shown recently 
by Panella et al (2000), more stringent than those from the 
LEP II accelerator, yields bounds on violation of Lorentz 
invariance (VLI) and equivalence principle (VEP) in the 
neutrino sector, in the range of small mixing, which can- 
not be constrained by other experiments. This implies that 
double beta decay probes even physics at the Planck scale, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mee (eV) 


Heidelberg-Moscow 


CUORE 


MOON 
GENIUS | t 


GENIUS 10t 


< 
> 


Triple 
SMA 
SMA 


Hierarchy 


Figure 5. Summary of expected values for the effective neutrino mass mee 


VAC 


Degeneracy Partial Degeneracy Inverse Hierarchy 


2DEG 


4y 


(m,) in different neutrino mass schemes and the potential of 


future double beta experiments to probe them (from Klapdor-Kleingrothaus et al 2000a). 


since violation of Lorentz invariance and of equivalence 
principle (as well as CPT violation) could occur in super- 
string theories (See STRING THEORY/SUPERSTRING THEORY). Vio- 
lation of the latter could result from contributions of dila- 
tons (excitations in compactified spacetime dimensions) to 
gravitation by flavour-characteristic couplings. This could 
lead to neutrino oscillations. Violation of Lorentz invari- 
ance can originate from the fact that in QUANTUM GRAVITY 
theories the vacuum has a non-trivial sPACETIME structure, 
and thus particles propagating through the quantum foam 
show energy-dependent recoil and vacuum polarization 
effects (for details see Klapdor-Kleingrothaus (1998, 1999), 
Klapdor-Kleingrothaus et al (1999b, 2000a, b, c)). 

In summary the most sensitive present double beta 
experiments yield important complementary information 
to accelerator experiments, which partly can be covered 
only by future colliders. 

The method of double beta decay could be pushed in 
another type of set-up to a limit of 0.1 eV or ultimately 
0.001 eV, which probably would be the ultimate value 
obtainable in double beta decay experiments. For this 
purpose the Heidelberg group has proposed the new 
project GENIUS (Klapdor-Kleingrothaus 1997, Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus and Hirsch 1997, Klapdor-Kleingrothaus 
et al 1999a, Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and Zuber 1997). Its 
research potential for neutrino physics is demonstrated 
in figure 5. It is complementary to that of solar neutrino 
experiments (see, e.g., Bahcall ef al 2000). More generally, 
this would have implications for a broad area of physics 
encompassing particle physics in the multi TeV range, 
and astrophysics, and which would serve as an important 
bridge between the physics that will be gleaned from high 
energy accelerators such as LHC and NLC on the one hand 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and satellite experiments such as MAP and PLANCK on 
the other. 


For further information please look at Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus H V (2000), and at the home page: 


http://www.mpi-hd.mpg.de/non-_acc. 


Bibliography 

Adhikari R and Rajasekaran G 2000 Phys. Rev. D 61 031301- 
1 

Bahcall J N, Krastev P I and Smirnov A Yu 2000 Preprint 
hep-ph/0002293 

Ellis J and Lola S 1999 Phys. Lett. B 458 310 

Georgi H and Glashow S L 2000 Phys. Rev. D 61 097301-1 

Gonzales-Garcia M 2000 Proc. Int. Conf. ‘Neutrino 
Physics and Astrophysics’, NEUTRINO 2000, Sudbury, 
Canada, 16-21 June 2000, ed A McDonald Nucl. Phys. 
Proc. Suppl. B 

Grotz K and Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 1990 The Weak 
Interaction in Nuclear, Particle and Astrophysics (Bristol: 
Adam Hilger) 

Hirsch M, Staudt A and Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 1992 
At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 51 243 

Hirsch M, Staudt A, Muto K _ and_ Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus H V 1993 At. Data Nucl. Data 
Tables 53 165 

Homma H, Bender E, Hirsch M, Muto K, Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus H V and Oda T 1996 Phys. Rev. C 54 
2972 

Klapdor H V 1983 Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 10 131 

Klapdor H V 1986 Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 17 419 

Klapdor H V and Grotz K 1986 Astrophys. J. 304 L39 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Beta Decay 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 1991 Nuclei in the Cosmos 
ed H Oberhummer (Heidelberg: Springer) p 199 
Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 1997 Proc. Beyond the Desert 
1997—Accelerator and Non-Accelerator Approaches, 
BEYOND ’97, eds H V Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and 

H Pas (Bristol: Institute of Physics) p 485 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 1998 Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 13 
3953 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 1999 Lepton and Baryon 
Number Violation in Particle Physics, Astrophysics 
and Cosmology ed H V Klapdor-Kleingrothaus and 
IV Krivosheina (Bristol: Institute of Physics) p 251 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 2000 Sixty Years of Double Beta 
Decay—From Nuclear Physics to Particle Physics Beyond 
the Standard Model, (World Scientific: Singapore) 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V, Baudis L, Heusser G, 
Majorovits B and Pas H 1999a MPI-Report MPI-H- 
V26-1999 Preprint hep-ph/9910205 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V and Hirsch M 1997 Z. Phys. A 
359 361 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V and Krivosheina I V (ed) 2000 
Beyond the Desert 1999—Accelerator, Non-Accelerator 
and Space Approaches (Bristol: Institute of Physics) 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V and Pas H (ed) 1998 Beyond 
the Desert 1997—Accelerator and Non-Accelerator 
Approaches (Bristol: Institute of Physics) 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V and Pas H 2000b Proc. 
COSMO’99 Trieste, Italy, 27 September-3 October 1999 
and Preprint hep—ph/0002109 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V, Pas Hand Sarkar U 1999b Eur. 
Phys. J.A53 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V, Pas H and Sarkar U 2000c 
Preprint hep—ph/0002215 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V, Pas H and Smirnov A 2000a 
submitted for publication, Preprint hep-ph/0003219 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V and Staudt A 1995 Non- 
Accelerator Particle Physics (Bristol: Institute of 
Physics) 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V and Staudt A 1998 Non- 
Accelerator Particle Physics (Bristol: Institute of 
Physics), second edition 

Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V and Zuber K 1997 Particle 
Astrophysics (Bristol: Institute of Physics), second 
edition 2000 

Lobashev V 2000 Proc. Int. Conf. ‘Neutrino Physics and 
Astrophysics’, NEUTRINO 2000, Sudbury, Canada, 
16-21 June 2000, ed A McDonald Nucl. Phys. Proc. 
Suppl. B 

Minakata H and Yasuda O 1998 Phys. Rev. D 56 1692 

Panella O, Carimalo C and Srivastava Y N 2000 Phys. Rev. 
D 62 015013-1 

Staudt A, Bender E, Muto K and_ Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus H V 1990 At. Data Nucl. Data 
Tables 44 79 

Staudt A and Klapdor-Kleingrothaus H V 1992 Nucl. Phys. 
A 549 254 

Suzuki Y (for the SUPERKAMIOKANDE collaboration) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2000 Proc. Int. Conf. "Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics’, 
NEUTRINO 2000, Sudbury, Canada, 16-21 June 2000, 
ed A McDonald Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. B 

Weinheimer C 2000 in Proc. Int. Conf. ‘Neutrino Physics and 
Astrophysics’, NEUTRINO 2000, Sudbury, Canada, 
16-21 June 2000, ed A McDonald Nucl. Phys. Proc. 
Suppl. B 

Yasuda O 1999 Proc. ‘Beyond the Desert ‘99’: Accelerator, 
Non-accelerator and Space Approaches, ‘Conference on 
Physics Beyond the Standard Model’ eds H V Klapdor- 
Kleingrothaus and I V Krivosheina, Tegernsee, 
Germany, 6-12 June 1999 (Bristol: Institute of 
Physics) 


Hans V Klapdor-Kleingrothaus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Combustion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nuclear Combustion 


Nuclear combustion is the rapid consumption of stellar 
material by a thermonuclear fusion front, propagating 
subsonically (deflagration) or supersonically (detonation), 
releasing large amounts of energy that are observable as 
astrophysical flashes. 


Overview 

In some astrophysical events, stellar material becomes 
sufficiently strongly compressed and heated that nuclear 
fusion reactions occur much more rapidly than during the 
slow, gradual nuclear burning that takes place for most 
of every star’s lifetime. If this happens, a thin sheet of 
reacting material, a so-called nuclear combustion front, 
forms and travels from the point of its ignition outward. 
The huge amount of energy released by the combustion 
front within a very short time is believed to be the source 
for the bursts of light that are observed as astrophysical 
flashes. There are mainly three types of astrophysical 
explosions whose theoretical explanations invoke fast 
nuclear combustion: classical NOVAE, X-RAY BURSTERS and— 
most violently—type Ia suPERNOVAE. In the former two, the 
hydrogen gas accreted onto a WHITE DWARF Or NEUTRON STAR 
in a BINARY SYSTEM becomes more and more compressed 
by the strong gravitational field of the accreting star and 
eventually explodes, leaving the underlying star intact. In 
the case of a type Ia supernova, the accreting white dwarf 
ignites nuclear combustion deep in its interior, leading to 
the explosion of the entire star. 

In order to understand these astrophysical phenom- 
ena, one must construct mathematical models that de- 
scribe the structure of nuclear combustion fronts and their 
modes of propagation. If one neglects the influence of 
turbulent fluid motions, all combustion fronts can be clas- 
sified as either deflagrations or detonations. Deflagrations 
(or ‘flames’) are thin layers of hot nuclear burning material 
that diffuse heat into the cold, unburned material ahead 
of the front, igniting it and thus moving the front forward. 
They propagate subsonically and resemble, for instance, 
flames in car engines. Detonations, on the other hand, are 
driven supersonically by a shock wave that is formed by 
the energy released in the reacting layer. 

In astrophysical explosions, however, the burning 
material is often not at rest but undergoes strong, 
turbulent motions—often stirred by the combustion front 
itsel{—making the modeling of the event much more 
difficult. Turbulent deflagrations can propagate much 
faster than laminar ones, and may sometimes even turn 
into detonations. Computers are needed to solve the 
mathematical models in all but the simplest cases, but 
even they can only provide us with a rough glimpse of 
the complexity of turbulent nuclear combustion fronts. 


Basic physics of nuclear combustion fronts 

Just like the hydrostatic nuclear burning that takes place 
in the core of our Sun, astrophysical thermonuclear flashes 
obtain their energy from nuclear FUSION reactions that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


combine light atomic nuclei to heavier ones. They 
differ mainly in the speed at which these reactions take 
place, described by the energy generation rate w. Since 
the reaction rate depends on the probability of two 
nuclei colliding and therefore on their speeds and mean 
separation, w is a very steeply rising function of the 
density p and, even more crucially, the temperature T. 
How do thermonuclear flashes reach sufficiently high 
temperatures to burn their nuclear fuel explosively? 

Stars control their central temperature, and thus their 
energy generation rate, by expansion or contraction that 
causes cooling or heating respectively. This feedback 
control becomes impossible if the pressure is almost 
independent of the temperature, as in the case of electron 
degeneracy. All three cases of known astrophysical 
thermonuclear flashes involve degenerate nuclear fuel (we 
shall use the terms ‘fuel’ and ‘ashes’ in a general sense for 
the nuclear reactants and reaction products respectively): 
in novae and x-ray bursts, the hydrogen layer on top 
of a white dwarf or a neutron star is compressed by 
the strong gravitational field and becomes degenerate, 
whereas in type Ia supernovae the nuclear fuel is the 
degenerate carbon and oxygen core of a Chandrasekhar 
mass white dwarf itself. In all three cases, accretion 
from a binary companion heats the material and triggers 
nuclear reactions. In the absence of an efficient cooling 
mechanism, T, and therefore w, rises at an accelerating 
pace that is only stopped when all of the material is burned 
to nuclear ashes. A thermonuclear runaway begins. It is 
localized in a small region where the initial temperature 
fluctuation was highest, the so-called ignition region. 

When a critical temperature T, is exceeded, all of 
the fuel inside the ignition region is consumed almost 
instantaneously, and a thin reaction zone forms at the 
interface of burned and unburned material. It propagates 
into the surrounding fuel by one of two mechanisms: if the 
overpressure created by the heat of the burning products 
is sufficiently high, a hydrodynamical shock wave forms 
that ignites the fuel by compressional heating. A self- 
sustaining combustion front that propagates by shock- 
heating is called a detonation (cf figure 1). Detonations 
generally move supersonically, and therefore do not allow 
the unburned medium to expand before it is burned 
(this is important in the context of type Ia supernovae). 
Their speed depends only on the total amount of energy 
released per unit mass, €. On the other hand, if the initial 
overpressure is too weak, the temperature gradient at the 
fuel—ashes interface steepens until an equilibrium between 
heat diffusion (carried out predominantly by electron— 
ion collisions) and energy generation is reached. The 
resulting combustion front consists of a diffusion zone 
that heats the fuel up to 7., followed by a thin reaction 
layer where the fuel is consumed and energy is generated. 
It is called a deflagration or simply a flame and moves 
subsonically with respect to the unburned material (cf 
figure 2). Flames, unlike detonations, may therefore be 
strongly affected by turbulent velocity fluctuations of the 
fuel. Only if the unburned material is at rest, can a unique 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Combustion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


laminar flame speed S, be found which depends on the 
detailed interaction of burning and diffusion within the 
flame region. It can be estimated by assuming that in 
order for burning and diffusion to be in equilibrium, the 
respective time scales, tj ~ €/w and tq ~ 6*/«, where 6 is 
the flame thickness and « is the thermal diffusivity, must 
be similar: t} ~ ta. Defining S; = 6/t, one finds S, ~ 
(xkw/e)'/*, where w should be evaluated at T ~ T.. This 
is only a crude estimate due to the strong T dependence 
of w. Numerical solutions of the full equations of 
hydrodynamics including nuclear energy generation and 
heat diffusion are needed to obtain more accurate values 
for S, as a function of p and fuel composition. 


Flame instabilities and turbulent nuclear 
combustion 

Even if the laminar, one-dimensional structure of flames 
and detonations is understood, one has to ask whether 
small perturbations of this structure grow in three- 
dimensional reality, i.e. whether the solution is hydrody- 
namically unstable (there are also non-hydrodynamical, 
one-dimensional flame instabilities which will not be dis- 
cussed here). If it is, the perturbations may either grow 
to a finite size and stabilize, or grow until the fluid be- 
comes fully turbulent. In either case, the exact mathemati- 
cal description of the combustion front becomes very com- 
plicated or even impossible. Instead, phenomenological 
or statistical methods must be employed to model impor- 
tant global quantities such as the total extent, propagation 
speed and energy generation rate of the front. The follow- 
ing discussion will be limited to flames; although detona- 
tions are known to develop cellular instabilities, their rel- 
evance in astrophysical explosions has not been as clearly 
established as flame instabilities. 

Let us first consider very thin flames, such that their 
internal structure can be neglected when observed on 
scales of the perturbation wavelength. These flames are 
unstable to the Landau—Darrieus (LD) instability which 
arises aS a consequence of the density jump produced 
by thermal expansion within the flame, and is present 
whenever a density discontinuity moves subsonically in 
the direction of the higher density. The instability grows 
until a web of cellular structures forms and stabilizes the 
front against further growth of the perturbations. The 
LD instability therefore does not, in general, lead to the 
production of turbulence. 

If the flame moves upward in a gravitational field, 
it is also subject to the Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) instability 
resulting from the buoyancy of the hot, burned fluid with 
respect to the dense, unburned material. Here, small 
perturbations grow until they form bubbles that begin to 
float upward. After a short time, bubbles of fuel and ashes 
with various sizes create a foamy RT mixing layer that 
continually grows in size. Secondary instabilities related 
to the velocity shear along the bubble surfaces may then 
lead to the production of turbulence. 

The problem of turbulent combustion has been 
researched extensively in the engineering sciences in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the context of car engines, turbines and chemical 
explosions. Owing to the nonlinearity of the underlying 
equations, the Navier-Stokes equations of FLUID DYNAMICS 
including reactions and diffusion, exact solutions are 
rarely obtainable. Even numerical simulations on 
supercomputers can only yield limited insight into the 
complexity of turbulent combustion. The main problem 
is the tremendous range of length scales that need to 
be observed (or solved for), ranging from the size of 
the largest turbulent eddy L (reaching some fraction of 
the stellar radius in the astrophysical case) down to the 
smallest one, which can be smaller than a millimeter. Since 
no computer is capable of resolving this range of scales, 
one has to resort to statistical or scaling approximations 
of those length scales that are not properly resolved. 
The most prominent scaling relation in the science of 
turbulence is Kolmogorov’s law for the cascade of velocity 
fluctuations: it states that under the assumption of 
isotropy and statistical stationarity, the mean velocity v 
of turbulent eddies with size / scales as v ~ 1'/>. Given the 
velocity of large eddies, e.g. from computer simulations, 
one can use this relation to extrapolate the eddy velocity 
distribution down to smaller scales under the assumption 
of isotropic, fully developed turbulence. 

Knowledge of the eddy velocity as a function of length 
scale is important to classify the burning regime of the 
turbulent combustion front. The ratio of the laminar 
flame speed and the turbulent velocity on the scale of the 
flame thickness, K = S,/v(5), plays an important role: if 
K > 1, the laminar flame structure is nearly unaffected 
by turbulent fluctuations. Turbulence does, however, 
wrinkle and deform the flame on scales / where S; < v(J), 
i.e. above the Gibson scale /, defined by S, = v(/,). These 
wrinkles increase the flame surface area and therefore the 
total energy generation rate of the turbulent front. One 
can define the turbulent flame speed, S,, as the mean 
overall propagation velocity of the turbulent flame front 
(obviously, S,; > S). If the turbulence is sufficiently 
strong (v(L) >> S}) the turbulent flame speed becomes 
independent of the laminar speed (and therefore of the 
microphysics of burning and diffusion) and scales only 
with the velocity of the largest eddy: S, ~ v(L). Because 
of the unperturbed laminar flame properties on very small 
scales, and the wrinkling of the flame on large scales, the 
burning regime where K > 1 is called the ‘corrugated 
flamelet regime’. 

The opposite limit, K « 1, is the ‘well-stirred reactor’ 
burning regime. In this regime, a laminar flame structure 
ceases to exist because the fluid is stirred by turbulence 
on scales of 5 and below. Nuclear reactions are no longer 
confined to thin layers but occur everywhere at once at 
varying intensities, depending on the local temperature 
and fuel concentration. The flame instabilities mentioned 
above are replaced by reactive convection as a source for 
the turbulence. Unlike the flamelet regime, the well- 
stirred reactor regime does not give rise to a simple 
estimate for S,, as the details of burning and diffusion 
continue to matter. It is, however, accessible to simplified 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Combustion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Terpetature 


a 
ae : me, 
~ Energy generation Me, 
/ tate ae 
é 
/ > 


Fuel eqneentration 


Density 


Figure 1. Sketch of the variation of flow properties across a detonation front. 


Temperature “ 


\ 


Foal concentration 


Density 


Figure 2. Sketch of the variation of flow properties across a deflagration front. 


treatments by approximating the effect of turbulent mixing 
with the help of statistical methods. 

The intermediate case of K ~* 1 is called the 
‘distributed burning regime’ and is the least understood 
of all three. It recently received some attention in 
the framework of type Ia supernova models suggesting 
that the turbulent deflagration front, after beginning its 
life in the flamelet regime, may turn into a detonation 
(deflagration—detonation-transition, DDT) when it passes 
through the distributed burning regime. It is very 
difficult to study theories that involve distributed burning, 
since neither nuclear burning and diffusion nor turbulent 
mixing can be properly described by simplified models 
in this regime. Phenomenologically, the laminar flame 
structure is believed to be disrupted by turbulence and to 
form a distribution of reaction zones with various lengths 
and thicknesses. 


Burning regimes in astrophysical flashes 
This section gives a brief summary of the burning regimes 
of nuclear combustion fronts that are currently believed 
to occur in the three most studied astrophysical flashes: 
novae, x-ray bursts and type Ia supernovae. 

In novae, hydrogen accreted onto a white dwarf 
star burns explosively. Even at the high temperatures 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


T ~ 3x 10° K that may be reached in nova outbursts, 
t, for hydrogen burning in the cNo cycle is larger than 
the turnover time scale of turbulent eddies driven by the 
convective instability of the hot burning region at the base 
of the cold hydrogen envelope. Consequently, K « 1, and 
the burning proceeds in the well-stirred reactor regime. 
Additional carbon enrichment, for instance caused by 
convective dredge-up of white dwarf material, may locally 
enhance the burning rate significantly by acting as a 
catalyst for the nuclear reactions. 

X-ray burst models invoke the nuclear runaway 
of accreted hydrogen, helium or a mixture of both on 
the surface of a neutron star. Very little is known 
about the propagation mode and burning regime of the 
combustion front. In the case of pure helium flashes, the 
front will most likely propagate as a convectively driven 
turbulent deflagration or even a detonation. An additional 
complication is the possible presence of dynamically 
important strong magnetic fields. 

The currently most successful model for type Ia 
supernovae involves the thermonuclear explosion of a 
Chandrasekhar mass carbon-oxygen white dwarf. Here, 
it is known from spectroscopical observations of the 
explosion products that the star needs to expand before 
being consumed by the combustion front, ruling out the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Combustion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


possibility of a single, centrally ignited detonation. If 
the explosion begins as a deflagration, the flame front 
immediately becomes turbulent due to the RT instability. 
Until the density has declined by roughly a factor of 
100, the front is in the flamelet regime and therefore 
depends only weakly on the microphysics of burning 
and diffusion. The final fate of the turbulent flame front 
is still the subject of active research: it may (a) release 
a sufficient amount of energy to power the explosion 
exclusively by turbulent combustion, (b) transition into 
a detonation (delayed detonation) upon entering the 
distributed burning regime, or (c) fail to release enough 
energy to unbind the star, whereupon it re-collapses and 
possibly ignites a detonation (pulsational detonation). 


Bibliography 

Canal R and Ruiz-Lapuente P 1996 Thermonuclear 
Supernovae (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Williams F A 1985 Combustion Theory (Menlo Park, CA: 
Benjamin/Cummings) 

Zeldovich Ya B, Barenblatt G I, Librovich V B and 
Makhviladze G M 1985 The Mathematical Theory of 
Combustion and Explosions (New York: Consultants 
Bureau) 


Jens Niemeyer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nuclear Processing 


Solar abundances, s-, r- and p-nuclei, 


reaction networks, thermonuclear reactions 

Nuclear processing is the of the heavy elements (better, 
ISOTOPES) with mass numbers A > 60 in stars by 
thermonuclear non-explosive as well as_ explosive 
breeding processes. The fuel and seed material are 
gravitationally contained in the hot interior of the star. 
Efficient breeding of heavy nuclei is possible with a fuel 
of neutral nuclear particles, i.e. neutrons and photons. 
The heavy isotopic abundances are generated by 
processing iron seed with neutrons (bulk of material) and 
by reprocessing so-formed heavy abundances under 
shock heating. The isotopic abundances created in the 
stellar cauldrons are ejected into the interstellar medium. 

The solar system is the object of the universe which 
provides the most complete set of high-quality cosmic 
abundance data. It is understood that solar system 
material is made of the ashes of many nucleosynthetic 
events that have been mixed in the interstellar medium 
before the formation of the solar system. The SOLAR 
ABUNDANCES are chiefly extracted from the spectrum of 
the Sun and _ from primitive METEORITES of 
unfractionized material (Anders and Grevesse 1989; 
Palme and Beer 1993). 

The origin of the heavy isotopes can be understood 
with only three different nuclear formation processes, the 
s-, r- and p-processes (figure 1)(see, e.g., the reviews of 
Burbidge et al 1957; Meyer 1994). In the solar 


i? ——$— 


abundance distribution the nuclei of the s-process 
population show up in sharp maxima at mass numbers 
88, 138 and 208 which correspond to isotopes of the 
magic neutron numbers 50, 82 and 126. The s-process 
nuclei are made by a neutron capture process (successive 
neutron captures) on a slow time scale. The synthesis 
path of the isotopes “Z with A the mass and Z the element 
numbers lies in the valley of B stability of the Z,A-Z 
plane (figure 2). The nuclei of the r-process population 
show up in broader maxima near the mass numbers 80, 
130 and 195. The r-process nuclei including *’Th and 
352381) are formed by a neutron capture process on a 
rapid time scale. The synthesis path is located far off the 
6 stability valley at the neutron-rich side of the Z,4-Z 
plane (figure 2). The peak structures are associated with 
the magic neutron shells at 50, 82 and 126 as well. The 
shift to smaller mass numbers compared with the s- 
process peaks and the broader structure of the peaks 
indicate that the abundances are the decay products of the 
originally synthesized unstable neutron-rich nuclei. 
Additionally there is an ensemble of neutron-deficient 
isotopes with considerably smaller abundances than r- 
and s-isotopes. These rare isotopes form a distribution 
with peaks at A = 92 and 144 which are also associated 
with the magic neutron shells 50 and 82. The p- 
abundances are suggested to be made from s- and r- 
process seeds shifted by photodisintegration reactions to 
unstable neutron-deficient isotopes. Post-p-process B 
decay then leads eventually to the abundances of the p- 
nuclei (figure 2). 


Ta t= 


105 Fe 


10°) 
g 


2 
ua 


i 


ABUNDANCE N(S 


n 1 n 1 n 1 1 


a Te 


Io = = I= Oe 


+ r-only isotopes 
-----+---- s-only isotopes 
—o— p-only isotopes 


ry 4 4 4 


1 
40 60 80 100 =120 


1 1 1 1 1 
1440 §=6160) «618006200 0)=— 220-240 


MASS NUMBER A 


Figure 1. Solar system abundances by mass number of the heavy isotopes. The double peaks at A =80,88, 130,138 and 195,208 are 
from r- and s-process nucleosynthesis. The abundances of isobars which are added in the global curve are also shown separately as 
full circles (r-only isotopes) and full squares (s-only isotopes connected by a dashed line). The p-process abundance population 
(open circles) is significantly lower than the s- and r-process. (From Palme and Beer 1993.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


p-process 
“" te a A 
| aa | aa 
IMP, 191pt 197 P4+1 199P¢tI 
P re Da ic Sad Lt at oal 
v. %, ». 
z| 
% A %, 


s-process and ey os 
18995 19D 19195 IRQs 198 CsI . . . 
T,6 r,s | ee | r,s LeJ 
». ». 


*. *. *. “. 
*. *. *. *. *. 
*. ‘. *. *. “ 


A-Z — 


Figure 2. A section of the chart of nuclides in the stability valley and the s-process path through the stable and radioactive isotopes 
in this mass region (solid and dashed boxes). The p-only '*°Pt and r-only '**Pt nuclei not on the path are destroyed in the s-process. 
At '*'Os, '” Ir and <sup>193</sup>Pt the s-process flow is branched because of competition between B decay and neutron capture. 
The p- and r-process occurs off the stability valley. Abundance contributions to the stable isotopes are obtained via isobaric B decay 


chains. This flow of post r- and p-process is indicated by the inclined dotted arrows. The s-only '”Pt isotope is shielded from r- 


abundance contributions. 


The network equations can be written in the form 


dN 


rr = — {sum of destruction terms) 
Ir 


+ (sum of creation terms). 


(1) 


In s- and r-process nucleosynthesis these terms are 
essentially proportional to neutron capture reaction rates, 
2", and beta decay rates 2° of the types B, B° and 
electron capture decay; in the  p-process to 
photodisintegration rates of neutrons, protons and a 
particles, X™, A” and 2X, respectively. The neutron 
capture rate is given by A" = n,(On,v) with the in-general 
time-dependent neutron density n, and the radiative 
capture cross section 6,, folded with the Maxwell— 
Boltzmann velocity distribution of the particles at the 
specified thermal energy kT, k being the Boltzmann 
constant and 7 the temperature. The radiative proton and 
alpha capture rates are defined equivalently. As for the 
majority of heavy isotopes oy, follows a v' energy 
dependence A” is approximately independent of 
temperature. It is also practice to form a Maxwellian 
average capture (MAC) cross section 6 = (Onyv)/vr by 
dividing (o,,v) by the thermal velocity vr = (2k7/u)'” 
with the reduced mass p = M,M,/(M, + M,). M, and M, 
are the neutron mass and mass of the isotope, 
respectively (Beer et al 1992). Then 2” can be expressed 
as A" = navro. 

The photodisintegration rates 4”, A” and A* are 
related to the inverse radiative capture reactions by the 
requirements of statistical physics and thermodynamics. 
For example the (y, n) rate is related to the (n, y) reaction 
by 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


RyN g_1z 
A (Gay?) AA Lz: 
Naz 


(2) 
The equilibrium concentrations of the neutrons 1, and the 
particles N47, N4-1.z which form a non-relativistic, non- 
degenerate Boltzmann gas at temperature T are described 
by a nuclear Saha equation 


MaNgiz — (2 ekT)** gaga-i.z 
Naz 7 3 BA,z 
x exp(—B, 4 2/kT) 
(3) 


with the binding energy B,4z of the neutron in the 
nucleus “Z, h Planck’s constant, p the reduced mass of 
neutron and isotope “~ 'Z, g, = 2 the statistical spin factor 
of the neutron, and with g47 the partition function for 
isotope “Z 


gaz = )_(2iaz + lexp(—Ejs.2/kT). 
Z 
The summation is over all excited states with spin j;47 
and energy E;,47. 
s-Processing 


The canonical s-process 
According to the concept of equation (1) the buildup of 
nuclei in the s-process is formulated by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


dN. az 
= Ay Ns.A-1,2 — Ag Me az 
dt 
+042 Nesuz — AG 2 Nea.z 
+ termination terms due to alpha decay at 


A > 209 
(4) 


where A? is zero if 4~'Z and/or 4Z is stable. In the case of 
an unstable isotope “Z and an s-process neutron density 
n, between 10’ and 10° cm™ corresponding to capture 
lifetimes between 35 yr and 128 days for an MAC cross 
section of 300 mbarn the condition "47 < Meg holds in 
general; then the term with A", 7 is neglected and the term 
WP Neaz quickly transforms into X"47 + 1Ns4z +1, the s- 
process synthesis path has reached a higher Z and 
remains in the valley of B stability of the Z,A—Z plane. 
However, as B decay rates near the stability valley can 
vary over many orders of magnitude (see NUCLEAR BETA 
DECAY), there are a number of cases where 2? is 
comparable with 2” and then the synthesis path is 
branched (figure 2). 

Starting in equation (4) from *°Fe as the major seed 
each isotope is formed and destroyed by neutron capture 
and B decay. In terms of a convenient notation yy = 
Ou4N,.4/Nioto With o4 the MAC cross section for neutron 
capture of isotope A, N, the abundance of isotope 4A on 
the synthesis path from “Fe to *°Bi and 
N<inf>tot,0</inf> the total seed abundance, we formulate 
a set of differential equations dependent on the exposure 


t 
C= Jotavr dt: 


1 dW 


asg dt 


= —Weg 


1 dW, 
——— = Wa-1 — Va 
o, dt 


1 dW, 


=W,_,—|1+ 
ay ot are vat 


1 dy Ah 
oy dt at 


1 dW yx 
dav dt 


(5) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The isotope A is a typical stable nucleus on the unique 
synthesis path, whereas A' represents a radionuclide with 
a B decay rate 4°» in competition with the neutron 
capture rate A"y = Oynyvy. Note that the occurrence of 
radionuclide A' with coefficients containing explicitly the 
neutron density 1, requires a constant neutron density. 
Otherwise, the time dependence of , must also be 
considered. 

The stable isotope A" is, therefore, formed by the s- 
process in proportion to this competition. The quantities 
Ws6 and yy" refer to the seed-only isotopes Fe and A", 
respectively. The isotopes which feel the neutron density 
explicitly are the few located within a branch (see figure 
2). Equations (5) can be written in matrix form dy/dt = 
My with M the coefficient matrix. Equations (5) can be 
solved by special numerical techniques or analytically. 
The matrix M is diagonalized: M = ABA '. With B the 
diagonal matrix the equation is solved with exp(Mt) = 
Aexp(Bt)A |. The matrix A is the matrix of eigenvectors 
with respect to the eigenvalues contained in B. The 
solution is given by 


Nit) = (o)'A exp(Br)A7'oNo ie 


with o the diagonal matrix of the MAC cross sections 
and No the vector of seed abundances. Special solutions 
to be derived from this ansatz are the Bateman solution 
which does, however, not include branchings. The 
solution N(t) for single exposures is relevant to special s- 
process scenarios, s-processing of nuclei in the mass 
range 56—90 (weak s-process, figure 3) and from sulfur to 
calcium. 

The s-process formation of the bulk of heavy 
isotopes (85 < A < 209) (main s-process, figure 3) is not 
the result of one exposure t but a superposition of 
exposures p(t). The differential equations describing the 
synthesis have to be integrated over that distribution. For 
a stable isotope A on the unique synthesis path we obtain 


dt 


1 f° dWy(r) 
pit)—— 
Os Jo dt 


[a] [a] 
= pity Wy, i(t) dt -| pelt y(t) de. 
a i 
(7) 


Partial integration of the left-hand side of equation (7) 
yields 


dt 


1 1 -_ datti 
-—W,0)e(0) -— J vy 
| Ga Jo t 


= G4-1Noa-1 —OaNya. 


(8) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10° 


10° 


103 


40? 


ON, [mb-Siz 10°} 


10" 


10° 


1071 


50 70 90 ‘16 130 150 170 190 
MASS NUMBER A 


Figure 3. oN curve versus mass number, characterized by a 
ledge precipice structure at nuclei with magic neutron shells (4 
= 88, 138 and 208) and flat portions between with 
approximately equilibrium abundance flow. The negative 
spikes indicate branchings. A weak s-process component is 
superimposed responsible for the steep increase for A < 90. Not 
all empirical data points shown are used to adjust the curves. 
Full symbols are s-only nuclei. Open symbols are data at the 
magic neutron numbers 50 and 82 (*°Sr, the Zr isotopes and 
'88Ba) with dominant s-process abundance as well as the data 
points **Fe, “Ni and “Cu. Other empirical data too low (‘”°Lu) 
or too high ('*7Os, 7°°°7°8pp) are affected by long-lived 
radioactive decay and in the case of 7°°°”?"8Pb contain extra r- 
process contributions from transbismuth nuclei and from an 
additional strong s-process exposure. (From Beer 1991.) 


As the empirical oN, values of s-only isotopes are 
decreasing with increasing mass number a monotonically 
decreasing function p(t) is required. The form dp(t)/dt = 
—to-'p(t) with the mean exposure to yields analytical 
solutions. From equation (8) we obtain the recursion 
formula 


1° 
(1 + — ] G4Ne4 = F4-1Nea-1+ t Nao 
Tod 4 


(9) 
and in the same way from the two differential equations 


describing a branching at the nucleus A' (see equation 
(5)) the recursion formulae 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


18 
Arg 
A _ 
1+ ce + — Oy Neg = Ogi Neat 
» os’ 
; _ F) 
pecin’, -1 
( 1+ ) Tao Ny an ar oy New th Nav o. 
Tae 4" Any 


(10) 


Finally for an isotope A" not lying on the synthesis path 
we obtain 


(11) 


The quantity N49 represents the seed abundance of the 
nuclide A. The exposure distribution p(t) is given by p(t) 
= G exp(-t/to) with G = Meto/to, N toto the total seed 
abundance. This form was suggested to arise from the 
effect of galactic reprocessing, i.e. the total exposure 
experienced by some fraction of material would relate to 
the number of times that material had been processed 
through stars (Seeger et al 1965). 

We write the final result for all isotopes involved in 
the s-process in the convenient matrix form (Ward et al 
1976; Beer et al 1997) 


(M — Uz. ‘oN = (—10)7'@No 
(12) 


where U is the unity matrix. The vector N(to) represents 
the wanted abundances. Normally a solar seed abundance 
distribution No is used and a seed fraction F'ecq defined 
by No = FyeeaNo. If only the dominant Fe is taken as 
seed material, the vector of solar seeds No reduces to a 
scalar as only the first element is non-zero No(1) = 
FeeeaNo (°F) (Ward et al 1976). Without branchings and 
Fe as the only seed material, 6,N.a=Ga5a-1---s6t9 — 
'No(1) is simply the product of propagators &;,=(1 + 
(oat) ) . An s-process analysis using the analytical 
solutions of Ward et al (1976) is shown in figure 3 (Beer 
1991). To treat reprocessing the s-process solutions of 
equations (6) and (12) can be used as seed distribution 
input for s-processing by a second exposure (Beer ef al 
1997). 

In the solutions equations (9), (10) and (11) of the 
main component s-process the efficiency of the s-process 
exposure of the isotopes on and beyond the synthesis 
path depends on the size of their cross sections (Beer et 
al 1997). For o4 > t% | stable isotopes on the path are 
characterized by the well-known correlation, N,4 ~o 4 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(equation (9)), and stable isotopes beyond the path are 
destroyed, Ny = 0 (equation (11)). For o4 ~ to’ stable 
isotopes on and beyond the path are sensitive to the 
average exposure 1 (bottle-neck or waiting-point 
isotopes) and may contain information on the burning 
temperature of the neutron source. The synthesis is 
controlled by these isotopes. For 6, «to | the abundances 
of stable isotopes on the path become independent of the 
MAC cross section and are determined by Tt) which is a 
function of temperature. The seed abundances of isotopes 
beside the path are practically unaffected. The MAC 
cross sections of the isotopes on the synthesis path have 
been compiled and tabulated as a function of temperature 
(Bao et al 2000). For unstable isotopes with A4° = A4" = 
O4nN,Vvr a branching in the synthesis path occurs which 
constrains ,. In addition the B decay rate can be a strong 
function of temperature and even electron density which 
in turn depends on the mass density of the stellar 
environment; then also temperature T and mass density 
are constrained (figure 2). Calculated values of the B 
decay rate 4, as a function of the temperature and 
electron density for the significant branch point isotopes 
have been published (Takahashi and Yokoi 1987). 


Experimental and observational constraints, stellar 

models 

The s-processing of the heavy nuclei with the canonical 
S-process using a best set of chiefly experimentally 
determined input parameters (figure 3) requires two 
components, the weak and main components. Each 
component is globally characterized by the fraction of 
seed material and the neutron exposure. The bottle-neck 
isotopes Sr, Y, Zr, Ba, La, Ce and 2°8Pb_ with magic 
neutron shells at 50, 82 and 126 control the main s- 
process synthesis. The processing can go up to Pb and Bi 
if Ba is bypassed; '°*Ba is, next to **Pb, the isotope 
with the smallest MAC cross section on the unique 
synthesis path (o('**Ba) = 4.0+0.2 mbarn, o(°Pb) = 
0.36+0.03 mbarn at AT = 30 keV). The required mean 
exposure must therefore be comparable with (AT = 30 
keV) ~ o('*8Ba)! = 0.25 mbarn™! (value found in the 
calculations t (kT = 30 keV) = 0.30 mbarn”') (Beer et al 
1997). Only the MAC cross section of **Pb is still 
smaller and requires, therefore, an extra-strong exposure. 
At the nuclei with a magic neutron shell, abundance is 
accumulating because of the small destruction rate. For 
the majority of nuclei lying in flat portions of the oN 
curve with practically steady flow conditions the N4 ~ 
64 | correlation is approximately fulfilled. From the local 
abundance structures of branchings, neutron and mass 
density and temperature are deduced (n, = (2-4) x 10° 
em’, p =(2.6-13) x 10° g em’ kT = 25-30 keV). 

The basic questions of s-processing to be clarified 
are the possible stellar site or sites and the neutron source 
or sources which produced the solar s-abundances. Weak 
S-processing can be located in the STELLAR EVOLUTION of 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


massive stars (VM > 15Mo) from the core He burning to 
the subsequent shell C and Ne burning phases. Neutrons 
are provided by the ~Ne reaction. The *’Ne being 
produced from the ashes of the pre-existing nuclei of the 
CNO cycle via the reaction sequence 
'4N(a,y)'SF(B’)'8O(a,y)”’Ne makes the s-process yields 
increase with metallicity. In the stellar model calculations 
the accuracy of the ”Ne(a, n) and competing ”Ne(a,y) 
rates is crucial for the final results. 

For the main s-process component the temperature 
estimated with the canonical s-process would suggest 
also the **Ne(a, n) neutron source and shell He burning in 
the stellar interior of thermally pulsing intermediate-mass 
stars (IMSs; with 4 < M/Mo < 8) as the s-process site. 
The exponential exposure distribution was shown to 
derive from the neutron release during the convective 
instabilities in the He shell (Ulrich 1973). It is obtained if 
the total exposure of the seed material occurs in a series 
of individual neutron exposures, where a decreasing 
fraction of seed material r,r7,7°,...,7 (r < 1) obtains an 
increasing number of exposures At, 2 At, 3 At,...,/At. 
The exponential exposure distribution p(t = /At) is given 
as follows: p(t IAt) Gr' G[exp(—At/t»)]' = 
Gexp(—/At/t9) = Gexp(—t/to) (Ulrich 1973). This would 
relate the mean exposure t) to r and At (note the 
equivalent arguments in the case of reprocessing in stars 
during the galactic s-process enrichment). However, 
IMSs which could provide this scenario are too rare and 
the predicted temperature and neutron densities were far 
too high to reproduce the abundance patterns of the s- 
process branchings. In addition the increase of the s- 
process yields with metallicity associated with the 
**Ne(a, n) neutron source and an enhancement of *Mg in 
these stars are not observed. 

Since the discovery of s-process Tc in the stellar 
atmospheres of RED GIANTS (the short 2.1 x 10° yr half- 
life of ”Tc suggests Tc nucleosynthesis in the star itself) 
elemental s-process abundances from Rb to Nd were 
found and studied in many low-mass asymptotic giant 
branch (AGB) stars. The s-process enrichment in these 
cool MS and S type stars (surface temperatures between 
2800 and 3800 K) is considered intrinsic in contrast to s- 
enhancements in the hotter Ba stars interpreted to 
originate from mass overflow in a binary system. The 
observation of Rb and *°Zr in the MS and S stars gives 
constraints for a low neutron density in accordance with 
the ignition of the 'C(a, n) neutron source at a 
temperature of only 7; = 1. Additional evidence for a 
dominantly primary '°C s-process neutron source comes 
from studies of the observed galactic enrichment of s- 
process yields which are independent of metallicity. 
From very low metallicity stars very strong neutron 
exposures can then be expected which are necessary to 
build up the abundance of *’Pb. 

The idea that the solar s-process abundances are a 
mixture of s-process yields from different stellar sources 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is also supported by cosmochemistry. The primitive 
unfractionized meteorites which represent well in their 
total composition the solar abundance mixture also carry 
presolar SiC grains containing elements with preserved 
isotopic abundance patterns of the s-process. These 
grains are supposed to be formed in the cicumstellar 
environments of low-mass AGB stars. Evidence for this 
S-process origin is the correlation between the isotopic 
ratios and the inverse of the corresponding MAC cross 
sections (e.g. s-Xe, s-Nd). The isotopic ratios of s-Kr, s- 
Sr and s-Ba which are sensitive to details of the s-process 
neutron exposure show additional variations for different 
grains. The scatter of the data with regard to the isotopes 
**Kr, *8Sr and '**Ba is interpreted to indicate an origin 
from a variety of stars with different masses and neutron 
exposures and suggests that the solar system s-process 
abundances are indeed an average over many sources. 

Low-mass thermally pulsing AGB stars (1 < M/Mo < 
3), where the 'C(o,n) reaction is most likely the 
dominant neutron source, are therefore the most favored 
site for the main s-process component. The '°C is 
supposed to be produced in a thin layer of the He shell by 
the reaction chain '*C(p,y)'*N(B‘)'°C from primary '°C 
with protons which have penetrated the envelope by 
diffusion or semiconvection. The formation and size of 
the '°C pocket which are crucial for the quantitative 
description are still treated in a parametrized way 
(Gallino et al 1998). It should be noted that in these 
stellar model calculations the solar s-process abundances 
are reproduced for the supposed model star with an 
exposure distribution that is much more complex than the 
exponential distribution of neutron exposure. In order to 
meet the constraints on s-process temperature imposed by 
the branching analysis of the canonical s-process the ”Ne 
neutron source must also be invoked marginally towards 
the end of the thermal pulse, providing a small additional 
exposure to reset the abundances of the branch point 
thermometer isotopes to the higher temperature of the 
*Ne(a, n) ignition. As the average MAC cross section in 
the mass region of the s-process thermometers is of the 
order of 300 mbarn this reprocessing is possible for a 
mean exposure of to(kT = 30 keV) = 1/300 = 0.0033 
mbarn' without affecting the global structure of the s- 
process determined by the very small cross sections of 
the bottle-neck isotopes (see also figure 4). Evidence for 
the '°C(a, n) source is also obtained from a significant 
temperature dependence of the neutron capture rate 4" of 
some bottle-neck isotopes (e.g. '’Nd, *°’Pb; see also the 
general temperature dependence of i"). The stellar model 
is put to the test by laboratory neutron capture 
measurements (see, e.g., Guber et al 1997, Koehler et al 
1998, Arlandini et al 1999). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10 

o sconly Isotopes 

oe s-dominant teolopes 
40: < a s-process calculation 


[double pulse model] 


| 


ABUNDANCE ($i1=10°) 


* | 
bial 


430 190 170 190 210 


F 
d 


70 8690 = 86110 1 
MASS NUMBER A 
2 
10 a f-only isolopes 
me a r-restdual isotopes 
= 1 + §n sbundance renormnst|zed 
n «610 
a 
uw 1 
vu 
=z 
5 ~1 
Zz 10 
a 
c 
107 
10° 


70 «690 ) «#6116 130 150 170 199 210 
MASS NUMBER A 


Figure 4. Decomposition of the solar abundances. (Top) 
Parametrized s-process abundance calculation with combined 
neutron exposure at kT = 8 and 28 keV associated with the 
®C(a, n) and 7*Ne(a, n) neutron sources, respectively. The 
calculation is a fit to the empirical s-only isotopes shown as full 
symbols. The typical signature of the s-process, an odd—even 
abundance staggering, is visible. (Bottom) The empirical r- 
process distribution NV, = No — N, exhibits a smooth behavior. 
The r-only isotopes are shown as full symbols. Note that for the 
similarities of s- and r-isotopes produced in about equal 
amounts no obvious genetic relation is known. (From Beer et al 
1997.) 


r-Processing 


Empirical r-process distribution 
The empirical r-process distribution is obtained by 
subtraction of the calculated s-contributions from the 
solar abundances. Possible p-process contributions are 
small and were, therefore, neglected: 


N..4,z = No,a.z — Ns,a,z- 


(13) 


The so-constructed r-process distribution (figure 4) with 
abundance maxima at A = 80, 130 and 195 (the waiting 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


points) related to the magic neutron shells at 50, 82 and 
126 is fundamental. It forms the basis for comparisons 
with r-process model calculations. Tables of the 
calculated empirical r-process distribution have been 
reported elsewhere (Kappeler et a/ 1989; Palme and Beer 
1993; Beer et al 1997; Arlandini et al 1999). 


The canonical r-process 
The general equation for the r-process is 


dN, 4.2 
dr 


— 4 40 ri 
= Ah LE t.A-LZ — Ma Naz 


FA 8 

+A Maz — Mg 2 Ms.4.z 
yn 7 yn 

+g 1 eM a-1z — hg Maz 


+ termination terms due to fission for A = 260. 


(14) 


Successive neutron captures in a_ thermonuclear 
environment (n, > 10° cm’, T > 10° K) will 
continuously build up for each isotopic chain more and 
more neutron-rich isotopes on a rapid time scale (10~ s) 
compared with the much longer B decay half-lives (10°'— 
10° s) (A°&gt;). This goes on until an equilibrium is 
reached via the reactions 


Al74n =" Z +¥. 
(15) 


This is because continuous neutron capture leads to 
nuclei with decreasing neutron binding energy. This 
process will go on until a neutron binding energy of B, = 
2-4 MeV is reached because of the incidence of (y, n) 
reactions at the temperature of the thermonuclear 
environment. If this point is reached with Ay 7 ~ A" 4-17 
and 


= M7 Neaz-1 a Mo Neaz 
(16) 


then the isotopes have to wait for B decay to isotopes 
with Z + 1 where quickly a new different (n, y) = (y, n) 
equilibrium is established. At the magic neutron shells 
50, 82 and 126 B decays are long and therefore large 
abundances are accumulated. In (n, y) = (7, n) 
equilibrium the relative abundances for isotopes of a 
given element are determined by the properties of a 
Boltzmann gas at temperature 7. The nuclear abundances 
and the neutron density are related by a nuclear Saha 
equation (3). Via equation (3) the distribution of nuclei of 
an isotopic chain Z is determined. We can describe the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


abundance flow from one isotopic chain to the next as 
(Seeger et al 1965) 


dN,.z . ‘ 
Panos > ec Maz-i = yo N naz 
A A 


B F 
= Az_1M.z-1 —A N,.z 


Zz 


(17) 


where we have defined 


Starting from *Fe as seed material the canonical r- 
process characterized by an “'Z + n = 4Z + y 
equilibrium proceeds for constant neutron density and 
temperature along a contour line of constant neutron 
binding energy B, towards the heavy nuclei according to 
the nuclear Saha equation. This binding energy B, is 
estimated in the abundance peak maxima where the 
nuclear flow of a chain is concentrated mainly at one 
isotope pair with Ny17/N4z ~ 1. Via the equations (17) 
for all element numbers Z on the r-process path a set of 
differential equations has to be solved by special 
numerical techniques as a function of duration time f4y,. 
With the solutions Nt) and the relative isotopic 
abundances from the Saha equation (3) isotopic 
abundances are determined. The final r-process 
abundances of the stable isotopes are obtained in the 
post-r-process phase after radioactive decay. Therefore, 
besides the nuclear properties, i.e. binding energies and 
essentially B decay rates, the astrophysical quantities n,, 
T and ta, are sufficient to predict the whole set of r- 
abundances. 


Experimental and observational constraints, stellar 

models 

The unstable isotopes of the r-process path, 15—35 mass 
units off the valley of B stability in the Z,4A—Z plane, are 
in their majority not studied directly in laboratory 
experiment. Theoretical nuclear physics has to provide a 
reliable data basis: mass formulas to determine r-process 
paths (equation (3)), B decay rates to solve equation (17) 
eventually with effective B decay rates, excited states 
properties of nuclei on the path for the partition functions 
(equation (4)), fission barriers and yields to assess the 
termination of the r-process, 6 delayed neutron emission 
and fission and a decay half-lives for the post r-process 
phase to obtain the r-process yield at the stable isotopes. 
To improve the applied nuclear mass formulas quenching 
of shell effects was suggested. This led to considerably 
better reproductions of the r-abundances around 4 = 120 
and 140. An important clue to an understanding of the r- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


process was given by the measurement of the half-lives 
of waiting point nuclei at the magic neutron shells 50 and 
82. These data give evidence that the r-process achieves 
really 4'Z + n = 4Z + y equilibrium and steady flow 
locally in the abundance peaks (Kratz et al 1993). 
Eventually the r-process calculations show that after each 
r-process abundance maximum the “'Z + n = 4Z + y 
equilibrium breaks down so that the reproduction of the 
empirical r-process distribution requires for the specified 
temperature (7) = 1.35) at least three different canonical 
r-process paths superimposed with three sets of neutron 
densities (10°°-10* cm™). The duration time of the 
synthesis lies between 1.2 and 2.3 s (figure 5) (Kratz et al 
1993). An important question about the canonical r- 
process is a check of the validity of the waiting point 
approximation by a boundary condition which marks the 
transition from equilibrium to conditions that require 
accounting for the competition of neutron capture and B 
decay. To what extent this limit, which is dependent on 
the local nuclear parameters, affects the r-abundances at 
freeze-out is a matter of debate. Detailed investigations 
stress the importance of the transition phase at r-process 
freeze-out for the final abundances. The suggested 
mechanisms of freeze-out can prevent abundance troughs 
in the r-process calculations ascribed to deficiencies of 
the nuclear input physics and explain the observed 
smoothness of the empirical r-process abundance 
distribution (figure 4). 


R-abundances, N{Si = 1 0} 


Residuals 


The yield of r-process elements in the galactic 
chemical evolution appears to require a neutron source 
which is not dependent on initial stellar metallicity. This 
is one of the arguments against a secondary r-process in 
an explosive environment fuelled by neutrons from the 
~Ne(a, n) source interacting with preexisting heavy 
element seeds (e.g. nova outbursts, shock-induced 
explosive He or C burning). 

The heavy element abundance pattern of old very 
low metallicity stars matches rather well the 
corresponding solar system r-process (derived from the 
empirical r-process, figure 4, by summation over isotopic 
abundances). This would suggest that the r-process is 
primary and contributed to the galactic element 
enrichment before the s-process. A secondary r-process 
would have to rely on an already abundant s-process 
enrichment. From the resemblance of the elemental 
stellar r-process and solar r-process distributions for 
elements heavier than Ba it is concluded that a unique r- 
process mechanism exists that always produces the 
abundances in similar proportions. Also, in these low- 
metallicity old stars, indications of the existence of a 
second r-process source for elements in the nuclear mass 
range A ~ 80-120 were detected (Sneden et al 2000). 
The definitive identification of these heavy elements in 
the low-metallicity stars as r-process products would, 
however, require the isotopic abundance determination. 


Mass number, A 


Figure 5. Global r-process abundance curve obtained from a superposition of three time-dependent calculations with the best fit n,- 
Ty values for the A = 80 peak and the 90 < A < 130 and 135 < A < 195 mass ranges. The weights of the individual components are 
10:2.6:1. In the lower part the ratio of calculated and observed r-process abundances is shown. (From Kratz et al 1993.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The question of the site of the r-process is not 
settled. Several scenarios, ranging from the neutrino- 
driven winds in type II SUPERNOVA explosions (Woosley 
et al 1994) to merging neutron stars, have been 
suggested. Supernova explosions of type I, understood 
to be initiated by the iron core collapse of a massive star 
with the formation of a NEUTRON STAR, are assumed to 
be a prominent site for an r-process at the mass cut of 
matter exploded and locked up in the neutron star. 
However, it was also argued that the total mass fraction 
of r-process material of ~10°’ (figure 4) which amounts 
to only ~107’ x 10''Ms = ~10*Mo, where ~10''Mo is the 
total mass of the Galaxy, would require a contribution 
per supernova explosion over the history of the Galaxy 
(estimated age of the Galaxy at the birth of the solar 
system ~10'° yr) of only ~10*Mo/((107 x 10'°) = 
~10“Ms. This estimate, where a supernova rate of ~10~7 
yr is assumed, would suggest that either the r-process 
occurs for only a small subset of supernova explosions or 
the efficiency of r-production is as small as ~10 “Mo. 
The latter possibility has been studied with some success 
in the framework of a primary r-process model site 
located at the formation of a hot neutron star 
predominantly cooling via neutrino emission (Woosley et 
al 1994). The compelling new scenario, a neutrino-driven 
explosion, appears to meet the time scales, temperature 
and neutron density conditions for a canonical r-process 
with B-flow equilibrium in the r-abundance peaks beyond 
nuclear masses A=110. In addition, as most neutron stars 
possibly pass through a_ similar early cooling 
development, the expectation that the same r-process 
relics will always be observed in old low-metallicity stars 
seems to be fulfilled. 


p-Processing 


Photodisintegration p-process 

In the p-process it is assumed that preexisting r- and s- 
process seed nuclei are exposed to a high temperature 
(2.1 < Ty < 3.2) for a short time (~1 s). The first reactions 
to occur are the (y, n) reactions which produce quite 
proton-rich nuclei. With each neutron ejected the neutron 
binding energy B, becomes on the average larger and the 
photoneutron reaction rate 4” slower (see equations (2) 
and (3)). At the same time the binding energy for a 
proton and oa particle is decreasing and the rate for 
photodisintegration accompanied by charged-particle 
emission A’, 4", is increasing. Once the nuclei become 
sufficiently proton rich about 5 mass units away from the 
stability valley, they begin a (y, p) and (y,a) cascade. The 
reaction network consists, therefore, of equations of the 
form 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Np, 
di 


dN, 4.2 
a ee ere ce ee 
= —lAgz tag tAg az) Npaz 
Yu YP 
tag oN patz tA gg ze Np ae z4l 
, Ya 
F hiss geo Np And 242 


(18) 


ordered in terms of decreasing element and mass 
numbers. In this way nuclei are shifted towards iron. In 
the already large network of equations (18) to be solved 
the possible reactions of the n, p and a background 
particles as well as the weak interactions ((e”,v), (e’,v)) 
are neglected owing to assumed particle reaction and 
weak decay time scales much longer than the p-process 
duration. This makes the results independent of the 
composition and density of the p-process site. The results 
are only dependent on the abundance distribution of the 
input seed nuclei and the photon temperature. During the 
synthesis abundance is accumulating especially at the 
nuclei, where the photodisintegration flow is deflected to 
lower-Z elements by the (y, p) or (y,a) reactions because 
of a long disintegration time (waiting points). When the 
disintegration flow crosses the closed neutron shells at 50 
and 82, the disintegration time scales become especially 
large because of the particularly strong binding energies. 
The abundances are then built up directly at the closed 
shell nuclei °*Mo and ‘Sm. The abundances of the 
primary unstable p-nuclei eventually B decay after freeze- 
out to stable p-nuclei. The concept of the 
photodisintegration p-process was elaborated by Woosley 
and Howard (1978). 

No single temperature exposure can produce all p- 
nuclei. However, with a distribution of exposures an 
approximate representation of the solar abundances is 
obtained. This is true also for the extended network 
including the n, p and o background reactions (figure 6) 
(Rayet et al 1990). Only the (n, y) reactions have some 
influence on the yield of individual p-nuclei. In 
particular, it appears to be impossible to reproduce the 
solar abundances of the isotopes **°*Mo and **’*Ru by 
the photodisintegration p-process because they are too 
abundant and there is insufficient s- and r-process seed at 
A > 96. In the search for possible solutions of this 
problem, a significantly higher s-process seed abundance 
is suggested (Costa et al 2000), which would result from 
a higher rate of the **Ne(a,n)”*Mg_neutron-producing 
reaction varied within the quoted uncertainty. In another 
suggestion, a different synthesis process, the rp-process 
on accreting neutron stars, is considered (Schatz et al 
2001). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


70 30 110 130 150 170 190 210 
Mass Number 


Out of Scale: Sn, “Ta 
0.01 ee oe oe er ee ee Se Oe ee Se Oe ee Oe 


70 30 110 130 150 170 190 210 
Mass Number 


Figure 6. Relative overproduction factors for p-process nuclei. 
Lines connect isotopes of the same element. (a) Predictions for 
a uniform weighting of the initial temperatures: filled and open 
symbols correspond to different time scales and mean 
overproduction factors (tyyp(s), Fo) = (0.446,200) and (1, 145), 
respectively. (b) Comparison of predictions for tyyp = 0.446 s 
for uniform weighting of the initial temperatures (filled 
symbols) and for a best fit mix of temperatures (open symbols 
and Fo = 114). (From Rayet et al 1990.) 


Experimental and observational constraints, stellar 
models 

The correlation found between neutron binding energy 
(hence photoneutron disintegration rate) and solar 
abundance of the p-process nuclei represents the first 
experimental evidence pointing to nuclear p-processing 
in terms of a photodisintegration process (Macklin 1970). 
This correlation is verified more properly between the 
total photodisintegration rate (A" + 2° + 2X") of the 
synthesized p-nuclei and solar p-abundances at that mass 
number. 

An important constraint on the p-process is the 
presence of live '*°Sm in the early solar system detected 
in meteorites and the inferred production ratio of 
'Sm/'*Sm. It appears to be a challenge to reproduce 
this ratio with the photodisintegration p-process. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


From the success of the parametrized photo- 
disintegration models it was astrophysically plausible to 
place p-processing in the oxygen/neon shell of a highly 
evolved massive star, exploding as a type II supernova. 
Such calculations were performed for the SUPERNOVA 
1987A (Prantzos et al 1990). The supernova shock that 
heated up this shell provided temperature and density 
profiles to initiate the photodisintegration reactions on 
the preexisting heavy isotope s-process seed from core 
He burning. The results are essentially similar to the 
parametrized model calculations. A detailed review of 
the origin of the p-process nuclei was given by Lambert 
(1992). 


Epilogue 

As the understanding of nuclear processing in stars relies 
mainly on the analysis of the solar system heavy element 
composition it has to be stressed that the stellar evolution 
and composition of stars including stellar mixing 
processes and the chemical evolution of the galaxy have 
to play a large role in the calculations. For example the 
solar r-process abundances are assumed to result from 
contributions of ~10* supernova explosions. 


Bibliography 
Concepts of stellar nuclear s-, r- and p-processing were first 
reviewed in the article 


Burbidge E M, Burbidge G R, Fowler W A and Hoyle F 1957 
Synthesis of the elements in stars Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 547— 
650 


The concept of the canonical s-process with an exponential 
exposure distribution and detailed canonical s- and r- 
process calculations date back to 


Seeger P A, Fowler W A and Clayton D D_ 1965 
Nucleosynthesis of heavy elements by neutron capture 
Astrophys. J. Suppl. 11 121-66 


A recent complilation of solar abundances was published by 


Palme H and Beer H 1993 Abundances of the elements in the 
solar system Landolt—Bérnstein, New Series, Group VI, 
Astronomy and Astrophysics subvol 3a (Berlin: Springer) 
pp 196-221 


An understanding of r-, s- and p-processing from general 
astrophysical principles with many references to the 
experimental and observational work which constrained 
the concepts of nuclear processing was given by 


Meyer B S 1994 The r-, s-, and p-processes in nucleosynthesis 
Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 32 153-90 


The canonical s-process with detailed analytical solutions and 
discussion of branchings was given by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Nuclear Processing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ward R A, Newman M J and Clayton D D 1976 s-Process 
studies: branching and time scale Astrophys. J. Suppl. 31 
33-59 


The formulation of a pulsed s-process was suggested by 


Ulrich R K 1973 The s-process in stars Proc. Conf. on 
Explosive Nucleosynthesis ed D N Schramm and W D 
Arnett (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press) pp 139-67 


An s-process analysis using the analytical solutions of Ward et 
al (1976) was performed by 


Beer H 1991 Capture cross section measurements of krypton 
and xenon isotopes and the fundamental parameters of the 
s-process Astrophys. J. 375 823-32 


The measurement of the crucial s-process bottle-neck isotopes, 
an update of the empirical r-process distribution and the 
representation of the canonical s-process to treat 
reprocessing were given by 


Beer H, Corvi F and Mutti P 1997 Neutron capture of the 
bottle-neck isotopes 8B and 7°Pb, S-process studies, and 
the r-process abundance distribution Astrophys. J. 474 
843-61 


The most recent stellar s-process model for low-mass AGB 
stars is found in 


Gallino R, Arlandini C, Busso M, Lugaro M, Travaglio C, 
Straniero O, Chieffi A and Limongi M 1998 Evolution and 
nucleosynthesis in low-mass asymptotic giant branch stars 
Il. Neutron capture and the s-process Astrophys. J. 497 
388-403 


The present understanding of the canonical r-process based on 
measured waiting point half-lives requiring a minimum of 
three components is found in 


Kratz K L, Bitouzet J P, Thielemann F K, Moller P and Pfeiffer 
B_ 1993 Isotopic r-process abundances and _ nuclear 
structure far from stability: implications for the r-process 
mechanism Astrophys. J. 403 216-38 


The most recent stellar r-process model is given in 


Woosley S E, Wilson J R, Mathews G J, Hoffman R D and 
Meyer B S 1994 The r-process and neutrino-heated 
supernova ejecta Astrophys. J. 433 229-46 


The concept of photodisintegration p-process was elaborated by 


Woosley S E and Howard W M 1978 The p-process in 
supernovae Astrophys. J. Suppl. 36 285-304 


and applied with an enlarged network, with the effect of the 
background particles, especially neutrons, also being taken 
into account, by 


Rayet M, Prantzos N and Arnould M 1990 The p-process 
revisited Astron. Astrophys. 227 271-81 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


These parametrized extended network calculations were applied 
to a realistic stellar model by 


Prantzos N, Hashimoto M, Rayet M and Amould M 1990 The 
p-process in SN 1987A Astron. Astrophys. 238 455-61 


The most recent detailed review of the origin of the p-process 
nuclei was given by 


Lambert D L 1992 The p-nuclei: abundances and origins 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 3 201-56 


Other references cited in the text: 


Anders E and Grevesse N 1989 Abundances of the elements: 
Meteoritic and solar Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 53 197-— 
214 

Arlandini C, Képpeler F, Wisshak K, Gallino R, Lugaro M, 
Busso M, and Straniero O 1999 Neutron capture in low 
mass asymptotic giant branch stars: Cross sections and 
abundance signatures Astrophys. J. 525 886-900 

Bao Z Y, Beer H, Kappeler F, Voss F, Wisshak K, and 
Rauscher T 2000 Neutron cross sections for 
nucleosynthesis studies Atomic Data and Nuclear Data 
Tables 76 70-154 

Beer H, Voss F, and Winters R R 1992 On the calculation of 
Maxwellian-averaged capture cross sections Astrophys. J. 
Suppl. 80 403-424 

Costa V, Rayet M, Zappala R A and Arnould M 2000 The 
synthesis of the light Mo and Ru isotopes: How now, no 
need for an exotic solution? Astron. Astrophys. 358 L67— 
70 

Guber K H, Spencer R R, and Koehler P E 1997 New '”!4Nd 
(n,y) cross sections and the s-process origin of the Nd 
anomalies in presolar meteoritc silicon carbide grains 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 2704-7 

Kappeler F, Beer H and Wisshak K _ 1989 s-process 
nucleosynthesis—nuclear physics and the classical model 
Rep. Prog. Phys. 52. 945-1013 

Koehler P E, Spencer R R, Guber K H, Winters R R, Raman S, 
Harvey J A, Hill N W, Blackmon J C, Bardayan D W, 
Larson D C, Lewis T A, Pierce D E and Smith M S 1998 
Phys. Rev. 57 R1558-61 

Macklin R L 1970 Were the lightest stable isotopes produced 
by photodissociation? Astrophys. J. 162 353-5 

Schatz H, Aprahamian A, Barnard V, Bildsten L, Cumming A, 
Ouellette M, Rauscher T, Thielemann F-K and Wiescher 
M 2001 End point of the rp process on accreting neutron 
stars Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 3471-4 

Sneden C, Cowan J J, Ivans I I, Fuller G M, Burles S, Beers T 
C and Lawler J E 2000 Evidence of multiple r-process 
sites in the early galaxy: New observations of CS 22892- 
052 Astrophys. J. Lett. 533 L139-42 

Takahashi K and Yokoi K 1987 Beta-decay rates of highly 
ionized heavy atoms in stellar interiors Atomic Data and 
Nuclear Data Tables 36 375-409 


Hermann Beer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Nuclear Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nuclear Properties 


Nuclei consist of NEUTRONS n and PROTONS p, which belong 
to the family of BaRYoNs (a combination of three quarks 
(qi, q2,q3)). These two combinations with the lowest 
masses contain only up and down quarks uandd. We have 
n = (udd) and p = (uud) with electric charge 0 and +1 and 
masses of 939.570 MeV/c? and 938.265 MeV/c”. They are 
fermions, i.e. particles with intrinsic half-integer spin 1/2. 
The binding energy of a nucleus of mass M(Z, N) with 
Z protons and N neutrons is given by the corresponding 
mass difference: B(Z,N) = Zm) + Nmy — M(Z, N). The 
mass excess of a nucleus with a total number of nucleons 
A = Z +N is defined with the aid of the atomic mass unit 
m, = M(?C)/12, i.e. the average mass of nucleons inside 
the carbon 12 nucleus, via M,.,(Z,N) = M(Z, N) — Amy. 
Here we use the notation “Z with mass number A, where 
Z is usually replaced by the element symbol representing 
that charge or proton number. 

The binding energy per nucleon B/A describes how 
tightly bound a nucleus is. Experimental binding energies 
range from 0 for neutrons and protons over about 7 MeV 
per nucleon for *He, reaching a maximum of 8.7 MeV 
per nucleon for Fe and then declining to about 7.5 MeV 
per nucleon towards the heaviest nuclei such as Th and 
U. These variations of nuclear binding are responsible 
for the energy generation in stars during a sequence of 
burning stages from hydrogen burning to silicon burning, 
transforming in total H to Fe-group nuclei. Variations in 
nuclear binding are also reflected in the abundances of 
nuclei produced in astrophysical environments. 

The, nevertheless, relatively constant binding per 
nucleon is related to an approximately constant density 
fo in the central part of the nucleus with a typically 
small surface diffuseness a of 0.55 fm = 5.5 x 10-4 cm. 
This permits one to express the nuclear mass M (~Am,) 
in terms of the mass of a constant-density sphere and 
explains the A dependence of the nuclear radius R = 
(3/4) (my/po)'/3AV? = ryA”3, where ro = 1.14 fm is 
a constant for all nuclei if 9 (*0.16 nucleons fm~? = 
2.7 x 104 g cm~*) does not depend on A. Such a constant 
density can be explained by a nucleon-nucleon interaction 
which drops off quickly with increasing distance and has 
a repulsive term for short distances. The strong repulsion 
ensures that the density cannot increase to infinite values, 
whilst the fast drop-off for large distances causes vanishing 
interaction with distant neighbors. Thus, only immediate 
neighbors are important for the interaction. 

Interactions are generally explained by the exchange 
of (virtual) particles. The strong interaction between 
nucleons is due to the exchange of MESONS, particles 
consisting of a quark—antiquark pair (qiq2). The lowest 
mass mesons—consisting of a combinations of up (u) and 
down (d) quarks—are mz-mesons with an approximate 
mass of 140 MeV. If we assume that these mesons move 
with the speed of light c, they can at most move a 
distance ra. = cAt ~ 1.4 fm when At is the time for 
which the violation of energy conservation (140 MeV) is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


permitted to create a particle—antiparticle pair according to 
the UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE AE At = h. Thus, as this concerns 
the lightest mesons with the largest rex, the nuclear force 
has to drop off very quickly beyond that distance. 

The above description is related to the dominant bulk 
feature of nuclear matter (either infinite in neutron stars 
or finite in nuclei), but it needs a substantial refinement 
responsible for nuclear shapes and shell structure, and 
the resulting effects on decay probabilities and nuclear 
reactions. This will be the focus of the following sections. 


Mass models 

The bulk part of nuclear binding is equivalent to replacing 
the (microscopic) many-body Schrédinger equation by 
independent particle models in an average potential and 
assuming for this average potential a simple square well 
potential of depth vp ~ 40 MeV. This leads to Fermi 
energies of degenerate nucleons (the highest populated 
state at temperature T = 0 K) of 


As N/V,thenucleon density, is roughly equal for all nuclei, 
Ey is also a constant for all nuclei with E; ~ 29 MeV. The 
average energy E of a nucleon in a nucleus is E =2 Ep. In 
order to unbind an ensemble of nucleons with average 
energy E = 2 Ey, a total energy of N(vp—E£) = N(vp—3 Er) 
is needed. With vp and Ep being roughly constant for all 
nuclei, the total binding energy is just proportional to the 
number of nucleons. Thus, for a nucleus consisting out of 
A nucleons, the total binding is B = A(vp — E). This is the 
dominant (volume) term of the binding energy By = a,A. 

This leading term has to be corrected for the errors 
introduced by the simplifying approximations. Nucleons 
which reside at the surface have fewer neighbors and 
are therefore less bound. This reduction in binding is 
proportional to the surface area of the nucleus 4m R* « 
A7/3, ie. By = —asA*/>. The electrostatic repulsion of 
protons is measured by the Coulomb self-energy (of a 
uniform charge distribution) Ecoul = 2 Q?/R with Q = Ze 
and R = 1mA%, leading to Be = —a.Z?A7'%. The 
derivation of the bulk term By = a,A relied on an equal 
density of neutrons N/V and protons Z/V. Correcting 
for N # Z causes the symmetry energy correction Byym = 
—Asym(N -* ZY/A _ —Asym(A = 2Z)?/A. 

Neutrons and protons are both fermions with intrinsic 
spin 1/2. Pairs can couple to a total spin of 0 or 1. 
The 0 state corresponds to a lower energy level and 
contributes to the binding energy. The binding energies of 
nuclei fluctuate by approximately Bpair = +12/A'/*? MeV 
around the mean defined by nuclei with an odd number 
of nucleons, with Z, N even-even nuclei being more and 
odd-odd nuclei being less bound. The total binding 
energy is the sum of all these terms with typical values 
of ay = 16 MeV, as = 18.5 MeV, ac = 0.72 MeV and 
sym = 23.4 MeV and we can express the nuclear mass via 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


components of a mass formula 


a a a 


mass [MeV] 


1000) —Toirh tap eon Te ee ee er ee 


mass [MeV] 


Figure 1. Several components in a liquid drop or 
Bethe—Weizsacker mass formula: the dotted curves indicate the 
Coulomb term, the dashed curves the asymmetry term and the 
dash-dotted curves the Z-dependent term Z(m), — m,). A is 
taken as a constant in either plot. The solid curves give the 
atomic mass excess. The thick solid curves result from a more 
elaborate modern mass model, the circles indicate experimental 
mass measurements, the solid circles stand for stable nuclei. The 
larger Coulomb term for heavier nuclei leads to a larger shift of 
the valley of stability from the location Z = A/2. 


M(Z, A) = Zm, + (A—Z)m, — B(Z, A), obtaining the well- 
known Bethe—Weizsacker (or liquid drop) mass formula 
with pairing corrections (see figure 1). 

In reality the single-particle levels of a nuclear 
potential are not as evenly distributed as for a Fermi gas 
in a cubic box, used for this derivation. For a realistic, 
spherically symmetric nuclear potential which also makes 
use of a ‘spin-orbit’ force proportional to is, where | stands 
for the orbital angular momentum and s for the intrinsic 
spin of a nucleon, the levels are unevenly bunched in 
excitation energy and large spaces can be interpreted as 
shell closures. Mass formulas which include such shell 
structure add an empirical shell correction term S(Z, A) 


M(Z, A) = Zm, + (A— Z)m, — ayA 
(A —2Z)* 


+ a,A7 + aeZAt + dsy A 


+ S(Z, A) _ Bpair(Z, A). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Shell closures (magic numbers at Z, N = 2, 8, 20, 28, 
50, 82, 114 or 126) are very important for understanding 
nuclear properties. It is well known that ‘magic’ nuclei 
which are tightly bound are spherical in general, while 
nuclei in between closed shells try to maximize their 
binding via deformation, which e.g. rearranges the charge 
distribution and leads to smaller Coulomb repulsion. 
Nuclear mass models of the ‘microscopic—macroscopic’ 
type which describe the macroscopic part in terms of 
such a nuclear droplet and the shell corrections in a 
microscopic way, including also deformation effects, can 
quite accurately predict nuclear masses within less than 
1 MeV and are at present mostly used in astrophysical 
applications dealing with unstable nuclei where masses 
are not known experimentally. 

An accurate prediction of the shell corrections is 
essential. Figure 2 shows predicted shell corrections 
from the finite range droplet model (FRDM) for stable 
and unstable nuclei. Only unstable nuclei which do not 
decay by proton or neutron emission are considered. A 
fully microscopic many-body treatment is also possible by 
now within the ‘shell model’ for nuclei up to around Fe. 
Microscopic ‘mean-field’ theories allow the heaviest nuclei 
to be treated as well. The present uncertainties of the latter, 
due to uncertainties of nuclear forces, are still of the order 
of a few MeV. One of the major remaining open questions 
is whether shell closures (magic numbers) and the size 
of shell gaps change with the distance from the valley of 
stability. 


Decay modes 

A necessary condition for the decay of a nucleus is that 
the transition is energetically possible. This is the case 
when the total mass of the (final) end products of a decay 
or reaction is smaller than the sum of the original (initial) 
masses. In other words, the reaction Q value has to be 


positive: 
Q=)-M,-)-M,>0. 


initial final 


The well known nuclear decay modes are a decay, B* 
decay, electron capture and fission. 


(Z, A) > (Z—2,A—4) + *He 
(Z, A) > 2(&Z/2, ~A/2) 

(Z, A) > (Z +1, A) +e7 +i 
(Z, A) > (Z—1, A) tet + v6 
(Z, A) +e7 > (Z—1, A) + ve. 


(i) a decay 

(ii) fission 

(iii) B~ decay 

(iv) B* decay 

(v) electron capture 


Ground state fission is not fully symmetric in its end 
products, as indicated above. Larger energies are released 
if at least one of the fission products is a nucleus near a 
closed shell. At higher excitation energies the shell effects 
vanish and symmetric fission occurs. Figure 3 displays 
in grey scale predicted B~ decay half-lives, based on the 
FRDM mass model and its microscopic features of excited 
states in the daughter nucleus. Electron captures occur in 
atoms by capturing one of the electrons of the low-energy 
orbitals. For an ionized atom, i.e. a nucleus, electron 
capture can only occur as a result of continuum capture 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


shell corrections 


10 


Sn (A) [MeV] 


-10 


-15 


-20 


pret tui yitiuyii le 


50 


100 


150 


Figure 2. Shell corrections of a modern mass model. They are strongest at closed shells and can be larger than 10 MeV. The two 
subminima between A = 150 and 190 are the onset of stronger effects expected at the closed proton shells Z = 82 and 50, which can, 
however, not be realized between the proton and neutron drip-lines (see next section). 


120 ETTTT Trt rp rrr rrr repr rrr tr tr ty ry 
100 E 
NE 
@ 805 
Q 7 
= 
2 60F 
Cc E 
L E 
Oo 40F 
Oo TE 
20 F 
0 [— 


60 


Sn=3.3 MeV 


SS SOO 
TASNnTNDND 


160 


80 
Neutron Number N 


100 120 140 


Figure 3. Some features of nuclei in the (N, Z) chart of isotopes. Stable nuclei are indicated by black filled squares. The thin solid curve 
represents the present limit of experimentally known nuclear masses. The magic numbers are shown as double bars. The thick solid 
curve is the contour line of constant S,; = 3.3 MeV. It relates nuclear properties to astrophysical abundances of the so-called r-process 
due to rapid neutron capture. It can be recognized that the abundances are proportional to the 6~ decay half-lives [indicated by grey 


shades in log,9(t1/2)] along 5, contour lines. 


from a background electron gas. In case of a negative Q 
value the missing energy has to be provided by the kinetic 
energy of the ELECTRON. 


These decay modes are only of interest between two 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


boundaries in the nuclear chart related to the onset of 
(much faster) particle emission, ie. decay of nuclei via 
neutron and proton emission (Z, A) > (Z, A —1)+nor 
(Z, A) > (Z—1, A—1)+p. The Q values of these decays 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are related to the neutron and proton separation energies 
via Q, = —S, and Q, = —S,: 


Sn(Z, A) = M(Z, A—1) +m, — M(Z, A) 


Sp(Z, A) = M(Z—1, A—1) + mp — M(Z, A). 


Nuclei with positive S, or S, are stable against neutron or 
proton emission. The connecting lines of S, or S, = 0 in 
the (N, Z) chart are called proton and neutron drip-lines. 
Figure 3 shows the predicted contour line for S, = 3.3 MeV. 
The kinks are due to magic numbers. One of the currently 
open questions is whether a quenching of shell effects 
decreases these features towards the neutron drip-line. 


Nuclear reactions 

In a nuclear reaction a projectile will penetrate a 
target nucleus in order to form a new compound 
nucleus. This penetration can be described by solutions 
to the Schrédinger equation for a given potential via 
transmission coefficients T into the nucleus. Bombarding 
a nucleus, described by a simple box potential, i.e. V = 0 
outside (1) and V = —V) inside (2) the nucleus, with a free 
neutron of energy E, momentum hk, k = [2u(E — V)]'*/h 
and a reduced mass yp leads to 


kik, 
[ky + ke?” 


As ky > ky, because of the large negative potential —Vo 
inside the nucleus, T ~ 4k,/kz. Protons experience a 
Coulomb repulsion potential outside the nucleus, which 
can be larger than the projectile energy E. Expressed 
in the quantum mechanical WKB approximation for the 
Coulomb potential of a nucleus with charge Z; and a 
projectile of charge Z;, V(x) = Z;Z je /x, this results in 


T =e n= (A) He 
2E h 

where 7 is called the Sommerfeld parameter. This 
transmission coefficient decreases for larger charges and 
increases with increasing energy. 

Aquantitative measure for the probability of reactions 
between a target nucleus and incoming projectiles is the 
reaction cross section, defined as 


number of reactions per target s 
"flux of incoming projectiles 


Because the flux of incoming particles is measured 
in cm~ s', o has units cm’. All particles passing 
through a circular area of that size perpendicular to the 
projectile trajectory will undergo a reaction. Introductory 
QUANTUM MECHANICS relates the cross section to the sum 
of transmission coefficients over all possible angular 
momenta / 


1 Cc 
oe Bors 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


if we neglect the fact that projectile and target have an 
intrinsic spin. Here / denotes the angular momentum 
and 7, the related transmission coefficient for incoming 
projectiles of momentum ik. 

This is the cross section for a successful production 
of the compound nucleus; however not in its ground 
state. With a reaction Q value, the projectile with center of 
mass energy E creates a nucleus at the excitation energy 
Q+E. This excited state can again (because it is not 
stable) decay into other states: electromagnetic transitions 
into lower states of the compound nucleus, i.e. y decay, 
or decay via particle emission into another nucleus i.e. 
i+tj > y+m(iVj,y)m) orit+ j > o+m (i(j,o)m). In 
most cases of low-energy projectiles y transitions to the 
ground state will dominate. In addition, s-waves (/ = 0) 
dominate at low energies and the capture cross section is 


approximated by 
4 


oe ae 
o~ eB 


T)=0- 

The / = O transmission coefficients are exactly 
the ones of the previously described one-dimensional 
approach, i.e. central collisions where no angular 
momentum is involved. From the approximate behavior 
of neutron and charged-particle transmission coefficients, 
the energy dependence (at low energies E or velocities v) 
for neutron and charged-particle capture reactions follows. 


(i) For neutrons with Tyo © 4k, /ky « E'/?, 


_ Tap 1 1 
Cas “ Fin Xo 


(ii) For charged-particle captures with T..9 = eo, 


These are key features of neutron-induced and 
charged-particle-induced reaction cross sections which 
are essential for astrophysical applications. They are, in 
addition, mass dependent and modulated by shell effects 
due to the density of available excited states. 

In general, target and projectile are not spinless 
particles. If a reaction of the type i(j,0)m takes place, 
the compound nucleus formation cross section has also to 
be multiplied by the probability of that specific outgoing 
channel 0, P, = T,/>.,T,, where n sums over all 
possible decay channels. In a generalized treatment 
the Hauser—Feshbach or statistical model formula results. 
With more realistic potentials than the ones discussed 
before, a correct inclusion of isospin conservation and 
mixing, an adequate treatment of y transitions in nuclei, 
a level density prescription required for transitions to 
higher energies where individual levels are hard to 
resolve and with width fluctuation corrections which 
include correlations between incoming and outgoing 
channels, a quite reasonable agreement can be found with 
experimental cross section determinations, provided that 
a high density of excited states (resonances) is found in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the compound nucleus at the appropriate bombarding 
energy. Reactions for light nuclei, which are dominated 
by individual resonances, have been discussed elsewhere 
(See NUCLEAR REACTION RATES). 


Bibliography 

Aboussir Y, Pearson J M, Dutta A K and Tondeur F 1995 
Nuclear mass formula via an approximation to the 
Hatree-Fock method At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 61 127 

Martinez-Pinedo G, Langanke K and Dean D J 2000 
Electron capture rates and B~ decay of pf-shell nuclei 
Astrophys. J. Suppl. 126 493 

Moller P, Nix J R, Myers W D and Swiatecki W J 1995 At. 
Data Nucl. Data Tables 59 185 

Moller P, NixJ R and Kratz K-L1997 Nuclear properties for 
astrophysical and radioactive-ion-beam applications 
At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 66 131 

Oda T, Hino M, Muto K, Takahara M and Sato K 1994 
Rate tables for the weak processes of sd-shell nuclei 
in stellar matter At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 56 231 

Rauscher T and Thielemann F-K 2000 Astrophysical 
reaction rates from statistical model calculations At. 
Data Nucl. Data Tables 75 at press 


F K Thielemann 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Reactions Rates 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nuclear Reactions Rates 


Investigations during the last 60 yr have shown that we are 
connected with distance space and time not only by our 
imagination but also through a common cosmic heritage: 
the chemical ELEMENTS that make up our bodies. These 
elements were created by nuclear reactions in the hot 
interiors of remote and long-vanished stars over many 
billions of years. Their nuclear fuels finally spent, these 
giant stars met death in cataclysmic explosions, scattering 
far and wide the atoms of heavy elements synthesized 
deep within their cores. Eventually this material, as well 
as material lost by smaller stars during red-giant stages, 
collected into clouds of gas in interstellar space; these, in 
turn, slowly collapsed giving birth to new generations of 
stars, thus leading to a cyclic evolution that is still going 
on. In this scenario, the Sun and its complement of planets 
were formed nearly 5 billion years ago. Drawing on the 
material gathered from the debris of its stellar ancestors, 
the planet Earth provided the conditions that eventually 
made life possible. Like every object in the solar system, 
each living creature on Earth incorporates atoms from 
distant corners of our galaxy. Every molecule in our bodies 
contains matter that once was subjected to the tremendous 
temperatures and pressures at the center of a star. This is 
where the iron in our blood cells originated, the oxygen 
we breathe, the carbon and nitrogen in our tissues and the 
calcium in our bones. All were formed predominantly in 
nuclear fusion reactions of smaller atoms in the interior of 
stars. The present picture is that all elements from carbon 
to uranium have been produced entirely within stars 
during their fiery lifetimes and explosive deaths. A few 
of the lightest elements were formed before the stars even 
existed, during the birth of the universe itself. In addition, 
a few of the most reactive light elements appear to have 
been synthesized in intergalactic space by COSMIC RAYS. 
Thus, theories of nucleosynthesis have identified the most 
important sites of element formation and also the diverse 
nuclear processes involved in their production. The 
detailed understanding of our cosmic heritage combines 
astrophysics and nuclear physics and forms what is 
called nuclear astrophysics. There are excellent theories 
of NUCLEOSYNTHESIS, but theories, in all of science, are 
only guides to understanding. They must be constantly 
confronted with experimental and observational data to 
ensure that they evolve in a meaningful direction. In turn, 
nuclear reactions are at the heart of nuclear astrophysics: 
they influence sensitively the nucleosynthesis of the 
elements in the earliest stages of the universe and in all 
the objects formed thereafter and control the associated 
energy generation, neutrino luminosity and evolution of 
stars. A good knowledge of the rates of these reactions is 
essential for an understanding of this broad picture. 


Nuclear astrophysical rates 

In a stellar plasma the constituent nuclei have kinetic 
energy (see below) and move in random directions. 
Occasionally they collide with other nuclei, whereby they 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


experience one of two types of processes. In one type they 
are scattered on each other (like billiard balls): this elastic 
scattering process may be written symbolically as 1+ 2 > 
1+2orx+A —> x+A (the latter is often written as A(x,x)A). 
The symbol x (or 1) represents the projectile and A (or 2) 
the target nucleus which together constitute the entrance 
channel. In the elastic scattering process the same types 
of nuclei emerge from the collision and constitute the exit 
channel. In the other type of process two different nuclei 
emerge from the collision, 1+2—> 3+40rx+A—>y+B 
(or A(x,y)B), where y (or 3) and B (or 4) represent the 
emerging nuclei which together constitute here the exit 
channel. This type of process is called a nuclear reaction, 
transmuting nuclei of the entrance channel into different 
nuclei of the exit channel and representing thus the key 
to the understanding of elemental nucleosynthesis. If the 
nuclei in the entrance channel have nuclear masses m1 
and m and those in the exit channel have nuclear masses 
m3 and m4, energy conservation together with EINSTEIN’s 
relation E = mc* leads to the nuclear reaction Q value, 
defined as Q = (m, +m) — m3 — m,)c*. If the Q value 
is positive, there is a net production of energy in the 
reaction for each event: mass is converted to kinetic energy. 
Clearly, such reactions are most important for the energy 
production in stars. The Q value can be obtained from 
nuclear mass tables, which are the results of decades of 
painstaking work. Of equal importance is the intrinsic 
nuclear probability that a given reaction will take place. 
This probability, expressed as an energy-dependent cross 
section o (£) (see below), determines how many reactions 
occur per unit of time and unit volume: hence, together 
with the Q value, o (E) provides important information on 
nuclear energy production in stars. 

We know that when one is shooting at a target the 
probability of hitting it increases as its area increases. 
By analogy, one may associate with each nucleus 
a geometrical area, which is directly related to the 
probability of a projectile interacting with the nucleus. 
This area is referred to as the cross section for the reaction. 
Classically, this cross section o is equal to the combined 
geometrical area of the projectile and the target nucleus; if 
the projectile and the target nucleus have radii Rp, and Ri, 
respectively, the cross section may be writtenaso = m(Rpt+ 
R,)? and does not depend on energy. In reality, the nuclear 
reactions are governed by the laws of quantum mechanics, 
whereby the geometrical cross section must be replaced 
by the energy-dependent quantity o = 1(A/27)? « E7! 
(E is the energy of the nuclei), where A represents the de 
Broglie wavelength reflecting the wave aspect of quantum 
mechanical processes. In some cases the Coulomb and 
centrifugal barriers related to nuclear charge and angular 
momentum strongly inhibit the penetration of one nucleus 
into another. This barrier penetration leads to a steep 
energy dependence of the cross section o(£). Other 
energy-dependent effects, such as resonances and their 
mutual interference effects, also play important roles and 
the energy dependence of o(£) can be quite complex. In 
addition to the effects just discussed, the cross section for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Reactions Rates 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a particular nuclear reaction depends on the nature of the 
force involved (i.e. strong, electromagnetic or weak force), 
with strengths that vary by many orders of magnitude. 
It is the challenge to the experimentalist to make precise 
o(£) measurements over a wide range of energies, as 
our fragmented knowledge of nuclear physics prevents 
us from predicting o(£) on purely theoretical grounds. 

In hot stellar matter the energies of the moving nuclei 
can be described by a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, 
®(E) « Eexp(—E/kT), where T is the local temperature 
and k the Boltzmann constant. At low energies, E < kT, 
the function ®(£) increases linearly with energy E. ®(E) 
reaches a maximum value at E = kT, and at higher 
energies, E >> kT, ®(E£) decreases exponentially (figure 1). 
Folding the cross section with this energy (or velocity) 
distribution leads to the nuclear reaction rate per pair of 
nuclei: 


(ov) = (8/mp) 2 (kT) 3” [ o(E)exp(—E/kT)dE (1) 
0 


where v is the relative velocity of the pair of nuclei, E 
is the center-of-mass energy and w = mm2/(m, + m2) is 
the reduced mass of the entrance channel. Multiplication 
of (ov) by the number densities of the interacting species 
in the entrance channel leads to the total reaction rate 
per unit of time and volume for a star of given chemical 
composition. In order to cover the different evolution 
phases of stars, i.e. from main-sequence stars (T ~ 10’ K) 
to supernovae (T ~ 10° K), one must know the rates over 
a wide range of temperatures, which in turn requires the 
availability of o(£) data over a wide range of energies. 

For the important class of charged-particle-induced 
reactions, there is a repulsive Coulomb barrier in the 
entrance channel of height E, = Z,Z,e?/r, where Z, 
and Z, are the integral nuclear charges of the interacting 
particles, e is the unit of electric charge and r is the 
nuclear interaction radius. Because of the tunneling effect 
through this barrier, o (E) drops nearly exponentially with 
decreasing energy (figure 2): 


o(E) = S(E)E~| exp(—27n) (2) 


where n = 27 ZZ2e*/hv is the Sommerfield parameter (h 
is the Planck constant). The function S(£), defined by this 
equation, contains all the strictly nuclear effects, and is 
usually referred to as the nuclear or astrophysical S factor. 
If equation (2) is inserted in equation (1), one obtains 


(ov) = (8/mp)7 (kT)? 


x 5 S(E)exp(—E/kT —b/E'”)dE (3) 
0 


with b = E7? 2(2u)/?2*e7Z1Zo/h. Since for 
nonresonant reactions S(E) varies slowly with energy, the 
steep energy dependence of the integrand in equation 
(3) is governed primarily by the exponential term. The 
penetration through the Coulomb barrier gives rise to 
the term exp(—b/E'/”), which becomes very small at low 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


MAXWELL - BOLTZMANN 
DISTRIBUTION 
= exp (-E/kT) 


"4 


TUNNELING 
THROUGH 


RELATIVE PROBABILITY 


Figure 1. The dominant energy-dependent functions are shown 
for nuclear reactions between charged particles. While both the 
energy distribution function (Maxwell—Boltzmann) and the 
quantum mechanical tunneling function through the Coulomb 
barrier are small for the overlap region, the convolution of the 
two functions results in a peak (the Gamow peak) near the 
energy £o, giving a sufficiently high probability to allow a 
significant number of reactions to occur. The energy of the 
Gamow peak is generally much larger than kT. 


energies. The other exponential term, exp(— E/kT), which 
vanishes at high energy, is a measure of the number of 
particles available in the high-energy tail of the Maxwell-— 
Boltzmann distribution. The product of the two terms 
leads to a peak of the integrand near the energy Eo, which 
is usually much larger than kT. The peak is frequently 
referred to as the Gamow peak (figure 1). For a constant 
S(E) value over the energy region of the peak, one finds 
Eo = (bkT/2)”’3; this is the effective mean energy for a 
given reaction at a given temperature. Approximating 
the peak by a Gaussian function, one finds an effective 
width A = 4(E9kT)'/?/3'/?. Thus, nuclear burning takes 
place predominantly over the energy window Ey + A/2, 
the stellar thermal energy range for which information on 
o(E) must be obtained. 

Because of the steep drop of o(£) at subcoulomb 
energies (E < E,), it becomes increasingly difficult to 
measure o(£) as E is lowered. Although experimental 
techniques have improved significantly over the years, 
extending o(£) measurements to lower energies (with a 
low-energy limit at E,, corresponding to a reaction yield 
in a detector of roughly 1 event per hour), it has not been 
possible to measure o(£) at stellar thermal energies, as 
E)/E- © 1/100 for hydrogen-burning reactions (i.e. pp 
chain and CNO cycles) in main-sequence stars such as 
our Sun. Instead, the measured energy dependence of 
o(£) at higher energies (E > E,) must be extrapolated to 
stellar energies, using the S(£) factor defined in equation 
(2). Such an ‘extrapolation into the unknown’ can lead 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Reactions Rates 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T TOT TUT y T T TT 1 TTT 


*He(*He,2p)*He 


HH ae teRing,.,. 


ouee FE setts; 


S(E)-FACTOR [MeV—b] 


RR SE Cm 


ie) 1 L 1 1 ‘ee il 1 1 1 
107 
E., [kev] 


om 


CROSS SECTION (b] 
3, eit 3 3 5, 3 3 3 3 3 
LU 
x 
~ 
*~ 
° 
° 
Fa Ae eT TT TT TOT TT MT TT TT MTT TTT TT TTT | 


Figure 2. Energy dependence of the cross section and the 
astrophysical S(£) factor for the 3HeCPHe, 2p)*He reaction. The 
Gamow peak is at Ey = 21 keV for solar conditions (central 
temperature T = 15 x 10° K). 


to considerable uncertainty. At energies lower than EF, 
there might be a change of reaction mechanism, or of 
the centrifugal barrier, or there might be a contribution 
of narrow or subthreshold resonances to o(£) at stellar 
energies. The danger of such extrapolations was strikingly 
demonstrated in the case of *H(d, y)*He, for example, 
where new low-energy data increased the extrapolated 
values by a factor 1000, mainly as a result of change in the 
centrifugal barrier (d- to s-waves). For another example, 
the observed solar neutrino fluxes in the existing neutrino 
detectors are not consistent with the current ‘standard’ 
picture of the microscopic processes in the Sun. A possible 
solution for this solar neutrino problem may be found 
in one or more of the areas of neutrino physics (e.g. the 
recent experimental evidence for neutrino oscillations at 
Super-Kamiokande), solar physics (models) or nuclear 
physics. In view of the important and fundamental 
conclusions regarding nonstandard physics, which may 
be deduced from the results of present and future solar 
neutrino observations, it is of utmost importance to place 
the predictions on a solid basis. The nuclear physics 
component of this problem involves the cross sections 
of the hydrogen-burning reactions extrapolated to the 
relevant solar energies. Yet another example is the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reactions ?C(a, y)!®O, which takes places in the helium- 
burning phase of red-giant stars, at Ey ~ 0.30 MeV. It 
has been found theoretically that this reaction influences 
sensitively not only the nucleosynthesis of the elements 
between C and Fe but also the evolution of stars, the 
dynamics of supernovae and the kind of remnant (neutron 
star or black hole) of a supernova explosion (see SUPERNOVA 
REMNANTS). At present, useful but still inadequate o (E£) data 
are available only above E;, = 1.3 MeV. New experimental 
approaches are needed to reduce the uncertainties of the 
extrapolations. 


The LUNA project 

Low-energy studies to thermonuclear reactions ina labora- 
tory at the Earth’s surface are hampered predominantly by 
background effects of cosmic rays in the detectors, leading 
typically to more than 10 background events per hour in 
common detectors. Conventional passive or active shield- 
ing around the detectors can only partially reduce the 
problem of cosmic ray background. The best solution is to 
install an accelerator facility in a laboratory deep under- 
ground. As a pilot project, a 50 kV accelerator facility has 
been installed in the Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso 
(LNGS), where the flux of cosmic-ray muons is reduced 
by a factor of 10° compared with the flux at the surface. 
This unique project, called LUNA (Laboratory for Under- 
ground Nuclear Astrophysics), was designed primarily for 
a renewed study of 3He(?He,2p)*He at low energies, aim- 
ing to reach the solar Gamow peak at Ep tA /2 = 2145 keV. 
This goal has been reached with a detected reaction yield of 
about 1 event per month at the lowest energy, E = 16 keV, 
with o © 20 fb of 2 x 107-38 cm’. Thus, the cross section 
of an important reaction of the pp chain has been directly 
measured for the first time at solar thermal energies (fig- 
ure 2); in principle, extrapolation is no longer needed in 
this reaction. The work demonstrated the research poten- 
tial of LUNA and that all of the experimental requirements 
in such low-rate, time-consuming experiments can be ful- 
filled. Installing larger facilities at LNGS in the near future 
will open the possibility of improving our knowledge of 
other key reactions by shifting their low-energy limit E,, 
significantly closer to Ey or even to within the Gamow 
peak. 

In the extrapolation of o(£) using equation (2), it 
is assumed that the Coulomb potential of the target 
nucleus and projectile is that resulting from bare nuclei. 
However, for nuclear reactions studied in the laboratory, 
the target nuclei and the projectiles are usually in the 
form of neutral atoms or molecules and ions, respectively. 
The electron clouds surrounding the interacting nuclides 
act as a screening potential: the projectile effectively 
sees a reduced Coulomb barrier. This in turn leads to 
a higher cross section, o,(£), than would be the case 
for bare nuclei, o,(£). There is an enhancement factor, 
fia(E) = 0;(E)/op(E) © exp(anU./E), where U, is the 
electron-screening potential energy (e.g. U. © Z1Z2e7/Ra, 
with R, an atomic radius). Note that fia,(£) increases 
exponentially with decreasing energy. For ratios E/U. > 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Reactions Rates 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1000, shielding effects are negligible, and laboratory 
experiments can be regarded as essentially measuring 
op(E). However, for E/U. < 100, shielding effects 
become important for understanding and extrapolating 
low-energy data. Relatively small enhancements from 
electron screening at E/U. ~* 100 can cause significant 
errors in the extrapolation of cross sections to lower 
energies, if the curve of the cross section is forced to 
follow the trend of the enhanced cross sections, without 
correction for the screening. Notice that, for a stellar 
plasma, the value o,(£) must be known because the 
screening in the plasma will be quite different from that 
in the laboratory nuclear-reaction studies, i.e. Oplasma(E) = 
folasma(E)op(E), and fpiasma(E) must be explicitly included 
for each situation. A good understanding of electron- 
screening effects in the laboratory is needed to arrive 
at reliable o,(£) data at low energies. Experimental 
studies of reactions involving light nuclides have shown 
the expected exponential enhancement of the cross section 
at low energies (figure 2). However, the observed 
enhancements were in all cases significantly larger than 
could be accounted for from available atomic-physics 
models. This situation is disturbing because, if the 
effects of electron screening are not understood under 
laboratory conditions, they are most likely to be not fully 
understood ina stellar plasma. Asolution to the laboratory 
puzzle might be found in one (or all) of the following 
areas: the assumed energy-loss predictions from stopping- 
power codes at low energies, the assumed nuclear-reaction 
models at energies far below the Coulomb barrier, and 
the assumed atomic-physics models. All of these areas 
require additional experimental and theoretical efforts. An 
improved understanding of laboratory electron screening 
may also help eventually to improve the corresponding 
understanding of electron screening in stellar plasmas. Itis 
in the nature of astrophysics that many of the processes and 
most of the objects one tries to understand are physically 
inaccessible. Thus, it is important that those aspects that 
can be studied in the laboratory be rather well understood. 
The electron-screening project addresses one such aspect. 


Other rapidly developing experimental 
techniques 

In explosive scenarios with temperatures of the order 
of 10° K (e.g. early universe, novae and supernovae), 
where Eo approaches £,, nuclear burning times can be 
greatly reduced, even down to seconds. If the half-life 
of a radioactive nuclide is longer than or of the same 
order as the burning time, that nuclide will be involved 
in the nuclear burning and thus will contribute to the 
composition of the final nuclear ashes. Since H and He 
are the most abundant species in these scenarios, the 
burning consists predominantly of (p,y) and (a, y) capture 
reactions involving these radioactive nuclides. If the half- 
life of a nuclide is longer than a day or so, it may be made 
into a radioactive target: e.g. ’Be(p,y)®B with T,/2(7Be) = 
53 days. However, in a great majority of interesting cases, 
the half-lives are too short to make targets: e.g. '7N(p,v)'4O 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with T;/2(9N) = 10 min. In this case, a possible method is 
to create the radioactive nuclides in an accelerator, separate 
them, accelerate them in a second accelerator and allow 
the radioactive ion beam (RIB) to interact with an H or He 
target (inverted kinematics). All of this must be achieved 
in a time shorter than the decay lifetime of the radioactive 
nuclei. A growing number of laboratories have already 
produced RIBs of astrophysical interest or are in the stage 
of technical development of such beams. For the study 
of these capture reactions, the detection of the capture y- 
rays or of the residual recoil nuclei (via their radioactive 
decay signals) leads in general to efficiencies far below 
100%. In addition, the radioactivity of the RIB seriously 
hampers the detection methods. Only p(°N,y)'4O has 
been successfully studied so far via y-ray spectroscopy, 
because of an unusually large cross section arising from a 
strong, broad resonance. For all other capture reactions 
studied so far, only upper limits for o(£) have been 
derived at the relevant energies Ey + A/2 owing to more 
typical (i.e. small) cross sections. Thus, future experiments 
require a significantly improved detection efficiency, with 
a detector that is less sensitive to background. Since the 
recoil nuclei are kinematically confined to a forward cone 
of a few degrees, a recoil mass separator (RMS) can be used 
to filter the recoils from the RIB and to focus all recoils onto 
a suitable detector for particle identification. Of course, in 
most RMSs one must make a choice of the charge state 
of the recoils; however, there is usually a charge state 
representing about 50% of the recoils produced and thus 
the capture reactions can be studied with an approximately 
50% detection efficiency. Such an RMS is in preparation 
at Bochum, called ERNA (European Recoil Separator for 
Nuclear Astrophysics), for the study of *He(?C,y)!©O and 
other key reactions. Although this reaction does not 
involve RIBs, a similar RMS should be appropriate for 
work with RIBs. 

It should be pointed out that the capture reactions 
7Be(p,y)®B and '*N(p,y)'4O have also been studied using 
the alternative method of Coulomb dissociation (Coulomb 
excitation into the continuum). However, there remain 
uncertainties about the interpretation and achievable 
precision of the method. It is to be hoped that these 
uncertainties can be resolved and that this technique will 
eventually prove to be useful for the indirect studies of 
capture reactions involving both stable and radioactive 
nuclides. Unique applications for this technique would be 
the study of capture reactions involving three particles in 
the entrance channel (e.g. *He(an,y)* Be) of two radioactive 
nuclides in the entrance channel (e.g. a neutron plus 
another radioactive nucleus). 

Neutron-induced reactions, mainly (n,y), play an 
important role in the early universe, as well as in stars 
where they are involved in the nucleosynthesis of the 
transiron elements via the s- and r-processes. Because of 
the short lifetime of the neutrons (7,2 = 10 min), they must 
be produced by nuclear reactions within the star (e.g. via 
13C(a,n)'©O) and are quickly thermalized through elastic 
scattering. Because of the absence of a Coulomb barrier 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nuclear Reactions Rates 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in the entrance channel, the most probable energy is near 

0 = kT & 30 keV for T = 3 x 108 K. Usually o(E) is 
very large and increases with decreasing E. Thus, o(£) 
measurements of the s-process can in principle be carried 
out directly in the relevant stellar energy region. Since 
the r-process involves radioactive nuclei near the neutron- 
drip line, the relevant o(£) measurements require RIB 
techniques (see above). 

As pointed out earlier, a few of the most reactive 
light elements, i.e. Li, Be and B, appear to have been 
synthesized in intergalactic space through spallation 
processes induced by high-energy cosmic rays. This 
possibility is currently under quantitative study using 
space vehicles (measurement of cosmic-ray composition 
and spectra) and in laboratories (measurement of high- 
energy spallation cross sections). 


Summary 

Impressive progress has been achieved in the knowledge 
of nuclear reaction rates. However, there remains much 
critical work to be done in the future to arrive at 
reliable data for many key reactions and processes. New 
techniques continue to be developed for this purpose, 
for nuclear reaction rates involving both stable and 
radioactive nuclei, and research in nuclear astrophysics 
will remain an exciting pursuit for many years to come. 


Bibliography 

Burbridge E M, Burbridge G R, Fowler W A and Hoyle F 
1957 Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 547 

Fiorentini G, Kavanagh R W and Rolfs C 1995 Z. Phys. A 
350 289 

Fowler W A 1984 Rev. Mod. Phys. 56 149 

Rolfs C and Rodney W S 1988 Cauldrons in the Cosmos 
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press) 


U Greife and C Rolfs 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nucleosynthesis 


Nucleosynthesis is the science related to all astrophysical 
processes which are responsible for the abundances of the 
elements and their isotopes in the universe. The 
astrophysical sites are the Big Bang and stellar objects, 
either during their stable (hydrostatic) evolution and wind 
ejection or during explosions like novae and supernovae, or 
possibly other events, where binary stellar systems are 
involved. The understanding of each of these environments 
requires in general hydro(fluid/gas)dynamics, 
thermodynamics and energy transport. Nuclear abundances 
and energy generation are determined by thermonuclear 
reactions. 

We give a brief review of hydrostatic burning phases in 
stellar evolution and the specific burning features of 
explosive stellar events. This is followed by a discussion of 
the basic equations for reaction networks which govern 
composition changes and the required nuclear physics input 
for thermonuclear reactions. 

The working of nucleosynthesis is presented in a survey 
of events which act as nucleosynthesis sources and an 
analysis of their role in the puzzle to explain the evolution of 
the elemental and isotopic composition in galaxies and 
especially the mixture found in the solar system (see figure 
1). Different timescales due to the mass dependence of the 
endpoints of stellar evolution (type II supernova 
explosions—SNe II versus planetary nebulae) or single 
versus binary stellar systems (the latter being responsible for 
novae, type Ia supernovae—SNe Ia, or x-ray bursts) are the 
key to understanding galactic evolution. We also speculate 
on the role of (1) very massive stars not undergoing the SN II 
explosions but rather causing ‘hypernovae’ after the 
formation of a central black hole via core collapse, and (11) 
binary neutron star or neutron star—black hole pairs. 


Nuclear burning 

Nuclear burning can in general be classified into two 
categories: (1) hydrostatic burning stages on timescales 
dictated by stellar energy loss and (2) explosive burning 
due to hydrodynamics of the specific event. Hydrostatic 
burning stages are characterized by temperature 
thresholds, permitting thermal Maxwell—Boltzmann 
distributions of (charged) particles (nuclei) to penetrate 
increasingly larger Coulomb barriers of electrostatic 
repulsion. We can describe the burning stages in terms of 
an abbreviated nomenclature for reactions with target i, 
projectile 7, emitted particle k, and main reaction product 
l[i+j—k+ lor i(j,A)/]. Projectiles are either neutrons n, 
protons p, a-particles (*He) or nuclei, emitted particles 
include those listed above, photons y or in B’-decays 
positrons/electrons e~ and neutrinos/antineutrinos v/v. 
H-burning converts 'H into “He via pp-chains or the 
CNO-cycles. Here we use the notation “Z where the mass 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Solar System Abundances 


10°) 


ABUNDANCE (Si 


t) 20 40 60 100 120 140 160 180 200 


ATOMIC MASS A 

Figure 1. Abundances by number as found in the solar system 
from meteorite samples and solar spectra. Abundances of 
isotopes of different elements with the same mass number A are 
added. The units are arbitrarily scaled to an abundance of Si of 
the order 10°. 


number A is the sum of neutrons and protons N + Z and Z 
is usually replaced by the element symbol representing 
that charge or proton number (see NUCLEAR PROPERTIES). 
The simplest pp-chain is initiated by 'H(p,e"v)’H(p,y)*He 
and completed by *He(*He,2p)*He. The dominant CNO- 
cycle chain '"C(p,y)"°N(e‘v)"°C(p.y)'“*N(p.y) °O(e*v) 
'N(p,a)'"C_ is controlled by the slowest reaction 
'4N(p,y)'°O. Further burning stages are characterized by 
their major reactions, which are in He-burning 
“He(2a,y)'’C (triple-alpha) and '*C(a,y)'%O, in C-burning 
¢(?C, a)°°Ne and in O-burning '°O('°O, «)°*Si. The 
alternative to fusion is photodisintegration which starts to 
play a role at sufficiently high temperatures T when 30kT 
= QO (the Q-value or energy release of the inverse capture 
reaction). This ensures the existence of photons with 
energies >Q in the Planck distribution and leads to Ne- 
burning (*’Ne(y,a)'°O, *’Ne(a,y)"“Mg) at T> 1.5 x 10°K 
(preceding O-burning) due to a small Q-value of =4 MeV 
and Si-burning at temperatures in excess of 3 x 10° K 
(initiated like Ne-burning by photodisintegrations). The 
latter ends with nuclear reactions in a complete chemical 
equilibrium (nuclear statistical equilibrium, NSE) and an 
abundance distribution around Fe. These temperatures 
permit photodisintegrations with typical Q-values of 8- 
10 MeV as well as the penetration of Coulomb barriers in 
capture reaction. 

In such an NSE the abundance of each nucleus Y,, 
with mass number 4,, charge Z;, and neutron number N; = 
A,— Z; is only dependent on temperature 7, density p, and 
its nuclear binding energy 8B, while fulfilling mass 
conservation >',4,;Y; = 1 and charge conservation ));Z;Y; = 
Y, (equal total abundances of protons and electrons). Y, is 
changed by weak interactions (beta-decays and electron 
captures) on longer timescales. Quasi-equilibrium can 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


occur when different nuclear mass regions are locally in 
equilibrium with the background of free neutrons, 
protons and alphas but offset from their NSE values. 

During core and shell He-burning specific a-induced 
reactions can liberate neutrons which are responsible for 
the slow neutron capture process (s-process). It leads to 
the build-up of elements up to Pb and Bi through a series 
of neutron captures and B -decays, starting on existing 
heavy nuclei around Fe. 

Many of the hydrostatic burning processes occur 
also under explosive conditions at higher temperatures 
and on shorter timescales (see figure 2), when often the 
B-decay half-lives are longer than the explosive 
timescales. This requires in general the additional 
knowledge of nuclear reactions for unstable nuclei. The 
fuels for explosive nucleosynthesis consist mainly of N = 
Z nuclei like '*C, '°O, ?°Ne, “Mg, or **Si (the ashes of 
prior hydrostatic burning), resulting in heavier nuclei, 
again with N =~ Z. At high densities also substantial 
electron captures on nuclei e& + 4Z > “(Z — 1) + v can 
occur due to energetic, degenerate electrons with high 
Fermi energies (equivalent to a B’-decay which converts 
a proton into a neutron inside a nucleus). 

Explosive Si-burning differs strongly from _ its 
hydrostatic counterpart and can be divided into three 
different regimes: (i) incomplete Si-burning and 
complete Si-burning with either (ii) a normal (high 
density, low entropy) or (ili) an alpha-rich (low density, 
high entropy) freeze-out of charged-particle reactions 
during cooling from NSE. At high temperatures or during 
a ‘normal’ freeze-out, the abundances are in a full NSE. 
An alpha-rich freeze-out is caused by the inability of the 
triple-alpha reaction “He(2a,y)'*C, and the *He(an,y)’Be 
reaction to keep light nuclei like n, p and “He, and nuclei 
beyond A = 12 in an NSE during declining temperatures, 
when the densities are small. This causes a large alpha 
abundance after freeze-out. This effect, most pronounced 
for SNe II, is a function of entropy. 

r-process nucleosynthesis (rapid neutron capture) 
relates to subsets of explosive Si-burning, either with low 
or high entropies, experiencing a normal or alpha-rich 
freeze-out. The requirement of a neutron/seed ratio of 10 
to 150 after charged particle freeze-out translates for a 
normal freeze-out into Y, = 0.12—0.3. For a moderate Y, > 
0.40 an extremely alpha-rich freeze-out is needed. 


Nuclear reaction rates and networks 

In this section we want to outline the essential features of 
thermonuclear reaction rates and nuclear reaction 
networks (see also NUCLEAR REACTION RATES). The 
nuclear cross section for a reaction between target j and 
projectile k is defined by 


1 


number of reactions target”! s~ rfn; 


flux of incoming projectiles gy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


p=10° 
He-burning 


Logr(s) 


O-burning 


p=10" 


p=10° 
C-burning 


2 4 6 8 10 


(a) 


Si-buming 


Ne-burning 


(b) 


Figure 2. Burning timescales in seconds for fuel destruction of 
He-, C-, and O-burning (top) and Ne- and Si-burning (bottom) 
as a function of temperature. Density-dependent timescales are 
labeled with a chosen typical density (in g cm”). They scale 
with 1/p for C- and O-burning and 1/p” for He-burning. Ne- and 
Si-burning, initiated by photodisintegrations, are not density- 
dependent. The almost constant He-burning timescale beyond 
Ty = T/10° K = 1 permits efficient destruction on explosive 
timescales only for high densities. 


The second equality holds for the case that the relative 
velocity between targets with the number density n; and 
projectiles with number density n,; is constant and has the 
value v. Then r, the number of reactions per cm? and s, 
can be expressed as r = ovnjn;. More generally, when 
targets and projectiles follow specific thermal momentum 
distributions, r is given by 


ri. = [ ote —v,|)|v; — vu, |dr,; di. 


The evaluation of this integral depends on the types of 
particles (fermions, bosons) and distributions which are 
involved. For nuclei j and & in an astrophysical plasma, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


obeying a Maxwell—Boltzmann distribution, _ this 
simplifies to 7,4 = <ov>njny. The thermonuclear reaction 
rates have the form 


ae eet _ pe 3 
(OU}i4 = a) ary? f Eo(Eye= "dE. 


Here p and E denote the reduced mass and center of mass 
energy of the target—projectile system. When particle k is 
a photon, the relative velocity is always c and quantities 
in the integral are not dependent on dn;. This simplifies to 
rj = Ajyn;. 4; (T) results from an integration over a Planck 
distribution for photons of temperature 7. 

A similar procedure is used for electron captures 
by nuclei. Because the electron is about 2000 times less 
massive than a nucleon, the velocity of the nucleus 7 is 
negligible in the center of mass system in comparison to 
the electron velocity (|v; — v| ~ |v-|). The electron capture 
cross section has to be integrated over a Fermi 
distribution of electrons. The electron capture rates are a 
function of TJ and n, = Y,pNy, the electron number 
density, where p denotes the matter density and Na, 
Avogadro’s number. In a neutral, completely ionized 
plasma, the electron abundance is equal to the total 
proton abundance Y, = >);Z,Y; and r; = dj. (T,pYe)nj. 

This treatment can be generalized for the capture of 
positrons, which are in a thermal equilibrium with 
photons, electrons, and nuclei. At high densities (p > 
10’? g cm™) the size of the neutrino scattering cross 
section on nuclei and electrons ensures that enough 
scattering events occur to thermalize a neutrino 
distribution. Then also the inverse process to electron 
capture (neutrino capture) can occur and be expressed in 
a similar way to photon and electron captures, integrating 
now over the neutrino distribution. Finally, for normal 
decays with half-life t<inf>1/2</inf>, we obtain an 
expression with the decay rate A; = In 2/t<inf>1/2</inf> 
independent of temperature or density. 

The time derivative of the number densities of each 
of the species in an astrophysical plasma is governed by 
the different expressions for 7, as discussed above for the 
different reaction mechanisms 


On, = ni y Nyt ay , 
( at 4 = > i gy + a BaP RA + > i PAM PAA 
p=cons r; Te 


Bd 


The reactions listed on the right-hand side of the equation 
belong to the three categories of reactions: (1) decays, 
photodisintegrations, electron and positron captures and 
neutrino induced reactions (7; = An), (2) two-particle 
reactions (7,4 = <j,A>njn,), and (3) three-particle reactions 
(ria: = <J,k,njnn) like the triple-alpha process, which 
can be interpreted as successive captures with an 
intermediate unstable target. The capital Ns indicate how 
many nuclei of type 7 are destroyed (-) or produced ( + ) 
in the corresponding reaction. In order to exclude 
changes in the number densities n ; which are only due to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


expansion or contraction of the gas, the nuclear 
abundances Y; = n;/(pNa) were introduced. With A; being 
the atomic weight, A;Y; represents the mass fraction of 
this nucleus. In terms of abundances Y; the previous 
equation translates into a set of differential equations 


Y= DINGY; + 2 Ni oN ali RVY Vs 
¢ 


i 
+0 Nig Nai. k YVAN. 


Jk! 


This reaction network has in general to be solved 
numerically. A simplified situation is given in the case of 
a nuclear statistical equilibrium (NSE) at high 
temperatures. Instead of solving reaction networks, 
which would result in the same, but much more time 
consuming, solution the abundances can be expressed by 
a chemical equilibrium for the build-up of all nuclei from 
neutrons and protons via the chemical potentials u(Z,A) = 
Zip + (A — Z)p,. For the typical Boltzmann distributions 
this leads to 


(Ay 14/2 


Y; = (pN yar Gi Al? 2a 
7 = (pNs 2a * Nan AT 


BfkT yZjyN; 
e Le ¥ 


for the abundance of nucleus Y;, with nuclear binding 
energy B; and partition function G7), and m, denoting 
the atomic mass unit. The required solution for neutron 
and proton abundances Y, and Y, is found from mass 
conservation >',4;Y; = 1 and charge conservation ));Z;Y; = 
Y,. In that case only the slow weak interaction processes, 
which change Y, as a function of time, have to be 
followed explicitly. 

The total energy generation rate per gram, due to 


nuclear reactions with abundance changes Y,, is 
expressed in terms of the mass M; of the participating 
nuclei 


oe >, ¥,N4M,c? 


where c is the speed of light. 

As noted above, the important ingredients to 
nucleosynthesis calculations are decay half-lives, 
electron and positron capture rates, photodisintegrations, 
neutrino induced reaction rates, and strong interaction 
cross sections. Photodisintegration rates can be calculated 
via detailed balance from the reverse capture rates. 


The early universe 

The dominant contributions to the cosmic abundances of 
the light nuclides 'H, 7H, *He, “He and ’Li are due to BIG 
BANG nucleosynthesis and thus relics of a hot and dense 
state of the early universe which underwent adiabatic 
expansion. When assuming that all microphysics is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


understood, the final abundances of the light elements are 
determined by only one parameter, the entropy, 
expressable in terms of the baryon to photon ratio n = 
np/ny, because this initial state possesses also a weak 
interaction equilibrium, determining Y.. The Big Bang 
entropies correspond to an extremely a-rich freeze-out 
(high entropies = a low density for a given temperature), 
where essentially no element with A > 7 is produced. The 
build-up of light elements through non-equilibrium 
reactions is only determined after the reaction 'H(n,y)’H 
falls out of equilibrium close to Ty ~ 1, because of a very 
small Q-value of 2 MeV. Uncertainties, affecting 
especially the primordial “He abundance, were related to 
the number of neutrino species and the neutron lifetime. 
LEP experiments at CERN proved the existence of three 
neutrino species in the late 1980s, and the neutron 
lifetime is determined by experiments with trapped 
ultracold neutrons. The cross sections of the relevant 
thermonuclear reactions linking nuclei from 'H to ‘Li 
have been measured at the appropriate energies to an 
accuracy better than 10%. The major uncertainties are 
related to the determination of the primordial abundance 
of *H, *“He and ‘Li with astronomical means. They 
constrain n to 2-5 x 107'°. 


Low mass stars and the s-process 

STELLAR EVOLUTION is an advanced subject with many 
successes. Major modeling uncertainties seem to be 
related to the treatment of convection, the consistent 
inclusion of effects due to stellar rotation, and the 
treatment of wind losses. Reactions involving stable 
nuclei are in quite reasonable shape, but with a number of 
open questions left until now. A few are (a) pp-chain 
reactions in H-burning, e.g. *He(a,y)’Be, ‘Be(p,y)*B, and 
’Li(p,a)"He, which affect sub-solar and solar type stars 
and are directly connected to the solar neutrino emission, 
CNO-cycle reactions like  ‘“N(p,y)°O — and 
'718O(p,a)'*!°N, which directly relate to the surface 
abundances in intermediate mass stars, NeNa-cycle 
reactions in intermediate and massive stars, (b) the 
"C(ay)'°O reaction in He-burning, and (c) fusion 
reactions of late burning stages, e.g. '"C + '°C, which are 
not well known at low energies. 

Low and intermediate mass stars which enrich the 
interstellar medium via stellar winds and/or planetary 
nebula ejection before forming central C + O WHITE 
DWARFS, are contributing important amounts of He and C 
as well as other H- and He-burning products. Among the 
He-burming products one also finds about half of the 
heavy elements and isotopes beyond Fe and up to Pb and 
Bi, resulting from s-process nucleosynthesis which is due 
to neutron capture by pre-existing intermediate and heavy 
nuclei. New data (Van Eck et al) support this view, 
which hitherto had little observational support. In core 
and shell He-burning neutrons are provided by a side 
branch of He-burning reactions acting on 'N, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dominant CNO nucleus after H-burning, 
'4N(a,y)'SF(e"v)'*O. (a,y)”Ne(a,n)”Mg. An alternative 
stronger neutron source during the period of He-shell 
flashes in low and intermediate mass stars is the reaction 
8C(a,n)'°O, which requires admixture of hydrogen and 
the production of °C via '’C(p,y)*N(e*v)8C. The s- 
process is characterized by neutron captures which are 
slow in comparison to beta-decays. 

Figure 3 shows a section of the chart of nuclei and 
the s-process path indicated by horizontal arrows for 
neutron captures with reaction rates <ov>,,(A) = <ov>4, 
connected by B -decays whenever an unstable nucleus is 
encountered. The path can be simplified by abundances 
related only to mass numbers A and the abundances 


approach a steady flow equilibrium Y , = 0 of creation 
and distruction 


¥4 = pNalov)s1¥e¥a-1 — pNalov) a¥n¥a 
= Ny(OV)a-1¥ 4-1 — MalOv) aYa- 


This leads to <ov>,Y, ~ const for neighboring As, with 
exceptions at closed neutron shells where the cross 
sections and reaction rates are small, i.e. the neutron 
capture timescales are too long to attain a steady flow 
equilibrium. For a large fraction of nuclei the neutron 
cross sections scale with E-'” (/ = 0 s-wave capture), 
which causes a temperature independent <ov>. Then the 
resulting abundance pattern is only dependent on the 
neutron exposure T = In, dt, and in this classical analysis 
a very good fit to all s-only isotopes (see figure 3) can be 
found with a continuous (exponential) superposition of 


eli 


Tprocess contributions 


PROTON NUMBER 


> ea cana ae é 


MECHANISMS OF HEAVY ELEMENT SYNTHESIS 
—————> (6- process capture path) 


104 106 108 110 12 194 


NEUTRON NUMBER 


Figure 3. A typical portion of the nuclear chart for heavy 
elements beyond the ‘Fe-group’. The s-process path, which is 
constrained to the ‘valley’ of stability, is indicated. Neutron- 
rich r-only isotopes formed by the r-process are identified as 
well as the shielded s-only isotopes, which cannot have an r- 
process contribution. Stable isotopes, more proton-rich than the 
s-process path, have typically an abundance smaller by two 
orders of magnitude than s- and r-isotopes. Their origin is due 
to the p- or y-process (discussed later). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


exposures t. This analysis can also provide the r-process 
abundances (to be discussed later) by subtracting the s- 
process component from the total solar abundances for 
those nuclei which have s- and r-contributions (see figure 
4). The s-process contribution has abundance peaks at 
stable nuclei with closed neutron shells (V = 50, 82, 126 
for A = 88, 138, and 208) where small cross sections are 
encountered. 

There exist two complications to the simple picture 
given above: (i) nuclei with very long B-decay half-lives 
(comparable to the s-process duration time) can cause 
branchings into two flows, and (ii) cross sections which 
are not s-wave dominated lead to a_ temperature 
dependent <ov>. In that case the results are not just a 
function of t but can depend on n,(¢) and 7(f). Among the 
most important and difficult examples is the branching 
occurring at *Kr, which involves Kr, the Rb and Sr 
isotopes. The abundance of '“’Nd can only be reproduced 
with realistic stellar conditions due to a temperature 
dependent <ov>. The s-process is recognized to occur in 
at least two different astrophysical sites, the weak 
component accounting for most of the s-nuclei below the 
Kr—-Rb-Sr abundance peak, and the main component 
accounting for heavier nuclei up to Pb. The main s- 
process component is due to the thermally-pulsing phase 


of shell He- and H-burning in low mass stars (M < 3Mo) 
and primarily driven by 'C(a,n)'SO rather than 
°Ne(a,n)”°Mg. Recent research indicates that '"C(a,n)'°O 
burns in the interpulse phases at low temperatures. Core 
He-burning with the ”Ne source contributes to the weak 
s-component which is a complex combination of core 
He-, and shell C-, and Ne-burning in massive stars. 


~~ solar s-process 
solar r-process 


o: hy / | 


10° W 


ABUNDANCE 


70 120 170 220 
ATOMIC MASS A 


Figure 4. Decompositions of s-process and r-process 
abundances. Notice the opposite behavior of the two processes 
with respect to odd—even staggering. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Massive stars and type II supernovae 


Stars with main sequence masses M > 8Mo follow the 
hydrostatic burning stages beyond He-burning, develop 
an onion-like composition structure, and produce a 
collapsing core after the end of their hydrostatic 
evolution, which proceeds to nuclear densities (see 
SUPERNOVAE). The latter is due to the fact that Fe-group 
nuclei possess the highest binding energy per nucleon 
and nuclear energy generation ceases to be available. The 
total energy released in the collapse, 2-3 x 10° erg, 
equals the gravitational binding energy of a neutron star. 
Because neutrinos are the particles with the longest mean 
free path, they are able to carry away that energy in the 
fastest fashion as seen for SN1987A in the Kamiokande, 
IMB and Baksan experiments. The apparently most 
promising mechanism for such type II supernova 
explosions (SNelII) is based on neutrino heating beyond 
the hot proto-neutron star via the dominant processes v, + 
n—>pte and v.+p—n+e with a (hopefully) about 
1% efficiency in energy deposition. The neutrino heating 
efficiency depends on the neutrino luminosity, which in 
turn is affected by neutrino opacities. The explosion via 
neutrino heating is delayed after core collapse for a 
timescale of seconds or less. The exact delay time tg, and 
other aspects of the explosion mechanism are still 
uncertain and depend on Fe-cores from stellar evolution 
and the supranuclear equation of state and maximum 
neutron star mass. The observational fact that many core 
collapse supernovae show polarized light emission is an 
indication of a nonspherical explosion mechanism. 


Nucleosynthesis calculations 
The still existing uncertainties of self-consistent models 
suggest making use of the fact that typical kinetic 
energies of 10°! erg are observed and light curve as well 
as explosive nucleosynthesis calculations can be 
performed by introducing a shock of appropriate energy 
in the pre-collapse stellar model, either by depositing 
thermal energy or invoking a piston. Induced calculations 
(lacking self-consistency) utilize the constraint of 
requiring ejected °°Ni-masses from the innermost 
explosive Si-burning layers in agreement with supernova 
light curves, being powered by the decay chain *°Ni- 
*°Co—’Fe (see figure 5). However, it should be clear that, 
even if ~°Ni ejecta from a variety of progenitor masses 
are known, this is not a simple one parameter problem. 
Explosion energies can vary as a function of progenitor 
mass (or implicit parameters like rotation) and the delay 
time between core collapse and explosion can vary as 
well. 

Figure 5 shows the radial composition of explosively 
processed mass zones caused by the shock wave which 
initiates a supernova explosion. The outer ejected layers 


(M(r) > 2Mo) are unprocessed by the explosion and 
contain results of prior H-, He-, C-, and Ne-burning in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stellar evolution. The interior parts of SNe II contain 
products of explosive Si, O, and Ne burning. In the inner 
ejecta, which experience incomplete and complete Si- 
burning, we see an alpha-rich freeze-out (*He). The Y, 
originates from the pre-explosive hydrostatic fuel in these 
layers and can change from 0.4989 to 0.494. This brings 
huge changes in the Fe-group composition for mass 


zones below M(r) = 1.63Mo, making the abundances of 
°8Ni and ~°Ni comparable. All neutron-rich isotopes 
increase (°’Ni, **Ni, °°Cu, °'Zn, and ©’Zn); the even-mass 
isotopes (“Ni and ©Zn) show the strongest effect. One 
can also recognize the increase of Ca, “Ti, ss @ and 
Fe with an increasing alpha-rich freeze-out, but a 
reduction of these V = Z nuclei in the inner more neutron- 
rich layers. 


Observational constraints 

There is limited direct observational information from 
individual supernovae with known progenitors, leading to 
direct O, Ti or Fe(Ni) observations. When including also 
supernova remnants, there exist observations for element 
abundances, like C, O, Si, Cl, Ar, Co, and Ni, and 
isotopic abundances, like *°Ni, °’Ni, “Ti, and *°Al, from 


optical, UV, and x-ray spectra, supernova lightcurves, as 
well as y-ray lines following nuclear decay. They 
constrain the products of hydrostatic burning stages like 
C, O, Ne and Mg as well as the composition close to the 
mass cut between the central neutron star and the 
supernova ejecta (Co, °*’Co, “Ti). The latter are a 
measure of temperature, entropy, and Y, and give a 
consistent picture for neutrino heating delay times of 0.3- 
0.5 s, explosion energies of the order 10°! erg, and a mass 
cut close to or outside the O-burning shell with minute 
permitted admixtures of deeper layers so that only matter 
with Y, = 0.497-0.498 is ejected. 

One has to investigate the question how the features 
discussed here might depend on the supernova progenitor 
mass and possibly other parameters. Figure 5 shows also 
that °Co (decaying to °°Mn) and *’Fe (decaying to Cr) 
are products of incomplete Si-burning, while ~’Cu 
(decaying to *’Co) is resulting from alpha-rich freeze-out. 
As these nuclei are the only (or dominant) stable isotopes 
of the respective element, this fact could be related to the 
Mn, Cr, and Co/Fe ratios observed in galactic evolution 
and give clues to changing mass cut positions as a 
function of progenitor mass. 


2.05 


Figure 5. Isotopic composition for a core collapse supernova from a 20Mo progenitor star with a 6Mo He-core and a net explosion 
energy of 10°! erg, remaining in kinetic energy of the ejecta. The exact mass cut in M(r) between neutron star and ejecta depends on 


the details of the delayed explosion mechanism. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finally, the question has to be answered for which 
progenitor masses a large Fe-core at the end of stellar 
evolution leads the creation of a black hole instead of a 
neutron star and a supernova explosion. With SN 1998bw 
and SN 1997ef, which appear in optical spectra like core 
collapse supernovae, the transition to ‘hypernovae’ 
(failed supernovae which produce black holes and are 
probably powered by black hole accretion and jet 
ejection) is encountered. Their nucleosynthesis products 
have not yet been seriously analysed nor included in 
chemical evolution studies. 


Nucleosynthesis as a witness of uncertainties 

The synthesized elements form three different classes 
which are sensitive to different aspects of the stellar 
models and supernovae explosion mechanism: (1) stellar 
evolution treatment, (2) stellar evolution plus the 
explosion energy, and (3) details of the explosion 
mechanism which includes aspects of stellar evolution 
determining the size of the collapsing Fe-core. 

(1) The abundances of C, O, Ne, and Mg originate 
from the unaltered (essentially only hydrostatically 
processed) C-core and from explosive Ne/C-burning. 
They are mainly dependent on the structure and zone 
sizes of the pre-explosion models and thus serve as a test 
for the treatment of stellar evolution. These zones and 
therefore the amount of ejected mass varies strongly over 
the progenitor mass range. 

(2) The amount of mass for the elements S, Ar, and 
Ca, originating from explosive O- and Si-burning, is 
similar for all massive stars. They do not show the strong 
progenitor mass dependence of C, O, Ne, and Mg. Si has 
some contribution from hydrostatic burning and varies by 
a factor of 2-3. This second set (Si, S, Ar, Ca) tests the 
progenitor models and the explosion energy, because the 
amount of explosive burning depends on the structure of 
the model plus the energy of the shock wave which 
passes through it. 

(3) The amount of Fe-group nuclei ejected (which 
includes also one of the so-called alpha elements, i.e. Ti) 
and their relative composition depends directly on the 
explosion mechanism, connected also to the size of the 
collapsing Fe-core. Observational checks of individual 
supernovae are presently still required to test the detailed 
working of a supernova. Three types of uncertainties are 
inherent in the Fe-group ejecta, related to (i) the total 
amount of Fe(group) nuclei ejected and the mass cut 
between neutron star and ejecta, mostly measured by °°Ni 
decaying to ~Fe, (ii) the total explosion energy which 
influences the entropy of the ejecta and with it the degree 
of alpha-rich freeze-out from explosive Si-burning and 
the abundances of radioactive “Ti as well as “8Cr, the 
latter decaying later to ““Ti and being responsible for 
elemental Ti, and (iii) finally the neutron richness or Y, of 
the ejecta, dependent on stellar structure and the delay 
time between collapse and explosion. Y, influences 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


strongly the ratios of isotopes 57/56 in Ni(Co,Fe) and the 
overall elemental Ni/Fe ratio being dominated by **Ni 
and *°Fe. 

(4) r-process yields. SNe II have long been expected 
to be the source of r-process elements. Some recent 
calculations seemed to be able to reproduce the solar r- 
process abundances well in the high entropy neutrino 
driven wind, emitted from the hot proto-neutron star after 
the SN II explosion. However, we should keep in mind 
that present-day supernova models have difficulties to 
reproduce the entropies required for such abundance 
calculations. In addition, incorrect abundance features of 
lighter r-process nuclei are encountered. The inclusion of 
non-standard neutrino properties may perhaps achieve 
low enough Y,s, for intermediate entropies to correct for 
such unwanted features. However, recent observations 
shed also some doubts on the supernova origin. On 
average SNe II produce Fe to intermediate mass elements 
in ratios within a factor of 3 of solar. If they were also 
responsible for the r-process, the same limits should 
apply. But the observed bulk r-process/Fe ratios vary 
widely. In CS 22892-052 the r/Fe ratio is 30 times solar! 


Type Ia supernovae 

There are strong observational and theoretical indications 
that SNe Ia are thermonuclear explosions of accreting 
white dwarfs (see BINARY STARS: OVERVIEW). 
Theoretically, both (i) Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf 
models and (ii) sub-Chandrasekhar mass models have 
been considered. These correspond to a single white 
dwarf scenario, involving accretion of H or He via mass 
transfer from a binary companion onto the white dwarf. 
High rates of H-accretion cause high temperatures at the 
base of the accreted matter and lead to quasi-stable H- 
burning and subsequent He-burning in shells surrounding 
the white dwarf, probably related to supersoft x-ray 
sources. This increases the mass of the white dwarf 
consisting of C and O which approaches the maximum 
stable Chandrasekhar mass. In the case of He accretion at 
low rates, He detonates (supersonic burning front) at the 
base of the accreted layer before the system reaches the 
Chandrasekhar mass. A double white dwarf scenario is 
related to the merging of two C + O binary white dwarfs 
with a combined mass exceeding the Chandrasekhar 
limit. 

Observational features of SNe Ia in early phases 
clearly indicate that Chandrasekhar models give a more 
consistent picture than the sub-Chandrasekhar models of 
helium detonations. 


Ignition and burning front propagation 

For Chandrasekhar mass models contraction and carbon 
ignition in the central region lead to a thermonuclear 
runway and a complete explosive disruption of the white 
dwarf. High accretion rates cause a higher central 
temperature and pressure, favoring lower ignition 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


densities. A flame front then propagates at a subsonic 
speed as a deflagration wave due to heat transport across 
the front. Here the most uncertain quantity is the flame 
speed which depends on the development of instabilities 
of various scales at the flame front. Multi-dimensional 
hydro simulations of the flame propagation have 
suggested that a carbon deflagration wave might 
propagate at a speed vues as slow as a few per cent of the 
sound speed v, in the central region of the white dwarf. 
The nucleosynthesis consequences of such slow flame 
speeds witness the actual burning front velocities and can 
thus serve as a constraint. Electron capture on free 
protons, intermediate mass and Fe-group nuclei affects 
the central electron fraction Y., which determines the 
composition of the ejecta from such explosions. The 
amount of electron capture depends on both vyger 
(influencing the time duration of matter at high 
temperatures, and with it the availability of free protons) 
and the central density of the white dwarf pi,, (increasing 
the electron chemical potential i.e. their Fermi energy). 
After an initial deflagration in the central layers, the 
deflagration can tur into a detonation (supersonic 
burning front) at lower densities. The transition from a 
deflagration to a detonation (delayed detonation model) 
leads to a change in the ratios of incomplete Si-burning, 
complete Si-burning with normal freeze-out and with 
alpha-rich freeze-out, the latter being less alpha-rich than 
in SNe II due to the smaller entropies or higher densities. 
This also leaves an imprint on the Fe-group composition. 
Nucleosynthesis constraints can help to find the ‘average’ 
SN Ia conditions responsible for their contribution to 
galactic evolution, i.e. especially the Fe-group 
composition. SNe Ia contribute essentially no elements 
lighter than Al, about 3 of the elements from Si to Ca, and 
the dominant (50—70&percnt;) amount of Fe group nuclei 
(Ti to Ni). In addition, the average Fe-group yields of 
SNe II differ from those of SNe Ia (e.g. in the elemental 
Cr/Fe, Mn/Fe ratios). The latter fact, combined with O- 
Ca/Fe ratios, gives the strongest constraints on the 
transition density p,, from deflagrations to detonations. 


Nucleosynthesis consequences 

Figure 6 shows the influence of central ignition densities 
Pien 1.37 (C) and 2.12 x 10° g cm™ (W) at the onset of the 
thermonuclear runaway and slow (S) deflagration speeds 
of Vder/vs = 0.015 (WS15, CS15), 0.03 (WS30,CS30) or 
0.05 (CS50) on the resulting Yr) due to different 
amounts of electron capture. Y, values of 0.47—0.485 lead 
to dominant abundances of “Fe and **Ni, values between 
0.46 and 0.47 produce dominantly *°Fe, values in the 
range of 0.45 and below are responsible for “Fe, “Cr, 
Ti, “Ni, and values below 0.43—0.42 are responsible for 
48Ca. The intermediate Y,-values 0.47—0.485 exist in all 
cases, but the masses encountered which experience 
these conditions depend on the Y,-gradient determined by 
Vaer. Whether the lower values with Y, < 0.45 are attained 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


depends on the central ignition density pj... Therefore, 
“Fe and **Ni are indicators of var while “Fe, “Cr, *°Ti, 
Ni, and “*8Ca are a measure of Pign- Conclusions drawn 
from these results are that (i) Vaer in the range 1.5-3% of 
the sound speed is preferred, and (ii) ignition densities 
Pien < 2 X 10° g cm® provide apparently a better 
agreement with the solar abundances of very neutron-rich 
species (case C rather than W). The latter interpretation is 
changed somewhat with improved electron capture rates 
on pf-shell (Fe-group) nuclei. In either case the ignition 
densities are in agreement with identifying supersoft x- 
ray sources as SN Ia progenitor systems. Their high 


accretion rates (close to M = 10'Mo) would be in 
agreement with such ignition densities. 

If a deflagration turns into a detonation, the 
transition density p,, affects the total amount of Peni the 
intermediate mass elements Si-Ca, and the ratios of 
different explosive Si-burning regimes like alpha-rich 
freeze-out to incomplete Si-burning as seen in figure 7 
(indicated by “Ni versus “Fe plateaux). Light curve 
modeling and spectra show that the typical °°Ni mass 


should be in the range 0.5—0.7Mo, which compensates for 
the well known overproduction of Si-Ca/Fe in SNe II 
during galactic evolution with the observed Ia/II ratios in 
order to obtain a solar mix. 

Small transition densities favor larger amounts of 
matter which experience incomplete Si-burning. 
Observations require an overproduction of Mn (and Cr) 
in SNe Ia. These elements are mostly made as *°Co 
and °’*Fe (decaying to Mn and Cr), which are favorably 


BD TTT? 
50 
49 
48 
PAT 
A6 
45F 
44 


43 


00 05 15 “20 


-10 
M(r)/M, 
Figure 6. Y, as a function of radial mass coordinate M(r) after 
freeze-out of nuclear reactions measures the electron captures 
on free protons and nuclei. Small burning front velocities lead 
to steep Y.-gradients which flatten with increasing velocities 
(see the series of models CS15, CS30, and CS50 or WS15, 
WS30, and W7). Lower central ignition densities shift the 
curves up (C versus W), but the gradient is the same for the 
same propagation speed. Only when the Y, from electron 
captures is smaller than for stable Fe-group nuclei, will 
subsequent B -decays reverse this effect (WSL and WLAM). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Nucleosynthesis ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


WS15DDe 


Expansion Velocity (x10*kms“‘} 


Mass Fraction 


0.0 0.2 0.4 


Figure 7. Composition of model WS15DD2 as a function of the expansion velocity and M(r) for a delayed detonation model with a 
deflagration/detonation transition density of 2.2 x 10’ g cm °. We see intermediate mass elements (Si-Ca) in the outer layers (at 
higher expansion velocities after the explosion), *°Ni from explosive Si-burning dominating from about 0.2 to 1Mo, with features of 


incomplete Si-burning (**Fe-plateau) and an alpha-rich freeze-out (**Ni-plateau). The very central regions experience substantial 
electron capture and show more neutron rich nuclei (see figure 6). 


10° SRE A SL RA he a Ld MR 
if ETFSI—-Q 
f Aa. T.=1.35; n.=107 — 3*10?7 : 
10' fy : . z 
aii 
r Ih hy 7] 
10° = i t 5 q 
MI as i J : 

L if #b i f 


Solar r—abundance 


3 
UR 
TTT TT 
— 
. 
ek 


10° Loviosssetes Mal 
60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 
Mass number A 


Figure 8. Comparison of theoretical abundances prior to and after B- and a-decay with solar r-process abundances (small filled 
circles). For A > 206 two superpositions are shown, obtained from fitting either the three r-process peaks or the global mass region A 
= 125-209 with r-process calculations obtained from 17 equidistant S,(7,,7) components between 1 and 4 MeV. Both calculations 
make use of the ETFSI-Q mass model which assumes a quenching of shell effects far from stability. 


produced in incomplete Si-burning. Combining all 

requirements on transition densities from total “°Ni- The r-process 

yields, Si/Fe and Ia/II ratios, as well as specific elements The site-independent classical analysis based on neutron 

favored in incomplete Si-burning, argues for a transition number densities n,, temperatures 7, and duration times t 

density close to 2 x 10° gcem™. assumed constant values of n, and T and a fast drop of 
these quantities at t = t. The combination of , and T is 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 9 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


related to an r-process path in the nuclear chart along 
nuclei with a neutron separation energy S,(”,,7) or 
neutron capture Q-value (see figure 3 in the article on 
NUCLEAR PROPERTIES). A continuous superposition of 
components with neutron separation energies in the range 
4-1 MeV on timescales of 1—2.5 s, provides a good 
overall fit (see figure 8). For the heavier elements beyond 
A = 130 this reduces to about S, = 3-1 MeV. The beta- 
decay properties along contour lines of constant S, 
towards heavy nuclei are responsible for the resulting 
abundance pattern. These are predominantly very 
unstable nuclei not accessible in laboratory experiments 
to date. A recent detailed analysis of the A = 206-209 
abundance contributions to Pb and Bi isotopes from a- 
decay chains of heavier nuclei also allows the prediction 
of abundances of nuclei as heavy as Th with reasonable 
accuracy. The results of this study are shown in figure 8. 

A different question is related to the actual 
astrophysical realization of such conditions. Stellar 
spectra of low metallicity stars, stemming from the very 
early phases of galactic evolution, are all consistent with 
a solar r-abundance pattern for elements heavier than Ba, 
and the relative abundances among heavy elements do 
not apparently show any time evolution. This suggests 
that all contributing events produce the same relative r- 
process abundances for the heavy masses, although a 
single astrophysical site will still have varying conditions 
in different ejected mass zones, leading to a superposition 
of individual components. The physical conditions must 
vary smoothly, as expected from a single astrophysical 
site. (This is opposite to the s-process, where the solar 
abundances are only an average of many sites with 
different features.) 

Some meteoritic abundances and very recent 
observations of low metallicity stars indicate that at least 
two r-process sources have to contribute to the solar r- 
process abundances. The observed non-solar r-process 
pattern for e.g. Ag, I, and Pd demonstrates the need for a 
second r-process component in the nuclear mass range A 
= 80-120 in addition to the main process which provides 
a solar r-process pattern for A > 130. It is not clear, yet, 
which of the two processes is related to SNe II and which 
one is related to possible other sources. 

To identify possible stellar sites, the basic 
requirement is a surplus of 10 to 150 neutrons per seed 
nucleus (in the Fe-peak or somewhat beyond) which have 
to be available to form all heavier r-process nuclei by 
neutron capture. For a composition of Fe-group nuclei 
and free neutrons that translates into a Y, = 0.12-0.3. 
Such a high neutron excess is only possible for high 
densities in neutron stars under beta equilibrium (e + p 
>nt+v,n—>pt+e + v), based on high electron Fermi 
energies which are comparable to the neutron—proton 
mass difference. Neutron star mergers from binary 
neutron star systems eject such matter and are a possible 
(low entropy) site. Recent calculations show that on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


average about 10°°Mo of neutron-rich matter can be 
ejected and preliminary calculations with assumptions on 
Y, predict a solar-type r-process pattern for nuclei beyond 
A = 130. The smaller masses are depleted due to a long 
duration r-process with a large neutron supply in such 
neutron-rich matter, which also leads to fission cycling. 
This seems (accidentally?) to be in accordance with the 
main observed r-process component. Given the frequency 
(=10° y' per galaxy) and amount of ejected matter, this 
component alone could be responsible for the heavy solar 
I-process pattern and also explain the large scatter of r/Fe 
elements found in low metallicity stars. Neutron star— 
black hole mergers have not been analysed yet with the 
same accuracy, but bear similar options. 

Another option is an extremely alpha-rich (i.e. high 
entropy) freeze-out in complete Si-burning with 
moderate Y, > 0.40, related to SNe II. Given the galactic 
occurrence frequency, SNe II would need to eject 


~10-°Mo per event. Explaining the r-process by ejecta of 
SNe II faces two difficulties: (i) whether the required 
entropies can really be attained in supernova explosions 
has still to be verified, (ii) the mass region 80-110 cannot 
be reproduced adequately. It has to be seen whether the 
inclusion of non-standard neutrino properties can cure 
both difficulties. It is also possible that none of this very 
high entropy matter escapes the neutron star surface and 
that outer mass zones in explosive He-burning introduce 
a ‘fast’ s-process, also dubbed an n-process, which just 
supplies the lower mass region (A < 120), missing or 
underproduced in some of the low metallicity stars, with 
the strongest r-process pollution. We should keep in mind 
that the question whether we understand fully all 
astrophysical sites leading to an r-process is not a settled 
one. 


Conclusions 
After an introduction into hydrostatic and explosive 
burning, the working of nucleosynthesis in general and 
its mathematical description, this overview concentrated 
on astrophysical sites or nucleosynthesis processes in the 
big bang, low and intermediate mass stars, type II and 
type Ia supernovae and analysed the options and sites of 
r-process nucleosynthesis. These are the major 
contributions to galactic chemical evolution. 
Nucleosynthesis calculations have a right on their 
own to predict abundance patterns for many stellar 
events, but they can also serve as a tool to test the 
correctness of model descriptions, either in comparison 
to direct observations or indirect information from 
galactic evolution. We tried to show especially for SNe 
Ia and II how specific isotopic abundances can test 
ignition densities, burning front speeds, 
deflagration/detonation transitions or explosion energies 
(entropies), temperatures and delay times between 
collapse and explosion. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Nucleosynthesis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


There exist other nucleosynthesis sites not 
mentioned here, e.g. (i) the p or y process (explosive 
neon burming in possibly both types of supernovae, 
producing proton-rich stable nuclei via 
photodisintegration from pre-existing heavy nuclei), or 
events in binary systems like (ii) novae (small hydrogen 
accretion rates onto a white dwarf and explosive ejection 
of the accreted layer), and (iii) x-ray bursts (hydrogen 
accretion onto a neutron star and explosive processing of 
the accreted layer). With the possible exception of '°N, 
°°Al and other proton-rich nuclei lighter than S (in novae) 
or possibly some of the hard-to-make p-process nuclei in 
the range of Sr and Mo (in x-ray bursts), neither novae 
nor x-ray bursts are primary nucleosynthesis sites. This is 
due to the small or negligible amounts of ejected mass. 
The energy in x-ray bursts might not be at all sufficient to 
overcome the gravitational potential. But in all of these 
cases there exists very interesting nuclear physics on the 
proton-rich side of stability (rp-process), which is 
important to understand these explosive astrophysical 
events. 


Bibliography 

Arnett W D 1996 Nucleosynthesis and Supernovae (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Grevesse N and Sauval A J 1998 Standard solar composition 
Space Sci. Rev. 85 161-74 

Iwamoto K et al 1999 Nucleosynthesis in Chandrasekhar mass 
models for type Ia supernovae Astrophys. J. Suppl. 125 
439-62 

Kappeler F, Thielemann F-K and Wiescher M 1998 Current 
quests in nuclear astrophysics and experimental 
approaches Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. S. 48 175-251 

Kratz K-L, Pfeiffer B and Thielemann F-K 1998 Nuclear- 
structure input to r-process calculations Nuc/. Phys. A 630 
352-67 

Schatz H et al 1998 rp-process nucleosynthesis at extreme 
temperature and density conditions Phys. Rep. 294 167-— 
264 

Van Eck S, Goriely S, Jorissen A and Plez B 2001 Discovery of 
three lead-rich stars Nature 412 793-795 

Wallerstein G et al 1997 Synthesis of the elements in stars: 
forty years of progress Rev. Mod. Phys. 69 995-1084 

Woosley S E and Weaver T A 1995 The evolution and 
explosion of massive stars Astrophys. J. Suppl. 101 181- 
235 


F-K Thielemann 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nuffield Radio Astronomy 
Laboratories 


The Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories are a part of 
the University of Manchester’s Department of Physics and 
Astronomy. They are located at Jodrell Bank in Cheshire, 
UK. 

In 1945, while it still functioned as the university’s 
botanical station, the site was used by Bernard Lovell 
to observe cosmic rays. The radio echoes he detected 
were soon found to come from meteors burning up in the 
atmosphere. 

Under the initiative of Lovell and engineer Charles 
Husband, the world’s largest fully steerable telescope was 
completed in 1957. One of its first tasks was to use radar 
to track Sputnik 1, the world’s first artificial satellite, and 
its rocket’s upper stage. It was then in great demand 
for sending and receiving telemetry from US and Soviet 
satellites, particularly lunar and planetary missions. 

Through a donation by Lord Nuffield and the 
Nuffield Foundation, the debts outstanding on the 
telescope’s construction were cleared. The Jodrell 
Bank Experimental Station then became Nuffield Radio 
Astronomy Laboratories. On the telescope’s thirtieth 
anniversary in 1987, the 76 m Mark I telescope was 
renamed the Lovell Radio Telescope. 

Small portable telescopes were later linked to the 
Mark I telescope by microwave radio links to create a radio 
interferometer. These instruments played a major role in 
the discovery of quasars in the early 1960s. 

The parabolic 38 x 25 m MKII telescope, completed 
in 1964, was built to a similar design to the Goonhilly 1 
telescope which received the first TV signals relayed by 
the Telstar satellite across the Atlantic. It was the first 
telescope of any type in the world to be controlled by a 
digital computer, the Ferranti Argus 100. 

In 1976, work began on the building of a 134 km array 
of telescopes linked by microwave radio links to Jodrell 
Bank. Three new 25 m telescopes were built to add to 
the MKII, MKIII and Defford telescopes already operated 
by Jodrell Bank. These were located at Knockin, near 
Oswestry, Pickmere, north of Northwich, and Darnhall, 
south of Winsford. 

In the early 1990s the array, now called MERLIN, was 
extended to include a new 32 m telescope at Cambridge. 
It can be linked to other observatories around the world 
for VLBI studies. 

Current research at Jodrell Bank includes studies 
of stars, pulsars, galaxies, quasars, gravitational lenses, 
cosmic microwave background and SETI. 

For further information see 
http://www.jb.man.ac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Numerical Simulation of Stellar Convection: Compar- 
ison with Mixing-length Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Numerical Simulation of Stellar 
Convection: Comparison with 
Mixing-length Theory 


The energy released by nuclear fusion in the STELLAR 
INTERIOR is carried to the surface by two different transport 
mechanisms, radiation and convection. In the presence of 
a temperature gradient, there is always a net radiative 
energy flux since more photons travel from hot to cool 
regions than in the other direction. If the temperature 
gradient exceeds a certain threshold, convection sets in. 
The resulting large-scale circulation of hot rising and cool 
sinking gas constitutes a very efficient mode of energy 
transport, usually dominating over radiation. 

While an elaborate theory of RADIATIVE TRANSFER is 
well established, a rigorous theory of stellar convection 
is lacking due to the complexity of the underlying 
hydrodynamical problem. So far, stellar structure models 
still rely on a phenomenological approximation, the so 
called mixing-length theory (MLT). However, radiation 
hydrodynamics simulations based on first principles can 
now provide physically consistent ab initio models of 
stellar convection which can serve to check the validity 
of MLT. 


Stellar convection 
Convection is a universal feature: essentially all types of 
stars have either a convective core, a convective envelope, 
or both. Low-mass stars are fully convective, giants may 
accommodate several distinct convective shells. In the 
case of the Sun, the energy transport in the inner parts 
is entirely due to radiation (radiative layers), while in the 
outer 28.7% (in radius) it is primarily due to large-scale 
convective currents. At the surface, the solar granulation 
is the visible imprint of gas flows in the outermost layers of 
the convection zone (See SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE). 
The role of stellar convection is far-reaching: convec- 
tive energy transport determines the internal temperature 
structure of a star and its radius (which decreases with 
increasing convective efficiency), and hence controls the 
star’s global properties. Convective regions are chemically 
completely mixed, and overshooting convective flows lead 
to partial mixing of the adjacent radiative layers. ‘Over- 
shoot’ and similar mixing processes which are not con- 
fined to the convectively unstable layers are thought to be 
responsible for the existence of carbon stars, carbon-rich 
white dwarfs, and for the destruction of lithium in solar- 
type stars. Convective motions and concomitant temper- 
ature inhomogeneities exert a direct influence on stellar 
spectra, causing small but practically relevant changes in 
wavelength position, shape and strength of spectral lines. 
Stochastic convective motions can excite stellar oscillations 
(like the five-minute oscillations in the Sun) and are a 
source of acoustic energy, contributing to the heating of 
stellar chromospheres. In combination with DIFFERENTIAL 
ROTATION, convection is a necessary precondition for the 
operation of the magnetic dynamo mechanism, and hence 
for STELLAR ACTIVITY. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Schwarzschild criterion 

A region in a star is convectively unstable if a gas 
element which is displaced from its equilibrium position 
is further accelerated due to buoyancy forces. In 1906, 
K Schwarzschild discovered that this situation occurs 
whenever the temperature stratification is superadiabatic, 
ie. dInT/dInP > (dInT/dInP)aqg, where T and 
P denote temperature and gas pressure, respectively 
(Schwarzschild criterion). For stellar applications (inviscid 
fluids), this is the necessary and sufficient condition for 
convective instability of a chemically homogeneous layer. 
In terms of the specific entropy, s, the criterion can be 
rewritten as ds/dz < 0, implying convective instability 
wherever entropy of the gas decreases with height, z. 

In the envelope of stars, convective instability is 
favored by large radiative opacities (steep radiative 
temperature gradient) and large specific heats (small 
adiabatic temperature gradient). This situation is found 
particularly in regions where an abundant element 
(hydrogen or helium) is partially ionized. Convective 
instability also occurs in the core of main-sequence stars 
more massive than ~1.3 times the Sun, where the strong 
temperature dependence of nuclear fusion rates leads to 
very steep temperature gradients. 

For a given stellar structure, the Schwarzschild 
criterion can be used to determine the location of 
convective regions. However, it does not give any 
information about the properties of the corresponding 
convection zone, like flow velocities and convective 
energy flux. Moreover, since convection changes the 
thermal structure, the boundaries of the unstable region 
depend on the convective efficiency. In addition to the 
Schwarzschild criterion, a theory of convection is required 
to compute the structure of stellar convection zones in a 
self-consistent way. 


Mixing-length theory 

As a ‘first approximation’, the mixing-length theory was 
developed mainly by Biermann (1932), Cowling (1935), 
Vitense (1953), and B6hm-Vitense (1958). The underlying 
picture is that of turbulent elements (‘bubbles’) moving 
relative toa mean background stratification. Inan unstable 
region, elements accelerated upwards gain an excess of 
thermal energy, while downward moving elements cool 
relative to their surroundings. After traveling some 
characteristic distance, £, the ‘bubbles’ are assumed to 
dissolve completely. The mixing length, ¢, determines the 
mean flow velocity, the typical amplitude of horizontal 
temperature fluctuations and the resulting convective 
energy flux. 

This simplistic formalism is unsatisfactory in several 
respects. First of all, the mixing length, £, which is 
usually expressed as £ = aH, (where the local pressure 
scale height, H,, measures the distance over which the 
gas pressure changes by a factor e~'), is a free parameter. 
The mixing-length parameter a is a priori unknown and 
must be determined empirically; its value may depend on 
stellar type. Moreover, MLT is a local theory: convection 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Numerical Simulation of Stellar Convection: Compar- 
ison with Mixing-length Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is restricted to the unstable region as defined by the 
Schwarzschild criterion, and the transport properties 
of convection are assumed to depend only on local 
thermodynamic variables and their local gradient. But 
actually convection is non-local: the velocity of a gas 
element at some point, for example, is determined by the 
acceleration it has experienced before along its path, not by 
local conditions. Obviously, MLT is not based on sound 
physical principles, and some of the basic assumptions 
are not even valid in real stars. Still, almost all current 
stellar evolution models rely on this phenomenological 
‘theory’. The same holds for modeling convective STELLAR 
ATMOSPHERES. 


Numerical simulations 

The differential equations governing the physics of stellar 
convection are well known but difficult to solve: these 
are the conservation equations of hydrodynamics, coupled 
with the equations of radiative transfer. While their 
highly nonlinear and non-local character precludes an 
adequate analytical treatment, the numerical integration 
of the system of partial differential equations has now 
become feasible. This approach constitutes an increasingly 
powerful method to study in detail the time-dependent 
properties of a radiating, partially ionized fluid under 
stellar conditions. 

Using modern supercomputers, it is possible today 
to perform three-dimensional numerical simulations of 
stellar convection with realistic background physics 
(equation of state, radiative opacities). Although such 
simulations are usually confined to a small section near the 
surface, even two-dimensional convection models require 
substantial amounts of computer time, particularly for 
solving the multidimensional, non-local radiative transfer 
problem in several wavelength bands, taking into account 
the influence of spectral lines. In order to yield meaningful 
information, the simulated time sequence must be long 
enough to ensure relaxation towards a statistical steady 
state which is independent of initial conditions. Also, the 
horizontal size of the computational domain must be large 
enough to accommodate at least two ‘convection cells’. 

Just like ‘classical’ stellar atmospheres, the hydrody- 
namical models are characterized by the average total en- 
ergy flux per unit area and time F (related to the effective 
temperature of the stellar atmosphere To via F = ols, 
o being the Stefan—Boltzmann constant), surface gravity g, 
and chemical composition. But in contrast to the mixing- 


theory, and for a quantitative comparison of the average 
transport properties. 

While the granules (‘bubbles’) seen at the solar 
surface have a typical size (dominant contribution to 
area coverage) of +1000 km, the ‘bubbles’ considered in 
mixing-length models have a size of the order of aHp, 
which is about five times smaller. Clearly, the MLT 
concept of single-sized ‘bubbles’ must not be taken too 
literally. On the other hand, the numerical convection 
models are capable of reproducing the size distribution 
of solar granules and other statistical properties rather 
well. As these models teach us, the typical granule size is 
determined by a complex interplay of nonlinear dynamics 
and radiative energy exchange. 

According to the simulations, the dynamics of 
convection is dominated by fast, cool, narrow downdrafts 
(sometimes also called ‘plumes’ or ‘jets’), embedded in 
much more extended, slowly ascending, warm material 
(granules). This pronounced up/down asymmetry is 
a general feature of the numerical models (2D as well 
as 3D), and is seen for all types of stars investigated 
so far. Obviously, this result is in stark contrast to the 
picture of MLT: instead of ‘bubbles’ traveling for about one 
pressure scale height before dissolving, we actually have 
deep-reaching ‘jets’ surviving over many Hp, possibly 
extending all the way to the base of even deep convective 


z [Mm] 


length models, there is no longer any free parameter to 0 5 10 
adjust the efficiency of the convective energy transport. x [Mm] 
Similarly, spatial and temporal scales are not imposed on 
the simulations, but rather develop naturally as a conse- 
quence of the underlying equations. 


Figure 1. Snapshot from a 2D simulation of convection in an A-type star (Tog = 80 
two separate convection zones. The unstable regions (ds/dz < 0,5 being the horiz 
gray. The velocity field is represented by pseudo streamlines, indicating the displ 
velocity 15.4 km s~! at this moment); the thermal structure is outlined by tempera 
levels of constant optical depth (rt = 0.01, 1, 100, 1000). Geometrical height z = 0c 
non-local, multidimensional radiative energy exchange and partial ionization. Th 
zone; lateral boundaries are periodic. The ‘dents’ seen at the ‘surface’ (z = 0) are tl 
intergranular lanes. (From Freytag et al (1996)). 


MLT versus hydrodynamics 

Time-dependent numerical simulations of stellar convec- 
tion can be used for a qualitative comparison with the ba- 
sic picture and assumptions underlying the mixing-length 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Numerical Simulation of Stellar Convection: Compar- 
ison with Mixing-length Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


envelopes. The downward ‘jets’ originate and are 
accelerated in the stellar surface layers, which are highly 
unstable (steep temperature gradient, density inversion) 
as a consequence of efficient radiative cooling. Since 
their temperature deficit relative to the surroundings is 
determined by the efficiency of surface cooling, convection 
is an extremely non-local process. The properties of 
the surface determine the dynamics and structure of the 
whole convection zone. Certainly, the inherently ‘linear’ 
approach enforcing symmetry between up and down, as 
well as the assumption of locality, are the major problems 
with MLT. 

A variety of observations (e.g. the fact that the 
granulation is still visible at the solar limb, corresponding 
to optical depths t < 0.3), and numerical simulations 
indicate that convective flows are not limited to the 
Schwarzschild-unstable regions, but rather must penetrate 
into the adjacent stable layers by some amount. Though 
not inherent in MLT, the problem of ‘overshoot’ was first 
recognized, considered and discussed in the original work 
by Vitense (1953). There is no simple rule to predict the 
amount of ‘overshoot’, since it depends on the nature of 
the particular convective boundary under consideration. 

The role of ‘overshoot’ is illustrated in figure 1. In 
this A-type main sequence star there are two distinct 
convection zones: the one at the surface is driven by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the combined first ionization of hydrogen and helium, 
the deeper one is related to the second ionization of 
helium. Although the Schwarzschild-unstable regions 
are separated by a stable radiative layer extending over 
more than two pressure scale heights, they are effectively 
connected by vigorous convective currents; the stable 
buffer layer is completely mixed, in contrast to MLT 
predictions. 

It is a physical property of overshoot that the 
pressure field that serves to drive the motions in the 
unstable regions extends far into the stable layers and 
accelerates the fluid there, even though the thermal 
stratification is convectively stable. The hydrodynamical 
simulations demonstrate that the velocity field due to 
overshooting declines exponentially with distance from 
the Schwarzschild boundary. In the example of figure 1, 
the velocity scale height below the He II convection zone 
is H, © 0.3H,. ‘Overshoot’ above the surface convection 
zone is the explanation for ‘microturbulence’ and the 
asymmetry of spectral lines; it cools the upper photosphere 
slightly below radiative equilibrium temperatures. 

In order to achieve agreement between observed 
and computed stars (isochrone fitting), stellar evolution 
models have to include some amount of ‘overshoot’, which 
is usually implemented by introducing another parameter, 
dover, Specifying the distance (in terms of H,) by which 
convection penetrates into the stable layers. This empirical 
approach ignores the hydrodynamical results indicating 
that ‘overshoot’ is characterized by an exponential velocity 
field causing (partial) diffusive mixing. 

A quantitative comparison of mixing-length models 
and averaged results from numerical simulations has been 
performed for various stellar types, including the Sun, A- 
type main sequence stars and DA wnite pbwarrs. The result 
is similar in all cases: no single choice of a can produce 
a detailed match of the structure of the hydrodynamical 
models in the framework of MLT. Adjusting # can only 
serve to fit particular properties, like maximum convective 
flux or maximum convective velocity, but it is impossible 
to reproduce the depth dependence of these quantities 
correctly. This point is illustrated in figure 2: while a = 1.5 
gives the correct maximum enthalpy flux, Fi max, MLT fails 
to match the flux profile F;,(z) even roughly. Amuch larger 
a would be required to reproduce the correct depth of 
the convection zone (F, > 0). This result resolves an 
apparent inconsistency which arises when modeling zz 
ceTr stars (a class of non-radially pulsating white dwarfs) 
with MLT. The observed spectrum (atmospheric structure) 
is best described adopting a moderate value of a ~ 1.5, 
but at the same time a large convective efficiency (a > 2.5) 
is required for driving the observed pulsations of these 
stars. Note that the simulations show a distinct region 
of negative (downward) F,—due to ‘penetration’ into the 
stable layers—and a significant negative kinetic energy 
flux. Both these features are missing in MLT. 

While it seems hopeless to successfully model the 
structure of the superadiabatic surface layers within the 
framework of MLT, it is possible to calibrate MLT through 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Numerical Simulation of Stellar Convection: Compar- 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ison with Mixing-length Theory 


0.60F T T 


enhalpy flux 
——— kinetic energy flux 


Figure 2. Comparison of the enthalpy flux, F,, predicted by 
MLT for different w and a 2D hydrodynamical simulation for the 
outer layers of a DA white dwarf (Teg = 12 200 K, log g = 8.0 
[cgs units]). The flux of kinetic energy, which is ignored in MLT, 
is negative (downward) according to the simulation. (Adapted 
from Freytag et al (1996)). 


hydrodynamical simulations for application to STELLAR 
EVOLUTION. The key quantity here is the entropy jump, As*, 
from the surface to the interior, which can be ‘measured’ 
from the simulations. MLT can then be calibrated by 
adjusting a to produce the given As*. This procedure gives 
the correct adiabat and depth of the convective envelope, 
as verified for the Sun by comparison with helioseismic 
measurements. 

For a sample of ‘solar-type’ stars, the result of this 
calibration is shown in figure 3. It is the first theoretical 
prediction of how the mixing-length parameter a depends 
on stellar type. According to this calibration (which needs 
to be verified by 3D hydrodynamics), the variation of a 
over the investigated region of the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL 
DIAGRAM is only moderate (from 1.8 to 1.2 for spectral type K 
to F). Certainly, this is one of the reasons for the surprising 
success of MLT over the past 40 years. 

There have been many attempts to improve MLIT. 
A recent example is the CGM model (Canuto, Goldman 
and Mazzitelli 1996), which accounts for the full spectrum 
of eddy sizes in a turbulent flow and adopts a mixing- 
length of the form = 7+ ¢H »°P where z is the distance 
to the (nearest) Schwarzschild boundary and ¢ is a free 
parameter related to ‘overshoot’. In comparison with 
MLT, CGM makes efficient convection more efficient and 
inefficient convection less efficient, implying that the 
variation of ¢ across the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram is 
even smaller than that of aw. Further claims that CGM is 
superior to MLT need to be verified. It is highly doubtful, 
however, that convection can be properly described in 
terms of classical turbulence, since the basic assumptions 
typically made in these models are found to be violated in 
the hydrodynamical simulations: in a stratified medium, 
large-scale motion is strongly anisotropic while small-scale 
turbulence is confined to the downdrafts and contributes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


N 
lou 


5500 5000 4500 
Tett [K] 


ee ia 


eae 
7000 6500 6000 


Figure 3. Calibration of the mixing-length theory for stellar 
evolution calculations based on 2D hydrodynamical simulations 
of surface convection. Symbols indicate that at least one 
simulation has been performed for the corresponding stellar 
parameters. For each simulation, an effective mixing-length 
parameter a has been determined from a differential comparison 
with MLT models. Contour lines, labeled with the respective 
value of a, visualize the derived variation of a as a function of 
Teg and log g (From Ludwig et al (1999)). 


little to the energy transport, which is dominated by scales 
exceeding the local pressure scale height by an order of 
magnitude. 


Further details can be found in the article on SOLAR 
INTERIOR: CONVECTION THEORY. 


Bibliography 

Biermann L 1932 Untersuchungen tiber den inneren 
Aufbau der Sterne. IV. Konvektionszonen im Inneren 
der Sterne Z. Astrophys. 5 117 

Bohm-Vitense E 1958 Uber die Wasserstoffkonvektion- 
szone in Sternen verschiedener Effektivtemperaturen 
und Leuchtkrafte Z. Astrophys. 46 108 

Canuto V M, Goldman I and Mazzitelli 1 1996 Stellar turbu- 
lent convection: a self-consistent model Astrophys. J. 
473 550 

Cowling T G 1935 The stability of gaseous stars Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 96 42 

Freytag B, Ludwig H-G and Steffen M 1996 Hydrodynami- 
cal models of stellar convection Astron. Astrophys. 313 
497 

Gimenez A, Guinan E F and Montesinos B (ed) 1999 Theory 
and Tests of Convection in Stellar Structure (Astron. Soc. 
Pacific Conf. Ser. 173) 

Ludwig H-G, Freytag B and Steffen M 1999 A calibration 
of the mixing-length for solar-type stars based on 
hydrodynamical simulations Astron. Astrophys. 346 
111 

Ludwig H-G, Jordan S and Steffen M 1994 Numerical 
simulations of convection at the surface of a ZZ Ceti 
white dwarf Astron. Astrophys. 284 105 

Schwarzschild K 1906 Uber das Gleichgewicht der 
Sonnenatmosphare Gottinger Nachr. 1 41 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Numerical Simulation of Stellar Convection: Compar- 
ison with Mixing-length Theory 


Spruit H C, Nordlund A and Title A M 1990 Solar 
convection Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 28 263 

Stein R F and Nordlund A 1998 Simulations of solar 
granulation. I. General properties Astrophys. J. 499 914 

Vitense E 1953 Die Wasserstoffkonvektionszone der Sonne 
Z. Astrophys. 32 135 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Matthias Steffen and Stefan Jordan 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Nutation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nutation 


Short-period oscillations in the long-term motion of the 
pole of rotation of a rotating body that is being acted on 
by external perturbing forces. In the case of the Earth, 
the gravitational attractions of the Sun and Moon on 
its equatorial bulge causes the direction of its axis, and 
hence the positions of the celestial poles, to revolve slowly 
around the pole of the ecliptic (the points on the celestial 
sphere 90° away from the ecliptic), this phenomenon being 
called precession. Because the orbital plane of the Moon 
is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic by an angle of 
about 5°, and revolves round the Earth in a period of 18.6 
years, an additional small oscillation in the position of the 
celestial poles is superimposed on the general precessional 
motion. The effect of this additional motion is to cause 
the Earth’s poles (and hence the celestial poles) to tilt, or 
‘nod’, periodically toward and away from the poles of the 
ecliptic, the term ‘nutation’ deriving from this ‘nodding’ 
motion. The magnitude of this nutational motion is about 
9 arcsec, and its period of oscillation is 18.6 years. Nutation 
also gives rise to a corresponding periodic variation in the 
obliquity of the ecliptic. 


See also: celestial poles, ecliptic, node, obliquity of the 
ecliptic, precession. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


OB Associations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


OB Associations 


The term OB association is used to describe a large 
collection of gas and young stars (O-type and B-type) 
located primarily in the disk of sprRAL GALAXIES. There is 
a great variance of size and star number among these 
associations, from ten stars or fewer at the lower end up to 
tens of thousands of stars. The latter case is sometimes 
referred to as an OB superassociation (NGC 206 in the 
ANDROMEDA GALAXY, for example). 

OB associations are among the least dense of the 
STAR CLUSTERS. Most OB associations lack the structure and 
central compactness present in the more easily discernible 
GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. In some cases, the overpopulation of 
O-type and B-type stars is the only factor that allows 
the association to be distinguished from the remaining 
stars in its vicinity. Because of this lack of structure, OB 
associations fall within the category of open clusters. 

There is a considerable difficulty in studying a 
complete sample of OB associations in our own galaxy. 
This difficulty arises from the fact that OB associations, 
as well as the other types of open clusters, are highly 
concentrated toward the GALACTIC PLANE. This means that 
the more distant OB associations in our galaxy will most 
likely be obscured by dust. As a result, studying the 
distribution of OB associations in other nearby galaxies 
allows us to learn more about the probable distribution of 
such associations in the Milky Way. 

One of the most important roles for OB associations 
in the field of astronomy is to act as tracers for both current 
and recent massive STAR FORMATION. In other words, regions 
where OB associations are found are interpreted as areas 
where massive stars are currently being formed or have 
just recently been formed. If knowledge can be gained 
regarding the environments in which OB associations tend 
to be found, then that knowledge should directly lead 
toward what environments trigger massive star formation. 

Determining the most accurate description for the 
dimension and content of any OB association requires 
knowledge about the spectral type of each potential 
member star. For our own galaxy, as well as other nearby 
galaxies, this is at least within the realm of possibility. It 
should be noted that nearby galaxies with small inclination 
angles are preferred, since this minimizes complications 
due to projection effects. For galaxies that are more distant, 
only signatures from the associations as a whole can be 
detected. This can be done from the actual stars themselves 
(ultraviolet light) or from the gas surrounding the stars 
as it becomes excited (Ha emission). It should be noted 
that while all OB associations will have an overdensity 
of O-type and B-type stars by definition, some may be of 
sufficient age that they will not have a detectable amount 
of gas remaining around them. 

Current research is being done to locate OB 
associations both in the Milky Way and in other nearby 
galaxies. Information from both catalogs, such as HIPPARCOS 
AND TYCHO CATALOGUES, and observations, including some 
from the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE, is being used in these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


projects. This research is very important to the 
understanding of the distribution of OB associations and 
the environments in which massive stars are most likely 
to form. 


Robert Mohr 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oberon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oberon 


A mid-sized satellite of Uranus, discovered by William 
Herschel in 1787. Its diameter is 1520 km and it orbits at 
a distance of 191000 km. The images of Oberon obtained 
by Voyager 2 were not clear, but were enough to show an 
extensively cratered surface, some craters surrounded by 
bright ejecta or rays, and some with dark floors, possibly 
a result of the eruption of water ice mixed with organic 
material. The largest crater is the 206 km diameter Hamlet. 
An 11 km mountain peak, possibly the central peak of an 
impact basin, was visible on the limb. The preponderance 
of craters suggest that this is an ancient surface, largely 
undisturbed by geological activity, save for the 500 km 
muted fault feature Mommur Chasma. One hemisphere 
is rather redder than the other, perhaps as a result of dust 
accumulated from the two small outer retrograde satellites 
of Uranus. Like most of Uranus’s satellites, Oberon has 
captured rotation, so the dust would be swept up by the 
leading hemisphere. 


See also: Uranus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oberth, Hermann (1894-1989) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oberth, Hermann (1894-1989) 


German space travel visionary, born in Sibiu, Hungary. 
His book Die Rakete zu den Planetenramen (The Rocket into 
Interplanetary Space), established his reputation in 1923, 
and he became president of the German Society for Space 
Travel. In the Second World War he worked on rockets at 
Peenemtinde, and went with WERNHER VON BRAUN to the US 
Army Ballistic Missile Agency in Huntsville, Alabama to 
develop rockets in the American space program. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Objective Lens 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Objective Lens 


The principal lens of a refracting telescope, which collects 
light from a distant object and forms an image of the 
object at its focus, or focal plane. The objective lens, or 
objective, is also known as the object glass (OG) because, 
ina telescope, it is the lens nearest to the object that is being 
imaged. 

The simplest form of objective is a single biconvex 
lens in which the curvature of each face corresponds 
to part of a sphere, the radius of which is called the 
radius of curvature. A ray of light passing through the 
center of the lens, perpendicular to its surface, passes 
through undeviated. Rays entering other parts of the lens 
meet its surface at an angle to the perpendicular and are 
refracted (deflected) so as to converge together and form 
an image. A simple objective lens of this kind suffers 
from a number of optical defects, or aberrations, notably 
spherical aberration (an inability to bring rays that enter 
different parts of the lens to the same focal point) and 
chromatic aberration (an inability to bring all wavelengths, 
or colors, to a focus at the same point). Chromatic 
aberration arises because different wavelengths of light 
are refracted by differing amounts, shorter wavelengths 
(e.g. blue) being refracted more than longer wavelengths 
(e.g. red). Consequently, blue light is brought to a focus 
closer to the lens than red light and the focal points for 
the various different colors lie at different points along the 
optical axis (the line that passes perpendicularly through 
the center of the lens). The range of focal points for light of 
different wavelengths is called the longitudinal chromatic 
aberration, or secondary spectrum. 

Both of these aberrations are considerably reduced 
by the achromatic lens, a compound lens consisting of two 
components, each made of different kinds of glass with 
different optical properties. The combination of two lenses 
is called an achromatic doublet. An achromatic doublet 
normally consists of a converging (biconvex) lens, usually 
made of crown glass, and a diverging lens (usually plano- 
concave: concave on the front surface and flat on the back), 
usually made of flint glass. The radii of curvature are 
chosen so that the positive spherical aberration introduced 
by one component is to some extent cancelled by the 
negative spherical aberration induced by the other. The 
different dispersive powers (ability to refract different 
wavelengths by differing amounts) of the two types of 
glass are used to minimize the spread of focal positions. An 
achromatic doublet is normally figured (shaped) to bring 
two particular wavelengths, for example 400 nm (indigo) 
and 600 nm (orange), to the same focal point. The spread 
in focal positions for the other wavelengths are usually 
reduced by a factor of 10-20 compared to the spread that 
would be produced by a single lens. The addition of a 
third lens further reduces the spread of focal positions. A 
three-element objective lens is called an apochromat. 

As the residual chromatic aberration decreases with 
increasing focal ratio, achromatic doublets usually have 
focal lengths that are at least ten times their apertures (focal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ratio f:10 or more). Objective lenses with large focal ratios 
have small fields of view. Where a wider field of view and 
shorter focal ratio is required, an apochromat is normally 
used. 


See also: aperture, chromatic aberration, field of view, 
focal length, focal ratio, refractor, spherical aberration, 
telescope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oblateness 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oblateness 


The degree of flattening of an oblate spheroid, the solid 
body obtained by rotating an ellipse about its minor axis. 
The shape of the Earth is approximately an oblate spheroid, 
for the equatorial diameter is slightly greater than the polar 
diameter. Jupiter and Saturn are considerably more oblate 
than the Earth. If a hypothetical planet had a polar radius 
of 10000 km and an equatorial radius of 20000 km, the 
oblateness (or flattening) would be: 


20 000 — 10000 05 
20.000 ia 


By measuring the degree of flattening at the poles of a 
planet as compared with the speed of rotation, itis possible 
to infer the density distribution inside the planet. If two 
planets had the same mass and bulk density, the planet 
with most of its mass concentrated close to the center 
would be more flattened by rotation. For example, from 
the relatively small oblateness of Uranus combined with 
the planet’s relatively rapid rotation, it would appear that 
its constituents, ice and gas, are well mixed and a rocky 
core is small or non-existent. 


See also: axis, rotation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Obliquity of the Ecliptic 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Obliquity of the Ecliptic 


The angle between the planes of the ecliptic and the 
equator. On the celestial sphere, the angle at which the 
ecliptic intersects the celestial equator. The current (year 
2000) value of the obliquity of ecliptic, which is denoted 
by the symbol ¢, is 23° 26’ 21”. Its value varies by +9” over 
a period of 18.6 years as a consequence of a phenomenon 
called nutation. Over a much longer period (about 40 000 
years) the perturbing influence of the planets causes its 
value to vary between 21° 55’ and 28° 18’; currently ¢ is 
decreasing at an average rate of about 0.5” per year. 


See also: celestial equator, ecliptic, nutation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire de Besancon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire de Besancon 


Founded in 1878 to provide an astronomically derived 
time reference service for the region’s watch-making 
industry, the Observatory today continues its research 
and service activities in the field of time and frequency 
metrology and has also developed active research groups 
in the fields of stellar and galactic evolution and the 
chemical physics of astrophysical media. A galactic stellar 
population simulation model and a database of double 
and multiple stars may be consulted via the Observatory’s 
web site. Occupying an attractive park and buildings, the 
Observatory’s instruments include a meridian telescope 
(2.37 m focus, 19 cm diameter) dating from the 1880s, 
an astrograph (two 3.5 m and one 3 m focal length 
instruments) commissioned in 1956 and a modern time 
and frequency laboratory equipped with three cesium 
atomic clocks. The staff is made up of 16 university 
lecturers and other researchers, 11 engineers and technical 
personnel and 6 support staff, plus a variable number of 
students up to PhD level. The Observatory is a part of 
the Université de Franche-Comté and is recognized by the 
Centre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS/INSU) 
and the Bureau National de Metrologie (BNM). 
For further information see 
www.obs-besancon. fr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire de la Céte d’Azur ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire de la Cote d’Azur 


This French public institute was founded in 1988, with 
the mission to collect and interpret astronomical data. In 
1881 Raphael Bischoffsheim founded and equipped its 
oldest component, Nice Observatory. The dome of its 
great refractor, 76 cm, was built by Eiffel. The second 
component, the CERGA, founded in 1974 for positional 
astronomy, is located near Grasse. 
For further information see 
http: / /www.obs-nice.fr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Observatoire de Lyon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire de Lyon 


The Observatoire de Lyon is a laboratory of Université 
Claude Bernard Lyon1, under the authority of the INsTITUT 
NATIONAL DES SCIENCES DE L’UNIVERS. It constitutes the Centre 
de Recherche astrophysique de Lyon together with the 
astrophysics group of the Ecole Normale Supérieure de 
Lyon. 

It operates a 1 m Ritchey—Chrétien telescope, which 
is now mainly used by students and the general public. 
Formerly installed on the summit of Gornergrat in 
Switzerland, the instrument was returned to Lyon in 1983 
for trials of various instruments—including photometers, 
an infrared camera and the OASIS spectrograph—that 
were developed at the observatory. 

For further information see 
http://www-obs.univ-lyon1.fr/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire de Marseille 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire de Marseille 


The Marseille Observatory was founded by the Jesuits in 
1702 and taken over by the State in 1763. A century later 
it was transferred to its present site on the Longchamp 
Plateau in Marseille, southern France. 

The observatory, which is part of the University 
of Provence, belongs to the Provence Astronomical 
Federation. It owns an 80 cm telescope, made in 1867 by 
Léon Foucault, which was the first large telescope with 
a silvered mirror ever built. It was used for observations 
until 1960 and designated an historical monument in 1993. 

The observatory is funded by a number of sources 
including the Ministry of Higher Education and Research, 
CNRS, the Gassendi Institute and regional authorities. 
It also carries out research and contracts for industry, 
and participates in international projects such as the 
CANADA-FRANCE-HAWAII TELESCOPE and the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN 
OBSERVATORY. 

Scientific research covers all areas of astronomy, from 
optical to radio and infrared observations. 

For further information see 
http://www-obs.cnrs-mrs.fr/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire de Paris 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire de Paris 


The Observatoire de Paris is the largest French institution 
dedicated to astronomy. Created in 1667 by Louis XIV 
to define the ‘Méridien de Paris’ and then devoted to 
metrology, celestial mechanics and positional astrometry, 
it further developed many branches of astrophysicis 
and is now established on three sites: the initial 
Paris Observatory, the Meudon Observatory (south- 
west suburb of Paris) appended in 1926, and the 
radioastronomy facility of Nangay (central France), 
appended in 1953. Research activities cover many fields 
from theoretical to observational astronomy, experimental 
physics and chemistry, instrument development for 
international ground-based observatories and space 
experiments for astronomy and planetology missions. 
Services related to its research activities are provided to the 
astronomical community (time and frequency metrology, 
solar monitoring, International Earth Rotation Service, 
etc). The observatory also has an educational mission and 
provides an astrophysical research degree and PhD course, 
courses in astronomy for high school teachers, visits and 
exhibitions for the public. 

The Observatoire de Paris is a governmental 
institution. Its sources of support are, for the most part, 
contracts with the Ministére de l’/Education Nationale, 
de la Recherche et de la Technologie (MENRT), the 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), the 
Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), the European 
Community, or with European scientific agencies such as 
the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY (ESO) or the EUROPEAN 
SPACE AGENCY (ESA). 

The Observatoire de Paris comprises ten research 
groups. Its staff is of about 800 people, of whom 640 are on 
permanent jobs (230 scientists) and 160 are students and 
research fellows on long-term contracts. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.obspm. fr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire de Section de Meudon, Paris 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire de Section de Meudon, 
Paris 


The Meudon Observatory in France was founded on an 
old royal estate in 1876. It was built with public funds and 
placed at disposal of astronomer Jules Janssen, in order to 
allow him to develop his research on solar spectra far from 
urban pollution. 

Several instruments were installed by 1893: an 
83 cm refractor placed under the dome over the castle; 
a 1 m reflector, which was restored in 1969; and various 
spectroheliographs and siderostats. Later additions 
included an equatorial table, a 60 cm telescope, and a solar 
tower, which was used for spectroscopic studies of the Sun. 

It merged with the Paris Observatory in 1926. The 
section is now devoted to theoretical astrophysics, with 
departments devoted to studies of stars, the interstellar 
medium, galaxies and cosmology. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.obspm.fr/index.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire de Strasbourg 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire de Strasbourg 


The Strasbourg Astronomical Observatory, located in 
Strasbourg, France, is a research unit of Université 
Louis Pasteur and CNRS. It hosts teaching and research 
activities, the services of the Strasbourg Astronomical 
Data Center (CDS), and public outreach activities, with 
its Planetarium. 

Founded in 1881, the Strasbourg Observatory 
currently carries out research in the following fields: 
stellar populations and galactic evolution, galactic 
dynamics, high-energy astrophysics, data and information 
management. It is active in the development and 
exploitation of space missions such as Hipparcos or XMM. 

The Data Center is used by professional astronomers 
worldwide for its databases and services related to 
astronomical objects outside the solar system. 

For further information see 
http:/ /astro.u-strasbg.fr/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire des Sciences de |’Univers de Bordeaux 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire des Sciences de 
l’Univers de Bordeaux 


Ground-based observations (meridian circle, radio- 
telescope, magnetic resonance spectrometer, radiometer, 
specrophotometer) are one of the main features of ‘Ob- 
servatoire des Sciences de l’Univers de Bordeaux, labora- 
toire d’astrodynamique, d’astrophysique et d’aéronomie’, 
which is located in its original place of foundation, in 1878, 
at Floirac, in the suburbs of Bordeaux. 

Dedicated to research, teaching and science for the 
general public, the Observatory is run by the Centre Na- 
tional de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), and the Teach- 
ing and Research Ministry. There are about thirty scien- 
tists and students, and six research groups: astrodynam- 
ics: (astrometry /Hipparcos, galactic dynamics, dynamic 
of the solar system, nucleus of galaxies); radio-astronomy 
(interstellar medium, galaxies and quasars, star forma- 
tion, space missions (First, Rosetta)); radio-aeronomy 
(ground based microwave radiometry, space radiometry 
(UARS, Odin), ozone international network); atmosphere 
of planets (photochemistry of giant planets, primitive at- 
mospheres, atmosphere of Mars (Mars-Express probe), 
and Saturn (Huygens probe)); Exobiology (prebiotic atmo- 
sphere of the Earth, extra-terrestrial molecules and matter); 
and exoplanets. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.observ.u-bordeaux.fr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatoire des Sciences de |’Univers de Grenoble ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire des Sciences de 
l’Univers de Grenoble 


Young stars and their environment, their formation and 
evolution, plasmas in active galactic nuclei, together with 
adaptive optics and optical interferometry research and 
development, are the main activities of the Laboratoire 
d’Astrophysique. Created in 1979 on the campus, later 
forming the Observatoire with geophysical laboratories, it 
has a permanent staff of around 50. It is a joint facility of 
CNRS and the Joseph Fourier University. 
For further information see 

http://www-laog.obs.ujf-grenoble.fr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Observatoire Royal de Belgique 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatoire Royal de Belgique 


This observatory was founded in 1826 and installed in the 
present site in 1891. It is organized into four departments, 
concerned with public services and scientific activities in: 
time; Earth rotation; space geodesy; seismology; Earth 
tides; gravimetry; astrometry and dynamics of objects 
in and outside the solar system, astrophysics of Galactic 
and extra-Galactic objects; stellar atmospheres; and solar 
physics (structure and dynamics of the solar atmosphere, 
solar activity). The library contains about 120000 books. 
A large Planetarium, receiving about 30000 visitors each 
year, is managed by the Royal Observatory. The budget is 
supported by the Ministry on Science Policy (60%) and by 
special projects initiated by the Royal Observatory (40%). 

The staff is composed of 32 permanent researchers 
and 50 technicians, who collaborate in public services 
and scientific researches, administration and maintenance. 
Also there are, on average, 10 to 15 researchers on contract 
(PhD students, post-doctoral positions. . .). 

For further information see 
http://www.OMA.BE/KSB-ORB/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories and their Location 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatories and their Location 


As astronomy and astronomical instruments have evolved 
over the centuries, so too have observatories. 

Up to the seventeenth century, observatories were 
usually privately owned. Rulers, wealthy land-owners 
and members of the aristocracy sponsored both the 
instruments and the astronomers who operated them. 
The first observatories were built where the sponsors 
had land that was available. For example, Castle of the 
Heavens. TYCHO BRAHE was sponsored by King Frederick 
II of Denmark, who built him a castle called Uraniborg 
(Star-city) on the island of Hveen (now Ven). 

In their second phase of development, observatories 
were a mixture of private facilities, perhaps owned and 
operated by a wealthy amateur, and public organizations, 
owned and funded by universities (too many to mention), 
cities and regional governments (for example, Florence, 
Palermo, ...), churches or other religious foundations 
(for example, the ARMAGH OBSERVATORY, founded by the 
Archbishop of Ireland), and scientific societies (for 
example, the Portuguese Royal Academy of Sciences). 

In recent times, the costs of big telescopes being 
so large, major observatories have been funded by 
government agencies (the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
the French Institut National des Sciences de |’Univers, 
the National Research Council of Canada, ...), or 
by associations of public bodies (such as AURA, 
the ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH IN ASTRONOMY, 
operator of the KITT PEAK NATIONAL OBSERVATORY and the CERRO 
TOLOLO INTERAMERICAN OBSERVATORY for American university 
astronomers). Private finance is still a factor, however, 
as in the WM KECK OBSERVATORY (capital finance from the 
Keck private foundation and running costs through the 
California Institute of Technology and the grants that it 
obtains) and the seTI INSTITUTE (privately financed). 

The major observatories of the current generation 
and the future are and will be financed and operated 
by international consortia. Sometimes this is obvious 
in their names (like the ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN OBSERVATORY, 
the CANADA-FRANCE-HAWAII TELESCOPE, and the EUROPEAN 
SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY), sometimes not (like the IsAAc 
NEWTON GROUP OF TELESCOPES on La Palma, the GEMINI 
OBSERVATORY, Or the ATACAMA LARGE MILLIMETER ARRAY, ALMA). 

The transition to state-operated observatories began 
in the seventeenth century. In Britain, King Charles 
II approved the foundation of the ROYAL OBSERVATORY AT 
GREENWICH in 1675 in order to produce a new star catalog 
that would assist British seafarers. Since the Royal 
Navy paid for it, the observatory was located on a hill 
overlooking the busy wharves along the River Thames 
and within an easy carriage drive of the royal palace and 
Admiralty buildings in London. Because of its location 
in a royal park, the observatory’s architect, SIR CHRISTOPHER 
WREN, acknowledged that he designed it ‘a little for pompe’. 

Although the importance of dark skies was generally 
recognized, astronomers had to accept poor weather as a 
price for accessibility in the days when transportation was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


not as easy as now. Thus, two optical telescopes that held 
the title of ‘world’s largest’ prior to the twentieth century 
were built in locations that today would be considered 
completely inappropriate for world-class observatories. 
In 1789, funded personally by King George III, William 
Herschel (See HERSCHELFAMILY) placed his 40 ft (focal length), 
48 in (aperture) reflector in Slough, a low-lying rural area 
near Windsor next to the River Thames. Lord Rosse himself 
financed his 72 in ‘Leviathan of Parsonstown’, which was 
built in 1845 in the grounds of his home, Birr Castle in 
Ireland, a site surrounded by numerous peat bogs. 

As time went by, urban expansion, increasing air 
pollution from smoke and light pollution meant that 
observatories located near cities were increasingly at a 
disadvantage. Thus, the vATICAN OBSERVATORY, Which was 
formally founded by Pope Leo XIII in 1891, was originally 
located in the Vatican gardens behind St. Peter’s Basilica. 
As light pollution increased, it was moved out of Rome 
to the Papal summer residence at Castel Gandolfo. By 
the 1970s, light pollution from the nearby city had become 
so bad that it was decided to relocate the observatory to 
Arizona. 

A similar process occurred in the case of the Royal 
Observatory at Greenwich. In the 1950s, the observatory’s 
main telescopes were removed from the growing, smog- 
ridden metropolis of London to the Sussex countryside at 
Herstmonceux. This site, whether or not it was among 
the best possible sites in the UK, suffered from the damp 
English climate with its frequent cloud cover and poor 
seeing conditions, and the population growth of the south 
coast area increased sky background. Asa result, the main 
instrument, the 2.5 m (98 in) Isaac Newton Telescope, was 
relocated to La Palma in the Canary Islands in 1990. 

Much the same happened with the Paris Observatory 
(OBSERVATOIRE DE PARIS) that was commissioned by King 
Louis XIV in 1667. Although accessible from the King’s 
main place of residence it was originally built so far from 
the center of Paris that it never grew, as planned, into the 
cultural center of the then Royal Academy of Sciences. It is 
now surrounded by the city. The observatory established 
a new campus south of the city, at Meudon, for observing 
facilities, but French astronomers’ attention has shifted 
since to more remote telescopes in ESO and on Hawaii. As 
one further example, the national operation of the Helsinki 
Observatory in Finland was also moved from its hill-top 
site, in land originally outside the city, first to Turku and 
then to Tuorla in the countryside. Finnish astronomers’ 
attention is now focused on the NORDIC OPTICAL TELESCOPE on 
La Palma and towards ESO. 

Radio observatories have likewise been established, 
first in fields near to universities and research institutes, 
and then in radio-quiet zones, like GREEN BANK, West 
Virginia. 

Nevertheless, the vast majority of observatories 
remain located with accessibility in mind, near the 
sponsoring body; if a telescope is intended for use by 
students or by the public, then accessibility is the over- 
riding concern. This means that most observatories for 
general use are in or near cities. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories and their Location 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mountain sites and city lights 

In a famous passage in Opticks (1730), IssAC NEWTON wrote 
that telescopes ‘cannot be so formed as to take away that 
confusion of rays which arises from the tremors of the 
atmosphere. The only remedy is a most serene and quiet 
air, suchas may perhaps be found on the tops of the highest 
mountains above the grosser clouds’. Modern technology 
has, in recent times, proved Newton wrong in the first 
statement but his second statement was proved correct in 
1856. The Astronomer Royal for Scotland, CHARLES PIAZZI 
SMYTH, mounted an expedition to the mountain of El Teide 
on the island of Tenerife in the Canary Islands. Re-erecting 
the 18 cm telescope with which he had made calibrating 
observations in Edinburgh, approximately at sea level, he 
found that he could see stars that were four magnitudes 
fainter through the more transparent mountain air at 
altitudes of 2700-3200 meters. He could also distinguish 
closer double stars, because the seeing was better. 

The first large observatory built on a mountain 
summit according to Newton’s conjecture and Smyth’s 
experiments was LICK OBSERVATORY, opened on Mount 
Hamilton in northern California in 1888 at an altitude of 
1280 meters. There one of the world’s largest refracting 
telescopes was built (the 36 in refractor), funded by a 
wealthy private donor, James Lick. 

Over the following decades, many leading mountain 
observatories sprang up in the dry, clear air of the 
American west. In California, the world’s largest (at the 
time) reflecting telescopes were installed. The 100 in 
Hooker Reflector was built in 1917 at MOUNT WILSON 
OBSERVATORY near Pasadena and the 200 in Hale Reflector 
in 1948 at Mount PALOMAR OBSERVATORY near San Diego. 
An almost permanent temperature inversion below the 
mountain tops more or less guaranteed low atmospheric 
turbulence and a cloudless sky. Even with the increase 
in urban sky glow as a result of the development of 
California since those times, these sites remain competitive 
in terms of ‘SEEING’ and image quality (table 1). Mount 
Wilson, for example, is the host site of CHARA, an optical 
interferometer, to which, since it works with bright stars, 
artificial sky glow matters little. 


Desirable physical characteristics for an 
observatory 

All observatories need road access for the installation, 
maintenance and operation of the telescopes and instru- 
mentation, and a level-enough site to build on, with ap- 
propriate foundation material. Power from transmission 
lines is desirable, but can be supplied by local generators, 
which in any case are needed as back-up if power fails over 
the sometimes long and vulnerable lines. Telecommunica- 
tion facilities are necessary, and in these days of high-speed 
data links optical fiber connectivity or telecommunication 
satellite bandwidth is becoming the norm. In the installa- 
tion of such facilities, care has to be taken not to degrade the 
electromagnetic environment of the observatory—small 
currents can be induced through pickup in the detector 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Loss of effective aperture and value due to urban sky 
glow. In the table that follows, X is the sky glow level. A value 
of 1.0 designates the natural sky background, without any 
human contribution; a value of 1.2 means a 20% increase above 
the natural sky background due to a man-made skyglow; 2.0 is 
double the natural background, and so on. 


Equivalent 
aperture Equivalent Per cent of 
xX in meters aperture ininches _ original value 


For a 4 m aperture telescope 


1.00 4.00 157 100 
1.10 3.81 150 88 
1.20 3.65 144 78 
1.25 3.58 141 74 
1.50 3.27 129 58 
2.00 2.83 111 39 
3.00 2.31 91 23 
5.00 1.79 70 11 
For a 4m telescope on Kitt Peak 

1.06 3.89 152 93 
For a 5 m (200 in) telescope on Mount Palomar 
2.00 3.58 141 39 
For a 3 m (120 in) telescope on Lick Observatory 
3.00 1.75 69 22 
For the 2.5 m (100 in) at Mt. Wilson Observatory 
5.00 1.14 45 11 


(Copyright the International Dark Sky Association, 
December 1996.) 


electronics and amplified, with interference to the obser- 
vations (see also TELESCOPE ENGINEERING). 

For an optical-infrared observatory, chosen for lack of 
cloud, water run-off from buildings is not likely to suffice 
for the operation of the facility, or for use by the staff, and 
must be pumped from artesian supplies or brought in. 
Remoteness from population sources minimizes artificial 
sky background, industrial smoke or dust generation, and 
background radio noise from electrical machinery, so it is 
not likely there will be abundant water, since water would 
probably have already attracted settlements. 

Prime requirements for an optical observatory are 
good atmospheric transparency and seeing characteris- 
tics. For an infrared or millimeter wave observatory, trans- 
parency is linked to (lack of) water vapor content in the air, 
measured by precipitable water vapor, and carbon dioxide 
absorption. 

There will undoubtedly be a winter-summer cycle 
in all these weather-related characteristics, but the less 
seasonal the variation, the more all-sky access there will be. 
If winters are severe, ice or snow may also affect building 
costs and access. To establish the weather characteristics of 
candidate sites for a major telescope, a period of site testing 
is necessary, and has to be at least a year long to establish 
the annual cycle. Moreover, since there are year to year 
differences across a region or even a hemisphere, similar 
testing should be carried out at a reference site whose long- 
term characteristics are known, to establish the differences 
between the new site and the established one. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories and their Location 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


As Newton conjectured, high altitude sites have the 
advantage of being above the inversion layer, which 
restricts aerosol content to the Earth’s surface layer. The 
inversion layer can be between 2 km and 10 km in altitude, 
depending on ground or sea heating. 

Local effects on seeing are minimized if the mountain 
presents a streamlined contour to the prevailing wind, so 
that air heated by the ground layer does not mix with 
colder, higher air. The thickness of the skin of air above the 
land surface in which there is local heating and turbulence 
drives the decision about the height at which the telescope 
is placed above the ground on a pillar, and is a cost- 
driver through the building costs. The prize of locating the 
telescope above the ground layer is that the seeing created 
by the air above this skin could be as small as 0.3 arcsec. 

Merle Walker (1983) identified a group of good 
observatory sites on mountain tops to the east (this 
is usually the down-wind direction) of cold oceanic 
currents, which stabilize air flow, reduce the scale height 
of convection and therefore keep the inversion layer 
low (at say 2 km). California, the Canary Islands, 
and Chile all fit this pattern; Walker also identified 
Namibia in southern Africa as a relatively under-exploited 
astronomically desirable country. 

Today, the vast majority of the world’s largest, most 
powerful, optical-infrared telescopes are to be found ina 
handful of high-altitude sites. There are concentrations of 
such sites in the western half of the continental United 
States, in the fiftieth state, Hawaii, in the arid Andean 
mountains of Chile, and in the Canary Islands. The 
local environmental factors outlined above are the driving 
force behind these concentrations. As remote observation 
and telescope control become increasingly common, while 
the jet plane makes travel quick and easy, accessibility 
for the astronomers who use these instruments and the 
engineering staff who build and maintain them drops 
down the list of priorities. 

Large regions of the world are downgraded as 
possible observational sites through their geographical 
location. Much of eastern North America, continental 
Europe, southeast Asia and the tropical regions of Africa 
and South America suffer not only from proximity 
to man-made pollution but from higher humidity, a 
higher percentage of cloudy days and poorer atmospheric 
transparency caused by water droplets, dust, smoke or 
other aerosols. Nevertheless, for the reasons already 
stated, most observatories, except the very largest, are 
located in these regions, near to the population. 

Of course, there are penalties associated with 
mountain top locations. Their geographical remoteness 
inevitably means that road and air links are probably 
limited or non-existent and these may have to be 
provided before construction can begin. Part of the 
costs of operating the observatory will consist of access 
maintenance. Access to the PIC DU MIDI OBSERVATORY in the 
French Pyrenees is by cable car. The IRAM millimeter- 
wave observatory at Plateau du Bure near Grenoble is also 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


accessed by cable car, whose collapse in 1999 caused loss 
of life and suspension of operations. 

Once the site has been selected, its rocky, sloping 
surface then has to be flattened and prepared for 
the foundations for the observatory building and its 
subsidiary facilities. Apart from the difficulty of building 
in remote conditions, staff and visiting astronomers have 
to survive low temperatures, strong winds, occasional 
blizzards and altitude sickness caused by the thin air. 
Acclimatization is important for visitors unfamiliar with 
the oxygen deprivation. On Mauna Kea, where the 
telescopes are at 4200 m, a ‘halfway house’ has been set 
up at 3800 m. Here a visitor may acclimatize before 
heading for the summit, an astronomer may sleep during 
the daytime after his or her night-time observations, and 
engineering staff may think about problems encountered 
at the summit but unsolved in an oxygen-poor, headache- 
inducing atmosphere. 

Earth tremors pose a threat to any facilities located 
nearby. One notable example was the earthquake which 
struck the BIG BEAR SOLAR OBSERVATORY in June 1992. The 
tremor, which measured 6.6 on the Richter scale, occurred 
only 9 km from the observatory. The causeway which 
links the observatory with the lake shore suffered from 
subsidence and fractures, while the support pedestal 
for the telescopes and the tracking machinery were also 
damaged. The observatory was out of action for more than 
four months while repairs were undertaken. Telescopes on 
the volcanoes of Mauna Kea and La Palma are protected 
against earthquakes of a size that is thought possible there, 
with spring-loaded pivots pulling gears apart in the case 
of tremors that could damage the main bearings. 

Observatories in Australia and La Palma have 
been uncomfortably close to bush fires, which threaten 
buildings, and drift ash onto delicate optical surfaces. 

Astronomical observatories are also affected by air 
pollution, vibrations and thermal pollution. For example, 
studies by the Us NAVAL OBSERVATORY in Washington, DC 
have shown that thermal turbulence and _ refractive 
index asymmetries over the site created by large heated 
buildings nearby are compromising the astrometric value 
of the site. Even aircraft lights and contrails can cause 
problems for observatories located beneath flight paths. 
Civilian air traffic has been re-routed away from La Palma 
and use of the take-off and approach path to Nice airport, 
which passes over the Observatoire de Calern, is not 
permitted at night for this reason. 

Environmental and ecological considerations may 
also play a part in influencing location. Many 
observatories are located in remote regions that are noted 
for their scenic beauty and rare fauna and flora. Some, 
such as Australia’s Siding Spring Observatory, are built 
close to a national park. 

Conflicts may sometimes arise with local residents or 
environmental groups. When the University of Arizona 
and its international partners selected Mount Graham as 
the site for a series of world class instruments, including 
the LARGE BINOCULAR TELESCOPE, the 3200 m mountain seemed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories and their Location 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


an ideal location, not only for its excellent ‘seeing’ 
but also because it already had a two-lane access road 
maintained for summer residences and rural industries 
such as logging. After a lengthy environmental impact 
assessment, permission to go ahead with the first stage of 
construction was duly granted by the US Fish and Wildlife 
Service. Unfortunately, the astronomers then became 
embroiled in a series of costly legal arguments centered 
around the fact that Mount Graham is a ‘sky island’, an 
isolated pocket of rare fauna and flora. Environmentalists 
argued that the unique ecosystem, which included an 
endangered subspecies of the red squirrel, would be 
irrevocably damaged by the new observatory, even though 
the initial area of construction was limited to 3.5 hectares 
(8.6 acres). Even after two bills of Congress were passed in 
order to allow the Large Binocular Telescope to go ahead, 
further appeals and protest meetings caused the project to 
be badly delayed and its costs to escalate dramatically. 

Environmental issues and the religious concerns of 
the Hawaiian native people to whom the mountains are 
sacred areas are factors that limit the development of 
Mauna Kea and Haleakala in Hawaii. 


Socio-economic conditions 

Economic development and political stability also play 
a significant part in influencing decisions about where 
to locate modern astronomical observatories. The 
governments of developed countries, sometimes assisted 
by private funds, seek to maintain astronomical facilities 
at the cutting edge of cosmological research by placing 
them in the most advantageous locations. These can 
be anywhere in the world where the environmental 
requirements are met. 

The underdeveloped infrastructure that is likely at 
an observatory location means that development of an 
observatory has to be undertaken from scratch, entailing 
a much longer, more expensive process of preparation 
and construction. The intangible asset of confidence 
is engendered by an economically solvent, politically 
stable and astronomically supportive regime in the host 
country, providing a basis for investment of large sums 
by the external partners. The establishment of a 
major astronomical center can help to improve economic 
conditions in the host country, by providing jobs, by 
improving levels of education and technical training, 
and by providing an aspirational example for future 
development. As a ’site fee’ the host nation usually 
receives a proportion of the observatory’s observing time, 
providing guaranteed access for its scientists to world class 
observational facilities at relatively little cost. 


The southern hemisphere 

The latitude of an observatory is important, with low 
latitudes generally favored. The natural sky glow 
decreases away from the polar regions (but this is a 
disadvantage if geomagnetic phenomena are the subject 
of investigation), the nights are of more uniform length 
near the equator, and a larger fraction of the sky passes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


above the horizon. The southern hemisphere sky contains 
unique astronomical phenomena, such as the galactic 
center and the Magellanic Clouds. Such objects are 
available for longer periods when they pass overhead, 
and for this reason, for multiwavelength studies driven 
by satellite telescopes that orbit the earth and see both 
hemispheres equally, and to provide a complete picture of 
the Galaxy and the universe, astronomers have required 
southern observatories. The need to improve coverage 
of the southern hemisphere skies was one of the driving 
forces behind new observatories in the twentieth century. 
In the early years of the twentieth century, the main 
observational centers south of the equator were the 
Radcliffe Observatory at Pretoria and Mount Stromlo near 
Canberra. The 1.9 m (74 in) reflectors that were built in 
Pretoria and in Canberra remained the largest telescopes 
in the southern hemisphere for 20 years. 

As light pollution from the nearby conurbation of 
Australia’s capital city increased, the Australian National 
University (ANU), which became responsible for Mount 
Stromlo Observatory, established a new facility at Siding 
Spring (MOUNT STROMLO AND SIDING SPRING OBSERVATORIES) near 
the town of Coonabarabran in New South Wales. In 
addition to its good local infrastructure and easy access, 
its observing conditions were among the best that could be 
found in Australia. The UK government joined Australia 
to add to the ANU facilities at Siding Spring, including 
the UK Schmidt telescope and the 3.9 m Anglo-Australian 
Telescope, in the 1970s. 

Today, the Siding Spring site is at a disadvantage 
when compared with other newer southern locations. 
First, it is only 1000 m (3200 ft) above sea level. Asa result, 
atmospheric turbulence is significant, while observations 
on cloud-free nights are only possible for about 60% of 
the year. Light pollution is also beginning to encroach 
from conurbations far to the south. At a time when 
funding for astronomical facilities is increasingly tight, 
these factors may militate against further development or 
even continued support for such middle-range facilities in 
the future. 

This experience compares and contrasts with the for- 
tunes of South Africa. During the early 1970s, the British 
Science Research Council joined with its South African 
counterpart, the Council for Scientific and Industrial Re- 
search, to set up a modern observatory in the semi-desert 
region of the Karoo, near Sutherland, northeast of Cape 
Town. The Radcliffe Telescope was relocated from Preto- 
ria and several smaller telescopes were added—new and 
relocated from the Cape Observatory. Despite its relatively 
low altitude (1760 m), this site has now been selected by an 
international consortium for a new 9 m class instrument 
(SALT, the SOUTHERN AFRICAN LARGE TELESCOPE). South Africa 
looks to enjoy an astronomical revival in the next decade, 
once more operating the largest telescope in the southern 
hemisphere, in competition with the VLT, whose individ- 
ual telescopes will be slightly smaller but which together 
lay joint or greater claim to that title. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories and their Location 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Island sites 

Because mountain tops are favored for large astronomical 
telescopes, and building on the development work carried 
out by the INSTITUTO DE ASTROFISICA DE CANARIAS, the UK 
prospected La Palma in the Canary Islands for its ‘northern 
hemisphere observatory’. The La Palma site became 
available in 1979 after Britain and Spain, to which the 
Canary Islands belong, signed an agreement to establish 
the OBSERVATORIO DEL ROQUE DE LOS MUCHACHOS on the rocky 
volcanic island. Site protection was guaranteed in Spanish 
law. British astronomers selected the site for the relocation 
of the Isaac Newton Telescope, then western Europe’s 
largest optical telescope, after examining other promising 
locations in Tenerife, Madeira and Italy. The 4.2 m William 
Herschel Telescope followed in 1989, funded by the UK in 
partnership with The Netherlands. 

The summit of La Palma is 2500 m above sea 
level and is home to half a dozen major astronomical 
instruments that are owned and operated by various 
European countries. La Palma is the site for the Gran 
Telescopio de Canarias, virtually a clone of the Keck 
telescope and the nucleus of the ‘European northern 
observatory’. 

However, despite its advantages, La Palma has been 
overtaken by Hawaiias the prime choice for today’s 8-10 m 
class telescopes in the northern hemisphere. Indeed, the 
huge extinct volcano of Mauna Kea in Hawaii lays claim to 
be the best observatory site in the world. At an altitude of 
4200 m it is also by far the highest of the major observatory 
sites. 

This extreme altitude is important because it opens 
the way to observations at optical, infrared and sub- 
millimeter wavelengths. The observatory lies above some 
90% of the atmospheric water vapor, and almost all of the 
remainder is removed from the air as frost or snow, while 
the trade winds which blow across the Pacific are forced 
around the mountain, leaving the summit in a pocket 
of exceptionally stable air. Since the island is far from 
any large land mass, the air is also free of dust. It is 
unaffected by light pollution, and there are strong zoning 
laws controlling lights in the coastal towns. 

On the other hand, as its name (Mauna Kea means 
‘White Mountain’) suggests, weather conditions on the 
summit can sometimes be severe, with heavy snowfall 
and 150 km h7! winds which can last for days. Oxygen 
levels are 60% those at sea level, and oxygen deprivation 
affects visitors’ ability to breathe, move around and make 
rapid decisions, as well as the cooling capacity of fans, the 
stability of computer disk drives and the power of diesel 
engines. Remote control facilities and remote diagnostic 
capability are emphasized for the Mauna Kea telescopes. 
The 10 m Keck telescopes on Mauna Kea are operated from 
a base at the foot of the volcano at Waimea, the James Clerk 
Maxwell Telescope likewise. 


Sub-millimeter and radioastronomy 
In contrast with optical observations, radioastronomy has 
a relatively short history. However, it follows a similar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pattern. From the earliest experiments, radio interference 
from terrestrial sources has been an obstacle to studies of 
the universe. 

One of the earliest examples of this dilemma came 
in December 1945, when BERNARD LOVELL borrowed three 
trailers of radio equipment from the British army for 
cosmic ray studies. In order to avoid electrical interference 
on the main campus, Lovell moved his equipment to the 
rural setting of the University of Manchester’s botany 
department at Jodrell Bank. In 1957 this became the site 
of the world-famous 76 m fully steerable antenna, later 
known as the Lovell Telescope, and is now the home of 
the NUFFIELD RADIO ASTRONOMY LABORATORIES, and the center 
of the MERLIN interferometer complex distributed across 
the UK. 

Unfortunately, facilities such as Jodrell Bank are 
now immersed in an electromagnetic jungle composed of 
signals from innumerable sources, including everything 
from TV transmitters to electric motors and CD players. 
Inevitably, modern radioastronomy observatories, such 
as the Goldstone and OWENS VALLEY RADIO OBSERVATORIES in 
California, and the Australia Telescope are built in radio- 
quiet areas, far from large population centers and often 
shielded by hills. 

Sometimes, the sites are able to benefit from local 
legislation that prevents interference. For example, the 
new Green Bank Telescope, the largest fully steerable dish 
in the world, lies in a 150 km wide National Radio Quiet 
Zone in West Virginia. This means that the observatory 
director is consulted over the installation of any new 
radio transmitters within this zone or any significant 
modification to existing transmitters. The radio telescopes 
of the MULLARD RADIO ASTRONOMY OBSERVATORY in Cambridge 
were protected from radio noise from car-ignition systems 
on the nearby motorway by sinking the road and erecting 
a metallic fence that acts as an electromagnetic shield. 

Today, interferometry is a vital technique for 
radioastronomers, and a number of multi-telescope 
systems have been created. These occupy large areas, so 
remote desert sites where flat land is cheap and plentiful 
are ideal. The largest of these observatories is the VERY 
LARGE ARRAY in New Mexico, where 27 separate dishes are 
spread in a Y-shape along three arms, each of which is 21 
km long. 

While sheltered valleys are popular sites, local 
topography can sometimes be utilized in unusual ways. 
The most famous example of this is the ARECIBO OBSERVATORY, 
the largest radio telescope in the world, which lies within 
a natural rock basin in the limestone hills of Puerto Rico. 
Since the antenna is not intended to be steerable, the giant 
depression provided an ideal site for the construction of 
the 305 m diameter dish. China has plans to construct 
a similar dish, FAST, the Five-hundred meter Aperture 
Spherical Telescope, in a region of southern China with 
many hemispherical karst depressions in which the 
telescope could be mounted. This project might be helped 
to fruition if a radio-quiet zone could be implemented in 
the area. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories and their Location 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Physical factors are relatively insignificant for long- 
wavelength radio observations. At sea level, observations 
at wavelengths of 2 cm or more are possible without 
serious interference, but at shorter wavelengths, it is 
necessary to observe from high-altitude sites where 
absorption by atmospheric water vapor is minimized. 
In particular, sub-millimeter observations benefit greatly 
from such high-altitude locations. Not surprisingly, the 
world’s largest sub-millimeter telescope, the JAMES CLERK 
MAXWELL TELESCOPE, is located on the summit of Mauna Kea. 


The VLT at Paranal—a case study 

The European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Tele- 
scope (VLT) site at Cerro Paranal in Chile, located 2650 m 
above sea level, exemplifies many of the advantages and 
problems involved in the construction and operation of 
a modern mountain-top observatory. Its physical advan- 
tages are fairly obvious. Its altitude and its low rainfall 
(a storm every decade) result in up to 350 clear nights a 
year, unusually stable air which allows a spatial resolu- 
tion of 0.45 arcsec for 15% of the viewing time and low 
water vapor concentrations which increase atmospheric 
transparency at infrared wavelengths. 

On the other hand, these advantages were bought by 
major investments of time and money. Seven years of 
extensive site testing were undertaken before preparation 
work at Paranal began in 1991. Once a road was built 
from a nearby highway to the summit, some 350000 
cubic meters of rock and soil were removed from the 
site, flattening the mountain to create the 20000 square 
meter platform on which the four 8.2 m telescopes and the 
interferometric complex would be built. 

Before construction began, political factors had to 
be resolved between the European Southern Observatory 
(ESO) and the government of Chile. Following the 
signature of a treaty between ESO and the Chilean 
government in 1963, 15 world-class telescopes had been 
located at Cerro La Silla in the arid mountains of 
the Atacama Desert. However, when ESO requested 
permission to build the VLT at Cerro Paranal, in 1991, the 
government of Chile asked for modification of the original 
Convention. 

A protracted period of negotiations ensued, concern- 
ing ownership of the Paranal site, labor relations, guar- 
anteed observing time on the ESO telescopes for Chilean 
astronomers, and the rules governing the installation of 
additional telescopes in the future. These difficult discus- 
sions, spread over several years, inevitably delayed com- 
pletion of the Paranal site, increased costs, and prompted 
ESO management to pursue studies of other first-class as- 
tronomical sites elsewhere in the world. The difficult is- 
sues were eventually resolved, the VLT is now in operation 
at Paranal and it is likely that the Atacama Large Millime- 
ter Array will be built nearby. 

Prior to construction of the main accommodation and 
office complex at Paranal, which began in 1999, ESO staff 
and visitors were housed in containers at a ‘Base Camp’, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


while the workers and engineers of the contracting firms 
were housed in similar quarters along the mountain road. 

Since the nearest town, Antofagasta, is 120 km 
away, and Paranal lies in the middle of the Atacama 
Desert, everything from food and water to telescope 
spare parts, is brought in by road. Several diesel 
generators are used to maintain a stable electricity supply 
for the sensitive astronomical instruments and to ensure 
a minimal level of comfort for staff and visitors. A 
hotel and observatory maintenance facilities, including the 
advanced aluminizing plant for the giant VLT mirrors, are 
situated at the foot of the mountain. 

In order to squeeze as much performance as possible 
out of such substantial investments, every effort is made 
to reduce the impact of the physical environment on 
the observational efficiency. At Paranal, for example, 
the laboratories, control building and most of the 
office /accommodation block are buried underground, in 
order to minimize disturbances to the wind flow around 
the mountain summit. 


Future sites 
Three major threats to future research have been 
recognized by the astronomical community: 


@ Growing levels of radio pollution, interference at radio 
frequencies from telecommunications satellites and 
their ever-increasing demand for new wavebands cloud 
the future of radio astronomy. 


@ Space debris is a growing threat to scientific satellites 
and also interferes with ground-based observations as 
satellites or space junk leave streaks across sky images. 


@ Observatories around the world are also in danger 
from the proliferation of outdoor lighting, increased 
urbanization, and projects to launch highly luminous 
objects into space for various purposes such as Earth 
illumination or artistic, celebratory and advertising 
goals (see table 1). 


The only undeveloped site on Earth known to rival Mauna 
Kea for infrared and sub-millimeter observations, and 
for freedom from radio noise and urban sky glow is 
Antarctica. Stratospheric air is pulled down onto the 
South Pole by convection upwards at latitudes closer to 
the equator and the cold, dry and stable conditions on 
the high-level Antarctic Plateau allow small telescopes at 
the South Pole to outperform much larger telescopes at 
temperate sites. Difficult access and the extreme climate 
have discouraged construction and observations, but there 
are astronomical observational facilities at the American 
CENTER FOR ASTROPHYSICAL RESEARCH IN ANTARCTICA (CARA), so 
far all quite modest in size and capability. 

As even near-Earth space becomes polluted with 
space debris, some astronomers have begun to look 
towards future observatories on the far side of the Moon. 
Problems with cloud cover, atmospheric turbulence and 
absorption of incoming radiation by water vapor are 
non-existent on the airless Moon. The absence of an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories and their Location 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


atmosphere means that every type of radiation can stream 
down to the surface without being filtered by a blanket 
of air. Optical and infrared interferometry would also be 
much easier in the lunar environment. Whereas terrestrial 
optical and infrared telescopes can only operate at night, 
lunar telescopes would be able to operate around the clock. 
With the Moon’s slow rotation, it would be possible to 
observe faint objects non-stop during the two-week-long 
nights. And in a one-sixth gravity environment, much 
larger, lighter mirrors or reflector dishes could be installed 
without being deformed. 

The difficulties in establishing a telescope on the 
Moon are not only the obvious ones of doing anything 
in space, but also the dusty environment (bad news for 
mechanical and optical devices). A study by the EUROPEAN 
SPACE AGENCY concluded that the theoretical advantages of 
an optical-infrared or millemeter wave observatory on the 
Moon were outweighed by the disadvantages. Free-flying 
observatories like the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the 
Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST) and the Far Infra 
Red Space Telescope (FIRST) were the way to go. 

The lunar far side would, however, be particularly 
favorable for radio astronomy. Shielded by the body of the 
Moon from terrestrial signals, the telescopes would have 
a clear view of the radio universe. Lunar craters would 
make ideal sites for giant Arecibo-style radio antennae. 
There would even be the opportunity to explore an entirely 
new region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Very-low- 
frequency radio waves (below about 15 MHz), which are 
absorbed or scattered by the Earth’s atmosphere, would 
be readily accessible to telescopes on the Moon. Moreover, 
since the body of the Moon screens radio telescopes from 
artificial signals engendered on the Earth, this might 
be the place from which artificial signals from other 
civilizations can be identified most readily. To protect 
the operational electromagnetic environment of the Moon 
for these purposes, astronomers have already established 
norms for radio communication between lunar colonies. 


Peter Bond and Paul Murdin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatories: History 


An astronomical opservaTory is a building, installation 
or institution dedicated to the systematic and regular 
observation of celestial objects for the purpose of 
understanding their physical nature, or for purposes of 
time reckoning and keeping the calendar. At a bona 
fide observatory such work constitutes a main activity, 
not just an incidental one. While the ancient Egyptians, 
Babylonians, Chinese, Greeks and Mayans made many 
observations of scientific and historical interest, their 
efforts were not carried out at observatories per se. In 
this article we shall concentrate on installations that were 
intended to be bona fide research centers. 


Observatories in Islam 

There was a strong motivation in medieval Islam to 
preserve the knowledge of the Greeks and if possible to 
add to it. In a large city the presence of a hospital, a 
university and a public library was considered sensible 
and desirable. Within this context, in which knowledge 
and piety were highly encouraged and intertwined, the 
tradition of observatory building began during the reign 
of al-Ma’mtin, the seventh Abbasid caliph (AD 813- 
833). He organized a scientific academy in Baghdad 
called the House of Wisdom, which included a library 
and observatory. This was the most significant scientific 
endeavor since the establishment of the Alexandrian 
Museum in the 3rd century BC. A second observatory 
was built on the plains of Tadmor in Syria. al- 
Ma’miin’s astronomers measured the obliquity of the 
ecliptic (obtaining a value of 23°33’), concluded that the 
precession of the equinoxes amounted to 54 arcsec yr“!, 
determined that the Earth was 6500 miles in diameter 
and produced tables of motion of the planets based 
on PTOLEMY’s work, but updated on the basis of new 
observations. Astronomical work continued in Baghdad 
under the ninth Abassid caliph, but then ceased (see also 
ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY). 

A second scientific academy, the Hall of Wisdom, 
was established in Cairo in 1005. It lasted until 1171. 
An observatory was begun there in 1120 and nearly 
completed, but was ordered destroyed by the caliph 
in 1125 after the death of the vizier in charge of the 
observatory and its instruments. Apparently, serious 
conflicts had arisen between this vizier and the caliph, and 
it did not help that the superstitious populace presumed 
that trying to understand the motions of the planets was 
akin to delving into magic. 

The Istanbul Observatory, completed in 1577, met 
a similar fate. Political back-stabbing and superstitions 
regarding astronomy led to that observatory’s destruction 
by 1580. 

The two most successful and extensive Islamic 
observatories were those at Maragha (in Azerbaijan, in 
modern-day Iran) and at Samarkand, in modern-day 
Uzbekistan. The Maragha Observatory was built under 
the direction of NASIR AL-DIN AL-TUSI (1201-1274). It was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


situated on the flattened top of a hill, covering 400 m by 
150 m. Completed in 1264, it was active at least until 
1304, perhaps until 1316. It was the first observatory 
whose activity did not greatly diminish after the death of 
its founder. While the motivation for the construction of 
the observatory was astrological, the prediction of future 
celestial events needed to be carried out on the basis 
of exact physical measurements. A significant number 
of instruments were built, among them equinoctial and 
solsticial armillary spheres, and a mural quadrant of radius 
4.3m. The observatory’s library at one time contained 
400000 volumes. The principal accomplishment at 
Maragha was the compilation of the IIkhanic Tables, which 
were tables of motion of the Moon, Sun and planets. These 
identified some of the major shortcomings of Ptolemaic 
astronomy. 

The most important astronomer of the 15th century 
Was ULUGH BEG (1394-1449). For most of Ulugh Beg’s life 
his father was the ruler of Transoxiana, a region situated 
between the River Oxus (Amur Darya) and the River 
Jaxartes (Syr Darya). This provided the son with the 
opportunity to indulge his passion for astronomy. As a 
young man Ulugh Beg visited the remains of the Maragha 
Observatory, and he endeavored to build an even greater 
institution in Samarkand. As many as 70 astronomers 
were active there between 1408 and 1437. The largest 
instrument constructed was a sextant of radius 40 m, a 
fixed instrument mounted on the north-south meridian 
which could achieve a resolution of several arc seconds, 
a value not to be exceeded until the invention of the 
telescope and the micrometer in the 17th century. This 
sextant was primarily used for observations of the Sun. 

On the basis of new observations, Ulugh Beg and his 
fellow astronomers compiled a catalog of the brightest 
1000 stars visible at the latitude of Samarkand. No 
one since Ptolemy (ca 150 AD) or perhaps as far 
back as Hipparchus had made such extensive stellar 
observations. Ulugh Beg’s catalog was most likely 
based on observations with a zodiacal armillary sphere 
graduated to 15 arcmin, with interpolation to two-tenths 
of a mark, or 3 arcmin. The typical positional accuracy in 
the catalog is +16 arcmin. 


China and India 

At the very end of the 17th century one Louis Lecomte 
published his Memoirs and Observations of a Journey through 
China. He noted in some detail the vigilant activity carried 
out by astronomers at the Imperial Observatory in Beijing: 
‘Five mathematicians spend every night on the tower in 
watching what passes overhead; one is gazing towards 
the zenith, another to the east, a third to the west, the 
fourth turns his eyes southwards, and a fifth northwards, 
that nothing of what happens in the four corners of 
the world may escape their diligent observation’. Such 
activity had been going on for three millennia. As a 
result, the Chinese had accumulated records pertaining to 
many hundreds of lunar and solar eclipses, observations 
of novae, supernovae, comets, meteor showers, aurorae, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


naked-eye sunspots and even a possible observation of 
Jupiter’s moon Ganymede in 364 BC, nearly two millennia 
before the invention of the telescope (see also CHINESE 
ASTRONOMY IN HISTORY). The first clock drive was built by 
the Chinese in AD 132; it was powered by a constant 
pressure-head of water in a clepsydra, or water clock. The 
Chinese astronomer Yii Xi independently discovered the 
precession of the equinoxes in AD 320, finding a value of 
about 72 arcsec yr, twice the value found by Hipparchus. 
Sunspot records in the Chinese annals demonstrate the 
11 yr solar cycle. 

Just as spices were transported along the caravan 
routes, so too was astronomical knowledge. Astronomers 
from Persia arrived in China in AD 719. The astronomical 
ties between the mid-East and far East became quite 
extensive during the Ytian Dynasty (1271-1368). In 1267, 
only 8 yr after the founding of the Maragha observatory, 
blueprints for seven instruments were sent to China. 
Actual models may have followed. 

In 1270 the astronomer Guo Shoujing (1231-1316) 
built the first equatorially mounted instrument. After 
the Beijing Observatory was re-equipped in 1276-1279 
under his direction, it was equal in stature to the Maragha 
Observatory. The Chinese also operated an observatory at 
Nanjing. 

The Chinese did not appreciate or understand 
the Greek geometrical models of planetary motions 
or the Arabic use of geometry, particularly spherical 
trigonometry and stereographic projection. However, 
300 yr before Tycho Brahe became convinced that right 
ascension and declination were the ‘coordinates of the 
future’, the Chinese were fully committed to their use. Just 
as the influence of the Emperor radiated in all directions, 
so the hour circles radiated from the pole, ‘like the spars 
of an umbrella’. The Chinese laid out a system of 28 lunar 
mansions (xiv), which were defined by the points at which 
these hour circles intersected the celestial equator. 

One of the most important events in the history of 
Chinese science was the arrival of the Jesuits in 1600, 
towards the end of the Ming Dynasty. They had a very 
specific motivation. By demonstrating the superiority of 
Western science, they hoped to convince the Chinese of 
the superiority of Western religion. Western science clearly 
won out over the traditional Chinese and Muslim methods 
of predicting the solar eclipses of 15 December 1610 and 21 
June 1629. In November 1629 a new calendar bureau was 
established under the direction of the Chinese Christian 
convert Xu Guangqi, who supervised the work of 50 
astronomers, many of whom converted to Christianity. 
However, in 1664, at the start of the Qing Dynasty, 
politics led to the dismissal of the Jesuits and most of the 
Chinese converts from the calendar bureau. Some of these 
astronomers were later beheaded. 

The Jesuits regained favor in Chinese astronomy in 
1669. From 1673 to 1676 the Beijing Observatory was re- 
equipped with a new set of Tychonic instruments, which 
are still in place today. However, the astronomical activi- 
ties in China were hindered by several factors, notably the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


limited interest of the Chinese in questions other than cal- 
endrical revision, the Jesuits’ observance of the Church’s 
prohibition of the discussion of heliocentrism, which was 
in effect until 1757, and their attraction for the hybrid geo- 
heliocentric model of Tycho Brahe. 

In India the most significant observatory construction 
was carried out under the direction of Jai Singh (1686- 
1743), a Hindu prince in the court of a Muslim Mogul 
emperor. Large instruments of masonry were constructed 
at Delhi, Jaipur, Ujjain, Benares, and Mathura. The 
largest instrument was a sundial 27 meters tall. Jai Singh 
wished to follow in the footsteps of Ulugh Beg, minimizing 
observational errors by using the largest instruments 
possible. His star catalog was an update of Ulugh Beg’s 
star catalog, but apparently with no new observations: 
4°8’ were simply added to Ulugh Beg’s ecliptic longitudes 
to account for precession over 288 years (see also INDIAN 
ASTRONOMY). 


Early European observatories 

Astronomical observations were carried out in Moslem 
Spain at Cordova in the 10th century, at Toledo in the 11th, 
and at Castille in the 13th century under the patronage 
of the Christian King ALFONso x. The Toledan astronomical 
tables were translated into Latin in the 12th century. The 
Alfonsine Tables, the first state-sponsored astronomical 
ephemerides published for general use, were reprinted as 
late as 1641. 

The first European observatory worthy of the name 
was built by Bernard Walther (1430-1504), a wealthy 
private citizen of Nuremberg, who was at the same 
time the pupil and patron of REGIOMONTANUS (1436-1476). 
Together they found that the positions of the planets 
differed to a significant degree from the predictions of 
the Alfonsine Tables. They printed astronomical treatises 
on a printing press set up in Walther’s house. One such 
treatise by Regiomontanus laid out the ‘method of lunar 
distances’ for determining longitude at sea. A significant 
innovation at Walther’s observatory was determination 
of the times of observations by mechanical clocks instead 
of by astrolabes or armillary spheres. Observations with 
Walther’s instruments exhibited an improved accuracy, to 
+10 arcmin. 

Wilhelm IV (1532-1592), the Landgrave of Hesse- 
Cassel, began systematic observations in 1561. In 1567 his 
father, the Landgrave of Hesse, died, and the landgraviate 
was divided up amongst the four sons. Wilhelm was 
compelled to take over the administration of his province 
and had to lay aside his astronomical endeavors. In 1575, 
however, he was visited by Tycho Brahe and was inspired 
to resume observing. 

Wilhelm constructed a number of metal instruments, 
among them an azimuthal quadrant of radius 0.4 m, a 
torquetrum, a sextant of radius 1.3 m, a quadrant of 
radius 1.5 m, and armillary spheres. He demonstrated 
the superiority of metal instruments over wooden ones. 
Wilhelm’s most significant innovation was the rotating 
dome; he observed from one built in a tower of his castle. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


His star catalog of about 400 stars, although far short of the 
intended number of stars he had hoped to measure, was 
one of the first assembled in Europe. 

The most significant observatory prior to the 
invention of the telescope was that of TYCHO BRAHE (1546— 
1601). It was situated on the 2000 acre island of Hven, 
in the Danish sound between Copenhagen and Elsinore. 
There Tycho built Uraniborg, the ‘castle of the heavens’. 
It sat in the middle of a square 300 feet on a side and 
enclosed by a wall 22 feet high. The castle itself had two 
main levels and was taller than a seven-story building. 
In addition to the observing rooms and verandahs on the 
upper level, it contained a dozen or so bedrooms, a dining 
room, library, chemical laboratory and even a jail in the 
basement. Begun in 1576, it was completed in 1580. Over 
the north portal was an inscription, carved in stone: nec 
fasces nec opes sola artis sceptra perennant (‘neither wealth 
nor power, but knowledge alone endures’). Uraniborg was 
the first scientific research institute in Renaissance Europe, 
and Tycho was the first full-time scientist. 

At Uraniborg Tycho and his assistants used a dozen 
instruments. The one that produced the most accurate 
stellar positions was a mural quadrant of radius 2 m, 
which was located in the southwest room on the ground 
floor. A mural quadrant is attached to a wall, fixed on 
the celestial meridian. Its fine construction and the use 
of transversals allowed the determination of declinations 
with a resolution of 10 arcsec. 

An auxiliary observatory, Stjerneborg, was built in 
1584 a short distance to the south of the main building. 
There were five new instruments, the largest of which was 
an equatorial armillary made of iron, which was 2.9 m in 
diameter and could be used to measure declinations with a 
resolution of 15 arcsec. Each of these five instruments was 
situated in a subterranean crypt. Three were sheltered by 
folding roofs, while two had revolving domes. 

From observations at Hven Tycho discovered four 
inequalities in the Moon’s motion, two in longitude (the 
‘variation’ and the annual equation with a period of one 
solar year) and two in latitude. His observations of Mars 
were used later by Kepler to discover the elliptical nature of 
planetary orbits. From observations of 1588-1591, Tycho 
produced a catalog of 777 stars with an improvement in 
positional accuracy of an order of magnitude. More than 
one of Tycho’s instruments produced positional accuracies 
for his nine principal reference stars of +0.6 arcmin. The 
average uncertainty of the (other) brighter stars in Tycho’s 
catalog is 1.9 arcmin in ecliptic longitude and 1.2 arcmin 
in ecliptic latitude. For the fainter stars the uncertainties 
amount to 2.8 and 2.6 arcmin, respectively. 

Tycho was able to afford such a magnificent 
observatory because his annual income from various 
fiefdoms was the equivalent of 1% of the Danish 
government's income, and this continued for a period of 
nearly 30 yr. It was not just money, of course, that led to 
the improvement in instrumentation. More than one of 
Tycho’s metal instruments required the workmanship of 
five or six people over a period of 3 yr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Tycho’s fortunes, both literally and figuratively, began 
to decline in 1588 after the death of Tycho’s patron, the 
Danish king Frederick II. Tycho left Hven in 1597 and his 
observatory fell into disuse. 

JOHANNES HEVELIUS (1611-1687), the son of a prosperous 
brewer of Danzig (Gdansk), built what was for a short 
time the world’s leading observatory. He copied a number 
of Tycho’s instruments, building many quadrants and 
sextants of wood or copper. For observing the Moon and 
planets he constructed refractors up to 150 feet in focal 
length, in which the objective was mounted on a tall mast. 
However, for stellar positions he preferred the unaided 
eye, as he explicitly stated in his Machina coelestis (1673). 
This precipitated a controversy with Robert Hooke, who 
was a strong advocate of telescopic sights. EDMOND HALLEY 
was compelled to visit Danzig in 1679 to try to resolve 
the controversy. For 2 months Halley observed with a 
telescope fitted with sights while Hevelius used naked-eye 
instruments. Their observations were of equal accuracy, 
slightly less than 1 arcmin. The Selenographia (1647) of 
Hevelius had been a milestone in lunar mapping, while 
his posthumous star catalog (1690) contains the positions 
of 1564 stars. 


The rise of national observatories 

First era: 1576-1725 

We may distinguish three eras in the construction of 
national observatories. Tycho’s island observatory was, 
in effect, a national observatory, but the Paris Observatory 
(established 1667) was the prototype of the national 
observatories that followed. Astronomers in Paris, 
along with those at the Greenwich Observatory (1675), 
Berlin (1701), and St Petersburg (1725), were dedicated 
to practical matters of national importance: improving 
navigation (especially the determination of longitude at 
sea), geodesy, calendar reform, producing accurate stellar 
coordinates and the determination of ephemerides of the 
Sun, Moon and planets. 

The Paris and Greenwich observatories stand out 
as institutional models on which many subsequent 
observatories were based. The Paris Observatory reflected 
the splendor of the court of Louis XIV, and many 
significant astronomers were associated with it. Jean 
Dominique Cassini (1625-1712), his son, grandson and 
great-grandson, all of whom were unofficial directors at 
Paris, formed a most notable astronomical dynasty (see 
CASSINI DYNASTY). The first Cassini discovered four moons 
of Saturn and the division of the ring system named 
after him. Paris astronomers used extremely long focal 
length refractors (up to 136 feet), mounted on tall masts, to 
observe the planets and Moon. Ole R6mer demonstrated 
the finite nature of the speed of light from observations of 
Jupiter’s Galilean satellites. Paris astronomers carried out 
the first geodetic surveys, covering the full arc of meridian 
of France by 1700, and were later involved in expeditions 
to Peru and Lapland. 

From the outset both Paris and Greenwich were 
mandated to aid navigation, and the production of nautical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Pulkovo Observatory, originally completed in 1839, 
was completely destroyed during the Second World War. It was 
rebuilt by 1954. This is the main building as it appeared in 1989. 
(Photo by Kevin Krisciunas.) 


almanacs wasa way of doing this. The French Connoissance 
de Temps first appeared in 1679, and the Nautical Almanac 
in 1767. In 1795 production of the Connoissance became the 
responsibility of the newly created Bureau des Longitudes, 
which supervised the work of the Paris Observatory. In 
Britain the Board of Longitude supervised the work of 
the Greenwich Observatory from 1714 to 1828. By then, 
with the existence of accurate star positions, ephemerides 
and the invention of the marine chronometer, the problem 
of determining one’s geographical position at sea was 
essentially solved. 

The buildings, staff size and funding level of the 
Greenwich Observatory were, until the 20th century, 
modest compared with those of Paris. Several of the 
Astronomers Royal, such as Flamsteed, Halley, Bradley, 
Maskelyne and especially GEORGE BIDDELL AIRY (1801-1892), 
were among the most important astronomers of their 
day. Airy organized the observatory as an astronomical 
factory with himself as factory director and sought to carry 
out the observatory’s mission (data acquisition, reduction 
and publication of results) as accurately and efficiently as 
possible. 


Second era: 1820-1918 
The second era of national observatory building was char- 
acterized by offshoots from previous national observato- 
ries (such as Royal Observatory Cape, South Africa, 1820), 
by newer observatories of younger nations (United States 
Naval Observatory, 1839) and later the rise of astrophysi- 
cal observatories (Potsdam, Prussia, 1874). Other national 
observatories of the second era include Pulkovo (Russia, 
1839) (figure 1), the Chilean National Observatory (1852), 
the Argentine National Observatory (1870), the Smithso- 
nian Astrophysical Observatory (USA, 1891) and Canada’s 
Dominion Observatory (1903) and Dominion Astrophysi- 
cal Observatory (1918). 

Of 19th century observatories, Pulkovo deserves 
special mention. Tycho had been given carte blanche 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by his sovereign to build the finest observatory in the 
world, and WILHELM STRUVE (1793-1864) was amply funded 
likewise by Tsar Nicholas I. Struve ordered an Ertel 
transit instrument (for the determination of absolute right 
ascensions), an Ertel vertical circle (for the determination 
of absolute declinations), a Repsold meridian circle (for 
the determination of differential stellar coordinates) and 
prime vertical transit (for the determination of aberration 
and nutation), a Merz & Mahler heliometer (for the 
determination of angular sizes or angular separations) 
and the 15 in Merz & Mahler refractor (for the discovery 
and measurement of double stars). This refractor was the 
largest telescope in the world at that time; a twin was built 
for Harvard College Observatory in 1847. 

The instruments listed above testify to the maturation 
of positional astronomy as a field of endeavor. Not 
only did Pulkovo astronomers measure some of the 
first stellar parallaxes and discover many double stars, 
they also produced the most accurate values for the 
constants of precession, aberration and nutation—values 
not superseded until 1964. 

It is important to note that progress in astronomy 
depended very greatly on progress in instrument making 
and optics. Thomas Tompion, George Graham, John Bird, 
Jesse Ramsden, Joseph Fraunhofer, Edward Troughton, 
Carl Zeiss, Alvan Clark, Alvan Graham Clark, Howard 
Grubb and George Ritchey are some of the men who made 
significant contributions to instrument making during this 
era. 


Third era: 1956-present 
The present era of national observatory building is 
characterized by national or international consortia, large 
budgets and the investigation of celestial objects at 
all electromagnetic wavelengths. From ground-based 
observatories we may investigate optical, infrared, radio, 
and submillimeter waves. Because of absorption by water 
vapor in the Earth’s atmosphere of certain infrared and 
submillimeter waves, we must make some observations 
from balloons and aircraft. Ultraviolet, x-ray and gamma- 
ray astronomy must be carried out from satellites. 
Significant national observatories of the third era 
include the National Radio Astronomy Observatory 
(USA, 1956), Kitt Peak National Observatory (USA, 
1957), National Radio Astronomy Observatory (Australia, 
1959), Cerro-Tololo Inter-American Observatory (Chile, 
1963) (figure 2), European Southern Observatory (Chile, 
1964), Anglo-Australian Observatory (Australia, 1967), the 
Kuiper Airborne Observatory (USA, 1975-1995) and the 
Space Telescope Science Institute (1981). 


Private observatories 

Not all significant astronomical work is carried out at 
observatories funded by federal governments, universities 
and research foundations. In the late 18th century and 
throughout the 19th religious orders (notably the Jesuits) 
and various (usually wealthy) individuals established 
their own private observatories. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The most accomplished private astronomer of all time 
was the German-English astronomer William Herschel 
(1738-1822) (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). He pioneered the 
production of larger and larger reflecting telescopes (up to 
48 in in diameter), whose light-gathering power enabled 
him to establish the field of galactic astronomy. His 
discovery of the planet Uranus in 1781 won him a royal 
pension that enabled him to give up his profession of 
music, and he moved to the neighborhood of Windsor 
Castle where his only obligation was to demonstrate the 
heavens to the royal family when requested to do so. He 
carried out deeper and deeper surveys of the northern sky, 
discovered hundreds of double stars and many hundreds 
of nebulae, and laid the groundwork for studies of the 
evolution of stars and stellar systems. 

Herschel’s son John followed in his father’s footsteps 
and took an 18 in, 20 foot focal length reflector to South 
Africa where from 1834 to 1838 he conducted a southern 
sky survey that completed his father’s work. The nebulae 
discovered by the Herschels were to form the basis of 
Dreyer’s New General Catalogue (1888). 

Following Herschel’s discovery of Uranus, the 
German astronomer JOHANN HIERONYMUS SCHROTER (1745- 
1816) quit his post in Hanover and moved to the small town 
of Lilienthal to devote himself to observational astronomy. 
He built what was then the largest observatory on the 
European continent, and was assisted by Karl Ludwig 
Harding (who discovered the third asteroid Juno in 1804) 
and Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel. Schréter made detailed 
drawings of features on the lunar surface and believed he 
detected changes in the structure of some of those features. 
He inspired many observers to dedicate themselves to 
planetary studies. 

William Parsons, the THIRD EARL OF ROSSE (1800-1867), 
in 1839 constructed at Parsonstown in central Ireland a 
reflector with a mirror 3 feet in diameter, and he followed 
this in 1845 with a monster with a mirror 6 feet in 
diameter. The ‘Leviathan of Parsonstown’ faced in a 
southerly direction, slung between masonry walls. Within 
weeks of completion it revealed the spiral nature of certain 
nebulae. 

In 1856 WILLIAM HUGGINS (1824-1910) established a 
private observatory at Tulse Hill, near London, where he 
observed the spectra of stars and other celestial objects. 
Huggins was the first to prove that some nebulae are 
composed entirely of glowing gas. After his marriage 
in 1875 to Margaret Lindsay Murray, husband and wife 
formed a productive scientific partnership. 

In 1868, simultaneously with the Frenchman Jules 
Janssen, the English amateur NORMAN LOCKYER (1836-1920) 
used a spectroscope attached to a refractor to observe 
solar prominences outside of a total solar eclipse. He 
was subsequently appointed head of the Solar Physics 
Observatory at South Kensington. When he retired in 1911 
he established his own observatory at Salcombe Regis. 

The American HENRY DRAPER (1837-1882) was a pioneer 
of astrophotography. His widow funded significant 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory illuminated 
by moonlight. The largest dome houses the 4 m reflector. (Photo 
by Kevin Krisciunas.) 


Figure 3. Lick Observatory, ca 1936. The large white dome 
houses the 36 in refractor, still the second largest in the world. 


spectroscopic research carried out by astronomers at the 
Harvard College Observatory. 

GEORGE ELLERY HALE (1868-1938), the son of a wealthy 
Chicago industrialist, invented the spectroheliograph 
while an undergraduate at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. He established a private solar observatory 
in his parents’ backyard in Kenwood, then a suburb 
of Chicago; this later became part of the University 
of Chicago. Hale became the greatest observatory 
entrepreneur of all time, setting up the Yerkes Observatory 
(1897) and the Mt Wilson Observatory (1904). He was 
the driving force behind the establishment of Palomar 
Observatory (1948). 

Today, as a result of advances in electronics and 
imaging devices, many amateurs obtain significant hard 
data for professional research projects. Photoelectric and 
CCD photometry by amateurs has been very important for 
variable star research and has even led to the discovery 
of a new class of pulsating stars. Astrometry from CCD 
imagery routinely provides data on recently discovered 
asteroids, which allows the calculation of their orbits. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Until very recently the most successful discoverer of 
supernovae in other galaxies was the Australian amateur 
Robert Evans. 


Mountaintop observatories and the modern era 
As a result of his optical researches, Isaac Newton realized 
that the Earth’s atmosphere acts as a lens of sorts and that 
one could achieve much better astronomical image clarity 
by siting one’s telescope on ‘some lofty mountain’ (see 
OBSERVATORIES AND THEIR LOCATION). 

In 1741 the French astronomer Francois de Plantade 
carried out the first high-altitude astronomical observa- 
tions near Pic du Midi in the French Pyrenees. Unfortu- 
nately, he died at the foot of the Pic, although the cause of 
his death is not known. 

The next small step leading to improved observing 
was taken with the establishment in 1783 of Dunsink 
Observatory, an institute of Trinity College, Dublin. The 
observatory was intentionally sited some 8 km outside 
the city. It also had the first fully functional rotating 
hemispherical dome, and the primary telescope was 
mounted on a pier which was structurally (and therefore 
vibrationally) isolated from the walls of the building. 

In 1856 the Scottish astronomer Charles Piazzi Smyth 
spent nearly 4 months at Tenerife in the Canary Islands 
and demonstrated that mountaintop observing was both 
desirable (for image clarity) and viable (for humans). 

The first mountaintop observatory intended to be 
permanent was Lick Observatory (figure 3), which was 
completed in 1888. Situated at the 1280 m summit of 
Mt Hamilton, near San Jose, California, it boasted a 
36 in refractor by Alvan Clark, then the world’s largest. 
After the subsequent spectacular success of the Mt Wilson 
Observatory and the Palomar Observatory, it became clear 
that the best seeing was obtained at mountaintop sites 
within 50 miles of the ocean. Because of the proximity 
of the ocean, one gets a smooth, laminar flow of air 
over the coastal mountains when the prevailing wind 
conditions are in effect. This has been borne out by 
the establishment of many other observatories during 
the second half of the 20th century. The highest major 
observatory in the world (at 4205 m) is at Mauna Kea on 
the island of Hawaii. From a very modest start in 1964, 
Mauna Kea’s astronomical installations expanded greatly 
and now include the University of Hawaii 2.2 m telescope, 
the Canada—France—Hawaii Telescope (3.6 m), the NASA 
Infrared Telescope Facility (3.0 m), the United Kingdom 
Infrared Telescope (3.8 m), the James Clerk Maxwell 
submillimeter telescope (15 m), the Caltech Submillimeter 
Observatory (10.4 m), one of the nine elements of the Very 
Long Baseline Array (25 m radio telescope), the two Keck 
telescopes (each 10 m), the Japanese optical and infrared 
telescope Subaru (8.3 m), the northern Gemini telescope 
(8.1 m) and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 
Submillimeter Array. 

At present, the highest established telescopes are the 
twin 0.7 m reflectors of the Meyer-Womble Observatory 
at Mt Evans, Colorado (elevation 4313 m). A still higher 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Number of telescopes with aperture > D meters (ca. 2001) 


100 


1 2 5 10 


D (meters) 


Figure 4. The number of optical and infrared telescopes with 
primary objectives larger than a given size, ca 2001. We include 
all telescopes with diameter D greater than or equal to 1.5m. We 
count the two 8.4 m diameter elements of the Large Binocular 
Telescope, the four 8.2 m diameter elements of the Very Large 
Telescope and the two 6.5 m telescopes of the Magellan Project 
as separate instruments. Each of the 10 m Keck Telescopes 
contains 36 hexagonal mirror segments, while the 11 m 
Hobby-Eberly Telescope has 91 hexagonal segments. (Diagram 
by Kevin Krisciunas.) 


observatory is being built at 5000 m about 40 km east of 
San Pedro de Atacama in Chile. This is the centimeter- 
wavelength Cosmic Background Imager, which will 
investigate the small ripples in the 3 K background 
radiation left over from the Big Bang. This observatory will 
have an oxygen-enhanced environment for the operators. 

At the time of the publication of this article there will 
be more than 90 optical or infrared telescopes in operation 
around the world with diameters of 1.5 m or larger (see 
figure 4). This includes the now single-mirror 6.5 m 
MMT at Mt Hopkins, Arizona, the twin 6.5 m reflectors 
of the Magellan Project (situated at Las Campanas, Chile), 
the twin 8.1 m Gemini telescopes (one at Mauna Kea, 
Hawaii, the other at Cerro Pachon, Chile), the four 8.2 m 
elements of the European Southern Observatory’s Very 
Large Telescope (at Cerro Paranal, Chile), Japan’s 8.3 m 
Subaru Telescope (at Mauna Kea), the two 8.4 m elements 
of the Large Binocular Telescope (at Mt Graham, Arizona), 
the two 10 m Keck telescopes at Mauna Kea and the 11 m 
Hobby-Eberly spectroscopic telescope at Mt Locke, Texas. 
In fact, by the beginning of the 21st century more than half 
the area of telescopes larger than 1.0 m will be in telescopes 
larger than 8 m. 

Given the expense of such facilities (measured in units 
of hundreds of millions of dollars), one might naturally 
ask why so many large telescopes are being built. It is a 
reflection of the blossoming of extragalactic observational 
astronomy, the desire to give hard data to cosmologists for 
testing their models and the wish to discover and study 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatories: History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


intrinsically faint objects such as asteroids in the outer solar 
system, brown dwarf stars and extrasolar planets. 

The design and construction of these state-of-the-art 
telescopes has required the development of computer- 
controlled mirror mounts, better-ventilated domes (to 
eliminate as much as possible the degradation of the 
visibility due to air in the dome), thin mirrors (as in 
the case of most of the telescopes mentioned above) or 
multimirror systems (36 hexagonal segments in the case of 
each of the Keck Telescopes, 91 segments in the case of the 
Hobby-Eberly Telescope). Modern instrumentation often 
uses techniques borrowed from spy satellites to achieve 
diffraction-limited performance. Whereas photographic 
plates a century ago had a quantum efficiency (QE) of less 
than 1% and photomultiplier tubes typically had peak QEs 
of a few per cent, modern instrumentation can achieve QEs 
of 70%. Such instruments, fed by the large objectives of 
the present generation of telescopes, are producing many 
spectacular results. Furthermore, modern computing 
capabilities are allowing digital celestial surveys which 
would have been technically impossible only a few years 
ago. 


Bibliography 

Dick S J 1990 Pulkovo Observatory and the national 
observatory movement: an historical overview 
Inertial Coordinate System on the Sky ed J H Lieske and 
V K Abalakin (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 29-38 

Howse D 1986 The Greenwich list of observatories: a 
world list of astronomical observatories, instruments 
and clocks, 1670-1850 J. Hist. Astron. 17(4) (1994 
Amendment list no. 1 J. Hist. Astron. 25(3) 207-18 

Krisciunas K 1988 Astronomical Centers of the World 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Miller P 1992 Sternwarten in Bildern: Architektur und 
Geschichte der Sternwarten von den Anfangen bis ca. 1950 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Needham J and Ling W 1959 Mathematics and the Sciences 
of the Heavens and the Earth (Science and Civilisation 
in China vol 3) (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Sayili A 1981 The Observatory in Islam (New York: Arno) 

Thoren V E 1990 The Lord of Uraniborg: a Biography of Tycho 
Brahe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Kevin Krisciunas 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatorio Astronomico Nacional, Colombia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatorio Astronomico Nacional, 
Colombia 


The Observatorio Astronémico Nacional (OAN) was 
founded by José Celestino Mutis in the framework of 
the ‘Expedicion Botanica’ on 20 August 1803. His first 
astronomer was Francisco Jose de Caldas. By the turn of 
the century, Julio Garavito worked in celestial mechanics— 
a crater on the far side of the Moon bears his name. 

Nowadays, the OAN leads a postgraduate program, 
‘Especializacion en Astronomia’, and the staff work 
in areas of celestial mechanics, statistical astronomy, 
cosmology, stellar structure, instrumentation, national 
ephemerides and parallel computing. The OAN is situated 
in Bogota, Colombia (South America), and at present 
belongs to the ‘Universidad Nacional de Colombia’ at the 
Faculty of Sciences. 

For further information see 
http://www.observatorio.unal.edu.co/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatorio Astronomico Nacional, Mexico (OAN) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatorio Astronomico Nacional, 
Mexico (OAN) 


Located in the mountains of the Sierra San Pedro Martir 
in Baja California. The observatory operates three 
telescopes—a 2.1 m, 1.5 m and 0.84 m. The observatory 
offices and workshops are located in Ensenada, beside the 
Pacific Ocean. OAN isa part of the Instituto de Astronomia 
of the Universidad Nacional Aut6énoma de México. 
For further information see 
http: / /www.astrosen.unam.mx/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Observatorio del Roque de Los Muchachos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatorio del Roque de Los 
Muchachos 


The Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos, at a height 
of 2400 m above sea level, is situated on the island of 
La Palma (Canary Islands) and belongs to the INstiITUTO 
DE ASTROFISICA DE CANARIAS (IAC). It contains one of the 
world’s most extensive collections of telescopes, which 
are operated by several countries, the largest being the 
William Herschel Telescope (4.2 m). Apart from several 
nocturnal telescopes, the Observatory houses two solar 
telescopes, an automatic meridian circle and an array 
of cosmic-ray detectors. In 2003, the Gran Telescopio 
Canarias (GTC), an optico-infrared telescope of 10 m 
diameter, is planned to come into operation. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.iac.es/folleto/orml.htm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatorio del Teide 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatorio del Teide 


The Observatorio del Teide, at a height of 2400 m above 
sea level on the island of Tenerife (Canary Islands), 
forms part of the INSTITUTO DE ASTROFISICA DE CANARIAS 
(IAC). It contains several solar telescopes (the largest of 
these being greater than 90 cm in diameter) operated 
by different countries, as well as helioseismological 
instrumentation, radiotelescopes to study the cosmic 
microwave background, various optical telescopes, a 
1.55 m infrared telescope and an optical ground station 
for communication with satellites and the cataloging of 
space debris. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.iac.es/folleto/teide.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observatory 


A structure from which astronomical observations may be 
made. In the case of ground-based optical and infrared 
astronomy, an observatory is a structure within which a 
telescope is housed and which allows the selected area of 
sky to be observed while at the same time providing the 
instrument and observer with protection from the wind 
and, to some extent, extraneous light. In the context of 
radioastronomy, where, in most cases, the radiotelescopes 
are out in the open and the observers in a building, the 
term ‘observatory’ relates to the complex of instruments 
and buildings on the observing site. 

The classic design of observatory has an opening slot 
in a hemispherical dome that rotates on a circular wall. 
In some cases, the ‘dome’ is cylindrical (like a cake tin) 
or polygonal. In others, the entire building rotates or, 
in smaller sizes, the entire roof slides off to one side. In 
order to minimize the effects of light pollution, absorption 
of light in the atmosphere and scattering of light by dust 
particles suspended in the atmosphere, and to attain the 
steadiest possible atmospheric conditions, most of the 
major new and recently constructed telescopes are housed 
in observatories that are clustered together on one or 
other of a small number of high, isolated, mountain sites. 
Among the principal sites are Mauna Kea, Hawaii (at an 
altitude of 4200 m, the world’s highest major concentration 
of observatories), Cerro Tololo, La Silla and Cerro Paranal, 
all in the Chilean Andes, La Palma (Canary Isles) and Kitt 
Peak, Arizona. 


See also: environmental threat to astronomy, infrared 
astronomy, optical astronomy, radioastronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Observing Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observing Asteroids 


The asteroids were so named in the early 1800s by 
William Herschel as they appeared star like to an observ- 
er (figure 1). They appear just like stars when observed 
with amateur equipment, but stars that move relative to 
the background star field. 

Initially amateurs observed asteroids purely for the 
thrill of discovery, but in the 1940s, they became known 
as vermin because they ‘contaminated’ the sky survey 
plates taken at the large observatories for mapping the 
stars and galaxies. Interest returned in the 1960s when 
the prospect of sending space probes through the main 
asteroid belt to the outer planets became a reality. The 
discovery of asteroids in the outer solar system in 1976 
and beyond Neptune in 1992 prompted further studies 
as these were examples of bodies that had formed in the 
early solar system. There is now much observational 
activity directed to the discovery and follow-up of NEAR- 
EARTH ASTEROIDS as realization of the risk and effects of 
impact have slowly dawned on both scientists and the 
public at large. 

Many amateurs begin asteroid observing by learn- 
ing to track them down and keeping a log of those 
viewed. Beyond this ‘trophy count’ there is quite a vari- 
ety of observation that can be done visually and much 
more with the use of a CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
camera. It is possible to image the brighter asteroids with 
a CCD camera and a 135 mm focal length telephoto lens 
mounted on an undriven camera tripod (figure 2). With 
no instrument at all, there is little to be done in the field 
of asteroid observing—at a favorable opposition 4 Vesta 
can reach naked eye visibility but even then a clear dark 
sky is necessary to allow it to be seen. However, with 
even small binoculars several examples can be seen at 
favorable opposition and this number increases signifi- 


Figure 1. Asteroid 15 Eunomia (arrowed) in Pegasus on 11 
September 2001—135mm lens and CCD. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


q 


Figure 2. An undriven 4 second exposure of 4 Vesta in Taurus 
—31 December 2001. 


cantly as the size of instrument used is increased. A per- 
manent record can be made with photographic film or a 
CCD imager for study later. 

The first task is to find the asteroid. As a minimum it 
is necessary to plot the position on a star chart to take to 
the telescope so that a visual identification can be made. 
On confusing fields where there are a number of possible 


- pa ie" ae 3 2 ong 
: bere e 
12 5 a ie - Si i 4 


Sone 
Figure 3. 135mm focal length lens and Starlight Express MX- 
516 CCD on a Celestron NexStar GoTo tripod mounting. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Observing Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars it is necessary to wait for perhaps an hour to identify 
which object has moved and is hence the asteroid. I cur- 
rently use a telephoto lens-CCD on a driven GoTo mount 
(figure 3) so I only need to know the position to send the 
imager and can find the asteroid on the resulting image. 
Modern planetarium-type computer programs, such as 
GUIDES from Project Pluto, can plot a starfield with the 
asteroid shown and can in some cases also drive the tele- 
scope to the field (a far cry from what could be done in the 
1950s). 

Once the asteroid is found there are a number of 
things that can be done. The brightness can be deduced 
either visually or preferably from an image. Suitable 
comparisons can be taken from GUIDE8 by choosing 
HIPPARCOS stars of similar color to that of the asteroid. For 
a CCD image a V-filter should be used to ensure that the 
light passed is similar to eyeball observation. The Sony 
chip has a pseudo-visual window and can be used care- 
fully with no filter as long as care is taken in the choice of 
comparison star. From this an indication of how the 
asteroid’s brightness changes as it comes to and recedes 
from opposition (figure 4). Taking images of one asteroid 
over a night allows the rotation period to be determined 
(figure 5). Typically these are between 6 and 12 h 
although there are many examples known with periods 
shorter or longer than this. 

Modern computer software allows CCD images to 
be used for positional measures. This is assuming that 
the start and end of the exposure is accurately timed and 
a suitable positional catalog is used (or downloaded 
from the internet for the field imaged). 

Frequently asteroids occult (see OCCULTATION) field 
stars as they follow their orbital motion. As asteroids are 
relatively small (most less than 300 km in diameter) the 
path across the Earth is small. In recent years the posi- 
tions of the stars and the orbits of the asteroids have been 
so refined that most predictions now have an uncertain- 
ty of typically 100 km—before HIPPARCOS and the 
orbital work, the uncertainty was 10 times greater or 
even more. Timing the events (or recording a miss) are 


11 Parthénepe 1997 and 2001/2 
PEP and CCD 


tude 
a om 
g 6 


magni 
~ 
c=] 
ao 


a 
2 
= 
[a] 
2) 
a 
<< 


z 


ma 
oa 
3 


20 
Phase angle / degrees: 


Figure 4. Phase curve for asteroid 11 Parthenope from CCD and 
photoelectric photometry. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


44 Nysa 
$5 


P = 6.49420.030 hours 


5.6 


Bz 
3 
= 
S 
e 6.8 
£ 
> 

8.9 

ir 
8.08 O Jang 1992 
% Repeated paints 
314 ea ea 
0.0 O2 04 o.6 oa 10 12 


Phase 


Figure 5. Rotation light curve for 44 Nysa from photoelectric 
photometry. 


used to prepare a shape and size profile of the asteroids. 
Most of the information we have is from Earth-based 
observation as there are only a limited number of space 
missions that can be flown and a larger number of poten- 
tial targets. 

There are many observers who cooperate with pro- 
fessional programs to study near-Earth objects (comets 
can also be in this group). Very few observers are now 
discovering new objects (pre 2000 there were many 
unknown at 16th magnitude) as most discoveries are 
now 19th magnitude or fainter. Important aspects in this 
field are follow-up observations to define the orbits or 
photometry to check the rotation periods. Notices are 
given for those which will be studied by radar from 
Arecibo and rotations are studied using CCDs which 
help with the radar work. 

From being a Cinderella field, the study of asteroids 
is now of high importance. All levels of study can be 
undertaken using simple equipment or the most modern 
of technology. As such there is much to interest all levels 
of observer. 

Andrew Hollis 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Obsevatoire d’Haute-Provence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Obsevatoire d’Haute-Provence 


The Obsevatoire d’Haute-Provence is situated in south- 
eastern France at Saint-Michel-l’Observatoire, at an 
altitude of 650 m. Founded in 1937, it was originally 
an observational national facility for French astronomers. 
Now it has become an astronomical institute of the French 
CNRS with several fields of activity. 

Astaff of astronomers and post-graduate students are 
active in fields such as quasars, x-ray binaries, interstellar 
matter etc. Visiting astronomers use the 1.93 m and 1.52 m 
telescopes and their high-accuracy spectrographs with 
which the first extra-solar planets have been discovered 
(1995). Smaller telescopes are used for educational 
purposes or specific experiments. 

All instrumentation including CCD controllers is 
observatory designed and built. Partnerships are 
developed with other institutes for the design of 
space experiments and the construction of the focal 
instrumentation of ESO VLT. 

Research and development of new technologies 
related to large arrays of telescopes and interferometry are 
carried out. 

A Department of Geophysics is active in research on 
the Earth’s atmosphere as a member of the ‘Network for 
Detection of Stratospheric Changes’. 

For further information see 
http://www.obs-hp.fr/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Occultation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Occultation 


The motion of celestial bodies sometimes causes their 
paths to cross on the heavens. One says that the 
background object (usually a star) is occulted by the front 
object. Usually, a star is occulted by a solar system body: 
a planet, a satellite or an asteroid. The occultation of the 
Sun by the Moon is called a ‘solar eclipse’. In fact, an 
eclipse is the disappearance of a body in the shadow of 
another one and an occultation (from the Latin occultare, 
to hide) happens when a body hides another body: in a 
lunar eclipse the Moon is in the Earth’s shadow but a 
solar eclipse is in fact the occultation of the Sun by the 
Moon. 

The occultation of stars by the Moon has been 
observed for a long time to study the stars. Later, stellar 
occultations by any solar system objects have been 
observed to study the planets, their atmospheres and their 
ring systems and small bodies such as satellites or 
asteroids. Occultations have now become a tool to 
explore the environment of other stars. 


Lunar occultations 

The disappearance of a bright star (Regulus, Antares, 
Aldebaran) behind the Moon is not a rare phenomenon, 
even if it is very difficult to observe without resorting to 
instrumental aid. However, some disappearances are 
reported in astronomical treatises. Copernicus observed a 
lunar occultation of Aldebaran in 1497. These 
observations allow one to deduce the relative proximity 
of the Moon and the very small apparent size of the stars. 
Sometimes, the star disappears in two steps, and this is 
interpreted as being because the light source is a binary. 
The abruptness of the occultation leads also to the 
conclusion that the Moon has no or at most a very 
tenuous atmosphere. 

When photographic emulsions became sensitive 
enough, it was possible to record the rapid fluctuations of 
the stellar light before its disappearance and to evaluate 
the star’s diameter. By 1980, a hundred star diameters 
had been measured with this method. The accuracy of the 
record was such that one had to take into account the fact 
that the occultation of a star by the Moon is a diffraction 
phenomenon: this means that the propagation of light 
when the star approaches the Moon’s edge creates 
interference. The light fluctuates before extinction and 
reaches a maximum intensity which is 1.37 times the 
nominal star intensity. This flickering is extremely rapid, 
two successive peaks being separated by 0.02 s. That is 
why records on rapidly moving film were necessary to 
detect the diffraction fringes. We had to await the 
discovery of photometric detectors sensitive and rapid 
enough to exploit this phenomenon and obtain accurate 
measures of stellar diameters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A tool to explore the solar system 

Because they have a very small apparent size, 
occultations of bright stars by objects of the solar system 
are rare. Modern instruments, such as rapid aperture- 
photometers and charge-coupled devices, have allowed 
one since 1952 (photoelectric record of the occultation of 
o Arietis by Jupiter) to observe occultations by planets, 
satellites, comets and asteroids. These observations are 
very fruitful tools to explore these objects. 

e The exact position of the occulting object can be 
computed. The mutual occultations (and eclipses) 
of the satellites of JUPITER and SATURN occur each 
time the Earth passes through their satellite orbital 
planes, every 6 yr in the case of Jupiter. The 
principal value of the observation of these ‘mutual 
phenomena’ is in the improvement of our 
knowledge of the orbits of the satellites but it also 
allows us to detect small features on the satellites 
such as volcanoes on Io. 

e When an occultation is observed from several 
observatories, the corresponding sections on the 
occulting object are separated by the same distance 
as between the observatories and the comparison of 
the lightcurves allows us to reconstruct the shape of 
the occulting object (figure 1). When their mass is 
known, the extremely precise size of some asteroids 
obtained with this method has made possible the 
determination of their density which provides clues 
to both composition and origin. An unexpected 
offshoot of minor planet occultations was the 
detection of possible satellites to some minor 
planets (Herculina, Melpomene, 146 Lucina), each 
satellite detected as a brief secondary dip in the 
occultation lightcurve. The observation by GALILEO 
of the double asteroid Ida and Dactyl has confirmed 
the reality of asteroid satellites. 


Figure 1. Limb profile of the asteroid 2 Pallas deduced from 
observations of chords during the 29 May 1983 occultation of 1 
Vulpeculae. (From Dunham et al 1983.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Occultation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e The extinction of a star’s light behind a planet’s 
atmosphere reveals the latter’s temperature profile 
and the possible presence of haze but also the 
presence of gravity waves, some structures which 
seem to be a constant in all the dense planetary 
atmosphere from the Earth to Neptune. When the 
star disappears behind the atmosphere, it strongly 
sparkles before disappearing. In fact, the 
atmosphere is not isothermal and local temperature 
variations betray variation of the refractive index. 
Just as the warm air above a heater distorts images, 
so the star twinkles when it passes behind the 
planetary atmosphere (figure 2 and figure 3). The 
measurement of these fluctuations provides a way 
to discover atmospheres. Pluto’s atmosphere has 
been discovered by this method. 

e A few lucky occultations have provided information 
about the shape of the planet’s atmosphere. The 
star’s light is focused by a circular atmospheric layer 
and this creates a bright spot in the middle of the 
planet’s shadow. The oblateness of the atmosphere 
gives to this spot the shape of a cardioid. If the 
observatory is at less than few tens of kilometers 
from the center of the planet’s shadow, a scan of this 
‘central flash’ is observed, which gives the global 
shape of the atmosphere. This phenomenon has been 
observed for Mars, Neptune, Titan (figure 2) and 
Triton. 

e Observations of occultations led to the discovery of 
the very narrow (few kilometers) and/or thin rings 
system of URANUS (1977) and NEPTUNE (1984), 
which are almost invisible with other methods of 
observation. The Uranian rings reveal their presence 
by nine symmetrical brief drops in the stellar flux 
before the immersion behind the planet and after the 
emersion. The incomplete rings of Neptune, called 
arcs, left astronomers puzzled as they observed only 
one drop. They had not imagined that incomplete 
rings could exist: in fact they cannot exist without 
the help of a satellite. This shepherd satellite was 
predicted by theoreticians after the discovery of the 
arcs and observed much later by Voyager 2. Thanks 
to successive occultations, the positions of the 
Uranian rings are now known with a precision of a 
few hundred meters. 


For these results it is necessary to record the star’s 
light with a very high frequency (100 points s“') and to 
know precisely the timing of the occultation: this is now 
possible with the GPS satellite network. This method of 
observation is very favorable for Uranus and Neptune, 
for which some tens of occultations have been observed. 
Taking advantage of the presence of methane in the 
atmosphere of these planets, the occultations are 
observed at the infrared wavelengths of 2.2 and 0.9 um: 
at these wavelengths, which correspond to absorption 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


m (km) 
nt) 2000 


-2000 


2000 90 
& (km) 


Figure 2. Geometry of the occultation of 28 Sagittarii by Titan, 
observed on 3 July 1989. W and N denote celestial west and 
north. The lines are the tracks of various stations in Titan’s 
shadow. Observers move from the right to the left in this 
diagram. The upper tracks, packed together, correspond to 
stations in Northern Europe (including Hanover); they pass near 
the center of the shadow and observe the central flash. The 
middle and lower tracks correspond respectively to stations in 
Italy and Israel. The dotted circle is at 425 km altitude, where 
the atmospheric pressure is 7 bar. (From Sicardy et al 1999.) 


—2000 


stellar flux 
0.5 


n 1 1 L 1 
22.64 22.66 22.68 22.7 22.72 22.74 


Universal Time 


Figure 3. Light curve of the occultation of 28 Sagittarii by 
Titan, observed from Hanover, Germany, by H J Bode and C 
Bittner with a 0.4 m telescope at 0.65 um wavelength. The 
normalized stellar flux is plotted in term of decimal Universal 
Time. The spikes visible during the immersion and the 
emersion are due to local temperature variations of the 
atmosphere. The central flash is created by the focusing of 
stellar light by a deep atmospheric layer. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Occultation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


bands of methane, the planet is darker than in the visible 
wavelengths, and the signal-to-noise ratio of the light 
curves is increased. Jupiter and Saturn are not such good 
candidates for this method of observation because they 
are too bright. However, in 1989, the very bright star 28 
Sagittarii (its visible magnitude is 5.5) was occulted by 
Saturn and its ring system (see SATURN: RINGS) and, 
1 day later, by its moon TITAN: this exceptional event has 
been a mine of information about the atmosphere of this 
satellite (see figures 2 and 3). 


Predictions and observations of occultations 
Satellites, or asteroids, much smaller than the planets, 
have a smaller chance to occult a bright star; moreover, 
the necessary task of prediction of occultation is then 
much more difficult. It is necessary to know as exactly as 
possible when and where the shadow of the occulting 
object will sweep the Earth to prepare for the 
observation. For this, astronomers compare the 
EPHEMERIDES of the planet or satellite with a sky map. 
The uncertainty in the shadow trajectory make the 
observation chancy from a given place. Some scientific 
teams have developed portable kits with a telescope and 
an acquisition system. They wait to determine precisely 
the shadow’s trajectory, a few days before the event, and 
they place the systems at the right location. The short- 
term predictions, the brevity of the events (less than a 
second for a ring and roughly | h for a giant planet) and 
their uniqueness make these observations very difficult. 
However, they are an unequalled tool for the exploration 
of the solar system, thanks to their high accuracy (up to 
1 km) for the determination of the dimensions of solar 
system bodies. 


Prospects for the future 

Stellar occultations are the only way to detect small 
objects in the outer solar system which are too faint to be 
detected directly: the future will make stellar occultations 
a tool for exploration of the asteroid family and the small 
satellites such as Charon or Triton but also of the KUIPER 
BELT, the residual protoplanetary disk which lies beyond 
Neptune. 

Sometimes, a star of a binary system is occulted by 
its dimmer companion. These so-called eclipsing binary 
are observed to determine their relative mass. 

An extraordinary object is the star B Pictoris: spectral 
signatures of objects passing in front of the star are 
observed and these phenomena are interpreted as comets 
occulting the star when they fall into it. 

The environment of stars can also be explored by 
searching for the extinction of the primary during the 
transit of giant planets. 

The search for transits of planets in front of the 
central star is a promising method to detect extrasolar 
planets: a planet passing in front of the star creates a very 
faint extinction. Thus, this method needs to detect an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


extremely small decrease of the stellar flux. The main 
limit to this method is the scintillation due to the Earth’s 
atmosphere. Observation from space will substantially 
improve the power of this method. 


Bibliography 

Dunham D W, Van Flandern T C, Millis R L , Chapman C R, 
Maley P D and Povenmire H 1983 The size and shape of 
(2) Pallas from its occultation of 1 Vulpeculae on 1983 
May 29. Bull. Am. Astron. Soc. 15 822 

Elliot J L and Olkin C B 1996 Probing planetary atmospheres 
with stellar occultations Annu. Rev. Earth Pl. Sci. 24 89- 
123 

Wamer B 1988 High Speed Astronomical Photometry 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Sicardy B, Ferri F, Roques F, Lecacheux J, Pau S, Brosh N, 
Nevo Y, Hubbard W, Reitsema H, Blanco C, Carreira E, 
Beisker W, Bittner C, Bode H, Bruns M, Denzau H, Nezel 
M, Riedel E, Struckmann H, Appleby G, Forrest R, 
Nicolson T, Hollis A and Miles R 1999 The structure of 
Titan's stratosphere from the 28 Sgr occultation. Icarus 
142 357-390 


Francoise Roques 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oceans 


Earth is a planet covered with oceans. This article 
describes these great bodies of water and the forces that 
shape their circulations. Also discussed are the latest 
observational techniques in oceanography with emphasis 
on remote sensing. Turning to the possibility of oceans on 
other worlds, the indirect evidence for ice-covered seas on 
Jupiter’s largest moons is reviewed. 

D H Lawrence once wrote: “They say the sea is 
cold, but the sea contains the hottest blood of all.’ These 
evocative words refer to whales in the sea, and they remind 
us that the topic of Earth’s oceans is larger than just the 
physics of waves and currents, but also encompasses the 
biology and ecology of much of the planet's living space. 

Humankind has always held a deep-seated fascina- 
tion for the marine world, and more than just as an abun- 
dant source of food and an avenue for transportation. In- 
terestingly, when spoken in reverse the poet’s words still 
make sense. Consider that seawater is about ten times 
saltier than blood, but that, by mass, ocean salt consists of 
55% chlorine (C17), 30% sodium (Na*), 8% sulfate (SO;,), 
4% magnesium (Mg*), 1% potassium (K*), and 1% calcium 
(Ca**). The corresponding percentages in human blood 
plasma are 51%, 44%, 0.6%, 0.3%, 2% and 0.7%. Except 
for sulfate and magnesium, which are much reduced in 
blood, the salt ions appear in roughly similar proportions 
in blood and seawater. In this sense ‘our blood contains 
the sea’. 


Seven seas 
Like a map of the constellations, a world map of Earth 
shows the patterns and locations of the ocean basins as they 
appear to us in the present epoch. But, just as the last frame 
of a movie provides only a hint of the plot, so too a world 
map hides most of the history of the endless movements 
of the continents. The solar system is 4.6 billion years old, 
based on radiogenic dating of primitive meteorites, and 
one need travel back in time only 2% of that age to see the 
Atlantic Ocean disappear. Continental drift proceeds at 
a typical rate of about 2 cm yr, which adds up to more 
than two trips around the circumference of Earth over the 
age of the solar system. The Seven Seas are going places! 
The Seven Seas are the Mediterranean Sea, the Indian 
Ocean, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Black Sea, the 
Adriatic Sea and the Caspian Sea. Today, we have a global 
view of Earth and speak in terms of four oceans, the Pacific, 
the Atlantic, the Indian and the Arctic. 


Arctic Ocean 

Earth’s south polar region is covered by the continent of 
Antarctica, but its north polar region has no continental 
land mass or islands, instead, it is the location of the 
planet’s smallest ocean, the Arctic Ocean. This remote 
body of water is nearly landlocked, with half of its sea 
floor made up by continental shelf. There is a central basin 
that contains three submarine ridges; the deepest point is 
4.7 km below sea level. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The majority of the Arctic Ocean is north of the Arctic 
Circle and hence stays in continuous darkness during the 
winter and continuous sunlight during the summer. The 
ocean is mostly covered by sea ice that is 3 to 4m thick, but 
where the ice opens up there is abundant life. The salinity 
of the ocean decreases from wintertime to summertime as 
the ice cap melts and shrinks in area (sea-ice melt has about 
one-tenth the salinity of average sea water). 

The shortest route between North America and Russia 
is via the Arctic Ocean, and there are active collaborations 
between Russian, Canadian and US scientists focused 
on establishing the ocean’s circulation patterns and 
interactions with the Atlantic Ocean via the Greenland Sea 
and Pacific Ocean via the Bering Strait. There have even 
been some recent attempts to find analogies between the 
morphology of pressure ridges in Arctic sea ice and the 
linear features seen in spacecraft images of Jupiter’s icy 
satellite Europa. 


Indian Ocean 

The only ocean included in the original Seven Seas is 
the Indian Ocean, which is nearest to the world’s oldest 
civilizations. It covers about one-fifth of the Earth’s surface 
and is somewhat smaller than the Atlantic Ocean. It is 
bordered by Africa and the Arabian Peninsula to the west 
and Asia to the north, and because of this prime location 
has had a long, and sometimes contentious, maritime 
history. 

Weather in the Indian Ocean region is dominated by 
monsoons (which comes from the Arabic word for season). 
These torrential wind and rain storms start June, with 
the heaviest rains hitting India in October, November and 
December. The winds are driven by differences in heating 
between the land and sea, and because they arise suddenly 
and cause much damage there is an effort to better monitor 
the storm breeding grounds in the Indian Ocean using 
satellite remote sensing. 

Near the surface, the Indian Ocean’s water is 
relatively poor in nutrients (it is warm and buoyant and 
hence resists mixing with nutrient-rich deep water). For 
this reason, phytoplankton (microscopic plants) do not 
thrive, and the ocean is not heavily populated by fish. 
The circulation in the southern basin is counterclockwise 
and the winds there are relatively mild. In the winter, 
the monsoon winds reverse the ocean currents around the 
northern basin from clockwise to counterclockwise. 


Effects of rotation 
Large-scale circulations in the oceans are affected by the 
EARTH’S ROTATION in the same manner that winds are affected 
in the atmosphere. Instead of rushing down-gradient to 
fill in low-pressure regions, which is the ‘nature abhors 
a vacuum’ direction that a fluid takes in a non-rotating 
system, Coriolis accelerations cause ocean currents to 
circulate around highs and lows in the water. 

The balance between the horizontal pressure-gradient 
force and the Coriolis acceleration that occurs in all rapidly 
rotating atmospheres and oceans is called geostrophic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


balance. The Earth-orbiting TOPEX/Poseidon and ERS-2 
(European Remote Sensing) satellites both generate daily 
global maps of sea-surface height that can be converted to 
ocean surface circulations via geostrophy. The Atlantic’s 
Gulf Stream, for example, stands out in surface altimetry 
data as a sharp ~1 m step (low on the western side, 
high on the eastern side). It is a step because sea-surface 
height is a surrogate for pressure, and it is the pressure 
gradient that is proportional to the current. It has been 
demonstrated that the abyssal circulation is controlled 
by the pressure boundary condition above, meaning 
that a useful estimate of the circulation throughout the 
entire ocean can be made by combining satellite altimetry 
data with numerical models. In addition to correlating 
undersea circulations with sea-surface height, satellites are 
also capable of determining ocean wave heights, as was 
first demonstrated by Seasat in 1978. 

There are two major differences between circulations 
in oceans versus atmospheres. The first is that ocean water 
is confined to move inside closed basins, which can be 
viewed as the most confining type of boundary condition 
encountered in geophysical FLUID DyNAMics (GFD). In 
contrast, atmospheres are not closed off, although 
mountain ranges strongly influence wind patterns on 
Venus, Earth and Mars. Interestingly, the winds on the 
‘bottomless’ gas-giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and 
Neptune can be viewed as having rather benign boundary 
conditions since they suffer no mountain ranges or ocean 
basins, and they all sport east-west circulations. 

Given the much greater mass of fluid in Earth’s 
oceans than its atmosphere, it may come as a surprise 
that the second major difference is that the large-scale 
ocean circulation is driven by wind stress. The tail wags 
the dog, so to speak. Take away the atmosphere and its 
trade winds, and great currents like the North Equatorial 
Current, which travels the Pacific from east to west at 
latitude 15°N, would run down. 

The winds do not merely push the water, except at 
the equator. If they did, the result would be confined to 
a shallow current that would head off perpendicular to 
the wind-stress direction. Away from the equator where 
rotational effects are important, two boundary layers 
called Ekman layers form in the wind-driven circulation, 
one in the atmosphere that is about 1 km thick and 
one in the ocean that is about 0.01-0.1 km thick and 
corresponds roughly to the ocean’s well-mixed layer (the 
upper layer below which there is little response to passing 
storms). Significantly, the net (vertically averaged) 
atmospheric transport and net oceanic transport in these 
boundary layers are in opposite directions, and both are 
perpendicular to the surface wind-stress direction. This 
intricate three-dimensional picture emerges because the 
Coriolis acceleration balances the applied force, causing 
the bulk mass motion to be perpendicular to the forcing 
direction. 

A horizontal variation in the wind stress leads to 
convergence or divergence in the oceanic Ekman layer, 
which leads to water being expelled from or drawn into 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the boundary layer, respectively. This process is called 
Ekman pumping. The amount of Ekman pumping is 
proportional to the curl of the wind stress. This vertical 
motion, a result of conservation of mass, deforms the 
constant-density surfaces underneath the boundary layer 
with the result that an ocean current is set up to achieve 
geostrophic balance. It is by this indirect mechanism that 
the wind drives the major ocean currents. 

An important practical result of Ekman pumping is 
that surface water can be drawn away from a coastline 
by a persistent breeze that blows along the coast in the 
appropriate direction (depending on the hemisphere). To 
conserve mass, cold, nutrient-rich deep water (enriched 
by the settling of dead organisms) then upwells near 
the coast, which causes the phytoplankton level to rise 
dramatically, which in turn attracts great quantities of fish. 
Half the world’s fishing relies on this sensitive mechanism. 
Given that Earth’s coupled atmosphere—ocean system can 
exhibit more than one type of circulation with similar 
boundary conditions, there is strong economic motivation 
to discover and understand the feedbacks. For example, 
in normal years one-fifth of the world’s catch is taken 
off the coast of Peru alone, but during El Nifio years 
the equatorward wind is disrupted and Peruvian fishing 
declines dramatically. 


Western boundary currents 

Each ocean basin contains a strong current that runs along 
its western boundary, the Atlantic’s Gulf Stream being a 
well-known example. In the Pacific, the North Equatorial 
Current turns into a western boundary current called the 
Kuroshio as it curves northward past Japan. In three 
dimensions, these fast moving rivers-in-the-sea have the 
appearance of writhing snakes. 

Why not eastern boundary currents too, or alterna- 
tively, no lateral intensification at all? The answer depends 
on the shape of the planet itself: if Earth was flat instead 
of round, then there would be no Gulf Stream. 

Because planets are round, the angle between their 
rotation axis and the local horizontal plane of motion 
changes with latitude. This means that the component 
of the Coriolis acceleration that is vertical (parallel with 
the local direction of gravity), which is the component 
that couples to horizontal motions, vanishes at the equator 
and is strongest, with opposite signs, at the two poles. 
The gradient of the Coriolis acceleration with respect to 
latitude is important because it appears in the equations 
of motion as a vorticity gradient. Itis traditionally denoted 
B, hence the phrase ‘beta effect’. The planetary vorticity 
gradient would be zero on a turntable Earth. On a sphere, 
B is zero only at the poles and is positive everywhere 
else (in both the northern and southern hemispheres); it 
is largest at the equator. 

The spatial anisotropy that generates western inten- 
sification in ocean basins comes from the dispersion prop- 
erties of a particular kind of wave, not a sound wave or a 
buoyancy wave, but a larger, more slowly moving wave 
called a Rossby wave (or planetary wave). Rossby waves 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


travel along gradients in the background vorticity (to be 
precise, gradients in the background potential vorticity, 
the ratio of the inertial-frame vorticity to any appropriate 
measure of vertical column stretching). On Jupiter and Sat- 
urn, the large amount of local vorticity in the alternating 
jet streams tends to dominate the beta effect, and conse- 
quently the local shape of the wind profile is important 
to the Rossby wave dynamics. But on Earth, the winds 
and ocean currents are much weaker and the beta effect 
governs the behavior of Rossby waves. 

Rossby waves are strongly dispersive. A wave packet 
that reflects off the western boundary of a beta-dominated 
ocean basin and travels eastward is composed of small 
wavelengths only, because only small wavelengths have 
eastward group velocities. Conversely, a wave packet that 
reflects off the eastern boundary and heads westward is 
composed of only large wavelengths. Thus, the western 
boundary is a source of small scales and the eastern 
boundary is a source of large scales. All models of the 
western intensification include some type of damping 
that prevents the small scales generated at the western 
boundary from leaking into the ocean’s interior, but the 
details do not affect the existence of the boundary current 
itself, which is a certain feature of ocean basins on a 
rotating, spherical planet. 

Western boundary currents play a role in marine 
biology and climate. Meanderings of the Atlantic’s Gulf 
Stream regularly pinch off to form drifting vortices called 
Gulf Stream rings that can transport phytoplankton over 
large distances. Regarding climate, the warmth of the 
Gulf Stream moderates the weather of the British Isles and 
western Europe. In fact, the Scottish islands to the north 
have a milder climate than the rest of Britain because of 
their close proximity to the Gulf Stream. 


Atlantic Ocean 

The Atlantic Ocean is separated from the Indian Ocean by 
a dividing line at the 20°E meridian between the southern 
tip of Africa and Antarctica. An association with Atlas in 
Greek mythology gives the Atlantic its name. 

Many gulfs and seas ring the north and south Atlantic 
basins, including the Mediterranean Sea to the east, the 
Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea to the west, the North 
Sea and several seas around Greenland and Canada to the 
north, and the Weddell Sea off the coast of Antarctica to 
the south. There is ample fishing in the waters over the 
continental shelves, which constitute about one-tenth of 
the ocean’s floor. 

The northern and southern halves of the Atlantic 
combine to form a shape like the letter S, and suggestively, 
the sea floor is dominated by a submerged mountain range 
with the same shape called the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The 
main evidence that first won widespread acceptance of the 
theory of plate TECTONICS is the fact that the orientation of 
the magnetic field in magnetic rocks on the ocean floor, 
which record the direction of Earth’s field when they cool 
below their Curie temperature, alternates in stripes that 
are mirror symmetric about the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. This 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


demonstrates that the ridge is a sea-floor spreading center. 
In fact, the Atlantic is only 100 million years old, which 
makes it the youngest of the four oceans. 

In the North Atlantic between the West Indies and the 
Azores is a stable region away from strong currents that is 
notable for containing large patches of floating seaweed. 
This is the Sargasso Sea, named after the Portuguese word 
for grape, sargaco, which describes the appearance of 
its most common seaweed, sargassum. The total area 
of the Sargasso Sea covers about 6% of the Atlantic (not 
counting adjacent seas). The free-floating seaweed does 
not hinder ships, although fishing is generally poor in the 
region because the water is warm and the phytoplankton 
concentration is reduced by a factor of three from average. 

The sargassum plays host to many small marine 
animals, but there is one fish in particular whose 
association with this sea-within-a-sea is remarkable, the 
fresh-water eel. The manner in which eels in eastern North 
America, Europe and the Mediterranean reproduced had 
long been a mystery, until it was discovered in the 1920s 
that they all swim to the Sargasso Sea to spawn (details, 
such as how long the eels live after spawning, are not 
yet known). One cannot help wondering what sort of 
sagacious greeting a 30-year-old American eel gives to a 
3-year-old Atlantic salmon as they swim past each other 
on these incredible early autumn reproductive migrations. 
How and why all this two-way traffic got started is a 
mystery (a similar puzzle is the migration of sea turtles 
in the South Atlantic, discussed below). The Pacific is 
home to many varieties of salmon, but eels spend their 
long lives inland, and in this respect it is notable that the 
Atlantic receives river outflow from a drainage area four 
times bigger than that received by either the Pacific or the 
Indian Oceans. 


Meddies 

A simple application of comparative PLANETOLOGY to the 
solar system’s atmospheres and oceans generates the 
following question: why do Jupiter, Saturn and Neptune 
have long-lived storm systems, numbering hundreds, a 
dozen or so, and a couple, respectively, with the largest 
and most famous being Jupiter’s GREAT RED SPOT, whereas 
Earth has only short-lived storm systems? Where are 
Earth’s great spots? Hurricanes might fit the bill, except 
they turn out to be a uniquely terrestrial phenomenon that 
requires surface friction to operate. To be specific, one 
is looking for free, coherent high-pressure storm systems, 
called anticyclones, not cyclones like hurricanes. 

In fact, EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE does have great high- 
pressure storm systems. One just needs to know where 
to look to find them. For example, a stubborn anticyclone 
called a blocking high often settles over North America or 
Russia for months at a time. Unfortunately, in satellite 
images these blocking highs are cloud-free and hence 
invisible, instead of cloud-filled and easy to visualize like 
spots on Jupiter. Blocking highs tend to divert rain storms 
from their normal paths and can cause droughts. One 
of several reasons they do not last long is simply that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Earth’s atmosphere is so small in horizontal area that its 
atmospheric eddies jostle against each other incessantly, 
and so do not remain coherent for long. In constrast, 
anticyclones on the gas giants have one hundred times 
more surface area to move around in, which results 
in fewer eddy-eddy interactions and more predictable 
weather. 

In contrast to its atmosphere, Earth’s oceans turn out 
to be as roomy as the gas-giant atmospheres. The typical 
ocean eddy is two orders of magnitude smaller than the 
typical atmospheric eddy because oceans having much 
slower buoyancy waves, a consequence of much reduced 
density contrasts. One could go so far as to refer to Earth’s 
oceans as ‘basin-giants’, to distinguish them from the ‘gas- 
giant’ atmospheres of Jupiter and Saturn. 

If indeed the Atlantic Ocean was populated with 
Jupiter-like anticyclones spinning around underneath the 
surface, how would we know it? Flow visualization for 
Jupiter requires simply running a movie of the swirling 
cloud tops that have been photographed from afar by a 
spacecraft or a space telescope like Hubble, but not so for 
Earth’s oceans. One discovers anticyclones in an ocean 
by hunting them down painstakingly with well-equipped 
ships. As it turns out, the hunting is good in the eastern 
Atlantic. 

The reason is that extra-salty water from the 
Mediterranean Sea regularly breaks away into the eastern 
Atlantic and forms undersea lens-shaped anticyclones 
called Mediterranean water eddies, or meddies for short. 
Large numbers of meddies have been tracked over the last 
two decades. Individuals persist for several years and 
travel great distances, and collectively they are responsible 
for 20-40% of the salt flux coming into the Atlantic from 
the Mediterranean. 

Subsurface SOFAR floats (SOund Fixing And Ranging 
floats) are used to determine the circulation structure 
inside meddies. They have core radii of about 20 km and 
turnaround times of about 4 days, with longer looping 
periods above and below the core. This is similar to 
the turnaround times of anticyclones on Jupiter. Because 
both meddies and Gulf Stream rings are likely to be 
mathematically similar to gas-giant anticyclones, there is a 
great deal of interest in both oceanography and planetary 
science to understand how environmental conditions like 
shear affect their drift speeds and directions, and how fluid 
nonlinearities allow them to remain coherent. 


Labrador Sea 

The general ocean circulation is called the thermohaline 
circulation because gradients in both temperature and 
salinity affect the density of seawater. This makes the 
dynamics of ocean currents particularly interesting. For 
example, a parcel of seawater can sink because it is cold 
and salty, or because it is warm and very salty, or because 
it is fresh and very cold. In addition, the diffusion rates 
of temperature and salinity are different, and this leads 
to a set of convective phenomena called double-diffusive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


convection, which includes unexpected structures like salt 
fingers and layered convection. 

Seawater that becomes dense enough will sink to 
the bottom of the ocean and then spread out until it is 
constrained by the effects of planetary rotation. This 
is especially true in the Arctic Ocean and the poleward 
borders of the Atlantic Ocean where the formation of sea 
ice increases the salinity and hence the density of the 
already-cold underlying water. One accurate method for 
tracking the deep circulation is to monitor the progress of 
radioactive isotopes introduced into the oceans by early 
nuclear bomb tests. 

An ongoing campaign that combines observations 
and numerical modeling from many research groups has 
the goal of understanding the formation of bottom water 
and the process of deep, penetrative convection. The 
Labrador Sea, which is the water between Greenland and 
Canada, is the unenviable location of the field laboratory 
for these mid-winter experiments. Often, ‘chimneys’ 
of downward convection are found there that have a 
significantly smaller horizontal scale than the atmospheric 
forcing above. They may occur preferentially in regions 
where the ocean stratification is weakened by the presence 
of pre-existing eddies (with cold centers), or be triggered 
by topography, or by some other small-scale, destabilizing 
mechanism. 

Understanding the rate of formation of deep water is 
important for climate studies because it affects the rate in 
which carbon dioxide is exchanged with the atmosphere, 
and because deep water circulation contributes to the 
redistribution of heat from the equator to the poles. The 
process of Coriolis-influenced deep convection occurs not 
only in the coldest seas on Earth but also in stars and 
planets. For example, it may play a role in the formation 
of hot spots (large holes in the clouds) on Jupiter, like the 
hot spot that the GALILEO atmospheric probe sampled in 
December, 1995. 


Pacific Ocean 

Earth’s oldest and largest ocean is the Pacific Ocean. It 
contains the deepest point on the planet’s surface, the 
Mariana Trench (11.7 km below sea level), and contains 
the continent of Australia, the island arcs that make up 
Polynesia bordered by Hawaii, New Zealand and Easter 
Island, and about 25000 islands all told. This single 
body of water covers one-third of Earth’s surface. Away 
from island arcs, their trenches, seamounts and mid-ocean 
spreading centers like the East Pacific Rise, the bottom of 
the Pacific basin is basically flat with an average water 
depth of 4.3 km. 


Ocean acoustics 

The high opacity of salt water prohibits direct observations 
of the three-dimensional structure of Earth’s oceans. But 
unlike light waves, sound waves travel readily in the 
ocean, and for this reason sound is used extensively by 
marine mammals for echolocation (high-frequency clicks) 
and communication (low-frequency songs). Physical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


oceanographers use acoustic tools as well, like inverted 
echo sounders (IESs), to exploit the linear relationship 
that exists between acoustic travel time and interesting 
properties such as temperature and the depth of the 
ocean’s well-mixed layer. Acoustic tomography uses 
coded transmissions sent between arrays of half a dozen 
or so elements that last for around 30s at a time. 

It is known that dolphins coordinate with each other 
when hunting in groups. Killer whale pods appear to have 
dialects or accents. During the mating season, humpback 
whales sing repeating songs that can be heard more than 
100 km away. The repertoire of marine mammals is 
impressive, spanning a range of clicks, rasps, buzzes, 
whistles, moans and haunting trumpets. Low-frequency 
man-made sounds (~120 dB), as from underwater drilling, 
have caused whales to change their migratory paths, 
so there are studies underway to determine the impact 
of military, commercial and scientific noise pollution on 
marine animals. 


Sea monsters 

In the process of gaining complete knowledge of the 
oceans and their inhabitants, we are losing something 
precious, namely the mystery of the sea and its ability, 
since antiquity, to fire our imaginations. No one expressed 
this mystery better than the early map-makers who filled 
uncharted expanses of ocean with illustrations of sea 
monsters. Besides the many species of whales in the 
oceans, there are at least two giants of the deep that have, 
over the centuries, greatly influenced the cultural view of 
what a sea monster looks like. 

First, consider the world’s largest invertebrate, and 
undoubtedly the source of the Norwegian kraken legend, 
the giant squid (Architeuthis dux). This mysterious 
behemoth has not yet been photographed alive, and 
virtually nothing is known about its social organization, 
but it is thought to live in total darkness a kilometer 
below the surface of the sea. Only a couple hundred giant 
squid have washed ashore around the world in the last 
century. The longest were 20 m long (the length of two 
school buses). The evidence suggests their typical lifespan 
is only about 5 years. To grow so large they must be 
terrific hunters that require an abundant food supply, as 
can be found in the Kaikoura Canyon off of New Zealand. 
Although no sunlight reaches the depths favored by the 
giant squid, most deep-sea fish are bioluminescent, and 
the giant squid has eyes the size of a human head, the 
biggest of any animal. 

Giant squid have been found in the stomachs of sperm 
whales, which is the only known predator of the adult 
squid, and in turn, dead sperm whales with giant sucker 
marks have been found washed ashore. Even though the 
sperm whale’s favorite food appears to be giant squid and 
it weighs 30 times more than its prey, the whale does not 
always hold the advantage in what is present-day Earth’s 
most titantic one-on-one rivalry. Legends of kraken attacks 
are most likely based on the actions of giant squids that 
mistook small ships for whales. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Second, consider the world’s largest and longest bony 
fish, and undoubtedly the source of the sea-serpent legend, 
the crested oarfish (Regalecus glesne). This incredible 
ribbonfish grows to over 10 m in length, and there are 
old reports of specimens twice that length, which rivals 
the length of the giant squid. The fish’s name comes from 
a pair of elongated pelvic fins that rotate like oars as it 
swims. Its dorsal fin runs the length of its back like a red- 
gold mane, and the first ray at the head extends upwards 
in the manner of a long feather. When seen swimming on 
the surface, the oarfish has the appearance of animpossibly 
long, red, undulating sea serpent. Oarfish are known to 
inhabit the Mediterranean, the Atlantic and the Pacific, 
and like the giant squid, they can survive to depths of 
1 km. They have large deep-sea eyes, a small toothless 
mouth, and a silvery appearance that is thought to attract 
prey. Studies of specimens washed ashore reveal that the 
fish’s stomach runs almost half the length of its body, but 
amazingly, the oarfish can apparently survive losing the 
second half of its body to attack by predators, and then 
regenerate it. 

Sightings of the oarfish occur only about once a 
decade, but unlike the giant squid, an oarfish has recently 
been photographed underwater. In May 1996, a pair 
of divers working near New Providence in the Bahamas 
encountered and photographed an oarfish rising from the 
depths. It was positioned vertically and was swimming 
by undulating its dorsal fin without body movement. 

Throughout the ages, there have been many detailed 
eyewitness accounts of sea monsters that can be attributed 
to giant squid or oarfish (examples of the former include 
an old report by sailors that describes a whale being pulled 
beneath the waves by an enormous ‘snake’, and another 
that tells how a giant squid crawled up the bow of a ship 
before being shot off), but there are other stories, from 
equally credible sources, that appear to require alternate 
explanations. For now, the fact that the most common 
undersea vessel, the military submarine, carefully listens 
to but does not look at its surroundings, means that the 
reader is free to imagine (and if talent permits to illustrate) 
the size and shape of unknown deep-sea creatures that 
occasionally glide by. 


Remote sensing 

Providing a complementary perspective of the inner 
space of the sea from the relative safety of outer space, 
oceanography’s newest observing platform is the orbiting 
satellite. The remote sensing of Earth’s oceans is, in many 
respects, similar to any other astronomical observation, 
except for the 180° turn of the space-borne telescope and 
the inherent advantages of proximity to the subject. Space- 
based detectors have generated so much high-quality data 
in so short a time that modelers are struggling to keep 
pace. They are developing optimized data assimilation 
techniques like those used in meteorology to gain the 
greatest accuracy from the blending of observations with 
numerical models. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sea-surface temperature 

In addition to sea-surface height and spectroscopic infor- 
mation, satellites produce maps of sea-surface tempera- 
ture (SST). Surface temperatures range in approximately 
zonal bands from freezing at the poles to 20-30 °C in the 
tropics. 

Changes in SST reflect changes in the transfer rate of 
energy between the air and sea. For example, hurricanes 
are known to develop in regions where the surface 
temperature is greater than 26°C. Since most tropical 
depressions do not grow into hurricanes, an energetic 
threshold must be overcome. Strong winds produce 
large evaporation rates that increase the moisture content 
of the atmosphere, which enhances the convection and 
has a positive feedback on the winds. Modelers are 
working on developing a reliable means of predicting 
which disturbances will become hurricanes and what 
specific field observations are needed to do so. 

Since December 1998, the Geostationary Operational 
Environmental Satellites (GOES) have been producing 
hourly SST estimates, with the ability to sample a position 
48 times per day with a 4 km field of view. Sea- 
surface temperatures cannot be determined over cloudy 
areas. This disadvantage is turned into an advantage 
by observers who exploit the fact that SST maps show 
precisely the location of cloudy areas, which is useful for 
other studies. 


Sea turtles 

Satellites are not only having a positive effect on the study 
of physical oceanography, but also on the study of marine 
biology, as the following example illustrates. 

In the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, just 80 km east 
of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, at coordinates 7.95°S, 14.37°W, 
there is a solitary island less than 90 km? in surface area 
that World War II pilots were fond of quipping about, 
dryly, saying ‘If you miss Ascension, your wife gets a 
pension’. Across half the ocean, about 2300 km west of 
Ascension Island, is the coast of Brazil in South America. 
For the past 100 million years since the birth of the Atlantic, 
plate tectonics has increased the distance between the Mid- 
Atlantic Ridge and Brazil by a few centimeters per year. 

Based on tagging studies, a remarkable group of green 
sea turtles (Chelonia mydas) are known to use Ascension 
Island as their only nesting site. Females return every 2 
to 4 years to their favorite beach on the island to lay eggs. 
No one can say for sure how long these turtles have been 
nesting exclusively on Ascension Island, but it is known 
that they have unique mitochondrial DNA that implies 
females do not trade places with other females. The species 
itself is many millions of years old. 

What makes Ascension turtles remarkable is that their 
feeding grounds are along the coast of Brazil. The pioneer 
of sea turtle studies, Archie Carr, first suggested the idea 
that plate tectonics has slowly but incessantly stretched 
the turtles’ foraging path from a reasonable foray millions 
of years ago into today’s mighty migration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The study of marine animal migrations has become 
a precise science with the advent of satellite tracking, 
which has been applied not only to green sea turtles but 
also to loggerhead turtles (Caretta caretta) and to elephant 
seals. As an example, six Ascension green turtles were 
outfitted with Telonics ST-14 satellite transmitters between 
April and July 1997 and then tracked as they migrated 
to Brazil. Of course, the ‘if you miss Ascension’ return 
trip would be even more interesting to track, but it is 
hard to predict when a turtle is going to leave Brazil, and 
current transmitters have relatively short lifetimes. The 
signal from one of the six turtles was lost after only 19 
days, during which time she did not head off to Brazil 
but went on an eastward exploratory path that eventually 
looped back to the island. The other five turtles headed 
west towards Brazil ina no-nonsense fashion, with three of 
them separately following indistinguishable paths during 
the first 300 km. The data show that the trip to the coast 
takes the turtles about 6 weeks (in this particular study all 
of the transmitters failed just shy of Brazil). 

The tracking results establish that turtles are able to 
swim ina straight line for weeks at a time with no islands 
or coastlines to guide them across the deep sea. They also 
like to punctuate their journey with occasional exploratory 
meanders that are then followed by the appropriate course 
corrections. The ability of sea turtles to achieve such 
precise navigation is not well understood. The satellite 
data show that most turtles tend to slow down somewhat 
at night, but the position of the Moon does not affect 
their navigation, and since they are known to be severely 
nearsighted when their heads are above water, they cannot 
focus on stars, which is one trick used by migrating birds. 
The leading hypothesis is that sea turtles are sensitive 
to both the intensity and inclination of Earth’s magnetic 
field and can navigate it like a grid. This ability has 
been established for hatchling by controlled experiments. 
Earth’s magnetic field is known to have changed some of 
its details in just the last 100 years, so the complete story has 
yet to be uncovered; however, the turtles will undoubtedly 
be patient with us as we try to come up to speed with them 
using the latest satellite technology. 


Icy satellites: the case for an ocean 

Of the nine planets, Earth’s orbit alone occupies the narrow 
corridor where surface liquid water is stable by virtue of 
sunlight, which happens to occur at about one hundred 
solar diameters from the Sun. However, sunlight is 
not the only heat source in the solar system, there is 
also geothermal energy, and with it, the possibility of 
underground oceans. 

There is no lack of potential sites for such an ocean 
in the solar system. Jupiter is the closest gas giant to the 
Sun and has four large moons, CALLISTO, GANYMEDE, EUROPA 
and 10, which are referred to collectively as the Galilean 
satellites in honor of their discovery in 1610 by Galileo, 
and which are easily seen with binoculars in the night 
sky. These are planets in their own right — in fact, to 
within 2% Callisto has the same radius as Mercury, while 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ganymede, the largest moon in the solar system (out of 62 
and counting), is 8% bigger. Saturn’s moon Titan is also 
6% bigger than Mercury (much more will be learned about 
Titan’s surface and interior during the Cassini mission). 

But, what Mercury has in over abundance these 
moons lack, namely proximity to the Sun and its warming 
rays. Surface temperatures on Europa do not exceed 130 K 
and average 103 K, which is —170°C. Given this, why are 
icy satellites viable candidates for bodies that might harbor 
subsurface seas? 

Firstly, one needs a ready supply of H,O in some 
phase, and the icy satellites are aptly named in this 
regard. Their ~2-3 ¢g cm bulk densities imply a 
substantial icy component to their make up, moment- 
of-inertia gravity data place the ice predominantly in a 
200-300 km outer shell (depending on satellite), and the 
spectroscopic signature of ice has long been detected on 
the surfaces of Callisto, Ganymede and Europa. No water 
has been detected on Io’s surface, which is covered by 
sulfurous volcanic material, mostly SO, frost. Excluding 
Io, much of the effort in icy-satellite spectroscopy is to peer 
through the strong HzO absorption lines and determine 
the composition of the small amount of dirt that is mixed 
in and to determine whether there are salts like MgSO, on 
the surface. 

Secondly, one needs to melt the ice. At a pressure 
of 1 bar = 10° Pa, or approximately sea-level pressure 
on Earth, the melting temperature is 273 K. The lowest 
temperature possible for pure liquid water is 251 K at a 
pressure of 2080 bar, which is the pressure found a few 
hundred kilometers below the surface of an icy satellite. 
This depth is likely to be past the icy shell and into the 
rocky mantle on Europa. However, it is not hard to 
make antifreeze out of water by adding small amounts 
of ammonia or salt, which lowers the freezing point by 
many tens of degrees. It is also beneficial that when 
ice forms it leaves a large portion of these contaminants 
behind and this increases the brininess of the remaining 
liquid. If enough ammonia is present, the target minimum 
temperature for liquid water will be less than 200 K. The 
trick, then, is to raise the temperature from the surface 
value of about 100 K to the melting temperature as near as 
possible to the surface. 


Sources of heating 
To form liquid inside an icy satellite requires a source of 
heating. One source is the decay of naturally occurring 
radioactive isotopes, called radiogenic heating. The 
amount is dependent on how much silicate-rock is mixed 
in with the ice, since it is this component that bears trace 
amounts of radioactive uranium, rubidium, samarium, 
potassium and thorium. It is reasonable to assume that 
these elements occur in proportions similar to what is 
measured in meteorites, so an estimate of the ice-to-rock 
ratio yields a heating rate. 

Tidal dissipation has the potential to produce a great 
deal more heating inside an icy satellite than radioactivity, 
which is the case for Io and Europa. By tiDes and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


tidal dissipation is meant the flexing of the body, both 
its solid and liquid components, in response to changes 
in the external gravity field. Flexing a solid object 
repeatedly produces an impressive rise in temperature, 
as can be demonstrated by bending a paperclip back 
and forth several times. Io, the innermost Galilean 
satellite, experiences so much of this heating that it is more 
volcanically active than Earth, in spite of the fact that Io 
has nearly the same size and density as Earth’s Moon. 

The reason that Io and Europa have high tidal heating 
starts with the fact that their orbits are continuously forced 
to be slightly elliptical. This is the price they pay for 
cooperating with Ganymede to form a 4:2:1 orbital-period 
resonance called the Laplace Resonance. Io is the closest 
to Jupiter and hence the fastest orbiter, with a period of 
42h. The result of the three-body resonance is a forced 
eccentricity for Europa of about 0.01 and for Io of about 
0.004. These seemingly small values turn out to be not 
so small when one carries out tidal stress calculations, as 
was first done by Peale, Cassen and Reynolds in 1979, 
who correctly predicted widespread volcanism on Io just 
a week before VOYAGER discovered the same. 

Orbital eccentricity is converted into tidal flexing, 
and ultimately into heating that could be maintaining a 
subsurface ocean today, by two means. A small amount 
of flexing is generated by the change in the strength of 
the external gravity field as a satellite moves closer to 
and then farther away from its planet during each orbit. 
However, for synchronous rotators like Io and Europa, 
that is, satellites that keep the same face pointed towards 
their planet in the same manner that the Moon points 
towards Earth, most of the flexing arises because each 
satellite rotates around its axis at a constant rate like a 
clock but revolves at a variable rate described by KEPLER’s 
Laws, moving along its orbit faster when closer to the 
planet and slower when farther away. This produces a 
constant nodding back and forth across the satellite—planet 
direction that is called ‘optical libration’. 

Estimates of Europa’s present-day heat flux, based 
on theoretical evolution models, run as high as 5 K km"!, 
which implies melted ice only 20 or 30 km below the 
surface. There are many details left to be worked out, 
for example solid-state convection of ice may replace 
conduction as the primary heat transfer mechanism for 
ice thicker than about 10 km. In any case, the strong tidal 
heating on Europa and Io cause these bodies to have two of 
the most intriguing and beautiful surfaces seen anywhere. 


Magnetometer data 

Is Europa’s beauty only skip deep? There have been 
some tantalizing signals obtained by the Galileo Orbiter’s 
magnetometer that suggest a subsurface ocean may be 
a reality. Jupiter’s strong magnetic field is tilted about 
10° from its rotation axis and rotates with the planet on a 
10 h cycle, which means the background magnetic field 
in which the Galilean satellites are immersed changes 
its direction every few hours. If an icy satellite has a 
global conductive component, for example a briny interior 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


sea, then an alternating magnetic field will be induced 
that could be distinguished from a permanent dipole by 
sampling the satellite’s magnetic field at different phases 
of Jupiter’s rotation. 

Surprisingly, the outermost and most heavily cratered 
Galilean satellite, Callisto, has yielded a positive initial 
result to this experiment. The first two passes of Callisto 
by Galileo (passes C3 and C9; the notation signifies 
that the third and ninth orbits involved close encounters 
with Callisto) revealed that the satellite has a magnetic 
field with a surface strength of about 15 nT (4000 times 
weaker than Earth’s surface magnetic field). Significantly, 
there was a flip in direction of the satellite’s field that 
matched the large change in the rotational phase of Jupiter 
between the two flybys. The conductivity of a hypothetical 
ionosphere on Callisto is insufficient to provide the needed 
current path, but an ocean as salty as on Earth that is about 
10 km thick, and at most only 100 km below the surface, 
can account for the data. This caught the Galileo team 
off guard, because Callisto has a much older surface than 
Europa and it is not part of the 4:2:1 orbital resonance. 

At Europa, an induced-field model like the one that 
works for Callisto can fit the Galileo magnetometer data 
obtained from orbits E4, E11, E12 and E14 (magnetometer 
data were not acquired on pass E6). However, for these 
orbits the picture is complicated by Europa’s interaction 
with the plasma caught in Jupiter’s magnetosphere. In 
particular, large magnetic fluctuations in the data can be 
attributed to ions that are sputtered off of the satellite itself. 
Also, for these passes the rotational phase of Jupiter was 
not as distinct as it was for Callisto. To settle the question, 
the E26 orbit on 3 January 2000 was designed to make 
it clear whether or not the north pole on Europa moves 
with Jupiter’s magnetic field. The experiment netted a 
positive result. Europa’s north pole is moving and thus it 
is likely that there is a salty ocean somewhere in the outer 
100 km of Europa. At the time of this writing the jury is 
still out for an induced field at Ganymede, but there are 
more encounters to come as part of the extended Galileo 
Millennium mission, which will also feature simultaneous 
observations of Jupiter by Cassini in December 2000 as it 
slingshots towards Saturn. 


Europa’s surface versus terrestrial sea ice 

The reason that the spotlight has been on Europa is that 
Voyager discovered it has very few craters and no large 
mountains, implying that its surface has unusually ductile 
underpinnings. Additionally, Europa’s darkest regions 
are all lighter in color than the lightest regions on Callisto 
and Ganymede—it is truly an ice world. But is it a sea-ice 
world like the Arctic? 

Voyager images reveal many long, thin dark-—light— 
dark markings called triple bands that criss-cross Europa’s 
surface and some dark, wedge-shaped bands that imply 
more than 20 km of lateral spreading. On Earth, various 
processes modify the appearance of sea ice on horizontal 
scales ranging from kilometers down to the size of ice 
crystals, and it is instructive to make comparisons with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Europa where possible. Caution is needed, however, 
because in some cases the formation mechanisms for 
ridges and jumbled terrain in sea ice are not completely 
understood, and so, even after accounting for the much 
lower surface temperature and gravity on Europa, one 
must always be conservative when attempting analogies. 
(Recall that before the 1960s, cloud-covered Venus was 
thought to harbor tropical rainforests by analogy with 
Earth’s tropics; when in truth, the Venusian surface is 
hotter than the inside of a self-cleaning oven.) 

Europa’s triple bands often exceed 1000 km in length 
and this is much longer than any open cracks (called 
leads) or pressure ridges observed in Earth’s sea ice. An 
important deformation mechanism on Europa is global- 
scale tidal flexing, whereas on Earth the shape of the ice 
is governed by local changes in temperature, sea currents, 
and the wind. Also, mature terrestrial sea ice reaches an 
average thickness of only 3 to 4 m, which is three orders 
of magnitude thinner than models suggest for Europa. 
The large difference in thickness, plus the large difference 
in temperature, prevent simple comparisons of ice-plate 
deformations on the two worlds. 

The best geological hints of water inside Europa are 
revealed in high-resolution imagery taken by the Galileo 
orbiter; reports of all the Galileo imaging results are 
collected together in a special issue of Icarus, (vol 135, 
1998). The spacecraft passed close enough to photograph 
Europa’s surface at 20 m/pixel, which is 100 times better 
resolution than obtained by Voyager. A type of terrain 
dubbed ‘chaos’ was discovered that consists of ~ 1 km 
and larger broken blocks that have been obviously rotated, 
translated and in some cases tilted, and appear to be frozen 
into an ice field. There is an active debate as to whether 
a global ocean is needed to explain the chaotic terrain. 
Alternative ideas include having only a local ‘slush field’, 
or having no liquid at all, just an underpinning of soft ice 
that, given enough time, could yield the same jumbled 
appearance. 

Evidence for local cryovulcanism is found in some 
moderate-resolution Galileo images that show flowlike 
masses covering portions of ridges, and in some high- 
resolution images that show small, smooth areas that 
appear to be frozen flood plains. Efforts to discover current 
cryovolcanic activity, for example by looking for scattered 
light from erupting particles while Europa is in Jupiter’s 
shadow, have yielded null results to date, but the Galileo 
observations are by no means exhaustive and the search 
continues. 


Life on Europa? 
Assume for the sake of argument that Europa contains an 
ice-covered salty ocean. Given what we know about the 
robustness of life on Earth, which routinely surpasses the 
expectations of even the experts, what are the chances that 
there is life on Europa today? Slim to none, is the present 
estimation, because of a lack of fresh oxidants. 

In addition to water and nutrients, which we are 
assuming Europa has, life requires both a source of energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oceans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to grow and reproduce and a mechanism for harnessing 
that energy. On Earth, the primary source of energy is 
sunlight. The most that can be expected of sunlight at 
Europa is a weak illumination of the frigid surface and a 
penetration to depths of a few tens of meters, which is at 
best one-thousandth of the 20 km distance needed to reach 
an interior ocean. 

Even so, energy is not the main problem for life 
on Europa, for two reasons. First, life on Earth is 
thought to have started before photosynthesis evolved. 
Simpler chemical reactions involving reduction—oxidation 
(redox) pairs of chemicals, kept in disequilibrium by 
deep-sea hydrothermal vents, were apparently an early 
means by which Earth’s organisms harnessed energy. 
Second, present-day Earth has impressive biota associated 
with these hydrothermal vents (called ‘black smokers’ 
because of their appearance) that are disconnected from 
other biological systems and see no sunlight, and yet are 
thriving. By analogy, we can say that as long as Europa has 
something like hydrothermal vents, its inhabitants would 
not have to suffer from an energy crisis. 

It is the chemistry needed to harness that energy 
that is the bigger problem, in particular, the oxidant 
budget. Present-day terrestrial vent organisms rely on 
redox reactions involving SsOy, O, and CO;, which are 
oxidants that are delivered to the deep sea from the 
ocean surface. Other energy-producing reactions exist that 
involve elemental sulfur or the production of methane 
(CH,), but these are low-energy alternatives that do 
not meet the needs of terrestrial organisms. In other 
words, Earth’s current vent biota is thriving because it is 
chemically connected to the surface. 

By occasionally turning over some of the ice on 
Europa (after all its surface is relatively young) some 
oxidants could be transported to the ocean below. 
However, calculations suggest that, at best, the resulting 
energy flux is a thousand times weaker than what is 
needed to support ecosystems on Earth. If the low- 
energy alternatives are to be used, then without terrestrial- 
style plate tectonics to keep Europa’s rocky mantle from 
becoming a reducing agent, mature hydrothermal vents 
will yield CH, instead of CO, in which case biological 
methane-producing reactions would be pre-empted and 
therefore shut down. 

The study of terrestrial lifeforms living in extreme 
environments, and their implications for life on icy- 
satellites, is a young research field that continues to 
develop. Experience with hearty strains of bacteria 
provides an optimistic note for life on Europa, namely, that 
we should be guarded against being too guarded when 
the topic is the tenacity of life. For example, there exist 
unusual bacteria that gain energy by using hydrogen to 
reduce minerals, and these are perhaps not too different 
from what a Europan might be like. 

With regard to Earth-like planets orbiting other 
worlds, NASA engineers are busy designing the Terrestrial 
Planet Finder, a space-based telescope system consisting 
of four 4 m wide mirrors. The goal is to be able to detect 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(or rule out) planets as small as Earth orbiting stars that 
are within 50 light-years, starting around 2010. 


Lights in the dark—an anecdote 

It has been pointed out, rightly, that astronomy is the 
study of outer space and oceanography is the study of 
inner space, and that we have only just begun to uncover 
the mysteries of both. There is much beauty in each that 
transcends scientific description. If the reader has ever 
been lucky enough to be at the sea on a still, clear night, 
then he or she has hovered between the blackness of both 
worlds, and at such a time, who does not sense a bit of 
mystery in the lights flickering above and below? 

For the writer, such a moment came with a group 
of fellow geophysical fluid dynamics students late one 
August night as we were wading and whispering in calm 
seawater near Woods Hole, Cape Cod. We were enchanted 
by the discovery that any movement of our arms and legs 
through the water elicited green, glowing bioluminescence 
that trailed like pixie dust, and was punctuated by flashing 
disks of blue light from tiny, harmless jellies, while above 
the occasional trail of a falling star could be seen. 

Apparently, such a transcendent moment can only be 
a fleeting one. The following night our attempt at a sequel 
was brought to an end by the appearance of a darkened 
patrol car called in by annoyed residents to contain the 
most recent outbreak of after-hours hotbloodedness on 
their beach. 


Bibliography 

Gaidos E J, Nealson K H and Kirschvink J L 1999 Life in 
ice-covered oceans Science 284 1631-3 

Gill A 1982 Atmosphere-Ocean Dynamics (New York: 
Academic) 

Kivelson M G, Khurana K K, Stevenson D J, Bennett 
L, Joy S, Russell C T, Walker R J, Zimmer C and 
Polanskey C 1999 Europa and Callisto: induced 
or intrinsic fields in a periodically varying plasma 
environment J. Geophys. Res. 104 4609-25 

Luschi P, Hays G C, Del Seppia C, Marsh R and Papi F 
1998 The navigational feats of green sea turtles 
migrating from Ascension Island investigated by 
satellite telemetry Proc. R. Soc. Ser. B Biol. 265 2279-84. 

Pedlosky J 1987 Geophysical Fluid Dynamics 2nd edn (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Turner J S 1973 Buoyancy Effects in Fluids (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Timothy E Dowling 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Octans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Octans 


(the Octant; abbrev. Oct, gen. Octantis; area 291 sq. deg.) 
A southern circumpolar constellation which lies between 
Indus/Pavo and Chamaeleon/Mensa, and includes the 
south celestial pole. It was named after the reflecting 
quadrant invented by John Hadley in 1731 by the French 
astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted 
the southern sky in 1751-2. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Octans is v Octantis, magnitude 3.7. There 
are no other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. o 
Octantis, magnitude 5.5, is the closest naked-eye star to 
the pole, being situated just over 1° away. Interesting 
objects include 4 Octantis, a close binary with yellow and 
orange (G8 and KO) components, magnitudes 5.6 and 7.3, 
separation 3.2”. 

There are no bright star clusters, nebulae or galaxies 
in Octans. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Odierna [Hodierna], Gioanbatista [Giovan or Giovanni 
Battista] (1597-1660) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Odierna [Hodierna], Gioanbatista 
[Giovan or Giovanni Battista] 
(1597-1660) 


Polymath, born in Ragusa, Sicily, became a priest, and 
was supported as chaplain and parish priest of the 
town of Palma di Montechiaro in Sicily by the Dukes 
of Palma. They made him court mathematician and 
gave him an apartment on the top floor of their palace 
for his astronomical observations. Observed the three 
comets of 1618-19, and later published De Systemate Orbis 
Cometici (1654). His studies on the satellites of Jupiter 
were intended to help the determination of longitude 
at sea, by timing their eclipses (Odierna timed the first 
such eclipse recorded, in 1652). His observations were 
published in Medicaeorum Ephemeredes (1656). He wrote 
on Saturn and astrology, and compiled a catalog (De 
Admirandi Coeli Caracteribus 1654) of some 40 nebulous 
stars, including 19 real nebulae found with a simple 
Galilean refractor of magnification 20. Believing that 
all nebulous objects were actually clusters of stars he 
classified his objects Luminosae (stars visible to the naked 
eye), Nebulosae (nebulous for the naked eye, but resolved 
in a telescope) and Occultae (nebulosity unresolved even 
in a telescope). His observations include an independent 
rediscovery of the Andromeda nebula (M31), and at least 
nine (probably 10) own true discoveries. Odierna made 
one of the earliest surviving drawings of the Orion nebula, 
M42. He was also interested in natural phenomena 
in meteorology, the rainbow and the spectrum, and he 
invented a microscope or camera obscura with which he 
studied the eyes of insects and the poison glands of vipers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oenopides of Chios (c. 500-c. 430 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oenopides of Chios (c. 500—c. 430 Bc) 


Greek natural philosopher credited by Eudemus with 
the identification of the ecliptic, within the zodiacal 
band discovered by Egyptian priests (Aétius credits 
PYTHAGORAS), and determined its inclination to be 24 
degrees (actually 23.5 degrees). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ohio State University Radio Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ohio State University Radio 
Observatory 


The Ohio State University Radio Observatory (OSURO), 
Columbus, Ohio, started in 1951. Its Director, John Kraus, 
designed, built and operated radio telescopes including a 
96-helix array and the ‘Big Ear’ which ceased operation in 
1998. 

Achievements include: the Ohio Sky Survey, which 
measured over 19000 sources, over half previously 
undetected; the Ohio Specials, sources with unusual radio 
spectra, which led to the discovery of the two most distant 
objects in the universe; overlays to the Palomar Sky Survey 
prints; master lists of radio sources and non-stellar optical 
objects; and the ‘Wow!’ signal, the strongest narrowband 
signal detected (its origin is still unknown). 

For further information see 
http://www.bigear.org. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Okayama Astrophysical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Okayama Astrophysical Observatory 


The Okayama Astrophysical Observatory (OAO) is 
a branch Observatory of the NATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL 
OBSERVATORY, JAPAN. Its main facilities are 188 cm and 91 cm 
telescopes, equipped with newly built instruments with 
CCD/IR cameras (e.g. OASIS). OAO accepts nearly 300 
astronomers a year, according to the observation program 
scheduled by the committee. 

OAO conducts observations of various astronomical 
objects and phenomena, including the Sun, solar system 
objects, stars, galaxies and quasars. Its information and 
data archives are open to outside researchers and institutes 
through the network. OAO accepts around 30000 public 
visitors a year. 

For further information see 
http: / /home.oao.nao.ac.jp /index-e.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Olbers, Heinrich Wilhelm (1758-1840) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Olbers, Heinrich Wilhelm (1758-1840) 


Doctor, astronomer, born in Arbergen, Germany, enthusi- 
ast for astronomy. He discovered several comets. In 1800 
he joined the team of 24 ‘celestial police’, organized by 
FRANZ VON ZACH, who were to patrol a share of the zodiac 
looking for the planet missing (according to Bopr’s law) 
between Mars and Jupiter. On New Year’s Day 1801 prazzi 
discovered Ceres, and, in March 1802, Olbers discovered 
Pallas. Both planets were small, leading to the name ‘mi- 
nor planet’, or asteroid, and Olbers suggested, to preserve 
Bode’s law, that they were fragments of a full-sized planet. 
This in turn suggested that there might be other fragments 
and in 1807 Olbers discovered Vesta. In contemplation of 
more distant problems, he formulated Olber’s paradox, ask- 
ing the question ‘why is the night sky not as uniformly 
bright as the surface of the Sun?’ If the universe has in- 
finitely many stars, any line of sight should end up on the 
surface of a star, and the sky should be as bright as the 
Sun. Olbers’ paradox can be traced as far back to KEPLER 
(1610), HALLEY and DE CHESEAUX. The explanation is that the 
universe is expanding, so distant stars are red-shifted into 
obscurity, and young, so distant light has not reached us 


yet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Olbers’ Paradox 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Olbers’ Paradox 


A paradox relating to the darkness of the night sky that 
was discussed by Heinrich Olbers (1758-1840) in 1826, 
but which had been noted previously by other scientists. 
Essentially the problem is that if the universe were infinite, 
static and uniformly populated with stars, the whole of the 
night sky should be as bright as the surface of a star (no 
matter in what direction one looked, eventually one would 
be looking at the surface of a star). The fact that the sky 
is dark at night clearly demonstrates that at least one of 
these assumptions is wrong. 

It had been suggested that the paradox could be 
resolved if it were assumed that space is filled with 
matter that absorbs starlight (clouds of interstellar dust do, 
indeed, exist). However, the absorbed light would cause 
the dust to heat up and glow. We now know that stars are 
clumped into galaxies and are not themselves uniformly 
distributed through space. Even so, in an infinite static 
universe, a similar paradox could be posed for galaxies. 
The observed expansion of the universe resolves the 
paradox. If galaxies are receding with speeds proportional 
to their distances, the more distant they are, the greater the 
redshift of their radiation (wavelengths emitted by these 
galaxies are stretched to longer wavelengths). Beyond a 
certain range, the intensity of their radiation would be 
so greatly reduced by the redshift that they could not be 
detected (even if the universe were infinite). Likewise, 
if the universe has a finite age (as the Big Bang theory 
implies), there has not been sufficient time for light to reach 
us from galaxies beyond a certain range. The paradox is 
also resolved if the universe is finite in extent. 


See also: Big Bang theory, cosmology, Hubble law, 
redshift. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oljato 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oljato 


An Apollo asteroid discovered by Henry Giclas in 1947, 
designated (2201) Oljato. About 2 km in diameter, it 
follows an orbit that shifts chaotically as a result of frequent 
close approaches to Earth and Venus. Its present orbit 
takes it from within the orbit of Venus at perihelion (0.67 
AU) to the outer reaches of the main asteroid belt at 
aphelion (3.72 AU); its mean distance from the Sun is 
2.18 AU (325 million km), period 3.20 years, inclination 
3°, eccentricity 0.71. The rotation period is roughly 24 h. 
Oljato was lost after its discovery and not recovered until 
1979. It is very high on the list of potentially hazardous 
asteroids, with a potential closest approach of less than 
75000 km. Its reflection spectrum bears no resemblance 
to that of any other asteroid, meteorite or comet so far 
obtained. It may well be an extinct comet nucleus. 


See also: near-Earth asteroids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Olympus Mons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Olympus Mons 


The largest volcano on Mars, and the largest in the solar 
system, centered at 18.4°N, 133.1 °W. It coincides with the 
albedo feature visible from Earth known as Nix Olympica, 
the ‘Snows of Olympus’, after the mountain in Greece 
which in legend was the home of the gods. Olympus Mons 
rises to a height of 27 km above Mars’s mean surface level, 
and in its greatest horizontal dimension measures 624 km. 
The central caldera has a diameter of about 90 km; from 
there, undulating flanks slope away at an average gradient 
of 4° toward the peripheral cliff, whose walls tower up to 
6 km above the surrounding plateau. This huge volcanic 
edifice contains a hundred times the mass of the Earth’s 
largest volcano, Hawaii’s Mauna Loa, which is 120 km long 
and rises to just over 9 km above the Pacific Ocean floor. 
On the Earth, plate tectonics operates to carry a volcano 
away from the underlying source of magma. With no such 
movement on Mars, volcanoes could continue to grow for 
as long as magma was available. 


See also: Mars: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Omega Nebula (M17, NGC 6618) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Omega Nebula (M17, NGC 6618) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Sagittarius, 
position RA 18 20.8™, dec. —16° 11’, also known as the 
Horseshoe Nebula and the Swan Nebula. All three names 
are suggestive of its shape. It measures 47’ by 37’, and was 
discovered by Philippe de Chéseaux in 1746. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ondrejov Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ondrejov Observatory 


The Ondrejov Observatory is located 20 miles from Prague 
in the village of Ondrejov. It was established in 1898 
as a private observatory and donated to the state of 
Czechoslovakia in 1928. Since 1953 it has been part of the 
Astronomical Institute, Academy of Sciences of the Czech 
Republic; there are 40 astronomers. 

The observatory’s instruments include: 2 m stellar 
telescope, photometric telescope, multichannel solar 
flare spectrograph, solar magnetograph, solar telescope, 
solar radiospectrographs, meteor radar and photographic 
zenith tube. The observatory is part of the photographic 
European fireball network. 

For further information see 
http: / /www.asu.cas.cz. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Onsala Space Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Onsala Space Observatory 


The Onsala Space Observatory (OSO), the Swedish 
National Facility for Radio Astronomy, operates two radio 
telescopes: the 20 m diameter millimeter and the 25 m 
decimeter wave telescopes at Onsala and the Swedish— 
ESO Submillimeter Telescope, SEST, in Chile. 

OSO was the first European observatory to participate 
in high-resolution observations of radio sources using 
the very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) technique. 
This technique is used in astronomy and geodesy when 
transatlantic distances are measured with high precision. 
OSO is a pioneer of VLBI at millimeter wavelength, 
providing images of AGN with 50 microarcsec resolution. 
Important VLBI observations of hydrogen absorption 
reveal tori around AGN; VLBI shows methanol masers 
delineate rotating protostellar disks. 

Research includes millimeter wave astronomy used 
for spectroscopy of interstellar molecules in the Galaxy, 
and external galaxies; molecular distribution in Magel- 
lanic Clouds measured with SEST. Several molecules have 
been discovered by Onsala scientists—molecules detected 
in distant galaxies in absorption against even more distant 
quasars leading to chemistry of the early universe (z > 1). 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.oso.chalmers.se/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oort Cloud 


The Oort cloud is a huge, spherical swarm of some 10'?- 
10!3 comets surrounding the solar system and extending 
roughly halfway to the nearest stars. The cloud is named 
for the Dutch astronomer JAN oort who first suggested 
its existence in 1950 in order to explain the orbits of the 
observed LONG-PERIOD (LP) CoMETS. 

The orbits of comets in the Oort cloud are so distant— 
typical APHELION distances are on the order of 30000 to 
60000 AU—that they are perturbed by random passing 
stars, giant molecular clouds and the tidal field of 
the Galactic disk and core. These external perturbers 
randomize the orbits and occasionally send comets back 
into the planetary system where they can be observed. 
However, the comets in the Oort cloud likely did not form 
at these great distances from the Sun where the density of 
the solar nebula must have been exceedingly low. Rather, 
the comets likely formed as icy PLANETESIMALS in the region 
of the giant planets and were ejected to distant orbits 
by the growing proto-planets early in the solar system’s 
history. Icy planetesimals that formed beyond the orbits 
of the giant planets remained in a low-inclination, low- 
eccentricity belt of comets, which is known as the KUIPER 
BELT. The Oort cloud and the Kuiper belt serve as long-lived 
storage reservoirs for comets in the outer solar system. 

LP comets are defined as comets with orbital periods 
exceeding 200 yr. The definition is somewhat arbitrary 
and is based on the fact that we only have good orbital 
records over the past 200-300 yr. LP comets passing 
through the planetary region have highly eccentric, near- 
parabolic orbits that take them out to very large distances 
from the Sun. Indeed, many of the orbits appear to be 
hyperbolic, that is they appear to come from beyond the 
solar system, from interstellar space. This is shown in 
figure 1(a) where the orbits of the observed LP comets are 
plotted as a function of the inverse of their semimajor axes, 
1/a, which is proportional to their orbital energies. About 
one-third of the comets have negative values of 1/a which 
correspond to positive energies. These are the apparently 
hyperbolic orbits. The remainder of the LP comets have 
positive values of 1/a, corresponding to negative or bound 
energies. These comets are in elliptical orbits around the 
Sun, although ones of exceedingly long period. These 
apparent or instantaneous orbits are known as ‘osculating’ 
orbits. 

However, if one integrates the orbits backwards in 
time, to a point before the comets entered the planetary 
region, and then references the orbits to the barycenter 
(center of mass) of the solar system, rather than to the 
Sun, the distribution of orbital energies changes radically. 
These are known as the ‘original’ orbits. The distribution 
of inverse ‘original’ semimajor axes, 1/d), is shown in 
figure 1(b). Almost all of the apparently hyperbolic orbits 
are shifted to bound, elliptical orbits. Also, the distribution 
is characterized by a large spike of comets at near-zero 
but positive (bound) values of 1/a, and a low continuous 
distribution of comets in more tightly bound, less eccentric 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


_ 40.0 
® i: . 
- | (a) Long-period comets 
= E 
20.0 
fa L Osculating orbits 
0.0L wall il ae | oe Sa 
-20 0 20 40 60 80 
100 
| (0) 
go |- 
[. Long-period comets 
oO .. 
asl a Original orbits 
E L 
2 [ 
40 | 
20 
0 rd pri ss 
-20 0 20 40 60 80 
_ 40.0 
2 [ (e) : 
a L Long-period comets 
2 20.0- 
Future orbits 
0.0 6 nanan lodko. omen Den benfl ot nom [Dinan an 
t/a-- 10 au" 


Figure 1. Distribution of inverse semimajor axes, 1/a, for the 
observed LP comets: (a) for the instantaneous or ‘osculating’ 
orbit as the comet passes through the planetary system, (b) for 
the original orbit, integrated backwards in time to before the 
comet entered the planetary system, and (c) for the future orbit, 
integrated forward in time to after the comet has left the 
planetary system. The sharp ‘spike’ of comets at near-zero but 
bound energies in (b) is the ‘dynamically new’ comets from the 
Oort cloud. The few hyperbolic comets in (b) are likely the result 
of errors in their orbit determinations. 


orbits. Comets in the spike have orbital semimajor axes 
between 104 AU and infinity and orbital periods greater 
than one million years. A small number of comets still 
appear to have hyperbolic orbits, but these have been 
attributed to small errors in their orbit determination and 
to jetting forces from the icy cometary nuclei, which also 
act to change the energy of the orbits. In the 1940s 
researchers showed that Jupiter would perturb the orbits 
of comets passing through the planetary system so as to 
spread them randomly in orbital energy, giving rise to the 
low, continuous distribution. However, what then was the 
explanation for the spike of comets? 

Oort recognized that the spike had to be the source 
of the LP comets, a vast, spherical cloud of comets at 
distances greater than 10* AU from the Sun, but still 
gravitationally bound to it (the spherical nature of the Oort 
cloud is revealed by the distributions of orbital elements 
for the LP comets, which show that they appear from all 
directions on the sky). Oort showed that comets in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


cloud are so far from the Sun that distant perturbations 
from random passing stars can change their orbits and 
occasionally send some comets back into the planetary 
system. On their first pass through the planetary system, 
random planetary perturbations, primarily by Jupiter, 
eject roughly half of the ‘new’ comets to interstellar space, 
while capturing the other half to more tightly bound, less 
eccentric orbits. Only about 5% of the new comets are 
returned to Oort cloud distances. On subsequent returns 
the comets continue to random walk in orbital energy 
until they are ejected, captured to a short-period orbit, 
collide with a planet or the Sun, or are destroyed by one of 
several poorly understood physical mechanisms. Analysis 
of the observed cometary orbits shows that the average 
‘dynamically new’ LP comet entering the planetary system 
from the Oort cloud comes from an aphelion distance of 
~4.3 x 10* AU. 

Interestingly, speculations by EDMOND HALLEY in his 
classic work on comets in 1705 could be interpreted as 
implying a distant comet cloud. Halley was only able to 
fit parabolic elements to the 24 comet orbits he derived, 
but he argued that the orbits would prove to be elliptic, 
writing, 


For so their Number will be determinate and, 
perhaps, not so very great. Besides, the Space 
between the Sun and the fix’d Stars is so 
immense that there is Room enough for a Comet 
to revolve, tho’ the Period of its Revolution be 
vastly long. 


It is possible to simulate the dynamical evolution of 
comets in the Oort cloud using computer-based Monte 
Carlo simulation models. These models include the 
effects of dynamical perturbations by the planets, random 
passing stars and nongravitational forces and of physical 
loss due to collisions, random disruption (splitting) and 
loss of volatiles (sublimation of ices). By ‘tuning’ such a 
model to fit the observed data in figure 1, some insight into 
the possible physical and dynamical loss mechanisms can 
be obtained. 

The dynamical simulations suggest that ~65% of the 
LP comets are dynamically ejected from the solar system 
on hyperbolic orbits, 27% are randomly disrupted—10% 
on the first PERIHELION passage—and the remainder are 
lost by a variety of processes such as loss of all volatiles 
and collision with the Sun and planets. The average 
hyperbolic ejection velocity is only 0.6 km s~'. Some 
comets may become unobservable owing to the formation 
of nonvolatile lag deposits, or ‘crusts’, on their surfaces, 
which would cut off further cometary activity. The average 
LP comet with perihelion distance less than 4 AU makes 
only five passages through the planetary region before 
arriving at one of the physical or dynamical end-states, 
with a mean lifetime of 6 x 10° yr between the first and last 
passages. 

Another way to illustrate the dynamical evolution of 
LP comets from the Oort cloud is shown by the scatter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


diagram in figure 2, which plots each observed LP comet 
as a function of its perihelion distance and inverse original 
semimajor axis (omitting those comets for which only 
parabolic orbital solutions are available). The dynamically 
new, Oort cloud comets appear as a horizontal band of 
objects at near-zero 1/a). As comets are perturbed by 
the giant planets, they random walk vertically in the 
figure (planetary perturbations of the perihelion distance, 
q, are typically small unless a very close approach occurs). 
However, if a comet random walks to a negative value of 
1/d,, it escapes the solar system and does not return. 


Cometary fading 

Some researchers have proposed that the height of the 
low, continuous distribution of returning comets seen 
in figure 1(b) is too low relative to the height of the 
Oort cloud spike. This problem was also noted by 
Oort. These researchers suggest that comets fade sharply 
after their first appearance. However, the problem is a 
complex one involving both observational selection effects 
and poorly understood physical processes in comets. 
Oort cloud comets on their first perihelion passage are 
often anomalously bright at large heliocentric distances, 
and thus their probability of discovery is considerably 
enhanced. Indeed, as seen in figure 2, most observed 
LP comets with perihelion distances greater than 3 AU 
are Oort cloud comets. Suggested explanations for 
this anomalous brightness include a veneer of volatiles 
accreted from the interstellar medium and lost on the first 
perihelion passage near the Sun, blow-off of a primordial 
cosmic-ray-processed nucleus crust or the amorphous-to- 
crystalline water ice phase transformation that occurs at 
about 5 AU inbound on the first perihelion passage. When 
these Oort cloud comets return, they are not observed 
unless they come within 3 AU of the Sun, where water 
ice can begin to sublimate at a sufficient rate to produce 
an easily visible coma (see COMA, COMETARY). The failure to 
observe returning LP comets with perihelia greater than 
3 AU must be an observational selection effect, as there is 
no recognized physical and/or dynamical mechanism for 
preferentially removing them. 

On the other hand, physical ‘fading’ of comets 
is not well demonstrated. Suggestions of fading in 
some SHORT-PERIOD COMETS have largely been explained by 
changes in instrumentation and observing techniques. 
Observations of three well-known intermediate-period 
comets (those with periods between 20 and 200 yr), 
1P/Halley, 109P/Swift-Tuttle and 55P/Tempel-Tuttle, 
have been traced back up to two millennia in human 
records. The observations suggest that these comets have 
remained remarkably constant in maximum brightness 
during that time and have not faded appreciably (if the 
comets had been brighter in the past then they should have 
been detected on additional past apparitions; this is not 
seen). 

A physical mechanism that might explain fading is 
the formation of nonvolatile lag deposits on the surfaces of 
COMETARY NUCLEI. As cometary ices sublimate, the evolving 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


026 ~T T 
* 
* * 
« * 
022 x 4 
=e 
* 4 
P * * 
me 
.018 [- * 4 
* 
* za 
* 
* 7 * 
- .014 4 
i 
2 
<t id * 
| * * * 4 
* 
= ae ; 
™ 010 * * * | 
* = 4 
se. % a 
rm: ~* ™ 
* | 
.006 oe ? " , . 
a F* * 
- * : ve a 
- 2)" = % 
it * = Pid ‘ cs ae * = 
. te, * 4 
.002 ! * ~ ae & nd 
* eee * x * 
oe * 
4, €¥ oy re Tey wate ie wy * *x* xe x * mee Eek | 
* 
* 
~.002 al | _t 2 Seer 
0 1 2 3 4 5 


PERIHELION — AU 


Figure 2. Scatter diagram in perihelion distance and inverse original semimajor axis for the observed LP comets. The horizontal band 
of comets at near-zero 1/a. are comets making their first perihelion passage from the Oort cloud. Comets diffuse up and down in the 
diagram as a result of planetary perturbations, primarily by Jupiter (from Weissman 1996). 


gases carry grains of dust and ice into the cometary coma. 
However, large grains may be too heavy to be lifted off the 
nucleus surface by the evolving gases, and thus would 
form a lag deposit. The effect of this lag deposit is to 
insulate the ices below from solar heating, thus decreasing 
the sublimation rate and the resulting observable cometary 
activity. Thermal models have suggested that a layer 
of nonvolatile grains only a few centimeters thick could 
completely insulate the underlying icy-conglomerate 
material from solar insolation. Thus comets may slowly 
‘turn off’ as these lag deposits build up on their surfaces. 
Observed outbursts in comets have been attributed to 
the sudden blow-off of surface crusts as the pressure of 
evolved gases builds up beneath them. 

It should also be recognized that random disruption, 
one of the physical loss mechanisms mentioned above, can 
mimic the apparent effect of cometary fading, removing 
a fraction of the LP comets on each perihelion passage. 
Disruption events which do not totally destroy the 
cometary nucleus may still result in smaller nuclei less 
capable of producing visible coma, i.e. faded comets. 


Oort cloud perturbers 
Since first proposed in 1950, Oort’s vision of a cometary 
cloud gently stirred by perturbations from distant passing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stars has evolved considerably. Additional perturbers 
have been recognized: giant molecular clouds (GMCs) in 
the Galaxy, which were unknown before 1970, and the 
Galactic gravitational field itself, in particular the tidal 
field of the Galactic disk. GMC encounters are rare, 
occurring with a mean interval of ~3 x 10° yr, but can 
result in major perturbations on orbits in the Oort cloud. 

The Galactic field sets the limits on the outer 
dimensions of the Oort cloud. The cloud is a prolate 
spheroid with the long axis oriented toward the Galactic 
nucleus. Maximum semimajor axes are about 10° AU 
for direct orbits (relative to Galactic rotation) oriented 
along the Galactic radius vector, decreasing to about 8 x 
10* AU for orbits perpendicular to the radius vector, and 
increasing to 1.2 x 10° AU for retrograde orbits (opposite 
to Galactic rotation). 

In addition, random stars will occasionally pass 
directly through the Oort cloud, ejecting a substantial 
number of the comets and severely perturbing the orbits of 
others. A star passage drills a narrow tunnel through the 
Oort cloud, ejecting all comets within a radius of ~200 AU, 
for a 1 solar mass star passing 10* AU from the Sun at 
a velocity of 40 km s-'. Over the history of the solar 
system, ~10* stars have passed within 10° AU of the Sun, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ejecting about 10% of the Oort cloud population. Although 
the ejected comets will all be positioned close to the path 
of the perturbing star, comets which are thrown into the 
planetary system in a ‘cometary shower’ can come from 
any location in the spherical Oort cloud. 

Galactic tidal perturbations result from the different 
distances of the Sun and a comet in the Oort cloud 
above the Galactic plane and (to a lesser extent) their 
different distances from the Galactic nucleus. Galactic 
tidal perturbations peak for orbits with their line of apsides 
at Galactic latitudes of +45° and go to zero at the Galactic 
equator and poles. The distribution of Galactic latitudes 
of the aphelion directions of the observed LP comets 
mimics that dependence. Although a lack of comet 
discoveries near the Galactic equator could be the result of 
observational selection effects (e.g. confusion with Galactic 
nebulae), the lack of comets near the poles appears to 
confirm the importance of the Galactic tidal field on the 
Oort cloud. 

The Galactic tide acts to step the cometary perihelia 
in a regular fashion, as compared with the random walk 
nature of stellar perturbations. Thus the tide results in 
comets being brought into the observable region more 
efficiently, making it easier to overcome the dynamical 
barrier that Jupiter and Saturn present to cometary 
diffusion into the inner planets region. 

The Oort cloud perturbers discussed above are all 
evaluated assuming the Sun’s current position in the 
Galaxy, its current velocity relative to the local standard 
of rest (LSR) and the current perturbing environment of 
stars, GMCs and the Galactic gravitational field. However, 
the Sun’s motion has likely varied considerably over the 
history of the solar system, precisely because of random 
encounters with GMCs. Also, there is some evidence that 
the Sun and solar system may have formed closer to the 
Galactic center, at about 6 kpc, as compared with its current 
estimated distance of 8.5 kpc. 

The Sun’s past motion can only be reconstructed 
statistically, and thus one can only give probabilities as 
to the perturbation history of the Oort cloud from stars, 
GMCs, and the Galactic tide. An interesting feature of the 
Sun’s current motion is that the Sun moves anomalously 
slowly relative to neighboring stars, as compared with 
stars with similar ages. The Sun’s current velocity is only 
~16-20 km s~! relative to the LSR, as compared with an 
rms velocity dispersion of ~42 km s~! for G-type stars. 
The effect of this lower velocity is to decrease the rate 
of encounters with stars and GMCs but to increase the 
perturbing effect of those encounters that do occur. Also, 
the low velocity restricts the Sun to moving in a low- 
eccentricity orbit around the Galactic center, and an orbit 
that does not carry it very far out of the Galactic plane. The 
Sun’s current Galactic orbit has it moving ‘inward’ towards 
Galactic periapsis and ‘upwards’, having recently passed 
through the Galactic plane. 


The inner Oort cloud 
As a result of this better understanding of the roles of 
Oort cloud perturbers, it is now estimated that the mean 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dynamical lifetime of comets in the cloud is only about 
60% of the age of the solar system; some researchers have 
estimated even shorter lifetimes. The Oort cloud must 
somehow be replenished, either by capture of comets from 
interstellar space or from a more populous inner Oort 
cloud reservoir, comets in orbits closer to the Sun that are 
pumped up to replace the lost comets. 

Cometary capture is a highly unlikely process because 
a three-body gravitational interaction is required to 
dissipate the excess hyperbolic energy. The probability of 
capture is proportional to V,;’, where V,, is the hyperbolic 
excess velocity. Capture is possible at encounter velocities 
<1 km s“!, but is highly unlikely at the Sun’s velocity of 
~16-20 km s“ relative to the LSR. 

On the other hand, Monte Carlo simulations have 
shown that the dynamical evolution of icy planetesimals 
formed in the giant planets’ zone would naturally lead 
to an inner Oort cloud. The icy planetesimals would 
be perturbed by the forming proto-planets into eccentric 
long-period orbits with semimajor axes of several times 
10° AU or more. Stellar and Galactic perturbations 
at aphelion would raise the perihelia of such orbits to 
heliocentric distances greater than Neptune’s semimajor 
axis, detaching the comets from planetary perturbations. 
In this manner, an inner Oort cloud reservoir, with a 
population about 2—5 times that of the outer cloud, could 
be formed. 

Note that the difference between the inner and outer 
Oort clouds is one of definition only. The two are really one 
continuous cloud of comets, formed coevally and evolving 
under the same combination of external perturbers. The 
difference is defined by the different dynamical regimes. 
The outer Oort cloud is ‘dynamically active’; perturbations 
on the orbits of comets in the outer cloud are sufficient to 
throw the comets back into the planetary region where 
they can be observed. The comets in the inner cloud 
are dynamically less active, unless the cloud undergoes a 
major perturbation. The transition between the inner and 
outer Oort clouds is generally taken to be at semimajor axes 
of ~104 AU, or at heliocentric distances of ~2 x 10* AU. 
As comets are stripped away from the outer Oort cloud by 
close stellar and GMC encounters, the same perturbations 
will pump up the orbits of comets in the inner Oort cloud 
to replace them. 

Anexample of a Monte Carlo simulation of Oort cloud 
formation is shown in figure 3 for four different times in 
the solar system’s history. Initially the comets are confined 
to the ecliptic plane (which is inclined approximately 62° 
to the Galactic plane). As perturbations drive the orbits 
outward, their inclinations relative to the ecliptic plane 
slowly increase. At the end of 4.5 x 10° years, the cloud is 
essentially randomized in both inclination and eccentricity 
beyond about 6 x 10° AU from the Sun. However, inward 
of that distance the cloud remains flattened toward the 
ecliptic plane and the orbits remain highly eccentric. 

Approximately 40-60% of the original comets ejected 
to the Oort cloud (both inner and outer) have been 
lost over the history of the solar system. Comets are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


107 YEARS 


109 YEARS 


108 YEARS 


4.5x109 YEARS 


Figure 3. Dynamical evolution of a hypothetical cloud of comets ejected out of the giant planets’ zone, at several times during the 
history of the solar system, under a combination of Galactic, stellar and planetary perturbations (projected onto a plane perpendicular 
to the Galactic plane). The dotted circle is at a radius of 2 x 10* AU, the approximate boundary between the inner and outer Oort 


clouds (from Duncan et al 1987). 


lost by direct ejection due to close stellar passages, by 
diffusion back into the planetary region where Jupiter 
and Saturn perturbations will eject them hyperbolically or 
where they will be physically destroyed and by the slow 
growth of some orbits to distances greater than the Sun’s 
gravitational sphere of influence, ~2 x 10° AU (1 pc). 


The population, mass and angular momentum of 
the Oort cloud 

Estimates of the population of the Oort cloud can be made 
by comparing the results of dynamical simulations with 
the observed flux of comets in the planetary region. To 
account for the observed flux, Oort estimated that the 
population of the cometary cloud was 1.9 x 10" objects. 
More recent dynamical models have produced somewhat 
higher estimates, by up to an order of magnitude. These 
result in part from higher estimates of the flux of LP 
comets through the planetary system and in part from 
a recognition of the role of the giant planets in blocking 
the diffusion of cometary orbits back into the planetary 
region. Comets perturbed inward to perihelia near the 
orbits of Jupiter and Saturn will likely be hyperbolically 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ejected before they can diffuse to smaller perihelia and 
be observed. Thus, the terrestrial planets’ region is under 
supplied in LP comets as compared with the outer planets’ 
region. 

About ten new LP comets are discovered each year, 
with about two or three of those having perihelia inside 
the Earth’s orbit. However, researchers have shown that 
many comets are missed because of observational selection 
effects. This is particularly true for comets that reach their 
greatest brightness on the opposite side of the Sun from 
the Earth. Estimates of the incompleteness range from 
50% to 95%. Using these numbers, the best current guess 
for the population of the outer, dynamically active Oort 
cloud is about 1 x 10” comets. The population of the 
inner Oort cloud is estimated at 2-5 times that of the outer 
cloud. These population estimates refer to comets brighter 
than absolute magnitude Hjy = 11. Absolute magnitude 
11 corresponds to a nucleus mass of ~4 x 10° g, or a 
nucleus radius of 1.2 km, assuming a density of 0.6 g cm? 
(although there is not good agreement on the cometary 
mass-brightness relationship). 

The population estimates depend on the assumption 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ETT To T FT I T 


300 


200 


100 


50 100 


Pat oa eh ak pot al 


150 
Time (Myr) 


pe a 


pee PR ced (eT 
200 


z 


n 
ce) 
fo) 


Figure 4. Number of new LP comets from the Oort cloud entering the terrestrial planets’ region, g < 2 AU, versus time, based on a 
Monte Carlo simulation that included random passing stars and Galactic tidal perturbations. The large spikes are comet showers due 


to random stars penetrating the Oort cloud (from Heisler 1990). 


that the currently observed LP comet flux through the 
inner planets region is equivalent to the long-term average 
flux. If the current flux is enhanced owing to a recent 
perturbation on the Oort cloud, then the population 
estimate for the cloud is too high, and vice versa. 
However, it has been pointed out that the Galactic latitude 
dependence of the observed LP comet aphelion directions 
would not be present if most comets seen were the result of 
a recent major perturbation on the cloud by a close stellar 
passage or by a GMC. Also, researchers have shown that 
the 1/a, distribution does not exhibit any indication of 
a recent major perturbation on the comet cloud. Thus, 
the Oort cloud population estimates above may be lower 
limits. 

The mass of the Oort cloud is highly uncertain 
because both the nucleus size distribution and the bulk 
density of cometary nuclei are not well known. Estimates 
of the density of the nucleus of COMET HALLEY range 
from 0.2 to 1.2 ¢g cm-°, with an even larger range 
of uncertainties. Measurement of the bulk density of 
recovered interplanetary dust particles which are believed 
to be of cometary origin finds values of ~0.7-1.9 g cm-3. 
Researchers found a bulk density of 0.6-1.1 g¢ cm? for the 
progenitor nucleus of comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, based on 
computer simulations of the tidal disruption of that comet. 

The cometary mass distribution is even more 
uncertain. Several attempts to derive the mass distribution 
have been based on the observed distribution of cometary 
magnitudes (including coma), Ajo, after correction for 
observational selection effects. Another method is to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


estimate the size of cometary nuclei from their observed 
brightness at large distances from the Sun, when they 
presumably are inactive: this method also requires one to 
assume an albedo for the nucleus surface; actual cometary 
albedos have only been measured in a few cases. A third 
method has been to construct a size or mass distribution 
from estimates of the population of the Kuiper belt in 
various size ranges. Using these various methods, a 
plausible value for the average nucleus mass is ~4 x 10’° g. 
Assuming a bulk density of 0.6 g cm~?, the average nucleus 
would have a mean radius of 2.5 km. Using this value, a 
current best guess for the total mass of the Oort cloud is 
~(1.2-2.4) x 10” g¢ or ~20-40 Earth masses, assuming an 
outer Oort cloud population of 10’ comets and an inner 
Oort cloud population of (2-5) x 10’? comets. 

Assuming that population and mass, and distribu- 
tions of cometary orbits from dynamical simulations, the 
total angular momentum of the Oort cloud at the present 
time is (3-6) x 10°° g cm’? s~!. The original angular mo- 
mentum of the comet cloud at the time of formation was 
approximately a factor of 5 less than the present value; 
angular momentum has been pumped into the cloud by 
stellar and GMC perturbations. The original angular mo- 
mentum is ~3 times that of Uranus and Neptune com- 
bined, which is consistent with estimates of the total mass 
of icy planetesimals originally in that zone. 


Temporal variations in the cometary flux 
The cometary flux into the planetary region is expected 
to vary as a result of major perturbations on the Oort 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


cloud and as a result of the variation in the Galactic tidal 
perturbation. The latter results from the solar system’s 
harmonic motion above and below the Galactic plane, 
which currently carries the planetary system ~75 pc out 
of the plane. The period of the oscillation is ~(62- 
68) x 10° yr. This is expected to cause the cometary flux 
to vary sinusoidally by a factor of 4 over that period, with 
the maximum flux occurring just after passage through the 
Galactic plane. However, the role of stellar perturbations 
during the oscillation has not been evaluated and they may 
act either to enhance the variations in the flux or to actually 
mitigate the variations. The solar system has just passed 
through the Galactic plane in the last few million years, so 
the current steady-state flux is likely at a local maximum. 

Random close approaches by stars can cause more 
extreme, although short-lived, changes in the cometary 
flux. A computer-based simulation of the flux of 
dynamically new comets perturbed to perihelion distances 
<2 AU is shown in figure 4. The large spikes are the result 
of close stellar passages which actually penetrate the Oort 
cloud to <10* AU. 

These extreme increases in the cometary flux caused 
by penetrating stellar passages are of particular interest. A 
1Mp star passage at 20 kms7! at 3 x 10° AU from the Sun 
would perturb a shower of ~5 x 108 comets into Earth- 
crossing orbits, raising the peak flux by a factor of 300 
or more, and lasting (2-3) x 10° yr. Contributing to the 
very high flux rate is the fact that the shower comets from 
the inner Oort cloud start from shorter-period orbits than 
outer Oort cloud comets, and returning comets tend to be 
perturbed to even shorter-period orbits. They thus make 
many returns in a relatively brief period of time. The 
temporal profile and fraction of surviving comets for a 
major cometary shower are shown in figure 5. 

Fortunately, major cometary showers as a result of 
deep, ~3 x 10° AU, penetrating stellar encounters are rare, 
occurring perhaps once every (3-5) x 10° yr. Cometary 
showers should also occur with a similar frequency owing 
to random encounters with GMCs, but with perhaps an 
order of magnitude less total flux into the planetary region. 
Lesser showers from more distant, but still penetrating 
stellar passages at heliocentric distances ~10* AU occur 
more frequently, on the order of every (3-5) x 10’ yr. 
Cometary showers have also been suggested as a possible 
cause of biological extinction events on the Earth. LP 
comet impacts, including comet showers, are expected 
to account for approximately 10-25% of the craters larger 
than 10 km diameter on the Earth and Moon. 

The suggestion that biological extinction events on 
the Earth repeat with an approximately 26 Myr period 
led to several hypotheses in the 1980s that each invoked 
cometary showers as the cause of the extinctions. These 
hypotheses involved (1) a dwarf companion star to the 
Sun in a distant, eccentric, 26 Myr period orbit with 
its perihelion deep in the Oort cloud, (2) a 10th planet 
circulating in a highly inclined, precessing orbit at about 
150 AU from the Sun, at the inner edge of the inner 
Oort cloud, (3) the solar system’s epicyclic motion above 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


rs) 


ape De a ed ra id Sa a | TIF 1.0 


MI aie tT 


i 
an 


Cp eter pee yy eek ee 


75 


a 
a 


25 


a 
BUIAIAINS S}eU09 Jo UOI}OeI4 


Frequency of perihelion passages 


4 
poo da ret og 


fe) L | a ee HD | | | Ta) CS EE L 
te) 5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 
Megayears 


Figure 5. Dynamical evolution of a shower of comets from the 
inner Oort cloud due to a close, penetrating stellar passage at 

20 km s~! at 3 x 10 AU from the Sun. The solid histogram is the 
relative number of comets crossing the Earth’s orbit versus time; 
the dashed curve is the fraction of the original shower comets 
still evolving in the system. On the order of 5 x 10° comets 
(brighter than H1o = 11) are expected to be thrown into 
Earth-crossing orbits by the 1Mo star’s passage (from Hut et al 
1987). 


and below the Galactic plane with a half-period of 
32-34 Myrs, with GMC encounters at Galactic plane 
crossings. There is an apparent coincidence between 
Galactic plane crossings by the solar system and some 
terrestrial extinction boundaries. 

However, a variety of dynamical problems have been 
identified with each of these hypotheses, and no evidence 
in support of any of them has been found. As a result, 
periodic comet shower hypotheses have not gained wide 
acceptance. Questions have also been raised about the 
reality of the periodicity in the fossil extinction record. 


Physical processing of comets in the Oort cloud 
It had generally been thought that the Oort cloud is a 
fairly benign storage location for the LP comets. The 
typical spacing between comets in the outer cloud is 
~15 AU, and in the inner cloud it is ~1 AU. The typical 
temperature is that of interstellar space, <10 K. However, 
it is now recognized that a variety of processes combine 
to act on the cometary nuclei, in particular their surface 
layers, over the history of the solar system. These 
include (1) irradiation, sputtering, and polymerization 
by Galactic cosmic rays, (2) heating by passing stars 
and nearby supernovae, (3) gardening by debris impacts 
and (4) the accretion of interstellar dust and gas and 
the accompanying erosion by hypervelocity dust impacts. 
In addition, the interiors of the nuclei may have been 
warmed by long-lived radionuclides, and even melted 
if short-lived radionuclides such as 7°Al are there in 
similar abundances to those found for some primitive 
carbonaceous meteorites. 

The combined effects of these competing processes are 
not well understood. They may lead to the development 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of a permanent nonvolatile crust over the nucleus surface 
before it ever enters the planetary system, or they may 
simply result in a heterogeneous collection of unbound, 
highly processed materials in a well-gardened nucleus 
regolith. Surface heating may cause both loss and inward 
diffusion of the more volatile cometary species, while 
internal heating will also mobilize volatile species and 
could conceivably result in the nucleus core transitioning 
from amorphous to crystalline ice, or even perhaps being 
melted and refrozen. 


Extra-solar Oort clouds and interstellar comets 
Presumably, the same processes that led to the formation of 
planetesimals and their ejection to form the Oort cloud in 
our planetary system can also occur around other forming 
stars. However, researchers have suggested that stars 
younger than about 10’ yr (M, > 7Mo) likely do not 
have sufficient time to form Oort clouds during their main 
sequence lifetimes. Also, the formation of Oort clouds 
is likely dependent on the presence of giant planets at 
distances greater than 3 AU from the central star (where 
ices could form) in order to eject enough comets to Oort 
cloud distances. 

Because the typical dimensions of Oort clouds are so 
large, ~0.1-0.5 pc, it may be possible to actually detect and 
resolve such comet clouds. Astronomers have searched 
for excess thermal emission from cometary dust around 
nearby stars in data from the Infrared Astronomical 
Satellite. Their results were negative. However, this 
was expected, since dust at Oort cloud distances will 
be very cold (T ~ 10 K at 10° AU from the Sun), and 
radiation pressure and collisions with interstellar dust and 
gas should rapidly sweep fine dust from the comet clouds. 

Astronomers have also proposed searching for Oort 
clouds around RED GIANT stars. These stars are sufficiently 
luminous that the comets in their Kuiper belts, if they had 
them, would be actively sublimating at rates comparable 
with the gas production rates of comets at 1 AU in our own 
solar system. Observed OH-IR stars may be an example 
of this phenomenon. 

It is interesting to speculate on the fate of the many 
comets ejected to interstellar space in forming the Oort 
cloud and over its history. Dynamical ejection is the 
most common loss mechanism for comets in the cloud, 
either due to close stellar and GMC perturbations or as a 
result of Jupiter perturbations during passage through the 
planetary system. 

No comet on a clearly interstellar trajectory has been 
observed passing through our planetary system. This fact 
sets an upper limit on the space density of interstellar 
comets of ~4 x 10” comets pce~?. For comparison, this 
is ~100-300 times less than the density of material in the 
solar neighborhood, ~(0.07-0.18)M5 por; so interstellar 
comets cannot contribute significantly to the ‘missing 
mass’ in the galaxy. Note also that this value is about 
half the mean density of comets in the outer Oort cloud, 
assuming a population of 10’? comets in a sphere of radius 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10° AU centered on the Sun. Thus, the limit is not very 
strict. 

It is also possible to compare the limit above with 
the estimated space density of interstellar comets, if 
one assumes that all stars produce cometary clouds. 
Dynamical models estimate that between 2 and 20 times as 
many comets are ejected by the proto-planets as are placed 
in the Oort cloud. Another factor of 2-3 comes from the 
comets lost from the Oort cloud over the history of the 
solar system. Thus, taking a nominal current Oort cloud 
population of 3 x 10’ comets, the solar system has ejected 
~10'8 to 2 x 10’ comets to interstellar space. Taking a 
mean volume per star in the solar neighborhood of ~12 pe 
and assuming that all stars produce comet clouds, the 
predicted space density is 10'-2 x 108 comets pe~?. This 
is 0.25—-5 times the upper limit noted above. 

The lower limit in the above calculation is obviously 
not a problem. Since half of all stars form in multiple 
systems, and that process may prevent the formation of a 
PROTOPLANETARY DISK leading to cometesimals (although that 
conjecture has not actually been demonstrated), factors of 
a few times the interstellar comet density limit are also 
likely not a cause for great concern. However, a factor of 
5 excess is not consistent with the Oort cloud models and 
population estimates presented here. This may suggest 
that Oort clouds are efficient at capturing a significant 
fraction of the planetesimals ejected from giant planet 
zones, rather than allowing them to escape to interstellar 
space. Alternatively, it may be that only a small fraction 
of stars actually produce Oort clouds. 


Bibliography 

Ferndndez J A 1994 Dynamics of comets: recent 
developments and new challenges Asteroids, Comets, 
Meteors 1993 ed A Milani, M Di Martino and A Cellino 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 223-40 

Weissman P R 1996 The Oort cloud Completing the 
Inventory of the Solar System (ASP Conference Series 107) 
ed T W Rettig and J M Hahn pp 265-88 


Paul R Weissman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oort, Jan Hendrik (1900-92) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oort, Jan Hendrik (1900-92) 


Astronomer, born in Franeker, Netherlands, became 
director of the Leiden Observatory, confirmed BERTIL 
LINDBLAD’s hypothesis of galactic rotation by analysing 
motions of distant stars, with our Sun orbiting around the 
mass of the Galaxy which lies inside its path. The Oort 
constants are measurements of the Galaxy’s rotation, and 
from them Oort was able to calculate the distance of the 
Sun from the center of the Galaxy and the period of its 
orbit. During the Second World War, Oort inspired HENDRIK 
VAN DE HULST to calculate the 21 cm radio spectral line from 
hydrogen, and led the Dutch group which co-discovered 
and used the line to map hydrogen gas in the Galaxy, 
discovering spiral structure and the galactic center. He 
suggested the existence of a sphere of primordial cometary 
material surrounding the Solar System. He proposed that 
comets detached themselves from this Oort cloud, and went 
into orbits about the Sun. Oort showed that light from 
the Crab nebula is polarized, confirming 10sIF SHKLOVSKII's 
suggestion that it was synchrotron radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Oosterhoff, P Th (1904-78) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oosterhoff, P Th (1904-78) 


Dutch astronomer, shared with JANoort the administration 
of the Leiden Observatory. Was in charge of the Leiden 
southern station in South Africa. His main interest was 
in variable stars and photometric systems. He discovered 
the Oosterhoff dichotomy, that the type-ab RR Lyrae variable 
stars in globular clusters are divided into two groups with 
different average periods, connected with the abundance 
of metals in the atmospheres of the stars in the globular 
clusters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ophiuchus ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


O phiu chus See also: Barnard’s Star, Kepler’s Star. 


(the Serpent-bearer; abbrev. Oph, gen. Ophiuchi; area 
948 sq. deg.) An equatorial constellation which lies 
between Hercules and Scorpius, and culminates at 
midnight in mid-June. The ecliptic cuts across the 
southern part of Ophiuchus, but the constellation is 
not included among the constellations of the zodiac. 
Ophiuchus is usually said to represent Asclepius, the 
Greek god of medicine, and is shown on early celestial 
charts as a man holding a huge snake (represented by the 
neighboring constellation of Serpens). The brightest stars 
of Ophiuchus were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) 
in the Almagest. 

A large constellation, the brightest stars in Ophiuchus 
are a Ophiuchi (Rasalhague), magnitude 2.1, 7 Ophiuchi 
(Sabik), magnitude 2.4, and ¢ Ophiuchi, magnitude 
2.5. There are 11 other stars brighter than fourth 
magnitude. Interesting stars include p Ophiuchi, a 
multiple system consisting of three bluish-white (B2, 
B9 and B3) components, magnitudes 5.1, 7.1v and 7.0, 
separation 152” and 156”, embedded in a reflection nebula 
(IC 4604), that have the same proper motion, the former 
and last of which are close binaries with a bluish-white 
(B2) component, magnitude 5.7, separation 3.1”, and a 
magnitude 8.7 component, separation 0.4”, respectively. 
Other interesting binaries include 70 Ophiuchi, which has 
yellow (KO) and orange (K4) components, magnitudes 
4.3 and 6.3, separation 1.6”, period 88 years, and 36 
Ophiuchi, which has two orange (K2) components, both of 
magnitude 5.2, separation 4.7”, period about 550 years, and 
a third orange (K5) component, magnitude 6.3v, separation 
12’ north-east, which has the same proper motion and 
parallax. The latter system is about 20’ north of the ‘stem’ 
of the Pipe Nebula, a large area of dark nebulosity which 
extends east-west for several degrees and is visible to the 
unaided eye. 

Other interesting stars include Barnard’s Star, magni- 
tude 9.5, which, at a distance of 5.9 light-years, is the sec- 
ond closest star to the Sun and has the highest proper mo- 
tion of any star, RS Ophiuchi, a recurrent nova (range 4.3— 
12.5), which is normally between tenth and eleventh mag- 
nitude but flared up to naked-eye visibility in 1898, 1933, 
1958, 1967 and 1985, and Kepler’s Star (V843 Ophiuchi), 
the most recent example of a supernova in our Galaxy, ob- 
served by Kepler in 1604. 

Other interesting objects in Ophiuchus include NGC 
6572, an eighth-magnitude planetary nebula, and IC 4665 
and NGC 6633, two open clusters, both of a few dozen stars 
of seventh magnitude and fainter, but the constellation 
is renowned for its globular clusters, of which over two 
dozen are known. Of the globular clusters, the finest 
are M12 (NGC 6218), M10 (NGC 6254) and M62 (NGC 
6266), all sixth magnitude, and M14 (NGC 6402) and M19 
(NGC 6273), which are seventh magnitude. The Milky 
Way crosses the southern part of Ophiuchus and many of 
the globular clusters in this region appear fainter than they 
would otherwise, owing to interstellar absorption. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Oppenheimer, Julius Robert (1904-67) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oppenheimer, Julius Robert (1904-67) 


Nuclear physicist, born in New York City, joined 
the Manhattan Project and directed the Los Alamos 
Laboratory, where he became known as the ‘father of the 
atomic bomb’. He directed the Institute for Advanced 
Studies, Princeton, NJ. He worked on cosmic rays and 
calculated theoretically the structure of neutron stars, 
remarking that it seemed unlikely that they existed. 
Neutron stars were discovered as pulsars in 1967 by JOCELYN 
BELL. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Oppolzer, Theodor Egon Ritter von (1841-86) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oppolzer, Theodor Egon Ritter von 
(1841-86) 


A gifted mathematician, he knew 14000 logarithms by 
heart. He calculated the Canon der Finsternisse (Canon of 
Eclipses) listing the time of occurrence and the visibility 
track of 8000 solar and 5200 lunar eclipses between 1208 
Bc and AD 2161, used for historical research. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Opposition 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Opposition 


The position of a planet in its orbit when it and the Earth 
are aligned such that it is directly opposite the Sun in the 
sky, so that it has an elongation of 180°. The term is also 
used for the time at which this alignment occurs. Only 
superior planets (those outside the Earth’s orbit) can come 
to opposition. As this brings them closer to the Earth 
than at any other position in their orbit, opposition is 
the most favorable time for observing them. This applies 
in particular to Mars: because Mars’s orbit is markedly 
eccentric, its distance from the Earth at opposition varies 
considerably. At aphelic opposition, when the planet is 
farthest from the Sun, the distance is 101 million km, while 
at perihelic opposition, when it is closest to the Sun, it is only 
56 million km from the Earth. 


See: elongation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Optical Astronomy 


Optical astronomy is the subset of astronomy that is 
studied through use of light (and near infrared) from the 
universe. It comprises the most common observational 
techniques used by astronomers and accesses a wide range 
of celestial objects. 

It is increasingly common for astronomers to 
concentrate on their subject matter, rather than the 
observational techniques which they use, and thus to use 
a variety of multiwavelength techniques to study their 
specialty subjects. Nevertheless, the different techniques 
of astronomy are individually complex and astronomers 
also, in practice, specialize in observational techniques too. 
They form collaborations with others when they venture 
outside their specialty technique to make the necessary 
observations of their specialty subject matter. 


Spectral range 

The spectral range of optical astronomy is set, not by the 
physical properties of its objects, but by its technology, 
which stems from the spectral response of the human 
eye. Two astronomical environmental considerations 
have, however, helped to define the optical spectral 
range. (i) The peak of the energy distribution of the 
Sun lies near to 550 nm, at which wavelength there is 
the maximum illumination of the Earth. (ii) The Earth’s 
atmosphere has evolved to contain oxygen produced by 
living creatures, and therefore ozone and water vapor, 
which set respectively a sharp lower and fuzzy upper 
boundary to a transparency window between about 330 
nm and, say, 1.4 wm. 

Of course, there were strong biological factors in 
the development of the spectral response of the eye. 
In the evolution of primates, biological considerations 
favored light as a means to inspect vegetation, rather 
than, as in snakes, favoring infrared with which to detect 
thermal emission from warm-blooded prey. Together with 
these important biological considerations, astronomical 
considerations have presumably been at least minor 
factors to pull the evolution of the human eye to respond 
to light. 

The precise spectral response of the eye is also a 
matter of the photochemical reactions of the retina and 
absorption in the material of the eye lensing system. 
The optical range fits within the atmospheric window, 
from 400 nm to 700 nm. Shortwards of 400 nm lies the 
ultraviolet, longwards of 700 nm lies the infrared. This 
spectral range is overlapped by the spectral responses of 
the photographic emulsion and CCD detectors, developed 
industrially to mimic human vision through the use of 
cameras fed by transparent lenses, and adopted as imaging 
and recording technology by astronomers (see DETECTORS: 
PHOTOGRAPHY, CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE). 

These rather ill-connected but consistent considera- 
tions define optical astronomy as in practice the study of 
the constituents of the universe that emit in the spectral 
range from 330 nm to say 1 wm. Beyond about 1 ym, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


optical detectors must be replaced by suitable infrared de- 
tectors, but optical telescopes give adequate performance 
up to about 2.4 4m. Above this wavelength, the increas- 
ing thermal emission from telescope and atmosphere be- 
comes a major limitation. Ground-based telescopes can 
be made which mitigate the problems. Ground-based IN- 
FRARED TELESCOPES look more or less like optical telescopes, 
but are used with special techniques. They are usable up 
to a wavelength of, say, 35 4m at most. The spectral band 
from 330 nm to, say, 35 zm is termed ‘optical—infrared’ or 
OptIR. 

By contrast with astronomy using much longer 
wavelengths (radio and millimeter), telescopes for OptIR 
astronomy are of manageable size. By contrast with 
astronomy using longer wavelengths (long-wavelength 
infrared to submillimeter), telescopes and detectors for 
OptIR astronomy operate at ordinary temperatures under 
the atmosphere (although with limitations of atmospheric 
seeing, and perhaps in cold mountain locations). By 
contrast with astronomy using shorter wavelengths 
(ultraviolet and x-ray), telescopes for OptIR astronomy 
have high throughput and do not have to be operated in 
space. Because of the commercial importance of optical 
detectors, they have been developed into panoramic 
detectors for astronomy with many detector elements 
(pixels) and produce rich amounts of data. 

These considerations account for the historical 
primacy of optical astronomy. It was the sole area of 
astronomy up to the Second World War period. A large 
proportion of astronomers and observatories still work 
in OptIR astronomy. It remains the broad basis for 
astronomy. Often in the last 50 yr, of course, it has been 
fed by exciting and innovative discoveries made in other 
wavebands. Non-optical emission from a celestial object 
is a flag which waves ‘look at me, I am interesting’ and 
distinguishes its optical counterpart from the numerous 
similar-looking optical stars or galaxies. Even so, as the 
technology of OptIR telescopes develops, for example 
to larger-sized telescopes with greater collecting area, 
or through access by OptIR telescopes to space (HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE, Next Generation Space Telescope), its own 
capability for discovery is undiminished. 


Subject matter of optical astronomy 
The cosmic bodies that emit OptIR constitute a rich 
proportion of the material contents of the Universe. Not 
coincidentally (because of the connection between the 
evolution of the human eye in a location near to the Sun), 
many stars are of a surface temperature such that they emit 
significant radiation in this waveband. Not coincidentally 
(because the human eye is made of a molecular fluid 
and photochemical in the nature of its detector, and it 
operates under an atmosphere), many of the weaker 
electronic transitions in atoms and some in molecules 
involve photons in the optical range. 

Optical astronomy therefore consists mainly of the 
study of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


@ thermal emission from stars of temperature above, say, 
1000 K, 


@ thermal emission from collections of stars such as 
clusters and galaxies and 


@ spectral lines from atoms and ions in stellar atmospheres 
and nebulae. 


Because SYNCHROTRON RADIATION has a broad band nature, 
synchrotron sources are also seen through optical 
astronomy, even if relatively weak. 

The OptIR band brings into the subject matter for 
study 


@ thermal emission from cooler stars and the dust material 
that surrounds them, at temperatures down to about 
150 K, and 


@ spectral lines of a number of molecules. 


Techniques of optical astronomy 

The broad range of techniques that lie in the science of 
optics have been applied to OptIR astronomy. Glass is 
transparent to the OptIR spectral range. Ionic impurities 
can limit the spectral range of transmission, a limitation to 
the wider spectral range of glass or an exploitable asset as 
color FILTERS. 

Mirrors reflect light and infrared. At first mirrors were 
of polished metal (speculum) and later of glass or ceramic 
material coated with aluminum, silver or gold (depending 
on the spectral region within or near the OptIR range that 
is most important). Lenses and mirrors can be used to 
focus and filter light and form optical images for detection 
and analysis. 

The DISPERSION properties of transparent materials 
produce a means to form spectra for analysis. The different 
dispersion properties of different transparent materials 
form the basis to compensate for defects of optical systems 
caused by it. The wavelength of light is longer than 
the separation of atoms and substructure in glass masses, 
so parallel scratches can create DIFFRACTION GRATINGS. The 
wavelength is not so small that the scratch separation 
or the controlled separation of parallel planes of glass 
is outside technological reach. The wavelength is small 
enough that a large density of scratches is feasible, making 
high spectral resolution possible in the dispersed light. 
These considerations facilitate spectroscopy, spectral line 
analysis and measurement of radial velocities at the levels 
common in the motions of stars and nebulae. 

The mechanical rigidity of glass materials and their 
relatively low thermal expansion coefficient make large 
telescope lenses and mirrors possible. This has enabled 
optical telescopes to reach low flux limits and drawn 
into consideration a substantial fraction of the universe 
of stars and galaxies. The limits to mechanical and 
thermal stability also ultimately set limits on the size 
of the ground-based telescopes that can be made, even 
with the active control systems now possible. Because 
of the flux gradients from celestial objects such as the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sun and Moon, thermal stability remains a limit to the 
performance of OptIR telescopes even in space, such as 
the Next Generation Space Telescope. 


Paul Murdin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Double 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Optical Double 


This term is used for an observed double star that consists 
of two quite unrelated stars which just happen to lie in 
almost the same line of sight, and therefore appear to be 
close together in the sky. They may in fact be at very 
different distances from us and each other. If one of the 
stars is sufficiently close to have a measurable parallax, the 
true nature of the system can be quickly established. For 
most pairs this is not the case, and only measurements of 
their separation and position angle repeated over many 
decades will confirm that they have no orbital motion and 
do not constitute a true binary system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Optical Interferometers 


Optical INTERFEROMETERS are astronomical instruments 
designed to provide higher angular resolving power than 
is possible with a conventional optical telescope or, in 
other words, the capacity to measure smaller angles and 
to discern finer details in an image. 

The ability of a telescope to resolve fine detail in 
an astronomical object is fundamentally limited by the 
wavelength (color) of the light used for the observations 
and the diameter of the mirror or lens that collects light 
from the object. In practice the Earth’s atmosphere 
imposes a limit on the resolution achievable unless special 
techniques are used, but even above the atmosphere the 
only way to see finer detail with a telescope would be to 
observe at a shorter wavelength (bluer light) or to build a 
larger telescope. 

The measurement of the sizes of stars was the 
challenge that led to the development of optical 
interferometry. The size of a star cannot be measured 
directly but, if its angular size 6, and its distance D, can 
be determined, its diameter d, can be calculated from 
d, = D, x 9,, as illustrated in figure 1. From above 
the Earth’s atmosphere the images of all but a very few 
stars appear as points of light blurred only by the wave 
nature of light. From the ground, turbulence in the Earth’s 
atmosphere corrupts the light from a star and blurs its 
image so badly that no star, other than our own Sun, can 
have its size determined from its image. Astronomers call 
this blurring effect ‘SEEING’. 

FIZEAU (1868) was the first to propose an interferomet- 

ric method to overcome the effects of seeing. He noticed 
that when a star was viewed through a small aperture its 
image was blurred but was otherwise regular in shape— 
unlike that from a large telescope where the image is 
blurred but also continually changing. This led him to 
the idea of putting a mask with two small holes in front 
of a telescope and observing the superimposed images of 
the star. The combined image would be crossed by inter- 
ference fringes—alternate bright and dark bands. Fizeau 
realized that the contrast of the fringes, the difference in 
brightness of the bright and dark bands, would diminish 
as the separation of the apertures was increased, and that 
the fringes would vanish at a separation directly related to 
the angular size of the star. Stephan (1873) tested Fizeau’s 
idea but was unable to observe the disappearance of the 
fringes since the largest telescope available had an aperture 
diameter of only 0.8 m, which was too small. Nevertheless, 
Fizeau’s idea is the basis of modern optical interferometers 
which, by measuring the fringe contrast as a function of 
the separation of the apertures, are able to determine the 
angular sizes of stars and the angular separations of close 
binary (double) stars as illustrated in figure 1. 

The first measurement of the angular diameter 
of a star was by MICHELSON and PEASE in 1920 when 
they measured the angular diameter of Betelgeuse, the 
bright red supergiant star in the constellation of Orion. 
Because even the 100 inch (2.5 m) Hooker telescope on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Star ds Star 
| 
\ i 
\ 
i T 
\ ! \ H 
1 i \ 1 
\ i \ fl 
1 1 \ 1 
\ i \ fl 
\ i \ 1 
\ i \ 1 
\ i \ i 
4 | \ ! 
\ i \ 1 
1 i \ i 
i i \ 1 
\ i \ 1 
\ H : fi 
D. | i D \ | 
\ 
* 1 \ i 
1 I Ss \ | 
\ i \ 1 
\ I \ 1 
\ I \ 1 
1 1 \ I 
1 1 \ | 
\ i \ | 
1 i | 
\ i \ 1 
atoll \ / 
: \ s | 
\ 
1 | 
i \ 
\ 4 yt 
\ | ee 
1 1 \ | 
\ | , 4 
1 , 4 
\ \ 4 
1! a 
‘I \ oy 
wi \ J 
\ Ved 
\f e 
Vv \i 
@ Earth @ Earth 
(a) (b) 


Figure 1. The angular diameter of a star 6, and the angular 
separation 6, of the components of a binary, or double star. 


Mask 
—_. — 
Observer 


Figure 2. Cross section of the Michelson stellar interferometer 
mounted on the 100 inch Hooker telescope on Mount Wilson in 
California. 


Mount Wilson in California was too small to observe 
the disappearance of the fringes, Michelson had the 
brilliant idea of attaching a long beam across the front 
of the telescope to carry mirrors to relay starlight from 
separations greater than the telescope aperture into the 
telescope. A diagram of Michelson’s stellar interferometer 
is shown in figure 2. 

In the absence of a turbulent atmosphere even the 
largest optical telescopes, with aperture diameters of 8- 
10 m, would only reveal about a dozen stars as images 
whose sizes could be measured. While interferometric 
techniques, like speckle interferometry and developments 
of the masking interferometry originally proposed by 
Fizeau, have enabled telescopes to measure stars to the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


limits set by their aperture diameters and the wavelength 
of light, interferometry has moved on to combine the 
light from separate apertures in order to increase the 
angular resolution. This development required new 
technology in the form of laser metrology, adaptive 
optics, fast electronics and computer control and, since 
the driving force was primarily the measurement of stars 
and binary stars, most instruments have been called 
stellar interferometers. The increasing sensitivity and 
capabilities of interferometers offer other possibilities 
that are exciting astronomers and astrophysicists as 
the potential of interferometry is recognized. For 
example, these include the determination of accurate 
stellar positions (ASTROMETRY), the search for EXOPLANETS 
(planets other than those in the solar system) and the 
measurement of the sizes of cores of ACTIVE GALAXIES. 


Basic theory 
The minimum angle Omin resolvable by a circular aperture 
of diameter d at a wavelength A is given by 


1.24 . 
Omin = —— radians. 


For a 10 m telescope @min is 0.012 arcsec at a wavelength of 
500 nm. The angular diameters of all but a few stars are 
less than a very few milliarcsec (mas) and interferometers 
with aperture separations (baselines) in excess of 10 m are 
required to resolve them. 

The combination of the light from two separate 
apertures is similar to a Young’s double-slit experiment 
with interference fringes being formed in the combined 
images of the source. A measure of the contrast of the 
fringes is Michelson’s fringe visibility V defined as 


Tmax = Tnnin 


V= 
Tmax + Tin 
where Imax and Jmin represent the maximum and minimum 
intensities in the fringe pattern. 

A more sophisticated approach involves considera- 
tion of the coherence of the light at the two apertures. The 
complex degree of coherence y12(t) can be expressed in 
terms of a modulus |y;2(t)| and a phase ¢12(t), where Tt is 
the difference in arrival time of the two beams at the point 
of combination and the subscripts 1 and 2 represent the 
two apertures: 


M12(T) = |Yi2(T)| explidi2(t)]. 


When the intensities from the two apertures are equal, the 
fringe visibility Vi2(0) = |y12(0)|. The complex degree of 
spatial coherence 712(0) (i.e. with t = 0) and the angular 
distribution of intensity across the source /, are a Fourier 
transform pair—the van Cittert-Zernike theorem. 


V12(0) — / Ty exp (=) da. 


If |y12(0)| and #12(0) are measured over an appropriate 
range of baseline lengths and orientations, the angular 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1.0 
0.2 mas 
0.8 F 1.0 mas 
& o6 f 
& 
ge 
6 L 
rs) 0.4 
0.2 + 
0.0 n n 1 d »: 
0 20 40 60 80 100 


Baseline (metres) 


Figure 3. The variation of correlation with baseline for two 
single stars whose angular diameters are shown in the figure. 
The oscillating curve is the response for a binary star. The 
primary star of the binary has an angular diameter of 1 mas and 
is twice as bright as the secondary. The angular separation of the 
two stars is 10 mas. 


intensity distribution (/,) of the source can be found. 
The fringe phase ¢12(0), as a function of the aperture 
separation, provides information on asymmetries in the 
angular intensity distribution—for a symmetrical source 
the fringe phase will be zero or 180° for all aperture 
separations. 

In practice, the Earth’s turbulent atmosphere disrupts 
the phase and, for observations made with a single 
baseline at a time, only the degree of coherence |y12(0)| is 
measurable. In the absence of the phase, departures from 
symmetry in the intensity distribution cannot be detected. 
Thus, measurements with a single baseline yield only the 
visibility, and these are interpreted as the angular size of 
an equivalent strip source or the angular diameter of a 
radially symmetrical disk source. To obtain images it is 
necessary to measure both the modulus and phase for at 
least three baselines simultaneously. 

In practice, many interferometers measure the square 
of the fringe visibility, which is usually called the 
correlation Cy(t). Thus 


Cr(t) = [Vio(t)P = I(t). 


As an example of the variation of correlation with 
baseline figure 3 shows the relationships for two stars 
with different angular diameters, both assumed to be 
uniformly bright across their circular disks. Also shown is 
the response for a BINARY STAR. 

If there is a path difference between the beams in an 
interferometer at the point where they are combined there 
will be a loss in fringe visibility and in correlation. The 
magnitude of the loss depends on the spectral bandwidth 
used for the measurements. The wider the bandwidth, 
the greater the loss. The reduction in correlation can be 
expressed in terms of the coherence length of the light AJ, 


which is given by Al = re /Ax, where Ad is the spectral 
bandwidth and 1 is the mean wavelength. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Fourier transform of the intensity distribution 
across the spectral bandpass is the complex degree of 
coherence and, as an example, the correlation for a flat- 
topped spectral bandpass is given by 
2 


Cn(AOPL) = [Vi2(AOPL)?? = |= * 


where x = 7 AOPL/A/ and AOPLis the optical path length 
difference between the beams (optical path length is the 
product of the geometrical path length in a medium and 
the refractive index of the medium). 

In order to obtain accurate measurements of fringe 
visibility or correlation, the optical paths from the source 
to the point of combination of the beams must be equal to 
within a small fraction of the coherence length (AOPL « 
Al). 


Overcoming the effects of atmospheric turbulence 
The effect of atmospheric turbulence on incoming light 
is to distort the shapes of wavefronts and introduce 
randomly varying phase shifts, wavefront tilts, and 
wavefront curvatures. The significance of these effects 
for interferometry depends on the observing wavelength. 
The spatial scale of the wavefront distortions is measured 
by the parameter rp, which is the diameter of a circle on 
a wavefront over which the phase fluctuations have an 
rms value of one radian. The temporal scale of the phase 
fluctuations is represented by fo, the time interval at the 
end of which the rms value of the phase fluctuations is 
one radian. 

Both ro and fp vary as A°/° so both improve for longer 
wavelengths. Observed values depend on the site, and 
both vary from night to night and during the course of each 
night. Typical values for the visual region of the spectrum 
are rp ~ 10 cmand tf) ~ 5 ms. 

In order to overcome the effects of atmospheric 
turbulence most optical and infrared interferometers use 
apertures of diameter less than rp and signal sampling 
times less than fj. In addition, tilts in the sections of the 
wavefront accepted by the apertures of an interferometer 
are individually measured and corrected in real time by 
tip-tilt mirrors (first-order ADAPTIVE optics). This ensures 
that the beams from the apertures are combined optimally 
for the measurement of the interference fringe contrast. 

In principle, instrumental loses and residual seeing 
effects are calibrated by observing unresolved stars 
between observations of the star or object to be measured. 


Two-aperture interferometers 

Modern optical/infrared interferometers operate with 
baselines ranging from a few metres up to a few hundred 
metres (see INTERFEROMETRY: GROUND). This necessitates 
mounting the input apertures on separate structures 
anchored to the ground. Because of the short wavelengths 
involved, extremely good stability and freedom from 
vibration is essential. With the input apertures at fixed 
locations the arrival time of the light from a star will differ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. A simplified layout for a long-baseline optical 
interferometer illustrating the main features. A represents the 
input apertures and T the wavefront tip-tilt correcting mirrors, 
A is the difference in path length for the two beams of starlight 
at the input apertures, C is the path-equalizing carriage, B is the 
beam-combiner and d is the baseline of the interferometer. 
Further details are discussed in the text. 


at the input apertures and an internal variable optical delay 
must be incorporated in the instrument to equalize the 
optical path lengths at the point of beam combination. One 
method of achieving this is shown in figure 4. 


For interferometers in which the light from only 
two apertures at a time can be combined, only the 
fringe visibility or the correlation is measurable since 
the phase is disrupted by the atmosphere. For such 
measurements, made with only a single baseline at a time, 
the Fourier transform yields the intensity distribution 
for the equivalent strip source (ie. the source intensity 
distribution reduced to the equivalent strip source parallel 
to the baseline direction). No information on asymmetries 
in the intensity distribution across the source can be 
derived and true images cannot be constructed. For 
angular diameter determinations and studies of binary 
systems this is generally of no concern—the relative 
brightnesses of the components of a binary system can be 
determined but with a 180° ambiguity in the orientation 
of the system. The combination of stellar angular 
diameters with complementary measurements made 
with conventional telescopes enables fundamental stellar 
properties such as surface fluxes, effective temperatures, 
radii and luminosities to be determined. For many binary 
stars radial velocities can be determined spectroscopically. 
For such systems stellar masses and distances can also be 
found. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Interferometers and interferometric arrays. 


Aperture Longest Wavelength 
Location diameter baseline range 
Instrument (acronym) (country) (m) (m) (um) Statust 
Stellar Intensity Interferometer (SII) Australia 2x 6.8 188 0.44 Cc 
Sydney University Stellar Interferometer (SUSI) Prototype Australia 2 x 0.10 11 0.4-0.5 Cc 
Mark III Interferometer USA 2 x 0.05 32 0.45-0.8 Cc 
Interférométre a4 2 Télescopes (I2T) France 2 x 0.26 144 visible Cc 
Grand Interférométre a 2 Télescopes (GI2T) France 2x15 65 visible W 
Infrared spatial interferometer (ISI) USA 2x 1.65 70 10 W 
Sydney University Stellar Interferometer (SUSI) Australia 2 x 0.14 640 0.4-0.9 WwW 
Infrared—Optical Telescope Array (IOTA) USA 3 x 0.45 38 visible /IR Ww 
Cambridge Optical Aperture Synthesis Telescope (COAST) UK 5 x 0.4 100 red/nearIR W 
Palomar Test Interferometer (PTI) USA 2x 0.4 100 2.2 W 
Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer (NPOI) (Astrometry) USA 4 x 0.125 38 0.45-0.9 Ww 
(Imaging) 6x0.35 437 0.45-0.9 UC 
Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy Array USA 5 x 1.0 354 0.55-0.9 UC 
(CHARA Array) 2.1-2.5 
European Southern Observatory (ESO) Chile 4x8 200 0.45-20 UC 
Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI) 3x 1.8 UC 
Keck Interferometer USA 2x 10 165 2.2-10 UC 
4x~2 UC 


+ Key: C = program completed and instrument shutdown; W = instrument working; UC = undergoing commissioning or 


under construction. 


Multiple-aperture interferometers 

In order to form images with an interferometer it is 
necessary to use more than two apertures simultaneously. 
For each pair of apertures in an imaging array the same 
constraints must be metas for a single-baseline instrument. 
This includes matching the optical paths to within a small 
fraction of the coherence length, dealing with the effects 
of wavefront distortion, and using rapid signal sampling 
to limit phase smearing during each observational sample 
period. 

Even though the phase measurement for a single 
baseline is corrupted by the atmosphere, it is possible 
to determine a ‘closure phase’, free of corruption, for 
each independent triangle of baselines formed by three 
apertures of an array. Aclosure phase is solely a function of 
the fringe phases due to the source since, in the calculation 
of the closure phase, the atmospherically induced phase 
differences cancel out. Closure phases are a property 
of the angular intensity distribution across the source 
and, together with the fringe visibilities measured for the 
baselines, enable an image of the source to be constructed. 
This technique, first developed for radio wavelengths, has 
been adapted to optical and infrared wavelengths. 

Multiple-aperture interferometric arrays are aimed at 
imaging a range of astronomical phenomena including the 
birth of stars and planetary systems, close binary systems 
and the cores of active galaxies and quasars. 


Modern optical interferometers 

Table 1 contains a list of optical/infrared interferometers 
and interferometric arrays with the acronyms by which 
they are generally known. The instruments shown as 
having two apertures combine the light from only two 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


apertures at a time. In most of these cases there is 
either an array of apertures, from which the two to 
be used can be selected, or there is the possibility of 
moving input optics between stations to provide a range of 
baselines. Instruments listed with three or more apertures 
are generally intended to combine the light from several, 
or all, of the apertures simultaneously for the construction 
of images. 

Interferometers and interferometric arrays intended 
for astrometric measurements are similar in principle to 
other interferometers and arrays, but differ in having ex- 
tensive monitoring of the instrument stability by laser 
metrology and an optical delay compensator operating 
in vacuum. Astrometric interferometers are of two broad 
types—global and narrow-angle (differential). Global as- 
trometric interferometers, such as the NPOI Astrometric 
Array in Arizona, measure the relative positions of stars 
over the whole sky with the aim of maintaining the Hippar- 
cos frame and improving proper motion determinations 
by extending the timebase of measurements. Narrow- 
angle interferometers are effectively double interferome- 
ters with each interferometer linked to the other by preci- 
sion laser metrology. One interferometer is phase locked 
to a reference source while the second is locked to the tar- 
get source to search for relative motion produced by a faint 
unseen companion such as a brown dwarf or planet. 

An alternative interferometric technique for the 
detection of exoplanets is the nulling interferometer. By 
working in the infrared, and suppressing the stellar flux 
by combining the star’s light out of phase, it should be 
possible to detect planets down to Earth size but with an 
instrument operating in space. 

Figure 5 shows an aerial view of SUSI, which is located 
in northern New South Wales in Australia. SUSI has the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Optical Interferometers ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is presented in Science with the VLT Interferometer 
ed F Paresce (Berlin: Springer, 1997). 


John Davis 


Figure 5. The Sydney University Stellar Interferometer (SUSI) 
seen from the northern end of its 640 m long baseline array. 


distinction of having the longest baseline array of any 
optical/infrared interferometer. Since it can only observe 
with two apertures at a time it does not form images. 
Instruments such as NPOI, the CHARA Array on Mount 
Wilson in California, and COAST in England all have 
arrays of input apertures arranged along three arms like 
the letter Y in order to form images by combining the light 
from three or more apertures simultaneously. The Keck 
interferometer and ESO’s VLTI will combine the light from 
separate 8-10 m class telescopes for imaging of fainter 
objects. 

Optical and infrared interferometry and interferomet- 
ric imaging is in its infancy but promises to make signifi- 
cant contributions to astrophysical research in the 21st cen- 
tury. 


Bibliography 

An overview of optical interferometry and its potential 
for astrophysics, as presented at a NATO Advanced Study 
Institute written by authors expert in various aspects of the 
field is contained in High Angular Resolution in Astrophysics 
ed A-M Lagrange, D Mourard and P Léna (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1997). 

A large proportion of reports on the developments 
in optical and infrared interferometry is contained in the 
proceedings of international symposia and workshops. 
However, the key technical papers in the development 
of optical interferometry have been collected in Selected 
Papers on Long Baseline Stellar Interferometry SPIE Milestone 
Series, Volume MS 139, ed P R Lawson (Bellingham, WA: 
SPIE, 1997). 

The theory of interference with partially coherent 
light is treated comprehensively by Born M and Wolf E 
1975 Principles of Optics: Electromagnetic Theory of 
Propagation, Interference, and Diffraction of Light 5th edn 
(Elmsford, NY: Pergamon). 

A review of the scientific potential, particularly for 
interferometric arrays involving large aperture telescopes, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 5 


Orbit 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orbit 


The path pursued by a body moving in a field of force. 
In most astronomical contexts we consider motion in 
a gravitational field, but the term applies equally well 
to motion under the action of other types of forces, 
for example to charged particles moving in a magnetic 
field. Bodies moving freely in the gravitational field of 
a massive body (e.g. the planets moving around the Sun 
or an artificial satellite moving around the Earth) follow 
conic orbits, which may be elliptical, circular, parabolic 
or hyperbolic. The precise orbit that such a body will 
pursue depends upon the strength of the gravitational 
field and the velocity of the body. A planetary orbit is 
completely described by six geometric properties called 
its elements. From these the future positions of a planet 
can be calculated. In the case of a binary system, where 
the masses of the stars are unknown, seven elements are 
required. 


See also: conic sections, ellipse, hyperbola, orbital 
elements, parabola, revolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orbital Elements 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orbital Elements 


The parameters required to define the shape and 
orientation in space of an orbit and to fix the position in that 
orbit at any time of the planet or satellite moving in that 
orbit. For a planet moving around the Sun, six elements 
are required and these would be as follows: 


a the semi-major axis of the ellipse 

e _ the eccentricity of the ellipse 

i the inclination of the orbit to the plane of the ecliptic 

Q the longitude of the ascending node, i.e. the angle 
measured anti-clockwise in the ecliptic from the 
vernal equinox to the point of intersection of the orbit 
with the ecliptic at which the planet passes from south 
to north of this plane 

w the longitude of perihelion (sometimes called the 
‘argument of perihelion’), i.e. the angle, measured 
anti-clockwise in the orbit plane, from the ascending 
node to perihelion 

T the time at which the planet passed perihelion. 


The Sun occupies one of the two foci of the ellipse 
of a planet’s orbit. A line drawn through the point of 
the planet’s perihelion and aphelion passes through the 
Sun and is called the line of apsides or major axis of the 
orbit. One-half of this line’s length is the semi-major axis, 
equivalent to the planet’s mean distance from the Sun. The 
eccentricity of an elliptical orbit is a measure of the amount 
by which it deviates from a circle; it is found by dividing 
the distance between the focal points of the ellipse by the 
length of the major axis. The position of a planet at any 
time can be predicted if it is known when it passed through 
any definite position; for example, its time of perihelion 
passage. 

For a satellite in orbit around the Earth, the ascending 
node and inclination would be referred to the plane of the 
celestial equator. 

In the case of a binary system of unknown mass, a 
seventh element is necessary: the orbital period P, or 
the mean motion, n(=27/P). In the case of the solar 
system this additional element, although sometimes listed, 
is related to the value of the semi-major axis (a) by Kepler’s 
third law. T, in the case of a binary system, relates to the 
time of periastron passage (the instant at which the two 
stars make their closest approach to each other). 


See also: conic sections, ellipse, hyperbola, orbit, 
parabola. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (OAO) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 
(OAO) 


Series of four NASA satellites. No data were returned from 
OAO-1 or OAO-B. The second satellite (OAO-2) operated 
for four years. It carried two experiments which surveyed 
the sky at ultraviolet wavelengths. Most successful was 
COPERNICUS (OAO-3), which was launched in August 1972 
and operated for nine years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Orbiting Solar Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orbiting Solar Observatory 


Series of eight NASA satellites launched 1962-75. 
Designed to study the Sun at ultraviolet and x-ray 
wavelengths. OSO-1 and 3 also carried gamma ray 
instruments for extrasolar studies. Most successful was 
OSO-8 which operated for more than three years and 
studied the diffuse cosmic x-ray background. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Oresme, Nicole (1320-82) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oresme, Nicole (1320-82) 


Born in Allemagne, France, became dean of Rouen and 
chaplain to King Charles V. He invented coordinate 
geometry before DESCARTES, finding the logical equivalence 
between a function and a graph. He taught the motion 
of the Earth, 200 years before corerNicus. He argued that 
there were objections to the ‘proofs’ that the Earth was 
stationary. These were that (i) the Sun and the stars are 
observed to rotate around the Earth, (ii) a great wind from 
the east would be expected if the Earth rotated, and (iii) 
a stone would be expected to fall in a curved path if the 
Earth rotated. But in the end he lost confidence in his own 
objections and ended back with a stationary Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orientale Basin 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orientale Basin 


A large multiringed structure on the Moon, about 930 km 
across in its largest dimension. It is partly on the nearside 
and partly on the farside, centered at 19.4°S, 92.8°W, and 
at best is only poorly visible from the Earth, and then 
only when libration brings it partly into view. It has 
been only partly filled by basaltic lava flooding, to form 
the Mare Orientale, 327 km across at its widest. (This 
name means ‘Eastern Sea’; its longitude demonstrates 
that the convention for directions on the Moon has not 
always been the same.) The surrounding ring structure 
is the best preserved of any of the Moon’s large impact 
features. The mountain range forming the outer ring is 
named Montes Cordillera, and the inner ring is Montes 
Rook. Orientale is the youngest of the Moon’s large impact 
features, having been excavated around 3.8 billion years 
ago, which explains why the structure is largely intact. 
Ejecta from the impact traveled up to 1000 km, and the 
basin is surrounded by chains of secondary craters and 
other radial features, including a number of lunar valleys. 


Seealso: Libration, Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Origin of The Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Origin of The Solar System 


The origin of the soLarsysTEM, and of the Earth in particular, 
is one of the most fundamental problems in astronomy. 
Apart from the intrinsic fascination of understanding how 
and when our planet was formed, a plausible solution to 
that problem could suggest an answer to a more general 
question: is the formation of a planetary system a normal 
feature of STAR FORMATION, or a rare accident? Are planetary 
systems likely to be so abundant throughout the universe 
that the chance of communicating with other civilizations 
is high, or is life on Earth the lonely exception in a dead 
galaxy? 

Before the 18th century, European astronomers 
believed that God created the Solar System in its present 
state only a few thousand years ago. In the 1700s, 
speculations proliferated about physical processes that 
might have formed the Sun and planets over a longer 
period of time. The French naturalist BUFFON imagined a 
close encounter of the Sun with a comet, which drew from 
it hot gases that later condensed to form the planets. He 
estimated that the Earth had cooled down over a period of 
about 75 000 years. 


The nebular hypothesis 

During the 19th century most astronomers accepted the 
‘nebular hypothesis’ proposed in 1796 by the French 
theorist Pierre Simon de Laplace and the German- 
British astronomer William HERSCHEL. Laplace stressed the 
uniformity of motions in the Solar System: all planets 
go in the same direction around the Sun in nearly the 
same plane and rotate in the same direction around their 
own axes, and all satellites go in the same direction 
around their primaries. Such uniformity would be 
extremely improbable if these bodies had been formed 
independently. For NewTon that was a proof that the 
system had been designed by God; for Laplace it showed 
that the system had developed by a unitary physical 
process. (He was not worried by exceptions such as the 
satellites of Uranus.) 

Laplace suggested that the atmosphere of the Sun 
originally extended throughout the entire space now 
occupied by planetary orbits; it was a hot, luminous 
rotating cloud of gas, gradually losing its original heat 
to the cold surrounding space. As the cloud cooled 
it contracted, rotated faster, flattened into a disk, and 
broke up into rings, which then condensed to planets. 
Satellites could be formed by a similar process from clouds 
surrounding the planets. The remaining central portion 
became the Sun (see figure 1). (There is one obvious defect 
of the theory: the Sun should rotate faster than the speed of 
revolution of Mercury around the Sun, but in fact it rotates 
much more slowly.) 

Herschel suggested that stars are formed by contrac- 
tion from nebulae like those he observed through his tele- 
scope. Thus the Laplace—Herschel nebular hypothesis, a 
‘monistic’ process requiring no outside stimulus to start 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Nebular hypothesis. (a) Rotating spherical cloud has 
started to flatten. (b) Most of the material has fallen to equatorial 
plane, forming a flat disk. (c) Disk cools and contracts, spins 
faster (conservation of angular momentum). (d) When the 
outside of the disk spins so fast its centrifugal force equals 
gravitational attraction of material inside the disk, it no longer 
contracts but is left as a ring. (e) This process is repeated, 
forming several rings. Material in the outer ring condenses to a 
protoplanet. (f) Each ring forms a protoplanet; outer 
protoplanets spin off rings which form satellites. (g) All rings 
have formed planets, most planets have satellites and one 
(Saturn) also has a flat ring that did not condense into a satellite. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Origin of The Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the development of the system, implied that planetary for- 
mation is a universal accompaniment of the birth of stars, 
and that with sufficiently powerful telescopes we should 
be able to observe the later stages of the process occurring 
in our Galaxy right now. Also, it would seem likely that 
life has arisen or will arise on some of these many plan- 
ets. A ‘dualistic’ process like Buffon’s, on the other hand, 
would be much rarer, especially when it is realized that the 
foreign body would have to be another star rather than a 
comet. 

The German scientist Hermann von HELMHOLTZ, in 
1854, modified the Laplace-Herschel theory by assuming 
that the primordial nebula was cold rather than hot; grav- 
itational contraction would convert mechanical energy to 
heat (in accordance with the Law of Conservation of En- 
ergy), and thus account for the present high temperature 
of the Sun. 

The nebular hypothesis was closely connected 
with 19th-century geological theories, which generally 
presumed that the Earth had been formed as a hot fluid 
ball and then cooled down, solidifying on the outside first. 

The British physicist Lord Kelvin (William THoMsoN) 
used the cooling model to estimate the age of the Earth and 
found it to be only 20-100 million years, compared with 
the several hundred million years assumed by geologists 
to have been available for slow processes like erosion to 
produce their observed effects. Adopting Helmholtz’s 
hypothesis of heating by gravitational contraction, Kelvin 
also estimated that the Sun could not be much older than 
20 million years. Kelvin’s estimates caused difficulties 
for Charles Darwin’s theory of biological evolution, since 
Darwin had assumed, following the geologists, that long 
periods of time would be available for present-day species 
(including humans) to emerge by the slow process of 
natural selection. 

At the beginning of the 20th century the credibility 
of the Laplace—Herschel—Kelvin scenario for the develop- 
ment and present state of the Earth was undermined by 
the discovery of radioactivity. The Earth’s crust contained 
enough radium, the highly radioactive element isolated 
by Marie and Pierre Curie in Paris, to generate the heat 
needed to replace that lost from the Earth’s crust by con- 
duction into space; the Earth might actually be warming 
up rather than cooling down. Analysis of the amounts of 
uranium, radium, lead and helium in rocks quickly led 
to estimates that these rocks are several hundred million 
years old. In 1953 the American geochemist Clair Cameron 
Patterson used very accurate determinations of lead iso- 
topes in rocks and meteorites to arrive at the presently 
accepted value for the age of the Earth: about 4500 million 
years. 

Similarly it was proposed that radioactivity (or, later, 
nuclear fusion reactions) in the Sun could provide enough 
energy to keep it shining for much longer than 20 million 
years; thus the evolution of the Solar System also took 
place over thousands of millions of years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Planetesimal and tidal theories 

Even before radioactivity had cast doubts on the 19th- 
century cooling Earth model, the American geologist 
Thomas Chrowder CHAMBERLIN had proposed to replace 
that model by a completely different hypothesis about 
the origin of the Earth and other planets. His researches 
on past Ice Ages led him to doubt the doctrine that the 
Earth had cooled down from an initial temperature of 
several thousand degrees. With the help of the American 
astronomer Forest Ray MOULTON, he showed that the 
nebular hypothesis could not satisfactorily explain the 
physical properties of the Solar System (for example, 
the fact that the giant planets have most of the angular 
momentum rather than the Sun). 

Chamberlin proposed that the planets and satellites 
had been formed by the aggregation of small cold particles, 
which he called ‘PLANETESIMALS’ (meaning ‘infinitesimal 
planets’). The formation process would generate enough 
heat to bring them up to their present temperatures. 

Having rejected Laplace’s theory of the formation of 
the Solar System, Chamberlin still seemed to be attached 
to Herschel’s old idea that the nebulae one sees in 
the sky are associated with the early stages of stellar 
evolution. Looking at photographs of spiral nebulae taken 
by the American astronomer James KEELER, Chamberlin 
speculated that the two prominent arms belonged to two 
previously distinct celestial objects. From this thought, 
and contemplation of solar prominences, he was led 
to the idea that a planetary system could be generated 
when another star passed close to the Sun. Just as the 
Moon raises tides on the near and far sides of the Earth, 
the gravitational force of the intruder would cancel the 
gravitational force holding in the solar gases on the near 
and far sides of the Sun, allowing two filaments of material 
to flow out; the filaments would then be curved by the 
continued action of the intruder as it receded. Chamberlin 
assumed that the filaments would eventually condense 
into small solid particles, which would be captured into 
orbits around the Sun (see figure 2). 

When it became clear in the 1920s that spiral 
nebulae are galaxies rather than objects that could be 
as small as planetary systems, Chamberlin dropped 
this part of his theory but retained the assumption 
that two stars interacted in order to release into 
space the material from which planets formed. As it 
happened, the British geophysicist Harold Jerrreys and 
the British physicist-astronomer James Hopwood JEANS 
independently proposed a similar assumption in 1916 and 
1917, respectively. It became known as the ‘tidal’ theory 
of the origin of the Solar System. But Jeans and Jeffreys 
rejected Chamberlin’s planetesimal hypothesis, retaining 
instead the older assumption that the planets formed from 
fluid balls (see figure 3). 

Astronomers realized that any theory that required 
the close encounter of two stars in order to form planets 
would entail an extremely small number of planetary 
systems in the universe (and an even smaller number of 
planets that could support the evolution of life). This was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Origin of The Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Creation of the Solar System by tidal action of a passing 
star on the Sun (Chamberlin’s version). Chamberlin, inspired by 
Keeler’s photographs of spiral nebulae, imagined that such a 
nebula could be produced when an intruder star S’ (in successive 
positions 1’, 2’, 3’) exerts a tidal force on the Sun S (in successive 
positions 1, 2,3). As a result, material is drawn out of the Sun on 
near and far sides (a). In the second stage, more material (b) has 
emerged from the Sun, but it will experience a force in a 
different direction because of the subsequent motion of S’ from 
1’ to 2’; similarly for material (c) emerging in the third stage. The 
resulting curvature of the filaments produces the spiral-arm 
appearance. The gaseous filaments condense first to small solid 
particles (planetesimals) which then aggregate into planets. 


Pre 


a a a 


teeta nenecseneernnee™ 


f 


Figure 3. Creation of the Solar System by tidal action of a 
passing star on the Sun (Jeans’ version). Jeans imagined that the 
Sun would first be deformed by the tidal force of the passing 
star, then a single coherent filament would be detached and 
subsequently break up into several fluid blobs which would 
condense directly into planets. According to Jeans ‘This 
sequence of six diagrams (a, b, c, d, e, f) is intended to suggest 
the course of events in the Sun, or other star, when its planets 
were coming into existence. For simplicity the second star is 
represented throughout by a small circle, although actually this 
would, of course, also experience deformation and possible 
break-up’. 


consistent with the failure to find convincing evidence for 
planetary systems surrounding other stars than our own. 
Jeans seemed to take perverse pleasure in the idea that we 
are the result of a chance event that has happened only 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


once in the history of the universe and (because the stars 
are decaying and thinning out by expansion) will probably 
never happen again. 

The tidal theory, whether the Chamberlin—-Moulton 
or Jeans—Jeffreys version, was generally accepted by 
astronomers until 1935, even though it was never worked 
out in sufficient detail to provide a convincing explanation 
of the quantitative properties of the Solar System. Its 
supporters believed that the tidal theory could overcome 
the major defect of the nebular hypothesis by showing 
at least qualitatively how most of the original angular 
momentum could have been given to the major planets 
rather than to the Sun. 

But the tidal theory turned out to have serious defects 
as well. The American astronomer Henry Norris RUSSELL 
found two major objections. First, theories of stellar 
structure developed by A S EDDINGTON and others in the 
1920s indicated that the gases drawn from the interior of 
the Sun would be at sucha high temperature—on the order 
of a million degrees—that they would dissipate into space 
before they could condense into planets. Second, a simple 
dynamical calculation showed that it would be impossible 
for the tidal encounter to leave enough material in orbits at 
distances from the Sun corresponding to the giant planets. 
(In other words, like the nebular hypothesis it failed to 
explain the distribution of angular momentum in the Solar 
System.) 

There was now no satisfactory theory of the origin of 
the Solar System, since the earlier objections to the nebular 
hypothesis still seemed valid. 


Revival of monistic theories after 1940 
New ideas and observations provided a plausible basis 
for reviving a monistic theory after 1940. For example, 
the Swedish plasma physicist Hannes ALFVEN proposed 
that the early Sun had a strong magnetic field and was 
surrounded by an ionized gas. Lines of magnetic force, 
rotating with the Sun, would be trapped in the ionized 
gas and transfer angular momentum to it. In this way one 
might explain why most of the angular momentum of the 
present Solar System is carried by the giant planets, rather 
than by the Sun. Alfvén’s ‘magnetic braking’ mechanism 
to slow the Sun’s rotation was adopted by several theorists 
in the 1950s and 1960s even though they rejected other 
aspects of Alfvén’s theory of planetary formation. 
Another problem with the nebular hypothesis was the 
implausibility of the assumption that the nebula would 
start to condense by itself. As Jeans and the French 
mathematician Henri poincaré had pointed out early in 
the 20th century, if the total mass of the planets and Sun 
were uniformly distributed throughout the entire volume 
of the Solar System, the density would be so small that 
(unless the temperature is very low) the atoms would 
simply dissipate into space rather than condensing. This 
difficulty could be avoided if the nebula had originally 
been much more massive, then (after the condensation 
process started) lost most of its mass. The clue as to how 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Origin of The Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a 


<stee te ae on. 
pene TO ET Ea He nwcey, 


Figure 4. Origin of the Solar System according to Schmidt, Safronov and colleagues. The primordial gas—dust cloud begins its 
evolution somewhat as described by Laplace but does not form rings and large protoplanets at an early stage. Instead it condenses to 
small solid particles (planetesimals) which then aggregate to the planets. 


this could have happened was furnished by Cecilia PAYNE- 
GAPOSCHKIN’S discovery, in 1925, that the Sun is mostly 
hydrogen and helium. Yet both planets and Sun are 
supposed to be formed from the same nebula. Since the 
planets are composed mostly of heavier elements, perhaps 
the nebula started with a large amount of hydrogen and 
helium (the same proportion as in the present-day Sun) but 
lost it after the formation of the planets. That idea provided 
the basis for monistic theories proposed in the 1940s and 
1950s by C von Weizsacker, G P kurrsr, and H C urey. 

The revival of monistic theories began with a 1944 
paper by the German astrophysicist C F von Weizsacker. 
At the same time Alfvén and the Russian astronomer Otto 
Schmidt developed theories that were dualistic, insofar 
as they postulated previously formed clouds of material 
captured by the Sun, but their theories concentrated on 
the subsequent development of the Solar System and 
eventually became monistic theories. 

Schmidt’s theory was developed by Victor Safronov 
and other Soviet scientists throughout the 1960s and 
1970s. It became primarily a model for the accumulation 
of small solid particles (Chamberlin’s planetesimals) 
from the protoplanetary cloud into planets. Safronov’s 
model was adopted, with some modifications, by the 
American geophysicist George W Wetherill, who explored 
its consequences with the help of computer calculations. 
The Safronov—Wetherill model is now considered the most 
plausible one for the formation of the terrestrial planets, 
though it does not yet account quantitatively for their 
properties (see figure 4). 

After the 1950s, a major role in ideas about the origin 
of the solar system was played by ‘IsoTOPIC ANOMALIES’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


These are discrepancies between the average abundances 
of isotopes estimated for the Solar System and the 
abundances found in particular meteorites. Although 
these anomalies have little bearing on most of the 
traditional problems of planet formation, they were 
believed to offer important clues to the initial stages of 
formation and contraction of the solar nebula, relating 
them to nuclear processes in the Sun and other stars. 
The best-known example was the ‘supernova trigger’ 
hypothesis, based in part on the excess *Mg found in 
the ALLENDE METEORITE which fell in 1969. The anomaly 
was established by Typhoon Lee, D A Papanastassiou and 
GJ Wasserburg at Caltech in 1976, and was ascribed to the 
earlier presence in the Solar System of °Al, which has a 
half- life of only 700 000 years. It was generally supposed 
that the °Al must have been synthesized in a supernova 
less than a few million years before the formation of the 
Solar System. Since a supernova explosion also produces 
a shock wave that might compress rarefied material 
to densities high enough for them to become unstable 
against gravitational collapse, the isotopic anomalies 
might indicate that the supernova caused the Solar System 
to form. 

The most influential advocate of the supernova trig- 
ger hypothesis was the Canadian—American astrophysicist 
Alistair Graham Walter Cameron. But Cameron aban- 
doned the hypothesis in 1984 when astrophysical observa- 
tions indicated that other modes of synthesis were proba- 
bly responsible for producing *°Al. (He revived it later for 
other reasons.) In the meantime Cameron had developed 
a quantitative theory of the collapse of the solar nebula 
and the formation of protoplanets. He argued that turbu- 
lent viscosity, rather than magnetic braking, is primarily 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Origin of The Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


responsible for the transfer of angular momentum from 
Sun to planets. 

In the 1990s, theorists were challenged to explain 
the proliferating observations of extrasolar planets (see 
EXOPLANETS). These discoveries, suggesting that many stars 
are surrounded by planets, seem to favor the monistic 
theory, although they do not exclude the possibility that 
supernovae could have triggered the formation of several 
systems at once. But the assumption, based on our 
own Solar System, that every system would have a few 
dense ‘terrestrial’ planets in orbits close to the central star, 
with gaseous ‘giant’ planets located further out, has been 
thrown into doubt. 

It now seems likely that the next few decades will see 
a revolution in theories of the origin of planetary systems, 
with important consequences for our understanding of our 
own system: which of its features are the result of general 
laws, and which are accidental? 


Bibliography 

Ahrens T J 1994 The origin of the Earth Phys. Today 47 (8) 
38-45 

Brush S G 1996 A History of Modern Planetary Physics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Fisher D E 1987 The Birth of the Earth: A Wanderlied through 
Space, Time, and the Human Imagination (Princeton, NJ: 
Columbia University Press) 

Levin AE and Brush G 1995 The Origin of the Solar System: 
Soviet Research 1925-1991 (New Yrok: AIP Press) 
Levy E H and Lunine J L 1993 Protostars and Planets. III 

(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


Stephen G Brush 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orion 


(the Hunter; abbrev. Ori, gen. Orionis; area 594 sq. deg.) 
An equatorial constellation which lies between Taurus and 
Monoceros, and culminates at midnight in mid-December. 
Its origin dates back to Sumerian times, when it was 
identified with the hero Gilgamesh and his fight against 
the Bull of Heaven (represented by Taurus), but today it is 
associated with the son of Poseidon, in Greek mythology, 
a mighty hunter who is accompanied in the sky by his two 
dogs (the constellations Canis Major and Canis Minor) in 
pursuit of a hare (the constellation Lepus). The brightest 
stars of Orion were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) 
in the Almagest. 

A conspicuous constellation and one of the few that 
even remotely resembles the object after which it was 
named, Orion is easily recognized by a quadrilateral of 
first and second magnitude stars, a, y, 6 and « Orionis, 
marking the hunter’s right and left shoulders, left foot 
and right knee, respectively, within which lies a trio of 
second-magnitude stars, 6, ¢ and ¢ Orionis, in a straight 
line, marking his belt, and below the belt another line of 
fainter stars, 42, 6 and 1 Orionis, marking his sword. 

The brightest stars in Orion are 6 Orionis (Rigel), 
a triple system consisting of two bluish-white (B8 and 
B5) components, magnitudes 0.2 and 6.8, separation 9.5”, 
the primary of which is the seventh brightest star in 
the sky, and a third, unseen component which revolves 
around the latter in a period of 9.86 days, a Orionis 
(Betelgeuse), a red giant semiregular variable (range 0.0— 
1.3, average period about 2335 days), which is usually 
considered to be the tenth brightest star in the sky, 
y Orionis (Bellatrix), magnitude 1.6, e Orionis (Alnilam), 
magnitude 1.7, ¢ Orionis (Alnitak), a close binary with 
bluish-white (09.5 and BO) components, magnitudes 1.8 
and 4.0, separation 2.4”, « Orionis (Saiph), magnitude 2.1, 
and 6 Orionis (Mintaka), a multiple system consisting of 
a bluish-white (O9.5) eclipsing binary (range 2.14—2.26, 
period 5.73 days) with a third, very close companion, 
magnitude 3.8, separation 0.27”, and a fourth, bluish-white 
(B2) component, magnitude 6.3, separation 53”. There are 
nine other stars brighter than fourth magnitude. 

Another interesting multiple system is o Orionis, 
which consists of a very close binary with bluish-white 
(09.5 and BO.5) components, magnitudes 3.8 and 5.2, 
separation 0.2”, period about 170 years, and three other 
bluish-white (A2, B2 and B2) components, magnitudes 8.8, 
6.9 and 6.6, separations 11”, 13” and 43” respectively. 

Other interesting objects include the middle star in 
the sword of Orion, 6 Orionis, which is a wide double with 
components 6! and 67 135” apart. Each component is itself 
multiple, 6? consisting of a bluish-white (09.5) primary, 
magnitude 5.0, and a fainter, magnitude 8.3, secondary, 
separation 0.4”, while 6! has four main components: 
A (also known as V1016 Orionis), a bluish-white (O7) 
eclipsing binary (range 6.7-7.7, period 65.43 days), B (also 
knownas BM Orionis), another bluish-white (BO) eclipsing 
binary (range 7.9-8.7, period 6.47 days), separation 8.8”, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


C, a bluish-white (O06) star, magnitude 5.1, separation 
12.8”, and D, another bluish-white (B0.5) star, magnitude 
6.7, separation 21.5”. The latter four stars, known as the 
Trapezium, are the brightest members of an open cluster 
at the heart of the Orion Nebula (M42, NGC 1976), one of 
the brightest emission nebulae in the sky, just visible to the 
unaided eye as a faint misty patch. 

The Orion Nebula is an area of ionized hydrogen (HII) 
associated with a region of mostly molecular hydrogen 
(H2) that forms part of the Orion Molecular Clouds, which 
extend across the constellation. These are believed to be 
sites of star formation, and infrared observations have 
detected the presence of several young stars and star 
clusters, such as the Becklin-Neugebauer (BN) object and 
the Kleinmann-—Low (KL) cluster, embedded in the gas. 

Another well-known nebula is the Horsehead Nebula 
(Barnard 33), an protuberance of dark nebulosity 
silhouetted against a swathe of emission nebulosity (IC 
434) that extends south from ¢ Orionis. There are no bright 
galaxies in Orion. 

The Orionid meteor shower appears to radiate from 
the constellation. 


See also: Becklin—Neugebauer object, Betelgeuse, Horse- 
head Nebula, Orion Nebula, Orionids, Rigel. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orion Arm 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orion Arm 


The local spiral arm of the Milky Way Galaxy within 
which the Sun and the star-forming region of Orion 
are embedded. The stars and clouds of gas and dust 
that comprise the Orion arm curve outwards (relative 
to the galactic center) from the general direction of the 
constellation of Cygnus to the constellation of Vela. The 
Orion region, which includes the hot young stars of 
the Orion O, B association, the Orion Nebula and the 
Orion molecular cloud, is the most prominent star-forming 
complex in the local arm. Sometimes referred to as the 
‘Orion spur’, the Orion arm is believed to be an extended 
arm segment rather than a major arm that originates 
directly in the central bulge of the Galaxy. 


See also: Milky Way Galaxy, Orion, Orion Nebula, spiral 
arms, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orion Nebula (M42, NGC 1976) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orion Nebula (M42, NGC 1976) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Orion, position 
RA 05" 35.4™, dec. —05° 27’. At fourth magnitude and 
measuring 66’ by 60’, it is the most prominent emission 
nebula in the sky and is visible to the naked eye. It 
surrounds the quadruple star 6! Orionis, known as the 
Trapezium, ultraviolet light from which energizes the 
nebula. The northwestern part of the nebula is designated 
M43 (NGC 1982). A dark lane of dust, named the Fish 
Mouth from its shape, separates M43 from M42. The Orion 
Nebula abuts onto OMC-1, the largest of many molecular 
clouds which occupy much of the constellation Orion. 
This is a region of active star formation, the Trapezium 
stars being some of many young, hot stars associated with 
the nebulosity. The Becklin-Neugebauer Object and the 
Kleinmann-Low Nebula lie behind the Orion Nebula. 


See also: Becklin-Neugebauer object, Kleinmann—Low 
Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orionids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orionids 


A meteor shower that takes place in late October. The 
radiant lies in the constellation Orion, near the border with 
Gemini. The Orionids occur when the Earth intersects 
the ascending node of the meteor stream from Halley’s 
Comet; the Eta Aquarids in May are produced by the 
Earth’s passage through the descending node. Because 
Halley’s orbit is retrograde, Orionid meteoroids impact 
the Earth at a high relative velocity and produce very fast 
meteors. This is a less active shower than the Eta Aquarids, 
because in October the Earth encounters the meteor stream 
off-center. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Orrery ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Orrery 


A mechanical model that illustrates the relative positions 
and motions of bodies in the solar system. The name 
derives from the fourth Earl of Orrery, Charles Boyle, for 
whom such a device was constructed, probably by George 
Graham (d. 1751) about 1725. 


See also: planetarium, planisphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Oscillating Universe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oscillating Universe 


A universe that expands and contracts in a cyclic fashion. 
The universe is expanding at present but the rate of 
expansion is generally believed to be slowing dow. If 
the expansion comes to a halt at some time in the future, 
the universe will then begin to contract, slowly at first, 
then ever more rapidly until it collapses back into a hot, 
highly compressed state (the ‘big crunch’). The oscillating 
universe theory suggests that the collapse of the universe is 
followed by a new ‘Big Bang’ and anew cycle of expansion 
and contraction. If this theory is valid, the current cycle of 
expansion and contraction may have been preceded by an 
indefinite, possibly infinite, number of cycles and will be 
followed by an indefinite number of cycles. 

There is no known physical process that could cause 
a collapsing universe to ‘rebound’ in this way, although 
some have suggested that a hitherto unknown force or 
forces may come into play to prevent the universe from 
collapsing to a genuine singularity (a point of infinite 
compression) and to trigger a new expansion phase. It has 
also been argued that if the universe is indeed oscillating, 
then each successive cycle will expand further, and last 
longer, than its predecessor. This argument is based on 
the contention that because the evolution of stars converts 
matter to radiation as the universe ages, and the radiation 
content of the universe is blue-shifted to higher energies 
during the collapse phase, the energy content of the ‘big 
crunch’ and the subsequent expansion cycle will be greater 
than that of the previous ‘Big Bang’. 


Seealso: Big Bang theory, cosmological model, expanding 
universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Osiander, Andreas (1498-1552) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Osiander, Andreas (1498-1552) 


A theologian, born Gunzenhausen, Bavaria, Germany. 
A minister, Osiander had mathematics as his hobby 
and came into contact with corernicus. In his old age, 
Copernicus had been persuaded to publish his theory of 
the heliocentric universe. He entrusted the publication 
of his work De Revolutionibus to GEORGE JOACHIM RHETICUS. 
The young Rheticus was forced to leave Nuremberg by 
a particularly attractive offer which he could not refuse 
of a job with a high salary, and, even knowing Osiander’s 
prejudices against the motion of the Earth, he left Osiander 
in charge of the publication of the book. It was Osiander 
who inserted an anonymous preface to Copernicus’ book, 
denying that the book intended to propose more than 
a mathematical hypothesis, useful for calculations—‘not 
necessarily true or even probable’. This was at first 
damaging to Copernicus’ credibility. In Rheticus’ own 
copy of the book he has angrily crossed out Osiander’s 
preface with red crayon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Osservatorio Astronomico di Bologna 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Osservatorio Astronomico di Bologna 


Astronomy in Bologna has a long history. Official 
records of systematic teaching of astronomy at the Bologna 
‘Studio’ date back to 1297. Records of systematic 
observing work can be traced back to the beginning of 
the seventeenth century, when G D Cassini built a huge 
sundial in the major church of the city. 

The present institute has a staff of about 70 people, 
half of whom are scientists. It manages a 1.5 m telescope 
in Loiano. Research activity is mainly addressed to stellar 
population, extragalactic astrophysics, cosmology and 
high-energy astrophysics. The Observatory is affiliated 
to the National Institute of Astrophysics (INAF), the main 
financial support coming from the National Ministry for 
Scientific and Technological Research. 

For further information see 
http://www.bo.astro.it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera 


The Observatory (OAB) is a world leader in x-ray mirror 
technology. (The mirrors of the Beppo-SAX, JET-x, 
and XMM satellites have been made using the electro- 
forming technology developed in Milan.) Important 
progress is now being made also in x-ray mirror multilayer 
technology. 

In ground-based instrumentation, OAB is part of 
both national and international teams to build various 
spectrographs: Dolores for the Italian National Telescope, 
NIMOS, VIMOS and AVES for the ESO-VLT. The research 
issues mainly address observational cosmology, high- 
energy astrophysics and stellar astronomy. The ESP 
survey has allowed a robust estimate of the local 
luminosity function for galaxies, and the Reflex survey is 
giving fundamental data about the large scale structure 
of the universe. A group of Brera scientists was the 
first to detect, using Beppo-SAX alert and the ESO- 
VLT, polarization from gamma ray bursts (GRBs). The 
Observatory is now involved, in collaboration with the 
USA and the UK, in a satellite (Swift) designed for 
detection and study of GRBs. 

The Astronomical Observatory of Brera, located in 
Milano Via Brera 28, dates back to the year 1764 when it 
was conceived by Ruggiero Boscovich, who became the 
first Director in 1770. Later, in 1923, the construction 
started of the observing station in Merate and, in 1926, the 
first telescope, a Zeiss reflector of 102 cm aperture, started 
operations. 

At present the Observatory consists of two Institutes, 
one in Milan and one in Merate. The administration and 
accounting are kept in Milan while all the laboratories— 
clean rooms, advanced metrology and design—are 
situated in Merate. The present staff consists of 30 
astronomers; 38 staff technicians, research engineers, 
and administrative personnel; 5 post-docs and about 
15 students. A very tight collaboration exists with the 
universities of Milan, Como and Pavia. 

Funding originates from the Ministry of Research 
and Technology (MURST), from the Italian Space Agency 
(ASI), from the Italian Consortium of Astronomy and 
Astrophysics (CNAA) and from the European Community 
and European Southern Observatory in the case of 
finalized projects. 

For further information see 
http://www.merate.mi.astro.it or 
http: / /www.brera.mi.astro.it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma 


The Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma is a non-profit 
institute dedicated to astrophysical research. It was 
founded in the early nineteenth century, and moved to its 
present residence, the ancient Villa Mellini, not far from St 
Peter’s Cathedral, in 1935. 

It has also acquired a second site at Monteporzio 
Catone, in the scientific area of Frascati, close to 
Rome. Completed in 1965, the Frascati buildings were 
originally intended to serve as headquarters of the national 
observational facilities, but the rapid expansion of the 
Rome urban area forced to abandon this project. The Rome 
Observatory was then entrusted with its management. 

The observatory also runs a mountain station at 
Campo Imperatore. Its 60-90 cm Schmidt telescope is used 
to search for supernovae. 

Research interests include globular clusters, the 
distribution of galaxies on cosmological scales and the 
distribution and properties of Lyman-a clouds in the 
early universe. Theoretical work covers solar activity, 
binary stars, active galactic nuclei, the properties of galaxy 
clusters in the optical and x-ray bands and open stellar 
clusters. 

Instrument work concerns the development of CCDs 
and the development of infrared spectral instruments. 

The Astronomical Museum of the Observatory was 
originally assembled in 1873 as a Copernican Museum 
on the occasion of the fourth centenary of Nicholas 
Copernicus’ birth. 

For further information see 
http:/ /oar.rm.astro.it/home.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Outer Planets ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Outer Planets 


A collective term for the major planets Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto: those whose orbits lie farthest 
from the Sun, beyond the main asteroid belt, as opposed 
to the inner planets, orbiting inside the main asteroid belt. 


Compare: superior planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Owens Valley Radio Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Owens Valley Radio Observatory 


The Owens Valley Radio Observatory (OVRO) is located 
in a deep dry valley 400 km north of Pasadena, California, 
where the California Institute of Technology—which 
operates the Observatory—is located. It was founded 
in the mid 1950s and the first major instrument was an 
interferometer composed of two 26 m antennas. These 
dishes moved on east-west and north-south tracks and so 
the pair provided excellent resolution in two dimensions. 
At the time it was the largest such system in the world, 
and made many high-resolution studies especially of 
extragalactic radio sources. In the late 1960s a 40 m 
paraboloid was constructed. For many years it was 
the major west-coast station of the Very Long Baseline 
Interferometer, which linked radio telescopes around the 
world to get angular resolution as fine as one-thousandth 
of an arcsec. More recently it has been used to study 
pulsars and the microwave background radiation. 

At present the major instrument at OVRO is an 
interferometer comprising six 10 m telescopes, and 
operating at millimeter wavelengths. These dishes are on 
tracks and the system can synthesize a 0.5 arcsec beam at 
1mm wavelength. Extensive studies are being undertaken 
in star formation, molecular studies in the Milky Way and 
other galaxies, and in studies of galaxies at high redshift. 

For further information see 
http://www.ovro.caltech.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Owl Nebula (M97, NGC 3587) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Owl Nebula (M97, NGC 3587) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Ursa Major, 
position RA 11* 14.8™, dec. +55° 01’. The Owl is 3’ across 
and gets its name from two adjacent dark patches that 
have the appearance of large eyes. The nebula is eleventh 
magnitude, and the central star is a faint magnitude 16. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Oxygen (0) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oxygen (O) 


A gas that makes up 20.95% by volume of the Earth’s 
atmosphere at ground level, 89% by weight in seawater 
and 46.6% in the Earth’s crust. It appears to be the 
third most abundant element in the universe (after 
hydrogen and helium), but its abundance—in terms 
of number of atoms—is only about 1/1500 that of 
hydrogen. The chemical symbol is O, and it normally 
occurs in the atmosphere in molecular form (two atoms 
linked), Oz. Triatomic oxygen, O3, called ozone, and 
monatomic oxygen, O, are more predominant in the upper 
atmosphere, where ozone shields the Earth from the Sun’s 
ultraviolet radiation. Pure oxygen is 1.1 times heavier 
than air. Its atomic mass is 15.99 and its atomic number 8. 
Oxygen molecules are essential to the sustenance of human 
and animal life on Earth. Oxygen combines with most 
other elements and, when this reaction occurs rapidly with 
the release of heat and light, we describe the reaction as 
combustion, or burning. Oxygen liquefies under normal 
pressure at about —183°C and it becomes solid at about 
—218°C. Liquid oxygen (LOX) is commonly used as the 
oxidant in the propellant of chemical rockets. 

Free molecular oxygen is almost entirely absent from 
the atmospheres of Venus and Mars. 


See also: cosmic abundance of elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ozone Hole 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ozone Hole 


The ozone hole is a recent seasonal phenomenon which 
corresponds to a significant reduction in the total amount 
of ozone in the EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE during springtime over 
Antarctica. Evidence that this phenomenon is caused by 
human activities through the release into the atmosphere 
of man-made chlorine and bromine compounds has been 
building up over the last 15 years. The depletion of the 
ozone layer is not restricted to Antarctica, but unlike the 
sudden and near total loss of ozone over this region at 
certain altitudes, ozone depletion at mid-latitudes is much 
less and much slower (only a few per cent per year). It 
is nevertheless a worrying trend which is the subject of 
intense scientific research at present. In view of this global 
phenomenon, regulations to restrict the release of man- 
made chlorine and bromine compounds were promptly 
decided with the Montreal Protocol in 1987 and successive 
amendments in 1990 and 1992. Full compliance with the 
protocol should lead to a recovery of the ozone layer by 
the middle of the twenty-first century. However, other 
environmental changes such as CLIMATE changes might 
impact the time of the recovery. 


The ozone layer 

Ozone (O3: three OxYGEN atoms) occurs naturally in the 
atmosphere. It is mainly found in two regions of the 
Earth’s atmosphere (see figure 1). Most ozone (about 
90%) resides in a layer located in the 10-50 km altitude 
range, a region called the stratosphere. This stratospheric 
ozone is commonly known as the ‘ozone layer’. The 
remaining ozone is located in the troposphere, the region 
which extends from the Earth’s surface up to about 10 km. 
Even in the stratosphere, ozone represents a very small 
fraction of the atmospheric gas with a maximum of 
about six ozone molecules for every million air molecules. 
Despite this small amount, ozone plays a vital role in 
the atmosphere: stratospheric ozone absorbs most of the 
biologically damaging ultraviolet sunlight (called UV-B), 
allowing only a small amount to reach the Earth’s surface. 
The absorption of UV radiation by ozone creates a source 
of heat, which actually forms the stratosphere itself. Ozone 
thus plays a key role in the temperature structure of the 
Earth’s atmosphere. On the other hand, ozone at the 
Earth’s surface can be harmful to living systems: it reacts 
strongly with other molecules and high levels of ozone are 
toxic to living organisms and biological life. 

The amount of ozone in the Earth’s atmosphere 
is governed by the balance between permanent ozone 
production through molecular oxygen photolysis and 
ozone destruction through chemical processes which 
involve numerous constituents whose abundance can be 
very low (less than one molecule for every billion air 
molecules). Besides, although ozone is mainly formed 
in the tropics where the solar radiation is strongest, 
the ozone layer is thinnest in the tropics (around the 
equator) and denser towards the poles due to the transport 
processes which redistribute the ozone over the globe. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


amount of ozone above a point on the Earth’s surface 
is measured in DOBSON UNITS (DU), typically 300 DU in 
global average, with large seasonal fluctuations. This 
quantity corresponds to the integrated ozone column 
density above one point, generally called ‘total ozone’. As 
a convention, it is reduced to the standard pressure and 
temperature conditions of the Earth’s surface (respectively 
1 atmosphere and 0°C). In these conditions, the thickness 
of a pure ozone layer above the Earth is about 3 mm. Asa 
comparison, the total thickness of the atmosphere defined 
in the same conditions amounts to 8 km. The Dobson unit 
is defined as 10° m of ozone at standard pressure and 
temperature conditions. 

The first theory on ozone equilibrium was introduced 
by Sydney Chapman around 1930. According to this 
theory, ozone equilibrium is governed by a cycle referred 
to now as the Chapman cycle. According to this cycle, 
production occurs when ultraviolet light breaks down 
oxygen molecules, while destruction involves chemical 
reactions among oxygen compounds: 


O> + radiation > O+0O (1) 
O+0,+M—> 034+M (2) 

O; + radiation > O, +O (3) 
O3 +O > Op + O2 (4) 


where M is any air molecule. 

Later ozone measurements showed that this cycle 
produces amounts of ozone which are too high. This led 
to the introduction of other atmospheric compounds to 
balance ozone production by reactions (1) and (2). The 
concept of a catalytic cycle was then introduced, where 
a constituent X participates in ozone destruction through 
the following reactions: 


X+0O3 > XO + Oo (5) 


XO+O0—> X+0,. (6) 


The net budget of reactions (5) and (6) corresponds 
to reaction (4) which destroys ozone and X is re- 
formed at the end of the cycle. The main components 
acting on ozone equilibrium involve hydrogen, oxygen, 
nitrogen, chlorine and bromine compounds. These 
constituents are produced chemically from source gases 
such as methane, water vapor, nitrous oxide (N20), 
chlorine and bromine compounds, including the man- 
made chlorofluorocarbons or CFCs and the halons which 
contain bromine. Chlorofluorocarbons were mainly 
used in refrigerators, air conditioners and as industrial 
solvents. After their emission into the atmosphere through 
physical, chemical or biological processes, these gases, 
chemically inert in the lower atmosphere, diffuse towards 
the stratosphere due to the permanent mixing of air in 
the atmosphere. After 7 to 10 years, they reach the 
stratosphere where the molecules are broken down by 
the more and more intense solar radiation as a function 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ozone Hole 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Altitude (kilometers) 


“Smog” Ozone 


eee Lees LES Lees OE 


Atmospheric Ozone 


Stratospheric Ozone 
(The Ozone Layer) 


Tropospheric Ozone 


ie Contains 90% of Atmospheric 
Ozone 
* Beneficial Role: 
Acts as Primary UV Radiation 
Shield 
* Current Issues: 
— Long-term Global 
Downward Trends 
— Springtime Antarctic Ozone 
Hole Each Year 


+ Contains 10% of Atmospheric 
Ozone 

+ Harmful (mpact: Toxic Effects 
on Humans and Vegetation 


+ Current Issues: 
— Episodes of High Surface 
Ozone in Urban and 
Rural Areas 


0 5 10 15 20 25 


Ozone Amount 
(pressure, milli-Pascals) 


Figure 1. The ozone layer. 


of altitude. Chemically active compounds are produced, 
which destroy ozone through chain reactions at the end 
of which they are re-formed. This means that one 
molecule of these active compounds can destroy 1000 
to 10000 ozone molecules, before being eliminated by 
recombination processes. 


The ozone hole 

Worries about the fate of the ozone layer first arose 
in the 1970s when nitrogen and chlorine compounds 
involving man-made products were introduced into the 
ozone catalytic cycles. The role of nitrogen compounds 
was suggested by Paul Crutzen in 1970 while Molina and 
Rowland pointed out the danger of increasing emission 
of chlorofluorocarbons in 1974. A ban on aerosol sprays 
containing CFCs was made by the USA in the late 1970s. 
These investigations, as well as their subsequent studies 
on the ozone hole, led to the award to these authors of the 
Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1995. 

Up to the mid-1980s, all the analyses of the impact 
of increasing chlorine levels on the ozone layer led 
to rather small decreases, so the first report on the 
Antarctic ozone hole was mostly unexpected. It was 
first reported in 1984-5 that ozone losses reached 50% as 
compared with the measurements performed in October 
during the previous decades from 1957 to 1975 (see 
figure 2). Such measurements were obtained in the Syowa 
station and Halley Bay Antarctic station. Subsequent 
satellite measurements showed that the ozone hole was 
spread over the whole Antarctic continent. In parallel, 
measurements of the ozone vertical profile revealed a 
destruction of more than 95% in the 16-22 km altitude 
range (figure 3). The intensive experimental and 
theoretical investigations which followed the discovery 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the ozone hole allowed the link between the man- 
made chlorine and bromine compounds and the rapid 
ozone depletion during the Antarctic springtime to be 
precisely established: they showed that the ozone hole 
results from the conjunction of two conditions—high 
levels of stratospheric chlorine and bromine and the 
specific meteorological conditions which prevail in the 
polar stratosphere during winter. 

The first condition is ensured by the continuous 
horizontal and vertical mixing of the Earth’s atmosphere 
over the globe. Thus, while human emission of CFCs 
and halons occurred mainly in the northern hemisphere, 
these constituents are present in the Antarctic stratosphere, 
where they have been measured. After emission at the 
Earth’s surface, they are rapidly mixed in the troposphere. 
This well-mixed air rises into the stratosphere essentially 
at tropical latitudes. Winds then move this air poleward, 
so that air throughout the stratosphere contains nearly the 
same amount of chlorine and bromine. 

The second condition is due to the particular location 
of the polar stratosphere: during the winter polar night, 
sunlight does not reach the south pole, leading to the 
development of strong circumpolar winds in the middle to 
lower stratosphere. These strong winds are known as the 
‘polar vortex’ which isolates the air over the polar region 
from the surrounding mid-latitude regions. Since there is 
no sunlight, the air within the polar vortex can get very 
cold, so cold that special clouds can form once the air 
temperature gets below about —80°C. These clouds are 
called polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs). These PSCs are 
formed of liquid and solid particles whose composition 
includes nitric acid, sulfuric acid and water. Their exact 
composition and formation temperature is still the subject 
of intense scientific debate. As the temperature gets colder, 
below —85 °C, larger droplets of water-ice with nitric acid 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ozone Hole 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Historical Springtime Total Ozone Record 
for Halley Bay, Antarctica (76°S) 


400 


300 


{ Dobson Units } 


200 


October Monthly Averages 


Total Ozone 


1955 I965 1975 1985 1996 
Year 


Figure 2. The decrease of the total amount of ozone in October 
at Halley Bay. 


Bott of fk pt | ee 


South Pole Station 
1992 Ozone Hole 


35 


25 


E 20 
x 21/8 
@ 
3 1s 
< 
10 Total O, (DU) 
259 
215 
20/9 162 
5 26/9 133 
23/9 117 
11/10 105 
0 se ee a A Se DS 
0 5 10 16 20 


O, Partial Pressure (mPa) 


Figure 3. The evolution of the vertical distribution of ozone 
during the ozone hole period in Antarctica. 


dissolved in them can form and freeze. These various PSCs 
are crucial for ozone loss to occur, since the presence of 
these particles allows the onset of a particular chemistry 
called ‘heterogeneous chemistry’ which transforms most 
of the chlorine compounds into potentially active chlorine, 
likely to destroy ozone. The most important reactions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the preconditioning of the polar stratosphere during 
winter are 


HCl + CIONO, > HNO; + Ch (7) 
CIONO, + H,O + HNO; + HOCI (8) 
HCl +HOCI > H,0+ Cl (9) 
N3Os + H,O —> 2HNOs. (10) 


These reactions are very fast and can only take place on 
the surface of polar stratospheric clouds. This is why the 
ozone hole was not predicted. Heterogeneous reactions 
were neglected in atmospheric chemistry (at least in the 
stratosphere) before the ozone hole was discovered. The 
nitric acid (HNO3) formed in these reactions remains in 
the PSC particles, so that the gas phase concentrations 
of nitrogen oxides are reduced. This reduction, called 
‘denoxification’, is important as it slows down the removal 
rate of ClO that would otherwise occur by the reaction 


ClO + NO, +M > CIONO, +M (11) 


where M is any air molecule. 

Without reaction (6), high levels of active chlorine 
(multiplied by a factor of about 1000) are maintained. The 
destruction of ozone requires the return of sunlight over 
the pole. First, HOCI and Cl are photodissociated: 


Cl + radiation > Cl+Cl (12) 


HOCI + radiation > Cl + OH. (13) 


Then, ozone destruction takes place through catalytic 
cycles which allow the re-formation of the destroying 
compounds. Thus, active chlorine constituents which are 
about 1000 time less abundant than ozone can destroy 
nearly all the ozone molecules in the lower stratosphere. 
Two main cycles are considered to be responsible for the 
ozone destruction: 

(1) ClO + ClO + M > ClO, + M 


CloO> + radiation > Cl + ClO, 
ClO. + M > Cl+O.+M 
2(Cl + O3) > 2(C1O + Or) 


net: 203 > 30. 
(11) ClO + BrO > Br+Cl+O> 


Cl +03 —> ClO+O, 
Br + O3 > BrO + Op 


net: 203 => 30>. 


The dimer (Cl,O;) of the chlorine monoxide radical 
involved in cycle I is thermally unstable, and the cycle is 
most effective at low temperatures. It is thought to be 
responsible for most (70%) of the ozone loss in Antarctica. 
In the warmer Arctic a large proportion of the loss may 
be driven by cycle II. These cycles lead to a very rapid 
ozone decrease which reach more than 1% per day at some 
altitude levels. This destruction is interrupted at the end of 
the spring when the general stratospheric warming breaks 
the polar vortex and the isolation of the polar airmasses. 
The ozone hole is then diluted in the southern hemisphere 
leading to a net global ozone loss. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ozone Hole 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


What is happening in the Arctic? 

Significant reduction in ozone content in the stratosphere 
above the Arctic has been observed during the late winter 
and early spring in five of the last eight years (1990, 
1993, 1995, 1996 and 1997). However, these reductions, 
which can reach 25%, did not last as long and occurred 
over a much smaller area than the Antarctic ozone hole. 
The difference between the two polar regions is due to 
the different weather patterns: Antarctica is a very large 
land mass surrounded by oceans. These symmetrical 
conditions produce very low stratospheric temperature 
within the meteorologically isolated polar vortex region. 
The conditions that maintain elevated levels of chemically 
active chlorine and bromine persist into September and 
October when sunlight returns over the region to initiate 
ozone depletion. In the Arctic, large-scale weather 
systems disturb this main flow, making it less stable 
than over Antarctica. These disturbances prevent the 
temperature from being as cold as in the Antarctic 
stratosphere and fewer polar stratospheric clouds are 
formed. Nevertheless, chemically active chlorine and 
bromine compounds are also formed from reaction on 
the surface of the clouds. But the cold conditions rarely 
persist into March when sufficient sunlight is available 
to trigger substantial ozone depletion. Several American 
and European scientific campaigns have been organized 
since the beginning of the 1990s in order to evaluate ozone 
depletion in the Arctic and evaluate its possible impact on 
the surrounding mid-latitude regions. Such campaigns 
generally involve measurements from numerous ground- 
based stations, large stratospheric balloons, aircraft, 
dedicated satellite platforms and numerical simulations 
of the atmosphere in order to interpret the experimental 
results. The last major campaign, called THESEO, was 
organized in winter 1998-9. It was the third major 
European campaign to study the effects of CFCs and other 
ozone-depleting substances on the stratosphere. 


Evolution of the ozone layer at mid-latitude 

The last evaluation of the stratospheric ozone trends in 
mid-latitude regions show that between 25 and 60°N, 
ozone abundance over the last years averaged about 4% 
below 1979 values. The winter/spring and summer/fall 
ozone losses are of the order of 5.5% and 2.8% respectively. 
As in the polar regions, the ozone depletion occurs mainly 
in the lower stratosphere. It is due to the dilution after 
the break up of the polar vortex at the end of spring, of 
the polar airmasses in which ozone was destroyed and to 
heterogeneous reactions which take place on the surface of 
the stratospheric aerosol layer which exists at all latitudes 
around 18 km. In the latter case, the processes are similar 
to the ones which occur at high latitudes, but the global 
surface of the stratospheric particles is much less than the 
PSC one. 


Regulations for protecting the ozone layer 


In 1987, the recognition of the potential for chlorine and 
bromine compounds to destroy stratospheric ozone led 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to the ‘Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete 
the Ozone Layer’ which aimed at reducing the global 
production of ozone-depleting substances. Subsequently, 
global observations of significant ozone depletion have 
prompted amendments to strengthen the treaty. The 
1990 London Amendments call for a ban of the most 
damaging compounds by 2000. The 1992 Copenhagen 
Amendments changed the date of the ban to 1996. Only 
some exceptions for the production of halocarbons were 
tolerated for essential uses, such as for medical sprays, 
before safe substitutes were found. Further restrictions 
on ozone depleting substances such as methyl bromide 
and strengthening measures to ensure compliance with 
the Montreal Protocol have been agreed upon in Vienna 
(1995) and Montreal (1997). Full compliance should lead to 
a recovery of the ozone layer by the middle of the twenty- 
first century. However, other environmental changes such 
as climate changes might impact the exact time of the 
recovery. 


Bibliography 

As a requirement of the Montreal Protocol, extensive 
reports on the latest findings concerning the ozone hole 
layer are produced regularly by the scientific community. 
The latest reports are the following: 


World Meteorological Organization 1998 Global ozone 
research and monitoring project, assessment of 
trends in the vertical distribution of ozone Report 43 
(Geneva: WMO) 

World Meteorological Organization 1999 Global ozone re- 
search and monitoring project, scientific assessment 
of ozone depletion (Geneva: WMO) at press 


Sophie Godin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Padova/Asiago Observatories 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Padova/Asiago Observatories 


The Asiago Highlands, about 90 km north-west of Padova, 
at an elevation of about 1000 m, host, in two sites, the 
main complex of optical telescopes operating in Italy. The 
telescopes belong to two independent institutions, based 
in Padova: the Astronomical Observatory (OAP) and the 
Astronomy Department of the local University. 

The OAP, a research institute, was founded in 1767 by 
the Venetian Republic and located in a tower built by the 
tyrant Ezzelino da Romano in 1242, and restructured by 
the architect Domenico Cerato. 

Research in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
dealt primarily with meteorology, geodesy, compilation 
of stellar catalogs, and determination of orbits of solar 
system bodies. The construction by the Padova University 
of the 122 cm reflector, then the largest telescope in Europe, 
completed in 1942, fostered the development of modern 
astrophysical research in Padova/Asiago. Three more 
telescopes were subsequently built by OAP: a Schmidt 
50/40 (in 1958), a Schmidt 92/67 (in 1965) and the 182 cm 
‘Copernicus’ reflector (in 1973). At present they are all 
located at the top of Cima Ekar (elevation 1350 m). A large 
collection of plates and spectra was secured over several 
decades of observations: about 10000 direct photographs 
and more than 18000 spectra taken with the 122 cm 
reflector; 14.500 and 18 000 wide field plates and films with 
the two Schmidt telescopes. 

Research groups (both observational and theoretical) 
cover a broad range of subjects: solar system, stellar 
astrophysics, external galaxies, active galactic nuclei, 
cosmology, and the history of astronomy. The Observatory 
played, and is still playing, a primary role in major 
technological projects: construction and commissioning 
of the ‘Galileo’ telescope at La Palma (Canary Islands) 
and of its instruments (optical imager, high-resolution 
spectrograph, adaptive optics), realization of the camera 
for the VST and of the LBT prime focus imager, ESO VLT- 
LGS program; development of innovative methods for 
handling very large databases. It also has a significant 
involvment in several space projects (Rosetta, Planck 
Surveyor, Gaia). Also very important are the educational 
activities exploiting the Web—in 1998 OAP was awarded 
the ‘New Media Prize’ for the best educational site for 
children. 

Padova is one of two Italian universities having a 
degree (Laurea) in astronomy (since 1968). Since 1983 it 
has also run PhD courses in astronomy. 

The Observatory staff is: 38 astronomers (5 senior, 
14 associates, 19 researchers), 38 technicians, and 28 
employees for administration and general services. 

The Department staff is: 16 professors (6 full, 10 
associate), 8 researchers, 25 PhD students and _ post- 
doctorates; 21 employees. 

For further information see 
http://www.pd.astro.it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Palimpsest 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Palimpsest 


A bright circular feature on an icy surface with very little 
vertical relief. The term is used to describe features on 
the outer three Galilean satellites of Jupiter; it originally 
meant a piece of parchment prepared for reuse by erasing 
what had been written on it. Palimpsests are interpreted 
as impact features whose original morphology has been 
smoothed out. The impacts are supposed to have occurred 
when the crust was thin, and subsurface ‘slush’ rapidly 
extruded out to fill the crater; alternatively, the raised 
rim and depressed floor of the crater were able to ‘relax’ 
towards the mean surface layer since the lack of rigidity of 
the underlying material meant that it could not support 
surface relief. Palimpsests are typically 100 km in 
diameter. They are found on Callisto at the centers of the 
large impact features Asgrad and Valhalla; and on Europa 
(e.g., the 148 km diameter Tyre Macula), where they have 
almost no discernible surface relief, and on Ganymede 
(e.g., the 348 km diameter Memphis Facula). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Palitzsch, Johann Georg (1723-88) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Palitzsch, Johann Georg (1723-88) 


German farmer-astronomer in Dresden who recovered 
Halley’s Comet at its predicted reappearance in 1758. 
During the 1761 transit of Venus across the Sun, he 
observed a black band linking Venus to the edge of the 
Sun at the beginning and end of the transit (the ‘tear-drop 
effect’) and correctly interpreted this as an effect of Venus’ 
atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Pallas 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pallas 


The second asteroid to be discovered, by Wilhelm Olbers 
in 1802, and so designated (2) Pallas. It is also the 
second largest asteroid, irregular in shape with an average 
diameter of 525 km. It orbits the Sun in the main asteroid 
belt at a mean distance of 2.77 AU (415 million km) in a 
period of 4.61 years; the orbital inclination is 35°, high 
for a main-belt asteroid, and the eccentricity 0.23. Pallas 
rotates in 7.81 h. It is a B-type asteroid, with a reflectance 
spectrum similar to that of carbonaceous chondrites, but 
rather brighter, with an albedo of 0.16. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Palomar Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Palomar Observatory 


The observatory is located on Mount Palomar, between 
Los Angeles and San Diego. It is owned and operated by 
the California Institute of Technology, a privately endowed 
educational and research institution located in Pasadena, 
and is used to support the scientific research programs of 
Caltech’s faculty and students. 

The principal instrument at Palomar is the 5 m Hale 
Telescope, which from 1948 to 1976 was the largest optical 
telescope in the world. Palomar also houses the 1.2 m 
Oschin Telescope, the 46 cm Schmidt telescope, and a 1.5m 
reflecting telescope (operated jointly by Caltech and the 
Carnegie Institute of Washington). By agreement, Caltech 
shares use of the Hale Telescope with astronomers from 
Cornell University and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

Through the efforts of George Ellery Hale, the 
International Education Board (one of the Rockefeller 
Foundations) awarded a grant to Caltech for the 
construction of a 5 m telescope in 1928. Mount Palomar 
was selected as the optimum site for the new instrument 
in 1934. 

The 5 m Pyrex glass disk was cast on 2 December 
1934, and after a cooling period of eight months, the 
20 ton disk was shipped by rail to Pasadena for the long 
process of grinding and polishing that would transform 
it to the precise shape and size required for astronomical 
observations. 

Construction of the building (including the 1000 ton 
rotating dome) and the telescope structure (the moving 
parts weigh about 530 tons) began in the mid 1930s and 
was nearly complete by 1941 when the United States 
entered the Second World War. But the war delayed 
polishing of the mirror, and it was not until 18 November 
1947 that the finished mirror, now weighing only 14.5 tons, 
began its two-day trip to Mount Palomar where it was 
installed in the telescope for a period of testing and 
adjustment. 

Scientific research at Palomar Observatory has been 
undertaken since 1948. The Hale Telescope has been used 
on virtually every clear night to study objects ranging from 
nearby asteroids and comets, to the stars that comprise the 
Milky Way, distant galaxies and quasars. 

The 5 m telescope has recently been upgraded. The 
telescope is fitted with CCD cameras which are 100 times 
more sensitive than the photographic plates used when 
the telescope first went into service. Anew adaptive optics 
system corrects for the effects of air turbulence by using 
a mirror placed between the telescope and camera and 
which is adjusted up to 500 times a second. An infrared 
camera, the Palomar High Angular Resolution Observer 
(PHARO), has also been installed. 

Although electronic detectors have replaced photog- 
raphy at the 5 m telescope, the 1.2 m Oschin Telescope, 
which is designed for wide-field viewing, still uses glass 
photographic plates to record images. Its Schmidt camera 
carried out the famous National Geographic-Palomar Sky 
Survey in the early 1950s, producing an atlas of the entire 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sky north of declination —33°. Each 6° square segment of 
the sky was photographed on both blue- and red-sensitive 
plates, a total of 879 pairs of plates. 

A second sky survey was carried out in the early 
1980s, and a third multi-year-long program to obtain 
complete photographic coverage of the northern sky is 
now under way. Unfortunately, light pollution is an 
increasing problem because of the rapid urbanization of 
southern California. 

For further information see 
http: / /astro.caltech.edu/ observatories /palomar/. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parabola 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Parabola 


A conic section obtained by cutting a right circular cone 
by a plane parallel to the side of the cone. Such a curve is 
open (i.e. it does not form a closed shape such as an ellipse 
or circle), with eccentricity = 1, and stretches to an infinite 
distance with the two arms tending to become parallel. 
The parabola forms the boundary between closed ellipses 
and open hyperbolas. 


See also: conic sections, ellipse , hyperbola, orbit, orbital 
elements, revolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parallaxes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Parallaxes 


The trigonometric parallax (z) of a star is the angle 
subtended by 1 astronomical unit (AU) at the star’s 
distance (d) from the Sun (see figure 1). As the Earth 
annually orbits the Sun, the observer’s changing position 
causes an annual shift in the star’s measured position, 
tracing a small ellipse on the sky that reflects the size 
and orientation of the Earth’s orbit as it might be viewed 
from the star. The size of this ‘parallactic ellipse’ is 
inversely proportional to the distance. For convenience, 
the astronomer’s unit of distance, the parsec (pc), is 
defined as the distance at which a star’s parallax would 
be one second of arc (arcsec), the unit in which parallaxes 
are traditionally measured. This gives the simple relation 
d=. 

The measurement of trigonometric parallaxes is 
fundamental to our knowledge of stellar distances in our 
Galaxy and is the first step in establishing the cosmic 
distance scale. However, most stars are so distant that 
their parallaxes are very small and difficult to measure 
accurately. The nearest known star, Proxima Centauri 
(a Cen C), has a parallax of 0.77 arcsec. A typical 
naked-eye star’s parallax is about 0.01 arcsec. Most of 
the 118000 parallaxes in the Hipparcos Catalogue are 
only a few milliarcseconds (mas) in size, barely larger 
than the errors of measurement (see HIPPARCOS AND TYCHO 
CATALOGUES). Indeed, the history of parallax observations 
has been as much a quest for increasing accuracy as for 
increasing numbers of stars measured. Moreover, the use 
of parallax data is fraught with difficulties caused by the 
small size of most stellar parallaxes. 

Parallaxes are also vital to the measurement and 
calibration of stellar luminosities, because a star’s distance 
needs to be known to convert its apparent magnitude 
into an absolute magnitude. Likewise, parallaxes are 
useful in the study of stellar kinematics, because the 
distance is needed to convert a star’s PROPER MOTION into its 
velocity in the plane of the sky (transverse velocity), and 
in the determination of stellar masses, where the distance 
converts a visual binary’s apparent orbit into the linear 
scale needed to apply Kepler’s third law. 


Historical background 

Copernicus’ 16th-century heliocentric theory of the solar 
system held two important implications for astrometry. 
First, if the stars were at finite distances, they should show 
annual parallactic motions. Detection of stellar parallaxes 
would directly confirm the COPERNICAN SYSTEM. Second, the 
distances to the stars themselves could be determined 
by measuring their parallaxes. However, more than 
two centuries of observational efforts, with gradually 
increasing accuracy, were frustrated because parallaxes 
remained too small to detect. Larger effects, such as 
proper motions (up to 10 arcsec yr~'), annual aberration 
(20.5 arcsec), and nutation (9 arcsec) were discovered in 
the first half of the 18th century, but it was not until 1838 
that Bessel finally measured the parallax (0.3 arcsec) of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


STAR 
* 


JAN JULY 


Figure 1. Parallax (z) of a star at distance (d). In this example, 
the star is observed at two opposite points (January and July) on 
the Earth’s orbit, which is assumed circular with radius 1 AU, 
but appears as an ellipse when viewed at an angle. The distance 
d is not drawn to scale. Even the nearest stars are several 
hundred thousand AU from the Sun. 


5th-magnitude high-proper-motion star 61 Cygni with the 
Konigsberg heliometer. Contemporaneously, parallaxes 
of two bright stars, Vega and a Centauri, were measured 
by Struve and Henderson, with different instruments. The 
rest of the 19th century saw much work but little progress 
(See ASTROMETRY: HISTORY). The errors of visual observations 
were too large to measure more than a few parallaxes with 
any real accuracy. Parallaxes for the same stars measured 
by different observers and instruments often disagreed 
badly. The introduction of photography failed to improve 
matters significantly. By the end of the century, parallaxes 
were known for fewer than 60 stars, often with a precision 
not much better than 0.1 arcsec. 

In the first two decades of the 20th century, 
SCHLESINGER revolutionized astrometry and opened the 
era of modern parallax determinations. Starting with 
the Yerkes 1 m refractor in 1903, Schlesinger perfected 
methods for accurate photographic observation with 
long-focus REFRACTING TELESCOPES. He systematized the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parallaxes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observing, measuring and reduction methods to eliminate 
or minimize errors. By 1920, Schlesinger’s techniques 
improved parallax precision to the 0.01 arcsec level, 
making it possible to measure distances for thousands of 
stars. This led to a world-wide program, with five major 
observatories (Allegheny, Cape, Greenwich, McCormick 
and Yale) working for nearly a half-century on an all-sky 
survey, complete to visual magnitude 5.5, supplemented 
by high-proper-motion stars as faint as 14th magnitude. 
Starting in 1924, Schlesinger and his successors at Yale 
compiled these observations into a series of catalogues. 
By 1960 the classic program had nearly ended; the 1963 
edition of the Yale General Catalogue of Trigonometric 
Stellar Parallaxes (GCTSP) lists 6390 stars. 


Modern observations 

By the 1960s it was widely recognized that future progress 
in parallax observations would require another leap in 
accuracy, which modern technology could now provide. 
Vasilevskis at Lick Observatory pioneered sophisticated 
observational techniques, automatic plate measurements 
and computerized data reductions. Strand obtained a 
1.5 m astrometric reflector for the US Naval Observatory. 
By the 1970s, parallaxes for faint, low-luminosity stars 
could be determined with a precision of several mas. 
The 1980s saw the replacement of photographic plates 
by electronic detectors (CCDs at USNO, the Multichannel 
Astrometric Photometer (MAP) at Allegheny), further 
reducing errors to the 1 mas level. The 1995 edition of the 
Yale GCTSP now lists 8112 stars. While this is only a small 
increase in number since 1963, the added stars represent 
nearly an order of magnitude increase in accuracy. 

In the 1990s, astrometry was revolutionized again by 
the European Space Agency’s HIPPARCOS satellite, which 
measured parallaxes and proper motions, as accurate as 
the best ground-based data, for 118000 stars. Scanning 
the sky for just over 3 yr, Hipparcos observed 15 times 
as many stars as ground-based parallax observatories 
had accumulated over the past century. Working from 
a predetermined Input Catalogue, Hipparcos observed 
a two-part program: (1) 52000 bright stars (V < 7-9, 
depending on galactic latitude), constituting a virtually 
complete magnitude-limited survey; (2) 66000 fainter 
stars (V < 12.4) selected for astrophysical or astrometric 
interest. Additionally, the Tycho experiment used the 
satellite’s star mapper to measure parallaxes of modest 
precision (7 mas for V < 9; 25 mas for V < 11.5) for 1.06 
million stars, complete to V ~ 10.5. 

So, by the close of the 20th century, space astrometry 
has almost entirely replaced ground-based observations 
as the source of parallax data for bright stars. However, it 
is worth noting that ground-based telescopes remain the 
only source of parallaxes for faint stars. 


Applications and critical analysis 

The utility of trigonometric parallaxes to calculate stellar 
distances, kinematics, masses or luminosities depends 
critically on the size of the parallax in relation to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observational error o,. Parallax errors propagate into 
stellar distances and transverse velocities in proportion to 
the ratio o,,/7, ie. 


0q/d =0,/v=0,/1 
and into visual binary star masses as 
ou/M = 30,/n. 


When the absolute magnitude is calculated from the 
apparent magnitude and parallax (in arcsec) 


M=m+5+5log,,7 
the parallax error propagates as 
Ou = 5a (log,, 7) ~ 2.170, /1. 


Because of this, only ‘large’ parallaxes (7 >> o;) are 
individually useful on a star-by-star basis. However, most 
parallaxes are ‘small’, ie. 7 ~ o,, and can only be used 
statistically. In either case, care must be taken to ensure 
that (1) the parallaxes are on an accurate absolute zero 
point, (2) the observational errors are accurately estimated 
and (3) statistical issues are properly addressed. 


Absolute zero-point calibration 

Ground-based parallax observations are made by repeat- 
edly pointing the telescope at the particular field (generally 
<1° in size) containing the ‘target’ star(s) and a number 
(usually 4-10) of background ‘reference’ stars. The paral- 
lactic ellipse of the target star is measured relative to the 
reference stars, whose own motions are in phase with the 
target star, only (presumably) smaller. The result is a ‘rel- 
ative’ parallax, which must be corrected to ‘absolute’ by 
adding the mean parallax of the reference stars. This cor- 
rection must be determined independently. This can be 
done statistically, by using Galactic models to estimate the 
reference frame’s parallax as a function of the stars’ appar- 
ent magnitudes and the Galactic latitude and longitude of 
the field. Reference star parallaxes can also be estimated 
individually from photometry and spectroscopy. For the 
1995 Yale GCTSP, van Altena re-calculated the corrections 
to absolute for all parallaxes published to that date. The 
size of the corrections is generally 1-5 mas, with an uncer- 
tainty of ~10%, i.e. a few tenths of 1 mas. 

The Hipparcos satellite simultaneously imaged two 
0.9° x 0.9° fields of view, separated by 58° on the 
sky. Because the parallactic motions in the two widely 
separated fields were out of phase, absolute parallaxes 
could be determined directly from the Hipparcos 
observations themselves. Global tests confirm that the 
overall absolute zero point of the Hipparcos Catalogue is 
accurate to 0.1 mas. However, this does not represent the 
zero-point accuracy in any individual field, where small- 
angular-scale zero-point errors may reach the order of 
1 mas. (See the discussion of cluster parallaxes below.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parallaxes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Observational errors 

Any parallax determination will have a finite accidental 
error obs — true, the size of which, o,, is estimated sta- 
tistically from the dispersion of the positional measure- 
ments. It is usually assumed that the observing process 
C(Zobs | Ttrue) is represented by a normal distribution with 
mean True and variance o2. Great effort has been taken 
by the compilers of the Yale GCTSP and the Hipparcos 
Catalogue to detect and eliminate systematic errors and to 
assess the real precision of the parallaxes. This allows the 
user to rely on the , 0, values listed in these catalogues to 
be the best statistical estimates of the true quantities. For 
the 1995 GCTSP, van Altena comprehensively assessed the 
‘external’ errors of each observatory, as a function of the 
published ‘internal’ errors. Before the 1997 publication of 
the Hipparcos Catalogue, the Hipparcos team verified that 
the errors were not underestimated by more than 10%. 

Parallax errors can be correlated in two ways that 
may be important. First, the unknowns in a star’s 
parallax solution (position, proper motion, parallax) will 
be correlated unless the observations are well distributed 
in time. This is simple to achieve with ground-based 
observations. However, for certain areas of the sky, 
Hipparcos was not able to provide equal numbers of 
observations on both sides of the parallactic ellipse, 
causing large (up to +£0.6) correlations between parallax 
and ecliptic longitude. The Hipparcos Catalogue lists for 
each star the correlations between all the observational 
variables; the data should be used with caution when these 
values are not small (<0.2). 

Second, the parallaxes of two or more stars in 
one telescope’s field of view will be correlated (i.e. not 
statistically independent) because they share the same 
reference frame. This is rarely a problem for ground- 
based observations, which generally have one ‘target’ star 
per field. Hipparcos presents a very different case. The 
satellite scanned great circles on the sky, timing each star’s 
passage through the 0.9° field of view as a one-dimensional 
‘abscissa’ relative to the positional zero point adopted for 
each ‘reference great circle’. All stars on any one circle 
share the same zero-point error. As the scans repeated 
with different orientations, stars separated by >>1° were 
measured on different sets of scans, and their parallaxes 
are statistically independent. However, stars close 
together on the sky (<S1°) share many scans in common, 
regardless of their orientation. As the same abscissa 
errors propagate into the parallax errors, the individual 
parallaxes are no longer statistically independent. The 
corresponding correlations, approaching = +0.6 for 
small separations, must be carefully taken into account 
whenever Hipparcos data for small areas of the sky, such 
as in a cluster, are used. 


‘Large’ parallaxes: Lutz—Kelker corrections 

Perhaps the most important use of trigonometric paral- 
laxes is the calibration of luminosities of different types of 
nearby stars. For ‘large’ parallaxes (7 >> o,), individual 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


absolute magnitudes are calculated from 
M=m+5+5log,)7. 


However, this requires selecting stars by the size of 
their observed parallaxes, which introduces a statistical 
bias caused by the distribution of stars in space. This 
is because the conditional distribution of true parallax 
given the observed value, C(ztrue|7obs) is not the same as 
the (unbiased) conditional C(sobs|true) representing the 
parallax measuring process. Rather, 


C (true |Tobs) ae C (Tobs| True) x Na (True) 


where Na (true) is the spatial distribution of the stars in 
question. For nearby stars distributed uniformly in space, 
Na(True) ~ 17+. The sense of the bias is that zu is most 
likely less than ztops, because of the larger volume of space 
corresponding to smaller parallax. 

The impact of this volume bias on luminosity 
calibrations was not fully understood until 1973, when 
Lutz and Kelker showed how to calculate absolute 
magnitude corrections 

AM = (Mirue — Movs) = (5 108 19 (Ttrue/Tobs )) 
with the averages taken over the conditional distribution 
C (true|ops). These ‘Lutz—Kelker corrections’ reach AM = 
—0.4 mag for the limiting value o, /7 = 0.175. 

A serious objection to Lutz and Kelker’s simple 
formulation is that, in practice, stars selected for parallax 
observation are not uniformly distributed in space. 
Common. observational criteria (apparent magnitude, 
proper motion) purposely select nearby stars in preference 
to more distant stars. So, the space distribution of parallax 
stars is generally much less steep than 2~*, and the 
appropriate Lutz—Kelker corrections are correspondingly 
smaller. In 1979, Hanson showed how to use the power- 
law distribution of the proper motions of the sample 
of stars in question to estimate the exponent n in the 
generalized distribution Na(z) ~ 1~" and how to calculate 
absolute magnitude corrections as a function of n and 
o,/m. For a typical case, n = 2 and o,/m = 0.15, 
AM = —0.1 mag. 

Even with the large number of mas-precision paral- 
laxes provided by Hipparcos, many stellar luminosity cal- 
ibration problems necessitate working with data of mod- 
est relative precision (0.1 S 0, /a < 0.2) in order to obtain 
a large enough sample size. For this reason, Lutz—Kelker 
corrections remain a vital step in the careful statistical treat- 
ment of the data. 

An outstanding example is the use of Hipparcos 
parallaxes of nearby field subdwarfs to calibrate the 
metal-poor main sequence which is fitted to Galactic 
GLOBULAR CLUSTERS to derive their distances and ages. Most 
studies have restricted o,/m < 0.15 to keep the Lutz— 
Kelker corrections small, but this leaves too few (~10- 
30) subdwarfs to calibrate My versus B — V empirically 
as a function of the metallicity [Fe/H], and almost 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parallaxes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


no subdwarfs comparable with the most metal-poor 
([Fe/H] < —2) clusters. Hipparcos actually measured 
parallaxes for several hundred metal-poor subdwarfs. The 
calibration sample could be increased substantially by 
extending the precision limit to 0, /7 ~ 0.2 or greater, and 
applying appropriate Lutz—Kelker corrections. 


‘Small’ parallaxes: reduced parallaxes 
Most classes of high-luminosity distance indicators (e.g. 
RR Lyraes, Cepheids) are sufficiently rare in space that 
even the nearest examples are too distant for their 
parallaxes to be individually useful. For example, 
RR Lyrae itself is the only variable of that type in the 
Hipparcos Catalogue witho, /m < 0.15. Over 200 Cepheid 
variables were observed by Hipparcos; most are so distant 
that o,/m ~ 1. Many of the parallaxes are negative. 
Although useless individually, ‘small’ parallaxes for large 
numbers of stars do contain valuable distance information, 
which can be extracted statistically, as long as the absolute 
zero point is reliable and the parallaxes are independent. 
The proper tool for this work is the classic method of 
reduced parallaxes, first introduced by Charlier as early as 
1916, and improved by Malmquist in the 1930s and again 
by Roman in 1952. The ‘reduced parallax’ P is defined by 


P=x~x 190-2045) = 10°:2” 


which is just a rearrangement of the usual formula relating 
parallax and absolute magnitude. The procedure is 
simple. For a group of stars presumed to have the same 
absolute magnitude M, the parallaxes are ‘reduced’ to a 
common apparent magnitude, thus scaling each parallax 
to acommon distance. The reduced parallaxes P can then 
be averaged (with appropriate weights), and then 


M = 5log,,)(P). 


With the advent of the Hipparcos parallaxes, the classic 
method of reduced parallaxes has been re-discovered and 
applied with considerable success. Most notable is the 
work of Feast’s group on the CEPHEID PERIOD-LUMINOSITY 
RELATION. The work of Arenou and Luri shows how 
reduced parallaxes can be used individually to make 
an ‘astrometric H-R diagram’ and clearly outlines the 
statistical advantages of the method. Respecting the long 
history of reduced parallaxes, however, one does regret 
their unfortunate coinage ‘astrometry-based luminosity’ 
in place of the classic terminology. 


Cluster parallaxes: small-scale errors 

For a set of stars at virtually the same distance, such as 
in a GALACTIC OPEN CLUSTER, the parallaxes can be simply 
averaged to obtain the cluster’s parallax, which will be 
accurate if the absolute zero point is reliable and the 
individual parallaxes are uncorrelated. With ground- 
based parallaxes, only a few nearby clusters, most notably 
the Hyades, have enough data to provide useful results. 
(The parallaxes of several Hyades members have also been 
measured with the Hubble Space Telescope.) Without 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


parallaxes, main-sequence (MS) fitting has been the only 
way to estimate distances for most open clusters. 

Hipparcos observed stars in more than 200 open 
clusters, opening the possibility to determine their 
distances directly, without assumptions about stellar 
structure or chemical composition. Several teams have 
analyzed Hipparcos’ cluster parallaxes. The Hyades 
distance was determined by Perryman et al to better than 
1% precision (d = 46.3 + 0.3 pc) using proper motions 
as well as parallaxes. Robichon et al studied 18 other 
clusters with d < 500 pce and eight or more members 
observed by Hipparcos. van Leeuwen independently 
analyzed the nearest nine of these. Because the angular 
size of the clusters (~1°, except for the Hyades) is 
roughly the size of Hipparcos’ field of view, and the star 
density in these clusters (9-17 stars deg™!) is so high, 
one must account carefully for the correlations between 
measurements on the same great circles. Both Robichon 
and van Leeuwen did this using van Leeuwen’s ‘combined 
abscissae method’, which uses the Hipparcos intermediate 
data to solve for a single parallax and proper motion for 
each cluster. These cluster parallaxes were claimed to be 
accurate to +~0.2-0.4 mas. 

Controversy arose in 1997-9 when the Hipparcos 
parallax analyses gave anomalous distances (compared 
with MS fitting) for several clusters (e.g. Pleiades, 
Coma Berenices). Moreover, there were unexplained 
discrepancies between the two groups’ results. Robichon 
concluded that only the Pleiades is anomalous, and the 
other clusters are consistent with MS fitting when their 
metallicities are taken into account. To the contrary, 
van Leeuwen claimed that the Pleiades and five other 
young clusters are subluminous, without regard to their 
metallicities, in stark contrast to modern understanding 
of stellar structure. Furthermore, the Hipparcos Pleiades 
parallax derived by both groups (8.5+ 0.2 mas) was nearly 
1 mas larger than the values determined from radial- 
velocity gradients by Narayanan and Gould, and from 
Allegheny MAP parallaxes by Gatewood. 

The solution lay in recognizing the size of the small- 
angular-scale zero-point errors in Hipparcos’ parallaxes. 
Regardless of what method of analysis is used, if the 
local zero point at the position of the cluster differs from 
absolute zero, the cluster parallax will be wrong by that 
amount. Hipparcos’ zero point had been tested globally 
before the Catalogue was published, but no tests on small 
(~1°) angular scales were performed—such tests would 
require the cluster parallaxes themselves. van Leeuwen 
asserted that the local errors were only ~0.1 mas, as small 
as the global errors, but the Pleiades parallaxes cast doubt 
on this. 

Itis important to note that the Pleiades has the highest 
central density (17 stars deg~') of any cluster observed by 
Hipparcos, and thus its parallax may be most vulnerable 
to small-scale systematic errors. Indeed, Pinsonneault et 
al discovered that the stars in the central 1° of the Pleiades 
have x ~ 9 mas, but the outer stars have (7) = 7.5 mas. 
Most of the central Pleiads have high correlations (9 > 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parallaxes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


+0.34) between parallax and right ascension, identifying 
these stars as sharing many scans in common, and having 
little statistical independence. The central parallax is 
dominated by the local error, which does not ‘average out’ 
as it could over a larger area, such as the outer Pleiades or 
the Hyades. 

Narayanan and Gould found correlated parallax 
errors with amplitude up to 2 mas on scales up to 2° for 
both the Pleiades and the Hyades regions. The RMS size 
of the zero-point fluctuations is 0.5-0.6 mas. Pinsonneault 
et al suggested that the RMS size of Hipparcos’ small-scale 
zero-point errors over the whole sky could be up to 0.4 mas. 
Perryman pointed out that the parallax differences in 
the separate Hipparcos data reductions by the FAST and 
NDAC consortia reach 2 mas or more averaged over 2° x 2° 
fields near the ecliptic. Merging the FAST-NDAC results 
for the final Catalogue reduces the local systematics by a 
factor of 2, to ~1 mas. The Pleiades and Hyades results 
are fully consistent with the expected uncertainties of the 
Hipparcos Catalogue. 

When the small-angular-scale errors in the Hipparcos 
parallaxes are taken into account, the cluster parallaxes are 
quite consistent with MS-fitting distances. In hindsight, 
it is now apparent that Hipparcos, for all its precision, 
was not the ideal instrument to measure cluster distances. 
The accuracy of a cluster’s parallax is effectively limited 
to the level of the small-scale zero-point errors, no matter 
how many stars per cluster are observed. Future parallax 
surveys from space, based on Hipparcos’ scanning 
principle, may also be affected by small-scale errors, and 
might well use cluster parallaxes to test them. 


Future prospects 

The future of parallaxes lies largely in space. Ground- 
based observations will continue to have importance for 
low-luminosity stars, binaries and clusters. Most late 
M dwarfs, white dwarfs and brown dwarf candidates are 
too faint to be observed even by the ambitious satellite 
programs mentioned below. Binaries generally need to 
be followed for longer periods than the limited lifespans 
of satellites. Hipparcos’ experience points out the need 
for ground-based cluster parallaxes. At present, several 
observatories (Allegheny and US Naval in the north, Cerro 
Tololo and Mt Stromlo in the south) have active parallax 
programs. 

The success of Hipparcos in producing large numbers 
of precise parallaxes for bright stars has proved the 
potential of space astrometry and spawned several 
projects to reach well beyond the magnitude and precision 
limits of Hipparcos. 

The US National Aeronautics and Space Administra- 
tion (NASA) has selected the US Naval Observatory’s Full- 
sky Astrometric Mapping Explorer (FAME) for a 2.5-5 yr 
mission, scheduled for launch in 2004. With an operating 
principle much like Hipparcos (input catalogue, two fields 
of view, great circle scanning) but with an advanced 24- 
CCD-array detector, FAME will measure astrometry (po- 
sitions, proper motions, parallaxes) and four-color pho- 
tometry for nearly all stars to V = 15, a total of 4 x 107 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stars. Projected astrometric accuracy ranges from 0.05 mas 
at V = 9 to 0.50 mas at V = 15. Photometric accuracy will 
be at the milli-magnitude level. 

Several other space astrometry projects are in various 
stages of planning. DIVA (Double Interferometer for 
Visual Astrometry), proposed for launch in 2003, is a 
small Hipparcos-like scanning satellite which will provide 
astrometry and broad-band photometry to V = 15, and 
spectrophotometry to V = 13.5. Parallax accuracy at 
V = 9 will be 0.20 mas. 

GAIA is a satellite observatory proposed for the 
European Space Agency’s Horizon 2000+ plan, with the 
goal to build a catalogue of positions, distances, and three- 
dimensional space velocities for 10°? stars to V ~ 20. 
Parallax accuracy will be 0.004 mas for V = 10, 0.14 mas 
for V = 15 and 0.30 mas for V = 20. Photometry and 
radial velocities will be measured by separate instruments 
on the satellite. 

NASA's SPACE INTERFEROMETRY MISSION (SIM), proposed 
for launch in 2005, is a 10 m baseline optical Michelson 
interferometer, making pointed observations from an 
Earth-trailing solar orbit. Astrometric precision will be 
0.001 mas in relative measurements over small angles 
(<1°). Absolute parallax accuracy will be 0.004 mas. 

Microarcsecond (jas) astrometry from space will 
revolutionize distance measurements once again. To give 
just one example, the parallax of the Galactic center is 
120 pas. At that distance, an RR Lyrae star of My = +0.5 
could be measured to 10% precision in parallax. Provided 
that systematic errors can also be reduced to the jas level, 
the prospects for 21st-century Galactic astronomy seem 
virtually unlimited. 


Bibliography 

Binney J and Merrifield M 1998 Galactic Astronomy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

ESA 1997 The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues ESA SP-1200 
(Noordwijk: European Space Agency) 

Kovalevsky J 1998 First results from Hipparcos Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 36 99-129 

Reid I N 1999 The HR diagram and the galactic distance 
scale after Hipparcos Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 37 
191-237 

van Altena W F, Lee, J T and Hoffleit D 1995 The General 
Catalogue of Trigonometric Stellar Parallaxes 4th edn 
(Schenectady, NY: Davis) 

Vasilevskis S 1966 The accuracy of trigonometric paral- 
laxes of stars Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 45 57-76 


Robert B Hanson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parker, Eugene [‘Gene’] Newman (1927-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Parker, Eugene [‘Gene’] Newman 
(1927-) 


American solar-terrestrial physicist, Parker worked at the 
University of Chicago, studying the solar wind and the 
effects of magnetic fields in the heliosphere. At first 
this work was through the study of the effect of the 
Sun on comet tails, but more recently through satellite 
measurements in situ he has developed understanding of 
the solar corona, the solar wind, the magnetic fields of both 
Earth and Sun, and their interactions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parkes Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Parkes Observatory 


Arguably one of the world’s great and most productive 
research instruments, the 64 m fully steerable paraboloid, 
Parkes Radio Telescope, is located in rural New South 
Wales, 400 km west of Sydney, Australia. 

Commissioned in 1961 to further the pioneering 
research of the CSIRO Division of Radiophysics, continual 
upgrades to its surface, receivers and correlators have kept 
it at the forefront of radio astronomy. 

Operated as part of the AUSTRALIA TELESCOPE NATIONAL 
FACILITY, much of its time is allocated to international 
pulsar, galaxy and Very Long Baseline Interferometry 
(VLBI) programs, with occasional support for JPL 
planetary missions. The H I Parkes All-Sky Survey for 
galaxies is a current major project. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.parkes.atnf.csiro.au. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parsec (pc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Parsec (pc) 


A unit of distance commonly used by astronomers. It is 
the distance at which a star would have an annual parallax 
of exactly one second of arc; from this distance, the Earth’s 
orbit would have an apparent radius of one second of arc. 
One parsec is equivalent to 3.26 light-years (3.09 x 10° km) 
or 206 265 astronomical units. 

The distance of a star expressed in parsecs = 
1/annual parallax (in seconds of arc); thus a star whose 
annual parallax is 0.1 seconds of arc lies at a distance of 
1/0.1 = 10 parsecs. For example, the nearest triple-star 
system, Alpha Centauri, has a parallax of 0.753 seconds of 
arc; hence, its distance from the Sun and the Earth is 1.33 
parsec. 

Multiples of this unit are kiloparsecs (kpc) = 1000 
parsecs and megaparsec (Mpc) = 1000000 parsecs. In our 
Galaxy distances to remote stars are measured in terms of 
kiloparsecs. The Sun is at a distance of 8.5 kiloparsecs 
from the center of the Galaxy. When dealing with other 
galaxies or clusters of galaxies, the convenient unit is 
the megaparsec. The distance to the Andromeda Galaxy 
(M31) is about 0.7 megaparsecs. Remoter galaxies and 
quasars have distances in the order of 3000 megaparsecs, 
or 9000 000 000 to 10 000 000 000 light-years. 


See also: parallaxes, second of arc. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Parsons, Charles (1854-1931) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Parsons, Charles (1854—1931) 


Youngest son of the third Earl of Rosse, brother to the 
fourth. Inventor of the steam turbine. Interested in 
telescope building through his father’s activities with the 
Birr telescope, took over the machine engineering business 
of THOMAS and HOWARD GRUBB in 1925, and formed Sir 
Howard Grubb-Parsons Ltd in Newcastle, which made 
large telescopes starting with the 74 in reflector for the 
David Dunlap Observatory in Toronto. The firm took over 
Cooke, TROUGHTON and Simms Ltd. The firm was wound 
up after completing the 4.2 m William Herschel Telescope 
on La Palma in 1985. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Acceleration in Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Particle Acceleration in Magnetic 
Fields 


Tenuous PLASMAS in astrophysical settings often contain 
particle populations which are not in thermodynamic 
equilibrium. Such non-thermal populations frequently 
possess power-law distributions. They are either observed 
directly or inferred from radiative properties. In low- 
density astrophysical plasmas the particles do not scatter 
against other particles, but scatter collisionlessly against 
magnetic field turbulence (see also PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS; 
ASTROPHYSICAL BOUNDS ON PARTICLE PROPERTIES). Thus the 
particles are forced to equilibrate with the collective 
body of particles held together by the nearly frozen- 
in magnetic field. When the scattering centers, i.e. 
magnetic field turbulence, are moving toward each other, 
charged particles trapped in between are accelerated 
like tennis balls bouncing off two approaching walls. 
This is the basic concept of magnetic field acceleration 
first proposed by FERMI in 1949. Two very distinct 
cases can be separated: in the first case scattering 
is due to the magnetic field turbulence upstream and 
downstream of fast magnetosonic shocks, i.e. shocks 
which have an upstream plasma velocity larger than the 
fast magnetosonic velocity. The process of acceleration of 
particles by scattering back and forth across a shock in the 
presence of magnetic turbulence in the background plasma 
is called first-order Fermi acceleration or the diffusive 
acceleration mechanism. Since the phase velocity of the 
waves is small in comparison with the upstream flow 
speed the scattering centers move essentially with the flow, 
and a particle scattered back and forth across the shock 
senses the difference in the upstream and downstream 
flow speeds. In the second case the scattering centers 
are low-frequency plasma waves traveling in the plasma 
frame in opposite directions. In the plasma frame, a 
particle makes either a head-on or an overtaking collision 
with a scattering center, leading to either energy gain 
or energy loss respectively. Due to the large relative 
velocity between particle and wave the frequency of head- 
on collisions is greater than the frequency of trailing 
collisions, which leads to a net energy gain. This 
is the second-order Fermi acceleration process. Other 
acceleration mechanisms relay on the possibility of strong 
magnetic field-aligned electrostatic potential drops. 


Diffusive shock acceleration 
The transport of energetic particles in fluctuating magnetic 
fields is effectively described by the equation 


AVG VA) -V4Ve)-VFFV- VES 


ot 
1a a 
Tes cas Sac Gaae + Q (1) 


where f(r, p, t) is the particle omnidirectional distribution 
function, p = myv is momentum magnitude, V(r, f) is 
the bulk velocity of the background plasma and Q(r, p, t) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is a source term (to describe for example ion injection 
at a shock). The control of the magnetic field on the 
spatial transport and transport in momentum space is 
described by the symmetric part of the spatial diffusion 
tensor, x, the drift velocity, Vp, and the diffusion coefficient 
in momentum space, (D,,). Equation (1) is based on the 
assumption that v >> V and the spatial scale length, L, 
is sufficiently larger than the scattering mean-free path. 
The first term on the right-hand side describes spatial 
diffusion of the particles. The second term describes 
the effect of spatial convection and energetic particle 
drift, and the third term is usually called the adiabatic 
deceleration term. This term is a momentum convection 
term and describes adiabatic deceleration as well as first- 
order Fermi acceleration in the case of converging bulk 
flow as, for instance, at a shock where V- V > 0. The drift 
term Vp-V f describes transport due to curvature, gradient 
and magnetization drifts in the ‘average’ (usually viewed 
as an ensemble average) magnetic field. The diffusion 
tensor is often assumed to be axisymmetric about the 
unit vector b = B/B and therefore has the form k = 
K 1 6;; + (ky — K,)b;b; where 6;; is the Kronecker symbol. x, 
(«,) describes spatial diffusion parallel (perpendicular) to 
b due to magnetic field fluctuations. The parallel diffusion 
coefficient «, and the diffusion coefficient in momentum 
space (D,,,) are determined by pitch angle averages 


2 pl ery: 
v (1 — p*) (2) 


i D;, 
(Dpp) = al du Dyp — —t (3) 
Pr 2s PD 


where Diy, Dpp, and D,, are the three Fokker—Planck 
coefficients, and yz is the cosine of the pitch angle a, 
pL = cosa = vj /v (vy, = velocity parallel to the magnetic 
field). 

Associated with the solution to the distribution 
function f is a streaming flux S 


and 


1 0 
$= —K\Vf —5V0e (4) 


and an associated anisotropy magnitude 6 = 3|S|/(vf). 
In the case of a planar shock with the shock at x = 0 
the steady-state solution to equation (1) can be obtained 
by solving it in the upstream and downstream regions 
and relating the solutions across the shock by the jump 
condition that the streaming flux S is continuous. With 
x in the direction of the shock normal the jump condition 
reads 


0 (5) 


The sub- and superscripts 1 and 2 denote upstream and 
downstream states, Q is that part of the source which is 
concentrated at the shock and x,,, the diffusion coefficient 
normal to the shock surface, is given by the angle © 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Acceleration in Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


between the magnetic field and the x direction as kK,., = 
ky Cos? © + x, sin? ©. The spectrum produced at a planar 
shock is a power-law spectrum in momentum, determined 
only by the shock compression ratio, R = V;/V2 = p2/p1, 
where p is the density: 


f(y) x pore), (6) 


This spectrum falls off upstream with e-folding distance 
L = kxx/Vi. The important quantity that determines the 
time scale for acceleration is the diffusion coefficient in 
the normal direction. In the case of quasi-parallel shocks 
this is the diffusion coefficient parallel to the magnetic 
field, whereas in the case of quasi-perpendicular shocks 
cross-field diffusion eventually determines the normal 
diffusion coefficient. From a time-dependent solution 
to equation (1) it can be shown that the steady state is 
reached in a characteristic time t * 4k,,/V?. Other linear 
modifications arise due to the fact that shocks are not 
necessarily planar, i.e. the radius of curvature of the shock 
front is no longer small compared with the diffusion length 
scale L = k,,/Vi. This is the case for blast waves from a 
point explosion or for shocks terminating stellar winds. 

The convection-diffusion equation (1) can be gener- 
alized to include, in addition to the term that describes 
energy changes due to the divergence of the flow, a term 
that describes energy changes due to a shear in the flow. 
In the case when the plasma velocity V varies over spatial 
scales that are large compared with the scattering mean 
free path, this term has the form 


T a 0 
ap (Ge) ” 


with I’ the viscous momentum transfer and t the scattering 
time. I is determined by the velocity shear 0V;/dV;. 
For a simple shear flow V = V,(x)e, the coefficient of 
momentum transfer reduces to l = (dV,/dx)?/15. The 
transfer of energy to the energetic particles leads in turn 
to a viscosity of the ambient plasma. 


The spatial diffusion coefficients 
The diffusion—-convection equation (1) is derived by pitch- 
angle averaging of a Fokker—Planck equation. The Fokker-— 
Planck equation is obtained by applying the quasilinear 
approximation to the behavior of energetic particles in a 
uniform magnetic field with superposed small-amplitude 
plasma turbulence. The effect of the turbulence is 
determined by calculating first-order corrections to the 
particle’s orbit in the uniform magnetic field and ensemble 
averaging over the statistical properties of the plasma 
turbulence. The ensemble-averaged first-order particle 
correction to the equation of motion in momentum and 
pitch angle space determines the three Fokker—Planck 
coefficients D)», Dp and D,,. The particles interact 
resonantly with the magnetic field turbulence, i.e. a 
particle is scattered only if the Doppler shifted wave 
frequency equals the particle’s gyrofrequency Q times an 
integer n: 

o— kyvy = nQ (8) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where vj = vs and k, are the parallel velocity 
component and the parallel wavenumber respectively. 
The gyrofrequency is given by Q = qB/mcy, where 
q = charge, m = mass and y is the relativistic factor 
of the particle. The resulting Fokker—Planck coefficients 
depend strongly on the type of turbulence present. Most 
analytical investigations have been done for the so-called 
slab model, where the plasma turbulence is assumed to 
consist of waves propagating parallel to the magnetic 
field. Furthermore, these waves are usually assumed 
to be Alfvén waves. The dispersion relation then reads 
w = kj Va, with V4 the Alfvén speed. In this case quasi- 
linear theory yields the pitch-angle diffusion coefficient 


2 
mq Q 
Duy. = —>—— P| — ]. 9 
Im2c2| |v & 
P(k) is the wave power at wavenumber k: 


P(k) = =| ds (5.B(so) -6B(sy +s))e*. — (10) 
IT 


If P « k~ this gives for the spatial diffusion coefficient 
in the non-relativistic regime an energy dependence x, « 
ES? Tf fast magnetosonic waves are present equation 
(9) has to be changed accordingly. Very low frequency fast 
magnetosonic waves have a dispersion relation given by 
w =kV4. For oblique propagation the wave magnetic field 
has both a compressive (along b) and a linearly polarized 
transverse component. Unlike the case of slab turbulence, 
the compressive component of oblique fast-mode waves 
allows energetic particles to resonate with the waves 
also through the n = 0 (Landau) resonance. However, 
this resonance is unimportant for the diffusion coefficient 
but, as will be shown below, is the dominant factor for 
the momentum diffusion coefficient. Summarizing, in 
order to determine the parallel spatial diffusion coefficient 
the following parameters have to be known: the total 
intensities in the Alfvén and fast-mode waves, the power- 
law shape, the distribution of the fast mode wave power 
in k space and the minimum cut-off frequency of the wave 
power. Depending on these parameters, the energy and 
mass/charge dependence of the parallel spatial diffusion 
coefficient may vary considerably. 

Resonant scattering which causes pitch angle diffu- 
sion causes particles to shift the field line about which 
they gyrate and thus contributes to «. In addition, a field 
line randomly walks about the average field B, which 
causes perpendicular transport of a particle that follows 
the field line. There is no generally accepted theory for 
k,. For large-amplitude fluctuations it is often assumed 
that «, ~ «,. Another model assumes that scattering of 
particles by the magnetic field turbulence occurs as in 
hard sphere scattering. With a parallel scattering time 
t = 3x,/v", the cross-field diffusion coefficient is given 
in this case by 

1 
KL = Tome 
The contribution to «, from field line random walk is 
proportional to the power P(0) of the magnetic field at 
zero wavenumber. 


(11) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Acceleration in Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nonlinear modifications to shock acceleration 

In general, the reaction of the shock-accelerated particles 
on the background plasma cannot be ignored. Two 
such kinds of reaction have to be considered. The 
streaming of the shock accelerated particles through the 
upstream plasma will excite waves through an ion/ion 
beam instability. This then leads to enhanced scattering 
with the particles themselves providing the scattering 
centers needed for diffusive shock acceleration. A more 
serious modification is concerned with the fact that for a 
power-law downstream distribution of energetic particles 
the pressure of these particles diverges for strong shocks 
and the reaction on the flow must be taken into account. 
Wave generation by the streaming of energetic particles 
can be dealt with in the framework of quasilinear theory. 
The diffusion—convection equation is supplemented by 
an equation for the wave energy density Ew. The time 
dependence dEw/dt is given by the convection of the 
waves with the flow and the wave growth rate yy, which 
is proportional to particle streaming. The spatial diffusion 
coefficient in the diffusion—convection equation according 
to quasilinear theory is proportional to Ey’. These two 
equations simultaneously determine f and Ey. 

The problem of the reaction of the energetic particle 
pressure on the flow is essentially one in fluid dynamics. 
The background plasma is usually described by the 
Euler equations (conservation of mass flux, momentum 
flux and energy flux), and the reaction of the energetic 
particles is incorporated by an additional pressure term 
in the momentum equation due to energetic particles. 
An equation for the energetic particle pressure P, = 
(4/3) [ dpp®vf (p) can be obtained by taking a suitable 
moment of the diffusion—convection equation with respect 
to momentum p. In practice, however, two supplemental 
assumptions are introduced instead. These are that the 
pressure and the energy flux of energetic particles are both 
continuous across the shock transition: 


[Pb = leV P: — KP./dx]3 = 0 (12) 


where y, is the ratio of specific heats for the energetic 
particles (which is 4/3 for relativistic, and 5/3 for non- 
relativistic particles). « is the suitable momentum 
averaged spatial diffusion coefficient. For low Mach 
number shocks the relativistic particle pressure has the 
effect of decreasing the effective specific heat ratio of the 
gas so that the shock compression ratio is not limited to 
four, but can increase up to seven. For stronger shocks 
the entire transition itself can be mediated by the presence 
of the energetic particles. Besides this two-fluid approach 
the mediation of shocks by energetic particles has been 
investigated through Monte Carlo simulations. 


The momentum diffusion coefficient and 
second-order Fermi acceleration 

The momentum diffusion coefficient can be computed 
from the Fokker—Planck coefficients according to equation 
(3). In the case of equal intensity of forward and backward 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


traveling waves (vanishing cross helicity) equation (3) 
reduces to the much simpler equation 


1 
(Dpp) =) Dpp du. (13) 


In the case of slab-Alfvén waves D,, has only a 
contribution De from gyroresonance: the particles gain or 
lose speed when they are resonantly pitch-angle scattered. 
The gain or loss in speed is equal to the Alfvén speed. The 
Fokker—Planck coefficient D,,, is additive; if magnetosonic 
turbulence is present, additional terms D/, and D&, have 
to be added to D*,. Here D¥, is the Fokker-Planck 
coefficient due to gyroresonant interaction (integer n in 
equation (8)), and Db» is the Fokker—Planck coefficient 
for the n = 0 resonance, ie. @ — kv; = 0. The latter 
condition means that interaction between the wave and 
the particle occurs when the particle is moving at about 
the parallel wave phase speed. This interaction is called 
transit-time damping and is due to the magnetic mirror 
force in the wave compressions. Introducing the parallel 
wavelength 4, = 27/k, and the wave period T = 27/w, 
the resonance condition reads A\/v) = T. This implies that 
a particle will interact with the wave when the particle 
transit time across the wave compression is about equal 
to the wave period. Transit-time damping can only occur 
for particles with a velocity exceeding the Alfvén velocity. 
In the case of a mixture of isotropically distributed fast 
magnetosonic turbulence and slab Alfvén waves of similar 
power, the contribution from the gyroresonances due 
to both Alfvén waves and magnetosonic waves to the 
Fokker—Planck coefficient D,, is less than the contribution 
from the n = 0 resonance of the magnetosonic waves. If 
fast magnetosonic turbulence is present, energetic particle 
acceleration is mainly due to transit-time damping. 


Other acceleration mechanisms 
In addition to the above mechanisms of accelerating parti- 
cles by magnetic waves and shocks, collisionless plasmas 
(See COLLISIONLESS PROCESSES IN ASTROPHYSICAL PLASMAS) are Ca- 
pable of dumping energy into small groups of particles 
by means of generating strong field-aligned electric po- 
tential drops, so-called electrostatic double layers. Large- 
scale potential drops can be produced by the action of 
the magnetic mirror force Fj,, = —MV\ B(s) on the par- 
ticle distributions in a magnetic trapping configuration 
(e.g. the dipole magnetic field of a neutron star). Here 
M = P.,/NB is the magnetic moment of the particles of 
mass m, perpendicular pressure P., and density N, and 
s is the coordinate along b. Since ions and electrons mir- 
ror on the field line at different locations s, a field-aligned 
electric potential is produced that may accelerate particles. 
Other important ways of producing strong parallel 
quasistatic electric fields require the presence of large- 
amplitude microturbulence which backscatters the elec- 
trons causing anomalous collisions, friction and ohmic 
electric fields. The energy for excitation of microturbu- 
lence is taken either from electric currents flowing along 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Acceleration in Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


or perpendicular to the magnetic field, density or temper- 
ature gradients, or from electron beams. Once the cur- 
rent density |j| > j. = eN|vp| exceeds a critical thresh- 
old j. (here e is electron charge, N density and vp the 
current-drift speed), high-frequency electric fluctuations 
near some typical plasma resonance frequencies are driven 
unstable until they grow to large amplitudes. For very 
strong currents up > V/kgT./2m. exceeding the electron 
thermal velocity, this frequency is the Buneman frequency 
Wg = 0.03Mp¢, with we the plasma frequency. At weaker 
currents vp > Cig, With cj, the ion sound speed, the ion 
acoustic wave w = kcig < Wy e/43 is excited. Electron 
beams generate Langmuir waves near w = w,,. and Bern- 
stein waves near w = nQ, (n = 1,2,... and Q, = eB/m, 
the electron cyclotron frequency). They also drive elec- 
tron acoustic waves at frequencies between the ion and 
electron plasma frequencies. Gradients and transverse 
currents excite waves near the lower-hybrid frequency 
@ = J/Q;Q. = 43Q,. In the region of such turbulence 
(extension L along b) the total resulting potential drop can 
be estimated from 


eNVan 


U = jy LNan © Lup. (14) 


pe 
Here vay, is the anomalous collision frequency. The 
maximum available energy to which an electron may be 
lifted is just Kmax = eU. Fora monochromatic electron flux 
F = Nacvo passing the potential drop U at speed vp the 
number of electrons that can be accelerated is NV = Fu g/L. 
This yields for the energy that can actually be reached the 
expression 
eNVan Up L? 


Kace © : 
wo F Vo 


(15) 


When the amplitude of the microturbulence reaches 
large values, typically of the order of Eyw/NkgT ~ 107+, 
the quasilinear effects causing anomalous resistivities are 
superceded by nonlinear effects. Particles become trapped 
in the wave potential and are accelerated and released 
in energetic bunches. These are effects well known 
from nonlinear processes encountered in chaos theory. 
In addition the interaction between the wave and the 
various groups of particles leads to the emergence of 
small-scale structures of the order of the Debye length, 
electron skin depth and particle gyroradii which trap 
the waves locally. Interaction of particles with these so- 
called solitons, solitary waves, cavitons, phase space holes 
or BGK modes causes microscopic stationary potential 
drops to develop across the solitary structures. Because in 
well developed turbulence myriads of such microscopic 
drops exist along and transverse to a field line their total 
potential drop may add up to very large values. Any 
small groups of particles falling across these potentials will 
then experience transit time acceleration in the interaction 
with the potential and the turbulence and will damp the 
turbulence. Some of them may thereby reach very high 
energies. Theory of this kind of particle acceleration 
is still under development and relies heavily on the 
availability of realistic numerical simulation models in 
many dimensions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 
Excellent reviews on diffusive shock acceleration are: 


Drury LO’C 1983 An introduction to the theory of diffusive 
shock acceleration of energetic particles in tenuous 
plasmas Rep. Prog. Phys. 46 973-1027 

Forman M A and Webb G M 1985 Acceleration of energetic 
particles Collisionless Shocks in the Heliosphere: A 
Tutorial Review ed R G Stone and B T Tsurutani 
(Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union) 
pp 91-114 

Jones F Cand Ellison DC 1991 The plasma physics of shock 
acceleration Space Sci. Rev. 58 259-346 


The original work on the diffusion-convection equation 
and on quasilinear theory is found in: 


Parker E N 1965 The passage of energetic particles through 
interplanetary space Planet. Space Sci. 13 9-49 

Jokipii J R 1966 Cosmic ray propagation—1. Charged 
particles in a random magnetic field Astrophys. J. 146 
480-7 


Acceleration due to velocity shear has been investigated 
in: 


Earl J A, Jokipii J R and Morfill G 1988 Cosmic ray viscosity 
Astrophys. J. 331 L91-L94 


A recent article which deals with momentum diffusion in 
magnetosonic turbulence is: 


Schlickeiser R and Miller J A 1998 Quasi-linear theory of 
cosmic ray transport and acceleration: the role of 
oblique magnetohydrodynamic waves and transit- 
time damping Astrophys. J. 492 352-78 


Manfred Scholer and Rudolf A Treumann 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Particle Astrophysics 


Particle astrophysics (or, equivalently, astro-particle 
physics), as the name implies, is an area of research which 
lies at the cross-roads of high-energy particle physics 
and astrophysics. Because most of the interest in the 
field is focused on high-energy phenomena, COSMOLOGY, 
particularly the early universe, is at the core of research 
activity. 

The related area of nuclear astrophysics was 
developed as a means to understand the mechanism 
of solar energy production and stellar evolution. For 
example, nuclear processes are fundamental to our 
understanding of element production in stars. Particle 
astrophysics was developed in the 1970s and one could 
perhaps identify three problems that sparked the field. 
The first was the recognition that NEUTRINOS, if massive, 
could have a profound effect on the overall mass density 
of the universe. In the STANDARD MODEL OF PARTICLE PHYSICS, 
neutrinos are massless. The theory was constructed this 
way to account for the lack of any experimental evidence 
for a neutrino mass. As such, the theory was quite 
economical, as it predicted the minimum number of new 
undetected particles. By expanding the theory, neutrino 
masses can be accommodated, and if present, even if very 
slight in comparison with any known massive particle, 
would come to dominate the dynamics of the universe. 

Another major motivating force in the development 
of particle astrophysics was the realization that theories 
which unify three of the fundamental forces in nature 
(electromagnetism, and the weak and strong nuclear 
forces), commonly called GRAND UNIFIED THEORIES or GUTs, 
possessed the ingredients necessary to solve a long- 
standing problem in cosmology relating to the asymmetry 
of MATTER Versus ANTIMATTER. As such, these two problems 
made it clear that any complete description of our evolving 
universe would hinge on our understanding of the 
fundamental processes in nature, namely particle physics. 

There are three known types or flavors of neutrinos. 
In the early universe, even massless neutrinos played a 
significant role in the dynamics of the rapidly expanding 
SPACE-TIME. If more than the three known neutrinos were 
present, the increased energy density would lead to an 
increase in the expansion rate and would alter the big bang 
NUCLEOSYNTHESIS (BBN) predictions of the light element 
abundances (of D, *He, “He and Li). The concordance of 
these predictions with the observational determination of 
the abundances places a strong constraint on the expansion 
rate at the time of BBN (about 2 minutes after the big 
bang) and hence on the particle content of the universe 
at that time. The establishment of a limit on the number of 
neutrino flavors also played a key role in the development 
of the particle-astrophysics connection. The limit on 
the number of neutrino flavors has been generalized to 
constraints on a multitude of particle properties including 
limits on particle masses and lifetimes, and even limits on 
the variation of the fundamental constants of nature. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


As the field developed, particle astrophysics has 
grown to include a wide variety of topics beyond neutrino 
masses and the matter asymmetry. The cosmological 
significance of stable particle masses provided an 
alternative means of solving the long-standing problem of 
DARK MATTER. Indeed, the theoretical constraints on theories 
with dark matter candidates and the experimental effort 
towards the detection of these candidates is one of the 
major thrusts in particle astrophysics today. 

The study of grand unification in a cosmological 
context has also spread and diversified the domain of 
particle astrophysics. In addition to its potential for 
resolving the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry, 
grand unified theories predict the existence of very 
massive magnetic monopoles. Like electrons which have 
a unit of electric charge, these particles would carry a 
single unit of magnetic charge. However, the predicted 
number of these cosmological relics is clearly ruled out by 
experiment. Attempts at solving the monopole problem 
led to one of the major changes in what is referred to as 
the standard COsMOLOGICALMODEL by introducing the notion 
of INFLATION, a period of extremely rapid expansion in the 
very early universe. 

As a symmetry of nature, grand unification is 
not realized at the energies available to laboratory 
experiments. The breakdown of the symmetry and its 
effects (including the production of magnetic monopoles) 
has been an active area of research. Indeed, inflation 
was first thought of as a direct result of this symmetry 
breakdown. Although the early models of inflation were 
not successful, the study of other exotic phenomena, such 
as the production of topological defects which include 
cosmic strings, domain walls and textures, thrived. As 
theories of unification were pushed to include gravity, 
even the number of spatial dimensions was no longer held 
sacred. In STRING THEORY, the universe is a ten-dimensional 
space-time and in extensions of string theory, called M- 
theory, the universe is eleven-dimensional. 

Although the description of all phenomena consid- 
ered to fall within the domain of particle astrophysics is 
clearly beyond the scope of this article, probing a few of 
the topics described above will serve to define the nature 
of the field. 

As noted above, although the standard model 
of electroweak interactions precludes the presence of 
neutrino masses, simple extensions of the theory can 
easily account for such masses. In the standard model, 
neutrinos and electrons form a weak left-handed doublet 
of the SU(2)_ gauge group. This means that there are 
gauge interactions, mediated by a spin-1 particle, which 
are capable of interconverting (left-handed) electrons and 
neutrinos. In addition, the theory includes an SU(2), 
singlet - a right-handed electron. Through its interaction 
with the Higgs boson, the left- and right-handed electrons 
mix to form a single, massive state. By adding a right- 
handed neutrino to the model, a neutrino mass can also 
be generated. However, we know experimentally that 
neutrino masses must be very small. To obtain a small 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mass, it is common to introduce a right-handed neutrino 
with a very large so-called Majorana (right-right) mass, 
M, in addition to the usual (left-right) Dirac mass, mp. 
Because of the left-right mixing, the physical neutrinos 
have masses which are different from the input masses, 
M and mp. To determine the physical masses one can 
write down a simple ‘mass matrix’ for neutrinos, which in 
a (VL, Vr) basis can be of the form 


Cae (a) 
Diagonalization of this matrix determines the physical 
neutrino masses, giving one massive state v, ~ ve with 
mass m,, ~ M and a lighter state, ». ~ vz + O(mp/M)vr 
with mass m,, < m/M. For M > mp, v1 can be made 
acceptably light. If all three flavors of neutrinos received 
mass in this way, the light states could mix (quantum 
mechanically) or oscillate. 

Neutrino oscillations occur when the physical masses 
and input masses are not identical as described above. 
For example, nuclear processes in the Sun may produce 
an electron neutrino which if massive may not be a 
propagating state. Rather than a 1%, it is one of the 
three light states v; which travels to Earth from the Sun. 
But v; contains some mixture of the three flavors of 
neutrinos ve, v, and v;. Depending on the degree of 
mixing, the distance between production and detection, 
and the energy of the neutrino, a v, or v, may be detected 
instead of v.. Neutrino experiments designed to detect 
ves from the Sun have for decades recorded a deficit in 
the flux of electron neutrinos from the Sun. A similar 
problem is seen when detecting neutrinos produced in 
cosmic-ray showers in the atmosphere (See COSMIC RAYS: 
EXTENSIVE AIR SHOWERS). In a cosmic-ray collision with a 
nucleus in the atmosphere, many pions are produced. 
Pions decay primarily into muons which subsequently 
decay to electrons. Simple counting predicts that the 
ratio of muon to electron neutrinos is 2:1. However, 
observations indicate that this ratio is only about 60% 
of what is expected. Again, the explanation could be 
neutrino oscillations. In fact, it is widely believed that 
these experiments provide the first positive indication of 
a neutrino mass. Indeed, neutrino astrophysics is one of 
the strongest and most experimentally based components 
of particle astrophysics. 

A light neutrino (with mostly left-handed interac- 
tions) would have been produced cosmologically and re- 
mained in equilibrium down to a temperature of about 
3 MeV (the temperature scale at which the rate of weak 
interactions falls below the expansion rate of the uni- 
verse). The relic number density of neutrinos is related 
to the neutrino temperature, n, ~ T?, and the mass den- 
sity of relic neutrinos is simply p, = m,n,. The neu- 
trino temperature is predicted to be somewhat below the 
photon or microwave background temperature due to the 
annihilation of electron-positron pairs shortly after neu- 
trino decoupling, T, = (4/11)'/°T,. Therefore the total 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mass density in neutrinos can be compared with the crit- 
ical density necessary to close the universe (o, = 1.05 x 
10*h? eV cm™? where h is the scaled Hubble parameter, 
h = H/(100 km Mpc! s~') ) and depends on the mass of 
the neutrino. The fraction of critical density in neutrinos 
is 

Qy = py/pc = 0.011m,(eV)h™. (2) 
The cosmological limit of Qh? < 0.3 (assuming that the 
age of the universe is greater than 12 Gyr) then places a 
constraint on the mass of the neutrino. In fact, it places a 
limit on the sum of all light neutrino masses 


yim, < 28eV. (3) 


The tiny mass scale should be compared with the electron 
mass me ~ 0.511 MeV, and the proton m, ~ 938 MeV. 

The connection between particle astrophysics and 
dark matter extends far beyond the case of light neutrinos. 
Very massive neutrinos (in the GeV mass range) were 
also considered as dark matter candidates. Neutrino 
interactions with matter (e.g. electrons) drop out of 
equilibrium when the average energy in the radiation 
background is about 3 MeV. At lower energies, the number 
densities and cross sections of neutrinos are too small 
to ensure scatterings with electrons in an expanding 
and cooling universe. Therefore, the relic density of 
much heavier neutrinos is determined by annihilations 
of v and v pairs. At temperature scales below the 
neutrino mass (kT ~ m,c* or m, in units where c = 1), 
neutrino annihilation is energetically preferred to neutrino 
production, and the density of neutrinos decreases. When 
the density becomes very low, the annihilations also 
stop (or freeze-out) and the relic density (relative to 
photons) becomes fixed. Because the efficiency of the 
neutrino annihilation scales with the neutrino mass, the 
cosmological limit Qh? < 0.3, places a lower bound on the 
mass of a heavy neutrino of about 4-7 GeV. 

Experimental results based on the production of Z 
gauge bosons at CERN and SLAC have shown that there 
are only three neutrinos (v,., v, and v,) with a mass less 
than mz. Therefore, the mass of a possible fourth heavy 
neutrino must exceed mz/2 ~ 45 GeV. However, for such 
a heavy neutrino, the relic density is far too small for it 
to constitute a significant amount of dark matter, thereby 
excluding a heavy (m, > 1 MeV) neutrino as dark matter. 

The study of heavy neutrinos was nonetheless very 
fruitful, as many of the same relic density calculations 
also apply to other heavy dark matter candidates. For 
example, the well studied extension of the standard 
model of electroweak and strong interactions, known 
aS SUPERSYMMETRY, predicts the existence of a new stable 
massive particle, the neutralino, which could account for 
the dark matter of the universe. Supersymmetry is a 
symmetry which relates particles of different spin. For 
example, all particles of spin-1, like the photon, must have 
a fermionic partner of spin-1/2 (for the photon, the partner 
is called the photino). For fermions, like the electron, a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spin-0 partner must exist (in this case, called the selectron). 
Supersymmetry predicts new interactions in addition to 
new particle types. In fact, some of these interactions 
could be responsible for the extremely rapid decay of 
the proton, which is clearly not observed. Therefore a 
new quantum number called R-parity is assigned to all 
particles. R-parity is related to baryon number, lepton 
number (see below for a description of these) and spin. As 
such, all observed particles are assigned an R-parity of +1, 
and all of the supersymmetric partners have R-parity —1. 
The lightest supersymmetric particle (commonly referred 
to as the LSP) is therefore stable as there are no lighter 
R = —1 particles to decay into. Supersymmetry is a 
theory which is currently under intensive experimental 
and theoretical investigation in both particle physics and 
particle astrophysics. Major efforts are under way to 
specifically search for the dark matter candidate that is 
predicted by supersymmetric theories and as such is a 
main focus in particle astrophysics today. 

Indeed, the methods for experimental searches 
for dark matter can be placed into three categories: 
(a) accelerator searches, (b) indirect and (c) direct searches. 
Accelerator searches for dark matter are in principle the 
most direct, since one can hope to produce and detect 
the dark matter particle (or an associated particle) and 
establish its identity. However, these searches are typically 
designed to search for a very specific candidate with 
theoretically predicted interactions. The so-called direct 
and indirect dark matter searches are more general and 
do not depend on the specific properties of the candidate. 
Indirect dark matter searches typically key on some other 
particle rather than the dark matter candidate itself. 
Weakly interacting dark matter in our Galaxy (and solar 
system) continuously flows through the Sun and the Earth. 
For example, as a dark matter particle passes through the 
Sun, it will occasionally scatter and lose enough energy 
to become trapped in the Sun. As the number of these 
particles builds up, they begin to annihilate in the Sun 
and provide a source for high-energy neutrinos. Neutrino 
detectors (the same ones as used to measure neutrino 
oscillations) search for a flux of high energy neutrinos 
from the core of the Sun as well as the center of the Earth. 
Direct searches are based on laboratory detectors which 
are designed to detect the passage of dark matter particles. 
These are typically ultra-cold detectors which attempt to 
measure slight changes in the temperature of the detector 
induced by the interaction of the dark matter candidate 
and the material in the detector. 

As can be inferred from the discussion above, the 
number of (light) neutrino flavors has been limited to 
three by experiment. However, particle astrophysics had 
provided a limit to this quantity (N,, < 4) years prior to the 
accelerator experimental results. Next to the prediction 
and discovery of the the 3 K microwave background, 
the prediction of the light element abundances of D, 
3He, *He and ’Li is the most important test of big bang 
cosmology. The production of the light elements, and 
in particular *He, depends on a competition between the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


weak interaction rates which interconvert neutrons and 
protons and the rate of expansion of the universe. Because 
the standard models of cosmology, nucleosynthesis and 
particle physics (with three neutrino flavors) are so 
successful, most deviations from any of the standard 
models spoil the agreement between the theoretical 
predictions of the light element abundances and their 
observational determinations. Hence, BBN can limit the 
number of neutrino flavors. Other departures from the 
standard electroweak theory can also be constrained by 
BBN. 

Nuclear processes in the early universe are very 
sensitive to the rate at which the universe expands and 
cools. The expansion rate of the universe (quantified by the 
Hubble parameter) is determined by the energy density 
of the universe. At early times (when curvature and 
the cosmological constant can be neglected) the Hubble 
expansion rate is given by 


82 G 
H = ‘p 


5 (4) 


where the energy density in radiation is given in terms 
of the black body temperature and the total number of 
relativistic particle species present, p ~ N T*. In the 
standard model, at the time of nucleosynthesis (kT ~ 
1MeV), N = 2+5+2N,, corresponding to the contributions 
of photons, electrons and neutrinos respectively. For 
N, = 3, big bang nucleosynthesis predicts the correct 
abundances of the light elements. Due to the uncertainties 
in the observational abundances of the light elements, the 
limit from nucleosynthesis is ~4, that is, the agreement 
between theory and observation becomes unacceptable 
when N,, exceeds 4. 

The limit to N, has proven to be one of the most 
valuable in the particle astrophysics connection. The limit 
in fact can be extended to any new particle degree of 
freedom present in the early universe at the time of big 
bang nucleosynthesis. Therefore, many new extensions of 
the standard model of particle physics can be, and have 
been, constrained by cosmology. 

Akey factor in the growth of particle astrophysics was 
the development of a wide class of constraints on theories 
of particle physics from cosmology and astrophysics. 
In addition to the BBN limits described above, our 
understanding of stellar processes has also provided 
valuable constraints. For example, certain theories predict 
new, massless or nearly massless particles. If these 
particles could be produced in the Sun, they would affect 
the rate of energy production and upset the agreement 
between observations and standard stellar models. In 
some cases, much stronger constraints are obtained by 
energetic arguments concerning RED GIANT STARS, which are 
relatively short lived. A new source of energy production 
could grossly affect the lifetime of these stars and make 
them in effect unobservable. The observation of neutrinos 
from the sUPERNOVA 19874 also provided a great opportunity 
for particle astrophysics to place constraints on many 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


phenomena beyond the standard model. In addition, 
this event, along with the new age of neutrino detectors 
(detecting neutrinos from the Sun and neutrinos produced 
in cosmic-ray collisions in the atmosphere), has opened 
a new door (NEUTRINO ASTRONOMY) which has grown to 
become a major focus of particle astrophysics. 

In the late 1970s, the success of gauge theories in 
explaining the standard model of electroweak interactions 
led to ambitious efforts towards the unification of the 
strong and weak nuclear forces with electromagnetism, 
or Grand Unification. In the standard model, proton 
stability is guaranteed by the conservation of a quantum 
number called baryon number. If conserved, the net 
baryon number, like electric charge, must not change in 
any physical process. To date, all experimental results are 
consistent with the exact conservation of baryon number. 
Particles which are built out of three constituent quarks, 
like neutrons and protons, are ascribed a baryon number 
of 1 (quarks have baryon number 1/3). Electrons and 
neutrinos in contrast, being elementary and not comprised 
of quarks, have no baryon number. Although pions and 
other similar particles called mesons are built from quarks, 
because they are described by a quark-antiquark pair they 
also have no baryon number. The neutron, being heavier 
than the proton, can decay (into a proton, electron and 
anti-neutrino). However, the proton is the lightest state 
with baryon number B = 1, and is stable if baryon number 
is conserved. 

One of the remarkable predictions of grand unified 
theories (GUTs) is the non-conservation of baryon number. 
The standard model interactions are mediated by particles 
called gauge bosons. There are 12 standard model 
gauge bosons: the photon, mediating electromagnetic 
interactions; the W* and Z°, mediating the weak nuclear 
force, and eight gluons, mediating the strong nuclear 
force. GUTs not only place these 12 particles in a 
common multiplet, but predict the existence of additional 
gauge bosons and hence new interactions. The gauge 
sector of the smallest grand unified theory has 24 gauge 
bosons. The 12 new particles (three ‘colors’ of Xs 
and their antiparticles X, and three ‘colors’ of Ys and 
their antiparticles Y) mediate interactions between quarks 
and the class of particle which include the electron and 
neutrino called leptons. For example, an X gauge boson 
can take two quarks and turn them into an anti-quark and 
a positron (the antiparticle of the electron). In doing so, 
the X takes an initial state of baryon number +2/3, and 
converts it to a final state with baryon number —1/3, thus 
violating baryon number by one unit. In fact this process 
would allow the proton to decay into a positron and a pion. 

Life, the universe and everything as we know it 
depend on the relative stability of the proton. Stars, planets 
and people could not exist if the proton lifetime were too 
short. The neutron lifetime or half-life, determined by 
the weak nuclear force and the mass of the W* gauge 
boson which is about 80 GeV (or about 80 times the mass 
of the proton), is just over 10 minutes. That means that 
a collection of free neutrons would be reduced by half 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


after about 10 minutes. After 20 minutes, only 1/4 would 
remain, and so on. The lifetime of the decaying particle 
scales as 1/M*, where M is the mass of the gauge boson 
mediating the interaction. 

The mass of the new GUT gauge bosons is determined 
by the unification energy scale, which in turn is 
determined by the point where the three standard 
model coupling constants meet after an energy-dependent 
renormalization. These constants determine the strength 
of the interactions. For example, the electromagnetic 
coupling constant, e, fixes the quantity known as the 
fine-structure constant a = e*/42. The value of these 
constants must be adjusted at high energies according to 
the predictions of quantum field theory and as verified 
with high precision by experiment. At a very high energy 
scale, the constants take the same (unified) value. Though 
the exact energy scale is not known, it is typically about 
10!5-'6 GeV. The masses of the X and Y gauge bosons are 
similarly large. The lifetime of the proton then scales as 
My’ and is at least 10° years. This extremely long lifetime 
should be compared with the current age of the universe of 
about 1.4 x 10"° years. Thus, although protons are allowed 
to decay, they do so very rarely. The search for proton 
decay has been under investigation since the late 1970s. 
To date, no decays have been observed. 

Grand unified theories have had a profound impact 
on cosmology and were in part responsible for the 
development of particle astrophysics. GUTs provided 
the missing ingredients to the long-standing problem of 
a matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe. 

All particles exist as particle-antiparticle pairs 
(though a few particles like the photon and Z° are 
their own antiparticles). Antiparticles are produced 
either in high-energy accelerator experiments or naturally, 
when high-energy cosmic rays collide with nuclei in the 
Earth’s atmosphere. However, apart from the secondary 
production of antimatter, there is no evidence of antimatter 
elsewhere in the universe. We know that the Earth and 
the solar system are composed solely of matter. If cosmic 
rays are of Galactic origin (as is widely accepted), then the 
lack of evidence of primary (not produced in a collision) 
antimatter in cosmic rays indicates that the Galaxy as a 
whole is also composed of matter. If nearby galaxies were 
composed of antimatter, the radiation produced by the 
annihilations of gaseous matter and antimatter along the 
boundary of these regions would be easily detected. 

The question posed for cosmology and _ particle 
astrophysics is two-fold: (a) Why is there an apparent 
asymmetry between matter and antimatter in the 
universe? (b) Why is the asymmetry, commonly referred 
to as the baryon asymmetry (due to the asymmetry of 
neutrons and protons, though it is expected that there is a 
similar asymmetry in leptons - or electrons and neutrinos), 
small compared with the number density of photons in 
the universe? In fact, it is common to define a parameter 
measuring the baryon asymmetry 

na BB wy MB we 2-5) x 10-2, (5) 


Ny Ny 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This quantity is estimated by comparing the observed 
density of matter, as determined for example by the visual 
and x-ray-output of galaxies and clusters of galaxies, 
with the density of photons determined by the measured 
temperature of the microwave background. This ratio 
can also be fixed by the observed abundances of the light 
elements, as 7 is the one free parameter of BBN theory. 

In 1967, Sakharov derived three essential ingredients 
to solve at least the first problem. Namely the necessary 
conditions to generate an asymmetry of matter over 
antimatter. They are: (a) baryon number violating 
interactions; (b) a violation of two other symmetries of 
nature called C and CP - for charge symmetry and a 
combination of charge and parity; (c) a departure from 
thermal equilibrium. The necessity for the first condition 
is rather obvious. Without baryon number violating 
interactions, it would not be possible to change the total 
baryon number of the universe. As described above, 
grand unified theories provide baryon number violating 
interactions automatically. The second condition is more 
subtle. C, P and T (for time reversal invariance) are 
three fundamental symmetries of nature. In fact, all of 
particle theory is built on the exact conservation of the 
full combination of CPT (that is when all three operations 
are performed (charge conjugation, parity or x > —x 
and time reversal or f > —t) simultaneously). However, 
individually they are known to be violated in certain 
interactions. Parity violation is explicitly demonstrated 
by the weak interactions, and was first observed in the 
decay of ®°Co in 1957. CP violation was observed in the 
decay properties of K° and K° mesons in 1964. GUTs also 
contain CP violation, although the simplest GUT does not 
contain enough to produce the observed asymmetry of 
matter. Thus cosmology again places strong constraints 
on the building of particle theories. The violation of C and 
CP is necessary in order for the reactions to preferentially 
produce baryons rather than anti-baryons. Without this 
violation, any baryon number produced by a baryon 
number violating interaction would be exactly canceled by 
the corresponding reaction (under the charge symmetry), 
producing a net negative baryon number. Finally, the 
departure from thermal equilibrium is necessary so that 
reverse processes to those which produce a net baryon 
number are not operative. If they were, they would simply 
erase any baryon number produced. The departure from 
thermal equilibrium is a common feature of a rapidly 
expanding universe. Ifthe expansion rate of the universe is 
fast compared with a specific interaction rate, that process 
willnotbe in equilibrium. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, 
it was shown that GUTs and standard big bang cosmology 
have all that it takes to explain the existence of the matter- 
antimatter asymmetry. The precise value of 7 has become 
a (GUT) model-dependent question. Although there are 
now many specific mechanisms proposed to produce the 
asymmetry, the exact mechanism is still an open question 
in particle astrophysics. 

Along with the cosmological success of grand 
unification, a serious problem was discovered. Since a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


grand unified symmetry is not realized in nature today 
(or else we would find massless X and Y gauge bosons), 
it must be broken. In the process of breaking such 
a (grand) symmetry, it was discovered that new very 
massive particles called magnetic monopoles must exist. 
These particles, as their name implies, carry a single unit of 
magnetic charge much like the electron carrying a unit of 
electric charge. This would, in effect, appear like a magnet 
with only a north or south pole, but not both. Needless to 
say, such a particle has never been found. 

In a cosmological context, grand unified theories 
predict the abundance of magnetic monopoles and their 
masses. Therefore, it is possible to compute their 
contribution to the energy density today. The masses of 
the monopoles are superheavy, of order My. Because the 
existence of monopoles is associated with the breakdown 
of the grand unified symmetry, their abundance is 
determined by the correlation length of the symmetry 
during the phase transition during which the symmetry 
is lost. The longer the correlation length, the fewer the 
monopoles produced. The maximum correlation length 
possible is determined by cosmology, and is related to the 
size of the observable universe at the time of the phase 
transition. This size is in turn determined by the age of 
the universe and is set by the maximum distance light can 
travel in that time. This distance is called the cosmological 
(or particle) horizon, and corresponds to the maximum 
distance over which information can be communicated. 
Therefore, this distance dy is proportional to ty, the age of 
the universe. Since it is expected that the grand unified 
symmetry is broken at a temperature scale related to Mx, 
and since in the early universe ty « T~?, the size of the 
horizon is very small and many massive monopoles are 
produced. The monopole problem, as it is referred to, is the 
expectation that the universe is dominated by monopoles 
today. In fact, the naive calculation predicts that the ratio 
of monopoles to baryons is about O(1). That is, as many 
monopoles as protons! This is clearly not the case. 

There are several other problems which occur in the 
standard big bang model. Although the cosmological 
density parameter, 2, is uncertain, itis known that its value 
is close to 1. As the universe evolves, this parameter also 
evolves, from an initial value extremely close to 1 (in the 
limit that ty — 0, Q — 1) to values much larger than 1 if 
the universe is closed, and to values much smaller than 1 
if the universe is open. Since the evolution of the universe 
is basically a gravitational phenomenon, one might expect 
that Q evolves on a typical gravitational time-scale which 
is set by Newton’s constant Gy. The natural time-scale, 
called the Planck time, is 


tp = (Gxh/c?)? + 10-" s. 


However, Q has remained near 1 for over 10!° years or 
10” s, thus outlasting its welcome by over 61 orders of 
magnitude. 

Another problem with the standard cosmological 
model is related to the near perfect isotropy of the cosmic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Astrophysics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MICROWAVE BACKGROUND. The temperature of the microwave 
background was extremely accurately measured to be 
2.728 K by the COBE satellite. Furthermore, it is measured 
to have the same temperature in all directions to an 
accuracy of better than 100 parts per million. In the 
standard cosmological model, there is no explanation 
for the isotropy of the background radiation. The 
detected background photons were last scattered when 
the background temperature was a few thousand degrees 
and the age of the universe was about 10° years. The 
horizon size at that time was considerably smaller than it 
is today. (Our horizon today comprises about 10° horizons 
corresponding to the time of last scattering.) Since there 
is no information communicated from one horizon to 
another, there is no intrinsic reason why different horizons 
would have the same temperatures at the time of last 
scattering. If horizons at last scattering did have different 
temperatures, it would be reflected as a large anisotropy 
in the microwave background today, as it is measured in 
different directions. 

Asolution to this problem is known as the inflationary 
universe. Originally formulated as a period of rapid 
(exponential) expansion in the very early universe, 
inflation was thought to have been produced during the 
grand unified phase transition. That is, while the large 
symmetry of GUTs was being broken, the universe was 
dominated by the (false) vacuum energy density of the 
the GUT, rather than by radiation. The result of the 
expansion and the subsequent rethermalization of the 
universe was a resolution of the cosmological problems 
discussed above. If monopoles are not reproduced at 
the end of inflation (if the GUT is not restored), the 
density of monopoles is diluted to the extent that we only 
expect about one magnetic monopole in the entire visible 
universe! The dramatic expansion of the universe has 
flattened the universe to such an extent that we would 
predict that Q is in fact indistinguishable from 1 today. 
Then, so long as the universe can live long enough to enter 
an inflationary stage, it is perfectly natural that it would 
last far beyond the gravitational lifetime discussed above. 
Finally, since the size of our horizon was dramatically 
inflated, our entire visible universe and more originated 
froma small and causal region of the universe. In this case, 
one expects the isotropy of the background radiation (up 
to perturbations caused by quantum fluctuations during 
inflation). Although it is now recognized that standard 
GUTs cannot be responsible for inflation, there are many 
alternative models. The development of these models has 
been another main focus of particle astrophysics since the 
early 1980s. 


Bibliography 
Borner G 1993 The Early Universe (Heidelberg: Springer) 


Kolb E W and Turner M S 1990 The Early Universe 
(Redwood City: Addison-Wesley) 


Keith Olive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Particle Physics and Astronomy 
Research Council 


PPARC is the agency through which UK taxpayers’ money 
flows to fund astronomy (as well as particle physics). 
PPARC supports the EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY as well as the 
telescopes with UK involvement such as the 8 m Gemini 
Telescopes, UK Infra Red Telescope (UKIRT), James Clerk 
Maxwell Telescope (JCMT), William Herschel Telescope 
(WHT) and the Anglo-Australian Telescope (AAT) along 
with Jodrell Bank and the Joint Institute for VBLI in Europe 
(JIVE). The Astronomy Technology Centre in Edinburgh 
is a PPARC establishment and provides the technology 
backbone for instruments for the telescopes. 

PPARC, based in Swindon, runs the peer review and 
allocation system for the financing of astronomy research 
particularly by making grants to UK universities and 
argues the case for funding to the Office of Science and 
Technology and the Science Minister. Its budget for 
astronomy is approaching £100M p.a. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.pparc.ac.uk. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pauli Exclusion Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pauli Exclusion Principle 


A principle of quantum theory, devised in 1925 by 
Wolfgang Pauli (1900-58), which states that no two 
fermions may exist in the same quantum state. The 
quantum state of a particle is defined by a set of 
numbers that describe quantities such as energy, angular 
momentum and spin. Fermions are particles such as 
quarks, protons, neutrons and electrons, that have spin = 
5 (in units of 4/22, where h is the Planck constant). 
The principle implies, for example, that no two electrons 
in a given atom can have identical quantum values of 
energy, angular momentum and spin. It thereby restricts 
the number of electrons that can exist in the various 
electron shells that surround the nucleus of an atom and 
hence determines the electronic structure and chemical 
properties of atoms of different chemical elements. For 
example, two electrons can exist in the ground state (lowest 
energy level) of a helium atom only if they have opposite 
values of spin. The permitted permutations of quantum 
numbers allow a maximum of two electrons to exist in the 
innermost shell, eight in the second, and so on. 

The principle also applies to the protons and neutrons 
in an atomic nucleus and to the quarks that make up 
protons, neutrons and other kinds of hadrons. When 
applied to free electrons, the principle implies essentially 
that no two electrons can have the same position and 
momentum. This limits the extent to which electrons can 
be squeezed together and gives rise to a pressure, called 
electron-degeneracy pressure, which prevents further 
contraction of compact stars such as white dwarfs. A 
similar argument applies to the close-packed neutrons 
inside neutron stars. 


See also: angular momentum, atom, degenerate matter, 
electron, energy, hadrons, quantum mechanics, quantum 
theory, quark. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pavo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pavo 


(the Peacock; abbrev. Pav, gen. Pavonis; area 378 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Telescopium 
and Octans, and culminates at midnight in mid-July. It was 
first shown on Petrus Plancius’ celestial globe of c. 1598, 
though it is usually attributed to the Dutch navigators 
Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known as Petrus Theodorus) 
and Frederick de Houtman, who charted that part of the 
southern sky in 1595-7. 

A small, rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Pavo are w Pavonis (Peacock), magnitude 
1.9, and 6 Pavonis, magnitude 3.4. There are four other 
stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. Interesting objects 
include x Pavonis, a Cepheid variable (range 3.9-4.8, 
period 9.09 days), NGC 6752, a fifth-magnitude globular 
cluster, and NGC 6744, an eighth-magnitude spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pawsey, Joseph Lade (1908-62) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pawsey, Joseph Lade (1908-62) 


Radiophysicist and astronomer, born Ararat, Victoria, 
Australia, pioneered the use of a Lloyd’s mirror 
arrangement for radio interferometry at Dover Heights 
in Australia, and located the source of solar radio noise 
within the disc of the Sun. As John Hey had suggested, 
the radio noise came from sunspots. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Payne-Gaposchkin, Cecilia Helena [née Payne] (1900- 
79) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Payne-Gaposchkin, Cecilia Helena 
[née Payne] (1900-79) 


Astronomer, born in England, married Sergei Gaposchkin, 
first woman to become a full professor at Harvard. Worked 
on stellar atmospheres, and in her 1925 dissertation 
suggested correctly that the great range in strength, from 
star to star, of absorption lines in stellar spectra was due to 
differing amounts of ionization (differing temperatures), 
not differing chemical composition. She suggested that 
hydrogen was the most abundant element in stars. This 
conclusion was at first resisted but accepted by 1929, in 
particular by HENRY RUSSELL. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pease, Francis G (1881-1938) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pease, Francis G (1881-1938) 


Astronomer and designer of optical instruments, born in 
Cambridge, MA, designed the 100 in telescope. With John 
Anderson used an interferometer to observe Betelgeuse 
in 1920 and obtained a diameter for the star of 0.047 
arcseconds, very close to the value predicted by EDDINGTON. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Peculiar Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Peculiar Galaxies 


A peculiar galaxy is an object that cannot be easily 
classified as a SPIRAL, ELLIPTICAL, Or IRREGULAR GALAXY based 
on its optical morphology. They constitute between 5% 
and 10% of the known galaxy population, although most 
‘normal’ galaxies will show peculiar features if examined 
carefully. Peculiar galaxies show a great diversity of 
form. The vast majority can be attributed to strong 
gravitational tides generated in the close passage of two 
galaxies, to the extent that the terms ‘peculiar galaxy’ 
and ‘interacting galaxy’ are now virtually synonymous. 
These objects provided the first clear evidence that a 
galaxy’s environment can profoundly affect its evolution 
(See GALAXY EVOLUTION). 

Many peculiar galaxies are experiencing episodes of 
enhanced star formation, called starbursts. They also 
show a greater tendency to host ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI 
(AGN) compared with the normal galaxy population. 
Conversely, when one examines the most luminous 
objects in the universe—quasars, radio galaxies and 
infrared galaxies—one often finds peculiar morphologies, 
suggesting a direct link between interactions and extreme 
levels of emission. Tidally induced mergers of separate 
galaxies almost certainly account for a substantial fraction 
of the local elliptical population. This process has probably 
played a key role in GALAXY FORMATION. 

Peculiar galaxies can be used to deduce the structure 
of normal galaxies and in a few cases probe large-scale 
mass distributions. Observational and numerical studies 
of these objects offer important insights into phenomena 
that have shaped the formation and evolution of galaxies. 


Galaxies that will not fit 

EDWIN HUBBLE introduced his ‘tuning fork’ classification 
scheme in 1929, in which galaxies were grouped into 
spiral, elliptical and irregular families based on their 
appearance in photographic plates. However, even at 
this early stage a small number of galaxies defied these 
broad categories. Deep exposures of NGC 4038/39 (aka 
‘the Antennae’) and NGC 5216/18 revealed long and faint 
filaments of light (see figure 1). Equally perplexing was 
the elliptical galaxy Messier 87 (ms7, figure 1), which 
showed a remarkable blue linear ‘jet’ emanating from its 
core. As intriguing as these objects were, they seemed 
to be rare exceptions and attracted little attention. Their 
apparent scarcity was due to difficulties in recording 
extended and low-surface-brightness emission with the 
telescopes and photographic plates then in use. This 
situation changed dramatically with the advent of wide- 
field Schmidt cameras. On completion of the National 
Geographic-Palomar Sky Survey in 1956, the number 
of peculiar galaxies grew from a mere handful to many 
thousands—roughly 10% of the galaxies visible in the 
Sky Survey plates. This new population displayed a 
bewildering array of morphologies: luminous bridges and 
tails, often extending many galaxy diameters, ellipticals 
with faint ripples or dust lanes, ring-shaped galaxies, even 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


systems that appeared to be dissolving. Figure 1 shows 
several examples taken from the Digitized Sky Survey 
and gives some idea of their varied (and beautiful) forms. 
Many of these were included in the photographic atlases 
of peculiar galaxies by Vorontsov—Vel’yaminov (1956) and 
Arp (1963), which are still widely used reference works. 

To the early investigators, these striking objects 
suggested gigantic explosions, galaxies in birth, galaxies 
in fragmentation, material ejections from nuclei, galaxies 
compelled by strong magnetic forces—or entirely new 
forces, even the creation of matter. However, the earliest 
explanation has proven to be the most successful, namely 
peculiar galaxies are the result of strong gravitational tides 
generated by near collisions of ordinary galaxies. This was 
originally suggested by the fact that peculiar galaxies are 
usually found in close pairs, and often with symmetrically 
placed features. This collisional interpretation had been 
rejected initially because galaxy encounters were thought 
to be exceedingly rare and because tides were considered 
incapable of creating long and narrow plumes like those 
seen in ‘the Antennae’. However, it was eventually 
realized that galaxies exist in groups, sometimes separated 
by only a few disk diameters. Galaxies should therefore 
experience several close passages over their lifetimes (see 
GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). It was Alar and Juri 
Toomre’s landmark 1972 paper that conclusively showed 
how gravitational tides could produce systems like the 
‘the Antennae’ through a near collision of two spirals. 
A wide range of peculiar morphologies could in fact 
result depending on the relative masses, inclinations, 
orbital speed and collision geometry of the two galaxies. 
Gravitational tides vary with distance like R-3, so they 
are most significant over a brief interval near closest 
approach. It is here that large-scale peculiarities such 
as plumes and bridges are abruptly ‘launched’ into their 
trajectories. The Toomres also extended the work of 
Holmberg by suggesting that sufficient orbital angular 
momentum could be lost in an encounter for two galaxies 
to coalesce, producing something resembling an elliptical 
galaxy. Simple statistical considerations implied that most 
ellipticals in the NGC catalog could have arisen this way. 
The idea that galaxies were isolated island universes had 
been dramatically overthrown. 

Peculiar galaxies have been studied extensively over 
the past 30 yr, both observationally and theoretically. 
During this period the tidal interpretation has proven 
to be so successful that the terms ‘peculiar galaxy’ and 
‘interacting galaxy’ are often used interchangeably. 


Peculiar galaxy morphologies 

There is a great diversity of form among peculiar galaxies, 
as evena quick examination of the Vorontsov—Vel’yaminov 
or Arp atlases will show. Even so, a number of clear 
categories can be recognized: 


Interacting spirals with tails and/or bridges 
‘Antennae’-like systems result from close passages of 
similarly massive spirals. Bridges (e.g. NGC 2535/36) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peculiar Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


require lower-mass companions to prevent quick capture 
and are thus less common. Both may extend 100-200 kpc 
from the host galaxies. Bridges and plumes originate in 
the outer disks, and are therefore often blue in color and 
gas rich. Some contain dwarf-galaxy-sized condensations 
of stars and gas that appear to be gravitationally bound. 


Interacting spiral-elliptical pairs 

Because their internal motions are not dominated by 
rotation, interacting ellipticals produce diffuse sprays of 
stars rather than tails and bridges. In spiral-elliptical 
encounters, therefore, a single tail or bridge is seen, and 
the spiral typically displays the most visible damage (e.g. 
NGC 274/5). 


Shell galaxies 

Roughly 40% of ellipticals show faint interleaved shells or 
ripples in their outer regions (e.g. Arp 230). These may be 
the result of weak tidal interactions or the cannibalization 
of another galaxy. The peculiar elliptical Centaurus A, for 
example, has both shells and a dust lane, suggesting the 
consumption of a gas-rich spiral. 


Galaxies with optical jets 

Remarkably linear filaments are sometimes found near 
peculiar spirals. Most are tidal tails and bridges 
that only appear linear owing to edge-brightening and 
projection effects (e.g. NGC 4676). The much rarer optical 
synchrotron jets are manifestations of AGN. M87 and 
3C 273 are the best known examples. 


cD and ‘dumb-bell’ galaxies 

The centers of rich galaxy clusters are often occupied by 
giant ellipticals called cD galaxies. These frequently pos- 
sess multiple nuclei, most likely from the cannibalization 
of another cluster galaxy. An extreme form of this class are 
‘dumb-bell’ galaxies, which are binary ellipticals embed- 
ded in a common stellar envelope (e.g. NGC 750). These 
are expected to coalesce after a few orbits (i.e. ~5 x 108 yr). 


Merger remnants 

Both the Vorontsov—Vel’yaminov and Arp atlases include 
objects now believed to represent the late stages in the 
merger of two galaxies (e.g. Arp 220). At this point they are 
roughly elliptical in appearance, although their vestigial 
tidal tails, large gas masses and double nuclei—generally 
visible only at radio and infrared wavelengths—betray 
their true origin. 


Polar-ring galaxies 

Roughly 0.5% of known SO galaxies possess rings orbiting 
a plane perpendicular to the disk. NGC 4650A (figure 2) 
is the prototype polar-ring galaxy. The rings are often 
rich in gas and young stars and are believed to represent 
material captured during an interaction that has settled in 
semistable polar orbits. Spiral-spiral mergers, in which 
one is transformed into an SO, have also been proposed as 
a formation mechanism. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ring galaxies 

Ring galaxies such as the Cartwheel (figure 2) are created 
by the passage of a companion through a spiral’s disk near 
the nucleus. This interaction crowds the disk’s orbits into 
a large ring (D,ing ~ 10-35 kpc) that propagates outward at 
speeds of ~50-100 km s~!. Observations show that ~90% 
of the spiral’s gas supply is concentrated in the ring, along 
with essentially all star formation activity. 


The expected lifetimes of these peculiarities vary 
greatly. The multiple nuclei of cD and dumb-bell galaxies 
evolve in a deep and rapidly changing gravitational 
potential, and so are believed to be very transient, perhaps 
needing less than ~108 yr to merge. Tidal tails, bridges and 
sprays experience a much shallower potential, and should 
persist much longer, perhaps several billion years. 

Most spirals show slightly distorted arms or minor 
asymmetries in their disks. These can be attributed to 
weak interactions with companions. Many otherwise 
‘normal’ galaxies show peculiar morphologies at low 
light levels. Particularly dramatic examples have been 
discovered by David Malin using special techniques (see 
DETECTORS: PHOTOGRAPHY) to explore emission as faint as 0.5% 
of the night-sky glow (see figure 3). These structures 
may represent long-lived remnants of ancient interactions. 
There is in fact a wide range of morphological oddities 
among the general galaxy population. What we have been 
calling peculiar galaxies throughout this article actually 
represent the extreme end of a continuum. 


Star formation in peculiar galaxies 

It had been long noted that peculiar galaxies tended to 
be very blue in color, and often with unusually luminous 
star-forming complexes. Analysis of the UV excess 
Byurakan Survey galaxies, for example, showed that 40% 
possessed double nuclei or obvious tidal features. By 
the 1970s sufficient observational data had accumulated 
to examine possible links between unusual morphologies 
and enhanced sTAR FORMATION activity. The most influential 
of these early investigations was that of Larson and 
Tinsley (1978), who compared the optical UBV colors of a 
normal galaxy sample taken from the Hubble atlas with 
peculiar galaxies from the Arp atlas. Figure 4, taken 
from that paper, shows that the Arp atlas galaxies are on 
average significantly bluer than the normal galaxy sample 
(i.e. smaller U-B for a given B-V) with a much wider 
spread of values. This could be simply understood if 
the peculiar galaxy sample had recently experienced brief 
episodes (~10’-108 yr duration) of elevated star formation 
activity called a starburst. The large color dispersion 
primarily reflects differences in the starburst’s age and 
strength, and/or dust obscuration. Research over the last 
two decades has established a clear connection between 
peculiar morphology and the occurrence of starburst 
activity. Theoretical studies show that tidal interactions 
can be very effective in triggering starbursts by driving 
strong spiral or ring density waves or by transporting 
gas to the inner nucleus. Observations show that star 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peculiar Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Antennae NGC 4676 NGC 2535/36, 
2 | al * 
. . 
NGC 5216/ 18 NGC 274/5 Arp 230 
oe 
el - 
NGC 750, Arp 220 
. N 
o - 
tee r 


Figure 1. A montage of peculiar galaxies reproduced from the Digitized Sky Survey. They are presented in negative to make faint 


emission easier to see. 


formation is increased only by modest factors of 2- 
3 over normal galaxies when averaged over the entire 
peculiar galaxy population. However, there is a wide 
range in star formation enhancement among individual 
peculiar galaxies, from essentially zero to several orders 
of magnitude. The induced star formation may be global 
in extent (e.g. the Cartwheel’s ring). However, the 
most intense starbursts occur within the galaxy’s inner 
kiloparsec. These nuclear starbursts tend to be found in 
the most strongly interacting systems. Excellent examples 
are the luminous infrared galaxies (LIRGs, e.g. Arp 220). 
LIRGs emit most of their total luminosity at infrared 
wavelengths (A > 5 wm), in at least half of the cases owing 
to dust heated by young massive stars. Astonishing star 
formation rates (GFR~(10?-10°)Mo yr7') and gas masses 
(Meas ~ (10!°-10"') Mo, ie. a substantial fraction of the 
total gas mass) characterize their inner nuclear regions. 
LIRGs show a strong tendency to possess unusual optical 
morphologies. In the most luminous examples, essentially 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


all are peculiar. 

It should be emphasized that not all STARBURST GALAXIES 
appear highly peculiar. Also, not all peculiar galaxies 
are experiencing starbursts. This may reflect time delays 
between interaction and peak star formation, weak and 
quickly damped tidal perturbations, details of the collision 
ora lack of sufficient gas to fuel a starburst in the first place. 
Nevertheless, the frequency of starburst activity is much 
higher in peculiar galaxies. And, as the intensity of the 
starburst increases, so does the likelihood that the galaxy 
will possess a highly disturbed optical morphology. 


Peculiar galaxies and active galactic nuclei 

The first securely identified optical counterparts of 
powerful extragalactic radio sources (Cygnus A and 
Centaurus A) were strikingly peculiar. This fact suggested 
a direct connection between galaxy collisions and radio 
emission. However, subsequent observations found 
luminous radio emission to be far more likely to be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peculiar Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 4650A 


Cartwheel 


Figure 2. Two examples of peculiar rings: NGC 4650A (polar-ring galaxy) and the Cartwheel (ring galaxy). Both images were taken 


with the Hubble Space Telescope. 


Figure 3. Enhanced photographs of nearby ‘normal’ galaxies by David Malin. The spiral galaxies M83 and M104 both show faint loops 
of starlight, while the elliptical galaxy M87 is embedded in an asymmetric spray of stars. More typical exposures have been inserted 


into the over-exposed centers to give an idea of their relative scales. 


associated with the nuclei of rather ordinary looking 
ellipticals. The issue was reopened in the 1970s with 
the discovery that nuclear starbursts were common in 
peculiar galaxies. Theoretical results also suggested that 
interactions could efficiently transport gas to small radii 
and fuel an AGN’s central engine. Recent surveys show 
that while the majority of galaxies with AGN in the local 
universe do not appear obviously peculiar, there is an 
increased tendency for peculiar galaxies to possess active 
nuclei. For example, Seyfert nuclei—the most common 
local type of AGN—occur more frequently in peculiar 
spirals than in normal spirals. The significance of this 
association increases with the degree of the morphological 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


distortion. Further, one-third to one-half of the most 
powerful LIRGs appear to harbor heavily obscured 
AGN. These objects are invariably peculiar at optical 
wavelengths. In addition, ground-based imaging of low- 
redshift QuAsARS shows that a significant fraction possess 
large-scale distortions, multiple nuclei or at least an excess 
of nearby peculiar companions. HST observations confirm 
that many quasars are morphologically peculiar. For 
example, of the 20 z < 0.3 quasars studied by Bahcall 
and collaborators (figure 5), more than a third are clearly 
interacting tidally, with half of the remainder showing 
faint extended structures resembling those of local merger 
remnants. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peculiar Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


{o) HUBBLE ATLAS 


-0,788 


fb) ARP ATLAS 


Figure 4. The UBV two-color distributions of normal (Hubble atlas) and peculiar (Arp atlas) galaxies reproduced from Larson and 
Tinsley (1978). The solid curve represents the mean through the Hubble atlas sample. Typical uncertainties in the colors are shown in 


each panel. 


Figure 5. Optical images of low-redshift (z < 0.3) quasars taken with HST (Bahcall and collaborators, 1997). Note the close 


companions and/or obvious tidal features. 


Again, most galaxies with AGN are not noticeably 
peculiar, and most peculiar galaxies do not possess AGN. 
Nevertheless, there is at least indirect evidence for a 
connection between galaxy interactions and at least some 


forms of powerful AGN. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Concluding remarks 

The vast majority of peculiar galaxies represent highly per- 
turbed ordinary galaxies. Observational and numerical 
studies of these systems can therefore provide insights into 
galactic structure. The kinematics of polar rings and tidal 
tails, for example, can be used to probe dark halos on scales 
much larger than ordinary optical or gas disks. Detailed 
computer simulations of interacting systems not only help 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peculiar Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


refine the input galaxy models, they also allow one to bet- 
ter understand how galaxies might evolve in more com- 
plex environments such as compact groups or rich clusters. 
Further, several lines of evidence suggest that galaxies are 
assembled through the coalescense of dwarf galaxy sized 
components at high redshift, and there is evidence that at 
least some nearby ellipticals have arisen through mergers. 
The ongoing mergers and merger remnants in the peculiar 
galaxy population can thus serve as templates for the study 
of galaxy formation and evolution. Finally, the energy re- 
leased by starbursts and AGN can have a major impact on 
the energy balance ina galaxy’s interstellar medium. Like- 
wise, studies of peculiar galaxies such as Arp 220 show that 
starbursts can also supply substantial amounts of heavy el- 
ements. Both processes appear to have been much more 
common at higher redshifts. These few examples show 
that peculiar galaxies are important for what they can tell 
us about the structure and evolution of galaxies and for 
providing local examples of processes that have shaped 
the chemical and luminosity evolution of the universe. 


Bibliography 
The peculiar galaxy literature is vast. Fortunately, there are 
a number of excellent reviews with extensive references, 


e.g. 


Kennicutt R, Schweizer F and Barnes J 1996 Galaxies: 
Interactions and Induced Star Formation (Saas-Fee 
Advanced Course 26, Lecture Notes 1996) (Swiss Society 
for Astrophysics and Astronomy) 


One would also benefit by reading such classic papers as 


Holmberg E 1941 Astrophys. J. 94 385 
Larson R and Tinsley B 1978 Astrophys. J. 219 46 


and of course 
Toomre A and Toomre J 1972 Astrophys. J. 178 623 


Perhaps the best introduction to this subject is simply 
to browse through the Vorontsov—Vel’yaminov and Arp 
atlases. Electronic versions exist on the web (both atlases 
can be found at nedwww.ipac.caltech.edu/level5/pi- 
galaxies.html), although the quality of Arp’s atlas is such 
that one should try to locate a large format copy in a 
university science library. 


James L Higdon 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peebles, Phillip James E (1935-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Peebles, Phillip James E (1935-) 


Canadian cosmologist, born in Winnipeg, professor at 
Princeton University, predicted the existence of the 
cosmic background radiation just before it was found by 
A PENZIAS and R WILSON. Investigated the clustering and 
superclustering of galaxies, providing evidence of the 
existence of large quantities of dark matter in the haloes of 
galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Pegasus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pegasus 


(the Winged Horse; abbrev. Peg, gen. Pegasi; area 
1121 sq. deg.) A northern constellation that extends from 
Cygnus, Lacerta and Andromeda almost to the celestial 
equator, and culminates at midnight in early September. 
Itis named after the winged horse in Greek mythology that 
sprang from the body of Medusa, the Gorgon, when she 
was beheaded by Perseus, and later was tamed by the hero 
Bellerophon. Its brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy 
(c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A large constellation, Pegasus is easily recognized by 
the asterism of the Square of Pegasus, formed by the stars 
B Pegasi (Scheat), « Pegasi (Markab), y Pegasi (Algenib) 
and aw Andromedae (Alpheratz). The last, which marks the 
north-east corner of the Square, was originally designated 
5 Pegasi. The brightest stars in Pegasus are « Pegasi 
(Enif), magnitude 2.4, w Pegasi, magnitude 2.5, 6 Pegasi, 
a red giant irregular variable (range 2.3-2.7), y Pegasi, a 
Beta Cephei variable (range 2.8-2.9, period 0.15 day), and 
n Pegasi (Matar), magnitude 2.9. There are five other stars 
of magnitude 5.0 or brighter. Other interesting objects 
include the W Ursae Majoris type variable star U Pegasi 
(range 9.2-10.1, period 0.37 day) and M15 (NGC 7078), a 
sixth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peiresc, Nicolas-Claude Fabri de (1580-1637) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Peiresc, Nicolas-Claude Fabri de 
(1580-1637) 


Polymath and astronomer, born Belgentier, Var, France, 
widely educated in Europe. In 1610 his patron, du 
Vair, acquired a telescope with which Peiresc and Joseph 
Gaultier were the first in France to see the satellites of 
Jupiter. With assistants in various locations, he recorded 
the positions of the satellites of Jupiter and used these 
observations to calculate terrestrial longitudes. Organized 
an international campaign to observe the lunar eclipse of 
28 August 1635, and was able to correct the considerably 
over-estimated length of the Mediterranean. Discovered 
the Orion nebula, M42, the first deep sky discovery witha 
telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pelican Nebula (IC 5070) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pelican Nebula (IC 5070) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Cygnus, position 
RA 20" 50.8™, dec. +44° 21’. It measures 80’ by 70’, but has 
a low surface brightness. Its eastern border, the ‘pelican’ 
profile, is delineated by dark nebulosity which separates 
it from the North America Nebula (NGC 7000). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Penston, Michael Victor (1943-90) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Penston, Michael Victor (1943-90) 


Astronomer, born in London, a ‘lover of active galaxies’ (a 
LAG), as he described himself, he witnessed the change of 
NGC 4151 from one type of active Seyfert galaxy to another 
and determined the mass of the black hole at its center. 
This went towards a proof of the unified theory of active 
galaxies by which it is hypothesized that the various types 
are fundamentally the same phenomena seen at different 
angles and in different circumstances, and set the way for 
the Hubble Space Telescope’s more accurate determination 
of the mass of black holes in different active galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Penzias, Arno Allan (1933-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Penzias, Arno Allan (1933-) 


Radioscientist, born in Munich in Germany, Nobel 
prizewinner (1978) ‘for the discovery of cosmic microwave 
background radiation’, a refugee from Germany at the 
age of 6, found his way to America and experience in 
microwave physics. Joined Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, 
New Jersey, searched for and investigated line emission 
from the interstellar OH molecule. Was able to gain the 
use of a large radio telescope (the Holmdel horn) and a 
new ultra low-noise 7 cm travelling wave maser available 
for radioastronomy. With ROBERT WILSON began a series 
of radioastronomical observations intended to make the 
best use of the careful calibration and extreme sensitivity 
of the system, including a measurement of the radiation 
intensity from the Galaxy at high latitudes. Discovered 
the cosmic microwave background radiation. Made 
a millimeter-wave receiver and discovered a number 
of interstellar molecular species, including deuterated 
hydrogen cyanide. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Periapsis ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Periapsis 


The point in an elliptical orbit at which the orbiting body is 
farthest from the body it is orbiting. The prefix ‘peri-’ may 
be attached to various words or roots depending on the 
body being orbited: for example, periastron for an orbit 
round a star; perijove for an orbit around Jupiter. 


See also: perigee, perihelion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Periastron ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Periastron 


The closest point in the relative orbit of one component 
of a binary system to the other component. The term is 
also used for the closest position of a planet orbiting a star 
other than the Sun. 


See also: binary system, perihelion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Perigee ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Perigee 


The point in its orbit around the Earth at which the Moon 
or an orbiting spacecraft is closest to the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Perihelion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Perihelion 


The point in the elliptical orbit of a planet or other object 
around the Sun at which it is closest to the Sun. The Earth, 
for example, reaches perihelion in January, when it is about 
147 million km from the Sun. This is the Earth’s perihelion 
distance. The heliographic longitude of a body’s perihelion 
point steadily moves around the Sun in the direction of 
the object’s orbital motion as the major axis of the ellipse 
precesses. This advance of perihelion is largely a result of 
gravitational perturbations by the planets on one another, 
but there is a small component caused by the curvature of 
spacetime in the vicinity of the Sun. The latter factor is 
most pronounced for Mercury, and provided an early test 
for the general theory of relativity. 


Compare: aphelion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Perrine, Charles Dillon (1867-1951) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Perrine, Charles Dillon (1867-1951) 


American astronomer, born in Teubenville, Ohio, became 
director of Cordoba Observatory in Argentina, constructed 
a 30 in telescope and observed galaxies. Was retired 
prematurely when, in political unrest, he became the target 
of nationalist sentiment and an assassination attempt. 
Discovered Jupiter’s sixth and seventh satellites with the 
36 in Crossley reflector at Lick Observatory, numerous 
comets and the expanding light echo around Nova Persei 
as the delayed nova flash reflected off nearby dust clouds. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Perseids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Perseids 


The best-known meteor shower and one of the most 
prolific, occurring in late July and August. In medieval 
times the shower was known as the Tears of Saint 
Lawrence, who was martyred on 10 August 258, close 
to the time of maximum Perseid activity. The radiant 
begins in the constellation Cassiopeia and moves through 
northern Perseus. The high inclination (113°) of the 
parent comet, 109P/Swift—Tuttle, keeps the Perseid meteor 
stream largely free from planetary perturbations, and its 
activity has remained fairly constant for many centuries. 
Zenithal hourly rates rose during the 1980s and 1990s, 
either side of the parent comet’s return in 1992. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Perseus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Perseus 


(abbrev. Per, gen. Persei; area 615 sq. deg.) A northern 
constellation which lies between Andromeda and Auriga, 
and culminates at midnight in early November. It is 
named after the hero in Greek mythology who beheaded 
the Gorgon Medusa and rescued Andromeda from being 
sacrificed to the sea monster Cetus. Its brightest stars were 
cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A conspicuous constellation, the brightest stars in 
Perseus are a Persei (Mirfak or Algenib), magnitude 
1.8, 6 Persei (Algol, the ‘Demon Star’), the prototype 
eclipsing binary (range 2.1-3.4, period 2.86 days), ¢ Persei, 
magnitude 2.8, and y and « Persei, both magnitude 2.9. 
There are 11 other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. 

The Milky Way passes through Perseus and the 
constellation contains a number of open star clusters, 
including the Double Cluster (NGC 869 and 884, or h and 
x Persei), the two components of which are each about 45’ 
across, contain a few hundred stars, and are just visible to 
the unaided eye as a faint misty patch midway between 
y Persei and 6 Cassiopeiae, M34 (NGC 1039), which 
contains about 80 stars fainter than eighth magnitude, 
and Melotte 20, a loose assemblage surrounding a Persei. 
Other interesting objects include M76 (NGC 650-51), the 
Little Dumbbell Nebula, a tenth-magnitude planetary 
nebula, NGC 1023, a tenth-magnitude spiral galaxy, and 
NGC 1275 (Perseus A), a twelfth-magnitude elliptical 
galaxy that is the brightest member of the Perseus cluster 
of galaxies and a strong radio source. 

The Perseid meteor shower appears to radiate from a 
point about 4° north of y Persei. 


See also: Algol, Perseids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Peurbach [Peuerbach, Purbach], Georg von (1423-61) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Peurbach [Peuerbach, Purbach], 
Georg von (1423-61) 


Born in Peuerbach, Austria, became court astronomer of 
King Ladislaus of Hungary and was served as professor of 
astronomy at the University of Vienna. Observed Halley’s 
and other comets in and, with his student REGIOMONTANUS, 
recorded the lunar eclipse of 3 September 1457 checking 
his own tables of eclipse calculations (Tabulae Ecclipsium) 
based on Ptolemy’s epicyclic theory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


PG 1159 Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PG 1159 Stars 


The PG1159 stars form a small group of about 30 
objects. They are named after the prototype PG 1159-035 
(=GW Vir), which was discovered in the Palomar-Green 
survey. They are hot post-asymptotic giant branch (post- 
AGB) stars and their location in the HR diagram coincides 
with the hottest central stars of PLANETARY NEBULAE (CSPN) 
and the hottest wHiTE pwarrs (WD). The most peculiar 
characteristic is their chemical surface composition. They 
are hydrogen deficient and the most abundant elements 
are He, C and O with typical abundances of 33%, 
50% and 17% respectively. This suggests that their 
immediate progenitors are CSPN with Wolf—Rayet type 
spectra, whose analyses yield similar abundance patterns. 
It is thought that most of the PG1159 stars evolve into 
non-DA WDs, i.e. helium-rich objects from which the 
heavy elements were removed from the surface layer by 
gravitational settling. The origin of the PG1159 surface 
chemistry is under debate. The most popular picture 
describes these stars as the result of a late He-shell flash, 
ie. the re-ignition of helium fusion in a CSPN or even in 
a cooling, contracting WD. This event causes the star to 
return onto the AGB and to retrace its post-AGB evolution 
for a second time (born-again AGB star scenario). As a 
consequence, envelope convection causes ingestion and 
burning of surface hydrogen and, possibly in conjunction 
with mass loss, carbon and oxygen as helium burning 
products are mixed into surface layers. 

The mere existence of PG1159 stars represents a 
challenge to post-AGB STELLAR EVOLUTION theory. Details of 
the born-again scenario are being worked out, in order to 
prove or disprove it. An alternative scenario proposes that 
close binary evolution causes stripping of the envelope 
during the RED GIANT phase. Since some PG1159 stars 
are associated with a planetary nebula, it is hoped that 
analyses of the planetary nebulae will give further hints 
as to the stellar history. Some PG 1159 stars are variable 
and these multi-periodic g-mode pulsators are defining 
the GW Vir (or DOV) instability strip in the HR diagram. 
The pulsational properties are used to probe the interior 
structure of these stars. Hence spectroscopic analyses with 
model atmospheres in combination with asteroseismology 
using pulsating stellar models help to constrain theoretical 
evolutionary calculations for PG 1159 stars. 


The hydrogen-deficient post-AGB sequence [WC] 
— PG1159 

Hot post-AGB stars (To > 20000 K) can be grouped 
into either H-deficient or H-‘normal’ objects. The 
evolution of the latter group is in principle understood, 
so research focuses on the problems with H-deficient 
objects. Spectroscopic analyses have firmly established 
an evolutionary sequence formed by the Wolf—Rayet 
CSPN and the PG1159 stars. This is suggested by their 
location in the g—T.¢ plane (figure 1) as well as the 
similarity of their chemical abundance patterns. The 
Wolf-Rayet CSPN, dominated by He, C and O emission 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Te / 1000 K 
200 100 50 30 =—.20 
I Nang? 
ae Ie al 
4 - a 
E Sor = 
1S} | “=f 
‘oo 
Bob : 
L = (WCL] | 
male a(wee) | 
© (WC]-PGI159 
r PGI15S9 1 
8 fF pal 
1 | L ! | at 1 | L l 
3:3 5.0 4.5 


log Ter / K 


Figure 1. Hydrogen-deficient post-AGB stars in the effective 
temperature versus surface gravity plane. We identify 
Wolf-Rayet central stars of late and early spectral subtype 
([(WCE] and [WCL]), PG 1159 stars as well as [WC]-PG 1159 
transition objects. Open symbols denote stars not associated 
with a planetary nebula. Evolutionary tracks (labels: mass in 
Mo) are only shown for a rough comparison, because they 
predict normal, H-rich surface abundances. 


lines, are subdivided into late and early spectral types, 
[WCL] and [WCE] (brackets are used to discriminate 
these CSPN from the massive WOLF-RAYET stars). The 
link between the [WCE] and PG1159 stars is marked 
by a few [WC]-PG 1159 transition objects which show a 
mixed emission/absorption line spectrum. The PG 1159 
stars display essentially absorption line spectra. Their 
spectroscopic hallmark is a broad absorption trough 
formed by He II and C IV lines (figure 2). While [WC] 
stars have been known for a long time, the PG1159 
stars have been established as a spectral class more 
recently (Wesemael et al 1985). We know 31 PG1159 
stars and about every other one is a CSPN. Note that 
the so-called ‘OVI’ classification of CSPN is no longer 
used because objects having very different spectra were 
subsumed under it. All former ‘OVI’ stars are now [WCE] 
stars of different subclasses according to an appropriate 
classification scheme. An exception is the well known 
CSPN NGC 246, also a former ‘OVI’ object, which is now 
classified as PG 1159. 

An overview of knowledge of PG1159 stars with 
detailed references is found in Werner et al (1999). For 
detailed spectroscopic results on the [WC] stars we refer 
to a review by Hamann (1997). 


Origin of H-deficient post-AGB stars 
The typical chemical composition of PG 1159 atmospheres 
is displayed by the prototype PG 1159-035 itself. It was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


PG 1159 Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PG 1159-035 


civ \ 


relative flux 


Vy 
’ W 
Mv 


\ or 
\ J 


Hy 


4300 4400 4500 


a yf Nas nla a4 Nang want \\, Me 
amanda gy Ol say ie Vey lanai yarne \ Ma 


4600 


| 
| Hell 
| | a Dect npr Wen nr pA /* 
ll VI/ "CIV 


CIV 


NGC 7293 (H-rich central star) 


dean WU wal YJ ae ail fear van [Mn LAY ety Mal 9 Minuet 
NN V4 fy WwW Wl } y | y \\ 
y ee es ~~ 


phan pre 
f\ 


Hell \/ HB 


4700 4800 4900 


wavelength / A 


Figure 2. Optical spectrum of PG 1159-035 as compared to a central star with a usual hydrogen-rich composition. The characteristic 
PG 1159 spectrum lacks hydrogen lines and shows a prominent He II/C IV absorption line trough near 4670 A, accompanied by central 


emission reversals in the line cores in the case of the prototype. 


found to be He:C:0=33:50:17 (mass fractions) while 
hydrogen is not detectable. A comparison of this 
abundance pattern with the interior structure of post- 
AGB stellar models suggests that the PG 1159 stars must 
have lost their entire H-rich envelope (~ 10-4Mo) and 
also most of their He-rich intershell layer (~ 10-?Mo) 
because the high C and O abundances are found only at its 
bottom. With the first reliable non-LTE model atmosphere 
analyses of PG 1159 stars available it was suggested that 
the H deficiency is a consequence of a late He-shell flash. 
Originally, Iben (1984) introduced this scenario in order 
to explain the discovery of H-deficient zones in the inner 
parts of the PNe Abell 30 and Abell 78 (whose nuclei are 
today classified as [WC]-PG 1159 transition objects). In 
this scenario He-shell burning re-ignites when the post- 
AGB star is already on the WD cooling track. As a 
consequence, the star moves back to the AGB (‘born-again’ 
AGB star). The star suffers another superwind phase and 
during its second descent from the AGB the star loses its 
remaining hydrogen envelope by a fast wind. FG SAGITTAE 
and SAKURAI'’Ss OBJECT (V 4334 Sgr) are thought to be such 
stars which are on their way back to the AGB (Asplund 
1999). 

There are several problems with this scenario, arising 
from several observational facts, which suggest that the H 
deficiency is not only formed during the second post-AGB 
evolution, but already during the second AGB phase. In 
spite of the rapid evolutionary rate, the existence of cool 
(i.e. young) [WC] stars requires the complete ejection of 
the H-rich envelope on the AGB. This is also corroborated 
by the fact that the ejection of H-deficient material in the 
planetary nebulae Abell 30 and Abell 78 occurs with low 
expansion velocities (<100 km s~!), which means that the 
rather extended AGB precursor of the more compact CSPN 
must already have been H deficient. 

The born-again scenario is faced with another 
problem, which is related to the expansion ages of the 
nebulae of [WC] stars. Their planetary nebulae should be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


systematically older than those of the CSPN with normal 
surface chemistry; however, this is not the case. This 
finding suggests that the H deficiency possibly occurs at 
the first departure from the AGB, i.e. without invoking the 
born-again scenario at all. What then is the origin of the 
H deficiency? One possibility is close binary evolution 
during which the stellar envelope could be stripped off by 
interaction with the companion star. However, for [WC] 
stars binarity is extremely difficult to detect directly from 
radial velocity or photometry. For PG 1159 stars the binary 
frequency does not appear to be unusually high. Bipolarity 
of planetary nebulae has frequently been invoked as a 
tracer of binarity. Here we face a puzzling fact: while the 
frequency of bipolar planetary nebulae around [WC] stars 
appears to be ‘normal’ (20%), the fraction of PG 1159 stars 
with a bipolar planetary nebula appears to be high (75%). 
The latter result, however, is limited by small-number 
statistics and inhomogeneous observational material. 

A further problem represents the high photospheric 
oxygen abundance found in many PG1159 and [WC] 
stars, which approaches almost 20% by mass. As 
already mentioned above, this means that not only must 
the hydrogen-rich envelope be removed from the star, 
but also the 100 times more massive helium envelope. 
This conflicts even more severely with the existence 
of the young [WCL] stars: removal of the He-rich 
intershell during the post-AGB evolution can be enforced 
in theoretical calculations by high mass-loss rates, but 
envelope removal is not completed until the star is very 
hot (Ter > 100000 K), because the main effect of mass 
loss is to increase the evolutionary rate. However, new 
evolution calculations show that this problem is probably 
much less severe. These calculations, which include a 
hydrodynamically based overshoot prescription, provide 
a very high oxygen abundance throughout the He-rich 
intershell, and not only atits bottom as suggested by earlier 
computations. Though the problem of envelope removal 
seems less serious now, it is still unsolved. In any case, we 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


PG 1159 Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


have to face the exceptional case of H 1504+65, a PG 1159 
star which is completely devoid of hydrogen and helium, 
i.e. its atmosphere is mainly composed of C and O by equal 
parts, with an admixture of neon (Werner and Wolff 1999). 
Obviously this naked C/O stellar core must have lost also 
its massive He-rich intershell. 

Further evidence that the H deficiency is formed on 
the AGB or at least very early on the post-AGB track 
comes from the analysis of ISO spectroscopy of two [WCL] 
CSPN (BD+30°3639 and He 2-113.). C-rich dust (PAHs) in 
the inner part of the planetary nebula and crystalline (O- 
rich) silicates in the outer part suggest that the chemical 
composition of both stars changed to a C-rich mixture 
very recently, i.e. less than 1000 years ago. The H-rich 
nature of the C-rich dust suggests that some hydrogen 
was still left on the star, which is in accordance with the 
identification of hydrogen in the atmosphere of one of 
these CSPN (BD+30°3639). 

The detection of residual hydrogen in some [WC] and 
PG 1159 stars as well as the detection of nitrogen in a few 
cases suggests that mixing and incomplete burning of the 
hydrogen envelope takes (or took) place in these stars. 
According to evolutionary calculations this can only occur 
after a very late He-shell flash (i.e. on the WD cooling 
track, where H-shell burning is extinct) and not on or soon 
after the AGB phase (where H-shell burning is still active). 
This is in clear contradiction with the planetary nebula 
observations of H-deficient gas and dust around the stars 
(see above). 

To conclude, the true origin for H deficiency in post- 
AGB stars is not known. Further progress can be expected 
from evolutionary calculations which must include both 
overshoot as described above and time-dependent mixing. 


Another H-deficient post-AGB sequence 

A few hot H-deficient post-AGB stars cannot be classified 
as PG1159 stars, because their absorption line spectra 
exhibit almost exclusively He lines and, if at all, only weak 
carbon or other metal lines. This small group of stars 
comprises four objects, two of which have an associated 
planetary nebula. These stars are classified as ‘O(He)’ 
and the prototype is the CSPN K1-27. Spectral analyses 
confirm that only trace amounts of metals are present 
in the helium-dominated atmospheres but, interestingly, 
two of them have a considerable fraction of hydrogen 
left (10% and 30%, by number). They are very hot 
(Tere = 100 000-140 000 K) and have relatively low surface 
gravities (log g =5.5-6.5); hence, their location in the g— 
Teg plane is among the PG1159 and [WCE] stars. It 
is possible that the O(He) stars are the successors of 
those He-rich subdwarf O stars, which are on post-AGB 
evolutionary tracks. These, in turn, might be connected to 
the RCrB stars, which are He-rich giants very similar to 
Sakurai’s object in its present state. 

The variety of abundance patterns among PG 1159 
stars and [WC] stars is rather diverse and the existence 
of O(He) stars makes an explanation for the origin of H- 
deficient stars even more difficult. At present it can only 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be speculated that, among other details, the phase in the 
thermal pulse cycle at the moment of AGB departure plays 
an important role. 


Mass loss from H-deficient post-AGB stars 

From the above discussions it is clear that knowledge 
about mass loss from [WC] and PG 1159 stars is essential 
for our understanding of the H-deficient post-AGB stars. 
Mass-loss rates from [WC] stars can be inferred from 
analyses of the optical emission line spectra. Good spectral 
resolution is required in order to eliminate the contribution 
from nebular emission lines to the photospheric features. 
As a result, high mass-loss rates are found, ranging 
between 10-5 and 10-°°Mo yr', with rates decreasing 
along with proceeding post-AGB evolution. The mass- 
loss rate of two [WC]-PG 1159 transition objects amounts 
to 10-7°Mgj yr7!. For the PG1159 stars one expects even 
smaller rates. As a consequence, the optical spectrum is 
formed in the hydrostatic layers of the photosphere and 
only the strong UV resonance lines of CIV and O VI can be 
used to study the properties of the weak winds. IUE, HST 
and ORFEUS spectra were analysed of four low-gravity 
PG 1159 stars, i.e. immediate successors of [WCE] stars, 
and one found M = 10-7-10-° Mj yr~!. Comparison with 
theoretical studies suggests that the winds are radiation 
driven. For the [WC] stars the highly stratified ionization 
structure of metals in photospheric models lends further 
support to the hypothesis that the strong [WC] winds 
are radiation driven, too. This might explain why the 
supposed progenitors of the O(He) stars, the He-rich and 
metal poor spo stars, do have ‘normal’ mass-loss rates 
(only observable in the UV spectra) in contrast to the C- 
and O-rich [WC] stars which are found in the same part of 
the g—To plane. 


Occurrence of super-hot winds at the end of 
pre-white dwarf evolution 

The bifurcation of post-AGB evolution into H-deficient 
and H-normal channels seems to continue into the WD 
domain, dividing the cooling sequence into non-DA and 
DA white dwarfs. It is natural to assume that the 
hottest He-rich WDs (spectral type DO) are descendants 
of the PG1159 stars, however, some H-deficient post- 
AGB stars will become DA WDs, namely those which 
have retained at least some hydrogen in their envelope. 
The transition of post-AGB stars into the hot WD phase 
is encompassed by a spectacular phenomenon, which 
has been discovered only recently. It was found that a 
large fraction (50%) of the hot DO WDs shows signatures 
of a super-hot wind in the optical spectrum. High- 
ionization absorption lines of the CNO elements were 
identified (e.g. C VI, N VIL, O VIII, and even Ne X). The 
high excitation potentials involved require temperatures 
approaching almost 10° K and the triangular shaped line 
profiles suggest their formation in a rapidly accelerating 
wind from the WD, reaching a terminal speed of the order 
of 10000 km s~!. Preliminary model calculations suggest 
mass-loss rates between 10~” and 107'°Mo yr~!. However, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


PG 1159 Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


at present these radiative equilibrium models are crude at 
best, as they simply assume a very high Tom in order to 
produce the high-ionization stages. Since the post-AGB 
age is of the order 10°-10° yr, consequences of the stellar 
wind on evolutionary times scales and chemical surface 
composition are possible, if the mass-loss rates are in fact 
as high as estimated right now. 

It is emphasized that this wind phenomenon is not 
restricted to DO WDs. It was also detected with one WD 
of spectral type DAO (H rich with traces of He) with similar 
high-ionization features. This is the only case discovered 
among DA/DAO WDs so far, and the question arises of 
why there is such a strong preference among DOs to show 
this phenomenon. 


Bibliograpy 

Asplund M 1999 Sakurai’s object—stellar evolution in real 
time IAU Symp. 191: AGB Stars ed T Le Bertre, A Lebre 
and C Waelkens (San Francisco, CA: Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific) pp 481-6 

Hamann W-R 1997 Spectra of Wolf-Rayet type central stars 
and their analysis IAU Symp. 180: Planetary Nebulae 
ed H J Habing and HJ G LM Lamers (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) pp 91-6 

Iben I Jr 1984 On the frequency of planetary nebula nuclei 
powered by helium burning and on the frequency of 
white dwarfs with hydrogen-deficient atmospheres 
Astrophys. J. 277 333-54 

Werner K, Dreizler S, Rauch T, Koesterke L and Heber 
U 1999 Born-again AGB stars: starting point of the 
H-deficient post-AGB evolutionary sequence? IAU 
Symp. 191: AGB Stars ed T Le Bertre, A Lebre and C 
Waelkens (San Francisco, CA: Astronomical Society 
of the Pacific) pp 493-8 

Werner K and Wolff B 1999 The EUV spectrum of the 
unique bare stellar core H1504+65 Astron. Astrophys. 
347 L9-L13 

Wesemael F, Green R F and Liebert J 1985 Spectrophoto- 
metric and model-atmosphere analyses of the hot DO 
and DAO white dwarfs from the Palomar-Green sur- 
vey Astrophys. J. Suppl. 58 379-411 


Klaus Werner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Phaethon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Phaethon 


An Apollo asteroid discovered by Simon Green and John 
Davies in 1983 from data returned by the IRAS satellite; it 
is designated (3200) Phaethon. It follows a highly elliptical 
orbit and at perihelion is just 0.14 AU from the Sun, well 
within the orbit of Mercury. It was named after the son 
of the Sun-god Helios, who took the reins of the Sun- 
chariot and, losing control, nearly incinerated the Earth. 
By April 2000, only two other asteroids were known to 
have a smaller perihelion distance. Phaethon’s aphelion 
distance is 2.40 AU, and its mean distance from the Sun 
is 1.27 AU (190 million miles); orbital period 1.43 years, 
inclination 22°, eccentricity 0.89 and rotation period about 
4h. The discovery of Phaethon solved the mystery of the 
Geminid meteor shower’s ‘missing’ parent comet, for the 
orbital elements of the asteroid match those of the Geminid 
meteor stream. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


> Earth 


Figure 2. The Earth-Moon system as seen from space. 


Phase 


In the different phases of its motion, a celestial body of 
the solar system, as seen from the Earth, shows different 
apparent shapes. This comes from the relative positions of 
the Earth (the location of the observer), of the body (that is 
observed) and of the Sun (which is illuminating the body). 
These different successive aspects of the illuminated body 
that is being observed are named phases (for example: the 
PHASES OF THE MOON). From these first definitions, the phase 
angle is defined as the angle measured from the center of 
the illuminated observed body between the source of light 
(the Sun) and the observer (the Earth). It is the Sun—object— 
observer angle. Knowledge of the value of this angle will 
provide the aspect of the body, the apparent disk of which 
is smaller than the true apparent disk (cf figure 1). 


The Moon phases 


In the case of the Moon, it is easy to understand its 
changing appearance day after day (figure 2). 

Let Lm and L, be the longitudes of the Moon and of 
the Sun and ¢ the phase angle. The relationship between 
these are given in table 1 and the illumination from the 
Moon as a function of the phase angle is given in table 2. 


Phases of the planets 


Similarly to the Moon, all the bodies of the solar system, 
and especially the planets, are affected by the phase effect. 
This effect is quite different if the planet is located between 
the Earth and the Sun (as are Mercury and Venus) or if the 
planet is located outside the Earth’s orbit (Mars, Jupiter, 
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune). 

In the case of Mercury and Venus, the phases are 
observed just as they are for the Moon and all the aspects 
of the apparent disk of these planets are as for the Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In the case of the other planets, the phase angle is 
always less than 90° (cf table 3) since these planets are 
never between the Earth and the Sun. 

Before the use of telescopes, it was impossible to see 
the phases of the planets with the naked eye. This was 
cited as a proof to astronomers that the Earth was the 
center of the universe. Let us see why. If the Sun is the 
center of the solar system, then the distance between the 
Earth and Venus should have very large variations, which 
is not the case if the Earth is the center of the solar system. 
However, observation shows that vENus keeps the same 
magnitude all the time, so that Venus is rotating around 
the Earth. Such an argument does not take into account 
the existence of the phase effect. GALILEO, when observing 
Venus through his telescope, understood easily why the 
magnitude of Venus was not changing much during its 
revolution around the Sun. The phases of Venus were 
compensating for the variation of distance to the Earth. 
Venus showed a full disk when furthest away and a thin 
crescent when nearest. 


The phase effect 

The phase effect is a tool for astronomers when observing 
the planets: first, the variation of the angle of incidence 
of the illumination of the planets by the Sun will provide 
information on the nature of the planets themselves. The 
‘flat’ aspect of the Moon, independent of the phase, shows 
that the Moon has no atmosphere. In contrast, the 
relief aspect of the planet Jupiter shows that this planet 
has a thick atmosphere. Whether the line marking the 
terminator between the illuminated side and the dark side 
of a planet is sharp or not is an indicator of the existence 
of twilight due to the atmosphere on the observed 
planet. This shows the importance of the phase effect 
for astronomers. For that, astronomers have theoretical 
models providing the light flux received from solar system 
objects depending on the phase angle. Different laws 
of distribution of the light on the observed bodies exist 
including parameters depending on the characteristics 
of the surface of the bodies. For example, Lambert’s 
law describes very well a planetary surface with a thick 
atmosphere. More recently, Hapke’s law describes more 
precisely the granulometry of the dust and the porosity of 
the surface of the objects. 

For example, the phase angle helps us to understand 
the nature of the surfaces of solar system objects: for 
a smooth surface, the reflectivity depends directly on 
the phase angle; for an irregular surface, the reflectivity 
changes when the phase angle becomes zero. The reflected 
light will increase suddenly owing to the disappearance of 
any shadow made by the particles of dust. This is called 
the opposition effect. Modeling the reflected light is very 
useful for the determination of the center of mass of the 
bodies of the solar system (in order to build dynamical 
models of their motion). Because of the phase effect, it 
is necessary to reconstruct the geometrical aspect of the 
planet from the apparent observed disk. Uncorrected, this 
can induce systematic errors in the observed astrometric 
positions of the body. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


/ Phase angle 
/ / 


fo) 
"lg « Se 
Un 


\. 
x 


Sun 


Illuminated 


< 


fraction 


Earth 


Figure 1. Phase angle and illuminated fraction of the disk. Quantities related to the phase: gy, phase angle; M, mid-point of the phase; 
L, L’, limbs of the body as seen from the Earth; T, terminator (limit of the illuminated part of the body on the apparent disk); OO’, 
direction of the Earth; 0, position angle of the phase; K = (1 + cos g)/2, illuminated fraction of the apparent disk (ratio of the 
illuminated area to the total area). 


Table 1. Relationships between longitudes of Moon and Sun and phase angles. 


Moon1 New Moon or conjunction 


Moon2 _ First crescent 


Moon3 __ First quarter or quadrature 
Moon4 Waxing gibbous Moon 


Moon 5 Full Moon or opposition 


Moon6 Waning gibbous Moon 
Moon7 _ Last quarter or quadrature 


Moon 8 Last crescent 


Lm = Ls y = 180° k=0 
Lm — Ls < 90° 180° > g > 90° 

Lm = Ls + 90° go =90° k=1/2 
90° < Lm — Ls < 180° 90° > gy > 0° 

Lm = Ls + 180° go =0° k=1 
180° < Lm — Ls < 270° 180° > g > 90° 

Lm = Ls + 270° g=90° k=1/2 
Lm — Ls > 270° gy < 90° 


Table 2. Illumination from the Moon as a function of phase 
angle (according to the Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes). 


Illumination (%) 


Phase angle before after 
(deg) the new Moon 
0 (Full Moon) — 100 100 
10 78.8 76.0 
20 60.3 58.7 
30 46.6 45.3 
40 35.7 35.0 
50 27.6 27.3 
60 21.1 21.1 
70 16.2 15.6 
80 12.0 11.1 
90 (quarter) 8.2 7.8 
100 5.6 5.8 
110 3.8 4.1 
120 2.5 2.6 
130 15 1.6 
140 0.9 
150 0.4 


Table 3. Maximum phase angles of the outer planets. 


Planet Mars Jupiter 
Maximum 

value of the 

phase angle 20° 6° 


Saturn Uranus 


3° 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


9° 


Neptune 


1° 


Phases of eclipses 

In the case of phenomena such as ECLIPsEs, the phases 
correspond to the successive configurations of the 
phenomenon such as partial eclipse and total eclipse. The 
analogy between these events led to the use of the same 
word. 


J-E Arlot 


Phases of the Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Phases of the Moon 


The various aspects that the Moon presents to observers 
on the Earth as the proportion of its sunlit side which is 
visible changes in the course of its orbit around the Earth. 
There are four principle phases: new moon, first quarter, 
full moon and last quarter. One complete cycle of phases is 
termed a Junation, and is completed in just over 29% days, 
the Moon’s synodic period. 

At new moon the Moon is between the Earth and the 
Sun, and is invisible as it presents its night side to the 
observer. If the alignment is exact a total solar eclipse will 
occur, but because the Moon’s orbital plane is inclined 
to the Earth’s, the solar and lunar disks do not usually 
coincide at new moon. The age of the Moon is reckoned 
in days from one new moon to the next. After a day or 
two, a sliver of the sunlit side becomes visible as a thin 
crescent (under exceptional conditions a crescent may be 
visible when the Moon is only about 12 hours old). From 
new moon until full moon the Moon is said to be waxing, as 
more of the sunlit side comes into view. A week after new 
moon comes first quarter, when the Moon is a quarter of 
the way around its orbit. The phase at first quarter is also 
termed a ‘half moon’—the terminator, the line marking 
the boundary between night and day, bisects the Moon’s 
disk. As the Moon continues to wax, the phase becomes 
gibbous, when most of the sunlit side is visible, a crescent- 
shaped portion of the disk remaining in darkness. Full 
moon occurs at just under 15 days. As at new moon, Earth, 
Sun and Moon are again aligned, but this time the Moon 
is opposite the Sun in the sky; if the alignment is close 
enough, a total lunar eclipse occurs. After full moon the 
phases then repeat in reverse, the terminator continuing its 
passage across the disk, through the gibbous phase to last 
quarter, when the Moon enters the last quarter of its orbit 
at nearly 23 days old. In this half of its orbit the Moon is 
said to be waning. After passing through a crescent phase 
again, and the lunation ends with another new moon. 


See also: phase. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Philolaus of Tarentum or Croton (c. 480 Bc—?) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Philolaus of Tarentum or Croton 
(c. 480 Bc—?) 


Pythagorean philosopher, wrote explanations on Pythag- 
orean views. Thought the Earth and planets revolved 
around a central fire. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Phobos ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Phobos 


Two large Soviet spacecraft launched in 1988. Intended to 
explore Mars and drop instruments onto the surface of its 
moon Phobos. Contact was lost with Phobos-1 en route 
to Mars. Phobos-2 failed during manoeuvres in Martian 
orbit. Some images and other data on the planet and 
Phobos were returned. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Phobos and Deimos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Phobos and Deimos 


Asaph Hall discovered the two moons of Mars, Phobos 
and Deimos, in August 1877. Although other observers 
claimed to have discovered several other moons during 
this opposition, a consensus was rapidly reached about 
the presence of two satellites only. This discovery 
allowed Hall to make the first determination of the mass 
of MARS from the observation of the satellites’ orbits with 
avery high accuracy, differing by less than 0.1% from the 
currently accepted value of 0.1074 times the mass of the 
Earth. 

Both Phobos (figure 1) and Deimos (figure 2) have 
a direct circular motion in the equatorial plane of Mars, 
at very short distances from the planet (9400 and 23 500 
km). They are very dark and small (~27 and ~15 km 
diameter) and are difficult to observe from the ground— 
particularly Phobos, which rotates rapidly and is always 
close to the much brighter Mars. Their shape and surface 
morphology are known through spacecraft observations 
only: both objects are very irregular with surfaces satu- 
rated by impact craters, very similar to the few ASTEROIDS 
observed so far, although Deimos’ surface is significant- 
ly smoother. These characteristics suggest that the two 
satellites are asteroids formed well beyond the orbit of 
Mars, and captured after the accretion of the planet. The 
capture mechanism is unknown, however. Although 


Figure 1. Phobos seen by Mars Global Surveyor on 19 August 
1998. The resolution is 4 meters per pixel. Individual boulders 
on the rim of the crater are ejecta blocks from the impact that 
formed Stickney, the large crater on top. The grooves are the 
elongated depressions near the rim of Stickney. High-resolution 
MOC image PIA01333 (Malin Space Science Systems, NASA). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Figure 2. Viking Orbiter image of Deimos acquired on 5 May 
1977, from 1400 km. Deimos appears smooth. Higher-resolution 
images taken during closer approaches show that the surface is 
covered with craters, but many of these have been partially 
buried or subdued by regolith. Deimos is about 14 km from top 
to bottom in this image. (Viking Orbiter 413B83, NASA.) 


their low density (~1.9) is difficult to reconcile with the 
most favored meteoritic analogs, it is comparable to the 
only C-type asteroid observed so far. The surface compo- 
sition has been observed only on Phobos; its spatial vari- 
ations imply that, whatever its origin, Phobos is not a 
primitive body but instead experienced a long and com- 
plicated history. The orbital position around Mars proba- 
bly favors very specific evolution processes, in particular 
concerning impact cratering. 


Discovery and observations 

Several astronomers, including William Herschel, had 
conducted unsuccessful searches for Martian satellites, 
and it was generally accepted that Mars had no moon 
when Asaph Hall systematically looked at very close dis- 
tances from the planet. He eventually discovered the two 
satellites in the bright halo of Mars with the 66 cm refrac- 
tor at the US Naval Observatory during the very close 
opposition of 1877—the same year Schiaparelli drew the 
first detailed map of Mars. Phobos and Deimos already 
had a literary history, however, since two satellites of 
Mars are mentioned by Jonathan Swift in <it>Gulliver’s 
Travels (1726) and by Voltaire in Micromégas (1750). Swift 
was probably influenced by Kepler’s view that, Mercury 
having no satellite, Earth only one, and Jupiter four (only 
the Galilean satellites were known at the time), Mars 
should have two satellites for symmetry reasons. 

The first studies of the physical properties of 
Phobos and Deimos were conducted by E Pickering at 
Harvard between 1877 and 1882; however, their detailed 
characteristics remained unknown for nearly a century. 
Detailed observations of the orbital motions permitted 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Phobos and Deimos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


accurate determination of Mars’ oblateness and rotation 
axis even before the space era. Phobos was first imaged 
by Mariner 7 in 1969, and appeared as a small and very 
irregular rock about 25 km long. Such small objects can- 
not be resolved by ground-based telescopes or the 
Hubble Space telescope at the distance of Mars, and 
therefore most of our current knowledge derives from 
spacecraft observations by Mariner 9 (1971), Viking 
(1977) and Phobos-2 (1989) and from a few ground-based 
spectroscopic observations. The Soviet Phobos mission 
was dedicated to the largest satellite of Mars, and repre- 
sented the first attempt to land on a small body of the 
solar system. Unfortunately the spacecraft was lost dur- 
ing its approach to Phobos, after two months in Martian 
orbit; therefore no in situ observations were performed 
although high-quality remote sensing data were 
acquired, mostly from the camera and the two spectrom- 
eters. 

The current Martian program is focused on sample 
return from Mars, and does not include specific observa- 
tions of the satellites. However, several projects dedicat- 
ed to Phobos have been proposed. The reason for this 
interest is that Phobos is the most accessible asteroid-like 
object and would give information about both the prim- 
itive matter from which terrestrial planets were built, 
and the evolution processes on small bodies of the solar 
system. 


Orbits, orbital histories and possible origins 
Deimos lies at 23 500 km from Mars’s center, Phobos at 
only 9400 km. Phobos is so close that it is located well 
inside the synchronous orbit of Mars, so it rises in the 
west and sets in the east twice a day as seen from Mars. 
This also means that Phobos is slowed down by the tidal 
forces raised inside the volume of Mars. Phobos is there- 
fore spiraling towards Mars, and will eventually crash to 
the surface; the predicted collapse time is of the order of 
40 million years. Conversely, this implies that the origi- 
nal orbit of Phobos was very different. Both orbits cur- 
rently have low eccentricity and inclination, and this 
puts strong constraints on the satellites’ origin. 

Two types of hypothesis have been proposed con- 
cerning the origin of the Martian satellites: the first type 
states that they formed in Martian orbit, and are rem- 
nants of the planetary formation process as are the large 
satellites of giant planets; in the second type of hypothe- 
ses the satellites are asteroids formed further from the 
Sun and captured by aerodynamic drag on either the 
planetary nebula or a dense primitive atmosphere. As 
detailed below, compositional arguments favor the sec- 
ond hypothesis, but the capture mechanism is difficult to 
explain. Dynamicists generally argue that the current 
orbits cannot be produced following capture of outer 
solar system objects; in particular the orbit of Deimos is 
stable on very long time scales and cannot result from a 
more eccentric orbit under the single influence of tidal 
forces. Several hints have been proposed that could 
accommodate the capture theory, including chaotic tum- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


bling, collisions, gas drag on a dissipating nebula, eccen- 
tricity jumps consecutive to gravitational resonances etc. 
It has also been proposed that the two satellites are the 
two parts of a single object in synchronous orbit, split 
apart at the time of heavy bombardment. In the frame- 
work of the capture hypothesis, Phobos and Deimos 
would be the last of many objects captured by the proto- 
Mars, which eventually crashed on the planet and con- 
tributed to its formation (see also PLANETESIMALS). 


Morphology and bulk properties 

Both satellites are very irregular, as expected for such 
small bodies. To a first approximation they are elongated 
ellipsoids with dimensions given in table 1. Like most 
satellites in the solar system they are in synchronous 
rotation, with their longest axis turned toward the plan- 
et and the shortest one perpendicular to the orbital plane. 
Large departures from this ellipsoidal form exist howev- 
er, and precise estimates of the density rely on accurate 
topographic models of the satellites. The currently 
accepted value (~1.9) is surprisingly low; it can be due to 
the material itself, to large porosity in a thick regolith, or 
to the existence of large voids inside the volume. 

Phobos’ shape is dominated by three large craters: 
Stickney (10 km diameter), Hall and Roche (5 km each). 
No secondary craters are identified and no central peak 
crater is observed, which is consistent with the small size 
of the satellite. On Deimos the largest identified crater 
is only 3 km across, and the density of large craters 
(>200 m) is at most half that of Phobos. However, a large 
saddle-like depression 10 km across, i.e. relatively much 
larger than Stickney on Phobos, could also result from an 
impact. Both surfaces are saturated with small craters 
and are thought to be at least 2 billion years old. All mea- 
surements demonstrate the existence of a regolith up to 
200 m thick on Phobos, a consequence of the impacts. On 
Deimos the regolith is apparently five to ten times thin- 
ner, but it fills most of the craters. 

A peculiarity of Phobos, which was long thought 
unique in the solar system, is the presence of several sys- 
tems of parallel grooves with directions related to the 
main axes of the satellite. The grooves are typically 30 m 


Table 1. Satellite data. 


Phobos Deimos 
Semi-major axis (km) 9378.5 (2.76 Ry) 23 459 (6.92 Ry) 
Period 7h39 min 30 h 18 min 
Eccentricity 0.015 15+0.00004 0.000196+0.000 034 
Inclination with respect 1.02° 1.82° 

to Laplace plane 

Orbital velocity (kms) 2.14 1.36 
Mass (kg) (1.08+0.01)x10% 1.8 x 1015 
Axes (radii, km) 13.4x11.1x9.340.3 7.5x6.2x 5.4+0.5 
Volume (km3) 5680+250 1000+300 
Density (g cm) 1.90+0.10 1.70+0.4 
Escape velocity (ms) 12 6 
Geometric albedo 0.071+0.012 0.068 +0.007 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Phobos and Deimos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


deep, 100-200 m wide and up to 20 km long. In many 
areas, grooves are alignments of coalescent pits that 
could result from outgassing mechanisms or more prob- 
ably from regolith drainage into large cracks in the vol- 
ume of Phobos. Most of them are centered on Stickney 
and are best developed in its vicinity. The main impact 
suffered by the satellite, which is close to the maximum 
that a body of this size can tolerate without disruption, is 
sufficient to cause these cracks to form, but tidal effects 
could have later played a role in the evolution of the 
grooves. Deimos has a much more rounded shape with 
large regular facets separated by bright ridges; other 
bright patches are visible on crater rims. The whole sur- 
face has a distinctly smoother appearance that is due to 
downslope movement of surface materials. This differ- 
ence in morphology is unexpected, given the similarity 
in bulk properties of the two satellites. 

The first high-resolution observations of asteroids 
by the Galileo and NEAR spacecraft have shown that 
Phobos is actually the most ‘normal’ body, while Deimos 
is markedly different. Gaspra and Ida, which are S-type 
asteroids with a much larger density, are the only other 
known solar system bodies with grooves, although theirs 
are less developed than those on Phobos. Mathilde, cur- 
rently the only C-type asteroid observed, is very much 
like Phobos: its overall morphology, its density (1.5-2.0 g 
cm-%) and its spectral properties are similar; conversely, it 
exhibits at least five impact craters with radius half its 
size, and no grooves. 


Evolution mechanisms 

Internal evolution of small bodies stops very early in 
their history because their volume-to-surface ratio is too 
small to allow significant heating. In these conditions the 
most efficient evolution process is meteoritic cratering, 
which is responsible for the shape and relief but also 
forms a regolith by accumulation of debris and can even 
modify the surface composition. Other significant 


core tirratoreitdiiiitiiis 


roootirirtiiis 


50% | a 


Redder unit 


42 Isis (dark S) 


P 221 Eos (K) 
oe 114 Kassandra (T) 
19 Fortuna (G) 
a as 511 Davida (C) 
ape eS 76 Freia (P) 
me 368 Daidea (D) 


TTT T Tt F T rT... YT T a a T T TYTpIT4y T T? Pay ETE 
05 #10 #15 20 2.5 3.0 
Wavelength in Microns 


Scaled Reflectance 
(norm to 1.0 at 0.55 ym) 


vittivitisiels 


Us DORR B ORS RARE OROR ASE ARER DARED REBESRLAES LASSE SE 


2 
° 


processes include space weathering (formation of dark 
glasses and modification of surface chemistry by interac- 
tion with the solar wind and cosmic particles) and possi- 
bly tidal effects. 

Crater formation (see CRATERS) is in general in the 
strength-scaling regime, where ejecta leave the immedi- 
ate vicinity of the crater and well-defined rims do not 
form. On Phobos, only craters more than 5 km large have 
a significant ejecta blanket; this suggests that the bulk 
material has a compressive strength similar to anhydrous 
carbonaceous chondrites, while the regolith has proper- 
ties similar to that of the Moon. In these conditions, mate- 
rials can be excavated from one or two kilometers deep; 
due to the small gravity, ejecta are also transported very 
far from the impact. However, observations from the 
Phobos-2 spacecraft showed significant spectral variabil- 
ity on a kilometer scale, related in particular to ejecta 
blankets and deep craters. Therefore, lateral and vertical 
mixing are not efficient enough to homogenize the whole 
surface. 

Cratering processes are deeply affected by the 
orbital situation around Mars. Because of the strong 
asymmetry of the effective gravitational field, ejecta suf- 
fer a different fate depending on the longitude of impact 
and on the speed and direction of ejection; this mecha- 
nism is clearly seen on Stickney’s ejecta, which are more 
confined in the sub-Mars direction. In addition, the aver- 
age escape velocities are much smaller than the orbital 
velocities (~8 m s-! versus ~2 km s~), therefore most ejec- 
ta escaping the satellites remain on the same orbit 
around Mars and are reaccreted by low-velocity impacts 
in a very short time (~104 yr), which strongly increases 
the meteorite flux and regolith thickness. Dust belts may 
have formed along the orbits of Phobos and Deimos 
when impacts were very frequent; these dust belts were 
never observed, however, and the lifetime of such objects 
seems rather short. Over long periods of times, surface 
materials can be ejected and reaccreted over and over 


FO OO OG OO OO OT SP OD OO 
sox | 4 b Mature lunar =F 
4 mare soil B 
q (A11) c 
o” 4 Phobos, redder £ 
2 in | of unit E 
he) Pa c 
és Pome gw Phobos, : [- 
Zo 5 @ , bluer unit Meghei (CM2) 
ooo. a Allende E 
ee’ (C3V) E 
ao] E 
wo 2 a rar ie 
s . 4 Gere (black L5) E 
AES L 
od EF 
=. [ 
ys ban a T Ts 1. T TTT TT 1 oat Se TTT TT a TTT [ets T 


0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 
Wavelength in Microns 


Figure 3. Comparison of the spectra of Phobos and various dark asteroids and meteorites. (From Murchie and Erard 1996 Icarus 123 


63-86.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Phobos and Deimos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


again. Shock heating would then dehydrate the surface 
materials and could profoundly modify the composition 
and spectral properties of the regolith. The regolith itself 
can insulate the interior, which could retain large quanti- 
ties of volatiles. 

The morphological peculiarities of Deimos are cur- 
rently best explained by the effect of a large impact cor- 
responding to the saddle-like scar mentioned above; seis- 
mic shaking and reaccumulation of ~200 m of debris 
would have concealed previous craters and possible 
grooves formed during the impact, thus explaining the 
lower density of large craters, the thinner regolith in the 
craters, and global downslope movements. The location 
in the Martian orbit permits isotropic reaccumulation of 
large quantities of ejecta, which is not possible for an 
asteroid in solar orbit, and could contribute to the partic- 
ularly smooth appearance of Deimos. 


Composition and internal structure 

Composition is inferred from spectral observations, with 
a strong constraint from the density. The observed prop- 
erties (figure 3) strongly suggest that the satellites are 
captured asteroids but do not strictly preclude formation 
in the inner solar system, although independent from 
Mars’ formation. The two satellites are among the dark- 
est bodies in the solar system, with geometric albedo half 
that of the Moon. Variations in brightness and photomet- 
ric functions are observed, but are usually ascribed to 
variations in particle size rather than composition. 

The Martian satellites have often been presented as 
homogeneous mixtures of materials similar to hydrated 
carbonaceous chondrites, inferred to be the primary 
component of C-type asteroids. This interpretation was 
based on the low albedo, on limited spectral coverage by 
Mariner 9 and Viking, and on the low density. More 
recent observations contradict this view, however. The 
major spectral properties observed by Phobos-2 are a 
very red continuum slope, no hydration signature, a 
weak and variable pyroxene/olivine absorption, and a 
strong fall-off in reflectance below 0.5 um; the Hubble 
Space Telescope has provided consistent results for both 
satellites in the visible range. These properties do not fit 
any known meteorite spectrum; the best match is given 
by some dark ordinary chondrites (L and LL types), but 
is not incompatible with dry carbonaceous chondrites 
(CO and CV types). However, only the mature lunar 
mare soils exhibit similarly steep spectral slopes, which 
demonstrates that exposure to the space environment 
has modified the regolith extensively. Consistently, 
Stickney’s ejecta have flatter spectra, and either are less 
altered or consist of a different material excavated by the 
impact. As for asteroids, only the driest C-type have low 
hydration bands like Phobos and Deimos, but the best 
spectral matches are given by P, D and T types. T-type 
asteroids are poorly understood, but there appears to be 
a gradual evolution in spectral properties from C to P 
and D. Most P and D objects are thought to be primitive, 
rich in organic materials and possibly in anhydrous sili- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


cates, and are located in the outer asteroid belt (2.8 to 3.8 
AU); interestingly, these dry asteroids are often suspect- 
ed to contain large amounts of water ice preserved since 
the formation of the solar system. 

The low density of the Martian satellites is in fact 
inconsistent with that of any low-albedo METEORITES. The 
density of the best spectral analogs is so much higher 
(3.4-3.8 for black ordinary chondrites, 3.3-3.6 for dry 
carbonaceous chondrites) that regolith porosity alone 
cannot explain the discrepancy. The presence of large 
quantities of ice in the interior would resolve this para- 
dox. On Phobos, an ice core with radius 7-9.5 km is 
required, depending on the density of the upper layer; 
the latter would mostly consist of space-weathered prim- 
itive material, but could also have accreted Martian 
material ejected during the formation of impact basins. 

Another possibility often suggested to explain the 
low density and surface heterogeneity of Phobos is that 
of the ‘rubble pile’ of fragments. Such objects are thought 
to result from disruption of larger parent bodies, and to 
have large internal porosity and therefore low density. 
However, impact modeling of Stickney suggests that 
Phobos’ grooves could have formed only in a coherent 
body; in addition, the satellite was apparently not frag- 
mented in the process and the resulting cracks are not 
large enough to explain the unusual low density. 
Furthermore, a rubble pile is expected to exhibit only a 
small departure from sphericity, which is hardly compat- 
ible with Phobos’ shape. The rheological properties of an 
ice core at low temperature would probably permit the 
formation of grooves during a large impact. Considering 
the absence of grooves and the more spherical shape, the 
rubble pile hypothesis cannot be rejected for Deimos in 
the framework of the large impact theory mentioned 
above; it is also favored for Mathilde, in spite of its close 
similarities with Phobos. 


Conclusion 

The last point above is representative of the uncertainty 
that persists concerning the origin and evolution of the 
Martian satellites: although it is more and more widely 
accepted that they are captured bodies formed in the 
outer asteroid belt, their structure and evolution are still 
poorly understood. The more attractive assumption is 
perhaps that they are D or T-type asteroids made of rela- 
tively primitive material accreted on a water ice core, 
with surfaces extensively modified by exposure to the 
space environment; specific processes related to the 
orbital position and the unusual proximity of the Sun 
have probably resulted in surface characteristics that are 
uncommon among asteroids of similar origin. 

However, numerous intriguing questions remain, 
including: the origin of the bodies (do they represent 
primitive objects still containing large amounts of ice 
formed in the solar nebula; from which part of the aster- 
oid belt do they come?), the regolith composition (are 
they made of a material similar to carbonaceous chon- 
drites or a more evolved one; is there a significant 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Phobos and Deimos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


amount of Martian material accreted on the surfaces?), 
the internal structure, the nature and efficiency of specif- 
ic evolution processes, the origin of the difference 
between Phobos and Deimos, and so on. The possibility 
of capturing distant objects around Mars is actually still 
problematic. 

A better understanding will require further obser- 
vations of the Martian satellites and more asteroids. 
Planetary missions now systematically consider asteroid 
flybys during the cruise phase (e.g. Cassini/Huygens, 
Rosetta), so our knowledge of these objects is rapidly 
improving. In the long term, sample return from Phobos 
may prove the only way to address open issues concern- 
ing its origin. In the meantime, global imaging spec- 
troscopy coverage in the near-infrared would provide 
important information about its composition; such 
observations could be performed from a spacecraft dedi- 
cated to the exploration of Mars. 


Bibliography 

Sheehan W 1996 The Planet Mars: A History of Observation 
and Discovery (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) [discovery of the satellites] 

Burns J 1993 Contradictory clues as to the origin of the 
Martian moons (in Mars ed Kieffer et al (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) [orbital and dynamic 
review] 

Thomas P, Veverka J, Bell J, Lunine J and Cruikshank D 
1993 Satellites of Mars: geologic history (in Mars ed 
Kieffer et al (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) [composition and geology] 

Stéphane Erard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Phoenix 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Phoenix 


(the Phoenix; abbrev. Phe, gen. Phoenicis; area 469 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Sculptor and 
Tucana, and culminates at midnight in early October. It 
was probably first shown on Petrus Plancius’ celestial 
globe of c. 1598, though it is usually attributed to the Dutch 
navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known as Petrus 
Theodorus) and Frederick de Houtman, who charted that 
part of the southern sky in 1595-7. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Phoenix are w Phoenicis (Ankaa or Nair al Zaurak), 
magnitude 2.4, 6 Phoenicis (combined magnitude 3.3), a 
very close binary with a yellow (G8) primary, magnitude 
4.0, and a slightly fainter secondary, magnitude 4.2, 
separation 0.7", and y Phoenicis, magnitude 3.4. There 
are four other stars brighter than fourth magnitude, 
including ¢ Phoenicis, a multiple system with bluish- 
white/white (B6 and A7) components, magnitudes 3.9v 
and 8.0, separation 6.5”, the former of which is an eclipsing 
binary (range 3.9-4.4, period 1.67 days). Other interesting 
objects include NGC 625, an eleventh-magnitude galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Photodissociation Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Photodissociation Regions 


Photodissociation regions, or photon-dominated regions 
(PDRs), are dense (~10°-10’ cm~3) regions in the 
interstellar medium (ISM) where the hydrogen gas is 
neutral, and is either atomic or molecular (see HI and 
Hil regions), and where externally incident far-ultraviolet 
(FUV: 6-13.6 eV) radiation controls the chemical structure 
and dominates the thermal properties of the gas. This 
definition excludes the diffuse and translucent clouds 
which are less dense and generally more transparent to 
FUV radiation, although some authors refer to the latter 
objects as ‘low-density’ PDRs. PDRs are ubiquitous in 
the ISM and are present in the surface layers of dense 
molecular clouds, reflection nebulae, planetary nebulae, 
neutral stellar winds and circumstellar disks. 

PDRs are widespread sources of optical, infrared 
and millimeter atomic and molecular line emission, as 
well as thermal infrared dust continuum emission. PDR 
emission is particularly bright in gas exposed to enhanced 
FUV radiation fields, such as exist in massive-star-forming 
regions in the Milky Way. PDRs are prominent in starburst 
galaxy nuclei and active galactic nuclei. 

Famous and well-studied Galactic PDRs are located 
in the A and B clouds and Bright-Bar region in the 
Orion molecular cloud complex, the star-forming regions 
M17 and S140, molecular clouds in the Galactic center, 
the reflection nebulae NGC 2023, NGC 7023 and IC 63, 
and the planetary nebulae NGC 7027 and BD+30°3639. 
PDR emission has been observed in numerous galaxies 
including the well-studied starburst galaxies M82 and 
NGC 253. 


Chemical structure 

The chemical processes which occur in PDRs are similar 
to those which occur in the diffuse and translucent 
clouds (see INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR CLoups). Molecules are 
destroyed by photodissociation (XYthv —> X + Y), and 
atoms with ionization potentials less than that of atomic 
hydrogen (13.6 eV) are photoionized (X+hv —> X + e) by 
the FUV radiation. Molecules form via sequences of two- 
body gas-phase processes including radiative association 
(X+Y — XY + hv), ion—molecule exchange (X* + YZ > 
XY* + Z), charge-transfer (X* + YZ — X + YZ") and 
neutral-neutral (X+YZ — XY + Z) chemical reactions. 
Molecular ions are removed by dissociative recombination 
(XY* +e > X+/Y). Endothermic neutral-neutral reactions 
play a more important role in PDRs compared with diffuse 
or translucent clouds owing to the generally higher gas 
temperatures that prevail in PDRs. 

Formation of molecules on grain surfaces and their 
ejection into the gas phase may also play an important role, 
particularly in the production of hydrogenated species. 
Molecular hydrogen (Hp) is not formed efficiently by two- 
body reactions, and catalytic formation on grain surfaces 
dominates its production in PDRs (and elsewhere in the 
ISM). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The typical structure of a uniform-density (model) 
PDR is illustrated schematically in figure 1. This particular 
model is for a cloud with a total hydrogen density equal to 
10* cm~? exposed to an incident FUV field which is 2 x 10° 
times more intense than the mean interstellar FUV field. 
The relative abundances of H, H2, Ct, C, CO, S*, S, SO and 
SO; are shown as functions of increasing visual extinction, 
Ay, into the cloud. 

A thin ionization front (IF) lies at the outer boundary 
of the PDR. Lyman continuum photons are absorbed in 
the IF, and longer-wavelength FUV radiation penetrates 
into the PDR. At the outer edge of the PDR molecules 
(in particular H, and CO) are rapidly photodissociated, 
and atomic carbon is photoionized. The incident FUV 
radiation is attenuated by a combination of dust grain 
continuum absorption and molecular line absorptions. 
The gas becomes progressively more molecular as the 
destructive effects of the FUV field diminish with 
increasing cloud depth. 

Figure 1 illustrates some important chemical layers 
which occur in PDRs. The first is the H—H> ‘dissociation 
front’ across which the hydrogen gas becomes molecular. 
Hp is photodissociated in a two-step process. FUV photons 
are first absorbed in electronic excitations in lines of the 
Lyman and Werner band systems. This is then followed 
by spontaneous radiative decays to the ground-state 
continuum, which lead to dissociation. The dominant H2 
absorption lines generally become very optically thick in 
PDRs, and once this occurs the hydrogen molecules are 
said to ‘self-shield’ against the destructive FUV radiation. 

A second important transition is the C*-C-CO layer 
across which the gas-phase carbon is incorporated into 
CO molecules. Atomic carbon becomes abundant in this 
transition layer. At large cloud depths the excess oxygen 
either remains atomic or is incoporated into O). A third 
transition illustrated in figure 1 is the S*-S-SO,SO, layer 
across which sulfur is incorporated into molecules. 

The locations of the various transition layers depend 
primarily on the hydrogen particle density and the 
intensity of the incident FUV field. Other cloud 
parameters include the elemental abundances, the grain 
absorption and scattering properties, and the cloud 
geometry. 

The observations are generally consistent with 
the structure illustrated in figure 1. However, in 
inhomogeneous clumpy clouds the behavior can become 
more complicated, owing to enhanced penetration and 
internal scattering of the FUV radiation and the presence 
of unresolved dense clumps within the observational 
beams. For example, photodissociation of CO molecules 
by scattered radiation in clumpy media probably accounts 
for the extended atomic carbon emission observed in star- 
forming molecular clouds. 

The ionization fraction is an important parameter of 
interstellar clouds. Near the outer edges of PDRs the 
positive charge is carried mainly by C* ions, and beyond 
the C*t-C-CO transition photoionization of silicon and 
sulfur provides the free electrons. In clouds which are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Photodissociation Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PDR 
< > 
ge 4 
35 J 
25 J 
4h co J 


log density (cm’’) 
| 


Ay (magnitudes) 


Figure 1. Chemical structure of a PDR, illustrating the H—-H) dissociation front and the C*-C-CO and S*-S-SO,SO} transition layers. 


The ionization front (IF) marks the outer boundary of the PDR. 


sufficiently thick to absorb all of the incident FUV radiation 
an inner boundary to the PDR exists beyond which 
other processes (e.g. cosmic-ray ionization) dominate the 
thermal and chemical properties of the gas. In the interior 
shielded regions the positive charge is carried mainly by 
abundant molecular ions (e.g. H} and HCO*) and metal 
ions. 


PDR emission lines 

The gas temerature in PDRs is fixed by the balance between 
FUV heating and atomic and molecular emission line 
cooling. Observations and theoretical computations show 
that the gas temperatures in the outer parts of PDRs 
range from a few 100 K in lower density clouds to more 
than 1000 K in very dense clouds. The gas temperature 
decreases with increasing cloud depth. Generally the 
gas temperature is significantly higher than the dust 
temperature in PDRs. 

The FUV radiation energy is effectively transferred 
to the gas via photoelectric emission from small dust 
grains and by the photoionization of ‘large molecules’ or 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Evidence for 
the presence of PAHs in PDRs is provided by observations 
of broad emission features at 3.3, 6.2, 7.7, 8.6 and 11.3 wm, 
although the exact identifications of these features remain 
uncertain. Dense PDRs are also heated by collisional de- 
excitation of H, molecules which have been vibrationally 
excited by the FUV-pumping process (see below). 

PDRs are cooled by atomic and ionic fine-structure 
emission lines and molecular rotational transitions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Important fine-structure emission lines include the [C II] 
158 um, [O I] 63 and 146 wm, [Si II] 35 wm, and [C I] 370 
and 609 «wm transitions. Their relative intensities serve as 
diagnostics of the conditions in PDRs. The [C II] and [O I] 
emission lines are particularly useful diagnostics, and can 
emit up to ~ 1% of the absorbed FUV luminosity (most of 
the FUV energy is reradiated as thermal far-infrared dust 
emission). 

Figure 2 shows model computations of the [C II] 
158 ym and [O I] 63 wm emission line strengths as 
functions of the incident FUV intensities for a range 
of assumed cloud densities. A selection of observed 
line strengths from several astronomical sources is also 
displayed in figure 2. The emission line intensities saturate 
at large values of the FUV intensity owing to the effects of 
dust absorption. The critical densities of the [C II] 158 wm 
and [O I] 63 wm transitions (for collisions with neutral 
hydrogen) are 3 x 10° and 3 x 10° cm~? respectively, so that 
the [O I]/[C II] emission line ratio becomes large in high- 
density PDRs. The [C II] line generally remains optically 
thin and can be used as a tracer of the cloud mass. The 
[O I] line becomes optically thick in PDRs. 

PDRs are prominent sources of H; and CO emission 
lines. Because Hp is a light molecule with a small moment 
of inertia its rotational energy levels are widely spaced, and 
elevated temperatures are required for efficient excitation. 
This occurs in PDRs, and mid-infrared H»2 emission lines, 
such as the fundamental J = 2-0 28.2 xm line (and other 
transitions including the 17.0, 12.3, 9.7 and 8.0 ym lines) 
are readily excited and have have been observed (from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Photodissociation Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10° — [Ol] 63 um 


-1 


-2 


24 
ergs cm’ sr 
—t 
oO 
T 


fo?" |) 
10° 0 esis ar Esp ae ge a oS Eg “6 
{oo 40" 10? 0% 10" 40” 10 
10° | [CN] 158 wm 3 
10° | 4 
7 oOriA 
-3 OM82 OSgrA 


-2 


1 

ergs cm’ sr 
—s 
oO 
T 


10° 10° = 10 
FUV intensity 


Figure 2. [C II] 158 wm and [O I] 63 wm fine-structure emission 
line intensities as functions of the incident FUV intensity for 
hydrogen particle densities in the range 107-10” cm~°. Square 
symbols indicate PDRs adjacent to H II regions, triangles are 
reflection and planetary nebulae and circles are starburst galaxy 
nuclei. 


space) in several Galactic PDRs. Mid-IR H: emissions have 
also been observed in several STARBURST GALAXIES, and may 
arise in PDRs. Near-infrared vibrational H»2 emissions, 
including the commonly observed v = 1-0 S(1) 2.12 wm 
line can also be collisionally excited in hot (T > 1000 K) 
and dense (>10* cm~?) PDRs. The relative intensities of the 
collisionally excited Hz emission lines are useful probes of 
the gas temperatures in the outer atomic hydrogen gas 
layer and the H—H) dissociation front. 

Hp is also excited directly by the FUV photons in 
PDRs via an important process called FUV pumping in 
which the Lyman and Werner band FUV line absorptions 
are followed by decays to discrete excited vibrational 
levels of the ground electronic state. The transitions 
to the excited vibrational levels initiate a cascade of 
slow radiative transitions at optical and near-infrared 
wavelengths. Figure 3 displays a model computation 
of the FUV-pumped fluorescent vibrational emission line 
spectrum produced in a PDR with a hydrogen density 
equal to 10° cm~? exposed to an FUV field with an intensity 
of 10°. Fluorescent Hz emissions have been observed in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1e-06 + 


-1 | 
sr 


ergs s cm 


5e-07 


0 | 
0.5 1.0 15 20 2.5 30 35 4.0 
i (microns) 


Figure 3. The FUV-pumped fluorescent Hz emission line 
spectrum in the range 0.5-4 wm. 


numerous PDRs (e.g. the REFLECTION NEBULA NGC 2023 and 
the PLANETARY NEBULA NGC 7027). The fluorescent emission 
line intensities are useful diagnostics of the hydrogen 
gas density, the FUV field intensity, the grain-surface H2 
formation efficiency, the dust grain scattering properties 
and the PDR lifetimes. 

The intensity ratio of the 2.12 ~m 1-0 S(1) and the 
2.25 ym 2-1 S(1) lines may be used to discriminate between 
collisional and fluorescent H» excitation in PDRs. The 
1-0/2-1 line intensity ratio is small (~2) when FUV 
pumping dominates the excitation and becomes large 
(>10) when collisions dominate the excitation and the level 
distributions approach local thermodynamic equilibrium. 
For example, observations of Hz line emissions from the 
planetary nebula BD+30°3639 show that the 1-0/2-1 line 
ratio is large in the hot outer part of the PDR which is 
closest to the central star. Collisional excitation becomes 
less effective with increasing distance from the star, and 
the FUV pumping by the stellar photons then dominates 
the molecular excitation, and the 1-0/2-1 intensity ratio 
becomes small. 

PDRs are prominent sources of CO _ rotational 
emission lines, including the fundamental millimeter 
wave CO J = 1-0 rotational transition at 115 GHz 
which is the standard tracer of interstellar molecular 
clouds. This important emission line generally forms 
in the inner cooler parts of the PDRs. PDRs are also 
sources of submillimeter and far-infrared mid-J (e.g. CO 
J = 7-6) and high-J (e.g. CO J = 14-13) emission lines. 
The high-J CO emissions trace warm and high-density 
gas, which is usually confined to isolated clumps within 
molecular clouds. These high-pressure clumps may be 
self-gravitating and collapsing objects. 

Despite the destructive effects of the FUV radiation 
fields some molecules are formed preferentially in PDRs. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Photodissociation Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Important examples are the radicals OH and CN and 
the molecular ion CO*. In warm PDRs OH and CO* 
are produced by the endothermic hydrogen abstraction 
reaction O+H, — OH + H, followed by the ion—molecule 
exchange OH+C* + CO*+H. This simple sequence may 
explain the large abundances of CO* ions that have been 
observed in the planetary nebula NGC 7027 and molecular 
cloud interfaces in M17 and the Orion Bar. Another 
interesting molecular diagnostic of PDRs is the CN/HCN 
abundance ratio which, because of the photodissociation 
of HCN, is expected to be larger in PDRs compared with 
shielded regions. Indeed, observations of HCN and CN 
molecules in the reflection nebulae NGC 2023 and NGC 
7023 show that the CN/HCN density ratios are enhanced 
near the sources of FUV radiation and decrease by large 
factors with increasing distance from the illuminating 
stars. 


FUV regulated star formation 

The ionization fraction in PDRs (see above) may control 
the rate of low-mass star-formation in the Galaxy. In 
this scenario the sTAR-FORMATION rate is fixed by the rate 
at which magnetic fields are removed from the clouds 
via ambipolar diffusion. The diffusion rates are inversely 
proportional to the ionization fractions which are fixed 
by the visual extinctions through the clouds. A feedback 
loop becomes possible in which energy injection by newly 
formed stars leads to cloud expansion, greater penetration 
of the background interstellar radiation and therefore 
larger ionization fractions, so that the star-formation rate 
decreases. As the energy injection rates decrease the 
clouds collapse, become better shielded against the FUV 
radiation and become less ionized, thereby leading to an 
increased star-formation rate. Theoretical computations 
suggest that an equilibrium occurs for clouds with total 
visual extinctions Ay ~ 7.5, generally consistent with the 
typical observed opacities of molecular clouds. 


Bibliography 

Hollenbach D J and Tielens A G G M 1999 Photodisso- 
ciation regions (PDRs) in the interstellar medium of 
galaxies Rev. Mod. Phys. 71 173 

Hollenbach D J and Tielens A G G M 1997 Dense 
photodissociation regions (PDRs) Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 35 179-215 

Sternberg A 1998 Photon-dominated regions The Molecular 
Astrophysics of Stars and Galaxies ed TW Hartquist and 
DA Williams (Oxford: Clarendon) pp 201-19 


Amiel Sternberg 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Photon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Photon 


An elementary particle that is equivalent to a discrete 
packet, or ‘quantum’, of electromagnetic energy. 

In accordance with the wave-particle duality, light, 
or any other form of electromagnetic radiation, behaves 
in some respect like a wave motion and in others as 
a stream of photons. The energy (£) of a photon is 
directly proportional to the frequency (f), and inversely 
proportional to the wavelength (A), of the radiation. It is 
givenby E = hf = hc/i, where c denotes the speed of light 
and h is the Planck constant. Gamma-ray photons, which 
correspond to the shortest wavelengths of electromagnetic 
radiation, have the highest energies, and radio photons, 
which correspond to the longest wavelengths, have the 
lowest. 

The photon is the force-carrying particle (gauge 
boson) that conveys the electromagnetic force between 
charged particles. It has zero mass, zero charge, and 
spin = 1 (in units of h/27). 


Seealso: electromagnetic radiation, electromagnetic spec- 
trum, elementary particles, fundamental forces, gauge 
bosons, light, quantum mechanics, wave-particle duality. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Physics of Molecules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Physics of Molecules 


Many varieties of molecule have been detected in the 
Milky Way and in other galaxies. The processes by which 
these molecules are formed and destroyed are now broadly 
understood (see INTERSTELLAR CHEMISTRY). These molecules 
are important components of galaxies in two ways. Firstly, 
radiation emitted by molecules enables us to trace the 
presence of diffuse gas, to infer its physical properties 
and to estimate the propensity for further sTaR FORMATION 
in that galaxy. Secondly, the emitted radiation removes 
energy from the emitting regions, allowing them to cool. 
This cooling is an essential part of the process of the 
gravitational collapse of gas clouds in the initial stages of 
star formation. 

Molecules are found in many environments in space, 
but most readily in the denser, cooler parts of the Galaxy 
and other galaxies. Molecules were discovered first 
in interstellar clouds and are also abundant in cool 
circumstellar envelopes around evolved stars. They 
have also been detected in planetary nebulae, in the 
ejecta of novae and supernovae, and in the atmospheres 
of relatively cool stars. Molecules have even been 
detected in the Sun: suNspots contain water molecules 
(admittedly, very short-lived). In general, molecules are 
likely to be present in astronomical situations where the 
gas temperatures are less than about 4000 K and the 
gas number densities are above about 10° H atoms/m? 
(assuming that other elements are also present with the 
usual cosmic abundances). 

Molecules were even important in the early universe 
where hydrogen molecules were an important cooling 
agent for pre-galactic gas clouds, allowing them to collapse 
under gravity to form PROTOGALAXIES. 


Physical processes 


Physical processes are here defined to be those in which 
the molecules interact with their environment but remain 
fundamentally unchanged. In a chemical process, by 
contrast, an exchange of atoms occurs, and new species 
are created. 

The main physical processes to which astronomical 
molecules are subjected are the following: 


@ absorption and emission of electromagnetic radiation; 


@ collisions with fast particles (cosmic Rays) and with other 
atoms and molecules on the gas; 


@ sticking to and desorption from the surfaces of dust 
grains. 


Since these processes generally involve the excitation 
of energy levels in molecules, we shall first give a 
brief summary of molecular energy level structure, 
emphasizing in particular how it differs from that of atoms. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Energy level structure in molecules 

Molecules have degrees of freedom unavailable to 
atoms: molecules may vibrate and rotate. Of course, 
molecules may also be excited electronically. Molecular 
electronic excitation energies are different from those 
of the individual atoms in the molecule. However, in 
the limit of large separations between the atoms (when 
the interaction energy between them becomes small) the 
molecular electronic energy levels approach those of the 
atoms. Hence, molecular electronic energy levels are 
normally of the same order of magnitude as atomic 
energy levels, and are separated typically by energies of 
a few electron volts. Energies associated with vibrational 
transitions are generally one to two orders of magnitude 
smaller than this, and transitions between rotational levels 
have energies that are generally again much smaller than 
those of vibrational transitions. 

The essential features of molecular vibration and 
rotation are evident in the smallest molecules, i.e. 
diatomics, so the discussion here is introduced in terms 
of diatomic molecules. In the simplest approximation, 
the vibrations of diatomic molecules can be treated as 
simple harmonic oscillations. Classically, a harmonic 
oscillator may have any energy, but for molecules quantum 
mechanics restricts the permitted energies, E,, to the 
discrete values 

E, =ho(v + 3) 


where hi is the reduced Planck’s constant, w is an angular 
frequency measured in radians per second, related to the 
force constant in the oscillator, and v is the vibrational 
quantum number that may take integer values or zero. 
The energies permitted by quantum mechanics for the 
harmonic oscillator are, therefore, thw, 3hw, 3hw,.... 
There is no restriction on transitions between these 
permitted energy levels, in this approximation. 

The rotation of a molecule can be considered in 
a simple approximation to be that of a rigid rotator. 
Quantum mechanics confines the permitted energy levels 
of a molecular rigid rotator, E, to the set of discrete values 


E,=B,J(J +) 


where B, is related to the moment of inertia, J, of the 
molecule 
B, =h? /21 


and J is the rotational quantum number and is confined 
to integer values or zero. Thus, the permitted energy 
levels are 0, 2B,, 6B,, 12B,, ... in this approximation and 
transitions between the levels are restricted by selection 
rules. Hence, massive molecules with large moments of 
inertia have relatively closely spaced energy levels, and 
the associated wavelengths of absorption or emission are 
relatively long, and vice versa. 

The total energy of a diatomic molecule is in the 
simplest approximation the sum of electronic, vibrational 
and rotational energies: 


Figo (n, v, J) = E.(n) + E,(v) + EJ) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Physics of Molecules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where E, is the electronic energy which depends on one 
or several quantum numbers, n. In general, transitions 
may occur between states of different n, v, and J, subject, 
of course, to any selection rules. For example, interstellar 
molecular hydrogen was first detected by absorption in 
its electronic transition from the ground electronic state, 
v = 0 vibrational level, and J = 0 and 1 rotational levels 
to the first accessible excited electronic state in a variety of 
vibrational and rotational levels. 

Vibration—rotation transitions may also be important. 
For example, molecular hydrogen is readily detected in 
warm astronomical regions by its emission at wavelengths 
near 2 ym arising from transitions in level v = 1 to 
level v =0 in the ground electronic state. In both v 
levels, several J levels are involved. Finally, pure rotation 
transitions may occur, and are the means by which most 
interstellar molecules have been detected. For example, 
carbon monoxide, CO, is an important tracer of cold gas 
through its emission from J = 1 to J = 0, occurring 
at a wavelength of 2.6 mm. The energy difference 
corresponding to this is equivalent to about 5 Kxk (k is 
Boltzmann’s constant), and so the J = 1 level is readily 
excited in collisions in gas at a temperature as low as about 
10 K (which is often the case for interstellar CO). 

Of course, many cosmic molecules are much more 
complex than diatomics. For polyatomics, the vibrational 
spectra can be regarded as a superposition of harmonic 
oscillations for each of the normal modes of the system, 
so the diatomic description can be very easily extended. 
However, polyatomics have a considerably more complex 
rotational energy level structure than diatomics. When 
there is an axis of symmetry in the molecule (a so- 
called symmetric top) then one more rotational quantum 
number, K, in addition to J, is required to define the 
energy state and a simple extension can be given: 


E, = B,J(J +1) + (A, — B,)K? 


where A, is related to the moment of inertia about an axis 
which is not the axis of symmetry. Figure 1 illustrates the 
rotational energy level structure that arises for a molecule 
of this type. However, when the molecule does not have an 
axis of symmetry (an asymmetric rotator) then no simple 
formula can be given. 


Excitation of molecules 

Radiative excitation 

Stellar radiation may raise molecules to high states of 
excitation from which relaxation will occur, though not 
necessarily back to the initial state. In the mainly 
neutral regions of space where molecules are found, 
stellar radiation is truncated at wavelengths of 91.2 nm 
corresponding to the ionization potential of hydrogen 
(13.6 eV). All radiation shortward of this value is confined 
within the Strémgren sphere of ionized hydrogen (H 1 
REGION) around the star. Within the Str6mgren sphere, 
any molecules that form are very rapidly destroyed 
through processes of direct photodissociation and direct 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


500 


400 


200 


100 


K=O K=l Ke2 Ke3 Ke4 KS K=6 


Figure 1. A partial energy level diagram for the rotational 
energy levels of a molecule with an axis of symmetry (a 
symmetric top); the levels illustrated are for the ammonia 
molecule NH3. The quantum number J is indicated for each 
level; the quantum number K is indicated on the abscissa. In the 
case of ammonia, each level with K > 0 is doubled because there 
are two equivalent positions for the N atom, one of each side of 
the plane defined by the three H atoms. Perturbations in the 
molecule (not discussed here) ensure that these two levels have 
slightly differing energy. 


photoionization. For example, in the case of molecular 
hydrogen in its ground vibrational state, the following 
processes occur: 


H, +hv — 2H (hv > 14.7 eV) 
H,+hv> Hy+e (hv > 15.4 eV) 
Hy} +hv>H+H* (hv = 2.65 eV) 


for photons (hv) of appropriate energy. Here, ‘direct’ 
processes signify transitions to states which are either 
repulsive (so that the molecule falls apart), or states 
in which the excess energy in the excited molecule is 
sufficient to dissociate or ionize the molecule (see also 
EXCITATION AND IONIZATION). 

In molecular clouds which are predominantly neutral 
and where the stellar radiation is restricted to wavelengths 
greater than 91.2 nm (photon energies less than 13.6 eV), 
many of these direct processes are inaccessible. However, 
electronic excitation of Hj, and many other molecular 
species, is still possible, and this enables the detection of 
H and provides a means of both populating vibrational 
energy levels and of destroying molecules. For Hp, 
absorption of starlight at wavelengths around 100 nm 
raises this molecule from the ground electronic state, X, 
and ground vibrational state v” = 0 to an excited electronic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Physics of Molecules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


$400 
¢ OPHIUCHI 


8 


He 
(4,0) 
R(t) 
| 


g 


800 


8 


400 


14~SECOND PHOTON COUNTS 


0 
1047 1048 1049 1050 


He He H2 H2 
(4,0) (4,0) (5,0) (4,0) (4,0) (4,0) 
P(1) = R(2) P(5) P(2) R(3) R(O) 
| | | | 1 4 


He HO 


1051 1052 {053 1054 $055 


WAVELENGTH (A) 


Figure 3. The ultraviolet absorption spectrum of Hp (the wavelength scale is in angstroms, A; 1 A is 0.1 nm). The radiation from a 
bright star ¢ Ophiuchi is absorbed by foreground Hz in a diffuse interstellar cloud. The lines of H2 arise in the ground electronic state 
and ground vibrational level. For example, the absorption at a wavelength of 1054 A is from X, v = 0, to the upper electronic state, B, in 
the v = 4 vibrational level. The transitions also involve a change of rotational levels; in the notation used in the figure, R(0) refers to an 
increase in J from 0 to 1, while P(1) implies a reduction in J from 1 to 0. Some of the lines are saturated. (From Spitzer and Jenkins 


1975.) 


state, B or C, ina variety of vibrational and rotational states 
Ha(X; v” = 0; J”) > Ho(BorC; v’; J’) 


where the v’ and J’ quantum numbers refer to the upper 
electronic state, B or C (see figure 2). The absorption of 
ultraviolet radiation from a background star enables the 
detection of H; in foreground diffuse interstellar clouds 
(figure 3). This excitation is very rapidly (on a timescale 
of about 10-* s) followed by radiative relaxation into the 
ground electronic state, X, and into a range of vibrational 
and rotational levels of X: 


Hp (B or C; v’; J!) > Ho(X; v"” > 0; J”) + hv. 


The distribution over the v” levels can be calculated, 
and for excitation by radiation around wavelengths of 
100 nm peaks around v’ = 6. Then, further relaxation 
occurs through vibration—rotation transitions within the 
ground electronic state of the molecule; for example, the 
vibrational quantum number may change by one 


H2(X; v3 J") > Ho(X; vb” — 1, J” + 2). 


Therefore, electronic excitation of a molecule can lead 
to the population of a range of vibration—rotation states 
in the ground electronic state, and radiative relaxation 
from those levels then occurs through infrared and radio 
wavelength transitions. 

In the important case of H, the relaxation from 
the upper electronic state may end in the vibrational 
continuum of the ground electronic state, X, implying 
that the molecule falls apart. This vibrational continuum 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


arises in the following way: the harmonic oscillator 
approximation breaks down for high vibrational energies, 
and the discrete levels become closer together (see figure 2) 
and eventually merge into a continuum for states above 
v" = 14. For excitation of Hz by radiation near 100 nm, the 
probability that the molecule relaxes into the vibrational 
continuum is about 10%. This mechanism constitutes 
the main destruction route for H» in diffuse interstellar 
clouds. However, one should note that the excitation 
occurs through absorption in spectral lines. Therefore, 
if Hz formation is also occurring, then Hz may shield 
itself from the dissociating radiation by absorbing all 
the photons within the narrow spectral lines. In diffuse 
clouds, a transition from mostly H atomic to mostly H 
molecular gas occurs at depths into a cloud corresponding 
to an optical depth (caused by interstellar dust) at visual 
wavelengths of a few tenths. For molecules other than H2, 
however, this indirect destruction mechanism is generally 
unimportant. Its special role for H2 arises because the 
minima of the potential energy curves of groundstate X 
and of excited states B and C differ considerably; this tends 
to promote a relaxation into high v” states of X. 

Other simple molecules may respond radiatively in 
the direct or indirect modes described here. For example, 
H,O molecules absorb strongly in the wavelength 
range 150 nm to 200 nm, and are directly dissociated. 
However, larger molecules have more complex responses 
to radiation, including internal conversion of absorbed 
energy into vibrational energy of many modes of the 
molecule. The energy is radiated away in the infrared, 
on relatively long time scales (on the order of seconds), in 
many photons. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Physics of Molecules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


E(eV) 


Figure 2. The potential energy curves of H2, in several electronic 
states. The curves show how two H atoms interact as the 
distance between them, R (measured in H-atom radii), is 
allowed to vary. The curves are attractive at long range, and 
repulsive at short range. The vibrational energy levels 
associated with each electronic state are shown. The transition 
from the lowest vibration level of the ground electronic state, X, 
to the upper state, B, is shown; this excitation is rapidly followed 
by a relaxation into discrete or continuum vibrational levels of 
the ground electronic state. 


Collisional excitation 
In the collision between a molecule, M, and a collision 
partner, P 

M+P—> M*+P 


energy may be transferred to or from the molecule, M, 
changing its energy state. The final state of the molecule 
M*, may differ from the initial state in its electronic, 
vibrational or rotational energies, or in a combination of 
these energies. If the process is one of excitation, then the 
internal energy of M* is increased at the expense of kinetic 
energy of the colliding pair. Conversely, in de-excitation 
processes, internal energy is converted into kinetic energy. 

Collisional excitation of molecules into electronic 
states via thermal processes is generally rare in astronom- 
ical situations, because the energies required (a few eV) 
correspond to temperatures that are too high for molecules 
to survive for very long. The final state of the molecule, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


M*, may then correspond to a dissociating state. Non- 
thermal excitation by fast particles can, however, be very 
important. Molecular hydrogen in collision with cosmic 
rays (mainly MeV protons and electrons) is directly ex- 
cited electronically into the ionization continuum of the 
molecule 

H) +er > H}+e*+er 


and the free electron carries away some 30 eV of energy. 
This energy is partly lost in collision with other molecules 
and with atoms, e.g. 


e* +H) > e*§ + H3 


followed by 
H; > Hp +hv 


so that at least some of the energy released in the ionization 
is radiated away. However, some of the electron’s energy 
is shared in elastic collisions with atoms, e.g. 


e*+H—- e* +H* 


and this represents a heating process for the gas which 
is important in situations such as molecular clouds 
from which starlight (the alternative energy source) has 
been excluded by interstellar dust. The molecular ion, 
Hj, created in the ionization of Hz by cosmic rays, 
is responsible for initiating an extensive ion—molecule 
interstellar chemistry. 

Thermal excitation and de-excitation of vibrational 
and rotational levels occurs in warm (around 2000 K) and 
cold (around 10 K) interstellar clouds (see figure 4). These 
processes compete with radiative relaxation, and together 
determine which molecular transitions are important in 
tracing and in cooling the gas. Emission is maximized 
when the collision rate is high, implying a high gas density, 
but not so high that radiative relaxation is quenched 
by collisional de-excitation. Hence, each transition of 
each molecule has associated with it a range of physical 
conditions in which it radiates most effectively, and this 
range is determined by equating the radiative rate (the 
Einstein A coefficient for spontaneous emission, Aem) with 
the collisional excitation rate 


Ncoll VeollFcoll ~ Aem 


where Noll, Veol! ANA Geo, are the number density of the 
colliding partner (usually Hz), and the velocity and cross 
section for the collisions. 

For a given temperature, therefore, this equation 
gives the approximate number density range of collision 
partners for which particular transitions of particular 
molecules are significant radiators, the so-called critical 
density. For example, in molecular clouds at temperatures 
of about 10 K, then CO(/J = 1-0) is an effective tracer of 
gas in which the number density of H) is about 10° H, 
molecules/m’, whereas the 1-0 rotational emission of CS 
traces the gas most effectively when the density is about 
100 times greater. The large differences between these 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Physics of Molecules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2 3 4 5 6 


7 8 9 10 {um] 20 


Figure 4. Vibrational emission from collisionally excited H2 in warm interstellar gas in the Orion Molecular Cloud, detected by the 
Short Wavelength Spectrometer on the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO). This gas has been heated by the passage of an interstellar 
shock. The emission in the spectrum arises because the collisions between atoms and molecules in the gas are sufficiently energetic to 
populate the v = 1 and v = 2 levels and high rotational states. Relaxation to lower energy states then provides the radiation that is 


detected. (From Rosenthal et al 1999.) 


values are caused mainly by the differences in the Einstein 
A values for the various transitions of each molecular 
species. In practice, the wealth of the chemistry and the 
richness available in molecular spectra ensure that there 
is a molecule and transition that is an appropriate tracer 
for almost any physical conditions in which molecules can 
exist in astronomy. 


Surface physics 
In interstellar molecular clouds, interstellar dust particles 
are generally well mixed with the gas. The particles 
have a range of sizes from about a nanometer to about 
a micrometer, and they probably have a porous open 
structure. They are probably composed mainly of silicates 
and carbons, and the total mass of interstellar dust is 
about 1% of the mass of interstellar gas. Both the gas 
and dust in molecular clouds are normally cold, with gas 
phase and solid temperatures typically around 10 K. At 
such low temperatures, there is a high probability that 
molecules stick to dust surfaces when they collide with 
them. For cold interstellar clouds with a normal gas:dust 
ratio then the time scale for loss of molecules from the 
gas phase by sticking to dust grains is rather shorter than 
10°(10!? m~3/n)(1/Sx) years, where n is the total number 
density of H atoms in all forms in the gas, and Sy is the 
sticking probability per collision of species X. Therefore, 
in a molecular cloud with number density n = 10'° H 
atoms/m?® and with a sticking probability of Sx = 1, the 
time scale tj for loss of molecules X from the gas is about 
one million years, i.e. the number of molecules of X would, 
in the absence of other processes, decay exponentially 
as e/, Therefore, significant depletion of gas phase 
molecules may occur within the typical age of a cloud 
(probably a few million years). 

The interaction between a perfect surface of the 
dust grain and a closed shell molecule (i.e. one with all 
valencies satisfied) is a physical process involving long- 


| 


Gaseous CO 


4 
- AFGL 4176 | 


1SO-SWS 


Relative intensity 


6 
[ Solid CO, 


42 44 46 48 5 $.2 


Wavelength (jm) 


Figure 5. The normalized spectrum obtained with the Short 
Wavelength Spectrometer on the Infrared Space Observatory 
(ISO) towards massive young stellar object AFGL 4176 
embedded in a dense molecular cloud. The strong broad 
absorption at 4.27 wm is due to solid CO, while the 
characteristic rotational structure near 4.4-4.9 jzm indicates the 
line of sight. (From van Dishoeck et al 1996.) 


interaction must involve a transfer of energy from the 
incident molecule into the grain if sticking is to occur. 


Figure 6. Chemically driven desorption of molecules. In this schematic diagram tl 
Hz deposits some energy in the grain, causing a local heating of the grain. ACO n 
desorbed by this transient rise in temperature. (From Takahashi and Williams 199 


range van der Waals forces. In fact, the surfaces of dust 
grains are likely to be defective, and stronger, shorter- 
range forces may also be involved. In any case, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Physics of Molecules 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Experimental and theoretical studies suggest that for most 
interstellar molecules and likely surfaces this interaction 
leads to energy transfer (possibly in repeated encounters) 
and that the sticking probability is on the order of unity. 
The detection of molecular ices on dust grains in molecular 
clouds confirms that sticking must be efficient. These 
ices are found to contain H.O, CO, CO, and some other 
simple molecules, and molecules on the grains have a 
quite distinct spectrum from those in the gas (see figure 5). 
The ices are all detected by means of absorption in the 
infrared, corresponding to stretching vibrations; e.g. the 
CO molecule has a vibrational transition at a wavelength 
near 4.7 wm, and all rotational structure is suppressed for 
CO in the ice. 

Observations show, however, that the fraction of any 
particular molecule locked up in ice on dust grains is often 
rather small. This suggests either that all such clouds are 
young, compared to fo, or that some process is returning 
molecules from the solid to the gas phase. Since the 
former possibility seems implausible, several desorption 
mechanisms have been invoked. Thermal evaporation 
at the low temperature of interstellar dust is too slow, 
and the desorption mechanisms depend on non-thermal 
processes to create a local ‘hot-spot’ from which some 
evaporation may occur. Sources of energy for the ‘hot spot’ 
include deposition of energy by cosmic rays in the grains, 
photodesorption by a cosmic ray generated radiation field 
internal to the cloud, or chemical energy from reactions 
occurring at the surface of grains (see figure 6). 


Bibliography 

Elitzur M 1992 Interstellar masers Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 30 543-74 

Hartquist T W and Viti S 1998 The basics of the structures 
and spectra of simple molecules The Molecular 
Astrophysics of Stars and Galaxies ed TW Hartquist and 
D A Williams (Oxford: Oxford Science Publication) 
pp 1-10 

Kirby K P 1990 Molecular photoabsorption processes 
Molecular Astrophysics ed T W Hartquist (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 159-80 

Rosenthal D, Bertoldi F, Drapatz S and Timmerman R 1999 
Proc. Conf. j The Universe as seen by 150’ (Paris, France, 
20-23 October 1998) (ESA Special Publications SP-427) 
ed M Kessler 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Roueff E 1990 Collisional excitation processes Molecular 
Astrophysics ed T W Hartquist (Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press) pp 232-58 

Shull J M and Beckwith S 1982 Interstellar molecular 
hydrogen Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 20 163-90 

Spitzer L Jr and Jenkins E B 1975 Ultraviolet studies of the 
interstellar gas Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 13 133 

Takahashi J and Williams D A 1999 Chemically-driven 
desorption of CO from icy grains in dark clouds Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. at press 

van Dishoeck E F et al 1996 A search for interstellar gas- 
phase CO); gas:solid state abundance ratios Astron. 
Astrophys. 315 L349 

Williams D A 1993 Physical and chemical processes on dust 
Dust and Chemistry in Astronomy ed T J Millar and 
D A Williams (Bristol: IOP Publishing) pp 143-70 


David Williams 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Piazzi, Giuseppe (1746-1826) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Piazzi, Giuseppe (1746-1826) 


Born in Ponte di Valtellina, Italy, became a monk, professor 
of theology and professor of mathematics in Palermo, 
where he set up an observatory in 1789. Measured 
the positions of 7646 stars, discovering that the star 61 
Cygni had a large proper motion. Because this suggests 
that the star is nearby, BESsEL chose it to investigate its 
parallax, making the first successful such measurement. 
He discovered the first minor planet, Ceres, on 1 January 
1801, but was able to make only three observations before it 
was lost behind the Sun. Fortunately, causs had developed 
mathematical techniques with which he could calculate 
the orbit and Ceres was recovered. The thousandth 
asteroid discovered was named Piazzia in his honour, as 
was the British astronomer CHARLES PIAZZI SMYTH. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Picard, Jean (1620-82) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Picard, Jean (1620-82) 


Astronomer, born in La Fléche, France, became professor 
of astronomy at the Collége de France in Paris and 
a member of the Académie Royale des Sciences. He 
made instruments to make more accurate observations, 
including (with Auzout) the movable-wire micrometer to 
measure small angles, such as the diameters of the planets, 
and a sighting telescope for a quadrant and sector to 
determine star positions. He also measured the length 
of a degree on the meridian at Paris; the data were used by 
NEWTON in his calculations of the shape of the Earth. Picard 
measured the location of TYCHO BRAHE’s observatory at 
Hven so that TycHo’s observations could be re-interpreted. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pic-du-Midi Observatory (Observatoire Midi- 
Pyrenees) (OMP) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pic-du-Midi Observatory 
(Observatoire Midi-Pyrenees) (OMP) 


OMP is under the administrative supervision of both the 
Institute des Sciences de l’Univers (INSU) of the French 
National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS) and the 
Ministry of Research, Technology and Education. It has 
laboratories located at the Université Paul Sabatier in 
Toulouse, Bagnéres, Lannemezan and at the summit of 
Pic du Midi de Bigorre. 

The Pic du Midi Observatory is located in the 
Pyrenees, 2876 m above sea level—the highest observatory 
in France. Construction began on the site of a 
meteorological station in 1878. It was affiliated to the 
Toulouse University Observatory in 1903. 

The main instrument is the 2 m Bernard Lyot 
Memorial Telescope, which began operation in 1980. 
It is named after the scientist who carried out the 
first experiments with a coronagraph in the 1930s. 
Other instruments include a 1.06 m lunar and planetary 
telescope, a solar telescope, four coronographs and a 60 cm 
telescope used by amateur astronomers. 

The observatory is perhaps best known for solar and 
planetary observations and for the detailed lunar map 
produced for Nasa’s Apollo program in 1968. It is being 
developed as a cultural center for the Bigorre region in the 
Hautes-Pyrénées. 

For further information see 
http://www.obs-mip.fr/omp/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pickering, Edward Charles (1846-1919) and Pickering, 
William Henry (1858-1938) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pickering, Edward Charles 
(1846-1919) and Pickering, William 
Henry (1858-1938) 


Astronomers—two brothers. Born in Boston, MA, Edward 
became director of the Harvard College Observatory and 
observed the brightnesses of 45000 stars. He hired 
a number of women, including WILLIAMINA P FLEMING, 
ANNIE J CANNON, Antonia Maury and HENRIETTA LEAVITT, and 
produced the Henry Draper Catalog, classifying the spectra 
of hundreds of thousands of stars. He and HERMANN CARL 
VOGEL independently discovered the first spectroscopic 
binary stars. Edward’s brother William, born in Boston, 
worked in Harvard’s astronomy department with the new 
astronomical detector, dry-plate photography, becoming 
the first person to discover a satellite (Phoebe, Saturn’s 
ninth moon) by photography in 1899. William established 
an outpost observatory for Harvard at Arequipa, Peru, and 
published sensationalist accounts of Martian canals, using 
the Arequipa telescopes, not for the stellar spectroscopy 
for which they had been established. For this and his 
inability to stay within budget his brother dismissed 
him from his post at Arequipa. William took up with 
PERCIVAL LOWELL and founded the Lowell Observatory to 
observe Mars. William’s and Percival Lowell’s careers 
overlapped later when William, independently of Lowell, 
predicted the position of a trans-Neptunian planet using 
the discrepancies in both the orbits of Uranus and Neptune 
as data, without it being found. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pictor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pictor 


(the Painter’s Easel; abbrev. Pic, gen. Pictoris; area 
247 sq. deg.) A southern constellation which lies between 
Columba and Dorado, and culminates at midnight in mid- 
December. It was introduced as Equuleus Pictoris (the 
Painter’s Easel) by the French astronomer Nicolas L de 
Lacaille (1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751- 
2. The shortened form (which strictly translated means 
‘the Painter’) was introduced by the American astronomer 
Benjamin A Gould (1824-96) in the 1870s and adopted by 
the IAU in 1922. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Pictor are a Pictoris, magnitude 3.2, and £ Pictoris, 
magnitude 3.9, the first star found, in 1983, to be 
surrounded by a dusty disk, out of which planets may be 
condensing. There are no other stars brighter than fourth 
magnitude. Other interesting objects include : Pictoris, a 
double star with two yellow (F9) components, magnitudes 
5.6 and 6.4, separation 12.3”, that have the same proper 
motion, and Kapteyn’s Star, a nearby star which has the 
second largest proper motion of any star. 

There are no bright star clusters, nebulae or galaxies 
in Pictor. 


See also: Beta Pictoris, Kapteyn’s Star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pioneer Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pioneer Missions 


Development of the first ‘Pioneer’ space missions began 
with the advent of the space age in 1957. After NASA was 
established by Congress in 1958, a further series of 
Pioneer missions were developed by NASA’s Ames 
Research Center. The series included humanity's first 
probes of space outside Earth’s influence, first passage 
through the Asteroid Belt, first flyby of Jupiter, first flyby 
of Saturn and first to escape the solar system. The final 
Pioneer mission was the United States’ first intense study 
of Venus. Pioneers became consistently successful with 
numerous discoveries and long productive lives. 

Pioneers 1-5 were part of the US Air Force’s urgent 
program to get America competitive in the space age. 
These were the United States’ first probes into space 
beyond altitudes of the early satellites to measure radia- 
tion and detect micrometeoroids. Pioneer 1 was launched 
in 1958, the year NASA was created. The program was 
completed in 1960. 

Pioneers 6-9, launched in the years 1965 through 
1969, were NASA's first spacecraft to explore space 
beyond any of Earth’s influence. These four orbited the 
Sun independently from Earth, not far inside and outside 
Earth’s orbital path at 1 astronomical unit (AU), 93 
million miles, from the Sun. They measured the million- 
miles-per-hour wind of plasma (electrons and ions) ema- 
nating from the Sun. Pioneers 6-9 identified storms on 
the Sun’s surface with magnetic storms from solar wind 
affecting communications and power grids on Earth. 
Pioneers 6-9 proved interplanetary space flight safe from 
destructive dust particles. 

Pioneers 10 and 11 were launched in 1972 and 1973. 
Greatly more complex than earlier Pioneers, they were 
the first spacecraft to explore beyond Mars (1.6 AU), 


The Pioneer Missions 


First to characterize 
the Solar Wind 
(Pioneer 6 to 9 = 1965) 


. 
First to fly 
te by Jupiter 
BC 4 (Pioneer 10 — 1973) 


First to fly 4 
by Saturn | 


Pioneer 11-1979)" 


» 
First map of 
« Venus surface 


piel ete = (Pioneer Venus Orbiter 1978-1992 ) 
> 7 


) 


Pioneer Venus 
Multi-probe 
(1978) 


Figure 1. The Pioneer missions. From left to right: Pioneers 6 
through 9, Pioneers 10 and 11, Pioneer 12 and Pioneer 13. 
(NASA / Ames Research Center.) 


through the Asteroid Belt (2.5-4 AU), near Jupiter (5 AU) 
and beyond. Pioneer 11 later made a close reconnais- 
sance with Saturn (10 AU). As the first man-made craft to 
escape the solar system, Pioneer 10 carried a plaque to 
identify where in our galaxy it originated and to intro- 
duce the creatures who made it. (Pioneer 11 carried a 
duplicate.) Data collection from Pioneer 10 continued 
through 2000. 

The Pioneer Venus Orbiter and Multiprobe space- 
craft, launched in 1978, were USA's first dedicated inves- 
tigations of VENUS. The Orbiter mapped Venus’s cloud- 
shrouded surface by radar, examined Venus’s upper 
atmosphere, and explored interaction of the solar wind 
with Venus’s atmosphere over a 14 yr period. (The 
Orbiter also measured rate of water loss from Halley’s 


Table 1. Pioneer 10 and 11 science payloads. 


Experiment 


Helium Vector Magnetometer 


Principal investigator 
Edward J Smith 


Institution 


Jet Propulsion Laboratory 


Flux-gate Magnetometer (Poineer 11) 
Plasma Analyzer 

Charged Particle Composition 
Cosmic Ray Energy Spectra 
Jovian Charged Particles 

Jovian Trapped Radiation 
Asteroid—Meteoroid Astronomy 
Meteoroid Detection 

Celestial Mechanics@ 

Ultraviolet Photometry 

Imaging Photopolarimetry 

Jovian Infrared Thermal Structure 
S-Band Radio Occultationa 


Mario H Acuna 
John H Wolfe 

John A Simpson 
Frank B McDonald 
James A Van Allen 
R Walker Fillius 
Robert K Soberman 
William H Kinard 
John D Anderson 
Darrell L Judge 
Tom Gehrels 
Guido Munch 
Arvydas J Kliore 


@ No on-board experiment. Used tracking data only. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Goddard Space Flight Center 

Ames Research Center 

University of Chicago 

Goddard Space Flight Center 
University of lowa 

University of California at San Diego 
General Electric Co., Drexel University 
Langley Research Center 

Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
University of Southern California 
University of Arizona 

California Institute of Technology 

Jet Propulsion Laboratory 


Pioneer Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ULTRAVIOLET PHOTOMETER IMAGING PHOTOPOLARIMETER 


METEOROID DETECTOR 
SENSOR PANEL. 


DETECTOR SENSGA 


TRAPPED RADIATION 
DéeTrEcTOR 


Cosmic RAY 
TELESCOPE 


MAGNETOMETER 
INFRARED RADIOMETER 
CHARGED PARTICLE 

INSTRUMENT 


Figure 2. Pioneer 10 and 11 configuration showing locations of 
scientific instruments. (NASA/ Ames Research Center.) 


comet as it passed near the Sun.) The Multiprobe 
deployed four probes into Venus’s atmosphere describ- 
ing the atmosphere down to the surface where lead and 
zinc would melt. 

PIONEER VENUS, the last launched of NASA’s 
‘Pioneer’ series of programs, is summarized in a separate 
article. Below, from latest to earliest, are summary 
descriptions of the missions of Pioneers 10 and 11, 
Pioneers 6-9 and Pioneers 1-5. Forms of NASA’s Pioneer 
spacecraft are illustrated in figure 1. 


Pioneers 10 and 11 
Dominating scientific objectives for Pioneers 10 and 11 
were important practical questions about outer space: 
would exploration beyond the orbit of Mars with more 
sophisticated spacecraft be feasible and in what environ- 
ments? Of special concern were possibilities of an impen- 
etrable population of micrometeoroids among asteroids 
and of destructively intense radiation belts (charged par- 
ticles trapped in a magnetic field) then theorized to be 
source of JUPITER’S radio noise. Scientific objectives 
included study of the solar wind en route to Jupiter and 
beyond, and the maximum practical definition of Jupiter 
and its environment from a small spacecraft. Penetration 
of the boundary of the heliosphere with the interstellar 
medium (heliopause) was expected to occur between 5 
and 10 AU. The interstellar medium was to be character- 
ized. 

The scientific instruments carried on Pioneers 10 
and 11 are listed in table 1 and are indicated in figure 2. 

Designed for 21 month or longer missions beginning 
in 1972 and 1973, Pioneer 10 was still transmitting data 
after 28 yr, and Pioneer 11 produced data for 21 yr. 
Launched in heliocentric orbits with energies to reach 
about 6 AU, their final planetary encounters in 1973 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


‘Satum Septamber 1, 1579 


Figure 3. Pioneer 10 and 11 trajectories. (NASA/ Ames Research 
Center.) 


(Pioneer 10, Jupiter) and 1979 (Pioneer 11, Saturn) gave 
them sufficient velocities to escape the solar system. 
They recede at about 2.5 AU per year forward (Pioneer 
11) and backward (Pioneer 10) along the Sun’s motion 
among nearest stars (see figure 3). 

Numerical density of dust particles was detected 
with an array of pressurized cells and was found to 
follow a diminishing gradient with solar distance 
unaffected by the ASTEROID BELT. (However, density was 
surprisingly greater in Jupiter’s equatorial plane where 
VOYAGER later showed a faint ring.) Size distribution of 
particles was found as expected by the fewer particles 
larger than 10-° g that could puncture thicker-skinned 
cells on Pioneer 11. An optical detector for tiny asteroids 
did not produce convincing observations. 

At Jupiter, radiation belts were measured. Giant 
inflation and compression of Jupiter’s shock wave in the 
solar wind were discovered dependent on the solar 
wind’s energy. Intensity of trapped radiation was found 
to be several thousand times greater than Earth’s, and the 
performance of some of Pioneer 10’s subsystems and 
instruments was temporarily impaired by radiation. 
Jupiter’s magnetic field, 19000 times Earth’s magnetic 
moment, was precisely modeled. Axis and rate of rota- 
tion of the nongaseous core of the planet were estab- 
lished for the first time. Cloud-top temperatures and an 
estimate of the planet’s radiation heat balance were 
determined with the infrared scanner. Hydrogen and 
helium proportions in Jupiter’s upper atmosphere and in 
space were measured. Abundance of gas and dust above 
the clouds were estimated with data from the Imaging 
Photo-Polarimeter (IPP). The first close-up ‘pictures’ of 
Jupiter, and of SATURN and its rings, came from the two- 
color optical imaging mode of the IPP. (‘Images’ were 
constructed from recordings of light intensity each half- 
milliradian of rotation of the spacecraft as it passed by 
Jupiter and Saturn, and the instrument’s small telescope 
was stepped such that the planet would appear to move 
correspondingly in cone angle during each rotation. 
Clarity and scientific value of these ‘images’ greatly 
exceeded expectations.) 

Exploration of Saturn by Pioneer 11 was first con- 
templated several months after launch of Pioneer 10. 
Feasibility of a Jupiter gravity assist to Saturn was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Pioneer Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


identified then, and the longevity of Pioneers’ newly 
redesigned plutonium power sources was showing 
promise. After Pioneer 10’s successful equatorial flyby of 
Jupiter, Pioneer 11 was targeted for a much closer steeply 
spiraled ‘reverse’ (clockwise looking south) flyby of 
Jupiter. The new trajectory greatly enhanced definition of 
Jupiter’s characteristics, such as magnetic field, charged 
particle distribution with latitude, polar optical depth 
etc, admitted a much smaller radiation dose to the space- 
craft (from higher average Jovian latitudes and higher 
speed) and induced a trajectory inclined 16° to the Sun’s 
equatorial plane that subsequently encountered Saturn 
(see figure 3). A proposal for high-risk passage between 
Saturn and its visible rings was abandoned in 1977 for a 
test of Voyager’s intended penetration of the ring plane 
just outside the A ring. Approach to Saturn was at low 
inclination to its ring plane, so in situ measurements of 
the environment could be made about 3/4 inward from 
the rings’ visible outer edge. A magnetic field and radia- 
tion belt was discovered and defined at Saturn. 
Interaction of radiation particles with ring material was 
found to produce a uniquely radiation-free space under 
the rings. Corresponding to results obtained at Jupiter, 
particulars of Saturn’s atmosphere, external heat balance, 
internal structure, mass and rotation were gleaned from 
Pioneer 11’s encounter. 

A confusing picture of solar influence in interplane- 
tary space was initially presented by Pioneer data. 
Energetic interactions between magnetic field lines and 
charged particles led to a number of theories to explain 
the data from Pioneers, later combined with data from 
other spacecraft. Reversal in polarity of the Sun’s mag- 
netic field every 22 yr, i.e. every other 11 yr solar cycle, 
was discovered through Pioneer 11’s data. Pioneer 10 
and 11’s data, together with data from Voyagers and oth- 
ers, have been analyzed to show a dynamic pattern of 
plasma embedded in outward-moving magnetic field 
lines beyond 70 AU. The heliopause lies very much far- 
ther out from the Sun. Low-energy helium, oxygen and 
nitrogen ions, increasingly encountered by both space- 
craft toward extremes of their productive travels, suggest 
incursions from the still unexamined interstellar medi- 
um. 

Densities of cosmic rays of energetic electrons and 
ions from interstellar space were found to increase as 
Pioneers 10 and 11 ranged beyond 10 AU from the Sun, 
but not as rapidly as expected. This implication of 
strength of the Sun’s influence is further evidenced by 
modulations in cosmic ray spectra. High-speed streams 
of solar wind correlate with decreased local cosmic rays 
in lower energy ranges. These observations add to sug- 
gestions that the radius of the heliosphere varies and is 
perhaps much greater than 100 AU. 

Precise Doppler tracking of Pioneers 10 and 11 has 
provided intervals of data with which to test hypotheses 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


of long (several AU) gravity waves emanating from 
celestial cataclysms. None has been detected. 
Mysteriously, these tracking data persist in showing 
10-10 ¢ excess in gravitational attraction of the solar sys- 
tem, apparently due to unidentified mass. 

On March 1, 2002, engineers and technicians at the 
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s (JPL) Deep Space 
Network in Goldstone, Calif., sent a signal to Pioneer 10 
which is still hurtling toward the fringes of the solar sys- 
tem. Twenty-two hours later, at 1:47 p.m. EST, engineers 
and technicians at the network’s facility in Madrid, 
Spain, monitoring a 70 meter dish antenna, heard 
Pioneer’s response. The signal was received on the 30th 
anniversary of the spacecraft’s launch (2 March, 1972). 
NASA previously lost contact with Pioneer 10 in August 
2000, but made contact again in April 2001 by switching 
the spacecraft to a different communications mode. 
Before 1 March, NASA had most recently made contact 
with the spacecraft on 9 July, 2001. There was another 
successful contact with telemetry received on 27 April 
2002 with more possible in the future depending upon 
the overall communication system link margin, space- 
craft power, and the durability of the transmitter. 
Scientific data were received during these contacts from 
the single remaining operating instrument onboard and 
passed on to the NASA Ames Research Center mission 
operations center and then relayed to the Principal 
Investigator, James Van Allen, at the University of Iowa. 


Spacecraft 

The form of the Pioneer 10 and 11 twins is an 8 ft diame- 
ter parabolic dish reflector with equipment and instru- 
ments in (and on) a box mounted behind (figure 2). Two 
pairs of radioactive thermoelectric generators (RTGs) 
and a magnetometer protrude from the equipment box 
on three booms, and an antenna feed is mounted ona tri- 
pod in front of the reflector. Mass was about 285 kg. The 
spacecraft were built by TRW Inc. 

Three especially difficult technical problems were 
overcome in development of Pioneers 10 and 11: (1) elec- 
trical power was needed to at least 6 AU from the Sun; (2) 
reliable communications were required through 7 AU of 
the unexplored interplanetary medium; (3) magnetic 
cleanliness was required to permit measurement of the 
weak interplanetary field levels. Plutonium RTGs had 
been flown but required basic improvements to reach 
past Jupiter reliably and to gain more from the isotope’s 
93 yr half-life. The generators were redesigned and rig- 
orously qualified against impacts and temperatures of 
accident to ensure against leakage into Earth’s environ- 
ment. The telemetry system was designed with convolu- 
tional encoding so that data bit errors could be corrected 
for a then-theoretical improvement of communications at 
extremely low signal power margins. The Deep Space 
Network, developed and operated by JPL, improved 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Pioneer Missions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


designs of receivers on Earth so much during develop- 
ment and flights of the Pioneers that data were ultimate- 
ly recorded from more than 10 times the original 7 AU 
system design capability. The spacecraft’s material con- 
tent and arrangement of its circuits were planned and 
tested to minimize magnetic fields. Partly because of the 
spacecraft’s simplicity (e.g. no camera or gyroscopes), a 
uniquely low background was achieved with Pioneer 
allowing unexcelled measurement of the interplanetary 
and planetary magnetic fields. 


Pioneers 6-9 

Pioneers 6, 7, 8 and 9 were the first Pioneers developed 
under management of NASA’s Ames Research Center. 
Each was of the same general design, built by TRW Inc. 
They carried scientific instruments to detect and measure 
magnetic field, electric field, plasma, cosmic rays and 
their anisotropy, and cosmic dust. Their orbits, at ranges 
from 0.8 to 1.1 AU from the Sun, provided descriptions of 
SOLAR WIND from varying longitudes around the Sun in 
Earth’s orbital plane. 

Pioneer 6-9’s data showed strong correlations of 
solar wind velocities and densities with eruptions on the 
Sun’s surface. ‘Magnetic storms’ which upset communi- 
cations and power grids on Earth became predictable 
when Pioneer 6-9 spacecraft found their sources on the 
rotating Sun before Earth was exposed. Solar wind was 
found to travel past the spacecraft at about 400 km sec"!. 
Embedded magnetic field lines appeared to move out- 
ward with solar wind. Severe solar storms could propel 
plasma to Earth in as little as 20 min. The Earth and its 
magnetic field were observed to create a huge ‘bow 
wave’ in the solar wind with a ‘tail’ of turbulence out- 
ward from the Sun. Variations in speed and density of 
solar wind result in large changes in the volume behind 
its shock wave shielding Earth’s magnetic field. 

Precise tracking of Pioneers 6-9 over their extended 
lives enabled NASA to substantially improve fundamen- 
tal metrics of the solar system needed for guiding inter- 
planetary trajectories. The Sun/Earth mass ratio uncer- 
tainty was reduced to 2.5x10-6. Orbits of the Earth and 
other planets were much better defined than before. 
Radio transmission from Pioneer 6 began to be occulted 
by the Sun’s corona in 1968. Effects of the corona on the 
radio carrier signal provided direct data on changing 
magnetic and electrical characteristics of the corona. 


Spacecraft 

Structures of Pioneer 6-9 spacecraft were simple rotating 
cylinders with axes aligned such that their flat ‘pancake’ 
antenna patterns always illuminated Earth (figure 1). 
Long-term stability of these aircraft spinning at 60 rev 
min~! was the first such application of the principle for 
pointing scientific sensors and for controlling antenna 
pattern. Data telemetered at low rates were originally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


communicated from tracking stations via standard tele- 
type format in blocks of alphabetic characters before 
breakdown into engineering and scientific intelligence 
by computers. Delta E and Delta L launch vehicles guid- 
ed Pioneers 6-9 into the desired orbits around the Sun; 
compressed gas was pulsed to reorient spin axes normal 
to their orbital plane. 

Designed for at least 6 months of service, Pioneers 6, 
7,8 and 9 produced much more than hoped and gained 
wide notice, with operating lives of 32, 19, 19 and 25 yr, 
respectively. 


Pioneers 1-5 

Pioneer 1 was launched in 1958, the year NASA was cre- 
ated by Congress. Intended to determine the extent of 
radiation belts in Earth’s magnetic field above altitudes 
of the earliest satellites, Pioneer 1 fell short of plan at 
about one-third the Moon’s altitude. Pioneer 2’s launch 
failed completely. (A number for Pioneer 2 would not 
have been assigned by subsequent NASA policy.) 
Pioneers 3 and 4 discovered the VAN ALLEN (radiation) 
BELTS to consist of two distinct bands of charged particles 
trapped in Earth’s magnetic field. Pioneer 4 passed close 
to the MOON (37000 miles) to measure radiation in its 
vicinity. Although second by 1 week to pass the Moon, 
Pioneer 4 became humanity’s first spacecraft to escape 
Earth’s gravity. Pioneer 5 made the first measurement of 
the interplanetary magnetic field outside the Earth’s 
influence and operated for the then record of 106 days. 
These five earliest Pioneers were launched on Thor Able 
(Pioneer’s 1, 2 and 5) and Juno 2 (Pioneer’s 3 and 4) 
launch vehicles. Instruments they carried were magne- 
tometers, radiation detectors, Geiger counters and 
micrometeoroid detectors. 


Bibliography 

More about the Pioneer 10 and 11 mission, and both 
encounters with Jupiter, is in 

1975 Science 188 445-77 


Early results of Pioneer 11 encounter with Saturn are in 
1980 Science 207 400-53 


Examples of scientific analyses of the Solar system’s 
interplanetary medium are in 
1979 J. Geophys. Res. 84 


More about Pioneer 10 and 11 in relatively popular form 
is in 
1980 Pioneer: First to Jupiter, Saturn, and Beyond NASA SP- 
446 
Larry Lasher and John Dyer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Pioneer Venus Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pioneer Venus Mission 


Rather contrary to its name, Pioneer was not the first, 
although certainly the most comprehensive mission yet, to 
explore vENuS, and most of our current knowledge, of the 
atmosphere in particular, derives from the measurements 
it made around 20 years ago. It also made the first detailed 
radar maps of Venus’ surface, although these are now 
largely superseded by the higher-resolution data from the 
more recent MAGELLAN mission. 

Pioneer Venus was in fact two missions, launched 
separately within a few months of each other. The 
first launch placed in orbit the first artificial satellite of 
Venus (the ‘orbiter’ mission), while the second delivered 
four probes, one large and three small, directly into 
Venus’ atmosphere (the ‘multiprobe’ mission). The 
orbiter mapped the atmosphere above the clouds at 
infrared wavelengths, the clouds themselves in the 
visible and ultraviolet, and the surface using radar. 
Operating froma highly elliptical orbit, it also investigated 
the thermosphere of Venus, utilizing measurements of 
the drag on the spacecraft as it dipped down into the 
atmosphere, to altitudes as low as 150 km, and occasionally 
lower. Aided by the angular coverage which it obtained 
as a result of its spin-stabilized configuration, the orbiter 
also obtained the first comprehensive maps of the Venus 
magnetosphere. 


History and scientific objectives 

The Pioneer Venus program was born of a series of studies 
carried out in the USA in the late 1960s and early 1970s, 
aimed at defining the best approach to addressing the 
major mysteries posed by Venus. The mission in its final 
form began in January 1972, when NASA formed a Pioneer 
Venus Science Steering Group (SSG) and assigned the 
project to its Ames Research Center in Mountain View, 
California. The SSG laid out a list of the most important 
scientific questions to be addressed and worked with the 
project to devise the mission design which would provide 
the best answers within the imposed cost ceiling of $200 
million. From this the concept of the two-launch strategy, 
within a single launch opportunity (originally 1976, but 
eventually 1978), evolved. 

The multiprobe was to address questions of the nature 
of the clouds on Venus, their layering, microstructure, 
and composition, solar heating of the atmosphere as a 
function of depth, the atmospheric circulation and its 
driving forces, the bulk composition of the atmosphere, 
the loss of water and stability of carbon dioxide, the deep 
atmosphere vertical temperature structure, ionospheric 
turbulence, ion chemistry and exospheric temperature. 
The orbiter, to be in position before, and operating during, 
the probe descent, was to address cloud-top morphology, 
the cause and extent of the 4 day ‘super-rotation’ at the 
cloud tops, vertical temperature structure, gravitational 
moments, exospheric temperature, composition and loss 
of water and ionospheric temperatures and motions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


OMNI ANTENNA 


BACKUP HIGH GAIN 
ANTENNA 


MECHANICALLY DESPUN 
ANTENNA ASSEMBLY 


MAGNETOMETER 
BOOM 


HIGH GAIN ANTENNA 
FORWARD AXIAL 
THRUSTER 


SUN SENSOR eee 


STAR SENSOR | 


SOLAR ane 


4 DESPIN BEARING 
RADIAL THRUSTER 


EQUIPMENT SHELF 


RBIT A RTION MOTOR 
OBB) LINSERHON MOTO AFT OMNI ANTENNA 


DECELERATION 
JODULE 


PRESSURE 
VESSEL 
MODULE 


PROBE 
ADAPTER 
STRUCTURE 


THRUST TUBE 


Figure 1. The Pioneer Venus orbiter (top) and multiprobe 
(bottom) spacecraft, showing the accommodation for the 
scientific instruments on the upper platform below the antenna 
on the orbiter, and the positioning of the cone-shaped probes on 
the corresponding platform of the multiprobe bus (NASA). 


Mission description 

Both spacecraft used the same basic body, a flat cylinder 
2.5 m in diameter and 1.2 m high, built by the Hughes 
Aircraft Corporation (figure 1). The orbiter was spin 
stabilized, using a 1.09 m diameter despun dish antenna 
to communicate with the Earth. It also carried a solid- 
fuel rocket motor to decelerate the spacecraft on arrival 
and allow it to achieve orbit insertion. It weighed 553 kg 
when launched, including 55 kg of scientific instruments 
and 179 kg of propellant. The multiprobe weighed 875 kg, 
including the probes themselves at 585 kg. 

The mission was launched from Cape Canaveral 
using two Atlas-Centaur vehicles. The orbiter was 
launched first, on 20 May 1978, followed by the multiprobe 
on 6 August. The orbiter arrived at Venus on 4 December 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pioneer Venus Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


100 EARTH ORBIT 


DIRECTION N 


1 
' 
i 
J 
* SUN u 


189 
lnc 40Q\ 


ARRIVAL 
4 DEC 1978 


VENUS ORBIT 


3) 
20 MAY TO 
10 JUNE 1978 


ORSITER LAUNCH 
MAY/JUNE 1978 


VENUS AT 
VENUS AT 
PROBE LAUNCH ORBITER LAUNCH 


@3 VENUS AT PROBE 
ENCOUNTER 


DECEMBER 1878 


ORBITER ARRIVES 
DECEMBER 1978 


EARTH AT PROBE 
EARTH AT ORBITER ENCOUNTER 
ENCOUNTER 


PROBE RELEASE 
SEI 


Figure 2. The trajectories followed by the Pioneer Venus orbiter 
(top) and multiprobe (bottom) spacecraft, en route to Venus. 


of the same year, followed by the probes only 4 days 
later; the latter could follow a faster, more direct trajectory 
since their velocity relative to Venus on arrival was less 
critical. Figure 2 shows the trajectories they followed and 
figure 3 the geometry of their deployment at Venus. The 
large, or ‘Sounder’ probe landed near the equator, at 4.0° 
latitude and 304.0° longitude, the three small probes, now 
named ‘North’, ‘Day’ and ‘Night’ at 60.2°, 3.2°, —31.3°, 
317.7°, and —27.4°, 56.6° respectively. In addition, the 
bus which had carried the probes prior to separation 
entered at —37.9°, 290.9°, carrying two instruments (a 
neutral mass spectrometer and an ion mass spectrometer) 
and operated down to 100 km altitude. The probe 
instruments functioned down to a height of about 12 km 
above the surface, when most of them stopped working 
simultaneously. An enquiry showed the cause of this to 
have been the failure of insulating material on one of the 
external sensors, which caused a short circuit. One of the 
probes survived its impact with the surface and continued 
to transmit data for a further hour. 

The orbiter functioned throughout its nominal 
mission of 1 Venus year with the loss of only one 
instrument, the infrared radiometer, after 72 days of 
excellent performance. It went on to obtain valuable data 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


PERIAPSIS 
REVERSE 
SIDE 


NIGHT 
PROBE 


ORBITER 


<< 
> 


Figure 3. Geometry of the Pioneer Venus probe entries on 
9 December 1978, showing the orbiter already on station 
(NASA). 


for nearly 14 Earth years, finally entering the atmosphere 
and burning up during mid-1992. 


Scientific payload 

The total complement of scientific instruments on all six 
spacecraft is summarized in table 1. The instruments are 
grouped according to their principal scientific objective, 
and the code names begin with O, L, S or B to signify 
mounting on orbiter, large probe, each of the three 
small probes, or probe carrier bus, respectively. The 
principal investigator and institution responsible for each 
experiment are also shown. 


Scientific achievements 

The scientific results from the mission are very extensive 
and in some cases still being accumulated. Compilations 
can be found in the references given at the end of this 
article. The following is a brief summary. 

Pioneer Venus obtained radar altimetry for about 
90% of the surface of the planet and made a number of 
radar images (see VENUS: SURFACE). With these, volcanic and 
tectonic features such as rift valleys, mountains, continents 
and volcanoes were discovered. It was found that there is 
a unimodal distribution of topography on Venus, whereas 
Earth has a more bimodal distribution, resulting from a 
dearth of elevated regions of continental size. The detailed 
mapping confirmed the existence of great troughs or ‘rift 
valleys’, the presence of which had been expected from 
Earth-based radar data. No evidence was found for a 
Venusian analogue to the continuous ridge systems which 
are characteristic of the terrestrial plate tectonics system. 

Over the course of its 14 yr lifetime, the Pioneer Venus 
orbiter obtained measurements of the gravity field that, 
when combined with the radar altimetry results, showed 
that the interior behavior of Venus is more Earthlike than 
Mars or the Moon. However, there is a great difference 
between Venus and Earth in that on Venus there is a 
strong positive correlation of gravity with topography at 
all wavelengths. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pioneer Venus Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Pioneer Venus science payload. 


Code 


name Experiment 


Principal investigator, affiliation 


Composition and Structure 


LNMS Large probe mass spectrometer 

LGC Large probe gas chromatograph 

BNMS Bus neutral mass spectrometer 

ONMS Orbiter neutral mass spectrometer 
OUVS Orbiter ultraviolet spectrometer 
LAS-SAS _ Large-small probe atmosphere structure 
OGPE Atmospheric propagation experiment 
OAD Orbiter atmospheric drag experiment 
Clouds 

LN-SN Large-small probe nephelometer 

LCPS Large probe cloud particle size spectrometer 
OCPP Orbiter cloud photopolarimeter 


Thermal balance 


LSFR Large probe solar flux radiometer 
LIR Large probe infrared radiometer 
SNFR Small probe net flux radiometer 
OIR Orbiter infrared radiometer 
Dynamics 
DLBI Differential long-baseline interferometry 
MWIN Doppler tracking of probes 
MTUR- 
OTUR = Atmospheric turbulence experiment 


Solar wind—ionosphere 


BIMS Bus ion mass spectrometer 

OIMS Orbiter ion mass spectrometer 

OETP Orbiter electron temperature probe 

ORPA Orbiter retarding potential analyzer 

OMAG Orbiter magnetometer 

OPA Orbiter plasma analyzer 

OEFD Orbiter electric field detector 

ORO Orbiter dual-frequency occultation experiment 


Surface and interior 


ORAD Orbiter radar mapper 
OIDD Orbiter internal density distribution experiment 
OCM Orbiter celestial mechanics experiment 


High-energy astronomy 
OGBD Orbiter gamma burst detector 


Interdisciplinary scientists 
Atmosphere, geology and geophysics 
Fields and particles 
Geology and geophysics 
Surface features 
Atmosphere 
Atmosphere 


Probe and orbiter made refined measurements of 
the abundances of major, minor and noble gas species 
in the lower, mixed atmosphere and in the upper, 
diffusively separated atmosphere (see VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). 
The orbiter discovered that sulfur dioxide is an important 
absorber of ultraviolet radiation a wavelengths below 
3200 A, accounting in part for the well-known ultraviolet 
markings in the clouds. However, another absorber, still 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


J Hoffman, University of Texas at Dallas 
V Oyama,Ames Research Center 

U von Zahn, University of Bonn 

H Niemann, Goddard Space Flight Center 
I Stewart, University of Colorado 

A Seiff, Ames Research Center 

T Croft, SRI International 

G Keating, Langley Research Center 


B Ragent, Ames Research Center 
R Knollenberg, Particle Measuring Systems, Inc 
L Travis, Goddard Institute for Space Studies 


M Tomasko, University of Arizona 

R Boese, Ames Research Center 

V Suomi, University of Wisconsin 

F Taylor, Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
and Oxford University 


C Counselman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
A Kliore, Jet Propulsion Laboratory 


R Woo, Jet Propulsion Laboratory 


H Taylor, Goddard Space Flight Center 

H Taylor, Goddard Space Flight Center 

L Brace, Goddard Space Flight Center 

W Knudsen, Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory 
C Russell, University of California at Los Angeles 

J Wolfe, Ames Research Center 

F Scarf, TRW 

A Kliore, Jet Propulsion Laboratory 


G Pettengill, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
R Phillips, Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
I Shapiro, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 


W Evans, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory 


G Schubert, University of California 

A Nagy, University of Michigan 

G McGill, University of Massachusetts 
H Masursky, US Geological Survey 

T Donahue, University of Michigan 

J Pollack, NASA Ames Research Center 


unidentified but probably a solid or liquid component of 
the clouds, must be present to account for absorption at 
longer wavelengths. 

The structure of the clouds was investigated globally 
and vertically, producing (when taken with results from 
earlier Soviet probes) the first good data on cloud layering, 
the distribution of particles of different sizes, composition 
and optical properties. These quantities are now known to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pioneer Venus Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


vary enormously across the planet, so the Pioneer Venus 
large probe nephelometer (cloud sensor) and particle size 
spectrometer data, once taken to represent the mean 
global structure in a relatively horizontally homogeneous 
cloud, are now regarded as a snapshot of a very dynamic 
cloud system (see also CLOUDS IN PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). 
Net flux measurements determined the sinks for solar 
radiation and the sources and sinks of infrared radiation 
in the lower atmosphere and clouds at four locations 
characterizing daytime, night-time, low-latitude and high- 
latitude conditions. Taken altogether, these provided an 
improved understanding of the Venusian version of the 
‘greenhouse effect’ which, coupled with global dynamics, 
explains the high surface temperature. The orbiter 
instruments detected radio signals that are thought to 
originate from lightning discharges in the clouds of Venus, 
thereby confirming earlier observations made by VENERA 
probes. 

One of the biggest mysteries concerning Venus is the 
dynamics of its atmosphere. Measurements of vertical 
profiles of wind velocities at four probe locations, and 
global wind measurements at the cloud tops and above 
by remote sensing, helped to clarify the vertical profile 
of the four-day winds observed in UV markings in 
the upper cloud layers, while orbiter infrared imaging 
discovered remarkable structure in the polar regions of 
the atmosphere. This included the ‘polar dipole’, a kind 
of double vortex several thousands of km across rotating 
around the pole. This and the polar collar, a cold wave- 
like disturbance surrounding the dipole, are aspects of the 
circulation pattern in those regions which still remain to 
be understood. 

Direct entry-probe measurements and remote sensing 
of temperature profiles with the infrared radiometer 
produced much new data concerning the atmospheric 
state properties (temperature, pressure and density) 
globally and vertically from the surface through the clouds 
and into the upper atmosphere. Several remarkable 
features were revealed for the first time, including a 
reverse temperature gradient from the equator to the pole 
(making the atmosphere above the pole warmer than 
that above the equator) and global-scale wave motions. 
Prominent among the latter are the solar tides, i.e. the 
diurnal cycle of heating of the atmosphere by the Sun, 
which on Venus have two maxima per day in contrast to 
the one on Earth. Pioneer Venus also discovered that the 
high atmosphere well above the cloud tops is much colder 
at night than in the daytime, with a surprisingly abrupt 
boundary between them. 

Pioneer Venus mapped the aircLow on the dark 
side of Venus, determined the global characteristics of 
the ionosphere—its ion composition, temperature, flows, 
electron concentration and temperature, modification of 
ionospheric characteristics by input from the solar wind 
and the production and maintenance of a night-side 
ionosphere. It determined the nature of the solar-wind 
interaction with the planet, including temporal and spatial 
studies of the location of the bow shock and ionopause, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and particle and energy input to the atmosphere (see 
VENUS: INTERACTION WITH SOLAR WIND). Finally, it confirmed 
that Venus has little if any intrinsic magnetic field, and 
set a very low upper limit on the magnetic moment of the 
planet. 


Bibliography 

A description of the Pioneer Venus mission and _ its 
instruments may be found in a special edition of the 
following journal: 


1980 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 18 


The results and their interpretation are discussed in 
another special issue: 


1980 J. Geophys. Res. 85 
See also the following books: 


Hunten D M, Colin L, Donahue T and Moroz V (eds) 1982 
Venus (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 
Bougher S W, Hunten D M and Phillips RJ (eds) 1997 Venus 

2 (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


F W Taylor 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pipe Nebula (B59, B65-7, B79) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pipe Nebula (B59, B65-7, B79) 


A large dark nebula in the constellation Scorpius, 
resembling a tobacco pipe. E E Barnard assigned five 
separate catalog numbers to sections of the nebula. B78 
is the ‘bowl’, about 3° by 22°, with approximate position 
RA 17 33™, dec. —26°, while B59 and B65-7 comprise the 
‘stem’, 5° by 1°, with approximate position RA 17 1: 
dec. —27°. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Pisces 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pisces 


(the Fishes; abbrev. Psc, gen. Piscium; area 889 sq. deg.) 
A northern zodiacal constellation which lies between 
Pegasus and Cetus, and culminates at midnight in late 
September. Its origin dates back to Babylonian times and 
it is said to represent Aphrodite, the goddess of love in 
Greek mythology, and her son Eros, who jumped into the 
Euphrates to escape from the multi-headed Typhon and 
were turned into fish. Its brightest stars were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A large but rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Pisces are 7 Piscium, magnitude 3.6, 
y Piscium, magnitude 3.7, a Piscium (Alrescha), a 
close binary with bluish-white (AO and A3) components, 
magnitudes 4.2 and 5.3, separation 1.9”, and w Piscium, 
magnitude 4.0. Other interesting objects include 
¢ Piscium, a double star consisting of white (A7) and 
pale yellow (F7) components, magnitudes 5.2 and 6.4, 
separation 23”, that share the same proper motion, each of 
which has a very close (separation <0.05”) companion, 19 
Piscium (also called TX Piscium), one of the few so-called 
‘carbon stars’ visible to the unaided eye (magnitude range 
4.8-5.2), and M74 (NGC 628), a ninth-magnitude face-on 
spiral galaxy mistakenly cataloged by John Herschel as a 
globular cluster. 

Pisces also contains the First Point of Aries, or vernal 
equinox (see First Point of Aries), which when named lay in 
the neighboring constellation of Aries but has since moved 
into Pisces as a result of precession. 


See also: Fomalhaut. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Piscis Austrinus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Piscis Austrinus 


(sometimes called Piscis Australis; the Southern Fish; 
abbrev. PsA, gen. Piscis Austrini; area 245 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Aquarius and 
Grus, and culminates at midnight in late August. Its origin 
dates back to Babylonian times, and it is usually shown on 
early celestial charts unnaturally drinking water from an 
urn carried by Aquarius. Its brightest stars were cataloged 
by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) in the Almagest, though he 
included a Piscis Austrini (Fomalhaut) in the neighboring 
constellation of Aquarius. 

A small but not inconspicuous constellation, Piscis 
Austrinus is easily recognized by virtue of a Piscis 
Austrini, magnitude 1.3. There are no other stars brighter 
than fourth magnitude. Interesting objects include £ Piscis 
Austrini, a wide binary with bluish-white (AO) and yellow 
(G2?) components, magnitudes 4.3 and 7.9, separation 30", 
y Piscis Austrini, a close binary with bluish-white (AO) 
and pale yellow (F5) components, magnitudes 4.5 and 8.2, 
separation 4.1”, and NGC 7314, an eleventh-magnitude 
spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plossl, Georg Simon (1794-1868) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plossl, Georg Simon (1794-1868) 


Born in Wieden near Vienna, optical-instrument maker. 
The Plossl eyepiece is a four-element design for a telescope 
eyepiece, well known to amateur astronomers. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Plage 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plage 


Aregion of intensified emission in the solar chromosphere. 
Plages are revealed in monochromatic images obtained 
in the light of various emission lines, for example, the 
hydrogen-a line and the ‘H’ and ‘K’ lines of ionized 
calcium. The name derives from the French word for 
“beach’, an allusion to the fact that these features stand out 
like bright sandy beaches against the fainter background 
of the chromosphere as a whole. 

Physically, plages are regions of enhanced tempera- 
ture and density that float in the chromosphere. They are 
heated by magnetic fields, with strengths of upwards of 
0.01 T, which are concentrated within solar active regions. 
Plages usually cover most of the area occupied by an active 
region, forming before sunspots appear in the region and 
persisting for some time after the spots have disappeared. 

They are similar in nature to the faculae that are 
observed in the photosphere. 


See also: active region, chromosphere, emission spec- 
trum, faculae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planck Surveyor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planck Surveyor 


European Space Agency mission to measure temperature 
fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background with 
a precision of about 2 parts in a million and an angular 
resolution of about 10 arcseconds. Named after Nobel 
Prize winning physicist Max Planck. Will carry a 
1.5 m telescope and two instruments to cover frequencies 
between 30 and 857 GHz. Planned for launch together 
with First in 2007. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planck, Max (1858-1947) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planck, Max (1858-1947) 


Born in Kiel, Schleswig-Holstein, Germany, Nobel 
prizewinner for physics (1918). Calculated the radiation 
of a black-body by means of the introduction of the 
quantum theory of light. The Planck satellite launched to 
study the black-body spectrum of the cosmic microwave 
background was named for him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Planet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planet 


A body, in an independent orbit around the Sun or another 
star, that is not self-luminous. The major planets of the 
solar system show a variety of sizes and physical states. 
The inner planets are of rock and metal, while the outer 
planets are much larger and predominantly gaseous (and 
liquid, under the high pressures in their interiors), with 
relatively small rock/metal cores. Asteroids in the main 
belt are mostly rocky; Pluto is icy with a rocky core, and the 
Kuiper Belt objects (which have been given minor planet 
designations) are icy. The icy comets, though, are excluded 
from the definition. The term planetary body is sometimes 
used to include sizeable planetary satellites and asteroids. 
There is no agreed lower size limit which determines 
what constitutes a planet. The largest bodies orbiting 
the Sun are sometimes referred to as major planets to 
distinguish them from the minor planets, and the category 
‘minor planets’ includes near-Earth objects only meters 
in size. Meteoroidal particles and dust do not count as 
‘planetary’. The question of an upper size limit has been 
highlighted with the discovery in the 1990s of exoplanets— 
planets orbiting other stars. All but a handful of them are 
several times the mass of Jupiter; the most massive are 
better described as substellar objects. The more massive 
a substellar object, the more closely its characteristics 
approach those of a brown dwarf. A common rule of 
thumb is that 10 Jupiter masses marks the division between 
planets/substellar objects and brown dwarfs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planet X 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planet X 


A name given to a hypothetical tenth major planet once 
believed to exist in the outer solar system, beyond the 
orbit of Neptune. The ‘X’, which stood for ‘unknown’, was 
also appropriate as the roman numeral for ‘ten’. The label 
‘Planet X’ was originated by Percival Lowell. From the 
late nineteenth century, he and others, including William H 
Pickering, worked out orbits for a large tenth planet which 
they believed responsible for gravitational perturbations 
of Uranus, which, even since the discovery of Neptune in 
1846, did not appear to be following the orbit calculated 
for it. In 1930 Clyde Tombaugh discovered Pluto. Though 
Pluto was only 5° from Lowell’s predicted position, and in 
asimilar orbit, itsoon became clear that the new planet was 
too small to be Lowell’s Planet X. Tombaugh continued 
searching, and by 1943 had surveyed the entire sky, but 
without finding a Planet X. 

From the 1940s, further predictions were made for 
a tenth planet whose perturbations would account for 
the deflection of comets from an outer reservoir into 
orbits that would bring them into the inner solar system. 
Charles Kowal’s search from 1977 to 1984 turned up the 
180 km Chiron, orbiting between Saturn and Uranus, 
briefly hailed in the media as the tenth planet. Others, 
including Robert Harrington and Thomas Van Flandern, 
returned to the problem of discrepancies in the orbits of 
Uranus and Neptune, and issued a variety of predictions 
for a tenth planet; but searches revealed nothing. 

In the 1990s the need to invoke a Planet X disappeared. 
Voyager 2 in 1989 had established a new mass for 
Neptune, and Myles Standish and others demonstrated 
that the discrepancies in the orbital motions of Uranus 
and Neptune could be explained away by this and by 
observational errors. The discovery from 1992 onwards of 
the first members of what appears to be a large population 
of asteroidal objects beyond the orbit of Neptune seems 
finally to have brought the Planet X chapter to a close. 


See also: Kuiper Belt, Pluto and Charon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetarium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetarium 


Usually a domed building housing a special projector that 
is used to simulate the night sky. The institution associated 
with a planetarium is devoted to popular education in 
astronomy. The term was originally used to describe 
teaching devices, known as orreries, designed to portray 
the orbital motions of the planets and their satellites. The 
first planetarium was opened at the Deutsches Museum in 
Munich in 1923. 

Planetarium installations vary greatly. The larger 
planetariums have an extensive exhibition area, museum 
collections and a seating capacity in excess of 600. The 
most common projector, since the 1940s, is manufactured 
by Zeiss in Oberkochen, Germany. Modern Zeiss 
instruments are large, technically advanced combinations 
of lenses, lights, gears and motors. They are designed to 
place the planets, Sun and Moon in their correct locations 
among the stars for thousands of years past and future. 
Manufacturers in Japan and the United States compete 
with Zeiss, producing an array of instruments appropriate 
for a variety of dome sizes and for different purposes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Atmospheres 


Planetary atmospheres are the external gaseous envelopes 
which surround the planets. In the case of the telluric 
planets, they represent only a negligible fraction of their 
mass, but they play an essential role in the energy 
balance between the surfaces and the Sun. In the case 
of the GIANT PLANETS, Which are mostly gaseous, they 
account for a large fraction of their total mass and 
constitute their major component. Planetary atmospheres 
show extremely diverse physical conditions, with surface 
pressures ranging from nanobars to hundreds of bars and 
surface temperatures ranging from 40 to over 700 K; they 
also show large differences in their chemical compositions, 
from the lightest, hydrogen-dominated, to the densest, 
dominated by carbon dioxide. 

In spite of these differences, there are striking 
similarities in the physical and chemical processes 
involved: photochemistry and photodissociation take 
place as a consequence of solar radiation and, in some 
cases, magnetospheric effects; condensation takes place on 
almost all planets, generating cloud structures, sometimes 
subject to seasonal effects; volcanism is present, or has 
been present, on several planets and/or satellites, and 
sometimes drives the surface /atmosphere interaction. 


From Mercury to Pluto 

Among the nine planets of the SOLAR sYsTEM, all except one 
have an atmosphere (table 1). MERcury, the planet closest 
to the Sun, is too small and too hot to retain a permanent 
atmosphere. The other planets are all surrounded by 
a gaseous envelope, but there is an incredible variety 
in their characteristics. Even within the group of the 
TERRESTRIAL PLANETS, the atmospheres of Venus, the Earth 
and Mars show extreme differences in their physical 
conditions: on Venus, the surface pressure reaches almost 
100 bar and its surface pressure is 730 K, while at the 
surface of Mars, the mean pressure is only 6 mbar 
and the mean temperature ranges around 210-230 K 
(see VENUS: ATMOSPHERE, MARS: ATMOSPHERE). Between these 
two extremes, the EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE shows intermediate 
physical conditions. Concerning their visual aspect, 
there is little in common between the cratered surface 
of Mercury, the thick white-yellow cloud layer of Venus, 
presumably composed of sulfuric acid, the blue planet 
Earth surrounded by white clouds, and the red rocky 
surface of Mars. The terrestrial planets, however, 
exhibit more similarities in their chemical atmospheric 
composition, dominated by carbon dioxide and nitrogen. 
In the case of the Earth, carbon dioxide is indeed present 
too, trapped under the oceans in the form of carbonates. 
The main difference, for our planet, comes from the 
presence of large amounts of oxygen, due to the presence 
of life. 

At further distances from the Sun, the four giant 
planets—JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS and NEPTUNE—also show 
striking differences in their visual appearance. Although 
they are all composed mostly of hydrogen and helium, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


their clouds, composed of various minor constituents, 
are very different. Giant planets have no ‘surface’; they 
are mostly gaseous and their central core is not directly 
observable. Finally, pLuto, the ninth planet, is a single 
case by itself. This small icy body, surrounded by a very 
tenuous atmosphere of nitrogen, shows more similarities 
with the satellites of the outer solar system than with any 
other planet. 

Some satellites are also surrounded with a stable 
atmosphere: TITAN, Saturn’s largest satellite, has a 
nitrogen-dominated atmosphere with a surface pressure 
comparable to that of the Earth. triton, Neptune’s 
largest satellite, also has a nitrogen atmosphere with a 
surface pressure of a few nanobars, comparable to that 
of Pluto when the planet is close to perihelion. Finally 
10, the Galilean satellite closest to Jupiter, has a very 
tenuous atmosphere of sulfur dioxide generated by active 
volcanism. 


What is an atmosphere? 

All planetary atmosphere are governed by the hydrostatic 
law, which expresses the balance between pressure and 
gravity. Its equation is 


dP/dz = —pg (1) 


where P is the pressure, z the altitude, o is the density 
and g is the acceleration due to gravity. Combining this 
equation with the ideal gas law, one can derive the pressure 
distribution as a function of altitude. In an isothermal 
atmosphere, its equation is 


P = Pyexp(—z/H) (2) 
where H is the scale height: 
H = RT/ug (3) 


R is the universal gas constant and jz is the mean molecular 
weight. H is the height at which the pressure is reduced 
by a factor e; the value of H, at the surface of terrestrial 
planets, is about 8 km for the Earth, 14 km for Venus and 
10 km for Mars; it reaches 20 and 40 km in the observable 
regions (at a pressure of about 0.5 bar) of Jupiter and 
Saturn respectively. For a given planet, the scale height 
is proportional to the temperature and thus slightly varies 
with altitude following the thermal profile. Atmospheric 
constituents are mixed up to high altitudes; the separation 
level is the homopause, at a pressure of a few microbars 
in the case of the Earth. Below the homopause is the 
homosphere, where mixing is achieved by convection in 
the lower part and by eddy diffusion above. 


Thermal structure 

The thermal structure of an atmosphere is a direct result 
of its interaction with the incoming solar flux. In the 
case of the telluric atmospheres, a small fraction of 
the solar radiation (especially in the UV and the near 
IR) is absorbed by the atmosphere itself (gas and/or 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Physical characteristics of the planets. 


Equatorial Inclination 
diameter Equatorial Mass Surface Escape of the Principal 
relative diameter relative to Mean gravity velocity Sideral equator to the atmospheric 
Name the Earth (km) Flattening the Eartht density (ms~*) (kms!) rotation orbital plane = components 
Mercury 0.382 4878 0 0.055 5.44 3.78 4.25 58 646 d o° H, He, Ne 
(solar wind) 
Venus 0.949 12104 0 0.815 5.25 8.60 10.36 243 d (r)*$ 2°07’ CO? (97%) 
Earth 1 12756 0.003353 1 5.52 9.78 11.18 23h 56 min 04s 23°26’ No (78%) 
Oz (21%) 
Mars 0.533 6794. 0.005 0.107 3.94 3.72 5.02 24h37 min 23s 23°59! CO? (95%) 
Jupiter 11.19 142800 0.062 317.80 1.24 24.8 59.64 9h 50 min to 3°04’ H, He, CHy, NH3 
9h56 min 
Saturn 9.41 120000 0.0912 95.1 0.63 10.5 35.41 10h 14 min to 26°44’ H, He, CHa, NH3 
10h 39 min 
Uranus 3.98 50 800 0.06 14.6 1.21 8.5 21.41 17h 06 min§ 98° H, He, CHa, NH3 
Neptune 3.81 48 600 0.02 17.2 1.67 10.8 23.52 15h 48 min 29° H, He, CHy, NH3 
Pluto ~0.2 2300 2 0.002 m2 2 6d9h18 min ? _ 


t mg = 5.976 x 104 kg. 
$ () indicates that the rotation is retrograde. 
§ Rotation period of the magnetic field. 


aerosols) while a larger fraction (in the visible range) is 
absorbed by the surface; a third part is scattered and 
reflected outside. Near the surface, the troposphere is 
heated by the infrared radiation of the surface, itself 
heated by the solar flux. This temperature gradient 
induces convection which transports the energy toward 
higher levels; this part of the atmosphere is called the 
troposphere. The tropopause, at the top of the convective 
cells, corresponds to a temperature minimum. Above 
it, in the stratosphere, the energy is transferred by 
radiation. In several cases, the temperature increases 
again with altitude, due to the absorption of the solar 
UV flux by atmospheric gases or aerosols. In the case 
of the Earth, ozone absorbs in this region while, in the 
giant planets, the solar flux is absorbed by methane and 
stratospheric aerosols. The stratosphere may be more or 
less complex, depending on the spectroscopic properties of 
the atmospheric constituents. Other heating mechanisms 
contribute at higher altitudes, including dissociation of 
radicals and propagation of gravity waves. At even higher 
altitudes, the solar flux is energetic enough to ionize all 
atoms; this region, called the ionosphere, strongly interacts 
with the magnetic field, when present, to produce, in 
particular, auroral phenomena (see AURORA). 

The thermal structure described above basically 
applies for all planets (figures 1 and 2), except that in the 
case of the giant planets there is no surface to absorb the 
visible solar flux, which is absorbed in the troposphere. In 
addition, with the exception of Uranus, all giant planets 
exhibit an internal source of energy, comparable to the 
energy received from the Sun. This internal source is 
probably the result of specific evolutionary processes. 

In the case of the telluric planets, the GREENHOUSE 
EFFECT can strongly affect the temperature distribution of 
the lower troposphere. Its mechanism is as follows: the 
surface, heated by the visible solar flux, mostly emits in 
the infrared range. This radiation can be absorbed by 
atmospheric gases if they present spectroscopic transitions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in this spectral range: this is the case for CO2, HyO and CHy 
in particular. The lower atmosphere is then heated, and 
radiates back to the surface to heat it even more, and the 
process accelerates. The extreme case is Venus, which now 
has a surface temperature of 730 K while its equilibrium 
temperature, in the absence of greenhouse effect, would be 
229 K! Both the Earth and Mars also present a significant 
greenhouse effect, which causes an increase of 33 K for the 
Earth and 4 K for Mars. 


General circulation 

Because the solar flux falls preferentially near the equator 
of all planets (except Uranus), latitudinal temperature 
and pressure gradients are created, and the heat is 
redistributed by thermal winds. The effect of the planet’s 
rotation then determines the general circulation. Due to 
Coriolis forces, pole-ward winds are apparently deflected 
in the direction of the planet’s rotation. A typical 
example is, on the Earth, the cyclonic motions (in the 
northern hemisphere) around low-pressure centers at 
mid-latitudes; similar examples exist in the southern 
hemisphere of Jupiter. If nonlinear terms, like centrifugal 
force, dominate in the momentum balance, the balance 
with the pressure gradient is called cyclostrophic balance. 
The Rossby number gives the ratio of nonlinear terms to 
Coriolis terms in the momentum balance: 


Ro = U/fL (4) 


where U is the mean zonal wind and L is a typical 
horizontal length scale of the weather system. f is given 
by 

f =2osiné@ (5) 


where w is the rotation angular velocity and 6 is 
the latitude. Geostrophy or cyclostrophy take place 
respectively for small or large values of Ro. The thermal 
wind equation is derived from a combination of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


geostrophic balance, the hydrostatic equilibrium and the 
ideal gas law 

dU R dT 

dT ~—sCfa dé 
where a is the planetary radius. If the temperature 
decreases toward the poles (as is usually the case), the 
zonal winds increase with height; this is observed on 
terrestrial planets up to the tropopause. In the case of 
Jupiter the situation is different, as strong winds have been 
measured in the deep troposphere by the Galileo probe; the 
circulation in this case is also influenced by the existence 
of the internal heat source. 

The rapidly rotating planets Mars and Earth, as well 
as the giant planets, are characterized by geostrophic 
dynamics, with low values of Ro (0.1-0.5). In contrast, 
for Venus and Titan, which have very slow rotation, Ro is 
in the range 10-100. Venus exhibits a strong superrotation, 
and it seems also to be the case for Titan. 


(6) 


The exploration of planetary atmospheres 

How can we study planetary atmospheres? There are 
two distinct classes of methods. The first one, used 
for centuries, is ground-based telescopic observation; the 
second, which started in the 1970s, is in situ exploration 
from space probes. 

Observations using ground-based telescopes consist 
first of images, which allow one to study the atmospheric 
cloud structures and to monitor their evolution with time, 
an essential tool for climatology studies. The main tech- 
nique used for remote sensing is spectroscopy: spectra 
recorded at different wavelengths, from the ultraviolet to 
the millimeter range, allow us to probe different altitude 
levels of the planetary atmospheres (depending upon the 
atmospheric composition). Infrared spectra of planetary 
atmospheres, in particular, are essential for determining 
their chemical composition and their thermal profile. An- 
other powerful method is the photometric observation of 
stellar occultation events: the stellar flux decreases at the 
time of the OCCULTATION and increases as the star emerges 
from the planet’s atmosphere. The study of the lightcurve 
provides valuable information about the refractive index 
of the atmosphere, which allows us to determine the tem- 
perature if the mean molecular weight is known; this tech- 
nique has been successfully used in the case of Uranus, 
Neptune and Titan. 

With the space era, we now have access to direct 
measurement of the physical parameters and the chemical 
composition of planetary atmospheres. Sensors are 
used for direct measurements of the pressure and 
the temperature, and mass spectrometers provide the 
chemical analysis of the atmosphere. The first space 
probes devoted to PLANETARY EXPLORATION were flyby 
or orbiter spacecraft, equipped with remote sensing 
instruments (cameras and spectrometers): then landers 
were sent for in situ analysis of the atmosphere and the 
surface. Some of these missions have been especially 
fruitful: vikINc on Mars (launch in 1974, operation in 
1976-7), VOYAGER toward the giant planets (launch in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


PRESSURE (mb) 


50 100 150 200 250 300 
TEMPERATURE (Kk) 


Figure 1. Vertical temperature profiles as a function of pressure 
for the planets (except Venus, out of scale) and Titan. The figure 
is taken from Samuelson (1997). 


Atmospheric pressure 
(mbar) 


104 j 


Thermosphere 


-X-85 kin 


Mesosphere 


K-45 kin 
Stratopause 


10 Stratosphere 
2 
10 a os 
roposphere 
103 , of the Earth 


170 210 250 290 
Temperature (K) 


Figure 2. Temperature profiles in the atmospheres of the Earth 
and Venus. The pressure scale is common to both planets. The 
altitude scales refer to the Earth (left) and Venus (right). On 
Venus, the surface temperature is 730 K and the surface pressure 
is 94 bar. The figure is taken from Encrenaz et al (1995). 


1979, operation in 1979-89), and, more recently, GALILEO 
toward Jupiter (launch in 1989, operation in 1995-2000). 
In parallel, after the launch of Mars Pathfinder and 
Mars Global Surveyor, the exploration of Mars is the 
object of an extensive on-going space program including, 
in forthcoming years, the planned launch of several 
planetary probes. 

For the terrestrial planets, most of our knowledge has 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


come from space exploration. The atmosphere of Venus 
was extensively explored in the 1970s and 1980s by the 
Venera and Pioneer Venus missions with, in addition, the 
Galileo flyby (1990); its surface has been mapped by the 
radar of the Magellan mission (1991-3). Our knowledge 
of Mars mostly relies on the results of the Viking mission 
which, with its two orbiters and landers, studied the Mar- 
tian atmosphere and surface over a full Martian seasonal 
cycle (2 years). For both Mars and Venus, the space mis- 
sions provided most of our knowledge about the atmo- 
spheric composition, the thermal profile and the properties 
of the clouds, as well as their spatio-temporal variation. 

In the case of the giant planets, our knowledge 
about the chemical atmospheric composition and the 
cloud and thermal structure first came from ground- 
based observations, especially in the infrared range, until 
the major achievement of the Voyager mission, which 
followed the precursor approach of the Pioneer 10 and 11 
spacecraft in the 1970s. Voyager was especially successful 
in revealing the thermal structure and the chemical 
composition of Titan’s atmosphere, largely unknown 
before. Finally, the Galileo mission, with the first launch of 
a probe in the atmosphere of a giant planet, has opened a 
new era in the space exploration of the outer solar system, 
with an extended monitoring of the planetary system. 
The next step of this program will be the CAssINI MISSION, 
which includes the descent of the Huygens probe into 
Titan’s atmosphere and the 4-year monitoring of the whole 
Saturnian system by the Cassini orbiter. 


The origin of planetary atmospheres 

In order to understand the formation of planetary 
atmospheres and their subsequent evolution, we need to 
know how the planets themselves formed. The history of 
the solar system is now understood in its basic concept, 
and generally accepted among the scientific community. 
Like other stars and stellar systems, the Sun and the solar 
system generated from a mass of interstellar gas, called 
the primordial nebula. The chemical composition of this 
gas must have been close to the composition generally 
found in the universe, i.e. mostly hydrogen (about 75%) 
and helium (25%), with all other elements (C, O, N,...) 
with their cosmic abundances, i.e. below 1%. Due to some 
instability (for example, the explosion of a nearby star), 
this primordial nebula starts rotating and contracting. At 
some point, the rotation becomes fast enough for the gas to 
collapse into a rotating disk. The central part will become 
the Sun, and the planets will form from the outside disk. 
We now observe some examples of such PROTOPLANETARY 
DISKS outside the solar system, around young nearby stars, 
so this formation process seems to be common in the 
universe. 

As the temperature cools down, the matter of the disk, 
mostly gaseous at the time of the collapse, combines from 
atoms to molecules and starts to condense (minerals and 
silicates first, then the HO ice, then the other ices like 
CO2, NH3, CHg, etc). Some molecules like CO and H) 
stay in gaseous form because of their low condensation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


temperatures. These are the bricks which will form the 
future planets, through the process of repeated collisions, 
leading to the formation of PLANETESIMALS. These small 
particles will continue to collide with each other and to 
stick together, giving rise to a larger and larger body. 
The protoplanet grows through the repeated accretion of 
infalling bodies, finally acquiring, for diameters larger 
than about 100 km, a spherical shape as a result of self- 
gravity. 

The major differences that we see today in the 
composition of the various planets and their atmospheres 
can largely be explained, at least to first order, by an effect 
of the condensation sequence which takes place as the 
temperature decreases from the Sun to the outside edge 
of the protoplanetary disk. This condensation sequence 
may have been the following: in the vicinity of the Sun, at 
heliocentric distances smaller than about 2 astronomical 
units (AU), only the heavy elements (minerals, silicates, 
etc) could be found in solid form. These elements were 
used in the planetesimals which formed the terrestrial 
planets. This explains why these planets are relatively 
dense and small. In contrast, at large heliocentric distances 
(at 5 AU and beyond) most of the molecules are in 
solid form, especially the molecules made with the most 
abundant elements H, O, C and N: H2O, CO2, CHa, NH3. 
Molecular hydrogen H2, however, is still in gaseous form. 

As a result, the cores formed by the ACCRETION process 
were much larger than in the case of the terrestrial 
planets, since, following the cosmic abundances, the mass 
contained in the ices is by far larger than the mass 
contained in the heavier elements. Theoretical models 
estimate that the cores of the protoplanets formed at 5 AU 
and beyond may have been about 15 times the mass of 
the Earth. At this stage, a qualitative difference appears in 
the evolution of the two classes of planets. Indeed, cores 
of 15 terrestrial masses have a gravity which is sufficient 
to accrete the surrounding nebula, mostly composed of 
gaseous hydrogen and helium; in the case of the terrestrial 
planets, the gravity field is not sufficient for this accretion 
to take place. This scenario explains why the giant planets 
are So massive (Jupiter’s mass is over 300 times the Earth’s 
one), mostly gaseous, and mostly formed of hydrogen and 
helium. 

At the heliocentric distances of Uranus and Neptune, 
the matter available for the core accretion must have been 
less abundant than close to the Sun; as a result, the time 
needed to accrete a core of 10-15 terrestrial masses must 
have been significantly longer. It is possible that in the 
meantime a large fraction of the light elements of the disk 
were blown away during the T-Tauri phase of the young 
Sun. In this case, Uranus and Neptune had little gas 
available in the surrounding nebula to be accreted around 
their cores. This would explain why Uranus and Neptune 
are smaller than Jupiter and Saturn, and why the relative 
mass fraction of their cores (about 60 to 80%) is much 
higher than for Jupiter and Saturn (3 to 15%). 

In the case of the terrestrial planets, the process of 
formation must have been very different. It is generally 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


believed that these atmospheres have been at least partly 
outgassed from the interior of the planets by active 
volcanism. It has been suggested, in particular by 
Owen, that part of their atmosphere might have been 
brought from the exterior through the infalling flux of 
meteorites (see Atreya et al 1989); a significant part of these 
meteorites must have been of cometary origin, i.e. rich 
in volatiles (H2O, CO2, etc). As will be discussed below, 
the recent measurement of the deuterium abundance in 
comets provides a constraint to this hypothesis. However, 
because the terrestrial planets are much less massive 
than the giant planets, they could not retain in their 
atmospheres the lightest elements like Hz and He. Only 
heavier molecules like CO, Nz, O2 and CO, could stay 
within the lifetime of the solar system. 


Chemical composition of planetary atmospheres 


In view of their chemical composition, planetary atmo- 
spheres also fall into two distinct classes. The terrestrial 
planetary atmospheres are mostly composed of CO) and 
No, with variable amounts of H2O, O2 and traces of CO 
and O3. In contrast, the giant planets’ composition in- 
cludes, apart from hydrogen and helium, CH, and NHs, 
with traces of many other minor constituents. 

In which form were carbon and nitrogen in 
the primordial nebula and the protoplanetary disk? 
Calculations of thermochemical equilibrium indicate that 
C is in the form of CH, or CO, and N is in the form of 
NH; or Nz, according to the following reversible chemical 
reactions 


CH, + HO = CO +3 H2 
2 NH3 = N2 +3 Ho 


which evolve toward the formation of CH,y and NH3 at 
low temperature, and the formation of CO and Np at 
high temperature. To first order, this favors the formation 
of CH, and NH; in the cold and dense environment of 
the giant planets where thermochemical equilibrium can 
effectively occur (this may not be the case in dilute media, 
like the interstellar medium or the medium from which 
comets formed). In the outer solar system, this scenario, 
however, does not explain the origin of the atmospheres 
surrounding the small bodies, Titan, Triton and Pluto, all 
dominated by nitrogen with a small fraction of methane. 
As for the terrestrial planets, these atmospheres are 
‘secondary’, i.e. probably outgassed from the cores, with 
some possible contribution from meteoritic impacts. The 
presence of both Nz and CH, on Titan, Triton and Pluto 
is not fully understood at present. In the case of Titan, 
formed within the Saturnian sub-nebula, the atmosphere 
may have originally contained CH, and NH3, ammonia 
being subsequently converted into N2 by photolysis, and 
Hp escaping in the process. The case of Pluto and Triton is 
different, as they were not formed ina dense environment, 
and they may have accreted like comets ina dilute medium 
far from equilibrium. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In the vicinity of the Sun, the reactions evolved toward 
CO and Np. CO in turn reacts with H2O according to the 
chemical reaction 


CO + H,O > CO, + Hp. 


This favors the formation of CO, CO»x, Nz and H> in the 
terrestrial atmospheres. Hydrogen escapes, as it is too 
light to be trapped by the planetary gravity field, and 
the planets are left with an atmosphere of Nz, CO:, CO 
and HO in various amounts. As mentioned above, the 
presence of a large fraction of O2 on Earth is due to the 
presence of life. 


The relative evolution of the telluric planets 

By which processes did Venus, the Earth and Mars 
evolve toward their extreme present conditions, while 
they started from more or less similar initial conditions? 
The three planets indeed are in the same range of 
heliocentric distances, diameters and densities, yet exhibit 
extreme differences in their present surface temperatures 
and surface pressures. In addition, water has almost 
completely disappeared from the atmosphere of Venus 
and Mars, while large amounts are present in the terrestrial 
oceans. How was such an evolution possible? Several 
authors, including Pollack, Hunten and Donahue (see 
Atreya et al 1989), have tried to rebuild the history of 
the three planets on the basis of the data available now: 
physical parameters, chemical composition, abundances 
of rare gases, isotopic ratios, etc. Although the question 
is still not completely solved, it is generally believed that 
two factors were especially important: the difference in 
heliocentric distance and the variation in the planetary 
mass. 

Although not more than a factor 2, the change in 
heliocentric distance implies a significant variation of 
the equilibrium temperature at the corresponding orbit. 
This temperature change is such that a key atmospheric 
element, water, tends to take different states on the three 
planets: mostly gaseous in the Venusian atmosphere, 
liquid at the Earth’s surface and solid on Mars. We know 
that water was very abundant in the early stages of Venus’ 
history, through the measurement of the deuterium-to- 
hydrogen ratio, derived from the HDO/H,0 ratio. The 
abundances of HDO and H20O have been measured from 
their infrared signatures in the spectra of Venus and 
Mars. As previously suggested from the Pioneer Venus 
measurements in 1982, the D/H ratio in Venus today, 
as derived from HDO/H20, is 120 times higher than 
the terrestrial value. In the case of Mars, it is 6 times 
higher than the Earth value. The explanation for HDO 
enrichment is the following: deuterated water—or heavy 
water, HDO—escapes slightly more slowly than HO; 
over the age of the solar system, this process leads to 
an accumulation of deuterium and an enhancement of 
the D/H ratio. The very high D/H ratio in Venus today 
is the signature of a very strong water outgassing over 
the history of Venus; the smaller, but still significant 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


enrichment of deuterium in Mars today indicates a 
moderate outgassing over the history of Mars. In the 
case of the Earth, no outgassing occurred since the water 
is trapped in the oceans. It is worth noticing that the 
comparison of the D/H ratio in the Earth’s oceans and in 
comets provides an important constraint upon the origin 
of the atmosphere of the Earth. As recently measured 
ON COMET HYAKUTAKE and COMET HALE-BopP, the D/H ratio 
derived from H,O and HDO in comets is twice as high as 
its value in the terrestrial oceans. There is no mechanism 
which could explain a deuterium depletion within the 
oceans over the history of the Earth. As a consequence, the 
water on Earth cannot come entirely from comets; about at 
least half of it must have been outgassed from its interior. 

In the case of Venus, the presence of gaseous water in 
massive amounts must have been important in increasing 
its surface temperature, through the greenhouse effect: 
H20, like CO,, is a gas which is spectroscopically very 
active in the infrared. This process is an amplifying one 
and is believed to be responsible for the very high surface 
temperature of Venus observed today (see VENUS: SURFACE). 
How did water escape from Venus? Several processes 
have been proposed, including dissociation by solar UV 
radiation, or reaction with the surface, or reaction with the 
atmospheric CO, but the question is not fully answered yet, 
and will require the development of more sophisticated 
photochemical models. 

In the case of Mars, the situation is completely dif- 
ferent. Due to the lower temperature, the abundance of 
gaseous water is severely constrained by saturation and 
the greenhouse effect has to be much less significant. There 
was some time in Mars’ history, however, where the at- 
mosphere must have been significantly more dense than 
today, as demonstrated by the signs of intense flooding 
shown on the surface. How did Mars lose its atmosphere, 
and how did water disappear? First, because of the smaller 
mass of the Martian globe as compared with Venus and 
the Earth, volcanism (whose energy is generated by the 
radioactive elements of its core) must have stopped ear- 
lier, thus interrupting a major contribution to the origin of 
the atmosphere. In addition, CO2 and Nz may have been 
trapped in the surface in the forms of carbonates and ni- 
trates respectively, but these constituents have not been 
firmly detected yet. Nitrogen might also have partly es- 
caped gravitationally. Water might be present in the form 
of permafrost under the Martian surface, as also observed 
in some places on the Earth. Discovering such water reser- 
voirs under the Martian surface would be of major impor- 
tance for understanding the whole history of the Martian 
climate, and this research will be a main objective of the 
future space exploration of Mars (see MARS: SURFACE). 

Finally, the evolution of the terrestrial atmosphere fol- 
lows a third different scenario: the primitive atmosphere 
of the Earth probably contained large amounts of CO, 
which would have been able to generate a greenhouse 
effect comparable to the one on Venus. However, the 
presence of liquid oceans of water prevented this fatal 
evolution. Carbon dioxide was trapped in the oceans and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reacted with the rocks to form carbonates (CaCO3). The 
amount of gaseous CO, consequently decreased and the 
greenhouse effect remained limited, so the surface temper- 
ature was never high enough for the oceans to evaporate. 


Dynamics and circulation of planetary 
atmospheres 

All planetary atmospheres show evidence for temporal 
variations, on very different time scales, diurnal and 
seasonal. In the case of the terrestrial planets, the climate 
is, as in the case of the Earth, dominated by the incoming 
solar flux and its variation as a function of latitude. The 
dynamics of the giant planets are more complex, as they 
are driven both by the incoming solar flux and the internal 
heat source. 

The case of Mars is of special interest as it shows 
striking analogies with the case of the Earth. The 
inclination of Mars’ rotation axis on the ecliptic is 25°, 
which generates strong seasonal effects. Both CO, and 
HO can condense on Mars. These constituents condense 
on the northern and southern caps during winter, and 
partially sublimate (especially CO2) to recondense on 
the opposite pole. After the pressure measurements 
achieved by the two Viking landers over a full seasonal 
cycle (1976-7), it was realized that this process involves 
as much as 25% of the mass of the total atmosphere. 
This enormous variation in the atmospheric mass induces 
strong meridional transport of heat and momentum, it is 
also responsible for the transport of water from one pole to 
another, the permanent CO; southern polar cap acting as 
a cold trap for water vapor. These transport phenomena 
are associated with violent winds which can generate huge 
dust storms, lifting particles as high as 50 km. The dust 
in turn influences the Martian meteorology by increasing 
the opacity of the atmosphere, heating the atmosphere 
and/or acting as nuclei for CO2 or HzO condensation. The 
Martian climate is thus the complex product of various 
seasonal cycles—carbon dioxide, water and dust—which 
are closely interconnected. 

It should be mentioned that another solar system 
body exhibits climatic changes even stronger than those 
of Mars, but still with some analogies: Triton, Neptune’s 
largest satellite, has a subsolar point which varies from 
+52 to —52° in latitude. Its very tiny Nz atmosphere, 
constrained by saturation, is subject to seasonal variations 
in abundance which are probably much stronger than in 
the case of Mars. On Triton there is probably a transfer 
from pole to pole comparable to the one on Mars, with 
N2 and CH, on Triton playing the roles of COz and HzO 
respectively on Mars. 

Jupiter and Saturn show a cloud structure along 
parallel belts and zones, which have been monitored 
by astronomers over the last three centuries. These 
striking features result from the fast rotation of the 
giant planets (about 10 h), associated with convective 
atmospheric motions. After the Voyager investigations— 
and more recently after the exploration of Jupiter by 
the Galileo probe—it is now generally believed that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


zones are cloudy regions of ascending motion, while the 
belts, more free (if not completely free) of clouds, are 
regions of subsidence. This type of circulation is similar 
to the Hadley circulation on Earth, which moves the 
humid air upward at the equator and brings back dry 
air downward at the tropics. The space results on the 
Jovian circulation are also supported by ground-based 
observations, especially in the infrared range, which show 
that the belts are associated with ‘hot spots’: the infrared 
radiation is stronger in these regions, because it comes 
from deep atmospheric levels where the temperature is 
higher. The latest Galileo observations do confirm this 
interpretation, but also show that the reality is much more 
complex that this simple scheme. The dimension scale of 
the hot spots is apparently very small, and the circulation 
is more complex by far than the simple zone/belt scheme. 
In addition to the latitudinal variation of the incoming 
solar flux which governs the climate in the terrestrial 
atmospheres, one has to take into account the effect of the 
internal energy which, for all giant planets except Uranus, 
is comparable to the absorbed solar energy. 

Another striking feature of the dynamics of the giant 
planets is the presence of cyclonic or anticyclonic features 
which consist of columns of ascending motion rising above 
their immediate surroundings and which are colder than 
their environment. The most famous of these features is 
the GREAT RED spot (GRS), in the southern hemisphere of 
Jupiter, which has been observed over more than three 
centuries, since the early days of planetary telescopic 
observations. The stability of this feature is still an enigma. 
Many structures of this kind exist elsewhere, on the giant 
planets but also on Earth (they are equivalent to our giant 
hurricanes), but these structures have short time scales. In 
particular, a similar feature, the dark spot, was discovered 
on Neptune at the time of the Voyager 2 flyby, in 1989; 
however, recent observations by the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE, 
over the past 2 years, have shown that this feature has now 
disappeared. Most of the similar features on Jupiter—the 
so-called ‘white ovals’—are also variable with time. 

What is the nature of the red material responsible for 
the Great Red Spot, and what is the constituent which 
makes the Jovian belts brown? We still do not know. 
The red color could be due to phosphorus or sulfur 
compounds, but there is at present no identification of 
them. More spectroscopic observations of these regions 
in the infrared and the ultraviolet range, from the Galileo 
orbiter or with the Hubble Space Telescope, might help 
to determine their chemical nature. We better understand 
the white ovals and plumes, most likely associated with 
ammonia clouds. These NH; clouds are also likely to be 
responsible for the yellow color of Saturn. The greenish 
color of Uranus might be due to the presence of methane. 
In large abundances, gaseous methane is responsible for 
the intense blue color of Neptune, while the white spots 
are methane cirrus. 


The small bodies of the outer solar system 
One planet—Pluto—and three satellites—Titan, Triton 
and Io—are surrounded with a stable atmosphere. Apart 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from Io, they are all composed of nitrogen and methane; 
apart from Titan, they are all tenuous, with a surface 
pressure of a few microbars (Triton and Pluto) or even a 
few nanobars (Io). 

Io, Jupiter’s closest Galilean satellite, is another 
unique object in the solar system: it is the only body 
showing evidence for active volcanism. The strong 
tidal forces generated by Jupiter’s gravity field, coupled 
with the eccentricity of Io’s orbit and the perturbations 
due to EUROPA, induce a permanent remodeling of Io’s 
surface. The active volcanoes of Io were first visually 
identified by Voyager, which also detected a plume of 
sulfur dioxide above one of them. The evidence for 
a stable atmosphere came from millimeter observations 
which detected transitions of SO, (its major constituent) 
and SO. The atmosphere of Io was found to be permanent 
but variable with time and localized, either produced by 
SO; frost sublimation or by direct volcanic outgassing. 

Titan’s atmosphere was largely unknown before its 
exploration by the Voyager spacecraft. Not only did this 
mission reveal the nature of its atmosphere—primarily 
nitrogen—and its thermal structure, but the Voyager in- 
frared spectrometer also detected a large number of un- 
expected complex molecules, mostly hydrocarbons and 
nitriles. These species are the products of methane 
photodissociation—the second atmospheric constituent in 
term of abundance—and the dissociation of nitrogen by 
energetic particles associated with the magnetic field of 
Saturn. The fascinating aspect of this discovery is that the 
complex molecules which were found are exactly those 
which appear in the laboratory in simulation experiments 
aiming to form HCN polymers and amino acids from the 
irradiation of CHy, HzO and NHs3 ices. Could a prebi- 
otic life have developed on Titan? Although the presence 
of a surface, and perhaps even lakes, may favor the de- 
velopment of heavier molecules, the low temperature is 
definitely a handicap that slows down all chemical reac- 
tions considerably. Nevertheless, the study of Titan’s at- 
mosphere could possibly shed some light on our under- 
standing of the early stages of the history of our own at- 
mosphere, and this is among the major motivations for the 
Cassini mission. 

Pluto and Triton show striking similarities in their 
physical properties (diameter and density) but also in 
the composition of their atmosphere. Pluto’s orbit is 
highly elliptical with a period of 248 years. For a period 
of 20 years, its heliocentric distance is very close to 30 
AU, which makes its incoming solar flux similar that 
one of Triton. This probably explains why they both at 
present have a surface pressure of a few microbars, mostly 
composed of nitrogen, with traces of methane; the surface 
pressure is apparently constrained by N2 saturation. 


Bibliography 

Atreya SK, Pollack J Band Matthews MS (eds) 1989 Origin 
and Evolution of Planetary and Satellite Atmospheres 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Atmospheres ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Del Genio A D 1997 Atmospheres Encyclopedia of Planetary 
Sciences (London: Chapman and Hall) 

Encrenaz T, Bibring J-P and Blanc M 1995 The Solar System 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Hanel R A, Conrath B J, Jennings D E and Samuelson R E 
1992 Exploration of the Solar System by Infrared Remote 
Sensing (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Samuelson R E 1997 Atmospheric thermal structure 
Encyclopedia of Planetary Sciences (London: Chapman 
and Hall) 


Thérése Encrenaz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Planetary Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Exploration 


Nine known planets, a large number of natural satellites, 
planetary rings, comets and asteroids are the constituents 
of the solar system. Knowing when and how they 
all formed, understanding the physical and chemical 
processes that shaped the planets and their moons as 
well as their relations with the Sun and the wider 
cosmos are the reasons why we want to explore the 
solar system. However, the fulfillment of the above 
scientific goals requires efforts that have embraced, and 
still do, large sectors of our society. The development 
of new technologies, more and more sophisticated 
and miniaturized, is essential for the progress of the 
exploratory programs, but such development requires 
investments which can only be supported at the highest 
political level. That is why the history of the exploration 
of the solar system is, in a way, the history of the post- 
world-war-II society. 


The first steps to the Moon 

It all started with the launch by the USSR of the Luna 1 
spacecraft to the MOON, on 2 January 1959. It accomplished 
its mission successfully and will be remembered as the 
first man-made craft to leave the Earth’s gravity field. The 
Soviet Union launched, on 12 September 1959, Luna 2, 
which impacted the lunar surface as planned, and, on 
4 October of the same year, Luna 3, which circumnavigated 
the Moon and sent back the first images of the far side. The 
effort carried out by the USSR to develop reliable launchers 
had paid off and put the Soviet planetary program in a 
leading position for about 5 yr. Indeed, it was only on 
July 1964 that the US Ranger 7 reached the Moon and 
sent back thousands of images of that part of the surface 
named Mare Cognitum. Such a late success of a NASA 
spacecraft gives to the landing of US astronauts on the 
surface of Moon, only 5 yr later, a miraculous touch. In 
fact, the first six Ranger missions had failed for a wealth 
of technical reasons. The Soviet Union, meanwhile, had 
launched from 1959 throughout the 1960s a total number 
of 17 fully successful missions to the Moon. 

It is common understanding to consider the landing 
of Apollo 11 and its crew on the surface of the Moon 
as the apex of lunar exploration. This landing is also 
considered as the final victory of the technology of the US 
over that of USSR. However, we tend to forget that already 
in 1970 the USSR had been able to return samples from the 
Moon’s surface with a fully automated mission (Luna 16) 
and that with a periodicity of a mission every other year, 
until 1976, lunar sample return missions were carried out 
successfully. NASA landed its first automated rover on 
Mars in 1996 and we will have to wait until 2003 to see a 
European lander on another planet. 

In the US, between 1967 and 1969, an incredible 
number of missions to the Moon were successfully 
launched in preparation of the human landing. The 
data acquired during those years constituted the main 
database, together with the Russian data, to be used by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the scientists to understand the geology, the geophysics 
and the geochemistry of the Moon. Five other landings 
followed the first human landing in 1969, the last of them 
being the mission of Apollo 17 in 1972. The US had 
demonstrated, in the course of their successful human 
landings, their technological superiority and, in particular, 
their capacity to define a goal that involved politically, 
scientifically and technologically the entire nation. On 
the contrary, the hyperprogrammed USSR had failed in 
coagulating around the conquest of the Moon the different 
interests of the nation. Contrasting industrial, political and 
technological interests did not favor the accomplishment 
of the ultimate goal: landing a Soviet cosmonaut on the 
surface of the Moon. 

New data were made available to the scientific 
community almost 20 yr later by the CLEMENTINE Mission 
in 1994 and the LUNAR PROSPECTOR Mission in 1998. 
The Clementine spacecraft was developed by the US 
Department of Defense in order to test both new 
microtechnologies and management procedure for the 
faster construction of smaller spacecraft. It provided 
us with extensive maps of the lunar surface, including 
some multispectral maps. Lunar Prospector, launched on 
6 January 1998, was to determine mainly surface chemistry 
and the lunar gravity field. The most noticeable result 
acquired by this last lunar mission is the determination 
of large quantities of hydrogen in the cold lunar polar 
regions. Some scientists speculated from this result that 
water ice might be present near the poles of the Moon; 
however, such a presence has yet to be proven, even after 
the impact of Lunar Prospector on the surface on 31 July 
1998. 

The major scientific result of the exploration of the 
Moon is that we now have a well-measured time scale 
of its evolution, thus providing us with a comparative 
basis to interpret the evolution of other planetary bodies, 
including the Earth. The larger craters on the Moon record 
a period of intense bombardment which ended about 
3.7 billion years ago. Presumably, this is a process that 
affected all the inner planets more or less at the same time. 
By counting and measuring the lunar crater density, and 
by determining accurately the age of the lunar samples 
with radioisotope dating techniques, we have been able 
to construct a chronological reference which allow us to 
interpret the geological history of Mars, Mercury and 
Venus. 

The analysis of the returned samples has revealed 
that two major provinces constitute the lunar crust: the 
young, sparsely crated and low-albedo mare terrains, and 
the old, heavily cratered, high-albedo highlands. Isotopic 
dating has shown that the youngest mare basaltic lava 
flows have an age of about 2.5 billion years; the oldest- 
dated lunar rocks have been found in the lunar highlands 
and have shown a radiometric age of about 4.5 billion 
years. Geophysics of the Moon, i.e. its internal constitution 
and state, is still the subject of intense debate within the 
scientific community. We know that the Moon had a strong 
magnetic field during the early phases of its history and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that this field had disappeared since. We still do not have 
clear data and understanding of the internal structure and 
the presence of a small molten core still needs to be proven 
definitively. Moreover, all the available geochemical and 
geophysical data refer to the near side of the Moon and 
there is still a need to obtain data from the far side in order 
to complete our geological and geophysical picture of our 
natural satellite. 


Exploring the void: the interplanetary missions 


The space within which the solid constituents of the 
solar system revolve around the Sun is far from being 
void and knowledge about it is essential to understand 
the ‘environment’ of that part of the universe where we 
live. Indeed, the particles emitted by the Sun, as well 
as the electric and magnetic fields associated with such 
emissions, have a strong influence on the planetary bodies 
and on the spacecraft supposed to explore them. It goes 
without saying that manned flights outside the Van Allen 
belt required detailed information on the possible natural 
hazards the astronauts were supposed to face. 

At the beginning of the space age a good number 
of spacecraft which missed their primary scientific goals 
and became lost in the interplanetary space provided 
interesting and novel information on the solar system 
‘environment’. The Pioneers 1, 2,3 and 4 launched between 
1958 and 1959, belong to this category. They were indeed 
supposed to flyby the Moon and reach a final orbit around 
the Sun, but never accomplished their primary goals. 
Nevertheless, these missions were the first to show that 
human beings could have reached the Moon without 
major problems due to the interplanetary radiation. The 
following series of Pioneers (6-9), launched between 1965 
and 1969, were successfully put in an orbit around the 
Sun similar to that of our planet and have provided us for 
many years with vital information on the interplanetary 
fields and particles and on the Sun itself. 

In 1990 a US shuttle launched the ESA-made 
Ulysses spacecraft. No other name would have been 
more appropriate for this spacecraft which is still 
travelling along an out-of-the-ecliptic orbit which takes it 
periodically above the poles of the Sun. 

Ulysses is one of the many spacecraft dedicated 
to the study of the interplanetary space in the frame- 
work of the International Solar Terrestrial Physics Pro- 
gram (ISTP). This program includes a large number of 
spacecraft mostly provided by the Russian Space Agency 
(RKA, recently renamed the Russian Aviation and Space 
Agency, Rosaviakosmos), the Japanese Institute for Space 
Science (ISAS), NASA, NOAA and ESA (ACE, AKE- 
BONO, ASTRID, CLUSTER, DMSP, EQUATOR-S, ETS-VI, 
FAST, FREJA, GEOTAIL, GMS-4, GOES, GOMS, IMP-8, 
INTERBALL-TAIL, INTERBALL-AURORA, LANL S/C, 
MSX, NOAA/TIROS, OERSTED, POLAR, PRACTICE-4, 
ROCSAT, SAMPEX, SOHO UARS, WIND). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The exploration of the inner region 

Taking for granted that exploration of our planet can be 
neglected in this context, and having described previously 
the exploration of the Moon, we are left with two planets: 
MERCURY and VENUS. 

All the planetary bodies orbiting the Sun in a 
belt between 0.4 and 1.5 astronomical units from the 
Sun, ie. Mercury, Venus, the Earth-Moon system and 
Mars, are mainly composed of rock and metal and are 
characterized by a relatively small amount of volatiles. 
A trend of decreasing density from Mercury to Mars 
is also a noticeable characteristic of the inner planets. 
This trend could be determined by the thermodynamical 
behavior of the PROTOPLANETARY NEBULA in which pressure 
and temperature decrease with increasing distance from 
Sun. However, it could also be due to local anomalies 
in the course of the fractionation and re-aggregation of 
these bodies during the early phases of their collisional 
accretion. The comparative study of the formation and 
evolution of the inner planets provides us with a better 
understanding of the Earth as well of those parameters 
which determine planetary evolution. 


Mercury 

What we know of Mercury is due to the NASA mission, 
MARINER 10, which, launched in 1973, flewby the planet 
three times. This spacecraft will be remembered as the first 
one to make use of the ‘gravity assist’ technique thanks to 
the brilliant calculations of the Italian scientist Giuseppe 
Colombo. Indeed, the gravitational attraction of Venus 
was used to slow Mariner 10’s solar orbital velocity down 
in order to let the spacecraft ‘fall’ towards the Sun and 
reach the orbit of Mercury. In the course of its three 
flybys, Mariner 10 was able to return about 12 000 images, 
corresponding to a coverage of about 40% of the surface 
of the planet. The Mariner 10 images revealed a densely 
cratered surface, dominated by the Caloris Basin, a huge 
multi-ringed impact crater. Caloris appears to have been 
filled by lava flows similarly to the Lunar Maria. 

The little information we have on Mercury is pushing 
the major world space agencies to plan new missions to 
this planet. In particular ESA has identified Mercury as the 
target of one of its ‘Cornerstone’ missions, with a launch 
date in the 2008-10 time frame. NASA and ISAS have also 
manifested interest in exploring Mercury. At the time of 
writing an effort of international coordination, led by ESA, 
is ongoing. 


Venus 

As for the exploration of the Moon, the Soviet Union had 
taken the lead in the exploration of Venus. In 1967 the 
Soviets, after three initial failures, succeeded in letting the 
VENERA 4 probe descend through the atmosphere of Venus. 
Shortly afterwards the Venera 5 and 6 probes repeated 
the atmospheric measurements providing us with the first 
extended database of ‘in-situ’ atmospheric measurements. 
During the 1970s the Soviets increased the ambition of 
their program of exploration of Venus by carrying out eight 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


landings during which the only images of the surface still 
available today were obtained. In the early 1960s NASA 
was facing a number of technical problems and failures 
with its first missions to the Moon and did not have many 
resources to invest in the exploration of other planets. 
Nevertheless, they had succeeded in sending Mariner 2 to 
Venus in 1962 (the first probe ever to visit another planet) 
and in 1967 Mariner 5, which succeeded in measuring the 
crushing atmospheric pressure at the surface. 

The Mariner 10 and PIONEER VENUS (PV) 1 and 2 
missions, launched in 1975 and in 1978 respectively, were 
real successes. The first mission returned 3500 images of 
the complex atmospheric structure of Venus characterized 
by a Hadley cell type of circulation as proposed already 
in 1735 by the eponymous scientist. The missions of 
the two Pioneers completed our understanding of the 
Venusian upper atmospheric processes (PV 1) and of the 
deep structure (PV 2) thanks to the four probes deployed 
inside the atmosphere. 

The complex geology of the planet was revealed 
by the two Soviet missions Venera 15 and 16 and by 
the NASA MAGELLAN mission. In fact, these spacecraft 
made use of imaging radars capable of penetrating the 
thick atmosphere of Venus and returning images of the 
surface. Venus’s surface is characterized by a large variety 
of structures: volcanoes, valleys, depressions, faults, 
plateaus, mountain ridges. Volcanic activity appears to 
have played a major role in the evolution of the surface, 
but, strangely enough, Venus’s crust seems to be much 
more static than that of the Earth. Magellan is a typical 
example of a space saga. Originally called VOIR (Venus 
Orbital Imaging Radar), this mission was to be launched 
at the beginning of the 1980s. For financial reasons it 
was first cancelled and then resurrected under the name 
of Magellan. However, also the new launch date of 1984 
could not be maintained owing to the delays of the shuttle 
program. Eventually, Magellan was launched in 1989, the 
first planetary spacecraft launched on a shuttle. 


Exploring the outer regions 
It is difficult to understand why the Soviet Union was 
completely absent from the exploration of the outer 
regions of the solar system: was it lack of interest, 
technological problems in operating the spacecraft at 
large distances from the Earth or shortage of funds? 
Perhaps a combination of all these reasons, plus the large 
investments made in the manned orbital infrastructure, 
explains such a strange absence. What is certain is that 
the missions to the giant planets are made only in the US, 
with the exception of the CASSINIMISSION that includes major 
participation by ESA and ASI, the Italian space agency. 
Pioneers 10 and 11 were the first missions to be 
launched towards the external regions of the solar system. 
Very small and simple spacecraft, they have shown an 
incredible reliability which has allowed them to survive 
the hostile environment of JUPITER and SATURN. The most 
outstanding result of the Pioneer 10 mission was the 
discovery of an intense magnetic field tilted 11° from the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


axis of rotation of Jupiter which created wobbling radiation 
belts around the planet. Pioneer 11 was targeted at Saturn 
where it discovered very intense magnetic field radiation 
belts interacting with the dusty rings and a very structured 
magnetosphere. 

Between 1977 and 1989 the NASA voyacers 1 and 2 
transformed our understanding of the outer solar system. 
These planetary probes were designed and launched to 
exploit the rare opportunity (available every 176 yr) to 
explore the outer regions of our planetary system: the 
alignment of the outer planets. In the course of a mission 
lasting about 13 yr the two Voyagers explored all the 
gaseous giants, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. 
These spacecraft have been able to transmit telemetry 
and science data from distances of hundreds of millions 
of kilometers with an emitting power of a few tens of 
watts. When Voyager 2 reached Neptune the radio signals 
emitted by the on board antenna took more than 4 h to 
reach us. 

Jupiter was the first planet to be visited by the two 
spacecraft. They reached this planet following different 
trajectories characterized by different cruise times. The 
spacecraft orbits were such that Voyager 1 could obtain 
the closest approach to the Galilean satellites of Jupiter. 
Voyager 2 was kept further away from Jupiter in order 
to minimize the interaction with its radiation belts and 
preserve it in the best possible conditions in view of 
the long voyage to Neptune. The acquisition of science 
data was extended to all phases of exploration of the 
Jovian system. This has allowed the spacecraft to measure 
the temporal variability of Jupiter’s atmosphere and 
magnetosphere, of the plasma torus associated with 10’s 
orbit and of the large-scale morphology of the satellites. 
Among the many results obtained during the long cruise 
phases it is worth remembering the discovery, at a distance 
of about 130000 km from the center of Jupiter, of a 30 km 
thick dust ring , the measurement of a5 million volt electric 
current that flows along the magnetic flux lines between 
Jupiter and Io and the generation of radio signals probably 
due to the oscillations of the plasma cloud associated with 
To. 

After one more year of navigation the Voyagers 
reached Saturn, which is at an average distance from the 
Earth of about 1.6 billion kilometers. At that distance, 
the solar radiation is only 1% of the amount that reaches 
our planet. The prominent ring system of this planet 
was eventually studied in great detail as well as TITAN, 
the only satellite in the solar system characterized by a 
thick atmosphere that resembles that of the Earth in its 
early phases. A completely unexpected feature of the ring 
system was the presence of transient radial spokes due 
to levitation of dust grains above the plane of the rings. 
The images of the icy satellites have shown that they all 
have been subject to an intense meteoritic bombardment. 
However, noticeable differences in the crater density were 
detected among the satellites, suggesting the possibility 
of a non-uniform distribution of the impactors and/or 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


geological reprocessing of the surface, effective just after 
the most intense phase of the meteoritical bombardment. 

The exploration of the Saturnian system concluded 
the ‘nominal’ part of the Voyagers’ mission in 1981. 
Immediately a political debate arose on the opportunity 
to turn the spacecraft off and terminate the funding of 
the mission. Fortunately, NASA succeeded in obtaining 
approval for an extended mission, which consisted in 
the targeting of Voyager 2 towards Uranus and Neptune. 
In January 1986 Voyager 2 reached uRANus, the only 
planet of the solar system with a spin axis parallel to 
the plane of the ecliptic and pointing towards the Sun. 
Uranus’s magnetic field axis is tilted by about 60°. This 
suggests the hypothesis that the planet’s magnetic field 
might be generated at relatively shallow depths. The 
images of Uranus returned by Voyager appear particularly 
sharp thanks to the reprogramming of both the attitude 
control of the spacecraft and the pointing of the imaging 
system which now was capable of locking on the target 
and compensating the motion of the spacecraft with 
appropriate rotations. It is thanks to this technique that the 
discovery of Uranus’s satellite 1985U1 became possible. 

After three more years of interplanetary cruising, 
Voyager 2 reached NEPTUNE. The scientific payload was still 
working nominally more than 12 yr after launch. In order 
to receive in the best possible way the images transmitted 
by the spacecraft from the borders of the solar system, 
the antennae of the Deep Space Network were all strung 
together in order to create a ‘virtual’ antenna of a much 
larger size. The images of Neptune show a blue planet, 
with cloud patterns similar to those of Jupiter, surrounded 
by rings segmented in arcs and only thinly connected. The 
discovery of active geysers and plumes on the surface 
of TRITON, a retrograde satellite of Neptune, was a great 
surprise. 

The two Voyager spacecraft, which are now flying 
in the depths of interstellar space, have accomplished 
flawlessly a fantastic mission of exploration to be 
remembered as one of the brightest successes of the US 
space technology. 

In 1989 the exploration of Jupiter started again with 
the launch of the GALILEO MISSION. The launch should have 
concluded a 20 yr long saga caused by changes in the US 
and NASA launching policy. Unfortunately, the problems 
started again after launch, when the atypical Galileo 
deployable high-gain antenna became stuck. It took 2 yr 
for the mission controllers to find a back-up solution to the 
antenna malfunction and to put the spacecraft back into 
an operational mode, which permitted 70% of the original 
scientific goals to be rescued. On 7 December 1995, Galileo 
reached Jupiter and, after a close flyby of Io, entered 
its operational orbit. Extended imaging of the Galilean 
satellites and in particular of EUROPA, which could be the 
target of a future NASA mission, was carried out in the 
course of 4 yr of operations in Jupiter orbit. 

Cassini, as mentioned above, is the only mission to 
the outer planets that includes European participation. 
The mission was launched from Cape Canaveral on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


15 October 1997, on a Titan 4/Centaur expendable 
launcher. Acomplex trajectory that includes gravity assists 
from Venus and the Earth will take Cassini to Saturn 
in about 6.5 yr. The highlight of the mission will be 
the deployment of the ESA-built Huygens probe into the 
dense Titanian atmosphere. Huygens will probe Titan’s 
atmosphere looking for traces of organic and prebiotic 
compounds. 


The leftovers of the cosmic construction 

According to the theories of formation and evolution of 
the solar system, the ASTEROIDS and the COMETS represent 
the leftovers of the cosmic working area which give rise 
to our solar system. The study of these numerous but 
still little-known bodies will allow us to jump back in 
time and analyze the most ancient and/or uncontaminated 
materials in the solar system. 

The exploration of Halley’s comet (COMET HALLEY) 
marked the beginning of a new era in the understanding of 
the comets. ESA, the Soviet Union and Japan decided to go 
chasing the comet that the British scientist Edmund Halley 
predicted would return in 1758, using Newton’s newly 
formulated laws of motion, after the appearances of 1531, 
1607 and 1682. The comet did indeed return as predicted 
and has since continued to return every 76 yr. The space 
agencies involved in the exploration of Halley could not 
miss the launch opportunity when at the beginning of 
the 1980s they decided to go exploring this comet. An 
‘armada’ of five spacecraft was indeed launched in time: 
the two Soviet Vegas went on 10 and 14 June 1985; the 
ESA’s Giotto was launched from Kourou on 2 July 1985; 
the Japanese Sakigake and Suisei probes were launched 
on 8 January and 18 August 1985 respectively. The closest 
approach to Halley’s nucleus was carried out by the Giotto 
probe that flewby at a distance of less than 600 km on 14 
March 1986. The on-board Multicolor Camera obtained 
a sequence of images of the nucleus that appeared to be 
elongated, very dark and characterized by very irregular 
morphology. 

Apart from the interesting scientific results the 
exploration of Halley’s comet will be remembered as the 
first worldwide effort of coordination of scientific space 
missions. NASA, which could not provide a spacecraft, 
joined the other participants by making its Deep Space 
Network available. Since then the four major space 
agencies in the world have tried to coordinate their space 
science programs through the Inter-Agency Consultative 
Group, an open forum which meets periodically at least 
once per year. 

The clortTo spacecraft surprisingly survived its close 
encounter with Halley. It was decided to put it on an 
orbit which would have brought the spacecraft back in the 
vicinity of the Earth every 5 yr, and then hibernate it. In 
February 1990, 1419 days later, Giotto was reawakened by 
the ESA mission controllers. Once again Giotto surprised 
everyone by showing no major sign of deterioration due 
to the long exposure to the harsh deep space environment. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The spacecraft was then retargeted towards the Grigg— 
Skjellerup comet and a very close (100-200 km) flyby of 
its nucleus took place on 7 July 1992. 

The only images of asteroids obtained at the time of 
writing were obtained in the course of a couple of flybys 
by the Galileo spacecraft, en route to Jupiter, and by the 
Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission. NEAR 
was launched on 17 February 1996 and it is the first of a 
new class of NASA missions called Discovery. The main 
characteristic of the Discovery missions is that they are 
a kind of Principal Investigator mission which have to be 
implemented with a NASA budget but completely outside 
the NASA infrastructure. In principle this procedure 
allows a faster and cheaper implementation of the missions 
but it also reduces dramatically the technical reliability 
of the missions and makes international coordination and 
collaboration very difficult. 

The NASA beep SPACE 1 mission, mainly devoted to 
testing electric propulsion as the primary propulsion, was 
launched in 1998 with the goal to fly by an asteroid and a 
comet. Some technical problems in the propulsion system 
have obliged NASA to change the orbital strategy in flight. 
Asteroid Braille flyby took place successfully on 28 July 
1999 at a distance of 15 km. 

The Japanese scientific agency ISAS has announced 
the launch of a technology mission devoted to returning 
samples from the Nereus asteroid in 2002. The name of 
the mission is MUSES-C. 

In 2003 the ESA rosETTA mission will be launched with 
an Ariane 5 from Kourou. This is a major mission of the 
ESA science program, supposed to reach comet Wirtanen 
after 8 yr of deep space cruise and orbit its nucleus for at 
least 2 yr. En route to Wirtanen, Rosetta will fly by two 
main-belt asteroids, Otawara in 2006 and Siwa in 2008. 
A major feature of this mission is the deployment of the 
Roland Lander on the surface of the Wirtanen nucleus. 
This lander will carry out high-resolution geochemical, 
mineralogical and geophysical measurements. 


The invasion of the red planet 
mars has always had a special place in people’s minds 
since the time that, rather erroneously, some astronomers 
thought they had identified artificial structures on the 
surface of the planet. However, it is true that Mars, both 
climatically and geologically, is the planet that resembles 
more closely the Earth. Since the 1970s a large number of 
missions have been sent to Mars; recently, after a break of 
about 20 yr, the exploration of the red planet has started 
again with the involvement of a large number of countries. 
In the 1960s NASA was the only agency that dared 
sending spacecraft to Mars. In 1964 Mariner 4, an 
adaptation of the lunar Ranger spacecraft, reached the 
red planet, returning 22 images, mostly from the southern 
hemisphere. NASA sent two more spacecraft, Mariner 6 
and 7,5 yr later; these were technologically more advanced 
especially in the field of telecommunications. Despite 
some problems with the on-board battery pack, the 
spacecraft reached Mars successfully and carried out 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


imaging campaigns as well as measurements of the 
composition and density of the Martian atmosphere. 
Unfortunately, because of celestial mechanics constraints 
on the orbital scenario of the two missions, Mariner 6 
and 7 also observed the southern hemisphere, confirming 
the wrong impression that Mars was a Moon-like body, 
heavily cratered and lacking signs of geological evolution. 
When a new favorable launch opportunity presented itself 
2 yr later, the Soviet Union decided to launch mars 2, a 
simple orbiter, and Mars 3, consisting of an orbiter and 
a lander. NASA launched Mariner 9. An agreement was 
stipulated between the two countries to exchange data and 
assist each other’s missions. In particular, Mariner 9, due 
to reach Mars before the Mars probes, was supposed to 
provide assistance for the choice of the landing site. When 
Mariner 9 entered Mars orbit, the on-board cameras found 
out that the entire surface was obscured by a planet-wide 
dust storm. The high winds were presumably the cause 
of the failure of the Soviet lander. When eventually the 
dust storm subsided, Mariner 9 initiated an observational 
campaign which revealed the true ‘face’ of the planet. 
Hemispherical asymmetry due to very intense and large- 
scale geological processes, gigantic shield volcanoes and 
flood-like morphologies demonstrated that Mars had 
undergone a very intense geological evolution and that 
perhaps, in a phase of its evolution, liquid water could 
have been flowing on its surface. After a new failure 
of the Soviet Mars 4 and 5 missions, NASA 4 yr later 
launched the vikinc 1 and 2 missions, both consisting of an 
orbiter and a lander. The Viking missions were extremely 
successful, but they also caused a terrible disappointment 
when the biology experiments showed that that there 
was no active life on the surface of Mars. This outcome, 
together with a new emphasis at NASA on the manned 
flights, brought to a halt the exploration of Mars for almost 
20 yr. The Vikings will be remembered, however, for 
having obtained the first high-resolution and panoramic 
images of two different (landing) sites on Mars, for having 
determined atmospheric profiles down to the surface, for 
having studied for extended periods of time the local 
meteorology and for having provided a medium-high- 
resolution coverage of the entire surface from orbit. 

In 1988 the Soviets tried again an adventure on Mars 
with the launch of two very complex spacecraft PHOBos 1 
and 2 consisting of orbiters and landers to be deployed 
on the surface of Phobos, one of the two natural satellites 
of Mars. The Mars malediction struck again, however. 
Phobos 1 was lost shortly after launch, while Phobos 2 
failed just prior to its rendezvous with the moon Phobos. 

The US went back to Mars on 4 July 1997. The 
MARS PATHFINDER mission, carrying a rover called Sojourner, 
landed on the surface of the red planet making use of 
an innovative passive landing technique, the air bag. 
Pathfinder had an incredible public relations success, 
rather thana scientific one, and the great merit of spreading 
‘Mars fever’ everywhere in the world. Since then, a robust 
program of exploration, internationally coordinated by 
the International Mars Exploration Working Group, has 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


started with the participation of most of the space-faring 
nations and organizations. 

After the failure of the Mars Observer, which 
exploded during cruise, NASA decided to decrease the 
complexity of each mission but to increase the launch 
frequency. The science objectives of Mars Observer were 
spread over a number of Mars Surveyor Orbiters, the Mars 
Global Surveyor, launched in 1996, being the first of the 
new series. 

In the US for the first time ever a budget spreading 
over 10 yr was approved in order to allow the launch 
of at least two spacecraft at each launch window: Mars 
Climate Orbiter and the Mars polar Lander in 1998-9; a 
Mars Surveyor Orbiter and a Lander in 2001 and in 2003; 
a Mars Sample Return in 2005 and 2007. 

Europe reacted as well. After many years of studies 
and setbacks, ESA succeeded eventually in starting the 
construction of MARS EXPRESS. This mission is breaking 
new ground in Europe in terms of rapidity of approval, 
simplified management procedures and reduction of the 
cost. This mission will be launched in 2003 also thanks to 
the strong collaboration of the ASI and the UK which is 
providing the Beagle 2 lander. ASI could also be involved 
in other NASA-led missions to Mars. A sample return 
mission might see a major participation of the French space 
agency CNES, which is also supposed to coordinate the 
construction of the Netlander probes meant to constitute 
the first geophysical network on the surface of Mars. 

Last but not least, the Japanese ISAS launched the 
NOZOMI (formerly Planet-B) spacecraft in 1998. Because of 
a technical problem this spacecraft will have a delayed 
arrival at Mars, but it will be able to carry out a ‘tandem’ 
mission with Mars Express supposed to arrive on Mars 
almost simultaneously. 


Bibliography 

Lewis J S 1997 Physics and Chemistry of the Solar System 
revised ed (New York: Academic) 

Shirley J H and Fairbridge R H (ed) 1997 Encyclopedia of 
Planetary Sciences (London: Chapman & Hall) 

Smith A E 1989 Mars, the Next Step (Bristol: Adam Hilger) 

The ESA web page is at 
http:/ /www.esrin.esa.it/ 


Marcello Coradini 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Interiors 


The part of a planet that we can see or directly explore 
is tiny by comparison to its interior. Inaccessibility does 
not imply unimportance, however. There are four reasons 
why planetary interiors are studied. (1) The interpretation 
of the interior is part of any unifying story for the planet 
structure and evolution. You cannot hope to understand 
the formation and history of a planet if you do not know its 
major constituents and how they are distributed internally. 
(2) The explanation for many observable features lies 
inside a planet. For example, you cannot understand why 
some planets have volcanoes, a magnetic field or a large 
heat flow without knowing what goes on inside. (3) Even 
when a phenomenon or planetary attribute is not directly 
determined by what is inside, the interior still matters. For 
example, the atmosphere of a planet is often affected by 
recycling i.e. transport of material into or out of the interior. 
There is at least as much water inside Earth as in Earth’s 
oceans. (4) Large planets have materials under extreme 
pressure and high temperature; this is of interest to those 
who study condensed matter physics (the fundamental 
science of materials). 


What is a planet? 

Since the study of planetary interiors involves the study 
of materials and conditions very different from those at 
the surface, and since these conditions are determined 
primarily by the mass of the body and not by whether it 
orbits the Sun, it is natural to include large satellites in the 
designation ‘planet’. Indeed, Pluto is much smaller than 
many satellites and even Mercury has a smaller radius 
than Ganymede or Titan. Small satellites and asteroids 
are not included in the discussion here, because their 
internal conditions differ rather little from their surface 
conditions. At the other extreme, some of the bodies 
recently discovered in orbit around other stars are ten 
Jupiter masses or more and could perhaps also be called 
planets. This designation is uncertain because we know 
so little about them. They might in some instances have 
formed in the same way stars formed and thus could better 
be called brown dwarf companions. Any object exceeding 
about eighty Jupiter masses can burn light hydrogen and 
reach the main sequence of conventional stellar evolution 
and thus should certainly not be called a planet. 


Pressures and temperatures 

Pressures inside planets are high because of the weight of 
overlying material. From this physical principle and our 
knowledge of gravity, we can estimate a pressure deep 
within a planet of around (1400 bars)(p)?(R/1000 km)’. 
Here, (¢) is the mean density (mass divided by volume) of 
the planet in grams per cm? (water at one bar pressure has 
a density of unity in these units), and R is the planet’s 
radius. One bar (=10° pascals or 10° dynes cm~) is 
close to the pressure of EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE at sea level. 
For Earth’s Moon, this equation yields an estimate of 
around 50 thousand bars (50 kilobars). For Earth, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


equation yields an estimate of around 2 million bars or 
megabars (the ‘exact’ value for Earth’s center being around 
3.6 megabars). For jupiter, the largest planet in our solar 
system, the estimated ‘typical’ pressure is around ten 
megabars. These numbers are of interest because if you 
ask how much work is done in compressing material 
to a megabar pressure, it is of the order of an electron 
volt per atom, and this is the natural energy scale of 
atoms. In other words, the pressures within planets are 
sufficient to change the structure of materials and modify 
greatly their behavior. In a very real sense, the inside 
of a planet is different from the outside (even when it 
is made of the same atoms!). Moreover, planets have 
difficulty eliminating heat, and as a consequence have 
high internal temperatures, irrespective of whether they 
are hot or cold externally. The central temperature of 
Earth is around 6000 K, and temperatures deep within 
Jupiter are 10* K or more. Even the Moon may have a 
central temperature of around 1600 K. Planets are ‘cold’ 
in the sense that thermal energy is small compared to 
the gravitational energy (indeed, this is much of what 
distinguishes planets from stars) but they are nonetheless 
hot enough to be partly molten, or, in the case of giant 
planets, mostly in the fluid state. In planets larger than 
about the size of Mars, the high internal temperatures 
are assured just by the large gravitational energy of 
formation, much of which is unavoidably converted 
into heat. These high temperatures can allow massive 
gravitational differentiation (e.g., the separation of a dense 
iron core from a less dense silicate mantle), particularly 
during the planet’s early history. 


Composition and planetary classes 

The behavior of a planet depends on the materials from 
which it is constructed and this depends in turn on the 
cosmic environment in which the planet formed. Massive 
planets are made of the most common materials (especially 
hydrogen), and relatively low mass bodies such as Earth 
are made of relatively uncommon materials which we 
call rock. The abundance of elements in the universe is 
similar to the abundances in the Sun, in most respects, 
and is dictated by NUCLEOSYNTHESIS, which favors light 
elements. Hydrogen dominates (it makes up around 70% 
of the mass of the material from which the Sun formed), 
followed by helium (27% by mass) and much smaller 
amounts of oxygen, carbon, neon and nitrogen. Rock 
forming elements (magnesium, silicon, iron) have still 
lower abundance. 

Itis convenient, both on the basis of cosmic abundance 
and because of how these elements behave, to define three 
classes of materials: ‘gases’, ‘ices’ and ‘rock’. These labels 
refer to composition and are listed in order of decreasing 
volatility (which refers to their tendency to evaporate 
easily or resist condensation). Quotation marks are needed 
to remind us that these labels do not refer to the state 
of the material (e.g., ‘gas’ can be a metal, as explained 
below). ‘Gases’ refer primarily to hydrogen and helium, 
which do not condense (i.e., form a solid or a liquid) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planets and Large satellites 


Mean density (g/cc) 


1000 10000 
Radius in km 


© Terrestrial 
@ Icy Satellites 
4 Giant 


100000 


Figure 1. The mean densities and radii for all planets and large satellites in the solar system. 


under conditions encountered during the formation of 
planets. Jupiter and saTurN are the only planets in our 
solar system that are predominantly ‘gas’. ‘Ices’ refer 
to the dominant compounds involving oxygen, carbon 
and nitrogen, and especially to HO. The ices partially 
condense under the cold conditions encountered beyond 
the asteroid belt and are thus important in all objects from 
the Jupiter-forming region outwards. ‘Rock’ refers to the 
least volatile materials: the silicates, oxides and metallic 
iron that dominate all bodies interior to Jupiter’s orbit. 
The behavior of these materials can be very different from 
our everyday experience, primarily because of the high 
pressures, but also because of high temperature. Thus, 
‘gas’ becomes a liquid metal or semi-metal at the extreme 
pressures inside Jupiter and Saturn. 

Water may become a very good ionic conductor, 
methane might decompose into hydrogen and diamond, 
and the minerals that make up rock adopt very different 
lattice architectures (packing of the atoms). We know 
about these phenomena through laboratory experiments 
on Earth, and understand them through the application of 
quantum mechanics to condensed matter; we then apply 
this knowledge to our understanding of the planets. As 
a result, we can predict the expected mean density of a 
planet for a particular assumption about its composition. 
The actual mean density is easily determined from the 
observed mass and radius. 

Figure 1 shows the mean densities and radii for all 
planets and large satellites in the solar system. In the giant 
planet group, there are two clusters, each containing two 
points: the gas giants, Jupiter and Saturn, are to be found 
in the lower right corner, with the ice rich bodies, URANUS 
and NEPTUNE, at somewhat higher densities and lower radii. 

Atsomewhat similar densities but much smaller radii, 
there are bodies that have comparable amounts of ice 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and rock (GANYMEDE, CALLISTO, TITAN, PLUTO and TRITON, 
although the latter two are somewhat less icy than the 
first three). If one made bodies of much larger mass (and 
hence radius) than this composition, they would have 
much higher density. The bodies that are primarily rocky, 
MERCURY, VENUS, Earth, Moon, Mars, io and perhaps EUROPA 
(though the latter has a significant component of H,O), 
form the remaining higher density group. Mercury, Venus, 
Earth and Mars are called the terrestrial planets for obvious 
reasons. 


How is internal structure determined? 

Although we can estimate mean composition from mean 
density, the layering, the thermodynamic state and the 
dynamics of a planet’s interior are much more difficult 
to determine. Seismology is by far the best technique for 
this. On solid planets, seismology usually means the study 
of travel times for body or surface waves created by the 
brittle failure of the rock, but the study of normal modes 
(oscillatory deformations of the entire body, analogous to 
the ringing of a bell) are also very important. Normal 
modes are readily detected for the Sun and you might 
hope to achieve something similar on giant planets. But 
the motions exciting the modes are far weaker, so no 
convincing detection has been made yet. Seismology has 
proved to be of paramount importance in our study of 
Earth, where it has enabled to determine crustal thickness, 
to confirm the existence of major mineral phase transitions 
in the mantle, and to establish the fluidity of the outer core 
and the solidity of the inner core. Seismic tomography 
(the ‘imaging’ of lateral velocity anomalies) also provides 
clues on the dynamic state of the mantle (warm upwellings 
and cold downwellings of large scale convection, carrying 
heat out of EARTH'S INTERIOR and driving plate tectonics). 
However, seismology is difficult to employ elsewhere. We 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


have only limited seismic data for our Moon, little yet of 
value for Mars, and no data for other planets. 


Gravity 

Gravity has assumed a central role in determining 
planet structure because of the technical or fundamental 
limitations of planetary seismology. Planets are not 
spherically symmetric and, as a consequence, the external 
gravity field may have a rich harmonic spectrum which 
influences the trajectory of a passing or orbiting spacecraft 
detectably. The planet’s gravity field can usually be 
thought of as three rather well separated components: the 
part that comes from the total mass (and which yields 
the familiar contribution to the total gravitational force 
that varies as the inverse square of distance from the 
planet’s center of mass); the part that comes from the 
rotational (and sometimes tidal) distortion of the planet; 
and the part that comes from internal dynamics or finite 
strength of the materials. The rotational or tidal responses 
are particularly important because (unlike the internal 
dynamical effects) the driving force for the planet’s 
distortion is precisely known. Consider, for simplicity, 
the case of a rapidly rotating planet with relatively small 
tidal effects (e.g. Jupiter or even Earth). The next most 
important contribution to the gravitational force beyond 
inverse square is a term that varies as the inverse fourth 
power of radial distance (the gravitational quadrupole). 
The dimensionless number that is a measure of its strength 
is a ‘gravitational moment’ called J. Theory relates this 
Jz to the difference between the polar and equatorial 
moments of inertia of the planet. These two moments of 
inertia differ by only a small amount but we would really 
like to know the mean moment of inertia, since that can 
tell us whether the planet is differentiated or well mixed. 
However, theory also tells us that provided the body 
behaves like a fluid on long time scales, Jz is proportional 
to the ratio of centrifugal to direct gravitational forces 
at the equator (a known quantity) with a constant of 
proportionality that depends on the mean moment of 
inertia. This theory of figures, developed a century ago 
and refined subsequently, is our main way of estimating 
the internal structure of all giant planets and also the 
Galilean satellites (where the permanent tidal bulges also 
provide similar information). It is an approximate theory 
and, in the case of giant planets, it imposes a much more 
complicated constraint than merely determining the mean 
moment of inertia. It does not work for Mercury or 
Venus because they rotate so slowly that J2 is very small, 
thus poorly determined and not dominated by rotational 
effects. Major uncertainties persist for the interiors of 
these planets for this reason. It might seem remarkable 
that this theory should work for Earth, a primarily solid 
body, but in fact most of Earth’s solid material flows in 
response to stresses as though it were a fluid, provided we 
allow sufficiently long times to elapse. A timescale less 
than a million years is sufficient, far less than the ages of 
the planets (all about 4.5 billion years). This approach 
has been superseded for Earth, Moon and Mars where 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


we possess additional geodetic information (precession or 
nutation of the polar axis) and can directly determine the 
principal moments of inertia, confirming but also refining 
the approach based on fluidity of the body. 

Our everyday concept of a liquid or fluid is an implicit 
estimate of the viscosity. A low viscosity material flows 
readily under stress but a very high viscosity material such 
as water ice or a terrestrial planetary mantle (silicate rocks) 
might seem to us to be solid on a human timescale, despite 
flowing. Planets which are fluid in the everyday sense of 
the word (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune) are made 
predominantly of materials that flow so easily that there 
are no detectable long-lived non-hydrostatic contributions 
to gravity. Terrestrial planets by contrast can often 
create and support non-hydrostatic loads corresponding 
to stresses of the order of ten to even thousands of 
bars. Though these may be tiny compared to the mean 
stress state deep down (the pressure) they yield detectable 
gravity and shape anomalies. These are generally 
interpreted to tell us: (a) the depth above which the 
planetary material has finite strength on long timescales 
rather than behaving like a fluid; and (b) something about 
the scale and magnitude of the dynamic (convective) 
density anomalies deep within the planet’s solid mantle. 
Indirectly, these tell us something about the temperature 
and viscosity structure, since the ability of a solid to flow 
depends very strongly on its temperature. 


Heat flow 

Heat flow also provides information on temperature struc- 
ture. There are two major sources of heat in planets, ra- 
dioactivity and gravitational energy release. Gravitational 
energy can be converted into heat either primordially (as 
the planet forms and perhaps differentiates to form a core) 
or as an ongoing process (the gradual settling of heav- 
ier material). Tidal flexing is an additional source that is 
mainly of interest for large satellites around giant planets; 
it leads to Io being the most volcanically active body in the 
solar system. 

In terrestrial planets (including the Moon), the 
dominant source of heating is long-lived radioactive 
elements (primarily *°U, ?’Th and “°K). For a volumetric 
heating source like this, the heat flux (energy flow per 
unit area) scales as mass to surface area, or approximately 
one power of radius. Large planets thus have higher heat 
fluxes. Planets are also expected to cool on billion year 
timescales, if only because the radioactive sources slowly 
decay, but also because they began hot due to the partial 
conversion of their gravitational energy of formation to 
internal heat. Gradual cooling might contribute as much 
as one half of the total heat output, but this is still poorly 
understood. Heat flows of terrestrial planets are difficult 
to measure and it is well known only for Earth. However, 
there is little doubt that the heat flow is so large as to require 
transport to be predominantly convective. 

In Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, gravitational 
energy dominates, partly because these bodies are so 
massive but also because only a small fraction of the mass is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in the rocky component that carries radioactive elements. 
A simple model assumes that the heat flow arises from 
steady cooling from an initial hot state. For a fully 
convective, adiabatic planet, the heat flow is then limited 
by the opacity of the atmosphere. This model works quite 
well for Jupiter but underpredicts the Saturnian heat flow 
and overpredicts the heat flows of Uranus and Neptune. 
The shortfall for Saturn is most likely explained by the 
rainout of helium, which has limited solubility in metallic 
hydrogen. 

Some satellites, notably Io and Europa, are in 
eccentric, close orbits and undergo tidal heating in 
addition to radioactivity. This arises because all real 
solid or partial solid materials are imperfectly elastic and 
dissipate heat as they are flexed. Io’s heat flux is roughly 
thirty times greater than Earth, and as a consequence, Io is 
the most volcanically active body in the solar system. 


Magnetism 

Magnetism can arise as a microscopic (quantum) property 
of the constituent materials, as in the permanent 
magnetism of iron or magnetite, but it can also arise 
from macroscopic currents in an electrical conductor. 
Since permanent magnetism can only occur below the 
Curie temperature of the material, it is thought to be 
restricted to a thin outer layer of solid planets, all of 
which have hot interiors. The fractional abundance of 
permanently magnetized materials is also frequently small 
compared to the major rock-forming minerals, and the 
spatial distribution of magnetization directions is often 
complex because of tectonic processes or magnetic field 
reversals. On Earth, the net contribution of permanent 
magnetization to the measured field is only one part in 
a thousand or less at most locations. On this basis, 
it is thought likely that when coherent, large dipole 
fields (e.g. surface fields of the order of one Gauss) are 
observed, they must be caused by macroscopic electrical 
currents deep within the planet. These currents can be 
sustained by a dynamo, which depends on electromagnetic 
induction within an electrically conducting, circulating 
fluid. Temporal variation of the field confirms that it is 
a dynamic property, but this temporal variation has only 
been seen for Earth. Planetary magnetic fields (PLANETARY 
MAGNETOSPHERES) can therefore tell us something of the 
internal dynamical state and material properties. Earth 
is the only terrestrial planet that currently possesses a 
large field, but Mars exhibits evidence of an ancient large 
field, expressed in unusually high permanent magnetism 
of ancient rocks. Mercury has a global field that is over 
two orders of magnitude smaller than Earth’s and not 
understood. Venus has no detectable global field. The 
Moon may have had an early large field, but the evidence 
could also possibly be explained by some local process 
(e.g., impact magnetization). The inference is that only 
Earth among the terrestrial planets still has the convective 
core motions needed for a dynamo. Although the other 
terrestrial bodies are likely to have at least partially liquid 
cores, they may not be convecting, because the heat flow 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is sufficiently low that it can be carried by conduction 
alone. Surprisingly, Ganymede appears to have a dynamo 
field, probably generated in a liquid iron core. Despite the 
presence of a water ice mantle, Ganymede thus has some 
Earth-like attributes. 

All the giant planets possess substantial fields, 
indicating that their deep interiors are convecting and 
electrically conducting. In Jupiter and Saturn, the 
conductivity arises from the partial metallization of 
hydrogen at extreme pressure (a semimetal is sufficient). 
In Uranus and Neptune, ionic conduction (transport by 
mobile protons) is the likely explanation. 


Volcanism and petrology 

Terrestrial planetary mantles consist of a mixture of 
minerals and as a consequence donot havea single melting 
point, but a range of melting temperatures. Despite 
the ability of solids to flow and convect heat at high 
temperature, some melting occurs and this is expressed 
at the surface as volcanism and the formation of crust. 
This melt mainly forms basalt on freezing, which is also a 
mixture of minerals (those that melt most readily). Basaltic 
volcanism has dominated the volcanic history of all but 
the most earliest periods for all terrestrial bodies. The 
composition and distribution of these basalts, which is 
the science of petrology, tells us much about what takes 
place within the planet. The continents on Earth are not 
basalt and are not thought to arise in a simple way; there 
are no known close analogs to continents on any other 
planet (though there are places where the topography is 
high). Volcanism is also a major, sometimes dominant, 
factor in determining the atmospheric composition of a 
planet. 


~1800 km 


Mercury 


Figure 2. The interior of Mercu 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giant planets are fluid throughout, except maybe for 
the very central region, and cannot have volcanism in the 
usual sense. However, their atmospheric compositions are 
affected by mixing and differentiation processes within. 
The most striking example is the lower than cosmic 
abundance of helium and neon in the atmosphere of 
Jupiter, and probably Saturn, arising from the formation 
of helium raindrops deep within the planet. 

Icy bodies may also have volcanism if the ice mixture 
includes appropriate constituents other than water ice. 
Ammonia and methane are good candidates for driving 
volcanic activity. (See also VOLCANISM IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM.) 


Electromagnetic response 

When a planet with a moderately conducting interior 
is subjected to time-variable external magnetic fields, 
internal currents are induced and can be detected. On 
Earth, these are called magnetotelluric currents and they 
flow both in the ocean water and in the (moist) continental 
crust. On the Moon, the detection of these induced 
currents enabled estimates of the conductivity of the deep 
interior, implying that the rocks are hot (around 1500 K 
or more). In Europa and Callisto, induced currents 
and their associated magnetic fields appear to require a 
conducting layer that is near (i.e. within about 100 km of) 
the surface. Were this layer to be of salty water (like Earth’s 
oceans) then it must have a thickness exceeding about ten 
kilometers, strong evidence for at least a thin water ocean 
in these bodies. Ganymede may also have a water ocean, 
but the effect is presumably masked by the much larger 
dynamo field that this body possesses. 


Models of planetary interiors 

It is easier to send a spacecraft to Jupiter than to send a 
probe to Earth’s core. Not surprisingly, our understanding 
of planetary interiors is incomplete. ‘Models’, as described 
below, provide a summary of our current best efforts to 
organize our understanding and expectations. 

Mercury is unusually dense for its size, and thus 
must be iron rich. Most of this iron is thought to be 
in an iron core, much of which may now have frozen. 
Possibly, Mercury started out with a conventional (Earth- 
like) composition and then lost part of its silicate mantle 
in a massive collision with another body similar in mass. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Venus is remarkably similar to Earth in mass and mean 
composition and may have a similar internal structure. 
Volcanic structures, presumably built of basalt, provide 
topographic relief that is of similar magnitude to Earth. 
The surface is devoid of ancient (heavily cratered terrains) 
implying resurfacing on a half billion to billion year 
timescale. However, Venus does not appear to have plate 
tectonics, at least at present, and may even be heating 
up internally. Either this or the absence of an inner 
core may explain why Venus does not currently have 
a magnetic field. The high surface temperatures may 
preclude retention of significant permanent magnetism in 
the rocks. 

Earth is in some ways the best understood of 
the planets, because of the large amount of seismic 
information, yet many aspects remain mysterious. The 
greatest puzzle centers around plate tectonics, which is 
a very efficient way of eliminating Earth’s internal heat, 
yet appears to be unique, at least at present, among the 
terrestrial planets. Plate tectonics also provides for a large 
amount of volcanism, most of which takes place on the 
sea floor. Although the ocean basins would exist even if 
there were no water to fill them (provided plate tectonics 
persisted), it is possible that water is indirectly responsible 
for plate tectonics through its influence on the ability of 
solid rocks to flow easily beneath the plates. The solid 
inner core may provide a crucial part of the buoyancy 
needed for convection in Earth’s core and thus sustain the 
dynamo and the geomagnetic field. 

Moon is iron poor and thus has little or no core. The 
lunar highlands are made of rocks that would occur by 
freezing from a fully molten outer layer of early Moon; 
this and other evidence attests to an early traumatic and 
very hot epoch of Moon’s history. The currently favored 
explanation is that the Moon was born from a giant impact 
of a Mars-sized or larger body on early Earth. The splash- 
out from this impact could have placed a short-lived disk 
of material in Earth’s orbit, from which the Moon quickly 
formed, perhaps in 100 years! All of this took place around 
4.5 billion years ago. The mare on the Moon (the darkest 
regions) are basaltic and came up to a billion years later. 
The Moon is ‘geologically dead’ in the sense that there are 
no surface features that result from internal processes that 
are more recent than a few billion years ago. 

Mars is only one tenth the mass of Earth and appears to 
have similarity to Earth in bulk composition. It evidently 
had a large magnetic field for at least the first few hundred 
million years of its history, during a period of massive 
crustal production. The northern hemisphere, at least, 
may have had plate tectonics or some form of recycling, 
thus explaining why it now has a much thinner crust than 
in the south. The volcanic province, just northward of the 
equator, is more recent geologically, and it is likely that 
volcanic activity on Mars has not entirely ceased. The iron 
core of Mars is likely to be at least partially liquid and may 
be entirely liquid if it possesses enough sulfur. 

Jupiter is easily the most massive planet and the 
most Sun-like in its composition. Even so, it does 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Interiors 


crust 


Silicate mantle 


~3200 km 


Fe -rich core; partly or 


entirely liquid 


Venus 


Figure 3. The interior of Venus. 


2 
2 
3 
BS 
5 


mantle 


Outer liquid 


core 


1220 km 


Solid inner 
core 


Earth 


Figure 4. The interior of Earth. 


(because of the inability of iron and silicates to remain well- 


7 


are 


not have the same composition as the primordial Sun 
and the differences in composition, though small 


mixed when partially or completely molten), the presence 
of a core in Jupiter and other giant planets is expected for 


the popular formation scenario in which a rock-ice core 


y 


very important. It has long been suspected that Jupiter 
possesses a core of rock and/or ice, perhaps about ten 


forms first and then gas is added on top. The atmosphere 
is enriched in a number of elements, notably carbon (in the 
form of methane) and heavier noble gases; this is probably 
due to the infall of icy bodies, perhaps including bodies 


that formed at far greater distance from the Sun where 


temperatures were very low. 


% or less 


~0.3 
of the entire mass of the planet and thus very hard to detect! 


Earth masses. However, this would be only 


The very precise gravity data obtained by spacecraft do 


not tell us with certainty whether this core exists, 


partly 


because there are still uncertainties in the high pressure 
behavior of the dominant constituents (hydrogen and 


helium), and partly because gravity data always admit 


The Galilean satellites are as rich and complex as 


an entire planetary system. Jo is roughly Earth-like in 


where 


multiple interpretations. Unlike terrestrial planets, 
the core is thought to form by a differentiation event 


composition, though possibly with more volatiles (e.g. a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Interiors 


oO 

se oO 
Lo & = 
Se = 
= ae 
ase 


o 
oO 
ae 
eg 
y oe 
a o 
5 85 
> SNM T= = 2° 
r=) » P> 
a Cas 
BS RRS == ey 233 
“-<-\----2 ia") f- Ss ;. Ss 
J = ° 
i Oi, 0) hy S ell. TR og 2 
BO RGF mes 
Eel Tah yh ety a> ipligl gE El gpg yi iig le Ty 
SR lglg . pres samira aie eco 
Rg Sit ses ee 
BE EE il gtgligti gh yk Zo eee ee 
Meigs sik Ze pie emcee ieee 
-—-------------- fo) =a SS 
See a Sg eee ass (oS Se 


Moon 


Figure 5. The interior of the Moon. 


<500 km 


& 
° 
faa 


it does not have a large magnetic 


y 


data tell us that the body is differentiated, with the central 
region being Io-like in structure. The evidence of past ice 
tectonics on the surface suggest that Ganymede has been 
through an epoch of severe internal heating, possibly tidal 
in origin. Callisto is very similar to Ganymede in size 
and bulk composition yet remarkably different in other 


ways: it is only partially differentiated (i.e., the rock and 


ice are partly mixed) 
grooved terrains) that are so common on Ganymede. The 


differences between Ganymede and Callisto are not well 


field and it exhibits none of the tectonic terrains (so-called 
understood. 


Mars 


Gravity 


Figure 6. The interior of Mars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


more nearly cosmic sulfur to iron ratio). Gravity data tell 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


us that Io possesses a core, presumably a liquid core of iron 


and sulfur. Tidal heating has made it the most volcanically 
in the form of an ocean, and the proximity of this layer 


Tidal heating may cause a large part of this layer to be 
to the surface has led to speculation about Europa as a 
possible habitat for past or present life. Ganymede is the 
largest satellite in the solar system and is roughly half 
(water-dominated) ice and half rock by mass. 


Europa is also mostly Earth-like in composition but has a 
100-200 km layer of H2O (as ice or water) on the outside. 


active body in the solar system and it has been suggested 
that a large fraction of the interior is continuously molten. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


69800 km 


~60000 km 


~10000 km 


Molecular 
Hydrogen/helium 
mix; He depleted 


st Hydrogen 
becomes 
conducting 


Metallic 
Hydrogen/heliummix; 
He enriched 


Possible rock and 
ice core 


Jupiter 


Figure 7. The 


58500 km 


~35000 km 


~10000 km 


Possible ice/rock core 


interior of Jupiter. 


Molecular 
Hydrogen/helium 
mix; He depleted 


“S Hydrogen becomes 
conducting 


Metallic 
Hydrogen/helium mix; He 
enriched 


Saturn 


Figure 8. The 


Saturn is in many ways similar to Jupiter: similar 
bulk composition, large magnetic field and heat flow. 
The lower mass means that hydrogen becomes an 
electrical conductor at greater depths, the magnetic field 
is generated deeper down, and there is more reliance on 
helium rain as an energy source. There is somewhat 
stronger evidence for a central ice/rock core in Saturn than 
in Jupiter, mainly because it is plausibly around ten Earth 
masses and thus a bigger fraction of the total mass and 
easier to detect. Saturn’s atmosphere is more enriched 
in elements such as carbon than is Jupiter’s atmosphere, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


interior of Saturn. 


consistent with a large influx of comet-like planetesimals 
after planet formation (See PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). 

Titan has similarities to Ganymede and Callisto, 
except that it is richer in some volatile elements and 
accordingly has a dense, opaque atmosphere consisting 
mainly of nitrogen and methane. The continuous 
destruction of methane by solar UV leads to the 
requirement that Titan has the equivalent of a kilometer 
of liquid methane or more (some of which has now been 
converted to liquid ethane and other hydrocarbons). This 
hydrocarbon reservoir may be partly on the surface as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Molecular 
Hydrogen/helium 
mix 


25000 km 
~15000 km Probably no sharp 
boundary 
: P Uncertain mixture of ice, 
Possible rock-ice rock and gas 
core; unknown 
radius 
Uranus 
or Neptune 
Figure 9. The interior of Uranus or Neptune. 
Ice layer, possibly 
liquid at the base 
1100- 
1300 km 


Rocky core 


Pluto or Triton 


Figure 10. The interior of Pluto or Triton. 


oceans or lakes and partly subsurface (analogous to aquifer 
storage of water in Earth’s crust). 

Uranus and Neptune are very similar but form a 
distinct class of planets in which no one or two of 
the three categories of materials (‘gas’, ‘ice’ and ‘rock’) 
dominates over the other(s). Certainly they possess 
several Earth masses of solar composition (hydrogen- 
dominated) material primarily in the outer regions which 
is responsible for the large radius and low mean density. 
However, most of the mass is in ice and rock, distributed 
in an unknown way deep down. Neptune has a higher 
heat flow than Uranus, but both have magnetic fields, 
suggesting that both have convective shells at pressures 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and temperatures where water can conduct electricity. 


Triton, Pluto and Charon have many similarities. 
Triton is a moon of Neptune, though probably captured, 
and thus formed in a way that may be indistinguishable 
from the formation of Pluto. Charon is the moon of Pluto. 
All of these bodies have mean densities of around 2 g cm~° 
and must have a lower ice mass relative to rock than 
we find in the large icy satellites (Ganymede, Callisto, 
Titan), though with uncertain amounts of other volatiles 
(methane, molecular nitrogen) that are mostly frozen out 
on the surface or contained internally. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The future 

Progress in understanding the interiors of planets may be 
slow, partly because it relies heavily on seismology (solid 
bodies) or deep atmospheric probes (giant planets)— 
and these are difficult missions—and partly because 
appropriate laboratory experiments are difficult. Mars is 
probably the body where the greatest advances, including 
the installation of a seismic network, can be expected in the 
coming decade. Detection and characterization of extra- 
solar system planets (EXOPLANETS) provides much hope for 
a fuller display of planetary menageries. 


Bibliography 
A general reference on planetary properties: 


Lodders K and Fegley B 1998 The Planetary Scientist’s 
Companion (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 


See also 


Lewis J S 1995 Physics and Chemistry of the Solar System 
(San Diego: Academic) 


There is no recent general monograph on the subject 
of this article. Excepting recent developments, a good 
general text is 


Hubbard W B 1984 Planetary Interiors (Princeton, NJ: Van 
Nostrand-Reinhold) 


A general reference on Earth and some aspects of 
earth-like planets: 


Anderson D L 1989 Theory of the Earth (Boston: Blackwell) 


Excellent information on specific planets can be found 
in the books published by University of Arizona Press, 
especially 


Mercury, Venus II, Mars, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and 
Triton. 


For a good review of the giant planets: 
Guillot T 1999 Science 286 72 
For a good review of the Galilean satellites: 


Showman A P and Malhotra R 1999 Science 286 77 


David J] Stevenson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary lonospheres 


Most planets and many satellites in our solar system are 
surrounded by envelopes of gravitationally bound gases. 
The interaction of solar radiation and charged particles 
of solar wind and planetary magnetospheric origin 
with these gases produces weak IONIZATION that creates 
planetary ionospheres embedded within the more dense 
PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES. Additional sources of ionization 
which are relatively more important in the outer solar 
system include resonance scattering of solar radiation 
by interplanetary atomic hydrogen, cosmic rays and UV 
starlight from the southern Milky Way and the Orion 
region. The free electrons and ions that result from this 
interaction are dominated by a thermal population with 
energies generally comparable to, but not much higher 
than, the neutral atmosphere and bound to the planet or 
satellite by gravitational and/or magnetic forces. This 
thermal population of gravitationally bound electrons 
and ions is one possible way to define a planetary 
ionosphere. The interaction of plasma in the inner Jovian 
magnetosphere with the atmospheres of the Galilean 
satellites produces ionospheres that strain this definition 
(see MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, SATELLITE INTERACTIONS). In this 
case frequent collisions between the ions and the neutral 
atmosphere can be a sufficient constraining force on the 
ionospheric plasma with respect to v x B convection away 
from the satellite. 

Planetary ionospheres can be classified according 
to the major categories of planetary atmospheres: (a) 
the H,-He atmospheres of the GIANT PLANETS, (b) the 
CO, atmospheres of MARS and veNuS and (c) the N2 
atmospheres of EARTH, PLUTO and satellites TITAN and 
TRITON. In addition to these categories there is the volcanic 
generated SO, atmosphere of 10, tenuous sputter generated 
O, atmospheres of the other Galilean satellites, and 
exospheres on MERCURY and the Moon. 


Nomenclature 

When an electrically conducting layer was discovered 
(or perhaps better, verified experimentally) in the Earth’s 
upper atmosphere by reflected radio waves, E V APPLETON, 
to whom the Nobel prize for physics was awarded in 1947, 
labelled it the ‘E-layer’ for the reflected wave’s electric 
field. When he inferred additional layers experimentally, 
he named them D and F layers, and since then this 
‘letter’ terminology has been firmly established in the 
nomenclature of Earth’s ionosphere and by analogy to 
ionospheres elsewhere in the solar system. Figure 1 
presents a schematic of these layers/regions, which are 
defined below. 


D region 

The 60-95 km region in the Earth’s ionosphere is 
characterized by a total neutral atmosphere column 
density of ~107° cm~ between the region and the top 
of the atmosphere. Absorption of solar Lyman-aw by NO 
and solar x-rays below 10 A and cosmic rays by air are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


600 + 
Topside 
lonosphere 
500 - 
N xt 
~e 400F N\ 
& i 
wi ~S 
S| SS 
»~ 
= \ 
Zz S 
300 F ~ Re take 
\ 2 
“N 
N 
~ = + 
ee ot XY N 
78S * 
200 | 7 g > N 
ot es -~.~. F, 
zo oe = 
sve ¢2 io 
Zon f>_7y-—> Bottomside 
ES oi =e E lonosphere 
gs 
100 FO x 7 > 
D 
XY 
10° 10° 104 108 10° 


ELECTRON DENSITY (cm) 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the Earth’s principal ionospheric 
regions. X*, XY*, and XY~ designate positive atomic ion, 
positive molecular ion, and negative molecular ion respectively. 
(After Bauer 1973.) 


the principal ionization mechanisms. Positive ions are 
molecular: NO* and hydrated ion clusters with three- 
body reactions being important in the formation of these 
clusters. A Chapman layer description is generally valid 
for this region (see below). Near the bottom of this region, 
negative ions are present. 


E region 

The 95-135 km region in the Earth’s ionosphere is 
characterized by a total neutral atmosphere column 
density of ~10'? cm™~™ between the region and the top of 
the atmosphere. Atmospheric absorption of soft solar x- 
rays and EUV radiation produces the ionization and the 
terminal ions are predominantly O; and NO*. AChapman 
layer model with photochemical equilibrium and chemical 
loss proportional to the electron density squared are a good 
description. Plasma transport is generally negligible. 


F1 region 

The 135-200 km region where the peak production of 
atomic ions occurs and ion loss is controlled by dissociative 
recombination (see below) is known as the F1 region. In 
many instances this region is not a distinct layer, but 
merely a ledge in electron density. The total neutral 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


atmosphere column density between the region and the 
top of the atmosphere is ~10" cm~?, the inverse of a 
typical absorption /ionization cross section of an atom and 
molecule for FUV and near EUV radiation. 


F2 region 

This is the region above 200 km, where production of 
ionization is in the optically thin limit and ion loss is 
limited by ion-atom and ion-molecule reaction rates 
with a linear dependence on electron density. Plasma 
transport due to diffusion and neutral wind induced 
drifts is extremely important. The electron density in the 
Earth’s ionosphere reaches an absolute maximum where 
the chemical ion loss time constant is equal to the time 
constant for plasma transport. 


Ionization 

The binding energy of an outer shell electron known as the 
ionization potential (IP) is fairly large, with a typical range 
of 9-25 eV, as given in table 1. The notable exceptions 
are the alkali metals with IPs as low as 5 eV. Thus only 
solar radiation shortward of ~1300 A and mostly below 
1000 A is important in producing ionospheric plasma. For 
comparison purposes the energy required to break apart 
a simple molecule known as the bond dissociation energy 
is typically ~5 eV, with CO and N> being the most notable 
exceptions. Charged particles must have a high velocity 
to have sufficient energy to remove an electron from a 
neutral atom or molecule and to attain a large cross section 
or probability for ionization of neutrals. Consequently, 
faster moving electrons are far more important than ions 
in generating ionospheric plasma. 


Absorption of solar radiation and the classical 
Chapman production rate expression 

The attenuation of monochromatic solar radiation at 
wavelength, 4, through a purely absorbing atmosphere 
with height, z, measured from the surface, is given by the 
expression 


f(A, z) = f(A, oo) exp[—t(A, z) sec x] (1) 


where 


T(A, z) = ndz 


o, is the total absorption cross section and x is the 
solar zenith angle. If the absorbing gas is in hydrostatic 
equilibrium, then [?ndz = nH, where H is the scale 
height of the absorbing gas. If more than one constituent 
absorbs solar radiation at the same wavelength, the optical 
depth, t, must be summed over all absorbing species. 
When absorption of solar radiation leads to ionization, the 
photoionization rate of the ith constituent, g;, at a given 
height is proportional to the attenuated solar flux, the cross 
section for ionization o; and the atmospheric concentration 
of the ith constituent. Integrating over wavelength, the 
photoionization rate is 


0 
gi(Z) =n f oA) f(A, z) da. (2) 
A(IP) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Ionization potentials (IP) for atoms and molecules of 
interest in planetary ionospheres. Dissociation energies for 
molecules. 


Dissociation 

Species IP(eV) (7 P) (A) energy (eV) 
K 4.34 2857 — 

Na 5.14 2412 — 

Mg 7.64 1621 — 

NO 9.26 1340 6.5 

CH3 9.83 1261 4.69 
NH3 10.15 1222 4.40 

SO 10.29 1205 5.36 

S 10.36 1197 — 

Cc 11.256 1102 — 

CoH 11.4 1088 5.38 

Oz 12.1 1025 5.115 
H2O 12.6 984 5.118 
SO2 13.1 947 5.65 
CHa 13.1 947 4.5 

H 13.595 912 — 

oO 13.614 911 — 

CO? 13.79 899 5.453 
CO 14.0 886 11.09 

N 14.545 853, _ 

Ho 15.41 805 4.48 

No 15.58 796 9.76 

Ar 15.75 787 — 

Ne 21.56 575 — 

He 24.58 504 _ 

For simplicity assume 0, = o, = oa, a single 


atmospheric constituent in hydrostatic equilibrium, and 
a monochromatic beam of sunlight, then 


q(z) = on(z) f(A, 00) exp[—on(z)H sec x] (3) 


provided x < 80°. The peak production, gmax, occurs 
where dq/dz = 0. This occurs where the slant optical 
depth is unity 


fa, oo)e7! 


— =onf (ir, el= 
qd = Imax SF ( ) H sec x 


where 
Tslant = oHnsec x = 1. (4) 


Note that gmax « cos x, and gmax is largest when x = 0°, 
i.e. overhead sun. Also the height of the peak production 
Zpeak is at a minimum altitude when x = 0°, since at t = 1, 
o Hn « 1/sec x reaches its maximum value with x = 0°. 

Let h = 2/H, and n = noexp(—h), then (3) can 
be transformed to the classical Chapman production rate 
expression 


fee) e" sec x) (5) 


q(h) = exp(—h 
where the reference levels h = 0 and z = O are the location 
of dmax When x = 0°, and g(h = 0) = dmax(x = 0). The 
peak, when x ¥ 0, is located at Zpea = HInsec x and 


peak = Zpeak/H. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


For the major constituents in planetary atmospheres, 
the ionization rate 


0 
i / oi(A) f(A, 00) da (6) 
(IP) 

at 1 AU (the Earth’s orbital distance from the Sun) is in the 
range of (0.5-10) x 10~’ s~! with the low values appropriate 
for H, Hp, He and the large values for species with low 
ionization potentials such as NO. For O, Oz, No, the rates 
are in range of (2-5) x 107” s~'. Of course these rates must 
be adjusted by the inverse of the planetary distance from 
the Sun squared (1/r? factor) for other planets and there is 
also a factor of 2-3 variability due to solar cycle variation 
of the Sun’s EUV and FUV flux output. 

A description of the penetration and ionization 
rate profile for charged particles is beyond the scope 
of this article. Generally the required description 
involves the solution of either a Boltzmann equation or 
a Fokker-Planck equation. Based on experimental data 
for ionization and penetration of electrons and some 
ions, range formulae have been determined to estimate 
penetration depth in an atmosphere in units of g cm. 
For electron energies above 100 eV, the electron interaction 
with most gases generates an ion-electron pair for every 
35 eV of energy expended. Thus a 3.5 keV electron would 
produce a total ionization rate of 100 electron-ion pairs. 


Ionospheric chemistry 

The primary production of ions in a planetary atmosphere 
is due to ionization of the dominant constituents. For the 
EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE Of Nz, O2 and O in the thermosphere, 
the major ionization sources are 


O+hv—> Of+e 
O.+hv > O; +eorO0+O* +e 
No +hv > Nj +eorN+N*+e (7) 


where the electron is ejected with most of the excess 
translation energy and may have sufficient energy to 
ionize other atoms or molecules and collisionally excite 
atoms and molecules. For the Hz-He atmospheres of the 
giant planets, one can substitute H for O in the first two 
equations above. Atomic helium ions are also created. In 
CO, atmospheres, CO} is the major ion initially produced. 
Once the primary ions are formed they may undergo a 
variety of chemical reactions. Symmetric charge exchange 
reactions (X* + X — X + X*) have no net chemical effect, 
but provide a mechanism for converting hot ions into hot 
neutrals which can enhance the escape rate of atmospheric 
species near the exobase. Charge exchange reactions 
involving unlike atoms are generally very slow at normal 
ionospheric temperatures, unless the reaction is accidently 
resonant (i.e. the atoms have almost the same ionization 
potential) with the most notable example being H* +O = 
H + O*. Ions may subsequently react in ion—atom and 
ion—molecule interchange reactions generically written as 


A*+BC —> ABT+C 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


AB* +C —> A*+BC. (8) 


At normal ionospheric temperatures these reactions occur 
by an induced dipole polarization interaction for which 
the theoretical rate constant known as the Langevin rate 
constant is given by 


1/2 
kr =2.6 x 10° (*) cm? s"! (9) 


where a is the polarizability of the neutral in units of 
10-4 cm? and yu is the reduced mass of the system in atomic 
mass units (amu). Most ion—atom and ion—molecule 
reactions proceed at or near the Langevin rate. There are, 
however, some notable exceptions which are extremely 
important reactions in the Earth’s upper ionosphere, 
which allow the F region to attain electron densities as 
high 10° cm~*: 


k~10-? cm? $7} 


k~ 107" cm? 57}. (10) 


O* +N) > NO*+N 
O* +0, > OF +0 


These reaction are two and three orders of magnitude 
slower than the Langevin rate, but 

N3+O—->NO*+N = &~107%cm?s! (11) 
is faster. 

The direction of ion—atom and ion—molecule reactions 
is always to yield an ion whose neutral progenitor has 
a lower ionization potential, as a consequence of the 
necessity for the reaction to proceed via an exothermic 
channel. This leads to the concept of the terminal ion. In 
the absence of loss processes which remove ionization (e.g. 
recombination or transport) ion—atom and ion—molecule 
reactions will convert all ions to the one whose neutral 
progenitor has the lowest ionization potential, hence the 
term terminalion. For example, in pure air containing only 
atoms and molecules of nitrogen and oxygen, NO has the 
lowest ionization potential (cf table 1) and thus NO* will 
be the terminal ion. Introduce an alkali metal such as Na 
and it will now have the lowest ionization potential and 
the terminal ion will be Na*. 


Recombination 
Ionospheric plasma can recombine by radiative recombi- 
nation also known as radiative association 


At+esAthv 9 dra ~ (1-10) x 10°" cm? st (12) 
which is extremely slow because the excess energy (=the 
ionization potential) must be radiated away. This is 
generally an inefficient energy loss process due to the 
mismatch in radiative lifetimes and the time interval when 
the electron and ion are in close vicinity to each other. Thus 
terminal atomic ions can potentially attain high densities 
in the absence of other loss processes. The preferred path 
for recombination of ionospheric plasma is the conversion 
of atomic ions to molecular ions which then proceeds via a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


dissociative path involving the formation and dissociation 
of intermediate state AB* 
AB*+e—> AB* > A+B — ag ~ (0.1-10) x 107 em? s71. 

(13) 

The ionization potential energy is partially consumed 
by the dissociation of the molecule AB and in many 
instances either fragment A or B or both are electronically 
excited. With two fragments the rest of the energy can 
easily be carried away as translational energy. 

The relative velocity for recombination is the elec- 
tron’s velocity and dissociative and radiative recombina- 
tion rates are faster at lower electron temperatures due 
to the longer Coulombic interaction time interval at low 
velocities. Dissociative and radiative recombination rates 
vary with electron temperature typically as T>©75*°5), 

For the Earth’s ionosphere the three major recombi- 
nation reactions are 


OF +e>O0+0 

NO*+e>N+O — ag ~ (2-4) x 10°? cm’ ss! 

N3 +e>N+N (14) 
whereas the following reactions are negligible loss paths 
a, ~3x 107% cm? st 
a, ~ 1071? cm? s7} (15) 


Ot+e > O+hv 
OF +e > Qn + hv 


due to their slow rates. 

But Of +O + O+4 O is fast, a = 2.7 x 
10-7 (T/300)~°* cm? s~!. However, negative ion densities 
are negligible above the mesopause (pressures less than 
0.01 mbar). Negative ions are primarily produced by 
three-body reactions 


e+AB+M-— AB +M (16) 


which require high pressures (>0.01 mbar) to form nega- 
tive ions quickly, and are destroyed by the photodetach- 
ment process 

AB +hv > ABte. (17) 


Generally the electron affinities of neutral atmospheric 
species are small (<1 eV, e.g. 0.44 eV for Oz) so visible 
sunlight can readily detach the electron. A notable 
exception is NO;, with an electron affinity of 3.9 eV. At 
night in the absence of an ionization source the ionosphere 
recombines rapidly and negative ions are not important 
even though photodetachment is inoperative. 

To understand some of the general ionospheric 
features let us consider the ionospheric plasma to be 
composed of atomic ions A* and molecular ions M* in a 
neutral gas M with electron density [e]. Charge neutrality 
is an excellent approximation throughout the ionosphere 
and requires that [e] = [A*] + [M*]. 

The relevant reactions are 


Athv>At+e  g=1,[A](cm’s!) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


AtT+M>Mt+A y(cm? s~) 
At+e>At+hv — a,(cm’s}) 
Mt+e>A+A aa(cm? s~') (18) 


where y = ek, and ¢ is ratio of the actual rate to the 
Langevin rate (9). The relevant continuity equations are 


d[e] 


wre 4 — au[M"Ile]— ofA") 09) 

MNT = g—yIMIIA|—aifA'Ilel 20) 
Mt 

OM = yIMIIA]- alle] 


where [] denotes number density. In photochemical 
(stationary or steady) state equilibrium the last continuity 
equation is 


[(A)*] _ aale] 
[My ~ yIM] oe 
and then charge neutrality can be written as 
aale] " 
lel= (S85 41) 0} (23) 


and in photochemical equilibrium, the electron continuity 
equation becomes 


_f fealel ..\71, «, IM" 
i. Ga 1) " y[M] Jouter. ee 


The second term on the right-hand side is due to radiative 
recombination and will always be small in comparison 
to the first term (a@o,[M*]le] « y?[MI]’) for weakly 
ionized planetary atmospheres. Hence this equation can 
be rewritten as 


a ee ae 
q yIMlle]_ ale?” 


(25) 


When y[M] > ale], appropriate for the lower ionosphere, 
then [M*] > [A*], i.e. mostly molecular ions, and g = 
agle}*. This is known as the E-region solution which is 
most appropriate for the 95-135 km region of the Earth’s 
ionosphere and is also called the square-law loss formula 
due to quadratic dependence on electron density. When 
y[M] <« ale], which is valid for low pressures and high 
in the ionosphere, then [M*] «< [A*] and g = y[M]f[e] 
which is known as the F2-region solution, appropriate for 
above 200 km and is also called the linear loss formula. In 
this region the ionosphere is composed of mostly atomic 
ions. For the Earth’s ionosphere one may adopt typical 
values of g ~ 10° cm st, ag ~ 10-7 cm? sl, y ~ 
10- cm? s“!, [M] ~ 10? cm~? to estimate [e] = (¢/ay)/? ~ 
10° cm~? in the square loss region and [e] = g/y[M] ~ 
10° cm-? in the linear loss region as representative electron 
concentrations. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The continuity equation with plasma transport 

At and above the F) peak (in electron density) plasma 
transport becomes important. Plasma can be transported 
by ambipolar diffusion and by neutral winds dragging 
ions and electrons up and down field lines. Ionospheric 
plasma satisfies the plasma approximation which means 
that the inverse of the product of the plasma density times 
the Debye length cubed is a small number. Hence the 
ionospheric plasma behaves as if it were an ideal gas, in 
spite of the Coulombic interaction of electrons and ions, 
because the mean kinetic energy is much greater than the 
interparticle potential energy. Ionospheric temperatures 
generally are equal to or exceed the neutral temperatures 
in planetary ionospheres. While it is not necessary for a 
planet or satellite to have a magnetic field, one test of the 
relative importance of a planetary magnetic field is the 
plasma beta parameter, which is the ratio of total plasma 
pressure to magnetic pressure, or equivalently, the ratio of 
plasma thermal energy to magnetic energy 


njkT; +n-kT. 


es B?/8 


(26) 
where k is Boltzmann’s constant. In a magnetic field 
in the absence of collisions a charged particle executes 
helical motion perpendicular to the magnetic field with 
a cyclotron or gyrofrequency given by w = eB/mc and 
corresponding gyroradius or Larmor radius a; = Uperp/o. 
The ratio of the gyrofrequency to the collision frequency 
with neutrals determines whether the motion of electrons 
and ions is constrained by magnetic fields (large ratio) or 
unaffected by magnetic fields (small ratio). 

In an ionized gas electrons diffuse much more rapidly 
than ions, but for length scales in excess of the Debye 
length, the electrons and ions must diffuse with the same 
velocity by virtue of a strong electrostatic polarization field 
coupling the electrons and the ions. This process is known 
as ambipolar diffusion. In planetary ionospheres plasma 
diffusion and wind induced transport is most important 
at low pressures and high altitudes, where the ratio of the 
electron gyrofrequency to the electron collision frequency 
with neutrals is extremely large (effectively infinite) and 
the ratio of the ion gyrofrequency to the ion collision 
frequency with neutrals is large (>>1). 

To illustrate the importance of plasma transport 
which can strongly influence the vertical density distribu- 
tion of ionospheric plasma let us consider the continuity 
equation for the number density of the major ion species i 


an; 
ot 


+V-(nj;v;) = P; — Lin; (27) 


where P; is the production rate per unit volume per 
unit time, L; is the loss rate per unit time and v; is the 
ion velocity of species i. On a planet or satellite with 
a magnetic field which may be internal and intrinsic, 
induced, or imposed by the parent planet or solar wind, 
the vertical ion flux, ¢;, in the limit of a large ratio of the ion 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gyrofrequency to the ion collision frequency with neutrals, 
is given by 


¢; =n;w; = —n; sin? I[D,D + v, cos 1 sin I] 
C) i i 
= = sin? 1D, (7 + : ) (28) 
dz Herp 


where wu; is the vertical ion velocity 
Vin = kiNn 
is the ion—-neutral collision frequency 


_ Ke +T) 


Vin} 


Dy 


the ambipolar diffusion coefficient 


k(T. + T; 
4, — MEAT) 
M8 


is the plasma scale height 


H, 0(T.+T;)  H,v, cotl\ 
+ 
T. + T; az Da 


is the effective plasma scale height and 


1 a 1 
= om li (Tl. +: Ti) + 
n(T, + T;) 0z H; 

where the latter expression represents the net imbalance 
between the upward plasma pressure gradient and the 
downward force of gravity. The subscript n denotes 
neutral gas and / is the magnetic dip angle measured 
from the horizontal to the magnetic field vector, which 
is positive in the downward direction. Thus a neutral 
horizontal wind component along the magnetic field line 
(v,cosI > 0), induces a downward ion flux when the 
magnetic dip angle is positive. 

From the continuity equation terms, time constants 
for the three important processes can be defined as 


(a) diffusion time constant 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


H? 
Taitf = ——>— 29 
es D, sin? I (9) 
(b) wind time constant 
Ai 
Twind = —————— 30 
ind ~ lv,| cos / sin I ie) 
(c) transport time constant 
HA. 
At ot 4 i 
Ty = 4b EE — 
tran = {Toist + Twinad (D, sin? I /H;) + v, cos 1 sin I 
(31) 
(d) chemical time constant 
Them = Lj. (32) 
5 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


With transport included, the peak electron density 
will occur approximately where the time constants for 
chemistry and transport are equal, i.e. at a neutral density 
given by 
b, sin? I 
Hj{H;L7' — v, cosT sin 1} 


Ny (33) 
where b, = [k(T. + T;)]/(kim;) = nD, is the ambipolar 
collision coefficient. When winds drag ions up the field 
lines (v, < 0), then the ionospheric peak is raised in 
altitude. But there must be net flow downward due to 
the presence of a chemical sink at lower altitudes and 
therefore the diffusion velocity should exceed the vertical 
drift velocity induced by the neutral winds. This statement 
implies that the peak must occur at a density where 


(34) 


ny, = 


b, tan I 
Un Hi; ; 


When v, = 0, then ambipolar diffusion and chemistry 
determine the location of the electron density peak. When 
winds drag ions down the field lines (v, > 0), then the 
ionospheric peak is lowered and ambipolar diffusion and 
winds act in concert. 

Note that winds also alter the shape of the electron 
density profile, especially in the vicinity of the maximum 
density as evident from the ratio of the effective to 
actual plasma scale height H.«/H;. Because D, decreases 
exponentially with altitude, Hg rapidly approaches H; 
within one to two scale heights above the density peak. 

At extremely high altitudes ina planetary ionosphere, 
ambipolar diffusion overpowers wind induced transport 
and the electron density profile depends on the upper 
boundary conditions. The diffusion differential equation 
possesses two basic solutions: (a) a no-flow, static 
equilibrium with the plasma density distribution given by 
the plasma scale height H;, and (b) a non-zero diffusion 
velocity with the plasma density distribution given by 
the neutral gas scale height which in thermal equilibrium 
is one-half the plasma scale height. The latter solution 
represents the maximum upward flux under steady state 
conditions and is applicable when the magnetic field 
lines are open or non-existent and plasma is sufficiently 
energetic to escape the gravitational field of the planet or 
satellite. Along closed magnetic field lines the ionospheric 
plasma is confined and the no-flow solution is applicable. 

Unlike the neutral gas species, which above the 
homopause are in gravitational diffusive equilibrium 
independent of each other, a mixture of multiple ion 
species in gravitational diffusive equilibrium are not 
independent of each other because the polarization electric 
field acts on allions according to their masses, charge states 
and temperatures. 


Ionospheric currents 

In the Earth’s E region, especially the ratio of the electron 
gyrofrequency to the electron collision frequency with 
neutrals, @-/Ven is extremely large whereas the ratio of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the ion gyrofrequency to the ion collision frequency with 
neutrals «;/vi,n is ~1. As a consequence the ion motion 
is strongly coupled to neutral winds through frequent 
collisions, but the electrons are frozen to move along 
magnetic field lines. The net effect is a substantial 
difference in the electron and ion velocities, which leads to 
current flow in the ionosphere. The presence of a magnetic 
field generates a highly anisotropic conductivity in the 
ionosphere, which can be represented mathematically by 
a tensor. The current flowing parallel to the magnetic field 
lines (or in the absence of a magnetic field) is given by 


J = %E| 


where 
os Ee (35) 


7 MjVin 


09 = & 
e. 
where the sum is performed over electrons and ions and oo 
is the longitudinal or direct conductivity and the current 
perpendicular to the magnetic field lines is given by 


: B X Eperp 
Jperp = 91 Exerp + 02€ — R2 (36) 
where 
. 2 
ioe ep, : zoe 
= MjVin Vin + 7 
and Pare 
inh or. (37) 


ei mj (V5, 7 5) 

with o; known as the Pedersen conductivity which is 
parallel to the electric field and perpendicular to the 
magnetic field and 0, the Hall conductivity, which is 
perpendicular to both the electric and magnetic fields. 
Note that w; is positive for ions and negative for electrons 
in (37). The electric field can be an imposed field from the 
magnetosphere, a polarization field, or an induction field 
v, < B due to neutral winds. 

Generally in planetary ionospheres, vertical length 
scales are much smaller than horizontal length scales 
and to lowest order the vertical electric current is zero. 
Thus the electric currents in the ionosphere are essentially 
horizontal. With a right-handed horizontal coordinate 
system (x, y) and y parallel to the vertical plane containing 
B, Ohm’s law may be written as 


(i )=( 23% \(F) ee 


where for magnetic dip angles J > 3°, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


02 O71 
Oxx = 01, Oxy = ——, Oyy = —— 39 
xx 1s Oxy and? 2 sin2 1 ( ) 
and in the vicinity of the magnetic equator, J < 3°, 
2 
Oxy = 01 + + = 03 = Cowling conductivity, 
O71 
6 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Oxy = 0, Oyy = op. (40) 


The Cowling conductivity is exceedingly large, of the 
order of the direct conductivity. A highly conducting strip 
is formed along the magnetic equator which carries a large 
current known as the ‘equatorial electrojet’ and the region 
is known as the dynamo region, which is confined to a few 
degrees in width, where oo sin? I < o,cos?J. The very 
high conductivity along the magnetic field lines ensures 
that these lines are approximately electric equipotentials. 
Because 02 >> 0 in the dynamo region, the major electric 
field is the polarization field rather than the v x B field, 
and the major current is the Hall current. 


Plasma temperatures in the ionosphere 

In the ionization process by either photons or energetic 
particles the majority of the excess energy is converted 
into translation energy of the ejected ‘photoelectrons’ with 
very little energy going to the ion. At low altitudes 
in the ionosphere, collision frequencies are sufficiently 
high to ensure thermal equilibrium among electrons, ions 
and neutrals. With increasing altitude and exponentially 
decreasing collision frequencies of electrons and ions with 
neutrals, the time constant for photoelectrons to lose 
their energy to neutrals is no longer extremely short 
in comparison to plasma recombination times and the 
average electron random kinetic energy can exceed both 
ion and neutral temperatures. The photoelectrons can cool 
by collisions with thermal electrons, ions and neutrals. 
Their collisions with thermal electrons elevate the electron 
temperature, where it is assumed that the electron velocity 
distribution has a Maxwellian shape at low velocities and 
the photoelectrons constitute the high-energy tail of the 
distribution. If the thermal electrons cool preferentially 
by collisions with the ions and there is an approximate 
balance between heat input into the electron gas, Q,, and 
heat transfer to the ions, then a first order representation 
of this equilibrium is given by 


T. — T; 
~8x 10 °*—— eVcm's"! (41) 


NeNj m;T; 


where the right-hand side has a maximum cooling rate 
for fixed T; at T, = 37;. Beyond this limit the electrons 
would have to cool by collisions with neutrals and/or 
by thermal heat conduction downward to denser regions 
where cooling rates are faster. Application of similar 
arguments to the ion gas when an equilibrium between 
heat input from the electrons is balanced by cooling 
through collisions with the neutrals leads to the first-order 
expression 


T, + T7122 - 
Dae ¥~ 6 x 108. (42) 


At low altitudes where the ionosphere is a very 
weakly ionized gas, 7; — T, and thermal equilibrium 
holds, whereas at high altitudes wy is large and 
T; — T,.. While these simple expressions are only 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


approximate they do illustrate the essential aspects of 
disequilibrium among the electron, ion and neutral gases 
in planetary ionospheres. For accurate quantitative 
vertical profiles of the temperatures of these gases, detailed 
calculations of thermal heat conduction, non-local effects 
of photoelectron transport when their mean free path 
exceeds a scale height and comprehensive treatment of all 
important energy transfer processes among the gases are 
required. 


The ionospheres of the terrestrial CO, planets 
In the COz atmospheres of Mars and Venus, photoioniza- 
tion of CO, is the dominant source of ions 


CO, +hv > CO; +e. (43) 


The CO; reacts rapidly with atomic oxygen, which is 
abundant in the upper atmosphere, to form oxygen ions 


COh+O5: 0" HCO; 


CORtO 50! 4CO. (44) 


The formation of an ionospheric F2 region of predomi- 
nantly O* is suppressed by the fast reaction of 


O* +CO, > OF +CO (45) 


ensuring that O} is the dominant, terminal ion in the 
ionospheres of Mars and Venus. In terms of Earth-based 
nomenclature, the peak ionization region is an F1 region. 


The ionospheres of the giant planets 
The giant planets with an upper atmosphere comprising 
of H, He and H have as the major ionization sources 


H+hv—> H*+e 
H,+hv > H}+eorH+H*+e 
He+hv > He*+e (46) 


and an equivalent set due to electron impact on these 
species. Atomic hydrogen has the lowest ionization 
potential (cf table 1) and the expectation would be that 
H* would be the terminal ion as 


H} +H, > H3+H 
He* + H, > H* + H+He (47) 


and H} would recombine dissociatively with a fast rate 
leaving behind H* which could only recombine radiatively 
and hence very slowly. In view of its long chemical 
time constant, protons are subject to plasma transport. 
With the exception of Saturn with its nearly dipole 
magnetic field aligned with the rotational axis, the other 
giant planets have highly distorted magnetic fields with 
quadrupole and octupole components comparable to the 
dipole components at ionospheric heights. Thus the 
calculation of plasma transport is considerably more 
complicated than in the Earth’s ionosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary lonospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


There is one potential loss path for protons at high 
altitudes and low Hp densities involving vibrationally 
excited H» 

H* + H,(v > 4) > Hj} +H. (48) 
This reaction is exothermic when v > 4, or equivalently 
Hz has a lower ionization potential when it is excited into 
the v > 4 vibrational level. At higher pressures, but still 
sub-microbar, the three-body association reaction becomes 
important 
H* +H) +H, > H3+H (49) 
and at still higher pressures, in the vicinity of the 
homopause, protons react with CH, to produce initially 
CH; and CH;. Subsequent reactions with more complex 
C.H, hydrocarbons lead to more complex ions. 


The ionospheres of planets and satellites with 
nitrogen atmospheres 

The Earth’s ionosphere has been discussed in some 
detail and is unique because of the presence of life and 
the associated highly oxidizing atmosphere. The other 
nitrogen atmospheres of Pluto, Titan and Triton are mildly 
reducing with CO as the most important oxygen-bearing 
molecule with a maximum volume mixing ratio of, at 
most, 0.001 in any of these atmospheres. The primary ions 
produced are N} and N*, which in the atmospheres of 
Pluto and Titan react with CH, 


N3 + CHyg > CH; +N.+H 
N* +CH, > CH} +N+H 
> CH; +N 
— H,CN*+H+H 
— HCN*+N+Hb. (50) 
Given the large suite of organic molecules in Titan’s 
atmosphere and possibly in Pluto’s atmosphere, the 
terminal ions are certainly more complex than indicated 
above and definitely molecular in composition. This 
ensures fast recombination and low electron densities 
with negligible plasma transport. On Triton with less 
CHy, a volume mixing ratio ~2 x 10-* at the surface 
and subject to significant photochemical depletion in the 
lower atmosphere, CO plays a fundamental role in the 
ionosphere as the dominant source of C atoms and C* ions, 
while suppressing the N* concentrations 


N3 +CO > CO*+Np> 
N*+CO—- CO*+N 
N*+CO—> NO*4+C 
CO*+e>C+0O 
Ct+thv > Cire. 


The net effect is to make C* the dominant, terminal 
atomic ion in the lower and middle ionosphere and N* 
the dominant ion in the upper ionosphere. 

More specific information on ionospheres of specific 
planets and satellites may be found in the separate articles 
on each planet and the major solar system satellites, as 
indicated in the cross-references above. Additionally, the 
references listed below may be consulted. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

For additional information on ionospheric physics and 
chemistry, there are a number of books which thoroughly 
discuss the subject in depth. Highly recommended are: 


Banks P M and Kockarts G 1973 Aeronomy, Parts A and B 
(New York: Academic) 

Bauer S J 1973 Physics of Planetary Ionospheres (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Kelley M C 1989 The Earth's Ionosphere: Plasma Physics and 
Electrodynamics (San Diego: Academic) 

Rishbeth H and Garriott O K 1969 Introduction to Ionospheric 
Physics (New York: Academic) 


For discussions of individual ionospheres, an excellent 
set of chapters can be found in the University of Arizona 
Press’s space science series of books: Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, 
Mercury, Uranus, Mars, Neptune and Triton and Pluto and 
Charon, listed here in chronological order of publication. 


Darrell F Strobel 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


A definition of a planetary magnetosphere is the region 
surrounding a planet within which its own magnetic field 
dominates the behavior of electrically charged particles. 
A magnetosphere can also be thought of as a magnetic 
cavity around which the soLar wIND is deflected. These 
definitions are not precise and the term magnetosphere 
does not imply a spherical shape but is used in a looser 
sense, as in the phrase ‘sphere of influence’. The solar wind 
is not completely excluded from a magnetosphere and 
important phenomena result from the coupling between 
the solar wind and the pLasmas and magnetic fields that are 
inside the magnetosphere. Furthermore, modern usage is 
more inclusive and is generally used to also encompass 
the solar wind interaction with non-magnetized objects as 
well as the interactions of satellites that are themselves 
embedded within magnetospheric plasmas. If a moon 
has sufficiently strong magnetization, it may carve out 
a true magnetosphere completely contained within the 
magnetosphere of the parent planet. 

Aschematic illustration of a ‘generic’ magnetosphere 
is given in figure 1 which shows how the solar wind is 
diverted around a surface called the magnetopause that 
encloses the planet. Upstream of the magnetosphere in the 
solar wind there is a bow shock, a standing shock wave, 
because the solar wind flow is ‘supersonic’ (the flow speed 
is faster than the speed of waves that propagate in the solar 
wind plasma). After passing through the bow shock, the 
solar wind flows around the sides of the magnetic barrier 
formed by planet’s magnetic field. The magnetopause is 
the interface between the solar wind and magnetospheric 
plasmas. Most of the solar wind is deflected around the 
magnetosphere with some solar wind plasma leaking into 
the magnetospheric cavity. A characteristic dimension of a 
magnetosphere is the distance, on the sunward side, of the 
magnetopause from the center of the planet (Ry). To first 
order, this distance is controlled by the balance between 
the internal pressure of the planet’s magnetic field and the 
external ram pressure of the solar wind. The magnetic field 
accompanying the solar-wind plasma merges with that of 
a planet and stretches it out to produce a long, turbulent 
magnetotail, or wake, on the downwind side of the planet. 
Spacecraft have determined that a magnetotail can extend 
up to 100 times farther down stream than the subsolar 
magnetopause distance (specifically in the cases of Earth 
and Jupiter; see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE, 
JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE). Thus, magnetospheres are very far 
from spherical, having an aspect ratio (1:100) that is similar 
to that of a comet (or a 30 m long pencil). 

The nature of the interaction between the solar 
wind and non-magnetized objects (figure 2) depends on 
the electrical conductivity of the body. If conducting 
paths exist across the planet’s interior or ionosphere, 
then electrical currents flow through the body and into 
the solar wind where they create forces that slow and 
divert the incident flow. The net result is a region 
very similar to a magnetosphere around which the solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


WIND MAGNETOTAIL 


~ 
— > ~A 
an = 
MAGNETOPAUSE 
fee 


Figure 1. Magnetospheric structures formed by the solar wind 
interaction with a magnetized planet. The subsolar distance of 
the magnetopause, Rw, is measured from the center of the 
planet. 


wind is diverted. The interplanetary magnetic field is 
draped around the planet and stretched out downstream 
to form a magnetotail (figure 2(a)). Mars and Venus have 
ionospheres which provide the required conducting paths 
to generate such an ‘induced magnetosphere’. The barrier 
that separates the planetary plasma from the solar wind 
plasma is referred to as an ionopause. A bow shock 
forms upstream of the conducting obstacle to the solar 
wind. The Earth’s Moon, with no ionosphere and a surface 
of low conductivity, does not carry sufficient current to 
deflect the solar wind. Instead, the solar wind runs 
directly into the surface of the Moon where it is absorbed 
(figure 2(b)). The absorption leaves the region immediately 
downstream of the Moon, the wake, devoid of plasma. 
Farther downstream, the void fills in as the solar wind 
plasma flows towards the center of the wake. 

The interactions of magnetospheric plasma with 
moons have similarities with the solar wind interaction 
with planets. An important aspect of the nature of 
the interaction is that the plasma flows into the moons 
at subsonic speeds so that the magnetospheric flow 
is deflected and no bow shock is formed. Since 
Titan (Saturn), Io (Jupiter) and Triton (Neptune) each 
have an atmosphere and ionosphere the interaction of 
these satellites with the magnetospheric plasma can be 
considered variations of the Mars—Venus case. Europa and 
Callisto are closer to the Moon’s case except the variable 
magnetic field of Jupiter induces substantial currents 
(probably in a liquid layer) within these satellites. 


Planetary magnetic fields 

Because the characteristic time scale for thermal diffusion 
is greater than the age of the solar system, the planets 
tend to have retained their heat of formation. At the same 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BOW SHOCK 


(b) 


IONOPAUSE 


~ ~ MAGNETOSHEATH 
oes RS OS aeate e > i 


eee eee 


INTERPLANETARY MAGNETIC FIELD 


vy 
= -> as 
a > a = 
SOLAR 
WIND T 
= -> pa eee ee 
-— > oj-— = 
= > = eo = 


Figure 2. The interaction regions surrounding non-magnetized objects: (a) a planet such as Mars or Venus which is sufficiently 
conducting that currents close through the planet or its lonosphere (shown by dots on the dayside); (b) a body such as the Moon which 


has no ionosphere and low surface conductivity. 


time, the characteristic time scale for diffusive decay of 
a magnetic field in a PLANETARY INTERIOR is much less than 
the age of the planets. Consequently, primordial fields 
and permanent magnetism are small and the only means 
of providing a substantial planetary magnetic field is an 
internal dynamo (see DYNAMO THEORY). For a planet to have 
a magnetic dynamo, it must have a large region that is 
fluid, electrically conducting and undergoing sufficiently 
vigorous convective motion. The deep interiors of the 
planets and many larger satellites are expected to contain 
electrically conducting fluids: terrestrial planets and the 
larger satellites have differentiated cores of liquid iron 
alloys; at the high pressures in the interiors of the 
giant planets JupiTeR and saTuRN, hydrogen behaves like a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


liquid metal; for Uranus and Neptune a water-ammonia— 
methane mixture forms a deep conducting ‘ocean’. The 
fact that some planets and satellites do not have dynamos 
tells us that their interiors are stably stratified and do not 
convect. Models of the thermal evolution of terrestrial 
planets show that, as the object cools, the liquid core ceases 
to convect and further heat is lost by conduction alone. 
In some cases, such as the Earth, convection continues 
because the nearly pure iron solidifies out of the alloy 
in the outer core, producing an inner solid core and 
releasing gravitational energy that can drive continued 
convection in the liquid outer core. The more gradual 
cooling of the giant planets allows convective motions to 
persist. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Planetary magnetospheres. 


Typical magnetopause 


Rotation Dipole Field at Field ratio? Tilt of distance 

period moment equator maximum/ _ Tilt of Plasma 

(days) (Earth = 1)* (G) minimum dipole (Rplane) (km) sources? 
Mercury 59 0.0007 0.003 2 +14° 15 0.04 x 10° Ww 
Venus 243 (R)* <0.0004 <0.0003 ? - ae - A, W 
Earth 1.00 1 0.305 2.8 +10.8° 11 0.7 x 10° W,A 
Mars 1.03 <25xlo- <5x1o-% 2 - ~ - A,W 
Jupiter 0.41 20000 4.2 4.5 —9.6° 80 60 x 10° S, A, W 
Saturn 0.44 600 0.20 4.6 <-1° 20 12 x 10° S, A, W 
Uranus 0.72 (R) 50 0.23 12 —59° 20 5x 10° A,W 
Neptune 0.74 25 0.14 9 —47° 25 6 x 10° S, A, W 


@ Earth’s dipole moment = 7.906 x 10° G cm? = 7.906 x 10!5 T m?. 
> Ratio of maximum surface field to minimum equals 2 for centered dipole field. 
° Angle between the magnetic and rotation axes. Minus/plus sign indicates dipole moment antiparallel/ parallel to 


spin vector. 
4 W, solar wind; A, atmosphere; S, satellite(s) or rings. 
© (R), retrograde. 


f These values are upper limits on a global magnetic field. The Mars Global Surveyor has shown Mars to have 
2000 km x 200 km regions of strong, local magnetization, presumed to be remnant magnetization produced by an 


ancient (now inactive) dynamo. 


The characteristics of the six known planetary fields 
are listed in table 1. Assuming each planet’s magnetic 
field has the simplest structure, a dipole, we are able to 
compare the equatorial field strength (Bo) and the tilt of 
the dipole axis with respect to the planet’s spin axis. Note 
that while the net magnetic moment of the magnetized 
planets varies by nearly eight orders of magnitude, the 
surface fields are on the order of a gauss = 10~* T (except 
for MERCURY) indicating that the strength of the dynamo 
scales with planetary size. The degree to which this dipole 
model is an oversimplification of a more complex structure 
is indicated by the ratio of maximum to minimum values 
of the surface field. This ratio has a value of 2 for a dipole. 
The larger values, particularly for URANUS and NEPTUNE, 
are indications of strong non-dipolar contributions to 
the planets’ magnetic fields. Similarly, the fact that the 
magnetic axes of these two planets are strongly tilted 
(see figure 3) also suggests that the dynamos in the icy 
giant planets may be significantly different to those of the 
aligned, dipolar planetary magnetic fields. 

Exploration of veNus has provided an upper limit to 
the degree of magnetization comparable with the crustal 
magnetization of the Earth suggesting that its core is stably 
stratified and that it does not have an active dynamo. In 
the case of mars, until the Mars Global Surveyor, the only 
spacecraft that were instrumented with magnetometers 
did not approach very close to the surface. There has been 
vigorous debate about whether the weak fields that were 
detected are due to a dynamo or are due to currents in the 
ionosphere. The upper limit to the Martian dipole moment 
is 2 x 10°° that of the Earth, corresponding to a surface 
field of 5 x 10-° G (5 nT). In September 1997 the Mars 
Global Surveyor spacecraft began its orbital tour of Mars, 
the first few orbits bringing the spacecraft within ~120 km 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the surface where the magnetometer measured regions 
of surprisingly strong magnetic fields (~400 nT on the 
surface). The patchy nature of the magnetic field suggests 
that it is crustal rather than generated by an active internal 
dynamo. From the preliminary data the magnetization 
appears to be frozen into the rock when regions of molten 
lava solidified and is a remnant of a dynamo that was 
active in Mars’ early history. pLuToO has yet to be explored. 
While models of Pluto’s interior suggest it is probably 
differentiated, its small size makes one doubt that its 
core is convecting and any magnetization is likely to be 
remanent. GANYMEDE is the only moon where a substantial 
magnetic field has been measured. Earth’s Moon has 
a negligibly small planet-scale magnetic field although 
localized regions of the surface are highly magnetized. 
The first Galileo flyby of Io has provided suggestions that 
Io might have an internally generated magnetic field but 
close-up measurements are needed to separate a dynamo 
field from the effects of the plasma interaction with Io’s 
atmosphere (see IO: PLASMA TORUS). 

For the six planets known to generate magnetic fields 
in their interiors the size of a planet’s magnetosphere 
(Rp) depends on the ambient solar wind density and 
the planet’s radius and magnetic field. Thus we 
expect a planet with a strong magnetic field to have 
a large magnetosphere, and even the weak fields 
of Uranus and Neptune produce moderately sized 
magnetospheres in the tenuous solar wind of the 
outer solar system (see URANUS AND NEPTUNE: ATMOSPHERES, 
IONOSPHERES, AND MAGNETOSPHERES). The measured sizes of 
planetary magnetospheres generally agree quite well 
with the theoretical Ry values. Jupiter is the only 
notable exception, where the plasma pressure inside 
the magnetosphere is sufficient to further ‘inflate’ the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


EARTH JUPITER 
Q QM 
M 
Obliquity 23.5° 3. 
Dipole Tilt +10.8° 9.6 
Solar Wind 
Angle 
Period tyr 12yr 


SATURN URANUS NEPTUNE 
QM Q 
M 
Q 
M 
26.7° 97.9 29.6 
-0.0° 59 -47° 
26yr 84yr 165yr 


Figure 3. Magnetic field orientations at the Earth and giant planets. The obliquity is the angle between the rotation axis and the 
normal to the ecliptic. The dipole tilt is the angle between the planet’s magnetic and rotation axes. The above two angles contribute to 
the seasonal variation in the angle between the solar wind flow direction (approximately radial from the Sun) and the planet’s 
magnetic axis (range shaded) over the planet's rotation and orbital periods. 


magnetosphere. This makes the magnetosphere of Jupiter 
a huge object—about 1000 times the volume of the Sun, 
with a tail that extends at least 6 AU in the antisunward 
direction, beyond the orbit of Saturn. If the Jovian 
magnetosphere were visible from Earth, its angular size 
would be twice that of the Sun, even though it is at least 4 
times farther away. The magnetospheres of the other giant 
planets are smaller (although large compared with the 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH), having a similar scale of about 20 
times the planetary radius, comparable with the size of the 
Sun. With only a weak magnetic field and being embedded 
in the denser solar wind close to the Sun, Mercury has a 
very small magnetosphere (See MERCURY: MAGNETOSPHERE). 
While the size of a planetary magnetosphere depends 
on the strength of a planet’s magnetic field, the 
configuration and internal dynamics depend on the field 
orientation (illustrated in figure 3). The orientation of a 
planet’s magnetic field is described by two angles: the tilt 
of the magnetic dipole field with respect to the planet’s 
spin axis and the angle between the planet’s spin axis and 
the solar wind direction, which is generally within a few 
degrees of being radially outward from the Sun. Since the 
direction of the spin axis with respect to the solar wind 
direction varies only over a planetary year (many Earth 
years for the outer planets), and the planet’s magnetic field 
is assumed to vary only on geological time scales, these 
two angles are constant for the purposes of describing 
the magnetospheric configuration at a particular epoch. 
Earth, Jupiter and Saturn have both small dipole tilts and 
small obliquities. This means that the orientation of the 
magnetic field with respect to the solar wind does not 
vary appreciably over a planetary rotation period and 
that seasonal effects are small. Thus Mercury, Earth, 
Jupiter and Saturn have symmetric and quasi-stationary 
magnetospheres, each exhibiting only a small wobble 
at the planetary rotation period owing to their ~10° 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dipole tilts (or a barely detectable wobble in the case 
of Saturn). In contrast, the large dipole tilt angles of 
Uranus and Neptune mean that the orientation of their 
magnetic fields with respect to the interplanetary flow 
direction varies considerably over a planetary rotation 
period, resulting in highly asymmetric and time-variable 
magnetospheres. Furthermore, Uranus’ large obliquity 
means that the configuration of Uranus’ magnetosphere 
will have strong seasonal changes over Uranus’ 84 yr orbit. 


Magnetospheric plasmas 

Magnetospheres contain considerable amounts of plasma, 
electrically charged particles in equal proportions of 
positive charge on ions and negative charge on electrons, 
from various sources (see table 1). The main source of 
plasma in the solar system is clearly the Sun. The solar 
corona, the upper atmosphere of the Sun (which has 
been heated by some, as yet undetermined, process to 
temperatures of 1-2 million K), streams away from the 
Sun at a more or less steady rate of 10’ kg s~! in equal 
numbers (8 x 10® s~') of electrons and ions. The boundary 
between the solar wind and a planet’s magnetosphere, the 
magnetopause, is not entirely plasma tight. Wherever the 
interplanetary magnetic field has a component antiparallel 
to the planetary magnetic field, magnetic reconnection 
is likely to occur and solar wind plasma will enter the 
magnetosphere across the magnetopause. Solar wind 
material is identified in the magnetosphere by its energy 
and characteristic composition of protons (H*) with ~4% 
alpha particles (He?*) and trace heavy ions, many of which 
are highly ionized. 

Secondly, although ionospheric plasma is generally 
cold and gravitationally bound to the planet, a small 
fraction has sufficient energy to escape up magnetic field 
lines and into the magnetosphere. In some cases, field- 
aligned potential drops accelerate ionospheric ions and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


increase the escape rate. Jonospheric plasma has a 
composition that reflects the composition of the planet’s 
atmosphere (e.g. abundant O* for the Earth and H* for the 
outer planets). 

Thirdly, the interaction of magnetospheric plasma 
with any natural satellites or ring particles that orbit within 
the magnetosphere can generate significant quantities of 
plasma. Magnetospheric plasma flowing by a satellite 
can ionize the outermost layers of its atmosphere thus 
providing a major source of plasma (as much as 1 
ton“! of sulfur and oxygen ions in the case of Jupiter’s 
satellite Io). Energetic particle sputtering of the satellite 
surface or atmosphere can create an extensive cloud of 
neutral atoms that are eventually ionized, possibly far 
from the satellite. The distributed sources of water- 
product ions (totaling ~2 kg s~') in the magnetosphere 
of Saturn suggest that energetic particle sputtering of 
the rings and icy satellites is an important process (see 
SATURN: MAGNETOSPHERE). Although the sputtering process, 
which removes at most a few microns of surface ice per 
thousand years, is probably insignificant in geological 
terms, sputtering has important consequences for the 
optical properties of the satellite or ring surfaces. 

The composition of the ionic species indicates the 
primary sources of magnetospheric plasma: satellites in 
the cases of Jupiter, Saturn and Neptune; the planet’s 
ionosphere in the case of Uranus. In the magnetospheres 
where plasma motions are driven by the solar wind, 
solar wind plasma enters the magnetosphere, becoming 
the primary source of plasma in the case of Mercury’s 
small magnetosphere and a secondary plasma source at 
Uranus and Neptune. At Earth, both the ionosphere 
and the solar wind are important sources. Earth’s moon 
remains well beyond the region in which sputtering or 
other plasma effects are important. In the magnetospheres 
where plasma flows are dominated by the planet's rotation 
(Jupiter, Saturn and within the Earth’s plasmasphere), the 
plasma is confined by the planet’s strong magnetic field for 
many days so that substantial densities are accumulated. 


Giant rotating magnetospheres 

The magnetospheres of Jupiter and Saturn are gigantic, 
dwarfing all the other planetary magnetospheres. The 
strong planetary magnetic fields allow the magnetospheric 
plasma to tap the planet’s rotational energy and 
accelerate particles to high energies. The interactions of 
magnetospheric plasma with the moons (and ring matter, 
in the case of Saturn) produce prodigious amounts of new 
plasma (see MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, SATELLITE INTERACTIONS). 
The magnetospheric plasma generates powerful radio 
emissions and stimulates strong auroral emissions in the 
planets’ polar atmospheres. 

The study of Jupiter’s magnetosphere has an 
interesting history. When Burke and Franklin discovered 
in 1955 that Jupiter is a source of radio emission, it 
was soon realized that this radio emission must come 
from energetic charged particles in a strong magnetic 
field (See MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, RADIO EMISSIONS). This 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


remarkable discovery came before Van Allen’s detection 
of the Earth’s radiation belts and the in situ verification 
of the solar wind. A more puzzling discovery came in 
1964 when it was revealed that the component of the 
Jovian radio emission at decametric (~tens of meters) 
wavelengths was influenced by Io, the innermost of the 
four Galilean satellites. The component of the radio 
emission at decimetric (~tens of centimeters) wavelengths 
was assumed to be synchrotron radiation from electrons 
with energies of >10 MeV that gyrate around dipolar 
magnetic field lines at a distance of a few Jovian radii. 
This basic picture of a strong magnetic field trapping 
a large, energetic particle population was confirmed by 
PIONEERS 10 and 11 which reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, 
respectively. The Pioneers also revealed that farther from 
the planet the magnetic field is considerably stretched 
out so that the Jovian magnetosphere is shaped more 
like a disk than a sphere (see figure 4). Although the 
large size and radial distension implied the presence of 
a substantial amount of plasma at lower energies, the 
Pioneer plasma detector provided little information on 
the thermal population. Nevertheless, the theorists had 
already come out strongly in favor of a magnetosphere 
dominated by the planet’s rotation. A few months before 
the Pioneer 10 encounter optical emission was detected 
using a ground-based telescope, coming from neutral 
sodium atoms in the vicinity of Io. The first direct evidence 
of the presence of high densities of ionized material at low 
energies near Jupiter came with the discovery of optical 
emission from S* ions. Borrowing techniques from studies 
of more remote astronomical gaseous nebulae, planetary 
astronomers concluded that the S* emission comes from a 
dense (500-3000 cm~*) ring of cold (2.3 x 10° K) plasma that 
is corotating with Jupiter inside the orbit of Io. In 1979 the 
VOYAGER 1 spacecraft confirmed that Io is the major source 
of plasma in the Jovian magnetosphere; a fact that seemed 
less surprising when the Voyager cameras revealed the 
satellite’s active volcanoes. Bright ultraviolet emission 
and local plasma measurements revealed an extensive 
torus of hotter (~10° K) plasma outside the inner ring of 
cold plasma. 

In the two years between September 1979 and 
August 1981 the magnetosphere of Saturn was explored 
by three spacecraft, Pioneer 11 and Voyagers 1 and 2. 
Overall, Saturn’s magnetosphere (figure 5) was found 
to be similar to the Jovian magnetosphere: satellites 
are the major source of magnetospheric plasma and the 
plasma dynamics are dominated by the planet's rotation. 
Nevertheless, the magnetosphere of Saturn is considerably 
smaller and the multiple sources of plasma are much 
weaker and less distinct than at Jupiter. Moreover, 
Saturn’s magnetosphere is less compressible. This 
behavior indicates that the planetary field stands off the 
solar wind with little contribution from the internal plasma 
pressure. The magnetosphere of Saturn is separated by a 
boundary at about 15 Saturn radii into two regions: an 
inner region where the plasma density and temperature 
vary smoothly with distance and an outer region where 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


JUPITER 


\ 2 en = PLASMASHEET 


ENERGETIC PARTICLES 


PLASMA TORUS 


Figure 4. Magnetosphere of Jupiter. Deeply embedded within the magnetosphere of Jupiter is the satellite Io. The ionization of Io’s 
atmosphere and extended neutral corona deposits 1 ton s~! of plasma into the torus. In the process of plasma spreading out from the 
torus in to the extended plasmasheet, the charged particles are accelerated. Some of the energetic particles are scattered and stream 
along magnetic field lines into the atmosphere of Jupiter where they stimulate intense auroral emissions. 


the plasma densities and temperatures vary erratically. 
While there is wide agreement that the source of plasma in 
the inner region of the magnetosphere is the icy satellites 
Dione and Tethys (with lesser contributions from Rhea, the 
small inner satellites and the rings) there is strong debate 
over the source and loss processes. In the outer region, 
debate also remains about the role of Titan (see SATURN: 
MAGNETOSPHERE INTERACTION WITH TITAN). 


Asymmetric magnetospheres 

Early magnetospheric studies were based on experience of 
Earth, Jupiter and Saturn and only considered symmetric 
magnetospheres. When the planet’s magnetic field can 
be closely approximated by a dipole at the center of the 
planet with its axis roughly parallel to the planet’s spin axis 
then the magnetospheric configuration is symmetric and 
remains constant as the planet spins (convective motions 
of plasma in the magnetosphere are quasi-steady in the 
inertial reference frame). Once the magnetic tilt angle 
becomes appreciable this is no longer true. 

Voyager 2 made the first-ever encounter with Uranus 
on 24 January 1986. It was realized ahead of time that the 
rotational axis of Uranus would, in early 1986, be within 8° 
of the planet-Sun line, whereas those of all other planets 
(except Pluto) are approximately perpendicular to their 
orbital planes. If Uranus’ magnetic and rotational axes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


were nearly parallel, as is the case for other magnetized 
planets, one magnetic pole would be pointed almost 
directly at the Sun and a very unusual magnetospheric 
topology would be expected. If they were inclined 
markedly to one another, each magnetic pole would move 
in a sweeping, conical path as the planet spun—creating 
an even more exotic magnetosphere. 

Voyager 2 ended our many years of conjecture. 
It found that Uranus has a substantial magnetic field 
with an orientation and asymmetry very different from 
expectations. Uranus’ magnetic axis is tilted a huge 59° 
from the rotational axis and is highly asymmetric (see 
table 1 and figure 3). Its large magnetosphere contains 
plasma and a large population of energetic particles. 
As at Saturn, the absorption of energetic particles by 
satellites Miranda, Ariel and Umbriel, and by particulate 
matter in rings, controls the development of the inner 
magnetosphere. However, unlike the situation at Saturn, 
the diurnal wobble of the tilted magnetic equator creates a 
very complex relationship between the orbiting satellites 
and the magnetic field’s topology. 

At Uranus the rotation axis is currently nearly parallel 
to the solar wind direction (figure 3) so that the solar wind 
driven convection and the direction of planetary rotation 
are orthogonal and hence de-coupled. In the reference 
frame rotating with Uranus the solar wind driven 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SATURN 


> 


yA 
_ YY 
FA EUTRAL GAS DIS 
SOLAR cS Grammy, 


MAGNETOTAIL 


Figure 5. Magnetosphere of Saturn. The magnetosphere of Saturn is populated by the ionization of an extensive disk of neutral gas 
which was generated by the sputtering of the rings and icy satellites by energetic radiation belt particles. 


convection is quasi-steady and permeates throughout the 
magnetosphere. Thus the plasma corotates with the planet 
once every 17 hbut ona longer time scale (days) the plasma 
is circulated through the magnetosphere by the solar wind 
driven convection. Elements of plasma exhibit helical 
trajectories, spiraling sunward at the magnetic equator 
and anti-sunward at high latitudes. Figure 6 (top) shows 
two configurations of Uranus’ magnetosphere separated 
by half a planetary rotation. To a first approximation, the 
magnetosphere of Uranus resembles that of the Earth but 
revolving every 17 h around the planet—Sun line. 

When Voyager 2 flew past Neptune in August 
1989 it discovered an extensive magnetosphere with a 
large population of trapped charged particles. The 
magnetometers detected a magnetic field whose surface 
intensity is similar to the Earth’s, but whose distribution 
was completely different. Neptune appeared to have a 
magnetic field with a higher degree of asymmetry than 
any other planet. To first order, Neptune’s magnetic 
field can be described as a dipole that is tilted 47° 
from the planet’s spin axis. As the planet spins over 
Neptune’s 16 h spin period, the orientation of the planet’s 
magnetic field drastically changes with respect to the 
solar wind. When the magnetic dipole is perpendicular 
to the solar wind, the configuration is, momentarily, 
symmetrical like that of Earth, Jupiter and Saturn. When 
the angle between the magnetic dipole and the solar 
wind direction is small, we have a unique configuration 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with the magnetic axis pointed ‘pole-on’ into the solar 
wind. These configurations lead to very different magnetic 
field topologies (see figure 6 (bottom)). | Complete 
reconfiguration of Neptune’s magnetosphere must occur 
every 16 h spin period. 

Neptune’s large satellite TRITON is comparable in size 
with Ganymede which raises the question of whether it 
too could have an internal magnetic field. The large moon 
orbits at 14.6Ry (1Ry is a Neptune radius), well inside the 
magnetosphere. Voyager 2 detected protons and nitrogen 
ions in Neptune’s magnetosphere, consistent with a source 
of ~200 g s-! from Triton and strong inward diffusion 
with a time scale of a few days. It appears that the 
rapid transport does not allow large plasma densities to 
build up. The nitrogen ions are thought to be produced 
directly in the interaction of the magnetospheric plasma 
with the satellite’s atmosphere while the protons come 
from the ionization of a large hydrogen cloud that extends 
from Triton’s orbit in to about 8Ry. Closer to the planet 
there appear to be significant losses due to waves which 
scatter the ions and electrons along the magnetic field 
into the atmosphere of Neptune. The charged particles 
transfer their energy to atmospheric molecules which 
then glow as dramatic auroras. Neptune’s tilted and 
asymmetric magnetic field concentrates the bombarding 
charged particles into an irregular region at mid-latitudes 
rather than the simple auroral ovals at the poles of other 
planets. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


URANUS 


PLASMASHEET 


OO 
C | 


PLASMASHEET 


Figure 6. The magnetospheres of Uranus and Neptune. The large angle between these planets’ magnetic and rotation axes leads to 
substantial variations over a planet's rotation period, particularly for Neptune. 


Small magnetospheres 

Before 1974 it was thought that only large planets would 
have magnetic fields and that convective motions in 
smaller objects would have halted as the interiors cooled. 
The discovery of weak but significant magnetic fields of 
smaller bodies, first Mercury and recently Ganymede, has 
challenged our view of both the dynamo process and 
the nature of small-scale magnetospheres. Mercury and 
Ganymede have magnetospheres that are comparable in 
size with the diameter of the Earth (see figure 7). 

The magnetosphere of Mercury (figure 7 (top)) 
contains field lines that connect to the planet at both ends 
but the Mercurian magnetic field is too weak to maintain 
a belt of trapped particles. Low-energy plasma was 
detected by the MARINER spacecraft’s traversals through the 
nightside magnetosphere but it is not clear whether this 
plasma originated in the solar wind or from ionization of 
Mercury’s tenuous atmosphere. More notable, however, 
are the intense bursts of energetic particles that were 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


measured in the magnetotail. These bursts have been 
compared with magnetic storms on Earth and suggest 
Mercury’s magnetosphere is dynamic. The time scales of 
~1 min for the Mercurian storms (compared with hours 
at Earth) are consistent with the much smaller scale of the 
magnetosphere. 

One of the greatest surprises of the Galileo mission 
to Jupiter was the discovery of Ganymede’s magnetic 
field. This was the first magnetosphere within a 
magnetosphere (figure 7 (bottom)). The Jovian plasma, 
in which Ganymede is embedded, flows at speeds much 
slower than the solar wind and slower than the local 
speeds of waves that can propagate in the magnetospheric 
plasma. Hence, there is no bow shock upstream of 
Ganymede. Models of the interaction of plasma in 
Jupiter’s magnetosphere with Ganymede’s magnetic field 
suggest that there is a small region where magnetic 
field lines are closed. However, the magnetosphere of 
Ganymede is too small to have stably trapped radiation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MERCURY ~ DIAMETER OF EARTH 


GANYMEDE 


and, 


.. 


ALFVEN WING 


Figure 7. The small magnetospheres of Mercury and Ganymede 
are comparable in size with the Earth’s diameter. 


belts or a magnetotail or contain substantial amounts of 
plasma. There is thought to be a pattern of convection, 
similar to solar wind driven convection at Earth, but 
in this case driven by the interaction of Ganymede’s 
magnetic field with the surrounding magnetospheric 
plasma. Orbiting Jupiter at a distance of 19 Jovian 
radii, Ganymede is located in the middle magnetosphere 
region (see figure 4). Ganymede experiences a periodic 
change in plasma conditions and background magnetic 
field orientation as the plasma sheet, tilted by the 10° of 
Jupiter’s magnetic field with respect to the equator, passes 
over the satellite twice per 10 h rotation. 


Magnetospheric scaling laws 

Magnetopause distance. 

In a true magnetosphere, the scale size is set by the 
distance, Ryp, along the planet-Sun line at which the 
sum of the pressure of the planetary magnetic field and 
the pressure exerted by plasma confined within that field 
balances the dynamic pressure of the solar wind. (The 
dynamic pressure is pu? where p is the mass density and u 
is its flow velocity in the rest frame of the planet. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


thermal and magnetic pressures of the solar wind are 
small compared with its dynamic pressure.) Assuming 
that the planetary magnetic field is dominated by its 
dipole moment and that the plasma pressure within the 
magnetosphere is small, one can estimate Ryp as Ryp ~ 
Rp(Bor/2popu’)'’°. Here By is the surface equatorial field 
of the planet and Rp is its radius. Table 1 shows the 
vast range of scale sizes in terms both of the planetary 
radii and of absolute distance. The large scale sizes of the 
magnetospheres of the outer planets arise both because Rp 
is large and because the solar wind density is so small at 
the orbits of the outer planets that the solar wind pressure 
is not effective in balancing a strong magnetic field. 


Dynamics 

Magnetospheric configuration is generally well described 
by MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD) in which the magnetic 
field can be considered to be frozen into the plasma 
flow. Thus we need to consider the processes controlling 
magnetospheric flows. The two largest sources of 
momentum in planetary magnetospheres are the planet’s 
rotation and the solar wind (see figure 8). The nature of any 
large-scale circulation of material in the magnetosphere 
depends on which momentum source is tapped. For 
planetary magnetospheres, corotation of plasma with the 
planet is a useful first approximation with any departures 
from strict corotation occurring when certain conditions 
break down. It may be helpful to think of plasma in 
the magnetosphere as mass that is coupled by means of 
magnetic field lines to a giant flywheel (the planet) with 
the ionosphere acting as the clutch. 

For magnetospheric plasma to rotate with the planet, 
the first two conditions are that the upper region of the 
neutral atmosphere must corotate with the planet and 
must be closely coupled to the ionosphere by collisions. 
The (Pedersen) electrical conductivity of the ionosphere, 
o', is large so that in a corotating ionosphere (with 
velocity V') horizontal currents (perpendicular to the local 
magnetic field) are given by Ohm’s law, Ji, = oj (Ei + 
vi x B). Just above the ionosphere the plasma particles 
in the (collision-free) magnetosphere are tightly bound 
to the magnetic field and do not easily conduct currents 
across the magnetic field so that E™ = —V™ x B. Because 
the plasma particles are far more mobile in the direction 
of the local magnetic field, the parallel conductivity in 
the magnetosphere a,” is large and the field lines can be 
considered to be equipotentials (E - B = 0). Thus the 
electric field in the magnetosphere can be mapped into the 
ionosphere. Because the ionosphere is relatively thin, the 
electric field E™ just above the ionosphere is the same as E! 
so that we can write Ji = oi (V'—V™) x B. The condition 
for corotation of the magnetospheric plasma is that the 
ratio J'/o’ is sufficiently small that V™" = V' = Q x r. For 
a dipolar magnetic field that is aligned with the rotation 
axis, the corotational electric field (in the equatorial plane) 
is therefore radial with magnitude E,, = QB,/r?. 

It is clear that large ionospheric conductivities 
facilitate corotation. The large a" also means that any 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


currents in the magnetosphere that result from mechanical 
stresses on the plasma are directly coupled by field-aligned 
currents to the ionosphere. Thus corotation breaks down 
when mechanical stresses on the magnetospheric plasma 
drive ionospheric currents which are sufficiently large that 
the ratio J'/o' becomes significant. Such conditions might 
occur in regions of the magnetosphere where there are 
large increases in mass density due to local ionization of 
neutral material, where there are strong radial motions of 
the plasma or where there are sharp gradients in plasma 
pressure. When the magnetosphere imposes too large a 
load, the ionospheric clutch begins to slip. 

Next let us consider how the momentum of the solar 
wind may be harnessed by processes occurring near the 
magnetopause where the external solar magnetic field 
interconnects with the planetary magnetic field. At the 
poles the planetary magnetic field lines are open to the 
solar wind. The solar wind drives a plasma flow across 
the polar caps and the field lines from the polar region 
move in the direction of the solar wind flow, being pulled 
by the solar wind over the poles and back into the extended 
magnetotail. Conservation of flux requires that field lines 
are further cut and reconnected in the tail. 

The MHD condition of the field being frozen to the 
flow can be written as E + V x B = 0 which allows the 
convection electric field to be written E, = —nVew x 
B./Rx, (where 7 is the efficiency of the reconnection 
process in harnessing the solar wind momentum, ~0.1 
for the Earth). In simple magnetospheric models Ey 
is assumed constant and the corresponding circulation 
is given by the E x B drift, Vw = nVew(r/Rm)°? where 
Ru is the magnetopause distance. After being carried 
tailward at high latitudes, the plasma then drifts towards 
the equatorial plane and eventually returns in a sunward 
flow to the dayside magnetopause. 

Comparison of the corresponding electric fields 
indicates whether the magnetospheric circulation is driven 
primarily by the solar wind or the planet’s rotation. 
Since E.. is proportional to R~? and Ey proportional 
to R°*® it seems reasonable to expect that corotation 
dominates close to the planet while solar wind driven 
convection dominates outside a critical distance R.. 
Thus, the magnetosphere corotates out to a distance of 
R./Ru = (RuQ/7Vew)'”. This formula simply says that 
magnetospheres of rapidly rotating planets with strong 
magnetic fields are dominated by rotation while the solar 
wind controls the plasma flow in smaller magnetospheres 
of slowly rotating planets. 


Orientation and seasonal variations 

If a planetary rotation axis is not approximately aligned 
with either the magnetic dipole axis or the solar wind flow 
direction then there exists no reference frame in which the 
plasma flow is steady. The degree of variability over a 
planetary rotation period is governed by the solar wind 
angle (see figure 3), the angle between the solar wind 
and the dipole axis. When the solar wind angle is near 
90° the configuration is symmetrical (as approximated by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Earth, Jupiter and Saturn). When the solar wind angle 
is small the configuration has the magnetic axis pointed 
‘pole-on’ into the solar wind, a configuration that was 
expected for Uranus before Voyager 2 found a large dipole 
tilt. These configurations lead to very different magnetic 
field topologies. Figure 3 shows how the solar wind 
angle varies for the major magnetospheres. At the time 
of the Voyager 2 encounter in 1989, Neptune’s northern 
hemisphere was close to mid-winter with the rotation 
axis tipped 23° degrees from the Sun, i.e. 67° from the 
radial, solar wind direction. The 47° tilt of the magnetic 
dipole means that the angle between the solar wind and 
the dipole axis changes between 20° and 114° over the 
16.1 h planetary rotation. Complete re-configuring of 
the magnetosphere must occur every planetary rotation 
(figure 6(b)). 

A planet’s obliquity is responsible for seasonal 
variations over the planet’s orbital period. For a 
planet such as Jupiter with a very small obliquity there 
are very small changes in the solar wind angle and, 
hence, magnetospheric configuration over Jupiter’s 12 yr 
orbital period. On the other hand, the high obliquity 
of Uranus leads to dramatic variations in the solar 
wind angle (covering all orientations) over the planet’s 
84 yr orbital period. Earth, Saturn and Neptune, with 
moderate obliquities (23.5°-30°), are intermediate cases 
with moderate seasonal variations. 


Energetic particle populations 

All magnetospheres have significant populations of 
particles with energies (keV-MeV) well above the thermal 
population. These particles are largely trapped by the 
strong planetary magnetic field in long-lived radiation 
belts. Where do these energetic particles come from? Since 
the interplanetary medium includes energetic particles 
of solar and galactic origins an obvious possibility is 
that these energetic particles were ‘captured’ from the 
external medium. In the cases of the giant planets, 
the observed high fluxes are hard to explain without 
additional internal sources. Compositional evidence 
also implies that some fraction of the thermal plasma 
is accelerated to high energies, either by tapping the 
rotational energy of the planet, in the cases of Jupiter and 
Saturn, or by processes in the distorted magnetic field in 
the tail, in the cases of Earth, Uranus and Neptune. Particle 
drifts in a non-uniform magnetic field lead to the ions and 
electrons drifting in opposite directions around the planet, 
producing an azimuthal electric current: the ring current. 
If the energy density of the energetic particle populations 
is comparable with the magnetic field energy then the 
ring current produces a magnetic field that significantly 
perturbs the planetary magnetic field. This is the case 
for Jupiter and Saturn, where the high particle pressures 
inflate and stretch out the magnetic field and generate a 
strong ring current in the magnetodisk. While Uranus 
and Neptune have significant radiation belts, the energy 
density remains small compared with the magnetic field 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Planetary Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) COROTATION 


IONOSPHERE 


ATMOSPHERE 

S26 

eee > E=-(Qx R)xB te 
--—— J 


PLASMA FLOW 


aa 
—_ 
—_— 
_~ 
—_ 


= 
Qaowe ee 
Vs 
Ye 
Ut 
| 
| \(@ 
\ " 
\. *~ Eco 
\ 4 & 
<a PLASMAPAUSE 
Ny 


Bere 


(b) SOLAR WIND CONVECTION 


B MAGNETOPAUSE 


NxB 
e-Nx 


| foes ea 
7 : 
a : 
| ee 4 
eas 
\ : ," —PLASMAPAUSE 
X 
\ 
< 
Seal ee Vv 
MAGNETOPAUSE 


Figure 8. Large scale magnetospheric circulation driven by (a) corotation and (b) the solar wind. In each case, the upper (lower) 
diagram shows the meridional view (the view in the equatorial plane). 


and the ring current is very weak. The Dessler—Parker-— 
Sckopke relation compares the magnetic field produced 
by the ring current with the kinetic energy of the trapped 
particle population, scaled to the dipole magnetic energy 
external to the planet. Applying the Dessler—Parker-— 
Sckopke relation to planetary magnetospheres we find 
that while the total energy content of magnetospheres 
varies by many orders of magnitude and the sources 
are very different, it appears that the particle energy 
builds up to only 1/1000 of the magnetic field energy in 
each magnetosphere. Earth, Jupiter and Saturn all have 
energetic particle populations close to this limit. The 
radiation belts of Uranus and Neptune are much less than 
this limit, perhaps because it is harder to trap particles in 
non-dipolar magnetic fields. 

Where do these energetic particles go? The 
majority appear to diffuse inwards towards the planet. 
Loss processes for energetic particles in the inner 
magnetospheres are satellite absorption, charge exchange 
with neutral clouds and scattering by waves so that the 
particles stream into the upper atmospheres of the planets 
where they can excite auroral emission and deposit large 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


amounts of energy. 


Bibliography 

Bagenal F 1992 Giant planet magnetospheres Ann. Rev. 
Earth Planet. Sci. 20 289 

Cravens T E 1997 Physics of Solar System Plasmas 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Gombosi T I 1998 Physics of the Space Environment 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Kivelson M Gand CT Russell (ed) 1995 Introduction to Space 
Physics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Van Allen J A and F Bagenal 1999 Planetary magneto- 
spheres and the interplanetary medium The New So- 
lar System ed J K Beatty, C C Petersen and A Chaikin 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 39-58 


F Bagenal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Planetary Nebula Central Star Mass Loss/Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Nebula Central Star Mass 
Loss/Winds 


The ultraviolet spectra of the central stars of PLANETARY 
NEBULAE frequently show broad emission—absorption 
features which are indicative of stellar winds with typical 
velocities of several thousand km s~!. The collision of 
these winds with the surrounding slower-moving nebular 
gas is important in shaping the nebula. In some cases, 
mass loss in the form of narrow jets is observed, which 
may indicate the presence of a companion to the central 
star. 


Mass loss and the formation of planetary nebulae 
Planetary nebulae are isolated clouds of gas, ionized 
by a hot central star. It is generally accepted that 
planetary nebulae form during the penultimate stage in 
the evolution of low- and intermediate-mass (<8Moq) stars, 
after they have become RED GIANTS for the second time. 
The red giant progenitor eventually expels its envelope 
at a relatively low velocity (~15 km s~'), and this ejected 
gas is subsequently ionized by the ultraviolet radiation 
of the red giant core. The stellar core—now the central 
star—will eventually cool to its final configuration, a 
WHITE DwarF. After the primary mass-loss event which 
expelled the nebula, mass loss from the central star does 
not immediately cease. A low-density, high-velocity 
(typically, several thousand km s~') stellar wind develops, 
driven by the radiation pressure of the central star (see 
RADIATIVELY DRIVEN STELLAR WINDS FROM HOT STARS). This wind 
will have important dynamical effects on the morphology 
and dynamics of the nebula, sweeping the previously 
ejected envelope into a well-defined shell. 

The details of the mechanism by which the red giant 
(technically, an asymptotic giant branch star) expels its 
envelope remain obscure. We know that, as the star 
evolves, it experiences a series of thermonuclear flashes 
in a shell near the degenerate core where helium is being 
converted to carbon. With each shell flash, the star 
becomes more luminous and its radius increases. A 
slow (~10 km s7!) stellar wind ensues, which carries off 
an increasing amount of mass; the mass loss eventually 
reaches values of ~10~*Mo yr", the so-called ‘superwind 
phase’. Such a wind could by itself remove the stellar 
envelope in a few thousand years. On the other hand, 
the mass loss may terminate with a more dramatic event. 
One suggestion is that mixing of carbon into the base of 
the envelope increases the opacity suddenly, increasing 
the radiation pressure and lifting off the entire envelope. 
In the case of stars with close binary companions, the 
companion may spiral in to the giant star, spinning up 
and ejecting its envelope: we know such interactions must 
occur, because some planetary nebula central stars have 
binary companions whose distance from the central star is 
less than the size of their asymptotic giant precursors (see 
CLOSE BINARY STARS). 

Following the removal of the hydrogen-rich envelope, 
there will be a period when the central star is not hot 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


enough to produce much ultraviolet radiation (Tog < 
30000 K) and the nebula will not be ionized. During this 
phase, the central star is heavily obscured by a dense cloud 
of neutral gas. This is the PROTOPLANETARY NEBULA phase. 
Many of these nebulae are strongly asymmetric and have 
bipolar jets. The jet velocity may be a few hundred km st, 
intermediate between the speed of the nebula and the 
speed of the later stellar winds. It is suspected that many 
of the morphological features seen in mature planetary 
nebulae are determined in the protoplanetary stage. 


Observational evidence of winds 

The presence of stellar winds is usually signaled by the 
appearance of ‘P-Cygni profiles’ in the star’s spectrum. 
These are broad lines with a deep absorption component 
on the short-wavelength (‘blue’) side and an emission 
component on the long-wavelength (‘red’) side. The 
absorption component is formed in the gas between 
the star and the observer, which is blueshifted by the 
DOPPLER EFFECT as it streams outwards, while the emission 
component is due to gas beside and beyond the star. 
P-Cygni profiles are only seen in strong lines of those 
ionization stages which are dominant in the wind. Because 
of the high temperatures of planetary nebula central stars, 
these are lines at ultraviolet wavelengths, such as C IV 
155nmand NV 124nm. Asa result, it was only with access 
to the ultraviolet by satellites such as the International 
Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) that it was discovered that up 
to half of all central stars have winds. 

The maximum blueshift of the absorption component 
of the P-Cygni profile provides v,., the terminal velocity 
of the stellar wind. It is believed that the wind is driven 
by the pressure of radiation scattered by strong absorption 
lines, and v,. is always a few times the escape velocity from 
the stellar surface. Since the surface gravity (and hence the 
escape velocity) increases greatly as the central star evolves 
toward the white dwarf stage, we find a considerable range 
of v9, with values generally between 500 and 4000 km sot 

Another wind parameter is the density, which 
multiplied by v.. gives us the rate of mass loss, M. The 
mass-loss rate is more difficult to determine than v,,, but 
results are available for a number of stars. M is found to 
vary greatly and is not a function of a single parameter 
such as stellar temperature or v.. In table 1 we give 
values for a few central stars, chosen to illustrate the 
range of properties encountered. The second column gives 
the surface temperature of the star, To, in thousands of 
kelvins, but it should be noted that the definition of the 
‘surface’ is somewhat arbitrary for a star with an extended 
atmosphere. The last column is the mass-loss rate in units 
of 10-°§Mo yr. 

Part of the variation in M is associated with the 
chemical composition of the central star’s atmosphere. 
One group of central stars retain a remnant (less than 
~10-*Mo) of the red giant envelope, which gives them 
a hydrogen-rich stellar atmosphere—they are stars of 
spectral type ‘O’ or ‘Of’. The other group has hydrogen- 
poor atmospheres: a typical chemical composition would 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebula Central Star Mass Loss/Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Parameters for selected central stars. 


Test Voo M 

Name (K) Type (kms!) (10-8 Mo yr 1) 
BD+30 3639 30 WR 700 600 
IC 418 37 Of 700 26 
IC 4593 40 Of 900 10 
NGC 2392 45 Of 400 <3 
NGC 6543 48 Of-WR 1600 16 
IC 4637 55 Of 1500 <2 
NGC 3242 75 Of 2300 <2 
NGC 40 78 WR 1000 250 
Abell 30 110 OVI 4000 5 
Abell 78 115 OVI 3700 2.5 
NGC 6369 150 WR 1200 70 


be 60% helium, 30% carbon and 10% oxygen. These 
stars may show Wolf-Rayet spectra. Wolf—Rayet spectra 
are dominated by broad emission lines of carbon and 
helium; such stars have very extended atmospheres and 
strong stellar winds. (Planetary nebula central stars 
with Wolf—Rayet spectra should not be confused with the 
more massive and luminous ‘classical’ WOLF-RAYET STARS.) 
Not all hydrogen-poor central stars are Wolf—Rayet stars, 
however. Those which are hotter and which have higher 
gravities may be Pc 1159 stars or O VI stars. The PG 1159s 
are hot, hydrogen-deficient stars with at most feeble stellar 
winds. Some of them pulsate, and only about half of the 
known members of this class are associated with planetary 
nebulae. The O VI stars (now usually called (WC)-PG 1159 
stars) seem to be intermediate between Wolf—Rayets and 
PG 1159s, very hot but still having a substantial fast wind. 
In fact, one PG 1159 star, Longmore 4, became an O VI 
star for a few weeks. During this outburst, the carbon and 
helium absorption lines went into emission and a stellar 
wind developed; the star then returned to its previous 
state. 

We might summarize by saying that, as planetary 
nebulae evolve, the temperatures and surface gravities 
of their central stars increase. As a result, the velocities 
of the central star winds increase, while the wind mass- 
loss rate drops. However, there is a second factor at 
work: those stars which have lost their hydrogen will have 
atmospheres of higher opacity, increasing the effective 
radiation pressure and driving stronger winds than in the 
case of stars with a hydrogen atmosphere. 


Dynamical effects of winds on nebulae 

After it was discovered that strong central star winds were 
common, it was realized that these winds could have a 
dynamical effect on the nebula itself. Pikel’ner considered 
such effects in 1968 and by the early 1980s the ‘two-wind 
model’ developed by S Kwok and others was widely 
accepted. In this model, the fast stellar wind overtakes the 
earlier slow red giant wind and sweeps it into the hollow 
shell we see as a planetary nebula. Because the nebulae are 
rarely spherical, but often have an axis of symmetry, it was 
necessary to modify the two-wind model by postulating 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The wind from the central star of Abell 30 (upper left) 
sweeps past nearby nebular material. 


that the red giant wind was not spherical but had a 
denser equatorial plane. Computer simulations based on 
this modified two-wind model have been successful in 
reproducing many of the basic observed morphologies. 
Such models, however, leave unanswered the question 
of why the red giant wind should be strongly aspherical, 
since it is not expected that the red giant would have a 
significant rotational velocity. This has led to speculation 
about the presence of companions—which might include 
substellar brown dwarfs or even massive planets—which 
could spin up the progenitor star and impart the needed 
asymmetry to the slow wind. 

Another outstanding question concerns the physical 
processes affecting the fast stellar wind after its collision 
with the nebula. A wind moving at 1000 km s™! will 
be heated to over 10’ K by such a collision. If this 
gas is able to cool within a few hundred years, only its 
momentum will accelerate the nebula. If it does not 
cool, however, the heated wind will fill the interior of the 
nebula, and the pressure of this hot, thin gas will be more 
effective in accelerating the planetary nebula outwards 
than the momentum alone. In the case of one nebula, 
BD+30 3639, x-rays have been observed from a3 x 10° K 
plasma, providing direct evidence for the still-hot bubble 
of shocked stellar wind. 

The high spatial resolution provided by the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) has revealed a wealth of unexpected 
structure in planetary nebulae. Many nebulae have been 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebula Central Star Mass Loss/Winds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


found to have neutral globules embedded in the ionized 
gas, which are in the process of evaporation. The comet- 
like tails streaming outwards from these globules give 
dramatic evidence of the interaction of the stellar wind 
with the nebula (figure 1). 


Jets in planetary nebulae 

In a few nebulae, such as NGC 6543 and IC 4593, HST 
images have revealed narrow jets. Many more nebulae 
have been found to possess ‘point symmetry’, where 
features are located symmetrically with respect to the star, 
even though there is no single axis of symmetry. Such 
structures immediately suggest the action of a bipolar jet, 
with a shifting axis. The discovery of such structures 
came as a surprise, because previously known stellar 
jets, such as those from protostars, arise from ACCRETION 
Disks, which are not expected around isolated planetary 
nebula central stars—stars from which material has been 
expelled not accreted. Nevertheless, the existence of jets 
must be explained, and many astronomers now believe 
they are strong evidence for the existence of some sort 
of companion to the central star. The presence of such a 
companion could allow mass transfer, resulting in at least a 
transient accretion disk and collimated jets. As mentioned 
above, there are planetary nebulae where the central 
star has a close binary companion and which must have 
evolved through a mass-transfer phase. Companions have 
also been invoked to explain the dense equatorial wind of 
the modified two-wind model. These considerations point 
toa whole range of complicated mass-loss phenomena that 
have yet to be explored. 


Bibliography 
There is some discussion of the central stars of planetary 
nebulae in this recent text: 


Lamers H J G L M and Cassinelli J P 1999 Introduction 
to Stellar Winds (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


A good entry point into the literature is: 


IAU Symposium No 180: Planetary Nebulae ed H J Habing 
and HJ GLM Lamers (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997) 


Patrick Harrington 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Nebulae 


Planetary nebulae, shells of illuminated gas that surround 
old and dying stars, were discovered by William Herschel, 
who in 1785 referred to the ‘planetary’, or ‘disk-like’, 
appearance of the object we now call NGC 7009 (figure 1). 
He later discovered that one of his ‘planetaries’ (NGC 6543) 
had a central condensation or star. Some 2000 planetary 
nebulae are known today, the best known being the Ring 
Nebula in Lyra (see figure 2). All have central stars. 
The central stars were once the nuclear burning zones of 
giant stars that have lost their outer envelopes and are on 
their way to becoming WHITE Dwarrs, the fleeing envelopes 
making the ephemeral planetaries. 


Spectra and parameters 
Although Herschel thought the nebulae were made of 
‘shining fluid’, their actual natures were not proven until 
William Huggins examined NGC 6543 (figure 3) in 1864 
with a visual spectroscope and found three emission 
lines, demonstrating that the nebulae are made of low- 
density gas. One in the blue (Hf at 4861 A) was quickly 
associated with hydrogen, but the green lines at 4959 A 
and 5007 A defied identification, becoming known as 
the ‘nebulium’ lines. Huggins and others subsequently 
discovered additional emission lines, including more from 
hydrogen, others later found to be helium, and yet others 
that added to the mysterious ‘nebulium’ list. 

The origin of the hydrogen emissions was worked 
out in 1927 by Hermann Zanstra. The blue central stars 
are very hot, above 25000 K, and emit copiously in the 


Figure 1. The discovery object, NGC 7009, is about 3500 ly away 
and about 1 ly across. Ionized by a hot star with a temperature 
of 90.000 K, the nebula consists of a complex, highly elliptical 
shell punched through by ‘FLIERS’ that make the ansae that 
gave the nebula the name ‘Saturn Nebula’. B Balick and 

J Alexander (University of Washington), A Hajian (US Naval 
Observatory), Y Terzian (Cornell University), M Perinotto 
(University of Florence) and P Patriarchi (Arcetri Observatory), 
Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Ring Nebula 


Feeage 


Figure 2. The Ring Nebula in Lyra (M57, NGC 6720), the best 
known of all planetary nebulae, is viewed in close to true color 
by the Hubble Space Telescope. Blue indicates ionized helium, 
green doubly ionized oxygen, and red hydrogen and ionized 
nitrogen. The 15th magnitude central star has passed its 
maximum temperature and (although still at about 150 000 K) is 
cooling and dimming. H Bond (Space Telescope Science 
Institute) and the Hubble Heritage Team (AURA, Space 
Telescope Science Institute and NASA). This figure is 
reproduced as Color Plate 39. 


Figure 3. NGC 6543, an enormously complex planetary nebula 
imaged by Hubble, was the first nebula to be observed 
spectroscopically. The young central star, with a temperature of 
47 000 K, is still heating as the nebula expands. J P Harrington 
(University of Maryland) and K Borkowski (North Carolina 
State University), Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA. 


ultraviolet beyond the Lyman ionization limit of hydrogen 
at 912 A. The nebula is primarily a plasma filled with 
protons, free electrons and neutral and ionized atoms 
that have their electrons in the lowest orbits or energy 
levels (the ground states). Each Lyman photon is capable 
of ionizing one hydrogen atom, the electron freed with 
an energy equal to the difference between the ionizing 
photon’s energy and hydrogen’s ionization energy. The 
electron is eventually recaptured by another proton and 
can land on any energy level. The best chance is for the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


electron to land back in the ground state. If it does, the UV 
photon is re-created and will ionize another atom. 

Absorption and re-creation continue until the free 
electron lands in an upper level. If it goes to the second, it 
produces a photon of the Balmer continuum, which flies 
out of the nebula, as there are few atoms able to absorb 
it. From level 2, the electron drops to level 1, creating a 
Lyman @ photon that bounces around in the nebula until it 
escapes or is destroyed by hitting a dust grain, by ionizing 
another element or in the creation of a pair of lower-energy 
photons that escape. 

If the electron lands above level 2, it has several 
choices. If it first goes to, say, level 4 (as in figure 4), it can 
jump directly to level 1, creating a Lyman y photon that 
is immediately reabsorbed by a neutral atom, the electron 
returning to level 4. Eventually the electron will jump to 
level 2 or 3. If it goes to 2, a Balmer photon is created 
that leaves the nebula. If it goes to 3, the same process 
operates until the electron jumps to level 2. The result is 
that each Lyman photon from the star produces one Balmer 
photon from the nebula. The ionization probabilities are 
high, while the recombination probabilities are low. As a 
result, the optically visible nebular gas is well over 99% 
ionized, there being essentially one free electron for each 
proton. Ina real nebula, a variety of atoms act in a similar 
way to produce ‘recombination lines’ of helium, oxygen, 
nitrogen, neon and others. 

The nebulium problem was solved in 1928 by 
IS Bowen. While exploring the energy-level structure 
of doubly ionized oxygen, he found levels just above 
the ground state with energy differences appropriate 
to Huggins’ 4959 A and 5007 A (and eventually other) 
lines. Downward transitions from these levels to the 
ground state are ‘forbidden’ under simplified quantum 
rules. In truth, they are allowed, just improbable, 
the upper levels being ‘metastable’ with long lifetimes. 
Electrons freed from hydrogen with sufficient energy (a 
few electron volts for the optical lines) collide with O7* 
ions and kick the bound electrons into the metastable 
states. . Upward and downward collisions establish 
an equilibrium and relatively high populations in the 
metastable states. Given a stable population, there will 
be a steady stream of downward radiative transitions that 
produce the ‘forbidden lines’, denoted by square brackets 
around the spectral signatures (the forbidden lines of 
doubly ionized oxygen called ‘[O III’, etc). Forbidden 
lines are produced by various ionization stages of oxygen, 
nitrogen, neon, sulfur, iron and other elements from the 
ultraviolet through the infrared. Although the forbidden 
lines are intrinsically weak, the recombination lines are 
weaker (the odds of a recombination quite low as a result 
of low density). The strongest forbidden lines therefore 
dominate the nebulae. 

Temperatures, densities and chemical compositions 
are easily derived. The free electrons thermalize quickly 
by rapid collision and establish gas kinetic (electron) 
temperatures (that reflect velocities) between about 8000 K 
and 20000 K that depend on the balance between heating 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and cooling. The gas is heated by ultraviolet radiation 
from the central star, so the hotter the star (temperatures 
range to over 200000 K), the hotter the nebula. The 
electrons are cooled when they lose energy in exciting 
the forbidden lines, principally [O III], so the more heavy 
atoms, the cooler the nebula. Electron temperatures are 
measured by comparing forbidden lines from a given ion 
that arise from levels that lie at different energies above 
the ion’s ground State, for example from the ratio of the 
4363 A and 5007 A intensities of [O III] or the 5754 A and 
6584 A intensities of [N II]. Electron densities (in the range 
from 10 to 10° electrons cm~*) can be measured from pairs 
of forbidden lines that arise from closely spaced levels 
that have different excitation and radiative probabilities, 
notably from the ratios of the 3729 A and 3726 A lines of 
[O II] and the 6731 A and 6717 A lines of [S II]. 

Once the physical conditions are known, we find the 
ionic abundances of the nebulae from the strengths of the 
recombination and forbidden lines. To find the elemental 
compositions we add the individual ionic compositions 
and use predictive radiative models to calculate the 
abundances of unobserved ions, in effect fine-tuning the 
model’s abundances and parameters until the predicted 
spectra match the observed spectra. Planetary nebulae 
in the Galactic disk have basic compositions similar 
to those of the Sun and other POPULATION I STARS, while 
those in the Galactic halo are notably deficient in heavy 
elements. Superimposed on these basic compositions can 
be powerful enrichments of helium, nitrogen and carbon, 
these elements having been created in the giant stars and 
dredged to the stellar surfaces before the creation of the 
nebulae. Helium abundances can be double normal, while 
those of nitrogen and carbon can be up by over a factor of 
10. Nitrogen- and helium-enriched nebulae (figure 5) are 
generally referred to as ‘Type I’, the other chemical types 
(whose terms are rarely used) having lower enrichments 
or none at all. 


Distances, dimensions and masses 

Physical diameters of the planetaries follow from angular 
diameters (which range from sub second of arc to a 
quarter of a degree) and distances. Masses equal 
the volumes multiplied by the mean proton (electron) 
densities multiplied by the proton mass. Distances, 
however, are poorly known. All but a handful of 
nebulae are too far away for PARALLAXES, and these have 
high errors. Distances can be found for some objects 
through association with clusters or companions, from 
their degree of interstellar reddening by dust or by 
comparing their angular expansions with their measured 
expansion velocities. We can also examine nebulae in the 
MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. From all these we find ionized masses 
typically a few tenths that of the Sun. 

Since the total energy radiated in the standard Hf line, 
E(HB), depends on the product of the electron and proton 
densities (multiplied by a recombination coefficient), 
E(H§8) can be related to mass. The flux in Hf at the 
Earth, F(H), depends on E(H) and distance. Adopting 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Free electron 
Electron — electron loss 


Excitation of 0?* 
line at 5007 


Recombination to 
Jonization limit fourth level 


NS 


H ® photon 
Soe 
4861 A 


Lyman & 
photon 
1216 A 
A 
Energetic 
stellar 
photon 
we gl 
Colliding 
Hydrogen free electron 


4363A 


o* 


Figure 4. Nebular emission lines are produced by a combination of ionization, recombination and collisional excitation. On the left, a 
hydrogen atom is ionized by a stellar photon. The freed electron undergoes various energy losses and recombines with another proton 
(here to the fourth energy level) to create the hydrogen lines. While free, the electron can collisionally excite the electrons of heavier 
atoms into long-lived metastable states, descent from which makes the forbidden lines. In the center we see the excitation of doubly 
ionized oxygen, at right of singly ionized oxygen (these two diagrams doubled in size for clarity). The ratio of the intensities of the 
lines at 4363 A and 5007 A (or 7325 A with 3726 A + 3729 A of [O II]) gives electron temperature, whereas the 3726:3729 intensity ratio 
gives density. From Kaler J B 1989 Stars and their Spectra (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 


a standard mass allows the computation of ‘statistical 
distances’. These are used to find most nebular radii, 
which range from about 0.01 pc to over 1 pc. Distances 
combined with radial velocities allow determination of 
nebular kinematics. Nebulae in the disk have the motions 
of other population I stars, those in the halo having high 
velocities typical of population II. 

The ionized mass is only a portion of a nebula. 
Planetaries fall into two broad categories, those in which 
the central star ionizes all the surrounding matter and 
some of the stellar radiation escapes (‘optically thin’) 
and those in which the radiation is all absorbed, leading 
to a bubble (a Str6mgren sphere) of ionization that is 
nested inside a neutral shell (‘optically thick’). In this 
simplified view, only optically thin nebulae are subject to 
the above statistical distance method, as the optically thick 
planetaries may have very low ionized masses, leading to 
distance overestimates, although corrective estimates can 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be made with enough calibrating objects. 

Reality is more complex. A nebula may be optically 
thin in one direction, thick in another. Planetaries also 
exhibit a great range in total mass, which leads to an 
even greater range in ionized mass, from 0.03Msun to 
0.5Msun or so (making statistical distances even more 
uncertain). Nebular structures are complex as well, 
commonly consisting of nested shells and disks. A dense 
inner shell may be optically thin, radiation leaking to a 
more tenuous outer shell that may be optically thick. This 
shell may also be optically thin, radiation leaking to a 
larger outer halo that may also be thick or thin. If the inner 
shells are thick, the outer will not be visible, or might be 
seen as fragmented if radiation leaks in one direction and 
not in another. 

High-dispersion spectra reveal internal velocities. 
The emission lines are broadened or split from the 
expansion of a shell. Expansion velocities increase 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Relative F(A)dA 


_al 


| t 
4000 4500 


5000 
d (A) 


eae I 
5500 6000 


6500 


Figure 5. The spectrum of a type I nebula (BV-1), one highly enriched in nitrogen and helium, displays powerful singly ionized 
nitrogen lines as well as a host of others. Two scales are used to show the full range of intensities. NOAO, from Kaler J B, Chu Y-H and 


Jacoby G H 1988 Astron. J. 96 1407. 


outward from the center, and are typically a few tens of 
kilometers per second. From dimensions and expansion 
velocities we find ages that range from a few hundred to 
tens of thousands of years. Some 50 000 yr after the nebulae 
are formed by ejection from their parent stars, the nebulae 
merge with the interstellar medium and are too faint to be 
seen, leaving behind white dwarfs. 

Infrared observations of molecular emissions show 
the traditional nebulae to be surrounded by molecule- 
rich shells in which we find Hz, CO and even polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons. These shells may or may not also 
be visible in the optical. Radiation longward of 912 A 
leaks into the molecular gas, exciting it and producing a 
‘partially dissociated region’ that will someday become 
ionized as the nebula expands and high-energy radiation 
attacks it. In other cases, molecular gas is rather 
thoroughly mixed in with the ionized gas, at least in 
projection, and in some cases physically. Intimately 
involved is dust, which radiates an infrared continuum 
and emits spectral signatures of carbon and silicates. Dust 
can both be buried in the nebula and surround it. When all 
these structures are taken into account, nebular masses— 
ionized, neutral and molecular—can range upward to well 
beyond solar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The central stars 

Excepting neutron stars, planetary nebula central stars 
are the hottest known and are exceedingly luminous. 
They are faint to the eye only because of high 
bolometric corrections for invisible ultraviolet radiation. 
From Zanstra’s mechanism, the total Balmer photon 
luminosity equals the stellar ultraviolet photon luminosity. 
Recombination theory relates the total Balmer photon 
luminosity to the Hf energy luminosity. Assuming 
a blackbody, the stellar ultraviolet photon luminosity 
can be related to its ultraviolet energy luminosity, 
which can therefore be found from the Hf energy 
luminosity (and distance). Comparison of the stellar 
ultraviolet luminosity with the star’s visual luminosity 
yields the effective (surface) temperature (the ‘Zanstra 
temperature’), distance factoring out. If a nebula is 
optically thin and ionizing radiation escapes, we do not 
count all the emerging ultraviolet photons and therefore 
derive only a lower limit to temperature. 

Because the strengths of the ionized helium lines 
depend on the amount of ionizing radiation shortward 
of the helium Lyman limit at 228 A, asimilar temperature 
can be found by comparing the flux in the He II 4686 A 
line (Paschen a) with the visual magnitude. A nebula 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


may be optically thin for hydrogen, but thick for helium. 
As a result, the He II Zanstra temperature is almost 
always greater than or equal to the hydrogen Zanstra 
temperature. If the two are equal, the nebula is probably 
thick. Reliable Zanstra temperatures range from around 
25000 K to nearly 300000 K. Temperatures combined 
with visual magnitudes and distances yield bolometric 
luminosities that range from a few solar luminosities to 
tens of thousands. Other temperature methods use the 
slope of the stellar flux in the observed ultraviolet and 
the determination of the energy balance in the nebula, 
equating heating (from the recombination lines) with 
cooling (from the forbidden lines). 

Temperatures and luminosities, as well as surface 
gravities and stellar compositions, can also be found by 
modelling the stellar absorption line spectra. Surface grav- 
ities and assumed masses combined with temperatures 
yield luminosities and thus another way to find distances. 
Modelled temperatures are in the range of the Zanstra tem- 
peratures. Specific disagreements with Zanstra tempera- 
tures suggest that some stars may not be blackbodies. 

Central star spectra are varied and complex. Some 
stars exhibit simple O-type absorption spectra. Lower- 
luminosity stars can be hydrogen rich or hydrogen poor, 
appearing as preludes to different kinds of white dwarfs. 
Higher-luminosity stars commonly show emissions from 
winds, some mimicking the spectra of the carbon woLr- 
RAYET (WC) stars. Spectra of lower-temperature stars can 
be so filled with emission lines that the continuum cannot 
even be seen. At the high-temperature end, the stars 
may radiate strong O VI lines. Many of these ‘O VI 
stars’ vary with periods of minutes, much as do the Pc 1159 
white dwarfs. We commonly observe P Cygni lines in the 
ultraviolet that reveal terminal wind velocities that range 
from a few hundred kms“! to 5000 km s~! and give mass 
loss rates of 10-’-10-° solar masses per year. The winds 
can be variable, leading to variations in line strengths. The 
winds also add considerable complications to modelling 
and may result in poorly determined temperatures (see 
PLANETARY NEBULA CENTRAL STAR MASS LOSS/WINDS). 

Wind modelling, however, shows enrichments in 
helium in the Of type of spectra, with He/H ratios of 0.2 
or so. The WC spectra exhibit no hydrogen lines. These 
helium stars have C/He ratios of unity and oxygen mass 
fractions of 4-10%. White dwarf DA and DB characteristics 
begin early, during the planetary nebula stage. The 
compositions of the stars are consistent with those of the 
dust grains found in the nebulae, carbon-rich stars having 
carbon grains, the others having silicate grains. 

Temperatures and luminosities allow the placement 
of planetary nuclei on the HR diagram (the log L-log T 
plane) for the establishment of empirical evolutionary 
tracks and for comparison with theoretical tracks (figure 6). 
Distance errors, however, greatly smear the luminosities. 
The best recourse is to use planetary nebulae in the 
Magellanic Clouds, although the low metallicity of the 
Clouds may make these nebulae different. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


100,000 
14Mo 
1.2 
= ' 08 
2 
510,000 OSE 
5 i —< 0.60 
i ~< 
2 | O57 
z ! 
a 1,000 i 0.55 
cena q 
E ! 
zai i 
100 1 + 
i 


1,000,000 500,000 200,000 100,000 50,000 30,000 
Temperature (K) 


Figure 6. Planetary nebula central stars evolve from the right 
(from AGB stars) along horizontal evolutionary tracks, reach 
maximum temperatures, and then cool and descend to become 
white dwarfs, the tracks depending critically on final (core) 
masses. Most observed planetary nebula stars fall to the right of 
the dashed line. From R A Shaw, evolutionary tracks by I Iben Jr. 


The direction of evolution on an evolutionary track 
is revealed by nebular expansion. The stars enter the 
planetary regime of the HR diagram at high luminosity 
and low temperature, then move to the left, increasing T 
at constant L, where they exhibit the wind phenomena 
that make for highly divergent spectra. At a high 
temperature that typically falls between 100000 and 
200000 K, the empirical track reverses, and the stars 
descend in luminosity while cooling to temperatures of 
70000 K or so, at which point the nebulae effectively 
dissipate. The empirical track leads directly to the tracks 
followed by white dwarfs. The birth rate of planetary 
nebulae found from the space density (pc?) and the mean 
expansion velocity is of the order of 10~ pe“? yr“, within 
the large errors comparable with the birth rate of white 
dwarfs. 

Since asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars (those that 
have completed core fusion and have contracting carbon— 
oxygen cores surrounded by fusing shells of hydrogen or 
helium) are losing their outer envelopes at fierce rates, 
and their luminosities are similar to those of planetary 
nuclei on the heating ‘horizontal track’, it is clear that they 
are the planetaries’ predecessors. The planetary nebula 
nuclei are therefore essentially the spent carbon—oxygen 
cores that are still surrounded by hydrogen-burning shells 
and topped by thin hydrogen envelopes. The planetary 
nebulae therefore link the AGB stars directly to the white 
dwarfs. 

Theory fits observation. The luminosity of a remnant 
core on a horizontal heating track increases with its mass, 
which in turn depends on initial mass. The cores run from 
about 0.55 solar masses for an initial mass of 0.8 solar to 
the Chandrasekhar limit for a 10 solar mass star. As the 
remnant outer envelope is thinned from the top by a fast 
hot wind and from the bottom by nuclear fusion, the radius 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the core goes down and the effective temperature goes 
up, the star traversing the HR diagram to the left. The 
traversal time depends on a high power of the core mass. 
As a result, masses on the horizontal tracks are strongly 
concentrated toward an upper limit around 0.6 solar 
masses. Planetary nebulae thus become useful distance 
indicators for other galaxies. They are easy to find and 
the upper limit of their brightness distribution represents 
a standard candle for distances to tens of megaparsecs. 

The turnaround point on an evolutionary track at 
specific mass is reached when the nuclear burning begins 
to shut down, the stars then cooling and dimming. The 
high-temperature maximum is proportional to the core 
mass, low-mass stars reaching only 80000 K or so, high 
ones exceeding 200000 K. The pace of evolution for 
different masses then changes, allowing the higher-mass 
cores to be observed. The ages of the nebulae can be 
found by comparing the positions of their stars with 
the calculated rates of evolution. However, this picture 
is complicated by the style of nuclear fusion, a large 
fraction (perhaps up to 40%) of the AGB stars becoming 
planetary nebulae while their inner shells are fusing 
helium instead of hydrogen, which slows the evolutionary 
pace. Evolutionary ages tend strongly to exceed the 
kinematic ages found from expansion velocities. 

The chemical enrichments seen in the planetary 
nebulae are interpreted in terms of internal processes that 
take place in the predecessor giants before nebular ejection. 
While on the red giant branch (the first ascent), the star’s 
convective envelope penetrates inward to the hydrogen- 
burning shell to dredge up the by-products of the carbon 
cycle, the process at least doubling the surface nitrogen 
content and altering carbon isotope ratios. A second 
dredge-up takes place in higher-mass stars beyond about 
3-5 solar masses after the cessation of core helium burning, 
at the beginning of the AGB phase, when convection brings 
up helium and nitrogen created in what had been the 
hydrogen-burning shell. Third dredge-up occurs after the 
start of helium shell flashes, when convection enters the 
zone between the hydrogen- and helium-burning shells 
and lofts upward more helium and now carbon. Finally, in 
the ‘hot bottom burning’ stage, the carbon cycle operates at 
the base of the convection zone, causing yet more nitrogen 
to rise to the surface. The observations are qualitatively 
in accord with theory, although the nebulae can be more 
enriched than predictions allow. Only cores above about 
0.7 solar masses, which come from higher initial masses, 
have highly enriched nitrogen, in rough accord with 
prediction. The carbon-rich nebulae are presumably the 
descendants of CARBON STARS. 

Along with helium, nitrogen, carbon, planetaries 
must also eject vast amounts of elements created in the 
helium-burning shells by slow neutron capture (the s- 
process). Most of the galactic carbon and a great deal of 
nitrogen, as well as those elements made by the s-process, 
find their way into the interstellar medium—and into new 
stars—via the planetaries. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Structure, formation and evolution 

Planetary nebulae exhibit a complex, sometimes bewilder- 
ing, variety of structures that have elicited numerous clas- 
sification schemes. The most general classification simply 
divides the nebulae into those with two lobes (‘binebu- 
lous’, now more commonly ‘bipolar’) and those without, 
the non-bipolar ranging from almost circular to quite el- 
liptical. The more extreme bipolar nebulae have a tight 
‘waistband’ that encircles the middle between two ex- 
tended poles that fall along a prominent major axis. The 
majority of nebulae, bipolar or not, display double or even 
multiple shells that sometimes include vast extended outer 
haloes. A significant number are also ‘point symmetric’, 
in which each feature on one side of the nebula is reflected 
through the center almost exactly onto the other side. 

The bipolar nebulae have distinctive common 
features. They tend to reside close to the plane of 
the Milky Way, suggesting that they are the progeny of 
higher-mass stars, which apparently eject their envelopes 
in a manner different from stars of lower mass. The 
bipolars also tend to have high enrichments of helium 
and nitrogen, in keeping with AGB dredge-up theory 
(although there are distinct exceptions). That is, highly 
enriched type I nebulae are population I and stick to the 
galactic plane. Moreover, bipolars are richer in molecular 
gas, the molecules strongly confined to the waistband. 
Waistband H seems to be excited more by shocks rather 
than by radiation. 

The nebulae are also filled with small ‘microstruc- 
tures’ that are not well explained. Some planetaries have 
rod-like features that extend along the major axis. They 
can extend past the main nebula to form jug-handle ‘ansae’ 
and are often broken into pieces with complex substruc- 
tures. Moving rapidly, they are called ‘FLIERS’ (from ‘fast 
low ionization emission regions’) and have very low ex- 
citations indicative of shock heating. Buried within the 
closest planetary nebula, the Helix (NGC 7293), are thou- 
sands of comet-like knots that point away from the central 
star, the knots filled with neutral gas, molecules and dust, 
their surfaces heated by starlight. 

These structural features all somehow emerge 
from giant (AGB) stars. However, the process long 
remained mysterious because of limited resolution and 
imaging capability and because the AGB stars surround 
themselves in dusty cocoons, which rendered the birth 
process invisible until the advent of infrared capabilities. 
Understanding requires that we see the transition objects 
that cover the gap in the log L-logT plane between 
the AGB stars and the planetaries. A number of such 
‘PROTOPLANETARY NEBULAE’, nebulae in the developmental 
state, are now recognized. The Egg Nebula in Cygnus 
(figure 7), the paradigm, is a bipolar reflection nebula 
whose bright lobes have the spectrum of a class F 
supergiant apparently buried within a thick, dark, 
molecule-filled waistband. Shining through the poles 
are twin beams that illuminate dozens of rings of bright 
reflective dust. The rings show that the mass loss 
from the progenitor AGB star is episodic, with sudden 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 7. The Egg Nebula is the best-known protoplanetary 
nebula: a planetary nebula in the making. Outflowing columns 
of dusty gas, arranged in symmetrical rings, reflect the light of a 
class F supergiant that was probably once a Mira variable. The 
star is embedded in the dark thick central disk. H Bond (Space 
Telescope Science Institute) and the Hubble Heritage Team 
(AURA, Space Telescope Science Institute, and NASA). R Sahai 
and J Trauger (Jet Propulsion Laboratory), Space Telescope 
Science Institute and NASA. 


increases every couple of hundred years, for reasons not 
understood. In other transition objects the star is hotter 
and the ionization of the interior just beginning. Very 
young nebulae clearly show oppositely directed flows 
from the buried stars that appear collimated by thick 
central disks. As the AGB star loses its envelope, the 
‘stellar’ body that remains heats through the various 
spectral classes, from class M through F then to A to B 
as it loses ever more mass and the core is revealed. Finally, 
it is able to ionize the surrounding thick nebula. 

The guiding principle to the formation of the visible 
nebular structures involves interacting winds (figure 8). 
As the hot core is revealed, the old, cool, slow wind of 
the AGB star is transformed into a fast hot wind that runs 
into the more slowly fleeing dusty gas and shovels it into 
a ring. When the star becomes hot enough, we then see 
a ‘snowplowed’ thick ring nested within a fainter outer 
structure that has not yet been shovelled up. The different 
structures are formed by the distribution of the mass that is 
lost by the AGB star and then magnified by the hot wind’s 
interaction. If AGB mass is lost with great uniformity, 
the resulting planetary will be round. If the AGB wind 
is slightly axial symmetric, thicker at the equator than at 
the poles, the hot wind will blow more vigorously through 
the poles, and the nebula will take on an elliptical shape. If 
the slow wind is yet more concentrated into a waistband, 
the resulting nebula takes on a distinct bipolar structure 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


as the hot wind creates huge bubbles that finally break 
through to interstellar space. 

MIRA VARIABLES (AGB stars that will soon produce 
planetary nebulae) have been shown not to be round. 
How such asymmetries factor into shaping planetary 
nebulae, however, is unknown. Interactions with binary 
companions could produce latitude-dependent winds that 
give rise to elliptical and bipolar nebulae. As the giant 
expands, it approaches the tidal boundary between it 
and its companion, and may lose mass to it through the 
common LAGRANGIAN POINT. If the wind is strong enough, 
the giant can surround its companion in a common 
envelope that enhances mass loss in the orbital plane. 
When the envelope has been lost, revealing the white 
dwarf to be, and the fast wind begins, the result is a 
highly bipolar nebula, bipolar flows also being created 
in the interaction. Yet though some central stars are 
observed as binaries, most that inhabit bipolar planetaries 
appear to be single. The central stars, however, are so 
luminous that small companions could be lost. That 
binaries are indeed important is perhaps revealed by the 
point-symmetric nebulae, as one explanation is precession 
caused by orbiting companions. 

At the extreme, the AGB wind loss pattern might 
be produced by interactions with planets still in orbit 
about the AGB star. The incorporation of planets into 
the growing giant may act to spin up the star, dust from 
their destruction adding to the dust formed in the giants’ 
winds. Moreover, it has been suggested, on the basis that 
planets form from dusty disks and even from the remains 
of pulsar-ablated stars, that new planets might form within 
the dusty waistbands of protoplanetary nebulae. 

As the star passes through the protoplanetary nebula 
stage, it finally reaches the critical 25000 K mark and 
begins to ionize the inner edge of the snowplowed nebula, 
shocks helping in the heating of the gas. As the nebula 
continues to expand and the density decreases, radiation 
can penetrate ever deeper into the cloud, dissociating 
the surrounding molecules, and ionizing more of the gas 
until radiation leaks through to illuminate the unplowed 
portions of the structure and then the outer haloes, which 
include matter lost while the star was still in its earlier 
giant phases. Jets presumably formed by the star penetrate 
through to act somehow in supplying the FLIERS. As the 
nebula continues to expand, the surrounding molecular 
shells disappear. Nevertheless, knots of dense matter 
in the wind can survive, leaving packets of molecules 
and dust behind perhaps to make a variety of globules 
that can survive for nearly the life of the nebula. The 
nebulae eventually become so large and tenuous that 
they and their motions through space are affected by 
the interstellar medium with which they are gradually 
merging. Continuing to move, the parent stars leave their 
nebulae behind, the star of one old object actually leaving 
a wake. All is now over except for the dim, cooling white 
dwarfs that will orbit the Galaxy forever. 

Yet a surprise may await. As the nascent white dwarf 
cools along its descending evolutionary track, the old 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 8. Planetary nebulae evolve with time. Each strip shows (1) a warming star in a protoplanetary nebula surrounded by a cloud 
of lost mass, (2) the development of a fast wind that shovels the matter into a shell, (3) the heating star radiating in the ultraviolet and 
illuminating the shell and (4) an advanced state in which the radiation penetrates the shell. The top strip shows the result of spherical 
mass loss that makes a spherical planetary; the bottom strip shows of mass preferentially lost in an equatorial waistband, the result a 
bipolar nebula. Art from Kaler J B 1997 Cosmic Clouds (Scientific American Library) (New York: Freeman). 


helium-burning shell can reactivate itself in a final thermal 
pulse. The new energy source re-expands the star to giant 
proportions. New sets of thermonuclear reactions coupled 
with convection can dramatically change the chemical 
composition of the surface, enriching it with s-process 
elements. FG SAGITTAE, Which has brightened and cooled 
over the past several decades, and whose spectrum has 
become increasingly bizarre, seems to be one of these. 

The low surface gravity of such a ‘born-again’ giant 
allows more matter to be ejected to produce a planetary 
within a planetary, the star then approximately retracing 
its old path on the log L-log T plane. However, the star 
had already lost most of its hydrogen envelope before it 
produced its first planetary, so the new ejecta are ultra- 
rich in helium and carbon, a composition totally different 
from that of the old nebula. Fine examples are Abell 
30 and Abell 78, which have knots of hydrogen-poor 
matter surrounding their nuclei, their stars now shrunken 
back to the usual dimensions. Such events may be 
responsible for a variety of other objects, including the rare 
R CORONAE BOREALIS STARS, giants with carbon-rich helium 
atmospheres. 


Current research 

Numerous problems involving both star and nebula 
remain. There are still no general methods that can 
unambiguously find distances to planetary nebulae. The 
best hope for now is to use nebulae in other galaxies, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


particularly in M31, where metallicity is no problem. 
Except in the Magellanic Clouds, however, extragalactic 
distances are too great to determine much of anything 
about morphologies. Chemical compositions of galactic 
nebulae also remain a problem. Abundances of carbon 
and oxygen found from recombination lines do not fit 
with those found from forbidden lines, perhaps because 
of temperature fluctuations. 

Wind theory is still in a primitive state, and we cannot 
easily relate the initial main sequence mass of the star to 
that of the final product, rendering it difficult to trace 
the full path of evolution. Moreover, kinematical ages 
do not fit stellar evolutionary ages, the predicted sizes of 
the nebulae for a given point on the HR diagram being 
too large. Either evolutionary theory is wrong or we are 
not properly taking into account the accelerations and 
decelerations of the nebular gas. 

The cause and the time of origins of the bipolar 
structures that so many of the nebulae assume are not 
known; neither are those of the bipolar flows. We 
are only beginning to penetrate into the mystery of the 
protoplanetaries. The degree to which binaries (including 
planets) are important is unknown. We do know, 
however, that Herschel’s discovery eventually led to a 
fuller understanding of STELLAR EVOLUTION, of how stars 
meet their ends and of the processes of mass and chemical 
recycling in the Galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Aller L H 1984 Physics of Thermal Gaseous Nebulae 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Frank A 1997 Blowing cosmic bubbles Sky Telesc. 
(February) p 36 

Gurzadyan G A 1997 The Physics and Dynamics of Planetary 
Nebulae (New York: Springer) 

Habing H J and Lamers H J G L M (ed) 1997 Planetary 
Nebulae: International Astronomical Union Symp. 180 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Iben I 1995 Planetary nebulae and their central stars— 
origin and evolution Phys. Rep. 250 1 

Kaler J B 1985 Planetary nebulae and their central stars 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 23 89 

Kwok S 1996 A modern view of planetary nebulae Sky 
Telesc. (July) 38 

——1998 Metamorphosis Sky Telesc. (October) 30 

Peimbert M 1990 Planetary nebulae Rep. Prog. Phys. 53 1559 

Pottasch S R 1984 Planetary Nebulae (Dordrecht: Reidel) 


James B Kaler 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Rings 


Planetary rings are common to all the giant planets of our 
solar system. They form a disk of particles following a 
nearly circular orbit in the equatorial plane of the central 
planet. Ring disks have various dimensions and radial 
structures. They have been discovered from both ground- 
based and spacecraft observations. SATURN’SRINGS were dis- 
covered by GALILEO GALILEI in 1610 but clearly identified 
as rings by CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS in 1659. The development 
of ring science has been tightly linked with the history 
of their observations during three centuries. The discov- 
ery of a new ring system around Uranus in 1977, during 
the ground-based observation of a stellar OCCULTATION by 
the planet (see URANUS: RINGS), boosted research in this area 
and a quest for new rings started. Suspected after the 
charge particle measurements of PIONEER MISSION 11 in 1974, 
the very faint JUPITER'S RINGS were finally detected by the 
VOYAGER spacecraft in 1979. The story of NEPTUNE’S RINGS 
started when ring ‘arcs’ were detected in 1984 with the 
same method of stellar occultation. The complete ring 
system was revealed by Voyager 2 cameras in 1989. The 
view of ring systems has been completely renewed in 
this 20 yr long ‘golden age’ period. Many theories have 
been developed to explain the huge amount of unexpected 
observations sent back by Voyager probes. Great progress 
has been made in our understanding of planetary rings 
but many questions remain on their origin and evolution. 
In the following sections the possible scenarios on their 
origin are discussed and the main questions raised after 
these discoveries are developed. Finally open questions 
and the main science objectives of the next CASSINI/HUYGENS 
MISSION to Saturn’s rings are presented. 


Origin 

Rings are a common feature in the close vicinity of giant 
planets. They are located within the ROCHE LIMIT, an 
approximate distance below which any rock is expected 
to break up under the tidal effects exerted by the planet. 
Ring disks in the Roche limit are vertically very thin, a few 
hundred meters thick for a few ten or hundred thousand 
kilometers wide. This is the natural evolution of a cloud 
of particles which is losing energy in inelastic interparticle 
collisions while conserving angular momentum in the 
gravitational field of a central planet. An out-of-plane 
particle, when crossing the mean plane of the other 
particles, has its out-of-plane velocity component reduced 
in each collision and finally reaches the common plane. 
Meanwhile particle orbits are precessing in the equatorial 
plane if the planet is oblate. 

Ring particles may have condensed from circumplan- 
etary material when the planet formed and have collapsed 
into a thin disk. The creation of rings after the disruption of 
a parent body is another plausible scenario. The progeni- 
tor, a satellite or a captured comet or asteroid, would have 
drifted into the Roche limit and been disrupted by tidal 
effects or by a large impact. Observations tend to show 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that the lifetime of particles and the timescales of evolu- 
tion of planetary rings are much shorter than the age of 
the solar system. Then primordial rings should have dis- 
appeared already or should be continuously replenished 
and destroyed over ages. The equivalent mass of a 200 km 
sized satellite should be reinjected into the Saturn’s rings 
every 500 Myr. The less massive main rings of Neptune, 
Uranus and Jupiter might have found enough material in 
their nearby small satellites to be fed with. An alternative 
scenario of a recent and widespread ring formation would 
imply a hardly reconcilable anthropocentric viewpoint. 

The origin of diffuse rings may be less uncertain. 
Their particles are typically micron sized and should be 
consequently removed very rapidly by drag forces. They 
are most probably replenished with the ejecta produced 
by the meteoroid bombardment of the surfaces of close 
satellites. The E ring of Saturn, which extends from 3 to 
8 Saturn radii, may be the most illustrative example. Its 
peak density is correlated with the orbit of the icy satellite 
Enceladus. The ejected dust would be dispersed around its 
orbit and further dispersed at large scale under the action 
of electromagnetic forces. Recent Galileo observations of 
Jupiter’s rings have shown direct evidence of very faint 
dusty rings associated with small satellites Amalthea and 
Thebe outside of the main ring system (see GALILEO MISSION 
TO JUPITER). Spectroscopic measurements tend to confirm 
the compositional link between Jupiter’s rings and nearby 
satellites (See JUPITER: SATELLITES). 

The chemical composition and bulk structure (den- 
sity, porosity, ...) of ring particles may provide hints of 
possible scenarios of formation but relevant spectroscopic 
data are often lacking. Water ice has been identified as 
the main constituent on the surface of Saturn’s ring parti- 
cles. Impurities are also present but not yet identified. The 
compositions of the other ring systems are still unknown. 
Water ice has not been detected. Reaching conclusions 
about the origins of rings from their current composition 
remains, however, a tricky task as ring particle surfaces are 
eroded or polluted on relatively short timescales by me- 
teoroid bombardment, high-energy particles sputtering or 
ejecta of nearby satellites. Clues to origin may be deeper 
under the surface of particles and therefore still hard to 
probe with current data. 


Evolution 

Interparticle collisions in the ring plane disperse particles 
radially even more. The final disk should be uniform 
with smooth edges. The most remarkable discovery in 
the past 30 yr has been the unexpected and extreme 
diversity of structures in planetary rings, such as divisions, 
sharp edges, spiral waves, narrow ringlets or azimuthal 
asymmetries such as arcs and clumps in narrow rings or 
spokes in Saturn’s rings. Most of them are common to 
all ring systems. Any narrow ring should be dispersed 
radially because of collisions and differential motion (the 
orbital velocity decreases with increasing distance to the 
planet). Any longitudinal asymmetry should also be 
slowly stretched along the ring and erased on timescales 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of a few years by this differential motion. The observed 
structures are therefore either very young or radially and 
azimuthally confined. 

Among the processes proposed to explain the 
observed structures, the resonant gravitational interaction 
of ring particles with nearby satellites is certainly one of 
the most important. Theories of the radial confinement 
of a ring, or a ‘shepherding’ mechanism, proposed by 
Goldreich and Tremaine in the 1970s, estimate the torque 
exchange between colliding ring particles and a satellite. 
A transfer of angular momentum takes place at resonant 
locations where the orbital frequencies of the satellite and 
ring particle are commensurable, with mean motions in 
a ratio m:m + 1 for example. The resonant perturbation 
of an outer satellite removes angular momentum from 
ring particles which drift inwards while an inner satellite 
adds angular momentum to outer ring particles which 
drift outwards. Both interacting bodies tend to move 
away from the resonant orbit. This interaction results 
in various structures depending on satellite mass and 
distance. A close or massive outer satellite creates a wake 
in the ring and repels particles along a sharp edge. The 
edge of Jupiter’s main ring is maintained by the close 
10 km sized satellite Adrastea. The outer edge of the B 
ring is located at the 2:1 resonance with 200 km sized 
Mimas and corresponds to the Huygens gap in the Cassini 
division. The massive Mimas is then able to remotely open 
a gap. The outer edge of Saturn’s A ring is located at 
a 7:6 resonance with the coorbital 100 km sized satellite 
Janus (see SATURN: SATELLITES). Gaps with sharp edges can 
also be opened in rings by embedded moonlets. The 
Encke gap is carved out of Saturn’s A ring by the 10 km 
sized moonlet Pan. The satellite was suspected because 
of wakes detected on gap edges and later discovered in 
Voyager images. Density waves or bending waves are 
driven by smaller and distant satellites at high-order (m) 
resonance locations. They provide useful information 
on the collective behavior of particles (or ‘viscosity’) in 
the densest parts of the rings. Waves a few kilometers 
wide driven by Prometheus, Pandora, Janus or Mimas are 
visible in Saturn’s rings. Because of these interactions, the 
orbits of particles drift a few cm to 1 m per year. The outer 
A ring is expected to fall onto the Cassini division in few 
hundred million years. 

Two shepherding moons on each side of a ring 
repel particles the same way and can confine the ring 
radially. The discovery of Saturn’s F ring shepherds 
Prometheus and Pandora and of Uranus’s ¢ ring shepherds 
Cordelia and Ophelia were the most spectacular success 
of the Goldreich and Tremaine theory. The singularity 
of URANUS’S RINGS at the time of their discovery was their 
extreme narrowness of a few kilometers. Dermott and 
Gold had proposed in 1977 another confinement theory 
involving a single small satellite. In a frame corotating 
with the moon, a ring particle of nearly the same semimajor 
axis describes a ‘horse shoe’ trajectory forming a narrow 
ring. However, this kind of orbit is not stable against 
collisions. No shepherding moons were discovered 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


around or within the other eight narrow rings of Uranus. 
However, resonant relationships were found between the 
sharp edges of Uranus’s 6, A and y rings and the satellites 
Cordelia and Ophelia. The radial confinement of the 6, 5, 
4, a, B and n rings remains unexplained. 

The discovery of Neptune’s arcs set the new puzzling 
question of azimuthal confinement. From 1984 to 1989, 
a campaign of stellar occultation observations led to the 
conclusion that Neptune’s ‘rings’ were in fact a family of 
longitudinally discontinuous rings, called ‘arcs’. Lissauer 
in 1985 formulated a model where an arc could be confined 
at the Lagrangian Ly or Ls points of a 200 km sized satellite. 
An inner satellite was required to prevent the radial 
spreading due to collisions. Goldreich, Tremaine and 
Borderies in 1986 proposed that a single nearby inclined 
satellite would confine azimuthally the whole family of 
arcs in very specific sites. Voyager 2 images in 1989 showed 
that arcs were in fact the densest parts of one narrow 
ring, the Adams ring. No coorbital massive satellite was 
found but clumps, maybe embedded km-sized objects, 
were discovered in the arcs themselves. After ground- 
based observations and Voyager 2 data were compared, 
the arcs appeared to be stable over 5 yr despite differential 
motion. Porco detected in Voyager 2 images a wavy 
radial distortion in the Adams ring that she attributed 
to the excitation of the ring by a 42:43 resonance with 
the nearby satellite Galatea. Arcs would be confined in 
4.2° long azimuthal sectors along the ring according to 
the theory of Goldreich and colleagues mentioned above. 
However, some arcs were not completely confined to 
these sites. Thanks to the recent first direct imaging of 
Neptune’s arcs from Earth with the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE, 
the mean motion of the arcs has been measured more 
accurately. The orbit is unambiguously outside the 42:43 
resonance with Galatea. The role of this satellite and 
the azimuthal confinement of arcs therefore have to be 
studied again. Other arcs and clumps have been detected 
in the F ring, in the Encke gap ringlets around Saturn 
and in Uranus’s 4 ring. Their temporal evolution is 
still poorly known but recent ground-based and HST 
images of the F ring arcs obtained during Sun and Earth 
ring plane crossings in 1995 suggest that the structure 
of the F ring is evolving on a timescale of weeks. This 
result appears to be compatible with former Voyager 
observations. Observing heterogeneous rings is certainly 
a key towards the understanding of the close relationship 
between rings and satellites, the radial and azimuthal 
confinements of ring material and then the origin and 
evolution of rings. 

Other processes at play in planetary rings can also 
severely reduce their lifetime. Erosion mechanisms 
due to interparticle collisions, meteoroid bombardment, 
sputtering by cosmic rays, etc supply new molecules 
to a gaseous ring atmosphere or new small particles in 
the ring system while removing others. The meteoroid 
bombardment appears to be the most efficient at eroding 
particle surfaces at a rate of about 10-° cm yr"!. These 
outstanding rates even for cm- to m-sized ring particles 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


still depend on poor data. The size distribution and 
number of particles are also changed by interparticle 
collisions but the surface erosion, fragmentation or 
accretion rates of particles are very uncertain as the 
restitution factor and bulk properties of particles are 
unknown and difficult to constrain. Ring particles 
immersed in the surrounding magnetospheric plasma 
are charged. Within the planetary magnetic field, sub- 
micron-sized grains can experience significant Lorentz 
force compared with gravity and be driven out of the ring 
plane. This process is certainly involved in the creation of 
Saturn’s B ring spokes and of Jupiter’s ring halo and in the 
spatial distribution of Saturn’s E ring. Small particles are 
also sensitive to drag forces such as Poynting—Robertson or 
plasma drags. The PoYNTING-ROBERTSON EFFECT due to solar 
radiation induces an orbital decay and reduces the lifetime 
of dusty particles in the system to less than 1 Myr. The 
plasma drag is due to collisions with electrons and ions 
or long-range charge interactions. Charged dust particles 
inside or outside the synchronous orbit (where particles 
and magnetic field rotation speeds are equal) will spiral 
inwards or outwards respectively. The related lifetime 
may be as short as few hundred years in Jupiter’s and 
Saturn’s systems. 


Future 

Planetary rings are complex systems. They apparently 
evolve on timescales much shorter than the age of the 
solar system but are also a common component around 
a planet. The different processes at play transfer angular 
momentum between rings and satellites, confine ring 
material at some places or push other material onto the 
planet, provide or remove particles. Rings are therefore 
marvellous laboratories for ‘live’ tests of theories of 
dynamical processes at work in disks, the same processes 
which have been certainly at work, at a larger scale, 
sometimes during the formation of planetary systems. 
Many important ring structures are still not understood. 
Timescales of evolution and lifetimes of particles have to 
be confirmed. The Cassini spacecraft will be placed into 
orbit around Saturn in 2004. Observations in a uniquely 
large spectral range will give decisive constraints on 
Saturn’s ring particles properties and on the compositional 
relationship between ring and satellites. The temporal 
evolution of structures will be carefully followed during 
4 yr to better understand confinement mechanisms or 
collective behavior of particles in dense disks. This 
mission will then allow major advances in answering the 
questions of the origin and evolution of Saturn’s rings 
and of planetary rings in general. Meanwhile technical 
progress will provide always-richer ground-based data 
on the other ring systems to constrain their physical 
properties and any short-evolution timescales, until a new 
generation of spacecraft is sent to Uranus and Neptune. 


Bibliography 


Greenberg R and Brahic A (ed) 1984 Planetary Rings 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Esposito L, Brahic A, Burns J A and Marouf E A 1991 
Particle properties and processes in Uranus’ rings 
Uranus ed J T Bergstrahl, E D Miner and M S 
Matthews (Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona 
Press) pp 410-65 

Esposito L, Cuzzi J N, Holdberg J B, Marouf E A, Tyler 
G Land Porco C C 1984 Saturn’s rings: structure, 
dynamics and particle properties Saturn ed T Gehrels 
and M S Matthews (Tucson, AZ: The University of 
Arizona Press) pp 463-545 

French R, Nicholson P D, Porco C C and Marouf E A 
1991 Dynamics and structure of the Uranian rings 
Uranus ed J T Bergstrahl, E D Miner and M S 
Matthews (Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona 
Press) pp 327-409 

Porco C C, Nicholson P D, Lissauer J J, Cuzzi J N and 
Esposito L W 1995 Neptune’s rings Neptune and Triton 
ed D Cruikshank and MS Matthews (Tucson, AZ: The 
University of Arizona Press) pp 703-806 


Cécile Ferrari 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Society 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Society 


Carl Sagan, Bruce Murray and Louis Friedman founded 
the non-profit Planetary Society in 1979 to advance the 
exploration of the solar system and to continue the search 
for extraterrestrial life. The Society has its headquarters 
in Pasadena, California, but is international in scope, with 
100 000 members worldwide, making it the largest space 
interest group in the world. The Society funds a variety of 
projects and programs, including Red Rover Goes to Mars 
(for students), the Mars Microphone on the Mars Polar 
Lander mission, S9ETI@home, the Gene Shoemaker Near 
Earth Object Grants, etc. 
For further information see 
http://planetary.org. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Surfaces 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Surfaces 


For most of the planets and satellites, the knowledge we 
have of their global properties comes from the observation 
of their surfaces. Indeed, the information used to 
characterize solar system objects derives essentially from 
the analysis of the light we receive from them. Only rarely 
does one have access to additional sources of data, such 
as in situ seismic or magnetic probing, or soil chemical 
analysis. When the objects are surrounded by a thick— 
and therefore opaque—atmosphere, as for VENUS Or JUPITER, 
we cannot see the surface. In all other cases, including the 
inner and minor planets, as well as planetary satellites, the 
surface characteristics are used to decipher clues about the 
past and present properties of the objects as a whole. 

Surface features do in general result from the complex 
interaction between internal processes, which initiated 
tectonic and volcanic activity, atmospheric phenomena 
and exogenic processes, due to the contact with the 
interplanetary medium, such as irradiation with solar 
particles and bombardment by meteorites. These 
processes control the evolution of planetary surfaces over 
a wide variety of time constants. Therefore, by studying 
their surfaces, one has the potential to trace back the 
history of planetary bodies, from seasonal variations to 
geological time scales. 


Heavily cratered terrains 

Some of the most widely observed surface features are 
impact CRATERS, aS on the MOON and MeRcuRY. These 
craters are remnants of the very intense bombardment 
that affected all solar system bodies after their accretion. 
Actually, in the inner solar system, a huge number of 
bodies were formed, on trajectories leading to violent 
collisions. It took hundreds of millions years to clear up the 
solar cavity, largely by mutual destruction of the impacting 
bodies. These impacts constituted the dominant process in 
the early solar system. If pictures of the inner planets had 
been taken four billion years ago, they would essentially 
all look the same. 

On the few remaining objects, records of this era 
remained in the form of impact craters of all sizes, 
covering their entire surface. Bodies that have not evolved 
much since still exhibit their impacted surface. ASTEROIDS, 
planetary satellites and planet areas are labeled ‘old’ when 
their surfaces appear heavily cratered, which only means 
that they have not been further remodeled by global 
activity. 

As a general rule, the smaller the objects are, the less 
they have evolved after this early bombardment. Thus, 
by studying the Moon and Mercury, we have access to the 
first billion years of solar system evolution. Mars has a 
greater mass and has transformed about half its surface 
by more recent activity, while preserving heavily cratered 
highlands on its southern hemisphere. On the largest of 
the inner planets, the Earth, geology has erased the record 
of that early history. Attempts to identify impact craters 
from that era on the terrestrial crust continue. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Tectonic and volcanic features 


Surface TECTONIC features have been produced in solid 
bodies with internal energies large enough to have 
sustained a mantle activity through the crust. For most 
planets and satellites, for which the energy source is 
dominated by the radioactivity of long-lived (U, Th and 
K) elements, the rise in temperature, and thus the level of 
internal activity, increases with the size. On the Moon, the 
only surface features associated with this internal activity 
come from the filling with lava flows of the largest—and 
thus the deeper—impact-produced basins, giving birth 
to the so-called ‘mare’. Predominantly made of Mg/Fe 
silicates (pyroxenes and olivines), they appear darker 
than the surrounding ‘continents’, rich in bright Al-rich 
feldspar (anorthosite). On larger bodies, internal activity 
induced the lifting of large areas, like THARSIS MONTES, 
on Mars, or ISHTAR TERRA on Venus, with MAXWELL MONTES 
dominating the surrounding plains from an altitude of 
11 km. The rise of these features is sometimes associated 
with great faults or canyons, such as VALLES MARINERIS on 
Mars, 5000 km long, 6 km deep on average and up to tens 
of km wide. 

Magmatic activity, restricted to mare production on 
the Moon, produced five impressive volcanoes on Mars, 
the largest in the solar system, with oLympus MoNs the 
highest, 27 km in altitude. Each of these volcanoes results 
from a process similar to the one responsible for volcanic 
chains on the Earth, the difference being the lack of plate 
tectonics on Mars: a ‘hot spot’ under the lithosphere 
generates distinct ‘bubbles’ of magma which, on Mars, 
contribute to the same volcano while, on the Earth, the 
moving lithosphere is ‘pierced’ through aligned blisters, 
building distinct volcanoes, as one can see for example 
with the Hawaiian islands. 

In a very few cases, tidal effects initiate volcanic 
activity at a very high rate. The most striking example is 
Io, closest of Jupiter’s four Galilean satellites, whose entire 
surface is remodeled by volcanic activity on time scales of 
only thousands of years (see 10: VOLCANISM AND GEOPHYSICS). 
The differences in surface properties of these four objects 
reflect the high degree of diversity of evolutionary patterns 
in the solar system. Formed almost at the same time 
from the same material, with about equal masses, they 
exhibit today totally different surfaces: the more distant 
one, CALLISTO, is very heavily cratered, and thus described 
as the ‘oldest’ one. On GANyMeDE, bright ‘young’ terrains 
contrast with darker cratered units. EUROPA is covered 
with a fractured but smooth and uncratered ice sheet, 
possibly floating on an underground water ocean; Io is the 
only planetary object, apart from the Earth, where active 
volcanoes have been observed (see also VOLCANISM IN THE 
SOLAR SYSTEM). 

Impact craters and volcanoes constitute surface 
structures with elevations that can reach tens of kilometers. 
However, mountains similar to those on Earth are 
extremely rare. They result from continental drifts directly 
linked to plate tectonics. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Surfaces 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Features induced by interaction with the 
atmosphere 

Surface structures can also be driven by interactions with 
PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES. Polar caps and frosts are currently 
observed on Mars; liquid, icy and eolian erosion features 
are also spread over large areas of its surface. Some may 
have been formed billions of years ago, such as valley 
networks, while dunes are formed by dust transportation 
processes occurring on a seasonal basis, at present, when 
CO, condensation at the poles induces drastic changes in 
atmospheric pressure, giving rise to giant dust storms (see 
MARS: SURFACE). 


Past and present: the surface records 

Altogether, the variety of information one can derive from 
an in-depth study of surface features, in the framework of 
comparative PLANETOLOGY, has the potential to trace back 
the entire history of the solar system. This requires an 
extended coverage of the surface mapping, together with 
a high spatial resolution, a wide spectral range and a 
large spectral resolution. Indeed, one needs not only to 
distinguish extended geological areas, but also to identify 
structures at a much smaller scale, such as outflows, crater 
rims and stratified canyon slopes. Moreover, in order to 
determine the composition of the observed terrains, the 
observation in the visible has to be extended towards the 
infrared, where most materials have specific transition 
features enabling unambiguous characterization. When 
the atmosphere is opaque in the visible, as for Venus 
and, to a lesser extent, TITAN, one needs to image the 
surface at longer wavelengths. A new generation of 
instruments, imaging spectrometers operating in a variety 
of wavelength ranges, will provide a major source of 
information for the future space exploration of the solar 
system. 


Jean-Pierre Bibring 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to 
Copernicus 


By the term planetary theory, in its widest sense, is 
meant a method of representing, either qualitatively or 
quantitatively, the apparent geocentric motions of the 
Sun, Moon and planets. Prior to the development of 
modern celestial mechanics by Newton, planetary theory 
could be purely arithmetic, geometrical with or without 
computation, or physical, the last being an extension of 
geometrical planetary theory to mechanisms presumed to 
exist in the heavens and to produce the apparent motions 
of the Sun, Moon and planets. The principal arithmetic 
planetary theory is that of the Babylonians, considered in 
the article on BABYLONIAN ASTRONOMY. Here we shall consider 
primarily geometrical and secondarily physical planetary 
theory in Greek, Arabic and European astronomy up to 
the time of Copernicus. 

The earliest geometrical and physical planetary 
theory is that of EUDOXUS OF CNIDUS (c. 350 Bc), known 
only from rather imprecise descriptions by ARISTOTLE (384— 
322 Bc) and Simplicius (sixth century ap), which has 
been reconstructed by SCHIAPARELLI and more elaborately 
by Yavetz. Eudoxus’s theory, and its slightly later 
modification by cCaLuppus (c. 330 Bc), is composed 
exclusively of uniformly rotating spheres concentric to 
the Earth, perhaps on the analogy of the sphere of the 
fixed stars, which appears to rotate daily about a central 
Earth. The Sun and Moon each receive three spheres, the 
outermost, with poles at the celestial poles and equator 
in the plane of the celestial equator, produces the diurnal 
rotation from east to west, the second, with poles at the 
poles of the ecliptic and equator in the plane of the ecliptic, 
slowly shifts the inclined plane of the path of each body— 
it was assumed that the Sun had some small motion in 
latitude—from west to east for the Sun, from east to west 
for the Moon, and the third, with poles inclined slightly 
to the poles of the second, carries the Sun in its annual 
motion and the Moon in its monthly motion through the 
zodiac from west to east. The planets are more interesting. 
The outer sphere produces the daily rotation just as for 
the Sun and Moon, the second sphere, with poles at the 
poles of the ecliptic and equator in the plane of the ecliptic, 
produces the motion through the zodiac from west to east 
in the zodiacal period specific to each planet; then a third 
sphere with poles in the plane of the ecliptic and a fourth 
with poles slightly inclined to the third complete rotations 
in opposite directions, in principle in the planet’s synodic 
period, the period between conjunctions with the Sun. 

In Schiaparelli’s reconstruction, the planet is at the 
equator of the fourth sphere and the combined motion of 
the third and fourth spheres produces a figure called by 
Simplicius a hippopede (horse-fetter), an elongated figure ‘8’ 
lying on its side and bisected by the ecliptic, with the 
inclination of the two spheres determining both its length 
along the ecliptic and its width above and below the 
ecliptic. When carried about the ecliptic by the second 
sphere, this produces periodic and invariable retrograde 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


arcs and deviations from the ecliptic in latitude for 
Saturn, Jupiter and Mercury, but fails badly for Mars and 
Venus, producing either no retrogradation, because their 
synodic periods are longer than their zodiacal periods, 
or enormous deviations in latitude if the inclinations 
are made large enough to produce a retrogradation. In 
Yavetz’s reconstruction, the poles of the fourth sphere 
are not only inclined to those of the third, but are offset 
from the plane of the ecliptic, in which the poles of the 
third are located, and the planet itself is offset from the 
equator of the fourth sphere. This gives three degrees 
of freedom and allows a far better approximation to the 
apparent path of a planet. It is not incompatible with 
Simplicius’s description, and can even produce a figure 
like the hippopede, but whether Eudoxus himself actually 
did something so complex, and so ingenious, is uncertain. 
The models were modified by Callippus by the addition 
of two spheres each to the Sun and Moon, to account for 
inequalities in their motions, and of one sphere each to 
Mars, Venus and Mercury, the reasons for which are not 
known. Both Schiaparelli and Yavetz have investigated 
such models, and Yavetz has shown that retrogradations of 
different shape can be produced, remarkably close to those 
of Mars, although they still remain invariable throughout 
the zodiac, contrary to the behavior of the planets. 
Whatever the models of Eudoxus and Callippus, 
which were intended as physical mechanisms in the heav- 
ens, may have achieved as geometrical representations of 
the apparent motion of a planet, they could not be used 
for calculation of any kind; in this sense they were purely 
qualitative. There was another geometrical method of 
representing the motions of planets, by means of concen- 
tric circles, or spheres, surrounding the Earth and carry- 
ing epicycles, or of eccentric circles, or spheres, about the 
Earth with movable centers, which are equivalent. Since, 
as shown in figures 7 and 8 below, these are also geometri- 
cally equivalent to the heliocentric theory for, respectively, 
superior and inferior planets, proposed by ARISTARCHUS OF 
SAMOS (early third century Bc), they must have been known 
by that time, as it is unthinkable that Aristarchus could 
have worked out the heliocentric theory without an un- 
derstanding of these transformations and equivalencies; 
in the most interesting equivalence of such models, APOLLO- 
NIUS OF PERGA (late third century Bc) showed how to find the 
stationary points between which the motion of the planet 
is retrograde. By the second century Bc, there were compu- 
tational planetary theories in Greek astronomy, but these 
were arithmetic rather than geometrical and based upon 
Babylonian methods, probably with no alteration except 
for adaptation to the Egyptian calendar and, late in the 
first century, to the Alexandrian calendar. HIPPARCHUS (mid 
second century Bc) developed epicyclic and eccentric mod- 
els for the Sun and Moon, and even derived parameters 
for them from observation. Nevertheless, it appears that 
for computation he too used Babylonian methods rather 
than geometrical models. Nearly 300 years elapse between 
Hipparchus and ptotemy (mid second century Ab), and al- 
though it is probable that computation from geometrical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Summer 
Solstice 


A 


_»y Vernal 
Equinox 


Autumnal . _ 
Equinox 


1 
v 


Winter 
Solstice 


Figure 1. 


models was developed during this period, as shown by 
survivals in Indian planetary theory, the earliest examples 
in Greek are in the works of Ptolemy, in particular, the 
Almagest and the Handy Tables. These remain central to 
mathematical astronomy for the next 1400 years, as does 
Ptolemy’s Planetary Hypotheses to physical astronomy. 

In what follows, we shall briefly go through the 
elements of Ptolemy’s theories of the Sun, Moon and 
planets. Ptolemy’s method may be characterized simply: 
it is rigorously empirical and rigorously mathematical. 
Every model is either derived or confirmed by observation, 
although not all the observations are presented in the 
text, and every numerical parameter is derived directly 
and uniquely from observation by strict mathematical 
procedures. There is, however, a large range of 
precision in his observations, from positions and times 
measured to within a few minutes for the derivation of 
parameters—although their accuracy is more variable and 
there are systematic errors—to rough, even qualitative, 
observations for demonstrating the properties of models. 

In the case of the Sun there is a single inequality 
most evident in observations showing that the intervals 
of time between the equinoxes and solstices, although 
separated exactly by quadrants, are unequal, meaning that 
the apparent motion of the Sun is non-uniform. Ptolemy 
accounts for this inequality by letting the motion of the Sun 
take place on a circle eccentric to the Earth, a model earlier 
used by Hipparchus, and an equivalent epicyclic model 
may also be used. In figure 1, the equinoxes and solstices 
seen from the Earth at O are separated by quadrants, but 
the arcs of the Sun’s motion on an eccentric circle about C 
are greater or less than quadrants. The motion of the Sun 
S may thus be considered as a uniform motion « about 
C and a variable correction c, resulting in a non-uniform 
apparent motion « = K +c about O. The mean anomaly 
k, the eccentricity e as a fraction of the radius R of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. 


eccentric, and the direction of the apogee A and perigee 
B may be derived from the very observations of intervals 
of time between the equinoxes and solstices that showed 
the Sun’s inequality. Although later astronomers found 
improved values of these parameters, the solar model itself 
received no improvement prior to KEPLER. 

The theory of the Moon is considerably more complex 
as Ptolemy found that it displayed two inequalities, the 
first with a period of the anomalistic month, in which the 
Moon returns to the same point in its (movable) orbit, 
already known to Hipparchus, and the second, which 
modifies the first, with a period of half a mean synodic 
month, in which the Moon returns to conjunction with or 
opposition to the ‘mean Sun’, that is, the Sun with only 
its mean motion (« in figure 1). He accounted for the first 
inequality by placing the Moon on an epicycle with the 
period of the anomalistic month and for the second by 
placing the epicycle on an eccentric such that it completes 
a full revolution on the eccentric in half a synodic month. 
A related inequality, also with a period of half a mean 
synodic month, affects the mean anomaly, the motion of 
the moon on the epicycle. In figure 2, the Earth is at 
O, the mean Sun is at S, from which the center of the 
epicycle C moves through the mean elongation 7, and the 
center of the eccentric D moves in the opposite direction 
through the same 7. The result is that C completes one 
revolution with respect to S in a mean synodic month, but 
two revolutions with respect to the apogee A and perigee 
B of the eccentric, the effect being to draw the epicycle 
closer to the Earth at quadrature than at conjunction and 
opposition, increasing the inequality due to the motion of 
the Moon on the epicycle. The Moon moves on the epicycle 
through the mean anomaly a, completing one revolution 
in an anomalistic month, measured from a direction FC E 
that has an ‘inclination’ to a point E that lies on the apsidal 
line AB exactly opposite D such that the distances OD 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and OE are equal, the effect being to modify a@ to the true 
anomaly a + c; measured from the direction GC O to the 
Earth. The true elongation of the Moon from the mean 
Sun is then 7 + cz, where cz is a function of a + c; and 
the variable distance OC. The parameters of the model 
are found from observation: the radius of the epicycle r, 
the mean anomaly a and mean elongation 7 from lunar 
eclipses, the eccentricity e from observations of the Moon 
at quadrature and octants from the Sun. A peculiarity, 
really a defect, of Ptolemy’s lunar model is that it produces 
a variation of the distance of the Moon from the Earth so 
large that it may be about half as distant at quadrature as at 
opposition and conjunction, which is directly contradicted 
by the small change in the Moon’s apparent diameter and 
parallax. 

The most impressive achievement in Ptolemy’s 
astronomy is the theory of the planets, which provided 
the foundation of all later planetary theory, including that 
of Copernicus, and was not improved upon until Kepler. 
Ptolemy’s criterion for ordering the planets in the Almagest 
is zodiacal period: in descending order from the fixed 
stars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon. 
The Sun, Venus and Mercury have the same period, one 
year, and Ptolemy places the Sun between the superior 
planets, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, which reach opposition 
to the Sun, and the inferior planets, Venus and Mercury, 
which reach only a limited elongation. The Moon of course 
reaches opposition, but is placed lowest since it has the 
shortest period, may occult all the higher bodies, and has 
a large, measurable parallax showing that it is close to 
the Earth. In the Planetary Hypotheses, Ptolemy sets out 
a method of computing the distances of the planets which 
confirms that the Moon, Mercury and Venus are below the 
Sun, since there is adequate space only for them, and the 
remaining planets above. 

The planets have two inequalities, the first a function 
of longitude, of location in the zodiac, the second a 
function of elongation from the Sun. It is the second 
inequality that produces the most obvious feature of 
planetary motion, a periodic retrogradation bounded 
by two stations, which occurs near opposition for the 
superior planets and near inferior conjunction for the 
inferior planets. The second inequality is produced by 
the motion of the planet on an epicycle and the first 
inequality by the motion of the center of the epicycle. 
For the superior planets, the motion of the center of the 
epicycle corresponds to the planet’s own motion about 
the Sun in a heliocentric model, and the motion of the 
planet on the epicycle to the Earth’s motion about the 
Sun; for the inferior planets the motion of the center of 
the epicycle corresponds to the Earth’s motion about the 
Sun and the motion of the planet on the epicycle to the 
planet’s own motion about the Sun. Ptolemy’s model 
for both inequalities is shown in figure 3. The earth is 
at O and at an eccentricity e let M be the center of an 
eccentric circle of radius R with apogee A and perigee 
B. Symmetrically to M at the same eccentricity e let E 
be the center about which the epicycle moves uniformly, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ey 

$ + 
inferior 
planets 


el 
superior 
planets 


Figure 3. 


often called the ‘equant’ point, and let the center of the 
epicycle C move on the circle about M uniformly about 
E through mean eccentric anomaly «. The effect of the 
separation of the center of constant distance M from the 
center of uniform motion E closely approximates motion 
according to Kepler’s ellipse and area laws since the circle 
about M corresponds to the circle constructed on the major 
axis of the ellipse, to which for small eccentricity the ellipse 
very nearly coincides, and E corresponds to the empty 
focus of the ellipse, about which the angular motion of the 
planet is very nearly uniform. In principle, the models of 
Ptolemy and Kepler differ by only a few minutes of arc, 
although inaccuracies in Ptolemy’s parameters and other 
approximations introduce greater errors. 

The planet P moves on the epicycle of radius r though 
the mean anomaly a measured from the direction EC 
extended to the mean apogee of the epicycle F such that 
for a superior planet C P is always parallel to the direction 
OS from the Earth to the mean Sun. For an inferior planet 
EC always lies in the direction of the mean Sun 5. The 
model produces variable corrections to two inequalities. 
The first, c;, called the ‘equation of center’, corrects K to 
the true eccentric anomaly « = k +c, seen from O and @ to 
the true anomaly a = a + c; measured from the direction 
OC extended to the true apogee of the epicycle G. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


equation of the anomaly cz, subtended by the radius of 
the epicycle r, then corrects the direction of the center 
of the epicycle OC to the direction of the planet OP. 
Hence, where the longitude of the apogee A is A,, the 
true longitude of the planet is given by A, +k +c) + cp. 
The parameters of the model are derived rigorously from 
observation. For the superior planets e, A4 and x are found 
from an iterative computation of considerable complexity 
using three oppositions of the planet to the mean Sun, and 
r and a from two observations not at opposition. For the 
inferior planets e, 44 andr are found through observations 
of greatest elongations from the mean Sun, and @ from an 
observation not at greatest elongation. 

This is but a brief summary of Ptolemy’s planetary 
theory in the Almagest, upon which the Handy Tables are 
based; there are additional complications for Mercury 
and rather complicated models for motion in latitude, 
due to errors in observations of extreme latitudes, in 
which the inclinations of the planes of the epicycles 
oscillate. The Planetary Hypotheses is notable both for the 
physical, spherical models that Ptolemy developed from 
the mathematical, circular models of the Almagest, and 
for a method of computing the distances and sizes of the 
planets (See DISTANCES (FROM ANTIQUITY TO 1900)). The two are 
related since the spherical models are contiguous, with 
no empty spaces, and the distances depend upon this 
contiguity. Figure 4 shows a cross section of the spherical 
model based upon the circles of figure 3. The epicycle, a 
complete sphere with the planet just inside it at P is carried 
by the eccentric sphere, the inner and outer surfaces of 
which are concentric to M. Within the eccentric sphere is 
an inner sphere with its outer surface concentric to M and 
its inner surface concentric to O. Outside the eccentric 
sphere is a corresponding outer sphere with its inner 
surface concentric to M and its outer surface concentric 
to O. The spheres of a lower planet lie inside the inner 
sphere and the spheres of a higher planet lie outside the 
outer sphere in the same way. The center of the eccentric 
sphere is M, but the sphere rotates such that the center of 
the epicycle C moves uniformly about the equant point 
E, and the epicycle rotates such that the planet moves 
uniformly with respect to the direction EC extended to 
the far side of the epicycle. But how can rigid, spherical 
bodies do this? For the spheres must be rigid in order to 
carry the epicycle and the planet, that is, the bodies are 
not moving through a fluid medium or empty space. This 
is the celebrated violation of uniform, circular motion in 
Ptolemy’s models that was noted by Arabic astronomers 
and Copernicus, and both developed nearly identical 
alternative models to maintain uniform motion about 
the equant point strictly through the uniform rotation of 
spheres (see ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY, NICOLAUS COPERNICUS). 

The original modifications of Ptolemy’s models were 
the work of a number of astronomers associated with the 
observatory of Maragha in north-western Persia in the 
second half of the thirteenth century, Nasir ad-Din at-Tusi, 
Mi’ayyad ad-Din al-‘Urdi, Qutb ad-Din ash-Shirazi, and 
in the following century in Damascus Ibn ash-Shatir. Their 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. 


models work on the principle of breaking up the equant 
motion in Ptolemy’s model into two or more components 
of uniform circular motion that may be produced by the 
rotation of spheres. The models for the first inequality 
of the superior planets of al-‘Urdi and ash-Shirazi, which 
are identical, and the model of Ibn ash-Shatir are shown 
superimposed on Ptolemy’s model in figure 5. The center 
of the Earth is O, the center of the eccentric in Ptolemy’s 
model is M, the center of the equant is E, and the two 
eccentricities OM = ME = e are equal; the center C of the 
epicycle of the second inequality of figure 3, which is not 
shown here, moves in a circle of radius R about M such 
that its angular motion, the mean eccentric anomaly «, is 
uniform about E. In Ibn ash-Shatir’s model the center 
C, of an epicycle of radius r; moves through « in a circle 
of radius R about O, and the center C2 of an epicycle of 
radius r; moves in the opposite direction through x so that 
r, is always parallel to the apsidal line OA. The center 
C’ of the epicycle of the second inequality moves in the 
same direction as C, through 2« such that 7. coincides 
with r; when C; is in the apsidal line. Provided that 
rm, = 3/2e and r2 = 1/2e, C’ will lie on the line EC, thus 
moving uniformly about E, and the apparent directions 
OC and OC’ will nearly coincide. In ‘Urdi’s and Shirazi’s 
model, we let OM’ = r, = 3/2e and let C. move about M’ 
through « on a circle of radius R, so that the motion of C’ 
measured from M’'C, will be x, and the model is identical 
in effect to Ibn ash-Shatir’s. Hence, both models preserve 
uniform motion about the equant and are observationally 
indistinguishable from Ptolemy’s. We shall see that the 
same is true of Copernicus’s model, to which the points S 
and P’ in parentheses refer. 

The Maragha astronomers also devised notable 
modifications of Ptolemy’s lunar model, both preserving 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. 


Figure 6. 


uniform rotation of spheres and greatly reducing the 
variation of lunar distance. The model of Ibn ash-Shatir, 
to which Copernicus’s model is identical, is shown here 
in figure 6. The Earth is at O, the apogee, which moves 
about 7’ per day or 40° per year, is A, from which the 
center C; of a larger epicycle of radius r; moves through 
the mean anomaly @ and through the mean elongation 7 
with respect to the mean Sun S. The radius r; moves in 
the opposite direction through a, thus remaining parallel 
to OA, and the radius rz of a smaller epicycle, with 
center Cy, carries the Moon M in the same direction as 
C, through 27, twice the elongation from the mean Sun. 
The effect of rz is to introduce a correction c; to the mean 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


anomaly, and to vary the equation of the anomaly cy from 
a minimum at conjunction and opposition when 27 = 0° 
to a maximum at quadrature when 27, = 180°. Both effects 
are also found in Ptolemy’s model, but at the cost of a 
variation in lunar distance reaching about 1.9/1, which is 
here reduced to about 1.3/1, still more than twice as great 
as it should be; the correct variation was found by TycHo 
BRAHE, Whose lunar theory was a great improvement over 
all predecessors. 

These innovations in planetary and lunar theory first 
appear in Europe in the sixteenth century in the work 
of Copernicus, although just how they were transmitted, 
perhaps by way of Italy, is uncertain. Ptolemaic astronomy 
itself only became known in the late twelfth century 
with the translation into Latin of the Almagest and of 
derivatives of the Handy Tables, first the Toledan Tables and 
then in the early fourteenth century the Alfonsine Tables. 
The most important exposition of Ptolemy’s astronomy 
was the Epitome of the Almagest by GEORG PEURBACH (1423- 
61) and Johannes REGIOMONTANUS (1436-76), which first 
made Ptolemy’s difficult book intelligible and was used 
along with, or even in place of, the Almagest until the 
beginning of the seventeenth century. In addition to 
Ptolemaic astronomy, the early sixteenth century saw 
a renewed interest in concentric-sphere models among 
Aristotelians, particularly at Padua, but these were little 
more successful than the models of Eudoxus and were 
never used for computation. The first serious innovation 
in planetary theory was that of Copernicus (1473-1543), 
built upon Ptolemy’s and upon the models of the Maragha 
astronomers. Copernicus’s principal innovation is in 
accounting for the second inequality of the superior 
planets and the first inequality of the inferior planets by the 
annual motion of the Earth about the Sun. He arrived at 
his theory by way of transformations of Ptolemy’s models 
explained by Regiomontanus in the Epitome of the Almagest, 
a work he used even in preference to the Almagest as 
his guide to Ptolemy’s astronomy. He first explained his 
new theory in a short work known as the Commentariolus, 
written at some time between 1510 and 1514, in which the 
parameters of the models were merely extracted from the 
Alfonsine Tables. The original theory was modified and 
expanded greatly in De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium 
(On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres), published 
in 1543, essentially a new Almagest, in which he derived 
new parameters from observation following Ptolemy’s 
methods, again as explained by Regiomontanus. 

The relation of Ptolemy’s and Copernicus’s models 
for the superior planets is shown in figure 7, in which we 
assume only circular motions. In Ptolemy’s model, the 
Earth O is at rest, about it is described a circle of radius 
R’, on which moves an epicycle with center C and radius 
r’, The planet P moves on the epicycle through the mean 
anomaly a measured from the apogee of the epicycle A’ 
such that the radius CP is parallel to the direction OSs’ 
from the Earth to the mean Sun, the Sun with only its 
uniform motion. The distance OS’ is arbitrary in Ptolemy’s 
model, but if a parallelogram OC PS is constructed and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 7. 


it is assumed that the mean Sun is at S, then both the 
Earth O and the planet P may be taken to move about 
S in circles of radii r and R where r/R = r’/R’, and the 
direction OP from the Earth to the planet, the diagonal 
of the parallelogram, is identical in both models. The 
relation of the models for the inferior planets is shown in 
figure 8, again assuming only circular motions. As before 
in Ptolemy’s model, about the Earth O at rest is described 
a circle of radius R’, on which is an epicycle with center 
C and radius r’. But now OC lies in the direction OS’ 
from the Earth to the mean Sun, where the distance OS’ 
is arbitrary, and the planet P again moves on the epicycle 
through the mean anomaly a measured from the apogee 
of the epicycle A’. If it is assumed that the mean sun S 
coincides with C, is identical to (=)C, then again both the 
Earth O and the planet P may be taken to move about 
S in circles of radii r and R, where r /R = r'/R’, and the 
direction OP from the Earth to the planet is identical in 
both models. 

The essential advantage of the Copernican theory is 
concerned with the order and distances of the planets, 
the unification of the planetary models into a single 
system in which everything is determined and nothing 
arbitrary. In Ptolemy’s models, the radii r’ and R’ are 
arbitrary for each planet, only the ratio r’/R’ is determined 
by observation; thus there is no common measure of 
distances within the planetary system, and even the order 
of the planets is arbitrary without further assumptions. 
However, in Copernicus’s models, the radii R of the 
orbits of all the planets are measured in terms of the 
unit r, the radius of the Earth’s orbit, which is common 
to the model for every planet, so neither the distances 
nor the order of the planets are arbitrary, for they are 
fixed by the ratio r/R, which, as in Ptolemy’s models, 
is determined by observation. There are also certain 
arbitrary rules governing Ptolemy’s models that are 
explained when it is seen that geocentric planetary models 
are actually transformations of underlying heliocentric 
models. The most obvious in the figures are why the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 8. 


Figure 9. 


radii of the epicycles of the superior planets are parallel 
to the direction from the Earth to the mean Sun, and 
why the centers of the epicycles of the inferior planets 
lie in the direction of the mean Sun, but there are 
many more properties of geocentric models, even as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 10. 


basic as why the superior planets move in the same 
directions on their epicycles, that are only explained 
as transformations of heliocentric models. The most 
well-known consequence of the heliocentric theory is 
the explanation of retrogradation (see RETROGRADE MOTION), 
which takes place in Ptolemy’s models near the perigee of 
the epicycle when the apparent backward motion of the 
planet on the epicycle exceeds the forward motion of the 
center of the epicycle, which happens to be near opposition 
for a superior planet and near inferior conjunction for an 
inferior. In Copernicus’s models retrogradation occurs 
when the Earth passes a slower superior planet near 
opposition or is passed by a faster inferior planet near 
inferior conjunction, so the location of the retrogradation 
is also explained. 

Copernicus’s solar theory is the same as Ptolemy’s, 
a simple eccentric, now with the Earth moving about the 
Sun, but, following medieval sources, he found a smaller 
solar eccentricity than did Ptolemy and he developed a 
model to produce a variation in the eccentricity, along 
with an inequality in the motion of the solar apsidal line, 
such that the eccentricity is near maximum at Ptolemy’s 
time and near minimum at his own. Following the 
Maragha astronomers, Copernicus objected to Ptolemy’s 
lunar model on the grounds that it violates uniform, 
circular motion, since the center of the epicycle does not 
move uniformly about the center of the eccentric on which 
it is carried, and also that it produces a large variation 
in lunar distance contradicted by the small variation in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the apparent size and parallax of the Moon. His own 
lunar model is identical to that of Ibn ash-Shatir shown 
in figure 6. 

Copernicus’s model for the first inequality of the 
planets in the Commentariolus is also that of Ibn ash-Shatir 
using two epicycles, shown above in figure 5, but with 
the mean Sun S$ in place of the Earth O and the planet 
itself P’ in place of the center C’ of the epicycle of the 
second inequality, as shown in parentheses in the figure. 
It thus preserves uniform motion about the equant E 
just as in Ptolemy’s model. The model for the superior 
planets is altered in De Revolutionibus to that of al-‘Urdiand 
ash-Shirazi, and is shown in figure 9, which shows both 
inequalities. As in figure 5, the larger epicycle is replaced 
by an equal eccentricity e} = 1; = 3/2e, which has the 
same effect since r; is always parallel to e;; r2 is unchanged, 
although its motion, because it is measured from C; C2, is 
now k. Thus P still moves uniformly about £ and, as in 
Ptolemy’s model, the true eccentric anomaly k = k + cy. 
The second inequality is accounted for by the motion of 
the Earth O in a circle of radius s about the mean Sun S 
through the mean anomaly a, uniformly with respect to a 
line F H which is drawn parallel to E P; the true anomaly, 
from line GS, is @ + c). The true position of the planet as 
seen from the Earth is found through two corrections, ci, 
the equation of center, the difference in direction between 
the uniform motion of the planet about the equant and 
the non-uniform motion about the mean Sun, and c2, the 
equation of the anomaly, found from the true anomaly, 
which reduces the heliocentric direction of the planet SP 
to the geocentric direction O P. Given the longitude of the 
apogee 1.4, the longitude of the planet is 1.4 + +c, +c2. The 
corrections are nearly identical to those used by Ptolemy, 
and Copernicus’s tabulations of the corrections are also 
nearly identical to Ptolemy’s. Likewise, Copernicus finds 
the parameters of the model for each planet by observation 
through exactly the same methods as used by Ptolemy, and 
except for the directions of the apsidal lines, his results are 
the same or quite close. 

The model for the inferior planets, shown for Venus 
in figure 10, is somewhat different in that the equation of 
center depends, not upon the distance of the planet from 
its own apogee, but, remarkably, upon the distance of the 
Earth from the planet’s apogee, due to a direct adaptation 
of Ptolemy’s model. The Earth O moves through « with 
respect to the planet’s apsidal line while at the end of 
the fixed eccentricity e, = 3/2e a movable eccentricity 
€2 = 1/2e rotates through 2k. The result is that the equation 
of center c; is measured at the Earth, just as in Ptolemy’s 
model, and the direction EC, from the equant to the center 
of the planet’s orbit lies in the direction of OS from the 
Earth to the mean Sun, just as though C; moved uniformly 
through « about E at a distance 2e from O in the direction 
of the geocentric apogee A’, again as in Ptolemy’s model. 
The equation of center c, and the equation of the anomaly 
cz are computed and tabulated as for the superior planets, 
and again the longitude of the planetis 1.,+«c;+c. There 
are further complications for Mercury, which are identical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Theory from Eudoxus to Copernicus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to those of Ibn ash-Shatir’s model, most notably that the 
radius of the planet’s orbit is itself variable as a function 
of 2k, twice the Earth’s distance x from the apsidal line, 
the result being an excellent approximation of Ptolemy’s 
model. 

Copernicus’s models for the latitudes of the planets 
are also direct adaptations of Ptolemy’s, which require 
oscillations of orbital planes that Kepler found implausible 
and prompted his famous remark, ‘Copernicus, ignorant 
of his own riches, took it upon himself for the most 
part to represent Ptolemy, not nature, to which he had 
nevertheless come the closest of all.’ Kepler could not 
be more correct. Copernicus’s astronomy was built 
upon Ptolemy’s descriptions of the apparent motions 
of the heavens, upon Ptolemy’s observations, upon 
transformations of Ptolemy’s models, and upon Ptolemy’s 
methods of deriving parameters from observation. Thus, 
he did, as Kepler said, represent Ptolemy rather than 
nature. 


Bibliography 

On planetary theory in general: 

Dreyer J LE 1906 History of the Planetary Systems from Thales 
to Kepler (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
(reprinted 1953 as A History of Astronomy from Thales 
to Kepler (New York: Dover) 

Herz N 1887-94 Geschichte der Bahnbestimmung von Planeten 
und Kometen 2 vols (Leipzig: Teubner) 

Neugebauer O 1975 A History of Ancient Mathematical 
Astronomy 3 parts (New York: Springer) 


On Eudoxus: 

Heath T 1913 Aristarchus of Samos, the Ancient Copernicus 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp 190-224 

Schiaparelli G V 1875 Le sfere omocentriche di Eudosso, 
di Callippo e di Aristotele Pubblicazioni del Reale 
Osservatorio di Brera in Milano 9 (also in Schiaparelli 
G V 1925-7 Scriti sulla Storia della Astronomia Antica 
vol 2 (Bologna: Zanichelli) pp 3-112 

Yavetz 11998 On the homocentric spheres of Eudoxus Arch. 
Hist. Exact Sci. 52 221-78 


On Ptolemy: 

Pedersen O 1974 A Survey of the Almagest (Odense: Odense 
University Press) 

Toomer G J 1984 Ptolemy's Almagest (New York: Springer) 


On Maragha planetary theory: 

Kennedy ES 1983 Studies in the Islamic Exact Science (Beirut: 
American University of Beirut) pp 50-97 

Ragep F J 1993 Nas? al-Din al-Tiist’s Memoir on Astronomy 
(al-Tadhkira fr'ilm al hay’a) 2 vols (New York: Springer) 

Saliba G 1993 A History of Arabic Astronomy, Planetary 
Theories During the Golden Age of Islam (New York: 
New York University Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


On Copernicus: 

Armitage A 1957 Copernicus, the Founder of Modern 
Astronomy (New York: Thomas Yoseloff) 

Swerdlow N M 1973 The derivation and first draft of 
Copernicus’s planetary theory. A translation of the 
Commentariolus with commentary Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. 
117 423-512 

Swerdlow N M and Neugebauer O 1984 Mathematical 
Astronomy in Copernicus’s De Revolutionibus 2 parts 
(New York: Springer) 


N M Swerdlow 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetesimal 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetesimal 


In cosmogony, a planetesimal is one of numerous solid 
bodies of sub-planetary size orbiting the suN (or another 
star), from which planets may accumulate. The term 
was coined near the beginning of the twentieth century 
by T C Chamberlin and F Moulton, who developed the 
‘planetesimal hypothesis’ for the origin of the SOLARSYSTEM. 
In their original concept, solid particles condensed from 
matter ejected from the Sun by tidal forces during a close 
encounter with another star. Collisions between objects 
in intersecting orbits caused them to accumulate into 
progressively larger bodies, forming the planets. Many 
features of the Chamberlin—Moulton theory have been 
rejected or superseded, but the concept of growth of 
planets from planetesimals has been adapted to the context 
of modern theories. 


Formation of planetesimals 

Both theory and observation indicate that a star forms 
by collapse of an interstellar cloud, composed mostly of 
hydrogen gas, when internal pressure cannot support it 
against its own gravity. If the cloud has some initial 
rotation, conservation of angular momentum ensures that 
some of its mass is left orbiting the star in a flattened, disk- 
shaped gaseous NEBULA. The nebula contains microscopic 
solid grains, a mixture of surviving interstellar grains 
and condensates from the cooling gas. Near the star, 
these consist of metals and silicate minerals; at larger 
distances organic compounds and ices are included. The 
small grains, with large area/mass ratios, are constrained 
by drag forces to move with the gas. They accumulate 
into planetesimals, which are sufficiently large to be in 
Keplerian motion about the star, controlled by gravity 
rather than gas drag. This is the case for objects of about 
kilometer size or larger. 

The mechanism by which kilometer-sized bodies 
form from micrometer-sized grains has been a topic 
of much effort and some controversy. The idea of 
gravitational instability was suggested by K Edgeworth 
in 1949. In this concept, solid grains settle to form a thin 
layer in the central plane of the nebula. If this layer’s 
density exceeds a critical value it becomes unstable, and 
localized regions collapse under their own gravitational 
attraction. This model was developed in quantitative form 
by V S Safronov in the Soviet Union, and independently 
by P Goldreich and W Ward in the United States. They 
showed that this process would tend to produce solid 
bodies a few kilometers in size in the inner solar system, 
and larger objects at greater distances from the Sun. 

The simplicity and elegance of gravitational instabil- 
ity caused it to be widely accepted. The process was be- 
lieved to be independent of the poorly defined properties 
of the grains themselves, requiring no sticking mechanism 
or force other than gravity. However, later investigations 
have cast doubt upon this concept. Microscopic grains 
would settle so slowly that the slightest degree of turbu- 
lence in the nebula would inhibit formation of the particle 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


layer. Some non-gravitational coagulation mechanism is 
needed to produce larger aggregates of grains to allow 
their descent to the central plane of the nebula. Many 
possible sticking processes have been suggested, includ- 
ing electrostatic charging of grains, magnetic attraction of 
metallic grains, van der Waals surface forces, sticky coat- 
ings of organic material, physical interlocking of irregu- 
larly shaped particles, and condensation of ices upon grain 
surfaces. Some or all of these mechanisms may have domi- 
nated in different density-temperature regimes in various 
regions of the nebula, and are current topics of theoreti- 
cal and experimental study. Because the rate of settling 
increases with particle size, larger particles can grow by 
overtaking and sweeping up smaller ones as they settle. If 
coagulation occurs, centimeter-sized aggregates of grains 
can grow in this manner on time scales of the order of a 
thousand orbital periods at any given distance from the 
star. 

Coagulation during settling allows particles to 
become concentrated into a layer in the central plane of 
the nebula, but gravitational instability is inhibited by 
interactions of particles with the gas. The pressure in the 
nebula decreases with distance from the Sun. This radial 
gradient acts to support the gas against the central gravity, 
and causes the nebula to rotate at slightly less than the 
Keplerian orbital velocity. This velocity difference is less 
than one per cent for any plausible nebular structure, but 
has a typical magnitude of tens of meters per second. A 
solid body in the nebula lacks this pressure support, and 
as a consequence cannot be at rest with respect to the gas. 
Its motion occurs within one of two dynamical regimes 
that depend on its size. A small particle, coupled to the 
gas by a large area/mass ratio, moves with the nebula’s 
angular velocity and drifts inward due to the residual 
radial component of gravity. The drift rate is proportional 
to the particle’s size and density, with magnitude of order 
100 times its diameter per second for a body of density 
one gram per cubic centimeter. A large body with low 
area/mass is less affected by drag, and pursues a Keplerian 
orbit. As it moves faster than the gas, it experiences a 
‘headwind’, that causes its orbit to decay. In this regime, 
the orbital decay rate decreases with size and density, and 
has a magnitude of order (100/D) m s“!, where D is the 
diameter in meters. The radial velocity reaches a peak, 
equal to the difference between the Kepler velocity and 
gas velocity, at the transition between these regimes, at 
sizes of about a meter. Thus, solid bodies of all sizes move 
radially inward, while large bodies also have significant 
transverse velocities (tens of meters per second) relative 
to the gas. 

If the particle layer becomes denser than the gas, as 
would be necessary for gravitational instability, collective 
effects become important. High mass loading allows the 
particles to become dominant, diminishing the pressure 
support of the gas within the layer, and causing its 
motion to be more nearly Keplerian, i.e. faster than 
the pressure-supported gas on either side. It can be 
demonstrated analytically that such a shear flow is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetesimal 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


unstable and would become turbulent; this behavior has 
been confirmed with numerical fluid-dynamic simulations 
(see FLUID DYNAmics). This self-generated turbulence is 
sufficient to prevent further settling of centimeter-sized 
particles. The layer cannot attain the critical density unless 
collisional coagulation produces meter-sized or larger 
bodies, which are unaffected by the turbulence. However, 
the critical density is necessary, but not sufficient, to 
allow gravitational instability. The particles must also 
have sufficiently low relative velocities to allow density 
perturbations in the layer to grow. The meter-sized 
bodies have radial and transverse motions induced by gas 
drag. As these velocities are size dependent, any system 
of non-identical bodies would have significant velocity 
dispersion, sufficient to prevent gravitational collapse. 

The failure of gravitational instability seems to 
require that planetesimals grew gradually by collisional 
coagulation. The details of this evolution depend on their 
mechanical properties, such as impact strength and energy 
dissipation, which are unknown. However, collisions 
driven by nebular gas drag are relatively favorable for 
particle growth. The size dependence of radial and 
transverse motions induced by drag implies that for bodies 
of comparable size impact velocities would be low, so 
coagulation may be more likely than disruption. Objects 
of very different sizes would have more frequent collisions 
at higher speeds, in which the smaller projectile could be 
embedded in the larger target. Drag-induced velocities 
decrease with size, so collisions become more gentle as the 
planetesimals grow. When they reach sizes of the order of 
a kilometer, gravitational attraction increases their impact 
velocities. Thus, planetesimals built up in this manner 
may have a lumpy structure on scales from meters to 
hundreds of meters. Numerical simulations of collisional 
growth driven by drag produce kilometer-sized or larger 
bodies on time scales of a few thousand orbital periods 
at any given heliocentric distance. In these simulations, 
coagulation and settling is only moderately efficient, so 
a significant population of small grains remains after 
planetesimals have formed. This result is consistent with 
observations of DUSTY CIRCUMSTELLAR DISKS; the presence 
of dust does not mean that planetesimals have not yet 
formed. Some disks appear to have dust-free inner 
regions; such clearing probably is not a direct result of 
planetesimal formation, but is due to other processes 
operating on longer time scales. 


Evolution of planetesimals to planets 

After planetesimals reach sizes of a few kilometers, 
gravity becomes more important than gas drag, at 
least for short-term behavior, and their motions can be 
described as Keplerian orbits. As the planetesimals 
become larger, their mutual gravitational perturbations 
stir up random velocities, i.e. orbital eccentricities and 
inclinations. Analyses of this stirring process by kinetic 
theory show that the mean random velocity tends to 
be comparable to the escape velocity of the bodies that 
dominate the mass distribution in the planetesimal swarm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


As the collisions are inelastic, gravitational binding 
ensures that the planetesimals experience net growth 
during this stage, regardless of their impact strength or 
mechanical properties. 

The continuing evolution of the swarm of planetes- 
imals is controlled by the interplay of stirring and col- 
lisions. V S Safronov developed an analytic solution to 
the coupled distributions of sizes and velocities, in which 
the mass distribution is assumed to be a power law. Its 
slope is such that it is dominated by the largest bodies. 
At any stage of the swarm’s evolution, random velocities 
are comparable to the escape velocity of these bodies, in- 
creasing as they grow. This process, sometimes referred 
to as ‘orderly growth’, continues with collisions at larger 
scales and higher velocities until a few large bodies (PLAN- 
ETS) survive in widely separated stable orbits that do not 
intersect. 

Numerical simulations of planetesimal ACCRETION 
have revealed another possible path for the growth of 
planets. At low relative velocities, gravitational attraction 
deflects trajectories, allowing collisions between orbits 
that would otherwise not intersect. This enhancement of 
the collisional cross section increases as the square of the 
ratio of the mutual escape velocity of two planetesimals to 
their relative velocity. In a swarm containing bodies with 
some range of sizes, this factor tends to favor growth of the 
larger bodies due to their higher escape velocities. In the 
orderly growth model relative velocities are high enough 
to minimize this advantage. However, more recent models 
of velocity stirring include dynamical friction, a tendency 
for gravitational interactions to produce equipartition of 
the energy in random motions. More massive bodies tend 
to have lower velocities, giving them a greater advantage. 
In numerical simulations of accretion in such a system, 
a small fraction of planetesimals, the first to become 
larger than the average size, experience ‘runaway growth’. 
The size distribution becomes bimodal, with a few large 
bodies (protoplanetary embryos) accreting while the mass 
distribution is still dominated by small planetesimals. This 
runaway growth is self-limiting, being halted by depletion 
of the small bodies in orbits near those of the embryos, 
when the latter have attained masses of the order of one 
per cent that of the Earth. Many such bodies must collide in 
order to produce a small number of widely spaced planets 
as found in our own solar system. Mutual perturbations 
among the embryos may cause their orbits to cross after 
the smaller planetesimals have been depleted. The final 
stage of planetary accretion probably involved very large 
impacts, like that which has been invoked to explain the 
formation of the Moon. 

This scenario appears to account for the formation 
of the TERRESTRIAL PLANETS. The estimated time scale for 
their accretion, of the order of tens of millions of years, 
does not violate geophysical constraints on the age of 
the Earth-Moon system. However, it is less successful 
when applied to the outer planets. One widely accepted 
model for the origin of gas GIANT PLANETS, Jupiter and 
Saturn, is accumulation of planetesimals of mixed rock/ice 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetesimal 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


composition into cores with masses of the order of ten 
times that of Earth, which then accrete gas from the solar 
nebula. Despite the higher surface density of solids due 
to condensation of ice, the longer orbital periods at greater 
heliocentric distances yield slower growth of the cores. 
Current models do not produce cores of the requisite 
mass within the estimated age of the nebula. Models for 
accretion of Uranus and Neptune from icy planetesimals 
fare even worse, failing to produce those planets within the 
age of the solar system. Probably unmodeled phenomena, 
such as tidal interactions between massive planetary 
embryos and the nebula, were involved. 

ASTEROIDS and COMETS represent populations of plan- 
etesimals that survive in the present solar system. The 
former have been greatly altered since their formation by 
collisional evolution; the smaller asteroids are not primor- 
dial, but are fragments of once larger bodies that have been 
disrupted. Comets in the Oort cloud and Kuiper belt have 
probably undergone little change since their formation. In 
situ examination by spacecraft may reveal structures elu- 
cidating their accretion in the solar nebula. 


Bibliography 

Brush S 1996 Fruitful Encounters: The Origin of the 
Solar System from Chamberlin to Apollo (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Lissauer J J 1993 Planet formation Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 31 129-74 

Safronov V S 1969 Evolution of the Protoplanetary Cloud and 
Formation of the Earth and Planets (Jerusalem: Keter) 
(NASA Technical Translation TTF-677) 

Weidenschilling S J 1997 The origin of comets in the solar 
nebula: a unified model Icarus 127 290-306 

Wetherill G W 1990 Formation of the Earth Ann. Rev. Earth 
Planet. Sci. 18 205-56 


S J Weidenschilling 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planetology 


Although created from the same solar nebula, the bodies 
residing in our solar system are all very different, each 
with its own distinct characteristics. The comparison of 
features and processes between different bodies can tell 
us about the evolution of those planets, or give us an 
idea of how things may have evolved if certain physical 
parameters were just slightly different. Comparing a 
particular process on two similar, but subtly different 
worlds allows us to isolate the contribution that just one or 
two physical parameters makes to the final form we see. 
Only in recent years, with the advent of spacecraft visiting 
other planets and taking detailed measurements of those 
systems, have we truly been able to compare one planet or 
satellite with another. But now, even superficial analysis 
reveals that the planets and satellites in our solar system 
are very different, each telling its own story and each able 
to tell us a little about our own past, present and perhaps 
even the future. 


Comparison of surface processes 

The surfaces of solid bodies can tell us much about its 
history. The different processes that can occur on the 
surface of a planet or satellite indicate properties of both its 
internal and external evolution. There are many processes 
that can act upon planets, satellites and asteroids, some 
affecting all, and others operating on only one or two. Here 
we look at the main processes that have acted to shape 
the PLANETARY SURFACES We see, revealing their differences 
and what those differences can tell us about the bodies 
themselves. 


Impact cratering 
Impact cratering is the most important process acting upon 
the surface of solid bodies in the solar system. Without 
exception, every planet, satellite and small body is subject 
to the effects of impacts, both large and small, past and 
present. The impact cratering process can tell us much 
about the history of a body as well as its present state; it can 
highlight the differences found between worlds and tell 
us something about the characteristics of the solar system 
itself. Without impact CRATERS, our knowledge of the solar 
system and the planets within it would be much poorer. 
While every planet in the solar system has impact 
craters on its surface (figure 1), some have more than others 
or one region of a planet may have a higher density of 
craters than another area on the same planet. The Moon, 
for example, is completely saturated with impact craters 
onits highland surface—in other words, every new impact 
crater obliterates an older one, so that the crater density 
observed is constant in the highlands. On the dark maria 
(solidified ancient lava flows) however, the number of 
craters per unit area is much lower. The reason for this 
is quite logical—the maria have been exposed to space 
for less time than the highlands, and hence have had less 
time to accumulate impact craters. Therefore, the simple 
observation that the maria have less craters immediately 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


tells us that they are younger than the highlands. This is 
true for any solid planetary body in the solar system 
although it starts to get more complicated when trying 
to compare the age of one planetary surface with another 
purely by counting craters. Firstly, the cratering flux 
through time is not constant. We can tell this by looking 
at the Moon. The highlands are known to be 4 Gyr or 
older and the maria are between 3.1 and 3.8 Gyr old. 
Yet the difference in the number of impact craters gives 
the appearance that the maria are very much younger. 
This implies that in the very earliest times, before the 
maria were emplaced, the impact cratering flux was much 
higher, and this has now become known as the period 
of heavy bombardment. The cratering flux dropped off 
dramatically after that time, and is now believed to be 
quite low. As the Earth is in close proximity to the Moon, 
it can be assumed that our planet underwent the same 
bombardment as the Moon. In fact, we may have had 
a slightly higher flux due to our greater gravitational 
attraction compared to the Moon. Therefore, the study 
of impact craters on the Moon can tell us something about 
the conditions on Earth about 4 Gyr ago—a period where 
terrestrial records have long been wiped out. While it is 
logical to believe that the whole solar system underwent a 
similar period of bombardment, the intensity of the flux 
may have varied quite considerably through space. It 
is possible that the immense gravitational pull of Jupiter 
may have caused more impacts to occur on the surfaces 
of its satellites than on the inner planets, for example. 
Or perhaps large impact events in the inner solar system 
threw off more debris destined to impact on the terrestrial 
planets. There may be many factors affecting the cratering 
flux through time and space, and hence to use the crater 
density ona planetary surface as an age indicator can givea 
great error on the value obtained. However, at the present 
time, counting craters is the only way we can estimate the 
age of a surface for which we have no sample, and this 
means every surface except the few areas for which we 
had rocks brought back from the Moon. Nevertheless, 
we are able to obtain crude estimates for relative ages, 
and in some cases this can tell us much about a planet’s 
history. For example, on venus, the crater density is very 
low. Although Venus is relatively large (approximately the 
same size as the Earth) it has less than 1000 craters across 
its entire surface, distributed in a random fashion. This 
number is far less than would be expected if the surface 
had been exposed for the length of time that the lunar 
highlands have. Therefore the surface of Venus must be 
relatively young, with some scientists believing that Venus 
underwent a global resurfacing event only 500 million 
years ago, effectively resetting its age to zero. 

Similarly, Mars also must have undergone some kind 
of resurfacing event, this time across only one half of the 
planet. Mars can be split into two hemispheres; the south, 
which is higher and has a high crater density; and the 
north, which is lower and has a low crater density. Lava 
flows can be seen across the northern plains, and it is 
believed that widespread volcanism is one of the reasons 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Impact craters on selected bodies. Left: a Magellan radar image of the 43 km diameter crater Dickinson, showing a complex 
structure with a central peak, terraced walls and flat floor. (Courtesy of NASA JPL/Caltech.) Top right: a large crater on Mercury, 

140 km in diameter again showing a complex shape. Note the many smaller impact craters also in the image. (Courtesy of NASA 
JPL/Caltech.) Bottom right: Mars’ moon Phobos has a large impact crater almost as large as the moon itself. Phobos is only 28 km by 
20 km but still suffers from the effects of impact cratering. (Courtesy of NASA.) 


for the dearth of impact craters across this hemisphere of 
the planet. MeRcurY, the closest planet to the Sun, is very 
Moon-like. It is a small planet, rocky with no atmosphere 
and therefore no weathering process to destroy the record 
of impacts across its surface. We would therefore expect 
to see a similar cratering record on Mercury as we do 
in the highlands of the Moon, but we do not. Although 
Mercury’s surface is heavily cratered, most of the surface 
is not saturated, and once again, it is believed that some 
kind of resurfacing event occurred early in Mercury’s past. 
The satellites of the outer planets do not escape this kind of 
analysis either, and we find some very interesting results. 
Many of the larger satellites of, for example, JUPITER, show 
very few impact craters, indicating that their surfaces are 
young. 10, one of Jupiter’s moons, is the only solid body 
that does not have impact craters on its surface (at least 
not at the resolution of our images). This does not mean 
that Io has never experienced an impact, it instead shows 
that the surface is extremely young in geological terms, 
some say as young as 10000 years. This is not difficult to 
imagine, as we know that the surface of Io is constantly 
being renewed by volcanism (see later). Another satellite 
of Jupiter, EUROPA, has a low crater density. Its surface is 
known to be covered in a layer of thick water ice, and 
it is possible that water from beneath the icy crust is 
periodically brought to the surface covering the previous 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


record of craters upon freezing. To obtain absolute ages it 
is necessary to get samples from areas of different crater 
densities and date them in the laboratory. Therefore, it is 
our Moon that provides the only key to this technique at 
the moment, because we have those samples to work with. 
We can infer much about the conditions in the solar system 
during its very earliest times as the Moon’s surface does 
not have any significant weathering processes to degrade 
the impacts on its surface. The impact craters that we see 
there today (along with the footprints and tyre tracks left 
by the Apollo astronauts) will still be there in a billion 
years’ time. 

The Earth has a very young surface, as evidenced by 
the relatively few impact craters we have found here. The 
volcanic and tectonic activity that is still going on today are 
constantly renewing the Earth’s surface, and the weather- 
ing caused by the action of wind and rain quickly degrade 
those craters we do see. Weathering also occurs on planets 
such as Mars and Venus, as these worlds both have atmo- 
spheres. In fact some craters may appear to be older than 
they truly are where weathering is particularly efficient. 
Other factors may also influence the shape of the impact 
craters, such as the angle at which the projectile hits the 
surface, the atmospheric density and, perhaps most im- 
portantly, the volatile content of the surface at the time 
of impact. For example, we can use impact craters to tell 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


us about the distribution of water across the surface of 
Mars through time by looking for distinct crater patterns. 
When an impact crater forms, material is ejected from the 
crater and thrown out onto the surrounding surface. When 
volatiles (i.e. water) are present, the ejecta takes on a mud- 
like appearance, as though it flowed as it hit the surface. 
The presence of a crater with this feature indicates that 
some water must have been present in the area (probably 
as a permafrost layer) at the time of the impact. Mapping 
the distribution of these craters across Mars gives an idea of 
where water has existed in the past, and hence may give us 
an idea of where life may have existed on the planet, if it did 
at all. These fluid patterns are unique to Mars and show 
how a single factor (in this case volatiles) can have a signifi- 
cant effect on the appearance of a crater. Similarly, by com- 
paring the Moon and Mercury (both small worlds with no 
atmosphere and no current day activity), we can directly 
study the effects of gravity in the impact cratering process 
(Mercury has a higher gravitational pull than the Moon). 

Of course, it is not only solid bodies that attract 
projectiles. The giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus 
and Neptune, also suffer from the impact of large and 
small bodies, but as they have no solid surface, they hold 
no record of impact events of the past. Scientists were 
recently privileged to witness such an impact. The comet 
Shoemaker-Levy 9 was captured by the gravitational 
influence of Jupiter, the largest planet in the solar system, 
and was subsequently torn apart before being dragged 
into the atmosphere of the planet. Scientists watched 
each explosion as the comet pieces were consumed, and 
found that traces of each impact were visible for some 
time before finally disappearing. This was the first large 
impact event observed by modern-day scientists and their 
instruments. If nothing else, it brought home the fact 
that these impacting bodies are still out there and can 
still collide with any body in its way, even the Earth. 
By studying these impacts we can learn about how they 
may have affected the history of our own planet. It 
was the impact of an asteroid in the Yucatan Peninsula 
65 million years ago that is believed to have caused the 
extinction of the dinosaurs. Such an impact today would 
cause world-wide devastation, and while we would hope 
that technological advances would allow some people to 
survive, the majority of Earth’s human population and that 
of the large animals would certainly perish. It is a sobering 
thought that less than 100 years ago, a comet exploded 
in the Earth’s atmosphere above Siberia flattening trees 
for many kilometers. Even a cometary explosion like this 
would kill thousands if located over a densely populated 
city. It is therefore very important to study the impact 
process and to identify precisely how many impacts we 
can expect over the next few hundred years—our lives 
may depend on it. 


Volcanism 

Volcanism, although not obvious on all planets, does 
occur, or at least has occurred, on many of the bodies 
we can see. Volcanism clearly still plays a role in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


evolution of the Earth today and there are many instances 
of volcanic eruptions causing disruption to populations 
over recorded history. Volcanism was once far more 
extensive in the distant past however, with vast areas of 
the planet being covered with lava. These flood lavas, as 
they are known, are not active on Earth today, but it is 
the most common form of volcanism that has occurred 
on other planets. The dark maria on the Moon are 
composed of basaltic lava of low viscosity, erupted from 
large fissures (cracks) in its crust. The volcanism on 
the Moon occurred over a relatively short period of time 
(3.1-3.8 Gyr ago) and has remained dormant since that 
time, apart from the possibility of minor outbreaks of 
volcanic activity up to 2.5 Gyr ago. Mercury, on the other 
hand, is somewhat enigmatic when it comes to working 
out whether volcanism has occurred on this planet. We 
have photographs of only 45% of its surface and it is not 
conclusive from those alone whether volcanic activity has 
shaped the planet in any way. It seems likely that some 
of the plains regions are volcanic, and recent re-analysis 
of Mariner 10 data, taken through ultraviolet and orange 
filters, suggests that this is the case. One thing that does 
remain clear is that further study of Mercury is essential 
if we are to understand more of the role volcanism has 
played in its past. 

From a world where volcanism has played an 
unknown role, we move to a world where there is 
little doubt that volcanism has significantly shaped the 
evolution of its surface. Across the entire planet of Venus, 
volcanic features can be seen. There are estimated to be 
over a million small volcanoes (<20 km diameter) across 
the planet, with a significant number of larger volcanoes 
to be found also. The volcanoes take on different shapes, 
which may be attributable to differences in the viscosity 
and perhaps composition of the lavas extruded. A similar 
situation occurs on Earth, with volcanoes at different 
locations erupting lavas of a different composition. Lava 
channels on Venus may extend for several hundred 
kilometers, which indicates that the lava was molten for 
a significant length of time, far longer than would be 
the case on Earth. It is highly likely that the elevated 
surface temperatures on Venus contributed to the ability 
of the lava to remain molten long enough to create 
these features. As we saw in the section on impact 
cratering above, the cratering record implies that Venus 
underwent a global resurfacing event a relatively short 
time ago. This event would have been volcanic, with 
the release of huge quantities of lava onto the surface 
covering the previous record of Venus’ past. There is still a 
debate as to whether this event happened simultaneously 
(in geological time) across the whole surface or as a 
continuous set of discrete eruptions occurring over a 
longer period of time. Whichever theory is correct, the 
planet Venus obviously underwent a massive change, 
which effectively prevents us from learning about the very 
early stages of Venus’ evolution. 

Mars is very much easier to study than Venus. For 
one, it does not have a thick optically opaque atmosphere 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. A Mars Global Surveyor /MOC image of Olympus 
Mons, the largest known volcano in the solar system. With a 
basal diameter of 600 km and a height of 24 km it is much larger 
than any terrestrial equivalent. (Courtesy of NASA/Malin 
Space Science Systems.) 


like Venus. This means we can use standard photographic 
and multispectral remote sensing data to observe the 
surface and deduce its volcanic past. Mars has had an 
interesting history in volcanic terms. Although half the 
diameter of the Earth, it is home to the largest volcano 
in the solar system, Olympus Mons (figure 2). With a 
basal diameter of 600 km, and rising more than 24 km 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


above its surroundings, it is many times larger than the 
largest volcano on the Earth, Mauna Loa, Hawaii (120 km 
diameter, 9 km above the sea-floor). The type of volcanism 
forming Olympus Mons and Mauna Loa appears to be 
the same. They are both shield volcanoes with Olympus 
Mons likely to be formed by the non-explosive eruption 
of basalts over a long period of time, as in the case of 
Mauna Loa. The main difference between them is the size. 
This is most likely due to the fact that Mars is a one-plate 
planet and does not experience motion of plates as the 
Earth does. The size of the Hawaiian volcanoes is limited 
by the fact that the plate on which they stand constantly 
moves. Once the volcano is no longer connected to the 
magma source, activity stops and a new volcano forms in 
the chain. On Mars this cannot happen and the volcano 
remains over the magma source and hence is active for 
as long as magma is available. The outermost flows on 
Olympus Mons appear to be very young, judging by the 
lack of large impact craters on its surface. However, while 
the youngest flows may have erupted only a few hundred 
million years ago, the volcano as a whole is likely to be 
much older. Olympus Mons is located just off the edge of 
a region known as the Tharsis bulge, a huge area uplifted 
relative to the surrounding terrain and which contains 
three very large shield volcanoes. Another volcanic area 
of uplift on Mars is the Elysium region, again containing 
large shield volcanoes. These regions and the long lava 
flows seen across the northern hemisphere indicate that 
volcanism has played an important role in the evolution 
of Mars. 

But do any of these planets have active volcanism 
today? We cannot be sure. We are reasonably confident 
that no volcanism occurs on the Moon today. There is no 
image-based evidence for volcanism occurring on Venus 
or Mars, but Venus does seem to have an excess of SO, 
in its atmosphere. Chemical reactions with the surface 
should quickly deplete the atmosphere of sulfur, so there 
must be a continual replenishment of this element into the 
atmosphere. The most likely explanation is volcanism, 
but we cannot be certain until we get direct evidence of 
eruptions taking place there. The only other body where 
we are certain that present day volcanism is occurring 
is on Io, the third largest satellite of Jupiter. The tidal 
forces from Jupiter and the surrounding satellites maintain 
a high temperature within Io, which in turn drives the 
volcanism we see today (figure 3). Evidence for active 
volcanism on Io was first found by one of the Voyager 
craft as it flew past the Jovian system. A large plume 
of material was seen on the limb of the satellite being 
erupted from a volcano. Subsequent analysis of Voyager 
data showed Io to have many volcanoes across its surface 
and it is the most volcanically active body in the solar 
system today. The Galileo mission to Jupiter has returned 
stunning pictures of eruptions in action, revealing changes 
visible over only a few days. But, how does the volcanism 
on Io compare with that of the Earth? Firstly, Io’s eruptions 
are likely to be more similar to terrestrial geysers. In 
addition, the type of volcanism occurring has become 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Images from the Galileo Orbiter showing volcanic 
activity on Io. The plume seen on the limb of Io in the main 
image (and enhanced in the top right insert) is 140 km high. The 
bottom right insert shows another area of activity with a 75 km 
high plume erupting from the surface. The shadow of this 
plume is clearly seen to the right of the main center of activity. 
(Courtesy of NASA JPL/Caltech.) 


a matter of debate. On Earth, most of the volcanism 
is silicate based with some sulfur gases being released 
when the magma rises and lava erupts. For some time 
it was suggested that Io had sulfur based eruptions, due 
to the orange and brown colors of Io. These are similar to 
allotropes of sulfur with the different colors representing 
sulfur at various temperatures. In addition, spectroscopy 
of the surface and tenuous Ionian atmosphere revealed the 
presence of substantial amounts of sulfur being present. 
However, the density of Io (~3.5 g cm~°) is more consistent 
with silicate rocks, and the crust has to be made of a strong 
material such as silicate in order to support the mountains 
of Io, some of which reach heights of 5-10 km. Finally, 
some of the ‘hotspots’ on Io reach temperatures of 1000 K 
or more, far too hot for sulfur. So it seems that Io, like the 
Earth, does have silicate volcanism, but also has an added 
contribution from sulfur (see also VOLCANISM IN THE SOLAR 
SYSTEM). 


Tectonism 

The Earth is today a tectonically active world, and has 
likely always been that way. The other planets and 
satellites in the solar system also show evidence of TECTONIC 
activity, but not like that of the Earth (figure 4). Without 
plate tectonics, the Earth would have been a very different 
world. Neither Mercury nor Venus nor Mars show any 
evidence for having multiple plates, and hence plate 
tectonics. On Mars, this means that huge volcanoes such 
as Olympus Mons could form. Mars’ huge canyon, Valles 
Marineris, is likely to be at least partly formed by tectonic 
activity and forms a scar approximately 4000 km long. On 
Venus, global tectonism could have provided the vents 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


through which the magma rose to completely resurface the 
planet. If true, evidence for this is now buried, but Venus 
still shows complex tectonic forms covering much of the 
planet. Tectonism is not limited just to the larger bodies. 
Smaller worlds like the Moon, Mercury and some satellites 
also show evidence for tectonism. Mercury in particular 
is another world where global events may have shaped 
the surface. Long lobate scarps are to be found all over 
the photographed hemisphere. These are contractional 
features, but have no associated extensional tectonism to 
compensate. This implies that at some point Mercury’s 
crust must have undergone a global contraction by a few 
kilometers to produce the features seen. Looking just at 
the four terrestrial planets, we get very different views of 
how tectonism has shaped their evolution and provides 
a convincing argument that the Earth would indeed have 
been very different without the action of plate tectonics. 


Comparison of planetary atmospheres 
The PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES in our solar system should 
be able to tell us much about the evolution of the 
planets themselves. After all, each atmosphere came 
from the same nebula that made up the planets and 
all their atmospheres, so we would think that to a first 
approximation all the atmospheres would be of a similar 
composition. It is now obvious that they are not, and 
this is likely to be the result of the differences in the 
formation and evolution through time of the host planet. 
There is an obvious dichotomy between atmospheres 
in different parts of the solar system. Close in to the 
Sun we have the terrestrial planets with their sometimes 
tenuous, sometimes thick atmospheres enveloping the 
solid rocky body beneath. Once we get past the orbits 
of Mars and the main asteroid belt, we come to the gas 
giants, which are composed entirely of gases and have 
no solid surface beneath. The difference between these 
two kinds of world are quite dramatic, with the gas giants 
showing spectacular ‘weather’ systems and storms which, 
in the case of Jupiter, are larger than the planet Earth 
itself. However, we can learn most about our own planet 
by looking at the atmospheres of the terrestrial planets. 
The gas giants have undergone different evolutionary 
processes due to their nature, whereas the terrestrial 
planets share the same region of space and will have had 
initial starting conditions closer to that of the Earth. 
Venus is often referred to as ‘Earth’s twin’ due to its 
similar size and density. We would perhaps expect its 
atmosphere also to be similar to Earth, but we now know 
that Venus’ atmosphere is very different. The atmosphere 
of Venus is composed mainly of CO2, whereas the Earth 
has an atmosphere dominated by Nz and O;. Also, the 
atmosphere of Venus is very much denser than the Earth’s. 
It has a surface pressure 90 times greater than that at our 
sea-level, and contains 100 times the amount of gas as our 
atmosphere. If Venus’ atmosphere was once similar to our 
own, something quite dramatic happened to change it in 
this way. Venus is known to have a runaway GREENHOUSE 
EFFECT that has raised its temperatures to far in excess of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Two examples of tectonism on different planets. Left: lineated plains in Lakshmi Region on Venus. It is not known whether 
the two sets of intersecting lineations are faults or fractures, but this kind of terrain is unique to Venus. The image is 37 km wide, and 
80 km long. (Courtesy of NASA JPL/Caltech.) Right: Mariner 10 image of part of the surface of Mercury. The long fault running 
through the center of the image is called Discovery scarp and is 350 km long. The large crater it intersects is 55 km in diameter and the 
maximum height of the scarp just below this crater is 3 km. (Courtesy of NASA JPL/Caltech.) 


those it would have if it had an Earth-like atmosphere. In 
fact, this effect raises the surface temperature on Venus 
to approximately 750 K—hotter even than the surface of 
Mercury, which is closer to the Sun. The abundant CO, 
in Venus’ atmosphere acts as an excellent greenhouse gas. 
One reason why the Earth’s atmosphere has so little CO, 
compared to Venus is that CO, is easily dissolved into 
the Earth’s oceans where it ends up being converted into 
carbonates, such as limestone. If you look at the total 
amount of CO, Earth and Venus have, including that 
locked into carbonates, we find that the amount on each 
planet is rather similar, but distributed in a very different 
way. 

The water content in the atmospheres of Earth, Venus 
and Marsareall very low. Overall, the total volatile content 
as a percentage of the mass of the planet is not very high 
either. However, water plays an important role where 
Earth is concerned—it supports the life on the planet. We 
also know that water played a role in Mars’ past, due to 
the numerous features on the surface that must have been 
cut by the action of running water or glacial action. For 
this to be the case though, the atmosphere of Mars must 
have been very different to what it is today. Under today’s 
atmospheric conditions, water is not stable at the surface 
of Mars. There is a small amount to be found in the north 
polar region as water ice, and it is likely that some water 
ice exists beneath the surface as a permafrost layer. As 
mentioned earlier, impact craters can be used to trace the 
past presence of ice beneath the surface, but it is difficult to 
say whether that ice layer still exists in those regions today. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


It is clear, however, that Mars lost a lot of its atmosphere 
some time in the past, and its surface water along with it. 

Why did the atmospheres of Mars and Venus change 
so dramatically over time? While this is still a matter of 
debate, Mars may have lost its atmosphere for a variety 
of reasons, including stripping of the atmosphere due 
to the solar wind, or erosion caused by impacts ejecting 
atmospheric gas into space. Venus, on the other hand, 
may have had a more hospitable atmosphere in the early 
solar system while the Sun was less luminous. As the 
Sun output more energy, Venus heated up, starting its 
runaway greenhouse effect and leaving the planet as it is 
today. Could this happen to the Earth? Conceivably, yes, 
but it would require a substantial heating of the Earth’s 
atmosphere and the appropriate levels of greenhouse 
gases to cause it. Venus does, however, give us an insight 
into what Earth may have been like if we were formed as 
close to the Sun as our twin. 


The rubble of the solar system: asteroids, comets 
and other small bodies 

While most of our comparative planetology concentrates 
on the planets and satellites of the solar system, we 
must not forget the smallest bodies, as they can tell us 
much about the characteristics of the young solar system. 
METEORITES are pieces of ASTEROIDS and other bodies, broken 
apart from their parent body, probably by an impact and 
sent on a course that sees it captured by the Earth’s 
gravity and fall to the surface. These give us the chance 
to study other bodies without the expense of sending a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spacecraft to it, although with meteorites, there is the 
problem of coping with terrestrial contamination in the 
results. Some meteorites have been found to contain 
material that dates back to the start of the solar system, 
and hence we can get an idea of the initial makeup of the 
solar nebula. Meteorites give us clues as to the nature of 
asteroids too. Asteroids are larger bodies, most of which 
reside in a belt between the orbit of Mars and Jupiter. 
The compositions of the asteroids vary, as evidenced by 
meteoritic compositions. In fact, there are a rare few with 
properties which indicate that the parent body underwent 
melting. The sizes of the asteroids today are too small for 
this to have happened, and so it is likely that the asteroids 
we see were once part of a larger body or bodies. The 
gravitational perturbations of Jupiter probably prevented 
this body from reaching planetary proportions. 

Further out in the solar system, beyond the orbit of 
Pluto are the KUIPER BELT objects. These again are large 
lumps of rock, left over from the formation of the solar 
system. Although we do not have any samples of these 
objects (or at least we do not know if we have a sample in 
a meteorite on Earth) scientists are discovering more and 
more Kuiper belt members. Being able to get a sample 
of one of these, or at least to be able to determine its 
composition remotely will tell us much about what we 
were made of. This region of space may also be the home 
of some of the comets we see on a regular basis. COMETS are 
made mostly of ice and rock. They can make spectacular 
displays when close to the Earth, but more importantly 
it may have been the comets that were responsible for the 
delivery of a substantial amount of the volatiles to be found 
on Earth today. By studying the complete composition of 
these bodies, we may get a better understanding of what 
the comets delivered to us. 

There is much to learn by comparing one world with 
another. Some may be able to tell us more about our own 
planet and what will or may have happened to it. In other 
cases, we can learn more about an individual process that 
occurs on many bodies. Comparative planetology was 
not possible a few decades ago, and we are now ina phase 
where our knowledge of other worlds is expanding at a 
fantastic rate. The more we learn about the differences 
between planets and why those differences occur, the more 
we will understand about the evolution of the entire solar 
system and perhaps even that of the planetary systems we 
are discovering around other stars (EXOPLANETS). 


Bibliography 

Beatty J K, Peterson C C and Chaikin A (ed) 1999 The 
New Solar System 4th edn (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Lewis J S 1997 Physics & Chemistry of the Solar System 
revised edn (California: Academic) 

McSween H Y Jr 1999 Meteorites and their Parent Planets 
2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Spudis P D 1996 The Once and Future Moon (Washington: 
Smithsonian Institution Press) 


Sarah K Dunkin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planisphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Planisphere 


A simple device that displays the stars visible from a 
particular place at a particular time and date. It consists of 
a disk-shaped chart of all of that part of the celestial sphere 
that can potentially be seen from a particular latitude, 
overlaid by a rotatable disk-shaped mask in which an 
aperture has been cut. Using graduated scales around the 
perimeters of the two disks, the mask may be rotated so 
that the aperture reveals the stars that are visible on any 
selected date or time. The principle of the planisphere 
is broadly similar to that of the astrolabe, an ancient 
astronomical and navigational device. 


See also: astrolabe, celestial sphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plaskett, John Stanley (1865-1941) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plaskett, John Stanley (1865-1941) 


Astronomer and spectroscopist, born in Woodstock, 
Ontario, worked as a mechanic. He was a member of the 
original staff of the Dominion Observatory, Ottawa, where 
he became director and designed and constructed the 72 in 
telescope there. He worked on stellar radial velocities and 
spectroscopic binaries, and studied spectra of O- and B- 
type stars, and the interstellar calcium that showed on 
their spectra, mapping galactic structure. Plaskett’s star 
HD47129 is the most massive known star, in fact a pair of 
O-type stars in a binary system, each 55 solar masses, and 
close to the maximum permissible for a star, beyond which 
radiation pressure disrupts the star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plaskett’s Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plaskett’s Star 


A spectroscopic binary in Monoceros, discovered in 1922 
by the Canadian astronomer J S Plaskett (1865-1941) 
using a spectrograph he had designed specifically for 
the measurement of stellar radial velocities, attached 
to the 72 inch reflector of the Dominion Astrophysical 
Observatory in Victoria, British Columbia. The telescope 
was also largely of Plaskett’s design, and is now known as 
the ‘Plaskett telescope’. 

Plaskett’s Star, also designated V640 Mon, is in the 
region between Betelgeuse and Procyon, about 10° south of 
the star y Geminorum. It is a member of a major cluster 
of hot, young stars associated with the Rosette Nebula, 
NGC 2244. Its apparent magnitude varies between 6.04 
and 6.08 in a period of 14.396 days. The system, believed 
to be one of the most massive pairs of stars in the 
Galaxy, comprises two blue supergiants of spectral class 
O8e which may be separated by as little as 80 million 
kilometers. There must therefore be a turbulent mass of 
gas surrounding, and flowing between, the components. 
The latest determinations indicate that the mass of each of 
the components is of the order of 50 solar masses. 

Sir James Jeans (1877-1946) described Plaskett’s 
Star as ‘the most massive and absolutely the brightest 
star whose elements are known with fair certainty. 
Temperature 28 000 °C. Every square centimeter of surface 
emits sufficient energy to run a locomotive at full speed for 
millions of years.’ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plasma 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plasma 


An almost completely ionized gas that contains equal 
numbers of electrons and positive ions moving freely 
and independently of each other. Although a plasma is 
electrically neutral, because it contains equal numbers of 
positively and negatively charged particles, it is highly 
conductive. Plasmas, which normally have very high 
temperatures, are found in a wide variety of astrophysical 
contexts, for example deep inside stars, where matter 
is very highly ionized, or in the high-temperature outer 
atmospheres of stars (coronas). The solar corona and 
the solar wind are both examples of plasmas that consist 
predominantly of electrons and protons (hydrogen nuclei). 

Magnetic fields and plasmas interact in interesting 
and important ways. Because a charged particle moving 
in a magnetic field is subject to an accelerating force acting 
at right angles to the direction in which it is traveling, it is 
compelled to trace out a circle around the field line. If it 
also has a component of motion along the direction of the 
field, the combination of the two motions will cause it to 
follow a helical path along the direction of the magnetic 
field and prevent it traveling for any distance at right 
angles to the field. Therefore, provided the density is not 
so high that frequent collisions between particles break the 
ties between particles and field lines and thereby enable 
charged particles to diffuse across the direction of the 
magnetic field, plasma can flow along the direction of 
a magnetic field but not at right angles to it. In these 
circumstances, magnetic field and plasma are closely tied 
together, and the field is said to be ‘frozen in’ to the 
plasma. Where the pressure of the plasma exceeds the 
pressure of the magnetic field, moving plasma pushes 
the field lines around; conversely, where the magnetic 
pressure exceeds the plasma pressure, moving magnetic 
field structures push the plasma around. In the case of the 
Sun, closed magnetic structures (field lines that curve out 
from, and back into, its surface) confine the hot coronal 
plasma and prevent it escaping into space, whereas open 
field lines (which lead out into interplanetary space) allow 
plasma to flow out into the solar wind. The interplay 
between magnetic fields and plasmas underlies practically 
all aspects of solar activity. 


See also: ion, ionization, magnetosphere of Earth, solar 
wind, Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plate-Measuring Machine 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plate-Measuring Machine 


A device that enables the positions of images on a 
photographic plate to be measured to a high degree of 
accuracy. The plate is mounted on a flat table that may 
be moved in two perpendicular directions (‘x’ and ‘y’). 
In traditional machines the plate is moved manually in 
the x- and y-directions by means of two fine screws 
until the star image of interest is centered on crosswires 
in a microscope eyepiece. The amount of movement 
is registered on a finely graduated drum or vernier, 
typically to an accuracy of about a micron (wm). The 
plate may then be reversed (and, if necessary, inverted) 
and re-measured to minimize positional errors. This is a 
tedious and time-consuming process. Automatic plate- 
measuring machines have speeded up the process by 
many orders of magnitude. Usually, in a machine of 
this kind, the plate is mounted on a table that moves 
slowly, or in very small steps, in one direction while a 
spot of light (produced, for example by a cathode ray 
tube or a laser) scans rapidly across the plate in the other, 
images being identified by measuring the amount of light 
transmitted through the plate. In addition to measuring 
position, some machines can also measure brightness and 
distinguish between different kinds of objects (for example 
stars and galaxies). The machines are usually computer 
controlled and the computer carries out much of the 
data analysis. The SuperCOSMOS machine at the Royal 
Observatory, Edinburgh, which uses a linear CCD array 
to scan successive strips of a plate, can scan a complete 
Schmidt plate (which covers an area of sky 6° square 
and typically contains about a million star images) in two 
hours. 


See also: celestial coordinates, Schmidt telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plato (428-347 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plato (428-347 Bc) 


Philosopher, real name said to be Aristocles, with ‘Plato’ 
a nickname (‘broad’) derived either from the breadth of 
his knowledge, shoulders, or forehead, born in Athens, 
Greece, taught by Socrates, and travelled in Egypt, Sicily 
and Italy. Back in Athens, he founded, in 387 Bc, a school 
of learning called the Academy, devoted to research and 
instruction in philosophy and the sciences, particularly 
to the development of mathematical models of natural 
phenomena. The Platonic solids are the cube, tetrahedron, 
octahedron and icosahedron, envisaged as the shapes of 
the atoms of the four elements, earth, fire, air and water, 
with the fifth Platonic solid, the dodecahedron, a model 
for the whole universe (see KEPLER). Plato envisaged the 
universe as a series of shells of crystalline spheres on which 
the stars, planets, Sun and Moon move round the Earth. 
He believed that the Moon shines by reflected sunlight and 
that astronomers were the wisest people. Plato’s Academy 
was deemed a pagan establishment and closed in ap 529 
by the Christian Emperor Justinian, but at 900 years of age 
it was the longest surviving university. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plough 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plough 


A well-known asterism, being the most readily recogniz- 
able part of the rather disjointed constellation of Ursa Ma- 
jor; it comprises the seven stars a, B, y, 6, €, ¢ and 7 UMa. 
The arrangement resembles the outline of the old-style, 
hand-steered plough drawn by a horse or ox. The stars a 
and 6 UMa are also termed ‘the Pointers’, as they indicate 
of the direction of Polaris, the pole star. The star ¢ Uma 
(Mizar), is a well-known binary system which has a fourth- 
magnitude naked-eye companion, Alcor (80 UMa). 

Five of the stars (8, y, 6, ¢ and ¢ UMa) are members of 
the Ursa Major open cluster and have very similar proper 
motions. As the proper motions of the other two stars 
(a and 7 UMa) are in an opposing direction, the present 
familiar appearance of the Ploughis temporary; thousands 
of years ago its shape was entirely different, and will be 
different again thousands of years hence. 


See also: Mizar and Alcor. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Plutino 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Plutino 


Any of the Kuiper Belt objects in or near the 3:2 mean 
motion orbital resonance with Neptune. This means that 
they complete two orbits around the Sun in the time it takes 
Neptune to complete three orbits. The 3:2 resonance acts 
to stabilize the Plutinos against gravitational perturbations 
by Neptune.The same resonance is also occupied by Pluto. 
‘Plutino’ means ‘little Pluto’. Approximately 35% of the 
known trans-Neptunian objects are Plutinos, and there are 
approximately 25 000 larger than 100 km diameter. Pluto 
is considered by some astronomers as by far the largest 
Plutino. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto and Charon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pluto and Charon 


Pluto is an unusual planet in many respects. It is the 
smallest and the most distant from the Sun of all nine 
planets. Its orbit is unusually eccentric and inclined to 
the ecliptic. It is accompanied in this orbit by a satellite, 
Charon, whose radius is half of Pluto’s. Its surface 
is among the coldest and, except for 1ApEeTus, the most 
contrasted of all PLANETARY suRFACES. Although Pluto is the 
only planet never visited by a space probe (but see PLUTO- 
KUIPER EXPRESS), a Series of breakthrough discoveries made 
since about 1975 have now provided us with a relatively 
detailed picture of the Pluto-Charon system, which is 
reviewed here. 


Pluto’s heliocentric orbit 

Although Pluto was discovered in 1930, prediscovery 
photographs establish its position back to 1914. Pluto 
has thus been observed for about 85 years, i.e. slightly 
over one third of its orbital period of 248 years. Pluto’s 
mean distance from the Sun is about 40 Astronomical 
Units (semi-major axis of the orbit, a = 39.54 AU), 
i.e. about 6 billion kilometers. However, due to its strongly 
elliptical orbit (eccentricity, e = 0.249), its distance from the 
Sun varies by 20 AU between PERIHELION (q = 29.7 AU) 
and APHELION (Q = 49.85 AU). Pluto’s orbit is therefore 
‘Neptune-crossing’ in the sense that during approximately 
two decades within its orbital period, it can get closer to the 
Sun than NEPTUNE, whose perihelion distance is 29.8 AU. 
However, due to its orbit high-inclination (@ = 17.1°), 
Pluto, unlike any other planet, makes large excursions of 
8 AU above and 13 AU below the plane of the ecliptic and, 
despite the fact that the orbits of Pluto and Neptune appear 
to cross when projected onto the ecliptic plane, Pluto never 
gets very close to Neptune (never closer than 17 AU). 
Pluto in fact makes closer (12 AU) and more frequency 
approaches to URANUS than to Neptune. The reason for this 
interesting situation lies in the so-called 3:2 mean motion 
resonance between Pluto and Neptune. Over a period of 
495 years, Pluto orbits the Sun twice while Neptune orbits 
three times (figure 1). As a consequence, the relative orbital 
phases of Pluto and Neptune recur periodically, so that the 
perturbative forces of Neptune on Pluto act in nearly the 
same phase at each repetition. Numerical integrations of 
the motion of the five outer planets over time scales of more 
than a million years indicate that Pluto’s conjunctions with 
Neptune (i.e. the configurations when the two planets have 
the same heliocentric longitude) occur when Pluto is near 
aphelion. More specifically, calculations show that the 
‘resonance argument’, defined as ® = 3Ap — 2An — O, 
where Ap and Ay are the longitudes of Pluto and Neptune, 
and @ is the longitude of Pluto’s perihelion, varies 
(‘librates’) about a mean value of 180° with an amplitude 
of 82° over a libration period of 19912 years. Therefore, the 
3:2 resonance has a strong stabilizing influence on Pluto’s 
orbit. In addition, Pluto’s perihelion and aphelion cannot 
occur at any position on the orbit and, in particular, they 
never cross Neptune’s orbital plane, further helping to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


keep the two planets apart. Finally, it is important to 
note that most modern observations of Pluto occurred near 
the last perihelion (1989). Thus, the vision of the planet 
(in particular the surface and atmospheric properties) 
described below essentially refers to perihelion and would 
be drastically different at aphelion. 


Charon’s orbit and Pluto—Charon self-rotation 
Charon, discovered in 1978, orbits about Pluto at a mean 
distance of 19 640 km (corresponding to about 17 Pluto 
radii, or an apparent separation on the sky of 0.9” at 
30 AU). (Because the masses of the two objects are not 
very different (see below), it is more correct to state 
that Pluto and Charon orbit about their common center- 
of-mass.) Charon is the only satellite of Pluto known 
to date, with a visible magnitude of m, = 17.25 at 
opposition. Searches for additional satellites, motivated 
by the fact that the volume of space around Pluto that 
is stable against solar perturbation (i.e. in which other 
satellites could exist) extends to about 100 Charon orbit 
radii, have concluded to the absence of any object brighter 
than my = 20.6 in the region from 6 to 10 arcsec and 
my, = 22.6 beyond that. The orbital period of the Pluto— 
Charon system is 6.387 223+0.000 017 days. The rotational 
period of Pluto, as determined from its photometric 
lightcurve (see below), is 6.387 260 + 0.000 070 days, The 
two numbers are consistent within error bars, implying 
that Pluto’s spin is tidally locked to Charon’s orbital 
motion. Charon’s rotational period is not well constrained 
but consistent with SYNCHRONOUS ROTATION. In addition, 
theoretical arguments indicate that Charon’s rotational 
motion must also be locked to the orbital motion, because 
the timescale over which the satellite’s self-rotation is 
slowed by frictional effects (called the tidal damping time) 
is much shorter than for Pluto. Therefore, just as the 
Moon always turns the same face to the Earth, each body 
(not only the satellite) keeps the same hemisphere turned 
towards the other. In addition, as seen from the surface 
of one of the two bodies, the other body is either invisible 
or always at the same position in the sky. This situation 
of mutual synchronism is the stable end of tidal evolution 
and Pluto—Charon is the only known example of such a 
case. 

The orientation of Charon’s orbit with respect to 
Pluto’s orbital motion gives rise to so-called ‘mutual 
events’. Every 124 years (i.e. every half-orbit of Pluto), 
and for a period of approximately 5 years, Charon’s orbit 
is seen edge-on from the Earth (and the Sun), allowing 
observers to view Pluto and Charon passing directly in 
front of and behind one another. By unusual chance, 
this ‘mutual events season’ started in 1985, i.e. only 
seven years after the discovery of Charon. The scientific 
return of the mutual events was enormous, not only 
because they allowed an improved knowledge of Charon’s 
orbit (thereby providing the total mass of the Pluto— 
Charon system by virtue of Kepler’s third law) but more 
importantly because they provided the first resolved view 
of the two bodies, with estimates for their individual 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto and Charon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


S555 
SOSA 


Y/AU 


-40 -20 0 20 46 


Figure 1. The orbits of the outer planets for 40 000 years in a 
reference frame corotating with the mean motion of Neptune. In 
this reference frame, two revolutions of Pluto trace a complete 
loop in 495 years. It can be seen that Pluto’s perihelion librates 
90° away from Neptune (with a period of about 19 900 years). 
From Malhotra and Williams (1997). 


diameters (thus the average density of the system), their 
surface composition and their albedo distribution (see 
below). The best determination of Charon’s orbit now 
relies on direct HST imaging. These observations yield 
a semi-major axis of 19 636 + 8 km and a small but 
significantly non-zero eccentricity of 0.0076 for Charon’s 
orbit. This result is surprising given that tidal effects can 
damp out such an orbital eccentricity on a time scale of 
1-10 million years, and may suggest that the system was 
disturbed relatively recently. The orientation of Charon’s 
orbit is such that its orbital angular momentum vector is 
inclined by 119.6° with respect to Pluto’s orbital plane. 
Again for tidal effect reasons, Pluto’s and Charon’s polar 
axes must be parallel to Charon’s angular momentum. 
Thus, with an obliquity of ~120°, the latitude of the 
subsolar point varies between —60° and +60° over a Pluto 
year. This excursion, which dictates the annual variation 
of the insolation for a given point on Pluto’s surface, is 
the largest experienced by any planet except Uranus. Due 
to the torques exerted by the Sun over the Pluto—Charon 
system, Pluto’s equatorial plane precesses about the plane 
of its heliocentric orbit, so that Pluto’s obliquity varies 
between 103° and 128° with a period of about 3 million 
years. 


Bulk properties: radius, mass, density 

Determinations of Pluto and Charon radii are based pri- 
marily on mutual event photometry, stellar occultations, 
and recently, from direct HST imaging. Radius values 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from mutual events and direct imaging tend to converge 
towards radii of about 1160 km for Pluto and 600 km for 
Charon, but the absolute accuracy, limited by the uncer- 
tain effects of limb darkening, is probably not better than 
10-20 km. Stellar occutrations by planets are a power- 
ful means for measuring diameters (and possibly oblate- 
nesses) but in Pluto’s case, the small size and slow motion 
of the planet make these events rare and difficult to pre- 
dict. To date, only occultation (June 1988) has provided 
good-quality data. Unfortunately, the uncertain structure 
of Pluto’s atmosphere (see below) makes the radius deter- 
mination ambiguous. Nominal values are 1180-1195 km 
which, at face value, are inconsistent with the above num- 
bers; however, whether the occultation has probed Pluto’s 
atmosphere down to the surface is actually not certain (see 
below). 

The total mass of the Pluto—Charon system is 
straightforwardly determined from the orbit parameters 
of Charon to be equal to 0.002 433 terrestrial masses. 
(Incidentally, this value is 1/4000 of the mass deduced 
by Lowell in 1915 to account for the then believed 
perturbations in the orbit of Uranus. Therefore although 
Pluto was indeed discovered somewhere near the 
position predicted by Lowell, this appears to be a mere 
coincidence.) The individual masses of Pluto and Charon 
are much harder to determine, as this requires examination 
of the motion of Pluto with respect to the barycenter 
of the system, which is about an order of magnitude 
smaller than Charon’s. Nonetheless, and in spite of 
remaining divergences, the current ‘consensus’ value for 
the Charon/Pluto mass ratio is about 0.119. This gives 
individual masses of 1.30 x 10” ¢g for Pluto and 0.15 x 10” 
for Charon. Adopting radii of 1151-1178 km for Pluto 
and 591-628 km for Charon, based on the various modern 
measurements, the average mass density of the Pluto— 
Charon system is 1.87-2.03 g cm~?; individual densities are 
1.92-2.06 g cm~ for Pluto and 1.51-1.81 g cm~? for Charon. 


Surface properties 

Visual appearance 

One of the earliest findings (1955) about Pluto is that 
its brightness varies by about +0.15 magnitudes (about 
+15%) around a mean magnitude of 15.9 with a period 
of 6.3872 days. At that time, this result, called 
the ‘Pluto visible lightcurve’, actually pertained to the 
‘Pluto+undiscovered Charon’ system. HST observations, 
which separate Pluto from Charon, prove that the variation 
is essentially entirely due to Pluto, with Charon having 
a very weakly marked lightcurve of +0.04 magnitude 
(figure 2). The existence of the lightcurve indicates 
that Pluto’s surface is not uniformly bright, but has 
bright and dark regions. Observations of the mutual 
events and now direct imaging, in combination with 
lightcurve information, indicate the gross structure of 
Pluto’s surface. It includes a large bright southern polar 
cap, a broad dark equatorial band, and a large region 
of intermediate brightness in the Northern hemisphere 
(figure 3). The equatorial and mid-latitude regions appear 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto and Charon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T a Tt ee T 


15.20 
oO 
ue] 
2 
* 15.30 
aD 
G 
E 
> 
§ ) 8 
= 15.40 
é 
o 
& 
oD 
g 15.50 
4 4 i. eens & 1 : 1 2 i 4 n 1 4 
0 45 90 135 180 225 270 315 360 
East Longitude on Pluto (degrees) 
(a) 
T T art Ei T T oy T oA T T 
8 17.10 : i i 
= 
2 } 
D 
if 
> t 
> 
> 17.20 ; + 
& 
= 
8 = 
& 
2 17.30 4 
is 
o = 
2 q 
4 
17.40 q 
_. 1. 4 n 1 1 1 ai L an i { _L 
0 45 90 135 180 225 270 315 360 


East Longitude on Charon (degrees) 


(b) 


Figure 2. Pluto and Charon separate lightcurves. These curves give the visual magnitude (for a mean opposition) as a function of 


longitude on the planet and satellite. From Buie et al (1997). 


Latitude 


0 90 


180 


270 


360 


East Longitude 


Figure 3. Surface appearance of Pluto, from HST imaging. Albedo contrasts reach values of 6:1. From Stern et al (1997). 


very variegated. Brightness contrast ratios over the planet 
can reach values of 6:1, nearly as high as on Iapetus. 
Brightness variations probably result from the effect of 
volatile condensation/sublimation cycles and transport 
over very many seasons (see below). Charon’s surface is 
not so well known but does not seem to show any strong 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


spatial variations. Its average geometric albedo is 0.36- 
0.39, substantially less than the average Pluto value (0.58), 


suggesting that its surface is not as frost-rich. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto and Charon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Geometric Albedo 
A 


aa ae ae a 


2 
f- Pluto April 16-17, 1994 and May 11, 1995 7 
+ m= after Roush etal., 1996 | 4 
a co | 
0 beg ae yp a ge Le Te | 
1 1.5 2 2.5 


Wavelength (um) 


Figure 4. The near-infrared spectrum of Pluto at 1-2.5 wm, 
showing absorption bands due to CH, N2, CO and tentatively 
H2O. From Cruikshank et al (1997). 


Composition 

Spectroscopic studies at 0.7-2.5 wm indicate that Pluto’s 
surface is dominantly covered by volatile ices. Ices of 
Nz, CHa, CO and tentatively HzO have been detected 
(figure 4). Nz appears to be the dominant species, with 
CO and CHy ices constituting less than 2% by mass of 
the surface materials. In the case of CHy, there appear 
to be at least two components: one corresponds to CHy 
ice intimately mixed at small concentrations with N2 ice 
(e.g. N2:CHg in ratios 100:1), and the other corresponds 
to a fraction of the surface covered by a thick layer of 
pure CHy. Some models also suggest that the N2:CHy 
layer is actually overlain by a thin CHy-enriched layer. 
The methane bands appear to vary in intensity with the 
phase, with generally weaker bands near the minimum of 
the visible lightcurve (i.e. when the largest fraction of dark 
regions are in view). The interpretation of this variation 
is, however, not clear. Variations in methane depth can 
be due, for example, to variations in the spatial coverage 
of the CHy ice deposits, in the abundance of CHy in the 
N2-CHa-CO mixture, or in the size of the icy grains. It 
also appears that the overall spectrum of Pluto at visible 
wavelengths is somewhat ‘red’, i.e. that the reflectance of 
the surface increases with the wavelength between 0.4 and 
1 um. This may be related to a compositional effect, but 
the reddening agent remains to be identified. On Charon, 
H2O ice has been clearly identified. It dominates the 
infrared spectrum at all longitudes. The visible spectrum 
of Charon, unlike Pluto’s, is spectrally neutral. 


Temperature 

Pluto’s and Charon’s surface temperatures remain uncer- 
tain. At 30 AU from the Sun, the maximum tempera- 
ture of any point of their surfaces is 72 K (the value cor- 
responding to instantaneous equilibrium with the solar 
insolation). Observationally, the surface temperature of 
a planet with no atmosphere or a tenuous atmosphere is 
mostly determined by the thermal flux emitted by the ob- 
ject. In the Pluto—Charon system case, measurements have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


been performed at far-infrared (60-200 4m) and millime- 
ter/submillimeter (0.8-1.3 mm) wavelengths. Note that 
these measurements cannot separate Pluto from Charon, 
so they primarily sample Pluto, which contributes ~80% 
of the total flux. The two techniques give apparently dis- 
crepant results, with an average surface temperature on 
the visible disk (i.e. on the dayside) of 47-58 K from the 
far-IR data and 30-44 K from the mm/submm. The far- 
IR values are thought to be the most representative of the 
true surface temperature, because the flux emitted at the 
longest wavelengths can be significantly lowered by non- 
unity surface emissivities, leading to an apparently lower 
temperature. However, studies of the shape of the N2 ab- 
sorption band at 2.15 4m on Pluto suggest that the N> ice 
temperature is about 40 + 2 K. This suggests that Pluto’s 
surface is not isothermal. This situation is also expected 
given the existence of Pluto’s visible lightcurve (dark re- 
gions reflect less energy than bright regions and there- 
fore must be warmer) and given the atmospheric compo- 
sition (see below). A direct proof that Pluto’s surface is not 
isothermal is provided by recent IR observations which in- 
dicate that the thermal flux emitted by the Pluto-Charon 
system varies with orbital longitude, with, as expected, 
more flux (i.e. a higher average temperature) when Pluto 
is darker. In summary, the current paradigm is that Pluto 
possesses cold (40 K) regions dominated by Nz ice and 
warmer regions at temperatures well above 50 K. No in- 
formation is available on Charon. 


Pluto’s atmosphere and interaction with the 
surface 

The existence of an atmosphere around Pluto was 
demonstrated by the observation of a stellar occultation 
in June 1988 (figure 5). It is not surprising in the 
presence of volatile species on its surface, which can 
sustain an atmosphere by sublimation equilibrium. The 
observations indicates a pressure of a few jbar, but the full 
interpretation of the occultation data requires a knowledge 
of the main atmospheric chemical composition (which in 
fact was obtained later). 


Chemical composition 

Methane is the only gas to have been spectroscopically 
detected in Pluto’s atmosphere. However, Nz must 
dominate the composition of Pluto’s atmosphere, because 
it is the most volatile of the various ices detected on 
Pluto’s surface, and because its abundance at the surface 
is also the largest. Based on the relative abundance of ices, 
estimates of the surface temperature and direct abundance 
measurement of CHg, Pluto’s atmosphere can be estimated 
to consist primarily of ~99% of No, ~1% of CH, and ~0.1% 
of CO (the latter two numbers being uncertain by factors 
of a few). 


Atmospheric structure and surface pressure 

The occultation lightcurve (figure 5) is very unusual in 
that it exhibits a break in slope. This break occurs when 
the stellar rays cross Pluto’s atmosphere at 1215 km from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto and Charon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


600} 
400} 


200 


0 50 100 150 200 
Seconds after 10:35:50 UTC 


Figure 5. The occultation lightcurve for the stellar occultation by 
Pluto of 9 June 1988. The dots represent the stellar signal as the 
star is progressively extinguished by Pluto’s atmosphere. Note 
the ‘breaks’ in the lightcurve. They occurred when the image of 
the star was 1215 km away from Pluto’s center. Above this level, 
the lightcurve can be fitted by an isothermal atmosphere. Below 
this level, the data can be interpreted as due to a haze layer or to 
a strong temperature gradient. From Elliot and Young (1992). 


Pluto’s center, at a pressure level of 2.3 wbar. Above 
this level, Pluto’s atmosphere is vertically isothermal 
with a temperature of about 102 K. Below this level, 
the shape of the occultation curve can be explained by 
either (i) a very strong temperature gradient (i.e. the 
temperature decreases towards the surface at a rate of 5- 
10 K km‘') or (ii) an extinction layer due to a relatively 
thick haze, with an opacity of about 0.15. A temperature 
of ~100 K for the upper atmosphere while the surface 
temperature is only 40-60 K is quantitatively explained by 
the fact that gaseous methane is an efficient heating agent, 
from absorption of solar insolation in its near-infrared 
bands. Models indicate that an atmospheric abundance 
of ~1% for methane may also be capable of sustaining 
a strong temperature gradient near the surface. On the 
other hand, the ‘haze’ interpretation of the shape of the 
occultation curve is more difficult to justify physically. In 
addition, both interpretations imply a surface radius in the 
range 1180-1195 km, which is inconsistent with the values 
inferred from the mutual events and direct imaging. A 
way to resolve this discrepancy is to postulate that the 
occultation has not probed Pluto down to the surface itself 
but that the atmosphere extends 20-40 km below the strong 
thermal gradient layer. Specifically it has been proposed 
that Pluto possesses a ‘hidden’ 40 km deep troposphere. 
The uncertainty in the structure of the lower atmosphere 
reflects on the surface pressure. The occultation probes the 
atmosphere down to pressures of 3-5 bar but the surface 
pressure could be significantly higher: for example with 
a 40 km troposphere at ~40 K the surface pressure would 
be about 30 bar. 


Interaction with the surface 


Pluto’s atmosphere is primarily produced by the sublima- 
tion of the surface ices. At a temperature of 38-42 K, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


surface pressure of nitrogen ice is 19- 159 wbar. To first or- 
der, this isin agreement with (although possibly somewhat 
higher than) the observed surface pressure. The equilib- 
rium between frost and gas implies that the frost must 
be isothermal. Indeed, on a planet covered by frost, the 
frosts in the two hemispheres are at a uniform tempera- 
ture if about half of the solar energy received by the sum- 
mer hemisphere is transported to the winter hemisphere 
in the form of latent heat across the equator. This can be 
expressed by the following equation: 


5S(1 — A)w R? = 22 RL® 


where S is the solar constant, A is the surface albedo, R is 
the planetary radius, L is the latent heat per unit of mass 
and ©® is the mass flux across the equator (g cm~'s™'). 
® is equal to the product of the mass density (¢) by the 
meridional flow velocity (v) and the vertical height (d) 
of the flow. One can solve this equation for the flow 
velocity. Taking d = 1 km, one finds v ~ 3m Sec 
Thus, modest meridional winds are able to equalize the 
N2 frost temperature and surface pressure over the globe. 
The situation is similar to Mars but with the important 
difference that on Mars the temperature of the CO, polar 
caps is determined by the annually averaged insolation. 
On Pluto, the characteristic time of hemisphere transport 
is of the order of a few planetary days only. Thus the 
frosts are in instantaneous equilibrium with the diurnally 
averaged insolation. As a consequence, the seasonal 
variations in surface pressure and frost temperature are 
expected to be much larger than on Mars. Over the 
21st century, when Pluto recedes from perihelion, the 
atmospheric pressure is expected to decrease by about two 
orders of magnitude. Seasonal variations are accompanied 
by a redistribution of volatiles, thereby modifying the 
visual appearance of the planet. Note that the above 
discussion applies as well to TRITON, which exhibits a 
14 «bar N> atmosphere in equilibrium with N> frost at 
38 K. 

This simple picture does not work for methane, whose 
atmospheric abundance (~1%) is orders of magnitude 
higher than expected from thermodynamical equilibrium. 
This methane enrichment is explained by postulating the 
existence either of a thin CHy-enriched layer at the surface, 
or of thick and warmer isolated patches of pure CH, 
ice. Both scenarios could result from the known fact that 
in a CHy-N> solid mixture, N» preferentially sublimes 
because of this higher volatility. Remarkably, both of 
them are supported by the most recent analyses of the 
near-IR spectra (see above). The presence of a thin CHy- 
enriched layer is also expected to somewhat decrease the 
equilibrium atmospheric pressure of N>. 


Atmospheric escape 

Reaching 100 K within a few kilometers from the surface, 
Pluto’s atmosphere is much warmer than Triton’s, where 
the 100 K upper atmosphere temperature is not attained 
before several hundreds of kilometers. As a consequence, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto and Charon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pluto’s atmosphere is very extended, with an exobase 
(i.e. the level where the mean free path of the molecules 
is comparable to the scale height) near 4000 km altitude 
(750 km for Triton). Given the low gravity field, Pluto’s 
atmosphere escapes very significantly, with an estimated 
escape flux of a few 10?” No molecules/s (and about 10 
times less of CHg). In fact, Pluto’s atmosphere is so weakly 
bound that escape occurs hydrodynamically (i.e. vertically 
‘blowing off’) rather than thermally (ie. from the fact 
that a fraction of the molecules has a velocity exceeding 
the escape velocity). Note, however, that Pluto’s escape 
flux is expected to drastically decrease towards aphelion, 
not only because of the expected collapse in surface 
pressure, but, more importantly, because the atmospheric 
temperature and extent, controlled by the atmospheric 
abundance of methane, will strongly decrease with 
increasing heliocentric distance. Pluto’s present averaged 
escape flux, if maintained over the age of the Solar System, 
represents a loss of a volatile (Nz, CH, .. .) ice layer at least 
several kilometers thick. 


Possible internal structure 

The internal structure of any planet is necessarily uncertain 
to some degree, as it escapes direct observation and 
is primarily based on models. The philosophy of 
structural modeling can be summarized as follows: 
a set of components (e.g. water ice, other volatile 
ices, rock) for the interior of the planet is selected 
based on observational (surface data) and theoretical 
(cosmogonic) considerations, an internal arrangement of 
these components is guessed (for example, is the planet 
differentiated or undifferentiated, i.e. are the ice and 
rock vertically statigraphed or homogeneously mixed’), 
and using the equation of state of the components and 
hydrostatic equilibrium, the equation of state is computed 
throughout the body. Parameters are adjusted until the 
model predicts correct values of the observables (mass, 
radius, quadrupolar moments of the gravity field, etc). 
In the case of Pluto and Charon, the internal models 
are particularly uncertain because only the individual 
masses and radii are known as constraints to the models, 
and still with a considerably uncertainty (see above). 
Nonetheless, internal models are useful because they 
allow the estimation of parameters such as the rock-to-ice 
ratio and the bulk chemistry, which are of key importance 
for understanding the origin of the bodies. 


Constraints to the models 

As discussed above, the most recently determined masses 
and radii provide values for the mass densities of 1.92- 
2.06 g cm™ for Pluto and 1.51- 1.81 g cm~? for Charon. 
This clearly indicates that Pluto and Charon are some 
mixtures of ice and rock. The dominant ice must be 
water ice because oxygen is the most abundant of the ice- 
forming elements (C, N, O). Given the temperature and 
pressure range in Pluto’s and Charon interiors, H2O ices 
I, IL, I, V and IV may be present. Like Pluto’s surface, 
Pluto’s interior may contain other volatile ices. However, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


they are probably concentrated near Pluto’s surface so 
that the present mantle structure and rheology must be 
dominated by water ice. The exact composition of the rock 
component is unknown but it is almost certainly at least 
partially hydrated. Finally, refractory organic compounds 
may represent an important fraction of Pluto and Charon 
interiors. This consideration is based on chemical evidence 
from COMET HALLEY in which CHON (carbon-hydrogen- 
oxygen-nitrogen) particles contained in a diversity of 
refractory organic materials represent as much as 10% of 
the mass. 

Pluto’s interior is probably differentiated. This stems 
from arguments based on Pluto’s thermal history and the 
current presence of volatiles. Radiogenic heating release 
is more than sufficient to allow solid state flow of water 
ice. In addition, the accretional heating of Pluto may be 
important, especially considering the fact that the collision 
that probably formed Charon could have triggered 
water ice melting, followed by DIFFERENTIATION. Moreover, 
surface volatiles, as the source of Pluto’s atmosphere, are 
subject to escape. Therefore, their continued existence 
implies either an initially substantial reservoir at the 
surface, which would suggest differentiation, or continual 
resupply. On the other hand, Charon’s differentiation state 
remains ambiguous, due primarily to the large remaining 
uncertainty on its density and surface frost coverage. 


Interior models 

Based on the previous arguments, the most likely internal 
structure for Pluto includes a ~300 km thick water ice 
layer (either pure ice I or a combination of ices I and 
II) and a ~850 km thick layer of partially hydrogenated 
rock. The deeper part of the ice layer probably undergoes 
solid-state convection. The boundary occurs at a typical 
pressure of 0.2 gigapascals (GPa) and a temperature 
of 250 K. Conditions at the center are a pressure of 
1.30 GPa and a temperature in excess of 1000 K. This 
model corresponds to a rock fraction of 0.65. If Pluto is 
organic-rich (say organic/rock mass ratio= 0.2), it may 
contain a separate ~100 km thick layer of organics. For 
Charon, both differentiated structures, similar to Pluto, 
and undifferentiated (in this case the interior is a mixture 
of water ice I and II and hydrated rock) are possible, and 
the pressure at the center is about 0.2 GPa. 


Origin of Pluto and Charon 

Our understanding of the origin of the Pluto—Charon 
system has enormously improved in recent years, 
especially as the true nature of the dynamical link between 
Pluto and Neptune became apparent and as new objects 
were discovered in the Kuiper-Edgeworth disk. The most 
popular early hypothesis, based on the fact that Pluto’s 
orbit is ‘Neptune-crossing’, was that Pluto was formerly 
a satellite of Neptune, which had been ejected to its 
present orbit by a collision with Triton (reversing, by the 
same mechanism, Triton’s orbit). In fact, Pluto’s 3:2 orbit 
resonance with Neptune, by preventing close approaches 
between Neptune and Pluto, implies that no Neptune 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto and Charon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ejection event could have placed Pluto on its present orbit. 
In addition, the high rock-to-ice ratio forbids formation 
in a planetary subnebula. Other bulk and chemical 
characteristics (density, presence of volatile ices) indicate 
instead a formation in the outer solar nebula, beyond at 
least 10 AU, although the constraints on the exact location 
are loose. The existence of the Pluto—Charon pair, with 
a satellite mass ratio of about 1/9, and the obliquity of 
the system suggests that one or more substantial physical 
collisions occurred in the past. It must be stressed, 
however, that the astronomically low probability of such 
collisions seems to imply that Pluto and its impactor (the 
Charon progenitor) were members of a large population of 
small planets. Charon’s orbit attributes suggest that it has 
undergone quick tidal evolution. Finally, the discovery 
in recent years of numerous objects with diameters of 
possibly tens to several hundreds of kilometers in the 
Kuiper- Edgeworth disk between 32 and 48 AU has placed 
Pluto in a clear dynamical and population context. 

With these various constrains in hand, a baseline 
scenario can now be elaborated. In this picture, Pluto 
(and independently the Charon progenitor) formed in a 
near-circular, low-inclination heliocentric orbit, probably 
beyond Neptune. At that time, a much higher density of 
population probably existed in this region, although it is 
not known whether this population included numerous 
objects similar in size to Pluto or Charon. Once formed, 
due to the perturbations by Neptune, these bodies 
underwent orbital migration and were captured ina stable 
suite of resonances and ultimately in the 3:2 mean motion 
resonance, amplifying their eccentricity and inclination. 
At some point, probably when the two bodies already had 
significant eccentricities, Pluto and the Charon progenitor 
underwent a mutual collision which formed the binary 
system. Charon’s orbit then quickly (in < 10° yr) evolved 
to its present synchronous state. Neptune perturbations 
on the 35-50 AU zone cleared the Kuiper-Edgeworth disk 
of most of its mass and prevented further growth of Pluto 
into a larger body. 


Bibliography 

Buie M W et al 1997 Icarus 25 233-44 

Cruikshank D P et al 1997 Pluto and Charon (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona) pp 221-67 

Elliot J Land Young LA 1992 Astron. J. 103 991-1015 

Malhotra R and Williams J G 1997 Pluto and Charon (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona) pp 127-57 

Stern S A et al 1997 Astron. J. 113 827-85 


Emmanuel Lellouch 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pluto—Kuiper Express ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pluto—Kuiper Express 


Proposed NASA mission to fly past Pluto and its moon 
Charon, and study Kuiper Belt objects. Possible launch 
in 2004, with arrival 2012-18. Named after distinguished 
planetary scientist Gerard Kuiper. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Poincaré, Jules Henri (1854-1912) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Poincaré, Jules Henri (1854—1912) 


Born in Nancy, Lorraine, France, became professor of 
mathematics at the Sorbonne in Paris, contributed to all 
areas of mathematics, including the three-body problem 
of celestial mechanics and studies of the stability of the 
solar system. He was first to consider the possibility 
of chaos in planetary orbits, foreshadowing the modern 
study that restarted in 1963. His work began as the 
answer to a question in a contest to show rigorously that 
the solar system, as a multi-body modelled by Newton’s 
equations, is dynamically stable. Poincaré realized that the 
outcome prediction was sensitive to the initial conditions: 
‘If we knew exactly the laws of nature and the situation 
of the universe at the initial moment, we could predict 
exactly the situation of that same universe at a succeeding 
moment. but even if it were the case that the natural 
laws had no longer any secret for us, we could still only 
know the initial situation approximately. . . it may happen 
that small differences in the initial conditions produce 
very great ones in the final phenomena. A small error 
in the former will produce an enormous error in the 
latter. Prediction becomes impossible...’ Poincaré also 
determined the shape of a rotating fluid subject only to 
gravity. He wrote Les Méthods Nouvelle de la Méchanique 
Celeste (1892-99) and Lecons de Mecanique Celeste (1905). 
He wrote on the philosophy of science, worked on 
equations of mathematical physics, and, with ALBERT 
EINSTEIN and HENDRICK LORENTZ, developed the special theory 
of relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pointers ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pointers 


A name sometimes used for the two leading stars of the 
Plough, Dubhe (wa UMa) and Merak (8 UMa), arising from 
their frequent citation as locating stars for Polaris, and 
hence for the north celestial pole. 


See also: Dubhe, Merak. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Polar ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polar 


Part of NASA’s Global Geospace Science programme 
and the International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) 
programme. Launched in February 1996 to study the 
interaction between Earth’s magnetosphere and the solar 
wind at high latitudes. Imaging instruments measure 
visible, ultraviolet and x-ray spectra of the polar regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Polar Caps 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polar Caps 


Bright, icy surface deposits in the polar regions of a 
planetary body. In the solar system, the Earth, Mars 
and Neptune’s major satellite Triton are known to possess 
polar caps. The Earth’s polar caps are permanent and 
consist of water ice, with a maximum thickness of about 
4km. The northern cap lies over Greenland and the Arctic 
Ocean; the southern covers the continent of Antarctica. 
Both show a little seasonal variation, with different limits 
of sea ice in winter and summer. Mars’s polar caps show 
a marked seasonal variation. At their minimum extent 
(about 600 km across for the northern cap, 400 km for the 
southern) they have a distinctive swirled pattern, the ice 
filling valleys that curve outward from the poles. In the 
winter the southern cap extends to around 60°S (50°S in 
the Argyre Basin), the northern to about 65°N, as carbon 
dioxide sublimes out of the atmosphere to form extensive 
deposits of frost. While the permanent southern polar 
cap consists of carbon dioxide ice, the northern one is of 
water ice. Triton has a pink southern polar cap, probably 
of nitrogen ice and frost. This is expected to migrate 
to the north polar region and back as the angle of solar 
illumination changes over the course of Neptune’s 165- 
year orbit round the Sun. 


See also: Mars: surface, Triton. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Motion and Length of Day 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polar Motion and Length of Day 


Polar motion 

Polar motion refers to the movement of the axis about 
which the Earth rotates. The length of day is the 
difference between the day measured using astronomical 
observations and the day as measured by an atomic 
clock. Both quantities are needed to specify the 
orientation of the Earth in space and both vary with time. 

The angles which characterize the direction of the 
rotational pole with respect to the Earth’s surface are 
called the polar coordinates, x and y. Variation of these 
coordinates is called polar motion. The polar coordinates 
specify the direction of the Earth’s pole of rotation in a 
reference frame which is defined by the adopted 
locations of terrestrial observatories. The coordinate x is 
measured along the 0° (Greenwich) MERIDIAN while the 
coordinate y is measured along the 90°W meridian. These 
two coordinates determine the directions on a plane onto 
which the polar motion is projected (figure 1). 

Polar motion consists largely of two motions. The 
largest is a mostly circular path which repeats after 
approximately 435 days and is called the ‘Chandler’ 
motion after Seth Chandler, who discovered it in 1890. It 
is caused by the misalignment of the EARTH’S ROTATION 
axis with respect to its axis of symmetry. The second 
motion is one which follows an elliptical path and repeats 
annually. This motion is caused by the redistribution of 
atmospheric mass during the year. These two motions 
account for the spiral motion of the pole as seen from the 
Earth’s surface (figure 2). 


Fiducial 
Point 


Figure 1. UT1 and polar coordinates x and y. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


y (second of arc) 


06 O5 G4 O23 Q2 9.1 9 
i or 
r 02 
r 0.15 
a Baia 
a) 
Pr =O, _— 
0.05 a 
Pi 
L o +O 
se] 
8 
0.05 Oo 
a 
Of se 
« 
O15 
r 02 
r 0.25 
a3 


Figure 2. The path of the rotational pole of the Earth. 
0.1 arcsecond corresponds to 3 m. 


Earth rotation 

The Earth rotation coordinate is the angle through which 
the Earth has turned in a given period of time. This angle 
expressed as the difference between a time scale 
measured by the rotation of the Earth, UTI, and a 
uniform time scale, UTC, refers to the angular separation 
between the direction of the 0° meridian on the Earth and 
the direction to a point defined in space astronomically 
(figure 1). 

Historically some form of time based on the rotation 
of the Earth has always been the basis for civil time, the 
definition and the measurement procedures depending on 
available technology and precision requirements (see 
TIME SCALES: TERRESTRIAL). In modern practice, UT1 is 
determined using a  ffiducial direction defined 
mathematically in the celestial reference system. This 
direction is referred to as the Mean Sun. 

UTC, standing for Coordinated Universal Time, 
designates the atomic time scale which approximates the 
rotational time of the Earth (see UNIVERSAL TIME, TIME 
SCALES: ATOMIC). From the time of its inception, its rate 
and/or epoch have been adjusted to keep it near UT1. The 
current practice is to adjust UTC in epoch by integral 
seconds (leap seconds) to keep the difference between 
UTland UTC less than 0.9 s. UTC as defined by the 
International Radio Consultative Committee (CCIR) 
Recommendation 460-4, differs from TAI (Temps 
Atomique International INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC TIME) 
by an integral number of seconds. TAI is an atomic time 
scale determined by the Bureau International des Poids et 
Mesures (BIPM). Its unit is exactly one Systeme 
Internationale (SI) second at mean sea level. 

The difference between the length of the day 
measured astronomically and 86 400 s (24 h x 60 min x 
60 s) is defined as the excess length of day. It is often 
referred to as the ‘length of day’ and abbreviated ‘LOD’. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Motion and Length of Day 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This quantity is related to the rotational speed of the 
Earth, such that a slower rotational speed will be seen as 
an increase in the LOD and vice versa. 

Until recent times the rotation of the Earth has 
served as the basis for timekeeping. The assumption was 
made that the rotational speed of the Earth was 
essentially constant and repeatable, and that the length of 
the day which resulted from this constant rotational speed 
was naturally useful as a measure of the passage of time. 
Comparisons of astronomical observations of different 
kinds and of terrestrial clocks have shown, however, that 
the speed with which the Earth is rotating is not constant 
with time. Variations in rotational speed may be 
classified into three types: secular, irregular and periodic. 
The secular variation of the rotational speed refers to the 
approximately linear increase in the length of the day due 
chiefly to tidal friction. This effect causes a slowing of 
the Earth’s rotational speed resulting in a lengthening of 
the day by about 0.0005 to 0.0035 s per century. 

The irregular changes in speed appear to be the result 
of random accelerations, but may be correlated with 
physical processes occurring on or within the Earth. 
These have caused the length of the day to vary by as 
much as 0.01 s over the past 200 years. Irregular changes 
consist of so-called decade fluctuations with 
characteristic periods of 5—10 years as well as variations 
that occur at shorter time scales. The decade fluctuations 
are apparently related to processes occurring within the 
Earth. The higher-frequency variations are now known to 
be related to the changes in the total angular momentum 
of the atmosphere. 

Periodic variations are associated with periodically 
repeatable physical processes affecting the Earth. Tides 
raised in the solid Earth by the Moon and the Sun 
produce periodic variations in the length of the day as 
large as 0.0005 s with periods of 1 year, 1/2 year, 27.55 
days and 13.66 days, among others. Seasonal changes in 
global weather patterns occurring with approximately 
annual and semi-annual periods also cause variations in 
the length of the day of this order. 

Knowledge of the rotational speed of the Earth is 
required for observers on the Earth who find it necessary 
to know the orientation of the Earth in an inertial 
reference frame. This includes navigators, astronomers 
and geodesists. The rotational speed of the Earth remains 
essentially unpredictable in nature due to _ the 
incompletely understood irregular variations. Because of 
this, astronomical observations continue to be made 
regularly with increasing accuracy, and the resulting data 
are the subject of continuing research in the field (see 
EARTH’S ROTATION: THEORY). 

Analyses of astronomical observations reveal 
different types of variations in the speed of rotation. The 
ancient observational data form the basis for estimates of 
the secular deceleration in the speed of rotation. The 
more recent information, having been obtained with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


higher accuracy and more regularity, has shown the 
changes in the acceleration causing irregular variations in 
the length of the day. These data have also been used to 
detect the periodic variations in the length of the day. 
Figure 3 shows the excess length of day in milliseconds 
or the difference between the rotationally determined 
length of day and 24 h of UTC time. 


Causes of variations in the Earth’s 


orientation 
The conservation of ANGULAR MOMENTUM of the Earth 
requires that changes in the Earth’s moments of inertia 
produce changes in the Earth’s orientation. The moments 
of inertia are dependent on the distribution of mass on 
and within the Earth. This includes the mass contained in 
the atmosphere and in the oceans. As mass is 
redistributed, the moments of inertia change, producing 
the subsequent changes in the Earth’s orientation. An 
example of such an effect is that of the spinning skater 
who is able to change rotational speed by redistributing 
mass through the changing of the positions of the arms. 
The crust and the interior of the Earth are not strictly 
rigid. Tides generated by the Sun and the Moon change 
the shape of the Earth. The Earth is thought to have a 
fluid core with material possibly in motion. Coupling 
between such a core and the mantle would change the 
speed of rotation of the mantle from which the 
observations are made. The Earth may undergo changes 
in the moments of inertia as landmasses move or rise and 
fall. All of these motions cause changes in the Earth’s 
moments of inertia and may cause changes in the 
rotational speed. Seasonal variations are caused by an 
exchange of momentum between winds and the crust of 
the Earth. 


Length of Day 


o 


Excess LOD (milliseconds) 


T 


OF 1 1 i rt 1 rt 
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
Year 


Figure 3. Excess length of day. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Motion and Length of Day 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Changes in the total angular momentum of the 
atmosphere have also been shown to be correlated with 
changes in the length of the day. Precise calculations of 
the total angular momentum using global observations of 
the wind speed and direction have been used to 
demonstrate this effect. The variations in the rotational 
speed are apparently caused by the interaction of the 
winds with the Earth’s topography, and may be the 
leading cause for all of the irregular variations in the 
rotation of the Earth. 

Another known cause of variations in the rotational 
speed is tidal friction. The Moon raises tides in the ocean. 
Friction carries the maximum tide ahead of the line 
joining the center of the Earth and Moon. The resulting 
couple diminishes the speed of rotation of the Earth, and 
this reacts on the moon to increase its orbital momentum. 
The sum of the angular momentum of the Earth and the 
orbital momentum of the Moon remains constant. This 
produces an increase in the size of the orbit of the Moon 
and a reduction of its angular speed about the Earth. 
Tidal friction should be distinguished from actual 
changes in the moments of inertia of the Earth brought 
about by the tides. 


Observations of variations in the Earth’s 


rotation 

In order to detect variations in the Earth’s orientation, 
observations must be made from the Earth of objects 
located in space. These include stars, artificial satellites, 
the Moon and distant radio sources called quasars. These 
bodies provide useful reference directions with which to 
measure the Earth’s orientation. 

Stars were observed photographically for decades to 
determine the motion of the pole and the rotation of the 
Earth. Recently, more accurate methods have been 
devised including the use of lasers, the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) and radio telescopes. Laser 
bursts can be bounced off of artificial satellites or the 
Moon. The length of time to receive the reflected pulse 
provides information on exactly where the object is at a 
particular time which, in turn, can be used to determine 
the Earth’s orientation in space. 

Observations of the GPS satellites at stations 
participating in the International GPS Service provide 
estimates of the Earth’s orientation with respect to the 
constellation of the satellites. Measurements of the length 
of time taken for a radio signal to travel to the observer 
on the Earth from the different satellites are used to 
locate the observer’s site on the surface of the Earth as 
well as determine the orientation of the entire globe in 
the celestial reference system. 

Radio telescopes can also be utilized in a technique 
called Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). By 
having several radio telescopes looking at the same 
quasar at the same time and recording the information 
that is seen at each telescope, the Earth’s orientation can 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


be determined. The recorded information then needs to 
be processed further before the final results can be 
determined. The reduction procedure involves the use of 
a highly specialized computer called a correlator. Once 
the data from a VLBI experiment have been correlated, 
they can be processed further to produce Earth 
orientation information. 

Astronomical observations are made routinely by a 
number of observatories located around the world for this 
purpose. The International Earth Rotation Service 
(http://www.iers.org/) is the international organization 
responsible for the coordination of observations of polar 
motion and nutation as well as astronomical time. The 
Central Bureau is located at the Bundesamt fir 
Kartographie und Geodasie (BKG) Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany. The Sub-bureau devoted to rapid service and 
predictions is located at the US Naval Observatory. 
Observations are contributed to the JERS by 
observatories and laboratories around the world and 
treated at analysis centers. The information is 
recomputed twice per week and disseminated by E-mail, 
anonymous ftp and the world-wide web. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Bibliography 
Lambeck K 1980 The Earth’s Variable Rotation: Geophysical 
Causes and Consequences (London: Cambridge 
University Press) 
DD McCarthy 
3 


Polar Plumes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polar Plumes 


Polar plumes (figure 1) are thin, bright, linear structures 
that are seen to emanate from the poles of the Sun during 
the ‘minimum’ phase of the solar cycle, when there are 
well-developed polar CORONAL HOLES. They may be seen 
with the naked eye during a solar eclipse or at any 
time with coronagraph instruments sensitive to visible or 
ultraviolet light. When seen with visible light, they are 
often called ‘coronal rays’. 


Figure 1. Polar plumes emanating from the pole of the Sun. The 
photograph was captured with the EUV Imaging Telescope 
aboard the SOHO spacecraft at Earth’s L-1 point, in a cluster of 
spectral lines given off by Fe IX and X (Fe** and Fe**) ions. 
These ion species are present at approximately 0.9-1.2 million K. 


Polar plumes are denser and cooler than the 
surrounding coronal hole material. They arise from 
approximately unipolar concentrations of magnetic flux 
under the polar coronal holes, expanding and spreading 
with altitude as do the holes themselves. Material is 
constantly accelerated along the plumes, forming part of 
the fast SOLAR WIND that streams from the polar coronal 
holes to fill most of the solar system. The plumes trace out 
the predominantly open magnetic field lines that connect 
their magnetized footpoints to the interplanetary medium. 
Near the limb of the Sun, they subtend about 2° relative to 
the center of the solar disk, but they expand superradially 
with altitude, subtending up to 30° at 15 solar radii above 
the disk in the plane of the sky. Above 25 solar radii, they 
fade from view, merging with the surrounding fast solar 
wind from other parts of the coronal hole. 

Polar plumes are important to the study of the 
solar corona because they present the simplest, most 
quiescent system within the corona and because they 
may contribute significantly to the high-speed solar wind 
that fills virtually the entire solar system. Because the 
flux tubes that make up the plumes are magnetic open 
structures, no magnetic stresses can build up along their 
length: displacements of individual field lines are free 
to propagate out the top of the plume at the Alfvén 
speed. Without concentration via magnetic stress of 
the energy available from the turbulent motions of the 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE, the physical mechanisms available to 
heat plumes are a small, strict subset of those available 
elsewhere in the corona. Likewise, the unipolar nature of 
the overall polar fields near solar minimum ensures that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Magnetic field 


Fe IX/X lines (17 nm) 


Figure 2. A close-up of a pair of polar plume footpoints from 
figure 1. The left panel shows the line-of-sight component of the 
magnetic field at the visible surface of the photosphere. The 
right panel shows corresponding plume structures in the corona, 
using spectral line emission at 17 nm. The plumes arise from 
unipolar magnetic structures in the photosphere; their shape is 
defined by the lines of magnetic force that are ‘pinned’ to the 
surface at the magnetic footpoints. 


the plumes are only weakly coupled to other features in the 
corona, so they are well isolated from the more complex 
activity elsewhere. These two aspects make polar plumes 
a simple but important test case for our understanding of 
the more general problem of the coronal heat. 


Overall shape and magnetic structure 

Plumes take the form of tall, thin structures that follow a 
particular bundle of magnetic field lines from the surface 
out to interplanetary space. They arise from unipolar 
magnetic flux concentrations (i.e. magnetic dipoles with 
one pole buried inside the Sun and the other poking out 
through the photosphere). The flux concentrations are 
approximately 3000-10000 km in size with typical total 
magnetic fluxes of 10!°-107° Mx and peak field strengths 
of up to several hundred gauss. The field lines diverge 
rapidly at first from their photospheric roots, expanding 
sideways with altitude until they begin to interact with 
other field lines of similar polarity from elsewhere in the 
coronal hole (see figure 2). This initial turning point takes 
place between 30000 and 50000 km above the surface of 
the Sun, giving them the appearance of blunt pencils near 
the surface of the Sun. 

At higher altitudes, the plumes expand and diverge 
slightly faster than radial (vertical) lines would. This is due 
to the fact that the entire coronal hole expands with altitude 
to fill the void left by closed magnetic structures (such as 
streamers and loops) at lower latitudes. By 4-5 solar radii 
(3 million km) over the surface, each polar coronal hole 
fills almost a complete hemisphere around the Sun, and 
its expansion turns radial. The plumes stop diverging, but 
continue expanding with altitude until ~10 solar radii over 
the surface (figure 3). They have been detected as far as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Plumes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


25 solar radii from the Sun using long-duration exposures 
with space-based coronagraphs. 

Plume-like magnetic flux concentrations account for 
approximately half of the field lines that escape from the 
coronal hole, although not all flux concentrations support 
visible plumes. Of the several hundred flux concentrations 
that are present at any given moment in the solar minimum 
coronal hole, 10-20 support bright, readily distinguishable 
plumes. The flux concentrations that harbor plumes are 
typically associated with weaker opposing flux regions 
nearby, suggesting that reconnection of the opposing field 
may be important to plume formation. 

At low altitudes, the relatively strong magnetic field 
dominates the plasma pressure (the plasma f£ parameter 
is low), so there is little difference in shape between field 
lines that harbor plumes and those that do not. Because 
the coronal hole expands superradially with altitude to 
occupy approximately an entire hemisphere, and because 
B remains low to altitudes of several solar radii, these 
plume-like magnetic structures are connected to a large 
fraction of the volume of the solar system. 


Plume density and temperature 

One may determine the temperature of solar coronal 
features in three principal ways: through spectrography, 
or by measuring the Doppler broadening of spectral lines 
by Brownian motion of atoms in the feature (‘dynamic 
temperature’); or by measuring the relative brightness of 
several spectral lines, indicating the relative abundance 
of different ionization species (‘ionization temperature’); 
by measuring the rate of falloff of density with altitude, 
which indicates the equilibrium between gravity and the 
gas pressure of the plasma (‘scale height temperature’). 
All three methods show that polar plumes are cooler 
than their surrounding environment at altitudes of 1.05- 
1.3 solar radii from the center of the Sun (50 000-400 000 km 
from the surface of the Sun). Spectral line width maps 
of the visible coronal hole, which measure dynamic 
temperature versus position, show that polar plumes have 
somewhat narrower spectral lines than do interplume 
regions. Ionization temperature measurements indicate 
that plumes have temperatures close to or under 1 x 10° K, 
while the interplume coronal hole may be as hot as 1.5 x 
10° K. At low altitudes (<1.5 solar radii), where the plasma 
motion is negligible compared with the local speed of 
sound, plumes’ scale heights are shorter than those of the 
surrounding interplume regions, resulting in a decreasing 
contrast with altitude. Above about 1.5 solar radii, the 
plumes are not in hydrostatic equilibrium, because the 
outward and upward gas flow is not negligible compared 
with the local speed of sound, and scale height is not a 
meaningful measure. 

Plumes appear bright in visible light instruments 
such as SOHO/LASCO and the HAO Mk III White Light 
Coronameter located on Mauna Loa. Those instruments 
image visible white (continuum) sunlight that is scattered 
by free electrons in the corona; the amount of scatter 
depends only on the number of electrons and not on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


their temperature. The plumes must be denser than the 
surrounding media to be seen. Several measurements 
of plume density have been made using both integrated 
emission measure in visible and EUV images and ratios 
of particular density-sensitive emission lines. Near their 
bases, plumes are seen to be anywhere from 2 to 10 times 
denser than the surrounding media, with the brightest 
plumes perhaps 10 times denser than the surrounding 
coronal hole. A typical low-altitude coronal hole density is 
a few 10 m%; the very brightest plumes may be as dense 
as 10° m~? near their bases. 

The fact that plumes are cooler and denser than their 
surroundings indicates that they are heated principally at 
their bases. Heat deposited more than a few 10° km above 
the surface of the Sun would mainly increase the local 
temperature, yielding hot, rarefied plumes. However, heat 
deposited near the surface is readily conducted downward 
into the dense, cool CHROMOSPHERE below, causing cool 
material to evaporate into the corona and yielding cooler, 
dense plumes. In the latter case, the additional density 
causes the plumes to be cooler than the surrounding 
coronal hole, because the denser plasma radiates energy 
more efficiently than a more rarefied one would. Coronal 
plasma is cooled mainly by radiation of collisionally 
excited spectral lines. These lines’ brightness varies as the 
square of the plasma density, so that the denser plumes 
have a proportionally higher rate of energy loss and hence 
a lower equilibrium temperature than does the less dense 
interplume plasma. 


Temporal evolution 
On human timescales of a few minutes to a few 
hours, plumes are quiescent structures: their brightness 
and overall shape remain almost constant over several 
hours. However, each plume comprises many smaller 
filamentary structures less than 5 arcsec (3000 km) across at 
the base of the plume. These smaller structures fluctuate 
in brightness very rapidly, lighting up and dimming in 
just a few minutes. A typical plume may support three to 
five bright filamentary structures at a time. The bright 
substructures are thought to be the result of numerous 
small magnetic reconnection events inside the base of each 
plume. Each entire plume stays bright for about 20-30 h 
at a time, which roughly corresponds to the time it takes 
for its plasma to cool by radiation alone. However, after 
a plume has vanished new plumes are seen to recur in 
roughly the same location on the solar surface, brightening 
repeatedly in the same location over periods of up to 
several weeks. This recurrence suggests that the field 
lines over a particular flux concentration on the surface are 
re-filled with plasma from time to time, perhaps because 
of reconnection with new opposing flux regions that are 
carried to them by the motion of supergranules in the 
photosphere (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: SUPERGRANULATION). 
Plumes support low-frequency magneto-acoustic 
waves that propagate upward from the photosphere into 
the corona. These wave fronts are quasi-periodic, coming 
in trains of only a few wavefronts at a time, with periods 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Plumes ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


eee 


Er ee ee eee een abr All 


c : ; 
iy 
. 
VW) 
« 


(171 A) 
4:14|8-Mar-96 


‘ 


sa 


120° F k 180° x 220° 240° 
~q— West South East —> 


Figure 3. The plumes in figure 1 in the context of the whole corona. Data from four instruments have been combined to make this 
montage image, in which the horizontal direction measures azimuth around the Sun and the vertical direction measures distance from 
the center of the solar disk. The vertical scale is logarithmic, to show both the small roots of the plumes and their vast extensions into 
interplanetary space. 


of 10-20 min (1-2 mHz). They have density amplitudes of | (about 1 kW m~*) required throughout the coronal hole to 
up to 10%, resulting in traveling fluctuations in brightness 

in the extreme ultraviolet seen by spaceborne telescopes _ heat the corona and drive the high-speed solar wind. The 
such as TRACE and EIT. The waves carry energy fluxes 

of about 50 W m~™, or a few per cent of the energy flux _ origin of the waves is not known. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Polar Plumes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Connection to the high-speed solar wind 

At any given time, there are only a few bright plumes 
in existence; these brightest plumes cannot account for 
more than a small proportion of material streaming out 
in the solar wind. However, the vast majority of plume- 
like magnetic structures are only slightly brighter-denser 
than the interplume regions between them; these fainter 
plumes do subtend a significant part of the solid angle in 
the coronal hole, and in turn must make up a large fraction 
of the solar wind. Hence, understanding solar wind flow 
in polar plumes is important to the broader problem of 
understanding the high-speed solar wind. 

With the advent of both stable coronagraphs and 
accurate coronal UV spectrometers aboard the SOHO 
spacecraft, it has been possible to place limits on the 
flow speeds inside polar plumes. Direct Doppler 
measurements by the SUMER instrument of spectral lines 
emitted by the magnesium IX and oxygen V ion species in 
the lower corona show that plumes’ outward flow is very 
subsonic in the lower reaches of the coronal hole: 150 Mm 
above the surface, SUMER measurements constrain the 
radial outflow speed to less than 30 km s~!. Higher up, 
about 1 solar radius over the limb of the Sun, Doppler 
dimming measurements with UVCS show outflow speeds 
of 100-200 km s“!, indicating that the sonic point occurs 
between 1 and 2 solar radii over the limb (2 and 3 solar radii 
from disk center). This rapid acceleration cannot be 
explained by hydrostatic forces alone; some other form 
of momentum transfer, such as waves launched from the 
photosphere or chromosphere, must be at work. 

Because plumes appear to extend well into the outer 
corona, one might expect traces of them to remain in the 
high-speed solar wind at interplanetary distances. The 
Ulysses spacecraft has flown over the poles of the Sun, 
sampling the solar wind throughout the coronal hole at 
latitudes from 0° to over 80° at distances greater than 
1 AU. Fluctuations in the density of the solar wind are 
seen on timescales of about a day, suggesting that the 
traces of plumes may survive as coherent structures to 
distances of more than 1 AU from the Sun itself. There is no 
direct evidence that the density fluctuations are actually 
polar plumes, in part because there was no spaceborne 
coronagraph in operation to compare with the in situ data 
during Ulysses’ first overflight of the poles. The frequency 
spectrum of the fluctuations shows no major features at 
particular timescales and does not vary strongly with 
latitude within the coronal hole. This pattern could result 
either from randomly sized plume-like structures in the 
heliosphere or from time-dependent fluctuations in the 
solar wind itself. Whether or not the plumes survive to 
high heliographic altitudes, and how much they affect the 
solar wind, are important unanswered questions. 


Bibliography 

DeForest C E et al 1997 Polar plume anatomy: results of a 
coordinated observation Sol. Phys. 175 393 

Hassler D, Wilhelm K, Lemaire P and Schtihle U 1997 
Observations of polar plumes with the Sumer 
instrument on SOHO Sol. Phys. 175 375 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Newkirk G Jr and Harvey J 1968 Coronal polar plumes 
Sol. Phys. 3 321 

Poletto G et al 1996 Searching for coronal plumes in Ulysses 
observations of the far solar wind Astron. Astrophys. 
316 374 

Wang Y M 1994 Polar plumes and the solar wind Astrophys. 
J. Lett. 435 L153 


C E DeForest 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Ring Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polar Ring Galaxies 


Polar ring galaxies are peculiar objects in the sky, 
composed of a primary galaxy disk and a ring of stars 
orbiting in a plane almost perpendicular to the primary 
disk (i.e. almost polar). The prototype of these peculiar 
galaxies is NGC 4650A, in figure 1. 

Polar rings are most often found around early-type 
galaxies, essentially classified lenticular (or SO) in the 
Hubble sequence (see HUBBLE CLASSIFICATION). In very rare 
cases, these rings have been found around flattened 
ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES and, even less frequently, around late- 
type SPIRAL GALAXIES, Which are gas rich themselves. In 
those cases, they are not well relaxed and are still 
composed of many tilted rings, in the process of settling 
to some symmetry plane in the potential of the primary 
galaxies (e.g. the Spindle galaxy NGC 2685, or NGC 660). 

Spectroscopy has shown that the two disks are 
rotating and that their axes of rotation are almost 
perpendicular. In the most frequent cases, the polar rings 
have radii larger than the main galaxy (they are then more 
detectable); when there is gas in the two systems, they 
are never at the same radii, since gas cloud collisions will 
scatter them apart. 

Note that a certain class of rare ringed galaxy could 
also be related to polar ring galaxies, those possessing 
only one broad ring around a central unbarred disk. The 
prototype is Hoag’s object (figure 2), also called the ‘bull 
eye’. We would then observe the central early-type galaxy 
end on, and the polar ring face on. The much more 
abundant barred galaxies possessing one or more resonant 
rings can be explained easily by the action of the bar. Also, 
head-on collisions between two galaxies can develop in the 
disk of each of them a density wave propagating radially as 
aring. The prototype is the well-known CARTWHEELGALAXY. 
These are recognizable from polar rings, since the galaxy 
nucleus is off-centered with respect to the ring. 


Origin of these galaxies 

The existence of two systems with almost perpendicular 
directions of rotation is not possible without a secondary 
event in the formation of the system, such as a galaxy 
interaction or merger. Whena galaxy forms, it is composed 
essentially of gas, and, through dissipative processes, this 
gas settles in a disk, perpendicular to the average angular 
momentum of the system (See GALAXY FORMATION, GAS IN 
GALAXIES). Clouds of gas with other directions of rotation 
lose their misaligned angular momentum in collisions that 
mutually re-orient their orbits. The equilibrium state is a 
disk of gas in rotation, in which stars form progressively, 
consuming the gas. All the matter is rotating in the same 
sense. 

However, galaxies form in a hierarchical way: they 
are formed in groups, that belong themselves to clusters, 
then superclusters, etc.... Galaxies are not distributed 
homogeneously in the sky, and they have frequent 
gravitational interactions that lead to mass exchange and 
mergers. A merger between two galaxy disks, with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Prototype of the polar ring galaxies, NGC 4650A, a 
southern sky object in the constellation of Centaurus. Two 
components can be seen: a primary disk galaxy, oriented almost 
horizontal in this picture, which is of lenticular type, and an 
extended ring-like distribution of stars, almost perpendicular to 
it, which is called the polar ring itself. The latter looks younger, 
with an irregular and clumpy shape, containing gas and dust, 
while the primary disk is old, smooth, and mostly stellar. 
(Photograph from VLT ESO-Press Release 19/98.) 


different angular momenta, is the way to build polar 
ring systems. When a small galaxy companion is tidally 
destroyed and swallowed by the primary galaxy, the 
stellar component is heated and spread all around, since 
stars cannot collide and dissipate energy. The gas on 
the contrary can dissipate its energy and fall inside the 
potential well of the primary galaxy. It settles into a disk, 
perpendicular to the average angular momentum, as in the 
case of first formation, and, in general, it becomes aligned 
in the equatorial plane of the primary galaxy. In rare cases, 
however, there exists a stable polar orbit, where the gas 
can be trapped. If the gas disk then formed is massive 
enough, it changes the gravitational potential in its vicinity, 
which stabilizes the new disk. Stars can then form in this 
perpendicular disk, and a polar ring system is born. In 
most of the polar rings known, stars in the polar disk are 
a few Gyr old, demonstrating the age and stability of the 
system. 

The formation of a polar ring is rare, since most of 
the time mass is accreted in the symmetry plane of the 
primary galaxy, sometimes in a sense opposite to the 
primary sense, forming a galaxy with two counter-rotating 
streams of stars. Also, polar rings are difficult to detect, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Ring Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Photograph of Hoag’s object, the ‘bull eye’, showing 
the central core and surrounding broad ring. The size of the ring 
is about 15 kpc. Objects of this type have been suggested to be 
polar rings seen face on. (From Schweizer et al 1987 Astrophys. J. 
320 454.) 


since they are conspicuous only for special viewing angles 
(see figure 3), when the polar ring appears nearly edge 
on. The percentage of polar ring systems observed at the 
present time is about 0.5%, and taking into account the 
viewing selection bias, together with other factors (such 
as dimming or short lifetime of the rings), it is estimated 
at 5% in reality. This percentage should have been even 
higher in the past, since the rate of galaxy merging is 
predicted to peak at about one-third of the universe’s age, 
in modern cosmological formation scenarios (See GALAXIES: 
INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). 


Stability 
If the ring is not too massive, and the orbiting matter can 
be considered as test particles in the potential of the main 
galaxy, it must evolve quite rapidly, through differential 
precession. The rings are not exactly polar (tilted by 
about 20° from the pole), and therefore do not lie in a 
symmetry plane of the inner galaxy. The gravity field is not 
spherical, since the primary galaxy is flattened, but has a 
quadrupole moment, which produces a torque on particles 
in the ring, causing their orbit to precess. The precession 
rate depends on the orbital inclination and radius of each 
particle and is differential, since all particles do not precess 
at the same rate (the ring is broad and spans a significant 
range in radius). Then, it can be computed that the polar 
ring should look warped and twisted in much less than a 
Hubble time, since the particles in the ring acquire orbits 
with different orientations according to their radius. 

This is a dynamical puzzle, since most present-day 
polar rings are flat, but also because the gas clouds will 
collide and dissipate when the disk is twisted and warped, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


CD Get) < 
OOODDBR+ 
®O@BAKX 
@©e@eo8 x x 
@eee*x + 
eoeeer 


Figure 3. Schematic representations of a polar ring galaxy, as 
seen from different viewing orientations. The full disk 
represents the primary (lenticular) galaxy, and the thin ellipse, 
the polar ring itself. Note that, in the majority of cases, it is 
difficult to identify the projected system as a polar ring galaxy, 
the most favorable cases being the two systems nearly edge on. 


and rapid inflow and settling to the equatorial plane will 
follow. The gas will not have time to form a disk of stars, 
as is observed. 

A solution to this problem is that the polar disk is 
warped in such a manner that the tilt with respect to the 
pole compensates the decrease of the torque with radius: 
the polar disk is slightly tilted towards the pole at large 
radius. Also, the self-gravity of the polar disk produces 
compensating torques that stabilize the polar ring. In any 
case, if the ring is too broad, it can break up in a number 
of subrings that will precess independently. The inner 
rings will precess more rapidly and settle to the equator, 
allowing the remaining outer ring to become more polar 
and more stable. 


The 3D shape of dark matter halos 

Polar ring systems are very useful, since they give us the 
possibility not only to test galaxy formation scenarios but 
also to probe the dark matter distribution around galaxies 
(See DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES). Indeed, we know from the 
rotation curves of spiral galaxies, that they are embedded 
in dark matter halos. In particular, the interstellar gas 
that can extend in radius much farther than the stars in a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polar Ring Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


galaxy disk is observed to rotate around the center at a high 
velocity. For this gas to be in rotation equilibrium requires 
a lot more mass in the disk than is visible by radiation. 
In other words, there must exist some dark mass that is 
detected only through its gravitational action. 

Since the gravitational action of the dark matter 
is usually known only in the galaxy disk, through 
measurements of velocities here, we cannot know the 3D 
shape of the dark matter distribution: is it a spherical 
halo or a dark matter disk or has it some flattening in 
between? The answer to this question will considerably 
help to determine the nature of dark matter. If it is a non- 
baryonic exotic particle, interacting only gravitationally 
with ordinary matter, than it is not dissipative, and cannot 
be flattened as a disk. On the contrary, a distribution of 
dark baryons could be more flattened. 

In polar ring systems, matter is rotating in two 
perpendicular disks, allowing us to probe the rotational 
velocity outside the main disk, in the dark matter halo. 
This is the occasion to deduce the 3D shape of dark 
halos. The problem is, however, more tricky to solve than 
expected. First, there is a selection bias to detect polar 
ring systems where the polar disk is bright enough: in 
that case, it is also massive enough to perturb the gravity 
field and mask the true dark halo potential. In the case 
of NGC 4650A, for instance, when all the mass is added 
(gas and stars), the polar accreted disk is almost as massive 
as the primary visible disk. The mass ratio is so extreme 
that one has proposed the opposite scenario, where the 
primary disk is the ‘polar ring’ and the accreted object is 
the lenticular old galaxy in the middle. 

Second, in general, the polar system is outside and 
not overlapping with the inner disk, and the velocities in 
perpendicular planes are not known at the same radii. 
Extrapolations are therefore required, which are model 
dependent. This is true in particular when there is gas 
in both systems, although gas velocities are more precise. 

Third, because of the flattened nature of the potential 
(at least due to the visible mass), there is no matter 
in circular orbit anywhere in the system (neither in the 
primary disk, which is no longer axisymmetric, owing to 
the mass of the polar ring, nor in the polar ring itself). 
Orbits are all elongated and explore a large range of radii. 
They must be modelled through shooting techniques and 
depend on the mass distribution in a complicated way. 

Finally, it is also possible that the dark matter, if 
not spherical, is flattened around the polar disk and not 
around the primary disk. This has been shown to be a 
viable model for NGC 4650A in particular. In summary, 
polar ring galaxies carry a real hope that they will allow 
the 3D shape of the dark matter halos (and clues to their 
nature) to be determined, but precise spectroscopy and 
photometry data are needed to constrain the models, 
together with further exploration of the many possible 
models. 


Bibliography 
Book: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Casertano S, Sackett P D and Briggs F H (ed) 1991 
Warped Disks and Inclined Rings around Galaxies Proc. 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Journals articles: 


Combes F and Arnaboldi M 1996 The dark halo of polar 
ring galaxy NGC 4650A: flattened towards the polar 
ring? Astron. Astrophys. 305 763 

Sackett P D, Rix H-W, Jarvis BJ and Freeman K C 1994 The 
flattened dark halo of polar ring galaxy NGC 4650A: 
a conspiracy of shapes? Astrophys. J. 436 629 

Whitmore B C, Lucas R A, McElroy DB, Steiman-Cameron 
TY, Sackett P D and Olling R P 1990 New observations 
and a photometric atlas of polar-ring galaxies Astron. 
J. 100 1489-522 


Francoise Combes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Imaging Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polarimetry: Imaging Polarimetry 


Knowledge of the poLarizaTION state of radiation provides 
far more astrophysical information than intensity alone. 
Although the degree of polarization can be small, its 
measurement is relatively straightforward and it can 
reveal the underlying nature of sources such as young stars 
and the nuclei of active galaxies that are often hidden from 
our direct view. 


Outline of the article 

Our knowledge of the universe comes almost entirely 
through observing the ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION emitted 
from the great variety of objects contained within it. Yet 
measuring just the intensity of that radiation, whether 
it be its spatial variation or spectral composition, gives 
only a fraction of the information that is potentially 
available. This article gives a more complete description 
of light, by including its polarization properties, and 
then outlines the main physical processes responsible for 
producing polarized radiation in astronomy and the way 
it can be used to understand astrophysical processes. 
The basic components of an astronomical polarimeter 
are introduced followed by some recent results from 
astronomical research based on imaging polarimetry. 


Basic physics 

All electromagnetic radiation, from radio through to y- 
rays, consists of an oscillating electric and magnetic field, 
with both oscillations transverse to each other and to the 
direction of propagation of the radiation. The polarization 
state of the radiation is, by convention, defined by the 
behaviour of the electric field. In the case of unpolarized 
radiation, the electric field orientation behaves ina random 
manner. For polarized radiation, the tip of the vector that 
represents the instantaneous electric field traces out an 
ellipse, a circle or a straight line, and the radiation is said to 
be elliptically, circularly or linearly polarized, respectively, 
with circular and linear polarization being particular cases 
of the more general elliptical form. 

Degrees of polarization p can take any value 
from 0 to 1, and thus a mathematical description is 
required that can accommodate zero, complete and partial 
polarization. The most convenient and most widely used 
parametrization is due to Sir GEORGE STOKES, who used a 4- 
vector representation of radiation with components J, Q, 
U and V. 

The link between the Stokes parameters and the 
geometry of a polarization ellipse is given by 


l=a’ QO =a’ cos 28 cos 20 


U =a’ cos2£ sin 20 V =a’ sin2p 


where a represents the ellipse size, tan 6B the ratio of the 
minor to major axes (8 = 0 for linear and 7/2 for circular 
polarization) and @ is the orientation of the ellipse. For 
linear polarization the ellipse collapses to a straight line 
and @ is known as the position angle of polarization, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


essentially giving the preferred angle of the radiation’s 
electric field, as projected onto the plane of the sky. By 
convention this is measured from north, with increasing 
values rotating eastwards. 

The degree of polarization p, linear polarization pin, 
circular polarization pci, polarized intensity J, and @ are 
given by 

(Q? ze U2 + yy (Q? + Uy? 

a i rr 


4 ae fl 
Peirce = I, = Ip 6 =0.5tan (3) 
and the sign of V gives the handedness of the circular 
polarization. 


Producing polarized radiation 

Some physical processes directly produce polarized 
radiation. The main examples of these intrinsic processes 
are cyclotron radiation, which is circularly polarised and 
produced by the motion of non-relativistic electrons in 
a magnetic field, and SYNCHROTRON RADIATION, Which is 
linearly polarized and produced by relativistic electrons 
in the presence of a magnetic field, with the polarization 
perpendicular to the magnetic field. 

More commonly, polarized radiation is produced in 
secondary processes through the interaction of radiation 
with matter. For example, scattering off electrons 
(Thomson scattering) or dust grains whose size is small 
compared with the wavelength of the radiation (Rayleigh 
scattering) produces linear polarization, with the degree 
of polarization p = (1 — cos*6)/(1 + cos”), where @ is 
the angle through which the radiation is scattered. In both 
cases the direction of the electric vector is perpendicular 
to the scattering plane, the plane containing the incident 
and scattered light, and the degrees of polarization are 
independent of wavelength. For larger grain sizes (the so- 
called Mie regime for spherical particles), the scattering 
becomes more complicated and the degrees of polarization 
are generally smaller. 


Polarized radiation as a diagnostic tool 

The detection of scattered (polarized) light is a very 
important diagnostic tool in astrophysics. It allows regions 
to be observed that are normally obscured from direct 
view. Examples are young stars and ACTIVE GALACTIC 
NucLeI (AGN), with both surrounded by optically and 
geometrically thick DUSTY CIRCUMSTELLAR DISKS (see figure 1). 
These disks obscure the central source unless our view 
is within typically ~30° of the normal to the disk plane 
(the disk polar axis). Optical and near-infrared radiation 
is unable to penetrate the dust but can escape along the 
poles of the disk and is then scattered to us by particles 
located along the polar axis of the disk. These particles are 
mostly dust grains in the case of young stars and electrons 
in the case of AGN. The scattering of light, above and 
below the plane of the disk, produces a REFLECTION NEBULA 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Imaging Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


To observer 


Scatterers 


ae 
Central 
source 


Paaates 
a, 

tt 
" 


% = ? Reflection 
on pas “ Nebula 
re 


4 ‘ YN 


Polarisation 
vectors 


Gu ey 


LWA /S 
a7 
e 


Figure 1. Light scattered from a central source is scattered to the observer by particles located along the poles of the obscuring disk. 
The reflection nebula is observed as a centrosymmetric polarization pattern with the length of each vector representing the degree of 
polarization and the direction of the line the position angle of polarization. The intersection of the normals to the polarization vectors 


(shown by dotted lines) gives the location of the illuminating source. 


with observed polarizations ranging typically from a few 
per cent to 50%. 

The scattered (polarized) flux in the reflection nebula 
gives the spectrum of the obscured source, although 
this will be modified if the scattering is off dust grains 
(in the Rayleigh domain, the scattered flux «1/A*), 
but is unchanged by electron scattering. The degree 
and position angle of polarization give the geometrical 
relation between the source and scatterers relative to the 
observer, e.g. the inclination and position angle of the 
polar axis respectively, as well as providing the location 
of the illuminating source, given by the intersection of 
the normals to the polarization vectors. Importantly, 
polarimetry is able to provide geometrical information 
on scales that could never be spatially resolved directly 
at optical or infrared wavelengths, even with the largest 
telescopes. 

In many astrophysical situations light is scattered 
more than once, and the scattering of linearly polarized 
radiation off non-Rayleigh particles produces circular 
in addition to linear polarization. Whereas linear 
polarization is dominated by the last scatter, circular 
polarization depends on the initial polarization state of 
the last-scattered photon and hence provides information 
on the previous history of that photon. Typical degrees of 
circular polarization produced by dust scattering are ~2%, 
or less, presenting a significant technical challenge. 

Circular polarization is also produced by the 
scattering of radiation (of any state) off aligned non- 
spherical grains. Dust grains can be aligned in many 
situations, and provided that the grains are paramagnetic 
they will always align themselves with their short axis 
parallel to the local magnetic field. 

Grains in the interstellar medium (ISM) are aligned, 
and radiation from any astronomical source, in passing 
through the ISM, is polarized by dichroic absorption, 
ie. the differential extinction of the light, with polarized 
components parallel to the long axis of the grain being 
preferentially absorbed. This produces a polarization with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the electric field vector parallel to the magnetic field and 
can be used to measure the direction of the fields. Dichroic 
absorption is the same process that filters polarized light in 
sheet Polaroid. Warm dust grains will also emit radiation 
(at wavelengths longer than a few microns), and if they 
are aligned the radiation will be polarized perpendicular 
to the magnetic field. 


Measuring polarization 


Most imagers and spectrometers can be converted to 
polarimeters by the addition of two standard optical 
components. The first is some form of modulator, which 
is usually a waveplate (also known as a retarder), and the 
second an analyzer. 

Both components are made from a birefringent crystal 
such as quartz or magnesium fluoride. Birefringent 
crystals have the property that the speed of light in the 
crystal depends on the direction of propagation and the 
polarization of the light. However, they do have one 
axis, known as the optical axis, along which all light— 
irrespective of the polarization state—travels with the 
same speed. 

A birefringent crystal has two refractive indices (n; 
and nz, with n; — nz known as the crystal birefringence), 
and light incident on a crystal surface, that is neither 
parallel to nor perpendicular to the optic axis, is doubly 
refracted. This is best understood by noting that, for 
polarized radiation, the electric field consists of two 
orthogonally polarized components which are refracted 
through different angles, producing two separate beams 
of light with orthogonal polarizations. This is the basis of 
the polarization analyzer. 

If light is incident normally on a crystal, with its 
optical axis parallel to the crystal surface, the two light 
components coincide but there is a phase difference or 
retardance between them. If the difference in crystal 
optical thickness d(n1—nz), where d is the crystal thickness, 
is exactly one-half or one-quarter of a wavelength then the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Imaging Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


* 2 


Cassegrain focus 
of the telescope 


Slots 
Retarder >) A B 
Bat 

Mask = = EI 

Wollaston > F=rsreey 

prism at ° RCTS Images on 

wae - detector 
Array ih cps A, Ay B, By 
Detector Orthogonal polarisations 


Figure 2. Typical polarimeter system used in optical and near- 
infrared imagers. 


crystal is known as a half-wave and quarter-wave retarder 
respectively. 

For measuring linear polarization a_ half-wave 
retarder is used. When rotated in the telescope beam 
it rotates the radiation’s plane of polarization through 
an angle twice the mechanical rotation. Following the 
modulator is the analyzer (here a Wollaston prism, see 
figure 2). The intensity of the emergent, orthogonally 
polarized, beams depends on the direction of the electric 
field of the light incident on the analyzer. 

As the half-wave retarder is rotated, the electric field 
of the emergent light rotates. On passing through the 
analyzer two light beams are produced with their relative 
intensity depending on the angle of the retarder. The two 
light beams are then recorded on an array detector. For 
light that is unpolarized no change in light intensity will 
occur as the waveplate is rotated, whereas if the light 
is 100% polarized the two beams will each have zero 
intensity for positions of the retarder separated by 45°. 

The most common polarizers are calcite plates, which 
produce a lateral separation of the two beams equal to one- 
tenth of the calcite thickness, and Wollaston prisms that 
produce an angular divergence given by 2(n, — nz) tan Q, 
where nj — nz is the birefringence of the prism material and 
Q is the prism angle. 

Exposures are normally taken with the retarder at 0°, 
22.5°, 45° and 67.5°, where 0° is along the equatorial north— 
south direction. The Stokes parameter Q is calculated from 
the relative difference between the intensities of the two 
beams with the retarder at 0° and 45°, and U is calculated 
from the relative difference with the retarder at 22.5° and 
67.5°. In principle, only the 0° and 22.5° positions are 
required but the 45° and 67.5° exposures provide some 
element of redundancy and also allow corrections for any 
difference in sensitivity between the two beams. 

Essentially the same procedures are used for 
measuring circular polarization except that a quarter- 
wave, rather than a half-wave, retarder is used. The action 
of this retarder is to convert the circular polarization to 
linear, which is then analyzed. 

In an imaging polarimeter, the two beams form two 
images on the detector, with both images representing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the same area of the sky. A focal plane mask has to be 
employed to prevent overlap of these images and thus loss 
of all the required information (see figure 2). 


Results from imaging polarimetry 

(a) Studying reflection nebulae around young stars, 
embedded in dusty molecular clouds, has been one of 
the major uses of imaging polarimetry at optical and 
particularly near-infrared wavelengths. Up to the mid- 
1990s all measurements were of linear polarization. The 
degrees of polarization give the inclination of the system 
to our line of sight, the symmetry axis of the polarization 
pattern gives the position angle of the normal to the 
circumstellar disk and the wavelength dependence of 
polarization gives the size of dust grains responsible for 
scattering the light to us. 

More recently, circular imaging polarimetry has 
been introduced. The degrees of circular polarization, 
produced by multiple scattering, are usually small (<2%), 
but nonetheless give important information on scatters 
close to the source, including in the circumstellar disk. 
Combined with the linear polarization, this technique 
provides far more information on grain composition and 
sizes. 

For some high-mass star-forming regions very high 
degrees of circular polarization have been reported 
(~20%). This is most likely produced by scattering off 
dust grains that have been aligned by magnetic fields in 
the region. Such high values, in a star-forming region, 
add weight to the suggestion that homochirality, the (left)- 
handedness of the amino acids of all living organisms 
on Earth, has an extraterrestrial origin, with the selective 
destruction of the other (right)-handed molecules by 
circularly polarized light. 

(b) Imaging polarimetry of AcTIVE GALAXIES, in the 
optical and near-infrared, has been used to study those 
cases where the nucleus, presumed to be a massive black 
hole fuelled via an accretion disk, is obscured by direct 
view by an optically and geometrically thick torus (type II 
AGN). The spectrum of scattered light reveals the nature 
of the obscured source and its spatial distribution gives the 
geometrical distribution of the scatterers. 

Light scattered from material along the torus polar 
axis (pointing away from us) is obscured by the torus. 
Hence the torus itself can be viewed in silhouette, 
back-illuminated by the scattered flux, and its size and 
inclination determined. 

(c) Imaging polarimetry of galactic disks is used to 
map the galactic magnetic field structure, with the po- 
larization presumed to arise from dichroic absorption at 
optical and near-infrared wavelengths, although contri- 
butions from scattered radiation can cause confusion. A 
more powerful technique is imaging polarimetry at radio 
wavelengths where the polarization is produced by syn- 
chrotron emission from charged particles, moving in the 
galactic magnetic field, with the electric field perpendicu- 
lar to the direction of the magnetic field. At radio wave- 
lengths scattering is unimportant. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Imaging Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(d) Polarization images in the mid- and far-infrared of 
the central regions of the Galaxy, and some star-forming 
regions, have been obtained. Here the polarization 
is due to thermal emission from dust grains aligned 
by the ambient magnetic field and the position angle 
of polarization is at right-angles to the projected field 
direction. The mechanisms involved in sTAR FORMATION 
are a major unsolved problem in astrophysics and this 
technique is at present the only one capable of studying 
the magnetic fields in the dense, neutral, molecular clouds 
where stars form. 


Bibliography 
A recent text covering polarimetry in astronomy: 


Tinbergen J 1996 Astronomical Polarimetry (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


A text on the physics and applications of polarised light: 


Collett E 1993 Polarized Light: Fundamentals and Applications 
(New York: Dekker) 


Reviews of polarimetry of galaxies and of AGN are given 
in 


Hough J H 1996 Polarimetry of external galaxies Astron. 
Soc. Pacific Conf Series vol 97, p 569 

Hough J H 1997 Polarization properties of active galactic 
nuclei Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf Series vol 121, p 600 

Hough J H 1997 IR polarimetry and the torus Astrophys. 
Space Sci. 248 269 


A paper presenting linear and circular polarization of 
a star-forming region, and discussing the origins of 
homochirality, is 


Bailey J A, Chrysostomou A, Hough J H, Gledhill T M, 
McCall A, Clark S, Menard F and Tamura M 1998 Cir- 
cular polarization in star formation regions: impli- 
cations for the origin of biomolecular homochirality 
Science 281 672 


A paper on the polarization of the Galactic center is 


Aitken D K, Smith C H, Moore T J T and Roche P F 1998 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 299 743 


James Hough 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Spectropolarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polarimetry: Spectropolarimetry 


Spectropolarimetry is an observational procedure in which 
the POLARIZATION characteristics of the light from an 
object are measured as a function of WAVELENGTH. Modern 
spectropolarimeters are capable of measuring not only 
the wavelength dependence of linear and/or circular 
polarization but also the total intensity of light at the same 
spectral resolution. In fact many spectropolarimeters 
are constructed by retrofitting a module containing the 
polarization optics to an existing spectrograph. The 
technique is most useful in objects that show relatively 
rapid changes in polarization with wavelength; otherwise 
imaging polarimetry (see POLARIMETRY: IMAGING POLARIMETRY) 
may suffice. 

Polarization is caused by anisotropy. This can be 
the simple geometry of scattering from electrons, dust or 
molecules or it can be the direction of a magnetic field. 
Spatial resolution in astronomy is always at a premium, 
and complex geometries often go unrecognized because 
they cannot be seen directly. Polarimetry in general, and 
especially spectropolarimetry, can give information on 
spatially unresolved geometries in objects which would be 
nearly impossible to study with conventional techniques. 

Spectropolarimetry has been used to discover hidden 
regions in the nuclei of active galaxies, study the 
asymmetric winds of stars, find parent stars of Herbig— 
Haro objects, separate reflected emission from emission 
produced in situ in the lobes of nebulae and characterize 
the magnetic fields of white dwarfs, among other things. 


Polarization analyzers 

Different wavelengths require different solutions to the 
measurement of polarization. For example in the x-rays 
Bragg scattering may be used. This article concentrates 
on UV-optical-IR applications. The simplest form of 
polarization analyzer is a material that preferentially 
absorbs one sense of polarization and which can be rotated 
in front of the detector. This is analogous to rotating a 
camera’s polarizing filter in front of the lens to change 
the contrast of the sky in a daylight scene or reduce the 
reflection on a lake’s surface. 

Almost all spectropolarimeters, however, use some 
sort of optic (the analyzer) that can split light into 
two beams of opposite linear polarizations', plus some 
mechanism (the modulator) for changing the relationship 
between the analyzer and the incoming light. In 
dual-beam instruments the analyzer outputs, and the 
detector records, two orthogonally polarized beams. The 
calibrated intensities of the two beams are compared, and 
the difference implies the polarization level. In single-beam 
instruments one of the polarization senses is discarded, 
either by absorption within the analyzer or by instrument 
design, and two separate measurements must be made 
to determine one sense of polarization. In this case the 


1 Outside of the realm of radio astronomy, there are few analyzers 
that can efficiently split circularly polarized light. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


modulator is necessary to present the polarization sense 
differently to the analyzer. In practice some number of 
inherently redundant measurements may be made, in 
either technique, in order to remove other effects within 
the system, such as drifting gains, changing backgrounds, 
etc. 

Many analyzers use the intrinsic birefringence of 
some crystals, most notably calcite, magnesium fluoride 
and quartz. Sapphire and lithium niobate are common 
choices in the infrared. In birefringent crystals the different 
linear polarizations have different refractive indices. Light 
will naturally separate into two side-by-side beams in such 
crystals, although the separation of the beams is sometimes 
inadequate for use in real instruments. In analyzers such 
as the Glan—Taylor (or Glan-air) and Glan-Thompson 
prisms, one polarization undergoes total internal reflection 
at an interface, effectively separating it from the other 
polarization, which passes through the interface. In 
single-beam instruments the separated beam is discarded; 
in dual-beam instruments both beams are used. These 
analyzers can have relatively large beam separations and 
are achromatic over wide wavelength ranges. 

In instruments that use smaller beam deviations, a 
‘comb dekker’ is often used. This consists of alternating 
clear and opaque strips, each roughly one beam separation 
wide. This allows the second, offset beam from one clear 
strip to fall on a part of the detector that normally would 
be illuminated by the first beam of the adjacent opaque 
strip. A comb dekker allows relatively thin analyzers to 
cover large fields of view, but effects from the edges of the 
strips often further reduce the field available in a single 
image. 


Polarization modulators 

The modulator is also required to measure the other sense 
of polarization using the same analyzer. Sometimes the 
entire instrument may be rotated, but more common is 
the use of a wave plate. These are typically two or more 
birefringent materials combined to provide either a half 
wave or quarter wave of phase difference between the 
two polarization senses. A half-wave plate will rotate 
the plane of polarization of linearly polarized light; hence 
a rotating half-wave plate is a common component of 
a linear spectropolarimeter. A quarter-wave plate can 
be used to convert linearly polarized light to circularly 
polarized light and vice versa. 

Wave plates are often designed to work over a 
large range in wavelength. Materials with different 
birefringent properties can be combined to produce 
achromatic or even ‘superachromatic’ wave plates, similar 
to the way in which different lens materials are combined 
to produce achromats or apochromats in lens design. 
The ‘Pancharatnam’ design, which uses six pieces of 
two different materials, is the most popular form of 
‘superachromatic’ wave plate design. It is used in 
instruments which span a factor of 4 in wavelength 
coverage, such as optical spectrographs working from 
3000 A to 1.2 wm. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Spectropolarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a 
400 ;— al 
L NGC 1068 nucleus_ 
300 total flux  — 
200 |- z= 
100 F 4 
Een L ned ben peacoat 
rt 7 
Err FEET TT 1 
L polarized | 
gE flux Ba 
21 a 
11 ail 
Sean: 


4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 1. Spectropolarimetry of NGC 1068. In total flux (top 
panel) the spectrum shows relatively narrow emission lines. In 
polarized flux (bottom panel), however, the spectrum looks 
quite different, with broad permitted lines and strong blends of 
Fe II emission, both characteristic of high-density regions. In 
total flux NGC 1068 was classified as a Seyfert 2 galaxy, while in 
polarized flux it would be a Seyfert 1. 


Applications of spectropolarimetry 

P(A) is particularly powerful when emission or absorption 
features are expected to show some polarization signature. 
It allows understanding of the geometry and kinematics 
of regions separated by angular distances far smaller than 
the diffraction limit of the telescopes. 

A dramatic example comes from the field of research 
into ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGN). In many AGN our view 
into the center of the nucleus is blocked. Yet the nucleus 
is bright enough that its light reflects off surrounding 
material—dust and electrons—that we can see. Since 
reflection generally polarizes light, the light from the 
blocked nucleus is polarized. Light generated in the outer, 
unblocked regions seen directly is unpolarized; hence 
spectropolarimetry provides a way of separating the two. 
Normal spectroscopy may be overwhelmed by light from 
the regions in direct view and show little evidence of the 
obscured region. 

Such ‘mirrors’ into hidden regions will also impart 
their own signature on the polarized spectrum. Electrons, 
for example, have a scattering cross-section independent 
of wavelength and will not change the overall shape of 
the scattered spectrum. Hot electrons will also broaden 
spectral features. Dust grains tend to ‘bluen’ the spectrum, 
having a scattering cross-section that rises towards the 
blue. The velocity of the mirror can be revealed as 
a wavelength shift between polarized and unpolarized 
spectral lines. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


These effects can be seen in figure 1, spectropolarime- 
try of the Seyfert 2 galaxy NGC 1068. A normal spectrum, 
shown in the top panel, displays relatively narrow emis- 
sion lines of hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, etc. The 
polarized flux spectrum at bottom shows a large broad 
component to the Balmer lines and strong emission of Fe 
II, something not obvious in the top spectrum. 

If the scatterers are flowing toward or away from the 
light source, we have a ‘moving mirror’, in which the 
emission features in the source are Doppler shifted by two 
effects: the mirror moving relative to the source itself and 
the mirror moving relative to the observer. For an outflow 
velocity, V(out), of the scatterers, the observed Doppler 
shift is given by 


V(obs) = V(out) — V(out) cos (obs) 


where 6(obs) is the observation angle, 0° if the mirror is 
moving directly towards us, 180° if it moves away from us. 
The first term is simply the mirror-source Doppler shift, 
while the second is the mirror—observer shift. Note that 
when the mirror is moving towards us the Doppler shift is 
small, and when the mirror moves away from us the shift is 
largest. Realistic situations, in which the outflow covers a 
range of angles, require integration of the polarized flux as 
a function of velocity, favoring velocities closer to V (out) 
because forward and back scattering generally show low 
polarization compared with scattering at 90°. 

Some types of stars show features similar to active 
galaxies, albeit on a smaller scale. An interesting case is 
GL 1403, a cool, highly polarized carbon star. Figure 2 
shows its unusual polarization spectrum. The polarization 
is high towards both the blue and the red, but drops to 


KR Rh © nm 8 
S056 6 Oo 6S Go = 
SS see por 
: | 
ro) 
3 
ro) 
nN | 
: ! 
ro) 
ro) : 
= 
= — ee 
, = SS ae 
—s ——— = 
or = es mex) 
at = ce 
-°} = — | 
Ske | 
o f 
se, 3 
L = 
Q28f 3 
MD 
eo | 
paul 
ok 
3S 
ol 


Figure 2. The very red carbon star GL 1403 shows strong polarization at both the | 
between. Coincident with this drop is a dramatic swing in the angle of polarizatio 
borne out by HST imaging. In the red one sees light reflected by the equatorial tor 
dust in the torus becomes opaque, and instead one sees light dominated by scatte: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Spectropolarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nearly zero in between. At this minimum, the polarization 
position angle swings through a nearly 90° change. 

The interpretation of this spectrum is that in the blue 
we see scattering of light from the star, hidden by an 
equatorial torus, much the same as in some active galaxies. 
Towards the red, however, the dust in the torus becomes 
progressively less opaque, until we finally can see in to 
the stronger scattering occurring within the torus itself. 
The polar scattering seen in the blue occurs at a 90° angle 
to the scattering in the torus seen in the red, hence the 
position angle swing. High spatial resolution images 
using HST have confirmed that the blue image of the 
nebula is extended more or less orthogonally to the red 
image. 

Spectropolarimetry has also been used to determine 
the parent stars of HERBIG-HARO OBJECTS AND EXCITING STARS 
(HH objects), small gas blobs ejected from the vicinity of 
young stars. Quite often the young stars are obscured 
by their parent molecular cloud. They also tend to lie in 
regions with many other stars, so that infrared surveys 
that might penetrate the surrounding dust in fact show 
a number of stars, any one of which might be the HH 
object’s parent. When the spectrum of the HH object 
contains enough light reflected from its parent, the angle 
of polarization indicates the direction in which the parent 
lies (with a 180° ambiguity). Further, the polarized flux 
will give a spectrum of the hidden parent, providing some 
information on its spectral type, activity, etc. Note that 
measurements of the PROPER MOTION of the HH object supply 
similar directional clues, without the 180° ambiguity 
inherent in the polarization measurements. Of course, the 
proper motion data do not give any indication of the type 
of star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Another common scenario is light passing through 
nonspherical dust grains, which are magnetically aligned 
by the local magnetic field (see INTERSTELLAR GRAINS). The 
asymmetry leads to scattering of the light that prefers one 
polarization sense over another. The transmitted light 
is hence polarized, at a level dependent on the shape, 
size and composition of the dust grains and the efficiency 
of the alignment mechanism. This ‘dust transmission’ 
polarization is accompanied by reddening, and in most 
cases is small. In our Galaxy an empirical upper limit 
to the polarization is given by P(max) x 9% E(B — V). 
As a function of wavelength the polarization shows a 
convex curvature, with the peak polarization typically 
occurring at visual wavelengths near 5500 A. The peak 
can be shifted towards the red for dust grains larger than 
typical and to the blue for smaller grains. Except for 
interstellar absorption lines, the shape of P(A) is smooth 
and can be studied using multicolor imaging polarimetry 
as well as spectropolarimetry. However, there have been 
notable cases in which broadband polarimetry has misled 
researchers into thinking they were seeing polarization 
by interstellar dust, when in fact a far more complicated 
situation was revealed by spectropolarimetry. 


15 


10 


F, (10°) 


PG 1658+441 


) 


| 
| 
i \ a Noe | onda 


oe 


( 


{ 


v/I 
oO 
ryt yt 
— 


a 
a icon aa capa 


(MG) 


B 


| | | | | | | i | | | | | | 
4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 3. The white dwarf PG 1658 + 441 shows only broad 
Balmer absorption lines in total flux (top panel). Circular 
spectropolarimetry, however, shows that some of the broadening 
is actually due to the splitting of the lines in a strong magnetic 
field (middle panel). The amount of splitting can be estimated 
from theoretical models and can be used to measure the mean 
field strength (bottom panel). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarimetry: Spectropolarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A third source of polarization involves magnetic 
fields. As electrons spiral around magnetic field lines, their 
emission is polarized. If the electrons are relatively slow 
moving, cyclotron emission, both circularly and linearly 
polarized, is produced, while if the electrons are relativistic 
linearly polarized synchrotron emission results. Cyclotron 
emission is seen in white dwarfs with magnetic fields and 
synchrotron emission is often seen in the powerful nuclei 
of radio galaxies. 

The magnetic fields in the atmospheres of some stars 
will also cause the splitting of absorption features in the 
stellar spectra (See STELLAR ATMOSPHERES). The presence of 
the magnetic field splits previously degenerate energy 
levels in the atoms, causing a single transition to break up 
into multiple transitions. Consequently the spectrum will 
show multiple components of normally single absorption 
lines. Depending on the geometry and details of the 
energy levels, some of these components will be circularly 
polarized in one sense, some in the other, and some will be 
linearly polarized. In the weak-field cases the absorption 
features simply look broadened, and spectropolarimetry 
can be used to cleanly separate the components of different 
polarization and determine the field strength (see figure 3). 
In high-field white dwarfs the lines can be shifted so 
far from their original wavelengths that polarization 
information is necessary even to identify them. 

Polarization measurements are usually photon 
starved, meaning that the accuracy obtained is limited by 
the number of photons one can collect. The new generation 
of 10 m class telescopes is opening new realms of research 
using the powerful techniques of imaging polarimetry and 
spectropolarimetry, spurring renewed interest in a number 
of fields spanning much of astronomy and astrophysics. 


Bibliography 
Tinbergen J 1996 Astronomical Polarimetry (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Robert W Goodrich 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polaris 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polaris 


The star a Ursae Minoris, the (north) Pole Star, currently 
situated 44.16’ from the north celestial pole. Owing to 
the effect of precession, Polaris is currently approaching 
the pole; its closest approach will be 27.52 in ap 2102. A 
pale yellow supergiant of spectral type F7:Ib-IIv, apparent 
magnitude 1.97, Polaris is at a distance of 430 light-years 
(parallax 0.008”, absolute magnitude 3.6). It is a Cepheid 
variable with a period of 3.97 days, magnitude range 
1.9-2.1. Polaris is also a binary system, having a ninth- 
magnitude companion at a separation of 18.4”, a useful 
test object for small telescopes. Two fainter companions 
have also been detected. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarization 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polarization 


The extent to which the vibrations of an electromagnetic 
wave display a non-random orientation. Light, and 
other forms of electromagnetic radiation, consists of a 
periodically varying electric and magnetic disturbance 
that travels through space as a transverse wave motion (a 
wave that vibrates perpendicular to the direction in which 
it is propagating, like a wave on water). A beam of light is 
said to be unpolarized if it contains waves vibrating with 
equal amplitudes (heights) in all directions perpendicular 
to the direction in which the beam is propagating. By 
contrast, a plane-polarized (or linearly polarized) beam 
contains waves vibrating in one plane only. If, as a wave 
advances, the direction of vibration rotates (clockwise 
or anticlockwise, with the same frequency as the wave 
itself) but the amplitude remains the same, it is circularly 
polarized. The most general case is elliptical polarization, 
in which both the amplitude and the orientation vary as 
the frequency of the radiation. 

Where a beam contains a mixture of polarized and 
unpolarized radiation, it is said to be partially polarized, 
the degree of polarization being given by the ratio of 
the strength of the polarized component to the total 
strength of the beam. The state of polarization of a 
beam of radiation provides information on the mechanism 
responsible for producing the radiation at its source 
and/or on what has happened to that radiation between 
leaving the source and arriving at the observer. For 
example, thermal radiation and blackbody radiation are 
unpolarized, whereas synchrotron radiation (radiation 
emitted by charged particles moving at high speeds 
in magnetic fields) is highly polarized (elliptically or 
linearly). Light emitted from an ordinary star is 
usually unpolarized, but becomes partially polarized 
when it passes through clouds of interstellar dust grains. 
Radiation from pulsars and supernova remnants, which is 
produced largely by the synchrotron process, is strongly 
polarized. 


Seealso: black-body radiation, electromagnetic radiation, 
frequency, pulsars, radiation, supernova remnants, 
synchrotron radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarization in Active Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Polarization in Active Galaxies 


In the absence of a strong magnetic field, the emission 
of photons is a random process and light is unpolarized. 
The mere presence of POLARIZATION therefore signifies 
asymmetry in the emission mechanism or light path 
through a source—structural details which in principle 
may be inferred from observations of sufficient quality. 
Since radiation sources in the nucleus of an ACTIVE 
GALAXY generally overwhelm all other components, these 
techniques can be extended to very high rEDsuiFT where the 
entire object is unresolved. POLARIMETRY of active galactic 
nuclei (AGN) therefore offers the potential of not only 
discerning structural characteristics of individual objects, 
but also identifying relationships between various classes 
of objects and testing for evolution in the dimensions and 
activity level of the central engines. 


Taxonomy of active galaxies 

The classification of AGN reflects an historical background 
in which categories were defined more by observational 
than physical characteristics. The myriad of classes can be 
broken down according to two primary criteria: optical 
‘spectral type’ and radio ‘loudness’ (see ACTIVE GALAXIES: 
OVERVIEW). Objects dominated by a featureless power-law 
continuum and broad emission lines (23000 km s7? full 
width at half-maximum) are termed spectral Type 1, while 
those exhibiting a prominent starlight component and 
narrow lines are Type 2. The division by radio power 
commonly considers the ratio R = F(5 GHz)/ F (4400 A), 
with log R = 2 indicating a radio-loud object and log R S 
0.5 radio-quiet. As indicated in table 1, QSOs, Seyfert 1 
and broad-line radio galaxies (BLRGs) are Type 1, while 
Seyfert 2 and narrow-line radio galaxies (NLRGs) are Type 
2 examples. 


Table 1. AGN classification*. 


Radio-quiet Radio-loud 
Type 1 
Strong featureless cont. Seyfert 1 BLRG 
Broad permitted lines QSO Quasar 
Narrow forbidden lines 
Type 2 
Weak featureless cont. Seyfert 2 NLRG 
Galaxy starlight IRASQSO_——Hi-z RG 
Narrow forbidden lines 
Blazar 
Variable polarized cont. Don’texist? Blazar 
BALQSO 
Type 1+ BALQSO Don’t 
Broad absorption lines exist? 


* Boldface indicates objects with L > 5 x 10'7Lo. 


The unified scheme 

Beginning in the late 1970s, evidence began to point 
to relationships between certain classes of AGN. For 
example, it was found that SUPERLUMINAL MOTION is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


confined to objects which exhibit strong, highly variable, 
polarization—the BLAZARS. SEYFERT 1 GALAXIES and QSOs 
(QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS) seemed to form something of a 
luminosity continuum, as did RADIO GALAXIES and QUASARS. 
However, the breakthrough in understanding came with 
Miller and Antonucci’s detection in 1985 of polarized 
broad emission lines in the prototype Seyfert 2 galaxy 
NGC 1068. This remarkable discovery established two 
crucial points: (a) at least some objects displaying Type 
2 spectra contain broad emission-line regions, and (b) the 
fact that these regions can be detected in light polarized 
by scattering implies that other vantage points (i.e. those 
in the direction of the scatterers) would observe an object 
with prominent broad lines (Type 1). The observations 
quickly led to models which ‘unified’ broad- and narrow- 
line AGN into a single type of object whose observed 
properties depend on viewing aspect (See ACTIVE GALAXIES: 
UNIFIED MODEL). 

The key element of the unified scheme (figure 1) 
is a dense dusty/molecular torus which obscures the 
central engine and compact broad emission-line region for 
low-inclination sightlines. Small portions of the intense 
featureless continuum and broad emission-line spectrum 
of the internal QSO that escape through the polar hole 
of the torus is scattered by small particles (electrons 
and/or dust grains); this reflected component is linearly 
polarized. Evidence for a torus as opposed to other 
geometries comes from ‘ionization cones’ revealed by 
emission-line imaging and which are thought to arise 
from gas within the toroidal opening illuminated by 
the nuclear UV radiation field. Imaging polarimetry 
of favorable examples also depicts highly polarized 
centrosymmetric scattering regions (figure 2) very similar 
to the bipolar reflection nebulae observed in our own 
Galaxy. Finally, direct images of some nearby AGN have 
uncovered toroidal structures several hundred LY (light- 
years) across—these may be large-scale extensions of the 
structures which absorb much of the nuclear radiation and 
define the opening angle of the escaping radiation. 

The unified scheme represents an enormous improve- 
ment over previous pictures; indeed the polarization prop- 
erties of essentially all AGN are explicable in this context. 
However, it is important that the picture should not be 
over-interpreted. The scheme is perhaps better regarded 
as a valuable tool rather than a physical model—a starting 
point from which many mysteries of the nature of AGN 
must still be explained. 


Polarization of AGN 

The critical parameter of the unified scheme—in radio- 
quiet and radio-loud objects alike—is the inclination of 
the line of sight to the toroidal axis. 


High-inclination objects (Type 2) 

Type 2 spectra are measured for near edge-on examples. 
In this case the optical spectrum is dominated by starlight 
from the host galaxy and by the extended narrow-line 
emission region. The direct view of the nucleus is highly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarization in Active Galaxies 


4. __Seyfert 1/QSO 
f 


RADIO 
QUIET 


y- BALQSO 


narrow-line clouds, . 
scattering particles. 
(~1000 LY) : 


black hole (~1 Lhr), 
accretion disk (1 LY?), 
broad-line clouds (“1 LY) 


Radio galaxy 
~< p-Se yfert 2/ 


> IRAS QSO 


uring pe 
torus (~10-1000 LY)——__||_ ———_—___- 


elativistic jet, 
radio lobes 
up to ~106 LY) 


© elles 
mS? 
Y 


Blazar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The unified scheme for AGN, indicating object class as a function of viewpoint. For objects with Type 2 spectra (e.g. Seyfert 
2s and IRAS QSOs) where the central continuum and broad emission-line source are hidden from direct view, nuclear light is visible 
only as a component polarized by scattering off polar clouds of small particles. The degree of polarization declines with decreasing 
inclination and as the nucleus becomes progressively more exposed for the BALQSOs and objects displaying Type 1 spectra. In nearly 
pole-on radio-loud examples (Blazars), an additional highly polarized, variable component appears due to beamed synchrotron 
emission from a relativistic jet directed nearly along the line of sight. Drawing is not to scale. 


extinguished at wavelengths shorter than 1 zm, and re- 
radiation by the dusty torus in the mid-infrared (10 — 
30 zm) is prominent relative to the optical light. Narrow- 
line radio and Seyfert 2 galaxies are viewed at these angles, 
as are the luminous IRAS QSOs selected by the Infrared 
Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). 

Light escaping through the polar hole of the torus 
is scattered at large angles, resulting in high linear 
polarization. With the dusty torus blocking the nucleus 
that would otherwise dilute the scattered light, the net 
polarization of the object can exceed 15%. Because 
the scattering particles are mixed with the extended 
narrow-line emitting gas, the broad emission lines and 
continuum share the same polarization, but the narrow 
lines are unpolarized. Finally, lack of dilution from the 
central source results in narrow emission lines which are 
overemphasized in total flux spectra (figure 3). 


Low-inclination objects (Type 1) 

At a lower-inclination sightline, our view is unhindered 
by the torus, and a Type 1 spectrum is measured. Thus, 
optical surveys which discriminate according to near-UV 
excess or strong, broad emission lines catalog primarily 
classical broad-line QSOs and Seyfert 1 galaxies. The 
overall polarization is found to be weak, P < 2%, and 
spectropolarimetry of the emission lines reveals a range 
of properties: polarization which is weaker, but at the 
same position angle 6 as the surrounding continuum; a 
position angle which differs from the continuum value; 
even a rotation in 6 through the lines. The strongly 
polarized but faint scattered component is presumably 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Offset North (arc sec) 
0 


5: 


Offset West (arc sec) 


Figure 2. Imaging polarimetry of the nucleus of NGC 1068 at 
2.2 um. A scattering bicone is evident in the centrosymmetric 
polarization pattern represented by the (pseudo)-vectors. 
Contours represent the total intensity. (After figure 3 of 
Packam C et al 1997 Near-infrared imaging polarimetry of 
NGC 1068 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 288 375.) 


still present, but it is diluted to obscurity by the brilliant 
featureless continuum and broad emission-line spectrum. 
Instead, the observed polarization of Type 1 objects is 
thought to originate in the heart of the nucleus: through 
scattering off electrons in the broad-line clouds, scattering 
off the inner torus or the accretion disk which feeds the 
supermassive black hole, and in the radio-loud objects, 
possibly residual synchrotron emission from an inclined 
jet (see below). Much like the observations that led to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarization in Active Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


s 


— Mgll 42798 
- [OM] 43727 
[NellI] 43869 


OMI A3133 


1 
NI] 
=~ —[NelV] 42424 


— CII] A2326 
_— [NeV] 43346 


— Hell 
He II 


\ fh 
fanned nerd Naren SR SY © 
| e® 6 @ gia 


7 


Hel 3188 + Hell 43203 


er "4 |. 


20 - | ty \  , 
Hl fied i 


Hh Mi 
il ui 
i 


i 

a | i ti Sy if in | | | | 
Q 5 i iy Ht lily PPM IMA Wah dil | 
| “ae th PN a 


Lh 


10) HA 


—— Derived Intrinsic Spectrum 
— Composite QSO spectrum 


F15307+3252 Observed 


\ 
pwr ard erect paca se AS enol baat Soren eal ho 
fi 


4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 
Observed Wavelength (A) 


Figure 3. Spectropolarimetry of the IRAS QSO F15307+3252. 

(a) The observed (Type 2) total flux spectrum. (b) The degree of 
polarization. (c) The polarized flux with same units as for (a). 

(d) Comparison of the ‘intrinsic’ nuclear spectrum of 
F15307+3252 with that of a composite quasar (heavy line). The 
intrinsic spectrum was constructed by summing the polarized 
flux and observed narrow emission-line spectra, assuming 
isotropic narrow-line emission with equivalent widths typical of 
a luminous QSO. The smooth curve in (c) is a power-law of slope 
typical of unobscured Type 1 spectra. 


the unified scheme itself, detailed polarimetric studies of 
these objects may dramatically revise our thinking about 
the innermost regions of the central engine. 


Transition objects 

Evidence has accumulated over several years suggesting 
that QSOs which show broad absorption lines displaced 
to the blue of the resonance emission lines represent 
objects seen from a vantage point that just skims the 
surface of the obscuring torus. Emission-line spectra of 
these so-called broad absorption-line QSOs (BALQSOs) 
closely resemble unobscured QSOs, but extinction by 
intervening dust is indicated by the significant reddening 
exhibited by certain examples (see also QUASISTELLAR 
OBJECTS: INTERVENING ABSORPTION LINES). In some models, the 
absorbing clouds represent material ablated off the dense 
torus and radiatively accelerated to outflow velocities of 
at least 20000 km s7!. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Polarimetric evidence supports the interpretation 
of BALQSOs as ‘transition’ objects between Type 1 
and Type 2. Not only do they exhibit a degree of 
polarization which is intermediate between the types, 
but spectropolarimetry indicates that we are presented 
with multiple light paths from the nucleus—a direct 
route which provides a large portion of the continuum 
but is heavily extinguished in the absorption features, a 
polarized continuum component which is presumably the 
same scattered light that is seen in the edge-on examples, 
and the largely unpolarized broad emission lines whose 
larger emitting area is not completely occulted by the 
absorbing clouds. 


Pole-on radio-loud sources 

The event which originally focused the attention of 
polarimetrists on AGN was the discovery in the early 1970s 
of strong linear polarization in BL Lac (BL LACERTAE) and 
several other compact radio sources. The property was 
quickly attributed to non-thermal (synchrotron) emission 
of relativistic electrons in a magnetic field, and a common 
opinion held that the objects, which collectively became 
known as Blazars, represented ‘naked’ QSOs where the 
central engine is viewed directly. This static picture led 
to many difficulties in explaining the short variability 
timescales, high apparent luminosities and superluminal 
motion—difficulties which Blandford and Rees proposed 
would be largely alleviated if the emission occurred in a 
relativistic plasma jet whose velocity v is directed roughly 
along our line of sight. Doppler boosting enhances the 
brightness within a cone of opening angle 6 ~ /2/T, 
where I’ = 1/,/1 — v?/c?, leading to more than a hundred- 
fold increase in brightness on-axis for modest Doppler 
factors (CT ~ 5). The polarization of optically thin 
synchrotron emission is almost entirely linear, with 

at+1 


B= 75% 
a +5/3 


for a uniform magnetic field and power-law emission 
spectrum characterized by a = 1 (F, « v“). The 
position angle is perpendicular to the projection of the 
magnetic field axis on the plane of the sky. Because of 
the many physical attributes of the beamed picture and its 
natural place in the unified scheme (figure 1), it is nearly 
universally adopted today. 

Unfortunately, it is proving difficult to extract phys- 
ical details of the central engine from the enormous ob- 
served polarizations (up to 40%) and dramatic variabil- 
ity of Blazars. The beamed picture means that modest 
changes in the injection direction into a jet or of the mag- 
netic field arrangement within a plasma blob can trans- 
late into wild variations in P and 6 at the observer (see 
figure 4); in this sense the problem is one of ‘the tail wag- 
ging the dog’. Time dilation further complicates the situa- 
tion. Certain sources exhibit ‘preferred’ position angles of 
polarization which are often thought to indicate the gen- 
eral projection of the jet axis on the sky. BL Lac (figure 4) 
commonly exhibits a position angle which hovers around 
6 ~ 30°. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Polarization in Active Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


8 T | A | T T r | 
BL Lac 1984 October 5 ty 
¢ {4 aba git 
4 dag ap ate et A dt A 
ge 7 ra Mas uw ARETE AT 
& { j 
i May ie 1 
6 t 
1 i 1 | i 1 1 
7" 15 8 85 9 95 
55 I T T 
50 
€ aeslat WNy 
a 
45 [— 4 4 F zal 
ed Hay Ny, at lh pe 
49 L114 fe ey (fh erie 
, 75 8 85 9 95 
< Poe One) 
a a, a wee 
a | ee =| 
a 30 min. 
4 0 1 | L | 1 L 
15 8 85 9 95 


Julian Day (2445978+) 


Figure 4. Optical polarization of the synchrotron source BL Lac 
recorded at 1 minute time resolution. The ‘event’ centered near 
fractional JD = 0.8 can be represented by an emission 
component which rotates by 90°—and back!—in an interval of 
2h. The slow decline in brightness is due to increasing airmass 
as the object sets in the sky. 


Remaining mysteries 
The unified scheme has proven qualitatively correct 
for both radio-quiet and radio-loud AGN over at least 
eight orders of magnitude in luminosity. It is a tool 
which can be used to disentangle pure orientation from 
fundamental properties of the nucleus and eventually lead 
to 3D models. From the combination of multiwavelength 
imaging and spectroscopic observations, it is now possible 
to infer the sizes and structures of obscuring tori, and to 
measure scattering cone opening angles, accretion rates 
and black hole masses. Polarimetric observations formed 
the foundation of the unified scheme, and polarimetry 
plays a key role in these studies as well, particularly at 
distances where the nuclei cannot be resolved directly. 
We have still not solved the radio-quiet/radio- 
loud dichotomy. Progress in identifying this essential 
ingredient of the central engine will likely require 
much improved theories of the fate of magnetic fields 
in the innermost regions of the accretion disk and 
their role in launching relativistic jets. Interferometric 
and polarimetric observations at the shortest possible 
wavelengths will probe deep into the base of the jets and 
lend clues to their formation. For some as yet unknown 
reason, a correlation between radio loudness and galactic 
morphology persists. That puzzle touches upon the 
overriding question of the feeding and evolution of AGN, 
and of how they form in the first place. The historical 
record of this field has shown that answers do not come 
easily. When they do, as in the polarimetric catalysing of 
the unified scheme, they can appear from the most unlikely 
corners. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 
Comprehensive reviews of the unified scheme for AGN 
are given in: 


Antonucci R 1993 Unified models for active galactic nuclei 
and quasars Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 31 473 


A similar review for Blazars can be found in: 


Urry C M and Padovani P 1995 Unified schemes for radio- 
loud active galactic nuclei Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 107 
803 


Anexample of the power of polarimetry for understanding 
the nature of extremely luminous infrared galaxies and the 
identification of the class of Type 2 QSOs is given in: 


Hines D C et al 1995 The buried QSO in IRAS F15307 +3252 
and the nature of hyperluminous infrared galaxies 
Astrophys. J. 450 L1 


Gary Schmidt and Dean Hines 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pollux ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pollux 


The star 6 Geminorum, an orange giant of spectral class 
KOllIvar. At apparent magnitude 1.16 it is the brightest 
star in Gemini, suggesting that it may have brightened 
(or Castor faded) since the Bayer letters were allocated in 
1603. Pollux is rather closer than Castor, at 34 light-years 
(parallax 0.097”); its absolute magnitude is 1.1. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Pond, John (1767-1836) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pond, John (1767-1836) 


As an amateur astronomer, Pond had used the mural 
quadrant at Greenwich and analysed its inaccuracies. 
He participated in the committee which supervised 
its replacement by a 6 foot mural circle by EDWARD 
TROUGHTON. When Maskelyne died in office, Pond was 
appointed to succeed him and, as sixth Astronomer 
Royal, concentrated on upgrading the instrumentation 
at the Royal Observatory. Its measurements of star 
positions and time were raised to an accuracy never before 
achieved. During his administration the observatory was 
taken over by the Royal Navy, for which the observatory 
regulated chronometers, and he instituted in 1833 the 
public dissemination of time through the dropping of a 
time ball at 1 p.m. each day (this still happens). What gave 
under the pressure of all this new work was the Nautical 
Almanac, and it fell into disrepute, being transferred for 
recovery to the responsibility of a separate office, called 
the Nautical Almanac Office. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pons, Jean-Louis (1761-1831) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pons, Jean-Louis (1761-1831) 


Born in Peyre, France, joined the Observatory at 
Marseilles as concierge, becoming an astronomer there. 
Like Australian supernova-finder Robert Evans, he 
remembered the star fields that he observed and 
recognized changes; this enabled him to discover comets 
at the rate of about one per year from 1801 until 1827. 
He suggested to J FENCKE that a comet found by him was 
one already discovered by Encke in 1805. Calculating a 
period of 3.3 years, Encke successfully predicted its return 
for 1822. This comet is known as ‘Encke’s Comet’, but 
Encke himself referred to it as ‘Pons’ Comet’. Pons became 
director of the observatory at Marlia (Italy), and director 
of the Florence Observatory. 26 comets bear his name, but 
he discovered or co-discovered up to 37. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Population | Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Population | Stars 


The relatively young, metal-rich stars that are found in 
the disks and spiral arms of spiral galaxies. Originally 
differentiated from Population II stars by the German-born 
American astronomer Walter Baade (1893-1960) in 1944, 
on the basis of their metallicity and spatial distribution, 
they are now seen as representing stars that have formed 
in the latest stages of galaxies’ morphological and chemical 
evolution. Their orbits about the galactic center have alow 
eccentricity and a low inclination to the galactic plane. 

The oldest Population I stars are fairly strongly con- 
centrated towards the galactic plane, where their spatial 
distribution overlaps with the youngest of Population II. 
Intermediate Population I stars have approximately cir- 
cular orbits, are strongly concentrated along the galactic 
plane, and have an irregular distribution. The Sun be- 
longs to this population, together with the stars in older 
open clusters, many A stars, giants, and emission-line (Me) 
dwarfs. Extreme Population I stars have an extremely un- 
even distribution within galaxies’ spiral arms and have 
the greatest abundance of heavy elements. They include 
young stars in the process of formation, T-Tauri stars, OB 
associations, stars of spectral classes O and B, supergiants, 
classical Cepheids, and young open clusters. 


See also: Population II stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Population II Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Population II Stars 


Old red stars that occur throughout elliptical and lenticular 
galaxies, and in the haloes, globular clusters and central 
bulges of spiral galaxies. They differ from Population I 
stars in having a very low metal content, and those heavier 
elements that they do contain are thought to have been 
produced by massive, short-lived earlier stars which form 
a hypothetical Population III. Population II stars are now 
seen as forming a continuum with the younger Population 
I stars, although, for convenience, various subclasses are 
recognized. Their respective distribution may be related to 
the gradual concentration of material towards the galactic 
plane that occurs in galactic evolution, together with the 
chemical evolution of stars themselves, and hence of the 
interstellar medium. 

The oldest stars with the lowest metal content have 
an essentially spherical distribution, and are known as 
Halo Population II stars. This group includes the stars 
in globular clusters, long-period RR Lyrae stars (period 
>0.4 days), the W Virginis stars (also known as Type 
II Cepheids), and certain metal-poor subdwarfs. The 
stars of Intermediate Population II, which include most 
high-velocity stars and many Mira-type variables, are also 
metal-poor, but are more strongly concentrated towards 
the galactic plane. Both subclasses show an increasing 
spatial density towards the galactic center. 

The youngest Population II stars are those of the 
galactic bulge, where they intermingle with the very oldest 
Population-I stars, and form part of the Disk Population. 
They include short-period RR Lyrae stars (period <0.4 
days). The orbital eccentricity and inclination to the 
galactic plane show a decrease from Halo Population II 
stars to the Disk Population. 


See also: high-velocity star, Mira variables, Population I 
stars, Population III stars, RR Lyrae stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Population Ill Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Population Ill Stars 


A hypothetical population of stars that may have existed 
in the very early universe. As originally proposed, 
these extremely massive stars would have formed before 
the earliest galaxies, and have been responsible for the 
‘primordial’ helium content of the universe and also 
for a large part of the cosmic microwave background 
radiation. This hypothesis does not agree with the 
currently generally accepted theory of the Big Bang, nor 
with ‘top-down’ theories of galaxy and star formation. 
Subsequently, the term has been used for an early 
population of massive stars, long extinct, that would have 
exploded as supernovae, and thus account for the metal 
content of the Population II stars in globular clusters. The 
remnants of this early population would be neutron stars 
or black holes, and could thus account for some of the dark 
matter postulated to explain the missing mass in galactic 
haloes. 


See also: cosmic microwave background, Population II 
stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Porter, Russell (1871-1949) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Porter, Russell (1871-1949) 


Arctic explorer, astronomer, telescope-maker; born in 
Springfield, VT, helped to design the 200 in Mount Palomar 
telescope which he illustrated in the book Giant of Palomar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Poseidonius of Apamea (c. 135-—c. 50 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Poseidonius of Apamea (c. 135-—c. 50 
BC) 


Greek Stoic philosopher born in Apamea, Syria, settled at 
Rhodes, and from the rather imprecise observation that 
Canopus just rose above the horizon at Rhodes, but was 
7 degrees 30 min above the horizon at Alexandria, he 
determined a too-low value for the circumference of the 
Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Position Angle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Position Angle 


Ameasure of the direction of one object relative to another 
on the celestial sphere, for example the direction of one 
component (usually the fainter) of a double star from its 
companion. Together with the separation, this defines 
the observed form of the system, and such measurements 
repeated over many years enable any binary motion to be 
determined. 

Position angle, usually abbreviated ‘PA’, has been 
defined in the literature in various ways, often confusing 
and sometimes mutually contradictory. The best 
definition of the system, now accepted as standard, is 
‘position angle is measured anticlockwise as seen on the 
sky, from the +6 direction’ (the ‘+6 direction’ being the 
direction of increasing declination, i.e. northwards). 

Position angle may also be used in recording the 
location of an observed feature on the disk of a planet or 
the Sun, or to define the direction of an axis of rotation. In 
such cases, PA is measured eastwards from a line joining 
the center of the disk to the direction of the north point. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Positron 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Positron 


The antiparticle of the electron. It has the same mass 
as the electron but carries unit positive charge (1.602 x 
10-'° coulomb). Like the electron, it has a spin of 1/2 (in 
units of the Planck constant, h, divided by 27) but when 
an electron—positron pair is created, the positron will have 
the opposite spin to the electron. Electron—positron pairs 
can be produced from high-energy gamma-ray photons. 
Conversely, when electrons and positrons collide, they 
liberate energy on the form of gamma-ray photons. Where 
the electrons and positrons have been accelerated to very 
high speeds and kinetic energies, for example in particle 
accelerators, the energy released when they collide and 
mutually annihilate may be high enough to create hadrons 
and quarks. 


See also: antimatter, electron, gamma rays, hadrons, 
photon, quark. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Poynting—Robertson Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Poynting—Robertson Effect 


A net force acting on small particles which causes their 
orbits to decay, also known as Poynting—Robertson drag. 
When photons of light strike a dust particle in orbit around 
the Sun, they impinge not directly ‘side-on’ but slightly on 
its leading side (the ‘forward’ side in terms of its orbital 
motion). Their energy is absorbed, and subsequently 
re-radiated, but it is re-radiated isotropically—in all 
directions. The transfer of energy from photon to particle 
can be thought of as the application of a force to the 
particle. There is a component of this force that acts in 
the opposite direction to the tangential component of the 
particle’s orbital motion which is not compensated for 
when the absorbed energy is re-radiated. As a result the 
particle loses kinetic energy, which reduces its velocity, 
so it spirals inward, toward the Sun. This simple picture 
is complicated by, among other things, the fact that 
particles have different shapes and spins; a ring of dust 
particles of the same mean radius but with a distribution 
of shapes would gradually broaden out. The decay time 
is shorter for smaller and low-density particles. The effect 
can be counteracted by radiation pressure, more so with 
decreasing particle size below about 1 wm. The Poynting— 
Robertson effect also acts on particles in planetary ring 
systems. John Poynting was the first to describe the effect, 
in 1903; Howard Robertson derived it from relativity 
theory in 1937. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Poznan Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Poznan Astronomical Observatory 


This Poznan Astronomical Observatory is a unit of 
the Adam Mickiewicz University, located in Poznan, 
Poland. From its foundation in 1919, it has specialized 
in astrometry and celestial mechanics (reference frames, 
dynamics of satellites and small solar system bodies). 
Recently, research activities have also included planetary 
and stellar astrophysics (asteroid photometry, catalysmic 
binaries). The scientific staff consists of twelve researchers 
and six PhD students. In 1949, a new minor planet was 
discovered at the Observatory, receiving the name 1572 
Posnania. Nowadays, due to light pollution, observations 
are carried out abroad as well as at the 0.4 m photometric 
telescope located outside the city. 
For further information see 

http://www.astro.amu.edu.pl. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Precession 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Precession 


The slow periodic change in the orientation of the Earth’s 
axis of rotation due to gravitational attractions of the 
Sun and Moon on the non-spherical globe (geoid) of 
the Earth. The effect is often referred to as luni-solar 
precession. The term is also applied to the periodic change 
in the rotation axis of any spinning body, for example, 
an artificial satellite. The axis of the Earth is inclined to 
the perpendicular to the ecliptic by an angle of 23.44° and 
precession causes the celestial pole to trace out a circle 
of this radius around the pole of the ecliptic in a period 
of some 25800 years. Thus the north celestial pole is at 
present located close to the fairly conspicuous star Polaris, 
knownas the Pole Star. It lay close to the star Thuban in the 
constellation Draco 4500 years ago. In 12 000 years time, it 
will be near the bright star Vega. 

As the celestial pole moves, so the celestial equator 
moves relative to the ecliptic. Thus the points of 
intersection of these two circles, in other words the 
equinoxes, move along the ecliptic in a clockwise direction 
at a mean rate of about 50 seconds of arc per annum (i.e. 
360 in 25 800 years). Since the celestial longitude of a star 
is measured from the vernal equinox, it follows that this 
must increase at a rate of about 50 arcseconds per annum 
due to precession. 

The gravitational attractions of the planets cause a 
very slow charge in the orientation of the ecliptic (the plane 
of the Earth’s orbit) which causes the right ascensions of 
stars to decrease by about 0.13 arcsec per annum and which 
is known as planetary precession. The combined effects 
of luni-solar and planetary precession are called general 
precession. 

Because of precession, star catalogs and charts must 
be drawn up fora particular equinox (e.g. 00 hon 1 January 
for the years 1900, 1950, 2000 etc). If a precise position fora 
star is required at some other time, the effects of precession 
must be calculated to determine by how much the stars 
coordinates will have changed from its tabulated position. 

Hipparchus first noted the effects of precession in the 
second century BC. 


See also: rotation, equinox. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Prehistoric Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Prehistoric Astronomy 


For many decades arguments have raged about the nature 
and level of sophistication of astronomical achievements 
among pre-literate cultures in the Old World and among 
pre-Columbian peoples in the New. The often-heated 
debates have tended to revolve around some claim that 
astronomical knowledge reached a remarkable degree of 
sophistication among a particular group of prehistoric 
people—for example, the people who built and used 
conspicuous stone monuments during the Neolithic and 
earlier part of the Bronze Age in Britain and Ireland—and 
sceptical reactions by archaeologists and anthropologists. 

A fundamental problem that is still not always 
recognized is that to talk about levels of sophistication is 
already to measure prehistoric ‘achievements’ against our 
own and by implication to see scientific astronomy in the 
modern Western world as a pinnacle of achievement with 
all other developments in understanding either as steps 
along the road towards it or as dead ends along the way. 
Many archaeologists and anthropologists still feel that to 
speak of prehistoric ‘astronomy’ at all is to fall into this 
very trap. Itis crucial to appreciate at the outset that many 
other ‘astronomies’ are simply different, and if we are to 
attempt to understand and evaluate them in their own 
terms—that is, if we are to study what celestial bodies and 
events meant to different groups of prehistoric people and 
how astronomical ‘knowledge’ was used—then we must 
attempt to discover something of the wider frameworks 
of understanding within which the sky was observed and 
perceived by those people. 

Such world-views or ‘cosmologies’ are likely to 
have been very different from the Western perspective, 
as is evident from the many examples still existing 
in the world today among a variety of indigenous 
peoples. Things that from a Western point of view 
seem widely separated and to bear no relationship to 
one another may in other world-views be understood as 
inextricably linked. Indigenous cosmologies generally 
draw no clear distinction between terrestrial and celestial 
realms, between sacred and mundane activities, between 
animate and inanimate objects or between (what to us 
is) empirically real and what is imagined: thus, to the 
Barasana of the Colombian Amazon, ‘Old Star’, chief 
protector of the inhabitants of the sacred He world, is 
at once a human warrior, the fierce thunder jaguar, a 
constellation corresponding to Orion and a short trumpet. 

Space and time in the Western view are abstractions: 
backdrops upon which objects and events can be placed 
and plotted. To indigenous communities, on the other 
hand, particular places may acquire specific meanings 
and significance for any number of reasons, and spatial 
perceptions of the world are developed, in very particular 
ways, in relation to such places. Similarly, the timing 
of various human actions tends to be defined in terms 
of natural events and cycles, celestial ones included. In 
some measure this is for very practical reasons to do 
with subsistence, but it is also the case that where and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


when certain activities take place tend to be defined by 
the perceived need to keep human action in harmony 
with the cosmos as it was perceived and understood. It is 
this propensity that enables archaeologists to extrapolate 
from spatial patterning in the material record to make 
deductions about prehistoric cosmologies. 

It is in this context that astronomy is of particular 
importance to the modern archaeologist, because we can 
reliably reconstruct recurrent elements of prehistoric skies. 
Thus celestial correlations in the archaeological record 
(such as the alignment of buildings on solstitial sunrise 
or sunset) are easily recognizable as such, whereas many 
other referents that might have been crucial in determining 
the location or orientation of a house, temple or tomb are 
no longer detectable. On the other hand, an astronomical 
alignment could easily have arisen fortuitously, as a result 
of factors quite unrelated to astronomy, and where there 
is no independent evidence to support the astronomical 
interpretation it often takes the recurrence of a similar 
phenomenon among a group of related structures (e.g. 
a consistent pattern of astronomical alignment among a 
group of similar monuments constructed in a local area 
at a particular stage in prehistory) to provide convincing 
evidence that astronomical considerations were indeed 
important. 

It is impossible to make sweeping generalities about 
‘prehistoric astronomy’. For a start, the pre- (and ‘proto’-) 
historic societies about which one might speak differ 
hugely from one another, spanning a time period from 
the Upper Palaeolithic ca 30 000 BC to times immediately 
prior to European contact in the Americas and elsewhere. 
They also vary from small groups of hunter-gatherers to 
complex city-states such as those of the Maya, Aztec and 
Inca which, unlike the urban states of the Near and Middle 
East, were in no way precursors of the Western tradition. 
Furthermore, there can be huge disparities between the 
nature of world-views even of communities of a similar 
nature in similar locations, as is evident from certain 
indigenous groups living in relative proximity today. 

The earliest claim for astronomical observations 
relates to the Upper Palaeolithic, the period when fine 
depictions of animals first appeared in western European 
caves. A large number of engraved portable artefacts such 
as pieces of bone and antler are also known from this 
period. One, part of an eagle’s wing from a cave at Abri 
Blanchard in the Dordogne valley, France, contains a series 
of notched marks in a serpentine pattern. In the early 
1970s Alexander Marshack concluded from microscopic 
studies of these marks that they had been accumulated 
over a period of time. Furthermore, the numbers of 
marks in different parts of the pattern suggested that they 
were tallies of days in the lunar phase cycle. Others 
have questioned these conclusions, and they remain 
controversial. 

Marshack’s claims aside, there is little direct 
evidence of any interest in the skies among hunter- 
gatherer communities during the Upper Palaeolithic and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Prehistoric Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mesolithic. However, the evidence from modern hunter- 
gatherer groups such as Australian aboriginals suggests 
this should not be taken to indicate a lack of interest in 
the sky or that world-views of considerable complexity 
were not developed by such communities; it is merely a 
reflection of the paucity of the material evidence relating 
to such groups. 

It is in the subsequent Neolithic period, when early 
farmers around the Atlantic fringes of Europe started to 
construct the large communal tombs that still remain in 
considerable numbers as conspicuous monuments in the 
modern landscape, that substantive evidence relating to 
prehistoric astronomy first appears in many areas. It is 
clear that orientation was important as early as the fifth and 
fourth millennia BC: regional trends in tomb orientations 
are sufficiently strong and distinctive in many places that 
simple factors such as local topography or prevailing 
wind may be ruled out as a satisfactory explanation. 
Regional orientation trends are also evident among groups 
of communal long-houses built in the earlier part of 
the Neolithic across northern Europe. Each spread of 
orientations has a distinctive ‘signature’, many of which 
seem to be related in a general way to the motions of 
the Sun: for example spreads between north-east and 
south are quite common, and may reflect a need for tomb 
entrances to face the rising Sun or the Sun climbing in the 
sky. A similar remark holds for tombs and other forms 
of stone monument such as the megalithic rings and rows 
built during the Neolithic and well into the Bronze Age, 
perhaps as late as 1000 BC in remote parts of Scotland 
and Ireland. The orientation signatures of a few of the 
later groups such as the Scottish ‘recumbent stone circles’ 
and short stone rows in south-west Ireland are strongly 
suggestive that it was the Moon rather than the Sun that 
was of primary importance for their builders and perhaps 
regulated the timing of rituals or ceremonials held there. 

This picture is very different from that put forward 
in the 1960s and 1970s by ALEXANDER THOM, who pro- 
pounded the idea that many standing stone monuments 
incorporated intentional high-precision alignments on the 
Sun and Moon, reflecting their use as high-precision 
‘observatories’. These ideas did not stand up to close 
scrutiny, the main problem being the fair selection of data. 
Nonetheless, certain Neolithic chambered tombs do seem 
to have incorporated more specific solar alignments, a fa- 
mous example being Newgrange in Ireland, where a spe- 
cially constructed roof-box above the entrance permitted 
sunlight to enter the tomb for a few minutes after dawn on 
days around the winter solstice, shining down the entire 
length of the 19 m long passage to light up the bones of the 
dead in the central chambers. The monument was not an 
observatory in any modern sense of the word; the align- 
ment is probably best seen as a symbolic expression of a re- 
lationship between ancestors and the Sun that was of great 
significance to the builders because of the way they under- 
stood their own place, and that of their ancestors, in the 
cosmos. Similarly, Stonehenge—which for some 500 years 
had existed as a unexceptional ditch-and-bank enclosure 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in which various timber structures had been constructed— 
was reoriented on the solstitial Sun at around the time, ca 
2500 BC, when it was transformed into the stone edifice 
whose remains are so famous today. It could well be this 
realignment helped to strengthen its symbolic power by 
legitimizing its place at the center of the perceived cos- 
mos. 

In the European Iron Age, the evidence shifts to 
domestic structures such as British roundhouses, which 
not only manifest distinctive orientation trends but where 
there is evidence to suggest that certain activities may 
only have been appropriate in particular quarters of the 
house, paralleling what is known from various indigenous 
groups in north America. It seems too that certain 
places were preferred when disposing of the dead, of 
animals or of other objects, also reflecting symbolic or 
cosmological principles. Celtic cult sites also show 
distinctive orientation trends. 

In other parts of the world astronomies developed 
in distinctive ways. Polynesian navigators, for example, 
developed a practical astronomy based on 36 linear star-to- 
star ‘constellations’ that formed a three-dimensional ‘star- 
compass’ enabling navigators to locate distant islands. 
Central to Inca cosmology was the system of ceques, 
conceptually straight lines radiating outwards from the 
Coricancha temple in the Incaic capital Cuzco, which at 
once reflected Inca knowledge of the sky, dictated the 
layout of the city and organized social groups within it, and 
functioned as a calendar. Life in the Mayan world revolved 
around a multitude of ritual acts which were dictated 
by the calendar, and in particular by a repeating cycle 
of 260 days used widely in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, 
each day of which had particular symbolic associations 
and omens. However, the Mayans, who had developed 
a base 20 system of numeration together with a form 
of hieroglyphic writing, also developed a quantitative, 
predictive astronomy capable of forecasting eclipses, the 
appearances of Venus and Mars, and the passage of 
the Moon through the zodiac. They were prepossessed 
with the passage of time, always trying to equate integer 
multiples of different cycles: thus 73 cycles of the 260 day 
count equals 52 years of 365 days, and 405 lunations (11 960 
days) equals 46 cycles of the 260 day count equals (actually 
to within 3 h). This prepossession developed not in a 
spirit of abstract enquiry but in the context of a world- 
view in which the ruling class communicated with, and 
were legitimized by, the gods; there was a cosmic ‘right to 
rule’ that needed to be constantly reinforced by keeping 
their activities in tune with various celestial cycles (see 
MAYAN ASTRONOMY). 

Many investigations of prehistoric astronomies now 
take place within the framework of archaeoastronomy, 
an interdiscipline which arose in the 1970s as a result 
of the need to resolve the cross-disciplinary disputes 
raised by the work of Alexander Thom on the British 
megaliths. In north-west Europe, archaeoastronomy 
was mainly concerned with statistical appraisals of 
putative astronomical alignments amongst prehistoric 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Prehistoric Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stone monuments, but in the Americas it quickly began 
to assess such alignments in the context of a wider variety 
of cultural evidence bearing on the nature and meaning 
of astronomies in pre-conquest times, such as historic 
accounts, ethnographic accounts of modern descendants 
of pre-Columbian peoples and the written record in the 
form of codices, inscriptions and iconography. 

Archaeoastronomers have moved on from the days 
when they simply looked for astronomical alignments 
in prehistoric architecture—a sort of celestial ‘butterfly 
collecting’ which fails to consider the social context in 
which prehistoric astronomies might have operated and 
to address the cognitive issues that are vital for their 
interpretation. This has been replaced by a much broader 
approach which tends to highlight particular themes such 
as concepts of space and time, calendar development and 
the place of celestial referents in different schemes of 
‘sacred geography’ which are the concrete reflection in the 
physical landscape of the cosmologies which structured 
human action within the world as prehistoric communities 
perceived it. 

The sky is a symbolic resource of immense signifi- 
cance, not only because many of its cycles are convenient 
and reliable for regulating human activity, but also be- 
cause its immutability confers power on those individuals 
who can convince others that they wield control over ce- 
lestial cycles and events. Most archaeologists expect that 
the meanings attached to what was seen in the sky were 
highly specific, varying greatly between different cultural 
contexts. This specificity works against the need to seek 
repeated instances of patterning in the material record in 
order to be better assured that they were meaningful to 
the people who created them. As we have said, a solstitial 
alignment could easily have arisen fortuitously, as a result 
of factors quite unrelated to astronomy. On the other hand 
there is evidence to suggest that traditions of public ritual 
tend to change slowly, even in the face of social upheaval, 
and it is this—reinforced by clear trends in the archaeolog- 
ical record such as the strong patterning in sets of orien- 
tations of prehistoric tombs in many parts of Europe from 
Neolithic times onwards—that most clearly suggests the 
existence of a great deal of evidence yet to be explored that 
will give us new insights into prehistoric astronomies, and 
into the broader frameworks of cosmology in which they 
operated. 


Bibliography 

Aveni A F (ed) 1989 World Archaeoastronomy (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Ruggles C L N (ed) 1993 Archaeoastronomy in the 1990s 
(Loughborough: Group D Publications) 

Ruggles C L N 1999 Astronomy in Prehistoric Britain and 
Ireland (New Haven: Yale University Press) 

Ruggles C LN and Saunders N J (ed) 1993 Astronomies and 
Cultures (Niwot: University Press of Colorado) 


Clive Ruggles 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pre-main-sequence Binary Stars 


The typical product of the STAR FORMATION process is a 
multiple star system, most commonly a BINARY STAR. A 
pre-main-sequence (PMS) binary star is a pair in which, 
typically, both stars have not yet fully contracted to 
the main sequence and are not yet fusing hydrogen at 
their cores. Such binary stars are recently formed, with 
usual ages of less than 10 million years. Since stellar 
contraction times decrease with increasing stellar mass, 
most known PMS binary stars include stars with masses 
from a few solar masses to masses of less than one-tenth of 
a solar mass, at the threshold of brown dwarfs. Although 
formally the definition of a PMS binary star includes 
only two stars, they are sometimes found in higher-order 
systems (e.g. triples and quadruples) with a hierarchical 
ordering of their separations. 

Given their youth, PMS binary stars are often 
found still associated with the parent molecular clouds 
out of which they formed. They are also often 
surrounded by protostellar (and likely, PROTOPLANETARY) 
disks. Observations show that a PMS binary star can 
dynamically clear regions in such disks on size scales 
comparable to the binary separation, as predicted by 
theory. The impact of such cleared regions on the evolution 
of binary systems and the formation of planets is at the 
forefront of the field of star and planet formation. 


Pre-main-sequence binary star populations 

It has long been recognized that most stars in the galactic 
field are binary, and thus it was expected that most pms 
STARS would also be binary. Even so, it came as a surprise 
to find that in some star-forming regions PMS binary star 
frequencies are higher than the binary star frequencies 
found among main-sequence stars. For example, near the 
Taurus dark clouds the binary star frequency is a factor of 
two higher than the main-sequence binary star frequency, 
a remarkable result given that the main-sequence binary 
star frequency is more than 50% for solar-type stars. (This 
apparent mathematical contradiction is the result of triple 
systems being counted as two binary stars and so on when 
deriving binary star frequencies.) Such high binary star 
frequencies among PMS stars leads to the profound result 
that most stars form in the immediate vicinity of another 
star. 

Presumably the main-sequence stars in the solar 
neighborhood derive from earlier generations of stars 
which formed in molecular clouds elsewhere in the galaxy. 
Hence the higher binary star frequencies among PMS stars 
also leads to the conundrum of how the main-sequence 
binary star population derives from the apparently more 
abundant PMS binary star population. While the answer 
to this question is not secure, present studies suggest that 
this is not primarily an evolutionary process—that is, PMS 
binary stars do not break up to become single field stars. 
More likely, the PMS binary star frequency may vary with 
the environment of star formation. For example, PMS 
binary star frequencies may be higher among stars formed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in cold dark clouds, and lower in young clusters and OB 
associations formed in dense, hot environments. If, as has 
been suggested, young clusters and OB associations are 
the primary contributors to the galactic STELLAR POPULATION, 
then the conundrum is resolved. 


Orbital properties 

PMS binary stars have been found with orbital periods 
ranging from 2 days to longer than 100 000 years (the latter 
inferred from projected separations). The logarithmic 
distribution of periods is roughly Gaussian, peaking at 
periods of about 50 years and decreasing to shorter and 
longer periods. For binary stars made up of two solar- 
mass Stars this peak in the period distribution corresponds 
to an orbital semi-major axis of 17 AU, similar to the orbital 
radius of Uranus. So for more than half of the binary 
stars both stars would reside within the dimensions of our 
planetary system. 

At present our knowledge of the distribution of 
orbital eccentricity of PMS binary stars rests entirely upon 
spectroscopically determined orbital elements. Orbital 
eccentricities from e = 0 to e = 0.8 have been found. 
Most of the shortest-period binary stars (P < 6 days) have 
circular orbits; on the other hand, no circular orbits are 
found at longer periods. Together, these results suggest 
that circular orbits are not favored by the binary star 
formation process, and that the circular orbits at short 
periods are the result of rapid tidal circularization between 
these large convective stars. 

The PMS binary star period and orbital eccentricity 
distributions are similar to those found for main-sequence 
solar-type binary stars. Evidently the orbital properties are 
largely established by the PMS phase of stellar evolution. 
The secondary mass distribution of PMS binary stars is not 
yet well determined. 


Disks around young binary stars 

Circumstellar ACCRETION DISKS are an inevitable conse- 
quence of conservation of angular momentum in a con- 
tracting cloud, and recent studies have found them to be 
an essential component of single star formation. The same 
is almost certainly true for binary star formation. Nonethe- 
less, the conceptual framework of circumstellar disks must 
be transferred to binary stars with care. Perhaps most im- 
portantly, a binary star introduces its semi-major axis as a 
scale length in the process. We cannot expect disks in bi- 
nary stars with separations of thousands of astronomical 
units (AU) to mimic disks in binary stars with separations 
of a few AU. Furthermore, the concept of a single disk must 
be discarded. A binary star embedded within a coplanar 
disk is expected to dynamically clear a region on the scale- 
length of its semi-major axis. Consequently three distinct 
disks may be identified (figure 1). Each star can have an as- 
sociated disk within its ROCHE LOBE, referred to generally as 
circumstellar disks and specifically as circumprimary and 
circumsecondary disks (where the primary star is taken 
to be the most massive star). In addition, a circumbinary 
disk may be present external to the binary star orbit. One 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Close Binary (e.g. 5 AU) 


Circumstellar 
disks 


Circumbinary disk 


Intermediate Binary (e.g. 30 AU) 


Wide Binary (e.g. 150 AU) 


Figure 1. Schematic illustration of circumstellar and 
circumbinary disks among pre-main-sequence binaries of 
different separations. The outer radii of the upper two 
circumbinary disks are not to scale; actual disks have larger 
outer radii by factors of a few. 


or all of these disks may be absent in any given PMS bi- 
nary star system. Finally, the coplanarity of these disks has 
not been established by observation, and eventually may 
be a critical property for distinguishing among binary star 
formation hypotheses. 


Disk-star interactions 

Observations of disks around binary stars are best 
understood in the context of the dynamical theory for 
the gravitational interaction of stellar companions with an 
associated disk. In the presence of the periodically varying 
gravitational potential of a binary star, gravitational 
resonances are established in disks (similarly to resonances 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


established in planetary rings by orbiting moons, or 
Lindblad resonances). Torques at these resonances act to 
transfer energy and angular momentum to or from the 
binary star orbit, resulting in evolution of both the orbit 
and the disk structure. 

A more detailed discussion is not appropriate here, 
but the essential elements of the evolution of the binary- 
disk system can be presented. In this spirit we develop a 
simple scheme for the evolution of an isolated, coplanar, 
binary-disk system. We consider initially the case 
of a binary star with a circular orbit and a small 
secondary/primary mass ratio. We ignore the details of 
binary star formation and ad hoc begin with the binary 
star embedded in a continuous coplanar disk having an 
outer radius much greater than the binary star separation 
and a mass less than that of the secondary star. Given the 
posited binary star mass ratio the primary star lies near the 
center of this disk. On a dynamical (orbital) time-scale the 
gravity of the companion will initially clear an annular 
gap in the disk which includes its orbital path. Two 
circumstellar disks are created, with the circumprimary 
disk being the larger of the two. A circumbinary disk also 
remains, with its inner radius set by a balance between 
the angular momentum transport in the disk (e.g. from 
viscosity) and the torque provided by the binary star. 
Calculations find the inner radius of the circumbinary 
disk to be approximately twice the semi-major axis of the 
circular orbit. 

Once this annular gap is established, disk evolution 
continues on slower (e.g. viscous) time-scales. Accretion 
of material from the circumstellar disks onto the stellar 
surfaces may proceed. However, because of the torques 
provided by the binary star at the inner edge of the 
circumbinary disk, material is not expected to flow from 
the circumbinary disk to the circumstellar disks (but 
see below). Unless replenished from otherwise infalling 
material, the circumstellar disks will exhaust themselves. 
Depending on the time-scale of this exhaustion with 
respect to the lifetime of the circumbinary disk, the binary 
star may then reside in a hole within the circumbinary 
disk. Outside the binary star orbit the circumbinary 
disk will adjust its surface density distribution so as to 
match the angular momentum drawn from the binary star 
with the outward angular momentum flow of the disk. 
Once the appropriate surface density distribution has been 
established, a prolonged phase ensues during which the 
circumbinary disk is expelled. 

Such disk evolution requires a response from the 
binary star. From energy arguments the semi-major axis 
of the binary star must decrease. The direction in which 
the orbital eccentricity will evolve depends on the relative 
rates of extraction of energy and angular momentum 
from the binary star orbit by the disk. Binary star 
orbital elements can be expected to change significantly in 
thousands of orbital periods. For binary stars with semi- 
major axes less than 100 AU this time-scale is shorter than 
PMS disk lifetimes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This binary-disk system is the simplest case. Among 
other things, the detailed distribution of disk material will 
depend on both the mass ratio of the binary star and the 
orbital eccentricity. For example, stars in a circular binary 
star with unit mass ratio are equidistant from the center 
of mass of the system. Consequently the morphology 
of the dynamically cleared region changes qualitatively, 
but the essential nature of the evolutionary history of the 
disk will not change. The interaction of a disk with an 
eccentric binary star is a more difficult problem. In terms 
of resonant clearing, the primary modification is that for 
given semi-major axis the inner radius of the circumbinary 
disk increases with eccentricity and the outer radii of the 
circumstellar disks decrease. 


Observations of disks around pre-main-sequence binary stars 
The observational case for disks in young binary stars 
is well established. Observations of PMS binary stars 
reveal many of the classic signatures of disk material 
and accretion, including excess emission at near-infrared 
through millimeter wavelengths, spectral veiling, Balmer 
and forbidden emission lines and polarization. Every 
indication is that the frequency of disk material in the 
environments of PMS binary stars is similar to that around 
PMS single stars. 

Given the scenario above, most attention has focused 
upon the structure of these disks. Flux measurements 
at submillimeter wavelengths provide insight into total 


Dec. Offset (") 
° 


—2 _ 
R.A. Offse 


edge of th 


disk masses. Interestingly, while submillimeter flux 
is easily detected from many PMS binary stars with 
large (>100 AU) and small (<1 AU) separations, most 
binary stars with intermediate separations have gone 
undetected, indicating reduced disk masses. These 
observations suggest the rather intuitive picture that 
binary stars much wider or much closer than typical disk 
radii do not significantly alter disk structure, while those 
binary stars whose separations are comparable to disk 
radii substantially modify the associated disks as in the 
theoretical scenario above (figure 1). The threshold of 
roughly 100 AU is similar to the sizes of circumstellar disks 
around PMS single stars. 

The submillimeter observations strongly suggest that 
companions do alter disk structure, but images are 
required to understand in detail the actual structure 
of the resulting disks. The PMS binary star GG 
Tau has proven particularly fruitful as a case study 
(figure 2). Millimeter wavelength interferometric 
observations reveal a circumbinary disk around the binary 
star. The total circumbinary mass is 0.12Mo, about 10% of 
the stellar mass. The images clearly show the circumbinary 
disk to be separated from circumstellar disks by regions 
of very low surface density, indicative of disk clearing. 
In addition, the circumbinary disk has an inner radius 
consistent with theory under reasonable assumptions 
about the orientation of the binary star. These observations 
are supported by beautiful near-infrared ADAPTIVE OPTICS 
images which also reveal a ring with the same dimensions. 

heca’ ine ; : 


e circumbinary disk, confirm: 
a Ee structure. 4 
hile observational evidence seems to support the 
heoretical picture for the structure of disks in sma 
1 


pnvironmen 
hccrétion at 


iven appropriate conditions accretion streams with 
aL L 


eg said flow ates may be able to tow inward trom a 


a sre mbirary disk. “The implitation of ¢ stich streartts for 
t (the Stohitioh 


the disks and the binary orbit are an 
4 both the disks and the binary orbi 
theoreti 


tohitio 


Figure 2. Left: the stellar components of the GG Tau binary are shown Ree eoretical pro bISe}s evident as the orange shaded 


region which shows millimeter wave (1.3 mm) continuum emission. 
emission, 5.55 km s~?, 6.30 km s~! and 7.05 km s~!, from left to right in #R 


e contaurs display three velocity channels of CO (2-1) line 
Pralabinaty. Stak 


Age in velocity from blueshifted on one side 


of the binary to redshifted on the other is consistent with Keplerian orbradearthyin bivany théBinhopnRadanthecanisinpaled (Fath 
adaptive optics image. The white ellipse is the same physical size in bBA fig pleasé vaferehothtilbght in Fn tearrindrerethasincidés the 
with the circumbinary ring seen in millimeter light, and is interpreted asepatteesl dgihathtee surat el gsinh Hye siags ‘Rhés Aiguaelis at 
reproduced as Color Plate 38. least approximately present in the PMS phase, and likely 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Pre-main-sequence Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


were established earlier. With the PMS binary stars now 
opened to observational study, the forefront of discovery 
is moving to yet younger, embedded protobinary stars. 
Several very wide pairs have been found embedded within 
dark clouds. The case of L1551 IRS5 best shows the 
prospects for the study of protobinary stars. 

L1551 IRS5 is the canonical protostar still undergoing 
infall from an envelope. Recent millimeter wavelength 
observations demonstrate that the system is a protobinary 
star with a projected separation of 45 AU (in projection 
on the sky). Observations reveal a system with three 
components: a large surrounding envelope of dust and 
gas, a circumbinary disk or extended structure with a 
size scale of order 150 AU, and the inner binary star 
system with two circumstellar disks. Very Large Array 
millimeter wavelength observations indicate circumstellar 
disk radii of 10 AU, with disk masses of 0.06Mp and 0.03Mp. 
These disk masses are comparable with the minimum mass 
required to form a planetary system like our own. It is 
also notable that such large circumstellar masses are found 
in a system with a projected separation of 45 AU, since, 
as noted above, PMS binary stars typically do not have 
detectable millimeter flux at this separation. Perhaps these 
substantial circumstellar disks are maintained by rapid 
accretion from the envelope, or by an accretion stream from 
a circumbinary disk. 

The presence of such massive circumstellar disks 
in L1551 IRS5 and near-infrared and submillimeter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observations of PMS binary stars suggest that while the 
radii of disks in binary systems may be constrained by the 
presence of a companion, the circumstellar disk material 
may be similar in temperature and surface density to 
that in disks around single stars. The implication is that 
in a significant fraction of young binary systems planet 
formation may be able to proceed relatively undisturbed. 
Clearly this is true for the widest systems, in which extra- 
solar planets have already been discovered (see EXTRASOLAR 
PLANETARY COMPANIONS AND BROWN Dwarrs). The possibilities 
for planet formation among closer systems remains to be 
explored. Given that most stars are in binary star systems, 
the answer will have an important impact on the frequency 
of planetary systems. 


Bibliography 
Two more comprehensive and detailed reviews of the field 
are: 


Mathieu R D 1994 Pre-main-sequence binary stars Ann. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 32 465-530 

Mathieu R D, Ghez A M, Jensen E L and Simon M 2000 
Young binary stars and associated disks Protostars 
and Planets IV ed V Mannings, A Boss and S Russell 
(Tucson, AZ : University of Arizona Press) p 703 


An insightful (but technical) observational paper is: 


Guilloteau S, Dutrey A and Simon M 1999 GG Tau: the 
ring world Astron. Astrophys. 355 165 


Robert Mathieu 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


Prior to their ignition of hydrogen, stars undergo a phase 
of bulk contraction. This process drives both the central 
density and the temperature upward, until nuclear fusion 
can begin. Somewhat paradoxically, the star’s luminosity, 
which stems from the released gravitational binding, 
is relatively high at this early stage. The luminosity 
generally decreases as a result of contraction, reaches a 
minimum just at the point of hydrogen ignition, and then 
rises again during post-main-sequence evolution. Thus, 
observed pre-main-sequence stars are relatively bright, a 
fact which aids in their detection. Several thousand low- 
mass examples have now been cataloged, despite the fact 
that the relevant lifetime is only about 0.1% that of the 
main-sequence phase. 

A snapshot of the star taken during the contraction 
epoch would show it to be very nearly in hydrostatic 
equilibrium. That is, the compressive force of self-gravity 
closely balances the internal pressure gradient. Evolution 
is driven by radiative emission from the photosphere, 
which gradually drains thermal energy. Note that the 
star’s interior temperature rises even as its heat content 
falls. Thus, the entire object is characterized by negative 
heat capacity. Note also that the inward velocity of 
any mass element is always well below the local sound 
speed. The contraction is therefore termed quasi-static, to 
distinguish it from more rapid, dynamical motion. 

This basic physical picture was already well estab- 
lished by the 1950s, when L Henyey constructed the first 
detailed, numerical models of young stars. At the time, the 
role of thermal convection in STELLAR INTERIORS was still not 
fully appreciated, even in mature objects such as the Sun. 
Henyey assumed that pre-main-sequence stars would be 
radiatively stable and found that they contracted at nearly 
constant luminosity. However, the opacity in the sub- 
photospheric layers is enhanced by the presence of H™ 
ions. It was C Hayashi who first realized, in the early 1960s, 
that the H~ opacity forces the star to radiate at nearly con- 
stant surface temperature. The luminosity L, is therefore 
high when the radius and surface area are both large. In 
particular, L, is more than can be transported by radiation 
alone, and the interior is convectively unstable. 

Within a few years after Hayashi’s discovery, the 
extensive numerical models of Iben, Cameron and others 
added more quantitative details. The theory now assumed 
the form it was to retain for many years. Each stellar mass 
has its own pre-main-sequence track in the HERTZSPRUNG- 
RUSSELL (HR) DIAGRAM, which it follows down to the zero- 
age main sequence (ZAMS). Early on, the star indeed 
contracts almost vertically, as found by Hayashi. The track 
then veers sharply to the left, and proceeds to the ZAMS 
along the more horizontal path obtained by Henyey. This 
change reflects a transition to radiative stability with 
falling luminosity. 

Figure 1 shows the traditional set of tracks, as 
obtained by Ezer and Cameron. Each track is labeled by 
the corresponding mass is solar units. Also indicated at a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


number of points are the times required to evolve along 
the track to the position in question. It is immediately 
apparent that more massive stars evolve faster than their 
low-mass counterparts. The great utility of pre-main- 
sequence theory is its ability to supply both a mass and 
an age for any observed object with known bolometric 
luminosity and effective temperature. These data help us 
not only to analyze individual stars, but to discern the star 
formation history of entire clusters. 

Despite the systematic drop in contraction time with 
mass, all the tracks in figure 1 are qualitatively the 
same. Each begins by descending vertically from a very 
high luminosity, before turning onto its more horizontal, 
radiatively stable portion. In contrast, figure 2 displays 
results from a more recent calculation. Although the 
individual tracks are still recognizable, the landscape 
has markedly changed. The upper portion of the 
diagram, corresponding to the highest luminosities, is 
now inaccessible to pre-main-sequence stars. So too is the 
area to the left containing objects of the highest effective 
temperature. In the new picture, the most massive stars 
have no pre-main-sequence contraction phase at all, but 
appear directly on the ZAMS. 

What has brought about this change? How, in turn, 
have these revisions impacted our understanding of sTaR 
FORMATION? My purpose in this review is to answer these 
two questions. It should be recognized at the outset that 
the theoretical developments, initiated over 20 yr ago, 
still continue, although the key ideas are probably secure. 
During the same period, our empirical knowledge of pre- 
main-sequence stars has increased tremendously. Here, 
I can only sketch the major advances and indicate the 
ongoing effort to accommodate these observations with 
a more refined theoretical treatment. 


Protostars and the birthline 

Most of the alterations to pre-main-sequence theory reflect 
the impact of new initial conditions. Compared with 
Hayashi and his contemporaries, we now have a better, 
although still imperfect, understanding of how each star 
begins its contraction phase. This knowledge in turn 
translates into the stellar birthline, a rather well-defined 
upper boundary for the set of evolutionary tracks in the HR 
diagram. Referring again to figure 2, it is the presence of 
the birthline that now restricts the luminosities to relatively 
modest values. In addition, the joining of this curve to the 
ZAMS sets the upper mass limit for all pre-main-sequence 
objects. 

Earlier calculations of quasi-static contraction needed 
to adopt specific initial conditions, whatever their physical 
plausibility. In the absence of relevant observational 
data, researchers set the stellar radii at very large values. 
The distended young stars had correspondingly high 
luminosities, as is evident in figure 1. Hayashi and others 
attempted to justify this choice on theoretical grounds, 
arguing that the youngest stars gain their mass too quickly 
to radiate away appreciable energy. In reality, the hope 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lx0® years —+ 


A 
38x10" years —+*? 


ox 
16x10" years J _ 


49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 4) 
log Ty 


100 My 
oc? years 


SOM, 
107 years+ - 
t 


' 7-55 yeo 
atl ee 
a 


' 
2x10” years {20 Me 


9.6x10° yeors 
10,7 Me 
‘ 
10,5 Mo 


6x10" years 


21x10 years 


: 
’ 
t 
t 
‘ 
i 
i 
' 
i 
ae 
1 
J 
t 
i 
‘ 
: 


‘ 
x 

6 WV 
2xl0 years 


(6 x10" yeors 


42x10 yeors 


6 
5x10 years 


3x0" yeors __. 


40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 


Figure 1. Pre-main-sequence tracks in the traditional theory. Each track is labeled by the appropriate mass. Dashed lines and 
corresponding times denote the point at which the stars cease to be fully convective. The times to reach the ZAMS are also indicated. 


was that all memory of the earliest epoch would quickly 
be lost during subsequent evolution. 

This idea does receive support from the temporal 
behavior of contracting stars. As we have just noted, 
any self-gravitating object must lose a large portion 
of its total energy content in order to reduce its size 
substantially. Now the virial theorem tells us that this 
energy is comparable with that from gravitational binding 
alone. Thus a star of mass M,, radius R, and luminosity 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


L,, contracts over the Kelvin-Helmholtz time scale, given 
by 

2 -1 -1 
2 M. R, iis 


GM i 
tH = —* =3 x 10’ yr x 
R,Ly 1M.) \1R5 is 


The luminosity, in turn, is that due to a radiating 


blackbody: 
L, = 40 R2opT 4 (2) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Luminosity log (Ly,)/L ) 


Temperature log (Teg) (K) 


Figure 2. Recent calculation of pre-main-sequence tracks. The 
upper curve is the stellar birthline, and the lower one the ZAMS. 
Each track is labeled by the mass in solar units. Also shown are 
isochrones for selected times. 


where Tor is the star’s effective temperature. As the star 
contracts with nearly constant Te, we see that tx increases 
as R,°. Thus, the contraction slows down markedly, and 
any early, distended state indeed occupies a small fraction 
of the total time to reach the ZAMS. 

From an observational perspective, their relatively 
brief evolutionary lifetimes would make the brightest 
pre-main-sequence objects relatively uncommon. The 
difficulty is that stars with the highest L, values depicted 
in figure 1 are never seen. Given the large sample sizes, 
one must conclude that the adopted initial conditions 
were mistaken. A star actually begins contracting at a 
much smaller radius and luminosity than was originally 
envisioned. Although the contraction indeed slows down, 
the time spent in the earliest state is not negligible. In other 
words, initial conditions do matter. 

The three decades since the original pre-main- 
sequence calculations have witnessed a substantial growth 
in our knowledge of stellar formation. Astronomers 
of the 1960s had no knowledge of molecular clouds, 
now established as the breeding grounds for stars of all 
mass. Nor did they understand well the mechanism of 
gravitational collapse, i.e. the transformation from diffuse 
cloud fragments to compact stars. Needless to say, these 
central developments have impacted the theory of pre- 
main-sequence evolution. 

Radio astronomers have by now supplied detailed 
maps of molecular clouds over a vast range of size scales. 
Largest are the giant complexes, elongated structures some 
50 pe in size, and containing perhaps 10°Mo of gas, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


outer envelope 
dust 
photosphere 


Be dust 
_——— destruction 
front 
accretion 


Shock 


Figure 3. Structure of a protostar and its environment. The range 
of distances is greatly compressed in this schematic rendering. 


mostly in the form of molecular hydrogen. Complexes are 
self-gravitating swarms of clumps, each one containing 
about 10°M,>. These clumps, in turn, are dotted with 
numerous dense cores. Each core measures some 0.1 pc in 
diameter, has a mass of 3Mo or so and shares the same low 
temperature (from 10 to 20 K) of its parent cloud. Although 
the origin of these smallest units remains mysterious, we 
do know that they are responsible for individual stars. 

The first phase of STELLAR EVOLUTION, then, is not the 
pre-main-sequence, but that earlier epoch when a dense 
core is undergoing gravitational collapse. The hydrostatic 
object forming at the center of this converging flow is 
known as a protostar. Theoretical work on protostars 
began almost 30 yr ago, with the first direct simulation 
of a collapsing, spherical cloud by R Larson. It is the 
subsequent development of this theory that has led to our 
present, altered conception of pre-main-sequence stars. 

Figure 3 depicts schematically a protostar and 
its surrounding cloud environment. Material in the 
collapsing dense core rains down onto the surface of the 
star, forming a strongly radiating accretion shock front. 
The ultraviolet and x-ray photons produced here work 
their way back upstream through the infalling gas. As 
they do so, they elevate the temperature of the envelope to 
the point where all dust grains thermally sublimate. Since 
dust is the cloud’s chief source of opacity, the protostar is 
surrounded by a relatively transparent region known as 
the opacity gap. Beyond this region, photons diffusing 
through the dusty envelope become degraded to infrared 
wavelengths. The full accretion luminosity then leaves 
the cloud at the dust photosphere, typically located about 
10 AU from the central star. 

A more complete theoretical description endows the 
parent dense core with a finite degree of rotation. Some 
portion of the infalling matter then misses the star itself, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and instead forms a circumstellar disk. This material 
then spirals onto the stellar surface. The structure and 
growth of the protostar are largely determined by the total 
mass accretion rate, conventionally designated M. The 
geometrical pattern of infall, i.e. the proportion coming 
through a disk or by direct infall, is less significant than the 
overall magnitude and temporal behavior of this rate. The 
former is set by the basic physics of gravitational collapse. 
If the parent cloud was largely supported by thermal 
pressure, its subsequent collapse yields a characteristic 
accretion rate toward the center: 


3 
. a 
M x Ee (3) 


Here, ar is the isothermal sound speed in the dense core, 
a quantity depending only on the ambient temperature 
T and molecular weight 4. In a molecular cloud with T 
between 10 and 20 K, equation (3) yields M values ranging 
from 10~°Mo to 10° Mo yr. 

The most detailed protostar calculations focus on the 
star itself and represent the infalling cloud envelope solely 
through the mass accretion rate. Collapse simulations 
designed to cover the large-scale dynamics of the cloud 
find that M has a rather slow variation with time, at least 
beyond an initial, transient phase. Thus, it is worthwhile 
examining the idealized case of a protostar accumulating 
mass ata strictly constant rate. 

Figure 4 shows the results of such a theoretical 
calculation. Here we see the protostellar radius R,, 
displayed as a function of the mass M,, for M=1«x 
10-°Moj yr~'. The first thing to notice is that the radii are 
not much larger than the corresponding main-sequence 
values. This result contradicts the original assumption of 
Hayashi and his contemporaries. Protostars have modest 
sizes because they lose significant amounts of energy 
while accumulating their mass. Radiation is generated 
at the accretion shock front bounding the stellar and disk 
surfaces. As we have seen, this energy readily escapes the 
cloud by virtue of the opacity gap. 

The relatively small sizes of protostars create elevated 
internal temperatures. Specifically, the stars become hot 
enough for deuterium to ignite, in the reaction 


"H+p— °Het+y. (4) 


Although the number fraction of this isotope is only of 
order 10-°, heat from the fusion swells the star’s radius. 
This swelling begins at subsolar mass and is evident as 
the first knee in the curve of figure 4. The second, even 
more dramatic, rise occurs when deuterium subsequently 
ignites in a subsurface shell. At still higher mass, M, = 
4Mo, the protostar largely exhausts its deuterium supply 
and starts to contract under the influence of self-gravity. 
Its temperature rise concurrently accelerates, and ordinary 
hydrogen ignites by the time M, reaches about 8M. Even 
more massive protostars are essentially main-sequence 
objects still gathering material from their surrounding 
clouds. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


$2 eq a 


Radius R, (Re) 


Gi I pe ee es ps eh 
Oo 4 Bg ge ee 


mass My (M,) 


Figure 4. Protostar radius as a function of mass. Open circles 
mark the onset of deuterium-induced central convection, 
appearance of a radiatively stable interior region, and the onset 
of central convection due to hydrogen burning. 


Deuterium-generated energy not only swells the 
protostar but acts as an effective thermostat, locking 
the central temperature to a value not far from 10° K. 
One important consequence is that the mass—radius 
relationship is rather insensitive to the adopted M value, at 
least for changes of about a factor of 10. On the other hand, 
the protostar’s history would be very different indeed 
if no deuterium at all were present. The short dashed 
curve in figure 4 was obtained by artificially ignoring the 
fusion reaction in the subsurface shell. In this hypothetical 
situation, the pronounced swelling would not occur at all. 

Protostar calculations like the one illustrated assume a 
continuous flow of mass onto the central object. Naturally, 
something must eventually truncate this flow to produce 
stars of finite mass. One possible factor is rotation of the 
parent cloud. We have remarked, however, that rotation 
merely shifts the infall trajectories from the stellar surface 
to a circumstellar disk. It is likely that internal torques 
within the disk then promote transfer of this material onto 
the star. Another possibility is that the star itself blows 
back its infalling envelope through the action of a strong 
wind. Finally, infall may cease because the remaining 
dense core is mechanically prevented from collapsing. 

We shall later revisit these last two possibilities. 
Even without a definitive answer to the question of infall 
termination, however, we can still address our original 
concern of pre-main-sequence initial conditions. As long 
as infall ends relatively quickly, the curve in figure 4 yields 
the radius of any star of mass M,, at the beginning of its 
quasi-static contraction phase. The stipulation here is that 
M must decrease substantially over a time that is brief 
compared with tx for the mass in question. Provided that 
this condition is met, we may construct a sequence of initial 
pre-main-sequence models with a range of masses and the 
appropriate radii. These objects, unlike their protostellar 
antecedents, are optically visible, and so may be placed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Luminosity log,, (L,/L) 


Orion Cluster 


fi | Zl ! | | | MH 
4.6 44 4.2 4 3.8 3.6 3.4 


Temperature log,, (T. 


eff ) 


Figure 5. HR diagram of the Orion Nebula Cluster. The 
theoretical birthline, tracks and ZAMS are identical to those of 
figure 2, but the ZAMS has been extended to include massive 
stars. 


in the HR diagram. The resulting curve is the birthline 
depicted in figure 2. 

The existence of the birthline is thus motivated by 
basic theoretical considerations. From an observational 
perspective, the curve should represent the upper 
envelope to the positions of young stars in the HR diagram. 
That is, no stars should be found above the birthline, 
whether they are observed in isolation or in heavily 
populated clusters. So far, the voluminous photometric 
observations of pre-main-sequence stars largely conform 
to this expectation. For example, Hillenbrand has recently 
placed over 900 stars of the Orion Nebula Cluster in the 
HR diagram, after obtaining their bolometric luminosities 
from J-band observations. The crowded diagram (see 
figure 5) shows a reasonably sharp upper boundary, which 
coincides well with the theoretical birthline. 


Quasi-static contraction 

Low-mass objects 

The presence of a birthline in the HR diagram means 
that pre-main-sequence tracks now fall into two broad 
categories. Those of lower mass depart from the birthline 
vertically downward. Observationally, these correspond 
to T TAURI STARS. In the second category are tracks that 
begin more horizontally. Here, the theoretical models have 
radiatively stable interiors, and represent the observed 
class of Herbig Ae and Be stars. Figure 2 shows that the 
dividing point is about 2M. 

We may understand this difference, i.e. predict the 
fate of any newly formed pre-main-sequence star, by 
comparing two luminosities. One is the surface value L,,, 
as given by the blackbody formula of equation (2). The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


second is L,aq, the maximum value that can be transported 
through the interior by radiation alone. This critical 
luminosity actually varies spatially within a star and 
also depends on the specific stellar model. Dimensional 
arguments show, however, that it must be approximately 


. =199 a 11/2 
Lyaa = L1 - (5) 
Ro Mo 


where L; ~ 1Lo. Note the steep mass dependence, 
reflecting the temperature sensitivity of the interior 
opacity. 

Consider now a sequence of very young pre-main- 
sequence stars. For sufficiently low mass, Lraq is much 
less than L,,. These objects are radiating more energy than 
can be transported by radiation. Their interiors are thus 
fully convective. On the other hand, stars of greater mass 
have Lraq > Ls, and are radiatively stable. Because Lrag 
climbs so rapidly with M,,, the transition between the two 
cases occurs at a rather well-determined mass value, even 
considering plausible uncertainties in the initial stellar 
radii. 

Schwarzschild’s criterion dictates that stars become 
convective once their specific entropy s decreases outward, 
ie. when s(M,) is a declining function of the internal 
mass coordinate M,. In practice, however, convection 
is so efficient at transporting energy that s(M,) is nearly 
uniform, apart from a thin super-adiabatic layer near the 
surface. Now the heat equation governing evolution of 
the entropy reads 


OL; as 
int e—T S 


aM, or 


(6) 


Here, Lin:(M,) is the interior luminosity crossing any mass 
shell and € the local nuclear energy generation rate. Prior 
to deuterium ignition, we may ignore the latter term. The 
star loses heat during contraction, so that ds /dt is negative. 
It follows that Lint is a monotonically increasing function 
of M,, rising from zero at the center to the surface value 
Ly. 

The kind of quasi-static contraction we have just 
described may be termed homologous. Here, the stellar 
interior at any one time is simply a rescaled version of 
its earlier state. This simplification arises from the spatial 
uniformity of the specific entropy. In mathematical terms, 
the star may be accurately represented as ann = 3/2 
polytrope, i.e. the pressure P and density p are related 
at every location through 


P=Kp”. (7) 


The coefficient K is a surrogate for the specific entropy and 
also decreases with time. 

Even if a pre-main-sequence object begins its life as 
a convective object, figure 2 indicates that it eventually 
becomes radiatively stable, at least for M, = 0.5Mo. We 
may again understand this transition in terms of our two 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


luminosities. Contraction reduces R, and therefore, by 
equation (2), L, as well. On the other hand, equation (5) 
shows that L,.q weakly increases at fixed M,. Thus, the 
original inequality L, > Lyaq may eventually be reversed 
and the star becomes stable against convection. In stars of 
the lowest mass, L,. is so much greater than Lyaq initially 
that the two cannot reach equality before hydrogen ignites 
and halts further contraction. That is, the star settles onto 
the ZAMS while still fully convective. 

The transition of a star to radiative stability occurs 
first at the center, where the temperature is highest and 
the interior opacity a minimum. The luminosity in the 
spreading radiative region obeys equation (5), at least in 
order of magnitude. Thus, the average Lraq rises slowly as 
R,, continues to drop. The surface luminosity must keep 
pace with L,aq, So L,. also increases. This rise is evident in 
the tracks of figure 2. From equation (2), Tor can no longer 
be fixed but is forced to increase. The tracks now veer to 
the left in the HR diagram. 

This picture of low-mass young stars accords 
well with a variety of observational data. We note, 
however, that the evidence for convection itself is entirely 
circumstantial. The phenomena actually observed are 
consistent with surface activity, an enhanced version of 
that present in the Sun and nearby dwarf stars. Thus, 
many T Tauri stars exhibit periodic fluctuations in light 
that indicate large, rotating starspots. Prominent optical 
emission lines, such as Ca H and K, are thought to 
stem from chromospheric heating. So too is the x-ray 
emission that has been especially useful in locating pre- 
main-sequence objects in dense cloud environments. 

It is conventional to divide T Tauri stars into two 
types, classical and weak lined. Objects in the first 
category have been studied for over 50 yr, ever since 
the pioneering work of A Joy. They display, besides the 
emission lines and other signs of surface activity, excess 
broadband flux in both the infrared and the ultraviolet 
regimes. Some of their emission lines exhibit P Cygni 
profiles, signaling the presence of an outflowing wind. 
Weak-lined stars derive their name from the suppression 
or absence of Ha emission, another diagnostic of heated, 
possibly outflowing gas that appears in the classical 
objects. Originally dubbed ‘naked’ stars by Walter, they 
have normal broadband energy distributions for their 
spectral types. 

In the HR diagrams of young clusters and associa- 
tions, the two types are thoroughly intermingled close to 
the birthline. The weak-lined variety predominates, how- 
ever, as one approaches the ZAMS. The generally accepted 
interpretation of this pattern is that classical stars are sur- 
rounded by disks of dust and gas. Stellar luminosity heats 
the dust, causing it to reradiate at infrared and longer 
wavelengths. Apparently, the disks vanish as stars con- 
tract toward the ZAMS. Note finally that many classical 
stars also display inverse P Cygni profiles. The suggestion 
is that matter from the disk may be spilling onto the stellar 
surface, perhaps along magnetic field lines. In any case, 
the associated mass transfer rate of roughly 10-° Mo yr! is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


too low to cause substantial deviation from the constant- 
mass theoretical tracks of figure 2. 

The variety of T Tauri broadband spectra implies 
that some pre-main-sequence stars first appear with 
substantial disks, while others seem to lack them entirely. 
As we have noted, disks represent material from the parent 
dense core that had too much angular momentum to 
impact the star directly during collapse. The production of 
objects both with and without disks may therefore point to 
a range in cloud rotation rates. However, it will be difficult 
to quantify this idea before we have a better understanding 
of how the infall process actually terminates. 

There is a smooth morphological progression from 
T Tauri stars with disks to other stars exhibiting far greater 
levels of infrared emission. The so-called ‘flat-spectrum’ 
and even more extreme ‘class I’ sources have far too 
much flux at long wavelengths to be attributable to disk 
reradiation. Indeed, the typical class I spectral energy 
distribution shows a broad maximum near 100 «um, far 
beyond the near-infrared peaks of classical T Tauri stars. 
What is the nature of these more embedded objects? 

One critical observation is that class I sources are 
invariably located near the centers of dense cores of 
molecular gas. Thus, their infrared and millimeter 
radiation plausibly stems from heated dust within more 
massive circumstellar envelopes. A number of researchers 
have suggested that these envelopes are collapsing onto 
their central stars, i.e. that the objects are true protostars. 
One should then observe, in addition to the star’s 
photospheric luminosity, the additional energy release 
from infall. Indeed, current theory predicts that this 
infall component should actually dominate the total. 
Observationally, however, the bolometric luminosities of 
class I sources are quite similar to those of optically 
visible T Tauri stars, whether classical or weak lined. It 
thus appears that, while some pre-main-sequence stars 
appear promptly as revealed objects on the birthline, 
others remain embedded for some time in remnant cloud 
material. How this gas is mechanically suspended is 
not well understood, but the ambient magnetic field 
almost certainly plays a role. In this regard, it will 
be interesting to see whether high-resolution mapping 
at millimeter wavelengths eventually reveals systematic 
differences between dense cores with and without internal 
stars. 


Stars of intermediate mass 

Consider next the evolution of objects above the transition 
near 2Mo. Here Lyag, the maximum luminosity carried 
by radiation, exceeds the surface value L,. The interior 
opacity is now low enough that the star can have a 
fully radiative interior. As we have noted, Lyaq is not 
just an upper limit, but also a good estimate for the 
actual luminosity under the condition of radiative stability. 
The inequality Liq > L, then implies that the surface 
cannot emit all the energy generated by the deep interior 
through gravitational contraction. Very young stars of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Q 
i=) 


Luminosity L, (Le) 
rs 
Oo 


20 


0 1 2 3 
Mass M, (Mo) 


Figure 6. Evolution of the internal luminosity in a 3.5Mo 
pre-main-sequence star. The luminosity crossing any shell is 
plotted against the mass interior to that shell, for the indicated 
times. 


intermediate mass are out of thermal balance and must 
readjust accordingly. 

Figure 6 displays a temporal sequence of luminosity 
profiles from detailed modeling of a 3.5Mo star. Plotted 
is Lin(M;), starting when the object first appears at the 
birthline. At this earliest time, we see that Lint reaches 
a maximum value of about 60L 5, while the surface 
luminosity L, is only about 10L4. What becomes of the 
excess energy? From the heat equation (6), ds/dt is now 
positive for all mass shells between the luminosity peak 
and the surface. The energy being released by contraction 
thus heats these layers, at least temporarily. 

Equation (6) also implies that the entropy is still 
falling inside of the luminosity maximum. This region 
therefore contracts as in lower-mass objects. Most of the 
energy expelled is transferred to the outer layers, which 
actually expand. The structural evolution of the star is 
now nonhomologous, and the earlier description in terms 
of polytropes breaks down. In physical terms, the star has 
accumulated its mass at a rate which outpaced its ability 
to thermally relax. 

Heating of the outer layers persists until the surface 
temperature To climbs substantially. The luminosity L,. 
then rises as well, eventually matching the interior peak 
value. This development may be followed through the 
alteration of the profiles in figure 6. In effect, the star 
has released a thermal pulse to the surface. From a 
more observational perspective, the object may be said 
to undergo a luminosity jump, a feature evident in the 
evolutionary tracks of figure 2. The duration of this 
phenomenon is the thermal relaxation time, or roughly 
10° yr at the relevant masses. Note that this period is 
shorter than xy in equation (1). In the present case, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


energy content of the star refers only to its outer layers and 
is therefore less than the full GM2/R,. 

The observed objects corresponding to these theoret- 
ical models are the Herbig Ae and Be stars, first identi- 
fied nearly 40 yr ago. While these stars are rare compared 
with their low-mass counterparts, they have come under 
increasing scrutiny in recent years. There is still no empiri- 
cal evidence for the thermal transition that should occur at 
these masses, including the luminosity jump. On the other 
hand, the very existence of this class is a testament to the 
essential correctness of the theoretical approach. It should 
be apparent by now that the location of the birthline in the 
HR diagram depends solely on the mass-radius relation 
for accreting protostars. We have seen how those of inter- 
mediate mass swell because of deuterium fusion (recall 
figure 4). Were it not for this effect, the birthline would be 
shifted downward toward the ZAMS, excluding the region 
where Herbig Ae and Be stars are actually found. Physi- 
cally, smaller-radius protostars would have higher central 
temperatures and would ignite ordinary hydrogen earlier, 
thus joining the ZAMS at a lower mass. 

Pre-main-sequence stars of intermediate mass also 
display, to varying degrees, excess broadband emission 
at infrared wavelengths. Subtracting off the likely photo- 
spheric contribution to the spectral energy distribution, 
one often finds that the long-wavelength flux constitutes 
a large fraction of the total observed luminosity. It was 
first argued that this emission must stem from accretion 
through a circumstellar disk, since a more isotropic 
distribution of dust would have obscured the visible 
radiation that is actually seen (See DUSTY CIRCUMSTELLAR 
DISKS). However, the required accretion rates can be so high 
that the disk would still need continual replenishment 
from an external envelope of dust and gas. In addition, 
observers have now spatially resolved the infrared 
emission in a number of cases, a clear demonstration that 
the source is much larger than a disk. We are led once more 
to a picture in which remnant cloud material hovers about 
the star for a protracted time. 

Even more puzzling than the infrared excesses are 
the signs of surface activity in a large fraction of Herbig 
Ae and Be stars. Emission in Ha and other lines 
is present in these cases and frequently displays the 
P Cygni profiles indicative of winds; other objects have 
substantial x-ray luminosities. Now the theoretical models 
do have transient surface convection, powered by the 
diminishing supply of deuterium. However, convection 
always vanishes by the time Ts increases to the range 
appropriate for A and B stars. Could the x-rays and winds 
instead originate in lower-mass companions that have not 
been spatially resolved or do they signal residual infall, 
as is believed for T Tauri stars? Further observations are 
needed to sort out this issue. 

The thermal relaxation characterizing pre-main- 
sequence stars also occurs in protostars, provided that they 
accumulate sufficient mass. Thus, the steep increase of R,. 
seen in figure 4 is caused both by deuterium shell burning 
and by the shift of internal entropy accompanying the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


thermal pulse. At these masses, the protostar’s luminosity 
stems more from internal energy release than from external 
infall. The time scale txy is now significantly shorter 
than the evolutionary time M,/M, and the object rapidly 
contracts even as it accretes. The mass at which ordinary 
hydrogen ignites, about 8Mo for M = 1 x 10°°Mo yr“, 
also marks the point in the HR diagram where the birthline 
joins onto the ZAMS. Observations of Herbig Ae and Be 
stars indeed find an upper mass limit close to this value. 

Stars of even higher mass never undergo pre-main- 
sequence contraction. They exist as obscured protostars, 
as objects on the ZAMS or as post-main-sequence stars 
rapidly depleting their nuclear reserves. It is doubtful, 
moreover, that their protostar phase resembles that at 
lower masses. Powerful winds from these objects drive 
back infalling matter, a tendency that is even present 
to a lesser extent at lower masses. The extraordinary 
luminosities of massive stars also disrupt the envelope, 
through radiation pressure acting on the grains. Anumber 
of researchers have pointed out that anisotropic infall 
might lessen the radiative effect. For example, gas in a 
rotating envelope would not fall directly onto the star, but 
onto a disk, where it could be shielded by the high optical 
thickness. However, the disk itself must remain intact 
for an extended period, despite the star’s harsh ionizing 
flux. Observations of disks in Orion being ablated by the 
Trapezium stars show that this is no easy matter. 

How then do massive stars form? It is significant that 
the youngest such objects appear close to the density peaks 
of crowded stellar clusters. The more commonly observed 
OB ASSOCIATIONS are the expanding descendants of such 
groups, while systems such as the ORION NEBULA Cluster 
represent them at an earlier, more compact stage. In the 
latter example, numerical calculations have demonstrated 
that the massive stars have not had time to drift to their 
present, central locations but must have formed in situ. 
One possibility is that these objects originate through the 
coalescence of previously existing stars. The interaction 
cross sections of the stars themselves, or even binaries, 
are probably too small to be relevant, even in the densest 
observed clusters. However, we have noted that pre-main- 
sequence stars appear to remain for some time within their 
parent cloud cores. The merger of these gaseous entities 
and the subsequent joining of their internal stars is an 
attractive picture that remains to be developed. 


Unanswered questions 

Throughout our discussion, the initiation of the pre-main- 
sequence phase has been a frequently recurring topic. 
Specifically, we still need to understand what physical 
event marks the termination of dynamical, protostellar 
collapse. The derivation of the birthline sidestepped this 
question by simply assuming that the critical event is 
suitably brief. We saw, however, that the relevant interval 
may not be small for many of the stars still surrounded by 
residual gas and dust. More fundamentally, the issue of 
infall termination is central in our quest to understand the 
empirical distribution of STELLAR MASSES. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


One possibility we have mentioned is that stars 
themselves are the responsible agents, through the 
momentum of their outflowing winds. This idea is 
motivated by the nearly universal association of optical 
jets and molecular outflows with embedded stellar objects. 
Outflows are thought to be cloud gas entrained by the 
high-velocity wind, where the latter is channeled into a 
narrow jet. On the other hand, we have no clear example 
of a cloud being shredded by its internal jet. Such well- 
observed objects as the Bok globule B335 show both high 
column densities in molecular gas and vigorous, well- 
collimated flows. The available evidence is that winds 
and dense cores coexist for some period. The proposition 
that the former eventually destroys the latter in all cases 
remains to be demonstrated. 

An alternative viewpoint is that stars accrete all the 
nearby material available to them. Now the typical 
masses of cloud cores, as obtained from molecular line 
observations, are larger by nearly an order of magnitude 
than the average mass of a newborn star. Assuming that 
the densest, inner portion of the cloud first collapses, the 
implication is that the outermost envelope is somehow 
prevented from joining onto the central star. 

The most likely means of preventing, or at least 
forestalling, collapse is through the embedded magnetic 
field. Measurements of Zeeman splitting have established 
a well-ordered field of typical magnitude 10 wG in the 
lower-density gas surrounding cores. Unfortunately, this 
observational technique fails within the core itself, but we 
may assume that the field penetrates this inner region. The 
narrow linewidths of NH3 and other tracers show that 
the core gas is relatively quiescent. Thus, the dominant 
expansive force aiding thermal pressure is tension from 
a smooth field, rather than the pressure associated with 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC (MHD) waves . By the same token, 
the broad lines observed outside the cores indicate a strong 
wave influence throughout the larger cloud volume. 

Although bending of field lines can effectively resist 
gravity, it cannot do so indefinitely. Neutral matter 
slowly drifts across the field through the process known as 
ambipolar diffusion. Thus we may picture, at least crudely, 
the collapsing inner core tugging on the ambient field 
until tension halts rapid infall onto the central star. This 
event marks the end of the protostar phase. Further mass 
addition and depletion of the core would occur much more 
slowly, over the diffusive time scale. The stars receiving 
this matter would be young, pre-main-sequence objects 
with strong emission at long wavelengths, perhaps the 
observed class I sources. 

Other vexing problems remain in the study of pre- 
main-sequence evolution. Chief among them is the issue 
of ANGULAR MOMENTUM. We remarked before that disks 
represent cloud material of excessive angular momentum 
that misses the star during collapse. It would seem 
to follow that the stars themselves must rotate close to 
breakup. In fact, the observed rotation speeds of T Tauri 
stars are very slow, typically under 10% of the breakup 
value. Furthermore, there is no clear indication of spinup 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pre-main-sequence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


due to contraction along the evolutionary tracks, except 
very close to the ZAMS. 

It has long been accepted that the torquing action 
of magnetic winds provides an effective brake on stellar 
rotation, in all low-mass stars including the Sun. Given 
a field strength and geometry, theory can predict with 
confidence the rate of angular momentum loss from the 
stellar surface. Less well understood is the interior 
response of the star to this braking action. Nor can theory 
yet specify what field is generated by a given stellar model. 
Until these gaps are closed, we will be unable to provide 
a convincing history of pre-main-sequence rotation. 

These problems are fundamental, involving both 
dynamo theory and the stability of rotating fluids. 
According to current thinking, regions that are stable 
against convection may still undergo a kind of anisotropic 
mixing that serves to transport angular momentum 
outward. This same process would also affect the 
internal CHEMICAL COMPOSITIONS OF STARS. Thus, the angular 
momentum problem relates to yet another outstanding 
issue, the depletion of lithium and other light elements. 
In the future, the pre-main-sequence theory outlined here 
will continue to provide the basic framework for these and 
other investigations. 


Bibliography 
For a brief history of the theory of young stars, see 


Stahler S W 1988 Publ. Astr. Soc. Pac. 100 1474 


An influential calculation of pre-main-sequence 
evolutionary tracks prior to the development of protostar 
theory was 


Ezer D and Cameron A G W 1967 Can. J. Phys. 45 3429 
while a modern result is 
Palla F and Stahler S W 1999 Astrophys. J. 525 772 


Calculations of protostellar collapse have been both 
numerical and analytic. Examples of each include 


Larson R B 1969 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 145 271 
Shu F H 1977 Astrophys. J. 214 488 


For the growth and structure of the protostar itself, 
see 


Palla F and Stahler S W Astrophys. J. 375 288 
Stahler S W, Shu F H and Taam R E 1980 Astrophys. J. 241 
637 


Note that the first article focuses on intermediate- 
mass Stars. 
The class of T Tauri stars was first recognized by 


Joy AH 1945 Astrophys. J. 102 68 
while the weak-lined subclass was distinguished by 


Walter F W 1986 Astrophys. J. 306 573 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A comparison of pre-main-sequence theory with 
observations, concentrating on low-mass objects, is in 


Stahler S W and Walter F W 1993 Protostars and Planets LI 
ed E H Levy and J I Lunine (Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) 


The categorization of Herbig Ae and Be stars is 
originally due to 


Herbig G H 1960 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 4 337 
A conference proceedings devoted to this latter topic 
is 


Thé PS, Pérez M R and Van den Heuvel E P J (eds) 1994 
The Nature and Evolutionary Status of Herbig Ae/Be Stars 
(ASP) 


Steven W Stahler 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Primeval Fireball ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Primeval Fireball 


A term coined by PJ E Peebles, to describe the early phase 
of the Big Bang universe during which space was filled 
with an opaque, high-temperature, mixture of radiation 
(photons) and particles (protons, neutrons, electrons and 
other elementary particles). Also known as the ‘primordial 
fireball’. 


Seealso: Big Bang theory, cosmic microwave background. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Procyon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Procyon 


The star w Canis Minoris, a cream subgiant of spectral type 
F5IV-V, apparent magnitude 0.40. Though long known 
as the ‘Little Dog Star’ or ‘Lesser Dog Star’, from the 
constellation name, the name Procyon is derived from the 
ancient Greek for ‘before the dog’, no doubt referring to 
the fact that it rises before its companion dog star Sirius. 
The two are the only bright stars in the region to the east of 
Orion, and hence are especially prominent as they rise in 
the eastern sky on winter evenings. Procyon is the twelfth 
star in distance from the Sun at 11.4 light-years, having a 
parallax of 0.286”. Its absolute magnitude is 2.7. 

Procyon is a spectroscopic binary, with a period of 
40.4 years. There is also a white dwarf optical companion 
(magnitude 11.7) at a separation of 122”. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Profession 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Profession 


There was a time, not very many years ago, when 
professional astronomers were widely regarded as being 
divorced from the real world. It was thought that they 
spent their nights in lonely observatories watching the 
stars, and that many were decidedly advanced in years. 
This picture was never true, and today it is as wide of 
the mark as it is possible to be. Your average professional 
astronomer is young or at most middle-aged, works in a 
team and very seldom actually looks through a telescope. 

In bygone days, of course, there were very few 
full-time astronomers, and these were supported by 
the patronage of dukes, princesses, kings and queens, 
or perhaps through membership of religious orders. 
Professional astronomers supported by patronage were 
almost always at least part-time astrologers. 

With the rise in Europe, and later in America and 
the countries of the new world, of the universities, 
astronomers were employed in larger numbers both to 
teach astronomy and to research into it, in particular 
into what we would now call dynamical astronomy or 
celestial mechanics. With the development of the concept 
of state responsibility, other astronomers were employed 
in civic-funded observatories and institutes, financed on 
a city, regional or national level. Such observatories and 
institutes were established both for the development of 
navigation and time-keeping (the Royal Observatories 
at Paris and Greenwich, and the US Naval Observatory 
were founded for these reasons), and for making accurate 
positional observations and calculations about the motions 
of stars, double stars etc. (astrometry). 

After amateurs led the way through observation of 
the intrinsic properties of the Moon, the planets, the stars 
and the nebulae (see AMATEUR-PROFESSIONAL COLLABORATION 
IN ASTRONOMY), by contrast to their positions, more and 
more astronomers turned to astrophysics, the application 
of scientific principles to elucidate the nature of celestial 
bodies—the majority of astronomers at the present time 
are astrophysicists. The definition of a ‘celestial body’ is 
usually taken to mean everything outside the Earth, i.e. in 
practice everything more than 100 km above the Earth’s 
surface, and the Earth itself in its planetary properties. 
This includes a very wide variety of natural phenomena! 
Astronomy is thus an interdisciplinary subject, linked 
inextricably with all other branches of science: space 
research (of course), physics, mathematics, chemistry, 
biology—there are no hard and fast boundaries. The 
astronomer was never really ‘a man apart’, but he is even 
less so now. 

The AMERICAN ASTRONOMICALSOCIETY estimates that there 
are 6,000 professional astronomers in the USA. In Europe 
there is about the same number (an estimated 1000 in the 
UK at post-doctoral level and up). Perhaps the world 
total is some 15,000-20,000. Established professional 
astronomers (also, rarely, distinguished amateurs) may 
become members of the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION, 
through nomination by the Union’s national adhering 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


organisations. Global membership is 6,000. The 
international language of astronomy is English. The 
number of astronomers is small enough to form a 
genuinely international community. This tendency is 
encouraged by the outward-looking nature of the subject, 
and the scale of investigations of large numbers of stars 
and galaxies, perhaps from both hemispheres of the 
Earth, which means that collaborations of astronomers are 
necessary to tackle the big astronomical questions. 

Although astronomy is a universal subject and has a 
wide appeal, professional astronomers are by no means 
a representative sample of the human population. They 
are most numerous (relative to the population) in Europe, 
North America, Russia and Australia. There are significant 
numbers of professional astronomers in South America 
and Asia. There are few in Africa. The proportion 
of female professional astronomers varies widely from 
country to country, and is never 50%. Vatican City’s 
Jesuit astronomers are 100% male, for understandable 
cultural reasons. The northern European nations have 
the smallest proportion of females. The United States 
forms an intermediate case between these and the southern 
European and South American countries. In all countries, 
the proportion of females decreases with seniority. (In 
what follows we will have to accept the limitations of the 
English language and often use male pronouns to denote 
astronomers of either gender.) 

It is difficult to give a simple picture of the prospective 
development of astronomy as a profession, since the 
situation varies from country to country. In the USA and 
the UK, public spending is limited by national economic 
policy and there is increasing pressure on astronomical 
budgets in observatories and public institutes. This 
means that the number of astronomers employed in 
such places is static, or decreasing. On the other hand, 
the attraction of astronomy to students has meant that 
an increasing number of universities offer astronomy 
components to degree courses, and the number of teachers 
has been increasing. Telescopes are provided centrally, not 
necessarily in a big laboratory on campus, so astronomical 
research is relatively cheap to the universities, and teachers 
have the opportunity for independent research in bite- 
sized morsels which have high impact. In general 
university authorities thus support astronomy research by 
their teachers. 

In continental Europe there has been a history of a 
larger proportion of astronomers being employed through 
national, regional or city observatories, and the same 
economic pressure developing in France and Germany 
is causing reductions in numbers of astronomers, which 
may be countered by university growth. Russia and 
China are special cases, in which astronomers have had 
high status as respected intellectuals and government 
employees under the communist governments, a status 
which has eroded in a negative reaction to everything 
governmental and disconnected with day to day survival. 
The difficult economic situation and greater competitivity 
in both countries has led to a reduction of the numbers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Profession 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of astronomers, although this seems to have been 
accomplished mostly at the expense of the less productive 
ones. In China this process has been called "Going down 
to the sea,’ meaning making your own way and surviving 
by a struggle. 

At the same time that national facilities are under 
pressure, established international ones are under pres- 
sure too, such as ESA and ESO. However, new interna- 
tional facilities are being set up all the time, such as Gemini 
and ALMA. The net trend in science is positive as the old 
gives way to the modern; the net trend in the population 
of astronomers is hard to discern. In the established astro- 
nomical countries, there were periods of great expansion 
in the population of astronomers after the 1957 launch of 
Sputnik, and the broadening of tertiary education. These 
periods of great expansion in traditionally astronomical 
countries are over, and astronomy in them is now in steady 
state. The future expansion may be in the astronomically 
developing countries, like Greece, Spain and South Amer- 
ica, with its large mass of astronomical assets especially in 
Chile. 

Astronomy is based on observation of the natural 
experiments in the Universe. Interpretation of the 
observations is by theory. Theoretical astronomy suggests 
further observations. Most astronomers combine theory 
and observation in their studies to some degree, but 
most are either principally observational astronomers or 
principally theorists. In principle, astronomers focus on 
the natural experiments, and deploy what is required 
to understand the phenomena, whether theory and 
calculation, or use of the range of available technology 
(radio, x-ray or optical telescopes, interferometers, 
spectroscopy, photometry, space astronomy,....). In 
practice, a given astronomer will develop skills in a subset 
of techniques which he or she deploys on the phenomena 
to which they are most appropriate. An investigation 
might therefore require the cooperation of a team of 
astronomers, especially when the investigation is large- 
scale. 

In past times the astronomer had to make his 
observations at night, often on his own in the cold, up 
a ladder. The astronomer’s presence was required to 
make and document the observations, initially with the 
eye and later by photography, and at the same time to 
operate the telescope, pushing it to new positions and 
relocating the ladders, while monitoring the performance 
of the telescope. Travel to an observatory in a remote place 
may have been arduous, and the sleeping arrangements 
may have been primitive. This all demanded a certain 
amount of physical stamina. EDWIN HUBBLE, the great 
astronomer who first proved that the so-called spiral 
nebulae are in fact external galaxies, used to relate how 
he spent night after night in the dome of the Mount 
Wilson 100 in reflector, checking to make sure that the 
target object was still perfectly positioned. The degree 
of domestic comfort may be judged by the name of the 
hostel on Mt Wilson—’The Monastery’. Today, with 
computer control of the telescope and data recording, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


astronomer need not be in the telescope dome, or even 
in the same country. Indeed, if the telescope is in space 
he cannot be in contact with it. This has meant that 
modern astronomers can specialise in astronomy, rather 
than technology, and more astronomers than before are 
‘wavelength independent’, happy to use any telescope in 
pursuit of the astrophysics. Some astronomers lament this, 
in part from nostalgia, more importantly because there 
is a generation of astronomers growing up who do not 
understand the limitations of the observation process and 
instrumental performance. 

It is possible for an individual astronomer to own 
and have exclusive access to a small telescope, using it 
whenever he or she wants and conditions are suitable. 
Moderate sized facilities may be within the scope of a small 
group of astronomers, say a university department. Large 
telescopes are however expensive and often provided from 
national funds and therefore probably with an expectation 
that access will be ‘open’. Competition for access to the 
facilities may therefore be high—’telescope time’ is at a 
premium because there are simply not sufficient numbers 
of large telescopes to satisfy everybody in the profession. 
The same may be true of access to computing power. 

All these facts are highly relevant from the viewpoint 
of the young enthusiast who is considering a career 
in professional astronomy. As a desirable profession, 
and a competitive one, modern astronomy is populated 
by men and women of exceptional ability and drive. 
Astronomy is an essentially mathematical and physical 
science; anyone who does not have a natural aptitude 
for the mathematical sciences may find employment in 
the role of an assistant to astronomers, for example as 
engineering or computing support staff, or (as exemplified 
by one of us) in the astronomical MEp1A, but is unlikely to 
succeed as a professional astronomer. 

In the progression towards being an astronomer it is 
wise to consider the competitiveness of the profession and 
to defer specialising wholly in astronomy until the later 
stages. If you are trained in maths or physics, you can take 
up astronomy and also a number of other professions; if 
you are trained exclusively in astronomy you are not so 
versatile or so desirable to an employer, if your plans to 
be an astronomer come to nothing. In school it would 
be wise to take up the maximum quota of science and 
mathematics subjects, and certainly to aim for a university 
degree. The first degree (BSc or equivalent) need not be in 
pure astronomy, indeed, according to the principle of least 
specialisation perhaps is better not to be, but many general 
science, physics or mathematics courses in universities 
offer astronomy and astrophysics options. There is, in 
fact, evidence in Britain that such options enhance the 
attractiveness of such courses in universities to students, 
even those who do not intend to take up astronomy as 
a career (See EDUCATION). Once a basic science, physics 
or math degree has been obtained, a further degree in 
astronomy can be added at Masters level, or in the US 
must be added as part of the Qualifying Examination for 
a PhD course. During the astronomy study, the student 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Profession 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


will be able to build on the necessary mathematical and 
physical background acquired in the first three or four 
years. In France the parallel sequence is the DEUG in 
mathematical or physical sciences, followed by a "maitrise" 
in mathematical or physical sciences with an Astronomy 
or Astrophysics option. 

At Bachelor’s or Master’s degree level, or its 
equivalents, career options remain limited to the role of 
an assistant helping better qualified astronomers, i.e. those 
with doctorate (PhD or equivalent). The doctorate course 
(in France Dipléme d’Etudes Approfondies followed by 
Thése de doctorat) is a training, not in the acquisition of 
knowledge discovered by someone else, but in research 
to acquire new knowledge. The training is supervised 
by an established astronomer, who will offer guidance 
on the choice of topic and execution of the research 
programme. In most cases the supervisor will work 
with the doctoral student on the research, including any 
observational work with telescopes, data reduction, and 
theoretical calculations as appropriate to the topic and the 
student’s inclinations and abilities. Often, a long lasting 
professional relationship builds up between a supervisor 
and his students, especially the talented ones. The research 
is written up by the student into publishable or published 
scientific papers, and assembled into a thesis. 

Success at the PhD stage is the entry qualification into 
astronomy as a profession. It is likely that the astronomer 
will be further informally tested for a few years in fixed- 
term or temporary positions, such as fellowships. It is not 
uncommon for such positions to be in other countries— 
indeed in the Netherlands it is regarded as a requirement to 
become an established Dutch astronomer that at the post- 
doctoral stage the astronomer should have been overseas, 
often in North America. During this period he or she 
has an opportunity to make a name for him- or herself 
by making important astronomical advances. The result 
could be to secure that highly desirable, tenured and 
long-term position as an astronomer in a university, an 
observatory or an institute. 

In past times, the student astronomer worked with 
a more senior astronomer in a kind of apprenticeship. 
Just as Johannes Kepler took over the role of his teacher 
Tycho Brahe, the student would succeed his master. A 
modern PhD course lasts for three or four years, and a 
professional astronomer’s career lasts perhaps 30 or 40. An 
active astronomer might supervise a large number of PhD 
students; even if an astronomer has just one student at a 
time he might supervise more than ten altogether. Itis clear 
that not all these students can succeed their supervisor, 
given that that employment opportunities for astronomers 
are in steady state. Asin any population, steady state is not 
compatible with reproducing oneself several times over. 
This is the numerical basis for the competition to become 
a professional astronomer. 

In the UK approximately 20% of PhD astronomy 
students remain in astronomy as a profession. On the 
other hand there are none who are unemployed. Student 
astronomers at this level are intelligent, numerically 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


literate, used to interpreting incomplete data (just as you 
have to in real life), practised in working in teams, often 
with international colleagues—and they have something 
to say at their interview. They are very employable, if 
not all in astronomy. This security has acted as a back 
stop for astronomy students in the UK who continue in 
increasing numbers to seek out opportunities to contribute 
to astronomy and to compete to become professional 
astronomers. We too were attracted into astronomy at an 
early age, and we know how powerful is the attraction. If 
we had to summarise our advice to an aspiring astronomer, 
it would be ‘Recognise the realities and make fall-back 
plans; but it’s not impossible, and it’s very rewarding to 
succeed, so give it your best try.’ 


Bibliography 

Careers advice on joining the community of professional 
astronomers in the UK is available on the Web from 
the Cardiff Astronomical Society (http:/ /www.astro.cf.ac. 
uk/cas/sheet3.pdf). The Royal Astronomical Society pub- 
lishes a leaflet: Becoming an Astronomer. An Australian 
perspective is available from the Astronomical Society 
of Australia (http://www.atnf.csiro.au/educate/become. 
html). Three comprehensive American discussions 
on astronomy as a profession are available from 
NOAO (http://www.noao.edu/education/astfaq.html), 
from the American Astronomical Society (http:/ /www.aas. 
org/education/career.html) and from the US Bureau of 
Labor Statistics (http://stats.bls.gov/oco/ocos052.htm). 
All these references include realistic statements about em- 
ployment prospects. The French route to an astronomical 
career is described by the Société Francaise d’Astronomie 
et d’Astrophysique (SF2A) at http://www.iap.fr/sf2a/ 
metier. html. 


Paul Murdin and Patrick Moore 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Prognoz ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Prognoz 


Series of 10 Soviet spacecraft launched 1971-85 to 
investigate the solar wind and its interaction with Earth’s 
magnetosphere. Prognoz-9 (launched July 1983) carried 
experiments to study the Sun, x-ray and gamma ray 
bursts as well as the Relict-1 radio astronomy experiment. 
Prognoz 10 (launched April 1985) carried instruments 
for studying the plasma, the magnetic field, electric and 
magnetic components of waves, solar flare x-ray bursts 
and kilometre radiation. (See also INTERBALL and RELICT.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Prominence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Prominence 


A plume of luminous gas in the solar atmosphere visible 
beyond the solar limb (the edge of the visible disk). 
Although their densities are about a hundred times greater 
than that of the surrounding coronal material, they are 
too low to enable them to emit a continuous white-light 
spectrum. Their visible light consists mainly of emission 
lines of hydrogen and ionized calcium and, except during 
total eclipses of the Sun (when they may be seen directly 
by eye), they are normally studied in monochromatic light 
(wavelengths corresponding to particular emission lines, 
suchas the hydrogen-a line in the red part of the spectrum). 

There are two principal types of prominence— 
quiescent and active. Quiescent prominences hang like 
clouds in the corona for weeks or months with relatively 
little overall change, whereas active prominences undergo 
rapid changes. Quiescent prominences have lengths 
ranging from several tens of thousands of kilometers 
to several hundred thousand kilometers and heights 
of around 30000 km. They are suspended above 
the chromosphere by magnetic fields. Most quiescent 
prominences look like curtains of gas that connect with the 
chromosphere at various points and contain many near- 
vertical strands down which gas flows. From time to time, 
a quiescent prominence will suddenly erupt outwards and 
dissipate, often to be replaced, in the same location, by a 
new one. Active prominences, which are associated with 
active regions on the Sun, and are often associated with, 
or triggered by, solar flares, are short-lived phenomena, 
most of which survive no more than a few hours. They 
take a variety of forms. Among the most active are loop 
prominences, structures that connect regions of opposite 
magnetic polarity and within which coronal material 
condenses and flows down into the chromosphere. Sprays 
scatter material over a wide range of angles at speeds 
ranging from 200 km s-! to as much as 2000 km s“1, 
whereas surges consist of more closely collimated ejections 
of material. Giant eruptive prominences (often loop- 
shaped) surge upwards to heights of 500000 km or more. 

When solar rotation carries prominences across the 
face of the Sun, they then appear as dark features against 
the bright solar disk. Quiescent prominences correspond 
to the extensive, long-lived, dark filaments that feature on 
monochromatic images of the solar disk. 


See also: active region, chromosphere, corona, emission 
spectrum, filament, flare. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Proper Motion 


Proper motion is the change of position of an object on the 
celestial sphere, usually measured in seconds of arc (") per 
year (figure 1). ‘Proper’ means intrinsic, as opposed to a 
motion due to change of coordinates (such as precession). 
The term is most often applied to stars but is also used for 
changes in position of clusters of stars, galaxies outside 
our Milky Way and features within these objects. In 
1718 Edmund Halley was the first to recognize proper 
motions, when he realized the positions relative to nearby 
stars of Arcturus, Aldebaran and Sirius had changed since 
antiquity. Proper motion is an angular measurement 
and depends directly on an object’s transverse velocity 
(the component of velocity across the line of sight) and 
inversely on its distance. For a given proper motion, 
the more distant an object is, the higher its transverse 
velocity must be (figure 2). Barnard’s star has the highest 
proper motion known, 1073 yr. The term also refers to 
changes in position of features observed at infrared and 
radio wavelengths. Proper motions are determined by 
measuring positions with respect to other objects, typically 
stars or galaxies. If the comparison objects cannot be 
assumed to be stationary on the sky, a correction for their 
motion must be made to determine the absolute proper 
motion. Together with the RADIAL vELocity, the proper 
motion defines the motion of an object relative to the sun. If 
the distance to the object is known, the proper motion and 
radial velocity define the three-dimensional space velocity 
of the object, again relative to the Sun. 

Proper motions are used to study stellar motions and 
the correlation, if any, between motions and age, metal 
abundances and spectral types of stars. Proper motions 
are also used to calculate the rate of revolution around 
the center of our Galaxy. Recently proper motions have 
been applied to the investigation of features associated 
with young stars, the possible existence of a massive black 
hole at the center of our Galaxy and the motion of objects in 
other galaxies. The latter investigations show promise for 
the direct determination of the distances to other galaxies. 
Space missions currently under discussion will further 
extend investigations of objects in our own and other 
galaxies through the use of proper motions. 

There are several components to the motion of stars in 
our Galaxy. Stars in the galactic disk, like the Sun, partake 
of a general revolution in a common direction around the 
center of the Galaxy (see GALACTIC THICK DISK, GALACTIC THIN 
DISK). Stars in the halo revolve around the galactic center 
in orbits with random eccentricities and orientations. In 
addition to the motion around the galactic center, disk 
stars each have their own peculiar, or random, motions, 
typically 10-20 km s~!. Peculiar motions are defined with 
respect to the local standard of rest, a reference frame in 
which the averaged random velocities of stars near the 
Sun is zero. The local standard of rest moves around 
the center of the Galaxy at the velocity corresponding to 
galactic rotation at the Sun’s distance from the galactic 
center. The apparent motion of stars relative to the Sun 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. An example of the change of position on the sky of a 
star, indicated by arrows, relative to other stars. 


is a combination of their motion and the Sun’s motion. 
The position of objects on the sky changes owing to their 
relative motion perpendicular to the line of sight with 
respect to the Sun. 

Because more distant stars tend to have small proper 
motions, in the past they were used to define a coordinate 
system in which to measure the motions of nearby 
stars. As measurement techniques improve, even the 
proper motions of distant stars can be detected. Modern 
measurements use the position of faint galaxies to define 
the reference frame. Motion along the line of sight directly 
towards or away from the Sun (the radial velocity) does 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Proper motion, indicated by the Greek letter jx, is the 
angular change of position of an object on the sky, usually 
reported in seconds of arc per year. The angle shown is highly 
exaggerated; the maximum proper motion measured is 

103 yr7}. 


not contribute to the proper motion. Motion relative to the 
Sun is usually reported, even though measurements made 
from the Earth contain a component due to the Earth’s 
motion around the Sun, which must be removed. 


Measurement 

While the concept of proper motion is straightforward, 
proper motions are difficult and time consuming to 
measure. In principle, two images of the object of 
interest separated by 1 yr, to remove the apparent change 
of position on the sky due to the Earth’s revolution 
around the Sun (see PARALLAXES), are sufficient. The 
position of the object relative to other objects in the 
field would then be measured. In practice, because the 
annual changes in position are small, successive images 
are often separated by several years or decades. Since 
one does not know in advance which objects will have 
detectable proper motions, proper motion surveys often 
use large photographic plates to observe as many objects 
as possible simultaneously. Large-area detectors also 
ensure that there are many stars and galaxies in the 
field to define the reference frame against which motions 
are measured. Positions of objects on the images must 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


then be compared. Historically, this was done manually 
with a blink comparator, a device which allowed the 
astronomer to look first at one image, then at the other, to 
see which objects appeared to move relative to the others. 
Now photographic plates are automatically scanned with 
densitometers, the output of which is fed into computers 
which find and catalog stellar positions. Computerized 
comparison of positions on plates taken at two different 
times identifies objects whose positions have changed 
significantly and the proper motion is calculated. Because 
the changes in position are very small and errors can easily 
be introduced into the results, it is advisable to take all 
data on the same telescope and, if possible, use the same 
instrument. If stars are used to define the reference frame 
for the measurements, the final results must be corrected 
for the mean parallax and proper motion of the reference 
stars. 

Results of proper motion surveys are generally 
produced as catalogs containing positions, proper motions 
and often photometric information for thousands or tens 
of thousands of stars. Modern surveys use faint galaxies 
to define the reference frame, which can then be linked 
to the International Celestial Reference Frame, based on 
extragalactic RADIO SOURCES. Accuracies of 3-8 marcsec yr7! 
are typical for ground-based observations, depending on 
the brightness of the star. 

Techniques to improve this accuracy and thus 
obtain more precise proper motions are constantly being 
investigated. One source of uncertainty is the size of 
the stellar images on the photographic plates. Motion in 
the EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE blurs astronomical images as the 
light passes through. This blurring, referred to as seeing, 
produces stellar images larger and more diffuse than they 
would be outside the Earth’s atmosphere and makes it 
difficult to determine the center of the image. 

Problems associated with seeing can be minimized by 
obtaining a series of images, each exposed for a fraction of 
a second, and then combining those data to produce the 
final image. In these exposures a star image is broken 
up into a series of blobs, or speckles, produced as the 
light passes through cells in the atmosphere. The speckle 
pattern changes rapidly, producing the blurred image 
normally observed. By aligning the speckle patterns of 
all the images, the spatial resolution of the telescope is 
significantly enhanced. Because the exposures must be 
taken rapidly in succession, an electronically read-out 
detector must be used, so the area of sky observable is 
limited by the available detector arrays. 

Space astronomy has also contributed to improved 
measurement of proper motions. Taken above the 
Earth’s atmosphere, these images do not suffer from 
the atmospheric seeing. Space observatories also avoid 
the problem of deflection of the telescope, optics and 
instruments due to the gravitational attraction of the 
Earth. They can, however, be subject to large temperature 
fluctuations, which can also cause deflection problems 
unless controlled or counterbalanced. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In 1989 the EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY launched the 
Hipparcos (High Precision Parallax Collecting Satellite) 
astrometric satellite, which measured the positions, 
parallaxes and proper motions of 118000 stars to an 
average accuracy of 1 marcsec. Astrometric data were 
obtained for a second group of more than one million 
stars at lower precision. The satellite was designed to 
spin slowly, scanning the entire sky several times during 
its mission. While only early results of the Hipparcos 
mission have been reported, they are already having a 
large impact on our understanding of stellar motions and 
other fundamental questions in astronomy. 


Scientific results 

Nearby and high-velocity stars 

One of the first applications of proper motions was to 
identify nearby and/or high-velocity stars, because stars 
with large proper motions are either nearby or have high 
transverse velocities relative to the Sun. Proper motions 
are an efficient way to identify intrinsically faint, nearby 
stars, which are otherwise difficult to distinguish from 
brighter stars that are more distant. Once nearby stars are 
identified, parallaxes and other data can be obtained. If 
several measurements of the stellar position are made and 
the star appears to follow a wavy path across the sky, the 
star has a fainter companion. In such systems, the center of 
mass follows a straight line, while the combination of star’s 
motion around the system center of mass and the system’s 
motion through the Galaxy produces the apparent wobble. 
Such systems can be used to derive stellar mass data. 
Astronomers are particularly interested in two classes 
of intrinsically faint stars: RED DWARFS and WHITE DWARFS. 
Red dwarfs are the faintest, yet most numerous, stars 
on the main sequence (stars which generate energy by 
converting hydrogen to helium in their cores). Red dwarfs 
are studied to determine the physical characteristics and 
space densities of the least massive stars. Because they are 
very numerous, red dwarfs are a significant component 
of the stellar mass in the Milky Way. A white dwarf is a 
stellar remnant, the remains of a star after it has consumed 
all of its fuel. Such stars are studied to test theories of the 
end state of STELLAR EVOLUTION and also to determine their 
contribution to the stellar density of the Galaxy. 

Proper motions are also an efficient way to identify 
stars moving rapidly with respect to the Sun. Such stars 
probably originated outside the Galaxy’s disk, and their 
high velocities may be clues to the star’s location at its 
time of formation, its age, chemical composition and even 
the evolutionary state of the Galaxy when the star was 
formed. According to some theories of GALAXY FORMATION, 
the Milky Way formed from a large rotating cloud of gas 
which collapsed into a disk containing most of the stars. 
In this scenario, some stars formed during the collapse. 
On the other hand, recent work suggests that some of the 
stars far from the Galaxy disk originated in stellar satellites 
which were destroyed by gravitational interaction with 
our Galaxy. Whatever their origin, stars far from the 
disk in the galactic halo have large components of motion 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


perpendicular to the galactic plane and relatively large 
(100-200 km s~') velocities compared with stars in the disk. 
Therefore stars with high proper motions may belong to 
a population that formed while the gas in the Galaxy 
collapsed or to a population that formed in star clusters 
or Satellite galaxies accreted by our Galaxy. Investigations 
of these stars can reveal the physical conditions in their 
place of origin and thus how the galactic halo formed. 

In principle, astronomers can identify high-velocity 
stars from radial velocities as well as proper motions. 
However, proper motion surveys have the advantage of 
screening large numbers of stars simultaneously. Until the 
advent of SPECTROGRAPHS with two-dimensional detectors, 
stellar radial velocities were measured individually. Even 
with modern electronic detectors, spectra of at most a 
few hundred objects can be obtained simultaneously. 
Measurements of positions and therefore proper motions 
can be obtained for thousands of stars simultaneously from 
imaging surveys. 

‘Runaway’ stars are a second type of high-velocity 
star that can be identified from proper motions. These are 
stars that are too young to belong to the halo population 
whatever its origin. Of particular interest are runaway O 
and B stars, which have lifetimes of a few million to a few 
hundred million years. Such stars are found at greater 
distances from their birthplaces in the galactic disk than 
they could travel in their lifetimes at the normal peculiar 
velocities of such stars. 

Two hypotheses have been suggested to explain the 
location of runaway O and B stars: they were ejected from 
their birthplace by a dynamical interaction among stars 
in a young, compact STAR CLUSTER or they were originally 
members of a BINARY SYSTEM containing two massive stars 
in which one star became a SUPERNOVA. Stellar evolution 
theory predicts that massive stars become supernovae 
when they have exhausted all of their nuclear fuel. Models 
indicate that, in binary systems with two massive stars, 
the system may be disrupted if the first supernova is 
asymmetric. Such a system could produce a high-velocity 
O star and a high-velocity PuLsar, the remnant of the 
exploded star. Even if the first supernova does not disrupt 
the system, the second supernova can, producing two 
high-velocity single pulsars. The two hypotheses make 
different predictions concerning the kinematic ages of the 
stars, the times since they left their birthplace. Kinematic 
ages can be estimated from the space velocity of the stars 
and the distance back to their point of origin or, if that is not 
known, to the plane of the galaxy. Recent investigations of 
Oand B stars by Moffat and collaborators tend to favor the 
cluster ejection scenario, although the binary disruption 
mechanism cannot be ruled out. 


Kinematics of stellar populations 

One of the fundamental goals of galactic astronomy 
is to understand the spatial distribution and kinematic 
properties of the stars in the Milky Way. These data 
not only reveal the current state of these objects but also 
contain information about the gravitational potential of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the Galaxy and the history of sTaR FORMATION. The proper 
motions, distances and radial velocities of a group of stars 
are needed to completely define their space velocities. The 
data are typically analyzed by comparing the observations 
with a model of the Galaxy and deriving the desired 
parameters. In some cases the model is expressed only 
in terms of transverse velocities, so that radial velocities 
may not be required. Quantities that can be estimated for 
the stellar group include the mean velocity and velocity 
dispersion perpendicular to the galactic plane, in the 
direction of galactic rotation in the plane and in the radial 
direction in the galactic plane. The velocity of rotation of 
the local standard of rest, the distance of the Sun from the 
galactic center, the peculiar velocity of the Sun and the 
density gradient parallel to the galactic plane in the solar 
neighborhood also can be determined. 

Because different types of stars have different 
kinematic properties, it is important to use a homogeneous 
stellar sample to derive the velocities. Then one may study 
the average velocity perpendicular to the galactic plane as 
a function of spectral type or other parameter. One result of 
such studies has been an anti-correlation between the age 
of a stellar population and the degree of concentration of 
its space distribution to the galactic plane. Investigations 
like these led to the classification of stars into multiple 
STELLAR POPULATIONS. Recent work by Wielen investigated 
the mean velocities and velocity dispersions of RR LYRAE 
stars as a function of metallicity. (Astronomers refer to all 
elements other than hydrogen and helium as metals. It is 
generally agreed that on average older stars have lower 
abundances of metals than younger stars.) RR Lyrae stars 
are old pulsating stars often found in GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. 
Such investigations relate the increase of metals in the 
Galaxy, which is directly dependent on the rate of massive 
star formation, to the rate of collapse of the gas in the 
galactic halo. The deviation of the stellar velocity from 
the circular rotation velocity also may be investigated. It 
has been found that, at the Sun’s distance from the galactic 
center, the rotational velocity derived from the youngest 
stars is closest to the circular velocity. 

Statistical analysis of proper motions is used to 
determine the mean parallax, and thus distance, to a 
sample of stars. If the stars are selected to have similar 
spectral type and luminosity class, and thus absolute 
magnitude, the mean distance can be used to determine 
a value for the mean absolute magnitude. There are two 
methods to determine distances, secular and statistical 
parallaxes. For secular parallaxes, the averaged velocity 
of a sample of nearby stars is assumed to be zero. The 
mean proper motion of the sample is therefore just due 
to the average of the Sun’s motion, 20 km sl, projected 
onto the plane of the sky at the positions of the stars. 
The average distance for the sample is directly calculated 
from the ratio of the distance traveled by the Sun during a 
year projected on the sky and the mean proper motion. 
Statistical parallaxes assume that the three-dimensional 
space velocities of the stars are isotropically distributed. If 
the radial velocities of the stars are known, by the isotropic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


assumption, the mean of the radial velocities must be 
equal to the mean of the transverse velocities. Since the 
proper motion is the distance traveled by a star in a year 
at its transverse velocity divided by its distance, the mean 
distance to the stars can be determined. More complex 
analyses for stars far from the Sun assume a model for 
motion of stars as a function of location in the Galaxy. The 
resulting statistical parallax is of course dependent on the 
model, just as the results described previously depend on 
the assumption that the average velocity of the sample 
stars is zero or the velocities are isotropic. 

Statistical parallaxes are useful for stars too distant 
to measure individual stellar parallaxes. Statistical 
parallaxes have been used to estimate the absolute 
magnitude of RR Lyrae stars. Because these stars vary 
in a recognizable way, they can easily be identified in 
globular clusters, in the galactic halo or in nearby galaxies 
and are useful as a distance indicator. If their absolute 
magnitude is known, the distance to the cluster or galaxy 
can be determined. Distances to globular clusters are 
particularly important because the ages of the clusters are 
determined by the absolute magnitude and spectral type of 
stars beginning to evolve off the main sequence. Globular 
cluster ages are a lower limit to the age of the universe. RR 
Lyrae variables are also observed in nearby galaxies and 
can be used to determine their distances. Unfortunately 
they are relatively faint and can only be detected in the 
closest galaxies. 


Star clusters and associations, nearby galaxies 
Detailed studies of the proper motions of stars in clusters 
(groups of physically associated stars thought to have 
a common origin) and associations (looser groupings 
of young stars which are probably not gravitationally 
bound) can reveal a great deal about the membership and 
dynamics of these groups. Since clusters are first identified 
as a concentration of stars in a small area of the sky, proper 
motions enable astronomers to confirm membership of 
individual stars and even to establish that a cluster really 
exists and is not just a random superposition of stars along 
the line of sight. Stars which are not obviously part of 
the group, for example F stars in an O,B association, can 
be identified. The proper motion of the cluster can be 
combined with its radial velocity to calculate the space 
velocity. For nearby clusters such as the Hyades, these 
data can be used to improve the precision of the cluster’s 
parallax and thus distance. For globular clusters, which 
are several billion years old, the space velocity provides 
information about the kinematics of the gas out of which 
the clusters formed. Proper motions can be combined with 
radial velocities to determine the distance to the cluster 
using the method of statistical parallax. Because even the 
closest clusters are somewhat distant, a long time baseline 
is required to measure accurately the proper motions of 
stars in clusters. 

If the relative proper motions are sufficiently accurate, 
they can be used to investigate the motions within the star 
cluster. Because most clusters are distant and the relative 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


motions small and of limited accuracy, the dispersion of 
the proper motions is often used. If the dispersion can 
be calculated as a function of magnitude, which relates 
directly to stellar mass, and distance from the center of 
the cluster, the mass of the cluster can be estimated. The 
azimuthal and radial proper motion dispersions relative to 
the cluster center measure the amount of anisotropy in the 
relative motions, which tests theories of cluster dynamics. 

Proper motions can also be used to study the 
kinematics of the MAGELLANIC CLOuDS, satellite galaxies 
gravitationally bound to the Milky Way. Proper motions 
combined with radial velocities determine the space 
motions of the galaxies and constrain the gravitational 
potential of the Milky Way. 


Black hole at the center of the Galaxy 

It has been suggested that the Milky Way, like many other 
galaxies, harbors a black hole at its center. In the 1990s 
the development of infrared array detectors and speckle 
interferometry has enabled astronomers to test this theory 
by measuring the proper motions of stars at the center of 
our Galaxy. Stars at the center of our Galaxy cannot be 
observed in visible light, owing to dust in the plane of 
the Galaxy along the line of sight. Infrared wavelengths 
are not absorbed to the same degree as visible light and 
can be used to detect stars obscured by dust. Eckart and 
Genzel (1996) and Ghez and collaborators (1998) have 
applied the speckle technique to near-infrared (2.2 wm) 
observations of the stars at the center of our Galaxy. The 
distribution of the proper motions of the stars is centered at 
the position of Sgr A*, a radio source previously suspected 
of being at the center of the Milky Way (figure 3). In 
general the stars closest to Sgr A* are moving fastest. 
The dispersion of the velocities obtained from the proper 
motions also peaks at the position of Sgr A*. If the stars are 
gravitationally bound, the central mass implied is 2.6 x 10° 
solar masses. While exotic alternatives such as clusters 
of elementary particles and very-low-mass black holes 
cannot be completely eliminated, the mass is most likely 
due to a supermassive black hole. 


Radio proper motions 

While proper motions were first observed and used 
at optical wavelengths, they can be measured at any 
wavelength for which repeated observations indicate 
motion on the plane of the sky. Since the late 1960s 
radio astronomers have used interferometry to obtain 
high-resolution measurements of the positions of radio 
sources (See RADIO INTERFEROMETER). Spatial resolutions of 
1 marcsec are readily attained with modern arrays of radio 
telescopes. While there are relatively few strong stellar 
radio sources, radio astronomers have observed proper 
motions of features in the continuum radio emission from 
nuclei of QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS and galaxies. In many cases 
there appears to be transverse motion at several times the 
speed of light, probably because of orientation effects in 
a relativistic beam pointed towards the observer (within 
a few degrees of the line of sight) (figure 4). These 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.4 + 
L ? : 
* a 
8 0.2 | 4 
oO S a 
§ r *. 
~ lhe : 
<q - e 4 
a Ob K + 
iva) a 
4 L J 
9° - 4 
& 
oO r e 7 
A-0.2 + * + 
4 hes = 
; f Oo 1995 { 
H 1996 | 
-0.4b o A 1997 - 
pg a yt a ee 
0.4 0.2 ) -0.2 -0.4 


ARA from Sgr A* (arcsec) 


Figure 3. Measured positions of stars in 1 arcsec” centered on 
Sgr A*, indicated by starred point. Significant velocities are 
readily detected in this region. Each year’s measurement is 
represented by a different symbol: 1995 by triangles, 1996 by 
squares and 1997 by circles. (Figure courtesy of A Ghez and 
American Astronomical Society.) 


observations help constrain models for the evolution of 
radio sources. 

Statistical methods have also been applied to 
the proper motions of radio sources to determine 
their distances and three-dimensional velocity field. 
Observations of star-forming regions in our Galaxy reveal 
that some of them contain numerous microwave radio 
sources called masers. These are small regions which emit 
enhanced molecular spectral lines, usually from OH or 
H,O. The enhancement is thought to be associated with 
star formation. Starting in 1977, Genzel and collaborators 
measured radial velocities and changes in the positions of 
water masers in star-forming regions. Distances may be 
determined by two methods. If the motions are random so 
that all velocity components have the same dispersion, the 
distance can be directly determined from the ratio of the 
velocity dispersion in the radial direction to the dispersion 
of the proper motions. If the kinematics in the source 
is not random, the proper motions, radial velocities and 
positions on the sky are used to model the source in three 
dimensions. The distance is then calculated by scaling 
the observed proper motions to the transverse velocities 
predicted by the model. In this method not only is the 
distance to the source estimated but a model of the source is 
also determined. If the distance to the star-forming region 
is known 4 priori, the proper motions and radial velocities 
can be used to investigate the dynamics within the source. 
Attempts have also been made to apply these techniques 
to clouds of molecular masers in nearby galaxies, thus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


B 
D = 
Ca 3 
1979.97 
| 
| 
ee Gs 
SS 
a 
§mas 


Figure 4. Map of the radio structure in the nucleus of the quasar 
3C 273 measured at frequency 10.7 GHz. The horizontal scale 
indicated is 4 marcsec. Changes in positions of components C3, 
C4 and Cs are readily visible. (Figure courtesy of S Unwin and 
American Astronomical Society.) 


directly measuring their distances without recourse to 
assumed luminosity standards. 

Proper motions of water masers associated with 
the centers of galaxies also show promise of enabling 
astronomers to directly determine distances to galaxies. 
This technique was used to determine the distance to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the center of our Galaxy by Reid and collaborators in 
1988. In 1995 Greenhill and collaborators detected water 
masers which apparently trace a thin, nearly edge-on disk 
rotating around a central mass in the galaxy NGC 4258. 
The rotation of the disk was predicted to cause the radial 
velocities and positions of the masers in the disk to change, 
with the change in position, i.e. proper motion, dependent 
on the distance to the galaxy. A series of radio observations 
indicated that the positions of the masers had indeed 
changed. Assuming a model for the rotation including the 
radial velocities, a distance to NGC 4258 was calculated 
based only on geometry. If such masers, appropriately 
positioned with respect to the plane of the sky, canbe found 
in other galaxies, this will be a powerful new technique for 
directly determining distances to galaxies. Not only will 
the distances to the galaxies be calculated but the results 
will make possible the calibration of variable stars and 
other luminosity standards using objects in other galaxies, 
not just the Milky Way. 


Future initiatives 

In the future increasingly accurate proper motions can 
be expected from observations on the ground and in 
space. Efforts are underway to combine the results of the 
Hipparcos mission with older ground-based photographic 
plates to extend the time baseline and accuracy of proper 
motions. 

With the success of the Hipparcos mission, several 
other space astrometry missions have been suggested. 
The two that seem most likely to fly at this time 
are SIM, the SPACE INTERFEROMETRY MISSION, proposed by 
NASA, and GAIA, Global Astrometric Interferometer for 
Astrophysics, under consideration by the European Space 
Agency. GAIA’s goal is to assemble a catalog of more 
than one thousand million stars with three-dimensional 
positions, space velocities and related information. 
Astrometric measurements of position, parallax, and 
proper motions will be obtained for all stars to apparent 
visual magnitude 20, about one-millionth the brightness of 
the faintest star visible to the naked eye. Radial velocities 
for stars down to apparent visual magnitude 17 will also be 
measured. This mission is expected to measure distances 
to the center of the galaxy to 10% accuracy and catalog 
about 1% of the stars in the galaxy. Assuming a 5 yr 
mission, the predicted precision for proper motions of stars 
brighter than apparent visual magnitude 15 is better than 
10 warcsec yr~!. 

The SIM mission will measure proper motions of 
individual, bright stars in several nearby intermediate- 
and late-type spiral galaxies. Assuming the averaged 
proper motions and ground-based radial velocities are 
both due to the nearly circular rotation in the disks of the 
galaxies, rotational parallaxes, distances independent of 
luminosity-based distance indicators, can be determined. 
Directly measured luminosities of bright stars, including 
cepheid and RR Lyrae variables, will then be available 
for a variety of galaxies, strengthening the calibration of 
the distance scale. As proposed, the mission is expected 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to achieve an astrometric accuracy of 5 arcsec or better, 
depending on the target. Other goals for SIM include 
determining positions and distances for stars throughout 
the Milky Way and probing nearby stars for Earth-like 
planets. 


Bibliography 

Genzel R, Reid MJ, Moran J M and Downes D 1981 Proper 
motions and distances of H,O maser sources. I. The 
outflow in Orion-KL Astrophys. J. 244 884-902 

Ghez A M, Klein B L, Morris M and Becklin E E 1998 
Astrophys. J. 509 678-86 

Kovalevsky J 1998 First results from Hipparcos Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 36 99-129 

Monet D G 1988 Recent advances in optical astrometry 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 413-40 

Strand K Aa 1963 Basic Astronomical Data (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press) 

Van Altena W F 1983 Astrometry Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 21 131-64 

Zensus J A 1997 Parsec-scale jets in extragalactic radio 
sources Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 607-36 


Donna Weistrop 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


The proper motion of a star, or other object, is its angular 
change in direction on the sky over a period of time, often 
expressed in arcseconds per year. Its definition is specific 
with regard to location of the observer, usually at the Sun, 
and the background frame of reference against which the 
motion is compared. 

Most of the stars in our Galaxy occupy a flattened, 
disk-shaped region and central bulge, while the remainder 
are sparsely distributed in a spherical halo. Some 400 
billion stars in our Galaxy, the Sun included, are revolving 
mostly in the same sense about a distant point, the galactic 
center, with different speeds and directions. The GALACTIC 
OPEN CLUSTERS and GLOBULAR CLUSTERS are also in orbit about 
the galactic center. Within each cluster each member star 
moves in an orbit about its center of mass. Even the non- 
stellar galactic nebulae and the dark absorption clouds are 
also in motion, as well as changing in size and shape. 
There is more. As we look to our neighboring galaxies, 
we are aware that they, too, are moving at different speeds 
and directions. Space motion is a universal characteristic, 
one component of which is the proper motion. Therefore, 
we need to measure proper motions in order to see the 
pattern of galactic motions for stars and clusters, as well 
as for stellar motions within clusters. The measurement of 
proper motions for nearby galaxies is becoming a reality 
that enables tracing their dynamical evolution and tidal 
interactions, including possible mergers with our Galaxy. 
These are forefront problems of astronomy. 

Consider a star viewed from the Sun in a certain 
direction on the sky (figure 1). Over a time interval 
the space motion (S) of the star, pictured here in two 
dimensions, is described by a vector, like an arrow of 
certain length and direction. The component of this space 
velocity projected on the sky is called the tangential velocity 
(T), while the component along the line of sight is the radial 
velocity (V), all expressed in kilometers per second. Proper 
motion pz is simply the change in direction after some time 
interval, say one year, for a star moving at the tangential 
velocity. It may be expressed in units of arcseconds, 
milliarcseconds (mas), or microarcseconds (jas) per year, 
where 1 mas = 0.001 arcsec = 1000 pas. Simple formulae 
relate these motions with distance of the object from the 
Sun d in parsecs (1 pc = 3.26 light years). 

S=(V74+T7)'? and T =4.74 ud. 
If we measure the distance, proper motion, and radial 
velocity of a star, we can compute its space velocity with 
respect to the Sun as origin. The distance and PARALLAX (77 
in arcsec) are inversely related by d = 27!. 

The observations are made from the surface of a 
rotating Earth (topocentric), which is revolving about the 
Sun, so that certain corrections are needed to specify a 
space motion with respect to the Sun (heliocentric), or 
to the center of mass of the solar system (barycentric). 
Observed positions represent the combined effects of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Earth 


Figure 1. Space velocity (S) with components radial velocity (V) 
and tangential velocity (7). Proper motion displacement (1) 
corresponds to the tangential velocity and parallax (z) is the 
angular change in direction of a star as seen from ends of a 
baseline of length one astronomical unit. 


parallax, significant for nearer stars, and proper motions. 
Observed radial velocities need corrections for the Earth’s 
rotation and orbital motion and, possibly, motion of 
the Sun about the center of mass of the solar system. 
Other small corrections are relevant. Other definitions 
of the space motion of stars are used for studies 
of stellar kinematics, including origins located at the 
average motion of stars in the solar neighborhood, the 
Local Standard of Rest (LSR), or at the galactic center 
(galactocentric motion). Transformation formulae enable 
conversions of space motions amongst these origins and 
axes. 

The proper motions for galactic stars reflect the wide 
range of their space velocities. The open clusters and the 
bulk of the stars near the galactic plane have heliocentric 
motions of low tens of kilometers per second, with some 
well over 100 km s7!. Large motions prevail for globular 
clusters and many halo stars, which reach several hundred 
kilometers per second. Internal motions in globular 
clusters are typically around 5 km s-!, while in open 
clusters it is only one-tenth of this. 

BARNARD’S STAR, the second nearest after the a 
Centauri system, has the largest known proper motion 
of 10.36 arcsec per year and lies at a distance of 1.82 pc. 
It traverses an angle corresponding to the diameter of the 
Moon in only 175 yr. Interestingly, among the nearby stars, 
there is the RED DwarF Gliese 710 with an annual proper 
motion of only 0.003 arcsec (or 3 mas). Now at a distance 
of 19.3 pc, it is approaching the solar system with a radial 
velocity of about —18.6 km sec-! and should pass at a miss 
distance of only 0.3 pc in about 1 million years. When 
closest to the Sun, its radial velocity becomes zero, while its 
tangential velocity equals its space velocity and its proper 
motion reaches a maximum of 13 arcsec per year. This 
change in size of proper motion illustrates the effect of 
perspective acceleration, now detectable for very few stars. 
Future astrometry from space, with sub-milliarcsecond 
levels of accuracy, will be able to measure this effect for 
many stars. 


Historical background 

In 1718 the English astronomer Edmond HALLey discovered 
that stars exhibit proper motions, when he compared 
recent positions observed by TYCHO BRAHE and others in 
the 1580s and 1590s with those in the Almagest, the early 
Middle Age Arabic version of the Greek proLemy’s star 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


catalog (AD 138). The positions listed by Ptolemy may 
actually be much older and refer to those observed by 
the Greek astronomer HIPPARCOS (ca. 130 BcE), corrected for 
PRECESSION to AD 138. Halley found that some stars showed 
large residual shifts in excess of expected errors, two of 
these being the bright stars Aldebaran and Betelgeuse. 
The discovery of the proper motions had no immediate 
impact. It was only in 1738 that Halley’s proper motion 
of Arcturus was confirmed by JACQUES CASSINI. The first 
catalog containing proper motions for many stars came 
a few years later with the work of Tobias Mayer, who 
compared RomeER’s observations of 1706 with those made 
by himself and LacaiLLz in the 1750s. Positional astronomy 
grew over the following 250 years with ever-improving 
instrumentation and observing techniques. 

The legacy from this long period is the many 
star catalogs containing the equatorial coordinates right 
ascension and declination, based on meridian circles and 
related devices for observing positions for the brighter 
stars to magnitude 8-9. Unfortunately, this limit was 
too bright to include the remote galaxies, which would 
have provided fixed anchor points against which to 
measure positions of moving stars. Instead, fundamental 
observations used the Sun and some relatively nearby 
stars to locate the positions of the moving celestial equator 
and equinox point, as a practical way of defining the 
equatorial coordinate system and its progressive change 
with time. The secular effect of precession and the periodic 
effect of NUTATION measure this change. The practice 
of correcting for systematic differences among catalogs 
was begun by Auwers after 1865. It led to a series of 
catalogs, each defining a new version of the Fundamental 
System of reference with improved precision and accuracy, 
culminating with the final Fundamental Katalog FK5 (1988), 
containing nearly 5000 stars around the sky. A new level 
of accuracy and precision was achieved in 1995 by the 
Hipparcos catalog, which is linked to the extragalactic 
frame and adjusted to the framework of the FK5 at epoch 
J2000. 


Determination of proper motion 

The tools of astrometry take various forms. The 
photographic plate has dominated direct imaging for 
over a century. The final decade of the 20th century 
saw electronic imaging sensors, such as the charged- 
coupled device (CCD), infrared detectors, and others, 
singly or in mosaic form, becoming the detectors of 
preference. Their advantages include high quantum 
efficiency, direct digital recording, and rapid real-time 
data processing by computers. Imaging detectors 
sensitive to the infrared domain offer great opportunities 
as astrometric probes in optically opaque regions of 
the Galaxy. Infrared observations take advantage of 
‘windows’ in the electromagnetic spectrum, where the 
Earth’s atmosphere is relatively transparent, such as those 
at near-infrared wavelengths 1.25, 1.65, and 2.20 microns 
(um) for the J, H, and K bands, respectively. The 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) provides capabilities in optical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and near-infrared regions for the measurement of proper 
motions and parallaxes with precisions at least comparable 
to the Hipparcos Catalog, but reaching to much fainter 
magnitudes. Optical INTERFEROMETRY shows the feasibility 
of differential astrometry to very high precision (tens 
of was) in very small fields, with further advantages 
expected by observing in the near-infrared region using 
large telescopes. 

The determination of proper motions is based on 
the comparison images of a star field obtained at 
suitably spaced epochs of observation. The images 
may be photographic plates or frames from electronic 
detectors. Precision coordinate measuring machines 
provide rectangular coordinates from photographic plates, 
while software associated with electronic detectors 
provides coordinates directly. The term plate is used below 
for images. 

Basically the proper motion is resolved into compo- 
nents, nominally aligned along right ascension and dec- 
lination, expressed by coordinate differences divided by 
epoch difference At, as 4, = Ax/At in x and yy = Ay/At 
in y. In practice, the case is more complex. Each plate is 
exposed and measured with small differences in centering 
and alignment of axes. The telescope contributes effects 
from guiding errors, optical distortion, flexure, plate tilt 
and others, which are not precisely the same for each expo- 
sure. Variations in atmospheric refraction and chromatic 
effects, depending on the color of the star, contribute to the 
imaging on each plate. The plates may even be taken with 
different telescopes. These effects must be accounted for 
in astrometric reductions. 

In order to map precisely each plate of a series of two 
or more plates into one selected as a standard frame, we 
use a model that accounts for the above-cited effects. For 
a pair of plates (At = ft) — t), we have in each coordinate 
the form 

Xy — Xy = fly At + F(x, y,m,c;a;) +€ i=1,n 
where the model F is some function of position (x, y), 
stellar magnitude (m), and color (c). The n unknown 
parameters a; are called plate constants, while € is a 
residual error. 

The simplest case is a linear model, often adequate for 
small fields, where we have for the x coordinate (similarly 
in y) 

Ax = At hy +a, xX +a. y +3 + & 

with unknown plate constants (a), a2,a3). Two basic 
approaches exist for finding the plate constants. If a subset 
of the measured stars is also contained in a star catalog 
of positions and proper motions, they may be used as 
reference stars to evaluate the plate constants and, hence, 
permit the calculation of proper motions, close to the 
astrometric system of the parent catalog, for the other stars 
in the field. 

If no external astrometric data exists, then we fall back 
to a solution for relative proper motions, which has an 
unknown zero-point offset. In practical terms, we use all 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(or part) measured stars as reference stars and, assuming 
their average proper motion is zero, solve for relative plate 
constants and then compute relative proper motions for 
all stars. However, if the measurements include faint, 
compact galaxies, we may compute their mean ‘fictitious 
proper motion’, taken with opposite sign, and apply it 
as a zero-point correction to convert from relative to 
absolute proper motions for the stars. An alternative 
statistical method (mean secular parallaxes) may be used to 
estimate the zero-point correction—the parallactic motion 
component of the reflex effect of solar motion—evaluated 
in the direction of the field and at the mean apparent 
magnitude and mean distance of the reference stars. 

Techniques for evaluating the plate constants include 
a simple least squares adjustment for a pair of plates. 
The more complex method of plate overlap, pioneered 
by Eichhorn (1960) and now used extensively, solves 
simultaneously by least squares for both plate constants 
and star constants (proper motion and parallax) for a series 
of plates. 


Some applications 

Cluster membership 

Proper motions provide a means for isolating members 
of open and globular clusters from foreground and 
background field stars. Goals include the construction 
of color-magnitude diagrams or studies of individual 
members. The internal motions in clusters are generally 
very small. This translates into very nearly equal and 
parallel proper motions, in contrast to the wide range 
of motions displayed by the surrounding field stars. 
The proper-motion vector point diagram, a plot of the 
two components of (usually) relative proper motion, 
forms the basis for estimating stellar membership in star 
clusters. The diagram displays two distributions of points 
with centroids representing the cluster (usually smaller 
dispersion) and the field stars. Estimates of membership 
have been made for some 100 open clusters and about 15 
globular clusters. Recent observations with large ground- 
based telescopes and with the Hubble Space Telescope 
(HST), focusing on small regions, particularly the cores 
of globular clusters, are raising the astrometry to new 
levels of precision and magnitude limits unattainable by 
traditional photography (see CLUSTER MEMBERSHIPS). 


Space motions of clusters 

The trajectories of clusters around the galactic center may 
be computed from their space motions. These orbits 
provide clues to the origin and evolution of the Galaxy. 
For globular clusters the issue concerns correlations 
between cluster metallicity, as age indicator, and cluster 
kinematics—whether the motion supports membership in 
the halo or disk population. Motions have been traced 
back over the age of the Galaxy, to expose the changing 
character of the orbits with time. For the generally much 
younger open clusters the trajectories provide information 
about their places of origin in the framework of spiral 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


structure as it was in the past and correlations of their 
atmospheric metal contents with galactocentric distance. 

The number of globular clusters with measured 
absolute proper motions of quality ranging from useful 
to submarginal is about 35 and growing. Many are 
measured on photographs using galaxies or stars from 
the Hipparcos Catalog as reference frame, while others 
are based on a statistical reduction for conversion to 
absolute motion. Absolute proper motions have been 
measured on photographs for more than 200 open clusters, 
using photographic star catalogs for the reference frame, 
as most clusters lie in the Milky Way. The Hipparcos 
Catalog provides astrometric and photometric data for 241 
clusters, ranging from one star per cluster to over 100 stars 
(Hyades). 


Astrometric distances of clusters 

The history of estimating distances to star clusters, using 
various astrophysical methods, is a long one. An 
alternative astrometric method for estimating distance 
involves the comparison of dispersions in proper motion 
and radial velocity, using the simple expression 


Oy 


d — 
4.746, 


where o, and o, are the error-corrected dispersions 
in radial velocity (km s~') and proper motion (arcsec 
yr), respectively. The astrometric method provides an 
independent way for finding distance that is insensitive 
to the interstellar medium. A more realistic approach 
that accounts for omissions in the simple method uses 
dynamical models of the cluster. Few clusters have been 
calibrated by these methods so far. 


Space motions of nearby galaxies 

Our Galaxy belongs to a clustering of some 30 known 
members called the LocaL Group. First steps towards 
measuring the trajectories for some nearer members 
have been made. These reveal the complex nature of 
interactions of our Galaxy with the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS and 
other neighbors. The absolute proper motion measured 
for the LMC in 1994 reveals it is gravitationally bound 
to the Galaxy and now lies at perigalacticon on a strongly 
eccentric orbit. Results using the Hipparcos Catalog for both 
LMC and SMC provide independent measurements of the 
motions. These indicate that more precise absolute proper 
motions are still needed to firmly establish the nature of 
the motions of the Clouds. 

Absolute proper motions measured for other satellite 
galaxies (the nearer dwarf spheroidal systems Ursa Minor, 
Draco, and Sculptor) show them to be generally moving 
along one of two great circles on the sky, either the 
MAGELLANIC STREAM Or a second stream with the Fornax 
dwarf spheroidal galaxy. The motion for the sAciTTarIus 
DWARF SPHEROIDAL galaxy, discovered in 1994, shows that it 
is a tidally distorted system now near perigalacticum, only 
16 kpc from the galactic center. The motions of galactic 
satellite systems provide evidence for the mass and mass 
distribution in the Galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Total proper motion resolved along (v) and normal (r) 
to great circle from star to antapex of Solar Motion. Peculiar 
motion (pec) is resolved into t and 7 components. The 
parallactic motion (par) is the reflex solar motion. 


Solar motion and galactic rotation 

The effect of galactic rotation is that on average stars closer 
to the galactic center than the Sun move faster around the 
center, while stars farther from the center than the Sun 
orbit more slowly. This differential galactic rotation effect, 
measured with respect to the average motions of stars in 
the Sun’s neighborhood, called the Local Standard of Rest 
(LSR), may be expressed by mathematical models as a 
function of absolute proper motions and radial velocities. 
The simplest is the linear Oort model, valid for nearer stars 
with circular orbits in the galactocentric plane. It provides 
the Oort constants A and B, which enable computing 
the angular velocity and circular velocity in the solar 
neighborhood. 


Statistical luminosity calibration 
The observed total proper motion is resolvable onto 
orthogonal axes, one aligned along (v) and the other at 
right angles (r) to the great circle passing through a star 
and extending from apex to antapex defined by the solar 
motion (figure 2). The two proper motion components 
form the basis of two variations of statistical methods for 
finding mean parallaxes and distances for specific classes 
of stars, usually applied to those with narrow range in 
luminosity, and, therefrom, the calibration of their mean 
absolute magnitudes. Certain classes of stars have too few 
members near enough for the accurate measurement of 
individual parallaxes. Consequently, statistical methods 
based on proper motions provide alternative approaches. 
The mean parallactic motion for a stellar sample is 
found from averaging the v components. For the special 
case of a small region at angular distance A from the Solar 
apex, we have the mean (uv) = (par) + (7) = (par), because, 
by definition of solar motion, the average peculiar motion 
of the stars (here 7 component) is zero with respect to their 
LSR. The mean parallax for the region, where Vo is the 


solar motion, is 
4.74 (par) 
(xt) = een Ty, 


Vo sind - 


The statistical parallax is based on t components, which 
represent pure peculiar motions of stars. It is measured 
by the ratio of mean (|t|) and mean peculiar radial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


velocity (|V|) components. The practical determination of 
mean parallax by either method is more complex, in that 
the distribution of peculiar space velocities is generally 
ellipsoidal. This means that forming averages of proper 
motions and radial velocities for stars located over the 
sky must be done carefully using the tools of statistical 
astronomy. 


Nebular astrometry 

Normally we regard proper motions as properties of stars 
and stellar systems. Proper motions can also refer to the 
angular movement of material in the stellar environment. 
Nebular astrometry has its roots in photographic imaging 
extending back to the early years of the 20th century, 
with observations of expanding shells and light echos 
of Novag. Observed proper motion expansions prevail in 
several classes of objects, including novae, SUPERNOVAE, 
PLANETARY NEBULAE, YOUNG STELLAR OBJECTS (Herbig—Haro), 
and various classes of luminous stars undergoing mass 
loss. These motions are observable in the optical and other 
wavebands. 

Measurements of proper motion expansion provide 
timescales and evidence for underlying stellar processes. 
Proper motions combined with radial velocities of shells, 
or other features, provide a valuable geometrical method 
for measuring distances and luminosities of central 
stars that is independent of corrections for intervening 
interstellar absorption. Moreover, observations of 
supernovae provide an independent measure of distances 
to galaxies. The advent of exceptional resolution provided 
by HST and ground-based CCD imaging of non-stellar 
features is leading to a new level of precision unattainable 
by the older photographic technique. 


Infrared astrometry and catalogs 

Historically color-sensitized photographic plates have 
recorded beyond the visual wavelength limit near 0.7 
micron up to a near-infrared limit of about 1.1 micron. The 
record shows scant precision photographic astrometry in 
this wavelength domain. However, infrared astrometry is 
emerging as cameras are being developed with electronic 
detectors possessing sensitivity, imaging characteristics, 
and field size suitable for precision measurements. The 
ability to penetrate deeply into a variety of optically highly 
opaque regions of the Galaxy is their prime advantage. 
These include star-forming regions, enabling studies of the 
kinematics of stars in the process of formation. Fields are 
now being exploited through proper motions of both stars 
and associated non-stellar matter, such as jets, streams, 
shells, and other parts. An outstanding success of near- 
infrared K-band astrometry is the measurement of relative 
proper motions of stars near the optically highly opaque 
galactic center using the Keck 10 m telescope. The motions 
support a massive BLACK HOLE candidate. Systematic 
large-scale infrared sky surveys are unveiling now-hidden 
populations throughout the galactic disk and bulge and to 
the far side of the Galaxy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Infrared surveys, such as IRAS, provide large 
numbers of sources, including many galactic stellar 
objects. The large positional uncertainty at a single 
epoch precludes their use for measuring accurate proper 
motions. However, cross-identifications with large 
optical catalogs, containing proper motion and other 
data, enables these catalogs to be used for kinematical 
studies. An example is the Infrared Astrometric Catalog 
(IAC), based on space observations made with the 
Mid-Course Space Experiment telescope Spirit III at a 
wavelength of 8 microns. It forms a new infrared 
database of 177 860 stars, containing improved positions 
as well as proper motions and other data compiled 
from optical catalogs. Other surveys in progress, giving 
positions at the 0.5-1.0 arcsecond level for over 100 
million objects, include the Sloan Digital Sky Survey 
(SDSS), Deep Near Infrared Survey (DENIS), 2 Micron 
All Sky Survey (2MASS), and Infrared Space Observatory 
(ISO). Eventually observations for high-precision proper 
motions will enable greater exploitation of these databases. 


Astrometric catalogs 

The precision of a catalog is characterized by the standard 
errors of its (equatorial) coordinates (€,) at its mean epoch 
t, and its proper motions (¢,). The inexorable temporal 
degradation in accuracy of positions computed at some 
epoch t away from the catalog epoch (At = t — t,) is given 
by the law of error propagation 


= [e? +(e, At)”. 


For the Hipparcos Catalog with errors of 0.8 mas in positions 
and proper motions at 1991.25, the error in computed 
positions grows to 8 mas after 10 years. This tells us that 
catalogs have finite useful lifetimes, as a source of positions 
projected to distant dates. 

During the preparation of the Hipparcos Catalog it 
became apparent that binary and multiple stars could 
affect both the derived proper motions and the estimates 
of the total errors. This comes from the fact that the 
observations for the Hipparcos program spanned only 
~3.5 years, while many binary stars have Keplerian 
orbital periods ranging from much shorter to much greater 
values. The measured instantaneous positions on the sky 
are the sum of the proper motion of the center of mass 
of the system and the location of each stellar component 
on a sky-projected orbit. The picture is more complex. 
The Hipparchos detector measures the equivalent of a 
photocenter, which at one extreme senses only the brighter 
component of a system where the fainter one lies below 
the detection limit. At the other extreme the measured 
photocenter senses the partially merged light of two 
components of comparable brightness. Moreover, one 
or more components may be variable in brightness, thus 
complicating the interpretation of the displacement of the 
photocenter with time. If observations of photocenters are 
made in different wavebands, for stars of different colors, 
a color-induced effect may also be significant. Therefore, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the total positional error in star positions projected to 
other epochs may be dominated by an orbital-motion- 
induced cosmic error, in excess of the measuring error. 
Conversely, a comparison of Hipparcos proper motions 
with those based on traditional decades-to-century-long 
baselines provides an independent way of discovering 
close binary stars. New techniques of statistical astrometry 
were developed to complement high-precision space 
astrometry made over short time baselines. 

The following sections describe major astrometric 
programs and star catalogs currently available or in 
progress. Table 1 summarizes these catalogs and provides 
references. Data centers or observatories providing these 
catalogs usually include detailed information for the user. 


Surveys for large proper motions 

Surveys to faint limits have uncovered many stars of 
large proper motion, mainly nearby red and white dwarfs 
and subdwarfs. These are useful collectively for stellar 
statistics of the solar neighborhood and individually for 
astrophysical observations. Stars of larger proper motion, 
typically over about 0.1-0.2 arcsec per year, are discovered 
by comparing photographs taken a decade or more apart. 
Major recent surveys include those of Luyten (Minnesota), 
Giclas group (Lowell Observatory), Wroblewski group 
(Cerro Calan Observatory), and others. About 70 mainly 
bright stars have proper motions over 2.0 arcsec per year. 
Some 4000 stars have annual motions over 0.5 arcsec (over 
half found by Luyten), while 60 000 stars exceed 0.2 arcsec 
(70% found by Luyten). An estimated 500000 stars have 
annual motions over 0.10 arcsec. Digitized Schmidt and 
other sky surveys will provide a full count of proper 
motions above their error thresholds. 


Astrograph surveys 
The Lick Northern Proper Motion (NPM) and Yale/San 
Juan Southern Proper Motion (SPM) programs provide 
absolute proper motions for large numbers of faint stars, 
based on photographs exposed 2-4 decades apart. These 
use faint galaxies to approximate an inertial frame for 
the non-Milky Way sky and the Hipparcos system in the 
Milky Way zone. The NPM program covers the sky 
northward of declination —23°, while the SPM program 
extends southward from —17°, with a some fields north 
of this. Both programs, still in progress, have produced 
large astrometric catalogs: NPM1 with 149000 stars for 
the non-Milky Way sky and SPM 1.0 with 59 000 stars in 
a 720 deg? region around the south galactic pole. Both 
programs include large numbers of special stars selected 
for their astrophysical and kinematical importance. 
Similar surveys include the Faint Star Catalog 
(KSZ) plan (Pulkovo), involving photography at several 
observatories for 205 fields north of declination —25°. The 
separate parts, when completed at Kiev, will form the 
General Compiled Catalog of Absolute Proper Motions (GPM). 
The Main Meridional Section of the Galaxy (MEGA) 
program at Kiev, including contributions from Potsdam, 
contains fields along an arc linking the galactic poles 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


for studies of stellar distributions and kinematics. 


Table 1. Large astrometric catalogs. 


Catalog Source Date MagColor No. objects Contentt 
HIP ESA 1995 12.4V 118 218 p/pm 
TYC ESA 1995 -11.5V 1058 332 p/pm 
TYC2 Hog+ 2.5 million p/pm 
AC2000 USNO 1998 =12.5B 4621 186 P 
ACT USNO 1997 -11.5V 988 758 p/pm 
TRC Heg+ 1998 =: 11.5V 990 182 p/pm 
TAC 1.0 USNO 1996 12.5V 705 679 p/pm 
TAC 2.0 USNO p/pm 
Starnet ARI 1996 12.5B 4.3 million p/pm 
GSC II STScI 2 billion p/pm 
DPOSS CalTech 2 billion p/pm 
APS Minn 1997 21B,20R 40 million Pp 
APS-Luyten Minn 20R p/pm 
USNO A1.0 USNO 1997 20-22BVR = 488 million p 
USNO A2.0 USNO 1998  20-22BVG 526280881 p 
USNO B USNO p/pm 
UCAC-S USNO 16VR 40 million P 
NPM1 Lick 1993 19B,18V 148 996 p/pm 
NPM2 Lick 19B,18V 300 000 p/pm 
SPM 1.0 Yale/SJuan 1998  19B,18V 58 800 p/pm 
SPM 2.0 Yale/S.Juan 19B,18V 320 000 p/pm 
GPM Kiev 15.5B 60.000 p/pm 
IAC MSxX 1996 K-band 61242 P 


+ Positions (p) and proper motions (pm). 

References: 

HIP & TYC: The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogu 1997, ESA SP-1200 
TYC2: Heg 1997 ESA Symp. Hipparcos-Venice ‘97, ESA SP-402, 25 
AC2000: Urban 1997 Astron. J. 115 1212 

ACT: Urban 1998 Astron. J. 115 2161 

TRC: Kuzmin 1999 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 136 491 

TAC 1.0 & TAC 2.0: Zacharias 1996 Astron. J. 112 2336 

Starnet: Roser 1996 IAU Symp. No. 172, 481 


GSC II: Morrison 1997 ESA Symp. Hipparcos-Venice '97, ESA SP-402, 73. 


DPOSS: Djorgovski 1998 Bul. Am. Ast. Soc. 30 1270 
APS: Cornuelle 1997 ASP Conf. 127 55 

APS-Luyten: Humphreys 1997 ASP Conf. 127 41 
USNO A1.0 & USNO B: Monet 1997 ASP Conf. 127 31 
USNO A2.0: Monet 1999 Bul. Am. Astron. Soc. 30 1427 


UCAC-S: Zacharias 1997 ESA Symp. Hipparcos-Venice '97 ESA SP-402, 177 


NPM1: Klemola 1987 Astron. J. 94 501 

NPM2: Hanson 1997 ASP Conf. 127 23 

SPM 1.0: Platais 1998 Astron. J. 116 2556 

SPM 2.0: van Altena 1990 IAU Symp. No. 141, 419. 
GPM: Rybka 1997 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 121 243 
IAC: Egan 1996 Astron. J. 112 2862 


The 


larger Tycho Catalog the median precisions for brighter stars 


Potsdam program uses the Tautenburg Schmidt telescope 
for deep photography in numerous regions over the 
northern sky. 


Hipparcos/Tycho catalogs 

The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogs provide positions, 
proper motions, photometry, and other data in the 
Hipparcos system, which is regarded as a representation 
of the ICRS system in optical wavelengths. This is a large 
catalog of unprecedented astrometric precision in optical 
wavelengths. For the brighter Hipparcos stars (H, < 9) 
the median precisions are 0.8 mas for position, 0.8 mas yr“! 
for proper motion, and 1.0 mas for parallax. For the much 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(V, < 9) is 7 mas, while for all stars it is 25 mas. A new 
version Tycho2 Catalog will have 2.5 million stars, including 
proper motions derived from re-reduced AC positions. 
The adopted astrometric reference system is now 
the International Celestial Reference System (ICRS). The 
ICRS is that astrometric system that closely approximates 
the conventional equatorial coordinate system for mean 
equator and equinox of J2000 and the fundamental FK5 
system. It is represented by the Hipparcos Catalog for 
stars and by the nearly inertial extragalactic frame defined 
at radio wavelengths by a special set of more than 200 
(later 600) faint quasars and compact galaxies uniformly 
distributed around the sky. The ICRS system is used 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proper Motion: Optical/Infrared 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hereafter for both optical and radio observations to ensure 
compatibility of their reference systems. 


Extensions of Hipparcos system 

The Astrographic Catalog (AC), also known as Carte du Ciel 
(CdC), was a massive program started in 1887 by some 
22 observatories to photograph and measure positions 
for stars to magnitude about B = 12.5. The resulting 
observatory catalogs contain rectangular coordinates of 
varying precision for over 4.5 million stars, spanning a 
very wide range of epochs around the average near 1905. 
These positions, now in computer-readable form, have 
been reduced to equatorial coordinates nominally in the 
Hipparcos (ICRS, J2000) system. One of several versions, 
completed or in progress, is the AC2000. 

The ACT Reference Catalog (ACT) and Tycho Reference 
Catalog (TRC) are parallel catalogs based on the same 
material, the Tycho and AC, but using different strategies 
for reducing the AC into the Hipparcos system for deriving 
improved proper motions for the Tycho and other stars. 
The ACT uses AC2000, while TRC uses its own version. 

The Twin Astrographic Catalog (TAC) Version 1.0 is 
based on photography at the US Naval Observatory 
(USNO) for the sky north of declination —18° with epochs 
1977-1986. It is an independent catalog with higher 
density than Tycho, where proper motions are found by 
comparison with the AC reduced to the (FK5, J2000) 
system. A new version TAC 2.0 reduced to the Hipparcos 
system is in progress. The US Naval Observatory CCD 
Astrometry Catalog (UCAC-S) represents a CCD survey in 
progress to produce a very high density catalog in the 
Hipparcos system for the southern sky to magnitude 16. 

The high-density Starnet Catalog and Four-million Star 
Catalog of Positions and Proper Motions (4M Cat) are parallel 
in using the HST Guide Star Catalog 1.0 and reduced 
AC, referred to the Positions and Proper Motions Catalogue 
(PPM). 


Schmidt telescope surveys 

The digitization of northern and southern photographic 
surveys obtained at several epochs with Schmidt tele- 
scopes forms massive databases of positions and photome- 
try, and (in progress) proper motions, to faint magnitudes. 

The Minnesota APS Catalog is based on copies of the 
Palomar Observatory Sky Survey I(POSS-I) plates for galactic 
latitude |b] > 20°. The APS-Luyten Proper Motion Catalog, 
in progress, includes red Palomar plates taken by Luyten 
in the 1960s to derive absolute proper motions with respect 
to galaxies. 

The USNO A2.0 catalog provides positions in the ICRS 
system from scans of POSS-I, UK(SRC), and ESO Schmidt 
plates made at the USNO (Flagstaff). The Space Telescope 
Science Institute (STScI) digitized the POSS-II and UK 
Schmidt plates intended for the second generation Hubble 
Guide Star Catalog (GST-II), containing positions, proper 
motions, and photometry. It is organized on the sky (32 768 
equal areas) for efficient cross-matching with other optical 
surveys and data from other wavebands. The DPOSS 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(Caltech) is the digitized POSS-II for two billion stars and 
50 million galaxies. 


Future prospects: space astrometry 

The success of the Hipparcos Mission in reducing errors 
to the milliarcsecond level has emphasized the decisive 
advantages of astrometry from space. Discussions 
for future missions now center on the scientific and 
technical aspects for achieving astrometric accuracy in the 
microarcsecond domain, some 1-3 orders of magnitude 
smaller than from the Hipparcos Mission. More 
optimistic scenarios envision measuring proper motions 
and parallaxes for objects throughout the Galaxy and deep 
into extragalactic space. Such a success would impact 
profoundly on problems that today are only imperfectly 
understood. Beneficiaries would extend from the solar 
system to stellar kinematics and galactic rotation, distance 
scale and luminosity calibrations, galaxy trajectories and 
their implications on the formation and evolution of the 
Galaxy, and much more. The needed metrology to achieve 
this goal is technologically challenging. Discussions 
envision a Space Interferometry Mision (SIM) and a 
German interferometer for a multichannel photometry 
and astrometry (DIVA) mission sometime after 2000. 
Some concepts include GAIA (ESA), POINTS (Center for 
Astronomy: Cambridge), OSI (Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
(JPL)), NEWCOMB and FAME (JPL, USNO, SAO, NRL). 
Direct imaging with HST and future space telescopes in 
optical and other spectral regions offer alternative options 
for space astrometry. 


Bibliography 

Eichhorn H 1974 Astronomy of Star Positions (New York: 
Fredrick Ungar) 

Heg E and Seidelmann P K (eds) 1995 Astronomical 
and Astrophysical Objectives of Sub-microarcsecond 
Astrometry (IAU Symp. 166) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Humphreys R M (ed) 1997 Proper Motions and Galactic 
Astronomy (ASP Conf. Ser. 127) (San Francisco, CA: 
ASP) 

MacGillivray H T, Thomson E B, Lasker B M, Reid I N, 
Malin D F, West R M and Lorenz H (eds) 1994 
Astronomy from Wide-Field Imaging (IAU Symp. 161) 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Morrison L V and Gilmore G F (eds) 1994 Galactic and Solar 
System Optical Astrometry (Cambridge Workshop) 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

van Altena W F 1983 Astrometry Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys 21 131-164 


Arnold Klemola 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protogalaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Protogalaxies 


The term protogalaxies or sometimes primeval galaxies 
(hereafter PGs) has been used in the literature with a 
range of different meanings, but a general definition may 
be something like this: progenitors of the present-day 
(normal) galaxies, in the early stages of formation; also, 
many, but not all, authors would also add to that the words 
‘at high redshifts’. The key phrase is ‘the early stages of 
formation’, which is fundamentally not well defined. 

The ambiguities are mainly due to the fact that 
our understanding of what GALAXY FORMATION means has 
been evolving over the past few decades. Moreover, 
even at any given time, experts of different technical 
orientations (e.g. observers versus n-body simulators) 
who would otherwise agree about the general picture 
of galaxy formation would have different and equally 
legitimate definitions in mind. For example, an observer 
may mean ‘the first major burst of star formation in a 
progenitor of a present-day elliptical galaxy’, whereas a 
theorist may mean ‘the peak merging epoch of dark halos 
of the fragments which assemble to produce an average 
galaxy today’; others would define a PG as a still gaseous 
body before any STAR FORMATION has taken place or as an 
overdense region of DARKMATTER in the very early universe, 
destined to become gravitationally bound and to collapse. 
In some sense all of them are right. 

It may be useful here to offer a brief account of 
our present understanding of galaxy formation and then 
describe some of the relevant observations, thus defining 
PGs in an implicit way. While the subject is still evolving 
rapidly as of this writing (late 1999), most cosmologists 
would agree that the basic picture we now have is likely 
to be essentially correct. Instead of seeking a hypothetical 
magic epoch when PGs appear and then evolve into the 
familiar types of galaxies today, the focus is now on 
understanding of the complete history of galaxy and large- 
scale structure assembly, as well as the history of star 
formation in all galaxies and the chemical enrichment of 
gas in the universe at large. It is then almost a matter 
of taste which slice of formative history would be called 
the epoch of galaxy formation and which objects or which 
evolutionary stages of normal galaxies would be called 
PGs. 

In what follows, we outline a broad-brush picture 
and give general arguments and order-of-magnitude 
estimates, which are likely to be at least roughly correct, 
however much our understanding of galaxy formation 
evolves in the forthcoming years. Ever more detailed 
models will be producing more precise predictions, which 
can then be tested by future observations. 


From density fluctuations to protogalaxies 

The basic paradigm of structure formation is that it 
takes place through the gravitational instability of bound, 
overdense regions in the early universe. The distribution 
of such regions in mass (or, equivalently, density) is 
quantified by the initial density perturbation spectrum, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which is produced by some type of quantum fluctuation 
processes in the early universe. Sufficiently overdense 
regions separate from the universal expansion and 
collapse under their own self-gravity, roughly on the free- 
fall time scale: 


RR. 3/2 M -1/2 
~5 108 init 
sr aos (a =) (sens) 


1.6 x 10° Bet (eS 
x 1. Yr 
se YE*\ToMpe) \ 105M, 


where Rinit is the initial radius of the bound region and 
M is the enclosed mass. It can be seen that for a galactic 
or subgalactic mass fragment the corresponding cosmic 
epochs (~10° yr) imply high repsHiFts of collapse, whereas 
CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES or larger structures may be still 
collapsing today. The free-fall time scale is a lower limit 
to the formation time scale, its duration and the cosmic 
epoch: in practice, it may take several free-fall times for a 
given mass overdensity to be assembled through a process 
of hierarchical merging and virialization. To a first order, 
this simple argument implies that the peak epoch of galaxy 
formation is likely to be found at the cosmic epochs of a 
few x 108 to a few x 10? yr, or roughly in the redshift range 
z ~ 2-20 or so, whereas the epoch of cluster formation 
lasts many billions of years and is still going on now. 


Collapse 

Since the non-baryonic dark matter appears to dominate 
the total mass, the overdense regions, i.e. proto-dark-halos, 
can start collapsing even while the universe is still ionized, 
e.g. at z ~ 104, with the baryonic matter following. The 
smallest mass fluctuations collapse the fastest; however, 
they are also most readily erased by a variety of damping 
processes operating in the early universe, such as the 
streaming of matter and photons, sound waves, etc. It 
is now believed that the smallest structures which survive 
at the recombination epoch are similar in mass to GLOBULAR 
CLUSTERS OF DWARF GALAXIES, i.e. (10°-10°) Mo. They may be 
the basic building blocks of galaxies. 

Images of the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND (CMB) 
photosphere show a snapshot of overdense regions at 
the recombination epoch at z ~ 1100. At the present 
time, the resolution of such observations corresponds 
to physical scales of large clusters and superclusters of 
galaxies rather than galaxies themselves. Nevertheless, 
these observations support the basic picture of structure 
formation via gravitational instability. 

Any energy dissipation in the baryonic component 
of the mass (also called the cooling of PGs) would of 
course accelerate the collapse and lead to the formation 
of denser objects, since systems which dissipate energy at 
a fixed mass become more tightly bound. The distinction 
between galaxies and large-scale structures such as galaxy 
groups or clusters (or larger) is that the galaxies (or 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protogalaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


their protogalactic fragments) can cool faster than the 
free-fall time. Physical mechanisms which enable this 
energy dissipation in collapsing PGs include the inverse- 
Compton cooling of hot gas on the CMB radiation (CMBR) 
photons and shocks in the infalling and colliding gas 
clouds. 

Thus galaxies (or their building blocks) become 
distinct concentrations within the overall large-scale 
structure, whose evolution is dominated by the gravity of 
the dark matter. Simple arguments based on the mean 
density of galaxies, the spin-up of galaxy disks, etc all 
suggest that they collapsed by about a factor of 10 or 20 in 
radius, whereas pure dissipationless collapse can produce 
only a factor of 2 (this is a direct consequence of the virial 
theorem for systems bound by gravity). Given the ratio of 
the comoving rms separation of galaxies today and their 
typical radii, this must have happened at z < 20 or so. It 
is also hard to have an effective cooling of PGs at redshifts 
much higher than that. 

There are two fundamental aspects of galaxy 
formation: assembly of the mass (mostly dark), and 
conversion of the primordial gas (see GAS IN GALAXIES) into 
stars, and the subsequent chemical enrichment through 
SUPERNOVA explosions. The former is easier to model 
numerically; the latter is what is actually observable. The 
two may be connected, as bursts of star formation are likely 
to result from mergers of gas-rich PG fragments. 


Assembly of protogalaxies 

At every spatial (or mass) scale, there is a gradual, 
hierarchical merging of fragments into ever larger 
structures. This process operates first at the smaller 
scales, and moves to ever larger ones as the age of 
the universe increases and as the smaller fragments are 
consumed in mergers. While mergers of galaxies are 
relatively rare (yet readily observed) in the present-day 
universe, such processes must have been much more 
common at higher redshifts, when galaxies and their 
initial building blocks were closer together, with less 
developed peculiar velocities, and when there were more 
fragments to merge with (See GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND 
MERGERS). However, this process of hierarchical assembly 
never really ceases, and today itis the principal mechanism 
of galaxy transformation. 

In 1960s and early 1970s, a simple picture of galaxy 
formation as a monolithic collapse of a single large PG 
cloud was promoted by Eggen, Lynden-Bell and Sandage, 
with a majority of the POPULATION 11 (bulge and halo) 
stars formed more or less during a single free-fall time. 
This picture has now been completely replaced by the 
hierarchical formation scenario. The remaining issue is 
when and where did most of the stars form? A merger 
of a large number of PG fragments on a time scale 
comparable with the free-fall time of the entire system, 
and accompanied by a rapid star formation activity, is in 
practice indistinguishable from the old monolithic collapse 
picture. It is quite possible that massive ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES 
in clusters formed in such a manner. In another extreme 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


scenario, mergers of large fragments occur over a more 
protracted time scale, comparable with the Hubble time, 
with most of the stars already formed in the merging units 
and some formed in merger-induced starbursts. It is likely 
that there was a full spectrum of galaxy assembly scenarios 
or formation histories at work. 

The interplay of mass assembly and star formation 
fundamentally determines the galaxy morphology and 
the origin of disks in spiraL GALAXIES. In general, random 
merging of fragments leads to the formation of spheroidal 
(or, more accurately, triaxial) systems such as the bulges, 
stellar halos and dark halos, where kinetic energy needed 
to support the system against its own gravity is in random 
motions. In contrast to that, if protogalactic gas settles into 
a dark halo potential well gradually, it radiates away its 
kinetic energy, but retains most of the angular momentum 
(which can be only mechanically transferred away). PGs 
acquire their angular momenta through tidal interactions 
in the early universe, as passing-by mass concentrations 
exert tidal torques on each other. The gas then assumes the 
lowest-energy configuration possible for a given amount 
of angular momentum, which is a centrifugally supported, 
rotating thin disk (similar arguments apply to the origin 
of any disks in astronomy, including PROTOPLANETARY DISKS, 
ACCRETION DISKS, etc, not just DISK GALAXIES). Any stars formed 
within the gaseous disk then inherit the same kinematics. 

Disks are dynamically fragile: major mergers would 
disrupt their orderly rotation and convert them to random 
motions. Thus, any disk galaxy is unlikely to have had 
a major merger since its disk was formed, but accretion 
of smaller satellites is still possible. Conversely, one 
often hears assertions that (some) ellipticals are made by 
merging spirals, which is indeed observed in the nearby 
universe. Obviously this is not the only possible path: 
a young elliptical may be made by merging a thousand 
small fragments early on. While some ellipticals may be 
formed in late, major mergers, many studies of elliptical 
galaxy properties in clusters at low and moderate redshifts 
suggest that most of their star formation was completed at 
high redshifts, z > 3 or higher, although some fraction of 
their stars may have formed since then. 

At large redshifts, the merging was much more 
rapid and frequent, and the formation of durable, 
massive galactic disks was not likely. As the merging 
subsided and galaxies were carried apart by the universal 
expansion, the necessary gradual assembly of disks 
increased (incidentally, the same argument is used to 
explain the morphology-—density relation in clusters and 
groups of galaxies: spirals are found mainly in low-density 
regions, and vice versa for ellipticals). Thus, we expect 
that the epoch of halo and bulge formation in galaxies in 
general preceded the epoch of disk formation, which is 
consistent with their star formation histories: bulges and 
ellipticals show little or no star formation today, and have 
spectra and colors characteristic of old stellar populations, 
where the bulk of the stars formed ~6-12 billion years 
ago, whereas the disks are actively forming stars now, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protogalaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and apparently had similar star formation rates over their 
entire history. 

To summarize, the expected history of galaxy 
formation may be something like this. The first PG 
fragments (gravitationally bound clumps in the early 
universe) may have had masses comparable with those 
of dwarf galaxies, M~(10°-10°)M. at the epoch of 
recombination, at z ~ 1100. Over the subsequent few 
billion years they merged hierarchically into ever more 
massive structures, stimulating star formation in the 
process. The first stars may have formed within a few 
hundred million years, at redshifts z ~ 20410. The 
process of hierarchical assembly of PGs reached a peak 
maybe 1-3 billion years later, at redshifts z ~ 2.541. At 
subsequent epochs, this activity subsided as galaxies were 
carried apart by the universal expansion, and the supply of 
fragments and gas to merge with was diminished. Galaxy 
formation became GALAXY EVOLUTION. Most of the early star 
formation was in proto-ellipticals and bulges, with the 
disks forming on longer time scales. 

Assembly of the mass into the present-day galaxies 
is one fundamental aspect of galaxy formation, but 
since most of the mass is dark this process is not 
readily observable. The other fundamental aspect is the 
conversion of primordial gas into stars and the early 
evolution of stellar populations, which is what we can 
observe. Let us then examine the sources of luminosity 
in PGs. 


Luminosity of protogalaxies 

The first is the release of excess binding energy, since PGs 
have collapsed. This is true regardless of the details of 
mass assembly, be it hierarchical merging or a monolithic 
collapse. A variety of arguments suggest that the PGs 
collapsed by about a factor of 10. First, the mean densities 
of galaxies exceed the extrapolated densities of the large- 
scale structure down to the typical radial scales of galaxies 
(a few kpc) by about a factor of ~10°, suggesting a collapse 
by about a factor of 10. Second, the spinup of galactic 
disks requires a collapse by a similar radial factor. We 
can estimate the amount of the binding energy released 
by assuming that the present-day galaxies are in a virial 
equilibrium and estimating their total intrinsic kinetic 
energy. According to the virial theorem, this is equal to 
the amount of the excess binding energy lost in the process 
of virialization: a PG starts as a marginally bound system, 
with the kinetic energy equal to the potential one, but ends 
up as a virialized system where the kinetic energy is one 
half of that, with the other half presumably radiated away 
or carried out by galactic winds. An estimate of the kinetic 
energy of a normal, average galaxy today can be written 
as 


1 2 
| EX. | = 3 Meoot (Visa) 


Mooi ( V34 ) 
10" Me \250km s7! 


where M¢oo1 is the total mass which can cool radiatively and 
V3q is the typical rms velocity. This estimate represents a 


~ 6.2 x 10° erg x 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


minimum amount of energy released by a PG, even with no 
star formation. A comparable amount of binding energy 
is released in the collapse of protostars within a PG. 

There are several possible mechanisms for release 
of this energy. The gas may be cooling via the inverse 
Compton effect on the photons of the CMBR. It may be 
radiated away in the shocks from colliding, still gaseous 
PG clouds and fragments. If the collapse happens on a 
free-fall time scale, t¢ ~ 10° yr, the corresponding mean 
luminosity is Loon ~ 2 x 10% ergs7! ~ 5 x 10° Lo. 

However, a much more energetically important 
process is nuclear burning in stars. It has been estimated 
that about a half of the sTELLAR mass in galaxies today is 
in the old populations, bulges and stellar halos, and thus 
about a half of all star formation in the universe’s history 
can be associated with PGs (this is admittedly dependent 
on how one wishes to define PGs). The key to estimating 
this energy is through the resulting chemical enrichment: 
the same stars which produce the energy also produce 
the heavier elements. Most of the energy comes from 
hydrogen burning into helium, ~7 MeV per nucleon, i.e. 
~0.7% or the initial rest mass of the processed hydrogen. 
The rest of the nucleosynthetic chain up to iron adds <0.1% 
to that. 

Unfortunately, it is practically impossible to measure 
directly the accurate abundance of helium in the old 
STELLAR POPULATIONS today. Instead, we can use the 
observed abundances by mass of heavier elements and a 
conversion from chemical evolution models: AY/AZ = f, 
where AY is the increase in the fractional mass abundance 
of helium, AZ is the increase in the fractional abundance 
of heavier elements (i.e. the mean metallicity), and f is 
typically found to be ~2-5. Since the initial abundance 
of heavier elements is essentially zero, AZ = Z, which 
is observable. Estimates of the mean metallicity of old 
stellar populations are of the order of solar, i.e. (Z) * 0.01- 
0.02. Thus the fraction of the rest mass of the primordial 
gas converted into energy during this initial chemical 
enrichment is 


AX © 0.07 f(Z) + (4£2) x 107. 


We can then estimate the total energy release from nuclear 
burning in stars responsible for this initial chemical 
enrichment: 

Enuc X M, AX 


7 sh M, AX 
~7.2 x 10% erg x 10M 4x 107 

where M, is the total mass burned in stars during the 
protogalactic starburst. This is much larger than the 
release of the binding energy and would thus be the 
dominant signal in detection of PGs. It may be a lower 
limit, since some of the produced metals must have 
been ejected in the resulting galactic winds and are not 
counted in our estimate of the mean metallicity of stellar 
populations today. Direct evidence for these ejected metals 
is in the intracluster gas seen in x-rays. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protogalaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


If this energy is released over a free-fall time scale, 
te ~ 10° yr, the corresponding bolometric luminosity 
would be Lnuc ~ 2x 10% erg s~! ~ 5x 10 Lo, comparable 
with the luminosities of bright Quasars and utraluminous 
IRAS STARBURST GALAXIES today. Some authors have indeed 
proposed that such PG starbursts are the source of 
luminosity of quasars, but a majority belief is that quasars 
are powered by accretion onto massive BLACK HOLES. The 
mean star formation rate would be several hundred 
Mo yr'. Even if this process proceeded on a more 
extended, hierarchical merging time scale ty, ~ 10° yr, the 
resulting luminosities would still be an order of magnitude 
higher than the mean galaxy luminosity today (L,) and 
comparable with that of the brightest cluster ellipticals 
today. 

Finally, if formation of AGN accompanied some or all 
of these PG starbursts in young ellipticals and bulges, a 
comparable amount of energy may have been contributed 
by these early AGN. There is now growing evidence that 
massive black holes exist in the centers of most ellipticals 
and bulges, with the mean mass proportional to that of the 
stars, Mpn ~ 0.002M,. If about 10% of the rest mass of the 
black hole is radiated away in dissipative processes during 
its formation and growth (this is a typical estimate), then 
a comparable fraction of the bulge rest mass is radiated in 
the production of these ubiquitous black holes as in the 
nuclear burning in stars. It would be hard to separate 
observationally the effects of primordial starbursts in PGs 
housing quasars at large redshifts in terms of the energetics 
alone. 

Thus, a ‘generic’ PG would have a typical bolometric 
luminosity Lpg ~ 10"*'Lo. To make an order-of- 
magnitude estimate of the observable fluxes, we note that 
in the relevant range of redshifts, z ~ 3-10, and for a 
reasonable range of cosmological models, the luminosity 
distances are D, ~ a few x10” cm, so that the expected 
bolometric fluxes are of the order of ~107'5*! erg cm~ s7!. 
Assuming for simplicity L ~ vP,, the corresponding 
observed R band magnitudes would be R ~ 25 mag, or 
F, ~ 0.1 mJy at Ans © 0.3 mm, give or take an order of 
magnitude in flux. Much of this flux range is detectable 
with present (or soon forthcoming) instruments. 


Detection of protogalaxies 

The key question about detectability of PGs is that of 
obscuration. Most of the energy is released in the restframe 
UV, either from the photospheres of massive stars or from 
accretion disks in AGN, and would be now redshifted 
in the visible regime. On the other hand, if these PG 
starbursts were obscured by dust, the captured energy 
would be reradiated in the far-IR and would now be 
observable in the sub-mm regime (the AGN may also 
be detectable in x-rays). Approximately a third of all 
star formation in the present-day universe is obscured by 
dust, and perhaps a similar fraction applied to PGs (note, 
however, that some tens of millions of years of stellar 
evolution and chemical enrichment are needed before any 
dust can be produced, and the early PG phases must 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Rest Wavelength (A) 
1100 1200 1300 1400 


0140+326 RD1 
Z2=5.34 


££ 
Lya 
| 


F(udy) 


pore Pi 


6500 7000 7500 8000 8500 9000 
Observed Wavelength (A) 


Figure 1. An example of a spectrum of a galaxy at z = 5.34, 
discovered serendipitously in a long-slit spectroscopic search. 
The Lya emission line is very prominent. Objects like this can 
also be found in a narrow-band imaging search, provided that 
the line falls within the narrow filter bandpass. Reprinted with 
permission from Dey A et al 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 498 L93. 

© The American Astronomical Society. 


have been unobscured). This dichotomy of energy release 
channels leads to a dichotomy of detection strategies. We 
will discuss the two cases in turn. 

Most of the early, and some of the modern searches 
for PGs were based on the detection of recombination 
emission lines, and most notably the Ly 4 1215.7 Aline of 
the ionized hydrogen. For an unobscured, young stellar 
population with a normal IMF, several per cent of the total 
bolometric luminosity should emerge in this line. A useful 
rule of thumb is that about two Lyw photons are produced 
for every three ionizing (i.e. A < 912 A) photons. The 
line is readily detected (and is very luminous) in quasars, 
but its detection from galaxies powered by star formation 
was only achieved in 1990s. An approximate conversion 
is that unobscured star formation rate of 1M, yr~' would 
produce the Lya line luminosity of about 10“ erg s~! in 
the restframe, but this number is highly sensitive to the 
form of the stellar initial mass function, since most of the 
ionizing photons are produced at the high-mass end but 
most of the mass is in the low-mass stars. 

There are two observational approaches to detection 
of high-redshift, emission line objects, including PGs: 
narrow-band imaging and slit spectroscopy. Most of the 
emission line PG searches in the visible light have targeted 
the Lya line, but exactly the same methodology was also 
used in the near-infrared, where searches targeted the 
Balmer lines of ionized hydrogen (mainly Ha A 6563 and 
H 4 4861) and the nebular lines of ionized oxygen, [O II] 
4. 3727 or [O III] A 5007. 

In the former, deep images are obtained in a narrow- 
band filter (usually an interference filter, or a Fabry— 
Perot tunable filter) and compared with images in a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protogalaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


broad bandpass with a comparable central wavelength. 
Objects with a strong emission line falling in the narrow 
bandpass would appear much brighter than in the broad 
band, where this line flux would be averaged out. This 
method can cover a relatively large area, but only a very 
narrow slice of redshift, corresponding to the redshifted 
line traversing the width of the filter, ie. Az = AA/d-, 
where Aa is the filter width and A, its central wavelength. 
Typically, Az ~ 0.01-0.02 is used in PG searches. 

The second approach is to obtain deep long-slit 
spectra of ‘blank’ patches of the sky, hoping that an 
emission line object would be covered by the slit. This 
method covers only a small area but a large range in 
redshift. One benefit of this approach is that almost any 
deep spectra taken for some other purpose can be used for 
a serendipitous search for PGs (figure 1). 

The first detections of Lyaw emission from GALAXIES AT 
HIGH REDSHIFT were from powerful RADIO GALAXIES, which are 
ostensibly ionized mainly by an active nucleus, and from 
quasar companion galaxies. However, no clear population 
of ‘ordinary’ PGs, i.e. powered by star formation, was 
found despite considerable efforts until the late 1990s. The 
early limits and the more recent detections correspond to 
modest star formation rates, up to a few Mo yr. 

This conspicuous absence of a large population of 
Lya luminous PGs was readily explainable by invoking 
extinction: both Lya photons and the ionizing UV photons 
which produce them are absorbed by interstellar dust, 
which is likely to be present at some level in all but 
the most primordial star-forming regions. To complicate 
things further, Lyw photons are resonantly scattered by 
the interstellar hydrogen, which greatly increases their 
probability of being absorbed before escaping the PG. 

The real breakthrough in the detection of high- 
redshift, star-forming galaxies came with the use 
of a different technique, the Lyman-break method 
(figure 2). Actively star-forming PGs would have 
relatively featureless, flat continua, except for one very 
significant feature: a strong drop in flux shortward of the 
Lyman limit, at 912 Ain the restframe, as the more energetic 
photons are readily absorbed by interstellar hydrogen. 
Thus, by imaging in at least three filters, one of which 
would cover the part of the spectrum shortward of the 
redshifted Lyman break, and two of which would sample 
the relatively flat continuum longward of the break, one 
can select candidate high-redshift galaxies through the 
resulting color signature. Actual spectra are then obtain 
to verify the candidates and measure their redshifts. This 
method is very efficient, and to date many hundreds of 
high-redshift galaxies (ie. at z > 2 or so) have been 
identified in this manner. 

At somewhat higher redshifts, ic. z > 4 or so, a 
variant of this technique is used to detect both galaxies 
and quasars. There the net absorption by the intergalactic 
Lya forest clouds along the line of sight decreases the flux 
shortward of the Lya line in the object itself and sufficiently 
so as to produce a similar color signature. For example, 
quasars and PGs at z ~ 44.5 or so are very red in the B—R 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


or a similar color owing to this absorption effect, yet blue 
in the R — J color, which is intrinsic and is not affected 
by the Lya forest. This is actually the principal discovery 
technique for z > 4 quasars, but it works equally well for 
galaxies at comparable redshifts. The effectiveness of this 
technique increases with redshift, as the optical depth of 
the Lyaw forest increases. 

What if the star-forming regions are effectively 
completely hidden by dust? The absorbed energy is 
then reradiated in the restframe far-infrared and would 
now be observable in the sub-mm and mm region 
of the spectrum. Adequate detection technology in 
these wavelength regimes is just maturing, and first 
detections of high-redshift sub-mm sources (intrinsically 
very luminous ones) are just starting as of this writing (late 
1999). This is clearly a very promising area of research, 
and it is likely that future observations in this regime will 
uncover a more substantial, optically obscured component 
of PG population. 

We note that the integrated emission of unobscured 
and obscured galaxies, both forming and evolving, is 
observable in the form of diffuse optical and far-infrared 
backgrounds. Discussion of this fascinating topic is 
beyond the scope of the present article, but suffice it to 
say that the data so far indicate that the two components 
(obscured and unobscured) are roughly comparable in 
terms of the energy content. 

A complementary approach to a direct detection of 
PGs in emission is to detect them in absorption, in the 
spectra of unrelated background quasars. Metallic line 
absorbers and high column density hydrogen absorbers 
are now believed to originate in galaxies or their halos, 
which at high redshifts may still be in the process of 
assembly. This approach eliminates all selection biases 
inherent in direct photometric detection, but it is limited 
in the information it can provide, primarily the gas column 
density, metallicity (an indicator of the chemical evolution) 
and perhaps rudimentary kinematics. Direct detections of 
a small number of high-redshift galaxies responsible for 
absorption systems have been made, and the data suggest 
that they are very similar to the general field population 
detected with the Lyman-break technique at comparable 
redshifts. 

Formation of galaxies and that of the large-scale 
structure are closely related at early epochs. It is plausible 
that the first galaxies form in the densest spots of the 
primordial density field. These ‘density peaks’ are 
expected to be intrinsically highly clustered, as they would 
be mainly located within the larger overdensity regions. 
The first PGs may thus be found in the cores of future 
rich clusters, and then galaxy formation would gradually 
spread to ever lower density environments. This concept 
of so-called biased galaxy formation is generic to almost 
all models of structure formation. There is now some 
evidence that galaxies and quasars at z > 3 or 4 may 
indeed be strongly clustered. It should be noted that 
this primordial large-scale structure derives from initial 
conditions, with the first PGs and quasars lighting up 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protogalaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1.5 
| 
~ | 
€ 
zal 
| 
al 
| 
1 £ | 
2 2 
o! 
S Oo! 
s =! 
8 oe 
: a 
0.5 o | 
Wi | 
| 
| 
0 
5 
A Uso0 
& 
n 
¢ 
© 
u 
~ 


2000 4000 


Model 


attenuated spectrum 4 


Nh oN 


6000 


galaxy at z=3.0 | 


unattenuated spectrum 


HST Filters 


814 


8000 10000 


observed wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. An illustration of the Lyman-break technique at work. The top panel shows a population synthesis model spectrum of an 
actively star-forming galaxy redshifted to z = 3, with and without attenuation due to the Lya forest. Note the sharp drop in the 
continuum shortward of the Lyman break, at the observed wavelength of 912 A x(1 +z). Aset of transmission curves of filter used in 
the imaging of the Hubble Deep Field is shown below the spectrum. One would expect that such a galaxy would appear about equally 
bright in the B, V and R filters, but be practically undetectable in the U filter. This is indeed observed in the actual images of a galaxy 
at z = 2.8 found in the Hubble Deep Field images, shown in the bottom row. Reprinted with permission from Dickinson M 1998 The 
Hubble Deep Field ed M Livio et al (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 219. © (The Cambridge University. Press). 


the highest peaks of the primordial density field. This 
is distinct from the large-scale structure seen in the local 
universe, which grows gradually over the Hubble time 
through the gravitational instability. 

The net result of the studies to date is at least a broad- 
brush understanding of the history of galaxy formation 
and evolution since z ~ 5 or so. The average star-forming 
activity has a broad maximum around z ~ 2 or 3, with 
a rapid decline since z ~ 1 or 2 towards the present 
day, z ~ 0. However, it is not clear whether we have 
yet seen the onset of galaxy formation. From absorption 
line studies we know that the universe was already fully 
ionized at z ~ 5, presumably by some combination of PGs 
and early AGN. While most of the stars may have formed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


since z ~ 5, clearly the first stars and thus PGs must have 
formed earlier. 


We know that the universe entered ‘dark ages’ after 
the recombination at z ~ 1100, a few hundred thousand 
years after the big bang. Current theory suggests that the 
first protogalactic fragments started forming at z ~ 10-20 
or so, a few hundred million years after the big bang. This 
‘cosmic renaissance’ ended the dark ages and marked the 
onset of galaxy formation. The challenge for the future is 
to map this critical era, from z ~ 20 to z ~ 5, where the 
first PGs were forming. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protogalaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
This is a rapidly developing field, and perhaps the 
best way to learn about the up-to-date results is by 
browsing recent conference proceedings on cosmology, 
high-redshift universe, etc, of which there are many. 
However, the following reviews give more details on the 
subject of this article. 

A good review of PG searches, problems, and 
techniques up to the mid-1990s is 


Pritchet C 1994 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 106 1052-67 


An updated review of searches for distant galaxies up to 
1999 is 


Stern D and Spinrad H 1999 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 111 1475-— 
502 


A good overview of the Lyman-break technique and some 
of the results is 


Steidel C 2000 Proc. Pritzker Symp. on the Status of 
Inflationary Cosmology (Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press) 


S G Djorgovski 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proton ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Proton 


Series of four large Soviet magnetospheric research 
satellites launched 1965-68. Carried experiments to 
investigate ultra-high-energy cosmic particles such as 
cosmic rays. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Proton 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Proton 


A positively charged elementary particle that is composed 
of three quarks. It has a charge of +1, equal in magnitude 
to the charge on the electron (1.602 x 10- coulomb), and a 
mass of 1.6725 x 10-*” kg, 1836 times greater than the mass 
of the electron. In terms of energy, its mass is equivalent 
to 938.3 MeV. It has an intrinsic angular momentum, or 
spin, of 1/2 (expressed in units of the Planck constant, h, 
divided by 27). 

The proton is a nucleon, one of the two basic 
constituents of an atomic nucleus (the other being the 
marginally heavier neutron). The number of protons in 
an atomic nucleus (its atomic number) determines its net 
charge and, therefore, the chemical element of which that 
atom is an example. For example, a hydrogen nucleus 
contains one proton, a helium nucleus, two, and a uranium 
nucleus, 92. Although it has a lifetime of at least 1032 years, 
and may be completely stable, some versions of grand 
unified theory predict that protons eventually decay into 
leptons and photons. 


See also: atom, baryons, electron, electronvolt, elemen- 
tary particles, hadrons, quark. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Protoplanet 


An object representing an intermediate stage in the 
process of planet formation. A protoplanet is formed 
by the accretional collision of planetesimals, the primary 
products of accretion, themselves formed initially by 
the coalescence of dust grains and then the gradual 
aggregation of further material. Protoplanets collide with 
one another to form larger objects; the end result of this 
stage is a system of planets—a small number of still 
larger objects which have swept up most of the debris 
from collisions and occupy orbits which have long-term 
stability. 


See: accretion, planetesimal, solar system: formation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanetary Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Protoplanetary Disks 


Protoplanetary disks are disks of dust and/or gas orbiting 
very young stars. Based upon what we know about 
the formation of our own solar system, these objects are 
deemed to be very likely to evolve into solar systems like 
our own. 

This is a very fast-paced field of study and many of 
the scientific advances have occurred within the past 15 yr. 
In 1983, a satellite was launched to study the infrared 
emissions from the sky. This satellite, called the Infrared 
Astronomy Satellite or IRAS, revealed that about one-fifth 
of the main-sequence A stars near the Sun exhibited an 
excess infrared emission that could only be explained by 
warm dust orbiting these stars. This suggested that a 
significant fraction of all A stars, and presumably other 
young stars as well, have dust orbiting them. Since A stars 
have lifetimes of 10°-10° yr, their implied ages overlap 
with the era of planet formation and heavy meteoritic 
and cometary bombardment of planets in our early solar 
system. 

Shortly after this discovery, attempts were made to 
image the dust surrounding these stars. This was very 
tricky, since one must see the dust against the glare of the 
bright star. A small disk was placed inside the camera 
to block out the light coming from the star. In this way, it 
was hoped that the light scattered by the dust surrounding 
the star could be seen. One star, 6 Pictoris, an A star at a 
distance of 62.5 light-years, revealed a very flat disk of 
dust extending over 500 astronomical units (AU) from the 
star. (An astronomical unit is the distance defined by the 
distance between the Earth and the Sun.) For comparison, 
Pluto has an average distance of 39 AU from the Sun. This 
was the first evidence for truly solar system sized disks 
of dust orbiting nearby stars. The size of this dust disk 
is comparable to that of the KUIPER BELT of our own solar 
system. The Kuiper Belt is thought to extend from just 
inside the orbit of Neptune to beyond 200 AU from the 
Sun. The Kuiper Belt is the home of an estimated 100 
million to 1 billion comets. A small fraction of these comets 
have orbits that penetrate into the inner solar system near 
the Earth and the Sun. 

Spectroscopic studies of fB Pictoris using the 
International Ultraviolet Explorer (TUE) satellite and the 
Hubble Space Telescope (HST), as well as ground-based 
telescopes, revealed an even more complicated picture. 
These spectra showed red-shifted spectral absorption lines 
of low-ionization atoms, varying with time, indicating gas 
possibly from comets falling onto the the stellar surface. 
The age estimates for 6 Pictoris are typically less than 100 
million years. 6 Pictoris and other stars similar to it show 
spectral signatures of ice. These data, collectively, suggest 
that large numbers of comets are present around many 
young A stars. Hopefully, by studying these objects we 
can gain some understanding of how our early solar sys- 
tem evolved. 

Thanks to a variety of observations, using both 
ground-based and space-borne instruments, we are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


beginning to get a consistent picture on how young 
protostars and disks representing PROTOPLANETARY NEBULAE 
evolve. The process starts with the gas on an interstellar 
cloud collapsing to form stars. The gas and dust forming 
an individual star fall inward and produce a star and an 
envelope which contains a large fraction of the angular 
momentum. An outward flow of gas, or ‘wind’, develops 
that clears the gas and dust of the inner envelope away 
from the young stellar object along the rotational axis of 
the star. The polar winds, or jets, can extend to very 
large distances. These extended bipolar flows can have 
distinct ‘knots’ of emitting gas along the flow. These 
flows can interact with the dense nebulosity typically 
found around these objects and produce shock-heated 
boundaries. These objects, if enough obscuring dust is 
removed so they can be seen at optical wavelengths, are 
sometimes called HERBIG-HARO OBJECTS. 


The youngest obscured systems 

Recent HST images have been acquired of YOUNG STELLAR 
opjyecTs (YSOs) in the constellation Taurus with the 
Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer 
(NICMOS). These young systems are typically only 
observable at infrared (IR) wavelengths because the thick 
veil of dust absorbs all the visible light. However, the 
dust re-radiates this light energy at infrared wavelengths. 
The NICMOS infrared images at wavelengths from about 
1 to 2 wm indicate YSOs with masses similar to our Sun 
and ages <1 Myr. These objects show dark obscuring 
dust lanes with diameters of 500-900 AU perpendicular 
to the bipolar flows emanating from the YSOs. The 
HST observations indicate these dust lanes are somewhat- 
flattened disks with equatorial extents of 500-900 AU and 
vertical thicknesses of 50-350 AU. The central protostar 
and the surrounding disk are completely obscured at 
optical wavelengths. 

Other presumably young objects are the ‘proplyds’. 
These objects are very compact knots of ionized gas that 
are seen near the core of the ORION NEBULA. The Orion 
Nebula is also a well-known site of active star formation. 
The proplyds appear to be very small with radii on the 
order of 50 AU. All observations suggest that they are 
a distinct class of very young objects. Proplyds appear 
to be flattened circumstellar clouds of gas and dust that 
surround stars collapsing toward the main sequence. Just 
how these objects fit into the observational scheme of the 
evolution of protoplanetary disks is not at all clear. 


Ages from 1 to 10 million years: the young stars 
are unveiled 

At ages from 1 Myr to 10 Myr, the envelope disperses, 
the disk continues to flatten and the central pre-main- 
sequence star becomes visible. Although much of the 
stellar radiation is absorbed by dust and re-emitted at IR 
wavelengths, the star itself shows very strong emission 
lines of ionized gas. The emission is produced by the 
gaseous infall onto the stellar surface and by the strong 
magnetic activity in these young objects. These young 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanetary Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. HST/STIS image of the circumstellar disk of the 
pre-main-sequence star, AB Aurigae (after Grady et al 1999). 
This image obtained with the STIS shows stellar light reflected 
from dust of the circumstellar disk. Notice the crossbar structure 
that blocks the direct light of the central star. The circumstellar 
disk appears to have a clumpy band or spiral structure centered 
on the star. 


emission-line stars are called T TAURI STARS and are named 
after their prototypical example. 

HST images of protoplanetary disks have been 
acquired with both the NICMOS camera in the near-IR and 
the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) at visual 
wavelengths using techniques to dramatically reduce 
the contributions of the central stars. These techniques 
enhance the visibility of the surrounding circumstellar 
dust disk. These images have provided important 
glimpses of what happens at ages from 4 to about 10 Myr. 
These observations are very important because they can 
be used to limit the time scale of the protoplanetary disk 
phase. At later times, if a massive, Jupiter-sized planet 
is present, its gravitational perturbations can act to clear 
away dust from the region interior to the planet’s orbit. 

Recent STIS images of the star AB Aurigae, at a 
distance of about 470 light-years, show a dust disk with 
a radius of about 1300 AU (figure 1). Age estimates are 
generally not highly accurate, but determinations for AB 
Aurigae yield an age of about 2-4 Myr. This star also 
displays a gas disk that has been seen in line emission 
from molecular CO. The images do indicate a nebulosity 
that is circularly symmetric about the star with some spiral 
or band-like structure superposed. In general, there is a 
uniform drop-off in surface density with distance from the 
star. No definite evidence of clearing due to a massive 
planet is seen. 

Near-IR images obtained by the NICMOS camera 
aboard the HST show annular dust rings instead of 
uniform dust disks about two young stars, HR 4796A and 
HD 141569. Both stars are hotter and much more massive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


than our Sun. The spectral types are AO Ve and B9.5 Ve 
for HR 4796A and HD 141569, respectively. The ‘e’ in both 
spectral types indicates that these stars have detectable 
hydrogen Balmer lines in emission. 

The age for HD 141569 is ill defined. All that can be 
said is that it has an age between 1 Myr and 10 Myr. The 
NICMOS images reveal a disk with a gap at a distance 
of approximately 250 AU from the star. In addition the 
brightness of the dust disk peaks at about 185 AU from 
the star and falls off in brightness at both smaller and 
larger distances. If recent modeling efforts are correct, 
the gravitational perturbations of a Jupiter-sized planet 
at a distance of 250 AU could produce the observed gap. 
This planet would be far too faint to be detected with the 
available ground-based and space borne instruments. 

The NICMOS imagery of the star HR 4796A is even 
more revealing (figure 2). The near-IR images at 1.1 and 
1.6 wm of this star clearly show a sharply defined annular 
ring. The inclination on the plane-of-the-sky implies that 
the ring brightness peaks at a distance of about 70 AU from 
the star. The resolved width of the ring further shows 
that it is sharply delineated with a width of 17 AU. The 
sharply defined morphology of the annular disk implies 
one, possibly two, unseen planets near 70 AU from the star, 
HR 4796A. The age estimate for HR 4796A suggests that it 
is 84 3 Myr old. 

The HST observations for HD 141569 and HR 4796A 
impose strong constraints on the theory of planet 
formation. Based upon theories attempting to explain 
how planets form in our own solar system, it would be 
extremely surprising to see massive, Jupiter-sized planets 
at such great distances (70-250 AU) from the central star, 
a region where the density in the protoplanetary disk 
should be far lower than at distances corresponding to the 
realm of the giant planets in the solar system. Also, these 
observations suggest the formation time needed to form 
giant planets is quite short (<8-10 Myr) and poses strong 
constraints on theories for planetary formation. 


The end of the protoplanetary phase 

At times greater than 10 Myr, if planets are, indeed, 
forming at times shorter than 10 Myr, we may not be 
seeing protoplanetary disks, but debris disks, representing 
the residues of planetary formation. Although meteoritic 
and cometary impacts will continue the planetary growth 
process, the protoplanetary part of the evolution of 
the circumstellar disk has come to an end. There are 
several physical processes that act to destroy and disperse 
circumstellar dust. Observations of stars older than 10 Myr 
can place important constraints on these processes. 

The most notable stars which appear to have 
circumstellar dust disks and that have ages >10 Myr 
are the so-called ‘big three’, 6 Pictoris, w Piscis Austrini 
(Fomalhaut) and a Lyrae (Vega). Based upon their 
deduced positions in the H-R diagram and theoretical 
evolutionary tracks, the ages of these three stars are 
thought to be near 100, 200 and 400 Myr, respectively. 
However, there is some indirect evidence which suggests 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanetary Disks 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. HST/NICMOS image of the circumstellar dust ring of 
HR 4796A (after Schneider et al 1999). This is the processed 
image of the disk as seen in the infrared at 1.1 wm. The central 
star has been placed in a 0.3” radius hole in an attempt to 
minimize the light seen from the star. Note the sharply defined 
dust ring. Its infrared brightness peaks at ~70 AU from the star. 
The sharply defined nature of the ring may indicate the presence 
of one or more unseen Jupiter-sized planets. 


that 6 Pic might be as young as 20 Myr. All of these stars 
have significant IRAS infrared excesses as has been known 
since the mid-1980s. 

The processes that lead to the destruction of the 
dust disk are (a) expulsion by pressure of starlight, 
(b) Poynting—Robertson drag and (c) sublimation of icy 
grains. Small grains have a high cross-sectional area 
relative to their mass and can be preferentially blown away 
when the force due to radiation exceeds that of gravity. The 
smaller grains, with sizes <2-10 wm, are quickly expelled 
even at early ages. The larger remaining grains, because 
they orbit the star, have a component of the radiation 
force, Poynting—Robertson drag, that opposes the orbital 
velocity of the grains. This causes the orbiting grains to 
eventually spiral into the star. This preferentially clears the 
inner disk, but the outer regions at distances of 1000 AU can 
be cleared on time scales comparable with the evolutionary 
time of the A stars. 

However, it is still unresolved how such extensive 
dust disks remain in these older systems. Perhaps this 
dust and the presence of massive planets inferred at 
larger distances suggest that the protoplanetary disks are 
quite massive and dense at very large distances from 
the protostar. Recent models even suggest that planets 
can form at much greater distances and then, through 
interactions with the disk, migrate inward toward the 
star. This is a controversy that hopefully will be solved 
with future observations of other young forming planetary 
systems and extrasolar planets (EXOPLANETS). 


Bibliography 

Comprehensive reviews of the research on protoplanetary 
disks are regularly presented in scientific conferences. The 
best source of these compilations can be found in the 
series published by The University of Arizona Press called 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Protostars and Planets I-IV. These published books detail 
the proceedings of regular meetings held every few years 
in this field. 

Much of what has been presented here comes 
from very recent observational results obtained with 
instruments aboard the Hubble Space Telescope. More 
exciting results are sure to come. Some of the recent 
observations and theoretical models can be found in the 
following references. 


Bryden G, Chen X, Lin D, Nelson R and Papaloizou J 1999 
Tidally induced gap formation in protostellar disks: 
gap clearing and suppression of protoplanetary 
growth Astrophys. J. 514 344 

Grady C, Devine D, Woodgate B, Bruhweiler F, Boggess 
A, Plaitt P, Clampin M and Kalas P 1999 STIS 
coronographic imaging of the Herbig Ae star: AB 
Aurigae Astrophys. J. Lett. 523 L151 

O’Dell C R 1998 Observational properties of the Orion 
proplyds Astron. J. 115 263 

Padgett D, Brander W, Stapelfeldt, Strom S, Terebey S and 
Koerner D 1999 HST/NICMOS imaging of disks and 
envelopes around very young stars Astron. J. 117 1490 

Schneider G et al 1999 NICMOS imaging of the HR 4796A 
circumstellar disk Astrophys. J. Lett. 513 L127 


Fred Bruhweiler 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Protoplanetary Nebulae 


Protoplanetary nebulae (or pre-planetary nebulae, PPNs) 
are defined as objects that are in transition between the 
asymptotic giant branch (AGB) and planetary nebula 
phases of STELLAR EVOLUTION. Stars on the AGB lose mass 
at a high rate ((10-’-10~*) Mj yr’) in the form of a stellar 
wind. Such mass loss eventually depletes the hydrogen 
envelope of the star and exposes the electron-degenerate 
carbon-oxygen core. This leads to an increase of the effec- 
tive temperature of the star and the termination of mass 
loss. As the small amount of remaining hydrogen above 
the core continues to be consumed by hydrogen shell burn- 
ing, the effective temperature of the star will gradually 
increase. When the stellar temperature reaches approxi- 
mately 30000 K, the amount of stellar photons with ener- 
gies above the Lyman limit (13.6 eV) will be large enough 
to photoionize the surrounding material. The emergence 
of strong recombination lines of hydrogen (e.g. Ha) and 
helium and collisionally excited lines of metals (e.g. the 
[O III] line at 5007 A) signifies the beginning of the plan- 
etary nebula phase. The evolutionary phase between the 
end of AGB mass loss and the beginning of photoioniza- 
tion is referred to as the PPN phase. 


Observational properties 

PPNs are primarily identified by their large infrared ex- 
cesses. Such excesses originate from dust in the remnant 
of the stellar wind ejected during the AGB. As the wind 
disperses, the dust cools and the thermal radiation shifts 
to longer wavelengths. Most of the PPNs are discovered 
by finding IRAS sources that have dust temperatures in- 
termediate between those of AGB stars and planetary neb- 
ulae. A typical PPN shows an infrared excess peaking at 
~20 wm, corresponding to a dust temperature of ~150 K. 
Some examples of PPNs are given in table 1. 


Table 1. Examples of protoplanetary nebulae. 


Object Spectraltype Chemistry  [s/Fe] 
TRAS 04296 +3429 G0Ola Cc +14 
TRAS 07134+1005 FOI Cc +2.0 
IRAS 18095 + 2704  F3Ib O —0.1 
IRAS 19500-1709 A2-31 Cc +1.2 
IRAS 22272 +5435 G5la Cc 42.5 


[s/Fe] denotes the abundance of s-process elements. 


Molecular emission is also a characteristics of PPNs. 
Molecules (e.g. CO, HCN) in the remnant AGB enve- 
lope emit line radiation as the result of rotational tran- 
sitions. These molecular lines have typical linewidths 
of 20-40 kms“!, implying expansion velocities of 10- 
20 km s“! for the envelope. From these velocities, we can 
estimate the dynamical ages of PPNs to be ~10*-10° yr. 
The total lifetime of the PPN phase is ~10° yr, depending 
on the mass of the star. 

The central stars of most PPNs are of spectral types be- 
tween G and B (corresponding to effective temperatures of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


07134+1005 


1 1 tit 
0.1 2 3 45678 4 2 


Wavelength (um) 


1 eee! 
3 4567810 


2 3 456784100 


Figure 1. The spectral energy distribution of the PPN IRAS 
07134 + 1005. The dust component (right) is clearly separated 
from the photospheric component (left). The fact that the dust 
shell is detached from the photosphere is confirmed by a 
radiation transfer model (shown as a dotted curve). 


5000-15 000 K) and luminosity class I. The high luminosity 
class of PPNs is a manifestation of the low surface gravity 
(log g ~ 1) in these objects. Because of their spectral class, 
PPNs are sometimes referred to as yellow supergiants. 
Evidence for the end of AGB mass loss and the detach- 
ment of the AGB envelope from the photosphere can be 
found in the spectral energy distribution. As the envelope 
expands, the decrease in circumstellar extinction allows 
the central star to become more prominent. This results 
in a double-peaked spectral energy distribution made up 
of a cool dust component and a photospheric component 
reddened by circumstellar extinction (see figure 1). 


The morphology 

Optical and infrared imaging has found that many PPNs 
have asymmetric envelopes. For objects that are viewed 
edge on, two bipolar reflection lobes can be seen. These 
lobes are the result of light from the central star scattered 
off the dust in the circumstellar envelope. An example of 
such bipolar structure is shown in figure 2. The dark region 
between the bipolar lobes is believed to be due to extinction 
from an equatorial disk. With the use of mid-infrared 
cameras on new large ground based telescopes, such disks 
can be directly resolved and imaged (see INFRARED IMAGERS, 
INFRARED TELESCOPES). 

PLANETARY NEBULAE are found to have diverse mor- 
phologies including bipolar (or butterfly) shapes. When 
and how the spherical AGB envelopes are shaped into such 
bipolar forms are topics of high current interest. The detec- 
tion of bipolar nebulosity in PPNs suggests that the shap- 
ing of planetary nebulae occurs early, possibly only a few 
hundred years after the end of the AGB. 

Some PPNs show two pairs of searchlight beams and 
a series of concentric arcs (figures 2 and 3). The beams 
can be explained as light reflected off a cavity in the polar 
directions, but the origin of the arcs is not known. The 
cavity is probably created by a collimated fast outflow 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The HST V-band image of the PPN IRAS 17150 — 3224 
(the Cotton Candy Nebula) showing two bipolar lobes and eight 
concentric pairs of arcs. The nebulosity is seen from scattered 
light, not emission lines as in planetary nebulae. This figure is 
reproduced as Color Plate 40. 


Figure 3. HST V-band image of the PPN AFGL 2688 (the Egg 
Nebula), showing both concentric arcs and searchlight beams. 
This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 41. 


that developed during the PPN phase. Support for the 
existence of a collimated outflow can be found in PPNs 
such as Hen 401 (figure 4) which have an elongated shape. 


Masses and luminosities 

The central star of a PPN represents the core of its 
AGB progenitor. Since the envelope mass is very 
small (<10-3Mo), the total mass of the central star is 
approximately equal to the core mass (M.). The typical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. HST V-band image of the PPN Hen 401. This figure is 
reproduced as Color Plate 42. 


mass of the central star is 0.6Mo, but theoretically it 
can be as high as 1.4Mg, the maximum mass limit for a 
WHITE DWARF (the Chandrasekhar limit). The luminosity of 
a hydrogen-burning PPN is directly proportional to the 
mass of the core: 


L,, ~ 60000(M,/M5 —0.5)Lo. 


For example, PPNs with M, = 0.60Mp5 and 0.64Mo will 
have luminosities of ~6000L, and 8300Lq respectively. 
PPNs are therefore among the most luminous stars in the 
Galaxy (see also HIGH-LUMINOSITY STARS). 


Which stars will become PPNs? 
The discovery of white dwarfs in young open clusters 
suggests that stars with initial (main-sequence) mass as 


500 
IRAS 2227245435 
ia + 
=, 400 ye Y 
= 12.2 / 
5 11.3 1a ] a 
Se | | | hd 
8 H 
a 78 gk : 
= 200 eo} i 
os 6.2 | / 
< : 2 
i ae SP, eee 
100 9: sp~ C-H ben 
3, 7.8: sp* C-C strete! 
iv oo 
i 12.2: sp? C-H out-c 
0 
| | L | 
0 10 20 30 


Wavelength (um) 


Figure 5. ISO spectrum of the PPN IRAS 22272 + 5435 showing various stretching 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


high as (8-10)M. will become white dwarfs. This implies 
that approximately 95% of stars will end their lives as 
white dwarfs. However, not all white dwarfs necessarily 
passed through the planetary nebula stage. Specifically, 
post-AGB stars with low core masses (M, < 0.57Mq) are 
believed to be evolving too slowly to cross the HERTZSPRUNG- 
RUSSELL (H-R) DIAGRAM in time to ionize the circumstellar 
envelope before it disperses. These post-AGB stars 
without surrounding nebulae will be observed as blue 
hot stars radiating primarily in the ultraviolet. Such stars 
have been suggested to be responsible for the ultraviolet 
excesses observed in ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES. 


Variability 

As PPNs evolve across the H-R diagram at constant 
luminosity, the radii of the central stars will decrease. 
Consequently, their pulsation periods are also expected to 
decrease from the several hundred days observed for AGB 
stars. Pulsations of PPNs have been observed through 
both spectroscopic (radial velocity) and photometric 
variations, with periods ranging from 25 to 150 days. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


250 r ; 1 ; ; 5 
07134+1005 ° 
200 f A 7 
Ma i} 
iy $ 
5 150 F : hil 1 
pe : Ht 
2 4 He sy ' 
5 fi { Wit J 
= 100 + ia) 
e 7" 4 
s an ", 
50/7 i Wy q 
sig ‘ 
GN = gg = | 
0 10 20 30 40 50 


Wavelength (um) 


Figure 6. ISO spectrum of the PPN IRAS 07134 + 1005 showing 
the unidentified 21 zm emission feature. 


Chemical abundances 

PPNs can be classified as oxygen or carbon rich depending 
on whether the O/C abundance ratio is larger or less 
than unity. Since the less abundant element is tied up 
almost exclusively in CO, it is not available to form 
other molecules. Oxygen-rich PPNs can be identified by 
the presence of the 9.7 wm circumstellar silicate feature 
whereas carbon-rich PPNs show molecular absorption 
bands of C2, C3 and CN. 

Stars on the AGB undergo hydrogen and helium shell 
burning as well as neutron capture processes. Some PPNs 
show a large overabundance of s-process elements (Y, Zr, 
Ba, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm and Eu), confirming that these 
objects have indeed evolved through the AGB phase (see 
table 1). 


Chemistry of the circumstellar envelope 

Infrared spectroscopy of PPNs has revealed the presence 
of organic compounds with aromatic and aliphatic struc- 
tures. A series of infrared emission features at 3.3, 6.2, 7.7 
and 11.3 wm due to aromatic C-H and C-C stretching and 
bending modes are commonly seen in carbon-rich PPNs. 
In addition, features at 3.4 and 6.9 wm due to stretching 
and bending modes of aliphatic subgroups are also de- 
tected (see figure 5). These features, as well as the under- 
lying broad emission plateaux around 8 and 12 wm, canbe 
found in the laboratory infrared spectra of polycyclic aro- 
matic hydrocarbons, quenched carbonaceous composites, 
hydrogenated amorphous carbons and coal. 

In addition, strong unidentified emission features at 
21 and 26 um are also seen in carbon-rich PPNs (see 
figures 5 and 6). In particular, the 21 wm feature is unique 
to PPNs and has not been seen elsewhere in stars in other 
phases of evolution or in the interstellar medium. 

The detection of these carbonaceous compounds 
suggests that complex organic molecules can be formed 
over a short (~10° yr) timescale. This process is believed 
to first begin during the late AGB phase, where simple 
organic molecules such as acetylene (C2H2) are formed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Protoplanetary Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in the AGB wind. Chemical reactions in the envelope 
can lead to the formation of benzene (CsH¢) and possibly 
other aromatic hydrocarbons. PPNs are therefore useful 
laboratories for the study of ASTROCHEMISTRY. 


Bibliography 
Reviews on the discovery and observations of PPNs can 
be found in 


Hrivnak B J 1997 IAU Symp. 180 p 303 
Kwok S 1993 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys 31 63 


A comprehensive discussion of PPNs in the context of 
planetary nebulae evolution is given in the book 


Kwok S 2000 The Origin and Evolution of Planetary Nebulae 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Sun Kwok 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Proxima Centauri 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Proxima Centauri 


The star a Centauri C, a red dwarf member of the 
Alpha Centauri gravitational system, spectral type M5Ve, 
apparent magnitude 11.01. The separation from the 
principal stars of the system, the binary pair (Cen A and B, 
is so great (2.2°) that although its similar distance from 
the Sun confirms that it is a member of the system no 
orbital motion can be detected. It is a star of very low 
luminosity indeed, absolute magnitude 15.4, and is also 
a flare star which frequently brightens briefly by about 
one magnitude. It is a good example of a main-sequence 
star nearing the end of its life. With a parallax of 0.772”, 
equivalent to a distance of 4.22 light-years, it is 0.17 light- 
years closer than the central pair and is thus the closest 
known star to the solar system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ptolemaic System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ptolemaic System 


The geocentric view of the universe as expounded by 
Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaus, c. Av 100-170, librarian 
at Alexandria) in the second century ap. According to 
this view, the Earth lay at the center of the universe and 
around it, in order of distance, moved the Moon, the 
planets Mercury and Venus, the Sun, and the planets Mars, 
Jupiter and Saturn. Beyond the outermost planet lay the 
sphere of the stars. The Sun and Moon were envisaged as 
moving around the Earth in circular paths while, in order 
to account for their observed motions, each planet was 
considered to move around a circle or epicycle, the center 
of which moved around a larger circle, the deferent, which 
was itself centered on the Earth. 

The system required additional complex devices in 
order to account fully for planetary motions and was never 
entirely satisfactory (although surprisingly successful 
predictions of planetary positions were achieved). At that 
time it was felt that the circle was the perfect geometrical 
form, and that only perfect motion was possible in the 
heavens. It was not until the work of Kepler (1571-1630) 
that it was appreciated that the planets move around the 
Sun in elliptical orbits. 


See also: Copernican system, Kepler’s laws, Tychonic 
system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ptolemy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ptolemy 


The last important astronomer of classical antiquity, 
Ptolemy is also the only one whose works have come down 
to us substantially intact. His Almagest, a comprehensive 
empirical and mathematical deduction of models to 
explain the motions and phenomena of the heavenly 
bodies, laid the methodological foundation for the Islamic 
and European mathematical astronomy of the Middle 
Ages and Renaissance. 


Biography and writings 

Claudius Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy) worked at or near 
Alexandria in Egypt during the middle decades of 
the 2nd century AD. He began making astronomical 
observations at least as early as AD 127. By 147, he 
had completed a preliminary version of his system of 
planetary models, which he described in outline in a 
public inscription that was later preserved in manuscript 
copies. The full presentation of the system, incorporating 
some significant revisions, was given in a large treatise 
entitled Mathematical Composition, which much later came 
to be universally called the Almagest (from an Arabic 
title meaning ‘the greatest’). Ptolemy wrote several 
other works on physical science, most of them after 
the Almagest. Those that are directly concerned with 
astronomy include the Phases of the Fixed Stars, the 
Handy Tables, the Planetary Hypotheses and brief works on 
stereographic projection and sundial theory. The original 
Greek texts of the Almagest and Handy Tables have been 
preserved in medieval copies, whereas the other works 
are incomplete, or extant only in Arabic versions. 


The Almagest 
The purpose of the Almagest is to establish quantitative 
geometrical models based on uniform circular motion 
for the Sun, the Moon, the five known planets and 
the fixed stars (see also PLANETARY THEORY FROM EUDOXUS 
TO COPERNICUS). Ptolemy attempted to make the work 
thoroughly empirical, deductive and demonstrative, 
following a course that he succinctly delineates in the 
introduction to his planetary theory: ‘anyone who 
was to convince himself and his future audience must 
demonstrate the size and the period of each of the two 
anomalies [in a planet’s motion] by means of well-attested 
phenomena which everyone agrees on, must then combine 
both anomalies, and discover the position and order of 
the circles by which they are brought about, and the type 
of their motion; and finally must make practically all the 
phenomena fit the particular character of the arrangement 
of circles in his hypothesis’. This is an axiomatic approach, 
resembling Greek geometry, rather than a heuristic one. 
The starting points are (a) hypothetical model types 
for the heavenly bodies, (b) approximate values for the 
periodicities, taken over from earlier astronomers, and (c) 
records of observations and measurements. 

Ptolemy’s plan also resembles a Greek geometrical 
treatise in being cumulative, building demonstrations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


on prior demonstrations. He begins with arguments, 
chiefly from qualitative observation, that the Earth and 
heavens are spheres with a common center, and that the 
Earth is stationary and negligible in size relative to the 
celestial sphere. This is followed by a table of the lengths 
of chords in a standard circle (used for trigonometrical 
calculations), a measurement of the obliquity of the ecliptic 
using a meridian ring and a group of geometrical theorems 
useful for solving problems in spherical astronomy, which 
Ptolemy immediately applies to deducing tables for 
declinations and right and oblique ascensions. 

The natural frame of reference for planetary positions 
in ancient astronomy was the backdrop of fixed stars. 
Because he knew from Hipparchus’ work (see HIPPARCHUS) 
that the stars have a precessional motion relative to 
the equinoctial points, and considered it necessary to 
demonstrate the nature of that motion before using the 
stars as reference points in observations, Ptolemy instead 
chose to build his chain of deductions from a solar theory 
demonstrated from observations of the dates of solstices 
and equinoxes. Drawing heavily on Hipparchus’ writings 
on solar theory, Ptolemy argues that the tropical year, 
ie. the interval measured between observed equinoxes or 
solstices of the same kind, is constant, and approximately 
365;14,48 days (where the numerals after the semicolon 
represent sixtieths, sixtieths of sixtieths, and so forth). 
Hence it also follows that the lengths of the astronomical 
seasons do not change, and Ptolemy claims to have 
confirmed by ‘very precise observations’ that Hipparchus’ 
values (945 days for astronomical spring and 92} days 
for astronomical summer) were valid in his own time. 
On this basis Ptolemy took over (with acknowledgment) 
Hipparchus’ solar model, according to which the Sun 
travels with a period of 365;14,48 days on a circle whose 
center is displaced from the Earth’s center by 1/24 of the 
orbit’s radius in a fixed direction 654" east of the vernal 
equinoctial point. 

Ptolemy’s handling of the solar theory calls for several 
remarks. First, without a constant tropical year his 
rationale for giving priority in the Almagest to the solar 
theory would have been undermined. Secondly, while 
there is no obvious reason why Ptolemy should not have 
been able to observe equinoxes and solstices generally 
within the quarter-day tolerance that Hipparchus correctly 
claimed for his own observations, consistent results 
unambiguously confirming the constancy of the seasons 
would have been much harder to achieve. Thirdly, 
Ptolemy’s observations of the equinoxes and summer 
solstice in AD 139 and 140, on which his demonstration 
rests, are not genuine, since they are consistently about 
a day too late. Why Ptolemy introduced falsified 
observations at this point, whether he made real ones 
and whether his proceedings were justifiable are topics 
of controversy. Since Ptolemy reckons longitudes from 
the vernal equinoctial point rather than relative to the 
stars, the error of a day introduces a systematic and 
gradually increasing error into all longitudes derived from 
his models, and the false observation reports continued 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ptolemy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to bedevil later astronomers’ solar theories for centuries 
afterwards. 

The lunar theory in the Almagest begins along the 
same lines as Hipparchus’, with a calculation of the radius 
of the Moon’s epicycle (or, equivalently, the eccentricity 
of its orbit) from sets of three observed lunar eclipses 
on the hypothesis of a simple epicyclic model. Unlike 
Hipparchus, Ptolemy obtains a consistent result, namely 
an epicycle radius of 54 units where the deferent circle’s 
radius is 60 units; the consistency is enhanced, however, 
by small ‘fudgings’ in Ptolemy’s arithmetic. Ptolemy 
revises Hipparchus’ lunar periodicities after finding the 
dimensions and configuration of the model, so that he is 
able to use for this purpose very widely spaced eclipse 
observations subject to fewer restrictions than Hipparchus 
required. 

From a study of observations recorded by Hip- 
parchus, Ptolemy discovered that the lunar anomaly pre- 
dicted by this model was too small in situations other than 
syzygy, with the maximum discrepancy when the Moon 
was elongated 90° from the Sun. He therefore modified 
the model by replacing the Moon’s deferent circle with a 
rapidly revolving eccentric circle so as to draw the epicycle 
closer to the Earth at quadrature than at syzycy. The revised 
model, which is quite successful in predicting lunar lon- 
gitudes, has the defect of falsely implying that the lunar 
disk ought to appear much larger at half Moon than at full 
Moon. Ptolemy does not mention the problem, although 
he can hardly have been unaware of it. 

Ptolemy was now in a position to calculate lunar 
positions accurately and to compare these with observed 
positions to measure the Moon’s parallax and hence 
its distance from the Earth. The calculation is marred 
by errors, yet arrives at a fairly accurate result (mean 
distance at syzygy of 59 Earth radii), a clear illustration 
of Ptolemy’s contriving to make a derivation arrive at 
an answer that he already knew by other means. In 
this instance, an inaccurate parallax would have shown 
up in the prediction of solar eclipses, and Ptolemy also 
could have been influenced by previous estimates by 
Hipparchus and others. Ptolemy uses Hipparchus’ eclipse 
diagram (see HIPPARCHUS, figure 1) in reverse to find a solar 
distance from his lunar distance, disregarding the extreme 
sensitivity of this calculation to small variations in the data. 

After the Moon Ptolemy turns to the fixed stars, 
showing from observations spanning more than four 
centuries that the configurations of stars do not vary (that 
is, they have no proper motion), and that the entire ‘sphere 
of fixed stars’ revolves about the poles of the ecliptic. 
Ptolemy finds too small a rate of precession (1° in 100 yr 
instead of in about 72 yr), but this almost exactly cancels 
out the error in his tropical year, so that the mean sidereal 
year implicit in his theory is unexpectedly good. A catalog 
of 1022 fixed stars, with longitudes (normed for AD 137), 
latitudes and numerical magnitudes ranging from 1 to 6, 
follows at this point. Ptolemy describes this as the product 
of his own observations; historians are in disagreement 
about the truth of this assertion, and whether the catalogue 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


actually incorporates an older catalogue by Hipparchus 
adjusted by Ptolemy for precession. 

Ptolemy’s planetary models impose an epicycle (to 
exhibit the synodic cycle of direct and retrograde motion) 
on an eccentric orbit (to exhibit the variations in the 
synodic cycle). For the INFERIORPLANETS the epicycle’s center 
revolves about the Earth with the same period as the Sun, 
whereas the SUPERIOR PLANETS revolve about their epicycles 
with a period such that they are approximately at the 
perigee of the epicycle when in opposition to the mean 
Sun. Ptolemy further modified the eccentric model by 
introducing the so-called equant point, a point twice as 
distant from the Earth as the center of the eccentric deferent 
along the same line; the revolution of the epicycle around 
the deferent is postulated as uniform as seen from the 
equant point rather than from the deferent’s own center. 
The effect of this model is roughly to make the planet’s 
deferent appear to have twice as great an eccentricity 
at opposition and conjunction as at situations half-way 
between. 

The procedure for measuring the components of the 
models is different for the inferior and superior planets. 
In the case of Venus and Mercury, Ptolemy is able, so 
to speak, to observe the edges of the epicycle directly 
when the planet is at its greatest elongation from the Sun; 
hence he can straightforwardly establish the apogee of 
the deferent and the size of the epicycle. In the case 
of the remaining planets Ptolemy selects sets of three 
observations of oppositions with the mean Sun, when 
the planet is theoretically seen along the same line with 
the epicycle’s center, and applies the same Hipparchian 
method of determining an eccentricity and apogee as in the 
solar and lunar models. The procedure is made much more 
difficult here by the equant motion, to account for which 
Ptolemy carries out a sequence of iterative corrections to 
his first calculation. The epicycle is then measured using 
an observation of the planet at intermediate elongation 
from the Sun. The verification of the periodicities is carried 
out after the determination of the radii and apogee, as was 
the case with the Moon. In contrast to the closely reasoned 
treatment of the planetary models so far as they concern 
motion along the ecliptic, Ptolemy’s rather complicated 
system of wobbles to produce their latitudinal motion 
is presented as a fait accompli, unsupported by specific 
observations. 


Other writings 

Ptolemy concluded the Almagest with a theory of the limits 
of planetary visibility, which served by its agreement with 
the accepted planetary phenomena asa confirmation of the 
validity of Ptolemy’s models. The essential concept here 
was the arcus visionis, a critical arc by which the Sun must 
be below the horizon along an altitude circle if the planet is 
to be visible. In his Phases of the Fixed Stars (the theoretical 
part of which has not survived) Ptolemy extended this 
visibility model to the stars, taking into account the effects 
of the observer’s latitude and the latitudes of the stars. The 
extant part of the book applies this information to produce 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ptolemy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a calendar correlating computed dates of appearance and 
disappearance of stars with regular patterns of weather in 
different localities. 

Interspersed in various parts of the Almagest are many 
tables for computing positions and phenomena of the 
heavenly bodies, derived from the models. These have an 
internal application in the deductions of the Almagest, but 
also were potentially useful for other purposes, especially 
asTroLocy. After completing the Almagest Ptolemy revised 
the tables, and published them separately as the Handy 
Tables. In addition to many improvements in the format 
of the tables, Ptolemy tacitly simplified the underlying 
models for planetary latitude and reworked the tables 
for planetary visibility. The Handy Tables was widely 
disseminated in antiquity. 

The Planetary Hypotheses represents Ptolemy’s last 
word on the celestial motions. In this work he treats the 
models of the Almagest in a more physical way, as a system 
of rotating spheres. Most of the Planetary Hypotheses exists 
only in an Arabic translation (see also MEDIEVAL COSMOLOGY) 
that is often difficult to interpret, and there is some 
ambiguity about the extent to which Ptolemy meant to 
delineate the actual structure of the heavens, since he also 
evidently has in mind the construction of a sort of ORRERY. 
A feature of this book that was profoundly influential 
in medieval astronomy was Ptolemy’s presentation of 
the models as a series of nested spheres, with the 
outermost sphere of the Moon directly continguous with 
the innermost sphere of Mercury, and so on outwards to 
the sphere of the fixed stars (see ISLAMIC ASTRONOMY). By 
a remarkable coincidence, as Ptolemy discovered, such a 
packing is almost perfectly in agreement with the solar and 
lunar distances that he determined in the Almagest. 


Bibliography 

Neugebauer O 1975 A History of Ancient Mathematical 
Astronomy (Berlin: Springer) 

Pedersen O 1974 A Survey of the Almagest (Odense: Odense 
University Press) 

Toomer G J 1984 Ptolemy’s Almagest (London: Duckworth) 


Alexander Jones 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsar Backends 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pulsar Backends 


Present-day pulsar astronomers require equipment which 
will perform two main tasks. The first of these is 
to search for new PULSARS and the second is to make 
observations of known ones, primarily to make precision 
timing measurements, but also to study the polarization 
and morphology of the pulses. These require rather 
different capabilities from the equipment, but the two 
things they have in common are the necessity for high 
time resolution and high sensitivity. The signal-to-noise 
ratio, which is the main measure of the quality of a pulsar 
observation, is approximately 


1/2 
SNR = x [ver (t 2 :) (1) 
W 


where K is a constant which depends on the size and 
performance of the radiotelescope, N is the number of 
polarization channels (usually 2), B is the total receiver 
bandwidth, T is the duration of the observation and P 
and W are the period and width of the pulses. This 
equation clearly indicates that the use of a receiver with 
a large bandwidth is important. Moreover, we see that the 
sensitivity is greatest for small values of the width of the 
observed pulses W. Thus any instrumental process which 
broadens the pulses reduces the sensitivity. 


Dispersion 

What makes the tasks non-trivial is the dispersion of 
the signals caused by the weak frequency dependence of 
the velocity of the pulses during their passage through the 
interstellar medium. The gas in the interstellar space is 
ionized to a greater or lesser extent by ultraviolet and x-ray 
emission from stars. The pulsar signals travel through the 
resultant electron plasma at a radiofrequency v with the 


group velocity of 
2 
Nee 
ek (1 = eo) @) 


where n, is the free-electron plasma density, c is the free- 
space velocity of light and e and m are the charge and mass 
of the electron. The effect of this can be seen most clearly 
in figure 1 which shows the dispersion of the radio pulses 
from the pulsar B1356 — 61, the pulses at low frequencies 
being delayed relative to those at higher ones. Clearly, 
if one uses a receiver with bandwidth exceeding a few of 
these frequency channels, the observed pulse will be much 
wider than the true pulse, so reducing the sensitivity. 

The amount of frequency drift is determined by the 
column density of free electrons along the line of sight to 
the pulsar, a quantity known as the dispersion measure. 


Dedispersion 

Of course one could combat the broadening effects of this 
dispersion simply by using a very narrowband receiver 
but this would be at the penalty of much reduced 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


B1356—-61 Pfold= 127.507104ms DM= 294.1 SNR= 232.6 

oO 

io) 

te) 
S 3 
ze 4 
a E 
5 F 
o E 
B a 
B& iS) 

jo) 

jo) 

oO 


0) 0.5 1 


Pulse phase (periods) 


Figure 1. Frequency dispersion in the pulses from 

PSR B1356 — 61. Each horizontal trace shows the pulse profile 
recorded in one of 96 adjacent frequency channels, each 3 MHz 
wide, centered on 1380 MHz. The pulse profile at the bottom is 
the result of correcting the individual profiles for the drift in 
frequency and then adding them together. 


sensitivity as can be seen from equation (1). However, 
there are several ways in which the effects of dispersion 
may be removed from the data, while retaining full 
sensitivity, using processes which come under the generic 
name of dedispersion. 

The most widely used technique is to segment the 
receiver band into a number of much smaller bands in 
which the dispersion broadening is small and to record the 
power from each (see figure 1). If the dispersion measure 
is known, the outputs from the individual channels may 
be delayed by appropriate amounts before adding them 
all together to give a ‘dedispersed’ time sequence with a 
resolution determined by the broadening arising in the 
single channels. 

There are two main practical ways of achieving this— 
by the use of FILTERBANKS or the use of autocorrelation 
spectrometers. The former essentially requires a bank 
of separate contiguous, narrowband receivers, with 
bandwidths equal to their frequency separation. These can 
often be constructed simply and cheaply using simple LC- 
tuned circuits. These have the disadvantage of inflexibility 
and more expensive digital filters have been employed in 
which the bandwidth and frequency are programmable. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsar Backends 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The alternative digital autocorrelation spectrometers 
(CORRELATORS) form the basis of most spectral analysis 
in modern RADIO ASTRONOMY and are also used in pulsar 
astronomy. These first involve the computation of the 
autocorrelation function (ACF) of the data. Fortunately, 
the ACF is easily calculated digitally and accumulated over 
a period of time. Its Fourier transform may be calculated 
in a computer to provide the power spectrum (from a 
relationship known as the Wiener—Khinchin theorem). 
This is essentially the output of a filterbank and, as before, 
after the application of appropriate delays and additions, 
a dedispersed time sequence may be obtained. 

Unfortunately there is a fundamental limit to the 
achievable time resolution of such post-detection, or 
incoherent, dedispersion techniques. As the bandwidth 
of the individual channels is reduced, the dispersion 
broadening is reduced. However, the use of a filter of 
bandwidth b limits the response time of the output to 
roughly 1/b and hence there is a critical bandwidth below 
which the time broadening starts increasing again. 

There is only one technique which can overcome 
this limitation; pre-detection, or coherent, dedispersion. 
This requires sampling the voltages of the full receiver 
bandwidth digitally and then applying exactly the inverse 
of the filter which has been applied by the interstellar 
medium, which essentially rotates the phase of the signals 
as a function of frequency according to the dispersion 
law. This is usually achieved by performing a Fourier 
transform of the data, rotating the phases of every element 
in the transform and then performing the inverse Fourier 
transform. The result is a time sequence which is 
essentially the output of a receiver which was very close 
to the pulsar. In this case, the time resolution is as little 
as 1/B, the inverse of the full receiver bandwidth. For 
example, with a bandwidth of 100 MHz, time resolution 
of only 10 ns is possible. 

This of course is the ideal process but requires very 
large computational resources and, while it is used for 
a number of studies of millisecond pulsars, it is not 
worthwhile for most slower pulsars. 


Searching for pulsars 

Most modern searches for pulsars are based on the 
identification of signals which are dispersed and periodic 
in nature. These searches are usually conducted by 
recording the output of a filterbank or spectrometer, using 
a sampling interval which is small compared with the 
intrinsic width of the pulses of the target pulsars. If this 
is not so, the effective pulse width will be increased and 
the sensitivity of the search will be reduced according to 
equation (1). The recorded data are then dedispersed for a 
number of trial dispersion measures, each trial producing 
a time sequence which is then searched for pulse trains 
of unknown periodicity and pulse width. This search is 
usually carried out by performing a fast Fourier transform 
of the data and seeking large spikes in the resultant 
spectrum. The search sensitivity can be improved by 
summing up to P/2W harmonics of the fundamental 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


period P, where W is the pulse width; the sensitivity is 
then improved by a factor (P/2W)'/? and is consistent with 
that given by equation (1). 

While these computations can in principle be carried 
out in real time, the required computing resource is 
considerable and there is no possibility of reprocessing 
the data, for instance if the data from some filterbank 
channels are spoilt by interference. For these reasons, 
data are usually recorded directly onto magnetic tape and 
processed later on off-line computers in a more leisurely 
fashion. The volume of recorded data in modern searches 
is often large. It is not unusual for 512 filterbank channels 
to be sampled every 100 ys, requiring the storage of 5 
million data elements per second. Recording say 8 bits for 
each element requires a sustained data rate of 5 Mbytes St, 
However the number, and hence cost, of tapes can be 
reduced by representing each element by asmaller number 
of bits, resulting in a somewhat reduced sensitivity. In 
fact, in the extreme case of the small signals expected 
from undiscovered pulsars, single-bit sampling provides a 
sensitivity which is reduced by a factor of only (2/7)! = 
0.80 for an eight-fold reduction in data volume. Such 
digitization simply requires the recording of a ‘0’ or a 
‘l’ depending on whether the signal level is less than or 
greater than the long-term mean level. The simplicity and 
economy of such sampling make it widely used (see also 
SOFTWARE: RADIO PULSAR SOFTWARE). 


Timing measurements 

Much of the most interesting astrophysics in pulsar 
astronomy arises from the ability to monitor the rotation 
of pulsars through very high-precision measurements 
of their arrival times. This is usually achieved by 
dedispersing and folding the data at the known period 
of the pulsar over a sufficiently long interval of time, 
typically 10 min, to give a high signal-to-noise ratio profile. 
Such folding may be carried out within special-purpose 
hardware or in general-purpose computers. 

In order to perform this operation, the pulsar 
dispersion measure and the instantaneous period must 
be known. The latter requires an accurate model of the 
rotation of the pulsar, as it would be observed at the 
BARYCENTER Of the solar system, together with an ephemeris 
for the rather complicated motion of the telescope around 
the barycenter. This then allows calculation of the phase of 
the data samples within the pulse period so that they may 
be added into one of a number of hardware or software 
registers, each containing data for a single pulse ‘phase’. 

The input data for this process is usually the output 
of a filterbank or spectrometer or a coherent dedispersion 
process. The data may be dedispersed completely, 
partially or not at all prior to folding, in which case the 
dedispersion is completed afterwards. The reason for this 
is that the dispersion measure may not be well determined 
at the time of observation, and incorrect dedispersion may 
lead to distortion, or smearing, of the pulse. Likewise, 
an incorrectly known period may lead to smearing of 
the pulse. To combat this, an observation is usually 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsar Backends 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


divided into a number of subintegrations within which the 
distortion is small. These may be combined subsequently 
when the period is better determined. 

In order to use such data for timing measurements, the 
local observatory clock must be synchronized with UTC or 
some other atomic time standard. This is usually carried 
out using the Global Positioning Satellites (GPS) with an 
accuracy of better than 0.1 ws. The profile must then be 
appropriately time tagged and, from this, a time of arrival 
is usually obtained by convolution with a template, which 
is a standard, noise-free profile. The time of arrival is taken 
to be the peak of the resulting function. 


Single pulses 

Most pulsars show a considerable amount of detail and 
variation from pulse to pulse, revealing much about the 
details of the emission process. The acquisition of such 
data uses most of the principles discussed in the previous 
sections and usually involves the recording of dedispersed 
time sequences. Sometimes, the amount of data recorded 
can be reduced by storing only the data lying within 
narrow ‘windows’ centered on the pulse, rather than the 
whole period. 


Polarization measurements 

The measurement of the polarization of the radio pulses is 
important in establishing the configuration of the pulsar 
rotation axis and the NEUTRON STAR magnetosphere. Most 
modern telescopes have receivers providing two channels, 
A and B, which are sensitive to either left-hand and 
right-hand circular polarizations or to orthogonal linear 
polarizations. These pairs of signals can be combined to 
provide the four Stokes parameters, J, V, Q and U, which 
completely specify the polarization state of the radiation. 
For incoherent dedispersion systems, these are obtained 
electronically for each element of the filterbank and each of 
the four Stokes parameters is then dedispersed separately. 
For coherent dedispersion systems, the phase information 
is still available in the dedispersed time sequences so that 
only A and B need be recorded and dedispersed, the 
full Stokes parameters being calculated digitally from the 
resulting dedispersed time sequences. 


Bibliography 

General introductions to the astrophysics of pulsars are 

given in 

Manchester R N and Taylor J H 1975 Pulsars (San Francisco, 
CA: Freeman) 


and 


Lyne A G and Graham-Smith F 1998 Pulsar Astronomy 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Anexcellent discourse on the principles of pulsar data 
acquisition and signal processing is given by 
Hankins T H and Rickett B J 1975 Pulsar signal processing 
Methods Comput. Phys. 14 55-129 


Andrew Lyne 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pulsars 


Pulsars are the lighthouses of the Galaxy—rapidly 
spinning NEUTRON sTARS whose strong magnetic fields 
produce conal beams of electromagnetic radiation that 
sweep past the Earth with each rotation of the star, 
producing the eponymous pulses that are observed 
primarily at radio wavelengths. 

Like other neutron stars, radio pulsars are born in 
the SUPERNOVA explosions that accompany the collapse of 
massive stars. The nascent pulsars are born rotating at up 
to about 100 times per second. It is this stored rotational 
kinetic energy that powers the pulsar, so like a spinning top 
the pulsar gradually slows, reaching spin periods of about 
a second within a few million years. Eventually, within 
about 100 million years, the pulsar is spinning too slowly to 
maintain its radio emission, and it fades from view. Some 
old pulsars that have binary companions can be ‘recycled’, 
or spun back up to fast rotation periods by mass transfer 
from their companions. Because the resulting ‘millisecond 
pulsars’ have relatively low magnetic field strengths and 
hence low energy loss rates, they can continue to spin 
rapidly for times that are long compared with the age of 
the galaxy. 

Just over 1000 pulsars are now known, all in our 
own galaxy except for a few pulsars detected in the 
MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. They are studied because neutron stars 
are intrinsically interesting astronomical objects, but also 
because the study of pulsars is deeply intertwined with 
many different branches of both astronomy and physics. 
Pulsars are, for example, very useful astrophysical probes. 
For example, a sharp radio pulse emitted by a pulsar is 
delayed and broadened during its propagation through 
the dispersive, turbulent interstellar medium, ina way that 
depends on the frequency and polarization of the signal 
as well as the properties of the medium. Multifrequency 
studies of pulsar signals have been used to map the 
distribution and turbulence structure of ionized material 
in the Galaxy, as well as the average Galactic magnetic 
field. 

Pulsars are also, by virtue of their very regular, 
clocklike pulses, useful probes of the gravitational 
environments in which they are found. The Doppler shifts 
of the signals from pulsars in binaries can be used to study 
the binary properties, just as spectral lines are used with 
normal stars. Some very close pulsar binaries have orbits 
that are substantially deformed from Keplerian ellipses by 
general relativistic effects; in these systems, very precise 
tests of ‘post-Keplerian’ gravity theory have been possible. 


Discovery and early history 

Pulsars were discovered in 1967 by a Cambridge 
University graduate student, JOCELYN BELL (now Jocelyn 
Bell Burnell), working under the supervision of her 
thesis advisor, ANTHONY HEWISH. Hewish, Bell and their 
collaborators had designed and built a new telescope 
near Cambridge that was designed to study the rapid 
SCINTILLATION, or twinkling, of radio signals from QUASARS 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


as they propagated through the soLar wIND. Studying 
the thousands of feet of chart recorder paper produced 
their receivers, Bell noticed some unusual ‘scruff’, from a 
direction well away from the Sun, that recurred on several 
nights at a fixed sidereal time. Follow-up observations 
showed that the signal had the form of a series of 
short radio pulses, repeated every 1.337 s. The extreme 
regularity of the pulsations was puzzling. After ruling out 
terrestrial interference sources, the team briefly considered 
the possibility of an artificial extraterrestrial origin— 
leading Bell to jokingly call the source LGM, for ‘little green 
men’—but her quick discovery of three more pulsating 
radio sources demonstrated that they must arise from 
some natural source. A distance estimate of 65 pc was 
obtained for the first object, from measurement of the 
DISPERSION of the signal in the ionized interstellar medium, 
placing the source far beyond the solar system. 

The rapid variability of the signal required a source 
that was much smaller than a light-second across: smaller, 
that is, than an ordinary star. The name ‘pulsar’— 
pulsating star—enshrines the original model put forth by 
Hewish and his collaborators in which the pulses were 
produced by radial oscillations of a WHITE DWaRF or neutron 
star. Models involving rotation rather than pulsation 
were, however, strongly favored by observations that the 
pulsation periods were gradually lengthening. (A top, as 
it loses energy, slows down; a bell rings with a constant 
frequency but a decreasing amplitude.) The identification 
of pulsars with neutron stars rather than white dwarfs 
came with the discovery in 1968 of pulsars in the Vela and 
Crab supernova remnants. Not only were neutron stars 
thought to be born in supernovae, but the Crab pulsar 
had a period of only 33 ms, much faster than allowed by 
any white dwarf model. (Remarkably, Franco Pacini had 
predicted that rotating, highly magnetized neutron stars 
were a potential source of electromagnetic radiation just a 
few months before pulsars were discovered.) 

Hewish was awarded the 1974 Nobel Prize in Physics 
for his ‘decisive role in the discovery of pulsars’ and his 
pioneering work in radio astronomy. Bell’s key role in 
the discovery has been widely recognized: among other 
awards, she has received the Michelson Medal of the 
Franklin Institute in Philadelphia (jointly with Hewish), 
the Tinsley Prize of the American Astronomical Society 
and the Herschel Medal from the Royal Astronomical 
Society. 


The pulsar population 

There are just over 1000 known radio pulsars (March 1999), 
with pulse periods ranging from 1.557 ms to over 8 s. 
This known sample represents fewer than 1% of the active 
pulsars in the Galaxy, with the others either too faint or 
too distant to detect, or with radio beams whose sweeps 
do not intersect the Earth. Most known pulsars lie within 
a few kiloparsecs, although some very luminous pulsars 
are observed in the distant reaches of our Galaxy and a 
few in the Magellanic clouds. No known pulsar is bright 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


enough to be detectable if it were placed in our neighbor 
galaxy M31. 

A new pulsar is born in the Galaxy every 50-300 yr. 
This rate is somewhat lower than the estimated rate of 
core collapse supernova explosions (type II and type Ib/c) 
in the Galaxy, thought to be one every 20-50 yr. Both 
rate estimates are subject to many uncertainties, so the 
significance of the discrepancy is unknown. It is possible, 
however, that many core collapse supernovae do not 
produce active pulsars. 


Pulsars in supernova remnants 

Only a relatively small number of known suPERNOVA 
REMNANTS harbor known radio pulsars. There are perhaps 
eight secure associations, and another dozen proposed 
associations where the possibility of a chance line-of- 
sight coincidence between the pulsar and remnant cannot 
be ruled out. Because pulsars remain active for over 
10 million years, and their remnants fade within a hundred 
thousand years, the absence of remnants around most 
pulsars is easily understood. Remnants without pulsars 
may result from type Ia supernovae, may have pulsars 
that are too faint to be seen or are beaming in a direction 
away from Earth, or may contain neutron stars that are 
not active as pulsars for some reason (e.g. the soft gamma 
repeaters). 

The association between the CRAB NEBULA, a plerionic 
supernova remnant, and the pulsar PSR B0531+21 has 
been particularly important. Chinese records of the 
supernova, which was first detected by Sung astronomers 
on 4 July 1054 and which remained visible in daylight for 
3 weeks and at night for nearly 2 yr, have given modern 
astronomers a precise age for the pulsar. Tracing the 
motion of the filaments in the nebula backwards in time, 
they converge nearly a century after the supernova took 
place, implying an acceleration of the expansion after the 
original explosion. The pulsar provides the long-lived 
energy source for this acceleration. 


Pulsar ages and magnetic fields 

Observations of pulsars over extended periods of time 
allow the measurement of both the pulsar period P and the 
rate at which the period is lengthening P (or equivalently 
the frequency Q and Q). Often, it is assumed that the 
braking torque on the pulsar is proportional to some power 
of the pulsar spin frequency, so Q o« Q" where n is the 
‘braking index’ (n = 3 for braking by magnetic spin-down 
radiation). If the original spin frequency was {o, then the 
current age of the pulsar is 


Q Qy\y"t 
= al (5;) | eI 


A ‘characteristic age’ is often defined by assuming that 
Q & Qo and n = 3, so 


Q P 
22 2P 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In a few cases, the braking index can be directly 
determined from measurements of the second derivative 
of the pulsar frequency, since n = 22/22. Measured 
values are between 1.4 and 3, slightly lower than prediction 
of the magnetic dipole model. 

With this caveat in mind, the assumption that 
magnetic dipole radiation dominates the pulsar energy 
loss rate leads to an estimate of the surface magnetic field 


strength: 
313 PP\ 
a ( 87r2 RE 6) 


where J is the moment of inertia of the neutron star and 
R its radius. For typical values from neutron star models, 
and P in seconds, we have 


B 3.2 x 10°(PP)'” G. (4) 


In figure 1, we show the known pulsars with mea- 
sured P and P, including lines of constant characteristic 
age (equation (2)) and surface magnetic field (equation (4)). 
The pulsars in supernova remnants are shown by stars; as 
expected, they are among the youngest known pulsars. 
The pulsars in the lower left region of the figure are the 
‘recycled’ pulsars; they will be discussed further below. 
The great majority of known pulsars are seen to have in- 
ferred magnetic field strengths of 10''-10'° G and ages of 
10°-108 yr. 

After pulsars are formed, pulsar spin periods 
lengthen and individual pulsars move from left to right 
in the figure. The precise shape of their tracks depends 
on the evolution of their magnetic fields, and hence the 
spin-down torques. For many years it was assumed that 
fields would decay owing to ohmic losses on timescales of 
10°-10’ yr, but the current understanding is that the high 
conductivity interior to the star prevents field decay at least 
on 10° yr timescales. Pulsars would then move along lines 
of constant magnetic field. Eventually, pulsars reach the 
region in the lower right of the figure and are lost from 
the sample, either fading below detectable luminosity or 
crossing a ‘death line’ below which the radio emission 
process does not function. 


The pulsar velocity distribution 

Pulsars have high space velocities. This is observed 
directly, with interferometric measurements of PROPER 
MOTIONS corresponding to typical transverse speeds of 
around 300 kms~!. Although most pulsars are born in the 
explosions of massive stars that are found near the Galactic 
plane, their high velocities carry them to a large observed 
scale height above (and below) the plane, z ~ 500 pe. 

The origin of the pulsar velocities is still uncertain. 
Many pulsars are born in binaries, and binary disruption 
during a supernova explosion can leave the individual 
stars with large velocities. Binary disruption cannot 
account for the highest observed velocities, however. A 
more promising source of a large ‘kick’ is anisotropy in 
the supernova birth event. Even a small asymmetry in the 
neutrino emission from a supernova explosion is sufficient 
to leave the neutron star moving at 1000 km s~' or faster. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pulsars with Measured Spin—Down Rates (excl. clusters) 


Period derivative 


0.1 1 10 


Pulsar period (s) 


Figure 1. Pulsars with measured spin-down rates (excluding pulsars in globular clusters). Binary pulsars are marked with open 


circles, pulsars in supernova remnants with stars. 


Radio and high-energy emission from pulsars 
Although a basic physical model of pulsars was developed 
within a few years of their discovery, the pulsar radiation 
source itself remains rather mysterious. Astronomer Jon 
Arons has observed that we know why pulsars pulse, but 
not how they shine. 

Some aspects of the emission process are straightfor- 
ward. The neutron star is very strongly magnetized, with 
a field that is at least roughly dipolar and whose axis is 
misaligned with the rotation axis of the star. The rotat- 
ing magnetic field produces a strong induced electric field 
which accelerates charged particles off the surface of the 
star into an ionized ‘magnetosphere’. The conductivity is 
high along the magnetic field lines but very low perpen- 
dicular to the lines, so the charged particles are forced into 
corotation with the star. At a radial distance r. = c/Q 
a corotating particle would travel at the speed of light, 
so corotation must break down within this ‘light cylin- 
der’. Magnetic field lines that close back to the star within 
this radius can support a static charge distribution, but the 
‘open’ field lines that cross the light cylinder define a conal 
region above the pulsar’s magnetic polar cap in which par- 
ticles can be accelerated to high energies. It is this polar cap 
region where pulsar radio emission is probably generated. 
Particle acceleration may also occur in a depleted region 
that develops just inside the light cylinder; this ‘outer gap’ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is frequently invoked as the source of high energy (optical, 
x-ray and y-ray) emission observed from some pulsars. 
This simple picture remains incomplete, with such 
questions as ‘current closure’ (global charge conservation) 
remaining unsolved. It is remarkable that the seemingly 
straightforward electrodynamical problem of a non- 
aligned, magnetized rotator has so far defied analysis. 


The radio emission mechanism 
Observed pulsar radio luminosities, together with the 
small source size, imply extraordinarily high brightness 
temperatures—as high as 10°! K. To avoid implausibly 
high particle energies, coherent RADIATION processes are 
invoked. A maser-like mechanism, involving particles 
bunched in momentum space, is attractive, if only because 
maser action has been observed elsewhere in astrophysics, 
but models with coherent emission from bunches of 
particles have also been widely discussed, with a bunch 
of N particles localized in physical space radiating power 
proportional to N?. Coherence by bunching is seen in 
terrestrial lightning flashes. In detail, severe problems 
remain in understanding pulsar emission by either the 
maser or the bunching models, and no consensus has 
emerged. 

The emission mechanism itself also remains uncer- 
tain. Charged particles gyrating around magnetic field 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lines produce SYNCHROTRON RADIATION. In the strong mag- 
netic fields of the pulsar magnetosphere, a particle will 
quickly radiate aways its components of momentum that 
are perpendicular to the field lines, so will be confined to 
the lowest Landau level. Roughly, the charged particle 
can be pictured as a bead on a wire, along which the bead 
is free to move. As a particle moves out along a curved 
field line, it will produce synchrotron-like radiation that 
is conventionally called ‘curvature radiation’. Coherent 
curvature radiation is currently the most widely accepted 
model for pulsar radio emission, but many other possi- 
ble models have been discussed, including models based 
on relativistic plasma instabilities that are varients of the 
mechanisms proposed for type III solar radio bursts (see 
SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS). 


Polarization 

The radio emission from pulsars is frequently highly 
polarized, with linear polarization fractions reaching 
nearly 100% in some cases. In most emission models, 
the electric vector in the radiation can be associated with 
a preferred direction: either in the plane of the curving 
magnetic field lines or perpendicular to that plane. In 
many cases, there is evidence for radiation in both of 
two orthogonal modes of linear polarization. This can 
be observed, for example, by monitoring the pulse-to- 
pulse variations in the polarization vector. The position 
angle of the linear polarization often swings smoothly 
across the pulse period, as expected from the changing 
projection on the plane of the sky of the magnetic field 
direction. With the assumption that the field geometry is 
roughly dipolar, this position angle swing can be modeled 
to produce estimates of the angles between the spin axis 
and magnetic axis, and between the spin axis and the 
observer’s line of sight. 

Significant circular polarization (210%) is also often 
observed. Often, the circular polarization changes 
handedness near the center of the pulse profile. It is not 
known whether the circular polarization is intrinsic to the 
pulsar radiation processes or arises as a linearly polarized 
signal propagates, for example, through a birefringent 
region in the pulsar magnetosphere. 


Radio phenomenology 

The observed radio beam of a typical pulsar is quite 
narrow, with the pulsar ‘on’ only a few per cent of the 
time. When averaged over hundreds to thousands of 
pulse periods, the radio emission pattern is usually very 
stable. Some pulsars confine their radiation to a single 
Gaussian beam; others have complex pulse shapes, or 
show ‘interpulses’ that most likely arise from the second 
magnetic pole. A few pulsars have two or more stable 
emission patterns, and switch, apparently at random, 
between the two emission ‘modes’. 

From one pulse to the next, pulsars display a 
bewildering array of complex behaviors, both random 
and highly structured. A histogram of pulse strengths is 
generally roughly exponential in form, with the strongest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pulses about 10 times the mean. Some pulsars undergo 
extended stretches, called ‘nulls’, with no detectable radio 
emission at all. Two pulsars, the Crab pulsar and the 
millisecond pulsar B1937+21, exhibit a power-law tail of 
‘giant pulses’ that extends to hundreds of times the mean 
pulse intensity. 

Individual pulses are often composed of one or more 
‘subpulses’, which are usually significantly narrower than 
the length of the average pulse window. These subpulses 
occasionally show highly organized behavior from pulse 
to pulse, drifting across the pulse window. On much 
shorter timescales, ‘micropulses’ with widths as short as a 
microsecond are seen. 


Rotation-powered X-ray and y-ray pulsars 

The coherent radio emission from pulsars is a nearly 
insignificant fraction of the total luminosity inferred from 
their spin-down rates. A handful of radio pulsars, 
primarily the youngest, also have pulsed emission at 
optical, x-ray and y-ray energies. The Crab pulsar, for 
example, has a spectrum that has been measured all the 
way from 10 MHz radio waves to at least 5 GeV y rays; 
the emitted power peaks in the hard x-ray band. The 
pulsar in the Vela supernova remnant has a spectrum 
that peaks in the y rays, where it is the brightest object 
in the sky. (These rotation-powered high-energy pulsars 
should not be confused with X-RAY BINARY STARS that are 
accreting material from a companion.) One pulsar is 
known, GEMINGA, that appears quite ordinary except that 
it is seen only at high energies and not in the radio. It is 
believed that Geminga is a very nearby radio pulsar whose 
radio beam does not intersect the Earth. As noted above, 
some models place generation of the high-energy emission 
from pulsars in an outer gap, rather than the polar cap 
region where the radio emission probably originates. 


Binary and millisecond pulsars 

There are about 50 pulsars now known in binary systems. 
Most of these pulsars are clustered in the lower left of 
figure 1, with shorter pulse periods, larger characteristic 
ages, and lower magnetic fields than the general pulsar 
population. Only a handful of ordinary pulsars have 
binary companions, certainly a far smaller number than 
might be expected from studies of Binary stars. Although 
most pulsar progenitors were originally in binaries, most 
of these binaries were gravitationally unbound by the mass 
loss that accompanied supernova explosions, leaving the 
pulsars isolated. 


Recycling 

Under normal circumstances, the more massive compo- 
nent of a binary star system will evolve most rapidly, re- 
sulting, if the star is above about 8Mo, in a supernova 
explosion. If the binary remains bound, the system may 
appear as a young pulsar with a main sequence compan- 
ion. Eventually, the second star will finish core hydro- 
gen burning and move off the main sequence, gradually 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


swelling. If the binary is sufficiently wide, the compan- 
ion will continue its evolution as if it were an isolated star. 
However, if the binary is sufficiently compact, the surface 
of the companion will eventually come into contact with 
its Roche surface and begin transferring mass (and angular 
momentum) to the neutron star, spinning it up to shorter 
rotation periods. During this stage, the system will be vis- 
ible as a luminous x-ray binary. 

The fate of the system depends on the mass of the 
companion. A massive companion will evolve quickly, 
exploding as a supernova after a relatively short mass 
transfer period (as a high-mass x-ray binary). The result 
will be a pulsar with spin period around 30-50 ms, with 
a neutron star companion or no companion at all if the 
system becomes unbound. A light companion will evolve 
slowly, with a long mass transfer period (as a low-mass 
x-ray binary), leaving a pulsar with period 1-10 msec and 
a light, helium white dwarf companion. An intermediate- 
mass companion will leave a pulsar with intermediate 
spin period and a massive, carbon—oxygen white dwarf 
companion. 

It is observed that the magnetic fields of these 
‘recycled’ pulsars are significantly smaller than those of 
young pulsars. (The reason is not well understood, but 
is probably related to the mass accretion.) The resulting 
torques are very small, so recycled pulsars can spin down 
much more slowly than ordinary pulsars and remain 
active for billions or even tens of billions of years. 


Selected binary pulsars 
A few binary pulsars of particular interest are described 
here. 


The Hulse-Taylor binary. The first binary pulsar was 
discovered by RUSSELL HULSE and JOSEPH TAYLOR in 1974, 
during a survey for new pulsars done at the ARECIBO 
OBSERVATORY as part of Hulse’s PhD thesis work. Follow- 
up observations showed that the pulsar is in a high- 
eccentricity (e = 0.6), short-period (P, = 8 h) orbit with 
another star, which is almost certainly a second neutron 
star. It was immediately realized that the high velocities 
and strong gravitational fields in this binary make it 
an extraordinary laboratory for studying fundamental 
physics, as described below. In 1993, Hulse and Taylor 
were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics ‘for the discovery 
of anew type of pulsar, a discovery that has opened up new 
possibilities for the study of gravitation’. 

Two other close, double neutron star binaries are now 
known. Loss of energy to GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION causes 
the neutron stars in these binaries to slowly spiral together; 
on timescales of 108-10? yr, the neutron stars will collide 
and coalesce, probably forming a BLACK HOLE and possibly 
powering a GAMMA-RAY burst. 


The eclipsing binaries. In 1988, a pulsar (B1957+20) was 
discovered with a 0.025M. companion. The pulsar was 
eclipsed by its companion for about 10% of each orbit. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


eclipse region is significantly bigger than the companion’s 
ROCHE LOBE, leading to the conclusion that the eclipse is 
caused by a wind of material streaming off the companion. 
Although the mass loss rate inferred for this system is fairly 
small, the excitation of a wind by pulsar radiation has 
been suggested as a means of ablation or evaporation of 
a companion. The handful of known millisecond pulsars 
without binary companions may have emerged from such 
‘black widow binaries’, of which several examples are now 
known. (See also ECLIPSING BINARY STARS.) 


Pulsars with main sequence companions. Two pulsars are 
known with massive main sequence companion stars. 
Both are young pulsars that have not yet been recycled 
during companion evolution. The pulsar B1259—63 is 
in a very wide (3.4 yr), high-eccentricity orbit around 
a 10Mp, Be star; J0045—7319 orbits a ~9M. B1 V star 
whose radial velocity curve has been measured with 
optical observations, making it the only known ‘double- 
line’ spectroscopic pulsar binary. Quadrupolar distortions 
of the companions in these systems lead to classical spin— 
orbit coupling and hence to measurable perturbations 
of the pulsar orbits, providing a test of stellar structure 
models of these massive stars. 


A pulsar with planets. PSR B1257+12,a pulsar with a 6 ms 
spin period, has two planetary companions of roughly 
terrestrial mass, 3.4Mg and 2.8M@, orbiting with periods 
of 66.5 and 98.2 days. A third body, of roughly lunar mass, 
orbits in a 1 month orbit. This was the first planetary 
system detected outside the solar system, and these remain 
the lightest known extrasolar planets. The planets are in 
nearly circular orbits, suggesting that they were formed 
after the supernova that created the pulsar. It is possible 
that they formed from a disk left by a companion star 
that was destroyed by the ablation processes seen in the 
eclipsing binary pulsars. 


A triple pulsar system. The pulsar PSR B1620—26, in 
the globular cluster M4, has a ~0.3M9, white dwarf 
companion in a low-eccentricity, half-year orbit. An 
observed acceleration of this binary has been interpreted 
as the reflex motion of the binary around its center of mass 
with a second, more distant companion. The outer body 
is light, probably either a planet or a brown dwarf, and the 
orbital period is most likely a few centuries. 


Isolated millisecond pulsars 

There are a few pulsars known that have short spin periods 
and low magnetic fields that place them with the binary 
pulsars in figure 1 but which have no observed binary 
companion. These include the first millisecond pulsar 
discovered, PSR B1937+21, which is still the fastest known 
pulsar, with spin period P = 1.557 ms. It is generally 
thought that B1937+21 and similar pulsars were recycled in 
binary systems but later lost their companions, perhaps to 
a process like the evaporation that appears to be occurring 
in the eclipsing binary systems. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pulsars in globular clusters 

Over 40 pulsars are now known in the Galactic GLOBULAR 
CLUSTERS, 20 in 47 Tucanae alone. Most have low magnetic 
fields and short spin periods and are probably products of 
recycling in a binary system. About half are now in binary 
systems. Since globular clusters contain very old stellar 
populations and no active star formation, no core collapse 
supernovae are currently producing young pulsars. The 
apparent presence of a few relatively young pulsars in 
clusters has led to the suggestion that some neutron stars 
could be created in ‘accretion-induced collapse’ of white 
dwarfs that are pushed over the Chandrasekhar mass limit 
by accretion from a binary companion. 

The stellar density in the core of a globular cluster is 
sufficiently high that stellar interactions, including star— 
binary interactions and binary—binary interactions, are an 
important dynamical process. Thus clusters contain a 
relatively high fraction of isolated millisecond pulsars, 
whose companions have been unbound in three or four 
body interactions. (See also BINARY STARS IN GLOBULAR 
CLUSTERS.) 


Pulsar timing 

Because of their great rotational inertia, the rotation of 
pulsars is extremely stable. The individual pulses from 
pulsars are the ticks of celestial clocks that are, in the 
best cases, as precise as the best terrestrial atomic time 
standards (long-term frequency stability of about a part 
in 104). Measuring the differential light travel time of the 
pulsar signal as the Earth moves around its orbit allows, for 
example, the position of the pulsar in EcLIPtic coordinates 
to be precisely determined. Similarly, the pulsar signal 
will be periodically advanced or delayed as the pulsar 
travels in a binary orbit. Pulsar timing experiments— 
clock comparison experiments that compare the pulse 
arrival time with a reference atomic time standard—can 
thus be used to make very precise estimates of the orbital 
parameters of binary pulsars. (For further details, see also 
RADIO PULSAR BACKENDS and SOFTWARE: PULSAR SOFTWARE.) 


Tests of general relativity 

The most famous application of pulsar timing techniques 
has been to tests of experimental gravitation. In 
most cases, binary orbits are well approximated as 
Keplerian ellipses. The high velocities (~10~3c) and 
strong gravitational fields in some binary pulsar systems 
cause relativistic deviations from Keplerian motion to 
be significant. Five relativistic corrections have been 
measured: the advance of the angle of periastron of 
the elliptical orbit (as is seen in the orbit of Mercury); 
the combined effect of the transverse Doppler shift and 
the changing gravitational redshift as the eccentric orbit 
carries the pulsars closer and further from its companion; 
two parameters describing the Shapiro time delay of the 
pulsar signal as it propagates through the gravitational 
potential well of the companion; the decay of the binary 
orbit due to gravitational radiation back reaction. The 
measurement of any two of these effects allows the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


amplitude of the other three to be predicted, making 
possible very precise tests of general relativity and 
alternative gravity theories. This was the subject of the 
1993 Nobel Prize in Physics, discussed above. (See also 
GENERAL RELATIVITY TESTS: BINARY PULSARS.) 


Pulsars and nuclear physics 

The average density of a neutron star is comparable with 
the density in heavy atomic nuclei, and the density reaches 
several times this value at the core. Neutron stars are 
thus useful laboratories for studying nuclear materials at 
densities beyond what can be reached in the laboratory. 
One topic of considerable interest is the maximum neutron 
star mass, above which the star becomes unstable to 
collapse to a black hole. Pulsar timing measurements 
allow, in some cases, very accurate stellar mass estimates. 
The most massive known neutron star in a radio pulsar 
binary is 1.44M,, considerably below the ~2Mo limit of a 
typical nuclear equation of state. 

A more direct probe of neutron star interiors comes 
from the study of timing ‘glitches’, that are observed in 
some young pulsars. During a glitch event, the pulsar 
period decreases in a step function, with amplitude from 
a few parts in 10° to a part in 10°. At the same time, the 
spin-down rate increases, and the pulsar recovers over a 
time period of weeks to months to a period close to the pre- 
glitch value. Smaller glitches may be caused by a sudden 
cracking of the crust of the neutron star and its relaxation to 
amore spherical shape; larger glitches are probably due to 
variations in the coupling between the superfluid interior 
of the star and its independently rotating crust. 


Bibliography 
The most recent introductory textbook is 


Lyne A G and Smith F G 1998 Pulsar Astronomy 2nd edn 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Amore advanced, classic textbook, now dated, is 


Manchester R N and Taylor J H 1977 Pulsars (San Francisco, 
CA: Freeman) 


A collection of more advanced review articles on a variety 
of topics have been published in book form as 


Blandford R D, Hewish A, Lyne A G and Mestel L (eds) 
1993 Pulsars as Physics Laboratories (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 


A good introduction to the problem of the pulsar emission 
mechanism is 


Michel F C 1991 Theory of Neutron Star Magnetospheres 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 


An annotated guide to the pulsar literature has been 
compiled: 


Weisberg J M 1993 Am. J. Phys. 61 13 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pulsars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This bibliography and more than two dozen papers on a 
broad range of topics of historical or current interest have 
been collected as 


Weisberg J M (ed) 1994 Radio Pulsars: Selected Reprints 
(College Park: American Association of Physics 
Teachers) 


Stephen E Thorsett 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 7 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Se- 
quence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar 
Upper Main Sequence Stars 


There is a natural astrophysical division of the main se- 
quence which occurs for early F stars. Stars cooler than 
this have deep surface convection zones, radiative cores, 
generate their energy by the proton—proton cycle, rotate 
relatively slowly and any global magnetic field present 
is weak, although strong fields may exist in tangled flux 
tubes, as in sunspots in the Sun. Stars hotter than early F 
have thin or no surface convection zones, convective cores, 
generate their energy by the CNO cycle, rotate relatively 
rapidly and, if they have magnetic fields, those fields are 
strong, global and approximately dipolar. Given this natu- 
ral division this article concerns the stars of the Upper Main 
Sequence, from early F to the O stars. A guide through the 
names of most of the types and classes for these stars is 
provided. 

Mostly, the peculiar stars do not pulsate, and the 
pulsating stars (see STELLAR PULSATION) are not peculiar. 
However, there is a small overlap; the relationship 
between pulsation and peculiarity is discussed, and the 
most widely accepted model, the diffusion hypothesis, is 
introduced and explained, with examples given of its wide 
applicability to many fields of stellar astrophysics. 


Nomenclature for the peculiar stars 

On and near the main sequence for Te > 6600 K there 
is a plethora of spectrally peculiar stars and photometric 
VARIABLE STARS With a bewildering confusion of names. 
Table 1 shows some of the subgroups of chemically 
peculiar (CP) stars as a function of temperature. These 
stars all show spectral peculiarities. Members of the 
magnetic group are known to have global magnetic fields 
which are roughly dipolar with strengths of hundreds to 
tens of thousands of G. (The global magnetic field of the 
Sun is about 0.5 G; the magnetic field in sunspots is about 
1500 G.) The magnetic stars are mostly known as Ap stars 
(for A peculiar), but many of the ‘Ap’ stars are B stars, so 
sometimes those are called Bp stars. Other A stars which 
have peculiar spectra, but not the same peculiarities as the 
Ap stars, and are non-magnetic, are called Am stars (for A 
metallic-lined). 


Table 1. Magnetic and non-magnetic peculiar stars of the upper 
main sequence. 


Test (K) Magnetic stars Non-magnetic stars 
7000-10000 Ap SrCrEu Am, A Boo 

A3 - FO AO -F1 
10000-14000 Ap Si Ap HgMn 

B8-A2 B6-B9 
13000-18000 He-weak Si,SrTi He-weak PGa 

B3-B7 B4-B5 
18000-22000 He-strong 

B1-B2 


Am stars are given three spectral classifications: one 
based on the Balmer lines which gives a good measure 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Sequence Stars 
© Astronomical Society of the Pacific 2000 


of the effective temperature; one based on the Ca II K- 
line which, because of its weakness relative to normal 
stars, gives an earlier spectral type; and one based on the 
metal lines which, because of the enhanced strength of the 
metal lines, gives a later spectral type. ‘Classical Am’ stars 
have K-line and metal line spectral types that differ by 
five or more spectral subclasses; this difference is less than 
five subtypes in ‘marginal Am’ stars (designated ‘Am.’). 
Classical Am stars have H-line types that lie between A3 
and Fl. For hotter stars the Am phenomenon is harder 
to recognize, but continues to AO (Sirius is an Am star), 
so Am stars with H-line spectral types between AO and 
A3 are known as ‘hot Am’ stars. Evolved Am stars with 
luminosity classes IV and III are classified as 6 Del stars, 
or as ¢ Pup stars (see also CLASSIFICATION OF STELLAR SPECTRA). 

To rationalize this situation another system of 
nomenclature was devised in which there were four 
subtypes of chemically peculiar (CP) stars: CP1 = Am 
stars, CP2 = magnetic Ap, Bp stars, CP3 = HgMn stars, 
and CP4 = He-weak B stars. This system is widely used— 
principally, but not exclusively, in Europe—whereas North 
Americans seem to prefer the Ap-Bp terminology. 

There are also the 4 Bootis stars which have H- 
line types between AO and FO, a Ca II K-line type of 
AO, or slightly later, and weak metallic lines, particularly 
Mg II 4481 A. Abundance analyses show marked under- 
abundances of the Fe-peak elements, with lighter elements 
essentially normal. 


The oblique rotator model 
The magnetic field strengths, spectra and luminosities of 
the magnetic CP stars all vary synchronously on time- 
scales of about a day to over a century. These variations 
are well-understood in terms of the oblique rotator model. 
Figure 1 shows the geometry of this model. The line-of- 
sight to the Earth is to the right. The inclination of the 
rotation pole is i, the obliquity of the magnetic axis is B, 
and the variable angle between the magnetic pole and the 
line-of-sight is a. As the star rotates, the magnetic field 
is seen from varying aspect, so its effective strength is 
observed to be variable. Because the stars have anomalous 
abundance patches at their magnetic poles, the spectrum 
also varies with rotation as does the luminosity—both 
of these in phase with the magnetic variations. These 
rotational variables are known as a” CVn stars. 

For a centered dipolar magnetic field the measured 
effective magnetic field strength is: 


115+ 


Ag = = ——— H,(cosi cos 6 + sini sin B cos Qt 
eff 20 a FX( U B u B ) 


where Hp is the polar magnetic field strength, i and f are 
the rotational inclination and magnetic obliquity, jz is the 
limb-darkening coefficient and Q is the rotation frequency. 
It can be seen from this equation that dipolar magnetic 
fields give rise to magnetic variations which are sinusoidal, 
with amplitudes proportional to sini sin 6 and zero points 
proportional to cosi cos §; this immediately constrains the 
values of i and £. 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Se- 
quence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


i 


Figure 1. The geometry of the oblique rotator model. Earth is in 
the direction marked. 


Nomenclature for the variable stars 


There are many kinds of pulsating stars near the upper 
main sequence: 


The 6 Sct stars lie in the instability strip, which ranges 
from A2 to FO on the main sequence and from A3 to F5 
at luminosity class III. They pulsate primarily in low- 
overtone radial and non-radial p modes with periods 
between about 30 min and 6 h, and amplitudes 
ranging from the detection limit of a few mmag up 
to 0.8 mag. Some 6 Sct stars may also pulsate in g 
modes. 

The high-amplitude 6 Scuti stars are known as HADS 
and as dwarf Cepheids if they are POPULATION I STARS. 
Low metallicity, POPULATION 1 subdwarfs with 6 Scuti 
pulsation are called SX Phe stars. 

The rapidly oscillating Ap (roAp) stars are mid- 
A to early-F main sequence Ap SrCrEu (CP2) 
stars which pulsate in high-overtone p modes with 
periods in the range 5-16 min and amplitudes 
<0.016 mag—generally much less. The pulsation 
modes are aligned with the oblique magnetic axis, 
so the geometry of the oblique rotator model in 
figure 1 applies to the pulsation of these stars in 
the similar oblique pulsator model. They mostly 
lie within the 5 Sct instability strip, but a few of 
them are cooler. The driving and mode selection 
mechanisms are not known. Asteroseismic study 
of the pulsation frequencies of these stars provides 
information about their pulsation modes, rotational 
inclination, the inclination of the magnetic field to 
the rotation axis, atmospheric structure, luminosity, 
internal structure and internal magnetic field strength 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Sequence Stars 
© Astronomical Society of the Pacific 2000 


and configuration. Asteroseismically, they are the 
most studied main sequence stars other than the Sun. 
The Herbig Ae and Be stars, known collectively as 
HAeBe stars, are PRE-MAIN SEQUENCE A and B stars 
which show emission lines from strong stellar winds 
and from cocoons of remnant gas from which they 
collapsed. These are massive counterparts of the T 
TAURISTARS. Two Herbig Ae stars are now known to be 
6 Sct stars. 

The y Dor stars are multi-periodic, non-radial g- 
mode main sequence pulsators with periods in 
the range 0.3-3 days, and amplitudes of a few 
hundredths of a magnitude. They are confined to an 
instability strip which partially overlaps the 6 Sct stars 
in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL (HR) DIAGRAM, ranging in 
temperature from 7200-7700 K on the main sequence, 
and 6900-7500 for log g ~ 4. 

The slowly pulsating B (SPB) stars (also known as 
53 Per stars) are multi-periodic, non-radial g-mode 
main sequence pulsators with periods in the range 
0.6-3 days and amplitudes typically less than a few 
hundredths of a magnitude. They lie in a narrow 
instability box in the HR diagram which ranges from 
B2 to B9, thus they do not overlap with the 6 Sct stars. 
The 6 Cephei stars are giant and sub-giant, p-mode 
pulsators with periods in the range 2-7 h. Some 
are singly periodic, some are multi-periodic; they 
pulsate in both radial and non-radial modes of low 
degree, £ < 3,and low overtone, n. Their photometric 
amplitudes are <0.1 mag, except for the star BW Vul. 
Even hotter than the 6 Cep stars there are (possibly) 
pulsating O stars known as a Cygni variables. Their 
periods are typically of the order of 1 to 2 months, 
and their amplitudes are less than a few tenths of 
a magnitude. They are thought to be pulsating in 
g modes, or in so-called ‘strange modes’—modes 
associated with a sound-speed inversion, caused by a 
density inversion, caused by an opacity bump, most 
likely from Fe, H and/or He. 

Amongst the B stars there are emission-line Be stars 
which have periodic variations with periods between 
0.3 and 3 days and amplitudes between 0.01 and 
0.3 mag. These are known as i Eri stars. It is 
contentious as to whether their variability is caused 
by g-mode pulsation or by some rotational effect. 


Non-pulsating variables near the upper main se- 


quence include: 


Eruptive LUMINOUS BLUE VARIABLES (LBVs) called S 
Doradus stars with variations of about 0.2 mag on 
time-scales of weeks to months. If there is thought 
to be periodicity in the variations, then these are 
called a Cyg stars as discussed above. LBVs also 
have eruptions of 0.5-2 mag on a time-scale of years 
to decades, and giant eruptions on the time-scale 
of a millennium, 7 Car being the best known, most 
spectacular example of this. 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Se- 
quence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


@ = WOLF-RAYET STARS which show non-periodic variations 
with amplitudes of the order of 0.02 mag caused by 
variable winds and possibly by rotation. 

e Non-periodic, long-time-scale light variable Oe and 
Be stars known as y Cas stars which are in addition 
to the periodic Be stars (A Eri stars) mentioned 
previously. They range from spectral type O6 to B9 
and through luminosity classes V to III. Their light 
variations are caused by variable winds. 

e a CVn stars which are magnetic stars with spots 
associated with their magnetic poles. These spots are 
seen from varying aspect as the stars rotate, causing 
photometric variability with the rotation period. The 
amplitudes are typically a few hundredths up to 
(rarely) a few tenths of a magnitude. 


In general, there is an exclusion between the CP stars 
and the pulsating 6 Sct stars. But there are some CP stars 
that do pulsate! The diffusion hypothesis is the favored 
explanation for this. It also has important implications in 
many other fields of stellar astrophysics. 


The diffusion hypothesis 

There is no universally accepted model that explains all 
of the observed characteristics of the CP stars. Models 
involving anomalous atmospheres, nucleosynthesis and 
dredging, surface spallation, magnetic accretion, planetes- 
imal impacts, binary mass transfer and element separation 
(diffusion) have all been tried with varying success. The 
most successful model, the diffusion hypothesis, is the work- 
ing model of choice for the majority of investigators. 

The idea is simple in principle: if there are layers 
in a star which are stable against turbulent mixing, then 
elements heavier than H will tend to sink gravitationally, 
unless they have many absorption lines near the local 
flux maximum, in which case the asymmetry in the 
flux arising from the temperature gradient will mean 
that ions absorb more radiation from below than above, 
hence are radiatively driven towards the surface. These 
two competing effects can cause some elements to sink 
and other to rise, thus producing peculiar atmospheric 
abundances. 

In the CP stars the diffusion hypothesis accounts for: 


e Overabundances of the Fe peak, rare earth and 
lanthanide elements: these elements, which are 
principally in their neutral and first-ionized states, 
have many absorption lines near the flux maximum, 
hence they are driven upwards to the surface layer. 

e Underabundances of Ca, Sc, C, He in Am stars: the 
principal atmospheric ionization states of Ca and 
Sc are Ca III and Sc IV which leave each of these 
elements, numbers 20 and 21, with 18 electrons so 
that they are in closed electronic shell configurations 
similar to Ar. With tightly bound electrons the 
absorption lines have high excitation potentials, 
hence lie in the UV where there is insufficient flux to 
levitate these ions. Thus they sink and are deficient. 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Sequence Stars 
© Astronomical Society of the Pacific 2000 


Isotopic ratios of Hg in HgMn stars: there are 
seven observable isotopes of Hg in the HgMn stars— 
196, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202 and 204—which show 
drastically different abundances from the terrestrial 
mixture, and which show large variation from star 
to star. Radiative levitation preferentially lifts the 
less abundant isotopes to the surface. Because their 
lines are less saturated, they absorb more flux per 
ion than the more abundant isotopes, and thus the 
isotopic ratios are altered. This same effect is seen in 
the He? /He? ratio embedded in Moon rocks from the 
solar wind. He? is preferentially driven off the Sun 
in the solar wind because its lines are less saturated 
than the more abundant He’. 

Ages of CP stars: calculations indicate that diffusion 
can produce observable anomalies in 10° years, the 
age of the youngest Am stars. 

Disappearance of anomalies in RED GIANTS with CP 
precursors: all models of CP stars can account for this, 
because it is known that the abundance anomalies 
must be confined to a thin atmospheric layer. One 
strong demonstration of this is the overabundance 
of some rare earths and lanthanides in Ap stars by 
a factor of 104-10°. More than one in a hundred 
thousand stars is a member of this group. Hence, 
if the abundance anomalies were global, the Ap 
stars would contain almost all the rare earths and 
lanthanides in the universe, a clear absurdity. In all 
models, the growing depth of the surface convection 
layer with age, as stars move to the right in the HR 
diagram towards the zone of completely convective 
stars, leads to mixing away of the surface anomalies. 
Slow rotation in Am and Ap stars: A-type stars may 
show equatorial rotational velocities up to veg sini © 
250-300 km s~!, whereas Am stars have Veq Sind < 
125 km s7! and Ap stars have veq sini < 100 kms“, 
although for the latter vegsini < 10 km s-! is not 
unusual. Rotation generates meridional circulation 
currents which flow faster with higher veg sini. At 
some value of veg sini they become turbulent; that 
value is calculated to be about 50-100 km s7!, in 
good agreement with the observations. The resultant 
turbulent mixing inhibits diffusion. 

Binary nature of Am stars: nearly 100% of Am stars 
are BINARY STARS With 1 < Poritaa < 10 days. Tidal 
synchronism locks the rotational and orbital periods 
and slows the rotation. A 2-Ro star rotating with a 
period of 1 day has veg sini ~ 100 km s-'. Binary 
stars with Poita < 1 day rotate too quickly; those 
with Porbita > 10 days do not become rotationally 
synchronized, thus tending to rotate too quickly. 
Magnetic braking of Ap stars: The very low rotational 
velocities of the Ap stars are considered to be the 
result of magnetic braking. 

Concentration of elements in spots near the magnetic 
poles in Ap stars: Ap stars have ‘spots’ or ‘rings’ 
of overabundant elements near their magnetic poles. 
Diffusion is thought to concentrate certain elements 


3 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Se- 
quence Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in these regions, perhaps because quadrupole 
magnetic field components may produce magnetic 
loops arranged in rings which halt radiative 
levitation and trap rising elements. 

e  Near-exclusion of CP and 6 Sct stars: about 30% of 
the stars in the lower instability strip are 6 Sct stars. 
Most of the non-pulsating stars in this part of the 
instability strip are Am and Ap stars. Only a few Am 
and Ap stars pulsate, and it is a strength of diffusion 
theory that it can explain this: in stable A- and early F- 
star atmospheres helium settles gravitationally. This 
shuts off the «-mechanism operating in the He II 
ionization zone which drives 6 Sct pulsation. 


There are problems for the diffusion hypothesis in CP 
stars: 


e Diffusion is at best semi-quantitative. Calculated 
diffusion velocities are very low—only 10-4 to 
1cms~!. Hence stars must be stable to turbulence 
at that level in the diffusive layers. 

e  Pulsation in peculiar stars which do pulsate must be 
laminar; i.e. it must not mix away the anomalies. Ina 
few cases this demands no turbulence with pulsation 
velocities of the order of 10 km s~!. 

e The odd-even effect in abundances is apparent in Ap 
and Am stars. Opponents of the diffusion hypothesis 
say this argues for a partial role for nucleosynthesis. 
Proponents say diffusion does not erase completely 
the initial abundance patterns. 


Thus, while the diffusion hypothesis is the most 
popular working model for the CP stars, it must be 
remembered that it has some weaknesses which are yet 
to be dealt with. That diffusion acts in CP stars is 
reasonably accepted; whether it is sufficient to explain 
all the peculiarities, or whether other mechanisms are 
working as well is still to be determined. 

In other stars diffusion can also be important: 


@ WHITE DWARF STARS (see also DB PULSATING STARS) are 
layered by gravitational settling. 

e The gravitational settling of He is an important part 
of the ‘Standard Solar Model’ changing the internal 
solar temperature gradient enough to decrease the 
calculated neutrino production rate by 7%. Helium 
and some metal settling have also been included in 
calculations of Li and Be mixing in the Sun. 

e Gravitational settling of He in older stars converts 
gravitational potential energy to thermal energy, 
increasing core temperatures and nuclear reaction 
rates, hence shortening stellar lifetimes. This could 
possibly reduce GLOBULAR CLUSTER ages by 1-4 Gyr, 
a significant amount in the on-going cosmological 
conflict of low Hubble time, Hy’ and high stellar 
age from globular cluster evolutionary tracks. 

e Gravitational settling also partially accounts for the 
Li-gap in F stars. 


Pulsating and Chemically Peculiar Upper Main Sequence Stars 
© Astronomical Society of the Pacific 2000 


Thus the CP stars of the upper main sequence are the 
best laboratory in which to test diffusion theory which has 
many applications is stellar astronomy. The pulsating stars 
are being mined for rich asteroseismic information about 
stellar structure, and the small group of stars that are both 
peculiar and pulsate are providing particularly stringent 
tests of theory, plus a unique look at the interaction of 
stellar pulsation and strong magnetic fields. 


Bibliography 
For an introduction to the CP stars see 


Wolff 1983 The A-type stars: problems and perspectives 
(Monograph series on nonthermal phenomena in 
stellar atmospheres) NASA 463 Special Publication 


For more recent discussions see 


Dworetsky M M, Castelli F and Faraggiania R (eds) 1993 
Peculiar Versus Normal Phenomena in A-type and Related 
Stars (ASP Conf. Ser. 44) (San Fransico: Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific) 


Asteroseismology is an exciting, rapidly developing field: 
see 


Deubner F, Christensen-Dalsgaard J and Kurtz D W (eds) 
1998 New Eyes to See Inside the Sun and Stars: Pushing 
the Limits of Helio- and Asteroseismology with New 
Observations from Earth and Space (Proc. [AU Symp. 185) 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


For a very useful introduction to the many kinds of 
variable stars see 


Sterken C and Jaschek C 1996 The Light Curves of Variable 
Stars (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


D W kurtz 


Puppis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Puppis 


(the Poop or Stern; abbrev. Pup, gen. Puppis; area 
673 sq. deg.) A southern constellation which lies between 
Canis Major and Vela, and culminates at midnight in early 
January. It was introduced by the French astronomer 
Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), who charted the southern 
sky in 1751-2, from stars that formed part of the ancient 
constellation of Argo Navis (the Ship), which had been 
included by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

The brightest stars in Puppis are ¢ Puppis (Naos), 
magnitude 2.2, 7 Puppis, magnitude 2.7, and t Puppis, 
magnitude 2.9. There are seven other stars brighter than 
fourth magnitude, including o Puppis, a double star with 
orange (K5) and yellow (G5) components, magnitudes 
3.3 and 8.6, separation 22.3”, the former of which has 
an unseen companion which revolves around it in about 
258 days. An interesting binary star is k Puppis (HR 
2948-2949), which has two bluish-white (B5) components, 
magnitudes 4.5 and 4.7, separation 9.9”. Other interesting 
stars include L” Puppis, a semiregular variable (range 2.6- 
6.2, period about 140 days), and V Puppis, an eclipsing 
binary (range 4.44.9, period 1.45 days). 

The Milky Way passes through Puppis and the 
constellation contains a number of open clusters, the 
brightest of which are M46 (NGC 2437), which has more 
than 150 stars fainter than eighth magnitude, M47 (NGC 
2422), which has a few dozen stars, the brightest of 
magnitude 5.7, M93 (NGC 2447), which consists of about 
80 stars fainter than eighth magnitude, and NGC 2477, 
which has about 300 stars fainter than ninth magnitude. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Purcell, Edward Mills (1912-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Purcell, Edward Mills (1912-) 


Physicist, born in Taylorville, IL, Nobel prizewinner (with 
Bloch 1952) for his studies of the nuclear magnetic moment 
of helium. With H I Ewen in 1951, he formed one of the 
three groups that independently detected cosmic 21 cm 
radiation from the spin transition of the electron in neutral 
hydrogen, predicted by H VAN DE HULST. The detection was 
soon confirmed in the Netherlands by C A Muller and Joorr 
and in Australia by w CHRISTIANSEN and J V Hindman. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Purple Mountain Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Purple Mountain Observatory 


The Purple Mountain Observatory was built in 1934. It is 
situated on the Purple mountain in the eastern suburb of 
Nanjing, China. 

At present itis engaged in the research of astrophysics, 
celestial mechanics, radio astronomy, space astronomy 
and practical astronomy. The programs consist of solar 
physics, stellar physics, planetary science, high-energy 
astrophysics, orbital theory of artificial satellites, etc. 

The observatory has a staff of about 300 people, and 
has three observing stations outside Nanjing. A 13.7 m 
millimeter wave telescope was set up at the Qinghai 
station. 

For further information see 
http://www.pmo.ac.cn/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pushchino Radio Astronomy Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pushchino Radio Astronomy 
Observatory 


The Pushchino Radio Astronomy Observatory is 120 km 
south of Moscow. The staff consists of 45 astronomers 
and 42 engineers, supported by the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Ministry of Sciences and Russian Foundation for 
Basic Research. 

The most sensitive meter-wavelength radiotelescopes 
BSA and DKR-1000, as well as the 22 m dish of the 
Observatory are used for studies of galaxies, pulsars, 
interstellar and interplanetary plasma. 

Discoveries and studies of Geminga’s and Magnetar’s 
(SGR1900+14) pulse radio emission are among the 
achivements of the last two years. 

For further information see 
http://www.prao.psn.ru. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pythagoras of Samos (c. 580-c. 500 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pythagoras of Samos (c. 580-c. 500 
BC) 


Mathematician, born in Samos, Ionia, taught by Thales 
and Anaximander on Miletus, founded a philosophical 
and religious school in Croton (in southern Italy) whose 
members, as well as having various beliefs that we would 
recognize as religious, believed that at its deepest level, 
reality is mathematical in nature. Pythagoras observed 
that vibrating strings produce harmonious tones when the 
ratios of the lengths of the strings are whole numbers, 
and proved Pythagoras’s theorem, and other geometrical 
theorems. In astronomy Pythagoras taught that the Earth 
was a sphere at the centre of the universe, and is credited 
as the first to realize that Venus as an evening star 
(Hesperus) was the same planet as Venus as a morning 
star (Phosphorus). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Pyxis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pyxis 


(the Compass; abbrev. Pyx, gen. Pyxidis; area 221 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Puppis and 
Antlia, and culminates at midnight in early February. It 
was introduced as Pyxis Nautica (the Mariner’s Compass) 
by the French astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), 
who charted the southern sky in 1751-2, from stars that 
formed the mast of the ancient constellation of Argo Navis 
(the Ship), but its name fell into disuse until resurrected in 
its shortened form by the American astronomer Benjamin 
A Gould (1824-96) in 1879. The shortened form was 
adopted by the IAU in 1922. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Pyxis are a Pyxidis, magnitude 3.7, B Pyxidis, 
magnitude 4.0, and y Pyxidis, also magnitude 4.0. 
Interesting objects include T Pyxidis, a recurrent nova 
(range 7.0-15.8), which is normally about fourteenth 
magnitude but flared up to seventh to eighth magnitude 
in 1890, 1902, 1920, 1944 and 1966-7, and NGC 2818, 
an open cluster of about 40 stars fainter than eleventh 
magnitude which contains a twelfth-magnitude planetary 
nebula (PK261 + 08.1). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Qadi Zada, al’Rumi (1364-1436) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Qadi Zada, al’Rumi (1364-1436) 


Born in Bursa, Turkey, professor of mathematics at 
Samarkand and taught ULUGH BEG. Became director of the 
Samarkand Observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Quadrantids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quadrantids 


A meteor shower that takes place in early January. It is 
one of the most prolific, with a peak zenithal hourly rate 
of 120 in a short, sharp maximum of about 12 hours. The 
brightest meteors show a blue or yellow-green tinge. The 
radiant lies in the constellation Bodtes, near its border 
with Hercules. The shower is named after the obsolete 
constellation Quadrans Muralis (the Mural Quadrant) 
which used to occupy this region. Perturbations of the 
meteor stream by Jupiter cause it to oscillate up and down 
through the ecliptic; the current phase of Quadrantid 
activity began in the 1700s and will last until the 2200s. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quadrature ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quadrature 


The position of a planet or the Moon when the angle 
it makes with the Sun (the difference between the two 
bodies’ celestial longitudes) is 90°. 


See: elongation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Quantum Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quantum Gravity 


GENERAL RELATIVITY and QUANTUM MECHANICS are among the 
greatest intellectual achievements of the twentieth century. 
Quantum gravity is the theory that is being sought to unify 
them. 

Each of the two theories has profoundly altered our 
understanding of the physical world. Furthermore, each 
has been successful in describing the physical phenomena 
in its own domain to an astonishing degree of accuracy. 
And yet they offer strikingly different pictures of physical 
reality. The world of general relativity is geometric, 
marked by precision and certainty. The world of quantum 
mechanics is fuzzy, marked by chance and uncertainty. 
Physicists can happily maintain a schizophrenic attitude 
and switch between the two because the natural domains 
of the two theories are distinct: while general relativity 
governs astrophysical and cosmological phenomena, 
quantum mechanics governs atomic and subatomic ones. 
But there do exist situations which straddle the two, 
in particular near the BIG BANG and the final stages of 
gravitational collapse. More importantly, everything 
in our past experience with physics tells us that such 
strikingly different descriptions of nature cannot both be 
fundamental. Since neither encompasses the other, they 
must both be special cases of a single, grander theory. 

The search for this grander theory has therefore 
become a holy grail of theoretical physics. Indeed, some 
of the most distinguished personalities of this century 
have devoted many years of work to it. These include 
Peter Bergmann, Paul Dirac, Richard Feynman, Stephen 
Hawking, Roger Penrose, John Wheeler and Edward 
Witten, to mention just a few. The search for the theory 
began in the 1930s in the writings of Rosenfeld. However, 
the area remained dormant till the late 1950s. From then 
on, there has been a steady increase in activity. Over the 
last 10 years, this activity has intensified many fold. In 
particular, striking advances have occurred within two 
approaches. While the final theory still eludes us, many 
intriguing and suggestive results have been obtained 
which have provided glimpses of the desired theory. 
Therefore, there is now a heightened sense of optimism, 
enthusiasm and rapid progress in the field. 

Why has the problem been so difficult? The 
most important obstacle has been the complete lack of 
experimental data with direct bearing on quantum gravity. 
The situation is thus very different from the evolution of 
quantum mechanics where the theory could be guided 
at critical junctures by masses of accumulated data from 
spectroscopy, radioactivity and solid state physics. But 
there also are, in addition, deep conceptual difficulties. 
Einstein taught us that gravity is a manifestation of 
curvature of sPAcE-TIME. Unlike other forces of nature, 
gravity is geometry. A quantum theory of gravity is thus 
simultaneously a quantum theory of space-time structure. 
Therefore, in quantum gravity, geometry itself has to 
be subject to uncertainties, probabilities and fuzziness. 
Suddenly, the familiar arena of physics is no more and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a host of fundamental questions arise. What happens 
to causality? To geodesics along which particles and 
lights rays travel? To differential equations obeyed by the 
electromagnetic waves? In short, how does one do physics 
without the familiar space and time? 


Key issues 

Although these difficulties seem enormous, we also have 
a number of hints. The first two come from the intrinsic 
limitations of the two theories themselves. 

In the mid-1960s, Penrose, Hawking and others 
showed that Einstein’s equations of general relativity 
themselves signal the limitation of the theory. More 
precisely, even if one begins with physically reasonable 
initial conditions, the resulting solutions to Einstein’s 
equations often lead to singularities, regions in space- 
time where the gravitational field and other physical 
quantities become infinite. The theory predicts ‘non- 
sense’. This is typically what happens when a theory 
is pushed beyond its domain of applicability. In the 
case under consideration, as the curvature of space- 
time increases, quantum effects which are ignored in the 
equations of general relativity are expected to become 
more and more important and make physical quantities 
finite. The challenge is to show that this does indeed 
happen. 

Quantum field theory—the theory that results by 
unifying quantum mechanics with principles of SPECIAL 
RELATIVITY—also has its own limitations. Calculations of 
physical quantities often lead to infinities. These arise 
because one has to allow virtual processes of arbitrarily 
high energies, or equivalently, because the calculations 
of physical quantities involve integration over arbitrarily 
small distances. Thus, their origin can be traced back 
to the assumption that the continuum picture holds at 
arbitrarily small scales. From the very early days, it was 
conjectured by Planck, Heisenberg and others that the 
continuum hypothesis probably fails in the real world 
due to quantum gravity effects. This is because with 
the three fundamental constants of nature that quantum 
gravity would have—Newton’s gravitational constant G, 
speed of light c and the Planck constant f—one can 
construct a unique combination of length, p = //Gh/c3 
whose numerical value is approximately 10-°° cm. This 
was noted by Planck in his seminal paper on quantum 
mechanics and £p is now called the Planck length. The 
existence of a natural scale in a theory signals a transition; 
physics below that scale is generally quite different from 
that above the scale. It is widely believed that the familiar 
picture of space-time breaks down below Planck length. 
The quantum geometry effects become important. If they 
are ignored and the classical continuum approximation 
is pushed beyond the domain of its validity, one obtains 
infinities, i.e. non-sense. A satisfactory quantum gravity 
theory of gravity should be free of such infinities. 

The clues provided by these limitations of the 
two theories have been valuable because they provide 
goals and general directions in the search of quantum 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quantum Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


gravity. More concrete hints came from rather unexpected 
quarters in the early 1970s, namely the physics of BLACK 
HOLES. Through ingenious thought experiments, Jacob 
Bekenstein first pointed out that black holes can be 
assigned thermodynamic properties. This idea became 
more concrete in the work of James Bardeen, Brandon 
Carter and Stephen Hawking. They introduced a notion 
of ‘surface gravity’ « of black holes, which is analogous 
to g on the surface of the Earth, and showed that within 
classical general relativity, black holes in equilibrium 
are subject to laws which are completely parallel to the 
standard laws of thermodynamics; a multiple of « plays 
the role of temperature and a related multiple of the area 
A of the black hole horizon plays the role of entropy (see 
table). 


Black hole mechanics Thermodynamics 
k constant T is constant 
A SE = TSS 
8G ~ 
d5A>0 6S > 0 


However, within classical general relativity this could 
only be a mathematical analogy because, since black 
holes can only absorb energy, they must have zero 
physical temperature. This view changed dramatically 
with Hawking’s discovery that, if quantum effects are 
included, black holes do in fact radiate due to the tunneling 
phenomenon and, furthermore, they do so exactly as if 
they were black bodies at temperature T,, = hk /2mc. 
The form of the first law of black hole mechanics then 
suggested that black holes carry an entropy Spr = 
Ac?/4Gh = A/€3. Note that, as h goes to zero, Typ, tends to 
zero and Sp, tends to infinity as expected within classical 
general relativity. More importantly, subsequent and more 
detailed thought experiments by William Unruh, Robert 
Wald and others confirmed the precise expressions of Tin 
and Sbh- 

These considerations led to concrete questions for 
potential quantum theories of gravity because Hawking’s 
calculations included quantum matter but treated gravity 
classically. Indeed, the considerations outlined above 
contain an ad hoc mixture of classical and semiclassical 
ideas, reminiscent of the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom. 
However, because the final picture seems compelling and 
naturally brings together the three pillars of fundamental 
physics—general relativity, quantum mechanics and 
statistical mechanics—the general consensus is that the 
results must continue to hold for large black holes also 
in full quantum gravity. The challenge is to account for 
black hole thermodynamics from first principles. 


Recent developments 

The problem of quantum gravity has been approached 
from several directions. For examples, methods from 
quantum field theory which have been highly successful 
in the description of other forces of nature were adapted to 
general relativity by Feynman, Bryce De Witt and others. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Unfortunately, the resulting theory has uncontrollable 
infinities. To cure these, theories with SUPERSYMMETRY—a 
new type of symmetry between bosons and fermions— 
were extended to include gravity. While some of the 
infinities were tamed by this process unfortunately, others 
continued to persist. Another avenue, developed by 
Hawking, James Hartle, Garry Gibbons and others, 
extends methods of quantum field theory in which 
the basic Green functions are first constructed in a 
four dimensional Euclidean space and the results are 
then used to calculate physical quantities of interest in 
the real, Lorentzian world. This approach was used 
especially in the cosmological context and also provided 
a unified description of black hole thermodynamics in the 
semiclassical regime. A completely new line of attack 
was adopted by Penrose and collaborators who developed 
twistor theory. Here, a four-dimensional complex space 
is regarded as fundamental and space-time emerges as a 
secondary, derived concept. 

While these and other approaches have provided a 
wealth of insights, they are yet to address the key questions 
discussed above in a concrete fashion. However, over 
the past decade, two approaches have been successful in 
addressing some of these questions and have provided 
concrete directions to address the remaining ones. I will 
conclude with a brief summary of this work. 

The first approach is sTRING THEORY. Here, the basic 
objects are extended, rather than point-like. Historically, 
point particles were first replaced by strings. However, 
recent work has indicated that not only does one have to 
include higher dimensional objects—membranes—but, in 
a certain well-defined sense, all these objects are equally 
important. The fundamental theory is formulated in nine 
space dimensions. The three-dimensional space of our 
everyday experience arises because six of the dimensions 
are tiny and manifest themselves only at extremely small 
distances or in processes involving very high energies. 

At present, string theory is still formulated on a 
background space-time geometry and the methods used 
are natural extensions of those developed in quantum 
field theory. However, because of the use of extended 
objects, there are fundamental differences from local 
quantum field theories such as supergravity. In particular, 
the so-called ‘ultraviolet’ infinities which arise in local 
field theories because of the integration over arbitrarily 
high energies are all absent. Even though the theory 
is not entirely free of divergences, taming of these 
ultraviolet infinities is a major triumph. Furthermore, 
there are situations in which the theory has been able to 
demonstrate how singularities of general relativity could 
be cured. More precisely, there exist space-times which 
are singular in general relativity but non-singular when 
embedded in string theory. In these situations, none of 
the physical quantities diverge in the ‘fundamental theory’ 
and infinities of general relativity can be seen as artifacts 
of the approximations in which one ignores the deeper 
structure. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quantum Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Perhaps the most exciting contribution of string 
theory to the basic issues of quantum gravity lies in the 
domain of black hole thermodynamics. Specifically, for 
large black holes with electric charge near the maximum 
allowed value, there is a procedure to count the number 
of string microstates that can constitute the black hole. 
The logarithm of this number turns out to give precisely 
the Hawking—Bekenstein entropy of the black hole. 
Furthermore, when interactions between string states are 
included, one obtains the Hawking spectrum of black hole 
radiation. 

The second approach that is addressing the key 
questions discussed above is based on a QUANTUM THEORY 
of geometry. Here, one takes the physical role of geometry 
as fundamental and begins by probing its quantum 
nature. In contrast to string theory, one works with 
three-dimensional space and the approach is manifestly 
background independent. Thus, to begin with, there is 
no classical space-time whatsoever; everything including 
geometry is treated quantum mechanically. A systematic 
mathematical and conceptual framework is introduced to 
substitute the standard one used in quantum theories of 
other forces. 

Detailed analysis shows that the fundamental 
excitations of geometry are one-dimensional, rather like 
a polymer. The fabric of your shirt, for example, is woven 
by one-dimensional threads. However, for all practical 
purposes, the shirt appears to be a two-dimensional 
continuum. Similarly, the three-dimensional continuum 
of our everyday experience is ‘woven’ by the ‘quantum 
threads’ of geometry. More generally, smooth classical 
geometries arise from coarse graining of semiclassical, 
‘weave states’. In extreme circumstances, like those near 
the Big Bang and black hole singularities, the continuum 
picture breaks down and one must describe physics 
directly in terms of the fundamental one-dimensional 
excitations. Furthermore, in this theory, geometrical 
quantities such as lengths, areas and volumes are all 
quantized, i.e. can take on only discrete values. In the 
case of area, all of these permissible values are known 
explicitly. As one would expect, the elementary quanta are 
of the order of ¢2. But for large areas, the allowed discrete 
values crowd exponentially so that the continuum limit is 
reached very rapidly. 

The questions raised by black hole thermodynamics 
have also been addressed in this approach. The 
microstates underlying a large black hole are now 
attributed to the quantum excitations of geometry itself. 
For non-rotating black holes, it is known that these 
microstates can account for the Hawking—Bekenstein 
entropy. (The restriction to the non-rotating case is 
only for technical simplicity and is not regarded as a 
fundamental limitation.) The Hawking process now 
corresponds to physical processes in which the quanta 
of area are converted to quanta of matter; the black hole 
shrinks as it emits radiation. Furthermore, somewhat 
surprisingly, the Hawking evaporation of large black holes 
provides a check on the details of predictions of quantum 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


geometry. Specifically, the crowding of the eigenvalues 
found in the theory is essential for reproducing from first 
principles the black body spectrum found by Hawking 
using semiclassical methods. 

Because of these successes, research in string theory 
and quantum geometry has intensified in recent years. 
(According to a survey by Carlo Rovelli, the number 
of quantum gravity publications in string theory is 
approximately three times that in the approach based 
on quantum geometry.) The strengths of the two 
approaches are complementary. In the analysis of black 
hole thermodynamics, for example, detailed calculations 
in string theory refer to black holes which are not of direct 
interest to astrophysics. Furthermore, by and large these 
calculations are performed in flat space and the relation 
of the microscopic degrees of freedom to the curved 
geometry of a black hole space-time is yet to become clear. 
The quantum geometry treatment encompasses black 
holes which are of interest to astrophysics and the relation 
to curved geometry is clear. However, in a certain well- 
defined sense, the quantum geometry treatment provides 
only an ‘effective description’ of a large black hole while 
the stringy description is ‘fundamental’ within that theory. 
In particular, string theory is much closer to addressing the 
issue of the final stages of black hole evaporation and the 
related ‘information loss paradox’. 

More generally, string theory has a natural built-in 
principle to specify the fundamental matter fields and 
their couplings. Over the last year, an interesting set of 
conjectures have emerged, pioneered by Juan Maldecena, 
which have allowed considerable flexibility in the choice 
of background space-times on which the theory is defined. 
But to bea satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, it would 
have to get rid of background dependence altogether. 
The approach based on quantum geometry is free of 
this problem. However, like general relativity, it has 
no principle to determine matter couplings. In the last 
two years, developments pioneered by Thomas Thiemann 
have led to considerable progress in formulating a 
quantum theory based on matter couplings taken from 
the standard model of particle physics. However, the 
issue of satisfactory quantum dynamics is yet to be settled. 
The two approaches seem to be complementary in many 
ways. Much progress would occur if in the coming years 
their strengths can be combined to overcome their present 
limitations. 


Bibliography 

Ashtekar A and Stachel J 1991 Conceptual Problems of 
Quantum Gravity (New York: Birkhauser) 

Schwarz J Web-page on string theory 
http://theory.caltech.edu/people/jhs/strings/ 
index.html 


Abhay Ashtekar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quantum Mechanics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quantum Mechanics 


A development of quantum theory that was initiated in 
the 1920s by Werner Heisenberg (1901-76) and Erwin 
Schrédinger (1887-1961). The theory drew on a proposal 
made in 1925 Prince Louis de Broglie (1892-1987), that 
particles have wavelike properties (the wave—particle 
duality) and that an electron, for example, could in some 
respects be regarded as a wave with a wavelength that 
depended on its momentum. In this new formulation, the 
permitted energy levels in the Bohr theory of the hydrogen 
atom corresponded to electron orbits into which integral 
numbers of electron wavelengths could fit. For example, 
the lowest level (the lowest energy level of the Bohr atom) 
contains exactly one wavelength, the second level two, 
and so on. Thus, the discrete orbits and energy states 
of the atom followed as direct consequences of the wave 
properties of electrons. 

Schrédinger developed a formulation of quantum 
mechanics, known as wave mechanics, in which an 
orbiting electron is treated as a standing wave, represented 
by a ‘wavefunction’, which is described by the Schrédinger 
wave equation (an equivalent formulation, based on 
matrices, was developed by Heisenberg). In accordance 
with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which implies 
that it is not possible to determine, simultaneously, the 
position and velocity of an electron, the wavefunction 
gives only the probability that an electron is in a particular 
state, or ata particular point ata particular time. Therefore, 
Bohr’s precise orbits are replaced by a set of more fuzzy 
‘orbitals’ within which electrons of a particular energy will 
lie. 

The quantum state of an electron (or other subatomic 
particle) is defined by a set of numbers (quantum 
numbers) that specify quantities such as energy, angular 
momentum and spin and which are associated with 
solutions to the wave equation. Each energy level 
within an atom corresponds to a unique set of quantum 
numbers and various selection rules determine which 
transitions between levels, and hence which spectral lines, 
are permitted. 


See also: atom, emission spectrum, uncertainty principle, 
Pauli exclusion principle, quantum theory, wave-—particle 
duality. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quantum Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quantum Theory 


A theory based on the premise that, on the microscopic 
scale, physical quantities have discrete, rather than a 
continuous range of, values. The theory was devised 
in the early part of the twentieth century to account 
for certain phenomena that could not be explained by 
classical physics. In 1900, the German physicist, Max 
Planck (1858-1947), was able precisely to describe the 
previously unexplained distribution of energy radiated 
by a black body by proposing that light, and other forms 
of electromagnetic radiation, exist in the form of discrete 
‘packets’ of energy called quanta (singular: ‘quantum’). 
The energy (£) of a quantum of electromagnetic radiation 
is directly proportional to the frequency (f) of the radiation 
and inversely proportional to its wavelength (A); thus, 
E = hf = hc/d, where h is a constant of proportionality, 
called Planck’s constant (or the Planck constant), and c 
denotes the speed of light. The value of the Planck constant 
is 6.63 x 10“ Js. 

In 1905, Albert Einstein (1879-1955) used the 
concept of quanta to explain the photoelectric effect, 
a phenomenon whereby certain substances will emit 
electrons when illuminated by light of a sufficiently short 
wavelength. Einstein showed that, because a certain 
minimum amount of energy has to be imparted to an 
electron in order for it to be ejected, the emission of 
electrons would only take place if the incoming light 
consisted of quanta (or ‘photons’) with energies above 
that minimum and, therefore, wavelengths shorter than 
a particular value. 

In 1913, Danish physicist Neils Bohr (1885-1962) 
extended the quantum hypothesis to matter as well as 
radiation by proposing that electrons in atoms could have 
only certain particular values of energy, values that were 
simple multiples of the Planck constant. While an electron 
was in one of the permitted energy states it could remain in 
orbit around the atomic nucleus without radiating energy 
(this was in marked contrast to classical theory, according 
to which an orbiting electron would radiate continuously, 
lose energy and spiral in towards the nucleus). If an 
electron were to drop down to a lower level, it would 
radiate a photon with a particular energy (and hence 
a particular wavelength) equal to the energy difference 
between the two permitted levels. Bohr’s theory gave 
very good agreement with the observed wavelengths of 
the various lines in the spectrum of the element hydrogen. 
Further development of the theory led to the suggestion 
that the angular momenta of orbiting electrons were 
restricted to integer multiples of h/2z and to the idea that 
the electron itself had an intrinsic spin (as if it were a tiny 
sphere rotating around its axis) of magnitude h/42. The 
precise quantum state of an electron (or other subatomic 
particle) is defined by a set of numbers (quantum numbers) 
that specify quantities such as energy, angular momentum 
and spin. 

A more comprehensive, and deeper, version of 
the theory, called quantum mechanics, was developed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


during the 1920s. Nowadays, quantum theory embraces 
practically all aspects of microscopic physics. 


See also: angular momentum, atom, black-body radia- 
tion, electron, electromagnetic radiation, uncertainty prin- 
ciple, Pauli exclusion principle, photon, quantum mechan- 
ics, wave-particle duality. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quark 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quark 


A fundamental particle that joins with others to form 
hadrons (baryons and mesons). 

There are six varieties, or ‘flavors’, of quark, each of 
which has an equivalent antiparticle. The six flavors, in 
order of increasing mass, are called up, down, strange, 
charm, bottom, and top. Quarks possess fractional charge 
(i.e. they carry an electrical charge that is a simple fraction 
of the charge on the electron) and have half-integer values 
of spin. For example, an up quark (symbol ‘u’) carries a 
charge of +4 and an anti-up (i), —3; a down quark (d) 
carries a charge of —} and an anti-down (d), +}. Quarks 
join together in clusters of three to form baryons, such 
as protons and neutrons, and as quark—antiquark pairs 
to form mesons. For example, a proton consists of two 

1 


ups and a down (net charge: +3 + 5 — 3 = +1) and an 


antiproton of two anti-ups and an anti-down (net charge: 
2 


—} — $+ 4% = —1); a neutron consists of two downs and 
an up (net charge —} — } + = = 0), and so on. A neutral 
pion (pi-meson) consists of an up and an anti-up (ud) ora 
down and an anti-down (dd), a positive pion of an up and 
an anti-down (ud), and so on. Of the six flavors of quark, 
only the up and down quarks are needed to make the 
nucleons (the building blocks of atomic nuclei) and pions, 
the other varieties being required to construct some of the 
many short-lived particles that are found among cosmic 
rays and created in high-energy particle accelerators. 

Six leptons are associated with the six quarks in 
three families, or ‘generations’: the electron and electron- 
neutrino with the up and down quarks (first generation); 
the muon and muon-neutrino with the charm and strange 
quarks (second generation); and the tau and tau-neutrino 
with the top and bottom quarks (third generation). 

In addition to electrical charge, quarks possess 
another property, called ‘color’, which in some respects 
is analogous to electrical charge. There are three types 
of color (called red, blue, and yellow by analogy with 
the primary colors), each of which can be positive or 
negative. As with electrical charge, positive and negative 
colors attract; but, in addition, different colors attract and 
like colors repel. In a hadron (a particle that consists 
of quarks), the net color has to be neutral (or ‘white’). 
This can be achieved either by combining three different 
colored quarks to make a baryon, or by linking a quark 
with an antiquark (in which case the opposite color charges 
neutralize each other) to form a meson. The interaction 
between the color charges, which is the believed to be the 
underlying source of the strong nuclear force, is described 
by a theory called quantum chromodynamics. The strong 
(color) force is conveyed between bound quarks by force- 
carrying particles called gluons and is so powerful that, at 
least to the limits of present-day experiments, individual 
quarks cannot be ejected from within hadrons. 

In the present-day universe, quarks exist only inside 
hadrons, not as free particles. However, during the very 
high-energy phase of the very early universe (during the 
first 10~° s), free quarks would have been abundant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


See also: antimatter, atom, baryons, Big Bang theory, ele- 
mentary particles, fundamental forces, fundamental par- 
ticles, grand unified theory, hadrons, mesons, neutrinos, 
neutron, proton. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quasar 


An extragalactic object (one that lies well beyond the 
confines of our own Galaxy) that has a very small angular 
size, but which has a high redshift. Because the first objects 
of this kind to be discovered, in the early 1960s, were radio 
sources that coincided in appearance with what looked 
like stars, they were called ‘quasi-stellar radio sources’, a 
name that was then abbreviated to quasar. Although it 
was shown subsequently that only about 10% of objects of 
this kind were actually strong radio emitters, and the more 
general term, ‘quasi-stellar object’ (QSO) was invoked 
to include the radio-quiet versions, in practice, the term 
‘quasar’ is widely used to describe both kinds of object. 

The spectrum of a quasar typically displays emission 
lines superimposed on a non-thermal (non-stellar) contin- 
uous spectrum (continuum). The redshifts of the lines in 
quasar spectra range from 0.06 to around 5, these values 
of redshift corresponding to velocities of recession ranging 
from about 6% to about 95% of the speed of light. If, as 
is generally accepted, the redshifts imply that quasars are 
remote objects that are receding because, like conventional 
galaxies, they are participating in the general expansion of 
the universe in accordance with the Hubble law, then they 
must all lie at very great distances. To appear as bright 
as they do, despite their very great distances, their lumi- 
nosities must range from about a hundred to about ten 
thousand times greater than that of a conventional galaxy 
like the Milky Way (the implied luminosities are in the 
range 10°°-10*! watts). Many quasars vary substantially 
in brightness (by factors of up to 10, or even more in ex- 
ceptional cases) over periods of time as short as months or 
even days. This implies that most of their energy is emit- 
ted from regions of space that are very small, in some cases 
less than a light-day in diameter. 

Since the 1980s a number of quasars have been 
shown to be surrounded by faint fuzzy patches of light. 
The spectra of these ‘fuzzy blobs’ contain stellar-type 
absorption lines, consistent with the idea that quasars are 
embedded within remote galaxies. In addition, studies of 
quasars that appear to lie within clusters of galaxies have 
shown that they have the same redshifts as those clusters, 
consistent with their being located at very great distances. 
Furthermore, quasars share similar characteristics to active 
galactic nuclei in general. They radiate strongly over a 
wide range of wavelengths, have anon-thermal spectrum, 
display short-term variability, are compact and highly 
luminous and, insome cases, appear to be emitting jets and 
blobs of material. In light of this evidence, astronomers 
(with a few notable exceptions) are convinced that a quasar 
is an extremely brilliant active galactic nucleus, so remote 
and so highly luminous compared with the galaxy within 
which it is embedded that, in most cases, only the compact 
nucleus can be seen. 

As with other active galactic nuclei, the energy source 
within a quasar is widely believed to be a supermassive 
black hole that is accreting matter from its surroundings. 
The broad emission lines in a quasar’s spectrum are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


believed to originate in heated gas clouds revolving 
around the central black hole at speeds of up to several 
thousand kilometers per second. 


See also: accretion, active galaxy, active galactic nucleus, 
black hole, blazar, BL Lacertae objects, Hubble law, 
redshift, spectrum, synchrotron radiation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasiperiodic Oscillations in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quasiperiodic Oscillations in X-ray 
Binaries 


The term quasiperiodic oscillation (QPO) is used in 
high-energy astrophysics for any type of non-periodic 
variability that is constrained to a relatively narrow range 
of variability frequencies. X-RAY BINARIES are systems in 
which a ‘compact object’, either a BLACK HOLE Or a NEUTRON 
STAR, Orbits a normal star and captures matter from it. The 
matter spirals down to the compact object and heats up to 
temperatures of 10’ K, which leads to the emission of x- 
rays. Such systems therefore provide ways of obtaining 
information about black holes and neutron stars that 
cannot be obtained in any other way, as the basic process 
taking place in them involves matter in close orbit around 
such a compact object. QPOs are an important diagnostic 
of these flows of matter in x-ray binaries. They are 
usually studied by calculating power spectra of a time 
series of, most commonly, x-ray flux samples by means 
of the Fourier transform. In such a power spectrum, the 
QPO shows up as a peak of finite width centered around 
the oscillation frequency (see figures 1 and 3). If the 
peak is too narrow, such as in the case of PULSARS, the 
signal is called periodic instead of quasiperiodic, and if the 
peak is too broad (conventionally, if its full width at half- 
maximum is broader than half its centroid frequency) the 
feature is usally called a ‘noise’ feature. There is no sharp 
physical distinction between QPO and noise features, and 
they are discussed together here. Two important classes 
of noise are ‘power-law noise’, which shows up in the 
power spectrum as a power law and thus has no measured 
associated time scale, and ‘band-limited noise’, which 
steepens towards higher frequency above some break or 
cut-off frequency Vpreak- 

A variety of processes can produce a similar power- 
spectral peak. Often the statistical quality of the data 
is insufficient to see the QPO directly in the time series. 
Then, it can only be detected by calculating the average 
power spectrum of a large amount of data. The exact 
signal causing a given power-spectral QPO peak then 
remains unknown. Popular examples of signals in the 
time series that may explain the QPO peaks observed in 
the power spectra of x-ray binaries are oscillating-shot 
signals, essentially a superposition of many short-lived 
oscillations, and frequency-modulated signals, which are 
oscillations whose frequency varies on a time scale much 
longer than the oscillation period. 

The presence of short-lived ‘clumps’ of matter 
orbiting the central object at some preferred radius in the 
ACCRETION DISK and producing a QPO with a frequency 
equal to the Keplerian orbital frequency corresponding to 
that radius may be the most popular explanation for QPOs 
in x-ray binaries (see the section on models). However, 
as several different types of QPO are observed, several 
different models are required. Most QPO phenomena 
increase in frequency when the accretion rate increases; 
in Keplerian models this implies the orbits come closer 
with increasing mass accretion rate. From KEPLER’S LAWS, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the closest possible orbits around neutron stars and stellar- 
mass black holes could have periods as short as 0.5 ms, and 
from the beginning astronomers have searched for QPOs 
with frequencies in the corresponding kilohertz domain. 
Only very recently have such QPOs been found (see the 
section on the current era). Their exploitation for the 
study of strong-field general-relativistic effects and the 
basic properties of neutron stars and black holes has only 
just begun. 


History: the discoveries with EXOSAT and Ginga 
Early reports of QPOs in x-ray binaries included 
observations with the Japanese Hakucho satellite of ~2 Hz 
oscillations during bursts of the Rapid Burster and with the 
European Space Agency’s ExosAT of 0.7-20 mHz QPOs in 
Cygnus X-3. Both of these objects are unique, very peculiar 
x-ray binaries. The discoveries of two different QPO 
phenomena (the 15-60 Hz ‘horizontal branch oscillation’ 
and the 6-20 Hz ‘normal-flaring branch oscillation’, or 
HBO and NFBO; figure 1) with EXOSAT in the brightest 
low-mass x-ray binaries (LMXBs) during 1985-1987 were 
the first which had sufficiently suggestive properties 
to lead to an appreciable body of interpretative work. 
In particular, the relatively high frequencies of these 
oscillations suggested an origin connected in some way 
with the inner accretion flow, where the characteristic time 
scales are short. 

By the early 1990s, the magnetospheric beat frequency 
model, in which the oscillations occur as a result 
of a quasiperiodic modulation of the accretion rate 
caused by an interaction between the inner accretion 
disk and the magnetic field of a rapidly spinning 
neutron star remained as a prominent, although not 
universally accepted, model for the HBO. The radiative- 
feedback model, where a radiation-force-driven instability 
quasiperiodically modulates the optical depth of an 
approximately radial, near-Eddington accretion flow and 
thus causes the oscillations by variations in the radiative 
transfer through this flow, enjoyed a similar status for the 
NFBO. Studies of correlated changes of the x-ray spectrum 
and the power spectrum of accreting low-magnetic-field 
neutron stars in LMXBs led to a subdivision into two 
groups, named, after the characteristic shapes of the tracks 
they trace out in x-ray color—color diagrams, the ‘Z sources’ 
and the ‘atoll sources’ (figure 1). In such diagrams, the x- 
ray ‘colors’ or spectral hardnesses in two different photon 
energy bands are plotted versus each other. The tracks 
in these diagrams are usually quite repeatable in shape 
(less so in the position in the diagram) and are traced 
out over and over again on time scales of hours to days. 
Sources in both groups were found to show several ‘source 
states’ characterized by their x-ray spectral and power- 
spectral properties; the transitions between these states are 
gradual and occur with intervals of hours to many days. 
The HBO and the NFBO were observed in the Z sources 
only; common to both source types were two broad power- 
spectral components, a power-law noise component called 
very-low-frequency noise, dominating the power spectra 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasiperiodic Oscillations in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Z source 
L ae 
© 
S 7 [ NB m 
oS ia sie 
o. .2 te oie 
ale 3 aye 


le | 
N 8 
+ © 
Ps ° 
N 
omnN & 
a 
2 ‘ee 
oO) S 
eS os 
Sel 3 
oO ° 
i=} 
ee 
oS 
| a 
2 
> | 
= = 
9 4 
fal = 
1075 0.01. 0.1 1 10 100 


Atoll source 


10 100 


1 


1077 10-8 10-5 107* 1073 0.01 0.1 


10-5 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 


Frequency (Hz) 


Figure 1. X-ray color-color diagrams (top) and power spectra (bottom) of Z and atoll sources. Top: the soft and hard colors represent 
the x-ray spectral hardness in the 3-6 and 6-10 keV photon energy bands, respectively. Arrows indicate the sense in which M is 
inferred to increase along each track. The various source states as they appear in the color-color diagram, horizontal branch, normal 
branch, flaring branch, island, lower banana and upper banana are indicated as HB, NB, FB, IS, LB and UB, respectively. Bottom: 
typical power spectra are displayed for each of the source states identified in the color-color diagrams. The various power spectral 
noise (very-low-frequency noise, low-frequency noise and high-frequency noise; VLFN, LFN and HEN) and QPO (horizontal branch 
oscillation, normal branch oscillation; HBO and NBO) components are indicated. Despite its name, the HFN in the atoll sources is 


probably similar to the LFN in Z sources. 


below ~1 Hz, and a band-limited noise component called 
either low- or high- frequency noise, with Vpreak typically 
between 0.1 and several tens of Hz. All these variability 
phenomena vary in their properties, often monotonically, 
along the tracks in the color-color diagram. The position of 
a source in its track was therefore interpreted as a measure 
of its instantaneous accretion rate, M; this interpretation 
implied that x-ray count rates in the usual photon energy 
bands (e.g. 2-20 keV) are not proportional to M; it is even 
possible for the count rate to rise when M drops. 
Observations with the GINGA satellite in the years 
1987-1991 led to a much clearer view of the correlated 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


x-ray spectral and power-spectral properties of the black 
hole candidates (BHCs), which turned out to be in many 
ways very reminiscent of those of the (neutron-star) atoll 
sources. The source states in BHCs were called, in order 
of increasing inferred M, the low state, high state and very 
high state. In the very high state clear 3-10 Hz QPO were 
seen that are perhaps related to some of the QPOs seen 
in the Z sources. In the low state the power spectra are 
dominated by a band-limited noise component similar 
to that seen in the atoll sources. The break frequency 
is variable between 0.03 and 1 Hz and correlated with 
inferred M. In the high state very little power is observed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasiperiodic Oscillations in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


[7 


1300 Hz 


2 pesreaee 19.0.8 2 aera 

a [1800 Hz _ 7 ___ 

3 L __-1800_Hz _______ 
[ 


Radius (km) 


Figure 2. Mass—radius diagram of neutron stars. The curves 
labeled A, FPS, UU, Land M represent neutron-star mass-radius 
relations for various different assumed equations of state of 
high-density matter. The shaded area is the region that can be 
excluded if orbital motion takes place around the neutron star at 
a frequency of 1171 Hz, as suggested by observed kHz QPO 
frequencies. For higher observed frequencies, larger areas can be 
excluded as indicated. The currently highest measured kHz 
QPO frequency is 1228 Hz. Adapted from Miller et al (1998). 


In the very high state a band-limited noise component 
reappears with Vpreak between 1 and 10 Hz. Later, an 
intermediate state was identified that fits between the low 
and high states and has properties similar to those of the 
very high state. 


The current era: RXTE 
Launched on 30 December 1995, the ROSSI X-RAY TIMING 
EXPLORER (RXTE) satellite provided the latest, and largest, 
upswing in our knowledge of QPO phenomena in x-ray 
binaries. It seems likely that for the first time we are 
detecting signals from the bottom of the gravitational 
potential wells of neutron stars and BHCs related to 
the orbital motion of matter very close around the 
compact objects. In these regions, space-time is strongly 
curved and strong-field general relativity is required to 
describe the motion of matter. Indeed, interpretations 
involving strong-field general-relativistic effects are being 
debated extensively with respect to the newly discovered 
phenomena. The inferred orbits are so close that they 
directly constrain the density of the central neutron star, 
and thus the compressibility (i.e. the equation of state) 
of the supranuclear-density matter of which they are 
composed (figure 2). 

In both Z and atoll sources, the long-predicted 
phenomena on millisecond and submillisecond time scales 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


S|, | ] 
= 4 iH 
: | 
Ps h 4 
a ek Hoi : 
S 5 fi | | 
; ach 
a Wt 
eal ta, 4 : 
: "Meath 


A 1 1 i 4 1 oe | 4 1 1 1 
200 500 1000 2000 5000 
FREQUENCY (Hz) 


Figure 3. Power spectrum of the Z source Scorpius X-1 showing 
the twin kHz QPOs. 


were found at last. Surprisingly, these phenomena are in 
the form of often quite narrow QPO peaks with frequencies 
up to about 1200 Hz that come in pairs, the ‘twin kHz 
QPOs’ (figure 3). It seems likely that one of these peaks 
is caused by the orbital motion at the inner edge of the 
accretion disk. In x-ray bursts of several atoll sources 
a different type of oscillation was discovered, with a 
frequency, near constant in each source, between 290 and 
590 Hz, that was interpreted as due to the neutron-star 
spin. RXTE also finally, after a search of nearly 20 yr, 
found the first accreting millisecond pulsar, which, at a 
spin frequency of 401 Hz, supports the interpretation of 
the burst oscillations as being due to the neutron-star spin. 
More importantly, this discovery provides the first direct 
confirmation of the evolutionary ideas about the origin of 
the millisecond radio pulsars. 

QPOs at frequencies of a few tens of Hz in atoll sources 
evident in the RXTE data may be similar to Z source HBOs. 
QPOs found in two BHCs stand out as perhaps different 
and possibly related to each other: the 67 Hz QPO in 
GRS 1915 + 105, which seems to always occur at the same 
frequency, and the 300 Hz QPO in GRO J1655 — 40, the 
highest-frequency QPO in a BHC so far. These QPOs may 
be related to some basic property of accretion onto a black 
hole of given mass and spin, such as the orbital, Lense— 
Thirring or apsidal motion frequency near the general- 
relativistic innermost stable orbit. 


Models 

Beat-frequency models have played a central part in 
interpretations of QPO phenomena observed in accreting 
neutron stars. In such models, there is an interaction 
between the spin of the neutron star and the orbital 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasiperiodic Oscillations in X-ray Binaries 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


motion at some preferred radius in the accretion disk 
which produces a third phenomenon, the beat, which has 
a frequency vp that is equal to the difference between the 
neutron-star spin frequency vs and the orbital frequency in 
the disk vp according to the relation vg = vp—vs. Nosignal 
is generated at the sum of these frequencies because the 
interacting frequencies are those of two angular motions 
that take place in the same sense (a sum frequency would 
be observed if the neutron-star spin was in the opposite 
sense to the orbital motion in the disk, a situation which 
because of angular-momentum transfer from the disk to 
the star cannot persist for a long time). 

Two mechanisms have been worked out to provide 
the spin-orbit interaction in a way that would lead to 
observable QPO phenomena. In the magnetospheric beat- 
frequency model the accretion of matter from short-lived 
clumps of plasma in the inner accretion disk is modulated 
by electromagnetic interactions with the neutron-star 
magnetic field, which spins with the spin of the neutron 
star. In this model the preferred disk radius at which 
we observe the Keplerian orbital frequency is the radius 
of the magnetosphere. This model has been used to 
explain the 15-55 Hz HBO in Z sources as due to the 
beat between the (unobserved) disk orbital and neutron- 
star spin frequencies, and to explain much slower QPO 
phenomena that are seen in some accreting x-ray pulsars 
with periods of 1-10? s, but has also been discussed as 
a possible explanation of the kHz QPOs. In the sonic- 
point beat-frequency model the preferred radius in the 
disk is located at the sonic point, where the disk flow 
becomes radially supersonic owing to either general- 
relativistic effects or interaction of the accretion flow with 
the emerging radiation. This model has been proposed 
for the twin kHz QPO peaks, where the higher frequency 
of the twin QPO peaks would be at vp and the lower- 
frequency one at vg. 

The spin frequency of the neutron stars in some of 
the twin kHz QPO sources as deduced from the burst 
oscillations is found to be close to the frequency difference 
between the two kHz peaks in the same source, in 
accordance with such a spin-orbit beat-frequency model. 
However, several discrepancies between the predicted 
and observed frequencies have emerged since the model 
was proposed, and it is clear that any spin-orbit beat- 
frequency model for the twin kHz QPOs cannot be as 
straightforward as was initially believed. Other models 
relying on various kinds of hydrodynamic or radiation— 
hydrodynamic accretion-flow instabilities are also being 
explored. 

Since the discovery of the kHz QPOs, which from 
their high frequencies probably originate very close 
to the compact objects, general-relativistic effects have 
played an increasingly prominent role in the attempts at 
interpretation of all QPOs. It has been proposed that 
Z source HBOs and related QPOs in atoll sources are 
due to Lense-Thirring precession of the inner accretion 
disk, and evidence has been mounting that the kHz QPO 
frequencies, which increase in each given source with mass 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


accretion rate, reach a maximum value near ~1200 Hz. If 
this is because the orbits corresponding to this frequency 
are near the general-relativistic innermost stable orbit (at 
6GM/c? with small corrections for frame dragging due 
to the spin of the neutron star), then neutron-star masses 
near 2 Mo are derived for the neutron stars in low-mass 
x-ray binaries. It so far remains a mystery why 1200 Hz 
is reached in different sources at luminosities that differ 
by factors of up to several 100. Lense—-Thirring precession 
of orbits around near-maximally rotating black holes has 
also been speculated to explain the 67 and 300 Hz QPOs 
in GRS 1915 + 105 and GRO J1655 — 40. Finally, a model 
has been proposed where the lower frequency of the twin 
kHz QPO is due to general-relativistic apsidal motion. In 
particular, in the case of the neutron stars where HBO, 
burst QPO and twin kHz QPOs are all seen in a single 
source, the data can constrain models of this type very 
well, and a shake-out among these models can be foreseen 
when data accumulates. 

With the discovery of the kHz QPOs, the historical 
goal of obtaining diagnostic information about the motion 
of matter at the bottom of the gravitational well of 
stellar-mass compact objects from high-time-resolution 
x-ray data appears to have been reached. Future work, 
requiring much larger-area instruments than even RXTE, 
will probably concentrate on mapping out space-time 
in these regions in detail by precisely reconstructing the 
orbits of matter in these regions. 


Bibliography 

Bildsten L and Strohmayer T 1999 New views of neutron 
stars Phys. Today February 40-6 

Charles P A and Seward F D 1995 Low-mass x-ray 
binary stars Exploring the X-ray Universe (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 187-217 

Miller M C et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 508 791 

van der Klis M 1995 Rapid aperiodic variability in x-ray 
binaries X-ray Binaries ed W HG Lewin, J van Paradijs 
and E P van den Heuvel (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 252-300 

van der Klis M 1998 Kilohertz quasi-periodic oscillations 
in low-mass x-ray binaries The Many Faces of Neutron 
Stars ed R Buccheri, J van Paradijs and M A Alpar 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic) pp 337-68 


M van der Klis 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening 
Absorption Lines 


Every parcel of gas along the line of sight to a distant 
QUASAR Will selectively absorb certain wavelengths of 
continuum light of the quasar due to the presence of 
the various chemical elements in the gas. Through the 
analysis of these quasar absorption lines we can study the 
spatial distributions, motions, chemical enrichment and 
ionization histories of gaseous structures from REDSHIFT 
five until the present. This includes the Gas IN GALAXIES of 
all morphological types as well as the diffuse gas in the 
INTERGALACTIC MEDIUM. 


Basics of quasar spectra 

Figure 1 illustrates many of the common features of a 
quasar spectrum. The relatively flat quasar continuum 
and broad emission features are produced by the quasar 
itself (near the black hole and its accretion disk). In 
some cases, gas near the quasar central engine also 
produces ‘intrinsic’ absorption lines, most notably Ly a, 
and relatively high ionization metal transitions such as 
CIV, N V, and O VI. These intrinsic absorption lines can 
be broad (thousands or even tens of thousands of km s~! 
in which case the quasar is called a broad absorption 
line (BAL) QSO; see QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: INTRINSIC AGN 
ABSORPTION LINES), Or narrow (tens to hundreds of km s~!). 
However, the vast majority of absorption lines in a 
typical quasar spectrum are ‘intervening’, produced by 
gas unrelated to the quasar that is located along the line of 
sight between the quasar and the Earth. 

Astructure along the line of sight to the quasar can be 
described by its neutral hydrogen column density, N(H 1), 
the number of atoms per cm’. N(H I) is given by the 
product of the density of the material and the pathlength 
along the line of sight through the gas. Each structure 
will produce an absorption line in the quasar spectrum 
at a wavelength of Agps = Arest(1 + Zaps), Where Zaps is the 
redshift of the absorbing gas and Ayes, = 1215.67 Ais the 
rest wavelength of the Ly @ transition. Since Zaps < Zaso, 
the redshift of the quasar, these Ly a absorption lines form 
a ‘forest’ at wavelengths blueward of the Ly a emission. 
The region redward of the Ly a emission will be populated 
only by absorption through other chemical transitions 
with longer Arest. Historically, absorption systems with 
N(HI) < 10!”* cm have been called LYMAN ALPHA FOREST 
lines, those with 10!7? < N(HI) < 10°3 cm™ are Lyman 
limit systems, and those with N(HI) > 107°? cm~ are 
damped Ly a systems (See LYMAN ALPHA ABSORPTION: THE 
DAMPED SYSTEMS). 

The number of systems per unit redshift increases dra- 
matically with decreasing column density, as illustrated in 
the schematic diagram in figure 2. Lyman limit systems are 
defined by a sharp break in the spectrum due to absorption 
of photons capable of ionizing HI, i.e. those with energies 
greater than 13.6 eV. The optical depth, t, of the break is 
given by the product N(H Do, where the cross section for 
ionization of hydrogen, o = 6.3x107'8(E,/13.6eV)~* cm”, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(and the flux is reduced by the factor e"). The energy 
dependence of o leads to a recovery of the Lyman limit 
break at higher energies (shorter wavelengths), unless 
N(HI) > 10!”? cm (see figure 1). 

The curve of growth describes the relationship 
between the equivalent width of an absorption line, W (the 
integral of the normalized profile), and its column density, 
N. Figure 3 shows that for small N(H I) the number 
of absorbed photons, and therefore the flux removed, 
increases in direct proportion to the number of atoms. 
This is called the linear part of the curve of growth. As 
N is increased, the line saturates so that photons are 
only absorbed in the wings of the lines; in this regime 
the equivalent width is sensitive to the amount of line 
broadening (characterized by the Doppler parameter b), 
but does not depend very strongly on N(H J). This is the 
flat part of the curve of growth. Finally, at N(HI) > 
10° cm~, there are enough atoms that the damping 
wings of the line become populated and the equivalent 
width increases as the square root of N(H I), and is no 
longer sensitive to b. 

In addition to the Ly a (ls — 2p) and higher-order 
(1s — np) Lyman series lines, quasar spectra also show 
absorption due to different ionization states of the various 
species of metals. Figure 1 illustrates that the damped 
Ly a system at z = 0.86 that is responsible for the Ly a 
absorption line at Ap; = 2260 Aanda Lyman limit break 
at Aops = 1700 Aalso produces absorption at A ps = 2870 A 
due to the presence of C IV in the absorbing gas at that 
same redshift. Like many of the strongest metal lines seen 
in quasar spectra, C IV is a resonant doublet transition due 
to transitions from *Sj/2 energy levels to the 7P;/2 and to 
the ?P3/. energy levels. (The left superscript ‘2’ represents 
the number of orientations of the electron spin, the letter 
S or P represents the total orbital angular momentum, 
L, and the right subscript represents the total angular 
momentum, J.) Doublet transitions are easy to identify. 
The dichotomy between rest wavelength and redshift is 
resolved because the observed wavelength separation of 
the doublet members increases as 1+z. Table 1 lists some of 
the metal lines that are commonly detected for intervening 
absorption systems. Many of these are only strong enough 
to be observable for quasar lines of sight that pass through 
the higher N(H I) regions of galaxies. 


History, surveys and revolutionary progress in the 
1990s 

The history of quasar absorption lines began within a 
couple of years of the identification of the first quasar 
in 1963. In 1965, Gunn and Peterson considered the 
detection of flux blueward of the Ly a emission line in 
the quasar 3C 9, observed by Schmidt, and derived a 
limit on the amount of neutral hydrogen that could be 
present in intergalactic space. In that same year, Bahcall 
and Salpeter predicted that intervening material should 
produce observable discrete absorption features in quasar 
spectra. Such features were detected in 1967 in the quasar 
PKS 0237 — 23 by Greenstein and Schmidt, and in 1968 in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


7 [1 T T T T T T T T T | T if T | T T T | T T T | T T T | T T T | T T q 
as 5. Lya Forest < Lye Emission 
L ELS ; 
c 4} partial break CIV Abs. 4 
_ t DLA f DLA 
i. a break | DLA LLS rom | 
a 2 | nt a 
L a 

. Tr + 
x L. 4 
= sr A ln aS Pa AN CP 

1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 2800 3000 3200 


Wavelength, A 


Figure 1. Typical spectrum of a quasar, showing the quasar continuum and emission lines, and the absorption lines produced by 
galaxies and intergalactic material that lie between the quasar and the observer. This spectrum of the z = 1.34 quasar PKS0454 + 039 
was obtained with the Faint Object Spectrograph on the Hubble Space Telescope. The emission lines at ~ 2400 A and ~2850 A are Ly B 
and Ly a. The Ly a forest absorption, produced by various intergalactic clouds, is apparent at wavelengths blueward of the Ly a 
emission line. The two strongest absorbers, due to galaxies, are a damped Ly a absorber at z = 0.86 and a Lyman limit system at 

z = 1.15. The former produces a Lyman limit break at ~1700 A and the latter a partial Lyman limit break at ~1950 A since the neutral 
hydrogen column density is not large enough for it to absorb all ionizing photons. Many absorption lines are produced by the damped 
Ly a system at z = 0.86 (C IV AA1548, 1550, for example, is redshifted onto the red wing of the quasar’s Ly a emission line). 


I I Pet = hoa 4 Table 1. Common transitions. 
Number per Unit Redshift 4 Transition —Arest (A) 
~ -12 er Unit log Column — 

oO wee 7 | LL ~912 
E L ; Ly y 972.537 
3 F 7 Ly B 1025.722 
eo 216 12 | Ly a 1215.670 
v [ ] SiIV 1393 1393.755 
= [ J SiIV 1402 1402.770 
> -20b al CIV1548 —-1548.195 
or L | CIV1550 —1550.770 
L ; Fe 112382 2382.765 
dts 7 Fell2600 — 2600.173 
-24 Mg Il 2796 2796.352 
12 14 16 18 20 22 Mg II 2803 2803.531 


log(Hl Column Density), cm” 


Figure 2. The column density distribution of Ly a clouds, 

f (N(H1)), roughly follows a power law over ten orders of 
magnitude; there are many more weak lines than strong lines. 
The column density regions for the three categories of systems 
are shown: Ly a forest, Lyman limit, and damped Ly a. The 
term ‘Ly a forest’ has at times been used to refer to metal-free 
hydrogen clouds, perhaps those with N(H I) < 10'° cm~?, but 
now metals have been found associated with weaker systems 
down to the detection limit. 


PHL 938 by Burbidge, Lynds and Stockton. By 1969 many 
intervening systems had been discovered, and Bahcall and 
Spitzer proposed that most with metals were produced by 
the haloes of normal galaxies. As more data accumulated, 
the sheer number of Ly a forest lines strongly supported 
the idea that galactic and intergalactic gas, and not only 
material intrinsic to the quasar, is the source of most quasar 
absorption lines. 

In the 1980s many more quasar spectra were obtained 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and many large statistical surveys of the different classes 
of absorption line systems were published. The emphasis 
was on characterizing the number of lines per unit redshift, 
dN/dz, stronger than some specified equivalent width 
limit. With 4 m class telescopes (equipped with charge 
coupled device (CCD) detectors) it was possible to conduct 
surveys with a spectral resolution of R ~ 1000. The 
spectral resolution is defined as R = 4/A = c/Av, so that 
R = 1000 corresponds to 300 km s~! or 5 Aat 4 = 5000 A. 
Separate surveys were conducted for Ly a lines, Mg II 
doublets, C IV doublets, and also for Lyman limit breaks, 
all as a function of redshift. The Ly a line is observable 
in the optical part of the spectrum for z > 2.2, Mg II for 
0.4 < z < 2.2, CIV for 1.7 < z < 5.0, and the Lyman limit 
break for z > 3. However, abreakis also easily identified in 
lower-resolution space-based UV spectra, which extended 
Lyman limit surveys to lower redshift. 

In order to consider the cross section of the sky 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


as L re 1 

Le r 1 

O) [ J 

fa [ i 

iS J 7 

2 } | 

- : 4 

-300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 
Velocity, km s__ 
ceettiorei torre tori tisiei titi iitiitiaid 
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
-2 
log N(HI), cm 

ES pe Fa a a Ca a a a 
a 12 | logN=13 cm” ] L logN=15 cm | 
ine —— et, a Ls a . a, ae Pa 
© l | ' : : 
2 ' | a ie wR { 
= + 7 97 SON ye ig q 
oD - 4 L ‘ _ Fe Pa | 
Oe [ 1 [ Sy ‘ Boy ] 
Te a POC Oc QO bee rales Zee Tt fa ell ae eet 


-100 -50 O 50 100 
Velocity, km s__ 


-200-150-100 -50 O 50 100 150 200 


Velocity, km a 


Figure 3. Illustration of the different regimes of the curve of growth. The middle panel shows the curve of growth for the Ly a 
transition, relating the equivalent width, W, of the absorption profile to the column density, N(H I). The different curves represent four 
different values of the Doppler parameter: b = 13, 23, 53 and 93 km s~!. The upper panel shows absorption profiles with Doppler 
parameter b = 23 kms7! for the series of neutral hydrogen column densities N(H I) = 10!7-10° cm-?. The thick (thin) curves 
correspond to the full (open) points on the b = 23 km s~! curve of growth (middle panel), starting at N(H I) = 10!" cm~?. For 

N(HJ) < 108 cm~?, known as the linear part of the curve of growth, the equivalent width does not depend on b. The lower left panel 
shows that, at fixed N(H I), the depth of the profile is smaller for large b, such that the equivalent width remains constant. On the flat 
part of the curve of growth, profiles are saturated and the equivalent width increases with b for constant N(H I). For 

N(HI) > 107° cm~?, the profile develops damping wings, which dominate the equivalent width. 


covered by the different populations, it can be assumed 
that absorption will be observed for all lines of sight 
within some radius of every luminous galaxy (>0.05L;,). 
(L% represents the Schechter luminosity, i.e. the transition 
between the exponential and the power law forms of the 
luminosity function, and corresponds to a K-band absolute 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnitude of Mx = —25.) To explain the observed 
dN /dz at z ~ 1.5, this radius would be 70 kpc for strong 
C IV (detection sensitivity 0.4 A), and 40 kpc for strong 
Mg II (detection sensitivity 0.3 A) and also for Lyman limit 
systems, implying that the latter two populations are in 
fact produced in the same gas. The higher N(H I) damped 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ly a@ absorbers would be produced within 15 kpc of the 
center of each galaxy, while the Ly a forest lines would 
require a considerably larger region, hundreds of kpcs 
around each galaxy, to produce a cross section consistent 
with the observed number of weak lines. 

Up until the 1990s, the focus of quasar absorption 
line work was to separately consider the properties of 
the individual classes of absorbers (e.g. Ly a@ forest 
or Mg II absorbers). In the 1990s, however, three 
different observational advances led to recognition of 
the direct connections between the different classes of 
quasar absorption lines, and of direct associations with 
the population of galaxies: 


(a) Deep images of quasar fields could be obtained, 
and redshifts of the galaxies in the field could be 
determined from low-resolution spectra. Steidel found 
that whenever Mg II absorption with W,(Mg II) > 0.3 A 
is observed, a luminous galaxy (Lx > 0.06L%) is found 
within an impact parameter of 38 h™! (L/L%)~° kpc 
with a redshift coincident with that determined from the 
absorption lines. Also, it is rare to find a galaxy within this 
impact parameter that does not produce Mg II absorption. 
There appears to be a one-to-one correspondence between 
strong Mg II absorption and luminous galaxies. The Mg II 
absorbing galaxies span a range of morphological types. 

(b) The High Resolution Spectrograph on the Keck I 
10 m telescope made it possible to obtain quasar spectra 
at a resolution of R = 45000, which corresponds to 
~6kms7!. Previous surveys with a resolution of the order 
of hundreds of km s~! identified absorption due to entire 
galaxies and their environments. With 6 km s~! resolution 
it became possible to resolve structure within a galaxy: the 
clouds in its halo, the interstellar medium of its disk, and 
the satellites and infalling gas clouds in its environment. 
Figure 4 is a dramatic illustration of this contrast for the 
Mg IT absorber at z = 0.93 toward the quasar PG 1206+459. 

(c) The Faint Object Spectrograph (FOS) on the Hubble 
Space Telescope provided resolution R ~ 1000 in the UV, 
from 1400-3300 A. Observations of Ly a forest clouds could 
be extended from z = 2.2 down to the present epoch. 
Furthermore, absorption from a given galaxy could be 
observed in numerous transitions; if Mg II was observed in 
the optical, the Lyman series and C IV could be studied in 
the UV (see figure 4). With information on transitions with 
a range of ionization states, consideration of the degree 
of ionization (related to the gas density and the intensity 
and shape of the ionizing radiation field) and the multiple 
phase structure of galactic gas became possible. 


No longer is analysis of absorption lines in quasar 
spectra an esoteric subject. It has developed into a 
powerful tool to be used in the study of GALAXY EVOLUTION 
(e.g. similar to imaging the stellar components of the 
galaxies). At least in principle, quasar spectra can be 
used for an unbiased study of the gaseous environments 
of galaxies from the present back to the highest redshifts 
at which quasars are observed. Gas structures smaller 
than 1M. can be detected if they are intercepted by the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


quasar line of sight, irrespective of whether they emit light. 
Through the tool of quasar absorption lines, protogalactic 
structures and low surface brightness galaxies can be 
studied as well as high-luminosity galaxies. 


Developing physical intuition 

With high-resolution spectra of quasars, it is possible to 
consider the physical conditions of the gaseous structures 
that produce absorption. However, it is challenging 
to separate the various effects that ‘shape’ the spectral 
features in the different chemical transitions. The 
absorption profiles observed for the different chemical 
transitions are determined by a combination of the 
spatial distribution of material along the line of sight, its 
bulk kinematics, temperature, metallicity and abundance 
pattern. The ionization structure is influenced by gas 
densities and by the UV radiation field, which is a 
combination of the extragalactic background radiation due 
to the accumulated effect of quasars and stellar photons 
escaped from galaxies (and corrected for absorption by 
the intergalactic medium). 

The shape of an absorption line can be modeled 
with a Voigt profile, which is a combination of the 
natural, quantum mechanical Lorentzian broadening and 
the Gaussian broadening caused by the thermal and 
turbulent motions in the gas. Several Voigt profiles can be 
blended together to form an overall complex absorption 
feature (see figure 4). The ‘width’ of a single Voigt profile 
is characterized by the Doppler parameter, b (expressed in 
velocity units and related to the Gaussian o by b = 2"?0). 
Physically, the Doppler parameter is the sum of thermal 
and turbulent components, b2,, = 2kT/m + b?_,, where T 


turb’ 
is the temperature of the gas, and m is the mass of an atom. 


Kinematic models 

Two of the simplest types of organized kinematics in 
galaxies are illustrated in figure 5: clouds distributed in 
a rotating disk, and radial infall of clouds in a spherical 
distribution. Here, Mg II absorbers are used as an example, 
but the same kinematic arguments would apply to other 
transitions. For radial infall, clouds can be distributed over 
the range of velocities, with a tendency for a ‘double peak’ 
from material that is redshifted and blueshifted but with 
a considerable amount of variation if there are typically 
several discrete clouds along the line of sight. A rotating 
disk with a vertical velocity dispersion characteristic of 
a spiral galaxy disk (10-20 km s™') will have clouds 
superimposed in velocity space, and an overall kinematic 
spread of tens of km s“!. Strong Mg II absorption has 
been found to arise along nearly all lines of within ~40 kpc 
of normal galaxies (i.e. the covering factor is nearly unity 
within that radius). The large variety of kinematics evident 
in Mg II absorption profiles is, in fact, consistent with 
a superposition of disk and radial infall (halo) motions, 
and not with just one or the other. In addition to these 
simple, toy models, insights can be gleaned by passing 
lines of sight through the structures in cosmological N- 
body/hydrodynamic simulations. Ina few studies, metals 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


. | — = 

1.565 'B i 

FTL THI ree ene | hae 

ae: HIR : 

a Mgll 2796,2803 4 

ie L 1 

= 0 [i dint haf? an we fee aif ne aaa ene fae ake ee ied ( Pen pale aie dial ire vie? ee aha tl [ea ie eo =i] 
q 5390 5400 5410 5420 

S 

EF ast CIV 1548,1550 5 

O [ mane? ] 

Zo I A j=! C | 

> E FOS/HST ] 

0 [= S| 


| 
2980 


| 
3000 3020 


Wavelength, A 


Figure 4. Dramatic demonstration of gains due to high-resolution spectroscopy of the Mg II doublet. The top panel is an R = 3000 
spectrum of PG1206 + 459. The doublet that is apparent at an observed wavelength of ~5400 A is due to Mg II absorption from a 
system at z = 0.927. The middle panel shows the remarkable kinematic structure that is revealed at the resolution (R = 45000) of the 
Keck/HIRES spectrograph of the same quasar. The 2796 A transition is resolved into multiple components (5583-5592 A), which also 
appear in the 2803 A transition (5396-5406 A). This system can be separated in two ‘clusters’ of clouds, labeled ‘A’ and ‘B’. Another 
weaker Mg II doublet is observed at 5409 and 5423 A, froma system at z = 0.934 A, labeled with a ‘C’. The solid line through these 
complex Mg II profiles is the result of multiple Voigt profile fitting, with a cloud centered on each of the ticks drawn above the 
spectrum. The lower panel shows the C IV doublets associated with the same three systems, observed with the Faint Object 
Spectrograph on HST, but at much lower resolution (R = 1300). The C IV is in three different concentrations around the three systems 
‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’. The C IVA1550 transition from system A is blended with the C IVA1548 transition from system B. The C IV equivalent 
width is too large for this absorption to be produced by the same phase of gas that produces the Mg II cloud absorption. The 
maximum absorption that can arise in the Mg II phase is given by the dotted line; a plausible model with a kinematically broader C IV 


phase yields the solid curve. 


have been added uniformly throughout the simulation box 
and photoionization models used to predict the absorption 
expected from different structures. This is especially 
important for establishing the kinematics that would be 
observed from the process of structure formation at high 
redshifts. 


Photoionization models 

Consider a cloud of material, modeled by a plane parallel 
slab with a certain total column density of hydrogen, 
N(H) = N(AJD)+N(H I), and witha constant total number 
density ny = n(H I) + n(H ID) along the line of sight. The 
cloud is also characterized by its metallicity, Z, which is 
the ratio of Fe/H expressed relative to the solar value, Zo, 
and by an abundance pattern (the abundance ratios of all 
other elements to Fe). The degree of ionization in the gas 
depends upon the intensity and shape of the spectrum of 
ionizing radiation. The intensity is characterized by the 
ionization parameter, U = n,/ny, which is the ratio of 
the number density of photons at the Lyman edge to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


number density of hydrogen (ny = n., where n, is the 
total number density of electrons). The larger the value 
of U, the more ionized the gas. Collisional ionization can 
also be an important process for some absorption systems 
with gas at high temperatures (hundreds of thousands of 
degrees). Photoionization equilibrium models typically 
yield temperatures of tens of thousands of degrees. 

Once the metallicity, abundance pattern, ionization 
parameter and spectral shape are specified the equations 
of RADIATIVE TRANSFER can be solved to find the column 
densities of all the different ionization states of various 
chemical elements. Figure 6 illustrates, for N(H I) = 101° 
and 10’? cm~, the dependence of column densities of 
various transitions on the ionization parameter, U. For 
optically thin gas (V(HI) < 10!”* cm~), the column 
density ratios of the various metal transitions are not 
dependent on the overall metallicity, i.e. the curves shift 
vertically in proportion to Z. For optically thick gas, 
ionization structure develops, with an outer ionized layer 
around a neutral core, and there is no simple scaling 
relation with metallicity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radial Infall Rotating Disk 
V infall = 200 km/s Viot = 200 km/s 


observer 


Velocity, km s__ 


Figure 5. Illustrations of two simple kinematic models are shown in the top panel. To the left, the model is radial infall of clouds to the 
center of a sphere, with constant velocity. The line of sight passes through five clouds, which leads to five different absorption features 
(for a single transition) in the quasar spectrum. Two of the features are blueshifted relative to the standard of rest of the absorbing 
galaxy, and the other three are redshifted. The absorption features from a radial infall model can be spread over a velocity of 

100-200 km s™!, typical of the velocity dispersion of a galaxy halo. To the right, a rotating disk model is illustrated. In this case all the 
‘clouds’ along the line of sight have a component of motion that is redshifted, and they tend to be clustered together in velocity space, 
with a typical spread of 20-60 km s~!. The lower panel shows a sample of 0.4 < z < 1.4 Mg Il absorption profiles observed with the 
Keck/HIRES spectrograph at R = 45 000, corresponding to a resolution of ~6 km s~!. The solid lines through these data are Voigt 
profile fits and the ticks drawn above the spectrum represent the cloud velocities. Some of these profiles are consistent with the 
kinematics of a rotating disk, and others with radial infall kinematics. However, to explain the full ensemble of profiles a model 
combining these two basic types of kinematics is needed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 6 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In practice, if we assume that a cloud has a simple, 
single phase structure, the ratios of the column densities 
can be used to infer the ionization parameter, which relates 
to the density of the gas. However, the abundance pattern 
can differ from the solar abundance pattern because 
of differing degrees of depletion onto dust, or because 
of different processing histories. Most of the so-called 
a particle nuclei (such as Mg and Si) are synthesized 
primarily by Type II surerNovak during the early history 
of a galaxy when most massive stars form and quickly 
evolve to reach their end states. On the other hand, 
the Fe group elements are primarily produced by Type 
Ia supernovae, and therefore build up over a longer 
timescale. In the basic picture of galactic evolution, the 
halo stars are formed early, have been enriched only by 
Type II supernova, and therefore are w-element enhanced. 
Younger disk stars have also incorporated the Type Ia 
processed material and therefore have relatively larger Fe 
group abundances. Ideally, several different ionization 
states of the same chemical element are observed so that 
there is no ambiguity between the ionization parameter 
and the abundance pattern, but this has generally not yet 
been possible because of limited wavelength coverage at 
high resolution. 

Examples of the variation of column density ratios 
with velocity in two absorption systems are shown in 
figures 7 and 8. In figure 7, N(Fe II)/N(Mg II) varies by 
an order of magnitude over the four components in the 
Zz = 1.325 system toward the quasar Q0117 + 213. This 
represents a variation of an order of magnitude in the 
ionization parameter (10-* < U < 107%), or an order of 
magnitude variation in the abundance pattern. Figure 8 
is a very unusual system with two clouds separated by 
only 20 km st in velocity, one of which has a silicon 
to aluminum ratio similar to the Milky Way ISM, and 
the other which requires a significant enhancement of 
aluminum. 


Multiphase conditions 

The gaseous component of the the Milky Way and nearby 
galaxies has a phase structure (i.e. spatial locations with 
different densities and/or temperatures). Examples are 
the disk/halo interface (galactic coronas) and the cold, 
warm and hot phases of the interstellar medium. From 
photoionization models, it is not usually possible to 
generate absorption that is simultaneously consistent with 
all observed chemical transitions for a given system. For 
example, in single cloud Mg II systems, figure 6 (with 
N(H1I) = 10' cm~?) shows that if Fe II is detected at a 
similar column density to Mg II, the ionization parameter 
must be small, and W,(CIV) cannot be large. Many 
systems have C IV absorption which exceeds this limit 
and requires a higher ionization (lower density) phase; 
generally, this phase must have structure over a large 
velocity range (a large ‘effective’ Doppler parameter). The 
z = 0.93 system toward the quasar PG 1206+459 is another 
case that requires multiphase structure. The observed CIV 
profile in figure 4 is much too strong for this absorption 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


16 7 Z=0.1 N(HI)=16 = 
CMViie 4 
“~~ 14 E soe =a 
LS Pad q 
Zz E ‘ ‘a 
12 = 
10 S 
1 | 1 it rei oe | eal A Ee | | | 1 al | i jt |) | 
16 F Z=0.1 N(HI)=19 CIV. 
= “"Mgll 4 
px “da 
2 4 
Zz z q 
12 F 3 
10 E . 4 
Ea‘ | putt | putt | jit t | | Fs | ji it | 11 4 
AS <A. 285° <Q. 25-2 


lonization Parameter, U 


Figure 6. Photoionization model predictions of the column 
densities of Mg IL, Fe II and C IV as a function of the ionization 
parameter (the ratio of ionizing photons to the electron number 
density in the gas). The spectrum incident on the cloud, 
represented by a constant density slab, is the ‘Haardt-Madau’ 
spectrum (attenuated spectrum due to the integrated effect of 
quasars and young galaxies). The predicted column densities 
are presented in two series of models with N(H I) = 10!° cm~? 
and with N(H I) = 10!° cm~”, the optically thin and optically 
thick cases. For both, the metallicity is fixed at 10% of the solar 
value. For the optically thin case, the column densities scale 
with metallicity, ie. the ratios remain constant, but for the 
optically thick case the situation is more complex. 


to arise in the same clouds that produce the Mg II, even 
if their ionization parameters are pushed to the largest 
values consistent with the data. 


Statistics, evolution and interpretation 

Future quasar absorption line studies will combine 
insights gained from detailed analyses of individual 
systems with conclusions drawn from the large statistical 
samples assembled over cosmic time. Evolution of 
the ensemble of absorption profiles generated by the 
universal collective of intervening structures is a result 
of the combined effects of numerous processes. These 
include growth of structure, star formation, morphological 
evolution of galaxies, galaxy mergers and changes in the 
extragalactic background radiation. Here, we summarize 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1.5 EF Mg ll Zee 


Flux 


Eee ame cae eee st oa 
1 Pre Il 2IS2 


x< 1 — ’ ia 1 
_ L Oo J 
5 EN(Mgll) me a 
EF N(Fell) PPPS © 7 4 

L VV V J 

@) EE = 


-200 = -100 0 100 


Velocity, km s | 


Figure 7. HIRES/Keck Fe II and Mg II absorption profiles for the 
z = 1.325 system in the spectrum of the quasar Q0117 + 213. The 
six clouds in this system show a range of more than an order of 
magnitude in N(Fe II)/N (Mg ID), given below each cloud in the 
lower panel. These variations could be due to cloud to cloud 
variations of ionization parameter (density) or of abundance 
pattern within the system. 


the best present statistical data and likely interpretations 
for the different classes of absorbers. The number of lines 
per unit redshift for various populations of absorbers is 
represented by a power law dN/dz « (1+ 2)”. For 
a universe with only the cosmological evolution due to 
expansion, y = 1.0 for deceleration parameter go = 0 and 
y = 0.5 for qo = 0.5. 


Ly a forest 

The Ly a forest evolves away dramatically from high to 
low redshift, as is strikingly clear from the spectra of z ~ 3 
and z ~ 1 quasars in figure 9. The evolution of the 
Ly o lines with W,(Ly a) > 0.3 A can be characterized 
by a double power law with y ~ 2 for 18 < z < 
4.5 and y ~ 0.2 for z < 1.8. Help in understanding 
the physical picture has come from sophisticated N- 
body/hydrodynamic simulations that incorporate the 
gas physics and consider cosmological expansion of the 
simulation box. The dynamical evolution of the HI gas can 
be described as outflow from the centers of voids to their 
surrounding shells, and flows along these sheets toward 
their intersections where the densest structures form. This 
picture is consistent with observational determinations of 
the ‘sizes’ of Ly a structures. It is difficult to obtain direct 
measurements of sizes except in some special cases to use 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


FAL Il 1863 4, ; 


EAL I 


| 1 
ape 


J oy 


0 Fi ae Po 


-200 = -100 0 


Velocity, km s_ 


Figure 8. An unusual aluminum-rich cloud is apparent in the 

z = 1.93 system toward the quasar Q1222 + 228, and it is close in 
velocity space to a normal (relative to galactic clouds) cloud 
which has detected Si II. Note the different kinematic structure 
in the higher ionization transitions. The excess of Al II] and Al III 
in the cloud at v = 9 kms7! is best explained by an abundance 
pattern variation, since Si II and Al II are transitions with very 
similar ionization states. 


‘double lines of sight’, close quasar pairs, either physical 
or apparent due to gravitational lensing. If the spectra of 
the two quasars both have a Ly a absorption line at the 
same wavelength that implies a ‘structure’ which covers 
both lines of sight. From these studies, it is found that 
‘structures’ are at least hundreds of kpc in extent. 

At redshifts z = 5 to z = 2 dN/dz for Ly a 
forest absorption is quite large, but it is declining very 
rapidly over that range. This dramatic evolution in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


number of forest clouds is mostly due to the expansion of 
the universe, with a modest contribution from structure 
growth. At z < 2, the extragalactic background radiation 
field is falling, and Ly a structures are becoming more 
neutral. Therefore, the more numerous, smaller N(H) 
structures are observed at a larger N(H I) and this will 
counteract the effect of expansion, thus slowing the decline 
of the forest. 

The high-redshift Ly a forest was once thought to 
be primordial material, but in fact it is observed to 
have a metallicity of 0.1% solar, even at z = 3. For 
N(H1) < 10* cm, the expected N(C IV) would be below 
the detection thresholds of current observations, so truly 
pristine material still eludes us. Perhaps it does not exist. 
To spread metals all through the intergalactic medium may 
have required a ‘pre-galactic’ population of stars at z > 10 
that polluted all of intergalactic space. 


Lyman limit and metal line systems 

The dN /dz of Lyman limit systems is consistent with that 
of strong Mg IT absorbers (with W,(Mg II) > 0.3 A) over the 
redshift range for which both have been observed, 0.4 < 
Zz < 2.2. For W,(Mg II) > 0.3 A, y = 1.0+ 0.1, consistent 
with no evolution. For even stronger Mg II systems 
(W.(Mg ID) > 1 A), dN/dz increases more dramatically 
with z, with y = 2.3+1.0. 

The number of Mg II systems (equivalent width 
distribution) continues to increase down to the sensitivity 
of the best surveys, W,(Mg II) > 0.02 A, such that dN/dz = 
2.740.15 at z ~ 1. The ‘weak’ Mg II absorbers are therefore 
more common than the strong systems (W,(Mg II) > 0.3 A) 
known to be associated with luminous galaxies. Unlike 
the strong Mg II absorbers, the weak Mg II absorbers are 
sub-Lyman limit systems (they do not have Lyman limit 
breaks), and no galaxies have been identified at the redshift 
of absorption. Yet, photoionization models indicate that 
the metallicities of these weak absorbers are at least 10% 
of the solar value, and in some cases comparable to solar. 
They are a varied population: some have relatively strong 
Fe II while others have no Fe II detected, and some 
have strong C IV that requires a separate phase while 
others have no C IV detected. Those with strong Fe II 
are constrained to be smaller than 10 pc (the ionization 
parameter must be small and n, large, as can be seen in 
figure 6). Also, since Fe is produced primarily by Type 
Ia supernovae they must be enriched by a relatively old 
STELLAR POPULATION. Those with weaker or undetected Fe II 
could be larger (kpcs or tens of kpcs) and possibly enriched 
by Type II supernovae. Candidate environments that 
could be traced by weak Mg II absorption are: remnants of 
pre-galactic star clusters formed in mini-haloes at z > 10, 
super star clusters formed in interactions, tidally stripped 
material, low surface brightness galaxies and ejected or 
infalling clouds (analogous to the Milky Way high-velocity 
clouds). 

The evolution of dN/dz for C IV absorbers can be 
studied in the optical for high redshifts. For W(CIV) > 
0.4 A and z > 1.2, the number decreases with increasing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


z,as y = —2.44+ 0.8. In this same interval, the number 
of Lyman limit systems is still increasing with redshift, 
with y = 15+40.4. This implies that the dramatic 
evolution in the number of C IV systems is either due 
to a change in metallicity or a change in ionization state. 
The dN/dz for C IV systems peaks at intermediate z and 
declines, consistent with no evolution, until the present. 
Combining optical and UV data, C IV and Mg II have 
been compared at 0.4 < z < 2.2. The fraction of 
systems with large W,(C IV)/W,(Mg II) decreases rapidly 
with decreasing redshift; there is a shift toward ‘lower 
ionization systems’. 

It is important to consider that the HI, Mg Il and CIV 
absorptions do not always arise in the same phase. It is 
possible that the C IV in many z ~ 1 Mg II absorption 
systems arises in a phase similar to the galactic coronas. If 
the origin of this phase is related to star-forming processes 
in the disk, then it might be expected to diminish below 
z = 1.2 since peak star formation rate is passed. 

Another important trend is the fact that the very 
strongest Mg II absorbers evolve away from z = 2 until 
the present. If we study the kinematic structure of these 
objects, we find that they commonly have a ‘double’ 
structure, with two separate kinematic regions in the Mg II 
profile. These objects also have strong C IV which also has 
separate components around the two Mg II regions in the 
‘double’ structure. The CIV does not arise primarily in the 
individual Mg II clouds, nor is it in a smooth, ‘common 
halo’ structure that extends in velocity space around the 
entire Mg II profile. As more data are collected on the 
kinematic structure of various transitions in these ‘double’ 
systems, it will be interesting to consider the hypothesis 
that galaxy pairs in the process of merger are responsible. 
The number of these is thought to have been dramatically 
larger in the past. 


Damped Ly a systems (DLAs) 

The N(H I) > 10*°3 cm~ systems are of particular interest 
because it is possible to observe many different chemical 
elements (such as Zn, Cr, Fe, Mn and Ni) in these 
objects back to high redshift. Metallicities and abundance 
patterns can be studied and compared with those of old 
stellar populations in the Milky Way. Back to z = 3, 
the metallicity in DLAs, as measured by the undepleted 
element zinc, is about 10% of the solar value, but it may 
decline at z > 3. The identity of sites responsible for DLAs 
at high z remains controversial, but they do contain most 
of the neutral hydrogen in the universe, from which most 
of its stars form. The kinematic structure of the absorption 
profiles of neutral and low ionization species is consistent 
with the rotation of a thick disk, so that it is possible that 
these are the z = 3 progenitors of normal spiral galaxies. 
However, this signature is not unique. It could also be the 
consequence of directed infall in an hierarchical structure 
formation scenario. The higher-ionization species show 
complex kinematics which vary in relation to those of the 
lower-ionization gas; in some systems they appear to trace 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-Q142242309° 


rrp rrr» 


ritliii al 


if Li Nth non il a 


500 


5 
Wavelength (A) 


T 


PG1634+706 


| 
2800 
Wavelength (A) 


\ 
2600 


\ 
3000 


3200 


Figure 9. Illustration of structure evolution of intergalactic gas from high to low redshift. The upper spectrum of a z = 3.6 quasar is a 
Keck/HIRES observation, while the lower spectrum is a FOS/HST observation of a z = 1.3 quasar. Higher-redshift quasars show a 
much thicker forest of Ly a lines. Slices through N-body/hydrodynamic simulation results at the two epochs z = 3 and z = 1 are 
shown in the right-hand panels. Three contour levels are shown: 101! cm? (dotted lines), 10!* cm~? (solid lines) and 10! cem~? (thick 
solid lines). Evolution proceeds so that the voids become more empty so that even the low column density material is found in 


filamentary structures at low redshifts. 


relatively similar structure, and in others there are clearly 
several different phases. 

At low redshift, many of the galaxies that are 
responsible for the DLA absorption can be directly 
identified. These galaxies are a heterogeneous population. 
They are not just the most luminous galaxies, but include 
dwarf and low surface brightness galaxies, and even 
cases where no galaxy has been identified to sensitive 
limits. Damped Ly a absorption does not trace the 
most luminous objects, but rather it traces the largest 
neutral gas reservoirs. An additional selection effect may 
be important. The most dust-rich galaxies that have 
the potential to produce DLA absorption could produce 
enough extinction so that their background quasars will 
not be included in quasar surveys. In this way, the 
population of DLAs that are actually observed could be 
significantly biased against dusty galaxy hosts. 


Future prospects 

The next decade will see the synthesis of the various 
techniques for the study of galactic evolution, through 
their stars and through their gas. Higher-resolution 
quasar spectra will be obtained in the ultraviolet (with 
the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) and with 
the Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS) on the HST, and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


later, hopefully, with a larger UV space telescope). It 
will then be possible to conduct a systematic analysis of 
the relationships between the different ionization species 
that trace the different phases of gas in 0.4 < z < 1.5 
galaxies. In this redshift regime, comparisons with the 
detailed morphological structure and orientations of the 
absorbing galaxies is possible from HST images. 

Invaluable insights into the origin of quasar absorp- 
tion lines have been gleaned from absorption studies of 
nearby galaxies, for which it is possible to directly observe 
the processes that are involved. Making more observa- 
tions of this type will be possible by discoveries of bright 
quasars that fall behind nearby galaxies. The discoveries 
of quasars in large surveys will also include multiple lines 
of sight behind distant absorption line systems which can 
be used to produce 3D maps of the structures. 

The interstellar medium of the Milky Way shows 
structure on sub-pc scales, and absorption features can 
only be resolved with resolution <1 km s-!. Such a 
resolution will soon be available on 8 m class telescopes. 
This is important for separating blends and for looking 
for metallicity, ionization and abundance pattern gradients 
along the line of sight. 

The key low-ionization transitions of Mg II and Fe II 
are shifted into the near-IR region of the spectrum for z > 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Quasistellar Objects: Intervening Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2.5. Very soon, near-IR quasar spectra will be obtained at 
relatively high resolution (~20 km s~'). Also, IR-imaging, 
narrow-band techniques and multi-object spectroscopy in 
the near-IR should provide much more information about 
absorbing galaxies at higher redshifts. This will extend 
evolutionary studies back to an epoch at which formation 
processes may be contributing significantly to evolution. 


Bibliography 
Articles in review journals: 


Churchill C W and Charlton J C 2000 Mg II absorbers: a 
review Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific in press 

Rauch M 1998 The Lyman alpha forest in the spectra of 
QSOs Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 267 


Conference proceedings: 


Blades J C, Turnshek D A and Norman C 1988 QSO 
Absorption Lines: Probing the Universe, Proceedings 
of the QSO Absorption Line Meeting (Baltimore 1987) 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Meylan G 1995 QSO Absorption Lines: Proceedings of the 
ESO Workshop (Munich 1994) (Berlin: Springer) 
Petitjean P and Charlot S 1997 Structure and Evolution of the 
Intergalactic Medium from QSO Absorption Lines (Paris: 

Editions Frontiéres) 


Jane Charlton and Chris Churchill 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Quasistellar Objects: Intrinsic AGN Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quasistellar Objects: Intrinsic AGN 
Absorption Lines 


Any gaseous material along our line of sight to distant 
QUASARS or, more generally, ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGNS) 
will absorb light according to the amounts and range of 
ions present. Strong absorption lines are common in rest- 
frame ultraviolet (UV) spectra of AGNs due to a variety of 
resonant transitions, for example the Lyman series lines 
of neutral hydrogen (H I, most notably Lya 11216; see 
also LYMAN ALPHA ABSORPTION: THE DAMPED SYSTEMS) and high- 
ionization doublets like CIV 14.1549, 1551 (of triply ionized 
carbon). 

The lines are called intrinsic if the absorbing gas is 
physically related to the AGN, e.g. if the absorber resides 
broadly within the radius of the AGN’s surrounding ‘host’ 
galaxy. Intrinsic absorption lines are thus valuable probes 
of the kinematics, physical conditions and elemental 
abundances in the gas near AGNSs. 

Studies of intrinsic absorbers have historically 
emphasized quasar broad absorption lines (BALs), which 
clearly identify energetic outflows from the central 
engines. Today we recognize a wider variety of intrinsic 
lines in a wider range of objects. For example, we now 
know that sEYFERT 1 GALAxiES (the less luminous cousins 
of quasars) have intrinsic absorption. We also realize that 
intrinsic lines can form in a range of AGN environments— 
from the dynamic inner regions like the BALs, to the 
more quiescent outer host galaxies > 10 kpc away. 
One complicating factor is that most AGNs also have 
absorption lines due to unrelated gas or galaxies far from 
the AGN (see QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: INTERVENING ABSORPTION 
LINES). Part of the effort, therefore, is to identify the intrinsic 
lines and locate their absorbing regions relative to the 
AGNs. Empirical line classifications are a good starting 
point for this work. 


Empirical line types 

AGN absorption lines are usually classified according 
to the widths of their profiles. These classes separate 
the clearly intrinsic broad lines from the many others of 
uncertain origin. The main empirical classes are (1) the 
BALs, (2) the narrow absorption lines (NALs), and (3) the 
intermediate ‘mini-BALs.’ 

Broad absorption lines (figure 1) are blueshifted 
relative to the AGN emission lines, implying outflow 
velocities from near 0 kms“! to as muchas ~ 60000 kms7! 
(~ 20% of the speed of light). A representative line width 
is~ 10000kms“!, although there is considerable diversity 
among BAL profiles. Velocity widths = 3000 km s™! and 
blueshifted velocity extrema = 5000 km s~! are usually 
considered minimum requirements for classification as a 
BAL. Some BALs have several distinct absorption troughs, 
while others are strictly ‘detached’ from the emission 
lines—such that the absorption appears only at blueshifts 
exceeding several thousand km sl. 

Narrow absorption lines (figure 2) have widths less 
than a few hundred km s~!. NALs with absorption 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Hoe 8 

| > 

o 6 ae, 
| | | 


Soy 


T 
= 
[o) 
+ 
=, 
n 
| 


1000 1200 1400 1600 


Figure 1. Detached BALs in the quasar PG 1254 + 047. The BALs 
are labelled just above the spectrum. The wavelengths of 
prominent broad emission lines are marked across the top. The 
flux has units 10 erg s~! em~? Att. 


Measured Flux 


l 
1300 1400 1500 
Rest Wavelength (A) 


| 
1200 


Figure 2. Intrinsic absorption in the quasar PG 0935 + 417. A 
system of associated NALs is labelled above the spectrum, with 
open brackets showing the doublet separations. A mini-BAL 
due to CIV blueshifted by ~ 51 000 kms! is labelled below. The 


flux has units 10 erg s~! em~? Att. 


redshifts, z,, within +5000 km s~! of the emission redshift, 
Ze, are called ‘associated’ (or za © Ze) lines because of their 
likely physical connection to the AGN. In general, NALs 
can appear at redshifts from z. © Ze to z, © 0. Many of 
these systems are not related to the AGNs. 


Absorption lines with intermediate widths between 
the BALs and NALs are increasingly called mini-BALs 
(figure 2). Their strictly blueshifted profiles appear smooth 
and BAL-like in high resolution spectra, and their centroid 
velocities span the same range as the BAL troughs (from 
near 0 km s~! to almost 0.2c). Mini-BALs evidently form 
in outflows similar to the BALs. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intrinsic AGN Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Outflow Velocity (km s ‘) 
2000 1000 


Normalized Flux 


je js a jo 
1535 1540 1545 
Rest Wavelength (A) 


Figure 3. High-resolution blow-up of the CIV NALs in PG 
0935 + 417, revealing multiple components (cf figure 2). The 
open brackets mark the strongest doublet pairs. The outflow 
velocities are appropriate for the short-wavelength doublet 
members. The absorption complex at 1535-1540 A is intrinsic 
based on the broad line profiles and doublet ratios that imply 
partial line-of-sight coverage. 


Identifying intrinsic NALs 


The first evidence that some NALs are intrinsic came from 
statistical tendencies, namely, (1) quasar NALs appear 
with greater frequency near the emission-line redshift, 
and (2) the strengths of these z, ~ Ze systems correlate 
with the quasars’ radio properties. The first tendency 
might be explained by external galaxies clustering around 
quasars, but the second clearly demonstrates a physical 
relationship to the quasars themselves. 


Direct evidence for the intrinsic origin of specific 
NALs has come from spectroscopic indicators, such 
as (1) time-variable line strengths, (2) well-resolved 
line profiles that are smooth and broad compared to 
the thermal velocity, (3) multiplet ratios that imply 
partial coverage of the background light source(s), and 
(4) high space densities (2100 cm s~°) inferred from 
the presence of excited-state absorption lines. These 
properties signal intrinsic absorption because they are 
most easily understood in terms of the dense and dynamic 
environments near AGNSs. Unrelated intervening 
absorbers—typically inter-galactic gas clouds or extended 
galactic halos—should generally be larger, more quiescent, 
and less ionized for a given gas density. The link 
between the first three properties and the near-quasar 
environment is further strengthened by the fact that they 
are common in BALs and mini-BALs. NALs with these 
characteristics probably also form in outflows; they have 
been measured at blueshifted (ejection) velocities from ~ 0 
to ~ 24000 km s“! (e.g. figure 3). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Global covering factors and the ubiquity of 
intrinsic absorbers 

All varieties of quasars and Seyfert 1 galaxies show some 
type of intrinsic absorption, but different objects favor 
different types of absorbers. For example, BALs and other 
high-velocity (= 3000 km s~' ) intrinsic lines appear only 
in quasars and never in the Seyfert galaxies. BALs also 
tend to avoid quasars with strong radio emission, while 
associated NALs seem to favor them. Preferences like 
these are probably tied to the unique physical conditions, 
whereby different AGNSs drive different types of outflows. 

Intrinsic lines also do not appear in every individual 
spectrum. For example, BALs are detected in only ~ 12% 
of quasars. The detection rate of associated (and so 
probably intrinsic) NALs in quasars is not well known, but 
it appears to be roughly similar to the BALs. Mini-BALs 
may be somewhat rarer than both BALs and associated 
NALs in quasars, but they can appear in either ‘radio-loud’ 
or ‘radio-quiet’ objects. Mini-BALs and intrinsic NALs are 
both common in Seyfert 1 galaxies, with at least one of 
these features appearing in 50-70% of the low-luminosity 
sources. 

These detection rates (for any given object class) 
depend on viewing angle effects and on the global 
covering factors of the absorbing gas. If the objects 
are randomly oriented, the absorption-line detection 
frequencies should approximately equal the average value 
of the global covering factor, Q = Q/4z, where Q is the 
solid angle subtended by the absorber as seen from the 
central light source. In practice, the situation can be more 
complicated. For example, attenuation by BAL gas might 
bias quasar samples against the inclusion of sources with 
BALs. Thus the true global covering factor of BAL regions 
could be 20-30%, instead of the ~ 12% implied by the 
detection rate. Nonetheless, the overall conclusion is that 
intrinsic absorbers are present in all AGNs, with global 
covering factors similar to the line detection frequencies in 
each type of object. 


Absorber geometry 

A consistent picture of the geometry has emerged in 
which the absorbing gas resides primarily near the 
equatorial plane of the AGN AccRETION DISK (figure 4). In 
particular, spectropolarimetric observations show that the 
continuum light from BAL quasars is more polarized than 
non-BAL quasars. Also, the percentage polarization is 
typically much greater inside BAL troughs compared to 
the adjacent continuum. These results are understood in 
terms of light scattering in the disk geometry. Quasars 
viewed close to edge-on exhibit BALs because our sight- 
line intersects the the absorbing gas. These objects are 
also more polarized because the direct (unpolarized) 
light through the BAL region is slightly attenuated; 
thus the scattered (polarized) light makes a relatively 
larger contribution to their measured flux. BAL troughs 
have higher percentage polarizations because the direct 
(unpolarized) light in the troughs is more attenuated than 
the continuum. Quasars without BALs, viewed from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intrinsic AGN Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Absorbing Scattered 
@e g Region eo Ray 
Fs "o,%0 Qo aaa . gen 
ore oe Pag SO 
— ee f= 
e,e0 @ 
ore 8 | oP Sa. . 
7° BELR - @ 6 
ee ee 


Figure 4. Schematic absorber geometry. The dotted lines are 
representative light rays from the continuum source (central 
dot). The open rectangles mark the broad emission line region 
(BELR) near the accretion disk plane. The teardrop lobes above 
and below are putative scattering regions near the disk axis. 
Extended radio jets, when present, would lie along this axis. The 
radius of the BELR (equation (3) below) sets the scale. 


above or below the disk plane, have low polarizations 
because their direct (unpolarized) light dominates the 
measured flux. 

This picture is also supported by observations 
showing that quasars with reddened spectra, presumably 
caused by dust near the disk plane, are more likely to 
have BALs and high polarizations. Similarly, studies 
of radio-loud quasars show that associated NALs are 
stronger and more common in sources with their radio 
jets aligned perpendicular to our line of sight (such that 
their unresolved inner disks are viewed nearly edge-on). 


Basic physical properties 
Kinematics 
One surprising property of intrinsic absorbers is that 
none of them have changed velocity between observations 
that now span 10-20 years. In one well-studied case, 
distinct features in a quasar BAL show < 30 km s-! of 
movement over 5 years in the quasar rest frame, implying 
an acceleration of < 0.02 cm s~?. The outflow speeds of 
10 000-20 000 km s~ are therefore stable to < 0.2% on this 
time scale. 

Another general property is the kinematic complexity 
(e.g. figures 1-3). Many intrinsic absorbers have multiple 
distinct absorption troughs. Sometimes BALs, mini-BALs 
and/or NALs appear together in the same spectrum, either 
blended together or at different (non-overlapping) outflow 
velocities. The narrower lines, i.e. the NALs and mini- 
BALs, generally have small velocity dispersions compared 
to the outflow speeds. Evidently, the outflows producing 
these lines are not continuously accelerated from rest along 
our line of sight. These properties all present challenges 
for the physical models discussed below. 


Column densities and partial coverage 

Estimates of the column densities in each absorbing ion 
are complicated by the fact that many (most?) intrinsic 
absorbers only partially cover the background light 
source(s) along our line(s) of sight. Partial coverage might 
occur if the absorbing regions are porous or they are 
smaller than the emission sources in overall projected 
area (see figure 4). In any case, partial coverage leads 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to unabsorbed flux filling in the bottoms of the measured 
troughs. The observed line intensities thus depend on both 
the line-of-sight coverage fraction, C;, and the line optical 
depths as 

I, = A-C)1,+ C;le™ (1) 


where 0 < C; < 1, /, and J, are the observed and emitted 
(unabsorbed) intensities, and 1, is the line optical depth, at 
each line velocity v. The first term on the right-hand side 
represents the unabsorbed light that fills in the troughs. In 
the limit t, >> 1 we have simply, 


Cy =1- — 


Outside of that limit, we can compare lines whose true 
optical depth ratios are fixed by atomic constants, such 
as the HI Lyman lines or doublets like CIV 441548, 1550, 
to determine uniquely both the coverage fractions and 
the true optical depths across the line profiles. For the 
commonly measured doublets (like CIV), where the true 
optical depth ratios are ~ 2, the coverage fraction at each 
velocity follows from equation (1) such that, 


7-241 


C2 saa 
‘ I,-—2h,+1 


(2) 
where I; and J, are the observed line intensities, 
normalized by /,, at the same velocity in the weaker and 
stronger line troughs, respectively. The column densities, 
N, follow from the line optical depths via, 


where f and i, are the line’s oscillator strength and 
laboratory wavelength. The integral is performed over 
all or part of the line profile. 

This analysis has been applied to well-resolved 
multiplets in NALs and mini-BALs. The derived coverage 
fractions range from ~ 10% to 100%. The column densities 
in commonly measured ions (e.g. HI, C IV, N V, Si IV, etc) 
are usually in the range 10'° < N < 10'° cms, consistent 
with the usual absence of Lyman edge absorption at 912 A. 
Most BALs are too broad and blended for this analysis. 
They probably have Cf < 1 in general, but the exact values 
are rarely known. Crude estimates suggest that the range 
of BAL column densities is perhaps an order of magnitude 
larger than the well-measured NALs. 


Ionization and total column densities 

Intrinsic absorbers are in general highly ionized. Their 
lowest levels of ionization are usually characterized by 
ions such as C III, N III, Si IV or C IV. Lower ionization 
species like Si II, Fe II, Mg II or C II are rarely present. The 
upper limits of ionization are generally not known because 
higher ions have their resonance lines at shorter (and more 
difficult-to-measure) wavelengths. Existing data suggest 
that ionizations up to at least Ne VIII are common. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intrinsic AGN Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The strong radiative flux of the AGN provides a 
natural ionization source. Theoretical simulations of 
photoionized plasmas in equilibrium with the AGN 
radiation field are used to match the measured column 
densities, and thus derive the overall ionization state(s) 
and total column densities (in H I + H ID). The ionization 
state is described by an ionization parameter, U, which 
is the dimensionless ratio of hydrogen-ionizing photon to 
hydrogen particle densities in the absorber: 


1 Ee y 
U= dv 
An R? cny Jy, hv 


where ny is the absorber’s hydrogen density, R is its 
radial distance from the central quasar, L, is the quasar 
luminosity distribution and vy, is the frequency at the HI 
Lyman limit. For a ‘typical’ AGN spectral shape (with 
L, « v-'® in the Lyman continuum) we have 


U + 03 Nip Rot L46 (3) 


where no is the density in units of 10° cm s~%, Roi is 
the radial distance in units of 0.1 pc, and Lag is the AGN 
luminosity relative to 10% erg s~'. Typical U values are 
between ~ 0.01 and ~ 1. Absorbers at the same velocity, 
or at different velocities in the same spectrum, often have 
a range of U values implying a range of densities or radii 
in the overall absorbing region. Derived total column 
densities are usually Ny ~ 10 to 107! cm s~? for NAL 
regions and = 10” cm s~* for the BAL gas. 


Correlated x-ray absorption 

Recent studies have shown that the presence of intrinsic 
lines in the UV correlates with continuous (bound-free) 
absorption in soft x-rays. Evidently, the UV lines are just 
one aspect of the intrinsic absorber phenomenon. The x- 
ray results are important because they reveal generally 
higher ionizations, U > 1, and much higher total column 
densities, by 1-2 orders of magnitude, compared to the UV 
lines. A critical issue, therefore, is the physical relationship 
between the UV and x-ray absorbers. 

The data clearly show that different absorbers (of 
either type) can have a wide range of physical conditions. 
Some well-measured UV absorbers, in particular, have 
ionizations and total column densities that should produce 
only minimal x-ray absorption. Moreover, the best 
ensemble data are often inconsistent with a 1-zone 
medium producing all of the measured features. Spatially 
distinct zones with different ionizations and column 
densities are at least sometimes present. It is therefore 
likely that the UV and x-ray absorbers are physically 
related but not, in general, identically the same. 


Space densities and radial distances 

Most constraints on the radial distance come indirectly 
from estimates of the space density and ionization 
parameter (via equation (2)). The densities are derived 
in several ways. For example, the absence of broad or 
blueshifted forbidden emission lines, e.g. [O III] 45007, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


suggests (for BAL regions only) that this emission is 
suppressed by collisional de-excitation at high densities. 
Some AGNSs have absorption lines from excited energy 
states, implying significant densities to support the upper 
level populations. In other cases, time-variable absorption 
lines require minimum densities to allow the gas to adjust 
its ionization structure within the variability time. This 
last method assumes that the variability time exceeds the 
recombination time, trecomb © (nea)~!, where n, is the 
electron density and a is the recombination rate coefficient. 
Even if the line variability is not caused by changes 
in the ionization, it turns out that dynamical limits on 
clouds moving across our line of sight lead to similar R 
constraints. 

The overall results imply densities from < 7 cms~? to 
> 10° cms and corresponding distances from = 300 kpc 
to < 10 pc in different sources. The largest confirmed 
distances apply only to narrow and non-variable NALs. 
Lines with clear dynamic signatures, e.g. the BALs, mini- 
BALs and some NALs, probably form closer to the AGN 
than even the smallest of these upper limits. The minimum 
radial distance, Rmin, is set by the fact that many intrinsic 
absorbers, e.g. most BALs, suppress both the continuum 
and broad line emissions. The absorber distances therefore 
cannot be much less than the broad emission line region 
radius, Rggtr, Which is known independently to scale with 
AGN luminosity, such that 


Rmin © Reer © 0.1 (Lag)! pe (4) 


where Lg © 1 is ‘typical’ for quasars. (Values of L4g can 
actually range from < 0.001 in Seyfert nuclei to > 100in the 
most luminous quasars.) If there is absorbing gas near this 
minimum radius, the densities could reach ~ 10!° cm s~3 
(see equation (2)). 


Physical models 


Most physical models of intrinsic absorbers feature a wind- 
disk geometry similar to figure 4. The outflowing gas stays 
close to the accretion-disk plane, and we observe it (via 
blueshifted absorption lines) only if our sight line(s) to 
the emission source(s) intersect wind material. The disk 
provides a likely source for the wind material, and its 
acceleration to high speeds probably occurs via radiation 
pressure from the central emission source. The outward 
transfer of angular momentum in these winds might 
facilitate the inward flow of matter in the accretion disk, 
thus promoting the growth and fueling of the central black 
hole. 

The measured line velocities suggest that the outflows 
often originate near the minimum radius implied by 
equation (3). In particular, the radial acceleration of a wind 
driven by radiation pressure from a central point source 
with luminosity L and mass M is 


udu fil GM 


dR 40 R2 cma Nu R2 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intrinsic AGN Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where f, is the fraction of the luminosity absorbed or 
scattered in the wind. Integrating this equation from R 
to infinity yields the terminal velocity, 


So.sLs6 
22 


1/2 
Vso © 10000 a1" ( - 0.80 kms! (5) 


where N2 is the total column density in 10” cm s~?, Mg 
is the central black hole mass relative to 10? Mo, and 
fo1 is the absorbed fraction compared to 10%. These 
expressions hold strictly for open geometries, where the 
photons escaping one location in the wind are not scattered 
or absorbed in another location. Estimates of the total 
absorption indicate that fo; could be as large as a few for 
BAL flows, and proportionately less for the narrower mini- 
BALs and NALs. Estimates of Nz range from < 0.01 for 
some intrinsic NALs to 2 1 for typical BALs. Radiative 
acceleration therefore requires small radii—very roughly 
similar to the radius of the broad emission line region. 

The radial scale is important for defining the mass and 
kinetic energy of outflowing gas. The total wind mass at 
any instant is, 


M, © 1.1Q01Nx2 Ri, Mo 


where Qo, is the global covering factor relative to 10%. The 
mass loss rate, M,,, depends further on the characteristic 
flow time, v/AR, such that, 


Ros 
M, *© 0.11 N. 
) Qo.1 N22 BR 


vs Mo yr 


where v4 is the flow velocity in units of 10* km s~! and 


ARp, is its radial thickness in units of 0.1 pc. The kinetic 
energy luminosity is Lk ~ 5M,v?, or, 


2 


R 
Le © 4x10" Qo1 Nx ARos vp ergss | 


During a quasar’s lifetime, perhaps ~ 108 years, outflows 
with these parameter values will eject a total of ~ 10? Mo 
of gas with kinetic energy ~ 10°8 ergs. BAL winds might 
often have total masses, kinetic energies, etc, that are an 
order of magnitude larger, based on our best estimates of 
Qo1 = 1-3 and N2 = 1 for these outflows. 

One unresolved issue is whether the outflowing gas 
is smoothly distributed or residing in discrete clouds. This 
seemingly simple question goes to the heart of the wind 
physics. It was long believed that the flows consist of 
many discrete clouds because, for example, a flow with 
Ny © 1 and ARoi © Roi © 1 would have a mean density 
of only n © 3 x 10‘ cms’? . This density would lead to U 
values several orders of magnitude larger than expected 
from the data (equation (2)). Moreover, a gas with this high 
ionization cannot be radiatively accelerated because the 
ions would be too stripped of electrons to absorb enough 
incident flux. The flows must therefore be distributed in 
much denser clouds that fill only part of the wind volume. 
If these clouds individually have velocity dispersions close 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to the sound/thermal speed (roughly 15 km s~! for a 
nominal 15 000 K gas), then a smooth BAL profile of width 
10* km s“! requires > 1000 clouds along the line of sight. 
The main objection to this scenario is that the clouds must 
be very small, $ 10° cm across, and they cannot survive 
as discrete entities without some ad hoc external pressure. 

An alternative model has emerged in which the flows 
are, in fact, smoothly distributed with high ionization 
parameters. The high U values, = 100, are reconciled with 
the data (and with radiative acceleration) by invoking a 
large column density (Ny 2 10% cm s~* for BAL winds) 
of highly ionized gas at the base of the flow. This gas 
is not radiatively accelerated because it is too ionized. 
But its bound-free absorption (in soft x-rays and the 
extreme UV) greatly ‘softens’ the spectrum seen by the 
wind material downstream, thereby lowering the wind’s 
ionization level and facilitating its acceleration. The most 
compelling aspect of this model is that it provides a 
physical basis for the observed correlation between UV 
and x-ray absorption: the winds revealed by the UV lines 
cannot exist without the shielding x-ray absorber. The 
leading alternative explanation, which simply equates the 
two absorbing regions, presents a serious problem because 
the high column densities implied by the x-ray absorption 
might be impossible to radiatively accelerate (equation 
(4)). 

A serious challenge to all models is the kinematic 
complexity. It is surprising, for example, that no intrinsic 
absorbers have shown line-of-sight acceleration. The 
crossing time for a flow with vs = 2 and ARoi = 
1 is only ~ 5 years, yet repeated observations over 
this time frame reveal no velocity changes. Just as 
challenging are the multi-component line troughs and 
the frequent lack of absorption near zero velocity. These 
characteristics might be caused by the episodic ejection 
of discrete ‘blobs,’ or by well-collimated flows that cross 
our line of sight and thus reveal only part of their 
full velocity extent. The latter hypothesis seems more 
likely for at least the broader lines, because their super- 
sonic velocity dispersions (> 1000 km s~!) should quickly 
dissipate discrete blobs. Collimated accretion disk winds 
might cross our line of sight if they are driven at first 
vertically off the disk, before being bent into fully radial 
motion by the AGN’s radiative force. The collimation 
and vertical ejection might both be facilitated by magnetic 
fields running perpendicular through the disk plane. 
However, multiple line troughs would require multiple 
collimated outflows. A major problem with this picture is 
that these intricate flow structures, which are tied to the 
accretion disk, must remain stable while the disk rotates. 

A more general problem is determining how much, 
and what aspects, of the diversity among intrinsic 
absorbers results simply from orientation effects. Do 
the various outflows identified by BALs, mini-BALs and 
intrinsic NALs coexist generally in AGNs? Orientation 
is clearly not the only factor. For example, the 
complete lack of high-velocity lines in Seyfert galaxies 
suggests a luminosity dependence, probably related to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Intrinsic AGN Absorption Lines 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the requirements for radiative acceleration. Similarly, the 
relationships to AGN radio emissions suggest that there 
is some (unknown) physical connection between the disk- 
wind properties and the formation of radio jets. 


Element abundances and host galaxy evolution 
Our understanding of the element abundances near AGNs 
is based on general principles of stellar NUCLEOSYNTHESIS 
and galactic chemical evolution. All of the heavy elements 
from carbon on up are synthesized from primordial H 
and He in stars. The amounts of these elements are thus 
revealing of both the amount of local STAR FORMATION and 
the evolutionary status of the galactic environment. The 
elements near AGNSs specifically probe these properties in 
the centers of big galaxies. For distant quasars, the local 
abundance evolution might involve some of the first stars 
forming in collapsed structures after the Big Bang. 

Abundance measurements from absorption lines 
are, in principle, quite simple; one has only to apply 
appropriate correction factors for the ionization to convert 
the ionic column densities into relative abundances. For 
example, the abundance ratio of any two elements a and 
b can be written simply as 


a _ Na) F(bj) 


b — N(bj) F(a) 


where N and F are respectively the column densities and 
number fractions of element a in ion state i, etc, in the 
absorbing gas. The F values are generally adopted from 
photoionization calculations. 

The results from intrinsic NALs, and independently 
from the broad emission lines, indicate that quasar 
environments have roughly solar or higher heavy-element 
abundances out to redshifts > 4. (Results based on 
the BALs are so far unreliable because of the problems 
with partial line-of-sight coverage mentioned earlier.) The 
local star formation must be both rapid and extensive to 
achieve these high abundances at early cosmic times. In 
particular, much of the gas must have already collapsed 
into stars by the time the quasars ‘turned on’ or became 
observable—just a few billion years after the Big Bang. 
These findings support prior expectations for the rapid, 
early-epoch evolution of massive galactic nuclei. 


Bibliography 

Studies of intrinsic AGN absorption lines began in the 
1960s with measurements of BALs and associated NALs 
in quasars. The status of this evolving field circa 1997 
is summarized by numerous articles and reviews in the 
conference proceedings: 


Arav A, Shlosman I and Weymann R J (eds) Mass Ejection 
from AGN (San Francisco: ASP Conference Series) 


More recent results on quasar BALs appear in 


Hamann F 1998 Broad PV absorption in the QSO 
PG 1254+047: column densities, ionizations and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


metal abundances in broad absorption line winds 
Astrophys. J. 500 798-809 


The status of BAL polarization work is summarized by 


Ogle P M, Cohen M H, Miller J S, Tran H D, Goodrich R W 
and Martel A R 1999 Polarization of broad absorption 
Line QSOs. I. A spectropolarimetric atlas Astrophys. J. 
Suppl. 125 1-34 


The latest results on intrinsic x-ray absorption are 
discussed by 


Brandt W N, Laor A and Wills B J 1999 On the nature of 
soft x-ray weak quasi-stellar objects Astrophys. J. 528 
637-49 


A comprehensive study of intrinsic UV absorption in 
Seyfert galaxies appears in 


Crenshaw D M, Kraemer S B, Boggess A, Maran S P, 
Mushotzky R F and Wu C-C 1999 Intrinsic absorption 
lines in Seyfert 1 galaxies: I. Ultraviolet spectra from 
the Hubble space telescope Astrophys. J. 516 750-68 


The work on AGN element abundances is reviewed by 


Hamann F H and Ferland G J 1999 Elemental abundances 
in QSOs: star formation and galactic nuclear evolu- 
tion at high redshifts Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 37 
487-531 


Frederick Hamann 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


Quasistellar objects, or quasars, were defined originally 
as star-like objects of large redshift. Quasars are believed 
to be powered by the accretion of matter onto massive 
black holes at the centers of galaxies, a process that emits 
more energy than thermonuclear reactions. Today, 
quasars are considered to be the most luminous members 
of the general class of objects called active galactic 
nuclei, or AGNs. Quasars are the most luminous objects 
in the universe. 

This article begins with a brief history of the 
discovery of quasars. Next it describes their main 
properties and the concepts that have been developed to 
explain them. It continues with a description of their 
nature and theoretical models. Then additional properties 
and topics are considered: absorption lines, host galaxies, 
and luminosity functions and evolution. 


History 

In 1960 Mathews and Sandage identified the radio source 
3C 48 (the 48th object in the 3rd Cambridge catalog of 
radio sources) with a star-like object of 16th magnitude. 
Its optical spectrum showed unusual emission lines that 
could not be identified, and the object was considered to 
be a radio star, more of which were identified in the 
course of their work. In 1962, Hazard, Mackey and 
Shimmins established an accurate radio position for 
another source, the BRIGHT QUASAR 3C 273, by observing 
the object as it was being occulted by the Moon. Schmidt 
used this position to identify 3C 273 with a 13th 
magnitude star-like object (figure 1), whose spectrum 
also displayed unusual emission lines. Schmidt 
subsequently realized that the emission lines could be 
identified with lines from hydrogen and oxygen 
redshifted by 15.8% of their rest wavelength. A redshift 
of 0.158 was unprecedented for such a bright object. If 
the redshift arose from the expansion of the universe, it 
meant that 3C 273 was about two billion light-years 
distant, according to the Hubble law, in which the 
redshift of objects increases in proportion to their 
distance. Furthermore, the combination of the observed 
brightness of 3C 273 with the inferred distance meant 
that it had an intrinsic luminosity 100 times that of an 
entire galaxy like the Milky Way. 

Following Schmidt’s work, it was immediately 
realized that the redshift of 3C 48 was 0.37. By 1965, 3C 
9 was found to have a redshift of 2.01, well in excess of 
the 0.46 value for 3C 295, the most distant galaxy known 
at the time. It had taken more than 30 yr of work on 
galaxies with the largest telescopes in the world for 
astronomers to push the limit of the observable universe 
to the distance of 3C 295. Only 2 yr after the discovery of 
quasars, the maximum observed redshift had increased 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Optical image of 3C273. The object looks stellar in 
this image except that it is accompanied by a jet of radiation 
extending to the lower right. (Credit National Optical 
Astronomy Observatories/National Science Foundation. 
Copyright Association of Universities for Research in 
Astronomy Inc (AURA), all rights reserved.) 


by more than a factor of 4. The light from 3C 9 had taken 
80% of the age of the universe, or more than 10 billion 
years, to reach Earth. The ability to observe objects at 
redshifts greater than 2 meant that astronomers could 
probe back in time to within a few billion years of the big 
bang. 

The unusual nature of quasars was compounded by 
the work of Smith and Hoffleit, who showed that 3C 273 
varied significantly in brightness on timescales of 
months. This variability indicated that the characteristic 
size of the emission region was light-months and led 
immediately to the question, how could such a small 
object produce more light than an entire galaxy, with a 
typical size of 100 000 light-years? 

To summarize, quasars revolutionized astronomy in 
the 1960s for two reasons: (1) they pushed back the 
limits of the observable universe significantly in both 
distance and lookback time and (2) their compact size 
and great luminosities could not be explained in terms of 
the stars and galaxies known at the time. Quasars opened 
new frontiers in cosmology and_ stimulated the 
development of a new subject—relativistic astrophysics. 


Main properties and concepts 

The main observed properties of quasars are the 

following. 

1. Nuclei that appear starlike in optical images. 
Extended emission can now often be detected around 
the nucleus, and jets extending away from the 
nucleus are occasionally seen. 

2. Spectra showing broad emission lines with widths 
greater than observed in normal galaxies and a range 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of ionization broader than seen in typical nebulae 
ionized by stars. 

3. Structures in quasars with observable radio emission 
that range in angular extent from m arcsec to tens of 
arcsec. The most compact structures are often 
observed to expand on timescales of years. 

4. Radiation of similar power at energies ranging from 
y-rays to the far-infrared (100 um) region of the 
spectrum, with a decrease in energy at radio 
frequencies. 

5. Redshifts, z, of spectral features ranging from 0.1 to 
5. 

6. Variability in brightness at different wavelengths on 
timescales as short as days to weeks. 

7. Luminosities as high as 10'* Suns. 

8. Total energy in high-energy electrons in the region 
of radio emission that can exceed 10 erg. 

Additional information about these properties and the 

concepts they imply about the nature of quasars follows 

below. 


Redshifts 

The large redshifts of quasars are one of their distinctive 
features, and the value of the greatest known redshift, z, 
continued to increase after 1965, surpassing z = 3 in 1973 
and z = 4 in 1987. The maximum value reached z = 4.9 in 
1991, and an object at z = 5 was discovered in the first 
stages of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey in 1998 (see 
QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: SURVEYS). The great majority of 
quasars, however, have redshifts less than 2.5. This 
occurs for two reasons: (1) such quasars are easier to find 
because they are brighter in the ultraviolet than most stars 
and (2) they are intrinsically more numerous than quasars 
with z > 2.5. The low-redshift limit of quasars is 
normally set at 0.1 because objects at lower redshift are 
usually resolvable as galaxies and are cataloged as 
ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI. 

In addition to providing our first view of the 
universe at z > 0.5, quasars also proved to be valuable 
cosmological probes because they were luminous enough 
to yield clues on the properties of matter along the line of 
sight back to the Earth (see discussion on absorption lines 
below and in more detail in QUASISTELLAR OBJECTS: 
INTERVENING ABSORPTION LINES). 


Variability 

Observations indicate that variability is a common 
feature of quasars and most quasars are believed to show 
variations in light at the 10-40% level over timescales of 
months to years. Furthermore, variations are observed in 
the strength and shape of emission lines and in 
continuum emission at x-ray, ultraviolet and radio 
wavelengths. The variations are irregular in nature, with 
periods of flaring and relative quiescence being 
intermixed. Some objects, which are called BLAZARS, 
show variations in light on timescales as short as | day 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(see BL LACERTAE, BL LACERTAE OBJECTS and AGN: 
VARIABILITY). 

Variability provides powerful tools for determining 
the inner structure and nature of quasars. When the 
central source itself varies in brightness, the effects of the 
variation propagate outward with time and produce 
changes in, for example, the emission line spectra and 
continuum radiation from the material surrounding the 
central source. In the case of blazars, we are seeing 
almost directly down the axis of the jets of material that 
are being ejected from the central regions. By following 
how the radiation from the jets varies at different 
wavelengths with time, we are able to infer the physical 
conditions and processes that are occurring in the jets. 

Observations of the variability of quasars carried out 
at different wavelengths in intensive campaigns and also 
in programs extending for years have provided some of 
the most direct information on the nature of the inner 
regions in quasars and AGNs. These programs have 
shown that the emission line regions are considerably 
smaller and closer to the central source than was 
originally thought. 


Continuum emission and multi-wavelength 
observations 

Quasars emit radiation strongly in bands ranging from y- 
rays and x-rays to the far infrared (100 um). The amount 
of energy emitted in each band by most objects is 
remarkably similar, in contrast to normal thermal 
radiation from stars, which is much more peaked and 
restricted in wavelength. For example, most stars are cool 
and are faint at ultraviolet wavelengths. In contrast, most 
quasars with redshifts less than 2.5 are bright at 
ultraviolet wavelengths, a property that is very helpful in 
distinguishing them from the more numerous stars that 
are found in sky surveys. 

Although quasars were discovered through their 
radio emission, about 90% of quasars do not emit 
strongly at radio wavelengths and are classified as radio 
quiet. Radio-loud quasars are typically 100 times brighter 
at radio wavelengths than radio-quiet quasars. 

The continuum emission in quasars appears to arise 
from a combination of thermal and _ non-thermal 
processes. For the latter, synchrotron emission from 
relativistic electrons produces the lower-energy radiation. 
The x-ray and y-ray emission may come from the inverse 
Compton scattering of lower-energy photons by high- 
energy electrons, although thermal mechanisms may also 
play a part in x-ray emission. In any event, the continuum 
radiation from quasars demonstrates that some very 
energetic processes are involved. Furthermore, the 
continuum radiation at the highest energies tends to show 
the most dramatic variability and the shortest timescales, 
which is another indication of the extreme conditions that 
exist near quasars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Emission lines 

The emission line spectra of quasars (figure 2) are 
characterized by the large widths of the lines and wide 
range of ionization. The full widths at half-maximum of 
the emission lines are typically 5000 km s' and range 
from about 500 km s"' to greater than 10 000 kms”. Full 
widths at the base of the lines can exceed a tenth the 
speed of light. 

The widths are produced by motions of gas in the 
emitting region, where a mixture of infall, rotation and 
ejection probably occurs. The widths are consistent with 
the emission region being at a distance of light-months to 
a few light-years from a central black hole. 

One of the most striking observational properties of 
the spectra of quasars and AGNs is the anticorrelation of 
the strength of the C IV emission line at 1550 A and the 
continuum luminosity, that is the emission line is 
observed to be weaker relative to the continuum in more 
luminous objects. This relation, which is called the 
Baldwin effect, is perhaps the most prominent observed 
correlation that has been found for quasar and AGN 
spectra. It is important for two main reasons: (1) the clues 
it provides about the nature of the emission line region 
and central source and (2) the potential it offers for using 
quasars as cosmological probes at high redshifts. 


10 


Composite Quasar Spectrum 


Flux 


1000 1500 =6©2000 )=8=6—2500 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. A composite quasar spectrum covering the ultraviolet 
region of the spectrum. It shows strong emission lines from 
hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen and magnesium. (Credit Francis P et 
al 1991 Astrophys. J. 373 465.) 


3000 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The strongest emission lines in quasar spectra come 
from hydrogen, carbon and magnesium, with lines of 
nitrogen, oxygen, iron and other elements also being 
visible. The observed levels of ionization range from 
neutral for hydrogen and oxygen up to five-times ionized 
oxygen and even more highly ionized iron. The range of 
ionization is another indicator of the strength of the non- 
thermal continuum radiation in quasars and its extent to 
high energies. 

Although it is difficult to make a reliable 
determination of the chemical abundances in quasar 
emission line regions, results to date indicate that the 
abundances are similar to those observed in present-day 
stars and nebulae, even in quasars at the highest redshifts. 
This is a striking result when one considers that the most 
distant quasars correspond to cosmic times of | or 2 
billion years after the big bang. Except for hydrogen, all 
the elements mentioned above originate in the 
thermonuclear reactions that occur in stars. The 
abundances of these elements increase with cosmic time 
as successive generations of stars complete their 
evolution. When stars die, they return part of their newly 
produced elements to interstellar space, and the next 
generation of stars forms from the enriched material. 

Thus, the apparently normal abundances of the 
elements in high-redshift quasars implies that they were 
preceded by substantial stellar activity in the early 
universe. 


Nature 

The prodigious luminosities of quasars in combination 
with their small size led theorists to consider gravity as 
their energy source immediately on their discovery. It 
was realized that normal stars and thermonuclear 
reactions were entirely insufficient to produce the 
observed properties of quasars. However, the required 
gravitational potential energy could only be extracted if 
quasars contained compact objects with masses of a 
hundred million Suns and sizes about that of the solar 
system. In addition the gravitational field of such objects 
was so strong that the effects of general relativity would 
be dominant in their vicinity. Since that time, gravity has 
remained as the consensus source of energy for quasars, 
although the concepts of the nature of the central source 
have changed considerably. For example, supermassive 
‘stars’, were originally postulated as the central objects in 
quasars, but enough difficulties were found with such 
ideas that they were soon abandoned. 

Subsequently, it was realized that BLACK HOLES were 
the most likely central engines of quasars. A black hole 
was an object with gravity so strong that not even light 
could escape from its surface. The widths of the emission 
lines in quasars and estimates of the size of the emission 
line region suggested that the central mass was about 10° 
Suns. Such objects would not be able to support 
themselves against the pull of their of their own gravity, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and they would collapse to form a black hole. The 
collapse could liberate 10% or more of the rest energy, 
mc’, of the object, that is, more than 10 times the energy 
of the thermonuclear reactions that occur in stars. 
Similarly, any material later captured by the black hole 
would liberate the same fraction of rest energy. This of 
course provided an explanation for the energies found in 
quasars. As a result, quasars stimulated much work on 
the origin and nature of black holes and the detailed 
processes of how the observed energy could be obtained 
from them. 

Today, the working hypothesis for quasars and 
AGNs is that massive (10°-10” solar masses) black holes 
exist at their centers. The radiated energy we detect from 
them comes from matter being accreted onto the black 
hole. According to general relativity, the radius of a black 
hole is 3 km per solar mass, and the radii of black holes 
in AGNs and quasars range from a few solar radii to 20 
times the distance of the Earth from the Sun. 

It is most likely that much of the matter surrounding 
the black hole is in the shape of a disk. The matter in the 
disk orbits the black hole and moves inward as it loses 
angular momentum from some source of viscosity in the 
disk. The inner edge of the disk may extend to within a 
few radii of the central black hole. The gas in the inner 
regions of the disk is expected to be hot enough, about 
10*° K, to account for the thermal component of the 
continuum radiation at ultraviolet wavelengths. 

The x-ray observations of quasars provide evidence 
of the existence of a corona of energetic particles above 
the accretion disk. The x-rays may be produced by 
upscattering of the ultraviolet photons from the disk on 
the energetic particles via the inverse Compton process. 
Some x-rays may also be produced in shocks located 
farther from the central source. 

Jets of beamed radiation are also an important 
feature. They are frequently observed in radio-loud 
quasars and, as in the case of 3C 273, sometimes are seen 
at optical wavelengths. The jets are thought to be 
accelerated electromagnetically and ejected along the 
rotational axis of the black hole. They can be moving at 
relativistic speeds and contain high-energy particles, such 
as the relativistic electrons that produce the radio 
emission through the synchrotron process. The radio 
emission in the 3C 273 jet is located several light-years 
distant from the central source. 

A striking feature of jets in some radio sources is 
that repeated observations on the smallest angular scales 
with radio interferometers show them to be moving 
outwards at speeds that appear to be several times greater 
than the speed of light. This of course would violate a 
basic limit of relativity. The most satisfactory 
explanation for this paradox is that the jets are moving at 
speeds near that of light in the direction of the Earth. In 
this case the apparent time interval in the expansion 
motion of the jet appears smaller than it really is because 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the motion toward the Earth. See the article on 
SUPERLUMINAL MOTION for more information. 

The emission line spectra of quasars indicate that 
there are also gas clouds surrounding the black hole. The 
clouds occupy about 10% of the volume of the region 
where the broad emission lines are produced. The broad 
emission line region in quasars can extend to several 
light-years from the black hole. 

Understanding the nature of the inner regions of 
quasars and the central black holes continues to be an 
important subject of research both observationally and 
theoretically. Specific topics include the formation of 
black holes and their relation to the formation of 
galaxies, the role that galaxy interactions play in 
providing the fuel supply of gas for accretion onto the 
black hole and how quasars evolve in time and what is 
their relation to the inactive black holes now being 
observed in the centers of nearby galaxies. 


Alternative theories 

One of the first alternative explanations for the large 
redshifts of quasars to be investigated was gravitational. 
If the emission arose near a compact massive object with 
a sufficiently strong gravitational field, then the emission 
lines could exhibit large redshifts. However, it was 
realized almost immediately that such a hypothesis was 
inconsistent with the widths and other properties of the 
emission lines, and the hypothesis was ruled out. 

Another hypothesis was that quasars were being 
gravitationally lensed and thus appeared much brighter 
than they really were. Interestingly, many years after this 
idea was proposed, some quasars were discovered to be 
lensed, but they are only a small fraction of the total. 

From observations of the apparent associations of 
quasars with galaxies of much lower redshift, Arp has 
challenged the concept that quasar redshift arise from the 
cosmological expansion of the universe. In this picture, 
the redshifts arise from some other, non-cosmological 
effect whose nature has yet to be determined. 

Subsequent observations, however, have shown that 
quasars do reside in galaxies. In the cases where it has 
been possible to measure the redshifts of the host 
galaxies, they agree with the redshifts of the quasars. 
Furthermore, low-luminosity quasars and luminous 
Seyfert galaxies overlap in luminosity and show a 
general continuity of properties. 

Today, it is generally accepted that the large 
redshifts of quasars do arise from the expansion of the 
universe and that they are at the distances indicated by 
the redshifts. 

A different approach has been taken by Terlevich 
and collaborators, who have proposed that starbursts, 
intense episodes of star formation, can account for 
quasars. In this case energy from hot, young stars and the 
supernova explosions that occur at the end of their 
evolution provides the radiation and spectral properties 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observed in quasars and AGNs. While there are abundant 
observations showing that starbursts are common in 
regions around AGNs and may well be related to the 
processes that fuel the central object, the starburst model 
has great difficulty in accounting for the most luminous 
quasars and for the rapid variability in x-rays that is 
observed in AGNs. Furthermore, the observational 
evidence for black holes in nearby galaxies has become 
increasingly strong. 


Additional topics 


Absorption lines 

Absorption lines were detected in quasars within a few 
years of their discovery and were initially believed to be 
rare. However, with improved sensitivity and spectral 
resolution, it became clear that absorption lines were 
present in all quasars with redshifts 2 and greater. A 
contributing factor to their presence was that ultraviolet, 
ground-state lines were being redshifted to wavelengths 
where they could be observed with ground-based 
telescopes. Today, the study of quasar absorption lines is 
a major topic and the article on this subject should be 
consulted for more details. 

Absorption lines may be placed in three categories 
according to the distance of the absorbing gas from the 
central emission source of the quasar: (1) intrinsic 
systems, (2) associated systems and (3) intervening 
systems. 

Intrinsic systems arise close to the quasar itself. The 
most conspicuous members of this class are the broad 
absorption line (BAL) quasars, whose spectra show 
broad troughs of absorption on the short-wavelength side 
of the Lyman oa line of hydrogen and such _high- 
ionization lines as C IV (41549 and N V A1240, for 
example. The troughs indicate outflow velocities that can 
exceed 30 000 km s"'. BAL features are seen in about 
10% of high-redshift quasars, a value that gives an 
indication of the average covering factor of the 
outflowing gas. 

Associated systems show absorption features from 
elements such as hydrogen, carbon and magnesium. They 
have redshifts close to that of the emission lines in 
quasars but are much narrower. They are believed to 
arise in gas associated with the host galaxy of the quasar 
or the environment in which the host galaxy resides, 
which might be a group or cluster of galaxies. 

Intervening systems have redshifts smaller than the 
emission lines in quasars and arise in clouds of gas 
unrelated to the quasar that lie along the line of sight to 
the Earth. In this case, the quasar serves as a background 
beacon that enables the study of otherwise invisible gas. 
The sight lines to quasars probe representative samples of 
intergalactic space, and absorption line spectra provide 
an unbiased way to determine the nature and distribution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the gas. Studies of absorption lines in quasars have 
provided crucial information about gas in the high- 
redshift universe. Intervening systems may themselves be 
classified in three groups according to the column density 
of the absorbing gas: (a) damped Lyman a systems, (b) 
intermediate (metal line and/or Lyman limit) systems and 
(c) the Lyman oa forest. 

Damped Lyman o systems represent the highest 
column densities, typically in excess of 10°° neutral 
hydrogen atoms cm”, and are so called because 
absorption is so strong that the damping wings of the line 
are seen. Such systems are thought to occur when the line 
of sight passes through a disk galaxy. Some may also 
arise in dense clouds or filaments of intergalactic gas at 
high redshift. 

Damped Lyman a systems, because of their high 
column densities, also exhibit absorption lines from 
heavier elements such as carbon, silicon, magnesium and 
iron, with additional elements being detected in the most 
favorable cases. Analyses of these lines indicate that the 
abundance of metals in the systems is about one-tenth of 
the solar value. This is consistent with our understanding 
of the chemical evolution of galaxies, in which the 
abundance of metals increases with cosmic time owing to 
the continuing enrichment of the interstellar medium by 
supernovae and red giant stars as they complete their life 
cycle. Damped Lyman a systems can only be observed 
from the ground for redshifts greater than 1.8, which 
corresponds to a lookback time of approximately 80% of 
the age the universe. 

Intermediate systems, with a characteristic column 
density of 10!’ neutral hydrogen atoms cm™, also show 
absorption lines from elements such as_ carbon, 
magnesium and other metals plus a discontinuity at the 
Lyman limit of hydrogen. They are commonly attributed 
to the halos of galaxies. Their metal abundances range 
down to 1% of the solar value, indicating that they have 
had less chemical enrichment than the gas in damped 
Lyman a systems. 

The Lyman oa forest lines are the most numerous and 
ubiquitous absorption features and are attributed to 
clouds of gas in the intergalactic medium. They are seen 
in a range of column densities beginning at the limit of 
detectability around 10'”'’ neutral hydrogen atoms cm™” 
and extending up into the range of the intermediate 
systems. Their number density increases with redshift; by 
redshift 4, the integrated effect of absorption from the 
Lyman o forest produces a significant depression of the 
flux shortward of the Lyman a emission in quasar 
spectra. Observations of the Lyman a forest are used to 
deduce the state of ionization of the intergalactic 
medium. Much of the ionizing flux at high redshift is 
produced by quasars. The data are also important for 
understanding the formation of structure in the universe. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quasar Host Galaxies 
PRC96-35a * ST Scl OPO + November 19, 1996 
J. Bahcall (Institute for Advanced Study), M. Disney (University of Wales) and NASA 


HST *WFPC2 


Figure 3. A sample of images showing the host galaxies of quasars. The hosts can be normal-looking spiral and elliptical galaxies 
(left panels) but are frequently seen to be interacting or merging galaxies (center and right panels). (Credit J Bahcall, M Disney, 
NASA. This image was created with support of Space Telescope Science Institute, operated by the Association of Universities for 
Research in Astronomy, Inc from NASA contract NAS5-26555, and is reproduced with permission from AURA/STScI.) 


Host galaxies 

The regions immediately around quasars are difficult to 
observe because of the glare from the central source, 
which is why quasars were originally called star-like 
objects. However, with improved observations, extended 
emission began to be detected around quasars. In the 
meantime the realization was developing that quasars, 
Seyfert galaxies and other active galactic nuclei were 
members of the same family. One of the main differences 
among the different classes of objects was the luminosity 
of the central source, and the host galaxies with low- 
luminosity nuclei were much easier to study. 

The excellent image quality and spatial resolution of 
the Hubble Space Telescope have enabled a significant 
advance of our knowledge of quasar host galaxies (figure 
3). Results to date for low-redshift objects show that 
quasars occur in elliptical, spiral and interacting galaxies, 
with some of the latter appearing very disturbed by the 
interaction. On average, the host galaxies are brighter 
than normal field galaxies. The radio-loud quasars tend to 
occur in elliptical or interacting galaxies. The radio-quiet 
quasars can occur in elliptical or spiral galaxies. These 
results are in contrast to the situation for lower- 
luminosity AGNs, where there are stronger tendencies 
for radio-quiet objects to occur in disk galaxies and 
radio-loud objects in ellipticals. 

The study of host galaxies is important to improving 
our understanding of how both galaxies and quasars form 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and evolve. The quasar is in the nucleus of the galaxy 
and represents the endpoint of the process that produced 
the central concentration of matter in the galaxy. How a 
massive black hole formed and grew from the central 
concentration remains an important research question. At 
the same time, for the black hole to be visible and attain 
the luminosity observed for bright quasars, it must 
accrete several solar masses of material per year. What 
causes this inflow of matter from the outer parts of the 
galaxy to the nucleus is also an important topic. It is 
thought that the interaction of two galaxies, that is their 
collision or near collision, can produce enough disruption 
to the orbit and angular momentum of stars and gas to 
produce the inflow, but the details of the process are not 
yet fully understood. 


Luminosity functions and evolution 

The luminosity function of quasars is the distribution of 
their volume density as a function of luminosity and 
redshift. As with galaxies, the number density decreases 
steeply at the highest luminosities. At low luminosities 
the slope of the function is smaller than at high 
luminosities, so the rate of increase of objects slows with 
decreasing luminosity. 

Luminosity functions are among the most basic 
parameters in astronomy and provide a basis for 
determining the amounts of matter in different forms in 
the universe. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


One of the most striking properties of quasars is the 
evolution of their luminosity function with redshift. This 
was first noticed by Schmidt, who realized there were too 
many quasars at high redshift in early surveys if the 
space density of objects were constant. Interpreted as 
density evolution, the space density of luminous quasars 
is more than a thousand times greater at z = 2 than in the 
local universe. An alternative explanation is that quasars 
were brighter at high redshift than at present. 

At redshifts greater than 3, there is considerable 
observational evidence that the space density of quasars 
declines steeply. A logical interpretation of the results 
(figure 4) is that we are seeing back to the epoch of peak 
quasar activity. Alternatively, clouds of dust at high 
redshift could be blocking our view of more distant 
quasars. For example, such clouds could be associated 
with star formation regions in the host galaxy of the 
quasar. However, the best information currently available 
indicates that dust is an important factor for some types 
of quasars but does not account by itself for the decline in 
space density at high redshift. In any event, the most 
distant objects now known in the universe are galaxies, 
the first time this has happened since 1965. Although this 
may be a coincidental result, it is another indication that 
quasars at redshifts greater than 5 are genuinely very rare 
objects. 

Current observations of quasars and distant galaxies 
are consistent with bursts of star formation occurring in 
galaxies before the quasar activity builds up to its peak 
around redshift 2-3. As was mentioned earlier, the gas in 
the emission line regions of distant quasars appears to 
have relatively normal abundances of elements heavier 
than hydrogen, which implies that the gas has been 
enriched by massive stars before reaching the quasar. 
Furthermore, it takes time for a supermassive black hole 
to attain the masses needed for quasars, time that allows 
for a few generations of massive stars to complete their 
evolution. For reference, the age of the universe is only 
about a billion years at redshift 5. 

Subsequently, the overall rate of star formation in the 
universe reaches a peak as galaxies continue to form and 
assemble. After that, both quasar activity and star 
formation rates decline until they reach the values 
observed today in the local universe. Both declines are 
probably related to galaxies completing their formation 
and assembly. In addition, the rate of interactions and 
mergers of galaxies decreases as the universe continues 
to expand. As a result less material is available (1) to fall 
to the central regions of galaxies and fuel the massive 
black holes and (2) to form stars. 

In this picture, the quiescent black holes that today 
are found to be ubiquitous in nearby galaxies are the 
products of the spectacular galaxy formation process and 
quasar activity that occurred in the first third of the 
history of the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Redshift 
0.16 0.41 0.84 3.6 


Relative Space Density 


H, = 75 
q, = 0.5 


0 2 4 6 8 1 
Lookback time t 


Figure 4. The evolution of the space density of luminous 
quasars as a function of cosmic lookback time, expressed as a 
fraction of the age of the universe. The space density shows a 
strong peak at 0.85, when the universe was 15&percnt; of its 
present age. (Credit Warren S, Hewett P and Osmer P 1994 
Astrophys. J. 421 412.) 


However, the picture is but a sketch and is in need of 
both development and confirmation. We may expect 
significant progress in the near future on several fronts. 

e Large new surveys for quasars that are being carried 
out at optical and radio wavelengths, such as the 
Sloan Digital Sky Survey, the Australian 2dF Survey 
and the FIRST radio survey, will increase the 
number of known quasars by a factor of ten. (In June 
2001, two quasars with redshifts of 6.0 and 6.2, the 
most distant objects ever observed in the universe 
were identified in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.) 

e The new generation of large telescopes with 8-10 m 
apertures that has come into operation and space 
observatories such as Chandra and XMM that will 
soon be launched provide powerful tools for 
observing quasars with significantly more sensitivity 
and resolution at optical, infrared and x-ray 
wavelengths than has been available previously. 

e Advances in theoretical modeling and the continuing 
increase in computing power will enable significant 
progress in interpreting the new observations and in 
modeling the inner regions of quasars and key 
processes such as accretion. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Overview ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thus, the prospects for improving our understanding of 
how quasars form and evolve and for determining their 
relation to galaxies are very bright. 


Bibliography 

Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Robinson I, Schild A and Schucking E L (ed) 1965 Quasi- 
stellar Sources and Gravitational Collapse: Proc. Ist Texas 
Symp. on Relativistic Astrophysics (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press) 


Patrick Osmer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Quasistellar Objects: Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quasistellar Objects: Surveys 


Since the discovery of QUASARS in 1963, surveys have 
been a prerequisite both for investigating models of the 
central regions of quasars themselves and to provide 
samples of quasars for use as cosmological probes. The 
early history of surveys for quasars was determined by 
our incomplete knowledge of their nature and of their 
relationship to galaxies. Discovered initially through the 
campaign to identify the strong RADIO SOURCES in the 
Third Cambridge Radio Catalogue (3CR), the optical 
counterparts were found to be stellar, i.e. unresolved 
point sources, and to possess blue optical colors. 
Following the initial spectroscopic identification of 
3CR273 as an object with the then unprecedented 
REDSHIFT of z = 0.16 (see BRIGHT QUASAR 3C 273), by 
Maarten Schmidt, a significant number of quasars were 
soon found by obtaining optical spectra of unresolved 
blue objects within the positional error boxes of radio 
sources. A further major advance was made in 1965 
when Allan Sandage showed that there existed a much 
larger population of unresolved blue sources with very 
similar properties to ‘quasars’ except that the objects 
were not detectable as radio sources. Some researchers 
continue to draw a distinction between quasi-stellar radio 
sources (quasars) and quasi-stellar objects (QSOs). 
However, many workers regard the distinction as 
primarily historical and both ‘quasar’ and ‘QSO’ may be 
used to refer to objects irrespective of whether they 
possess significant radio emission. 

An enormous observational effort at radio, infrared, 
optical and x-ray wavelengths in the three decades 
following the discovery of quasars has resulted in the 
identification of some 12 000 quasars. Most recently, the 
ability to undertake sensitive surveys over very large 
areas of sky has marked the beginning of projects that 
will produce catalogs of hundreds of thousands of 
quasars, allowing entirely new scientific investigations to 
be undertaken. 


Identifying quasars 

Quasars are rare objects that exhibit a very broad range 
of intrinsic properties. Normal stars and the majority of 
galaxies, whose spectral energy distributions are 
dominated by the radiation from their constituent stars, 
possess blackbody-like spectral energy distributions that 
are strongly peaked. The characteristic temperature of the 
stellar photospheres determines the wavelength at which 
the bulk of the radiation is emitted. By contrast, the 
extreme physical conditions in the central regions of 
quasars lead to the emission of radiation over many 
decades of wavelength and quasars emit significantly in 
the x-ray, ultraviolet, optical, infrared and radio portions 
of the spectrum. With only a few exceptions, surveys for 
quasars rely on identifying objects whose spectral energy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


distributions differ from the blackbody-like spectra of 
normal stars and galaxies. 

The majority of known quasars have been identified 
using data from the optical region of the electromagnetic 
spectrum. At redshifts z < 2.2 quasars exhibit an excess 
of near-ultraviolet light compared with common Galactic 
stars. The ‘ultraviolet-excess’ technique, involving the 
selection of objects with unusually blue broad-band 
colors derived from B and U band magnitudes, has 
produced several thousand quasars—figure 1. The 
technique can be made both more efficient, by reducing 
the number of contaminating hot stars included, and more 
complete, by increasing the sensitivity to a larger fraction 
of the quasar population, by extending the wavelength 
interval through the use of additional broad-band 
magnitudes (e.g. one or more of V, R, J). The so-called 
‘multicolor’ technique has proved very effective, 
allowing the identification of quasars over the redshift 
range 0<z<5. 

The second primary methodology employed in the 
optical regime relies on the identification of the 
prominent emission lines, present in most quasars, visible 
in low-resolution spectra. Slitless spectroscopy, a 
technique that employs a thin prism (objective prism) or 
a combination of prism and transmission grating (grism) 
enables spectra of thousands of objects over large fields 
to be obtained. Prior to the development of the multi- 
color selection techniques virtually all quasars with 
redshifts z > 2.2 were located through the identification 


10 


Relative Flux 
wa 


: Y 
VY). [rm 


300 400 500 600 700 800 900 
Wavelength (nm) 


Figure 1. Spectra of a solar-like star (dashed curve) and a 
typical quasar of redshift z= 1.8 (solid curve). The measured 
fluxes of both objects in an optical passband, such as the V band 
represented by the hatched region to the right, are very similar. 
However, the flux of the quasar measured using a passband in 
the near-ultraviolet, such as the U band represented by the 
hatched region to the left, is relatively much greater than for the 
star. Employing this characteristic excess of ultraviolet flux is 
one of the simplest and most effective techniques for 
identifying quasars with redshifts z < 2.2. Another class of 
discovery techniques focus on the detection of the strong 
emission lines which are visible in the quasar spectrum but 
absent in the spectra of normal stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the strong hydrogen Lyman-a 121.6 nm and carbon C 
IV 154.9 nm emission lines which, for redshifts 1.5 <z< 
3.5, appear in the optical portion of the spectrum. 

While the basic methodologies of the color, slitless- 
spectroscopic and other discovery techniques have been 
established for several decades, there has been a 
longstanding debate over the relative effectiveness of 
quasar survey techniques. Advocates of particular 
methodologies have often claimed to detect a greater 
fraction of the quasar population compared with other 
approaches. Originally, the selection of candidate quasars 
was performed by individual researchers visually 
inspecting photographic plates through a_ binocular 
microscope. In recent years a significant improvement in 
the agreement between the results of different surveys 
has come about through the use of digital data and the 
implementation of automated, computer-based selection 
procedures. The computer-based selection ensures 
homogeneity in the candidate selection and, most 
importantly, allows a precise quantification of the 
effectiveness of a particular survey (see e.g. SOFTWARE: 
DIGITAL SKY SURVEYS). A now well-established 
technique is to simulate the appearance of quasars of 
given properties—redshift, magnitude and_ spectral 
energy distribution—in the data set under examination. 
The survey selection procedure can then be applied to the 
simulated objects to establish what fraction of quasars 
with particular properties can be — successfully 
identified—figure 2. An example of the success of such 
methodology was the remarkable agreement in the 
derived space density of HIGH-REDSHIFT QUASARS, z = 3— 
4.5, from two groups, one employing multicolor selection 
and the other using slitless-spectroscopic techniques. 

The extreme luminosities and very extended spectral 
energy distributions of quasars mean that many of the 
apparently brightest sources of radiation at x-ray, infrared 
and radio wavelengths are quasars. Employing the very- 
large-wavelength baseline between, for example, the 
optical and x-ray portions of the electromagnetic 
spectrum should provide a highly efficient technique for 
identifying quasars; given a sample of quasars and stars 
of similar optical brightness, the quasars will appear 
unusually ‘x-ray bright’. Relatively small numbers of 
quasars have been identified through investigation of 
radio, infrared and x-ray catalogs and these samples have 
proved particularly important for studies of the physics of 
the central energy source of quasars. However, the 
sensitivity of telescopes and their associated detectors at 
wavelengths away from the optical is, in a relative sense, 
poor. Thus, only a small fraction of the quasars 
detectable via optical techniques have been accessible to 
observations made at the extremes of the electromagnetic 
spectrum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


B—R 


Figure 2. Many modern surveys aim to detect quasars with a 
variety of spectral energy distributions over a large range in 
redshift. Simulations of the appearance of a quasar in a 
particular survey, incorporating a detailed model of the effects 
of intervening absorption and the properties of the survey itself, 
allow the probability that a quasar of given brightness, redshift 
and spectrum will be detected to be calculated. The figure 
shows a two-color diagram with the colors of 980 of the total of 
~30 000 objects in the survey area (¢). The larger symbols show 
the predicted colors of a quasar with redshift z = 3.33 derived 
from such a simulation. os indicate occasions when the quasar 
would not have been identified, while xs represent occasions 
when the quasar was successfully picked out. The simulation 
shows that the probability of detecting a quasar of the specified 
type is P = 0.78. Symbols with downward pointing arrows 
correspond to occasions when the simulated U magnitude was 
below the survey detection limit and the quasar lies somewhere 
below the plotted symbol, with a larger U— B color. 


Notwithstanding a general convergence in the results 
from, and understanding of the differences between, 
various survey techniques, some researchers continue to 
believe that a significant fraction of the quasar population 
remains to be identified. Two alternative techniques, 
based on lack of proper motion and the presence of 
photometric variability, have been proposed to address 
this question. Over timescales of decades essentially 
every star in our own Galaxy exhibits a small, but 
detectable, motion on the sky and surveys for quasars 
employing so-called PROPER MOTIONS focus on objects 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that do not appear to move. Photometric variability, with 
a wide range of amplitudes, was recognized soon after 
the discovery of quasars as a distinctive feature of many 
objects. The cause in the majority of quasars is believed 
to be variations in the rate at which material is accreted 
by the central massive object. The statistical properties of 
photometric variability are not well determined but, if 
monitored at approximately monthly intervals over a 
period of one or two decades, virtually all quasars exhibit 
brightness changes of at least 10%. Variability surveys 
thus treat any object showing evidence of variability, not 
explicable as a variable or binary star, as a quasar 
candidate. Recent results from both techniques agree well 
with those derived from other surveys. 


Present status 

Impressive progress has been made over the last 15 years 
in compiling samples of quasars from x-ray to radio 
wavelengths. As a result, the general behavior of the 
quasar luminosity function over the redshift range 0 < z < 
5 is fairly well established. Significant constraints on 
models of the central regions of quasars have been 
derived from the spectroscopic and other properties of 
quasars in existing surveys. However, the popular unified 
scheme models for quasars and ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI 
predict that the population should exhibit a very large 
spread in luminosity and spectral energy distribution. 
Similarly, quasars viewed along a line of sight that passes 
through an intervening galaxy containing dust may be 
dimmed by very large factors. Virtually all current 
surveys, independent of wavelength, are sensitive to 
objects with only a narrow range in luminosity at fixed 
redshift (see also GALAXY REDSHIFT SURVEYS). As a 
consequence, existing surveys do not in general provide 
strong tests of a number of different theoretical models. 
While the total number of quasars known, ~12 000, may 
seem large, for many investigations, including those that 
exploit quasars as cosmological probes, very large 
numbers of objects are required. Progress in areas where 
the signal sought is weak, such as defining the clustering 
behavior of quasars as a function of redshift, are still 
limited by the lack of surveys containing many thousands 
or tens of thousands of quasars. 


Future surveys 
Undertaking surveys for many thousands of quasars has 
in practice been impossible because of the lack of an 
instrument capable of obtaining spectroscopic 
observations of hundreds of faint candidate objects over 
areas of at least a square degree on the sky. Recent 
developments in instrumentation have overcome this 
practical restriction and two major surveys now in 
progress will produce samples of tens of thousands of 
quasars within the next five years. 

In Australia, at the 3.9 m Anglo-Australian 
Telescope, a multiobject fiber spectrograph with 400 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fibers and a 2° diameter field of view, the so-called ‘2 
degree field’ (2dF), has been commissioned (see also 
SPECTROGRAPHS: FIBER-FED SPECTROGRAPHS). 
Simultaneous spectroscopy of quasar candidates to B = 
21 over an area of three square degrees is relatively 
straightforward and the ‘2dF Quasar Survey’, with a 
target of 25 000 quasars, is a key program. The survey 
area consists of two long strips on the sky, 75° x 5° in 
extent, with the selection of the targets based on a three- 
color (UBR) technique that is sensitive to quasars over 
the redshift range 0.2 < z < 3.0. The magnitude limit of 
the survey and the geometry of the survey regions have 
been chosen to optimize the quasar sample for 
investigation of spatial clustering properties as a function 
of redshift. The quasars act as probes of large-scale 
structure and the extended redshift range over which 
quasars are detected will provide an order of magnitude 
improvement in the determination of the development of 
large-scale clustering with redshift, providing an 
important new constraint on theories of structure 
formation. 

A still more ambitious program involves the SLOAN 
DIGITAL SKY SURVEY (SDSS) which has recently begun 
to acquire imaging in five broad optical passbands 
(u,g,r,i,z) with the aim of covering 10 000 square degrees 
of the sky at high Galactic latitude. The second element 
of the project is to obtain spectra of the brighter galaxies 
and quasar candidates identified from the broad-band 
imaging data. Although the study of some 1 000 000 
galaxies is the principal motivation for the SDSS some 
150 000 quasar candidates will be observed using the 
dedicated multifiber spectrograph mounted on a 2.5 m 
telescope at Apache Point in New Mexico. The broad- 
band filters employed in the SDSS extend from the near- 
ultraviolet through to a ‘z‘-band at the far-red extreme of 
the optical atmospheric window. The wu and g colors 
allow the detection of low-redshift quasars via the 
ultraviolet-excess technique with additional information 
from the redder filters, while sensitivity to radiation with 
wavelengths as red as 1000 nm means the SDSS is 
sensitive to quasars with redshifts as high as z = 6 (see 
below). The primary, 10 000 square degree, survey will 
identify relatively bright quasars, B < 20, and the number 
of very-high-redshift objects is not expected to be large. 
However, a smaller area of 100 square degrees will be 
surveyed to much fainter limits. It will also be possible to 
select subsets of potentially rare quasar candidates to 
rather fainter limits that may be followed up using 
telescopes of larger aperture. The first results from such a 
strategy are already encouraging, with a number of high- 
redshift quasar candidates observed in late 1998 
producing the first quasar to be found with a redshift z = 
5. More recently, a group of astronomers in California 
discovered a quasar with z = 5.50, and in April 2000 a 
group from Chicago reported a quasar with z = 5.8. In 
June 2001, two quasars with redshifts of 6.0 and 6.2, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quasistellar Objects: Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


most distant objects ever observed in the universe, were 
identified in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. 

The use of the FIRST (FAR-INFRARED AND 
SUBMILLIMETRE TELESCOPE) radio source catalog to 
identify optically bright quasars has proved highly 
successful, with an initial catalog of more than 650 
objects. The origin of the very large range in radio 
luminosity at fixed optical luminosity among the quasar 
population has been an outstanding question for several 
decades. The FIRST sample and future extensions to 
fainter optical magnitudes will make a significant 
contribution in this and a number of other areas. 
Similarly, the quasar samples to be defined from the 
CHANDRA and XMM x-ray satellites will be well suited to 
addressing key questions such as the contribution of 
quasars to the x-ray background and testing the 
predictions of unified schemes for quasars and active 
galactic nuclei. 

The capabilities of optical telescopes with apertures 
of 8-10 m will allow fainter quasars at redshifts z ~ 2-3 
to be investigated, helping to extend the dynamic range 
of the surveys. Probably of even greater significance will 
be the ability to conduct surveys for quasars at near- 
infrared wavelengths to relatively faint magnitudes over 
many hundreds of square degrees of sky. Extinction of 
radiation by dust is greatly reduced at wavelengths of 
~2000 nm compared with optical wavelengths and 
quasars at very high redshifts, with very faint optical 
colors owing to the presence of intervening hydrogen 
clouds, should also be detectable in the near-infrared. 
Such infrared surveys will be possible early in the 
millennium and a resolution to the ongoing debate 
concerning whether a significant proportion of the quasar 
population has eluded detection owing to extinction by 
dust and gas, either associated with the quasars 
themselves or present in intervening systems, should 
result. 


Bibliography 
A general introduction to quasars and active galactic nuclei, 
including the principles behind surveys is 


Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


A more specific review of quasar surveys 


Hewett P C and Foltz C B 1994 Quasar surveys Publ. Astron. 
Soc. Pac. 106 113 


Results from the FIRST Bright Quasar Survey can be found in 
White R L et al 2000 Astrophys. J. Suppl. at press 
The potential of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey for detecting 


quasars is demonstrated by the description of the discovery of a 
number of high-redshift quasars by the SDSS Collaboration; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Fan X et al 2000 Astron. J. 119 1 


Initial results from the Anglo-Australian Observatory 2dF 
quasar survey are described in 


Boyle B J et al 2000 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. at press 


Paul Hewett 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Quetelet, Lambert Adolphe (1796-1874) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Quetelet, Lambert Adolphe 
(1796-1874) 


Statistician, born in Ghent, Flanders, Belgium, founder 
(1833) and director of the Brussels Observatory. Studied 
astronomy at the Paris Observatory under FRANCOIS 
ARAGO, and probability under Joseph Fourier and PIERRE 
LAPLACE. Apart from social statistics (crime, mortality, 
census taking), he worked on statistical, geophysical and 
meteorological data, and established statistical methods. 
Following a suggestion of Arago, he studied the statistics 
of the visibility of meteors and showed that there was 
a greater frequency of meteors in the month of August. 
He found archival records of earlier exceptional meteor 
displays in August, and predicted the shower (the 
Perseids) of 10 August 1837 (See EDWARD CLAUDIUS HERRICK). 
He published the Catalogue des Principales Apparitions 
d’Etoiles Filantes (1839) listing 315 meteor displays recorded 
until then. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


R Coronae Borealis Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


R Coronae Borealis Stars 


The R Coronae Borealis stars (RCB) stars fade dramatically 
and unpredictably by factors of up to 1000 within a few 
weeks. Over succeeding months, they gradually recover 
their original brightness. This spectacular fading is caused 
by the formation of sooty dust clouds above the surface of 
the star. The surfaces of RCB stars are unusually poor in 
hydrogen, and rich in carbon and nitrogen, which implies 
that they are the remnants of evolved stars. Practically 
all RCB stars pulsate, which may help to explain the dust 
formation episodes. 

R Coronae Borealis, or RCB, stars are an important 
class of VARIABLE STAR. Stars vary in many different ways, 
often by changing the amount and color of the light they 
emit. They can change regularly or irregularly. RCB stars, 
remarkably, do both. 

RCB stars are best known because of their irregular 
‘fades’. Unpredictably and every few years or so, their 
brightness suddenly drops by a huge amount. Then they 
get slowly brighter until they look the same as before the 
fade. The fades are caused by enormous clouds of dust 
which cover a large part of the star’s surface. The dust is 
thought to be made of small particles of carbon—rather 
like ground-up pencil sharpenings. 

Why the dust clouds form is harder to understand. As 
well as irregular fades, the light output from RCBs goes up 
and down by a few per cent every 40 days or so. This is due 
to the star swelling and shrinking—known as pulsation. It 
seems that these pulsations may cause dust to form which 
is then thrown out from the star. Thus, indirectly, they 
may be responsible for the irregular fades. 

Another remarkable thing about RCB stars is that their 
surfaces contain almost no hydrogen, the most common 
element in space. In fact, they are mostly made of helium 
and carbon. These elements are made by nuclear reactions 
deep inside stars. Since they are now seen on the surface, 
RCB stars must be very old. 

This article introduces the history and basic properties 
of RCBs, before exploring them in more detail. Three brief 
sections address the origin of RCBs, the occurrence of RCB 
activity in other stars, and recent progress towards solving 
some of the outstanding problems. 


Historical background 
RCB stars are named after a star just visible to the 
naked eye in the constellation of Corona Borealis. R CrB 
was discovered by Edward Pigott, an English amateur 
astronomer who had been observing a star in the ‘Northern 
Crown’ for over a decade. In the spring of 1795 he 
noticed that it had disappeared, but over succeeding 
months it gradually reappeared and recovered its original 
brightness. Pigott estimated a period of 10.5 months for 
this phenomenon, but he was puzzled that the changes did 
not repeat themselves precisely. 

In fact, unlike 6 CEPHEI and other variable stars known 
at the time, R CrB’s changes in brightness are irregular and 
unpredictable. This irregularity has prompted numerous 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


R CrB in 1859 


a 
7 


: 
—_ ) 
6 e a e e 
e 
Oa 
: 
’ \e . 
2 ' 
2 | 
ear ‘ | 
3 ° Fi 
2 \ 
gor \ / 4 
a \ é 
> \ \ = 
10 + | vs 1 
a 
12 Ll L L n L J 
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 


JD 2400000 


Figure 1. The light curve of R Coronae Borealis during a fading 
event in 1859. 


astronomers to observe R CrB so regularly that its light 
curve has now been monitored continuously for almost 
200 years. 

Since 1795, other RCB stars have been discovered 
and their properties have been carefully observed. The 
defining property is their characteristic light curve, 
marked by the irregular fadings first seen by Pigott. 
In addition, nearly all RCB stars pulsate with periods 
between 40 and 100 days. Their surfaces contain very little 
hydrogen, unlike the vast majority of stars which have 
about 90% hydrogen. Instead their surfaces are rich in 
helium and carbon, which must have been produced by 
nuclear reactions deep within the star. 

It is established that the sudden fadings of RCBs are 
caused by clouds of carbon-rich dust passing in front of 
the star, but it is unclear what causes carbon gas in the 
stellar atmosphere to condense into dust. Other questions 
remain about the precise composition and origin of RCB 
surfaces. 

Remarkable as their properties are and extensive 
as two centuries of observations have been, RCB stars 
continue to pose many problems. The irony is that the 
original question posed by Pigott’s observations in 1795 
remains essentially unsolved—‘what causes the sudden 
fadings of R CrB ?’ 


Basic properties 

RCB stars were first identified by their characteristic light 
curves. A part of the light curve of R CrB itself is shown 
in figure 1. 


Spectrum 

Many light-curve identifications were made retrospec- 
tively from photographic plates originally obtained to pa- 
trol the sky for asteroids, supernovas and other variable 
phenomena. As a consequence the light curves were often 
incomplete so that symbiotic, cataclysmic and semiregular 
variables were sometimes identified as RCBs. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


R Coronae Borealis Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


RCB stars have a spectrum which resembles that of an 
F or G supergiant. Balmer lines are weak or absent, there 
are many lines of neutral atomic carbon and strong bands 
of molecular carbon (C2 and CN). In one of the earliest 
analyses of stellar surface composition, it was shown that 
R CrB itself was extremely hydrogen deficient. A handful 
of hot RCB stars have B-type spectra. These characteristics 
have enabled the identification of 34 RCB stars in the 
Galaxy to be confirmed. 


Galactic distribution and absolute magnitudes 

The distribution of galactic RCB stars is controversial. 
Several authors have argued that they belong to a thick 
galactic disk, and are thus old Population I stars. However, 
they may alternatively belong to the even older galactic 
bulge (Population II). The controversy may simply be a 
result of the different ways in which surveys for RCB stars 
and related objects have been carried out. In either case, 
the populations are sufficiently old that RCB stars must 
have relatively low masses (<1Mo). 

A growing number of RCBs have been discovered in 
the LARGEMAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC), most recently as a result 
of wide field surveys. These are the only RCB stars for 
which a distance is known and hence for which an absolute 
magnitude can be deduced. With My ~ —4 to —5, the LMC 
RCBs are 3000-10 000 times more luminous than the Sun. 


Numbers and distances 

The absolute magnitude of the RCBs in the LMC and the 
small number of galactic RCBs implies that they are very 
rare stars. Together with statistics for related stars, the 
total number of hydrogen-deficient stars in the Galaxy is 
estimated to be about 1000. Whilst the luminosity of RCBs 
is similar to that of other low-mass stars as they evolve 
rapidly from the asymptotic RED GIANT branch to become 
WHITE Dwakrrs, their frequency is much lower. They do not, 
it seems, represent a stage in the evolution of all normal 
low-mass stars. 

From the preceding estimates of mass and luminosity, 
it is seen that RCBs have very high luminosity-to-mass 
ratios (L/M ~ 10000) and lie close to the Eddington 
limit for radiative stability. If they were any more 
luminous, their atmospheres would be expelled by 
radiation pressure. 


Physical characteristics 

Atmospheres 

The fundamental properties of RCBs may be deduced 
from their spectra at maximum light. A typical spectrum 
looks like that of an F or G supergiant. RCB effective 
temperatures fall mostly around 7000 K, although a small 
number are as cool as 5500 K. The spectra of most RCBs 
have now been analysed in detail. They show that 
hydrogen makes up less than one part per thousand down 
to less than one part per million of the STELLAR ATMOSPHERE. 
Most of the atmosphere is neutral helium. Although 
carbon is enriched, it is not possible to establish its 
abundance reliably. All RCB atmospheres show products 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of hydrogen- and helium-burning NUCLEOSYNTHESIS in 
several different episodes, as well as mild enhancements 
of s-process elements. 


Pulsations 

Most RCB stars are small-amplitude variables at maximum 
light. Light variations are typically a few tenths of a 
magnitude with periods between 40 and 100 days. In well- 
studied cases, radial-velocity variations have been found 
with amplitudes proportional to the light variations. The 
visual light curve of RY Sgr (period ~38 days, amplitude 
0.2-0.3 mag) correlates well with the radial velocity curve 
(amplitude 40 km s~') and indicates that RCBs are radially 
pulsating stars. 

The light curves of RCB stars are not strictly periodic. 
Some authors suggest that this is due to interference 
between a number of radial modes with different periods. 
It is more likely due to extreme non-adiabacity in the 
stellar envelope which can lead to chaotic behavior in the 
pulsation cycle length. Since pulsation periods are directly 
related to the mean density of a star, evidence for period 
changes was thought to imply secular changes in RCB 
radii. Itnow seems likely that the observed period changes 
are due to chaotic behavior. 

The driving mechanism for pulsations in RCB stars 
is not the classical « mechanism found in 6 Cepheid 
variables; RCB stars do not lie in any of the classical 
instability strips. Their pulsations are due to ‘strange- 
mode’ oscillations whereby waves trapped in parts of the 
acoustic cavity of the stellar envelope are amplified. Such 
pulsation modes are also seen in other HIGH-LUMINOSITY 
stars, such as luminous blue variables and a Cyg variables. 

A consequence of the high L/M ratios of RCB stars 
is that densities in their atmospheres are low. The 
action of the pulsations on the photosphere resembles 
that of a piston imparting an outward impulse at regular 
intervals. In between these impulses the photosphere 
is virtually in free-fall. During the impulse, highly 
nonlinear processes can generate shock waves within the 
photosphere. Evidence for such nonlinearity has been 
observed in RY Sgr where, at minimum radius, absorption 
lines are seen to double. A redshifted component is due 
to infalling material and a blueshifted component is due 
to lower-lying plasma that has already being accelerated 
outwards. 


Frequency of fading events 
The most obvious and spectacular properties of RCB stars 
are their dramatic fading events. They spend the majority 
of their time at maximum light. Initial decline is sudden 
and steep, the star can fade by up to eight magnitudes in 
a few weeks. The decline may show a series of standstills, 
partial recoveries and subsequent declines. The final 
recovery to maximum light may take several months to 
a year. 

The first outline of a mechanism for the fading events 
was proposed in the 1930s when it was ‘shown that the 
shape of the light curve of R CrB and its spectral variations 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


R Coronae Borealis Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


=a, 


surface of star 


2R, 


E2+BL 
emission lines 


ana 


/ =e \ 
7 \ 


line of sight 


Figure 2. RCB dust-cloud ejection and evolution. (Based on a 
figure in Clayton (1996) and reproduced by permission.) 


at minimum can be accounted for by supposing it to eject 
matter which condenses at a considerable distance and 
forms obscuring clouds. The solid matter is believed to be 
principally carbon.’ 

From nearly two centuries of observations of R CrB, a 
characteristic interval of 1100 days between fading events 
has been deduced. Several searches have consistently 
failed to find any regular patterns in RCB declines which 
might help to identify a causal factor such as rotation or 
binarity. For two cases only, RY Sgr and V854 Cen, it has 
been shown that the onset of the decline episodes may be 
closely correlated with a particular phase of the pulsation 
cycle. It is attractive to relate the onset of a dust formation 
episode to the pulsation of the stellar envelope, but the 
evidence for such a connection is not yet compelling. 

The ratio between the characteristic interval between 
fades and the typical pulsation period of RCBs implies that 
a decline occurs about once every 20 pulsation cycles. 


Anatomy of a decline 

Infrared observations of RCBs show that, even at 
maximum light, there are copious amounts of dust 
surrounding the star. A very interesting result is 
that during a decline, when the V-band brightness is 
plummeting, the infrared L-band brightness shows no 
significant change and continues to show pulsational 
variations. It seems that the V-band brightness is 
dominated by the obscured atmosphere, but the L-band 
brightness is dominated by dust surrounding the star 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


at some distance. Evidently the dust continues to be 
illuminated by light from the photosphere, including 
its pulsations, whilst light coming directly from the 
photosphere to the observer is obstructed. Therefore the 
obscuring dust can only cover a fraction of the stellar 
surface. 

The picture that emerges (figure 2) is that at a 
particular phase in the pulsation cycle, conditions in the 
photosphere can compel the carbon-rich gas to be expelled 
from a part of the stellar surface to cool, condense and 
form dust grains. Roughly once every 20 cycles, this ‘puff 
of soot’ is directed into our line of sight, and obscures the 
photosphere from view. 

Another important observation associated with RCB 
declines is that, during the early part of the decline, 
a rich emission spectrum appears, consisting of many 
narrow lines of neutral and singly ionized metals. These 
lines (known as E1 lines) appear to be short-lived so that 
within two or three weeks, they are replaced by a simpler 
broad-line spectrum (BL), although a few narrow lines 
(E2) persist for an extended period. The E1 spectrum is 
probably due to hot gas close to the stellar surface which 
is visible only when the photosphere alone is obscured. 
As the dust cloud moves away from the stellar surface it 
expands, obscuring the El region. Since the E2 and BL 
regions remain visible, they must arise from cooler gas 
spread over a much larger volume around the star. 

This picture of clouds of dust ejected by the pulsating 
stellar surface has been successful in explaining many 
properties of RCBs. There remain a number of difficult 
questions, the hardest being ‘What is the origin of RCB 
stars?’ 


The evolutionary status of RCBs 

Nuclear processes within stars first convert hydrogen to 
helium, then helium to carbon, and eventually to heavier 
elements. RCB surfaces consist primarily of a mixture of 
helium and carbon-rich layers, with a trace of hydrogen. 
Single-star evolution does not normally succeed in mixing 
such different layers of a star, so special models have been 
proposed to explain their origin. 

In one model, a low-mass star which has finished its 
evolution as a red giant contracts to become a white dwarf, 
passing through a phase when it illuminates a PLANETARY 
NEBULA. It may happen that sufficient unprocessed helium 
remains on the surface of the white dwarf that nuclear 
reactions can be reignited. The star then expands suddenly 
to become a helium-burning red giant for a second time. 
Convection will thoroughly mix the outer layers of this star 
to give the mixture of helium and carbon seen in RCBs. 

In another model, it is supposed that two white 
dwarfs are in orbit around one another. Over a long time 
scale (~10"° years), GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION will make the 
orbit decay and the stars will spiral in towards one another. 
If one star is a helium white dwarf (HeWD), and the other 
a carbon/oxygen white dwarf (COWD), the HeWD will 
be cannibalized by the more massive COWD. This helium 
will be capable of initiating new nuclear reactions and, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


R Coronae Borealis Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


helium-carbon envelope 


helium-burning shell 


carbon-oxygen core 


~50 solar radii 


cooler > dust condensation? 


Figure 3. Internal structure of an RCB star. 


like the previous model, the star will expand to become 
a helium-burning giant, with a helium- and carbon-rich 
surface. 

Itis difficult to resolve which model is correct, if either, 
because RCBs show a range of surface compositions, and 
the crucial carbon abundance is not well known. However, 
it is agreed that RCBs probably have a degenerate carbon- 
oxygen core, and their energy comes from a nuclear- 
burning shell at the bottom of the helium-carbon envelope 
(figure 3). 


Other hydrogen-deficient stars 

The Galaxy hosts a variety of other extraordinary stars 
with little or no surface hydrogen. Most are rare, but 
nevertheless intriguing. Massive WOLF-RAYET STARS are 
young (Population I) hydrogen-deficient stars, as are 
binary systems such as uv Sgr. Low-mass stars like the 
RCBs belong to an old population. A group of hydrogen- 
deficient giants with spectra similar to RCBs show no RCB 
fading events. These have probably failed to become RCB 
stars because their luminosities are too low. 

As well as RCB stars with F- and G-type spectra, 
several other stars show RCB-type light curves. Two, 
MV Ser and DY Cen, are B-type helium-rich giants and 
are very similar to a group of about 20 ‘extreme helium 
stars’, A- and B-type stars with weak or no Balmer lines, 
strong neutral helium and ionized carbon lines. If they are 
indeed RCB stars, they are not very active. Their surface 
carbon abundance is ~1% by number, the remainder being 
helium. A more active B-type helium star, V348 Sgr shows 
strong emission lines at all times, and has a surface carbon 
abundance of ~10% by numbers. This star may be related 
to about 20 hydrogen-deficient central stars of planetary 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


nebulae which have similar carbon abundances and strong 
emission line spectra. These stars are all overluminous and 
have strong stellar winds. Carbon-rich knots may form in 
the winds and give rise to RCB behavior. Of importance 
to understanding the RCB fading events, the discovery 
in 1997 of weak RCB-like fading events in CARBON STARS 
suggests that the process of carbon condensation in stellar 
atmospheres is not confined to classical RCB stars. 

During the past century three stars have been 
observed as being both hot subdwarfs and RCB stars at 
different times. V605 Aql is now the hydrogen-deficient 
central star of a planetary nebula (Abell 58). In 1919 it 
brightened as a slow nova, and there is a report that its 
spectrum at one time resembled an RCB star. FG Sge 
was a faint blue star in 1900. Since then, it has become 
progressively redder and brighter so that now it has the 
spectrum of a K-type giant. In 1960 it started to pulsate 
and in 1992 it started to show RCB-type fading events. 
Its surface composition contains the products of many 
nuclear reaction processes, and is thought to be hydrogen 
poor. FG Sge may be a new-born RCB star. Most 
recently, in 1996, an unremarkable faint blue star suddenly 
brightened and within three years had become a very cool 
and luminous carbon star, now known as SAKURAI’S OBJECT 
or V4334 Ser. The spectacular evolution of these three stars 
and their similarities with RCB stars may eventually help 
to explain the origin of RCB stars. 


Unsolved problems 

Since the discovery of R CrB itself, the mechanism 
that produces fadings has been elusive. Primary data 
connecting pulsation phase and the trigger for fadings 
exist for only two RCBs (V854 Cen and RY Sgr), and 
protracted photometry of several RCBs will be necessary 
to establish any connection firmly. 

A second difficulty is encountered by the physical 
conditions necessary for dust to condense above the 
surface of the star. The frequency and duration of fading 
events implies a geometry in which the dust clouds form 
within two stellar radii (2R,). Under normal conditions, 
the local temperature would be too high for dust to 
condense at this distance, and a condensation distance 
of 20R, would be expected. Recent models treat the 
chemistry, energy balance and dust nucleation in pulsating 
star atmospheres in considerable detail. They show 
that excess cooling can occur during adiabatic expansion 
after the passage of a shock wave, reducing the local 
temperature to about 1500 K within 1.5-3R,. It remains 
to be shown that pulsations in all RCB stars provide the 
necessary conditions for dust nucleation to occur at this 
distance. 

The RCB carbon abundance remains an enigma. 
Whether it is ~1% or ~10% determines if RCBs are related 
to the C-rich remnants like the extreme helium stars or 
to C-strong remnants like the H-deficient central stars of 
planetary nebulae. 

The problem is a natural consequence of stellar 
atmosphere physics. The strength of a stellar absorption 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


R Coronae Borealis Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


line represents the ratio of line opacity to continuous 
opacity in the atmosphere; both are related to the number 
density of the absorbing atoms and so provide the number 
ratio of line absorbers to continuum absorbers. When the 
line and continuum absorbers are the same, it becomes 
impossible to measure the abundance of the absorbing 
species. In hydrogen-rich stars, hydrogen is normally the 
main continuum absorber and, since it is also assumed 
to be the most abundant species, the problem does not 
arise. Since the predominant continuum absorber in 
RCB atmospheres is neutral carbon, it has not yet proved 
possible to measure the carbon abundance from carbon 
absorption lines. 

Finally, the emission line spectrum seen during fading 
events is difficult to explain, especially the sodium D 
lines which indicate an expansion (or wind) velocity of 
several hundred km s7!. Superimposed are a number 
of narrow absorption components, possibly representing 
cooling gas from previous ejections. The presence of 
heavily blueshifted absorption from infalling material 
remains a puzzle. 

RCB stars offer the astronomer a wealth of informa- 
tion, from their spectacular fadings, through their pulsa- 
tions and dust shells, to the nuclear waste on their surfaces 
that traces previous evolution. Even with all of these data, 
RCBs retain much of their original mystery. 


Bibliography 
Most general astronomy texts and books on stellar 
variability refer to RCB stars, but only briefly. For example: 


Hoffmeister C, Richter G and Wenzel W 1985 Variable Stars 
(Berlin: Springer) 


In contrast, the academic literature is extensive and 
this article can only provide a few pointers. A recent 
and comprehensive review provides many important 
references: 


Clayton G C 1996 The R Coronae Borealis stars Publ. Astron. 
Soc. Pacific 108 225-41 


A conference held in 1995 was devoted to hydrogen- 
deficient stars in general. Its proceedings contain many 
excellent reviews covering recent work on RCBs and 
related objects: 


Jeffery CS and Heber U (eds) 1996 Hydrogen-deficient Stars 
(Astr. Soc. Pac. Conf. Ser. 96.) 


Simon Jeffery 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Romer [Romer, Roemer], Ole [Olaf] Christensen 
(1644-1710) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Romer [Romer, Roemer], Ole [Olaf] 
Christensen (1644-1710) 


Born in Aarhus, Denmark, studied at the University of 
Copenhagen under Thomas and Erasmus Bartholin, who 
gave him TYCHO BRAHE’s manuscripts to edit and his own 
daughter to wed. Romer accompanied Bartholin and 
JEAN PICARD to Hven to measure the position of Tycho’s 
observatory, the better to reduce Tycho’s observations. He 
went on to the Paris Observatory where he made and 
used instruments for the measurement of star positions. 
While in Paris, he timed the eclipses of Io, the innermost 
of Jupiter’s moons. He discovered that the period between 
eclipses was changing. The change of period was due 
to a Doppler shift, caused by the changing velocity of 
Earth relative to Jupiter, and led Romer to a value of 11 
minutes for the value of the light travel time from the 
Sun to Earth (the ‘light equation’). The modern value 
is 499 s. Romer’s explanation of the eclipses of Io was 
criticized by cassini, who could not repeat it with the other 
Galilean satellites, and by an incredulous ROBERT HOOKE. 
Hooke maintained that light travels instantaneously, and 
“tis so exceeding swift that ‘tis beyond Imagination; 
for so far he thinks indubitable, that it moves a Space 
equal to the Diameter of the Earth, or near 8000 miles, 
in less than one single Second of the time, which is 
in as short time as one can well pronounce 1, 2, 3, 4: 
And if so, why not be as well instantaneous I know 
no reason...’.. Romer was supported by HUYGENS and 
NEWTON. Roemer became professor of astronomy and of 
mathematics in Copenhagen, astronomer royal to Kings 
Christian V and Frederick IV of Denmark, and director of 
the Copenhagen Observatory. He carried out a succession 
of state tasks, including development of a reformed 
measurement system for Denmark. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radar Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radar Astronomy 


The branch of astronomy that is concerned with the 
investigation of solar system bodies by radar methods. 
The technique involves transmitting a beam of microwave 
radiation from an Earth-based radio telescope or an 
orbiting spacecraft towards a target and analyzing the 
faint ‘echo’ that returns from the target’s surface. Radar 
techniques can yield information on the precise distance 
between the Earth and the target body, the rate at which 
the target body is rotating, the altitude of a spacecraft 
above a body’s surface, the vertical relief and topography 
on the surface of a planet or satellite, and the nature and 
roughness of that surface. 

The transmitted beam may be continuous (continuous 
wave) or pulsed. Typical pulses transmitted by 
Earth-based astronomical radar systems have lengths 
(durations) of between 10 vs and 10 ms (107° to 107? 
seconds) and peak powers of tens of megawatts. Pulsed 
radar is used to measure planetary distances. During the 
time interval (Ar) between the transmission of a pulse and 
the arrival back at Earth of the reflected pulse, the signal 
has traveled, at the speed of light (c) a distance equal to 
twice the distance between Earth and the target planet. 
Therefore the distance (d) between Earth and the target 
planet is given by: d = cAt/2. The distance to a planet 
(Venus) was measured for the first time in 1962 and, from 
this result, the value of the astronomical unit (the mean 
distance between Earth and the Sun) was calculated to a 
much higher precision than had previously been possible. 
The altitude of a spacecraft above any particular point on 
a planet’s surface (and hence the heights of features on the 
planet’s surface above or below the mean surface level) 
can be measured in a similar way. 

If the target body is rotating, part of the reflected 
radar pulse will be reflected from the side of the planet 
that is approaching the observer and part from the side 
that is receding. Compared with the transmitted signal, 
the part that has been reflected from the ‘approaching’ 
side will be Doppler shifted to a higher frequency and the 
part from the ‘receding’ side Doppler-shifted to a lower 
frequency. The spread of frequencies in the returning 
signal, therefore, provides information on the rotation rate 
of the target body. This technique enabled the retrograde 
rotation period of cloud-covered Venus to be determined 
in 1962 and the 59-day rotation period of Mercury to be 
determined in 1965. 

Detailed mapping of the surface topography of Venus 
has been carried out using ground-based radar and radar 
instrumentation carried on a succession of spacecraft that 
have been placed in orbit round that planet, including 
Pioneer Venus (1978), Veneras 15 and 16 (1983) and 
Magellan (1990-4). The key to achieving high-resolution 
radar mapping is synthetic aperture radar (SAR), a 
technique that uses the movement of the spacecraft in the 
time interval between the transmission of the signal and 
the return of its ‘echo’ to simulate the performance of a 
‘dish’ much larger than the onboard radar dish. By this 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


means, the Magellan mission achieved best resolutions of 
about 120 m on the surface of Venus. Radar techniques 
have been used to study meteors, planets, satellites, comets 
and asteroids. 


See also: Magellan, Pioneer Venus, radio telescope, 
resolving power, Venera. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radial Velocities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radial Velocities 


The radial velocity of a star is the component of its motion 
along the line of sight to the observer. A typical value 
for the radial velocity of a star in the solar neighborhood 
is 10-20 km s~!. The early work with radial velocities, 
dating back more than 100 yr, is reviewed in the first 
section of this article. Then the efforts over the past 
25 yr to survey many thousands of stars with correlation 
techniques are described, together with examples of 
applications to Galactic structure and to studies of the 
frequency and characteristics of spectroscopic binaries. 
Recent efforts to achieve velocity precisions better than 
10 ms“! are outlined next, along with their successful use 
for the discovery of extrasolar planets. The final section 
speculates about the future of radial velocity research, 
especially in conjunction with space astrometric missions. 


Early radial-velocity work 

The measurement of stellar radial velocities has a long and 
rich history. KIRCHHOFF and Bunsen electrified the scientific 
and intellectual world in 1862 with their wonderful 
demonstration that spectral analysis could be used to 
unlock the chemistry of the Sun and stars. Doppler and 
Fizeau had already proposed, independently in 1842 and 
1848, that the motion of a star along the line of sight would 
introduce a shift in its spectral features, such as the dark 
Fraunhofer absorption lines, according to the formula! 


0 Cc 
and Kirchhoff and Bunsen’s discoveries inspired several 
stellar spectroscopists to look for Doppler shifts in the 
spectra of stars. 

For example, at his private observatory in England, 
the great spectroscopist SIR WILLIAM HUGGINS compared the 
position of a prominent hydrogen emission line from 
a Geissler tube with the position of the corresponding 
hydrogen absorption line in the spectrum of Sirius. 
Huggins reported the detection of a Doppler shift for Sirius 
in 1868, but his result was off by more than 50 km gs! 
and did not even have the correct sign; Sirius is moving 
towards the solar system, not away from it. Except in 
the hands of JAMES KEELER with the great 36 in refractor at 
the Lick Observatory on Mt Hamilton in California, visual 
spectroscopy was unable to achieve the precision needed 
to make sense out of the radial velocities of nearby stars. 

A breakthrough in this field came with the application 
of photography to stellar spectroscopy, which led to an 
order-of-magnitude improvement in the precision of the 
measurements. HERMANN CARL VOGEL at Potsdam pioneered 


1 Where c is the speed of light, v is the velocity of the star 
along the line of sight to the observer, 49 is the wavelength 
measured in the laboratory for a chosen spectral feature and A 
is the wavelength observed for the same feature in the spectrum 
of the star. A negative velocity, or blueshift, indicates that the star 
is approaching the observer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the use of dry plates for radial-velocity work and was able 
to achieve a precision of 2 or 3 km s~! for bright stars. 

Leadership in this field soon moved to the Lick 
Observatory, where WILLIAM WALLACE CAMPBELL had taken 
over the reins from Keeler. With generous long-term 
financial support from D O Mills, Campbell and his staff 
were able to undertake an ambitious survey of all the 
stars brighter than visual magnitude 5.5, first with the 
36 in refractor in the north, and subsequently with a 36 in 
reflector at a southern station near Santiago in Chile. For 
solar-type stars the precision of their measurements was 
about 1 km s~!, more than good enough for studies of 
Galactic structure, and well suited for solving the orbits 
of SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY STARS. The great catalog reporting 
the results of this work was published by Campbell and 
Moore in 1928, with center-of-mass velocities listed for 57 
spectroscopic binaries among the 2771 stars in the catalog. 

Photographing stellar spectra for the purpose of 
measuring radial velocities continued to be a major 
enterprise at several observatories on the North American 
continent up through the time of the Second World 
War, especially with the telescopes at the Mt Wilson 
Observatory, built by GEORGE ELLERY HALE. The fruits of these 
labors were summarized in 1953 by Ralph E Wilson in a 
catalog of mean radial velocities for more than 20 000 stars, 
with the Mt Wilson and Lick Observatories contributing 
more than half of the total between them. 


Radial-velocity measurements using correlation 
techniques 

In that same year, 1953, a revolutionary new approach to 
measuring stellar radial velocities was proposed by Peter 
Felgett. One of the main goals of the new scheme was 
to take advantage of the much higher quantum efficiency 
of photoemissive cathodes, which offered a gain of at 
least a factor of 10 compared with photography. The best 
photographic emulsions were barely able to register 1% 
of the incident light, even when hypersensitized for the 
low light levels encountered in ASTRONOMICAL SPECTROSCOPY. 
Felgett’s second idea was to measure many FRAUNHOFER 
LINES simultaneously, thus gaining a major advantage over 
the traditional procedure of measuring the positions of 
only a small number of lines carefully selected to be 
unblended. 


Correlations using a physical mask 

Felgett’s ideas were implemented by Roger F Griffin witha 
new instrument at the Cambridge Observatory. A physical 
mask containing 240 fine slots, chosen to match selected 
absorption lines in the spectrum of the K2 giant ARCTURUS, 
was placed at the focus of the spectrometer, and the light 
passing through the slots was gathered onto the cathode 
of a photomultiplier tube. By driving the mask back 
and forth in the dispersion direction with a micrometer, 
it was possible to determine the shift of the mask that 
gave the best match to the stellar spectrum being observed. 
The shift of the mask could then be converted into a 
Doppler shift using a calibration curve. Griffin used this 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radial Velocities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2 


Eccentricity 


e 
é 
e 
e 
eee teiorareecs erent acre ne Cree 


oO 
| 
e 
] 
] 
° 
° 
8 
e 


L (OE Se | {| | 4 | {| | | | Peseett ble, | en CS Rea | {| | | 
-1 0 1 2. 3 4 5 
Log Period (days) 


Figure 1. Eccentricity versus log(period) for the stellar 
companions orbiting nearby solar-type stars. 


instrument for nearly 30 yr to monitor the radial velocities 
of thousands of stars. One of the main achievements of this 
work was a series of more than 150 papers on the orbits of 
spectroscopic binaries. 

Similar instruments with physical masks were put 
into operation at several other observatories, including 
the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory near Victoria, 
British Columbia, and the 200 in Hale Telescope on 
Palomar Mountain. Especially noteworthy were the 
CORAVELs, operated for many years by a team led 
by Michel Mayor at the Geneva Observatory, both on 
the 1 m Swiss telescope at the Observatoire de Haute 
Provence in France and on the 1.5 m Danish telescope 
at the European Southern Observatory (ESO) on La Silla 
in Chile. These two, nearly identical, instruments also 
used physical masks, but were based on a spectrometer 
design that employed a cross-dispersed echelle grating. 
This provided significantly larger spectral coverage than 
Griffin’s spectrometer, with the result that the CORAVELs 
could go fainter, easily reaching to visual magnitude 
13. Altogether the two CORAVELs accumulated 286 181 
measurements of 60811 stars, with velocity precisions 
mostly in the range 0.3-1.0 kms“. 

The CORAVELs were used to study pulsating stars, 
the memberships and kinematics of stars in clusters, and 
especially the frequency and orbital characteristics of 
spectroscopic binaries in a variety of stellar populations, 
including open clusters and globular clusters. Perhaps 
the most famous result from the CORAVELs was a 
comprehensive summary of the stellar companions found 
in a volume-limited sample of 164 solar-type dwarfs 
within 22 pc of the Sun. Figure 1 shows the distribution of 
eccentricity versus period for the binaries in this sample 
with orbital solutions. Notice that there is a transition at 
about 10 days. For longer periods the orbital eccentricity 
shows a wide distribution with a median value of about 
0.3, but for periods shorter than 10 days the orbits all have 
very small eccentricities, presumably because they have 
been circularized by tidal mechanisms. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In addition to measuring radial velocities, it was 
possible to calibrate the shape and area of the cross- 
correlation dips produced by the CORAVELs, in order to 
derive rotational velocities up to about v sini = 50 km sl, 


and even metallicities. 


Correlations with digital template spectra 

Physical-mask instruments suffer from the disadvantage 
that the detector provides just a single channel. Only 
one wavelength can be registered at a time, as the mask 
is scanned through the range of Doppler shifts expected 
for the star. This shortcoming can be overcome by using 
an imaging detector directly at the focal plane of the 
spectrograph to record simultaneously all the wavelengths 
in the spectrum, in just the same way that photography 
was used to make a spectrogram, except that a modern 
digital detector can now be used. The determination 
of the Doppler shift can then be carried out digitally in 
software by cross-correlating a template spectrum against 
the observed spectrum. 

Perhaps the most dramatic advantage of this 
approach is that silicon diode arrays, such as large- 
format CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs), can be used as 
the detectors, and these can have detective quantum 
efficiencies that are so good that they detect nearly all 
the incident light over a wide range of wavelengths 
from the ultraviolet to the near infrared. Also, with the 
advent of large array detectors with good sensitivity in 
the near infrared, this approach can now be extended to 
considerably longer wavelengths. 

A second advantage of digital cross-correlations is 
that the template spectrum can be chosen after the fact 
froma large library of templates and thus can be optimized 
to match the temperature, rotational velocity, metallicity 
and surface gravity of the target star. If better templates 
become available, or better software is developed, then 
the analysis can be carried out all over again from scratch. 
With a physical mask spectrometer, you are stuck with the 
pattern of slots that was built into the mask. 

The digital speedometers developed at the HARVARD- 
SMITHSONIAN CENTER FOR ASTROPHYSICS (CfA) are early exam- 
ples of instruments designed to use digital correlation tech- 
niques. They used photon-counting intensified Reticons 
for the detectors, and normally recorded about 50 A cen- 
tered near 5187 A in a single order of an echelle spectro- 
graph. Operationally the photon-counting Reticons had 
the advantage that they provided a real-time display of 
the incoming count rates and of the spectrum as it accumu- 
lated. This was useful for optimizing the telescope guiding 
and for deciding when to end an exposure. However, be- 
cause of the limited spectral coverage and a peak detective 
quantum efficiency of not much more than 10%, these de- 
tectors fell far short of what is now obtainable with CCDs. 

To calibrate the wavelength scale, every observation 
of a stellar spectrum with the CfA digital speedometers 
is bracketed by an exposure of a thorium—argon hollow- 
cathode lamp. This naturally establishes the scale for 
converting a wavelength shift to a Doppler shift, but it 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radial Velocities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


leaves open the possibility of a systematic error in setting 
the zero point of the velocity system. Exposures of the 
dawn and dusk sky are obtained every night, and these are 
used to monitor the velocity zero point (the actual radial 
velocity of the Sun can be calculated very accurately for 
any given observatory and time, from the known orbit 
and rotation of the Earth). As a double-check on the 
velocity zero point, more than a thousand observations 
of several dozen minor planets have been made over 
the years (absolute radial velocities can be calculated 
very accurately from the known astrometric orbits of the 
minor planets). The velocity zero point based on minor 
planet observations agrees with the dawn and dusk sky 
calibration within about 100 m s7!. 

Initially the CfA digital speedometer spectra were 
analyzed using observed spectra as the templates. 
Subsequently a large library of more than 60000 synthetic 
spectra was calculated by Jon Morse using Kurucz model 
atmospheres. Not only did this make it possible to choose 
an optimum template during the reductions, but it also 
opened up the possibility of determining temperatures, 
rotational velocities up to about vsini = 140 km sl, 
metallicities and even surface gravities from the same 
spectra. Another important advantage of having a 
closely spaced grid of synthetic template spectra came 
in the analysis of composite spectra, such as the spectra 
of double-lined spectroscopic binaries, using a two- 
dimensional correlation technique, TODCOR. The choice 
of templates for the primary and secondary stars could be 
optimized simultaneously for the TODCOR analysis. 

Three nearly identical CfA digital speedometers were 
put into operation, on the 1.5 m Wyeth Reflector at the Oak 
Ridge Observatory in the town of Harvard, Massachusetts, 
and on the 1.5 m Tillinghast Reflector and MMT, both 
located at the F L Whipple Observatory atop Mt Hopkins, 
Arizona. With the MMT it was possible to reach stars as 
faint as visual magnitude 16. Altogether nearly 200000 
radial velocities have been measured with the CfA digital 
speedometers, with velocity precisions mostly in the range 
0.5-1.0 km s7!. 

A major application of the CfA digital speedometers 
was a study of the structure and early history of the Galaxy 
using a sample of nearly 1500 nearby stars selected for high 
PROPER MOTION. An example of how these observations were 
used to study the relationship between kinematics and 
chemistry is shown in figure 2, which plots the Galactic 
V velocity (the component in the direction of Galactic 
rotation, relative to the local standard of rest) versus 
metallicity, [m/H] (the logarithm of the metal-to-hydrogen 
ratio compared with the Sun). The broad distribution of 
stars centered near V = —210 km s7! and [m/H] = —1.5 
is the halo population, the first generation of stars that 
formed even as the Galaxy was still collapsing out of 
a vast intergalactic cloud composed of metal-poor gas 
and dust. These stars are distributed roughly in a giant 
sphere centered on the Galaxy, and on average they do 
not participate in the rotation of the Galaxy. As the Sun 
passes them by in its circular orbit around the center of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


° 


nm 

3° 

ro) 
I 


Direct 


Galactic Tangential Velocity V (km s-') 
& 
3 
8 
I 
| 


roy 

3 

ro) 
I 

| 


4 3 2 


1 0 1 
Metallicity [m/H] 


Figure 2. Galactic V velocity versus metallicity for the stars in a 
large sample selected for high proper motion. The single-lined 
binaries are plotted as open circles, the stars without detected 
velocity variations are plotted as small filled circles. 


11174 


o #e e 


ees OS ee ene 


Eccentricity 
BR 
[Seals epic Flee a es 

ie) 
8 
@®, 
08 
@ 

oe) 

e 
@0o 
(2) 


—__—-o 9 @e 


Cee ee be Pe PP 
-1 0 1 2 3 4 
Log Period (days) 


a 


Figure 3. Eccentricity versus log(period) for the spectroscopic 
binaries in the proper-motion sample. The halo stars are plotted 
as filled circles, the disk stars as open circles. 


the Galaxy, the halo stars appear to be streaming past 
us into the solar system’s wake. The more concentrated 
distribution of stars near V = 0 and [m/H] = 0 is the disk 
population, stars that lie in a highly flattened disk and 
orbit the center of the Galaxy along with the Sun. These 
stars formed after the Galaxy had collapsed into its present 
disk configuration and after the interstellar medium had 
been enriched by initial generations of massive stars that 
finished their lives quickly and spewed metals from their 
interiors, where they were created by nuclear reactions, 
back into the raw material for the next generation of stars. 

Long-term monitoring of the radial velocities of the 
stars in the proper-motion sample over a span of more than 
15 yr revealed that the frequency and orbital characteristics 
of spectroscopic binaries are pretty much the same for 
solar-type dwarfs in the halo as in the disk populations of 
the Galaxy. Figure 3 shows the distribution of eccentricity 
versus period for all the binaries with orbital solutions in 
the proper-motion sample. The halo stars are plotted as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radial Velocities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


51 ba 


a 

oO 
Pet opel Toa bo] 
Pepe bp pl 


49 


Radial Velocity (km/s) 


48 


0 2 4 6 8 1 
Orbital Phase 


Figure 4. The orbital solution for HD 114762. The theoretical 
velocity curve is plotted as a solid line, the individual velocity 
measurements from the CfA digital speedometers are plotted as 
filled circles. 


filled circles and the disk stars as open circles. The two 
populations show similar distributions, with the exception 
that the transition from circular to eccentric orbits occurs 
at a longer period for the halo binaries because they are 
older and tidal circularization has managed to reach out 
to binaries with wider separations and longer periods. 

Together with the CORAVELs, the CfA digital 
speedometers have been used to monitor large samples of 
solar-type stars, from which optimum targets have been 
selected for extrasolar planet searches and searches for 
extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), namely targets without 
evidence for a companion star that would interfere with 
the formation and/or survival of planets in the habitable 
zone. 

Aprophetic discovery, made with observations jointly 
from the CfA digital speedometers and the CORAVELS, 
was the detection in 1988 of an unseen low-mass 
companion orbiting the solar-type star HD 114762. This 
target had been especially well observed by both teams 
because it was one of the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION 
(IAU) radial-velocity standard stars. The mass of the 
companion could be as small as 10 Jupiter masses (Mj) if 
the orbit happens to be oriented edge-on to the line of sight 
(the orbital inclination cannot be determined from radial- 
velocity observations alone). The orbital characterisitic 
of this companion that dissuaded most astronomers from 
thinking it could be a giant planet was the relatively short 
period, P = 84 days. This implied that the companion was 
orbiting too close to the parent star to have formed the way 
that giant planets were thought to form, by core accretion 
in the icy regions of the stellar system, out beyond the snow 
line. Figure 4 shows the velocity curve for HD 114762’s 
orbital solution, together with the velocities observed with 
the CfA digital speedometers. The observed velocities 
show a scatter that is similar to the amplitude of the 
orbital motion, but the solution is secure and gives reliable 
parameters because many cycles have been covered with 
a large number of observations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Very precise radial velocities 

A proper exploration of the realm of extrasolar planets 
using stellar radial velocities required the development 
of a new generation of instruments: ultrastable echelle 
spectrographs coupled to large-format CCDs as the 
detectors. Two examples of such instruments are the 
High Resolution Echelle Spectrograph (HIRES) built by 
Steven S Vogt for the Keck I telescope on Mauna Kea in 
Hawaii and ELODIE built by Michel Mayor’s team for the 
1.93 m reflector at the Observatoire de Haute Provence 
in France. With these instruments it is possible to record 
enough photons in a single CCD spectrogram of a slowly 
rotating solar-type dwarf so that the photon-noise limit to 
the determination of the Doppler shift is only a few m st. 
At this level of precision, where the shift of the system 
of absorption lines must be determined to less than one- 
thousandth of the width of a typical line, itis the systematic 
drifts and image distortions in the spectrograph that set the 
most difficult limitations. 


Gas absorption cells 

Two different approaches have been developed for 
monitoring the spectrograph drifts so that systematic 
errors in the velocities can be corrected to better than 
10ms-~!. The first technique was pioneered by a Canadian 
team, who used a hydrogen-fluoride gas absorption 
cell to impress many sharp absorption lines of known 
wavelength on each stellar spectrum. An improvement 
of this technique was developed by R Paul Butler and 
Geoffrey W Marcy. For the absorbing gas they chose to 
use iodine, which has a rich spectrum of lines in the region 
5000-6000 A. 

One approach to the reduction of these spectra is to 
use a very-high-resolution Fourier transform spectrometer 
(FITS) scan of the iodine lamp to model the temporal 
and spatial variations of the instrumental profile of the 
spectrograph. <A high-quality spectrum of each star 
without the iodine absorption lines is also needed, to 
serve as a template, and velocities relative to the template 
are then determined for each stellar spectrum taken with 
the iodine gas absorption cell. With careful attention to 
the characteristics of the CCD readout electronics and 
detailed modeling of the instrumental profile, it has been 
possible to achieve a precision of a few m s! with 
HIRES. A version of the two-dimensional cross- correlation 
technique TODCOR has also been used to analyze stellar 
spectra taken with the iodine gas absorption cell and 
HIRES and has achieved a precision of 10 m st. 


Optical fiber feeds 

A second approach for achieving very high precision is 
to use optical fibers to scramble the stellar light as it is 
fed onto the spectrograph slit and to monitor the drifts 
in the spectrograph during a stellar exposure using a 
simultaneous exposure of a thorium—argon comparison 
lamp. This approach has the advantage that it can provide 
wider spectral coverage than the limited window over 
which iodine absorption lines are available, at the cost of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radial Velocities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


minor light loses in the optical fibers. This approach has 
been used both with ELODIE and with CORALIE on the 
1.2m Swiss telescope at ESO on La Silla. These instruments 
can both produce velocities with a precision of better than 
10ms-!. 

The speed of the Earth in its annual orbit around the 
Sun is nearly 30 km s~!, and the daily rotation amounts to 
about 0.5 km s~! at the Earth’s equator. When reporting 
a radial velocity, it has been customary to remove these 
motions and to state the velocity relative to the Sun. Now 
that it is feasible to measure velocities with precisions of 
a few m s“!, additional motions must also be taken into 
account, including the monthly orbit of the Earth and 
Moon and the orbits of the other planets in the solar system. 
In particular, the gravitational pull of Jupiter causes a reflex 
motion in the Sun of about 12 ms7! witha period of about 
12 yr. Thus, for very precise work it is necessary to refer 
radial velocities to the center of mass, Or BARYCENTER, of the 
solar system. 


Extrasolar planets 

Most of the excitement in stellar radial-velocity research 
during the 1990s was the discovery of dozens of extrasolar 
planets orbiting nearby solar-type stars (see EXTRASOLAR 
PLANETARY COMPANIONS AND BROWN DWARFS). Perhaps the 
biggest surprise was the announcement in 1995 of a 
Jupiter-sized companion orbiting 51 Pegasi with a period 
of only 4 days. This placed the companion in a very tight 
orbit, 20 times smaller than the Earth’s orbit around the 
Sun, and led to the development of new theoretical ideas 
for how to get giant planets to migrate inward from where 
they originally formed out beyond the snow line. The 
problem of how to stop the migration and park the planet 
in an orbit like that of 51 Pegasi remained unsolved. 

A particularly significant discovery was the detection 
in 1999 of transits for the planet orbiting the solar- 
type star HD 209458. This marked the opening of a 
new era in extrasolar planet research, when the physical 
characteristics of extrasolar planets could be studied in 
detail. By measuring the amount of dimming the parent 
star undergoes as the planet transits in front of the star, 
it is possible to deduce how much of the stellar surface 
is being shadowed, which allows the radius of the planet 
to be determined, assuming the radius of the star can be 
estimated accurately. Moreover, from the shape of the light 
curve it is possible to deduce the exact inclination of the 
planet's orbit, thus eliminating any ambiguity in the mass 
of the planet. In turn this makes it possible to deduce the 
bulk density of the planet, simply by dividing the mass by 
the volume. 

In the case of the planet orbiting HD 209458, the mass 
is 0.69Myj, the radius is 1.40R; and the density works out 
to be 0.31 g cm°, about one-third the density of water. 
This implies that the planet must be made mostly of gas, 
more or less like Jupiter and Saturn, but puffed up by the 
intense heating due to its close proximity to its parent star. 
However, despite this heating, the gravity of the planet is 
strong enough to keep its atmosphere from boiling away. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The escape velocity from the planet’s surface works out 
to about 40 km s~!, while the typical thermal velocity for 
an atom in the planet’s atmosphere is only a few km s7!. 
The prospects for learning more about this planet are 
fascinating. For example, astronomers expect to be able 
to study the atmosphere of the planet by observing the 
absorption lines that are introduced into the spectrum of 
the parent star during transits, when the planet passes 
between us and the star and some of the starlight passes 
through the planet’s atmosphere. Another possibility is to 
look for the light reflected from the surface of close-in giant 
planets and to measure radial velocities from the Doppler 
shift of the reflected stellar absorption lines. 

Another important development was the discovery 
in 1999 of two more planets orbiting v Andromedae, in 
addition to the close-in giant planet reported in 1996, 
making this the first planetary system to be discovered 
around a solar-type star. The outer two planets are more 
massive than Jupiter, and their orbits are more eccentric 
and smaller than that of Jupiter, so the v Andromedae 
system does not look anything at all like our own solar 
system. Nevertheless, this is path-breaking progress 
towards understanding the characteristics of systems of 
extrasolar planets and whether or not our own system is 
unusual (see also EXOPLANETS). 


Future developments for radial-velocity research 
So far, we have not detected any true Jupiters, planets 
the size of Jupiter orbiting with periods of 10 or 20 yr. 
This does not mean that such systems do not exist. It 
does not mean that the configuration of our solar system 
is unique, with the terrestrial planets huddled in close 
to the parent star and the giant planets patrolling the 
outskirts, warding off incoming intruders suchas asteroids 
or comets that might be instruments of mass extinction. 
Such a conclusion is premature, because we have so far 
barely achieved the Doppler precision that is needed 
to detect a true Jupiter, and with few exceptions the 
observations do not yet cover long enough time spans. 
Both these shortcomings are being addressed. New and 
better instruments and techniques are being developed. 
Gradually enough additional data with sufficient time 
coverage will be accumulated to detect true Jupiters. 

It is not yet clear what the ultimate limit to the 
precision of stellar radial velocities will be. The limit 
may already have been reached for stars rotating more 
rapidly than a few km s"! in vsini, where the velocity 
residuals are often larger than 10 m Set, perhaps because 
of stellar spots that distort the stellar line profiles as the star 
rotates. For giant stars there is good evidence that some 
astrophysical phenomena, such as oscillations in the stellar 
atmospheres, are the source of significant velocity jitter, 
often exceeding 1 km s-! for the most luminous evolved 
stars. For well-behaved solar-type dwarfs that are hardly 
rotating and have no unusual surface activity, the ultimate 
limit to the velocity precision may turn out to be smaller 
than 1m-s-!. Instruments that should be able to reach that 
level of precision are now under development. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radial Velocities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The future of radial-velocity research will be 
intimately connected with the success of space astrometric 
missions, such as the Full-Sky Astrometric Mapping 
Explorer (FAME) and the Space Astrometric Mission (SIM) 
under development by the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA). In the case of the European 
Space Agency’s (ESA’s) Global Astrometric Interferometer 
for Astrophysics (GAIA) there are even plans to include the 
capability to measure radial velocities of millions of stars, 
although the velocity precision cannot be much better than 
afew kms“ because of photon starvation. 

Data from the space astrometric missions will usher 
in anew era in the study of the structure and kinematics of 
the Galaxy and of stellar subsystems such as star-forming 
regions and clusters. Radial velocities will be an important 
part of this research, because they can be combined with 
proper motions and distances to derive space motions for 
literally millions of stars. 

Another important area of study for the space 
astrometric missions will be the characterization of 
extrasolar planets. For most of the planets discovered by 
radial-velocity observations it should be possible to derive 
the orbital inclinations using AsTROMETRY, thus removing 
the ambiguity about the actual masses of the planets. 
Astrometry can also look for evidence of outer planets 
with orbital velocities too small to be detected using radial 
velocities. When applied to systems with known radial- 
velocity planets in short-period orbits, astrometry should 
be able to explore what kind of systems those planets come 
in. 

Despite all the excitement about the discovery of 
extrasolar planets and the outstanding prospects for 
learning more about the characteristics of these planets and 
their systems in the coming years, one should not forget 
that we have a lot more to learn about the frequency and 
orbital characteristics of stellar companions in a variety 
of populations, building on the good progress in this field 
over recent years. Indeed, a full understanding of how and 
where planets form and evolve will also require a fuller 
understanding of the formation and evolution of stellar 
companions. Only then can we hope to understand how 
stars decide whether they will have planets or stars for 
companions. 


Bibliography 

Philip A G D and Latham D W 1985 (ed) Stellar Radial 
Velocities (IAU Colloq. 88) (Schenectady, NY: L Davis) 

Hearnshaw J B 1986 The Analysis of Starlight: One Hundred 
and Fifty Years of Astronomical Spectroscopy (New York: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Hearnshaw J B and Scarfe C D 1999 (ed) Precise Stellar 
Radial Velocities (IAU Collog. 170) (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 


David W Latham 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiant 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radiant 


The point on the celestial sphere from which the meteors 
of a particular meteor shower all appear to diverge. 
Meteoroids in a particular meteor stream impinging on 
the Earth’s atmosphere do so on essentially parallel paths. 
That they appear to an observer to radiate from a single 
point is an effect of perspective. Some showers have 
more than one radiant, representing different strands of 
meteoroids within the meteor stream. Radiants move 
eastward at a rate of 4 min of RA per day as a result of 
the Earth’s orbital motion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radiation 


The emission and propagation through space of elec- 
tromagnetic energy (photons) or subatomic particles. 
Electromagnetic radiation, of which visible light is an ex- 
ample, can be regarded as a wave-like disturbance that 
travels through space at the speed of light, 300 000 km s“1; 
it may also be regarded as a stream of particles, ‘packets’ 
of energy called photons. Examples of particle radiation 
include alpha and beta ‘radiation’ resulting from radioac- 
tivity, the solar wind, and cosmic rays. High-energy sub- 
atomic particles or electromagnetic radiation (gamma rays 
and x-rays) cause ionization and are harmful to living tis- 
sue. Most of the ionizing radiation absorbed by living 
creatures at the surface of the Earth comes from natural 
radioactivity and cosmic rays. 

Electromagnetic radiation may be emitted or ab- 
sorbed in a variety of ways. In general, any electrically 
charged particle will emit or absorb radiation when it is 
accelerated or oscillated. For example, if an electron mov- 
ing freely through a gas, makes a close encounter with an 
ion, and is not captured by that ion, its kinetic energy will 
be changed by a finite amount, the change in energy cor- 
responding to the emission or absorption of a photon (a 
‘packet’ of electromagnetic energy). Radiation emitted in 
this way is called free—-free radiation (the electron moves 
freely before and after the encounter). When a large num- 
ber of electrons and ions are involved in these kinds of en- 
counters (the assemblage of ions and electrons is called a 
plasma), their individual free—free emissions add together 
to produce a continuous spectrum, or continuum, of radi- 
ation. Because the temperature of the plasma determines 
the energies of the electrons, radiation produced in this 
way is often called thermal emission. 

If a freely moving electron is captured by an ion, the 
kinetic energy that it loses is radiated away as a photon. 
Electromagnetic energy released in this way is called free— 
bound radiation (the electron, which was moving freely 
before the encounter, ends up bound to the ion). Again, 
where a large number of electrons are involved, with 
a spread of kinetic energies, free-bound emission takes 
place over a wide range of wavelengths, so producing 
a continuous spectrum. An electron that is bound to an 
atom exists in one of a restricted number of possible energy 
levels. If an electron drops from a higher to a lower energy 
level, it emits a photon of energy equal to the difference 
between the two levels; this corresponds to the emission of 
light of one particular wavelength. The various possible 
transitions (changes in level) correspond to emissions (or 
absorptions) at a discrete set of wavelengths and give rise 
to various series of emission or absorption lines. Electron 
transitions of this kind are called bound—bound transitions 
(the electron remains bound to the atom before and after 
the transition) and the resulting radiation is sometimes 
referred to as bound-bound radiation. 


See also: absorption spectrum, atom, continuous spec- 
trum, cosmic rays, electromagnetic radiation, electron, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


emission spectrum, ion, ionization, photon, plasma, quan- 
tum mechanics, radioactivity, solar wind, subatomic par- 
ticles. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radiative Transfer 


Astronomy is an observational science and astronomers 
rely mostly on the electromagnetic radiation emitted by 
cosmic sources. Indeed over 95% of the information 
comes from observed radiation, with the remaining 
5% coming from COSMIC RAYS, METEORITES, NEUTRINOS and 
possibly GRAVITATIONAL WaVES. Before reaching an observer, 
the radiation has interacted with matter in the source and 
in the intervening space between the source and observer. 
Understanding the interaction with and transport of 
radiation through matter is crucial for astronomers to 
interpret the observations. Radiative transfer deals with 
the propagation and interaction of radiation with matter. 

When radiation passes through a region of space 
containing gas particles and dust grains, energy is 
generally removed from the beam either by absorption 
or by scattering. In addition, the material in a medium 
may emit radiation, with the source of energy coming 
from the internal energy of excitation or indirectly from the 
kinetic energy of motion. In scattering, the photon energy 
is only slightly altered (energy transferred to the internal 
energy of the scatterer) and is not being converted into the 
kinetic or thermal energy. In general scattering does not 
couple the radiation field to the thermodynamic properties 
of the medium. Examples of scattering are: Thomson 
or Compton scattering by electrons, Raman or Rayleigh 
scattering by molecules and coherent scattering by dust 
grains. On the other hand, in absorption the photon energy 
is being converted into kinetic energy or thermal energy. 
Radiation is coupled to the thermodynamic properties of 
the medium. Examples of absorption are photoionization 
of gas particles, bremsstrahlung of free electrons and 
absorption of radiation by dust grains (see also PHYSICS OF 
MOLECULES, SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: ATOMIC PROCESSES). 

The theory of radiation transport has many applica- 
tions. Some important applications in astrophysics in- 
clude: (a) formation of spectral lines and continuum ra- 
diation in STELLAR ATMOSPHERES, (b) excitation mechanisms 
of interstellar molecular lines and cosmic masers, (c) inter- 
pretation of dust spectral features in the energy spectrum 
of circumstellar envelopes and molecular clouds, (d) mod- 
eling PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES, and (e) ionization and thermal 
structures of HIIREGIONS. Some applications in physics and 
engineering include: (a) neutron transport in nuclear re- 
actors, (b) radiation hydrodynamics in nuclear explosions, 
and (c) GREENHOUSE EFFECTS in the Earth’s atmosphere. 


Basic concepts and definitions 
To understand the theory of radiation transport, we first 
introduce a few basic concepts and definitions. 


Description of radiation field 

Microscopically a radiation field is simply an ensemble of 
photons. A photon may be described as a point particle 
of zero mass which moves with constant speed c in free 
space. It has spin 1 and obeys Bose-Einstein statistics. At 
any time t, we may represent a photon as a point in phase 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


space, characterized by six phase-space variables: (a) three 
spatial coordinates (components of position vector r) 
which specifies the location in some reference frame, 
(b) two angular variables (direction cosines of direction 
unit vector Q) which denotes the direction of propagation, 
and (c) a frequency v such that the photon has energy hv 
and momentum hv/c, where h is the Planck constant. 
Hence a radiation field is a function of r, f, Q and »v. 
We often specify Q by a polar angle @ and an azimuthal 
angle ¢. The components of Q in Cartesian coordinates 
are known as direction cosines: Q = 2,8 + QyYYy + QZ, 
where 2, = sin@ cos ¢, Q, = sin@ sing, Q, = cosd, and 


z 


|Q| = /Q24+ Q + Q2 = 1. Furthermore, Q is related to the 
solid angle element dQ defined by 


_ dA _ (rsinédd)(r dé) 


r2 


=sinddéd¢d. (1) 


When integrated over all directions, the total solid angle, 
measured in steradians (sr), is 47. 


Photon distribution function 

To describe the radiation field as a statistical ensemble 
of a we define a photon distribution function 
W(r, t; Q, v) such that 


dn = Wr, t; 2, v) dV dQ dv (2) 


is the number of photons at time t with frequency v 
in a frequency interval dv located within a differential 
volume dv near a point r and traveling with speed c ina 
direction Q in a solid angle element dQ. In other words, 
W is the number of photons at time ¢ per unit phase- space 
volume (not spatial volume) centered at position (r, Q, v) 
in phase space. In general r and Q are not specified by 
the same coordinate system. A radiation field is said to 
be homogeneous, stationary, isotropic « or gray according 
to whether W is independent of r, t, Q or v. Blackbody 
radiation is an example of a homogeneous, stationary and 
isotropic radiation field. 

In the KINETIC THEORY OF GASES, the particle distribution 
function f is usually defined such that f(r, ft; p)dp is 
the number of particles per unit spatial volume at (r, t) 
with momenta in the range (p,p + dp). By noting that 

= (hv/ c)Q for photons and that the number of particles 
ae unit spatial volume is the same irrespective of what 
distribution function we use, one can show that ¥ = 


(3 v2/c3) f. 


Specific intensity 

Consider a beam of photons with frequency v at a 
position r traveling in direction Q (see figure 1). During 
a time interval dt, the number of photons dn crossing 
an element of surface area dA which is oriented at an 
angle @ with Q is simply dn = YW dV dQ dv, where dV is 
the differential volume swept through by those photons in 
crossing dA during dt. Hence, 


= (cdt)(Q- dA) = (cdt)(cos6 dA) (3) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. 


dn = W(cdt)(cos@ dA) dQ dv. (4) 


The amount of energy transported across dA is then 
= (hv) dn = (chv)W cos6 dA dQ dv dt. (5) 


The specific intensity / (r, £5 Q, v) of radiation at position r, 
traveling in direction ior with frequency v, at time t 
is defined as the amount of energy, per unit frequency 
interval, passing through a unit area oriented normal to 
the beam, into a unit solid angle, in a unit time, ie. 


as : dE 

LS diego di+0 (53 6dAdQ dv x) ee) 
The specific intensity is a scalar quantity with dimensions 
erg cm sr"! Hz~! s“!, and is spatially invariant in free 
space, i.e. independent of the distance between the source 
and the observer if there are no sources or sinks of radiation 
along the line of sight. Observationally, the quantity / 
can be measured approximately if a source is spatially 
resolved. Provided POLARIZATION effects can be ignored, 
the specific intensity completely describes the radiation 
field. From the above, we see that J and W are related by 
I(r, t; Q, v) =chvU (r,t; Q, v). 

Characterization of radiation by either J (r, t; Q, v) or 
Wr, t; Q, v) ignores the wave nature of radiation. Such 
a description is valid only if the uncertainty principle is 
satisfied. This condition implies that dAdQ > i” and 
dvdr > 1. 


Energy density and mean intensity 

The energy density Ex(r, t; v) of radiation at frequency v 
and at time ¢ is defined as the amount of energy 
at position r per unit frequency interval dv per unit 
volume dV 


E = 
Ex(r,¥,t) = § — = nv W(r, t;Q,v)dQ. (7) 


This is physically consistent since YW is the number of 
photons, per unit volume, of energy hv, propagating in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


direction Q into intervals dv dQ, so that the energy density 
is just this number, multiplied by the energy per photon 
and summed over all solid angles. Ez is a scalar quantity 
and has dimensions erg cm? Hz7?. 

The mean intensity J (r, t; v) is defined as the average 
of the specific intensity over all solid angles, i.e. 


1 a 
J(r, trv) = ap lend, v) dQ. (8) 
IT 
The mean intensity is the zeroth angular moment of 
the specific intensity. It is also a scalar quantity 
and has the same dimensions as specific intensity, 
erg cm~ Hz"! s7! sr~’. From the above, we see that 
4n 
Ex(r, tv) = —J(r, 8; v) (9) 
Cc 
so that the mean intensity is basically a measure of the 
energy density. 


Radiative flux 

The radiative flux F(r, t; v) at position r, frequency v, and 
time ¢ is a vector defined as the net rate of energy flowing 
across a fixed surface of unit area in all directions per unit 
frequency interval (flow — direction) 


F(r, tiv) = hy § W(r, t; Q, v)cQdQ (10) 


where (cQ) is just the velocity vector indicating the 
direction of photon propagation. For an arbitrarily 
oriented surface dA = ndA, F-dA gives the net rate 
of energy flow across the surface dA per unit frequency 
interval. The component of F in the direction 7 is just 


FQ) =2F= dE 
eee funl(|> =) 


= chv § W(r, t; Q, v) cos@ dQ (11) 


where @ is the angle between Q and the normal to dA 
(cos@ = n- Q. The net flux F (Q’) in the given direction 
® can be written as (see figure 2) 


F(Q) = F* — F7 (12) 


F* (outward net flux) 
F~ (inward net flux) 
F(Q’) due to the radiation from the direction Q such that 


a,2al> 
QQ | a 
unit volume at a given point is characterized by energy 
density Er whereas the direction and velocity of its flow 
at the point are given by the radiative flux F. The radiative 
flux has dimensions erg cm~* Hz7! s7!. It is the first 
angular moment of the radiation field. For an isotropic 
radiation field F = 0. Observationally, if a source is 
spatially unresolved, we can measure only the flux, and 
the energy received falls off as the inverse square of the 
distance between the source and the observer. 


where | represents the part of 


| Note that the amount of radiant energy per 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


s incident 
F flux 


> n 


F + 
emergent 
flux 


slab medium 


net flux F = Ft - F° 


Figure 2. 


Radiation pressure tensor 

In the kinetic theory of gases, pressure at a given point is 
defined as the net rate of momentum transfer normal to 
an arbitrarily oriented surface of unit area at that point. 
The same definition applies to radiation field which is 
essentially a photon gas. In general, the radiation pressure 
tensor is defined as 


P(r, t; v) = hv § Wr, t; Q, QA dQ. (13) 


Physically we may interpret the i — j component of 
the radiation pressure tensor as the rate of momentum 
flow in the j-direction from radiation of frequency v 
through a surface of unit area oriented perpendicular to 
the i-direction 


Pi (r,t; v) = f (c2N(WwO, /UE, t; Q, v) dQ (14) 


where (cQ,;) is the projected velocity in the i-direction and 
(hvQ;/c) is the momentum in the j-direction. P(r, t; v) is 
a tensor of second rank and has nine components. It is 
the second angular moment of the radiation field. It has the 
same dimensions as energy density, erg cm? Hz7!. It is 
symmetric, i.e. P;; = P;;, and obeys the trace relationship 
Yo; Pi = Pex + Pyy + Pz, = Ep. Foran isotropic radiation 
field, P is diagonal and isotropic 


Py = 


0 iF j (all off-diagonal terms are zero) 
5E r i= j (all diagonal terms are equal) = 
Note that for an isotropic radiation field P 4 O while F = 0. 


Simplifications in 1D geometries 
In most astrophysical problems, the following one- 
dimensional (1D) geometries are assumed: 


(a) Planar or slab geometry: if one employs Cartesian 
(x, y, z) coordinates to specify r and introduces polar 
and azimuthal angles (6, @) to denote 2, 1D planar or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


slab geometry implies azimuthal independence and 
infinite extent in x and y, ie. r is independent of x 
and y while Qis independent of ¢, so that I(r, ¢; Q, v) 
becomes I (z, t; u,v), where uw = cosd = Q-2. 

(b) Spherical geometry: in spherical coordinates, the 
position vector r is specified by (r, ©, ®) while the 
direction Q is specified in terms of the polar and 
azimuthal angles (6, ¢), now measured with respect 
to a unit vector fr in the radial direction. 1D spherical 
geometry implies that r depends only on r and is 
independent of © and ®, while Q is independent 
of @ so that I(r, t; Q, v) becomes I(r, t; 4, v), where 
w=cosd =Q-F. 


In both geometries, Q-> ju so that Qa 5 pw? and 


2a 54 +1 
g...da= | 0 [ sin do = 2x [ ...dy. (16) 
0 0 -1 


With these simplifications, the angular moments of the 
specific intensity can be written as 


1 +1 
mrnny=sf lntwvu'dn 7) 
-1 


so that we have mean intensity J = M°, Eddington flux 
H = M', K-integral K = M?. 

For 1D geometries, the angular distribution of a 
radiation field may be characterized by the scalar ratio 
f = K/J,knownas the Eddington factor or anisotropy factor. 


f=K/J Radiation field anisotropy 
0<f<1/3  Sideward peaking 

f=1/3 Isotropic or linearly anisotropic 
1/3 < f <1 Forward peaking 


The assumption of f = 1/3 is known as the Eddington 
approximation which is valid for stellar interiors. In the 
outer layers of stellar atmospheres and for centrally heated 
sources, the radiation tends to stream radially and f — 1. 
On the other hand, for externally illuminated sources 
(interstellar clouds embedded in the ambient interstellar 
radiation field) in which radiation tends to peak sideways 
and non-radially, f < 1/3. 


Observational implications 

The energy received from an unresolved astronomical 
source by a distant observer depends on the geometry of 
the source. The energy received, per unit area normal to 
the line of sight, from a differential area dA on the surface 
of the source with its normal 7 making an angle 6 with the 
observer's line of sight is 


dF =1dQ=I1(n-dA)D~ = I dAcos@D~ (18) 


where dQ is the solid angle subtended by the surface 
element, D is the distance of the source from the observer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and / is the specific intensity emergent at the surface of 
the source. 

Consider two sources of the same surface bright- 
ness Jp: one is a sphere of radius R and the other is a disk 
of radius R and half-thickness Z. In both cases D >> R or 
Z so that all rays from the source to the observer may be 
considered to be parallel. Below we show that if R = Z, 
Faisk = Fsphere for all viewing angles. 

For a spherically symmetric source of radius R, the 
surface element is just a differential annulus on the disk 
(projected image of sphere), ie. NdA = 2ardr = 
27 (R sin @)(R cos 6 d@) so that the flux received by a distant 
observer (D > R) from the visible face of the sphere is 


R\2 
F sphere = [ Wada = (5) Icos@siné dé. (19) 


The upper limit of integration for 6 is 7/2 = 90° because we 
assume that R < D so that all rays from the source to the 
observer may be considered to be parallel. For a sphere of 
uniform brightness Jo, this reduces to Fsphere = (7 R?/ D*)Ip 
which is independent of 6. Note that AQ = (7 R?/D?) is 
just the solid angle subtended by the source at the observer, 
so that Fsphere = Jo AQ. 

For a disk of radius R, half-thickness Z, and with its 
symmetry axis making an angle 6 with the line of sight, we 
can view the element area dA as having two components: 
(7-dA)faco = cos@(rdrd@) for the planar surface of the 
disk and (71-dA)eage = sin (cos R d¢@ dz) for the curved 
surface of the disk edge. Hence the total flux received by 
a distant observer (D > Z or R) is 


20 R 
Fisk = cos | / TtaceY dr d@ 
¢=0 Yr=0 


+Z m/2 
+ Rsin@ i. / Tedge COS p dp | D~. 
z=-Z J p=—T/2 
(20) 


For a disk of uniform surface brightness Jp, this reduces 
to Faisk = Ip AQ, where again AQ = (rR? cosé + 
4RZ sin@)/D* is the solid angle subtended by the total 
projected area of the disk. Compared to a sphere with the 
same Jp and R, and if R = Z, the ratio of observed fluxes 
for the two geometries is just given by the ratio of their 
projected areas 


Faisk _ 1 R? cos0 +4R* sind Faisk 4 
1 


F. sphere mR? a sphere 


which indicates that Faisk = Fphere for all viewing angles. 


Equation of radiation transport 


To derive the equation of radiation transport, we introduce 
a few terms to quantify the physical processes of 
absorption, scattering and emission. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Basic definitions 

When radiation passes through material, energy is 
generally removed from the beam either by pure 
absorption or by scattering. The sum of scattering and 
absorption is called extinction. In addition, the material in 
a medium may emit radiation. 


Extinction coefficient The volume extinction coefficient x is 
defined such that an element of material of cross section 
dA and length ds, oriented normal to a beam of radiation 
having specific intensity I(r, ¢; Q, v) propagating along 
Q into solid angle dQ within a frequency interval dv, 
removes from the beam in a time dt an amount of energy 


dE_ = x(r,t;Q, v)I(r,t;Q2,v)dAdsdQdvdt. (22) 


x has the dimension of cm! and is given by the product of 
an extinction cross section o (cm?) and the number density 
of interacting particles n(cm~*) summed over all states that 
can interact with photons of frequency v,i.e. x = no.Some 
authors use the term mass extinction coefficient « which is 
related to x by x = xp, where p is the mass density. It can 
be shown that 1/x is the photon mean free path, defined 
as the average distance traveled by a photon before it is 
absorbed or scattered. 

The extinction coefficient x is made up of two 
contributions, pure absorption and scattering, with the 
corresponding coefficients x“ and x° 


X(r, t; Q, v) = xr, t; Q, v) + x0°(r, t; Q, v). (23) 


Emission coefficient The volume emission coefficient or 
simply emissivity n is defined such that the amount of 
energy released froma material element of cross section dA 
and length ds, into a solid angle dQ around a direction Q, 
within a frequency interval dv in a time df is 


dE, = (r,t; Q,v)dAds dQ dvdr. (24) 


7 has units of erg cm~? s~! sr-! Hz“!, the same as specific 


intensity 7. The emissivity may be isotropic in the rest 
frame of the material, but is anisotropic in the laboratory 
frame when the material moves. 

The emission coefficient 1 can be represented as a 
combination of two different coefficients 


n(r, t; Q,v) = ni (r,t; Q, v) +n (r,t;Q,v) (25) 


where 7’ is the true or thermal emission coefficient and 
n° is the scattering emission coefficient. 

For a system in thermodynamic equilibrium, x and 
are related by Kirchhoff’s law n*(v) = x*(v)B(v, T), where 
B(v, T) is the Planck function. 


Source function The source function S(r, t; Q, v) is defined 
as the ratio of n and x 
S(r, ts Q, v= nr, 0; Q, v)/x(r, t; Q v) (26) 


so that from Kirchhoff’s law S(r,t;v) = 
thermodynamic equilibrium. 


Ba, T) in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Optical depth The optical depth t is defined as the volume 
extinction coefficient integrated over a path length 


T= / x ds. (27) 


Note that t is a dimensionless quantity. A medium is said 
to be optically thin if t < 1 and optically thick if t > 1. 
In dimensionless units, a path length of one photon mean 
free path corresponds to t = 1. 


Scattering and redistribution functions During scattering, 
there are changes in both direction and frequency of 
the radiation. These changes _ are described in terms 
of a redistribution function R(Q, v's Q, v) which is the 
probability of a photon i in the frequency interval (v’, v’ + 
dv’) in the direction Q’ within a solid angle dQ’ being 
scattered in the direction 2 within solid angle dQ in the 
frequency interval (v, v + dv). More simply, it is the joint 
probability that a photon with direction_ and frequency 
(Q', v’) is absorbed and a photon with Q, v) is emitted. 
It satisfies the normalization condition 


2 
(=) § an’ f aa | dv’ f dve@ v's») = 1. (28) 
4n f Q vf! v 


If Osca(1, t3 Q, v) is the scattering cross section, and n is the 
number denisty of scatters, then the scattering emission 
coefficient n* is given by 


(r,t; Q, v) = Ndsalr, t;2,v) P —— | dv' 
ag 4m Jy 
x [T(r, t: &, VRQ’, vv’: Q, v)). (29) 
Similarly, the scattering coefficient x* is given by 
(r,t; Q, v) = noscalr, t; 2, v)g(v) (30) 


where we have defined a scattering profile g(v) as 


gv) = § —t> = [ a R(Q’, v'; Q, v). (31) 
Q’ 


For coherent scattering, v = v’, the redistribution function 
can be expressed as 


RQ, v's Qv) = pQQHewys—v') 32) 
where p(’, Q) is known as the phase function which gives 
the probability of scattering in the direction Q of radiation 
arriving from the direction 2’ ona volume element at point 
r. It is normalized as 


1 ~ A ~ 
re § pQ, 2) dQ = 1. (33) 


For coherent scattering (e.g. scattering by dust grains), the 
scattering emission coefficient becomes 


ni (r,t; Q, V) = NOgca(7, F3 Q, v) 
q 4a 


x [1 (r,t: , v)pQ’, D]. (34) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ds 


+ 


I(r, t; Q2,v) 


I(rtAr,tt+At;Q,v) 


before after 


dA 


Figure 3. 


Derivation of the transport equation 

Consider an element of material of length ds and cross 
section dA, fixed in the laboratory frame. We calculate 
the change, in a time dt, in the energy of the radiation 
field contained in a frequency interval dv, traveling into 
solid angle dQ along a direction Q normal to dA, as it 
passes through the material. The difference between the 
amount of energy that emerges at position r + Ar at time 
t + dt and the amount incident at position r at time t must 
equal the difference between the amount of energy created 
by emission from the material and the amount removed 
by extinction (see figure 3). The equation of radiation 
transport is just a statement of the energy conservation 
along a ray path ds 


— 
energy emitted 


AE = dE, - dE. (35) 
Se od 


energy change energy removed 


From the definitions of J, , and x, this means 


[I(r + Ar, t+ At; Q, v) — I(r, t; &, v)]dA dQ dy dt 
=[n(r,t; Q, v)— x(r, Ft; Q, vl (r,t; Q, v)]dA ds dQ dv dt 
(36) 


where we have At = ds/c. Applying Taylor’s expansion 
in (r,t) to (r+ Ar, t + At; Q, v) 


I(r + Ar,t + At; Q,v) © I(r, t: Q,v) 


1 a ue Le 
+ I(r, t; Q, v) ds 
c Ot Toe 


+ higher-order terms. 


Neglecting the higher-order terms and substituting 
into the energy conservation statement, we obtain the 
time-dependent equation of radiation transport 


— x(r,t; Q, v)l (r,t; Q, v). (37) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Suppressing the functional dependence of the quantities 
involved, we may write 


lol al 
mars + aa =n-xl. (38) 
we —— 


temporal change _ spatial change 


This derivation is based entirely ona classical, macroscopic 
and phenomenological approach. It neglects the wave 
nature of radiation such as polarization, dispersion, 
coherence, interference and other quantum effects. For 
situations in which 

ol lol 

—>-—*0 39 

Chy c ot ©?) 
we have the time-independent equation of radiation 


transport 
al 


— 
geometry Piya 


The term on the left depends on the geometry of the 
medium while the term on the right represents the physics 
of how radiation interacts with matter. Since s is a 
coordinate-independent path length, the above equation 
is valid in arbitrary coordinate systems, provided we use 
an appropriate expression to evaluate 0/ds. 


Expressions for 0/ds in different geometries 

The directional derivative 0/ds basically describes how 
Q changes with r. In general r and Q are not specified 
by the same coordinate system. If both Q and r are 
specified in Cartesian coordinates (r = xe + yy + zz, 
Q = Q,8 + Qy + QZ), then d/ds can be expressed in 
vector notation as 


i= (= )(re)*(n) le) Co) 


a a Os as 
+2,— =Q.V. (41) 


In curvilinear coordinates, the coordinate basis vectors 
rotate with respect to the direction determined by Q and 
we must evaluate 0/ds as 


d/ds = 2-V+(dQ/ds)-Vo (42) 


where Vg denotes differentiation with respect to the 
direction cosines of Q. Specifically, for arbitrary 
curvilinear coordinates (x, .x2,x3) with unit vectors 
(i, 7, k), the directional derivative is 


a ‘oes a L... ; r) 1 a 
— = — siné cos¢— + — siné sin ¢— + — cos — 
Os hy 0X1 hy 0x2 hg 0x3 
1 Jr] 1 ra 
Nig Se PET) ls 6089 > Spy |b 2 
sin 0 sin @ sin? 6 ap 
*_avGw) 2 (43) 
sin 6 00 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where 


; 2 , 2 P 2441/2 
irl eV Ah ha , §=1,2,3 (44) 
OX; OX; OX; 


are the Lamé coefficients. Below we summarize the 
expressions for 0/ds in various 3D geometries 


Directional derivative 
(/ds = QV) 


Geometry _r,Q 


a 
Slab (x, y, z), (6, d) sm OC08 @ 
x 
; : a 
+sin 6 sin ¢— 
dy 
+ 6 @ 
cos a 
0 sinOcos¢ 0 
hi ,O, ®), (6, 6— + ———— 
Sphere (r. ),(0,¢) cos a ; 10 
sindsing a 
rsinO 0® 
sind 0 
r 06 
sindsing a 
rtan®O od 


Cylinder (r, z, ®), (0, d) 


a 
sin 6 cos ¢ — 
or 


sinésing 0 
goin Sip 0 


r a®d 
+ é 2 
cos 6 — 
dz 

_ sing sing a 

7 ad 


For 1D geometries, the above expressions simplify to 
(u = cos6) 


1D geometry (r;Q) Directional derivative (0/ds) 
Slab (z; 8) 6 a 
a : ee ayy ea 
z3 cos = Mee 
a sind @ 
h 50 g—— a 
Sphere (r; 0) cos 6 ey 
— a 1-9 
Px or r Op 
a i 0 
Cylinder (r;6,%)  sin@ [cos = sa x 


For 2D disk geometry with axial symmetry, we have 


a a a sing a 
ene ae sind (cose — AT) (45) 
Moments of the transport equation 

For simplicity we suppress the functional dependence 
of the quantities involved, except for the frequency 


dependence which we denote by subscript v. Starting with 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the time-dependent transport equation and rewriting 0/ds 
as V-Q, we integrate over all directions and frequencies to 


get 


i awf ao va,, = dv f dQ —1.%). 
0 Cc ot 0 


(46) 


Re-arranging the terms yields 


JE R ne 
= / dv § dQ(n, — Lx.) — VF. (47) 
ot 0 

This is the zeroth moment equation and is a statement of 
energy conservation for the radiation field. Integrating 
the equation over a fixed volume element and applying 
the divergence theorem, we see that the rate of change of 
radiative energy in the volume equals the emission from 
the material, minus the absorption by the material, and 
minus the net flow of radiant energy (flux) through the 
volume element’s boundary surface. 

In steady state when the energy density does not 
depend on time, and if there is no internal energy source so 
that the radiative energy absorbed in any volume element 
is balanced locally by the energy emitted, we have the 
condition of radiative equilibrium 


i dv § dQ(n, = Nx) =0 (48) 
0 


which leads to the vanishing of flux divergence, V-F' = 0. 
Thus radiative equilibrium implies that the integrated net 
flux is constant with depth in 1D planar geometry while 
the luminosity is constant with radius in 1D spherical 
geometry. 

The first moment equation is obtained by multiplying 
the transport equation by Q and then integrating over all 
directions and frequencies 


/ av f an(? noe v8.8) = / dv p da 
0 Cc ot 0 
x [(ny = 1,x))Q] 
(49) 


which simplifies to 


loF 1f* ~ 
sas f dep datin— hx @-vP. (0) 
c? ot Cc Jo 


This may be viewed as the momentum equation of the 
radiation field. Now the momentum of a photon with 
energy hv is (hv/c)Q so that the net rate of radiative 
momentum transport across a surface dA is clF-dA. 
Since the transport by particles occurs at a speed of 
c, the radiative momentum density vector is just c?F. 
Integrating the equation over a fixed volume element and 
applying the divergence theorem, we see that the rate of 
change of radiative momentum density equals the gain 
from material emission, minus the loss due to material 
absorption and the transport across the boundary surface 
of the volume element. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


O Ss 
c -—_# 
observer background 
source 


Figure 4. 


Formal solution of the transport equation 

The solution to the transport equation under the 
assumption that either x and n (or equivalently t and S) of 
the medium are known is called the formal solution. In this 
case, the transport equation becomes a linear first-order 
differential equation. 

Consider an observer looking through an intervening 
medium that absorbs and emits radiation. There is a 
background source behind the medium (see figure 4). In 
terms of the optical depth t and source function S, the 
time-independent transport equation may be written as 


dl di 

—=-yxI+ —-=I1-S 51 
ds . aad dt eh) 

where, by convention, we measure t inward from the 


observer into the medium 


dt =-xds>r(s)= / x(s') ds’. (52) 
0 


Using the integrating factor exp(—t), we obtain the formal 
solution 


I*(0o) =I(s)e* + [se et dr’. (53) 


0 


The superscript ‘+’ means emergent intensity. Hence 
the observed intensity is the sum of two contributions: 
contribution from attenuated background source and 
contribution from the emitting /absorbing medium of the 
foreground layer. For a medium with constant properties 
(both S and t are uniform), the above result simplifies to 


I*(o) = I(s)e* +S —e7*). (54) 


In terms of x and n, the formal solution is 


I*(0) = I(s) exp ( -_ [ x(s') ev’) 
0 
de / "$@e@ ( = i 16") «') ds’. (55) 
0 0 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Consider the following situations: 


(a) No background source; only uniform foreground 
material. The formal solution becomes 


I*(o.) = SA —e*). (56) 


If the layer is optically thin, i.e. t << 1, we have 


I*(o) © St = @z = nL. (57) 


This means we can see through the layer and the 
observed intensity is just the sum of all the emission 
from different points along the total path length L. 
On the other hand, if the medium is optically thick, 
ie. tT >> 1, we have 


I*(o)®¥S=n (~) : (58) 
x 


This means we can see up to a distance of t = 1 in 
the layer if we regard (:) as the distance to t = 1 or 
just one photon mean-free-path. 


(b) Background source only; no emission by foreground 
material. In this case, the formal solution is 


I*(0) = I(s)e* (59) 


which is just simple attenuation of background 
intensity by the foreground material. 

(c) Background source + uniform foreground material. 
The formal solution is 


I’ (0) =I (s)e* +S —e7) (60) 


Consider the observational technique of ‘position 
switching’ which consists of combining two observa- 
tions: 


I*(0) = I(s)e"* + S(1—e7*) 
T* (0) = 1(s) 


on source: 
off source: 


so that 
AI*(0) = I*(0) — I* (0) = [S — 1(s)] 1 —e7). (61) 


This implies that one would see (i) an emission line 
if AJ*(0) > O or S > I(s), (ii) an absorption line if 
Al*(o) < Oor S > J(s), and (iii) no line or signal if 
AlI*(o) =OorS=I(s). 


We may view the equation of radiation transport as a 
description of a relaxation process in which the radiation 
field asymptotically approaches the source function in the 
limit of large optical depth, i.e. 


I*(0) = *(s)e* +S —e*) = S+e[I*(s) — S] (62) 
which implies that lim,_. I*(0) > S. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Input physics 

To solve the problem of radiation transport for a medium 
containing dust grains and gas particles, we need to 
express the extinction and emission coefficients in terms 
of microphysical parameters. Below we first consider the 
interaction of radiation with a gaseous medium. 


Gas component 

When a gaseous particle (atom, ion or molecule) absorbs 
radiation, it will undergo a transition from a lower 
energy level i to a higher energy level j. Subsequently 
two different recombination transitions may take place: 
spontaneous emission for which the emitted photons are 
isotropic and induced or stimulated emission in which the 
emitted and incident photons have the same direction. 
Since the emitted and incident photons for an induced 
transition have the same direction, the induced emission 
is often treated as negative absorption. If both levels i and 
j are bound states, we have bound-bound transitions. If j 
is a free state (or continuum level), we have bound-free 
transitions (e.g. ionization). Free—free transitions occur 
when both i and j are free states. The total volume 
extinction coefficient (of a gaseous species ata given degree 
of ionization) due to bound—bound, bound-free and free— 
free transitions can be written as 


N j-l 


j=2 i=l j 


0 a A(T) sak | 
Tr ik Ni — NeNKPi 
= kT 
hv 
+ NeNkOKK(V) : — EXP ( = 7) | (63) 


where the subscript k refers to a continuum or ionized 
state, n. is the number density of electrons and ¢;(T) is the 
Saha—Boltzmann factor given by 


3/2 
h? U; h 
o(T) = (a7) 2U, exp (* (Vy »») (64) 


The gs and Us are the statistical weights of the energy 
levels and partition functions of the ionization states. The 
os are the relevant cross sections for radiative excitations 
(either photoabsorption or photoionization). For example, 
for bound—bound transitions 


~ A ij 
oi(v) = — 2 gy) (65) 
8x gi Vi; 


where Aj; is Einstein’s coefficient for spontaneous 
emission and ¢(v) is the line profile function. The 
interaction cross sections for bound-free and free—free are 


normally determined from laboratory measurements. For 
example, an empirical formula for bound-free transitions 


is . aa 
cu =m] a( 2) va-a(™] (66) 
Vv v 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where oo, 6, y, vo are fitting parameters. Likewise, the 


corresponding emission coefficient is 


2h nies 
n(v) = — pe oij(0) 
j=2 i=1 
Y hv 
+ Ne Oj. (V) NG (T) exp (- 
BD k k kT 
+ NeNOpR(V) EXP ( - | , (67) 


Both x(v) and n(v) depend on the level populations, 
which in turn are determined by both collisional and 
radiative processes, the latter dependent upon the 
intensity of the radiation field. On the other hand, 
the radiation intensity depends on x(v) and n(v) of the 
medium. Hence a self-consistent solution of the radiation 
transport problem involves solving simultaneously the 
equation of radiation transport and equations which 
govern the level populations. These depend on the 
thermodynamic state of the medium as discussed below. 


Local thermodynamic equilibrium Asystem of gas particles 
(e.g. atoms, ions, molecules) and photons are said to be in 
thermodynamic equilibrium (TE) when all of the following 
conditions are met: 


(a) The velocities of each species of particles have a 
Maxwellian velocity distribution fu(v), characterized 
by the same temperature T for all species 


3 2 
m 2 mv 
v- ex (68) 
(2amkT)? P( ee 


2 


fu(v) = 40 


or in terms of kinetic energy E = smo 


20 E 
VE (-=) ; 69 
ekES exp | —pF (69) 


fu(E) = 3 


(b) The distribution of atoms or molecules over the 
energy levels obeys the Boltzmann law or distribution, 
i.e. for levels i and j, the populations n; and nj are 


given by 
n* O. h ve 
i gj ji 
= ex 70 
where hv;; = E; — E; and g;, g; are the statistical 
weights. 


(c) The distribution of electrons, ionized and neutral 
atoms is given by the Saha equation 


k 
n* U,, 2(22mkT)?2 hvo 
e—= ex 71 
"ent Uys Pha A 
where hv = Ep is the ionization potential, U, and Up 


are the partition functions of the ionized and neutral 
atoms. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(d) The radiation field is isotropic, homogeneous and 
stationary. The frequency dependence of the 
intensity is a universal function of the system’s 
temperature 7. It is given by the Planck function and 
does not depend upon the properties of the matter 


-1 
3 
1(v) = BO) = [ese (77) | . (72) 


(e) The principle of detailed balancing applies, which 
states that in thermodynamic equilibrium (TE) every 
detailed microscopic process is statistically balanced 
by its precise inverse (reciprocal) process. 

(f) Kirchhoff’s law applies, which relates the emission and 
extinction coefficients to the Planck function 


nv) = x(Qv) BO, T), or S(v) = n) = Biv, T). 


x) 
(73) 


In other words, if a system of gas particles and 
photons is in TE, its properties can be characterized by a 
single parameter, the temperature T. In most astronomical 
situations, the conditions for TE are rarely met. However, 
it is often found that the above conditions may be satisfied 
locally in a small region. If we can characterize the 
properties of each region by a different T, then it may be 
possible to describe the properties of the whole system by 
a temperature distribution. If these conditions are satisfied 
at each point in a gas, and the temperature T is permitted 
to change from point to point, the gas is said to be in local 
thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE). One often finds that when 
collisional processes dominate radiative processes in the 
ionization and excitation of atoms, the state of the gas is 
close to LTE, such as in stellar interiors. 

When more than one of the conditions for TE are 
violated in a system, either locally or globally, the system 
is said to be in non-local thermodynamic equilibrium (NLTE). 
Even in systems which are described as NLTE, sometimes 
one or more species of particles has a Maxwellian velocity 
distribution and it is possible to introduce the concept 
of kinetic temperature. In most astrophysical problems, 
deviation from the Maxwellian velocity distribution is 
small, although the assumption of TE or LTE cannot be 
made. 

Under LTE, the level populations are governed by 
the Boltzmann distribution for bound levels and by the 
Saha equation for ionized states. Hence under LTE 
conditions both the extinction and emission coefficients 
can be determined if the gas temperature is known. On 
the other hand, for NLTE one must determine the level 
populations which in turn are governed by both collisional 
and radiative processes, the latter dependent upon the 
intensity of the radiation field. 


Equations of statistical equilibrium Let us now consider the 
equations by which we determine the level populations of 
atoms. These are governed by the rates of all processes, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


collisional and radiative, by which an atom leaves a certain 
state i to some other state j and return rates of processes 
from all states j back to state i. The collisional and 
radiative processes that determine the level populations 
for bound-bound and bound-free transitions are: 


Bound-bound Bound-free 
Radiative 
Photoabsorption (Rjj) | Photoionization (Rjx) 
Spontaneous Spontaneous 


+ stimulated 
recombination (Rxi) 


+ stimulated 
emission (R ji) 


Collisional 
Collisional Collisional 
excitation (C;;) ionization (Cix) 
Collisional Three-body 


de-excitation (Cj; ) recombination (Cx; ) 


Let the total rate be: 
upward rate: Pi = Ci + Rij (74) 
downward rate: Pj; = Cj + Rji- 


The equations of statistical equilibrium, also known as rate 
equations, for an atom with N levels are given by 


dn; N N 
TT iP mi DP = 0, 


j#i j#i 


for leveli. (75) 


The first term represents the gain in population due to 
contributions from all other levels while the second term 
is the loss of population to all other levels. Note that while 
we can write down one such equation for each of the N 
levels, only (N — 1) of these are truly independent. These 
(N — 1) equations must be solved subject to the constraint 
of particle conservation 


Soni =r (76) 


i=1 


leading to N equations in N unknowns. 

For a moving medium with local fluid velocity v and 
time-dependent situations, the equations governing level 
populations take the form 


N N 
j#i j#i 

which simply states that the rate of change of n; is 
determined by the net rate of flow of particles into the 
volume and the net rate of transitions into level i from 
all other levels j by collisional and radiative processes. 
Summing over all states, the rate terms cancel one another, 
and we obtain a continuity equation 


onr 


ot 


where we made use of the constraint of particle 
conservation. The equations of statistical equilibrium are 
linear equations if the collisional and radiative rates are 
known. 


= —V-(nrv) (78) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Expressions for radiative and collisional rates Hence, to 
describe a system under NLTE conditions we must 
determine in detail the collisional and radiative processes 
by solving the rate equations. In particular, for each 
transition (or pair of energy levels), we need to determine 
the cross sections: collisional excitation, collisional de- 
excitation, radiative excitation and radiative de-excitation. 
We can express the radiative rates for both bound—bound 
and bound-free transitions in a common form 


upward rate: Rjj = ax | Or dv (79) 
downward rate: Rji =4r [ WOM G00) 
3 
x (= +400) dv (80) 
8/8) (b-b) 
Gy) = een exp(-) (bf) e) 


where the subscript k stands for continuum or ionized 
state. ¢;(T) is the Saha—Boltzmann factor and 0;;(v) is the 
appropriate cross section for radiative excitations (either 
photoabsorption or photoionization). J(v) is the mean 
intensity at frequency v. 

Consider the excitation scheme in which an electron 
with kinetic energy E excites an atom and so loses energy 
E. Inthe corresponding de-excitation, the electron follows 
the reverse path. The total collisional rates are given by 


ce 2E 
excitation: Cj; = n. f oij(E)\) —f(E)dE (82) 
m 


Eo 


2 2(E— E 
de-excitation: Cj; = n. | oji(E — Eo)y/ seo) 
; m 
x f(E — Eo) d(E — Eo) (83) 


where f(E£) is the energy distribution of the colliding 
particles. It can be shown that the collisional cross sections 
are related by 


oij(E) _ & E- Eo 
oji(E — Eo) 8i E 


(84) 


This relation is valid in general, independent of the energy 
(or velocity) distribution of the electrons because the ratio 
0;;/0;; depends only on atomic parameters (e.g. g;, g; and 
Eo) and is independent of quantities like n;,n;, and f(E) 
that depend on the thermodynamic state of the system. For 
a Maxwellian velocity distribution, the ratio of collisional 


rates is Z E 
ij _ Si 0 
Cji 7 &i exp ( ir) , oe 


For non-Maxwellian velocity distribution, one must use 
the relation 0;;/0;; to derive a different expression for the 
ratio Cj; /Cji. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Consider the process of collisional ionization in which 
an electron of energy E produces an ion together with a 
pair of electrons of energies E’ and E — Ey — E’, where 
Eo is the ionization potential of an atom in state i. The 
cross sections in collisional ionization (0;,) and three-body 
recombination (o;;) are related by 


oik(E, E’) _ 16m Uy mE'(E — Ey — E’) 
oy(E',E—E)—E') fh U,; E 


(86) 


where U; and U; are partition functions of the atoms of 
states i and k. The collisional ionization rate is given by 


eo) E-E9 IE 
Ci =n. | az | oi (E, E'),| — f(E)dE" (87) 
Eo 0 m 


where f(£) is the velocity distribution of electrons. A 
similar expression can be written for C;;, the three-body 
recombination rate. For Maxwellian velocity distribution, 
we have 


Cik = U; 2(20 mkT)9/? Eo (88) 
Gi ae 


Gas cooling by line radiation Atoms or molecules are 
excited either by collisions or by radiation. The excitation 
energy is supplied either from the kinetic energy of 
the exciting particle, in the case of collisional excitation, 
or from the absorption of a photon, as in the case of 
radiative excitation. Similarly, excited molecules may 
lose their energy either by collisional de-excitation or 
by spontaneous and stimulated emission. In stimulated 
emission, a photon stimulates the emission of a similar 
photon from an excited molecule which is then de- 
excited. Thus the conversion of radiative to kinetic energy 
occurs through collisional de-excitation of an excited 
molecule following the absorption of a photon. On the 
other hand, kinetic energy is converted into radiative 
energy in collisional excitation followed by stimulated or 
spontaneous emission. 

To derive an expression for the rate of gas cooling, we 
consider a two-component system consisting of gas atoms 
(or molecules) and photons. Since collisional and radiative 
processes are the only physical processes occurring in the 
system, the net rate of energy loss by the gas component 
must be equal to the net rate of radiative energy gain by 
the photon component, from the principle of conservation 
of energy, i.e. the energy gain or loss through collisional 
processes must be equal to that by radiative processes. We 
may generalize the above results to atoms with N bound 
levels. In this case, the net cooling rate becomes 


N_j-l 
(njCij — njCi Ej = So aj Ri — nj Rij)Eji- 


j=2 i=l 

(89) 
The net cooling rate due to line emission can also 
be expressed in terms of the emission and extinction 
coefficients as 


A= / dv § dQ[n(v) — x(v)I(v)]. (90) 
0 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


When a system of gas and photons is in TE, the principle 
of detailed balancing applies, i.e. 


oes eee >A=0 (91) 
nj R ji = Ni R; i 

so that there is no net cooling. While TE clearly implies 
A = 0, the reverse is not necessarily true. Indeed 
the condition that A = 0 is equivalent to that of 
radiative equilibrium, which states that the radiative 
energy absorbed in any volume element is balanced locally 
by the energy emitted. It does not require the balancing of 
individual microscopic processes. 

Theoretically the temperature distribution in the gas 
component is determined by the thermal balance between 
various heating and cooling processes. The gas cools 
by the emission of line photons. In general, the gas 
cooling rate is determined by the difference between the 
kinetic energy loss through collisional excitations and 
the kinetic energy gain through collisional de-excitations. 
For isothermal and homogeneous media, the cooling 
rate decreases toward the interior region where radiation 
trapping is most significant. Because cooling results from 
a binary process (collisions), we expect the cooling rate 
to depend quadratically on the gas density under many 
astrophysical environments. In extreme cases of very high 
densities and optical depth, the cooling rate is roughly 
independent of density, because most of the cooling lines 
are saturated and thermalized. The cooling rate increases 
with temperature because more cooling species are excited 
collisionally to higher levels. Because photons from higher 
transitions not only carry more energy but also are created 
more frequently, the net cooling rate is increased. In 
general, the line transitions contributing most to the total 
cooling rate are those in which the energy for excitation is 
comparable to the thermal energy of the gas. 


Dust component 

When radiation passes through a region of space 
containing dust grains, the photons can be either absorbed, 
with conversion of radiation into heat, or scattered, 
with a change in the photon’s direction of travel. The 
sum of these two processes is called extinction, since a 
collimated beam of light can be extinguished by either 
process. The probabilities of absorbing and scattering 
photons are given respectively by the absorption and 
scattering cross sections, the sum of which is called 
the extinction cross section. The ratio of the scattering 
cross section to the total extinction cross section is called 
the ALBEDO which measures the relative importance of 
scattering as opposed to true absorption. For dust 
grains in astrophysical environments, both the extinction 
cross section and the albedo decrease as the wavelength 
increases, with scattering dominating absorption in the 
UV and visible and vice versa in the infrared. The 
albedo approaches unity in the UV and visible, while in 
the infrared there is very little scattering and the albedo 
essentially goes to zero. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In general, the scattering and absorption cross 
sections for dust grains depend on the grain composition, 
shape, size and wavelength of radiation. The interaction 
of radiation with a particle of homogeneous solid material 
and refractive index m is completely described by 
Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism. If we can solve 
these equations for the appropriate boundary conditions, 
wecan determine the cross sections. For spherical particles 
which are homogeneous and optically isotropic, these 
cross sections can be calculated from the Mie theory of 
scattering based on optical constants of the grain material. 
The cross sections are often expressed as the product of a 
dimensionless efficiency factor Q and the geometric cross 
section 2a’, where a is the grain radius 


abs A 
absorption efficiency factor Qaps(A) = —_ (92) 
sca (A 
scattering efficiency factor Q..a(A) = oe g a (93) 
wa 


In general we find: 


(a) Qaps(A) and Qgca(4) depend on the wavelength A 
only via the dimensionless quantity x = 27ra/d, i.e. 
Q. = Q(x). Furthermore, Q,(x) may be greater 
than unity for some values of x. 

(b) Asx — 00 (A > a), we have the geometrical limit so 
that Ogca > land Q,p; > 1. 

(c) Asx > 0(A « a), we have Rayleigh scattering for 
which Osea « X* & A~* and Qaps KX KAT. 


Although the interaction cross sections for spherical 
grains may be calculated from the Mie scattering theory, 
cosmic dust grains have irregular shapes as they are most 
likely formed by stochastic growth processes. The cross 
sections for grains of arbitrary shapes may be calculated 
using a technique called discrete dipole approximation (DDA) 
in which an irregularly shaped grain is approximated by 
a collection of dipoles. The DDA is valid only when the 
dipole lattice spacing (A) is less than the wavelength of the 
incident radiation. For a grain approximated by N dipoles, 
A = (4/3N)"3 ace, where deg is the radius of a sphere 
containing the same number of dipoles. For deg = 0.1 wm 
and N = 512, the DDA introduces typical errors of 5% in 
spectral regions where the approximation is valid. 

Before using the DDA to calculate the interaction 
cross sections, one must first generate a grain shape by 
computer simulation. A useful parameter to characterize 
the topology of irregularly shaped grains is the fractal 
dimension (D), defined by the relation N(r) « r?, where 
N(r) is the number of monomers within a sphere of 
radius r. For a spherical grain, D = 3, while for a rod 
shaped grain, D = 1. In general 1 < D < 3 and the 
smaller the fractal dimension, the more filamentary the 
structure. The thermal and radiative properties of a dust 
grain depend on the ratio of volume to surface area, which 
is determined by D. Fora given mass, grains with the same 
D show no significant difference in their absorption cross 
sections, temperature and energy spectrum, independent 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the overall grain shape. Hence in modeling phenomena 
involving irregularly shaped grains, we need to introduce 
just one parameter, the fractal dimension D, to characterize 
the shape. It should be emphasized that porosity [=1— 
(volume of solid)/(total volume)] and fractal dimension 
are not uniquely related. Porosity measures the effect of 
volume filling factor in a grain and is ill-defined for a 
dust grain with an open and filamentary structure. Grains 
with the same porosity may have very different fractal 
dimensions, and vice versa. 

The absorption and scattering coefficients as a 
function of frequency v are respectively given by 


X“(V) = NgOaps(V) = Ng Qaps(v) Ta? (94) 
X°(V) = Nadsca(V) = Na Osca(v)a°. (95) 


In general dust grains emit radiation over a continuum 
of wavelengths, similar to a blackbody but mediated by 
the overall oj; profile. For continuum radiation, the 
assumption of LTE is valid so that the thermal emission 
coefficient can be derived from Kirchhoff’s law 


n'(v) = [x*(v) + x°() 1B, (Ta) 
= Nal Qavs(v) + Osca(v) |r a" B, (Ty) (96) 


where B,(Tz) is the Planck function at dust temperature 
T,. Since coherent scattering is valid for dust grains, the 
scattering emission coefficient is given by 


dQ’ ~, a, as 
n’(v) -ro(f 1G. 9.0) (97) 
Qt SI 
where p(X, Q) is the scattering phase function. 


Phase function and asymmetry parameter The scattering 
process involving dust grains is coherent since it involves 
only a change of direction of radiation but not of its 
wavelength. Coherent scattering by dust particles is 
described in terms of a phase function p (Q, 2) which gives 
the probability of scattering in the direction Q of radiation 
arriving from the direction Q' ona volume elementat point 
r. The scattering is isotropic or linearly anisotropic when 
p(6) =1or p(@) = 1+-xcos6, where x = +1 and cosé = 
Q.9". The phase function may either be given in the form 
of a numerical table from measurements or computations, 
or represented by a mathematical expression. A useful 
form is an expansion in Legendre polynomials written as 


L 
pO) = >> Bi Pi(cos 8); 
1=0 


_ +1 
‘ce 
with Bp = 1 from the normalization condition and B; = 3g 
where g is the asymmetry parameter defined as 


+1 
/ p(6)P;(cos 8) d(cos 6) (98) 
-1 


1 +1 By 
= >| p(8) cos 6 d(cos 8) = >. (99) 


1 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Radiative Transfer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Two commonly used analytic approximations for the 
phase function are the Henyey-Greenstein phase function 


1-2? 


6 = 
PO) (1 + g* — 2g cos 6)3/2 


(100) 


and the two-parameter phase function for highly 
anisotropic scattering 


4ag(1 — g*)* 


PO = Tay — A gy™]U + a — 2g cos 


(101) 


which reduces to the Henyey—Greenstein form for a = i. 


The phase function for Rayleigh scattering is given by 
3 2 
p@)= a0 + cos’ 6). (102) 


Once the extinction and emission coefficients quanti- 
fying the interaction of radiation with gas and dust parti- 
cles are expressed in terms of microphysical parameters, 
the equation of radiation transport can be solved in prin- 
ciple. For physically realistic situations, analytical solu- 
tions are seldom available so one must resort to numerical 
methods. Even for time-independent situations involv- 
ing 1D geometries, the problem of radiation transport is 
three-dimensional because of the intrinsic dependence of 
the radiation field on direction and wavelength. 

Due to space limitation, the following topics are not 
covered in this article: methods of solution (numerical 
and semi-analytic) of the equation of radiation transport; 
transfer of polarized radiation; radiation hydrodynamics 
that deal with transfer phenomena involving velocity 
(relativistic and non-relativistic) flows and/or time 
dependence. 


Bibliography 

Bohren C F and Huffman DR 1998 Absorption and Scattering 
of Light by Small Particles (New York: Wiley) 

Chandrasekhar S 1960 Radiative Transfer (New York: 
Dover) 

Pomraning G C 1973 The Equations of Radiation Hydrody- 
namics (Oxford: Pergamon) 

Rybicki G B and Lightman A P 1979 Radiative Processes in 
Astrophysics (New York: Wiley) 

Mihalas D and Mihalas B W 1999 Foundations of Radiation 
Hydrodynamics (New York: Dover) 

Sen K K and Wilson S J 1998 Radiative Transfer in Moving 
Media: Basic Mathematical Methods for Radiative 
Transfer in Spherically Symmetrical Moving Media 
(Berlin: Springer) 


Chun Ming Leung 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


13 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from 
Hot Stars 


A stellar wind is the continuous, supersonic outflow of 
matter from a star. Among the most massive stars—which 
tend also to be the hottest and most luminous—the winds 
can be very strong, with important consequences both for 
the star’s own evolution as well as for the surrounding 
interstellar medium. Such hot-star winds are understood 
to be driven by the pressure of the star’s emitted radiation. 

Our Sun has a SOLAR WIND, but it is so tenuous and 
transparent that it would be difficult to detect directly from 
a more distant star. However, many stars have winds that 
are dense enough to be opaque at certain wavelengths 
of the star’s radiation, and this makes it possible to 
study them remotely through careful interpretation of the 
observed stellar spectra. The winds from massive, hot 
stars—with surface temperatures above about 10000 K— 
form a well-defined class, distinct from the winds from 
cooler stars, and characterized by the central role of the 
star’s own radiation in driving the mass outflow. The 
high temperature of such stars means that they have a very 
high surface brightness. Because light carries momentum 
as well as energy, this high surface brightness imparts a 
force to the atoms that scatter the light. At the level of 
the star’s atmosphere where this force exceeds the inward 
force of the stellar gravity, material is accelerated upward 
and becomes the stellar wind. 

An important aspect of this radiative driving process 
is that it stems mostly from line scattering, wherein an 
electron is shuffled between two discrete, bound energy 
levels of an atom. In a static medium such scattering 
is confined to radiation with a photon energy near 
the energy difference between the levels, corresponding 
to a range of wavelengths near a distinct, line-center 
value. However, in an accelerating stellar wind flow, 
the Doppler effect shifts the resonance to increasingly 
longer wavelengths, allowing the line scattering to sweep 
gradually through a much broader portion of the stellar 
spectrum. This gives the dynamics of such winds an 
intricate feedback character, in which the radiative driving 
force that accelerates the stellar wind depends itself on that 
acceleration. 


Overview and comparison with the solar wind 

The general concept that stars can sometimes lose or eject 
matter is apparent from some spectacular, catastrophic 
examples, such as nova or supernova explosions. 
However, the specific notion of a continuous, quiescent- 
phase stellar wind outflow stems largely from discovery, 
during the 1950s and 1960s, of the solar wind. The Sun is a 
relatively low-mass, cool star with a surface temperature 
about 6000 K, but curiously its wind arises from pressure 
expansion of the very hot, million kelvin solar corona, 
which is somehow superheated by the mechanical energy 
generated from convection in the Sun’s subsurface layers. 
By contrast, high-mass stars with much higher surface 
temperatures (10000-100000 K) are thought to lack the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


strong convection zone needed to heat a circumstellar 
corona. Their stellar winds thus remain at temperatures 
comparable with the star’s surface, and so lack the very 
high gas pressure needed to drive an outward expansion 
against the stellar gravity. However, such hot stars 
have a quite high radiative flux, since by the Stefan— 
Boltzmann law this scales as the fourth power of the 
surface temperature. It is the pressure of this radiation (not 
of the gas itself) that drives the wind expansion. 

The typical flow speeds of hot-star winds—up to 
about 3000 km s~!—are a factor of a few faster than the 400- 
700 km s7! speed of the solar wind. However, the inferred 
mass loss rates of hot stars greatly exceed—by up toa factor 
of a billion—that of the Sun. At the Sun’s current rate of 
mass loss, about 104M yr7!, its mass would be reduced 
by only ~0.01% during its entire characteristic lifespan of 
10 billion (10!°) years. By contrast, even during the much 
shorter, few million (10°) year lifetime typical for a massive 
star, its wind mass loss at a rate of up to 10-°Mo yr! 
can substantially reduce, by a factor of 2 or more, the 
original stellar mass of a few times 10M. Indeed, massive 
stars typically end up as ‘WOLF-RAYET’ STARS, Which often 
appear to have completely lost their original envelope of 
hydrogen, leaving exposed at their surface the elements 
suchas carbon, nitrogen and oxygen that were synthesized 
by nuclear processes in the stellar core. (Much of this 
cumulative mass loss might also occur during relatively 
brief ‘superwinds’ or epsisodic ejections as a ‘luminous 
blue variable’.) In addition to directly affecting the star’s 
own evolution, hot-star winds often form ‘wind-blown 
bubbles’ in nearby interstellar gas. Overall they represent 
a substantial contribution to the energy, momentum and 
chemical enrichment of the interstellar medium in the 
Milky Way and other galaxies. 


Wind detection through asymmetric, P-Cygni line 
profiles 

The high density of hot-star winds means that the 
expanding material is itself opaque, or optically thick, to 
scattering in many atomic spectral-line transitions. When 
observed as part of a stellar spectrum, radiation that is 
line scattered within the wind develops a characteristic 
line profile, known as a ‘P-Cygni profile’, after the star 
P-Cygni in which its significance as a signature of mass 
outflow was first broadly recognized. 

Figure 1 illustrates the formation of a P-Cygni line 
profile. Wind material approaching an observer within a 
column in front of the star has its line resonance blueshifted 
by the Doppler effect. Thus scattering of stellar radiation 
out of this direction causes an absorption trough, or 
reduction in the observed flux, on the blue side of the 
line profile. However, from the lobes on either side of 
this absorption column, wind material can also scatter 
radiation toward the observer. Since this can occur from 
either the approaching or the receding hemisphere, this 
scattered radiation can be either blueshifted or redshifted. 
The associated extra flux seen by the observer thus occurs 
as a symmetric emission component on both sides of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


re eee 
zy 
3 eae ee > 
Observer : ss : - 


P-Cygni 


Line Profile Symmetric } 


Emission 


V. V=0 v V=0 


Flux > 


Absorption 


= + 
Blue-Shifted 


+ Velocity; Wavelength +» 


Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the formation of a P-Cygni 
type line profile in an expanding wind outflow. 


the line center. Combined with the reduced blue-side 
flux, the overall profile has a distinctly asymmetric form, 
with apparent net blueward absorption and redward 
emission. Moreover, the wavelength of the blue edge of 
the absorption provides a quite unambiguous measure of 
the asymptotic wind speed, v.o. 


The radiative force from electron scattering 

A radiative force results from the material interception 
of radiative momentum. A particularly simple case is 
scattering by free electrons, which is a ‘gray’, or frequency- 
independent, process. Since gray scattering cannot alter 
the star’s total luminosity L, the radiative energy flux at 
any radius r is simply given by L/4zr?. This corresponds 
to a radiative momentum flux of L/4r*c, where c is 
the speed of light. The material interception of this flux 
is characterized by an interaction cross section per unit 
mass, «, Which is formally named the ‘mass absorption 
coefficient’ but more succinctly is also commonly called the 
‘opacity’. For electron scattering in an ionized medium, 
the opacity is simply a constant given by ke = ¢/[e, 
where o, (=0.66 x 10-*4 cm?) is the classical Thompson 
cross section, and the mean atomic mass per free electron 
is fe = 2my/(1 + X), with my and X the mass and 
mass fraction of hydrogen. This works out to a value 
Ke = 0.211 + X) = 0.34 cm? g™!, where the latter result 
applies for the standard (solar) hydrogen mass fraction 
X = 0.72. The product of this opacity and the radiative 
momentum flux yields the radiative acceleration (force per 
unit mass) from free-electron scattering, 


KeL 
Anr2c 


&e(r) i 


It is of interest to compare this with the star’s 
gravitational acceleration, given by GM/ r*, where G is 
the gravitation constant and the M is the stellar mass. 
Since both accelerations have the same 1/r* dependence 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


on radius, their ratio is spatially constant, fixed by the ratio 
of luminosity to mass, 


_ KeL 
~ AnGMc’ 


e 


This ratio, sometimes called the Eddington parameter, 
thus has a characteristic value for each star. For the Sun 
it is very small, of order 2 x 10-5, but for hot, massive 
stars it is often within a factor of 2 below unity. As 
noted by Eddington, electron scattering thus represents a 
basal radiative acceleration that effectively counteracts the 
stellar gravity. The limit, — lis knownas the Eddington 
limit, for which the star would become gravitationally 
unbound. 

It is certainly significant that hot stars with strong 
stellar winds have IT, only a factor of 2 or so below 
this limit, since it suggests that only a modest additional 
opacity could succeed in fully overcoming gravity to drive 
an outflow. However, it is important to realize that a 
stellar wind represents the outer envelope outflow from 
a nearly static, gravitationally bound base, and as such is 
not consistent with an entire star exceeding the Eddington 
limit. Rather the key requirement for a wind is that 
the driving force increase naturally from being smaller to 
larger than gravity at some radius near the stellar surface. 
We shall now see that the force from line scattering is 
ideally suited for just such a spatial modulation. 


The Doppler-shifted resonance of line scattering 
When an electron is bound into one of the discrete energy 
levels of an atom, its scattering of radiation is primarily 
with photons of just the right energy to induce shuffling 
with another discrete level. The process is called line 
scattering, because it often results in the appearance of 
narrowly defined lines in a star’s energy spectrum. At 
first glance, it may seem unlikely that such line scattering 
could be effective in driving mass loss, simply because the 
opacity only interacts with a small fraction of the available 
stellar flux. However, there are two key factors that work 
to make line scattering in fact the key driving mechanism 
for hot-star winds. 

The first is the resonant nature of line scattering. 
The binding of an electron into discrete energy levels of 
an atom represents a kind of resonance cavity that can 
greatly amplify the interaction cross section with photons 
of just the right energy to induce transition among the 
levels. The effect is somewhat analogous to blowing into 
a whistle versus just into open air. Like the sound of a 
whistle, the response occurs at a well-tuned frequency 
and has a greatly enhanced strength. Relative to free- 
electron scattering, the overall amplification factor for 
a broad-band, untuned radiation source is set by the 
quality of the resonance, Q © v9/A, where vo is the line 
frequency and A is the decay rate of the excited state. 
For quantum mechanically allowed atomic transitions, 
this can be very large, of order 10’. Thus, even though 
only a very small fraction (~10~*) of electrons in a hot- 
star atmosphere are bound into atoms, illumination of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Velocity 
» 


Ison | =ven/ (dv/ar) 


1 > 
v Radius 
Wavelength 


Figure 2. Doppler-shifted line resonance absorption in an 
accelerating flow. Photons with a wavelength just shortward of 
a line propagate freely from the stellar surface until redshifted, 
within a reference frame moving with the wind outflow velocity, 
into a narrow line resonance, whose width is set by the thermal 
broadening of the line, as represented here by the shading. 


these atoms by an unattenuated (i.e. optically thin), broad- 
band radiation source would yield a collective line force 
that exceeds that from free electrons by about a factor 
Q ~ 10’ x 10-* = 1000. For stars within a factor of 
2 of the free-electron Eddington limit, this implies that 
line scattering is capable, in principle, of driving material 
outward with an acceleration on the order of a thousand 
times the inward acceleration of gravity. 

In practice, of course, this does not normally occur, 
since any sufficiently large collection of atoms scattering 
in this way would quickly block the limited flux available 
within just the narrow frequency bands tuned to the 
lines. Indeed, in the static portion of the atmosphere, the 
flux is greatly reduced at the line frequencies. Such line 
‘saturation’ keeps the overall line force quite small, in fact 
well below the gravitational force, which thus allows the 
inner parts of the atmosphere to remain gravitationally 
bound. 

This, however, is where the second key factor, the 
Doppler effect, comes into play. In the outward-moving 
portions of the outer atmosphere, the Doppler effect 
redshifts the local line resonance, effectively desaturating 
the lines by allowing the atoms to resonate with relatively 
unattenuated stellar flux that was initially at slightly 
higher frequencies. By effectively sweeping a broader 
range of the stellar flux spectrum, this makes it possible 
for the line force to overcome gravity and accelerate the 
very outflow it itself requires. As quantified within the 
CAK wind theory described later, the amount of mass 
accelerated adjusts such that the self-absorption of the 
radiation reduces the overall line driving to being just 
somewhat (not a factor of 1000) above what is needed to 
overcome gravity. 


The Sobolev approximation for line scattering in 
an accelerating flow 

The late Russian astrophysicist V V Sobolev developed 
an extremely useful approach for treating line scattering 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in such a rapidly accelerating flow. As illustrated in 
figure 2, he noted how radiation emitted from the star 
at a wavelength somewhat blueward of a line propagates 
freely until it is redshifted by the accelerating flow into a 
local line resonance. For the usual case that the broadening 
of the line is set by the ion thermal speed v,,, the geometric 
width of this resonance is about a Sobolev length, /s» = 
vn/(du/dr). In a supersonic flow, this Sobolev length is of 
order uy,/v « 1 smaller than a typical flow variation scale, 
like the density—velocity scale length H = |p/(dp/dr)| ~ 
v/(dv/dr). 

The nearly homogeneous conditions within such 
resonance layers imply that the key parameters of the 
line scattering can be described in terms of strictly local 
conditions at any radius. In particular, the total optical 
depth of radiation passing through the line resonance— 
which normally requires evaluation of a nonlocal spatial 
integral—can in this case be well approximated simply in 
terms of the local density and velocity gradient, 


_— KpUth 
* = du/dr (1) 


where x is the line opacity. This allows a localized solution 
for how much the flow absorption reduces the illumination 
of the line resonance by the stellar flux and leads to a 
simple, general expression for the line acceleration, 


1.er* 
Sline © Sthin (2) 


In the optically thin limit t « 1, the line acceleration 
reduces to a form similar to the electron scattering case, 


KUnVoLy K Vth 
~ o 


Be (3) 


Sthin = 


~ 
Anr2c? Ke C 


wherein the last approximate equality applies the usual 
assumption that the line frequency vp is near the peak of 
the stellar luminosity spectrum L,, so that vl, ~ L. In 
the opposite limit of an optically thick line with t > 1, 
there results a quite different form, 


L dv oL dv 


~ &thin 
= =a Uv 
Mc? dr 


Sthick 


(4) 


t  4xr2pc2 dr 


where the last equality uses the definition of the wind mass 
loss rate, M = 4srpur?. 

A key result here is that the optically thick line 
force is independent of the opacity and instead varies in 
proportion to the velocity gradient du/dr. The basis of 
this result is illustrated by figure 2, which shows that the 
local rate at which stellar radiation is redshifted into a 
line resonance depends on the slope of the velocity. By 
Newton’s famous equation of motion, a force is normally 
understood to cause an acceleration. However, here we see 
that an optically thick line force also depends on the wind’s 
advective rate of acceleration, v dv/dr. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Derivation of direct absorption force for a single 
line 

Let us derive this key property of line driving in more 
quantitative terms. Under the simplifying approximation 
that the stellar radiation flux is purely radial (as from a 
central point source), the force per unit mass associated 
with direct absorption by a single line at a radius r is given 


by 
line (1) = ein dx glx = v(r)/vanl etn, (5) 


The integration is over a scaled frequency x = (v/v9 — 1) 
c/Up,, defined from a line center frequency, vo, in units of 
the frequency broadening associated with the ion thermal 
motion, vy,. The integrand is weighted by the line profile 
function (x), which for thermal broadening typically has 
the Gaussian form ¢(x) ~ e-’. The exponential reduction 
takes account of absorption, as set by the frequency- 
dependent optical depth to the stellar surface radius R., 


t(x,r)= / dr’ kp(r’)o[x — v(r')/vm]. 
Rx 


A crucial point in evaluating this integral is that, in 
a supersonic wind, the variation of the integrand is 
dominated by the velocity variation within the line profile. 
As noted above, this variation has a scale given by the 
Sobolev length /sgp = vy,/(du/dr), which is smaller by 
a factor un/v than the competing density—velocity scale, 
H = |p/(dpe/dr)| ~ v/(du/dr). A key step in the Sobolev 
approximation is thus to recast this spatial integration as 
an integration over the comoving frame frequency x’ = 
x — v(r')/Vin, 


Hx.r) / ee ee) 
x,ry=r— KO (x x 
x! (Rx) dv/dr’ 


co 
x T(r) 
x—v(r)/Vth 


dx’ p(x’) (6) 


where the latter approximation uses the assumption that 
v(r) > vm to formally extend the surface frequency x'(R,.) 
to infinity relative to the local resonance x’(r). The quantity 
t(r), which is just the local Sobolev optical thickness 
defined in equation (1), arises as a collection of spatial 
variables that are assumed to be nearly constant over the 
Sobolev resonance zone and thus can be extracted outside 
the integral. 

Finally, a remarkable, extra bonus from this approxi- 
mation is that the resulting optical depth (6) now has pre- 
cisely the form needed to allow analytical evaluation of 
the line force integral (5), yielding directly the general ex- 
pression given in equation (2). 


The mass loss rate from inertial force balance 

We can actually estimate the wind mass loss rate from 
a simple consideration of how this line force overcomes 
the wind inertia (for now ignoring gravity). For a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


single optically thick line near the peak of the stellar flux 
spectrum, the resulting steadystate flow acceleration is 
given by 


Since the acceleration cancels from both sides, this simply 
implies M * L/c?, or that the total mass loss of the wind 
is roughly equal to just the mass loss associated with the 
stellar luminosity. In practice, hot-star winds are driven 
by not just one but many optically thick lines. As long 
as these are independent of each other, the total resulting 
mass loss simply accumulates in proportion to the total 
number of thick lines, 


: L 
Ms Minick = - (7) 
é 


For a wind with terminal speed v., each line sweeps 
through about a fraction v./c of the spectrum. This 
means that there can at most be about Miia ~© 
c/Vs. nonoverlapping thick lines spread throughout the 
spectrum. This implies a single-scattering limit for the 
mass loss, 
Mio < —. 
Cc 
The winds from stars of spectral types O and B are 
generally within this limit, but winds from Wolf-Rayet 
(WR) stars can exceed it by a factor of 10 or more. As 
further discussed below, the driving of such WR winds 
thus requires a more intricate, multiline scattering process. 


The CAK theory for line-driven winds 

In practice, the number of thick lines depends itself on the 
mass loss rate and so is not known a priori. Self-consistent 
solution of the wind properties is possible, however, 
through the formalism developed by Castor, Abbott and 
Klein (CAK). A key simplification is to approximate the 
flux-weighted number distribution of lines as a power law 
in the line opacity x, 


dN 1 f«\? 

dk a Ko (<) 
where the CAK power-law index satisfies 0 < a < 1, 
and xo is a normalization constant defined such that 
ko dN/dk = 1. (The latter is related to the commonly 
defined CAK constant k by k = D(a) (Vin /0) (Ko /Ke)*/ — 
a), where I denotes the complete gamma function.) 
The cumulative force from this line ensemble can be 
obtained by an integration of the single-line result (2) 
over this opacity distribution. This yields a kind of 
‘geometric mean’ between the optically thin and thick 
forms (equations (3) and (4)) for a single line, 


8thin,c 

8cak = —, (8) 
T, 

Here t, and gtnino are respectively the Sobolev optical 


thickness and the optically thin acceleration for a single, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Graphical solutions of the dimensionless equation of 
motion (9). 


spectral-peak line of opacity «,. This normalization opac- 
ity is given roughly by the line resonance amplification 
factor discussed previously, 
Foi Oke © 10°ke 
Cc 

which thus implies that ginino © 10°g., as noted earlier. 
In this context, O can be thus thought of an alternative, 
dimensionless way to specify the opacity normalization. 

Ignoring the generally unimportant contribution of 
gas pressure, the steady-state equation of motion simply 
requires that the wind acceleration must equal the line 
acceleration minus the inward acceleration of gravity, 


dv GM(1—T.) 


VU = 8cak 
dr r2 


wherein we have also taken into account the effective 
reduction of gravity by the free-electron scattering factor 
T.. 
Defining the flow acceleration in units of the gravity 
as 
w =r vv /GM(1—-T.) 


the equation of motion can be rewritten in the simple, 
dimensionless form, 


w=Cw*-1 (9) 


where the constant is given by 


7 a Or. l-a@ L a 

~A\1-T. Mc2) ° 
Figure 3 illustrates the graphical solution of this 
dimensionless equation of motion for various values of 


the constant C. For fixed stellar and opacity distribution 
parameters, this corresponds to assuming various values 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the mass loss rate M. For high M there are no 
solutions, while for low M there are two solutions. The two 
limits are separated by a critical case with one solution— 
corresponding to the maximal mass loss rate—for which 
the function Cw® intersects the line 1 + w at a tangent. 
For this critical case, the tangency requirement implies 
aC.w*! = 1, which together with the original equation (9) 
yields the critical conditions we = (@#/1 — a) and C, = 
1/(a% (1 — a)!-*). 

Since equation (9) has no explicit spatial dependence, 
these conditions hold at all radii. By spatial integration of 
the critical acceleration w, from the surface radius R,,, we 
thus obtain the CAK velocity law, 


1/2 
V(r) = Voo (1 _ *) (10) 
r 


where the terminal speed is given by vo. = Vescla/(1 — 
a)]'/?, where ves. is the effective surface escape speed. 
Likewise, the associated critical value of C, defines the 
maximal CAK mass loss rate 


fg aa (TROY Ey 


Comparison with equation (7) shows that the first two 
factors in equation (11) now provide an explicit expression 
for the number of thick lines. 

These results strictly apply only under the idealized 
assumption made above that the stellar radiation is 
radially streaming from a point source. If one takes 
into account the finite angular extent of the stellar disk, 
then the mass loss is slightly reduced (typically by about 
a factor of 2), and the velocity law becomes slightly 
flatter (approximated by replacing the exponent 1/2 in 
equation (10) by a value £ ~ 0.8), with a somewhat higher 
terminal speed (Uso © 3vesc). 

Finally, another simplifying assumption of this 
analysis is that the line opacities are spatially constant, 
which implies a fixed wind ionization. The effect of a 
radial change in ionization can be approximately taken 
into account by correcting the CAK force (8) by a factor 
of the form (n./W)*, where n, is the electron density, 
W =0.5[1— (1 — R,/r)‘/7] is the radiation ‘dilution factor’, 
and the exponent has a typical value 6 ~ 0.1. This 
factor introduces an additional density dependence to that 
already implied by the optical depth factor 1/t% given in 
equation (8). Its general effect on the mass loss can be 
roughly accounted with the simple substitution a > a’ = 
a — 5 in the power exponents of the CAK mass loss scaling 
law (11). The general tendency is to moderately increase 
M and accordingly to somewhat decrease the wind speed. 


The wind momentum-luminosity relation 

An important success of these CAK scaling laws is the 
theoretical explanation they provide for an empirically 
observed ‘wind momentum-luminosity’ (WML) relation. 
Combining the CAK mass loss law (11) together with the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


scaling of the terminal speed v,, with the effective escape 
speed vesc = [2GM(1—T)/R]'/?, we obtain a WML relation 
of the form, 

Moyo RU? ~ LY Que’ 


wherein we have neglected a residual dependence on 
M(1 — [) that is generally very weak for the usual 
case that a’ is near 2/3. Stellar mass loss rates can be 
routinely derived by fits to the observed Balmer (Ha) line 
emission, and wind terminal speeds can be inferred from 
the blue edge of observed P-Cygni profiles. Combined 
with spectroscopic estimates of the stellar luminosity and 
radius (the latter of which in any case enters only weakly as 
a square root), empirical fits for a large sample of galactic 
OB supergiants have demonstrated a remarkably tight 
agreement with a single WML relation. These fits give 
a luminosity slope that implies a’ ~ 0.57 and an overall 
normalization that is quite consistent with the expectation 
that 0 ~ 10°. 

Less extensive fits have also been derived for OB 
stars in the Magellanic clouds. These are each separately 
consistent with a single WML relation, but with a lower 
normalization, especially for the small cloud. This 
probably just reflects the weaker radiative driving from the 
lower metallicity Z, since the line opacity normalization 
varies in direct proportion to the metallicity, O ~ Z. There 
are currently efforts toward carefully calibrating this WML 
relation and its dependence on metallicity. The ultimate 
goal is to apply observationally inferred wind parameters 
of luminous hypergiant stars in external galaxies as an 
alternative ‘standard candle’ for extragalactic distance 
measurements. In this way hot-star winds may play a 
role in calibrating the distance scale of the universe. 


The Wolf-Rayet wind ‘momentum problem’ 

WR STARS are evolved, massive, hot stars for which 
the cumulative mass loss has led to depletion of the 
original hydrogen envelope. They typically show 
broad wind emission lines of elements such as carbon, 
nitrogen and/or oxygen that are the products of core 
nucleosynthesis. Overall, observations indicate that WR 
winds are especially strong, and even optically thick to 
continuum scattering by electrons. Notably, inferred WR 
wind momenta Mv,, are generally substantially higher 
than for OB stars of comparable luminosity, placing them 
well above the OB star line in the WML relation. In fact, 
the inferred ratio of the wind momentum to that of stellar 
luminosity, 7 = Mo /(L/c), is typically much above unity, 
sometimes as high as 7 = 10-50. 

This last property has generally been cast as the 
WR wind ‘momentum problem’, sometimes with the 
implication that it implies that WR winds cannot be 
radiatively driven. In fact, it merely means that, 
unlike for OB stars, WR winds cannot be treated in 
the standard, single-scattering formalism, which assumes 
optically thick lines do not overlap within the wind. 
However, momentum ratios above unity can, in principle, 
be achieved by multiple scattering between overlapping 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


b. 


a. 
ne ee ee ae ae np S ©: 


ce) 


Figure 4, Schematic diagram illustrating the role of line gaps, 
line bunches and photon thermalization for WR wind 
momentum deposition. The horizontal lines represent the 
velocity-frequency spacing of optically thick lines in the wind. 
The four parts represent (a) an effectively gray model, (b) a wind 
with fixed ionization and extensive gaps, (c) a wind with 
ionization stratification that fills gaps and (d) the importance of 
limiting energy redistribution in the wind. 


thick lines with a velocity unit frequency separation Av < 
UVoo- Indeed, if the spectral distribution of lines is ‘gray’— 
ie. spread randomly through the spectrum without 
substantial gaps or bunches—then the momentum 
attained scales simply with the mean thick-line velocity 
separation as 7 © v/Av (figure 4(a)). 

However, realistic line lists are not gray, and leakage 
through gaps in the line spectral distribution tends to limit 
the effective scattering to 7 < 1 (figure 4(b)). However, 
the optically thick nature of the WR winds gives them 
a substantial ionization stratification, and this helps to 
spread line bunches and so fill in gaps, allowing for more 
effective global trapping of radiation that makes n > 1 
(figure 4(c)). Redistribution of photon energy can reduce 
the local effectiveness of line driving (figure 4(d)). In 
particular, redistribution by photon thermalization near 
the stellar core makes it especially difficult for radiation 
alone to initiate the wind. The relative complexity of 
WR wind initiation may be associated with the extensive 
turbulent structure inferred from observed variability in 
WR wind emission lines. Overall, the understanding of 
WR winds is perhaps best viewed as an ‘opacity problem’, 
ie. identifying the enhanced opacity that can adequately 
block the radiation flux throughout the wind and thus 
drive a WR mass loss that is much greater than from OB 
stars of comparable luminosity. 


Wind instability and variability 
There is extensive evidence that hot-star winds are not 
the smooth, steady outflows idealized in the simple 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CAK theory but rather have extensive structure and 
variability on a variety of scales. The most direct example 
is the explicit variability often detected in unsaturated 
absorption troughs of P-Cygni line profiles. To produce 
such explicit line profile variability, the associated wind 
structure must be relatively large scale, covering a 
substantial fraction of the stellar disk. (By comparison, the 
emission component of P-Cygni profiles is generally much 
less variable, since it forms from a more global average of 
the wind.) 

Much of the variability can be characterized as 
‘discrete absorption components’. These begin as broad 
absorption enhancements in the inner part of the blue 
absorption trough of an unsaturated P-Cygni line, which 
then gradually narrow as they drift, over a period of days, 
toward the blue edge of the profile. Their occurrence is 
generally irregular, and their apparent acceleration is quite 
slow, much slower than expected for an element of the 
steady wind. They may reflect the slow acceleration of 
mass ejected by some kind of semirandom disturbance 
from the underlying stellar surface. The exact nature of 
this is unknown, but might possibly be linked to either 
magnetic activity or stellar pulsation. 

In a second class of explicit variation are the 
‘periodic absorption modulations’. These occur at 
regular, sometimes multiple periods, and include both 
a modulated increase and decrease in the absorption 
strength. The periods are generally of order a few days, 
which is consistent with a low-order multiple of the 
stellar rotation period. They probably represent rotational 
modulation of wind structure by an unknown kind of 
surface irregularity (again perhaps magnetic). 

The optical emission lines formed in WR winds also 
commonly show a low- amplitude variability. Such optical 
lines have been monitored using ground-based telescopes 
at much higher signal-to-noise ratio than has been typical 
for the ultraviolet wind lines monitored from OB stars by 
orbiting satellites. Analysis suggests a turbulent hierarchy 
of structure extending down to quite small spatial scales. 

There is also indirect evidence that OB winds have 
an extensive, small-scale, turbulent structure. Saturated 
P-Cygni lines have extended black troughs thought to be 
a signature that the wind velocity is highly nonmonotonic. 
Such stars commonly show soft x-ray emission and 
sometimes also nonthermal radio emission, both of which 
are thought to originate from embedded wind shocks. 

A promising explanation for this small-scale, turbu- 
lent structure is the intrinsically strong instability of line 
driving to small-scale velocity perturbations. As noted 
above, there is a strong hidden potential in line scatter- 
ing to drive wind material with accelerations that greatly 
exceed the mean outward acceleration. Numerical simu- 
lations suggest this can indeed lead naturally to a highly 
structured flow dominated by multiple shock compres- 
sions. However, it is not yet clear whether the simulated 
flow properties can robustly explain key observational fea- 
tures such as the soft x-ray emission. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Frontiers: colliding winds, disks, etc 

The theory for line-driven winds is mature enough that 
it is now finding application in many more complex 
circumstances. Let us thus briefly summarize some of 
these frontiers. 

One example is colliding winds of close, massive star 
binaries. In several cases these involve WR + O stars with 
separations of only a few O-star radii. Generally the WR 
wind is so much stronger that a simple hydrodynamic 
ram balance between the two stars is not possible. This 
suggests the WR wind should simply overwhelm its 
companion’s outflow and penetrate down to the O-star 
surface. Orbital phase monitoring of such systems 
suggests, however, that this does not occur, but that a 
wind-—wind interface is generally kept away from the 
O-star surface. An attractive explanation for this comes 
from considering the additional pressure provided by 
the O-star light in a radiative braking of the impacting 
WR wind. Such a radiative deceleration has many 
of the same properties of the usual wind acceleration, 
including a crucial role for the Doppler shift of line 
resonance in allowing a strong line force. An interesting 
result is that radiative braking is generally only effective 
if the interaction of O-star light with WR material is 
characterized by a stronger line opacity than needed for 
driving the O-star wind. This represents a new twist 
to the usual ‘opacity problem’ of how WR stars drive 
such strong winds and even suggests that observations 
of WR + O binaries could help to constrain answers to this 
fundamental question. 

Hot stars generally have a rapid rotation, but among 
the fastest rotators are the BESTARS, which are characterized 
by strong Balmer line emission thought to originate in a 
circumstellar disk. A quite appealing idea is that these 
form naturally as ‘wind-compressed disks’ by rotational 
focusing of the star’s radiatively driven stellar wind 
toward the equatorial plane. Initial dynamical simulations 
that assumed a simple, radial form for the line force 
generally supported this idea. Surprisingly, however, 
subsequent, more realistic models show that nonradial 
components of this line force can actually completely 
inhibit the formation of such a disk by effectively driving 
material away from the equatorial plane. Further analysis 
has shown how this, and other peculiar properties of line 
driving, follows naturally from the characteristic scaling 
of the line force with the velocity gradient. 

Finally, line-driven winds can also originate from lu- 
minous accretion disks, such as those found in cataclysmic 
variables (see also CATACLYSMIC BINARIES: CLASSICAL AND RECUR- 
RENT NOVAE). Recent work has thus focused on extending 
the basic CAK theory to account for key differences from 
the stellar case, for example the 2D nature of the flow and 
the peculiar nonmonotonic variation of the effective grav- 
ity, which initially increases from the disk plane before 
eventually falling off with distance. There is even renewed 
interest in developing such disk wind models to explain 
the broad-line flows observed from ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI 
and QUASARS. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radiatively Driven Stellar Winds from Hot Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
The theory of hot-star winds is nearly three decades old, 
and in this time there has amassed an appropriately large 
literature. 

The basic notion of line driving was first broached in 
a prescient paper by 


Milne E A 1926 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 86 459 


The seminal work laying out the CAK formalism still 
used today was in 


Abbott D 1982 Astrophys. J. 263 723 
Castor J I, Abbott D C and Klein R1 1975 Astrophys. J. 195 
157 


The key Sobolev approximation was developed in 


Sobolev V V 1960 Moving Envelopes of Stars (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press) 


The reformulation of the CAK scalings in terms of the Q 
of line resonances was by 


Gayley K G Astrophys. J. 454 410 


A key paper testing the validity of the Sobolev approach 
was also one of the first to relax the CAK point-star 
approximation: 


Pauldrach A, Puls] and Kudritzki R 1986 Astron. Astrophys. 
164 86 


Wind variability is the subject of several recent conference 
proceedings: 


Kaper L and Fullerton A (eds) 1998 Cyclical Variability in 
Stellar Winds (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Moffat A, Owocki S, St-Louis N and Fullerton A (eds) 1994 
Instability and Variability in Hot Star Winds (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

Wolf B, Fullerton A and Stahl O (eds) 1999 Variable and Non- 
spherical Stellar Winds in Luminous Hot Stars (Springer 
Lecture Series in Physics) 


A recent paper on instability, which also addresses the 
general validity of the Sobolev approach, is 


Owocki S P and Puls J 1999 Astrophys. J. 510 355 


WR stars have also been the subject of several recent 
conferences, with proceedings containing several reviews 
on the dynamics of WR winds both for single stars and in 
binary systems: 


van der Hucht K, Koenigsberger G and Eenens P (eds) 1999 
Wolf-Rayet Phenomena in Massive Stars and Starburst 
Galaxies (IAU Symposium 143) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Some general reviews on hot-star winds can be found in 


Cassinelli J 1979 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 17 275 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Howarth I (ed) 1997 Boulder-Munich Workshop II (San 
Francisco: Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 

Kudritzki R and Hummer D 1990 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 28 303 

Owocki S 1990 Rev. Mod. Astron. 3 98 

Puls J et al 1993 Rev. Mod. Astron. 6 271 


Finally, an essential general reference is the new 
introductory book on stellar winds: 


Lamers HJ GLM and CassinelliJ 1999 Introduction to Stellar 
Winds (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Stanley Owocki 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Emission from Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio Emission from Binary Stars 


Stellar radio emission is most common in double star 
systems where each star provides something essential in 
producing the large amounts of radio radiation needed for 
it to be detectable by RADIO TELESCOPES. They transfer mass, 
supply energy or, when one of the stars is a NEUTRON STAR 
or BLACK HOLE, have the strong gravitational fields needed 
for the energetic particles and magnetic fields needed for 
the radio emission process. However, while this is an area 
of science where we know what has been observed, the 
underlying causes are not well understood. 


Radio emission from stars in general 

Radio emission may be detected from either single or 
binary stars, although the latter are generally the most 
luminous. Because it is the closest star, the Sun is the 
brightest source of radio emission that we see produced 
by natural processes. This is mainly because it is so 
close. Other stars are 200 thousand times, or more, further 
away and, because the strength of observed radio emission 
weakens with the square of the distance, our Sun would 
appear about 40 billion times weaker if it were at the 
distance of the nearest star. 

Only a small number of nearby single stars, called 
flare stars (see RED DWARFS/FLARE STARS), emit enough radio 
emission to be observable with the largest radio telescopes. 
Detecting the radio emission from stars usually requires 
physical conditions that produce stronger radio emission 
than is normal for stars. These extreme conditions occur 
most often when there are two or more stars in close orbits 
around each other. The strongest and most interesting 
radio emission comes when one star in a binary system 
is in its last stages of its life as a star. 

BINARY STARS are common in the universe, but very few 
of them are detectable as sources of radio emission. This 
generally occurs under the special conditions where one 
of the companions either has an unusually high level of 
surface activity, or is a collapsed star at the end of its life. 
There are four types of special stars that are important for 
the strongest radio emission: ‘normal’ stars with much 
more surface activity than seen on the Sun; WHITE DWARF 
sTARS, which are special because of their compactness and 
the sensitivity of their electron degenerate matter; neutron 
stars, which are special because of the neutron degeneracy 
of their matter and the stronger gravitational fields due 
to their compactness; and black holes, which are the most 
compact and massive ‘dead’ stars. White dwarfs, neutron 
stars and black holes are the final stages in the life of 
stars with masses in the range of 1-1.44 solar masses 
(Moun), (1-3) Mgun and > 3 Mgun, respectively. The extreme 
conditions of these dying, or dead, stars are important in 
producing strong radio emission. 


Radio emission mechanisms 
Radio emission, particularly from radio stars, comes 


from four basic processes involving some combination 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of radiating electrons and magnetic fields, with the latter 
needed for three of the most important processes. 

The first process is thermal emission which arises 
because the temperature of the gas is hot enough so 
that interactions between electrons and the electrical field 
of protons in the gas, which must be in a partially or 
totally ionized plasma state, radiate by so-called braking 
radiation (bremsstrahlung). This form of radio emission 
limits the observed flux densities, the total emission that 
can be collected by a radio telescope, to 


2kT. x (D\* 
S< =| 
2 4\ad 


where k is Boltzmann’s constant, T. is the temperature 
of the electrons in the plasma, 4 is the wavelength of 
observation by the telescope, D is the diameter of the 
source and d is the distance between the source and the 
observer. The maximum thermal emission occurs when 
the plasma is optically thick, that is, all radio photons 
are absorbed and re-emitted one or more times before 
escaping from the radiating plasma. Because ionized gases 
have temperatures that are generally either about 10 000 K 
or in extreme cases a million kelvins, this severely limits 
their radio emission. The non-thermal processes that have 
effective radiation temperatures from 10° to 10” K are 
needed for most of the observed radio stars. 

The next three processes differ from thermal emission 
only in that the emission is from electrons moving at 
a velocity v and interacting with large-scale magnetic 
field structures rather than the electric fields of protons. 
These three differ only in the energy of the radiating 
electrons. The lowest-energy electron—magnetic field 
radiation process is from electrons with Lorentz factors, 
y = 1//1—(v/c)?, which are much less than 1; this is 
cyclotron or gyroresonance emission. The next highest 
energy process is gyrosynchrotron radiation where the 
electrons have y ~ 1. The most important, and highest- 
energy, process, synchrotron emission, requires y >> 1 so 
the electrons are highly relativistic. Most radio stars are 
seen only because they have regions which produce highly 
relativistic electrons, moving very close to the speed of 
light, which then interact with large-scale magnetic field 
structures in the binary system or its outflows. 


Need for acceleration of relativistic electrons 

How nature can so easily produce highly relativistic 
plasmas is still a mystery that we only partly understand. 
We know that particle acceleration occurs in strong 
electric fields and in so-called reconnection events in 
magnetic field structures. However, the only process we 
believe can produce the needed highest-energy electrons 
is acceleration in shocks. Shocks occur whenever plasma 
or gas from different sources collides or interacts with 
each other, sometimes simply as internal structures in an 
extended plasma. The case where the matter ejected froma 
SUPERNOVA explosion collides with the interstellar medium 
is one reasonably well-understood process and is believed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Emission from Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


UX ARIETIS 1983JULY 27 4.98 GHz 


"HALO" 


“CORE 


Figure 1. A VLBI image of the radio emission from the active 
binary UX Ari together with a drawing showing the active 
regions and magnetic field structures linking the two stars. 


to supply most if not all observed cosmic Rays. In the cases 
of stars little is known about the shock interaction regions 
that produce the needed acceleration to highly relativistic 
energies. Observing strong radio emission is the main 
reason for believing that shocks accelerating relativistic 
electrons do exist in observed radio binaries. 


Active binaries and flare stars 


Nearby red dwarf flare stars were the first stars reported to 
have radio emission, although much of the early work is 
doubted because simultaneous monitoring for man-made 
radio interferences was not done. It was not until that was 
done, and interferometers less subject to interference were 
used in the 1970s, that stellar radio emission was definitely 
established. The radio emission from dwarf flare stars, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


called dMe stars because of their small size, M spectral type 
and characteristic occurrence of strong optical emission 
lines, is a scaled-up version of solar radio emission. The 
radiation is mainly from relativistic particles created by 
magnetic loop reconnection and other non-linear plasma 
phenomena. Many of the observed flare stars are in double 
star systems where both systems show radio emission. 
Active binaries where one star is a relatively cool K star 
with extreme magnetic surface activity are the greatest 
source of radio binaries involving normal stars. Figure 1 
shows a radio image of the active binary UX Arietis 
together with a cartoon showing the probable magnetic 
fields linking the two stars. 

It is generally believed, based on statistical evidence 
of their frequent occurrence, that active binaries are 
more active than equivalent single stars because one 
effect of having a companion star is the increase in the 
rotation rate of the active star. This rotation probably 
leads to increasing magnetic dynamo effects in convective 
regions near the outer layers of the stars, and this 
increases the number and size of large starspots and 
related magnetic activity leading to radio emission. It 
is still unclear whether intrastellar plasma phenomena 
are important in augmenting this activity or whether the 
regions between the stars are simply regions into which 
radio-emitting plasma, mainly radiating gyrosynchrotron 
emission, extends during magnetic activity. 


Radio emission from white dwarf binaries 

Binaries containing an evolved ‘normal star’ and a white 
dwarf produce episodic outbursts of optical, infrared and 
radio emission when shells of hot, ionized gas are ejected 
by thermonuclear explosions ocurring on the surface of 
the white dwarf. This happens when a companion star 
has expanded to fill its local gravitational (Roche) lobe 
and this transfers matter to the surface of the white dwarf. 
This increases the amount of non-degenerate matter on 
top of the degenerate electron material of the white dwarf. 
When this layer reaches roughly 1/10 000 of a solar mass, a 
thermonuclear explosion results and the non-degenerate, 
built-up layer is ejected at velocities of several hundreds 
to a few thousands of km s~!. This is the cause of the 
Nova, or ‘new star’ phenomenon, which is first seen by 
the sudden appearance of a bright, new star usually seen 
first by amateur astronomers. The nova shell is an ionized 
gas with temperatures near 10 000 K, and its thermal radio 
emission becomes observable in a few days or weeks when 
the size of the shell becomes large enough. 

The radio emission from nova shells is first seen as 
optically thick surface emission, and with time the less 
dense outer layers become transparent, and more weakly 
emitting, as the opaque surface slowly moves from the 
outer part of the shell to the inner boundary of the shell. 
The resolved structure of the nova shells has been observed 
with large arrays of radio telescopes such as the Very Large 
Array in New Mexico and the Merlin array in England, 
the first being nova QU Vulpecula 1974 and the most 
recent being nova V1974 Cygni in 1992. These imaging 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Emission from Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observations indicate shell masses higher than expected 
from theoretical models of the nova explosion process. 
Bright novae that are easy to study at all wavelengths occur 
only every several years. 


Neutron star binaries and x-ray sources 

Among the first stellar systems observed to show radio 
emission were strong x-ray sources such as SCORPIUS x- 
1 and cyGNus x-1, which have these names because in 
the 1960s they were the strongest x-ray sources in their 
constellations. Sco X-1 is one of the class of radio-emitting 
binaries where a neutron star with a strong magnetic field 
and magnetosphere probably plays a major role in the 
process; Cyg X-1 was the first stellar system in our galaxy 
suspected of containing a black hole, and is in the class 
that we discuss in the next section. 

In the early 1970s Sco X-1 would occasionally exhibit 
radio flares up to levels of 1/4 Jy that lasted a few hours; 
then it seemed to weaken in its flaring, only to return to 
1/4 Jy level flaring in the late 1990s. Sco X-1 belongs to 
a small class of x-ray sources called Z-sources because of 
the Z-like shape they exhibit in plots where the ratio of the 
observed intensities at two high-energy ranges is plotted 
against the ratio of intensity for two lower-energy ranges. 
The Z-sources at any one time occupy only one location in 
their Z-diagram and this identifies the state of the X-ray 
source. The properties of these sources, including their 
radio emission, vary in the Z-diagram. Sco X-1 and other 
Z-sources such as Cygnus X-2, GX17+2 and GX349+2 show 
the weakest and most steady radio emission when at the 
lower end of the Z and have stronger and more erratically 
variable radio sources as the sources move to the other end 
of the Z. 

At the time of this writing we can only speculate 
that the weak steady emission may be due to jet-like 
radio emission while the stronger, more erratic emission 
is related to complex, flare-like phenomena arising from 
the magnetospheric regions generated by the neutron 
stars. One could also speculate that some of the unusual 
radiation processes seen in single neutron stars seen as 
radio pulsars, may occur in a weaker and non-periodic 
form in X-RAY BINARIES containing neutron stars. 

There are a number of other radio-emitting star 
systems where a neutron star component is probably 
involved. One is the periodically flaring system LSI +61° 
303, which is an x-ray binary with a period of 29 days, 
where the compact star is moving inside the strong stellar 
wind from its companion star with what is probably an 
elliptical orbit. In this system it is believed that when 
the compact star is closest to the other star radio flaring 
is initiated, perhaps because of the strengthening of the 
bow shock region where the winds from the compact 
star’s ACCRETION DISK interact with the wind of the other 
star. Circinus X-1 is a similar case where radio flaring is 
triggered once in each orbit of the compact star around 
its companion. The neutron star binaries Aquila X-1 and 
Centaurus X-4 have been shown to exhibit radio flares 
associated with recurring x-ray outbursts. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a 4 
\ fae 
x eY  Wind 
ae a Outflow 

Sa Normal aad 
aed Star hase’ v=0.26¢--- 

—— te : Be oe 

Optical y ates Z —— X-Ray Jets 


Recombination 
Line Emission 


- Compact Star 


2,000 km/seo 


ao Accretion 
\ v= 0.26c ' Disk 
Entrained Sige 
Gas 
\ 2,000 km/sec 


"Cylindrical" 
sheath of accelerated, radiating 
relativistic electrons & magnetic fields 


Figure 2. A cartoon showing the x-ray, optical and 
radio-emitting jets of SS433. They are ejected along the axis of 
the accretion disk at a velocity of 0.26c. 


There are two binary systems where the evidence is 
not clear whether the compact star is a neutron star or 
a black hole: Cygnus X-3 and ss433. Because black hole 
binaries seem to show stronger radio events than neutron 
star binaries, we will discuss Cygnus X-3 and SS433 with 
the black holes and black hole candidates. 


Binary stars with black holes and black hole 
candidates 
In the late 1970s the 433th entry in the Stephenson— 
Sandeulek catalog of emission line stars, called $5433 
(figure 2), was found to show a strong 162.5 day periodicity 
in the velocities of its optical emission lines which 
indicated jets of emission with velocities of 26% of the 
speed of light, or 0.26c. That this was due to precession 
of jets ejected along the rotational axis of the accretion 
disk was verified when x-ray emission lines and images 
of radio emission were seen to show changes explainable 
by a precessing jet. The x-ray and optical lines vary with 
radial velocity along the line of sight, with a stationary 
line system, one line system producing emission with 
redshifts indicating that they are moving away from us and 
another line system with the blueshifts of material moving 
toward us. The radio emission is seen in radio images 
on size scales ranging from a few milliarcseconds up to 
several arcseconds and exhibits lateral proper motions that 
provide us with the full three-dimensional picture of the 
behavior of the 0.26c jets. It is still uncertain whether SS433 
is a binary with a neutron star or a black hole. Depending 
on which evidence in emphasized the conclusion can go 
either way. However, although $S433 seemed to be unique 
for 15 yr, the phenomenon of highly relativistic radio jets 
has recently been shown to be associated with some binary 
systems that are either clearly established or strongly 
suspected to be binary stars with black hole systems. 

The discovery of highly relativistic radio jets in the 
recurring but transient x-ray binaries GRS 1915 + 105, 
GRO J1655-40 and XTE J1748-288 in 1994, 1994 and 1998, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Emission from Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-39 5044.3 4 


444 


446 


DECLINATION (J2000) 


448 


§ aI 
449 l | l l | 


16 54 00.19 00.18 00.17 00.16 00.15 00.14 
RIGHT ASCENSION (J2000) 


Figure 3. An 18 cm VLBA radio image of GRO J1655-40 made on 
18-19 August 1994 showing its jets, which appear superluminal 
on one side. The brightest region at the lower right is the 
location of the black hole x-ray binary and the material to the 
upper left is moving with an apparent lateral velocity of 1.1c 
owing to relativistic effects resulting from its 0.92c velocity. 


respectively, brought the realization that strong radio 
flares are often associated with the x-ray events where 
highly relativistic radio jets are ejected with velocities near 
the speed of light. These three systems show apparent 
motions of radio-emitting matter moving towards us that 
seem to be moving faster than the speed of light. The 
finiteness of the speed of light causes the radio emission 
seen at a particular time to be emitted earlier from the 
far side jet and later from the near side jet such that the 
apparent velocities are 


Vv 
1+ (v/c) cos(®) 


Vapparent = 


where the + sign is for the receding jet, the — sign is for 
the aproaching jet and © is that angle between the line 
of jet ejection and the line of sight to an observer. For 
the three superluminal jet sources, Vapparent/C is 1.4, 1.1 
and 1.3, respectively. It is because u/c is close to unity 
in these systems that it is possible for the denominator 
in this equation to become small, leading to Vapparent > 
c and producing a so-called superluminal jet source. 
Superlumiminal jets are commonly present in extragalactic 
systems such as quasars and active galactic nuclei. 

Figure 3 shows the high-resolution radio image of 
GRO J1655-40 observed with the Very Long Baseline Array 
(VLBA) on 18-19 August 1994, about a week after this black 
hole binary ejected a jet with a velocity of 0.92c. The binary 
x-ray source is located in the middle of the central bright 
source in the lower right and the material to the upper left 
is the approaching jet moving with an apparent velocity 
of 1.1c. It has been established that the GRO J1655-40 
binary system consists of a 7 solar mass black hole orbiting 
around a 1.2 solar mass F2 IV star every 2.61 days. Matter 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from the F2 IV star falls toward the black hole forming an 
accretion disk whose inner regions are disappearing into 
the event horizon of the black hole. The x-ray outburst 
associated with the relativistic jet ejection in early August 
1994 was the result of a state change in the black hole’s disk 
of accreting matter when it went from weakly to strongly 
radiating in x-rays, with the ejection of the observed radio 
jet along the rotation axis of the accretion disk. 

$8433, GRS1915 + 105, GRO J1655-40 and XTE J1748- 
288 all exhibit another effect due to the relativistic nature 
of their jets: Doppler boosting, due to the relativistic 
distortion of the area of the emitting regions as seen by 
a distant observer, so the apparent ratio of the flux density 
of the approaching and receding jets is given by 


Sapproaching _ ( ot (u/c) cos(@) 


Steceding 1 — (v/c) cos(®) 


where a is the spectral index of the radio emission and 
k = 2 or 3 depending on whether the jet is continuous or 
blob like. 

The x-ray binary Cygnus X-3 is the system with the 
most frequent, strong radio flares, exhibiting an average 
of two big flares per year since first discovered in 1972. In 
early 1997 an 11 Jy flare in Cyg X-3 was imaged at very high 
resolution, showing an entirely one-sided jet with v > 0.8c 
and © < 8°. The Doppler boosting of the Cyg X-3 jets 
pointing nearly at the Earth is part of the reason why Cyg 
X-3 flares are so strong, often rivaling the apparent radio 
brightness of distant Quasars. These systems with highly 
relativistic jets are frequently described as microquasars. 


Future prospects 

The study of radio events in binary stars with one stellar 
component having magnetic-field-driven surface events, 
or being a compact white dwarf, neutron star or black hole, 
is one of the best ways to study relativistic plasma outflows 
in stars. With X-Ray ASTRONOMY Satellites monitoring the 
sky for x-ray outbursts, astronomers can quickly turn 
x-ray, radio and infrared or optical telescopes to observe 
these objects with their accretion disks and outflows that 
develop synchrotron radio emitting plasmas. Arrays 
of radio telescopes such as the Very Large Array, the 
Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope, the Australian 
Telescope Compact Array, the VLBA, the European VLBI 
Network, the Giant Metre-wave Radio Telescope and other 
arrays of radio telescopes promise to continue generating 
images detailing the evolution of these relativistic plasma 
events. These images, when combined with x-ray, optical 
and infrared information about the events, will continue 
to play a major role in the study of the major events in 
exotic binary star systems. 


Bibliography 

Hjellming R M 1988 Radio Stars Galactic and Extragalactic 
Radio Astronomy ed G L Verschuur and K I Kellerman 
(New York: Springer) pp 381-438 

Hjellming R M and Han X-H 1995 Radio Properties of 
X-ray Binaries X-ray Astronomy ed W H G Lewin, J 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Emission from Binary Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


van Paradijs and E P J van den Huevel (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 308-30 

Mirabel I F and Rodriguez L F 1999 Sources of Relativistic 
Jets in Out Galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 37 
409-43 


Robert M Hjellming 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Radio Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio Galaxy 


A galaxy that is an intense source of radio-frequency 
emission. The radio luminosity of a strong radio galaxy 
(10°”-10°° watts) can be up to a million times greater than 
the radio output of a conventional galaxy (typically about 
10° watts) and up to a hundred times greater than the 
optical luminosity of a galaxy such as the Milky Way. The 
optical counterparts of radio galaxies are usually elliptical 
galaxies 

In a typical radio galaxy, most of the radio emission 
comes from two ‘lobes’ (clouds of radio-emitting material), 
often located beyond and on either side of, the visible 
galaxy. Typically, the radio-emitting clouds span a region 
of space five to ten times larger than the optical galaxy. 
The overall extent of a radio galaxy (measured across 
its lobes) may be several million light-years; indeed, the 
lobes of the giant radio galaxy 3C 236 (‘3C’ denotes the 
Third Cambridge Catalogue of radio sources) have an 
overall diameter of nearly 20 million light-years. High- 
resolution images show that many radio galaxies also 
possess a compact central radio source from which there 
emerges a jet, or a pair of oppositely directed jets, of radio- 
emitting material, pointing outwards towards the distant 
lobes. The radio-emitting lobes are believed to be clouds 
of electrically charged particles (predominantly electrons) 
that have been expelled at some time in the past, from 
a central ‘powerhouse’ in the core of the galaxy. The jets 
appear to be streams of highly energetic electrons that have 
been accelerated to a substantial fraction of the speed of 
light. Spots of enhanced intensity are often seen where the 
outflowing jets of particles plough into the distant lobes. 

The jet and lobes radiate synchrotron radiation (a type 
of radiation that is emitted by charged particles traveling at 
large fractions of the speed of light in magnetic fields). The 
spectrum of a radio galaxy is relatively ‘flat’, displaying 
the smooth slow decline in intensity from low to high 
frequencies (from long to short wavelengths) that is typical 
of a synchrotron source (by contrast, the spectrum of a 
galaxy like the Milky Way is dominated by the combined 
light of its constituent stars and, like that of a star, rises 
steeply at the short-wave end of the spectrum, reaches a 
peak in the visible and declines in the infrared). 

The energy that is needed to produce the lobes 
and sustain them for tens of millions of years is very 
substantial; in the region of 10°° joules for a strong radio 
galaxy. The ‘energy machine’ that is responsible for 
ejecting the lobes and powering the jets is believed to reside 
in the core of the galaxy and is widely considered to be a 
supermassive black hole surrounded by an accretion disk 
of heated gas. 

The first radio galaxy to be identified was Cygnus A, 
a classic double-lobed strong radio galaxy. The nearest 
(rather weak) radio galaxy, Centaurus A, lies at a distance 
of about 15 million light-years. 


See also: accretion, active galactic nucleus, active galaxy, 
astrophysical jets, Centaurus A, Cygnus A, radioastron- 
omy, synchrotron radiation, Virgo A. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Instrumentation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio Instrumentation 


RADIO TELESCOPES generally fall into two categories: single- 
dish telescopes, where one antenna is used on its own 
as a telescope, and synthesis arrays or INTERFEROMETERS, 
where several antennas are combined to synthesize the 
effect of one very large telescope. Whilst instrumentation 
on a single-dish radio telescope can often be changed 
in a similar way to that on an optical telescope, 
instrumentation on a synthesis array tends to be very 
tightly integrated into the telescope system. In this article, 
instrumentation for the two classes of radio telescope is 
therefore considered separately. 


Single dish continuum detectors 

The earliest radio telescopes worked in a simple ‘single 
dish’ mode, in which the entire signal of the telescope 
was focused on to a single detector. This detector was 
typically a low-noise amplifier followed by a detector that 
simply measured the amount of continuum radio power 
falling onto it. Much of the early pioneering work of radio- 
astronomy was performed with this simple arrangement. 
To make an image of the source, it was necessary to move 
the entire telescope back and forth in a raster pattern, and 
thus gradually build up a radio image of the area being 
surveyed. In practice, this raster pattern was generally 
composed of a number of points set in a rectangular grid. 
The telescope would be pointed at each of these grid 
points in turn, and a total power measured. However, this 
technique is limited by fluctuations in the receiver power 
caused either by the atmosphere or by the electronics. A 
modern variant of this technique is ‘on-the-fly’ mapping, 
where the telescope is kept in constant motion. As a 
result, fluctuations in receiver power due to atmosphere or 
electronics occur on a longer timescale than the observed 
changes in power caused by the motion of the telescope 
beam past a radio source in the sky, and so the two effects 
can be separated out. Thus, on-the-fly mapping yields 
more reliable images than the earlier gridded images. 

The main limitation of the technique of using a single 
dish for continuum imaging of the sky is the relatively 
poor spatial resolution obtainable with a single-dish 
telescope. However, this simple single-dish technique is 
still sometimes used for specialist purposes, particularly 
at millimeter and sub-millimeter wavelengths where 
receivers tend to be too complex to build in multiple 
packages (See RADIO TELESCOPE DATA PATH FOR SINGLE DISH AND 
INTERFEROMETERS). 

Modern radio-astronomy RECEIVERS come in two 
varieties. The most common is a heterodyne receiver, in 
which the incoming signal is successively amplified and 
mixed with local oscillators to produce a coherent signal 
at low frequency which can then be processed in ‘back- 
end’ instrumentation. At millimeter and sub-millimeter 
wavelengths, the receiving element is sometimes a 
bolometer, which is a sensitive device that measures 
the instantaneous incoherent radio power falling on the 
detector. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spectroscopy 

In the early days of radio-astronomy, measurements of the 
radio spectrum of a source were made by using a set of 
filters, each tuned toa slightly different frequency. Such an 
instrument was used in many early pioneering studies of 
the neutral hydrogen line. However, it suffered both from 
instability in the electronics and from a relatively limited 
frequency resolution. 

In the 1970s, Fourier transform or autocorrelation 
spectrometers (or ‘CORRELATORS’) were developed. In 
these instruments, a signal was successively delayed 
electronically in a shift register, and then the delayed 
samples were then cross-correlated with the original 
signal. The resulting autocorrelation function was then 
Fourier transformed to produce a spectrum of the signal. 
This technique was not possible until the advent of fast 
digital computers to perform the Fourier transform, but 
once established it quickly replaced the older filter banks. 
Its advantages were much higher stability and flexibility, 
and a scalability which allowed very high frequency 
resolution. In recent times, correlators with up to one 
million channels have been produced for specialist projects 
such as that of the SETI INSTITUTE. 

Until recently, these autocorrelation spectrometers 
still suffered from a relatively low total bandwidth, which 
was limited by the speed of the available electronic 
components. This bandwidth was generally too low for 
millimeter work, and so a different type of spectrometer 
was born. This was the acousto-optic spectrometer 
(or AOS) which was widely used at millimeter and 
submillimeter telescopes. In this type of spectrometer, 
the radio signal is applied to a Kerr cell, causing a 
periodic modulation of opacity across the Kerr cell. A 
laser beam applied to this Kerr cell is diffracted by the 
resulting grating, and the intensity distribution of the 
diffracted laser beam is effectively the Fourier transform 
of the input signal, and thus gives the spectrum of 
the input signal. Such a spectrometer can cover a 
very wide bandwidth (up to several GHz), but suffers 
from a high sensitivity to thermal instability, so that 
these spectrometers need elaborate calibration schemes 
to be usable for radio-astronomy. They have recently 
started to be supplanted by autocorrelation spectrometers, 
since the advent of high-speed samplers has meant that 
autocorrelation spectrometers can now operate up to 
bandwidths of several GHz. 


Pulsar timing 

Specialist receivers are used to search for and study 
PULSARS. These receivers differ from conventional ones both 
in their ability to combat interstellar DisPERSION and in their 
ability to record data in ‘bins’ of short time duration (see 
PULSAR BACKENDS). 

In pulsar searches, it is necessary to record data 
at a very high rate, as the data need to be sampled 
at millisecond intervals with a wide bandwidth. This 
typically results in tens of gigabytes of data per day of 
observation. These data are then analyzed offline using 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Instrumentation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


powerful but computationally expensive algorithms that 
search for periodicities in the data (see SOFTWARE: RADIO 
PULSAR SOFTWARE). 

For studying the characteristics and timing of known 
pulsars, the data rates can be much lower as the data can 
be synchronously added into a number of ‘bins’, each 
covering a small (millisecond) time interval across the 
pulsar period. The data may then be integrated over a 
period of minutes, and at the end of this integration only 
an amplitude for each bin need be recorded. 

In all studies of pulsars, allowance must be made for 
the dispersion of the pulsar signal as it passes through the 
interstellar medium. This dispersion occurs because high- 
frequency radio waves travel faster through an ionized 
medium than low-frequency waves. So, a sharp pulse 
emitted by the pulsar will be blurred out over time, and 
if no correction is made for this effect, the pulse recorded 
back on Earth using a wide bandwidth will be weakened 
and broadened. ‘To correct for this, ‘de-dispersers’ are 
used, in which the received band is broken into a number 
of small frequency channels using either a filter bank 
or a correlator, in the same way as for spectroscopy, as 
described above. The signals in the different channels 
are electronically delayed by an appropriate amount such 
that the pulses in all channels are once more aligned 
in time. The data from all the channels can then be 
integrated together. Recently, the increasing power of 
high-speed electronics and computers has enabled an 
additional technique to be used, in which the raw signal 
from the telescope is recorded as a voltage at very high 
speed (at hundreds of millions of samples per second). 
Then all these corrections to the data can be made off- 
line on high-speed computers at the same time as other 
processing. 


Multibeam and array feeds 

Traditional single-dish radio-astronomy typically uses just 
one or two receiving elements at the focus of the telescope. 
Increasingly, there is pressure to mount an array of 
receiving elements at the focus. This evolution is similar to 
the replacement of photomultipliers on optical telescopes 
by ccd arrays. However, the challenge is harder at radio 
wavelengths because the physical size and the complexity 
of the receivers makes it difficult to mount more than one 
receiver at the focus simultaneously. However, a feed 
array with n elements increases the power of the telescope 
by a factor of n, and so the pressure to develop such 
multibeam receivers is huge. At millimeter wavelengths, 
the physical size of the receivers does not present such a 
problem as those operating at longer wavelengths, and so 
the first experimental multibeam receivers, developed at 
several observatories, typically had a few elements and 
operated at millimeter wavelengths. 

However, the first multibeam receiver to make a major 
impact on radio-astronomy was the seven-beam receiver 
developed by NRAO and successfully deployed first on 
the GREENBANK 70 m telescope in the USA and then on the 
PARKES OBSERVATORY 64 m telescope in Australia. It was used 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to make a very successful continuum survey of the entire 
sky at a wavelength of 6 cm. 

In 1997, a 13-beam receiver operating at 21 cm was 
mounted on the Parkes 64 m telescope, representing 
a milestone in radio-astronomy instrumentation. This 
receiver, which required a major upgrade of the telescope 
in order to accommodate its enormous size, was used for 
both spectroscopic surveys of neutral hydrogen and for 
pulsar searches. 

At millimeter wavelengths, development of array 
feeds is continuing, using both heterodyne receivers and 
bolometers. A major advance was signalled by the 
development of SCUBA (Submillimeter Common-User 
Bolometer Array) which was installed on the James Clerk 
Maxwell Telescope in 1996. SCUBA consists of two arrays 
of bolometers, containing 37 and 91 elements respectively. 
Plans are already being made for similar receivers with an 
even larger number of elements. 

Another type of array feed which is in its early stages 
of development is the focal plane array in which the 
focal plane is sampled sufficiently densely to be able to 
measure the electric field across the focal plane. The 
signals from the different elements are cross-correlated, 
and the Fourier transform of the cross-correlation function 
yields a holographic image of the electric field distribution 
across the telescope. Corrections can then be made to this 
image for effects such as telescope deformation, pointing 
errors and atmospheric effects. In principle, this technique 
can yield a near-perfect image of the sky, regardless of the 
quality of the telescope or the atmosphere. 


Synthesis arrays and interferometry 

All the types of instrumentation fitted to single-dish radio 
telescopes, with the exception of the bolometer, can also 
be fitted to radio synthesis arrays or interferometers. In 
practice, because each instrument generally has to be 
duplicated many times over, synthesis arrays usually have 
far less flexibility than single-dish radio telescopes, and so 
the range of instrumentation tends to be smaller. 

Modern synthesis arrays all use correlators to 
combine the data from their telescopes, and these 
correlators follow the same principles as those correlators 
used for spectroscopy in single-dish radio-astronomy. 
Thus, the two functions are relatively easily combined, 
so that a synthesis array can generally yield images in 
each of many frequency channels across the observing 
band. In practice, the size of the correlator tends to be 
limited, and so older instruments such as the VERY LARGE 
ARRAY tend to have only a modest spectroscopic capability, 
whereas more recent instruments tend to have much 
higher spectroscopic resolution. Similarly, the correlators 
on synthesis arrays can be designed to include ‘binning’ 
for pulsars, and several instruments offer this capability 
for pulsar astronomy. 

In very long baseline interferometry (vLBI), the same 
principles apply, and most VLBI correlators offer both a 
spectroscopic mode and a pulsar binning mode. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Instrumentation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The future 

Instrumentation on radio telescopes is changing rapidly 
on several fronts. Increasingly, the distinction between on- 
line instrumentation and off-line processing is becoming 
blurred. 

For example, the increasing speed and power of 
general-purpose computers means that some functions 
that once had to be performed in hardware can now be 
done in software. One example, mentioned above, is the 
class of pulsar search and de-dispersion techniques, which 
is now within the reach of general-purpose computers. 

Another aspect of this blurring is the move towards 
real-time processing. At present, data from a synthesis 
array are typically collected over a period of hours, then 
written to tape or CD-ROM, and then taken back to a 
user’s institution for analysis. However, the amount of 
processing time needed is now typically smaller than the 
observing time, and so this processing is starting to be 
performed in real-time on computers attached to the on- 
line system. 

Another change that is rapidly occurring is the 
increase in radio-interference contamination of radio- 
astronomy signals. There are two causes of this. One 
is the rapidly growing rise in interference that occurs 
within supposedly protected radio-astronomy bands. 
For example, the designated 18 cm radio-astronomy 
bands are becoming very badly contaminated by out-of- 
band emissions from constellations of low-Earth orbiting 
satellites. The other cause of the problem is the need 
for radio-astronomers to receive radiation from a greater 
fraction of the available spectrum than that officially 
designated as a radio-astronomy protected band. For 
example, technology now allows us to study the neutral 
hydrogen emission from GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT. The 
redshifted hydrogen lines fall well outside the band 
protected for radio-astronomers. 

To enable radio-astronomy to continue in the face 
of this interference, it is clear that techniques need 
to be developed to excise or cancel radio interference 
from the radio-astronomy signal received by a telescope. 
Such radio interference mitigation techniques are in their 
infancy, but will become increasingly important as the 
next-generation radio telescope, the Square Kilometer 
Array (SKA), is developed. 


R Norris 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Interferometer 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio Interferometer 


A device that utilizes interference effects between radio 
waves in order to obtain higher angular resolutions than 
those achievable with individual radio telescopes. 

The simplest form of radio interferometer consists of 
two antennae or dishes that point in the same direction 
but are separated by a distance (the ‘baseline’) that is 
large compared with the wavelength of the radiation that 
is being observed. Depending on the angle between 
the direction of the source and the direction of the 
baseline, wavefronts arriving at the two dishes from a 
given radio source may be in phase (a wavecrest arriving 
simultaneously at each dish) or out of phase. If the 
signals received by the two dishes are combined, they will 
interfere with each other. In particular, if they are exactly 
in phase, the two waves will add together to produce 
a signal of greater amplitude (constructive interference), 
whereas if they are 180° out of phase (a ‘trough’ arriving 
at one dish when a ‘crest’ arrives at the other), they will 
cancel to produce a signal of zero amplitude (destructive 
interference). Constructive interference occurs whenever 
the angle (9) between the direction of the source and the 
normal to the baseline is such that the extra distance (d) 
traveled by a wavefront between arriving at one dish and 
the next is equal to a whole number of wavelengths. The 
condition for constructive interference is given by sin@ = 
ni/D where n is an integer, D is the separation between 
the dishes and i is the wavelength of the radiation. 

As a point source moves across the sky, and its 
direction relative to the baseline changes, the signals will 
shift in and out of phase with each other, so producing an 
interference pattern. Two neighboring point sources will 
produce overlapping interference patterns. Analysis of 
the interference pattern produced by the system enables 
the position of a point source to be determined and 
neighboring point sources to be resolved. Since an 
extended source can be considered to consist of a set of 
point sources, an interferometer can be used to resolve 
an extended source in detail. However, this resolution 
is achieved only along a direction parallel to the baseline. 
The resolving power of a two-element radio interferometer 
of this kind is given by 4/2D (in radians), or 1.03 x 1054/D 
(in arcsec). Thus, for example, an interferometer consisting 
of two dishes separated by 1000 m and operating at a 
wavelength of 21 cm (0.21 m) would have a resolution of 
0.21 x 1.03 x 105/103 ~ 20 arcsec. 

In more sophisticated interferometers, the separations 
between the dishes can be varied and more than two dishes 
may be included. Very-long baseline interferometry 
(VLBI) utilizes radio dishes separated by very large 
distances. The baselines in such systems can be thousands 
of kilometers long and, in principle, can be almost as 
great as the diameter of the Earth. The signals received 
by the two (or more) dishes are stored along with precise 
timing information and combined ata later date to produce 
interference patterns and to achieve resolutions that can 
approach 0.001 arcsec at centimeter wavelengths and 100 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


arcsec at millimeter wavelengths. VLBI using space-based 
instruments will improve resolutions even further. 


See also: 
power. 


aperture synthesis, radio telescope, resolving 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio Sources 


Extragalactic radio sources can be divided into two groups. 
One group consists of the star-forming galaxies—most 
optically bright galaxies, including sTARBURST GALAXIES— 
which produce radio emission at a fairly low rate, about 
10°” to 10 ergs~!. The radio emission from these is 
associated with by-products of stellar activity, such as 
particle acceleration caused by suPERNOvAE, and is limited 
in extent to the size of the star-forming regions in the 
optical host galaxy. The second, much more powerful, 
group includes RADIO GALAXIES, radio-loud QUASARS, SEYFERT 
GALAXIES, and other normal galaxies with active nuclei. 
These galaxies, often collectively referred to as AGNs 
(ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI), vary by a factor of more than 
10° in their emitted power, reaching up to 10° ergs! 
in the radio. In both star-forming galaxies and AGNs 
the radio emission is non-thermal and is almost certainly 
synchrotron emission from relativistic electrons moving in 
a magnetic field. How these various groups of galaxies are 
related, and what causes the huge variation in their levels 
of activity, remain major questions for astronomy. 

Observations of H I in the coma CLUSTER in the 
early 1980s revealed that for many normal (star-forming) 
galaxies there is a strong correlation between their radio 
continuum (RC) emission and far infrared emission (FIR). 
Since the radio emission is related to high-energy particles 
and magnetic fields, while the FIR is produced by warm 
dust, the physical basis for this correlation is not direct, 
and the tightness of the correlation is surprising: it has not 
yet been fully explained. Young massive stars appear to 
play an important role, presumably as a common energy 
source. The relationship is quite tight, holds for over five 
orders of magnitude in luminosity, and covers sources 
as diverse as blue compact DWARF GALAXIES, normal star- 
forming galaxies, Seyferts and radio-quiet quasars. Since 
the K-correction is quite different for the FIR emission from 
the dust (varying as ~*) and the radio continuum (varying 
as 4°), this correlation makes it possible to get distances 
of starburst galaxies in the absence of optical REDSHIFTS. 

Radio galaxies and radio-loud quasars have much 
more powerful radio emmisions, and a FIR-to-RC ratio 
that is about two orders of magnitude lower than that 
for normal star-forming galaxies, and with much greater 
scatter. 

From the radio data alone, radio galaxies and quasars 
are indistinguishable. Both have extremely compact cores 
(nuclei) less than 1 pc in extent. Quasars differ from radio 
galaxies only by the extremely bright optical emission from 
their nuclei. In most cases this ‘quasi-stellar’ light makes it 
difficult to detect the fainter emission from the host galaxy, 
although such detections have now been made for many 
quasars using the Hubble Space Telescope. In both radio 
galaxies and quasars, thin jets emerge from the compact 
core and feed into diffuse radio lobes. 

The first radio galaxy to be discovered, CYGNUS 4, 
has just this classic form. This object, the strongest 
extragalactic radio source, appears in one of the earliest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


radio surveys, GROTE REBER’S 1944 map. It was found 
again in subsequent surveys in 1948 and the source was 
double-lobed and more than a minute of arc in size: 
clearly, unusual astrophysics was at work here. The object 
was optically identified in 1954. Other radio sources— 
Centaurus A (NGC 5128), Virgo A (M87) and Fornax A 
(NGC1316)—had been identified with galaxies using the 
Dover Heights interferometer, and so it was clear that they 
were extragalactic. Cygnus A was found to be distant (z = 
0.06), but still so intense that it would be in the 3C catalogue 
even if it were 20 times further away, and readily detectable 
anywhere in the universe. Hence, radio galaxies offered 
the first possibility of observing well beyond z = 1. At this 
time, the most distant objects known were at z < 0.2. 

Early counts of these radio sources showed that they 
had to be a strongly evolving population: this effectively 
ruled out the then popular Steady State cosmology and 
provided early evidence for an evolving ‘history’ universe. 
But ironically, because of this strong evolution, radio 
galaxies did not turn out to be the powerful new tool 
for cosmology that astronomers hoped for. Until very 
recently, all radio source surveys have been dominated 
by a shell of sources at very great distance, picking up 
very few sources in the local universe, because the effects 
of cosmic evolution have totally outweighed those of 
geometry: more distant, and hence younger, sources have 
power great enough to completely offset the effects of the 
inverse-square law. Only the most recent surveys, those 
with enough sensitivity to detect sources below 1 my, 
have been able to detect fainter radio sources where the 
population starts to be dominated by the normal star- 
forming galaxies. These can be observed in large numbers 
at all distances, and so the study of distant radio sources 
has returned to the mainstream of extragalactic astronomy. 

Fifty years after extragalactic radio sources were 
discovered we are still seeking to understand their details, 
but we do have a broad understanding of their energetics 
and evolution. After radio galaxies were discovered, 
the first questions that arose were: ‘What supplies their 
energy?’, ‘Why are they double-lobed?’ and ‘What was it 
that made some galaxies active?’ Some of these questions 
have been answered: we now understand that the energy 
supply is gravitational, and have coarse models to explain 
the double-lobed structure. But today we still need to 
understand: which galaxies have ‘central engines’; the 
detailed relationship between the various classes of active 
galaxies and quasars; issues related to the speed, structure, 
collimation and symmetry of jets; which came first, AGNs 
or the black holes they are thought to house?; and how 
radio galaxies interact with their environment. 


Ron Ekers and Helen Sim 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio Telescope 


An instrument used to collect and measure radio waves 
from cosmic sources. In essence, a radio telescope consists 
of a collector of radiation, a detector, an amplifier (to 
enhance the weak cosmic signals) and a device to store, 
monitor and display the output from the system. Although 
the most familiar type of radio telescopes uses a concave 
dish to collect radiation, radio telescopes may take other 
forms, for example arrays of aerials or antennae arranged 
in rows or grids. 

The archetypal collector is a parabolic dish that, 
like the primary mirror of an optical telescope, reflects 
incoming radiation to a focus. Radio waves arriving at 
the focal plane set up an electrical disturbance in an aerial, 
or antenna, that is fed to a receiver, tuned to the frequency 
of interest, which amplifies the weak incoming signal by 
factors of up to around 10°. The output from the receiver 
may then be displayed directly by an output device, such 
as a chart recorder, or stored and processed in digital form 
by acomputer. An image of an extended radio source may 
be produced by scanning the dish to and fro to record the 
intensity of the signal originating at different points on 
the source, storing the data and then constructing a map 
in which intensity values are plotted as contour lines or 
are color-coded to make up a false-color image. 

Most dishes are steerable, and can be pointed to 
any location on the sky, but some are fixed. The largest 
steerable dish is the 100 m instrument at Effelsberg, near 
Bonn, Germany. The largest fixed dish is the 300 m 
(1000 foot) instrument that is built into a natural hollow 
at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. 

As with an optical reflector, the resolving power 
of a radio dish is given by 1.22\/D, where i is the 
wavelength of the radiation and D the aperture of the 
instrument. Because the wavelengths studied by radio 
telescopes are orders of magnitudes longer than optical 
wavelengths, the resolving power of a radio telescope 
is orders of magnitude poorer than that of an optical 
telescope of the same aperture. For example, the resolving 
power of a radio dish of aperture 100 m, operating at 
a wavelength of 0.5 m (about one million times longer 
than visible wavelengths) would be about 20 arcminutes 
(a third of a degree), much poorer than that of the human 
eye. The theoretical resolution of a 1 m aperture optical 
telescope is about 0.1 arcsec. In order to achieve this 
resolution, a radio telescope operating at a wavelength 
of 0.5 m would require an aperture of 1000 km; even at 
the shorter wavelength of 1 cm, an aperture of 20 km 
would be required. Clearly, this cannot be achieved witha 
single dish. Much improved resolutions can, however, be 
achieved by radio interferometers and aperture synthesis 
systems, instruments that combine the signals received by 
pairs or sets of dishes. 

Because the wavelengths of radio waves are so 
much longer than those of visible light, radio dishes 
do not require to be shaped with the same degree of 
precision as the surfaces of optical mirrors. For example, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


irregularities in the reflecting surface of a centimeter, 
correspond to deviations of less than one-twentieth of 
the wavelength (a good level of precision for a reflecting 
surface) for an instrument that is studying emissions 
by clouds of hydrogen at a wavelength of 21 cm. At 
shorter wavelengths (centimeter or millimeter waves), 
the tolerances are proportionately finer. At longer radio 
wavelengths (above, say, 20 cm), a wire mesh surface 
rather than a solid metal skin can achieve good reflection. 
This lightens the dish considerably, and reduced the effect 
of the wind. 


See also: aperture synthesis, electromagnetic spectrum, 
flux density, radar astronomy, radioastronomy, radio 
interferometer. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Telescope Data Path for Single Dish and 
Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radio Telescope Data Path for Single 
Dish and Interferometers 


Radioastronomers derive all their observational data from 
the ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION which arrives at the RADIO 
TELESCOPE from the region of interest. The subset of 
parameter space of interest to the astronomer is modest: 
what part of the spectrum; what polarization; which 
direction; when and where the observations are made. The 
telescope is the filter which determines the actual subset, 
and care is required in order to ensure that the filter’s 
characteristics are well understood. 

This overview outlines the path from the raw data to 
the end product in the astronomer’s hands. 


The data 

The radiation to be studied is generated by random natural 
processes, which leads to an incoherent mix of frequencies, 
in the form of Gaussian noise with statistical properties 
which are stationary on time scales which are usefully 
long—minutes to hours. 

The incident wavefront can be described in terms of 
its flux density (power/unit area/unit frequency interval); 
Stokes parameters provide a convenient framework for 
describing the polarization characteristics. We also need 
to account for the directional properties if the radiation is 
from an extended region of space. 


Single dish 
This section examines the data flow in a single radio 
telescope, whether operating in a stand-alone mode 
(‘single dish’) or as an element of an array. 

Figure 1 locates the major components of the data 
path. 


The telescope optics 
At the top of the chain we impose an angular distribution 
filter. 


1. The reflecting surfaces. We want the telescope to be as 
sensitive as possible to the radiation from the target. To 
that end we build a structure with as large a collecting area 
as possible. In general the design is based on a paraboloid 
with a prime focus or with a secondary cassegrain or 
gregorian subreflector. 


2. Thefeedantenna. Inevery telescope there is the problem 
of converting the energy in the focal plane to a useful 
form. Optical telescopes are able to exploit simultaneously 
a sizeable region of the focal plane, with the silver grains of 
a photographic emulsion or the active elements of a CCD 
array. Most radio telescopes are single-pixel devices, with 
just one active element in the focal plane. The interface 
device is the feed antenna, able to convert the converging 


1 The radioastronomer’s unit of flux density is the Jansky (after 
the father of RADIO ASTRONOMY), and is : 1 Jy = 10-76 W m-? Hz7!. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


% 


Polarization A 


l Feed Antenna 


Polarization B 


Amplifier 


Conversion Ve 
Chain x HY-(X ae 


Processing Unit 


Figure 1. A generic radio telescope, identifying the main 
components in the data path. 


(‘focused’) wavefront to an electrical signal suitable for the 
downstream electronics. 

The feed antenna needs to be tailored to the telescope 
optics to optimize the efficiency. In electrical terms this 
is a matching problem. The feed antenna is optimized 
for a particular electrical field over its aperture; therefore 
the telescope focussing must endeavour to produce that 
optimal field if the combination is to reach its peak 
efficiency. 


3. The radiation pattern. There are several related ways 
to characterize the antenna’s performance: effective 
aperture, efficiency, radiation pattern. 


A wavefront from a distant target can be described in 
terms of its flux density S. An antenna with its optical axis 
normal to this wavefront will produce a signal of power 
density P (W Hz7') at the terminals of the feed antenna. 
The ratio P/S is called the effective aperture, and is related 
to the physical aperture by the efficiency: 


Aett = 17 Aphysical . 


The telescope does respond at some level to all wavefront 
directions; this is often expressed in terms of the peak 
effective aperture and the radiation pattern, G(0), the 
effective aperture function normalized to the peak value. 
In the general case of a telescope observing an 
extended source distribution the output at the feed 
antenna’s terminals will be a convolution of the source 
distribution of wavefronts and the radiation pattern: 


T(%) = i Tsource(0)G (0 — 6) AO). 
G(@) is a slow function of frequency—modern antennas, 
for example, often take the form 


G6) _ AW) 


where J; is the first-order Bessel function, U = 27 R sin(0) 
and R is the aperture radius in wavelengths. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Telescope Data Path for Single Dish and 
Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bandpass 
Filter 


Low Noise \ / 
Amplifier 


Bandpass 
Filter 


Local Oscillator 


Bandpass 
Filter 


Frequency 


Local Oscillator 


Spectrum at the mixer inputs 


ae 


Frequency 


Spectrum at the mixer output 


Figure 2. A generic mixing stage. 


The polarization splitter 

The polarization filter is the next stage—generally a device 
built into the feed antenna. The incoming wavefront is 
now transformed to two electrical waveforms, V,(f, ft) 
and V,(f,t). The standard alternatives are orthogonal 
linear or circular polarizations. The critical point to note 
is that polarization information is encoded in the cross- 
correlations: 

t+T/2 


1 
Vap(t) = (Va.Ve) = z/ Va(t).Vg(t) dt. 


t—T/2 

Since the cross-correlations are only computed at the end 
of the conversion chain, it is important to ensure that 
the two waveforms are treated in identical ways, and 
that the relative phasing is carefully controlled. This has 
implications for the local oscillator machinery. 

The discussion in the sections below will describe the 
treatment of a single electrical signal as it progresses down 
the conversion chain. A polarization-sensitive system will 
have two such chains, constructed to be as similar as 
possible. 


The low noise amplifier 


The signal at the output of the feed antenna is weak; it 
would be P = 5 x 10-4 W Hz"! for a 1 Jy source observed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by a 100% efficient 25 m diameter antenna; this is equal 
to the signal from a matched resistor at a temperature of 
0.35K. 

This poses a serious problem for the signal processing 
machinery which needs to detect this signal in the face of 
competing sources of noise. 

The first line of defense is to provide amplification 
immediately after the feed antenna. Modern telescopes 
use low-noise amplifiers, with cooled electronics (10 K 
units are now in widespread use). The total noise 
competing against the signal will be somewhat higher 
than the raw temperature of the amplifier, as there will be 
contributions from lossy elements ahead of the amplifier, 
as wellas contributions from the atmosphere, the universal 
cosmic mirowave background and the ground pick-up 
from the antenna’s environment. 

In a well designed system the signal-to-noise 
characteristics are established at this stage. The 
astronomical signal can be described in terms of Ty, 
the antenna temperature; this is the temperature of a 
hypothetical matched resistor which if placed at the 
terminals of the receiver would produce the same power 
(within the specified frequency range) as does the 
astronomical source. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Telescope Data Path for Single Dish and 
Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


x 
x 


X Ne 


Frequency 
standared 


Delay Unit 


Array Correlator 


Figure 3. A generic interferometer array. 


Competing against T, is the system temperature (T;y,) 
which describes in a similar way the noise generated by 
the system. 

Modern systems operating in the centimeter wave- 
length band now achieve T,y, in the 20-50 K range. 


The conversion chain 

The feed antenna and the low-noise amplifier operate at 
the astronomer’s chosen sky frequency, while the final 
stages of the signal processing operate at standard, low 
frequencies. This means that some form of frequency 
translation will be required; the conversion chain will 
isolate a section of the spectrum, a band of width B 
centered on fy, and translate it to a band B centered 
on fase. In the process it must avoid introducing aliased 
artifacts. We need also to take care that the spectrum is not 
distorted. 

The process, termed mixing, amounts to multiplying 
the input data stream by a reference signal from a local 
oscillator (LO). A generic mixing stage is shown in figure 2. 

The mixing process is best understood in terms of a 
Fourier series description of the data. Given a stretch of 
data, T seconds long, then the voltage can be rephrased as 


v(t) = )° Cy cos(2r fut + bn)- 
The coefficient C, is an estimate of the spectral power 
density at frequency f,; the phase terms ¢, are uniformly 


distributed over the interval 0 to 27. 
The mixer performs the operation 


Umix(t) = v(t) cos(271 fit). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There will be a sum and a difference product for every 
frequency component in the input signal. Two filtering 
operations are therefore required: on the input side we 
need to ensure that all the frequencies are on just one side 
of fio if we wish to avoid a folding of the spectrum; and on 
the output side we need to separate the ‘sum’ components 
from the ‘difference’ components. 

Asingle LO, split between the two polarization signals 
will ensure that the polarization properties (the cross- 
correlations) are not compromised. 


The processing unit 
Asampler (an analog-to-digital device) is almost inevitable 
as it is probable that the data will be processed by a 
computer. The sampler must operate at least at the 
Nyquist rate, 2B, where B is the bandwidth of the signal 
if spectral information is not to be lost. 

A CORRELATOR is increasingly the workhorse at this 
point in the chain: 


@ in the autocorrelator mode it will produce the spectral 
distribution. 


@ the polarization (Stokes) parameters can be derived 
from the four correlation products of the two polariza- 
tion signals (C44, Cas, Capa, Czp)- 


Interferometer array 
The INTERFEROMETER array is the radioastronomer’s imaging 
device. 

Figure 3 shows the additional components needed to 
combine a number of radio telescopes into an array. 

The subunits of the array are single dish telescopes. 
The array operation requires the telescopes to operate 
coherently; the hardware modifications to achieve this are: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radio Telescope Data Path for Single Dish and 
Interferometers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) The conversion chains must be phase coherent; this 
can be achieved by driving all the local oscillators 
from a common frequency standard’. 

(b) All the data streams are returned to a common 
processing unit, the array correlator. 

(c) The imaging algorithms require the data to be 
transformed to the coordinate frame which has its z- 
axis oriented towards the center of the field of interest. 
Let é be the unit vector towards the field center, 
and rz be the baseline vector for the antenna pair 
(A,B); then the data from antenna (A) will need to 
be delayed by an amount t = (& - r4g)/c in order 
that the data streams remain aligned on common 
wavefronts. Since (é-74g)/c changes with time (as the 
Earth rotates) t will need to be adjusted continuously. 


An additional (dynamic) phase correction must be made 
at the local oscillator if, as is usually the case, the delays are 
applied at baseband (at the end of the conversion chain). 

A computer is obviously part of the data chain; this 
is particularly so when imaging with an interferometer 
array. Imaging is possible because the array exploits the 
Van. Cittert-Zernicke theorem. It samples the complex 
coherence function of the extended target. A number of 
operations are required before the image is delivered to 
the astronomer: 


(a) The data collected in time-order need to be sorted so 
that the 2D coherence function can be estimated. 

(b) The coherence function is Fourier transformed to the 
image domain. 

(c) Calibration and data quality checks will be needed. 

(d) The coherence function is rarely fully sampled—the 
location of the sampling is set by the antenna loca- 
tions; this means that the raw image contains sig- 
natures (‘artefacts’) reflecting the sampling function. 
Procedures, some based on maximum entropy algo- 
rithms, are available to account for these signatures 
and provide a usable image. 


Bibliography 

Thompson A R, Moran J M and Swenson G W 1986 
Interferometry and Synthesis in Radio Astronomy (New 
York: Wiley) 


M Kesteven 


? Intercontinental interferometry (vLBI) uses independent stan- 
dards (e.g. masers) of sufficient stability that the local oscillators 
are phase coherent over adequate observing periods. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radioactivity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radioactivity 


The spontaneous decay of certain unstable atomic nuclei 
through the emission of alpha particles (helium nuclei), 
beta particles (electrons) or gamma radiation. This 
process, otherwise known as radioactive decay, changes 
(‘transmutes’) the original (‘parent’) atomic nucleus into a 
(‘daughter’) nucleus of another element. If the resulting 
nucleus is itself unstable, further radioactive decay will 
ensue until, after a series of stages, the original nucleus has 
been transmuted into a stable nucleus and radioactivity 
ceases. 

For a nucleus of element X, with atomic number 
Z (equal to the number of protons in the nucleus) and 
mass number A (equal to the total number of protons and 
neutrons in the nucleus), which is denoted by 7X, alpha 
emission (the emission of a helium nucleus, $He, which 
contains two protons and two neutrons) reduces A by 4 
and Z by 2. Beta emission, the most common form of 
radioactivity, usually results from the spontaneous decay, 
within the nucleus, of one of its constituent neutrons into a 
proton, an electron and an antineutrino. This process (beta 
decay) increases the atomic number by 1 but leaves the 
mass number unchanged (the number of protons increases 
by one and the number of neutrons decreases by one) 
and is accompanied by the emission of an electron and 
an antineutrino. With either type of decay, if the resulting 
nucleus is formed in an excited state it will ‘de-excite’ (drop 
to a lower energy level) by emitting gamma radiation. 

The time taken for half the nuclei in a sample of 
radioactive material to decay is known as its half-life, 
each radioactive nuclide (nucleus of a particular isotope) 
having its own characteristic half-life. The half-lives of 
the various radioactive nuclides range from fractions of 
a microsecond to billions of years. For example, 33°U, 
by far the most abundant of the 14 different isotopes of 
the element uranium, undergoes alpha decay with a half- 
life of 4.5 billion years. The decay process continues via 
a series of much faster decays, terminating eventually 
in the production of the stable isotope of lead, 39°Pb. 
Radioactive decay can be used to estimate the time that 
has elapsed since a sample of material (e.g. rock) has 
solidified. For example, if a sample of lead, formed 
by the radioactive decay of uranium, is analyzed, and 
the relative proportions of the remaining quantity of 
the parent uranium and daughter lead compared, then, 
knowing the half-life of uranium, the age of the sample 
can be calculated. The ages of the Earth, of meteorites 
and of samples of lunar rock have been calculated by this 
technique. Younger materials can be dated by means of 
shorter-lived radioactive isotopes such as carbon-14 (#4C), 
which decays through beta emission with a half-life of 5570 
years. 


See also: alpha particle, atom, electron, isotope, gamma 
rays. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radioastron (Spectrum-R) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radioastron (Spectrum-R) 


Russian-US radio astronomy satellite which may launch 
in 2000-2001. Designed as part of a very long baseline 
interferometry programme which involves linking the 
satellite with ground receivers. The satellite carries a 10 
metre antenna and will observe from a highly elliptical 
orbit of 4000 x 77 000 km. Intended to study compact radio 
sources such as quasars and galactic nuclei at extremely 
high resolution (3 x 10~° arcseconds). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Radioastronomical Institute, Ukraine ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radioastronomical Institute, Ukraine 


Located in Chervonopraporna near Kharkov. The institute 
aims its research efforts at: developing the theory 
and design principles of radio telescopes; ground-based 
radioastronomical observations at decimeter and milli- 
meter wavelengths; investigations of the Earth and other 
planets, terrestrial environment and interplanetary space 
by radioastronomy methods. 
For further information see 

http://www.nas.gov.ua/d/d4/nas_d4i9.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Radioastronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radioastronomy 


Mankind has been fascinated by what one can see in 
the heavens for thousands of years. The human eye is 
sensitive to anarrow band of the electromagnetic spectrum 
from about 4000 to 6600 A wavelength. Astronomical 
objects, however, emit electromagnetic radiation across 
most of the spectrum from meter wavelengths in the radio 
band to sub-angstrom wavelengths in the x-ray /gamma- 
ray bands. This article concerns itself with the radio 
band, which traditionally covered meter and centimeter 
wavelengths, but more recently has expanded to shorter 
wavelengths as radio instrumentation has been developed 
for millimeter and sub-millimeter wavelengths. 

If one were to have eyes sensitive only to radio 
waves, the Sun, the planets, and the Milky Way would 
be recognizable, yet different. The Sun would still 
be extraordinarily bright. However, the tenuous and 
extremely hot plasma comprising the solar corona would 
cast a diffuse, luminous haze around the Sun. The planets 
would shine on their own, instead of in reflected light from 
the Sun. The Milky Way, the spiral galaxy in which we live, 
would still glow. However, the radio light would not come 
from stars too numerous to discern, but instead it would 
come from highly energized electrons. 

The radio sky would also have many new and 
fascinating features. Few stars could be seen, and these 
would be double stars so tightly bound together that 
they interact strongly gravitationally and magnetically. 
Old stars which have undergone massive explosions, 
called supernovae, would form large shell-like ‘lanterns’ 
which decay in strength slowly over human lifetimes. 
As these lanterns dimmed, one would occasionally find 
a remnant beacon or pulsar providing regular pulsating 
radio waves. The radio sky would also be littered with 
numerous dumbbell-shaped structures associated with 
distant galaxies, some near the ‘edge’ of the universe. 
Finally, the sky would not be totally dark, as the remnant 
light from the Big Bang explosion that created the universe 
continues to bathe us in faint radio waves. 


Early history 
KARLJANSKY made the first radioastronomy observations in 
the early 1930s. Jansky was working for the Bell Telephone 
Laboratories, investigating the sources of interference 
which might affect transatlantic phone calls. He built a 
rotatable antenna sensitive to emissions at a wavelength 
of 15 m and found sources of ‘static’ coming from local 
thunderstorms, distant thunderstorms in the tropics and 
an unknown steady source. The peak of the steady 
source drifted in position at the same rate at which stars 
drift across the sky from night to night (about 4 min per 
day), indicating an extraterrestrial origin for the emissions. 
Jansky had discovered synchrotron emission associated 
with energetic electrons accelerated in the magnetic field 
of the Milky Way. 

The astronomical community did not fully appreciate 
the significance of Jansky’s discovery for decades. One of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the few who followed up on Jansky’s results was GROTE 
REBER. Reber built a 9 m diameter parabolic reflector to 
investigate the strength of the radio emission from the 
Milky Way at meter and centimeter wavelengths. His 
antenna-receiver system was not sensitive enough to 
detect the Milky Way at centimeter wavelengths, but he 
did detect and map the Milky Way at 1.9 m wavelength. 

Both Jansky and Reber detected broad-band radia- 
tion, analogous to the continuous static in radio recep- 
tion found between man-made radio channels. Dutch as- 
tronomers sought a spectral feature, radiation at a particu- 
lar frequency analogous to the narrow-band emission from 
aradio station. Spectral features, or lines, in the radio band 
come from atoms or molecules, similar to those seen op- 
tically. With a spectral line, one can measure a frequency 
(or Doppler) shift indicative of the relative motion between 
the source and the observer. A transition of atomic hydro- 
gen at a wavelength of 21 cm provided a candidate, and 
some years later this line was detected at Harvard Univer- 
sity. Observations of atomic hydrogen have been used to 
study the structure of the Milky Way as well as to measure 
the mass of other galaxies. A major advantage of observa- 
tions at radio waves, compared with visible light, is that 
one can see through interstellar dust grains which hide 
most of the Milky Way from view at optical wavelengths. 

Radioastronomy grew rapidly following the Second 
World War, aided by the significant wartime investment 
in radio equipment for use in radar systems. The Sun was 
shown to be a strong radio source, along with some other 
isolated sources. The strongest source in the constellation 
of Taurus, called Taurus A, was identified with the Crab 
Nebula, a remnant of the ap 1054 supernova chronicled 
by Chinese astronomers. Another isolated radio source, 
Cygnus A, proved difficult to identify. Ultimately it 
was associated with a distant galaxy with a peculiar 
optical morphology, and Cygnus A became the archetypal 
member of the important class of objects called radio 
galaxies. 


Radio telescopes 

Radioastronomy developed rapidly and some very large 
telescopes were built. A 250 ft (76 m) diameter, fully 
steerable telescope was built in England in the 1950s, and 
other large telescopes were built in Australia, the United 
States and elsewhere. In the early 1970s, the Effelsberg 
100 m telescope (see figure 1) in Germany, the world’s 
largest fully steerable radio telescope, came into operation. 
The largest (partially steerable) telescope is the Arecibo 
1000 ft (305 m) telescope in Puerto Rico. This telescope 
has a fixed spherical primary reflector, built over a large 
natural depression, and complex movable radio ‘optics’ 
suspended near the primary focus. 

The diffraction-limited resolution of a telescope 
is approximately A/D, where A is the observing 
wavelength and D is the telescope diameter. For the 
ARECIBO OBSERVATORY operating at 6 cm wavelength, this 
corresponds to a resolution of about 40 arcseconds, 
comparable to that of the human eye, but far poorer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radioastronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The Bonn 100 m diameter telescope, operated by the 
Max-Planck-Institut fiir Radioastronomie in Germany, is the 
largest, fully steerable, telescope in the world. 


than the ~1 arcsecond (atmospherically limited) resolution 
achievable by telescopes at optical wavelengths. The 
construction of a centimeter wavelength radio telescope 
with ~1 arcsecond resolution would require a diameter 
of ~10 kilometers, which is not technologically feasible. 
However, arcsecond and better resolution has been 
achieved though radio interferometry as discussed below. 


Imaging in radioastronomy 

Single telescopes 

Photography produces an image which typically contains 
millions of picture elements, or pixels. This is achieved 
with photographic film (or plates) placed in the focal 
plane of a camera (or telescope). There is no analogous 
photographic film for radio waves, and radio astronomers 
have been able to place only a small number of detectors 
in the focal plane. Thus, maps of radio sources have 
been generated laboriously by moving the telescope across 
the source and recording its intensity pixel by pixel. 
Ultimately, an ‘image’ of a radio source can be displayed 
on a computer monitor. While single radio telescopes can 
image an arbitrarily large field of view, the finest angular 
resolution, or smallest useful pixel size, is limited by the 
diameter of the telescope. 


Interferometry 

The appetite for radio images with angular resolution 
finer than can be reasonably obtained with single 
telescopes was satisfied in an elegant manner with RADIO 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


INTERFEROMETERS. Unlike optical interferometry, for which 
direct combination of light from different telescopes 
(or segments of one telescope) is employed, a radio 
interferometer makes use of coherent amplifiers that 
preserve both the amplitude and phase of the incoming 
electromagnetic waves. The signals from the individual 
telescopes can then be replicated without significant 
loss, distributed and combined with signals from other 
telescopes. 

Combining signals coherently from two telescopes 
is analogous to what occurs when light from a laser 
propagates through two pin holes to yield a sinusoidal 
interference pattern on a screen. One can think of two 
radio telescopes as pin holes to view the sky and then 
understand that a radio interferometer is responsive to 
the sky brightness modulated by a sinusoidal interference 
pattern. If a mathematical function is multiplied by 
a sinusoid and then summed (integrated), one obtains 
a Fourier coefficient of the function. Thus, radio 
interferometers provide Fourier coefficients of the sky 
brightness. 

One can accumulate many Fourier coefficients of the 
sky brightness by combining signals from many pairs 
of telescopes and also by taking advantage of different 
projections of telescope separations (as seen from the 
source) provided by the Earth’s rotation. These Fourier 
coefficients can be placed on a grid, called the (u, v)-plane, 
whose axes are the eastward and northward projection of 
the antenna separations, and a two-dimensional inverse 
Fourier transform performed to recover an image of the 
sky. The result is that each telescope acts as a piece 
of a giant telescope, equal in size to the maximum 
separation of individual telescopes. One achieves the 
angular resolution, but not the light collecting capacity, 
of the giant telescope. This technique, called aperture or 
Earth-rotation synthesis, was pioneered by MARTIN RYLE in 
England who received a Nobel Prize for this work in 1974. 

Large-scale interferometers involving many individ- 
ual telescopes have been built in the Netherlands (Wester- 
bork) and in the United States (the VERY LARGE ARRAY NRAO; 
see figure 2) and have achieved angular resolutions of bet- 
ter than 0.1 arcseconds. In the mid 1960s some sources of 
radio emission (radio galaxies and molecular masers) were 
found to contain structures much smaller than could be 
resolved with existing interferometers. This motivated ra- 
dioastronomers to seek even higher resolution by combin- 
ing signals interferometrically from telescopes across the 
Earth. This was achieved by tape recording the voltages re- 
ceived at each telescope with a precise timing signal avail- 
able from atomic clocks. The tapes were then shipped to a 
‘correlation’ facility where the data streams from pairs of 
telescopes were played back, carefully aligned in time, and 
cross-multiplied. This technique, called Very Long Base- 
line Interferometry (vLB1), achieved the astounding angular 
resolution of ~0.001 arcseconds and revealed remarkable 
properties of bright sources. Recently, VLBI techniques 
have been extended to link a radio telescope in space (the 
Japanese ‘Halca’ spacecraft with the 8 m “VSOP’ telescope) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radioastronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The Very Large Array (VLA) on the plains of St 
Augustine in New Mexico, operated by the National Radio 
Astronomy Observatory of the USA, contains 27 25 m diameter 
telescopes. 


with arrays of ground telescopes, yielding interferometer 
baselines of about three times the Earth’s diameter. 


Millimeter wavelengths 

In recent decades much of the emphasis in radioastronomy 
has been on observations at shorter wavelengths. The 
pioneering work of millimeter wave telescopes, such as 
the Bell Labs 7 m, the Texas 5 m, the NRAo 12 m (originally 
36 ft), the FCRAO 14 m and the Onsala 20 m, opened 
up the field of observational molecular spectroscopy. 
Carbon monoxide (CO) was detected in 1970 from giant 
molecular clouds, whose dense cores have now been 
studied in line emission from many other molecules. 
Molecular line observations have enabled astronomers to 
study the star formation process in these clouds in great 
detail. Following up on these breakthroughs, two large 
millimeter wave telescopes were constructed in the 1980s: 
the NOBEYAMA RADIO OBSERVATORY 45 m in Japan and the 
INSTITUTE DE RADIOASTRONOMIE MILLIMETRIQUE (IRAM) 30 m in 
Spain. These telescopes, which operate at wavelengths 
as short as 1 millimeter, have greatly added to our 
understanding of the distribution of molecular clouds in 
the Milky Way and the chemical processes which operate 
in these clouds. 

Interferometry techniques have been developed to 
work at millimeter wavelengths at the Berkeley—Illinois— 
Maryland (originally HAT CREEK RADIO OBSERVATORY) and 
the OWENS VALLEY RADIO OBSERVATORY arrays in California, 
the Nobeyama array in Japan, and the IRAM array in 
France. The high angular resolution afforded by these 
interferometers has allowed astronomers to study disks 
surrounding newly formed stars, elucidate the nature 
of spiral arms in galaxies, and detect emission from 
molecular gas and dust at cosmological distances. 


Electronics 

Radioastronomy has benefited immeasurably from the 
development of low-noise amplifiers. The added noise can 
be exceedingly small, equivalent to a black-body radiator 
whose temperature is only a few degrees above absolute 
zero. Today the preferred amplifier is a cooled HFET 
(heterostructure field-effect transistor) device. These 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


devices work best at centimeter wavelengths. For 
shorter wavelengths it is advantageous first to shift, 
or mix, the observing band to a longer wavelength 
where HFET amplifiers can be used. Currently this is 
accomplished with an electronic device made up of a 
triple-decker ‘sandwich’ comprising a superconducting 
layer, an insulating layer and another superconducting 
layer (SIS), which provides the mixing with little added 
noise. 

Digital electronics have also had a dramatic effect 
on radioastronomy. In 1961, Sander Weinreb constructed 
the first digital spectrometer for radioastronomy. This 
instrument digitized the amplified voltage from a 
telescope and formed the autocorrelation function by 
multiplying replicas of the voltage delayed in time by 
different amounts. The autocorrelation function was 
then Fourier transformed to yield the source spectrum. 
In early CorRELATORS, digitization involved clipping, or 
1-bit sampling, a process by which positive voltage is 
conceptually represented by a +1 and negative voltage 
by a —1. Although one would suspect that retaining 
only the sign of the voltage would lose most of the 
information in the signal, a mathematical relationship 
(derived by J H Van Vleck during the Second World War) 
demonstrates that one retains the essential character of the 
spectrum, losing only a factor of 2/z in signal-to-noise 
ratio. Often this loss of signal-to-noise ratio is offset by 
the exceptional stability of digital correlation, allowing 
one to integrate noise levels down for long periods of 
time without encountering systematic effects, such as 
frequency-dependent gain variations, that plague analog 
spectrometers. 

In addition to spectrometers, digital correlators are 
used to cross-multiply signals from pairs of telescopes 
used as an interferometer. These correlators are special 
purpose digital computers which perform an astounding 
number of operations per second. For example, the 
Very Large Array correlator, which was built in the early 
1980s, processes data from each telescope coming in at 
hundreds of megasamples per second. It cross-multiplies 
these signals for all 351 independent pairings of the 
27 individual telescopes, corresponding to an aggregate 
processing speed of over 100000 megahertz! 


Discoveries in radioastronomy 

Radio galaxies 

The discovery of radio galaxies is one of the many 
achievements of radioastronomy. At first, the origin of 
these sources was uncertain. The radio emission was 
resolved with interferometers and presented as two giant 
‘lobes’ as shown in figure 3. Once accurate positions 
for the radio emission from these sources were obtained, 
astronomers noted that they were often centered on 
distant, giant galaxies—usually the dominant galaxy at the 
center of a large cluster of galaxies. These lobes are among 
the largest structures in the universe—some separated by 
more than a million light years, or nearly a hundred times 
the size of our Milky Way. The radiation mechanism is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radioastronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The radio galaxy Cygnus A as imaged by the VLA at a 
wavelength of 4 cm. Note the large double lobes of radio 
emission and the thin jets connecting the lobes to the nucleus of 
the galaxy at the center of the image. 


now understood to be incoherent synchrotron emission, 
which comes from electrons excited to nearly the speed 
of light and then accelerated in a spiral motion around 
a magnetic field line. Remarkably the minimum possible 
energy contained in energetic particles and magnetic fields 
needed to power radio galaxies can exceed 10’ Mgc*—that 
is the total conversion of the mass of 10 million Suns into 
energy! 

What is the source of this phenomenal amount of 
energy in radio galaxies? The symmetrical placement 
of the lobes about a central galaxy clearly suggested 
a galactic link. Next, the discovery of thin jet-like 
structures connecting the lobes with the centers of the 
galaxy indicated a channel for the energy to flow. Finally, 
images of the nuclei of radio galaxies made with VLBI 
indicated that these JETS continued down to scales less 
than 0.001 arcseconds, or typically less than 1 parsec. Thus, 
a strong circumstantial case was made that the mass of far 
more than 10 million Suns must have flowed through a 
tiny region at the center of a radio galaxy, smaller than that 
from the Sun to its nearest neighboring star, and then was 
converted into energy! This reasoning lead to the current 
understanding that SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES power radio 
galaxies. 


Quasars and superluminal motion 

Large portions of sky were observed at +1 m wavelength, 
such as by the third Cambridge (or 3C) survey, and 
astronomers sought optical identifications for the newly 
discovered sources. While many radio sources could be 
associated with supernova remnants in the Milky Way 
or with radio galaxies, one class of sources appeared as 
bluish, star-like objects called quasistellar radio sources 
or quasars. In 1963, astronomers at Caltech identified 
spectral lines in two quasars, the BRIGHT QUASAR 3C 273 and 
3C 48, as having extraordinarily high recessional velocities 
(or ‘redshifts’). Distances to these objects obtained from 
their redshifts using the Hubble law indicated extremely 
great, cosmological, distances and, correspondingly, 
extremely high intrinsic luminosities. The cosmological 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


interpretation of high redshifts was controversial since 
quasars would then be the most luminous objects in the 
universe. (Recently, however, nearly all astronomers 
have come to accept this interpretation. Indeed, ‘normal’ 
galaxies have been found with red shifts greater than 4, 
making the ‘extreme’ redshift of 3C 48 of 0.4 unremarkable 
today.) 

Quasars, along with radio galaxies and many other 
types of galaxies which exhibit strong nuclear activity, are 
all thought to be powered by accretion of matter onto 
supermassive black holes. Early VLBI observations of 
some quasars revealed an usual morphology: emission 
dominated by a small number of ‘blobs’ which appeared 
to expand at speeds exceeding that of light. This 
phenomenon, called suPERLUMINAL MOTION, has been well 
studied for decades and numerous quasars have been 
found to exhibit superluminal motion. | Apparent 
superluminal motion is explained quite simply in terms 
of the constant and finite speed of light (and radio waves). 
A source moving at nearly the speed of light and nearly 
along the line of sight toward an observer can almost keep 
up with its own light, causing the observer to see events 
in the source greatly speeded up. 


The cosmic background 

In 1965 ARNO PENZIAS and ROBERT WILSON, working at the 
Bell Telephone Laboratories, discovered that ‘blank sky’ 
is not totally dark at radio wavelengths. Instead, the 
universe is bathed in a ‘cosmic background’ (see CosMICc 
MICROWAVE BACKGROUND) of radiation, which has an intensity 
equivalent to that of emitting material (a black-body) at 
a temperature of 2.7 K (equivalent to about —270.4°C). 
The cosmic background is the cooling remnant of the 
Big Bang ‘explosion’ that marked the origin of the 
universe. Recently, the Cosmic Background Explorer 
(cose) satellite confirmed that the spectral shape of the 
emission corresponds precisely to what would be expected 
for a black-body. COBE also detected fluctuations in the 
background, which could possibly explain the formation 
of galaxies in the Universe. 


Pulsars and supernova remnants 

In the mid-1960s, ANTHONY HEWISH in England led the 
construction of a telescope capable of studying variable 
radio emissions. Some radio sources were known to 
be variable, owing to propagation effects (scintillation 
by free electrons) in the interstellar and interplanetary 
medium. In 1967, JOCELYN BELL observing with this 
telescope unexpectedly discovered sources of pulsed radio 
emission with very regular periods (~1 s). Pulsars, as 
they are now called, are formed in explosions of evolving, 
massive stars. During the explosion the outer envelope 
of the star is expelled, while the inner portions are 
compressed so strongly that protons and electrons join 
to make neutrons. These ‘neutron stars’ typically contain 
about 40% more mass than the Sun and yet have a radius of 
only about 10 kilometers! The formation of a neutron star 
also leads to astounding magnetic field strengths (~10'? G) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radioastronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and to rapid rotation (~1 Hz). We see intense radio 
emission when the magnetic pole sweeps by at the star’s 
rotation rate, if the rotation axis and the magnetic pole are 
misaligned. 

More recently, RUSSELL HULSE and JOSEPH TAYLOR 
discovered a double-star (binary) system containing a 
pulsar. Precise timing of the pulsar signals over many 
years has lead to the detection of changes in the orbit of this 
binary pulsar caused by energy loss owing to gravitational 
radiation as predicted by Einstein’s theory of general 
relativity. Hulse and Taylor received the 1993 Nobel Prize 
for this discovery, joining Hewish who received this prize 
in 1974 for his role in discovering pulsars. 

The supernova explosion also creates a shock wave 
which expands into the interstellar environment, plowing 
up and exciting a hot sphere or shell-like region. The 
hot electrons in such SUPERNOVA ‘REMNANTS’ are strong radio 
sources and can be seen throughout the Milky Way and in 
other galaxies. 


The galactic center 

The central region of our Milky Way has proven to be 
rich in a variety of phenomena, containing numerous 
supernova remnants, massive star-forming clouds, strong 
x-ray and gamma-ray sources, and towering magnetic 
structures which protrude from the galactic plane (see 
figure 4). In the early 1970s, an intense radio source was 
discovered in the galactic center. This radio source, called 
SAGITTARIUS A (Sgr A)*, is very compact, with an intrinsic 
size less than the distance from the Sun to the Earth 
(1 AU), and appears to mark the center of our rotating 
galaxy. Stars in a dense cluster surrounding Sgr A* move 
at speeds exceeding 1000 km s! at projected distances of 
3000 AU from Sgr A*. These high speeds, if resulting from 
gravitationally bound orbits, indicate that Sgr A* contains 
about 3 million solar masses. While stars around Sgr A* 
move rapidly, Sgr A* itself appears stationary, suggesting 
that it is far more massive than the stars surrounding it. 
The evidence is very strong that Sgr A* is a supermassive 
black hole, a diminutive relative of the supermassive black 
holes that power quasars and radio galaxies. 


Gravitational lensing 

One of the predictions of Einstein’s theory of general 
relativity is that gravitational mass bends light and 
therefore acts as a lens. Gravitational lenses magnify 
background sources, distort their appearance, and even 
create multiple images of a single source. In 1979, 
0956+571, a source discovered in a large radio survey, 
was imaged and found to consist of two compact objects 
separated by only about 6 arcseconds. Subsequent optical 
observations revealed that the two objects were quasar-like 
and had nearly identical spectra. While it was conceivable 
that two quasars could form in the same environment 
and have similar properties, the possibility that these 
‘quasars’ were two images of the same object was a simpler 
explanation. Recently, fluctuations in the two ‘quasars’ 
have been shown to be nearly identical, except for a time 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. An image of the central region of the Milky Way made 
with the VLA at a wavelength of 4 cm. The filamentary structure 
near the center of the image indicates a complex network of 
magnetic field lines. The actual center of the Milky Way, 
probably a supermassive black hole containing a few million 
solar masses, is hidden in the center of the brightest region near 
the lower right corner of the image. 


difference of roughly one year as expected if there is one 
quasar whose light reaches us along two different paths 
with different path lengths. This provides conclusive 
evidence of GRAVITATIONAL LENSING. In the past 20 years 
dozens of other lensed systems have been identified. In 
these systems, the lens is formed by the gravitational mass 
of a galaxy or a cluster of galaxies. 


Molecular clouds 

Life as we know it on Earth involves very complex 
chemical processes which give rise to many organic 
molecules. It had been thought that such molecular 
complexity could only evolve on planets. However, 
in the 1970s radioastronomers started to discover many 
molecules, including water, ammonia and simple organic 
molecules, in clouds of interstellar gas. At centimeter 
wavelengths detectable spectral lines are rare. However, at 
millimeter, and especially at submillimeter wavelengths, 
the spectrum is nearly completely covered with detectable 
lines of molecules, e.g. methyl alcohol (CH30OH). Over 
100 different molecular species have been identified; some 
species, such as HCiN, contain more than a dozen atoms. 
These molecular clouds, as they are now called, are the 
sites of the formation of stars and planets and provide the 
building blocks for life. 


Masers 

One of the early surprises of molecular spectroscopy in 
the radio band was the discovery of extremely strong 
emission lines from the hydroxyl (OH) radical. These 
lines were not only thousands of times stronger than 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Radioastronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


expected, they also were extremely narrow and highly 
polarized. Originally dubbed ‘mysterium’ because of 
these remarkable properties, the emission was correctly 
understood as coming from a natural amplification 
process, called a maser, analogous to the process that 
results in (optical) lasers. Masers have been detected in 
many molecular species, such as water vapor and methyl 
alcohol. Water vapor displays the most spectacularly 
strong signals of any known maser species. In fact, a water 
maser in a star-forming region called W49, located most of 
the way across the Milky Way, puts out as much energy in 
one narrow spectral line as the Sun does across the entire 
visible band. 


Sun and planets 

As early as the 1940s, the Sun was found to be a very 
strong and complex source of radio emission. Intense, 
sporadic, low-frequency emissions were detected by radar 
equipment during the Second World War but these 
discoveries were kept classified until the end of the war. A 
variety of solar flares were seen and found to be associated 
with sun spots and other active regions. 

Early radio observations of the planets also re- 
vealed diverse and fascinating characteristics. Optical as- 
tronomers thought they had established that Mercury’s 
spin and orbital periods were equal (as occurs for our 
Moon owing to tidal effects). Thus, it was a great surprise 
when early radar observations revealed that MERCURY in- 
stead rotates three times for every two orbits about the Sun. 
In retrospect, the erroneous conclusion that Mercury’s spin 
and orbit were locked was based on images which were 
obtained only when the planet was near the maximum 
elongation from the Sun; with such poor sampling many 
spin periods could fit the same data. 

Early radio measurements of the brightness of VENUS 
indicated very high temperatures, and this was thought 
to indicate a hot ionosphere. However, the polarization of 
the radio emissions confirmed that the high temperature, 
about 750 K, came from the planet’s surface. The high 
surface temperature of Venus is understood to be due toa 
strong ‘greenhouse’ effect, in which visible light from the 
Sun heats the planet, evaporates its oceans and produces 
an extremely dense atmosphere. Infrared emission cannot 
easily escape the atmosphere, preventing cooling, and 
further elevating the temperature. 

JUPITER, surprisingly, was found to have strong 
emission at about 10 cm wavelength, which was shown to 
be synchrotron in nature. Even more surprising was the 
discovery of sporadic emission at about 10 m wavelength, 
which comes from electrical discharge involving the 
interaction of Jupiter’s innermost satellite, Io, with the 
magnetic field of the giant planet. 


Future directions 

The current trend in developing major new telescopes 
for radioastronomy is toward interferometric arrays. 
Distributing the collecting area of an instrument among 
many individual telescopes can greatly reduce costs and at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the same time increase angular resolution compared with 
building single large telescopes. Extremely ambitious 
projects are currently planned or being developed. For 
example, a millimeter/sub-millimeter wavelength array 
called the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) will 
soon be built by an international collaboration involving 
the United States, Europe and possibly Japan. This array 
is planned to consist of more than 50 12 m diameter 
telescopes spread over an area of about 10 km on an 
exceptionally dry 5000 m elevation site in northern Chile. 

Looking toward the future, radioastronomers in 
many countries are working to develop the technology 
necessary to build a centimeter wavelength telescope with 
a collecting area of one square kilometer! This would 
represent an increase in collecting area of about a factor 
of 70 over the VLA and a factor of about 15 over Arecibo. 

The far future for radioastronomy will probably in- 
volve radio telescopes in space. The weightless environ- 
ment of space should allow large, low-mass telescopes to 
be constructed, extremely long interferometer baselines 
and decreased exposure to man-made interference. The 
latter benefit of space may be the most important, as the 
explosion of electronic technologies has resulted in a dra- 
matic increase in the pollution of the radio band from fixed 
and satellite transmitters broadcasting a variety of data 
from telephone calls to television programs. 


Bibliography 

Rolufs K and Wilson T L 1996 Tools of Astronomy 2nd edn 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Verschuur G L and Kellermann K I (ed) 1988 Galactic and 
Extragalactic Radio Astronomy 2nd edn (New York: 
Springer) 


Mark Reid 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ramsden, Jesse (1735-1800) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ramsden, Jesse (1735-1800) 


Instrument-maker, born in Halifax, Yorkshire, England, 
the most outstanding maker of precision scientific instru- 
ments of the eighteenth century, producing extremely pre- 
cise scaled circles. In 1775, he made the first dividing ma- 
chine that could enscribe precise divisions on the borders 
of small-diameter circles. He made the theodolites with 3 
foot diameter circles used in triangulation to connect the 
geodetic networks of France and England, and the large al- 
tazimuth instrument with a 5 foot diameter vertical circle 
built for piazzi. His telescopes used achromatic lenses ac- 
cording to DOLLOND’s design (Ramsden was married to his 
younger sister). His name is commemorated in the design 
of the Ramsden eyepiece. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ranger ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ranger 


Series of NASA missions launched 1961-65. Designed 
to send back detailed images of the Moon prior to crash 
landing on the lunar surface. Only the last three, Rangers 
7,8 and 9, were successful. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ray 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ray 


A bright linear feature on a planetary body formed by 
ejecta from a recent crater-forming impact. Surface 
material darkens with age through exposure to radiation, 
so rays, consisting of freshly excavated material, are bright 
by contrast. In addition, some impacts have sufficient 
force to vaporize surface material, which can resolidify ina 
reflective, glassy form. Rays extend from their associated 
crater, often in a radial pattern known as a ray system. The 
best-known ray systems are lunar, the most prominent 
being the one surrounding the crater Tycho, which is very 
prominent at full moon, individual rays extending for a 
thousand kilometers or more. Other solar system bodies 
with rays are Mercury and Ganymede. 


See also: Tycho (Crater). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rayet, Georges Antoine Pons (1839-1906) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rayet, Georges Antoine Pons 
(1839-1906) 


French astronomer, who co-discovered Wolf—Rayet (WR) 
stars (See CHARLES WOLF). Became director of the Floriac 
Bordeaux Observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Rayleigh Limit 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rayleigh Limit 


The theoretical resolving power of a telescope according to 
acriterion devised by Lord Rayleigh (1842-1919). Because 
of the phenomenon of diffraction the image of a point 
source of light (such as a star) produced even by a perfect 
optical instrument consists of a central bright spot (the 
Airy disk) surrounded by concentric dark and light rings. 
If two point sources are very close together, the resulting 
image will consist of two overlapping diffraction patterns. 
According to Rayleigh’s criterion, two close point sources 
of light may just be resolved if the angle between them is 
such that the center of the Airy disk corresponding to the 
image of one source falls on the first minimum in intensity 
in the diffraction pattern of the other (i.e. the first dark 
fringe around the Airy disk of the other source). Under 
these circumstances, assuming an ideal optical system, 
there will be a drop in light intensity of 20% mid-way 
between the centers of the two Airy disks. 

The Rayleigh limit is given, in radians, by a = 
1.224/D, where 4 denotes wavelength and D denotes 
the aperture of the telescope; and in seconds of arc by 
a = 2.52 x 10°A/D. Thus, for example, the theoretical 
resolution of a telescope with an aperture of 0.1 m, for 
light of wavelength 550 nm (5.50 x 1077 m), is 2.52 x 10° x 
(5.50 x 10-7 /107') 1.4 arcsec. 


See also: Airy disk, aperture, Dawes’ limit, resolving 
power. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reber, Grote (1911-2002) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reber, Grote (1911-2002) 


American radio engineer, born in Chicago, IL. After read- 
ing JANSKY’s articles on radioastronomy he built (1937) 
the world’s first radio telescope (a 9 m tiltable para- 
boloid) in his backyard in Wheaton, IL. With it he detect- 
ed radio emission (‘cosmic static’) at 1.9 m wavelength 
from the Milky Way. With an improved receiver in 1941 
he detected the Sun and a strong source in Cassiopeia 
(Cas A). As a self-employed researcher in Hawaii and 
Tasmania he mapped the background radiation at 1-2 
MHz. He produced the first radio maps of the sky. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Millimeter and Longer-Wavelength Feeds 
and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Receivers: Millimeter and 
Longer-Wavelength Feeds and 
Receivers 


The frequency range over which ground-based RADIO 
ASTRONOMY observations can be carried out extends from 
about 2 MHz (4 = 150 m) at the low-frequency end to near 
1 THz (A = 350 wm) at the high end. This discussion treats 
systems and techniques from the low-frequency limit up 
to a frequency of 300 GHz (A = 1 mm); submillimeter 
systems and techniques are dealt with in the next article 
(see also MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER ASTRONOMY). 

Within this very broad range of frequencies, as- 
tronomers measure the properties of incoming cosmic ra- 
diation in the form of broadband continuum or narrow- 
band spectral-line emission. This incoming radiation is 
collected by the RADIOTELESCOPE, amplified, detected and 
recorded by a sensitive radio receiver mounted on the tele- 
scope, and then processed in such a way as to display the 
output as a flux density measurement, or as a spectrum of 
the frequency band to which the receiver is tuned. 

The power levels of the received signals are extremely 
small. Even after collection by the largest telescopes, they 
amount to as little as 10-'© W for a continuum source 
or 10-*! W for a weak spectral line. For this reason, 
the receiver must contribute a minimum of self-generated 
noise to the overall system and be highly gain stable in 
order to detect very small changes in noise power when the 
telescope is pointed at a RADIOSOURCE. In addition, it must be 
highly stable in frequency to detect narrowband spectral- 
line emissions and, when arrayed with other telescopes to 
form an INTERFEROMETER, must have a high degree of overall 
phase stability. 


Modern radio astronomy receivers—general 
features 

The modern radio astronomy receiver system can be 
divided into four main subsystems as depicted in 
figure 1. The first of these is a feed horn—front end 
combination situated at one of the focal regions of the 
telescope system. The front-end electronics will consist 
of low-noise preamplifiers for centimeter wavelength 
operation or a heterodyne mixer detection stage for 
millimeter wavelengths (for which amplifiers are not 
readily available). The output signal from the mixer will 
usually be at centimeter wavelengths and similar to the 
output of longer-wavelength receivers. The feed horns, 
amplifiers and mixers are integrated in such a way as to 
minimize transmission line loss between these elements, 
thus avoiding signal loss and excess noise. Finally, to 
reduce overall front-end receiver noise the preamplifiers, 
mixers and millimeter wave feed horns are all cooled to 
cryogenic temperatures. 

The next part of the signal path employs the 
heterodyne mixing process again, where the amplified 
centimeter wavelength signals, or the down-converted 
millimeter mixer outputs, are converted to an intermediate 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


frequency (IF) which can be more readily amplified. It is 
at this frequency that further signal conditioning such as 
filtering, gain control and detection can take place. 

The principle of heterodyne detection can be 
understood by reference to figure 1. Here the received sky 
frequencies mm and vem are mixed in non-linear elements 
with local oscillator (LO) frequencies vlomm and vpocm to 
produce IFs vem and vy. 

In fact, the mixing process produces many frequency 
products consisting of the sum, difference and _ all 
harmonic combinations of the signal and LO inputs. 
However, it is the difference frequencies which are selected 
by a filter and amplifier following the mixer, to produce 
the IF output band required. In any broadband mixer 
system, two input frequency bands will contribute to 
the signal content in the mixer IF output. These bands 
are given by vo + ve and wo — vg, forming what 
is known as a double-sideband mixing system. This 
scheme was commonly used for millimeter-wavelength 
systems in years past; however, recent improvements 
in sideband rejection techniques allow single-sideband 
measurements to be made with most modern millimeter 
receiver systems. At centimeter wavelengths, which 
employ low-noise preamplifiers before the mixing process, 
filters can be used between the amplifier and the mixer to 
select the desired sideband for the mixer input. 

The heterodyne mixing process requires an appropri- 
ate source of LO signal, and this forms the third subsystem 
necessary for the receiver. The LO system will provide all 
the necessary frequency sources at an appropriate power 
level to be mixed with the incoming sky signals and all 
the subsequent IF signals present in a multiple conver- 
sion receiver system. Frequency stability of these sources 
is paramount, particularly for spectral-line systems, and 
if the telescopes form part of an interferometer array, the 
phase behavior of these sources requires control along with 
a high degree of spectral purity and low phase noise. 

A final signal subsystem deals with the output of the 
IF section in two ways. The first is to detect the IF power 
in a square law detector (a diode rectifier whose output dc 
voltage is proportional to the input IF power), integrate 
its output for a fixed integration time and then digitally 
record this output via an A-D converter. This output can 
then be calibrated as a measure of flux density. 

The second method involves the use of a digital 
spectrometer to obtain a power spectrum of the final IF 
passband. This is done by first digitally sampling the 
IF noise waveform with sufficient speed and precision 
as to have minimal effect on the measurement accuracy. 
A digital CORRELATOR is then used to generate an 
autocorrelation function of the time-sampled IF noise, after 
which a Fourier transform is used to obtain the power 
spectrum. This spectrum is a direct representation of the 
spectrum at the incoming sky frequency, transposed by the 
various local oscillators used in the converter systems. 


Receiver sensitivity 
The contributions to excess noise in a practical radio 
astronomy system come from several sources which 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Millimeter and Longer-Wavelength Feeds 
and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vr LOCAL LOCAL 
LOmm a DIGITAL 
OSCILLATOR OSCILLATOR > 
RECORDER 
mm cm 
V Locm 
Ym [7 &) 
mm MIXER IF 
eo Vom Vip iT TrT 
. AMPLIFIER " 
e SAMPLER |CORRELATOR 
uw AND 
LOW NOISE @ neat FILTERS 
ven| H [> 
AMPLIFIER 


Figure 1. Block diagram of a typical radio astronomy receiver for both millimeter and centimeter wavelengths. 


include atmospheric attenuation, antenna spillover and 
diffraction, feed horn and transmission line losses, as 
well as the receiver itself. The sensitivity of the receiver 
system depends on the level of this excess noise power. 
To quantify this, a figure of merit called the system 
temperature, Tsys, can be assigned to the receiver and 
telescope system. This is defined as the physical 
temperature of an ideal resistive termination, placed at 
the input of an ideal receiver with the same gain and 
bandwidth and producing the same noise power output 
as the practical system. 

The minimum signal detectable against this noisy 
background is then defined by the radiometer equation, 
ATims & Tsys(Bt)~'*, where B is the final bandwidth 
just prior to detection and 1 is the integration time. This 
expression indicates how important it is to minimize T,,, 
to obtain maximum sensitivity. 

For frequencies of 1-300 GHz the values of T.y; range 
from about 12 K to ~1000 K. Bandwidths can vary from 
1 kHz for spectral-line measurements to several GHz 
for broadband continuum observations, while integration 
times vary from fractions of a second for strong time- 
varying phenomena to tens of hours for weak spectral 
lines. 


The feeds 

Reflector antennas need a feed horn or some other type of 
radiating element to couple the receivers to the reflector 
systems. For effective coupling the feed should be 
dual polarization, have low cross-polarization coupling, 
illuminate the reflector surfaces efficiently, have a highly 
circular beam and have sufficient bandwidth to match 
the receiver. Much development has occurred in feed- 
horn design over the years, starting with simple circular 
waveguide horns, progressing through choke-ringed 
aperture and early multiple-mode designs, to the modern 
corrugated hybrid-mode horn in its single- or dual-mode 
form. These corrugated horns are characterized by radial 
quarter-wavelength slots (operating frequency) in the 
walls of the waveguide along its length, and a short mode 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


conversion section at the waveguide input end to excite 
the required hybrid mode. This mode, on radiation from 
the horn aperture, displays very low cross-polarization, 
excellent pattern symmetry and low sidelobe structure 
thus making it an ideal solution for radio astronomy 
application. A further development to this type of horn 
resulted in the internal corrugated surface being profiled to 
produce a more compact design, and this, when excited by 
a ring-loaded slot mode converter, produces a feed-horn 
system with an octave bandwidth. An excellent review of 
the design parameters of all these types of feed is given by 
Olver et al (1994). 

A recent development in hybrid-mode feed design 
is the dielectric-loaded horn. This is a smooth-walled, 
profiled horn filled with a dielectric of appropriate 
permittivity. A small gap between the dielectric and horn 
wall allows the hybrid mode to propagate and, because 
there are no quarter wave slots, the potential bandwidth 
of this design is enormous. A recent design indicates 
a horn performance covering 16-120 GHz, with pattern 
symmetry, low cross polarization and high return loss 
being maintained over this wide frequency range. 

For feed arraying applications such as focal-plane 
imaging arrays, while the corrugated horn is still the most 
efficient, its size makes it difficult to pack closely. Simpler 
horns, such as the Potter, stepped and diagonal horns, are 
better suited for these applications, such as multibeam 
horn arrays for fast surveying. Figure 2 shows smooth- 
wall stepped horns in a 13-beam hexagonal array, at 21 cm 
on a 64 m prime focus fed paraboloid. 


Millimeter wave receivers 

Most modern millimeter wave receiver systems will 
have a quasi-optical input beam waveguide, in which 
polarization splitting and LO power coupling can take 
place before the incoming radiation finally illuminates a 
lens-corrected feed horn. The feed horn will be closely 
integrated with a heterodyne mixer block, both of which 
will be cooled within a cryogenic vacuum dewar to 4 K. 
The horn coupling to the beam waveguide will be via a 
transparent vacuum window. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Millimeter and Longer-Wavelength Feeds 
and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ELECTRONICS ———-] 
PACKAGE 


CTI 1020 
ua CRYODYNE 


= 
VACUUM 
i le DEWAR 
OOOO boll OO | 00 Wo OOC0O 
100 K—~] 
PLATFORM 
i190 kK 
om : : 5 RADIATION 
~ a go i ——t SHIELD 
| + 
AMPLIFIER] 
THERMAL 
= GAP 
[*}—— VACUUM 
WINDOW 
20 K 
PLATFORM, FEED 
Lo HORNS 
Fl a 


Figure 2. Cross-section view of a 21 cm multibeam front end 
consisting of a 13 stepped horn hexagonal array, cryogenic 
receiver dewar and cooled orthomode waveguide-coaxial 
transitions. 


The non-linear element used in the heterodyne 
mixer is a superconducting tunnel-junction type or 
superconductor—insulator-superconductor (SIS) junction. 
Mixers utilizing these devices have very low noise 
temperatures and because of this have replaced gallium 
arsenide (GaAs) Schottky diode mixers in almost all of the 
millimeter wave systems currently operating. In practice 
the single-sideband (SSB) noise temperature of the best SIS 
receivers will be less than 0.5 K GHz"! across the whole 
millimeter spectrum. Early tuning of these mixers was 
accomplished by adjustable backshorts in the waveguide 
structure. However, current mixer designs now achieve 
broadband tuning by integrated tuning circuits using thin 
film inductances to resonate the SIS junction capacitance. 

Because the LO power required by SIS mixers is quite 
small (~1 «W), coupling to the junctions can be made 
either via the beam waveguide system through the feed 
horn or by —20 db directional coupler between the feed 
horn and mixer block. Sources of LO are now derived 
directly from phase-locked Gunn oscillators for the longer 
millimeter wavelength systems in the 1 cm—2 mm region or 
Gunn oscillator-multiplier combinations for wavelengths 
in the 1 mm region. 

A significant development in recent years has been 
the rapid development of low-noise high electron mobility 
transistor (HEMT) amplifiers with good performance in 
the millimeter-wave region. 

The availability of robust indium phosphide (InP) 
HEMT devices has now resulted in reliable hybrid ‘chip 
and wire’ amplifiers being developed, to operate at 
frequencies up to 110 GHz, with noise temperatures of 50 K 
when cooled to a physical temperature of 15 K. Monolithic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


microwave integrated circuit (MMIC) amplifiers also 
using InP, and designed to operate over the 75-110 GHz 
band, have also recently been tested at 15 K physical and 
found to yield amplifier temperatures of 50-60 K. This 
makes these low-noise amplifier systems competitive with 
SIS mixer receivers at frequencies up to 115 GHz, with 
the added advantage of a much simpler cryogenic cooling 
system. 


Centimeter wavelength receivers 

Centimeter wavelength receiver systems are characterized 
by preamplification of the incoming sky signal in a low- 
noise amplifier (LNA) before heterodyne mixing to a lower 
IF. The LNA is almost universally cryogenically cooled 
(except for frequencies below 1 GHz where cooling is 
not necessary) and utilizes GaAs HEMT amplifiers for 
frequencies up to ~10 GHz and more recently InP HEMT 
amplifiers for frequencies up to 45 GHz. Cooled noise 
temperature performance of these LNAs is excellent, being 
in the region of 1 K GHz"! for GaAs HEMT amplifiers 
and <0.5 K GHz! for InP HEMT amplifiers. The 
feeds used with these receivers are almost exclusively 
corrugated hybrid mode horns giving maximum efficiency 
with the telescope system, minimum spillover noise 
and good pattern symmetry for precision polarization 
measurements. In addition, wide bandwidths can be 
achieved by using the profiled form of corrugated feed. 

While these centimeter feeds are often much too 
large to cool cryogenically, the transmission lines between 
the feed and LNA often are cooled cryogenically, so 
the feed horns must be integrated with the cryogenic 
dewar. Figure 3 illustrates this, showing a receiver—feed 
horn combination spanning 2 cm—3 mm wavelength and 
utilizing three horns of the compact corrugated profiled 
form. The linear polarization splitters, and following InP 
HEMT amplifiers for all three receivers, are incorporated 
within the cryogenic dewar and cooled to a physical 
temperature of 15 K. 

The heterodyne mixer and IF systems following these 
centimeter front ends are now simple and straightforward. 
Wide-bandwidth balanced and double-balanced diode 
mixers are readily available with operating wavelengths 
up to 1 cm (30 GHz). The LO power requirements for 
these mixers is readily obtained from YIG (yttrium iron 
garnet) tuned transistor oscillators or dielectric resonator 
oscillators, phase locked to a reference frequency derived 
from an atomic standard oscillator. 

Anovel development in recent years has been the use 
of optical-fiber transmission systems to distribute these 
LO reference frequencies within the telescope and across 
arrays of telescopes. Fiber systems have also been used 
to transport band-limited sky signal noise from remote 
antenna front ends and to distribute IF signals within a 
telescope system. 


Future developments 
The impetus for future radio astronomy receiver develop- 
ment will be driven by all types of arraying applications. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Millimeter and Longer-Wavelength Feeds 
and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


16-25 GHz 


40-50 GHz 85-100 GHz 


ia AEBS Ht 
} ic} | 
CA soe be Lee] | Bewar 
Ly ea aaa 
iG =aM 
ie ° . 
ale 6 —t 
Ig 
St U 
era era 
ba ES 
i 


pa —ee 
Refrigerator QO 


/ \ 
! | 


Figure 3. Wideband front end utilizing compact corrugated feed 
horns. Frequency selection is accomplished by feed horn 
translation to the antenna Cassegrain focus. 


Focal-plane feed arrays will require close-packed 
feeds backed by compact receivers to image the focal-plane 
region of single paraboloids, while distributed arrays of 
large collecting area will require very large numbers of 
sensitive, wideband, reliable and inexpensive receivers. 

These challenges will best be met by having all parts 
of the basic receiver subsystems in the form of MMICs. 
Already tentative steps are being taken to develop low- 
noise amplifiers, heterodyne mixers and oscillators in this 
form for both centimeter and millimeter bands, leading 
to the possibility of a complete ‘receiver on a chip’ in the 
very near future. A successful integration of these devices, 
combined with fiber-optic connections between elements, 
will be a major step forward towards developing large- 
area arrays. 


Bibliography 

Bird TS and James G L19xx Design and practice of reflector 
antennas and feed systems in the 1990s URSI Review 
of Radio Science 1996-1999 ed W Ross Stone (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) pp 81-117 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Carlstrom J E and Zmuidzinas J 19xx Millimeter and 
submillimeter techniques URSI Review of Radio 
Science 1993-1995 ed W Ross Stone (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) pp 839-82 

Olver A D, Clarricoats P J B, Kishk A A and Shafai L 1994 
Microwave Horns and Feeds (IEE Electromagnetic Wave 
Series 39) (IEEE Press) 

Pospieszalski M W and Wollack E J 1998 Characteristics 
of broadband INP HFET millimeter-wave amplifiers 
and their applications in radio astronomy receivers 
Proc. 2nd ESA Workshop on Millimeter Wave Technology 
and Applications: Antennas, Circuits and Systems 
(Espoo, 27-29 May 1998) pp 221-6 

Tiuri E and Raisaénen A V 1986 Radio telescope receivers 
Radio Astronomy 2nd edn, ed J D Kraas (Powell, OH: 
Cygnus-Quasar Books) 7-0 


Malcolm Sinclair 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Submillimeter Feeds and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Receivers: Submillimeter Feeds and 
Receivers 


The submillimeter band of the ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM 
is generally defined as wavelengths in the range 1 mm-— 
100 wm. This spectral range is at present only partially 
explored owing to molecular (H,O and O;) absorption 
in the Earth’s atmosphere. Also, it is difficult to extend 
the performance of radio-style telescopes to this band. 
Finally, it is still early in the development of both 
continuum detectors, usually bolometers, and heterodyne, 
or radio, detectors, which are used for high-resolution 
spectroscopy. It is the latter devices which form the subject 
of this article. 

The submillimeter band contains several important 
aspects of astrophysics, e.g. the spectral features of the 
rotational motion of interstellar molecules such as CO 
and CH30H and the fundamental lines of light, hydride 
molecules such as HO, NH3, HCl and HE. The band 
also contains the ground state fine-structure lines of 
atoms and ions, e.g. atomic carbon [C I]. The interstellar 
medium also contains dust, seen in the continuum, and 
the combination of spectral and continuum data provides 
information which enables the study of STAR FORMATION in 
our Galaxy. The submillimeter band naturally contains 
emission mostly from objects whose temperatures range 
from about 10 to 100 K. This is indeed the temperature 
range of much of the interstellar medium of our Galaxy but 
is also the temperature of the redshifted, but intrinsically 
hotter, gas and dust in distant galaxies. This means that 
much of the information about distant galaxies, now seen 
to z ~ 5, comes to us in the submillimeter band (see 
MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER ASTRONOMY. 

Astronomy demands the very best possible receivers 
to detect the limited number of photons arriving 
from such distant objects. Several new facilities are 
under construction or in the design and development 
phase, complementing existing facilities such as the 
CALTECH SUBMILLIMETER OBSERVATORY and JAMES CLERK MAXWELL 
TELESCOPE. These include the Smithsonian interferometer 
on Mauna Kea, ALMA, the international interferometer 
planned for the Atacama desert in Chile, SOFIA, the US— 
German airborne observatory, and FIRST, the ESA-NASA 
space observatory. 


Receiver principles 

The operation of a heterodyne receiver in the submil- 
limeter is similar to that for a radio receiver. The basic 
principle is to mix the weak signal (£; cos wt) from the 
telescope with a strong local oscillator signal (Ez cos wet) 
in a non-linear element, so generating the difference 
term EE cos(@) — w))t of much greater power than E? 
and at the frequency w2 — w, which is determined by 
the frequency range of the preamplifier. The amplified 
intermediate-frequency (IF) signal, say 1-2 GHz, is finally 
integrated in small frequency intervals, say 1 MHz, with 
the aid of some kind of spectrometer, such as a FILTERBANK, 
CORRELATOR etc. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Traditionally the receiver acquires the radiation from 
the telescope by means of a feed horn which condenses 
the free space wave from the telescope down to a 
waveguide mode. The feed horn is usually of the 
type known as a ‘scalar’ feed, which has the property 
of generating an approximately Gaussian beam of the 
same width in both dimensions. It does this by means 
of circular grooves inside the cone which act as a 
high-impedance boundary. The radiation is then fed 
from the horn to the mixer element by a short run 
of rectangular waveguide (see figure 1). The leads 
providing the current through the mixer will be across 
the waveguide in the strong electric field region for the 
TE: mode. Sometimes the mixer element may be matched 
to the waveguide by mechanical tuners, or better by 
microcircuit elements, photolithographically fabricated. 
An alternative scheme for coupling radiation to the mixer 
element is ‘quasioptical’, which avoids the difficulties in 
construction and alignment associated with very high- 
frequency waveguide. Here a high dielectric constant 
material plano-convex (hyperhemispheric) lens focuses 
the radiation to a planar microantenna on a flat substrate 
fixed to the flat side of the lens. (See figure 2). The planar 
antenna, which feeds current to the mixer, can take many 
possible forms, such as bow-ties, spirals, dipoles or slots. 
The best results have been obtained with twin slots, where 
the beam profiles are similar to those for scalar feed horns. 

The critical element in the receiver, and the one 
which usually gives the receiver its name, is the mixer. 
This may be a classical diode, typified by the Schottky 
barrier elements formed from photolithographically 
shaped gold dots on gallium arsenide substrates, 
or a quantum detection device, usually involving a 
superconductor, such as a Josephson junction or a 
quasiparticle tunneling junction. These last two devices 
are based on a superconducting phenomenon, the 
tunneling of Cooper pairs and single quasiparticles 
respectively, both of which can occur in the physical 
structure of a superconductor—insulator-superconductor 
(SIS) tunnel junction (See DETECTORS: SUPERCONDUCTING 
TUNNEL JUNCTION DEVICES). For better or worse, the name ‘SIS 
mixer’ is now applied to the device in use in nearly all 
high-frequency RADIO TELESCOPES in the world, which is the 
single-quasiparticle, photon-assisted tunneling device (an 
early attempt to introduce the acronym SQPAT failed). 

There is a certain similarity between a semiconduct- 
ing photoconductor device and an SIS device in that, in 
both cases, an incoming photon causes a transition of an 
electron (or quasiparticle) from a state below an energy 
gap to a state above, where conduction occurs. The es- 
sential difference is that the semiconductor energy gap 
is about 0.6 eV, suitable for optical—infrared photon de- 
tection, whereas the superconducting gap is ~1073 eV, 
equivalent to a submillimeter photon’s energy. This is the 
reason for choosing SIS devices for frequencies of detec- 
tion up to the energy gap of the superconductor (about 
2.9 meV = 700 GHz for Nb—the most suitable material 
found to date). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Submillimeter Feeds and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


WAVEGUIDE 
TRANSFORMER SECTION 


E PLANE 


FEEDHORN SECTION 


'T’ SECTION tF OUTPUT 
Be asain BLocK 


MICROMETER DRIVE 


SIGNAL 


CORRUGATED SECTION 


LO 
E PLANE TUNER: 


Cu WW ed 


etre TO LINEAR 
MOTION TRANSFORMER 


RECEPTOR CONE FOR 


BACKSHORT TUNE! 
UNER RETRACTABLE DRIVE 


SIS JUNCTION SUBSTRATE 


TO SECOND MICROMETER DRIVE 


Figure 1. The structure of a typical submillimeter waveguide SIS receiver. The case shown has beamsplitter LO injection, a scalar feed 


and E-plane and backshort tuners. 


Actually, it is not required that the mixer element be 
a diode-type device; it is only necessary that the mixer 
element have a non-linear J—V characteristic. The device 
can even be bulk material and in fact the first successful 
heterodyne receiver in the submillimeter employed an 
InSb hot electron bolometer (HEB) element as mixer, in 
the form of a rod across the waveguide. The problem with 
such devices is that there is a relatively slow response of 
the hot electron current due to the weak electron-phonon 
coupling and, in the InSb receiver case, it is limited to 
about 1 MHz. Such a narrow-band device would not be 
considered useful today. Surprisingly, a new style of HEB 
employing a very small (micron-size) superconducting 
film is having considerable success and is almost certainly 
the device of choice for frequencies well above the band 
gap of niobium. 

A measure of the effectiveness of a receiver is the 
noise temperature (7,). That is the temperature of a black- 
body (in the Rayleigh—Jeans approximation) which, when 
coupled fully to the input of the receiver, produces the 
measured noise at the output. All receivers are governed 
by the Dicke radiometer equation, where the signal-to- 
noise ratio is given by: 


T* 
S/N ® a AvAt. 


n 


Tx is the Rayleigh—Jeans temperature of an astronomical 
emission object, Av is the channel width which is being 
integrated and Ar is the integration time. In general a 
receiver will have two sidebands [upper (w2 — w,) and 
lower (#1 — @2)]. Tn is usually measured by replacing Tx 
with known temperature loads and, if both sidebands are 
equally sensitive, then 7, is the double-sideband (DSB) 
value, relevant to continuum detection. For spectroscopy, 
where the astronomical line of interest falls in only a single 
sideband (SSB), the relevant noise temperature to employ 
in the Dicke formula will be T, (SSB) = 27,,(DSB). 

A non-trivial component of a submillimeter receiver 
is the source of local oscillator (LO) power, which has 
to be adequately intense and stable. This becomes an 
extreme technological challenge when applied toa receiver 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Quartz 
hyperhemisphere 


< 


Plastic lens 


— RFin 


Planar-antenna 
SIS chip 


Figure 2. A quasioptical coupling scheme for an SIS receiver. 
The LO could be injected as in figure 1, but the waveguide 
components are all replaced with optical systems. The two-lens 
design shown here can be replaced with a single silicon lens 
suitably antireflection coated. 


operating at 1000 GHz (1 THz) or more. The LO power 
required by a submillimeter receiver varies depending on 
the type of detector element and the frequency. LO power 
is coupled to the receiver either by means of a dielectric 
beamsplitter, which must allow most of the signal to 
pass and therefore couples only a small fraction of the 
LO power, or by means of a frequency selective device 
such as an INTERFEROMETER. A balanced mixer configuration 
is also a possibility. Roughly speaking, in most cases 
the LO power needed is the same order of magnitude 
as the dc power supplied by the bias circuit, because 
the device is in thermodynamic equilibrium somewhere 
between the sinks of the dc and LO supplies, to which 
it is coupled. The typical superconducting device will 
require a bias voltage of ~2.5 mV (related to the gap 
voltage), whereas a semiconducting device needs a bias 
of ~0.5 V. Since both devices must have a suitable circuit 
impedance (~100 Q), the superconducting device should 
require roughly 4 orders of magnitude less LO power, 
making it the device of choice in this respect. The LO 
power is usually generated by a series of diode varactor 
doubler or tripler units multiplying the output of a phase- 
locked Gunn oscillator. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Submillimeter Feeds and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3000 20 hv/kg 
ASIS r 
mHEB a @ : 
ts ] a 
S 1000b = é ss . 2 
u eee a VN / - 
2 5005 eer r ry 1 2 Sse a 
3 lr Besinae / me © AUK 
g L AA <—Best SIS - 
& a) 
3 100F aA at Ue q 
S F nm aid Be 
50 A sect 
a lam ko 
a Li~ 
r Vgap(Nb) Vgap(NbTiN) 
id ee ee ee 2 , 
300 500 1000 2000 3000 


Frequency (GHz) 


Figure 3. Noise temperatures for SIS receivers (triangles) and 
HEB receivers (squares) compared with the quantum limit. 


The SIS receiver 

The SIS receiver is now the workhorse for millimeter and 
submillimeter observatories. Originally, when the SIS 
junctions were first introduced they were made from a 
lead-indium-gold alloy which suffered mechanical and 
chemical problems and was unreliable. Now the junction 
elements are usually made from niobium, which is robust 
and provides a high degree of reliability. It is expected that 
the order of 1000 such receivers will be constructed for the 
ALMA project. 

Clearly, the requirement for the receiver is that it 
provides the best S/N in a given observation, so in the 
Dicke formula T, must be minimized. T,, the noise from 
the receiver, is limited by the quantum noise due to the 
detection of photons with simultaneous measurement of 
phase and amplitude. This fundamental noise source 
provides a minimum noise temperature of T, ~ hv/k 
where h is Planck’s constant and k Boltzmann’s constant. 
To this are added excess noises from the inefficiency of the 
frequency conversion process, noise from the preamplifier 
and noise due to signal loss in the warm input optics. 
SIS receivers are able to achieve T, values only a few 
times the quantum limit throughout the millimeter and 
submillimeter bands, up to the gap frequency of niobium. 
Above this frequency a microstrip circuit made from 
niobium becomes lossy. A plot of the noise temperature of 
receivers including a set of niobium junction SIS receivers 
is shown in figure 3. 

A second factor in the performance of the receiver 
is the IF bandwidth which is primarily limited by the 
achievable bandwidth of low noise cryogenic HEMT 
preamplifiers. This is currently about 10 GHz but is 
expected to increase further yet. The third factor is the 
integration time which can be achieved before the system 
noise ceases to integrate down with the square root of time. 
This depends on the care taken in thermal stabilization of 
components, for example, the integration channel width 
and the type and rate of switching in use. 

In order to extend the low-noise performance 
achieved below the niobium gap to higher frequencies, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


there are several possibilities. One is simply to use 
higher-gap superconducting material for the microstrip 
circuit. Niobium titanium nitride has been successfully 
used. However, that solution is limited by the band gap of 
high-quality superconductors (see figure 3). A completely 
different superconducting device, which is not limited in 
frequency by the band gap, is the HEB. In principle this is 
similar to the older bulk semiconductor device, but has a 
much shorter response time and therefore should be more 
useful in a practical device. 


The superconducting hot electron bolometer 

SIS receivers are the devices of choice for most 
applications, when they are operating below the gap 
frequency. For higher frequencies the choices are between 
SIS receivers with normal metal tuning circuitry, which 
extends the range for SIS receivers to about 1200 GHz, 
Schottky diode receivers, which are generally more noisy 
but operate to several THz if sufficient LO power is 
available, and superconducting HEB receivers, which 
also have performance to several THz, but are relatively 
low noise and require less LO power than do SIS 
receivers. For astronomy applications such as the ESA-— 
NASA submillimeter space telescope, FIRST, and the US— 
German airborne telescope project, SOFIA, the choice for 
frequencies above 1200 GHz may be the HEB. 

HEBs use a heating-induced non-linearity in a small 
superconducting film held near the critical temperature, 
T.. The electronic system is heated above the lattice 
temperature by dc and rf power. The device will act as a 
mixer as long as the IF is restricted to the regime below 
the hot electron relaxation rate, otherwise the electron 
temperature cannot follow the power variation at the IF. 
There are two types of superconducting HEB, the first 
depending on the electron-phonon interaction for cooling 
the hot electron system and the second using the diffusion 
process to carry the excess thermal energy out of the 
superconductor and into the normal metal leads. Both 
techniques appear to work well, with the diffusion type 
able to sustain IF bandwidths of about 10 GHz for niobium 
films. The plot of figure 3 includes the HEB results for very 
high frequencies. 


Bibliography 
The first astronomical submillimeter heterodyne spec- 
troscopy employed the InSb hot electron bolometer 


Phillips T G and Jefferts K B 1973 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 44 1009 


However, the development of SIS receivers came partly as 
a result of the intense effort in the late 1970s to develop 
superconducting switching devices for computers, using 
the Josephson effect. Although this was never successful 
for computing, it provided materials and a fabrication 
technology for making small-area superconducting tunnel 
junctions. The first SIS detectors were described in 
adjoining papers in 1979 by Berkeley and Bell Telephone 
Labs groups working independently: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Receivers: Submillimeter Feeds and Receivers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1979 Appl. Phys. Lett. 34 345, 347 


Interpretation of the performance was helped a great deal 
by a quantum theory for quasiparticle tunneling devices 


by 
Tucker J R 1979 IEEE J. Quantum. Electron. 15 477 


published shortly thereafter. Subsequent milestones have 
been the initial attempts at planar-antenna, quasioptical 
structures 


Wengler M J, Woody DP, Miller R E and Phillips T G 1985 
Int. J. Infrared Millim. Waves 6 697 


improved on subsequently by a twin-slot design 


Gaidis M C, LeDuc H G, Bin M, Miller D, Stern J A and 
Zmuidzinas J 1996 IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 
44 1130 


Superconducting HEBs were first considered for 
mixers in the phonon cooling mode by 


Gershenzon E, Gol’tsman G, Gogidze I G, Gusev Y P, 
Elant’ev A I, Karasik B S and Semenov A 1990 
Superconductivity 3 1582 


and in the diffusion cooling style by 
Prober D E 1993 Appl. Phys. Lett. 62 2119 


A detailed description of the scalar, corrugated feed horn 
is given by 


Clarricoats P J B and Olver A D 1984 Corrugated Horns for 
Microwave Antennas (IEE Electromagnetic Wave Series 
18) (Peter Peregrinus) 


A comprehensive modern review article is that by 


Carlstrom J and Zmuidzinas J 1996 Millimeter and 
submillimeter techniques Review of Radio Science 
1993-1996 ed W Ross Stone (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) pp 839-82 


Thomas Phillips 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Red Dwarfs/Flare Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Red Dwarfs/Flare Stars 


The red dwarf stars are main-sequence stars characterized 
by masses in the approximate range from 0.51M, to 
0.08M>. The upper mass limit corresponds to a spectral 
type of MO V and the lower limit is the critical mass for the 
onset of nuclear burning in the central cores of stars with 
chemical abundances similar to the Sun. Below the range 
of approximately (0.074-0.08)Mo is the realm of substellar 
objects known as brown dwarfs. The radii of the red 
dwarfs span from 0.60R, to ¥ 0.18Ro while their effective 
temperatures are in the approximate range 2500 K-4000 K. 
Thus, the red dwarf stars are cooler, smaller and less 
massive than the Sun. Correspondingly, their luminosities 
are low relative to the Sun, ranging from less than a few 
tenths of a per cent (or less) to about 8% of the solar 
luminosity. The flare stars are observationally defined 
as those red dwarfs that exhibit transient brightenings on 
time scales of seconds to minutes as seen in the visible 
region of the electromagnetic spectrum. These short-lived 
brightenings are considered to be qualitatively similar to 
SOLAR FLARES. 

The red dwarfs represent the largest constituent of 
the STELLAR POPULATION, composing at least 80% of the stars 
in the Galaxy. Therefore, the typical star in the Galaxy 
is smaller, less massive and cooler than the Sun. From 
this perspective, the Sun is not a common star. Rather, 
the Sun and Sun-like stars are actually atypical compared 
with the more numerous red dwarf stars. The large mass- 
to-luminosity ratios of the red dwarfs combined with 
their high flare activity and relatively large space density 
suggest that these objects could play an important role in 
galactic dynamics. 

Within K-M spectral types, the red dwarfs are divided 
into subclasses according to the appearance of certain 
spectral features. In particular, the dMe stars are those red 
dwarfs that exhibit Ha line emission. It is nearly always 
the case that a given dMe star is also a flare star. Those 
red dwarfs without Ha in emission are non-dMe stars 
or, simply, dM stars. The spectrum of a dM star exhibits 
either Ha in absorption or no apparent Ha feature. Flare 
activity has only rarely been observed in dM stars, and 
these objects are usually not identified as flare stars. 


Interior and atmospheres 

The interior structure of red dwarf stars is characterized 
by a thick outer convection zone relative to the radius 
of the star. STELLAR INTERIOR models suggest that at a 
mass of 0.4Mo, the depth of the convection zone is 
nearly 60% of the stellar radius. At masses less than 
approximately 0.30Mo, the interiors of red dwarfs are 
completely convective. The photospheric spectra of red 
dwarfs are dominated by molecular features. Molecular 
bands of TiO and, for the latest types, VO are strongly 
present together with atomic lines of Ca II, Na I and K 
I. The progression from K to M dwarfs is characterized 
by increasing strength of TiO absorption. The coolest M 
dwarfs (later than M7 V) exhibit prominent absorption 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by VO. Bands of MgH are visible in K through early M 
dwarfs (~ M3.5) after which they become dominated by 
overlying TiO. Bands of CaOH at 553-557 nm and near 
625 nm begin to appear at spectral type M3.5. These bands 
become especially prominent toward the latest M dwarfs 
(at least as late as M8) where they remain visible through 
the thicket of TiO lines. The CaH B band at 638.5 nm is 
also sensitive to temperature, first appearing at spectral 
type MO and remaining identifiable through the latest M 
spectral subclasses. Atomic lines of Fe I and Ca II that are 
strong in the K through mid-M dwarfs disappear in the 
coolest M dwarf stars as molecular absorption by TiO and 
VO dominates. The appearance of the red spectrum of 
these cool dwarfs is illustrated in figure 1. 

The red dwarfs can exhibit periodic or quasi-periodic 
behavior in their photometric light curves. This is due to 
the rotational modulation of large, cool spots analogous to 
SUNSPOTS, on the surfaces of these stars. As rotation carries 
a spotted region on the star through the line of sight, a 
dip in the photometric light curve is observed. Repeated 
observation of this phenomenon yields the rotation period 
of the star, independent of the inclination of the rotation 
axis to the line of sight. The rotation rates of red dwarfs are 
correlated with their activity in the form of flares, emission 
lines and x-ray emission from a CoRONA. Red dwarfs with 
rotation rates exceeding 3-5 km s-! are generally more 
active and tend to be classified as dMe stars. Those objects 
with slower rotation rates are non-dMe or, simply, dM 
stars. These red dwarfs have lower levels of magnetic- 
field-related activity and no Ha emission. 

All red dwarfs thus far observed with sufficient 
sensitivity and spectral resolution exhibit Ca II H and K 
line emission, indicative of the presence of CHROMOSPHERES. 
In addition to Ca II resonance line emission, ultraviolet 
spectra obtained with satellite observatories have revealed 
Mg II h and k line emission as well. Emission from 
these metal species together with Ha emission (as seen 
in the dMe stars) establishes the presence of significant 
nonradiative heating in the red dwarfs that is presumed 
to be related to surface magnetic fields. Interestingly, 
chromospheric models have shown that Ha absorption 
is also a result of chromospheric heating in the non- 
dMe (dM) stars. The photospheres in these red dwarfs 
are so cool that, in the absence of a chromosphere, 
only weak Ha absorption would be observed in their 
spectrum. However, as chromospheric heating increases, 
the population of hydrogen atoms in the n = 2 quantum 
level increases, thus leading to increasing opacity in the 
Ha line to initially produce an absorption feature. From 
the perspective of stellar chromospheric activity, this result 
suggests that the principal difference between dMe and 
dM stars is, in part, due to differing intrinsic heating rates 
that are present in their respective chromospheres. 

The far-ultraviolet spectrum of active red dwarfs 
is dominated by emission lines arising from high- 
temperature (T > 50000 K) plasma in the so-called 
transition region of the outer atmosphere. Distinctive 
spectral features include lines arising from C IV, Si IV 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Red Dwarfs/Flare Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bt 4, GL 820 A -- KB V 
Call Ha oH HO @ 
i I eee 16 rq 
Ba lt ul oo Tio 
7 


GL 725B —— M3.5 V 


LHS 2924 —- M9 


Normalized Flux + Constant 
» on 
port Ty TTT ry rrr ry rr rr pr rer pr rr ry rrr ry rrryr yp rrr) 


rT 
j 
b 


rm 1 frost 


TT T ] TTT T | ame aed a a | 


rtiiy 


HO@ Fel Fel Fel FelFel 
cr | | fl 


Fel Mgl 


3 


@ Fel call 


Nal Fol Fe [/Ti lt Tio 


[aps ly wpe side ich 


TIO 
HO © To Ca Il Mg il Mgt 
r | 

no HO ® HO e Fel Fel Fel 


® 
Edit 


6500 7000 7500 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 1. Photospheric spectra of red dwarfs. Illustration of the principal features in the red spectrum of cool dwarf stars extending 
from spectral types mid-K to M9. Molecular bands of titanium oxide (TiO) begin to dominate the spectrum in the M dwarfs while, in 
the coolest dwarfs, vanadium oxide (VO) becomes prominent. Other features include CaH and neutral metal lines of iron (Fe), 
magnesium (Mg) and sodium (Na). Terrestrial lines due mainly to atmospheric water are indicated with a ® symbol. (From 
Kirkpatrick J D, Henry T J and McCarthy D W Jr 1991 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 77 417.) 


and N V. The surface fluxes of these high-temperature 
lines in the dMe stars are 10-100 times greater than the 
corresponding line surface fluxes in the quiet Sun. The 
far-UV spectra of the less active red dwarfs (dM stars) 
are, by contrast, dominated by lines arising from neutral 
metal species and other low-temperature features. An 
illustration of the far-ultraviolet spectra of active and 
inactive red dwarfs is given in figure 2. 


X-ray emission and coronae in red dwarfs 


The red dwarfs are x-ray sources with levels of detected 
x-ray emission that range in luminosity from ~0.1 to 
~1000 times that of the value of the quiet solar corona 
(~10*”" erg s~'). The absolute x-ray luminosity of red 
dwarfs declines toward lower masses. However, the x-ray 
luminosity normalized to the bolometric luminosity of the 
star, which is often expressed as Ly /Lpoi, can persist among 
the active (dMe) stars at the so-called saturation level of 
approximately Lx /Lpo1 X 10~?° to spectral types at least as 
late as M7. Thus, the active red dwarfs are characterized 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by relatively high coronal heating efficiencies compared 
with that of the active Sun (i.e. the Sun as viewed in the 
x-ray at the maximum of the solar activity cycle) where, for 
the active Sun, we have that Lx /Lpo1 ~ 10~°. If there is any 
sharp decline in coronal heating efficiency, as measured by 
the parameter L,/Lpo1, then it occurs at spectral subtype 
M8. However, any possible decline in coronal heating 
efficiency cannot be verified until more red dwarf stars 
of subtypes M8 and M9 are discovered and observed with 
an x-ray telescope such as the new Chandra x-ray satellite 
observatory. 

Analysis of the x-ray results shows that those red 
dwarfs that are more luminous in the x-ray have higher 
average coronal temperatures. Red dwarfs that exhibit 
little chromospheric activity (i.e. dM and dK stars) do 
indeed have cooler and weaker coronae than the more 
active (dMe) stars. Detailed model results based on 
x-ray observations reveal that the coronae of the low- 
mass dwarfs consist of two distinct thermal components: 
a so-called ‘soft’ component with temperatures T ~ (2- 
4) x 10° K and a ‘hard’ component with T ~ 10’ K. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Red Dwarfs/Flare Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a 
[ EQ Vir 
4 {dK5Se) 
r c 
at NZ oco sim I clom 
= | ! It Hen aT cI 
| 
baat Muh sof Ioboul AN JAK LA 
iiss y wl Witty fy an ian) 
[ 61 Cyg B 
nw 
. (K7 WZ) 
€ ol | 
§ 2p t 11 | 
4 | | 
£ PMLA hit HAAN afb h at aA Wt waa mn 
ty : HOLA Wi : 
= HD 88230 
° (K7 ©) 
= 1 
Se ] at a " ‘i 
cs, 
7 (\wfll wrt nycaal fhe hal apd re i poop Anh 
fat HD 13264 
~ ALT (M1.3 WZ) 
4 SI _ ct F. 
Ww ; sty St ¢1| co 
a i,t 4 | 
o 
be ' 
: HO 95735 
zt sl ot (m2.0 W) 
i | sI 
| ! | tl ia) 
6 ar Pek ee | A AA, Ne A fll 
A yj Wha Mit ni Tat VY o 


i 1 1 1 l 1 _t : 
100 1200 1300 1400 1500 i600 1700 1800 1900 2000 
WAVELENGTH (A) 


AU Mic 
(M1.6e Y) 


sil 
' aem 


AT Mic 
(M4.4e Y) 


100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 [700 1800 1900 2000 
WAVELENGTH (A) 


Figure 2. Far-ultraviolet spectra of red dwarfs and flare stars. The far ultraviolet spectra of active and inactive red dwarf stars as 
obtained with the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite observatory. The identification of emission lines is indicated. The active 
red dwarfs (denoted as types dKe or dMe) exhibit emission features from highly ionized species, indicative of hot plasma. By contrast, 
the far UV spectra of the inactive (dK or dM) red dwarfs are dominated by emission from low-temperature species thus implying that 
a significantly lower density of hot plasma is present in their outer atmospheres. (From Linsky J L, Bornmann P L, Carpenter K G, 
Wing R F, Giampapa M S, Worden S P and Hege E K 1982 Astrophys. J. 260 670.) 


Based on the observational and model results, the author 
and his collaborators concluded that coronal emission 
in active red dwarfs (dMe stars) can be interpreted as 
arising from quiescent active regions (a quiescent, low- 
temperature component) and compact flaring structures 
(variable, high-temperature component). 

Active red dwarfs are also radio sources. The 
quiescent component of radio emission is attributed to 
gyrosynchrotron radiation from electrons with energies 
of 20-200 keV. Surveys of both radio and x-ray emission 
reveal that the x-ray and radio luminosities are directly 
correlated over a range of 3 orders of magnitude, 
irrespective of spectral type. This result strongly suggests 
that there is a physical relation between the particle 
populations that give rise to the x-ray and to the radio 
emissions. 

Underlying the wealth of activity that is observed 
in red dwarfs are magnetic fields. Emergent magnetic 
flux as a result of interior dynamo action is presumably 
directly related to the origins of spotted regions, flares, 
chromospheres and coronae, as is seen on the Sun. Direct 
spectroscopic detections of surface magnetic flux on active 
red dwarf (dMe) stars reveal field strengths in the broad 
range of 2-4 kG covering over 50% of the star. These kinds 
of field strengths are consistent with a model consisting of 
magnetic flux tubes in equilibrium with the surrounding 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


photospheric gas pressure. Direct measurements of 
magnetic field properties in the relatively inactive red (dM) 
dwarfs have not yet been accomplished. 


Flare activity in red dwarfs 

The vast majority of observations of flare outbursts in 
red dwarf flare stars have been recorded in broad-band 
photometry, typically with Johnson U BV filters. During 
a flare, the U band exhibits a larger relative change than 
the B band which, in turn, shows a larger relative change 
than the V band. The blue color of the optical flare 
energy distribution is due both to enhanced UV emission 
lines and to a continuum suggestive of an optically thick, 
radiating plasma which is much hotter than the underlying 
red dwarf photosphere. The continuum emission in 
stellar flares is consistent with free-free emission at 
temperatures of (5-10) x 10* K, bound-free emission at 
a temperature of 2 x 10* K, or a combination of both 
processes. A black-body component due to heating of 
the lower stellar chromosphere and upper photosphere 
with a characteristic effective temperature of ~104 K may 
also contribute to the flare continuum emission. Based 
on the assumption that the flare continuum emission 
is predominantly composed of black-body radiation, 
effective areas of the flaring region are derived that 
correspond to a range from 0.5% to 2% of the stellar disk. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Red Dwarfs/Flare Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


EQ PEG 


COUNT RATE 


Nw 


0-00 4-00 8-00 


42-00 
MINJTES 


7/AS/BO__10+ 4-58 UT 


+ 


Figure 3. Flare event on a red dwarf flare star. A particularly striking example of the variety of phenomena that can be seen in stellar 
flares is encapsulated here in a single, extraordinary event observed on the binary flare star EQ Pegasi (dM3.5e + dM4.5e). This event 
was observed at the Cloudcroft Observatory 1.2 m utilizing high-speed photometry in the Johnson U band filter. The flare is preceded 
by a ‘pre-flare dip’, i.e. a decrease in the U band brightness of the star, in this case, of roughly 0.1 mag min“! for 2.7 min. The signal 
then leveled off at 75% of the quiescent brightness for 1 min before the flare begins. The peak of the flare is 3 times the quiescent level 
brightness, and is followed by two more smaller peaks separated by 60 and 30 s. The flare event then decays exponentially in 
brightness, finally returning to the pre-flare level 19 min after the onset of the event. (From Giampapa M §, Africano J L, Klimke A, 
Parks J, Quigley R J, Robinson R D and Worden S P 1982 Astrophys. J. Lett. 252 L39.) 


The total energy released during a stellar flare event can 
be as much as 2-3 orders of magnitude greater than the 
largest solar flares. 

Photometric observations of stellar flares display a 
wealth of variety in temporal profile and color. Generally, 
however, the flares are divided into two categories: ‘spike 
flares’ typically attain their peak intensity in less than 
a minute while ‘slow flares’ take several minutes before 
reaching maximum. The initial decay toward quiescence 
is rapid, falling below half-maximum in several minutes. 
In most flares the rate of decay quite suddenly slows and 
then can take several hours to relax fully to quiescence. 
Large flares typically exhibit the superposition of slow 
and fast events that may be the result of several related 
flares, or a ‘wavelike’ flaring in the stellar active regions. 
A distinctly non-solar-like phenomenon that occasionally 
occurs in flare stars is a ‘pre-flare dip’. A particularly 
striking example of this sudden diminution in the light 
from the star, followed by a flare, is shown in figure 3. 

Time-resolved, optical spectroscopic observations of 
red dwarf flares reveal that a strong continuum rises to 
dominate the violet and blue region during maximum 
light. The Balmer series is seen out to H14, Ca Il H 
and K emission, and He I emission lines all rise with the 
continuum, but usually peak a few minutes afterwards. 
The rapid decline of the continuum is responsible for 
the initial photometric decay, while the emission lines 
slowly return to quiescence. The emission lines can remain 
at enhanced levels for hours following the initial flare 
outburst and decline. A sequence of spectra obtained 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


during a flare on the prototype flare star, UV Ceti, is 
displayed in figure 4. 

High-resolution line profiles obtained during flares 
can show evidence of significant mass motions with 
blueshifted emitting material rising at ~70 km s-! in 
one case, and perhaps much higher velocities in other 
cases. In brief summary, the qualitative picture of the 
flare would include upward-moving material filling a 
large volume (with a characteristic length scale ~0.1 
stellar radius) with hot plasma at chromospheric densities 
of ne~10"-" cm->. The flare volume produces line 
emission that is strongly enhanced in total flux compared 
with the pre-flare emission but is often otherwise 
similar in basic line profile shape to the profile in the 
quiescent chromosphere (apart from components that 
can be attributed to bulk motions in the line of sight). 
The flare luminosity can be a few per cent of the 
quiescent stellar bolometric luminosity which is an order 
of magnitude greater than the corresponding ratio for 
either chromospheric or coronal heating. Hence, the 
conversion of flare energy to radiative flux is significantly 
more efficient than the processes that control coronal and 
chromospheric heating in red dwarfs and flare stars. 

Observations of stellar flares in the x-ray reveal that 
the total energy in soft x-rays is often comparable with 
that in the largest solar flares. Stellar flare x-ray light 
curves morphologically resemble the x-ray light curves 
observed for compact and two-ribbon flares that occur on 
the Sun. Very recent observations by the author and his 
collaborators using the ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Red Dwarfs/Flare Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


io 14 
2.0 
SCAN <#1- #24> 
TO1Sb 
ot 
Ss 
i} 
§ 
1, 1.0 
g 
2 
5 
Sost 
z 
pve 
3600 3800 + 4000 4200. 4400 °~«~—«4600 
(a) WAVELENGTH, A 
io 4 
5.0 
SCAN #25 
= 4.0 
q 
oct 
By 
3.0 
7 
Fe 
3 
ee 20 
5 
Pad 
= 
= toe 
0 1 fe ts 1 " 1 L 1 L I i 
3600 3800 4000 4200 44004600 
tb) WAVELENGTH, A 
1073 
4.0 
SCAN 426 


FLUX (erg sec7 ! em? Av" 


er ees | rete 
4200 4400 4600 


(c} WAVELENGTH, A 


0.0 1 
3600 3800 4000 


40713 


2.0 


SCAN #27 


a 
I 


o 
| 


FLUX (erg sec~! com=2 A-1) 


05 
Ole pe S| pe ee ie] 
3600 3800 4000 4200 4400 ~——«4600 
; 
(a) WAVELENGTH, A 
19718 
2.0 
SCAN #28 
ob AS 
ot 
a 
I 
5 
1 4.0/- 
e 
3 
2 
5 
x< 
3 0.5- 
1 ks re 1 ie bees 
3600 3800 4006 ©4200 4400 4600 
4 
(e) WAVELENGTH, A 


Figure 4. Spectrum of a large flare event. Time sequence of the blue spectrum of the flare star UV Ceti (dM5.6e) during the onset of a 
strong flare that exhibited a 5 mag increase in the photometric U band. The first scan is the average, quiescent spectrum of the star. The 
Ca II H and K lines are strong, and the Balmer series is evident out to H14, even during quiescence. The following scans document the 
onset of the flare event. Note the varying vertical axis scales. Emission lines from hydrogen are the most numerous and prominent 
emission features during the flare itself. Strong continuum emission is seen at the peak of the event in scan 26. Note the red 
asymmetry that appears in the emission lines at flare maximum, indicating the possible presence of mass motions. These spectra were 
originally obtained with the 2.3 m telescope and Reticon detector of the Steward Observatory of the University of Arizona. (From 
Eason E LE, Giampapa M §, Radick R R, Worden S P and Hege E K 1992 Astron. J. 104 1161.) 


disclosed the occurrence of an x-ray flare on the very-low- 
mass star VB 10 (dM8e). VB 10 is the latest-type, lowest- 
mass main-sequence star known to exhibit coronal activity. 
The peak luminosity of the flare was ~ 107” ergs s7!. 
This is at least 2 orders of magnitude greater than the 
quiescent x-ray luminosity of VB 10, which has yet to be 


measured. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Concluding remarks 


The manifestations of magnetic-field-related activity in the 
red dwarfs and flare stars are especially vivid because of 
the sharp contrast between the high-temperature emission 
features, arising from nonradiatively heated plasma at 
temperatures extending from ~10* to 10’ K, against the 
cool photospheres with effective temperatures in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Red Dwarfs/Flare Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


~2500 K-4000 K range. 

The origin of the surface magnetic field itself in the 
Sun and cool stars is ascribed to interior dynamo action 
involving the interaction between rotation, convection and 
extant magnetic fields. Empirically, coronal x-ray emission 
and chromospheric line emission strengths are correlated 
with rotation in red dwarfs. Magnetic field measurements 
by S Saar suggest an inverse relationship between rotation 
period and the area coverage, f, of magnetic flux of the 
form f ~ Po. ° for rotation periods greater than 3 days. 
At more rapid rotation periods, the surface is saturated 
with magnetic fields. However, the total magnetic flux, 
i.e. the product of the field strength and fractional area 
coverage, continues to increase with more rapid rotation 
rates according to the preliminary, empirical relation f B « 
P,.’. The implication is that magnetic field strengths 
continue to increase with increasing rotation rates, perhaps 
forming dark starspots. 

In the Sun, the magnetic field that eventually appears 
on the surface in the form of plages, spots and flares 
is widely considered to have originated in an interface 
region between the outer convection zone and the interior 
radiative core. While this dynamo model may indeed 
apply to cooler dwarfs, it is the regime of the red dwarfs 
where the transition from a partial to a fully convective 
interior occurs. Thus, in the absence of an interface layer 
between the radiative and convective regions, another 
dynamo mechanism must then operate to continue to give 
rise to the variety of magnetic activity that persists into the 
wholly convective red dwarfs and flare stars. The nature of 
this new dynamo mechanism is a key question in current 
research efforts involving red dwarfs. 

The physical mechanism that leads to the spectacular 
flare events in these cool stars is also unknown but is 
believed to involve, as in the Sun, magnetic reconnection. 
The energetics of stellar flares can often be accounted 
for within the context of two-ribbon flare models. 
Nevertheless, neither the actual flare morphology nor 
the true plasma-heating mechanism is known in the case 
of stellar flare events. Large stellar flares, like their 
solar counterparts, probably represent the superposition 
in space and time of many evolving flare regions ina flaring 
complex that could encompass a geometrically extended, 
large volume of emitting plasma. 

Other key questions involving red dwarfs and flare 
stars include the possible contributions by these active 
objects to the diffuse galactic x-ray background, the 
evolutionary relationship between the active dMe flare 
stars and the relatively quiescent dM stars; whether red 
dwarfs exhibit cycles in their activity analogous to the 
solar cycle, the relationship of red dwarfs to brown dwarfs 
and the frequency of extrasolar planet formation among 
the low-mass stars. As always in astronomy, advances in 
instrumentation and analysis techniques will yield new 
insights on these common yet fascinating stars. 


Bibliography 


Bastian T S 1990 Radio emission from flare stars Sol. Phys. 
130 265-94 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Delfosse X, Forveille T, Perrier C and Mayor M 1998 
Rotation and chromospheric activity in field M 
dwarfs Astron. Astrophys. 331 581-95 

Fleming T A, Schmitt J H M M and Giampapa M S 
1995 Correlations of coronal x-ray emission with 
activity, mass, and age of the nearby K and M dwarfs 
Astrophys. J. 450 401-10 

Giampapa M S 1983 Results from optical and UV stellar 
flare spectroscopy Activity in Red-Dwarf Stars ed P B 
Byrne and M Rodono (Dordrecht: Reidel) pp 223-35 

Giampapa M S, Rosner R, Kashyap V K, Fleming T A, 
Schmitt JH M Mand Bookbinder J A1996 The coronae 
of low-mass dwarf stars Astrophys. J. 463 707-25 

Henry TJ and McCarthy D W Jr 1993 The mass-luminosity 
relation for stars of mass 1.0 to 0.08M. Astron. J. 106 
773-89 

Johns-Krull C M and Valenti J A 1996 Detection of strong 
magnetic fields on M dwarfs Astrophys. J. Lett. 459 
L95-8 

Kirkpatrick J D, Henry T J and McCarthy D W Jr 1991 A 
standard stellar spectral sequence in the red/near- 
infrared: classes K5 to M9 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 77 417- 
40 

Mullan D J 1976 Flare stars: I. Physical characteristics of 
the stars Irish Astron. J. 12 161-82 

Schmitt J H M M, Fleming T A and Giampapa M S 1995 
The x-ray view of the low-mass stars in the solar 
neighborhood Astrophys. J. 450 392-400 

Stauffer J R and Hartmann L W 1986 The chromospheric 
activity, kinematics, and metallicities of nearby M 
dwarfs Astrophys. J. Suppl. 61 531-68 

Turnshek D E, Turnshek D A, Craine E R and Boeshaar P C 
1985 An Atlas of Digital Spectra of Cool Stars (Tucson, 
AZ: Western Research Company) 


Mark Giampapa 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Red Giant Stars 


Most stars are less massive and less luminous than the 
Sun, yet most of the visually bright stars are considerably 
more luminous than the Sun. Many of these are also cool- 
er than the Sun, so that their higher luminosity indicates 
a much greater diameter, although they are not necessar- 
ily more massive. These are then known as giant stars, 
whereas the Sun is a dwarf. This difference in structure 
results from their being at different stages in their evolu- 
tion (see STELLAR EVOLUTION). Dwarf stars derive their 
energy from hydrogen burning in the core, whereas giant 
stars have already exhausted hydrogen in the core, 
although they may still burn hydrogen in a surrounding 
shell, and may burn helium or even heavier elements in 
the core. 

Stars are classified according to their surface tem- 
perature which dictates the degree of ionization and 
excitation of the atoms in the visible outer layers of the 
atmosphere. The main classes, from hot to cool, are 
denoted as O, B, A, FE, G, K, M. Classes L and T have been 
added recently to describe very cool dwarf stars. There 
are also giant stars with peculiar surface composition. 
The R and N stars, which are sometimes lumped togeth- 
er as C, are carbon rich. The S stars are those in which the 
TiO molecule, which is the defining characteristic of the 
M-type spectra, is joined and ultimately superseded by 
ZrO and other molecules containing elements produced 
by the nuclear reaction known coincidentally as the 
s-process. 

Giants and dwarfs may be distinguished by subtle 
spectroscopic differences, notably the greater strength of 
singly ionized metals in giants at any given temperature. 
The basic difference in luminosity is determined by 
trigonometric PARALLAXES which are based on observing 
the tiny angular movement relative to more distant stars 
which is produced by the Earth’s annual motion relative 
to the Sun. The recent HIPPARCOS satellite measured the 
trigonometric parallaxes and hence distances of many 
stars to unprecedented accuracy. Giant and dwarf stars 
may also be present in a single cluster of stars all at the 
same distance, and then the difference in luminosity is 
observable directly. 

Most of the giant stars which are visible to the naked 
eye or are seen in clusters such as the Hyades and 
Praesepe are of spectral type K and appear yellow to the 
eye. The true red giants are cooler, of spectral type M, S 
or N, and are much more luminous and represent the tip 
of the giant branch. They show a variety of interesting 
phenomena, including altered surface chemical composi- 
tion, variability and mass loss. 

The development of the technology for the efficient 
detection of infrared radiation has opened up a new field 
in recent years. Many red giant stars have been found to 
have extensive dust shells which, radiating at a tempera- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


ture of a few hundred kelvin, are only detectable in the 
infrared. Some of these stars have such thick dust shells 
that the star itself is invisible at optical wavelengths, and 
the INFRARED ASTRONOMY SATELLITE (IRAS) which was 
equipped with a small infrared-sensitive telescope dis- 
covered thousands of stars whose existence was 
unknown to ground-based astronomers. 


The giant branch 

The recognition that the cooler stars are clearly divided 
into two groups, large bright giants and small faint 
dwarfs, was one of the principal results of the first large 
surveys of trigonometric parallaxes. This result is encap- 
sulated in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL (HR) DIAGRAM, 
named for its independent discoverers, in which a mea- 
sure of luminosity is plotted against a measure of tem- 
perature—originally spectral type but usually a photo- 
metric color—which increases to the left. Figure 1 shows 


B-V 


Figure 1. The HR diagram in the now usual color-magnitude 
form. The main sequence (MS) of H-burning dwarf stars slants 
from upper left to lower right (open circles). The subgiant 
branch (sub), red giant branch (RGB), horizontal branch (HB) 
and asymptotic giant branch (AGB) of a typical metal-deficient 
globular cluster are denoted by crosses. The AGB and RGB are 
only clearly separable at relatively low luminosity; it is a matter 
of inference that the most luminous red giants and especially 
those with altered surface composition belong to the AGB and 
not to the RGB. The V at the tip of the RGB-AGB indicates the 
position of red variable stars in the cluster. The filled circle to the 
right (red) of the RGB is the approximate position of the red 
giant clump in the more metal-rich stars of the solar neighbor- 
hood, while the RGB of this population lies just to the red of the 
clump (figure 2). Note that this diagram is based on the visible 
spectrum only and the hottest and coolest stars would appear 
relatively brighter if their entire luminous output, the bolomet- 
ric luminosity, were considered. Conversely, the brightest stars 
of intermediate (solar) surface temperature fall above the upper 
limit of this diagram and the cool red variable stars of high 
metal content are visually much fainter than those in globular 
clusters denoted by V. The massive red supergiants of the 
younger population (super) fall in the top right of the diagram. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


V-I 


Figure 2. The color-magnitude diagram for nearby K and 
MO-M3 giants with well-determined parallaxes from the 
Hipparcos Catalog. The choice of V-I instead of the more usual 
B-V as abscissa uses TiO to expand the temperature scale for the 
cooler stars. The red giant clump is prominent near MI=0, 
V-I=1.0, and the red giant and asymptotic giant branches run 
together to higher luminosity (i.e. upward) and lower surface 
temperature (to the right). The few stars which lie above this are 
probably more massive stars. The RGB and AGB are not separa- 
ble in this mixed population of stars from the solar neighbor- 
hood. 


a composite color-magnitude diagram for dwarf stars 
near the Sun and giant stars in a typical GLOBULAR CLUS- 
TER, using representative points along the corresponding 
sequences. This figure illustrates the terminology we 
introduce in this section and use throughout the article. 
It follows from the difference in luminosity that the 
coolest giants shown have radii which are several hun- 
dred times those of dwarfs of similar effective tempera- 
ture. 

Dynamical studies of BINARY SYSTEMS show that a 
typical giant star has a mass in the range 1-3 times that 
of the Sun so that the difference in radii between giants 
and dwarfs results from a difference in structure rather 
than of mass. The mean density of the Sun is close to that 
of water but that of a giant star may be more than a mil- 
lion times less. This matter is not evenly distributed, 
however, because while the Sun has a ratio of the central 
to the mean density of about 50:1 the corresponding fig- 
ure for a giant can be as large as 108:1. The giant has a 
very small dense energy-generating core which contains 
over 10% of the mass of the star. 

Observations of stars in clusters, which have the 
great advantage that all the stars lie at almost the same 
distance, so that their apparent luminosity gives their 
true relative luminosity, and usually have the same age 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


and chemical composition, revealed the detailed struc- 
ture of the giant branch. There is a marked concentration 
of stars at a luminosity about 40 times that of the Sun and 
slightly to the blue (hot) side of the red giant branch 
(RGB). This takes the form of a compact clump, the red 
giant clump, in open star clusters of high metal content 
and in the stars of the solar neighbourhood. 

The red giant clump, whose location is marked in 
figure 1, is shown in more detail in figure 2. Figure 2 
shows the color-magnitude diagram for a sample of 
nearby stars, based on high-quality trigonometric paral- 
laxes obtained with the Hipparcos satellite. The early K 
stars are strongly concentrated in the red giant clump, 
while cooler K and early M stars extend to redder colors 
and higher luminosity; the intrinsically fainter stars are 
under-represented because star selection is by apparent 
magnitude. The clump becomes the horizontal branch, 
extending to much higher surface temperature, in the old 
metal-deficient globular clusters. The luminosity of the 
clump is very similar to that of the horizontal branch, as 
is well seen in the HR diagrams of nearby galaxies where 
both populations are present. The extension of the clump 
to the upper left in figure 2 represents stars which are 
substantially more massive then the majority. 

The originally single giant branch becomes double 
at higher luminosities than that of the clump. This is not 
apparent in figure 2, where observational error and the 
range of mass and chemical composition among the 
nearby stars obscure the finer details. Observations of 
globular clusters showed that the giant branch extends as 
a sharp continuous locus from the subgiant branch 
which follows from the main sequence turnoff to the tip 
at a luminosity about 1000 times brighter. This is joined 
by a second giant branch which starts above the hori- 
zontal branch, displaced to the hot (blue) side of the 
RGB, and runs progressively closer to the RGB until they 
become indistinguishable. This second giant branch is 
known as the asymptotic giant branch or AGB. This is 
shown in figure 1 and in more detail for the giant stars 
in the moderately metal-poor globular cluster 47 Tucanae 
in figure 3. 

Theoretical calculations have been able to reproduce 
these main features of the observed HR diagrams with 
some precision, yet the fundamental reason for the 
change in structure from the dwarf to the giant state has 
been hard to establish. Recent work shows that the 
expansion of the envelope following increasing luminos- 
ity in the core causes cooling, ion recombination and an 
increase in the opacity of the envelope. The inability of 
the envelope to transmit all the luminosity impinging on 
its base causes further expansion which exacerbates the 
situation, leading to a runaway expansion which only 
stops when the entire envelope becomes convective and 
energy can be transmitted to the surface by this more effi- 
cient process. The locus of a convective envelope in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3.The color-magnitude diagram of the moderately metal- 
poor globular cluster 47 Tucanae. The short red horizontal 
branch lies below the limit of this figure, near =13.4. Note the 
clump on the AGB for [=12.0-12.4, with gaps both above and 
below, with a resumption near [=11.8. The crosses denote semi- 
regular variable stars. This old and moderately metal-deficient 
cluster has a much steeper giant branch than the younger, metal- 
rich stars in the solar vicinity (figure 1). 


HR diagram, the Hayashi track, defines the position of 
the giant branch. 

A star leaves the main sequence and moves to the 
red on the subgiant branch when it has exhausted hydro- 
gen in its core; hydrogen burning continues in a shell sur- 
rounding the currently inert helium core. This energy- 
generating shell gradually moves outwards, consuming 
hydrogen from the pristine outer layers and depositing 
helium and other reaction products on the core. The core 
in a star with a mass of not more than about two solar 
masses is degenerate during the ascent of the giant 
branch. The term red giant branch (RGB) is sometimes 
used specifically to refer to this stage in the evolution of 
a low mass star, although it is not easy to distinguish 
observationally between such stars and stars in the next 
(AGB) stage of evolution or more massive stars without 
degenerate cores. The H-burning shell moves outwards 
and at some stage it encounters the inner edge of the rel- 
atively H-rich convective envelope: the ascent of the 
giant branch slows for a time, causing a concentration of 
stars at this point on the giant branch. This is well seen in 
rich star clusters and is known as the RGB bump. The 
spectra of stars higher up the giant branch show a 
decline in the carbon isotope ratio; this is consistent with 
the mixing of an increasing quantity of the products of 
the CNO cycle of H-burning into the envelope. 
Observations of star clusters show that this process, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


which is not yet fully accounted for by theory, is most 
pronounced in metal poor stars of low mass. 

The ascent of the RGB continues until ignition of the 
triple-alpha process of helium burning in the core. The 
reaction rate builds up very rapidly because of the strong 
temperature dependence of the nuclear reaction coupled 
with the inability of the degenerate material to expand 
and cool in response to the energy input. The degenera- 
cy is lifted eventually and helium burning stabilizes. The 
rate of energy production in the star is considerably 
reduced during this stage, so the process described in the 
previous paragraph occurs in reverse and the star moves 
rapidly down the Hayashi track until equilibrium 
returns at the red giant clump or its equivalent. The the- 
ory requires mass loss to occur after the ignition of heli- 
um in the core. This is especially the case for the bluer 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS which can only have a very 
small mass in the envelope. No direct evidence has been 
found for this mass loss so far. The process is so rapid 
that we would not expect to observe many stars in tran- 
sit. 

A star of more than about two solar masses does not 
have a degenerate core. The star does not increase great- 
ly in luminosity on the giant branch before helium 
ignites in the core and the surface temperature increases; 
it spends most of its core helium burning life in a band to 
the blue of the giant branch. Observations of star clusters 
of a range of ages show the red giant clump in the oldest 
clusters becoming brighter and bluer as successively 
younger clusters are considered. These younger clusters 
lack the tall giant branch (RGB) of the older star clusters. 


The asymptotic giant branch 

The second ascent of the giant branch follows the 
exhaustion of helium in the core. The star now consumes 
hydrogen and helium in concentric shells. Instabilities 
occur in the energy-generating shells at high luminosity. 
Thermal pulses in the helium-burning shell may cause 
the temporary extinction of the hydrogen-burning shell, 
with substantial changes in the total energy production 
of the star and in its structure and luminosity. The obser- 
vational consequences of this include changes in lumi- 
nosity and in the character of the variability which is a 
general feature of such luminous red giant stars. This 
would most easily be seen by comparison with other 
stars in a cluster, but this evolutionary stage is quite short 
and well-populated clusters of the relevant age are few, 
so this effect is hard to establish. 

These disturbances to the structure of the star lead to 
additional nuclear reactions as a result of material from 
the region outside the reaction zone being drawn into it. 
Deep convection in the envelope then brings reaction 
products to the surface of the star. This is known as the 
third dredge-up mechanism, as there have been earlier 
convective upwellings of processed material. The princi- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 
(J-K), 


Figure 4. The composite near-infrared color-magnitude diagram 
of the upper asymptotic giant branch in star clusters of interme- 
diate age in the Magellanic Clouds. Filled circles are early M 
stars, the open circle is a K star, the open triangles are MS or S 
stars and the crosses are carbon stars. The transition from M via 
S to carbon stars is clear. 


pal reaction products brought to the surface are carbon, 
mainly the 12C isotope produced by the triple-alpha 
process of helium burning, and heavy elements made by 
the slow neutron process (s-process). 

The addition of large quantities of these materials to 
the STELLAR ATMOSPHERE causes spectacular changes to the 
spectral appearance, as these stars are cool enough to 
have spectra dominated by molecules and the principal 
molecules present depend on the chemical composition 
of the atmosphere. 

The very low surface gravity and high luminosity of 
these stars are conducive to mass loss from the stellar 
atmosphere; this is observed and may occur at a high 
rate. Loss of the stellar envelope is the penultimate stage 
before the appearance of a WHITE DWARF star as the end- 
point of the evolution of a star of small or intermediate 
mass; a more massive star will end its giant stage of evo- 
lution in a SUPERNOVA explosion. The ejected material 
from a low-mass star appears for a while as a PLANETARY 
NEBULA in which the material is ionized by the hot stellar 
remnant. The thermally pulsing AGB (TP-AGB) stage of 
evolution is thus one of the most dramatic in the whole 
evolution of a star. 


The changing chemical composition of the 
atmosphere 

Carbon produced by the triple-alpha reaction may 
change the normally oxygen-rich atmosphere to one in 
which carbon is more abundant. Most oxygen and carbon 
atoms are tied up in the CO molecule at the low photo- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


spheric temperature of these stars, so that only the more 
numerous species is available in quantity to form other 
molecules. Thus the spectra of the oxygen-rich M stars are 
dominated by oxygen-bearing molecules such as TiO and 
VO, while Cj, CH and CN are prominent in the spectra of 
the carbon-rich N stars. Stars with C/O very close to 
unity do not have strong bands of carbon- or oxygen- 
bearing molecules, although unusual molecules such as 
CaCl may be present; these stars are called SC or CS stars 
depending on whether they are marginally O or C rich. 
(Figure 5 shows examples of the spectra of cool giant stars 
of different surface composition.) 

Nuclei produced in the STELLAR INTERIOR by the s- 
process are brought to the surface at an early stage and 
their presence is recorded by the appearance of ZrO, YO 
and LaO in oxygen-rich stars. These are classified as S 
stars if the additional bands are comparable with or 
stronger than TiO, or MS stars if these bands are weak. 
The lines of the s-process elements are also enhanced in 
the spectra of most CARBON STARS. Conclusive proof that 
this material is produced by an ongoing process in the 
star itself is provided by the presence of lines of Tc. This 


5000 5500 6000 6500 
WAVELENGTH A 


Figure 5. Optical spectra of M, S, CS and C type in the yellow- 
red spectral region. These show the very different sets of molec- 
ular bands which characterize these stars. These stars, except for 
the carbon star which is of the !3C-rich J subtype, are rather cool 
examples or, as for TT Cen, were observed when the bands were 
strong. The original spectra were taken with an intensified 
Reticon detector at a resolution of 5 A. 


7000 7500 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is an s-process element with a radioactive half life of only 
2x105 yr so that no significant quantity would remain 
from the time when the star was formed. 

The evolutionary sequence M to S to N was pro- 
posed on theoretical grounds and ultimately proved by 
observations of stars of these types at successively high- 
er luminosities on the upper giant branch of star clusters 
in the MAGELLANIC CLOuDS (figure 4). These clusters have 
ages of typically 109 yr and the giant stars have a mass of 
about 2 solar masses. Stars of type S and N are not found 
in the old globular clusters with evolving stars of a solar 
mass or less. Figure 5 illustrates the dramatic difference 
in spectroscopic appearance which results from the 
changing abundances of carbon and the s-process ele- 
ments. The stars shown are galactic field stars which 
were selected as extreme examples with strong bands 
and do not represent an actual evolutionary sequence 
such as is seen in the Magellanic Cloud star clusters. 

The spectra of M stars can be classified in terms of 
parameters which correlate well with surface gravity, 
which gives an indication of luminosity, and the photos- 
pheric temperature. This is not so for the cooler or N- 
type carbon stars, although the hotter R-type carbon 
stars are more tractable. The Na D lines seemed to offer a 
temperature criterion for the N stars, but the C/O ratio 
has a great influence on these and other resonance lines. 
The features which work well as luminosity criteria in 
ordinary giants and dwarfs, notably the Sr II lines and 
CN bands, are affected by the s-process and carbon 
enrichment and cannot be used. The CN strength also 
depends on the N abundance which, unlike the C abun- 
dance in the carbon stars, is essentially that with which 
the star was formed. Thus carbon stars in the Magellanic 
Clouds, which are N deficient, have weaker CN bands 
than most galactic carbon stars. The few galactic N stars 
with weak CN bands have the high space velocity typi- 
cal of the old, metal-deficient stars of the galactic halo. 

The transition from M to S to N occurs at a spectral 
type of about M4 in the Magellanic Cloud clusters. The 
stars near the transition are either constant in light or at 
most show small variations; these clusters contain a few 
much redder stars which are the mass-losing stars at the 
tip of the AGB. Thus the transition occurs well below the 
tip of the AGB in these moderately metal-deficient stars 
of two solar masses. The transition may occur at different 
points in different systems, for instance there are no N 
stars in the Central Bulge of the Galaxy although O-rich 
M stars are very common. 

The Central Bulge of our Galaxy contains a very 
metal-rich old population. The quantity of carbon which 
must be dredged up to produce a carbon star depends on 
the relative quantities of oxygen and carbon which are 
present to start with, and it will be less if there is rela- 
tively little oxygen as in the case of a metal-deficient star. 
The trend of an increasing proportion of carbon stars in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


the sense galactic center, solar neighborhood, LMC, SMC 
may be dictated primarily by the metal content which 
decreases in this sense. It may be affected also by the dis- 
tribution of stellar masses, which in turn depends on the 
history of star formation in each system. 

There are also red giants of unusual surface compo- 
sition which cannot have arisen in this way, mainly 
because the luminosity is far below that at which the 
third dredge-up occurs. The CH STARS AND BARIUM STARS, 
which are hotter and fainter than the stars described 
above, and some S stars which lack Tc lines so that their 
s-process material may be ancient, are found to be mem- 
bers of binary systems. The companions, when detected, 
are white dwarfs. This suggests that the companion was 
initially of higher mass and has already passed through 
the red giant stage. The processed material which gives 
the characteristic spectrum of the star now in the giant 
stage may therefore be attributed to reactions within the 
formerly more massive companion. This material would 
have been transferred when the original primary reached 
the mass-losing stage, or perhaps earlier if it overfilled its 
ROCHE LOBE as soon as processed material reached the 
surface layers. The existence of subdwarf and even dwarf 
CH and carbon stars is most easily understood in this 
way. 

The R stars are the hotter carbon stars and are an 
inhomogeneous group. They include CH stars and the 
hydrogen-deficient carbon stars. The latter include the R 
Coronae Borealis stars, which undergo deep visual fad- 
ing when clouds of soot are ejected. The carbon is almost 
pure !2C and it is thought that these stars represent the 
final ‘reborn’ giant phase of the carbon core produced by 
the triple-alpha process of helium burning; as such they 
fall off the main line of evolution described above. Many 
of the remaining R stars form a group difficult to under- 
stand. There are unusually few binary stars among them 
while the spectra are characterized by a low 122C/18C 
ratio, suggesting that the carbon has been processed 
through the CNO cycle in a hydrogen-burning zone, and 
by the absence of an enhancement of the s-process ele- 
ments. One possibility is that the helium core flash at the 
top of the RGB took an unusual course so that the prod- 
ucts of hydrogen-burning were dredged up in quantity. 
The star would then be a carbon star at the red giant 
clump and throughout its ascent of the AGB. Theoretical 
calculations cast doubt on this: they indicate that only 
stars of exceptionally low metal content can become car- 
bon stars in this way—such carbon stars have been dis- 
covered recently. 

Some of the cooler N stars also have a low 12C/18C 
ratio: these are often called J stars. These amount to only 
about 15% of the local N star population, so it is surpris- 
ing that many of the CH stars in both globular clusters 
and the field exhibit this property, which might suggest 
that the donor stars were not typical of carbon stars in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


general. It has been proposed instead that the process of 
mass transfer caused deep convection in the stellar enve- 
lope of the receiving star, so that some of the material in 
the envelope has been processed by the CNO cycle in the 
H-burning shell. 


Variability and mass loss 

The coolest and most luminous stars are intrinsic VARI- 
ABLE STARS. The variability is usually at least quasi-peri- 
odic, with periods of a few hundred days in the case of 
the stars of larger amplitude. These are the long-period 
variables, divided into semiregular and MIRA VARIABLES. 
The latter are conventionally defined by having visual 
amplitudes greater than 2.5mag. They are also more reg- 
ular and have longer periods. The visual amplitudes may 
be as great as 10 magnitudes in the case of some M and S 
stars. The TiO bands become very strong when the star is 
coolest and depress the luminosity in the V band, so that 
the amplitude is much greater than it would be in a star 
without absorption bands. The corresponding ampli- 
tudes at 2 um are only 1-2 mag. The carbon stars do not 
have such strong molecular bands in the V band and 
generally have much smaller amplitudes in visual light. 

A few stars have shown large abrupt changes in 
period and amplitude, indicating changes in the mode of 
pulsation, and the precise MACHO photometry of a 
large sample of stars in the Magellanic Clouds shows 
that several pulsation modes are possible and that more 
than one may be active at the same time in a given star. 
Several relationships between period and other proper- 
ties are known. The longer-period stars have lower space 
velocities and so belong to a younger population, while 
among those in globular clusters the most metal-rich 
clusters have the stars of longer period. None is known 
in very metal-deficient clusters. The central bulge of the 
Galaxy, where the metal abundance is high, has relative- 
ly more Miras of very long period (around 500 days) than 
the solar neighborhood. 

Infrared studies have revealed large quantities of 
dust around many of the most luminous giant stars. 
Most Mira variables and many semiregulars show emis- 
sion from dust at 12 um the Miras are systematically 
brighter at this wavelength relative to the photospheric 
emission at 2 um. The few Miras in globular clusters 
have comparatively little circumstellar dust, which is 
made of the heavier elements which are deficient in glob- 
ular cluster stars. The Miras of longer period all have 
dust shells. The most extreme cases, Miras of very long 
period, are invisible in the optical region because of the 
great extinction by the dust. The O-rich stars among 
them usually have strong OH maser emission in the 
microwave region and are known as OH/IR stars 
because they are observable only at these longer wave- 
lengths. Many visible Miras and some semiregulars 
show weaker OH emission. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Maser emission from SiO and HO is also sometimes 
observed, but from different radial regions. SiO emission 
arises relatively near the photosphere and OH from very 
far out in the shell, while H2O is located at an intermedi- 
ate radius. The microwave emission in the form of sharp 
lines allows the measurement of radial velocities and it is 
found that the material is generally in the form of a shell 
with an expansion velocity of up to a few tens of kilo- 
meters per second. The combination of the expansion 
velocity with an estimate of the size of the shell and the 
density of the material allows the rate of mass loss to be 
estimated. The mass loss becomes observable at a rate of 
about 10-7 solar masses per year, and reaches 10+ solar 
masses per year in the most extreme cases. This stage of 
evolution is necessarily shortlived, as is also apparent 
from the scarcity of such stars. 

The dust emission has its own characteristic spec- 
trum, dominated by silicate emission bands at 9.7 and 18 
um in the O-rich stars and by SiC emission at 11.4 um in 
the carbon stars. The OH/IR stars show silicate absorp- 
tion features but SiC is rarely seen in absorption in heav- 
ily obscured carbon stars. Carbon-based dust grains 
absorb more heavily in the optical region than does the 
silicate material around the oxygen-rich stars, so that a 
higher proportion of carbon stars are optically invisible. 
Many have only recently been found by infrared studies 
and it appears that the carbon Miras which are known 
from optical searches are only the less-obscured tail of a 
much larger population. 

The ejection of material from the red giant stars is 
unlikely to occur at a constant rate. Long-continued 
observations of carbon-rich Miras show that the mean 
brightness varies on a time scale of decades (figure 6). 


7.5 
3 
an} 
. e 
3 

fo 
10 . 
e 
12.5 


6000 8000 10000 12000 


JD 2440000+ 


Figure 6. The light curve of the carbon Mira, R Lep, from visual 
observations by amateur astronomers in South Africa. The 
appearance of the resonance lines of Na, K and Rb and the C) 
bands in emission coincided with the marked fading of the over- 
all light curve near JD 2 450 000 when two successive minima 
were exceptionally faint. These emission features disappeared 
rapidly when the star brightened up again. The last maximum 
shown is the brightest for many years. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


These stars are much redder during their faint episodes 
in a manner consistent with increased extinction by dust. 
The visible light spectrum is normally dominated by 
absorption bands of C, but during a faint episode these 
bands appear in emission instead; the resonance lines of 
Na, K and Rb appear in emission at the same time. This 
is suggestive of resonance fluorescence emission; the 
geometry remains to be established. 

Hubble Space Telescope pictures of some stars with 
bright circumstellar material show many apparently con- 
centric shells which suggests that mass loss has been 
episodic. The time scale is probably that of the helium 
shell instability which must cause major re-organization 
of the envelope and so disrupt the mass loss process. 

Recent studies in which stars were selected by the 
IRAS and ISO infrared satellites for their far-infrared 
emission have revealed M stars with as much circumstel- 
lar material as the Mira variables but which are not con- 
spicuously variable. These could be stars which alternate 
between Mira and small-amplitude pulsations, the dense 
shell being produced during the Mira episodes. The situ- 
ation may alternatively imply that pulsation of large 
amplitude is not the only way to initiate large-scale mass 
loss. The flat energy distribution of some stars which are 
not variables of large amplitude but which have excess 
emission at both 3 um and 60 um relative to a typical 
Mira, may indicate that the circumstellar material is in a 
disk. The most extreme examples of stars with this type 
of energy distribution, which is not confined to very cool 
stars, sometimes show emission of the resonance lines of 
Na, K and Rb. This may be understood by a model, first 
put forward for the M star VY CMa, in which the star is 
hidden by an edge-on dust disk and is visible only by 
reflection from circumstellar material out of the plane of 
the disk. The resonance emission arises in this material. 

The J-silicate carbon stars are an enigmatic group 
which combine the photospheric spectra of carbon stars 
with the circumstellar material normally associated with 
oxygen-rich stars. The J notation refers to the enhance- 
ment of !8C in the spectra of most members of this group. 
These stars have a large value of the IRAS [12]-[25] index, 
in the range 0.8-1.8. Normal optically visible carbon stars 
nearly all have [12]-[25] <0.6 and redder objects are hid- 
den by their circumstellar dust. OH and HO emission is 
seen in some cases, in agreement with the inference that 
the circumstellar material is O rich. The velocity structure 
suggests that the material is in a disk, and this is support- 
ed by the excess emission in the near infrared (around 3 
um) which is measured in some cases. A disk is a much 
longer-lived structure than an expanding shell and it is 
possible that O-rich material ejected in the previous evo- 
lution of the star, before it became a carbon star, has been 
retained in this way. The existence of a disk, formed from 
ejected material, around a single star is not easy to under- 
stand, but would be facilitated if the star is in a binary 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


system. No direct evidence for the presence of compan- 
ions has been forthcoming. Dusty disks of this type seem 
to be peculiar to J-type carbon stars, as similar near 
infrared excesses have not been found in ordinary N 
stars, although they are known in some M-type stars. 


Giant stars in binary systems 

Giant stars are not found in short-period binary systems 
because they would not fit. A star in a binary may evolve 
normally until it expands to fill its Roche lobe, following 
which further expansion will lead to rapid mass loss to 
the companion. The minimum separation of a binary sys- 
tem is thus such that neither star has filled its Roche lobe 
during its evolution to date. The present stellar radius 
may be much less than the maximum in the past. A clas- 
sical Cepheid, a star with typically five times the mass of 
the Sun and in the core-helium-burning stage of evolu- 
tion, would fit into a system with an orbital period of 
about 40 days, but the shortest periods known for binary 
systems containing Cepheids are about 500 days. This 
reflects the radius of the Cepheid when it was at the tip 
of the first ascent of the giant branch. Similarly, the min- 
imum binary separation which will accommodate a star 
of the red giant clump is that which would accommodate 
the star when it was at the tip of the RGB. 

Giant stars in binary systems may show evidence of 
interaction in the past, even though there has not been 
overflow of the Roche lobe. The orbits of the systems 
with the shortest orbital periods, with one component 
which is close to filling its Roche lobe, are invariably cir- 
cular. A mean separation in excess of that of the smallest 
possible circular orbit is required to accommodate the 
giant star if that the minimum separation of an orbit is 
eccentric, as there must be space for the giant star when 
the stars are closest together. Tidal interaction works to 
reduce the eccentricity. 

K giants which are members of binary systems with 
orbital periods less than about 100 days often show 
enhanced chromospheric activity, resulting in strong 
emission reversals of the Ca II H and K lines. Many show 
light variations caused by large starspots which move 
across the line of sight as the star rotates, so the light of 
the star is modulated at the rotational period of the star. 
There is normally close synchronism between the period 
of rotation of the giant star and the orbital period of the 
binary system. This is also a consequence of tidal inter- 
action between the components. 

The binaries where the separation is such that the 
evolving (giant) star will fill the Roche lobe set by the 
gravitational field of its companion undergo mass 
exchange from the evolving star to its companion. Mass 
loss from the system is also likely, in which case the size 
of the orbit will be affected. Gas in the system, whether 
in transit from one star to the other or in a ring or disk 
around one of the stars, may contribute atomic emission 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lines to the spectrum of the system. The evolving star 
generally loses so much mass that it is stripped down 
and becomes the fainter of the pair, although it still has a 
large radius. This is the type of system which, seen edge- 
on, will undergo Algol-type eclipses. The now-fainter 
star is difficult to study without interference from the 
companion, but analyses of the light from the photo- 
spheres and coronae of several stars have shown that the 
chemical composition has been altered by the dredging- 
up of nuclear reaction products to the surface. There is 
increasing interest in the idea that some of the chemical- 
ly-peculiar stars may owe their nature to such extreme 
interactions with companions which, unlike in the case 
of the Algol systems, are too faint to be obvious in the 
combined light of the system. 

SYMBIOTIC STARS and some NOVAE in which the mass 
donating, non-degenerate component is a giant belong to 
the class of cataclysmic variables. The strong stellar wind 
of the giant may suffice to drive such activity even if the 
giant star does not overflow its Roche lobe. The type star 
of the Mira variables, Mira Ceti is a marginal example of 
this type. It has a companion star, at a distance of a few 
arcseconds, which has H emission lines and is variable. It 
shows both erratic rapid variability, caused by variable 
accretion, and long-term variability, which may result 
from changes in an accretion disk. These phenomena are 
best seen in the ultraviolet spectral region, to which the 
red giant contributes little. 

More massive giant binaries, in which mass inter- 
change has not yet had major evolutionary conse- 
quences, may be detected by their composite colours and 
spectra when the companion is a dwarf of type A or B 
and comparable in luminosity with the giant. Some of 
these systems have nearly edge-on orbits so that the 
small hot star acts as a probe of the atmosphere of the 
giant star when it passes behind it. Lines arising in the 
atmosphere or extended atmosphere of the giant are seen 
projected on the featureless spectrum of the hot star. 
Velocities and densities in the atmosphere of the giant 
star may be studied in this way. Dense clumps of gas 
have been found in the extended atmospheres of K 
supergiant stars in binaries by this means. 


Stars in globular clusters 

The globular clusters in our Galaxy show a wide range in 
chemical composition. The ratio Fe/H ranges from a 
value not far below solar to over 100 times less. The 
sharpness of the giant branch and the good agreement of 
the results of spectroscopic abundance analyses of the 
individual stars indicate that there is little spread in the 
iron abundance within a cluster, with the notable excep- 
tion of Omega Centauri and possibly also M22. There is 
a relatively small range in age, of perhaps two billion 
years compared to an average age of over ten billion 
years, among the globular clusters in our Galaxy. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


globular clusters were the first clusters to be formed in 
the Galaxy and nothing similar appears to have been 
formed in our Galaxy since, although some nearby galax- 
ies contain rich young clusters. 

The much smaller numbers of stars in the younger 
open clusters do not suffice to study the giant branch in 
such detail, although the populous young and inter- 
mediate-age clusters in the Magellanic Clouds as well as 
the DWARF SPHEROIDAL GALAXIES which appear to have a 
simple star formation history help to fill in the gaps. The 
globular clusters allow the location of the giant branch, 
sometimes known as the Hayashi track, to be studied as a 
function of chemical composition at constant age. The 
giant branch is displaced to the red in the color-magni- 
tude diagrams for clusters of higher metal content and 
this has been calibrated spectroscopically, so that the 
metal content of more distant systems can be estimated 
from photometric data alone. Theory and observation 
show that mass differences have a much smaller effect on 
the colour of the RGB. The low mass and reduced metal 
content of the evolving stars in globular clusters preclude 
many of the phenomena we see in stars of the solar neigh- 
borhood. There are no long period Miras, no stars with 
thick dust shells and no carbon or S stars on the thermal- 
ly pulsing asymptotic giant branch. The CH stars in sev- 
eral clusters are evidence that these phenomena occurred 
in more massive stars earlier in the life of the cluster. 

The giant globular cluster Omega Centauri has long 
been known for having a broad giant branch, which is 
attributable to a range of metal content in the cluster. It 
has been shown recently to have stars of a range of age as 
well, and this has lead to the suggestion that it may be 
the remnant of a small galaxy cannibalised by the Milky 
Way. The chemical composition deviates from those 
found in other clusters as well as in the Galaxy at large, 
in that the stars of higher metal content show an excep- 
tionally high ratio of the s-process elements to the iron 
group. The coolest stars show strong bands of ZrO and 
are classified as S stars. They are too faint to owe their 
overabundance of s-process elements to the operation of 
the third dredge-up themselves, and have presumably 
formed with this unusual composition as the result of 
incorporating material ejected by an earlier generation of 
more massive AGB stars. 

The more metal-rich clusters such as 47 Tuc have 
short stubby horizontal branches, close to the giant 
branch, while the metal-deficient clusters have more 
extended or even predominantly blue horizontal branch- 
es. The discovery of clusters with red horizontal branch- 
es far out in the galactic halo suggested that, contrary to 
expectation, these clusters were relatively metal rich. It 
was soon found that the form of the horizontal branch is 
not solely a function of metal content and that a second 
parameter is involved. Age appeared as a likely con- 
tender for the second parameter but age determinations 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


from photometry of main sequence stars show that the 
age range among globular clusters cannot account for 
this. The clusters with red horizontal branches, other 
than those of relatively high metal content, are generally 
small or have a low central concentration. Stars on the 
blue horizontal branch are thought to have lost much of 
the mass of their envelopes, so it has been suggested that 
blue horizontal branch stars could have suffered strip- 
ping of the envelope by close stellar interaction in a 
densely crowded environment. 


Massive stars 

Much of our discussion so far has related to giant stars of 
low mass, typically less than about two solar masses on 
the RGB. Stars of higher mass differ in a number of ways. 
The red giant clump becomes brighter and somewhat 
bluer and the stage of core helium burning is now known 
as the blue loop. The loop extends to higher surface tem- 
perature for stars of higher mass or lower metal content. 
A star may pulsate as a Cepheid when it passes through 
the instability strip which lies well to the blue of the giant 
branch, and classical Cepheids, with masses between 3 
and 9 solar masses, will be most common when the long- 
lived core-helium-burning stage falls within the instabil- 
ity strip. Subsequently the star will return to the giant 
branch. Observations of Magellanic Cloud stars suggest 
that stars of mass up to about 7 times that of the Sun pass 
through the AGB stage as described above, although the 
more massive stars do not become carbon stars. 

Stars with moderate S characteristics (MS stars) are 
prominent among the most luminous identifiable AGB 
stars in the Magellanic Clouds. This is probably because 
increased CNO cycling converts carbon into nitrogen, so 
that there could in principle be nitrogen stars which, as 
C/O would be less than unity, would not be readily dis- 
tinguishable from M stars. It is also possible that severe 
mass loss sets in to terminate evolution on the AGB 
before the C/O ratio exceeds unity, while the massive 
envelope of a star of high mass requires more processed 
material than that of a low-mass star to change its com- 
position. 

The mass range of these stars, 3-7 solar masses, 
implies that mid to late B-type main sequence stars and 
Cepheid variables may evolve into carbon stars or Mira 
variables but to date there is little direct evidence for this 
from the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD clusters. The clusters 
containing carbon stars all have evolving stars within a 
relatively small mass range, 1.5-2.5 solar masses, but this 
appears to be limited on both sides by the age limits of a 
burst of star formation in the Large Magellanic Cloud. 
The failure to find carbon stars in clusters with B type 
main sequence stars and classical Cepheids may simply 
reflect a lack of large clusters of the correct age group. 

Stars of still higher mass do not pass through the 
same evolutionary stages. Stars of mass around 10-15 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


times the mass of the Sun become M supergiants with 
luminosity class Ia, Ib or II rather than the luminosity 
class III giants of the lower mass stars. The Hertzsprung 
gap between the main sequence and the giant branch 
stars widens with increasing luminosity and there are 
few red supergiants of type earlier than MO. They are 
rarely of spectral type later than M3, that is they do not 
become as cool as the giants, and variables of large 
amplitude are almost unknown. One of the few excep- 
tions is S Per, of spectral type M4—5 and with an ampli- 
tude which can reach 5 mag at times. These stars are 
found in several young star clusters in the Galaxy, with a 
concentration in the association around the Perseus 
Double Cluster. 

The M supergiants have extensive circumstellar 
dust. The theoretical evolutionary tracks are nearly hori- 
zontal in the HR diagram plotted with luminosity or 
bolometric magnitude as ordinate. There is a loop to the 
blue after a red supergiant stage, then perhaps a second 
spell as a red supergiant before the star evolves to the 
blue again. The great width of the Hertzsprung gap 
implies very rapid evolution across the HR diagram, so 
that the evolved stars spend almost all their time as blue 
(spectral type B) or red (M) supergiants and move quick- 
ly through the intervening yellow supergiant stage. 
Supergiants of the intervening types, A, F, G and K, are 
known but are rare. 


Bibliography 

There is an enormous literature on red giants but several 
excellent reviews cover major parts of the topic. The 
Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics is an 
excellent source and several recent reviews may be 
cited 


Chiosi C, Bertelli G and Bressan A 1992 New develop- 
ments in understanding the HR diagram Annu. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 30 235-85 

Gustafsson B 1989 Chemical analyses of cool stars Annu. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 27 701-56 

Renzini A and Fusi Pecci F 1988 Tests of evolutionary 
sequences using color-magnitude diagrams of glob- 
ular clusters Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 199-244 


A detailed account of our present understanding of the 
ascent of the red giant branch by low mass stars is 
given by 

Salaris M, Cassisi S and Weiss A 2002 Red Giant Branch 
Stars: The Theoretical Framework Publs Astr. Soc. 
Pacific 114 375-402 


Arecent review of our knowledge of carbon stars is given 
by 

Wallerstein G and Knapp G R 1998 Carbon stars Annu. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 369-433 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Red Giant Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A wide-ranging review of the field as of a decade ago is 
given in 

Johnson H R and Zuckerman B (ed) 1989 Evolution of 
Peculiar Red Giant Stars (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

See also 


Wing R F (ed) 2000 The Carbon Star Phenomenon 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


A comprehensive review of the physical processes lead- 
ing to the manufacture of heavy elements in stars, 
containing much information on the observational 
properties of the stars involved, is given by 


Wallerstein G et al 1997 Rev. Mod. Phys. 69 995-1084 


And also by 


Sugimoto D, Fujimoto M 2000 Why Stars Become Red 
Giants Astrophys. J. 538 837-53 


The explanation for the expansion to the red giant stage 
is given in 

Renzini A, Greggio L, Ritossa C and Ferrario L 1992 Why 
stars inflate to and deflate from red giant dimen- 
sions Astrophys. J. 200 280 


The complex field of abundance anomalies in globular 
cluster stars is reviewed by 


Kraft R P 1994 Abundance Differences Among Globular- 
Cluster Giants: Primordial Versus Evolutionary 
Scenarios Publs Astr. Soc. Pacific 106 553-565 


And by 


Da Costa G 1998 Abundance Anomalies in Globular 
Clusters Fundamental Stellar Properties: The Interaction 
between Observation and Theory (IAU Symposium 189) 
ed Bedding T R, Booth A J and Bavis J (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 193-202 

Tom Lloyd Evans 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Redman, Richard Oliver (1905-75) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Redman, Richard Oliver (1905-75) 


English astronomer, became director of the Cambridge 
Observatories. A solar astronomer and an instrumentalist, 
he analysed the solar chromosphere, as well as playing an 
active role in specifying and supervising the building of 
the Anglo-Australian Telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Redshift 


The redshift (or blueshift) of an object is the displacement 
of its spectral features to longer (or shorter) wavelengths 
due to a combination of the gravitational redshift, Doppler 
motions and the general expansion of the Universe. More 
properly, the term RADIAL vELociTy is used primarily for 
the Doppler motions, which are usually the result of 
gravitational interactions, while redshift is reserved for the 
cosmological and direct gravitational effects. Redshift, z, 
is defined in wavelength as 


where the subscripts 0 and e refer to observed and emitted. 
In the frequency domain, redshift is defined as 


Ve— Vo _ Ve 1 


Vo Vo 


Z= 


The dichotomy between these formulae is due to the 
fact that redshift causes wavelengths to increase and 
frequencies to decrease. 

The redshift any given object can be decomposed as 


Ztotal = Zgrav + Zphysical + ZH 


where zy is the cosmological redshift due to Hubble 
expansion and Zphysical is the redshift due to the physical 
motion of the object with respect to the observer. In an 
expanding universe, the cosmological redshift is always 
positive (objects are always redshifted). The gravitational 
redshift as observed from the Earth is also generally always 
positive, but the physical motions of stars or galaxies 
can produce both redshifts and blueshifts, depending on 
whether the induced motion is away from or towards the 
observer respectively. 

The gravitational redshift is due to the loss of energy 
light suffers when leaving a deep gravitational potential. 
Indeed, if the potential is strong enough, light cannot 
escape, the gravitational redshift is infinite and and a BLACK 
HOLE results. The gravitational redshift of a photon emitted 
at radius r; and observed at radius r. from a central mass 


is given by 
Av = —GM /1 1 
pv © rh fo) - 


Gravitational redshifts have been measured in the Sun 
(see e.g. SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: THE LIMB EFFECT AND GRAVITATIONAL 
REDSHIFT) and in only a small number of dense stellar objects 
such as WHITE DwaRF stars. For example, the gravitational 
redshift of light leaving the surface of the white dwarf 
star Sirius B and viewed at infinity (or the Earth!) is 
about 0.000 06 or, in velocity units, cz ~ 19 km s-!. The 
gravitational redshift of light leaving the surface of the Sun, 
which is much less dense than Sirus B and so has a much 
smaller gravitational potential well, is about 0.000002, or 
only 0.6 km s7!. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


25000 


Redshift—Distance Relation Ld 


for Type Ia Supernovae 


20000 


15000 


10000 


Redshift (cz in km/s) 


5000 


1 | i 1 
0 100 200 300 
Distance (Megaparsecs) 


So 
o 


Figure 1. The redshift—distance relation for type Ia supernovae 
from the Calan-Tololo supernova survey (from data courtesy of 
S Jha, Harvard-Smithsonian). Redshift is given as cz and the 
distance is in megaparsecs (1 Mpc is approximately 3.26 million 
light years). The line through the data represents a Hubble 
constant of 65 km s~! Mpc“, close to the value astronomers 
measure today. 


Physical motions are most often gravitational in 
nature, such as the orbital motion of the Earth around 
the Sun. The Earth is in a nearly circular orbit around 
the Sun at a velocity of ~ 29.7 km s-!. An observer 
at the outskirts of the solar system and in the plane 
of Earth’s orbit would see the velocity of the Earth 
relative to the Sun vary sinusoidally between +29.7 and 
—29.7kms~!. On cosmological scales, physical velocities 
are also generally caused by the orbital motions of galaxies 
around each other or around a common center of mass 
such as the deep potential well of a CLUSTER OF GALAXIES. 
The largest extragalactic physical velocities seen in the 
nearby universe are found for galaxies orbiting in clusters 
of galaxies (~1500 km s~! or z = 0.005), kinematics in 
the central regions of QUASARS and ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI 
(~10000 km s“! or z = 0.035, and our Galaxy’s motion 
with respect to the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND reference 
frame (630 km s~!, ~z = 0.002) 

Outside the nearby Universe, redshifts or apparent 
radial velocities are dominated by the cosmological 
expansion. This expansion is more properly described as 
the stretching of the metric or yardstick. In the standard 
mathematical description of cosmology, the Friedmann-— 
Lemaitre model, distances are defined in terms of the 
Robertson—Walker metric, the most general mathematical 
description for a uniform, homogeneous space that is 
expanding or contracting: 


2 


2_ 24,24 p2 A 
ds“ = c dt +R (Se 


+r sin? 6 ao’) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


200 i + 


150 4 


100 i 


| | | | 
4000 4500 5000 5500 


Wavelength (angstroms) 


(4) 


FRC | 


Loc > ly 


Me 


4qoco 45500 cooc 


Sooo 


Wavelength (Cengstrame) 


(0) 


Figure 2. (a) The spectrum of a normal galaxy with strong 
absorption features due to common chemical elements, Ca, Mg, 
Fe, etc. The redshift of the galaxy is z = 0.0455 

(cz = 13624 km s~'). (b) The spectrum of a galactic star similar 
to the stars dominating the light of the galaxy in (a), but at a 
redshift near zero. The strongest absorption lines seen in both 
the star and the galaxy are the Call doublet at 3933 + 3968 A and 
the G-band (a mix of Fe, Mn, Cr and other metals) at 4300 AIn 
the star, these features are seen nearly at their rest wavelengths. 
In the galaxy, the Ca lines have been shifted to 4110 and 4150 A, 


and the G-band is nearly at 4500 A. The ‘redshift’ is that shift to 
longer, redder wavelengths. 


for spherical coordinates r,@,¢ and time coordinate ct. 
R(t) is the scale factor, a function of time that is specified by 
the laws of gravity, and k is the curvature constant, either 
—1,1 or 0 for an open, closed or flat space geometry. 

In an expanding universe, the cosmological redshift 
of an object is directly related to its distance. Light travels 
onnull geodesics, ds = 0. Therefore a burst of light emitted 
from a source at some coordinate distance r; and time tf, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


will be received by an observer at coordinate r = 0 and 
time fp, and will be given by 


[ dr/(1 — kr?)'/? = de dt/R(t). 
0 le 


The left-hand side of this equation is constant in time, 
while the right-hand side evolves as the photons propagate 
from the source to the observer. If another burst of light is 
emitted after an interval d¢,, then the integral on the left- 
hand side is unchanged, so that dt./R. = dtp/Ro. We can 
consider dt to be the time between peaks of a continuous 
wave, and since the frequency of the wave is the inverse 
of the interval between peaks, we have 


Ve/Vo = Ao/he =1+z= R(t)/R(te). 


Thus photon wavelengths simply stretch with the 
universe. For small separations, the redshift z is 
proportional to the distance D to the galaxy, cz = HAoD, 
where ; 

R(t) 


SREP 


is the HUBBLE CONSTANT, named for the discoverer of the 
expansion of the Universe. The form of this equation 
is the reason that redshift is often quoted as apparent 
radial velocity, cz. Note that there is no special relativistic 
1/(1 + v?/c”) correction applied—apparent radial velocity 
is just cz. 

There are several definitions of distance in cosmology. 
The proper distance to an object is the integral of the scale 
factor over the metric: 


" dr; R(t) 
Dp — R(t) | = Sez 
0 1—kr? R(t) 
which again reduces to the standard redshift—distance 


relation 
cZ 


Dp=—. 
P TR 


Other definitions of distance are defined by physical 
properties of objects, and include luminosity distance and 
angular diameter distance. These different distances are 
also described in any specific COSMOLOGICAL MODEL in terms 
of the redshift and the scale factor R(t). 

Another key parameter for observers and theorists 
alike is the lookback time to a given redshift. This depends 
not only on the Hubble constant but also the specific 
cosmological model. For variants of the Friedmann— 
Lemaitre models we have been considering, lookback time 
is given by the integral equation 


a 
oA = Hs? | (1+z)*[(1+z)?(1-Qz)—2(2+z) Qa] dz 
0 


derived by Caroll, Press and Turner (1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 30 499). Here Qy is the ratio of the mean matter 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


density of the universe to the closure density and Q, is the 
effective density in a cosmological constant 


Q A 
Bee 

The first significant extragalactic redshift was that of 
the ANDROMEDA GALAXY (M31) measured by Vesto Slipher 
in 1912. EDWIN HUBBLE discovered the empirical linear 
correlation between redshift and distance for nearby 
galaxies in the late 1920s, although we now know 
that Hubble’s original redshift-distance relation, 600 
kilometers per second per megaparsec, was nearly a factor 
of ten too steep—today’s value lies near 65 km s~! Mpc"?. 
A modern version of the redshift-distance relation based 
on type Ia SUPERNOVAE is shown in figure 1. 

Redshifts are measured spectroscopically by measur- 
ing the shift of spectral features of known wavelength and 
frequency. This is done by either measuring individual 
lines such as the 21 cm emission line of neutral hydro- 
gen in the radio or the strong absorption features found 
in the atmospheres of cool giant stars that dominate the 
optical spectrum of most galaxies, or by cross-correlating 
the galaxy spectrum with a template spectrum of a similar 
star at known redshift. The spectrum of a galaxy which 
is at a redshift of 13624 km s~! is shown in figure 2 along 
with that of a star in our own galaxy at a redshift near zero 
(see also GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT). 

In the last few decades, astronomers have begun 
to map the nearby Universe by measuring redshifts for 
samples of thousands of galaxies (see GALAXY REDSHIFT 
suRVEYS). Maps such as that shown in figure 3 have revealed 
the complex tapestry of the large scale distribution of 
galaxies. 


John Huchra 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Redshift ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


15000 


Figure 3. A redshift survey of a broad slice of the nearby Universe. The view is down on a wedge similar to a slice of an orange that is 
22° thick and extends out to z = 0.05 (cz = 15000 km s~!). Each point represents a galaxy and there are approximately 5600 galaxies in 
the plot. We are at the origin or apex of the wedge. The large structure crossing the wedge is the Great Wall of galaxies. The structures 
that point at the origin are clusters of galaxies; the individual galaxies in each cluster are actually in a relatively small volume of space 
but appear stretched out towards and away from the observer (the origin) when plotted in redshift space due to the physical motions 
of the galaxies orbiting each other in the gravtational potential well of the cluster. In real space, they would appear essentially all at the 
same distance, about the mid-point of the ‘finger of God’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Rees, Sir Martin John (1942-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rees, Sir Martin John (1942-) 


British cosmologist, became Plumian Professor of Astron- 
omy at Cambridge and in 1995 Astronomer Royal (an hon- 
orary office by then separated from the directorship of the 
Royal Observatory at Greenwich). His forte is to be able 
to model any astrophysical phenomenon with physical in- 
sight, and he has successfully applied this technique to 
quasars, x-ray sources, gamma ray bursters, galaxy for- 
mation, galaxy clustering and the cosmic background ra- 
diation. Successful lobbier for and popularizer of science. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Reeves, Hubert (1932-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reeves, Hubert (1932-) 


French astrophysicist, born in Montreal, Quebec, became 
Directeur De Recherche Scientifique, Centre Nationale de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, and specialized in nuclear 
astrophysics, studying the reactions in the centres of stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Reference Frames and Time Scales in General 
Relativity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reference Frames and Time Scales in 
General Relativity 


In relativity one considers events to be described by points 
in a four-dimensional sPAcE-TIME manifold. Let x" (u = 
0, 1, 2, 3), be a set of coordinates in a certain part of the 
space-time manifold. x° = ct is a time coordinate t 
multiplied by the speed of light, c, to gain the dimension 
of length. x',i = 1,2,3 are three spatial coordinates. 
If such a coordinate system is actually used in practice 
(e.g. for some EPHEMERIDES of solar system bodies) it is also 
called a reference system. A reference frame presents a 
materialization of a reference system. This materialization 
is obtained by association of some observed events with 
corresponding space-time coordinates. In astronomy, 
observations of satellites, solar system bodies, stars or 
extragalactic radio sources can be employed for that 
purpose (see SPACE AND TIME REFERENCES, CONCEPTS). 

To describe the observables theoretically in a 
coordinate-independent manner a so-called local reference 
frame is often introduced. Such a local reference frame 
is defined by a set of four orthogonal unit vectors eta) 
(a = 0,1, 2,3) moving with the observer. eo) is related 
with the passage of time as experienced by the observer 
and et) i = 1,2, 3 present three spatial reference directions. 


Metric tensor and coordinates 

The fundamental object of relativity and Einstein’s theory 
of gravity is the so-called metric tensor g,,, of space-time. 
This metric tensor describes the infinitesimal distance ds 
between two neighboring points x“ and x" + dx" by 


ds? = guy dx" dx” 
where a summation over jz, v = 0,1, 2,3 is implied. This 


means: a 
ds? = S s Suv Ax" dx”. 


pu=0 v=0 


In the absence of gravitational fields one can choose 
Cartesian inertial coordinates such that the metric tensor 
takes the simple form 


8a = fw = diag(—1, 1,1, 1) 


which means: 


800 = —1 
31 
8i0 = 0. 


This form is valid in any of such inertial coordinate 
systems; from this one finds that if (ct, x) and (ct’, x) are 
two such coordinate systems, where the two origins move 
with constant speed relative to each other, the two systems 
are related by a Lorentz transformation. If the velocity is in 
the direction of common x-axes this transformation reads: 


Hee t—vx/c? i x — vt 
— Vt-0/er 1-0/0 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


One basic property of the metric tensor is its relation 
with the proper time t indicated by some (idealized) 
atomic clock. Let z'(t) describe the motion of the clock 
in the chosen coordinate system then (dz° = c dr) 


ds? = —c? dr? = g,, dz" dz’. 


If gravitational fields are considered, the metric tensor 
has to be determined by Einstein’s field equations of 
Einstein’s theory of gravity (general relativity theory, 
GRT). The so-called post-Newtonian framework presents 
a slow-motion weak-field approximation to GRT. To 
lowest order, the gravitational potential U enters the time— 
time component of the metric tensor: 


2U 
800 = -1+ = + O(c). 
Cc 
For the motion of solar system bodies the post-Newtonian 


metric must be developed to higher powers of c~! and can 
be written in the form 


2w  2w? 
ses ate = 6 SO?) 
Cc Cc 
4 
80i = = eee 


2w fy 
8ij = by (1 + =) +O(c4). 


Here, 6;; is the Kronecker symbol, the scalar potential 
w generalizes the Newtonian potential U and the vector 
potential w; describes magnetic-type gravitational effects 
related for instance with the Lense—Thirring acceleration 
due to the gravito-magnetic effect in a rotating body. 


Barycentric and geocentric coordinates 

Let (ct, x‘) be barycentric coordinates with origin at the 
center of mass of the whole solar system. If we forget 
about the rest of our universe and consider our solar 
system to be isolated we might choose these coordinates to 
extend to infinity such that far from the origin the metric 
tensor approaches f,,,. Such coordinates are called global, 
asymptotically Minkowskian (barycentric) coordinates. 
They play an especially important role in ASTROMETRY and 
the definition of an international celestial reference system 
(ICRS). 

Let (cT, X“) be coordinates moving with the Earth. If 
the origin is chosen by the vanishing of the (relativistic) 
Earth’s mass dipole moment these coordinates are called 
geocentric. In both barycentric and geocentric coordinates 
the post-Newtonian metric tensor can be written as 
indicated above; with (w, w;) in the barycentric system 
and (W, W“) in the geocentric one. One usually requires 
the external part of geocentric metric potentials resulting 
from the gravitational fields of solar system bodies apart 
from the Earth to vanish at the geocenter. This implies 
that the geocentric metric equals f,,, given above (i.e. the 
Minkowski metric) at the geocenter if we forget about the 
potentials from the Earth itself. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reference Frames and Time Scales in General 
Relativity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Various time scales: TCB, TCG, TT, TAI and TDB 
The barycentric coordinate time ¢ is called TCB; the 
geocentric coordinate time T is called TCG. Let us consider 
the reading t of some (idealized) atomic clock in the 
vicinity of the Earth. From the geocentric metric tensor 
one infers that t is related with T = TCG by 


dt U 1Wv? 
=1 O(c7). 
dT Ce 2c POEs) 


Here, V is the geocentric coordinate velocity of the clock 
and U is the total geocentric gravitational potential at the 
location of the clock (the Earth’s gravitational potential 
plus tidal terms resulting from other solar system bodies). 

The SI second is related to proper time indicated by 
a clock. Since the relation of proper time to coordinate 
time involves the coordinate velocity of the clock and the 
gravitational potential at the location of the clock, for the 
definition of an operationally defined geocentric time scale 
(TT = terrestrial time), one has to specify the relation of TT 
with the proper time of certain, carefully selected clocks. 

At present the definition of TT involves the geoid: TT 
is a time scale that differs from T = TCG uniquely by a 
constant rate, its unit of measurement being chosen such 
that it agrees with the SI second on the rotating geoid. This 
implies 


TCG — TT = Lg x JD — 2443 144.5) x 86400 s 


where JD is the Julian continuous count of days. The 
bracket vanishes on 0h, 1 January 1977. One has: 


Lg X 6.96929 x 107". 


Here, the constant Lg is determined by the gravitational 
potential at the geoid, Uj, by Lg = Up/c?. Because of the 
problems with the geoid definition, the definition of TT 
will likely become independent of the geoid in the future. 
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC TIME (TAT) is derived as a weighted 
mean over the readings of several atomic clocks, reduced 
to the geoid. At present, TAI is related to TT by 


TT = TAI + 32.184 s 


where the additive constant has purely historical origin. 
The relation between barycentric and geocentric 
coordinates takes the form of a generalized Lorentz 
transformation. Let Zz, vz be the barycentric coordinates 
and coordinate velocity of the geocenter, U®' the 
gravitational potential produced by all solar system bodies 
apart from the Earth then the TCB — TCG relation is given 


by 
—2 : ext 1 2 
TCB — TCG =c | (v + a) dt+ve- «-25)] 
19 
+O(c). 


The numerical expression for TCB— TCG can be evaluated 
from the positions and velocities of the solar system 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


bodies from this expression by numerical integration. 
Approximate formulae have been derived by Hirayama 
et al (1987) and by Fairhead and Bretagnon (1990). Note 
that the rates of TCB and TCG differ. This secular term is 
given by 


(TCB — TCG) secular = Le x (JD — 2443 144.5) x 86400 s 


with 
Le & 1.48083 x 1078. 

Finally, another barycentric time scale is called TDB 
(sometimes also denoted by TB). This time has no 
official status, but is still used especially for solar system 
ephemerides and spacecraft navigation. According to [AU 
recommendations from 1979, TT and TDB should differ 
only by periodic terms leading to the serious problem 
that such a TDB time scale cannot be realized rigorously 
because of arbitrarily long periods in the motion of the 
solar system. Approximately we have 


TCB — TDB = Lz x (JD — 2443 144.5) x 84400 s 
with Lp = Lo + Le & 1.55052 x 107%. 


Dynamically and kinematically non-rotating 
geocentric coordinates 
The relation between barycentric and geocentric spatial 
coordinates, x' and X? respectively, can be written in the 
form 

x = 2,(T) +e (TX? +++, 
where quadratic and higher-order terms in X“ have been 
dropped. This generalizes the result from a Lorentz- 
transformation. Two possibilities exist: 


@ rotationally inertial (dynamically non-rotating) or 


@ fixed-star oriented (kinematically non-rotating). 


Adynamically non-rotating reference system is a locally 
inertial system with relation to rotations characterized by 
the vanishing of Coriolis and centrifugal forces in some 
dynamical equation of motion for a test body. It is a 
remarkable fact that, due to relativistic effects, local inertial 
axes precess with respect to the fixed stars. For a geocentric 
reference system this precession is mainly given by the so- 
called geodesic precession, resulting from the motion of the 
Earth—Moon system about the Sun. The angular velocity 
of geodesic precession amounts to 2” per century. 

In contrast to these dynamically non-rotating systems 
kinematically non-rotating systems cannot be defined locally; 
instead their definition involves the globally defined 
coordinate system, comprising the asymptotic regime 
where the celestial sphere is defined. Then a (local) 
system is called kinematically non-rotating if the spatial 
coordinate lines differ from the corresponding global ones 
only by scale factors but not by their orientation in space, 
ie. they are simply defined by ein) = iq X (scale factors). 

To have a simple relation of the geocentric spatial 
coordinates with reference catalogs (implying a simple 
relation between the satellite frame and the visi frame) 
kinematically non-rotating systems are clearly preferred. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reference Frames and Time Scales in General 
Relativity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Brumberg V A 1991 Essential Relativistic Celestial Mechanics 
(Bristol: Adam Hilger) 

Damour T, Soffel M and Xu C 1991 Phys. Rev. D 43 3273 

Fairhead Land Bretagnon P 1990 Astron. Astrophys. 229 240 

Hirayama T, Kinoshita H, Fujimoto M-K and Fukushima T 
1987 Proc. IAU Symp. at IUGG XIX General Assembly 
(Vancouver) vol I, p 91 

Soffel M 1989 Relativity in Astrometry, Celestial Mechanics 
and Geodesy (Berlin: Springer) 


Michael H Soffel 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflecting Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reflecting Telescopes 


All the earliest optical telescopes were REFRACTORS, using 
lenses to form an image; they date back to at least 1608. 
Since light of different wavelengths is bent or ‘refracted’ 
unequally as it passes through glass, a refractor always 
gives a certain amount of false color round an image such 
as that of a star. Light of whatever color is however 
reflected in the same direction, so a REFLECTOR does not 
suffer from this chromatic aberration. The first practical 
optical reflecting telescope was made by Isaac Newton 
around 1668. 

In a Newtonian reflector, there is no lens to collect 
the light. The light passes down a tube and falls upon a 
concave mirror. The mirror sends the light back up the tube 
onto a smaller, flat mirror placed at an angle of 45°. The 
light is then directed into the side of the tube and is brought 
to focus. The image is formed outside the incoming light 
beam and is enlarged by an eyepiece lens—the observer’s 
head does not obstruct the incoming beam (see NEWTONIAN 
TELESCOPE). 

The Newtonian pattern is still widely used by 
amateur reflectors of the 6 inch to 20 inch (15 to 50 cm) 
class. The lower limit to the useful size range is set by the 
proportion of light to the main mirror which is obstructed 
by the flat mirror and its support. The upper limit is 
weaker and is set by the convenience of access to the 
eyepiece, say at the height of a standing man or woman, 
although larger telescopes may have a Newtonian focus 
accessed by ladders. The 72 inch (1.9 meter) Radcliffe 
Telescope, originally erected in 1948 at Pretoria in South 
Africa and later moved to Sutherland in 1974, was the 
largest Newtonian telescope constructed (equal to the 
size of the Rosse reflector of 1845). Its Newtonian focus 
is accessed from a cage attached to the dome shutter 
mechanism—this facility (intended for photography) is 
almost unused nowadays. 

For larger apertures than, say, 50 cm, the CASSEGRAIN 
TELESCOPE, invented in 1673 is more convenient. Here the 
secondary mirror is convex and is placed between the 
main mirror and its prime focus, reflecting the light to the 
main focus of the telescope, through a hole in the main 
mirror. The combined action of the two mirrors lengthens 
the focal length of the telescope above the focal length of 
the primary mirror alone, but makes the telescope more 
compact. The combination of concave and convex mirrors 
also reduces the off-axis aberrations introduced by the 
primary mirror. The focus of a Cassegrain telescope is 
close to the observing floor, and as convenient to access 
as the telescope mounting will allow. The reduction in 
overall length of a Cassegrain telescope (compared to 
a Newtonian telescope) directly reduces the size of the 
building in which it is housed, with consequent saving 
of costs. Thus, Cassegrain telescopes quickly became 
popular for astronomical use, and still are, largely because 
they are much shorter and more compact than Newtonians 
and are therefore much easier to handle and less expensive. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The next major developments in making reflecting 
telescopes were due to William Herschel. He made his 
own mirrors and telescopes, of altazimuth design. With 
one of these, a reflector of 6.2 in (16 cm) aperture and 7 foot 
(2.1 m) focal length, he discovered the planet Uranus in 
1781. His largest telescope had a mirror 49 in (1.5 m) across. 
It was not surpassed in size until 1845, when the third 
Earl of Rosse, in Ireland, produced a Newtonian telescope 
with a 72 in (1.9 m) mirror. Despite the limitations 
of its extraordinary mounting (it swung on ropes and 
chains between two massive stone walls on which the 
observing platform was mounted, to access the eyepiece), 
and its cylindrical tubular mounting (which trapped heat 
and, potentially, degraded seeing), the Rosse telescope 
discovered the spiral forms of the objects we now know 
to be external galaxies. The telescope was restored to 
working order (although not with its original mirror) in 
1998. 

The early reflectors had ‘speculum’ mirrors of low 
reflectivity and did not produce bright images. The 
metal mirrors tarnished quickly and had to be regularly 
re-polished, whereas refractors required practically no 
maintenance at all. It became possible to make glass 
mirrors, which could be coated with a highly reflective 
substance such as silver or aluminum. In modern times, 
the reflection coating can be optimized to the wavelength 
bands used by the telescope, e.g. the infrared. 

As telescopes, whether refractors or reflectors, track 
a star, or point to different stars in the sky, their attitude 
changes relative to the vertical and thus to the direction of 
gravity. This produces mechanical flexure not only of the 
telescope structure but also of the glass lenses or mirrors, 
causing degradation of the images. The mechanical 
rigidity of glass held at the edges limits the size of lenses 
to about the 40 inch (1 m) size of the Yerkes refractor, 
made 1895. A mirror, on the other hand, can be supported 
over the whole of the back of the mirror. Supporting 
mechanisms or mirror mounts were developed to spread 
the support evenly and to be effective at all attitudes of the 
mirror. 

Reflecting telescopes are typically made with a 
paraboloidal primary mirror, which, if perfectly formed, 
correctly focuses light from a star on its optical axis to 
a diffraction-limited point image. Off-axis, however, the 
images are aberrated by coma. A large reflecting telescope 
thus has a small field of view, perhaps only an arc minute 
or two, unless a correcting lens is used just ahead of 
the prime focus. A corrector lens combined with its 
3.9 m hyperboloidal primary mirror enables the Anglo- 
Australian Telescope to have a field of view of up to 
1°. The hyperboloidal primary mirror is combined with 
an ellipsoidal secondary mirror in the AAT’s Ritchey— 
Chrétien optical design. 

For survey purposes, such as to make a photographic 
atlas of the whole sky, an even larger field of view is a great 
advantage. In 1930, an entirely new optical system was 
developed by an Estonian researcher, Bernhard Schmidt, 
with a modified system invented in 1941 by Dmitri 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflecting Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maksutov. In these reflecting telescopes, the incoming 
light is collected by a main mirror which is spherical rather 
than paraboloidal. Normally this would introduce serious 
image distortions, but these are removed by means of a 
glass corrector plate fixed at the upper end of the tube. 
The SCHMIDT TELESCOPE corrector has a complex aspheric 
profile, the Maksutov corrector has spherical surfaces. The 
detector, say a photographic plate, a photographic film, or 
a mosaic of CCDs, is situated at the prime focus. The 
main problem is that the focal plane is curved, and so 
the detector has to be shaped to the surface of a sphere. 
A special plate-holder has to be used to bend a glass 
photographic plate into the correct form, or the CCDs have 
to be mosaicked onto a spherical surface. The end result 
is that sharp star images can be obtained over very wide 
fields, often well over 10° across. The Oschin Schmidt 
telescope at Palomar, in California, has a 48 in (1.2 m) 
corrector plate feeding its 1.8 m primary mirror and was 
used to make the Palomar Observatory Sky Survey of 
the northern hemisphere. It is optically similar to the 
UK Schmidt Telescope in Siding Spring Observatory. The 
1.35 m Schmidt at Tautenberg, in Germany, is the largest 
Schmidt telescope of classical design, whose size is limited 
by the same issue of support of the optical corrector lens as 
has restricted refractors to the 1 m class. However, a 4m 
Schmidt telescope, LAMOST, is under construction near 
Beijing for multi-object spectroscopy. Its spherical mirror 
is fed by a celostat on whose almost flat reflecting surface 
the appropriate corrections are figured. 

In 1908 George Ellery Hale masterminded a 60 in 
(1.5 m) reflector, which was set up on Mount Wilson in 
California. It was not so large as the Rosse 72 in, but 
had a silvered glass mirror and a fully maneuverable 
equatorial mounting. The tube was a structure of rigid, 
triangular, skeletal girderwork, rather than being solid 
walled tube. This reduced weight, improved air flow and 
seeing, but held all the optical components in exactly the 
right positions. Most modern reflectors have similar open 
support structures, which nevertheless are referred to as 
telescope ‘tubes’. 

Another design driver, for the tube of telescopes like 
the 4 m UK InfraRed Telescope on Mauna Kea, the largest 
designed specifically for infra-red use, is the desire to 
reduce the amount of structural material intruding into the 
infra-red beam, so as to limit the thermal radiation created 
as infra-red background in the telescope. 

Hale made a 100 in (2.5 m) equatorially mounted 
reflector, again set up on Mount Wilson and financed 
mainly by a Los Angeles millionaire, John D Hooker, 
after whom it is named. Before he died, Hale planned 
the reflector with a 200 in (5 m) mirror on Mt Palomar 
named in his honor. The Hale telescope was completed 
in 1948 and was the largest telescope in the world for a 
generation, with epoch-making discoveries to its credit 
too many to list. The telescope incorporated the ‘Serrurier 
Truss,’ newly invented by Mark U. Serrurier of CalTech 
in Pasadena in 1935 as a way of controlling flexure in the 
tube of the telescope that he helped to design. Serrurier 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


conceived of a structure that bent as little as possible, 
but if it did deflect (as was inevitable to some extent), 
it kept the primary and secondary mirrors in the correct 
relative positions. The telescope tube includes a cubical 
section at its center of gravity where the declination axis is 
attached. Eight triangular trusses are fixed to the corners 
of the cube, four pointing up to the top end ring which 
supports the secondary mirror, and four to the primary 
mirror cell. Four opposite pairs of the triangular trusses 
oppose bending by gravity, while the four interposed pairs 
form a parallelogram with the end-rings such that motion 
of the end rings is of equal magnitude and in parallel, thus 
keeping the optical elements collimated in spite of flexure. 
The Gemini telescopes use a variant of this principle, with 
the large cubical sections at the center of gravity eliminated 
because of their effect on thermal input into the light beam 
of the telescopes. 

A telescope has two principal degrees of freedom, 
the axes around which it rotates to point to and follow a 
star. To a first approximation, an equatorially mounted 
telescope tracks by rotation about one axis, at constant 
speed. However, mechanical flexure changes the optical 
axis of the telescope with two additional degrees of 
freedom. The change of focus, whether due to mechanical 
flexure or thermal expansion, is another. Although the 
telescope mounting structure will have been made to the 
highest standards, nevertheless the axes will not be exactly 
orthogonal, nor aligned exactly on the sky. Its bearings 
will not be exactly circular nor exactly centered, and the 
gears that drive the telescope will have periodic errors 
introduced in their manufacture. Refraction of starlight 
by the curvature of the atmosphere means that the sky 
does not appear to rotate uniformly. All these effects limit 
the accuracy of telescope performance. 

With the development of computers, it was possible to 
coordinate the motions of the telescope structure at a high 
enough rate to compensate for these departures from ideal. 
In 1974, building on the experience of radio astronomers 
in controlling altazimuth radio telescopes, the 3.9 m 
Anglo-Australian Telescope successfully implemented 
computer control of its equatorially mounted structure 
at the arc second level. This paralleled the successful 
computer control of altazimuthally mounted optical 
NASMYTH TELESCOPES, like the 6 m Bolshoi Teleskop 
Azimutalnyi (BTA). Virtually all the current generation of 
large telescopes (over 4 m) are altazimuth designs. The 
BTA telescope, however, revealed just how important it 
was to control the thermal environment of a large mirror, 
otherwise diurnal changes of temperature propagate into 
the mirror, causing an ever-shifting pattern of thermal 
distortion. 

Symmetrically oriented in gravity, altazimuth tele- 
scopes can be made stiffer, and hence could respond bet- 
ter to control. The dome can be fitted more symmetrically 
around an altazimuth telescope, made more compact and 
cheaper—the less money of a telescope project spent on a 
building, the more that can be spent on the telescope and 
its instrumentation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflecting Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. The 30 largest reflecting telescopes 


Name and abbreviation Location Size Date Website URL 
(m) 

Keck Telescope I Mauna Kea, Hawaii 10.0 1991 astro.caltech.edu/ observatories /keck 

Keck Telescope II Mauna Kea, Hawaii 10.0 1996 

Gran Telescopio de Canarias (GTC) La Palma, Spain 10.0 2002 www.gtc.iac.es 

Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) Mt Fowlkes, Texas 9.2 1999 www.as.utexas.edu/mcedonald/het/ 

het.html 

South African Large Telescope (SALT) Sutherland, S. Africa 9.2 2003 da.saao.ac.za/~salt/ 

Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) Mt Graham, Arizona 8.4 2002/04 Ibtwww.arcetri.astro.it/ 

Subaru Mauna Kea, Hawaii 8.3 1999 www.naoj.org / 

Antu (VLT 1) Cerro Paranal, Chile 8.2 1998 www.eso.org /outreach/info-events / 
ut1fl/ 

Kueyen (VLT 2) Cerro Paranal, Chile 8.2 1999 

Melipal (VLT 3) Cerro Paranal, Chile 8.2 2000 

Yepun (VLT 4) Cerro Paranal, Chile 8.2 2000 

Gemini North Mauna Kea, Hawaii 8.1 1999 www.gemini.edu 

Gemini South Cerro Pachon, Chile 8.1 2000 www.gemini.edu 

MMT Mt Hopkins, Arizona 6.5 2000 sculptor.as.arizona.edu/foltz/www/ 
mmt.html 

Magellan Telescopes I and II Las Campanas, Chile 6.5 2000 medusa.as.arizona.edu/mlab/mag.html 

Large Zenith Telescope (LZT) Vancouver, BC 6.1 wwwaastro.ubc.ca/LMT /1zt.html 

Bolshoi Teleskop Azimutalnyi (BTA) Mount Pastukhov, Russia 6.0 1975 www.sao.ru 

200 in Hale Telescope Mount Palomar, Ca 5.0 1948 astro.caltech.edu/observatories / 
palomar/ 

William Herschel Telescope (WHT) La Palma, Spain 4.2 1987 ing.iac.es/WHT.html 

SOAR Cerro Pachon, Chile 4.2 2001 www.lIna.br/soar/soar_e.html 

Victor Blanco Telescope Cerro Tololo, Chile 4.0 1976 www.ctio.noao.edu/telescopes /4m/ 
base4m.html 

Large Sky Area Multi-Object Fiber Xinglong Station, China 4.0 2004. 159.226.88.56 

Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST) 

Anglo-Australian Telescope (AAT) Siding Spring, Australia 3.9 1975 Www.aao.gov.au. 

Mayall Reflector Kitt Peak, Arizona 3.8 1973 www.noao.edu/kpno/kpno.html 

UK InfraRed Telescope (UKIRT) Mauna Kea, Hawaii 3.8 1978 www,jach.hawaii.edu/UKIRT/ 
home.html 

3.6 m Telescope La Silla, Chile 3.6 1977 www.ls.eso.org/lasilla/ Telescopes / 
360cat/html/tel360.html 

Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope (CFTHT) Mauna Kea, Hawaii 3.6 1979 www.cfht.hawaii.edu 

Largest reflecting telescopes in space 

Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST) Lagrangian point, L2 8 2007 ngst.gsfc.nasa.gov /index.html 

Hubble Space Telescope (HST) Low Earth orbit 2.4 1990 www-.stsci.edu 

Largest reflecting telescope for public 

education: Faulkes Telescope (FT) Haleakala, Hawaii 2.0 2001 www.faulkes.com 


The Gemini Telescopes at 8 m, the four telescopes of 
the VLT at 8.2 m and the Subaru Telescope at 8.3 m have 
probably reached the practical limit of a thin monolithic 
mirror, whose optical figure is computer controlled by 
actuator pads—the transportation of such a mirror from 
the factory to the site is a major issue, solved in the case 
of the BTA in the then Soviet Union by construction of a 
special railway. To transport the monolithic mirrors of the 
8 m Gemini telescopes, roads were widened, the radius 
of curvature of bends reduced and detours constructed 
around low bridges. 

To make larger aperture reflecting telescopes, the 
solution is to make a segmented mirror, in which the 
various smaller components are fitted together to make 
the correct optical curve. This technique was developed 
in reflecting telescopes working at wavelengths longer 
than light, such as the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


on Mauna Kea for sub-millimeter wave astronomy, where 
276 individual panels are assembled into a mosaic, each 
of which can be moved by 3 motorized adjusters. Its 
first realization for optical astronomy was in the original 
4.5 m Multi-Mirror Telescope in Arizona, before its six 
mosaicked mirrors were replaced by a monolithic 6.5 m. 
The Keck telescopes, also on Mauna Kea, have 
hexagonal reflecting mirrors 12 m across (10 m diameter 
effective circular area). Each hyperboloidal mirror is made 
up of 36 hexagonal segments, 1.8 m in diameter, fitted into 
a honey-comb pattern like tiles. Although each telescope 
is more than twice the aperture, and four times the area of 
the Palomar 200 in (5 m) telescope, the total mass of glass 
in each is little more than 14 tons—about the same as the 
Palomar mirror. The Gran Telescopio de Canarias, under 
construction for La Palma, also has a similarly segmented 
12 m diameter mirror, essentially replicating the Keck 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflecting Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


design. As the largest telescopes in the world, the Keck 
telescopes are setting the pace of discovery among optical 
observatories. 

The overall mirror figure of a segmented mirror is 
typically maintained through active computer control of 
the mirror support system, referenced to laser beams. In 
active optics, the shape of the main mirror is continually 
modified by computer-controlled pads behind it, so that 
the shape can be maintained very precisely when the 
mirror is moved around to point to different directions 
in the sky. Acceptance that the mirror will bend and 
provision of a compensating control mechanism makes 
it possible to reduce the thickness of a mirror, reducing 
its weight and the strength of the telescope support, and 
the thermal inertia of the mirror, with benefits in thermal 
distortion and cost reduction. An alternative method 
to reduce mirror mass is through a hollow honeycomb 
construction of the mirror material, used in the two 
telescopes of the Large Binocular Telescope with 8.4 m 
mirrors. 

With adaptive optics, a relatively bright star in the 
field of view is monitored, either a naturally occurring star 
or an artificial star generated in the upper atmosphere by a 
laser beam. Reacting to the degradation of the image of the 
monitor star, a flexible optical component in the telescope 
beam (a small mirror) is continuously modified in shape, 
to remove distortions due to turbulence in the Earth’s air. 
This technique is more effective at infra-red wavelengths, 
as optimized in the design of the 8 m Gemini telescopes, 
which reach the diffraction limit of resolution. 

An alternative approach with large reflectors to 
increase angular resolution is to combine beams from 
separate telescopes situated tens or hundreds of meters 
apart. The two Keck telescopes and the Large Binocular 
Telescope will be used this way, as will the world’s greatest 
telescope at Parafial in Chile; this is the VLT (Very Large 
Telescope) which will use four mirrors, each 8 m across, 
working separately as four powerful 8 m telescopes or 
together as an interferometer. 

Seeing conditions at Parafial and other mountain- 
top observatories, where large reflectors are nowadays 
constructed, are excellent, but of course for ‘perfect’ seeing 
it is necessary to be above the Earth’s atmosphere, and 
this has been achieved with the Hubble Space Telescope, 
launched from the Shuttle on 25 April 1990. It has a 
2.4m mirror. The size of the monolithic reflecting mirror 
of the HST was limited by the capacity of the Space 
Shuttle’s cargo bay. In spite of its relatively small size, 
the HST is the reflecting telescope with the most impact of 
modern times. The 8 m Next Generation Space Telescope 
(NGST) reflecting telescope, optimized as a successor to 
the HST for observations in the near infrared, will be 
made of segments which unfold like an umbrella. Thermal 
distortion of the mirror due to solar, terrestrial and lunar 
thermal radiation, will be controlled by sunshades and 
passive thermal radiators. In weightlessness, gravitational 
deflection will not be an issue! 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A completely different approach to the provision 
of large reflecting telescopes is to make their mirrors 
of a rotating reflective liquid (mercury), spinning on a 
vibration-free bearing such that centrifugal force builds 
up the correct parabolic dish shape (as first proposed by 
Isaac Newton). The 3m NASA Orbital Debris Observatory 
(NODO) telescope in New Mexico and 2.7 m Liquid Mirror 
Telescope of the University of British Columbia are as far 
as this technology has been proved, but a 6 m Large Zenith 
Telescope is under construction and a 42 m equivalent 
aperture array of 18 10 m telescopes with combined focus 
is planned. Such telescopes are restricted to staring at the 
zenith, and can be used to sample the sky, whether for 
space debris or for stars or galaxies. 

Another large innovative reflecting telescopes is 
the Hobby-Eberly Telescope, a spherical reflector of 91 
interchangeable segments forming an 11 x 10 meter 
hexagon. The telescope structure is tilted at a fixed angle 
of 55° above the horizon (35° zenith angle). The structure 
rotates 360° about a vertical axis. It can be rotated to 
catch stars and galaxies as they rise or set across the 
small circle centred on the zenith at 55° altitude, and track 
them via a moving instrument carriage for long enough 
for spectroscopy (up to 2.5 hours). The South African 
Large Telescope (SALT) destined for the observatory at 
Sutherland is a copy of this design. 

It is believed that there are no theoretical limitations to 
the manufacture of ground based reflecting telescopes up 
to the 50 m to 100 m class. Design studies are in progress 
for the OWL (Overwhelmingly Large Telescope) or MaxAT 
(Maximum size Astronomical Telescope); they will surely 
be projects with global participation. 

Ever since Galileo had such spectacular success 
in 1608 when he first turned a telescope to the sky, 
astronomers have been seeking ways to make larger and 
more accurate telescopes in their quest for more light. 
The present large telescopes of the 8 to 12 meter class 
are fine examples of what can be done. Engineers, 
technologists, scientists, administrators and politicians 
have been inspired to work together to address questions 
that, in the 21st century, are the modern equivalent of the 
questions tackled by Galileo in the 17th century. In the 
words of astronomer Fred Hoyle, put into the mouth of 
Britain’s Prince Charles at the dedication of the Anglo- 
Australian Telescope in 1974, ‘reflecting telescopes are 
examples of the sorts of things our civilization does well’. 

The largest reflecting telescopes operating or under 
construction are listed in table 1. 


Paul Murdin and Patrick Moore 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflection Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reflection Nebulae 


Dust in interstellar space interacts with light primarily 
by scattering. When a concentration or cloud of dust 
happens to be near a bright source of light such as a star 
or group of stars, the resultant scattered light stands out 
against the sky background and identifies this cloud as a 
reflection NEBULA. Given that the source of light is almost 
invariably starlight, a defining characteristic of reflection 
nebulae is a continuous spectrum, matching that of the 
illuminating sources in all spectral features except for the 
color. The color of reflection nebulae, in most instances, is 
bluer than that of the illuminating radiation, because the 
scattering efficiency of interstellar dust particles increases 
with decreasing wavelength throughout the visible range 
of the spectrum of light. 

Most commonly, reflection nebulae result from the 
close association of a cloud of interstellar dust and a 
single dominant stellar source of illumination. The cause 
for this association can be found in each case in one of 
three scenarios: most frequently, dense cloud material 
left over from the formation of a relatively luminous 
star is being illuminated by the new star. Most of the 
resulting reflection nebulae are therefore associated with 
stars known to be young and luminous and relatively 
abundant, i.e. stars of spectral type B. Stars even more 
luminous and hotter than B stars emit sufficient ultraviolet 
radiation to ionize the gas in their surroundings. In 
this case, the emission from the gas will dominate the 
spectrum of the resulting nebulae, which are then known 
as emission nebulae, although a faint scattered light 
continuum produced by the nebular dust is commonly 
observable in these objects as well. 

The second most common form of reflection nebula 
results from the scattering of starlight by the dust 
produced by condensation of particles within a mass 
outflow from a star itself. Such stars are usually in 
advanced stages of their evolution and their spectral types 
are generally characteristic of stars cooler than a B star. 
In most instances, the mass outflow from such stars is 
preferentially directed along the axis of rotation of such 
stars, and the resulting nebulae can be recognized by their 
bipolar morphology. 

The third class of single-star reflection nebulae, 
containing relatively few members, results from the 
random encounter of luminous stars and relatively 
dense interstellar clouds as they move through galactic 
space. They are distinguished from the reflection nebulae 
mentioned first on the basis of differences in the RADIAL 
veLociy of the nebula and that of the star, revealing their 
relative motion with respect to each other. The well-known 
reflection nebulae in the Pleiades staR CLUSTER are examples 
of this third class. 

The total number of known reflection nebulae is of 
order 200, with those located north of —33° declination 
cataloged by van den Bergh (1966). A fairly complete 
collection of photographs of reflection nebulae and their 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


environments is shown in the Atlas of Galactic Nebulae by 
Neckel and Vehrenberg (1985-90). 

Much fainter than the reflection nebulae illuminated 
by individual stars are extended nebulosities arising from 
scattering of the general interstellar radiation field of the 
MILKY WAY GALAXY by dust in isolated interstellar clouds. 
While such clouds can be observed as individual structures 
at high galactic latitudes, at lower galactic latitudes the 
scattering by multiple, overlapping clouds produces the 
so-called diffuse galactic light, which contributes about 
20% of the overall glow of the Milky Way. In this sense, 
the entire Milky Way galaxy or any other dusty galaxy is 
a reflection nebula as well. 


Reflection nebulae as astrophysical laboratories 
Since the early days of the twentieth century and the 
work of Slipher, Hertzsprung and Hubble (1922), reflec- 
tion nebulae have attracted the attention of astrophysicists. 
Much of observational astrophysics deals with the inter- 
action of matter and radiation in cosmic environments, 
and reflection nebulae are extremely useful laboratories 
for such studies. The density of the illuminating radia- 
tion is typically a few hundred times higher than gener- 
ally available in interstellar space, which makes the in- 
teractions more easily observable. The variable angular 
offset from the illuminating star provides a mechanism 
for varying this density over a large range; and the choice 
of nebulae with illuminating stars of different tempera- 
tures allows one to study the effects of radiation fields 
with varying fractions of ultraviolet light on the dust and 
gas in these nebulae. Over the years, particular attention 
has been focused on a number of important astrophysi- 
cal processes, among these the studies of light scattering 
by dust; the heating of dust particles by stellar radiation, 
in particular the stochastic heating of nanoparticles and 
the resultant non-equilibrium thermal radiation; the pho- 
toluminescence by dust particles, also known as extended 
red emission; the excitation of the near-infrared emission 
bands, now attributed to small aromatic hydrocarbon par- 
ticles; the excitation of fluorescence by molecular hydro- 
gen and the photodissociation of the molecules associated 
with this process; and the far-infrared thermal emission by 
dust grains heated by starlight. In the remaining sections, 
these topics and their relationship to reflection nebulae will 
be reviewed briefly. 


Dust scattering properties 

The first extensive quantitative studies of reflection 
nebulae were carried out by HuBBLE, who discovered a 
close correlation between the apparent magnitudes of 
the illuminating stars and the angular sizes of a large 
sample of nebulae, measured on photographs obtained 
under identical conditions. This suggested that reflection 
nebulae are largely illumination-bounded, i.e. that their 
observable extent is set by their surface brightness falling 
below the level of detectability well before the dust 
boundary is reached. The constants derived from the 
observed correlation indicated that the dust albedo, i.e. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflection Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the fraction of the light being scattered by an illuminated 
dust grain, is above 0.5, a result which stands firm to this 
day. 

Scattered light studies involving individual reflection 
nebulae are complicated by the largely unknown 
geometry, which leaves unanswered the question of where 
the scattering dust is located with respect to the plane 
containing the star. However, two factors help to alleviate 
this problem. Firstly, since interstellar dust grains scatter 
predominantly into the forward direction, nebulae in 
which the dust lies between the star and the observer 
are expected to be much brighter than nebulae where 
the dust lies in the same plane as the star or behind 
the star. The brightest nebulae, i.e. those selected most 
frequently for intensive study, are therefore invariably 
cases where the star is located behind the scattering 
material. Second, modern observing tools allow surface 
brightness measurements in nebulae over a wide range of 
wavelengths, from the far-ultraviolet to the near-infrared. 
Even if the dust/star geometry of the nebulae is not 
known in detail, an argument can be made that the 
geometry is the same at all wavelengths, whatever it may 
be. Important information can thus be obtained from 
the relative changes that can be seen as a function of 
wavelength. It is from studies of this kind that we now 
know that the dust albedo in the near- and far-ultraviolet is 
generally as high or higher than that derived for the visible 
by Hubble, and that the degree of forward scattering 
is increasing with decreasing wavelengths. It has also 
been found that scattering is still rather effective at near- 
infrared wavelengths (0.8-2.5 wm), leading to estimates 
of the dust albedo which exceeds values predicted by 
current dust models. This difference can be understood 
if reflection nebulae contain dust grains with larger 
upper size limits than generally accepted for the diffuse 
interstellar medium of the Milky Way galaxy. Thus, 
empirically determined scattering properties of grains 
in reflection nebulae provide useful constraints for dust 
models. These characteristics identify the scattering dust 
grains as particles comparable in diameter to the size of the 
visible wavelengths. As will be shown below, however, 
these relatively large grains are only part of the story. 


Dust emission by very small grains 

Starlight which interacts with nebular dust but is 
not scattered is absorbed. The absorbed energy, 
which is mainly in the form of stellar photons of 
optical and ultraviolet wavelengths, is ultimately re- 
emitted by dust grains by two processes taking place 
at longer wavelengths, namely thermal radiation and 
photoluminescence. Our knowledge of these processes 
has expanded greatly through studies of reflection 
nebulae. 

The spectrum of the thermal radiation from dust 
depends on the temperature distribution of the grains 
and the emission characteristics of the dust materials. 
Given the relative proximity of the dust to the illuminating 
star(s) in reflection nebulae, coupled with the fact that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the radiation density will decrease with the inverse 
square of the distance from the star, it was generally 
expected that grain temperatures in reflection nebulae 
would be somewhat higher than those found in the diffuse 
interstellar medium far from any star and that they would 
span a certain range, e.g. from 30 K to 50 K, versus 20 K in 
interstellar space. The thermal radiation anticipated from 
any grains at these temperatures occurs at far-infrared 
wavelengths longward of 50 jm, and it is indeed observed 
there. However, a remarkable discovery by Sellgren 
(1984) demonstrated conclusively that in addition to the 
expected far-infrared radiation, thermal radiation emerges 
from dust distributed throughout reflection nebulae which 
indicates grain temperatures in the range from 500 K to 
over 1000 K, much higher than expected from equilibrium 
heating of the larger grains. This additional thermal 
radiation emerges at near-infrared wavelengths. Grain 
temperatures in the 500-1000 K range cannot be generated 
under equilibrium conditions in the nebular environment, 
because the density of radiation is not nearly high enough. 
Such high temperatures can be explained only if the 
radiating INTERSTELLAR GRAINS are so small that the energy 
of a single stellar photon is large compared with the heat 
content of the grain, so that its absorption will increase 
the grain’s temperature temporarily to values as high as 
1000 K or more. Such grains must be exceedingly small 
and can contain only between 30 and 100 atoms, with a 
typical size of 1 nm. Such particles are basically equivalent 
to large molecules and are referred to as nanoparticles. 
Stochastically heated nanoparticles were subsequently 
found by the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) to be 
a common component of the interstellar medium of the 
Milky Way galaxy as well of other dusty galaxies, where 
they generate typically about 30% of the total infrared 
radiation emitted by dust. 

Still another unexpected radiative process involving 
interstellar grains was discovered first in reflection 
nebulae and continues to be studied in these objects 
(Witt et al 1984). This process is photoluminescence by 
interstellar grains, also known as extended red emission 
(ERE). The ERE emerges in the form of a broad, featureless 
emission band in the 540-950 nm spectral range. An 
important characteristic of this emission band is that 
the wavelength of its peak varies both within a given 
nebula and from nebula to nebula. The determining 
environmental parameter for this variation appears to be 
the density of ultraviolet photons. In reflection nebulae, 
this photon density is a function of the temperature and 
luminosity of the illuminating star and the distance from 
the star. One observes that the peak of the ERE band shifts 
to shorter wavelengths with increasing angular offset, and 
nebulae with somewhat cooler stars generally show the 
ERE band with a shorter peak wavelength than those 
with hotter exciting stars. Recently, the ERE has been 
detected in the diffuse interstellar medium of the Milky 
Way galaxy as well, and as expected from the observed 
behavior in reflection nebulae, the peak wavelength of the 
ERE, found near 610 nm in the diffuse interstellar medium, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflection Nebulae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is shorter than in any nebula, consistent with the fact that 
the radiation field in the diffuse interstellar medium is of 
lower density than that found in any single nebula. 

Just like the stochastic heating of nanoparticles, the 
ERE is thought to be a single-photon process involving 
particles or large molecules in that same size domain. 
Assuming that the emission of a single ERE photon 
requires the excitation by a single photon of higher 
energy, most likely in the ultraviolet, one can estimate 
from the observed ERE intensities in reflection nebulae 
and the diffuse interstellar medium that up to 10% of 
absorbed ultraviolet photons are needed to generate the 
ERE. This suggests that the ERE is produced by a very 
common grain species, made from cosmically abundant 
elements. Current proposals point to oxidized silicon 
nanoparticles or partially hydrogenated carbon clusters 
as likely candidates. These same particles are almost 
certainly also contributing to the non-equilibrium thermal 
emission at near- and mid-infrared wavelengths, because 
the ERE process consumes only a fraction of the energies 
of the exciting photons, the remainder being available to 
heat the nanoparticles to high temperatures. 

Additional evidence for the existence of very small 
carbonaceous particles with a preferential aromatic 
bonding arrangement comes in the form of near-infrared 
emission bands at wavelengths of 3.3, 6.2, 7.7, 8.7, 11.3 
and 12.7 wm, which are frequently observed in reflection 
nebulae. Again, the emitting particles must be excited 
to an equivalent temperature near 1000 K in order to 
radiate at these wavelengths. Proposed identifications 
include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) molecules 
or grains composed of amorphous, aromatically bonded 
hydrocarbon units. These same emission bands have also 
been observed at correspondingly lower intensities in the 
diffuse interstellar medium of the Galaxy, indicating that 
these nanoparticles are ubiquitous throughout space. 


Emission from molecules 


Many reflection nebulae are associated with star-forming 
regions. The gas in these environments is typically 
very clumpy and consists of molecules, predominantly 
molecular hydrogen. Reflection nebulae are thus also 
ideal laboratories for studying the interaction of stellar 
light with this most common form of interstellar molecule. 
Far-ultraviolet photons with wavelengths shortward of 
110 nm cause electronic excitations in hydrogen molecules. 
The decay of an excited hydrogen molecule is associated 
with line and continuum luminescence in the 100-165 nm 
ultraviolet part of the spectrum and a host of emission lines 
longward of 1 zm in the near-infrared, the latter resulting 
from cascade transitions between vibrational states of the 
electronic ground state (Gatley et al 1987). Well over 100 of 
these lines can be seen in bright reflection nebulae. About 
10% of the decays of the excited hydrogen molecules result 
in outright photodissociation of the molecules, which 
is the primary method by which molecular hydrogen 
is returned to atomic form in the interstellar medium. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The observation and analysis of the ultraviolet and near- 
infrared emissions from molecular hydrogen in reflection 
nebulae lead to detailed information about the local 
densities and radiation field intensities in these hydrogen 
photodissociation regions. Models which make specific 
predictions for the relative intensity of the various 
emission features can thus be tested and used to determine 
the physical state of the gas in star-forming environments. 
Again, it was in reflection nebulae that the characteristic 
ultraviolet and near-infrared luminescence of excited 
molecular hydrogen was first observed in interstellar 
space, and these phenomena continue to be studied there 
with preference. 


Bibliography 

Gatley I et al 1987 Astrophys. J. 318 L73 

Hubble E P 1922 Astrophys. J. 56 400 

Neckel Th and Vehrenberg H 1985-90 Atlas of Galactic 
Nebulae vols 1-3 (Duesseldorf: Treugesell) 

Sellgren K 1984 Astrophys. J. 277 623 

van den Bergh S 1966 Astron. J. 71 990 

Witt A N, Schild R E and Kraiman J B 1984 Astrophys. J. 281 
708 


Adolf Witt 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reflector 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reflector 


An optical or other telescope that utilizes the reflection of 
light from one or more mirrors to form an image of a distant 
object. When reflected from the front surface of a concave 
mirror (the primary mirror), rays of light from a distant 
point source, such as a star, initially traveling parallel to 
the optical axis (the line through the center of the mirror, 
perpendicular to its surface), converge to a focus where a 
point-like image of the source is formed. Rays entering at 
an angle to the optical axis form images at the focal plane, a 
plane perpendicular to the optical axis that passes through 
the focus. The size of the image formed at the focal plane 
is proportional to the focal length of the mirror. 

In x-ray reflecting telescopes (like XMM), the x-rays 
are incident at grazing reflection on to the reflectors 
and focused into a focal plane. The images are highly 
aberrated. 

In most reflecting telescope systems, the converging 
cone of light from the primary is reflected from one or 
more secondary mirrors. In the Newtonian system, the 
secondary is a small flat mirror that reflects the focus 
to the side of the telescope tube, where the eyepiece 
is located. In the Cassegrain and Gregorian systems, 
and their derivatives, light from the secondary (which is 
convex in the former and concave in the latter) passes back 
down the telescope tube, through a hole in the center of 
the primary, to the eyepiece. Because their secondaries 
have curved surfaces, they change the angle at which the 
rays of light reflected from the primary are converging, 
and so increase the effective focal length and focal ratio 
of the instrument. A Cassegrain or Gregorian telescope, 
therefore, has a primary of relatively short focal length, 
which minimizes the overall length of the instrument, but 
has a long effective focal length. 

The instrumentation used to detect, record or analyze 
the image (e.g. a photographic plate, electronic detector or 
spectrometer) can be attached directly at the Cassegrain 
focus. In large telescopes the instrumentation may be 
placed directly at the prime focus (the focus of the primary 
mirror) and, in some cases, the observer can be housed in 
a ‘cage’ at the prime focus. In either of these cases, the 
instrumentation has to swing round with the telescope as 
it points towards different parts of the sky. To minimize, 
or eliminate, the need for the telescope structure and 
mounting to shift heavy instrumentation around, some 
telescopes incorporate additional mirrors to direct the 
focus to a fixed plane (e.g. the Nasmyth focus) or a fixed 
position (the coudé focus). 

Although the first design for a reflecting telescope 
(the Gregorian) was produced in 1663 by the Scottish 
mathematician, James Gregory (1638-75), the first working 
reflector was designed and built in 1668 by Sir Isaac 
Newton (1642-1727), this being the prototype of the 
Newtonian type. The Cassegrain design was produced 
in 1672 by the Frenchman, Guillaume Cassegrain, but 
did not become popular until much later because of 
the technical difficulties involved in making its convex 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hyperboloidal secondary. Early reflectors used solid metal 
mirrors that had relatively poor reflectivities, tarnished 
quickly and expanded and contracted as the temperature 
changed. By the late nineteenth century, these had been 
replaced by metal-on-glass mirrors in which a thin film 
of reflective metal (silver or, more recently, aluminum) is 
deposited on the front surface of a glass substrate. The 
development of low-expansion Pyrex glass in the 1930s 
greatly improved the performance of reflecting telescopes. 
Modern mirrors use ultra-low expansion materials such as 
quartz or ceramics as their substrates. 

The largest reflector with a one-piece (‘monolithic’) 
mirror is located at the Zelenchukskaya Astrophysical 
Observatory, Russia. Its primary mirror has an aperture 
(clear diameter) of 6 m. The largest individual reflecting 
telescopes are the two Keck telescopes on Mauna Kea, 
Hawaii, each of which has a primary mirror, 10 m in 
diameter, which consists of 36 interlocking hexagonal 
segments. 


Seealso: Cassegrain telescope, Dobsonian telescope, focal 
length, focal ratio, focus, Gregorian telescope, mirror, 
magnification, Maksutov telescope, Newtonian telescope, 
Schmidt telescope, Schmidt—Cassegrain telescope, tele- 
scope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Refracting Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Refracting Telescopes 


Nobody is sure of the date when the first telescope was 
made. It may be as far back as the early 1550s, when there 
is evidence that a telescope of some sort was constructed 
in England by Leonard Digges, but it is all very uncertain, 
and the first telescope of which we have definite proof was 
built by the Dutch spectacle maker H Lippershey in 1608. 
Others soon followed and were turned toward the skies. 
The first systematic telescopic series of observations was 
made in early 1610 by Galileo; others had preceded him, 
but for skill and perseverance Galileo stands alone in those 
very early days. 

His telescope was, of course, a REFRACTOR. It was tiny, 
and even his most powerful telescopes magnified no more 
than 30 times, so that they were far inferior to modern 
binoculars, but they were the direct ancestors of the huge 
refracting telescopes of today. 

In a refractor, the light from the target object is 
collected by a glass lens, known either as an object glass or 
as an objective. The light is passed down the telescope and 
brought to focus, where an image is formed and is enlarged 
by asecond lens, termed an eyepiece or ocular. Note that it 
is the eyepiece which is responsible for the magnification; 
the function of the object glass is to collect the light—and, 
naturally, the greater the amount of light collected, the 
higher the magnification which can be used. The distance 
between the object glass and the focus is termed the focal 
length of the telescope. Magnification is given by the focal 
length of the telescope divided by the focal length of the 
eyepiece. The focal length of the telescope divided by the 
diameter of the object glass gives the focal ratio. Thus if a 
3 in (7.6 cm) refractor has a focal length of 36 in (91.4 cm), 
its focal ratio is 36/3 = 12 (in metric, 91.4/7.6 = 12). 

Assume now that with our 3 in refractor, with its focal 
length of 36 in, we use an eyepiece of focal length 5 in. The 
magnification will be 36 /4 = 72, often written as x72. 

In theory, and usually in practice, eyepieces are made 
with a standard thread, so that any eyepiece can be used 
with any telescope. There is, however, one obvious 
limitation—the amount of light available depends on the 
aperture of the object glass (or the main mirror of REFLECTING 
TELESCOPES). Suppose, with our 3 in refractor, we use an 
aperture of ; in. The magnification will then be 36/3 = 
288. Unfortunately, every time an image is enlarged it 
becomes fainter, and with this power on this telescope 
the image would be so faint that it would be completely 
useless. It is a general rule that the maximum really 
satisfactory magnification is x50 per inch of aperture, so 
that for our 3 in telescope the highest power which can be 
properly used is 3 x 50 = 150. For a higher magnification 
it is necessary to have a larger telescope. For example, a 
6 in refractor of focal length 72 in will have a focal ratio of 
f/12. On this, an eyepiece of focal length ; in will give a 
magnification of 72/4 = 288, which is quite acceptable. If 
the focal length of our 6 in refractor is only 54 in, the focal 
ratio will be 54/6 = 9. This makes for greater convenience, 
because the tube is shorter, but to make the f ratio too low 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


will introduce other troubles, and one has to strike a happy 
mean. 

With any telescope it is desirable to have several 
eyepieces: one to give low magnification and a wide field, 
suitable for observing objects such as star clusters; one 
with a moderate magnification, for views of the Moon 
and planets; one with high magnification, for use on really 
good, clear nights. With our 3 in, f/12 refractor, suitable 
eyepieces might well be of focal length 1 in (36/1 = 36), 
5 in (36/5 = 72) and } in (36/5 = 144). 

The main problem with a refractor is that it introduces 
what is known as chromatic aberration. Light is really 
a mixture of all the colors of the rainbow, and the color 
depends on the wavelength of the light; red light has 
the longest wavelength for visible radiations, violet the 
shortest, with orange, yellow, green and blue in between. 
When a beam of light is passed through a lens, it is 
split up, and the different colors are bent or refracted 
by different amounts—red least, violet most. They are 
therefore brought to focus at different distances from the 
object glass of a refractor, and an object such asa star is seen 
to be surrounded by gaudy colored rings which may look 
superficially attractive but which are most unwelcome to 
the astronomer. 

The false-color trouble can be reduced by what is 
termed an achromatic object glass, in which there are 
several component lenses made of different kinds of glass; 
the errors then tend to cancel each other out. Some 
false color always remains, but with a good achromatic 
objective it is not really serious. 

Bear in mind that an astronomical refractor will give 
an inverted image. In fact any refractor will do this, 
but in a telescope made for terrestrial use an extra lens 
system is put into the optical train to make the image erect. 
However, each time a ray of light passes through glass it is 
slightly weakened. This does not in the least matter when 
looking at birds, or ships out at sea, but it matters very 
much to an astronomer, who is anxious to collect every 
scrap of light available. Therefore, the erecting lens system 
is left out, although an erecting eyepiece can always be 
obtained. 

The first known telescopes were refractors; the first 
REFLECTOR was not made until around 1669, when Isaac 
Newton believed that nothing could rid the refractor 
of severe chromatic aberration, and decided to develop 
an entirely different system (See NEWTONIAN TELESCOPES). 
Previously, efforts to eliminate false color meant that 
refractors were made with very long focal length. This 
does reduce chromatic aberration, but at the expense 
of making the telescopes very unwieldy. For example, 
Christiaan Huygens, probably the best observer of the 
early 17th century, constructed a telescope with an 
aperture of 2 in and a focal length of 103 feet and used 
it to discover Titan, the largest of the satellites of Saturn. 
He then built a telescope with a focal length of 23 feet, and 
with it discovered the true nature of Saturn’s ring system. 
The telescope must have been incredibly awkward to use, 
and even more so were the refractors made and used by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Refracting Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Some large refracting telescopes. 


Name Observatory Aperture (in) | Date of completion 
Yerkes 40 in Yerkes, Williams Bay, WI, USA 40 1897 
Lick 36 in Lick, Mount Hamilton, CA, USA 36 1888 
Meudon Refractor Meudon, Paris, France 33 1889 
Potsdam Refractor Potsdam, Germany 31 1899 
Lunette Bischoffsheim Nice, France 30 1886 
Thaw Refractor Allegheny, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 30 1985 
Grosser Refraktor Archenhold, Treptow, Germany 27 1896 
McCormick Refractor Leander McCormick, Charlottesville, VA, USA 26 1880 
26 in Equatorial US Naval Observatory, Washington, DC, USA 26 1873 
Thompson Refractor Herstmonceux, England 26 1897 
Innes Telescope Johannesburg, South Africa 26 1926 
Vienna Refractor Vienna, Austria 26 1880 
Newall Refractor Athens, Greece 25 1862 
Lowell Refractor Lowell, Flagstaff, AZ, USA 24 1895 


another pioneer observer, Hevelius of Danzig (the town 
now known as Gdansk). One of Hevelius’ telescopes had 
a focal length of no less than 150 feet, but was so subject 
to wind disturbance that it could seldom be used to its full 
potential. 

Next came the ‘tubeless’ telescope. Here, the object 
glass was fixed to the top of a mast, and the observer 
sighted it by looking along guide wires which could be 
used to turn the object glass to the right position. The 
observer then held the eyepiece by hand. One of Huygens’ 
‘aerial telescopes’ had a focal length of 210 feet, and it is 
said that one refractor with a focal length of 600 feet was 
planned, although there is no record that it was actually 
built. 

Obviously these long-focus telescopes could never 
be really satisfactory, but in 1733 a wealthy amateur 
astronomer, Chester Moor Hall, constructed the first 
achromatic or compound objective, with one component 
made of flint glass and the other of crown glass. The 
idea was taken up by John Dollond, and this led on to 
what was probably the first ‘optical firm’ in history. In 
1765 John’s son, Peter Dollond, took one of his achromatic 
objectives to the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, and 
its performance was found to be far better than that of 
the Observatory’s best long-focus telescope. The old 
aerial refractors promptly became obsolete. Moreover, 
Dollond’s telescopes looked attractive. From about 1783 
they were made with brass tubes; when set up on well- 
made mahogany stands they were easy to use and were 
fitted with slow motions. 

By the first part of the 19th century it had become 
possible to make really good objectives. Then, in 1862, 
Thomas Cooke, in England, built the first of the ‘great 
refractors’; it is known as the Newall Telescope and had 
an objective of 25 in across (it is still in use, at the Athens 
Observatory in Greece). Between 1870 and 1900 even 
larger refractors were built, culminating in 1897 with the 
40 in telescope which was set up at the Yerkes Observatory 
in Wisconsin, USA. At the time, and for some years 
afterwards, it was the most powerful telescope in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


world, and it proved to be a great success. It is still in 
use on every clear night. 

Could it be possible to build a refractor of greater 
size than the Yerkes 40 in? Theoretically, yes, but there 
were serious practical difficulties. If a lens is too large 
it will begin to distort under its own weight, and this 
will make it useless. An attempt was made at the very 
end of the century, when a 49 in objective was made in 
France. The 180 foot tube could not be mounted in the 
conventional way; instead it was left horizontal, and the 
light was brought to it by means of movable mirrors. The 
telescope was shown at the Paris Exposition of 1901, but 
it was clearly a failure, and it was never used for any 
astronomical work. Before long it was dismantled, and 
the fate of the object glass is unknown. The fate of a 41 in, 
destined for the Pulkovo Observatory in Russia, was even 
worse; before the optics could be completed, the mounting 
of the telescope had rusted away. 

By then it had become possible to build very powerful 
reflecting telescopes, and these were not subject to size 
limitation, because a mirror can be supported by its back; 
light does not have to pass through it. A few large 
refractors have been made in the 20th century, but not 
many are used by professional astronomers except for very 
specialized programs, and it is undeniable that the future 
of the telescope lies with the reflector. 

Yet in amateur hands, the refractor remains ideal. It 
is much less delicate than a reflector and will need little 
maintenance; if it is treated with care, it will last a lifetime 
and more. Although its color correction can never be as 
good as that of a reflector, it will give superb, clear-cut 
images. 

Choosing a refractor for home use is something to 
be undertaken with care, because a poor-quality telescope 
does not betray itself at a glance. Some small refractors are 
sold according to the power available—or so it is claimed; 
it one recent advertisement it was said that the telescope 
offered ‘would magnify 750 times’. The aperture of the 
object glass was however only 3 in, so that the maximum 
power which could be used to advantage was no more than 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Refracting Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


150. Aperture is all-important, and a telescope advertised 
without giving the diameter of the objective should be 
avoided. Watch too for a ring fixed inside the top of the 
tube, masking the outer part of the objective and thereby 
cutting down the aperture; this is a trick designed to 
conceal defective optics. 

Generally, it is not really sensible to spend much 
money on a refractor with an object glass less than 3 in 
in diameter. Of course a smaller instrument, such as a 2 in, 
is better than nothing at all, but given a choice between 
a very small telescope and a pair of good binoculars it is 
certainly better to opt for the binoculars. 

A refractor of aperture up to 4 in is easily portable, 
although a larger instrument will be too heavy to move 
around, and will be best set up in a permanent observatory. 

Some large refracting telescopes are listed in table 1. 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Refractor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Refractor 


An optical telescope that utilizes the refraction of light 
through a lens to form an image of a distant object. In 
essence, a refractor consists of two lenses, an objective (or 
object glass) and an eyepiece. The objective is a lens of 
long focal length that collects light and forms an image of 
a distant object at its focus, or focal plane. The eyepiece is 
a lens of short focal length that enables an observer to view 
a magnified image and which may also be used to project 
an enlarged image onto a screen, photographic emulsion 
or electronic detector. In practice both the objective and 
the eyepiece are compound lenses, each consisting of two 
or more components. 

The invention of the refractor, or refracting telescope, 
is usually ascribed to the Dutch spectacle-maker, Hans 
Lippershey (c. 1570-1619), who is reputed to have 
discovered the principle in 1608 when, by chance, he 
noticed that distant objects were seen to be enlarged 
when he placed one lens in front of another. The first 
astronomer to make serious use of the refractor was the 
Italian scientist, Galileo Galilei (1564-1642), who, with 
a telescope of his own design and construction, made a 
succession of epoch-making discoveries in 1609-10. The 
Galilean refractor used a convex (‘positive’) objective and 
a concave (‘negative’) eyepiece that was placed in front of 
the focal plane of the objective. It produced erect images, 
but its field of view was very small and the instrument was 
difficult to use. An improved design, which is the basis of 
the modern refractor, was published in 1611 by Johannes 
Kepler (1571-1630). The Keplerian, or ‘astronomical’, 
refractor uses a convex objective and a convex eyepiece 
that is placed behind the focal plane of the objective. 
Although it produces an inverted image, it has a wider 
field of view than the Galilean instrument. Because the 
eyepiece is located on the observer’s side of the focal plane, 
it is possible to focus simultaneously on the image and on 
micrometer wires placed at the focal plane. 

The performance of early refractors was seriously de- 
graded by several optical defects, in particular, chromatic 
aberration and spherical aberration (the inability of a sim- 
ple lens to focus all wavelengths and all rays from a point 
source at the same focal point). Because the effects of these 
aberrations could be reduced by using lenses of very long 
focal length, attempts to overcome these problems led, in 
the seventeenth century, to the development of extremely 
long and unwieldy instruments, such as the 46 m long re- 
fractor constructed in Danzig by Johannes Hevelius (1611- 
87). Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens (1629-95) dis- 
pensed altogether with the telescope tube. His ‘aerial tele- 
scope’ consisted of an objective, which was held ina short 
tube that was hoisted up a mast, linked to and aligned with 
an eyepiece by means of a taut cord. 

The invention of the achromatic doublet (a lens 
consisting of two components, the combination of which 
greatly reduced the effects of chromatic aberration) 
transformed the development of the refractor and 
rendered the aerial telescope redundant. Following 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a series of experiments using different types of glass, 
which he had carried out between 1729 and 1733, the 
English amateur optician, Chester Moor Hall (1703- 
71), instructed professional optician George Bass to 
construct the first achromatic objective in 1733. From 
1754 onwards, telescope-makers, notably John Dollond, 
began to construct good quality achromatic refractors. 
Greatly improved glass-making techniques, developed by 
the German astronomer, Joseph von Fraunhofer (1787— 
1826), enabled larger objectives of higher quality to be 
produced. The development of the refractor culminated 
in the construction of the 1 m (‘40 inch’) refractor at Yerkes 
Observatory, Wisconsin, USA, which was commissioned 
in 1897 and remains, to this day, the largest operational 
refractor in the world. Because reflecting telescopes are 
easier and cheaper to build, mount and support and do not 
suffer from chromatic aberration (which cannot entirely be 
eliminated from a refractor), large refractors are no longer 
constructed and all large modern instruments are of the 
reflecting type. 


See also: chromatic aberration, eyepiece, focal length, 
objective lens, reflector, spherical aberration, telescope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Regiomontanus [Miller, Johann or Johannes] (1436-— 
76) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Regiomontanus [Muller, Johann or 
Johannes] (1436-76) 


Born in Ko6nigsberg (latinized in his trade name), Mainz 
(now Germany), a pupil of PEURBACH. Succeeded him 
as professor of astronomy at the University of Vienna, 
and became astronomer to King Matthias Corvinus of 
Hungary. He built an observatory and instrument 
workshop in Nuremberg. Observed Halley’s Comet in 
1472 and eclipses of the Moon. This led him to suggest 
that eclipse timing and techniques that he had used in 
tracking comets could be used effectively as a clock to 
determine longitude. Eclipses were in fact too infrequent 
to be of much use as timing markers, but the general 
idea was picked up by JOHANN WERNER of Nuremburg 
and developed into the method of lunar distances (i.e. 
continuously measuring the distance of the Moon from 
the Sun). Regiomontanus wrote on calendar reform, and 
was summoned by Pope Sixus IV to Rome to advise on the 
topic but died (of the plague or poisoned by his enemies) 
before he could do so. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Regolith 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Regolith 


The loose material covering the surface of a rocky 
planetary body. Regolith consists of dust and tiny 
fragments of rock produced by the impact of small 
meteorites and micrometeorites, and is characteristic 
of worlds which have no atmospheres and have been 
essentially geologically inactive for a few billion years. The 
lunar regolith is 2-8 meters deep on the maria, and as much 
as 15 meters deep in the highlands, which have had longer 
exposure to meteoritic bombardment. Its composition 
largely reflects that of the underlying rock. Mercury has 
a very similar albedo to the Moon, and is assumed on 
this basis to possess a similar regolith. Images showing 
boulders on the surface of the asteroid Ida suggest that it 
has a regolith. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Regulus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Regulus 


The star a Leonis, apparent magnitude 1.36, a blue-white 
main sequence star of spectral type B7V. Its name, meaning 
‘Little King’, was given by Nicolaus Copernicus (1473- 
1543), marking the fact that it had been regarded as one 
of the leading stars in the sky for some 2000 years. It was 
one of the four ‘Royal Stars’ of the Persians, c. 3000 Bc, 
who called it Venant, later Miyan (‘the Center’); it marked 
for them the summer solstice, being prominent on June 
evenings (see Aldebaran). At a distance of 78 light-years, 
it has a parallax of 0.042” and absolute magnitude —0.5. 
There is an eighth-magnitude companion star 2.95’ distant 
at position angle 307°. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reiche, Maria (1903-98) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reiche, Maria (1903-98) 


German mathematician and archaeologist, born Dresden, 
fled the Nazi regime to Peru, identified and researched the 
huge figures of Nazca drawn in the desert and revealed 
the knowledge of astronomy of the ancient inhabitants of 
Peru’s coastal region. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Reinhold, Erasmus (1511-53) and Reinhold, Erasmus 
(1538-92) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reinhold, Erasmus (1511-53) and 
Reinhold, Erasmus (1538-92) 


Father born in Saalfeld, Germany, became professor of 
mathematicum superiorum (astronomy) at the University 
of Wittenberg. Influential on BRAHE and KEPLER. Revised a 
work by GEORG PEURBACH about the motion of the planets 
and calculated the Prussian Tables (Prutenicae Tabulae 
Coelestium Motuum) containing calculations about the 
movements of celestial bodies. The first such calculations 
made according to the Copernican theory, they became a 
basis for the reform of the calendar in 1582. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Relative Sunspot Number 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Relative Sunspot Number 


An index of sunspot activity originally devised in 1858 by 
J R Wolf (1816-93) of the Federal Observatory of Zurich 
and otherwise known as the Zurich sunspot number. 
The relative sunspot number, denoted by the letter R, is 
given by the formula R = k(f + 10g), where g is the 
number of visible sunspot groups, f is the total number 
of individual spots visible on the face of the Sun and k 
is a correction factor that takes account of factors such as 
the size of telescope used, atmospheric conditions and the 
performance of the individual observer. For example, if 
on a particular occasion there were four sunspot groups 
containing 3, 7, 9 and 12 spots respectively, g would be 4 
and f would be 31. Assuming k = 1, the value of R would 
be 1(31 + 40) = 71. 

The relative sunspot number places greater emphasis 
on the number of groups than on the number of individual 
spots, because the number of groups is more closely related 
to the number of underlying active regions. Although the 
relative sunspot number gives a reasonable guide to the 
changing level of sunspot activity throughout successive 
sunspot cycles, sunspot areas give a better measure of the 
overall level of solar activity. 


See also: active region, sunspots, sunspot cycle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Relict ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Relict 


Two Soviet astronomical missions. Relict-1 was launched 
on the prRocNoz-9 satellite in July 1983. Two small 
radio telescopes were used to search for any anisotropy 
(unevenness) in the cosmic background radiation. Relict 2 
was launched into a halo orbit at the L2 Lagrangian point, 
1.5 million km in the anti-sunward direction, in January 
1994. It returned submillimetre wavelength astrophysical 
and magnetotail plasma data. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Resolving Power 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Resolving Power 


A measure of the ability of a telescope to separate objects 
that are apparently close together. Resolving power, or 
resolution, is usually expressed as the minimum angular 
separation at which two identical point sources of light (for 
example, two identical stars) can just be distinguished as 
separate points (if the sources are closer together than this 
minimum angle, they will appear as a single point). The 
smaller the angular resolving power, the better the ability of 
the telescope to separate close pairs of stars and the greater 
the amount of detail that will be revealed in the image of 
an extended object (which can be regarded as consisting 
of large numbers of points). 

The theoretical resolving power, R, of a telescope 
depends on its aperture (D) and the wavelength (A) of the 
light that is being observed. It is given, conventionally, 
by the Rayleigh limit, whereby R = 1.22/D (where R is 
expressed in radians), or R = 2.52 x 10°A/D (where R is 
expressed in arcsec). For example, for light of wavelength 
5x 1077 m(500nm), a telescope of aperture 1 m would have 
a theoretical resolution of 2.52 x 10° x (5 x 1077/1) = 0.13 
arcsec. By contrast, a telescope of aperture 0.1 m would 
have a resolution of 1.3 arcsec. 

In practice, atmospheric effects limit the resolutions 
of Earth-based telescopes. Turbulence in the atmosphere 
smears out star images into disks (‘seeing disks’) that 
often are significantly larger than 1 arcsec in diameter. 
Consequently, the actual resolutions attained even by large 
telescopes are often poorer than 1 arcsec (the theoretical 
resolution of a 13 centimeter telescope) and seldom, 
even at the very best sites under the best conditions, 
better than 0.25 arcsec. Because it orbits clear of the 
atmosphere, the Hubble Space Telescope, with an aperture 
of 2.4 m, is able to achieve its theoretical resolving 
power of about 0.05 arcsec (about 5-10 times better than 
the largest conventional ground-based telescopes). The 
deleterious effects of the atmosphere can to some extent be 
overcome by means of active/adaptive optics or speckle 
interferometry. 

The theoretical resolution of a radio interferometer 
consisting of two dishes separated by a distance D (the 
‘baseline’) is given (in radians) by 4/2D, where i is the 
wavelength of the observed radiation. For very long 
baseline interferometers using separations comparable to 
the diameter of the Earth and wavelengths of around 
a centimeter, resolutions as fine as 0.001 arcsec can be 
attained. 


See also: active optics, adaptive optics, Airy disk, Dawes’ 
limit, interferometer, radio interferometer, Rayleigh limit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Resonance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Resonance 


A resonance in CELESTIAL MECHANICS occurs when some of 
the quantities characterizing the motion of two or more 
celestial bodies can be considered as commensurable, i.e. 
their ratio is close to an integer fraction. In a simplified 
form, this can be expressed as 


T,: Tz = pi: p2 


where 7, and 7» are the actual values of the quantities 
involved, while p; and pz are positive integers (1, 2, 3, ...; 
P1 < p2). Commensurabilities are frequently found in 
the dynamical behavior of celestial bodies of the solar 
system, involving widely different regimes of motion: 
spin, orbit, secular precessions. Although resonances in 
real systems usually approximate within a given accuracy 
of the corresponding exact value, they give important 
information on the existence of symmetries in the motion 
of the objects involved, leading to peculiar configurations 
and the periodic recurrence of gravitational interactions. 

The resonances that can be more easily revealed 
among the solar system’s bodies involve the orbital 
periods of two dynamically interrelated objects, e.g. two 
planets circling around the Sun or two satellites around 
a planet. They are usually referred to as mean motion 
resonances because they can be alternatively expressed 
by comparing the average orbital angular velocity of 
the bodies. Thus a mean motion resonance ensures the 
repetition of certain geometrical configurations: as an 
example, a 1:2 resonance between the orbital periods of 
two natural satellites implies that, while the inner body 
completes two orbits around the planet, the outer has 
made only one, and therefore conjunctions always occur 
along the same direction in space. 

For many satellite pairs of the outer planets a resonant 
relation can be found ata high level of accuracy. Within the 
Saturnian system the pairs MIMAS-TETHYS and ENCELADUS— 
DIONE are both in the 1:2 resonance, TITAN and HYPERION 
satisfy the 3:4 resonant relation, while the ratio of the 
orbital periods of Titan and 1aperus is close to 1:5. The 
three Galilean satellites closest to Jupiter, ie. 10, EUROPA 
and GANYMEDE, represent an outstanding example of a 
multiple mean motion resonance. The pairs lo-Europa 
and Europa—Ganymede are both found in a 1:2 resonance: 
thus the periods of revolution of Io and Ganymede are 
also in the ratio 1:4. This peculiar resonance, known 
as the Laplace resonance, prevents the occurrence of 
triple conjunctions of the three satellites. As far as the 
planets are concerned, some are indeed found close to 
mean motion resonances. The so-called great inequality 
is a 2:5 resonance which rules the motion of the two 
most massive planets of our solar system, JUPITER and 
SATURN, while the 2:3 commensurability between NEPTUNE 
and pLuTo provides the basic dynamical mechanism for 
avoiding too close approaches between them. For the 
Saturn—URANUS (1:3) and Uranus—Neptune (1:2) pairs the 
corresponding resonant relations are satisfied with less 
accuracy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The 1:1 mean motion resonance represents an 
exceptional case, allowing widely different dynamical 
behaviors depending on the relative mass and position of 
the bodies involved. The basic dynamical framework is 
provided by the so-called restricted three-body problem 
(one of the masses is negligible with respect to the 
other two) and its special solutions. In particular the 
two equilateral Lagrangian points, located along the 
unperturbed orbit of the secondary body around its 
primary and displaced 60° ahead or behind its current 
position, are of special relevance because they possess the 
necessary stability conditions for real systems to exist. The 
TROJAN ASTEROIDS are in fact grouped around the triangular 
Lagrangian points of the Sun-Jupiter system. Being 
historically the first bodies of the solar system discovered 
satisfying a 1:1 mean motion resonance, the attribute 
‘Trojan’ is now commonly used to indicate the occurrence 
of this peculiar configuration. Trojan satellites have been 
also observed and many more are supposed to exist within 
the crowded systems of the outer planets. This is the 
case of two of the largest satellites of Saturn: Tethys 
shares its orbit with the tiny moonlets (a little more than 
10 km in size) Calypso and Telesto, each located close 
to one of the triangular equilibrium points, while Dione 
is preceded by Helene, a 16 km long irregularly shaped 
body. When a 1:1 resonance is not exactly satisfied, it 
may still lead to peculiar trapping mechanisms, such as 
the so-called tadpole and horseshoe orbits. The motion of 
the already mentioned Trojan asteroids and those of Janus 
and Epimetheus, the two small satellites of Saturn sharing 
almost the same orbit, are well-known examples of this 
kind. The question whether the Earth itself has Trojans, 
small enough to have escaped direct observation, has been 
repeatedly posed. The advent of orbiting telescopes has 
allowed us to detect the existence of a thin cloud of dust 
dispersed along the orbital path of our planet, temporarily 
trapped in the vicinity of the 1:1 resonance (a possible 
explanation for the origin of the zodiacal light) while the 
recent survey of the near-Earth asteroid population has 
allowed us to identify (3575) Cruithne, an object in an 
unusual Earth horseshoe orbit. 

Mean motion resonances are encountered rather often 
throughout the solar system, more than due to chance, 
suggesting that they may provide a basic mechanism for 
long-term stability. Yet the study of the orbital evolution of 
objects close to mean motion resonances has shown that 
a wide variety of dynamical behaviors can be expected, 
including regular and chaotic regimes. Both characterize 
the resonant structure of the asteroid main belt, the densely 
populated region of small-sized celestial bodies extending 
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Opposite trends 
are in fact observed in the distribution of asteroidal mean 
distances from the Sun: regions devoid of objects (‘gaps’) 
corresponding to low-number mean motion resonances 
with Jupiter (e.g. 1:2, 1:3, 2:5), as well as concentrations (e.g. 
2:3, 3:4, 1:1). Detailed modeling of the individual cases 
has shown that resonances might be closely surrounded 
by chaotic regions. This is the dynamical mechanism 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Resonance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


responsible for the formation of the 1:3 gap: sudden 
chaotic jumps in the eccentricity of the orbit may have 
caused a near-resonant asteroid to become a Mars crosser 
and eventually be removed from the main belt by close 
encounters with that planet. 

The contradictory tendency to prefer certain reso- 
nances and avoid others is observed not only in the as- 
teroid belt but also in other densely populated systems, 
such as planetary rings. When the structure of Saturn’s 
rings is analyzed in the light of resonances, it turns out 
that the largest relatively empty region observed, i.e. the 
Cassini division, is strongly related to Mimas, correspond- 
ing to the 1:2 mean motion resonance. Smaller-scale fea- 
tures characterizing the A-ring can be also explained by 
the resonant effects of the satellites Pandora, Prometheus 
and Janus, orbiting just beyond the main ring system (see 
also SATURN: RINGS). 

More complex, less intuitive orbital resonances are 
found when the motion of a celestial body is investigated 
in detail. The presentation of an orbit as an ellipse fixed 
in space is only valid as long as two bodies alone are 
gravitationally interacting: distant perturbations by other 
bodies have the effect of inducing slow changes in the 
shape and the orientation of an orbit in space. This 
means that the eccentricity and the inclination are not 
constant any more, while the apsidal line (i.e. the line 
joining apocentre and pericentre) and the line of nodes 
(marking the intersection of an inclined orbit with the 
local reference plane) may advance, regress or librate in 
time. Commensurabilities in the rate of change of these 
quantities are called secular resonances and have been 
found to play a fundamental role in several problems of 
solar system dynamics. 

The overabundance of resonant configurations can 
therefore be considered as the result of a long-term 
selection process: among the multitude of objects once 
crowding the solar system, only those which could 
rely on the strong sheltering action of one or more 
resonances could dynamically survive. An outstanding 
example of this kind involves Neptune and Pluto: the 
unusually large eccentricity of the latter if compared with 
the almost circular orbits of the other planets has the 
consequence of letting Pluto’s perihelion distance become 
smaller than Neptune’s mean distance from the Sun. 
Although at present the orbits do not cross owing to their 
mutual inclination and angular parameters, they might, in 
principle, bring the two bodies dangerously close to each 
other. Nevertheless, the already mentioned mean motion 
resonance combined with the motion of Pluto’s perihelion 
prevents Neptune and Pluto from actually reaching their 
minimum achievable approach distance. The observation 
of several newly discovered objects sharing with Pluto 
the 2:3 mean motion resonance gives an indication of the 
importance of this mechanism in shaping the dynamical 
structure of the so-called Transneptunian Belt. 

Hyperion, the small irregularly shaped satellite of 
Saturn, is also similarly sheltered from the perturbing 
action of Saturn’s largest moon Titan. Being closer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to the planet and moving faster, Titan periodically 
overtakes Hyperion: when this happens the two bodies 
experience a minimum approach distance, while their 
mutual gravitational perturbations reacha maximum. The 
existence of a resonance allows conjunctions to take place 
only when Hyperion is at the apocenter of its orbit, namely 
at the largest possible distance from Saturn and therefore 
also from Titan. 

Exotic resonant mechanisms have also been found 
within the solar system. The existence of narrow 
arcs in Neptune’s Adams ring has been explained as 
the observable effect of a 42:43 mean motion inclined 
resonance between the ring particles and the neighboring 
Galatea satellite, which then provides the necessary 
confinement (see also NEPTUNE: RINGS). Also, a peculiar 
high-number commensurability strongly characterizes the 
motion of the Moon around the Earth, as witnessed by 
the existence of the saros cycle, a period of approximately 
18 yr and 10 or 11 days (depending on the number 
of leap years in the interval) which has allowed the 
prediction of solar and lunar eclipses with remarkable 
accuracy since ancient times. One Saros encompasses 
223 lunar synodic months (the time span between two 
subsequent conjunctions with the Sun) which nearly 
equals 239 anomalistic months (the time span between 
two subsequent perigee passages) and 242 nodical months 
(the time span between two subsequent passages at the 
ascending node). From a strictly dynamical point of view 
this means that any configuration of the Earth-Moon-Sun 
system closely repeats after one Saros. 

Resonances are also found when investigating the 
coupling between the rotation of a celestial body around 
its own axis and its orbital motion. If a commensurability 
exists among the corresponding periods, a spin-orbit 
resonance is said to occur. The Moon, whose rotation 
period equals its orbital period around the Earth, thus 
allowing only one side of its surface to be seen from 
our planet, is a well-known example of a 1:1 spin— 
orbit resonance. This particular commensurability, called 
synchronous resonance, is also found for the vast majority 
of natural satellites in the solar system, suggesting the 
existence of an underlying physical phenomenon in action. 
As a matter of fact, the synchronous resonance can be 
considered as a direct outcome of the long-term tidal 
interaction between bodies of finite dimensions (see 
also TIDES). The presence of a tidal bulge raised by the 
differential gravitational attraction on the surface of a 
celestial body determines the onset of internal friction, as 
the bulge is carried along with the rotation. Usually this 
leads to a slowdown of the spin rate until a 1:1 resonance 
is achieved, because the bulge is then permanently locked 
towards the attracting body. Tides are experienced 
by both bodies, although with different intensity and 
timescales depending on their relative size, mass and 
internal structure; thus the end state of a tidally interacting 
system is achieved when the revolution and the rotation 
periods of both bodies are equal, i.e. they revolve with 
their tidal bulges facing each other. This is observed in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Resonance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


case of Pluto and its satellite Charon, almost comparable in 
size, currently trapped into a fully evolved 1:1 spin-orbit 
resonance. The Earth-Moon system has only partially 
evolved (owing to lunar tides the length of the day on 
our planet is at present increasing at a pace of about 
2 ms per century), while the other planets have a mass 
much too large with respect to that of their satellites 
to be affected by their tides. Mercury represents an 
exceptional case: because of its proximity to the Sun it 
is subjected to strong solar tides and has therefore evolved 
towards a 2:3 spin-orbit resonance. Its present period of 
revolution is 87.97 days, while its rotation amounts to 58.65 
days, showing that, for every two orbits around the Sun, 
Mercury completes three rotations around its axis. 

Thus, resonances have provided a powerful means to 
explain many puzzling problems in solar system studies. 
The chaotic behavior of near-resonant asteroidal orbits 
has allowed us to discover the long-sought dynamical 
paths for the transport of matter from the asteroid belt 
to the inner solar system, since a significant fraction of 
near-Earth asteroids and of meteorites are thought to have 
originated by collisional evolution within the main belt. 
The Laplace resonance involving the innermost Jupiter 
Galilean satellite Io has been indicated as the ultimate 
cause for the internal tidal heating mechanism which 
provides the energy for the intensive volcanic activity 
observed on the surface of the satellite. 

Resonances have proven to be a powerful tool for 
space mission design. Already in 1974, the US MARINER 
10 spacecraft could perform repeated flybys of planet 
Mercury exploiting a 1:2 mean motion resonance between 
the spacecraft’s period of revolution around the Sun and 
that of the target planet. The geostationary ring, located 
along the Earth’s equatorial plane at a distance of about 
36000 km above its surface, is now widely used for 
telecommunication purposes because the 1:1 spin-orbit 
resonance between the Earth’s rotation and the orbital 
period of a geostationary satellite allows a spacecraft to 
remain permanently stationed over a given longitude. 

On a larger scale, when looking at the Sun and 
the stars in our Galaxy and the existence of extrasolar 
planets, resonances are also observed. In the rapidly 
expanding field of astroseismology, the study of solar 
oscillations exploits the effect of resonances to detect 
peculiar structures in the interior of the Sun. The 
confirmation of the discovery of two planets orbiting 
around a pulsar (PSR1257+12) has been possible thanks 
to the existence of a 2:3 mean motion resonance among 
them, which produced a characteristic signature in their 
mutual perturbations. 


Bibliography 
Murray C D and Dermott S F 2000 Solar System Dynamics 


(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
Roy AE 1988 Orbital Motion 3rd edn (Bristol: Adam Hilger) 


Ettore Perozzi 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Reticulum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reticulum 


(the Net; abbrev. Ret, gen. Reticuli; area 114 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies (to the north- 
west of the Large Magellanic Cloud) between Dorado 
and Horologium, and culminates at midnight in mid- 
November. It was first shown as Reticulum Rhomboidalis 
(the Rhomboidal Net) on Isaac Habrecht II’s celestial 
globe of 1621 and was renamed by the French astronomer 
Nicolas L de Lacaille (1713-62), after the reticle in the 
eyepiece of the telescope with which he measured the 
positions of the stars of the southern sky in 1751-2. The 
shortened form was adopted by the IAU in 1922. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Reticulum are a Reticuli, magnitude 3.3, and 
B Reticuli, magnitude 3.8. There are no other stars 
brighter than fourth magnitude. Interesting objects 
include ¢ Reticuli, a naked-eye double star with two 
yellow (G1 and G2) components, magnitudes 5.2 and 
5.5, separation 5.1’, that have the same proper motion 
(which is very similar to that of the Sun), 6 Reticuli, 
a close binary with bluish-white (B9) and white (Am) 
components, magnitudes 6.0 and 7.8, separation 4.1”, and 
NGC 1559, an eleventh-magnitude barred spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Retrograde Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Retrograde Motion 


Angular motion in the opposite sense to the prevailing 
direction (as opposed to direct or prograde motion, which 
is in the same sense). Motion of a body in the solar system, 
either axial rotation or orbital revolution, is retrograde if 
it is in the opposite direction to that of the Sun’s rotation: 
clockwise as viewed from the Sun’s north pole. Bodies 
in retrograde orbits have orbital inclinations between 
90° and 180°; bodies with retrograde rotation have axial 
inclinations between 90° and 180°. Retrograde motion is 
the exception to the norm, for it is in the opposite sense 
to the motion of the rotating disk of material from which 
the Sun and the planets formed, and hence is indicative 
of some event in a body’s history having modified its 
motion. Of the major planets, Venus, Uranus and Pluto 
have retrograde rotation, possibly as a consequence of 
impacts they suffered at some time in their past. The 
outermost satellites of Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus, and also 
Neptune’s largest satellite, Triton, have retrograde orbits, 
indicating that these are captured objects. Many long- 
period comets have retrograde orbits as a consequence of 
the circumstances in which they were perturbed inwards 
from the cometary reservoirs in the distant outer reaches 
of the solar system. 

The term is also used for the temporary apparent 
motion from east to west on the celestial sphere of a 
superior planet or minor planet, in contrast to its usual 
direct eastward motion. This retrograde motion occurs 
around the time of a planet’s opposition. As a planet 
nears opposition, the Earth is approaching it and travelling 
faster, and the planet’s apparent rate of motion slows 
down, and then reverses direction. Its retrograde motion is 
fastest at opposition. The reverse occurs after opposition, 
when the Earth is moving away from the planet: the 
retrograde motion slows, halts and returns to direct. The 
two points at which the motion changes direction are 
called stationary points. Because the planets’ orbits are 
inclined to the ecliptic, which defines the plane of the 
Earth’s orbit, the direct-retrograde—direct sequence causes 
the planet to describe what is known as a retrograde loop on 
the celestial sphere, or sometimes an S-shaped curve. The 
more distant a planet, the smaller its retrograde loop. 


Compare: direct motion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Revolution ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Revolution 


The motion of one celestial body about another, for 
example the motion of a satellite around a planet or 
of a planet around the Sun. The Earth completes one 
revolution of the Sun in a year. 


See also: axis, orbit, rotation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Rhea 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rhea 


The largest of the mid-sized icy satellites of Saturn, with 
a diameter of 1528 km, discovered by Giovanni Cassini 
in 1672. It orbits at a distance of 527000 km. The 
surface was well imaged by Voyager 1. Unlike the other 
regular mid-sized satellites of Saturn, Rhea shows little 
diversity of terrain—the surface is saturated with craters. 
The 250 km diameter crater Izanagi is the exception: the 
majority of Rhea’s craters are around 20 km in size. It 
has been suggested that this even population of craters 
was produced by debris from the collision that left the 
satellite Hyperion, orbiting farther out, with its irregular 
shape. There are some ridges and scarps, interpreted as 
resulting from a global compression, as is thought to have 
occurred on Mercury. The lack of any orbital resonances 
with other satellites is what has left Rhea for the most part 
geologically inactive. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rheticus [Rhaeticus; Lauchen, Georg Joachim von] 
(1514-74) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rheticus [Rhaeticus; Lauchen, Georg 
Joachim von] (1514-74) 


Born in Feldkirch, Austria, and started an extraordinary 
life with the name Georg Iserin. After his father was 
executed for sorcery and his name was abandoned, Iserin 
took a germanized form of his mother’s maiden name 
and then the name of Rheticus (the Roman name of the 
province where he had been born). Taught mathematics 
and astronomy at the University of Wittenberg, visited 
COPERNICUS for two years, on the basis of which he 
published and introduction to the heliocentric theory, the 
Narratio Prima or First Report to Johann Schoner on the Books 
of the Revolutions of the Learned Gentleman and Distinguished 
Mathematician, the Reverend Doctor Nicolaus Copernicus of 
Torun, Canon of Warmia, by a Certain Youth Devoted to 
Mathematics, which established the Copernican hypothesis 
with credibility. Rheticus negotiated with the authorities 
for the publication of Copernicus’ De Revolutionibus, at 
first publishing the trigonometrical sections, with his own 
calculation of a table of cosines (the first published). As 
he neared the end of the preparation of the text of De 
Revolutionibus, he was offered a post at the University of 
Leipzig at greatly increased salary and left the completion 
of the task to OSIANDER. Rheticus had to flee a homosexual 
scandal in Leipzig and found himself in Cracow as a 
doctor, working in his spare time and with a group of 
assistants on trigonometric tables, making instruments 
and observing in astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Riccioli, Giambattista [Giovanni Battista] (1598-1671) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Riccioli, Giambattista [Giovanni 
Battista] (1598-1671) 


Italian astronomer, born in Ferrara, became a Jesuit 
and came into conflict with the Copernican system, 
like OSIANDER refuting it while acknowledging its use 
as a mathematical hypothesis. Mapped the Moon and 
introduced some of the names still used, in a chart 
published in the New Almagest in 1651. As a follower 
of the Ptolemaic system, he named major lunar craters 
after HIPPARCHUS, PTOLEMY and BRAHE (and a big crater after 
himself), and gave the names of COPERNICUS and ARISTARCHUS 
to smaller ones. He experimented with falling bodies, 
intending to refute GALILEO and show that the Earth was 
at rest. His experiments, however, confirmed Galileo’s 
concept of uniformly accelerated motion. He made 
general astronomical observations—of sunspots, Jupiter 
and Saturn, atmospheric refraction, and the positions of 
the stars. His observation in 1650 that Mizar was a double 
star was the first discovery of such a star with a telescope. 
He discovered Venus’ ashen light phenomenon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Richard of Wallingford (1291/2—1336(7?)) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Richard of Wallingford 
(1291/2—1336(?)) 


Born in Wallingford, Oxfordshire, England, became abbot 
of St Albans, went to Avignon to have his appointment 
confirmed by the Pope, and contracted leprosy (or perhaps 
syphilis, scrofula or tuberculosis), dying young. He made 
and described an astronomical clock and an elaborate 
equitorium called Albion, a sort of analog computer that 
could make Ptolemaic calculations of lunar, solar and 
planetary positions, including eclipse predictions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Richer, Jean (1630-96) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Richer, Jean (1630-96) 


Born in France, became an ‘astronomer’ of the Académie 
Royal des Sciences. Carried out missions for the 
Académie, measuring the heights of the tides at La 
Rochelle at the equinoxes, and on a trip to Canada tested 
two clocks made by HuycEns (they stopped, to Huygens’ 
chagrin). In 1671 he went to Cayenne, French Guyana, as 
part of a campaign to measure the parallax of Mars and to 
examine the periods of pendulums at different points on 
his travels so as to determine the Earth’s gravity. NEWTON 
and Huygens used the data to determine the shape of the 
Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rigel 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rigel 


The star 6 Orionis. At apparent magnitude 0.18 it is the 
seventh brightest star in the sky, and though designated 
B is actually the brightest star in Orion. Betelgeuse (a 
Orionis), now an irregular variable, may have been the 
brighter star when the Bayer letters were allocated in 1603. 

Rigel (‘Left Leg of the Giant’) is a blue-white 
supergiant of spectral type B8Ia. With an absolute 
magnitude of —6.7 it is the most intrinsically luminous 
star known. It is an a Cygni-type pulsating variable, with 
a period of 2.07 days, magnitude range approximately 0.0-— 
0.3. It has a faint companion which is itself a spectroscopic 
binary, separated from the primary by 9.5”; the orbital 
period is not measurable. The system is 770 light-years 
distant, with a parallax of 0.004”. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Right Ascension (RA) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Right Ascension (RA) 


The angle between the hour circles passing through the 
vernal equinox and a celestial body, measured eastwards 
(i.e. anti-clockwise) from the vernal equinox and expressed 
in time units (hours, minutes, and seconds) where 24 h is 
equivalent to 360°. In other words, it is the angle between 
the vernal equinox and a point on the celestial equator such 
that the angle between the vernal equinox, this point and 
a star is a right angle. The position of a star is normally 
expressed in terms of right ascension and declination. 


Seealso: great circle, declination, hour angle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Rille 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rille 


A long narrow depression on the Moon’s surface. There 
are several types. Linear rilles (or straight rilles), forked rilles 
and arcuate rilles are mostly graben—flat-bottomed strips 
of land that have collapsed between a pair of parallel 
fault lines. As their names imply, they may be straight 
or arc-shaped, and are often associated with large impact 
features. Examples are those named Rimae Mersenius and 
Rimae Hippalus, on opposite sides of Mare Humorum 
(rima is the term used in naming this type of feature). 
Different in origin are sinuous rilles. These are long, steep- 
sided channels, sometimes discontinuous, that wind their 
way across the floors of the lunar maria. They are in 
fact collapsed lava tubes, similar to those found on Earth. 
The surface of a narrow lava flow can solidify while lava 
beneath is still flowing, so that when the flow ceases an 
empty tube is left. A sinuous rille is produced when all 
or part of the roof of the tube collapses. An example of a 
lunar sinuous rille is the Hadley Rille, visited by the crew 
of Apollo 15. Sinuous rilles have also been identified on 
Venus and Mars. Some features on Uranus’s satellite Ariel 
strongly resemble sinuous rilles, and may have a similar 
origin in a ‘cryovolcanic’ process in which melted ices can 
behave as lava. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ring Nebula (M57, NGC 6720) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ring Nebula (M57, NGC 6720) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Lyra, position 
RA 18" 53.6™, dec. +33° 02’. It is ninth magnitude and 
measures 70” by 150”; the central star is only fifteenth 
magnitude. Its telescopic appearance resembles a smoke- 
ring. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ritchey, George Willis (1864-1945) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ritchey, George Willis (1864-1945) 


At first a furniture-maker and woodworker, became 
an instrument-maker and especially an optician when 
he obtained part-time work at the observatory of 
the University of Cincinnati. Met GEORGE ELLERY HALE 
in Chicago and volunteered to assist him, preparing 
photographic plates, learning to use the camera to 
photograph stars and nebulae. Became a full time 
optician and supervisor of the instrument shop at Yerkes 
Observatory and made its 40 in refracting telescope work 
properly. He built the 24 in Ritchey reflecting telescope 
with which he discovered the expanding nebulosity 
around Nova Persei 1901. He also built the horizontal 
solar telescope, and the Snow horizontal telescope that 
replaced it. Ritchey followed Hale to the Mount Wilson 
Observatory, and made the 60 in and 100 in mirrors for 
the large Californian telescopes. He discovered a nova 
in a spiral galaxy, NGC 6946, showing the distances of 
galaxies as ‘island universes’. Hale fell out with Ritchey 
and fired him. Ritchey went to live in France, where he 
implemented the design of the Ritchey—Chrétien telescope, 
a Cassegrain variant with paraboloidal concave primary 
mirror and ellipsoidal secondary mirror, and a curved 
focal plane (like the Anglo-Australian Telescope). He 
returned to the United States, and began to build a 40 inch 
Ritchey—Chrétien telescope for the US Naval Observatory 
in Washington, DC, but when he dropped the mirror he 
had been working on, the project lost confidence in him, 
and Ritchey retired. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rittenhouse, David (1732-96) and Rittenhouse, Ben- 
jamin (1740-1825) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rittenhouse, David (1732-96) and 
Rittenhouse, Benjamin (1740-1825) 


David was an instrument-maker and astronomer, born in 
Paper Mill Run, PA, self-taught, as a young man he made 
clocks and telescopes, introduced the use of spider’s webs 
as cross-hairs in transit telescopes and made orreries to 
show planetary motions. He used his own instruments for 
astronomy. He worked to survey the MASON and DIXON line 
and taught astronomy at the University of Pennsylvania. 
He became a statesman, and was director of the US Mint. 
Benjamin, his brother, born in Norriton, was a craftsman, 
who made decorated compasses and clocks. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Robinson, Thomas Romney (1792-1882) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Robinson, Thomas Romney 
(1792-1882) 


Irish astronomer, was director of the Armagh Observatory 
for 59 years (possibly a world record for an observatory 
director). Concentrated on determining star positions 
with newly installed meridian and transit telescopes. 
For the observatory Robinson procured from THOMAS 
crus, the instrument-maker and founder of the telescope 
building company that bore his name, a 15 in diameter 
reflector. This was the first large Cassegrain telescope 
built in Britain, and the first large reflecting telescope to 
be mounted equatorially with a clock drive. It had a 
novel, lever-support system to maintain the shape of the 
speculum primary mirror against flexure due to gravity 
as the mirror changed attitude. This design for the mirror 
cell was later used for LORD RosSE’s six foot reflector and 
for the Great Southern Telescope at Melbourne, whose 
construction Robinson also oversaw, and for a century 
of later Grubb-Parsons telescopes. Robinson observed 
with the ‘Leviathan of Parsonstown’. The duties of the 
observatory included meteorology and Robinson invented 
the cup-anemometer to measure wind speed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Roche Limit 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Roche Limit 


The minimum distance from a planet at which a satellite 
can resist being gravitationally disrupted by tidal forces. 
It is given by 2.456R(p,/p,)'/3, where R is the planet’s 
radius, and pp and p, are the densities of the planet 
and the satellite. This expression (without the density 
term) was derived in 1849 by Edouard Roche, and played 
a part in theories of the formation of Saturn’s rings. 
Material within the Roche limit would be prevented 
from accreting into a larger body, while the break-up of 
a satellite that ventured inside the Roche limit would 
perhaps give rise to a ring system. The Roche limit as 
defined above applies to a fluid satellite—a hypothetical 
body of zero tensile strength—whereas real satellites are 
of course solid objects with a degree of structural integrity, 
able to offer some resistance to tidal disruption. Small 
satellites can in theory exist within the Roche limits 
for their bulk densities. However, it is not clear how 
many do, for the densities of the innermost satellites 
of the giant planets are mostly undetermined. Larger 
satellites, though, would be broken up within their Roche 
limit. If this happened, continued collisions between the 
resulting fragments, which would occupy similar orbits, 
would gradually produce progressively smaller and more 
numerous objects, and would thus create a ring system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Roche Lobe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Roche Lobe 


Within the region surrounding the components of a binary 
system there are two competing gravity fields. The Roche 
lobe, named after the French mathematician Edouard 
Roche (1820-1883), is the volume of space within which 
any matter is controlled by the gravity field of a single 
star. It is said to be bound by an ‘equipotential surface’ in 
which the gravitational force exerted by the star is equal 
at all points. 

The Roche lobes of each component of a binary 
system, which in isolation would be spheroidal, are drawn 
out into cone-like extensions meeting at a point between 
the two stars known as the Lagrangian point, where the 
gravitational attractions of the two components are exactly 
equal. The position of this point along the line joining the 
centres of the two stars depends upon their relative masses. 
If one of the component stars expands to fill its Roche lobe, 
mass transfer will occur through the Lagrangian point 
towards the other star. 


See also: binary system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Roche, Edouard Albert (1820-83) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Roche, Edouard Albert (1820-83) 


French astronomer and mathematician, fl. Montpellier, 
who studied the attractive force of rotating fluid bodies 
and discovered the Roche limit, the closest that a satellite 
can approach its planet and survive the stresses introduced 
when the nearer side tries to orbit faster than the further 
side. Empirically this closest distance is about 2.5 times 
the radius of the planet. Saturn’s rings lie inside the Roche 
limit of Saturn. Roche lobes are the surfaces that define 
zones in a double-star system such that a test particle 
placed inside one of the surfaces will tend to gravitate 
towards the star near its center. If the star grows bigger 
than the zone in which it lies, it will expel material from 
its surface, possibly towards its companion star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rockets in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rockets in Astronomy 


Prior to the launch of the first satellite, Sputnik 1, in 1957, 
the only way to place scientific instruments above the 
atmosphere was to launch them on board rockets. In 
the following four decades, suborbital sounding rockets 
have continued to play a major role in improving our 
knowledge of the Earth, geospace and the universe as a 
whole. 

Sounding rockets take their name from the nautical 
term ‘to sound’, which means to take measurements. The 
rockets consist of one or more stages, each with its own 
solid-fuel rocket motor, and a payload. They follow a 
parabolic trajectory, with less than 30 min of flight time. 
Following the launch, as the rocket motor uses its fuel, it 
separates from the vehicle and falls back to Earth. The 
payload continues into space and, once the experiment 
is completed, it re-enters the atmosphere. A parachute is 
deployed to bring the payload gently back to Earth for 
retrieval, a procedure that results in significant savings 
because all or part of the experiment can be refurbished 
and flown again. 

The idea of using rockets to probe the upper 
atmosphere dates back to the 1930s, when ROBERT 
GODDARD proposed sending up small payloads that would 
parachute back to the ground from heights of up to 80 km 
(50 miles). Unfortunately, Goddard’s plans were dashed 
by a lack of government interest and a shortage of funding. 

As a result, rocket technology only became available 
for scientific research after American armed forces 
captured German V-2 missile factories at the end of 
the Second World War. Dozens of missiles and spare 
parts, along with blueprints and many of the key rocket 
designers (including WERNHER VON BRAUN), were shipped 
back to the United States and used to found the nation’s 
missile program. 

Between 1946 and 1951, 69 V-2s were launched from 
the US Army’s White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico, 
reaching altitudes up to 185 km (116 miles). As the 
supply of captured missiles dwindled, a number of new 
rocket designs were introduced. These included the 
Aerobee, which was developed under the direction of 
space scientist JAMES VAN ALLEN from the Johns Hopkins 
University’s Applied Physics Laboratory. Van Allen’s 
main interest in using such vehicles was to observe cosmic 
rays before they struck the upper atmosphere. 

Meanwhile, German engineers were also helping the 
Russians to build and fly their own V-2 rockets. These 
and their successors were launched from Kapustin Yar 
between 1947 and 1987. The rocket flights for atmospheric 
sounding were supervised by Soviet Academician A 
Blagonravov. The most used vehicle during the 1950s 
was a modified V-2, known as the R-1, which flew in five 
different versions. 

Amajor impetus for rocket development and research 
on both sides of the Iron Curtain during the 1950s was the 
announcement that the 18 month period from 1 July 1957 
to 31 December 1958 would be declared as International 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Geophysical Year (IGY). This would coincide with an 
expected peak in sunspot activity as well as several 
eclipses. 

Almost 300 suborbital rocket launches were under- 
taken by the United States during this period, with another 
175 sent up by the Soviet Union. Other countries that par- 
ticipated in IGY sounding rocket programmes included 
Australia, Canada, France, Japan and Great Britain. These 
were mainly designed to investigate the properties of the 
upper atmosphere, particularly the ionosphere. 

Despite their short duration, these and subsequent 
suborbital flights made a number of scientific break- 
throughs. The key to their success was the rocket’s capabil- 
ity to lift detectors above the atmosphere which absorbed 
much of the cosmic radiation. 

Attempts to study the universe at ultraviolet 
wavelengths from balloons during the 1920s were largely 
unsuccessful, since the Earth’s ozone layer absorbs most 
of the incoming ultraviolet radiation. The first detection 
of ultraviolet radiation from the Sun had to wait until a 
spectrometer was carried to high altitude by a captured 
V-2 rocket in 1946. This was followed during the late 
1950s by the first ultraviolet observations of stars from 
rockets carrying instruments with pointing capability. The 
breakthrough was achieved by Don Morton and Lyman 
Spitzer of Princeton University. Despite the failure of the 
rocket’s parachute, their instrument survived to provide 
ultraviolet spectra for two stars in the constellation of 
Scorpius. 

Also in 1946, T R Burnight from the US Naval 
Research Laboratory (NRL) reported fogging on a piece 
of photographic film carried aloft by a V-2. He claimed 
that the effect was caused by solar x-rays, but the cause 
of the blackening was questioned by other scientists. 
The first undisputed discovery of x-rays from the Sun 
had to wait until another NRL experiment, provided by 
HERBERT FRIEDMAN, flew on a modified V-2 rocket from 
White Sands in 1949. The experiment used a number of 
geiger counters to detect the radiation and provide basic 
directional information. 

Then, on 18 June 1962, an Air Force experiment to 
search for x-rays from the Moon turned up a surprise. 
Three proportional counters on an Aerobee suborbital 
rocket found an x-ray source beyond the solar system in the 
constellation of Scorpius. The researchers, led by Italian 
physicist RICCARDO GIACCONI, called the discovery scorPIUus 
x1. Further celestial x-ray sources were discovered over 
the next few years by rocket-launched experiments. 

INFRARED ASTRONOMY also gained an early boost from 
instruments on American suborbital rockets, this time 
provided by the US Air Force Cambridge Research 
Laboratories (later renamed the Air Force Geophysics 
Laboratory). Project HISTAR was prompted by the 
USAF’s desire not to confuse the heat signature of an 
incoming enemy missile with the infrared emission from 
harmless astronomical sources. Accordingly, the Air Force 
launched a 16.5 cm (6.5 in) telescope, cooled by liquid 
helium, ona series of nine rockets, seven from White Sands 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rockets in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


between April and December 1972, and two more from 
Australia in 1974. During some 30 min of accumulated 
observing time, more than 2000 cosmic infrared sources 
were detected at four wavelengths between 4 and 27 wm. 

Although the limited size and mass of payload, 
together with the limited duration for observations, have 
reduced the number of such flights carried out in recent 
years, sounding rockets still offer a number of benefits. 
First, they are low cost and offer a launch flexibility 
not available with larger launch vehicles. They also 
provide the only means of making in situ measurements 
at heights between the maximum altitudes for balloons 
(about 48 km or 30 miles) and the minimum altitude for 
satellites (160 km or 100 miles). 

Sounding rocket experiments provide a variety of 
information. This includes studies of the chemical 
composition and physical processes taking place in 
the atmosphere; measurement of the natural radiation 
surrounding the Earth; and data on the Sun, stars, galaxies 
and many other astronomical phenomena. 

In addition, sounding rockets provide a reasonably 
economical means of conducting engineering tests for 
instruments and devices used on satellites and other 
spacecraft prior to their use in more expensive activities. 
Their low cost and short mission lead time mean that they 
are valuable scientific research tools for undergraduate 
and graduate students. 

Although some countries, such as the UK, have 
phased out sounding rocket programs altogether, these 
launch vehicles are still widely used in the United States, 
Europe and Japan. Nasa currently uses 15 different 
sounding rockets and launches about 30 such rockets each 
year. The launchers come in a variety of sizes from the 
single-stage Super Arcas, which stands 3 m (7 ft) tall, to the 
20 m (65 ft) tall, four-stage Black Brant XII. These rockets 
can carry payloads of various weights to altitudes from 
48 km (30 miles) to more than 1287 km (800 miles). 

NASA sounding rockets are launched routinely from 
Wallops Island in Virginia, White Sands Missile Range in 
New Mexico and Poker Flat Research Range in Alaska, 
as well as sites in Canada, Norway and Sweden. They 
can also be launched from temporary launch ranges. In 
the past, NASA launch programs have been conducted 
from Peru, Puerto Rico, Brazil, Greenland, Australia and 
an aircraft carrier in the Pacific Ocean. 

The Japanese space agency, ISAS, has also been 
building and launching sounding rockets for more than 
30 yr. Many of these have been dedicated to astrophysical 
observations, upper atmosphere exploration, space 
plasma physics and other for scientific research. The 
main rockets used are the small MT-135, which is used 
primarily for middle atmosphere research, e.g. ozone layer 
depletion, the medium-range S-310 and the powerful S-520 
which is capable of launching 100 kg of payload above 
300 km (190 miles). These are usually launched from 
Kagoshima Space Centre on Kyushu island. Launch 
campaigns abroad with these sounding rockets have been 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


made in Antarctica and at Andoya, Norway, for the in situ 
measurement of auroras. 

Andoya Rocket Range (ARR) in the Svalbard 
archipelago is the world’s northernmost permanent 
launch facility for sounding rockets. It provides favorable 
conditions for studying the ionosphere, the dayside aurora 
and processes in the magnetospheric boundary layer. 
Since 1972, ARR has been supported by several EUROPEAN 
SPACE AGENCY (ESA) member states. In return, the range 
facilities are available to the ESA member states on a 
marginal cost basis. By the beginning of 2000, the range 
had conducted 698 rocket launches. 


Peter Bond 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rooke, Lawrence (1622-62) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rooke, Lawrence (1622-62) 


Born in Deptford, near London, became professor of 
astronomy and of geometry at Gresham College, London. 
Observed the satellites of Jupiter and made telescopic 
observations of lunar eclipses to determine longitude. But, 
more practical than many enthusiasts for these methods, 
he realized that they were too difficult to observe at sea, 
and could be used only to establish the longitude of cities 
and harbors. He proposed instead that a good lunar 
theory might provide an astronomical means to determine 
longitude at sea. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ROSAT (Rontgen Satellite) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ROSAT (Rontgen Satellite) 


The German-US-UK x-ray observatory ROSAT was 
launched into a 550 km circular orbit in June 1990. 
It carried two imaging telescopes operating in the soft 
x-ray (0.1-2.4 keV) and extreme UV (EUV) (006-0.2 keV) 
ranges. The x-ray telescope consisted of four nested 
Wolter type-I mirrors. The manufacturing of the x-ray 
mirrors — the largest and most accurate ones at that time 
— pioneered the use of Zerodur (a ceramic with zero 
thermal expansion) and an extremely low surface rough- 
ness (0.25 nm rms). In the telescope’s focus were two 
position sensitive proportional counters (PSPC, 20 arc- 
sec) and one high resolution imager (HRI, 5 arcsec). The 
EUV telescope consisted of three nested Wolter- 
Schwarzschild mirrors and two channel plate detectors 
(3 arcmin). The satellite and the x-ray telescope was 
designed, built and operated by Germany. NASA pro- 
vided the Delta launch and the high resolution imager 
while the UK built and operated the EUV telescope. The 
prime ROSAT data centers were and are at the Max 
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching 
(x-rays) and at the University of Leicester (EUV) with 
mirror sites at the Goddard Space Flight Center and 
other scientific institutions. 

ROSAT performed the first all-sky surveys with 
imaging x-ray and EUV telescopes leading to the discov- 
ery of 125000 x-ray and 479 EUV sources. In addition the 
diffuse galactic x-ray emission was mapped with 
unprecedented angular resolution (< 1 arcmin). Most of 
the mission time was devoted to pointed observations at 
selected targets. In total 4580 PSPC and 4482 HRI fields 
were covered with observation times between ~ 2000 s 
and ~ 1 Ms. Seven hundred scientists (‘Principal 
Investigators’) from 24 countries were involved in these 
pointed observations. The total number of ROSAT-based 
publications is 4787, with 54.9% in refereed journals 
(August 2001). All ROSAT data are calibrated and 
archived and are available through 


http:/ / wave.xray.mpe.mpg.de/rosat/ catalogues 
A large number of discoveries were made using both 


the all-sky survey and the pointed observations of 
ROSAT: 


e x-ray shadows cast by cool interstellar clouds on the 
soft x-ray background in the Galaxy and nearby 
galaxies; 


e x-rays and EUV light from the sunlit side of the Moon; 
¢ x-rays from brown dwarfs; 


e x-rays from T Tauri stars located at large distance 
from their birthplaces; 


¢ underluminosity of single white dwarfs in x-rays and 
EUV, due to metals in their atmospheres; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


e blackbody-like emission from intermediate polars; 


¢ supersoft x-ray sources — nuclear burning on accret- 
ing white dwarfs; 


* x-ray emission from the photospheres of single neu- 
tron stars; 


¢ x-ray emission from millisecond pulsars; 


e x-ray pulsations of the enigmatic Y ray source 
Geminga and its identification as a neutron star; 


e x-ray and EUV emission from comets (e.g. 
Hyakutake, Levi); 


¢ soft x-ray emission from the shock wave of SN 1987A; 


* x-ray emitting explosion fragments in the Vela 
Supernova remnant; 


e strong and highly variable x-ray emission from nar- 
row line Seyfert galaxies; 


¢ 80% of the cosmic x-ray background resolved into dis- 
crete source, mostly active galactic nuclei (AGN); 


¢ superluminous flares at the centers of normal galaxies 
indicating episodic accretion onto supermassive black 
holes; 


¢ x-ray diagnostics of merging clusters of galaxies; 


¢ interaction between AGN jets and the intracluster 
medium in clusters of galaxies; 


¢ measurement of the large-scale structure up to scales 
of ~ 700 Mpc using large samples of x-ray detected 
clusters of galaxies. 


ROSAT was switched off in February 1999 after 8/4 years 
of successful operation. 


ROSAT images can be found at 
http:/ /wave.xray.mpe.mpg.de/ gallery /index 


Joachim Triimper 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Rosetta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rosetta 


The International Rosetta Mission was approved in 
November 1993 by ESA’s Science Programme Committee 
(SPC) as the Planetary Cornerstone Mission in ESA’s 
long-term program Horizon 2000. The mission goal is a 
rendezvous with comet 46P/Wirtanen. A subsidiary aim 
is the study of two asteroids during close fly-bys en route 
to the comet. 


Background 

Our knowledge of small solar-system bodies, the COMETS 
and asTERoIDs, has improved dramatically over the last 
20 yr. The major milestones were undoubtedly the first 
fly-bys of COMET HALLEY by the GIOTTO, VEGA, SAKIGAKE and 
SUISEI probes in 1986, the Giotto Extended Mission to comet 
Grigg-Skjellerup in July 1992, the first near encounters 
with main-belt asteroids Gaspra and Ida by the GALILEO 
spacecraft on its way to Jupiter, the encounters with Braille 
by Deep Space 1 and with near-Earth object Mathilde 
by the NgaR spacecraft, and finally NEAR’s rendezvous 
with ERos in February 2000. During the same period, 
telescopic observations performed on the ground or in 
Earth orbit have greatly expanded and diversified. They 
constitute the basis for understanding small bodies as a 
population, since we can now compare observations of a 
large variety of objects and can undertake investigations 
of the variability of cometary activity. In particular, the 
outstanding opportunities to observe two bright comets, 
Hyakutake and Hale-Bopp in 1995 and 1996, provided 
new insights into cometary composition from ground- 
based observations. 

Systematic observations in the visible spectrum are 
being performed for short-period comets as well as main- 
belt and near-Earth asteroids. It is now possible to observe 
cometary nuclei even at large heliocentric distances 
from the ground and with the Hubble Space Telescope. 
Furthermore, small bodies have now been studied 
systematically at all wavelengths from the ultraviolet, via 
the infrared to microwave and radio wavelengths. Here 
the International Ultraviolet Explorer (TUE) and ESA’s 
Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) played, among others, 
an important role. 

From this wealth of new information, it is becoming 
apparent that asteroids and comets constitute an almost 
continuous suite of progressively less evolved objects, 
reflecting the radial gradient in the swarm of planetesimals 
during the formation of the solar system. Indeed, the 
outermost asteroids exhibit spectral similarities to the bare 
cometary nuclei observed far from the Sun. A better 
understanding of the relationship between asteroids, 
comets and PLANETESIMALS throughout the solar nebula is 
an essential step in unravelling the first stages of the 
formation of the solar system. 

Cometary material has been submitted to the lowest 
level of processing since its condensation from the 
protosolar nebula. It is considered likely that pre-solar 
grains may have been preserved in comets. As such, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cometary material should constitute a unique repository 
of information on the sources that contributed to the 
protosolar nebula, as well as on the condensation processes 
that resulted in the formation first of planetesimals and 
then of larger planetary bodies. While tantalizing results 
have been obtained in situ from cometary grains and from 
interplanetary dust particles collected on Earth, the latter 
cannot be considered as fully representative, in particular 
in terms of their organic and volatile complement. 

Two solutions to the problem of obtaining unaltered 
material can be considered: returning to Earth a sample 
of a COMETARY NUCLEUS (the original Rosetta concept of a 
comet-nucleus sample-return mission) or staying close to 
the comet and performing comprehensive in situ analyses 
of material from the surface and the coma. 

The first approach had the undisputed advantage 
of bringing the full range of analytical techniques that 
are, or will be, available in the laboratory to bear on 
investigations of the sample material. Limiting thermal 
and mechanical stresses to acceptable levels during cruise 
and recovery, and even defining these acceptable levels, 
represented a significant scientific and technological 
challenge. The approach of a rendezvous mission with 
a suite of high-resolution remote sensing instruments and 
very sensitive in situ analytical investigations results in 
a less complex and cheaper mission and guarantees by 
design minimal perturbations of the cometary material, 
as analyses are performed in situ, at low temperatures 
and in a microgravity environment. It also provides the 
opportunity of observing at close range the onset and 
development of cometary activity, which results in the 
spectacular displays that have captured the imagination 
of humanity over the centuries. 

Direct evidence on cometary volatiles is particularly 
difficult to obtain, as species observable from Earth and 
even during the Halley fly-bys result from physicochem- 
ical processes such as sublimation, interaction with so- 
lar radiation and the solar wind. The currently avail- 
able information on cometary material gained from in situ 
studies and ground-based observations demonstrates the 
low level of evolution of cometary material. The latter’s 
tremendous potential for providing information on the 
constituents and early evolution of the solar nebula has 
yet to be exploited. 

Studying cometary material represents a major 
challenge, owing to the very characteristics that make it 
a unique repository of information about the formation of 
the solar system, namely its high content of volatiles and 
organic material. 

A fundamental question that has to be addressed by 
the mission is, to what extent can the material accessible 
to analyses be considered as representative of the bulk 
material constituting the comet and of the early nebular 
condensates that constituted the cometesimal 4.57 x 10° yr 
ago? This representativity issue has to be addressed by 
first determining the global characteristics of the nucleus 
(mass, density, state of rotation), which can provide clues 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rosetta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


concerning vertical gradients, and hence the relationship 
between the outer layers and underlying material. 

The dust and gas activity observed around comets, 
as well as its rapid response to insolation, guarantees 
the presence of volatiles at or very close to the surface 
in active areas. Analyzing material from these areas 
will therefore provide information on both the volatile 
and the refractory constituents of a cometary nucleus. 
The selection of a proper site for surface science 
investigations should be relatively straightforward, given 
the extensive remote sensing observation phase and the 
advanced instrumentation, which covers a broad range 
of wavelengths, being provided on the Rosetta orbiter. 
The surface science sites can be monitored during surface 
activities as well as during a large fraction of the activity 
cycle, which should bring to light clues concerning the 
compositional heterogeneity of active regions. 

The dust-emission processes are induced by very 
low-density gas outflows and should preserve the fragile 
texture of cometary grains. These grains can be collected 
at low velocities (a few tens of meters per second) by the 
spacecraft after short travel times (of the order of minutes), 
which will minimize alterations induced by the interaction 
with solar radiation. Similarly, gas analyzed in jets or very 
close to the surface should yield information on the volatile 
content of cometary material in each source region. 

The Rosetta mission will study the nucleus of comet 
46P/Wirtanen and its environment in great detail for a 
period of nearly two years, the near-nucleus phase starting 
at a heliocentric distance of about 3.25 AU, from the onset 
of activity through to perihelion, close to 1 AU. On its long 
journey to the comet, the spacecraft will pass close to two 
asteroids, 4979 Otawara and 140 Siwa. 


Some questions to be answered 

Just as the Rosetta Stone was the key that unlocked 
the meaning of Egyptian hieroglyphs, so the Rosetta 
spacecraft (figure 1) is intended to decipher the meaning 
of comets and their role in the origin and history of the 
solar system. Here are a few of the main puzzles. 


@ What is the bulk density of a comet? Guesses about the 
density of cometary material vary widely, and only an 
orbiting spacecraft can give exact measurements of the 
comet’s volume and mass. 


@ Isacomet a dirty snowball or an icy dirtball? In other words, 
is it made of ices contaminated with mineral and tarry 
dust, or is it a consolidation of dust coated with ices? 


@ Why is the nucleus of a comet so dark? Giotto established 
that Halley’s nucleus is like brownish-black velvet, 
absorbing 96% of the sunlight falling on it. Is the color 
due to a surface deposit of tarry dust, or is the interior 
dark too? 


e@ Why are small regions of a comet highly active when most of its 
surface is not? Multiple jets of dust seen emanating from 
Halley’s comet, and spectacularly from comet Hale— 
Bopp, imply that certain hot-spots differ physically or 
chemically from the rest of the comet’s surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The Rosetta spacecraft. 


@ Is a comet made as single piece, or does it consist of loosely 
joined blocks, as suggested by the Giotto images? This relates 
to the questions of how comets are built, and why they 
break up into smaller fragments, as seen spectacularly 
with comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 which hit Jupiter in 1994. 


@ Does a dying comet evaporate and disappear, or does it simply 
exhaust the stocks of ice that drive the emissions of gas and 
dust from an active comet? If the latter answer is correct, 
dead comets persist long afterwards as dark, inactive 
masses of minerals and tar, and pose a lasting threat of 
collisions with the Earth. 


@ What is a comet's exact composition? Many ingredients are 
known, and the approximate abundances of the main 
constituents. Details coming from Rosetta will pin down 
(1) how comets were fashioned from similar constituents 
of interstellar dust and (2) how comets contributed to 
building the planets, including the Earth, and stocking 
their atmospheres. 


e@ Is the tarry, carbon-rich material in comets a jumble of every 
kind of chemical that inorganic processes can make from 
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen, or does it contain 
special compounds? This is relevant to assessing the role 
of comets in the origin of life on the Earth. 


Scientific objectives 

The prime scientific objective of the mission as defined 
by the Rosetta Science Study Team is to study the origin of 
comets, the relationship between cometary and interstellar 
material and its implications with regard to the origin of 
the solar system. The measurements to be made in support 
of this objective are as follows: 


@ the global characterization of the nucleus, determination 
of dynamic properties, surface morphology and 
composition; 


@ the determination of the chemical, mineralogical and 
isotopic compositions of volatiles and refractories in a 
cometary nucleus; 


e@ the determination of the physical properties and 
interrelation of volatiles and refractories in a cometary 
nucleus; 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rosetta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


@ the study of the development of cometary activity and 
the processes in the surface layer of the nucleus and the 
inner coma (dust—gas interaction); 


@ the global characterization of asteroids, including de- 
termination of dynamic properties, surface morphology 
and composition. 


Comet 46P/Wirtanen 

Comet 46P/Wirtanen (P = 5.5 yr), a Jupiter family comet, 
has been chosen as the prime target of the International 
Rosetta Mission. Jupiter family comets not only present a 
large group of the short-period comets in the solar system 
but also in principle are observable along their entire 
orbit. Thus, they are excellently suited to serve as targets 
for a complete description of the evolution of a comet 
along its orbit. Comet 46P/Wirtanen was discovered by 
Carl A Wirtanen at Lick Observatory on 15 January 1948 
and described as a diffuse 17 mag object with a central 
condensation. Two close approaches to Jupiter in 1972 
(0.28 AU) and 1984 (0.47 AU) changed the orbit from 
an initial perihelion distance of 1.63 AU and a period 
P = 6.71 yr to a perihelion distance of 1.06 AU and a 
period P = 5.46 yr. 

Except in 1980, the comet was observed during all its 
apparitions. After the reduction of its perihelion distance, 
46P/Wirtanen had come into reach of the visual observers 
and a first light curve of the observations in 1986 and 1991 
was compiled. The coordinated observational campaign 
during its latest apparition in 1996-7 made this object one 
of the best-monitored comets. Some basic parameters 
of the nucleus could be derived and the evolution of its 
activity along the same part of the orbit that will be covered 
by Rosetta was closely monitored. 

Assuming a geometric albedo of 0.04 a radius of about 
600 m was derived with an upper limit of 700 m. Its gas 
production rate at perihelion is about 107° molecules s~', 
about a factor of 100 less than 1P/Halley, which, however, 
is fairly active for such a small nucleus. 


Scientific payload 

In February 1996, ESA’s SPC endorsed the Rosetta Orbiter 
Payload, and originally two Surface Science Packages— 
Champollion to be provided by NASA-JPL/CNES and 
Roland to be provided by a European consortium led by 
MPI and DLR from Germany—and five Interdisciplinary 
Scientists. Programmatic difficulties led to the withdrawal 
of NASA from Champollion in September 1996. CNES has 
joined the original Roland consortium to provide a single 
European Lander. 

The Orbiter Payload has unprecedented capabilities 
to study the composition of both the volatile and refractory 
material released by the cometary nucleus with very high 
resolution. The remote sensing suite of instruments (see 
table 1) will allow for a characterization of the nucleus 
surface in a wide wavelength range from UV to mm with 
high resolution, e.g. the narrow-angle camera of OSIRIS 
will achieve from close orbits a resolution on the nucleus 
surface of better than 4 cm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


To complement these instruments and to provide for 
a proper monitoring of the comet environment and its 
interaction with the solar wind, a dust flux analyzer and a 
plasma instrument package have been selected. 


Rosetta Lander payload 
The Lander science (see table 2) will focus on the in situ 
study of the composition and structure of the nucleus 
material. Measurement goals include the determination 
of the elemental, molecular, mineralogical and isotopic 
composition of the cometary surface and subsurface 
material. Highest priority is given to the elemental and 
molecular determinations, as it is believed that some 
mineralogical and isotopic measurements can be carried 
out adequately by Orbiter science investigations. In 
addition properties such as near-surface strength, density, 
texture, porosity, ice phases and thermal properties will be 
derived. Texture characterization will include microscopic 
studies of individual grains. 

CONSERT, with hardware on both the Lander and 
the Orbiter, will try to reveal the coarse structure of the 
nucleus through radio sounding. 


Interdisciplinary Scientists 
Five Interdisciplinary Scientists were nominated in 
support of the mission: 


e M Fulchignoni, DESPA, Observatoire de Paris, France; 
e M Fulle, Trieste Astronomical Observatory, Italy; 
e E Griin, MPI fiir Kernphysik, Heidelberg, Germany; 


e@ R Schulz, MPAe, Lindau, Germany, now ESA Space 
Science Department; 


@ P Weissman, NASA-JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA. 


Mission overview 

Rosetta will by launched in January 2003 by an Ariane 
5 from Kourou. To gain enough orbital energy to reach 
its target, one Mars and two Earth gravity assists will be 
required (see table 3). The long mission duration required 
the introduction of extended hibernation periods. The 
mission can be subdivided into several distinct phases. 


Table 3. Major mission events. 


Event Nominal date 
Launch 15 January 2003 
Mars gravity assist 26 August 2005 
Earth gravity assist 1 26 November 2005 
Otawara fly-by 11 July 2006 
Earth gravity assist 2 26 November 2007 
Siwa fly-by 25 July 2008 
Rendezvous maneuver 24 August 2011 
Start near nucleus operations 

at 3.25 AU (from Sun) 22 August 2012 
Perihelion passage (end of mission) 10 July 2013 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rosetta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Short name 


Table 1. Individual instruments on the Rosetta Orbiter. 


Objective 


Principal investigator 


Remote sensing 
OSIRIS 


Multicolor imaging 


(narrow- and wide-angle camera) 


ALICE 


VIRTIS 


UV spectroscopy (70 nm-205 nm) 


Visible and IR mapping spectroscopy 


(0.25 «~m-5 xm) 


MIRO 


Microwave spectroscopy 


(1.3 mm and 0.5 mm) 


Composition analysis 


ROSINA 


Neutral gas and ion mass spectroscopy; double 


focusing, 12-200 AMU, M/AM ~ 3000 


Time of flight, 12-350 AMU, M/AM ~ 1500 including 


neutral dynamics monitor 


COSIMA 


Dust mass spectrometer 


(SIMS, M/AM ~ 2000) 


MIDAS 


Grain morphology (atomic force microscope, 


nm resolution) 


Nucleus large-scale structure 


CONSERT 


Radio sounding, nucleus tomography 


Dust flux, dust mass distribution 


GIADA 


Dust velocity and impact momentum 


measurement, contamination monitor 


Comet plasma environment, solar wind interaction 


HU Keller, MPAe, 
Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany 
A Stern, SWRI, 

Boulder, CO, USA 

A Coradini, 

IAS-CNR, Rome, Italy 

S Gulkis, NASA-JPL, 
Pasadena, CA, USA 


H Balsiger, 
University of Bern, Switzerland 


J Kissel, MPE 

Garching, Germany 

W Riedler, Institute for Space Research, 
Graz, Austria 


W Kofman, CEPHAH, 
Grenoble, France 


L Colangeli, Osservatorio Di Capodimonte, 
Naples, Italy 


RPC Langmuir probe R Bostrém, Swedish Institute of Space Physics, 
Uppsala, Sweden 
Ion and electron sensor J Burch, SRI, 
San Antonio, TX, USA 
Flux gate magnetometer K-H Glassmeier, 
TU Braunschweig, Germany 
Ion composition analyzer R Lundin, Swedish Institute of Space Physics, 
Kiruna, Sweden 
Mutual impedance probe J G Trotignon, LPCE/CNRS, 
Orleans, France 
RSI Radio science experiment M Patzold, University of Cologne, Germany 
Table 2. The Lander payload. 
APXS a—p x-ray spectrometer R Rieder, MPI Chemistry, 
Mainz, Germany 
SD? Sampling and drilling device AE Finzi, Politechnico Milano, 
Italy 
COSAC Evolved gas analyzer, elemental, molecular H Rosenbauer, MPAe, 
composition Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany 
MODULUS _ Evolved gas analyzer, isotopic composition I Wright, Open University, UK 
CIVA Panoramic camera, IR microscope J P Bibring, IAS, Orsay, France 
ROLIS Descent camera S Mottola, DLR Berlin, Germany 
SESAME Surface electrical and acoustic monitoring, dust | D Mohlmann, DLR Cologne, 
impact monitor Germany 
H Laakso, FMI, Finland 
I Apathy, KFKI, Hungary 
MUPUS Multipurpose sensor for surface and subsurface T Spohn, University of Miinster, Germany 
science 
ROMAP Roland magnetometer and plasma monitor U Auster, TU Braunschweig, 
Germany 
I Apathy, KFKI, Hungary 
CONSERT Comet nucleus sounding W Kofman, CEPHAG, Grenoble, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


France 


Rosetta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The science mission phases 

Otawara fly-by (July 2006) 

Fly-by operations last from 3 months before to 1 month 
after the fly-by. Parallel to the daily tracking with orbit 
determination and corrections, the scientific payload is 
checked out. The aim is to pass the asteroid at a distance of 
about 1000 km on the Sunward side. The relative asteroid 
ephemeris will be determined with a cross track accuracy 
of 20 km by spacecraft optical navigation. The cameras 
and scientific payload will be pointing in the direction of 
the asteroid until after the fly-by. 


Siwa fly-by (July 2008) 

The operations are similar to the Otawara fly-by; however, 
the fly-by distance will be of the order of 2500 km 
to be commensurate with the spacecraft angular rate 
capabilities which are determined by the requirements 
of the Otawara fly-by, which occurs at a lower relative 
velocity. 


Global mapping and close observation phase 
The preliminary survey of the surface of the comet is 
known as global mapping. At least 80% of the surface 
subject to solar illumination is required to be mapped. 
Even in the gravity field of a nucleus of very irregular 
shape, it will be possible to choose quite stable orbits 
that do not impact on the cometary nucleus. Polar 
orbits around the comet at a distance between 5 and 
25 nucleus radii will be used for mapping the surface. The 
orbital period will be usually greater than the spin period; 
horizontal swaths will cover the nucleus surface as it is 
presented. The semimajor axis of the mapping orbit will 
be chosen as a function of comet gravity and spin rate, 
taking into account the following constraints: 


@ coverage without gaps; 

@ safety considerations (no impact on nucleus); 
® volume of data for real-time transmission; 

@ maximum time to complete surface mapping; 


@ minimum resolution and viewing angle to surface 
normal; 


® continuous communications with Earth. 


In case of slowly rotating comets, it may be necessary 
to use more than one revolution in the same orbit 
or a second different orbit by means of plane change 
maneuvers. 

Ideally all the Orbiter payload instruments are 
operating during this phase. The scientific data gathered 
by the whole payload is buffered in the on-board memory, 
before transmission to the ground station. 

The nucleus shape and surface properties as well as 
kinematics and gravitational models will be derived using 
optical landmark observations. Based on the mapping 
and remote observation data, five areas will be selected 
for close observation. 

At the end of the close observation phase, based on 
the collected data, a decision will be taken to which site 
the Surface Science Package (SSP) will be delivered. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Surface Science Package delivery phase 
Surface Science Package delivery will be from an eccentric 
orbit (pericenter altitude as low as possible, e.g. 1 km) with 
a pericenter passage near the desired landing site. The 
time and direction of the SSP separation will be chosen 
such that the package arrives with minimum vertical and 
horizontal velocities relative to the local (rotating) surface. 
An ejection mechanism will separate the SSP from the 
spacecraft with a maximum relative velocity of up to 
15ms-t. 

After delivery of the SSP, the spacecraft will be 
injected into an orbit that is best suited to receive the data 
transmitted from the SSP and to relay them to the Earth. 


Extended monitoring phase (through perihelion) 
After the end of the activities related to the SSP, the 
spacecraft will spend at least 200 days in orbit in the 
vicinity of the comet until perihelion passage. The 
objective of this phase is to monitor the nucleus (active 
regions), dust and gas jets and to analyze gas, dust and 
plasma in the inner coma from the onset to peak activity. 
Orbits between 1 and 10 cometary radii are envisaged. 
Orbital design will depend on safety considerations 
and scientific goals taking into account that the commu- 
nication relay service has to be provided for the long-life 
SSP. Mission planning will depend on the results of previ- 
ous observations, such as the activity pattern of the comet. 
Extended monitoring of different regions in the vicinity of 
the nucleus could be performed by successive hyperbolic 
fly-bys configuring petal-like trajectories. 


Spacecraft overview and payload accommodation 
The spacecraft design is driven by key features of this very 
complex and challenging mission: 


@ the fixed and fairly short launch window for comet 
46P/Wirtanen—because of the launch capability re- 
quired, even for Ariane 5 there exist only very few 
backup scenarios within a reasonable time frame; 


@ the long mission duration of 10.5 yr; 


@ the critical gravity assists at Mars and the Earth and 
the close asteroid fly-bys, where the spacecraft and the 
payload will be active; 


@ the wide variation of spacecraft-Earth-Sun cycles and 
distances, which poses challenges for the thermal design 
and require large solar arrays (approximately 64 m7) 
with novel cells for low-intensity low-temperature 
operation; 


@ the long operations in close proximity to the comet 
surface—only a few comet nucleus radii away in 
an environment (dust and gas emitted from the 
nucleus) that will not be known in great detail during 
development. 


The long round-trip times for light of up to 90 min 
require an autonomous spacecraft that in addition will 
be able to survive a long hibernation phase without any 
ground contact during the cruise. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rosetta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The payload is mounted on one spacecraft wall, 
which during the close comet phase will continuously be 
pointed towards the nucleus. All instruments are body 
mounted and the proper attitude is achieved by rotating 
the spacecraft with the high-gain antenna always pointing 
towards the Earth and the solar array pointing towards the 
Sun. 


Résumé 

Asophisticated payload such as the one to be flown on the 
Rosetta mission and especially the goal to deploy a Lander 
onto the nucleus surface for in situ investigations requires 
laboratory simulations of nucleus properties of which we 
have very little—and only indirect—knowledge. 

To land the Lander and to anchor it into the nucleus 
surface requires basic knowledge of the material, its 
tensile strength, density and structure. The evidence for 
all of these parameters is still extremely tenuous. The 
presence of small-scale and possibly larger-scale active 
areas, such as the craters seen on Halley Multicolour 
Camera images of comet 1P/Halley, clearly indicates 
that there are differences in the near-surface properties. 
These in turn must be related to physical or chemical 
heterogeneities within the nucleus. However, from 
ground-based observations it is not possible to determine 
whether variations in activity stem from small-scale 
heterogeneity (such as variations in the thickness of the 
mantle) or from larger-scale variations of the volatile 
content of underlying porosity. 

One of the main scientific objectives of the mission is 
the study of the physicochemical processes that are specific 
to comets. The increase in cometary activity as these 
bodies approach the Sun undoubtedly represents one of 
the most complex and fascinating processes to be observed 
in the solar system. 

A full understanding of cometary activity involves in- 
puts from a wide range of disciplines, including thermo- 
dynamics, phase equilibrium, gas-solid interactions, fluid 
dynamics, heterogeneous chemistry, photochemistry and 
plasma physics. 

The mission will provide information on ‘how a comet 
works’ and will be crucial to our understanding of the early 
solar nebula and the evolution of the planetary system. 
The study of the chemical (isotopic) composition of the 
ices and the dust grains will provide us with information 
on the processes through which these elements formed 
and about prebiotic chemistry. It will answer the question 
what role comets played in the evolution of life on Earth. 

Rosetta is a fascinating mission that will address many 
key questions about our origins: if we want to understand 
the origins of the solar system, we have to study comets. 


Bibliography 

For up-to-date information on the mission and _ its 
status, details of the payload, information on the science 
background and general information on comets, please 
visit 

http://sci.esa.int/home/rosetta/index.cfm 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Gerhard Schwehm 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rosette Nebula (NGC 2237-39, 2246) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rosette Nebula (NGC 2237-39, 2246) 


A complex emission nebula in the constellation Mono- 
ceros, position RA 06" 30.3™, dec. +05° 03’. It surrounds 
the star cluster NGC 2244, the stars of which energize its 
gas. Different parts of the nebula received separate NGC 
designations; the whole resembles a rosette or wreath. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Rosse, 3rd Earl of [William Parsons, Lord Rosse, 
Lord Oxmantown] (1800-67) and Rosse, 4th Earl of 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fiasseod Earl of [William Parsons, 
ord Rosse, Lord Oxmantown] 
(1800-67) and Rosse, 4th Earl of 


[Laurence Parsons, Lord Rosse, Lord 
Oxmantown] (1840-1908) 


Irish astronomer and landowner, the 3rd Lord Rosse was 
educated at Trinity College, Dublin and Oxford as a 
mathematician. He became interested in astronomy and 
made at the family castle in Birr a 36 in reflector with 
the same design as William Herschel’s (See HERSCEL FAMILY). 
Mapped the Moon, and observed nebulae with the intent 
to resolve them into stars. He developed the technology 
at Birr Castle to make speculum mirrors, using the estate’s 
blacksmiths, labourers and materials (such as peat for the 
fuel for the furnaces). In 1842, he successfully cast a 72 in 
mirror for the ‘Leviathan of Parsonstown’, which stood 
as the largest telescope in the world at the time (1845- 
1917), slung between two massive walls aligned on the 
meridian. The telescope, restored to working order in 
1998, was raised in elevation, and tracked for a small angle 
across the meridian, by a system of ropes and pulleys. The 
observer had access to the eyepiece from chairs mounted 
on the walls and was able to observe an object for at most 
an hour and a half. The potato famine in Ireland delayed 
the astronomical work of the telescope until 1848, from 
when it was used to view planets, satellites and nebulae. In 
over a dozen nebulae Lord Rosse, his son, his astronomical 
assistants and visiting observers (like J L E DREYER and 
THOMAS ROMNEY ROBINSON) were able to resolve spiral arms, 
indicating that they were more than just collections of 
gas—galaxies in fact. They went so far as conclude that 
‘no real nebulae seem to exist . . . all appeared to be clusters 
of stars’. Lord Rosse also realized that some elliptical 
and lenticular nebulae were edge-on spirals. Lord Rosse’s 
drawings of the nebulae were strikingly accurate, although 
there was a curious lapse in the telescope’s first record 
of M1, where a fanciful drawing with many radial ‘legs’ 
inspired the enduring name Crab Nebula. The 3rd Earl 
Rosse’s son, Laurence, the 4th Earl Rosse, fitted both the 
72 in and the 36 in telescopes with spectroscopes. His 
observations proved that some nebulae had bright-line 
spectra, including all the planetary nebulae, and others, 
including the Andromeda galaxy, were made up of stars. 
Healso measured the temperature of the Moon by focusing 
its light onto a thermocouple, watching the temperature 
drop during an eclipse. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE/Explorer 69) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer 
(RXTE/Explorer 69) 


NASA mission to study variations in x-ray emissions 
on time scales from microseconds to years. Named 
in honour of x-ray astronomy pioneer Bruno B Rossi, 
former Professor of Physics at Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. Launched December 1995. Carries 
a Proportional Counter Array and High-Energy X-ray 
Timing Experiment to study compact objects in the energy 
range 2-200 KeV. Also has an All Sky Monitor which 
scans over 70% of the sky each orbit. Key feature is 
flexible operations through rapid pointing, high data 
rates and nearly continuous receipt of data. Discovered 
millisecond x-ray pulsars and high-frequency x-ray pulses 
from neutron stars in binary systems. (See EXPLORER.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rossi, Bruno Benedetto (1905-93) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rossi, Bruno Benedetto (1905-93) 


Cosmic ray physicist, born in Venice, Rossi studied 
and worked in Italy until the Fascist regime dismissed 
him. He held positions in Europe and joined the 
Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico, to develop 
the atomic bomb. He became professor at MIT. He 
devised the Rossi coincidence circuit, which recorded the 
simultaneous occurrence of electric pulses in cosmic 
ray and other detectors to distinguish real events from 
noise. He investigated the nature of and energies of 
cosmic rays, and placed detectors in space for cosmic ray 
investigations, discovering with the Explorer X satellite 
in 1961 the magnetopause, the boundary containing the 
Earth’s magnetic field. With riccarpocracconthe launched 
a rocket to detect cosmic x-rays (from the Moon), which 
discovered by chance, behind the Moon, the Scorpius X- 
1 x-ray source, the first discovered. An x-ray astronomy 
satellite, the Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE), isnamed 
after him. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rotation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rotation 


The motion of a body about an axis; for example, the Earth 
rotates on its axis in a period of 23 h 56 min. All celestial 
bodies, such as planets, stars and galaxies, exhibit some 
degree of rotation. 


See also: axis, orbit, revolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Royal Astronomical Society 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Royal Astronomical Society 


The Royal Astronomical Society (RAS) represents profes- 
sional astronomers and geophysicists in the UK. It was 
founded in 1820 as the Astronomical Society of London by 
John Herschel and 13 other well-known astronomers and 
scientists. The Society received the grant of a Royal Char- 
ter from King William IV in 1831. Its headquarters are in 
Piccadilly, London. 

The Society’s aims are ‘the encouragement and 
promotion of astronomy and geophysics’. Its main 
functions are to publish the results of astronomical and 
geophysical research, to maintain as complete a library as 
possible in these subjects and to hold meetings, in London 
and elsewhere, at which astronomical and geophysical 
matters can be discussed. 

The RAS is affiliated to the European Astronomical 
Society and to the European Geophysical Society. With 
the Geological Society, it has formed a Joint Association 
for Geophysics to promote geophysics. 

The RAS library contains material for research in 
astronomy and geophysics as well as the histories of 
these sciences and of associated fields such as navigation. 
Collections of the Society’s instruments are loaned to 
museums, universities and observatories throughout the 
UK. 

The Society publishes research papers in two aca- 
demic journals: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomi- 
cal Society for astronomers and Geophysical Journal Interna- 
tional for geophysicists. The Society’s house publication, 
Astronomy and Geophysics carries reports of scientific meet- 
ings, papers on current topics, correspondence and book 
reviews. 

Regular scientific discussion meetings are organized 
in London, while annual national astronomy meetings 
are held at different venues. The Society has a number 
of interactions with the Particle Physics and Astronomy 
Research Council (PPARC) and the Natural Environment 
Research Council (NERC). The Society awards the Michael 
Penston Astronomy Prize (formerly the RAS Astronomy 
Prize) and the RAS Blackwell Prize, and awards a number 
of medals for contributions to astronomy and geophysics. 

For further information see 
http://www.ras.org.uk/ras/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Royal Astronomical Society of Canada 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Royal Astronomical Society of 
Canada 


The Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, originally 
known as the Toronto Astronomical Club, was founded 
in 1868 by eight charter members. On 25 February 
1890, in Toronto, it was incorporated with a constitution 
and bylaws. In 1903 it became known as the Royal 
Astronomical Society of Canada. Today, the Society has 
23 affiliated centers from coast to coast, and a membership 
of close to 4000. 

The Society produces several widely respected 
publications, including the Journal of the Royal Astronomical 
Society of Canada, the Observer’s Handbook, the Beginner's 
Observing Guide, and the Observer's Calendar. 

For further information see the publication Looking Up 
or the Society’s website at 
http:/ /www.rasc.ca. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Royal Observatory, Edinburgh 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Royal Observatory, Edinburgh 


The Royal Observatory, Edinburgh (ROE) comprises the 
UK Astronomy Technology Centre (ATC) of the PARTICLE 
PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY RESEARCH COUNCIL, and the University 
of Edinburgh’s Institute for Astronomy. 

The Institute for Astronomy is a research and teaching 
group within the university’s Department of Physics and 
Astronomy. It is one of the UK’s major centers of 
astronomical research, particularly involving cosmology, 
active galaxies and star formation. 

The institute has a 0.5 m telescope and a 3.5 m spec- 
trograph/solar telescope, infrared, reticon and CCD detec- 
tors, facilities for photography, photoelectric photometry, 
polarimetry and a CCD spectrograph. 

The ATC is the UK’s national center for the design and 
production of state-of-the-art astronomical technology. It 
includes an applied optics group which designs and builds 
instruments for both ground-based telescopes (UKIRT, 
GEMINI, ING) and space telescopes (FIRST, NGST). Other 
groups in the ATC deal with mechanics, electronics and 
software. Major technology research is undertaken into 
CCD detectors/cameras, infrared systems, submillimeter 
and cryogenics. 

Particular research interests of the ATC astronomy 
group include star and planet formation, brown dwarfs 
and interacting galaxies. One of the main areas of study is 
the remnant dust disks around main sequence stars such 
as Vega. 

The ROE manages UK telescope sites and data archive 
resources. It is the home of the Plate Library for the 
UK Schmidt telescope, which contains over 17 000 plates, 
and the SuperCOSMOS advanced photographic plate 
digitizing machine. 

The ROE was founded in 1811 by a group of amateur 
and professional astronomers. Originally known as the 
Astronomical Institution of Edinburgh, it was renamed the 
Royal Observatory in 1822 after a visit to the city by King 
George IV. In 1834, the University of Edinburgh took over 
its administration on condition that the government would 
provide the salary for a professor who would hold the title 
of Astronomer Royal for Scotland. The link continued 
until 1995, when this honorary title was separated from 
the post of Director of the ROE. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.roe.ac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Royal Observatory, Greenwich 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Royal Observatory, Greenwich 


The Royal Observatory at Greenwich, London, founded 
in 1675, is the location of the Airy Transit Telescope 
that defines the prime meridian of the world and is the 
home of the Harrison Chronometers. The Observatory 
was founded by Charles II with the ultimate purpose 
of providing an accurate star catalog and model of 
the Moon’s motion, that enabled mariners to find their 
longitude. During the twentieth century the observatory 
became increasingly involved in astrophysics and the 
research arm, known as the Royal Greenwich Observatory, 
moved from the Greenwich site in the 1950s and was 
eventually closed in 1998. The Greenwich site is now 
a museum, visited by half a million visitors per year, 
containing clocks, astronomical instruments, including a 
70 cm refractor and a planetarium. It is administratively 
part of the nearby National Maritime Museum. The 
buildings, including Flamsteed House designed by 
Christopher Wren, have been restored. The Observatory 
contains a public information group that answers public 
and media enquiries about modern astronomy. It will be 
the management center of the 2 m Faulkes telescope for 
public education, located in Hawaii and used by students 
in Hawaii and the UK. 
For further information see 

http://www.rog.nmm.ac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RR Lyrae Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


RR Lyrae Stars 


RR Lyrae stars are members of a class of VARIABLESTAR whose 
variations in light, radius and temperature are known to be 
caused by self-sustained radial pulsations of giant A stars 
with masses between 0.5 and 0.8 solar masses, mean radii 
of 5 times the radius of the Sun and absolute magnitudes 
at mean light of (My) ~ +0.5. The amplitudes of their light 
curves range between 0.2 and 1.8 magnitudes in B. Their 
periods range between 0.25 and 1.2 days. 

Although early called ‘short-period Cepheids’ be- 
cause the shapes of their light, color and radial velocity 
curves are so similar to those of the long-period classical 
Cepheids, it was soon realized that the two groups were 
in fact separate in other of their characteristics. They dif- 
fer in their spatial distribution in the Galaxy. The long- 
period classical Cepheids are concentrated to the Galactic 
disk while the field RR Lyrae stars have an almost spher- 
ical distribution in Galactic latitude. Furthermore, most 
of the RR Lyraes have high space velocities relative to the 
local standard of rest, whereas the long-period classical 
Cepheids have the low space velocities characteristic of 
extreme population I stars (see STELLAR POPULATIONS). 

By 1950 it had become evident that the two groups 
of variables are of different population types and are in 
different evolutionary states. Using the RR Lyrae stars of 
the extreme population II, the extent of the Galactic halo 
has been mapped to at least 100 kpc from the Sun and 
the Galactic center, showing the enormous extent of the 
spherical component of the Galaxy. 

In addition, these RR Lyrae variables in the halo and 
in the thick disk are metal poor. The chemical elements 
heavier than He, Li, Be and B are between 5 and 150 
times less abundant than in the Sun, providing important 
clues to events in the chemical evolution of the Galaxy. 
A small subset of RR-Lyrae-type variables in the disk do, 
however, have near-solar metallicity and population I low- 
velocity kinematics, providing additional clues, not yet 
deciphered, for Galactic evolution. 

RR Lyraes as a distinct class of variable stars were 
discovered in 1893 when large numbers of them were 
found in globular clusters by Solon Bailey. Because of 
their high abundance in many globular clusters, they 
were initially called ‘cluster-type variables’ whether they 
occurred in clusters or the field. 

The brightest of the class in the general field, 
discovered by W Fleming at Harvard in July 1899 by 
the technique of multiply exposed photographic plates, 
is the eponymous star RR Lyrae itself. Soon other 
similar variables in the field were discovered, and the 
identification was soon made between the characteristics 
of Fleming’s short-period field variables and Bailey’s 
cluster variables. 

There are now more than 7000 RR Lyraes known in 
the field and 1990 in Galactic GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. The class 
accounts for 20% of the total of nearly 30000 variables in 
the Russian standard Fourth General Catalogue of Variable 
Stars (1985 edition). However, the discovery is far from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


WS 


one 
a a a : 


Figure 1. The light curve characteristics of the three Bailey types 
of RR Lyrae stars of classes a, b and c. 


complete. A current estimate is that the Galaxy contains 
of the order of 100000 RR Lyraes in the halo, with a still 
higher number in the thick disk and the galactic bulge. 


Shapes of the light curves 
Bailey’s early (1902) division into three classification 
groups, based on the shape of his light curves for the 
variables in the globular cluster omega Centauri, is still 
valid. We now know that this division into Bailey types, 
a, band cis related to the physics of the internal forces that 
drive the self-sustaining pulsation according to the degree 
of energy dissipation that determines whether pulsation 
can occur. 

Figure 1 shows typical light curves for the three Bailey 
RR Lyrae types. Type a variables (top panel) have a 
very steep rise to maximum light, usually taking only 
10% of the period to go from minimum to maximum 
light. Moreover, the amplitude is largest in Bailey type a 
compared with the average amplitudes for types b and c. 
Type b variables have a more gradual rise to maximum, 
taking typically 20% of the period. The decline from 
maximum to minimum light is continuous rather than 
having the nearly flat light curve near minimum that is 
typical for Bailey type a variables. 

The difference in the shapes of the light curves is 
undoubtedly due to a difference in the strength of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RR Lyrae Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mechanism that drives the pulsation. Struve in 1947, 
Sanford in 1949 and Preston and Paczynski in 1964 
discovered that type a variables all show the hydrogen 
lines in emission for about 10 min midway on the rising 
light curve from minimum to maximum, whereas none 
of the type b and c variables shows the emission. The 
emission is interpreted to be caused by a shock wave in the 
rising gas in the highly non-linear and stronger pulsation 
push of the a type compared with b and c type variables. 
The non-linearity of the driving is seen directly by the 
highly asymmetrical light curves of Bailey types a and b. 

Type c variables have more symmetrical light curves 
that are also of smaller amplitude than either type a 
or b. They also are bluer than ab variables (see next 
section), occupying the left portion (hotter temperature) 
of the instability strip of the HR diagram, and they have 
shorter periods. Type c variables are vibrating in the first 
overtone of the pulsation, whereas type a and b variables 
are vibrating in the fundamental mode. 

In recent years a type called RRd has been introduced, 
based on the discovery of stars that are driven by a 
combination of both the fundamental and first overtone 
periods. These occur in a very narrow range in period at 
the transition between the type c and type ab variables. 
These stars are called double-mode cluster variables in the 
literature. 

Finally, concerning light curve shapes, it is to be 
noted that a few, perhaps 15%, of the RRab stars show 
systematic shape variations that themselves are periodic. 
Said differently, a given shape appears again and again 
as in the beat modulation in the addition of two periodic 
functions with slightly different periods. In RR Lyrae itself, 
the return of the light curve to a given shape has a period 
of 41 days. The phenomenon is called the Blazhko effect. 
Blazhko periods, as known up to 1995, range from 11 days 
for AH Cam to 533 days for RS Boo. Smith (1995) states 
that ‘though a number of hypotheses have been advanced, 
there is no accepted explanation for the Blazhko cycles’. 


Importance for theories of stellar evolution, 
galactic structure and cosmology 

The importance of RR Lyrae variables for a large number 
of astronomical problems stems from their unique place 
in the HR diagram on the horizontal branch of globular 
cluster color-magnitude diagrams, showing that they 
have only asmall spread in absolute luminosity as a group. 
Shapley used this fact to derive the first reliable distances 
to globular clusters using the cluster-type variables to 
calibrate the brightest 25 stars near the tip of the giant 
branch of the HR diagram. The calibration of the absolute 
magnitude of RR Lyrae stars has occupied astronomers 
from 1915 to the present. 

The variables have been central in such diverse 
studies as (1) the structure and age of the Galaxy, in 
both the disk and the halo components, (2) the age 
of globular clusters, (3) study of the advanced, post- 
main-sequence evolution state of the variables in the HR 
diagram, (4) study of the astrophysical processes of stellar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is. M3 I I ] (a) | 
r>150" : 
ye 
16 
{Sp- 
bol i 
IGF- 


LOG Te 


Figure 2. The observed position of the cluster variables in the 
globular cluster M3 along the horizontal branch. Circles in the 
instability strip are for Bailey type c variables. Crosses are for 
Bailey type ab variables. Type c variables are pulsating in the 
first overtone. Type ab variables pulsate in the fundamental 
mode. 


pulsation as a problem in stellar structure that combines 
the physics of classical mechanics, hydrodynamics and 
thermodynamics, (5) an understanding of the position 
of the instability strip in the HR diagram and (6) the 
calibration of extragalactic distances and the expansion 
rate of the universe. 


Placing RR Lyrae variables in the HR diagram 

In 1940 Martin Schwarzschild first showed that the RR 
Lyrae stars occur only within a small region the horizontal 
branch of the HR diagram of the globular cluster M3. The 
horizontal branch is populated by low-mass stars that have 
evolved from the main sequence to the tip of the giant 
branch, and after mass loss and the ignition of helium in 
the hydrogen-exhausted core have evolved from that tip 
at My ~ —3 to My ~ +0.5 mag The horizontal branch 
is a configuration of decreased radius and hotter surface 
temperature (see STELLAR EVOLUTION) and has only a small 
spread in absolute magnitude from cluster to cluster. 

Schwarzschild’s discovery of the cluster instability 
strip for the variables in M3 was soon extended as a general 
feature to all globular clusters whose horizontal branches 
covered the appropriate color range. His conclusion that 
‘stars which can pulsate do pulsate’ was shown to be 
universal. 

Amodern mapping of the instability strip in the color— 
magnitude diagram of the globular cluster M3 is shown 
in figure 2. The top panel shows the photometric data 
for a complete sample of horizontal branch stars outside 
a radius of 2.5 arcmin from the cluster center, plotted at 
mean light. 

The RR Lyrae domain occupies the color interval 
0.18 < B-V < 0.42. The Bailey type c variables (circles) are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RR Lyrae Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


separated in color (being bluer) from type a and b variables 
(crosses). The bottom panel shows the conversion of the 
data to bolometric apparent magnitudes and logarithm of 
the effective temperature. There is a sharp separation color 
(and temperature) between type c and type a, b variables in 
M3. However, in other clusters there is an overlap region 
occupied by both types. 

The vertical boundary lines in figure 2 define the 
blue and red edges of the pulsator instability strip at the 
luminosity of the RR Lyrae stars. It is known that the 
strip continues vertically in the diagram, sloping slightly 
to cooler temperatures at luminosities that are fully 6 
magnitudes brighter over the whole of the long-period 
Cepheid instability strip. 


Properties of the instability strip 

The parameters of (a) amplitude, (b) shape of light curve 
and (c) period vary systematically with color within the 
instability strip. In a given cluster the longest-period ab 
variables are at the red side of the strip; the shortest period 
are the bluest. This is the period—color relation. Clearly 
such a relation is demanded by the pulsation model where 
the period must vary with the inverse square root of the 
density, which can be expressed as a combination of mass 
and radius, and therefore of temperature at a given mass 
and luminosity. A period-color relation also exists for the 
variables in the cluster M15, which, however, is shifted 
by a factor of 1.2 in period at a given color relative to the 
relation in M3. The periods in M15 are longer. 

The largest-amplitude light curves occur near the 
center of the strip, decreasing toward the red edge of 
the instability region. Because there is a period—color 
relation, this amplitude-color relation can be changed to 
an amplitude—period relation. The amplitude correlation 
is also shifted in M15 by again a factor of 1.2 in period 
relative to the relation in M3. The same is true of the light 
curve shapes, as measured by the rise times (in units of the 
period) from minimum light to maximum. 

These correlations with their period shifts between 
M3 and M15 are shown in figure 3. The top panel shows the 
period—amplitude relation. The relation between period 
and the light curve shape, measured by the rise time, is in 
the bottom panel. 

Because the metallicity is different for M3 and M15 
(M3 is down by a factor of 50 in metals from the Sun; M15 
is down by a factor of 150) the period shifts were suspected 
early on (in 1958) to be a metallicity effect. From studies 
of many clusters of different metallicities, the period shifts 
were found to be strongly correlated with metallicity. The 
effect is a generalization of the Oosterhoff-Arp—Preston 
period—metallicity correlation that provides an important 
method for the RR Lyrae absolute magnitude calibration 
(see next section). The period—metallicity correlation is 
obeyed both in the globular clusters and in the general 
field. 

Figure 2 shows that, within a given cluster, the 
absolute V magnitudes of the RR Lyrae stars are closely the 
same. There is a small vertical dispersion in magnitude 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


O M15 \ 
1.6F emM3 e\ oO mi 
. ° 
#. 


W2b e \O Gg <i 
Boss 
Ap \ om \o 
Cre) 
0O.8E- On 6 eo) \ On at 
Co a %. % 
“5 ° eX 
o4- ao: 4 
\ \ 
e \ \ 
0.0F \ Oe el 
x 
i i | L 1 | | 
T T T 7 T 


iL “bs & : 


log P 


Figure 3. (top) The period shifts in the period—amplitude 
relation between the RR Lyrae stars in M3 and M15. The clusters 
have different metal abundances. (bottom) Same as the top but 
using the shape of the light curves as measured by the rise time 
(in phase units) from minimum to maximum light. 


which has been shown to be real. It is caused by the 
evolution from the ‘age zero’ horizontal branch as the 
helium burning in the core proceeds. Proof that the 
dispersion in absolute magnitude is real, not due to 
observational error, is made by showing that the variables 
that are brighter have longer periods than the fainter 
cluster variables of the same color. This, of course, is 
required from the period—density relation. However, the 
dispersion is small, only at the 0.1 mag level. Most 
of the stars in a given cluster have a nearly constant 
V magnitude, showing that the RR Lyraes are excellent 
distance indicators once the metallicity dependence and 
the evolutionary effects can be calibrated out. 

The expectation that there is a correlation of absolute 
magnitude with metallicity, required by the period shifts, 
is confirmed observationally. Figure 4 shows a composite 
color-magnitude diagram of seven globular clusters 
whose metallicities range from 2.5 times down from the 
Sun (NGC 6838) to 150 times smaller than the Sun (M15). 
All seven have horizontal branches, four of which thread 
the instability strip and have cluster variables, but at 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RR Lyrae Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a 
[ 1 
-2h +t pee | 
ae 
-O Ene} Ear | 
Myo +2 7,7 = 
+4 i | 
[FesH] (m—M I, 
M92: (-2.19) (14.36) 
eo MIS (-2.15) (14.97) 
HYADES .... M3 (1.69) (14.85) 
+6r- +4+++ MS (-1.58) (14. 18} Boia 
NGC 6752 (-1.52) (12.98) 
ene 847 TUC (-0.64) (12.81) 
xxxx NGC 6838 (-0.40) (12.66) 


(B-V)> 


Figure 4. Composite HR diagram for seven globular clusters of different metallicity. Their absolute magnitude positions are set by 
main sequence fittings to the positions of fiducial main sequences as a function of metallicity. The sold curve from upper left to lower 
right is the position of the main sequence for stars of solar metallicity determined from trigonometric parallaxes. 


different luminosities. 

The cluster diagrams in figure 4 have been fitted 
vertically according to the expected fiducial main sequence 
positions as a function of metallicity (see HERTZSPRUNG- 
RUSSELL DIAGRAM and LARGE HOT SUBDWARFS AND EXTREME 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS). From these main sequence 
normalizations, the spread in the vertical positions of the 
cluster variable instability strip as a function of metallicity 
is evident. This is the luminosity—metallicity relation that 
must be calibrated and accounted for in using RR Lyrae 
stars as distance indicators. 


Calibration of the RR Lyrae absolute magnitudes 
An early history 

Shapley in 1918 was the first to calibrate the RR Lyrae 
absolute magnitudes. After calibration, he used his value 
of (Mpg(RR)) = —0.23 to derive his famous new model 
of the Galaxy using his new distances to globular clusters 
which he had derived from the apparent brightness of the 
cluster variables in a few clusters. He then used these 
data as an intermediate step to calibrate the 25 brightest 
giant stars that could be more easily be measured ina large 
number of clusters. His radical new model of the Galaxy 
was that of a globular-cluster system that defined a distant 
center in the direction of Sagittarius, offset from the central 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


position of the Sun that had been the main feature of the 
Galaxy model of Kapteyn. 

His route to the RR Lyrae mean luminosity was to 
repeat Hertzsprung’s 1913 luminosity calibration of the 
long-period field classical Cepheids. The method was 
that of statistical parallaxes to calibrate Leavitt’s period— 
apparent luminosity curve for the long-period classical 
Cepheids in the Magellanic Clouds. Shapely then noted 
that a few globular clusters also had long-period variables 
which he took to be of the same type as the field Cepheids 
which he and Hertzsprung had just calibrated. Tying the 
cluster RR Lyrae to the cluster ‘long-period Cepheids’ and 
then tying this combination to the field Cepheids gave the 
RR Lyrae calibration quoted above as (Mpg) = —0.23. 

Shapley’s conclusion for a displaced center of the 
Galaxy and the consequent huge dimensions of the 
resulting Galaxy was so revolutionary that it was 
immediately challenged by Kapteyn and van Rhijn. These 
were the two greatest statistical astronomers of their 
day. They published what seemed to be a devastating, 
critical paper in 1922 in which they determined statistical 
parallaxes directly for the few field RR Lyraes whose 
proper motions were then known. Using the value of the 
solar motion relative to the slow-moving ordinary field 
stars, called now stars of population I, they derived a mean 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RR Lyrae Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


absolute magnitude of (M(RR)) = +4.2 which require 
a distance scale that was fully seven times smaller than 
Shapley’s. Their scale would have returned the Galaxy 
back closer to Kapteyn’s earlier small-scale model with 
the Sun near its center. 

Shapley replied in a short note in Harvard Bulletin 
765 (1922), noting that his much brighter calibration was 
consistent with the discovery of RR-Lyrae-like variables in 
the SMC at mp, = 16.1. With the known’ large distance 
of SMC from its classical Cepheids, which was not in 
contention by Kapteyn and van Rhijn, Shapley’s claim that 
Magellanic Cloud RR Lyraes occur at mpg = 16.1 would 
clearly confirm his new RR Lyrae bright calibration near 
Mpg = 0. 

However, it is now known that Shapley’s argument 
here is not correct. The true RR Lyrae stars that belong to 
SMC occur only at the much fainter level of mpg = 19.6. 
Either the variables noted but not identified by Shapley 
are foreground or, more likely, have longer periods than he 
believed. Nevertheless, Shapley’s conclusion the M(RR) 
is near M(RR) = 0, not as faint as +4.4, was correct. 

Shapley hints at the reason for the Kapteyn—van 
Rhijn incorrect conclusion by noting that the field RR 
Lyraes have a spherical spatial distribution, whereas 
the long-period Cepheids are confined to the plane, 
and therefore that the two types are different, requiring 
different precepts for the statistical parallax calculations. 
Nevertheless, his argument on this point is curious 
because Shapley himself, in his method through the cluster 
data calibrated with classical Cepheid field variables, had 
earlier combined the data for the two types as if they were 
related. 

In a longer, much more closely reasoned reply, 
Shapley (Harvard Circular 237, 1922) points to the 
abnormally high radial velocity of RR Lyrae itself at 
—69 km s~!, which is much higher than the radial velocity 
of any classical Cepheid. In addition, he pointed to the 
most unusual high proper motion of two of the Kapteyn— 
van Rhijn field variables, and therefore he correctly 
pointed out the high-velocity character of the spherically 
spread system of field RR Lyrae as a group. This requires 
that one must use a radically higher value for the solar 
motion for them than for the low-velocity population I 
objects for the statistical parallax calculation. The concept 
of the high-velocity stars and the nature of the Stromberg 
asymmetric drift was just coming into view in 1922, and 
Shapley again correctly identified the Stromberg drift of 
the RR Lyrae system, perhaps for the first time. 

A number of direct determinations via statistical 
parallaxes, using a correctly high solar motion, were then 
made from 1922 to the present, all generally confirming 
Shapley’s (M(RR)) ~ 0 value. The two most important 
studies were by P F Bok and C D Boyd at Harvard in 1933 
and R E Wilson at Mount Wilson in 1939 who had much 
more complete proper motion and radial velocity data than 
were available to Kapteyn and van Rhijn. 

Because of the consistent results from the several new 
statistical parallax studies in the decades of the 1920s and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1930s, the problem was considered solved until Baade 
failed to resolve RR Lyraes in the disk of M31 with the 
Palomar 200 in telescope in the early 1950s. His result 
showed either that the classical Cepheid distance to M31 
was incorrect (based on R E Wilson’s 1939 recalibration of 
the classical Cepheid P-L relation) or that (M(RR)) had to 
be as faint as (M(RR)) ~ +2. It was then that the method 
shown in figure 4 was introduced after the globular cluster 
main sequences had been identified beginning in the early 
1950s showing, in fact, that (M(RR)) ~ 0 was indeed 
correct. 


Modern methods 

Four principal modern methods have been used to 
determine the absolute magnitude of the RR Lyrae 
variables. 

The three other methods besides that of statistical 
parallaxes are (1) the Baade—Becker—Wesselink way 
of combining the light and radial velocity curves to 
determine the radius of a pulsator, from which the absolute 
magnitude can be calculated from the radiation laws 
once the temperature is known (it must be measured 
independently), (2) pulsation theory together with the 
Oosterhoff—Arp-Preston metallicity effect to give the slope 
of the correlation of M, 1 with [Fe/H], together with an 
independent method for the zero point, and (3) main 
sequence fitting of globular cluster color-magnitude 
diagrams to calibrate the absolute level of the horizontal 
branch as in figure 4. 

The chief problem with the powerful main-sequence- 
fitting method is the lack of precise knowledge, at the 
0.1 mag level, of the position of the fiducial main se- 
quence as a function of metallicity. Eventually, precision 
trigonometric parallaxes from space interferometry mea- 
surements of a large sample of subdwarfs with a range 
of metallicity will solve this problem. Nevertheless, the 
method is now sufficiently accurate to show beyond doubt 
that the luminosities of the horizontal branches, and there- 
fore of the cluster variables, is a function of metallicity 
(figure 4). 


Present status of the calibration 

The results of the four methods to derive (M(RR)) are in 
agreement at the 0.3 magnitude level, but there still remain 
(1999) systematic differences in (M(RR)) as a function of 
metallicity at that level. 

Figure 5 compares the extant calibration using two of 
the four methods. The individual data points summarize 
results for individual field RR Lyraes determined by 
several independent groups using the Baade—Becker— 
Wesselink method. Details of the method that combines 
the light curve with the radial velocity curve to determine 
the stellar radius, and then the luminosity, are set out in 
a number of the references listed at the end, principal of 
which is the comprehensive review by Gautschy. 

The line marked ‘Oosterhoff pulsation’ in figure 5 
uses the period ratios similar to those shown in figure 3 
between RR Lyrae stars of different metallicities, but read 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RR Lyrae Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0 T T T 1.9 
“\ OOSTERHOFF 41.8 
PULSATION 


-2 4 0 
[Fe/H] 


Figure 5. Comparison of the RR Lyrae star calibration (circa 
1995) of the bolometric absolute magnitude determined using 
the Baade—Becker—Wesselink and the Oosterhoff—Arp—Preston 
metallicity-effect methods. The differences in the slope and zero 
points of the two correlations are crucial in the many 
applications of RR Lyrae stars to astronomical problems. The 
calibration of (M(RR)) as a function of metallicity is not yet 
(1999) solved at the level of the differences shown. 


at the blue edge of the instability strip. The blue-edge 
periods are well correlated with metallicity at the rate of 
log P = —0.112[Fe/H] — 0.500, which, when put in the 
theoretical pulsation equation that relates the luminosity 
to the period, temperature and mass, predicts the pulsation 
relation in figure 5. Conversion to My gives the calibration 
as My(RR) = 0.30[Fe/H] + 0.94. A detailed account of 
the method can be found in the first paper in the IAU 
Symposium 139 conference report cited in the bibliography. 


Astronomical used of RR Lyraes in clusters and in 
the field 

Because RR Lyrae variables are such excellent standard 
candles once the metallicity dependence is calibrated out, 
and because they are relatively bright at (MW) ~ 0.5, they 
have been used for many purposes. Among many we list 
five. An extensive literature exists for each. 


(1) The system of field RR Lyrae stars shows the 
Strémberg asymmetric drift in its kinematics. This, of 
course must be accounted for in the calculations for 
statistical parallax, but simply its existence as a function 
of metallicity gives an important clue to the chemical and 
dynamic evolution of the Galaxy. The asymmetric drift 
velocity varies from (V) ~ —50 km s~' for RR Lyraes with 
solar metallicity to (V) ~ —250 kms“! for the most metal- 
poor variables of the extreme population II. Many of the 
latter are on retrograde galactic orbits. The early history of 
the collapse of the protogalaxy as a function of time and of 
the progressive chemical enrichment of the disk and halo 
can be studied from such data. 

(2) Because of the large amplitudes of their light 
curves and their short periods, RR Lyraes are easy to 
discover. They have been extensively used in studies of 
Galactic structure. Among other data, they provide the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


identification of stellar populations in the halo, bulge, 
center and the thick disk components of the Galaxy. 
Two large surveys for RR Lyraes in the halo, one by 
Saha at Palomar and the other by Kinman at Lick, have 
mapped the extent of the halo and have determined the 
density distribution in various directions at high Galactic 
latitude. A large discovery survey in the bulge has 
been completed at Palomar by Plaut to determine the 
population characteristics at intermediate latitudes in the 
bulge toward the Galactic center. 

(3) The ages of globular clusters have been determined 
to be 13 billion years by comparing the difference in 
apparent magnitude of the RR Lyraes and the main 
sequence turn-off point in globular clusters of different 
metallicities. The question of whether there is an age— 
metallicity relation for the clusters depends on which RR 
Lyrae absolute magnitude calibration as a function of 
metallicity is used. If the steep metallicity dependence 
is used that is required to explain the Oosterhoff—Arp-— 
Preston effect (see previous section), then all globular 
clusters are closely the same age. However, if the more 
shallow dependence of My(RR) on metallicity (figure 5) 
is used that is determined by Baade—Becker—Wesselink 
methods, then there would be an age—metallicity variation 
for the globular clusters. The sense would then be that 
metal-poor clusters would be older than the more metal- 
rich clusters by several billion years. The problem has not 
been resolved at the time of writing (1999). 

(4) One way to test whether the period—luminosity 
relation for the long-period classical Cepheids depends 
on metallicity is to compare the distance to a given galaxy 
determined by its RR Lyrae stars and independently by its 
classical Cepheids using a CEPHIDPERIOD-LUMINOSITY RELATION 
with no metallicity term. If the two distances agree, 
then no metallicity correction would be need for the long- 
period Cepheids. Of course, a correct RR Lyrae—metallicity 
calibration is required to make the test. At the time 
of writing, with the several versions of the RR Lyrae 
calibration extant as in figure 5, the method, although very 
powerful in principle, is not yet definitive. The metallicity 
dependence of the RR Lyrae calibration is the centerpiece 
here. 

(5) The physics of the pulsational instability of stars 
and of the mechanism that drives the pulsation has been 
understood at a deep level by comparing the theoretical 
pulsation calculations with various observed aspects of 
light and velocity variations of both the RR Lyrae stars and 
the long-period classical Cepheids. The literature is vast. 
The theory is elegant. The agreement between theory and 
observations is excellent. The subject is one of the major 
triumphs of modern astrophysics (see STELLAR PULSATION). 


Bibliography 

Cox J P 1980 Theory of Stellar Pulsation (Princeton, N J: 
Princeton University Press) 

Gautschy A 1987 The Baade—Wesselink method Vistas in 
Astronomy vol 30, ed A Behr and A Roy (Oxford: 
Pergamon) p 197 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RR Lyrae Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hoffmeister C, Richter G and Wenzel W 1985 Variable Stars 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Nemec J M and Matthews J M (eds) 1993 New Perspectives 
on Stellar Pulsation and Pulsating Variable Stars (IAU 
Colloq. 139) (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Rosseland S 1949 The Pulsation Theory of Variable Stars 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press) 

Schmidt E G (ed) 1989 The Use of Pulsating Stars in 
Fundamental Problems of Astronomy (IAU Colloq. 139) 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Smith H A 1995 RR Lyrae Stars (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Tsesevich V P 1975 The RR Lyrae stars Pulsating Stars 
ed B V Kukarkin (New York: Wiley) 


Allan Sandage 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RS Canum Venaticorum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


piitiii 


Figure 1. A three-dimensional map of the close binary system 
RS CVn, the prototype of a class of intrinsically variable systems 
showing solar-like activity phenomena of magnetic origin, as 
derived from cool spot modelling of the 1964 optical light curve 
(Rodon6 et al 1995). The projected two-dimensional Roche lobes 
in the plane of sky and the inner Lagrangian point (L;) are also 
shown. 


RS Canum Venaticorum 


RS CVn = RS Canum Venaticorum (BD +36° 2344, HD 
114519; oy9509 = 13°08™18°, 61950.0 = +36°12'.0; Ad = 
2.79 s yr!, Ad = —0.319' yr-') is a detached CLOSE 
BINARY STAR (F5 V+K2 IV) in the CANES VENATICI constellation 
(cf Rodono et al 1995 for a discussion of the spectral 
classification). In addition to the canonical eclipse- 
related light variability, early photometric observations 
had already shown uneven outside-of-eclipse maxima 
suggesting low-amplitude intrinsic variability of the 
component stars, which led to the classification of RS CVn 
as an intrinsically VARIABLE STAR in the General Catalogue of 
Variable Stars. An illustrative map of the RS CVn system is 
shown in figure 1. 

RS CVn is considered the prototype of a class of close 
binaries with outside-of-eclipse variability in optical light 
essentially consisting of a so-called ‘wave-like distortion’ 
or ‘photometric wave’ (figure 2), which is characterized by 
anamplitude up toa few tenths of amagnitude, variable on 
time scales from several months to years. Moreover, this 
‘photometric wave’ usually systematically moves towards 
decreasing orbital phases at a variable rate. This peculiar 
optical behavior can be ascribed to one or both components 
of the binary system by assuming that their rotation 
periods are slightly shorter than the orbital period, so 
that the dark or bright surface inhomogeneities producing 
the observed variability appear on the visible stellar 
hemisphere(s) at systematically decreasing orbital phases. 
Actually, the first interpretation of this phenomenon, as 
suggested by Rodono (1965) soon after he discovered the 
systematic variability of the RS CVn light curve, was that 
solar-like activity phenomena, such as dark spots or bright 
PLAGES, form in the photosphere of one or both components, 
so that the visibility of such surface features, and the 
related effects on the optical light curve, are modulated 
by the star’s rotation. A slightly asynchronous rotation 
of the spot-forming region on a differentially rotating 
photosphere may account for the characteristic variability 
and its systematic backwards drift on the light curve. Most 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the RS CVn systems show a ‘photometric wave’ that 
migrates towards decreasing orbital phases, but in a few 
cases where the reverse situation is observed and in a few 
other systems (SS Boo, V 711 Tau, CG Cyg, AR Lac) changes 
of the migration direction have occurred (see also STELLAR 
PHOTOMETRY). Moreover, for SS Boo and V 711 Tau there is 
some evidence of cyclic changes in the migration direction. 
Stellar spots and flares, which are occasionally observed as 
well (cf Catalano 1990), appear to be orders of magnitude 
more powerful and extended than on the Sun. 

The identification of a new class of variable stars, 
named after the prototype system RS CVn, was proposed 
by Oliver (1974) and Hall (1976), who, in addition to the 
already mentioned photometric wave and the well-known 
presence of Ca II H and K emission lines in their spectra, 
identified the following distinctive characteristics of RS 
CVn close binaries: (a) ‘undersized’ subgiant component, 
well within its ROCHE LoBE, (b) fast rotation, ie. almost 
synchronized binaries with orbital periods shorter than 
about 15 days and (c) orbital period variation (for further 
details see the review articles by Rodond 1983, Catalano 
1983, Hall 1991, Rodon6 1992). 

In addition to spots and flares, RS CVn stars show a 
rather complete set of solar-like activity signatures, such 
as chromospheric and transition region bright plages, 
as derived from synoptic studies of enhanced UV line 
(Rodono ef al 1986, 1987, Neff et al 1989, Linsky et al 
1989), coronal x-ray (Walter et al 1983, White et al 1990, 
Rodond et al 1999) and microwave (Gibson and Hijellming 
1985, Trigilio et al 1993, Umana et al 1995) emissions. In 
non-optical wavelength domains, the quiescent flux from 
late-type cool stars being rather low, the characteristic 
high-temperature flare phenomena are best observed for 
contrast effects. In a rather complete compilation of 
magnetic activity signatures detected on stars (Linsky 
1988), only two question marks concerning the detection 
of magnetic fields and optical flares were listed. Both 
question marks were positively answered within a few 
years (Saar 1988; Donati et al 1990; Foing et al 1991). 

Activity phenomena of presumably magnetic origin 
have been detected also on other types of close binaries, 
e.g. BY Dra type (Bopp and Fekel 1977, Rodond 1983) and 
UV Cet type M-K dwarfs (Rodond 1990), W UMa type 
contact systems (Eaton et al 1980), Algols (Olson 1984) 
and cataclysmic variables (Bianchini 1990). These different 
types of binary systems share the common properties that 
one or both component stars have deep convection zones. 
Since they are tidally locked close binaries, they are also 
fast rotators. These same two factors (deep convection 
and rapid rotation) also exist in several types of single stars 
that display the very same activity phenomena (Hall 1991). 
When these two conditions are met, an a—w dynamo can 
efficiently operate at the base of the convection zone (see 
DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR). This leads, with a sometime 
substantial contribution of surface turbulence, to strong 
intensification of the star’s magnetic fields. When the 
magnetic pressure surpasses the gas pressure, magnetic 
flux tubes can emerge at the stellar surface giving rise to the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RS Canum Venaticorum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1963-1973 We Ih 


0.0 f 


1975-1984 


1988-1993 


ws ; sett 
c 00 09 06. x 29- : aa" cep 
NY eo 
~ pa “and Poee tae ~ RR ia ae aa hac EE 
q | anne 7 a: Te ] o $0, \ | 
Nr Ree |p 
5 Ped \. ne ea 2-09 0-0 ° 086 
Ee -_ oe Nt. oo o-.—¢ ty on. ey Ais 09 0a 
u ¢ |p eer eo qt om gto 9 eH 0-0-0002 900 5 0-% Po — 09-2) 
ee ee enn ee, bata Gets 
> woe a ener Vg ane Pane ie | 
qf ie ~ Se \RY « Sb B00. - PRO Loe% o 
ba tee ye eee we 4 em aa gr -$ 

- ~ age iy TN eee, 4 | 

4 4 9 Hy 

¢ : \] 

f pe fee | t ! | ! 4 eee! ! 

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 


ORBITAL PHASE 


ORBITAL PHASE 


ORBITAL PHASE 


Figure 2. A sequence of RS CVn light curves over a 30 yr interval showing the characteristic ‘wave-like distortion’ or ‘photometric 
wave’ that migrates toward decreasing orbital phases. Each yearly light curve is shifted vertically with respect to the previous one. A 
blank vertical space is left if observations are not available. The thin continuous curves are maximum-entropy spot-model fits by 
Rodon6 et al (1995). Most of the plotted data were obtained at Catania Astrophysical Observatory, where systematic photometry of RS 
CVn systems and other magnetically active stars has been carried out since 1963 (Rodon6 1965, Chisari and Lacona 1965). 


whole panoply of activity phenomena that are observed on 
the Sun and several other late-type stars. The emerging 
magnetic loops interact with pre-existing ones and the 
subsequent magnetic line reconnections lead to energy 
dissipation. Therefore, magnetic fields appear to be the 
principal energy source of the observed phenomena. 

Among magnetically active stars, RS CVn binaries of- 
fer, however, the cleanest, rather stable and understand- 
able phenomena, when compared, for example, with the 
complex variability of contact binaries or binaries contain- 
ing a degenerate component, where other types of phe- 
nomena simultaneously contribute to the observed vari- 
ability. This makes it rather difficult to identify and dis- 
entangle pure solar-like activity phenomena from the ob- 
servations and, consequently, it renders rather uncertain 
their study and interpretation. 

In addition to allowing us to study the physical char- 
acteristics of surface activity phenomena, the monitoring 
of RS CVn stars and other active systems has led to the 
detection of activity cycles (see Strassmeier et al 1993) and 
has triggered the study of their effects on the star and sys- 
tem dynamics (see also STELLAR DYNAMICS): short-term vari- 
ations of the orbital period appear to be compatible with 
changes of the quadrupole moment of the active compo- 
nent that are produced by the modulation of the star’s in- 
ternal magnetic field and angular momentum distribution 
throughout a magnetic cycle (Lanza and Rodond 1999). 

In conclusion, RS CVn systems offer one of the best 
and most complete astrophysical laboratories for studying 
solar-like activity phenomena in stellar photospheres and 
overlying atmospheric layers up to corona levels. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Bianchini A 1990 Astron. J. 99 1941 

Bopp B W and Fekel F C 1977 Astron. J. 82 490 

Catalano S 1983 Activity in Red-dwarf Stars (IAU Colloq. 71) 
ed PB Byrne and M Rodoné (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 343 

Catalano S 1990 Active Close Binaries ed C Ibanoglu 
(Dordrecht! NATO Advanced Study Institute, 
Kluwer) p 411 

Chisari D and Lacona G 1965 Mem. Soc. Astron. Ital. 36 483 

Donati J-F, Semel M, Rees D, Taylor K and Robinson R 1990 
Astron. Astrophys. 232 L1 

Eaton J A, Wu C C and Rucinski S M 1980 Astrophys. J. 239 
919 

Foing B M, Char S, Ayres T, Neff J E and Zhai Di-S et al 
1991 Astron. Astrophys. 292 543 

Gibson D M and Hijellming R M (ed) 1985 Radio Stars 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Hall D S 1976 Multiple Periodic Variable Stars (IAU Colloq. 
29) ed W S Fitch p 287 

Hall DS 1991 The Sun and Cool Stars: Activity, Magnetism, 
Dynamos (IAU Colloq. 130) (Berlin: Springer) p 353 

Lanza A F and Rodond M 1997 The Earth and the 
Universe ed G Asteriadis et al (Aristotle University 
of Thessaloniki: Ziti) p 161 

Lanza A F and Rodond M 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 349 887 

Lanza A F, Catalano S, Cutispoto G, Pagano I and Rodond 
M 1998 Astron. Astrophys. 332 541 

Lanza A F, Rodond M and Rosner R 1998 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 296 893 

Linsky J L 1988 Multiwavelength Astrophysics ed F Cordova 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 49 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


RS Canum Venaticorum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Linsky J L, Neff J E, Brown A et al 1989 Astron. Astrophys. 
211 173 

Neff J E, Walter F M, Rodond M and Linsky J L 1989 Astron. 
Astrophys. 215 79 

Oliver J P 1974 PhD Thesis University of California, Los 
Angeles CA 

Olson E C 1984 Advances in Photoelectr. Photom. 3 15 

Rodono M 1965 Physics ‘Laurea’ Thesis Catania University 

Rodond M 1983 Adv. Space Res. 2 (9) 225 

Rodono M 1990 Flare Stars in Star Clusters, Associations and 
in the Solar Vicinity (LAU Symp. 137) ed L V Mirzoyan, 
B R Petterson and M K Tsvetkov p 371 

Rodono M 1992 Evolutionary Processes in Interacting Binary 
Stars (IAU Symp. 151) ed Y Kondo, R F Sistero and R 
S Polidan (Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 71 

Rodond M, Cutispoto G, Pazzani V et al 1986 Astron. 
Astrophys. 165 135 

Rodono M, Byrne P B, Neff J E et al 1987 Astron. Astrophys. 
176 267 

Rodond M, Lanza A F and Catalano S 1995 Astron. 
Astrophys. 301 75 

Rodono M, Pagano I, Leto G et al 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 
346 811 

Saar S 1988 Astrophys. J. 324 411 

Strassmeier K G, Hall D S, Fekel F C and Scheck M 1993 
Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 100 173 

Trigilio C, Umana G and Migenes V 1993 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 260 903 

UmanaG, Trigilio C, Tumino M, Catalano S and Rodond M 
1995 Astron. Astrophys. 298 143 

Walter F M, Gibson D M and Basri G S 1983 Astrophys. J. 
267 665 

White N E, Shafer R A, Horne K, Parmar A N and 
Culhane J L 1990 Astrophys. J. 350 776 


Marcello Rodoné 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rubin, Vera Cooper (1928-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rubin, Vera Cooper (1928-) 


Astronomer, born in Philadelphia, worked at the Carnegie 
Institute on problems of extragalactic research, including 
the dark matter that forms a major component to galaxies 
and reveals its existence by its gravitational effect on their 
stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Rue, Warren de la (1815-89) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rue, Warren de la (1815-89) 


Born in Guernsey, astronomer at the Kew Observatory, 
astrophotography pioneer. Showed in the total solar 
eclipse of 1860 that the prominences seen at the edge of 
the Sun and Moon were independent of the motion of the 
Moon and thus solar appendages. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Runaway Star ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Runaway Star 


Term used to describe a star that is moving with 
very high velocity, typically hundreds of kilometers per 
second, relative to the local standard of rest. Such 
exceptionally high velocity presumably indicates an 
‘explosive’ departure of the star from the location of its 
formation. The most likely explanation of this is that the 
star was a minor component of a binary system, ejected 
when the primary component exploded as a supernova. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Russell, Henry Norris (1877-1957) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Russell, Henry Norris (1877-1957) 


Astronomer, born in Oyster Bay, NY, spent nearly all his 
life working at Princeton University. He spectroscopically 
studied eclipsing binary stars to determine the masses 
of their component stars. At first collaborating with 
the British astronomer Hinks at Cambridge, he started 
to measure stellar parallaxes and, plotting the absolute 
magnitudes of stars whose distance he had thus measured, 
against their spectral types, he found the correlation now 
known as the main sequence of the Hertzsprung—Russell 
diagram. He distinguished between giant stars and dwarfs. 
He proposed that stars cooled along this correlation. 
This theory of stellar evolution was superseded, but the 
H-R diagram continues to provide a tool with which 
to test theories of stellar evolution. Russell applied 
MEGHNAD SAHA’s theory of ionization to stellar atmospheres 
and determined the abundance of the elements in stars, 
including, after the foundation work by CECILIA PAYNE- 
GAPOSCHKIN, the great abundance of hydrogen. In the 
theory of stellar structure, he showed that the size, 
temperature, etc, of a star at each stage of its evolution 
can be found solely from its mass, chemical composition 
and age (the Vogt—Russell theorem). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Russian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Russian Astronomy 


Russia is a vast multinational country whose boundaries 
have been changed to a great extent. The Russian 
Empire at the beginning of this century included many 
countries, which are now independent states. This article 
is concentrated on the history of astronomy and current 
activity on the territory of modern Russia with necessary 
brief astronomical excursions in the history of the states. 


History 

Archaeo-astronomical studies in Russia have brought 
some material evidence of astronomical knowledge of 
previous generations (e.g. thousand year old ring and 
rod inscribed with a primitive astronomical calendar 
found in an excavation near Achinsk in Siberia). The 
first astronomical observatory was established in 1690 
by the archbishop of Archangel’sk for navigational 
purposes. In 1701 the Russian tsar Peter the Great 
who was highly impressed by his visit to Greenwich 
and Copenhagen observatories established in Moscow 
‘The School for Navigation and Mathematics’ with an 
astronomical observatory, which was headed by J Bruce. 
In 1725 the Astronomical Observatory of the Petersburg 
Academy of Sciences was founded. The well-known 
French astronomer Joseph-Nicolas DELISLE was the first 
director of this well-equipped (according to the standards 
of that epoch) observatory. 

In the 18th century most astronomical observations, 
both at observatories and during numerous expeditions, 
were aimed to maintain a network of points with 
accurate coordinates. Thus the ‘Catalogue of astronomical 
coordinates’ by S Rumovsky contained coordinates of 82 
points with an accuracy, good for that period, of 8’. The 
first astrophysically important observation was carried out 
by a famous Russian scientist of encyclopedic knowledge, 
M Lomonosov, who in 1762 observed the passage of Venus 
across the solar disk and discovered the atmosphere 
of that planet. Growing industrial and military needs 
caused quick development of astrometry and practical 
astronomy in Russia, which led to the construction of new 
observational facilities. 

In the 19th century new observatories at Kharkov 
(1808), Derpt (Tartu) (1809), Nikolaev (1827), Kiev (1845) 
and Odessa (1871) universities were built. In 1831 
the construction of a new Moscow observatory began. 
However, the most prominent event in Russian astronomy 
of the 19th century was the construction of the Pulkovo 
Observatory (figure 1). This observatory was founded 
in 1839. The first director of the observatory was 
the famous astronomer Vassily (Wilhelm) struve, well 
known for his classical studies of double stars and 
for his guess (1847) about the existence of interstellar 
absorption. Because of the outstanding organizational 
abilities of its first director, the Pulkovo Observatory in 
30 yr after its foundation became one of the world’s best 
astronomical institutions and had unprecedented high- 
precision astrometric instruments. Pulkovo fundamental 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stellar catalogues of 1845, 1865, 1885, 1905, 1930 and 
1955 were most precise and the observations performed 
in Pulkovo were included into the world’s popular 
fundamental catalogues with the highest weight. Stellar 
astronomy also was a field of interest to astronomers from 
Pulkovo. The world’s best instruments were installed at 
Pulkovo observatory, e.g. a REFRACTOR with D = 76 cm 
(1885). This telescope was destroyed (as were almost 
all the instruments and buildings of the observatory) by 
fascist troops attacking Leningrad during World War II. 
In the second half of the 19th century astrophysics in 
Russia was developing too. The theory of cometary 
tails (F Bredikhin, 1862-1877) and the first observational 
evidence of periodic changes of the radial velocity in 5 Cep 
(which turned out to be typical for cepheids) were the most 
important contributions of Russian astrophysicists of the 
19th century. 

The very beginning of the 20th century was relatively 
favorable for the development of astronomy in Russia. 
New observatories at the Kazan University (1901), L’vov 
University (1907) and Simeiz Observatory (1908) were 
built. World War I and the October revolution, followed 
by years of economic dislocation, were negative factors for 
science in Russia. In 1922-1924 an important discovery 
was made by A FRIEDMANN, who found non-stationary 
solutions of the Einstein equations and thus contributed 
to the fundamentals of cosmology. 

In the period of the strengthening of the state in 
1930s new observatories were built (in ABASTUMANI— 
1932 and Irkutsk—1931) and new big plans of scientific 
development were elaborated. The leading role of 
the Academy of Sciences in fundamental research was 
then consolidated. An all-Union coordination body—the 
Astronomical Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences— 
was established in 1936. Members of this body were 
responsible for strategic planning of astronomical research 
in the USSR. New approaches were advanced. World War 
II prevented the realization of these ambitious plans. 

After the war intensive investments in fundamental 
science (particularly in astronomy) brought a flourishing 
period. Astrophysical instruments require particularly 
dark and clean skies, so the best places for the new 
observatories were found in the southern mountains. 
Construction of the new large CRIMEAN ASTROPHYSICAL 
OBSERVATORY (CrAQO) (1945-1954), BYURAKAN ASTROPHYSICAL 
OBSERVATORY (1946-1956), observatories near Alma-Ata 
(1951), Ashkhabad (1946), Goloseevo (founded in 1944), 
Dushanbe (1958), Shemakha (1960) and a solar station near 
Kislovodsk were essential steps of postwar development. 
The Pulkovo Observatory was reconstructed. Great 
progress in radioastronomy was not missed in the 
USSR (as happened with cybernetics and genetics) and 
new instruments and dedicated observatories were built. 
The radioastronomical station of the Institute of Radio 
Physics near Gorky (1949), radioastronomical station of 
the Lebedev Physical Institute (1956), radioastronomical 
observatory in Latvia (1958), radio telescopes in CrAO, 
Kharkov etc were evidence of attention to radioastronomy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Russian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Special Astrophysical Observatory in the Caucasus: 
top—Large Alt-azimuth Telescope, bottom—RATAN-600 radio 
telescope. 


Prominent discoveries of that period were made by 
V AMBARTSUMIAN (young stellar associations—1947, ideas 
on the important role of nuclei in active galaxies—1958) 
and I sHKLovski (ideas on the observation of interstellar 
molecules in the radio range—1949, on the formation of 
planetary nebulae by red giants loosing their mass at the 
latest stages of stellar evolution—1956). 

The peak of this postwar thriving of ground-based 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


astronomy was marked by the construction of the sPECIAL 
ASTROPHYSICAL OBSERVATORY (SAO) in North Caucasus (1966— 
1976) (figure 2). This was a nationwide project which 
required huge resources. The 6 m optical telescope was 
for a long time the world’s largest one. The unique 600 m 
radio telescope RATAN-600 even now is one of the most 
powerful instruments in the world. The 6 m telescope is 
located in a region whose astroclimate is far from ideal 
(although this place seems to be one of the best in the 
Russian Federation); that is why new astronomical centers 
were built in the Pamir region where places with record 
seeing parameters were found. All-Union observatories 
in Mydanak and Sanglok were the most promising for 
development of observational facilities in the USSR. At the 
same time space astronomy was quickly developing. 

The serious problem was the lack of modern detectors 
(and computers) as a consequence of the general lag of the 
USSR in some high-technology fields. That substantially 
reduced the efficiency of large optical astronomical 
instrumentation. Thanks to international cooperation this 
situation was somewhat improved. A special program for 
the design and implementation of modern astronomical 
detectors was supported by the Academy of Sciences but 
the epoch was over. 

During and after the ‘perestroika’ period the 
economic situation in the USSR drastically worsened. 
This immediately influenced scientific development. In 
the last 15 yr no new observatories and no large 
instruments have been built. All programs including 
prestigious space experiments were slowed down or 
stopped. After the disintegration of the USSR, Russia and 
other former USSR (fSU) republics were busy with political 
and social problems. Strong economic and sometimes 
political boundaries appeared. Most observatories are 
located outside Russia and this prevents effective use 
of them. Regular funds for astronomy as well as for 
other fundamental sciences in Russia were cut at least 
by an order of magnitude. In the process of intensive 
social separation the Russian astronomers (as most of 
population) quickly sank close to the social bottom. The 
various support programs were initiated by the world 
astronomical community to help Russian astronomers. Yet 
Russia remains a major astronomical country. 


Astronomical institutions 

Astronomy in Russia is a matter of research in academic 
institutions (those of the Russian Academy of Sciences— 
RAS) and at some universities. 

The SAO (of the RAS) is Russia’s main center for 
ground-based space research. The observatory is located 
in the south of Russia, in the Caucasus mountains of 
Karachaevo-Cherkessia. The main instruments of the 
observatory are the optical telescope BTA (Large Alt- 
azimuth Telescope) which primary mirror has a diameter 
of 6 m and the radio telescope RATAN-600 with an 
antenna diameter of 600 m. The observatory has highly 
experienced experts and modern detectors (some of them 
were provided by international cooperation). Study 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Russian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of the universe as a whole, analysis of non-stationary 
energetic processes in galactic and extragalactic objects 
of various types, investigation of evolution and chemical 
composition of our Galaxy and the nature of solar activity 
and the ecology of the upper atmosphere and nearby space 
are basic research activities of the observatory. 

The Main Astronomical Observatory of the RAS 
(Pulkovo Observatory) is located in the suburb of a big 
city. The observatory lost its own observational facilities 
in the south and researchers actively seek (and develop) 
cooperation with observatories over the world. Stellar 
astronomy, astrophysics and solar research remain as 
prime research directions of the observatory. 

The Institute of Applied Astronomy of the RAS in St 
Petersburg has newly built observational facilities—30 m 
dish radio telescopes over Russia, originally designed for 
the construction of national time-coordinate system. 

The Institute of Astronomy of the RAS (former 
Astronomical Council) is situated in Moscow. Research 
directions of the institute include astrophysics and 
astronomical data processing. Zvenigorod Observatory 
of the institute was specialized for tracking satellites 
and relevant basic research (Earth rotation, geodynamics, 
study of near-Earth objects). 

The Astro Space Center of the Lebedev Physical 
Institute of the RAS, whose own main observational 
facility is a 22 m radio telescope in Pushchino, is carrying 
out studies of cosmology, physics of extragalactic objects 
and interstellar matter. 

The Radio-Astronomical Station of the Institute of 
Radio Physics in Gorky is involved in studies of interstellar 
matter. 

Sternberg State Astronomical Institute of Moscow 
University is a large institution with multidirectional 
research activity: cosmology, astrophysics, celestial 
mechanics, astrometry etc. 

There are also smaller university observatories and 
institutes in St Petersburg, Kazan, Ekaterinburg and 
research groups in some other high schools. Big groups 
of experts in high-energy astrophysics and planetary 
research work in the Space Research Institute of the RAS 
(Moscow). Groups for solar physics and solar-terrestrial 
relations work in the Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism 
and Propagation of Radio Waves of the RAS in Troitsk 
(and a similar institution in Irkutsk) and small groups 
for theoretical astrophysics do studies in other research 
centers. 


Space astronomy 

In the USSR the number of astronomical experiments 
in space was continuously increasing. Numerous 
experiments on board Mir and Salyut stations in the 
field of high-energy astrophysics and solar physics 
as well as many dedicated missions to the Moon, 
Venus, Mars, Halley’s comet, missions for study 
of solar-terrestrial relations and the Sun and _ the 
astrophysical missions asTRoN (80 cm telescope for 
UV spectroscopy), GRANAT (high-energy astrophysics) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and RELICT (microwave background measurement) were 
carried out successfully. In the last 10 yr Russia has 
reduced ambitions in the field but still has a rather big 
space program. The RAS is responsible for preparation 
of the program of fundamental research. The RUSSIAN 
AVIATION AND SPACE AGENCY provides the general control and 
funding, while the scientific institutions are the main 
contractors for the following projects: SPECTRUM-x-GAMMA— 
a high-energy observatory (Space Research Institute), 
Spectrum-R—a radio interferometer with a space 10 m 
aperture radio telescope and base distance 70000 km 
(Astro Space Center), Spectrum-UV—a general-purpose 
observatory with a 170 cm aperture UV-optical telescope 
equipped with spectrographs, imaging camera and 
polarimeter (Institute of Astronomy), CORONAS-F—project 
for investigating solar—terrestrial relations (Institute of 
Terrestrial Magnetism and Propagation of Radio Waves), 
‘Fobos-Ground’—delivery of a sample of the Fobos soil 
to the Earth (Space Research Institute). In the last few 
years the space program has encountered serious financial 
difficulties and launch dates are somewhat indefinite, 
which worries the Russian project teams as well as 
international cooperations. 


Organizational features 

Researchers. The total number of professional astronomers 
as estimated at the beginning of 1999 is about 1000 
(members of the [AU—300, members of the EAS—250). 

Funding. Most astronomical institutions are funded 
by the state via RAS or the Ministry of Education. Annual 
expenditures for astronomy (except space projects) in 1999 
are expected to be equivalent to US$3.5 million. 

Coordinating bodies. General cooperation in funda- 
mental research is carried out by the scientific councils 
(SCs). In 1999 the list of the councils included the SC 
for astronomy, SC for physics of the solar system, SC for 
solar—terrestrial relations and the Space Council (includes 
sections for space astronomy, solar system, cosmic rays 
etc). All four are established by the RAS. The Council for 
Education in Astronomy was established by the Ministry 
of Education. The councils include leading persons in the 
field and are devoted to strategic planning of research and 
educational policy in astronomy. 

Astronomical societies in Russia. These began to appear 
from 1890 (Russian Astronomical Society, Petersburg). 
The most long-lived society was the semiprofessional 
All-Union Astronomical-Geodetic Society (founded in 
1932). The first fully professional society (The EURO-ASIAN 
ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY—EAAS) was established in 1990. It 
is officially legalized as an international society. The 
EAAS performs its activities mainly on the territory of 
the fSU. The main goals of the EAAS are to maintain 
the development of astronomy and to reinforce scientific 
contacts between astronomers of the fSU and _ their 
colleagues all over the world. About 700 professional 
astronomers from Russia and the other fSU countries are 
members of the society. The EAAS has been affiliated to 
the EAS since 1992. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Russian Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astronomical journals. The main professional journal 
published in Russia is Astronomicheski Zhurnal (Astronomy 
Reports); two others are Pis’ma in Astronomicheski Zhurnal 
(Astronomy Letters) and Astronomicheski Vestnik (Solar 
System Research). Some institutions have non-regular 
series of publications. 


Bibliography 

Kolchinsky I G, Korsun A A and Rorriges M G 1986 
Astronomers (Kiev: Naukova Dumka) (in Russian) 

Ponomarev DN 1987 Astronomical Observatories of the Soviet 
Union (Moscow: Nauka) (in Russian) 


Boris Shustov 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Russian Aviation and Space Agency 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Russian Aviation and Space Agency 


The Russian Space Agency (RKA) was created on 25 
February 1992 by a decree issued by the President of the 
Russian Federation. It was formed after the break-up of the 
former Soviet Union and the dissolution of the Soviet space 
program. The RKA uses the technology and launch sites 
that belonged to the former Soviet space program. This 
includes payment to Kazakhstan for use of the Baikonur 
Cosmodrome. 

The official responsibilities of the RKA were codified 
in August 1993, in the Russian Federation Law on Space. 
It defines the state policy in space research and exploration 
for peaceful purposes, and execution of the Federal space 
program. This includes promotion of Russia’s interests in 
the international space arena. 

RKA has centralized control of Russia’s civilian space 
program, including all manned and unmanned non- 
military space flights. The agency now oversees a growing 
number of bilateral and multilateral accords with other 
national space agencies, e.g. the Shuttle-Mir program and 
the International Space Station. 

Since 1994, the agency has gained greater power over 
Russian industrial concerns. Under the 1994 government 
decree, 38 enterprises of the rocket and space industry 
were transferred to RKA. In 1998 RKA was given a control 
over 38 more state companies and federal shares in 22 joint- 
stock companies. On 11 March 1999 it was announced 
that RKA would gain control over 350 companies of the 
aviation industry and be renamed the ‘Russian Aviation 
and Space Agency’. 

For further information see 
http://www.rka.ru/english/eindex.htm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Rutherford Appleton Laboratory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rutherford Appleton Laboratory 


One of three sites operated since 1995 by the UK Central 
Laboratory of the Research Councils. Located in Chilton, 
Oxfordshire. 

In association with university science groups, the 
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL) space science 
department is involved in the design, construction, test 
and management of space instrumentation as well as 
reception, processing and distribution of space data. 

RAL has a significant role in many space missions, 
including the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO); the ERS, 
Envisat and Meteosat Earth observation projects; the 
ROSAT and Spectrum-X high-energy astronomy missions; 
SOHO and Cluster which study the Sun—Earth connection; 
the Rosetta comet mission; and the Earth Observing 
System. 

Specialist facilities include class-100 clean rooms, a 
full range of environmental test facilities, optical design 
and test facilities, a satellite control center, geophysical 
and solar-terrestrial data facilities and a molecular 
spectroscopy facility. 

In addition to the space activities, RAL is actively 
involved in research into particle physics, high-power 
lasers, computing, cryogenics and microelectronics. 

RAL’s principal customers are the UK research 
councils, the British National Space Centre, the UK 
Meteorological Office, ESA, NASA, institutes of higher 
education and industry. 

The astrophysics division undertakes research and 
projects in space science. Research covers astronomy 
and solar system science in the areas of space plasma 
physics, solar physics and planetary science. Project 
work involves space instruments in these areas and the 
provision of science support to programs undertaken in 
other divisions. 

For further information see 
http://www.ssd.rlac.uk/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ryle, Sir Martin (1918-84) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ryle, Sir Martin (1918-84) 


British radioastronomer, Nobel prizewinner (1974) for pio- 
neering research in radio astrophysics, in particular for his 
invention of the aperture synthesis technique. During the 
Second World War worked on the development of radar 
and joined the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, becom- 
ing professor there. In 1972 he was appointed Astronomer 
Royal, the first such appointment as an honorary post un- 
connected with the Royal Observatory. He invented ra- 
dio interferometry and determined accurate positions and 
fluxes for radio sources. This led to the identification of 
many sources with galaxies that could be studied in visi- 
ble light, revealing their nature. He compiled catalogs of 
radio sources that provided a body of statistical informa- 
tion about the numbers of sources at fainter and fainter 
fluxes (and therefore greater and greater distances) which 
proved that the universe had evolved, i.e. started from a 
Big Bang. This was the first of several near-fatal blows to 
the credibility of the steady state model, championed by 
his disputative Cambridge colleague FRED HOYLE, before the 
theory was finished off by the discovery of the microwave 
background radiation. Ryle invented aperture synthesis, 
by which an interferometer, rotating on the Earth, could 
fill in the aperture of a virtual large radio telescope. This 
created the method by which radioastronomers can pro- 
duce unsurpassed angular resolution, studying phenom- 
ena close to the central black holes in radio galaxies, for 
example. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sabine, Sir Edward (1788-1883) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sabine, Sir Edward (1788-1883) 


Physicist, astronomer, soldier and explorer, born in 
Dublin. He was the astronomer on two expeditions to the 
Arcticregions. He carried out experiments with pendulum 
clocks to measure the force of gravity at Spitzbergen and 
in Africa, in order to determine the shape of the Earth 
and studied terrestrial magnetism. Inspired by the work 
of HEINRICH SCHWABE on the 11 year cycle of sunspots, as 
reported by ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT, he correlated hiss 
measurements and his compilations of magnetic data and 
found a similar periodicity in magnetic storms, evidence 
of a solar influence on the magnetic field of the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sadler, Donald H (1908-87) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sadler, Donald H (1908-87) 


Mathematician, became superintendent of the Nautical 
Almanac Office at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. 
His expertise was in numerical analysis, tabulation and 
printing, and he applied these skills to the production of 
the Nautical Almanac, and took pride in the accuracy of 
computation and reproduction. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Sagan, Carl Edward (1934-96) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sagan, Carl Edward (1934-96) 


Planetary scientist, born in Brooklyn, NY, became 
professor at Cornell University and director of its 
Laboratory for Planetary Studies. He directed programs 
on theoretical, laboratory and spacecraft studies of organic 
molecules in the atmospheres and on the surfaces of 
planets, satellites and comets in the solar system, and in the 
interstellar medium. This was a means of understanding 
the origin of life on Earth and the possibility of the present 
or past existence of life elsewhere in the solar system. He 
was very influential in NASA, playing key roles in the 
Apollo program to the Moon, and the Mariner, Viking, 
Voyager and Galileo expeditions to the planets. He helped 
identify the runaway greenhouse effect on Venus which 
produces its high temperature, the dust storms which 
cause seasonal changes on Mars, and the complex organic 
molecules which cause the reddish haze of Titan and 
are the building blocks of proteins and nucleic acids. 
He inspired the continuing search for extraterrestrial 
intelligence, and his novel on the subject, Contact, was 
made into a successful film. He was a very successful 
popularizer of astronomy, witha book and TV series called 
Cosmos. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sagitta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sagitta 


(the Arrow; abbrev. Sge, gen. Sagittae; area 80 sq. deg.) 
A northern constellation which lies between Vulpecula 
and Aquila, and culminates at midnight in mid-July. Its 
origin dates back at least to ancient Greece, where it was 
identified (by different authorities) with arrows belonging 
to Eros, Apollo and Hercules in Greek mythology. The 
brightest stars of Sagitta were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. AD 
100-175) in the Almagest. 

A small but distinctive constellation, the brightest 
stars in Sagitta are y Saggitae, magnitude 3.5, and 6 
Sagittae, magnitude 3.7. There are no other stars brighter 
than fourth magnitude. ¢ Sagittae is a triple system with 
bluish-white (A1) and bluish components, magnitudes 
5.6 and 9.0, separation 8.3”, the former of which has a 
very close (separation 0.2”) bluish-white (A3) companion, 
magnitude 6.0, which revolves around it in 22.8 years. 
Interesting variable stars include U Sagittae (range 6.45- 
9.3, period 3.38 days), an eclipsing binary, and WZ Sagittae 
(range 7.0-15.5), a recurrent nova which is normally about 
fourteenth magnitude but flared up to seventh to eighth 
magnitude in 1913, 1946 and 1978. 

The Milky Way passes through Sagitta and the 
constellation contains a number of star clusters and 
planetary nebulae, the brightest of which is M71 (NGC 
6838), an eighth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sagittarius 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sagittarius 


(the Archer; abbrev. Sgr, gen. Sagittarii; area 867 sq. deg.) 
A southern zodiacal constellation which lies between 
Ophiuchus and Capricornus, and culminates at midnight 
in early July. Its origin dates back to Sumerian times, when 
it was identified with Nergal, a god of war, but today it 
is associated with Crotus, son of the Greek god Pan and 
the inventor of archery, and it is shown on early celestial 
charts as centaur with a bow and arrow aimed at the heart 
of a scorpion (the neighboring constellation Scorpius). The 
brightest stars of Sagittarius were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. 
AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A large, conspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Sagittarius are « (Kaus Australis), magnitude 
1.8, o Sagittarii (Nunki), magnitude 2.1, ¢ Sagittarii 
(Ascella), a very close binary with white (A2) components, 
magnitudes 3.3 and 3.5 (combined magnitude 2.6), 
separation 0.2-0.6", period 21.1 years, and 6 Sagittarii 
(Kaus Media), magnitude 2.7. There are 12 other stars of 
magnitude 4.0 or brighter. Other interesting stars include 
6 Sagittarii (Arkab), a wide, naked-eye optical double 
with bluish-white (B9) and pale yellow (F2) components, 
magnitudes 4.0 and 4.3, the former of which has a white 
(A5) companion, magnitude 7.2, separation 28.5”, and RY 
Sagittarii, an R Corona Borealis variable (range 5.8-14.0). 
Eight of the brighter stars form an asterism known as ‘the 
Teapot’: 6, ¢, ¢ and represent the body, o and rt the 
handle, y the tip of the spout, and A the top of the domed 
lid. 

The Milky Way passes through the western half of 
the constellation, which lies in the direction of the center 
of the Galaxy. It is brightest just to the north of y Sagittarii, 
where it is known as the Great Sagittarius Star Cloud. 
Among the many star clusters and nebulae are the open 
clusters M25 (IC 4725), which contains more than 30 
stars fainter than sixth magnitude (including the Cepheid 
variable U Sagittarii, range 6.28-7.15, period 6.75 days), 
M21 (NGC 6531), which contains about 70 stars fainter 
than seventh magnitude, and M23 (NGC 6494), which has 
about 150 stars fainter than ninth magnitude, the fifth- 
magnitude globular cluster M22 (NGC 6656), which is 
the third-brightest in the sky, and the sixth-magnitude 
emission nebulae M8 (NGC 6523, the Lagoon Nebula), 
M17 (NGC 6618, the Omega Nebula) and M20 (NGC 6514, 
the Trifid Nebula). M24, a bright portion of the Milky 
Way sometimes called the Small Sagittatius Star Cloud, 
contains the open cluster NGC 6603, which consists of 
several dozen stars fainter than fourteenth magnitude. 

Also in Sagittarius are the Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy, 
a dwarf spheroidal galaxy in the Local Group and the 
closest known satellite of the Milky Way Galaxy, lying 
about 80000 light-years from its center, and the strong 
radio source Sagittarius A, part of which (Sagittarius A*) 
is believed to lie at the center of our Galaxy. 


See also: Lagoon Nebula, Omega Nebula, Sagittarius A, 
Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy, Trifid Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sagittarius A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sagittarius A 


The brightest radio source in the constellation of 
Sagittarius. Located at the center of the Milky Way 
Galaxy, at a distance of some 25 000 light-years, 
Sagittarius A (abbreviation, Sgr A) consists of two 
principal components, Sgr A East and Sgr A West. Sgr A 
East, which is a source of synchrotron radiation, appears 
to be a bubble of ionized gas, possibly a supernova 
remnant. Embedded within Sgr A West, which is a cloud 
of hot gas, is an intense, very compact, variable radio 
source called Sagittarius A* (pronounced ‘A-star’) that 
has an angular diameter of less than 0.002 arcsec. At the 
distance of the galactic center, this angular size 
corresponds to a linear diameter of less than 15 
astronomical units (smaller than the diameter of the orbit 
of the planet Saturn). 

Sgr A* appears to have no orbital motion and to be 
completely stationary. It is therefore believed to mark the 
exact center of the Galaxy. It lies at the center of a three- 
armed mini-spiral of hot, ionized gas, some 10 light- 
years in diameter. The orbital velocities of gas clouds 
close to the galactic center imply that some 6 million 
solar masses must lie within a light-year of the galactic 
center. Since infrared observations imply that stars 
contribute only about 3 million solar masses to that total, 
many astronomers contend that the residual 3 million 
solar masses is contained in a central black hole and that 
the underlying energy source for Sgr A* is a disk of hot 
gas swirling round this black hole. Sgr A*, then, appears 
to be similar in nature to an active galactic nucleus, 
though on a smaller and less energetic scale. 

In 2001, NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, 
detected a sudden x-ray flare while observing Sgr A*. In 
a few minutes, the source brightened dramatically, 
eventually reaching a level 45 times brighter than before 
the flare. After about three hours, the x-ray intensity 
rapidly declined to the pre-flare level. The rapid rise and 
fall of the x-rays from this outburst are compelling 
evidence that the x-ray emission is coming from matter 
falling into a supermassive black hole. Given the 
extremely accurate position, it is highly unlikely that the 
flare is due to an unrelated contaminating source such as 
an x-ray binary system. 


See also: active galactic nucleus, black hole, galactic 


nucleus, Milky Way Galaxy, radioastronomy, 
synchrotron radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy 


The Sagittarius DWARF GALAXY is the closest member of the 
Milky Way’s entourage of satellite galaxies. Discovered 
by chance in 1994, its presence had previously been 
overlooked because it is largely hidden by the most 
crowded regions of our own Galaxy with which it is 
merging. 


Position and morphology 

Despite being located at a mere 16 kpc behind the GALactic 
BULGE (see figure 1), and 6 kpc below the Galactic disk, the 
determination of the morphology of this object has been 
complicated by its unfavorable position. For this reason, 
the inferred geometrical picture is somewhat sketchy, 
especially at Galactic latitudes b > —10° where a large 
fraction of the dwarf remains hidden behind the Galactic 
disk (and is revealed in those fields only by number counts 
of RR Lyrae variables). The Sagittarius dwarf galaxy 
appears to bea prolate body with axis ratios ~3:1:1, with its 
longest dimension extending some 10 kpc in the direction 
perpendicular to the GALACTIC PLANE. It is assumed that 
the center of this dwarf galaxy is coincident with the 
region of highest stellar surface density, which is found at 
Galactic coordinates £ = 5°, b = —14.5°, coincident with 
the massive GLOBULAR CLUSTER M54. At distances greater 
than 5 kpc from this center, a very low surface brightness 
stellar stream has been detected. Because of its irregular 
structure, it is difficult to estimate the total luminosity of 
the dwarf; an upper limit from integrating the surface 
brightness profile (given a simple model of its structure) 
is 5.8 x 10’Lo. 

Its present proximity to the Galactic center must 
induce huge tidal stresses on the dwarf; this ongoing tidal 
disruption is expected to lead to its destruction, so its stars 
and globular clusters will eventually become dispersed 
and assimilated into the Milky Way halo. Modern GALAxy 
FORMATION simulations suggest that large galaxies like the 
Milky Way formed through the repeated AccRETION of 
many small galaxies; the existence of the Sagittarius dwarf 
provides striking evidence that the Milky Way is still 
growing in the way predicted by such theories. Thus, 
this dwarf galaxy is perhaps a prime, and it is certainly 
the closest, example of a small galactic building block, as 
envisaged in this currently popular picture of hierarchical 
structure formation. One of the motivations for its study 
is that this may shed light on the hypothesized population 
of primordial galaxies that merged to form the Milky Way. 


Stellar populations 

This dwarf galaxy contains a mix of STELLAR POPULATIONS 
ranging from intermediate-age stars (given the presence of 
carbon stars) to old stars (some RR Lyraes are observed), 
with the dominant stellar population being 10-14 billion 
years old. It also contains four globular clusters (M54, 
Ter 7, Ter 8 and Arp 2) which also display an age spread, 
with Ter 8 being as old as the oldest Galactic halo clusters. 
The mean chemical abundance lies between [Fe/H] = 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(kpc) 


x (kpc) 


Figure 1. Schematic diagrams showing the position of the 
Sagittarius dwarf in relation to the Galaxy. In both diagrams, the 
orbital path of the dwarf is indicated with a solid curve. The 
left-hand panel is in the x-z plane of the Galaxy. The line of sight 
from the Sun to the center of the dwarf is marked with a dotted 
line. The right-hand panel shows the projection of Sagittarius 
dwarf on the sky. 


—0.8 and [Fe/H] = —1.2, while the full abundance range 
observed covers 1 dex around this mean. 


Kinematics 

The RADIAL VELOcITY of the central parts of the Sagittarius 
dwarf galaxy is v, = 17141 kms"|, (after subtraction of 
the solar motion around the Galactic center). Normally, 
this would be almost all the kinematic information one 
could measure from such a system; however, as this galaxy 
is so close, it is also possible to deduce the transverse 
motion by measuring its PROPER MOTION. Several numerical 
studies have shown that dwarf satellite galaxies become 
elongated in the tidal field of their massive companion. 
The elongation, it transpires, always points parallel to the 
plane of the dwarf’s orbit. Since the Sagittarius dwarf 
is almost directly behind the Galactic center, as viewed 
from Earth, the projected elongation must be aligned with 
the proper motion vector (and the projection of the orbit) 
to very good approximation. Given that the Sagittarius 
dwarf is elongated perpendicular to the Galactic plane, 
these considerations indicate that it must be on a nearly 
polar orbit. Proper motion measurements deduced from 
Schmidt plates show that it has a transverse motion (along 
the major axis direction) of v, = 250+ 90 km s“!, and that 
it is moving northwards. 


Orbit and survival 

With the above measurements of the three-dimensional 
position and three-dimensional velocity of the dwarf 
galaxy, it is possible to calculate its orbit around the 
Galaxy, assuming a model for the gravitational potential 
of the Milky Way. Taking a standard Galaxy model, 
with a double-exponential disk, and a spherical halo 
giving rise to an asymptotically flat rotation curve (vg = 
220 km s~!), the period of the orbit is 0.7 Gyr, and the peri- 
and apogalactic distances are, respectively, ~12 kpc and 
~60 kpc. This means that the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy is 
on a collision course with the disk of the Milky Way that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


will bring the two galaxies into contact within 25 million 
years. 

Given the age of its dominant stellar component, this 
orbit implies that the Sagittarius dwarf has had many 
(more than 10) close interactions with the Milky Way 
during its lifetime. This turns out to be a very interesting 
constraint. Numerical N-body simulations show that the 
tidal stresses on the dwarf are so large each time it passes 
close to the Milky Way that it should have been destroyed 
after just a few (~2) close approaches to the Galaxy, and so 
it is very surprising that it has survived until the present 
day. A self-consistent solution to the present existence of 
the dwarf can be obtained if the observed stars do not trace 
the underlying mass. That is, the tidal disruption of the 
Sagittarius dwarf can be impeded if the stellar component 
of the dwarf galaxy is enveloped in a halo of DARK MATTER, 
which has a mass profile such that dark matter density 
is a factor of 2-3 larger than the mean Galactic density 
interior to its perigalacticon distance. To be consistent 
with the observed low velocity dispersion of the stellar 
component embedded therein, the core radius of the dark 
halo would have to extend out to the photometric edge 
of the system. The total mass of stars and dark matter is 
then M > 5 x 10°Mo. With this model, the escape velocity 
from the center of the Sagittarius dwarf is substantial, ve = 
90km s~!, which would help to explain the observed wide 
abundance range. The only alternative to this dark matter 
halo scenario is if the Sagittarius dwarf was deflected 
from a previously longer period orbit into its current short 
period orbit by a close encounter with another satellite, 
perhaps the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC); however, the 
chances of such a ‘bull’s-eye’ collision are small. 

It is interesting to note that all of the numerical 
simulations of the disruption of this dwarf galaxy give 
rise to streams of tidally disrupted material that follow the 
orbital path of the main body of the dwarf quite closely. 
The disrupted fraction can be significant, so one may 
expect to find a sizeable fraction of the stellar component 
of the Sagittarius dwarf spheroidal, including perhaps 
several globular clusters, stretching along the locus of the 
orbit around the sky. It will be very fruitful to detect such 
material, as the kinematics of the stream will provide a 
very sensitive test of the Galactic potential gradients. 


Interaction with the Milky Way 

The models of the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy that are 
designed to reduce tidal disruption have sufficient mass 
to affect the structure of the Milky Way. Hydrodynamical 
calculations undertaken to simulate the collisional interac- 
tion between the Sagittarius dwarf and the Galactic outer 
HI disk show that a significant distortion of the Galactic 
H I disk will be induced by the collision if the mass of the 
dwarf exceeds ~10°M.. Indeed, if M = 10°Mo, the tidal 
forces on the Milky Way due to the Sagittarius dwarf will 
be substantially larger than those due to the LMC, which 
has also been invoked as a possible perturber of the H I 
disk. For model masses 25 x 10°Mo, prominent spiral 
arms and a substantial lopsidedness in the outer disk are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


produced. Furthermore, a noticeable warp-like structure 
is induced in the disk. It seems that the Sagittarius dwarf 
may have significantly affected the star formation history 
and structure of the outer Galaxy. 

Much interesting work remains to be done in 
understanding the chemical evolution of the dwarf (and 
the outer regions of the Galaxy) and how this is affected by 
the interaction (see also GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). 
From this, one may gain insights into the chemical 
evolution of galaxies during a merger event, and in turn 
about dominant evolutionary processes occurring during 
hierarchical formation of ‘normal’-sized galaxy units. 


Bibliography 

The discovery and some subsequent studies that discuss 
the survivability and dark matter problem in the 
Sagittarius dwarf can be found in: 


Ibata R, Gilmore G and Irwin M 1994 Nature 370 194 

Ibata R, Wyse R, Gilmore G, Irwin M and Suntzeff N 1997 
Astron. J. 113 634 

Mateo M, Olszewski E and Morrison H 1998 Astrophys. J. 
508 55L 

Zhao H-S 1998 Astrophys. J. 500 149L 


The following is a selection of the numerical attempts 
to model the interaction between the Sagittarius dwarf and 
the Milky Way: 


Ibata R and Lewis G 1998 Astrophys. J. 500 575 

Ibata R and Razoumov A 1998 Astron. Astrophys. 336 130 

Johnston K V, Spergel D N and Hernquist L 1995 
Astrophys. J. 451 598 

Velasquez H and White S 1995 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 275 
L23 


Rodrigo Ibata 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saha, Meghnad (1893-1956) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saha, Meghnad (1893-1956) 


Physicist, born in Seoratali, near Dacca, India, became 
professor of physics at Calcutta, where he founded the 
Calcutta Institute of Nuclear Physics, now the Saha 
Institute. Saha (and Bose) translated several of Einstein’s 
papers from German into English, leading to their greater 
dissemination, and he worked on the thermal ionization 
that occurs in the atmosphere of stars. He showed 
that elements in stars are ionized in relation to their 
temperature, as described by Saha’s equation. This work 
fundamentally underpinned the interpretation of stellar 
spectra and led to the determination by HENRY RUSSELL of 
the abundances of the elements. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sakigake ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sakigake 


Japan’s first deep space mission. Launched in January 
1985, it approached to within 7 million km of Halley’s 
Comet on 11 March 1986 to study radio and plasma waves. 
Sakigake means ‘pioneer’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Sakurai’s Object 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sakurai’s Object 


Sakurai’s Object (V4334 Ser, RA = 17°52™32°.69 and 
Decl. = —17° 41’ 07".7 at equinox 2000.0) is the central star 
of a faint PLANETARY NEBULA which experienced a late helium 
flash at, presumably, the end of 1994. It was discovered by 
amateur astronomer Yukio Sakurai in February 1996 as 
a rapidly brightening object, then at the 11th magnitude. 
It remained bright during two years, before dimming in 
mid-1998. 

Sakurai’s Object is the third ‘final helium flash’ star 
monitored so far. The first one was V605 Aql whose 
outburst and subsequent fading occurred during 1919- 
1923. Its characteristics were very similar to those of 
Sakurai’s Object. The second one, Fc saciTTAg, had a longer 
evolution time scale. It presumably underwent its final 
helium flash at the beginning of the 19th century, reached 
its maximum visual brightness in mid-1970, and faded in 
1992. 

Final helium flash stars are post-asymptotic giant 
branch (post-AGB) stars on their way to the WHITE DWARF 
stage which experience a late thermal instability in their 
helium burning shell. The blue compact post-AGB star 
evolves back to a RED GIANT configuration on a time scale 
of a few years to a few decades. As a result, its effective 
temperature decreases from above 90000 K to less than 
7000 K, but its bolometric luminosity is expected to remain 
more or less constant (after a possible rapid initial increase 
at the onset of outburst). The rapid increase in the visual 
magnitude by several orders of magnitude then essentially 
results from the surface color change. 

The current evolution of Sakurai’s Object on its way 
back to the red giant configuration is accompanied by a 
change in its surface chemical composition. Spectroscopic 
monitoring during 1996 reveals an important decrease 
of its hydrogen abundance by a factor of ten, while 
the abundances of some other elements, such as 
lithium or some elements heavier than iron, have 
meanwhile increased. The exact internal mixing and 
NUCLEOSYNTHESIS scenarios responsible for those surface 
abundance variations are still a matter of debate 
among astrophysicists, given the complexity of the 
structural evolution of those stars. In this context, the 
observed properties of Sakurai’s Object offer a unique 
opportunity to test our understanding of the physical and 
nucleosynthesis mechanisms at work in such stars. Final 
helium flash stars may furthermore provide important 
clues to understand the formation of R CORONAE BOREALIS 
(R CrB) stars as well as of some white dwarf stars. 


The final helium flash 

The rapid evolution of the photometric and spectroscopic 
properties of Sakurai’s Object is currently understood as 
resulting from the occurrence of a thermal instability in its 
interior. Such a thermal instability is a well established 
feature of AGB stars, the progenitors of final helium 
flash stars. It results from their double burning shell 
configuration, one of helium capped by one of hydrogen. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Those burning shells are very thin, the hydrogen burning 
shell having about 0.001 solar mass (M,) and the helium 
burning shell about 0.01 Mo. 

During most of the AGB lifetime, the stellar 
luminosity is supplied by the hydrogen burning shell. The 
helium synthesized in that burning shell accumulates in 
the helium burning shell, whose temperature eventually 
increases until a thermal runaway is triggered. The 
instability, also called helium flash (not to be confused 
with the core helium flash which develops in the electron 
degenerate central regions of low-mass stars at the onset 
of helium burning), liberates one hundred to one million 
times the stellar luminosity on a time span of only several 
tens to hundreds of years. That energy, however, is 
mainly absorbed by the intershell layers, and affects 
the surface luminosity only to a factor of two. The 
intershell layers are thus subject to important thermal and 
structural readjustments during the after-flash phase. In 
particular, the convective envelope may penetrate through 
the now extinct hydrogen burning shell into the C-rich 
layers, and bring to the surface ashes of helium burning 
nucleosynthesis. CARBON STARS, for example, are currently 
understood as resulting from the operation of a series of 
such dredge-ups. 

Those thermal instabilities (also called pulses) occur 
periodically in AGB stars on a time scale of 10° to 10° 
years, depending on the mass of the hydrogen-depleted 
core. When the star leaves the AGB, it evolves to the 
white dwarf stage on a time scale comparable to that of 
the interpulse phase. A ‘final’ helium flash may occur 
in that post-AGB stage if the star has not yet sufficiently 
cooled in the white dwarf configuration at the time the 
next instability is expected to occur. Current estimations 
predict the occurrence of such a final instability in about 
10% of post-AGB stars. 

The detailed structural and chemical evolution of 
post-AGB stars undergoing a final helium flash is not yet 
well understood. The current lack of model predictions for 
such stars is due to the difficulty of modeling adequately 
the chemical and energetic evolution of their intershell 
layers. In some cases indeed, such as presumably for 
Sakurai’s Object, the final helium flash is triggered at a 
late stage of the post-AGB phase, when the star is already 
fading to the white dwarf stage. In those conditions, the 
intershell mixing triggered by the helium flash may cross 
the now almost extinct hydrogen burning shell and reach 
the envelope. Hydrogen is consequently mixed from the 
surface down to the high temperatures characterizing the 
helium burning shell, and burns. The observed depletion 
of hydrogen at the surface of Sakurai’s Object may result 
from the operation of such a scenario. 


The planetary nebula 

The faint planetary nebula observed around Sakurai’s 
Object supports the idea of it being a final helium flash 
star. The measurement of the size of the planetary nebula 
(~ 40") and of its expansion velocity (~ 31 kms~') can lead 
to the determination of its age, or in other words of the time 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sakurai’s Object 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


) i De 
0G Pew fae’ 
25 ge Hee 1 
4 : 
r OV + 
6+ 4 
Aan . J 
| (a) V magnitude 
20 +4 
3 (b) B-V color i + 4 
a oe t 3 
1E a . 
EP sain olitid engi adths pt hiaaehib ti wi xieus oul ahpts nara ieee. 
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 
date 


Figure 1. Evolution of the V magnitude of Sakurai’s Object from 
1995 to 1999. Open symbols refer to pre-discovery estimates 
from Takamizawa’s photographic plates (http://www.kusastro. 
kyoto-u.ac.jp/vsnet), the triangle representing an upper limit. 
Filled circles are observations published in Astron. J. 114 1657, 
and in Astron. Lett. 24 248. Plus signs are measurements reported 
in several circulars of the International Astronomical Union. 


elapsed since Sakurai’s Object left the AGB, if we know 
the distance to the object. Based on an estimation of the 
absolute stellar magnitude from photoionization models 
of the nebula, a distance of five to eight kiloparsecs is found 
(see also next section). The planetary nebula would then 
havea radius of ~ 0.7 pc and an age of ~ 24000 years. This 
age is consistent with the time necessary for a post-AGB 
star to evolve from the tip of the AGB to the high surface 
temperatures (> 50000 K) required to ionize the nebula. 

It is worth mentioning that the planetary nebula 
around Sakurai’s Object was in fact searched for, and 
discovered, only after the object brightened, guided by 
the remarkable similarity of Sakurai’s Object to V605 Aql, 
the central star of the planetary nebula A 58. 


Luminosity and color variations 
The light curve of Sakurai’s Object in the V band is 
shown in figure 1(a). It has been followed in detail since 
Sakurai’s discovery in 1996 (filled circles in the figure), and 
reveals a continuous brightening of the star by about half a 
magnitude over the following 18 months. Superimposed 
on that steady visual magnitude increase, small amplitude 
variations (S 0.1 mag) are further detected on a time 
scale of few to 60 days (not visible in the figure). Those 
variabilities may be related to stellar pulsation modes 
triggered by the classical «-mechanism acting on the 
partial ionization zones in the envelope of Sakurai’s Object. 
When was the outburst of Sakurai’s Object initiated? 
The answer requires further information on the light curve 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of that object prior to Sakurai’s discovery. Fortunately, 
photographic records taken by Takamizawa during 1995 
enable one to extend the light curve in some detail 
up to one year prior to its discovery (open circles in 
figure 1(a). They confirm the general picture of the star’s 
rapid brightening. Moreover, the analysis of photographic 
plates in 1994 puts a lower limit on its visual magnitude 
(upper limit on its brightness) of 15 mag (open triangle in 
the figure), and locates the start of the outburst at the end 
of 1994, 

The rapid increase in visual magnitude after the 
outburst, by four stellar magnitudes over 500 days 
(figure 1(a)), is compatible with the picture of an 
expanding photosphere surrounding an object of constant 
luminosity. The radial expansion rate of the photosphere 
is estimated to be 0.05 solar radius (Ro) per day (i.e. 
1500 kmh"!) at burst, and twice this value in 1996. 
The expansion of the compact post-AGB star to a giant 
configuration is accompanied by a concomitant cooling 
of its photosphere. This cooling is attested by the 
change in the B — V color index as shown in figure 1(b). 
Photometric and spectroscopic measurements lead to 
effective temperatures of 8000 and 7000 K at the beginning 
and end of 1996, respectively, to be compared with an 
estimated temperature higher than 90 000 K before burst. 

A rapid increase of the luminosity may have occurred 
at the onset of the flash in 1995. The analysis of the remnant 
ionization of the planetary nebula around Sakurai’s Object 
indeed suggests that the luminosity of the pre-flash central 
object, then close to a white dwarf’s configuration, was 
of the order of one hundred times the solar luminosity 
(Lo). It must have rapidly reached 5000-10000 Lo after 
the outburst, and kept this value, to within a factor of three, 
during the subsequent expansion phase. The increase in 
the visual magnitude from 1996 to 1998 then mainly results 
from the change in color during that period. 

Knowledge of the distance to Sakurai’s Object 
would be an important ingredient in estimating its 
physical characteristics such as its absolute magnitude. 
Unfortunately, such information is difficult to derive 
from current observations. Several techniques have been 
applied to Sakurai’s Object, such as those based on its 
PROPER MOTION in the Galaxy, on the degree of interstellar 
extinction suffered by the light during its travel from 
the star to us, on the comparison of its luminosity with 
that of V605 Aql, or on the comparison of the observed 
characteristics of the star and of its nebula with those 
predicted by model calculations. Most of them lead to 
a distance estimation between 5 and 8 kiloparsecs, the 
latter value putting Sakurai’s Object in the bulge of our 
Galaxy. But even those values are still uncertain (a value of 
1.1 kpc has even been derived from the extinction method), 
and illustrate the difficulty of deriving accurate individual 
distances in astronomy. 

Comparison of the observed characteristics of 
Sakurai’s Object with the few available final-helium flash 
model predictions suggests a stellar mass between 0.7 and 
0.8 Mo, a luminosity between 5000 and 15000 Lo, and a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sakurai’s Object 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


radius between 50 and 100 Ro. Those data, however, still 
need to be confirmed by adequate helium flash model 
predictions. 

Sakurai’s Object dimmed dramatically, though irreg- 
ularly, from 1998 onward (plus signs in the figure), with 
M, increasing above 20 in 1999. The rapid fading is very 
similar to that observed in V605 Aql at the beginning of 
this century. It is attributed to the formation of dust in 
an extended shell around the star. This is attested to by 
the detection, already from mid 1997, of the CN and C, 
bands in the spectrum of Sakurai’s Object, and of a strong 
excess in the infrared emission. Photometry taken by the 
Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) in 1997 indeed showed 
an increase of the flux in the range 4-15 ym by a factor of 
about ten. The inferred mass loss from Sakurai’s Object 
reaches 10-7 Mo / yr. The extensive dust formation is very 
similar to that seen in R CrB stars. 


Surface abundances 

Most of the data currently available in the literature on 
the surface abundances of Sakurai’s Object were obtained 
in 1996. Sakurai’s Object is slightly metal-poor, with an 
iron mass fraction 0.2 to 1 dex below solar, and displays 
peculiar chemical composition compared to normal red 
giants. In general, the observed abundances confirm the 
double shell structure characteristic of AGB stars and the 
dredge-up scenario. 

Sakurai’s Object is first of all enriched in carbon, 
with [C/Fe] ~ 2.3 (the notation [X] stands for log X/Xo, 
where Xo is the solar abundance). The carbon enrichment 
can easily be explained by the operation of one or more 
dredge-up episodes when the star was on the AGB, the 
carbon being produced in the helium burning shell. Such 
a scenario is probably also the origin of the high oxygen 
([O/Fe] ~ 1.5), sodium ([Na/Fe] ~ 1.4), neon ([Ne/Fe] ~ 
2.4) and aluminum ([Al/Fe] ~ 1.1) abundances. Oxygen 
is produced directly in the helium burning shell, and 
sodium could be produced by successive dredge-up 
and hydrogen burning sequences. Reliable chemical 
abundance predictions, however, are still lacking and 
prevent a quantitative comparison with the abundances 
observed in Sakurai’s Object. 

Sakurai’s Object also reveals an important nitrogen 
abundance enhancement ([N/Fe] ~ 2.2), which must have 
its origin in the CNO cycles of hydrogen burning during 
the AGB phase. In order to lead to significant nitrogen 
production, however, the synthesis of nitrogen must have 
occurred directly in the convective envelope, requiring 
temperatures at the base of the envelope exceeding 50 x 
10° K. This scenario is further supported by the low #C/¥8C 
isotopic abundance ratio of 1.5-5 measured in Sakurai’s 
Object, which essentially points to the equilibrium value 
of the CNO cycle. 

A similar constraint is provided by the measurement 
of high lithium abundances in Sakurai’s Object. The 
most remarkable feature, however, is the rapid increase 
currently observed in the Li abundance, by 0.6 dex within 
four months in 1996. The scenario responsible for such 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


an increase invokes the production of beryllium in the 
hot (temperatures above 50 x 10° K) bottom layers of 
the envelope and its convective transport to the surface, 
where it transforms to lithium by electron capture. Such 
a scenario requires thus a subtle coupling of mixing and 
nucleosynthesis, which must currently be at work in 
Sakurai’s Object. 

Rapid abundance alterations are also recorded for 
other elements such as Sc, Ti, Cr, Zn, Rb and Y. 
The abundances of those heavy elements have indeed 
significantly increased by 0.6 to 1 dex between April and 
October 1996. Those particular elements are synthesized 
by neutron capture reactions (the so-called s-process, 
which is also responsible for a similar abundance pattern 
of heavy elements in S and C stars). The production of the 
required neutrons in the helium burning shell, however, 
imposes specific constraints on stellar models which are 
still matter of research. In this respect too, Sakurai’s Object 
provides a unique opportunity to test our understanding 
of those objects in particular, and of AGB stars in general. 

Last but not least, the hydrogen abundance of 
Sakurai’s Object was observed to decrease rapidly in 1996. 
In April of that year, it was already one hundred times 
lower than the hydrogen abundance in the Sun, and it 
decreased by another factor of ten during the next six 
months. The abundance pattern of Sakurai’s Object is 
actually very similar to those of RCrB stars. Those stars 
are characterized by very low hydrogen abundances and 
by unpredictable visual dimming effects. Both of those 
features are now displayed by Sakurai’s Object. We may 
thus be witnessing in Sakurai’s Object the birth of a new 
RCrB star, providing a clue to the formation of at least a 
fraction of those stars. 


Bibliography 

Given the recent discovery of Sakurai’s Object, further 
information should be sought in papers published in 
international astrophysical journals. The interested reader 
may look to the first papers on this object: 


Duerbeck H W and Benetti S 1996 Astrophys. J. Lett. 468 
L111 
Duerbeck H W et al 1997 Astron. J. 114 1657 


More information on the planetary nebula and on the 
distance derivation to Sakurai’s Object is presented by 


Jacoby G H et al 1998 Astron. J. 116 1367 
The past of that object before its burst is discussed by 
Kerber F et al 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 344 L79 


Information on the on the chemical abundances is given 
by 
Asplund M et al 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 343 507 


and on dust formation around Sakurai’s Object by 


Kerber F et al 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 350 L27 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sakurai’s Object ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Let us also mention a study of the relation between 
final helium flash stars and the formation of RCrB stars 
and hydrogen-deficient white dwarfs presented by 


Iben I Jr 1984 Astrophys. J. 277 333 


Nami Mowlavi 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Salpeter, Edwin Ernest (1924-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Salpeter, Edwin Ernest (1924-) 


Nuclear astrophysicist, born in Austria, emigrated to 
Australia and was educated in Sydney, and at Birmingham 
University. Became professor at Cornell University. 
Worked with HANS BETHE on atomic physics, and in 1951 
explained the ‘triple alpha’ reaction, also called the Salpeter 
process, which in red giant stars makes carbon-12 from 
three helium nuclei. This led him to investigate stellar 
evolution, and, from this theory and observations of stars 
of different luminosities, he worked back to the initial mass 
function, i.e. the rate of formation of stars of different mass 
in the Galaxy, now known as the Salpeter function. This 
important concept identifies a target for theories of star 
formation to explain. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sampex (Small, Anomalous and Magnetospheric 


; ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
Particle Explorer) 


Sampex (Small, Anomalous and 
Magnetospheric Particle Explorer) 


First of NASA's Small Explorer missions, launched 3 July 
1992. Designed to investigate cosmic rays, solar energetic 
particles and magnetospheric electrons. (See EXPLORER.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


San Fernando Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


San Fernando Observatory 


The San Fernando Observatory is located on the north 
side of the San Fernando Valley, approximately 30 miles 
northwest of downtown Los Angeles. It was built by 
the Aerospace Corporation in 1969 and donated to the 
California State University, Northridge, in 1976. 

The observatory has a variety of modern instruments. 
The main instrument is a 61/28 cm aperture vacuum 
telescope feeding a vacuum spectroheliograph. At 
present, the spectroheliograph is configured as a Video 
Spectro-Spectraheliograph (VSSHG). After the VSSHG 
completes a scan of an active region, the output consists 
of two data cubes, each of which has solar north-south 
and east—west as the x- and y-axes and wavelength as the 
z-axis. The two cubes have orthogonal polarizations. 

Other instruments are contained in the Little Dome. 
These are the full disk photometric telescopes: the 
Cartesian Full Disk Telescope no. 1 (CFDT1); Cartesian Full 
Disk Telescope no. 2 (CFDT2); and the Rotating Full Disk 
Photometer (RFDP). The CFDT telescopes obtain daily 
full-disk photometric images of the Sun. 

A separate 10 m high tower contains a folded 15 cm 
refracting telescope designed to study individual active 
regions at the diffraction limit of 1 arcsec. 

Research specialties are the measurement on a daily 
basis of solar variability due to sunspots and faculae 
and the study of the eruption and disappearance of solar 
magnetic flux, particularly in active regions. 

Support comes primarily from the federal govern- 
ment, both from the National Science Foundation and from 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The 
University provides some support for upkeep and main- 
tenance. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sandage, Allan Rex (1926-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sandage, Allan Rex (1926-) 


Astronomer, born in Iowa City, IA. Worked with 
WALTER BAADE and EDWIN HUBBLE, and became professor at 
Mount Wilson and Palomar observatories. His research 
has focused on the biggest problems in cosmology. 
He determined the ages of the stars in globular 
clusters (the oldest objects known, apart from the 
chemical elements). In 1960, with JESSE GREENSTEIN, he 
identified the radio source 3C48 as a blue star with an 
unusual, unidentifiable spectrum. After MAARTEN SCHMIDT'S 
breakthrough recognition of the nature of 3C273, this 
discovery by Sandage was recognized as the first quasar. 
Discovering many more quasars, Sandage worked on their 
properties. Realizing that the key question in cosmology 
was (and perhaps still is) the age and distance scale of 
the universe, he invested his career in the calibration of 
‘standard candles’ (Cepheids, supernovae, ...), used to 
determine the distances of remote galaxies, most recently 
using the Hubble Space Telescope, for which he prepared 
an influential preparatory atlas of galaxies. This has led 
him to progressively more accurate values of the Hubble 
constant and the deceleration parameter of the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saros 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saros 


The eclipse cycle of 18 years 11.3 days, after which the 
pattern of eclipses which occurred at the beginning of the 
cycle is quite closely repeated. The cycle was known in 
ancient Greek times and was used for eclipse prediction. 
The repetition is not perfect, however, as changes in the 
pattern increase with time. The cycle is almost exactly 
equal to the time taken for the nodes of the Moon’s orbit 
to make a complete circle of the Earth. After one cycle, the 
Sun, Moon, and nodes return almost to the same relative 
positions and it is the alignment of these which determines 
the occurrence of eclipses. As the relative positions of the 
bodies are slightly changed after each saros, an eclipse 
cycle ends after a number of saroses—approximately 71 
for solar eclipses and 48 for lunar. Each saros contains 
about 43 solar and 28 lunar eclipses. 


See also: eclipse, epoch. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sarpi, Paolo (1552-1623) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sarpi, Paolo (1552-1623) 


Born in Venice, and became a monk in the Servite order, 
rose to politically powerful positions in Venice. Came 
into conflict with the Pope in Rome over his defense of 
intellectual enquiry and religious freedom. Sarpi was 
a friend of GALILEO, discussing his work with him, and 
it was he who told Galileo about the reports from the 
Netherlands about telescopes, and brokered Galileo’s offer 
of a telescope to the Venetian government in 1609. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Satellite (Natural) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Satellite (Natural) 


In its most general sense, any celestial object in orbit 
around a similar larger object. Thus, for example, the 
Magellanic Clouds are satellite galaxies of our own Milky 
Way galaxy. Without qualification, the term is used to 
meana body in orbit around a planet; an alternative term is 
moon. The term natural satellite distinguishes these bodies 
from artificial satellites—spacecraft placed in orbit around 
the Earth or another celestial body. 

In the solar system, all the major planets except 
Mercury and Venus possess one or more satellites, and 
many of these are planetary bodies in their own right. 
Jupiter’s largest satellite, Ganymede, is bigger than 
Mercury, and seven solar system satellites are larger than 
Pluto. Saturn’s largest satellite, Titan, is the only one to 
possess a substantial atmosphere, with a surface pressure 
one and a half times the Earth’s; other large satellites are 
known to have rarefied atmospheres. Many show signs of 
present or past geological activity, and Jupiter’s Io is the 
most active body of all the planets and satellites in the solar 
system. The giant planets possess the lion’s share of the 
major planets’ complement of satellites: 60 of the 64 known 
for certain by 1999. Saturn and Uranus have the most, each 
with 18 confirmed (other minor satellites of Saturn and 
Uranus are suspected, and there are almost certainly minor 
satellites of the other giant planets awaiting discovery). A 
few asteroids, including (45) Eugenia and (243) Ida, have 
small satellites which have been directly imaged optically, 
while a number of others, including (4179) Toutatis, have 
been shown by techniques such as radar imaging to consist 
of two objects in close contact. The nucleus of Comet Hale— 
Bopp was found to have a small satellite in orbit around 
it. 

Planetary satellites may be categorized as regular or 
irregular, according to their orbit. Regular satellites are 
those in direct orbits, in the direction of the planet’s 
axial rotation, which are of low eccentricity and orbital 
inclination. Irregular satellites tend to be smaller, and 
follow orbits which are retrograde, or of high inclination, 
or show any combination of these properties. Whether 
satellites are regular or irregular also reflects their origin. 
Large regular satellites such as the Galilean satellites of 
Jupiter are believed to have condensed out of the same 
part of the solar nebula as their parent planet, from a 
protosatellite disk. The small and medium-sized regular 
satellites of Saturn are most likely collisional fragments 
of larger bodies. Uranus’s satellite system is inferred to 
have been formed by the impact that is surmised to have 
given the planet its extreme axial tilt. Likewise, the Earth’s 
Moon is believed to have accreted from the debris of a giant 
impact. Irregular satellites, such as Neptune’s Triton, and 
the outermost satellites of the other three giant planets, 
were acquired by gravitational capture. Triton is probably 
a captured Kuiper Belt object; the others are probably 
captured asteroids or extinct comet nuclei. Jupiter’s outer 
satellites fall into two groups, each representing a different 
capture mechanism. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturn 


Without its rings, Saturn looks like a pale JUPITER, with 
striking similarities to its giant sister (figure 1). As 
planetologists became more familiar with the structure of 
both planets, when they measured their thermal structure, 
composition and the zonal winds, this similarity appeared 
still more evident. However, important differences have 
been revealed as well. On the contrary, the other giants, 
URANUS and NEPTUNE, are more different, with 
atmospheric temperatures low enough to condense 
methane. It is therefore natural to list, as a starting point 
for the studies of Saturn’s atmosphere, the similarities 
and differences between Saturn and Jupiter, each one 
telling us more about the formation of planets in the 
external solar system. As a model, Jupiter is better 
understood than Saturn, because of proximity and 
because it was visited by an atmospheric probe in 1995. 
As expected, the Jupiter results would benefit the 
Saturnian studies, as illustrated by examples given below. 


Historical observations 

The observations of the disk of Saturn at the beginning of 
telescopic observations, in the 17th century, were 
rendered difficult by the presence of the rings, which 
perturbed even simple observations of the shape of the 
planet (see SATURN: RINGS). The flattening of the planet 
was measured by William Herschel only in 1789, when 


Figure 1. This unusual view of Saturn has been processed from 
an image taken by the HST Wide Field Planetary Camera 
(STScI-PRC96-16) on 17 November 1995. The rings have been 
artificially erased, and the equatorial region has been filled to 
eliminate all trace of the rings. Credit NASA. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the rings were observed on their edge, a configuration 
repeated only every 14 yr. The fainter contrast of 
atmospheric features, compared with Jupiter, precluded 
also the observation of any atmospheric structure before 
1676, when Gian Domenico Cassini discovered the 
existence of an equatorial belt. The period of rotation was 
accurately measured later in 1790 by Herschel. Accurate 
telescopic observations on a regular basis have now 
permitted the constitution of a planetary database, used 
for the study of long-term evolution of atmospheric 
features, such as the global storms discussed below. 
However, only few individual atmospheric spots were 
observed before the space age. After the Pioneer 1] 
observations in 1979, which gave important information 
about thermal structure and magnetospheric emissions, 
the Voyager observations in 1980-1981 provided the first 
accurate tracking of individual spots in the atmosphere, 
and the differential rotation of Saturn could be measured 
for the first time. The development of ultrasensitive 
charged coupled devices has since permitted a continuous 
monitoring of Saturn’s long-lived individual spots with 
ground-based telescopes and the Hubble Space 
Telescope. 


Description 

The physical and orbital parameters of Saturn are given 
in table 1, with comparison with Jupiter. These 
parameters give a first constraint to the models of 
formation of Saturn. Such models can predict the thermal 
evolution of a giant planet, given its initial mass and 
composition. In the list, the effective temperature is an 
important parameter, as it is related to the energy budget 
of the planet. It can be defined as the temperature of 


Table 1. Jupiter and Saturn, the sister planets. 


Jupiter Saturn 
Revolution period 11.9 yr 29.6yr 
Mass 1.899 x 10°’ kg 0.568 x 10°” 
Equatorial radius 71 492 km 60 268 km 
(at 1 bar) 
Flattening 6.48% 9.80% 
Rotation period 9h50 mn 30s 10h 39 mn 22 s 
(magnetic field) 
Atmospheric He 0.234 0.06" 
mass fraction (Y) 
Mean density 1.33 gem? 0.70 gcm* 
Equilibrium 109.5 K 82.4K 
temperature 
Effective 124.4K 95.0 K 
temperature 
Emitted/received 1.67 1.78 
energy 
Gravity at the 22.9ms~ 9.1ms~ 
equator (1 bar) 
Obliquity 3° 27° 


“ from Galileo. 
° from Voyager. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a black body that would radiate on average the same 
amount of energy per surface unit as the planet itself. The 
effective temperature is higher than the equilibrium 
temperature, the temperature of a planet heated solely by 
the Sun. An important result of the Pioneer and Voyager 
missions was an accurate measurement of the radiative 
budget of Saturn and of the excess energy due to an 
internal source. In the case of Saturn, the internal heat 
magnitude is found to be comparable with the amount 
absorbed from the Sun. 

The important fact that both Jupiter and Saturn emit 
more energy to space than received from the Sun has 
implications for their internal structure. The excess 
energy can come either from a residual contraction of the 
planet, transforming gravitational energy to heat, which 
is in turn radiated to the space, or from a compositional 
fractionation. In the latter case, some heavy elements, 
especially helium, fall to Saturn’s core, again dissipating 
the gravitational energy. The last process cannot take 
place within the upper fluid atmosphere, where the gas or 
liquid phase of normal hydrogen is uniformly mixed with 
other gases. At high pressures (3-5 Mb) in the interior of 
Saturn, hydrogen changes to a metallic state, helium 
condenses to a liquid state and fractionates from the 
former. 

The fact that, despite a lower mass, the diameter of 
Saturn is close to that of Jupiter is also understandable 
from the internal structure of the planet. The thermal 
history of Saturn is different from that of Jupiter, owing 
to the different mass and distance to the Sun. The 
difference in the abundance of helium between Saturn 
and Jupiter, as measured by Voyager, can be understood 
if the separation of helium took place earlier on Saturn 
than on Jupiter. Some recent measurements have 
questioned the accuracy of the helium abundance of 
Saturn. New estimates give a helium abundance closer to 
the original H/He of the solar nebula, although still lower 
than that on Jupiter. The question of the internal structure 
of the giant planets is therefore still largely uncertain, and 
further measurements are highly desirable to improve the 
models. 


Planetary formation 
The formation of a giant planet from the original solar 
nebula is described by modeling the accretion 
mechanisms in the first stages of the solar system. The 
scenario has been assembled from various constraints, in 
particular on the composition, internal structure and the 
shape. Many details remain to be refined, but a general 
agreement between various models is as follows. 

The first step begins with the ACCRETION of a core of 
icy PLANETESIMALS and grains of dust up to about 10 
Earth masses, with a composition thought to be similar to 
that of the KUIPER BELT objects, which form a belt of icy 
asteroids beyond the orbit of Neptune, or to some comets 
that are observed in the inner solar system. With a core of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


this size, the gas of the solar nebula itself begins to be 
accreted in the protoplanet, resulting in a fast growth of 
the planet until its final mass, reached when all the 
available material in the vicinity of the core has been 
accreted. The entire process could be completed in only a 
few million years. This scenario has been confirmed by 
the measurements of the heavy elements on Jupiter made 
by the GALILEO probe. Furthermore, the similarity 
between Saturn and Jupiter suggests a similar formation 
scenario for Saturn also. In the case of Jupiter, the 
measured composition gives a comparable enhancement 
for the elements C, S, N, Ar, Kr and Xe compared with 
the solar nebula. This result rules out older models that 
propose homogeneous accretion in the solar nebula, 
which would imply a global composition of the planets 
similar to the solar nebula. It also rules out models 
involving planetesimals which would have experienced a 
differentiation in their ice contents, the most volatile 
compounds, such as nitrogen, being lost during thermal 
processing of pristine ices. Once formed, the new planet 
slowly cools down, and some constituents, such as 
helium, begin to sediment when the temperature is cold 
enough. The timeline of the evolution of Saturn will be 
dependent on the convection in the interior and the heat 
release from the interior. A determination of its present 
state, in particular the He/H) ratio, will therefore help to 
constrain the models of evolution. 


Interior 

The interior of Saturn can be probed indirectly by 
measurements of the gravity field, the composition, 
thermal structure, heat flow and magnetic field. The 
models of the interior are based on the high-pressure 
thermodynamics of hydrogen—helium mixtures, which 
can be computed from first principles of physics, but 
unfortunately only with large uncertainties. Laboratory 
experiments are necessary to explore this poorly 
understood high-pressures physics. A terra incognita is 
the region of metallic hydrogen, a still hypothetical phase 
of high-pressure hydrogen where H, molecules can 
exchange their electrons becoming _ electrically 
conductive. Unfortunately, the experiments hardly reach 
the margin of this region. The interior of Saturn exhibits 
very large pressures, ranging between 0 and almost 50 
Mbar (1 Mbar is one million Earth atmospheric 
pressures) at the center, and temperatures rising to about 
10 000 K. Let us imagine a journey towards the interior 
of Saturn. Starting from the external layers, we encounter 
first the boundary between metallic hydrogen and 
molecular hydrogen envelope at about 2.8 Mbar, at about 
half the radius of Saturn. Is the change in density at the 
boundary large enough to generate giant waves, like at 
the surface of a monstrous ocean? Nobody knows. 
Deeper in the planet we find a boundary between an ice 
core, enriched in He, and the hydrogen-rich envelope at 
about three-quarters of the way into Saturn’s interior. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Finally, a rock core is expected to be located at 0.88 of 
Saturn’s radius towards the centre. The mass of this 
central core is estimated at between 0 and 10 Earth 
masses, and current models do not even rule out the 
possibility that it could be totally absent, the heavy 
elements being diluted in the other parts of the planet, 
although this case is not considered as the most probable. 

The separation of helium from hydrogen takes place 
in the region where helium condenses to liquid and 
hydrogen turns to metallic hydrogen, according to the 
theoretical models of the equation of state of hydrogen. 
The upper atmosphere also becomes depleted in helium 
and relatively enriched in hydrogen, and the fall of 
helium droplets into the interior releases gravitational 
energy, contributing partly to the source of internal heat. 
On Jupiter the separation process started later than on 
Saturn, according to the model, because of the higher 
temperatures experienced at Jupiter. Effectively, the 
depletion of helium measured by Galileo is only 
marginally smaller than the solar nebula abundance. On 
Saturn, there has been a recent reevaluation of the He/H, 
ratio; new measurements seem to indicate less depletion 
in helium than the first Voyager measurements, listed in 
table 1, but they still show a substantial depletion. 


Thermal structure 

The thermal structure of Saturn is again very similar to 
that of Jupiter, with differences attributable to the larger 
distance to the Sun. Several techniques are used to 
remotely retrieve the thermal profile of Saturn. One is the 
use of a stellar or solar OCCULTATION, when a star (or the 
Sun) is eclipsed behind Saturn: the extinction curve of 
the light when observed through denser and denser 
atmospheric levels gives a measure of the vertical 
variation of density. From the density curve, one can 
retrieve the temperature with height, or pressure in the 
upper atmosphere. Another technique is the inversion of 
infrared spectra where a well-known constituent, such as 
CH,, absorbs with spectral characteristics depending on 
the temperature. Combining these techniques, together 
with infrared and radio science data, it has been possible 
to probe the atmosphere in the pressure range from 1| bar 
to 0.001 mbar. An extrapolation of the profiles extends 
the thermal profiles to lower or higher atmospheric 
regions. 

Like the atmosphere of Jupiter, Saturn’s upper 
atmosphere can be separated into two domains, with 
opposite temperature gradients: the troposphere, where 
temperature is increasing downwards, and _ the 
stratosphere, with temperature increasing upwards (see 
PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). The boundary between them 
is called the tropopause, a layer located between 60 and 
100 mbar, at a temperature of 80 K (or —193 °C). The 
presence of a minimum temperature in the atmosphere at 
the tropopause is due to the absorption of solar energy by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


methane in the upper atmosphere, which heats the upper 
stratospheric layers. 

The heat is dissipated mainly by two processes in a 
planetary atmosphere: convection transports heat through 
atmospheric turbulent motions and radiation transports 
heat by the thermal (mainly infrared) radiation through 
the atmosphere, if it is transparent enough. To the first 
approximation, convection in the troposphere and 
radiation in the stratosphere are the dominant 
mechanisms of heat transport. In the troposphere, 
convection maintains a constant gradient in the 
temperature, with a regular increase of about 0.8 K km‘! 
below the clouds. In the stratosphere, the atmosphere is 
stable against convection, since the upper layers are 
hotter than the lower, and heat is transported by radiation 
(or also by more complex dynamical processes like 
atmospheric waves, as discussed below). 

The reality could be more complex than described 
here. In particular, the presence of a radiative layer, 
below the clouds, within the tropopause has been recently 
predicted: the presence of such a layer, where the 
atmosphere would be stable against convection in 
contradiction to the above description, as in the 
stratosphere, would have important implications for the 
transport of heat from the interior of Jupiter or Saturn to 
the observable layers. A better knowledge of the external 
composition, cloud structure and the radiative opacity of 
the atmosphere will be needed to complete such models. 

The upper atmosphere of Saturn is dominated by 
other processes. A large temperature increase is observed 
in the upper atmosphere, at the microbar level and above, 
with the temperature reaching a constant value at high 
altitude, called the exospheric temperature. Two main 
mechanisms could be responsible for this heating, which 
is also observed in the stratosphere and thermosphere of 
other giant planets. 

An explanation could be the deposition of energy by 
charged particles from the magnetosphere (see SATURN: 
MAGNETOSPHERE). In contrast to Jupiter, in the case of 
Saturn the deposited energy seems too low to explain the 
high exospheric temperature. It has been proposed that 
the ionosphere could also be traversed by high electrical 
currents whose dissipation would heat the atmosphere. 
An internal origin of the heating is also possible. Heating 
by internal waves, produced in the deep atmosphere and 
dissipating their energy in the upper atmospheric layers 
of the order of 1 pbar, has been proposed. This model is 
very attractive, as it also takes into account several 
measurements of the turbulence in the giant planets. 


Composition 

The general composition of Saturn is given in table 2, 
where the measurements have been taken from various 
ground-based and space observations, in particular from 
Voyager and ISO spacecraft. Even though compounds 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Composition of Saturn’s atmosphere. 


Molecule Mole fraction relative to H, 

Hydrogen (H) 1 

Helium (He) 0.034 

Methane (CH,) 45x10? 

Ammonia‘ (NH3) (1-6) x 104 

Water“ (H,O) Still below the saturation 
vapor pressure at 3 bar 

Phosphine? (PH) 45x 10° 

Monodeuterated methane 3.25 x 107 

(CH3D) 

Carbon monoxide (CO) 1.65 x 10° 

Arsine’ (AsH3) 35x 10° 

Germane” (GeH,) 55x 101° 

Ethane (CH) 35 x 10° (stratosphere) 

Acetylene (C,H») 2.15 x 1077 (stratosphere) 

Carbon dioxide (CO.) 3 x 107'° (stratosphere) 

Benzene (C¢H¢) (Stratosphere) 

Methyl radical (CH;) (Stratosphere) 


For species vertically varying by “ condensation or ? photo- 
chemical destruction, the current estimate of the deep 
abundance has been listed. 

From Atreya et al 1999 Planet. Space Sci. The abundance 
measurements are given with very large uncertainty, even for 
the major constituents (He, CH,). 


heavier than helium constitute less than 0.2% of the 
atmosphere of Saturn (by volume), they are important in 
the energy balance of radiation, because hydrogen and 
helium are poor radiative emittors. Methane, for 
example, controls mainly the thermal structure of the 
stratosphere, despite its low abundance. Other 
compounds, such as phosphine (PH;) are found only at a 
few ppm but also have pronounced effects on the 
spectrum of Saturn. Access to the composition of 
Saturn’s atmosphere is limited by remote sensing to the 
outer layers, at pressures lower than 10 bar. The physical 
processes affecting the composition are of two origins: 
thermochemical reactions in the troposphere and 
photochemical reactions in the stratosphere. 


Thermochemical reactions 

Thermochemical reactions equilibrate to produce an 
average composition. A typical example is_ the 
conversion of carbon compounds between CH, and CO, 
through the reaction 


CH, +H,0 = CO +3H:. 


At temperatures lower than 2000 K, CH, is the dominant 
carbon-containing species, but, as temperature increases, 
the production of CO becomes more important. At the 
low temperatures of the atmospheres of the outer planets, 
thermodynamics would predict the presence of CH, only. 
Nevertheless, CO was observed in the atmosphere of 
Saturn, in 1985. One possible explanation for this 
observation is the presence of an out-of-equilibrium 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


phenomenon, where kinetics of reaction is taken into 
account and not only the final equilibrium. The 
conversion of CO to CH, is inhibited at the low 
temperatures of the upper troposphere, because the above 
reaction is slow. If CO can be transported rapidly enough 
to atmospheric regions where the reaction rate becomes 
insignificant, it will remain unaffected, because of a too- 
slow kinetics. This mechanism, called quenching, 
transports a compound to a region of low reactivity, even 
if thermodynamic equilibrium seems to be violated. 
Indeed, on Saturn, the observed tropospheric composition 
is far from equilibrium. Disequilibrium species, such as 
PH3, GeH, and AsH3, have been observed on Saturn. PH; 
is particularly dominant, because of its strong bands in 
the infrared. These compounds are tracers of the 
composition of heavy elements compared with hydrogen 
and helium. For example, the phosphorus elemental ratio 
is found to be 5-10 times greater than on the Sun 
(according to submillimeter and infrared measurements), 
implying a composition of Saturn’s atmosphere highly 
enriched in heavy elements. Similar enhancements seen 
for several compounds favor an inhomogeneous 
accretion scenario for the formation of Saturn, as 
discussed above. 


Photochemical reactions 

The stratosphere is accessible to UV photons, and 
photochemistry becomes a dominant process, with a 
completely different chemistry, compared with most of 
the troposphere. Each molecule is sensitive to a specific 
range of UV wavelengths, which penetrate to different 
depths, and the photochemical reactions start at different 
levels, for different molecules such as NH;3, PH; and 
CH,. The photochemistry of CH, is found at the 
uppermost levels in the atmosphere, with the production 
of heavier hydrocarbons such as CH», CoH, and C,H, 
initially. These compounds, in turn, absorb the solar UV, 
dissociate, react with other molecules and form more 
complex products. Heavier hydrocarbons can ultimately 
condense in the stratosphere, and they are thought to be 
part of the stratospheric hazes. At deeper levels, NH3 and 
PH; compounds are also photolyzed, with a production of 
N2Hy or P2Hy; such compounds could also be an 
important source of haze particles. 

A recent and unexpected discovery by the ISO 
satellite has given new insight into the complex processes 
of the photochemistry of the upper layers in Saturn’s 
atmosphere. ISO observations have shown the presence 
of CO, and H,0O in the stratosphere. Oxygen compounds 
coming from the interior are efficiently trapped at the 
tropopause, as condensation of H,O, the main reservoir 
of oxygen at Saturn, prevents water vapor from reaching 
the stratosphere in significant amounts. ISO observations 
suggest that there is an influx of external oxygen, coming 
probably from dust particles of the interplanetary 
medium, falling into the atmosphere of Saturn (as well as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


into the other giant planets and Titan), or from the rings 
of Saturn. The presence of water and carbon dioxide 
strongly modifies the photochemistry, with different 
reactions with methane byproducts and the possibility of 
forming other constituents. From ISO observations, an 
average flux of 12 000 tons of material per day over 
Saturn has been estimated. The photochemical reactions 
between oxygen and carbon compounds can also become 
much richer than with pure methane in a hydrogen 
environment, with the possible production of many 
organic molecules, such as fomaldehyde (H2CO). 


Clouds 

The giant planets exhibit many meteorological features 
and a large variety of cloud structures, apparent in 
telescopic observations (figure 2). The clouds appear 
when atmospheric gaseous compounds condense into 
liquids or solids at the cold temperatures found in the 
upper atmosphere (see CLOUDS IN PLANETARY 
ATMOSPHERES). As on the Earth, water clouds are 
expected in the troposphere, but the water clouds are 
hidden by upper cloud layers on Saturn. Above the water 
cloud, thermodynamic calculations predict the presence 
of two overlying layers, one cloud of ammonium 
hydrosulfide, NH4SH, and another of ammonia ice, NH3. 
The latter, an ammonia cirrus, is probably ubiquitous 
over Saturn’s atmosphere, with an opacity varying with 
local meteorology. Individual clouds and spots seen in 
some images are probably the result of the lower less 
uniform cloud layers. The main difficulty in the 
interpretation of cloud structure is that the atmosphere is 
usually not in thermodynamic equilibrium, as we already 
know from the composition. To form a cloud, it is 
necessary not only to be at or below the condensation 
point but also to have nuclei of small particles to 
initiate the growth of cloud drops or crystals. A 
cloud is formed in a perpetual competition between 
small growing particles and large sedimenting particles. 


Figure 2. Saturn in false color from the NICMOS camera of the 
HST (STScI-PRC98-18). The false-color image shows 
indications of cloud layers. Green and yellow colors are 
sensitive to hazes above the cloud layers. Red and orange colors 
are sensitive to high clouds reaching the top of the atmosphere. 
Blue colors are an indication of a clear atmosphere down to the 
main cloud layer. Credit NASA. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The optical properties of the clouds largely depend on an 
extraordinarily complex microphysics, not always fully 
understood even in terrestrial water clouds. On Jupiter, 
the Galileo probe has shown that thermodynamically 
predicted clouds were probably present, but with 
different structure and altitude to what was thought 
before, because of local meteorological conditions. 
Above the main cloud layers, a haze of small particles is 
present on Saturn as well as on Jupiter. 

Remote sensing observations of Jupiter and Saturn 
can measure with a reasonable accuracy the vertical 
distribution of small haze particles in the upper 
atmosphere, but the origin of the colors and morphology 
seen in the images remains mysterious. Minor 
constituents could possibly populate the clouds. These 
minor constituents (sulfur, phosphorus, etc) could be 
responsible for the coloration of Saturn’s clouds. The 
structure of the clouds is also responsible for the different 
aspects of Saturn when seen at different wavelengths. 
Observations in a methane filter, where light is strongly 
absorbed by the atmosphere, are limited to the uppermost 
layers of the atmosphere. The regions of high clouds are 
therefore seen with better contrast. In the northern 
regions, an enhanced absorption is found in the UV. It is 
attributed to the presence of a polar haze. This haze could 
be formed by heavy hydrocarbons, generated by 
precipitating particles in the auroral regions, as on 
Jupiter, and condensing in the low temperatures of the 
lower stratosphere. 


Photometric properties of clouds 

The cloud structure has important effects on the radiative 
budget of Saturn. Variations in reflectivity govern the 
global absorption and reflection of the solar flux. Opacity 
variations also influence the reabsorption of the thermal 
flux inside the atmosphere, with pronounced 
consequences for the thermal structure. 

To retrieve the atmospheric structure from 
photometric observations, one method is to measure 
center-to-limb variation: by measuring the variation of 
reflectivity along a parallel on Saturn’s disk, vertical 
variations of the cloud structure are inferred. The 
scattering by small particles is observed at higher 
altitudes in the atmosphere close to the limb than at the 
central meridian, because of the more vertical path of the 
photons coming from the Sun at the center of the disk. 
The cloud structure of Saturn is found to be 
homogeneous in longitude, and variations occur mostly 
with latitude, as is apparent in the usual images in the 
visible, from ground-based or space missions (Voyager, 
HST). 


Meteorology 

As on Jupiter, the wind system on Saturn consists of a 
longitudinal banded structure, with strong westward winds at 
the equator, limited by eastward jets north and south. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturnian cloud bands correspond roughly, although not 
exactly, to a system of easterly—westerly jets. The equatorial 
wind speeds are as high as 500 ms”, 4 times larger than on 
Jupiter, and directed in the sense of rotation. There is still no 
general agreement about the origin of these winds. On Jupiter, 
the Galileo probe measurements have shown that strong 
winds persist down to pressure levels of at least 20 bar, below 
the levels where solar energy has been deposited. It has been 
proposed that the internal heat source is the most likely source 
of these deep winds. The banded structure, on the other hand, 
is believed to be caused by convective motions in the form of 
columnar cells, chaotically built and destroyed permanently. 
Even though no completely realistic models of the dynamics 
of giant planets have been constructed yet, laboratory 
measurements on convection in rotating spherical shells show 
some similarities to the banded structure seen on the giant 
planets. At first glance, these experiments tend to support 
models explaining the wind structure by global convection in 
the whole planetary interior (or at least the upper part of the 
atmosphere above the metallic hydrogen transition). Another 
class of models explain the appearance of the giant planets by 
dynamical forcing by solar energy deposition. Even if solar 
energy is deposited at the external boundary, over long time 
scales the entire atmosphere can be moved as well. A 
competition between internal energy release and solar heating 
is probably at work, but the hydrodynamical problems pose a 
challenge to our current knowledge. Without a global model 
of atmospheric motions, the meteorology of Saturn remains 
mostly confined to a more phenomenological description of 
atmospheric structure. 


Spots 

There is no feature on Saturn like the Great Red Spot on 
Jupiter, but several small ovals of various colors have 
been observed by Voyager (figure 3). At the time of 
Voyager observations, some symmetric, anticyclonic 
brown ovals (rotating clockwise in the northern 
hemisphere) were situated at 42°N, 5000 km x 3000 km 
in size. These spots have flows similar to the Jovian 
White Oval Spots. A unique structure present on Saturn 
during the Voyager epoch was a ribbon-like structure, 
located at 46°N, and described as a dark, wavy line 
moving at about 150 m s_' eastward (figure 3). A so- 
called vortex street has also been observed. It represents 
a line of vortex with alternate direction of rotation, 
usually formed in turbulent flow in the wake of an 
obstacle. Generally, Saturn’s atmosphere looks less 
active than Jupiter’s. It must be noticed that the activity 
of the planet is observed through the cloud motions. 
Since clouds on Saturn are located deeper, owing to 
temperatures colder at corresponding pressure levels of 
Jupiter, they are more obscured by the overlying 
stratospheric hazes. Comparisons of the Jovian and 
Saturnian cloud activities should therefore be made 
cautiously. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Spots on Saturn: image from Voyager 2 (Voyager 2, 
P-23919) in the northern temperate belt, showing an elongated 
atmospheric disturbance in Saturn’s atmosphere on 20 August 
1981. Credit NASA. 


Storms 

One of the most striking differences in Saturn’s 
meteorology compared with Jupiter is the periodic 
appearance of large storms on the former. Several events 
have been observed since 1876, showing an apparent 
periodicity related to the seasons of Saturn. Observations 
of such phenomena were made subsequently in 1903, 
1933 and 1960. The last event was observed in 1990, and 
an image of Saturn soon after the beginning of the 
disturbance is shown in figure 4. The interpretation of 
these storms remains mysterious. They could correspond 
to a large convective cloud, originating deep in the 
atmosphere and redistributing a large amount of water to 
high altitudes. This cloud could therefore be compared to 
the equatorial plumes of Jupiter, which are also thought 
to correspond to water clouds, regularly spaced along the 
equator, and are present permanently. Another difference 
in the case of Saturn is the latitude of the storms, which 
varies from 5° to 58° (in 1960). If Saturn’s storms are 
indeed convective water clouds, they would correspond 
to intermittent convection, with plume generation, as 
opposed to the more regular and permanent pattern of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. A giant storm on Saturn: image from Pic du Midi 
observatory, from October 1990, a few days after the 
emergence of a giant storm in equatorial regions. Several rare 
structures are seen in the northern regions also. 


Jupiter. Such phenomena are indeed observed in the 
laboratory in experiments on convection. A difference in 
the thermal structure of Saturn, as compared with Jupiter, 
would result in differences in the convective activity. The 
observation of this storm was useful in completing the 
measurements of the wind field in the equatorial regions, 
which were obscured by the rings at time of the Voyager 
observations, but not in 1990 from ground-based 
observations. 


FAfot spots 

One of the better-known features in Jupiter’s atmosphere 
are the 5 um hot spots. One of these is where the Galileo 
probe entered Jupiter’s atmosphere. These spots are very 
bright in thermal emission at 5 um. They represent 
regions of very low humidity, high transparency and low 
cloud coverage. On Saturn, there seem to be no features 
like Jupiter’s hot spots. Water in the troposphere of 
Saturn has been measured from the ISO satellite, which 
found a very low water abundance. As for Jupiter, it has 
been attributed to some meteorological processes which 
decrease the water content of the atmosphere, as in 
Earth’s deserts. The observation of an average low 
humidity despite the absence of hot spots seems therefore 
to argue for a different model of meteorology on Saturn 
than to that on Jupiter. 


North polar regions 

A special mention must be made about the north polar 
regions of Saturn. The Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft 
recorded a strange hexagonal structure of clouds in the 
northern latitudes, and the presence of a particular spot, 
the North Polar Spot, named “Big Bertha’ by the Voyager 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


imaging team. Since Voyager, this spot has been 
observed from the HST and from the ground, allowing 
planetary astronomers to follow its motion over a long 
period of time (figure 4). 


Seasonal effects 

Because of the 27° inclination of its axis, the north and 
south polar regions are alternatively in shadow during 
part of the orbital period of Saturn. Despite this long 
interval of 13 yr, no substantial effects are expected in 
the deep atmosphere, because the response time of the 
deep atmosphere to illumination conditions is much 
smaller than the orbital period, for pressures greater than 
several bars. The appearance of large storms seems to be 
periodic and could be related to Saturnian seasons, as 
mentioned above. Major seasonal effects are expected 
only in the stratosphere. The stratospheric thermal 
structure also depends on illumination effects and could 
exhibit seasonal variations. Indeed, the stratospheric 
temperatures measured by Voyager showed a difference 
in temperature at the 150 mbar level, the southern 
hemisphere being 6-8 K warmer than the northern, 
consistent with the modeling. Models of temperature 
variations predict a delay in the temperature response of 
the atmosphere subject to seasonal forcing, with 
maximum temperatures shifted by about one-sixth of a 
Saturnian year at 150 mbar. Finally, there is a possible 
influence of thermal effects on the underlying cloud 
structure, through the variation of the upper haze and the 
condensation of potential compounds of the stratospheric 
haze, such as N>H, and P,Hy, or the heavy hydrocarbons. 


Aurorae 

Although less intense than Jupiter’s, Saturn’s magnetic 
field also produces a large variety of magnetospheric 
effects. One of them affects the atmosphere. The 
observation of auroral emissions (see AURORA) in an 
atmosphere corresponds to the precipitation of charged 
particles from the magnetosphere, guided along the 
magnetic field lines and falling into the atmosphere. 
Saturn’s strong magnetic field is, as for Jupiter, 
associated with auroral effects, mainly represented by the 
emissions of hydrogen molecules and ionospheric 
byproducts, in particular H;”. The emissions of hydrogen 
molecules and atoms can be seen only from space, as in 
figure 5 observed from the HST. These emissions are 
located along ovals, whose pattern is directly related to 
the geometry of the magnetic field. As on Jupiter, a 
complete oval is observed in the H, bands. Auroral 
emissions on Saturn have also been observed from the 
ground in the infrared through the emission of a 
molecular ion present in the ionosphere, H;". The aurorae 
on Saturn correspond to a total deposition of energy 
estimated to be 10'' W, about 100-1000 times 
fainter than on Jupiter. Unlike Jupiter, where the internal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. HST aurorae on Saturn (STScI-PRC98-05). Image of 
ultraviolet aurora, taken from the HST Imaging Spectrograph in 
October 1997. Credit NASA. 


magnetosphere is populated by particles produced by the 
Galilean satellites, Saturn’s aurorae are more dependent 
on the SOLAR WIND, which is 4 times fainter at Saturn 
because of the distance to the Sun. Saturn appears 
therefore as an intermediate case between Jupiter and the 
Earth for auroral processes. 


Future observations 

The Cassini spacecraft will enter the Saturnian system in 
2004 and will provide extensive observations of Saturn, 
its moons (see SATURN: SATELLITES) and its rings. 
Although Titan is considered as the main objective of the 
Cassini&ndash;Huygens mission, the atmosphere of 
Saturn will also be extensively observed by remote 
sensing instruments during the mission. Several 
objectives are expected to be satisfied from this mission 
from the close study of composition variations and of the 
dynamics of the system. Unprecedented spatial resolution 
will be obtained on the cloud features, the cloud structure 
will be observed at angles inaccessible from the Earth 
and the night side of Saturn will reveal the thermal 
emission without contamination by the solar reflection 
which affects ground-based measurements. Many of the 
open questions mentioned above should find a solution 
after the Cassini observations, and many others will 
probably arise. 


Web update 

The discovery of twelve new moons of Saturn brings the 
planet’s total to 30: the most in the Solar System. The 
new moons vary between about 6 and 30 km in diameter, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and are moving in irregular, tilted orbits. They fall into 
several clusters, leading Brett Gladman, of the 
Observatoire de la Cote d’Azur, Nice, France, and 
colleagues to conclude that they are the remnants of 
larger satellites that have been fragmented by collisions. 
The moons probably began life as wandering bodies that 
were captured by Saturn’s gravity. Gladman and 
colleagues found the moons by scanning Saturn with 
sophisticated electronic detectors mounted on medium- 
sized, ground-based telescopes. 


Bibliography 

Atreya S K 1986 Atmospheres and Ionospheres of the Outer 
Planets and their Satellites (Berlin: Spinger) 

Gehrels (ed) 1984 Saturn (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 


Special issue on Galileo: 
1996 Science 272 (10 May) 


Special issue on Jupiter and Saturn (see example articles by 
Atreya et al and Encrenaz et al: 
1999 Planet. Space Sci. 47 (16 December) 


ISO results: 
P Cox and M Kessler (ed) 1999 The Universe as Seen by ISO 
(ESA SP-427) (Nordwijk: ESTEC) 


Web sites 
Cassini mission: http://www. jpl.nasa. gov/cassini/ 
Galileo mission: http://www. jpl.nasa.gov/galileo/ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Planetary Data System: http://www.pds.nasa.gov/ 
pds_home.html 
Pierre Drossart 
8 


Saturn Nebula (NGC 7009) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturn Nebula (NGC 7009) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Aquarius, position 
RA 215 04.4™, dec. —11° 22’. It measures 25” and shines 
with a greenish hue. It is of eighth magnitude and for a 
planetary nebula has a high surface brightness. Two small 
lobes on either side give it the appearance of the planet 
Saturn. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


Perhaps the most awe-inspiring sight in our solar system, 
which can be appreciated by even a modest telescope, is 
that of the planet sATuRN, with its banded atmosphere and 
delicate ring system. Saturn is the sixth planet away from 
the Sun ata distance of 9.5 AU. Saturn is the second-largest 
planet in our solar system after JUPITER with a radius of 
60330 km (defined as 1Rs), and has a rapid rotation rate 
of 10 h and 39.4 min. This rapid rotation rate generates a 
centrifugal force that causes the equatorial regions of the 
planet to bulge outwards and the poles to flatten. Saturn 
is the least dense of all the planets and does not have a 
solid surface. Instead the planet consists of an enormous 
sphere of gas that gradually compresses to liquid deep 
beneath the clouds. 

The rings of Saturn were first observed by Galileo in 
1610, although because of the poor quality of his telescope 
he did not recognize them as such. He initially declared 
that Saturn consisted of three different planets, and then 
later he observed Saturn as first a single planet and then 
one that seemed to have developed side handles. It was 
only in 1655 that Huygens, with a telescope of far better 
quality, was able to propose that Saturn actually had rings 
in orbit around the planet. These rings we know today 
consist of countless individual particles that range from 
a fraction of a centimeter in radius to a few meters, with 
each particle having its own orbit around the planet. 

The current count of satellites which orbit around 
Saturn is 18 and the biggest of these is Titan, which is 
unique in the solar system since it is the only moon to 
have its own atmosphere. Saturn has had three spacecraft 
fly past it, Pioneer 11 and Voyagers 1 and 2, the last taking 
place in 1981. The Cassini mission, which will spend 4 yr 
orbiting around Saturn, was successfully launched on 15 
October 1997 and will reach Saturn in July 2004. 

The magnetosphere is the volume around the planet 
that is dominated by Saturn’s magnetic field. The 
magnetosphere of Saturn results from the interaction of 
the solar wind with the magnetic field of the planet, with 
the solar wind being deflected around the planet by the 
pressure of the planetary magnetic field. 

This cavity is compressed on the Sunward side of 
the planet, under the influence of the pressure of the 
solar wind, and is drawn out into a long magnetotail 
on the nightside of the planet. Magnetospheric cavities 
form around any magnetized planet, for example, at 
the Earth and Jupiter (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH; JUPITER: 
MAGNETOSPHERE). Figure 1 shows a schematic of the 
Saturnian magnetosphere with the solar wind impinging 
onto the planetary magnetic field from the left. The shock 
wave that results, the bow shock, is shown by the dotted 
curve, and this results in the solar wind slowing down as 
well as being heated and deflected around the planet. The 
broken curve, the magnetopause, separates the flowing 
solar wind from Saturn’s magnetic field. Saturn, like the 
Earth, has the magnetopause and bow shock at a standoff 
distance from the planet that scales with solar wind 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dynamic pressure. The region between the bow shock 
and magnetopause is known as the magnetosheath. The 
cusp region, as shown, allows magnetosheath particles 
entry into the magnetosphere since that is where the 
magnetic field is weakest. Full curves show the magnetic 
field lines of the planet. The cavity which forms the 
magnetosphere is filled with electrons, protons, ions, 
molecules, energetic particles and charged dust grains, 
with the charged particles and dust grains interacting 
with the electric and magnetic fields which are present. 
The charged particle motion generates currents within the 
magnetospheric plasma; the main current systems that 
exist are those due to the magnetopause, the equatorial 
ring current and a cross-tail current in the magnetotail. 

The nightside of the planet shows a fully developed 
magnetotail that has been observed to be about 40Rs in 
diameter at 25Rs; downtail. This magnetotail develops 
as a result of the solar wind flow past the magnetopause 
that aids in pulling the planetary field lines in an anti- 
Sunward direction. This magnetotail which may extend 
hundreds of Rs downstream acts as a reservoir for energy 
and plasma. Shown in figure 1 are magnetic reconnection 
processes which generate plasma bubbles or plasmoids. 
It has been postulated that these break off from the 
Saturn magnetotail and escape downtail just as occurs 
at the Earth. The outer magnetosphere (close to the 
magnetopause) and magnetotail are thought to be the 
primary regions where energy from the solar wind is 
transferred to the magnetospheric plasma. 

TITAN, the largest moon of Saturn, orbits the planet 
at a radial distance of 20Rs. Depending on solar wind 
conditions, Titan can be found in the magnetosphere (as 
shown in the figure), or in the magnetosheath or out in 
the solar wind (see SATURN: MAGNETOSPHERE INTERACTION WITH 
TITAN). During the previous planetary flybys of Saturn, a 
variety of solar wind conditions generated varying sizes of 
magnetospheric cavities, and this will be discussed later. 


The magnetosphere 

The magnetosphere is defined as being everywhere inside 
of the magnetopause, and comprises the magnetic and 
electric fields, plasma, energetic particles, the rings and 
some of the satellites. 


Saturn’s magnetic field 
The behavior of the magnetosphere of Saturn is controlled 
by the magnetic field of the planet and hence in order 
to understand magnetospheric dynamics we need to 
understand the planetary magnetic field. The intrinsic 
magnetic field of Saturn was first measured by the 
PIONEER 11 spacecraft which flew past the planet in 1979. 
This spacecraft observed not only the intrinsic magnetic 
field but also the accompanying magnetosphere. The 
equatorial ring current was implied by the Pioneer 11 
observations, and its existence was confirmed by the 
VOYAGER 1 and 2 flybys in 1980 and 1981. 

The equatorial ring current is of the order of 10’ Aand 
flows eastward around the planet between radial distances 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


RECONNECTION 


PLASMOID 


BALLOONING 


Figure 1. The magnetosphere of Saturn, with the solar wind flowing in from the left. The bow shock and magnetopause are shown, as 
are various processes within the magnetosphere. Titan is shown just inside the magnetopause. The large full arrow denotes the 


rotation direction of Saturn. 


Ring 
Current 


Distance, Saturn radii 


T T 
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 
Distance, Saturn radii 


Figure 2. A meridian plane projection view of the magnetic field 
of Saturn (in a planet-centered cylindrical coordinate system). 
The broken curves represent dipole field lines and the full curves 
represent field lines that have been distended radially outwards 
as a result of the influence of the equatorial ring current. The 
shaded region shows the position of the ring current plasma. 
The flyby trajectories of the Pioneer 11 and Voyager 1 and 2 
spacecraft are also shown. (Based on and courtesy of Connerney 
et al (1983) and Spilker (1997)). Figure 4 reveals a view of the 
flyby trajectories with respect to local time. 


of 8Rs and 16Rs. This ring current is generated by the 
drift of ions and electrons in opposite directions around the 
planet. Current flow ina plasma generates magnetic fields, 
and the ring current results in the dipole-like magnetic 
field lines of the planetary field being stretched outwards 
in a radial direction (although this radial distension is 
moderate when compared with the field lines at Jupiter). 
Figure 2 shows a view of the magnetic field at Saturn, with 
the broken curves denoting dipole field lines and the full 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


curves containing not only the dipole field but also the 
contribution from the ring current as well. The shaded 
area shows the ring current and the dark full arrows show 
the direction of the magnetic field, with the open arrows 
revealing the direction of motion of the three spacecraft 
which have already visited Saturn. 

On the nightside of the planet a well-developed 
magnetic tail occurs such as is found at the Earth and 
Jupiter. Effects of currents in the magnetotail as well 
as on the magnetopause need to be taken account of as 
far as their contribution to the magnetic field observed 
at Saturn is concerned. The planetary field as has been 
observed so far is primarily that of a dipole with a magnetic 
moment of 0.21R3 G. The polarity of the magnetic field is 
opposite to that of the Earth, that is positive from north 
to south, and therefore is in the same direction as that of 
Jupiter. The magnetometer observations from the Pioneer 
11 and Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft revealed quadrupole 
and octupole terms as well, although no non-axisymmetric 
terms could be resolved from the observations. Hence 
the magnetic field shows a remarkable symmetry about 
the rotation axis of the planet with there being a less 
than 1° tilt between the dipole and rotational axes. This 
is a unique feature in our solar system with all other 
magnetized planets having significant tilts between the 
dipole and rotational axes, for example the Earth has 
an 11.5° tilt and Jupiter has one of 9.6°. If, however, 
the internal field at Saturn has, like those of the other 
giant planets, been formed by dynamo action deep inside 
the interior of the planet, then one would expect non- 
axisymmetric coefficients to be present in the field (that 
is, an asymmetry in longitude around the planet). The 
circulation of conducting fluids deep in the planetary 
interior generates dynamo action, where the two physical 
processes of convection and planetary rotation in turn 
generate the interior magnetic field. 

Not only does dynamo theory imply the existence 
of a non-axisymmetric magnetic field but there are also 
other observations that seem to confirm this: for example, 
rotational modulation of kilometric radiation near local 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


noon in the northern hemisphere, a periodic variation 
which occurs in optical spoke activity in one of the 
rings and auroral brightening at the poles at specific 
longitudes. All of these observations seem to imply that 
longitudinal asymmetries do in fact exist in the magnetic 
field close in to the planet although they have not yet been 
observed by spacecraft magnetometers. The most likely 
reason why such non-axisymmetric terms have not been 
observed is that they are very weak in comparison with 
the stronger axial terms, and the magnetometer onboard 
Cassini has been designed and built specifically with such 
measurements in mind. 


Plasma 

The behavior of the plasma in Saturn’s magnetosphere 
can be separated into three distinct regions as are shown 
in figure 3. The left-hand side of the figure shows the 
magnetosphere at noon local time whereas the right-hand 
side reveals the behavior in the dawn magnetosphere. The 
inner plasma torus is characterized by the presence of 
dense low-energy ions and electrons at low temperatures 
(<10 eV, where an eV is equivalent to 11605 K) and high 
densities of about 100 cm~°. The inner region of the plasma 
torus, inside of 4Rs is thin, of the order of 0.4Rs;. Between 
4Rs <r < 8Rs, the plasma sheet thickens out to about 2Rs 
with a density of a few cm~? and is oxygen rich owing to 
sputtering from the satellites Dione and Tethys. This outer 
region of the torus extends to just beyond Rhea’s orbit. 

In between the inner torus and the hot outer 
magnetosphere is an extended equatorial plasma sheet 
with enhanced levels of cold plasma. This is probably 
the primary contributor to the equatorial ring current. 
This plasma sheet extends out to about 15Rs and has a 
thickness of 8Rs, density between 0.1 and 2 cm~? and 
an electron temperature of 10-100 eV. The inner edge of 
the extended plasma sheet coincides with a vast cloud of 
neutral hydrogen that extends beyond 25Rs, shown by the 
dot-filled circle. This neutral hydrogen probably escaped 
from Titan and the other satellites. At the inner edge there 
are very hot ions of the order of thousands of eV which 
are most probably new-born ions that have been heated 
by planetary rotation. 

Beyond the extended plasma sheet lies the hot 
outer magnetosphere which consists of a highly variable 
region that coincides with the Titan-produced hydrogen-— 
nitrogen torus. This torus maintains the density between 
about 0.01 and 0.1 cm~? and the temperature between 
50 and 800 eV (about 10° K). Near noon local time, cold 
density enhancements were observed by the Voyager 1 
and 2 spacecraft which also correspond to drop-outs in the 
magnetic field. The Voyager 1 enhancements have been 
described as the spacecraft having crossed through plumes 
of Titan. Titan is a direct source of plasma, with the plasma 
streaming away from Titan in the local corotation direction 
and thereby generating a plume of plasma. These plumes 
tend to remain in the equatorial plane and will slowly over 
time merge with the background plasma. For the Voyager 
2 flyby, Titan was not inside the magnetosphere, but was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


rather in the magnetosheath plasma and nowhere near 
the spacecraft itself. The cold density enhancements and 
magnetic field drop-outs which were observed have been 
described as plasma bubbles which have broken away 
from the edge of the extended plasma sheet. Similar types 
of plasma bubbles have also been observed at Jupiter and 
may be symptomatic of plasma transport processes in fast- 
rotating magnetospheres. 

In all three regions of the magnetosphere the plasma 
particles tend to be concentrated in a disk in the equatorial 
plane where most of the plasma sources are located. Titan 
acts as a significant source of plasma in the Saturnian 
magnetosphere, as does the vast hydrogen torus, with the 
other satellites playing a role as well, the importance of 
which is yet unclear. 


Energetic particles 

Saturn like other planets in our solar system has 
populations of energetic particles, which are trapped by 
the planetary magnetic field. These trapped energetic 
particles, similar to the Van Allen radiation belts at the 
Earth, interact with the inner satellites and rings of Saturn. 
In the inner magnetosphere, inside of about 10R;s, the ions 
tend to rigidly corotate with the planet, with the planet 
enforcing this through the magnetic field. The potential 
sources for these energetic particles are the solar wind, 
cosmic rays, ionized gas from the ionosphere of the planet 
and gas from the rings and satellites. The energization of 
these particles remains unclear and is one of the many 
questions that scientists with instruments onboard the 
Cassini spacecraft hope to answer. 

The motion of charged particles in a magnetic field is 
described by adiabatic theory, and there are three distinct 
motions that take place. The particle gyrates around the 
field line as well as moving along it. There is also a slow 
drift of the energetic particles through the magnetic field, 
with the ions drifting one way and the electrons the other. 
The radiation belts are made up of the energetic particles 
moving in helical orbits along the magnetic field lines, with 
the particles being reflected or mirrored near the poles and 
therefore bouncing back and forth on the field lines. 

The energetic particles in the inner magnetosphere 
are severely affected by the rings and inner satellites in a 
number of different ways. The energetic particles can be 
swept up by collisions with the satellites, the rings and 
satellites can act as sources of secondary particles as well 
as sources of gas and dust. The core of the radiation belts 
is made up of high-energy protons, above 1500 eV, inside 
of the orbits of Enceladus and Mimas. In the outer regions 
of the magnetosphere there is a population of low-energy 
electrons of tens of eV and at the magnetopause there is a 
large increase in the proton and electron population below 
500 keV. 


Rings 

The rings of Saturn remain one of the great mysteries of 
our solar system and the more we find out about them the 
more questions seem to arise (See SATURN: RINGS). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar 
Wind Magnetosheath 
Detached Extended 
Plasma Plasma 
Blobs Sheet Mimas — Tethys 


Outer 
Magnetosphere 
Neutral 9 . 
Hydrogen Noon 
Cloud 


Dione Rhea 


Enceladus 


Dawn 


Figure 3. The different plasma regions of Saturn’s magnetosphere, where the noon meridian is shown on the left of the figure and the 
dawn meridian on the right. The inner plasma torus, extended plasma sheet and hot outer magnetosphere are all shown with respect 
to the position of the rings and some of the inner satellites. The neutral hydrogen cloud is shown by the dotted circles, the 
magnetosheath as angled straight lines and the solar wind as straight lines. (Based on and courtesy of Sittler et al (1983)). 


With Earth-based optical telescopes, one is able to 
differentiate distinct zones to the rings and with spacecraft 
flybys and Earth-orbiting telescopes further ring divisions 
have been observed. The outer zone, known as the A 
ring, is separated from a bright inner zone, the B ring, 
by a gap known as the Cassini division. Inside of the 
A and B rings is a semitransparent ring, the C or crepe 
ring. There are also a large number of smaller rings 
labeled through from the D through to the G ring, which 
were named in order of discovery and not in order of 
placement from the planet. The A and B rings are known 
to be composed of nearly pure water ice and dark, nearly 
radial lines or spokes have been observed in the B ring. 
There seems to be a link between the formation of these 
dark radial wedge-shaped features that appear on the ring 
and the rotational period of the magnetic field and Saturn 
kilometric radiation (SKR), and hence there must be an 
interaction between the electromagnetic fields of Saturn 
and the ring system. 

Waves have been observed to propagate through the 
rings. The rings are made up of particles ranging in size 
from a few millimeters to several meters. These particles 
are bright and backscatter light rather strongly, behaving 
in a similar fashion to rough icy blocks. Moonlets have 
been observed within the ring system by the Voyager 
spacecraft, some of which seem to act as shepherds to the 
smaller rings. Some of the ring regions contain fine dust 
particles, which implies a link between the ring system 
and the magnetosphere of Saturn. 

Even though we have been able to learn a great deal 
about this fascinating ring system there still remain a great 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


deal of unanswered questions, some of which will be 
answered by the Cassini mission. 


The icy satellites 

There are at least 18 satellites orbiting about Saturn and 
there may well be other small yet undiscovered satellites 
as well (see SATURN: SATELLITES). All of these satellites are 
cratered to some extent and range from the biggest planet- 
like Titan with its own dense atmosphere to tiny irregular 
objects just tens of kilometers in diameter. The positions 
of some of the larger satellites are shown in figures 2 and 3. 
Mimas, which is at a distance of 3.08Rs from Saturn with 
a radius of 197 km, is heavily cratered and there is very 
little evidence for thermal evolution or resurfacing having 
taken place. Enceladus, at 3.95Rs from the planet, has a 
radius of 251 km and is a good reflector. It shows no large 
craters but there is some indication of large-scale surface 
changes having taken place which therefore implies some 
type of internal activity having taken place. Its orbit 
coincides with the densest part of the E ring and one of 
the questions which needs to be answered by Cassini is 
whether Enceladus could be the source of particles for the 
E ring. 

Tethys, at 4.9Rs from Saturn with a radius of 530 km, 
also reflects well and is very densely cratered. Dione out 
at 6.3Rs from the planet has a radius of 560 km and a bright 
icy surface and there is evidence of past internal activity 
with numerous craters and valleys and troughs on the 
surface. Rhea is the outermost and largest of the inner 
icy satellites at 8.3Rs with a radius of 765 km and has well- 
formed craters on the surface. Before discussing Titan in 
some detail, Iapetus out at 59Rs from Saturn with a radius 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of 730 km deserves a mention. Iapetus has a great many 
craters on its surface and a density similar to the other 
icy satellites, which is consistent with water ice being the 
major constituent. 


Titan 

Titan, at 20Rs; from Saturn and with a radius of 2575 km, 
is the second largest satellite in the solar system after 
Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. It is unique in the sense 
that it is the only satellite in our solar system with 
its own atmosphere, which is dense and predominantly 
consists of nitrogen and methane. Until very recently 
the surface of Titan has remained hidden beneath an 
orange hydrocarbon haze, which is formed as a result of 
methane in the atmosphere being destroyed by sunlight. 
Recent images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), 
however, in near-infrared wavelengths (to which the haze 
is transparent) have revealed a surface feature on Titan of 
about 4000 km across (about the size of Australia). 

An interesting issue for Titan concerns the relation- 
ship of the atmosphere, its surface and its interior. Its at- 
mosphere is believed to be filled with complex organic 
molecules similar to the atmosphere of primordial Earth. 
Titan is the sole focus of the Huygens probe as well as a 
main target of the Cassini orbiter. 

The Galileo orbits of Jupiter (see JUPITER: SATELLITES) 
have revealed that both Ganymede and Io have internal 
magnetic fields of their own. Titan has a size and 
density very similar to Ganymede and this raises the 
possibility that Titan and possibly some of the other 
Saturnian satellites may have internal fields of their own, 
either intrinsic like Ganymede’s or remnant such as has 
been recently observed at Mars. The study of any 
induced or intrinsic fields associated with satellites is 
important for a variety of reasons. It allows a better 
understanding of the interior structure, composition and 
dynamics of the satellites, the way in which particles from 
the magnetosphere impinge on the satellite and how this 
affects the evolution and generation of magnetic fields in 
solid bodies in the solar system. 


Saturn as a radio and wave source 

For 20 yr before the Voyager missions reached Saturn, 
scientists had been searching for radio emissions at Saturn. 
There were no radio astronomy investigations onboard 
the Pioneer 11 spacecraft and it was only when Voyager 1 
was within 3 AU of Saturn that radio emissions were first 
measured, thereby confirming Saturn as a radio source, 
although a much weaker source than Jupiter. 

There are three distinct components to the radio 
spectrum, kilometric radiation, which we will discuss in 
some detail, together with narrowband noise and related 
continuum and electrostatic discharges. SKR appears from 
the auroral regions in both the northern and southern 
hemispheres. There are localized regions near noon local 
time that are evident with the most fundamental period 
observed occurring at the rotation period. This is one of 
the observations which tends to disprove the validity of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


very symmetrical magnetic field which has been measured 
to date. The source energy of the SKR seems to be the solar 
wind, with a strong correlation being in evidence between 
the solar wind and SKR including a 25 day periodicity 
(which is the solar rotation period). 

In a magnetized plasma such as a planetary magne- 
tosphere, a whole range of different types of waves are 
produced which are trapped inside the magnetosphere. 
These radio and plasma wave emissions range from a sin- 
gle frequency (narrowband) through bursty and broad- 
band (several frequencies) to continuous frequencies. The 
types of waves range from electromagnetic, sound and 
gravity waves (such as are supported in gases and flu- 
ids), to an entire range of waves unique to a magnetized 
plasma, such as Alfvén waves, magnetosonic waves and 
ion and electron cyclotron waves for example. The variety 
of waves trapped inside of Saturn’s magnetosphere will 
be measured by the Cassini instruments. 


Auroral processes 

Saturn, like the Earth and Jupiter, has aurorae generated 
at its north and south poles. These aurorae are caused 
by charged particles depositing their energy in the upper 
atmosphere. The auroral emission is generated when the 
energetic particles interact with gas in the atmosphere; 
in the case of Saturn this gas is molecular and atomic 
hydrogen. 

The Voyager spacecraft first detected the Saturn 
aurorae. Recent HST images of the aurorae have revealed 
both light and dark aurorae at the planet. The light aurorae 
have been observed at other magnetized planets but the 
dark auroral oval which was observed encircling the north 
magnetic pole is unique in the solar system. This seems 
to represent an excess of absorption of sunlight by the 
atmospheric particles that are a product of the auroral 
process. 


Magnetospheric processes 

Figure 4 shows a view of the Saturnian magnetosphere in 
the equatorial plane, with the Sun to the left of the figure, 
the nominal bow shock denoted by the full curve marked S 
and the nominal magnetopause again shown asa full curve 
and denoted by MP. The magnetosphere is not usually 
static, however (as it is being shown in this figure), and for 
the three planetary flybys that are shown as broken curves 
a variety of solar wind conditions existed. 

During the Pioneer 11 flyby in 1979, a fast solar wind 
stream inbound caused a bow shock to form upstream 
at 17.3Rs away from the planet. On the outbound 
pass during which time the solar wind must have been 
rather variable there were numerous magnetopause and 
bow shock crossings. Voyager 1 in 1980 observed 
a magnetosphere during relatively stable solar wind 
conditions with single bow shock crossings both inbound 
and outbound. The Voyager 2 flyby in 1981 occurred 
during extremely disturbed solar wind conditions, with 
initially an interplanetary shock wave being measured 
3.5 days before the first bow shock encounter. An 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nN 
-80 Noyager 2 
\ 
i 
Pioneer 11\ H 
\ 
-60 |- aa 
i \ 
Y(Rs) Convection } 
-40- 


40 20 0 -20 -40 


Figure 4. A view of the Saturnian magnetosphere in the 
equatorial plane, in a coordinate system which is Saturn 
centered with X positive in the direction from the planet to the 
Sun, Z positive along the rotation axis and Y completing the 
right-handed set. The nominal bow shock (S) and 
magnetopause (MP) positions are shown. The inbound and 
outbound trajectories of the Pioneer 11 and Voyager 1 and 2 
spacecraft are shown by the broken curves, with the arrows 
showing direction of motion. The various regions of plasma 
circulation, that is corotation, diffusion and convection effects, 
are also shown. (Based on and courtesy of Sittler et al (1983)). 


interplanetary current sheet was then observed some 
12 h later, all of which resulted in five different bow 
shock crossings inbound (between 31.5Rs and 23.6Rs). 
The magnetopause was observed at 18.5Rs inbound and 
then an expansion of the magnetosphere occurred with 
numerous magnetopause and bow shock crossings on 
the outbound pass; the final magnetopause crossing 
occurred at 70.4Rs;. Another explanation for this extremely 
disturbed behavior could be that Saturn in fact passed 
through an extended Jovian magnetotail during this flyby. 

In planetary magnetospheres there are two main 
sources of energy which drive the physical processes 
which take place, those of the solar wind and the planetary 
rotation. This in turn results in two main types of large- 
scale plasma flow, those of convection and corotation. 
Convection describes the flow of plasma in a tailward 
direction, which results from the solar wind dragging 
magnetic field lines past the planet (as shown in figure 4). 
The term convection was first used for this process in the 
Earth’s magnetosphere, where it was noticed that plasma 
flowed over the poles of the planet from noon towards 
midnight and then back again towards the dayside at 
lower latitudes. The type of flow pattern that results was 
very similar to flow cells that are thermally driven and 
hence the term convection has been used ever since. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fast rotation of Saturn and its magnetic field causes a large- 
scale electric field to form, which extends out into the 
magnetosphere. This in turn causes the magnetospheric 
plasma to rotate with the planet and the magnetic field, 
that is the plasma corotates with the planet. Now, at the 
Earth, solar wind processes dominate the magnetosphere, 
with the convection pattern usually penetrating halfway 
from the magnetopause to the Earth. At Jupiter, its 
very fast rotation rate ensures that the circulation of 
magnetospheric plasma is dominated by the planetary 
rotation. The Saturnian magnetosphere is somewhere 
in between the two cases, with both convection and 
corotation playing an important role. Corotation effects 
seem to dominate close to the planet, inside of Rhea’s orbit 
out to about 9Rs, as revealed in the figure. Convection 
processes seem to dominate much further out close to 
the bow shock and magnetopause, with the plasma in 
the outer magnetosphere being moved by large-scale 
convection. One of the goals of the Cassini mission is to 
better understand the role of these two plasma circulatory 
processes at Saturn. In addition to these rapid transport 
processes there is also the more uniform redistribution of 
plasma which occurs by means of diffusion within the 
magnetosphere itself. 


The Cassini-Huygens mission 

Cassini-Huygens is a joint NASA-ESA mission, which 
was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, 
on 15 October 1997. Its aim is to study the Saturn—-Titan 
system, with the Cassini orbiter orbiting Saturn for 4 yr 
beginning in July 2004 and the Huygens probe which will 
descend through the atmosphere of Titan in November 
2004. This mission is named after two astronomers who 
pioneered observations of Saturn. The orbiter is named 
after Jean-Dominique Cassini who discovered the moons 
Iapetus, Rhea, Dione and Tethys, as well as ring features 
such as the Cassini division, during the period 1671-1684, 
and the probe is named after Christiaan Huygens who 
discovered Titan in 1655. 

The general science targets for Cassini-Huygens can 
be divided into five main categories: that of Saturn itself, 
the rings, the icy satellites, Titan and the magnetosphere 
of Saturn. Although Titan is primarily the target of 
the Huygens probe, which will descend through the 
atmosphere onto its surface, it will also be studied by the 
Cassini orbiter during 40 or so flybys of the moon. 

The Cassini-Huygens mission is described in detail 
in the article on the CASSINI MISSION as are the science 
objectives of the mission. This section will simply give 
a brief description of the magnetospheric objectives of the 
mission. 

The science objectives for the magnetosphere of 
Saturn are to determine the configuration of the nearly 
axially symmetric magnetic field and its relationship to 
SKR. Current systems, the composition and sources and 
sinks of the charged particles within the magnetosphere 
will also be determined. Wave-—particle interactions that 
take place within the magnetosphere will be investigated, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


as will the dynamics of the dayside magnetosphere and the 
magnetotail. The interaction of the magnetosphere with 
the solar wind, satellites and rings will also be studied. 

A comparison will be made between the solar wind 
interaction that occurs at Saturn and those that occur 
at the Earth and Jupiter. At Earth, the magnetosphere 
is dominated by the solar wind whereas at Jupiter the 
magnetosphere is dominated by the rapid rotation rate 
and the internal plasma sources. Saturn’s magnetosphere 
is likely to be somewhere in between these two extremes. 
It is more likely to mimic that of Jupiter since it too has a 
fast rotation rate and internal plasma sources, Titan and 
the icy satellites. Understanding the plasma dynamics at 
Saturn will allow a better understanding of the dynamics 
of planetary magnetospheres in general. 


Bibliography 

Connerney J E P, Acuna M H and Ness N F 1983 Currents 
in Saturn’s magnetosphere J. Geophys. Res. 88 8779-90 

Gehrels T and Matthews M S (ed) 1984 Saturn (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) 

Sittler E C Jr, Ogilvie K W and Scudder J D 1983 
Survey of low-energy plasma electrons in Saturn’s 
magnetosphere: Voyagers 1 and 2 J. Geophys. Res. 88 
8847-70 

Spilker L J (ed) 1997 Passage to a Ringed World (NASA 
SP-533) (Washington, DC: NASA) 


M K Dougherty 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere Interaction with Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturn: Magnetosphere Interaction 
with Titan 


Titan is the largest satellite of sATURN with an orbital 
distance from that planet of 20.6 Saturn radii (Rs), 
at which distance it will usually finds itself within 
Saturn’s outer magnetosphere, where it interacts with the 
magnetospheric plasma. Titan is, after Jupiter’s satellite 
Ganymede, the second largest satellite in our solar system 
and it possesses both an atmosphere and an ionosphere, 
which together act as an obstacle to the flow of Saturn’s 
magnetospheric plasma that is incident on that satellite. 


Introduction 

Titan apparently does not have a significant intrinsic 
magnetic field. Consequently, the external plasma flowing 
nearby impinges directly on Titan’s upper atmosphere and 
ionosphere. In contrast, at the Earth the solar wind plasma 
is deflected by Earth’s strong intrinsic magnetic field. 
Titan is usually located inside Saturn’s magnetosphere and 
the external plasma is the magnetospheric plasma, but 
occasionally solar wind conditions are such that Titan lies 
outside Saturn’s magnetopause so that the external plasma 
encountering Titan is the solar wind. 

Most of what we know about Titan and its interaction 
with Saturn’s magnetosphere derives from data gathered 
by the voyacER 1 spacecraft when it encountered Titan 
on 12 November 1980. Titan was located within the 
Saturnian magnetosphere on this occasion. The radial 
distance of Voyager’s closest approach to Titan’s center 
was 6900 km, and the trajectory was downstream of the 
satellite with respect to the motion of the magnetospheric 
plasma. Titan’s radius is 2575 km (Rr); hence, the radial 
distance of closest approach was r = 2.67Ry. General 
information on Titan can be found in the main article TITAN. 

The plasma instruments on Voyager 1 observed clear 
signatures of a plasma wake, in which the plasma densities 
were much greater than, and the temperatures much 
lower than, those in the ambient, external, magnetospheric 
plasma. The plasma wake is located downstream of 
Titan with respect to the external magnetospheric flow. 
The magnetometer on Voyager 1 observed a magnetotail 
coincident with the plasma wake. In this magnetotail, 
the measured magnetic field pattern was characteristic 
of field lines ‘draped’ around an obstacle (figure 1). 
Plasma wakes and magnetotails are also present at most 
planets and solar system bodies, and for objects such as 
Venus, Mars and comets, which lack significant intrinsic 
magnetic fields yet possess significant atmospheres. The 
tails are formed by a draped external magnetic field. 
Titan provides another example of the interaction of an 
externally flowing plasma with a non-magnetic body 
which has a significant atmosphere. A schematic diagram 
of the Titan interaction is shown in figure 2. In the rest of 
this article, a brief description of the atmosphere will be 
followed by a description of the ionosphere, and then the 
magnetospheric plasma interaction with the atmosphere 
and ionosphere will be revisited in more detail. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Titan’s upper atmosphere 
The atmospheric surface pressure of Titan is 1.45 bar and 
the surface temperature is a chilly 94 K. The dominant 
atmospheric species is molecular nitrogen (Nz), but there is 
a considerable abundance of methane (CHg) with a mixing 
ratio in the range 2-10% in the lower atmosphere. Many 
other species are present at lower abundances, including 
ethane (C:H¢), propane (C3Hs), acetylene (C:H2) and 
hydrogen cyanide (HCN). In the upper atmosphere, 
molecular nitrogen is the most abundant neutral below 
an altitude of about 1700 km, but methane becomes the 
dominant neutral constituent above this altitude. At very 
high altitudes (z > 2500 km), molecular hydrogen (Hz) and 
atomic species such as N and H become more important. 
A planetary exosphere is the uppermost region of a 
neutral atmosphere, in which the collision mean free path 
exceeds the scale size (or scale height) of the atmosphere 
(see also PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). The exobase is the lower 
boundary of the exosphere, and for Titan the exobase is 
located at a radial distance of about r ~ 4200 km (or 
an altitude of z ~ 1500 km). In figure 2, the exosphere 
starts midway through the region labeled ionosphere. A 
considerable escape flux of H and N, and other species, 
is produced in Titan’s exosphere due to the dissociation 
of CH, and Nz. The exosphere and ionosphere act as 
sources of ionized and neutral material for the outer 
magnetosphere of Saturn. The extended neutral exosphere 
of Titan strongly affects the interaction of Titan with 
the magnetosphere, giving this interaction a ‘comet-like’ 
character. 


Titan’s ionosphere 

An ionosphere is an atmospheric region, or layer, 
consisting of charged particles (electrons and ions). 
Ionospheres form around any planet which possesses an 
atmosphere and are produced by the ionization of neutral 
atoms and molecules (see also PLANETARY IONOSPHERES). The 
ionosphere coexists with the neutral upper atmosphere. 
The main ionization sources in any planetary ionosphere, 
including the Earth’s, are photoionization of neutrals by 
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) solar photons and electron- 
impact ionization of neutrals by fast electrons. The energy 
of the ionizing photon or ionizing electron must exceed the 
ionization potential of the relevant neutral (this energy is 
typically in the range 10-20 eV). The electrons are either 
photoelectrons produced by photoionization or energetic 
electrons which have traveled from the adjacent planetary 
magnetosphere. For example, the auroral displays 
observed at high latitudes on the Earth are produced by 
collisions of energetic electrons with oxygen and nitrogen 
atoms and molecules in the upper atmosphere. These 
electrons originate in the magnetotail region of EARTH’s 
MAGNETOSPHERE and follow magnetic field lines that extend 
from the magnetotail down to the polar ionosphere. At 
Titan, both the photoionization source and the electron 
impact ionization source contribute to the formation of the 
ionosphere. The ionizing electrons at Titan originate in the 
nearby magnetosphere of Saturn and follow the magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere Interaction with Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


VOYAGER 1 MAGNETIC FIELD DATA 
AT TITAN CLOSE APPROACH 
+Z 


05:33:03 


Po 
ll 
| 


3000 km 
ee ea 


ino 


"UPSTRE 
eae 
8000 km 


+Y 


~ 3000 km 


ent -4000 km 


u Top" 
VIEW 


N\ oe 
7 8000 km 
DIRECTION 


OF 
COROTATION 


van q Win 


05:39:29 
05'42:39 
05:45:51 


-8000 km TO 


SATURN 


WE 4 


i 


Figure 1. Projections of measured magnetic field vectors on two planes are shown along the Voyager 1 trajectory during its encounter 
with Titan’s plasma wake. (From Ness et al (1982), © 1982 American Geophysical Union.) 


field lines down into Titan’s upper atmosphere. These 
electrons are hot, with thermal energies of about 200 eV. 
The relative proportion of the two ionization mechanisms 
(EUV or magnetospheric electrons) at a particular location 
on Titan and at a particular time is a complicated function 
of altitude, latitude and longitude, and orbital position of 
Titan. 

Many different ion species are produced by ionization 
processes in Titan’s upper atmosphere. The ion 
production rates are highest for the following species: 
N3, N*, CH; and CH3. The overall ion production rate 
has a maximum at an altitude (above Titan’s surface) 
of about 1100 km. This is the altitude where the 
optical depth for the incoming EUV radiation, or for 
the magnetospheric electron ‘beam’, is unity. Optical 
depth is the probability of absorption and is proportional 
to both the column density of absorbing atmospheric 
constituent and to the absorption cross section. In 
the main ionospheric region (altitudes between about 
1000 km and 1700 km), the neutral density is high enough 
that ionization and chemical processes determine the 
distribution of ion species. The electron density at any 
location is equal to the sum of the ion densities of all ion 
species, because the plasma must remain charge neutral 
to an extremely high degree. N3, CH; and CH} ions 
which are originally produced by ionization processes 
are quickly converted by ion-neutral chemical reactions 
to a variety of other ion species. These other species 
include hydrocarbon species as C)H? and CH: and nitrile 
species such as HCNH*. These molecular ion species 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


then recombine with the thermal ionospheric electrons 
via dissociative recombination reactions. For example, 
CoH ions are produced from CH3 ions via reaction 
with methane, and C,H? in turn reacts with hydrogen 
cyanide (HCN) producing HCNH*. HCNH* can further 
react with the neutral hydrocarbon C,H2, producing even 
heavier hydrocarbon ion species, or it can dissociatively 
recombine. Two of the more important chemical reactions 
can be represented by 


C,H? + HCN —> HCNH* + CoHy 


HCNH* +e —> HCN +H. 


The full ion chemistry scheme for Titan’s ionosphere is 
quite complex and is not yet well understood. 

The ionospheric electron density profile measured 
near the dawn terminator (i.e. the day-night boundary) 
by the Voyager spacecraft using the radio occultation 
technique had a peak density of 2400 cm~3 (witha possible 
uncertainty of 1100 cm~°), and the peak was located at 
an altitude of 1180 km (with an uncertainty of 150 km). 
These values are in reasonable agreement with theoretical 
models which incorporate known ion sources and known 
chemical processes. 

For altitudes above about 1700 km, where the 
neutral density is rather low, plasma transport associated 
with rapid flow becomes more important than chemical 
processes in controlling the distribution of ionospheric 
plasma. This flow is driven mainly by the interaction 
of the ionosphere with the external magnetospheric 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere Interaction with Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Incident 


Flow 
EEE 


H+ Nt 
mass-loading 


MolenTey pick-up ion 


+ 


Figure 2. Schematic representation of the interaction of Titan’s 
exosphere and ionosphere with the Saturnian magnetospheric 
plasma which is being convected from the left of the diagram. 
The external flow is mass-loaded with ions created by ionization 
of Titan’s exospheric neutrals, such that the flow is slowed down 
and the magnetic field becomes draped around the satellite. 
(Adapted from Keller et al (1992).) 


plasma. In situ measurements were made by the 
Voyager 1 spacecraft in the plasma wake region at a radial 
distance of about 2.7R;. The plasma seen by Voyager 
was much denser, colder and slower than the external 
magnetospheric plasma, yet was less dense, hotter and 
slower than the plasma deep in the ionosphere. The 
measured flow speeds were a few kilometers per second 
and the ion temperatures were such that typical thermal 
energies were a few eV. The total ion density was about 
30 cm-°. The major ion species had a mass of about 
28 atomic mass units (making it either Nj, HCNH* or 
some similar species). Measurements of the upper hybrid 
resonance (a type of plasma wave) also indicated the 
existence of a cold (temperature, T., of a few eV) electron 
population with a maximum electron density of 39 cm7. 
The wake plasma appears to be an extension of the 
ionosphere and is probably transported outward from the 
main ionosphere. 


Interaction of Titan with Saturn’s magnetosphere 

We now reconsider the interaction of Titan’s atmosphere 
and ionosphere with Saturn’s magnetosphere. The plasma 
conditions near Titan in Saturn’s outer magnetosphere 
are quite variable (see SATURN: MAGNETOSPHERE). At the time 
of the Voyager 1 encounter, the magnetospheric plasma 
incident on Titan had H+ and N* densities of ~0.1 cm~* 
and 0.2 cm~? respectively, an N* temperature of about 
3 keV (this is really a thermal energy and the corresponding 
temperature is about 3 x 10’ K), and a flow speed of 
approximately 120 km s7! relative to Titan (see table 1). 
This flow speed is less than the full co-rotation speed of 
about 200 km s~!. The co-rotation speed is that speed, as a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


function of distance from Saturn, which is needed for the 
all the magnetospheric plasma to move around the planet 
with the same rotational frequency. The high temperature, 
the presence of N* and the flow speed less than the full co- 
rotation speed are all indications that a fair fraction of the 
plasma in Saturn’s outer magnetosphere has come from 
Titan itself, no doubt from previous encounters. Plasma 
is apparently added to the magnetosphere of Saturn in 
the near vicinity of Titan from ionization of the exosphere, 
or from direct escape out the plasma wake, and also in a 
very extended region by ionization of the extensive neutral 
torus which exists throughout a significant part of the outer 
magnetosphere. The torus is formed from neutrals which 
have escaped from Titan. 


Table 1. Properties of Saturn’s magnetospheric plasma flow 
upstream of Titan determined by Voyager 1. (Adapted from 
Neubauer et al (1984).) 


Magnetic field strength (B) 5 nT 
Plasma flow speed 120 km s7! 
Proton number density 0.1 cm~3 
N* number density 0.2 cm~3 
Electron number density 0.3 cm~3 
Proton temperature 210 eV (10° K)t 
N* temperature 2.9 keV 
Electron temperature 200 eV 
Sound speed 210 km s~! 
Alfvén speed 64 km s~! 
Magnetosonic/fast mode speed 220 kms7! 
Magnetosonic/fast mode 0.55 

Mach number 
Alfvénic Mach number 19 
Thermal proton gyroradius 413 km 
Thermal N* gyroradius 5790 km (*2Rr) 


+ Note that 1 electron volt (eV) is 1.602 x 1071? J and 
1 keV = 1000 eV. Also note that thermal energy ~ kT 
where k is Boltzmann’s constant and T is temperature. 


The plasma flow incident on Titan at the time of 
the Voyager encounter (table 1) was subsonic (M, < 
1) and submagnetosonic (My < 1), yet super-Alfvénic 
(M, > 1), which distinguishes this interaction from 
other examples of plasma interactions with non-magnetic 
bodies. For example, the solar wind is supersonic and 
supermagnetosonic. Jupiter’s magnetospheric plasma 
impinges on its satellite Io as both a subsonic and a 
sub-Alfvénic flow (see 10: PLASMA TORUS, MAGNETOSPHERES: 
JUPITER, SATELLITE INTERACTIONS). A Mach number is the ratio 
of a flow speed to a characteristic wave speed in a 
fluid medium. For a magnetized plasma the relevant 
wave modes are sound waves (propagation of pressure 
disturbances), Alfvén waves (propagation of magnetic 
disturbances) and magnetosonic waves (also called fast 
mode waves). Magnetosonic waves are the propagation 
of combined magnetic and pressure disturbances. 

Putting aside for the moment the question of how 
Titan acts as an obstacle, one difference between Titan’s 
interaction and the solar wind interaction with non- 
magnetic bodies such as Venus or comets is that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere Interaction with Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solar wind, unlike Saturn’s plasma, is supersonic and 
supermagnetosonic. When a fluid approaches a body 
(that is, an obstacle) at subsonic speeds, sound waves are 
able to communicate the existence of the body out into 
the approaching fluid, so that the flow is able to adjust 
gradually and is able to smoothly flow around the body. 
However, when a supersonic flow (or supermagnetosonic 
flow for a plasma) encounters an obstacle, a shock wave 
forms upstream of the obstacle. Ashock wave isa very thin 
layer across which the fluid properties change suddenly. 
The flow speed decreases and the density and temperature 
both increase as a fluid goes from upstream to downstream 
of a shock front. Bow shocks have been observed in the 
supersonic and super-Alfvénic solar wind flow upstream 
of all the planets in the solar system (except Pluto), as 
well as in the solar wind upstream of COMET HALLEY and 
COMET GIACOBINI-ZINNER. However, because Saturn’s plasma 
encounters Titan at a submagnetosonic speed (at least at 
the time of the Voyager encounter), a bow shock is not 
expected in this case and, in fact, was not observed by any 
of the Voyager 1 plasma and field experiments. Numerical 
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models of this interaction 
confirm this feature of the magnetospheric interaction with 
Titan. 

What is the nature of the obstacle that Titan presents 
to the external plasma flow? What determines the type 
of interaction? Why is Saturn’s magnetic field draped 
around Titan? The atmosphere and ionosphere of any 
non-magnetic body present an obstacle to an external 
flow. The nature of this interaction depends on the 
characteristics of the object and on the nature of the 
external flow. The solar wind interactions with comets 
and Venus represent extreme cases of how this can happen 
(see SOLAR WIND: INTERACTION WITH COMETS, VENUS: INTERACTION 
WITH SOLAR WIND). The mass-loading process dominates the 
cometary interaction, whereas the ionospheric pressure 
force is the most important factor for Venus. Both seem 
to be important near Titan. First, consider the important 
mass-loading process. 

Ions which are newly created in a plasma flow must 
somehow be assimilated into that flow. A charged particle 
moves in a circular trajectory in a uniform magnetic field 
if the background plasma is stationary. The radius of this 
circle is called the gyroradius. The gyroradius increases 
with increasing particle mass and with increasing particle 
speed. For example, the N* ions observed in Saturn’s outer 
magnetosphere are fast enough that their gyroradii are 
roughly the size of Titan. H* ions near Titan have smaller 
gyroradii. When ions are created in a magnetized flowing 
plasma, their motion is a superposition of both gyromotion 
and drift motion in the direction of the background plasma 
flow. This is called ion pick-up. Associated with ion pick- 
up is a process called mass-loading, which appears to be 
operating near Titan, as well as near comets. The addition 
of mass to a fluid will slow down the fluid, in order for 
momentum to be conserved. The ion pick-up and mass- 
loading at Titan mainly consists of molecular ions close 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to that satellite and atomic ions further away (figure 2), 
reflecting the radial variation of the neutral composition. 

The slowing down of a magnetized and flowing 
plasma, whether due to mass-loading or due to the other 
dynamical processes, affects the magnetic field in the 
plasma. Magnetic fields are ‘frozen into’ any fluid, such as 
most plasmas, which have high electrical conductivity. In 
this case, a piece of field line stays attached to a particular 
parcel of fluid. Hence, if the flow is slower in one region, 
such as near an obstacle or in a mass-loaded region, 
yet remains rapid elsewhere, the result is the draping 
of the magnetic field lines around the obstacle, with the 
associated formation of a magnetotail. 

The interaction of the solar wind with comets is 
primarily determined by the mass-loading process. The 
nucleus of a comet is typically only a few kilometres 
in extent and is made of ice and dirt. The neutral gas 
(mainly water vapor) produced by the nucleus is not 
restrained by gravity and forms an atmosphere (or coma) 
that extends more than 10° km into interplanetary space. 
These neutrals are ionized by solar EUV radiation and 
the newly created ions are ‘picked up’ by the solar wind. 
On the other hand, the interaction of the solar wind with 
Venus takes place mainly near the planet. Mass-loading 
plays a relatively minor role in the Venus interaction. The 
ionosphere itself acts as the main obstacle to the solar 
wind flow. Ionospheric plasma is an excellent electrical 
conductor, and the solar wind induces electrical currents 
in the ionosphere that act to largely exclude the solar 
wind plasma with its imbedded interplanetary magnetic 
field. The magnetic field strength builds up as the flow 
approaches the ionosphere, resulting in the formation 
of a magnetic barrier located outside the ionopause. 
The ionopause is the boundary between the cold, dense 
ionospheric plasma and the hotter magnetized solar wind 
plasma. At the ionopause, the ionospheric thermal 
pressure balances the solar wind pressure, which mainly 
consists of magnetic pressure in the magnetic barrier. In 
fact, this pressure balance determines the location of the 
ionopause. As the solar wind pressure increases, the 
ionopause moves to lower altitudes where the ionospheric 
pressure is greater. 

Ordinarily, for time periods when the solar wind 
dynamic pressure is significantly less than the maximum 
ionospheric thermal pressure, the ionosphere of Venus 
remains virtually field-free and the ionopause is a sharp 
boundary. However, at other times, when the external 
pressure exceeded the maximum ionospheric pressure, the 
ionosphere of Venus was observed by the magnetometer 
on board the Pioneer Venus Orbiter to be permeated by 
large-scale magnetic fields. In this case, the ionopause 
was much broader and less distinct, and was located at 
lower altitudes. The interaction of the solar wind with 
Mars seems to be similar to the Venus-like interaction for 
high solar wind dynamic pressure conditions, although 
mass-loading processes appear to make some contribution 
at Mars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Magnetosphere Interaction with Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


What about the interaction of the external plasma 
with Titan? The exosphere of Titan is rather extensive, 
resulting in some comet-like mass-loading, but there is also 
a substantial ionosphere, so that the Venus-like interaction 
scenario also applies to some extent. The Titan interaction 
appears to be a hybrid between a comet-type interaction 
and a Venus-type interaction. A magnetic barrier and a 
draped-field magnetotail are part of all these interaction 
scenarios. Will an ionopause boundary exist at Titan, 
just as it does at Venus? The total external plasma 
pressure upstream of Titan, including dynamic, thermal 
and magnetic pressure (which can be found from the 
parameters listed in table 1), is approximately per ~ 
10~? dyncm~?. The maximum ionospheric pressure can be 
estimated to be Pionos = 0.95 x 10~? dyn cm~™ at an altitude 
of 1150 km for daytime conditions. Hence the ionospheric 
and the external pressure are comparable, leading us 
to believe that, although the ionospheric pressure plays 
a very important role in the interaction, the external 
magnetic field will push its way deep into the ionosphere. 
The ionopause will be very broad, indistinct and located 
at a low altitude, and the ionosphere should be permeated 
with magnetic field. The proper analogy is Venus for 
high solar wind pressure conditions but with a significant 
amount of mass-loading also taking place. 

Much remains to be learned about how Titan interacts 
with Saturn’s magnetosphere. The next major advance 
in our understanding will come from the CASSINI MISSION, 
which was developed by NASA and ESA. The Cassini 
spacecraft was successfully launched in October 1997, and 
will arrive at Saturn in 2004. After insertion into orbit 
around Saturn, the Cassini Orbiter will encounter Titan 
many times. 


Bibliography 

Bird M K, Dutta-Roy R, Asmar S W and Rebold T A 
1997 Possible detection of Titan’s ionosphere from 
Voyager 1 radio occultation observations Icarus 130 
426 

Hartle R C, Sittler E C Jr, Ogilvie K W, Scudder J D, 
Lazarus AJ and Atreya S K 1982 Titan’s ion exosphere 
observed from Voyager 1 J. Geophys. Res. 87 1383 

Keller C N, Cravens T E and Gan L 1992 A model of the 
ionosphere of Titan J. Geophys. Res. 97 117 

Ness N F, Acuna M H, Behannon K W and Neubauer F M 
1982 The induced magnetosphere of Titan J. Geophys. 
Res. 87 1369 

Neubauer F M, Gurnett D A, Scudder J D and Hartle 
R F 1984 Titan’s magnetospheric interaction Saturn 
ed T Gehrels and M S Matthews (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) p 760 


T E Cravens 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturn: Rings 


Saturn’s magnificent ring system is unique, with uncount- 
able billions of icy particles in orbit around the planet. 
They represent a fundamental class of planetary structure. 
In this way, the studies of Saturn’s rings may be crucial 
to one of the fundamental objectives of planetary science: 
to understand the origin and the evolution of the plane- 
tary systems. The aim of this article will be to emphasize 
general aspects of the structure of Saturn’s rings. 

The outer planet saTuRN symbolizes all the planets. 
Its beautiful rings, discovered in the 17th century, give 
it a unique majesty, and whoever has seen Saturn 
through a moderately large telescope is not likely to 
forget the experience. As revealed by Pioneer and 
Voyager spacecraft and more recently by the Hubble 
Space Telescope, the rings are unbelievably dynamic and 
complex. The wealth of knowledge about Saturn’s rings 
accumulated over 300 yr, with special attention paid to 
the cascade of data obtained by voyacer, is summarized 
according to the following steps. 

The questions of the origin and of the evolutionary 
processes are directly correlated with the properties of in- 
dividual ring particles. These properties include compo- 
sition, nature of surface and particle size distribution; they 
will be discussed after the presentation of a brief history 
of the very exciting discovery of Saturn’s rings. 

The structural features, at whatever scale the rings 
were observed, posed great challenges to scientists to 
construct new dynamic theories. Some of these features 
have been explained from previous work in galactic and 
stellar dynamics. However, the rings remain extremely 
useful to astronomers, because some of the unexplained 
dynamic processes operating in the present ring may be 
similar to processes that occurred in the early ACCRETION 
pisks. We will describe in a particular section the major 
dynamic phenomena which sculpt the rings. 

The rings show many youthful features, raising the 
problem of their age and their origin. The problem 
is essentially this: calculated lifetimes for phenomena 
that are now occurring in the rings are considerably 
less than the age of the solar system. A review of the 
theories proposed to explain the formation of the rings 
will be presented. We will end with current and future 
developments. 


History of their discovery 

Considerable controversy resulted from the precise nature 
of the appendages of Saturn first observed by Galileo 
in 1610. Was Saturn grossly oblate? Were there two 
giant satellites? CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS revealed in 1659 that 
they were parts of a ring that surrounded Saturn whose 
diameter was more than twice Saturn’s. The anagram 
being a common method of publishing among scientists 
in the seventeenth century, he announced his discovery 
as the following anagram: AAAAAAA CCCCC D EEEEE 
G H IWIN] LLLL MM NNNNNNNNN OOOO PP Q 
RR S TITTT UUUUU, meaning Annulo cingitur, tenui, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


plano, nusquam cohaerente, ad eclipticam inclinato (He is 
surrounded by a thin flat ring, which does not touch him 
anywhere and is inclined to the ecliptic). 

Huygen’s speculation, that the ring was monolithic, 
became more controversial after JEAN DOMINIQUE CASSINI’S 
observation of a gap in Huygen’s single ring in 1675; this 
gap is now known as the Cassini Division. PIERRE SIMON DE 
LAPLACE began in 1787 dynamic studies on the ring system 
and concluded that the planet was surrounded by a large 
number of narrow solid rings. During the first part of 
the 19th century, Laplace’s vision was generally accepted, 
and it inspired some observers to report faint additional 
divisions of the rings that could not be confirmed later. 

In 1849, EDOUARD ROCHE determined the minimum 
distance at which a satellite influenced by its own 
gravitation and by its planet can exist; in the case of 
Saturn, if the planet and the satellites have equal density, 
the satellite cannot come closer than 2.44 times the radius 
of the planet without being broken up. He noted that 
this distance is ‘a peine supérieure au rayon extérieur 
de l’anneau de Saturne’ (a little farther than the external 
radius of Saturn’s rings). This result was later known as 
the ‘Roche limit’ and began to discredit the idea of solid 
rings. 

Finally, a series of dynamical studies followed, 
culminating in JAMES CLERK MAXWELL’s classic essay of 1857, 
after which no theoretical doubt remained that Saturn’s 
rings could only consist of an indefinite number of very 
small particles. Only much later (in 1895) did observations 
confirm the theory, when JAMES KEELER spectrographically 
measured the Doppler shift of the particles. 

The discovery of new rings around Saturn (and 
around Jupiter, Uranus and Neptune (see PLANETARY RINGS)) 
has been a major finding of the past 30 yr, and has been 
the result of spacecraft- and ground-based observations. 
In 1967, Feibelman first reported photographic evidence 
of a wide outer ring (now called the E ring) encompassing 
the orbits of the satellites Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys and 
Dione (see SATURN: SATELLITES). 

Anarrow ring (called the F ring) lying a few thousand 
kilometers beyond the outer edge of the common broad 
Saturnian ring was detected by Pioneer 11 in 1979. 

From the early 1970s, numerous astronomers at- 
tempted to identify some material within the main rings. 
However, only Voyager spacecraft were able to distinguish 
the presence of material between the C ring and the planet. 
This material came to be identified as the D ring. 

Of all of the Saturnian rings given a letter designation, 
the latest and the least known is the G ring. _ Its 
presence was detected by Pioneer 11 through its absorption 
of several charged particles and visually confirmed by 
Voyager 2. 


Overview of the remarkable rings 

The rings fall into two main categories, depending on their 
optical depth t, which measures the average number of 
particles that a light ray perpendicular to the ring would 
go through. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The main ring system. Saturn’s main ring system taken by the Hubble Space Telescope. Moving radially out from Saturn, we 
see the general areas which are the C ring, the B ring, the Cassini Division and the A ring. The rings cast their shadow onto Saturn. The 
C ring and the Cassini Division are significantly darker than the A ring; the B ring is slightly brighter. The bright line seen within this 
shadow is sunlight shining through the Cassini Division. Two of Saturn’s satellites were recorded, Dione on the lower left and Tethys 
on the upper right. Tethys is just ending its transit across the disk of Saturn. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 43. 


The main rings (C ring, B ring, Cassini Division and 
A ring), displayed in figure 1, are located within or near 
the Roche limit and have 0.05 < t < 2.5. The total 
mass of these rings is approximately that of the satellite 
MIMAs, which has a radius of 200 km. All observations 
imply that the main rings’ particles are primarily water 
ice, but there is evidence of some ALBEDO and therefore 
some compositional variation within the ring system. 
Most of the particles are in the 1 cm-5 m size range, 
but wave structures detected by Voyager spacecraft are 
strong indicators that small satellites with radii ~10 km 
also exist. The motion of a particle is determined, to 
a first approximation, by the gravitational influence of 
the planet. To a much lesser extent, the gravity exerted 
by Saturn’s satellites and the other ring particles and the 
collisions between particles disturb the orbit. 

By contrast, the G and E rings (see figure 2) and the 
D ring are tenuous (t < 10~*) and consist primarily of 
micrometer-sized particles. These rings are distinguished 
in two fundamental ways from the major Saturnian 
rings: single-particle dynamics (dominated by Saturn’s 
gravity, solar radiation pressure and electromagnetic 
forces), rather than collective effects, probably govern 
their form and the majority of particles have quite limited 
lifetimes (<10* yr). The smaller particles, less than 1 cm 
in radius, would indeed be quickly removed from the 
Saturnian environment by falling onto the planet or ejected 
outwards. These particles must be replenished by some 
source within the rings. 

The F ring (t ~ 0.1) is intermediate in properties 
between the main rings and tenuous rings. It is a narrow, 
inclined, multistranded ring lying 3400 km beyond the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


edge of the main ring system and shows a remarkable 
degree of longitudinal variation, including clumps, kinks 
and braided structures (see figure 3). Data on Saturn’s 
rings are given in table 1. 


Rings: a myriad of small satellites 

Saturn’s rings are composed of a myriad of individual 
particles. | However, even in the post-Voyager era, 
no individual particle has been seen yet. The basic 
properties of individual particles can be constrained by 
reflected sunlight, thermal emission and radar reflectivity. 
Specifically, ground-based and spatial observations from 
ultraviolet (10~° cm) to radio (10 cm) wavelengths contain 
crucial information on the ring properties. Because the 
rings comprise an ensemble of particles acting collectively, 
radiative transfer relates the ring properties to some 
intrinsic particle properties such as the composition, the 
size and the physical nature. 


Composition of the particles 
Near-infrared spectral data (1-2.5 xm) of the main rings 
were used to establish that water ice is a major component 
of the ring material. The decrease in reflectivity from the 
visible to the ultraviolet indicates that something other 
than pure water ice (probably silicates) is present, the non- 
icy component making up less than about 10% of the rings. 
The tenuous rings are spectrally resolved with 
difficulty. However, recent observations during the 1995 
Earth ring plane crossings show that the spectra of the 
E and F rings are clearly bluish, different from the main 
rings and from most of the solar system objects, which are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The tenuous E and G rings. Two images of the east ansa of the E and G rings, taken near the Earth August 1995 ring plane 
crossing (top) and near the Sun November 1995 ring plane crossing (bottom) with the Hubble Space Telescope. The planet Saturn, not 
visible, is on the right side. The two images cover the same region ranging approximately from 2.5 to 8 Saturn radii. The G ring 
appears as a thin bright line extending beyond the edge-on main rings in August but it is visible more distinctly in November, when 
the rings are inclined. The E ring is seen as a line extending beyond the G ring. The E ring peaks at the satellite Enceladus. 


Figure 3. The strange F ring. One section of the strange F ring 
viewed by Voyager 1 showed braids, clumps of matter and 
kinks. Nine months latter, Voyager 2 revealed that the structures 
were gone. 


reddish. More detailed analysis is needed to indicate their 
particle composition. 


Size and physical nature of the particles 
Our understanding of the sizes of the main rings’ 


particles comes principally from radio measurements of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. Radial structures of the rings. Voyager 1 obtained this 
spectacular view of the crescent Saturn and its rings from a 
distance of about 1.5 million kilometers. Typical structures in the 
rings vary. Going outwards from the innermost visible ring, we 
first encounter the C ring characterized by a broad platform. 
Then, the B ring dominated by irregular structures. The Cassini 
Division is a region of low optical thickness. The A ring is almost 
featureless. The Encke gap can clearly be seen in the outer part 
of the A ring. Finally, the F ring is visible like a pencil line 
circumscribing the main rings. 


the brightness temperature and the radar reflectivity of 
the rings. Observations at these millimeter to centimeter 
wavelengths indicate that most of the surface area of the 
ring must be filled with particles whose radii lie between a 
few centimeters and a few meters. Very little micrometer- 
sized dust is present. Small moonlets (10-100 m radius) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Spokes. The dark spokes in the B ring can be seen in 
this Voyager 2 picture by reflected light. They are made of small 
particles (about 1 micrometer), which do not reflect the light 


properly. 


have been invoked to explain some irregular structures 
such as gaps and narrow ringlets. One satellite, Pan 
(~10 km), has been discovered within the A ring. 

Although the rings are inside the Roche limit, particles 
can gravitationally be bound onto the surfaces of larger 
ones, and particle collisions should produce accretion in 
Saturn’s rings, especially in the A ring. The process 
of accretion can be counterbalanced by tidal disruption, 
so that complex, aggregate, fluffy particles (dynamical 
ephemeral bodies (DEBs)) may exist. Recent studies 
indicate that aggregates of microscopic particles, gathered 
in weak clusters of a few centimeters to a few meters, could 
explain the spectroscopic properties. These results seem 
to support the DEB model of ring particles, but further 
studies are required. 

The E ring particle size distribution is dominated by 
microscopic particles: a narrow size range centered near 
1 wm radius dominates its brightness. The G ring contains 
a large range of particle size which goes from dust particles 
to kilometer-sized bodies. 

The very strange morphology of the F ring is not easy 
to interpret and could be due to its position near the Roche 
limit, which would imply a very broad particle size range. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Voyager detected a narrow core (a few kilometers in width) 
of centimeter-sized particles, with an inward envelope 
(some 10 km in width) of micrometer-sized particles. Both 
the F and G rings must also contain a certain number of 
moonlets, roughly 1 km in size, to supply the smallest 
particles and to explain some azimuthal variations. 


Ring structures 


Disks and rings are a natural consequence of dissipation 
in rotating systems. A cloud of debris surrounding an 
oblate planet settles very quickly into a flat circular ring 
in the equatorial plane because of collisions between the 
particles. Subsequently, a spreading process occurs on a 
time scale much larger than that of the flattening process. 

Eventually, the traditional image of a ring is 
that of a set of particles in orbit around a planet 
undergoing mutual collisions and making up a structure 
with perfect circular symmetry and ill-defined edges. 
However, Voyager probes and the most recent ground- 
based observations revealed several surprising structural 
features (see figure 4): eccentric shapes and inclined 
orientations; sharp edges; azimuthal variations, arcs, 
clumps, kinked and braided configurations; waves. We 
will now discuss some major structures by describing the 
phenomena which create them. 


Gaps and narrow rings 

The fact that the rings have sharp edges rather than diffuse 
ones, as well as the presence of thousands of narrow rings 
clearly separated by gaps, indicates that some mechanism 
confines the particles. Through gravity, a nearby satellite 
will alter a ring particle’s orbit, making it elliptical. This 
effect is especially pronounced when there is a resonance 
between the ring particle and the satellite (a resonance 
occurs when the orbital periods of the ring particles are 
commensurate with the period of the satellite by a ratio 
of integers). The resonant perturbations on a population 
of ring particles increase the density in some places and 
decrease it in other places. Because of the collisions, the 
theory shows that there is a repulsion between part of 
the ring and the satellite, leading to the creation of a gap 
in the disk. For instance, the small moon Pan has been 
discovered in the Encke gap. If the forcing satellite is 
external to the ring system and close to it, a sharp edge 
will form accordingly. The process is clearly illustrated in 
the Aring, where a sharp edge is seen at a Janus resonance, 
which marks the outer edge of the ring. 

Strange narrow and eccentric features are present in 
the C ring, the Cassini Division and the Encke gap. These 
ringlets are surrounded by two gaps. In some cases, such 
as the Encke gap, the ringlet can only be seen at some ring 
longitudes and may consist of dust on ‘horseshoe orbits’ 
which has been ejected from the moonlet Pan. By contrast, 
the formation of some structures remains unexplained. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Azimuthal variations 

Narrow rings in the Encke gap exhibit strong azimuthal 
brightness variations. However, the most striking 
phenomenon is undoubtedly the F ring, located near 
the Roche limit. Voyager images indeed showed some 
condensations up to about 5 km in radius within the 
rings. The F ring is surrounded by two moons (Pandora 
and Prometheus) orbiting on either side of the ring and 
called the ‘shepherd’ satellites. The strange appearance 
of the F ring suggests that moons-F ring interplay has 
some importance, but the confinement of this ring remains 
unexplained. 

A moon in an eccentric orbit induces variations in 
semimajor axes of the ring particles. As a result, the 
ring particles tend to crowd into clumps. Some observed 
condensations are indeed roughly consistent with those 
induced by gravitational influence of the two moons. 
The clumps or arcs could also be explained through 
resonances between particles and moons, which confine 
the ring particles. Unfortunately, collisions between the 
ring particles tend to smooth the clumps, so that it is 
not clear whether these features would be detectable. 
The existence of small (radius <10 km) moons within 
the F ring has been postulated by several authors, 
because an embedded moon may provide a source for the 
condensations. However, no moon has been seen yet. So, 
it is not clear whether the clumpy structures are individual 
solid objects embedded in the ring or just enhancements 
in the local surface density due to the perturbation of the 
shepherd satellites. Further theoretical and observational 
studies are required to answer the fundamental questions 
of confinement of ring particles by moons. 


Waves 

Among the most intriguing phenomena observed by 
Voyager were the spiral waves. Observations and 
dynamical theories have identified two kinds of spiral 
waveforms: density waves and bending waves. Density 
waves are spiral patterns of enhancement and depletion 
of ring materials. Bending waves are vertical undulations 
of the disk, formed by inclined orbits of particles. 

A wave is the oscillatory response of the disk 
associated with a satellite resonance. Saturn has several 
known satellites inside the orbit of Mimas (see table 1). 
Satellites in eccentric and inclined orbits supply periodic 
horizontal and vertical perturbations to ring particles at 
resonance locations. The displacement of particles away 
from their circular orbits perturbs the gravity field in the 
immediate area. The self-gravity of the aggregation of 
ring particles allows the perturbations to propagate away 
from resonance locations, leading to the formation of spiral 
(density or bending) waves. 

Waves are most common in the A ring. The waves 
are signatures of a number of physical properties: mass 
density, viscosity, vertical thickness. As an example, the 
total mass of Saturn’s rings could be estimated to be about 
the same as its moon Mimas by inferring the dynamic 
response of the rings to the waves. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Meteoritic bombardment 
Soon after the spectacular imaging observations of the ring 
systems at the Saturn encounter by Voyager, it was quickly 
recognized that the formation and structure of the rings 
must be closely coupled to the interplanetary meteoroid 
complex via collisional interactions. The basic idea is that 
hypervelocity meteoroid impacts create EJECTA, which are 
reabsorbed by the ring plane. Continuous exchange of 
ejecta between different ring regions causes mass transport 
from one region of the ring to another. In particular, the 
bombardment may help to sharpen the inner edges of the 
A and B rings, which cannot be done by resonances. 
Another physical consequence of the meteoroid—ring 
impact would be the generation of ring atmosphere. 
Moreover, in some theoretical models elaborated from the 
rings—meteoroid interaction, the lifetime of the rings was 
estimated to be as short as a few million years. While 
such estimates have large uncertainties, they underline the 
importance of the meteoritic bombardementin shaping the 
ring dynamics. 


Spokes 

Thirty-seven days before its closest approach to Saturn, 
Voyager 1 discovered dark, nearly radial features in 
Saturn’s B ring; these finger-like markings are called 
spokes, visible in figure 5. These dark clouds are 
about 8000 km long and 2000 km wide, develop in 
several minutes, follow the rotation of the rings and 
disappear several hours later. In fact, the spokes appear 
dark in reflected light and bright in scattered light, 
indicating that they are made of micrometer particles. 
These small particles are thus most easily moved by 
electric and magnetic forces. These properties point to a 
mechanism coupling the dynamics of ring particles with 
electromagnetic phenomena in the magnetosphere and 
have prompted several scenarios to explaining the spokes’ 
formation. The most advanced one is that the spokes are 
the result of meteoroid impacts onto the rings, producing a 
plasma. Lorentz forces from Saturn’s magnetic field force 
the plasma into a radial direction, which electrostatically 
levitates small ring particles, leading to the formation 
of spokes. In another theory, it would be an electron 
beam originating in the upper magnetosphere, which 
could hit the ring and charge the dust grains. One 
alternative possibility is that spokes are the manifestation 
of compressional waves (called also magnetosonic waves) 
in the partly ionized ring disk in Keplerian rotation, 
embedded in the vertical magnetic field of the planet. 
However, none of these scenarios is fully satisfactory. 


Dusty rings 

The dusty D, E, F and G rings tend to have very 
brief lifetimes owing to a variety of physical processes: 
drag forces, such as plasma and Poynting—Robertson 
drag, sweep material out of the ring, while destruction 
mechanisms, including magnetospheric and meteoroid 
impacts, eliminate dust grains in place. The dust observed 
must therefore be replenished by some nearby source, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Saturn’s rings and inner satellites 


Object Radial distance* (km) Period (hr) Particle size Optical depth Mass (g) 
Cloud tops 60330 10.66 - = = 

Dring 66 000-74 500 4.9-5.6 10-100 wm 10-6-10-5 ? 

C ring 74 500-92 000 5.6-7.9 1-500 cm 0.05-0.35 1 x 107! 
Bring 92 000-117 580 7.9-11.4 1-500 cm 0.4-2.5 3 x 1072 
Cassini division 117580-122170 11.4-12.1 1-750 cm 0.05-0.15 0.5 x 102! 
Aring 122 170-136 780 12.1-14.3 1-500 cm 0.4-2 6 x 107! 
Pan‘ 133 580 13.8 10 km = 4x 1018 
Atlas 137 670 14.4 15 km = 9 x 1018 
Prometheus 139 353 14.7 45 km = 3 x 1070 

F ring 141 220 14.9 0.01 zm-10 cm _0.01-0.6 1 x 10!7+1 
Pandora 141700 15.1 40 km = 2 x 1070 
Epimetheus 151420 16.7 60 km - 5.5 x 107 
Janus 151470 16.7 90 km = 1.98 x 107! 
Gring 166 000-173 000 19.9 <0.03 wm 10-6 ? 

Mimas 185540 22.6 = = 4.5 x 1072 
E ring 181 000-483 000 ~334 1m 10-5 7 x 10" 
Enceladus 238 040 33 - - 8.5 x 1022 


* Radial distance is the boundaries for the rings, semimajor axis for the satellites. 


> Particle size is range of typical radii for ring particles, mean radius for the satellites. 


© Pan orbits inside the Encke gap. 


4d TheE ring is very broad, but densest near the orbit of Saturn’s moon Enceladus. 


either seen or unseen. Sources of the dust are meteoroid 
impacts onto moons and large ring particles and collisions 
between ring particles which release regolith material. The 
dust content within the rings is then determined by a 
balance between collisional and meteoroid excavation of 
dust, as sources, and sweep-up and loss from the rings 
by drag and magnetic field, as sinks. The typical dusty 
ring model considers two distributions of particles: one 
includes the large particles which are responsible for the 
production of dust, the other the dust particles. The 
balance between dust loss and dust production allows 
us to determine the population of the large bodies. For 
instance, it is proposed that the G ring is formed by 
a dusty population of short-lived particles continuously 
maintained by a belt of large bodies of roughly 1 km in 
size. 


Age and origin of the main rings 

The main rings appear to result from a similar process 
to that which created regular satellites. Their orbits are 
prograde, equatorial and nearly circular. A question that 
immediately arises is whether they are the uncoagulated 
remnants of satellites which failed to form because of the 
tidal forces or the result of a disruption of pre-existing 
objects. In fact, evolutionary processes with time scales 
considerably smaller than that of the solar system appear 
to affect the ring systems. Because of these short time 
scales, rings would not form with their primary planets 
but could be created later by disruption of satellites. 


Age of the rings 


The high albedos of the main rings’ particles seem to 
imply that the rings lack dark impurities. Over the age 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the solar system, the rings should have been struck by 
roughly 0.1-1 times their mass in meteoritic material. So, 
if the rings existed from the origin of the solar system, 
they should be much darker than they are at present. In 
particular, the impacts of dark micrometeoroids onto the 
B ring should have darkened the particles to their present 
albedo in only 100 million yr. This darkening time is 
comparable with the evolution time inferred for the main 
rings from mass loss by erosion. 

An independent short time scale argument comes 
from the evolution of the small moons near the rings. 
The moons which have resonances with rings pull angular 
momentum out of the ring system and, therefore, should 
evolve outward. For example, the transfer of angular 
momentum between rings and moons would move the 
satellite Prometheus the same distance it has already 
moved from the edge of the A ring in several million years. 
Neither the moons nor the rings could then maintain their 
present positions for more than about 10 million yr. 


Origin scenarios 

Since many workers in the field now look at rings 
as systems which cannot survive for longer than 10- 
100 million yr, the rings must be created and recreated 
many times over the age of the solar system. In the recent- 
origin models, the rings are created by the breaking up of 
some other body, either by cometary impact on one of the 
nearby moons of Saturn or by tidal disruption of a large 
comet which passed close to the planet. 

The lifetime of a moon before a catastrophic 
disruption depends on its size and on the bombardment 
flux. The bombardment flux has varied during the age 
of the solar system. It is smaller in the current epoch 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


than during the early phase, so that the expected lifetime 
for a moon 200 km in radius is close to the age of the 
solar system: the creation of Saturn’s rings in the last 100 
million yr is therefore an improbable event. A similar 
alternative involving tidal disruption of a large comet 
suffering a close encounter with the planet, has been 
discussed, but it appears to be equally unlikely. 

Current understanding favors the destruction model 
in which the Saturnian ring system is derivative. However, 
it is especially difficult to explain, because of its large mass 
and compositional purity. Clearly, considerable effort 
needs to be devoted to this. 


Prospects for the future 

The complicated physical and dynamical processes 
involved in the generation of Saturn’s rings require further 
studies and observations. The recent observations of 
the 1995 ring plane crossings and the upcoming Cassini 
mission to Saturn should be able to yield new knowledge 
on the ring system. 


New results and challenges from 1995 ring plane crossings 
observations 

The most spectacular ring system of the outer planet can 
also be a nuisance for the detection of faint material lying 
close to the main rings. Huygens was the first who 
realized that Saturn’s ring system appears to vanish twice 
every orbital period of 30 yr as the Earth crosses the ring 
plane and that the rings are viewed edge on. The last 
crossing through Saturn’s ring plane during 1995-1996 has 
provided the best opportunity to observe the faint E, Fand 
G rings and small satellites from Earth until the year 2009. 

The structure and particle properties of the E ring 
were constrained by new photometric observations, from 
the UV (0.3 wm) to the near infrared (2.2 4m). These 
observations continued to indicate a fairly narrow particle 
size centered around 1 wm radius. This predominance of 
sucha narrow-size particle is unique in planetary rings and 
confirms that the ring may be self-sustained by collisions 
between E ring particles and the satellite ENCELADUS. A 
puzzle is the absence of localized peaks associated with 
other icy moons. 

The 1995 campaign captured stunning new images 
of the G ring. Its intensity and inferred optical depth 
show the G ring to be a region where many large particles 
are present. This supports the idea that the G ring was 
formed by the disruption of a progenitor satellite. So, 
the observations of E and G rings are in fair agreement 
with previous spacecraft data, but photometric analysis 
and modeling should continue. 

The most surprising result was that a few teams 
have detected several never-before-seen bodies in the 
vicinity of the F ring. First studies indicated that these 
bodies are not new satellites but more probably transient 
clumps or arcs within the F ring. These discoveries 
are more interesting than finding new satellites, because 
the dynamical processes sculpting these objects probably 
occurred when many of the planets first formed moons 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and rings. An explanation of these phenomena would 
constrain the processes of accretion in the early solar 
system. The other very interesting and puzzling result 
to come out of the ring plane crossing data is the 1 h lag 
of the satellite Prometheus behind its expected position. 
This lag actually challenges celestial mechanics and seems 
to reflect the importance of the moon-ring interaction. 


The Cassini/Huygens mission 

The CASSINI/HUYGENS MISSION is a 4 yr, close-up study of the 
Saturnian system. It will begin in 2004 and include the 
planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field, several moons 
and of course the rings. As the best-instrumented probe 
ever sent to another planet, Cassini will produce the most 
complete information about a planet system ever obtained. 
For instance, the instruments will investigate the rings at 
UV, optical, infrared and microwave wavelengths. We 
will be able to map the chemical makeup and the size 
distribution of ring material. Some cameras will return 
images of the rings at resolutions better than a few hundred 
meters/pixel. It will be essential to observe possible 
changes at high resolution over a period of 25 yr between 
the Voyager and Cassini missions and therefore to select 
peculiar features to be repeatedly observed during the 4 yr 
of the mission. Finally, one hopes that the orbiter will 
remove many of the uncertainties currently besetting the 
problem of ring origin. 


Bibliography 

Greenberg R and Brahic A (eds) 1984 Planetary Rings 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Nicholson P D, Showalter M R, Dones L, French R G, 
Larson S M, Lissauer J J, McGhee C A, Seitzer P, 
Sicardy B and Danielson G E 1996 Observations 
of Saturn’s ring-plane crossings in August and 
November 1995 Science 272 509-15 


Francois Poulet 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Saturn: Satellites 


We now know that SATURN has at least 30 satellites, 
forming a largely diverse set of bodies (figure 1). They 
range from the planet-like TITAN, surrounded by a dense 
atmosphere and half the Earth’s size, to small, barren 
objects, of irregular shapes (table 1). The surfaces of the 
latter objects are all believed to be covered with some 
type of frozen volatile, primarily water ice, but also 
carbon dioxide, methane products, ammonia and other 
volatiles. The surface of Titan remains hidden underneath 
thick clouds. At some 1.5 billion kilometers from the 
Sun, nights are terrible on the surfaces of Saturn’s 
companions: —220 °C. However, during daytime, also, 
the thermometer never shows more than —170 °C. 

The first of the Saturnian moons, Titan, which is also 
the biggest satellite after Jupiter’s Ganymede, was 
discovered in 1655 by Christiaan Huygens. Later on, 
Cassini discovered the next four largest satellites of 
Saturn: Rhea, Iapetus, Dione and Tethys. The family 
grew as Earth-based telescopes acquired more resolving 
power and the Voyager missions visited the system 
(figure 1). The eighteenth, Pan, was discovered nearly 10 
years after the Voyager fly-bys, embedded in the A ring 


of the giant planet (see SATURN: RINGS). Saturn’s ring 
plane crossings—that is, when the rings move to an edge- 
on orientation as viewed from the Earth and therefore 
have their bright light dimmed by satellite eclipses— 
represent an ideal configuration for discovering new 
satellites. The recent discovery, in 2001, of twelve new 
moons of Saturn brings the planet’s total to 30: the most 
in the Solar System. The new moons vary between about 
6 and 30 km in diameter, and are moving in irregular, 
tilted orbits. They fall into several clusters, leading Brett 
Gladman, of the Observatoire de la Cote d'Azur, Nice, 
France, and colleagues to conclude that they are the 
remnants of larger satellites that have been fragmented 
by collisions. The moons probably began life as 
wandering bodies that were captured by Saturn’s gravity. 
Gladman and colleagues found the moons by scanning 
Saturn with sophisticated electronic detectors mounted 
on medium-sized, ground-based telescopes. 

At the beginning of the 20th century, it was 
recognized that Titan was a special body in our Solar 
System, the only satellite known to possess a significant 
atmosphere, which was soon demonstrated to host an 
active organic chemistry similar, in some aspects, to that 
found on Earth. 


Saturn's Satellites and Ring Structure 


F Ring 
thickness 
(FWHM) 


7 30,000 km 
0 
0 


Figure 1. Saturn’s satellites are a diverse set of objects, ranging from Titan, a planet-size moon with a dense atmosphere, to 
Hyperion, a small and dark, irregularly shaped icy body. Some of the satellites are embedded within the ring system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Saturn’s satellites. 


Name, Magnitude — Orbital radius (km) Orbital period (days) — Density Diameter (km) 

year of discovery (g cm”) 

Pan, 1990 18.5 133 580 0.56 - 20 

Atlas, 1980 18 137 670 0.60 ~ 30 
(A-ring shepherd) 

Prometheus, 1980 16.5 139 350 0.61 ~ 100 
(inner F-ring shepherd) 

Pandora, 1980 16 141 700 0.63 - 90 
(outer F-ring shepherd) 

Epimetheus, 1966 15.5 151 450 0.69 0.63 118 
(co-orbital) 

Janus, 1966 14.5 151 450 0.69 0.65 178 
(co-orbital) 

Mimas, 1789 12.9 185 520 0.94 1.12 398 

Enceladus, 1789 11.8 238 020 1.37 1.00 498 

Tethys, 1684 10.3 294 660 1.89 0.98 1060 

Telesto, 1980 19 294 660 1.89 - 30 
(Lagrangian: trailing) 

Calypso, 1980 18.5 294 660 1.89 - 26 
(Lagrangian: leading) 

Dione, 1684 10.4 377 400 2.74 1.49 1118 

Helene, 1980 18.5 377 400 2.74 - 32 

Rhea, 1672 9.7 527 040 4.52 1.24 1528 

Titan, 1655 8.4 1 221 830 15.94 1.88 5150 

Hyperion, 1848 14.2 1 481 100 21.28 - 290 

Iapetus, 1671 10.2-11.9 3 561 300 79.33 1.03 1436 

Phoebe, 1898 16.5 12 952 000 550.40 - 220 


Formation and evolution 

Our solar system is believed to have formed from the 
condensation of a primordial cloud of gas and dust about 
4.5 billion yr ago (see SOLAR SYSTEM: FORMATION). The 
outer regions of the protosolar nebula, where the giant 
planets and their satellites formed, were colder than the 
inner ones. As a consequence, volatile material, gases 
with low condensation temperatures, prevailed there and 
they became the building blocks of the outer bodies. 
Such materials include methane, ammonia (and their 
hydrated forms), water ice and ice silicate mixtures. The 
giant planets and their satellites accreted these 
components into successively larger lumps of matter, 
forming the planetesimals. The planets accreted enough 
mass to maintain large atmospheres and became the gas 
balls we know today. Their satellites, for the most part, 
were small blocks of mass, characterized by low density 
and therefore unable (with the exception of Titan) to hold 
onto a significant amount of gas to form an atmosphere 
against thermal escape. The surfaces of these smaller 
bodies were ‘contaminated’ by two sorts of carbon- and 
hydrocarbon-rich material: the C type and the D type 
respectively. 

Following their formation, a long period of heating 
awaited the newly accreted satellites. The heating was 
due to the release of the gravitational potential energy 
and of the mechanical energy produced during the heavy 
bombardment of their surfaces by remaining debris. The 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Voyager images also showed that the bright region of 
IAPETUS (and especially the North Pole) is heavily 
cratered, as in the cases of Mercury, CALLISTO or the 
Moon. HYPERION is similar to Iapetus in terms of surface 
cratering. MIMAS and TETHYS have impact craters (named 
Herschel and Odysseus), caused by bodies that must have 
been rather large. Hyperion is believed to have disrupted 
in the past (as a result of an important impact?) and its 
debris may have fallen on Titan, which is in a 4:3 
resonance with Hyperion. Tidal and resonant interactions 
among the satellites and among the satellites and Saturn 
are another source of frictional energy causing heating of 
the satellites. 

Chemical fractionation is possible on most of the 
larger satellites of Saturn, which may have undergone 
periods of melting and active geology within a billion 
years of their formation, before becoming quiescent. 
ENCELADUS may still be geologically active. 


Physical and dynamic characteristics 

Most planetary satellites present the same hemisphere 
toward their primary as a result of tidal evolution. They 
are in synchronous rotation with the planet. Of Saturn’s 
satellites, only two, Hyperion and Phoebe, are known to 
exhibit asynchronous rotation. 

The Saturnian satellites other than Titan (the largest 
and most massive of Saturn’s satellites, boasting 0.02% 
of the planet’s mass) are too small to retain much of an 
atmosphere. When GERARD KUIPER, of Chicago 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


University, discovered in 1944 spectral signatures in the 
Titan spectrum at wavelengths longer than 0.6 um, 
among which he identified two absorption bands of 
methane at 6190 A and 7250 A, he also searched for a 
similar behavior in the spectra of other Saturnian 
satellites. In data he had obtained in 1952, he found—by 
contrast—differences between Titan and the other 
satellites in the intensity observed in the ultraviolet and 
visible continuum. These differences, due to the presence 
of an atmosphere around Titan, hinted at the lack of such 
an adomment on the smaller satellites of Saturn. As a 
consequence, astronomers expected them to be simply 
icy, geologically dead bodies. However, the era of space 
exploration had some surprises in store for the scientists. 

High-resolution photometry and spectroscopy have 
shown that the main constituent on the surface of the 
brightest among Saturn’s satellites is water ice. Their 
densities (ranging from 1.0 to 1.9) are such that ice must 
be a major constituent of the interior, also. The most 
probable structure for each of them (and Titan too) is a 
rocky center surrounded by a thick shell of ice. Taking 
typical densities for rock and ice, and knowing the size of 
the satellite and its mass, a model for the relative sizes of 
the rocky core and icy mantle can be worked out. In the 
case of smaller satellites, such as Janus and Epimetheus, 
the densities are of the order of 0.65. 

Of course, the ice and the rock will not be pure water 
or silicate but may contain many impurities. The icy 
surfaces are obviously contaminated by materials of 
various colors and these can be studied using 
spectroscopy. Contrary to what was previously believed, 
the Voyager and Galileo spacecraft revealed in 1980 and 
1995-1998 a wide range of geological processes on the 
moons of the outer planets and showed that several of the 
larger Kronian satellites may have undergone melting of 
their mantles and subsequent differentiation and 
resurfacing of the liquid ice or ice silicate mud. Flows of 
these liquid components are similar to the lava flows 
witnessed on Earth and the Moon, owing to the melting 
of silicate rock mixtures. The ridged and grooved terrain 
found on Enceladus and Tethys may be the result of 
tectonic activities occurring throughout the solar system. 
Explosive volcanic eruptions may be occurring on 
Enceladus, as on Earth. 

In the young solar system, meteoritic bombardment 
was intense and frequent causing the surfaces of icy 
satellites (among others) to be heavily cratered. 
Nowadays the bombardment continues but at a 
significantly lower rate. Knowing something about the 
flux of impacting material and by enumerating the 
number of CRATERS on a solid surface, geologists can 
recover information on the origin and epoch of formation 
of ground portions. Impacts have several consequences: 
they pulverize the rock and the icy components of a 
surface, forming a fine material that covers it, the 
REGOLITH; they tend to excavate and expose fresh 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


material on the surface; they also cause the vaporization 
and escape into space of volatiles, leaving behind on the 
ground a deposit of opaque and dark material. As a 
consequence, the larger satellites of Saturn, like those of 
Jupiter (see JUPITER: SATELLITES), have a_ brighter 
‘leading’ than ‘trailing’ hemisphere (a leading side is the 
hemisphere seen from the Earth when the satellite moves 
toward our planet; the trailing side is the opposite in the 
direction of orbital motion). This is the case for Hyperion 
and Titan, for instance, but not for Iapetus, as will be 
discussed in the following section. The hemispheric 
asymmetry is believed to be due to more meteoritic 
encounters occurring on the leading side. The fact that 
well-formed craters, similar to those observed in the 
inner solar system bodies, are also observed on the 
Galilean and Kronian satellites today, suggests that the 
surface ice is strong enough to sustain intense impacts, 
perhaps because it is mixed with silicate contaminants or 
other impurities. The low temperatures and the small 
surface gravity in these cases prevent viscous relaxation 
from eradicating the impact features. Mimas is thus 
covered with high-rimmed, bowl-shaped craters, 
Herschel being the most prominent one (130 km large). 


Individual properties 

With a diameter of more than 500 km, the six larger 
satellites of Saturn are Titan (5150 km, half our own 
Earth), followed by RHEA and Iapetus (less than a third of 
Titan’s size), DIONE and Tethys (with close to 1000 km 
diameter) and Enceladus, the smallest of the mid-size 
satellites (table 1; figure 2). Hyperion, Phoebe (farthest 
from Saturn), Janus, Epimetheus, Mimas and Prometheus 
afford diameters of more than 100 km, being sizable 
objects. The latter four are found close to their primary 
and are therefore difficult to observe from the ground 
because of the planet’s scattered light. Most among these 
and the even smaller icy satellites (such as Pan, Atlas, 
Pandora, Telesto, Calypso and Helene), were not 
discovered before the 1980s. Most of what is presently 
known about the Saturnian system is due to the 
extraordinary exploration of the two Voyager missions, 
which encountered Saturn, its rings and satellites in 1980 
and 1981. 

The satellites have low densities and high ALBEDOs. 
They were therefore expected to be largely composed of 
water ice, probably combined with ammonia and other 
volatiles. Spectroscopic measurements performed on the 
medium-sized Saturnian satellites confirm this hypothesis 
by showing the spectral signatures of ice. Even Titan’s 
surface, eternally hidden by a thick cloud deck and only 
recently explored by imaging and spectroscopy in the 
near-infrared, is believed to be covered with some sort of 
‘dirty’ water ice. Other areas of the satellite’s surface are 
expected to host a variety of landscapes, ranging from 
hydrocarbon lakes to ice-covered mountains. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The six largest icy Kronian satellites are all unique worlds; from top left and clockwise, Rhea, Tethys, Mimas, Enceladus, 


Dione and Iapetus. 


The larger satellites 

After the planet-sized Titan, four large and four medium- 
sized satellites share the system’s mass: Rhea, Iapetus, 
Dione and Tethys are kilometer-sized objects, while 
Enceladus, Mimas, Hyperion and Phoebe are less than 
half that size. 

Iapetus is not like the other Kronian satellites in that 
it is the only large satellite of Saturn in a highly inclined 
orbit and—for no obvious reason—its two faces are 
radically different, one bright and the other very dark 
(figure 3). The surface albedo on the trailing hemisphere 
varies from 0.4—-0.5, values typical for ice-covered 
objects, to as low as 0.02 in the central parts of the 
leading hemisphere. Already in 1672, when CASSINI 
discovered Iapetus, it was noticeable that, at one point on 
its orbit around Saturn, the satellite seemed quite bright, 
whereas on the opposite side of the orbit it almost 
disappeared. Cassini then correctly deduced that this was 
ample indication for a marked difference between the 
moon’s two hemispheres, with one of them (the trailing 
hemisphere, in other words the side viewed from the 
Earth when the satellite moves away from us) bearing 
highly reflective material, while the other (the leading 
hemisphere, or the side facing the Earth when the 
satellite moves toward us) was of a darker nature. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Images of Iapetus obtained by Voyager confirm 
these observations and show that the bright region, 
reflecting about 50% of the incident radiation, is typical 
of heavily cratered icy surfaces. The other side is 
centered on the direction of motion around Saturn and is 
coated with a redder material. This gives a symmetrical 
distribution about the apex of the orbital motion. In the 
craters found near 200°E longitude, the shape and 
orientation of the dark deposits suggest that they cover 
bright terrain and that they are, in consequence, more 
recent. The mean density of the satellite is 1.03 g cm®, 
somewhat less dense than the other icy satellites of 
Saturn, but still consistent with models predicting water 
ice as the main component of these bodies (although this 
may be indicative of a higher fraction of ice in its 
interior). The dark material on the surface must then have 
been deposited in a very thick layer if it can cover large 
quantities of ice. 

Because Voyager was unable to map the surface on 
the whole leading hemisphere, the nature and origin of 
the dark material on Iapetus remain a mystery. The 
observed symmetry with respect to the direction of the 
orbital motion of the satellite strongly argues in favor of 
an external control, or even perhaps an external origin for 
this material. Studies of its composition, based on 
ground-based low-resolution observations performed at 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the infrared telescope facilities, the United Kingdom 
Infrared Telescope and the University of Hawaii 
telescope from 1981 to 1983, show that it is very red in 
the visible and near-infrared. A fit of the Iapetus 
spectrum was obtained at first by using a mixture of 
polymers (10%) and hydrated silicates (90%), simulated 
in the laboratory. A more recent study, however, achieves 
a better agreement with a mixture of HCN polymers, 
organic residuals and water ice. 

The mechanisms suggested for the production of this 
dark material are (a) a layer of eroded dust from the 
surface of Phoebe (the dark outermost Saturnian satellite, 
characterized by a highly inclined, retrograde orbit and 
with a surface albedo similar to but a little less red than 
that of Iapetus) pulled inwards and (b) a leading 
hemisphere surface modified by impacts from Phoebe 
material, leading to a low-albedo material concentration 
on that side of the surface; in the latter case, the dark 
material would be of endogenic origin, but controlled by 
exogenic impacts. A recent study of some UV Voyager 
archived images, in accordance with these models, 
suggests impacts of exogenic material from round-shaped 
Phoebe on the surface of Iapetus, leading to ice 
evaporation and leaving a dark and red deposit on the 
crater floors. This deposit would be a mixture of Phoebe 
material and a pre-existent non-volatile constituent, 
uncovered by the impacts, similar to the D-type material 
found in the asteroids of this type, as well as on Hyperion 
(an example would be methane erupting from the interior 
and subsequently being darkened by _ ultraviolet 
radiation). The major problem with the exogenic models 
is that the dark material on Iapetus is generally ‘redder’ 
than that found on Phoebe. However, it is conceivable 
that dark particles ejected from Phoebe may have 
undergone chemical changes that rendered them redder. 
Smaller than Hyperion, Phoebe’s eccentric orbit suggests 
it may be a captured object. With a rotational period of 
about 9 h, Phoebe is the only Saturnian satellite to exhibit 
a simple, asynchronous rotation. 

Hyperion is a special satellite because of the 
complex aspect of its chaotic rotation and its irregular 
shape. Although its global composition is uncertain, we 
know that water ice is present on the surface. Its 
spectrum in the visible range and in the near-infrared is 
compatible with that of Titan, showing a brighter leading 
and a darker trailing hemisphere. Hyperion is in 4:3 
resonance with Titan and it has been suggested that 
Hyperion material was deposited in the past on Titan. 
Hyperion’s albedo is rather low (0.21 in the visible), 
lower than all satellite albedos but for the ones of Phoebe 
and Iapetus. Its red color and low albedo value suggest 
the presence of an additional component (besides water 
ice) on the surface of Hyperion. A partial coverage by 
Phoebe-originating material has been suggested in this 
case also, as on Japetus. One cannot exclude, however, 
the possibility of the existence of a certain intrinsic dark 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


material which would have found its way to the surface 
through ‘pockets’ located in the regolith. 

Because of the differences between the albedo values 
of Iapetus and Hyperion, different mixtures of surface 
material are required. Dark organic material and hydrated 
silicates are likely candidates for the composition of the 
external objects of our solar system and could explain the 
albedos of both Hyperion and Iapetus. It is worth noting 
that Hyperion is the satellite closest to Saturn after 
Iapetus and, consequently, it is quite conceivable because 
of this proximity that its surface may be covered by a 
similar material, which, however, was not deposited in 
the case of Hyperion preferentially on one of the 
hemispheres, owing to its chaotic rotation. 


Figure 3. Rhea (upper half), the second largest satellite of 
Saturn, after Titan, shows an array of bright streaks, whereas 
Iapetus (bottom half) exhibits both bright and dark terrains on 
this Voyager 2 image. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thus, among the medium-sized icy satellites of 
Saturn, Hyperion and Iapetus are historical mysteries 
presenting a pronounced hemispheric asymmetry, also 
observed on Titan. The observational data that we 
possess today have not provided yet a valid explanation 
as to the composition of the surface of these satellites. 
The nature of the dark component observed is not yet 
discovered. 

Rhea is the second most massive satellite of Saturn 
(figure 3), but still possesses less than 2% of Titan’s 
mass. The surface of Rhea bears distinct signs of multiple 
impacts and is heavily cratered. One hemisphere shows 
bright wispy streaks that may have been caused by ejecta 
from impacts or perhaps have been caused by the 
condensation of volatiles leaking from the interior as a 
sign of internal activity. Parts of the ground are covered 
with large craters while other regions lack them. The 
larger craters are probably the signatures of early 
bombardment, while the smaller ones may have been 
more prevalent during a later episode of collisions. In 
many respects Rhea looks very much like the MOON or 
MERCURY, although the morphology of individual craters 
is somewhat different. 

Dione appears to be quite similar to Rhea on the 
images, showing a wide diversity of morphology (figure 
4). It also shows parts in which craters seem to be too 
few in number, as though many have been obliterated or 
covered up, indicating that several periods of resurfacing 
have occurred during the first billion years of its 
existence. It therefore appears that, although small, these 
bodies afforded, nevertheless, in some distant past 
significant internal activity. This could be the case if the 
relatively high densities have provided added radiogenic 
heat from siliceous material to spur this activity. The 
leading hemisphere of Dione is about 25% brighter than 
the other, as a result of more intense meteoritic 
bombardment on this side. 

Icy Tethys is heavily cratered, (figure 4), similarly to 
Mimas, one of Saturn’s inner satellites. Mimas’ 
remarkable crater (figure 5), Herschel, is about the same 
size as Tethys’ Odysseus (400 km in diameter, ~40% of 
the diameter of the satellite, the largest crater in the 
Saturnian system). This outstanding topographic feature 
is accompanied by a huge trench formation, the Ithaca 
(Odysseus’ home country) Chasma, similar in appearance 
to the grooves on Enceladus. Viscous relaxation and flow 
in the craters of Tethys under the influence of its strong 
gravitational field give them an aspect flatter than for 
Mimas or the Moon. Regions where craters are fewer 
give evidence for several episodes of resurfacing in 
contrast to Mimas, where surface gravity is not sufficient 
to have caused viscous relaxation and craters tend to be 
high-rimmed, bow]-shaped pits. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The surface of Tethys (upper half) shows many 
impressive craters, the most prominent of which is Odysseus 
(400 km, the largest impact structure in the Saturnian system) 
and Telemachus, as well as the Ithaca Chasma, a groove-like 
trench formation. Dione’s surface (lower half) is also heavily 
cratered, as shown on this Voyager 1 image, with bright wispy 
streaks visible on the limb. 


Enceladus may well be one of the most interesting 
and beautiful examples among the primitive, airless 
worlds accompanying Saturn (figure 5). Extremely close 
to its planet, at a distance of 238 000 km, Saturn’s 
apparent diameter (25°) in Enceladus’ sky is 50 times 
larger than that of the Moon seen from the Earth. Part of 
its surface was detected by Voyager and seemed entirely 
covered with vast plains of ice, an ice so pure and bright 
that it reflects almost all the visible radiation incident on 
it (by comparison, our Moon reflects only 11% of the 
light it receives). Enceladus shines bright: the only 
plausible composition for this part of its surface is pure 
water ice or some other very bright volatile. Here and 
there, on Enceladus, dark spots testify to the presence of 
craters, but not very many. In fact, this lack of impact 
craters on half of Enceladus’ surface points to a relatively 
small age, less than a billion years, and subjection in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


recent geological past to extensive resurfacing, while 
some form of ice volcanism may still be occurring. This 
phenomenon may well be responsible for the formation 
of the E ring around Saturn, by providing the source of 
particles. The other half of the surface, as seen by 
Voyager 2, was a great relief for geologists because it 
appeared heavily cratered, and is therefore compatible 
with an age of 4 billion yr. The complex nature of 
Enceladus’ surface is a delight to astronomers. 


The smaller satellites 

Ten of the Saturnian satellites are decent-sized objects. 
However, the system also has a number of unique small 
satellites under or around 200 km in diameter (figure 6). 
These are distinguished in basically three classes of 
objects: the shepherding satellites, Atlas, Pandora and 
Prometheus, believed to play a key role in defining the 
edges of Saturn’s A and F rings; the co-orbital satellites, 
Janus and Epimetheus, move in almost identical orbits at 
about 23 Saturn radii; finally the Lagrangian satellites, 
Calypso, Helene and Telesto, are so called because they 
orbit in the Lagrangian points of larger satellites, Dione 
and Tethys. Lagrangian points lie about 60° in front of 
and behind the larger body, and correspond to locations 
within an object’s orbit in which a less massive body can 
move in an identical, stable orbit. No other satellites in 
the solar system are Lagrangians. The only other similar 
example we have is of the Trojan asteroids orbiting in 
two of the Lagrangian points of Jupiter. 

Of the shepherds, Atlas lies several hundred 
kilometers from the outer edge of the A ring. The other 
two orbit on either side of the narrow F ring, constraining 
its width and causing its kinky appearance. 

Janus and Prometheus, discovered in 1966 and 1978 
respectively, may once have been part of a larger body 
that disintegrated following a major collision. Every 4 yr, 
the inner satellite (which orbits slightly faster than the 
outer one) overtakes its companion. Instead of colliding, 
the satellites simply exchange orbits. The 4 yr cycle then 
starts all over again. 

Pan was discovered in 1990 in Voyager 2 images 
dating back to 1981. The small object lies hidden within 
the A ring and helps to keep the Encke division clear of 
particles. 


Future investigations 

The two Voyager spacecraft provided the first detailed 
reconnaissance of the Saturnian system, with Titan as one 
of the major poles of attraction. It seems, nevertheless, 
that this precious data set did but whet our appetite for 
our exploration of this world. Titan has become in recent 
years one of the main goals for the CASSINI/HUYGENS 
MISSION to the Saturnian system, a joint ESA-NASA 
mission, launched in October 1997 and which will reach 
its target in 2004. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Saturn’s icy moon Enceladus (upper half), shows a 
bright surface with evidence of numerous resurfacing episodes 
in the past. Mimas (lower half), is a small object with crater 
Herschel (about 130 km in diameter), nearly centered on the 
leading hemisphere. 


Perhaps only then will some of the remaining 
questions regarding Titan and the other Saturnian 
satellites find an answer. Succinct examples are given 
below. 

e Are there more satellites around Saturn than those 
known today? They could be, for instance, 
embedded in the ring system, and hence difficult to 
detect. High-resolution imaging by the Cassini 
Imaging Science Subsystem (ISS) will help discover 
even kilometer-sized objects. 

e What is the detailed morphology and the exact 
composition of the surfaces of the satellites? For 
example, what is the distribution of dark material on 
Iapetus’ craters and what does that tell us about the 
origin of this material? Besides ISS imaging, the 
three Cassini spectrometers (CIRS, UVIS and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Saturn: Satellites ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 6. Seven of Saturn’s small inner satellites. Clockwise from top left: Helene, Epimetheus, Calypso, Prometheus, Pandora, 
Telesto and Janus. 


VIMS) will probe the satellites’ surfaces in high- Burns J A and Matthews M S (ed) 1986 Satellites (Tucson, AZ: 
resolution mode (capable of distinguishing tens of University of Arizona Press) 
meters on the ground) and thus allow us to correlate Coustenis A and Taylor F 1999 Titan: the Earth-like Moon 
geophysical units with specific compositions. (Sitigdpore: World Scicnntic) 
e What is the connection between the rings, the dust Athena Coustenis 
(which, along with the icy particles, will be 
measured in detail by the Cosmic Dust Analyzer— 
CDA—on board Cassini) and some of the satellites 
in the Saturnian system and how does this help us 
understand its formation and evolution? For 
instance, is Enceladus the source of the E ring? 
e Do any of the other Saturnian satellites, besides 
Titan, possess even a thin, tenuous atmosphere and 
what is its composition? The Cassini spectrometers 
will here again enable us to detect such atmospheres 
and their interaction with Saturn’s magnetosphere 
(as in the case of Titan) will be studied by the Dual 
Technique Magnetometer (MAG), the 
Magnetospheric Imaging Instrument (MIMI), and 
the Cassini Plasma Spectrometer (CAPS). The Ion 
and Neutral Mass Spectrometer (INMS), the CDA 
and the Radio and Plasma Wave Science Instrument 
(RPWS) on board Cassini will on the other hand 
study the composition, size and mass of material 
eroded or expelled from the satellites’ surfaces. 


In the 4 yr mission of Cassini, numerous close fly- 
bys of the Saturnian satellites will allow us to determine 
their characteristics with precision and tie these precise 
measurements to the origins, evolution and fate of the 
Kronian system and furthermore to that of the solar 
system as a whole. 


Bibliography 
Beatty J K and Chaikin A (ed) 1990 The New Solar System 3rd 
edn (Cambridge, MA: Sky Publishing) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Scaliger, Joseph (1540-1609) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Scaliger, Joseph (1540-1609) 


French mathematician who, in 1582, founded the system of 
the Julian day, a continuous reckoning of time which starts 
at midday GMT on 1 January 4713 Bc. The system has the 
advantage that it is able to set aside issues of leap years, 
the different lengths of months, ‘lost’ days at changes of 
calendars etc. The label ‘Julian’ commemorates Scaliger’s 
father Julius. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Schall von Bell, Johann Adam (1592-1666) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schall von Bell, Johann Adam 
(1592-1666) 


Astronomer, born in Cologne, Germany, became a Jesuit 
and studied astronomy in Rome. He was one of 
numerous Jesuit missionaries sent to China, and was 
the first European ever to be a member of the court 
bureaucracy in Peking, becoming head of the Imperial 
Board of Astronomy, and adviser to the young emperor 
Shun-chih (ruled 1644-61). He produced a large six- 
part cosmological map, accompanied by pictures of 
astronomical instruments, he translated astronomical 
books and he reformed the Chinese calendar. He was 
falsely implicated in the death of the emperor, and escaped 
execution only through a fortuitous earthquake. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Scheiner, Christoph (1575-1650) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Scheiner, Christoph (1575-1650) 


Astronomer, born in Wald, near Mindelheim in Swabia 
(southwest Germany), became a Jesuit and professor of 
mathematics at the university at Ingolstadt. He made 
instruments, including sundials and a pantograph. On 
learning about GALILEO’s discoveries, he obtained his own 
telescopes, with which he observed the Sun, and in 
1611 independently discovered sunspots for himself. His 
publication on the subject started from the Aristotelian 
concept of the perfection of the Sun, so he proposed that 
sunspots represented transits of satellites of the Sun. He 
came into conflict with Galileo, who argued that sunspots 
are on the surface of the Sun, because they change their 
shapes, and they originate and perish on the solar disk. 
Scheiner at first persisted stubbornly against the evidence. 
In Rome he published Rosa Ursina (1630), a work on 
sunspots that was required reading for a century. His 
theories having been repeatedly dismissed by Galileo, 
Scheiner attacked him in the book, although by then he 
had actually accepted many of Galileo’s opinions. Shortly 
after the appearance of Rosa Ursina, sunspot activity 
decreased drastically (the MAUNDER minimum, 1645-1710), 
and Schiener’s work could not be verified or superseded. 
Scheiner retired to Vienna and Neisse, building a Jesuit 
college and writing a massive refutation of the Copernican 
theory (Introductory Treatise in Favour of a Moving Sun and 
a Stable Earth against Galileo Galilei), which, posthumously 
published, had no influence whatsoever. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schiaparelli, Giovanni Virginio (1835-1910) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schiaparelli, Giovanni Virginio 
(1835-1910) 


Astronomer, born in Savigliano, Italy, studied in Berlin 
and at Pulkova, Russia, and became director of Brera 
Observatory, Milan. He wrote authoritative accounts 
of the early astronomy of many cultures. He observed 
comets, inferring from their tails that there was a repulsive 
force from the Sun (solar wind and radiation pressure). He 
explained the regular meteor showers as the result of the 
dissolution of comets and proved it for the Perseids by 
calculating orbital effects on the Perseid shower. From his 
observations, he mapped Mars, naming martian ‘seas’ and 
‘continents’ and connecting features with linear features 
which he called ‘channels’ or, in Italian, canali. The 
implication that these features, mistranslated ‘canals’, 
were artificial water-distribution systems, stimulated 
PERCIVAL LOWELL to a sensational search for life on Mars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schickard [Schickhardt], Wilhelm (1592-1635) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schickard [Schickhardt], Wilhelm 
(1592-1635) 


Born in Herrenberg, Witirttemberg, Germany, became 
professor of astronomy in T’bingen. He corresponded with 
KEPLER, was one of the first to teach Kepler’s discoveries, 
and, on the basis of his experience in making maps 
and other devices, proposed to Kepler the development 
of an analog computer to calculate planetary positions. 
He invented the first calculating machine, a ‘hand 
planetarium’ (like an orrery) and a machine for Hebrew 
grammar. He died of the plague. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schlesinger, Frank (1871-1943) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schlesinger, Frank (1871-1943) 


Astronomer, born in New York City, became director of the 
University of Pittsburgh’s Allegheny Observatory and the 
Yale University Observatory. He developed a method to 
observe stellar parallaxes photographically, and compiled 
a catalog of 4000 stellar distances. He compiled data to 
produce the first and second editions of an influential and 
practical Catalog of Bright Stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Schmidt Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schmidt Telescope 


A type of telescope, invented by the Estonian optician 
Bernhard Schmidt (1879-1935), that is used to photograph 
large areas of the sky. Because, in its original design, 
it was useable only for photography, the instrument is 
also known as the Schmidt camera. The Schmidt uses a 
concave spherical mirror as its light collector and corrects 
for the optical defect, known as spherical aberration, that 
is introduced by a mirror of this shape, by means of 
a specially shaped thin lens, or corrector plate, which 
is located at the front end of the telescope tube. An 
instrument such as this, which uses both lenses and 
mirrors to collect light, is called a catadioptric instrument 

By contrast with a conventional telescope, where the 
sharply focused field of view may be only a few arc 
minutes or, at best, a few tens of arc minutes, the field 
of view of a Schmidt telescope may be six to ten degrees 
across. Its wide field of view makes it eminently suitable 
for surveying large areas of sky. A disadvantage of the 
system is that the surface of sharp focus (the focal ‘plane’) 
is curved rather than flat. This problem is overcome by 
bending the photographic plate, film, or detector to match 
the shape of the surface of sharp focus. 

Because the corrector plate has to be situated at the 
center of curvature of the primary mirror, its distance from 
the mirror is twice as great as the focal length of that 
mirror. Consequently, the tube of a Schmidt telescope is 
at least twice as long as the focal length of its primary 
mirror. Because the correcting lens causes a degree of 
divergence in the incoming light rays, the diameter of the 
primary mirror has to be greater than that of the corrector 
plate. The maximum size of a Schmidt camera is limited 
by the practical problems associated with supporting the 
thin lens (which can be supported only round its edges). 
The largest Schmidt telescopes in the world, one located at 
Mount Palomar, California, and the other at Siding Spring, 
Australia, each have corrector lenses with diameters of 
1.2m. 


See also: field of view, focal length, mirror, reflector, 
Schmidt—Cassegrain telescope, spherical aberration, tele- 
scope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schmidt, Bernhard Voldemar (1879-1935) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schmidt, Bernhard Voldemar 
(1879-1935) 


Optical designer, born on the island of Naissar, off the 
coast of Tallin, Estonia. In spite of an accident at the 
age of 15, in which he lost his right hand and forearm, 
he successfully made fine optics for amateur astronomers. 
He started an optical workshop in Mittweida, Germany, 
and his reputation spread. He worked at the observatory 
in Bergedorf (near Hamburg) as an optician and made 
observations of Jupiter, Saturn, the Moon and eclipses. 
During the eclipse expedition of 1929, Schmidt discussed 
a camera for wide-angle sky photography with WALTER 
BAADE, and invented the Schmidt telescope or Schmidt camera. 
The camera has a spherical mirror and an aspheric 
corrector plate of half the mirror’s diameter. Its optics 
is almost identical when viewed from over a wide angle 
and the pictures that it takes are therefore almost uniform 
in quality. The focal plane is curved, but nevertheless, 
in the largest Schmidt telescopes (e.g. on Mount Palomar 
and in Coonabarabran) which have corrector plates of 48 in 
diameter, 14 in photographic plates can be exposed. These 
telescopes have been used to survey the entire sky for stars, 
galaxies and nebulae of different kinds. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schmidt, Maarten (1929-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schmidt, Maarten (1929-) 


Astronomer, born in Groningen, Netherlands, worked on 
galactic dynamics and the mass distribution of the Galaxy 
with JAN oortT at Leiden and went to CalTech, and became 
director of the Hale Observatory. In 1963 he observed 
3C273, a radio source which had been identified by Cyril 
Hazard with a blue star by using the edge of the Moon asa 
scanning device when the Moon occulted the source. With 
a 200 in telescope picture, he discovered that there was a 
jet protruding from ‘star’. He obtained a spectrum, which 
like 3C48 studied by ALLAN SANDAGE, showed emission 
lines at unusual positions. Schmidt’s breakthrough was 
to recognize that the object exhibited ordinary hydrogen 
lines, but at a redshift far greater than those observed in 
stars. The distance that was implied meant that the power 
output of the object was very large, and connected with the 
jet mechanism. This was the first completed discovery of a 
quasar. Schmidt went on to investigate the distribution of 
quasars, discovering that they were much more abundant 
when the universe was young. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schmidt—Cassegrain Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schmidt—Cassegrain Telescope 


A form of telescope that combines some of the features of 
the Schmidt and the Cassegrain systems. The principal 
optical components of the Schmidt-Cassegrain are a 
concave primary mirror, a thin corrector lens located close 
to the focus of the primary, and a convex secondary (which 
is often attached directly to the inside of the corrector lens), 
which reflects light through a central hole in the primary to 
a focus. The curved secondary changes the angle at which 
light rays from the primary mirror are converging and, as 
with the conventional Cassegrain, increases the effective 
focal length of the instrument while keeping down its 
overall length. The corrector lens gives a wider field 
of sharp focus than that of the conventional Cassegrain. 
The Schmidt—Cassegrain is an example of a catadioptric 
system, one that uses both lenses and mirrors to collect 
light. 


Seealso: Cassegrain telescope, field of view, focal length, 
focus, mirror, Schmidt telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schopf, James William (1941-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schopf, James William (1941-) 


Paleontologist, born in Urbana, IL, became professor of 
paleobiology at the University of California, Los Angeles. 
He was NASA's principal investigator of lunar samples, 
and discovered fossil organisms in 3.5 billion-year-old 
Australian rocks, one of the earliest manifestations of life 
on Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Schroter Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schroter Effect 


A phenomenon in which the observed and predicted 
phases of Venus do not coincide. It applies in particular 
to the predicted and observed times of dichotomy (half- 
phase), at which the terminator—the boundary between 
the illuminated and unilluminated portions of Venus’s 
disk—should be a straight line. At eastern elongation, 
when the planet is visible in the evening sky, dichotomy 
usually comes a day or two earlier than it theoretically 
should, while at western elongation, when Venus is visible 
before sunrise, dichotomy tends to occur a day or two 
later. The effect is named after Johann Schroter, who first 
described it in 1793. There is no satisfactory explanation 
for the Schréter effect. It may be purely subjective, or 
it may have a physical cause, perhaps the scattering of 
twilight in Venus’s thinner upper atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schroter, Johann Hieronymous (1745-1816) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schroter, Johann Hieronymous 
(1745-1816) 


Magistrate of Lilienthal near Bremen, Germany, assiduous 
mapper of Mars, although he believed that all martian 
markings were duststorms. The Schroter effect in Venus is 
the gap of a day or two between the time of the geometrical 
dichotomy of Venus and the time at which Venus actually 
appears as a half-circle (an effect of Venus’ atmosphere). 
His assistant K L HARDING discovered Juno, and F W BESSEL 
began his career at his observatory, which, with his records, 
his wealth and his position, was lost during the Napoleonic 
war. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schramm, David N (1945-97) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schramm, David N (1945-97) 


Cosmologist, born in St Louis, MO, studied with wILLiAM 
FOWLER, became professor at the University of Chicago. 
He was a founder of the subject of ‘astro-particle 
physics’, studying the particle-physics properties of the 
Big Bang at the start of the universe. When only two 
families of particles were known, Schramm predicted 
from cosmological considerations that there would be 
just one more family, a prediction confirmed in 1989 
by experiments at particle accelerators in Stanford and 
Geneva. He worked on the nuclear physics by which 
light elements (hydrogen, deuterium, helium, lithium, 
beryllium and boron) were produced in the Big Bang. 
Schramm was a large man and a champion wrestler. He 
was killed piloting his own plane. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schuster, Sir Arthur (1851-1934) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schuster, Sir Arthur (1851-1934) 


Physicist, born in Frankfurt, Germany, became professor 
at Manchester. In his work on terrestrial magnetism he 
developed the Schuster—Smith magnetometer for measuring 
the Earth’s magnetic force. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Schwabe, Samuel Heinrich (1789-1875) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schwabe, Samuel Heinrich 
(1789-1875) 


Born in Dessau, trained as a pharmacist. When he sold the 
family pharmacy he became financially independent and 
was able to turn to astronomy, erecting an astronomical 
observatory on top of his house, from which he made 
observations of the Moon, the Sun and the planets. 
Schwabe began a search for the planet Vulcan inside 
Mercury’s orbit, hoping to find it amongst the sunspots 
that he observed and listed. After 17 years he began 
to suspect a regular variation in sunspot numbers, with 
a period of about 10 years. His under-sold article 
‘Solar observations during 1843’ was overlooked until 
ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT drew attention to it in Cosmos, his 
encyclopedia of natural science. The 11 year cycle was 
confirmed by Julius Schmidt, RUDOLF WOLF, EDWARD SABINE, 
and J von Lamont, in both the sunspot cycle and in the 
Earth’s magnetic field. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schwarzschild, Karl (1873-1916) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schwarzschild, Karl (1873-1916) 


Mathematical physicist, born in Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany, at first worked on celestial mechanics, including 
POINCARE’s theory of rotating bodies, the tidal deformation 
of moons and LaPLace’s origin of the solar system. He 
became professor at Gottingen and Potsdam. He wrote 
on relativity and quantum theory. He early on proposed 
that space was non-Euclidean, giving a lower limit for the 
radius of curvature of space as 2500 light years, and in his 
mature papers gave the first exact solution of EINSTEIN'S 
general gravitational equations about the geometry of 
space near a point mass. This led to the first relativistic 
study of black holes. The size of the ‘event horizon’ 
within which light cannot escape froma black hole is called 
the Schwarzchild radius. His mathematical formulation 
of the description of the geometry of space is called the 
Schwarzchild metric. He served in the Army in the First 
World War, contracting an illness while in Russia from 
which he died on returning home. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Schwarzschild, Martin (1912-97) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Schwarzschild, Martin (1912-97) 


Astrophysicist, born in Potsdam, Germany, the son of 
KARL SCHWARZSCHILD, left Germany, became professor at 
Princeton University. Working with John von Neumann, 
Schwarzschild used the powers of the newly developed 
electronic digital computers to work on the theory of stellar 
structure and evolution. He uncovered phenomena in 
red giant stars, including how they evolve off the main 
sequence in the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram, how they 
generate energy in hydrogen shells, the helium flash and 
the ages of star clusters. He summarized his work in an 
influential text-book, Structure and Evolution of the Stars. In 
the 1950s and 1960s Schwarzschild pioneered the use of 
space telescopes for precise imagery of the Sun, planets 
and stellar systems. Stratoscope I, a 12 in telescope lifted 
to 80000 feet altitude by balloon, was the first instrument 
to obtain sharp photographs of the Sun from above most 
of the Earth’s atmosphere. Stratoscope II, with a 36 in 
telescope, yielded infrared images and spectra of the outer 
planets, red giant stars and galactic nuclei. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Scintillation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Scintillation 


Rapid fluctuations in the radiation from stars due to its 
passage through the atmosphere. The more familiar term 
for the effect on visible light is ‘twinkling’. The effect is 
most marked for a point source of light, such as a star. An 
extended source (covering a finite area) does not exhibit 
the effect so appreciably (thus a planet tends to twinkle less 
obviously thana star). Scintillation is caused by turbulence 
in layers of the atmosphere (which may have differing 
temperatures, refractive indices, velocities, etc). Seen from 
space, stars would not appear to twinkle. 

At radio frequencies it is possible to detect scintillation 
due to the passage of radiation through the solar wind. 
Analogous to the twinkling of stars, the distortion of radio 
emissions in the ionosphere occurs at wavelengths longer 
than about 20 cm (1.5 GHz). 


See also: seeing. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Scorpius 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Scorpius 


(the Scorpion; abbrev. Sco., gen. Scorpii; area 497 sq. deg.) 
A southern zodiacal constellation which lies between 
Ophiuchus and Ara, and culminates at midnight in early 
June. Its origin dates back to Sumerian times, when it was 
called Girtab, ‘the stinger’, but today it is associated with 
the scorpion that, in Greek mythology, killed Orion the 
hunter—and the two constellations lie on opposite sides 
of the sky. Scorpius was originally a larger constellation, 
which was divided into two by the ancient Greeks, the 
western part, Chelae (the Claws—of the Scorpion), being 
renamed Libra by the Romans in the first century BC (see 
Libra). The brightest stars of Scorpius were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. (An alternative 
form of the name for the constellation, Scorpio, is used by 
astrologers.) 

A conspicuous constellation and one of the few 
that even remotely resembles the object after which it 
was named, Scorpius is easily recognized by a Scorpii 
(Antares), a red giant irregular variable (range 0.9-1.2), 
which marks the scorpion’s heart, and an arc of second 
to fourth magnitude stars, ¢, w/w, ¢, n, 0, 0, kK, A and 
v Scorpii, marking its tail and sting. 

a Scorpii is also a close binary, it having a bluish-white 
(B2.5) companion, magnitude 5.4, separation 2.9", which 
appears pale green in contrast with its red (M1) primary. 
Other bright stars include 4 Scorpii (Shaula), magnitude 
1.6, 6 Scorpii (Girtab or Sargas), magnitude 1.9, 6 Scorpii 
(Dschubba), magnitude 2.3, ¢ Scorpii, also magnitude 2.3, 
and «x Scorpii, magnitude 2.4. There are 14 other stars 
of magnitude 4.0 or brighter, including 6 Scorpii (Acrab 
or Graffias), an optical double consisting of two bluish- 
white (B0.5 and B2) components, magnitudes 2.6 and 4.9, 
separation 13.7”, the former of which has two companions, 
magnitudes 5.9 and 4.2, separation 0.5” and 0.001” (orbital 
period 6.83 days), and the latter a companion of magnitude 
7.6, separation 0.1”. Another interesting multiple star 
is v Scorpii, which has two bluish-white (B2 and B8) 
components, magnitudes 4.1 and 6.8, separation 41”, each 
of which has a close companion, magnitudes 6.2 and 7.5, 
separation 1.3” and 2.3”, the primary also having two much 
fainter components, one at a separation of 0.06” and the 
other with an orbital period of 5.55 days. 

Interesting variable stars in Scorpius include RR Scor- 
pii, a Mira-type star (range 5.0-12.4, period about 281 
days), and U Scorpii (range 8.7-19.3), a recurrent nova 
which is normally about eighteenth magnitude but flared 
up to ninth magnitude in 1863, 1906, 1936 and 1979. Other 
interesting objects include the naked-eye open clusters 
NGC 6231, which contains more than 100 stars (includ- 
ing many high-luminosity O- and B-type supergiants) of 
mostly tenth to thirteenth magnitude but with a dozen or 
so brighter than seventh magnitude, including ¢' Scorpii 
(magnitude 4.7), M7 (NGC 6475), which has more than 
80 stars, mostly between seventh and tenth magnitude, 
and M6 (NGC 6405, the Butterfly Cluster), which also con- 
tains more than 80 stars, mostly between magnitudes 7 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and 11. There are also two bright globular clusters: M4 
(NGC 6121), which is sixth magnitude and located about 
1.3° west of w Scorpii, and M80 (NGC 6093), which is sev- 
enth magnitude. Another interesting object is NGC 6302 
(the Bug Nebula), a tenth-magnitude, elongated planetary 
nebula. 

Also in Scorpius is Scorpius X-1, an x-ray binary and 
the brightest x-ray source in the sky. 


See also: Antares, Scorpius X-1. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Scorpius X-1 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Scorpius X-1 


The brightest cosmic x-ray source in the constellation of 
Scorpius and the first cosmic x-ray source to be discovered. 
Detected for the first time in 1962 by instrumentation 
carried to an altitude of 225 km by an Aerobee rocket, 
Scorpius X-1 is, apart from occasional transient sources, 
the brightest cosmic source of x-radiation in the sky. 

It is a low-mass x-ray binary with an orbital period of 
0.787 days and an x-ray luminosity of about 2 x 10°” watts 
(about 5000 times the optical luminosity of the Sun) that is 
located at a distance of about 2300 light-years. The binary 
is believed to consist of a low-mass star and a neutron 
star, the x-radiation being emitted from the surface of the 
neutron star and from its accretion disk. 


See also: accretion disks, binary system, neutron star, x- 
ray astronomy, x-rays. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sculptor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sculptor 


(the Sculptor; abbrev. Scl, gen. Sculptoris; area 475 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies between Cetus and 
Phoenix, and culminates at midnight in late September. 
It was introduced as Apparatus Sculptoris (the Sculptor’s 
Workshop) by the French astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille 
(1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751-2. 

An inconspicuous constellation, the brightest star in 
Sculptor is a Sculptoris, magnitude 4.3. Interesting stars 
in Sculptor include ¢ Sculptoris, a binary with pale yellow 
(F2) and yellow (G9) components, magnitudes 5.4 and 8.8, 
separation 4.9”, period about 1200 years, and R Sculptoris, 
a very red (C6) semiregular variable star (range 9.1-12.9, 
period about 370 days). 

Other interesting objects include NGC 288, an eighth- 
magnitude globular cluster, the Sculptor Dwarf Galaxy 
(ESO 351-G30), a widely dispersed dwarf spheroidal 
galaxy in the Local Group, about 260000 light-years 
distant, NGC 253 and NGC 55, eighth-magnitude edge-on 
spiral galaxies (both members of the Sculptor group, which 
is the nearest collection of galaxies to the Local Group, 
about 12 million light-years distant), and the Cartwheel 
Galaxy (ESO 350-G400), a fourteenth-magnitude ring 
galaxy with faint, radial ‘spokes’ bearing witness to a 
former collision. 

The south galactic pole is located in Sculptor. 


See also: Cartwheel Galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Scutum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Scutum 


(the Shield; abbrev. Sct, gen. Scuti; area 109 sq. deg.) 
A southern constellation which lies to the south-west of 
Aquila, and culminates at midnight in early July. It was 
introduced as Scutum Sobiescianum (Sobieski’s Shield) by 
the astronomer Johannes Hevelius (1611-87) of Danzig 
(Gdansk) in 1684 in honor of Jan Sobieski III, king of 
Poland. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Scutum is @ Scuti, magnitude 3.9. There are no 
other stars brighter than magnitude 4.0. Interesting objects 
include the variable stars R Scuti (range 4.2-8.6, period 
about 147 days), an RV Tauri star, and 6 Scuti (range 4.6— 
4.8, period 0.19 day), the prototype of a class of pulsating 
stars, and M11 (NGC 6705, the Wild Duck Cluster), a fan- 
shaped open cluster which contains more than 400 stars 
between eighth and fourteenth magnitude. 

The Milky Way passes through Scutum and is 
particularly bright in the north-east of the constellation, 
where it is known as the Scutum Star Cloud. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


sdO Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


sdO Stars 


Subdwarfs of spectral type O (sdO stars) are hot evolved 
stars with a lower luminosity than main sequence O 
stars. The sdO stars cover a wide range in the 
HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM (HRD, see figure 1). At lower 
luminosities and temperatures they form the extension 
of the subdwarfs of spectral type B (sdB), bounded by 
the extreme blue extension of the Horizontal Branch 
(EHB) and the helium main sequence (He-MS). At higher 
luminosities the sdOs are found up to the region of the 
central stars of planetary nebulae (CSPNe). Some of 
the most luminous sdOs are indeed associated with a 
planetary nebula. 

The existence of the sdO stars is a challenge for stellar 
evolution theory since their location in the HRD is usually 
avoided by evolution tracks. Understanding the sdOs 
stars and inclusion of these stars in the overall picture of 
stellar evolution requires knowledge of their fundamental 
stellar parameters, ie., the effective temperature, the 
surface gravity and the chemical composition, for a 
reasonably large sample of sdOs. This requires a search 
for these rare objects, the analysis of their spectra, and 
an interpretation of the results in the context of stellar 
evolution theory. 

A further introduction to the evolution of low and 
intermediate mass stars can be found in the article 
HORIZONTAL-BRANCH STARS. 

Many results for sdO stars are summarized in the 
proceedings from the Second and Third Conferences on 
Faint Blue Stars (FBS2, Philip et al 1987; FBS3, Philip et al 
1997). A review on subdwarfs has been given by Heber 
(1992). 


The search for sdO stars 

Blue, i.e. hot, stars in the Galactic disk are mainly young 
main sequence O and B stars. In surveys at high Galactic 
latitudes, however, hot evolved stars dominate the stellar 
objects. A large number of surveys have been conducted, 
which are described in detail in the article BLUE STARS AT 
HIGH GALACTIC LATITUDES. A list of about 1000 sdO stars is 
provided by Kilkenny, Heber and Drilling (1987, FBS2). 
Recently, several sdO stars in globular clusters have been 
detected by the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope. In the UV 
the majority of the cluster stars are invisible and only the 
UV bright stars like sdOs can be picked out easily. 


Spectral analyses of sdO stars 

In the last decade many of the sdO stars were analysed 
and high resolution optical and UV spectra allowed the 
determination of the chemical composition for selected 
sdOs. The major uncertainty originates from systematic 
differences between the results of different working 
groups, which are not resolved up to now. The 
latest results for nearly 50 sdO stars were presented by 
Lemke et al (1997, FBS3). They used non-LTE model 
atmospheres and a x*-fitting technique to determine 
effective temperatures, gravities and H/He abundances. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


log L/ Lecter 
° 
pp 


i : 1 i i i i i 
140 100 70 40 20 10 7 5 
Te; [1000 K] 


Figure 1. Schematic Hertzsprung—Russell diagram with an 
evolution track of a 1 Mo star. H-MS, He-MS: hydrogen and 
helium main sequence; RGB, AGB: red and asymptotic giant 
branches; HB, EHB: horizontal and extreme horizontal branches; 
CSPN, WD, sdB, sdO: positions of central stars of planetary 
nebulae, white dwarfs, sdB and sdO stars, respectively. 


H/Hell H/Hell 


H/Hell 


Hell Hell 


a a a 
/ 
Poiviti 


log (relative flux) 


-13.2) 


[Hi 


lel Hel Hel Hel Hel Hel 


4000 4200 4400 4600 4800 5000 
wavelength [A] 


Figure 2. Sample spectra of a hot (80000 K) sdO with normal 
H/He composition (top) and a cooler (40 000 K) helium-rich sdO 
(bottom). 


Effective temperatures of sdO stars range from 
40000 K up to 100000 K, the surface gravities range from 
logg = 45 up to logg = 6.5. The He/H ratio 
varies from about the solar value up to extreme helium- 
rich compositions with no hydrogen detectable. Besides 
these sdO stars there is also a group of helium-poor 
subdwarfs, mainly below 40000K and surface gravities 
around log g = 6. In the literature these objects are also 
termed sdOB stars, emphasizing the close evolutionary 
connection with the sdBs. 


Spectral characteristics 

The spectral characteristics (see figure 2) of sdO stars 
in the optical spectrum are the presence of the 4686A 
line of singly ionized helium and the broad and shallow 
line profiles of the hydrogen Balmer series, which are 
superposed by the lines from the Pickering series of singly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


sdO Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ionized helium. The cooler members of the sdO group 
also display several spectral lines from neutral helium. At 
a spectral resolution of about 3A only a few lines from 
carbon or nitrogen can be detected in some sdO stars. 


Model atmospheres for sdO stars 

The progress of spectral analyses of sdO stars is very 
closely connected to the progress of modeling the 
atmospheres of hot stars. STELLAR ATMOSPHERES Of solar type 
stars can in general be described with the assumption of 
local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) for the calculation 
of the population of all the atomic energy levels. In 
hotter stars this population is no longer determined by 
the local electron temperature but strongly influenced by 
the radiation field, which is non-local in those regions of 
the stars where the emergent spectrum is formed. Early 
analyses using LTE model atmospheres were therefore 
hampered by a poor reproduction of the observed spectra. 
The upcoming non-LTE stellar atmosphere models at 
the beginning of the seventies allowed for the first 
time a realistic modeling, however, taking into account 
only a basic model atom for hydrogen and helium. 
Greenstein and Sargent (1974) used these non-LTE models 
to determine effective temperatures and surface gravities 
for a large fraction of the sdOs known at that time. The 
abundances of heavier elements like carbon, nitrogen and 
oxygen could be determined only in calculations, where 
the structure of the atmosphere was kept fixed and the 
population of the element was iterated. This procedure 
cannot take into account the influence of the heavier 
elements on the structure of the model atmosphere. With 
the launch of the IUE satellite in 1978, access to the 
UV part of the spectra of sdOs became available and it 
soon became obvious that these stars exhibit an enormous 
number of metal lines in the UV. It was therefore clear 
that these numerous lines must significantly influence 
the atmospheric structure by blocking the transport of 
radiation, which can now be taken into account in state-of- 
the-art non-LTE model atmospheres (e.g. Haas et al 1996, 
Lanz et al 1997). 


Chemical composition 

Constraints for the evolution scenarios might be obtained 
from metal abundances. Several results are summarized 
by Dreizler (1993) and Bauer and Husfeld (1995). The latest 
analysis using HST spectra is presented by Lanz et al (1997). 
The metal abundances also show a large scatter. In general, 
the helium-rich sdO stars are also enriched in some metals, 
especially in carbon and nitrogen. This clearly indicates 
that the surface contains material burned in the CNO cycle 
as well as the products of the helium burning. 

Elements like iron or nickel can be used as indicators 
for the metallicity since these elements are not produced 
in low mass stars. However, the Fe/Ni ratio can show 
deviations from the solar value, which very likely hints at 
diffusion processes, caused by gravitational settling and 
radiative levitation. In that case, the element composition 
would not allow conclusions on the evolutionary status 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


since the abundance pattern can be completely altered by 
diffusion. 


Mass loss 

While main sequence O stars are known to exhibit a stellar 
wind, the atmospheres of most sdO stars can be regarded 
as hydrostatic. However, signatures of a stellar wind can 
be detected in the most luminous sdOs through P-Cygni 
profiles of UV resonance lines or through emission lines 
in the optical region. But even in these stars all other lines 
originate from the quasi-static layers of the atmosphere. 


Evolutionary status 
Even though sdO stars are predominantly found at high 
Galactic latitudes, investigation of the kinematics of these 
stars reveals an affiliation with the old disk population. 
Only a very small minority of the sdOs belongs to the 
POPULATION Il, either through membership of a globular 
cluster or through a high radial velocity. No reliable 
scale height nor space density has been determined yet. 
In addition to spectroscopically determined parameters 
this would require knowledge of the masses to derive 
distances and the lifetime of the sdO stage. However, the 
evolutionary status must be identified beforehand. 
Several evolutionary scenarios for single and binary 
stars exist to explain the sdO stars, which will be discussed 
in the following. The situation is complicated by the fact 
that the sdO stars cover a wide range in the HRD and 
comprise very different chemical compositions. In this 
context one question requires special attention: How did 
some sdOs become helium-rich? 


Post-AGB scenario 

The hottest and most luminous sdOs are found in the 
region of CSPNe. Therefore, those few sdOs with an 
associated planetary nebula can be identified as post-AGB 
stars evolving from the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) 
towards the white dwarfs. Heber and Hunger (1987, FBS2) 
suggested that the helium-rich sdOs in the region of the 
CSPNe may be linked to extreme helium and RCrB stars 
and could be products of a late helium shell flash scenario 
in which a star leaves the AGB, becomes a white dwarf and 
suffers a late helium shell flash. This takes the star back 
to the AGB and the post-AGB evolution repeats. The time 
span until the star is in the CSPNe range for the second 
time is sufficiently long to let the planetary nebula, ejected 
on first leaving the AGB, disappear. 


Post-EHB scenario 

The majority of the sdOs are found at the extreme end of 
the HB along the He-MS. The close proximity in the HRD to 
the sdB stars suggests an evolutionary connection between 
these two groups. Indeed, evolutionary tracks leaving the 
extreme end of the HB, the EHB (the position of the sdB 
stars) pass through the region in the HRD where sdOs are 
found. This scenario therefore is a plausible explanation, 
at least for many of the helium-normal sdOs. The post- 
EHB sdOs would have a very narrow mass range around 
0.5 Mo. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


sdO Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It was long discussed how helium-rich sdO could be 
explained in this scenario, since a transition of a helium- 
poor sdB into a helium-rich sdO must have occurred then. 
Convective mixing caused by the helium ionization does 
not start off as long as the helium abundance is as low 
as in the sdB stars. A possible solution might be that the 
hydrogen-rich envelope, which was inert on the EHB, re- 
ignites during the post-EHB phase followed by excursions 
towards the AGB. The luminosity is not sufficient to let 
the star ascend the AGB and it therefore returns back to 
the sdO region. This excursion might cause deep mixing 
processes, which would help to explain the transition from 
hydrogen-rich sdBs to helium-rich sdOs. 

UV bright stars in globular clusters have been 
analysed recently by Moehler ef al (1998) and were 
identified as post-EHB or post-early AGB stars, the hotter 
ones being sdOs with a normal H/He ratio. The detection 
of sdOs in globular clusters is especially interesting in 
connection with the lower-than-expected detection rate of 
CSPNe in globular clusters. This matches the significantly 
higher population of the EHB where the stars evolve into 
post-EHB or post-early AGB stars, but cannot evolve to the 
top of the AGB and become CSPNe. 


Delayed helium core flash scenario 

The post-EHB scenario requires an exact tuning of the 
mass loss on the red giant branch (RGB) if the sdB stars, 
and therefore in the above picture also the sdOs, are 
explained by single star evolution. Mass loss on the 
RGB must be sufficiently high to remove most of the 
hydrogen-rich layer around the helium core at the moment 
the helium core ignites. Hydrogen layer masses below 
about 0.02 Mo are required to have a sufficiently hot star 
on the HB. If, however, the mass loss on the RGB is 
too high then the helium core never reaches its ignition 
mass and the star ends as helium white dwarf without a 
HB phase. The scenario of the delayed helium flash as 
presented by Sweigart (1997, FBS3) opens the possibility 
to explain the cooler and most compact sdOs, especially 
the cluster of helium-rich sdOs around Tag ~*~ 45000K 
and log g © 5.8, not covered by post-EHB tracks. If high 
mass loss terminated the RGB evolution before the helium 
core ignites, this ignition can still happen when the star 
is already on the white dwarf cooling sequence. The flash 
takes the star into the region of the sdOs also covering those 
compact sdOs which cannot be explained in the post-EHB 
scenario. Helium enrichment would be the consequence of 
mixing and burning of the remaining hydrogen-rich layer 
during the flash. 


Subdwarfs and binary star evolution 

Besides the evolution of single stars, binary evolution 
could also produce sdO stars. If two helium white dwarfs 
in a close binary system merge due to angular momentum 
loss through gravitational waves, the result could be an 
sdO star. The problem for this scenario is the observational 
lack of possible progenitor systems. The long time scale of 
this evolution would also imply membership of an old 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


population. This scenario might therefore account for 
individual sdOs but not for the group in total. 

Subdwarf O stars in binary systems are a valuable 
tool to check the evolutionary status since the stellar 
masses can be determined independently. However, mass 
transfer before the pre-subdwarf stage has to be excluded 
in order to test single-star scenarios. As discussed by 
Heber (1992), this seems not to be the case even in the 
widest system. On the other hand, the mass transfer is a 
plausible explanation for the helium enrichment through 
removal of the progenitor’s envelope. 


Bibliography 

Bauer F and Husfeld D 1995 Metal abundances in 
subdwarf O stars Astron. Astrophys. 300 481-92 

Dreizler S 1993 Spectral analysis of extremely helium rich 
subdwarf O-stars Astron. Astrophys. 273 212-20 

Greenstein J L and Sargent A L 1974 The nature of faint 
blue stars in the halo II Astrophys. J. Suppl. 28 157-209 

Haas S, Dreizler S, Heber U, Jeffery S and Werner K 1996 
Iron and nickel abundances of subluminous O-stars. 
I. NLTE-model atmospheres with line blanketing by 
iron group elements Astron. Astrophys. 311 669-79 

Heber U 1992 Hot subluminous stars in The Atmospheres of 
Early-Type Stars, Lecture Notes in Physics 401 (Berlin: 
Springer) p 233 

Lanz T, Hubeny I and Heap S R 1997 Non-LTE line- 
blanketed model atmospheres of hot stars. III. Hot 
subdwarfs: The sdO star BD +75°325 Astrophys. J. 485 
843-58 

Moehler S, Landsman W and Napiwotzki R 199, Hot UV 
bright stars in globular clusters Astron. Astrophys. 335 
510-6 

Philip A G D, Hayes D S and Liebert J W 1987 The 
Second Conference on Faint Blue Stars, IAU Coll. 95 
(Schenectady: L Davis Press) 

Philip A G D, Liebert J W and Saffer R A 1997 The Third 
Conference on Faint Blue Stars (Schenectady: L Davis 
Press) 


Stefan Dreizler 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seares, Frederick Hanley (1873-1964) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Seares, Frederick Hanley (1873-1964) 


Born in Michigan, joined the original staff of the Mount 
Wilson Observatory. He used astrophotography of Jacosus 
KAPTEYN’S Selected areas as part of the worldwide effort 
to determine the structure of the Galaxy, standardizing 
the stellar magnitude system. He extended it beyond the 
eighteenth magnitude by photographing stars of different 
brightnesses through wire screens and comparing the 
diffracted images of bright stars with the zeroth-order 
images of the faint ones. He used the body of data that this 
work produced to investigate the brightness of the Milky 
Way and the distribution and properties of its interstellar 
dust. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Season 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Season 


Natural environmental and climatic changes occurring 
as a planet completes one orbit of the Sun. Any planet 
experiences seasons as long as its rotation axis is not at 
90° to the plane of its orbit (the plane of the ecliptic, in 
the case of the Earth). Seasonal effects are very marked 
on Earth and Mars, especially at the poles. On Earth 
the four seasons—winter, spring, summer and autumn— 
begin in the Northern hemisphere on the winter solstice 
(December 22 or 23), the vernal equinox (March 20 or 21), 
the summer solstice, (June 21 or 22), and the autumnal 
equinox (September 22 or 23). In the Southern hemisphere, 
summer and winter are reversed, as are spring and 
autumn. 

At the poles, the seasons consist of a short summer 
and a long winter when there is continuous darkness all 
winter and continuous daylight or twilight all summer. In 
low latitudes, where the range of the annual solar radiation 
and temperature cycle is very small, seasonal changes are 
based largely on rainy and dry periods. 

Outside the tropics and the polar regions, seasons are 
distinguished by the temperature oscillating between a 
single maximum and a single minimum. This oscillation 
results from the annual variation in the angle at which the 
Sun’s rays reach the Earth’s surface and the duration of 
sunlight on the Earth’s surface each day. Inclined about 
66° 33’ to the orbital plane, the Earth’s axis maintains a 
nearly constant orientation in space as it orbits the Sun. 
During the six-month half of each orbit when the North 
Pole is inclined toward the Sun, a point in the Northern 
hemisphere receives the Sun’s rays at an angle closer to 90° 
than does a point in the Southern hemisphere. The result is 
greater heating and more hours of daylight in the Northern 
hemisphere than in the Southern hemisphere. During the 
following six months the conditions are reversed. 

The amount of solar radiation arriving at the surface 
of a planet is also affected by the eccentricity of its orbit. 
Because the Earth currently reaches perihelion (closest 
approach to the Sun) in early January, the input of solar 
radiation to the Northern hemisphere during Northern 
hemisphere winter is slightly greater than the input 
to the Southern hemisphere during that hemisphere’s 
winter. Conversely, the input of solar radiation to the 
Northern hemisphere in summer is less than to the 
Southern hemisphere in summer. Furthermore, because 
the Earth travels slightly faster along its orbit at perihelion 
than at aphelion, the Southern hemisphere summer 
is of marginally shorter duration than the Northern 
hemisphere summer. Because of its greater orbital 
eccentricity (0.0934, compared to 0.0167 for the Earth), 
these effects are more marked in the case of Mars. 

Because the rotational axes of planets precess 
(undergo slow periodic changes in their orientation), 
the times at which planets reach perihelion or aphelion 
migrate slowly through the seasons; for example, in 
about 13000 years’ time, the Earth will reach perihelion 
during the Northern hemisphere summer. Furthermore, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


because of the gravitational influence of other solar system 
bodies, the axial inclinations and orbital eccentricities of 
the planets undergo slow, quasi-periodic changes that 
alter the input of solar energy at different latitudes 
during the different seasons and cause climatic changes. 
According to M Milankovich, the combination of these 
three cycles leads, from time to time, to a drop in the 
Earth’s temperature that triggers the onset of ice ages. 
Mars experiences greater changes in axial inclination and 
orbital eccentricity than does the Earth. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Secchi, Angelo (1818-78) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Secchi, Angelo (1818-78) 


Born in Reggio Emilia, became a Jesuit and was exiled 
with the rest of the order by Mazzini’s Roman Republic. 
After a period at Georgetown Observatory, he returned to 
Italy in 1849 as director of the Roman College Observatory, 
constructing a new observatory dome on top of the main 
pillars of the incomplete church of Saint Ignazio. Secchi 
used its telescopes for solar and stellar research, one of 
the first astronomers to concentrate on physical properties 
rather than positions. He classified the spectra of over 
4000 stars into five classes based on the appearance of the 
spectra (this work developed and superseded by the more 
detailed Harvard system of EDWARDPICKERING), and studied 
the planets. He discovered that Jupiter was gaseous. He 
drew the dark lines that join areas of Mars, and used the 
word canali, a direction taken up by SCHIAPARELLI. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Second of Arc ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Second of Arc 


One second of angular measurement. Also known as ‘arc 
second’ (abbreviation ‘arcsec’) and denoted by the symbol 
”,asecond of arc is one-sixtieth of a minute of arc (arcmin) 
which, in turn, is one-sixtieth of a degree. There are 3600 
(60 x 60) seconds of arc in 1 degree and 206 265 seconds of 
arc in one radian. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Secondary Crater 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Secondary Crater 


A small crater formed on a planetary body by a block 
of ejecta thrown out during the excavation of a larger 
impact crater, the primary crater. Secondary craters from 
recent impact events, such as those associated with the 
lunar crater Tycho, tend to be more easily identifiable 
as secondary features. Some are clustered around the 
primary crater, and tend to be irregular, having been 
formed by low-angle, low-velocity impacts. Others, 
produced by ejecta on higher trajectories travelling faster, 
are found quite far away and tend to be more circular. They 
can occur as crater chains, as on the Moon for example 
(though some crater chains are volcanic in origin) and in 
the so-called intercrater plains of Mercury. Other bodies 
on which secondary craters have been identified include 
Ganymede, associated with the large multiringed impact 
feature Gilgamesh, and Europa, where they are presumed 
to have been formed by the impacts that produced large 
craters such as Pwyll. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seeing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Seeing 


The sharpness of a telescope image determined by the 
degree of turbulence in the Earth’s atmosphere. 

Temperature alters the refractive index of air, so 
bubbles of air at different temperatures, blown by the wind 
across the aperture of a telescope, cause a distortion of its 
image of a star, much like the effect of wrinkled bathroom 
window glass. Physically the effect of inhomogeneous 
refractive index corrugates the incoming planar wave front 
from the star, and its image does not focus to a point (or 
to a near-point-like diffraction disk). A crucial quality is 
the size of the bubbles of inhomogeneous air relative to 
the aperture of the telescope. Small aperture telescopes 
view the star through not many bubbles and the effect 
of a single bubble is to tilt the incoming light beam. As 
the wind blows the bubbles across the telescope, the star 
image dances in the focal plane. As viewed in a very 
small telescope such as the eye, the star may twinkle a lot. 
By contrast, a large telescope views a star image through 
many bubbles and the image is stationary but diffuse. 
In the intermediate case, the image shows condensations 
or ‘speckles’—the technique of speckle interferometry 
constitutes a way to sharpen the image. 

Seeing is quoted in arc seconds across a star image. 
There is no clear convention whether the number quoted 
is the Full Width at Half Maximum, of the light distribution 
in the image, or the diameter of the circle enclosing 90% 
(or 95%, or 99%) of the radiant flux. Eye-estimates of 
seeing are not very reliable because the eye is a quick- 
response detector and picks out the brighter core of the 
image, minimizing the apparent size of the seeing disk. 

Seeing is crucial to the performance of a telescope. 
For this reason, amateurs avoid placing telescopes near 
sources of heat (such as chimneys and houses) and seek 
country locations for their observations, and professionals 
place their telescopes on high mountains in undisturbed 
air, designing the observatory buildings and telescopes 
to minimize seeing induced by the equipment (‘dome 
seeing’). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Selene (Selenological and Engineering Explorer) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Selene (Selenological and 
Engineering Explorer) 


Japanese lunar exploration project conducted jointly by 
NASDA and the Institute of Space and Astronautical 
Science (ISAS). Launch is planned for 2003. Consists of 
a lunar polar orbiting satellite and a relay satellite. After 
one year, the polar orbiter’s propulsion module will soft- 
land on the Moon. The major objectives are to obtain 
data necessary for clarifying the origin and evolution of 
the Moon, and to develop technologies vital for lunar 
exploration, such as soft landing technology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seleucus of Seleucia (c. 190 Bc—?) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Seleucus of Seleucia (c. 190 BCc—?) 


Greek philosopher, born in Seleucia, on the Tigris River 
in Babylon. He followed Aristarchus in holding that the 
Earth rotated on its axis and revolved around the Sun. He 
correlated the tides of the Indian Ocean with the position 
of the Moon, theorizing a causal connection from the Moon 
to the sea through the Earth’s atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Self-Organized Criticality and Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Self-Organized Criticality and 
Turbulence in the Solar System 
and Beyond 


Complexity, an ubiquitous phenomenon? 

Forest fires, earthquakes, avalanches, solar flares and 
stellar flares caused by the collapse of ACCRETION DISKS all 
share common observable features. These systems do not 
appear to be in a single equilibrium. Rather, they migrate 
between many metastable states, releasing energy in an 
irregular, bursty manner. These energy release events, or 
avalanches, do not have the characteristic mean size, or 
timescale, that those seen in an equilibrium system 
would have. Instead their probability density functions 
are inverse power laws, P(x) ~ x where s is the expo- 
nent. In consequence, ‘extreme’ events (with large x) are 
thus much more probable than they would be in systems 
in equilibrium which exhibit Gaussian statistics 
(P(x) ~ exp(-x2/ 02). 

A recent paradigm is that these non-equilibrium sys- 
tems are highly correlated. In such complex systems the 
physics occurring on different scales is strongly coupled. 
As a consequence we say that the observed behavior is 
scaling, that is to say it is statistically self-similar, and on 
the average looks the same on any scale. The corollary of 
this is inverse power law statistics, and the presence of 
self-similarity (and possibly fractality, i.e. a non-integer 
dimension) in the spatiotemporal structure of the events 
themselves. This key aspect of the phenomenology aris- 
es from the nature of the coupling between processes on 
many scales, rather than from individual processes when 
understood in isolation. Thus, although these individual 
processes (say plasma instabilities or the point of ignition 
in forest fires) may be very different, the way in which 
processes on different scales couple may share the same 
mathematical description. 

A topical, and in principle generic, paradigm that 
provides elements of a spatiotemporal description for 
such complex, highly correlated systems is that of self- 
organized criticality (SOC), introduced by Bak et al 
(1987). Essentially, such a system is high dimensional, 
with non-linear coupling between the many nodes of the 
system. Characteristically this coupling takes the form of 
a hysteresis. A local variable characterizing, say, stress in 
an earthquake model, or free energy in a plasma, is 
driven to increase, but the system does not relax until an 
(arbitrary) critical threshold, that is a threshold for insta- 
bility, is exceeded. Once this threshold is exceeded, the 
system relaxes locally on a fast timescale to a value well 
below critical. This fast local reconfiguration may trigger 
instability in its vicinity, thus initiating an avalanche of 
energy release. The driven system then releases energy in 
bursts and crucially it does not relax back to an equilib- 
rium ground state but, rather, returns after each 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


avalanche to one of many metastable states. The 
avalanches then can occur on all sizes supported by the 
system and have no characteristic scale, instead exhibit- 
ing inverse power law statistics. 

A related class of systems is that of turbulent fluids. 
Again, one in principle has a system of equations that 
specify the dynamics, the Navier-Stokes equation in the 
case of FLUID DYNAMICS or (in the case of a plasma on suf- 
ficiently large spatiotemporal scales) MAGNETOHYDRO- 
DYNAMICS (MHD). In practice, once a parameter charac- 
terizing the flow is increased beyond a certain threshold, 
the dynamics becomes highly irregular. In the 1940s 
Kolmogorov showed from energy and dimensionality 
considerations that turbulence should have a self-similar 
energy cascade. The resulting power laws in, for exam- 
ple, the wavenumber spectrum (k spectrum) have expo- 
nents which can be obtained from Kolmogorov’s theory. 
A different approach in which there has also been con- 
siderable progress is to model the cascade in energy 
using dynamical systems techniques (see for example 
Bohr et al (1998) and references therein). These seek to 
describe the turbulent cascade in terms of the non-linear 
coupling of the different k shells. The relevance of SOC to 
these approaches is that it may provide insights that will 
lead to a spatiotemporal theory of turbulence that pre- 
dicts not only the formation and evolution of spatial 
structure but also the scaling laws and the observed cor- 
relation in both space and time. 


Self-organized criticality, the renormalization 
group approach 

An elegant analytical framework for SOC is provided by 
the renormalization group (RG) procedure (for an intro- 
duction see Wilson (1979) and Sethna et al (2001); a 
detailed discussion of the method is given by Cardy 
(1996)). The key idea here is to consider the effect of 
coarse graining a physical system. This may be pictured 
either as examining the system averaged over a progres- 
sively longer and longer spatial scale or as stepping 
backwards from a given system so that the available res- 
olution is progressively reduced. The mathematics of the 
renormalization procedure (‘group’ is in some ways a 
misnomer as the transformation does not have an 
inverse) essentially embodies a recurrence relation that 
describes any single step in the above coarse graining of 
a system. Importantly, the coarse graining may be 
applied in an abstract system space, where the coordi- 
nates are the various values of parameters in a given 
theoretical model or different models, or in real (configu- 
ration) space (see figures 4—6 of Sethna et al (2001)). We 
can specify a path (the renormalization flow) of the sys- 
tem in the corresponding RG space which has coordi- 
nates that essentially specify the number of times that the 
coarse graining operation has been applied. The system 
may be found to possess a fixed point in this RG space; 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Self-Organized Criticality and Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that is, the dynamics appears to be unchanged as we 
repeatedly coarse grain. If the renormalization is in real 
space, the implication of such a fixed point is that the 
dynamics must then be the same on all spatial scales 
under suitable rescaling; hence the dynamics is self-sim- 
ilar. In this case the RG will predict the exponent of the 
inverse power law statistics of event size and so forth (for 
an example applicable to THE MAGNETOSPHERE OF THE 
EARTH, see Tam et al (2000)). If the renormalization is in 
system space, the fixed point provides a fundamental 
prediction of the universality of the system; the different 
values of the many available parameters produce the 
same dynamics in the repeatedly coarse grained system 
and thus, although the microphysical processes may be 
very different, the macroscopic physics will be the same. 
An example here is the identical exponents describing 
the self-similar fluctuations in a liquid—gas critical point 
and a ferromagnetic critical point (Goldenfeld 1992). The 
RG thus provides the theoretical basis for understanding 
why universality, and self-similarity, can occur. Although 
it may appear that the microphysics has been ‘lost’ in this 
analysis this is not the case; instead, the physics on all 
scales is embodied in the recurrence relation that relates 
the physics on one scale to that of the next, more coarse- 
grained scale. 

Renormalization (successive coarse graining) in con- 
figuration space of SOC models and some natural sys- 
tems has revealed that the dynamics is governed by a 
fixed point and in this sense such systems are indeed crit- 
ical. As a consequence, in the vicinity of the fixed point 
the avalanches have no characteristic scale, exhibiting 
inverse power law statistics with characteristic expo- 
nents. If the renormalization flow in system space is 
always towards the fixed point the system self-organizes 
towards criticality with weak dependence on tuning 
parameters (see also Jensen 1998) and independently of 
its starting point in the system space. In such a system, 
details of the microphysics, such as thresholds for local 
instability, would not strongly affect the macroscopic 
physics. Thus if a given system is tractable to RG 
approaches it is possible to analytically establish whether 
the system is in SOC and to predict the characteristic 
exponents of event statistics. 

Unfortunately, many physical systems, and in par- 
ticular the hierarchy of plasma equations, are so far 
intractable to the RG. An approach is then to construct a 
simple analytical model for the system (a sandpile or 
‘avalanche’ model, say) that preserves the conservation 
properties and symmetries of the physical system of 
interest but which is also tractable to the RG. 


Numerical approaches 

The intermediate step is to construct simple numerical 
models which mimic the physical system and which are 
computationally tractable, that is they can be run on a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


sufficiently large spatial grid, and for a sufficient time, to 
test for self-similarity, i.e. to establish power law statistics 
in events. For a discussion of numerical, as well as ana- 
lytical, approaches to SOC see Jensen (1998) and for a 
review relevant to magnetospheric physics see Chapman 
and Watkins (2001). Once the dynamics of these simple 
systems has been understood, one can then in principle 
use RG to establish whether the simple model is in the 
same universality class as the physical system of interest. 
In practice a more readily achievable goal is to use real 
space RG to obtain the scaling predicted by the model. 
This can then be directly compared with observations of 
the physical system. Simple numerical models also allow 
the effect of finite-sized systems on the dynamics to be 
explored; the real space RG naturally only treats systems 
where length scales can be taken arbitrarily large (see, for 
example, Tam et al (2000)). 

The numerical sandpile approach parallels that of 
shell models for turbulence, where numerical models 
(difference equations) in k space describe an energy cas- 
cade from one k mode to the next; these are constructed 
to preserve the symmetries and conservation properties 
of the Navier-Stokes equations (see Bohr et al (1998) for 
a discussion). SOC models may also be contrasted with 
other numerical schemes where difference equations 
locally couple the nodes (typically spatial coordinates at 
which fields are defined) on the grid. Coupled map lat- 
tices use chaotic maps to specify the local spatiotempo- 
ral evolution of the system; these systems can exhibit 
self-similarity but require fine tuning of the parameter of 
the map (for a review see Kaneko (1993)). The perhaps 
more familiar example is where the local difference 
equations are obtained directly from the governing 
equations of the system (say the MHD equations) essen- 
tially by Taylor expansion. Provided that the difference 
scheme captures the essential physics of MHD, and a 
sufficiently large computational grid is used, these can 
generate self-similar dynamics in the form of turbulent 
cascades (for a recent example see Miiller and Biskamp 
(2000)). Directly physically motivated simulations of this 
type can provide insight into the spatiotemporal struc- 
ture and in particular the role of topology in an evolving 
turbulent system. Unless tractable to the RG, they can- 
not establish whether the self-similarity found in the 
simulation is a universal property of turbulence or is 
unique to the particular conditions and geometry of the 
simulation. 


Solar system plasmas: complicated or complex? 

Observational motivation for SOC in the solar system 
and beyond currently centers around evidence of self- 
similarity and also evidence of intermittent, bursty 
anomalous transport (seen also in artificial plasma con- 
finement systems such as Tokamaks, see Chapman et al 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Self-Organized Criticality and Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(2001)). A significant difficulty is that establishing a 
power law in the statistics of events requires large 
datasets with a dynamic range spanning several orders 
of magnitude. Nevertheless, self-similar statistics of 
bursty energy release have been found in x-ray flux from 
solar flares over several orders of magnitude (see, for 
example, Crosby et al (1993) and references therein); this 
prompts comparisons with simple avalanche models 
(see, for example, Lu and Hamilton (1991)). Self-similar- 
ity, and, by implication, SOC, has also been inferred from 
the power spectra of stellar accretion disks (e.g. 
Mineshige et al 1994). In the case of the Earth’s magne- 
tosphere, the challenge is to find an observable that 
unambiguously contains information on all the 
avalanches hypothesized to be occurring in the system 
and an attempt has been made with images of patches of 
activity in the AURORA (Lui et al 2000)). This followed the 
observation of power law power spectra of indices (AE — 
auroral electrojet) which characterize magnetic perturba- 
tion underneath the auroral oval. However, power laws 
are not a unique property of SOC (for a review of other 
processes see Sornette (2000)). In particular, power law 
power spectra are consistent with a colored noise process 
(for a magnetospheric example in the context of chaos 
see Shan et al (1991)). 

Progress is thus needed on two fronts. First, a com- 
bination of numerical experiments and RG analysis is 
needed to make predictions of quantitative observables 
such as the exponents of inverse power law statistics of 
events. The theory needs to establish that non-trivial self- 
similarity arises from criticality as a natural emergent 
property of the multiscale plasma process at hand. 
Second, unambiguous observables with sufficient 
dynamic range are needed to test the prediction of scal- 
ing behavior. The promise of SOC is that it may provide 
a unifying theory of anomalous plasma transport in nat- 
ural astrophysical plasma confinement systems. 


Bibiliography 

Bak P, Tang C and Wiesenfeld K 1987 Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 
381 

Bohr T, Jensen M H, Paladin G and Vulpiani A 1998 
Dynamical Systems Approach to Turbulence 
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press) 

Cardy J 1996 Scaling and Renormalization in Statistical 
Physics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Chapman S C and Watkins N W 2001 Avalanching and 
self organised criticality: a paradigm for magnetos- 
pheric dynamics? Space Sci. Rev. 95 293 (see also 
other reviews in this issue) 

Chapman S C, Dendy R O and Hnat B 2001 Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 86 2814 

Crosby N B, Aschwanden M J and Dennis B R 1993 
Frequency distributions and correlations of solar x- 
ray flare parameters Sol. Phys. 143 275 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Goldenfeld N 1992 Lectures on Phase Transitions and the 
Renormalisation Group (Perseus Publishing) 

Jensen H J 1998 Self Organized Criticality (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Kaneko K 1993 Theory and Applications of Coupled Map 
Lattices (New York: Wiley) 

Lu E T and Hamilton R J 1991 Avalanches and the distri- 
bution of solar flares Astrophys. J. 380 89 

Lui A T Y, Chapman S C and Liou K et al 2000 Is the 
dynamic magnetosphere an avalanching system? 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 27 911 

Mineshige S, Takeuchi M and Nishimori H 1994 Is a 
black hole accretion disk in a self-organised critical 
state? Astrophys. J. 435 125 

Miiller W C and Biskamp D 2000 Scaling properties of 
three dimensional MHD turbulence Phys. Rev. Lett. 
84 475 

Sethna J P, Dahmen K A and Meyers C R 2001 Crackling 
noise Nature 410 242 

Shan L-H, Hansen P, Goertz C K and Smith R A 1991 
Chaotic appearance of the AE index Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 18 147 

Sornette D 2000 Critical Phenomena in the Natural Sciences 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Tam S, Chang T, Chapman S C and Watkins N W 2000 
Analytical determination of power law index for the 
Chapman et al sandpile (FSOC) analog for magne- 
tospheric activity-renormalization group analysis 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 27 1367 

Wilson K G 1979 Problems in physics on many scales of 
length Sci. Am. 241 140 

Sandra C Chapman and Nicholas W Watkins 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Separation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Separation 


The angular distance between two objects, measured in 
arc units on the celestial sphere. This is most commonly 
used in measurements of double and multiple stars, and 
together with the position angle defines the observed form 
of the system. It is also used to determine the observed 
distance of a satellite from its primary planet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Serpens 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Serpens 


(the Serpent; abbrev. Ser, gen. Serpentis; total area 
637 sq. deg.) A constellation that is unique in that it is 
divided into two: Serpens Caput (the Serpent’s Head; 
area 429 sq. deg.), which lies mostly in the northern 
sky between Bootes and Hercules, and culminates at 
midnight in mid-May, and Serpens Cauda (the Serpent’s 
tail; area 208 sq. deg.), which lies mostly in the southern 
sky between Ophiuchus and Scutum, and culminates at 
midnight in late June. It represents the huge snake held 
by Ophiuchus, the Serpent-bearer, around whose body it 
is coiled. The brightest stars of Serpens were cataloged by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A rather inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Serpens are a Serpentis (Unukalhai), magnitude 
2.6, n Serpentis, magnitude 3.2, 4 Serpentis, magnitude 
3.5, and & Serpentis, also magnitude 3.5. There are 
four other stars brighter than magnitude 4.0. Interesting 
stars in Serpens include 6 Serpentis (Alya), a wide 
double with white (A5) components, magnitudes 4.6 and 
5.0, separation 22”, that have the same proper motion, 
6 Serpentis, a close binary with white (A9 and A7) 
components, magnitudes 4.2 and 5.3, separation 4.0”, R 
Serpentis, a Mira-type variable (range 5.2-14.4, period 
about 356 days), and W Serpentis, an Algol-type eclipsing 
binary (range 8.4-10.2, period 14.15 days). 

Other interesting objects in Serpens include M5 (NGC 
5904), a sixth-magnitude globular cluster, and IC 4703 (the 
Eagle Nebula), an emission nebula which contains the 
open cluster M16 (NGC 6611) of more than 60 stars fainter 
than eighth magnitude. 


See also: Eagle Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SETI Institute 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SETI Institute 


The SETI Institute, founded in 1984, is a private non-profit 
center for research and education related to the scientific 
search for extraterrestrial life. 

The SETI Institute currently encompasses more than 
30 research projects. The most visible of these is 
Project Phoenix, the world’s most sensitive search for 
extraterrestrial intelligence (‘SETI’). Begun in 1995 at the 
Parkes 210 ft radiotelescope in Australia, Phoenix moved 
to the 140 ft telescope at the National Radio Astronomy 
Observatory in Green Bank, West Virginia in 1996. From 
fall of 1998 through the summer of 2003, observations will 
take place at the 1000 ft Arecibo radiotelescope in Puerto 
Rico. Project Phoenix is a targeted search which scans 
billions of frequency channels for narrow-band continuous 
wave and pulsed signals from nearby Sun-like stars. It 
commands slightly more than half of the Institute’s total 
operation, and is privately funded. The Institute is now 
developing and prototyping new system designs for next- 
generation SETI. 

The balance of research projects at the SETI Institute 
fall within the Institute’s Center for the Study of Life 
in the Universe. These projects investigate the origin 
and evolution of life on Earth and possibilities for life 
elsewhere. Most of this work is currently funded through 
competitively won peer-reviewed government research 
grants. 

For further information see 
http://www-seti.org. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Severin [Soerensen, Longomontanus], Christian 
(1562-1647) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Severin [Soerensen, 
Longomontanus], Christian 
(1562-1647) 


Danish astronomer, born in Longberg (from which his 
Latin name), Jutland, studied astronomy under TycHo 
BRAHE, became professor of mathematics and astronomy at 
Copenhagen. His work, Astronomia Danica, was effectively 
Tycho Brahe’s legacy, and resolutely maintained the 
geocentric theory of the planets in the Tychonic version 
(the Moon and Sun revolving round the stationary Earth 
and the remaining planets revolving around the Sun). His 
only concession to COPERNICUS was to introduce the concept 
of the rotation of the Earth on its axis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sextans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sextans 


(the Sextant; abbrev. Sex, gen. Sextantis; area 314 sq. deg.) 
An equatorial constellation which lies between Leo and 
Hydra, and culminates at midnight in late February. It 
was introduced as Sextans Uraniae (Urania’s Sextant) to 
commemorate the astronomical sextant (which is larger 
than the later marine sextant) by the astronomer Johannes 
Hevelius (1611-87) of Danzig (Gdansk), who included it 
in his atlas Firmamentum Sobiescianum sive Uranographia of 
1687. 

A small, insignificant constellation, the brightest star 
in Sextans is of magnitude 4.5. Interesting objects include 
NGC 3115 (the Spindle Galaxy), a ninth-magnitude 
lenticular galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Seyfert Galaxies 


In many respects Seyfert galaxies are similar to any 
other galaxy, except their nuclear regions show unusual 
properties: they can be much brighter and their spectra 
show strong emission lines of high excitation. Such nuclei 
are called ‘active’, and so Seyfert galaxies belong to the 
wider category of ‘ACTIVE GALAXIES’ or, more specifically, 
they have ‘ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI’ (AGN). Seyferts were, 
in fact, the first type of active galaxy to be discovered. 

In the zoo of AGNs the power of the nuclear activity 
spans a wide range. Within this zoo, Seyferts show 
intermediate levels of activity, being more powerful than 
LINER galaxies but less powerful than Quasars. Seyferts 
also join the majority of active galaxies in being ‘radio- 
quiet’, with radio luminosities 10°-10* times weaker than 
the ‘radio loud’ category, which includes RADIO GALAXIES 
and radio quasars. 

Over the past 20 years much effort has gone into 
finding Seyfert galaxies amongst the more normal galaxy 
population. Efficient ways to detect Seyferts include 
looking specifically for galaxies with bright UV emission, 
bright x-ray emission, or unusual far-infrared colors, since 
these are common characteristics of Seyferts. The fraction 
of galaxies with active nuclei depends on the level of 
activity: moderate luminosity Seyferts make up ~ 1-2% of 
nearby bright galaxies, lower luminosity Seyferts make up 
~ 10%, while LINERs make up ~ 40%. Currently, about 
800 Seyferts are known, though the number continues to 
rise. 

Froma wide range of studies, a picture has emerged of 
the structure of the central regions of Seyferts. Briefly, the 
gravitational field of a supermassive (10°-10° Mo) black 
hole provides the ultimate energy source, as gas falls 
inwards via a luminous accretion disk (see SUPERMASSIVE 
BLACK HOLES IN AGN). A small region of fast moving clouds 
surrounds this central engine, spanning a few light days 
or weeks, while a larger region of slower moving clouds 
extends out a few hundred to a few thousand light years. 
In some cases, oppositely directed collimated jets of low 
density gas plow into the surrounding galaxy, accelerating 
the interstellar medium and creating jet-like or linear 
radio structures. In at least some Seyferts, dense gas and 
dust shroud the innermost regions, hiding them from our 
direct view, though the nuclear radiation escapes in other 
directions to light up gas and dust residing much further 
out in the galaxy. 

The conditions that give rise to Seyfert activity 
are still under debate. While Seyferts are found in a 
wide range of galaxy types, they are more commonly 
found in reasonably luminous early-type spirals (e.g. 
types S0/a, Sa, Sb in the Hubble classification scheme). 
It seems, therefore, that prerequisites favoring Seyfert 
activity include a massive galaxy bulge and the presence 
of an interstellar medium. There is also evidence that 
Seyferts prefer galaxies with an asymmetric gravitational 
field arising from a bar or other distortion, possibly 
induced by a nearby companion galaxy. Such distortions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are thought to be instrumental in funneling gas down to 
the nuclear regions where it can then fuel the central black 
hole. 


Discovery, classification and detection 

The early identification of nearby Seyfert galaxies rested 
on two observational properties—their unusual nuclear 
spectra and their unusual nuclear brightness. While 
studying galaxy spectra for his PhD work in 1908, Fath 
noted strong emission lines in the spectrum of the nucleus 
of NGC 1068. These observations were confirmed in 1917 
by Slipher and by 1926 Hubble had added two more 
galaxies with similar spectra: NGC 4051 and NGC 4151. In 
1932 Humason noted that NGC 1275 had a bright starlike 
center, but it wasn’t until 1943 that CARLSEYFERT recognized 
a distinct class of galaxies with unusually bright and 
concentrated nuclei, and studied in detail six of the 12 
then known cases (NGC 1068, 1275, 3516, 4051, 4151, 
7469), leading to the group’s name: Seyfert galaxies (see 
figure 1). Seyfert’s spectra showed emission lines which 
were not only unusually strong, but also unusually wide. 
Interpreting the width of the spectral lines as Doppler 
shifts caused by motion of the ionized (line emitting) gas 
implied gas velocities in some objects of several thousand 
km s“|, far higher than velocities found in normal galaxies. 
A further subtlety Seyfert noticed was that in some objects 
the hydrogen lines were broader than the other lines. 

Little work was done until the 1960s, when it became 
clear that Seyfert galaxies shared a number of properties 
with the then recently discovered quasars. At this time, 
quasars posed a serious theoretical puzzle. While their 
high REDSHIFTS implied great distance and therefore high 
luminosity, their brightness had been found to vary from 
month to month, indicating that the region producing 
all this energy was only a few light months across—tiny 
compared to the rest of the galaxy. The puzzle of how so 
much energy could emerge from so small a volume was 
sufficiently acute that some astronomers even questioned 
whether the quasar redshifts were true indicators of 
distance, leading to the so-called ‘redshift controversy’. 
Although this controversy has since been resolved in 
favor of large distances it might never have been as 
problematic if Seyfert galaxies had been better studied 
in the early 1960s, since they are clearly low redshift 
counterparts to the quasars. Not only are their spectra 
basically similar, but in 1968 Ncc 4151 was found to vary in 
brightness, confirming a highly compact nuclear energy 
source. As more Seyferts and quasars were discovered, 
their separation in luminosity narrowed and finally even 
overlapped. Continuity had been established and, for 
most astronomers, the reality of the quasar distances and 
luminosities was no longer in doubt. 

In 1974, Khachikian and Weedman identified two 
types of Seyfert galaxy on the basis of the widths of the 
nuclear emission lines. Figure 2 shows example spectra 
of each Seyfert type. While spectra of type 2 Seyferts 
have a single set of relatively narrow emission lines, in 
the spectra of type 1 Seyferts the hydrogen and helium 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a b 


C 


Figure 1. Three photographs of NGC 4151 taken with increasing exposures (a, b, c) showing its unusually bright nucleus—an 
important characteristic used in the early identification of Seyfert galaxies. (Taken from Morgan W W 1968 Astrophys. J. 153 27) 


lines have an additional much broader component. In 
the simplest cases, the broad component is either absent 
(Seyfert 2) or strong and dominant (Seyfert 1). With 
better data it became clear that there is a wide range in 
the relative strength of the broad and narrow emission 
lines, and this led Osterbrock in 1981 to refine the Seyfert 
classification by introducing intermediate types. A good 
place to establish the classification is with the hydrogen HB 
line at rest wavelength 4861 A. As the broad component 
of Hf becomes weaker relative to the narrow component, 
the Seyfert type changes from 1 to 1.2 to 1.5 to 1.8. For 
Seyfert 1.8 galaxies, weak broad wings are just visible at 
the base of Hf while for Seyfert 1.9 galaxies they are only 
visible on the Ha emission line at 6563 A. In practice, 
these Seyfert sub-types have not been formally defined but 
instead give an overall indication of the degree to which 
the broad component is present. 

Although there are a number of Seyfert properties that 
depend on Seyfert type, perhaps the most noticeable is 
the ‘white light’ continuum coming from the nucleus. In 
normal galaxies the nuclear continuum is mostly starlight, 
but in active galaxies there can be additional emission, 
often blue in color and with few or no absorption features. 
This component is much stronger in Seyfert 1s, weaker 
in Seyfert 2s, and may even be undetectable in the lowest 
luminosity Seyfert 2s. Although we refer here to the optical 
continuum emission, this component extends into the UV 
and x-ray, and so emission in these spectral bands can also 
be quite different for Seyfert 1s and Seyfert 2s. 

Bearing in mind the principal features which 
distinguish Seyfert spectra from normal galaxy spectra— 
strong broad emission lines and a blue continuum—we 
can now follow the history of how Seyferts have been 
identified over the past 40 years. 

As outlined above, the first Seyferts were discovered 
essentially by accident when a galaxy spectrum was noted 
as being unusual. The first survey which identified many 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Seyferts was that of Markarian and collaborators at the 
Byurakan Observatory in Armenia, during the period 1962 
to 1981. This survey used a technique known as Objective 
Prism Spectroscopy to find galaxies with unusually blue 
continuum emission. The telescope was a 1.3 meter 
Schmidt telescope with a thin prism bolted over the 
entrance aperture. This combination gives relatively wide 
field photographs in which each star and galaxy appears as 
asmall spectrum. In this way, the spectra of many galaxies 
can be studied quickly, and those which appear unusual 
noted and listed. The survey covered ~ 10000 square 
degrees and yielded 1500 galaxies with blue continua, of 
which ~ 10% were Seyferts (the remainder were mainly 
STARBURST GALAXIES, blue because of the presence of young 
massive O and B type stars). Because of the emphasis 
on blue continuum, the Markarian Seyferts contain a 
relatively high proportion of Seyfert 1s (about 50%) and 
rather luminous Seyfert 2s. 

Since x-ray emission is common in active galaxies, 
x-ray surveys provide an effective means to find Seyferts. 
Starting in the late 1970s surveys have included those of the 
Ariel V, HEAO-1, Einstein and ROSAT satellites. Some of 
these were all-sky surveys, some included deeper pointed 
observations, some were sensitive to hard x-rays (2-10 
keV) and others to soft x-rays (~ 0.2-4 keV). In general, 
x-ray surveys tend to find Seyfert 1s since their nuclear 
continuum emission is stronger than in Seyfert 2s. 

In 1982, the IRAS satellite provided a huge list of 
galaxies which were relatively bright in the far infrared 
(25-100 xm). Although bright infrared flux by itself is 
no guarantee of Seyfert activity, the ‘color’ of the infrared 
emission can help distinguish between Seyfert and normal 
galaxies: normal galaxies have colder dust (~ 30 K) 
than Seyfert galaxies (~ 100-300 K) in which nuclear 
activity provides an additional heating source. Thus, 
IRAS-selected galaxies with ‘warm spectra’ have yielded 
many Seyferts. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Seyfert Spectra 


Mkn 1243 
Seyfert 1.0 


F, | NGC 5548 | 


Seyfert 1.5 eee 


Po 
oo 


(Ne IIT) 


to It) (0 TIT] 


Hy 


Mkn 1157 
Seyfert 2.0 


Lori} 


[OIIT] HB 


4363 HeII 


4500 
Rest Wavelength (A) 


5500 


Figure 2. Spectra of three Seyfert galaxies illustrating the 
difference between Seyfert 1, 1.5 and 2 classes. Principal 
emission lines are labeled, with square brackets indicating 
forbidden lines. (Adapted from Osterbrock D E 1984 Quart. J. R. 
Astron. Soc. 25 1.) 


Since Seyferts belong to the radio-quiet group of 
active galaxies, radio surveys at high flux levels tend not 
to find Seyferts, but rather radio galaxies. Deeper radio 
surveys, however, do pick up more Seyferts but along 
with many star-forming galaxies. On further study, the 
presence of a compact core with flatter spectral index 
increases the chance that the galaxy is a Seyfert. 

Perhaps the most reliable method of finding Seyferts, 
though also the least efficient, is optical spectroscopy of 
galacticnuclei. Inthe early 1990s the CfA redshift survey of 
about 2000 galaxies brighter than about magnitude 14-15 
found about 2.5% to be Seyferts with an even mix of Seyfert 
1s and 2s. Using smaller apertures and higher quality data, 
the deep Palomar survey of the nuclei of nearly 500 bright 
galaxies from the RSA catalogue yields about 10% Seyferts, 
including many of lower luminosity. In the near future, the 
SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY Will surely find many more. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A catalog of all known Seyferts has been maintained 
by Veron-Cetty and Veron, and at its last edition (1998) 
about 790 Seyferts were listed with redshifts < 0.1 and 
brighter than 17™ in V. 


Overall structure and geometry 
In this section we give a brief outline, without justification, 
of the basic structures found in Seyfert galaxies; brief 
because similar material is given elsewhere in this 
encyclopedia and also because more detailed descriptions 
of some of the structures are given in subsequent sections. 
Figure 3 gives a cartoon of the structures nested from 
innermost to outermost. The region sizes probably scale 
with luminosity, larger for quasars and smaller for low 
luminosity Seyferts and LINERs. The values given are 
rough guides for the case of moderate luminosity Seyferts. 
The ultimate origin for the energy which drives 
nuclear activity is thought to lie in the gravitational field of 
a central supermassive black hole of mass ~ 107-108 Mo. 
Gas falls into the black hole via an accretion disk, which 
radiates powerfully across much of the electromagnetic 
spectrum. The disk may span from a few Schwarzschild 
radii to a few thousand Schwarzschild radii, probably 
with x-ray emission coming from the inner parts, UV 
and optical from further out. It is this radiation which 
floods out into the galaxy and ionizes any surrounding 
gas, causing it to radiate emission lines. The innermost 
region of ionized gas resides a few light days from the 
center, and contains gas with density ~ 10’-10' atom 
cm? moving with speeds of a few thousand km s“!. 
Doppler shifts therefore lead to broad emission lines— 
hence the name: Broad Line Region (BLR). Outside the 
BLR, on scales from one to a few pc lies thick dense 
gas, possibly in the form of a torus. This gas blocks 
radiation coming from the innermost regions, which can 
only escape out of the equatorial plane along the torus 
axis. This partially collimated radiation field emerges 
further into the galaxy to ionize gas residing in a region 
out to a few kpc. In this region, the gas has a lower 
density ~ 10?-10° atom cm? and moves with speeds 
of a few hundred km s“!, leading to narrower emission 
lines—hence the name: Narrow Line Region (NLR). 
Because of the partially collimated radiation field, the 
NLR often appears elongated or even biconical, with 
axis matching that of the central radiation field. When 
a radio source is present it is often elongated, aligned 
with the NLR axis, and has approximately the same size. 
The radio source emerges from the inner regions as a 
bipolar flow, accelerating and possibly shocking some of 
the gas in the NLR. The entire NLR and associated radio 
structure usually fill a region a few kpc across within 
the bulge of the host galaxy, but randomly aligned with 
respect to obvious galactic structures and orientation. If 
there is a more extended gaseous component, it can be 
illuminated by the central ionizing radiation field, leading 
to faint extended emission, sometimes showing conical or 
biconical form. This is the so-called Extended Narrow Line 
Region (ENLR). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BH & Accretion Disk 


a 
Rap ~ 3-1000 Rs 


Nested structures 
within a 


Seyfert galaxy 


Dense ISM 


SL Torus / Lanes / Random ? 


~ 1-few kpc 


Radio 
Source 


Host galaxy & ENLR NLR 


Figure 3. Cartoon illustrating the nested structures thought to be present within Seyfert galaxies. 


Inherent in this picture is a lack of spherical symmetry, 
rooted in the anisotropic emergence of both radiation 
and radio emitting flows. The origin of the anisotropy 
might arise in either of two ways: (a) an intrinsic nuclear 
axis perhaps defined by the black hole spin and/or the 
accretion disk, and (b) partial obscuration by dense gas 
which blocks radiation in some directions but not in 
others. For Seyferts, partial obscuration is thought to 
be important. The simplest geometry envisioned is a 
thick disk or torus a few parsecs in size and aligned with 
the central engine axis. More recently, images from the 
Hubble Space Telescope (HST) have shown that dust lanes 
and filaments are common in the central few hundred 
parsecs, particularly in Seyfert 2s, raising the possibility 
that less coherent obscuration on these larger scales might 
also be important. Either way, the fact that the nuclear 
radiation can only emerge along particular lines of sight 
raises an interesting possibility which was first noted in 
1978 by Osterbrock: namely, that Seyfert 2s might actually 
be Seyfert 1s but oriented in such a way that our view to 
the central region is blocked. Stated slightly differently, the 
same Seyfert galaxy might appear as a Seyfert 1 from some 
directions and a Seyfert 2 from others. This constitutes a 
‘Unification’ scheme, since apparently different classes of 
objects are ‘unified’ into a single class. The important topic 
of unification arises in a number of contexts in the study of 
active galaxies and is discussed at length in ACTIVE GALAXIES: 
UNIFIED MODEL. Here we give a brief outline of the evidence 
supporting the particular case that many (though perhaps 
not all) Seyfert 2s are in fact hidden Seyfert 1s. 

First, the emission line regions of Seyfert 2s, on both 
large scales (ENLR) and small scales (NLR), are often 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


elongated, with a subset showing sharp edges and even 
conical or biconical form. These patterns are consistent 
with dense nuclear gas casting shadows in a strong 
central ionizing radiation field. When visible, the cone 
opening angles are ~ 40°-80°, suggesting ~ 25% of the 
surrounding sky sees the nuclear regions. Good examples 
of this are found in NCG 1068, NGC 5252, MKN 78, MKN 
573. 

Extending this topic further, one can use spectroscopy 
of the ionized gas to show that it sees a significantly 
brighter central radiation source than we see. There are 
two approaches. In the first, emission line strengths 
from extended gas are used to infer both the gas density 
and its degree of ionization. Knowing the distance 
between this gas and the central source then allows one 
to estimate the (ionizing) luminosity of the central source. 
This luminosity is often significantly greater than the 
luminosity we see directly, along our line of sight. The 
second approach uses the total Hf luminosity coming 
from all regions to estimate the total ionizing luminosity of 
the central source. This luminosity is again often found to 
be significantly greater than the luminosity we infer from 
our own line of sight to the nucleus. 

The third and perhaps most dramatic piece of 
evidence involves taking spectra of light that was initially 
moving out of the nucleus in one direction but then got 
reflected into our line of sight. This provides a sort 
of periscope, allowing one to look around a corner and 
into the nucleus from a different direction. The mirrors 
of the periscope are dust particles or electrons in the 
surrounding gas which scatter light in all directions, some 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of which comes towards us. Since the scattered light is 
so faint compared to the normal light we need a way 
to isolate it. Fortunately, the scattering process also 
induces polarization, and so a spectrum of the polarized 
light shows just the scattered component. Remarkably, 
for many of the brighter Seyfert 2s these polarized light 
spectra show Seyfert 1 form: strong non-stellar continuum 
and broad hydrogen and helium lines. The classic 
discovery was for Ncc 1068 by Antonucci and Miller in 1983, 
but since then many other examples have been found. 

A fourth approach is to compare the nuclear x- 
ray emission of Seyfert 1s and 2s. Consistent with 
unification, soft x-ray spectra show significant absorption 
towards Seyfert 2s but little or none towards Seyfert 1s. 
Furthermore, at higher x-ray energies where absorption 
isn’t important, the spectra of Seyfert 1s and 2s are often 
quite similar, with ratios of x-ray to optical flux much 
higher for the Seyfert 2s, as expected if the optical emission 
is blocked but the hard x-rays are not. 

Finally, there is some evidence for the nuclear 
obscuring material itself. When water masers are detected, 
they tend to be in Seyfert 2s. These sources form in dense 
warm molecular gas with long paths in our line of sight, 
consistent with an edge-on disk geometry. Also, infrared 
spectra are often dominated by thermal emission from 
warm dust. Although some of this originates on NLR 
scales, some comes from much smaller scales. The fact that 
the total luminosity of many Seyferts, particularly Seyfert 
2s, is dominated by the thermal infrared is consistent with 
the obscuration picture: much of the nuclear luminosity is 
absorbed by gas and dust whose principal mode of cooling 
is in the far infrared. 

Assuming, for the moment, that all Seyfert 2s contain 
hidden Seyfert 1s, then we can ascertain the extent of the 
obscuration by comparing the relative number of Seyfert 
2s (obscured) with Seyfert 1s (unobscured). In practice, it 
is important (and difficult) to select an unbiased sample of 
Seyferts using a property that is not thought to depend on 
orientation. Possibilities include radio flux, far-infrared 
flux, host galaxy magnitude, and narrow emission line 
flux, though none are ideal. With some uncertainty, the 
ratio of Seyfert 2s to Seyfert 1s found in such samples is 
roughly 2-5 to 1, suggesting ~ 20-30% of the sky sees 
an unobscured view of the nucleus, consistent with other 
estimates based on the opening angle of emission line 
cones. 

Whether all Seyfert 2s contain hidden Seyfert 1s is still 
an open question. Arguments against full unification of 
the two classes focus either on the absence of expected 
properties (for example, most Seyfert 2s have lower 
polarization than expected), or the fact that properties 
which should be the same in Seyfert 1s and 2s are not 
(for example, host galaxy morphology, and possibly radio 
luminosity). 


Relation of Seyferts to other AGN 
To the newcomer, it may seem that there are an annoyingly 
large number of names for different classes of active galaxy, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of which ‘Seyferts’ are only one class. This situation has 
arisen for a couple of reasons: (a) nuclear activity seems 
to have some genuine range of character, and (b) historical 
development is never clean and different approaches have 
naturally focused on different manifestations of activity. 
In hindsight, it is now possible to group the various 
categories in a more or less natural way which depends on 
two or three fundamental aspects of the activity itself: total 
luminosity, radio luminosity and variability. While these 
aspects are discussed in ACTIVE GALAXIES: OVERVIEW and ACTIVE 
GALACTIC NUCLEI: VARIABILITY, here we give a brief overview 
of the different classes of AGN, intending to locate Seyferts 
in their proper place. 

Consider first the enormous range in total luminosity 
of AGN: ~ 10° ergs"! (Mg ~ —10) at the lowest detectable 
end, up to ~ 10” erg s! (Ms ~ —30) at the highest. 
Seyferts span the low to intermediate range, overlapping 
somewhat on the high end with quasars. Since it 
now seems that Seyferts and quasars form a continuous 
physical sequence, any attempt at a formal separation is 
somewhat arbitrary. Although a morphological criterion 
is usually adequate (quasars have point-like appearance) 
close scrutiny of low redshift quasars often reveals galactic 
‘fuzz’ in ground-based images or clear host galaxies in 
HST images. For this reason, a luminosity criterion is 
sometimes chosen to delineate Seyferts and quasars. There 
is no consensus, but threshold values of Mg ~ —23 or 
Lz ~ 10* erg s“! are typical. While Seyferts and quasars 
may be physically similar, differences do seem to occur 
with increasing luminosity, including longer variability 
timescales indicating larger emission regions, the apparent 
loss of the ‘type 2’ class, and some line strength changes 
including the relative weakening of both broad and 
especially narrow lines relative to the continuum. 

Turning to lower luminosities, although one of the 
lowest luminosity AGNs is in fact a Seyfert (NGC 4395, 
Mz nuc ~ —10) most of the low luminosity AGNs belong to 
the ‘LINER’ class. This group was originally identified by 
Heckman in 1980 from a spectroscopic survey of a large 
number of bright nearby galaxies. A high fraction were 
found to have weak emission with low overall degree 
of ionization, hence the name: Low Ionization Nuclear 
Emission Line Regions, or LINERs. The exact nature of 
LINERs is still unclear, with evidence for an active nucleus 
inatleast ~ 20%: acompact nuclear UV source seen in HST 
images; a compact though weak nuclear radio source; or 
weak broad line emission visible at the base of Ha. A 
major uncertainty is the ionization mechanism for the gas. 
Possibilities include shocks or photoionization by either a 
weak nuclear UV source, very hot young stars or very hot 
evolved stars. 

Shortly after the identification of LINERs, a method 
for classifying emission line regions was introduced by 
Baldwin, Phillips and Terlevich and subsequently refined 
by Veilleux and Osterbrock. They used a number of 
diagrams which plotted the ratio of one pair of emission 
line fluxes against another pair. Figure 4 shows one of 
these diagrams and nicely illustrates how three major 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Diagnostic Line Ratios 


Seyferts 


((O O11} 45007} HB 44361) 


({N 11] 46583) Ho. 46563) 


Figure 4. One of several useful diagnostic diagrams which help 
distinguish between different classes of emission line object. 
(Adapted from Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active 
Galactic Nuclei (Cambridge University Press), figure 2.3, p 26). 


emission region types occupy different places on the 
diagram; in this case Seyferts separate from LINERs 
around [OIII] 45007/HB ~ 3 while Seyferts and LINERs 
separate from H II regions around [NII] 16584/Ha ~ 
0.6. These line ratio diagrams also provide a suitable 
place to compare observations with theoretical models. 
For example, the HII REGION sequence matches models 
of gas clouds with a range of metallicities photoionized 
by radiation from OB associations with a range of ages. 
Similarly, Seyferts and LINERs form a sequence that 
matches gas which is photoionized by a power law 
spectrum with a range of intensities; the highest excitation 
Seyferts correspond to the most intense nuclear radiation 
field. The apparent continuity of Seyferts and LINERs on 
these diagrams supports the possibility that at least some 
LINERs are simply low intensity Seyferts. 

Turning now to radio properties, Seyferts belong 
to the majority (~ 90%) of AGN in being radio quiet— 
more luminous than normal galaxies but ~ 10°-10* 
times fainter than radio-loud AGN. The closest radio-loud 
counterparts to Seyferts have similar optical luminosity 
and are called Broad Line Radio Galaxies (BLRG) and 
Narrow Line Radio Galaxies (NLRG), with optical spectra 
very similar (though not identical) to Seyfert 1s and 
Seyfert 2s respectively. At higher optical luminosity, we 
have radio-loud quasars, and at lower optical luminosity 
we have radio galaxies whose spectra are often LINER- 
like. Although most radio galaxies have huge radio 
sources which extend well outside the host galaxy, some 
have much smaller radio sources comparable in size to, 
though much more powerful than, the Seyfert sources 
(these are called, depending on details, Compact Steep 
Spectrum (CSS), Compact Double (CD) or Gigahertz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Peaked Spectrum (GPS) sources). It is quite likely that 
similar physical phenomena are occurring in the Seyferts 
and these compact powerful sources—both are embedded 
in a dense gaseous environment and probably interacting 
strongly with it. Thus, studying one may help understand 
the other. 

The fundamental reason why ~ 5-10% of AGN 
become radio-loud is still not understood, though it is 
probably related in some way to the interesting fact 
that radio-loud and radio-quiet AGN tend to inhabit 
different types of host galaxy: ELLIPTICAL and SPIRALGALAXIES 
respectively. It has been suggested that the radio-loud 
AGN have rapidly spinning (Kerr) BLACK HOLES which drive 
powerful jets along the spin axis, and these jets generate 
the powerful radio source. Conversely, slowly rotating 
(Schwarzschild) black holes cannot drive such jets and so 
remain radio-weak. The link between black hole spin and 
host galaxy type could arise from the fact that the elliptical 
hosts have formed from the merger of two spirals along 
with the merger of their two black holes to form a single 
rapidly rotating black hole. 

Finally, Seyferts have little relation to the highly 
variable ‘BLazar’ classes of AGN: BL Lac objects, OVV 
(optically violently variable) quasars and HPQs (high 
polarization quasars). These are all radio-loud objects and, 
under the unified scheme for this category, are thought 
to be seen looking directly down a powerful jet where 
relativistic Doppler boosting enhances the luminosity, 
variability and polarization of the continuum. 


Black holes and continuum emission 

It is worth noting that the evidence for black holes in 
Seyferts and other AGN is mostly indirect: large variable 
luminosity; relativistic jets with a stable axis; high energy 
spectra. Ideally, one would study gravitational dynamics 
of near-nuclear stars or gas. While this has been possible 
in a number of normal or weakly active galaxies, it is very 
difficult for most Seyferts simply because of the bright 
nuclear light and uncertain nature of the gas motions. With 
many ongoing HST observations, the case is now building 
for black holes at the centers of most (perhaps all) luminous 
galaxies, with black hole mass a few per cent of the bulge 
mass. It would be ironic if the discovery of black holes in 
most normal galaxies gave the most convincing evidence, 
by continuity, for their presence in AGN. 

Two methods might provide a better approach to 
detecting black holes in Seyferts. The first method is to 
measure the dynamics of water masers in the dense warm 
gas close to the center. The classic case is NGC 4258 (not, 
in fact, a Seyfert galaxy), which provides the best case 
to date for a supermassive black hole, but other possible 
examples are increasing in number. The second method 
is to study the Fe Ka x-ray emission line profile at 6.4 
keV. In several cases it is very broad and double peaked, 
suggesting its origin in a nuclear accretion disk at a few 
tens of Schwarzschild radii. An important goal will be to 
use profile fits to infer not only the mass of the hole but 
also its spin and orientation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The energy released from matter falling towards 
the central black hole emerges in both bulk flows and 
photons; the latter yields, either directly or indirectly, the 
observed nuclear continuum emission. Perhaps the most 
noteworthy aspect of AGN continua is their extremely 
wide spectral range, with approximately equal energy per 
decade of frequency from far infrared to 100 keV x-rays 
(five decades) with extensions to radio and y-ray energies 
in about 10% of AGN (not usually Seyferts). To a first 
approximation, the continuum shape can be described 
as a power law, f, « v%, with index a ~ 0-1, with 
several features superposed. These features include: (a) 
a ‘Big Blue Bump’ (BBB) comprising a rise below ~ 4000 A 
peaking in the UV or (unobservable) EUV and dropping 
to rejoin the underlying continuum in the soft (~ 0.5 keV) 
x-ray region (the ‘soft excess’); (b) an infrared peak rising 
from ~ 1 um, peaking at ~ 25-60 xm and falling again at 
~ 0.3 mm; (c) a rise at the highest energies ~ 5-200 keV 
with cut-off at even higher energies. 

The interpretation of these various components is 
still somewhat uncertain, though there seems to be a 
general consensus. The underlying power law might 
be generated by the synchrotron self-Compton process: 
a population of relativistic electrons not only generates 
low energy photons via the synchrotron process but 
then inverse-Compton scatters these same photons up to 
higher energies. A related model for the x-ray power 
law involves inverse-Compton scattering of optical-UV 
photons produced in the ACCRETION DISK by electrons in 
a hot corona above the disk. The BBB is thought to 
arise from thermal emission from the accretion disk, with 
progressively higher energy photons coming from higher 
temperatures at smaller radii. Although the overall BBB 
feature can be nicely fitted by disk models, some expected 
disk signatures are not seen: a strong Lyman edge at 912 A; 
high polarization; and significant phase delays between 
flux variations at different wavelengths. For this reason 
alternatives have been suggested, such as an optically thin 
bremsstrahlung component. The infrared peak, which can 
be very strong in some objects (e.g. NGC 1068), is thought 
to arise in most cases from thermal emission from dust. 
The rise longward of ~ 1 wm suggests hot dust close to 
its sublimation temperature at ~ 2000 K, possibly located 
within ~ 1 pc. At longer wavelengths (~ 25-60 jm) the 
dust is cooler and probably located in or near the NLR. 
Finally, the x-ray rise might come from reflection of the 
underlying power law off ‘cool’ gas, either the accretion 
disk or the dense obscuring torus. A byproduct of such 
reflection is fluorescence of the Fe Ka emission line at ~ 6.4 
keV, which can be quite strong. 

The observed blue-UV continuum in Seyfert 2s 
deserves further comment since, as we have discussed, 
the nuclear contribution should be hidden behind an 
obscuring torus. Why, then, do many Seyfert 2s have a 
sufficiently strong UV excess to show up in the Markarian 
survey? The reason is that much of the blue-UV light 
in Seyfert 2s is extended, coming from the inner few 
kpc. The origin of this continuum is still under some 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


debate, but it seems there are at least several contributions. 
Polarization observations indicate that part of the emission 
is scattered from the hidden nucleus. The remainder 
(sometimes called ‘FC2’, for Featureless Continuum 2) 
may be a combination of near-nuclear star formation, 
Balmer continuum emission from the ionized gas, and 
continuum emission from hot post-shock gas associated 
with the radio source. 


Broad line region 

A defining characteristic of Seyfert 1 spectra is the presence 
of broad emission lines, including the Balmer lines, He II 
44686 and He I 45876 in the optical, and Ly 11212, C IV 
41549, C IIT] 41909 and Mg II 42800 in the near UV. In the 
early 1980s it was found that the Balmer line strengths 
in Seyferts and quasars form a single tight correlation 
with the non-stellar continuum strength, confirming a 
basic connection between the two: continuum emission 
photoionizes the BLR gas which then produces line 
radiation. An estimate of the gas density in the BLR 
comes from the absence of any broad components on the 
forbidden lines. These so-called ‘forbidden’ emission lines 
come from electron transitions which cannot occur via 
the fast electric dipole mode (which requires a quantum 
number change AJ = +1). With only slower modes of 
transition available (e.g. magnetic dipole), the ions are 
vulnerable to collisional deexcitation in a high density 
gas where the mean time between collisions is small. 
The ‘critical density’, nit, above which collisional de- 
excitation becomes important varies widely for different 
lines, so one can bracket the gas density in the BLR by 
noting which lines have broad components and which do 
not. For example, while the [OTT] 14363 line with neit ~ 
3 x 10” cm™ has no broad component the semiforbidden 
CII] 41909 line with nait ~ 3 x 10'° cm~? does, implying 
a gas density in the BLR somewhere in the range 10”°- 
10° em-3 (see below for a refinement of this estimate). 
In contrast to the forbidden lines, the so-called ‘permitted’ 
lines arise from fast (~ 10-8 s) electric dipole transitions 
with correspondingly high critical densities ~ 10!” cm-3. 
Such lines, which include those due to recombination, are 
therefore easily produced in the BLR gas. 

In the last decade, Seyfert variability studies have 
significantly helped develop our picture of the BLR. 
In these studies, the emission lines and continuum are 
repeatedly measured over periods of many months. 
Because of the finite size of the region, it takes time for 
a change in the central continuum brightness to reach the 
BLR gas and thereby cause a change in the emission line. 
Allowing for light travel delays between the continuum 
source and BLR gas and between the BLR gas and us, 
it is in principle possible to reconstruct the distribution 
of line emission and velocity field throughout the BLR. 
In practice, this full ‘reverberation mapping’ has not yet 
been possible, but instead simple time delays have been 
measured in the response of each emission line to the 
continuum, and these delays indicate an approximate 
region size. The most well studied object is the Seyfert 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Light Curves 


Cross Correlation Functions 


2 


F,5100A) —_—«#F,(1350A) 


Ly a 


CIv 


HB 


7500 7600 7700 -20 0 20 40 60 


Julian date (2440000) Time delay (days) 


Figure 5. Variability in NGC 5548 over a period of 280 days in 
1988-89. Left panels show changing fluxes in the continuum 
(upper two) and emission lines (lower three), while the right 
panels show the cross correlation of each flux curve with the UV 
continuum (uppermost left panel). Note that while the optical 
and UV continua vary together, the Lya, C IV 11550 and Hf 
emission lines lag behind by increasing amounts, Hf being 
delayed by about 20 days. These lags indicate the size of the BLR 
(about 20 light days) and the fact that it is radially stratified, with 
C IV produced preferentially at smaller radii and Hf at larger 
radii. (Taken from Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active 
Galactic Nuclei (Cambridge University Press), figure 5.6, p 86). 


1.5 galaxy NGC 5548, for which delays of ~ 2-10 days 
are found for the highest ionization lines (e.g. He II 41640, 
C IV 41549) and ~ 10-20 days for the lower ionization 
lines (e.g. Lyw, Ha, Hf, CII] 41909), indicating a radially 
stratified BLR with size ~ 2-20 light days (figure 5). 
Surprisingly, these size estimates were a factor of ten 
smaller than previous estimates based on photoionization 
calculations (see below). The reason for the discrepancy is 
now understood: not only does stratification undermine 
the simple photoionization estimate but the densities in 
the BLR are probably higher than previously thought (e.g. 
~ 10" cm’? in the C IV 41459 emitting region). 

Since the ionization structure in the BLR is roughly 
the same from object to object (because the line ratios are 
similar), we infer that BLR sizes must increase for more 
luminous objects. Using the C IV 41549 data from NGC 
5548 as fiducial, the form of the dependence is Rgtr ~ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10hoL, (1350 A, 40)? light days, where ho is the Hubble 
constant in units of 100 km s~' Mpc™! and L;,(1350 A, 40) 
is the continuum luminosity at 1350 A in units of 10% erg 
s-! A-1. Since, roughly speaking, quasars are ~ 100 times 
more luminous than Seyferts, they have BLRs which are 
~ 10 times larger, perhaps a few light months to a light 
year across. 

In the 1980s photoionization models were developed 
which aimed to reproduce the observed emission line 
strengths. In general, these calculations consider a power 
law (or AGN-like) continuum impinging on a thick slab 
of gas. At a given depth in the cloud, ionization and 
thermal equilibrium conditions are evaluated, together 
with the emitted line spectrum. Absorption of the 
incoming ionizing continuum is calculated and the 
modified continuum enters the next zone deeper in the 
cloud. The calculation repeats for ever deeper zones 
in the cloud until the gas is sufficiently cool and/or 
neutral that no more emission is produced. Overall, 
the ionization degree drops into the cloud, becoming 
suddenly more neutral at a depth corresponding to the 
classical Stré6mgren depth (where the total number of 
ionizing photons is balanced by the total number of 
hydrogen recombinations). However, unlike H II regions 
ionized by hot stars, AGN continua also havea high energy 
component which penetrates beyond the Strémgren depth 
to create an extended partially ionized zone in which many 
low ionization lines are produced. Usually, the emergent 
spectrum from a single cloud is compared to observations, 
though more recently cloud ensembles spanning a range 
of conditions have been considered in an attempt to match 
the stratified nature of the BLR. 

Several parameters help define these photoionization 
calculations. The most important is the ‘radiation 
parameter’, defined as the ratio at the cloud front of the 
ionizing photon density to the hydrogen density: U = 
Nion/Muy, Where Nion = Q/4sr?c where Q is the number 
of ionizing photons produced by the central source per 
second, and r is the distance to the cloud. Other relevant 
parameters are gas density, cloud thickness, ionizing 
spectral shape and element abundances. Optimum fits 
suggest that for Seyfert 1s, U ~ 0.04 and ny ~ 10" 
cm7. Estimating cloud thickness is more difficult. The 
fact that in variable objects the emission lines follow the 
continuum tells us the clouds are at least optically thick 
to the ionizing radiation, i.e. they are at least thicker 
than the Strémgren depth S ~ Uc/n.ag ~ 5 x 101° 
cm where n, is the electron density and ag is the case- 
B hydrogen recombination coefficient (~ 2.5 x 107 cm? 
s-'). Matching the low ionization strengths requires 
the extended partially ionized region to be a few times 
deeper—perhaps a few times the diameter of our Sun. 
There is also evidence, it should be said, for an optically 
thin component to the BLR gas, coming from studies of 
line ratio and profile variability. 

It is possible to estimate some other properties of the 
BLR line-emitting gas, starting with the basic equation 
for the production of Hf by recombination: Lyg = 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hvypnenydypV where hvyg is the energy of each HB 
photon, ne and ny are the electon and proton densities, V 
is the volume of ionized gas, and ag is the recombination 
coefficient for HB (~ 3 x 10-4 cm? s~!). Since the mass 
of ionized gas is simply M = mpnyV where mp is the 
proton mass, we find an ionized gas mass and volume of 
~ 0.1 My and 10* cm for a typical HB luminosity ~ 10” 
erg s-' and BLR gas density ~ 10"! cm~3. Taking the BLR 
radius of 10 light days from the variability measurements 
given above, we find that the ionized gas occupies only 
fc ~ 15 x 10° of the BLR volume (f, is called the filling 
factor). If we assume the gas is in the form of clouds with 
diameters a few times the Str6mgren depth (d, ~ 5 x 104 
cm) we derive anumber of clouds N. ~ V/d? ~ 10!° which 
collectively intercept a fraction of the central radiation of 
C. ~ N.d2/4nr? ~ 0.3 (C, is called the covering factor). 
In this picture, then, the BLR is sparsely filled by a large 
number of small clouds which collectively intercept ~ 30% 
of the ionizing radiation. 

The velocity field in the BLR is poorly understood, 
despite the fact that the emission line profiles clearly have 
Doppler origin. Profiles have approximately logarithmic 
form (flux « log Ad) often with slight asymmetry and/or 
substructure, with full widths at half maximum (FWHM) 
anywhere from 1000 to 10000 km s“! and maximum 
wing widths of up to 30000 km s-'. Lines in the same 
object can have slightly different shape (e.g. He IT 4686 
is often broader than Hf), indicating both velocity and 
ionization stratification in the BLR, with higher velocities 
at smaller radii. One approach has been to fit each 
line by the sum of two components, one broad and one 
very broad with possible blueshift. These fits support 
the decrease in velocity for lower ionization gas, and 
point to a slight radial velocity component, although 
profile variability studies suggest that radial flow is not a 
dominant component of the velocity field. If the velocities 
are gravitational, estimates of central mass M ~ rv?/G ~ 
10’-10° M. with some evidence for a correlation between 
central mass and luminosity. The luminosities derived 
amount to ~ 1% of the Eddington luminosity, which is the 
natural upper limit to accretion-powered energy release 
when outward radiation pressure just balances inward 
gravitational force, limiting further accretion. 

The geometry of the BLR is also poorly understood, 
with spherical or flattened cloud distributions as obvious 
possibilities, including a thin but flared disk, although 
the absence of very narrow lines expected for face-on 
disks weighs against this last possibility. The origin and 
evolution of the cloud system are also poorly understood. 
Possibilities that have been explored include a two-phase 
medium in which the clouds are in pressure balance 
with a hot intercloud medium; clouds may be confined 
by magnetic forces; clouds may form in cooling post- 
shocked gas; clouds may even comprise the extended 
atmospheres of giant stars. Each of these has its strengths 
and weaknesses, and we must await further work to clarify 
the true situation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Narrow line region 

In the spectra of Seyferts, the narrow forbidden and 
permitted emission lines come from a region well outside 
the BLR, spanning a few tens of pc to a few kpc called the 
‘Narrow Line Region’ (NLR). Unlike the BLR, therefore, 
ground-based telescopes can often resolve the outer parts 
of the NLR while HST has provided some detailed images 
and spectra. The mere presence of forbidden lines tells 
us that gas densities are lower than in the BLR. At these 
lower densities the physics of line production is simpler 
and line ratios may be used to estimate physical properties 
of the ionized gas. Classic examples include the two 
line ratios: [S II] 446717/6731 and [O III] 445007/4363 
which yield electron densities ~ 10°-10* cm~? and electron 
temperatures ~ 1-2 x 10* K respectively. Such simple 
estimates must be viewed with caution, however, because 
they represent weighted averages over a wide range 
of conditions: for example, gas densities probably rise 
from ~ 10* cm~ on kpc scales to ~ 10°§ cm™? in the 
inner regions. More sophisticated approaches follow the 
same strategy as for the BLR: photoionization calculations 
evaluate conditions within a single gas cloud and, in 
more recent work, integrate over a distribution of cloud 
properties. As with the BLR gas, much of the NLR gas 
is thought to be optically thick to the ionizing radiation, 
although studies of the He II 14686/Hf ratio indicate the 
presence of some optically thin gas. In trying to match 
these calculations to observations, sequences of models 
are evaluated with a range of radiation parameter and/or 
relative mix of optically thick to optically thin gas. Typical 
values for the radiation parameter found for the NLR are 
U ~ 0.01, with some evidence for higher values in Seyfert 
1s than Seyfert 2s. 

Repeating the analysis for the BLR, we can derive 
crude estimates for the global properties of the NLR gas. 
Taking as fiducial, Liz ~ 10“' ergs~',a gas density of ~ 10° 
cm? and NLR size of ~ 100 pc, we obtain a mass of ionized 
gas of ~ 10’ Mj with filling factor ~ 10~*. The Str6mgren 
depth in the clouds is ~ 108 cm; there are ~ 10° clouds 
with integrated covering factor ~ 1. While the numbers 
are far from precise, they do indicate that the amount of 
gas is dynamically unimportant, that it only sparsely fills 
the region, and that it intercepts a significant fraction of 
the ionizing radiation. 

As the name suggests, the emission lines from the 
NLR have ‘narrow’ Doppler widths, with FWHM ~ 200- 
800 km s“! (a few lie outside this range). The emission 
line shapes are almost always more peaky than Gaussian, 
and most have an asymmetry with the base and wing 
stronger and more extended on the blue side than the red 
(figure 6). This asymmetry tells us that, at least for the 
higher velocity, more nuclear gas, there is a radial flow and 
part of the region is obscured by dust. If the far side of the 
region is obscured by intervening dust, then the flow is 
outwards (the visible near side is blueshifted). If the clouds 
themselves contain dust, and the line emission comes from 
the side of the cloud facing the central source, then the 
flow is inwards (we cannot see the clouds on the near side 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NGC 7674 


Asymmetry Function 


H 
resolution 


500 km/s 


Figure 6. The [O III] 45007 emission line profile from the 
nuclear region of NGC 7674 provides an extreme example of an 
asymmetric blue wing. A velocity scale, line median, instrument 
resolution and asymmetry function are also shown. 


since we look into their backs). Recent observations have 
shown that the optical and infrared forbidden lines have 
similar asymmetries, showing that the dust is still opaque 
even at these long wavelengths. The preferred scenario is 
thick nuclear dust, possibly in a dense disk, blocking the 
far side and indicating an outflow. The outflow might be 
driven by a nuclear wind or be related to the jets which 
give rise to the radio source. For those Seyferts with 
relatively strong double or triple structured radio sources 
it is often possible to see separate red- and blueshifted 
emission components close to the radio lobes, indicating 
bipolar driven outflows. In these objects, the integrated 
line profile can be particularly structured and broad, with 
base and core widths up to ~ 1000 km s~! (examples 
include NGC 1068, MKN 3, MKN 78). For most objects, 
however, there is good evidence that the majority of the 
NLR gas, as measured by the [O III] 45007 profile core 
width (FWHM), is moving in the gravitational field of the 
bulge of the host galaxy. The evidence includes the fact 
that the profile peaks and cores are close to the rest frame 
of the galaxy, and that there are good correlations of the 
[O III] 45007 emission line width with (a) rotation velocity 
of the galaxy, (b) bulge luminosity and (c) bulge stellar 
velocity dispersion. Stated simply, galaxies with massive 
bulges have relatively broad forbidden lines (e.g. ~~ 500 km 
s-!), while galaxies with low mass bulges have relatively 
narrow forbidden lines (e.g. ~ 200 km s~!). Galaxies with 
relatively strong double or triple radio sources tend to 
stand off these correlations with yet broader lines, due to 
bipolar flows. For the gravitationally dominated gas, it is 
still unclear whether the predominant motion is rotation 
or random, though probably both occur. 

Not all emission lines have the same profile shape, 
and in general lines of higher ionization and/or higher 
critical density tend to be broader with a higher degree of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


asymmetry. This indicates that, like the BLR, the NLR is 
stratified with the higher velocity, more nuclear gas having 
higher density and ionization degree. It is conceivable, 
though not yet shown convincingly, that a continuous 
sequence of conditions connects the inner NLR to the BLR. 

The spatial structure of the NLR emission has been 
studied using emission line imaging, both from the ground 
and using HST. In this technique, images are taken through 
two narrow pass filters, one centered on the color of the 
emission line (ON band) and one centered on the nearby 
continuum (OFF band). By subtracting the OFF band from 
the ON band one is left with a pure emission line image. 
Furthermore, by dividing two emission line images such 
as [O IIT] 45007 and Hf one can generate a map of the gas 
excitation which clearly highlights AGN-related emission 
([O I]/H£ ~ 10) and distinguishes it from star formation 
emission ([O III]/HB < 3). Such images indicate that 
the NLR is often elongated, with an axis parallel to the 
radio axis. Indeed, for those Seyferts with well developed 
radio sources the NLR emission is closely related to the 
radio source, with brighter emission either coincident with 
jets and jet bends, or surrounding and sheathing radio 
lobes, sometimes with a curved ‘bow shock’ appearance. 
Spectroscopic studies show higher velocities for this radio- 
related emission, indicating strong dynamical interaction 
and an overall bipolar outflow, but also including split 
lines near jets, possibly indicating lateral expansion away 
from the jet. A good example of close radio /emission line 
association is Markarian 78 (figure 7). 

The close association between line and radio emission 
in the NLR raises the important possibility that the gas is 
ionized, at least in part, by shocks arising in the interaction. 
Although early calculations of slow shocks could only 
match LINER-like spectra, more recent calculations of fast 
(~ 500 km s7!) shocks can match Seyfert-like spectra. 
A key feature of these calculations is the production of 
UV and x-ray radiation, both line and continuum, in 
the hot post-shock gas. This radiation then photoionizes 
gas both behind the shock and in front of it, yielding 
a spectrum quite similar to that observed in Seyferts. 
At present, ‘photoionizing shocks’ and standard power 
law photoionization (possibly including optically thin 
gas) give an equivalently good match at least to the 
optical lines, though there is some hope that UV lines 
will help discriminate between the models, as long as the 
uncertainties introduced by dust reddening are not too 
great. 

Returning to the emission line images and excitation 
maps, a number show sharp edges which outline parts 
of a cone, or bi-cone if it occurs on both sides. As 
described earlier, this seems to indicate a partly shadowed 
nuclear source of ionizing radiation. These emission 
regions can extend out to considerable distances, ~ 15- 
20 kpc, where they are termed the ‘Extended Narrow 
Line Region’ or ENLR. This emission has high excitation 
and narrow lines of low velocity, suggesting it is simply 
undisturbed ambient gas residing either in the disk of the 
galaxy or in the galactic environment. The fact that most 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mkn 78 : [OIII| and Radio 


Ol] — HST 
= a 


375 500 


Radio 3.6cm VLA 


= fl * 


Dec offset (arcsec) 


—3- =e +7 O 7 oa 3 
RA offset (arcsec) 


Figure 7. HST [O ILI] emission line image and VLA radio image 
of the Seyfert 2 galaxy Mkn 78 showing close spatial association. 
Note that a dust lane crosses the nucleus, hiding the most 
nuclear [O III] emission. Gray scale numbers are proportional to 
flux, with the radio core rescaled by a factor of five for clarity. 
For this galaxy 1 arcsec ~ 1 kpe (ho = 50 km s~! Mpce~!). (Data 
courtesy of M Whittle and A S Wilson.) 


ENLRs lie well beyond any radio source and can show 
conical form suggests they are ionized by the central UV 
radiation source. Recently, however, careful estimates of 
the required UV flux suggest that at larger radii there may 
be an additional source of ionization, though what this is 
is not yet known. 

A final pragmatic theme is the frequent need to correct 
measured spectra for the effects of reddening by dust. 
Fortunately, the NLR Balmer line strengths are expected 
to be close to their theoretical values, and so any deviation 
can be attributed to reddening. For example, the Ha /HB 
flux ratio should be ~ 2.8 (the ‘Case B’ value, though a 
more detailed calculation gives 3.1) and so a measured 
value of, say, R, yields an estimate for the absorption 
due to dust of Ay ~ 6.8log,,(R/2.8) magnitudes in the V 
band, where the coefficient depends on the reddening law 
(Whitford’s law in this case). Knowing Ay allows one to 
correct the observed spectrum, using the same reddening 
law f(A), where A, = Ay x f(A). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Hosts, environment and triggering 

While the previous sections have concentrated on the 
anatomy of activity in Seyfert galaxies, there remains an 
important question: why are some galaxies active while 
others are not? Although we cannot yet answer this 
question with confidence, two or three lines of enquiry 
help pave the way forward. The first is to ask whether 
Seyfert host galaxies are unusual in any way; the second 
is to ask whether any active properties correlate with 
any host galaxy properties; and the third is to identify 
mechanisms which might send gas down to fuel the 
nuclear regions. In this area, empirical studies are difficult 
because of the statistical weakness of the effects and the 
presence of sample and control biases. 

Perhaps the one clear result concerns the morpholog- 
ical type of the host galaxies: Seyferts favor early-type 
spirals, S0O-Sbc, clearly avoiding late-type spirals and, toa 
lesser extent, ellipticals. Interestingly, LINERs show a sim- 
ilar distribution (with somewhat more ellipticals), while 
radio galaxies are almost exclusively elliptical or SO. In all 
these cases, more luminous galaxies are more likely to be 
active. It seems, therefore, that an important condition for 
the onset of activity is a relatively massive bulge. There 
is also a tendency for active galaxies to be disturbed in 
some way and/or have a nearby companion—both being 
conditions which may lead to nuclear fueling. The neu- 
tral gas content (atomic and molecular) of Seyferts is basi- 
cally normal, though Seyfert 2s may have more molecular 
gas and associated star formation than otherwise similar 
non-active galaxies. Recent HST images have also shown 
that Seyfert 2s tend to inhabit later Hubble types and have 
more nuclear dust lanes than Seyfert 1s. This suggests a 
modification to the standard unification scheme: Seyfert 
2s simply have more nuclear dust than the Seyfert 1s and 
are therefore more likely to be obscured, rather than being 
identical except for our viewing angle. 

It is worth noting a few active properties which do 
(or don’t) correlate with host galaxy properties. First is 
the axis of nuclear activity, as defined by the radiation 
field and/or radio source. Overall, there appears to 
be little alignment of this axis with the large scale disk 
or bar of the host galaxy. Recent evidence, however, 
suggests that for later Hubble types there is an alignment 
with the host disk, while for early Hubble types the 
alignment is with smaller scale nuclear gas or dust disks 
or lanes whose more random orientation probably reflects 
recent merger or infall history. Because the NLR resides 
within the galaxy bulge, it is perhaps not surprising that 
some NLR properties correlate with bulge luminosity, for 
example emission line and radio luminosities. The origin 
of these correlations is not yet clear, but might involve 
a number of properties which depend on bulge mass 
(i.e. depth of gravitational potential): emission region 
volume, gas and radio source pressures, mass loss rate 
from bulge stars, and mass of central black hole. More 
easy to understand is the dependence of NLR emission line 
width on bulge mass, since the gas velocities are largely 
gravitational. An interesting wrinkle on this last result is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Seyfert Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that disturbed galaxies have even broader emission lines, 
confirming that such disturbances can affect gas motions in 
the inner regions. Perhaps more fundamental is a possible 
correlation between nuclear (active) luminosity and host 
galaxy (or more likely, bulge) luminosity—low luminosity 
Seyferts reside in lower mass bulges than quasars. An 
obvious explanation is that more massive bulges have 
more massive central black holes, a result supported at 
least in part by recent black hole mass measurements in 
more normal galaxies. 

Perhaps the central theoretical problem has been to 
understand how gas moves from far out in the galaxy disk 
down to the innermost regions where it can accrete onto the 
black hole—a loss in ANGULAR MOMENTUM by a factor ~ 10°! 
Early work focused on bars as a means of draining angular 
momentum from gas, via shocks and dissipation. It is at 
present unclear how important this particular mechanism 
is since, although studies have been somewhat ambiguous, 
there seems to be no tendency for active nuclei to prefer 
barred galaxies. More recently, Barnes and Hernquist 
have shown, using computer simulations, that galaxy 
encounters and mergers can be particularly effective at 
sending gas into the nuclear regions. The tidal fields 
resulting from the encounter help create a gaseous bar 
which lags behind a stellar bar. The gravitational torque on 
the gas robs it of angular momentum and it falls inwards, 
losing up to ~ 99% of its angular momentum. At smaller 
radii it is unclear what happens: gas may build up and 
become unstable to self gravity and/or there may be bars 
within bars which help funnel the gas to ever smaller radii. 
Once in an accretion disk, however, Balbus and Hawley 
have shown that magnetically driven turbulence provides 
enough viscosity to drive the gas inwards to the black hole. 


The future 

We now briefly identify several themes likely to be 
pursued in the coming years. (a) The hunt for black 
holes will continue, aiming to establish a demographic 
perspective—how do black hole mass and spin relate to 
AGN or host properties? (b) How does the inner accretion 
disk function, and how does it play a role in generating the 
continuum emission? (c) Much remains to be done to find 
out the structure and velocity field of the BLR—ideally, its 
kinematics will be dominated by black hole gravity giving 
another handle on the properties of the central object. 
(d) The root cause of the apparent unification of Seyfert 1s 
and 2s needs to be clarified—is the torus model too simple 
in the light of the recent HST observations showing more 
distributed dust lanes in Seyfert 2s? (e) We need to refine 
our picture of the NLR, and in particular the importance 
of the radio emitting jets—clearly the jets accelerate the 
gas, but do they also ionize it? (f) What is the nature of the 
extended UV continuum in Seyfert 2s, and is enhanced star 
formation associated with nuclear activity? (g) Finally, we 
would like to know how activity is triggered in more detail. 
Although interactions are now known to send gas to the 
central kpc, how does it get from there to the pc scale and 
beyond? 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Clearly, these are exciting times in the study of 
Seyferts. 


Bibliography 
Some excellent graduate level texts include: 


Osterbrock D E 1989 Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and 
Active Galactic Nuclei (University Science Books) 
Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active Galactic Nuclei 

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Krolik J H 1999 Active Galactic Nuclei, From the Central 
Black Hole to the Galactic Environment (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press) 

Kembhavi A K and Narlikar J V 1999 Quasars and 
Active Galactic Nuclei, An Introduction (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Some useful review articles in approximate chronological 
order include: 


Weedman D W 1977 Seyfert galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 15 69-95 

Balick B and Heckman T M 1982 Extranuclear Clues to the 
Origin and Evolution of Activity in Galaxies Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 20 431-68 

Rees M J 1984 Black hole models for active galactic nuclei 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 22 471-506 

Osterbrock D E and Mathews W G 1986 Emission line 
regions of active galaxies and QSOs Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 24 171-203 

Osterbrock D E 1991 Active galactic nuclei Rep. Prog. Phys. 
54 579-633 

Barnes J E and Hernquist L 1992 Dynamics of interacting 
galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30 705-42 

Antonucci R 1993 Unified Models for active galactic nuclei 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 31 473-521 

Mushotsky R F, Done C and Pounds K A 1993 X-ray spectra 
and time variability of active galactic nuclei Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 31 717-61 

Peterson B M 1993 Reverberation mapping of active 
galactic nuclei Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 105 247-68 

Koratkar A and Blaes O 1999 The ultraviolet and optical 
continuum emission in active galactic nuclei: the 
status of accretion disks Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 111 
1-30 


Mark Whittle 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Seyfert, Carl K (1911-60) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Seyfert, Carl K (1911-60) 


American astronomer, studied the properties of galaxies 
and identified a class with condensed nuclei and broad, 
high-excitation emission lines. These are now known as 
Seyfert galaxies, with the central nucleus supposed to be a 
massive black hole. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Shakerley, Jeremy (1626-—c. 1655) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shakerley, Jeremy (1626-—c. 1655) 


Born in Halifax, Yorkshire, self-educated. Taken into 
the Towneley household and encouraged in his scientific 
pursuits, he discovered the work of HoRROCKs and was 
the first mathematician to recognize its significance. He 
emigrated to India, possibly with the East India Company, 
and observed a transit of Mercury in 1651, the second such 
transit ever observed. He died young in India. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Shanghai Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shanghai Astronomical Observatory 


The Shanghai Astronomical Observatory, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences (CAS), is located in Shanghai, China. It was es- 
tablished in 1962 combining Xujiahui and Sheshan, which 
were founded in 1872 and 1900 respectively. The main 
fields cover astrophysics and astrogeodynamics, includ- 
ing star clusters, our Galaxy, galaxies, Earth rotation and 
satellite dynamics application. The major facilities are: 
1.56 m telescope, 25 m radio telescope, 60 cm SLR sys- 
tem and 40 cm astrograph. The staff consists of some 50 
astronomers, 40 engineers and technicians. 

For further information see 
http:/ /center.shao.ac.cn/english.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shapley Concentration ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shapley Concentration 


Although the universe is homogeneous on very large 
scales, it is clearly clumpy even on scales of a few million 
parsecs. Thousands of galaxies, together with gas and 
dark matter, make up gravitationally bound clusters, and 
several associations of clusters, known as superclusters, 
have been identified. The Shapley concentration is probably 


distribution o 
can be expected 
The distribution of 
plates by Abell and hr 
and shows the Shapley c 
Shapley supercluster or the al, 
obvious aggregation of clusters: 

Furthermore, the Shapley c 
close to the direction in which the Loc 
(including our Galaxy) is moving with r 
frame of the universe defined by the cos 
BACKGROUND radiation. This has led many to spec 
the Shapley concentration, even though it is at a di 
of 140 Mpc from us, may indeed be one of the major caus 
of our peculiar motion. 


Shapley’s galaxy survey 

In the late 1920s, HARLOW SHAPLEY and his team at the 
Harvard College Observatory started a survey of galaxies 
in the southern sky, using photographic plates obtained at 
the 24-inch Bruce telescope at Bloemfontein, South Africa. 
By 1932, Shapley could report the discovery of 76000 
galaxies between 14th and 18th magnitude in a third of 
the southern sky, for a small fraction of which actual 
positions and magnitudes had been measured. More than 
half of these galaxies were estimated to be fainter than 
17th magnitude. Some of these data were later published 
as part of the Harvard galaxy counts, intended to map 
Galactic obscuration and to find the space density of 
galaxies. 

In this catalog, Shapley could see most of the ‘Coma-— 
Virgo cloud’ (now known to be a superposition of the 
Coma and Virgo superclusters), but found a ‘cloud’ 
in Centaurus to be the most striking concentration of 
galaxies. He found it particularly interesting because of its 
‘great linear dimension, the numerous population and distinctly 
elongated form’. This 2° x 1° cloud, centered on right 
ascensiona = 13 26™ and declination = —31° 37’ (J2000) 
can be identified with what we now know as the core of 
the Shapley concentration. He also noted an ‘indefinite 
extension’, consisting of 30 ‘systems’, from the rich cluster 
Shapley 8 (Abell 3558) towards the north of the cloud. 


Shapley Concentration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


180° 


180° 


Galactic Latitude 


Galactic Longitude 


Figure 2. The distribution of 4076 optically selected Abell clusters plotted in an equal-area projection in Galactic coordinates. Clusters 
lying within redshift z < 0.1 are plotted in black, between 0.1 < z < 0.2 in grey and those with z > 0.2 as open circles. The 
underpopulated area is the portion of the sky obscured by our own Galaxy. The two richest concentrations of clusters in the z < 0.1 


universe are indicated. 


Is it the “Great Attractor’? 


Several studies of the distances and motions of galaxies 
have revealed large systematic departures from the 
Hubble Flow in the nearby universe. Many attempts have 
been made to account for them in terms of the gravitational 
effects of significant overdensities and underdensities in 
the local distribution of matter. 

The simplest such model is that of the ‘Great 
Attractor’, originally proposed to be a large concentration 
of galaxies of mass about 2 x 10'h~! Mo, situated at 
a distance of rcg = 42h7! Mpc from us. Subsequent 
studies have disagreed on whether a back-flow beyond 
rca, which should be the signature of a single mass 
concentration causing our peculiar motion, is detected 
or not. Interestingly, the detailed reconstruction of the 
density field from peculiar velocities, within 50 ho} Mpc 
from us, finds evidence for a large concentration of mass 
at the distance of the proposed Great Attractor. 

However, it is uncertain whether this concentration 
is enough to account for the peculiar velocities in the 
Local Supercluster, and whether the peculiar velocities 
converge on larger scales (see also SUPERCLUSTERS AND THE 
LOCAL SUPERCLUSTER). It is in this context that the Shapley 
concentration was rediscovered in the 1980s. 

The fact that the Shapley concentration lies within 
10° of the direction of motion of the Local Group, and 
very close to the proposed position of the Great Attractor, 
prompts us to consider the possibility of its being an 
important contributor to the peculiar motion of the Local 
Group. However, the Shapley concentration is situated at 
three times the putative distance of the Great Attractor. If 
it were to be responsible for the entire peculiar motion of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Local Group (600 km s-! towards Hydra—Centaurus), 
it would have to have a mass of Mca ~ 2.6 x 10'7h7! Mo. 

If all the galaxies brighter than 17th magnitude 
within 10° (25h~' Mpc) of Shapley 8 were placed at a 
distance of 140 h-! Mpe, the mean distance of the Shapley 
concentration, then the total blue light from these galaxies 
would amount to Lg ~ 5 x 10%? Lgo. This is clearly 
an overestimate, because a lot of these galaxies would be 
in the foreground, particularly in clusters belonging to the 
Hydra—Centaurus supercluster. So the lower limit to the 
mass-to-light ratio of the Shapley concentration would be 
M/Lz ~ 4500h, if it alone were responsible for the entire 
peculiar motion of the Local Group. This is an improbably 
high value, considering that a large spiral galaxy like ours 
has a mass-to-light ratio of about 10, and a typical cluster 
of galaxies has M/Lg ~ 300h. Indeed, for a critical- 
density universe (Q)9 = 1), the corresponding value is 
M/Lz ~ 1500h. 


The optical dipole 


Both gravity and luminosity decrease as the inverse square 
of the distance. Thus the dipole moment of an all- 
sky distribution of galaxies (individually weighted by 
their luminosities) can be used to estimate the peculiar 
acceleration of the Local Group. Since this does not require 
one to know the distances of individual galaxies, it can 
be calculated from a catalog of positions and luminosities 
(or sizes) of galaxies. It has been shown that the net 
acceleration of the Local Group estimated in this way 
is almost parallel to its direction of motion, supporting 
the notion that in the universe the distribution of matter 
follows the distribution of light. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shapley Concentration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Galaxy clusters with known redshift in the direction of 
the motion of the Local Group (in a wedge of width 30° in 
declination). Rich clusters are plotted as larger circles, and poor 
clusters and groups as smaller ones. This plot of their position 
on the sky (right ascension) against mean redshift shows the 
existence of three distinct groups of clusters. The poorer clusters 
< 5000 kms~! belong to the ‘Hydra—Centaurus Supercluster’. 
The dense bunch of clusters at ~ 14000 kms7!, between 
134-14", consisting of significantly richer clusters, is the 
‘Shapley Concentration’. The Abell 3571 group of clusters at 

~ 12000 kms7! belongs to a foreground filament-like structure. 


However, for galaxies in an extended region towards 
the direction of the motion of the Local Group, which 
includes the Shapley concentration, all galaxies smaller 
than the mean size of galaxies at about 4547! Mpc 
contribute only about 15% of the dipole acceleration due 
to those that are larger (nearer). 


Its contribution to our peculiar motion 

Both the values of the luminosity and the optical dipole 
of the Shapley concentration indicate that it could be 
responsible for 10-15% of the net acceleration of the Local 
Group, the rest being due to much nearer galaxies. This 
is consistent with the sum of the masses of its component 
clusters found from x-ray analyses. 

If the Shapley concentration were a major source of 
the dipole acceleration of the Local Group, one would 
expect peculiar velocities to continue to rise beyond the 
nearer concentration of galaxies. At this moment there is 
conflicting evidence about whether this is seen or not. 

This makes the Shapley concentration unlikely to be 
the Great Attractor, since that would imply (a) that mass 
does not follow light, and dark matter prefers to reside in 
clusters and superclusters of galaxies than in the field, and 
(b) that superclusters are capable of having higher mass-to- 
light ratios (M/Lg 2 4000 h) than even the richest clusters 
of galaxies (e.g. for the Perseus cluster: M/Lg ~ 350h), 
over much larger scales. Both of these are against theories 
of GALAXY FORMATION from gravitational collapse. 


Cosmological significance 
The fraction of baryons in the universe, calculated from the 
abundance of primordial light elements in the universe 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


« x 


Figure 4. An x-ray map of the core of the Shapley concentration, 
from a mosaic of two long observations with the ROSAT PSPC. 
The cast of characters, from left to right, are the clusters Abell 
3562, SC1329-31, SC1327-31 and Abell 3558 (Shapley 8). All of 
these clusters are around a redshift of 14000 kms~!. Shapley 8 is 
the central cluster of the Shapley concentration, and it is almost 
certain that the other three clusters are in the process of merging 
with it. 


and predictions from the standard Big Bang model, is 
Qb/Qm ~ 0.014h-?. However, various studies have 
claimed that on scales of about 15h7! Mpc within the core 
of the Shapley concentration, the observed baryon fraction 
from the visible galaxies and the x-ray emitting hot gas is 
about Q4/Qm = 0.04h-!5+0.02, where the first term comes 
from the gas and the second from the galaxies. 

If this is indeed borne out by future research, it would 
suggest that the baryon fraction observed over the scales of 
dozens of clusters might exceed that of an Qm = 1 universe 
by a factor of about 3. Detailed hydrodynamic simulations 
show that baryons do not segregate into rich clusters and 
superclusters to such overdensities within the age of the 
universe. The above results would therefore imply that 
either the mean density of the universe is Qn < 0.3, or 
that the baryon density is much larger than predicted by 
NUCLEOSYNTHESIS. 

It is not clear on what scales superclusters are bound, 
but there is evidence of merging clusters in the cores 
of the richest concentrations of clusters. The Shapley 
concentration provides the best such example (figure 4), 
with tenuous evidence of x-ray emitting gas being detected 
outside the clusters at its core. It is the best laboratory 
we know of in which to study the formation of nonlinear 
structures in a dense environment. It is also the place to 
look for answers to questions like: what are the largest 
coherent bound structures? On what scales can they have 
dynamical influences on each other within the lifetime 
of the universe? On what scales do coherent peculiar 
velocities exist? What is the typical morphology of these 
structures? From the answers to such questions it is hoped 
that important clues to the history of galaxy and cluster 
formation will emerge. 


Bibliography 
The Great Attractor was first proposed in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shapley Concentration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lynden-Bell D et al 1988 Spectroscopy and photometry of 
elliptical galaxies: V. Galaxy streaming towards the 
new Supergalactic Center Astrophys. J. 326 19 


For an exciting though idiosyncratic account of this 
collaboration, see 


Dressler A M 1994 Voyage to the Great Attractor: Exploring 
Intergalactic Space (Knopf/Vintage) 


The rediscovery of the Shapley concentration in the 
context of our peculiar motion can be found in 


Raychaudhury S 1989 The distribution of galaxies in the 
direction of the ‘Great Attractor’ Nature 342 251 
Scaramella R et al 1989 A marked concentration of galaxy 
clusters—is this the origin of large-scale motions? 

Nature 338 562 


The concentration was named after Shapley in the first of 
these papers. 

Harlow Shapley wrote several papers in the Circulars 
of the Harvard College Observatory in the early thirties. 
Notable among them in this context are 


Shapley H 1930 Note on a remote cloud of galaxies in 
Centaurus HCO Bull. 8749 

Shapley H 1930 The Super-Galaxy hypothesis HCO Circ. 
3501 

Shapley H 1932 Seventy-six thousand faint galaxies HCO 
Bull. 889 1 


For discussions of the cosmological implications of 
the Shapley concentration, see 


Raychaudhury S et al 1991 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 248 101 
Ettori S et al 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 289 787 
Hanami H et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 521 90 


Somak Raychaudhury 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shapley, Harlow (1885-1972) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shapley, Harlow (1885-1972) 


Born in Nashville, MO, he studied with FREDERICK SEARES 
and at Princeton with HENRY NORRIS RUSSELL, where he took 
over the analysis of Russell’s observations of the light 
curves of 90 eclipsing binary stars (ten times the number 
known up to then). In this work he established that 
Cepheid variable stars, whose spectral lines mimic the 
spectroscopic binary stars, are in reality pulsating stars. 
He joined the staff of the Mount Wilson Observatory in 
California, moving to the study of globular star clusters. 
He discovered Cepheid variable stars in some and 
calibrating HENRIETTA LEAVITT'S period—luminosity relation, 
determining their distances. The asymmetric distribution 
of globular clusters on the sky meant that the Sun is off the 
center of the distribution, some 50000 light years away in 
the direction of the constellation of Sagittarius. Shapley 
identified this with the center of our Galaxy. Although 
Shapley had underestimated interstellar absorption and 
thus overestimated the size of the Galaxy, this established 
the size of our stellar system. Shapley took part in the great 
debate with HEBER cuRTIS and successfully demonstrated 
that our Galaxy was a star system comparable to other 
galaxies. Shapley became director of the Harvard College 
Observatory, establishing modern outstations at the Oak 
Ridge (later, Agassiz) Station west of Cambridge, MA, 
and by moving the Arequipa Southern Station in Peru to 
become the Boyden Station in South Africa, each equipped 
with a 60 in telescope. He used the Cepheid variable stars 
to investigate the Magellanic clouds, to probe the spatial 
distribution of external galaxies. He discovered the dwarf 
galaxies in Sculptor and Fornax. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shen Kua (1031-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shen Kua (1031-95) 


Born in Ch’ien-t’ang, Chekiang province (now Zhejiang), 
China, turned to science after a less than completely 
successful career as a general. He described his work 
on mathematics, astronomy, cartography, optics and 
medicine. He developed ideas on the motion of the planets 
which included techniques to predict retrograde motion, 
and used the techniques to improve predictions of the 
Moon. This led him to propose a new calendar, whose 
implementation required further observations of the sky, 
stimulating the development of astronomy in China. He 
made the first reference to a magnetic compass in his work 
Meng ch’i pi t’an (Dream Pool Essays). He also devised 
a celestial sphere, a bronze sundial and an improved 
clepsydra (water clock). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shepherd Moon 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shepherd Moon 


A minor satellite whose gravitational influence on the 
particles of a narrow planetary ring constrains the ring’s 
radial extent. The ring systems of the giant planets are 
all shaped by gravitational perturbations of the particles 
that make up the rings. A lone shepherd moon can give 
a broad ring a sharply delineated outer edge, while pairs 
of shepherd moons can ‘squeeze’ the particles of narrow 
rings into well-defined orbits. 

Shepherd pairs were originally hypothesized in the 
late 1970s by Scott Tremaine and Peter Goldreich to 
account for the narrow rings of Uranus. In their model, 
one satellite orbits just outside a ring, and one just inside 
it. The outer shepherd moves more slowly than the ring 
particles. When a particle on the outside of the ring passes 
it, the ring drags it back, causing it to lose energy and fall 
into a slightly lower orbit. The inner shepherd, in contrast, 
moves faster than the ring particles, so when it overtakes a 
particle on the inside of the ring its gravitational attraction 
gives an energy boost to the particle, lifting it into a slightly 
higher orbit. The net effect is to counteract the natural 
tendency of the ring particles to spread out, so maintaining 
the narrow ring. 

The theory received support with the discovery of 
such pairs of shepherd moons, first in the Saturnian system 
in 1981, and then in the Uranian system in 1986. The 
minor satellites Prometheus and Pandora orbit either side 
of Saturn’s Fring. The clumpy, braided appearance of the F 
ring has been ascribed to the slightly different eccentricities 
of the two shepherds. Another minor satellite, Atlas, orbits 
right at the outer edge of the bright A ring, and appears 
to act as a shepherd, preventing the ring’s particles from 
spreading outwards. Another pair of shepherds, Ophelia 
and Cordelia, were found to be orbiting either side of the 
é ring around Uranus. 

What is not clear is how other narrow rings can exist 
without the channeling effect of shepherds. It could well 
be that they are in fact shepherded by as yet undiscovered 
small satellites. On the other hand, some other mechanism 
could be playing a part in constraining the particles in 
them. 


See also: Neptune: rings, Saturn: rings, Uranus: rings. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shinsei ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shinsei 


First Japanese scientific satellite, launched September 
1971. Returned data on the ionosphere, solar wind and 
cosmic rays. Shinsei means ‘new star’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Shklovskii, losif Samuilovich (1916-85) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shklovskii, losif Samuilovich 
(1916-85) 


Soviet astrophysicist, educated and worked, particularly 
in radioastronomy, at Moscow State University and the 
Shternberg Astronomical Institute. He investigated the 
solar corona, showing that its temperature is of the order 
of a million degrees kelvin, and made theoretical and 
radio studies of supernovae and supernova remnants. 
In 1953 he proposed that the continuum radiation from 
the Crab nebula is synchrotron radiation, because of 
its broad spectral distribution, and predicted that the 
radio emission would be polarized by the magnetic 
fields causing the synchrotron radiation. This was 
demonstrated by Dombrovsky in 1954. From a very 
general theoretical model of how a supernova remnant 
expands into the interstellar medium he predicted the 1% 
per annum decrease of emission from the Cassiopeia A 
radio source, confirmed by Hégbom and Shakeshaft in 
1961. Shklovskii’s book on Intelligent Life in the Universe 
was translated and expanded by CARLSAGAN. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker, Eugene [‘Gene’] Merle (1928-97) and 
Shoemaker, Carolyn [née Spellman] 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shoemaker, Eugene [‘Gene’] Merle 
(1928-97) and Shoemaker, Carolyn 
[née Spellman] 


Astrogeologist Gene Shoemaker was born in Los Angeles, 
California and became chief scientist at the USGS Center 
of Astrogeology (Flagstaff) and professor of geology at 
CalTech. He worked with his wife Carolyn on cratering, 
both on the Moon and the Earth, by volcanoes and 
by meteor and cometary impact. He discovered, with 
Edward Chao, coesite, a type of silica produced in a 
violent impact and a signature that a terrestrial crater is 
meteoritic. With Eleanor Helin, Carolyn and he searched 
for potential Earth-impacting asteroids. As a result of 
this search (through which they found 13% of all known 
asteroids), they also discovered 32 comets which now bear 
the Shoemaker name, including Comet Shoemaker-Levy- 
9 which impacted on Jupiter in 1996. Gene died in a car 
crash in Australia while visiting meteor craters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker-Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Shoemaker-—Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


The collision of comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 (SL9) with 
JUPITER, in July 1994, was an exceptional event for 
astronomers who were able to watch in real time the 
response of a planetary atmosphere to a large meteoritic 
impact. A wide variety of phenomena were observed such 
as temperature increase in the stratosphere, formation 
of aerosols and new gaseous species, and changes in 
the magnetosphere. Some of them remained visible in 
the following months and years. The observations were 
performed at all wavelengths, using all possible means 
from Earth and from space. Their interpretation has given 
an estimate of the size of the various impactors, their 
penetration level in the Jovian atmosphere, the energy 
released in the explosions, and the mass of the newly 
formed molecules. There is still uncertainty, however, 
about the chemical composition of comet SL9 itself. 


The comet’s history 

Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 was discovered in March 1993 
by EUGENE AND CAROLYN SHOEMAKER and by David Levy, as a 
trail of about 20 individual fragments (figure 1). The study 
of its trajectory showed that it was a Jupiter-family comet 
(see comETS) which was disrupted by tidal forces in July 
1992 at its previous perijove passage, and that it would 
collide with the planet at its next perijove passage, in July 
1994 (figure 2). 

As a result of the discovery of comet SL9, a huge 
international effort took place using a wide variety of 
ground-based telescopes and instruments, working at 
all wavelengths from the ultraviolet to the radio range. 
Observations were also planned from spacecraft, in 
particular the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) and GALILEO, 
but also the INTERNATIONAL ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER (IUE) and 
the x-ray satellite Rosat. Questions to be addressed 
were the amount of released energy, the temperature 
evolution, the size of the impactors, their physical nature 
and their chemical composition. In the meantime, the 
SL9 fragments, labeled from A to W, were repeatedly 
monitored from the the HST and ground-based telescopes 
between March 1993 and July 1994. 

A collision of this type is very rare: according to 
the models of orbital dynamics, such an event might be 
expected once every few hundred years. A similar event 
might indeed have taken place about three centuries ago: 
as reported by the archives of Paris Observatory, Jean- 
Dominique Cassini reported in 1690 an unusual feature 
on the disk of Jupiter and his drawings show a remarkable 
similarity with the craters observed after the SL9 collision 
in 1994. 

The fragments of comet SL9 entered the Jovian 
atmosphere between 16 July and 22 July 1994, at a latitude 
of —44°, only a few minutes within the dates predicted by 
astrometry. The impacts took place just behind the limb, 
and came into direct viewing from Earth about 10 minutes 
later, due to Jupiter’s rotation. The Galileo spacecraft, 
then at a distance of 1.6 AU from Jupiter, benefited from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a direct viewing of the impacts. During the week of 
impacts, all fragments collided on the / = —44° parallel, 
at different longitudes, as an effect of the planet’s rotation. 
All explosions were extensively studied from almost all 
observatories; a huge temperature increase was measured 
in the stratosphere of Jupiter, dust was formed and new 
molecules were detected; changes were reported in the 
magnetosphere (see JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE). 


The impacts 

Three types of data have been recorded during the impacts: 
(a) the lightcurves, at different visible and infrared 
wavelengths, have given the temperature evolution and 
the energy budget; (b) images taken from the ground, from 
the HST and from Galileo, have shown the meteor entry, 
the ejecta trajectories and crater evolution; (c) spectra, 
recorded in the ultraviolet, visible, infrared and radio 
range have shown evidence for new species. For all 
observed impacts, from the recorded lightcurves, events 
can be interpreted as a sequence of three main phases 
(figure 3): the ‘entry’ phase, the ‘explosion’ phase and 
the ‘splash’ phase. The entry phase, which took place 
behind the limb as seen from Earth, was mostly observed 
by Galileo and we have little information about it; it was 
sometime detected as a first weak emission in the ground- 
based lightcurves. The explosion phase, about 1 min later, 
was observed as a strong emission, especially in the visible 
range, corresponding to the explosion of the impactor 
within the atmosphere and the ascension of the fireball; 
here again, most of our knowledge about this phase comes 
from Galileo. The splash phase, which starts about 6 min 
after the explosion and lasts for about 15 min, corresponds 
to the heating of the Jovian stratosphere by the ejecta as 
they fall back on the planet; this phase was extensively 
studied from Earth. The intermediate period between 
these two last phases was mostly observed by the HST 
which was able to measure the maximum altitude reached 
by the EyECcTA (over 3000 km). 


The entry phase 

The lightcurve of the entry phase or ‘meteor phase’ has 
been mostly observed by the imaging system (SSI) and the 
photopolarimeter (PPR) of the Galileo spacecraft. Several 
ground-based observatories also recorded a weak, early 
event, about 1 min before the explosion itself; it probably 
corresponds to a meteor storm accompanying the main 
fragment. 

Several attempts have been made to detect light 
echoes on Galilean satellites, but they were all unsuccess- 
ful; the corresponding upper limits for the radiated energy 
are compatible with the estimates derived from the Galileo 
lightcurves. 


The explosion phase 

From a modeling of the lightcurves by Crawford, McLow 
and Zahnle, and with the use of the plume altitudes 
observed with the HST, estimates of the fragment 
diameters have been obtained. They range between 150 m 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker-Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The fragments of comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 as observed from the 3.5 m New Technology Telescope (NTT) at ESO, La Silla, on 
1 and 2 July 1994. About 12 of the 20 identified fragments, labeled from A to W, are visible in theses pictures (from top to bottom: filters 
B, V, Rand I). The figure is taken from Stiiwe et al in West and Bohnhardt (1995, pp 17-22). 


and 600 m, which corresponds to H2O masses of 2 x 10” 
and 10! g respectively. These values also agree with 
the estimate deduced by Asphaug and Benz from the 
trajectories of the cometary fragments after disruption. 
Calculations show that the altitude reached by the ejecta is 
about the same (about 3000 km) for all fragments whatever 
their size is, as the smaller fragments explode at a higher 
level than the more massive ones. The total energy 
released is about 3 x 107” erg for the biggest impactors 
(K and G impacts), and about 10 times less for the smaller 
ones. However, even in the case of the big impacts, the 
energy is not sufficient to lead to detectable seismic waves, 
for which only an upper limit was obtained by Galdemar 
and Mosser. 

The temperature of the fireball resulting from the 
explosion has been estimated by Martin and Orton from 
the visible and near-IR lightcurves measured by the 
Galileo SSI, NIMS and PPR experiments. From over 
10000 K at the beginning, it decreased to about 2000 K 
after about 15 s. According to the NIMS data, the size of 
the fireball increased adiabatically from 15 km, 10 s after 
the explosion, to 100 km after 40 s. There is still some 
uncertainty about the penetration level of the fragments, 
as some observations (including infrared emission lines of 
NH) suggest that the explosion of the biggest fragments 
took place below the NH3 cloud, at a pressure higher 
than 0.5 bar, while the interpretation of the Galileo NIMS 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observations favors a higher penetration level, at about 
0.2 bar. In any case, the explosions are likely to have taken 
place in the upper troposphere or near the tropopause, in 
the pressure range 0.1-1 bar. 


The splash phase 

Information upon the temperature evolution in this third 
phase comes from the lightcurves, but also from the spectra 
of the emission bands of CHg, especially in the strong 
v3 band around 3.3 wm. Methane, a spectroscopically 
very active gas, is one of the main minor constituents 
of the Jovian atmosphere (see JUPITER: ATMOSPHERE) and 
its mixing ratio, with respect to the main constituent 
Hy, is well known (about 2 x 10-3). From its emission 
spectrum, one can derive the temperature of the emitting 
region. Measurements obtained by this method indicate a 
decrease from about 1000 K at T = 10 min down to about 
600 K at T = 25 min. 

Apart from the information about the temperature, 
spectra obtained during the splash phase have led to the 
discovery of new species, both gaseous and solid. The 
presence of dust was visible in the early part of the splash 
phase, with the formation of dark craters at the center of 
the impacts, surrounded by crescent-shaped areas due to 
infalling ejectas (figure 4). Infrared spectra have shown the 
presence of silicates, which suggests, for the impactor, an 
O/C ratio larger than 1, and a cometary origin. The dust 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker-Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Disruption at Close Approach 
to Jupiter on July 8, 1992 


89 
CS 
a 


yw 


Impacts on Jupiter 
July 16-22, 1994 


Earth 


Apojove 
@ July 16, 1993 


Figure 2. The orbit of comet SL9 between July 1992 (time of tidal 
break-up) and July 1994 (time of collision with Jupiter). This 
schematic diagram is not drawn to scale. (Prepared by Z 
Sekanina, P Chodas and D Yeomans.) 


F, (Jy) 


0.10, 4; 3 


F ¥ I Maat nims 
Oe es eae Deena ct 
30 40 50 60 70 
minutes after 5:00 UT, 21 July 1994 


Figure 3. Lightcurves of impact R, observed with the Keck 

(10 m) and Palomar (6 m) telescopes at three different infrared 
wavelengths. The black bars indicate the time intervals at which 
NIMS-Galileo observations were recorded. The time of 
explosion is 05:34:57 (Chodas and Yeomans 1996). The first weak 
maximum corresponds to the entry phase (t = —1 min). The 
second maximum corresponds to the explosion phase 

(t = 0-2 min) and the third maximum, brighter and extended in 
time, corresponds to the splash phase (t = 6-25 min). The figure 
is taken from Nicholson (1996). 


probably also contains a carbonaceous component, but no 
firm identification could be derived from spectroscopy. 
The total volume of dust injected in the stratosphere has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. This image, taken with the wide-field camera of the 
Hubble Space Telescope, shows the impact craters for fragments 
D and G. The larger crater was created by impact G on 18 July 
1994. The central hole is distinctly surrounded by two concentric 
rings. The smaller crater on the left of the G impact site is due to 
impact D which took place a day earlier. This image was taken 
1h 45 min after impact G (Hammel, NASA, ESA). 


been estimated by West to make up a sphere of about 1 km 
diameter, with particles of 0.25 4m diameter. From their 
infrared signature, the total mass of the silicates has been 
estimated to 8 x 10’? g, or 10-20% of the total volume of 
the impactor. 

Many new gaseous species have been detected in the 
stratosphere during the splash phase: CO, HO, S2, CS», 
CS, OCS, HCN, C,H4, NH3 (previously present mostly in 
the Jovian troposphere), and possibly PH3 and H2S. These 
discoveries and their implications have been reviewed 
by Lellouch. The most abundant of the newly formed 
species was CO, detected both in the infrared and in the 
radio range. A remarkable result was the high excitation 
temperature deduced from CO infrared observations, 
which increased from 2000 to 5000 K during the first 10 min 
of the splash phase. In contrast with other molecules, CO 
is not dissociated at these temperatures. The temperature 
increase has been explained by Zahnle on the basis of a 
ballistic model, in which the CO molecules having the 
highest excitation temperature are the ones which, being 
lifted at highest altitudes, fall down later. H,O was 
detected in the beginning of the splash phase; it was 
observed both by the near-infrared spectrometer of Galileo 
(NIMS) and from the Kuiper Airborne Observatory; its 
excitation temperature was about 1000 K. Sz, CS, CS and 
possibly H,S (although this latter detection is tentative) 
were found from ultraviolet spectroscopy with the HST. 
In addition to CO, ground-based millimeter heterodyne 
spectroscopy provided the detection of HCN, CS and OCS, 
while C,H, and HCN, together with NH3 emission lines, 
were found in the infrared region, at 10-13 wm. The 
infrared and millimeter spectroscopic observations have 
also provided key information about the evolution of the 
stratospheric thermal profile. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker-Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Abundances (in g) of detected species and corresponding elemental masses following the impacts of SL9 on Jupiter. Elemental 
abundances expected from a comet nucleus and from a carbonaceous chondrite are shown for comparison (from Crovisier 1996). 


Molecular mass{ Elemental mass 


Elemental mass 
ina 10" g fragment 


Molecule Observationt inanSL9impact inanSL9impact Comet CI chrondrite 
c 2 
oe es ea 515x104[O] 5x 104[o} 5x 10" [oO] 
3 
ae Roe } é i : 1x 10'3 [N] 2x103[N] 3x 10! [N] 
S> UV 1.5 x 1012 ? 
CS UV 1.5 x 10! 
cs UV, radio 5x 10! 5 x 10! [S] 4x 10! [S] 6 x 10!5 [S] 
H2S UV ? 
Ocs Radio 3x 104 
1 x 10!4 [C] 2 x 10! [C] 3 x 10% [C] 
PH3 IR ? 3 x 10! [P] 1 x 10! [P] 
Silicates IR 6 x 1012 8 x 10! [Si] 1 x 10" [Si] 
4x10 [Mg] 1.x 10!4 [Mg] 


t In bold are the observations from which the abundances are taken. 
$ Some of these values are preliminary and subject to revision. 


Mass (grams) 


05 06 07 0809 1 2 
O/C Ratio 


Figure 5. Total production of a mass of gas, 50% Jovian and 50% 
cometary, produced by a comet of 10'* g, as a function of the 
cometary O/C ratio. This model assumes gaseous phase 
chemistry. The production corresponds to temperatures ranging 
from 1500 to 5000 K. Comparison with table 1 shows that the 
global composition of the newly formed species cannot be 
explained by a single value of the O/C ratio. The figure is taken 
from Zahnle (1996). 


The relative abundances of the newly formed species 
can provide information about the chemical nature of the 
impactors. Assuming that the emitting region is formed 
with material containing 50% of Jovian material and 50% 
of cometary matter, Zahnle has calculated the expected 
relative abundances of the expected new molecules, as a 
function of the O/C ratio (figure 5). If oxygen dominates, 
the expected new species are CO, Nz and H20, then SOQ2, 
SO and CO). In contrast, if carbon dominates, then CO, 
No, CS, HCN, C2H2, CH, and CS, are expected. The 
puzzling result is that the newly formed species belong 
to the two lists, which makes the interpretation difficult. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This might imply that the chemical composition was 
different for the various impacts, but the origin of such 
differentiation would remain to be explained. Inversely, 
if a cometary O/C ratio is assumed, then the relative 
abundances observed for the new species imply that the 
emitting region must have been mainly formed of Jovian 
gas. 

Another surprising result was the detection, in the 
visible range, of a large number of atomic and ionized 
lines at the beginning of the splash phase. In particular, 
lithium was observed for the first time in an outer solar 
system body. These emissions have to be of cometary 
origin; however, as discussed below, it is difficult to derive 
the cometary abundances of these species, because their 
excitation mechanism is not fully understood at present. 


The long-term evolution of impact phenomena 
An extensive monitoring of the Jovian disk, both by 
imaging and spectroscopy, took place during the months 
following the impacts, and some of the observations have 
been periodically repeated during the three following 
years. 


Evolution of the thermal profile 

The thermal evolution of the Jovian stratosphere has 
been studied using the spectral profiles of the various 
emission lines observed during and after the impacts: 
CH, at 8 wm, C,H» at 13 wm, CO at 4.7 wm, and CO, 
CS and HCN in the millimeter range. The stratosphere 
cooled rapidly (figure 6), and had returned to its nominal 
temperature within about a month; this rapid cooling has 
been explained by Bezard, taking into account the presence 
of the silicate particles injected into the stratosphere at the 
time of the explosion, which efficiently contribute to its 
radiative cooling. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker-Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-0001 


001 


ro) 
= 


PRESSURE (mbar) 


10 
100 150 


200 250 
TEMPERATURE (K) 


Maillard o af. (1995) 
L+ 45 hrs 


+ 


—«—e—a- [| + 11 hrs 
-—a—e K + 23 hrs 


o—e—e H + 1.4 day 


-e-o-e E + 2.6 days 


300 350 


Figure 6. Evolution of the Jovian stratospheric temperature after impacts L, K, H and E. Calculations of radiative cooling show a faster 
cooling than anticipated by the Jovian gases only, which can be explained by the effect of newly formed silicates. The figure is taken 


from Bézard et al (1997). 


Evolution of the newly formed molecules 

The newly formed species had very variable lifetimes. 
H,O disappeared after a few hours, while S,, OCS and 
NH lasted for a few weeks. CS» and CO were detectable 
for several months; CS and HCN lasted several years. A 
good general agreement was found between the observed 
evolution of these species and the predictions provided 
by the photochemical evolutionary models developed by 
Moses. 


Evolution of the dust 

The clouds formed at the time of impacts were extensively 
monitored in the weeks and months following the impacts. 
The horizontal dust distribution was observed with UV 
HST images and ground-based images within the CHy 
bands, probing the high stratosphere. The clouds first 
spread in longitude during the first few days, as an effect 
of the fast rotation of Jupiter. Then they elongated to form 
a continuous dark band along the —44° parallel. During 
the year following the collision, they spread in latitude, 
between —20° and —80°. The density of aerosols was 
reduced by a factor 4 to 10 after 10 months; the aerosol 
layer was still weakly detectable after one year. 

Dust particles were originally located at high 
stratospheric levels, stable against convection, and they 
were sufficiently light to have a residence time of about 
a year, as estimated by West. Their vertical motion 
was monitored through the evolution of the stratospheric 
profile, as they are mostly responsible for its cooling. After 
a year, the areosol layer had reached the tropopause level 
at 0.1 bar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The morphology of the ejecta showed two concentric 
rings which expanded at constant velocities of about 
450 ms! for the outer ring and 210 ms" for the inner ring; 
it was suggested by Ingersoll that they possibly originated 
from waves. The radial speed of the outer ring, however, 
is too slow for an acoustic wave and too fast for a gravity 
wave, so that the origin of the rings is still an open question. 


Magnetospheric effects 

The radio emission 

The radio emission of Jupiter has three types of 
components: the thermal millimeter radiation, the 
synchrotron emission of the electrons along the magnetic 
field lines, in the centimeter-decimeter range, and the 
outbursts from localized radio sources, in the decametric 
range. 

The Jovian magnetosphere has also been perturbed by 
the collision. If little change was observed at decimetric 
or decametric wavelengths, the synchrotron radiation, 
observed in the centimeter range, showed a significant 
enhancement (by 10 to 40%) during the week of impacts, 
as well as some modification of its properties. Most of 
the emission was confined to one hemisphere, between 
100 and 240° longitude. The observations apparently 
imply the existence of a population of newly excited 
electrons which are confined in a particular region of 
the magnetic field. The hemisphere of maximum radio 
emission correlates with the side where the magnetic field 
lines crossing the radiation belts intercept the Jovian disk 
in the region of latitude —44°, i.e. where the impacts 
took place. Several mechanisms have been proposed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker-Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


for the origin of the new population of electrons: radial 
diffusion enhancement, shock acceleration and pitch 
angle scattering; as discussed by Bolton, more than 
one mechanism is probably required to account for the 
observed data. 


Auroral phenomena 

Changes have been also recorded in the Aurora of the 
planet. The first sign of auroral activity may have been 
an Mg* flash fortuitously recorded from the HST at the G- 
condensation, on 14 July 1994, four days prior to the entry, 
presumably corresponding to the G-entry in the Jovian 
magnetosphere. Other UV signatures were recorded from 
the HST in the H and Hp lines a few hours before the 
impacts; they were probably emitted in auroral flares when 
the fragments crossed high L-shell magnetic lines. A 
strong infrared H} emission was recorded a few minutes 
before the C impact, implying a strong heating of the upper 
stratosphere. 

A remarkable result was the detection of emissions, 
on several occasions, at the location of the northern 
counterparts of the impacts (the footprints of connecting 
magnetic field lines): such an x-ray emission was observed 
by the ROSAT satellite at the time of the K and P2 impacts; 
UV emissions of norther counterparts were recorded by 
the HST just after the splash phase (¢ = 30-60 min), 
and infrared H} emissions of northern counterparts were 
reported a few days after the impacts. As reviewed by Ip, 
all these results, together with the observed enhancement 
of the synchrotron radiation, suggest that field-aligned 
current systems established a connection between the 
impact sites and their magnetic conjugate points. 

The auroral activity of Jupiter was monitored in the 
UV with the IUE satellite during the impacts, and in the 
IR from ground-based H3 observations during the week 
following the impacts. An enhancement of the northern 
auroral emission was recorded a few days after the last 
impacts: its ratio to the southern emission increased to 
a value of 7-8 on 25 July, and then returned to its normal 
value of 1-3. The decrease of the southern aurora may have 
been associated with chemical effects induced by newly 
formed material reaching high southern latitudes. 


What have we learnt about comet SL9? 

History of SL9 

On the basis of more than 3000 astrometric measurements, 
Chodas and Yeomans have been able to predict with high 
accuracy the impact times of all fragments. The set of 
predicted impact times was systematically early by about 
7 min, probably due to systematic errors in the reference 
star catalogs used for the data reduction. The timing 
of the impacts as measured by Galileo was found to be 
accurate within 10 s of the predictions, corrected from the 
systematic effect, while the impact timing derived from 
ground-based observations was accurate to within a few 
minutes. Using the observed impact times, new orbit 
solutions were generated, leading to the best orbital fits 
ever obtained for a comet. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


On the basis of its retrieved orbit, the pre-break-up 
history of comet SL9 has been inferred by Chodas and 
Yeomans, using a Monte Carlo analysis. The progenitor 
of comet SL9 was most likely captured by Jupiter around 
1929 + 9 years. Before capture, the comet was in a low- 
eccentricity, low-inclination heliocentric orbit, probably 
inside Jupiter’s orbit, consistent with a group of Jupiter- 
family comets called the quasi-Hildas. 


Evolution and activity of SL9 

Studying the possible break-up scenarios of comet SL9 can 
provide important constraints upon its internal strength. 
Two extreme models have been proposed, with on the 
one hand a coherent body subject to sequential crack 
formation, and on the other side a rubble pile/swarm 
model. Neither of them is fully satisfactory, which led 
Rickman to propose a new scenario involving processes 
from both models. He estimated the tensile strength of 
the comet to be about 100 Pa, a very low value consistent 
with a fluffy aggregate of sub-micron particles. 

Asphaug and Benz have modelled the elongation of 
the swarm, on the basis of tidal forces and self-gravity, 
and they have calculated the expected chain length as 
a function of the comet density and the size progenitor. 
Comparison with the actual chain length favors a 1.5 km 
progenitor with a density of 0.5 g cm’. This estimate 
is consistent with the mean size of the impactors derived 
from the dynamical simulations. 

The activity of the comet prior to the impact has been 
studied from the HST and ground-based images. The 
break-up of the comet apparently triggered the activity 
of the fragments which were continuously surrounded 
by a dust coma from July 1992 to July 1994; estimates 
of dust production rate are rather low (between 1 kg s7! 
and 5 kg s“! for the largest components). All attempts to 
detect gaseous activity, in the visible, near-UV and radio 
range, were unsuccessful. Upper limits of production rates 
were in the range of 10” s~' for OH, and 3 x 10” for 
CN. Taking into account the small size and the low dust 
production rate of SL9, the absence of a gaseous signature 
in its spectrum is not surprising. 


Chemical composition of SL9 

A spectacular result was the ground-based detection of 
the atomic lines in the visible range, in the splash phase of 
impacts L, Q1 and Q2. The observed species were Fe, K, 
Ca, H, Na, Mn, Mg, Cr and, for the first time, Li. Other 
atomic and ionic transitions were also detected in the UV 
from the HST: H, He, S, Si, Mg*, Fe*, Sit, Al*.... All these 
elements, absent from the Jovian outer atmosphere, are 
indubitably coming from the impactor; their signatures 
are also found in the spectra of sungrazing comets. These 
emissions are usually excited by fluorescence. However, 
as discussed by Crovisier, this mechanism does not seem 
to be responsible for the SL9 emissions, or at least it 
cannot be the only one: the observed lines are heavily 
saturated, and their intensities and widths are too large to 
be explained by fluorescence. Other possible mechanisms 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Shoemaker-Levy 9—Jupiter Collision 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


could include thermal excitation by collisions, electronic 
recombinations, or prompt emissions following chemical 
reactions; all these time-dependent excitation phenomena 
are unfortunately very difficult to model. No firm 
conclusion can thus be derived at present about the 
abundances of the observed atom and ion species. 

The chemical composition of the comet is also difficult 
to retrieve from the newly formed molecules. Indeed, 
all cometary elements must have been vaporized at the 
time of the explosion; the new molecules observed are not 
coming directly from the comet, but are recombination 
products, most likely formed in the early part of the 
splash phase. In addition, the newly formed species can 
be partially of planetary origin, so that even the atomic 
abundances derived from their mass may not necessarily 
provide reliable determination of the comet elemental 
masses. 

Some information, however, can be retrieved from 
the relative abundances of the newly formed species; this 
study has been performed, in particular, by Lellouch and 
Crovisier (table 1). The oxygen- and sulfur-bearing species 
are known to be absent from the Jovian stratosphere; their 
abundance can thus be used to infer the cometary mass of 
oxygen and sulfur. The derived values are 5 x 10” g for S 
and (1-3) x 10"* g for O; the derived S/O ratio is compatible 
with both cometary and asteroidal abundances, and does 
not allow us to discriminate between the two origins. 
The cometary abundance of carbon cannot be retrieved 
from newly formed carbon-bearing species, as carbon 
might come from Jovian CHy. The case of nitrogen is 
more dubious: some newly formed NH3 was probably of 
cometary origin, but some may have come from the NH3 
cloud if this cloud was hit by the meteor. The derived 
abundance of stratospheric nitrogen was 108 g. Assuming 
an impactor origin for N, the inferred N/O ratio would 
clearly favor a cometary origin. 

Another important parameter is the composition of 
aerosols. The signature of silicates was identified at 
10 wm, leading to an estimate of 8 x 10% g for the Si 
abundance. The inferred S/O ratio is in good agreement 
with a cometary composition. 

Was SL9 a comet or an asteroid? Although no 
definite conclusion can be drawn on the basis of its 
chemical composition, several arguments strongly favor 
the cometary origin: the small size, the activity level, weak 
but real, the low density and the low tensile force, and the 
silicate signature. SL9 was most probably a small, very 
common Jupiter-family comet which would never have 
caught astronomers’ attention without its premature death 
in a crash with Jupiter. 


Conclusions 
Several years after the collision, there is still work to 
be done on the modeling and interpretation of the huge 
database collected at the time of impacts and in the 
following weeks and months. 

The coordinated observation of the entire impact has 
allowed a repeated intercomparison of all observations, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and their interpretation in the light of theoretical impact 
models and fireball evolutionary models. There is a good 
overall understanding of the general phenomenon, which 
has allowed a determination, at least to first order, of 
the main physical parameters involved in the collisions: 
energetic budget, size of the fragments, penetration levels. 
The abundance of newly formed species has been analysed 
in the light of shock chemistry models, and their temporal 
evolution is in good agreement with the predictions of 
photochemical evolutionary models. 

From the global set of astrometrical measurements, 
the history of the comet has been determined with high 
precision. However, the physical and chemical nature 
of the comet itself is still poorly known. In summary, 
one could say that the collision of comet Shoemaker-Levy 
9 with Jupiter has not allowed us to fully understand 
the nature of the comet; in contrast, it has provided a 
huge amount of information about the physics of large 
meteoritic impacts, as well as on the behavior of a 
planetary atmosphere after such impact. 


Bibliography 
Articles of the authors quoted above can be found in the 
following references: 


Special journal issues 


Earth, Moon Planets 1994 66 (1) 

Science 1995 267 

Geophys. Res. Lett. 1995 22 (12, 13, 17) 
Icarus 1996 121 (2) 

Planetary and Space Science 1997 45 (10) 


Noll K S, Weaver H A and Feldman P D (eds) 1996 
The Collision of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 and Jupiter 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Spencer J R and Mitton J (eds) 1995 The Great Comet Crash 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

West R M and Bohnhardt H (eds) 1995 Proc. European 
Workshop on the SL9-Jupiter Collision no 52 (Garching: 
ESO) 


Thérése Encrenaz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Short-period Comet 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Short-period Comet 


A comet whose period is less than 200 years, also known 
as a periodic comet. Comets with longer periods are 
termed long-period comets; these are also ‘periodic’, but a 
comet can be incontrovertibly classified as periodic only 
when it has been observed on at least two returns. The 
choice of 200 years as a cut-off is a historical convenience, 
corresponding roughly to the length of time for which 
it has been possible to calculate orbits with sufficient 
accuracy to predict a return; also, no comet with a 
calculated period of more than 200 years has yet been 
observed to return since its discovery. In the system 
of cometary designations introduced in 1995, a short- 
period comet is assigned the prefix ‘P/’ and a number 
indicating the order in which the periodicity of its orbit was 
established, ina sequence beginning with 1P/Halley. As of 
April 2000 there were 143 known short-period comets. In 
addition there are over 40 comets with calculated periods 
of less than 200 years that have been observed at only one 
return, plus some two dozen short-period comets that have 
failed to show up when expected or have been observed 
to disintegrate. 

Most short-period comets have orbital inclinations of 
less than 30° (15° is typical) and move in direct orbits. The 
shortest period, 3.3 years, is possessed by 2P/Encke; the 
longest, 155 years, by 35P /Herschel-Rigollet. Many short- 
period comets have been perturbed into their present 
orbits by the gravitational influence of Jupiter and have 
aphelia near 5.2 AU, Jupiter’s distance from the Sun, and 
orbital periods of 6 to 12 years—in fact, three-quarters of 
all short-period comets have periods that fall within this 
range. These so-called Jupiter-family comets are believed to 
have originated in the Kuiper Belt. Those with periods 
of 20 to 200 years, known as random or Halley-type comets, 
are, like the long-period comets, thought to come from the 
Oort Cloud. 


See also: comets, comet family, Kuiper Belt, long-period 
comet, Oort Cloud, solar system: nomenclature. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sidereal Period ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sidereal Period 


A period of time measured relative to the ‘fixed’ stars. In 
normal usage the term refers to the time taken by a planet 
to complete one orbit of the Sun, returning to its original 
position relative to the position of the stars, or the time 
taken for a satellite to complete one orbit of its parent 
planet, again measured relative to the background stars. 
In the case of the Earth, this period of time is referred to as 
the sidereal year and is equal to 365.2564 mean solar days. 


See also: synodic period. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Sidereal Time 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sidereal Time 


A time system based on the rotation of the Earth measured 
relative to the background stars, which for this purpose 
are regarded as fixed in position. Relative to the stars, the 
Earth rotates on its axis in a period of 23 h 56 min 04.1 s 
of mean time (ie. ordinary civil time), and this period 
is called the sidereal day, which is, in turn, divided into 
sidereal hours. 

For an observer located at a particular longitude on 
the Earth, the sidereal day is equivalent to the apparent 
rotation period of the celestial sphere. This period 
may be determined by measuring the interval between 
two successive upper transits of a given star across his 
meridian. The value of the sidereal time at any instant 
is defined to be the hour angle, i.e. the angle measured 
clockwise from the meridian, of the vernal equinox (a 
fixed point on the celestial sphere). Thus, when the vernal 
equinox is on the meridian, its hour angle is zero, and the 
sidereal time is zero hours. By the time that the rotation 
of the celestial sphere has increased this angle to 90°, 6h 
have elapsed, and the sidereal time is 6 h, and so on. After 
24 h, the vernal equinox returns to the meridian. 

The hour angle measured by this observer relative 
to his meridian is the local hour angle, and the sidereal 
time so obtained, the local sidereal time (LST). Greenwich 
sidereal time (GST) is the hour angle of the vernal equinox 
measured from the Greenwich meridian. The difference 
between LST and GST corresponds to the longitude of the 
observer expressed in time units (where 1 h is equivalent 
to 15°, since the Earth rotates through 15° per hour). If the 
observer is east of Greenwich, LST is greater than GST, if 
he is west of Greenwich his LST is less than GST. 


See also: equinox, hour angle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Siderite ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Siderite 


An obsolete term for an iron meteorite. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Siderolite ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Siderolite 


An obsolete term for a stony-iron meteorite. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Siderostat/heliostat/coelostat 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Siderostat/heliostat/coelostat 


A plane mirror that is driven about an axis so as to 
reflect light from a particular celestial object along a fixed 
direction. In practice, a coelostat usually comprises two 
plane mirrors. One mirror is driven around an axis parallel 
to that of the Earth at half the Earth’s rotation rate in order 
to counteract the apparent rotation of the celestial sphere 
and ensure that rays from a particular object are reflected 
along a constant direction. The other mirror is orientated 
so as to reflect the beam of light from the first mirror into 
a fixed telescope. A siderostat uses a mirror driven at the 
same angular rate as the rotation of the Earth but suffers 
from the drawback that although a star located at the center 
of the field of view remains stationary, the rest of the field 
of view rotates about that central point. 

Where the mirror, or mirrors, is (are) driven to follow 
the apparent motion of the Sun, the device is called a 
heliostat. Systems of this kind are used in a number 
of specialist solar telescopes. For example, the McMath 
solar telescope at Kitt Peak, Arizona, uses a 2 m diameter 
heliostat, mounted at the top of a 30 m tower, to reflect 
light down a cooled inclined tunnel, about 150 m long, to 
a reflecting telescope system that produces a fixed image 
of the Sun, some 76 cm in diameter, in a laboratory. 


See also: celestial sphere, diurnal motion, solar feeds. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sigiienza y Gongora, Carlos de (1645-1700) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sigtenza y Gongora, Carlos de 
(1645-1700) 


Spanish colonial astronomer, born in Mexico City, became 
professor of astrology at the university but seems strongly 
to have opposed astrology and, in 1681, wrote on comets 
to calm fears aroused by the one of 1680-1. Appointed 
by decree of Charles II of Spain as royal cosmographer, 
he mapped New Spain, Mexico and Pensacola Bay and 
determined the longitude of Mexico City. He published 
almanacs and observed the solar eclipse of 1691. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Sikhote Alin Meteorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sikhote Alin Meteorite 


An iron meteorite that fell in the Sikhote Alin mountain 
range in southeast Siberia on 12 February 1947. It was 
preceded by a brilliant fireball. The incoming body 
fragmented at a height estimated at about 5 km, and 
the fragments produced nearly 400 small impact craters, 
the largest 27 m across. The total of 23 tonnes that was 
collected included a fragment with a mass of 1.7 tonnes. 
According to some estimates there may be as much as 
75 tonnes of material uncollected. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sirius 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sirius 

Sirius is the brightest star in the night sky and lies in the 
constellation CANIS Major. In reality, Sirius is a BINARY SYSTEM 
consisting of a main sequence star (Sirius A) and a WHITE 
DWARF companion (Sirius B). Other common names for this 
star system include Canicula, Aschere and the Dog Star. 

Canis Major, which translates to the greater dog, is 
one of the hunting dogs of Orion, with CANIS MINOR being 
the other. The Sirius binary star system represents the nose 
of the greater dog, and canbe easily found by following the 
line made by the three stars comprising the belt of ORION. 

Several centuries ago, Sirius was believed to be a 
single star. In 1862, nearly 20 years after a companion 
star to Sirius A was first suspected to exist, ALVAN CLARK 
discovered Sirius B while testing a new lens he had made 
for Dearborn Observatory. The location of this binary 
system in the sky is at right ascension 06" 45™ 09° and 
declination —16° 42’57”. The distance to these two stars 
is 8.6 light years, or just over 80 trillion kilometers. Sirius 
Aand Sirius B constitute a VISUALBINARY, which means that 
each of the two stars can be individually resolved through 
the use of a telescope. 

Sirius A, which has a spectral type Al V, is 
considerably larger than our own Sun. Sirius B, spectral 
type DA, is roughly four times the size of the Earth. 
Although the ratio of the sizes of these two stars is roughly 
similar to the same ratio for the Earth-Sun system, the 
mass ratios of the two pairs are quite different. It would 
not be unreasonable to approximate the Earth—Sun system 
as the Earth moving in a nearly circular path about a fixed 
Sun. Sirius A and Sirius B, however, must be considered 
as two stars that each orbit about their common center of 
mass. It should be noted that the Earth and Sun also orbit 
about their own common center of mass, but that lies very 
close to the center of the Sun while center of mass of the 
Sirius system is relatively well removed from either star. 

The apparent magnitude for Sirius A is —1.5, which 
makes it appear to be the brightest star in the night sky; 
its absolute magnitude is 1.4. The apparent and absolute 
magnitudes for Sirius B are 8.3 and 11.2, respectively. 
Note that the difference between absolute and apparent 
magnitudes for each star is the same. This is a direct result 
of the fact that they are at the same distance. 

The evolutionary state of the Sirius binary system 
today is quite different from what it must have been in 
the past. Sirius B, which is now a white dwarf, was most 
likely a RED GIANT. When the old Sirius B exploded, its core 
remained behind to become the Sirius B we are familiar 
with today. Estimates for the earlier Sirius binary system 
place the mass of Sirius B near four solar masses, the 
separation between the two stars at seven astronomical 
units, and the orbital period about the center of mass at 
seven years. 

Sirius A recently provided the first proposed detection 
of a stellar wind from a spectral type A star. There is no 
currently known mechanism capable of initiating a stellar 
wind in A-type stars. However, if such a mechanism 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


does exist, it is believed that radiation pressure would be 
capable of fueling such a wind. The nearby proximity of 
Sirius A, along with its white dwarf companion, provides 
a unique environment in which to search for such winds 
and their origin. 

An intriguing puzzle has surrounded Sirius A for 
nearly two thousand years. Specifically, observations by 
PTOLEMY and others suggest that Sirius A was considerably 
redder during their time. Several theories suggesting 
mechanisms capable of producing the observed color 
differences within a time frame of 2000 years have been 
investigated. One of the more viable explanations is that 
Sirius A appeared redder due to interference caused by 
the Earth’s atmosphere, given the position from which 
Ptolemy was most likely to have made his observations. 

Because Sirius B has a mass very close to that of our 
Sun confined within a sphere whose radius is less than five 
times the radius of the Earth, the gravitational attraction 
at the surface of Sirius B is extremely high (more than two 
million times that felt on the surface of the Earth). It is so 
high, actually, that it causes a REDSHIFT in the light emitted 
from Sirius B. 

Sirius B is also intriguing in that it is one of the most 
massive white dwarfs detected to date. Although it is 
very close as far as astronomical distances are concerned, 
observations are made quite difficult due to its association 
with Sirius A. Newer, more accurate measurements for the 
basic properties of Sirius B can help us to understand not 
only the Sirius binary system, but also our universe as a 
whole. 


Bibliography 

Bertin P, Lamers H J G LM, Vidal-Madjar A, Ferlet R and 
Lallement R 1995 HST-GHRS observations of Sirius 
AIII. Detection of a stellar wind from Sirius A Astron. 
Astrophys. 302 899-906 

Holberg J B, Barstow M A, Bruhweiler F C, Cruise AM and 
Penny A J 1998 Sirius B: a new, more accurate view 
Astrophys. J. 497 935-42 

Whittet D C B 1999 A physical interpretation of the ‘red 
Sirius’ anomaly Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 310 355-9 


Robert Mohr 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sitterly, Charlotte Emma Moore (1898-1990) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sitterly, Charlotte Emma Moore 
(1898-1990) 


Astrophysicist and atomic physicist, worked with HENRY 
NORRIS RUSSELL at Princeton on binary stars and their masses. 
She worked at Mount Wilson with Charles E St John and 
HAROLD BABCOCK analysing the atomic lines in the sunspot 
spectrum. At the National Bureau of Standards and the 
Naval Research Laboratory she analysed laboratory data 
on the solar spectrum and the atomic data by which 
spectral lines are characterized; towards the end of her 
long life she was still working extending the tables into 
the ultraviolet for use with data from space instruments. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Skylab 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Skylab 


The NASA Skylab space station was launched from Cape 
Kennedy, Florida, on 14 May 1973 with the Saturn V rocket. 
It went into a 93 min low-Earth orbit with an altitude of 
433 km and an inclination of 50°. The Apollo telescope 
mount (ATM) of the Skylab space station carried a suite of 
instruments of unprecedented spatial resolution that made 
solar observations leading to significant advances in solar 
physics. These instruments were originally developed 
in 1965 for a NASA mission known as the Advanced 
Orbiting Solar Observatory (AOSO), which was intended 
to provide high-spatial-resolution solar observations as a 
successor of the ORBITING SOLAR OBSERVATORY series of solar 
missions. Cancellation of the AOSO program in late 1965 
led to a plan to fly the experiments on the ATM by 1969, 
near the maximum of solar activity. Changes and delays 
in the Skylab program resulted in the 1973 launch during 
the decline in the solar activity cycle. 

The Skylab space station (figure 1) consisted of the 
15 m long orbiting workshop (OWS), which provided 
storage space and crew quarters. That was joined to 
the multiple docking adapter, which housed the ATM 
control and display panel (figure 2) and provided a 
docking port for the Command and Service Module, 
which ferried the astronauts to and from Skylab. The 
AIM consisted of an outer rack structure attached by a 
gimbal system to an inner 3 m long canister that could 
rotate, pitch and yaw relative to the rack. The canister 
housed the solar instruments. The ATM optical bench for 
the instruments was a stiff cruciform structure dividing 
the canister length into four quadrants. The pointing 
capability of the ATM, critical for the success of the 
solar observations, was achieved by a pointing control 
system that sensed Sun center and sent error signals to 
the torque motors controlling the ATM canister gimbals. 
The yaw and pitch stability over minutes of time was about 
0.5 arcsec, considerably exceeding the nominal 2.5 arcsec 
specification. Offset pointing was accomplished by the 
astronaut with a panel joystick. 

ATM observations were conducted over three 
manned missions (SL-2, 3 and 4), each consisting of a crew 
of three astronauts who lived and worked on the station. 
Following Skylab launch problems that threatened the 
mission, the SL-2 crew carried out the first major repair 
work in space by erecting a parasol that replaced a lost 
thermal shield and by deploying the closed solar array 
on the OWS. The SL-2 mission lasted 28 days, from 25 
May to 22 June 1973; SL-3 59 days, from 28 July to 25 
September 1973; and SL-4 84 days, from 16 November 
1973 to 8 February 1974. These missions permitted about 
9 months of solar observations. After the SL-4 mission, 
Skylab was inoperative and re-entered the atmosphere 11 
July 1979. 


ATM instruments and operations 


The ATM suite of solar instruments consisted of six 
primary and seven auxiliary instruments. The Skylab 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. View of Skylab from the Sun. The OWS is at the top, 
covered with a parasol and sunshade. The one OWS solar array 
is at the upper left; the diagonal arrays supplied power to ATM. 
The ATM doors and experiment access ports are shown in the 
circular structure at the lower center. From Eddy (1979). 


instrument numbers, names, sponsoring institutions and 
brief descriptions were as follows. 


S052: White Light Coronagraph. The HIGH ALTITUDE 
OBSERVATORY (HAO): The instrument provided white-light 
images of the full corona in the altitude range of about 1.5 
to 6 solar radii with a spatial resolution of 8 arcsec. Light 
from the solar disk was blocked by a series of three external 
disks and an additional adjustable internal disk behind the 
primary objective lens. The light passed through several 
lenses and mirrors and a polaroid wheel to the focus on a 
removable film camera. The polaroid wheel had one clear 
position and three polaroid positions with 60° differences 
in orientations. A movable mirror permitted the beam to 
be sent to a TV camera which provided a real-time image 
for crew observation and ground transmission. More than 
35 000 exposures were obtained on 35 mm film from both 
manned and unmanned missions. 

S054: X-ray Spectrographic Telescope. American Science 
and Engineering (ASGE): The instrument used a grazing- 
incidence Wolter system of concentric and confocal mirrors 
to form a full-disk solar x-ray image at the focus on a 
removable film camera. A prefilter and six-element filter 
wheel provided various broad wavebands in the 2 to 60 A 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Skylab 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


range with 3 arcsec of spatial resolution and a 48 arcmin 
field of view. A transmission diffraction grating could 
be moved into the field of view behind the mirrors to 
provide spectrographic images. Nearly 35000 exposures 
were obtained on 70 mm film from both manned and 
unmanned missions. 

S056: X-ray Telescope. MARSHALL SPACE FLIGHT CENTER 
(MSFC): The instrument was very similar to the S054 
x-ray spectrographic telescope, but the metallic filters 
provided a generally shorter wavelength range of about 
6 to 30 A, corresponding to somewhat higher coronal 
source temperatures than those of the S054 instrument. 
The light-gathering area of S056 was about one third that 
of S054, the field of view was 38 arcmin, and there was 
no diffraction grating in the S056 instrument. More than 
27000 exposures were obtained on 35 mm film from the 
manned missions only. 

S055: Ultraviolet Spectrometer-Spectroheliometer. Har- 
vard College Observatory (HCO): The instrument was a 
seven-channel photoelectric spectrometer operating in the 
280 to 1340 A range. Solar rays were reflected off a 
parabolic mirror onto a reflection grating and then into 
channel electron multipliers. Seven wavelengths could be 
simultaneously observed with a spatial resolution element 
of 5 x 5 arcsec* which could be scanned in a raster pattern 
of 5 x 5 arcmin? in 5.5 min. Other instrument modes per- 
mitted spectral scans over a spatial resolution element or 
scans at seven wavelengths along a line 5 arcmin long and 
5 arcsec wide. Photoelectric data were obtained and stored 
on a tape recorder on both manned and unmanned mis- 
sions. 

S082A: Extreme Ultraviolet Spectroheliograph. US NAVAL 
RESEARCH LABORATORY (NRL): The instrument consisted of 
a Wadsworth concave grating which formed spectrally 
dispersed full-disk images ona film strip. The field of view 
was 57 arcmin, the wavelength range was 171 to 630 A,and 
the spatial resolution was about 2 arcsec. A total of 1023 
images were obtained on 35 mm film from the manned 
missions only. 

S082B: Ultraviolet Spectrograph. NRL: The instrument 
consisted of a parabolic mirror reflecting light through a 
2 x 60 arcsec entrance slit to a predispersing grating, which 
then reflected it toa main grating and on toa film strip. One 
setting of the predisperser grating covered the wavelength 
range 970 to 1970 A with 0.06 A resolution and the other 
1940 to 3940 A with 0.12 Aresolution. Aslitimaging system 
allowed the astronaut to observe the position of the slit 
relative to the white light image of the Sun. Over 6400 
spectra were obtained on 35 mm film from the manned 
missions only. 

Of the seven auxiliary instruments, one class 
permitted the astronaut to do precise solar pointings 
with coordinates which could be displayed on board and 
telemetered to the ground. Two separate Ha telescopes 
with zoom capability and 2 arcsec resolution were used, 
images of which could be displayed on one of the two 6” 
diameter CRT monitors on the ATM control and display 
panel. The Ha #1 telescope, provided by HCO, was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


equipped with a film camera which provided pointing 
information via a superposed reticle that indicated the 
positions of the coaligned S055 and S082B instruments. 
Over 68000 photographs were obtained from Ha #1 on 
35 mm film from manned and unmanned missions. Ha #2, 
provided by MSFC, had a wider field of view but no film 
camera. 

The XUV monitor was provided by NRL and attached 
to S082B to provide CRT images for the astronauts and 
ground images for planning solar observing programs. 
The full-disk images were of 15 arcsec resolution in the 
170 to 500 A range. They were valuable for identifying 
coronal features and SOLAR FLARES. 

Among the instruments used to alert the astronauts 
and solar mission scientists at JOHNSON SPACE CENTER 
(JSC) in Houston to solar flares was the x-ray event 
analyser (XREA), a proportional counter x-ray experiment 
provided by MSFC which measured x-rays in the 3 to 
33 A range. AS&E provided the photomultiplier exposure 
counter (PMEC) to detect x-rays in the 0 to 8 A range 
and an image disector telescope (IDT) to provide a 3 to 
10 A coarse full-disk image for the ATM CRT. Finally, the 
radio noise burst monitor (RNBM) provided a continuous 
measurement of the solar 6 cm flux. In practice the PMEC 
was used as the flare-warning device, with a threshold set 
each day for astronaut initiation of flare observing modes. 

The ATM scientists were forced by the limited time 
for astronaut ATM operations and by the number and 
complexity of the instruments to develop plans for 
simultaneous operations of ATM instruments. Each 
scientific problem resulted in a joint observing program 
(JOP), and each JOP was composed of building blocks 
(BB) describing the operational sequences of each of the 
instruments (figure 3). The 13 JOPs of SL-2 evolved into 
27 JOPs for SL-4. 

Extensive time was required before the mission to 
train the astronauts in solar physics and the requirements 
and operations of the ATM experiments. In addition, it 
was necessary for the scientists and engineers to become 
familiar with flight operations procedures. An ATM 
mission control room was set up at JSC which was 
manned by a scientist and an engineer from each of 
the five principal institutions around the clock in three 
shifts. An ATM planning session began each day at 
noon to plan the next day’s operations. Forecasts of 
solar activity from National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) personnel and results of current 
and previous ATM observations were important for the 
planning. Detailed observing plans were sent up to Skylab 
that evening. During the night (12 a.m. to 08 a.m.) shift 
Skylab summary planning was done which resulted in 
determining how much time (or how many orbits) would 
be allotted for ATM astronaut operations the following 
day. Both the summary planning and ATM planning 
sessions frequently involved contentious negotiations for 
resources and priorities. Far less planning and support 
was required for the unmanned periods when only S052, 
$054, S055 and Ha #1 were operational. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. SL-4 astronaut Bill Pogue at the ATM control console, 
showing instrument switches and viewing monitors. From 
Eddy (1979). 


The solar science results 
The high-spatial-resolution observations made possible by 
the ATM pointing system provided significant advances 
in a number of areas of solar physics. Only after ATM 
was it clear that coronal structures consisted of magnetic 
loops. Some phenomena, such as bright points, were 
completely new. Others, such as coronal holes and 
coronal mass ejections, had been observed previously, 
but the clarity and extent of the ATM observations 
established their basic properties and importance for 
coronal physics. Earlier ideas, based on observations with 
coarse spatial resolution, of a relatively homogeneous and 
slowly varying corona were demolished. 

The new results were intensively investigated in 
a series of three Skylab Solar Workshops in Boulder, 
Colorado, in the 1970s. The first was devoted to CORONAL 
HOLES, the second to flares and the last to ACTIVE REGIONS. 
Each workshop was followed by a published monograph 
discussing the new results. 


Historical perspective on instruments and 
operations 

Solar imaging observations today are obtained from un- 
manned spacecraft using CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


JOP 2B - ACTIVE REGIONS: Long Term Evolution - Disc 


Target 


e Roll 82A XUV dispersion clear of activ 
e Point 55 OFFSET so that 55 MAR covers 
e Record pointing coordinates RL+/- 
e@ Point Hal at a Hebright point. 

e@ Roll slit for uniform emission. 
e 
e 


Maximize DET 1 or 3. 
Repeat B at a second Hal bright point. 


e@ Point Hal at a relatively dark Ha area 
e Roll 828 slit for uniform emission. 

e Pointing and roll same as 4A. 

e Repoint 82B slit for uniform emission. 


BB4: SPATIAL AND SPECTRAL RESOLUTION.— BRIGHT FEATURES. 
n 26 2 16 UW 6 


a8 
OPARTHA $5 OFFSET PYGMES HAD PTS 


E 
g 


sa 
Ay 


AWVURAVs 
| 
| 

SISSY 
36 


tel 
\a] 
(<| 
Pe] 
62 
ARES 
a 
ESTEE 


Kol 


2. 


| 
ae 


MAR 


yg det An 
ToT | Grat 


aa 

o 

Bcg 
wv 


Pre 


a 


Figure 3. Part of a JOP (top) for active region study and part of 
one of the BBs (bottom) called for in the JOP. ATM experiments 
are listed vertically in the BB while time runs to the right, 
showing various modes and settings for the experiments. From 
Tousey (1977). 


Prior to Skylab, solar images from spacecraft were ob- 
tained by photoelectrically scanning or rastering the Sun 
to build up an image. The Skylab mission was a labor in- 
tensive transition through a photographic detector stage 
involving considerable astronaut and ground support in- 
volvement. Photographic film, with its instantaneous im- 
ages over wide fields of view with high spatial resolution, 
provided a big leap in information content over previous 
spacecraft observations. Film had, however, several draw- 
backs. It was a finite consumable which required careful 
budgeting throughout the mission. It was vulnerable to 
fogging by heat and radiation. It had alow dynamic range, 
incontrast to that of the intensities of coronal features being 
observed. This required that sequences of increasing ex- 
posure times be employed to observe both faint and bright 
features. The S054 x-ray instrument typically used a seven 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Skylab 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


or eight frame sequence of exposures ranging by factors of 
4 from 1/64 s to 64 or 256 s in duration. The film roll had 
to be carefully developed on the ground, and calibration 
was always a challenge. CCDs have proven their clear 
superiority to film for solar observations. 

After the Skylab mission, it was generally concluded 
that the astronauts had played key roles in the success of 
the mission. The reasons were twofold: (a) they carried 
out solar observations, and (b) they performed repairs on 
instruments. Astronauts removed cloth threads from the 
front occulting disk of the S052 coronagraph and moved a 
jammed filter wheel into a filter position in the S054 x-ray 
telescope. They also pinned open experiment doors that 
had failed shut and replaced failed or troublesome film 
transport assemblies. 

Astronauts functioned well as observers, but they 
carried out solar observations for only about 23% of the 
total manned mission periods. The presence of limited 
film budgets and the need to set the hard-wired switches 
for experiments on the ATM control panel also mandated 
a critical role for the crew that photoelectric detectors 
and computer control of instruments render unnecessary. 
A similar critical role was accorded the astronauts in 
the eight-day Spacelab 2 mission in July 1985, but the 
limited success of that mission indicated the problems 
of a multidiscipline, limited-duration solar mission with 
untried instruments. Perhaps the most significant factor 
in the demise of the crew-operated solar experiments is 
the great improvement in communications that allows 
a high degree of control of space experiments from the 
ground. That capability has obviated the expensive cost 
of launching and supporting human solar observers. 

Skylab did provide us with some visions of the future. 
Among the viable innovations associated with the Skylab 
program, we can count the following: 


(a) The development of coordinated observing programs 
among the experiment groups. 

(b) A guest investigator program for scientists not part 
of the PI institutions. 

(c) The use of thematic workshops to advance the science 
from the mission. 

(d) The use of calibration rocket flights (calrocs) as a 
means of instrumentation calibration. 

(e) The use of a supporting coordinated ground-based 
observing program. 


Bibliography 

Eddy J A 1979 A New Sun: the Solar Results from Skylab 
NASA SP-402 (Washington, DC: NASA) 

Tousey R 1977 Apollo telescope mount of Skylab: an 
overview Appl. Opt. 16 825 (several ATM instrument 
descriptions follow this introductory article) 


Stephen Kahler 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Slipher, Vesto Melvin (1875-1969) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Slipher, Vesto Melvin (1875-1969) 


Astronomer, born in Mulberry, IN, became director at the 
Lowell Observatory. He used spectroscopy to determine 
the rotation periods of several planets, and identified the 
constituents of their atmospheres. He recorded the first 
radial velocities of galaxies. The exposure times for these 
early photographs were as long as a week. The data were 
extended by EDWIN HUBBLE to discover the expansion of the 
universe. With the data, Slipher measured the rotations of 
the spiral galaxies. He supervised the search for the ninth 
planet, Pluto. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sloan Digital Sky Survey 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sloan Digital Sky Survey 


The Sloan Digital Sky Survey employs a special purpose 
2.5m telescope located in New Mexico to create a five-color 
digital map of 10000 square degrees of sky, to be complete 
by about 2005. The images will be used to autonomously 
select one million objects for spectroscopy, via a multi- 
object spectrograph mounted on the same telescope, 
yielding redshifts, and thus distances, for each galaxy. 
A huge number of previously unrecognized quasi-stellar 
objects and peculiar stars will also be revealed. Although 
originally motivated by problems concerning large scale 
structure of the universe, the Survey will constitute a 
permanent public data bank applicable to a large variety 
of problems in astronomy, ranging from nearby asteroids 
to the most distant quasars. The Survey is conducted by an 
international consortium of ten universities and research 
laboratories. 
For further information see 
http://www.sdss.org/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Small Astronomy Satellite (SAS) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Small Astronomy Satellite (SAS) 


Series of three pioneering NASA scientific satellites, 
launched 1970-75. SAS-1, also known as UHUuRU (Freedom), 
was the first dedicated x-ray astronomy satellite. SAS- 
2 was the first satellite to detect gamma rays, and it 
discovered the enigmatic Geminga source. SAS-3 also 
carried x-ray experiments. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Small Magellanic Cloud 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Small Magellanic Cloud 


The smaller of two nearby companions of the Milky 
Way Galaxy that can be seen with the naked eye in the 
southern hemisphere sky and which are named after 
the Portuguese navigator, Ferdinand Magellan. Located 
in the constellation of Tucana, at a distance of about 
190 000 light-years, the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) 
has an angular diameter of about three degrees, about 
half the apparent diameter of its larger sibling, the Large 
Magellanic Cloud. It contains about 2 billion stars and 
has a mass of about one-fiftieth of the mass of the Milky 
Way Galaxy (about one-fifth of the mass of the LMC). An 
irregular galaxy (Hubble class Irr I), it has been stretched 
into an elongated cylinder, some 60 000 light-years long by 
about 15000 light-years wide, with its long axis pointing 
towards our Galaxy, presumably as a result of gravitational 
tidal forces exerted on it by the Milky Way Galaxy. 
Although it contains substantially less gas and dust than 
the LMC, it nevertheless contains significant numbers of 
HII regions (luminous nebulae), young clusters and hot 
young stars. The presence of these objects suggests that it 
has experienced a recent bout of star formation, possibly 
triggered by a close encounter with the Milky Way that 
took place about 200 million years ago. 


See also: interacting galaxies, irregular galaxy, Large 
Magellanic Cloud, Local Group, Milky Way Galaxy, 
nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Smart-1 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Smart-1 


First European Space Agency advanced technology 
demonstration mission proposed under the Horizons 2000 
Science plan. Intended to demonstrate innovative and 
key technologies for scientific deep-space missions such as 
solar electric propulsion. Launch is planned for late 2001. 
Possible targets include the Moon, near-Earth asteroids 
and comets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Smith, Harlan James (1924-91) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Smith, Harlan James (1924-91) 


Astronomer, born in Wheeling, WV, became director of 
the McDonald Observatory of the University of Texas at 
Austin. He discovered (with Dorrit Hoffleit) that quasars 
were variable, making it possible to set limits to their 
size and probe the mechanisms of their emission. He 
identified the dwarf Cepheid variable stars. He studied 
the radio emissions from Jupiter and the other planets, 
and the influence of the solar wind on them. He was one 
of the first astronomers to plan ground-based observations 
in conjunction with space missions, constructing a 107 in 
telescope at the McDonald Observatory to support 
planetary space missions. He was an advocate of space 
exploration both by orbiting astronomical telescopes and 
by humans on the Moon, using lunar bases for astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Smith, Sir Francis Graham (1923-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Smith, Sir Francis Graham (1923-) 


British radioastronomer, worked on radar during the 
Second World War, joined Martin Ryle’s group at 
Cambridge and together they discovered the strongest 
radio source Cassiopeia A in 1948. For his PhD in 
1951 he refined the positions of Cas A and Cygnus A. 
David Dewhirst at Cambridge pointed out that there was 
nebulosity at the position of Cas A, which proved to 
be a supernova remnant, and WALTER BAADE and RUDOLPH 
MINKOWSKI used the 200 in telescope to identify Cyg Aas a 
galaxy. He showed that the fluctuations in brightness of 
radio sources were due to local effects in the ionosphere 
and used the Long Michelson Interferometer at Cambridge 
to measure its electron density. Became professor at Jodrell 
Bank where he worked on pulsars, discovering the high 
polarization of their radio emission and worked on their 
optical identification and period changes. He directed 
the Royal Greenwich Observatory and built the UK’s 
telescopes on La Palma in the Canary Islands. He was 
given the honorary title of Astronomer Royal. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Smyth, Charles Piazzi [also Charles Piazzi-Smyth] 
(1819-1900) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Smyth, Charles Piazzi [also Charles 
Piazzi-Smyth] (1819-1900) 


Astronomer, son of an amateur astronomer, Admiral 
William Henry Smyth, and named after the Italian 
astronomer GIUSEPPE PIAZZI. Became director of what was 
then called the Astronomical Institution on Calton Hill 
in Edinburgh, which evolved into the Royal Observatory, 
Edinburgh, in a new building on Blackford Hill in the 
same city. He made an estimate of the amount of heat 
radiation received from the Moon and studied the zodiacal 
light. However, he did not distinguish himself in the 
role of director, being responsible for the neglect of the 
instruments, and commissioning a telescope that never 
worked. Moreover, he was obsessed with pyramidology, 
founded in the mistaken belief that the measurements 
of the Great Pyramid are of mystical and mathematical 
significance. He published very successful popular books 
on this topic but the Royal Society refused to publish his 
cranky papers and he became the only person ever to have 
resigned his fellowship, apparently making a ill-judged 
threat to do so without calculating that his offer would be 
accepted. After a negative official report on the state of 
the Calton Hill observatory, he resigned the directorship 
and devoted the rest of his life to cloud photography in 
the Lake District. But although this is basically a sorry 
tale, Piazzi Smyth made one outstanding contribution 
to the astronomy of Britain and the world. In 1856, he 
travelled, on his honeymoon with his wife Jessica, to 
‘Teneriffe’ in the Canary Islands and camped on its high 
volcano, E] Teide, investigating Isaac Newton’s suggestion 
that optical observatories would be better sited at altitude. 
He discovered that he could indeed see fainter stars than 
with the same telescope in Edinburgh, and resolve closer 
double stars. Mount Hamilton Observatory was the first 
mountain observatory set up on the basis of Piazzi Smyth’s 
site-testing expedition, and the Observatorio del Teide and 
the Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos on the sister 
Canary Island of La Palma are direct consequences. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SNC Meteorite ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SNC Meteorite 


One of a small number of achondritic meteorites believed 
to have originated on Mars. The letters SNC (pronounced 
‘snick’) stand for the three main classes: shergottites, 
nakhlites and chassignites. As of April 2000, 14 SNCs 
had been discovered. The largest at 40 kg is the first 
known nakhlite, which fell at Nakhla in Egypt on 28 June 
1911. 


See also: METEORITES FROM MARS 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Snel [Snell or Snellius or Snel van Royen], Willebrord 
(1580-1626) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Snel [Snell or Snellius or Snel van 
Royen], Willebrord (1580-1626) 


Born in Leiden, Netherlands, at first studied law 
but eventually succeeded his father as professor of 
mathematics at the University of Leiden. He founded the 
science of geodesy in 1617, when he published Eratosthenes 
Batavus, which developed the method of triangulation for 
surveying. In 1621 he discovered what became known 
as Snell's sine law of refraction; it was first published by 
HUYGENS in his book Dioptrica. He published on astronomy 
including on comets; he remained committed to the 
Ptolemaic theory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Société Frangaise d’Astronomie et d’Astrophysique 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Société Francaise d’Astronomie et 
d’Astrophysique 


The French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics (SF2A) 
(previously SFSA for Société Francaise des Spécialistes 
d’Astronomie), officially constituted on 18 November, 
1978, includes about 500 French astronomers and 
astrophysicists. Its basic aim is to induce a better cohesion 
among the professionals in astronomy and to defend the 
interest of their research activity. 

Since November 1980 a journal has been regularly 
published in French: Le Journal des Astronomes Francais. Itis 
sent to more than 800 scientists. Also a regular letter is sent 
by e-mail, in which information of all kinds concerning 
French astronomers is given. 

The society organizes a meeting every year, in a 
different French town. In 1999, the meeting was organized 
in Toulouse, together with the general meeting of the 
EUROPEAN ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY (ENAM’99). In 2000 the 
SF2A meeting was held in Marseille. 

Every year, during the meeting, a scientific prize is 
given to a young researcher who contributed in a major 
way to the advances of research in astronomy. The prize 
is sponsored by the society Compaq-France. In 1999 it 
was given to Francis Bernardeau, for his work about the 
formation of structures in the primordial universe. 

The society also organizes a school every year on 
a different specialized subject, in the town of Goutelas. 
The proceedings of these Goutelas Schools are regularly 
published. 

For further information see 
http://www.iap.fr/sf2a/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Software in Astronomy 


‘Software’ is the term used to refer to the programmed 
sequences of instructions that are executed by a digital 
computer. Software of some sort is required by any 
task that involves a computer. Computers first became 
generally available in the years following World War II, 
and since then they have become progressively more 
powerful, progressively cheaper and progressively more 
ubiquitous. Computers now influence almost all aspects 
of astronomy: applying for observing time; the scheduling 
of observations; the acquiring and reducing of data; the 
final dissemination of data across networks, particularly 
the internet; even the use of presentation graphics systems 
when giving talks at conferences. 

Software is needed for all of this. In some cases, 
general-purpose software, such as Microsoft’s PowerPoint 
for presentations, or 4TgxX for typesetting, can be used. 
In other cases, for example the control of a specific 
instrument, special-purpose software is needed. This 
has to be written, either by astronomers or by specialist 
programmers employed by an astronomical institution 
or university. The production of specialized software 
is a labor-intensive undertaking, and this provides a 
continuous incentive to re-use existing software if at 
all possible. However, there are a number of factors 
conspiring against such re-use, and how these are 
overcome may be one of the most important challenges 
facing astronomical software. 


Acquisition and reduction of astronomical data 
Most of the specialized software written especially for 
astronomy is used either for the actual obtaining of data 
or its subsequent reduction and analysis. 

Data acquisition is a question of the control of 
telescopes, instruments and detectors. Telescopes need 
to be pointed at their targets and kept pointing at them 
despite structural deformation, atmospheric refraction 
and other effects. Their control software can attempt to 
calculate these effects in advance and allow for them. It 
can also make use of feedback systems such as autoguiders 
and—in recent years—active optical systems. Detectors 
and instruments need to be configured and the data 
read and recorded, generally with some feedback to the 
astronomer as to the quality of the data being obtained. 
Radio observations may involve the control of hardware 
correlators. All of these aspects need to be coordinated by 
some higher-level system that may even allow the order 
of pre-planned observations to be changed in response to 
atmospheric and other conditions. 

Most data reduction has an initial stage, which is 
essentially the removal of the instrumental effects from 
the data. In many cases the ideal result will be a calibrated 
image—a two-dimensional image each element of which is 
at a known sky coordinate and whose value is an absolute 
intensity. Alternatively, it may be a calibrated spectrum 
or set of spectra—each a set of data values covering a 
known wavelength or frequency range and whose value 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is again an absolute intensity measurement. There are 
other types of data, such as time-resolved data, and 
some measurements may include POLARIZATION and other 
parameters, but in all cases the ideal is that all instrumental 
effects have been removed and the result is as the target 
object produced it. Subsequent processing will depend on 
the problem the data was taken to solve. 

Optical data are usually in the form of images taken 
by a two-dimensional detector. These may be direct 
images of an area of sky or may be the images seen by a 
spectrograph CAMERA, in which case they will contain one 
or more spectra. These spectra may be distorted, especially 
when echelle spectrographs are used. Long-exposure 
CCD images often contain cosmic ray events which can be 
identified by comparing one or more exposures of the same 
target field. Images usually require division by a flat field 
to take out pixel-by-pixel instrumental variations, and 
linearity corrections if the detector is non-linear. It may be 
necessary to subtract detector bias values, determined by 
exposures with no light on the detector, or sky background. 
For images, techniques such as the construction of median 
sky frames may be used. For spectra, extraction techniques 
attempt to trace the spectra and any corresponding sky 
data and subtract the two. 

Radio data, particularly when produced by synthesis 
telescopes, need more complex processing even to get 
to a two-dimensional image of a target. CORRELATORS 
provide the fringe phases from baselines between pairs 
of antennae, which, once calibrated, are then samples of 
the Fourier transform of the required image. As a result 
Fourier transforms are required to obtain an image. The 
uneven and incomplete sampling in the Fourier domain 
means that even a perfect point source gives a messy 
picture with significant side-lobes, effectively convolved 
with a ‘dirty beam’ caused by this imperfect sampling. 
An iterative algorithm due to Hogbém, called CLEAN, is 
usually used to tidy this up, estimating the dirty beam 
and successively subtracting it from each source. Further 
calibration steps, making use of redundant information in 
the data, can reduce the residual errors. 


Data and file formats 
Data files are usually passed, on tape, disk or a network, 
from the data acquisition system at the telescope to the 
data reduction system to be used by the astronomer. 
Being able to transfer information between computer 
systems is of fundamental importance, but the differences 
between machines can complicate this. If a 32-bit number 
is held in four 8-bit ‘bytes’, is the first byte the most 
or least significant? Unfortunately, even today both 
conventions, termed ‘big-endian’ and ‘little-endian’ (after 
the petty squabblers over boiled eggs in Gulliver's Travels) 
are commonly used. Personal computers based on Intel 
processors are little-endian, SUN Workstations are big- 
endian. Floating-point formats—the way non-integer 
values are represented—have also varied in the past, but 
there is now an IEEE standard for floating-point data and 
most machines have adopted this. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


These considerations make it difficult even to write 
out a single number from one machine in the certainty 
that another machine can read it. However, for astronomy 
a much more complicated problem is the question of the 
higher-level file formats used. A ‘file format’ refers to 
the conventions adopted when writing data to a file. An 
instrument may create a data array of nx by ny data values, 
but if all its control software does is write this to a disk file 
as an image of how it appears in the instrument computer’s 
memory, this will be hard to make use of. At the very 
least, a program that will read it needs to be able to 
start by determining the dimensions of the data, so this 
information needs to be included and some convention is 
needed for how this is to be done. For practical purposes a 
great deal of additional information is needed—the name 
of the object under study, instrumental parameters, time 
of observation, coordinates of the target object, etc. In the 
early days of astronomical instrumentation, ad hoc formats 
proliferated, and in many cases the only software that 
could read data written by a given instrument was the 
software package that wrote it. The search for a universal 
file format has elements of the search for the Holy Grail, 
but it is also an area in which a great deal of progress has 
been made. 


FITS format 
It is still the case that most astronomical software packages 
have their own internal formats. However, in 1981 
Wells, Greisen and Harten published a description of FITS 
(Flexible Image Transport System). FITS defined a set of 
conventions based on the use of a header prefacing the 
actual data. This header contained pairs of keywords and 
values describing the actual data. Additional keywords 
could be added to provide the ancillary information 
associated with the image. To get the most out of a FITS 
file one had to have a reading program that understood 
the meaning of all the keywords in the header. However, it 
was possible to write a program that could extract the main 
data array from a FITS format file even in the presence 
of ancillary information that the programmer had not 
anticipated. FITS became and has remained the de facto 
standard for the interchange of astronomical data. Over 
the years many groups have proposed and implemented 
and used extensions to the original FITS standard, and 
some of these have been incorporated into the evolving 
standard. FITS can now handle multiple images (so can 
associate error and quality information with a base image, 
or can handle a set of related images) and can include an 
arbitrary amount of tabulated data. A standard library 
of routines for accessing FITS data (CFITSIO) is available 
from GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER. FITS provides a good 
example of the advantages of standardization and the 
CFITSIO library is a good example of software re-use. 
For some purposes it is natural to arrange data 
items in a hierarchical structure. Hierarchies provide 
an obvious way of arranging large amounts of related 
data, and systems exist that provide such an arrangement 
within a disk file. The Starlink project in the UK uses a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hierarchical format called HDS, while the National Center 
for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) supports a 
format called HDF that has a similar philosophy. These 
formats can handle a greater variety of information than 
can FITS, but have not attained the almost universal 
acceptance that FITS has. Most large astronomical 
software packages can import and export data in FITS 
format. 


Evolution of astronomical software 

Until the 1960s, computers were of only limited applica- 
tion in astronomy. In the 1950s early programmable calcu- 
lating punches and similar devices were used by almanac 
offices. Although these were programmable, they were 
programmed using plug boards and the term ‘software’ 
was not used in this context. Mainframe computers such 
as the IBM 7090, introduced in 1959, could run FORTRAN 
programs and these began to be used for ephemeris calcu- 
lations. They could also be used to run model atmosphere 
codes, which involved intense mathematical calculation 
but which did not require connection to instruments. At 
that time, observational astronomy made little use of com- 
puters and software. 


Mini-computers 

The emergence of the mini-computer, notably the PDP- 
8 and PDP-11 series, in the late 1960s and early 1970s 
meant that it was feasible to provide computerized control 
systems for the 4 m class optical telescopes then being 
built. Earlier telescopes, in the main, had relied on 
the characteristics of the equatorial mount to keep them 
tracking their targets and on offset guiders to provide a 
fine correction. Introducing computers made it feasible 
to model the telescope errors, introduced for example by 
mechanical flexure, and to correct for them. Computers 
could also allow for atmospheric refraction, could precess 
coordinates, could slew the telescope in the most efficient 
way and could control raster scans. With the advent of 
computer control systems telescopes began to be judged 
by how accurately they could set on an object of given 
coordinates, and how accurately they could track that 
object without the use of guiders. The Anglo-Australian 
Telescope (AAT) set the standard for such systems, being 
able to set with an accuracy of better than 1.5 arcsec when 
it came on line in 1974. Computerized control system 
could also handle the more complex control requirements 
of telescopes with alt-az mounts. 

Atabout the same time, optical detectors were moving 
into the digital era. Before then, most optical observations 
had been photographic in nature. While spectra might 
be scanned by microdensitometers, the output would go 
to chart recorders rather than being fed to a computer. 
However, the new electronic detectors such as Wampler’s 
Image Dissector scanner or Boksenberg’s Image Photon 
Counting System, both of which fed data directly into 
computer memory, could not operate without computers. 

On the mini-computers available then, 64 Kbytes 
represented a substantial amount of memory and hard 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


disk drives were expensive options that held only a few 
megabytes (2.5 Mbytes was typical). These were ‘16- 
bit’ machines, using only 16 binary bits to represent 
memory addresses, giving them a natural address limit 
of 64 Kbytes, although this could be worked around in 
some cases. Programming was often done using assembler 
languages, although FORTRAN was available. Mini- 
computers could be used for instrumentation because 
they were sufficiently affordable (for the time) that such a 
machine could be dedicated to an instrument or telescope. 
The amount of memory available for such machines was 
a serious restriction, but they did have very capable real- 
time operating systems. Portability of code was rarely an 
issue, and programmers generally felt that their only object 
was to produce code that would do the required job with 
the available equipment. Proponents of methodologies 
such as ‘structured programming’, which emphasized a 
clear structure to a program above absolute performance, 
did not always find a receptive audience until machines 
became rather faster. 

Memory limitations were one reason for the popular- 
ity of the Forth programming language. A program writ- 
ten in Forth’s somewhat unconventional syntax would be 
converted into instructions for a ‘Forth machine’ that had 
an extensible instruction set—new instructions could be 
defined in terms of sequences of other instructions. Since 
this extensibility encouraged the re-use of existing instruc- 
tion sequences, this made for a remarkably efficient use of 
memory. The first complete, standalone Forth system was 
developed by Moore for the Kitt Peak 11 m radio telescope 
in 1971. Forth became very popular and was used widely 
for telescope and instrument control and data reduction. 
As machines gained more memory, however, Forth’s effi- 
cient use of memory became less compelling an attraction, 
the freedom it provided could be seen as a liability, and its 
reputation for making it easy to write code that was very 
hard to understand began to tell against it. 

Data reduction for RADIO TELESCOPES became more 
complex with the advent of the APERTURE SYNTHESIS 
telescopes such as the VERY LARGE ARRAY (VLA), because 
of the need for Fourier transform processing to produce 
images. At this point, the need for radio-astronomical 
computing increased dramatically. 


Software frameworks 

In 1977 Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) introduced 
a significant machine for astronomy: the VAX 11/780 was 
an outgrowth of the PDP-11 line, but it used 32 bits for 
memory addresses and could swap memory blocks to and 
from disk to give the impression it had more memory 
available than was in fact the case (a technique called 
‘virtual memory’). Such a machine can handle data arrays 
of many megabytes directly, without having to resort to 
devious programming techniques. With a 1024 by 1024 
pixel CCD producing data arrays of 4 Mbytes per readout 
(if converted to floating-point form for data reduction 
purposes), this capability was sorely needed. For most of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the 1980s the VAX and its VMS operating system became 
a de facto standard for astronomical software. 

The ability of the VAX and similar machines to run 
much more complicated software allowed astronomical 
software designers to think more about the ‘systems’ 
aspects of what they were writing. An ideal had always 
been to provide a framework that could be used by 
any programmer as a basis for a new program, rather 
than requiring each new program to be written from 
scratch. For example, a data reduction framework 
could define the file formats to be used, could define a 
common command language that could invoke a new 
program—provided that the new program was written 
to the framework’s conventions—and could allow that 
new program to interact with other programs. The way 
parameter values could be specified by the user and passed 
to a program would be laid down, so that all programs 
run within the framework would provide the same ‘look 
and feel’. By providing subroutine libraries that could be 
called by programs written for the framework, it would be 
made easy to write new programs that would provide new 
facilities while integrating seamlessly with the existing 
system. 


Data reduction frameworks 

Some work on framework systems had started earlier, 
but the advent of the more powerful machines allowed 
it to accelerate. Data reduction systems were the obvious 
applications for such frameworks. Almost all astronomers 
want to process their data in some standard ways 
(everyone wants to display data, divide by flat fields, do 
wavelength calibrations or Fourier transforms, etc) and 
most then want to apply some specialized processing as 
well. Ideally, they would use the standard tools provided 
by a framework—the existing application programs—for 
the former. Then not only would they write their own 
programs, using the framework, for the latter, they would 
make these generally available so that the system would 
grow. Software re-use of this sort is potentially one of the 
best ways of reducing the cost of astronomical software. 
The AIPS system, first developed for the reduction of 
radio-astronomical data in 1978, was a successful early 
example of this sort of framework system. 

AIPS was written in the first instance to support 
the new VLA radio telescope. It was designed to be 
easy to port to different computer systems. It was 
implemented first on a ModComp Classic and on a 
VAX 11/780. Written in a standard language (the 
long-established FORTRAN variant called FORTRAN- 
66), it had different implementations of the same low- 
level subroutine interfaces used to conceal differences 
between machines. AIPS emphasized the need to 
handle coordinates properly and provided general- 
purpose image manipulation routines together with the 
radio-specific operations such as CLEAN. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Data acquisition frameworks 

Data acquisition systems were less obvious candidates 
for the framework approach. An observatory would 
usually have only a limited number of instruments, and 
these would be programmed in house. However, even 
these needed a significant amount of infrastructure. An 
optical observation might require coordination between 
the telescope, a detector, a spectrograph, a data display 
subsystem and a data recording subsystem. Early control 
systems were often large monolithic single programs that 
handled all aspects of an observation. In principle, a more 
manageable structure results from splitting such a system 
into a number of cooperating tasks each handling one 
aspect, such as the telescope. It also allows standard parts 
such as the telescope task to be re-used unchanged in a 
different configuration of tasks designed to control a quite 
different instrument. 

Although such an approach has compelling advan- 
tages in terms of modularity and structural elegance, it 
requires an underlying framework that can coordinate a 
number of concurrent real-time tasks (tasks responding 
within rigid time constraints to external events generated 
by the instruments they control). This is generally a more 
complex framework than is needed by a system designed 
purely for data reduction. Anexample was the ADAM sys- 
tem designed originally at the Royal Greenwich Observa- 
tory in the UK and ported to the VAX at the Royal Observa- 
tory Edinburgh. It can be argued that what is required for 
data reduction is a subset of that required for data acquisi- 
tion, and a data acquisition framework should be ideally 
suited for data reduction. The UK Starlink project took 
this line, and uses ADAM as the basis for its data reduc- 
tion software. 


Workstations, microprocessors and UNIX 

The VAX was a multi-user machine, but it was possible 
to use it for dedicated instrumentation control; its VMS 
operating system provided, at least nominally, the facilities 
needed by real-time tasks, such as the ability to insist that 
physical rather than virtual memory be used for critical 
program sections, and a task scheduler that should prevent 
high-priority tasks being blocked at critical times by the 
more mundane requirements of lower priority tasks. The 
4.2 m William Herschel telescope (WHT) in La Palma was 
controlled by a dedicated VAX system, as was the 2.3 m at 
Siding Spring in Australia. 

At the same time, the microprocessor had started 
to appear. Microprocessors allowed engineers to design 
hardware subsystems around dedicated programmable 
computers. These were often run with ‘home-built’ 
operating systems written for the immediate purpose— 
sometimes without operating systems as such at all. These 
would usually be programmed in assembler, sometimes in 
a higher-level language, C. A small microprocessor-based 
system could be used to provide direct real-time control 
of a single instrument or part of an instrument. Data 
acquisition systems could now be built with a machine 
such as a VAX handling the overall control and processing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the resulting data, but using a bevy of microprocessors to 
provide the tight real-time control needed by the actual 
instruments. 

It is unusual for one computer system to remain 
dominant for any length of time, and the challenge to 
the VAX came from the emerging UNIX workstations. 
The UNIX operating system, as it appeared at first in 
1967 on a PDP-7, made little pretence at being a real-time 
system. Its great advantage was its portability; it was 
an operating system written not in assembler (as most 
were, for efficiency) but in C. Moreover, it was made freely 
available and so became very popular, particularly in 
university computing departments. This made it an ideal 
match for the workstations that were being built around 
the more powerful of the new microprocessors, such as 
SUN’s SPARC and the MIPS processors. These reduced 
instruction set computers (RISCs) provided a limited set of 
basic instructions, but were able to run them very quickly. 
Computers based around RISC processors, almost all 
of which now run UNIX, are the dominant systems in 
astronomy at the turn of the century. Unfortunately, 
different implementations of UNIX still manage to differ, 
sometimes in quite significant ways. 


Recent developments 

There are now some common elements to astronomical 
computing systems. In recent years the trend has been 
for workstations, almost all running UNIX, to become 
faster, and almost all are now networked. Instrument 
control systems generally involve workstations for overall 
control and on-line data reduction, with dedicated real- 
time systems based on microprocessors in direct control 
of the instruments and the telescopes themselves. These 
microprocessors, often as powerful as the workstations, 
usually run some real-time kernel system; examples are 
VxWorks and pSOS. These generally try to provide a 
programming environment as close to UNIX as possible, 
but with additional features to support their real-time 
nature—and with additional limitations imposed by that 
real-time nature. 


Data reduction 

A number of data reduction frameworks exist. AIPS 
continues as the mainstay of radio astronomical data 
reduction, but is in the process of being superseded by 
AIPS++. AIPS++ is written using the object-oriented 
language C++, a descendant of C that supports and 
encourages an approach to programming where one 
creates software ‘objects’ that are capable of performing 
a number of related functions. This can often be a more 
natural way to program, possibly because it has analogies 
to the way tasks in the real world are accomplished by 
people or groups each specializing in certain tasks, which 
they perform as requested. For optical data reduction, 
the dominant framework is IRAF, the Image Reduction 
and Analysis Facility developed and maintained at NOAO 
since the mid-1980s (see SOFTWARE: IRAF). IRAF provides 
a programmable command language and a large and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


increasing number of applications. Originally, IRAF 
applications had to be written in its own programming 
language, SPP, provided in the interests of portability; 
more recently interfaces to more standard languages have 
been provided. The UK Starlink project continues to 
support the use of ADAM for data reduction, and ESO 
provides MIDAS. However, no such system has gained the 
level of world-wide acceptance that IRAF has achieved. 

There are numerous other data reduction packages 
in use. A number of programs are built around 
the commercial IDL system, which provides interactive 
facilities for manipulating and displaying data arrays. 
Interactive languages such as Perl and Tcl/Tk are used to 
produce very flexible programs with easily programmed 
user interfaces, and Tcl/Tk in particular is used by a 
number of the larger frameworks. The Glish interactive 
language, used by AIPS++, is also finding uses in 
instrument and telescope control. 


Data acquisition 

The data acquisition software environments used at major 
observatories are now almost all based on a framework 
of some sort. This is partly because of the increasing 
trend to have instruments for telescopes built not by the 
observatory but by outside institutions, often university 
departments. In these circumstances, the observatory can 
get a homogeneous set of instrument control packages 
only by imposing the use of such a framework—which also 
makes it easier to write the instrument control software, 
once the often steep learning curve for the framework 
has been overcome. Moreover, this allows for much 
better integration of instrumental software with the overall 
observatory system, which now tends to take control of 
aspects such as archiving of data and even observation 
scheduling. Stand-alone instruments, with isolated one- 
off control systems, are no longer an acceptable or efficient 
way to use a large telescope. 

There is, however, no dominant instrumentation 
framework as yet. A number of existing systems are 
based around a ‘database’ approach to instrument control, 
a paradigm where instrumental settings are viewed as 
database entries. Such entries can be monitored easily 
to provide user interfaces, especially if a change in a 
database entry triggers the corresponding actual change 
in the hardware. This style of operation originated in 
systems such as accelerators where there are a large 
number of small items to control. It has more difficulty 
handing hierarchical systems where there is a natural 
flow of control with a number of stages overlapping in 
time. A number of observatories, such as Gemini, have 
adopted the EPICS database system. A similar system, 
the commercial RTAP system from Hewlett-Packard, is 
used by the ESO VLT project. Systems differ in the extent 
to which this database paradigm (as opposed to more 
conventional command-based systems where relatively 
large-scale tasks respond to commands sent by other 
tasks) pervades the whole system. The VLT has a more 
conventional command-based layer than does the Gemini 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


system, where commands are implemented in terms of 
the underlying EPICS database. Other systems, such 
as the AAO’s DRAMA, a descendant of ADAM used 
on a number of UK-affiliated telescopes, are entirely 
command based. The Keck telescopes use a system 
called KTL (Keck Task Library) which is a command-based 
system that provides interfaces to both EPICS-based and 
non-EPICS instruments. IRAF is beginning to provide 
some of the communications facilities needed by data 
acquisition environments, and these are being used by 
some instrumentation projects. 


Variety and standards 

The variety of astronomical software can be a problem for 
the astronomer looking for nothing more than a way to 
reduce her data. However, it can be seen as a necessary 
consequence of a continual search for improved ways of 
doing things. When there is no perfect solution, and the 
best solution on yesterday’s hardware fails to take full 
advantage of what is available today, new ideas have to 
be pursued. Only if these are pursued simultaneously by 
a number of separate developers will the best solutions 
emerge. The real problem is to provide ways for such 
separate developers to take advantage of what others 
are doing where possible and to avoid unnecessary 
duplication of effort. The number of de facto standards 
that have emerged is encouraging. For example, although 
there are a large number of different image display 
packages available, both Gemini and ESO are using the 
ESO real-time display package (RTD). Also, almost every 
astronomical package can read and write FITS format files. 
The production of standard libraries of routines—a long- 
lasting example might be the PGPLOT library of routines 
used for plotting data—can assist here, and this should 
extend to the re-use of C++ objects, even eventually the 
production of re-usable software components, such as 
Active-X controls or Java beans. 


Personal computers 

Personal computers (both Intel-based systems running a 
version of Microsoft Windows and to a lesser extent Apple 
Macintoshes) are used extensively by astronomers, since 
astronomers have to write papers and give presentations. 
There are a number of packages aimed at amateurs that 
do, for example, CCD image processing on PCs, and there 
are also some excellent ‘planetarium’ programs available. 
However, there is little professional astronomical data 
reduction software available for Windows or Macintosh. 
There is some use of component software, such as that 
provided by Active X controls, for small-scale instrument 
control, but this can be hard to integrate into an overall 
observatory system. However, the emergence of Linux 
(a UNIX-like operating system that is freely available and 
which runs on PCs of both kinds) has made it possible for 
astronomers to run astronomical UNIX-based packages on 
their home computers. This has a number of implications 
for the way astronomers will work in future—many find 
they havea more powerful machine available athome than 
they do at work. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software in Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Archives and the internet 

Software is becoming increasingly important both before 
observations are made and well after the data are 
reduced and published. For the VLT, for example, 
observations need to be planned well in advance using 
software that generates observation ‘blocks’ that will 
be executed much later at the telescope by the control 
system. The information introduced at that planning 
phase is associated with the data as they become part of 
the data archive. That data archive can be thought of 
as an instrument in its own right, and its store of data 
can be ‘mined’ years later, either reducing the need for 
observations that replicate earlier ones or to provide a 
long-term study of particular objects (see e.g. SOFTWARE: 
RADIO PULSAR SOFTWARE). 

Making proper use of the huge data archives, 
particularly those from survey telescopes, is a new 
challenge for astronomical software (see also SOFTWARE: 
DIGITAL SKY SURVEYS). A large number of internet web sites 
now provide access to archival data, survey data, preprints 
of articles and even journals that are completely electronic 
in nature. NASA is a good example of an organization 
that disseminates information widely through the internet, 
both to professional astronomers and to members of the 
public. This becomes circular: observation preparation 
software can obtain from the internet a digitized picture of 
the sky around a target object and observers can use this 
to choose the guide stars needed for a new observation, 
which in turn will eventually be archived and made 
available. 


Bibliography 

Few facts are so transient as those relating to computers 
and software, and there are few conventional publications 
on the subject. All the various software packages are 
documented and in most cases both the documentation 
and the code can be found on the internet. Most of the 
major observatories have web pages with links to the 
packages they use and develop. Each year there is a 
conference on Astronomical Data Analysis Software and 
Systems (ADASS) whose proceedings are published in the 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series. 


Keith Shortridge 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Digital Sky Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Software: Digital Sky Surveys 


Large digital sky surveys, over a broad range of wave- 
lengths, both from the ground and from space observa- 
tories, are becoming a major source of astronomical data. 
Some examples include the SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY (SDSS) 
and the Digital Palomar Observatory Sky Survey (DPOSS) 
in the visible, the Two-Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS) 
in the near-infrared, the NRAO VLA Sky Survey (NVSS) 
and the Faint Images of the Radio Sky at Twenty Cen- 
timeters (FIRST) in the radio. Many other surveys are 
planned or expected (see also ASTROMETRIC SURVEYS). While 
most surveys are exclusively imaging, large-scale spectro- 
scopic surveys also exist. In addition, a number of ex- 
periments with specific scientific goals, e.g. microlensing 
surveys for MACHOs, searches for near-Earth asteroids, 
are generating comparable volumes of data. Typical sizes 
of resulting data sets (as of the late 1990s) are in the range 
of tens of terabytes of digital information, with detections 
of many millions or even billions of sources, and several 
tens of parameters measured for each detected source. 

This vast amount of new information presents both 
a great scientific opportunity and a great technological 
challenge: how to process, and calibrate the raw data; 
how to store, combine and access them using modern 
computing hardware and networks; and how to visualize, 
explore and analyse these great data sets quickly and 
efficiently. This is a rapidly developing field, which 
often entails collaborative efforts between astronomers 
and computer scientists. 

Broadly speaking, the steps along the way include: 
obtaining the data (telescope / observatory and instrument 
control software), processing the data into catalogs of 
detected sources and their observed properties, calibrating 
the data, archiving the results and providing the tools for 
their scientific analysis and exploration. 


Survey pipeline software 
The actual gathering and processing of the raw survey 
data encompasses many steps, which can often be 
performed using a software pipeline. The first step 
involves hardware-specific data acquisition software, 
used to operate the telescopes and the instruments 
themselves. In principle this is not very different from 
the general astronomical software used for such purposes 
(See SOFTWARE IN ASTRONOMY), except that the sky surveying 
modes tend to require a larger data throughput, a 
very stable and reliable operation over long stretches 
of time, and greater data flows than is the case for 
most astronomical observing. In most cases, additional 
flux calibration data are taken, possibly with separate 
instruments or at different times. Due to the long time- 
scale required to complete a survey (often many years), a 
great deal of care must be exercised to monitor the overall 
performance of the survey in order to ensure uniform data 
quality. 

The next step is the removal of instrumental effects, 
e.g. flat-fielding of CCD images and subtraction of dark 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


current for infrared detectors. Other than the sheer volume 
of the data, this process is extremely similar to the usual 
astronomical observational data reduction techniques. 

At this point one does some kind of automated source 
detection on individual survey images, be it CCD frames, 
drift scans, photographic plate scans, their subsections, or 
whatever other ‘raw’ image format is being generated by 
the survey. This process requires a good understanding 
of the noise properties, which determines some kind of 
a detection significance threshold: one wants to go as 
deep as possible, but not count the noise peaks. In other 
words, maximizing the completeness (the fraction of real 
sources detected) while minimizing the contamination 
(the fraction of noise peaks mistaken for real sources). 
Typically one aims for completeness levels of at least 
90%, and contamination of less than 10% in the first pass, 
and typically the source catalogs are purified further at 
subsequent processing steps. 

Most source detection algorithms require a certain 
minimum number of adjacent or connected pixels above 
some signal-to-noise threshold for detection. The optimal 
choice of sucha threshold depends on the power spectrum 
of the noise. In many cases, the detection process 
involves some type of smoothing or optimal filtering, 
e.g. with a Gaussian whose width approximates that of 
an unresolved point source. Unfortunately, this also 
builds in a preferred scale for source detection, usually 
optimized for the unresolved sources (e.g. stars) or the 
barely-resolved ones (e.g. faint galaxies), which are the 
majority (See DETECTION OF FAINT OBJECTS). This is a practical 
solution, but with the obvious selection biases, with the 
detection of sources depending not only on their flux 
but also on their shape or contrast: there is almost 
always a limiting surface brightness (averaged over some 
specific angular scale) in addition to the limiting flux. 
The subject of possible missing large populations of low 
surface brightness galaxies has been debated extensively 
in the literature. The truth is that a surface brightness 
bias is always present at some level, whether it is actually 
important or not. Novel approaches to source, or more 
accurately structure, detection involve so-called multiscale 
techniques. 

Once individual sources are detected, a number of 
structural parameters are measured for them, including 
fluxes in a range of apertures, various diameters, 
radial moments of the light distribution, etc, from 
which a suitably defined, intensity-weighted centroid is 
computed. In most cases, the sky background intensity 
level is determined locally, e.g. in a large aperture 
surrounding each source; crowding and contamination 
by other nearby sources can present problems and create 
detection and measurement biases. Another difficult 
problem is unblending or splitting of adjacent sources, 
typically defined as a number of distinct, adjacent intensity 
peaks connected above the detection surface brightness 
threshold. A proper approach keeps track of the hierarchy 
of split objects, usually called the parent object (the 
blended composite), the daughter objects (the first level 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Digital Sky Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


splits), etc. Dividing the total flux between them and 
assigning other structural parameters to them are non- 
trivial issues, and depend on the nature of the data and 
the intended scientific applications. 

Object detection and parameter measurement mod- 
ules in survey processing systems often use (or are based 
on) some standard astronomical program intended for 
such applications, e.g. FOCAS, SExtractor or DAOPHOT, 
to mention just a few of the programs often used in 1990s. 
Such programs are well documented in the literature. 
Even if customized software is developed for these tasks, 
the technical issues are very similar. It is generally true 
that all such systems are built with certain assumptions 
about the properties of sources to be detected and mea- 
sured, and optimized for a particular purpose, e.g. detec- 
tion of faint galaxies or accurate STELLAR PHOTOMETRY. Such 
data may serve most users well, but there is always a pos- 
sibility that customized reprocessing for a given scientific 
purpose may be needed. 

At this point (or further down the line) astrometric 
and flux calibrations are applied to the data, using the 
measured source positions and instrumental fluxes. Most 
surveys are designed so that improved calibrations can be 
reapplied at any stage. In some cases, it is better to apply 
such calibration after the object classification (see below), 
as the transformations may be different for the unresolved 
and the resolved sources. Once the astrometric solutions 
are applied, catalogs from adjacent or overlapping survey 
images can be stitched together. 

Object classification, e.g. as stars or galaxies in 
the visible and near-IR surveys, but more generally 
as resolved and unresolved sources, is one of the key 
issues. Classification of objects is an important aspect 
of characterizing the astrophysical content of a given 
sky survey, and for many scientific applications one 
wants either stars (i.e. unresolved objects) or galaxies; 
consider for example studies of Galactic structure and 
studies of the large-scale structure in the universe (see 
UNIVERSE: SIMULATIONS OF STRUCTURE AND GALAXY FORMATION). 
More detailed morphological classification, e.g. Hubble 
types of detected galaxies, may be also performed if 
the data contain sufficient discriminating information to 
enable it. Given the large volumes of data involved 
in digital sky surveys, object classification must be 
automated, and in order to make it really useful, it has to 
be as reliable and objective as possible, and homogeneous 
over the entire survey. 

In most cases, object classification is based on some 
quantitative measurements of the image morphology for 
the detected sources. For example, star-galaxy separation 
in optical and near-IR surveys uses the fact that all stars 
(and also Quasars) would be unresolved point sources, 
and that the observed shape of the light distribution 
would be given by the point-spread function, whereas 
galaxies would be more extended. This may be quantified 
through various measures of the object radial shape, e.g. 
moments of the light distribution in various combinations. 
The problem of star-galaxy separation thus becomes a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


problem of defining a boundary in some parameter space 
of observed object properties, which would divide the 
two classes. In the simplest approaches such a dividing 
line or surface is set empirically, but more sophisticated 
techniques use artificial intelligence methods, such as 
artificial neural nets or decision trees (artificial induction 
software). They require a training data set of objects for 
which the classification is known accurately from some 
independent observations. Because of this additional 
information input, such techniques can outperform the 
methods where survey data alone are used to decide on 
the correct object classifications. 

There are several practical problems in this task. 
First, fainter galaxies are smaller in angular extent, thus 
approaching stars in their appearance. At the fainter 
flux levels the measurements are noisier, and thus the 
two types of object become indistinguishable. This sets 
a classification limit to most optical and near-IR surveys, 
which is typically at a flux level a few times higher than 
the detection limit. Second, the shape of the point-spread 
function may vary over the span of the survey, e.g. due 
to the inevitable sEEING variations. This may be partly 
overcome by defining the point-spread function locally, 
and normalizing the structural parameters of objects so 
that the unresolved sources are the same over the entire 
survey. In other words, one must define the unresolved 
source template which would be true locally, but may (and 
usually does) vary globally. Furthermore, this has to be 
done automatically and reliably over the entire survey data 
domain, which may be very heterogeneous in depth and 
intrinsic resolution. Additional problems include object 
blending, saturation of signal at bright flux levels, detector 
nonlinearities, etc. 

The net result is that the automated object classifi- 
cation process is always stochastic in nature. Accuracies 
better than 90% are usually required, but accuracies higher 
than about 95% are generally hard to achieve, especially 
at faint flux levels. 

In other situations, e.g. where the angular resolution 
of the data is poor, or where non-thermal processes are 
dominant generators of the observed flux, morphology of 
the objects may have little meaning, and other approaches 
are necessary. Flux ratios in different bandpasses, i.e. 
the spectrum shape, may be useful in separating different 
physical classes of objects. 


Survey archive software 

Once all of the data have been extracted from the image 
pixels by the survey pipeline software, it must be archived 
in order to facilitate scientific exploration. Basically, this 
data archiving can take one of two forms: raw data access 
through the Web or some suitable storage and distribution 
medium (e.g. CD-ROMs or data tapes), or utilization of a 
database system designed specifically to handle a given 
digital sky survey archive. The former storage technique, 
while considerably less expensive, is certainly not optimal 
for any real analysis, especially for very large volumes of 
data. On the other hand, using a database system provides 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Digital Sky Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


significant advantages (e.g. powerful query expressions) 
limited primarily by how much a survey can afford. 
Currently, most surveys are accessible from the Internet, 
whether it is a simple ftp location or a full featured, Web- 
accessible, query engine. 

While certainly flexible and generally easy to 
establish, Web accessible data are subject to limitations 
on bandwidth. Despite technological advances which 
promise to ease such concerns, the rapid growth in 
available data will continue to swamp available resources. 
To illustrate this bandwidth problem, for a typical building 
network (e.g. shared Ethernet at 10 Mbit s'), it would take 
nearly a week and half to sift through a terabyte of data 
(which is the current benchmark for large sky surveys), 
and this assumes a dedicated bandwidth. Even at fast SCSI 
speeds (e.g. 100 Mbit s~'), it would take approximately one 
day to merely move the data of interest. 

Each archival center is presented with the challenging 
problem of storing and serving vast amounts of complex 
data. Currently the majority of the software written 
for these applications is in either C++ or Java, while 
the actual data are transferred via ASCII, FITS or XML. 
Recently, many of the major data centers have begun to 
work on sharing knowledge and expertise in order to 
simplify the development process, as well as improve 
the overall efficacy of astronomical archives. This work 
is leading to standards which dictate how archives can 
communicate with each other, how archives can describe 
themselves (i.e. their metadata, or data that describes the 
data), how archives can transfer large amounts of dynamic 
information, and how sources in different archives can be 
cross-identified. 

In general, the data processing flow is from the 
pixel (image) domain to the catalog domain (detected 
sources with measured parameters). This usually results 
in a reduction of the data volume by about an order 
of magnitude (this factor varies considerably, depending 
on the survey or the data set), since most pixels do 
not contain statistically significant signal from resolved 
sources. However, the ability to store large amounts of 
digital image information on-line opens up interesting 
new possibilities, whereby one may want to go back to 
the pixels and remeasure fluxes or other parameters, on 
the basis of the catalog information. For example, if a 
source was detected (i.e. cataloged) in one bandpass, but 
not in another, it is worth checking if a marginal detection 
is present even if it did not make it past the statistical 
significance cut the first time; even the absence of flux is 
sometimes useful information! 

The two most common types of database manage- 
ment systems used within astronomy are relational-based 
(where data are manipulated as tables), and object-based 
(where data are manipulated individually as objects). 
Each of the two methods have working sites which demon- 
strate the technology in action (e.g. the 2MASS project 
uses Informix, while the GSCII project uses Objectivity). 
In general, relational systems offer more features includ- 
ing third-party add-ons, and powerful query mechanisms 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


due to their dominant position in the business world. On 
the other hand, object-based systems have shown higher 
performance and better potential for scaling to extremely 
large data sets (e.g. CERN is developing an object-based 
persistence solution to multi-petabyte archives). 
Regardless of how the data are actually archived, 
with the advent of the Internet, essentially all archives are 
Web accessible. This trend away from tabular or media 
based archiving produces data sets which are distributed 
in nature, allowing users and tools equal access to vast 
amounts of data, which in the past were nearly impossible 
to efficiently query. As a result, astronomical data are now 
able to be utilized in a more democratic fashion resulting 
in uses which the survey institutions did not even imagine. 


Scientific analysis and exploration 

The end goal of digital sky surveys is to enable scientific 
investigations. In some cases, the goals are so specific that 
the best approach is to use analysis software designed 
and optimized to tackle them, e.g. as in the studies 
of the cosmic microwave background, in gravitational 
microlensing experiments, etc. However, most of the 
modern survey data sets are so information-rich, that a 
wide variety of different scientific studies can be done 
with the same data. This entails some general tools for 
the exploration, visualization and analysis of large survey 
data sets. 

The tools which will be utilized with the new data 
sets will need to employ cutting-edge techniques from 
computer science. For example, clustering techniques 
to detect rare, anomalous or somehow unusual objects, 
e.g. as outliers in the parameter space, to be selected for 
further investigation (i.e. follow-up spectroscopy). Other 
examples include genetic algorithms to improve current 
detection and supervised classification methods, new 
data visualization and presentation techniques, which can 
convey most of the multidimensional information in a way 
more easily grasped by a human user, and the use of semi- 
autonomous AI or software agents to explore the large data 
parameter spaces and report on the occurrences of unusual 
instances or classes of objects. 

The nature of sky surveys and the resulting data sets 
dictates the kinds of science one may wish to do with them. 
For example, most surveys would cover a large solid angle, 
but not go as deep as the typical ‘pointed observations’. 
This, in turn, drives the kinds of data analysis software 
needed for their scientific exploration. Broadly speaking, 
the kinds of astronomical investigations for which surveys 
are well suited include the following. 


Multiwavelength astronomy 

Combining surveys done at different wavelengths, for 
a more panchromatic view of the universe. Typically, 
optical IDs are needed for most of the follow-up work. 
An obvious example is the optical identification of radio 
or x-ray sources. A typical basic software requirement 
is efficient and accurate matching of sources detected 
in different wavelengths. If positional accuracies and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Digital Sky Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


User Interface 


or 


Services 


Astronomer 


Middle layer 


Application 


Archive 
Information 


Figure 1. A sample prototype blueprint for the system architecture of a virtual observatory, connecting the scientific users with a 
multitude of separate digital sky survey archives (schematically represented at the bottom of the picture). The basic task of such a 
system is to combine large volumes of data from different archives, e.g. through the positional matching of detected sources. Once this 
is achieved, various other computing services provided by such a virtual observatory may include visualization of data, data-mining, 
cluster analyis, etc. This system model is predicated on the universal adoption of standards dictating everything from how archives 
communicate with each other to how data are transferred between archives, services and users. 


source densities in matched surveys are comparable this 
is a relatively straightforward task; however, if either of 
these two conditions is not satisfied, more sophisticated 
algorithms may be needed to assign matching probabilities 
to multiple candidates. These techniques can generally 
be optimized for certain classes of sources by utilizing as 
much 4 priori knowledge as possible. 


Statistical astronomy 

Studies of the large-scale structure (if one detects galaxies 
in copious numbers), or studies of the Galactic structure (if 
one detects stars in copious numbers). The sheer numbers 
of detected sources make the Poissonian fluctuations 
unimportant, but systematic errors may limit the results. 
Accurate and uniform flux calibrations and source 
classifications are essential for such applications, and 
possible biases should be modeled. In addition, the sheer 
size of most surveys allows for further subdivision of 
various analysis (e.g. by morphological or spectral type) 
for more specific results. 


Rare object searches 

Searches for rare types of objects or groups of objects, 
whose frequency of occurrence is so low that huge input 
source catalogs are necessary in order to find them. This 
‘needle in a haystack’ search is facilitated by the vast 
number of sources in current surveys (ie. a one in a 
million object would appear a thousand times in a billion 
source survey). Typically such rare objects are found 
as outliers in some parameter space, e.g. colors: the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


bulk of ‘ordinary’ sources (normal stars, galaxies, etc) 
would form well-defined clusters in the parameter space of 
observables, and some rare or peculiar types of objects may 
be found away from them. Unsupervised classification 
and cluster analysis techniques may be especially useful 
for this task. This data-mining also facilitates significantly 
higher efficiencies in performing follow-up spectroscopy 
of unusual objects. We note that rare objects may belong 
to known classes (e.g. distant quasars (see QUASISTELLAR 
OBJECTS: SURVEYS), brown dwarfs, etc), which can be known 
to occupy some a priori determined portion of the given 
parameter space. Alternatively, there may be previously 
unknown or unexpected types of objects discovered in this 
manner. 


Future directions 
Astronomy finds itself at an interesting time, as several, 
large-area digital sky surveys are currently under way. 
In the future, the number of such surveys, as well as 
the wavelength coverage, will only continue to increase, 
providing temporal as well as spatial coverage of the sky. 
This flood of data necessitates a new approach to data 
handling—a virtual observatory (see figure 1). Individual 
surveys are important in their ownright, but the federation 
of multiple, cross-wavelength digital surveys provides a 
tremendous opportunity to truly quantify the origins of 
stars, galaxies and the universe itself. 

This future situation provides the opportunity to 
adopt a new research paradigm for studying the heavens, 
as the ability to perform cutting edge research will not be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Digital Sky Surveys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


restricted to those fortunate enough to have access to the 
best facilities. Instead, anyone who has the diligence and 
ability to sift through the avalanche of data can perform 
novel science. 


Bibliography 
The field of large digital sky surveys, the related software 
methodologies, and the new astronomy they enable are 
developing very rapidly as of this writing (late 1999). 
There are thus no standard texts or reviews, and whatever 
articles do exist tend to become obsolete very quickly. 
Probably the best way to find more up to date information 
is through the World Wide Web (and the interested reader 
will know how). While many Web sites can be somewhat 
ephemeral, we suggest one which will provide a number 
of useful links in this field, and which we hope will be 
active throughout the useful shelf life of this encyclopedia: 
http://www.digital-sky.org 

Another possibility is conference proceedings on 
this and related subjects, e.g. the series of volumes on 
‘Astronomical Data and Software Systems’, published by 
the Astronomical Society of the Pacific in their conference 
series. A number of useful papers can also be found in 


McLean B J et al (ed) 1998 New Horizons From Multi- 
Wavelength Sky Surveys (IAU Symp. 179) (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 


Anexample of a particular software system for processing 
of digital sky surveys is described by 


Weir N et al 1995 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 107 1243 


S George Djorgouski and Robert J Brunner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: IRAF 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Software: IRAF 


IRAF, the Image Reduction and Analysis Facility, is a large 
software system used primarily for the reduction and 
analysis of optical and infrared data from ground- and 
space-based observatories. The principal IRAF software 
distributions provide an integrated collection of standard 
data reduction packages for all instruments operated by 
the National Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO) 
and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Many other 
observatories use IRAF for processing data from their own 
telescopes, often providing customized ‘layered packages’ 
tailored to reduce data from their instruments. IRAF is also 
used extensively at the telescope for data acquisition and 
quick look and by many individuals around the world for 
general astronomical data reduction and analysis. 


Historical perspective 

In the years leading up to 1980, data processing at 
KITT PEAK NATIONAL OBSERVATORY (KPNO) was performed 
on a CDC Cyber-series computer, a classical mainframe 
system with computer operators and batch submission 
of programs using decks of punched cards. To this 
was connected the pioneering IPPS interactive picture 
processing system. This consisted of some custom in- 
house-developed hardware and software used to connect 
a Tektronix storage scope terminal and a Comtal image 
display to the Cyber mainframe. Revolutionary for 
its time, this combination permitted interactive use of 
the Cyber mainframe for program development and 
image processing. The Tektronix storage scope terminals 
and Comtal image display provided interactive vector 
graphics and image display capabilities. A menu-based 
system provided the main user interface. 

Applications for the old IPPS system were written 
in Cyber Forth, a locally developed variant of the 
Forth programming language, and CDC Fortran, used 
for numerically intensive functions. The IPPS system 
operated for approximately 10 yr, and was one of the most 
advanced image processing systems in the world at the 
time. 

In the 1970s the DEC PDP-11 minicomputer appeared 
on the scene. This was followed shortly by the legendary 
VAX minicomputer. The VAX was quickly adopted for 
data processing by astronomy worldwide. These new 
minicomputers were interactive systems, putting the end- 
user in control, and would soon doom the batch-oriented 
mainframe to oblivion. The dominant operating system 
for the VAX at the time was VAX VMS, which commanded 
a very strong following from most of the scientific users 
at the time. A handful of software developers, however, 
including a small group at Kitt Peak, were excited about a 
new operating system called Unix, and the new language 
it was written in, the C programming language. 

The transition from the mainframe to the minicom- 
puter sealed the fate of the old IPPS system. The combi- 
nation of custom hardware and custom software used to 
build the IPPS ensured that the IPPS was a one-of-a-kind 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


system, the only IPPS installation in the world, and that 
virtually all of the effort which went into building this sys- 
tem would be lost when the technology it was based on 
became obsolete. With the coming of the minicomputer, 
it was time to build a new image processing system to 
replace the IPPS. 

Around 1980 Kitt Peak undertook a study of the 
existing astronomical data analysis systems of the time 
(AIPS, Starlink and others) and eventually concluded that 
a new system was needed to serve the needs of KPNO. 
The developers were determined that this time around 
the system would be put together in such a way that 
the many years of effort spent developing applications 
software would survive the technology it was based 
on. To ensure this the system would be both portable 
and device independent, with controlled interfaces to 
all external services. Everything learned with the IPPS 
about interactive graphics and image processing would 
be preserved in the new system. 

The little-known (at the time) Unix operating system 
would be the primary development platform for the 
new image processing facility, but the software would 
be portable and would be supported on VMS and other 
operating systems from the beginning (in addition to 
VMS there were subsequent ports to other now extinct 
operating systems, e.g. from Data General and Perkin 
Elmer). Two new VAX minicomputers, one running 
Berkeley Unix and the other VMS, were purchased for 
developing the new image processing system. Graphics 
and image display capabilities were provided by DEC 
VT100/VT640 graphics terminals and an IIS image display. 

Development of the IRAF system began at KPNO in 
Tucson in 1981. By 1984 the basic system framework, 
command language and a few of the core applications 
packages were complete. The sPACk TELESCOPE SCIENCE 
INSTITUTE, after its own internal review of existing systems, 
adopted IRAF as their data processing framework in 1984 
and completed the initial VMS port within the following 
year. This began a major collaboration between ground- 
and space-based astronomy which continues to this day, 
providing users of both communities with a consistent, 
integrated data processing capability which can be used 
for both types of data. By the mid-1990s about half of all 
IRAF software had been contributed by the space science 
community. 

In the late 1980s workstations appeared on the scene, 
led by Sun, which was just another small workstation 
vendor in the early days. Following a trip to Silicon Valley 
to visit Sun, MIPS and other early workstation vendors, 
Kitt Peak chose to go with Sun. This eventually proved to 
be another in a series of fortuitous choices for IRAF and 
NOAO. 

The workstation was a major development because 
it provided a high-resolution bit-mapped screen which 
could be used to runa windowing system. This was a great 
boon to scientific data processing because one could use 
this to implement custom graphics and image processing 
visualization tools in software (see also SOFTWARE IN 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: IRAF 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ASTRONOMY), and every workstation could have its own 
integrated image display capability. IRAF developed one 
of the earliest software image displays during this period, 
the imtool display server for the now obsolete Sunview 
window system (which pre-dated X). A companion 
program gterm provided interactive vector graphics. With 
the subsequent wide adoption of the workstation and the 
development of the X window system, this was followed 
by the development of SAOimage by SAO, the X11IRAF 
tools from IRAF and many other data visualization tools 
from various sources in the years to follow. 

The appearance of the workstation on the world as- 
tronomy scene had another big impact: these new sys- 
tems ran the Unix operating system almost exclusively. 
Although DEC would later develop VMS-based worksta- 
tions such as the VAXstation, this meant the beginning of 
the end for the VMS operating system as a major platform 
for astronomy software. Some years later the PC would 
evolve to the point where it was the equal of the worksta- 
tion. With the PC came the open source Unix-based oper- 
ating systems such as FreeBSD and Linux, further sealing 
the fate of proprietary systems like VMS. 

By the late 1990s the IRAF system, now approaching 
20 yr in age, was a mature system in wide use throughout 
the world. IRAF had survived a very turbulent period 
in the evolution of computers and computer software 
spanning at least three major eras from minicomputer 
to workstation to PC. Approximately 200 man-years of 
software development had been invested in IRAF and 
its applications. By the end of the decade attention was 
turning to the evolution of the IRAF system itself. A 
new system framework was needed to take full advantage 
of new software technology and to permit better use 
of the wealth of non-astronomy software now available. 
Research and development leading to this new framework 
got underway in the late 1990s, aided by several grants 
from NASA. 

The challenge facing IRAF in 2000 as we start into the 
new decade is to upgrade the foundations of the system 
even while it is still in use, to bring the system up to 
date with the latest technology, while preserving the many 
years of work invested in developing and refining the 
current wide range of science applications. 


System structure 
IRAF is not a program, but rather a large integrated 
software system. Included are a system framework 
upon which all the other software is based, an integrated 
programming environment, standard user interface 
software such as a command language and graphics and 
visualization tools, and a great variety of applications 
software. The applications software is organized into 
packages of logically related tasks. 

An IRAF task is an individual program, designed 
to perform some specific data processing function. A 
parameter set controls the operation of each task. Tasks 
may be either simple batch-oriented tasks or interactive 
tasks which use keystroke, text, vector graphics or image 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


display capabilities to interact with the user during 
execution. JRAF tasks are normally run interactively 
from within the IRAF environment, but most tasks may 
also be called at the host level, e.g. for integration 
into an external data processing system. IRAF tasks 
are pure computational modules; where user interaction 
occurs, the user interface is provided externally by 
separate user interface modules in the system framework 
which communicate with the IRAF task at runtime using 
messaging. 

All the IRAF software is integrated into a single 
system, but all of the applications packages and tasks, 
and most of the system modules such as the command 
language interpreter and the visualization tools, are 
modules which can easily be replaced or substituted. This 
flexibility is the chief reason that so many institutions have 
been able to extend IRAF to process their own data, or 
otherwise integrate IRAF into their local data processing 
systems. Every IRAF installation is unique, consisting 
of only those packages which the user has obtained and 
installed in the system. 

From an architectural point of view IRAF consists 
of a host system interface (HSI), which includes all the 
system dependent code, and the portable IRAF system, 
which includes most of the system framework and all 
applications. The portable code is identical on all IRAF 
platforms, including all build files; there are no ‘ifdefs’ 
or other system-dependent features in the source code or 
build files. In the runtime system all binary object code 
and executables are segregated from the rest of the system 
into ‘bin’ (binary) directories. A single IRAF installation 
can simultaneously support any number of architectures, 
or target platforms; every major class of platform must, 
however, have a separate HSI. 


Applications 

An IRAF installation consists of the system framework 
and the applications packages and tasks installed in the 
system. As we noted earlier, IRAF tasks (programs) are 
organized into packages of logically related tasks. Above 
this there is one additional level of structure, collections 
of logically related packages. Chief among these are 
the core IRAF packages and the standard astronomical 
data reduction and analysis applications developed by 
NOAO and included in the standard IRAF release. In 
addition there are many external or layered packages 
which may be separately obtained and installed in IRAF. 
Finally there are many individual programs, including 
user-written Fortran or C (IMFORT) programs, which have 
been developed by users primarily for their own use. It is 
this broad collection of IRAF science applications, many 
of which were contributed by the community using IRAF, 
which more than anything else has made IRAF such a 
successful and widely used system. 


Core system 
The core IRAF packages are generic system packages 
providing standard facilities for importing and exporting 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: IRAF 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


data, general image processing, graphics and image 
display and data visualization, and user interaction 
including the IRAF command language (CL), as well as 
facilities for software development. 


Table 1. Core IRAF packages. 


dataio Data format conversion package 
images General image processing package 
language The command language itself 
lists List processing package 

local The template local package 
obsolete Obsolete tasks 

plot Plot package 

proto Prototype or interim tasks 
softools Software tools package 

system System utilities package 

utilities Miscellaneous utilities package 


The major packages in the core IRAF system are listed 
in table 1. Each of these packages contains many tasks. 
The images package, for example, contains approximately 
100 tasks which provide facilities for image filtering, 
image matching, fitting functions and surfaces, geometric 
corrections, coordinate manipulation, and general image 
manipulation. Altogether the core system contains three 
or four hundred tasks. 


Astronomical applications 

The standard IRAF distribution also includes a suite of 
packages for the reduction and analysis of optical and 
infrared astronomical data called the ‘NOAO’ packages 
(table 2). Although these packages include special 
support for reducing data from the NOAO instruments, 
most of the packages therein are general enough to be 
applied to data from similar instruments outside NOAO. 
Packages are provided for reducing both image and 
spectral data, as well as standard astrometric, photometric 
and spectroscopic data analysis. All told the NOAO 
packages contain about 1200 individual tasks. 


Layered packages 


Layered or ‘add-on’ packages are optional applications 
packages which may be separately obtained and installed 


Table 2. NOAO packages. 


artdata Artificial data generation 
astrometry § Astrometry package 

astutil Astronomical utilities package 
digiphot Digital stellar photometry 


focas Faint object classification 


imred Image reductions package 
nobsolete Obsolete tasks to be phased out 
nproto Prototype—interim tasks 
observatory Observatory database 

onedspec One-dimensional spectral analysis 


Iv Radial velocity analysis package 
surfphot Galaxy isophotal analysis package 
twodspec Two-dimensional spectral analysis 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


into IRAF. Once installed, layered packages are no 
different from the standard packages included in the IRAF 
distribution. The NOAO package is actually a layered 
package itself, even though it is included in the standard 
IRAF distribution. 

Many layered packages have been developed for 
IRAF, enough so that it has been difficult to track them 
all. It is hard to be fair in listing layered packages, but a 
few of those in use at NOAO are listed in table 3. 


Table 3. Miscellaneous layered packages. 


arcon CTIO Arcon CCD data acquisition 

color RGB color image composition 

ctio CTIO miscellaneous tasks 

dimsum IR image reductions 

euv EUVE extreme UV reductions 

finder ST guide star catalog astrometry 

ftools HEASARC FITS tools package 

grasp GONG helioseismology package 

ice KPNO/Steward ICE CCD data acquisition 
mscred CCD Mosaic image reductions 

nso National Solar Observatory reductions 
rgo Royal Greenwich Observatory reductions 
steward Steward Observatory reductions 

stsdas Hubble Space Telescope reductions 
tables STScI tabular data format package 

xray SAO x-ray data analysis package 


The most notable of the layered packages are the 
tables and stsdas packages from STScI, which provide 
extensive facilities for reducing HST data as well as many 
other generally useful IRAF tasks. The xray and ftools 
packages also provide many generally useful IRAF tasks. 
The ice (IRAF Control Environment) package is widely 
used for CCD data acquisition into IRAF. The mscred 
package from NOAO is used to reduce data from wide- 
field CCD mosaic imagers. Other major packages are 
available from outside groups such as Starlink in the UK 
and ESO/ECF in Europe. 

If we were to add them all up, there are probably 
a few hundred IRAF packages in all, containing several 
thousand tasks in total. New IRAF packages are constantly 
under development. 


Graphic and image display 

Interactive graphics and image display has been an 
integral part of IRAF since the earliest days. Although 
these capabilities are built into IRAF, the actual graphics 
and image display servers are replaceable components 
which are distributed separately from the main IRAF 
distribution. NOAO currently supports a separate 
product called x1lliraf which includes the graphics and 
image display servers xgterm (basically xterm but with 
vastly more powerful graphics) and ximtool, a powerful 
multiframe image display server. The Smithsonian 
Observatory (SAO) provides additional image display 
servers which can be used with IRAF, most notably 
SAOimage and SAOtng. Data interaction is a vital 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: IRAF 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


part of IRAF and new facilities are continually under 
development. 

In addition to basic graphics and image display, IRAF 
includes capabilities for integrated application graphical 
user interfaces, or GUIs. The system support for these 
GUIs is included in x1liraf. The actual GUI applications 
are essentially standard IRAF tasks, with additional 
messaging capabilities used to link the computational 
application with the external GUI. This allows the GUI 
technology to evolve without greatly affecting the science 
software at the heart of IRAF. 


Data formats 

The fundamental data objects in IRAF are the image and 
the table. Logically, images are N-dimensional pixel arrays 
with an associated image header containing keyword = 
value attributes describing the image. Images may be 
complex objects, including associated information such as 
pixel masks or world coordinate systems describing the 
mapping of an image onto the sky, or a spectral dispersion. 
Examples of subclasses of images might include direct 
images of the sky, spectra or variance arrays. Observations 
are composed of one or more logically associated images 
and auxiliary data objects such as tables or other associated 
information. 

IRAF uses FITS for all archival data. Internally 
IRAF supports a number of runtime image formats used 
for various types of data. Each image format has a 
corresponding image kernel in IRAF, which maps the 
physical or external data format to the logical image data 
model used in IRAF. 

The currently supported IRAF runtime image formats 
are summarized in table 4. All of these are pixel (raster) 
image formats except the qpf format, which is a sparse 
event list used for event-counting detectors. The pixel 
list image format stores typical image masks in a highly 
compressed internal format. Most IRAF applications 
support only the abstract image model defined by IRAF 
and will work with any of these image formats. 


Table 4. IRAF runtime image formats. 


oif Native (original) IRAF image format 
fxf FITS image format 

plf Pixel list image format 

qpf Event data format 

stf | HST GEIS image format 


Many additional image formats can be used, but a 
separate image format conversion is required before the 
image can be used within IRAF. For example, the PC image 
formats such as GIF and TIFF can be used with an extra 
data conversion step (see the dataio package). 


Special applications 

Data acquisition 

In addition to conventional data reduction and analysis, 
IRAF is also used at the telescope for data acquisition 
and quick look. Using IRAF for data acquisition allows 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a single familiar environment to be used for all data 
interaction both at the telescope and at the observer’s home 
institution. 

The ice package (IRAF Control Environment), an 
IRAF layered package, provides integrated control of 
a detector, instrument and telescope, allowing various 
types of exposures to be taken with the observation 
written directly to an IRAF image file at the end of 
the exposure. Automatic display, postprocessing and 
archiving of newly acquired images are supported. A 
more specialized package ccdphot is available for digital 
aperture photometry with CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs). 

More recently the Mosaic Data Handling System 
has been developed for the acquisition and quick-look 
processing of CCD Mosaic images (or single-frame CCD 
images). The companion IRAF package mscred provides 
for the reduction of Mosaic data. The Mosaic DHS system 
is component based, using messaging to connect the 
components and a data feed component to interface to an 
external detector subsystem and feed data to the DHS. A 
data capture agent captures Mosaic data and writes them 
to disk as multi-extension FITS files. Real-time image 
display and quick-look data interaction capabilities are 
also provided. 


Pipeline processing and archiving 

IRAF has long provided standard data reduction packages 
for a wide range of instruments. In the classic IRAF 
system data is reduced by running a reduction task or 
imred (image reduction) CL script on a list of unprocessed 
images. Some interaction is typically required to reduce 
the data, especially for spectral data. 

More recently an automated pipeline processing 
facility has been added. A pipeline manager executes 
the pipeline, driven by an externally defined rule-based 
pipeline script. External pipeline modules (IRAF tasks 
or other programs) perform all the actual processing 
operations. The pipeline manager continually loops over 
the data set, classifying objects by type and applying 
processing rules to move data through the stages of 
processing defined by the user-defined pipeline being 
executed. The pipeline manager has the ability to run a 
number of tasks concurrently, on the same host or ona set 
of cooperating hosts. The parallel processing capability 
allows this scheme to be scaled up to handle very large 
data sets. 

The automatic pipeline processing capability can be 
combined with a database system to generate a data 
archive. In general, whenever an automated pipeline is set 
up to routinely process data for a particular instrument, it 
is desirable to go one step further and create an online 
archive of the data products. If a pipeline is set up 
and the data are put online, IRAF provides an integrated 
framework for all data handling from acquisition and 
quick look at the telescope, through pipeline processing, 
to interaction with the processed data from the online 
archives. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: IRAF 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Future developments 

The framework for a new IRAF system is being 
prototyped in the Mosaic Data Handling System and the 
automated pipeline processing facilities discussed in the 
previous sections. A related NASA-funded project called 
Open IRAF is adding a multilanguage programming 
development capability to IRAF, allowing applications 
to be written in a number of standard compiled or 
interpreted languages. Other projects are underway to 
add advanced GUI capabilities and to interface modern 
scripting languages such as Python and Tcl to IRAF. 

The new framework will be component based, us- 
ing a message bus to connect the components. The sys- 
tem framework will provide standard components for ap- 
plication scripting, GUI presentation, data visualization, 
parameter editing, online help and the like. Standard 
data service components based on distributed shared ob- 
ject technology will be used to provide efficient shared 
concurrent access to data objects such as images or ta- 
bles. Applications will be assembled from custom com- 
pute components which implement the numerical or sci- 
ence algorithms, combined with mostly standard user in- 
terface components for user and data interaction. An in- 
terpreted script written in one of the supported scripting 
languages, executing in a script language component on 
the message bus, will tie the components together. 

The new system framework will be inherently 
distributed since the message bus will allow components 
on different hosts to interoperate and since distributed 
shared objects will allow data objects such as images to 
be simultaneously accessed by multiple components or 
applications. Including a capability to directly access 
images and tables stored in local or remote data archives 
will allow applications written within the new framework 
to be used for data mining of archival data. 

Ultimately the technology developed by these 
projects will be used to rebuild the framework of the 
existing IRAF system. Although the IRAF framework and 
the major user interfaces will be almost completely new, 
the existing science applications (most compiled tasks) 
are expected to migrate to the new framework almost 
unchanged. This will give us a modern new IRAF system 
while preserving most of the 200 or so man-years invested 
in the current science applications. 


Availability 

IRAF is available for most major Unix-based platforms, 
including both workstations and PCs. A Windows port 
is possible but does not yet exist. VMS has been 
supported for many years, but support will be dropped 
in versions of IRAF beyond V2.11. The set of supported 
platforms varies from year to year; check the IRAF web 
pages (http://iraf.noao.edu, or any mirror) to determine 
whether support is available for a particular platform. 

A typical IRAF installation requires a minimum of 
50-150 MB of disk space. If some of the larger layered 
packages are installed, or an installation is configured to 
support multiple target architectures, the space required 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


can be several times larger. The largest installations, 
including the most common layered packages and 
supporting several target architectures, can require a 
gigabyte or more of disk space. 

IRAF is freely available via download over the 
internet, or a mailed CD-ROM distribution can be obtained 
from NOAO for a nominal fee. 


Doug Tody 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Radio Pulsar Software 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Software: Radio Pulsar Software 


Software used to process radio pulsar data is almost all 
written in Fortran, C and C++ and runs mainly on UNIX 
platforms. The size of the user base is such that most of 
the major groups have their own home-grown solutions 
to what are very similar problems. However, there are 
generic features in the software used in the discovery, 
timing and understanding of the statistical properties of 
PULSARS. 

When the first pulsars were discovered in 1967, 
computers were not common in radio observatories. Now 
they play an essential role in the discovery, timing and 
analysis of pulsars as well as in Monte Carlo simulations 
that enable us to understand the population. In the 
32 yr since the discovery of pulsars we have witnessed 
an exponential growth in the power of computers with 
the speed at which they are able to perform calculations 
doubling every 18 months or so. This has made it possible 
to undertake large-scale surveys of the Galaxy for pulsars 
where over a terabyte of information has been recorded 
and processed. In the future real-time processing of the 
Nyquist-sampled electric field will be possible for ultra 
high-precision observations of radio pulsars. At the end 
of this article a number of WWW (world-wide web) links 
are given to assist the reader to download software and 
use online resources (see also SOFTWARE IN ASTRONOMY). 


Pulsar searching software 

There is no standard pulsar search software used by 
groups around the world. This is due in part to the fact 
that most observatories have their own data acquisition 
systems and so the format of pulsar search data differs. 
There is also the fact that most astronomers are trained 
in physics, not computer science, and the flexibility of the 
software is not always what it could be. Search codes often 
take a long time to perfect, and, once this is achieved, 
the source code is rarely distributed. This would mean 
providing adequate documentation, which is a chore, and 
there is an implied responsibility that the code is bug 
free. In my experience, most groups are more than happy 
to provide mature codes which address most aspects of 
pulsar astronomy provided that they are not expected to 
provide a 24h support line and that the final responsibility 
for published material lies with the authors of the paper, 
not the authors of the software. 

Almost all pulsar search codes operate on a two- 
dimensional (2D) data array of time and frequency 
samples. Because of interstellar pulse dispersion, a 
large number of frequency channels are required to 
prevent dispersion reducing sensitivity to radio pulsars. 
Multichannel filterbanks are the most commonly used data 
acquisition system, but in the past autocorrelators have 
been used to form filterbank data and in the future it is 
possible that searches will record the electric field directly 
to obtain the ultimate frequency resolution to improve 
sensitivity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There are two basic methods of processing these 
data. The first is to dedisperse at several hundred 
different trial dispersion measures, perform a fast Fourier 
transform (FFT), look for spikes, and progressively sum 
harmonics until 32 or so are added, looking for significant 
peaks after each harmonic sum. A list of candidates can 
then be formed, and either the raw data folded at the 
period and dispersion measure corresponding to the peak 
to explore the temporal and frequency structure of the 
candidate, or, as some groups do, just taking note of 
candidates well above the noise. The alternative is the 
2D FFT method, which is faster computationally, but has a 
more complicated harmonic summing algorithm. Pulsars 
appear as a series of harmonics equally spaced in the 2D 
FFT. To be efficient, this requires at least enough random 
access memory (RAM) to accommodate the 2D FFT. For 
the Parkes 70 cm all-sky survey this would have been 
256 x 512 x 1024 x 4 = 512 megabytes (MB) which is 
too large for most typical workstations (in early 1999). 
At Parkes, larger bandwidths are possible in contrast to 
most other observatories and the number of channels is 
particularly large. At Arecibo and Jodrell Bank, it is 
becoming much easier to fit the search data into RAM and 
process the search data very quickly. In a recent survey, 
the Princeton group used the 2D FFT method and reported 
an increase in processing speed of a factor of 3; see Camilo 
et al (1996). 

Unfortunately, the major headache for pulsar as- 
tronomers is the eradication of periodic interference from 
their datasets. Almost all of the recent software develop- 
ments in search software, at least in our group, have been 
aimed at eliminating man-made signals which mimic pul- 
sars. One can do this in a number of ways, but it is cus- 
tomary to run through all of the data in a quick pass and 
find periodic signals that are present in a very large num- 
ber of pointings and could not possibly be pulsars. Very 
effective filters can then be implemented in software. 

It is wise to fold the original data at the period of the 
candidate pulsar using the best dispersion measure (DM) 
and view the pulse profile as a function of both time and 
frequency. This can eliminate a lot of interference which 
is often narrow band in character or is not a pure tone, 
sometimes referred to as having a low Q. The only way 
to confirm that a source is really a pulsar, however, is to 
re-observe it. 


Pulsar timing software 
Once found, a great deal of science can often be deduced 
from regular observations of pulsars. By cross-correlating 
the average profile with a standard template, topocentric 
arrival times can be deduced and fitted to a simple 
timing model of a pulsar. The model includes such 
basic parameters as the position in the sky, DM, period 
and period derivative, from which most of the physical 
parameters of a pulsar are derived. 

When a binary pulsar is discovered it soon becomes 
apparent that additional parameters are necessary to 
adequately describe the arrival times. The normal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Radio Pulsar Software 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


procedure is to obtain as accurate a measure of the pulsar’s 
apparent period as possible at several different epochs 
and then to perform a least-squares fit to the periods 
for a Keplerian orbit using a program such as fitorbit, 
originally written by Brinklow and Lyne at Jodrell Bank. 
The mathematical foundation of fitorbit can be found in 
Smart (1977). A similar program ‘binfit’ was developed by 
the Princeton pulsar group and is probably more portable. 
Once several orbits have been observed a first-order fit 
is usually sufficient to attempt a timing solution with a 
timing program such as TEMPO. 

TEMPO is the most widely used pulsar timing 
program, currently maintained by the Princeton group 
and the Australia Telescope National Facility and freely 
available from the WWW. Numerous authors have made 
contributions to this program over the years and it has 
recently undergone extensive revisions. The program 
runs under LINUX, as well as on SUN workstations and 
COMPAQ’s Digital Unix, and ports have been made to SGI 
and HP. The only issues to address when attempting a new 
port are usually byte swapping and the record length of 
Fortran records. 

TEMPO is capable of taking an input pulsar model 
and list of arrival times and fitting for almost any 
reasonable parameter. Taylor has introduced detailed 
support for a variety of models of relativistic gravity and 
TEMPO was used to time the celebrated ‘Hulse—Taylor’ 
(Hulse and Taylor 1975) binary pulsar to a high degree of 
accuracy which ultimately led to the awarding of the 1993 
Nobel prize for physics (see RADIOASTRONOMY). 

TEMPO was originally written in the era of punch 
cards, and for a long time it demanded input parameters 
in a very strict format in the first six lines of the input 
file. The top line was a series of 1s and spaces and it 
was necessary to learn which parameter occupied which 
column if you wanted to fit for it. Although black belts 
in TEMPO would not have it any other way, to beginners 
this proved an impediment to mastery of the program. In 
the latest revision (version 11) there is a new user-friendly 
input structure, which is free format and much easier to 
use. 

TEMPO also has the ability to produce an ephemeris 
suitable for reducing gamma-ray observations made with 
the COMPTON GAMMA-RAY OBSERVATORY (CGRO) and has a very 
useful facility to create a polynomial description of a 
pulsar’s topocentric period and phase at any given epoch. 
This is often used when observing to fold incoming pulsar 
data at the correct rate to form a nice sharp profile with no 
smearing. 


Pulsar database programs 

The new TEMPO input format is identical to the 
most widely used pulsar database program PSRINFO, 
developed by Harrison at Jodrell Bank in the early 1990s. 
The source code now resides at Swinburne University of 
Technology and has been expanded. This is one program 
which is freely available with a web interface, and it is 
possible to interrogate the catalogue online and also create 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


publication quality plots of the pulsar population using 
PSRPLOT, a program written by Hughes at Swinburne. 
PSRPLOT uses PSRINFO to retrieve information from 
the catalogue and has the ability to select populations of 
pulsars based on several different criteria. The user can 
request a gif or Postscript version of the plot and a list of 
pulsars and parameters is provided to the user. 

PSRINFO can also create an ephemeris file suitable 
for input straight into TEMPO, and it is therefore easy 
to generate polynomial coefficients for observing with a 
script. PSRINFO can also access the database for specific 
pulsars or provide lists of parameters. The source code is 
available on request from Swinburne. 

PSRCAT is another catalog program which is 
less flexible than PSRINFO but has nice formatting 
abilities when preparing catalogs for the literature and 
is maintained at Princeton and the Australia Telescope 
National Facility by Taylor and Manchester. 

The European pulsar community provided one of 
the most sensible advances in pulsar astronomy by 
standardizing their data into one format. Details of the 
format are freely available on the WWW. This is probably a 
sensible standard to follow for new groups as the software 
to read this format and manipulate it is available from 
the web site. One of the most useful resources on the 
web is the European pulsar network’s database of pulsar 
profiles. There are literally hundreds of pulsar profiles 
nicely indexed and these form a valuable resource. There 
are numerous mirror sites around the world. 


Coherent dedispersion 

Pulsar signals are dispersed by the ionized interstellar 
medium and this smears the observed profiles of radio 
pulsars. The most common method to minimize this 
dispersion is to build a multichannel filterbank or 
CORRELATOR system as the smearing is proportional to the 
filter width. However, for the fastest pulsars, this is often 
insufficient to prevent a large amount of pulse dispersion 
within a single frequency channel. 

In their 1975 paper, Hankins and Rickett describe 
in some detail a method for removing the effects of 
dispersion exactly by recording the electric field in the 
antenna at the Nyquist rate and ‘coherently dedispersing’ 
the data. This involves filtering the complex data using 
effectively the inverse filter to that of the interstellar 
medium in a deconvolution process that gives the highest 
time resolution possible. At several major observatories 
around the world coherent dedispersion software is being 
written. Even in 1999 coherent dedispersion is difficult, 
because, with any reasonable bandwidth, the amount of 
data is immense. For a 10 MHz bandwidth and two-bit 
sampling, observers are required to record 10 MB s“! of 
raw data and take this away for processing. The Caltech— 
Parkes-Swinburne Recorder (CPSR) is located at the 
Parkes observatory and it is capable of recording 20 MB s“! 
continuously using four DLT7000 tape drives and six 
9 GB disks for destriping the data for convenient post- 
processing. Similar systems are in place at Arecibo, Jodrell 
Bank and Westerbork but with more modest bandwidths. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Radio Pulsar Software 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The software used for this processing has to be able to 
unpack the two-bit numbers, filter them and fold the data 
at the topocentric pulsar period. Although this sounds 
easy, the major problem is that in a week-long run the 
amount of data recorded can be 10 MB s~! for 7 days, 
which is 6 TB. Just to read these data back on a single 
DLT7000 takes 14 days. On the Swinburne supercomputer, 
our coherent dedispersion software takes 64 times real 
time to process a 20 MHz band on a single processor. 
Hence it is imperative to ensure that the code has a high 
degree of parallelization in it or that one can run on 
multiple processors. Groups thinking seriously about 
commencing coherent dedispersion timing programs 
should think carefully about the computer power required. 
As computers become more powerful this will be less of a 
consideration. 

Coherently dedispersed data have a time resolution 
of 1/B, where B is the observing bandwidth. It therefore 
makes it possible to study the pulsar magnetosphere 
on submicrosecond timescales—provided that the DM is 
accurately known. 


Software for understanding the pulsar population 
When we consider the pulsar population as a whole, 
we can learn interesting things about their birthrate, 
kinematics and evolution. The best way to do this 
is to perform Monte Carlo simulations of the Galactic 
population of pulsars. By modeling the major pulsar 
surveys it is possible to tweak the parameters of the input 
population until it mirrors what we have discovered. 
There are at least a half a dozen different groups that have 
attempted such studies, but none of the codes are publicly 
available. 

These studies often vary in their approach and 
complexity. The most complicated generate each pulsar 
from birth and follow the trajectory through the Galaxy 
by modeling the Galactic potential. Simpler models just 
assume that, by the time a pulsar dies, the effect of 
acceleration in the Galactic potential is small and ignore 
it. The right approach depends on the issue you wish to 
address. Millisecond pulsars live for many oscillations 
in the Galactic potential whereas magnetars spin down 
very rapidly. Short-cuts invoked to save computer time 
a decade ago are becoming less important as computers 
grow in processing power. 

A modern approach might be to model the Galactic 
potential and generate pulsars every N years with some 
initial Galactocentric and Z distribution with a variable 
velocity distribution. By defining an initial period and 
magnetic field distribution it is easy to determine the 
period and magnetic field distribution of the population 
at any instant in time. By assigning a luminosity law 
as a function of period and magnetic field strength, it 
becomes possible to determine the radio flux density of 
a given pulsar at the position of the Sun. A model of 
the distribution of free electrons and scattering can then 
determine the dispersion measure and scattering of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pulsar and its detectability in various surveys can then be 
determined by comparison with a formula such as 


min = 


10(Trec + Tsky) P ae 
G(BNot)1/ € zs =) 

where Smin is the minimum detectable flux density, Trec 
and T;,, are the temperatures in kelvin of the receiver and 
sky respectively, G is the antenna gain in K Jy, B the 
bandwidth in hertz, N, is the number of polarizations of 
light (maximum 2), tf the integration time, P the period 
of the pulsar and w the observed width of the pulsar, 
a combination of the intrinsic width, scattering, DM 
smearing and the sampling time of the data. If the width 
is larger than one pulse period the pulsar is invisible in a 
standard pulsar search. 

Although such codes are popular, in my opinion they 
often tell us more about what we do not know or cannot 
really say about the pulsar population than what we do 
know about it. Any estimate of the pulsar birthrate should 
not be trusted to better than a factor of 2. Anyone who has 
taken part in a pulsar survey will tell you that (especially 
in recent times) the effects of interference on a survey’s 
sensitivity are impossible to accurately estimate. 


Bibliography 
A database of pulsar profiles often with full polarization 
information and information on the European Pulsar 


Network’s (EPN’s) data format and software can be found 
at 


http://www.mpifr-bonn.mpg.de/div/pulsar/ 
epn/epn.html 


The source code and help on TEMPO can be found at 
http://pulsar.princeton.edu/tempo 
and also at 


http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psr/ 
timing /tempo 


The pulsar catalog and plotting program can be found at 
http: //www.swin.edu.au/astronomy 

A paper which outlines how to search for pulsars is 
Manchester R N et al 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 279 1235 
Two papers describing how to do population synthesis are 


Lorimer D R, Bailes M, Harrison P A and Dewey R J 1993 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 263 403 
Narayan R 1987 Astrophys. J. 319 162 


TEMPO is described in 
Weisberg J and Taylor J H 1989 Astrophys. J. 345 434 


Coherent dedispersion is described in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Radio Pulsar Software ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hankins T H and Rickett B J 1975 Methods Comput. Phys. 
1455 


Other references: 


Camilo F, Nice D J, Shrauner J A and Taylor J H 1996 
Astropys. J. 469 819-27 

Hulse R A and Taylor J H 1975 Astropys. J. 195 L51 

Smart W M 1977 Textbook on Spherical Astronomy 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Matthew Bailes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Software: Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Software: Stellar Photometry 


The term ‘photometry’ refers to the accurate determination 
of the apparent brightness of an astronomical object. 
Differences in brightness as measured through several 
colored-glass or interference FILTERS (for example) permit 
the definition of color indices, from which the temperature, 
chemical composition or other properties of the object 
can be approximately inferred. Changes in the apparent 
brightness of certain types of astronomical object over 
time also allow interesting conclusions to be drawn about 
their intrinsic nature. Photometry plays a key role in the 
measurement of the ages of star clusters and the distances 
of external galaxies. 

Until roughly 1980, nearly all astronomical photom- 
etry was done by means of analog measurements of 
photographic plates (for instance, with an optomechani- 
cal device called an ‘iris photometer’), or by analog or dig- 
ital (photon-counting) techniques with photomultipliers. 
These photometers produced brightness readings which 
were typically displayed on dials, plotted on strip charts 
or printed on strips of paper, and it was often quite prac- 
tical to analyse these raw data with pencil, paper and a 
slide rule or table of logarithms. However, during the late 
1970s electronic area detectors for astronomy became more 
advanced: first, for a brief period, television-type cam- 
eras were employed, but these were soon supplanted by 
CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs), which remain overwhelm- 
ingly the detector of choice to the present day. CAMERAS 
employing these devices can produce vast quantities of 
data directly in electronic form, and the only realistic way 
to convert these bit strings into human knowledge is by 
computerized data analysis. 

There are two properties of the older types of 
photometric measurement that distinguish them from 
modern CCD photometry: previously, (1) one observation 
produced a measurement consisting of one number 
and (2) the astronomer attempted, at the time of the 
observation, to measure only the particular object of 
interest, isolating its light from that of other, nearby 
astronomical objects. Two or more astronomical objects 
which lie too close together on the sky cannot be effectively 
measured either with a photoelectric photometer, owing 
to the large measuring aperture needed (see below), or 
on a photographic plate, owing to its nonlinear response 
to the incoming light. In a modern area detector, which 
automatically produces a linear brightness map of a given 
patch of sky, the image of any given astronomical object 
will usually be spread over several picture elements 
(‘pixels’) in the data array, and its brightness will therefore 
be divided among several simultaneous but separate 
measurements. Furthermore, the linearity of the detector 
combined with the fact that each object’s image is divided 
among several pixels allows the ex post facto disentangling 
of the individual brightnesses of numerous different 
astronomical objects whose images were recorded in the 
original observation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There is also one extremely important fact that 
distinguishes modern photometry of stars, in particular, 
from photometry of other astronomical objects such as 
galaxies and gaseous nebulae: the apparent angular 
sizes of all stars as viewed from the Earth (except, of 
course, the Sun) are very much smaller than the angular 
resolution permitted by the terrestrial atmosphere and the 
optical elements of the telescope. Because in any given 
observation the atmosphere and telescope affect all stars 
comparably, the perceived images of all stars in a data 
frame have almost exactly the same shape. (In fact, some 
camera systems and some techniques—such as observing 
with ADAPTIVE OPTics—can produce stellar images whose 
shape does vary somewhat with position within the frame. 
Except in the worst cases these variations are small and 
easily accounted for.) As will be seen below, this property 
is routinely exploited by modern software to extract stellar 
photometry from digital images. 

The entire process of STELLAR PHOTOMETRY can be broken 
down into three stages which, for want of better terms, can 
be identified as follows. 


1. Preprocessing. The raw digital frames from the 
telescope are rectified onto a linear intensity scale by 
operations such as bias subtraction and flat fielding. 

2 Processing. Each rectified digital frame is searched 
for the images of individual stars, whose positions 
and relative brightnesses on an instrumental scale are 
then determined with the highest possible precision. 

3.  Postprocessing. The results of stage 2 from numerous 
different frames are combined and calibrated to 
fundamental magnitude scales by comparison with 
similar observations of other stars having known 
brightnesses. Measurements made with different 
filters can then be compared to form observational 
colors and/or observations made at different times 
can be assembled into light curves for variable stars. 


The preprocessing stage will not be discussed here. 
Stage 2 is by far the subtlest part of the whole process, and 
a great deal of creativity has gone into the development of 
specialized software for extracting the desired quatities; 
a few specific software packages for this purpose have 
become quite widely used (see SOFTWARE IN ASTRONOMY). 
The postprocessing that occurs in step 3 is conceptually 
the same as the calibration process for photoelectric 
photometry. For the most part, general statistical modules 
or home-grown software have been used for this purpose, 
so postprocessing will not be discussed in detail here. 

The simplest way to extract a brightness measurement 
for a star which is well isolated from other astronomical 
objects in its digital data frame simulates the type of 
measurement that is made with photomultipliers. This 
older type of photometer contains within it a flat piece 
of metal with a small hole, or ‘aperture’, drilled through 
it, whose diameter generally corresponds to 10 arcsec or 
more projected onto the sky. The telescope is used to 
focus an image of a star onto this aperture, which permits 
the light of the star and some light from the foreground 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


night-time sky to pass through and be measured by the 
photomultiplier. With the same aperture, a separate 
measurement is made for an empty patch of sky with no 
star visible in it, permitting the brightness of the night- 
time sky alone to be determined. When subtracted from 
the other measurement, this yields an estimate of the 
brightness of the star alone. An analogous process may 
be carried out with stellar images in a digital data frame: 
one simply defines a synthetic ‘aperture’ consisting of all 
the pixels lying within a certain distance from the center 
of the star image in question, and sums the brightnesses 
measured in all of those pixels. One also determines the 
average brightness of the night-time sky from the values 
measured in nearby pixels which do not lie within the 
images of perceptible stars in the frame. The average 
sky brightness per pixel is scaled up to the area of the 
synthetic star aperture and is subtracted from the stellar 
measurement. This difference represents the brightness 
measurement for the star alone. 

The size of the best digital ‘aperture’ to use in 
synthetic-aperture photometry depends on several factors. 
To provide a reliable measurement, the aperture must be 
large enough that a constant fraction of the light of any 
given star will be measured, regardless of where the star 
falls with respect to the pixel grid of the detector. On the 
other hand, a large aperture produces a measurement with 
more observational uncertainty, resulting from the readout 
noise of the detector, random noise in the contaminating 
light of the night-time sky, the increased possibility of 
including other astronomical objects in the ‘aperture’ 
and the greater likelihood of encountering a detector 
blemish or cosmic-ray event in the data. For comparing 
brightnesses of different stars measured in the same data 
frame, a fairly small aperture (perhaps of order 1 arcsec 
in diameter) can usually be used, since to the extent that 
all stellar profiles have the same shape, a fairly small 
aperture can include a constant fraction of the profile, 
thus allowing precise relative brightness determinations. 
When it is necessary to compare brightnesses among 
different frames, however, it is usually necessary to 
employ a comparatively large aperture (at least several 
arcseconds in diameter), because differences in SEEING and 
telescope guiding will cause star images in different frames 
to have different profile shapes: one must then use a 
synthetic aperture that is large enough to contain all of 
the profile variations produced by these causes. In other 
words, measurements through small apertures have high 
precision (i.e. the random measuring noise is low) but poor 
accuracy (i.e. there may be large systematic differences 
from one data frame to the next due to differences in 
the stellar profile), whereas large-aperture measurements 
have low precision but high accuracy (they are noisy, but 
they mean the same thing from one frame to another). 

In cases where numerous stars are measured in a 
given data frame, it is possible to combine measurements 
through both small and large apertures to yield results 
with the desirable properties of both. One can measure 
all the stars in the frame through a small aperture of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


fixed size, and one can then remeasure selected bright, 
well-isolated stars through a larger aperture, also of 
fixed size. By comparing these two results for the stars 
that were measured twice, one can derive an accurate 
mean value for the ratio of brightnesses as measured 
through the two apertures for that frame. A constant 
brightness ratio corresponds to a constant magnitude 
difference. This difference can then be added to the small- 
aperture magnitude measurements for faint and crowded 
stars, to yield the magnitude that would have been measured 
for them through the larger aperture, had it been practical 
to do so. These magnitudes have nearly as high a 
precision as the small-aperture measurements (because 
the correction, if determined from the average of many 
stars, can have comparatively little uncertainty) and the 
accuracy of the large-aperture measurements. The actual 
or inferred large-aperture magnitudes for stars in any one 
frame can then be compared with similarly derived large- 
aperture magnitudes for stars measured in other frames, 
even though the image profiles may have been rather 
different. 

In general, while measurements through small aper- 
tures contain the least possible noise, the comparatively 
large corrections required to calculate the corresponding 
large-aperture magnitudes still do have some uncertainty. 
If a star is very faint, it is best measured through a very 
small aperture because in such a case the uncertainty as- 
sociated with the aperture measurement is more critical 
than the uncertainty of the correction to the larger aper- 
ture (see also DETECTION OF FAINT OBJECTS). Conversely, if the 
star is bright it is better measured through a large aperture 
because otherwise the uncertainty of the correction would 
dominate over the uncertainty of the aperture magnitude. 
A more elaborate scheme of measurement through aper- 
tures of many different sizes can be undertaken, which 
would allow one to choose for each star the ‘best’ aperture 
which offers the optimum combination of uncertainty in 
the aperture magnitude and uncertainty in the correction. 
The way in which the instrumental magnitudes measured 
in a given data frame vary with the radius of the synthetic 
aperture used is called that frame’s ‘growth curve’ (not to 
be confused with the spectroscopic ‘curve of growth’). 

Even more precise measurements can be made at the 
expense of much more computational work by using the 
technique of ‘profile-fitting’ photometry. In this method, 
one exploits the fact that any given star image is spread 
over several pixels, and the internal shape of the image, 
broadened by the atmospheric seeing and the telescope 
optics, can be mapped out. To exploit this approach, one 
must generate a numerical model of the actual profile 
shape for star images in each data frame. This model 
profile is determined from the brightest, best-isolated star 
images in the frame and must be encoded in such a 
way that the computer can then predict the actual local 
brightness that should be measured at any point within 
the profile of a given star image. This profile, or ‘point- 
spread function’ (PSF) as it is called (since it describes 
the way the image of a point source—a star—is spread 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Software: Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


out by the atmosphere and optics) can be encoded as a 
simple mathematical formula with parameters describing 
the variation of the local brightness in the profile as a 
function of position relative to the center of the star or 
as a table of actual numerical values extracted from the 
original data frame, from which specific brightness values 
are subsequently estimated by interpolation techniques. 

An analytic model profile has the advantage of 
simplicity and computational speed but is limited in 
its ability to represent complex profiles produced by 
aberrated optics or guiding errors. A PSF encoded as 
an empirical look-up table can represent any arbitrary 
profile shape but is subject to the difficulty of achieving 
accurate interpolations for stars that fall differently on the 
underlying pixel grid. Interpolation errors are especially 
critical when the diameter of a stellar image is less than a 
few pixels. Again, there are advantages to be achieved 
by combining the two types of encoding. An analytic 
function fitted by least-squares techniques to the profiles 
of several bright, isolated stars in a data frame is generally 
found to represent the actual form of those profiles with 
95-98% fidelity. The numerical differences between the 
actual observed profiles and the fitted analytic models can 
then be computed and stored as a look-up table. In using 
this hybrid PSF to predict the brightness value for a pixel 
located somewhere in the profile of an arbitrary target 
star, first a value corresponding to that pixel’s location is 
calculated from the analytic approximation to the PSF, and 
then a correction to the actual empirical profile is estimated 
from the look-up table. The analytic approximation to the 
PSF is simply a mathematical formula, so its contribution 
to the total profile can be interpolated with arbitrary 
precision, while the amplitudes of the profile corrections 
stored in the look-up table represent only of order 2-5% of 
the total amplitude of the PSF, so that errors in the tabular 
interpolations are proportionately reduced. 

Once the PSF for a given data frame has been defined 
in suitable computer-accessible form, it can be fitted to the 
images of all detected stars in that frame using nonlinear 
fitting techniques. For each star, four fundamental 
parameters must be determined: the position, in x and 
y, of the centroid of the star within the frame, the local 
diffuse sky brightness in the frame (which may vary 
from position to position because of underlying light from 
other astronomical objects, such as unresolved stars or 
nebulosity) and the amplitude of that star’s profile above 
the local diffuse sky brightness. This amplitude is linearly 
related to the relative brightness of the star, and brightness 
ratios between stars are readily converted to magnitude 
differences. Separate positions and magnitudes can be 
estimated even for stars that are so close together that 
their images are somewhat blended together in the data 
frame, by suitable simultaneous fits of overlapping model 
profiles. 

The scaling of the model PSF to match the amplitudes 
of stellar profiles provides a very precise measure of the 
relative brightnesses among stars in any given data frame. 
However, since each data frame has its own PSF that may 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be quite different in form from those found in other frames, 
profile-fitting photometry does not necessarily guarantee 
accurate comparisons from one exposure to another. As 
a safeguard against the possibility of systematic errors 
in frame-to-frame comparisons, it is common to compare 
the relative, profile-fitting magnitudes for a number of 
comparatively bright, isolated stars in each frame with 
large-aperture magnitudes for the same stars which have 
been either measured directly or inferred from smaller- 
aperture magnitudes with growth-curve corrections. The 
average difference between aperture magnitudes and 
profile-fitting magnitudes measured for these stars can be 
added to the profile-fitting magnitudes for all stars in the 
frame, resulting in a magnitude scale that is both highly 
precise and fundamentally accurate. 


Bibliography 

The rationale behind and statistical properties of synthetic- 
aperture photometry and magnitude growth curves are 
discussed extensively in these two papers: 


Howell S B 1989 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 101 616 
Stetson P B 1990 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 102 932 


Two of the currently most popular software packages for 
performing profile-fitting photometry were first described 
in detail in the following papers: 


Mateo M and Schechter P 1989 1st ESO Data Analysis 
Workshop (Garching) ed P Grosbel 
Stetson P B 1987 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 99 191 


PB Stetson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory) 


The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) is a 
project of international cooperation between ESA (the 
EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY) and NASA to study the Sun, from 
its deep core to the outer corona, and the solar wind. 
SOHO was launched on 2 December 1995, on top of an 
Atlas/Centaur combination, from Cape Canaveral Air- 
Force Base in Florida. It reached its operating orbit around 
the L1 Sun-Earth Lagrangian point in mid-February 1996. 
For more than two years this unique vantage position has 
allowed nearly uninterrupted observations of the Sun, 24 
hours a day, 365 days a year. 

The main scientific objectives of the SOHO mission 
are 


@ to study the sonar INTERIOR, using the techniques of 
HELIOSEISMOLOGY, 


@ to study the heating mechanisms of the solar CORONA 
through data obtained by imaging telescopes and 
spectrometers, and 


@ to investigate the soLaR winD and its acceleration 
processes, again by remote sensing, and by in situ 
particle measurements. 


To achieve these objectives SOHO carries onboard a 
complement of 12 state-of-the-art instruments, developed 
and furnished by 12 international Principal Investigator 
(PI) consortia involving 39 institutes from 15 countries. 
Nine of these consortia are led by European PIs, and the 
three others by US PIs. 

During the nominal mission, from 1 May 1996 to 
30 April 1998, the SOHO spacecraft operated extremely 
well, exceeding its specifications in many instances, while 
the SOHO instruments collected a large number of data, 
allowing SOHO scientists to make substantial progress 
in all three science objectives. Scientific highlights from 
the nominal mission will be presented below. Because 
of SOHO’s scientific success, ESA and NASA have both 
committed themselves to a mission extension of several 
years. On 24 June 1998, during routine maintenance 
operations, ground controllers lost contact with the 
spacecraft. Efforts to re-establish nominal communication 
succeeded seven anguish-filled weeks later, and a team 
of engineers from ESA and Matra-Marconi, the spacecraft 
contractor, succeeded in returning the spacecraft to full 
nominal status. All experiments onboard have been 
restored to the same operational status as before the 
accident, despite the extremes in heat and cold endured. In 
the aftermath of these events the third and last gyroscope 
onboard the spacecraft failed, but after some initial 
difficulties ground controllers succeeded in operating 
SOHO in a gyro-less mode, with the function of the gyros 
taken over by the reaction wheels. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The SOHO orbit around the first Lagrangian point, 1.6 
million km sunward from the Earth. 


Development and launch 

SOHO was first proposed in November 1982, in response 
to a call for mission proposals by ESA, as a high-resolution 
spectroscopic investigation of the upper solar atmosphere. 
In 1983 helioseismology was included as one of the 
science objectives. After a joint study by European and 
US scientists, the Science Program Committee of ESA 
approved SOHO as part of the Solar Terrestrial Science 
Program (STSP), to be implemented in collaboration with 
NASA. 

ESA and NASA agreed that ESA would take the 
responsibility for developing the spacecraft, and NASA 
for the SOHO launch and operations. The 12 SOHO 
experiments were selected in 1988 after a combined 
ESA-NASA announcement of opportunity. The SOHO 
spacecraft was build by a consortium of European 
industries, led by Matra-Marconi. 

SOHO is large, 4.3 x 2.7 x 3.7 m’, and weighs 
1861 kg, with 655 kg for the payload and 250 kg of 
propellants. The maximum power supply from the solar 
cells is 1400 W, with a maximum payload consumption of 
625 W. SOHO’s reaction wheels are designed to provide 
short-term pointing stability better than 1 arcsec over 
15 min, while the roll angle around the Sun is stabilized 
with the use of a star sensor unit to under 1.5 arcmin over 
15 min. Two Gbits of solid state memory, backed up by a 
one Gbit tape recorder, can store the continuous scientific 
data rate of 40 kbit s~, plus 1.3 kbit s~!, for more than 13 h. 
During continuous contact with the stations of NASA’s 
Deep Space Network (DSN), another 160 kbit s~! of MDI 
high-rate data are downlinked. 

SOHO was launched on top of a Centaur-Atlas 
combination on 2 December 1995 at 8:08 UT. After one orbit 
around the Earth the Centaur engine was reignited to set 
SOHO on course towards the first Lagrangian point, about 
1 million miles sunward from the Earth. The launch was 
so accurate, and the orbital maneuvers so efficient, that 
SOHO reached its halo orbit six weeks ahead of schedule, 
on 14 February 1996, with sufficient fuel left to maintain 
the (unstable) halo orbit for more than a decade, at least 
twice the time foreseen prior to launch. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The first four months of SOHO operations were 
devoted to commissioning and performance verification 
of the spacecraft and the scientific instruments. By the 
end of this period the spacecraft was shown to be in 
excellent shape, with a pointing accuracy of 3 arcmin, 
better by a factor of 2 than the specification, and a 
short-term (15 min) stability of 0.3 arcsec, exceeding the 
specification by a factor of 3. With some minor exceptions, 
the experiments were all found to operate nominally or 
better than anticipated. 


Experiments and science investigations 

An overview of the twelve science experiments onboard 
SOHO is presented in table 1. The experiments are 
grouped according to their science objectives. The three 
interior and surface experiments (GOLF, VIRGO and MDI) 
use the techniques of helioseismology to measure the 
properties of the solar interior. GOLF measures the 
net velocity fluctuations of the entire Sun, VIRGO the 
intensity variations of the Sun in a dozen zones, and MDI 
makes maps of the entire surface in velocity, intensity 
and magnetic field on a 1024 x 1024 CCD. The GOLF 
and VIRGO instruments are designed to achieve high 
absolute precision in order to detect the Sun’s internal 
gravity waves (g-modes). MDI is geared towards higher 
order acoustic modes (p-modes), in order to probe the 
detailed structure of the SOLAR INTERIOR CONVECTION ZONE. 
MDI surface maps also allow us to follow the generation 
and evolution of magnetic fields on a GRANULATION to global 
scale, with a spatial and temporal resolution sufficient to 
follow the life-cycle of individual magnetic structures. The 
continuity of SOHO observations is essential for achieving 
SOHO’s helioseismology objectives. To obtain a signal- 
to-noise ratio necessary to detect the low-amplitude g- 
modes, and to measure the frequency of the p-modes with 
the desired accuracy of a few tens of nanohertz, years of 
virtually uninterrupted data are required. 

SOHO’s remote sensing experiments study the outer 
atmosphere and solar wind. Three of those, SUMER, 
CDS and EIT, concentrate on the transition region and 
corona at moderate to high spatial and spectral resolution. 
The others, UVCS, LASCO and SWAN, avoid the disk 
to provide data on the outer corona, including the soLAR 
WIND ACCELERATION region. The CELIAS solar extreme- 
ultraviolet monitor (SEM) is a very stable photodiode 
spectrometer that measures the full disk solar flux in He II 
at 304 A, as well as the absolute integral flux between 170 
and 700 A. 

SUMER is a UV telescope with a normal incidence 
spectrometer with high spatial and temporal resolution 
(~10 s). It measures line profiles and intensities of UV lines 
in the range from 500 to 1600 A, with a resolution of 18 800 
to 40000. Thus SUMER can measure velocities down to 
1 km s“!. CDS operates at shorter wavelengths (150 to 
800 A), and consists of a Walter II telescope equipped 
with both a normal and a grazing incidence spectrometer. 
It determines line intensities in selected EUV lines to 
study the temperature and density of coronal structures. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


EIT obtains full-Sun high-resolution images, limited only 
by the 2.6 arcsec pixel size, in four emission lines, and 
corresponding to temperatures of 80000, 1.3, 1.6 and 2.0 
x10° K. EIT’s observations provide the morphological 
context for the spectrographic data from CDS and SUMER. 

LASCO is a triple coronagraph with nested concen- 
tric, and increasing annular fields of view. It also has 
a Fabry-Pérot interferometer for spectroscopic measure- 
ments with a spectral resolution of about 700 mA, in Fe XIV 
and X, Ca XV, Na D2 and Ha. UVCS is an occulted tele- 
scope equipped with high-resolution spectrometers for 
spectroscopic observations of the solar corona out to 10 
solar radii to determine the source regions, the accelera- 
tion and the heating of the solar wind. One UVCS grating 
is optimized for line profile measurements of Lya, another 
for line measurements in the range from 944 to 1070 A. 
SWAN, finally, maps the intensity of interplanetary Lya, 
with two identical periscope systems, each of which ob- 
serves one hemisphere at a resolution of 1 arcmin. Its goal 
is to determine the latitude distribution of the solar wind 
flux, and its variation. In addition it can measure the shape 
of the Lya line at a resolution of about 3x 10°. 

Of the three in situ particle experiments onboard 
SOHO, CELIAS studies the solar wind at L1, pristine 
in comparison with the data affected by the Earth’s 
foreshock, which are collected by near-Earth spacecraft. 
The CELIAS proton monitor measures ions in the range 0.3 
to 6 keV/e, and generates values of the solar wind proton 
bulk speed, density and north/south flow direction with 
a 30s temporal resolution. The CELIAS mass determining 
time-of-flight (MTOF) sensor is a high-resolution mass 
spectrometer, which measures the solar wind’s elemental 
and isotopic composition. CELIAS/CTOF, the charge 
determining time-of-flight sensor has obtained high time 
resolution charge state spectra for solar wind iron ions, 
but is no longer fully operational. Finally, CELIAS’ 
suprathermal time-of-flight sensor (STOF) measures ionic 
charge states of particles with suprathermal energies from 
just above the solar wind up to low-energy solar flare 
particles (20-4000 keV amu_!; see SOLARFLARE OBSERVATIONS), 
thus bridging the gap between the solar wind instruments 
and the high-energy particle instruments ERNE and 
COSTEP. 

ERNE and COSTEP are designed to detect Earthward 
traveling energetic particles ejected from the Sun in the 
course of flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs; see 
SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS). Electrons are 
recorded at energies from 44 keV to 50 MeV, and protons 
from 44 keV to over 100 MeV. Alpha particles are observed 
from a few MeV/nucleon to over 100 MeV/nucleon. 
Heavier elements, up to iron, can be identified up to 
500 MeV /nucleon. 


Operations and data archive 

In nominal science operations each SOHO experiment car- 
ries out an individual synoptic or baseline science pro- 
gram, complemented for the remote sensing experiments 
and MDI by a coordinated mode, involving frequent joint 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. An overview of the twelve science experiments on SOHO. 


Experiment Investigation Technique Bit rate 
(kb s~!) 

Helioseismology 

GOLF Global Sun velocity and Na vapor resonant scattering 0.160 

(Global Oscillations magnetic field oscillations, cell, Doppler shift and 

at Low Frequency) harmonic degree / = 0-4 circular polarization 

VIRGO Low degree (/ = 0-7) Global Sun and low-resolution 0.1 

(Variability of Solar Irradiance irradiance oscillations and (12 pixels) photometers, 

and Gravity Oscillations) solar constant active cavity radiometers 

SOI/MDI Velocity oscillations with Doppler shift with Fourier 5 and 

(Solar Oscillations Investigation / harmonic degree up to 4500 tachometer, 4 and 1.5” 160 

Michelson Doppler Imager) resolution 

Solar atmosphere remote sensing 

SUMER Plasma flow characteristics Normal incidence spectrometer, 10.7 

(Solar Ultraviolet Measurements (temperature, density, velocity) 50-160 nm, spectral resolution or 21 

of Emitted Radiation) chromosphere through corona 20 000-40 000, angular res. 1.2-1.5” 

CDS Temperatures and density: Normal and grazing incidence 11.5 

(Coronal Diagnostic transition region and corona spectrometers, 17-80 nm, spectr. or 23 

Spectrometer) res. 1000-10 000, angular res. 2” 

EIT Evolution of chromospheric Full disk images (42’ x 42’ with 2.0 

(Extreme-Ultraviolet and coronal structures 1024 x 1024 pixels) in He L, or 6.6 

Imaging Telescope) Fe IX, Fe XII and Fe XV or 27 

UVCS Electron and ion temperature Profiles and/or intensity of 5 

(Ultraviolet Coronagraph densities, velocities in corona spectral EUV lines 

Spectrometer) (1.3-10Ro) (Lya, O VI, etc) 

LASCO Coronal evolution, mass, One internal and two externally 5.9 

(Large Angle and Spectro- momentum, and energy occulted coronagraphs, or 9.2 

metric Coronagraph) transport (1.1-30 Ro) Spectrometer for 1.1-3Ro or 27 

SWAN Solar wind mass flux Scanning telescopes with 0.2 

(Solar Wind Anisotropies anisotropies and temporal hydrogen absorption cell 

Study) variations for Lya light 

Solar wind ‘in situ’ 

CELIAS Energy distribution and Electrostatic deflection, 15 

(Charge, Element, and mass, charge and charge time-of-flight measurements, 

Isotope Analysis System) state of ions 0.1-1000 keV/e and solid state detectors 

COSTEP Energy spectrum of protons, Solid state detectors and 0.3 

(Comprehensive Suprathermal a-particles, and electrons, electrostatic analysers 

and Energetic Particle Analyser) composition of ions 

ERNE Energy distribution and Solid state, and plastic and 0.71 


(Energetic and Relativistic 
Nuclei and Electron experiment) 


composition of ions 
(p, Ni), 1.4-540 MeV/n, 
and electrons 1-25 MeV 


crystal scintillator detectors 


operations programs (JOPs), occasional targets of oppor- 
tunity, and regular campaigns with other spacecraft and 
ground-based observatories (GBOs). 

The SOHO experiments were designed to comple- 
ment each other, and through intense and innovative use of 
the Internet, SOHO has lifted the standard, frequency and 
documentation of coordinated solar observations to anew 
level. Images, observing sequences and target coordinates 
are exchanged instantaneously, while the data are auto- 
matically linked through the SOHO catalogs. Hundreds 
of campaigns have been carried out during the nominal 
mission. These vary from large-scale campaigns of sev- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


eral hours daily for one or two weeks, involving GBOs all 
over the world as well as other spacecraft (YOHKOH, TRACE, 
ULYSSES), to instrument intercalibrations of an hour or two, 
occasionally supported by rocket underflights. 

The center of SOHO operations is the Experiment Op- 
erations Facility (EOF) at NASA’s GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CEN- 
TER, where experiment commanding, real-time coordina- 
tion and long-term planning are executed. Representa- 
tives of the six interactive experiments (SUMER, CDS, EIT, 
MDI, UVCS and LASCO) are permanently present at the 
EOF to operate the mission in collaboration with the NASA 
Flight Operations Team and the ESA/NASA Project Sci- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


entist Team. The science observing programs are planned 
through a regular, nested series of meetings, that lead to a 
schedule that is both predictable enough to prevent over- 
burdening operations scientists, and flexible enough to al- 
low rapid reaction to observing opportunities. 

SOHO is unique among solar physics missions in that 
data are received ‘live’, and the experiments commanded 
in near real time directly from the EOF for about 8 ha day. 
Scientists, from behind their workstations, can retarget 
and reprogram their experiments in a matter of minutes 
in response to events on the Sun. 

Four SOHO data archives are being constructed, 
one in the US, at Goddard Space Flight Center, and 
three in Europe, at Medoc in Orsay, RUTHERFORD-APPLETON 
LABORATORY in the UK, and in Torino. These archives 
contain all experimental data, except for the MDI 
helioseismology data, which are stored in a separate 
facility at Stanford. To make the data easily accessible 
through the Internet for the widest possible group 
of scientific users, and to facilitate multi-experiment 
data analysis, the SOHO archive has a uniform data 
format (FITS), uniform access to all experimental data, 
a campaign catalog that cross-links experimental data of 
coordinated observations, a collection of synoptic data 
from observatories world wide, and a complete set of 
analysis software. The main SOHO catalog, an event 
catalog and the experiment catalogs round out the archive. 


Science highlights 

Exploitation of the enormous number of data from the 
SOHO nominal mission is only in its initial phase, but 
already a large number of exciting new results have been 
announced. A brief synopsis is given below. 


Solar surface and interior 

MDI medium angular degree data have provided the most 
precise measurements of the sound speed profile and the 
differential rotation profile within the Sun, thus setting 
new boundaries for the solar model 

Application of a new technique, called time— 
distance helioseismology, to high-resolution MDI data has 
provided the first images of the convection zone of a star; 
maps of vertical and horizontal flow velocities, as well as 
sound speed variations in the convection zone, just below 
the visible surface. 

MDI data have revealed a jet-like flow near the poles, 
which is totally inside the Sun and cannot be seen at the 
surface. Circling the Sun at about 75 deg latitude, this 
flow consists of a flattened oval region about 30000 km 
across where material moves about 10% faster than its 
surroundings. 

MDI data have also revealed at least six differentially 
rotating belts, three in each hemisphere. These belts are 
more than 65 000 km across and they move about 15 km ht 
faster than their surroundings. 

The use of the new time-distance helioseismology 
technique in analysing MDI data has yielded that the entire 
outer layer of the Sun, to a depth of at least 25000 km, is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


slowly but steadily flowing from the equator to the poles 
at about 80 km h~', fast enough to transport an object from 
the equator to the pole in just over a year. 

High-precision MDI measurements of the Sun’s shape 
and brightness obtained during two special 360° roll 
maneuvers of SOHO have produced the most precise 
determination of solar oblateness ever. There is no excess 
oblateness. These measurements unambiguously rule out 
the possibility of a rapidly rotating core and any significant 
solar cycle variation in the oblateness. 

Results from the radiometers and photometers of 
VIRGO confirm that active regions modulate total and 
spectral irradiance on time scales of days to weeks. 


Solar corona and solar wind 

The UVCS coronagraph has revealed dramatic differences 
in the line widths of the strong hydrogen Ly line and 
even more so in the resonance lines of O VI in coronal 
streamers and CORONAL HOLES at heliocentric heights from 
1.25 out to 3.5 solar radii. Preferential acceleration of high 
mass ions affords one possible explanation for generating 
the observed velocities in the O VI ions. 

Combined Doppler-dimming measurements of UVCS, 
LASCO white-light images of the solar corona, and radio 
scintillation measurements by the Galileo spacecraft have 
yielded new insight into the origins of the slow and fast 
solar wind. While the prevailing view is that the fast solar 
wind originates only in polar coronal holes and their equa- 
torial extensions, the new measurements are interpreted 
as evidence that the slow solar wind is limited to the axes 
(or ‘stalks’) of coronal streamers while the fast solar wind 
dominates the corona. 

A UVCS spectroscopic study of the composition in 
coronal streamers has revealed an ionization temperature 
of 1.6 x 10° K. The elemental abundances in the leg of 
the streamers and in ACTIVE REGION streamers are similar 
to those observed in the slow solar wind, indicating that 
the slow solar wind originates at the legs of the coronal 
streamers. 

The CDS and SUMER spectrometers have observed 
extensive evidence of explosive events in transition- 
region lines. These could be the signature of MAGNETIC 
RECONNECTION events in nearby small magnetic dipoles, 
observed in MDI magnetograms. These events seem to 
account for a substantial part of the energy that is needed 
to heat the corona. 

Coordinated measurements by SUMER and CDS 
have provided new observations of the temperature 
structure of coronal holes. The temperature measured at 
the base has a higher value than anticipated, of the same 
order as that of closed field regions (about 10° K), but it 
decreases much more rapidly with height than had been 
expected, falling to about 0.3 x 10° K at 1.3 solar radii. This 
is not consistent with a thermally driven fast solar wind. 

Time-lapse sequences of white-light images from the 
LASCO coronagraph, obtained during sunspot minimum 
conditions in 1996, have been used to measure, for the 
first time, the acceleration of the solar wind. The outflow 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of about 150 features in the streamer belt has been 
tracked between 3 and 30 solar radii. The speed versus 
radial distance profiles cluster around a parabolic path 
characterized by a constant acceleration of about 4 m? 
throughout the field of view. That profile is consistent 
with an isothermal solar wind expansion at a temperature 
of +1.1 x 10° K and a sonic point around 5 solar radii. 

EIT and LASCO have recorded the very onset and 
evolution of several Earth-directed CMEs, a few of which 
actually hit the Earth’s magnetosphere (See MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH). This type of observation holds considerable 
promise for the further development of space weather 
forecasting methods. The LASCO instrument is collecting 
an extensive database for establishing firm statistics on 
CMEs and their geomagnetic effects. 

The LASCO coronagraphs have discovered more than 
50 sungrazing comets, several of which were observed 
crashing into the Sun (See COMETS: KREUTZ SUNGRAZING). 

The in situ particle detectors (ERNE and COSTEP) 
regularly detect high-energy protons, electrons and alpha- 
particles, in the aftermath of prominence eruptions and 
CMEs, while CELIAS, SOHO’s solar wind analyser, has 
doubled the number of elements and isotopes previously 
recorded in the solar wind. During a Venus disk passage 
CELIAS also observed, for the first time from such a 
large distance, pick-up ions from the Venusian ionosphere, 
finding a much smaller diffusion cone than anticipated. 

SWAN, looking away from the Sun, has recorded full- 
sky Lya maps at a resolution and signal-to-noise ratio of at 
least a factor 10 better than previous observations. From 
these maps, the latitude distribution of the solar wind is 
determined. 


Bibliography 

SOHO Web Site with the latest information on mission 
status and observing programs, and a picture and movie 
gallery: http: //sohowww.nascom.nasa.gov/index.html 


Fleck B and Svestka Z (ed) 1997 The first results from 
SOHO (reprinted from Solar Phys. 170(1), 175(2)) 
Fleck B, Domingo V, and Poland A (ed) 1995 The SOHO 
Mission (reprinted from Solar Phys. 162(1,2)) 

Lang K R 1997 SOHO reveals the secrets of the Sun Sci. 
Am. March 40 

Wilson A (ed) 1997 The corona and solar wind near 
minimum activity ESA Report SP-404 


Petrus C Martens 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Abundances 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Abundances 


What is the Sun made of? This fundamental question 
only received an answer about 70 years ago. H N RUSSELL, 
whose name is associated with much pioneering research 
in astrophysics during the first half of this century as well 
as witha series of basic work in atomic spectroscopy, made 
the first quantitative analysis of the chemical composition 
of the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE in 1929. Using eye estimates 
of solar line intensities, he succeeded in deriving the 
abundances of 56 elements. He also showed that the 
Sun and, finally, the universe were essentially made of 
hydrogen; this observation took some time to be accepted 
by the whole astronomical community. Many of the 
remarkable features correlated with nuclear properties 
(see figure 1), giving clues to the origin of the different 
elements, were already present in Russell’s results. 

Is the solar composition unique or does it vary with 
time and/or from one solar layer to another? The only 
obvious expected variation is in the central layers, where, 
because of thermonuclear reactions, the hydrogen content 
decreases, leading to an increase in the helium content 
(See NUCLEAR REACTION RATES). More subtle and unforeseen 
variations in the chemical composition have, however, 
been observed recently. During the solar lifetime, the 
convective zone reservoir which fills the outer solar layers 
is slowly enriched in hydrogen from the radiative zone 
below it, whereas it slowly loses, through its lower 
boundary layer, about 10% of all the heavier elements (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE). In the outer atmospheric 
layers, and particularly in the very heterogeneous solar 
corona, the observed composition is variable in different 
types of solar matter and a fractionation occurs in the 
low chromospheric layers: elements of low first ionization 
potential (<10 eV) show abundances larger than in the 
photosphere. 

In spite of these subtle variations, it is possible to de- 
fine a standard solar chemical composition, essentially de- 
rived from spectroscopic analysis of the solar photosphere. 


Interest of solar abundances 

The chemical composition of the Sun is obviously a key set 
of data for modeling the interior as well as the atmosphere 
of the Sun. 

The Sun, being the best-known star, has always been 
considered as the typical star, the reference to which the 
abundance analyses of other stars are compared. 

The standard abundance distribution as shown in 
figure 1 is also the basic set of data that have to be 
reproduced by nucleosynthesis theories; it also plays a key 
role in modeling the chemical evolution of galaxies and of 
the universe. 

The Sun is also unique because chemical composition 
data can be measured in other objects of the solar system 
such as the Earth, Moon, planets, comets, meteorites. 
These data are very important for modeling the evolution 
of the solar system (See SOLAR SYSTEM: FORMATION). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2 : a 
12 | 
a | 
y 10F| 
aE ] 
= ah My zi 
_ Et) | WA \ 1 
2 BLL EW Vay fy 4 
2 8tiy ) MM ly 
Ss E | \N A 4 
c 4 H | |" 4 FJ 
5 c | ! Ww 1 
ab \J My a ] 
. EY aa \M/ i q 
fe) + Wy V WA any IN rw \ 1 
Ke) nk VV\N | 
Hn OF ol 
S21 Ee es ee ee TT L aa 
fe) 20 40 60 80 100 


Z (atomic number) 


Figure 1. Logarithmic distribution of the abundance of the 
elements relative to hydrogen as a function of the atomic 
number, Z. 


: 


= [ee if 
ae Hf ca dbl get iE Ih 1 
a -0.5- - 
“ i ae E iG 60 i 
(atomic number) 


Figure 2. Difference between solar and meteoritic abundances of 
elements, in the usual logarithmic scale, as a function of Z. Error 
bars represent the uncertainty of the solar abundance 
determinations. The point representing Li falls outside of this 
figure (—2.21). 


Sources of solar abundances 

Solar abundances can be derived by very different 
techniques and for very different types of solar matter, 
from the interior to the outermost coronal layers. Using 
spectroscopy in a very large wavelength range, we can 
derive the chemical composition of the photosphere, 
CHROMOSPHERE and CORONA and also of sunspots. Particle 
collection techniques from space allow us to measure the 
chemical composition of the SOLAR WIND and of SOLAR WIND 
ENERGETIC PARTICLES, emitted when the Sun is active. We 
can also obtain information on solar flares from GAMMA-RAY 
ASTRONOMY. Finally, calibration of theoretical solar models 
and direct inversion of solar oscillation data allow us to 
derive the solar abundance of helium. Note also that lunar 
soils contain a record of the past chemical history of the 
Sun. 

For different reasons and because of the variations in 
chemical composition, all of these sources of abundance 
results do not have the same weight. The solar 
photosphere is actually the layer from which we have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Abundances 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Element abundances in the solar photosphere and in meteorites. 


Photosphere— Photosphere— 
meteorite meteorite 
Element Photosphere* Meteorites difference Element Photosphere* Meteorites difference 
1H 12.00 = = 42 Mo 1.92 + 0.05 1.9740.02 —0.05 
2 He [10.93 + 0.004] - = 44 Ru 1.84 + 0.07 1.83+0.04  +0.01 
3 Li 1.10 + 0.10 3.3140.04  —2.21 45 Rh 1.12+40.12 1.10+0.04 +0.02 
4 Be 1.40 + 0.09 1.42+0.04 —0.02 46 Pd 1.69 + 0.04 1.70+0.04 —0.01 
5B (2.5540.30) 2.79+0.05 —0.24 47 Ag (0.94 + 0.25) 1.24+0.04 —0.30 
6C 8.52 + 0.06 7 = 48 Cd 1.77 £0.11 1.76+0.04 +0.01 
7N 7.92 + 0.06 = = 49 In (1.66 + 0.15) 0.82+0.04 +0.84 
80 8.83 + 0.06 = = 50 Sn 2.0+0.3 2.144+0.04 —-0.14 
9F [4.56 + 0.30] 4.48 + 0.06 +0.08 51 Sb 1.0+0.3 1.03+ 0.07 —0.03 
10 Ne [8.08 = 0.06] - - 52 Te - 2.24 + 0.04 - 
11 Na 6.33 + 0.03 6.32 + 0.02 +0.01 531 - 1.51 + 0.08 - 
12 Mg 7.58 + 0.05 7.58 + 0.01 +0.00 54 Xe = 2.17 + 0.08 = 
13 Al 6.47 + 0.07 6.49+0.01  —0.02 55 Cs = 1.13 + 0.02 = 
14Si 7.55 + 0.05 7.56+0.01  —0.01 56 Ba 2.13 + 0.05 2.22+0.02 —-—0.09 
15P 5.45 + 0.04 5.56+0.06 —0.11 57 La 1.17 + 0.07 1.22+0.02 —0.05 
16S 7.33 + 0.11 7.20 + 0.06 0.13 58 Ce 1.58 + 0.09 1.63+0.02 —0.05 
17Cl [5.50 + 0.30] 5.28 + 0.06 +0.22 59 Pr 0.71 + 0.08 0.80+0.02 —0.09 
18 Ar [6.40 + 0.06] - - 60 Nd 1.50 + 0.06 1.49+0.02  +0.01 
19K 5.12 + 0.13 5.13+0.02  -0.01 62 Sm 1.01 + 0.06 0.98+0.02  +0.03 
20 Ca 6.36 + 0.02 6.35 + 0.01 0.01 63 Eu 0.51 + 0.08 0.55+0.02 —0.04 
21 Sc 3.17 + 0.10 3.10 + 0.01 0.07 64 Gd 1.12 + 0.04 1.09+0.02  +0.03 
22 Ti 5.02 + 0.06 4.94 + 0.02 +0.08 65Tb (—0.1+0.3) 0.35+0.02 —0.45 
23. V 4.00 + 0.02 4.02+0.02 —0.02 66 Dy 1.14 + 0.08 1.1740.02 —0.03 
24 Cr 5.67 + 0.03 5.69+0.01 —0.02 67 Ho (0.26 + 0.16) 0.5140.02 —0.25 
25 Mn 5.39 + 0.03 5.53+0.01 —0.14 68 Er 0.93 + 0.06 0.97+ 0.02 —0.04 
26 Fe 7.50 + 0.05 7.50 + 0.01 +0.00 69 Tm (0.00 + 0.15) 0.15+0.02  -—0.15 
27 Co 4.92 + 0.04 4.91 + 0.01 0.01 70 Yb 1.08 + 0.15 0.96 + 0.02 0.12 
28 Ni 6.25 + 0.04 6.25 + 0.01 +0.00 7iLu 0.06 + 0.10 0.1340.02 —0.07 
29 Cu 4.21 + 0.04 4.29+0.04 —0.08 72 Hf 0.88 + 0.08 0.75 + 0.02 +0.13 
30 Zn 4.60 + 0.08 4.67+0.04 —0.07 73 Ta = —0.13 + 0.02 = 
31 Ga 2.88 + 0.10 3.1340.02 —0.25 74W (1.11 + 0.15) 0.69 + 0.03 +0.42 
32 Ge 3.41 + 0.14 3.63+0.04 —0.22 75 Re =i 0.28 + 0.03 - 
33 As = 2.37 + 0.02 = 76 Os 1.45 + 0.10 1.39 + 0.02 +0.06 
34 Se = 3.41 + 0.03 = 77 Ir 1.35 + 0.10 1.3740.02 —0.02 
35 Br = 2.63 + 0.04 = 78 Pt 1840.3 1.69 + 0.04 0.11 
36 Kr a 3.31 + 0.08 = 79 Au (1.01 + 0.15) 0.85 + 0.04 +0.16 
37 Rb 2.60 + 0.15 2.41+0.02 +0.19 80 Hg = 1.13 + 0.08 = 
38 Sr 2.97 + 0.07 2.92+0.02  +0.05 81 Tl (0.9 + 0.2) 0.83 + 0.04 +0.07 
39 Y 2.24 + 0.03 2.2340.02 +0.01 82 Pb 1.95 + 0.08 2.0640.04 —0.11 
40 Zr 2.60 + 0.02 2.61+0.02 -—0.01 83 Bi = 0.71 + 0.04 = 
41 Nb 1.42 + 0.06 1.40+0.02 +0.02 90 Th = 0.09 + 0.02 = 
92U (<-0.47) —0.50 + 0.04 = 


Abundances are given in the logarithmic scale usually adopted by astronomers Ag = log Ne /Nu + 12.0, where Ne is the 
abundance by number. By definition the abundance of hydrogen is exactly Ay = 12.0. 

* Values between square brackets are not derived from the photosphere, but from sunspots, solar corona and solar wind 
particles. Values between parentheses are less accurate results. 


the largest number of data. Actually, 65 elements, out 
of 83 stable elements, are present in the photospheric 
spectrum; other sources of solar abundances only concern 
a limited number of elements. The photosphere, just 
above the convection zone, is a well-mixed region whereas 
the outer solar layers show a very heterogeneous and 
changing structure. Furthermore, it is also the layer that 
was studied quite a long time before the other layers for 
an obvious reason: the solar photospheric spectrum has 
been recorded for quite a long time with high resolution 
and high signal-to-noise ratio. For all these reasons, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


photospheric abundances are adopted as a reference for 
all the other solar (and stellar) data. 


Solar photospheric abundances 


The basic data for deriving photospheric abundances are 
from the photospheric spectrum. Solar photospheric 
spectra with very high resolution and very high signal- 
to-noise ratio, obtained from the ground and from space, 
are now available for quite a large wavelength range, from 
the ultraviolet to the far infrared. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Abundances 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The strength of a line in the ABSORPTION SPECTRUM is 
directly related to the abundance of the element producing 
the line. The exact relation between these two quantities 
can be obtained if the physical conditions and physical 
processes of the layers where the line is formed are known. 
Empirical modelling of the photosphere has now reached 
a rather high degree of accuracy. Physical processes are 
also well known. Actually, in the photosphere, collisional 
processes dominate, which allows us to simplify the 
treatment. From the line strength, now measured with 
high accuracy, or directly from the fit of the predicted 
and observed spectra, the so-called spectral synthesis 
technique, it is possible to derive rather accurate values 
for the product of the abundance of the element producing 
the line, relative to the hydrogen abundance, times 
the transition probability of the line (see also SOLAR 
SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOstIcs). The ratio Nei / Ny is a natural 
measurement of abundance because the continuum is 
essentially produced by the opacity due to hydrogen 
species whereas the absorption line is the result of an 
additional opacity caused locally by a given element. 

One of the largest sources of uncertainty of solar 
photospheric abundances comes from the inaccuracies 
of the transition probabilities. These data really play 
a key role in solar spectroscopy. Most of the progress 
in our knowledge of the solar photospheric chemical 
composition during the last decades has been mainly, if 
not uniquely, due to the use of more accurate transition 
probabilities. Actually, we believe that the dispersion of 
solar photospheric abundance results reflects the internal 
accuracy of the transition probabilities used to derive the 
abundances. Also, unfortunately, too few very accurate 
transition probabilities are available for the atomic and 
molecular lines present in the photospheric spectrum. 

In table 1, we give the latest data for the solar 
photospheric abundances relative to hydrogen. The 
values are given in the logarithmic scale usually adopted 
by astronomers Aq = log Nea/Ny + 12.0, where Ne is 
the abundance by number. It is to be noted that such a 
scale was originally adopted in order to avoid negative 
numbers for the least abundant elements. It is still used 
nowadays even if two values are now negative numbers 
i.e. their abundance is less than one million millionth that 
of hydrogen—rather rare! 

As may be seen from table 1, the photospheric 
abundances of a few elements cannot be measured in the 
photosphere, because these elements do not show lines 
in the photospheric spectrum, the most important of them 
being helium. This does not at all mean that these elements 
are absent in the Sun. Actually, this is purely for basic 
spectroscopic reasons: under the physical conditions in the 
photosphere, witha typical temperature around 5000 K, no 
line of these elements (neutral or once-ionized species) falls 
within the wavelength range covered by the photospheric 
spectrum. 


Comparison with meteorites 
Although most of the matter of the solar system is 
contained in the Sun, very useful information concerning 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the chemical composition of the initial solar nebula and 
its evolution can be obtained from the observations of 
other bodies of the solar system. Early terrestrial data 
very rapidly showed that the Earth suffered from heavy 
chemical fractionation since its formation but results of 
measurements made on METEORITES, during the first half of 
this century, soon showed many regularities, as seen in 
figure 1. 

Most meteorites suffer from differentiation due to 
melting after condensation in the parent body. However, 
the so-called CI carbonaceous chondrites, has preserved 
the bulk composition of the stellar nebula from which they 
condensed, except for the highly volatile elements (H, C, 
N, O and the rare gases) which partly escaped. 

Meteoritic chemical composition can now be mea- 
sured with very high accuracy. When compared with 
photospheric results, there were past discrepancies, for 
several elements, but the discrepancies have gone away 
as the photospheric values have become more accurate. 
Now, as seen from figure 2, the agreement between the 
photosphere and CI chondrites is remarkably good. The 
uncertainties essentially come from the photospheric re- 
sults which cannot be obtained to better than 10-20%. The 
few discrepant points can be accounted for by the larger 
uncertainty of some photospheric results, especially for 
elements which only show very few blended lines in the 
photospheric spectrum. 

Table 1 allows us to define a ‘standard abundance 
distribution’ (also sometimes called ‘cosmic abundance’ 
or ‘local galactic abundance’) by combining photospheric 
results, for elements partly lost by meteorites, with 
meteoritic results for the other elements. 


A few special cases 
For different reasons that will become clear in the 
following, a few elements deserve particular comments. 


Helium 

In 1868, a new element was discovered in the solar 
spectrum obtained during an eclipse. The name of the 
Sun was given to this unknown element, namely helium. 
It was only discovered on Earth in 1895. 

Despite its name and its very high abundance, about 
one-tenth of hydrogen, the most abundant element, He 
is not present in the photospheric spectrum, for purely 
spectroscopic reasons, as explained previously, and it is 
largely absent from the meteorites. Solar wind and solar 
energetic particles show a very variable and rather low 
value when compared with values observed in hot stars 
and in the interstellar medium from H II regions around us. 
Coronal values derived from spectroscopy still have too 
large uncertainties, Nye/Ny © 8 + 1.5%. Among the giant 
planets, values are still too uncertain and fractionation 
might have been at work in some of them. 

Progress in our knowledge of the solar helium 
content has recently come from standard solar models 
as well as non-standard models and also from the direct 
inversion of HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS. The calibration of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Abundances 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solar theoretical models, i.e. the fit of a theoretical model 
to the presently observed characteristics of the Sun (age, 
mass, diameter, luminosity), leads to the abundance of 
helium in the protosolar cloud from which the Sun formed 
(Nue/Nu = 9.8 + 0.4%). Inversion of helioseismic data 
leads to a very accurate, but smaller, value, NHe/NH = 
8.5 + 0.07%; this is the present solar abundance of helium 
in the outer convection zone. The difference between these 
two values is now explained by slow element diffusion at 
the base of the convection zone during the solar lifetime, 
as already mentioned in the introduction. 

Astronomers often use the abundances by mass of 
hydrogen (X), helium (Y) and all the other elements 
together, the metallicity (Z), ina scale where X+,Y+Z = 1. 
The numbers cited above become Y = 0.275 + 0.01 or 
Ape = 10.99 + 0.02 in our logarithmic scale, at the birth 
of the Sun, and Y = 0.248 + 0.02 or Ape = 10.93 + 0.004, 
as the present value in the solar outer layers. 


Lithium, beryllium, boron 

The strikingly low abundances of these light elements are 
a direct consequence of their low nuclear binding energy; 
at temperatures of the order of a few million kelvins, these 
nuclei are destroyed by proton collisions. 

In the Sun, meteoritic and photospheric abundances 
of Be and B agree within the error bars, whereas Li is 
160 times less abundant in the (present) photosphere than 
in the meteorites, i.e. at birth of the Sun. Lithium is 
the most fragile of these three elements and its solar 
destruction rate could be explained if the solar convection 
zone reached a little deeper layers than now deduced from 
helioseismology. So additional mixing, just below the 
convection zone, has to be added in order to explain the 
observed solar lithium depletion. 


Carbon, nitrogen, oxygen 

These elements which have largely escaped from 
meteorites are key elements. Because of their large 
abundances, they are the main contributors to the 
metallicity (O 47%, C 17%, N 5%) and they are also very 
important contributors to the opacity which plays a crucial 
role in modeling the solar interior. 

Although coronal measurements of the CNO abun- 
dances are certainly very helpful, the solar abundances of 
these three elements rely heavily on photospheric analy- 
ses. 

In spite of the fact that the solar photospheric 
abundances of these elements can be derived from a large 
number of indicators, atoms as well as diatomic molecules 
made of C, N,O and H, the uncertainties of the solar results 
are uncomfortably too large, partly because of the lack of 
very accurate transition probabilities. 


Neon, argon 

These two noble gases do not appear in the solar 
photospheric spectrum, for the reasons already described, 
and are largely lost by meteorites. It is hoped that 
values obtained for the outermost solar layers, from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


coronal spectra, solar wind and solar energetic particle 
measurements as well as gamma ray spectroscopy of solar 
flares, do not suffer from the fractionation mentioned in 
the introduction and can be used as representative of the 
present solar photosphere. 


Isotopic abundances 

Because isotopic shifts in atomic lines are extremely small, 
it is impossible to obtain isotopic ratios for most of the 
elements. For a few elements, however, such as C, O and 
Mg, which appear in diatomic molecules, we can derive 
estimates of the solar isotopic composition, with rather 
large uncertainties. Isotopic data can be obtained from 
solar wind measurements for He, Ne and Mg. 

Isotopic ratios for all the elements can be measured 
with high accuracies for terrestrial material. They 
agree with the results obtained from meteorites although 
‘isotopic anomalies’ are observed which are, however, 
confined to a very small fraction of the meteorites. Thus 
the method is to take solar abundances for the elements 
together with isotopic ratios as derived on earth in order 
to obtain the solar abundances of individual nuclides. 


Conclusions 

With the solar chemical composition presented in table 1, 
the usual mass abundances are X = 0.735, Y = 0.248 and 
Z = 0.017 with Z/X = 0.023. 

The solar abundances are in excellent agreement with 
the meteoritic abundances derived from CI carbonaceous 
chondrites. The effects of element migration at the 
bottom of the convection zone are, however, not observed. 
This is puzzling although not surprising. Actually, the 
uncertainties of the photospheric abundance results are 
still too large to allow such a faint effect to be detected. 


Bibliography 

Anders E and Grevesse N 1989 Abundances of the 
elements: meteoritic and solar Geochim. Cosmochim. 
Acta 53 197-214 

Frohlich C, Huber M C E, Solanki S and von Steiger R 
(ed) 1998 Solar Composition and its Evolution—From 
Core to Corona, Space Science Series of ISSI (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) (also 1998 Space Sci. Rev. 85) 

Grevesse N and Sauval A J 1998 Standard solar 
composition Solar Composition and its Evolution - From 
Core to Corona, Space Science Series of ISSI ed C 
Frohlich, M C E Huber, S Solanki and R von Steiger 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 161-74 (also 1998 Space Sci. 
Rev. 85 161) 

Palme H and Beer H 1993 Abundances of the elements 
in the solar system Landolt-Bornstein, Group VI, As- 
tronomy and Astrophysics Extension and supplement 
to vol 2, subvol a, ed H H Voigt (Berlin: Springer) 
pp 196-221 

Russell H N 1929 Astrophys. J. 70 11-82 


N Grevesse and A J Sauval 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Active Regions 


Solar active regions form where the tops of loops of 
magnetic flux, shaped like the Greek letter omega (2), 
emerge into the solar atmosphere where they can be seen. 
These loops are thought to be generated by the solar 
dynamo, located deep within the Sun (see DYNAMOS: SOLAR 
AND STELLAR). The appearance of active regions depends 
greatly on the radiation used to image them, as well as the 
angle at which they are observed. When seen projected 
against the dark sky at the edge of the Sun (called the Limp), 
the magnetic field of an active region is traced by glowing 
arches of gas confined within CORONAL Loops (figure 1). 
When projected against the solar disk the appearance of 
active regions is much different. In hydrogen Ha, at low 
telescopic resolution, one sees bright SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC 
PLAGE (figure 2). At higher resolution, the relatively 
cool (chromospheric) loops of the active region appear 
(figure 7). In x-rays, the much hotter (coronal) loops of 
the active region are seen (figure 3). 

All of these active region loops, whatever their 
temperature, trace out magnetic field lines. Plage appears 
at their footpoints, where the loops pass through the 
chromosphere and photosphere. At one footpoint of 
each loop the magnetic field comes out of the Sun (north 
polarity), and at the other footpoint it goes back into the 
Sun (south polarity). Active regions are formed of many 
such bipolar pairs of footpoints connected by coronal 
loops, as if a large magnet was buried beneath the visible 
solar surface at the site where the active region appears. 

The high density at which magnetic loops are packed 
together at their photospheric footpoints is the distinctive 
feature that makes active regions different from the 
surrounding quiet atmosphere. The effects of the magnetic 
field on the temperature and density structure of an active 
region depend on its strength, the relative fraction of 
the active region it fills (compared with non-magnetic 
regions) and its topology, i.e. how each point is connected 
to another. In chromospheric plage—the bright areas 
that can be seen in figure 2 both scattered around the 
quiet Sun (two examples shown) and within the active 
region itself—magnetic loops are packed 10-100 times 
more densely than in the quiet Sun. In sunspots, loops 
are packed so tightly that there is no significant amount 
of unmagnetized gas, which inhibits the flow of heat by 
convective motions and makes sunspots cooler and darker 
than their surroundings. Finally, irregular dark strands of 
gas called solar FILAMENTS form where the magnetic field 
lines dip to form valleys in the corona that can hold ionized 
gas (which cannot easily move across field lines) in clouds 
above the photosphere. Several such filaments can be seen 
in figure 2, both inside the active region and outside it, in 
the quiet solar atmosphere. When filaments are seen in 
profile at the solar limb, they are called SOLAR PROMINENCES. 

Active regions come and go, and their lifetime 
depends toa large extent on their size. Active regions have 
no preferred size; they form a continuous distribution, 
with many more small ones than large ones. The smallest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A small solar active region near the edge of the solar 
disk, seen in emission from a highly ionized Fe line emitted by 
gas at about 1.5 x 10° K. Photo from the NASA TRACE satellite 
courtesy Lockheed Martin. 


2. / Filament 
“Plage \ 


Sunspot — 


Figure 2. An image of the Sun’s chromosphere in the neutral 
hydrogen Ha line emitted at about 104 K, showing a large active 
region near disk center, containing sunspots, plage and filaments 
(labeled elsewhere on the disk). Photo courtesy the National 
Solar Observatory, which is supported by the US National 
Science Foundation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. An x-ray image of the Sun’s corona on 25 January 1992, a few years after the 1989 solar cycle maximum. Such x-rays are 
emitted by gas at about (3-5) x 10° K. At mid-latitudes a huge solar activity complex, made of many solar active regions, is present. 
The tiny x-ray bright points seen most easily in the northern (upper) hemisphere mark the sites of ephemeral solar active regions. The 
prominent cusp in the lower right signals a recent coronal mass ejection. Yohkoh image courtesy L Acton, Montana State University 


Bozeman. 


ones that can be observed depend on telescope resolution, 
and presumably there are many still smaller ones that have 
not been resolved. In the photosphere the largest and 
most long-lived active regions have areas in the range 50- 
100 000 Mm2, which is only 1-2% of the surface area of the 
Sun, but about 100-200 times greater than that of the Earth. 
The x-ray image shown in figure 3 illustrates the extreme 
range of sizes seen in the solar corona. The smallest active 
regions, and also the most short lived, are called ephemeral 
solar active regions, which are often only a few thousand 
km across. Several tiny x-ray bright points, which mark 
the sites of ephemeral solar active regions, can be seen the 
the northern hemisphere of the image in figure 3 (see SOLAR 
CORONA: X-RAY BRIGHT POINTS; SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS: EPHEMERAL). 
The active regions in which phenomena such as SOLAR 
FLARES and sunspots occur typically fall in the size range 
from 10000 to 100000 km, and live for a month or two 
(one or two solar rotations). Many such active regions 
can be seen in figure 3. It happens that, at the time of 
this image, more were located in the southern hemisphere 
than in the northern, but that is not a general rule. At 
the extreme end of the distribution of sizes and lifetimes 
are SOLAR ACTIVITY COMPLEXES, which are made up of several 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


active regions. The interconnected active regions at and 
below the center of the solar image in figure 3 collectively 
form such a complex of activity. 

Active regions have several interesting properties, 
which vary either on the 22 yr SOLAR CYCLE or the 
11 yr sunspot cycle. Very few active regions, or the 
sunspots they contain, are present at sunspot minimum— 
sometimes, none at all. In contrast, near sunspot 
maximum, it is not usual to find five to ten active regions 
on the hemisphere visible from Earth. Their emergence 
frequency varies by about a factor of 8, in phase with the 
sunspot cycle. On the other hand, the shape of the size 
distribution of regions does not change significantly from 
minimum to maximum. 

The orientation of the magnetic polarity pair in active 
regions, with respect to the direction of solar rotation (from 
left to right, solar east to west, if north is up), follows what 
is called the Hale-Nicholson polarity law during the solar 
cycle. As can be seen in figure 4 one magnetic polarity 
tends to predominate at the leading (right) edge of all 
active regions in one hemisphere, whereas the opposite 
polarity predominates at the leading edge in the other 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Solar magnetogram, 19 February 1999 at 15:17 UT. 
Photo courtesy the National Solar Observatory, Kitt Peak, which 
is supported by the US National Science Foundation. 


hemisphere. The polarity that dominates in a given 
hemisphere reverses every 11 yr, repeating with the 22 yr 
period of the solar cycle. Interestingly, the Hale—Nicholson 
polarity law is only an approximation, and many regions 
are exceptions. These exceptions are attributed to kinks in 
Q loops and buffeting of them by convective motions. 

The solar latitude at which active regions emerge 
varies from about 60° at the start of each sunspot cycle 
to very close to the equator at its end almost 11 yr later. 
The regions that emerge at high latitudes early in the solar 
cycle tend to be very small—not large enough to contain 
sunspots, which tend not to be seen in regions above 30° 
or so. As the cycle goes on, the latitude of emergence 
proceeds toward the equator, and the size of the active 
regions tend to increase. This tendency for active regions 
to emerge at progressively lower latitudes as the sunspot 
cycle progresses is called Spoerer’s law. There is also a 
tendency for the smaller regions to be spread out more in 
latitude of emergence, which may be attributed to greater 
buffeting by convection. 

The spots on the leading edge of active regions tend to 
be closer to the equator than those that follow, so the axes 
of the active regions appear to be tilted with respect to the 
equator. Several clearly tilted regions appear in figure 4; 
in the north, white polarity leads and tends to be closer 
to the equator, and in the south, black polarity plays that 
role. When enough regions are studied, it becomes clear 
that this tilt depends on latitude, being only about 1-2° 
near the equator, but increasing to 5-8° at latitude 25° The 
flux in the leading part of active regions also tends to be 
concentrated in fewer larger spots than the following part 
(see figure 4, lower right quadrant, and figure 5). This 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Sunspots are the most prominent feature of active 
regions in the photosphere, as seen in ordinary visible light. 
Photo courtesy the National Solar Observatory, Kitt Peak, which 
is supported by the US National Science Foundation. 


morphology has been ascribed to the dynamics of gases 
in flux loops as they rise through the convection zone and 
expand. Gas tends to flow toward the following leg of 
the Q loop, increasing its cross-section. This reduces the 
field strength in the following leg, making it more easily 
shredded into smaller strands by convection. 

The rope-like magnetic field structures of active 
regions in the northern hemisphere tend to be twisted 
weakly in a left-handed sense, and those in the southern, 
right-handed. As a result, coronal loops in the south tend 
to be shaped like an S, and those in the north, the mirror 
image of an S. These properties, and some of the other 
properties described above, are thought to be determined 
by the forces felt by convection zone flux tubes (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE FLUX TUBES). The fields of active 
regions are twisted by motions of the rising gas, which 
tend to rotate in opposite directions in the two hemispheres 
under the influence of the Coriolis force. As well, they are 
buffeted by strong turbulence. The same tendencies of tilt 
and asymmetry seen in active regions appear in emerging 
magnetic flux tubes (see SOLAR INTERIOR: EMERGING MAGNETIC 
FLUX TUBES) that have just appeared in the atmosphere after 
their journey through the convection zone. 

Active regions are sites of strong heating of the 
outermost solar atmosphere (corona). Hence, active 
regions are much brighter than their surroundings in 
coronal x-ray images (figure 3). Active regions are filled 
with coronal loops, which outline magnetic field lines 
along which the ionized coronal plasma is forced to move. 
In active regions, magnetic fields are very strong, ranging 
from roughly 1000 to 3000 G. These fields are about 10000 
times stronger than the 0.3 G field of the Earth at the 
equator. Ina mature active region, the amount of magnetic 
flux (the product of the strength of the magnetic field 
and the area it covers) ranges from 10’ to 5 x 10” Mx. 
These magnetic fields carry currents—as much as 10” A. 
In comparison, a 100 W light bulb carries a current of about 
1 A. Nevertheless, it is not understood just how the vast 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supergranule motions 


Flux rope 


Figure 6. The tree-like structure of an active region thought to 
exist below the photosphere. Adapted from a figure by 
J H Piddington. 


amounts of energy contained in these currents is converted 
into coronal heating, solar flares or coronal mass ejections 
(See SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION). 


Active regions—photosphere to corona 

Active regions extend from below photosphere far into 
the corona. The physical conditions change dramatically 
over this range. In and below the photosphere, the gas 
is so dense that its turbulent motions push the magnetic 
fields around. Such motions serve to break up the 
magnetic fields into bits and pieces outside active regions, 
as well as to concentrate magnetid fields in individual 
dark sunspots and suNspor pores within them. Active 
regions are surrounded by brighter granular areas which 
are almost field free (figure 5). As one goes higher in the 
solar atmosphere, the density of the gas falls off more 
rapidly than the strength of the magnetic field. In and 
above the chromosphere, the magnetic field can no longer 
be forced to move by the flow of the gas, and it spreads out 
to fill all space. Hence, the appearance of active regions 
is much different in the photosphere, where kinetic and 
thermal terms dominate the energy budget, from in the 
chromosphere and corona, where the magnetic field is 
more important. 

At some depth below the visible surface convection 
zone flux ropes are shredded into smaller strands, 
as envisioned in figure 6. Motions within granules, 
supergranules and perhaps even larger structures (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION; SUPERGRANULATION) push 
these strands around to form the sunspots and pores of an 
active region, such as those shown in figure 5. Our present 
knowledge of the subphotospheric structure of active 
regions is fuzzy, since the techniques of helioseismology 
that tell us about this structure do not have high enough 
spatial resolution. The main reason for believing that 
the structure has such form is the appearance of the 
active region in the photosphere shown in figure 5. This 
appearance typically evolves from many tiny pores early 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 7. The graceful structures of an active region in the 
chromosphere, consisting of loops and swirls connecting 
magnetic features in the underlying photosphere. Sunspots, as 
they appear in the chromosphere, can be seen in the lower part 
of the active region. Photo courtesy R Muller, Pic du Midi 
Observatory. 


in the region’s life to large spots (in the leading polarity) 
when it is fully developed. This is understood as the 
consequence of the gradual rising and emergence of the 
tree-like structure of figure 6. 

In the chromosphere, imaged in the hydrogen Ha 
line in figure 7, the structure of the active region consists 
primarily of magnetic loops, which are the continuation 
of the flux strands into the upper atmosphere from below. 
Such loops show up in a hydrogen Ha image only where 
the atmospheric conditions are just right for hydrogen gas 
to be partially ionized. The temperature in this part of 
an active region is typically about 10* K, and extends a 
few thousand km above the photosphere. The important 
aspect of such Ha images is that the structures seen in 
them outline the magnetic field, since the ionized gas must 
follow magnetic field lines. Generally, Ha images are 
more useful for revealing the connections of the magnetic 
field than for measuring the temperature or density of 
the gas—brightness in an Ha image has little do do with 
these thermodynamic variables. An exception is at the 
footpoints of hot coronal loops, visible in x-rays and 
not in Ha. Their presence in the corona, overlying the 
chromosphere, is reflected in the very bright areas that 
wind through the lower left-hand part of figure 7. In 
these regions the chromosphere is unusually hot and dense 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


because the overlying arcade of coronal loops that has its 
footpoints there is also hot and dense. Such active region 
coronal loops, those with temperatures of several times 
10° K, appear prominently bright in each of the many active 
regions in figure 3. Other loops, somewhat cooler, appear 
in images made in light from spectral lines radiated by ions 
formed at lower temperatures around 10° K, such as that 
of figure 1. 


Evolution of active regions 

Active regions are born when strands of magnetic flux 
emerge into the visible atmosphere from the solar interior. 
Sometimes flux continues to emerge for as long as 5- 
7 days, and the active region grows to large size; at 
the other extreme, flux stops emerging so quickly that 
observers never even notice the small active region before 
it vanishes. The shape and brightness of the region depend 
on both the rate and location of emergence of this new 
flux and the manner in which it reconnects with the pre- 
existing magnetic fields. After a lifetime that varies up 
to a few months, the active region is gradually dispersed 
by convective motions differential rotation, meridional 
motion, and magnetic reconnection. 

The first indication of an emerging active region is the 
appearance of bright chromospheric plage in Ha and tiny 
sunspot pores in visible light. Pores of opposite magnetic 
polarity are soon seen to be connected by chromospheric 
loops called arch filaments, which appear as dark linear 
features in line-center Ha images. The curvature of these 
features, which are the projections of three-dimensional 
arches, depends on the angle with which they are viewed. 
An arcade of several such arch filaments, with bright 
chromospheric plage at their ends, can be seen in figure 8 
(top). These arch filaments are the portions of strands of 
magnetic flux that are just now emerging into the visible 
atmosphere, and the pores seen in figure 8 (middle) are 
the cross-section of these strands where they pass through 
the photosphere. The image in figure 8 (middle) is made 
in the blue wing of the Ha line. The chromosphere 
at this wavelength is transparent when no line-of-sight 
motions are present, allowing the pores in the underlying 
photosphere to be seen clearly. However, at the tops of 
arch filaments, absorption can be seen, as a consequence 
of Doppler blueshift from their rising motion. 

As flux continues to emerge in an active region, pores 
and small spots tend to coalesce into larger spots, implying 
that the thinnest flux strands in figure 6 are now above the 
photosphere, and larger strands of the lower part of the 
flux rope are now emerging. As long as flux emergence 
continues, arch filaments can be seen. Often new flux 
emerges amidst old flux, so only part of the region shows 
obvious arch filaments, as in the lower part of the region 
shown in figure 8 (top, middle). The distance separating 
the opposite-polarity spots of the active region increases. 
This growth of the active region shown in figure 8 can 
clearly be seen by comparing the bottom panel of the figure 
with the two above it, taken a day earlier. Bright loops of 
comparable size (not shown) can often be seen in x-rays, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


> 
7-12 -83 


1846 00 


18 46 00 
(b) 


Figure 8. An emerging flux region: (top) early stages, Ha line 
center; (middle) early stages, Ha blue wing; (bottom) 1 day later, 
Ha line center. Courtesy H Zirin, Big Bear Solar Observatory. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


4309,000 


Figure 9. Co-aligned images of the photospheric magnetic field 
(left) and coronal loops (right) in an active region that has 
reconnected with its surroundings. Courtesy B Thompson, 
NASA/ESA Solar and Heliospheric Observatory. 


overlying the chromospheric arch filament system seen in 
Ha. 

The next phase of the development of an active region 
is the reconnection of the magnetic fields of the bipole with 
the ambient fields into which it has emerged. The structure 
that forms as a result of this reconnection is shown in 
figure 9, in which a small active region is seen in projection 
on the solar disk. To understand that structure, it is useful 
to compare the co-aligned photospheric magnetic field 
map (left) and projected coronal loop image (right). The 
polarities in the magnetic field map (toward and away 
from the viewer) are indicated by black and white; where 
the field is weak, the map is gray. Note that a strong and 
compact bipole is present just to the right of the center 
of the map—black on the left, white on the right. The 
coronal image shows that the black and white regions 
of the magnetogram are connected to one another, as 
one would expect from an emerging bipole. However, 
there are also prominent connections of the bipole to 
surrounding regions, forming a structure variously called 
a pinwheel, anemone or fountain. These loops are formed 
by reconnection of the bipole, after its emergence, with its 
surroundings. 

The lifetime of active regions, the period for which 
they can be seen to be bipolar, has no unique or typical 
value. The most short-lived regions, called ephemeral 
active regions, and the most long-lived complexes, in 
which one active region may emerge within another, are 
discussed elsewhere. Ordinary active regions, as seen 
on these pages, live from a few days to a few months. 
The end of the lives is determined by the dispersal of 
their magnetic flux by convective motions, differential 
rotation, meridional flows and magnetic reconnection. 
Bits of magnetic flux break off from the edge of a decaying 
active region, like icebergs from a glacier. Such moving 
magnetic features often produce surges as they reconnect 
with surrounding flux of opposite polarity. Those bits 
of flux that do not reconnect nearby may be transported 
great distances. Typically an irregular diagonal streak of 
such magnetic debris may be seen poleward of decaying 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


active regions. Evidence of such dispersed flux can be seen 
faintly above some of the northern-hemisphere regions, 
and below some of the southern-hemisphere regions, in 
figure 4. Ultimately all such flux reconnects and flows 
out in the solar wind; new flux in emerging active regions 
replaces it, and the Sun moves on to its next 22 yr cycle. 


Bibliography 

Harvey K Land Zwaan C 1993 Properties and emergence 
patterns of bipolar active regions Sol. Phys. 148 85-118 

Howard R F 1996 Solar active regions as diagnostics of 
subsurface conditions Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 
75-107 

Lang K R 1995 Sun, Earth and Sky (Berlin: Springer) 

Zirin H 1989 Astrophysics of the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Richard C Canfield 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions: Ephemeral 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Active Regions: Ephemeral 


Magnetic flux emerges through the surface of the Sun as 
bipolar regions with a wide range of sizes, such as shown 
in figure 1. Larger magnetic bipoles develop sunspots and 
are identified as ACTIVE REGIONS. Small bipolar regions, such 
as indicated in the lower panels of figure 1, are called 
ephemeral regions, a name given by H Dodson in 1953 
because of their short lifetimes. Ephemeral regions have 
sizes typically less than 20000 km along their long axis, 
lifetimes of a few hours, and no sunspots. Their numbers 
vary in phase with the soLar cycLe. Unlike active regions, 
which are confined within a latitude band extending from 
40°N to 40°S, ephemeral regions occur over the entire 
solar surface. The bipolar axes of ephemeral regions show 
all possible orientations, but there is a preference for a 
proper, low-inclination orientation as seen in larger active 
regions. During the declining phase of a cycle, ephemeral 
regions at high latitude (poleward of 30°) develop with a 
preferential orientation reversed from the active regions 
and ephemeral regions at lower latitudes. These regions 
are identified with the new cycle and are seen at least 3 
years before sunspot minimum and 2-3 years before the first 
recognized sunspot regions of the new cycle. 

The amount of magnetic flux that ephemeral regions 
bring to the surface in one day is equivalent to that in one or 
more major active regions. Their flux does not accumulate 
at the surface, however, as the magnetic poles of ephemeral 
regions quickly interact with nearby magnetic fields 
leading to the disappearance (also termed cancellation) 
of one or both of the poles of these ephemeral regions. 
This interaction results in the complete replacement of the 
network magnetic fields in the quiet Sun (although not 
the large-scale pattern of magnetic polarities) within about 
40 h, perhaps playing a key role in the heating of the solar 
CORONA. 


General properties of ephemeral regions 
Ephemeral regions were first identified in Ca II K images 
by H Dodson in 1953. Our knowledge about most of 
the properties of ephemeral regions, however, comes 
from studies of high-spatial-resolution observations of the 
magnetic fields on the solar surface during the last two 
decades. Ephemeral regions are most easily identified 
in time-sequence magnetograms, where they first appear 
as two closely spaced positive and negative polarity 
elements (poles) that strengthen and separate with time. 
The average flux density in ephemeral regions increases 
with time, indicating that the magnetic flux in ephemeral 
regions emerges from below the surface. 

Table 1 summarizes the range and average values of 
the total magnetic flux (i.e. the sum of the absolute values 
of the positive and negative flux), area, separation of the 
centroids of the two opposite polarity poles, and lifetime 
of ephemeral regions. 

The lifetime of ephemeral regions, defined as the 
period both poles can be distinguished as separate 
elements, strongly depends on the proximity, strength 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Summary of ephemeral region properties. 


Property Average Range 
Total magnetic flux 

(10!8 Mx) 9.3 0.1-67 
Area (1018 cm?) 0.46 0.1-75 
Separation (km) 6910 2200-12 000 
Lifetimes (h) 4.4 0.5-140 


and polarity of the surrounding magnetic elements. 
During their emergence, the separating poles of an 
ephemeral region often encounter and ‘cancel’ with 
magnetic elements of opposite polarity or merge with 
elements of the same polarity. 


Orientations 

The magnetic axis of an ephemeral region is defined by a 
line connecting the centroids of its two opposite polarity 
poles. The bipole orientation of the region is the angle 
of its magnetic axis with the equator. Ephemeral regions, 
although they have a wide range in the orientations of 
their bipolar axes, do show a preference to emerge with 
a proper, low-inclination orientation. This preference 
persists throughout a cycle. 

The preferential orientation of ephemeral regions 
follows that of active regions. For the periods when 
there are two concurrent cycles, the orientations of 
ephemeral regions are consistent with the preferred active 
region orientations for those cycles, as discussed in more 
detail below. The latitude at which ephemeral regions 
change their preferential bipole orientation coincides with 
the boundaries separating active regions belonging to 
different cycles. 


Frequency of emergence 

The frequency with which new ephemeral regions emerge 
at the surface ranges from 0.02 to 1 h-1(10" km*)7!. 
These emergence frequencies suggest that thousands of 
ephemeral regions emerge over the entire surface of the 
Sun within a 24 h period. With an average flux of 
9.3 x 10'8 Mx, ephemeral regions can bring to the surface 
each day from 0.3 to 5 x 10” Mx, the equivalent of one or 
more large active regions. 


Time variation of ephemeral regions 

The number of ephemeral regions present on the visible 
hemisphere of the Sun at any given time clearly varies 
nearly in phase with solar activity, as shown in figure 2. 
The minima in ephemeral region counts precede those 
defined by sunspots. For example, the minimum in the 
number of ephemeral regions in 1975 occured about one 
year prior to the sunspot minimum between cycles 20 and 
21 in June 1976; between cycles 21 and 22, the ephemeral 
region minimum in early 1985 was about 1.5 years before 
the sunspot minimum in September 1986. By the time of 
the sunspot minima, the counts of ephemeral regions have 
increased 40% to 50% above their minimum levels of more 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions: Ephemeral ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Full-Disk Magnetogram 


Magnetogram Continuum Intensity 


Figure 1. Full-disk magnetogram of the Sun on 25 November 1996 comparing a large bipolar active region and nearby ephemeral 
regions. The area outlined in white on the full-disk magnetogram is expanded in the lower panels to better show the size comparison 
and the association of sunspots with a large active region. The horizontal distance of the expanded panels is 3.6 x 10° km. Magnetic 
fields coming out of the Sun are shown as white and those going into the Sun are black. North is at the top and east to the left. 


than a year earlier. In figure 2, the maximum phase for — sunspot number) and persists into early 1983. The counts 
ephemeral regions is reached in early 1978, more than a of ephemeral regions also appear to vary on time scales of 
year earlier than for other parameters of solar activity (e.g. several rotations in some cases coincident with the pulses 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Solar Active Regions: Ephemeral 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


250 tT 2789 

be: 4 > 

o) |. e =| 3 
E eo °¢ irae | bbag 
a 7 o 
5 - ¢ ° eel ° s 
2 é ° a 
1S) r 8 > e ° e 
by a ° e @ ° 0° | © 
& 150 }— co ° * 1650 © 
° fo} fo} e S 

» r % ° % 7 c 
© L } of ) | > 
me L ae e 4 J 5 
& L ° Fy 4 faa 
® ‘s ui 
2 100K . es alt00 
§ le. 9° ee 6 | o 
Ej oe 4 6 e 
2 [ fo} 7 =) 
i ° 26 e 4 Ze 

50K "e —]550 
OO 
1970. 1974. 1978. 1982. 1986. 
Year 


Figure 2. The cycle variation in the number of ephemeral 
regions observed at any given time (left scale). These numbers 
are converted to the number of regions per day (right scale) 
assuming an average lifetime of 4.4 h. The estimated errors, 
shown by the vertical bars, are derived from the square roots of 
the number of regions, normalized as per the data points. The 
smoothed sunspot number (light dotted curve) is shown for 
comparison. 


of activity that are seen in other measures of solar activity, 
such as the 10.7 cm radio flux. 

From the minimum to the maximum phase of cycle 
21, the ephemeral region counts increase by a factor of 2.0 
to 2.5. This is substantially smaller than the factor of 8 
observed for numbers of larger active regions. 

If it is assumed that the average lifetime of 4.4 h 
is valid for any time in the cycle, then the number of 
ephemeral regions emerging on the Sun per day increases 
from 870 during their minimum to about 1900 during 
maximum phase. This range is consistent with the number 
of ephemeral regions emerging per day determined from 
their frequency of emergence. 


Spatial distribution of ephemeral regions 

Ephemeral regions can be observed at any solar latitude. 
Figure 3 shows the variation in their distribution both in 
latitude and in relation to larger active regions during 
a solar cycle. The distribution in latitude of ephemeral 
regions roughly corresponds to a function that describes 
how easily ephemeral regions are observed as a function of 
their distance from the disk center. This correspondence 
indicates that outside the latitudes where active regions 
occur, the distribution of ephemeral regions is nearly 
uniform. There are, however, significant departures that 
are related to active region belts. The low-latitude peaks 
in the distribution for 1975 to 1976, for example, coincide 
with the activity of outgoing cycle 20. At higher latitudes 
during 1975 to 1978 are peaks in the distributions related to 
the increase of cycle-21 active regions; these peaks increase 
in amplitude and shift systematically toward the equator 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


min 21-22 
LP 


> 
(o) 
Q 
L 
oO 
Oo 4 max 21 1979-1982 
0p) = oh al 
8 Dn = 
o 2 YY =a 
ax = Yi — 
°) 6) WAAC 
D 
2 tise 21 1977-1978 
E 3 
Z VAR. 7 
1 Y, 4 
) 
min 20-21 1975-1976 
3 : 
. north PDD. south 7 
1 a4 WT, ‘yj; 4 etl 
0 al. e fo} fo} oO ‘ a fo} 
60° 40° 20 0° —20° —40°%60 
Latitude 


Figure 3. Distribution of ephemeral regions in heliographic 
latitude during five phases in the rise and decline of cycle 21. 
The lightly hatched histograms are in equal surface area bins in 
sine latitude. The more closely hatched histograms, rescaled to 
fit the plot, are the latitude distributions of active regions for 
cycles 20, 21 and 22. Cycle-21 active regions have their hatching 
in the same direction as the ephemeral regions and cycle 20 and 
22 regions are perpendicular. 


over the cycle, following the emergence pattern of active 
regions during a cycle. 

Two to three years prior to the first appearance 
of sunspot regions belonging to a new cycle, a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions: Ephemeral 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Latitude 


i Cy 20 
i 


Ia a Be a a 
Cy 23 


Cy 22 
ir er tier 


90° 


1950. 1960. 19°70. 


Latitude 


1980. 
Year 


1980. 1990. 2000. 


Figure 4. Superposition of the butterfly diagram of sunspot regions with the latitude extent of ephemeral regions having the same 
preferential orientation. Top panel: Ephemeral regions identified as Ca II K regions are indicated by vertical bars and as magnetic 
bipoles by boxes. Sunspot regions in even-numbered cycles are shown as o and in odd-number cycles as x. Bottom panel: An overlay 
of the latitudinal extent of ephemeral regions (vertical bars) relative to sunspot regions during cycle 21. The heavy dashed curves 


indicate the boundaries between activity of two concurrent cycles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Active Regions: Ephemeral 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


persistent and expanding pattern with preferential reverse 
orientation ephemeral regions appears at latitudes in both 
hemispheres poleward of 30°. As shown in both panels of 
figure 4, this pattern persists and merges with the pattern 
of new-cycle sunspot regions. As this pattern develops, 
ephemeral regions at lower latitudes still have a clear 
tendency for bipole orientations that are proper for the 
older cycle. The preferentially reverse-orientation, high- 
latitude ephemeral regions are interpreted to be the first 
emergence of bipolar regions associated with the onset of 
a new cycle. The early appearance of new cycle activity 
in the form of small bipoles (top panel of figure 4) was 
observed in cycles 19 to 21 as small Ca II K plage regions; 
these small plage regions are spatially and temporally 
consistent with the pattern of small reverse-orientation 
magnetic bipoles in cycles 21 to 23. The high-latitude 
patterns of ephemeral regions suggest that they are a 
common feature of solar activity, and they mark the onset 
of a new solar cycle substantially earlier than would be 
indicated by sunspot regions. The latitudes and timing of 
ephemeral regions extends the sunspot butterfly pattern 
to an earlier time and higher latitudes. 


Are ephemeral regions active regions? 

There are many similarities between the properties of 
ephemeral regions and larger active regions strongly 
suggesting that a substantial fraction of these small bipoles 
are in fact the small end of a wide size distribution 
of active regions. The similar preferential orientations, 
temporal variations and co-spatial peaks in the latitude 
distribution of ephemeral regions and the larger active 
regions indicate that these small-scale regions are related 
to the large-scale emergence pattern of solar activity. Their 
wider latitude distribution and lower amplitude variation 
from minimum to maximum suggests that the population 
of ephemeral regions is a composite of activity related 
small bipoles and what appears to be a nearly uniform 
component. 


Importance of ephemeral regions to the global 
magnetic field pattern 

Recent observations by sono/ MDI (Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory/Michelson Doppler Imager) indicate that 
ephemeral regions play a significant role in maintaining 
the magnetic fields on the solar surface. As ephemeral 
regions emerge and evolve, their magnetic poles separate 
and encounter existing magnetic flux. During these 
encounters, the magnetic fields of most of the ephemeral 
regions will ‘cancel’ with opposite polarity magnetic 
networks, leaving the pole having the same polarity as 
the network somewhat displaced from the cancellation 
site. As a result of this process, the magnetic field of 
an ephemeral region has effectively replaced some of 
the existing magnetic flux. It is found that ephemeral 
regions emerge in sufficient numbers to completely 
replace the magnetic fields in the quiet Sun regions 
within about 40 h, leaving the large-scale pattern of 
magnetic polarities unchanged. This ‘cancellation’ process 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and the resulting reconfiguration of the magnetic fields 
(magnetic reconnection) can result in localized heating in the 
chromosphere and corona (See SOLAR CORONA: X-RAY BRIGHT 
Points), and therefore, may be an important source for 
CORONAL HEATING. 


Bibliography 

Harvey K Land Martin S F 1973 Ephemeral active regions 
Solar Phys. 32 389-402 

Harvey K L, Harvey J W and Martin S F 1975 Ephemeral 
active regions in 1970 and 1973 Solar Phys. 40 87-102 

Martin S F and Harvey K L 1979 Ephemeral active regions 
during solar minimum Solar Phys. 64 93-108 

Schrijver C J, Title A M, Harvey K L, Sheeley N R Jr, 
Wang J-M, van den Oord G HJ, Shine R A, Tarbell T 
Dand Hurlburt N E 1998 Large-scale coronal heating 
by the dynamic, small-scale magnetic field of the Sun 
Nature 394 152-3 

Schrijver C J and Zwaan C 1999 Solar and Stellar Magnetic 
Activity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Karen Harvey 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Complexes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Activity Complexes 


SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS tend to cluster in space and time by 
emerging in or beside an existing active region or at the site 
of a previous one. Whereas an individual bipolar sunspot 
region (See SUNSPOT CLASSIFICATION) typically lasts from a 
few days to a few weeks—rarely as long as a few solar 
rotations—a cluster may survive for over a year, kept alive 
by fresh bipolar regions repeatedly emerging within the 
small area which delimits the cluster. This tendency has 
been recognized since the early 18th century but it is only 
in recent decades that its implications have had an effect 
on DYNAMO THEORY and on studies of interacting magnetic 
fields at the solar surface (see MAGNETIC RECONNECTION). 


Identifying clusters of sunspot regions 

Various names have been invented to describe this phe- 
nomenon. Compilers of the Greenwich Photoheliographic 
Results in the 19th century recorded clusters as ‘revivals’, 
not mere ‘recurrences’, of sunspot regions on successive 
27 day solar rotations. Recently introduced terms include 
‘Sonnenfleckenherde’ (U Becker), ‘complex of activity’ (V 
Bumba and R Howard) and ‘sunspot nests’ (M Casten- 
miller, C Zwaan and E van der Zalm). The last of these 
names was chosen to imply closeness for the emerging 
bipolar regions and persistence of their rejuvenation far 
beyond any single region’s lifetime. Below, ‘sunspot nest’ 
is used chiefly for discussing statistical properties of the 
clusters and their bipolar sunspot contents, while ‘activity 
complex’ is reserved for issues concerning the distribution 
of magnetic flux in and around clusters. 


Statistical methods 

Sunspot nests can be identified from tabulations of sunspot 
positions such as the Greenwich Photoheliographic Results 
by defining selection rules and then applying objective 
statistical methods to distinguish between real clusters 
and those produced by chance. Mathematical techniques 
at different levels of sophistication have been applied 
to selected epochs drawn from this data base. Several 
studies, reviewed by C Zwaan and K Harvey, confirm 
the non-random nature of the space-time distribution of 
sunspot groups. Basic properties found for nests include 
compactness (areas much smaller than a medium-—large 
sunspot group, provided that due allowance is made for 
differential rotation (See SUN: BASIC PROPERTIES) of the nests), 
ubiquity (at least 30% of all sunspot groups), a steady rate 
of rotation about the Sun (but unique to each nest) and 
lifetimes up to about 15 solar rotations (allowing for gaps 
up to 2.5 rotations). If substantially longer interruptions 
are allowed, then some nests may even last a few years. 
There is also a strong tendency for nests to cluster yet again 
in still larger nests: more than a third of the compact nests 
are components of composite nests. The components can 
be quite close in latitude (<2.5°) and longitude (<25°), 
although pairs of nests sometimes differ in longitude by 
as much as 60° to form ‘superclusters’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Other aspects of the clustering phenomenon are re- 
vealed from magnetic data of the line-of-sight component 
of the photospheric magnetic flux, By (see SOLAR MAGNETIC 
FIELD: POLARIMETRY). The daily full-disk magnetograms (fig- 
ure 1(a)) produced at the Vacuum Telescope of the National 
Solar Observatory (NSO) at Kitt Peak, Arizona (see SOLAR 
TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: GROUND), are especially useful 
in this regard because of their high resolution (1" pix- 
els), high dynamic range (3 orders of magnitude in the 
magnetic flux density) and high continuity in the flow of 
data. White patches in figure 1 denote positive (outward- 
directed) magnetic fields, black patches denote negative 
polarity. This bipolar signal has an overriding advantage 
for defining the boundaries of active regions: it makes 
their evolution and their tendency to cluster much easier 
to follow from the critical moment of their birth than do, 
for example, white-light photographs of sunspots. 

Thus the ‘great complex of activity’ enclosed by a 
box in figure 1(a) can be readily decomposed during 
this particular disk passsage into five individual bipolar 
regions (A-E), of which three are nested inside one 
another (figure 1(b)). This example also serves to raise 
a cautionary note about the significance of the word 
‘complex’. These multiply nested emergences reveal a 
complicated pattern of polarity reversals. Yet it took a 
long time after the last emergence to develop magnetic 
complexity of the kind associated with intense current 
sheets and MHD instabilities resulting in large flares (see 
SOLAR FLARE MAGNETIC FIELDS). The evidence to date does not 
favor clustering as the sole process for building up the 
extreme magnetic complexity of spots classified as a 6 
configuration. Large 6 spots are relatively rare and shorter 
lived than normal spots of the same size; they seldom last 
more than one passage across the solar disk. This means 
that their complexity has, on average, to be produced very 
quickly, at or even before their emergence. 

K Harvey surveyed nearly 1000 newly emerged 
bipolar active regions larger than 2.5 square heliographic 
degrees (373 Mm?) chosen from 29 intervals of above- 
average continuity in the daily flow of magnetograms at 
NSO between 1975 and 1986. She found that sunspot nests 
were rejuvenated by the emergence of new bipolar regions 
at intervals of, typically, 4-5 days. The number of regions 
that emerge in nests is comparable with emergences 
elsewhere in the activity belts: from 40% to possibly 55% of 
all active regions emerge inside nests. However, the rates 
of emergence, defined as the number of emergences per 
day per unit available surface area, differ drastically: new 
regions are at least 22 times more likely to emerge within 
existing sunspot regions than elsewhere. 


Pictorial methods 

A convincing illustration of the clustering phenomenon is 
made with a stackplot (figure 2), a method first adopted 
for the NSO synoptic magnetic maps by V Gaizauskas 
and co-workers. This figure assembles data, separately 
for each hemisphere, for 100 Carrington rotations (SOLAR 
ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM RECORDS) during solar cycle 21. It was 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Complexes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


C) FLUX 


CARRINGTON ROTATION 


2) 


1668 


90 


180 270 360 


Figure 1. NSO (Kitt Peak) magnetograms and synoptic maps (courtesy of J W and K L Harvey): (a) full disk on 27 May 1978 with the 
‘great complex of activity’ boxed in; (b) a close-up view of the boxed area (8' x 8’) and with individual bipolar active regions outlined 
with dashed curves; (c) a synoptic map of the magnetic flux density for Carrington rotation 1668; the horizontal scale is the Carrington 
longitude increasing westward (right), while the vertical scale is heliographic latitude; the rotation begins on the extreme right on 7 
May 1978 and ends at the extreme right on 2 June 1978; the white box encloses the same portion of the great complex as panel (a) of this 


figure. 


constructed by stacking 30° wide latitudinal strips, one per 
Carrington rotation, extracted from successive synoptic 
maps of By (e.g. figure 1(c)). Longitude (L) increases from 
left (east) to right and extends for another one-third of 
a rotation to provide continuity for clusters formed near 
L = 0°; time (t) advances downward. Inthe ~7.5 yr period 
sampled here the activity belts migrate equatorward from 
the latitude of 40° used as the maximum of the strips at 
the beginning of the sample. The central latitude of each 
30° wide strip was therefore shifted according to Sp6rer’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


law (SOLAR CYCLE) before the data were extracted from the 
full synoptic maps. The maps are uncompensated for the 
differential rotation of the Sun; their frame of reference 
rotates rigidly at the Carrington synodic period of 27.275 
days. 

In the L-t plane note the linear tracks of different 
lengths, spacings and slopes which are sometimes double, 
often diverging, sometimes converging. These tracks 
locate activity complexes; they share many properties in 
common with sunspot nests. Thus a nest rotating around 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Complexes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SYNODIC 
ROTATION 
NO. 
1655 


1660 


1665 


1675 
1680 
1685 
1690 4 
M1695 


1700 


DaromeH< 
arm~< 


1705 
i710 
I715 
1720 
1725 -| 

5-730 lee 
1735 
1740 
1745 


1750 


o 360° 


LONGITUDE LONGITUDE 


Figure 2. Active belts in both hemispheres of the Sun for 100 
Carrington rotations during solar cycle 21. Construction, 
courtesy of J W Harvey, is described in the text. 


the Sun at the Carrington rate produces a vertical track. 
Nests rotating faster than the Carrington rate produce 
tracks sloping down to the west (right); nests lagging 
behind the Carrington rate produce tracks sloping down 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to the east (left). 

The pattern of tracks changes with the phase of the 
solar cycle—widely spaced in longitude during the onset 
(1977-1978) and the decay (1982-1983), but more closely 
packed (1979, N hemisphere) or even chaotic (1979-1980, 
S hemisphere) during the maximum phase. Even during 
highly active periods there can be longitudinal zones over 
90° wide which are relatively free of activity (centered 
near 0°, N hemisphere, early in 1980, and near 190°, S 
hemisphere, in mid-1981). Some complexes are fully active 
for an entire year (1982, N hemisphere, near L = 330°); 
others fade out after a brief period of recurrent activity only 
to revive a few rotations later for further lively rotations 
(1982, N hemisphere, near L = 120°). 

The existence of so many cohesive tracks enables a 
number of important inferences to be drawn about activity 
complexes. They usually appear and end quickly—within 
1 solar rotation. The linearity of most tracks means that 
activity complexes are unaffected by differential rotation 
over many rotations; only when the injection of fresh 
flux stops are the weak remnants differentially sheared. 
Magnetic flux does not accumulate in an activity complex. 
The ‘great complex’ depicted in figures 1(a) and 1(b) had 
at least 24 additional major bipolar regions emerge within 
it, for a total of 29, over a period of 6 solar rotations, 
yet the total flux in the complex remained near a steady 
level of 10°? Mx. During its active lifetime a complex 
loses as much flux as it gains. The greater part of the 
flux disappears locally, within the complex; only a minor 
portion is carried poleward by meridional circulation (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE). At times a wavelike pattern of eight 
regularly spaced bands of alternating polarity is noticeable 
around the entire Sun. 

Very little drift in latitude is evident in complexes 
or in the tightly bounded sunspot nests. In particular, 
there is no meridional spreading of magnetic flux across 
the solar equator during the active lifetime of an activity 
complex. Hence the term ‘active solar longitude’, a 
popular one employed in solar—terrestrial studies, is open 
to misinterpretation and should be avoided. 


Interpretation 
The flux densities and spacing of activity complexes 
have important quantitative consequences for theoretical 
dynamo models of stars (DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR). E N 
Parker has pointed out that the gaps in longitude between 
activity complexes are so wide as to limit severely the 
reconnection between them. So small a portion of the 
emerging flux is able to reconnect and escape that the 
surface of the Sun resembles an impenetrable barrier rather 
than an open surface. The localized disappearance of the 
surface magnetic flux suggests an active dynamical control 
by subsurface convection. 

The arrival of intense magnetic fields in bursts at 
a few localized sites has been modeled by Parker as a 
thermal relaxation oscillator. He conceives an intense 
azimuthal magnetic field (>3 kG) pressed down into 
the lower convective zone (SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Complexes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ZONE) by its thermal shadow. The accumulation of heat 
beneath the field causes the gas heated below to penetrate 
intermittently through the field, sending thermal plumes 
of gas with entrained fields to the surface at irregular 
intervals ~1 week. 

D Wentzel and P Seiden reproduced the quasi- 
regular distribution of active regions in clusters by using 
percolation theory. Their model bundles complicated 
MHD and turbulent processes into two dimensionless 
parameters: one to express the probability for the release 
and rise of one flux tube to stimulate the subsequent 
release and rise of its neighbors; the other to measure the 
lifetime of flux once it arrives at the surface. Wentzel and 
Seiden argue that if thermal plumes were the only cause 
of rising flux tubes, then the resulting surface patterns 
would not exhibit any of the correlations apparent in active 
regions. They suggest that flux tubes are released instead 
by magnetic dissipation of turbulently distorted magnetic 
fields. 

Further progress in elucidating the phenomenon 
of sunspot clusters awaits helioseismic tomography of 
subsurface layers of the Sun (see HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS) 
with instruments on board the space satellite soHo 
(Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) and at the ground- 
based observatories of GONG (GLOBAL OSCILLATION NETWORK 
GROUP). 


Bibliography 

Gaizauskas V, Harvey K L, Harvey J W and Zwaan C 1983 
Large-scale patterns formed by solar active regions 
during the ascending phase of cycle 21 Astrophys. J. 
265 1056-65 

Harvey-Angle K L 1993 Magnetic bipoles on the Sun PhD 
Thesis Astronomical Institute, Utrecht 

Parker E N 1987 The dynamical oscillation and propulsion 
of magnetic fields in the convective zone of a star: I. 
General considerations Astrophys. J. 312 868-79 

Wentzel D G and Seiden P E 1992 Solar active regions as a 
percolation phenomenon Astrophys. J. 390 280-9 

Zwaan C and Harvey K L 1994 Patterns in the solar 
magnetic field Solar Magnetic Fields ed M Schiissler 
and W Schmidt (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 27-48 


Victor Gaizauskas 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Indices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Activity Indices 


Solar activity is driven by the temporally and spatially 
varying distribution of magnetic flux in the photosphere, 
chromosphere and corona. It covers a range of phenomena 
at all levels in the solar atmosphere and time-scales 
ranging from seconds and minutes (SOLAR FLARES and SOLAR 
CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS), through months (the evolution of 
ACTIVE REGIONS and SOLAR ACTIVITY COMPLEXES), to the 11 (or 22) 
yr solar activity cycle. Being able to express aspects of that 
activity in terms of single indices is useful for studying the 
Sun’s long-term behavior, comparing the Sun with other 
stars or investigating its role as a driver for various space 
and terrestrial phenomena. Lang (1995) gives a useful 
overview of the Sun, its activity and its connection with the 
Earth. Zirin (1988) provides a more focused discussion on 
solar astrophysics. Some indices, such as sunspot number, 
require imaging the solar disk, and, until we can similarly 
map other stars, are confined to solar applications. Others, 
suchas the Ca II H and K indices or the 10.7 cm solar (radio) 
flux, are measurements of emission integrated over the 
Sun’s visible disk and are therefore measurable in other 
stars. 

The longest continuous record of solar activity is 
provided by sunspot counts (sunspot number). In 1946 
measurements began of another index, the 10.7 cm solar 
flux. This is more consistent and objective than sunspot 
number, and so may be more applicable to studies covering 
the last few decades. More recently, other indices of 
activity have become available. In this article we will 
discuss indices of solar activity and the relationships 
between them. A single index cannot fully describe the 
level of solar activity. Although the indices discussed here 
are those which are most widely used, more specialized 
studies might involve using other manifestations of solar 
activity as indices. Therefore this discussion should not be 
regarded as complete. 


Activity indices 

An index of solar activity is a quantity intended to 
describe some aspect of activity for the Sun as a whole. 
Although the Sun is highly complex, and we are far 
from understanding all the processes taking place in the 
centers where activity takes place, or even the small-scale 
magnetic and plasma structures within them, similarities 
and large-scale patterns are present in almost all aspects 
of solar activity. This is because all manifestations of solar 
activity are driven by the same ‘engine’: the temporally 
and spatially varying distribution of magnetic flux in the 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE, CHROMOSPHERE and CoRONA. In principle, 
determinations of magnetic flux would provide the best 
general-purpose single index of solar activity. However, 
this cannot be measured directly. Instead we use as 
indices of solar activity quantities which are driven or 
strongly modulated by magnetic fields. By appropriate 
choices of index we can describe activity at different 
levels in the solar atmosphere. Figure 1 shows the cyclic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Soft X-Rays 


; Pe 


Faculae 


see Ay 
a sia a Ale 


Fioz 


sl My 

Number 

1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
Year 


Figure 1. Monthly averages of various indices of solar activity 
plotted against time for the period 1975-99. Sunspot number, 
magnetic flux and facular area are indices that are photospheric 
in origin. The 10.7 cm solar flux is coronal, but is highly 
correlated with sunspot number, and is therefore plotted 
adjacent to it. The He I plot is a chromospheric index, and the 
upper plots (Fe XIV and soft x-rays) describe activity in the 
corona. 


variability of several activity indices over the period 1975- 
99. Sunspot number is a photospheric phenomenon. 
The 10.7 cm solar flux is coronal, but correlates very 
strongly with sunspot number. Most active regions 
contain FACULAE, which are visible in white light, and 
stand out more clearly with increasing angular distance 
from disk center. The total facular area is related the 
total magnetic flux and is therefore a useful index of 
solar activity. The temperatures (of the order of 10* K) 
and densities of plasma concentrations supported in 
chromospheric magnetic fields give rise to some useful 
spectral lines. The lines most widely used as activity 
indices are the H and K lines of Ca II and Mg II and 
the 1083 nm line from He I. In the corona, temperatures 
are of the order of 10° K and densities are much lower 
than they are in the chromosphere. Useful indices of 
activity are provided by emission lines such as Fe XIV, 
the 530.2 nm coronal green line and soft x-rays, which are 
produced by thermal bremsstrahlung (free-free) emission 
from concentrations of hot plasma. All these indices 
are strongly modulated by the ebb and flow of magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Indices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


200 


ag Sew 
oO ££ 
Oo oO 


Sunspot Number 
3 
Oo 


ol ies LA 


NTA 


1700 1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 
Year 


Figure 2. Monthly means of sunspot number between 1700 and 
present. This is the longest, consistent record of solar activity 
available. Note the variations in the amplitudes of the maxima 
and minima from cycle to cycle, and that the cycles vary in 
length. 


flux over the solar activity cycle and remarkably highly 
correlated, which emphasizes the strong role of magnetic 
fields in all observable manifestations of solar activity. 


Photosphere 

sunspots have been observed since the earliest days of 
astronomy, probably for more than three millennia. In 
the Western world they were rediscovered in the 17th 
century by Galileo and Scheiner. Systematic observations 
of sunspot number were well under way by the beginning 
of the 18th century. Schwabe (1789-1875) was the first to 
identify the 11 yr periodicity in sunspotnumber. However, 
these data, available through various sources, were put on 
a more systematic basis by Wolf (1816-93), who defined 
the partly empirical ‘Zurich sunspot number’, given by 
R, = K (10g + f), where R, is the Zurich sunspot number, 
g is the number of sunspot groups, which are always 
assumed to contain 10 members, and f the number of 
single spots. The parameter K, known as the personal 
reduction coefficient, is a scaling factor taking into account 
the instrumentation, site quality and observer skills and 
practices for each source of data. In practice, K ranges 
between about 0.55 and unity. Ideally, there should be no 
need for parameters specific to individual observatories or 
observers, i.e. K = 1, which is the value Wolf used for his 
own observations. However, in order to relate modern 
data obtained using more sensitive instrumentation to 
older data, lower values of K need to be used. For more 
information on the history and the scientific background 
of the sunspot number index, see Zirin (1988), chapter 10, 
and Wilson (1994), chapters 1, 2 et seq. 

Despite its rather empirical definition, the Zurich 
sunspot number (usually simply referred to as sunspot 
number) is a useful index of solar activity. It is monitored 
at several observatories and yields a continuous record 
of solar activity dating back at least to the early 18th 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


= 
ye] 
oO 


= 
oo fo} 
oO oO 

L 
ar 


£ 
is) 


MDMAA NAT 
ea ag 


1975 1980 1985 
Year 


Magnetic Flux in Units of 10E22Mx 
fon) 
ro) 
= 
2 


ie] 
oO 
4 


Figure 3. Monthly means of the photospheric magnetic flux over 
a solar cycle. The upper plot shows the total flux contained in all 
flux elements, the middle curve the total magnetic flux 
contained in strong-field elements, with average magnetic field 
strengths stronger than 25 G, and the lower curve, which shows 
little variation over the solar cycle, the total magnetic flux in 
weak-field elements, where the average magnetic field strengths 
are less than 25 G (total; = strong, + weak;). 


century (See SOLAR ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM RECORDS). Such time- 
scales are needed for studies of trends in solar activity 
and in terrestrial CLIMATE studies. Figure 2 shows a plot 
of monthly means of the sunspot number dating back to 
1700. This is the longest, most consistent record of solar 
activity observations available. It has been possible to 
extend the sunspot number record back to at least AD 
1600. Total sunspot area would probably provide a better 
indicator of total magnetic flux, as would total plage or 
facular areas. However, these data are not as available 
as sunspot number. Zirin (1988) reports that, over many 
years of observations, the solar community has established 
that a usable estimate of total sunspot area can be obtained 
by multiplying the sunspot number by 16.7. 

Measurements of magnetic field strength at the 
photosphere are now made routinely by determining 
the degree of Zeeman splitting of selected photospheric 
spectral lines. Magnetograms showing the distribution of 
magnetic flux over the solar disk have been made regularly 
for roughly two solar activity cycles. Harvey (1994) shows 
that magnetic elements in the photosphere fall into two 
broad classes: weak-field elements, having average magnetic 
field strengths smaller than 25 G and strong-field elements, 
where the average magnetic field strength exceeds that 
value. Figure 3 shows a plot of the total magnetic flux 
over the solar sphere plotted over a solar cycle, together 
with the totals of magnetic flux strong-field elements and 
weak-field elements. 

The variation of total magnetic flux over the solar 
activity cycle shows clearly the ebb and flow of activity 
and the formation and decay of active regions and activity 
complexes (these entities are described in Gaizauskas et al 
1983). However, this occurs almost entirely in elements 
with magnetic fields stronger than 25 G. When the total 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Indices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


300 


ie) 
a 
oO 


nN 

fo} 

oO 
L 


=a 

a 

ro) 
— 


F10.7 in solar flux units 


ai cne. Ui 


50 1 1 : ; 1 ; 
1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 


Year 


Figure 4. Monthly means of the 10.7 cm solar flux between 1946 
and present. With this index the shape of the cycle is much more 
apparent, and it is possible to see the fluctuations of up to a year 
or so due to the appearance and decay of complexes of activity. 
There is a constant background component due to thermal 
emission from the quiet solar disc, which has a flux density of 
about 64 solar flux units. 


magnetic flux in these strong-field elements is subtracted 
from the total magnetic flux in all elements, the remainder, 
which is the total magnetic flux in weak-field elements, 
shows little variation over the solar activity cycle. Harvey 
(1994) and Schrijver (1986) note that the total magnetic flux 
seems to correlate with the total area of active regions, as 
represented by total PLAGE area and other indices, and that 
it can be broken into contributions from individual active 
regions on the basis of their areas. 


Chromosphere 

Chromospheric activity can be monitored through mea- 
surements of the millimeter-wavelength emission inte- 
grated over the solar disk. These emissions are purely 
free-free thermal emission from plasmas trapped in ac- 
tive region magnetic fields. However, because the chro- 
mosphere is not much hotter than the photosphere, 
millimeter-wavelength emission from active regions is 
only slightly hotter than the background emission from 
the solar disk. Moreover, atmospheric attenuation makes 
these measurements difficult to make from the ground on 
any regular basis. They need to be made from space plat- 
forms. The most widely used indices of chromospheric 
activity are derived from spectral lines. The main ones 
are the H and K lines of Ca II and Mg II. These have the 
great additional advantage that they can be used to study 
chromospheric activities in other stars. Another spectral 
line widely used for monitoring chromospheric variability 
is the 1083 nm line produced by He I. This line is purely 
chromospheric in origin, although there is evidence that 
this line is ‘pumped’ to some extent by ultraviolet emis- 
sion from the corona. 


Corona 


The slowly varying component of solar radio emission 
provides an excellent activity index. This emission is best 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


300 


250 + 


De) 
f=} 
oO 


= 
a 
oO 


F10.7 in solar flux units 


= 
fo} 
o 


0 50 100 150 200 250 
Sunspot Number 


Figure 5. Plot of monthly means of the 10.7 cm flux plotted 
against similarly averaged values of the sunspot number. The 
two indices are highly correlated. The reduction in slope for 
sunspot numbers less than about 30 may be due to low levels of 
photospheric activity not generating much activity in the 
overlying corona. 


observed in the wavelength range 2-50 cm but shows 
the largest variability over the solar cycle at wavelengths 
around 10 cm. It is thermal in origin and is dominated 
by free-free emission from plasma concentrations trapped 
over active regions. It also contains a contribution 
from gyroresonance at low harmonics of the electron 
gyrofrequency, originating in the corona over sunspots 
(Kriiger et al 1985; Tapping 1987; Tapping and Harvey 
1994), and maybe some non-thermal radio emission. The 
10.7 cm solar flux index, also referred to as F10.7, Fj97 or 
F,9, is a measurement of the slowly varying component at 
10.7 cm wavelength. Its advantage over sunspot number 
is that it is an objective measurement that can be made in 
almost any weather. The monthly averages of Fio.7 from 
1947 to the present are shown in figure 4. It is expressed 
in solar flux units, where one solar flux unit (or sfu) is 
10-% W m~? Hz. It now forms a continuous, consistent 
record covering more than 50 yr. In the optical part of the 
spectrum, the coronal green line at 530.2 nm wavelength is a 
very useful index. This strong emission line is produced by 
Fe XIV. Other useful spectral lines include Fe X (637.3 nm), 
Fe XI (789.2 nm) and Fe XIII (1076.8 nm). 

Thermal emission in the x-ray wavelength region is 
significant for plasmas with electron temperatures of 10°K 
or more. This radiation is produced entirely by free—free 
transitions and is probably the ‘purest’ index of coronal 
activity. Its disadvantage is that it has to be measured 
from space platforms, where it is difficult to obtain long- 
term, consistent, continuous records. The data here were 
obtained from the GOES satellite. 


Comparing indices 

The plots in figure 1 show significant correlations between 
the indices, despite their being produced at different 
locations in the solar atmosphere and by different 
processes. The most striking correspondences are between 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Indices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


140 
= 
w 120 + >25 Gauss : 
Phy » <25 Gauss ee 
=) ~ at 
= 100 + Total ras 
6 a oa 
g Lene: 
= tat ae 
2 a oh vas - 
= “ Mg Spe 
x 60 we 
= fo fe fee 
L Tr sooo oe 
o 40 rar 7 re 
= tae ee ee 
2 Bae cbs a 
Hy 20 rr 
“ee 
¢? 
= : , : 


50 100 150 200 250 300 
F10.7 in solar flux units 


Figure 6. Monthly means of the weak-field and strong-field 
magnetic elements plotted against the 10.7 cm solar flux. The 
weak-field elements show no relationship with the 10.7 cm solar 
flux. However, the correlation with the strong-field elements is 
very strong. 


sunspot number, Fi97, the He I (1083 nm) line and total 
facular area. These indices are also highly correlated 
with total magnetic flux, although rather less so than they 
are with each other. The Fe XIV line correlates slightly 
less well (but still significantly), and the soft x-ray flux a 
little less again. When the short-duration, high peaks are 
removed, the remaining emission correlates well with Fio.7 
and sunspot number when activity is high, but not when 
it is low. 

Figure 5 shows a plot of sunspot number against 
Fio7. The correlation is high. However, there is a 
significant decline in the degree of correlation for sunspot 
numbers smaller than about 30. Figure 6 shows a similar 
plot of total magnetic flux against Fjo7. In this case 
elements of photospheric magnetic flux are divided into 
two classes: strong-field elements with average magnetic 
fluxes exceeding 25 G and weak-field elements with 
average field strengths less than this value. The total 
magnetic flux from all elements correlates well with Fo 7, 
but this variation comes almost entirely from the strong- 
field elements. 

These varying but usually high degrees of correlation 
can be largely understood when we consider the various 
levels in the solar atmosphere at which these emissions 
originate. If magnetic fields are the engine driving 
all manifestations of solar activity, it is intriguing that 
the total photospheric flux does not correlate perfectly 
with sunspot number, Fio7 and He I. The not-perfect 
correlation with sunspot number could be due to not 
all active regions having sunspots, and the maxima of 
plage area and sunspot number not occurring at the same 
time in the evolution of an active region. In the case 
of indices using chromospheric and coronal emissions, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


it is possible that not all elements of photospheric flux 
stronger than 25 G are associated with the footpoints of 
loops extending into the upper chromosphere and corona 
and which contain significant amounts of trapped plasma. 
The indices arise in these trapped plasmas. However, the 
strong magnetic fields in faculae and especially sunspots 
form loops extending into the overlying corona over 
their host active regions. These are good candidates for 
being plasma traps. This could account for there being a 
good correspondence to He I and Fj97, which originates 
primarily in the low corona. The soft x-ray flux is an 
exclusively coronal emission. This emission would only 
increase when activity extends to those heights. Therefore, 
we would expect poor correspondence when activity is 
low, as is observed. The Fe XIV line probably originates 
lower in the corona, hence the better correlation with 
other indices over the whole soLar cycLe. The high degree 
of correlation between the indices, particularly sunspot 
number, Fjo7, facular area and He I, indicates that we 
can use one of these indices as a proxy for the others. 
For example, for sunspot numbers bigger than about 
30, the sunspot number and Fjg7 are related by R, = 
1.14 x Fio7 — 73.21, and Fi97 and total magnetic flux can 
be related through the equation ® = 0.5 x Fio7 — 10, 
where ® is the total (strong-field) magnetic flux in units 
of 1072 Mx. 


Discussion 


The situation we have with solar activity indices is 
extremely fortunate for solar researchers. There are 
indices more-or-less specific to particular levels in the 
solar atmosphere, which are highly correlated with one 
another over (with the possible exception of the soft x- 
ray flux) the full variation in activity during the solar 
cycle. This would suggest that the emission processes (or 
mixes of processes) do not change suddenly as activity 
changes. The other implication is that all the activity 
indices are strongly modulated by the varying distribution 
of magnetic flux at and above the photosphere, in 
a more-or-less simple, linear way, probably in that 
the magnetic fields support the plasma concentrations 
producing the emissions forming the indices. If the 
temperatures (~10* K in the chromosphere and ~10° K in 
the corona) vary less than does the density, there is a fairly 
simple relationship: the more magnetic flux—the higher 
the density—the brighter the emission. 

The ability to summarize the various aspects of solar 
activity into a single quantity is highly useful. It makes 
it possible to study the long-term behavior of the Sun, to 
compare it with other stars and to investigate its role as a 
driver for processes on the Earth and in space. Considering 
the rich menagerie of phenomena embraced in the term 
solar activity, is is surprising and fortunate that single- 
parameter indices have proved valuable in many areas of 
solar and solar-related research. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity Indices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Acknowledgments 

The magnetic flux and He I (1083 nm) data used here were 
kindly provided by the National Solar Observatory at Kitt 
Peak. I would like to thank Karen Harvey particularly for 
providing some of the results of her research into solar 
magnetic activity. The sunspot number data and GOES 
soft x-ray observations were obtained from the National 
Geophysical Data Center, which is operated by the US 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The 
10.7 cm solar flux data are provided as a service by 
the National Research Council of Canada. The Fe 
XIV observations were made by the Czech Academy of 
Sciences. 


Bibliography 

Gaizauskas V, Harvey K L, Harvey J W and Zwaan C 1983 
Large-scale patterns formed by solar active regions 
during the ascending phase of cycle 21 Astrophys. J. 
265 1056-65 

Harvey K L 1994 Irradiance models based on solar 
magnetic fields The Sun as a Variable Star (IAU 
Colloq. 143) ed Pap, Frélich, Hudson and Solanki 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 220- 
5 

Kriiger A, Hildebrandt] and Furstenberg F 1985 A working 
model of the solar s-component radio emission 
Astron. Astrophys. 143 72-6 

Lang K R 1995 The Sun, Earth and Sky (Berlin: Springer) 

Schrijver C J 1986 Stellar magnetic activity PhD Thesis 
University of Utrecht 

Tapping K F 1987 Recent solar radio astronomy at 
centimeter wavelengths. The temporal variability of 
the 10.7 cm flux J. Geophys. Res. 92 829-38 

Tapping K F and Harvey K L Slowly-varying microwave 
emissions from the solar corona The Sun as a Variable 
Star (IAU Collog. 143) ed Pap, Frolich, Hudson and 
Solanki (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

p 182-95 

Wilson P R 1994 Solar and stellar activity cycles Cambridge 
Astrophysics Series No 24 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Zirin H 1988 Astrophysics of the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


K F Tapping 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity: Long-Term Records 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Activity: Long-Term Records 


Long-term records of solar activity show several interest- 
ing features. The most prominent one is the 11 yr cycle that 
can be traced back in the sunspot record to the 17th cen- 
tury. Indications of longer cycles have also been found, 
but are difficult to confirm due to the limited length of the 
observational period. Another interesting feature is the 
increasing trend of the solar activity between 1700 AD and 
today. This trend is interrupted by short periods of re- 
duced solar activity around 1900, 1800, and 1700. The last 
period, called the Maunder minimum (after E w MAUNDER), 
is by far the most pronounced one and lasted from 1645 to 
1715 AD. It is characterized by an almost complete absence 
of sunspots. 

Cosmogenic nuclides measured in tree rings and 
polar ice indicate that similar minima occurred several 
times during the past 10000 years. 

When analysing long-term records of solar activity we 
distinguish between direct and indirect proxies. Direct 
proxies are continuously or regularly recorded from 
ground-based as well as from space-borne instruments. 
In general their quality is high, but limited to the last few 
decades or centuries. Going back in time the number of 
continuous direct observations of phenomena related to 
solar activity decreases. Table 1 provides a list of the main 
proxies of solar activity that were recorded continuously 
for at least 50 yr with a time resolution of 1 yr or better. 


Table 1. Direct proxies of long-term solar activity. 


Solar activity proxy _ Records since 


Sunspots ~1600 
Aurorae ~1600 
Aa index 1844 
Neutrons 1937 


Direct proxies of solar activity 
SUNSPOTS are the most prominent proxies of solar activity. 
After the discovery of the 11 yr soar cycle by Schwabe 
in 1843 a well-defined observational program was set up 
by Wolf leading to the Zurich RELATIVE SUNSPOT NUMBER. 
Collecting all available information about earlier sunspot 
observations, Wolf reconstructed the sunspot record back 
to about AD 1610, the time when the telescope was 
invented. Pretelescopic observations are only sporadic 
and limited to relatively large spots. A re-examination 
based on an extended database of observations agrees well 
with the Zurich sunspot numbers since 1750, but differs 
somewhat for earlier times (Hoyt and Schatten 1998). 
AURORAE are spectacular colorful phenomena high 
up in the atmosphere which are mainly visible at 
high latitudes in both hemispheres (aurora borealis and 
aurora australis). They are due to ionization processes 
caused by the interaction of the SOLAR WIND with the 
atmosphere. Although well known since ancient times 
their connection to solar activity was only discovered in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1896 by Birkeland. To establish a consistent reliable record 
is difficult because their appearance is restricted mainly to 
two oval bands around the magnetic poles that are only 
sparsely populated (Legrand and Simon 1987). However, 
many strong individual events are reported that could also 
be seen in highly populated low-latitudinal areas. 

The aa index is a measure of the global disturbance 
of the geomagnetic field. It is derived from averaged 
two-hourly measurements at two antipodal stations (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC STORMS AND SOLAR WIND 
ORIGINS). The aa record goes back to 1844, about the time of 
the invention of the magnetometer (Mayaud 1973). 

The neutron flux in the atmosphere is produced by 
the interaction of galactic cosmic Ray particles (protons and 
alpha particles) with the atmosphere. The primary cosmic 
ray flux is modulated by the magnetic properties of the 
solar wind which prevent the low-energy particles from 
penetrating into the atmosphere. As a consequence the 
neutron flux recorded by neutron monitors is low during 
periods of high solar activity and vice versa. The longest 
record of a neutron monitor goes back to 1951 (Climax, 
CO, USA, operated by the University of Chicago). It can 
be combined with the record of the ionization chamber 
from Cheltenham, which was in operation between 1937 
and 1973. In figure 1 sunspots, aurorae and aa index are 
plotted with an annual resolution. All of them show clearly 
the 11 yr Schwabe cycle and a generally increasing trend. 
However, a detailed comparison reveals differences in 
amplitudes and phases that are due to the fact that, beside 
observational uncertainties, each solar proxy reflects a 
different aspect of solar activity. 


Indirect proxies of solar activity 

High-resolution direct observations of proxies for solar 
activity are restricted basically to the telescopic era starting 
in AD 1610. Earlier observations are sparse and usually 
not very reliable. At present, the only way to extend 
significantly the history of solar activity is to rely on 
indirect proxies. Cosmogenic radionuclides such as '’Be 
and *C proved to be useful tools for this purpose (Beer 
et al 1990, Stuiver and Braziunas 1993). 

Cosmogenic radionuclides are produced by the 
interaction of cosmic ray particles with the atmosphere. 
Be (half-life: 1.5 x 10° yr) is mainly produced at 
high energy by neutron-induced spallation reactions on 
nitrogen and oxygen, whereas “C (half-life: 5730 yr) is 
produced by thermal neutrons through the reaction “N(n, 
p)4C. The production rate for a particular cosmogenic 
nuclide j can be calculated for any point D within the 
atmosphere according to the formula: 


P\(D)=)°N; >> i} Oijx (Ex) Je(Ex, D) AE, 
i k v0 


where P;(D) is the production rate of nuclide j at position 
D, N; the density of target element i, 0;;,(E,) the cross 
section for the production of nuclide j by the particle k 
with energy E; interacting with the target element i and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity: Long-Term Records ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


250 FOSS ee (SN rR Oe (le Ol Cl a 35 


Sunspots / Aurorae 
xapul-ee 


1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 
250 
1 Sunspots O Aurorae G aa-index 

200 
150 


100 


xopul-ee 


50 


Sunspots / Aurorae 


1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 
Year 


Figure 1. Comparison of the three longest records of direct solar activity proxies. 


10Be Production Rate 


Rel. 


Figure 2. Calculated relative mean global production rate of !°Be in the atmosphere as a function of solar activity expressed by the 
parameter ¢ and the geomagnetic field intensity relative to its present value. The production rate 1 corresponds to 
0.018 !°Be atoms cm~* s~?. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Solar Activity: Long-Term Records 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1 [] Sunspots 
0.2 7 
[ Beryllium-10 


10Be [104 atoms g™!] 


1840 


1880 


200 
150 
n 
c 
—) 
100 2 
fo) 
o 
50 


1920 1960 


Year 


Figure 3. Comparison of the !°Be record from Dye 3, Greenland, with the sunspot record. The time scale of the !°Be record has been 


shifted by 1 yr to account for the atmospheric residence time. 


Ji (Ex, D) the differential flux of particle k with energy Ex 
at position D. 

J, (E;, D) can be calculated using a physical model 
simulating the interaction of primary cosmic ray particles 
with the atmosphere and the subsequent production 
and transport of secondary particles in the atmosphere 
(Masarik and Beer 1999). To describe the dependence of 
the primary cosmic ray proton flux on the solar activity 
the following parameterization is usually applied: 


E,(E, + 2m ,c?)(E » +x+)?5 
(E, + &)(E, + 2m,c? + d) 


J(Ep, 0) = Cp 


where x = 780 exp(—2.5 x 10-*E,), J (Ep, #) is the proton 
flux with energy E, for the solar modulation parameter 
¢, E, the proton energy, M,c* the proton rest mass 
(938 MeV) and C, a normalization factor C (1.244 x 
10° cm~* s“! MeV~'). ¢ = 1000 MeV corresponds to 
a very active Sun, ¢ = 0 MeV to a completely quiet 
Sun. The production rate P depends not only on the 
solar modulation parameter ¢ but also on the altitude 
in the atmosphere, the geomagnetic latitude and the 
geomagnetic dipole moment. In figure 2 the mean global 
production rate for '°Be is depicted as a function of the 
solar parameter ¢ and the geomagnetic field intensity 
relative to its present value. The production rate P is 
normalized to 1 for ¢ = 550 MeV and the geomagnetic 
field 1. During a typical 11 yr Schwabe cycle ¢ fluctuates 
between 450 and 750 MeV, leading to a mean global peak- 
to-trough ratio of 1.3 for '°Be and 1.4 for 4C. 

After production 'Be atoms in the atmosphere 
become attached to aerosols and are removed from the 
atmosphere after a mean residence time of about 1 yr 
mainly by wet deposition. 'C oxidizes to CO) and 
exchanges between atmosphere, ocean and biosphere with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


residence times in the last two of about 10 and 60 yr, 
respectively. To reconstruct the history of production 
variations natural archives can be used: ice sheets record 
continuously the Be concentration in precipitation and 
tree rings the MC concentration in the atmosphere. 

Measurements of cosmogenic nuclides in natural 
archives provide therefore information on several param- 
eters. 


1. Changes in the production rate caused either by solar 
or geomagnetic modulation. 

2. Changes in the system itself. Climate changes affect 
the system behavior. In the case of '"Be they influence 
the atmospheric transport and deposition processes. 
In the case of '*C changes in the size of the carbon 
reservoirs (atmosphere, biosphere, ocean) and in the 
exchange fluxes between them can occur, affecting 
the atmospheric '*C concentration. 


An interpretation of cosmogenic radionuclide records in 
terms of solar modulation needs therefore a detailed 
analysis of all possible involved processes in order to 
exclude geomagnetic modulation and system effects. 

System effects can relatively easily be identified 
by comparing ‘Be with “C variations. The two 
radionuclides are very similar regarding production but 
completely different regarding system effects. Therefore, 
a comparison using a carbon cycle model allows us to 
distinguish between production and system effects. The 
results of several comparisons confirm that both nuclides 
basically reflect changes of the production rate during the 
past centuries to millennia. 


Information on solar activity derived from 
cosmogenic radionuclides 

The 11 yr solar modulation of the 'Be production 
rate was found for the first time in an ice core from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Activity: Long-Term Records 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


150 : : : 
100 4 F 
Al4c 
[permil] 50 [ 
0) 4 a 
-50 T T T T T 
8000 6000 4000 2000 e) 2000 
Year [BC / AD] 


Figure 4. Al4C record measured in tree rings for the last 11 000 
years. The atmospheric #C/'C ratio was most of the time 
higher than today owing to a higher production rate. Note the 
peaks of typically 70-120 yr duration that indicate periods of 
low solar activity (e.g. Maunder minimum AD 1645-1715). 


Dye 3, Greenland, covering the time interval 1423- 
1985 (Beer et al 1994) (figure 3). The comparison of 
the Dye 3 record with the sunspot record shows in 
general the expected anticorrelation with a phase lag of 
1 yr. The periodicity over the time interval 1423-1985 
is 10.83 yr. The Dye 3 record also shows the 88 yr 
Gleissberg cycle which is difficult to derive from the 
sunspot record because its length is less than 400 yr. As a 
consequence of the strong damping effect of the carbon 
system on short-term variations the most prominent 
periodicity in the C record is the 205 yr De Vries cycle. 
Longer periodicities, which show up during certain time 
intervals in cosmogenic radionuclide records, cannot yet 
be attributed unambiguously to solar activity because they 
could also be due to changes in the geomagnetic dipole 
field. 

Anespecially interesting period in the sunspot record 
is the so-called Maunder minimum (AD 1645-1715). 
During this time interval only very few sunspots could 
be observed and the solar activity was very low, leading 
to an enhanced production rate of ‘Be and “C. Similar 
minima periods occurred earlier often at intervals of about 
200 yr (Spoerer around 1500, Wolf around 1300) and 
several others are visible in the AC curve during the last 
11000 years (figure 4). A'™C is defined as depletion or 
enhancement (in per mil) of the atmospheric C/"C ratio 
relative to the standard ratio. 

The absence of sunspots during solar activity minima 
does not mean that the solar dynamo was switched off. 
On the contrary, ‘Be shows a clear 11 yr Schwabe cycle 
during the Maunder minimum (Beer et al 1998). 

The results obtained so far show that, in spite of the 
difficulty in separating solar, geomagnetic and climatic 
effects, cosmogenic radionuclides do have the potential 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to extend the solar activity record back to several 10000 yr 
with a time resolution of 1 yr. 


Bibliography 

Beer J, Baumgartner S et al 1994 Solar variability traced by 
cosmogenic isotopes The Sun as a Variable Star: Solar 
and Stellar Irradiance Variations ed J M Pap, C Frohlich, 
HS Hudson and S$ K Solanki (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 291-300 

Beer J, Blinov A et al 1990 Use of “Be in polar ice to trace 
the 11-year cycle of solar activity Nature 347 164-6 

Beer J, Tobias S M et al 1998 An active Sun throughout the 
Maunder minimum Sol. Phys. 181 237-49 

Hoyt D V and Schatten K H 1998 Group sunspot numbers: 
a new solar activity reconstruction Sol. Phys. 179 189- 
219 

Legrand J P and Simon P A 1987 Two hundred years of 
auroral activity (1780-1979) Ann. Geophys. 5a (3) 161- 
8 

Masarik J and Beer J 1999 Simulation of particle fluxes 
and cosmogenic nuclide production in the Earth’s 
atmosphere J. Geophys. Res. 104 12 099-13 012 

Mayaud S N 1973 A hundred year series of geomagnetic 
data 1868-1967, indices aa, storm sudden commence- 
ments Bull. Int. Assoc. Geomagn. Aeron. 33 1-251 

Stuiver M and Braziunas T F 1993 Sun, ocean, climate 
and atmospheric CO, an evaluation of causal and 
spectral relationships Holocene 3 289-305 


J Beer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Atmosphere: Empirical Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Atmosphere: Empirical Models 


The basic atmospheric stratification of the Sun can 
be described as having (1) an outwardly decreasing 
temperature with height in the photospheric layers which 
emit radiation at visible wavelengths, (2) a temperature 
minimum region where the temperature no longer 
decreases but begins to increase with height, (3) an 
extended chromospheric region where the temperature 
increases to values at which hydrogen starts to become 
partially ionized and the atmosphere starts to lose energy 
by Lyman line radiation, (4) a narrow transition region 
separating the chromosphere and the fully ionized corona, 
having a large initial temperature gradient near the top 
of the chromosphere and a smaller gradient at higher 
temperatures, and (5) the hot (T > 10° K) corona where 
hydrogen is fully ionized. See figure 1. 

The temperature distribution shown in this figure is 
for a model of the average quiet Sun and does not represent 
regions of the solar disk that are brighter and darker 
than the average, but similar models can be constructed 
for these other regions. The observed inhomogeneous 
features on the solar disk include the granular cell and 
network pattern throughout quiet, relatively undisturbed 
areas, active regions of varying brightness, as well as 
sunspots and flares. Significant variations with time 
occur in such structures, particularly in flares (see 
PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION, SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC PLAGE, SOLAR 
ACTIVE REGIONS, SUNSPOT MODELS and SOLAR FLARE MODELS). 

To a first approximation, such different types 
of features can be treated separately, assuming little 
interaction between the different features, since their 
horizontal extent is usually much larger than the vertical 
distance between the photospheric and coronal layers 
in each case. Hence, it is reasonable as a first 
approximation to construct separate one-dimensional 
models that describe the vertical structure of each 
horizontally distinct region. 

Consider a given type of brightness feature in a quiet 
or active region, such as typical centers of granulation 
cells or bright network structures, and suppose we have 
observations of the spectrum of such a feature over a 
wide range of wavelengths, from the radio region to 
x-rays. Because the opacity of the solar atmosphere varies 
with wavelength, we can probe different atmospheric 
layers by observing radiation at different wavelengths. 
At wavelengths where the opacity is small the observed 
radiation originates deep in the atmosphere, and at 
wavelengths where the opacity is greater the observed 
radiation originates higher in the atmosphere. 

The lowest opacity in the solar atmosphere occurs 
at A = 1.6 wm, the threshold for H~ bound-free 
absorption. At that wavelength the light originates 
from the deepest observable layers, and the disk-center 
brightness is observed to be about 6800 K. The average 
brightness of the integrated disk at 1.6 wm is about 500 K 
lower because of limb darkening (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
CENTER-TO-LIMB VARIATION). For infrared wavelengths longer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


than 1.6 ym the opacity increases as / increases so that the 
observed radiation is emitted from higher, cooler layers in 
the atmosphere, and the observed brightness temperature 
decreases, reaching a minimum value of about 4500 K 
at 4 = 150 wm. The opacity continues to increase with 
increasing wavelength for A > 150 4m, and the observed 
brightness temperature now increases as a result of the 
increasing temperature in the chromosphere. 

Now consider the wavelength region 1 < 1.6 wm. 
The opacity increases with decreasing wavelength and 
the brightness temperature decreases, since unit optical 
depth occurs at successively greater heights. Near 160 nm 
the brightness temperature passes through a minimum 
value of about 4400 K and then increases with decreasing 
A, again because of the increasing temperature in the 
chromosphere. 

Similar indications of the temperature stratification 
are evident in the profiles of spectral lines, since the opacity 
is much greater at line center than in the line wings or 
the nearby continuum. The Ca II resonance lines have 
weak emission features near the line centers owing to 
the chromospheric temperature rise, but this emission 
varies with time and spatial position and is sensitive 
to small-scale kinematic effects. The clearest evidence 
for the chromospheric temperature rise is the increase in 
continuum brightness temperature in the A > 150 wm and 
A < 160 nm ranges and the UV emission lines shortward of 
160 nm. These emission lines vary with position and time, 
but observations at high spatial and temporal resolution 
(Carlsson et al 1997) show that, while the UV line emission 
varies with time and position, it never vanishes, implying 
that the chromospheric temperature rise is persistent and 
not the time average of transitory increases in temperature 
(See SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: ULTRAVIOLET AND EUV EMISSION). 

However, a problem that is still under investigation 
is why the strongest lines of carbon monoxide (CO) in 
the infrared show no central emission. Unit optical 
depth in these line cores is estimated to occur above the 
temperature mimimum region (based on results from one- 
dimensional time-independent, hydrostatic-equilibrium 
modeling), and these lines are dominated by collisional 
processes and should be formed in local thermodynamic 
equilibrium (LTE). Thus the brightness temperature at line 
center should be the kinetic temperature at unit optical 
depth. The lowest disk-center brightness temperature in 
the strongest infrared CO line is about 4100 K (Avrett 1995), 
but values down to 3800 K are seen near the solar limb 
(Noyes and Hall 1972, Ayres 1995) (see SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: 
INFRARED EMISSION). 

An important characteristic of the CO lines is 
their sensitivity to low temperatures. High-temperature 
regions along the line of sight tend to be transparent, 
because CO molecules readily dissociate with increasing 
temperature. CO observations might be reconciled with 
the observations of persistent UV line emission if the 
cores of the strong CO lines are formed no higher 
than the temperature minimum region, which shows 
temporal and spatial variations as a result of granulation 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Atmosphere: Empirical Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


106 


transition 
region 


X-rays 


coronal 
lines 


105 


T(K) 


104 


4 (g cm-3) 


Ha 
ZY f core > 


Ca II K core “14 


Mg lik core 


103 
3000 2000 


1000 0 


height (km) 


Figure 1. Temperature and density as functions of height for a model of the average quiet Sun (model C). The calculated height 
intervals where the various continua and line features originate are indicated. (See Avrett (1998) for details.) 


and wave motions. See Uitenbroek et al (1994). The 
3800 K values seen near the limb are more difficult to 
interpret, however, indicating that the line of sight near 
the limb passes through cool regions that do not affect 
the UV chromospheric lines (see CHROMOSPHERE: THERMAL 
BIFURCATION). 

Apart from the unsolved difficulties presented by 
these CO lines, models corresponding to temperature 
distributions such as in figure 1 can be constructed for 
the various brightness components, i.e. for different types 
of observed features, that roughly account for the entire 
observed spectrum from each component. Such models 
are given by Fontenla ef al (1993) for the average quiet 
Sun (as in figure 1), for faint and bright components of 
the cell-network pattern of quiet areas, and for a bright 
active region. These are shown as models C, A, F and P, 
respectively, in figure 2. 

The temperature as a function of height for each 
brightness component model has been adjusted so that 
the calculated spectrum agrees as well as possible with 
observations. The corresponding density distribution is 
determined from a balance between gas (and turbulent) 
pressure and solar surface gravity. The intensity of 
radiation as a function of wavelength, position and 
direction and the number densities of atoms, ions, and 
molecules in various energy states are determined by 
solving the coupled equations of radiative transfer and 
statistical equilibrium, accounting for arbitrarily large 
departures from LTE and arbitrarily large optical depths. 
The calculations also depend on the use of accurate 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


100 
80 


60 


40 


T (kK) 


2000 1000 0 
height (km) 


Figure 2. Temperature as a function of height for quiet-Sun 
models A, C and F and for plage model P (see Fontenla et al 
1993). 


opacities for the millions of atomic and molecular lines 
throughout the spectrum. See Kurucz (1996, 1997) and 
SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: VISIBLE EMISSION. 

In addition to the temperature distribution, we 
assume a microvelocity distribution needed to account for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Atmosphere: Empirical Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the observed nonthermal broadening of lines formed at 
various heights. The same values are used for a turbulent 
or kinetic pressure contribution to the total pressure. It 
appears to be sufficient in the various component model 
calculations to assume that the microvelocity is the same 
function of density for all models (Fontenla et al 1993). 
Thus the temperature distribution essentially defines each 
model. 

To the extent that the calculated spectrum agrees 
with observations, we can have confidence that the 
various models represent the structure of the various 
components of the solar atmosphere, and we can use the 
models to understand the physical processes at work. 
For example, Anderson and Athay (1989) derived the 
distribution of mechanical heating needed to account 
for the chromospheric temperature rise in model C (see 
CHROMOSPHERE: HEATING MECHANISMS). 

Spectra computed from component models A, C, 
F and P agree reasonably well with time-averaged 
observations of faint, average and bright components 
of quiet regions and of bright plage regions. As 
stated earlier, observations of UV emission lines at 
high spatial and temporal resolutions show that, while 
there are significant time variations at each position, 
the UV emission lines never vanish, indicating that the 
chromospheric temperature rise is persistent rather than 
transitory. 

The narrow transition region separating the chromo- 
sphere and corona can be interpreted as the result of (1) 
sufficient mechanical heating at low densities to heat the 
corona to the high temperatures at which hydrogen is fully 
ionized and (2) strong radiative cooling by the hydrogen 
and helium resonance lines in the upper chromosphere 
that balances chromospheric mechanical heating, so that 
the temperature remains in the 8000 K range until the tran- 
sition region is reached where hydrogen abruptly changes 
from being mostly neutral to mostly ionized (See TRANSITION 
REGION MODELS). 

The energy required to produce these outwardly 
increasing temperatures is relatively small. About 10-4 
of the total energy output of the Sun is needed to heat the 
chromosphere. The energy required to produce the corona 
is an order of magnitude smaller, and most of this energy 
is transported back through the upper transition region by 
thermal conduction and particle diffusion to be radiated 
away by the hydrogen and helium resonance lines. The 
transition region for each of the component models 
can be determined theoretically by solving the energy 
balance equations, making use of upper-chromosphere 
boundary conditions that are determined with reference 
to observational data. See Fontenla et al (1993). 

Each empirical model considered here is based on 
an assumed temperature versus height extending from 
the deep photophere to the base of the transition region. 
In principle, an entire spectrum can be computed and 
compared with observations, and the disparities used 
to adjust the temperature distribution to get optimum 
agreement with observations for a particular component 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


region. Given sufficient agreement, such models can 
provide much useful information about the physical 
properties of the solar atmosphere. 

Time-independent, one-dimensional component mod- 
els based on observations with low time resolution can 
only provide information about time-averaged behavior. 
It is not difficult to construct a series of ‘snapshot’ models 
describing the time evolution of the atmospheric region 
in response to waves or other disturbances. The assump- 
tion that different brightness components can be indepen- 
dently modeled, ignoring their effect on one another, is 
clearly not always valid, as indicated, e.g. by the central 
brightness temperature of 3800 K observed in strong CO 
lines near the limb discussed above. 

The models in figure 2 indicate that the transition 
region is located at a height of approximately 2000 km 
above the photosphere (above the level where the radial 
optical depth in the continuum at 500 nm is unity). This 
2000 km height of the transition region is inferred from 
the properties of the disk-center spectrum used to define 
the models. It is important to determine whether limb 
observations give the same result. 

Observations at the limb in the 1083 nm line of 
He I show a narrow band of enhanced emission at 
approximately this height. This band of emission can 
be explained as the result of coronal line radiation 
at wavelengths below 50 nm, which can ionize He I, 
illuminating the top layers of the chromosphere. The 
resulting ionization of He I followed by recombination 
populates the levels of He I responsible for the 1083 nm 
emission from these upper chromospheric layers. This 
interpretation is consistent with the observed property that 
1083 emission is diminished in coronal hole regions where 
the coronal line radiation is reduced. See Zirin (1975) and 
Avrett et al (1994). 

For a uniform one-dimensional atmosphere with 
the transition region at a fixed height, the 1083 nm 
emission above the limb would abruptly decrease with 
height after reaching the peak value near 2000 km. 
However, observations show a gradual decrease above 
2000 km (Schmidt et al 1994) indicating the presence of 
chromospheric material at heights above 2000 km. 

The 1083 nm line observations at the limb give 
particularly useful information because this line is strong 
enough to produce observable emission, but weak enough 
so that the total optical thickness along a tangent ray 
passing just above the limb is less than unity, so that 
this ray can sample the entire line of sight. In stronger 
lines, such as the hydrogen Ha line, or in the continuum 
at centimeter wavelengths, the transition region would 
appear to be located higher owing to the optical thickness 
of relatively small amounts of chromospheric material 
projecting above 2000 km in the form of spicules and 
relatively cool prominence-like gas (see CHROMOSPHERE: 
SPICULES and SOLAR PROMINENCE MODELS). 

Solar atmospheric modeling gives us direct insight 
into the physical processes that occur in the atmosphere. 
The spectra calculated from the models also have a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Atmosphere: Empirical Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


practical application. The calculated intensity as a function 
of wavelength for any particular quiet or active region 
can be used to fill in the gaps between the relatively 
few portions of the spectrum that have been observed 
with high spatial and spectral resolution with good 
absolute calibration. To the extent that, for a well-defined 
component region (such as cell centers or bright network 
features), the calculated intensities generally agree with 
the available observations over a sufficient wavelength 
range, the model calculations for the given quiet or active 
feature provide the absolute intensity versus wavelenth 
over the entire spectrum at high spectral resolution for 
that feature. 

Variations of solar irradiance are due mostly to 
changes in the fraction of bright active regions present on 
the solar disk facing the Earth as a function of time (see 
SOLAR IRRADIANCE). This fraction varies as the Sun’s rotation 
brings active regions into and out of the hemisphere facing 
the Earth. Active regions also are responsible for most of 
the long-term variations of both the total irradiance and 
the spectral irradiance over the solar cycle. Solar images 
at a given time at one or more wavelengths (e.g. in the 
visible) can be used to define the pattern of bright and dark 
regions. Using the calculated intensity versus wavelength 
for each region, the disk image can be constructed for 
any given wavelength (e.g. in the ultraviolet), and we 
can integrate over the disk to get the spectral irradiance 
at that wavelength. See Avrett (1998). Such results can 
provide spectral irradiances on solar-rotation and solar- 
cycle time scales at wavelengths for which observations 
are not available (see SOLAR CYCLE). 


Bibliography 

Anderson L S and Athay R G 1989 Model solar 
chromosphere with prescribed heating Astrophys. J. 
346 1010-8 

Avrett E H 1995 Two-component modeling of the solar IR 
CO lines Infrared Tools for Solar Astrophysics: What's 
Next ed J Kuhn and M Penn (Singapore: World 
Scientific) pp 303-11 

Avrett E H 1998 Modeling solar variability—Synthetic 
models Solar Electromagnetic Radiation Study for Solar 
Cycle 22 ed J M Pap, C Frélich and R K Ulrich 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 449-69 

Avrett E H, Fontenla J M and Loeser R 1994 Formation of 
the solar 10830 A line Infrared Solar Physics ed D M 
Rabin, J T Jefferies and C Lindsey (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) pp 35-47 

Ayres T R 1995 Thermal bifurcation revisited Infrared Tools 
for Solar Astrophysics: What’s Next ed J Kuhn and M 
Penn (Singapore: World Scientific) pp 289-302 

Carlsson M, Judge P G and Wilhelm K 1997 SUMER 
observations confirm the dynamic nature of the 
quiet solar outer atmosphere: the internetwork 
chromosphere Astrophys. J. 486 L63-6 

Fontenla J M, Avrett E H and Loeser R 1993 Energy 
balance in the solar transition region. III. Helium 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


emission in hydrostatic constant-abundance models 
with diffusion Astrophys. J. 406 319-45 

Kurucz R L 1996 Model stellar atmospheres and real 
stellar atmospheres Model Atmospheres and Spectrum 
Synthesis (ASP Conf. Ser. 108) ed S Adelman, F Kupka 
and W W Weiss pp 2-18 

Kurucz R L 1997 Progress on model atmospheres and line 
data Fundamental Stellar Properties ed T R Bedding, 
AJ Booth and J Davis (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 217-26 

Noyes R W and Hall D N B 1972 Thermal oscillations in 
the high solar photosphere Astrophys. J. 176 L89-92 

Schmidt W, Knoelker M and Westendorp Plaza C 1994 
Limb observations of the He I 1083.0 nm line Astron. 
Astrophys. 287 229-32 

Uitenbroek H, Noyes R W and Rabin D 1994 Imaging 
spectroscopy of the solar CO lines at 4.67 microns 
Astrophys. J. 432 L67-70 

Zirin H 1975 The helium chromosphere, coronal holes, and 
stellar x-rays Astrophys. J. 199 L63-6 


Eugene H Aorett 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromosphere: Ellerman Bombs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Chromosphere: Ellerman 
Bombs 


In 1917, Ellerman discovered short-lived, intense bright- 
enings at tiny (<1 arcsec) points in the lower solar CHROMO- 
SPHERE. A typical Ellerman bomb lasts less than 10 min. Its 
spectrum is characterized by very broad emission wings 
on the hydrogen Balmer lines. On a photographic nega- 
tive, the pattern of a bomb’s emission resembles a mus- 
tache or whisker. Reinforcing the allusion to mustaches 
is the fact that a bomb’s enhanced emission does not ex- 
tend into the hydrogen line cores. The spectral line then 
resembles a stripe of shaved skin flanked by two tufts of 
dark hair. Emission at line center is lacking, presumably 
because the radiation is absorbed in the overlying atmo- 
sphere or in the bomb itself. 

Mustaches are about 10% brighter than the continuum 
at 1 A from the Ha line center. Because of the strong 
absorption at the line center, Ellerman bombs must be low 
in the chromosphere. This is an important difference from 
flares: all flares are brightest in the cores of the affected 
spectral lines. Flares are bright because the chromosphere 
is heated from the overlying corona. The topmost layers 
are affected first, whereas in bombs, the mustache shape 
of the spectrum means that the heating must originate in 
the chromosphere. 

Bombs always occur along the boundaries of 
magnetic field concentrations, so they might be evidence 
for magnetic field reconnection. They are also interesting 
because of the resemblance of their extended emission 
wings to those found in some solar flares. Bombs, which 
are almost always present on the Sun, may shed light on 
the elusive mechanism of solar flares. 


Bomb sites 

Bombs are almost always seen in emerging flux regions 
(See CHROMOSPHERE: EMERGING FLUX REGIONS) (figure 1) and at 
the outer edges of SUNSPOT PENUMBRAE (figure 2). There 
may be as many as 100 bombs per spot group. Very 
high resolution pictures, such as figure 2, also reveal that 
Ellerman bombs occur on the network of photospheric 
faculae (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FACULAE). The network of 
bright points extends into the low chromosphere as seen 
in the figure, and it corresponds to the network of 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES in the photosphere. 
Elements of the network brighten about 3 min before 
Ellerman bomb onset. Thus the true energy source for 
the explosion may lie in the photosphere. 

Ellerman bombs appear before and during the 
formation of sunspots. In the best images, bright features 
composed of elements smaller than 700 km diameter can 
be seen drifting outward from sunspot pores. Bombs 
probably always occur where magnetic features of one 
polarity meet other, opposite polarity, features. Roy found 
that bombs occur only where the magnetic fields are 
changing and estimated the average rate of flux change 
at 3 x 10 Mx s~! (where Mx s~! = 3 x 10” weber s~'). 
Bomb frequency and number increase with growth rate of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the magnetic field. When bombs occur in clusters, they 
attain maximum brightness within 2-3 min of each other. 

Bomb visibility does not depend on distance from the 
solar limb, that is, they seem to have the same brightness 
when viewed from any angle. But near the solar limb 
bombs are elongated in the radial direction. One study 
gave the mean length as 800 km and the mean width as 
350 km. The maximum brightness and maximum length 
were achieved at nearly the same time, but the bombs grew 
only in length at first. 

The average lifetime of a bomb is probably less than 
10 min, but some bombs last much longer. The longer- 
lived ones pulsate, so they might be a succession of 
explosions. Recurrence of bombs in the same location is 
common. Rust suggested that bombs occur at magnetic 
field reconnection points, while Kitai suggested instead 
that bombs occur in isolated flux tubes. An important 
clue to resolving the issue may be found in the association 
between bombs and surges. 


Ha surges and bombs 

Hea surcEs originate in bombs, and surge length (amount of 
material) is proportional to bomb size times the lifetime, 
according to Roy and Leparskas. Surges are clusters of 
very fine dark (sometimes bright) filaments connected 
to bombs (see surcgs). They consist of dense material 
apparently ejected from the chromosphere. The velocity 
averages about 100 km s-'. The trajectories of surge 
threads above 5000 km match the magnetic lines of force 
calculated from models of current-free fields in sunspot 
regions. 

No x-ray emission has been clearly associated with 
Ellerman bombs, but x-ray jets do accompany surges (see 
SOLAR: X-RAY JETS). 

The link between surges and bombs is consistent 
with a model (figure 3) in which the bomb site lies above 
a satellite sunspot. Satellite sunspots are generally not 
visible in white light, but they stand out in maps of 
the magnetic fields surrounding major sunspots. Their 
polarity is opposite to that of the spot and most of its 
surroundings. In figure 3, the X marks the supposed 
site of magnetic field reconnection, and presumably of the 
bomb itself. One effect of the reconnection is to transfer 
chromospheric material from lower-lying fields into the 
higher families of field lines that stretch away from the 
sunspot. This would explain the surge of material from the 
bomb site. Numerical models suggest that reconnection 
should accelerate both hot (x-ray emitting) and cold (Ha 
emitting) plasmas. 


Spectral properties 

Severny was the first to study the spectra of mustaches 
extensively, and he showed that Stark broadening cannot 
explain the extraordinary extended line wings. Engvold 
and Maltby measured mustache profiles systematically, 
finding spectral line widths at Ha ranging from 3 to 10 A. 
The true widths could have been greater, having escaped 
detection because of instrumental dilution. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromosphere: Ellerman Bombs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Ellerman bombs in a region where magnetic flux is emerging through the chromosphere. The left and right images were 
obtained simultaneously through a birefringent filter. The left image shows the upper chromosphere. The dark fibrils in the center are 
the telltale signatures of emerging flux. The lower chromosphere, on the right, has many bright point-like Ellerman bombs that do not 
extend into the upper chromosphere. (Sacramento Peak Observatory photograph.) 


Bomb spectra are usually asymmetrical, with 60% 
being brighter in the blue and 40% brighter in the red. 
But the asymmetry could be due to the effect of overlying 
material, if there are steady upward or downward flows. 
During the first 2 min of development, the mean upward 
velocity deduced from mustache spectra is 8 km s~!. This 
could account for the blue asymmetry. The mean upward 
velocity in the underlying photosphere is 1 km s~', which 
may indicate that the matter in surges is being supplied 
from the photosphere. 

The spectra of bombs are weakly polarized. Babin 
and Koval at the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory 
found 24% linear polarization in the enhanced emission. 
They subtracted an estimated background from the bomb 
brightness before computing the polarization degree. 
From a study of Ha spectra taken simultaneously at four 
linear polarizations, Babin and Koval also concluded that 
the degree of linear polarization in any given mustache 
is the same over the entire emission contour but the 
orientation of the plane of polarization may be different for 
adjacent mustaches, and some large mustaches encompass 
differently polarized elements. Generally, they say the 
electric vector is perpendicular to the radial direction 
on the solar disk, but no physical process that could 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


produce sucha high degree of polarization was suggested. 
Another study, at the Sacramento Peak Vacuum Tower 
Telescope, did not confirm polarization greater than 2%. 
If a systematic pattern of polarization could be found, 
it might provide a crucial clue to the physical nature of 
bombs. 


What are Ellerman bombs? 


Although the close association of Ellerman bombs with 
magnetic boundaries suggests strongly that magnetic 
reconnection is the energy source for bombs and surges, 
many questions remain unanswered. It is very difficult 
to explain the great width of the spectral lines, especially 
since Severny showed that it cannot be due to Stark 
broadening. That would seem to rule out electric fields, 
and it casts doubt on the reconnection model. 

Shklovskii proposed that the wide wings are Doppler 
broadened, which implies velocities of several hundred 
km s7! for the hydrogen atoms. In Shklovskii’s model, 
the radiating matter must be renewed several hundred 
times. Shklovskii proposed to achieve that with a fusillade 
of plasmoids from below the chromosphere. His model 
provides an effective excitation process and explains 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromosphere: Ellerman Bombs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Ellerman bombs at the outer boundaries of sunspots 
and at the boundary between spots of opposite magnetic 
polarity (center). 


-_— 
——_ =o 


Figure 3. A model of the magnetic field lines above a satellite 
sunspot. The X marks the point where magnetic reconnection is 
supposed to heat and/or compress material to give the intense 
brightening of Ellerman bombs. The shaded feature represents a 
dark surge of material ejected from the reconnection region. 


the broadening. The difficulty is in accounting for the 
acceleration of the plasmoids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Another possibility is that the erupting material 
forming a bomb is driven initially by a Kelvin-Helmholtz 
fluid instability (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC INSTABILITIES) at 
the interface between the chromosphere and photosphere. 
The focus of this model is more on the steep density 
gradients and fluid flows at the outer boundaries of 
sunspots than on the magnetic field configuration. A 
fluid instability would raise a blob of dense material into 
the chromosphere where the magnetic fields in it might 
be pinched off, thus isolating the blob and heating it. 
The wide spectral line wings would be explained easily 
because an isolated gas with nearly photospheric density 
would have very large optical depth in the hydrogen line 
wings. The problem is to defy gravity and hold a heavy 
blob up above the photosphere for 5-10 min. 

Although they are still not well understood, Ellerman 
bombs are not much studied today. At one time, it was 
believed that the extraordinarily wide wings are evidence 
of previously undiscovered physical processes, and that 
they are formed at very high densities below an optical 
depth of 0.4. Today it is understood that a variety of 
now-familiar phenomena might produce the conditions 
for broad line wings. Kitai developed a mustache model 
based on solar flare-like excess heating of 1500 K at heights 
of 700 to 1200 km above the level of optical depth unity. 
The principal distinction between his model and flare 
models is that the disturbance is confined between two 
chromospheric layers. To reproduce mustache line profiles 
Kitai had to assume a density enhancement of five in the 
affected layers, in addition to the heating. The magnetic 
fields where bombs occur are strong enough to contain 
the gas at the added pressure, but the problem is to find 
the heating mechanism. Magnetic reconnection is the 
best candidate, but no one has worked out a model of 
reconnection at chromospheric densities. 


Bibliography 

Canfield R C, Reardon K P, Leka K D, Shibata K, Yokoyama 
T and Shimojo M 1996 Ha surges and x-ray jets in AR 
7260 Astrophys. J. 464 1016 

Kitai R 1983 On the mass motions and the atmospheric 
states of mustaches Solar Phys. 87 135 

Rust D M and Keil S L 1992 A search for polarization in 
Ellerman bombs Solar Phys. 140 55 

Zirin H 1988 Astrophysics of the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


D Rust 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromospheric Oscillations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Chromospheric Oscillations 


By the term solar chromospheric oscillations we here refer 
to any periodic or quasi-periodic dynamic phenomena 
seen in the solar CHROMOSPHERE. We thus include both 
propagating and standing waves. 

Information about chromospheric oscillations is 
given by the Doppler shift of spectral lines formed there. 
To avoid strong temperature sensitivity in the opacity 
it is also advantageous to study lines originating from 
the ground state of an element (called resonance lines). 
Unfortunately, there are only two such lines opaque 
enough to be formed in the mid chromosphere that 
are visible from ground based observatories—the two 
resonance lines from singly ionized calcium called the H 
and K lines. Much of our knowledge about chromospheric 
dynamics has therefore been derived from studies of 
these lines. The H and K lines appear as very strong 
absorption lines with a slight emission in the line center. 
This emission has a central reversal such that there are 
two slight emission peaks with a dark core in between. 
The peak on the violet (shortward) side of line center 
is called Hjy, the peak on the red (longward) side Hp 
(and correspondingly for the K line). The calcium H and 
K emission outlines a pattern strongly correlated with 
the photospheric magnetic field, the so-called network 
(CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK). The dynamic behavior is very 
different in the network patches and in the inter-network 
areas and these are therefore treated separately in the 
following. 


Inter-network oscillations 

In the inter-network the calcium emission is absent most 
of the time. When the emission appears it is almost always 
only the violet peak that appears and in a small area 
with a diameter of a few arcseconds. Jensen and Orral 
found in 1963 that the brightening in the emission peak is 
preceded by a brightening in the line wing that is formed 
in the photosphere and the phenomenon is often repeated 
a number of times in the same location with about a 
three minute period. The localized brightenings are called 
Kyy (or Hoy) bright points or preferably bright grains (to 
indicate that they have a resolvable structure). The quasi- 
periodic behavior is known as the chromospheric three 
minute oscillation. 

The calcium bright point behavior has been explained 
as resulting from propagating acoustic waves that form 
shocks about 1000 km above the visible surface of the 
photosphere (see figure 1 and Carlsson and Stein 1997). 
Some aspects of the observed behavior turn out to be 
very robust diagnostic indicators of the dynamics of the 
chromosphere. The strongly asymmetric intensity profile 
with only the violet peak appearing is only possible 
if there are very strong velocity gradients around the 
formation height of 1000 km. Such strong velocity 
gradients typical of shock formation thus have to exist in 
the solar chromosphere. Acoustic waves steepening into 
shocks is also the expected behavior from the fact that the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Simulation 
3000 ha Soe] Coo 


2500 F Sis 


2000 F Si 


time [s] 


1500 F qP 


1000 Liat eee 
-1.00 -05 0.0 0.5 1.0 


Ad (Angstrém) 


-1.0 -05 0.0 0.5 1.0 
Ad (Angstrém) 


“1 ve) Efe ern 


Figure 1. The computed Ca II H line intensity as a function of 
wavelength and time compared with observations. There is close 
correspondence between the simulated and observed grains. 


gas density falls off exponentially with height in the solar 
atmosphere forcing a disturbance to grow in amplitude 
with height in order to conserve energy. 

The strongly dynamic behavior of the solar chromo- 
sphere manifested in the calcium bright grains has impor- 
tant consequences for our concept of the chromosphere. 
Processes like line formation, line emission and radiative 
cooling are strongly nonlinear. In a dynamic medium this 
means that such quantities have to be calculated from dy- 
namic atmospheres; a semi-empirical chromospheric ‘av- 
erage’ model (See SOLAR ATMOSPHERE: EMPIRICAL MODELS) Will 
then be misleading. 

How are the chromospheric oscillations excited? 
In a stratified atmosphere like the solar chromosphere 
acoustic waves can only propagate if they have a period 
shorter than a characteristic period called the acoustic 
cut-off period. This period is about 200 s in the solar 
chromosphere. The acoustic cut-off period is thus close 
to the three minute period of the dominant chromospheric 
oscillations. Waves with periods close to the cut-off period 
can be excited in several different ways and which one is 
most important in the solar case has been much debated. 
Long-period evanescent waves will excite wakes with the 
acoustic cut-off period. Merging of shocked waves with 
shorter periods will also preferentially favor the same 
period waves. A sudden pulse with a time scale smaller 
than three minutes will excite such waves as well. Lastly, in 
a spectrum of waves with many periods with most power 
at longer periods, all the evanescent modes will decrease 
in importance with height leaving the ones close to the 
cut-off period as the most important ones. 

The issue can only be resolved using numerical 
simulations coupled with observations. From detailed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromospheric Oscillations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


simulations it is clear that the grain behavior is set by 
acoustic waves that at a height of 280 km above the 
visible surface have a period of around three minutes. 
At that height, the velocity field is dominated by the five 
minute oscillations (see HELIOSEISMOLOGY) but these waves 
are evanescent and their relative importance decreases 
with height. These simulations do not, however, give the 
excitation mechanism for the photospheric three minute 
period waves. Recently it has been shown (Skartlien 1998) 
that small collapsing granules, where upflow is turned into 
downflow ina time scale smaller than three minutes, may 
be the photospheric excitation mechanism for the calcium 
grains. 

Many more chromospheric diagnostics than the reso- 
nance lines from singly ionized calcium are now available 
thanks to access to the ultraviolet (UV) part of the electro- 
magnetic spectrum from instruments on board satellites 
and spacecraft. With the SUMER (Solar Ultraviolet Mea- 
surements of Emitted Radiation) spectrograph on board 
the SOlar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft 
much more observational material on solar chromospheric 
oscillations now exists. The very dynamic behavior of the 
lower inter-network chromosphere has been confirmed 
with intensity oscillations and Doppler shifts in general 
agreement with numerical simulations. The spectral lines 
formed in the upper chromosphere, however, are not well 
reproduced by one-dimensional dynamic models. The 
emission lines in the UV exist in emission all of the time 
at all locations indicating a mean temperature rise. This 
may be in the form of magnetic hotter elements overlying 
the non-magnetic inter-network regions. The UV continua 
and emission lines from neutral elements show grain- 
like behavior at all inter-network locations with domi- 
nating periods around three minutes. Lines from singly 
ionized carbon and silicon formed in the upper chromo- 
sphere show grain-line variations mainly in Doppler shift 
with intensity variations of much smaller amplitude than 
would be the case in a one-dimensional picture. Even a 
high-temperature indicator like five times ionized oxygen 
formed in the transition region often shows Doppler shifts 
well correlated with the oscillations in the lower chromo- 
sphere but again with the intensity controlled mainly by 
processes other than compressive acoustic waves. It is 
thus clear that the upper chromosphere contains influences 
from several physical processes. This is also expected from 
the fact that magnetic fields must start to play a dominant 
role in the upper chromosphere where the magnetic pres- 
sure is larger than the gas pressure. In the upper chromo- 
sphere it is thus probably not meaningful to speak about 
non-magnetic regions any more. The dynamic behavior 
observable in the calcium resonance lines is, however, ev- 
ident throughout the chromosphere into the transition re- 
gion. 

The calcium H and K lines are the ideal diagnostic 
lines available from the ground but there are also other 
spectral features formed in the solar chromosphere that 
have received a lot of attention. Examples are the 
hydrogen Ha line, the calcium infrared triplet lines, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sodium D resonance lines and the helium line at 1083 nm. 
They all suffer from line formation complexities (like very 
temperature sensitive opacity, non-locally determined 
source function or influence from incident radiation field) 
making the diagnostic inference complicated. Velocities 
inferred from the calcium infrared lines, the calcium 
resonance lines and the helium 1083 line seem to be all in 
phase. In a traditional atmosphere these lines are formed 
at different heights and the zero phase difference then 
indicates the presence of standing waves. This has been 
interpreted as an indication of a chromospheric ‘cavity’ 
where reflection off the boundaries set up a standing wave 
pattern. This picture is, however, in conflict with other 
observations (like the clear signature of propagating waves 
seen in the calcium resonance lines). 

In addition to the three minute oscillations, recent 
SUMER observations show oscillatory behavior at shorter 
periods. Waves with periods around 150 s are seen in 
upper chromosphere /lower transition region lines. These 
oscillations can be coherent over thousands of kilometers. 
They may be correlated with phase jumps observed in 
the lower chromosphere in the sodium D-line by Deubner 
and co-workers. The photospheric temperature drop is 
rather steep and may cause the reflection of waves. A 
steep temperature rise from the chromosphere to coronal 
temperatures may also cause partial reflections (around 
70% reflection of planar waves in a one-dimensional 
simplified model). A chromospheric cavity between these 
partially reflecting may support a velocity field with modal 
structure even when the transmission coefficient is rather 
high and the chromosphere is dominated by propagating 
shocks. Due to the high phase speed of waves with periods 
just below the acoustic cut-off period of the chromosphere 
there is less sensitivity to the exact height of the reflecting 
layer. Such a ‘partial’ cavity may explain phaseshifts 
as seen in lower chromospheric lines, the existence of 
standing wave signatures and preferred periods around 
150 s. Modes may also exist due to reflection of waves 
from shocks. 


Network oscillations 
The network shows a dynamical behavior very different 
from that of the inter-network regions. The H and K lines 
from singly ionized calcium show two emission peaks 
most of the time. The emission varies with time, but both 
the red and the violet peak may be missing and the time- 
averaged profile is quite symmetric. No pronounced three 
minute oscillations can be found but slower variations 
around a five minute period are present (Lites et al 1993). 
SUMER observations give the same picture of mainly 
slower variations in the network. There are no reported 
phase relations that would support a picture with upward 
propagating acoustic waves. It is unclear whether the 
slow variations are manifestations of waves or of the 
buffeting of the network magnetic flux tubes by the 
granular motion. There are some SUMER observations 
showing three minute periods in network structures but 
much more rarely than in the inter-network. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromospheric Oscillations ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Carlsson M and Stein R F 1997 Formation of solar calcium 
Hand K bright grains Astrophys. J. 481 500-14 

Lites B W, Rutten R J and Kalkofen W 1993 Dynamics 
of the solar chromosphere I. Long-period network 
oscillations Astrophys. J. 414 345-56 

Skartlien R 1998 3D Modeling of solar convection and 
atmosphere dynamics PhD Thesis University of Oslo 


Mats Carlsson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Solar Chromospheric Plage 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Chromospheric Plage 


Chromospheric plage (from the French 19th century 
wording: ‘plage brillante’, bright plage or bright area) 
or facular plage (facula, Latin word for small torch) is a 
bright area seen in chromospheric lines most of the time 
surrounding one or several suNspots. Chromospheric plage 
is one of the main components of the solar activity (see 
SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS). 

Plages are the results of very complex magnetic 
processes. After a general description, the magnetic 
field properties of plages introduce the plage structure. 
Although very general and simplified, some insight into 
plage modelization is given. 


General description 

Chromospheric plages are the prolongation in the 
CHROMOSPHERE and the TRANSITION REGION of bright faculae 
seen in the photosphere (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FACULAE). 
The linear extension of a plage varies between a few tens 
of arcseconds to 3-4 arcmin. While the area covered by 
one plage may vary between less than 1 arcmin? and 
16 arcmin’, the total area covered by plages is between 
less than 1% and 17% of the solar disk area and is strongly 
related to the solar activity cycle. 

In the visible, chromospheric plages are best seen in 
the strongest lines such as the red H I Ha 656.3 nm line 
and the blue Ca II H and K 393.4-396.9 nm lines. In the 
ultraviolet the chromospheric H I La 121.6 nm dominates 
the spectrum, but plages produce enhanced intensities in 
the entire set of chromospheric emission lines (optically 
thin or thick). In all the ultraviolet transition region lines 
the intensity in plages is also strongly enhanced by a factor 
of 2-20. Chromospheric plages can also be observed in 
the submillimeter wavelength range (100 ~m-1000 pm). 
In this range, if a 5400 K temperature is assigned to 
the quiet Sun brightness in the low chromosphere, the 
corresponding plage brightness can attain up to 6500 K. 

Chomospheric plage is the bright part of the 
chromospheric active region. In the low transition region, 
where sunspots are not seen, plage fills the whole space 
of the active region as loops of different temperatures. So, 
the plage represents an intermediate stage of the magnetic 
field density, where the flux tube density is not high 
enough to block the transfer of radiation but large enough 
to be seen as emissive loops. 

The complexity of intermixing of plages with 
sunspots and filaments in the chromosphere and the 
transition region is illustrated in figure 1. The 
fine structure of chromospheric plages observed on 
high-resolution spectroheliograms shows a fibril-like 
distribution (e.g. in Ha, Le) or a distribution of fine grains 
(faculae) in Ca II K1 (low chromosphere). 

The plage area in Ca II K is used as an index of activity 
and as a proxy component for the modeling of the solar 
irradiance variation (three components are used to model 
solar activity variation: sunspots, plages, network). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Magnetic field 

Direct measurements of the magnetic field in chromo- 
spheric plages have been performed in the HI Hf 486.1 nm 
line by using the Zeeman effect. The longitudinal field 
can reach 80-100 G (1 G = 10~* T) near disk center. New 
measuring techniques using Stokes polarimetry in Ca II 
K lines are beginning to provide chromospheric magnetic 
field values. 

The magnetic field of the plage is not homogeneous. 
It is structured in tubes with a mean flux of 2.5 x 10!8 Mx. 
The filling factor of flux tubes is within the 5-15% range 
in photospheric layers; this value can be compared with 
the less than 1% filling factor in a quiet area. From vector 
magnetogram measurements a gradient of around —3 G 
km7! with height has been inferred, starting from 1400 G 
in the middle photosphere. Higher in the atmosphere the 
magnetic fields from an individual tube spread rapidly 
with height, producing a ‘canopy’ of much lower field 
strengths above the photosphere. 

At any time on the Sun a significant part of the 
magnetic flux defined as the weak fields (flux density 
below 25 G) comes from a dispersing active region. 

There is a strong correlation between the brightness 
of the Ca II chromospheric plages and the magnetic field 
strength measured in the photosphere: the Ca II plage 
bright patches overlie areas of strong magnetic field. 
The relation between Ca II K intensity and magnetic 
flux density (measured at photospheric level) holds from 
the quiet Sun cell network up to the brightest plage. 
Statistically, the mean trend between Ca II K excess flux 
density and the magnetic flux density is a power-law 
relation with an exponent smaller than unity (about 0.6). 

The total magnetic flux in a plage is of the order of 
10” to 1073 Mx. With or without spots the plage magnetic 
field is bipolar. 

The fibril-like structure is related to photospheric 
magnetic field tubes, filled with matter at relatively low 
pressure (inside each tube the gas pressure is added to the 
magnetic pressure to balance the external pressure) and 
expands and bends with height in a canopy-type structure 
(See CHROMOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY). 


Plage structure 

The plage is the basic element of an active region: plage 
appears before the sunspots and may disappear long after 
the sunspots’ disappearance. The overall structure of an 
active region is determined by both the structure of the 
emerging flux loops and the sign and strength of the fields 
already present on the surface when it emerges. A plage 
appears as an emerging flux region sometimes within or 
near an already existing active region and sometimes in 
a quiet region. A few hours or a day later, in most of the 
plages, sunspots emerge within the bright bipolar region. 
After 3-4 days, the plage has reached its maximum extent 
(up to 5 arcmin or about 200 000 km across) and intensity 
in Ha. During the following days (5-15 days) the activity 
in the plage grows and reaches its maximum. In most 
cases, after one solar rotation the sunspots disappear and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromospheric Plage 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The same active region seen in several lines (8 x 4.5 arcmin’). The top left and right are Ha and Ca K spectroheliograms from 
Sacramento Peak synoptics data (3.8 arcsec pixel size) taken on 13 May 1996 near 13:40 UT. The bottom left and right are simultaneous 
hydrogen Le and $ VI (93.3 nm, 2 x 10° K) spectroheliograms (1 arcsec pixel size) recorded by the SUMER spectrometer on the SOHO 


ESA/NASA spacecraft taken on the same day near 3:00 UT. 


the plage brightness begins to decrease while the size may 
continue to increase. If the plage is not reactivated by the 
emergence of a new flux region, the brightness continues 
to decrease and progressively the plage dissolves in the 
surrounding network after a few solar rotations (2-4 
rotations). 

While it is not clear why a plage (or emerging 
active region) appears in a specific location on the solar 
surface (although preferred longitudes seem to exist 
where the plage may emerge), detailed observations of 
the disappearance phenomenon have been performed. 
The characteristic diameter of a plage network (or the 
center-to-center supergranular cell distance) is typically 
10000 km-15000 km, a factor of 2 smaller than the 
corresponding quiet Sun network diameter. The following 
scenario, which combines several processes, has been 
proposed to explain the decay of magnetic plages: 


@ from observations using magnetograms and Doppler- 
grams it has been inferred that flux cancellation often 
occurs along the cell’s boundary when two elements of 
opposite polarities have approached each other; 


@ other observations of plage decay suggest that motions 
along supergranular lanes contribute strongly to the 
random walk of magnetic features; 


@ it has also been suggested that retraction, a process 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that is the reverse of the emergence of magnetic 
flux, controlled by subsurface motions, contributes 
substantially to the decay of plages. 


At the edge of the plage, where the magnetic flux 
density is lower than 50-80 G, because of random-walk 
motion of flux tubes, the plage flux leaks into the quiet 
region while some flux tubes coming from the quiet region 
are captured at the plage periphery. The combination of 
these two processes may explain the slow decay of most 
of the plages. Some data suggest that less than half of the 
plage flux leaves the active area; the largest part disappears 
in situ by reconnection, cancellation or submergence. 

Plage flux tubes are filled with matter in motion. From 
the chromosphere to the low transition region (6000 K < 
T < 2x 10° K) the velocities increase from a few km s~1 
to 25-30 km s"!. There is a systematic redshift detected 
over plages in the chromosphere transition region. It is 
more important than in the quiet Sun and the velocity 
differential, compared with the quiet region, peaks at 7 
km s7! near 10° K. In the transition region, in lines with a 
maximum of the ionization temperature near 10° K, along 
individual loops, velocities reaching up to 60 km s~! have 
been measured (e.g. from sono, the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory). These results must be confirmed by several 
other measurements to evaluate the importance of flows 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Chromospheric Plage 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in plage loops. There are still uncertainties in the 
interpretation of such Doppler velocities: 


@ either the flow is coming up from one loop leg and 
returning down to other loop leg, 


@ or the apparent Doppler shift is due to the propagation of 
sound waves, Alfvén waves, or magneto-acoustic waves 
along the loop magnetic field. 


Few measurements of chromospheric plage oscilla- 
tions have been done. Although 5 min intensity and ve- 
locity oscillations in phase over an extent of 10-20 arcsec 
have been reported, the amplitudes are smaller than in the 
quiet area and an increase of power has been noticed for 
periods shorter than 100 s. 

The complexity of active regions, a mixture of very 
compact clusters of magnetic flux tubes (sunspots) and 
more dispersed flux tubes (plage) of several polarities, 
arises from the mutual interaction of new flux loops rising 
within and near old ones. Within a few hours the whole 
magnetic flux tube distribution is renewed. 


Modeling of plage 

The solar abundance in the quiet solar photospheric region 
is used as a reference for abundance determination in dif- 
ferent structures at several temperatures. Measurements 
made in using the intensity of lines formed in the 2 x 104- 
10°K temperature range indicate a possible enhancement 
of low first ionization potential (FIP) (smaller than about 
10 eV) elements compared with the photospheric abun- 
dance in plage. The presence of electric fields in this highly 
dynamic atmosphere has been proposed as the cause of the 
enrichment of low-FIP elements. 

Semiempirical models of plage in one or two 
dimensions have been built. Such models provide a 
first estimate of temperature and density distribution 
as a function of an average height. From the top of 
the photosphere the plage temperature is higher than 
the quiet Sun temperature and, above the minimum 
the temperature gradient is increasing faster, giving a 
more compact chromosphere. In the chromosphere the 
electronic density is higher than the corresponding quiet 
Sun density. While in the quiet Sun the chromospheric 
plateau has an electronic density of a few 10!° cm, the 
chromospheric plage plateau reaches a few 10"! cm~?. At 
the top of the chromosphere the total pressure is greater 
than 1 dyn cm~?, nearly 10 times the pressure of the 
quiet Sun. On average the plage chromospheric radiative 
cooling is about 5 times that of the quiet Sun. 

Several dynamical models have being proposed to 
explain the emergence and decay of active regions (see 
CHROMOSPHERE: EMERGING FLUX REGIONS). 


Bibliography 
Article in review journal: 


Zwaan C 1987 Elements and patterns in the solar magnetic 
field Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 25 83-111 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Journal articles: 


Schrijver C J 1989 The effect of an interaction of magnetic 
flux and supergranulation on the decay of magnetic 
plages Sol. Phys. 122 193-208 

Seiden P E and Seiden P E 1996 Solar active region as a 
percolation phenomenon Astrophys. J. 460 522-9 


Philippe Lemaire 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Constant 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Constant 


The amount of radiant solar energy per second arriving 
perpendicularly on an area of one square meter, at a 
distance of 1 astronomical unit from the Sun. It is 
equivalent to the average flux of solar radiation at the top 
of the Earth’s atmosphere. The measured value of the solar 
constant is 1368 W m7?. 

Because the Earth travels round the Sun in an elliptical 
orbit, its distance from the Sun ranges from 1.0167 AU to 
0.9833 AU. Consequently, over the course of a year, the flux 
of solar radiation at the top of the atmosphere varies about 
its mean value by about +3%. Precise measurements of the 
solar constant have shown that the luminosity of the Sun 
fluctuates on time-scales of days and weeks by up to 0.2%, 
mainly as a result of changes in the numbers of dark spots 
or bright faculae on its surface. Long-term measurements 
suggest that there is a general variation in solar luminosity 
that appears to follow the solar cycle, the Sun being about 
0.08% more luminous at solar maximum (when there are 
more active regions on its surface) than at minimum. 


See also: active region, faculae, sunspot cycle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Corona: X-ray Bright Points 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Corona: X-ray Bright Points 


X-ray (or coronal) bright points are small knots of intense 
x-ray emission scattered randomly throughout the solar 
CORONA. They are associated with pairs of opposite-polarity 
magnetic flux seen below in the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE and are 
most likely to be heated by the motion of the magnetic 
fluxes causing reconnection in the corona. 


Observations 
In the late 1960s and early 1970s rocket-borne X-RAY 
TELESCOPES capable of resolution and pointing stability in 
the arcsecond range imaged the Sun for between 5 and 
15 min per flight. These images taken using very similar 
grazing incidence techniques to those used today revealed 
the complex beauty of the solar corona and revolutionized 
our understanding of it. One particular rocket flight on 
8 April 1969 took longer time exposures than previous 
flights and revealed for the first time hundreds of small 
faint spots of emission scattered randomly across the disk; 
they were named x-ray bright points. However, it was 
not until the skYLaB mission provided consecutive images 
over a period of hours and days that the characteristics 
of bright points could be studied. From these images it 
was found that x-ray bright points are made of a diffuse 
cloud of emission which grows at about 1 km s! up to 
approximately 22 x 10° km in diameter and contains an 
intense bright core about (3-4) x 10° km across. Their sizes 
were determined to range from 5 x 10° to 20 x 10° km, 
however, the lower bound to this range was limited by 
telescope resolution and the upper bound was arbitrarily 
chosen so that the bright points could be distinguished 
from ACTIVE REGIONS with which they appeared identical 
from coronal images. It was found that the lifetimes of 
bright points varied widely from 2 h to 2 days which 
is considerably shorter than for active regions. Recent 
high-cadence observations, however, have discovered x- 
ray bright points with lifetimes as short as a few minutes. 
These bright points are normally just a few arcseconds 
across (2 x 10° km) and are known as micro bright points. 
X-ray bright points have fairly low temperatures of 
about 2 x 10° K but high electron densities of around 5 x 
10° cm~3. They appear randomly distributed throughout 
the corona in coronal holes, quiet regions and active 
regions. Approximately 400 are present at any one time 
at solar minimum with approximately 1200 appearing 
each day, although these numbers vary depending on the 
wavelength, cadence and resolution of the telescope used. 
Comparing the first rocket images with magne- 
tograms it was found that bright points were associated 
with pairs of opposite-polarity magnetic fragments. Since 
ephemeral regions, pairs of newly emerged opposite- 
polarity flux, had just been discovered it was natural to 
assume that bright points were caused by the new emer- 
gence of a small loop in the corona. However, studies of 
the long-term variation of bright points revealed that their 
number decreased near solar maximum, suggesting that 
they were out of phase with the solar cycle. This was in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


complete contradiction to the observations of ephemeral 
regions which were found to be in phase with the solar 
cycle. 

This discrepancy remained a mystery for many years 
basically because after Skylab soft x-ray images could only 
be taken on board rocket flights and so further comparative 
studies could not be made until it was discovered that He 
10830 dark points observed by ground-based telescopes 
were fairly good proxies for the 30% largest bright points. 
A ground-based study comparing He 10830 images and 
magnetograms then came up with an explanation in 1984. 
This detailed study of time sequences of magnetograms 
revealed that most pairs of opposite-polarity flux below 
dark points were in fact converging not diverging and 
that the pairs of magnetic fragments were mutually losing 
flux. These new photospheric phenomena were called 
cancelling magnetic features and are believed to be related 
to the amount of mixed-polarity flux in the photosphere 
which decreases by a factor of 6 from solar maximum to 
solar minimum. Thus, like x-ray bright points, cancelling 
magnetic features were also found to be out of phase 
with the solar cycle. Indeed, recent studies show that 
about 80% of bright points are associated with cancelling 
magnetic features and just 10% with emerging flux 
regions. The remaining 10% are mysteriously related to 
unipolar regions of flux, although with higher-resolution 
instruments it may become apparent that these unipolar 
regions actually contain weak opposite-polarity regions of 
flux after all. 

Interestingly these recent studies also suggest that 
bright points are in fact neither in nor out of phase with the 
solar cycle, but that their number remains approximately 
constant over the whole cycle. The change in opinion has 
come about through results from soft x-ray telescopes with 
much less scatter than Skylab which reveal that the intense 
emission from active regions can obscure the faint bright 
points during periods of increased activity on the Sun and 
so make it appear that at solar maximum there are far fewer 
bright points. 

A study in the late 1970s using a time series of Fe 
XV images from the S-082A instrument revealed that 
x-ray bright points consist of small loops which vary 
in intensity on a timescale of about 6 min. The loop 
structures were found to be quite complex in nature and 
had loops of different temperatures. This was believed to 
be consistent with the repeated impulsive heating of the 
loops followed by their subsequent cooling before another 
pulse of heating. It was also found that sometimes these 
fluctuations could increase by a factor of 10-100. In such 
cases the bright point was said to have flared. These 
microflaring events tend to occur in about 10% of bright 
points and generally last from 5 to 10 min. Occasionally 
when x-ray bright points flare they produce long hot loops 
that grow up to hundreds of megameters long at speeds 
of 1000 km s~!. These events are known as SOLAR X-RAY JETS. 
In bright points the jets are mostly two winged. 

X-ray bright points and bright point flares have 
typical energy emissions between 10”° and 10” ergs and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Corona: X-ray Bright Points 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Left: half of a full-disk soft x-ray image taken by NIXT. 
The arrow indicates a bright point which is enlarged at the top 
right. Bottom right: the magnetic field due to the fragments 
below the bright point. The shaded regions are the newly 
reconnected field lines that give rise to the bright point. 


so are the size of microflares. Indeed, signatures of 
microflares can be identified in the GOES data coincident 
in time with some of the larger bright point flares. Bright 
points also produce radio emission that can be both 
thermal (e.g. 17 GHz, 20 cm, etc) and non-thermal (e.g. 
type III bursts) suggesting that there are both open and 
closed field lines and that whatever powers bright points 
is not just heating them but is also accelerating particles. 

An interesting phenomenon relating to cancelling 
magnetic features has been observed in Ha images: tiny 
filaments form above the cancelling magnetic feature. 
They typically last between 10 min and a few hours before 
they erupt. It is estimated that about 10% of cancelling 
magnetic features may have associated filaments, but there 
have, as yet, been no studies relating bright points or bright 
point flares to these filaments or their eruption. 

Further studies of x-ray bright points using high- 
resolution soft x-ray telescopes (for instance, NIXT and 
TRACE) have managed to resolve the structure of bright 
points. Many are just single loops, but others are more 
complex and have a multiple loop structure (figure 1). In 
general, the complexity of the x-ray emission is related to 
the complex mixture of magnetic polarities below. 


Theory 

It is believed that x-ray bright points are heated by driven 
reconnection: the motion of footpoints of magnetic loops 
that are pushed together, interact and reconnect in the 
corona. The generally accepted model is the converging 
flux model proposed in 1994 which predicts in a natural 
way the key observations relating to x-ray bright points 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and their associated cancelling magnetic feature. In this 
model the interaction of two opposite-polarity magnetic 
fragments in an overlying ambient field are modelled in 
three stages: the pre-interaction phase, the interaction 
phase and the cancellation phase (Figure 2). First, in the 
pre-interaction phase of the model, a positive and a negative 
fragment are situated in a uniform overlying field such 
that they are unconnected magnetically, analogously to 
the observation that before opposite polarity flux pairs in 
a cancelling magnetic feature start to cancel no fibrils are 
observed linking them. 

These opposite-polarity flux regions are seen to 
converge slowly at a typical speed of 0.3 km s7!, which 
compared with the Alfvén speed of 100-1000 km s-tis very 
slow; thus in the model the magnetic field is assumed to be 
evolving through a series of quasi-static equilibria as the 
fragments converge. The observations show that at some 
point during the convergence a bright point will appear 
(not necessarily directly) above the pair of opposite- 
polarity flux fragments. This sudden appearance of the 
bright point marks the start of the interaction phase and 
is explained naturally in the model as the point at which 
the fragments first interact magnetically at a neutral point 
which forms in the photosphere. The field is assumed 
to continue to evolve through a series of equilibrium 
states as the fragments converge even more closely; thus 
reconnection must take place at the neutral point. The 
reconnection causes field lines to be ‘broken’ and new field 
lines to be formed. Although initially the neutral point 
and therefore the energy released in the model start out at 
the level of the photosphere as the fragments continue to 
converge the neutral point rises up into the corona. Newly 
reconnected field lines are believed to be injected with 
hot dense plasma which creates the increased emission 
observed in soft x-rays as the bright point. 

Observations show that bright points start before 
cancellation starts and may even end before cancellation 
starts. In the model this is also true: at the point where the 
fragments first interact magnetically they are not actually 
losing flux, merely changing their flux connections. The 
bright point will continue until the two fragments are 
completely connected magnetically. This point may 
be reached before or after the two fragments actually 
touch one another in the photosphere. At this point the 
cancellation phase begins even though the interaction phase 
may not have ended. Flux is lost mutually from each 
fragment through reconnection in the photosphere. This 
process can continue until either the smallest fragment has 
been completely cancelled or the flows driving the two 
fragments stop driving them together. 

The converging flux model clearly explains the 80% of 
bright points that are associated with cancelling magnetic 
features. The 10% associated with the emerging flux 
regions can also be explained by just considering the stages 
of the converging flux model in reverse (i.e. considering 
a diverging flux model). The cancellation phase if run 
backwards is analogous to an emerging phase where two 
new fragments grow in strength and diverge, as observed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Corona: X-ray Bright Points ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


fragments. The corresponding magnetic field topology of 
these four fragments was modelled as it evolved according 
to the observations through a series of equi-potential 
states. The newly reconnected field lines that formed are 


soideahare sasaiei panne x-point on photosphere those shaded in figure 1(c) and compare very favorably 
(a) PRE-INTERACTION PHASE (b) with the structure of the bird bright point observed. 


Because of the imbalance of flux in this situation there 
ee would also have been newly reconnected open field lines 
that would not brighten since the heat flux along very 
extended loops would be small. They may, however, 
have enabled non-thermal radiation to be observed from 
particles accelerated along them. 


So — right point = point 


coronal / (c) INTERACTION PHASE (d) Bibliography 
eee ee Forbes T G 1994 ‘Fireflies’ on the Sun Nature 369 278 


Golub L and Pasachoff J M 1997 The Solar Corona 


= (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Priest E R, Parnell C E and Martin S F 1994 A converging 
flux model of an X-ray bright point and an associated 
cancelling magnetic feature Astrophys. J. 427 459-74 


cancelling \ 
magnetic 
feature 


~~ 

photospheric 

‘\. reconnection 
. 


Clare E Parnell 


(e) CANCELLATION PHASE (f) 


Figure 2. Converging flux model. (a) and (b) show the 
pre-interaction phase where the fragments are initially 
unconnected. (c) and (d) show the interaction phase in which 
reconnection creates a bright point in the corona. (e) and (f) 
show the cancellation phase where photospheric reconnection 
forms a cancelling magnetic feature. 


This may or may not, depending on the circumstances, 
overlap with the interaction phase which as before gives 
rise to reconnection in the corona that creates the bright 
point. This time, however, the reconnection is driven 
by the divergence of the fragments. The bright point 
ends when the two fragments are completely unconnected 
magnetically. 

The reconnection that powers the bright points is 
driven by the convergence or divergence of the two 
opposite-polarity magnetic fragments and is likely to be 
of an impulsive bursty nature. This means that the 
reconnection will not continue in a steady manner but is 
likely to take place in frequent, but random, spurts that 
occur every few minutes. It is unclear whether the flaring 
stage of a bright point is just a very large sudden random 
release of energy or whether it is some completely separate 
event like the eruption of a mini filament. 

In figure 1(a) an arrow indicates a three-looped bright 
point that resembles a bird in flight (figure 1(b)). The 
philosophy of the converging flux model was used to 
model this bright point by comparing it with images of 
the magnetogram below to discover the magnetic flux 
regions associated with this structure. These revealed an 
imbalance of flux with one positive and three negative 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: 
Observations 


The Sun ejects matter into space. There appear to be two 
basic ejection classes, the first leading to the soLAR WIND 
outflow, and the second leading to the occasional ejection 
of huge, discrete clouds known as coronal mass ejections 
(CMEs). First identified in the early 1970s, a typical CME 
can carry 1000000000 t of plasma into space as part of 
the Sun’s atmosphere erupts. The CME source regions 
within the Sun’s atmosphere can be hundreds of thousands 
of km across and the resulting CMEs can expand into 
space at many hundreds of km s-!. The rate of CME 
eruptions varies with the soLaR CYCLE, but not by a large 
factor; one might expect about one CME event per day. 
CMEs represent a very significant disturbance to the solar 
wind. Given their size and mass, combined with the fact 
that the expanding clouds carry a frozen-in magnetic field, 
such events can engulf the Earth system and their arrival 
at the Earth can generate significant geomagnetic storms. 


Observation of activity in the corona 

In visible light the Sun’s corona, or outer atmosphere, 
at its brightest, is a million times less intense than the 
solar disk. With such a huge contrast only rather special 
techniques can be used to observe the corona, effectively 
by removing the glaring solar disk emission. Indeed, one 
such technique is provided by nature. 

During a total solar EcLIrsE the Moon occults perfectly 
the Sun’s disk and the corona can be seen with the naked 
eye, as a system of milky, diffuse closed-loop features and 
streamers extending well into space. However, at best we 
see just a few minutes of totality and thus this only gives a 
brief glance. We may view the structure of the Sun’s corona 
during the eclipse, but we cannot rely on such observations 
to observe the dynamic nature of the corona. Having said 
that, we can make use of an eclipse-like technique using 
an instrument called a CORONAGRAPH. 

The bulk of our knowledge of CMEs comes from 
visible or ‘white light’ coronagraphs. Such a coronagraph 
is basically a telescope which contains an externally 
mounted or internally mounted device for occulting the 
solar disk. Obscuring such a bright, extended source 
does introduce difficulties with scattered light within the 
instrument; one can never produce as good an occulting 
disk as the Moon. However, modern coronagraphs can 
observe to within a tenth of a solar radius of the edge of 
the solar disk. In addition, because of scattered light from 
the Sun’s disk in the Earth’s atmosphere, one must operate 
such instruments at high altitude or from spacecraft, that 
is, above most of the atmosphere or outside the Earth’s 
atmosphere. 

Given the ability to produce an artificial eclipse one 
can monitor the Sun’s atmosphere and study its structure 
and evolution at will, and this allows the study of activity 
in the Sun’s corona, such as the CME eruptions. 

The plasma in the solar corona is optically thin. This 
means that any observation along a line of sight is the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


integrated intensity of light emitted along that line of sight. 
Thus, we observe three-dimensional features projected 
onto a flat image—the plane of the sky. 

The observation of CMEs is further complicated. The 
Sun’s corona radiates in visible light because the light from 
the photosphere (the visible solar ‘surface’) is scattered 
off free electrons which are concentrated in the magnetic 
structures of the corona, and this is true for CMEs. The 
geometrical factors relating to the scattering process mean 
that coronagraphs are best suited to the observation of 
features over the limb or edge of the Sun. Thus, a CME 
ejected above the limb would, in general, appear to be 
brighter than one ejected out of the plane of the sky. 

Another feature of the Sun’s atmosphere allows 
further refinements to the coronal observing techniques. 
The Sun has a so-called K-corona and F-corona. The 
K-corona is the ‘electron’ corona; this is the true solar 
corona, i.e. radiation from the electrons contained within 
the structures in the Sun’s atmosphere. The F-corona 
is effectively the near-Sun dust environment which is 
illuminated by solar radiation. For the analysis of the solar 
coronal structure and evolution, including CME activity, 
we wish to observe the K-corona. The K-corona is brighter 
than the F-corona close to the Sun, but, beyond about 2 
solar radii, the F-coronal radiation begins to dominate. 
Thus, one has to separate the two and here we can make 
use of the fact that emission from the K-corona is heavily 
polarized. Indeed, this fact can help us to observe the 
coronal features against unpolarized scattered light such 
as in the Earth’s atmosphere. 

The first space-borne ‘white light’ coronagraph was 
flown in ORBITING SOLAR OBSERVATORY (OSO) 7 in 1973. With 
this device, the first CME observations were made, though 
it has been suggested that eclipse photographs from 1860 
demonstrate that a CME was in progress, although no- 
one at the time could have identified it as an ejection. 
After OSO 7, extensive observations of CMEs were made 
using space-borne coronagraphs aboard skyLaB (1973-4), 
P 78-1 (1979-85), SOLAR MAXIMUM MISSION (1980 and 1984— 
9) and sono, the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory 
(1995 to date). In addition, ground-based observations 
of CMEs have been made for many years with a similar 
device, called a K-coronameter, which measures the 
polarized brightness from the K-corona, at the HICH 
ALTITUDE OBSERVATORY’S Mauna Loa Solar Observatory in 
Hawaii. 


The anatomy of a coronal mass ejection 

The most basic definition of a CME is that it represents 
a discrete ejection of mass from the solar atmosphere 
detected as a transient feature expanding outward through 
a coronagraph field of view. CMEs represent a significant, 
rapid restructuring of a large portion of the solar 
atmosphere as the mass is ejected. CMEs occur in all 
shapes and sizes, and with many topological variations, 
but some basic characteristics are quite common. In this 
section we try to describe a ‘typical’ CME event, but draw 
attention to some features that vary from event to event. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


First, to put the CME story in perspective we must 
remember that the solar atmosphere is an environment 
where the interplay between the solar plasmas and 
magnetic fields produces a complex hierarchy of magnetic 
loops containing plasmas at temperatures up to a few 
million kelvins. The loops are rooted in the body of the 
Sun and move with the surface plasma, which is subject 
to differential rotation as well as the turbulent effects of 
the convection patterns below the surface. The net result 
is an environment where magnetic field systems can be 
driven to a great deal of complexity; the motions of the 
solar surface literally weaving the magnetic field lines into 
highly stressed patterns. Eventually, one could imagine 
some kind of breakdown or rapid expansion of magnetic 
fields, where the response to further motion actually drives 
magnetic fields outwards and this becomes the CME, i.e. 
the ultimate result is the ejection of mass from the Sun. We 
know that sunspots, flares and other forms of solar activity 
are all driven by the Sun’s magnetic fields and the CME 
is another form of solar magnetic activity. In short, one 
can state that it would be a logical process for the Sun 
to expel magnetic fields in the way described, and that is 
the CME. Having said that, the actual process by which 
the eruption occurs, the reasons for the topology we see 
and the prediction of mass ejections are all beyond our 
understanding at the moment. 

The first view one might get of a CME is the expansion 
of a bright loop system rising into the solar corona from 
behind a coronagraph occulting disk. This can appear as 
a sharply defined single loop or a highly structured loop 
system. As the loop system expands outward one often 
sees a cavity in the region behind the loop, that is, the loop 
system is leading a region of depleted density. Within the 
cavity, for many CME events, one might find the ascending 
features of a prominence or filament which erupts as part 
of the CME event. 

An example is shown in figure 1, taken using the 
coronagraph aboard the Solar Maximum Mission. This 
CME occurred on 14 April 1980 and it is shown here in 
a sequence of four images shown in negative form. The 
images were taken at 04:48, 05:44, 06:10 and 07:09 UNIVERSAL 
TIME (top left to bottom right) and in each image one can see 
streamers extending from the disk to the top and left of the 
image. These persist throughout the ejection event. In the 
images the Sun is tilted at 45°, with the north pole to the 
upper left, and the occulting disk (white in the negative) 
is 3 solar radii across. 

The first image (top left) shows the CME loop just 
ascending above the occulting disc, apparently over the 
northern polar region. In the second image (top right), 
56 min later, the CME loop has ascended further, to half 
way to the top left corner of the image, and a second loop 
can be seen. The second loop is an ascending prominence 
and it actually lies in a density ‘cavity’ which occupies the 
volume behind the outer loop. The third image (bottom 
left), taken only 26 min later, shows significant outward 
expansion, and, in the last image (bottom right), the CME 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Four images of the CME of 14 April 1980 detected by 
the Solar Maximum Mission coronagraph (courtesy of High 
Altitude Observatory). 


1967/1 1:08 12 26 22 


Figure 2. The CME of 6 November 1997 detected by the 
coronagraph on the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory 
(courtesy of Naval Research Laboratory). 


outer loop has left the field of view and the prominence 
can just be made out. 

A second CME event is shown in figure 2, this 
time taken by the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory 
coronagraph on 6 November 1997. This event shows a 
more complex outer loop system expanding out from the 
Sun, and no clear sign of a following prominence. In 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


this event the legs of the CME are particularly bright and 
the outer portions show a dramatic amount of hair-like 
structure. In this case, the occulting disk is also 3 solar 
radii across, and the solar disk is denoted by the white 
circle. 

Typically a CME spans some 45 heliographic degrees 
of the solar disc, with clear legs which remain fixed over 
the same location of the Sun as the CME expands outward. 
However, CMEs have been reported with widths of less 
than 10°, and CMEs which are apparently directed toward 
or away from the Earth can appear to expand like a halo 
around the entire solar disk. Thus, although the average 
CME span is about 45°, and about 60% of CMEs have spans 
between 30° and 60°, CMEs of almost all spans are found. 

Measurements of the speed of the outer loops of 
CMEs give typical outward speeds of 300-400 km s"!, 
although CMEs have been detected with speeds as high 
as 2000 km s~! and as low as just a few tens of km s7!. 
The majority of CMEs show a modest acceleration with 
altitude from the solar surface, or a constant velocity. 
Very few display deceleration with height. The ascending 
prominence or filament material always follows the outer 
loops at a slower velocity. Since the escape velocity at the 
surface of the Sun is over 600 km s~' the ejection process, 
at least in most cases, cannot involve the ballistic flight 
of a cloud which is launched by an impulse at a single 
point in time. The constant velocity or modest acceleration 
properties of CMEs, combined with the fact that they leave 
the Sun and can travel out as slowly as a few tens of 
kms“!, suggest that the ejection expands outwards under 
the influence of a continuous process. 

Statistical analyses indicate that 75% of CMEs contain 
prominence or filamentary material as part of the ejection. 
Figures 1 and 2 show an example of a CME with and 
without a prominence eruption. The prominence or 
filament can sit symmetrically within the CME loops (as 
with figure 1) or can appear to lie asymmetrically within 
the CME. The prominence can rise as a single entity 
within the CME but many events show partial prominence 
eruption under the CME. 

The scattering process which allows the observation 
of CMEs also allows us to estimate the amount of mass 
contained in the CME, by measuring the intensity of 
the CME material, and many estimates have put typical 
CME masses at about 107-10" kg, i.e. 1000000 000- 
10 000 000 000 t, although once again there must be a huge 
spread of masses. 

Many CMEs occur underneath or within pre-existing 
coronal helmet streamers (See CORONAL STREAMERS). For a 
period which may last for some days the streamer can 
show signs of the impending ejection by displaying a 
gradual ‘swelling’. The ejection itself can disrupt the 
streamer which may form again afterwards, although in 
the aftermath of a CME, for some days, the coronal region 
from which the CME erupted can appear to be swept out. 
Whether or not the CME ‘cloud’ is magnetically connected 
to the ejection site for some days after the ejection itself is 
open to debate. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


We know that prominences can erupt as part of 
the CME process, but other forms of solar activity may 
accompany the event. For example, many CMEs involve 
SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS; either the CME can appear to erupt 
from an active region or an active region lies at one 
footpoint of the CME event. For such active region related 
CMEs the ejection process can be associated with flare 
activity. However, detailed studies of the relative timing 
of flare onsets and CME onsets show quite clearly that the 
flare onset can occur well before, coincident with or after 
the CME onset. The only thing which is clear is that there 
is an association. The location of a CME associated flare 
can be anywhere under or near the span of the CME, and 
frequently in one leg. From these associations it is clear 
that CMEs and flares do not cause one another, but they 
often occur in close association. 

Here, we have described a ‘typical’ CME. However, 
some CME events do not fit nicely into the scenario 
described. Some events are more ‘tongue-like’, appearing 
as an ascending mound. Some are more spikey and 
narrow. A newly discovered class of events are relatively 
common, small ejecta which appear to ascend within the 
streamer systems and their relationship to their larger 
brothers is not at all clear at this stage. Thus, while 
describing CME activity it should be noted that there 
may actually be different event types relating to different 
ejection processes, or there may be a wide event ‘spectrum’ 
with huge eruptions at one extreme, and small ascending 
clouds at the other extreme. Of course, all of this is subject 
to the sensitivity of our coronagraphs and as we develop 
better techniques we are likely to identify events or event 
types which were not previously visible. 

Finally, one feature which we have not addressed 
here is the fact that the CME is a projection of a three- 
dimensional object projected onto a flat image, in the plane 
of the sky. This provides a few very basic questions. Is 
the CME loop representing the projection of a bubble, a 
loop or an arcade? If the CME loop was identified as the 
blast or coronal response to a sudden impulsive event from 
below, such as a flare, then a bubble-like expansion may 
be expected. However, no such cause can be identified. 
This, combined with the fact that the CME appears to be a 
signal of the eruption of a magnetic loop system, suggests 
quite strongly that we are witnessing the eruption of a 
magnetic loop or (more likely) arcade. The latter would 
fit nicely with the multiloop structures often seen in CMEs 
and is consistent with the idea that prominences lie within 
arcade systems in the solar atmosphere. It should also 
be noted that observations of prominences on the limb, 
particularly in eclipse images, reveal that the prominence 
arcade systems appear to enclose density depletions or 
cavities, which is also consistent with the basic structure 
of many CMEs. 


Coronal mass ejections and the solar cycle 

Solar activity adheres to an 11 yr magnetic cycle and 
CMEs are no exception to this. The rate of CMEs varies 
in harmony with the numbers of sunspots and rates of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


flares. However, whereas the sunspot number increases by 
a factor of over 100 between the minimum and maximum 
of solar activity the number of CMEs appears to vary by 
a factor of only 10 or so, from about 0.1 per day to over 1 
per day at solar maximum. 

As well as variations in the CME rate, the solar cycle 
sees a variation in the latitude of CME source regions. 
During solar minimum CMEs tend to come from regions 
focused at or near the solar equator. At solar maximum, 
CMEs come from a larger spread of solar latitudes. This 
appears to be a direct association with other coronal 
features. At solar minimum the helmet streamers are 
mainly confined to a single belt around the Sun which lies 
at low latitudes. At solar maximum the corona is far more 
complex with systems of streamers at all but the highest 
latitudes. This appears to confirm that the majority of 
CMEs are associated with streamers. 

The two CMEs shown in figures 1 and 2 show two 
extremes. Figure 1 shows a CME at the maximum of 
solar activity. Its apparent ejection over the polar region is 
most likely a projection effect. However, the ascending 
prominence was seen to erupt on the disk and it was 
formerly a high-latitude polar crown filament. On the 
other hand, figure 2 is a CME at solar minimum which 
erupted through a pre-existing equatorial helmet streamer. 


The CME onset question 

CMEs are detected using coronagraphs. Thus, the source 
regions of CMEs are obscured by the occulting disks 
of the very instruments which detect them. CMEs are 
seen clearly to rise up from behind the occulting disks 
of Skylab, Solar Maximum Mission and the intermediate 
coronagraph of the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory— 
ie. they rise up from below half a solar radius above the 
limb of the Sun. Coronagraphs which are able to observe 
nearer to the disk, such as the Mauna Loa coronameter 
and the inner coronagraph of the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory, may be able to view portions of the CME 
source regions, although the observations thus far are 
inconclusive. To observe the onset of CMEs one must 
observe the lowest levels of the solar atmosphere and for 
this many researchers employ different techniques. 

For reasons given above, coronagraphs are best suited 
to observations in the plane of the sky, that is, they are best 
suited to detecting CMEs which erupt over the edges of 
the Sun. Thus, even if one could observe the source region 
of the CME it would be near or even beyond the limb, or 
edge, of the Sun. Even if the source region of the CME is on 
the near side of the Sun, it will be near the limb and thus, 
because of the curvature of the Sun’s disk, the features in 
the Sun’s atmosphere associated with the CME onset will 
be foreshortened. 

Before considering activity which we might observe 
on the solar disk which could be associated with a CME 
onset, we can make some comments on the CME source 
region. The average CME is 45° in span; some are much 
larger. CMEs often have well-defined legs which must 
indicate where they are rooted at the Sun, and those legs do 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


not move during the eruption. These observations imply 
that the CME comes typically from a rather large source 
region, much larger than a flare or even an active region. 

Flares and prominence eruptions are the most obvious 
forms of solar activity whose relationship with CMEs can 
be investigated. They are both observed using ground- 
based techniques. In basic terms, we can identify a CME 
using a coronagraph and then examine the underlying 
portion of the Sun to look for flare or prominence activity. 
Some discussion about the flare-CME and prominence— 
CME relationship are given above, but here we consider 
their possible role in the onset. 

We already know that SOLAR PROMINENCES can erupt as 
part of the CME process, but is that the result of some kind 
of secondary process or could the prominence signal the 
driving force behind the entire CME event? Over the years 
the fact that the observing techniques used to detect CMEs 
and to observe prominence eruptions are so different 
has spawned many lines of research which consider 
each in isolation from the other. This has hindered our 
understanding of the full picture. However, whereas 
CMEs can be seen without obvious prominence material 
within them, coronagraphs never detect prominences 
ascending through the corona without an associated CME. 
Thus, the current thinking is that the prominence eruption 
is part of the CME process, but it does not drive the 
overlying CME loops. 

As described above, the association between flares 
and CMEs is not straightforward. The association was 
recognized in the early years of CME observation. Again, 
flares could be identified from ground-based observations 
and their locations and timings noted with respect to 
any overlying CME activity (See SOLAR FLARE OBSERVATIONS). 
Quite logically, many researchers at that time suggested 
that the CME was some kind of blast or coronal response to 
an underlying flare. However, many CMEs occur without 
underlying flares and the timing and location of flares 
which are associated with CMEs imply that flares do not 
drive CMEs. 

One has to conclude that the associated flare and 
prominence activity occur as a result of processes which 
also led to the mass ejection, but that neither the flare nor 
the prominence eruption cause the CME. For the same 
reasons, the CME cannot generate the flare. 

So, far from making the picture clear, the examination 
of flare and prominence associations with CME onsets 
reveals a rather confusing picture. 

The Sun’s corona radiates ultraviolet and x-ray light. 
This is due to the fact that the plasma in the corona 
is so hot—rising from 6000 K at the photosphere to a 
few million K. However, as well as thermal emission, 
ultraviolet observations in particular reveal patterns—so- 
called emission lines—which come from trace elements 
in the Sun’s atmosphere, such as iron, silicon, oxygen, 
magnesium and so on. We are aware of this because 
the wavelength or color of the emission characteristics 
is known from laboratory measurements. By making 
observations in specific emission lines one can view 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| pil fp 
Pn i pF , LG i 


Figure 3. An ejection event detected in ultraviolet light from oxygen showing ascending plasma at a temperature of 250000 K 


(courtesy of Rutherford Appleton Laboratory). 


different temperature layers in the Sun’s atmosphere 
and derive plasma characteristics of the solar plasmas, 
such as density, temperature, flow velocities and plasma 
constituents. 

Employing these spectroscopic techniques, recent 
spacecraft campaigns, involving the Solar and Helio- 
spheric Observatory in particular, have been used to 
examine in detail the solar atmosphere at the time of a 
CME onset. By making spectroscopic observations near 
the solar limb and awaiting an ejection a new view of the 
ejection process is being formed. 

Figure 3 is an example of the fruits of one of these 
observing sequences, where, in this case, an ultraviolet 
spectrometer has been used to scan a region of the solar 
limb where an ejection is underway. Each image covers the 
same 200000 km x 200 000 km area on the edge of the Sun 
at 16 min intervals from top left to bottom right. Although 
the event was detected in emission lines which allow the 
analysis of plasmas at 20 000 K—2 000 000 K, we show here 
radiation from a form of ionized oxygen which has a 
characteristic temperature of 250000 K. The first image 
is a raw image which shows the solar limb and a weak, 
diffuse cloud extending into the corona. The subsequent 
images are differenced, i.e. the intensity of the first image 
is subtracted from each. Thus, for each image, white 
indicates an increase in intensity with time, and black 
shows a depletion with time. The heavy black and white 
mottled patterns of the solar surface reflect the activity of 
the supergranulation. However, the dramatic feature is 
the clear outward expansion of a 250000 K cloud as part 
of a CME onset. The ultraviolet spectroscopy reveals clear 
ejection of material associated with a prominence eruption, 
as well as the outward expansion of plasmas up to several 
hundred thousand kelvins. Hotter plasmas (around 
1 million kelvins and upwards) show little evidence for the 
ejection at all, and certainly confirm that there was no hot, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


CDS—SOHO — 12 DECEMBER 1997 0 V 629 A 


Figure 4. A schematic model of the CME process indicating (A) a 
pre-existing coronal streamer, (B) the ascending CME loops, (C) 
an erupting prominence and (D) an underlying active region. 


impulsive event at the onset. These spectral analyses are 
continuing and, at this time, we conclude that the ejection 
process is a very subtle event, i.e. the events which are so 
dramatic in the high corona are really rather insignificant 
lower in the atmosphere. 


Conclusion 


Figure 4 shows a schematic of the CME process as many 
would describe it today. The salient components of the 
cartoon are (A) a pre-existing coronal streamer, (B) the 
ascending CME loop structure, (C) a prominence erupting 
behind the CME loops and (D) an active region. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In this case, we include the pre-existing streamer 
(A) although for some events such a feature may not be 
apparent. Under the streamer are closed-loop systems 
spanning some tens of heliographic degrees; this is a 
typical streamer form and size. These loops may be rooted 
in quiet Sun regions but in this case we show an active 
region (D). Under one portion of the loop systems within 
the span of the streamer is a magnetic arcade containing a 
filament or prominence. 

The magnetic fields are rooted in the body of the Sun. 
As a result of the differential motion of the solar ‘surface’ 
the loop footpoints may shear, i.e. slide in different 
directions with the flow of the Sun. Such motion can 
cause the loops to begin to rise as the magnetic system tries 
to achieve an equilibrium. This shear activity, combined 
with magnetic complexities associated with the associated 
active region, can cause the large-scale fields to achieve 
a non-equilibrium situation or a lack of stability. The 
loops may expand outward. As they begin to expand 
the streamer above shows signs of some swelling. The 
continued ascent of the loops heralds the ascent of the outer 
loop of the CME as we know it. 

As the magnetic loops expand out, either the arcade 
enclosing the filament or prominence ascends with it or 
quite separately reaches a non-equilibrium because of the 
removal of the overlying magnetic fields which would 
have acted to anchor the system. Thus, the eruption of 
a prominence (C) follows the CME. The exact nature of the 
ascending prominence will depend on many factors such 
as the state of development of the prominence prior to the 
event. 

In this picture part of the ascending loop system is 
rooted in an active region (D). One might expect that the 
effect of this opening of field lines could in itself drive 
secondary changes in the active region. This may result in 
the onset of a solar flare if the conditions are right. Such 
an event may occur at any time in the sequence and, thus, 
may occur before the CME, at the same time as the CME 
onset, or after the CME onset. Thus, the CME onset and 
the flare are associated but do not cause one another. They 
are both driven by the same basic process. 


Bibliography 

Crooker N, Joselyn J-A and Feynman J 1997 Coronal 
Mass Ejections (Geophysical Monograph Series, vol 99) 
(American Geophysical Union) 

Hundhausen A J 1988 The origin and propagation of 
coronal mass ejections Proc. 6th Int. Solar Wind Conf. 
(Technical Note TN-306) ed V J Pizzo, T E Holzer 
and D G Sime (Boulder, CO: National Center for 
Atmospheric Research) pp 181-214 


Richard A Harrison 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Theory 


Solar coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are episodic expul- 
sions of mass out of the solar corona involving large-scale 
reconfigurations of the corona. In a typical event, sev- 
eral 10'°-'° ¢ of plasma pre-existing in the low corona is 
expelled into interplanetary space, with a rate of occur- 
rence varying from one event every few days at activity 
minimum to as high as three events per day at activity 
maximum in the course of a SOLARCYCLE. The CME and the 
FLARE are the two most energetic phenomena, liberating 
some 10°! erg of energy in each case, among the myr- 
iad of time-dependent phenomena in the corona. Since it 
involves length scales of the order of the solar radius and 
time scales characteristic of sound and Alfvén speeds in 
the corona, the CME is appropriately described by mac- 
NETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD) and is thus one of few known 
MHD processes in astrophysics which are accessible to di- 
rect imaging as a spatially resolved time-dependent event 
(See SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS). 

Discovered in the 1970s, CMEs have been a subject 
of intensive research, with several outstanding questions 
to which contending theoretical answers have been 
proposed. The rest of this article treats some of these 
questions: those dealing with the causes and consequences 
of CMEs, the origin of the CME energy, the nonlinear, 
time-dependent MHD flows of CMEs in the corona, and 
the characteristic structural form of the CMEs and their 
manifestations in the SOLAR WIND. 


Causes and consequences of CMEs 

The observed close association between CMEs and the 
other two major forms of coronal eruptions, namely flares 
and eruptive prominences, was the basis for the theory, 
once seriously considered, that CMEs are the responses 
of the corona to these other eruptions occurring lower 
down in the corona. This suggestion was attractive 
because of its physical simplicity. It was also in keeping 
with the reasonable idea prevalent before CMEs were 
discovered that the impulsive flare might produce a blast 
wave traveling out of the corona. This blast wave was 
identified with type II traveling radio noise and with shock 
wave structures observed in the solar wind by satellites 
at 1 AU. In this theory the CME would be identified 
with the blast wave generated by the flare. This scenario 
was pursued with many simulations with time-dependent 
MHD numerical codes treating CMEs as the results of 
impulsive inputs of flare-like energies at the base of static 
atmospheres embedding a potential magnetic field. 

The flare initiation of CMEs as a theoretical idea was 
shown to be not tenable by the observational results of 
R Harrison and by the follow-up work of A Hundhausen. 
Although the question is still being debated by some 
theorists, it is widely accepted that where observation is of 
sufficiently good quality, when a CME is associated with 
an observed flare, the flare does not as a rule precede the 
CME onset. Actually, events were found which showed 
that the CME preceded the associated flare. This rules 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


out the flare as a cause of CMEs. From the theoretical 
point of view, there are several other aspects of the CME 
phenomenon which suggest that flares are not likely to be 
the cause of CMEs, notable of which are the following two 
points. Firstly, an impulsive ejection of the corona would 
involve the highest speeds of the MHD medium whereas 
the observed CME speeds fall in a huge range, from 10 to 
2000 km s~!, with a median of about 400 kms~!. Secondly, 
CMEs tend to show a characteristic three-part structure 
in white-light coronagraph observation—a bright loop 
leading a dark cavity containing a bright core. This 
structure is reasonably interpreted to be corresponding to 
that of the pre-existing helmet streamer—a bright dome 
overlying a dark cavity containing a quiescent prominence 
(See CORONAL STREAMERS). The breaking up of a coronal 
helmet has been commonly observed to be the origin of 
a CME. Thus the CME is a nonlinear but not necessarily 
an impulsive ‘breaking loose’ of a large-scale coronal 
structure which preserves the coherence of the three-part 
structure. 

The rejection of a flare as the cause of the CME 
is an important theoretical development, for it brings 
about a new or different way of viewing the large-scale 
corona. This view has a strong theoretical appeal because 
it integrates various theoretical and observational results 
in terms of simple MHD principles. 

The solar corona is ordered by an interplay between 
two competing effects as the result of heating and the 
presence of magnetic fields. The hitherto still poorly 
understood heating maintains the corona at temperatures 
of the order of 1 to 2 million degrees with such a degree 
of relentlessness that at no time is the corona in any 
large bulk part able to cool down significantly below 
these temperatures. One of the consequences of its 
high temperature is the high thermal conductivity of the 
corona. Combined with the inverse square fall-off in 
solar gravity, the hot corona can extend so far out from 
the solar surface that the natural state of the corona is 
one of outward expansion into the solar wind, as first 
pointed out by E N Parker. This expansion is not ballistic 
or forced from below. The expansion results from a 
failure of gravity to confine the upper atmosphere. The 
upper atmosphere continuously expands to supersonic 
speeds, during times of more or less steady conditions, 
while the lower atmosphere heaves continuously outward, 
departing only weakly from hydrostatic equilibrium, to 
make up for the expansion. 

The presence of magnetic fields in the electrically 
highly conducting corona introduces the Lorentz force, 
whose action may be decomposed into that of a magnetic 
pressure force combined with that of a magnetic tension 
force. The magnetic pressure can only enhance the 
tendency of the corona to expand. The magnetic tension 
force provides a means of restraining the expansion 
provided it acts towards the Sun and provided the 
magnetic field is sufficiently intense. This occurs low 
in the corona where magnetic fields are bipolar with the 
magnetic feet anchored to the solar surface on the two sides 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of a polarity inversion line. The low corona is dominated 
by the typically 10 G magnetic field, with a plasma 6 
of the order of less than 0.1, that is, with the plasma 
pressure typically of the order of a tenth of the magnetic 
pressure. In such a region, the closed magnetic fields may 
trap a parcel of plasma in more or less static equilibrium 
against the global tendency to expand. This is the origin 
of the ubiquitous coronal helmet streamer straddling a 
photospheric magnetic inversion line. Outside of the 
helmet, the field is strong but, because it extends too far 
out where the solar wind dominates, it is kept open into 
interplanetary space by the solar wind. 

Another way of seeing the effect of the magnetic 
tension force is to note that, under the condition of high 
electrical conductivity, a bipolar magnetic field anchored 
to the surface of the Sun has a tendency to remain closed 
because this is a state of minimum magnetic energy. 
The competition alluded to above is then between this 
magnetic tendency and the opposing expansion of the 
global corona. The balance between these competing 
effects determines how much mass and magnetic flux is 
trapped in a coronal helmet surrounded by open magnetic 
fields where the wind flows. The CMEs are then the 
consequence of the failure of this balance when the helmet 
would break loose to move out along with the global solar 
wind. 

In this view, the term ‘loss of equilibrium or non- 
equilibrium’ is invoked to make the point that it is not 
just an instability. The remarkable aspect of a CME is 
that, when initiated, it expands out in a global nonlinear 
flow with a total mass of ejection characteristically of the 
order of a few times 10'*~'° g. The idea of an instability 
merely implies that the system would evolve away from 
an initial equilibrium when perturbed, but sucha behavior 
does not a priori require the ejection of a huge amount of 
material out of the corona, a basic feature of the CME 
phenomenon. It is the teetering between confinement 
and expansion of plasmas trapped in the coronal helmets 
to result in a global loss of equilibrium that underlies 
the CME phenomenon, in this theoretical interpretation. 
Depending on physical circumstances under which this 
loss of equilibrium develops, it is theoretically conceivable 
that the structure breaking up may maintain its internal 
form with coherence and may move out witha broad range 
of speeds as opposed to the case of an impulsive blast-off. 

The coronal magnetic field that produces the CME 
is also the agent for producing the PROMINENCE and its 
eruption, and the solar flare. Thus it is not a simple 
causal relationship one needs to find among these major 
eruptions making up the activity in the corona. This is an 
important point for theory, and it is reflected in the facts 
that flares, as defined as a sudden localized heating of the 
corona, have several different varieties and that the rate of 
flare occurrence increases by orders of magnitude over a 
solar cycle as opposed to an increase of a factor not larger 
than 10 in the CME rate over the same period of time. 

There is, however, a particular relationship between 
CMEs and flares of a special kind, often referred to as the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


two-ribbon flares, which is of theoretical significance. The 
adjective ‘two-ribbon’ came originally from observations 
of the Ha part of this type of flare, referring to the 
characteristic heating occurring at the chromosphere along 
two bands which separate in time. This type of flare, 
known long before the discovery of CMEs, has been well 
explained in terms of magnetic reconnection taking place 
above the flaring chromosphere which recloses a magnetic 
field that has been caused to open up. The two flare ribbons 
in the chromosphere are then reasonably interpreted 
to be marking the footpoints of newly reconnected 
fields containing heated plasma. As more magnetic 
fields reconnect, newly heated footpoints light up while 
footpoints heated earlier cool out of visibility to produce 
the effect of the separating ribbons. With soft x-ray 
observations available from space these days, the two- 
ribbon flares are observed as long duration outputs of soft 
x-rays (hours to a fraction of a day) rising above the full- 
disk output, or as arcades of flaring loops in soft x-ray 
images. 

Before CMEs were known, this flare mechanism 
lacked a physical reason why the magnetic field should 
open up on its own to produce a two-ribbon flare. The 
idea that a CME is the opening up of the magnetic field 
in a coronal helmet provides the missing ingredient. If 
the two-ribbon flare is indeed the result of the reclosing 
of opened magnetic fields by reconnection, and the CME 
is indeed responsible for the opening up of an initially 
closed magnetic field, the CME necessarily has to precede 
the two-ribbon flare associated with it. Theoretically, the 
reconnection could begin as soon as the CME takes off 
with the field opening up, or the reconnection could be 
delayed until after the field has completely opened up 
and the CME is well on its way out of the upper corona. 
The latter is supported by some observations and the 
former leaves the temporal sequence ambiguous because 
the flare would have an onset very close to, or, in practical 
terms, almost simultaneously occurring with the CMEs. 
What this theory would not accommodate would be the 
observation of a two-ribbon flare preceding the associated 
CME. If it can be shown that such an event occurs and 
that the association between the flare and CME is not by 
chance, then the event cannot be explained by the theory, 
pointing to a much more complex physical behavior than 
the one envisioned in the theory. 


CME energy 

The mechanical energy of aCMEis impressively large. The 
often quoted CME energy of 10°!” erg is the sum of its 
kinetic energy and the work done against solar gravity to 
lift its mass of 10'°-'* g out of the corona. The gravitational 
potential energy typically is about a half of the sum, as 
can be seen from the fact that the gravitational escape 
speed in the low corona is about 500 km s-! whereas the 
observed median speed of CMEs is about 400 km s-! with 
the large range mentioned above. The sound speed of the 
2 million degree corona is about 120 km sl. The Alfvén 
speed in the low corona can be estimated to be in excess of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


700 kms~!. Therefore, a striking feature of the CME is that 
a great many CME speeds are supersonic, sub-Alfvénic, 
and below the low-coronal gravitational escape speed. 

It is widely held that the CME energy originates from 
energy contained within the corona previously stored in 
the magnetic field. This view is based on noting that the 
CME moves at speeds near the limit or in excess of the 
characteristic MHD speeds of wave propagation in the 
corona. In this case, it is not possible for the CME to be 
driven by photospheric processes which involve typical 
speeds of 0.5 kms". It is possible that the photosphere 
may stress the coronal magnetic field over a long period 
of time to result in a build up of energy in the corona, but 
it is not likely in this view that the photospheric motion, 
given its small magnitude, is relevant during the course 
of the CME moving out of the corona at the characteristic 
high speed of the latter. This point of view is supported by 
the fact that to date no surface photospheric motions of a 
particular type have been shown to be indicative of a CME 
leaving the solar corona directly above the photospheric 
region of observation. 

A minority view has persisted, hinting at some 
possible large-scale non-MHD effects in which the CME 
is driven by currents generated at the photosphere or 
in the solar convection region. This view has remained 
speculative and non-quantitative. 

Accounting for the CME energy in terms of magnetic 
energy stored in the corona has turned out to be a 
deeper problem than previously appreciated. Taking 
the simplifying limit of the corona as a perfect plasma 
conductor with negligible inertia, it was an attractive idea 
to try to account for the energy in the field-aligned currents 
Of a FORCE-FREE MAGNETIC FIELD anchored to the surface of 
the Sun. These currents were taken to be induced by the 
stressing of the field by slow but persistent photospheric 
motion taking the embedded magnetic footpoints along 
with it. It was proposed in the 1970s that the spontaneous 
opening up of a closed force-free magnetic field may result 
from a build-up of magnetic energy by surface stressing to 
a level above that of an open state. This idea was shown 
to be incorrect by J J Aly in the 1980s, who proposed a now 
widely accepted conjecture that the build-up of energy 
in a closed and anchored force-free magnetic field cannot 
exceed the energy of any open magnetic field having the 
same anchored footpoints on the solar surface. 

The energy demand of a CME is especially impressive 
if one has to account not only for its energy but also for 
the energy of the open field it leaves behind, in the light 
of Aly’s conjecture. The large amount of energy in the 
open field left behind by the CME would neatly account 
for the post-CME flare that results from the reclosing of the 
opened magnetic field. Therefore, the theoretical question 
on the energy storage for the CME is one of demonstrating 
that there could be coronal structures with closed magnetic 
fields in possession of two huge amounts of free energy, 
that carried away in the gravitational and kinetic energy 
of the CME and that left behind in the open magnetic 
field to fuel the CME-associated flare. This, by Aly’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


conjecture, cannot be accounted for by the stressing of 
force-free magnetic fields. 

A first step in the resolution of this problem is to 
realize that the force-free assumption is not valid over 
the large scale of the corona. In the thermally highly 
conducting corona, pressure is almost isothermal and it 
falls with height less rapidly than the magnetic pressure, 
especially with gravity dropping inversely with distance 
squared. Both the pressure and the solar wind dominate 
over the magnetic field at increasing distance from the Sun 
and the force-free assumption is invalid over such scales, 
for example, as characterized by the radial extent of the 
helmet streamer. Over these scales, the Lorentz force is 
not zero everywhere but interacts with pressure gradient 
and gravitational forces, and all these forces also produce 
the solar wind in the open-field regions. 

Once this is recognized, models of the corona in static 
equilibrium can be constructed to show that the necessary 
amount of magnetic energy can be stored to fuel ejection of 
aCME and its associated flare. Of particular note is that the 
magnetic energy is most efficiently stored if a part of the 
magnetic field is not in the form of simple bipolar anchored 
field but is in the form of a flux rope detached in its main 
part from the coronal base, that can be identified with the 
cavity under the helmet-streamer. The confinement of this 
flux rope in equilibrium requires the weight of the large 
mass in the helmet dome. In this model, the large mass 
of the CME plays the very role of trapping the magnetic 
energy in the pre-eruption stage that eventually drives the 
CME. 

This promising resolution of the energy problem has 
also raised a new question. If the magnetic energy needed 
to drive the CME requires interaction between the plasma 
and the field for its storage, it must follow that plasma 
pressure forces must also play a significant role in the 
CME outflow. This implication is not surprising when it is 
realized that the Lorentz force cannot work against gravity 
in the direction of the magnetic field, only the component 
of the pressure force in that direction can. And, working 
against gravity is an essential aspect in the energetics of 
the CME. Ultimately, to understand the effect of pressure 
would require an understanding of the nature of coronal 
heating under the time-dependent circumstance of the 
moving CME. 


The time-dependent MHD flow of a CME 

The simplest description of the CME in fully developed 
motion uses the one-fluid MHD equations including the 
presence of solar gravity. To avoid the complication of the 
energy and heating of the plasma, a polytropic assumption 
with an index taken smaller than 5/3 is usually made to 
simulate the heating of the coronal, largely proton, gas in 
expansive motion. 

The only general approach to treat the MHD 
equations is by the use of numerical codes with the 
capability of dealing with at least two dimensions in 
space. Previous work had treated the flare-initiated CME 
theory and the shearing of magnetic footpoints to force 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Coronal Mass Ejection: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a spontaneous opening up of the coronal magnetic field. 
These works had been instructive in their respective ways 
but have not dealt with the CME nonlinear flows such as 
observed in the low corona. Recent numerical modeling 
efforts have begun to address the idea that the CME cavity 
is a magnetic flux rope and morphological agreement 
between two-dimensional models and the observed three- 
part structures of CMEs have been obtained, lending 
credence to the suggestion of magnetic flux ropes playing 
a role in the CME phenomenon. 

The MHD equations for a polytrope of index 
4/3 admit a family of self-similar solutions both in 
two- and in three-dimensional space. These solutions 
have been useful in capturing the essence of the 
MHD time-dependent expulsion of mass out of a 
gravitational potential well. Among the properties 
directly demonstrated with these solutions is that the 
transport of magnetic field, mass and the 4/3 polytropic 
pressure may proceed in a mode such that gravity can be 
countered throughout the expulsion process. The result 
is that the modeled CME could in this mode of behavior 
travel out of the corona with mildly accelerated or constant 
speeds in an enormous range of speeds, such as seen in the 
observed CMEs. The possibility of generating solutions in 
this class with fully three-dimensional variations was also 
exploited to produce a CME geometrically sophisticated 
enough for direct (favorable) comparison with white-light 
observations. 

The large range of observed CME speeds implies that 
a rich variety of MHD shocks may be associated with 
this highly nonlinear flow. The fast MHD shock has 
behaviors which are intuitively simple modifications of the 
hydrodynamic shock by the presence of magnetic fields. 
The slow and intermediate MHD shocks have properties 
which can be counter-intuitive, such as the possibility of 
having a shock surface shaped with a concavity away 
from the shock driver. The leading fronts of observed 
CMEs have shown a variety of shapes suggestive of such 
unconventional shock-surface geometry. Recent time- 
dependent MHD models have demonstrated that these 
observations may be explained in terms of the MHD 
shocks formed by the CMEs plowing into the ambient 
corona at speeds in the supersonic but sub-Alfvénic range. 
Much work remains to be done in this classical area of 
MHD shock theory, especially in the discovery of the role 
of the intermediate shock in the CME outflow. 

In interplanetary space, the signatures for recognizing 
a CME in the solar wind are being developed. Among 
these signatures are the bidirectional streaming electrons 
indicative of magnetic lines of forces with both ends 
anchored to the low corona such as might be expected 
from the stretching out of bipolar lines of force by the 
CMEs. The three-part structure of the CMEs seen in the 
corona has not been unambiguously identified with their 
counterparts in interplanetary space but some promising 
results have been obtained, including the identification of 
the CME cavity with the so-called interplanetary magnetic 
clouds. Both the cavity and the magnetic cloud may be the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


manifestation of a magnetic flux rope. It is conceivable that 
the CME will undergo significant evolution as it travels 
along with the solar wind. Much theoretical work and 
modeling remain to be done in parallel with observational 
studies of coronal and interplanetary observations to 
address these issues. 


Conclusion 

The discovery of CMEs in the 1970s has ushered in a new 
chapter for coronal physics, taking us from the concern 
with the solar wind structures in the synoptic regime to the 
time dependence of episodic mass expulsions, and taking 
us from the preoccupation with flares to a new form of 
eruption involving just as much energy. Worthy of note 
is the fact that the flare is dissipative in nature, heating of 
the coronal plasma; whereas, the CME involves liberation 
of energy in the ordered forms, gravitational potential and 
kinetic motion. The two forms of eruption are related in 
ways that are not simple and the physics of the corona is 
richer than many would have realized when CMEs were 
first discovered. Much remains to be done, and there is 
a confusion of ideas. These have been partially resolved 
and the view will probably continue to evolve. 


Bibliography 
Gibson S E and Low B C 1998 Astrophys. J. 493 460 
Low B C 1996 Solar Phys. 167 217 


Boon Chye Low 
CC: <cmw@hao.ucar.edu> 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Cycle 


The term solar cycle refers to a quasi-periodic variation 
with a period of about 11 years, visible in many of the 
Sun’s observables. The solar cycle is most easily 
observed in indices directly related to the Sun’s magnetic 
field, such as SUNSPOTS. During the last decades, solar- 
cycle variations have also been found in many other 
aspects of the Sun (irradiance, surface flows, coronal 
shape, oscillation frequencies, etc). The modulation 
amplitudes may vary widely between different indices. It 
is minute in visible light, and this explains why the solar 
cycle is not visible to a casual naked-eye observer. 
Elsewhere (in the far ultraviolet, x-rays, radio 
frequencies) the modulation amplitude is large (table 1). 
The prime cause of the solar cycle is a quasi-periodic 
oscillation of the SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD. 


Magnetic-field indices 

The oldest and best known index of the solar cycle is 
provided by sunspots, whose discovery for Europe 
around 1610 is associated with the names of FABRICIUS, 
GALILEO and SCHEINER. The commonest sunspot index is 
the Ziirich sunspot number R = K(10g +f), where g is the 
number of sunspot groups, fis the number of individual 
spots and K is a coefficient that corrects for differences in 


the quality of the observations. Usually one derives an 
annual average R, shown in figure 1. The most striking 
feature of the sunspot record is the Schwabe cycle of 
about 11 years, discovered by Samuel Heinrich SCHWABE 
in 1843. By convention, the cycle that began in 1755 is 
assigned number 1; hence cycle 23 began in 1997. 


Cycle shape 

A typical sunspot cycle in figure | is characterized by a 
sharp rise from minimum to maximum, lasting 3—6 years 
(on average 4.8). The duration of the rise phase is 
anticorrelated with the height of the maximum 
(Waldmeier’s rule). The maximum is followed by a 
gradual decline lasting 5-8 years (on average 6.2). 
Whereas the maxima of the Ziirich number are typically 
well-defined, this is not the case for some other SOLAR 
ACTIVITY INDICES. For example, it has been suggested 
that the number of Jarge sunspots has a double-peaked 
maximum. 

Most indices vary roughly in phase with the sunspot 
number, and therefore the sunspot extrema are also 
referred to as the solar minimum and the solar maximum. 
On the other hand, some coronal indices are clearly out 
of phase with the sunspot cycle, and they peak at the 
sunspot minimum (see below). 


Table 1. Selected indices of the solar cycle. 


Period Minimum Maximum —_ Unit 
Magnetic indices 
Ziirich annual mean sunspot number R_ 1610-1997 O-I1 38-201! 
Weak field (B < 25 G) flux 1975-92 15-20 30-33 10°? Mx 
Strong field (B > 25 G) flux 1975-92 2-3 60-80 107 Mx 
Full-disk spectral indices 
10.7 cm radio flux 1947-95 70 160-280 107 Wm? Hz! 
393.4 nm Ca II K 1 A index (UV) 1975-90 0.085 0.105 
121.6 nm La UV flux (SME$) 1982-9 2.5 4 10'! photons cm s! 
0.1-0.8 nm x-ray flux (GOES ||) 1974-88 <0.01 3 10° Wm? 
Other indices 
Total irradiance (ACRIM9) 1979-97 1365.6" 1366.9" Wm? 
530.3 nm green coronal index 1939-94 2 10-20 10'° W sr 
Solar wind speed at 1 AU (NSSDC*)! 1965-87 400 500-530 kms! 


‘Minimum occurs at solar minimum, except for solar wind speed, whose minimum occurs at solar maximum. 


Excluding the Maunder minimum (1645-1715) and the scarce data before 1645. 


§Solar Mesosphere Explorer. 


| Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites. 


Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor on board the Solar Maximum Mission. 


*A calibration error of about 3 W m” must be allowed for. 


*National Space Science Data Center. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


200 
180F 
1607 
140F 
1207 
100F 


calla lta 


1660 1620 1640 1660 1680 1700 1720 1740 1760 1780 1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1966 1986 2006 


Figure 1. The Zirich annual-mean sunspot number (data from the Geophysical Data Center, Boulder, CO, USA). 


Cycle length and amplitude 

Individual sunspot cycles since 1710 lasted between 7 
and 14 years (on average 11) and had amplitudes in the 
range 38<R<201 (on average 105). No significant 
correlation between length and amplitude of individual 
cycles has been found. For nearly all of the cycles 0-21, 
the amplitude of an odd-numbered cycle exceeds that of 
the preceding even-numbered cycle (the Gnevyshev—Ohl 
tule). 


Magnetic bipoles 

Sunspots are sites of strong magnetic fields (B = 2-3 kG). 
Frequently, they form bipolar pairs, consisting of a 
leading spot and a trailing spot with respect to the solar 
rotation. Virtually all bipolar pairs obey the Hale— 
Nicholson polarity rules. (a) The magnetic polarities of 
leading and trailing spots are opposite, and those of the 
leading spots in one hemisphere are opposite to those of 
the leading spots in the other hemisphere. (b) The 
predominant sunspot polarities reverse after the solar 
minimum. Taking into account this polarity reversal, the 
magnetic field has a period of about 22 years, which is 
referred to as the Hale cycle. 

The axes of bipolar pairs are slightly tilted with 
respect to the equator, leading spots being closest to the 
equator (Joy’s rule). Tilt angles (on average 4°) increase 
with latitude, but show no significant variation with the 
solar cycle. Also the relative size distribution of SOLAR 
ACTIVE REGIONS is almost invariant throughout the cycle. 
The only exception is a period of 2—3 years before solar 
minimum, during which small bipolar regions are 
relatively more frequent. This is due mainly to the 
emergence of opposite-polarity ephemeral regions at high 
latitudes. They follow the Hale cycle with a minimum 
preceding the solar minimum by about | year. 


Butterfly diagram 

The latitudinal distribution of sunspots as a function of 
time can be viewed from the butterfly diagram (figure 3). 
Sunspots, indicated by black dots, appear in two belts 
parallel to the equator, whose midpoints migrate 
equatorward from about +27° to about +8° during the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


course of a cycle (Spérer’s law), and whose widths attain 
a maximum of about 36° during the sunspot maximum. 
The polarities of the northern and southern wings of the 
butterfly diagram are opposite, and they alternate from 
one Schwabe cycle to the next. Sunspots exist for at most 
a few months, and they hardly migrate themselves, but in 
the course of a cycle every new sunspot appears on 
average at a lower latitude. 

Sunspots and active regions have a tendency to 
emerge near existing active regions. These loci of flux 
emergence, referred to as active nests or active 
longitudes, may live up to 6 months (see SOLAR ACTIVITY 
COMPLEXES). The magnetic field of sunspots probably 
has its origin near the base of the SOLAR INTERIOR 
CONVECTION ZONE, at a depth of about 200 000 km, and 
the butterfly diagram traces this deep-rooted, large-scale 
magnetic field. 


Magnetic network 

Magnetograms (figure 2) reveal an extended pattern of 
surface fields, referred to as the magnetic network (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: INTRANETWORK AND TURBULENT 
MAGNETIC FIELDS). Around the solar maximum, the 
magnetic network up to a latitude of about +60° consists 
mainly of large unipolar regions, in which the bipolar 
active regions are embedded. For about 5 years around 
the solar minimum, the network is much weaker and has 
mainly mixed polarities. From the magnetograms it is 
also concluded that the solar-cycle modulation decreases 
with decreasing field strength (table 1). Thus the total 
unsigned flux of strong-field regions (B > 25 G) varies by 
a factor 30-40, compared with a factor of only 1.5—2 for 
weak-field regions (B < 25 G). 


Polar field 

The weak polar magnetic field has mainly one polarity at 
each pole, and the two poles have opposite polarities. 
Between the solar minimum and the solar maximum, its 
polarity on each hemisphere agrees with that of the 
leading spots of bipolar pairs. Around the solar 
maximum, the polar field changes its sign. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Latitude 


1950.0 


Figure 3. Butterfly diagram. Arrows denote sunspot maxima (top) and minima (bottom); e and © indicate sunspot regions smaller 


1960.0 


Figure 2. Magnetograms of the solar disk taken respectively at 
23 August 1990, near the solar maximum, and at 15 October 
1996, near the solar minimum. Black and white indicate 
magnetic regions of, respectively, negative and positive polarity 
(National Solar Observatory, USA.) 


1970.0 1980.0 


and larger than 80 x 10~° of a hemisphere, respectively; ® and © indicate whether the magnetic field of leading and trailing spots is 
directed outward or inward, respectively. (Adapted from K L Harvey (1992).) 


Other periods besides the Hale cycle 

If the Sun’s surface field as a function of time is 
decomposed in terms of spherical harmonics, one finds 
very different frequency spectra for axisymmetric modes 
(1.e. m = 0) with odd ¢ (i.e. antisymmetric with respect to 
the equator) and axisymmetric modes with even 0. 
Whereas odd-f modes are dominated by the Hale cycle, 
even-€ modes are weaker and have no single, well- 
defined frequency. No such difference between even- and 
odd-f modes is observed for non-axisymmetric modes (m 
# 0), which have a main peak at the Hale cycle, and 
smaller peaks at its higher harmonics, almost irrespective 
of €. Altogether, though, the reality of magnetic cycles 
shorter than the Hale cycle is still uncertain. 

Magnetic cycles longer than the Hale cycle have also 
been proposed. The sunspot record appears to be 
modulated by a period of 80—90 years, referred to as the 
Gleissberg cycle, but the number of oscillations is very 
small (about three can be seen in figure 1). There is some 
evidence for this and longer periodicities in the records of 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


'4C and '°Be, but their existence remains uncertain (see 
SOLAR ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM RECORDS). 


Grand minima 

During the so-called Maunder minimum (1645-1715) 
sunspots were very few and, prior to 1700, no cycles are 
apparent. Coverage of the sunspot record in this period is 
estimated to be about two-thirds, and the reality of the 
Maunder minimum is undisputed. This and earlier grand 
minima such as the Sp6rer minimum (1420-1530) are 
clearly visible in the '‘C and 'Be data. Timing and 
duration of the known grand minima are irregular, but the 
Sun may have spent as much as a third of its time in 
grand minima. Surprisingly, these records also suggest 
that the solar cycle continued throughout the Maunder 
minimum at a reduced level, an issue which is of 
particular interest for solar dynamo theory (see 
DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR). More recent but less 
impressive prolonged minima, visible in figure 1, are the 
Dalton minimum (1800-30) and the Modern minimum 
(1880-1910). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Grand minima are but the most conspicuous 
manifestations of solar variability, which is also apparent 
for example in length and amplitude variations of the 
sunspot cycle. The question of whether solar variability 
should be ascribed to (quasi-) periodic or chaotic 
nonlinear behavior on the one hand, or to stochastic 
processes on the other hand remains as yet unresolved 
due to the lack of a sufficiently long dataset (see 
DYNAMO THEORY). 


North—south asymmetry 

Asymmetry between sunspot activity in the northern and 
southern hemispheres is larger than average during solar 
minima and was particularly strong during the Maunder 
minimum, when the few observed sunspots seem to have 
been concentrated on the southern hemisphere. Smaller 
but nevertheless clear north-south asymmetries can be 
seen in the regular sunspot cycle as well, for example 
during the years 1955-65 (figure 3). 


Irradiance and spectral properties 

Solar-cycle modulations are apparent throughout most of 
the Sun’s electromagnetic spectrum, which extends from 
radio to gamma ray energies (see SOLAR ACTIVITY 
INDICES). Only in the far infrared, a technically difficult 
spectral range, has no modulation been demonstrated yet. 
Data for a selection of full-disk spectral indices are 
included in table 1. They exhibit a wide range of 
minimum-to-maximum variations, from 0.1% for total 
SOLAR IRRADIANCE up to factors >100 for the x-ray flux 
at 0.1-0.8 nm. As a general rule, the larger the solar- 
cycle modulation of an index is, the more it is dominated 
by phenomena related to strong magnetic fields. 

Solar irradiance, like most spectral indices, is largest 
at the solar maximum, in spite of the darkening by 
sunspots. This net luminosity increase is attributed 
largely to an overcompensation by photospheric faculae, 
the number of which peaks at solar maximum (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: FACULAE). 


Solar oscillations and internal structure 

The frequencies of solar p-mode oscillations increase by 
up to 0.1% from solar minimum to solar maximum (see 
HELIOSEISMOLOGY). The shift increases with frequency, 
and is largest for oscillations with a period of about 
4 min. Such a frequency dependence is interpreted as 
evidence that the shifts are caused by magnetic fields 
near the solar surface, rather than by a deep-rooted field. 
At the solar minimum, p-mode amplitudes are about 35% 
larger than at the solar maximum. 

The rotational splittings of p-mode frequencies also 
depend on solar-cycle phase. They are possibly related to 
solar-cycle variations in the Sun’s internal rotation, but 
attempts to derive angular-velocity changes from the 
measured frequency splittings have so far yielded 
inconclusive results. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


A solar-cycle modulation of the neutrino flux 
originating in the Sun’s core is unproven, and seems 
unlikely on theoretical grounds (see NEUTRINOS). No 
significant solar-cycle modulation of the solar diameter 
and oblateness has yet been found (see SUN: BASIC 
PROPERTIES). 


Velocity fields 

Solar-cycle changes in the surface rotation rate of the Sun 
are seen in Dopplergrams, and are traced by sunspots and 
other surface features. The Doppler data reveal a pattern 
of parallel belts of faster and slower rotation known as 
torsional oscillations, reminiscent of the butterfly 
diagram. Their amplitude is 5-10 ms” (i.e. 0.25-0.5% 
of the surface rotation), and the regions of maximal shear 
coincide more or less with sunspot latitudes. Whereas 
these belts were once thought of as being uninterrupted 
during the 16-20 years of their migration from pole to 
equator, persistent gaps at mid latitudes now suggest that 
their pattern is in fact more complex. Solar-cycle changes 
in the rotation rate of sunspots are larger (4-5%) and do 
not show evidence of latitude migration. The largest 
value of the sunspot rotation rate occurs at the sunspot 
minimum, and a smaller peak occurs at the sunspot 
maximum. 

Doppler measurements also reveal a_ general 
poleward meridional flow of 10-20 m s"' at all latitudes, 
with no visible solar-cycle modulation. A poleward drift 
of similar magnitude is seen in the motion of unipolar 
magnetic regions at high latitudes. Their velocity is 
largest around the solar maximum. The latitudinal drift of 
sunspots is typically 10 times smaller. It is not generally 
poleward, and can be different for leading and trailing 
spots. There is some evidence for a_ solar-cycle 
dependence. 

Finally, there are indications for solar-cycle changes 
of the GRANULATION. At the solar maximum, size and 
flow speed of the granules seem somewhat reduced, but 
this modulation needs further confirmation. 


Coronal indices and solar wind 

The shape of the CORONA changes during the solar cycle. 
At the solar minimum it is elongated along the equatorial 
direction, and POLAR PLUMES can be seen. At the solar 
maximum, most of the disk is surrounded by CORONAL 
LOOPS and CORONAL STREAMERS, giving the corona a 
rounder shape. This increase of coronal activity at solar 
maximum is also evidenced by the number of coronal 
mass ejections and by the green coronal index (table 1; 
see SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS). 
Some coronal indices vary out of phase with the sunspot 
cycle, and peak at the sunspot minimum. These include 
the number of polar FACULAE, SOLAR CORONA X-RAY 
BRIGHT POINTS and CORONAL HOLES. Coronal holes exist 
during most of the solar cycle and occur less frequently 
only during a few years near solar maximum. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SOLAR PROMINENCES and SOLAR FLARES are 
phenomena related to SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS, and their 
numbers vary in phase with the solar cycle. Solar wind 
speed and the spiral angle of the interplanetary magnetic 
field are slightly reduced during the solar maximum 
(table 1). This near-constancy of the SOLAR WIND may in 
part arise because it is fed with particles from both flares 
and coronal holes, the numbers of which vary out of 
phase with one another. However, the flux of high- 
energy solar particles is more strongly modulated 
because they are produced mainly by flares. 


Extended solar cycle 

The extended solar cycle is a concept based on the 
observation that several branches that are assigned to 
consecutive cycles can coexist in the butterfly diagram, 
and seem to be continuous across the solar minimum. 
The main example is the emergence of opposite-polarity 
bipolar ephemeral regions at high latitudes, 2-3 years 
before the solar minimum, apparently precursors of a 
new cycle. Also observations of the green coronal line, 
filaments, torsional oscillations, and the reversal of the 
polar field near the solar maximum may be mentioned. 
Dynamo theory suggests that such overlapping bands are 
a consequence of traveling wave fronts. 


Terrestrial indices 

The SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION is a wide and 
complex subject, and the implications of the solar cycle 
for the Earth’s climate are controversial due to 
uncertainties of atmospheric physics and _ climate 
modeling. Out of the many solar—terrestrial correlations 
that have been proposed, only a selection is given here. 

It is well established that the strength of the Earth’s 
magnetic field, as measured by the AA index, varies in 
phase with the solar cycle. The field increase is attributed 
to compression of the Earth’s magnetopause (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE) due to 
coronal mass ejections, the number of which peaks at 
solar maximum. The solar wind carries a magnetic field 
into interplanetary space, which provides enhanced 
shielding of COSMIC RAYS during solar maximum. The 
resulting solar-cycle modulation of the cosmic-ray flux at 
Earth is typically 50%. This is subsequently passed on to 
various other indices, including the rate at which radio 
isotopes are produced in the upper atmosphere. 
Measurements of the concentration of 'Be in arctic ice 
cores and of '“C in tree rings thus provide a unique tool 
for studying the history of solar activity. Due to different 
atmospheric storage times, the solar-cycle variations in 
these records are reduced to about 25% and 2% 
respectively. The 11-year signal in the '°Be concentration 
follows the solar cycle with a delay of 0.5—1.5 years. 

The number of AURORAS is related to the total 
particle flux emitted by the Sun, and it is weakly 
modulated by the solar cycle. Low-latitude auroras occur 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


only around the solar maximum; they are attributed to 
flare-related high-energy particles, whose number peaks 
at the solar maximum. 

Climate models indicate that the  solar-cycle 
variation of the Sun’s irradiation has only a marginal 
effect on terrestrial temperatures (about 0.05 K). A more 
likely solar-cycle influence on the Earth’s climate, if 
present, would be chemical effects due to changes in the 
solar UV flux. Another possible cause is variations in 
cloud formation. They may arise from the solar-cycle 
modulation of the cosmic-ray flux, which affects the 
availability of condensation nuclei. 

Examples of climate indices that show some 
evidence of a solar-cycle modulation are pressure scale 
height and temperature at low latitudes. The evidence for 
such modulations is, however, mostly based on a small 
number of cycles (often 1-2), which is probably 
insufficient. Also a remarkable anticorrelation between 
temperature on the northern hemisphere and cycle length 
has been found, but no mechanism is known that may 
account for it. 


Stellar cycles 

Magnetic cycles have been detected in other stars besides 
the Sun, as the result of a monitoring project conducted at 
Mount Wilson since 1966 (see SOLAR-STELLAR 
CONNECTION). For some 100 lower main-sequence stars 
regular measurements are made of the chromospheric Ca 
II H and K emission cores, which are known to have a 
magnetic origin from solar observations. Cyclic 
variations are found predominantly in old, slowly 
rotating stars of stellar types G-K, of which the Sun is 
one. Stars with well-defined activity cycles have cycle 
periods ranging from 7 to 14 years. Some stars have 
long-term activity trends that may turn out to be cyclic as 
the observations continue. Stars with a low and flat 
activity level may be in a grand minimum. They make up 
about a third of the total number of solar-type stars, 
which may be indicative of the fraction of time spent by 
the Sun in grand minima. 


Origin of the solar cycle 

The solar cycle is a magnetic phenomenon, and its 
explanation must come from dynamo theory, which 
concerns the generation of magnetic fields in conducting 
fluids. Theoretical difficulties have as yet prevented a 
satisfying, comprehensive explanation of the solar cycle. 
Nevertheless, several elements of the solar dynamo 
mechanism may be mentioned, that play an important 
role in most models. 


Magnetic-field storage 

As suggested by the Hale—Nicholson polarity rules, the 
prime cause of the solar cycle is an oscillating strong 
magnetic field (10*-10° G) of predominantly toroidal 
orientation. This field can be stably stored not in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


convection zone itself, but in the overshoot layer at the 
base of the convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
CONVECTION ZONE). For sufficiently large field strengths 
a magnetic buoyancy instability sets in, which leads to 
the eruption of magnetic loops from the overshoot layer, 
their subsequent rise through the convection zone and, as 
a by-product, the emergence of bipolar pairs of sunspots 
at the solar surface (figure 4(a)). 


Alpha effect 

Convection or magnetic instabilities (see MAGNETO- 
HYDRODYNAMIC INSTABILITIES) can cause a magnetic 
flux element to rise or to sink. Due to the stratification of 
the atmosphere, a rising gas parcel, say, will generally 
expand. Through the Coriolis force, rotation provides this 
diverging flow pattern with a twist that is clockwise on 
the northern hemisphere and anticlockwise on the 
southern hemisphere. A sinking, contracting parcel 
acquires a twist of the opposite sense. The embedded 
magnetic field is also twisted, and thus poloidal loops 
may be formed around an initially toroidal flux element 
(figure 4(a)). This amounts to the creation of a net 
electric current parallel to the magnetic field, and is 
referred to as the alpha effect. Through the alpha effect, a 
net poloidal magnetic field is generated from the toroidal 
magnetic field. 


Differential rotation 

In the solar overshoot layer, rotation varies strongly with 
depth. This differential rotation, in turn, stretches the 
poloidal field into a strong toroidal field. 


Dynamo mechanism 

Both the alpha effect and the existence of an overshoot 
layer point to the crucial role played by convection in the 
solar dynamo. Together, the alpha effect and differential 
rotation maintain the solar magnetic field. They enable 
the formation of new toroidal flux elements of both 
polarities adjacent to an initial toroidal flux element. If 
this flux merges in a suitable manner, and if the 
differential rotation and the alpha effect have the proper 
sign, the net effect can be magnetic belts that migrate 
toward the equator. As the northern belt and the southern 
belt, which has the opposite polarity, meet at the equator, 
they both annihilate. At high latitudes, magnetic fields of 
opposite polarity, marking the beginning of a new cycle, 
may be formed a in this way (figure 4(5)). Thus, the solar 
cycle may be a traveling-wave phenomenon of the deep- 
rooted magnetic field. 

The spatial distribution of magnetic flux at the solar 
surface may be largely explained by an additional flux 
transport model based on flux emergence in active 
regions, and surface transport by turbulent diffusion and 
meridional flow. Part of the magnetic energy can be 
released through various conversion mechanisms, and 
this leads to the broad range of solar-cycle modulations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


a b 
Figure 4. Diagram of the solar-cycle mechanism. The dashed 
circle represents the top of the radiative interior. (a) Generation 
of the poloidal field (dotted curve) from the toroidal field 
(drawn curve) by an alpha effect, and the formation of bipolar 


pairs of sunspots. (b) Migration and reversal of the toroidal 
field. 


Breaking news update (30 April 2002) 

Solar activity varies on a rough 11-year cycle with some 
cycles having more than one peak. The current activity 
cycle appears to be reaching its second peak. The most 
recent (and ongoing) solar max crested in mid-2000. 
Sunspot counts were higher than they had been in 10 
years, and solar activity was intense. After that, sunspot 
counts slowly declined and the Sun was relatively quiet 
for month-long stretches. Solar max was subsiding. But 
now, activity has once again increased: the Sun is again 
peppered with spots, and eruptions are frequent. 


Bibliography 

Harvey K L (ed) 1992 The Solar Cycle (Astronomical Society 
of the Pacific Conference Series 12) 

Proctor M R E and Gilbert A D (eds) 1994 Lectures on Solar 
and Planetary Dynamos (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Stephenson F R and Wolfendale A W (eds) 1988 Secular Solar 
and Geomagnetic Variations in the Last 10,000 Years 
(NATO ASI Series C 236) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Willson R C and Hudson H S 1991 The Sun’s luminosity over a 
complete solar cycle Nature 351 42-4 

Wilson P R 1994 Solar and Stellar Activity Cycles (Cambridge 
Astrophysics Series 24) (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Mathieu Ossendrijver 


Peter Hoyng 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Evolution 


It is generally accepted that the formation of the Sun arose 
from the passage of a shock wave through an interstellar 
cloud (see, for example, INTERSTELLAR MATTER), Causing part 
of the cloud to become gravitationally bound. The major 
component of the cloud was hydrogen, together with 
about 25% helium, and more massive elements in minor 
proportions. 

On contraction of the cloud, half the kinetic energy so 
produced caused an increase in its temperature and half 
was lost as radiation. The stages in solar evolution are 
effectively illustrated by the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM, 
a plot of the logarithm of the surface temperature against 
the logarithm of the luminosity. The pre-main sequence 
phase, in which the contracting cloud began to emit as a 
cool, luminous star, lasted some 107” years (see PRE-MAIN- 
SEQUENCE STARS). With further contraction and a consequent 
increase in temperature, fusion of hydrogen nuclei to 
helium became the dominant process, the energy released 
halting contraction and maintaining the core temperature 
at approximately 12 x 10° K. This stage in the evolution of 
the Sun is referred to as the zero-age main sequence, the 
effective point at which the Sun can be considered as a star. 

The subsequent main sequence phase, during which 
the Sun continues the fusion process of hydrogen to 
helium, has an estimated duration of 10'° years, and is 
characterized by a slow expansion of the Sun together 
with a steady increase in luminosity. The main sequence 
phase will cease when the hydrogen in the core has been 
exhausted, and the Sun will evolve into a red giant, then 
a red supergiant and finally to a white dwarf star (see RED 
GIANT STARS, WHITE DWARFS and STELLAR EVOLUTION). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Feeds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Feeds 


Observations of the Sun typically involve modest aperture 
and a large and heavy spectrograph. In the field at ECLIPSES 
the telescope itself may need to have a long focal length. 
These requirements are conveniently met by having a 
tracking flat mirror which feeds a stationary telescope 
and its instrumentation. Magnetograph observations, 
which involve the polarization analysis of spectrum lines, 
place an additional constraint by demanding that the 
imaging system introduce a minimum of polarization. 
Geographic latitude of the site is another factor. These 
various considerations have led to a variety of what may 
be called ‘solar feeds’. 

A mirror which tracks a celestial object and delivers 
the light in an arbitrary but fixed direction is called 
a siderostat. In general, the mirror must move at a 
non-uniform rate, the image field rotates non-uniformly 
and linear polarization results from the oblique mirror 
reflection. Percentage polarization increases with the 
angle of reflection. 

If the optical path is confined to the polar axis, either 
by placing the telescope there or by introducing a second 
mirror, conditions simplify and we have a heliostat. For 
the heliostat the polar axis of the mirror turns at the 
diurnal rate and the change of declination for the Sun is 
accommodated as in a conventional EQUATORIAL MOUNTING. 
The image plane unfortunately also rotates at the diurnal 
rate. This means that for other than short exposures the 
instrument package (spectrograph) must co-rotate. Also 
the amplitude of introduced feed polarization is constant 
during the day (ignoring any second flat), but its plane 
rotates. 

If the mirror surface is parallel to the polar axis we 
have a coelostat, figure 1. Now either the telescope must 
move in angle in the meridian plane or, more commonly, 
a second mirror is introduced which must translate for 
objects at different declinations to intercept the beam and 
direct it to the stationary telescope. The coelostat mirror 
rotates at half the diurnal rate. Most important the image 
plane does not rotate, although it does change if the 
second mirror is translated. Compared with a heliostat, 
the per cent polarization may be less depending on mirror 
positions, although it will vary through the day. 

Because of the deleterious effects of feed polarization, 
particularly for full vector magnetographs, and taking into 
account the availability of CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
arrays which mean smaller image scales, the present trend 
is toward compact systems in which the entire telescope 
points at the Sun. This avoids oblique reflections and is 
achieved by altazimuth or equatorial mounts. 

Solar mirror feeds remain popular for eclipse work. 
Fora site near the equator a heliostat is convenient since the 
exposures are short and the telescope nearly horizontal, 
figure 2. A coelostat, with its fixed image, is well suited 
for observations near the solstice, since declination change 
is then at a minimum. If an altazimuth mounting is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Large coelostat feed for the Kitt Peak Vacuum 
Telescope. Here the number 2 mirror is adjustable in height and 
angle only. The coelostat itself swings along a circular path to 
account for seasonal and diurnal change. This scheme was first 
used at the Potsdam Observatory in Germany. 


Figure 2. Eclipse site near the equator with a heliostat 
arrangement. 


considered, remember that the Sun disappears at totality 
where no guiding is possible. 

Other solar feeds include the polar siderostat, which is 
the same as a heliostat except the beam is directed toward 
the pole, and the uranostat, which is a siderostat which 
operates or tracks correctly only near the meridian (see 
also SIDEROSTAT /HELIOSTAT/COELOSTAT). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Feeds ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
Manley P L 1991 Unusual Telescopes (Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press) 


William Livingston 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Solar Filament Channels 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Filament Channels 


A filament channel is a magnetic rift that runs through 
the chromosphere along the base of a solar filament and 
beyond either end. Because the filament and its channel 
separate magnetic fields of opposite magnetic polarity 
at the solar surface, field lines will cross over them at 
some height as an arcade of closed loops. A channel is 
a rift in the sense that it partitions positive and negative 
fields by directing its own magnetic field predominantly 
along, rather than across, a horizontal, axial direction. A 
channel develops before its filament forms and can outlive 
it by a large margin. Channels are therefore an essential 
ingredient of the prominence-forming environment (see 
SOLAR PROMINENCE FORMATION). Although filament channels 
were first recognized 30 years ago, investigations into their 
origins are recent. We now believe that both filaments and 
their channels derive from the evolution of surrounding 
magnetic fields at the solar surface. 

The clearest signature of a channel is a pattern of 
chromospheric fibrils (see CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS) aligned in 
a band along a magnetic polarity boundary. This pattern 
is not present at every polarity boundary; the bands of 
fibrils appear only where overlying magnetic fields are 
suitably configured to form and support a solar filament. 
Not every filament channel contains a filament, nor does 
every polarity inversion develop an associated channel. 
The term polarity inversion line (PIL) signifies a line 
traced along the photospheric surface where the normal 
component of the magnetic field (B|) reverses sign. The 
visibility of a channel depends upon the strength of the 
fields adjacent to its PIL. 


Historical background 

Dark chromospheric filaments have been familiar for over 
a century as bright prominences at the limb carried onto 
the solar disk by the Sun’s rotation (see SOLAR PROMINENCES). 
Yet channels were, until recently, overlooked, chiefly 
because they are often veiled by optically thick matter 
in their overlying filaments. They need to be viewed 
in large-scale images (resolution ~1") at wavelengths 
where filaments become optically thin. Furthermore, the 
significance of filament channels was not appreciated until 
chromospheric images could be compared with maps of 
the underlying photospheric magnetic fields. 

Solar astronomers have long observed the entire 
chromospheric surface by making monochromatic images 
in the core of the strongest Fraunhofer absorption lines, 
usually the Balmer a line of hydrogen and the H and 
K resonance lines of ionized calcium. Instruments 
used for this purpose are either the spectroheliograph 
or the tunable birefringent monochromatic filter (see 
SOLAR TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: GROUND). The resulting 
images are recorded as spectroheliograms and filtergrams, 
respectively. Observers frequently liken extensive 
patterns of short dark fibrils in Ha images to patterns 
of iron filings sprinkled over a sheet of paper placed 
above a bar magnet. The mapping of magnetic fields 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


anywhere on the Sun thus became a motivating factor for 
the invention of the solar magnetograph in the 1950s by H 
W and H D Babcock (see SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: INFERENCE BY 
POLARIMETRY). The magnetograph’s mapping capacity led 
to their discovery that solar filaments are located along 
PILs. 

Where a PIL passes between bright chromospheric 
plages of opposite magnetic polarity (see SOLAR CHROMO- 
SPHERIC: PLAGES), its corresponding filament is shorter and 
narrower than a quiescent prominence (See SOLAR PROMI- 
NENCE OBSERVATIONS) surrounded by weak fields. When ob- 
served at wavelengths with lower optical thickness in the 
chromosphere than the core of Ha, a channel surrounded 
by strong fields appears as an elongated void conspicu- 
ously free of absorbing structures. It is also called a plage 
corridor, or plage couloir, following M-J Martres and her 
colleagues at Meudon Observatory, who first described the 
phenomenon in the 1960s. 

Solar magnetographs were few and far between in the 
early years of space exploration; even fewer could measure 
all the Stokes parameters for deriving vector magnetic 
fields to test SOLAR FLARE MODELS. Pressing demands to 
forecast trends in solar activity, both in the long and 
short term, stimulated attempts in the 1970s to use 
monochromatic Ha images in conjunction with maps of 
B, as a proxy for a chromospheric vector magnetograph. 
H Zirin and co-workers at Big Bear Solar Observatory 
(BBSO) coined the term chromospheric magnetograph and 
championed the method as a viable option for inferring 
field directions in some magnetic configurations from Ha 
filtergrams. The Ha line has the combined advantages 
of large opacity and large scale height at a geometrical 
height where magnetic flux tubes, penetrating the surface, 
rapidly expand laterally to form a magnetic canopy (see 
CHROMOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY). Accordingly, the coarser 
fine structures in Ha, being nearly horizontal wherever 
conditions favor canopies such as the borders of plages or 
the outer chromospheric reaches of sunspot penumbrae 
(the superpenumbra), indicate the location and direction of 
the transverse component of the local magnetic field in the 
chromosphere. 

Because large-scale patterns of solar magnetic activity 
evolve slowly, i.e. often lasting many days, Ha filaments 
and patterns of Ha fibrils follow suit even though they 
may dissolve or erupt and then reappear several times 
in response to small local changes. Evolutionary changes 
are slow enough that a panoramic, or ‘synoptic’, view can 
be constructed from the daily Ha filamentary structures 
to summarize the distribution of magnetic activity at 
each longitude during a full rotation of the Sun. PS 
McIntosh pioneered the use of synoptic maps based on Ha 
observations to forecast trends in solar activity from one 
solar rotation to the next. He recognized magnetic polarity 
boundaries as key structural elements for describing how 
global surface activity is organized. To infer their locations 
he used filaments, plage corridors, emerging flux regions 
with arch filament systems (see CHROMOSPHERE: EMERGING 
FLUX REGIONS), and alignments of Ha fibrils. Patterns of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Filament Channels 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Carrington Rotation 1936’ 
Ha Synoptic Chart 


2 
(4,3 = Hel 10830 Coronal Hole 


p = Preliminary and incomplete 


Heliographic Longitude 


Last Revised 6/04/98 


210 240 270 300 330 360 390 
Compiled from H-alpha and Hel 10830 images by 
HELIOSpnoptics , Inc. Patrick S. McIntosh 


Figure 1. This synoptic map is constructed from chromospheric elements: filaments, plage corridors, emerging flux regions with arch 
filament systems , and alignments of Ha fibrils. It also provides the boundaries of coronal holes based on spectroheliograms made in 


the A 1083 nm line of He I. (Courtesy of P S McIntosh.) 


aligned fibrils extending axially far beyond either end of 
a filament, or patterns of axially aligned fibrils without 
a filament forming among them, were called ‘filament 
channels’ by McIntosh. In his accompanying synoptic 
map (figure 1) channels are shown as dashed lines joining 
Ha filaments. They are extrapolated to form proxy PILs 
which wind their way through, around, and between solar 
activity complexes, over vast distances. 


Chromospheric properties of filament channels in 
strong background fields 

The earliest descriptions noted an inverse relation between 
the width of chromospheric corridors and the strength of 
the field gradient across their corresponding PILs. This 
effect is illustrated by three channels in the small activity 
complex of figure 2. Two sunspots, S1 and 82, of following 
(black) magnetic polarity (See SUNSPOT CLASSIFICATIONS) in 
the magnetogram in panel C mark the locations of the 
strongest concentrations of flux in this complex. The 
remaining flux is distributed among plages of both leading 
(white) and following magnetic polarities: bright Ha 
plages in panel A coincide with strong flux concentrations 
outside of the sunspots in C, faint plages with the weaker 
flux concentrations. Three Ha filaments (F1, F2, F3 in 
panels A and C) and three corresponding channels (C1, 
C2, C3 in panel B) separate plages, or plages and sunspots, 
of like polarity from plages of opposite polarity. The 
narrowest channel, C2, is a narrow crack about 1 Mm 
wide among the optically thick absorbing structures just 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


above the characters ‘C2’ in panel B; it is located close to 
spot S1 at a PIL within a steep gradient of B,. The widest 
channel, C3, appears as a broad void between absorbing 
features in panel B, and over a PIL with a shallow gradient 
between widely spaced flux concentrations. A channel of 
intermediate width, C1 in panel B, separates two bright 
plages. 

A more exact description of a chromospheric channel 
includes the orientation of Ha fibrils along its fringes. In 
figure 2, fibrils rooted in the bright plage above channel 
C3 (panel B) are oppositely inclined to the fibrils rooted 
in the fainter plages of opposite magnetic polarity below 
C3, as indicated by the curved arrows. P Foukal first drew 
attention to such patterns where Ha fibrils are oppositely 
oriented on either side of a filament channel. He concluded 
that this characteristic pattern arises from a magnetic field 
with a predominantly horizontal component along, and 
not across, the axial direction of the channel. 

S Martin and associates at BBSO applied Foukal’s 
result to many quiescent filaments and their underlying 
channels. They discovered a hemispheric asymmetry 
for filaments based on the patterns of oppositely 
oriented fibrils. When channels are viewed from 
the positive polarity side, a majority in the northern 
(southern) hemisphere have fields directed to the right 
(left) as determined from the orientation of the fibrils 
fringing the channel. Thus the channel field has a 
definite orientation—either dextral or sinistral—which 
predominates in the northern and southern hemispheres 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Filament Channels 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Filament channels in McMath 14726 observed at the Ottawa River Solar Observatory (ORSO) on 18 April 1977: (a) Ha 
filtergram; (b) cospatial filtergram at Ha + 0.6 A, with voids between plages at channels C1, C2, C3; (c) cospatial NSO/KP By 
magnetogram with contours of three filaments superposed. S1 and S2 are both p-polarity spots (black is negative). Top N; right W. 


respectively. Channels with a common orientation can join 
to form very long and very persistent structures. Channels 
can exceed in length and duration any filament which 
forms within them. 


Chromospheric properties of filament channels in 
weak background fields 

Filament channels, seen as aligned bands of Ha fibrils, are 
seldom found alongside quiescent filaments which border 
the Sun’s polar caps or, more generally, in weak magnetic 
fields. The example in figure 3 (middle panel) contains Ha 
filaments formed in segments along a single outstretched 
PIL which winds from high to low latitudes around an 
extended area of predominantly negative (black) polarity 
flux (figure 3, bottom panel). Because this PIL reverses 
direction in an east-west sense by bending around a centre 
of curvature located to the west of the reversal, it is called 
a switchback. Fibrils next to the filaments in the polar 
arm (polar crown filaments, or PCFs) are not preferentially 
aligned with respect to the PIL; fibrils in the arm at lower 
latitudes do align strongly with the PIL in the dextral 
orientation, which is characteristic of a filament channel 
in the northern hemisphere. White contours in each panel 
of figure 3 outline narrow arteries following several PILs 
(with and without filaments) of reduced absorption in the 
He I line at 41083 nm (upper panel). Brightness inside 
these arteries is comparable to that of the small CORONAL 
HOLE outlined in black at the right-hand edge of each 
panel. The bright He I arteries, considered equivalent to 
Ha filament channels because they correspond closely in 
width and location in stronger fields at lower latitudes, 
have the advantage of remaining visible among weak 
magnetic fields elsewhere. 

Yet the Ha and He I signatures of channels differ 
in essential characteristics. The Ha signatures have 
a radiative and a morphological component: a void 
observed at wavelengths where the Ha line is optically 
thin informs us about chromospheric excitation conditions 
along a PIL, while the orientations of fibrils inform 
us about the geometry of the magnetic field in the 
chromosphere at a PIL. The He I signature is primarily 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a radiative one from a more complex regime of densities 
and temperatures characteristic of both the chromosphere 
and the corona. The same can be said for other diagnostics 
which have been applied in the recent past to the detection 
of filament channels at wavelengths ranging from soft 
x-rays to sub-millimetre radio waves. 

The absence of an Ha signature for a filament 
channel at a PCF is probably due to weaker ambient 
magnetic flux densities and to their greater height relative 
to the corresponding factors for a quiescent filament 
at lower latitudes. But an elevated axial field of a 
PCF can leave its imprint on the chromosphere in other 
ways: the horizontal field inhibits downward (i.e. cross- 
field) heat conduction from the corona, thereby affecting 
the balance and transport of energy directly beneath 
it. For example, the 11083 nm line of He I forms 
through an interplay between direct collisional excitation 
of the relevant energy levels of He I within the ambient 
plasma and photoionization—recombination of those same 
levels driven by overlying coronal sources (see SOLAR 
SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS). Obstruction of downward 
heat conduction could, in principle, contribute to the 
reduced absorption seen as a bright He I artery at a 
PCF. The actual mechanism that dominates the formation 
of the 41083 nm line can be determined from models, 
provided that the local circumstances are properly defined. 
Here atmospheric inhomogeneities play significant roles, 
the most relevant being the CoRONAL caviry—plasma at 
coronal heights enveloping a prominence where density 
rather than the coronal temperature is reduced. H S 
Hudson, K L Harvey and associates have recently used 
simultaneous observations in soft x-rays (Yohkoh/Soft X- 
ray Telescope) and the 41083 nm line of He I (National 
Solar Observatory, Kitt Peak (NSO/KP)) to show that 
the outer boundaries of a coronal cavity coincide with 
the boundaries of a bright He I artery at a filament 
channel. The chief factor responsible for locally weakening 
the 41083 nm absorption and thereby creating a bright 
artery is, according to this evidence, the reduced coronal 
illumination from the rarefied cavity overlying the 
filament channel. Further simultaneous, multiwavelength 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Filament Channels 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Top: NSO/KP He I 11083 nm spectroheliogram; middle: ORSO Ha filtergram; bottom NSO/KP magnetogram, all of the 
same portion of the northern hemisphere of the Sun on 14 July 1979. The bright arteries in He I 41083 nm are outlined in white and a 
small coronal hole is outlined in black in all three panels. Top N; right W. (Courtesy of K L Harvey). 


observations with space- and ground-based instruments 
will soon be forthcoming to clarify the link between 


chromospheric filament channels and coronal cavities. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Creation of filament channels 


The initial conditions for creating a filament channel— 
based on empirical criteria identified in the 1980s by 
S F Martin—are the same as those for solar prominence 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Filament Channels 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Field lines in a filament channel. (2) Ha fibrils around an activity complex (ORSO image). (b) Field lines deduced from 
force-free model superposed on a contour of the NSO/KP magnetogram. (c) Oblique view of field lines in (b). (Courtesy of DH 


Mackay.) 


formation: mass flows transporting magnetic flux of 
opposite polarities to a PIL, cancellation of opposite 
polarity flux in these converging flows, and a magnetic 
arcade overlying the PIL. During the process of formation, 
magnetic shear is created above the PIL, ie. the 
magnetic field in a vertical plane above a PIL departs 
from an ideal potential (current-free) configuration (see 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS). This departure is manifestly 
obvious in the axial alignment, described above, of 
chromospheric fibrils in a filament channel. 

Models of solar prominence formation have been 
put forward over many years; not until the past 
decade have any addressed the formation of filament 
channels. Opinion about the formation of channels is 
divided between two main schools of thought (see SOLAR 
PROMINENCE MODELS). One school creates a channel at the 
solar surface by converging mass flows of already emerged 
magnetic elements onto a PIL so that oppositely directed 
field lines of the surrounding arcade reconnect but only the 
axial component survives. The other school produces an 
axial component of the field below the surface by making 
differential rotation act on subsurface magnetic fields (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). In the latter case the filament 
channel forms when the subsurface axial field emerges at 
a PIL. Of the two hypotheses, the first is more amenable to 
direct observational tests. 

The most complete observational description to date 
of a channel in the act of formation, by V Gaizauskas, 
J] B Zirker, C Sweetland and A Kovacs, supports instead 
a process by which an existing magnetic topology at 
the surface readjusts to the arrival and rapid evolution 
of new magnetic flux from below. In this scenario, an 
existing slowly decaying bipolar plage trails behind a large 
field-free area in which new flux emerges not as a single 
bipolar region but as two, arriving in quick succession and 
almost on top of one another, thereby forming a compact 
activity complex. The placement of the bipoles, old and 
new, results in a regular alternation of magnetic polarity 
along almost the same parallel of latitude, thus ensuring 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a PIL between the existing plage and the new cluster of 
sunspots. The nearly superposed emerging bipoles create 
a highly non-potential magnetic configuration with nearly 
horizontal field lines low in the atmosphere. Normal 
evolutionary expansion of the new active regions then 
drives this configuration with its strong horizontal field 
component towards the PIL. 

The visible result of these actions appears at the 
extreme left of figure 4(a) as an alignment of many Ha 
fibrils which happen to be superposed on a PIL. That 
alignment develops within a few hours which coincide 
with rapid growth of the second bipole in the compact 
activity complex. These Ha fibrils stream in opposite 
directions on opposite sides of that PIL—thus confirming 
that the aligned pattern is a filament channel. According 
to the Ha observations the channel is maintained on 
succeeding days. But it takes three more days before a 
filament forms in it. By using a force-free approximation 
(See FORCE-FREE MAGNETIC FIELDS) to model the magnetic field 
due to this distribution of magnetic sources, D H Mackay 
was able to fit the pattern of fibrils with a system of 
horizontal loops (figure 4(b)). The flatness of the magnetic 
loops is emphasized in the oblique view of figure 4(c). 
Mackay also applied the force-free model to represent the 
filament itself, and showed that the representation would 
fail without the presence of the pre-existing plage. This 
combination of observations and models shows that it is 
possible to attribute the formation, at least among active 
regions, of a filament channel and a filament entirely 
to normal evolutionary processes acting on flux after it 
has emerged. No recourse is needed to a hypothetical 
submerged flux rope. 

Although this channel and its filament are small 
their environment is a typical one within the belts of 
active latitudes—new flux emerging in an activity complex 
next to decaying flux. They are special only in the fact 
that emergence occurred in an area free of any magnetic 
activity which could have complicated and confused the 
evolving patterns of chromospheric fibrils. The real merit 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Filament Channels 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of this example lies in hinting at an alternative source 
for providing magnetic fields with a strong horizontal 
component: currents associated with emerging activity 
complexes that distort the magnetic topology into a 
highly non-potential configuration. Horizontal fields 
are naturally resistant to decay or to submergence, 
although they will disrupt due to plasma instabilities 
of various kinds (see SOLAR PROMINENCE ERUPTION). When 
confined as channels at a PIL they can also be replenished 
by reconnections between numerous canceling magnetic 
elements converging onto the PIL. 

So one way to produce channels on the scale and 
duration of the ones outlining the switchback of figure 3 
is to link up channels with common orientation that 
have been created in the belts of active latitudes by flux 
emergence of many neighboring activity complexes and 
then transport them poleward. The push can come from 
migrating flux driven poleward by large-scale emergences 
of new flux at lower latitudes combined with meridional 
flows. In this scenario filaments at the polar crowns are 
created when the migrating flux reconnects with fields 
already present in the polar caps. At polar latitudes 
an arcade overlying the PIL between the polar cap and 
an approaching surge of migrating photospheric flux 
arches well up into the corona. Field lines anchored 
in converging, sheared photospheric flows of opposite 
polarity flux near the polar caps are thus more likely, 
on reconnection, to leave an axial field suspended in 
the corona well above the chromosphere. In effect, the 
‘channel’ for a polar crown filament as defined by the axial 
field leaves little or no imprint on the chromosphere, which 
is consistent with the situation illustrated in figure 3. 

The elegant model of global flux transport by van 
Ballegooijen, Cartledge and Priest contains some of these 
features but does not include any role for reconnection of 
field lines in arcades overlying PILs to produce the axial 
horizontal field. The combined effects in this model of 
differential rotation, magnetic diffusion (random dispersal 
of magnetic elements by supergranulation (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: SUPERGRANULATION)), and meridional flows 
acting on distributions of flux emerging at low latitudes 
result in axial fields located around switchbacks as 
observed. The orientation of the axial fields in the low- 
latitude diagonal arms of switchbacks derived from their 
model is consistent with the global organization of the 
orientation of channels found by Martin, Bilimoria and 
Tracadas. However, the orientation of channels in the arms 
of switchbacks at the polar crown predicted by this model 
of global flux transport are in conflict with observations. 
Some essential aspects are still missing in the physics of 
formation of the axial field in polar crown filaments. New 
observations made simultaneously from spacecraft and 
the ground of polar crown filaments are already planned 
to identify the missing ingredients. 


Bibliography 

Gaizauskas V, Zirker J B, Sweetland C and Kovacs A 1997 
Formation of a solar filament channel Astrophys. J. 479 
448-57 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Martin S F, Bilimoria R and Tracadas P W 1994 Magnetic 
field configurations basic to filament channels and 
filaments Solar Surface Magnetism (NATO ASI Series 
C 433) ed RJ Rutten and C J Schrijver (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) pp 303-38 

Ruzdjak V and Tandberg-Hanssen E (ed) 1990 Dynamtics 
of Quiescent Prominences (Lecture Notes in Physics 363) 
(Berlin: Springer) 

van Ballegooijen A A, Cartledge N P and Priest E R 1998 
Magnetic flux transport and the formation of filament 
channels on the Sun Astrophys. J. 501 866-81 

Webb D F, Schmieder B and Rust D M (ed) 1998 New 
Perspectives on Solar Prominences (IAU Coll. 167) (San 
Francisco: Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 


Victor Gaizauskas 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flare Classification 


SOLAR FLARES are classified according to their size, duration, 
morphology or magnetic topology and the composition of 
their associated energetic particles. This article will cover 
the more enduring and comprehensive of these various 
classification schemes. 

Solar flares are wonderfully complex phenomena and 
are observed across the electromagnetic spectrum as well 
as via energetic particles in space. The first reports of a 
flare, observed in white light by Carrington and Hodgson 
in 1859 (see SOLAR FLARES: WHITE LIGHT), captured their 
essence as transient energy releases in SUNSPOT regions. 
Following Hale’s invention of the spectrohelioscope 
during the 1920s, flares were extensively studied in the 
Ha emission line. The 1940s saw the first observations 
of flare-associated radio and particle emissions and 
during the space age the full gamut of flare x-ray, 
extreme-ultraviolet and gamma-ray data (SOLAR FLARES: 
GAMMA RAYS) became available along with observations of 
accompanying transient coronal activity. 

Not surprisingly, the successive opening of new 
observational windows to the flare phenomenon has 
resulted in the development of classification schemes 
particular to given wavelengths. These classification 
schemes encompass flare size and morphology, and, in 
the case of flare-associated energetic particles, the particle 
composition. If there is one overarching theme, it is that 
solar flares, despite their seemingly infinite variety, come 
in two basic flavors—impulsive and gradual. Impulsive 
flares have time scales of the order of a few minutes 
or less while gradual flare durations range from tens 
of minutes to several hours. These two basic types 
are combined in fully developed flares in which an 
impulsive phase is followed by a gradual main phase 
(See SOLAR FLARES: IMPULSIVE PHASE; SOLAR FLARES: MAIN PHASE). 
The time scale (gradual versus impulsive, short versus 
long-duration) distinction between the two basic kinds 
of flares has been noted by investigators working in 
virtually every wavelength and energy range. During 
the 1970s, it became appreciated that these time scales 
were indicative of magnetic topology; long-duration 
flares were linked to SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS (CMEs) 
and impulsive flares were thought to be completely 
confined within the Sun’s lower atmosphere. Today it 
is recognized that some short-duration flares may also 
have ejecta. Nevertheless, the concept of two fundamental 
types of flares (impulsive/short duration/confined versus 
gradual/long duration/eruptive) frames current thinking 
on this subject. 


Size classification of solar flares: Ha and soft x-ray 
There are only two widely used classification systems that 
address flare ‘size’ or ‘importance’. The first of these is 
the Ha classification scheme (table 1) that was developed 
during the 1930s. It consists of a character (S = subflare, or 
1, 2, 3, or 4 for successively larger flares) that denotes the 
flare size and a letter (f = faint, n = normal, b = bright) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Optical classification of solar flares. 


Area (A) at disk center 


Importance class (millionths of a solar hemisphere) 


S A < 100 

1 100 < A < 250 
2 250 < A < 600 
3 600 < A < 1200 
4 A > 1200 


corresponding to a subjective estimate of the intensity 
of the emission. Thus the most outstanding flares are 
classified as 4b and the smallest and faintest as Sf. In 
general, the larger the optical classification of a flare, the 
more likely that it is a gradual (long-duration) or eruptive 
flare, but this is only a rule of thumb. 

A second size classification that has come into 
common usage since about 1970 is based on soft x-ray 
observations of the Sun in the 1-8 A band by Earth- 
orbiting satellites. The size of the flare is given by the peak 
intensity (on a logarithmic scale) of the emission. Flares 
are classified with a letter (A, B, C, M or X) corresponding 
to the power of 10 (—8, —7, —6, —5, —4, respectively) of the 
peak 1-8 A flux in units of W m~ and a number (1-9) that 
acts as a multiplier. For example, a B3 flare has a peak 
flux of 3 x 10-7 W m® and an M8 flare has a peak flux 
of 8 x 10° W m~. Generally, flares smaller than C1 can 
only be detected during a SOLARCYCLE minimum when the 
x-ray background is low. Flares occasionally exceed class 
X9 in intensity; they are simply referred to as X10, X11 
etc events. Note that the soft x-ray classification gives no 
indication as to whether the flare is eruptive or compact. 
While there is a general tendency for intense flares to be 
eruptive, X-class flares can be confined and B-class flares 
can have CME associations. 


Classification of flares in terms of magnetic 
topology: confined versus eruptive 

The discovery of coronal mass ejections in about 1970 
gradually led to a profound change in the way that solar 
astronomers think about flares. The word ‘flare’ implies 
an event that is localized within an active region while 
CMEs leave the Sun at speeds of up to 2000 km s~! and 
can have angular spans that encompass several active 
regions. At first it was thought that CMEs were blown 
out by the explosive release of energy during the flare, 
whereas today the prevailing view is that eruptive flares 
are a consequence of CMEs. Figure 1 captures much of the 
rich phenomenology associated with eruptive flares. The 
essential aspect from a flare classification point of view is 
that magnetic field lines are opened by CMEs in eruptive 
events. The closing down or reconnection of these newly 
opened field lines typically occurs ona time scale of hours 
and provides the prolonged energy release characteristic 
of gradual or eruptive flares, although it must be noted 
that CMEs can also be accompanied by short duration 
flares. As can be seen in figure 1, the intersection of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


WHITE LIGHT 
TRANSIENT 


EJECTED 
FILAMENT 
MATERIAL 


UPWARD 
MOVING 
ELECTRONS 
EXCITE PLASMA 
(STORM CONTINUUM 
TYPE IZ) 


MOST RECENTLY FORMED, 
LEAST DENSELY 
POPULATED LOOPS 


SOFT X-RAY AND 
THERMAL RADIO 
EMITTING LOOP 


ELECTRONS ACCELERATED 
HERE ViA RECONNECTION 


TRAPPED ELECTRONS EMIT 
GYRO - SYNCHROTRON 
RADIATION (LATE » WAVE 
PEAKS} AND BREMSSTRAHLUNG 
(GHB) Ha POST FLARE LOOP 
NEWLY ACCELERATED 
ELECTRONS “MIRROR” 
HERE AND ARE CONFINED TO 
LOWER DENSITY REGIONS 


He FLARE RIBBONS 


Figure 1. Magnetic topology of a gradual or eruptive flare (from 
Cliver et al 1986 Astrophys. J. 305 920). 


newly formed flare loops (or ‘post-flare’ loops as they 
were previously called) with the solar surface is marked 
by two parallel ribbons in Ha. Thus, before the role 
of the CME was fully appreciated, eruptive flares were 
referred to as two-ribbon or double-ribbon events. This 
type of flare morphology is also observed in association 
with eruptive prominences outside active regions (such 
events are often referred to by the French term ‘disparition 
brusque’). Today it is generally thought that the basic 
physics of eruptive prominences and large two ribbon 
flares is identical and both phenomena are referred to as 
eruptive flares. 

While eruptive flares attract much attention because 
of their size, complexity and association with GEOMAGNETIC 
storms and Forbush decreases of cosmic ray intensity, they 
comprise only a small fraction of all flares. The vast 
majority of flares are short-lived or impulsive events that 
lack CMEs. Such flares were traditionally modeled in 
terms of energy release within a single static magnetic 
loop and were thus referred to as single-loop, point, 
compact or confined flares. However, recent images of 
flares in energetic x-rays have indicated that confined or 
impulsive events may also result from loop top magnetic 
reconnection as shown in figure 2. In that case, the 
difference between the eruptive and confined classes of 
flares may be more one of degree than of kind, since 
the reconnection event depicted in figure 2 will result 
in the detachment of a narrow magnetic loop into the 
SOLAR WIND. The idea that the particle acceleration process 
is similar in impulsive and eruptive flares (or in the 
impulsive and gradual phases of fully developed flares) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Reconnection point 


Reconnection flow 
(v~ 3,000 km s7) 


Shock 


HXR loop-top impulsive source 


TTS 


HXR double footpoint sources 


Figure 2. Magnetic topology of an impulsive or confined flare 
(from Masuda et al 1994 Nature 371 495). 


finds some support from gamma-ray observations that 
indicate similar compositions of interacting particles for 
both types of events. 

The most important flares in terms of their geophys- 
ical consequences are large fully developed events in 
which an impulsive phase is followed by a gradual main 
phase. Such ‘hybrid’ flares are classified according to their 
end phases as eruptive flares. Occasionally, disparition 
brusque events, which represent a ‘pure’ form of eruptive 
flares, can also result in severe magnetic storms. 


Classification of meter wavelength radio bursts 
associated with flares 

Solar flares have associated radio events, or ‘bursts’, at 
wavelengths ranging from millimeters to kilometers. The 
radio burst classification scheme developed during the 
1950s by Australian and French solar radio astronomers 
has proven to be particularly useful in terms of the 
current division of flares into confined and eruptive 
categories (See SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS). A schematic of 
the meterwave dynamic spectrum corresponding to a 
large eruptive flare is shown in figure 3. In terms of the 
eruptive/confined classification scheme, burst types III 
and V are characteristic phenomena of impulsive flares (or 
the impulsive or initial phase of fully developed eruptive 
flares). Type III bursts and their associated type V continua 
are attributed to flare-accelerated electrons moving along 
open field lines into the corona. Type II and type IV 
bursts are most commonly identified with eruptive flares. 
Type II or ‘slow-drift’ emission indicates a shock wave 
moving out through the corona with a characteristic speed 
~500 km s~!. The shock exciter is either a flare-initiated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


25 


100 


200 


FREQUENCY (Mcps) 


400 


10 
FLARE STARTS 


15 20 25 


TIME (minutes) 


Figure 3. Metric radio emission associated with a fully developed eruptive flare. 


blast wave or a CME. Type IV emission is thought to 
result from magnetic reconnection in the wake of the CME 
(figure 1). 


Classification of solar energetic particle events 
The energetic particle (E > 1 MeV/nucleon) events 
observed in space following flares were one of the last 
aspects of flares to be brought under the two-class picture 
(see SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES). Prior to about 1985, 
there were a number of abundance anomalies associated 
with solar particle events that defied organization. These 
included a wide range of variation in electron (e) to proton 
(p) ratios, 7He/*He ratios and Fe/O ratios. In the mid- 
1980s it was recognized that flare time scale was a useful 
parameter that could order the data. In general, it was 
found that particles from impulsive flares have higher e/p, 
3He/*He and Fe/O ratios than those recorded for ‘normal’ 
particle events (which include virtually all large events) 
that are associated with long-duration flares. In addition, 
heavy ions in large events have relatively low charge 
states corresponding to 2 MK temperatures, indicating 
acceleration high in the corona and in the solar wind 
rather than in hot (10 MK) flare plasma. Energetic particle 
events associated with eruptive flares can be observed over 
a much wider range of heliolongitudes than is the case 
for confined flares. Thus these large events are attributed 
to acceleration by coronal/interplanetary shocks driven 
by CMEs. Distinctions between impulsive and gradual 
events may be blurred in hybrid particle events for which 
both flare and shock components are observed. The 
current two-class picture of SEP events is summarized in 
table 2. The usage of ‘impulsive’ and ‘gradual’ in this table 
refers to both the flare and particle event duration. 


Open questions and ongoing research 

The separation of flares into two distinct classes has proven 
to be a useful framework that organizes a great deal of 
disparate data. At the same time, many key questions 
remain unanswered. A sampler of some of these open 
questions follows: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 2. Properties of impulsive and gradual energetic particle 
events and their associated flares. 


Impulsive Gradual 
Particles: 
e/p Electron-rich — Proton-rich 
3He/*He ~1 ~0.0005 
Fe/O ~1 ~0.1 
H/He ~10 ~100 
Fe charge state ~20 ~14 
Duration Hours Days 
Longitude cone <30° 180° 
Flare: 
Type Confined Eruptive 
Radio bursts Tll/V II/IV 
Soft x-ray duration <ih >1h 
CME? = Yes 
Interplanetary shock? — Yes 
Events /year ~1000 ~10 


(a) While the relationship of CMEs to long-duration 
flares is generally interpreted in terms of magnetic 
reconnection, the role of CMEs in impulsive flares 
remains unclear. Nor is the relationship of the 
impulsive phase to the gradual phase in large fully 
developed flares understood. Does the impulsive 
flare serve to trigger a larger-scale eruption? 

(b) There is some evidence that CMEs associated 
with prominence eruption events have different 
acceleration profiles from CMEs that accompany 
eruptive flares in active regions. Specifically, 
flare-associated CMEs undergo much more rapid 
acceleration than CMEs associated with disparition 
brusques. The basis for this difference is not 
understood and requires further investigation. 

(c) The origin of the coronal shocks manifested as metric 
type II bursts remains a matter of controversy, with 
advocates for both flare and CME causes. The source 
of the chromospheric Moreton waves (or the waves 
imaged in extreme-ultraviolet wavelengths in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


corona) that have been identified with type II shocks 
is similarly unclear. 

(d) Does the magnetic topology for gradual or eruptive 
flares depicted in figure 1 apply to all such events? 
In particular, there is a controversy as to whether 
magnetic reconnection is required for the formation 
of the magnetic flux ropes (corresponding to the 
upper ‘disconnected’ structure seen in cross section 
in figure 2) that are observed in interplanetary space. 

(e) Does the magnetic topology for impulsive flares 
depicted in figure 2 apply to all such events? Intense 
impulsive flares are frequently observed that lack 
type II] emission; this is contrary to expectation, given 
the open field lines at the acceleration site in the 
model. 

(f) Can coronal/interplanetary shocks accelerate parti- 
cles to the tens of GeV energies occasionally observed 
in solar particle events? 


Bibliography 

Cliver E W 1995 Solar flare nomenclature Solar Phys. 157 
285-93 

——1996 Solar flare gamma-ray emission and energetic 
particles in space High Energy Solar Physics ed R 
Ramaty, N Mandzhavidze and X-M Hua (Woodbuty, 
NY: American Institute of Physics) pp 45-60 

Crooker N, Joselyn, J A and Feynman J (ed) 1997 
Coronal Mass Ejections (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) 

McLean D J 1985 Solar Radiophysics (Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press) 

Shibata K 1996 New observational facts about solar 
flares from Yohkoh studies-evidence of magnetic 
reconnection and a unified model of flares Adv. Space 
Res. 17 (4-5) 9-18 

Svestka Z, Jackson B V and Machado M E 1992 Eruptive 
Solar Flares (Berlin: Springer) 


Edward Cliver 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Forecasting 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flare Forecasting 


Like weather forecasting, solar flare forecasting (or 
forecasting solar activity in general) is motivated by 
pragmatic needs. Solar flares, coronal mass ejections, solar 
winds and other solar activity intimately influence the 
near-Earth space environment. All kinds of spacecraft 
including weather and communication satellites are 
orbiting Earth, and their performance and lifetimes are 
greatly influenced by solar activity. High solar activity 
increases the density of the stratosphere, which increases 
the atmospheric drag of low-Earth-orbiting satellites. In 
planning manned space activity such as space station 
fabrication and interplanetary travels, one must consider 
harmful effects of solar energetic particles and radiations. 

Even on the ground, we are not free from the 
influence of solar activity. The Great Quebec Blackout 
of 13 March 1989 was caused by a big solar flare and 
its associated phenomena. When the geomagnetic field 
is abruptly changed by a magnetic cloud crashing onto 
it or by an interplanetary shock wave, strong electric 
fields are induced in large-scale electric power distribution 
systems. The blackout was a result of such a process. 
Additionally, geomagnetic storms make a compass useless 
for navigation. Short-wave communication is hampered 
when the ionosphere is disturbed by energetic UV and 
x-radiations. 

In deploying solar experiments, one should also 
consider the level of solar activity. Spacecraft containing 
instruments for solar activity are usually launched near 
solar cycle maxima. For the same reason, it is better to 
launch a balloon carrying instruments for investigating 
solar flares during or just before an episode of high solar 
flare activity, if possible. 

Even long before the advancement of meteorology, 
people began to forecast weather on the basis of 
phenomenology. Likewise, even though we do not 
fully understand the underlying mechanisms for various 
manifestations of solar activity, we should make best of 
our current knowledge in order to forecast solar activity 
more reliably. 


Long-term forecasting 

We utilize our knowledge of the local climate and seasons 
in order to predict the local weather far in the future. 
Likewise we can utilize the 11 yr sunspot cycle in order 
to predict the level of solar activity far into the future. The 
phase and the strength of the sunspot cycle are relevant 
information. However, the length of the 11 yr cycle, unlike 
the length of a year, is not fixed but can vary abruptly 
in a range from 7.3 to 17.1 yr. The maximum sunspot 
number is also highly variable from one solar cycle to the 
next. In spite of these, various empirical rules, although 
not strict, have been utilized to predict the upcoming 
sunspot cycle. For example, it has been noticed that an 
odd-numbered cycle is usually stronger than the preceding 
even cycle. (The sunspot cycle which peaked in the year 
1760 is defined as cycle 1.) Inspecting the strengths of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cycles 1-21, we find that this rule has been observed by 
all the even—odd pairs except two pairs (cycles 4 and 5, 
cycles 8 and 9). It remains to be seen whether cycle 23, 
which is expected to reach its maximum in the year 2000, 
is going to be stronger than cycle 22. However, considering 
the chaotic nature of sunspot cycles, which is inherent to 
many nonlinear systems, we cannot be sure. (See SOLAR 
ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM RECORDS.) 

Another empirical rule is that a cycle of larger- 
than-average size usually follows a cycle of shorter-than- 
average period, while a cycle of smaller-than-average size 
usually follows a cycle of longer-than-average period. By 
the end of one sunspot cycle, one can guess the strength of 
the next sunspot cycle by using this rule. 

These empirical rules have no obvious scientific 
justifications. On the other hand, the ‘precursor technique’ 
is widely accepted by the scientific community because 
it has a scientific basis. This technique is based on 
the concept of extended solar cycles. According to this 
concept, the true length of a solar cycle is longer than 11 yr 
(perhaps 18 yr), and a new solar cycle does not start near 
the end of the preceding solar cycle but starts much earlier 
in the declining phase of the preceding cycle. Therefore, 
for some years, two cycles coexist: the signatures of a 
new cycle are manifested in high latitudes, while sunspots 
belonging to the declining cycle are found in low latitudes. 

According to the precursor technique, each of the 
geomagnetic indices Ap and aa is made of two components: 
one is due to the current-cycle solar activity and the other 
is due to the precursor of the next solar cycle. The second 
component is due to stable coronal holes, giving rise to a 27 
day recurrent pattern. A stable coronal hole is a unipolar 
region with magnetic field lines open to interplanetary 
space. The magnetic fields of unipolar regions are thought 
to become seeds for the next sunspot cycle. The second 
component of the geomagnetic indices, therefore, can 
reveal the strength of the next cycle. On this basis, some 
solar physicists successfully retrodicted the peak strengths 
of cycles 12-22. Using this technique, solar physicists 
formed a consensus that cycle 23 is going to be much 
stronger than the average. 

From the early days of solar activity study, it was 
attempted to express the sunspot cycle with analytical 
equations involving a few parameters. Recently, some 
scientists found that the solar activity curve for each cycle 
can be fit by a single equation with three free parameters, 
which are adjustable for each cycle. By fitting such an 
equation to the rising phase of a sunspot cycle, one can 
deduce the best values of the free parameters, which in 
turn determine the activity curve of the remaining part of 
the cycle. In this method, one has to wait until a new cycle 
has progressed considerably. 


Mid-term forecasting 

The prospect of mid-term forecasting of solar activity 
has not been studied in recent years. Here timescales 
from months to several years are regarded as mid terms. 
Scientists and forecasters have not paid much attention 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Forecasting 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to mid-term forecasting because of the lack of useful tools. 
Recently, it has been found that the occurrence rate of solar 
flares episodically exhibits periodic modulations. The 
best-known periodicity is a 152 day periodicity, which 
was in operation during the four years from 1980 through 
1983. Other well-known periods are 51 day and 76 day 
periods. These periods are close to integral multiples of 
25.5 days (2, 3 and 6 times, respectively). Even though 
these periodicities are not persistent but episodic, it can be 
used for mid-term flare forecasting when one of them is 
found to be in operation. 

By the end of 1981, one of the scientists in charge 
of the gamma-ray detector aboard the Solar Maximum 
Mission found that four episodes of high flare activity were 
roughly separated by 5 months. Suspecting the existence 
of 5 month periodicity, he predicted that the next high flare 
activity would occur in February 1982. Not only was this 
prediction realized, but also high flare activity was later 
observed with 5 month intervals (in June and July 1982, 
December 1982, May 1983 and October 1983). After it was 
recognized in March 1992 that the 51 day periodicity was 
in operation, four episodes of high flare activity occurred 
in accordance with this periodicity. Therefore, one can say 
that flare periodicities were, in fact, used for mid-term flare 
forecasting. In order to use flare periodicities as a practical 
tool for forecasting, however, one has to investigate the 
reliability and limitation of this method, analyzing the past 
data. 


Short-term forecasting 


Studies on flare forecasting have been mostly concentrated 
in short-term flare forecasting for timescales of a few days. 
The Space Environmental Lab of the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration of the United States of 
America mainly performs short-term flare forecasts rather 
than long-term forecasts. All the major flares occur within 
sunspot groups; hence, the term ‘active region’ is often 
used for a sunspot group. Therefore, investigation of the 
morphology and the development of a sunspot group is 
a useful tool for making short-term flare prediction. (See 
SUNSPOT CLASSIFICATION.) 

Short-term flare prediction is based on both theoreti- 
cal understanding of solar flares and hands-on experience 
of observers. Because a rather small number of highly 
flare-productive active regions account for the majority of 
energetic flares, it is important to recognize the signatures 
of flare-productive active regions. Well-known signatures 
of flare-productive active regions are as follows. 


(i) Complex active regions in which many sunspots of 
opposite polarities are mixed tend to produce many 
flares. Even if an active region is made of many 
sunspots, it is not flare productive if sunspots of one 
polarity are neatly separated from those of opposite 
polarity. An active region with a delta configuration, 
which is defined as two umbrae of different polarities 
surrounded by a single penumbra, is flare productive. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(ii) If, in a delta configuration, a bright H-alpha plage 
obscures a part of an umbra or runs along the neutral 
line, it is very flare productive. 

(iii) If an emerging sunspot bumps into an existing 
sunspot of opposite polarity, flares are likely to occur. 

(iv) If magnetic field lines connecting the sunspots of 
opposite polarities are highly sheared (in other 
words, the angles between these field lines and the 
neutral line are small), flares are likely to occur. 

(v) Arapidly growing active region is flare productive. 
In general, an active region in the decaying phase 
does not produce energetic flares unless new spots 
emerge within it. 


Very-short-term forecasting 

Flare prediction with timescales of tens of minutes is based 
on flare precursors. X-ray bright points, bright EUV knots 
and high-temperature emission of 6-20 GHz microwaves 
are recognized as precursors of flares. (See SOLAR FLARES: 
PREFLAREPHASE.) Such very-short-term flare forecasts are not 
usually valuable because of short lead times. However, 
it is useful to recognize early a flare that is likely to be 
associated with solar energetic particles and/or coronal 
mass ejections because energetic particles take hours to 
propagate to Earth and coronal mass ejections take days 
to do so. Therefore, even if we identify them while they 
are in progress on the Sun, we can have some preparation 
time before their impacts arrive here. 

Flares associated with large fluxes of solar energetic 
particles, coronal mass ejections, and interplanetary 
shocks have been recognized as constituting a distinct 
class of flares, and they have been called ‘proton flares’, 
‘two-ribbon flares’, ‘gradual flares’, ‘extended flares’, 
‘long-decay events’, ‘gradual gamma-ray-proton flares’ 
and so forth. (See SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS and 
SOLAR FLARE CLASSIFICATION.) This kind of flare has several 
characteristics: (1) long durations (of order of minutes) 
of individual hard x-ray spike bursts; (2) a long total 
duration (of tens of minutes) of hard x-ray emission; 
(3) spectral hardening of hard x-rays during individual 
spike bursts; (4) a gradual rise and very gradual decay of 
soft x-ray emission, (5) Two H-alpha ribbons separating 
gradually. One can use the first three characteristics for 
forecasting proton flares by analyzing hard x-ray data 
in real time. Although soft x-ray emission from the 
Sun is monitored continuously, the fourth characteristic 
has limited utility because the distribution of soft x-ray 
emission durations has no recognizable demarcation line. 
H-alpha observations are routinely available, but H-alpha 
ribbons begin to separate in the declining phase of a flare, 
limiting its usefulness as a timely identification method of 
proton flares. 


Future prospects 

Identification of flare-productive active regions discussed 
earlier is mainly based on high-resolution, ground-based 
observations of magnetic fields and H-alpha emissions of 
active regions. Now high-resolution instruments aboard 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Forecasting 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


various spacecraft are observing the Sun. The Michelson 
Doppler Imager (MDI) on the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory is measuring photospheric Doppler shifts 
with a spatial resolution of 2 arcsec and a good cadence. 
The Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) 
is observing the transition region and the corona with 
high spatial resolution. Yohkoh, which has been taking 
soft x-ray pictures of the Sun since 1991, is still in good 
condition. When we analyze Yohkoh, MDI and TRACE 
data appropriately, we may be able to learn new methods 
of forecasting solar flares. 

Using local helioseismology, one can detect sunspots 
before they emerge to the surface because they absorb 
p-mode oscillations and modify sound speeds. (See SOLAR 
INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY .) This technique has not 
been perfected yet, but we can see its potential. It is 
impractical to apply local helioseismology to see whether 
sunspots are buried below the photosphere at random 
places and times. However, one can apply this technique 
to a developing active region to see whether a large 
reservoir of strong magnetic fields is beneath the surface. 

With the abundance of data on solar phenomena 
recently accumulated and to be obtained in the near future, 
scientists will be able to better understand various solar 
phenomena influencing the Earth environment. It will 
naturally improve the ability to forecast solar flares and 
space weather in general. 


Bibliography 

Sawyer C, Warwick J W and Dennet J T 1987 Solar Flare 
Predictions (Boulder, CO: University of Colorado) 

Thompson R J et al (eds) 1990 Proc. Leura Solar Terrestrial 
Predictions Workshop (Boulder, CO: NOAA) 


Taeil Bai 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flare Magnetic Fields 


This article describes the relationship between magnetic 
fields and solar FLARES. 

Like most dynamic phenomena on the Sun, the 
occurrence of solar flares is closely related to the presence 
and evolution of solar magnetic fields, especially the 
complicated, non-potential magnetic configuration. As a 
simple introduction, we compare flares with earthquakes. 
The occurrence of earthquakes involves two steps: energy 
build-up and energy release. The stress and energy are 
built up by relative motion of two tectonic plates along 
fault lines. When the stress reaches a critical point, two 
plates cannot slide further, the equilibrium breaks down 
and a section of the fault line is restored to its original 
position (minimum energy state). The excess energy is 
released in the form of kinetic energy and propagated as 
seismic waves. A simple flare can be described by a very 
similar scenario. We start with two magnetic regions of 
opposite polarities. The line dividing two polarities is 
called the neutral line. If the field lines are connected 
directly, i.e. perpendicular to the magnetic neutral line, 
this is called the potential configuration. If, for some 
reason, magnetic regions slide, the field lines will start 
to move away from perpendicular to the neutral line. 
This is called the sheared configuration. In an extremely 
sheared configuration, the magnetic field lines are nearly 
parallel to the neutral line. A sheared magnetic field has 
more magnetic energy than the corresponding potential 
field configuration and the extra energy is called the 
free magnetic energy. When the fields are extremely 
sheared, an instability occurs. Fields tend to be restored 
to the potential configuration and magnetic free energy 
is released by the process of MAGNETIC RECONNECTION. The 
free magnetic energy is converted to thermal and non- 
thermal energy to power solar flares, which create thermal 
emissions and acceleration of non-thermal particles. The 
total energy of a flare depends on the total volume and 
complexity of the sheared magnetic region. 

The determination of the magnetic field configuration 
in flare-productive regions can be done directly and 
indirectly. Most of the methods will be addressed 
throughout the article. Here is the summary of them. 
The most direct way is by the vector magnetograph 
observations, at present all from ground-based solar 
observatories. However, the Japanese-US mission 
SOLAR-B (launch date: 2004) will provide the first 
space measurements of this kind. The line-of-sight 
magnetograms can provide certain information of ACTIVE 
REGION magnetic structure too: data are available 
from space (e.g. MDI on board sono) as well as 
ground-based observatories. Indirect measurements of 
magnetic field structure include Ha, white-light and D3 
images from ground-based observations and soft X-RAY 
(vonKon), UV/EUV (TRACE, EIT /SOHO) images from space 
observations. 

In addition to the presence of sheared magnetic 
neutral lines, the complexity of active regions is also vitally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A line-of-sight magnetogram of 10 June 1991 active 
region NOAA 6659 obtained at Big Bear Solar Observatory. It is 
a 6 sunspot group. The field of view is 5 arcmin x 4 arcmin. 
White and black gray scales represent field strength of positive 
and negative magnetic polarities, respectively. The dominant 
negative spots are surrounded by opposite-polarity satellite 
spots. In the lower-right corner (marked by a white box), a 
magnetic channel structure due to new flux emergence is visible. 


important in producing solar flares. The close association 
between 5 sunspots and major solar flares provides 
evidence that flares are associated with complexity of 
active regions (Zirin and Liggett 1987). The 5 sunspots 
are SUNSPOTS having two or more umbrae of opposite 
polarities within a common penumbra. Figure 1 shows 
an example of a 6 sunspot. It is a magnetogram of active 
region NOAA 6659, taken on 10 June 1991 by Big Bear 
Solar Observatory; white and black gray scales represent 
line-of-sight magnetic field of north and south polarities 
respectively. The dominant negative spots are surrounded 
by opposite-polarity satellite spots. This active region was 
one of the most flare-productive regions in solar cycle 22, 
which produced many flares including six of the strongest 
flares (classified as X-class flares). As a matter of fact, 
almost all of the more than 100 X-class solar flares that 
occurred in solar cycle 22 were associated with 6 sunspots. 

Another prominent common feature in the flare- 
productive 5 sunspot groups is the unbalanced magnetic 
flux inside the 6 configuration. Again, figure 1 gives 
a very good example of an unbalanced magnetic flux 
configuration. Inside the 6 group, the negative magnetic 
flux (field strength multiplied by area) is about 6 times 
greater than the positive flux. From theory, of course, we 
know that the overall fluxes must be balanced when added 
up over a large enough area. It is not clear why the flare- 
productive 5 groups always show such very unbalanced 
fluxes. Statistical studies show that the average ratio of 
dominant flux versus minor flux is around 5 in all the 6 
groups. 

Another very important aspect in flare magnetic field 
studies is the electric currents in flare-producing regions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


When the field is potential, it is called the current free field. 
Sheared and twisted magnetic fields carry electric currents. 
The existence of currents is important for flares, because 
an electric field is most efficient in both heating (Joulean 
dissipation) and acceleration of charged particles. 

The magnetic fields in flare-productive active regions 
have been observed by various vector magnetograph 
systems. The most notable ones are systems at Marshall 
Space Flight Center, Big Bear Solar Observatory, Huairou 
Solar Observatory, Mees Solar Observatory and Advanced 
Stokes Polarimeter at National Solar Observatory. Studies 
of the magnetic structure of flare-producing regions have 
been concentrated in the following areas. 


Relationship between magnetic shear and solar flares 

Study on this subject was first carried out extensively by 
the solar group at Marshall Space Flight Center/NASA. 
The magnetic shear is defined as the angular difference 
between the azimuth of the potential transverse field 
calculated from the observed longitudinal magnetic field 
and the observed transverse magnetic field (Hagyard et al 
1984). Statistically speaking, flares occur in areas where 
the local photospheric magnetic field departs the most 
from a potential field. These regions are characterized 
by (1) high shear angle, (2) strong transverse magnetic 
field along the neutral line and (3) long sheared magnetic 
neutral line. Figure 2 shows a transverse magnetogram 
of 10 June 1991, obtained at Marshall Space Flight Center. 
It contains the top-left part of the active region shown in 
figure 1. Magnetic neutral lines are shown as contours and 
the transverse fields are represented as bars. These field 
components are superposed on a broad-band Ha image 
which shows that the flare kernels were on opposite sides 
of the neutral line in an area where the transverse field was 
highly sheared along that line. 

However, more recently, it has been found that not all 
the flares occur in sheared neutral lines. If the flare ribbons 
start near the neutral line, the strong shear conditions are 
usually satisfied. If the flare ribbons start further apart, the 
neutral line may not have large shear (Chen et al 1994). The 
former situation may represent a reconnection closer to the 
photosphere, while the latter may imply a reconnection 
higher up. 


Flux emergence and formation of magnetic shear 

The picture of magnetic shear due to relative motion 
of magnetic regions that we gave in the introduction is 
oversimplified. There are several ways that a sheared 
magnetic configuration can form. A few examples are 
given here and have been discussed by Wang (1993, 1997): 
(a) shear formed by relative shear motion of magnetic 
regions with opposite polarities; (b) shear formed by head- 
on collision between two magnetic regions of opposite 
polarities; (c) complicated magnetic structure, perhaps 
formed as a result of new flux emergence, in which 
opposite magnetic polarities can be closely intertwined. 
The three most famous superactive regions in solar cycle 
22 (NOAA 5395, March 1989; NOAA 6659, June 1991; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ie) 100 200 300 400 500 


Figure 2. AR6659 on 10 June 1991, at the start of an M3 flare at 
16:53 UT. The 1.5 arcmin square field of view shows the 
north-east portion (top-left) of the same active region as in 
Figure 1. The solid contour marks the magnetic neutral line 
separating the positive polarity of the umbra near the center of 
the picture from the negative polarity of the larger umbra at the 
bottom. The line segments indicate the magnitude and direction 
of the transverse component of the magnetic field and are scaled 
from 125 to 500 G. These field components are superposed on a 
broad-band Ha image which shows that the flare kernels were 
on opposite sides of the neutral line in an area where the 
transverse field was highly sheared along that line. This figure is 
provided by Dr M Hagyard at Marshall Space Flight Center. 


NOAA 6891, October 1991) all show very similar new 
flux emergence inside the already existing penumbrae, 
and new fluxes subsequently formed magnetic channels 
(elongated mixed-polarity magnetic regions) with high 
magnetic shears. These new flux emergence regions are 
the sites of many major solar flares (See CHROMOSPHERE: 
EMERGING FLUX REGIONS). In the lower-right part of figure 
1 (marked by a box), the magnetic channel structure is 
demonstrated for the June 1991 region, which was a result 
of new flux emergence inside the sunspot penumbra. 

It has also been brought to light that magnetic shears 
may not be caused by surface flows; they may instead 
be formed beneath the surface by convective motion. 
When flux emerges, the twisted flux tubes are brought 
up above the surface, which provides free energy to 
power flares. Such an idea was originally proposed 
by Tanaka (1991) based on observations from Big Bear 
Solar Observatory. In a recent paper, Ishii et al (1998) 
studied active region 5395 (March 1989) in detail. To 
explain the apparent complicated flux emergence and 
flow motions, they proposed a schematic model of the 
successive emergence of twisted and winding magnetic 
flux ropes coiling around a trunk of a big magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


flux tube. The location of strongest flare activity was 
found to coincide with the vortex-like apparent surface 
motion of sunspots which are actually a consequence of 
twisted flux emergence. Data obtained with the Advanced 
Stokes Polarimeter confirmed such an idea of emergence 
of twisted flux tubes (Lites and Low, 1997). 


Changes of magnetic shear after solar flares 

Before vector magnetograms were available, people used 
the Ha fibril structure to study the shear of magnetic fields 
and its relation to flares. Sheared magnetic neutral lines 
can be easily visible as filaments which are dark elongated 
structures in the solar chromosphere, as seen in Ha images. 
Evidence exists to show that the field lines are along the 
major axis of filaments—in the same direction as neutral 
lines. Many flares are related to eruptions of filaments. 
Eruptive filaments are also known to be associated with 
a type of large-scale coronal activity called coronal mass 
ejections. Relaxation from a sheared to a potential 
magnetic configuration is evidenced by the disappearance 
of sheared filaments and formation of potential post- 
flare loops which connect two magnetic polarities directly 
(Zirin 1988). However, the Ha structure may only 
represent the field in the chromosphere. Although in some 
cases it matches the direction of the transverse field in the 
photosphere, it is not guaranteed that this match is still 
valid for complex flare-producing regions. Furthermore, 
Ha fibrils provide only the direction; transverse field 
measurements provide field strength as well. X-ray loop 
structures and their evolution during flares, as observed 
by the Japanese Satellite Yohkoh, have demonstrated 
magnetic reconnection and the change from a sheared 
to a more potential configuration. However, studies of 
the evolution of photospheric magnetic fields in flare- 
producing active regions is still very important, because 
they are the only way to provide a quantitative description 
of magnetic fields in active regions. Even though 
observed fields are measured along a two-dimensional 
surface, force-free magnetic field extrapolations based on 
measured photospheric magnetic fields as a boundary 
condition provide a powerful tool to obtain the three- 
dimensional field structure. 

Study of evolution of vector magnetic fields during 
solar flares requires accurate vector field measurements, 
with sufficient spatial resolution (1-2 arcsec, the solar 
diameter is about 2000 arcsec), high cadence (5 min 
or less) and long duration (several hours before and 
after flares). Only sufficiently strong flares may have a 
measurable effect on photospheric magnetic fields. Giving 
the observing requirements, it is not surprising that such 
observing sequences are rare. At the time of writing, the 
change of photospheric magnetic fields before and after 
solar flares is still an unsettled issue. Wang (1997) has 
reported shear increases for five X-class flares, while Chen 
et al (1994) reported that there were no detectable changes 
associated with about 20 M-class flares. Observations 
at Marshall Space Flight Center demonstrated a similar 
inconsistency: some events show a shear increase, some 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a decrease and some were unchanged. Theoretical 
predictions are also mixed, as shear increase, decrease or 
undetectable changes in photospheric magnetic fields can 
each be explained by different models. Flares are mainly 
considered as coronal events; in the corona, the magnetic 
shear has to be released to produce solar flares, so shear 
there is definitely released after a flare. It may not be 
required for its photospheric boundary to have similar 
shear relaxation. 

The study of magnetic fields in flare-productive 
regions is still a very active research area. The most 
outstanding problems include the following. (1) How 
is magnetic shear built below or above the surface? 
(2) Do photospheric magnetic fields change when flares 
occur mainly in the chromosphere and corona? (3) Can 
we observe direct evidence of magnetic reconnection 
as a result of flares? To answer these questions, a 
new generation of instruments and new models are 
needed. New observations would require high spatial and 
temporal resolutions as well as accuracy in the polarization 
measurements. They also need to be multiwavelength 
so information from the photosphere to corona can be 
combined to provide a three-dimensional view of this 
physical problem. Observations from new space missions 
such as TRACE and planned missions such as Solar-B and 
improved ground-based instruments such as SOLIS may 
shed light on this research area. 


Bibliography 

Chen J, Wang H, Zirin H and Ai G 1994 Sol. Phys. 154 261 

Hagyard M J, Smith J B, Teuber D and West E A 1984 Sol. 
Phys. 91 115 

Ishii T, Kurokawa H and Takeuchi T 1998 Astrophys. J. 499 
898 

Lites B W and Low B C 1997 Sol. Phys. 174 91 

Tanaka K 1991 Sol. Phys. 136 133 

Wang H 1993 The Magnetic and Velocity Fields of Solar Active 
Regions (IAU Colloquium 141(Beijing)) ed H Zirin, G Ai 
and H Wang 

Wang H 1997 Sol. Phys. 174 163 

Zirin H 1988 Astrophysics of the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Zirin H and Liggett M 1987 Sol. Phys. 132 173 


Haimin Wang 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flare Models 


Even though rrares have been observed on the Sun for 
nearly 150 years, their origin remains a mystery. At the 
present time there is no generally accepted model which 
explains why they occur, but there do exist models which 
successfully explain certain limited aspects such as the 
formation of flare loops and ribbons. Before discussing 
particular models, we review the constraints imposed on 
models by the observed properties of flares. 


Principal observational constraints 

In constructing models, theorists are constrained by 
several basic properties of flares which have been 
firmly established by observations (see also SOLAR FLARE 
OBSERVATIONS). One of the most important is that they occur 
in a PLASMA environment dominated by magnetic fields. 
Magnetic energy is the only source of energy in the solar 
atmosphere which is capable of producing the radiative 
and kinetic energy output of large flares. Prior to the 
onset of a flare the magnetic energy density (B?/210, 
where jig is the permeability of free space) of a 100 G 
(10-* T) coronal field is about 40 J m~°. By comparison, 
the thermal energy density (nkT, where k is Boltzman’s 
constant) is about 0.01 J m~ since the coronal particle 
density, n, and temperature, 7, are about 10 m~? and 
10-° K respectively. Finally, the kinetic energy density 
(m,nv*/2, where m, is the proton rest mass) in the corona is 
about 10° J m~? assuming that the velocity, v, is of the order 
of 1 km s~!—the convective velocity imparted by flows at 
the photospheric level. The gravitational energy density 
(m,ngh, where g is the solar surface gravity of 247 m s~”) 
is of the order of 0.04 J m~? assuming that the average 
mass height, h, is about 10° m. Thus, the magnetic energy 
density is about three orders of magnitude greater than 
any of the other types. Since large flares typically have an 
energy of 10” J (10% erg) and a volume in the range from 
10*4 m? to 10% m3, an average energy density of 1-10 J m~? 
is required. Only the magnetic energy density is in this 
range, so non-magnetic models of flares are ruled out. 

Another important constraint is that the slow 
movements of suNspots and other magnetic features in 
the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE are unaffected by the occurrence of 
flares. This is because the plasma in the photosphere is 
almost 10° times denser than the plasma in the corona 
where flares originate. Consequently, it is very difficult for 
disturbances in the tenuous corona to affect the extremely 
massive plasma of the photospheric layer. Field lines 
mapping from the corona to the photosphere are said to be 
‘line-tied’ to the photosphere, meaning that the footpoints 
of coronal field lines are effectively stationary over the 
timescale of a flare. 

Perhaps the most important observational constraint 
is the rapid timescale of the initial flare development. From 
observations it has been estimated that as much as 10” J 
(10% erg) is generated in the form of thermal and kinetic 
energy during the first few minutes after onset. This is an 
extremely short timescale for an organized process to be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


occurring over a region whose size is of the order of 10° km 
(about 10 times larger than the diameter of the Earth), 
and it implies dynamic velocities of the order of 100- 
1000 km s~!—close to the speed at which magnetic and 
acoustic waves propagate in the corona. The implication 
of such a large energy output in so short a time is that 
about 10% of the available magnetic energy in a volume of 
10'> km? is converted to thermal and kinetic energy within 
a few wave-travel times. In other words, flares require a 
process which converts magnetic energy with an efficiency 
of the order of 10%, or greater, on a timescale which is 
only a few times greater than the wave travel time. This 
combination of efficiency and speed is not easy to explain 
theoretically. 

There are some additional constraints that are 
especially important for the class of flares known as 
large, two-ribbon flares or long duration events (see 
SOLAR FLARE CLASSIFICATION). After the initial rapid phase, 
these flares continue to produce a sustained, low level 
emission for over 10 h. They stand in stark contrast 
to the more numerous, short-lived events (<30 min), 
known as compact flares. Long duration events give 
rise to two bands of chromospheric emissions called flare 
ribbons which slowly propagate away from one another. 
(Compact flares may also produce ribbons which are 
usually called ‘knots’ because they are small and short- 
lived.) The flare ribbons lie at the feet of dense, x-ray 
emitting loops often referred to as ‘post’-flare loops with 
the word ‘post’ in quotes to indicate that nowadays they 
are considered an integral part of the flare process, rather 
than simply an aftereffect. High resolution images and 
Doppler measurements have established that the motion 
of both ribbons and loops are only apparent and are 
caused by the progressive lighting up and dimming of 
the regions through which they propagate. Models for 
large, two-ribbon flares must be able to account for these 
apparent motions as well as the long lifetime of the events 
themselves. 


Difficulties of constructing flare models 

It is sometimes thought that the only requirement for a 
successful theoretical model is that its predictions match 
observations. What is forgotten in this simplistic view is 
that any model can be made to match a particular set of 
observations to any degree of accuracy desired simply by 
including enough adjustable, free parameters. When the 
number of free parameters reaches the point where there 
is one for each observational measurement, the model 
becomes simply a reorganization of the observational 
data. Thus a successful model should not only match 
observations, but also have as few free parameters as 
possible. 

Virtually all quantitative flare models are formulated 
as solutions of initial boundary-value problems. These 
problems are comprised of a system of differential 
equations, a set of boundary conditions, and an initial 
state. Since the underlying system of differential equations 
for all models are those of electromagnetism (i.e. Maxwell’s 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


equations) and Newtonian mechanics (for continuous 
media), models differ from one another in their choice of 
boundary and initial conditions and in the approximations 
which are made to solve the equations. 

Most flare models use the MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC 
(MHD) approximation. Although these equations do 
not provide a description of kinetic processes, they 
nevertheless provide a complete and _ self-consistent 
description of the fluid behavior of the coronal plasma, 
and what is equally important, they can be solved in many 
circumstances where more complete descriptions cannot. 
Used alone, the MHD equations do not provide any 
information on the production of radio waves or energetic 
particles, both of which constitute a major database for the 
flare phenomenon. Thus, several flare models attempt to 
augment the MHD system by adding additional equations. 
For example, some energetic particle models use an MHD 
solution to provide electric and magnetic fields as inputs 
into the exact equation which describes the motion of the 
particles in electromagnetic fields (ie. the Lorentz force 
equation). 

Boundary conditions for flare models are fairly well 
constrained by observations. Observations have already 
established that ACTIVE REGIONS, with complex magnetic 
fields, are most likely to flare. Particularly favored are 
active regions containing multiple sunspots with opposite 
magnetic polarities in close proximity to one another and 
undergoing motions which act to shear the magnetic field. 
These observations imply that currents are built up in 
the corona prior to a flare by the transport of magnetic 
flux from the convection zone into the corona and by the 
stresses exerted on the existing coronal field by the shear 
flows in the photosphere. 

The greatest uncertainty in the development of 
quantitative flare models is caused, not by the boundary 
conditions, but by the initial conditions because these are 
very poorly constrained by observations. Since the flare 
is a magnetic phenomenon, the magnetic vector field is 
the most important variable which needs to be specified 
in the initial state. Unfortunately, the magnetic field is 
the one quantity which cannot be directly observed in the 
corona at the present time. The problem of determining 
the coronal magnetic field is further exacerbated by 
the fact that it is only the component of the magnetic 
field generated by currents flowing in the corona that 
contributes to the energy release. The component of 
the field due to photospheric sources remains invariant 
during a flare and so cannot contribute to the energy 
release. The contribution to the magnetic field from the 
coronal currents is estimated to be anywhere between 
10-50% of the total field. Thus, even if the coronal 
magnetic field could be directly observed, it would be 
necessary to measure its strength and its orientation to 
an accuracy of about 10% everywhere in the flare region 
before such measurements could be used to formulate 
initial conditions. The best that can be done at the 
present time is to infer the coronal magnetic structure from 
variations in the density and temperature of the coronal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


plasma. This is done by assuming that such variations 
occur only across field lines, so that contours of constant 
density or temperature follow field lines. However, there 
are many instances where this assumption is known to be 
violated (e.g. density and temperature structures in flare 
loops). 

Even if the system of equations, the boundary condi- 
tions, and the initial conditions could be accurately estab- 
lished by observations, there would still be the enormous 
mathematical difficulty of actually solving the governing 
equations. Fluid equations, with or without the addition 
of Maxwell’s equations, are notoriously difficult to solve 
because of their high degree of nonlinearity. For example, 
there is still no generally accepted analytical description 
for ordinary fluid turbulence, let alone MHD turbulence. 
Some progress has been made using numerical methods, 
but these methods cannot handle the tremendous range 
of scales involved in flares. To provide a complete de- 
scription of all phenomena, a flare model should include 
scales as small as 10-? m (e.g. an electron gyro radius) and 
as large as 10° m (or even greater) if the flare produces a 
SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION. 

Most modelers, whether they use analytical or 
numerical techniques, are forced to simplify the geometry 
of their initial configuration to the point where it is far 
removed from the complexity of the actual solar field. 
However, such models are still valuable because they 
provide a quantitative way to test whether a proposed flare 
mechanism is really consistent with the laws of physics. 
It will be many years before it is technically possible to 
solve the complete set of plasma equations using initial 
and boundary conditions which actually match reality. 


Storage models 

Most flare models are based on mechanisms which release 
magnetic energy stored in the corona. The energy is 
stored in the form of coronal currents, and it is released 
when these currents become unstable due to the slow 
evolution of the normal magnetic field component at the 
photosphere. The continual emergence of new flux from 
the convection zone and the shuffling of the footpoints 
of closed coronal field lines causes stresses to build up 
in the coronal field. Eventually, the stress exceeds a 
threshold beyond which a stable equilibrium cannot be 
maintained, and the field undergoes a rapid transition to 
a configuration with a lower magnetic energy. 

Because the magnetic pressure greatly exceeds the 
gas pressure in the corona, the currents associated with 
the magnetic energy stored there must either be force-free 
(i.e. field aligned) or confined to thin layers (i.e. current 
sheets). In other words, the energy cannot be stored as 
a distributed, non-force-free current since such a current 
cannot be in equilibrium in the absence of any significant 
gas pressure. Models for magnetic energy storage in 
the corona can be divided into those based on force-free 
currents and those based on current sheets. A well-known 
example of the latter is the emerging flux model illustrated 
in figure 1. As new flux emerges from the photosphere it 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ve, current 
“emerging MQ sheet 
“i flux SS 
i eK ? 
bet 
(a) 
surge 
- ies rapid 
“2 * =reconnection 
heat — 
™ 
Ha knot (b) 


Figure 1. The emerging flux model of impulsive flares. In (a) a 
current sheet forms as a newly emerging loop collides with a 
pre-existing field. In (b) the onset of a resistive microinstability 
produces rapid reconnection of the field lines. 


forms a current sheet as it presses against field structures 
that are already present. As the current in the sheet grows, 
it may then reach a critical threshold for the onset of a 
micro-instability. Once such an instability occurs, it is 
possible that the local resistivity of the plasma will increase 
so much that the current sheet is rapidly dissipated by 
means of magnetic reconnection. This process changes 
the connectivity of the field lines and releases most of the 
stored magnetic energy, but in order to be effective in flares 
it must occur very rapidly. How such rapid reconnection 
occurs is still a matter of debate. 

In order for the emerging flux model to work for large 
flares, the pre-existing current sheet must be stable for a 
period of the order of a day or more. However, numerical 
simulations suggest that coronal current sheets reconnect 
so rapidly that a stable sheet cannot be sustained for such 
a long period of time. The success of x-ray bright-point 
models, which assume that current sheets are dissipated 
as soon as they try to form, reinforces this view (see SOLAR 
CORONA: X-RAY BRIGHT POINTS). Also, since no flux is ejected 
in the emerging flux model, it cannot explain the coronal 
mass ejections that are associated with very large flares. 
Thus, the emerging flux model is limited to small flares. 

One type of force-free model that has received much 
attention is based on trying to create an eruption by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


shearing the footpoints of an arcade of loops. In two- 
dimensional force-free configurations with translation 
symmetry (i.e. sometimes referred to as 25 D configura- 
tions) shearing causes the arcade to smoothly expand out- 
wards towards a fully opened state without ever produc- 
ing an eruption. It is not yet known for certain whether 
an arcade will maintain a stable equilibrium as its foot- 
points are sheared in less symmetric systems. Even if no 
loss of mechanical equilibrium or stability occurs, it is still 
possible to create an eruption of the arcade by invoking a 
resistive instability as is done in the emerging flux model. 
Shearing an arcade leads to the formation of a current sheet 
which can undergo reconnection, but again there must ex- 
ist a critical threshold for the sudden onset of a micro- 
instability. 

Another way for an arcade to form is for part of a 
flux rope to emerge from the convection zone, through 
the photosphere and into the corona. If the axis of the 
flux rope remains below the surface, then a simple arcade 
exists. However, if the axis of the flux rope emerges into the 
corona, the arcade will contain a flux rope. The presence 
of the flux rope may make it possible for the arcade to lose 
equilibrium and erupt even when no current sheet or x line 
is present. 

Figure 2 shows a quantitative flux-rope model which 
demonstrates the underlying principle of this process. The 
model has the drawback that it is two dimensional and, 
therefore, does not include the effect of anchoring the 
end of the flux ropes in the photosphere. The evolution 
of the configuration takes place in two phases. During 
the storage phase, the evolution is assumed to be slow 
relative to all other timescales, so that at any given moment 
the configuration is very well approximated by a static 
equilibrium. The second phase occurs when the sources 
reach a critical distance, which is of the order of the initial 
height of the flux rope. At this point the equilibrium 
vanishes, and the flux rope jumps toa higher altitude. This 
process releases a small fraction (~5%) of the magnetic 
energy stored in the system, and creates a large-scale 
current sheet as shown. The extent and lifetime of this 
current sheet depends on how fast reconnection occurs. 
Without reconnection, there is no further release of energy, 
and the jump of the flux rope is finite, but if reconnection 
occurs, the flux rope can continue to move upwards 
indefinitely. 

At least two important issues still remain to be 
investigated before the viability of flux-rope models can 
be satisfactorily determined. First of all, there is the 
unknown effect of anchoring the ends of the flux rope 
in the photosphere. Although anchoring the ends might 
make an eruption more difficult, it is not clear that it would 
prevent a loss of equilibrium from occurring. The motion 
of the middle of the flux rope relative to the ends would 
constitute a type of external kink, and it is known that 
kink modes are not stabilized by anchoring the ends of 
a flux rope if the rope is sufficiently long. Second, there 
is the question of whether the two-dimensional flux-rope 
equilibria will remain stable to the kink instability as the 
system approaches the equilibrium point. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


; ; A = 0.96 
7 
6 y 
os ER I oA 
= A = 0.96 
= 8 
oe é 
m4 
o 
Qo 
S 
mm 37- current sheet 
E ooh 
oy -4 0 4 
2” - AF 250. 
Sees : 
1 - a Ze 
critical point Y 
0) I | 1 ; 7 - 
0 2 4 6 8 on 0 4 
Source Separation 2A x 


Figure 2. An arcade model containing a flux rope. Eruption 
occurs when the source regions in the photosphere are pushed 
together. A current sheet forms only after the eruption begins. 


Models for flare loops and ribbons 

Flare loops range from temperatures of 104 K to 3 x 
10’ K with the cooler loops nested below the hotter ones. 
Remarkably, the loops at the low temperature are two 
orders of magnitude cooler than the ambient coronal 
plasma even though they lie underneath a region which is 
an order of magnitude hotter than the ambient corona. It 
is generally accepted that the cool loops are formed from 
the hot loops by a thermal instability. Such an instability 
is possible in the solar atmosphere because of the non- 
black-body behavior of the corona. The coronal radiative 
loss function decreases with temperature in the range from 
10° K to 10’ K, so in this range a temperature perturbation 
can lead to runaway cooling. 

The footpoints of the flare loops map to Ha emission 
features in the CHROMOSPHERE that are known as flare 
ribbons. (Ha refers to the red light emitted in the Balmer 
transition of the hydrogen atom.) Very roughly, the 
outermost edge of the hot x-ray loops maps to the outer 
edge of the ribbons while the innermost edge of the cool 
Ha loops maps to the inner edge of the ribbons. During 
the course of the flare the separation between the ribbons 
increases, while the loops grow larger. 

At the present time, MAGNETIC RECONNECTION is thought 
to be the only mechanism which can account for the 
apparent motion of the flare loops and ribbons. Although 
some alternate mechanisms have been suggested in 
the past, these mechanisms have become less tenable 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


x 


=! Xx, xy 


Figure 3. Relation between the rate of reconnection, as measured 
by the electric field at an x line, and the motion of the flare 
ribbons. 


as observations have improved. For example, simple 
expansion of the loops due to outward motion of the 
plasma from the flare site has been ruled out by Doppler- 
shift measurements of Ha loops. These measurements 
show that the plasma in the Ha loops flows downward 
at speeds of 100-500 km s7! during the time that the loops 
appear to be expanding upwards. Thus the loop motions 
are not due to mass motions of the plasma, but rather to 
the continual propagation of an energy source onto new 
field lines. 

In a two-dimensional configuration there is a simple 
relation between the rate of reconnection and the motion 
of the photospheric footpoints of the field lines mapping 
to the x line. Consider the configuration shown in figure 3. 
Using Faraday’s equation, the electric field Eo, at the x line 
can be written as 


Eo = Vo By (xo, 0) (1) 


where x is the location of the outer edge of the ribbon, 
B, (Xo, 0) is the vertical magnetic field located at xp, and Vo 
is the apparent velocity of the ribbon edge. This relation 
is model independent except for the assumptions that an 
x line exists, that the configuration is two dimensional, and 
that the field lines are tied to a stationary photosphere. 

If one assumes that the outer edges of the flare ribbons 
lie at the footpoints of the field lines mapping to the x line, 
then it is possible to use equation (1) to determine the 
electric field in the corona as a function of time, as shown 
in figure 4 for a flare observed by the skyLaB space station 
in 29 July 1973. A few minutes after flare onset the electric 
field for this event reaches a peak value of about 2 V cm7!, 
but then declines until it is an order of magnitude weaker 
a few hours later. 

Although one can argue that the loop and ribbon 
motions are strong evidence of reconnection , they are, 
nevertheless, indirect evidence. In principle, x-ray 
observations of sufficient spatial resolution and sensitivity 
can provide direct evidence. However, the ability to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


200 
29 July 1973 
150 is 
a! in 
§ %, 
= 100 %, 
ie) Xo 
4 ” 
ica) 
50 % a 
Ode 
0 A 
14 15 16 
flare onset U-T- (hours) 


Figure 4. Coronal electric field inferred for the flare on 29 July 
1973. The upper curve is obtained using formula (1) in the text, 
while the lower curve is based on a more elaborate 
three-dimensional potential extrapolation of the surface field. 


determine whether or not there is a reconnection site in 
the corona depends very much on theoretical expectations 
of what such a site should look like. High resolution 
images obtained from x-ray telescopes on the Japanese 
satellite YOHKOH show several features that are suggestive 
of areconnection site in the corona. These features include: 
(i) a hard x-ray source located above the soft x-ray loops; 
(ii) cusp structures suggestive of either an x type or a y 
type neutral line; (iii) bright features at the top of the soft 
x-ray loops; and (iv) high temperature plasma along the 
field lines mapping to the tip of the cusp. 

Some of the cusp-shaped loops observed by Yohkoh 
havea linear, trunk-like feature which extends from the top 
of the cusp all the way down to the innermost arch of the 
flare loop system. The hottest regions in the loop system 
do not lie in the trunk feature but along the edges of the 
cusp formed by the outermost loop. The trunk feature is 
both cooler and denser than the plasma surrounding it. 

Figure 5 shows a theoretical model which explains 
the loop structures and evolution in terms of reconnection 
and evaporation. According to this model, flare loops 
are created by chromospheric evaporation on field lines 
mapping to slow-mode shocks in the vicinity of the 
neutral line (sometimes referred to as Petschek shocks). 
These slow shocks are somewhat different than the 
standard MHD slow-mode shocks because the conduction 
of heat along the field lines causes them to dissociate 
into isothermal subshocks and conduction fronts. The 
shocks annihilate the magnetic field in the plasma flowing 
through them, and the thermal energy which is thus 
liberated is conducted along the field to the chromosphere. 
This in turn drives an upward flow of dense, heated 
plasma back towards the shocks, and compresses the lower 
regions of the chromosphere downward. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


current sheet 


slow shock 
| Mach 2 jet 


conduction front termination shock 


— shock enhanced 
cooling region 
uv loops (10° K) 
~ Ha loops aot K) 


condensation 
evaporation downflow 
upflow - 
chromospheric y flare ribbon 
downflow 


Figure 5. Model diagram for a flare loop system formed by 
reconnection in the corona (only the left half is shown). In this 
particular model, the outflow from the reconnection region 
creates upward and downward supermagnetosonic jets, but 
only the downward jet is shown in the figure. Solid curves 
indicate boundaries between various plasma regions, while 
dashed ones indicate magnetic field lines. 


In order for strong slow shocks to form on the 
field lines below the X-line, the outflow from it must be 
supermagnetosonic with respect to the fast-mode wave 
speed. If the magnetic fields are sufficiently strong, the 
outflow from the X-line produces two supermagnetosonic 
jets—one directed upward and the other downward. 
Because of the obstacle presented by the closed field lines 
attached to the photosphere, the lower jet terminates at a 
fast-mode shock after traveling a short distance. Below 
this termination shock the flow is deflected along the 
field, and only weak, field aligned slow-mode shocks 
are present. Consequently, the magnetic energy released 
below the termination shock is relatively small. 

When the magnetic field is relatively strong, the fast- 
mode Mach number of the jets is about two, but as 
the field decreases, the Mach number decreases and the 
jets eventually become submagnetosonic. The transition 
occurs when the ratio of gas to magnetic pressure (plasma 
B) exceeds (3 — y)/y in the x-ray loops where y is the ratio 
of specific heats. For y = 3 this gives B = 2, which for 
typical loop parameters corresponds to a coronal magnetic 
field strength of a few gauss. 

When the fast-mode Mach number becomes less than 
one, the lower jet disappears and almost all of the outflow 
from the neutral line is directed upwards. Only a relatively 
slow flow, aligned along the separatrices, remains below 
the neutral line. An upward reconnection jet is still 
present, but it is located at the upper end of a current 
sheet which may extend far out into the corona. Slow 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


shocks are still present below the neutral line at the lower 
tip of the current sheet, but they are aligned along the 
separatrices and are much weaker than the Petschek-type 
shocks. Because of the weaker shocks, the evaporation 
process is greatly reduced and the plasma density in the 
loops becomes too low to trigger a thermal condensation. 
For a while, condensations remain on the loops at lower 
altitude, but, eventually, as the older loops continue to cool 
and disappear, the trunk feature vanishes. 
The ribbon width, W, is approximately determined 
by 
W = Volo (2) 


where Vp is the ribbon velocity and 1, is the cooling time 
due to conduction and radiation acting together. For 
the 29 July 1973 flare observed by Skylab, the observed 
densities and temperatures imply cooling times ranging 
from fo, = 15 min (n = 10’” m~%) shortly after flare onset to 
te: = 240 min (n = 10'° m~*) 10 h after onset. When used 
in equation (2), these values predict ribbon widths which 
agree well with the observed widths. 

The thickness, Wj, of the region of the ribbon which 
maps to the reconnection jet, is roughly 


W; = (Ve/Vj)L; 


where V, is the speed of the plasma flow in the jet. 
Assuming V, = 10° km s7!, Vg = 10 km s“!, and L; = 
10° km, gives W, = 10° km which is a little more than an 
arcsecond in angular size. This value of Wj is consistent 
with the dimensions of the thin (*1”) region of redshifted 
chromospheric plasma observed at the outer edge of flare 
ribbons. The redshift is thought to be produced by the 
bombardment of the chromosphere by energetic particles 
produced in the region of the jet. 

One possible explanation for the lower part of the 
trunk feature is that it is created by the onset of the 
thermal instability which produces the cool Ha loops 
lower down. A very similar feature has been found 
in numerical simulations which include radiation but 
not conduction. In these simulations the termination 
shock triggers a thermal instability in the downstream 
region, and as the reconnection site travels upward, the 
condensing region forms a trunk-like feature on the static 
loops. 

Just as for reconnection in the geomagnetic tail (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC TAIL), reconnection in 
flare loops leads to a relaxation of stretched field lines. 
In the geomagnetic tail, this relaxation is referred to 
as dipolarization, but in flare loops it is referred to as 
shrinkage. What causes the shrinkage is the upward 
retreat of the neutral line. When a field line is connected 
to the neutral line it is cusp-shaped, but as the neutral line 
moves further up, the field line becomes rounded. The 
expected shrinkage from this effect is about 20-30% for 
typical flare loops, and this matches the observed values 
fairly closely. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Priest E R 1982 Solar Magnetohydrodynamics (Dodrecht: 
Reidel) 

Somov B V 1992 Physical Processes in Solar Flares (Dodrecht: 
Kluwer) 

Svestka Z 1976 Solar Flares (Dodrecht: Reidel) 

Tandberg-Hanssen E and Emslie A G 1988 The Physics 
of Solar Flares (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Terry G Forbes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flare Observations 


Flares are caused by the release of magnetic energy up 
to some 10” J in the solar atmosphere within a few 
minutes (figure 1). The energy input causes a myriad 
of phenomena including the flaring up of the region and 
its surroundings at all wavelengths from radio to gamma 
rays, the acceleration of elementary particles to relativistic 
energies and the launch of a shock wave. Flares may be 
responsible for the heating of the solar corona and for 
large-scale restructuring of the corona. The largest ones 
influence interplanetary space and substantially affect the 
Earth’s lower ionosphere. Solar flares have been a major, 
unexplained problem of astrophysics for more than a 
hundred years. 


History of solar flare observations 

The history of flare observations is a fascinating unfolding 
of a persisting enigma and is full of surprises. The first 
solar flare was recorded independently by RC CARRINGTON 
and R Hodgson on 1 September 1859. They recognized 
intensely bright patches close to a group of dark sunspots. 
In retrospect the patches can be identified as a white light 
flare of the photospheric continuum emission, consistent 
with the great, terrestrial magnetic storm that occurred a 
few hours later. With the visual technique at that time, 
flares were extremely rare phenomena. That changed a 
few years later with the newly developed spectroscope. 
C A Young, C Secchi and J N LockyER noted much more 
frequent brightenings near sunspots in certain spectral 
lines, particularly in the hydrogen Ha line originating 
at a higher altitude, in the chromosphere. G E HALE’S 
spectrohelioscope made this method sensitive enough in 
the early 1930s to record several such Ha flares per active 
day. 

The gradual progress in observations and under- 
standing changed pace in 1944, when J s HEY serendip- 
itously discovered solar radio emissions and associated 
some of them with flares. At about the same time, 
SE Forbush noticed ground-level cosmic ray enhance- 
ments associated with major solar flares. These discov- 
eries could only mean that the flare phenomenon is not 
confined to thermal plasma, but includes high-energy par- 
ticles and involves the corona. Rocket flights in 1959 by 
T A Chubb, H FRIEDMAN and R W Krepin detected flare x- 
rays up to 125 keV and again opened a new dimension. 
From x-ray emissions, the fundamental conclusion was 
drawn later that accelerated electrons were not a periph- 
eral phenomenon, but recipients of a considerable fraction 
of the primary energy released in flares. At the same time 
soft x-rays from flares were discovered. They usually peak 
when the hard x-rays have already disappeared and most 
of the flare energy resides in the more than 10 million de- 
gree soft x-ray emitting plasma. With the discovery of 
gamma-ray line emission in 1972 by E L Chupp and col- 
laborators, the >1 MeV ion component of flare particle ac- 
celeration became accessible. There is now observational 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Encircled is the ultraviolet emission of a small flare 
observed by TRACE. It has resulted from the collision of two 
expanding magnetic loops. The two loops brightened, in 
particular the point of contact, where the magnetic field was 
observed to reconnect. The size of the image is 175 x 175 Mm. 


evidence for the suggestion that ions get a similar share of 
the primary energy release as electrons. 

Recent space missions, including SKYLAB, SOLAR 
MAXIMUM MISSION, YOHKOH and SOHO, as well as new ground- 
based observatories, both for optical and radio waves, 
have been essential in the detection of flares outside of 
active regions. First, CORONAL BRIGHT POINTS in thermal soft 
x-ray emission were noted, then smaller events in the 
network of the quiet Sun granulation and finally even in 
the interior of supergranular cells were discovered. These 
microflares are about a million times smaller than the one 
Carrington and Hodgson discovered, and they occur at a 
rate of thousands per second on the Sun at any time. 

A general flare scenario has emerged in which the 
flare energy is released in the corona and accelerates or 
heats particles to an energy of 20 keV and more. The 
particles precipitate into the dense chromosphere, where 
they collide and deposit their energy. The chromospheric 
material is heated to the temperatures seen in soft x-rays 
up to tens of millions of degrees. It expands and adds 
new high-temperature plasma to the atmosphere above 
the transition region. The upward motion usually fills 
up coronal loops, but the motion may continue in an 
expansion of these loops. 

In some cases, the above flare scenario may be only a 
minor part of a much larger destabilization of the corona, 
when the magnetic confinement of a considerable part 
of the corona is removed. It expands and is expelled 
by magnetic forces in a coronal mass ejection (CME). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-300 -720 


-540 360 -180 


Figure 2. The source region of narrowband spikes, identified with the Phoenix radio spectrometer, has been observed with the Very 
Large Array at 0.33 GHz. The intensity is presented with contours and is apparently at high altitude, in projection near the solar limb. 
The photospheric magnetic field is shown in gray scale together with the extrapolated potential field lines. Enhanced thermal radio 
emission at 1.44 GHz (contours) is also present near the active regions. 


The shock front associated with this motion is also a site 
of particle acceleration, particularly of high-energy solar 
cosmic rays observed on Earth at ground level. 


Types and phases of flares 

Flares vary greatly in their spatial shapes and in the relative 
intensities at different wavelengths. Considering this 
observed variety, it is not surprising that many attempts 
have been made to classify flares. 


(a) The archetypical flare is impulsive in time and 
‘compact’ in space. It occurs in loops of an active 
region, which confine most of the energy, i.e. the 
accelerated particles and the heated plasma. Thus 
it is also referred to as a ‘contained’ flare. 

(b) A very spectacular class combines large flares 
occurring at higher altitude. They are often preceded 
by the disappearance of a prominence and sometimes 
related to a coronal mass ejection. In view of their 
longer duration they are called gradual or ‘long- 
duration events’, and in Ha they are often seen as 
‘two-ribbon flares’ and ‘eruptive’. 

(c) High coronal flares occur at even higher altitude. 
They are responsible for metric type III radio 
bursts (cf SOLARSPECTROSCOPY: COHERENT PLASMA EMISSION) 
and interplanetary electron events, both caused 
by electron beams propagating into interplanetary 
space. The energy release may occur at altitudes of 
half a solar radius or more above the photosphere 
(figure 2). 

(d) In quiet regions of the Sun, flares observed in the 
emissions of the coronal plasma are very small in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


energy (some 10° to 10” J) and reach heights of only 
a few thousand kilometers. They have been termed 
network flares because of their preferred location 
above the magnetic network of the chromosphere 
(figure 3) and may be related to ‘explosive events’ 
and ‘blinkers’ observed previously in the transition 
region. The largest network flares have been known 
since the 1970s as coronal bright points (see SOLAR 
CORONA: X-RAY BRIGHT POINTS). 


There is little doubt that the primary cause of the large 
variety originates in the wide range of possible plasma 
parameters and unstable magnetic configurations in the 
energy release region of flares. In active regions of the 
corona, the magnetic field is generally observed to have 
a larger scale height than in quiet regions, although the 
actual energy release may take place on equally small 
scales and by similar processes. Differences in altitude 
reflect the change of the global field properties from 
predominantly closed at low altitudes to partially open 
at high altitudes. 

Flare emissions at different wavelengths do not peak 
at the same time. The general order of these emissions is 
shown in figure 4. Flares often start with a brightening in 
soft x-rays of a few keV due to chromospheric material 
freshly heated to coronal temperatures. Metric radio 
emission caused by escaping electron beams indicates that 
this pre-flare phase is not entirely thermal. The bulk of 
the flare energy is released in the impulsive phase (or 
non-thermal phase; see SOLAR FLARES: IMPULSIVE PHASE). Its 
start is characterized by the onset of hard x-ray (HXR) 
and centimetric gyrosynchrotron radiation of the energetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Microflare activity in a field of 280 x 280 solar radii of 
the quiet corona observed by EIT on SoHO. All pixels that have a 
>3o0 enhancement of the coronal emission measure (density) in 
at least one time step during a 42 min observation are indicated 
white. The large-scale structures in white follow the magnetic 
network in the chromosphere below. 


electrons (See SOLAR FLARES: PARTICLE ACCELERATION MECHANISMS 
and SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS) as Well as gamma-ray line 
emission caused by energetic ions (see SOLAR FLARES: GAMMA 
rays). Throughout the impulsive phase, the soft x-ray 
emission increases in size and total flux. Also the lower 
chromosphere is increasingly affected as evidenced by 
growing Ha emission. In the flash phase (or thermal or 
late phase) the non-thermal particles and their emissions 
have mostly disappeared and the impact of the energy 
release becomes fully visible. The temperature of the 
hot plasma decreases. Sometimes, however, gigantic soft 
x-ray emitting loops cool only slowly and indicate that 
energy is still released in this phase. Then the flare 
develops gradually into the decay phase, during which 
the thermal flare emissions disappear. In the dense flare 
plasma evaporated into the corona, hydrogen recombines 
and emits spectacular post-flare loops in Ha. They 
often show down-moving material. It is the signature 
of a cooling loop, the density scale height of which is 
decreasing. Thus the plasma evaporated by the flare is 
‘raining’ back to the chromosphere. 


General properties of flares 

The typical timing of the observed flare emissions suggests 
that the major energy release in the impulsive phase 
transfers the free energy into coronal particles, both 
electrons and ions. They reach energies far beyond the 
mean thermal values of the corona. Aconsiderable fraction 
of this energy has been found in 10-30 keV electrons. A 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hard X-rays 


microwaves 


decimetric radio 


intensity 


metric radio 


soft X-rays 


time 


Figure 4. A schematic evolution of flare intensities at different 
wavelengths. The phases indicated at the top vary greatly in 
duration. In large events, the preflare phase lasts 10 min, the 
impulsive phase 1 min, the flash phase 5 min and the decay 
phase 1h. 


characteristic of this initial particle acceleration is that it 
produces a power-law in energy distribution of the form 
E~*, where 6 is between 2 and 5. Electrons reach energies 
up to 300 MeV, ions up to 10 GeV. 

The energetic particles, generally called ‘non- 
thermal’, have a much reduced collisional cross section. 
They spiral along magnetic field lines due to the Lorentz 
force. A few escape into interplanetary space, but 
most follow loops and eventually penetrate the denser 
chromosphere where they quickly lose their energy by 
collisions. 

An impulsive flare of say 10” J is typically spread 
over an area of several 10'* m? as seen by its Ha imprint 
on the chromosphere. Limb flares indicate that such a flare 
may have a vertical extension of several 10’ m, and thus a 
volume of about 10” m3. 

The energization of particles far beyond thermal 
energies is no surprise since the corona is a plasma 
with a low ratio of thermal energy density to magnetic 
energy density. Any relevant release of magnetic energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


must therefore produce particles beyond thermal energies. 
If all the magnetic energy were released in the above 
example, an average field of 160 G must be annihilated. 
If this energy is taken up by plasma with an electron 
density of 10'° m~, each electron and ion receives 30 keV 
on average. The process that transfers electromagnetic 
energy into kinetic particle energy is not clear (see SOLAR 
FLARES: PARTICLE ACCELERATION MECHANISMS). Moreover, the 
number of electrons required to produce the observed 
HXR bremsstrahlung is astonishing. The actual value is 
model dependent and may be of the order of 10°° s~! or 
more. 

In an extreme scenario, the flare energy builds up 
in the corona and all of the flare energy is released there 
into accelerating non-thermal particles. The electrons are 
observable in their radio and hard x-ray emissions, the 
ions in gamma-ray lines. These particles precipitate after 
a few seconds and dump their energy into small spots 
of the chromosphere, which heat up to temperatures of 
several tens of millions of degrees. The larger the flare, 
the higher is the observed temperature. The hot material, 
ie. the flare plasma, explodes due to overpressure and 
expands along field lines into the corona with a velocity of 
several hundred km s~!. This phenomenon is observed in 
transition region lines and is termed ‘evaporation’. 

The above scenario does not fit all observations. It 
does not explain why flares usually start with thermal 
soft x-ray emission, when very few non-thermal particles 
are observed in the preflare phase. Similarly, the 
extended heating in the flash phase does not seem to be 
associated with particle acceleration. Furthermore, the 
ratio of gyrosynchrotron to soft x-ray emissions decreases 
to smaller flares, indicating relatively fewer relativistic 
electrons or smaller lifetimes. For these reasons, occasional 
or partial direct thermalization without acceleration 
cannot be completely excluded. 

In spite of the large variety, homologous flares 
occurring at the same site of an active region have also been 
reported. Homologous flares have similar energy and 
shape. They occur within hours and suggest a continuous 
energy build-up that is occasionally released. 


Flare sites 

Magnetic fields can best be measured in the photosphere, 
and thus flares can easily be located relative to 
photospheric magnetic features. As a rule, flares occur 
above the places in the photosphere with largest V x B, 
thus where the electric current has a maximum (figure 5). 
Most productive flare sites are regions in sunspots or 
groups of sunspots where new and oppositely directed 
magnetic field emerges from below. 

Large, ‘gradual’ flares often occur above ‘neutral’ 
lines in the photosphere, separating regions with opposite 
magnetic polarity. Neutral lines are bridged by arcades of 
loops. The Ha picture of flares in such structures shows 
two bright ribbons formed by the footpoints on each side 
of the neutral line. Flares usually appear above the part 
of the neutral line which has experienced most shear by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Map of the vertical current density (gray scale), 
vertical magnetic field (contours), and sites of Ha signatures of 
non-thermal electron precipitation (gray circle) and high coronal 
pressure (cross-hatched triangles) (courtesy of R C Canfield). 


different surface motions on both sides. The first bright 
He point appears near the neutral line. In the course of 
the impulsive phase, the maximum brightness drifts away 
to both sides and remains stable during the flash phase. 

In quiet regions, the most powerful microflares occur 
at the boundary of supergranular cells. The cellular 
structures are formed by large-scale convection below, 
sweeping frozen-in magnetic field lines to the down-draft 
region at the surface. There a complex, small-scaled 
entangled field builds up, the magnetic network. Time 
scales are a few tens of minutes, over which magnetic 
elements can be observed to appear and disappear. 
Enhanced coronal emissions and microflares in soft 
x-rays and high-temperature iron lines are predominantly 
associated with bipolar magnetic elements, consisting of 
a patch of up-going and adjacent down-going magnetic 
field. 

Photospheric observations clearly support the sce- 
nario that flare energy originates from electric currents in 
the corona or, which is equivalent, from free magnetic en- 
ergy in excess of the potential value defined by the pho- 
tospheric footpoints. Such currents may arise from the 
emergence of new magnetic loops penetrating into an old 
coronal magnetic field configuration. Another possible 
site is the separatrix between oppositely directed field lines 
forming a current sheet, e.g. above a cusp-shaped coronal 
structure. Currents can also build up by shearing or twist- 
ing footpoints in the photosphere. 

The unifying theme over the past few decades for 
releasing the energy stored in electric currents has been 
reconnection. Enormous current densities are necessary to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flare Observations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


make it happen fast enough. Such high current densities 
exist only on the scale of a few tens of meters. Thus it is 
not surprising that there is little direct evidence for the 
process. In fact, the actual reconnection region cannot 
have the above volume derived from the energy and 
particle requirement. Thus it is often assumed that the 
bulk energy release does not occur in the reconnection 
region, but in the outflows from it, where shocks and 
high-frequency turbulence release most of the energy and 
accelerate particles. 

It is not clear whether actual signatures of the outflow 
from flare acceleration sites have been observed. Potential 
candidates are hard x-ray sources observed above the 
soft x-ray loops and occasional narrowband spikes in 
decimeter radio waves. The narrowband spikes emitted 
by tens of thousands of sources smaller than about 100 km 
having electron densities between 10 and 10!” m- are 
still speculative diagnostics. 

Large flares do not consist of a single process 
continuously releasing energy during the impulsive phase. 
A fragmentation into ‘elementary flares’ has been noted 
first in hard x-rays involving time scales of some ten 
seconds. The total flux of hard x-ray flare emission often 
consists of a sequence of such peaks. They are sometimes 
resolved into shorter structures at radio waves of short 
centimeter and millimeter wavelength. Also, they loosely 
correlate with electron beams propagating upward in the 
corona and visible by their radio emission in meter waves. 
Both radio emissions strongly suggest an even higher 
degree of fragmentation. Narrowband radio spikes exceed 
even this number by another order of magnitude or two. 
Their duration is only a few tens of microseconds. 

The observational evidence indicates impulsive 
acceleration in a large number of small-scale regions. The 
flare process thus involves scales from a solar radius for 
the energy build-up and large-scale instability to about 
the ion gyroradius of few centimeters for acceleration and 
energy release. It involves both magnetohydrodynamic 
and kinetic plasma phenomena. 


Effects and consequences of solar flares 
The sudden release of energy in the tenuous corona 
disturbs the fragile equilibrium with the underlaying 
chromosphere. The transition region that couples the two 
layers adjusts to the new situation, and these transitory 
changes are observable in ultraviolet lines and jet motions. 
In the late phase, the flare energy input into the corona 
becomes well observable in all thermal coronal emissions. 
The role of this impulsive, localized injection of hot 
plasma for the heating of the corona is not yet fully 
understood. It is clear, however, that the flares observed 
in active regions contribute only about 20% of the energy 
loss by thermal radiations from ultraviolet to x-rays. The 
flare frequency distribution with energy is too flat to make 
flares below the sensitivity threshold obvious candidates 
for the rest. Microflares in quiet regions, on the other hand, 
seem to be relatively more important contributors and 
have a steep distribution suggesting a dominant role for 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the smaller events. The actual value of impulsive energy 
input is model dependent. At present, microflares are an 
attractive possibility to satisfy the requirement for coronal 
heating in quiet regions and coronal holes (see CORONAL 
HEATING MECHANISMS). 

As a rule of thumb, about one particle in a thousand 
accelerated by a flare escapes into interplanetary space. 
This number varies over orders of magnitude for different 
flares, and some particles are accelerated not by the flare 
process releasing magnetic energy, but by the shock front 
of the CME. Nevertheless, flares are frequent sources of 
energetic particles, both electrons and ions, in the solar 
wind, even though CMEs generally have a more dramatic 
impact on interplanetary space. 

Major flares considerably influence the Earth’s upper 
atmosphere. The prompt effects by flares must be 
distinguished from impinging CMEs, delayed several 
days by propagation. The enhanced x-ray emission 
of flares increases the ionization in the ionospheric 
D region at heights around 80 km. The increase 
in electron concentration leads to several phenomena 
grouped together under the name sudden ionospheric 
disturbance. The disturbance has a profound effect on the 
propagation of radio waves. A more dramatic ionization 
is caused by flare protons in the polar regions of the Earth, 
where the magnetosphere does not shield against solar 
cosmic rays. 

The average rate of major flares has been up to 
thousand times higher when the Sun was younger and 
rotating faster as can be observed for example today on 
the 70 million year old star EK Dra. The solar activity 
has markedly decreased after the age of about one billion 
years. It may increase again for a short time in some 
6 billion years, when the Sun will develop into the sub- 
giant branch and the convection layer will temporarily 
deepen. 


Bibliography 

Benz AO 1993 Plasma Astrophysics: Kinetic Processes in Solar 
and Stellar Coronae (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Gtidel M, Schmitt J H M M and Benz A O 1995 Microwave 
emission from x-ray bright solar-like stars: the main 
sequence and beyond Astron. Astrophys. 302 775-87 

Svestka Z, Jackson B V and Machado M E (eds) 1992 
Eruptive solar flares (Lecture Notes in Physics 399) 
(Berlin: Springer) 

Tandberg-Hanssen E and Emslie A G 1988 The Physics 
of Solar Flares (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Watanabe T, Kosugi T and Sterling A C (eds) 1998 
Observational Plasma Astrophysics: Five Years of Yohkoh 
and Beyond (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Arnold O Benz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Gamma Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Gamma Rays 


Overview 

Electromagnetic radiation extends over a very broad 
range of wavelengths, from gamma rays at the shortest 
wavelengths to radio waves at the long-wavelength end 
of the spectrum. In terms of photon energies, gamma rays 
are at the high end of the spectrum, starting at a few tenths 
of an MeV. This unit of energy (1 MeV = 1.6 x 107'° J) is 
used throughout this article. In solar FLARES, as at many 
other astrophysical sites, gamma-ray emission results 
from interactions of fast particles with an underlying 
ambient medium. These fast particles, protons, a particles, 
heavier nuclei and electrons, are accelerated from the 
ambient plasma by the electric fields associated with the 
complex and varying magnetic fields in the flaring solar 
atmosphere. Thus, solar flare gamma rays can teach us 
about the mechanisms that accelerate the particles, in 
particular those which yield particles with energies in 
excess of about 1 MeV, the minimum energy needed to 
produce gamma rays. This is quite important for the 
understanding of flare mechanisms, because such protons 
and a particles, along with lower-energy electrons, contain 
the bulk of the energy released in flares. In addition, 
the solar flare gamma-ray emission exhibits characteristic 
spectral lines which provide information on the elemental 
composition of the ambient solar atmosphere. 


Gamma-ray production mechanisms 

Solar flare gamma-ray emission exhibits both lines and 
continuum (figure 1). This theoretical spectrum extends 
over the entire energy range in which gamma rays from 
flares were observed. The lines appear at energies from 
about 0.5 to 8 MeV, whereas the continuum extends up to at 
least 1000 MeV. Up to about 1 MeV, and again from about 10 
to 50 MeV, the continuum is dominated by bremsstrahlung 
produced by the braking of the accelerated electrons in the 
Coulomb fields of the ambient nuclei and electrons. The 
bremsstrahlung produced by ultrarelativistic electrons is 
strongly collimated along the direction of motion of the 
electrons. The lines result from the deexcitation of nuclei, 
from the capture of neutrons and from the annihilation 
of positrons. The relevant nuclear cross sections are 
available from accelerator measurements. Deexcitation 
lines are either narrow or broad. Narrow lines result 
from the bombardment of ambient nuclei by accelerated 
protons and a particles, while broad lines result from 
the inverse reactions in which accelerated C and heavier 
nuclei collide with ambient H and He. The strongest 
narrow deexcitation lines are at 6.129 MeV from 'O, 
4.438 MeV from 'C, 1.779 MeV from 78Si, 1.634 MeV 
from 7°Ne, 1.369 MeV from *4Mg and 0.847 MeV from 
56Fe. The broad lines merge into a quasi-continuum above 
the bremsstrahlung between about 1 and 8 MeV. The 
broadening of the deexcitation lines is the consequence 
of the Doppler shifting of the essentially monochromatic 
radiation produced in the rest frame of the excited nuclei. 
In the case of the narrow lines the broadening is due to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


4Mge 20Ne 
“2 205} 


Photons cm~? MeV"! 


as 
@ 


‘ 


oe ce oes ee eee eee es Ce ‘ 
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 i) \ 
\ 


\ 
\ 


i0=1 10° 101 102 103 
Photon Energy (MeV) 


Figure 1. Theoretical solar flare gamma-ray spectrum 
constructed to fit the observations. 


recoil velocity of the excited nuclei which is quite small. 
The widths of the broad lines are much larger because 
the excited nuclei continue to move rapidly after their 
excitation. 

The strong, very narrow line at 2.223 MeV is 
due to neutron capture. All accelerated ions (protons 
and heavier nuclei) produce neutrons. The dominant 
neutron production mode in solar flares is the breakup 
of He nuclei, both in the accelerated particles and the 
ambient medium. Along with the deexcitation lines, 
the neutrons are produced at sites most likely located 
in the chromospheric portions of magnetic loops. The 
neutrons propagate both upward, away from the Sun, 
and downward into the photosphere where they are 
first thermalized by elastic collisions with protons and 
subsequently captured mostly by protons to produce 
deuterium and essentially monoenergetic photons at 2.223 
MeV, the binding energy of deuterium. The neutrons 
moving away from the Sun can reach Earth where they 
were detected with ground-based and Earth-orbiting 
instruments. The protons resulting from neutron decay 
in the interplanetary medium were also detected. 

The 2.223 MeV neutron capture line is very narrow 
because it is broadened by only the relatively low 
photospheric temperature of about 6000 K. Because the 
production site of the 2.223 MeV line is situated much 
deeper than that of the nuclear deexcitation lines, the 2.223 
MeV line can be attenuated resulting in limb darkening. 
This means that, for flares located at or near the solar Limp, 
the intensity of the line is much weaker than that of the 
deexcitation lines, in contrast with disk flares located far 
from the limb for which the 2.223 MeV line is the strongest. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Gamma Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


140000 J 
1991 June 4 
120000 
‘2100000 
n 
Z> 80000 
i‘ 
© 60000 
- 
fx. 40000 
MN 
20000 
gj Lees eee 
3:35 3:40 3:45 3:50 3:55 
Universal Time (hrs:min) 
oa 
i} 
= 1991 June 11 
n 
nN 
E 
<) 
— 
ral 
=) ‘a : 
Bad | 2.2 MeV line 
cs ry 
e m7 decay 
oe & @ 
° 
5 
A 10% 02 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 103 


Universal Time (Minutes) 


Figure 2. Time dependences. The upper panel exhibits the 
impulsive nature of the gamma-ray emission, along with the 
associated high-frequency radio emission. In contrast, the lower 
shows gamma-ray emission extending over many hours. 


Acompeting mode of neutron capture in the photosphere 
is that on 9He. This has been used to obtain information 
on the photospheric 3He abundance. 

Another strong narrow line is that at 0.511 MeV 
from positron annihilation (figure 1). The positrons result 
mainly from the decay of various short-lived radioactive 
nuclei, for example "'C, '°N and 0, which are also 
produced by interactions of the accelerated ions. The 
positrons subsequently either annihilate directly into 
0.511 MeV gamma rays or form positronium (an atom 
analogous to hydrogen with the nuclear proton replaced 
by a positron), which also annihilates into gamma rays. 
Positronium annihilation leads to both line emission 
at 0.511 MeV and continuum below this energy. The 
positronium continuum (denoted by Ps) can be seen in 
figure 1 at energies just below the e* (0.511 MeV) line. The 
width of this line is very sensitive to the temperature of 
the medium in which the positrons annihilate. For the 
calculations of figure 1 it was assumed that the positrons 
annihilate in the CHROMOSPHERE. 

Two strong lines result from the interactions of a 
particles with He. Fast and ambient *He nuclei fuse 
into ’Li and 7Be which are born either in their ground 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


states or in their respective excited states at 0.429 and 
0.478 MeV. Because of Doppler broadening, the ensuing 
deexcitations produce a relatively broad emission feature 
centered around 0.45 MeV (except under conditions of 
strong accelerated particle anisotropy when the two lines 
are narrowed into separate distinguishable features). The 
combined feature, generally referred to as the aq line, 
can be seen in figure 1, superposed on the Ps and 
bremsstrahlung continua. Along with the aa line, there are 
several other lines which can only be excited by accelerated 
a particles, as well as lines which are excited exclusively 
by accelerated *He nuclei. The latter are of interest because 
of the very large *He abundances observed in accelerated 
particles from impulsive flares (see below). The lines in 
question are at 1.00, 1.05 and 1.19 MeV and at 0.937, 1.04 
and 1.08 MeV from @ particle and 3He induced reactions, 
respectively. 

At high energies the continuum in some flares is 
dominated by pion decay radiation. Neutral and charged 
pions are produced mostly in high energy (greater than 
hundreds of MeV) proton—proton, proton-a particle and 
a—-a interactions. Neutral pions decay directly into two 
photons, while charged pions decay (via muons) into 
secondary electrons and positrons which produce gamma 
rays via bremsstrahlung and annihilation in flight. The 
combined pion decay radiation is shown in figure 1. 


The data and their implications 

Gamma-ray lines from solar flares were first observed in 
1972 with a detector flown on spacecraft. However, it 
was not until 1980 that routine observations of gamma- 
ray lines and continuum became possible with the much 
more sensitive spectrometer on the SOLAR MAXIMUM MISSION 
(SMM), a spacecraft that carried out successful solar 
observations for almost a decade. During that period, 
gamma-ray observations were also carried out with a 
smaller instrument on the Japanese spacecraft HINOTORI. 
During the 1990s, solar flare gamma rays have been 
detected with instruments on the COMPTON GAMMA RAY 
OBSERVATORY (CGRO). This observatory was launched in 
1991, and it is expected that it will continue to operate 
well into the first decade of the 21st century. Additional 
solar gamma-ray observations during this period were 
carried out with instruments on the GRANAT and Gamma- 
1 spacecraft, which are no longer operational, as well 
as with a small detector on the YOHKOH spacecraft which 
continues functioning. Starting in 2000, a new spacecraft, 
the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI), will 
carry out solar flare x-ray and gamma-ray observations 
(see also SOLAR FLARE OBSERVATIONS). The main implications 
of the already available data are the following. 


Flare energy release 

Hard x-ray observations of solar flares demonstrated that 
a major fraction of the released flare energy resides in 
subrelativistic electrons of energies above 0.02 MeV. This, 
together with the observed impulsiveness of the hard 
x-rays, strongly suggested that electron acceleration to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Gamma Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


these subrelativistic energies is closely associated with 
the process that releases the flare energy initially stored 
in magnetic fields. However, prior to the availability 
of gamma-ray data, the accepted paradigm was that 
ion acceleration is only a secondary manifestation of the 
flare energy release process. The gamma-ray emission, 
however, turned out also to be very impulsive. Moreover, 
recent studies based on the relative intensities of gamma- 
ray lines (in particular the *°Ne line at 1.634 MeV) 
provided new information on the energy distribution of 
the accelerated ions, requiring very large particle fluxes 
near 1 MeV. It was shown that the energy contained 
in such ions is comparable with that contained in the 
subrelativistic electrons. It thus appears that a large 
fraction of the released flare energy (approximately 10° 
erg for large flares) is indeed in accelerated particles, 
but equipartitioned between ions and electrons. The 
top panel in figure 2 shows the impulsive time profile 
of gamma-ray emission produced by ions and electrons 
of MeV energies compared with very high-frequency 
radio emission produced by electrons of similar energies 
gyrating in solar magnetic fields of hundreds of gauss. 


Particle acceleration and transport at the Sun 

Particles accelerated at or near the Sun are also observed 
by detectors on spacecraft in interplanetary space. These 
observations have led to the identification of two classes 
of acceleration events, impulsive and gradual. Among the 
various characteristics of the two classes, the composition 
of the accelerated particles is perhaps the most important. 
The impulsive events exhibit large enhancements of 
relativistic electrons relative to MeV protons, of 3He 
relative to *He and of heavy ions (particularly Fe) relative 
to the C and O. In contrast, the gradual events have 
smaller electron-to-proton ratios (e/p), and their heavy ion 
abundances and *He-to-*He ratios are similar to coronal 
values. The strong association of the gradual events 
with SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION (CME) suggests that the 
particles in these events are accelerated by CME driven 
shocks. On the other hand, the electron, 7He and heavy 
ion enrichments in impulsive events require selective 
acceleration which is most likely achieved by gyroresonant 
interactions with plasma waves. 

The gamma-ray observations have independently 
revealed the characteristics of impulsive acceleration. In 
particular, high e/p ratios are required by the observed 
continuum-to-line flux ratios and high 3He abundances are 
suggested both by the 2.223 MeV line observations, which 
require enhanced neutron production, and very recent 
findings in SMM data of 3He induced lines. In addition, 
there is evidence in the Granat data for highly enhanced 
heavy ion abundances based on broad lines from Ne, Mg, 
Si and Fe. 

The increased sensitivity of the CGRO detectors and 
the occurrence of large flares while these instruments were 
observing the Sun have shown that flares can produce 
gamma rays for very long periods of time. The data, 
showing gamma ray emission lasting for up to 8 h after 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the impulsive phase of the flare, can be seen in the bottom 
panel of figure 2. It is still not known whether the 
particles were accelerated in the impulsive phase of the 
flare and subsequently trapped in magnetic loops at the 
Sun or accelerated continuously over the duration of the 
emission. 

Additional information on accelerated particle trans- 
port at the Sun was obtained from observations of the 2.223 
MeV line and electron bremsstrahlung above 10 MeV. The 
limb darkening of the 2.223 MeV was observed from many 
solar flares, and it was demonstrated most dramatically by 
gamma-ray observations of a flare located 10 degrees be- 
hind the limb for which the 2.223 MeV line was absent 
while the deexcitation lines were still seen. Evidently, a 
considerable fraction of the interactions occurred in the 
CORONA, at a site which was visible from Earth orbit while 
the neutron capture site in the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE Was OC- 
culted. On the other hand, there is one observation of a 
behind-the-limb flare from which the 2.223 MeV line was 
seen. Because of the very strong expected attenuation, 
the observed 2.223 MeV line must have been produced 
by charged particles interacting on the visible hemisphere 
of the Sun. These particles were either accelerated by a 
coronal shock over a large volume, thereby producing an 
extended gamma-ray-emitting region, or accelerated lo- 
cally at the flare site whence they propagated along large 
loops to the visible hemisphere. 

In contrast to the limb darkening of the 2.223 MeV line 
emission, the bremsstrahlung above 10 MeV was observed 
to be limb brightened. This means that the flares from 
which such emission was observed were preferentially 
located close to the solar limb. This effect is most likely 
the consequence of particle motion in magnetic loops 
which converge toward the footpoints with the particles 
radiating most efficiently when they move parallel to the 
photosphere near the mirror points. 


Ambient medium abundances 

SMM and CGRO data on narrow gamma-ray lines have 
provided information on solar atmospheric elemental 
abundances (see SOLAR ABUNDANCES). While the C-to-O 
abundance ratio was found to be consistent with both 
photospheric and coronal values, the Mg-to-O, Si-to-O 
and Fe-to-O ratios turned out to be enhanced relative to 
the photospheric abundances but consistent with those 
of the corona. The first ionization potentials (FIPs) of 
Mg, Si and Fe are lower than those of C and O. The 
enhancement of the abundances of low-FIP elements in 
the corona relative to the photosphere has been known 
from both atomic spectroscopy and particle observations 
of gradual events, but the origin of this fractionation is still 
only poorly understood. The gamma-ray results, and the 
fact that the gamma-ray lines are most likely produced in 
the chromosphere, indicate that the FIP bias sets in already 
at relatively low heights in the solar atmosphere. Ongoing 
research on the wa line indicates that in the gamma-ray 
production region either the a particle or the ambient He 
abundance is enhanced, exceeding the standard He/H 
value of 0.1. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Gamma Rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

The early development of the field is summarized in the 
reviews of Chupp and of Ramaty and Murphy. Much of 
the recent observations and theory, the relationship of the 
gamma-ray studies to other solar flare investigations, as 
well as a detailed historical review (by Chupp), are given 
in the HESP conference proceeding edited by Ramaty, 
Mandzhavidze and Hua. The Murphy et al paper provides 
details on ongoing research. 


Chupp E L 1984 High-energy neutral radiations from the 
Sun Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 22 359-87 

Murphy RJ et al 1997 Accelerated particle composition and 
energetics and ambient abundances from gamma-ray 
spectroscopy of the 1991 June 4 solar flare Astrophys. 
J. 490 883-900 

Ramaty R and Murphy R J 1987 Nuclear processes and 
accelerated particles in solar flares Space Sci. Rev. 45 
213-68 

Ramaty R, Mandzhavidze N and Hua X M (ed) 1996 High 
Energy Solar Physics (New York: American Institute 
of Physics) 


R Ramaty and N Mandzhavidze 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Impulsive Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Impulsive Phase 


Although impulsive phenomena are commonplace in the 
universe, solar FLARES are unique in astrophysical research 
because they provide the largest diversity of observational 
data, which means diagnostic information available to 
the observer. Solar flares are truly unique, insofar as 
they provide the vantage point of seeing the development 
of impulsive phenomena with high temporal as well as 
spatial resolution. This also includes the possibility of 
direct in situ measurements of its byproducts, such as 
accelerated particles in interplanetary space. As we shall 
demonstrate below, the analysis of all this information has 
led to the inevitable conclusion that flares are very efficient 
particle accelerators. A significant fraction of the 10-10% 
erg of magnetic free energy that are liberated during an 
event is released as energetic particles. Since such release 
occurs in the few seconds to few tens of minutes that it lasts, 
it is no wonder that the impulsive phase can be considered 
as the ‘core’ of the flare phenomenon. 


Observations 
The impulsive phase of a flare is characterized by a 
rapid increase in radiation intensity at all wavelengths, 
spanning from radio frequencies to the gamma rays. Its 
main characteristic is the ubiquitous presence of rapidly 
fluctuating bursts of hard x-ray (HXR) radiation, as 
well as similarly structured and cotemporal emission 
in the ultraviolet (UV) and extreme ultraviolet (EUV), 
decimeter and centimeter radiation, and the so-called 
type III and U radio bursts. In UV and soft x-rays 
(SXR), the spectra show redshifts and blueshifts in lines 
formed at 10° and 10’ K temperatures respectively. 
When looking at its spatial characteristics, the impulsive 
phase can be adequately described as composed of 
‘kernels’ or ‘knots’ at all wavelengths, whose area 
usually represents only a fraction of the, ensuing, ‘main 
phase’ of the flare (See SOLAR FLARES: MAIN PHASE). These 
kernels were first detected, and can easily be seen, in 
ground-based off-band H-alpha observations as regions 
of enhanced and highly broadened Balmer line emission 
(and sometimes continuum enhancements). These 
characteristics indicate that the emission originates deep 
in the solar chromosphere or upper photosphere, at layers 
where the electron density exceeds 10'? cm~°. With the 
advent of space-borne solar observatories, first SkYLAB, then 
the SOLAR MAXIMUM MISSION (SMM) and HINoTorI and more 
recently YOHKOH, the concept of impulsive kernels was 
extended to the EUV, UV and x-ray domains. However, 
the most definite indication of what, as we shall see, is 
the basic physical property of the impulsive phase came 
with the advent of HXR imaging from SMM, Hinotori and 
Yohkoh. Observations from the SMM spacecraft showed 
the presence of HXR kernels spatially coincident with the 
UV and H-alpha knots at the feet of bipolar magnetic loops. 
The observations showed, when combined with 
vector magnetic field observations, that the bulk of the 
HXR emission was concentrated in loops rooted in highly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


nonpotential field regions, thus indicating that impulsive 
phenomena are associated with current-carrying bipoles. 
The observations also show that, even though the basic 
structure of a flare consists of a bipolar loop or arcade 
of loops, the observed impulsive phenomena generally 
encompass two or more bipolar structures. This suggests 
that their interaction leads to the impulsive release of 
magnetic free energy. 


Interpretation of the observations 

To explain all the phenomena that characterize the 
impulsive phase, solar physicists have developed over the 
years a most useful paradigm, the so-called nonthermal 
thick-target model (TTM). In the TIM, initially developed 
to explain HXR burst observations, the dissipation of 
energy, presumably occurring at the top of the loop, first 
goes into the acceleration of electron beams to energies 
> 20 keV with a power law distribution AE~*. As these 
electrons stream down the legs of the loop, they lose 
energy primarily through electron—electron collisions and 
produce HXR viaa bremsstrahlung process in electron-ion 
interactions. As long as the ambient loop density is small 
(<10'° cm~’), the beam electrons lose little energy and 
also produce little HXR emission. However, on reaching 
the dense layers of the chromosphere (>10'* cm~*), both 
processes increase dramatically and the electrons are 
stopped, heating the ambient plasma and more efficiently 
producing HXR photons. It should be noted that only 
a small fraction, of order 10~°, of the beam energy, is 
‘used’ in bremsstrahlung emission, the bulk is spent 
in heating ambient electrons with characteristic preflare 
temperatures < 10* K (see also SOLAR FLARES: PREFLARE PHASE). 
As with any theoretical model, the power of the TTM 
resides not only in its ability to explain the data from which 
it is deduced (in this case HXR burst intensity and spectra), 
but also in successfully predicting other observational 
signatures. The TTM predicts the following. 


e The HXR emission should be concentrated at the 
chromospheric feet of coronal loops. 

e The upper chromosphere is heated and driven 
upwards, owing to convective flows caused by the 
high pressure of the previously cool and dense 
plasma. 

e This hot plasma upflow increases the coronal loop 
density, causing an increase in its emission measure 
and, thus, a rise in SXR emission. 

e The beam heating also produces a cotemporal in- 
crease in transition zone lines’ emission (characteris- 
tic T = 10° K), which are seen at UV and EUV wave- 
lengths. 

e Momentum balance at the transition layer, between 
the upflowing SXR emitting plasma and the cooler 
and denser transition zone and chromospheric 
material, leads to the condensation and downflow of 
the cooler plasma, causing red-shifted UV lines and 
asymmetric H-alpha profiles. 

e The energy deposition in the deep layers of the 
chromosphere, due mostly to electrons with energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Impulsive Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


50 > keV, causes an increase in visible line emission 
and the broadening of hydrogen line profiles (such as 
H-alpha and other Balmer lines), owing to the Stark 
effect caused by high (>10'° cm~°) electron densities. 

e = Relativistic electrons streaming along the loops pro- 
duce microwave bursts, because of gyrosynchrotron 
emission as they spiral along the magnetic field and 
precipitate to the footpoints. 

e Those electrons that escape from the closed bipolar 
loop, either by getting into open field structures 
or into neighboring longer-scale bipoles, produce 
type III and/or reverse U radio bursts respectively. 
In many cases, H-alpha brightenings are observed 
at the far end of such loops, in such a close time 
correspondence to the main flare site that any exciting 
agent other than energetic electrons is ruled out. 


No other model, with perhaps the sole exception 
of ad hoc versions of the so-called thermal model (TM), 
to which we shall refer in the next section, can account 
for so many observational constraints. Furthermore, 
although not explicitly stated in the formulation of the 
TIM, the acceleration of ions during the impulsive phase 
can also explain observed gamma-ray phenomena. The 
interaction of accelerated (> 1 MeV per nucleon) ions with 
ambient nuclei leads to the production of 1-7 MeV nuclear 
deexcitation gamma-ray lines, the positron annihilation 
line at 0.511 MeV and the neutron capture line at 2.2 MeV. 
Reactions of relativistic ions with ambient particles also 
produce pions and high-energy neutrons. Neutrons with 
energies between 50 and 500 MeV are produced by protons 
with up to GeV energies and have been directly observed 
in space. The pions decay into gamma rays or into 
ultrarelativistic secondary electrons and positrons, which 
also contribute to the observed >10 MeV continuum. For 
a long time it was believed that only a few of the strongest 
flares produced gamma rays. However, the advent of 
more sensitive space-borne detectors has shown that the 
lack of detected gamma-ray emission in many flares 
may be due to just its weakness rather than its absence. 
Forthcoming observations, such as those to be obtained 
with detectors to be flown aboard the HESSI mission, 
will show whether the great majority of impulsive events 
are accompanied by high-energy photon and neutron 
emission. They will also contribute to determining how 
important, to overall flare energetics, ions are. 


The energy and number problem 

As we mentioned above, the efficiency of the bremsstrahlung 
process is very low, so that ~ 10° erg of electron kinetic 
energy are necessary to produce just 1 erg of HXR emis- 
sion that is radiated. We also mentioned that the observed 
photon spectrum of HXR can be reasonably well fitted by 
a power law distribution aE~”. As shown by J C Brown, 
R P Lin and H S Hudson and others, in the TTM the en- 
ergy differential rate at which the electrons are injected 
into the flaring loop is also a power law AE ~> where 
6 ~ y +1. Then, from the observed intensity or flux of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


HXRs at 1 AU, one can estimate the total number of elec- 
trons accelerated per second at the source. Typical HXR 
fluxes show that some 10-10” electrons s~! have to be 
accelerated to energies >20 keV in order to reproduce the 
observed impulsive phase HXR photon spectra. To illus- 
trate the relative magnitude of these numbers, we can men- 
tion that a ‘typical’ quiescent active region loop contains 
= 10° electrons, meaning that the whole electron content 
of a loop is being accelerated per second. It is also very 
easy to calculate that the power dissipated in the acceler- 
ated electrons’ distribution is, for typical impulsive phase 
parameters, some 108-10" erg s~! over the 10? s dura- 
tion of the burst. To complicate matters even further, we 
note that in the largest events the electron number, power 
and duration of the burst can all be up to two orders of 
magnitude larger than these ‘typical’ values. Thanks to 
the orders of magnitude denser chromospheric reservoir, 
that can provide a continuous supply of ‘fresh’ thermal 
electrons, near-real-time replenishment of the acceleration 
region may not be a problem. The power issue instead is 
difficult to avoid. It implies that a substantial fraction of 
the total energy of the flare resides in accelerated electrons. 
In view of this, considering that the bulk of the power re- 
sides in the low-energy end of the power law distribution, 
an alternative TM has been widely discussed over the past 
20 years. In the TM concept, the lower-energy photons 
are predominantly emitted by hot (10° K) thermal elec- 
trons, confined by ion-acoustic turbulent fronts. Since the 
confined plasma electrons collide among themselves, the 
ratio of bremsstrahlung to collisional energy loss could, 
in principle, be orders of magnitude higher than in the 
TIM. However, the turbulent fronts are ‘transparent’ to 
the higher-energy electrons (those with speeds >3 times 
the thermal speed), so that there is a leakage of high energy 
electrons that precipitate to the footpoints in a thick target 
fashion. Considering the aforementioned characteristics 
of impulsive phase phenomena, such resemblance might 
be considered a favorable feature, since energetic particle 
precipitation is needed to explain many of the observa- 
tions. However, it also means that, in order to explain 
HXR burst observations, the escaping tail needs to be re- 
generated quasi-continuously. This reduces the theoretical 
high efficiency of the TM, and turns it into a hybrid, where 
acceleration again plays an important role. 


New perspectives and the future 

It is noteworthy that the first observations ever recorded 
of a solar flare, by Carrington and Hogdson in 1859, 
can also be recognized as the first observation of the 
impulsive phase of a flare. One hundred and forty 
years later, we are able to understand their white 
light continuum observations. They are the effect of 
precipitating high-energy particles into deep layers of the 
solar chromosphere and upper photosphere. Carrington 
immediately noticed the close temporal correspondence 
of the event he had observed to terrestrial disturbances 
but judiciously refrained from speculating about a cause— 
effect relationship. Many decades of dedicated research 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Impulsive Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and improvements in observational methods have shown 
that such a relationship does indeed exist, and this has 
developed as one of the most dynamic areas of solar— 
terrestrial research. 

We thus find it worthwhile to conclude by pointing 
out some recent results obtained from ground- and space- 
borne instrumentation that may still be a subject of 
debate. First of all, new observational evidence seems 
to converge towards a view that impulsive phenomena 
originate at relatively high coronal levels. Radio emission, 
due to upward and downward directed electron beams, 
gives an indication that the source of these accelerated 
electrons is in the corona, at levels where the electron 
density is of order 10°-10'° cm~ (see SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC 
PARTICLES). Observations from the Yohkoh spacecraft have 
also shown cases of high-altitude coronal HXR emission 
regions. These sources, detected in flares occurring 
near the solar limb, are cotemporal with footpoint HXR 
emission, although considerably weaker, and located 
above the SXR-emitting loops seen by the spacecraft’s 
SXR telescope. These sources have been interpreted as 
evidence of magnetic reconnection and energy release 
above the, already cooling, SXR-emitting loops (see 
SOLAR FLARE OBSERVATIONS and SOLAR FLARE MODELS). Although 
their interpretation may still be a matter of debate, the 
mere existence of the coronal HXR sources signals that 
suprathermal particles are being generated or injected 
there, traveling downwards and upwards, as the radio 
observations suggest. The downward-traveling particles 
cause the footpoint HXR emission, while those traveling 
upwards either escape or lead to remote brightenings, 
when they access large-scale closed field structures. 

The most intriguing aspect of impulsive phase 
physics resides in the mechanism that leads to the release 
of, say, 10°° erg in 10* s. This is equivalent (e.g.) to 
the annihilation of a 100 G field over a (3 x 10° cm)? 
cube in such a time interval. This is particularly 
difficult to accomplish under coronal conditions of low 
resistivity, unless the actual dissipation occurs at spatially 
unresolvable microscale levels. For many years, radio 
observations have given an indication of a ‘fragmentation’ 
of impulsive phase emission, as evidence of microstructure 
in the energy release region. This property has been 
confirmed by observations of prompt and optically 
thin bremsstrahlung HXR emission, which give direct 
evidence of the timescales associated with the energization 
of suprathermal electrons. Observations obtained 
with BATSE (Burst and Transient Source Experiment) 
aboard the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO) 
have shown that HXR bursts are composed of both 
spiky structures due to precipitating electrons and a 
gradual component with particle trapping characteristics 
(figure 1). The range of timescales associated with the 
spiky component ranges from 200 to 1000 ms, which could 
be associated with dissipation regions with characteristic 
lengths A ~ 10” cm. 

The resolution of the impulsive phase enigmas will 
be addressed through a worldwide coordinated program 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


50-100 keV 


aut titania a ited ol ee Smal 


Counts per second 


f 
S 


[eenEE WET 


¢ 
i 
é 


2.510° T T T T T 
i 100-300 keV: 


1.10* 


5.10° 


17:10:54 17:11:00 


Universal Time 


17:11:06 


Figure 1. Observations of an HXR burst detected by BATSE in 
three energy intervals. The temporal resolution is 64 ms, the bin 
size, and the shortest statistically significant fluctuations 
observed in this event are in the 200-500 ms range. The burst 
was associated with an x-ray class C3 flare of 26 June 1991. 


of flare observations to start in the year 2000. Among 
the observations obtained by ground observatories and 
spacecraft, a major contribution to impulsive phase studies 
will be provided by the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic 
Imager (HESSI) mission. HESSI will obtain HXR images 
and spectra with an unprecedented combination of spatial, 
temporal and spectral resolution (2 arcsec to 300 keV, tens 
of milliseconds, and less that 1 keV FWHM increasing to 
5 keV at 20 MeV). With its fine resolution and sensitivity, it 
will be possible to locate both coronal and chromospheric 
HXR sources and carry out a numerical inversion of 
the spectral data. This will help determine the parent 
electron spectrum as a function of time and energy. 
Furthermore, HESSI’s gamma-ray spectroscopic imaging 
will provide the first information ever obtained on the 
spatial distribution of gamma-ray lines and on the spatial 
distribution of energetic (>1 MeV) protons. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Impulsive Phase ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Priest E R (ed) 1981 Solar Flare Magnetohydrodynamics (New 
York: Gordon and Breach) 

Somov B V 1992 Physical Processes in Solar Flares (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

Svestka Z 1976 Solar Flares (Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Tandberg-Hanssen E and Emslie A G 1988 The Physics 
of Solar Flares (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Marcos E Machado 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Solar Flares: Main Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Main Phase 


After the impulsive phase of a flare is over (See SOLAR FLARES: 
IMPULSIVE PHASE), we talk about the main phase or gradual 
phase. Most FLares (often called compact or confined 
flares) are short lived and they simply cool during the 
main phase, decaying within minutes or tens of minutes. 
However, there is also another kind of flares (eruptive 
flares) which continue to release energy during their main 
phase, and in those flares the decay is much longer: in 
some events it can continue for many hours. These 
eruptive flares are much more interesting, because they 
are often associated with other active phenomena in the 
solar CORONA which may be sources of disturbances in 
interplanetary space and in the Earth environment. 


Confined flares 

The majority of flares (and essentially all subflares) are 
confined flares—relatively simple structures consisting of 
one or several brightened loops. It is likely that even those 
flares which look like a brightened single loop actually 
consist of more loops which our telescopes are unable to 
resolve. After the heating process, accomplished during 
the impulsive phase, these loops begin to cool. This 
cooling is due partly to heat conduction from the hot flare 
loop to the cooler CHROMOSPHERE (conductive cooling) and 
partly to radiation emitted by the loop (radiative cooling) 
and in some cases also due to mass flow to the loop 
footpoints. The conductive cooling time increases with 
the length of the loop, while the radiative cooling time 
decreases with increasing density. As a flare can consist of 
a set of loops of various lengths and densities, its cooling is 
a complex process: short and dense flare loops disappear 
first, while long and less dense loops survive longer. 

In addition to these internal differences in the flare 
structure, there occur sometimes secondary phenomena 
that accompany confined flares and eventually may 
become more impressive, and last longer, than the flare 
itself. For example, energetic electrons accelerated during 
the impulsive phase of a flare can stream into a pre-existing 
larger coronal loop which is rooted close to the flare region, 
thus forming a less bright, but much larger, structure 
which, because of its large size and low density, can be seen 
much longer than the flare which caused its brightening. 
Another example are flaring arches, in which material of 
widely different temperatures and densities flows along 
magnetic field lines from the flare site to another footpoint 
which sometimes can be located more than 100 000 km afar. 
In some cases, this material does not reach any secondary 
footpoint, but just rises and falls back along magnetic field 
lines, thus creating a flare-associated surcE. Thus even the 
‘simple’ cooling main phase of a confined flare may be 
sometimes very complex and not easy to understand. 


Eruptive flares 

More interesting flares on the Sun belong to the other kind: 
events in which energy release continues during the main 
phase. This class comprises a wide energetic range of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


phenomena which all can be interpreted in the same way: 
the originally closed magnetic field is disrupted so that 
its field lines open, and subsequently the open field lines 
begin to reconnect. The field disruption is often indicated 
by an activated dark filament which eventually erupts and 
rises into the corona, but this need not be observed in all 
events of this kind: sometimes the disrupted configuration 
is young, or it already disrupted once shortly before, so 
that there has not been enough time left for plasma to 
condense and cool to temperatures which make a filament 
visible in the Ha line. 

After the field lines open, mass begins to flow from the 
dense lower layers to the corona. Therefore, the magnetic 
pressure begins to prevail over the gas pressure and this 
imbalance causes reconnection of the open field lines: first 
fast, low in the atmosphere, where the magnetic field is 
strongest, and thereafter with progressively slower speed 
at higher altitudes. As the field lines reconnect, they create 
new loops at progressively higher altitudes and release 
energy at the reconnection site, i.e. at the tops of the loops. 
The loops are formed at very high temperature (close to 
20 million K and still higher in the early phase of the loop- 
system creation) and are first visible in x-rays. Thereafter 
they gradually cool, so that one can see them in images 
corresponding to lower temperatures, until they become 
visible in the Ha line at temperatures below 20000 K and 
eventually disappear. As the result of this process we see 
a growing system of flare loops, in which the lowest loops 
cool and decay while new ones are formed above them. 
The growth of this loop system proceeds with speeds of 
a few, up to a few tens of, kilometers per second at the 
beginning of the loop system formation and decreases to 
less than 1 km s~! late in the main phase. Because this 
process of loop formation and cooling can continue for 
hours, long after the impulsive phase is over, these newly 
formed loops are often called post-flare loops (incorrectly, 
as they actually form the long-lasting main phase of the 
flare). 

The released energy at the reconnection site heats 
the chromosphere at the loop footpoints which begins to 
evaporate into the loops, thus enhancing the loop density 
and making the loops visible. The heating also produces 
chromospheric emission in the Ha line which is aligned 
at both sides of the neutral line of the magnetic field, thus 
creating two bright flare ribbons. As the loops rise in the 
corona, their footpoints move farther from the neutral line 
and the two ribbons gradually separate from each other. 

The amount of energy released, and thus also the 
intensity of this chromospheric emission, depends on the 
strength of the magnetic field in which the process of 
field opening and reconnection has been accomplished. 
In very strong fields, i.e. in fully developed ACTIVE REGIONS, 
we find enormously bright two-ribbon flares, an example 
of which is shown in figure 1. Essentially all major flares 
on the Sun belong to this category. In weaker fields the 
Ha ribbons are less bright, and they may be completely 
invisible when the process occurs in a very old decaying 
active region. Such events are then indicated in Ha only by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Main Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Main phase of a major eruptive (two-ribbon) flare 
observed in the Ha line at Big Bear Solar Observatory. Two 
bright flare ribbons extend along the neutral line, marked in the 
preflare state by a dark filament—its remnant is still visible at 
the right-hand side of the figure. Inner edges of the ribbons are 
connected by loops, some in emission and other in absorption. 


SEPTEMBER 1, 1973 


ona 
¥é 


. 
?" ee 


1814 UT 


2118 UT 


Figure 2. ‘Disparition brusque’ of a quiescent filament as seen in 
Ha (below) and in soft x-rays (above, aboard Skylab). The 
central Ha frame is out of the line center and shows the moving 
(Doppler-shifted) material of the filament. 


the disappearance of an activated dark filament, and have 
been called disparitions brusques (figure 2). However, all 
these phenomena, from the disparitions brusques up to the 
major two-ribbon flares, although accomplished in regions 
with different magnetic characteristics, represent the same 
process on the Sun, and, therefore, have been called, all 
together, eruptive flares. 

While in Ha some these events do not look like 
flares (and, therefore, the term ‘eruptive flares’ may be 
somewhat misleading), in x-rays all eruptive flares have 
one characteristic common: a bright x-ray ribbon-like 
emission extending along the neutral line at the top of 
the reconnecting loops (figure 2) and, in consequence of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ARBITRARY UNITS 


21:00 00:00 03:00 06:00 09:00 12:00 15:00 
Figure 3. A long-lasting enhancement in soft x-rays (1-8 A above 
and 0.54 A below) recorded by the GOES satellite during an 
eruptive (LDE) flare. The horizontal scale gives time from 21:00 
UT on 28 August 1992 through 15:00 UT next day. X-ray 
enhancements corresponding to confined flares are short lived, 
like that around 12:00 UT. 


it, they all produce long-lasting enhancements of x-ray 
emission in x-ray records of the Sun (figure 3). For this 
reason this kind of flares is also called long-decay events, 
often abbreviated as LDE. Other terms, sometime used for 
the same phenomena, are dynamic flares or ejective flares. 


Complex events 

The classification into two classes of flares, confined and 
eruptive, somewhat simplifies the real situation, because 
there are also complex flares on the Sun which do not fit 
exactly any of these two classes. Let us mention the most 
common cases. 

Most (and perhaps all) eruptive flares are related to 
SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS (CMEs). One would expect 
that one observes the CME first, when the magnetic field 
disrupts and opens, and only then, through reconnection, 
the flare itself begins to be formed, but that is not always 
the case. In some events one begins to observe the flare 
emission already before any CME is recorded. A likely 
explanation is that we see first a confined flare, which 
triggers the field disruption and thus initiates the eruptive 
flare that follows. In such a case the main phase of the 
confined flare that triggers the whole process merges with 
the early phase of the triggered eruptive flare (which, as 
it seems, needs not always to be impulsive). In some 
cases a flare is followed in x-rays by an extensive arcade of 
growing loops which may extend over very large distances 
on the Sun, far from the original site of the flare. In 
such cases apparently magnetic field lines opened along 
a very long portion of the neutral line and subsequently 
reconnected. However, it is indicated that a substantial 
part of the field lines stays open for a long period of time 
and only some of them reconnect. The same may be true, 
although perhaps to a lesser extent, in all eruptive flares. 
Then the flaring active regions in which open field lines 
do not fully reconnect or in which the process of full 
reconnection takes a long time may become temporary 
sources Of SOLAR WIND. 

There are also eruptive flares in which the speed of 
growth of the loop system does not decrease with time: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Main Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Be 3-NOV-91 00:36:32) 4 


& f Bes. 

&3-NOV-91 12:00:16 / 3-NOV-91 23:18:56 
Figure 4. Soft x-ray images of a rising giant arch obtained 
aboard Yohkoh. The arch followed an eruptive flare of 

2 November 1991. 


during most of the main phase the loops grow with a 
constant speed of a few km s! for many hours. This 
indicates that the loops are continuously heated, do not 
cool, and expand. 


Coronal main phase 
Confined flares may be associated with radio type III or 
type V bursts (see SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS) which are 
related to the flare impulsive phase, but the main phase 
usually has no response in higher coronal layers. On 
the other hand, above eruptive flares the solar corona 
sometimes shows striking changes, and energetic particles 
(See SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES), accelerated during the 
flare, are often trapped in the corona above the flaring 
active region, where they manifest themselves in several 
different forms. One can consider these phenomena as the 
main phase of the eruptive flare in the corona. 

On metric radio waves one often observes a type 
IV burst which is a continuum radio emission, usually 
consisting of two parts: a moving type IV starting shortly 
after the impulsive phase and rising in the corona for 
several tens of minutes and a stationary type IV that 
appears later below the rising structure. There are also 
events in which only the stationary type IV is present and, 
on the other hand, this component may be missing in 
events observed close to the solar limb. The stationary 
type IV burst may be very long lived: in some events the 
continuum gradually becomes bursty and eventually can 
change into a type I noise storm, which then stays above 
the flaring active region for tens of hours or even several 
days. 

Soft X-RAY TELESCOPES in space record after some 
eruptive limb flares coronal phenomena which have 
been called giant arches. Some of them are stationary, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


corresponding to lower and denser parts of a stationary 
type IV burst or a noise storm. While the radio emission 
is due to gyro-SYNCHROTRON RADIATION OF SOLAR WIND PLASMA 
waves, the x-ray emission is produced by bremsstrahlung 
of the energetic electrons. Other giant arches rise in the 
corona with constant speeds of 1 or a few km s™! for tens 
of hours (figure 4). It is likely that these arches are rising 
loop-like structures, left behind a CME, which begin to 
expand into the coronal ‘vacuum’ above them. Although 
these flare-associated coronal arches can be observed in 
x-rays only above flares that occur close to the solar limb, 
they are probably common phenomena characterizing the 
coronal main phase of eruptive flares. 


Bibliography 

Schmieder B 1992 ‘Post’-flare loops Eruptive Solar Flares 
(Lecture Notes in Physics 399) ed Z Svestka, BV Jackson 
and M E Machado (Berlin: Springer) pp 124-33 

Svestka Z 1989 Solar flares: the gradual phase Solar Phys. 
121 399-417 

Svestka Z, Poletto G, Fontenla J, Hick P, Kopp R A, 
Sylwester B and Sylwester J 1999 The gradual phase 
The Many Faces of the Sun: a Summary of the Results from 
NASA's Solar Maximum Mission ed K T Strong, J R L 
Saba, B M Haisch and J T Schmelz (Berlin: Springer) 

Tandberg-Hanssen E and Emslie A G 1988 The Physics 
of Solar Flares (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 206-28 


Z Svestka 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Nonthermal Electrons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Nonthermal Electrons 


Solar flares energize particles to different levels, usually 
subdivided into (1) thermal, (2) nonthermal or energetic 
and (3) high energetic (figure 1). The lowest energetic level 
is a thermal particle distribution (where particles have a 
Maxwellian velocity distribution), produced by Coulomb 
collisions between the particles of the heated flare plasma. 
Because the coronal plasma is heated to temperatures of 
10-30 million K during a solar flare, thermal electrons 
have a mean kinetic energy of 0.4-1.3 keV, with tails 
reaching up to a maximum of about 20-30 keV. The 
next higher energetic level is referred to as nonthermal 
particles. Particles acquire nonthermal energies when they 
become accelerated above the thermal level. Accelerated 
electrons maintain their nonthermal nature as long as 
they propagate in a sufficiently low-density (collisionless) 
plasma so that they do not suffer Coulomb collisions and 
become thermalized again. Nonthermal electrons with 
typical energies of 20-100 keV are often observed in hard x- 
ray and radio wavelengths during flares. In strong flares, 
particles become accelerated up to 1-10 MeV, referred 
to as high energetic, and can be detected in gamma ray 
wavelengths (see SOLAR FLARES: GAMMA RAYS). 


Particle acceleration 

Particle accelerators were built in large physics labora- 
tories to study the elementary structure of particles, by 
analysing the kinematics of high-energetic particles and 
their decay products in collision experiments. In solar 
flares, such high-energy experiments take place too, when 
particles accelerated in the coronal plasma propagate to- 
wards the solar surface and collide there with the dense 
chromospheric plasma. However, how the particles be- 
come accelerated in the coronal flare plasma is difficult 
to probe. There are a number of theoretical models for 
the accelerations process, such as (1) acceleration by elec- 
tric fields, (2) stochastic acceleration or (3) shock acceler- 
ation (See SOLAR FLARES: PARTICLE ACCELERATION MECHANISMS), 
but their diagnostics can only be accomplished by remote 
sensing methods. It was therefore until recently not even 
clear where the acceleration sites are located ina solar flare. 
Only the most recent observations by the YOHKOH hard x- 
ray telescope (HXT) and the COMPTON GAMMA RAY OBSERVA- 
ToRY (GRO) enabled a breakthrough in the localization of 
particle acceleration sites. 

The most significant discovery was made by Satoshi 
Masuda, who identified weak hard x-ray sources above 
flare loops that appear bright in soft x-rays (figure 2). 
Because the weak above-the-loop-top hard x-ray sources 
were detected up to 50 keV and their spectrum was 
identified as nonthermal, they provided for the first 
time a glimpse of the actual acceleration site. Because 
Yohkoh revealed also cusp-like plasma structures above 
the soft x-ray flare loops, the above-the-loop-top hard 
x-ray sources were brought into context with MAGNETIC 
RECONNECTION processes. Accurate electron time-of-flight 
measurements with Compton GRO confirmed that the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1019 m 

r Thermal : Nonthermal : High-energetic | 
, electrons : electrons ' electrons+ions ] 
go 
wo L 4 
‘= [ | 
oo 400 | 
Cc P 4 
[e) L 4 
o [ J 
6 L ] 
® 10° J 
DS b 4 
i L J 

1 071 0 [ SOFT X-RAYS HARD X-RAYS GAMMA-RAYS 
po iil po hit fast ott et eh po iit po ii 

10° 10! 10° 10° 104 10° 


Photon eneray [keV] 


Figure 1. Composite photon spectrum of a large flare, extending 
from soft x-rays (1-10 keV), through hard x-rays 

(10 keV-1 MeV), to gamma rays (1 MeV-10 GeV), mostly 
produced by thermal, nonthermal (energetic), or high-energetic 
electrons. Gamma-ray line emission and parts of the gamma-ray 
continuum are produced by interactions of protons, neutrons, 
ions and pion decay. 


a a | a 


“92.Jan:13, 1728 U 


4, 


0.065 27! | 


0.070 iii iiif ; 


NS [deg] 


0.0751) 4 


-0.080 - 


0.260 0.265 0.270 0.275 
EW [deg] 


Panipat 


0.255 


Figure 2. Discovery of the acceleration site of nonthermal 
electrons by Masuda in the flare of 13 January 1992. The flare 
loop is bright in soft x-rays (indicated with white contours and 
grayscale), and shows an above-the-loop-top hard x-ray source 
(black contours) where electrons are accelerated and two hard 
x-ray footpoints (black contours), where electrons precipitate to 
the chromosphere and produce the most intense hard x-ray 
bremsstrahlung there. 


propagation distance between the acceleration site and the 
chromospheric footpoints is consistent with the location 
of the acceleration site found by Masuda. A third 
piece of evidence for this location of the acceleration site 
was found from bi-directional electron beams detected 
at decimetric radio wavelengths, which show electron 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Nonthermal Electrons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-0.020 


-0.025 | 40F 
305 

-0.030 
205 
-0.035 401 


-0.040 [7 


50F TOF distance 
Loop radius r 


rea 0.2 


GyeTKEV] 
ease 


eS 
o 
T 
L 


HX ener 
ie) 
co} 


0 T= 33.6 +11.9Mm 


0.265 0.270 0.275 0.280 0.285 -20 -10 


0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 
Time delay [s] 


Figure 3. Electron time-of-flight difference measurement between electrons that produce 20-80 keV hard x-ray emission (right panel). 
From this time difference and a soft x-ray image that shows the loop footpoint separation (left panel), the height of the acceleration site 
can be reconstructed (middle panel), which is here found at an altitude of 30000 km. 


streams propagating in upward and downward directions, 
both starting in a common region that has an electron 
density of n, = 10°-10'° cm s“!, and is thus consistent 
with the electron densities measured in above-the-loop- 
top locations. Given this overwhelming evidence, 
theoreticians can now work with more specific physical 
parameters to model the acceleration process itself. The 
above-the-loop-top location is likely to be located in 
the downward reconnection outflow from an x-point 
reconnection process, where slow and fast shocks occur 
and plasma turbulence is created, effects that faciliate 
both shock and stochastic acceleration. Some new 
observations with Yohkoh soft x-ray telescope (SXT) and 
the Nobeyama Radio Heliograph reveal also sometimes 
large-scale secondary flare loops that have one footpoint 
in common with the compact soft x-ray flare loop (with 
hard x-ray emission at the footpoints), suggesting that 
more complicated loop—loop interactions take place at the 
acceleration site. 


Particle propagation 

Once particles are accelerated to nonthermal energies, 
the ambient plasma becomes collisionless and they can 
propagate freely along magnetic field lines. The Lorentz 
force caused by the magnetic field and the particle velocity 
forces charged particles to spiral along the field lines. The 
magnetic topology of flares can often be visualized from 
soft x-ray images, where the heated plasma traces out 
the magnetic field lines. From such soft x-ray images, 
e.g. obtained from Yohkoh SXT, it becomes apparent that 
magnetic field lines connect the acceleration site with flare 
loop footpoints and thus reveal to us the likely propagation 
path of accelerated particles. Above the acceleration site, 
it is likely that the magnetic field lines are open ended and 
connect with interplanetary space, or close over large-scale 
arches back to the solar surface at a remote location from 
the flare site. 

The propagation of downward-ejected electrons from 
the acceleration site has recently been studied by means of 
time-of-flight differences. Electrons with a kinetic energy 
of 25 keV have a relativistic velocity of v/c = 0.3, while 
electrons with an energy of 200 keV have a relativistic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


speed of v/c = 0.7. This velocity difference makes the 
high-energy electrons arrive earlier at the CHROMOSPHERE 
than the low-energy electrons, if they start simultaneously 
at the coronal acceleration site. Because the acceleration 
site has typically a height of 20000-50000 km above 
the solar surface, the resulting time-of-flight differences 
amount to 100-200 ms. This timing can be measured from 
energy-dependent time delays of hard x-ray emission, 
which is produced when the precipitating electrons enter 
the chromosphere and lose their energy by collisional 
bremsstrahlung. This time-of-flight method represents 
therefore an important tool to localize the acceleration site 
and to probe particle propagation. An example of such a 
measurement is shown in figure 3. 


Particle trapping 

Particles injected from the acceleration site onto a magnetic 
field line can have different velocities and different pitch 
angles. Because the magnetic field generally increases 
towards the chromosphere, propagating particles see a 
converging magnetic field when they approach the flare 
loop footpoints. Because of the conservation of the 


electrons 


Chromospheric 
Thick-target HXR emission 


Figure 4. Electrons with small pitch angles precipitate directly, 
while electrons with large pitch angles become trapped and 
precipitate after many bounces and eventual scattering into the 
loss cone. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Nonthermal Electrons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Closed Magnetic Fields 


n.=10° cm? Open Magnetic Fields 
(V,= 100 MHz) ' | Interplanetary 
Beams 
. n.=10° cm? N tf III 
Benen _ (p= 800 MHz) aes ae Upward Beams 
7 ee ee 
Bl | Aavidt<0 Lee 
ci {— — ee am Sebahe dee. Rnerg Release . 
5) | Accelération Region 
8 dv/dt>0 ; 
<| | 
| Downward Beams 
Time t n,=10'° cm? — _— 
mS (= 1 GHz) 
n.=10"' cm? DCIM Ch heri 
“mi romospheric 
(V,= 3 GHz) Evaporation 


Tomosphere 


Figure 5. A schematic flare scenario that indicates various trajectories of energetic particles and their possible radiation signatures: 
radio emission (type III, RS, U, N, decimetric (DCIM) bursts), microwave emission (MW) and hard x-ray emission (HXR). 


magnetic moment, the perpendicular velocity or the pitch 
angle to the magnetic field line increases in response 
to the increasing magnetic field strength (figure 4). A 
consequence of this magnetic convergence is that particles 
bounce back at the bottleneck above the footpoints, called 
mirror points. This phenomenon of magnetic mirroring is 
also observed in other converging magnetic fields, e.g. in 
the Earth’s polar cusp magnetic field or in tokomaks. In 
solar flare loops, mainly electrons with high initial pitch 
angles become trapped this way and are forced to bounce 
forth and back between the opposite flare loop footpoints 
until they suffer a sufficient number of collisions that their 
pitch angle becomes parallel, which allows the electrons 
eventually to precipitate. This collisional deflection time 
t increases with higher kinetic energy E, according to 
t x E*. This energy dependence of the trapping time 
was recently confirmed from detailed measurements of 
hard x-ray delays with Compton GRO. 


Hard x-ray and radioemission 

Our diagnostics of particle kinematics in solar flares is 
almost entirely based on their radiative signatures we 
observe at radio or hard x-ray wavelengths. As long 
as particles propagate in the collisionless plasma (as is 
the case in the corona for >30 keV electrons), no hard 
x-rays are produced. However, when they precipitate 
towards the dense chromospheric layers, their velocity is 
slowed down by Coulomb collisions, in which hard x-ray 
photons are produced by bremsstrahlung. This process 
illuminates the two footpoints of a flare loop. Flare models 
that simulate the bombardment of the chromosphere 
by energetic particles (both electrons and ions) predict 
a strong local heating of the plasma, resulting in an 
overpressure that causes the heated plasma to evaporate 
and to flow upwards into the flare loop. This hot plasma 
upflow eventually fills the entire flare loop, and thus 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


explains the common appearance of soft x-ray-bright flare 
loops (marked with SXR in figure 5). This thermal plasma 
is also responsible for the bulk of hard x-ray emission at 
energies of 10-30 keV near the loop tops. 

Electrons can escape from the acceleration site in 
upward and downward directions. Because of their 
anisotropic velocity distribution, propagating electron 
beams are unstable toward growth of Langmuir waves, 
which excite plasma oscillations and are converted into 
electromagnetic waves observable at radio wavelengths. 
From the frequency-time drift rate of such propagating 
electron beams, upward (type III bursts) and downward 
(reverse-slope (RS) bursts) electron beams have been 
identified in flares. The common start frequency 
of upward- and downward-injected electron beams is 
sometimes visible as a separatrix in radio dynamic spectra 
(figure 5), from which the plasma frequency can be used 
as a diagnostic of the electron density in the acceleration 
site. Some upward-moving beams are guided along large- 
scale arches, which show up in the form of inverted-U 
bursts in dynamic spectra, or N-shaped bursts, if they 
are subject to a subsequent mirroring (figure 5). The 
dominance of closed field lines in active regions explains 
why a much smaller number of energetic electrons escape 
into interplanetary space than those that precipitate to the 
photosphere, as estimated from the hard x-ray flux. 

High-energetic (relativistic) electrons, say with ener- 
gies > 300 keV, emit also gyrosynchrotron emission be- 
cause of the interaction of their motion with the magnetic 
field, which is observable in microwaves. Such microwave 
emission is often seen cospatially with flare loops, with 
high frequencies closer to the footpoints (because of the 
higher magnetic field). In summary, most coherent and 
incoherent radio emission observed in flares is caused in 
one way or the other by nonthermal electrons and thus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Nonthermal Electrons ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


represents an important diagnostic of particle dynamics 
in flare plasmas (see also SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS). 


Bibliography 

Aschwanden M J 1998 What did Yohkoh and Compton 
change in our perception of particle acceleration in 
solar flares? Observational Plasma Astrophysics: Five 
Years of Yohkoh and Beyond T Watanabe et al (ed) 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 285-94 

Benz A O 1993 Plasma Astrophysics, Kinetic Processes in Solar 
and Stellar Coronae (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


M J Aschwanden 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Solar Flares: Nonthermal Electrons 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Author 
Markus J. Aschwanden 
Lockheed-Martin ATC 
Solar & Astrophysics Lab. 
Dept. H1-12, Bldg.252 
3251 Hanover St. 
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA 
phone: 650-424-4001 
fax: 650-424-3994 
e-mail: aschwanden@sag.lmsal.com 


Abbreviations 

K = Kelvin 

keV = kilo electron Volt = 10° eV 

MeV = Mega electron Volt = 10° eV 

Yohkoh = Japanese solar satellite 
(launched in 1991) 

SXT = Soft X-ray Telescope on Yohkoh 

HXT = Hard X-ray Telescope on Yohkoh 

Compton GRO = Compton Gamma Ray Observatory 
(NASA satellite launched in 1991) 

Nobeyama = radio observatory in Nobeyama, Japan 


Abbreviations in figure 5: 

SXR = soft x-rays 

HXR = hard x-rays 

MW = microwaves 

DCIM = decimetric radio bursts 
RS = Reverse-slope bursts 

III = type III bursts 

U = type U bursts 

N = type N bursts 


Definitions defined in text 

NONTHERMAL PARTICLES - YOHKOH HXT - YOHKOH 
SXT - COMPTON GRO - TIME-OF-FLIGHT - BI- 
DIRECTIONAL ELECTRON BEAMS - MAGNETIC MIR- 
RORING - TRAPPING TIME 


Definitions to be defined elsewhere 

MAXWELLIAN VELOCITY DISTRIBUTION - COULOMB 
COLLISIONS - STOCHASTIC ACCELERATION - SHOCK 
ACCELERATION - MAGNETIC RECONNECTION - RE- 
CONNECTION OUTFLOW - X-POINT RECONNEC- 
TION - SLOW SHOCKS - FAST SHOCKS - PLASMA 
TURBULENCE - NOBEYAMA RADIO HELIOGRAPH 
- LOOP-LOOP INTERACTIONS - LORENTZ FORCE 
- MAGNETIC MOMENT - PITCH ANGLE - COLLI- 
SIONAL DEFLECTION TIME - BREMSSTRAHLUNG 
- LANGMUIR WAVES - PLASMA OSCILLATIONS - 
FREQUENCY-TIME DRIFT RATE - TYPE III BURSTS - 
REVERSE SLOPE BURSTS - INVERTED U-BURSTS - GY- 
ROSYNCHROTRON EMISSION - COHERENT RADIO 
EMISSION - INCOHERENT RADIO EMISSION 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Particle Acceleration Mechanisms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Particle Acceleration 
Mechanisms 


Electrons and ions with energies well into the relativistic 
regime are a universal feature of solar flares (see SOLAR 
FLARES: NONTHERMAL ELECTRONS and SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC 
PARTICLES). The attainment of these energies poses severe 
constraints on particle acceleration mechanisms from 
the viewpoint of timescales, energies, total number of 
accelerated particles, spectra and the energy of different 
isotopes and charge states. 

Electron energies well in excess of 100 keV, and 
occasionally up to tens of MeV, are inferred. Electrons 
are accelerated up to 100 keV in <400 ms and to higher 
energies in a few seconds. The number of electrons 
required above 20 keV is large—for x-class flares 10°” 
electrons s~! are inferred, although this number is model 
dependent and suffers from inadequate hard x-ray data. 
Information on spectra is sparse. One balloon flight in 
1980 with germanium detectors obtained high-resolution 
(1 keV) spectra in hard x-rays. The data were fitted with a 
combination of power laws and Maxwellians. 

Ions (especially protons) are inferred to have energies 
in excess of 1 MeV up to >1 GeV per nucleon. The 
= 10 MeV ions are accelerated on the same timescale as 
the electrons, with the higher-energy ions being delayed 
by perhaps 10 s. The total number of accelerated ions is 
unclear. Traditionally the total energy associated with the 
accelerated ions was assumed to be much smaller than 
contained in the electrons, but recent evidence suggests 
that the energetic ion and electron energy contents may 
be similar in some flares. The y-ray spectra are usually 
power laws. Another important result is the massive 
enhancement of energetic He in very impulsive flares. 
This is discussed in the section SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC 
PARTICLES. 

Efforts to account for these energetic particles are 
hampered by very limited observations. The poor spectral 
resolution in hard x-rays and the lack of information 
on ions with energies below ~ 2 MeV are particularly 
debilitating. There is also minimal information on the 
strength and topology of the coronal magnetic field, whose 
associated energy must be tapped to produce the energetic 
particles. Nonetheless, in the past decade hard x-ray 
imaging, in particular from the YOHKOH spacecraft, has 
begun to shed light on what processes may be responsible 
for particle acceleration in solar flares. 

A variety of possible mechanisms exist that could 
produce the energetic particles that are inferred to exist 
in solar flares. The most prominent among them 
are acceleration by shock waves, magnetohydrodynamic 
(MHD) turbulence and direct electric fields. 


Shock acceleration 

Shock acceleration has been invoked widely to account 
for energetic particles in the solar wind, at the termination 
shock and at a host of galactic and extragalactic locations. 
Two types of shock acceleration exist. In one, referred to as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


shock drift acceleration, particles move along the surface of 
the shock, gaining energy from the shock electric field. The 
mechanism is only effective when the angle between the 
magnetic field and shock normal approaches 90°, and even 
then the energy gain and particle flux are very limited. 
Since one would expect shocks to propagate at arbitrary 
angles, it is unlikely to be the source of the large number 
of particles accelerated in flares. However, the process 
may be very relevant in situations on the Sun where small 
numbers of accelerated electrons are required, such as type 
II radio bursts (see SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS). 

The second process, called shock diffusive accelera- 
tion, occurs when a particle interacts with so-called scat- 
tering centers on either side of the shock. If, in the frame of 
the shock, the scattering centers approach each other, the 
particle systematically gains energy. This process is similar 
to that suggested by Fermi in 1949, except that, in the so- 
lar flare context, the scattering centers are low-frequency 
MHD waves generated by energetic particles streaming 
away from the shock. The mechanism is the same for elec- 
trons and ions, with the important restriction that each 
species must reach a critical velocity prior to acceleration 
becoming effective. Ions need to have velocities greater 
than the Alfvén speed (V, = B/(j10p)'/?) while electrons 
must have velocities exceeding at least (m;/m,.)"V,. This 
is the so-called injection problem. Numerical modelling 
has shown that it is easily overcome for ions. For electrons 
it is unsolved at this time. 

Diffusive acceleration has been used to account for 
energetic interplanetary particles but has been less widely 
applied to impulsive flare acceleration. There are a 
number of reasons for this. Doubts have persisted that 
shocks do not form quickly enough to accelerate particles. 
These doubts are spurious since shocks form on kinetic 
timescales («1 s). Others have questioned whether a flare 
gives the plasma a big enough impulse to form a shock. 
Although a flare may appear as a large explosion, the 
coronal magnetic field is very resistant to compression, 
and hence to shock formation. There is little doubt that 
if shocks do form, and particles can reach energies above 
which diffusive acceleration is effective, they are capable 
of generating the required particle energies very quickly. 
Whether the required flux can be produced is unknown at 
this time. 

One particular location where shocks almost certainly 
do occur is in the vicinity of sites of magnetic reconnection 
(See SOLAR FLARE MODELS). However, some of these shocks 
may not be suitable for acceleration of particles. Figure 1 
shows a sketch of a flare energy release region (based on 
suggestive evidence from the Yohkoh satellite) with a pair 
of shocks trailing away from the reconnection site. The 
problem is that the shocks are slow mode, corresponding 
to the steepened slow mode wave. At such slow shocks, 
the scattering centers do not approach each other, so that 
no energy gain results. Fast mode shocks have also been 
proposed in this geometry, as shown in figure 1. It is 
argued that the high-speed plasma jet that arises during 
magnetic reconnection interacts with stationary magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Particle Acceleration Mechanisms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


reconnection 
site 


i 
y 

y 

y 

y 

\“ 

y 

y 

y 

y 

y 

plasma Z 
. y 
inflow y 
y 

y 

y 

y 


RAR AAAAAAAAAAQRQAAAM’HHUAS 


DC electric 


me! —-— fields 
reconnection jet 
~ 
~ slow 
shocks 


MHD 


turbulence 
“\ 


fast termination 
shock 


Figure 1. A sketch of a flare energy release region in the solar 
corona, with possible locations of the particle acceleration 
mechanisms discussed in this article indicated. The sketch is 
based on interpretation of hard and soft x-ray data from the 
Yohkoh satellite. A magnetic reconnection site is assumed to be 
present, with plasma flowing into it from the left and right sides. 
The reconnection leads to the generation of a pair of slow mode 
shock waves, a high-speed plasma jet that may lead to the 
generation of MHD turbulence and a possible fast mode shock 
that may terminate the jet. Direct electric fields in the vicinity of 
the reconnection site itself can also accelerate particles. 


fields, resulting in a fast mode termination shock. The role 
of such a shock in accelerating particles is only beginning 
to be assessed. 


MHD turbulence 

MHD turbulent acceleration occurs when particles interact 
many times with randomly propagating MHD waves. The 
particles undergo slightly more head-on than overtaking 
collisions with the waves, so that an energy gain results. 
The rate of energy gain is slower than for diffusive 
shock acceleration. MHD turbulence has suffered from 
the perception that there was an injection problem. In 
addition, the solution proposed for ion injection at shocks 
does not work here. The difficulty is that for typical 
parameters in the solar corona prior to a flare (T ~ 3 x 
10° K, n ~ 10! m-° and B * 500 G), a thermal ion or 
electron cannot resonate with MHD waves. The resolution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of this difficulty is similar in concept for ions and electrons, 
yet different in detail. It should also be noted that all of the 
models discussed here assume that pitch-angle scattering 
is efficient enough to maintain an isotropic distribution 
throughout the time that acceleration is proceeding. 

For ion acceleration, the most complete argument 
proposes that if a fully developed turbulent spectrum of 
Alfvén waves develops, rather than only long-wavelength 
waves, thermal ions can interact with waves with 
frequencies at roughly the ion gyrofrequency. As an 
ion gains energy, it is continually scattered by longer- 
wavelength waves, until, when it has a high energy, it 
resonates with MHD waves. Calculations have been 
performed indicating that energies of 1 MeV can be 
produced in 0.1 s, energies of 500 MeV in 2 s for a 
turbulence level that has magnetic field fluctuations 1% 
of the ambient field. For the low-energy ions, the majority 
of the time required to reach these energies is taken up 
with waves cascading to high frequency. 

A similar process of a turbulent cascade, this time of 
fast mode waves, could operate for electron acceleration, 
but needs high levels of turbulence. An alternative 
idea stems from the fact that MHD fast mode waves 
can accelerate electrons directly by the process of transit 
time damping. This leads to an increase in the parallel 
energy of the electron, and so requires ancillary pitch-angle 
scattering for it to be effective. In fact, for the process to 
operate, a cascade of energy up the fast mode branch is 
also required since Coulomb collisions prevent low-energy 
electrons being energized. Energization of the electrons 
thus occurs initially through high-frequency waves, with 
the MHD waves gradually becoming important as the 
particle energy increases. Initial estimates indicate that 
the acceleration is prompt (relativistic energies obtained 
in < 1s) and that small volumes (10! m?) can produce 
roughly 10* electrons with energies above 20 keV. A flare is 
then the sum of many of these small energy release regions. 

While MHD turbulence is clearly an attractive 
acceleration mechanism, its possible origin in solar flares 
is not fully clear. By examining the spectral profiles of 
coronal emission lines, it is clear that there are significant 
random motions during flares that may correspond to 
MHD turbulence. However, these observations have no 
spatial resolution so that it is unclear where the turbulence 
is located. One speculation is that the turbulence is the 
result of an instability in the high-speed plasma flows 
associated with magnetic reconnection in, or at the top 
of, flare loops as shown in figure 1. The latter hypothesis 
is especially attractive given the Yohkoh observations of 
hard x-ray emission from high in the corona. 


Direct electric fields 

Direct electric field acceleration may occur in flares in two 
different forms depending on the strength of the electric 
field. The key parameter is the field strength that leads to 
an electron moving at the electron thermal speed gaining 
energy indefinitely. This is defined as the Dreicer electric 
field (Ep = (e/41€0)(@pe/Vre)*In A V m7). For typical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Particle Acceleration Mechanisms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


preflare parameters (T, = 3 x 10° K,n = 10% m°%, 
InA = 20), Ep ¥ 10° Vm". If E < Ep, then only the 
tails of the electron distribution functions are accelerated. 
If E > Ep then most electrons will gain energy. In the 
magnetic reconnection model shown in figure 1, E > Ep, 
with 100 V m7! being a plausible value, but other scenarios 
have been proposed with E < Ep. 

When E < Ep the energy gain that particles attain 
is limited by the flare geometry, i.e. the length of the 
potential drop. For a flare loop length of 5 x 10’ m, one 
is limited to 500 keV, lower than the maximum electron 
energies inferred from y-ray emission. The ion energies 
are much lower than required. However, the process 
may be capable of reproducing hard x-ray spectra below 
100 keV. The acceleration time is short, and significant 
fluxes of electrons can be generated. For E > Ep, 
high energies are readily attainable. Particles of energy 
1 MeV can be produced in 104 m, a much smaller distance 
than the resolution of current observations. Ions with 
energies >1 GeV may pose more significant problems to 
the mechanism. 

The limitation on both mechanisms is the need to 
ensure overall quasi-neutrality of charge and current in 
the acceleration regions. Since the inferred number of 
energetic particles requires that a significant fraction of 
the coronal population be accelerated, an efficient means 
of repopulating the acceleration site is required. Also, the 
accelerated particles correspond to a significant electric 
current, that in turn will generate large magnetic fields 
if the current is unneutralized. The resolution of these 
problems is straightforward for acceleration by shocks 
and MHD turbulence and is accomplished by a return 
current of low-energy thermal particles travelling from 
chromosphere to corona. The return current is oppositely 
directed to the current due to the accelerated particles, 
so that only weak magnetic fields are generated. The 
low-energy electrons also permit overall neutrality to be 
maintained in the acceleration region. Here the return 
current flows unimpeded, since no direct electric field 
acts to oppose it. However, when a direct electric field 
is present, it will accelerate particles in one direction, and 
so a return current cannot flow cospatially in the same 
direction. The problem is especially acute when E < Ep 
since long potential drops are required. The resolution 
is to propose that the acceleration site is composed of 
millions of oppositely directed electric fields such that in 
an average sense there is approximately no net current or 
charge deficit. The problem is less severe when E > Ep 
provided that the particles can escape from the electric field 
before a large current builds up, but precise calculations 
have yet to be performed. 


The future 

In recent years, interpretation of satellite data and 
theoretical modelling have led to major advances in our 
understanding of particle acceleration mechanisms in 
flares. While the models still do not address particle 
acceleration in the global flare context in an adequate 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


manner, the understanding of the plasma physics of the 
acceleration mechanisms has improved greatly for all of 
the competing mechanisms. While it is to be expected that 
progress will be made on the theoretical understanding 
of mechanisms in the next few years, the major advance 
in this field is likely to come from the high spectral and 
spatial resolution at hard x-ray and y-ray wavelengths 
made possible by the instruments to be launched on the 
NASA High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) 
spacecraft in mid-2000. 


Bibliography 

Cargill P J, Simnett G M and Emslie A G 1996 Do protons 
or electrons dominate particle acceleration in solar 
flares? EOS Trans. Am. Geophys. Union 77 (37) 353-7 

Heyvaerts J 1981 Particle acceleration in solar flares Solar 
Flare Magnetohydrodynamics ed E R Priest (New York: 
Gordon and Breach) pp 429-555 

Melrose D B 1992 The Sun as a lab for particle acceleration 
mechanisms Particle Acceleration in Cosmic Plasmas ed 
G P Zank and T K Gaisser (New York: American 
Institute of Physics) pp 3-14 

Miller J A, Cargill P J, Emslie A G, Holman G D, Dennis B 
R, LaRosa T N, Winglee R M, Benka S G and Tsuneta 
S 1997 Critical issues for understanding particle 
acceleration in impulsive solar flares J. Geophys. Res. 
102 14 631-60 


Peter J Cargill 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Preflare Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Preflare Phase 


Solar flares are believed to be the result of a sudden 
conversion of a large amount of free magnetic energy, 
previously stored in the solar corona. The release takes 
place in a matter of minutes to half an hour, and the amount 
of energy involved can be up to 10” J (10° erg). 

It is generally accepted that in the preflare phase 
this magnetic energy is slowly built up in the corona, 
in a matter of hours to days. The sudden release may 
then be triggered by the onset of a MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC 
(MHD) instability, by ‘loss of equilibrium’, or by other 
triggers. Solar physicists have for a long time studied 
the preflare phase to try to understand the mechanism 
for the supposed build-up of of magnetic energy, and for 
a clue to the trigger mechanism. The purpose of these 
studies is to try to develop the tools to identify regions 
that are likely to flare and some day to be able to predict 
the location, time, type and intensity of flares. Moreover, a 
good physical understanding of the preflare build-up and 
the trigger mechanism is at the heart of understanding the 
physics of solar flares as a whole. 

Multiwavelength observations of the preflare regions 
are clearly needed for studying the preflare phase. 
These observations suffer from the fundamental difficulty 
that the defining event—the flare—takes place at the 
end of the observing sequence. A preflare observing 
campaign therefore often consists of the identification of a 
‘promising’ solar region and then leaving the participating 
instruments and observatories in a ‘sit and stare’ mode 
for as long as it takes. The day-night cycle for ground- 
based observatories and for earth-orbiting spacecraft very 
often frustrates this endeavor. Experiments on the recent 
SOHO mission (which orbits the Sun and therefore has 
an uninterrupted view) have been quite successful in 
following regions with a flare promise for more than a 
day. Future observations from a fleet of spacecraft, in solar 
orbit and positioned at different angles from the Sun (the 
‘Stereo’ mission) will further eliminate the two week limit 
of visibility of any promising region, due to the rotation of 
the Sun itself, and further allow a three-dimensional view 
of the structures involved. 

In the following section the observational results to 
date on flare precursors will be reviewed. After that the 
observational signatures for the magnetic energy build- 
up and changes in the magnetic field structure in preflare 
regions will be summarized. The article concludes with 
a description of the basic requirements for theoretical 
models of preflare energy build-up and the triggering of a 
flare. 


Flare precursors 

The categorization of precursors by Gaizauskas (1989) will 
be adhered to here. His definition of a precursor is a 
transient event preceding the impulsive phase, possibly 
even before the onset, and not necessarily at the site of 
the flare itself (figure 1). Sometimes the frequency of 
occurrence of minor flares reaches a maximum just before 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a major flare. In that case the minor flares may qualify as 
precursors. 


Homologous flares 

Homologous flares are earlier flares in the same location 
with similar emission patterns. They occur most often in 
periods of frequent flare activity. The rate of repetition 
in a homologous series ranges from a few per hour 
to several days. There is no consistent relationship 
between repetition rate and brightness in x-ray, optical or 
microwave emissions. It is expected that the same flare- 
producing stress acts on the regions for hours and days, 
and indeed it has been found that homology is clearly 
correlated with the development of magnetic shear in an 
active region, but strict homology is never realized because 
of the ongoing evolution of small-scale magnetic fields. 


Sympathetic flares 

Sympathetic flares are earlier flares in different locations, 
but erupting in near synchronism. Soft x-ray images of the 
solar corona clearly demonstrate the existence of multiple 
links between adjacent, and even remote, active regions. 
Along these links a single excitation could, in principle, 
be transmitted to other sites and trigger flares. Statistical 
tests of large samples of flares have been inconclusive, but 
the analysis of individual cases has shown unequivocally 
that one flare can trigger another. 


Soft x-ray precursors 

Soft x-ray precursors are transient enhancements in soft 
x-rays, lasting for several minutes, that occur in loops or 
unresolved kernels at, or close to, flare sites. Their shape 
and location may coincide with those of the subsequent 
impulsive phase, but that coincidence is usually only 
partial. Weak soft x-ray bursts are often observed at the 
time of the projected onset of a SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION 
(CME) associated with a flare. This may be tens of minutes 
prior to the impulsive phase of the flare, and the location 
is usually at one foot of a large pre-existing coronal arch. 
The rest of the arch brightens weakly within minutes, and 
the outward motion of the x-ray emitting plasma indicates 
that a CME has been launched. One interpretation of 
this sequence of events is that a small magnetic structure 
interacts with the large coronal arch at one of its footpoints 
(seen as the precursor), destabilizing the whole structure. 
This global instability then causes the launch of the CME 
and the onset of a flare at one of its footpoints. 


Radio precursors 

Radio precursors, most often observed in microwaves, 
consist of changes in intensity and/or polarization of 
radiowaves emitted from an active region, tens of minutes 
before the onset of a flare. Statistical studies indicate 
that radio precursors do not occur for the majority of 
flares, although the correlation between radio bursts 
and flares is significant. Also, preimpulsive bursts 
may have very narrow spectral bands, so that most are 
missed by single-frequency radio telescopes. Individual 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Preflare Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


radio precursors observed at high resolution show 
morphological transitions of the emitting structures for 
tens of minutes through the preflare and impulsive phase, 
while there are also dramatic changes in polarization 
in centimeter wavelengths from minutes up to an hour 
before the flare, continuing through the impulsive phase. 
These results indicate a preflare reorganization of the 
magnetic field, but the exact nature of this reorganization 
(flux emergence, reconnection, eruption, etc) cannot be 
determined from the radio data alone. 


Ultraviolet precursors 

Ultraviolet (UV) precursors are mostly small-scale tran- 
sient brightenings above active regions, and they exhibit 
a broad range of amplitudes. Some of the UV kernels co- 
incide with the later flare, but in other cases the flare may 
be concentrated in nearby new kernels. Repeated tran- 
sient UV brightenings have been observed in association 
with the upwelling, twisting and disruption of an active re- 
gion prominence just prior to a two-ribbon flare. However, 
there is not enough statistical evidence to reliably identify 
a UV flare precursor against the varying UV background. 


Surging arches 

A surging arch is a transient absorbing feature visible 
at wavelengths displaced from the central core of Ha. 
Simultaneous red- and blueshifted components are also 
visible from the first appearance of the arch, but they are 
not cospatial. The arch is initially straight in shape (seen 
from above), expands rapidly and unravels in multiple 
strands by the time the associated flare erupts in the same 
active region. Ina statistical study of 58 flares it was found 
that just over half were preceded by a surging arch. 

The common inference from the variety of flare 
precursors described above is that up to tens of minutes 
prior to the impulsive phase of the flare coronal plasma 
is heated and set in motion by a rearrangement of the 
coronal magnetic field. This rearrangement accelerates 
from gradual to explosive at the onset of the impulsive 
phase of the flare. 


Prominence eruptions and coronal mass ejections 
SOLAR PROMINENCE ERUPTIONS very often, but not always, 
precede two-ribbon flares, the most energetic and long- 
lived flare type. CMEs are also often associated with a 
two-ribbon flare. In fact, the extrapolated launch of the 
CME precedes the prominence eruption and flare in most 
events, but this launch is difficult to observe. The time 
delay between the onset of the prominence eruption and 
the impulsive phase is of the order of minutes, but activity 
such as enhanced mass motions inside the prominence, a 
slow rise of the prominence and untwisting can precede 
the main flare by hours. Enhanced mass motions in active 
region prominences are the earliest sign of an impending 
flare and form one of the best flare predictors. 

However, not all flares, not even all large ones, have 
associated prominence eruptions, and not all prominence 
eruptions lead to flares. While some observers claim 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


an Impulsive phase 
x 
Cc 
= 
aad 
Na 
= 
oO 
“ 
Oo 
~ Preflash Postburst 
ostbursi 
= Increase 
4 Precursor 
aL 
-20 -10 ie] +10 
TIME (mins.) 


Figure 1. Idealized flux profile of a flare detected in an energy 
band that senses a distinct impulsive phase (after Gaizauskas 
1989). 


there are indications for the eruption of a magnetic flux 
tube in all flares, other soft x-ray observers claim there 
is ample evidence for a class of flares that involves the 
interaction of two or more magnetic loops without an 
eruption. What seems clear is that at least for two-ribbon 
flares the prominence eruption is direct evidence for a 
preflare rearrangement of coronal magnetic field, setting 
the stage for the sudden energy release that causes the flare 
emissions. 


Magnetic field structure and evolution 

The precursors described above are mostly indirect 
indicators of changes in the coronal magnetic field prior 
to a flare. A direct signature of these changes comes 
from observation of the magnetic field in the corona and 
photosphere. Because of the high coronal temperature 
only infrared lines are really suitable to measure the 
magnetic field in the corona, and those have not been 
explored sufficiently yet. Observations in soft x-rays and 
the UV show coroNnaL Loops, which outline the magnetic 
field morphology. Ha observations show cool matter in 
filaments or arches that is either streaming along the field 
or resting at the bottom of slings in the magnetic field, thus 
yielding additional clues to the magnetic field structure. 


Vector magnetic field measurements 

More quantitative information can be extracted from the 
photospheric magnetic field. Here both the line-of-sight 
and the transverse magnetic field component can be 
measured in a usually thin layer where the specific line is 
formed (see the article on SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: INFERENCE BY 
POLARIMETRY). The three components of the magnetic field 
then can be deduced after removing the sign ambiguity 
in the transverse magnetic field component, which can 
be done in several ways, all based upon plausibility 
arguments. These vector magnetic field measurements 
have been carried out since the early 1980s at several 
ground-based solar observatories, and their resolution has 
increased with newer equipment becoming available. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Preflare Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


—=ae 


(— er 
iti === —-—<< 
LPM tl een 


FA hati acid 


i 
NN 
N 


\ 
Ae ee es 


SNe ee ee 


VS WA A NN 


FS SRReHannre 
en aay 


ee 
ae 
beh 
ee 
a 
NA 
AN 
bath 
4A 
8S 
KX 
AA 
qa 


eee ak & k Dee eHOe eo 

Pewee be ) yaa ese eae 

savanna rd ewecene 
os SSS 


tetaeeene 
Fut evey 
veVVIVE 


Figure 2. The transverse magnetic field of AR 4711 (a) measured 
by the Marshall vector magnetograph on 3 February 1986, at 
16:42 UT, compared with the potential field direction 

(b) calculated from a line-of-sight magnetogram. The region of 
the largest shear along the polarity inversion line, between 
points 30 and 50, will be the location of a flare about 4 h later. 
The field of view is 110 by 110 arcsec, and north is up (from 
Hagyard 1990). 


The magnetic field in the corona can be calculated 
from the vector magnetic field measured at the lower 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


coronal boundary if one assumes a force-free state for 
the coronal magnetic field. This assumption is very 
sensible for two reasons: (1) the observed velocities 
in the corona are very low compared with the Alfvén 
velocity, and hence the field is quasi-static, and (2) the gas 
pressure in the corona is much lower than the inferred 
magnetic pressure. Therefore the Lorentz force cannot 
be balanced by either gas or flow pressure gradients 
over large areas, and the magnetic field must be close 
to force free. Practical methods have been devised to 
calculate a force-free field with known vector magnetic 
boundary conditions, although neither the existence nor 
the uniqueness of the solutions is guaranteed. 

Coronal magnetic fields calculated from the measure- 
ments of vector magnetographs show satisfactory agree- 
ment with the above-mentioned observed coronal field 
morphology. Observations of flare sites prior to the im- 
pulsive phase have confirmed the scenario of a gradual 
build-up of free magnetic energy, and yielded several ad- 
ditional clues to the cause of the sudden release of that 
energy. Hagyard (1990) emphasizes the importance of an- 
gular shear, i.e. the angle between the observed transverse 
field and the potential field that can be derived from the 
line-of-sight component of the magnetic field alone (fig- 
ure 2). From the analysis of a sample of only four flares 
she found that these flares occurred in an area where the 
local photospheric field departed the most froma potential 
field. For all flares the magnetic field was strong and the 
maximum angular shear was at least 85°, while over an 
extended interval of 8000-10000 km the shear angle was 
larger than 80°. It has been claimed that these are sufficient 
conditions for a flare, but the exact timing for the ensuing 
flares cannot be determined, so exact flare prediction re- 
mains an elusive goal. Clearly, however, vector magnetic 
field measurements represent the most direct and physical 
approach towards SOLAR FLARE FORECASTING. 


Magnetic field complexity and evolution 

Extreme magnetic complexity has long been recognized as 
very advantageous for producing great flares. Complexity 
in the magnetic field can be present from the moment the 
magnetic flux emerges, while in other cases it is fabricated 
when several sunspot pairs collide and interact. 

Numerous flares have been observed to erupt in the 
vicinity of emerging flux, while the opposite process, flux 
cancellation, has also been shown to lead to the formation 
of prominences and to trigger their eruption and the 
subsequent flare. Large flares often erupt in areas where 
old and new magnetic flux interacts. An empirical rule 
here is that prior to a flare the magnetic features of one 
polarity are increasing, while nearby features of opposite 
polarity are decreasing. 

Chromospheric fibrils (see CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS) 
adjacent to the magnetic polarity inversion line usually 
stretch nearly parallel to it, indicating a strong magnetic 
shear in flare-prone regions, in agreement with vector 
magnetograph observations. Rapid suNsrot motions and 
high inferred velocity shear (i.e. a rapid variation of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Preflare Phase 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


magnitude of the horizontal velocity in the horizontal 
direction perpendicular to the velocity) are known to 
correlate with increased flare activity. 

There is no evidence that complexity, flux emergence 
or cancellation are sufficient conditions for flares, since 
all can occur without ensuing flares. What the 
above observational results indicate is the importance of 
considering the evolution of the magnetic field. Free (i.e. 
non-potential) magnetic energy can be transferred from 
the photosphere into the corona during the evolution 
of the magnetic field, both through shearing motions 
of existing magnetic fields and through emergence of 
new current-carrying field. At the same time the 
cancellation of photospheric flux elements can reconnect 
coronal magnetic loops at their footpoints, changing the 
connectivity of the coronal field and destabilizing it. 


Modeling the preflare phase 

The task for the theorist in modeling the preflare phase 
that emerges from the description of the observational 
results above is clear. In the preflare phase the magnetic 
field evolves quasi-statically through a series of force-free 
states in response to slow changes in the photospheric 
boundary field. Because of the low electrical resistivity in 
the corona ideal MHD may be assumed, so no large scale 
reconnection takes place and the field line connectivity 
is maintained. The footpoints of field lines are moved 
around by the photospheric motions, and the coronal 
magnetic field adjusts by evolving through adjacent force- 
free states with identical connectivity. New flux elements 
may be introduced to account for the process of flux 
emergence. Flux cancellation may represent a deviation 
from ideal MHD at the photospheric boundary and can be 
modeled as a boundary change in the fieldline connectivity 
and magnetic topology. 

The simplest model for flare energy build-up 
therefore consists of calculating a series of topologically 
connected force-free equilibria that corresponds to a 
physically meaningful series of photospheric boundary 
conditions (e.g. continuous motions, finite velocities). At 
some point in the series the magnetic field may become 
linearly unstable, and it may be assumed that at that point 
a dynamical evolution on a much more rapid time scale 
will set in; the onset of the flare. The same response may 
occur at a point where no adjacent force-free equilibrium 
is available, a so-called catastrophe point. A detailed 
discussion of several of such currently prevailing models 
is presented in the article on SOLAR FLARE MODELS. 


Bibliography 

Gaizauskas V 1989 Preflare activity Sol. Phys. 121 135-52 

Hagyard MJ 1990 The significance of vector magnetic field 
measurements Mem. Soc. Astron. Ital. 61 (2) 337-57 

Rust D M, Sakurai T, Gaizauskas V, Hoffman A, Martin S 
M, Priest E R and Wang J 1994 Preflare state Sol. Phys. 
153 1-17 

Svestka Z, Jackson, B V and Machado M E (eds) 1991 
Preflare situation and flare onset Eruptive Solar Flares 
(Lecture Notes in Physics 399) (Berlin: Springer) ch 1 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


PC Martens 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Radio Bursts 


Energy release in solar flares heats plasma and accelerates 
electrons and ions to high energies. Radio bursts of various 
types are produced by energetic electrons interacting with 
the ambient plasma or with the magnetic field. They 
may be divided into two broad classes according to 
frequency range and the dominant emission mechanisms. 
(1) Coherent plasma radiation plays a dominant role 
for burst phenomena that occur at meter and decimeter 
wavelengths (frequencies v S 3 GHz). Plasma radiation 
results from the nonlinear conversion of electron energy 
to plasma waves and from thence to electromagnetic 
waves at a frequency near the local plasma frequency 
or its harmonic (see SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: CONTINUUM RADIO 
EMISSION AND DIAGNOSTICS). Plasma radiation is rarely a factor 
at higher frequencies, where it experiences strong free— 
free absorption. (2) Incoherent gyrosynchrotron radiation 
dominates burst activity at centimeter and millimeter 
wavelengths (v = 3 GHz). Gyrosynchrotron radiation 
is due to electrons with energies of tens of keV to a few 
MeV gyrating in a magnetic field at the local electron 
gyrofrequency. Thermal or nonthermal distributions of 
such electrons emit a broadband continuum of radiation. 
Gyrosynchrotron radiation is relatively unimportant at 
frequencies <1 GHz because the radiation is strongly 
self-absorbed and/or masked by free-free absorption in 
overlying plasma. 


Bursts at meter and decimeter wavelengths 

At meter wavelengths, radio bursts of types II, III and 
IV accompany flares (see SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS). Type 
II radio bursts, the result of plasma radiation associated 
with a magnetohydrodynamic shock propagating through 
the corona, are well correlated with flares. More than 
90% of type II bursts have an associated flare. Not all 
flares produce type II bursts, however. They are rarely 
seen in association with flares with an Ha importance 
less than 2 but they accompany 30% of flares with an Ha 
importance of 2 and 3. However, because small flares are 
more common than large flares, type II radio bursts are 
nevertheless more commonly associated with small flares. 
Type IV bursts are a broadband continuum usually seen 
in association with type II bursts. Both type II and type IV 
bursts have a close association with coronal mass ejections 
(CMEs). Roughly 70% of all type II bursts are associated 
with a CME. Whether coronal type II and/or type IV radio 
bursts are produced by CMEs or by the blast wave from 
an associated flare remains controversial (See SOLAR FLARES: 
RELATION TO CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS). 

Type III bursts occur whenever active regions are 
present on the Sun. Hence most occur during times when 
flares are absent. Type III bursts are due to beams of 
suprathermal electrons propagating upward in the corona. 
Dynamic spectra of type III bursts are characterized 
by frequency drifts from high to low frequencies as 
the beam excites plasma waves at lower densities with 
increasing height in the corona. More interesting as a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a) Magnetic Loop Model b) Tg Spectra 
g i | B >P 


Loop top 


WY LZ 


Loop top ~~ 


ies Bree Footpoint A —-—--- 


Footpoint B __ _. 


2 GHz 3: 10 


2.00 GHz 2.88 GHz 3.67 GHz 5.27 GHz 
C5 Seo 
7.59 GHz 9.67 GHz 15.70 GHz 20.00 GHz 


Figure 1. A schematic model of gyrosynchrotron emission from 
a single asymmetric magnetic loop. Top left: the magnetic loop 
model. Top right: brightness temperature spectra at the two 
footpoints and the loop top. Bottom panels: the brightness 
distribution in total intensity at the frequencies indicated. 


flare phenomenon are the decimeter wavelength type III 
and type-III-like bursts. Type IIIdm bursts have durations 
and drift rates that follow the same frequency dependence 
as meter wavelength type III bursts. Other than the 
fact that type IIIdm bursts occur lower in the corona in 
a higher density environment (n, ~ 10'°-10'® m~°), an 
important difference between meter wavelength type III 
and type IIIdm bursts is in the sense of frequency drift. 
The bulk (~90%) of type IIIdm bursts drift from low to high 
frequencies, implying that they are excited by downward- 
directed electron beams. Roughly half of these reverse- 
slope type IIIdm bursts are correlated with impulsive hard 
x-ray (HXR) emission. Studies of strong flares show that a 
detailed correspondence exists between type III, reverse- 
slope type IIldm, or type II[-reverse-slope type IIdm 
pairs and discrete HXR pulses in flares. This is taken to 
be strong evidence that bidirectional beams of electrons 
are produced during the impulsive phase of flares. The 
upward directed beams can produce decimeter and meter 
wavelength type III bursts (or type J and type U bursts 
in large-scale, closed magnetic loops) while downward- 
directed beams can produce type IIdm and/or HXR 
pulses via thick-target bremsstrahlung emission in the 
chromosphere. 


Bursts at centimeter and millimeter wavelengths 

Bursts at centimeter wavelength accompany flares of all 
sizes. Electrons are commonly accelerated to energies 
of several x100 keV during the impulsive phase on 
a timescale of seconds. These electrons are injected 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


into coronal magnetic loops where they emit incoherent 
gyrosynchrotron emission. The spectral maximum of 
gyrosynchrotron emission is typically in the range of 
5-10 GHz (A * 3-6 cm). The low-frequency (v < 
5 GHz) source is therefore optically thick while the high- 
frequency (v = 10 GHz) source is optically thin. The 
morphology of a radio burst depends on the details of the 
energy distribution of energetic electrons, on the magnetic 
field configuration and on the ambient plasma. At low 
frequencies the entire radio source, defined by those 
coronal magnetic loops to which energetic electrons have 
access, is typically optically thick. The optical depth of the 
emission strongly depends on the magnetic field strength. 
Since the footpoints of a given coronal magnetic loop are 
more strongly magnetized than the loop top, footpoint 
emission dominates in optically thin sources (figure 1). 

Radio bursts are highly dynamic. Time sequences 
of images of the evolving radio source show that, as the 
number of energetic electrons in the source increases with 
time, parts of the source change from being optically thin 
to optically thick. The radio source morphology can also 
vary as the magnetic connectivity between coronal loops 
changes in time. As a consequence of optical depth effects 
and/or changes in the magnetic topology, the morphology, 
flux and polarization of radio sources can change radically 
as a function of time and frequency. Figure 2 shows an 
example of an observation made by the Very Large Array 
at 4.9 GHz (A = 6.1 cm) compared with the underlying 
chromospheric Ha emission. The Ha ribbons of emission 
demarcate the footpoints of an arcade of magnetic loops. 
Early in the event, footpoint emission is seen. Later, the 
Ha ribbons are bridged, the radio source becomes optically 
thick and the source maximum lies between the magnetic 
footpoints. 

Flares are commonly accompanied by millimeter 
wavelength emission. Radiation at millimeter wave- 
lengths is of particular interest because, when due to 
gyrosynchrotron emission, it is produced by electrons 
with energies of a few MeV. Hence, millimeter wave- 
length observations offer access to some of the most en- 
ergetic electrons accelerated in flares, those which are also 
responsible for electron bremsstrahlung y-ray emission 
(See SOLAR FLARES: GAMMA RAYS). Fixed-frequency observa- 
tions of the spatially integrated flux from flares with po- 
larimeters show that many have an apparent spectral flat- 
tening at millimeter wavelengths. Most impulsive flares 
show evidence for a post-burst increase in flux due to op- 
tically thin, thermal free-free emission from warm plasma 
ablated from the chromosphere by nonthermal electrons. 
This may account for the spectral flattening in some bursts. 
Other flares, however, clearly involve a distinct population 
of nonthermal electrons at high energies, separate from 
that producing centimeter wavelength and HXR radiation, 
and due, perhaps, to an additional acceleration mecha- 
nism or mechanisms. Spectral hardening at high energies 
has also been noted in photon spectra observed by spec- 
trometers on board the Solar Maximum Mission, Hinotori 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Example of the time evolution of a flaring source 
observed by the Very Large Array at 4.9 GHz (A = 6.1 cm; 
contours) on 17 June 1989. The grayscale shows the underlying 
Ha emission. 


and GRANAT satellites. Joint millimeter wavelength-y- 
ray observations have confirmed that at least some flares 
clearly show the presence of a distinct, hard, nonthermal 
component of energetic electrons. 


Relation between radio and x-ray bursts 
The fact that time profiles of centimeter wavelength 
and HXR emission are quite similar during flares was 
recognized long ago, as was the correlation between 
flux levels in the two emissions. The close correlation 
between centimeter wavelength and HXR emission during 
flares has often been cited as evidence that the ‘same’ 
population of energetic electrons is responsible for both 
types of emission. Comparisons of HXR and centimeter 
wavelength bursts have established that this is essentially 
the case to the extent that the HXR- and centimeter- 
wavelength-emitting electrons are drawn from the same 
nonthermal distribution of electrons. Centimeter- 
wavelength-emitting electrons tend to be of higher 
energy than the electrons responsible for 30-100 keV HXR 
emission. For impulsive flares, electrons with energies 
of order a few x100 keV gyrating in magnetic fields 
of 300-900 G are typically responsible for centimeter 
wavelength emission. In long-duration events, higher- 
energy electrons (~1 MeV) gyrating in weaker magnetic 
fields (<100 G) are responsible for the observed centimeter 
wavelength emission (See SOLAR FLARE CLASSIFICATION). 
While there is often a close correlation between 
HXR and centimeter wavelength emission flux and time 
variation, they differ in detail. Timing comparisons 
made with spatially unresolved HXR counting rates and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| 13.6-21.8 keV (contours) | |. 
F 4} 21.8-31.7 keV (greyscale) {> 


| (a) Nobeyama Jt (b) Yohkoh HXT J} (c) Yohkoh SXT 


PAO 0. 40 g.67 40 


pele SLIT, [ih PD TT EMEC ET ETE] TEP EID st EL Eee SRT LTSARET PEE EDEL AT E> 


Nobeyama 17 GHz 


HXT 21.8-31.7 keV 


Figure 3. Observations of a flare by the Nobeyama radioheliograph and Yohkoh. (a) A snapshot map of the 17 GHz source. 

(b) Snapshot maps of the 13.9-22.7 keV (contours) and the 22.7-32.7 keV (grayscale) emission. (c) A snapshot of the SXR emission. 
(d) Time variation of the total 17 GHz flux and the 22.7-32.7 keV HXR counts. The time of the images shown in (a), (b) and (c) is 
indicated by a vertical arrow. Note the delay of the 17 GHz maximum relative to that in HXRs and the more extended decay. 


radio fluxes find that temporal features in centimeter 
wavelength emission (e.g. the time of maximum flux) lag 
those in HXRs by up to a few seconds. Furthermore, 
the centimeter wavelength emission typically decays more 
slowly than the HXR count rate (figure 3). While transport 
effects might be relevant to the smallest delays observed, 
electron trapping may account for the full range of delays 
observed. Electron trapping is a result of electrons being 
injected into a magnetic field topology that converges 
near the base of the corona. Only those electrons with 
trajectories at sufficiently small angles relative to the local 
magnetic field vector (the pitch angle) can escape, or 
precipitate, from the trap. The cone of pitch angles 
that enable electrons to escape from the trap is called 
the loss cone. Various mechanisms can scatter electrons 
into the loss cone, including collisions of the energetic 
electrons with background electrons and ions (Coulomb 
collisions) or scattering on a spectrum of waves (e.g. 
whistler-mode waves). In the case of Coulomb collisions, 
high-energy electrons have a longer lifetime against 
scattering into the loss cone than low-energy electrons 
and therefore remain in the magnetic trap for a longer 
time. Consequently the radiation they emit peaks later 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and decays more slowly than emission from lower-energy 
electrons. Another possible reason for the delay between 
centimeter wavelength and HXR emission is that higher- 
energy electrons are simply accelerated somewhat later 
than lower-energy electrons ina ‘second-step’ process such 
as stochastic acceleration. 

The spatial relationship between centimeter wave- 
length and x-ray bursts has recently been clarified. Soft 
x-ray (SXR) emission demarcates coronal magnetic loops 
containing hot, dense, thermal plasma. The dominant 
sources of HXR emission are in conjugate magnetic foot- 
points in the upper chromosphere and low corona where 
nonthermal electrons impact dense, relatively cool mate- 
rial and produce thick-target bremsstrahlung radiation. 
Centimeter wavelength emission traces out the entire 
volume accessible to nonthermal electrons. Hence, the 
optically thick emission defines its spatial extent. At fre- 
quencies where the centimeter wavelength emission is 
optically thin, regions characterized by strong magnetic 
fields dominate, e.g. magnetic footpoints. Recent stud- 
ies indicate that, in asymmetric magnetic loops, HXR 
emission is emitted preferentially from the magnetically 
weaker footpoint, where electrons precipitate from the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


trap in greater numbers, while centimeter wavelength 
emission is stronger in the magnetically stronger footpoint, 
leading to a spatial displacement between the dominant 
HXR and centimeter wavelength sources. Recent stud- 
ies of centimeter wavelength and HXR source morpholo- 
gies suggest that impulsive flares commonly involve loop— 
loop interactions—both a compact and a larger-scale mag- 
netic loop structure interact owing to new flux emerging 
into pre-existing magnetic structures. Magnetic cusp mor- 
phologies also appear to play an important role in flares 
(See SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES). 


Radio bursts as diagnostics of physical processes 
Both low- and high-frequency radio bursts offer diagnos- 
tics of a variety of physical parameters and processes dur- 
ing flares. The multitudes of type IIIdm bursts that accom- 
pany impulsive flares yield insight into the nature of en- 
ergy release. With each type-III-like event corresponding 
toa discrete electron energization event, studies of the tem- 
poral and spatial distribution of type IIIdm bursts offer a 
means of constraining local conditions in the energy re- 
lease site and the means by which energy release proceeds. 
Recent work in this area has concentrated on ‘avalanche’ 
models of flares, wherein the fragmentary nature of energy 
release plays a central role. 

High-frequency bursts also yield insights into local 
conditions in the flaring source and into electron 
acceleration and transport. Unlike HXR_ emission, 
gyrosynchrotron emission has a sensitive dependence on 
the magnetic field strength and orientation in the source. 
Spatially and temporally resolved spectral observations 
offer a means of constraining the magnetic field in the 
flaring source. Such observations also allow the electron 
distribution function to be measured as a function of space 
and time. Current research is directed toward making 
such measurements in order to clarify which, of the 
many possible, electron acceleration mechanisms operates 
during flares—quasi-static dc electric fields, weak double 
layers, stochastic acceleration or shocks—and under 
what circumstances (see SOLAR FLARES: PARTICLE ACCELERATION 
MECHANISMS). Similarly, the details of the evolution of 
the emitted spectrum of radiation shed light on the 
transport of electrons throughout the flaring volume: the 
details of electron trapping, electron scattering, electron 
precipitation and chromospheric ablation. 


Bibliography 

Bastian T S, Benz AO and Gary D E 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 36 131-87 

Benz A O 1993, Plasma Astrophysics (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

McLean D J and Labrum N R ed 1985 Solar Radiophysics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


T S Bastian 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: Relation to Coronal Mass Ejections 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: Relation to Coronal 
Mass Ejections 


SOLAR FLARES and SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS have both 
been associated with geomagnetic activity such as the 
AURORA, radio interference and ‘geomagnetic storms’ 
caused by large currents flowing through the Earth’s 
magnetosphere. They are also both associated with high 
fluxes of energetic particles (‘proton events’) in near-Earth 
space. However, they are different types of event. 

Solar flares are sudden, intense increases in brightness 
of particular solar features. They have been observed for 
over acentury in visible light, and are detectable with radio 
telescopes. With the advent of space-based observations, 
flares have been observed throughout the short end of 
the electromagnetic spectrum, from ultraviolet through to 
gamma rays. Flares occur when small, intense regions of 
the solar magnetic field undergo reorganization, suddenly 
releasing energy into the solar coronal and chromospheric 
plasma. In the near-Earth space environment, flares 
cause immediate increases in the flux of ionizing radiation 
such as highly energetic electrons (6 rays), protons and 
photons (y rays). They are also correlated with delayed 
geomagnetic effects at Earth: the aurora and temporary 
motion of the Earth’s magnetic field are more likely to 
be observed three days after a solar flare than at other 
times. This delay time corresponds to the transit time of 
the slow SOLAR WIND that propagates out from the Sun at 
~400 km s~!. However, not all flares are associated with 
aurorae or geomagnetic storms; and some aurorae occur 
even without a precursor solar flare. 

Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are eruptions of large, 
massive bodies of plasma from the corona. CMEs can 
span 120° of solar latitude or longitude, and involve up to 
10'° grams (10'° metric tons). They have been discovered 
only since the advent of the coRONAGRAPH, and have been 
studied in detail only since the advent of skyLas and other 
space-based coronagraphs such as the Solar Maximum 
Mission coronagraph and, more recently, the LASCO 
coronagraph aboard the soHo spacecraft. Coronal mass 
ejections are correlated with flares, but appear to be more 
closely associated with the lift-off of LAMENTS from the 
surface of the Sun. Because only half of the solar surface 
is visible at any one time, half of all CMEs originate on the 
far side of the Sun. Approximately half of the observed 
CMEs can be traced to the disappearance of a filament or 
prominence on the visible disk of the Sun; these statistics 
indicate that all CMEs originate from filaments. High 
resolution ultraviolet image sequences from the Transition 
Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite and from the 
SOHO/EIT instrument have shown that filament ‘lift-off’ 
is central to the formation of CMEs. 

The association between flares and CMEs is not 
coincidental. Coronal mass ejections appear to be 
caused by large-scale instabilities in magnetic structures 
(filaments) up to 300000 km in size, while flares 
are caused by smaller scale instabilities that cause 
sudden reconnection of field lines within very small 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(<1000 km) volumes. Filamentary lift-off, and_ its 
associated field reorganization, causes additional local 
stress in the magnetic field, which may sometimes trigger 
a flare; and flaring causes field reconfigurations that 
can trigger large scale instabilities. Which (if either) 
of these mechanisms is correct is currently unknown. 


Craig DeForest 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: White Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Flares: White Light 


Characteristics of white light solar flares 

A white light flare is a short-lived increase of the solar 
continuum emission, with a duration of 1-10 min, that 
takes place during some solar FLARES. The first white light 
flare was detected by Carrington in 1859 as a local and 
short-duration brightening on a white light picture of 
the Sun. Since spectral observations indicate that the 
continuum emission enhancement extends towards the 
UV part of the spectrum, the term ‘White light flare’ 
means more generally an enhancement of the continuum 
spectrum. 

There is no world-wide flare patrol organization to 
record flares in white light such as exists for recording 
flares in the hydrogen Ha line. Consequently, white light 
flares appear as events rarer than they presumably are, and 
only about a hundred of them (fewer than 90 in 1993) have 
been reported. 

The typical appearance of the spatial distribution of 
the white light emission is one, two or sometimes more 
bright patches. The white light brightenings are most of 
the time moving very fast or jumping from point to point. 
Some observations made with a passband filter centered at 
4308 A displayed a double footpoint character, suggesting 
that the white light flares observed were located at the 
base of magnetic flux tubes (see also SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC 
MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES: OBSERVATIONS). 

Filtergram measurements, made with broad-band 
FILTERS, are affected by the enhancement of the intensities 
and of the number of the atomic lines that occurs during 
the flare process. This enhancement is particularly high 
in the blue part of the spectrum. Intensities up to twice 
the quiet Sun continuum intensity in the visible have 
then been reported using filters, when the continuum 
intensity enhancements measured on the spectrum did 
not exceed 10-20%. Spectral observations of white light 
flares, when not made with broad-band filters, require the 
spectrograph slit to be located at the right position and at 
the right time. Therefore, the wavelength intensity spectra 
of no more than a few tens of flares have been observed, 
making the physical origin of white light flares not yet fully 
understood. 

Two extreme typical spectra have been reported in 
observed white light flare spectra. They differ by the 
presence or not, near 3646 A, of a discontinuity of the 
continuum intensity. The presence of a discontinuity 
implies that the emission is hydrogen free-bound 
emission resulting from the recombination between a 
proton and an electron. At visible wavelengths, the 
main contribution comes from the Paschen continuum 
associated with recombination leaving the recombined 
electron onan energy level described by the main quantum 
number n = 3. Recombination to the level n = 2 
produces Balmer continuum emission at wavelengths 
shorter than 3646 A, introducing a discontinuity at this 
wavelength. Contrary to electron—proton recombination, 
recombination of electrons with neutral hydrogen atoms to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


form an H7 ion or modifications of the electron velocities 
in the field of this ion do not produce a discontinuity in 
the UV. 

The two kinds of continuum emission, due respec- 
tively to hydrogen and H_, originate from different depths 
in the solar atmosphere. The Balmer continuum is formed 
at the chromospheric level, while the H~ emission is 
formed deeper at the photospheric level where the local 
hydrogen and electron densities are higher. Therefore, the 
amplitude of the Balmer discontinuity provides informa- 
tion on the depth of formation of the white light flare emis- 
sion, i.e. on the atmospheric layers from which the radiated 
energy originates. 

It is widely accepted that solar flares come from 
the fast dissipation of magnetic energy, and most flare 
models put the location of this dissipation somewhere 
in the solar corona. This hypothesis has been supported 
by the possibility of explaining the main properties 
of chromospheric Ha flares by a transport of energy 
from the corona down to the lower atmosphere by 
various processes, such as particle beam propagation, heat 
conduction or irradiation. The total energy radiated in the 
excess of continuum emission of a white light flare can 
reach 10°? erg; this is comparable to the energy involved 
in chromospheric flares. Therefore, flare models must take 
into account the white light flare phenomenon. 

The possibility of explaining white light flares by 
energy transport from the corona must be checked. This 
requires the estimation of the depth of formation of the 
observed continuum emission, in order to put constraints 
on the depth of penetration of the energy coming from 
coronal heights, and on the amount of energy that must be 
deposited in order to compensate for the radiative loss. 


Origin of white light flares 

Apart from local heating, the origin of white light flares 
was looked for in the few processes likely to deposit energy 
into the solar CHROMOSPHERE or high SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE, 
i.e. heat conduction, particle bombardment and radiative 
heating. The decrease of the thermal gradient with height 
suggests that the heat conduction flux is too low to explain 
white light flares, most of the heat flux being evacuated in 
UV lines in the transition zone between the corona and the 
chromosphere. The remaining energy transport processes 
are particle bombardment and radiative heating. 

Electron bombardment is present in most energetic 
flares. It is detected via the bremsstrahlung hard x-ray 
emission associated with the change in the orientation of 
the velocity vector of energetic electrons in the electric 
field of the ions. During their propagation to the lower 
atmosphere, electrons also collide with local electrons 
and lose most of their energy—nearly five orders of 
magnitude more than in brehmsstrahlung emission—in 
these Coulomb collisions. The rate of deposition of 
energy by an electron beam at the maximum of hard x-ray 
emission can exceed 10!! erg cm~? s“! and be one order 
of magnitude higher than the rate of energy lost in the 
enhancement of the continuum emission. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: White Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The beam electrons lose their energy in inelastic 
collisions with electrons and in elastic and inelastic 
collisions with neutral hydrogen. The depth of 
penetration, expressed by the column mass m crossed by 
high-energy electrons, moving vertically, is related to their 


energy E,, by 
Ke \"7 


my 


where my is the hydrogen atom mass and K’ is a 
function of the target plasma degree of ionization and of 
various parameters describing the effect of collisions on 
the particle energy. Entering the numerical values of the 
constants, and expressing m ing cm~’ and E,, in keV, leads 
to Em *© 1.25 x 10° m2. Collisions with local electrons 
heat the upper part of the chromosphere to coronal 
temperatures and shift down the region of minimum 
temperature and the chromosphere. The formation of 
the hot 10’ K coronal plasma is due to the lower part 
of the electron energy spectrum. For beams carrying a 
high energy flux, the electrons that penetrate to layers 
dense enough for their temperature to stay, after heating, 
below 10 K are those of energy higher than about 50 keV. 
Only electrons of about 120 keV penetrate down to the 
base of the preflare chromospheric plateau, at m equal to 
0.01 gcm™. 

Inelastic collisions with neutral hydrogen, by increas- 
ing the hydrogen ionization rate by four to six orders of 
magnitude, increase accordingly the recombination rate 
and consequently lead, in the heated and deeper chromo- 
sphere, to an enhancement of both the bound-free Paschen 
and Balmer continua. Prediction of the resulting contin- 
uum emission requires us to compute the depth variation 
of temperature and density that results from beam bom- 
bardment. 

Depending on the amplitude of the particle energy 
flux, chromospheric condensations may or may not be 
generated. They are formed in explosive chromospheric 
heating, i.e. when the heating rate of the chromospheric 
plasma is beyond its ability to radiate, leading to a 
very rapid temperature increase (See also CHROMOSPHERE: 
HEATING MECHANISM). If the time scale for this temperature 
change is shorter than the hydrodynamic expansion time, 
a strong pressure increase follows that drives matter both 
upward and downward. The compression of the plasma 
below increases its density. That, in turn, leads to a 
decrease of its temperature in order to reduce its radiative 
loss. Achromospheric condensation moving downward is 
formed, with higher density and lower temperature than 
the surrounding atmosphere, and such condensation was 
suggested to be at the origin of white light flares. 

Computations of the white light emission of chro- 
mospheric condensations have been limited to empirical 
models, where the temperature and density of the conden- 
sation were prescribed. These computations showed that 
an increase of the white light continuum intensity requires 
the condensation to be hotter than its surroundings, while 
dynamical models of the response of the atmosphere to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


beam bombardment lead to a condensation cooler than its 
surroundings. 

Observations of white light flares during hard x-ray 
emission in the absence of chromospheric condensation 
have been reported. In a flaring ACTIVE REGION, the 
presence of electron bombardment was established by the 
characteristic shape of the Ha line profiles that exhibited 
a strong self-reversal of the emission core. The selected 
locations, where this signature was the strongest, did not 
show the typical asymmetry due to the depth dependent 
Doppler redshift, that results from the downward motion 
of chromospheric condensations. However, they were 
associated with a strong enhancement of the white 
light continuum emission. This enhancement was not 
present at other locations that showed the signatures of 
chromospheric condensation. 

Comparison of the time variation of the white light 
and hard x-ray flare continuum emission generally shows 
a good time correlation during the few minutes’ duration 
of the impulsive phase (see SOLAR FLARES: IMPULSIVE PHASE). 
Since hard x-ray emission is measured without any spatial 
resolution, comparison is made between the total hard x- 
ray power of an unresolved hard x-ray source and the 
white light flare intensity at the location of maximum 
brightness. The total power deposited into the solar 
atmosphere by an electron beam, the electron energy flux, 
and the resulting white light flare intensity, depends on the 
beam cross section. Therefore, not all hard x-ray power 
peaks are expected to be associated with white light flare 
emission. 

The overall time correlation between white light and 
hard x-ray emission varies with the hard x-ray photon 
energy. On average, a good time correlation is found, that 
increases with the photon energy. Time delays of the white 
light flare emission peak relative to the hard x-ray power 
peak above 50 keV, close to the observation time resolution 
of about 1 s, were observed. Indeed, this strongly suggests 
that energetic electrons bombarding the solar atmosphere 
are at the origin of the observed white light emission. 

Impulsive hard x-ray emission lasts only a few 
minutes and is generally followed by a more gradual rise 
and fall of the soft x-ray emission coming from the hot 
plasma generated presumably by electron bombardment. 
White light flare emission has been reported to continue 
during this gradual phase and to peak at the time of 
maximum of the 10 keV soft x-ray emission. Therefore, 
heating of the lower atmosphere by soft x-ray photons was 
proposed as the origin of the gradual phase of white light 
flares. 

For an event observed on 1 July 1980 the soft x-ray 
peak power was within a factor two of the white light 
power, supporting the hypothesis of soft X-ray irradiation 
as at the origin of the progressive phase of white light 
flare emission. In other events, at the time of the peak 
of white light emission the power radiated over 27 by 
1-8 A soft x-ray photons was reported to be an order 
of magnitude smaller than the white light flare power. 
However, the assumption of isotropic emission in soft 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Flares: White Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


x-rays, used in all comparisons, is not valid if the x- 
ray source is optically thin and not spherical. The x-ray 
intensity is then proportional to the extension of the soft 
x-ray source along the direction of photon propagation, 
and a source more extended in height that laterally would 
irradiate the lower atmosphere more than expected from 
measurements made in a direction other than vertical. 

The wavelength dependence of white light emission 
provides additional constraints on white light flare 
models. The number of events for which simultaneous 
observations of the white light spectrum and of the hard x- 
ray emission are available is still very limited. However, it 
has been reported that the wavelength spectrum of events 
for which a good time correlation between hard x-ray and 
white light flare emission is observed shows a significant 
Balmer jump, not observed in events for which there is no 
such time correlation. 

Atmospheric heating by electron beams is not 
restrained to chromospheric layers and occurs also in 
the upper photospheric layers. At the higher hydrogen 
number density of the temperature minimum region, 
electron bombardment, via an increase in the electron 
number density, enhances the H~ number density. As 
a result, atmospheric backwarming by the enhanced 
chromospheric radiation takes place, increasing the 
temperature of the upper photosphere. As an example, 
a beam of electrons with an energy distribution of the 
energy flux, above a 70 keV low-energy cut-off, given 
by a power law, carrying an energy flux of about 8 x 
10!° erg cm s~!, produces a temperature rise of 240 K 
at the temperature minimum. Consequently, the intensity 
of the H” white light continuum emission increases, 
which adds a significant contribution to the chromospheric 
hydrogen free-bound emission and reduces the amplitude 
of the Balmer jump. However, even when reduced in 
amplitude the Balmer discontinuity is still expected to be 
present in the spectrum. 

In a very few observed spectra, the Balmer 
discontinuity is not present at all. Therefore, soft x- 
ray irradiation has been proposed as possibly releasing 
energy deep enough in the solar atmosphere to generate a 
dominant H~ continuum emission. Such a model requires 
that most of the x-ray energy is deposited deep enough 
in the solar atmosphere, at a column mass higher than 
0.1 g cm. 10 keV photons satisfy this condition. As 
reported above, the observational checks of the validity 
of this hypothesis are still contradictory. 

Like electron beams, proton beams deposit energy in 
the solar atmosphere. The ratio of proton and electron 
energy needed to reach a given atmospheric depth is the 
square root of their mass ratio. Consequently, protons 
must have an energy higher than about 150 keV at the 
beginning of the flare to interact with the chromosphere, 
with an energy requirement increasing to the MeV range 
with the downward shift of the chromosphere that occurs 
during the flare. Above about 1.5 MeV, protons can 
be detected via the gamma ray lines they produce (see 
also SOLAR FLARES: GAMMA RAYS). Below this limit they are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


not detectable, except by measurements of the linear 
polarization in chromospheric lines, like the hydrogen Ha 
line, that they generate by impact. 

By non-thermal ionization of the background hydro- 
gen, protons could generate white light continuum emis- 
sion. The resulting white light flare would be time cor- 
related with the evolution of the hot, soft x-ray emitting 
thermal plasma resulting from their bombardment. De- 
pending on the proton beam characteristics, the power ra- 
diated in the white light flare could be higher than that 
radiated in soft x-rays. There will be no associated hard 
x-ray emission. 

In conclusion, in the limit of the accuracy of existing 
measurements, energy transfer from coronal heights down 
to the low atmosphere, either by energetic particles or by 
energetic soft x-ray photons, is able to explain the white 
light flare characteristics without requiring in situ energy 
deposition. However, white light flare characteristics 
depend on the energy transport processes, which could 
be either particle bombardment or x-ray irradiation, and 
on their characteristics. Consequently, observations made 
from UV to infra-red, in hard and soft x-rays, with high 
space and time resolution, are still needed in order to 
progress in our understanding of the white light flares. 


Bibliography 

Canfield R C et al 1986 Impulsive phase transport Energetic 
Phenomena on the Sun (NASA Conf. Publ. 2439) 
ed M Kundu and B Woodgate pp 26-31 

Carrington R C 1859 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 20 13 

Svestka 1976 Solar Flares (Dordrecht: Reidel) 


J C Hénoux 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior 


The interior of the Sun is hidden from our sight, because 
it is opaque to electromagnetic waves: the radiation we 
receive from it on Earth is emitted in the outermost layers. 
Our knowledge of the solar interior is based solely on 
theoretical models which are built with some assumptions 
about the physical conditions and processes that are likely 
to prevail there, and on helioseismology, a very powerful 
technique which permits us to explore the interior directly 
with acoustic waves. 


General properties 
Until recently, all that we knew about the Sun came from 
observing it in visible light (see SUN: BASIC PROPERTIES). Its 
distance and radius Ro were determined long ago by 
triangulation of the solar system, although the precision 
was increased significantly by using the modern technique 
of radar echoes. In the early nineteenth century, 
spectroscopy of the solar light revealed the gaseous 
nature of the emitting layers and the presence of many 
chemical elements known on Earth, with the notable 
exception of helium, which was detected on the Sun 
before it was discovered on Earth. Later, with the 
advent of atomic physics, it became possible to decipher 
the spectral lines, and to assess the temperature and 
composition of the surface layers (See SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY 
ANDDIAGNOSTICS): hydrogen turned out to be most abundant 
species, followed by helium (*~25% in mass), the other 
elements representing only 2% altogether. The mass of 
the Sun, Mo, is deduced from the orbital motions of the 
planets and from precise laboratory measurements of the 
gravitational attraction between two bodies. Finally, the 
heat flux received on Earth gives the total amount of 
thermal energy radiated by the Sun into space, i.e. its 
luminosity Lo (See SOLAR IRRADIANCE). 

With a few ‘reasonable’ assumptions, these global 
parameters permit us to derive some important properties 
of the solar interior. 


Central temperature 

The first of these assumptions is that of hydrostatic 
equilibrium, which states that everywhere in the solar 
interior there is an exact balance between gravity and the 
pressure forces. This allows us to evaluate the central 
pressure, which is the weight of a column of matter of unit 
area; it is given by P. = PgRo where p and g are suitable 
averages of the density and the gravity along the radius. 
As crude estimates, one may take the median value of all 
the quantities involved: 

Pc M o/ 2 


py 


2 


with p, being the central density and G the gravitational 
constant, which leads to 
GMo 


Po & Pe Ra 
(0) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


One may further assume that the solar material consists 
mostly of ionized hydrogen, as suggested by its surface 
composition, the molecular mass thus being ~ = 0.5 g, 
and that it obeys the perfect gas law P = RpT/, with 
R being the gas constant. This yields an estimate of the 
central temperature which depends only on the mass and 


the radius: 
~ HU GMo 


Teentral ~ 


~10’K (1) 
o) 

acrude figure which is not that far from the value predicted 

by the best models of the present Sun. 


Heat transport 

This high temperature, compared with that of the surface 
layers (See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE) Whose effective temperature 
is Tog * 6000 K, tells us that the thermal energy radiated 
into space is produced in the deep interior. One way 
to transport this energy to the surface is by radiation: 
the photons travel a short distance, are either scattered 
in another direction, or absorbed and re-emitted, and so 
on, until they finally reach the outermost layers from 
which they escape. Their mean-free path is small enough 
to guarantee that the solar interior is locally in thermal 
equilibrium and thus that the radiation is close to that of 
the ideal black body, meaning that the energy density only 
depends on temperature, and that it scales as T*. This 
allows us to estimate the optical thickness t of the Sun along 


its radius 
Teaser \ 
tk ( centra ) es 1033. 
Tee 


This huge figure indicates that the Sun is extremely 
opaque: on the average, the mean free path of a photon is 
of order Ro/t © 10-7 cm. 

If it did not interact so strongly with matter, a photon 
emitted in the central region would cross the Sun in 2 s, 
but this very opaque medium forces it into a random walk: 
instead of t interactions with matter, it will undergo Tt 
and therefore it will take t times longer to escape, which 
amounts to 10° years. 

But closer inspection of the solar surface shows that it 
is the seat of turbulent motions which also contribute to the 
heat transport. Indeed, near the surface, where hydrogen 
and helium are partly ionized, the opacity is so high that 
the thermal stratification becomes unstable: a bubble of 
solar matter which is lifted there from its equilibrium 
position becomes lighter than its environment, and hence 
it continues to rise. This convective instability occurs 
whenever the temperature gradient exceeds a critical 
value, which is the adiabatic gradient (i.e. the gradient that 
would be experienced by the bubble if it did not exchange 
heat with the surrounding medium). The instability 
condition is called the Schwarzschild criterion; it is usually 
expressed in terms of logarithmic temperature gradients 
with respect to pressure: 


dlog T Geez 


= or in short V > Vag. 
d log P a log P Ves 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Detailed models indicate that this criterion is satisfied in 
the outer third of the Sun (in radius). This turbulent region 
is the cause of the various phenomena which characterize 
the solar activity. Unfortunately, the description of the 
convective motions is still in a very crude state, and it 
remains one of the weakest points of modeling the solar 
interior (See SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE). The inner 
two-thirds of the Sun are in stable equilibrium, and there 
the thermal energy is transported by radiation. 


The energy source 

The source of solar energy long remained a puzzle. All 
energy sources which were considered in the nineteenth 
century predicted a life expectancy for the Sun which 
was much smaller than the estimated age of some 
rocks on Earth. The problem was solved only in the 
1920s, as scientists became aware that nuclear reactions 
could provide the necessary energy. When hydrogen is 
transformed into helium, 0.7% of the mass is changed into 
energy, according to Einstein’s formula E = mc*. One can 
easily estimate the Sun’s life expectancy tx, by equating 
the rate at which energy is emitted with the total amount 
which is available: 


fexp = 0.1 x 0.007Moc?/Lo © 10° years 


where we have assumed that only 1/10 of the solar 
material will be changed into energy, namely that which 
is located in the innermost region, where the temperature 
is high enough to sustain nuclear reactions. This figure 
is compatible with the age of the solar system, which is 
now determined by the precise radiochemistry of its oldest 
components which can be analysed, namely meteorites. 

The specific nuclear reactions which are responsible 
for the energy release in the Sun were identified later. The 
main contribution comes from the p—p chain, which starts 
with the fusion of two protons into a nucleus of deuterium: 
ptp —? H+et+»,. This reaction involves the weak 
interaction and therefore emits a neutrino; since it is very 
slow, it regulates the whole energy production process. 
Other reactions follow, until *He is produced (see soLaR 
INTERIOR: ENERGY GENERATION). 

The next step of nuclear burning would transform 
helium into carbon, but with an efficiency ten times less 
per unit mass processed. This explains why most stars are 
observed in the hydrogen burning phase, on the so-called 
main sequence. 

The rate of production of nuclear energy in the solar 
interior is very sensitive to temperature, because the fusion 
of two nuclei can only occur when their electrostatic 
repulsion is overcome by their kinetic energy: the higher 
the temperature, the higher the release of nuclear energy. 
This has an important consequence: assume that for some 
reason the production of nuclear energy slightly increases; 
additional heat is then deposited in the outer layers, which 
for this reason expand, but through hydrostatic balance 
that increase in radius leads to a decrease of the central 
temperature (see equation (1)), which has the effect of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reducing the nuclear reaction rate. This self-regulation 
ensures that main-sequence stars, such as the Sun, are in 
stable thermal equilibrium. 


Modeling the solar interior 

Astellar model describes the internal constitution of a star, 
namely its pressure and temperature stratification, and 
also its chemical composition, as a function of depth, at 
a given age (See SOLAR INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS). Usually 
such models are based on the assumption of hydrostatic 
equilibrium, although small departures from it are easily 
accounted for. Most models also assume spherical 
symmetry, a simplification which is well justified for the 
Sun, where the rotation is so slow that the centrifugal force 
may indeed be neglected compared with gravity. 

The conservation laws for mass, momentum and 
energy yield a differential system which is of fourth order 
in space and of first order in time. Four boundary 
conditions are available for the main dependent variables: 
the obvious m = O for the mass and L = O for the 
luminosity at center r = 0, with the pressure P and the 
temperature T at the surface being borrowed from an 
atmospheric model. This would be sufficient to build a 
model if the chemical composition were known at each 
depth, but it too must be calculated in a consistent way. 
For that purpose one has to add a set of n differential 
equations, of first order in time and second order in 
space, which follow the evolution of n chemical species 
under the effect of nuclear reactions and/or microscopic 
diffusion; the associated boundary conditions simply 
state that the flux of each species vanishes at center and 
surface. In the first stellar models built in the 1950s, one 
was able only to track the transformation of hydrogen 
into helium, but nowadays n is no longer limited by 
computer performance. Finally one has to provide an 
equation of state to express the pressure as a function of 
density, temperature and composition, P = P(p,T, X;), 
the nuclear energy production rate e = e(p, T, X;) and the 
opacity x = «(p, T, X;) which determines the temperature 
gradient in the radiative regions. The time integration of 
this differential system is started at an early stage, when 
the star is still entirely convective, with specified uniform 
composition. 


The need to calibrate 

Mathematically, the problem is well defined: the 
differential system is of order 4+ 2n in space with an equal 
number of imposed boundary conditions. Its numerical 
integration presents no fundamental difficulty. Thus it 
would seem that it suffices to run a stellar structure code 
with specified mass Mo to the present age of the Sun 
in order to obtain an acceptable solar model. Such a 
model could then be validated by comparing the predicted 
radius and luminosity with the observed ones. This 
would indeed be the case if the initial composition were 
known with high precision and if the physical processes 
coming into play were all translated into perfect numerical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


prescriptions. Unfortunately, these two conditions are not 
yet satisfied. 

The abundance of helium determined by spec- 
troscopy is rather inaccurate: most of its spectral lines are 
hard to interpret because they are produced in the chro- 
mosphere and in the corona, where there are large devi- 
ations from local thermodynamic equilibrium. Further- 
more, what one needs to start the time integration is the 
initial abundance Yo, which may depart significantly from 
the present one because helium, being heavier than hy- 
drogen, may have settled below the observed layers. For 
this reason Yo is taken as an arbitrary parameter (chosen in 
some reasonable range), to be adjusted by comparing the 
model with the actual Sun. 

Another major uncertainty arises from the poor 
description of the convective heat transport. The recipe 
which is still commonly used, for lack of something better, 
also involves an arbitrary parameter, which is the ratio 
between the mean-free path of the convective eddies (the 
so-called mixing length) and the pressure scale height. 

For these reasons, the time integration of the 
constitutive equations is started with trial values for the 
two parameters Yo and a, and the resulting radius and 
luminosity, at the age of the Sun, are compared with the 
actual values Ro and Lo. This procedure is iterated until 
the calibration is judged satisfactory, considering the other 
uncertainties. 


The standard model 

The standard model may be defined as the model which 
uses the best physical data that are available (equation 
of state, opacities, nuclear reaction rates) and which 
agrees best with the observations, while including the 
minimum of physical processes to achieve this result. As 
the observational constraints become more severe, the 
standard model is bound to include physical processes 
which have been neglected before. At the time of 
writing, the last process implemented in the standard 
model was the microscopic diffusion of helium and the 
heavy elements in the radiation zone, and this addition 
was required by the helioseismic profiles which clearly 
indicated that helium has settled out of the convection 
zone (see below). 


Probing the solar interior 


Since the observed values of the solar luminosity and 
radius are needed to calibrate the initial helium abundance 
Yo and the mixing length parameter a, one has to use other 
means to check the accuracy of solar models. Indirect 
evidence can be gleaned from observing the properties 
of other stars, for which models have been built with 
the same prescriptions (See SOLAR-STELLAR CONNECTION). But 
fortunately we dispose of means which allow us to probe 
the solar interior directly. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Solar neutrinos 
Unlike photons, neutrinos show extremely little interac- 
tion with matter and therefore most of those emitted by the 
fusion of hydrogen in the central region of the Sun escape 
and a very small fraction of these can be detected on Earth. 
Indeed, no fewer than six different experiments have mea- 
sured the flux of solar neutrinos, thus proving that the solar 
energy arises from nuclear fusion (see NEUTRINOS). Origi- 
nally, the expectation was that these experiments would 
provide precious constraints on the central conditions of 
the Sun. However, the measured flux turned out to be 
systematically smaller than that predicted by the standard 
model, by a margin which cannot be reconciled by ad- 
justing the sensitive parameters; we shall see below that 
non-standard models do not fare much better, although 
they include additional physical processes (see below). 
The reason for this discrepancy has been the matter 
of long-standing debate. Is it due to serious imperfections 
of the standard model? Or is there something wrong with 
the experiments and their interpretation, as suggested by 
the incompatibility of their results? Or is the observed 
deficit due to some unknown property of the neutrino, 
beyond the electroweak theory? Recent results obtained 
at SuperKamiokande seem to favor the latter explanation; 
their straightforward explanation is that neutrinos have 
a non-zero mass; the neutrinos emitted in the solar core 
would then oscillate between two states, of which only 
one is detected by the present experiments. Thus it is quite 
possible that in the not too distant future the neutrino flux 
can be used to probe the solar core. 


Helioseismology 

Fortunately another technique has been developed in 
the meantime for the same purpose of sounding the 
solar interior, and it has turned out to be extremely 
powerful: called helioseismology, it makes use of 
the elastic properties of the Sun which allow for the 
propagation of waves. The sound waves observed at the 
surface of the Sun penetrate to a depth which depends 
on their frequency and on their wavelength; through an 
appropriate treatment inspired by seismology on Earth, 
they reveal some properties of the layers which they 
traverse (See HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS and. HELIOSEISMOLOGY 
THEORY). 

The vertical profile of the sound velocity determined 
by this technique has now reached a precision of the order 
of 10-4, thus calling for models built with at least the same 
numerical accuracy, and also for a refined evaluation of 
solar age. Helioseismology permits us to locate the base 
of the convection zone within a thousandth of the radius, 
and it proves unquestionably that helium has settled below 
it. The characteristics of high-degree modes allow us 
to evaluate the helium content of the convection zone. 
Moreover, the rotational splitting of the mode frequencies 
yields the internal rotation velocity of the Sun as a function 
of depth and latitude. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rotation of the solar interior 

Helioseismology has revealed that the angular velocity 
varies with latitude in the solar convection zone, the 
equator rotating faster than the poles as observed at 
the surface, but that it depends little on depth (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). Deeper down, the radiation zone 
appears to rotate almost uniformly, with the possible 
exception of the innermost core. The shallow boundary 
layer between the two rotation regimes, which has been 
called the tachocline, is a region of strong vertical shear, 
and it certainly plays a crucial role in the generation of 
the toroidal component of the magnetic field (see SOLAR 
ACTIVITY). 


Non-standard models 

The present standard model fits the helioseismic data 
rather well: within a few thousandths, when comparing 
the observed and predicted sound velocities. Many solar 
physicists believe that this excellent agreement will further 
improve with better opacities, better nuclear reaction 
rates, some refinements of the equation of state and more 
accurate determinations of the chemical composition. 
However, there are some observations which call for 
the implementation, in the model, of additional physical 
processes which have been neglected until now. 

One is the depletion of lithium with age which is 
observed in solar-type stars: the lithium abundance is 
100 times higher at the surface of young stars of solar 
mass (members of the Pleiades cluster, for example) than 
it is in the Sun. The reason is certainly that this fragile 
element is destroyed inside the Sun by the nuclear reaction 
“Litp—*He+*He, but the temperature at the base of the 
convection zone is not high enough to explain such a large 
depletion. Therefore some mixing must occur within the 
radiation zone to carry lithium deeper down, and non- 
standard models have been built to account for this mixing 
(see the review by Pinsonneault 1997). Some invoke 
macoscopic motions, such as the large-scale flow which 
is induced by the spin-down of the star and the weak 
turbulence caused by the shear of differential rotation. 
Others ascribe this extra transport to the gravity waves 
which are emitted by the convective motions at the base 
of the convection zone. 

Some mixing is also needed to soften the profile of 
molecular weight below the convection zone; microscopic 
diffusion and gravitational settling alone would establish 
a gradient whose steepness is incompatible with the 
helioseismic data. The fact that this mixing ought to occur 
in the strong shear of the tachocline is hardly a coincidence. 

Non-standard models are also required to correctly 
predict the observed internal rotation of the Sun: in 
particular, they have to explain why the radiative interior 
appears to rotate so slowly and so uniformly. Before this 
property was established by helioseismology, the solar 
core was expected to rotate faster than the convective 
envelope, whichis spun down by the solar wind. Magnetic 
torques can easily achieve that uniform rotation, but other 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mechanisms may also contribute, such as the transport of 
angular momentum by gravity waves. 

Other non-standard models have been built to 
produce a smaller flux of neutrinos, in an effort to 
match the observed values; in general they introduce 
some extra mixing in the solar core, which modifies 
chemical composition and therefore the network of nuclear 
reactions and the emission of neutrinos. But so far 
these models have failed to comply with the helioseismic 
constraints. Work progresses very actively on such non- 
standard models. 


Bibliography 

Hansen C J and Kawaler S D 1994 Stellar Interiors; Physical 
Principles, Structure, and Evolution (Berlin: Springer) 

Kippenhahn R and Weigert A 1990 Stellar Structure and 
Evolution (Berlin: Springer) 

Pinsonneault M 1997 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 557 

Stix M 1989 The Sun (Berlin: Springer) 


Jean-Paul Zahn 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Convection Theory 


Convection is the transport of energy by hot fluid moving 
upwards and cold fluid moving downwards. A familiar 
example is the upwards and downwards motions one 
may observe (best just before the boiling point) when 
heating water in a casserole. In stars, convection is often 
responsible for transporting heat up to the visible surface, 
or for transporting heat away from the central parts of the 
star, where energy is being generated by nuclear processes. 

Whether or not convection occurs in a certain region 
of a star depends on how transparent or opaque the region 
is to radiation. The transparency (or its inverse, the 
opacity) determines the temperature gradient necessary 
to transport the total stellar energy output; the stellar 
luminosity. If the temperature gradient exceeds a 
certain critical threshold (which depends on the detailed 
properties of the gas), then the gas is convectively 
unstable, and convective motions occur spontaneously. 
The convective motions assist in the transportation of the 
stellar luminosity towards the surface, where the energy is 
finally radiated away freely into space in the form of light. 

In the Sun, conditions are such that convection is 
the dominant energy transport mechanism in the outer 
30% (by radius), while there is no convective transport 
of energy associated with the energy-generating central 
region. 

Convective motions are directly visible on the solar 
surface; energy-carrying scales give rise to a cellular 
brightness pattern called GRANULATION (sizes from a 
few hundred to several thousand km), while larger, 
more deeply rooted scales are visible as patterns of 
primarily horizontal motions called meso-granulation 
(up to about 10000 km) and super-granulation (up to 
about 100 000 km) (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: MESOGRANULATION; 
SUPERGRANULATION). 


Density stratification 
One of the most decisive conditions influencing the way 
convection in the Sun has to organize itself is the enormous 
range of mass densities in the SOLAR INTERIOR. Figure 1 shows 
the density and pressure stratification, illustrating that the 
density (pressure) increases by over ten (fourteen) orders 
of magnitude from the surface down to the center of the 
Sun, where nuclear processes are generating the energy. 
Note that, even though the solar convection zone 
extends over only 30% of the radius, eight orders of 
magnitude of density change occur there. These eight 
orders of magnitude have again been split into half, 
to illustrate that the top four orders of magnitude of 
density change occur within only 3000 km of the surface 
(corresponding to about 4% of the radius). The reason why 
one order of magnitude of density (or pressure) change 
near the surface covers a much smaller depth interval than 
further down is that the density scale height, defined as 
H, = dz/dlnp, is roughly proportional to temperature, 
and the temperature increases with depth below the solar 
surface. (See also SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


T T m T T T T * T 
102 L 700 Mm 
0 o 
107 a 
L on ~7* radiative 
40 ae 
no Pia 
ou - 
2s r wie 
a -4 rd N near adiabatic 
10 "F —— 3mm ——__~ 
10°6 \ optically thi 
optically thick 
r N surface 
10°8 \ optically thin 


1 L 1 4 L 
tol 4912 4014 4016 
P [cgs] 


107 = 10° ~— 108 


Figure 1. The density and pressure stratification of the Sun. The 
figure extends from the top of the photosphere to the center of 
the Sun. The properties of the thin transition region between the 
optically thin layers of the solar photosphere and the convection 
zone are crucial for the structure of the whole convection zone. 


The small ‘plateau’ in the density marks the visible 
surface of the Sun. There, the temperature drops so 
rapidly that the density (which is roughly proportional 
to the pressure divided by the temperature) stays nearly 
constant, or even decreases slightly with depth. The 
pressure must necessarily increase monotonically with 
depth, since the pressure at any one depth is determined 
by the weight of all the mass at smaller depths (larger 
radii). But there is relatively little mass in the thin surface 
layer where the temperature drops rapidly (from about 
10000 K to about 5000 K over less than 100 km), and 
thus the pressure does not change much, and therefore the 
temperature drop is reflected in the density stratification 
as that little plateau. 

The occurrence of that plateau, where the density 
scale height is radically different, and possibly even goes 
to infinity (this happens if the density has a local minimum 
there), may have significantly influenced the development 
of the theory of stellar convection. It was clear to 
researchers early on that the rapid change of density with 
depth must have important consequences for the flow 
patterns. 

Consider, for example, two depth levels, where the 
vertical velocities are about the same, but the density 
differs by a factor of ten. The amount of matter transported 
upwards (as well as downwards) then is ten times larger 
through the deeper lying level, and all of the upward 
moving mass clearly cannot be accommodated by the 
higher lying level. The downward moving mass at 
that higher level, on the other hand, can easily be 
accommodated by the lower lying level, taking up only 
10% of the downward mass transport capacity there. One 
concludes that most of the ascending gas from the lower 
lying level has to turn over into descending motion in 
between the two levels (thus making up the remaining 
90% of downflow there). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It would then have been natural to incorporate 
the density scale height H,, mentioned earlier, into a 
theoretical description of convection. However, because 
the density scale height may become infinite, whereas the 
pressure scale height by necessity is regular (while still 
being comparable to the density scale height where that is 
regular) one chose to instead use the pressure scale height 
as the geometrical scaling parameter of the theory. 

The theory, that was developed for stellar convection 
by Erika Vitense (1953), thus has as one of its main 
ingredients the assumption that ascending hot gas must 
necessarily mix with descending, cooler gas over a 
distance that is roughly proportional to the pressure scale 
height, Hp = dz/dIn P, which for an ideal gas is equal to 
RT/g, where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, 
g is the acceleration of gravity and jz is the mean molecular 
weight. 

The distance over which mixing occurs is thus written 
as € = aHp, where a is a free parameter of the theory. 
In analogy with similar early theories for laboratory 
turbulence, the distance & was called a ‘mixing length’, 
the parameter a was called the ‘mixing length parameter’, 
and the theory has been referred to as the ‘mixing length 
theory’ever since. 


Convective heat transport 

Heat transport by convection occurs because upward 
moving gas, which is hotter, transports more energy 
upwards than cooler, downward moving gas transports 
downwards. The rate of convective energy transport, the 
convective energy flux, is therefore proportional to the 
product of the velocity amplitude and the amplitude of the 
temperature fluctuations. Pressure is roughly constant in 
horizontal planes, and one may thus invoke the specific 
heat capacity at constant pressure, Cp, and write the 
convective energy flux as 


Frony © (pUuzCp AT) (1) 


where u, is the vertical velocity (positive upwards), and 
AT is the temperature fluctuation. 

The convective instability occurs when vertical 
motions spontaneously generate positively correlated 
temperature and velocity perturbations. A parcel of gas 
that is displaced upwards expands and cools, because of 
the drop in pressure with height. The cooling is associated 
with adiabatic expansion, i.e. expansion without exchange 
of heat. Cooling by expansion is the process at work in a 
refrigerator, and the inverse, heating by compression, is 
the process at work in the cylinders of an engine (before 
ignition). 

If the mean temperature drop with height is larger 
than the adiabatic cooling, then the displaced parcel 
finds itself hotter than the surroundings. Conversely, a 
downward displaced parcel of gas from above becomes 
cooler than the surroundings. Since hotter gas is lighter, 
and cooler gas is heavier, such perturbations are self- 
amplifying; the larger weight accelerates the cooler gas 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


further downwards, while the lighter gas is accelerated 
upwards. 

The mixing of ascending and descending gas 
mentioned earlier implies mixing of hot and cold gas, 
and mixing of upwards and downwards motions, and 
hence a loss of organized heat transport. It is the 
balance between the spontaneous growth associated with 
the convective instability and the loss associated with 
the mixing that ultimately determines the level at which 
convection saturates, for any given temperature gradient. 

Balancing the loss of vertical momentum against the 
gain from the acceleration associated with the temperature 
difference AT one obtains the estimate 


u2 ~ a HpgAT/T (2) 


where g is the acceleration of gravity and a is a parameter 
of the order of unity. Balancing the growth of temperature 
differences from vertical motions against the loss from 
mixing one obtains the estimate 


AT dlnT dinT 3) 
T  “ladinp \dinP . 
adiabatic 


where a again is a parameter of the order of unity, 
and where the bracket is the difference between the 
actual temperature gradient and the one that corresponds 
to adiabatic expansion/contraction with height—this 
temperature gradient difference is often denoted AV. 

When taken together, the equations above imply 
that the convective energy flux may be expected to scale 
roughly as 


Feony © 0°!" pesCpT (AV)? (4) 


where @ is a parameter of the order of unity that satisfies 
3/2 — ay! 209 / rr; ? where I’, is the adiabatic gas gamma, 
relating P/p to sound speed c,. The quantity pc,;CpT has 
the dimension of an energy flux and in the interior of the 
Sun it is much larger than the actual solar energy flux. This 
means that the difference between the actual temperature 
gradient and the adiabatic one, AV, is small, and that 
consequently the relative temperature fluctuations AT /T 
and the ratio of velocity to sound speed u/c also are small. 

One may therefore conclude that in the interior of 
the Sun convection is able to carry practically all of 
the required energy flux with relatively weak convective 
velocities, maintained by a temperature gradient that 
differs only little from the adiabatic one. 

Close to the surface of the Sun this is no longer 
true; there the mass densities p, the sound speed c, 
and the temperature T have all dropped so much that 
convective velocities reach a good fraction of the sound 
speed, the relative temperature fluctuations are large, and 
the temperature gradient deviates significantly from the 
adiabatic one. 


a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Near-surface convection 

The visible surface of the Sun occurs where the 
dimensionless optical depth t, is equal to unity. The 
optical depth increment dz, is equal to px, dz, so it 
is proportional to the mass density and the absorption 
coefficient «;, (that has dimension m? kg“! in SI units). At 
temperatures of the order of the solar surface temperature, 
k varies extremely rapidly with temperature (« ~ T!). In 
addition, a large number of atomic and molecular spectral 
lines also make the wavelength dependence of «, very 
complicated. 

The ultimate outcome of the decreasing efficiency 
of convective energy transport and the rapid decrease 
of opacity with decreasing temperature is that, near 
the solar surface, radiative energy transport again takes 
over as the dominant energy transport mechanism, after 
having turned over the responsibility for energy transport 
to convective motions in the solar convection zone. 
The transition occurs in an extremely narrow boundary 
layer, the thickness of which is significantly smaller 
than a pressure scale height, and much smaller than the 
horizontal size of the energy-carrying convection cells. 

Because of the relatively low efficiency of convec- 
tion in the crucial layers near the solar surface, the tran- 
sition from predominantly convective to predominantly 
radiative energy transport is accompanied by a significant 
drop in entropy; there is a thin but very important super- 
adiabatic layer that separates the optical surface of the Sun 
from the almost adiabatic interior. It is this layer that gives 
rise to the near-surface ‘plateau’ in density in figure 1, and 
it is also this layer that ultimately determines the radius 
of the Sun; if the entropy jump were different, the whole 
convection zone would have to adjust, so as to maintain 
the correct surface luminosity. 


Numerical modeling 

It is in practice impossible to determine the quantitative 
properties of the transition from convective to radiative 
convective energy transport by analytical means; there are 
too many, too complicated processes that interact. 

There are two compounding reasons in particular 
that complicate the physics of the solar surface layers: 
on the one hand the optical properties, and on the other 
hand the very strong density and pressure stratification 
of the solar surface layers. The crucial transition from 
convective to radiative energy transport thus takes place 
inside convection cells, across a thin surface layer that is 
itself buckling and folding in response to local changes 
of the velocity and temperature patterns. At the same 
time, across a height extent of the order of characteristic 
horizontal scales of the energy carrying cells, the density 
varies by several orders of magnitude (cf figure 1). 

Thus, whereas the scaling analysis leading to the 
‘mixing length’ estimates above is useful to obtain order 
of magnitude estimates (and for many years have been 
used even for quantitative modeling, after ‘calibrating’ 
the mixing length parameter a empirically), one cannot 
hope to obtain self-consistent, parameter-free prediction 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. A composite illustration obtained by combining 
warped images from numerical simulations onto the faces of a 
cut-out view of the Sun. The quantity displayed is the entropy, 
which is almost constant in the convection zone, and is lower in 
the solar interior. 


without actually including all relevant physical processes 
in sufficient detail. For that, one must resort to 
accurate numerical modeling. (See NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
OF CONVECTION: COMPARISON WITH MIXING LENGTH THEORY.) 

The circumstance that a shallow surface layer is 
almost all that matters, in so far as both observable 
surface properties and the influence of convection on the 
solar structure is concerned, is then indeed fortunate. It 
means that detailed 3D models may be restricted to a 
region only somewhat larger than that layer, thus avoiding 
most of the complications of covering multiple scales 
(in space and time). Also, for the very same reason 
that numerical modeling is really required, i.e. large- 
amplitude temperature fluctuations and ratios of velocity 
to sound speed v/c, no longer small, fully compressible 
3D simulations become feasible, because turn-over times 
are comparable to the sound travel times. 

Deeper down, where the convective velocities are 
much smaller than the sound speed, and where the actual 
solar flux is much smaller than pc,C pT, direct numerical 
simulations are still prohibitively costly, because too many 
time steps are required to follow the slow motions. There, 
one may instead make scaled models that have convective 
fluxes much larger than the actual solar flux. From 
equations (2) and (4) one expects the velocity to scale as 
v ~ F1/°_, and the temperature to scale as 5T ~ F2/>.. It 
is thus possible to rescale the results of such simulations 
to solar conditions. Properties such as the topology of the 
flow are expected to be invariant under such scalings. 

Figure 2 shows results from such scaled models, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


wrapped onto a spherical model of the Sun. Also 
shown is an inset with a blow-up of the surface radiation 
intensity of a model of the solar surface layers. Typical 
geometrical scales and evolution times in the surface 
model are a few thousand km, and a few minutes, 
respectively. The corresponding numbers for the lower 
part of the convection zone are of the order of a few 
hundred thousand km, and a few weeks, respectively. This 
illustrates why it is not possible to cover all geometrical 
scales and all time scales in a single numerical model. 
Nevertheless, numerical models are very helpful, both as 
a guide to the development of theoretical concepts, and 
as a source of synthetic observational data that may be 
compared in a direct, forward manner with observations. 


Bibliography 

Spruit H C, Nordlund A and Title A 1990 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 28 263-301 

Stein R F and Nordlund A 1998 Astrophys. J. 499 914 

Vitense E 1953 Z. Astrophys. 32 135 


Ake Nordlund 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone 


The Sun, like all main sequence stars of moderate mass, 
possesses a deep convective envelope just below its surface 
in which turbulent fluid motions serve to carry outward 
the energy flux that results from nuclear burning within 
its core. Observations of the Sun reveal complex flows and 
magnetic structures that are evidence of highly turbulent 
convection just below the surface of this rotating star. 
Theoretical models of stellar structure and evolution 
indicate that such convection must extend from the surface 
well into the interior within the present Sun, forming 
a convection zone occupying about the outer 30% by 
radius (or a depth of nearly 200 Mm). Within this outer 
envelope, convective motions will transport nearly all of 
the emerging flux of energy, whereas below it radiation 
suffices to carry the flux outward from the core. The energy 
transport by fluid motion is very efficient throughout the 
convection zone, except in a thin superadiabatic boundary 
layer immediately beneath the photosphere in which 
there is a transition to transport by radiation in the solar 
atmosphere. There is another complex transition layer 
at the bottom of the zone where penetrative convective 
motions extend a small distance into the very stable 
radiative interior. 


Intricate turbulent dynamics 
Intense turbulence within the convection zone not only 
transports heat but also continually redistributes angular 
momentum. This leads to a pronounced DIFFERENTIAL 
ROTATION Within the convection zone. It has long been 
known from observation of features such as sunspots that 
the surface of the Sun rotates differentially: there is a 
smooth poleward decline in the angular velocity Q, the 
sidereal rotation period being about 25 days in equatorial 
regions and about 33 days near the poles. More recently, 
helioseismology has revealed how Q varies with both 
radius and latitude throughout much of the solar interior. 
The convection also appears to build magnetic fields by 
some form of DYNAMO action, the details of which are 
likely to depend sensitively on the rotation profile that 
is established both within the convection zone and in 
a region of overshooting immediately beneath its base. 
Yet how the turbulence couples to the rotation and the 
magnetic field is not understood in detail. It is very 
difficult to describe theoretically the dynamics of such 
highly nonlinear compressible fluid flows that extend over 
many decades in scale. One of the novel aspects of such 
dynamics is that amidst the apparent chaos there also 
appears to be distinct order. This is suggested by the 
relatively smooth variation of angular velocity observed 
at the solar surface, and by the nearly cyclic temporal 
variation of magnetic activity, involving sunspot eruptions 
with very well defined rules for field parity and emergence 
latitudes as the cycle evolves. 

The convection zone of the Sun thus exhibits some 
striking properties that have largely defied theoretical ex- 
planation. Most prominent are issues concerning its ro- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


tation profile with latitude and depth (the ‘solar differen- 
tial rotation problem’), and the manner in which the Sun 
achieves its 22-year cycles of magnetic activity (‘solar dy- 
namo problem’). Both global issues touch on the seeming 
inconsistency that turbulence can be both highly intermit- 
tent and chaotic on smaller spatial and temporal scales, 
and yet achieve a large-scale order that is robust in char- 
acter. Observations of the solar surface show that the Sun 
possesses a wide range of scales of convection, ranging 
from granules (~10° km or 1 Mm in horizontal size), to 
mesogranules (~5 Mm), to supergranules (~30 Mm), to 
possible patterns of giant cells comparable to the over- 
all depth of that zone (~200 Mm) (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
GRANULATION, SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: MESOGRANULATION and. so- 
LAR PHOTOSPHERE: SUPERGRANULATION). Similar scale separa- 
tion is seen temporally. Small-scale magnetic fields rekin- 
dle with the turnover of the granulation (~10 min), and yet 
somehow the Sun achieves 22-year cycles of magnetic ac- 
tivity. The wide range of dynamical scales involved with 
turbulence in the Sun presents severe challenges to both 
theory and numerical simulation: in the convection zone 
of the Sun these scales range from about 10° km (about the 
depth of the convective layer) to 0.1 km or smaller (dissipa- 
tion scales), encompassing at least six orders of magnitude 
for each physical dimension. The largest current turbu- 
lence simulations can capture about three orders of mag- 
nitude in each dimension. Theoretical progress in dealing 
with the turbulent dynamics of the solar convection zone 
thus requires trade-offs in either studying a highly turbu- 
lent but localized portion of a convecting spherical shell 
or a less turbulent but full shell with correct account of 
geometry. 

The magnetic fields that emerge into the solar 
atmosphere are also diverse in character, and this must 
reflect how they are produced and shuffled within the 
depths of the convection zone. The cyclic eruption of 
strong magnetic fields through the solar surface in the form 
of sunspots and ACTIVE REGIONS has long been a center of 
attention. In the active Sun, large sunspots have central 
dark umbras with field strengths of 2000 to 3000 G and 
diameters as great as 10 Mm, surrounded by a brighter 
penumbra of up to three times that size. The largest of 
such active region complexes can span a good fraction 
of the disk. Yet observations have shown that magnetic 
flux is also emerging at a comparable rate during the 
quieter phases of the 22-year cycles, but does so through far 
smaller structures. In the quiet Sun, much of the magnetic 
energy resides in compact flux elements or tubes with 
strengths of the order of 1000 G to 1500 G, with these 
occupying only a very small fraction of the surface area to 
yield an average field strength of a few gauss. The smallest 
of the detected compact magnetic structures are the bright 
points, about 0.1 Mm in size, visible in the intergranular 
lanes. The magnetic fields also appear as somewhat larger 
structures, possibly composed of many individual flux 
tubes assembled into flux ropes that have broken through 
the solar surface, appearing as dark magnetic pores about 
1 Mm across. Such strong field components in the quiet 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sun are augmented by a weaker component made up of 
many small dipole loop pairs with field strengths possibly 
as low as 50 G. The gradual sweeping of magnetic fields 
to mesogranule and supergranule boundaries yields an 
ordering of these fields into networks of larger scales, with 
such relatively narrow but widely spaced network lanes 
occupied by compact field elements. 


Solar differential rotation 

The advent of helioseismology, which involves the 
study of the acoustic p-mode oscillations of the solar 
interior that are observable at the surface, has permitted 
probing of both structure and dynamics below the solar 
surface. The profiles of angular velocity (Q) revealed 
by helioseismology have turned out to be revolutionary, 
for they are unlike any anticipated by theory prior to 
such probing of the interior of a star. The convection 
in early numerical simulations of rotating convection in 
spherical shells was dominated by columnar roll-like cells 
(or ‘banana cells’) oriented in a north-south direction, the 
tilting of which yield nonlinear interactions or ‘Reynolds 
stresses’ that sustain the differential rotation. Such 
convection models yielded an angular velocity Q nearly 
constant on cylinders, aligned with the rotation axis and 
decreasing with depth in the equatorial plane. The Sun 
does not appear to comply. 

Helioseismology has shown that the rotation profiles 
obtained by inversion of frequency splittings of the p 
modes have a decidedly different character: the angular 
velocity observed near the surface, where the rotation is 
faster at the equator than near the poles, extends through 
much of the convection zone with little radial dependence. 
In particular, Q at high latitudes in the convection zone 
appears to increase slowly with depth, at mid-latitudes it 
is nearly constant on radial lines, and near the equator 
it first increases and then gently decreases with depth. 
Another striking feature is the region of strong shear at 
the base of the convection zone, known as the tachocline, 
where Q adjusts to apparent solid body rotation in the 
deeper radiative interior. Thus whereas the convection 
zone exhibits prominent differential rotation, the deep 
radiative interior does not; these two regions are joined 
by the complex shear of the tachocline. More detailed 
deductions about subsurface solar flows and rotation, and 
possible changes as the Sun enters active phases of its 
magnetic cycle, are becoming available from the nearly 
continuous helioseismic observations with the ground- 
based six-station Global Oscillation Network Group 
(GONG) project, and from the SOI-MDI experiment on 
the SOHO spacecraft. 

Fully developed turbulence at Reynolds numbers 
R, (ratio of inertial to viscous forces) of order 10, as 
estimated for the Sun, appears to redistribute angular 
momentum quite differently from what was thought on 
the basis of laminar and mildly turbulent convection 
studies, thereby yielding mean flows and rotation profiles 
of a special and different kind. Recent three-dimensional 
simulations have begun studying full spherical shells of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


rotating turbulent convection using spherical harmomics 
Y;" (for horizontal expansion) up to degree € ~ 400. 
The models are a highly simplified description of the 
solar convection zone: solar values are taken for the heat 
flux, rotation rate, mass and radius, and a perfect gas is 
assumed since the upper boundary of the shell lies well 
below the H and He ionization zones. The computational 
domains include a region of stable stratification below the 
primary unstable zone in which the effects of penetrative 
convection can also be studied. 

The resulting convection is highly time-dependent 
and the flows are intricate. The time-averaged angular 
velocity Q is nearly constant on radial lines throughout 
much of the convection zone at mid latitudes, and there 
is a systematic decrease of rotation rate with latitude in 
going from the equator to the poles. The convection 
is now dominated by intermittent plumes of upflow 
and stronger downflow, some possessing a distinctive 
cyclonic swirl; the dominant role of coherent plumes is 
now becoming apparent. A tachocline at the base of the 
convection zone is not yet realized, since the simulations 
still operate at R, where viscous coupling can imprint the 
local rotation rate of the unstable zone upon the stable 
region. The development of a tachocline may involve 
anisotropic diffusivities and confining magnetic fields. 
Some theoretical discussions concerning the tachocline 
invoke strong horizontal viscosity due to anisotropic 
turbulence in the stable layer to circumvent the diffusive 
spreading. Other models invoke magnetic fields to enforce 
solid body rotation in the radiative interior. Simulations 
at higher R, (requiring greater resolution) and including 
the effects of magnetic fields can test such theories and 
provide hope for modeling the tachocline. It will be 
essential to have at least four-fold higher spatial resolution 
(effectively dealing with 2048? modes) in such simulations, 
now becoming feasible on the latest parallel machines, to 
study a fully developed convection zone bounded below 
by a radiative layer. 


Solar dynamo and cyclic field emergence 

Magnetic flux emergence (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC 
FLUX TUBES) at the solar photosphere occurs on a wide range 
of scales, from large active regions (sunspot groups) to 
small fibril concentrations in the intergranular lanes. A 
central problem of magnetic field generation in the Sun is 
the origin of the coherent magnetic field that emerges at the 
solar surface to form the active regions. Although it was 
once widely believed that all the smaller-scale flux was 
derived from the break-up of the larger regions, current 
observations suggest that flux emerges at a rate which 
is inconsistent with this simple fragmention model, and 
therefore flux must be actually generated at the smaller 
scales. The solar dynamo problem can thus be thought of 
as two problems rather than one, i.e. a large-scale dynamo 
responsible for global properties of the magnetic field 
including cyclic behavior and active regions, and a small- 
scale dynamo, contributing to the abundance of short-lived 
mixed-polarity flux found outside the active regions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It is now commonly thought that the global dynamo 
behavior is derived from strong organized toroidal 
magnetic fields generated by the shearing flow of the 
tachocline just below the base of the solar convection zone. 
The weaker poloidal field is then regenerated throughout 
the convection zone by the action of cyclonic turbulence. 
This separation of the generation of toroidal field and the 
regeneration of poloidal field has been termed an interface 
dynamo. Recent mean-field dynamo models have shown 
that such an interface model can circumvent the problem 
of strong dynamo suppression feedback (@ quenching) 
by mean magnetic fields and so produce field strengths 
similar to those inferred from observations. They can also 
give rise to modulation of the basic cycle and recurrent 
so-called grand minima. 

The interface paradigm is based on a number of 
underlying processes, crucial to the overall operation of 
the dynamo, which are parametrized in mean-field models 
and yet should be modelled explicitly. The building blocks 
of the full mechanism are (a) the actual generation of field 
by cyclonic turbulence within the convection zone (small- 
scale dynamo, parametrized by the a effect in mean- 
field models), (b) turbulent transport of this field across 
the interface (enhanced turbulent diffusion in the mean- 
field sense), (c) its subsequent amplification by large-scale 
shear in the overshoot region below (large-scale dynamo, 
represented by the w effect in mean-field models), and 
(d) transport of the resultant large-scale field through the 
convection zone to be either shredded and recycled or 
to emerge in the photosphere. Currently, computational 
resources are insufficient to model a complete system 
incorporating both small- and large-scale dynamo effects. 
Efforts are under way to study separately these individual 
building blocks, with the aim of using the intuition so 
developed toward attaining a fully nonlinear interface- 
type solar dynamo model as resources become available. 


Bibliography 

Brummell N, Cattaneo F and Toomre J 1995 Science 269 
1370-9 

Elliott J R, Miesch M S and Toomre J 2000 Astrophys. J. 533 
546-56 

Schou J et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 505 390-417 

Thompson M J et al 1996 Science 272 1300-5 


Juri Toomre 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone Flux 
Tubes 


The magnetic field at the solar surface reflects the presence 
of isolated flux tubes below the photosphere. The 
magnetic field is not diffusively distributed over the 
entire surface but is concentrated into regions of rather 
intense field, ranging from suNspots—with diameters of 
approximately 20000 km and field strengths of 3000 G— 
down to smaller magnetic elements (100-200 km and 
1000 G). The existence of this hierarchy of concentrated 
magnetic structures in the observable layers is indicative of 
the intermittent nature of magnetic fields in the underlying 
convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE). The 
equilibrium and dynamics of flux tubes are basically 
different from those of a diffuse field. This has important 
consequences for the storage of magnetic flux, the onset 
and development of instabilities, the rise of magnetic 
flux towards the surface to form the observed active 
regions, and also for the understanding of the dynamo 
mechanism (see DYNAMO THEORY). Magnetic buoyancy due 
to the increased effective pressure inside the tubes poses 
a dilemma: on the one hand, it is necessary to bring the 
magnetic flux to the solar surface; on the other it leads to a 
rapid loss of magnetic flux from the convection zone, thus 
preventing the storage of magnetic flux long enough for 
the operation of a hydromagnetic dynamo. It is nowadays 
widely accepted that the magnetic field emerging at the 
surface is stored within a stable layer at the bottom of the 
convection zone prior to eruption. 


Filamentary nature of the magnetic field 

High-resolution observations show that the magnetic 
field at the surface of the Sun is not diffuse, but 
extremely concentrated into discrete structures in the 
form of magnetic flux tubes, of which sunspots are 
the most prominent manifestation (e.g. Zwaan 1992). 
More than 90% of the magnetic flux on the solar 
surface outside of sunspots and their associated active 
regions is concentrated into intense flux tubes (1- 
2 kG) of diameter 100-500 km. These small magnetic 
elements are surrounded by plasma with substantially 
lower field strength. This fibril state of the observed 
magnetic field is a consequence of the very large 
magnetic Reynolds number of the solar plasma and 
its unstable (superadiabatic) stratification in the layer 
below the photospheric surface. The idea that the 
discrete appearance of the magnetic field extends 
further through the convection zone is also supported 
by numerical simulations of magnetoconvection (see 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: MAGNETOCONVECTION). 

Apart from observations of the solar surface, there are 
indirect hints for the existence of a strong toroidal system 
of magnetic flux at the bottom of the solar convection 
zone or below. Bipolar active regions form by the 
emergence of large bundles of toroidal magnetic flux from 
the convection zone into the photosphere. In spite of the 
turbulent convection zone in which they are immersed, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


active regions show a large number of regularities 
(Moreno-Insertis 1994). For example, Hale’s polarity 
tule, the tilt of active region’s main axis (by typically 
10°) with respect to the equator and the systematic 
asymmetry between the preceding and following parts of 
the active region (as regards morphology, stability and 
proper motion) point towards the presence of a strong 
toroidal magnetic field at the bottom of the convection 
zone or just below. 

The concentration of magnetic flux into flux tubes has 
important consequences for its storage. Since a magnetic 
field gives rise to an effective ‘magnetic pressure’, a 
flux tube surrounded by almost field-free plasma can 
become buoyant. Buoyancy can be a very efficient 
mechanism in expelling magnetic flux to the solar surface. 
Some simplified estimates as well as detailed numerical 
simulations show that flux tubes with a field strength 
of the order of equipartition with the energy density of 
convective motions (or larger) rise to the solar surface 
within one month or less; this time scale is much shorter 
than the 11-year characteristic time for field generation 
and amplification by the dynamo process. In order 
to circumvent this problem, it has been suggested that 
most of the magnetic flux is stored within the overshoot 
layer, a slightly subadiabatically stratified layer below the 
convection zone proper. 


Overshoot region 

Overshooting is the penetration of convective motions 
from an unstable layer into an adjacent stable layer. The 
existence of convective penetration is known from both 
observation and experiment in the laboratory and in the 
Earth’s atmosphere. A convective eddy is driven in 
the unstable region and arrives at the boundary of that 
region with some inertia sufficient to penetrate into the 
surrounding stable layers where it is decelerated by the 
stable stratification. This yields an enlargement of the 
region effectively mixed by convection. 

Near the bottom of the solar convection zone, a 
steep gradient of the differential rotation profile can be 
inferred from helioseismological data (see HELIOSEISMIC 
OBSERVATIONS); this zone is called the ‘solar tachocline’. 
Many astrophysicists think that this zone plays an 
important role in the mixing processes between the 
radiative and the convective zones. It could also be 
the principal source of solar magnetic flux. In order to 
investigate the problem of the storage of magnetic flux 
tubes in the overshoot region one exploits the fact that they 
are thin as compared with the local pressure scale-height. 


Thin flux tubes 

The study of the structure and dynamics of magnetic 
fields in stars is a complex mathematical problem due 
to the nonlinear nature of the magnetohydrodynamic 
(MHD) equations, to the presence of boundary layers 
and to the inhomogeneities involved. The filamentary 
nature of magnetic fields in the convection zone allows 
for a considerable simplification of the MHD equations. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The thin flux-tube approximation permits the reduction of 
the full set of MHD equations to a mathematically more 
tractable form without making any restriction on the 
compressibility of the plasma, the magnetic Lorentz force 
or gravity. In physical terms, the approximation amounts 
to assuming that the variation of the physical properties 
over the cross section of the tube is small as compared with 
the variation along it (with the exception of a jump at the 
boundary). Since for the stability and the first stages of the 
rise one is interested in perturbations that affect the flux 
tube as a whole, and given the large value of the pressure 
scale-height at the bottom of the convection zone (about 
60000 km), the use of the thin flux-tube approximation 
for the dynamics of the magnetic flux concentrations is 
perfectly justified. 

With the aid of the thin flux tube approximation it 
is possible to obtain a consistent model of magnetic field 
storage, instability, dynamics and eruption not only for the 
Sun, but also for other stars with convection zones. 


Stability of toroidal magnetic flux tubes 

For a linear stability analysis of flux tubes in a stellar 
convection zone, one considers a toroidal flux tube 
symmetric with respect to the solar rotation axis and 
lying in a plane parallel to the equator, at an arbitrary 
latitude. Figure 1 shows a sketch of the adjustment of an 
initially buoyant flux tube with equal internal and external 
temperatures and angular velocities to a mechanical 
equilibrium characterized by neutral buoyancy and a 
longitudinal internal flow in the direction of stellar 
rotation: since the curvature force and the rotationally 
induced forces are both perpendicular to the axis of 
rotation, there always remains an unbalanced axial 
component of the buoyancy force (except for flux tubes 
lying exactly at the equatorial plane). Consequently, if 
the tube is to be at mechanical equilibrium, the matter 
inside the tube must be slightly cooler than its environment 
and rotate slightly faster. Since the motions causing 
the perturbation of the flux tube have a time-scale that 
is much shorter than the characteristic time for thermal 
relaxation, isentropic perturbations may be assumed (i.e. 
the entropy of each fluid element remains unchanged). 
Stability against isentropic perturbations can be examined 
by means of a normal-mode analysis of both axisymmetric 
and non-axisymmetric displacements of the equilibrium 
shape of the tube. The stability properties depend 
on the various parameters (e.g. latitude, field strength, 
superadiabaticity of the stratification, angular velocity and 
its gradients). 

The stability analysis shows that the unstable 
stratification of the convection zone and the strong 
convective motions render the storage of magnetic flux 
in the convection zone proper impossible. The alternative 
is that the magnetic flux is stored in the overshoot layer 
underneath the convection zone, some 200000 km below 
the solar surface, and with a thickness of only a fraction 
of the local pressure scale-height. Independent support 
for this idea comes from numerical simulations showing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Q, > Q, -'+-Q; < Q, —_- 
can 
* Pir>Pe i 
Me 
Pi< Pes f 
x Ny 
\ ieee sree 


\ 
overshoot layer conv. zone 


a me a oem 


aa 


a) 
equilibrium ase 


_ rad. zone 


non-equilibrium 


Figure 1. Approach of an initially buoyant flux tube (open circle) 
with 7; = Te and Q} = Qe to a position of mechanical (force) 
equilibrium (full circle) characterized by neutral buoyancy 

(pi = Pe) and faster internal rotation, Q| > Qe (from Caligari et al 
1998). Q is angular velocity, p density, and T temperature. The 
subscripts ‘i’ and ‘e’ denote physical quantities inside and 
outside the flux tube, respectively. 


that magnetic flux with a field strength of the order of 
the equipartition value is pumped downwards below 
the convection zone by the strong sinking plumes of 
overshooting convection. 


Instability and rise of magnetic flux tubes 
Due to the subadiabatic (stable) stratification of the over- 
shoot layer, flux tubes can achieve a stable configuration in 
which buoyancy vanishes. Probably, the flux tubes evolve 
through a sequence of equilibria while being continuously 
amplified by the dynamo mechanism which is supposed 
to operate within this layer. Once the field has become 
sufficiently strong, instabilities set in; the most unstable 
perturbations (i.e. with the shortest growth time) are non- 
axisymmetric (i.e. undulatory) and give rise to the forma- 
tion of rising loops. The critical magnetic field strength 
for the onset of the instability lies around 10° G for condi- 
tions prevailing at the bottom of the solar convection zone 
(e.g. Schiissler et al 1994). If we assume that a typical tube 
which later gives rise to an active region has a magnetic 
flux between 107! and 10” maxwell (i.e. at least the total 
flux of the active region), then the typical size of the tube at 
the onset of the instability must be of the order of 1000 km. 
A linear stability analysis can provide the proper 
initial conditions for numerical simulations of the 
emergence of magnetic flux loops through the convection 
zone. Once an unstable loop has entered the super- 
adiabatic part of the convection zone, the subsequent 
evolution becomes very fast and nonlinear, so that 
numerical simulations are necessary to follow its rise 
towards the surface. In the last two decades, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Snapshot of an unstable magnetic flux tube that started 
at the bottom of the convection zone. The direction of solar 
rotation is towards increasing azimuthal angle (from Caligari et 
al 1995). 


nonlinear dynamic evolution of unstable flux tubes has 
been studied in detail by numerical integration of the 
thin flux-tube equations (see e.g. Schiissler et al 1994, 
Fisher et al 2000). For initial field strengths of the order 
of equipartition (10* G) or a few times this value, the 
Coriolis force plays a dominant role and flux tubes starting 
from low latitudes are deflected polewards along the solar 
rotation axis and emerge at unrealistically high latitudes, 
contrary to sunspot obervations. With a field strength 
of approximately 10° G, the results of the numerical 
simulations are in agreement with a number of observable 
features. For instance, the rise is not significantly deflected 
by the Coriolis force, so that the flux tubes emerge at low 
latitudes, the deviation of the eruption latitude from the 
starting latitude being less than 5°. Other features that 
are reproduced by the numerical simulations are the tilt 
angle (inclination with respect to the East-West direction) 
of sunspot groups or the asymmetry between the two legs 
of the rising tubes (figure 2). 


Flux tubes and the dynamo problem 

It is widely accepted that the solar activity cycle, with its 
various manifestations and regularities, is the result of a 
hydromagnetic dynamo operating at the bottom of the 
solar convection zone. The principle of dynamo action 
was first suggested by Larmor in 1919. Basically, it requires 
that the plasma moves in such a way as to induce electric 
currents capable of maintaining and amplifying a ‘seed’ 
field against Ohmic decay. In the case of stars like the 
Sun, one of the main ingredients for dynamo action is 
differential rotation, which generates the toroidal field 
component from the poloidal component. The generation 
of the poloidal field from the toroidal field is explained in 
terms of an induced electric current parallel to the mean 
magnetic field (a-effect), an idea originally put forward by 
Parker in the context of a turbulent solar dynamo. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The concentration of magnetic flux into intense tubes 
also has important consequences for the operation of the 
dynamo. The conventional kinematic approach—in which 
the back-reaction of the Lorentz force on the flow field 
is neglected and in which turbulent flows play a key 
role in regenerating the poloidal field from the toroidal 
component—is not applicable. Nevertheless, although the 
a-effect was originally formulated for rotating, turbulent 
convective systems, the basic idea behind Parker’s 
topological argument is that the generation of an a-current 
is due to the lack of symmetry of the flow, and this can also 
be achieved by the combination of rotation and buoyancy 
instability. The picture of a dynamo working with strong 
(super-equipartition) fields without invoking convective 
turbulence has been outlined recently. In this dynamo 
model the flux tubes are stored in mechanical equilibrium 
in a layer of overshooting convection at the boundary 
with the radiative region. Differential rotation (or other 
mechanisms) intensifies the field strength until a critical 
value is reached above which buoyancy instabilities set 
in. The non-axisymmetric perturbations of the flux tubes 
combined with the Coriolis force give rise to helical 
waves of growing amplitude which produce an electric 
current in the direction of the mean (‘unperturbed’) 
magnetic field. The resulting o-effect is a ‘dynamic’ 
one in the sense that the Lorentz force and its feedback 
on the velocity field are taken into account (as well 
as the compressibility of the plasma). Only unstable, 
non-axisymmetric perturbations contribute to the mean 
electric current, which is antisymmetric with respect to 
the equator. 


Conclusions and some open questions 
From the properties of active regions it can be inferred that 
there must exist a strong toroidal flux system in the solar 
convection zone. Magnetic buoyancy poses a dilemma 
for the efficient operation of a hydromagnetic dynamo: 
on the one hand, it is necessary for flux emergence to 
take place, but on the other hand it is so efficient that it 
leads to a rapid flux loss from the convection zone. A way 
out from the dilemma is to assume that prior to eruption 
the magnetic field is stored in a stably stratified layer of 
convective penetration for a sufficiently long time for the 
dynamo to operate on it. Whether this storage is already 
in the form of an ensemble of flux tubes or as a magnetic 
layer of ‘diffuse field’ from which the flux tubes thread out 
by some sort of MHD instability is still an open question. 
In any case, the field is already in the form of 
intense flux tubes when it enters the convection zone and 
buoyantly rises through it to emerge as sunspots at the 
solar surface. A stability analysis yields values of the 
order of 10° G prior to eruption. There are independent 
arguments in favor of the intense (super-equipartition) 
fields. One is that a flux tube of equipartition strength 
at the bottom of the convection zone would become 
extremely weak when rising across several scale-heights 
through the turbulent convection zone, contrary to the 
coherent and concentrated form of bipolar active regions 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Convection Zone Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observed at the solar surface. Another is that the results 
of the numerical simulations are in agreement with the 
observed basic properties of active regions only for field 
strengths of the order of 10° G. 

Although the production of the strong toroidal field 
is localized at the lower boundary of the convection zone, 
the exact process of intensification is not quite understood. 
It is possible that the explosion process or the formation of 
Q-loops operate in conjunction with differential rotation 
(Moreno-Insertis et al 1995). In any case, the existence 
of super-equipartition fields requires a modified dynamo 
approach. A possible scenario is the one depicted above: 
a dynamo based on the instability of strong magnetic 
flux tubes. Alternatively, one could imagine a dynamo 
with spatial separation of the generation processes for the 
poloidal and toroidal components. 

A complete theory encompassing in a self-consistent 
way the generation, structure, dynamics and evolution 
of magnetic fields in stellar convection zones does not 
exist; this lack of self-consistency is basically due to our 
insufficient comprehension of turbulent flows. 


Bibliography 

Caligari P, Moreno-Insertis F and Schtissler M 1995 
Emerging flux tubes in the solar convection zone. I: 
Asymmetry, tilt, and emergence latitude Astrophys. 
J. 441 886-902 

Caligari P, Schtissler M and Moreno-Insertis F 1998 
Emerging flux tubes in the solar convection zone. II: 
The influence of the initial conditions Astrophys. J. 502 
481-92 

Fisher G H, Fan Y, Longcope D W, Linton M G and Pevtsov 
A A 2000 The solar dynamo and emerging flux Solar 
Phys. 192 119 

Moreno-Insertis F 1994 The magnetic field in the 
convection zone as a link between the active regions 
on the surface and the field in the solar interior 
Solar Magnetic Fields ed M Schtissler and W Schmidt 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 117-35 

Moreno-Insertis F, Caligari P and Schtissler M 1995 
‘Explosion’ and intensification of magnetic flux tubes 
Astrophys. J. 452 894-900 

Schiissler M, Caligari P, Ferriz-Mas A and Moreno-Insertis 
F 1994 Instability and eruption of magnetic flux tubes 
in the solar convection zone Astron. Astrophys. 281 69— 
72 

Zwaan C 1992 The evolution of sunspots Sunspots—Theory 
and Observations (NATO Advanced Research Workshop) 
ed J H Thomas and N O Weiss (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
pp 75-100 


Antonio Ferriz-Mas 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Emerging Magnetic Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Emerging Magnetic 
Flux Tubes 


The magnetic field observed in the photosphere and at 
higher levels of the solar atmosphere is generated in the 
convective envelope that extends along the first 200 000 km 
below the solar surface (see DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR and 
SOLAR INTERIOR). To properly understand the solar magnetic 
cycle, it is necessary to explain the processes whereby 
the magnetic field, once generated, emerges across the 
convection zone and then appears at the surface. In fact, 
when we observe the birth at the solar surface of sunspots 
and, more generally, active regions, which are structures 
with an intense magnetic field, we are witnessing the 
final stages of the emergence of magnetic flux from the 
solar interior. Looking at the solar disk face-on, what 
we see after some hours of eruption of magnetic flux 
is a simple bipolar structure consisting of two patches 
of mutually opposite magnetic polarity, each containing 
one or more sunspots (See SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS and. SOLAR 
ACTIVITY COMPLEXES). The imaginary line linking the two 
patches is generally oriented in an approximate east- 
west direction. After the first stages of formation, the 
two patches separate from each other, reaching a mutual 
distance of up to 150000 km. This pattern of behavior 
seems to be followed by most incipient active regions in 
the Sun. A simple interpretation of this process is that, 
when an active region is formed, we are witnessing the 
emergence at the surface of a large magnetic tube (or, 
rather, a bunch of them) oriented in a direction roughly 
parallel to the equator (figure 1). The roots of this magnetic 
tube are located at some deep level below the surface. By 
studying the dynamics of magnetic tubes in the convection 
zone including, in particular, why and how they rise and 
appear at the surface and comparing the conclusions with 
the actual observations of the birth of active regions, we 
can therefore gain precious insights into the structure and 
dynamics of the solar interior. 


The magnetic field in the deep convection zone 
and the instabilities that trigger its eruption 
According to current understanding, the magnetic field 
that we see in active regions is originated and stored in a 
magnetized sheet at the bottom of the convective envelope, 
possibly with the shape of a spherical shell or a spherical 
band extending on both sides of the equator roughly 
coinciding with the region known as the overshoot layer 
right beneath the convection zone. A simple possibility 
(favored by many theoreticians, who are looking for 
simplicity wherever possible) is that the magnetic field, 
instead of permeating the whole sheet, adopts the form 
of a collection of magnetic rings or hoops around the 
Sun, the axes of which roughly coincide with the solar 
rotation axis; in between the rings the plasma has a 
much weaker magnetic field. Another possibility, on the 
opposite extreme, is that the field is continuous and fills up 
a large fraction of the sheet instead of being concentrated 
into tubes or rings. In either case, the magnetic field in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Illustration of a magnetic tube rooted in the deep solar 
interior whose apex has emerged through the convection zone 
producing an active region at the surface. The transparent 
spherical surface with a grid represents the solar surface and the 
inner solid sphere corresponds to the solar interior below the 
convection zone. (Figure courtesy of P Caligari.) 


sheet does not stay put forever: at some point, it becomes 
unstable through a process of a kind collectively known as 
buoyant instabilities. The basic idea is that, under a variety 
of physical conditions, a portion of matter in the solar 
interior or atmosphere, if given an initial kick upward, will 
not stop rising because it becomes increasingly light with 
respect to its surroundings (and thus, also increasingly 
buoyant). 

In the presence of an ordered magnetic field, a 
classical example of buoyant instability is the Parker 
instability. To understand how it operates, imagine a 
magnetic tube lying horizontally in the deep convection 
zone (and, for a graphical image, compare it with a 
bunch of flexible plastic tubes filled with gas lying at the 
bottom of a gas tank). If a certain stretch of the magnetic 
tube is moved upward, then, under given conditions for 
the temperature distribution in the region, the matter 
within the tube moves in such a way that the apex of the 
deformed stretch becomes increasingly light with respect 
to its surroundings. In this way, the initial upward 
movement becomes amplified and does not stop. The 
conditions under which this unstable process takes place 
are fulfilled for isolated magnetic tubes in the deep solar 
convection zone if their field strength is above a threshold 
of roughly 100000 G (some 300 000 times the strength of 
the Earth’s surface magnetic field). The field strength may 
indeed be this high at the bottom of the solar convection 
zone; the Parker instability is thus one of the fundamental 
mechanisms that can explain why the magnetic field leaves 
the deep solar interior and erupts at the solar surface. In 
the alternative view, with the magnetic field permeating 
a whole sheet instead of being in the form of individual 
tubes, there is also a mechanism for triggering the eruption 
of magnetic flux, called the magnetic Rayleigh-Taylor 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Emerging Magnetic Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


instability. This instability (akin to the instability that 
ensues when heavier fluid rests on a less dense one) may 
lead to the disruption of the magnetic structure and the 
formation of rising buoyant magnetic tubes. 


Modeling the inner workings of the Sun in a 
computer 

Asa result of the buoyant movement of the magnetic tubes, 
magnetic flux is brought all the way from the bottom of the 
convection zone to the surface, where we see it appearing 
as sunspots and other magnetic elements. If we could 
contemplate the solar interior, then we would see how the 
magnetic tube stretches from the bottom of the convection 
zone, where it is rooted, all the way to the surface and into 
the solar atmosphere. Sunspots are, in this sense, just a cut 
across the flanks of an erupted magnetic tube. 

In the past two decades there has been a true revolution 
in our understanding of the detailed physics of the process 
of rise of the magnetized plasma, thanks, among other 
things, to the possibility of detailed numerical simulation 
using the impressive increase in computing power and the 
development of simplified models. A first generation of 
models (the so-called slender flux tube models) use the fact 
that the radius of the magnetic tube progenitors of active 
regions (possibly some 1000 km only) is very small with 
respect to the size of the solar structures at the bottom of 
the convection zone. The slender flux tube models use 
a drastically simplifying approach; given that the tubes 
are thin, one can, in a first go at the problem, neglect the 
complicated transverse structure of the tubes in each cross 
section. There results a self-consistent set of equations, the 
thin flux tube equations, which contain the most essential 
ingredients to describe why the tubes rise and what the 
main features of the resulting structure are. The solution 
of those equations yields a simple model for the process of 
emergence of flux. 

One such model can be seen in figures 2 and 3. The 
plasma in the rising loop of the tube experiences a huge 
expansion as it adapts to the new environments it crosses 
in its upward journey: the pressure of the solar plasma 
is a billion times higher at the bottom of the convection 
zone than at its topmost levels. This causes a marked 
weakening of the field intensity along the rise. On the 
other hand, as a result of the unstable evolution, the lower 
reaches of the tube descend to somewhat deeper levels and 
become anchored in the overshoot region right beneath the 
convection zone. The matter in the overshoot region is being 
stirred because of the intrusion of convection cells from 
the overlying layers, but, in itself, is stable to convection. 
A magnetic tube in sufficiently low levels in that region 
is stable to the buoyant instabilities and remains there 
while the rising sections of the tube are on their way to 
the surface. 

The thin tube models have provided explanations for 
some of the observed large-scale features of active regions. 
One of them concerns an old observational result: Hale, 
Ellerman, Nicholson and Joy observed in 1919 that the 
main axis of an active region (i.e. the imaginary line linking 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Result of a time-dependent calculation of emergence of 
magnetic flux from the bottom of the convection zone. The 
equations that govern the time evolution of a thin magnetic tube 
have been solved starting with a Parker-unstable configuration. 


the centers of the two patches of opposite polarity) and 
the solar equator were not strictly parallel but, rather, 
subtended an angle of, typically, several degrees with 
opposite sign in the northern and southern hemisphere. 
The magnitude of this angle was larger the higher the 
latitude at which the active region appeared. The thin 
tube models explain the origin of this empirical law 
as a consequence of the rotation of the Sun or, more 
precisely, through the action of the Coriolis force. This 
can be understood by comparing this phenomenon with 
the formation of an anticyclone in the Earth’s atmosphere 
when air moves away from a high-pressure area (which 
is also a consequence of the Coriolis force). Studying 
the motion of the individual mass elements of the tube 
along the rise, one can see that those along the flanks 
move sideways away from the mass element at the apex. 
The Coriolis force thus brings about a rotation of the 
vertical plane containing the magnetic tube. When the 
tube reaches the surface, this is seen as a tilt of the main 
axis of the active region (clearly visible in figures 1 and 2). 

A further empirical law (in this case, a much more 
recent one) concerning active regions is the fact that the 
mutual separation of two patches of opposite polarity does 
not proceed in a symmetrical way: it appears that one side 
(the one closest to the western limb of the Sun) moves 
away from the line separating the opposite polarities 
much faster than the other side. This phenomenon 
can also be explained by the thin tube models and is, 
again, a consequence of the solar rotation: because of the 
conservation of angular momentum, the two flanks of the 
rising loop become differently inclined with respect to the 
vertical direction (figure 3). When the tube breaks out at 
the photosphere, this difference in inclination translates 
into a higher speed of separation of one of the branches of 
the rising loop from the apex than the other branch. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Emerging Magnetic Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Radius [10° km] 


Figure 3. Several stages of the evolution of a rising magnetic 
tube with the horizontal axis representing solar longitude and 
the vertical axis height (measured by the radial distance to the 
solar center). Note the asymmetry in inclination of the flanks of 
the tube. 


Perhaps the most interesting result of the thin flux 
tube models is an estimate of the strength of the magnetic 
field at the bottom of the convection zone. For the thin 
tube models to yield a good agreement with the empirical 
observations of active regions discussed above, the field 
intensity in the bottom layers must be of the order of 
100 000 G. This result came as a surprise when it was first 
clearly stated since most people thought it to be much 
weaker, some 1000 to 10000 G. That the field must be as 
strong as 100000 G can be understood in different ways: 
first, if the tubes in the deep convection zone had weaker 
fields, then, upon the huge expansion taking place along 
the rise, they would yield very weakly magnetized regions 
rather than concentrated tubes. Second, the risetime of 
magnetic tubes with weaker field strength is much longer, 
so that the Coriolis force has a much larger impact on the 
rising tube. Consequently, the resulting active regions 
would have features not seen in the actual Sun like: (a) 
the eruption at the surface would take place at high solar 
latitudes, (b) their main axes would systematically subtend 
a large angle to the equator and (c) the asymmetric motion 
of the polarities discussed in the previous paragraph 
would be extreme. 


Recent research: twists, buckles, inner structure 
and aerodynamic properties of a rising magnetic 
tube 

In recent years, the research on the emergence of magnetic 
flux has focused on issues concerning the transverse 
structure and the three-dimensional stability of the rising 
magnetized regions. One of the issues deals with the 
question of whether a magnetic tube that is rising across 
the convection zone can maintain its unity, i.e. if it can rise 
without splitting into smaller strands. To understand the 
problem, we can recall the case of rising columns of hot air 
in the Earth’s atmosphere, typically occurring on sunny 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


summer days ona plain: the rising column of air typically 
turns into two horizontal rolls (also called vortex tubes) 
which rotate in opposite directions. Similarly, a buoyantly 
rising magnetic tube can easily split into two horizontal 
vortex tubes. Vortex tubes suffer aerodynamic lift forces, 
so that their path may deviate significantly from the simple 
path calculated with the standard thin flux tube model. A 
branch of research has therefore been devoted to studying 
the details of the internal structure of the tube and of the 
surrounding boundary layer. This includes the generation 
of vorticity, especially around the tube boundary, the 
formation of a trailing wake, the aerodynamic lift and 
drag experienced by the tube, etc. A major result of these 
studies is that the magnetic field lines must be twisted for 
the tube to preserve its unity during the rise, i.e. they must 
be wound around the tube’s main axis instead of running 
more or less parallel to it. The magnetic field thus has both 
a component parallel to the tube’s axis and a component 
contained within the cross section of the tube. It is the 
Lorentz force associated with the latter that gives the tube 
the possibility to withstand the forces that tend to break it 
into vortex rolls. 

Another related issue subject to scrutiny in recent 
years is the development of kink instabilities (well known 
from the plasma fusion research in laboratories) in 
magnetic tubes with twisted field lines in the solar interior. 
The instability has to do with the fact that the magnetic 
field exerts a tension along its lines. As a consequence, if 
the tube is sufficiently twisted it may buckle and produce 
kinks, like a simple rope subject to tension and twist. This is 
being studied with the help of computer simulations. An 
interesting result of this research is a possible explanation 
for the peculiar behavior of a special class of active regions, 
the so-called 5-spots. 5-spots are exceptional active regions 
with the two patches of opposite polarity close together 
and with the main axis of the region inclined at high 
angles with respect to the solar equator. These peculiar 
features may be explained as the arrival at the surface 
of a strongly twisted magnetic tube in an advanced stage 
of development of the kink instability. An easy pictorial 
image for this is a highly twisted rope which is quickly 
developing buckles: the direction of the rope in the buckles 
may deviate considerably from the original direction of the 
unkinked rope. 

In parallel to the research into the behavior of 
individual magnetic tubes, there have been several studies 
of the physics of continuous magnetic field distributions. 
The buoyant instabilities in the latter are in several ways 
similar to the magnetic tube counterparts. However, the 
techniques for studying them are different. For instance, 
there is no equivalent to the thin tube approximation, so 
that there are to date no full simulations of the eruption of 
a continuous magnetic layer in the lower convection zone 
all the way until the up-going elements reach the solar 
surface. However, these studies have provided interesting 
insights into how magnetic flux tubes may form out of 
a continuum of field, the subsequent three-dimensional 
instabilities, etc. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Emerging Magnetic Flux Tubes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


All of the foregoing studies require the use of the 
largest and most advanced computers available: if the 
pace of increase in computing power continues at the 
current rate, we can expect substantial advances in our 
understanding of the physics of the magnetic field in the 
solar interior and its emergence to the surface. 


Bibliography 

Caligari P, Moreno-Insertis F and Schtissler M 1995 
Emerging flux tubes in the solar convection zone. I 
Asymmetry, tilt and emergence latitude Astrophys. J. 
441 886-902 

D’Silva S and Choudhuri A R 1993 A theoretical model for 
tilts of bipolar magnetic regions Astron. Astrophys. 272 
621-33 

Emonet T and Moreno-Insertis F 1998 The physics of 
twisted magnetic tubes rising ina stratified medium: 
two-dimensional results Astrophys. J. 492 804-21 

Fan Y, Zweibel E G, Linton M G and Fisher G H 1999 
The rise of kink-unstable magnetic flux tubes and the 
origin of 6-configuration spots Astrophys. J. 521 460- 
77 

Moreno-Insertis F 1997 Emergence of magnetic flux from 
the solar interior The Inconstant Sun (Mem. Soc. Astron. 
It. 68) ed G Cauzzi and C Marmolino pp 429-47 


Fernando Moreno-Insertis 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Energy Generation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Energy Generation 


Energy generated deep in the SOLAR INTERIOR via the 
nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium provides the 3.9 x 
107° J s“! radiated by the surface of the Sun. Beginning 
in the 1920s the foundations of nuclear astrophysics 
were laid on the basis of (a) the recognition that the 
solar system was several billion years old (based on the 
decay of radioactive elements such as uranium), (b) the 
recognition that, in contrast with inadequate chemical and 
gravitational energy sources, the then newly discovered 
nuclear reactions could readily supply the energy required 
to account for the luminosity of the Sun over this lifetime 
and (c) the recognition by Gamow in the late 1920s of 
the role of quantum mechanical tunneling in making it 
possible for these reactions to occur in the solar interior 
where kT was most probably equivalent to only a few keV, 
well below the repulsive Coulomb barrier. Building on 
that foundation, in the late 1930s, Weizsaécker and Bethe 
independently laid out the energetics and many of the 
theoretical details for converting hydrogen to helium in 
the solar interior via the pp chain and the CN cycle. 

At the temperatures and densities characteristic 
of the solar interior (T ~ 16 x 10° K and p *& 
150 g cm), interacting nuclei reach a Maxwellian 
equilibrium distribution in a time that is infinitesimal 
compared with the mean lifetime of these nuclear reactions 
and decays. Therefore it is possible to determine the 
thermally averaged nuclear reaction rate by folding its 
energy-dependent cross section o(£) with the Maxwell-— 
Boltzmann distribution as 


1/2 
8 fo.@) 
(OV)12 = (<a) ff Eo(E)exp(—E/kT) dE 


and where fo is a correction to the laboratory (bare- 
nucleus) cross section measurements to take into account 
the effects of plasma screening in STELLAR INTERIORS. (This 
correction is the order of 1.20-1.25 for pp-chain reactions 
in the solar interior.) As noted above, in the solar interior 
nuclear reactions take place via tunneling at energies 
which are far below the Coulomb barrier. One of the major 
sources of the energy dependence of the cross sections 
arises from this tunneling whose principal effects can be 
factored out by reexpressing the cross section in terms of 
the astrophysical S$ factor, 


S(E) = 0 (E)E/exp(217n) 


where exp(—2n) is the usual quantum mechanical 
penetration term associated with tunneling under the 
Coulomb barrier, in which n = Z,Z2e7/hv, so that 


1/2 
8 feo] 
(ov) = (a) ff S(E) exp(—27n) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


x exp(—E/kT) dE. (1) 


An example of the comparison between the energy 
dependences of o(£) and S(£) is shown in figure 1, for 
the case of the °He(?He,2p)*He reaction; in the energy 
range plotted in this figure, 20 keV< Ea < 350 keV, 
o(E) varies by nearly a factor of 10'° while S(E) varies 
by only about 20%. For reactions in which there are no 
important low-energy resonances so that S(£) is only a 
slowly varying function of energy (which is the case for all 
the pp-chain reactions), the dominant energy dependence 
in the integrand in equation (1) is then given by the 
product of barrier-penetration and Maxwell—Boltzmann 
terms, shown schematically in figure 2. The centroid Eo 
of the peak of the integrand (the ‘Gamow peak’) and AE) 
(its width at 1/e of its maximum value) are given by 


Ey = [(Z1Z€7/he)kT (uc? /2)'? P? 
and AE = 4(E kT /3)'". 


Because of the effects of the Coulomb barrier, laboratory 
measurements of the cross sections for these reactions can 
typically be carried out only at energies well above Ep. 
Because of its much smaller energy dependence, the S(E£) 
function is then frequently a convenient way to extrapolate 
these measurements to the lower energies of interest in the 
(ov)12 integral in equation (1). It is usually convenient to 
characterize the energy dependence of S(£) in terms of its 
intercept and derivatives at E = 0: S(0), S’(0) and S”(0). 


sO, 18" °) . 


E 


5) 2 SO) (2) 


S(E) = S(0) (1 + 
For a more detailed discussion of these rate equations, the 
reader should consult one of the standard reviews listed 
in the bibliography at the end of this article. 


The proton—proton chain 

The pp chain (figure 3) is responsible for ~98% of the 
41H + 4He+2e++2v, nuclear-fusion energy generation in 
the Sun. The critical reactions in the chain are (i) the 1H + 
TH + 2D+et +, reaction which is the slowest link in the 
pp chain and whose rate therefore determines the central 
temperature of the Sun, (ii) the *He@He,2p)*He and 
3He(a, y)’ Be reactions whose relative rates determine the 
fraction of pp-chain terminations which produce neutrinos 
with energies greater than the Eymax = 420 keV from 
the pp reaction and (iii) the 7Be(e~, v,)’Li and ’Be(p,y)°B 
reactions whose relative rates determine the fraction of 
terminations which result in the production of high- 
energy neutrinos, Emax * 14 MeV. The three terminations 
for the pp chain (as well as the various permutations 
of the CN cycle) all generate the same total energy 
(25.731 MeV, which is simply the mass difference between 
4'H and +He). However, the amount of that energy lost 
directly from the center of the Sun via the two neutrinos 
can be quite different, varying from 0.420 MeV for the 
5He(?He,2p) termination to ~7 MeV for the ’Be(p,y) 
termination. (For a more complete discussion see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: NEUTRINOS.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Energy Generation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10-2 


10-4 


(b) 
Es 


CROSS SECTION 


2 
i=} 


10712 


e 
nS 


3 


S-FACTOR (MeV b) 


0 so 100 m 


3He (7He, 2p) “He 


200 250 x 350 
ENERGY £,, (keV) 


Figure 1. Comparison of the energy dependences of « (£) and S(E) for the 7He@He,2p)*He reaction. 


The ‘H+4H—+ 2D+et + v, reaction 

The 'H+'H > *D+e* +, reaction takes place via 
the weak interaction and is by far the slowest link in 
the pp chain; its S(O) intercept is roughly 107° times 
smaller than the intercepts for the other reactions in the 
chain. Its cross section is not currently measurable in 
laboratory experiments and must instead be determined 
on the basis of measurements of the properties of the weak 
interaction—for example, measurements of the beta decay 
of the neutron and of superallowed 0* — 0* beta decays. 
On this basis, the astrophysical S factor for this reaction 
can be written as 


MTG Ci 
Su(E) = 62? mpca In2 (S) PP —(1+6)? 


vy? \Gv/ (ft)oror 


where A is the overlap integral between the pp and 
deuteron wavefunctions, y is the deuteron binding 
wavenumber, Ga and Gy are the usual axial-vector and 
vector weak coupling constants, f, is the phase space 
factor for the pp reaction, (ft)o+0+ is the ft value for 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


superallowed 0* — 0* beta decay and 4 is the fractional 
correction to the nuclear matrix element due to exchanges 
of x and p mesons. Utilizing the current best values for 
these parameters yields the following values for the Sy; (0) 
intercept and its energy derivative, S;, (0): 


S1(0) = 4.00x10-** keV b and Si, (0) = 4.5x 10-** b. 
Currently the largest source of uncertainty in this reaction 
rate is in the parameter 6. 


The 3 He(3He,2p)*He reaction 

Since “Li is particle unstable, one important aspect of 
the *He(*He,2p)*He reaction is the fact that it provides 
a termination for the pp chain without requiring the 
presence of previously synthesized *He. Recently, the 
LUNA facility (Laboratory for Underground Nuclear 
Astrophysics) has been used to carry out measurements 
of the *He(*He,2p)*He reaction down to the region of 
the Gamow peak. (The LUNA Collaboration includes 
scientists from Italy, Germany and the US.) Using the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Energy Generation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


el-eset- p/e/2] 


~_enel? 


0 E 


Figure 2. Energy dependence of the integrand in equation (1). 


Gran Sasso tunnel in the the Appennine Mountains in 
central Italy, as a cosmic ray shield, it has been possible to 
measure cross sections as small as 0.76 pb and to thereby 
carry out direct measurements of this reaction down to 
Eom = 20.8 keV. Together with earlier above-ground 
measurements of the Bochum group, these measurements 
cover more that half of the actual Gamow peak for this 
reaction, Ey 22 keV at the center of the Sun. 

In measurements made for Een > 100 keV the 
distance of closest approach for these nuclei is inside the 
electron cloud so that their interaction is as essentially 
bare nuclei. In contrast, at the low energies used in 
the LUNA measurements described above, the interacting 
nuclei have a distance of closest approach that is near or 
outside the atomic radius R,, so that electron screening 
corrections are necessary in order to relate these laboratory 
measurements o,. to the cross sections that would be 
measured for bare nuclei o,. This screening correction is 
given by 


where U, = Z1Z2e7/Ra 

(3) 
and where 7 is the usual Coulomb parameter. For 
the *He(*He,2p)*He reaction (Ue = 240 eV), at Em = 
22 keV this corresponds to a 20% correction, while 
at Eyn > 150 keV the correction is <1%. Note 
that this correction should not be confused with the 
plasma screening correction which must be used to relate 
laboratory measurements of bare-nuclear cross sections to 
reaction rates in plasmas. 

A fit (see figure 4) to the LUNA and Bochum data 
sets (which are consistent with each other and with earlier 
higher-energy measurements), including the screening 
correction of equation (3), determines the following bare- 
nucleus values for the 533(0) intercept and for 5S33(Eo) at 
the center of the Gamow peak: 


Ob = Osc EXP(—TNUe/ Em) 


S33(0) = 5.4 + 0.4 MeV b 
and S33(Eo) = 5.3+40.4 MeV b. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The 3He(a, y)’ Be reaction 

The relative rates of the 7He(?He,2p)*He and *He(a, y)’Be 
reactions determine the fraction of pp-chain terminations 
which produce neutrinos with energies greater than the 
Eymax = 420 keV available from the pp reaction. While 
there have been nine independent sets of measurements of 
the cross section for the *He(a, y)’ Be reaction, because the 
cross section for this reaction is approximately 10 000 times 
smaller than the cross section for the *He(*He,2p)*He 
reaction none of these measurements has been carried out 
close to the Gamow peak for this reaction. Therefore, 
the rate of this reaction in the solar interior must be 
determined from an extrapolation of the higher-energy 
measurements. Extrapolation is always dangerous, but 
fortunately the energy dependence of this reaction is well 
described by a variety of nuclear models (ranging from 
3He@*He cluster models to microscopic potential models) 
which agree within a per cent or two and which can then be 
used to carry out the extrapolation with confidence. The 
good agreement between these calculations arises from the 
fact that over the energy range 0 keV< Eom < 2500 keV this 
reaction is anon-resonant direct-capture process for which 
almost all the contributions to the matrix element come 
from the region outside the nuclear potential well. Figure5 
displays the agreement between such calculations and the 
measured data sets from the four experiments which cover 
significant energy ranges; for one of the experiments the 
data extend up to Ez = 2500 keV (still well below the 
first unbound ’Be state at Ex, = 2983 keV) with the same 
quality of agreement between the model calculations and 
the measurements. 

A weighted mean of the extrapolation of the nine 
independent experiments determines the intercept 534(0), 
while the theoretical calculations determine the slope 
S44 (0): 


5S34(0) = 0.53 + 0.05 keV b 
and —S4,(0) = —3.0 x 10-* b. 


In spite of the fact that 534(0) is 104 times smaller than 
the corresponding $33(0), the *He(@, y)’Be reaction can 
compete with the *He(?He,2p)*He reaction in the solar 
interior because of the large abundance of *He in the solar 
interior relative to 7He; He/*He~ 10°—-10°, depending on 
the location. Integrated over the solar interior, solar model 
calculations find that 16% of the pp-chain terminations 
occur via the *He(q, y)’Be reaction while the remaining 
84% occur via the 7He(?He,2p)*He reaction. 


The ’Be(e,v.)’ Li decay 

For the 16% of the pp-chain terminations that proceed 
through the *He(a, y)’Be reaction, the branch between 
7Be electron capture and 7Be proton capture determines 
the fraction of terminations which produce high-energy 
neutrinos (Eymax * 14 MeV) via the beta-decay 8B. In 
this way, the relative rates of the 7Be(e~, ye)’ Li decay and 
the ’Be(p,y)®B reaction are critical in determining both 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Energy Generation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


4'H > 4He + 2e* + 2v¢ Q = 25.731 MeV 
IH+1H> 7Dt+et+ue 1.442 MeV Eymax = 0.420 MeV 
1H+e—+ 1H> 7D+ v6 1442MeV E, = 1.442 MeV 
°D+ 1H %Het+y 5.493 MeV 
(a) 3He + 27He > 24H + 4He 12.859 MeV 
(b) °He + He > 7Be+y 1.587 MeV 
(b1) 7Be+e~ > 7Li+ve 0.862 MeV E, = 0.862 MeV (89.5%) 
7Li+p — 2*He 17.346 MeV = 0.384 MeV (10.5%) 
(b2) 7Be+ 1H > 8B+y 0.135 MeV 
8B + SBe* +e* + ve 14.939 MeV Ey max © 13.9 MeV 
8Be* > 24He 3.132 MeV 


Figure 3. Proton—proton chain. 


*He(?He,2p)‘He 


@ present (LUNA) 


O previous 
— Screened Nuclides (U, = 240 eV) 


S—Factor [MeV b] 


10 10° 10° 
E keV] 


Figure 4. Low-energy measurements of S(£) for 
5HeCPHe,2p)*He, showing the effects of the electron screening 
described in equation (3). 


the effective energy generation of the pp chain and the 
resulting neutrino energy spectrum. 

The decay of 7Be via the capture of its own atomic 
electrons has been well studied in the laboratory; it has a 
measured half-life of 53.29 + 0.07 days, with a branching 
ratio of 89.5% for decays to the ground state of "Li (Ey, = 
0.862 MeV) and 10.5% to the first exited state of ’Li 
(E, = 0.384 MeV). However, in the solar interior ’Be 
atoms will be mostly ionized, so that any 7Be(e~, v.)’ Li 
decays will occur mostly via the capture of continuum 
electrons from the plasma, and the resulting decay rate 
will be proportional to the electron density in the plasma. 
Calculations of the continuum decay rate combined with 
calculations of the bound-state electron populations and 
their contributions to the decay rate determine 


1/t (8")=(/t)e + A/T) 


= 5.60 x 1092 + XW) 
2 


Te. 7[1 + 0.004(Ts — 16)]. 
Integrated over the solar interior, this corresponds to 82% 
of the decays coming from the capture of continuum 
electrons from the plasma and 18% from bound atomic 
electrons. Under conditions typical of the hydrogen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


-— 
i=) 
N 


[0s82} 


S,, (Arb. Units) 


1 


0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 
E.,, (keV) 


Figure 5. Comparison of the energy dependence of a theoretical 
calculation of $(E) with the measured data sets from four 
independent *He(q, y)’ Be experiments. 


burning region in the solar interior (9 = 100 g cm, 


Xy = 0.50, T; = 13.8), this corresponds toa 7Be half-life of 
70 days (compared with the laboratory value of 53 days). 


The” Be(p,y)°B reaction 

The fraction of pp-chain terminations proceeding through 
the ’Be(p,y)°B reaction is especially significant (i) because 
of the production of high-energy (°B) neutrinos which 
are crucial for a number of solar neutrino detectors 
(See NEUTRINO ASTRONOMY) and (ii) because of the ~27% 
energy loss associated with the escape of those neutrinos 
from the center of the Sun. The rate of the ’Be(p,y)°B 
reaction is therefore particularly important for probing 
and understanding energy generation in the solar interior. 
In spite of the significant added complications associated 
with the radioactive nature of 7Be, seven such experiments 
have been carried out using 7Be targets to measure the 
rate of this reaction. This is another case in which the 
Si7(0) intercept must be determined by extrapolation from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Energy Generation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


p,a 


Figure 6. The CNO tri-cycle. 


values measured at energies well above the Gamow peak. 
In this case the low-energy cross section is again non- 
resonant, and there are a number of consistent theoretical 
calculations which provide a basis for the extrapolation. 
The full range of the S;7(0) results from these experiments 
covers a variation of a factor of ~2 between the highest 
and lowest values. Following a critical review of all of 
these experiments, the 1997 INT Workshop on Solar Fusion 
Cross Sections recommended the adoption of 


Si7(0) = 19*4 eV b. (4) 


A quadratic fit to the theoretical energy dependence over 
the range 0 keV < Ew < 300 keV, using the form of 
equation (2), determines 


SO) _ 


—0.7 Mev! and 0) = +3.8 MeV~”. 


S(O) S(0) 


These results, integrated over the solar interior, determine 
that the 7Be(p,y)®B termination accounts for only 0.02% 
of the pp-chain terminations. While this is clearly not an 
important consideration as far as solar energy generation 
is concerned, because of its high-energy neutrinos this 
branch is still the most important termination for a number 
of solar neutrino experiments. The interpretation of the 
results of those experiments therefore requires that 517 (0) 
be more accurately measured. 

We appear to be on the threshold of a series of 
promising new experiments to measure the rate of this 
reaction, using a variety of new techniques, such as 
7Be beams, new ’Be-target strategies and the Coulomb 
dissociation of ®B. These new techniques will have 
the advantages of avoiding some of the systematic 
uncertainties associated with the previous experiments, 
but at the same time these new techniques will have 
systematic uncertainties of their own which will need to 
be understood in order to interpret the results of such 
experiments together with the previous (p,y) experiments. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Initial measurements utilizing a 7Be beam have recently 
been reported by the NABONA collaboration, and 
initial Coulomb dissociation measurements have provided 
preliminary results which are not inconsistent with 
equation (4) and are encouraging for further studies to 
provide an independent determination of 5;7(0). 


The carbon-nitrogen cycle 
The CN cycle uses C as a nuclear catalyst in the 
conversion of 44H — +He + 2e* + 21. Because of the 
roles of various branch points available in the CN cycle, 
the whole process (see figure 6) is now described as a ‘tri- 
cycle’. Because of the high Coulomb barriers of the nuclear 
reactions involved in the CNO cycles (compared with 
those in the pp chain) and the relatively low temperature 
in the solar core (compared with more massive stars), the 
CNO tri-cycle is responsible for only a small fraction (<2%) 
of the energy generated in the Sun. Based on a comparison 
of the measured cross sections for the N(p,y)!©O and 
1SN(p,a)!*C reactions, the main cycle, terminating via the 
IS5N(p,a)!*C reaction, is responsible for >99.5% of this 
small fraction. 

By far the slowest reaction in the CN cycle is the 
“Ni (p,y)'°O reaction—typically more than 100x slower 
than the other reactions for temperatures between 15 x 10° 
and 20 x 10° K. It is the rate of this reaction which 
then determines the rate of the CN cycle. Recent, 
extensive measurements of the N(p,y)°O reaction show 
evidence for important interference effects involving the 
high-energy tail of a subthreshold resonance (Em = 
—504 keV; J™ = 3/2*). However, the magnitude of 
these interference effects at low energies is not well 
determined by these recent data. A combination of these 
data (0.20 MeV < Eun < 3.6 MeV) and earlier, lower- 
energy data (0.100 MeV < Ew < 0.135 MeV) has been 
used by the 1997 INT Workshop on Solar Fusion Cross 
Sections to determine a current ‘best’ value of S(0) for this 
reaction, 

Stanqp.y) (0) => chose keV b. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Energy Generation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


New experiments are clearly needed in order to better 
determine the cross section of this reaction and, thereby, 
the rate of the CN cycle. 


Summary 
Energy generation in the solar interior represents an 
intertwining of the effects of the gravitational and nuclear 
forces. The total gravitational potential energy available 
from the collapse of the proto-solar nebula to the size of 
the Sun would be only sufficient to generate the solar 
luminosity for the order of 50 million years (~1% of the 
current age of the Sun). However, the contraction of 
the proto-solar nebula converted gravitational potential 
energy to thermal kinetic energy which heated the solar 
interior until the 45H — 4He nuclear fusion reactions 
became fast enough to generate the solar luminosity; 
at that point an equilibrium was established between 
the nuclear fusion energy supporting the star and the 
attractive gravitational force containing this fusion device. 
Based on the measurements and extrapolations 
of nuclear cross sections discussed above and their 
integration over the solar interior in a standard solar 
model (see SOLAR INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS), We find the 
following percentages for each of the significant 4H > 
“He processes: 


pp chain 98.2% 
3He(?He,2p) termination 82.5% 
7Be(e7 ,ve) termination 15.7% 
7Be(p,y) termination 0.02% 
CN cycle 1.8% 
Bibliography 


Adelberger E G et al 1998 Solar fusion cross sections Rev. 
Mod. Phys. 70 1265-91 

Burbidge E M, Burbidge GR, Fowler W Aand Hoyle F 1957 
Synthesis of the elements in stars Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 
547-650 

Clayton D D 1983 Principles of Stellar Evolution and 
Nucleosynthesis (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press) 

Parker P D MacD and Rolfs C E 1991 Nuclear energy 
generation in the solar interior Solar Interior and 
Atmosphere ed A N Cox, W C Livingston and 
M S Matthews (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) pp 31-50 

Rolfs C E and Rodney W S 1988 Cauldrons in the Cosmos 
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press) 


Peter Parker 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Equation of State and Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Equation of State and 
Opacity 


In stellar models, the equation of state and opacity are, 
together with nuclear reaction rates, the fundamental 
material properties. The structure of a star is a result of 
(i) a balance of forces, (ii) a balance between the energy 
loss at the stellar surface and energy generation in the 
core and (iii) stationary energy transport between the core 
and the surface (See SOLAR INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS). The 
balance of forces, described as hydrostatic equilibrium, 
results in a relation between the pressure gradient and 
the gravitational acceleration. The force of gravity is 
determined by the density distribution in the star: thus 
stellar modeling requires a relation between density and 
pressure through the specific properties of the matter. 
More precisely, the relevant properties of stellar matter 
are expressed by the equation of state, connecting pressure 
p, density p, temperature T and composition. A simple 
example is the perfect gas law for a fully ionized gas, 
which may be written as p = RpT/p; here R is the gas 
constant and 1 is the mean molecular weight of the various 
species contained in the gas. Clearly 4 depends on the 
composition, which is often characterized by the fractional 
mass abundances X, Y and Z of hydrogen, helium and 
heavier elements. 

The temperature of the stellar interior is determined 
by the energy balance. In much of the Sun, energy 
transport takes place through radiation and depends on 
absorption coefficients, obtained from atomic physics, 
which determine the opacity of stellar matter. It was 
also realized early on that the requirements of radiative 
transport could result in a temperature gradient so 
steep that a star would become convectively unstable: 
convection, where hot elements of gas rise and then 
generally dominate the energy transport. In the Sun this 
occurs in about the outer 30% of the radius. Because of 
the efficiency of convective energy transport, it generally 
requires a temperature gradient only slightly in excess of 
the adiabatic gradient, a thermodynamic quantity derived 
from the equation of state. Another consequence of 
the equation of state, adiabatic sound speed, plays a 
crucial role in helioseismology (see SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL 
HELIOSEISMOLOGY; HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY). 

The equation of state appears as a necessary part of 
stellar modeling as well as of any opacity calculation. 
For the latter, it has to provide ionization equilibrium 
concentrations and level populations. However, the 
interest in the stellar equation of state is not merely 
motivated by astrophysics. It has turned out that one 
star—the Sun—is very special in two respects. First, the 
methods of helioseismology allow us to infer conditions 
in the solar interior very accurately (in particular sound, 
speed and density). Second, in the solar convection 
zone, helioseismology presents an opportunity to isolate 
the question of the equation of state from opacity and 
nuclear reaction rates, since the stratification is essentially 
adiabatic and thus determined by thermodynamics. Thus, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Sun has become an astrophysicsal laboratory to study 
subtle thermodynamic properties of a Coulomb system 
under conditions that cannot be acheived on Earth. 

One of the two major recent equation-of-state and 
opacity efforts is the international Opacity Project (OP; see 
the books by Seaton 1995, Berrington 1997). A necessary 
part of the OP is the so-called Mihalas-Hummer—Dappen 
(MHD) equation of state (see below). It deals with heuristic 
concepts about the modification of atoms and ions in a 
plasma. The principal effort of OP has been to construct a 
tremendous atomic database, comprising state-of-the-art 
theoretical and experimental data. The other major recent 
equation-of-state and opacity effort is being pursued 
by the OPAL group at Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory (Iglesias and Rogers 1996; Rogers et al 1996). 
Its equation of state is based on a sophisticated systematic 
method for including density effects in a plasma. A further 
effort is ongoing at Los Alamos National Laboratory, 
which has been an important opacity provider since the 
1960s. 


The equation of state 

Chemical and physical picture 

Most realistic equations of state that have appeared in the 
last 30 yr belong to the chemical picture and are based on 
the free-energy-minimization method. This method uses 
approximate statistical mechanical models (for example 
the nonrelativistic electron gas). From these models 
a macroscopic free energy is constructed as a function 
of temperature T, volume V and the particle numbers 
Ny,...,Nm of the m components of the plasma. This 
free energy is minimized subject to the stoichiometric 
constraint. The solution of this minimum problem then 
gives both the equilibrium concentrations and, if inserted 
in the free energy and its derivatives, the equation of state 
and the thermodynamic quantities. 

In the absence of interaction terms, the free-energy 
minimization method is equivalent to the familiar Saha 
equation. For more realistic systems, interactions can be 
modeled in many ways. The MHD equation of state, 
e.g., is based on an occupation probability formalism. 
Specifically, the internal partition functions Zi" of species 
s adopted by MHD are sums that are made convergent by 


weights 
in Eis 
zit = > WisSis EXP (- =) ; (1) 


Here, the index is labels the state i of species s. Ej; and 
Sis are their energies (in MHD assumed to be unshifted) 
and statistical weights, respectively, kg is the Boltzmann 
constant, T temperature and the weights w;, are the 
occupation probabilities that take into account charged 
and neutral surrounding particles. In physical terms, ws 
gives the fraction of all particles of species s that can exist in 
statei with an electron bound to the atom or ion, and 1—w;, 
gives the fraction of those that are so heavily perturbed by 
nearby neighbors that their states are effectively destroyed. 

In the alternative physical picture, on which the 
OPAL equation of state is based, no assumptions about 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Equation of State and Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


energy-level shifts or the convergence of internal partition 
functions have to be made. On the contrary, properties of 
energy levels and the partition functions come out from the 
formalism. The physical-picture approach is illustrated by 
the activity expansion for gaseous hydrogen. Pressure is 
determined from a self-consistent solution of the equations 


P 2 3 
— = 7+ bo + bo +-+- 2 
ist Z£TZ O27 Z V3 (2) 


Zz op 
0= a (Z)- i 


In these equations, z = MM? exp(u/kgT) is the activity, 
dX = h/(2xm_.kgT)"” is the thermal (de Broglie) wavelength 
of electrons and jy is the chemical potential. The b, are 
cluster coefficients such that bz includes all two particle 
states, b; includes all three particle-states, etc. Although 
the bound-state part of b, is divergent, the scattering-state 
part, which is omitted in the chemical-picture approach, 
has a compensating divergence. Consequently the total b, 
does not contain a divergence of this type. 


Solar applications 

In the solar convection zone, helioseismology presents 
an opportunity to isolate the question of the equation of 
state from opacity and nuclear reaction rates, since the 
stratification is essentially adiabatic and thus determined 
by thermodynamics. Accurate analysis of the observations 
requires use of the full, nonasymptotic behavior of the 
oscillations (see SOLAR INTERIOR: INVERSIONS OF HELIOSEISMIC 
patTA). Figure 1 shows a typical result of a numerical 
inversion of solar oscillation data. It gives, as a function 
of distance r from the center, the relative difference (in 
the sense Sun — model) between the squared sound speed 
obtained from inversion of oscillation data and that of two 
standard models. If a model were perfect, it would lead 
to a zero line. The two models used for figure 1 are in all 
respects identical except that they use a different equation 
of state (MHD and OPAL). 

In a simplifying spirit we can look at results such 
as shown in figure 1 as the data of helioseismology, dis- 
regarding how they were obtained from solar oscillation 
frequencies. The most important result of the helioseis- 
mic equation-of-state analyses was that it is essential to 
include the leading Coulomb correction to ideal-gas ther- 
modynamics. Under solar conditions, the size of the rel- 
ative Coulomb pressure correction is largest in the outer 
part of the convection zone (about 8%) and it has another 
local maximum in the core (about —1%). Figure 1, how- 
ever, hides the fact that the Coulomb correction is the most 
important one, since both MHD and OPAL already con- 
tain it. Note that in figure 1 the most significant infor- 
mation about the equation of state regards the convection 
zone (r > 0.71Ro), since, beneath it, one cannot disen- 
tangle the influence from the equation of state from other 
effects. Figure 1 contains the evidence that in the region 
0.90Rg <r < 0.97R, the OPAL equation of state is a better 
fit to reality than MHD. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.008 ; 
« OPAL EOS | 
0.006 | 4 MHD EOS $b 7 
A 
L : 
og 
0.004 - 5 aR + 
L iy : 
L frags PT J 
a) ca a 
spo.00e AE : | 
Li ira) 
ee in es 
= rss alate b | 
0 : pa ny 
[ “hia | | 
fi nia ma x A | 
L - e. ‘ 4 
0.002 [ ae \P | 
[ A $ | 
0.004 L ATH et pe eae a at A S| 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 


r/Ro 


Figure 1. Difference between squared sound speed from 
inversion of oscillation data and that of a standard model based 
on the MHD (circles) and OPAL (triangles) equation of state. 
Figure provided by S Basu (Princeton). 


Two very recent inversions have had further 
implications for the equation of state. First, the strong 
constraints from helioseismology now force us to include 
relativistic effects of electrons. Neither MHD nor OPAL 
has so far included relativistic effects, unlike the earlier 
and simpler EFF and its more recent sibling SIREFF (see 
below). Second, there are indications that, for r > 0.97Ro, 
MHD is favored over OPAL. If this result is confirmed, 
it would mean that the treatment of excited states in 
equation (1) is validated. Such a result might appear 
somewhat surprising, because in the upper part of the Sun, 
with density decreasing, OPALby its nature of a systematic 
expansion is becoming inevitably more accurate; however, 
by its heuristic approach MHD would have incorporated 
even finer, higher-order effects. Since the excited states 
are effective in the hydrogen and helium ionization zones, 
this result would have implications for the solar helium 
abundance determination. 


Opacity 

History 

Opacity has long been an issue in understanding stars. 
As long ago as 1926, Eddington identified opacity as one 
of two clouds obscuring stellar model calculations (the 
other being the source of stellar energy). At that time 
it was thought that bound-bound absorption was not a 
significant source of opacity. It was another 40 yr before 
a group at Los Alamos included bound-bound transitions 
and obtained increases in the Rosseland mean opacity! 


1 The Rosseland mean is a weighted frequency average over the 
inverse opacity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Equation of State and Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


exceeding a factor of 3 in some cases. The Cox-Stewart 
opacities greatly improved the quality of stellar models 
and remained the standard for more than a quarter century. 

Even though the Los Alamos opacities helped 
elucidate many features of stars, a number of observations 
continued to resist explanation. For example, period 
ratios in classical Cepheid models were too low, the 
mechanism for pulsation in B-Cephei stars could not be 
identified, the calculated Li abundance in dwarf stars of 
the Hyades cluster was much less than observed and 
simulations underestimated wind-driven mass loss in 
classical novae. A number of studies found that these 
problems are sensitive to changes in opacity. However, 
the opacity increases needed seemed unrealistically large, 
as much as 300% in the case of the classical Cepheids and 
the B-Cephei stars. This situation has spawned the major 
opacity recomputation efforts by OP and OPAL, which 
have now been ongoing for 15 yr. The new calculations 
of both groups have resulted in the expected large opacity 
increases, and they have helped resolve a number of long- 
standing puzzles. 


Solar applications 

The opacity affects the thermal structure of a star and 
therefore the sound speed and density stratification. 
Thus observations of solar and stellar pulsations have 
the potential to constrain and test opacity calculations. 
It is important to note, however, that helioseismology 
alone cannot determine the thermal stratification and 
hence the opacity, without additional assumptions. The 
oscillation frequencies are sensitive only to the mechanical 
structure of the star, particularly the sound speed c. The 
helioseismic inferences can only provide a combination 
of the opacity and the composition profile, but not each of 
these properties separately. Only if the composition profile 
is otherwise determined, e.g. from a stellar evolution 
calculation, can the opacity be properly constrained from 
the helioseismic data. Such successes were indeed 
possible; already with early inversions for the solar sound 
speed done in the mid 1980s, it resulted that a modest 
increase in opacity, around 20% at temperatures between 
about 2 x 10° K and 5 x 10° K, was required relative to 
the Los Alamos opacity tables used then. Such an increase 
has indeed resulted from the more recent (OPAL) opacity 
calculations. Interestingly, this trend now appears to be 
reversing: the latest updates to the OPAL opacities and 
the solar initial composition have tended to increase the 
discrepancies between the Sun and the model. 


Practical considerations 

Opacity and equation of state data can be in the form 
of either analytical or in-line routines that calculate the 
desired opacities or thermodynamic quantities, given as 
input the temperature, density and chemical composition. 
Alternatively, pre-calculated opacity and equation of 
state tables can be provided, with appropriate look-up 
and interpolation routines. The hydrostatic structure 
calculation requires fewer thermodynamic quantities or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


derivatives than a pulsation calculation, for which smooth 
derivatives of the various quantities are required. 

There are advantages and disadvantages of using 
tables versus in-line analytical formulations. Tables are 
often limited in coverage of T, p and composition space, 
and so may not be useful for stellar models over a wide 
range of masses, compositions and evolutionary states. 
Interpolation within and between tables or extrapolation 
off the edges of tables can be difficult and risky, and 
introduces significant uncertainty into the calculations. 
On the other hand, tables often include superior physics 
compared with simple analytical schemes and can be less 
computationally expensive than a sophisticated analytical 
routine. 

Analytical procedures can be more flexible, for 
example in taking into account variations in element 
mixtures and composition or in providing smooth 
derivatives. They also may be modified easily to 
generate additional thermodynamic quantities. Analytical 
procedures can also be useful to explore the importance of 
various physical processes, since these processes can easily 
be turned on and off, exaggerated with multipliers, etc. 


Selected equations of state 

Table 1 lists the specifications of four of the more popular 
equations of state. For more information, see the article by 
Dappen and Guzik (1999), which contains a more detailed 
description of these, and other equations of state. The 
equations of state of table 1 are the Eggleton, Faulkner 
and Flannery (EFF) formalism, the EFF extension by 
Swenson, Irwin and Rogers (SIREFF), MHD and OPAL. 
Documentation of the MHD equation of state is found in 
the book by Seaton (1995). The newest OPAL equation 
of state tables are described in the article by Rogers et al 
(1996). 


Mid- to high-temperature opacities 

The three currently most popular opacity sources are listed 
and the reader is again referred to the article by Dappen 
and Guzik (1999) for further details and other opacities. 


@ The updated OPAL tables (Iglesias and Rogers 1996) are 
based on a 21-element solar mixture. The tables span 
the range 3.75 < log T < 8.7, and —8 < log R < +1, 
where R = T2/p and T, = 10-°T. These opacities 
and interpolation routines are available on the web site 
http: //www-phys.11n1.gov/V_Div/OPAL/. 


e@ The OP provides monochromatic opacities for 17 
astrophysically relevant elements up through Ni, 
on grids of T and WN, (electron density). Tables 
of Rosseland and Planck? mean opacities for 213 
compositions are available. Interpolation codes and 
tables are available on the web site of the OP 
http://visier.u-strasbg.fr/OP.html. 


@ Los Alamos has recently generated new opacities, using 
the so-called LEDCOP (Los Alamos Light Element 


? The Planck mean is a weighted frequency average over the 
opacity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Equation of State and Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Fine effects included in the EFF, MHD, OPAL and SIREFF equations of state. 


Effect EFF MHD OPAL SIREFF 
Coulomb correction No Yes Yes Yes* 
Pressure ionization Yes? Yes Yes Yes* 
Partial ionization Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Molecules No Hp, Hi, H~ Nod H> 
Classical ions Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Electron degeneracy _ Relativistic Nonrelativistic  Nonrelativistic Relativistic 
Excited states No Yes Yes No 
Electron exchange No No Yes Yes 
Quantum diffraction No No Yes No 


* Debye-Hiickel approximation. 
> Ad hoc. 
© Ad hoc, but more general than in EFF. 


4 Molecules will be included in future OPAL tables. 


Detailed Configuration Opacity) code. The new 
Los Alamos Astrophysical Opacity database contains 
elements from hydrogen to zinc (atomic number Z = 1- 
30). The individual element data can be manipulated 
to generate Rosseland or Planck mean opacities for 
any desired mixture. The ranges of validity in T and 
p are 0.5 eV < T < 100 keV, and 10° g cm? < 
p < 10? gcm™°. These codes and tables are available 
on the web site http://t4.lanl.gov. These new Los 
Alamos opacities have not yet been tested extensively 
for astrophysical applications, but a direct comparison 
with OPAL opacities reveals that they are much closer to 
OPAL than to the older Los Alamos opacities. Figure 2 
shows a selected comparison of OPAL, LEDCOP and OP 
opacities for stellar interior conditions. It emerges that 
the results of these three modern efforts agree quite well 
with each other, but small differences remain. 


Low-temperature opacities 

Note that neither the OPAL nor OP opacities extend to low 
temperatures or include molecules. Also, it may be more 
correct to use Planck mean opacities for optically thin outer 
layers. For this reason, modelers of the Sun and low-mass 
stars must supplement the OPAL or OP tables with low- 
temperature opacities. The article by Dappen and Guzik 
(1999) lists the current options. The two most important 
are as follows. 


e Kurucz provides Rosseland mean opacities including 
58 million lines and diatomic molecules for 1 > 
log(Z) > -3 relative to solar, based on the 
Grevesse solar mixture (data available at the web site 
http://cfaku5.harvard.edu/OPACITIES). 


e Alexander and Ferguson provide Rosseland and Planck 
mean opacity tables valid for T = 700-12 500 K includ- 
ing atomic and molecular line absorption, grain absorp- 
tion and scattering by silicates, iron, carbon and SiC 
(contact Alexander, e-mail: dra@twsuvm.uc.twsu. edu). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


X=0.70 Z=0.02 


o 
+ 


log Rosseland Mean Opacity [cm2/gm] 


5.0 55 60 65 7.0 
log T IK] 


Figure 2. OPAL (Livermore), LEDCOP (latest Los Alamos) and 
OP Rosseland mean opacities versus temperature for X = 0.7 
and Z = 0.02, for several log R values, where R = p/ 2. Figure 
provided by J J Keady (Los Alamos). 


Bibliography 

Berrington K A 1997 The Opacity Project vol II (Bristol: 
Institute of Physics Publishing) 

Dappen W and Guzik J A 2000 Astrophysical equation of 
state and opacity Variable Stars as Essential Astrophysi- 
cal Tools (NATO-ASI, Cesme, 1998) ed C Ibanoglu (Dor- 
drecht: Kluwer) pp 177-212 

Iglesias C A and Rogers F J 1996 Updated OPAL opacities 
Astrophys. J. 464 943-53 

Rogers F J, Swenson F J and Iglesias C A 1996 
OPAL equation-of-state tables for astrophysical 
applications Astrophys. J. 456 902-8 

Seaton M J 1995 The Opacity Project vol I (Bristol: Institute 
of Physics Publishing) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Equation of State and Opacity ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Werner Dappen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Solar Interior: Influence of Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Influence of Magnetic 
Fields 


The p-modes that propagate in the solar interior are sound 
waves in a gravitationally stratified medium (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR; HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY). Sound waves involve 
compressions and rarefactions of the medium and as 
such are influenced by other effects that cause pressure 
variations. Magnetic fields impart an extra degree of 
elasticity to a medium. In the plasma that models 
the Sun and its atmosphere, magnetic elasticity adds 
to the compressibility of the medium. These general 
considerations lead us to expect a coupling between the 
Sun’s global oscillations (p-modes) and magnetism. What 
is the nature of that coupling and how may it be used 
to further our understanding of both oscillations and solar 
magnetism? This is the topic of magnetic helioseismology; 
still at an early stage of observational and theoretical 
development, the subject promises to provide insights not 
only into the physics of the Sun’s global oscillations but 
also into the nature of some of its magnetic structures. 

In what ways, then, may magnetism influence 
p-mode oscillations? An equilibrium magnetic field 
carries with it a magnetic pressure and a magnetic 
tension (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS); when perturbed, 
the field generates restoring forces through the bending 
or compressing of its field lines, which lead to 
magnetohydrodynamic waves (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC 
waves). Magnetoacoustic waves are produced whenever 
perturbations compress or expand the medium. Thus p- 
modes, being compressible, are quite naturally influenced 
by magnetism. 


Structured magnetism 
Now the Sun’s magnetic field is not distributed uniformly 
through its interior, surface and atmosphere; rather, 
the field tends to be accumulated in certain locations 
favored by stability considerations or the influence of 
convective flows. In the surface layers of the Sun, 
magnetism is most apparent in sunspots where the field 
conspires to produce a 20% or 30% local cooling of the 
plasma when compared with surroundings (see SUNsPOTS). 
Aside from sunspots, magnetism is also present in small 
magnetic flux tubes which border the network between 
supergranules, preferring the downdraught regions (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE). Thus, the field of the photospheric 
layers of the Sun is present in concentrated forms, rather 
than spread uniformly throughout the medium: flux tubes 
or ensembles of flux tubes are the preferred forms. 
Above the photosphere, the fall off in plasma pressure 
brought about by gravitational stratification allows the 
confined fields of flux tubes to spread out and occupy 
the whole of the atmosphere. The expansion of the 
field is accomplished by some 1000-1500 km above 
the solar surface. The result is a magnetic canopy. 
The canopy overlies the photosphere and separates 
magnetized plasma (in the overlying chromospheric and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


coronal atmosphere) from the convection zone and below 
(See CHROMOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY). 

Below the photosphere, the roots of the magnetic field 
lie within the solar interior where various effects bring 
about the manipulation and transport of magnetic flux 
through the convection zone and into the visible layers (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE FLUX TUBES). The base of the 
convection zone, some 200 000 km below the solar surface, 
is a favored location for the storage and manipulation of 
magnetic field. 

Thus, it is convenient to view the magnetic field of 
the Sun in three separate locations: the solar interior, the 
vertical tubes of the photosphere, and the expanded field 
of the solar atmosphere. 

These general considerations suggest that p-modes 
are influenced by magnetism, and that influence depends 
upon the local magnetism of the Sun. Thus there arises 
the possibility of a local seismology (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY) in which p-modes interact with 
the magnetic fields of a particular region, producing a 
distinctive signature that may be analysed for information 
about the magnetic structure in question. 

The influence of a magnetic field on p-modes 
may be thought of in several ways. First, the field 
modifies the equilibrium structure of a plasma, simply 
because its magnetic pressure has to be balanced along 
with the fluid or plasma pressure. Gradients in the 
total pressure (plasma plus magnetic) are balanced by 
gravitational effects: the medium is stratified according 
to magnetohydrostatic balance. Secondly, the presence of 
a magnetic field within a medium (plasma) means that 
additional forces act on the system when it is perturbed, 
and these forces depend upon the strength of the magnetic 
field. The effect is most simply characterized by the Alfvén 
speed, the basic speed with which a magnetic disturbance 
propagates, to be compared with the sound speed (the 
basic speed with which sound propagates in a medium). 
Together, these two speeds may be combined to describe a 
fast magnetoacoustic speed which is both supersonic and 
super-Alfvénic. Finally, there is an indirect effect possible 
because of magnetism: the temperature of the medium 
may be changed because of the presence of a magnetic 
field, thus modifying the sound speed. This effect is 
most clearly apparent in sunspots with their reduction in 
temperature (and thus sound speed), but may also occur 
elsewhere in more subtle ways. 

Thus, the influence of magnetism on p-modes is 
different in different regions of the Sun. Sunspots offer 
locations where magnetism is especially significant; a 
3000 G field in the visible layers of a sunspot produces 
a magnetic pressure that is broadly comparable with 
the atmospheric pressure of the plasma within the spot. 
Consequently, we can expect p-modes to be appreciably 
influenced by sunspots. Indeed, observations show that 
p-modes are strongly absorbed (up to 50%) in the vicinity 
of a spot (see SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND SEISMOLOGY). Also, 
p-modes are influenced by the active regions that overlie 
sunspots; the amplitudes of oscillations are found to be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Influence of Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


suppressed in the vicinity of active regions. Several 
theoretical interpretations have been advanced as possible 
explanations of the effect. 

Elsewhere in the Sun, away from sunspots, the 
effects of magnetic fields on p-modes are likely to be 
less pronounced, either because the magnetic pressure 
in the field is considerably lower than the plasma 
pressure—as within the solar interior—or because the 
modes themselves do not reach that particular magnetic 
region (as with the solar corona). Generally, p-modes 
occupy the solar interior to different depths, depending 
upon the degree (a measure of horizontal wavelength) of 
the mode. Low-degree modes penetrate deeply below 
the solar surface, intermediate-degree modes are largely 
confined to within the convection zone, and high-degree 
modes occupy the upper reaches of the convection zone. 

Now the solar interior is the store-house of all 
the magnetic field that is ultimately seen in the Sun’s 
atmosphere. But, despite the obvious importance of the 
interior in the process of generating and manipulating 
magnetic field (see DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR), the effects 
of subsurface magnetic fields on p-modes are not likely 
to be large. This is simply because stratification leads 
to a high plasma pressure in the interior, dominating 
any magnetic pressure that may be present. In fact, the 
field strength is uncertain in these layers. For example, 
estimates of the field at the base of the convection zone 
range anywhere from 10° G to 10° G; only field strengths 
towards the upper end of this range are likely to produce 
detectable effects on the oscillations. If fields of this 
order are present—and magnetic helioseismology can be 
expected to resolve this issue—then slight but significant 
changes in p-modes are to be expected as a consequence of 
such magnetism. Oscillations of low degree are perhaps 
most likely to be influenced by internal magnetic fields, 
since these modes penetrate deep within the Sun; modes 
of intermediate or high degree are confined mainly to the 
upper layers of the convection zone, and so are not directly 
subject to the fields stored deeper within the Sun. Instead, 
high-degree modes are likely to be influenced more by the 
fields that fill the chromosphere or are in photospheric flux 
tubes and sunspots. 

Oscillations have also been used to probe active 
regions in the process of emerging through the convection 
zone. This is the developing subject of solar tomography. 
By looking at travel times of modes that occupy the upper 
30% of the convection zone, it has proved possible to 
infer the existence of ‘acoustic perturbations’ at a depth 
of 10-20 Mm below the solar surface. The perturbations 
are in the mode propagation speed and amount to about 
+1.5 km s-! in the magnetoacoustic speed, and are 
interpreted as corresponding either to local temperature 
changes or magnetism. At a depth of 10 Mm, the 
perturbation in propagation speed would correspond to a 
temperature variation of the order of 2000 K or a magnetic 
field of strength 15 000 G (or some combination of the two 
effects). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Solar cycle variations 

Of particular interest in magnetic helioseismology is 
the observed variation of p-mode frequencies with the 
Sun’s activity cycle (see soLar activity). The effect was 
first suggested by data for low-degree modes (degrees 
0-4) but the smallness of the effect (a frequency shift 
of about 1 part in 10*) meant that it was not at first 
universally accepted. Later, detailed studies of both 
low- and intermediate-degree (5-140) modes showed 
unequivocally that oscillation frequencies vary with the 
solar cycle. Accurate ground-based measurements of low- 
degree modes are now available over an almost complete 
solar cycle of 22 years, and the period 1990 to 1996 (during 
which solar activity was falling) has been recently studied 
in detail. Also, observations from space, using instruments 
on the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) 
satellite, have monitored p-modes since 1996 (when the 
Sun was at a minimum in activity). Considerable interest 
attaches to expected developments in these programs as 
the Sun moves through solar maximum. 

The analysis of frequency changes in time is done by 
comparing mode frequencies for one year with those in 
another year; systematic shifts are found. For example, 
frequencies measured when the Sun was at or close to solar 
minimum, such as in the year 1986, may be compared with 
frequencies measured in later years when the Sun was 
more active (e.g. 1988 and 1989). The shift in frequency 
may then be displayed as a function of frequency (taking, 
for example, the frequency at solar minimum as a base). 
The results show (see figure 1) that frequency shifts 
are very small for oscillations of frequency below about 
2 mHz, but rise rapidly thereafter and reach a peak 
shift of about 0.8 w~Hz (for intermediate-degree modes) 
at a frequency just below 4 mHz. Thereafter, at higher 
frequencies the shift falls rapidly and may switch in sign. 
A similar trend is seen also in low-degree modes. 

Theoretical explanations of the observed frequency 
shifts with the solar cycle have been based primarily upon 
a combination of temporal changes in chromospheric mag- 
netism coupled with simultaneous changes in chromo- 
spheric temperature (i.e. changes in the magnetic canopy) 
or in changes in the magnetism and thermal structure of 
photospheric magnetic flux tubes. Such models give fre- 
quency shifts similar to those observed, but only at the 
expense of invoking thermal changes that are larger than 
expected. It may be that other effects, masquerading as 
temperature changes, are also involved. 


Coronal seismology 

Since p-modes are mainly confined to the solar interior 
they are not expected to be greatly influenced by the 
solar corona. Consequently, if we are to study the 
corona through seismology, it is unlikely that p-modes 
will be involved. Instead, a coronal seismology must be 
developed using waves other than p-modes as diagnostic 
probes. A number of such attempts are currently under 
way, using magnetohydrodynamic waves to probe the 
magnetism of the corona. Both propagating waves and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Influence of Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


v(mHz) 


Figure 1. The observationally determined frequency shifts Av 
(in nHz) of intermediate p-modes as a function of frequency v 
(in mHz) for the years 1988 (crosses) and 1989 (full circles), 
compared with 1986. The observations were made by KG 
Libbrecht and M F Woodard. Also shown are the results from 
model calculations by R Jain and B Roberts, for oscillations of 
degree 75. The theoretically determined frequency shifts (shown 
as full curves) arise from an increase in chromospheric magnetic 
field strength (from 30 G to 50 G (lower curve) or 61 G (upper 
curve)) combined with a simultaneous rise in chromospheric 
temperature (from 4170 K to 6370 K (lower curve) or 7770 K 
(upper curve)). 


standing oscillations have been used in a variety of 
magnetic objects. Magnetic loops (see CORONAL Loops), 
plumes (see POLAR PLUMES), and prominences (see SOLAR 
PROMINENCE OSCILLATIONS) are all being investigated in an 
attempt to discover their properties through the use of a 
local seismology. 


Bibliography 

Kosovichev A G 1999 Oscillations in active regions— 
diagnostics and seismology Magnetic Fields and 
Oscillations (Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. Ser. 184) ed B 
Schmeider, A Hofmann and J Staude (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) p 151 

Pallé P L 1995 Solar cycle frequency shifts at low 1 GONG 
‘94: Helio- and Astero-Seismology from the Earth and 
Space (Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. Ser. 76) ed R K Ulrich, 
EJ Rhodes and W Dappen (San Francisco: Astron Soc 
Pacific) p 239 

Rhodes E J et al 1995 Solar cycle dependence of p-mode 
frequencies at intermediate and high degrees GONG 
‘94: Helio- and Astero-Seismology from the Earth and 
Space (Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. Ser. 76) ed R K Ulrich, 
EJ Rhodes and W Dappen (San Francisco: Astron Soc 
Pacific) p 227 

Roberts B 1996 The influence of chromospheric magnetism 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


on oscillation frequencies Bull. Astron. Soc. India 24 
199 

Thompson M J 1994 Recent results from helioseismology 
Advances in Solar Physics ed G Belvedere, M Rodono 
and G M Simnett (Berlin: Springer) p 19 


B Roberts 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Inversions of Helioseismic Data 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Inversions of 
Helioseismic Data 


Once the eigenfrequencies of the solar oscillations are 
measured (see HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS), they are analysed 
further to investigate the solar interior. For example, 
we can use these frequencies to reveal how the adiabatic 
soundspeed varies with depth, or how the interior of the 
Sun rotates differentially, both in depth and in latitude. 
This procedure is called inversion, because the procedure 
of calculating eigenfrequencies for a given solar structure, 
or a given rotation rate, is conventionally considered 
‘forward’ (see HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY). Inversions play the 
central role in our investigation of the solar interior, and 
indeed most of what we know about the internal structure 
of the Sun and its rotation (See SOLAR INTERIOR, SOLAR INTERIOR: 
ROTATION) have been obtained through inversions. 


General properties 


Generally, when there are many measurements (such as 
eigenfrequencies) which reflect a certain property (such as 
soundspeed distribution) of the system observed (such as 
the Sun), we can hope to infer this property in detail. How 
well we can do this depends on the actual information 
content of the entire dataset. 

First of all, the information content of each 
measurement depends on how well the particular 
property is reflected in this measurement. The m-averaged 
eigenfrequencies w,, (n and / are the radial order and the 
degree of the mode) are determined by the (spherically 
averaged) distribution of soundspeed and density, but 
largely by the former in the case of p-mode oscillations. As 
a result, there is more information about the soundspeed 
distribution in the p-mode frequencies than about the 
density distribution. Buta mode frequency can reflect only 
soundspeed distribution within the propagation zone of 
the mode; the frequency carries essentially no information 
about the soundspeed below the lower turning point. The 
statistical error in the measurement is also important; as 
the measurement error decreases the actual information 
content increases. 

Another very important issue is how the information 
content of each measurement adds up; if the data are 
highly redundant, even if there are a large number of them, 
they do not add much independent information to each 
other. Consequently, although the effective measurement 
error will be lowered, the actual information content may 
not be rich enough for us to obtain much detail about the 
property we are investigating. 

In case of inversions of solar oscillation frequencies, 
a certain degree of non-redundancy is guaranteed by the 
variation of the penetration depths from mode to mode, 
which ensures that the different modes sample different 
regions of the Sun, and therefore carry independent 
information. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Method of linear inversions 


Helioseismic inversions are often linearized. In a typical 
linear inverse problem in one dimension (a < x < b), 
we seek to estimate a function g(x) from a set of integral 
constraints 


b 
a= | Ki(x)q(x)dx +e G@=1,...,M) (1) 


where the measurement d;, associated with error 
e;, is linearly related to g(x) with a kernel (or 
sensitivity function) K;(x), and M is the number of such 
measurements. 

In fact, it is not possible to determine the function 
q(x) uniquely if M is finite, even when the data are 
completely free from measurement error. This is because 
for any finite M, one can find an infinite number of 
functions that are orthogonal to K,(x)...Ky(x), which, 
when added to g(x), have no effect on the measurement. 
The dataset has no information about the component of 
q(x) that is a linear combination of these functions, so this 
component has to remain undetermined. Fortunately, in 
helioseismic inversions these unknown components are 
generally highly oscillatory functions in space, so our lack 
of knowledge about their magnitude is unlikely to affect 
our global view of the Sun. 

There are two important classes of inversion methods: 
optimally localized averaging (OLA) and regularized 
least-squares fitting (RLSF). Both are linear methods 
comprising only linear processes, and therefore produce 
an estimate of g atx = x9, G(X), thatis a linear combination 
of the data: 


(xo) = Yc: (x0)d; 


i 


b 
= / D(x; xo)q(x) dx +} ° ci(xo)ei 


where c; (x9) is inversion coefficient and 


D(x; x9) = > Cj (Xo) Ki (x) 


i 


is the averaging kernel, the width of which gives the 
resolution of the estimate; if D(x; x9) is sharply peaked 
at x = x9, then q(xo) will be close to g(x) but for the error 
term. The standard deviation of the estimate g (xo) is given 


by 


1/2 
54 (x0) = (S. (xo)¢j «8 


i 


where E;; is the covariance of e; and e;. It would be desired 
that the resolution be as high as possible and that the error 
beas low as possible, but in fact there is a trade-off between 
the two; a higher resolution is generally associated with 
greater amplitudes of the coefficients c;(xo), and hence 
with greater error (figure 1). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Inversions of Helioseismic Data 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


error 


resolution 


Figure 1. A schematic figure of a trade-off curve. 


Optimally localized averaging (OLA) 

The optimally localized averaging technique directly 
seek to balance resolution and error by minimizing, for 
example, 


b 
Sota = / D(x; x9)? (x — x0)" dx + a[59 (x0)? 


for each target position x9, subject to the unimodular 
condition 


b 
/ D(x; x9) dx =1 


by varying c)(xo)...cm(%o). Significant amplitudes in 
D(x; x9) far from x = xo are penalized by the integral, 
a measure of spread of the averaging kernel, whereas a 
large error is penalized by the second term. The trade-off 
parameter a determines the compromise between the two. 
As the data error increases, a higher value of a will have 
to be chosen and as a result, D(x; xo) will be more poorly 
localized. When the localization is poor, often the center 
x1 of D(x; x9) is calculated under a proper definition (e.g. 
the center of gravity), and g(xo) is re-interpreted as q(x1). 

Using a different measure of spread will lead to 
a different formalism. An essential and important 
alternative, however, is so-called subtractive optimally 
localized averaging (SOLA), in which the averaging kernel 
is fit to a target function (e.g. Gaussian) centered at the 
target position. 


Regularized least-squares fitting (RLSF) 

To many people, probably the most natural way to solve 
the set of equation (1) is to use least-squares fitting; to find 
an estimate g(x) one minimizes 


1 b 2 
Sisp = > 2(« -{ Ki(x)q(x) ar) , 


as 


In practice, q(x) is expanded in a series of functions 
and then the minimization problem is reduced to a 
matrix equation. It is often found, however, that the 
resulting matrix is nearly singular, producing an ‘ill-posed’ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


problem. This is normally caused by the redundancy 
of the data. The most common way to avoid this is 
to introduce a ‘regularization’ term that imposes some 
kind of smoothness to the estimates q(x). For example, 
minimization of 


b 
Srisp = Sisp + af [Lq(x)F dx, 


where a isa regularization parameter and CL isa differential 
operator, leads to a linear system of equations that is not 
singular, provided a is large enough. Unlike OLA, it is 
not necessary to obtain inversion coefficients explicitly, but 
they are often calculated for diagnostic purposes. 


Structure inversion 

Since the spherically averaged structure of the Sun 
determines the m-averaged eigenfrequencies @,), in 
structure inversion the observed spectrum of the m- 
averaged frequency is inverted to recover the internal 
structure of the Sun. 

The m-averaged frequencies of a solar model are 
calculated by solving an eigenvalue problem. Although 
this is almost routine work today, its complexity, and 
nonlinear nature in particular, does not permit direct 
inversions. Therefore we have to introduce some 
approximation to simplify the forward problem, so that 
the problem becomes directly invertible. 

One strategy is to use asymptotic analysis. From the 
asymptotic analysis of solar p-mode oscillations, we see 
that the m-averaged frequency w is related to c(r), the 
soundspeed as a function of radial coordinate r, in the 
following way: 


a ( L*¢? J dr a(n+a) 
1 = 
ip r2o2 Cc o 

where r, is the radius of the lower turning point 
determined by the relation c(r,)/r, = w/L, R is the solar 
radius and L = J//(/+1). The phaseshift a is generally 
a function of frequency, but in the simplest treatment 
it is regarded as a constant. We note that, for a given 
soundspeed distribution, the left-hand side is a function of 
w = w/L alone, and denote this function by F(w), which is 
identified to the observed quantity in the right-hand side. 
Then the relation 


& L?c? ie dr 
fs reo c 


is analytically inverted to yield 


a 1 2 \ ar 
dw 
mH Jar) \wr a? dw 
where a(r) = c(r)/r is a monotonically decreasing 


function of r in the solar case. This formula gives the 
depth as a function of a, which can easily be converted to 


r= Re] 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Inversions of Helioseismic Data 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the soundspeed distribution c(r). In reality, F(w) can be 
observationally constructed only in a limited range: even 
for the highest degree modes, w is larger than a(R), the 
surface value, and therefore F(w) cannot be known down 
to a(R). A minor correction term is usually introduced 
to amend this. Likewise, the highest observed w = w/L 
determines the deepest layer of the Sun which is accessible 
by this method. 

Although the accuracy of the asymptotic method is 
limited by the accuracy of asymptotic analysis itself, the 
method proved to be very successful. More sophisticated 
asymptotic analyses, which can also be used for inversion, 
have been developed. 

Another strategy, which is more commonly adopted 
nowadays, is to abandon the idea of dealing with 
frequencies themselves. Instead, we consider the 
difference between solar frequencies sy, and the 
frequencies of our reference model, wer (the suffixes n and/ 
are omitted). If we assume that our reference model is close 
enough to the Sun, then we can use linear perturbation 
theory to relate the difference in structures to difference in 
frequencies: 


R 
oe = if (k..in%n ot Knee) dr 
0 c p 
te E~'Feurt(@) 


where 6@ = @sun — @ref, @ is normally taken to be Gee, 
K..,(r) and K,-(r) are the kernels calculated from the 
reference model (figure 2), dc and 6p denote the excesses in 
soundspeed c and density p in the Sun, respectively, with 
respect to the reference model. The extra term is present 
because of our poor knowledge of the surface layers of 
the Sun; E is the normalized mode inertia and F,,,; is the 
surface term. Choices of quantities other than c and p are 
possible too. 

Once the forward problem is linearized in this 
way, it can be inverted by using either OLA or RLSF. 
The formulation in the previous section requires some 
modifications because the number of variables is two in 
this case, and also because of the presence of the surface 
term. In the case of RLSF, having two variables requires 
that the two functions have to be fitted at the same time. 
In the case of OLA, one of the variables (say, soundspeed 
excess) is chosen as the target, and to So. is added an extra 
term that penalizes contributions from the other variable. 

The surface term has to be evaluated from the 
comparison between @un and @,.¢ and then subtracted 
from the left-hand side. This can also be done implicitly 
in the case of OLA, by choosing the coefficients in such a 
way that the contribution from the surface term vanishes. 


Rotation inversion 

The internal rotation of the Sun manifests itself in the 
variation of eigenfrequency over azimuthal order m. In 
rotation inversion, we invert the rotational splitting, the 
shift of frequency from the m-averaged value @nim — ni, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


D0 
40} 
30} 
20} 


kernel 


Figure 2. The kernels K.,,(r) (full curve) and K,,.(r) (dotted 
curve) calculated from a standard model for / = 1, n = 20 mode. 


averaging kernel 


Figure 3. An example of a well localized averaging kernel for 
two-dimensional rotation inversion. The target position is 
r/Ro = 0.75, colatitude 6 = 45°. 


for internal differential rotation of the Sun. The rotational 
splitting is usually calculated by using linear perturbation 
theory, noting that the Sun’s rotation rate is slow compared 
with its oscillation frequencies. The result is a linear 
relation between solar internal rotation and rotational 
splittings: 


Mnlm — Onl 


R a 
=f rar f dO Knim(r, 0)Q(r, 9) 
0 0 


m 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Inversions of Helioseismic Data 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which is numerically invertible. This is similar to the 
second approach of structure inversion: here we use 
the linearized difference between eigenfrequencies of a 
rotating Sun and with frequencies of a non-rotating Sun 
to infer the difference (namely the rotation). In this case, 
the linear inversion methods discussed before are more 
readily applicable except for the difference in dimensions. 
Figure 3 illustrates an averaging kernel constructed by an 
OLA method. 


Bibliography 

Gough D O 1993 Linear adiabatic stellar pulsation Astro- 
physical Fluid Dynamics, Les Houches Session XLVII, 
1987 ed J-P Zahn and J Zinn-Justin (Amsterdam: 
Elsevier) pp 399-560 

Gough D O and Thompson M J 1991 The inversion 
problem Solar Interior and Atmosphere ed A N Cox, 
W C Livingston and M S Matthews (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 519-61 

Unno W, Osaki Y, Ando H, Saio H and Shibahashi H 1989 
Nonradial Oscillations of Stars (Tokyo: University of 
Tokyo Press) 


Takahashi Sekti 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Local Helioseismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Local Helioseismology 


This article describes how we use acoustic waves to study 
the subsurface properties of particular areas of the Sun. 
Local helioseismology is not as well developed as the 
more mature area of study, global HELIOSEISMOLOcY. New 
techniques are still being suggested and developed.This 
article will discuss some of these techniques and the most 
solid of the inferences about the SOLAR INTERIOR derived 
from them. 

When one observes a spectral line formed in the SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE, one finds that the wavelength shifts back and 
forth with a period of about 5 min. This wavelength shift 
is caused by the DopPLeR EFFECT and tells us there is an 
approximately vertical mass motion in the photosphere 
of several hundred m s“!. Theoretically it was calculated 
some years ago that acoustic waves with 5 min period 
should not propagate in the sun’s photosphere. In fact, 
by measuring the Doppler shift at different heights in 
the photosphere, it was found that the waves are not 
propagating, but that the whole atmosphere is lifting up 
and down. 

From calculations we know that acoustic waves of 
5 min period propagate throughout most of the interior of 
the Sun, but that near the photosphere, where the density 
is falling off rapidly, the waves reflect. So the interior of 
the Sun can be considered as a cavity allowing acoustic 
wave propagation. As part of this reflection process, the 
atmosphere is raised and lowered with the period of the 
wave, leading to our observations of Doppler shifts in the 
photosphere. 

By observing different locations in the photosphere, 
we obtain a picture of apparently independent oscillators, 
separated by roughly the acoustic wavelength in the 
photosphere, 2 Mm. The oscillators are not very good 
ones, with the amplitude rising and falling and the 
frequency varying. 

Below the surface, waves propagate away from a 
source near the surface. The waves follow ray paths, 
as seen in figure 1. For a wave propagating into the 
interior obliquely, the increasing temperature (and hence 
increasing sound speed) causes the ray paths to bend, or 
refract. At some point the rays are bent back toward the 
surface which can be called total internal refraction, similar 
to the optical phenomenon of total internal reflection. The 
bottom of the ray path, or turning point, occurs at a 
characteristic depth. From a straightforward examination 
of the purely acoustic dispersion relation, we find that the 
sound speed at the bottom of the ray path is the same as the 
horizontal phase speed seen at the surface (w/k,), where 
w is the frequency and k, is the horizontal wavenumber. 
An important point to remember is that, when we observe 
a wave with phase speed w/ky, that wave propagates to a 
depth at which the sound speed is the same as the phase 
speed. 

From a variety of evidence, we believe that the 
acoustic waves are excited by convective motion just below 
the photosphere.The lifetime of this convection, visible 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


at the surface and called GRANULATION, is about 15 min. 
One possible picture of the wave field is a random array 
of sources sending off wave packets with 5 min period 
(the turnover time of the convection) and lasting for about 
15 min. This random array of sources could very densely 
cover the solar surface or not—we do not know yet. The 
basic problem of local helioseismology is how to use these 
waves as a probe of solar structure. 

One way to use these waves is to somehow 
isolate the waves travelling from one surface location to 
another. Two methods have been studied that perform 
this isolation, termed time-—distance helioseismology and 
acoustic imaging. 

In time-distance helioseismology, the signals at two 
surface locations are cross correlated, a mathematical 
operation consisting of shifting in time the two signals 
relative to each other and measuring how similar the two 
signals are at each value of the shift. 

If a wave packet was emitted at surface location 1 
at time f and it takes an interval T to travel along the 
subsurface path to location 2, we expect that the signal 
at location 2 at time t + T would be most similar to the 
signal at location 1. The time interval T, called the travel 
time, depends on the distance between the locations, with 
T increasing with the separation. T therefore depends on 
the normal increase of sound speed with depth into the 
Sun. It also depends on temperature perturbations, flows 
and magnetic fields along the way. If there is a ‘hot spot’ 
along the waves’ path, the wave will temporarily speed 
up and the resultant interval T will be reduced. If there is 
a material flow, say from a convective cell, with the flow 
directed towards location 2, the wave will be advected 
by the flow and the resultant interval T will be reduced. 
Conversely, for waves travelling from location 2 to location 
1, the interval T>; will be increased. So, by measuring 
the difference in travel time for the two directions, the 
direction and magnitude of flows can be isolated. 

The second method of isolating the waves is called 
acoustic imaging. An acoustic signal present at a certain 
location and a certain time will act like a source. The signal 
will propagate out from the origin and at a certain time 
interval later will reach the surface. In principle, all surface 
points can be used and it is only necessary to know how 
long it takes to propagate to each surface point. Then, by 
shifting the signals in time and adding them up over all the 
surface points, we can reproduce the signal at the origin. 
What we have described here is the generation of the origin 
signal from the outgoing waves. However, the process can 
be reversed and the signal can be reconstructed from the 
ingoing waves. That is, we look earlier in time at waves 
that will propagate to the origin point. 

The reconstructed signals, ingoing and outgoing, con- 
tain information about flows, magnetic fields, temperature 
perturbations and absorption. To date, information about 
absorption and phase changes has been derived. By com- 
paring the strength of the ingoing signal, which is unaf- 
fected by whatever is at the origin, with the outgoing sig- 
nal, which will be reduced in amplitude by an absorber 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Local Helioseismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0 

5 

=e 10 
— 

al 15 

20 

25 


40 60 
x (Mm) 


Figure 1. Acoustic ray paths below the solar surface. An acoustic source at the surface would send out energy along these paths that 
would return to the surface. It takes a longer time for waves to travel the longer paths. 


conf $3 
(3538.87 [iy 

ae 
“Bt b569 .67 
- 1600.47 


631.27 
- 337.93 


Figure 2. Subsurface wave speed map below a sunspot. One plane from a three-dimensional inversion is shown from the surface to 
24 Mm below the surface. The top plane is the intensity of the sunspot at the surface with the normal surface intensity transparent. 
The wave speed perturbations are shown in the blue-red scale in km s~!. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 51. 


near the origin, it has been possible to detect the presence 
of absorbers, mostly in the neighborhood of sunspots. 

By cross correlating the ingoing signal with the 
outgoing signal, itis possible to find phase shifts that occur 
near the origin. These have been used to study the high- 
wave-speed region below sunspots. The high wave speeds 
are presumably caused by a combination of higher than 
normal temperature and magnetic field. 

Both time-distance helioseismology and acoustic 
imaging can benefit from a further step of modelling 
or inversion. In this step the measurements, which are 
smoothed averages or integrals of interior solar properties, 
are used as input to a calculation that attempts to isolate the 
inhomogeneities at and below the solar surface. This is an 
important step that can better summarize our knowledge 
and uncertainties of the interior. To date, more of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the modelling effort has centered on the time—distance 
technique, which has led to some interesting results as seen 
in the next section (see also SUNSPOT MODELS). 


Examples 

Sunspots have been observed with telescopes for nearly 
400 yr. Our knowledge of their properties below the Sun’s 
surface, or photosphere, is almost completely theoretical. 
We know that the gas in a sunspot is cooler than the 
surroundings, leading to the relative darkness and hence 
the name sunspot. We also know from our surface 
observations that a strong magnetic field permeates the 
sunspot (see SUNSPOT MAGNETIC FIELDS). An example of the 
intensity of a spot is shown in figure 2 in the top plane 
in which only the region of reduced brightness is shown. 
The black region, or umbra, is the region of maximum 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Local Helioseismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


200. 


100. 


Y Mn 


-100. | 


-200. 


Ls 


- 200. 


100. 200. 


tine seasal 


Figure 3. Divergence and magnetic field near the solar surface. 
The gray scale shows travel time measurements that are 
proportional to the velocity divergence, with white indicating 
outflow, black converging flow. The green and red are the two 
polarities of the magnetic field, which are only shown when the 
field is larger than 15 G. This figure is reproduced as Color 
Plate 52. 


reduction of brightness. The region of intermediate 
brightness, the penumbra, is shown in red surrounding 
the umbra. 

Below the intensity plane is shown a vertical cut from 
a three-dimensional wave-speed inversion using time— 
distance data. The most striking feature is the red region 
extending about 12 Mm below the sunspot indicating a 
region of higher than normal wave speed. Although in 
principle we may be able to separate temperature changes 
from magnetic fields, for this work it was not possible to 
distinguish the two. So, at a depth of 10 Mm, we have 
either a magnetic field of strength 10 kG or a temperature 
rise of 3% of the temperature. 

The Sun’s radiant energy, generated in the core by 
nuclear fusion, is carried outwards in the outer 30% 
of the radius by convective motions. These motions 
near the surface have been studied by time—distance 
helioseismic techniques. In figure 3, we show near-surface 
measurements of the flow of the supergranules, a cellular 
flow with cell sizes of 30 Mm. The gray scale in the 
figure is showing the flow divergence, positive or white 
for outflow and negative or black for converging flows. 
This signal was measured using surface-gravity waves 
concentrated in the 2 Mm immediately below the surface. 
Superposed on the divergence signal in green and red 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are areas where the magnetic field strength is larger than 
15 G. The two colors are for the two polarities of the field. 
We see that the magnetic fields are concentrated in the 
regions of converging flows, as if the flows were pushing 
them around. The time—distance measurements provide 
a way to study this flow pattern in detail over most of 
the visible hemisphere, a definite improvement over other 
techniques. 


Thomas L Duvall Jr 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


Six experiments have observed solar NEUTRINOS, three 
of which are radiochemical experiments: Homestake 
(chlorine detector), GALLEX (gallium detector) and 
SAGE (gallium detectors). These radiochemical detectors 
register all neutrinos above a fixed threshold energy 
(0.8 MeV for chlorine, 0.2 MeV for gallium), with 
no further information about energy. Three other 
experiments, Kamiokande, SUPER-KAMIOKANDE, and SUDBURY 
NEUTRINO OBSERVATORY (SNO), measure the energies in 
real time of electrons produced in neutrino interactions 
in water. Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande use 
neutrino-electron scattering in ordinary (but very pure) 
water and SNO uses neutrino absorption and neutrino 
disassociation of deuterium in heavy water. These water 
detectors are designed to measure electrons, from neutrino 
interactions, with more than 5 MeV of energy. 

I will discuss the results of each of these experiments 
after I first answer a series of background questions. Why 
study solar neutrinos? What does the combined standard 
model (solar plus electroweak) predict for solar neutrinos? 
Why are the calculations of neutrino fluxes robust? What 
are the three solar neutrino problems? I will conclude by 
summarizing what have we learned in the first 35 yr of 
solar neutrino research and what we hope to learn in the 
next decade. 


Why Study Solar Neutrinos? 

Astronomers study solar neutrinos for different reasons 
than physicists. For astronomers, solar neutrino 
observations offer an opportunity to test directly the 
theories of STELLAR EVOLUTION and of nuclear energy 
generation. With neutrinos one can look into the interior 
of a main sequence star and observe the nuclear fusion 
reactions that are ultimately responsible for starlight via 
the general reaction 


UH —> 4He + 2e* + 2re. (1) 


The optical depth of the Sun for a typical neutrino 
produced by nuclear fusion is ~10~°, about 20 orders 
of magnitude smaller than the optical depth for a 
typical optical photon. As we shall see, solar neutrino 
experiments constitute quantitative, well-defined tests of 
the theory of stellar evolution. Since stellar evolution 
theory is used widely in interpreting astronomical 
observations, direct tests of this theory are of importance 
to astronomers. 

Table 1 shows the principal nuclear reactions that 
accomplish equation (1) via the proton—proton chain of 
reactions. In what follows, we shall refer often to the 
reactions listed in this table. 

Solar neutrinos are of interest to physicists because 
they can be used to perform unique particle physics 
experiments. Many physicists believe that solar neutrino 
experiments may have already provided evidence for a 
non-zero neutrino mass and that electron flavor (or the 
number of electron-type neutrinos) may not be conserved. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. The principal reactions of the p-p chain. 


Reaction Neutrino energy 
number Reaction (MeV) 
1 ptp— *Htet+r. 0.0-0.4 
2 pte +p > 7Htr-¢ 1.4 
3 *H+p—> %Het+y 
4 5He + 3He > *He +2p 
or 
5 3He + 4He > 7Be+y 
then 
6 e+ “Be > 7Li+ve 0.86, 0.38 
7 7Li+p— *He+ +He 
or 
8 p+ 7Be > ®B+y 
9 8B > 8Be+et +e 0-15 


For some of the theoretically most interesting 
neutrino parameters, solar neutrino experiments are more 
sensitive tests for neutrino transformations in flight than 
experiments that can be carried out with laboratory 
sources. The reasons for this exquisite sensitivity are (1) the 
great distance between the accelerator (the solar interior) 
and the detector (on Earth), (2) the relatively low energy 
(MeV) of solar neutrinos and (3) the enormous path length 
of matter (~10"' g cm7’) that neutrinos must pass through 
on their way out of the Sun. 

One can quantify the sensitivity of solar neutrinos 
relative to laboratory experiments by considering the 
proper time that would elapse for a finite-mass neutrino 
in flight between the point of production and the point of 
detection. The elapsed proper time is a measure of the 
opportunity that a neutrino has to transform its state and 
is proportional to the ratio, R, of path length divided by 
energy: 


ath length 
paeen (2) 


proper time « R = energy 

Future accelerator experiments with multi-GeV 
neutrinos are expected to reach a sensitivity of order 
R = 107 km GeV". Reactor experiments are planned that 
will reach a level of sensitivity of R = 10° km GeV™! for 
neutrinos with MeV energies. Solar neutrino experiments, 
because of the enormous distance between the source 
(the center of the Sun) and the detector (on Earth) and 
the relatively low energies (1 MeV to 10 MeV) of solar 
neutrinos involve much larger values of neutrino proper 


time, 
10° / km km 
R 1, =; =~ = Ot: 1 fk ( ee . 
= 93 (ay) : (ar) 6) 


Because of the long proper time that is available to a 
neutrino to transform its state, solar neutrino experiments 
are sensitive to very small neutrino masses that can cause 
neutrino oscillations (changes between different neutrino 
states) in vacuum. Quantitatively, vacuum neutrino 
oscillations are sensitive to masses as small as 


m, (solar level of sensitivity) ~ 10° eV-10- eV (4) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


provided that the electron-type neutrino that is created by 
beta decay contains appreciable portions of at least two 
different neutrino mass states. Technically, this amounts 
to saying that the mixing angle between different neutrino 
states is relatively large. Neutrino mixing is analogous 
to photon polarization in that photons can be in different 
polarization states (e.g. linear or circular) and there are 
mixing angles which describe the relations between the 
different states of the photon. 

Laboratory experiments have achieved a sensitivity to 
electron-type neutrino masses of order 1 eV. Observations 
of neutrinos produced by cosmic ray interactions in 
the Earth’s atmosphere have suggested the existence of 
neutrino oscillations involving neutrino mass differences 
of order ~0.07 eV. 

Resonant neutrino oscillations, which may be 
induced by neutrino interactions with electrons in the 
Sun (the famous Mikheyev-Smirnov—Wolfenstein (MSW) 
effect), can occur even if the electron neutrino produced in 
the Sun is not well mixed with any of the other neutrinos 
(i.e. even if the mixing angles between e and yz neutrinos 
and between e and rt neutrinos are tiny). Standard solar 
models indicate that the Sun has a high central density, 
p(central) ~ 1.5 x 10? g cm’, which allows electron- 
type neutrinos to be resonantly converted to the more 
difficult to detect 4 or t neutrinos by the MSW effect, 
provided that the difference in neutrino mass satisfies a 
resonance condition involving the local electron density 
and the neutrino energy. 

Given the solar parameters from standard models, 
the planned and operating solar neutrino experiments are 
sensitive to neutrino masses in the range 


10-*eV Sm, S107 eV (5) 


via matter-induced resonant oscillations (MSW effect). 

The range of neutrino masses given by equations (4) 
and (5) is included in the range of neutrino masses that are 
suggested by attractive particle-physics generalizations of 
the standard electroweak model. 

Both vacuum neutrino oscillations and matter- 
enhanced neutrino oscillations can change electron-type 
neutrinos to the more difficult to detect w or t neutrinos. 
In addition, the likelihood that a neutrino will have its 
type changed may depend on its energy, affecting the 
shape of the energy spectrum of the surviving electron- 
type neutrinos. The shape of the energy spectrum 
for solar neutrinos produced by any particular nuclear 
process must be the same as the shape measured in 
the laboratory unless some new physics (e.g. neutrino 
oscillations) is occurring. Currently operating solar 
neutrino experiments will measure the shape of the energy 
spectrum. 


What does the combined standard model tell us 
about solar neutrinos? 

In this section, I will describe the combined standard 
model (standard solar model and standard electroweak 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


theory) that is used to decide whether solar neutrino 
experiments have revealed something unexpected. Then 
I will present the calculated solar neutrino spectrum as 
predicted by the standard model. 


The combined standard model 

In order to interpret solar neutrino experiments, one must 
have a quantitative solar model. Unlike many other areas 
of astronomy in which one can make important discoveries 
by identifying new classes of objects (such as quasars, or 
x-ray sources, or y-ray sources), solar neutrino research 
requires a reliable theoretical model for comparison with 
the observations in order to determine whether one has 
found something surprising. Our physical intuition is not 
yet sufficiently advanced to know whether we should be 
surprised by, for example, 10~, by 10° or by 10? neutrino- 
induced events per day in a chlorine tank the size of an 
olympic swimming pool. 

I will use the most conservative model for comparison 
with experiments, the combined standard model, unless 
explicitly stated otherwise. The combined standard model 
is the standard model of solar structure and evolution and 
the standard electroweak model of particle physics (see 
also SOLAR EVOLUTION, STANDARD MODEL OF PARTICLE PHYSICS). 

A solar model is required in order to predict the 
number of neutrinos created in a given energy range per 
unit time. On a fundamental level, a solar model is 
required in order to predict the rate of nuclear fusion by 
the p—p chain (shown in table 1 and discussed below) and 
the rate of fusion by the CNO reactions (originally favored 
by H sertue in his epochal 1939 study of nuclear fusion 
reactions). 

In our discussion, I will assume a result common to 
all modern solar models, namely that the CNO reactions 
contribute only a very small fraction of the luminosity of 
the Sun. Although the dominance of the p-p chain is often 
taken for granted in theoretical analyses of solar neutrino 
experiments, it is not an a priori obvious result. 

A precise solar model is required to calculate 
accurately which nuclear reaction occurs more often at 
the two principal branching points of the p-p fusion 
chain. Referring to table 1, the branching points occur 
between reactions 4 and 5 and between reactions 6 and 8. 
If the p-p chain is terminated by reaction 4, only low- 
energy (<0.4 MeV) p—p neutrinos are produced, but if the 
termination occurs via reaction 5, then higher-energy 7Be 
and °B neutrinos are created. 

Many authors have claimed that the p—p neutrino flux 
is essentially determined by the solar luminosity. This is 
wrong. Depending on whether reaction 4 or reaction 5 
is dominant, the flux of p-p neutrinos can vary by a 
factor 2. If reaction 4 is dominant, two p-p neutrinos are 
produced each time four protons are burned to produce an 
alpha particle (see equation (1)). If reaction 5 is dominant, 
only one p-p neutrino plus a ’Be neutrino (or rarely 
a °B neutrino) is produced for each alpha particle that 
is formed. A solar model is required to decide which 
reaction, 4 or 5, is dominant. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The ratio of the rates for reaction 6 and reaction 8 
determines how often ’Be neutrinos (two lines: 0.86 MeV 
and 0.38 MeV) are produced rather than the rare, but more 
easily detected, °B neutrinos (maximum energy ~14 MeV) 
are produced. The predicted rates in solar neutrino 
experiments depend sensitively on the relative frequencies 
of these crucial reactions. Fortunately, the theoretical 
uncertainties in the predicted neutrino fluxes are not 
very large. For the important fluxes, the uncertainties 
vary from ~1% to ~20%, depending on the neutrino 
source in question. The rates for individual detectors are 
determined by the energy spectrum, by the neutrino type 
of the incoming solar neutrinos and by the interaction cross 
sections of the different detectors. 

A particle physics model is required to predict what 
happens to the neutrinos after they are created. I will use 
the simplest version of the standard electroweak model, 
according to which nothing happens to the neutrinos 
after they are created in the interior of the Sun. In 
this theory, neutrinos are massless and neutrino flavor 
(electron type) is conserved. The standard electroweak 
model has had many successes in precision laboratory 
tests; modifications of this theory will be accepted only 
if incontrovertible experimental evidence forces a change. 


The solar neutrino spectrum 

Figure 1 shows the calculated neutrino spectrum for the 
most important neutrino sources from the Sun. I will 
discuss briefly the p-p (and pep) neutrinos, the ’Be 
neutrinos, and the ®B neutrinos. I will concentrate on the 
reliability of the predictions and will indicate the role of 
each of these neutrinos in the ongoing experiments. 

The dominant source of solar neutrinos is the first 
reaction listed in table 1, the basic p—p reaction (p + p —> 
D + e* + v.), which creates neutrinos with energies less 
than 0.4 MeV. Most of the nuclear energy that emerges 
as sunlight begins with this reaction. The theoretical 
uncertainty in the p—p neutrino flux is about 1%. Among 
the solar neutrino experiments that are currently operating 
or that are being constructed, only the GALLEX and SAGE 
gallium experiments have energy thresholds low enough 
to detect the p—p neutrinos. About 0.2% of the p—p fusions 
are believed to occur via the pep reaction, the second 
reaction in table 1. This reaction produces a neutrino witha 
fixed energy, a ‘neutrino line’ that contributes a small part 
of the calculated event rate in the chlorine and gallium 
experiments. 

The next most important source of neutrinos is from 
the 7Be neutrino line at 0.86 MeV, which is produced by 
reaction 6 of table 1. About 15% of the solar luminosity is 
produced by reactions which go through this channel; the 
uncertainty in the neutrino flux is ~9%. The 7Be neutrinos 
contribute significantly, according to standard model 
calculations, to the chlorine and the gallium experiments, 
but are too low in energy to be detected in the Kamiokande 
experiment. In an experiment under development called 
BOREXINO, ’Be neutrinos will be detected by the unique 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


signature they produce in scintillation light caused by 
neutrino-electron scattering. 

The ®B neutrino flux, produced by reaction 9 of table 1, 
is tiny, ~10-* of the flux of p-p neutrinos. However, 
the ®B neutrinos are crucial for solar neutrino physics 
and astronomy. Because of their high energy (~10 MeV, 
which takes advantage of a superallowed transition from 
the nuclear ground state of chlorine to an excited state 
of argon), §B neutrinos dominate the predicted capture 
rate for the chlorine experiment. They are also the only 
significant source of neutrinos above the energy threshold 
in the water Cherenkov experiments, Kamiokande, Super- 
Kamiokande and SNO. Unfortunately, the theoretical 
uncertainty in the predicted 8B neutrino flux is relatively 
large, ~19%. 


Why are the predicted neutrino fluxes robust? 

The predicted event rates in the different solar neutrino 
experiments have been remarkably stable over the past 
30 yr. Our published estimate in 1968, which accompanied 
the first report by Davis and his collaborators of 
measurements with the chlorine experiment, was 7.5+ 1.0 
solar neutrino units (SNU); the most recent and detailed 
calculation yielded in 1998 a predicted rate of 7.7*12, SNU. 
An SNU is a convenient unit to describe the measured 
rates of solar neutrino experiments: 10~* interactions per 
target atom per second. The theoretical errors are intended 
to be as close as possible to effective lo errors; they are 
obtained by carrying out detailed calculations using 1o 
uncertainties on all the measured input data and, for the 
theoretical errors (which are generally less important), by 
taking the extreme range of theoretical calculations to be 
30 uncertainties. 

In the intervening three decades since the first 
experimental report on solar neutrinos, my colleagues 
and I have calculated many different models with steady 
improvements in measured and calculated input data and 
in the physics used to describe the solar interior. The 
best-estimate predictions have bounced around every few 
years, as different improvements were included, but the 
answers have always remained within +2 SNU of the 1968 
best estimate. 

There are three reasons that the theoretical calcula- 
tions of the neutrino fluxes are robust: (1) the availability 
of precision measurements and precision calculations of 
input data; (2) the connection between neutrino fluxes and 
the measured solar luminosity; (3) the measurement of the 
helioseismological frequencies of the solar pressure-mode 
(p-mode) eigenfrequencies. 

Over the past three decades, many hundreds of 
researchers have performed precision measurements of 
crucial input data including nuclear reaction cross sections 
and the abundances of the chemical elements on the solar 
surface. Many other researchers have calculated accurate 
opacities, equations of state and weak interaction cross 
sections. By now, these input data are relatively precise 
and their uncertainties are quantifiable. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Water 


Chlorine I 


Gallium I 


Flux 


Neutrino Energy (MeV) 


Figure 1. Solar neutrino spectrum. This figure shows the energy spectrum of neutrinos from the p—p chain that is predicted by the 
standard solar model. The neutrino fluxes from continuum sources (p-p and §B) are given in the units of number per cm” per second 
per MeV at 1 astronomical unit. The line fluxes (pep and ’Be) are given in number per cm” per second. The arrows at the top of the 
figure indicate the energy thresholds for the ongoing neutrino experiments. The higher-energy ’Be line is just above threshold in the 


chlorine experiment. For simplicity, CNO neutrinos are omitted. 


The solar neutrino fluxes and the solar luminosity 
both depend on the rates of the nuclear fusion reactions 
in the solar interior. Since we know experimentally the 
solar luminosity (to an accuracy of ~0.4%), the calculated 
neutrino fluxes are strongly constrained by the fact that the 
standard solar models must yield precisely the measured 
solar luminosity. 

Thousands of p-mode helioseismological frequencies 
have been measured to an accuracy of 1 part in 10*. 
The standard solar models discussed here reproduce 
these p-mode frequencies to an rms accuracy of better 
than 1 part in 1000. In fact, the standard solar models 
are in agreement with the measured helioseismological 
frequencies to a high level of precision without any 
adjustment of parameters. 

The calculated solar neutrino fluxes are, after 30 yr 
of intense study, known to reasonable accuracy because 
of the many precise measurements and calculations of 
input data, because of the strong constraint imposed on 
the models by the measured total solar luminosity and 
because of the important tests of solar structure that 
are provided by helioseismological measurements (see 
HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS). 


What are the three solar neutrino problems? 


I will compare in this section the predictions of the 
combined standard model with the results of the operating 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


solar neutrino experiments. We will see that this 
comparison leads to three different discrepancies between 
the calculations and the observations, which I will refer to 
as the three solar neutrino problems. 

Figure 2 shows the measured and the calculated event 
rates in the five solar neutrino experiments (Homestake, 
GALLEX, SAGE, Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande) 
for which quantitative results are available at the time 
of this writing. The figure reveals three discrepancies 
between the experimental results and the expectations 
based on the combined standard model. As we shall 
see, only the first of these discrepancies depends at all 
sensitively on predictions of the standard solar model. 


Calculated versus observed chlorine rate 

The first solar neutrino experiment to be performed was 
the chlorine radiochemical experiment, which detects 
electron-type neutrinos that are more energetic than 
0.81 MeV. After more than 30 yr of the operation of this 
experiment, the measured event rate is 2.56 + 0.23 SNU, 
which is a factor 3 less than is predicted by the most 
detailed theoretical calculations. Most of the predicted rate 
in the chlorine experiment is from the rare, high-energy 8B 
neutrinos, although the ’Be neutrinos are also expected 
to contribute significantly. According to standard model 
calculations, the pep neutrinos and the CNO neutrinos (for 
simplicity not discussed here) are expected to contribute 
less than 1 SNU to the total event rate. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Total Rates: Standard Model vs. Experiment 


[= ris br2oss 
1.07848 || 
Z $7846 
6748 Z 
: FD tosaso.o7 } ZZ, 
0.47+0.02 dpm Z tj 
ZA%2.5640.23 EZ GY J 
ty Yj g 
Yj WY ty Z 
Yj tj jj Gy 
Lj Gy Uj 
g Z Z Yj jj 
G Z 
g tj G 
Cl H,0 Ga 
Theory "Be Pp, pep Experiments 
5B mM CNO 


Figure 2. Comparison of measured rates and standard-model 
predictions for four solar neutrino experiments. 


This discrepancy between the calculations and the 
observations for the chlorine experiment was, for more 
than two decades, the only solar neutrino problem. I 
shall refer to the chlorine disagreement as the ‘first’ solar 
neutrino problem. (It used to be called ‘the’ solar neutrino 
problem.) 


Incompatibility of chlorine and water experiments 

The second solar neutrino problem results from a com- 
parison of the measured event rates in the chlorine ex- 
periment and in the Japanese pure-water experiments, 
Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande. The water exper- 
iments detect higher-energy neutrinos, those with ener- 
gies above 7.5 MeV (Kamiokande) or 6.5 MeV (Super- 
Kamiokande, so far), by neutrino-electron scattering: v + 
e —> v’ +e’. According to the standard solar model (see 
also table 1), °B beta decay is the only important source of 
these higher-energy neutrinos. 

The Kamiokande and Super-Kamiokande experi- 
ments show that the observed neutrinos come from the 
Sun. The electrons that are scattered by the incoming neu- 
trinos recoil predominantly in the direction of the Sun— 
Earth vector; the relativistic electrons are observed by the 
Cherenkov radiation they produce in the water detector. 

In addition, the water experiments measure the 
energies of individual scattered electrons and therefore 
provide information about the energy spectrum of the 
incident solar neutrinos. The currently most popular 
parameters for neutrino oscillations predict only relatively 
small deviations from the spectrum expected with no 
oscillations. Indeed, Super-Kamiokande does observe a 
deviation that can be explained by neutrino oscillations 
but as of the time of this writing the statistical significance 
is not very high. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The event rate in the Kamiokande experiment is 
determined by the same high-energy 8B neutrinos that are 
expected, on the basis of the combined standard model, 
to dominate the event rate in the chlorine experiment. 
I have shown elsewhere that solar physics changes the 
shape of the 8B neutrino spectrum by less than 1 part in 
10°. Therefore, we can calculate the rate in the chlorine 
experiment that is produced by the 8B neutrinos observed 
in the Super-Kamiokande experiment (6.5 MeV threshold 
energy). This partial (8B) rate in the chlorine experiment 
is 2.78 + 0.10 SNU, which exceeds by about one standard 
deviation the total observed chlorine rate from all neutrino 
sources, of 2.56 + 0.23 SNU. 

Comparing the rates of the Kamiokande and the 
chlorine experiments, one finds that the net contribution 
to the chlorine experiment from the pep, 7Be and CNO 
neutrino sources is negative: —0.22 + 0.10 SNU. The 
standard model calculated rate from pep, 7Be and CNO 
neutrinos is 1.9 SNU. 

The apparent incompatibility of the chlorine and the 
Kamiokande experiments is the ‘second’ solar neutrino 
problem. The inference that is often made from this 
comparison is that the energy spectrum of ®B neutrinos is 
changed from the standard shape by physics not included 
in the simplest version of the standard electroweak model. 


Gallium experiments: no room for 7 Be neutrinos 

The results of the gallium experiments, GALLEX and 
SAGE, constitute the third solar neutrino problem. The 
average observed rate in these two experiments is 73 + 
5 SNU, which is essentially fully accounted for in the 
standard model by the theoretical rate of 72 SNU that is 
calculated to come from the basic p—p and pep neutrinos 
(with only a 1% uncertainty in the standard solar model 
p-p flux). The °B neutrinos, which are observed above 
6.5 MeV in the Super-Kamiokande experiment, must also 
contribute to the gallium event rate. Using the standard 
shape for the spectrum of 8B neutrinos and normalizing to 
the rate observed in Kamiokande, *B contributes another 
6 SNU, unless something happens to the lower-energy 
neutrinos after they are created in the Sun. (The predicted 
contribution is 12 SNU on the basis of the standard model.) 
Given the measured rates in the gallium experiments, there 
is no room for the additional 34 + 4 SNU that is expected 
from ’Be neutrinos. 

The seeming exclusion of everything but p-p 
neutrinos in the gallium experiments is the ‘third’ 
solar neutrino problem. This problem is essentially 
independent of the previously discussed solar neutrino 
problems, since it depends on the p-p neutrinos that 
are not observed in the other experiments and whose 
calculated flux is approximately model independent (if 
the general scheme of the p—p chain shown in table 1 is 
correct). 

The missing 7Be neutrinos cannot be explained away 
by any change in solar physics. The °B neutrinos 
that are observed in the Kamiokande experiment are 
produced in competition with the missing 7Be neutrinos; 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the competition is between reaction 6 and reaction 8 in 
table 1. Solar model explanations that reduce the predicted 
”Be flux reduce much more (too much) the predictions for 
the observed 8B flux. 

I conclude that either (1) at least three of the four 
operating solar neutrino experiments (the two gallium 
experiments plus either chlorine or Kamiokande) have 
yielded misleading results or (2) physics beyond the 
standard electroweak model is required to change the 
neutrino energy spectrum (or flavor content) after the 
neutrinos are produced in the center of the Sun. 


What have we learned? 

No solar-model solution has been found that explains the 
results of the five existing solar neutrino experiments. 
Many particle physics solutions have been proposed that 
can explain the existing data. In this section, I will 
summarize the main astronomical lessons that have been 
learned from the first 30 yr of solar neutrino research. 

The chlorine solar neutrino experiment was proposed 
in 1964 as a practical test of solar model calculations. 
The only motivation presented in the theoretical and 
experimental papers was to use neutrinos ‘to see into the 
interior of a star and thus verify directly the hypothesis of 
nuclear energy generation in stars’. 

What have we learned by direct experiments about 
nuclear energy generation in stars? How does our 
1964 understanding compare with the results of the 
solar neutrino experiments? Table 2 summarizes the 
six principal predictions that were made (or which were 
implicit in the theory) in 1964 and compares those 
predictions with the results of the four ongoing solar 
neutrino experiments. 

The neutrinos were predicted to originate in the solar 
interior; the direction of origin of the neutrinos has been 
verified by detecting neutrino-electron scattering (as was 
also suggested in 1964) in the Kamiokande and Super- 
Kamiokande experiments. 

The rates of the four operating experiments are 
in semiquantitative agreement with the predictions; the 
ratios of the observed to the predicted rates are 0.3 
(chlorine), 0.5 (neutrino-electron scattering in water), and 
0.6 (gallium, average). This agreement is better than 
any of us dared hope for in 1964, especially since the 
dominant neutrino flux (from °B beta decay) for the first 
two experiments depends on the central temperature of 
the Sun as approximately the 24th power of the central 
temperature. 

The energy range of the dominant neutrinos was 
predicted to be from 0 MeV to 14 MeV, which is consistent 
with the observations from the Kamiokande and Super- 
Kamiokande experiments. 

Standard models predict that the neutrino fluxes are 
constant in time except for a small seasonal variation. (The 
Kelvin-Helmholtz cooling time for the solar interior is 
~10’ yr.) The consensus view of the experimentalists is 
that there are no statistically significant variations in the 
available data. Small deviations from the constant flux 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


prediction are predicted by some of the popular neutrino 
oscillation scenarios, but improved statistics are required 
to test these predictions. 

Standard solar models predict that the Sun shines 
almost entirely via the p—p chain of nuclear fusion 
reactions, rather than the CNO reactions originally 
emphasized by Bethe. If CNO reactions were dominant, 
the event rates in solar neutrino experiments could be 
calculated precisely. These ‘all-CNO’ rates, as shown in 
table 2, differ from the observed rates by more than an 
order of magnitude. Finally, if we crudely characterize 
the rate of the ®B neutrino emission by its approximate 
dependence on the central temperature of the solar model, 
then the central temperature of the solar model agrees 
with the value obtained from the experimental rates to an 
accuracy of ~2% or better. 

The pioneering solar neutrino experiments have 
shown directly that the Sun shines by nuclear fusion 
reactions, thus achieving the original goal proposed in 
1964. Quantitative improvements in the tests shown in 
table 2 will occur with the next generation of experiments, 
which should also refine our knowledge of the physical 
properties of neutrinos. However, the most important 
qualitative result has been established: neutrinos have been 
observed from the interior of the Sun in approximately the 
number and with the energies expected. 

In the more than three-decade long struggle to 
improve solar models in order to calculate more accurate 
solar neutrino fluxes, we have obtained a greater 
understanding of solar structure. The theoretical models 
have gradually been refined as improved input data, 
more accurate physical descriptions and more precise 
numerical techniques have been employed. Perhaps most 
importantly, the complementary field of helioseismology 
has been developed and now provides precise data that 
determine the sound velocity over most of the solar 
interior; these beautiful measurements are used to test and 
to refine the standard solar model. Further improvements 
in the solar model are desirable and important, but the 
quantitative agreement, typically better than 1 part in 
1000, between the calculated eigenfrequencies of pressure 
modes and the measured (helioseismological) frequencies 
provides strong evidence for the basic correctness of the 
standard solar model. 


What next? 

In this section, I will summarize the goals of solar neutrino 
research, first in physics and then in astronomy, during the 
next decade or two. 


Physics goals 

The fundamental goal of physics research with solar 
neutrinos is to measure the energy spectrum and flavor 
content as a function of time of the solar neutrino flux. 
We want to know how many neutrinos reach the Earth 
with a given energy and with a given flavor (i.e. neutrino 
type: e, or Tt), all as a function of time. Because of 
some exotic particle physics possibilities, we also want to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Predictions versus observations: 1964 versus 1995. 


Property Predicted Observed 
Direction From the Sun OK 
Rates Measurable ~ Predicted rates 
(within factor of few) 
Neutrino energy 0-15 MeV <15 MeV 
Time dependence Constant OK 
(except seasonal) 

Cl:28SNU = =2.6SNU 
p-p not CNO If CNO: } Ga: 610SNU_ 73SNU 

H20 : 0.0 0.44 standard model 
Central temperature 16 x 10° K T 8B) /Tmodel = 0.98 


know whether the solar neutrino flux contains any anti- 
neutrinos. 

The standard model predicts that the energy spectrum 
of neutrinos from any given neutrino source, e.g. from 
8B beta decay, will be the same to high accuracy as 
the energy spectrum inferred from terrestrial laboratory 
measurements. In the standard electroweak theory, 
only massless electron-type neutrinos are created in 
nuclear beta decay or nuclear fusion reactions. Standard 
electroweak theory predicts that the solar neutrinos 
produced by nuclear fusion reactions are all ve, not v, or 
v,. (According to MSW and vacuum oscillation theories, 
neutrinos created in nuclear beta decay or nuclear fusion 
reactions are linear combinations of different neutrino 
types and at least one neutrino type has a non-zero mass.) 
Finally, the total amount of thermal energy in the solar 
interior implies that the neutrino fluxes will be constant in 
time (for time scales less than 10’ yr) except for the seasonal 
dependences caused by the Earth’s orbital eccentricity. 
Any departure from these expectations will be a signal of 
physics beyond the standard electroweak model. 

Physicists want to use solar neutrino experiments 
to measure, or to set stringent limits on, the elementary 
properties of neutrinos, especially their masses and mixing 
angles. It seems likely that we will make important 
progress toward this goal in the next decade. 


Astronomy goals 
The fundamental goal of solar neutrino astronomy is to 
determine the rates of different nuclear fusion reactions in 
the solar interior. Neutrino fluxes created by the different 
nuclear sources are the signatures of the fusion reactions. 
We must know what happens to the neutrinos after they 
are created in order to infer the created neutrino energy 
spectrum from the measured neutrino energy spectrum. 
Progress in solar neutrino astronomy is held hostage 
to progress in particle physics. As discussed in the 
previous subsection, it seems likely that we will learn 
enough about the particle physics in the next decade to 
permit accurate inferences about the rates of neutrino 
creation in the Sun from the observed rates of neutrino 
arrival at the Earth. The discussion in this subsection 
presumes that the required progress in understanding the 
properties of the neutrino will be achieved. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Completing hydrogen fusion Table 1 shows that the two 
principal ways of completing nuclear fusion in the sun 
are reactions 4 and 5, the so-called #HeHe and *He- 
4He reactions. Because of the slightly smaller reduced 
mass that exists for the 7He—*He reaction, Coulomb barrier 
penetration favors this reaction over the 35He—*He reaction 
at lower temperatures. According to the standard solar 
model, the *He-*He reaction is dominant in the innermost 
region of the Sun (where it is 1.5 times faster than the 7He- 
3He reaction), but overall occurs in only ~15% of the fusion 
terminations that are described by equation (1). That is, in 
the most detailed solar models, the *He—*He reaction is on 
average more than 6 times faster in completing the nuclear 
fusion of protons into a-particles than the competing 5He- 
4He reaction. 

Is this prediction of the standard solar model correct? 
A determination of the p-p and 7Be neutrino fluxes 
(corrected for what non-standard particle physics has done 
to them after they were created in the Sun) can answer this 
important question. The average ratio of the total number 
of *He-*He reactions per unit time in the Sun to the total 
number of *He-*He reactions per unit time in the Sun is 

(?He-*He) _ 2¢ (Be) 6) 

(3He+He) = (p-p) — o(7Be) 


where $(p-p) and ¢("Be) are, respectively, the fluxes from 
the p-p and ’Be neutrinos. 

Equation (6) is the most precisely testable prediction 
that I know of that follows directly from the theory 
of stellar energy generation. The known theoretical 
uncertainties in the calculation of the average solar ratio 
of 7He-*He to 7He—*He reactions is 9%. 


The °B neutrino flux The flux of neutrinos from °B beta 
decay in the Sun (see reaction 9 of table 1) is, in principle, 
the simplest solar neutrino flux to measure. The higher 
energies of the 8B neutrinos make them easiest to detect. 
For this reason, the Kamiokande, Super-Kamiokande and 
SNO neutrino experiments will all concentrate on the 8B 
neutrinos. 

However, one must determine the total flux of 
8B neutrinos, including the more difficult to detect 
ft or t neutrinos that may have been produced by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


neutrino oscillations from the originally created electron- 
type neutrinos. The total number of neutrinos of all 
types will be measured directly in the SNO experiment 
via the neutral-current disintegration of deuterium and, 
less directly, via electron—-neutrino scattering in Super- 
Kamiokande. (This statement presumes there are no 
sterile neutrinos, i.e. neutrinos that do not interact with 
matter.) 

The magnitude of the °B flux (all neutrino flavors), 
which is a sensitive probe of the temperature of the solar 
interior, varies approximately as T24..,,. Therefore, it is 
important to determine experimentally the total °B solar 
neutrino flux. 


The temperature profile of the solar interior A precision test 
of the theory of stellar structure and stellar evolution 
can be performed by measuring the average difference 
in energy between the neutrino line produced by 7Be 
electron capture in the solar interior and the corresponding 
neutrino line produced in a terrestrial laboratory. This 
energy shift is calculated to be 1.29 keV. The energy shift 
is approximately equal to the average temperature of the 
solar core, computed by integrating the temperature over 
the interior of a standard solar model with a weighting 
factor equal to the locally produced 7Be neutrino emission. 
The total range of values for the shift, calculated for a 
number of modern solar models (going back to 1982), is 
0.06 keV. 

A measurement of the energy shift is equivalent to 
a measurement of the central temperature distribution of 
the Sun. 

The calculated energy profile of the 7Be line 
contains, analogous to line-broadening in classical 
(photon) astronomy, information about the distribution 
of solar interior temperatures. The theoretical shape of 
the ’Be neutrino line is asymmetric: on the low-energy 
side, the line shape is Gaussian with a half-width at half- 
maximum of 0.6 keV, and, on the high-energy side, the line 
shape is exponential, with a half-width at half-maximum 
of 1.1 keV. 

The calculated shape of the 7Be neutrino line is not 
affected significantly by vacuum neutrino oscillations, the 
MSW effect or other frequently discussed weak interaction 
solutions to the solar neutrino problems. This is a 
key result: it implies that the astronomical information 
contained in the line shift and in the line profile is not 
dependent on further progress in neutrino physics. 

Detectors are available that have the resolution to 
measure the line shift. Unfortunately, their current 
sizes are too small to permit a full-scale solar neutrino 
experiment. However, proposals have been made in the 
literature for developing detectors that are sufficiently 
large to be able to measure well the average shift in energy 
of the solar neutrino line. 


More complete models of the Sun The accuracy of the 
physical description that is currently achieved with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


one-dimensional (spherically symmetric) models of the 
Sun that include diffusion is sufficient to permit 
excellent quantitative agreement with the measured p- 
mode oscillation frequencies. Numerical experiments 
and theoretical arguments also suggest that further 
improvements are unlikely to affect significantly the 
calculated neutrino fluxes. 

Nevertheless, current models of the Sun are incom- 
plete. They are spherically symmetric and do not take 
account of the two-dimensional (or three-dimensional) 
nature of solar structure. They do not contain a self- 
consistent dynamical treatment of the effects of rotation, of 
magnetic fields, of mass loss or of other possible effects that 
may violate the currently used approximations of spheri- 
cal symmetry and quasi-static evolution. We know obser- 
vationally that the Sun (at least near its surface) contains 
magnetic fields, that it is losing mass, and that it departs 
from spherical symmetry by ~1 part in 10°. 

There are both analytic and calculational challenges in 
including these complicated processes in a more complete 
physical description in the next generation of solar models. 
New self-consistent methods of calculating solar models 
(and stellar models) must be developed, and then the 
appropriate numerical techniques must be worked out, 
tested and applied. 

The goal of developing a more complete solar model 
is a challenge for the next decade and beyond. Fortunately, 
it is a challenge that could lead to important progress since 
computing power is much greater than it was in the past 
and there is an abundance of precision data with which to 
make detailed comparisons. 


Summary 

The first 30 yr of solar neutrino research have verified 
experimentally the fundamental predictions of nuclear 
energy generation in stars. The next 10 or 20 yr of 
research will, I think, concentrate on using solar neutrinos 
to learn more about weak interaction physics. As the weak 
interaction questions are being resolved, it will be possible 
to carry out progressively more accurate tests of the theory 
of nuclear energy generation and of stellar structure. 

In retrospect, the history of solar neutrino research 
seems ironic. It began with an effort to use neutrinos, 
whose properties were assumed to be well known, to 
study the interior of the nearest star. The project was 
an unconventional application of microscopic physics 
that was designed to carry out a unique investigation 
of a massive, macroscopic body, the Sun. It now 
appears likely that a large community of physicists, 
chemists, astrophysicists, astronomers and engineers 
working together may have stumbled across the first 
observed manifestation of physics beyond the standard 
electroweak model. 

We may have been incredibly lucky. 


Bibliography 
Bahcall J N 1989 Neutrino Astrophysics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Neutrinos 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chlorine collaboration: 


Cleveland B T et al 1998 Measurement of the solar electron 
neutrino flux with the Homestake chlorine detector 
Astrophys. J. 496 505-26 


Kamiokande collaboration: 


Fukuda Y et al 1996 Solar neutrino data covering solar 
cycle 22 Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 1683-6 


GALLEX collaboration: 


Hampel W et al 1996 GALLEX solar neutrino observations: 
results for GALLEX III Phys. Lett. B 388 384-96 


SAGE collaboration: 


Gavrin V et al 1997 Solar neutrino and *!Cr results from 
SAGE Neutrino 96: Proc. XVIIth Int. Conf. on Neutrino 
Physics and Astrophysics (Helsinki) ed K Huitu, 
K Engqvist and J Maalampi (Singapore: World 
Scientific) pp 14-24 


Super-Kamiokande collaboration: 


Suzuki Y 1999 Neutrino 98: Proc. XVIIIth Int. Conf. on 
Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics (Takayama, 4-9 June 
1998) ed Y Suzuki and Y Totsuka Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. 
Suppl.) 77 35-42 

Bahcall J N, Basu S and Pinsonneault M H 1998 How 
uncertain are solar neutrino predictions? Phys. Lett. 
B 433 1-8 


Recent results on standard solar models and on neutrino 
oscillations are available at 


http://www.sns.ias.edu/~jnb 


John N Bahcall 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ABO ee ae Be OE LR PRE Pane wee ena Wage tk ae my agar A 
ae Doppler features (supergranulation) 
L a _ 425 
460— Ben, Carrington rotation 
i Sah n 
S [ a Sunspots 26 & 
c 440; so) 
ao r u& 
420- g 
c L 
8 L ocr 
a o 
8 r u 
BPA ee 
L Ee n 
L 130 
380 - 
[ 31 
860 iii iia ees et pra e ese 92 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 


Latitude, deg 


Figure 1. Rotation rate, 2/27, and period of various tracers on 
the Sun’s surface: recurrent (old) sunspots (dashed curve), 
magnetic features (dot-dash), and Doppler features (dots). The 
rotation rate and period determined spectroscopically through 
the Doppler shift are shown by the full curve. The shaded areas 
show the lo error estimates. 


Solar Interior: Rotation 


The Sun rotates differentially, i.e. the solar rotation rate 
varies with both latitude and radius. The differential 
rotation is particularly prominent in the convection zone 
where equatorial zones rotate almost 30% faster than near- 
polar regions. There are also strong variations of the 
rotation rate with radius near the surface and at the bottom 
of the convection zone (rotational shear layers). In contrast 
to the convection zone, the radiative zone rotates almost 
uniformly, although the rotation rate of the inner solar 
core has not been determined reliably. The mechanisms 
of the differential rotation, which are probably due to the 
interaction between convection and rotation, are not fully 
understood. The differential rotation is believed to play 
a major role in the dynamo mechanism of solar activity. 
It also affects the internal structure of the Sun because 
of rotational instabilities related to rotational shear layers. 
Knowledge of the internal rotation (in particular, whether 
the inner core rotates rapidly) is important for determining 
the quadrupole gravitational moment of the Sun and 
testing Einstein’s theory of relativity (SOLAR INTERIOR: SOLAR 
DIAMETER, OBLATENESS, AND TEMPERATURE). 


Measurements of solar rotation 

It has been known since the first observations of solar 
rotation around 1610 by GALILEO GALILEI, Johannes FABRICIUS 
and Christoph scHEINer that the solar equator rotates faster 
than the regions closer to the poles (latitudinal differential 
rotation). However, the accurate determination of the 
differential rotation on the solar surface and in the deep 
interior is still one of the major problems of solar physics. 
A unique tool for determining the rotation of the Sun’s 
interior is provided by helioseismology. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Differential rotation 

There are two basic approaches for measuring the 
surface rotation: spectroscopic and tracer motion. The 
spectroscopic method is based on measuring the Doppler 
line shift. It provides the angular velocity in those 
layers of the solar atmosphere where the spectral lines 
chosen for the measurements are formed. In principle, 
by observing the spectroscopic shift in several lines it is 
possible to determine the variation of solar rotation with 
height in the solar atmosphere because different spectral 
lines are formed in different layers of the atmosphere. 
Such measurements of the radial variation of the rotation 
in the surface layers are not particularly accurate, 
because of the significant noise caused by large-scale 
convective motions—supergranulation. Nevertheless, 
these measurements have provided evidence that the 
lower layers of the solar atmosphere, and thus presumably 
the subsurface layers, rotate faster. This was later 
confirmed by helioseismology. 

The tracer measurements are carried out either 
by tracking the rotation rate of individual resolved 
features on the surface (such as sunspots, active regions, 
supergranular cells etc) as they pass across the disk, or 
by cross-correlating magnetograms and Dopplergrams 
obtained at different times. 


Representations of the surface differential rotation 

Angular velocity 2 of the surface differential rotation as 
a function of co-latitude 6 is usually represented in a 
parametric form. Historically, it was given in terms of 
trigonometric functions: 


Q(6) = A+ Bcos* 6 + Ccos* (1) 


where the coefficient A gives the equatorial rotation rate 
(9 = 90°), and coefficients B and C give the differential 
rotation. However, the basis functions in this expansion 
are not orthogonal. This results in correlated errors (‘cross- 
talk’) among the coefficients. Therefore, more recently a 
presentation in terms of orthogonal polynomials has been 
used: 

Q() = A+ BTZ@) + CTL@) (2) 


where 7,(0) = a; P}.,,(0)/sin 6, ay = k!2k/(2k + 1)!! and 
P} (0) are the associate Legendre functions of order 1 and 
degree i. For the first two terms, T; (6) = 5cos” 6 — 1 and 
T; (0) = 21 cos* 6-14 cos” 641, ay = 1,4, = 2/3, ay = 8/15. 
Coefficients A, B and C are linear combinations of A, B and 
C of equation (1): 


C=HC. 


The equatorial angular velocity in this formulation is 
given by A—B+C. The coefficients of the orthogonal 
representation (equation (2)) are usually obtained with 
higher accuracy that the coefficients of equation (1). 

The surface angular velocity is usually measured 
in deg day"! or rad s'. However, for internal 
rotation obtained by helioseismology the typical measure 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Coefficients of the solar rotation rate in nHz. 


Tracers 
Coefficients | Sunspots Doppler features Magnetic features Doppler Shift 
A 469.39+0.194 473.024 1.59 458.22 + 0.32 453.76 + 0.95 
B 92.58 + 1.94 77.03 + 6.05 —53.96 + 2.07 —54.59 + 0.80 
Cc —57.46 + 8.12 —77.19 + 3.34 —75.44+1.11 
A 450.87 + 0.43 452.65 + 0.95 440.87 + 0.32 433.71 + 0.80 
B 18.52 + 0.39 23.08 + 0.64 —21.17 + 0.32 —21.17 + 0.08 
Cc —2.71 + 0.32 —3.66 + 0.16 —3.50 + 0.06 


CARRINGTON ROTATION 
1860 18 


1780 1800 1820 an 


A bWAin 


80 


1920 1940 


GUS AT \ i ia ti ANHUITTT ! l ! 
iin ae \ Wi i Wi 


i wai mn my R 


Nt i 


IW nine 


(MO 


oe 


i il th MeO At 


i 
jf . il i 
WANNA MIU! ee 


Ih MI HN th 


Figure 2. Migrating zonal flows (‘torsional oscillations’) in 1986-99, determined from the Mt Wilson Observatory data. The vertical 
scale is latitude in degrees, the lower horizontal axis shows time in years starting from 1986, and the upper scale shows the 
corresponding Carrington rotation numbers. The dark areas correspond to a rotational velocity 7.5 ms~! faster than the average 
velocity, and the light area shows rotation 7.5 m s~! slower than the average (Ulrich 1998). 


is the rotation rate, 2/27, expressed in nanohertz (nHz). 
Therefore, we shall use this measure in this article. 
The rotation rate can converted in the angular velocity 
units using the following relations: 1 nHz = 6.283 x 
10-3 rad s-' = 0.031 deg day~!. The typical rotation 
rate at the solar equator is about 460 nHz (2.89 rads“! or 
14.31 deg day~'), and corresponds to a linear velocity of 
2012 ms"}. 


Measurements of the surface rotation 
The coefficients of the sidereal rotation rate of different 
features on the solar surface are shown in table 1 and 
figure 1 (Snodgrass 1992). The surface features (tracers) 
related to magnetic field structures rotate faster than the 
solar plasma, rotation of which is measured from the 
Doppler shift of spectral lines. The magnetic structures are 
likely to be anchored in the solar interior. Therefore, the 
faster rotation of these structures probably can be related 
to higher angular velocity of the interior. The averaged 
period of rotation of sunspots is close to the ‘Carrington 
period’, 25.38 days (the corresponding synodic period 
is 27.275 days). The Carrington period corresponds to 
the differential rotation of recurrent (i.e. old) sunspots 
at approximately 20° latitude and is often used as a 
reference. The surface rotational velocity at this latitude is 
approximately 1.9 x 10° ms7!. It is found that the rotation 
rate of individual sunspots may vary depending their size, 
age and relative position to other sunspots of the same 
group. 

Observations of solar rotation have also revealed 
temporal variations related to the 11 yr activity cycle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


These include an increase in the equatorial rotation rate 
at solar minimum and a migrating pattern of zonal flow 
bands, known as ‘torsional oscillations’ (figure 2). The 
bands start at high latitudes near solar maximum and 
approach the solar equator at solar minimum. 


Helioseismic measurements 

Helioseismology provides a picture of rotation inside 
the Sun as a function of both depth and latitude. The 
helioseismic measurements are based on the frequency 
shift of resonant solar oscillations (modes) due to rotation. 
The modes which propagate in the direction of solar 
rotation have higher frequencies than the modes with 
the same resonant properties propagating in the opposite 
direction. This effect called ‘rotational frequency splitting’ 
is somewhat analogous to the Zeeman or Stark splitting of 
energy levels in atoms. The amount of splitting depends 
on the rotation rate in the mode resonant cavity and their 
azimuthal order (HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS, HELIOSEISMOLOGY: 
THEORY). 


Rotational frequency splitting 

The mode frequencies, Vnim, are characterized by three 
‘quantum numbers’: radial order n which is essentially 
the number of radial nodes in the mode eigenfunction 
and the angular degree / and azimuthal order m (—m < 
1 < m) which come from the spherical harmonic part 
of the eigenfunctions, ©,(r)Y/"(6,¢). The modes with 
m # 0 represent azimuthally propagating waves. The 
modes with m > 0 propagate in the direction of solar 
rotation and, thus, have higher frequencies in the inertial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sos 


Lennart Heinesen ae 
/' 


Wewerrarnnanittl 


Angular order, m 


erence 


ily 


3040 3060 3080 3100 


Frequency, wHz 


3120 


Figure 3. Typical power spectra of solar oscillation data from the 
MDI instrument on SOHO. Each horizontal curve shows three 
lines of the power spectrum for different azimuthal order m with 
radial order n = 15 and angular degree / = 19, 20, and 21 (from 
left to right). The slope of the modal lines is due to the rotational 
frequency shift: prograde modes with positive m have higher 
frequencies than retrograde modes with negative m. 


frame than the modes with m < 0 which propagate in 
opposite direction. As a result the modes with fixed n and 
! are split in frequency: Avyim = Vaim — Yao. Thus, the 
internal rotation is inferred from splitting of normal mode 
frequencies with respect to the azimuthal order, m. 

An example of the frequency splitting is shown in 
figure 3, in which the horizontal curves are oscillation 
power spectra for m = —20,..., 20 of modes with n = 15 
and / = 19, 20 and 21. The slope formed by the modal 
peaks, Avjim/Am, is approximately the solar synodic 
rotation rate 0.43 wHz (or 430 nHz). 

The frequency splitting is proportional to m and the 
internal angular velocity Q(r, 0) averaged over radius r 
and colatitude 6 with splitting kernels Knin(r, 9): 


R iu 
AVnim =m / i} Knim (r, O)Q2(r, 0) dé dr 
0 0 


where R is the solar radius. The kernels K,,;,, are calculated 
from mode eigenfunctions. 

The determination of Q(r, 6) from a set of observed 
Avnim tepresents a helioseismic inverse problem. This 
problem is solved by a regularized least-squares method or 
by estimating optimally localized averages Q(ro, 0) from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


50 F 
445 
N 440 
i 7 
. 43567 
“© 430 
es + 
425 + 
oe Eb ss care Pty J 
GPE 2 + + tag 
ERE 4 tte 
» 20F ie errr 
Po ee at ti es 
on c Tat ies 
£2 10F ARE He 
i E as ant + 
Bie + qt | 
E ees 
OF eae : : : 
t+ 
10F ay Paes 
. 55 oe ae oe 
N sabi + 4, 4a oy fa 4 
se E + BAe tery Haba gt 
S OF cs Ae tHe eet 4 
+ ip 
vet + eae nae 
Sa 5b fy ae ii S| 
© OF + tae atte phe eer ® 
c + car + Rt 4 
_ ne + pa 
10 st nal 
E ae i ¥ 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 


Figure 4. Rotational splitting coefficients obtained from a 144 
day observing run from SOHO/MDI. The coefficients are 
plotted as a function of r;, the radius of the mode turning point, 
which is determined for each mode from the relation: 

r¢/c(rt) = L/27 mio, where c(r) is the sound speed. 


a linear combination of the data: 


Q(r9, 80) = S Cnim (10s 90) AVaim 


nlm 


where the coefficients Cy)», are chosen to localize the corre- 
sponding averaging kernel A(r, 70) = Yoyjjm Cntm os 90) Knim 
(r, @) at the target position (79, 4). When the localization 
attempt is successful the optimally localized kernels re- 
semble a Gaussian, and {2(79, 9%) provides a good estimate 
of the angular velocity. 

The measurements of Av,,,, are often noisy. Therefore, 
it is useful to determine the frequency splitting in terms of 
Legendre polynomials in m/L, where L = [I(/ + 1)]'”: 


N 
i m 
Avan =L ay P (7) 
i=l 


where N is typically 5-36. (In some recent measurements 
the Legendre polynomials are replaced with orthogonal 
polynomials in m/L.) The odd terms in this equation 
represent the rotational splitting; the even terms are due 
to asphericity of the solar structure. 

If the internal angular velocity is represented in the 
form of equation (2) with the coefficients depending on 
radius r, 


Q(r, 0) = A(r) + Bir) T3 (6) + CO) TL (6) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


480F °° a Ro 
[ : 0° 
460 |- ae 
re 26 & 
4407 S 
a [ 4e7d 
= [ g 
© 420- 5 
S [ 428 a 
3 i 3 
3 400} =29 2 
= r oO 
2 r Ke 
r 30” 
380 }- 
[ 31 
360 - 7132 
L n | 1 piuiiy | 1 : DR fa Ser met aay oO Pa im} 


Figure 5. Solar rotation rate inferred from 144 day series of MDI 
medium-/ data as a function of radius at three latitudes, 0°, 30° 
and 60°. The formal errors are indicated by the shaded regions. 
The vertical straight line shows the lower boundary of the 
convection zone (Schou et al 1998). 


then each of the coefficients in this form is primarily 


determined from the individual a‘) coefficients: 


R 
es / K? (r)A(r) dr 


0 


R 
ay = -{ KO) Br) dr 
0 
R f~3 
ay) = / Kp (CO) dr. (3) 


The radial functions A(r), B(r) and C(r) canbe determined 
by solving the one-dimensional integral equations (3). 

For acoustic (p) modes the seismic kernels K\?(r) are 
significant mainly inside the mode propagation region, 
(7, R), where 7, is the radius of the inner turning point 
of acoustic modes and R is the solar radius. Therefore, 
it is useful to plot the a coefficients as a function of 7 
(figure 4). Each point in this plot represent an average 
of A(r), B(r) and C(r) in the interval (n, R). The first 
coefficient, a, which corresponds to the spherically 
symmetric component of the angular velocity, A(r), shows 
a steep decrease with 7, near the surface. This corresponds 
to the increase of the angular velocity with depth in the 
subsurface layers. 

The coefficient a®, which determines the prime 
component of the latitudinal differential rotation, shows a 
decrease below 0.7R, the lower boundary of the convection 
zone. Therefore, one may expect a decrease of the 
differential rotation in the radiative zone. In this way, 
investigating seismic data versus the radius of the mode 
turning points helps us to make qualitative inferences 
without solving the inverse problem. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Results of helioseismic measurements 

The rotation rate inferred by inversion as a function of 
radius at the equator and at 30° and 60° latitude is shown 
in figure 5. It shows that the latitudinal differential 
rotation extends through the convection zone and is 
sharply reduced in the radiative zone. 

The layer of transition from the differential rotation 
in the convection zone to almost uniform rotation in the 
radiative zone is characterized by a strong radial gradient 
of the angular velocity at low and high latitudes. This 
is probably the place where the global magnetic field of 
the Sun is generated in the course of the 11 yr cycle. 
The part of the transition layer which is located in the 
transition layer is called the ‘tachocline’. Because the 
internal rotation matches the Carrington rotation only in 
low-latitude zones, it is likely the magnetic field which 
constitutes sunspots is generated at low latitudes. Most of 
the transition layer is located beneath the lower boundary 
of adiabatic convection (shown in figure 5 by the vertical 
dashed line) which is located at 0.713 solar radii. The 
estimates of the width of the transition layer range from 
0.05 to 0.1 solar radii. 

Another region with a strong radial gradient of the 
angular velocity is located near the upper boundary of the 
convection zone above 0.95 solar radii. 

Contour lines of the rotation rate in a cross-section 
of the interior are shown in figure 6. The lines of 
constant angular velocity are quite complicated and follow 
neither radial nor vertical (cylindrical) lines as predicted 
by models of the differential rotation. 

Rotation in the central and near-polar regions (shaded 
areas) has not been determined reliably. However, 
the current helioseismic data are consistent with the 
assumption that the central core rotates with the same 
rate as the outer part of the radiative zone, which is 
approximately 440 nHz (corresponding period 26.3 days). 

The data also show that the rotation rate in the near- 
polar region of the upper convection zone is substantially 
(about 5%) lower than the rate estimated from the three- 
term formula (equation (1) or (2)) (figure 7). There is 
an indication that the polar rotation varies with the solar 
cycle. 

The results in figure 7 also show variations of the 
rotation rate of ~0.5% (2 nHz), or variations in the 
rotational velocity of 10 m s-', at low and mid-latitudes. 
These variations correspond to the migrating zonal flows 
(‘torsional oscillations’) associated with the solar activity. 
These flows extend to, at least, 5% of the solar radius 
(35 Mm) in depth. 


North-south asymmetry 

The observation of rotation of sunspots reveals the 
asymmetry in the differential rotation between the 
northern and southern hemispheres. The asymmetry 
correlates with the magnetic activity—the hemisphere 
with lower activity (fewer active regions) rotates faster 
than that with higher activity. The difference in the average 
rotation rate may reach 0.5% (10 ms“). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nHz 


460 


440 


420 


Figure 6. (a) Angular velocity profile Q(r, 6) as deduced from helioseismology, using the GONG data. (b) Time-averaged angular 
velocity profile obtained by a 3D simulation. The dashed lines indicate the lower boundary of the convection zone (Elliott et al 1998). 


This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 55. 


| 
on 


AQ/2n, nHz 


| 
a 
on 


| | 

fav) io 

oO oO 
Palette ee eee ae 


Oey pra 


| 
iw) 
oO 


20 40 60 80 
Latitude, deg 


oO 


Figure 7. The deviation of the solar rotation rate from the 
three-term law (equation (1)) in the upper 4% of the convection 
zone. The horizontal bars indicated the half-width at 
half-maximum to the left and right of the peak of the localized 
averaging kernels, A(r, ro). The vertical bars indicate the 
standard error estimate (Birch and Kosovichev 1998). 


The rotational frequency splitting is not sensitive 
to the asymmetrical component of rotation to first 
order. However, the north-south asymmetry of the 
internal rotation can be studied by methods of local 
helioseismology, e.g. ring-diagram and time—distance 
techniques (SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Theories of solar rotation 

Evolution of solar rotation 

The Sun rotates more slowly, by a factor of 50, than 
early main sequence stars. This suggests that the Sun 
initially rotated much faster and lost most of its angular 
momentum over its lifetime. The angular momentum 
of the Sun is believed to be lost as a result of ‘magnetic 
braking’ through the magnetized solar wind. 

The magnetic braking is mainly applied to the surface 
layers of the Sun. However, it also slows down the interior 
because the deep layers of the Sun are coupled with the 
surface because of convective flows and internal magnetic 
field. In fact, the convection zone reacts to the external 
torque almost like a solid body because the angular 
momentum transport provided by turbulent friction is 
very efficient. 

In the radiative zone the angular momentum 
transport is much less efficient. It primarily depends on 
the diffusion transport coefficient. This coefficient may be 
increased by various instabilities due to strong shearing 
motions or excitation of internal gravity waves in the 
convective overshoot layer or by instability arising from 
the accumulation of the *He at the outer boundary of 
the energy-generating core. The internal magnetic field 
provides probably the most efficient mechanism of angular 
momentum transport. Even a very weak magnetic field 
(~10~° G) is sufficient to slow down the solar core. 

The theories of the evolution of solar rotation based 
on these mechanisms predicted that the central core might 
still rotate much faster than the surface. However, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


recent helioseismic data have provided strong evidence 
that the whole radiative zone rotates almost uniformly. 
Which of the mechanisms of angular momentum transport 
provide most of the braking is not yet understood. 


Mechanisms of the latitudinal differential rotation 

The angular momentum transport which causes the 
differential rotation of the convection zone results from 
thermal stresses and the anisotropic Reynolds stresses, 
Qj; = (uju;), where u; and u; are components of the 
convective velocity and the brackets mean an average over 
longitude ¢. The anisotropy arises from the distortion of 
convection motions by the Coriolis force and other effects 
of rotation such as the meridional circulation. 

The evolution of the angular momentum in the 
convection zone is described by non-linear Navier-Stokes 
equations. The coupling between the turbulent solar 
convection and rotation can be modeled in the ‘mean- 
field’ approximation by averaging over an ensemble 
of convective elements or by solving the equations 
numerically on a high-resolution spatial grid. Both 
approaches are still far from the real situation. The 
mean-field theory employs various approximations and 
assumptions for the mean anisotropic properties of 
convection, whereas the numerical models do not provide 
sufficient spatial resolution to model the fully developed 
turbulent convection accurately. 

The basic mechanisms of the differential rotation 
can be understood from the conservation of the angular 
momentum in the convection zone (for more details see 
Stix 1989). Consider the velocity field, v, in the convection 
zone as a superposition of the mean rotational velocity, 
(vg), a meridional circulation, v,, = ((v,), (v9)), and the 
convective velocity, u: 


v=(v)t+u 


From the azimuthal component of the equation of 
conservation of momentum, 


dv 1 
—+v-Vvu=-—--VP-V® 
ot p 


where p is the density, P is the pressure and ® is the 
gravitational potential, and the conservation of mass, 


ap 

—+V-(pv) =0 

oF (pv) 
we obtain the equation of the conservation of the angular 
momentum: 


° (ps7Q) + V + (ps?Qvy, + ps(ugu)) = 0 (4) 
where s =r sin6,and Q = (vg) /s. (Fluctuations of density 
which may also be important are not taken into account 
in equation (4).) This equation shows that the density of 
angular momentum, ps*@, changes either because angular 
momentum is transported by the meridional circulation, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Um, or because of the Reynolds stresses, (ugu). These two 
processes play important roles in the mechanism of the 
differential rotation, and, therefore, it is very important to 
study them. The meridional circulation and convective 
flows are studied by measuring the Doppler velocity of 
the solar plasma on the surface and inside the convection 
zone by time—distance helioseismology. 

The numerical simulations have been able to repro- 
duce the differential rotation qualitatively (figure 6(b)). 
However, there are significant differences. The simula- 
tions provide an angular velocity profile with the con- 
tour lines parallel to the rotation axis in the plot, meaning 
that the angular velocity is constant on cylindrical shells, 
whereas the observations reveal a more complicated pro- 
file. The ‘cylindrical’ distribution of the angular momen- 
tum is attributed to large-scale convective cells oriented 
north-south, so-called ‘banana cells’. This type of convec- 
tion results from the effect of the Coriolis force. Evidently, 
some other important physical processes are missing in 
the simulations. Perhaps the small-scale turbulent con- 
vection which is not resolved in the current simulations 
transports angular momentum quite differently, yielding 
other classes of mean flows and rotation profile. 

The future efforts in our understanding of solar 
rotation will be focused on the precise determination of 
the rotation rate of the solar core, tachocline, near-polar 
regions and the upper convective boundary layer. Itis very 
important to study variations of the solar rotation, both 
temporal and spatial, which are associated with the solar 
cycle, and, in particular, the variations in the tachocline 
and zonal flows (‘torsional oscillations’) because these 
studies will help us to understand the mechanism of solar 
activity. 


Bibliography 

Birch A C and Kosovichev A G 1998 Latitudinal variation 
of solar subsurface rotation inferred from p-mode 
frequency splittings measured with SOI-MDI and 
GONG Astrophys. J. 503 L187-90 

Elliott J, Miesch M S, Toomre J, Clune T and Glatzmaier 
GA1998 Turbulent convection and its coupling with 
rotation Structure and Dynamics of the Interior of the 
Sun and Sun-like Stars ed S Korzennik and A Wilson 
(Noordwijk: European Space Agency) pp 765-70 

Schou J ef al 1998 Helioseismic studies of differential 
rotation in the solar envelope by the solar oscillations 
investigation using the Michelson Doppler Imager 
Astrophys. J. 505 390-417 

Snodgrass H 1992 Synoptic observations of large scale 
velocity patterns on the Sun The Solar Cycle (ASP 
Conf. Ser. vol 27) ed K L Harvey (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) pp 205-40 

Stix M 1989 The Sun: an Introduction (Berlin: Springer) 

Ulrich R K 1998 Identification of very large scale velocity 
structures on the solar surface using Mt Wilson 
synoptic observations Structure and Dynamics of the 
Interior of the Sun and Sun-like Stars ed S Korzennik 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Rotation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and A Wilson (Noordwijk: European Space Agency) 
pp 851-6 


Alexander Kosovichev 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 7 


Solar Interior: Solar Diameter, Oblateness and 


Temperature 


Solar Interior: Solar Diameter, 
Oblateness and Temperature 


The visible edge of the Sun is called the Limp and is almost 
circular, but very small deviations from a spherical Sun 
are measurable. The largest deviation is a ‘flattening’ 
of the polar radius in comparison to the equatorial 
solar radius. The Sun’s surface temperature is also not 
spherically symmetric but has a tiny asphericity in the 
form of a latitudinal temperature variation. The radius, 
shape and surface temperature may also change on SOLAR 
CYCLE (yearly) time scales and the measurement of these 
properties yields important clues about the Sun’s interior, 
and the physical origins of the 11-year solar cycle. 


Solar shape and temperature measurements 

The limb of the Sun is not a sharply defined edge but 
declines in brightness smoothly as we measure from the 
solar disk to off of the limb. This limb brightness profile 
changes most rapidly within about an arcsecond of the 
edge, or visible photosphere of the Sun. Here the effects 
of the Earth’s atmospheric blurring, and magnetic features 
in the Sun’s photosphere and the higher solar atmosphere 
(like SUNSPOTS Or FACULAE), tend to cause the limb profile 
to change with time and limb position. Real changes in 
the brightness or temperature of the photosphere will also 
affect the apparent limb profile. These effects make it 
difficult to measure the true angular position of the limb of 
the Sun against the sky, since variations in the form of the 
limb profile can be confused with limb position changes 
(See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: CENTER-TO-LIMB VARIATION). In general, 
solar shape and temperature variations are difficult to 
disentangle and accurate shape measurements must often 
depend on a simultaneous study of the Sun’s brightness 
or temperature. 

Measurements of the shape of the Sun, and in 
particular the solar oblateness (which can be expressed 
as the relative difference between the equatorial and 
polar diameters), have been published and debated for 
nearly a century. Interest in the solar oblateness over 
the last 35 years was rekindled by measurements from 
Princeton which suggested that general relativity may 
be seriously ‘incomplete’. Subsequent data did not 
confirm these results, although the ensuing experimental 
activity has generated a better understanding of the SOLAR 
INTERIOR and atmosphere. Figure 1 shows oblateness 
measurements since the mid-1960s. The most recent 
observations have the smallest error bars and were 
obtained from space, above the blurring effect of the 
atmosphere. The dotted line, which the measurements 
seem to converge toward, describes the approximate 
‘flattening’ or oblateness expected due to the nominal 
solar surface rotation rate. Although the rotational 
flattening of the Sun amounts to an equatorial—polar 
diameter difference of only about 12 km, it seems to be 
reliably observed in the modern experiments and if it 
does vary with time, the temporal changes are very small 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
Solar Oblateness Measurements 

50F T T T 1 
ear | 4 
Se E 4 
fy c q 
es RAL ES 4 
Ge Se 7 
ee: | 
® 20F 3 4 
ro) F . q 
So OF A i 
BO te iE q 
O- WC E * “ Aga. x. 7 
E > J 
0) E i 1 i ;| 

1960 1970 98 1990 2000 


Figure 1. Recent measurements of the solar oblateness (10° 
times the fractional difference between equatorial and polar 
solar radii) are plotted versus time. The dotted line shows the 
expected solar flattening due to the nominal surface rotation rate. 


(corresponding to less than about 1 km in the radius 
difference). 

More complicated departures from a spherical limb 
shape have also been observed. Beyond the oblateness the 
next largest equator-symmetric departure from circularity 
is called the hexadecapole shape term and resembles a 
four-leaf clover pattern. The solar hexadecapole shape 
implies a solar diameter which is about 2 km smaller at 
mid-latitudes than near the equator or poles. 

Limb shape measurements also reveal that the Sun’s 
surface temperature varies with latitude and with the 
11-year solar cycle by as much as a few kelvin. The 
poles and equator are always hotter than solar mid- 
latitudes by 1-2 K while the low-latitude regions, where 
sunspots and faculae appear on the surface, vary in 
brightness temperature throughout the 11-year solar cycle, 
but are usually a few degrees hotter than the mid-latitude 
photosphere. It is possible that the variability of the 
Sun’s surface temperature has been mistaken as a variable 
solar diameter and oblateness in some solar size and 
shape measurements. This may help to explain the large 
variations in the early data points in figure 1. 


Solar diameter measurements 

Archival records of solar diameter measurements extend 
back to the mid-seventeenth century. By using the Earth’s 
rotation to transit a solar image created by a long focal 
length telescope objective, the solar diameter could be 
deduced subject to the accuracy and repeatibility of an 
observer’s definition of the solar limb, and instrumental, 
timing and atmospheric distortion errors. Other historical 
diameter measurements have been inferred by timing 
solar eclipses, and by timing transits of Mercury across 
the solar disk. Although the many observations are not 
entirely consistent, there is no evidence that the Sun’s 
diameter has changed by more than 2” over the last 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Solar Diameter, Oblateness and 


Temperature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


350 years. Modern optical measurements yield a solar 
diameter of 1919.36 + 0.02 and imply that solar cycle 
(yearly) variations in the diameter are less than a few 
tenths of an arcsecond. The intercomparison of different 
diameter determinations is difficult because the solar limb 
profile is not sharply defined. The outer part of the Sun 
varies continuously, so that over a height difference of 
about 400 km the solar gas density changes by a factor 
of 10—there is no unique definition of the Sun’s limb. A 
1 arcsecond change in the solar diameter corresponds to a 
solar radius change of 370 km. 

Measurements of solar acoustic wave modes allow the 
possibility of detecting very small changes in solar radius. 
We can expect to observe changes in helioseismic mode 
frequencies caused by a changing solar diameter, just as 
the pitch of an organ pipe shifts when the length of the pipe 
changes. So far, helioseismic acoustic measurements yield 
no evidence of solar diameter changes larger than about 
10 km over 1 year interval (see HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS). 


Mechanisms for solar shape and size changes 

The fluid outer regions of the Sun respond to gravitational, 
centrifugal and gas and turbulent pressure forces, so that 
the shape of the Sun yields a direct measure of the balance 
of these forces at the visible photosphere. For example, 
the solar oblateness can be directly related to the non- 
spherical solar quadrupole gravitational potential and the 
Sun’s internal and surface rotation rates. The observed 
oblateness is entirely consistent with a Sun which rotates 
at approximately the observed surface rate, and which 
does not have a rapidly spinning inner core. The solar 
hexadecapole shape probably results from the variation in 
rotation rate with solar latitude. 

We expect the Sun’s diameter to change very slowly 
over millions of years because of variations in the internal 
solar structure caused by the Sun’s nuclear evolution. 
While these diameter changes are too small for us to 
measure there have been inconsistent observational hints 
that the solar radius could be changing, perhaps with the 
solar cycle. Such changes, should they be detected, would 
be quite interesting because even a small change in the 
solar radius requires an enormous energy. For example, 
the energy required to lift just the outer convection zone 
of the Sun by 1 arcsecond (or 730 km) is equivalent to the 
total luminous energy of the Sun summed over 100 years. 
A physical mechanism that could cause such changes in 
diameter over a few years would also have profound 
consequences for our understanding of the internal solar 
structure. 


Bibliography 

Kuhn J R et al 1998 The Sun’s shape and brightness Nature 
392 155-7 

Ribes E et al 1991 The variability of the solar diameter The 
Sun in Time ed C P Sonett, M S Giampapa and M S 
Matthews (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 
pp 59-97 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Toulmonde M 1997 The diameter of the Sun over the past 
three centuries Astron. Astrophys. 325 1174-8 


Jeffrey R Kuhn 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


Due to its proximity, there are many properties of the 
Sun which we can observe. Consequently, it plays a 
key role in our understanding of the physics of the 
internal structure of stars. Standard models of the Sun 
are theoretical representations of its present structure. 
These models include the best physical description of 
the fundamental processes which contribute to solar 
evolution and allow theoretical predictions of all the 
solar observables. ‘Testing against observations brings 
about theoretical improvements which are regularly 
implemented in standard models and new ideas for 
laboratory experiments (e.g. nuclear reaction rates, 
opacity measurements) or solar investigation (e.g. detailed 
photospheric abundances, acoustic modes, gravity modes, 
neutrino fluxes). 


From the age of Earth to stellar evolution 

If gravity were the main actor in the structure of the stars, 
one could easily calculate how long it would take for 
the Sun’s own gravity to cause a significant change in its 
radius. The corresponding time scale is the free-fall time, 
tg, Which is a function of the mass M of the star, its radius 
R and the gravitational constant G: 


rR? \'2 

mee ( oa) : (1) 
This time is of the order of half an hour for the Sun, and 
is incompatible with its present extreme stability (see sun: 
BASIC PROPERTIES). Another way of determining the age of 
the Sun is to correlate the rate of stellar evolution with 
the available energy. The gravitational potential energy 
has the following dimensional form: Q « —M?G/R. For 
the Sun, 2 = 4 x 10" erg and the present luminosity is 
4 x 10° erg s~!. The time scale over which the Sun could 
maintain more or less the present luminosity is called the 
Kelvin-Helmholtz time: 


Q 
tk x ra =~ 30 Myr. (2) 


This would give an order of magnitude for the solar age 
if one assumed a constant luminosity and no other energy 
losses. Until early in this century, people believed that the 
solar energy came from gravitational contraction, and that 
the Sun, and presumably the Earth, were a few million 
years old. However, the time scale required for biological 
evolution is considerably greater than fx, and this fact was 
at the origin of public disagreements between Darwin and 
Lord Kelvin. At about the same time, the geologist Sir 
Charles Lyell established that the ocean floor should be 
at least a billion years old in order to be compatible with 
features of sediments. 

Later, Rutherford developed the radioactive dating 
of rocks, and it became evident that the Earth had to be 
several billion years old. However, the Sun should be at 
least as old as the Earth! 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The thermonuclear source of energy stabilizes the 
Sun 

Considering this contradiction, Eddington finally sug- 
gested in 1920 that perhaps a subatomic source of energy 
existed in stars and he introduced another concept, the Ein- 
stein time, which corresponds to the transformation into 
radiation of the total mass: 


Mc? 
tr => 


= 14x 10” yr. (3) 


It then became evident that thermonuclear fusion had to 
play the fundamental role. 

In fact, anticipating the result that the duration of 
hydrogen burning is about 10 billion years and that fusion 
occurs only in the inner part of the Sun (30-40% in mass 
fraction), one can deduce from the Einstein time that the 
efficiency of the conversion of mass to energy in the Sun is 
of the order of some per cent. 

The present quiet Sun and most of the stars cannot 
be understood without their having an internal energy 
source that compensates for the energy lost at the surface. 
During stellar formation, nevertheless, gravity really is 
the main actor and its effect leads to an increase in the 
central temperature until nuclear fusion can deliver the 
energy required for a stationary equilibrium. After the 
first stage of deuterium burning, the Sun is limited in its 
contraction by the beginning of hydrogen burning; the 
beginning of this new phase is often called ‘arrival on the 
main sequence’ in stellar evolution. 

Hydrogen, the most abundant element in stars, is 
also the first one to be converted because of its lower 
Coulomb barrier. Gamow, von Weizsacker and Bethe 
have shown clearly that two different sets of reactions, the 
p-p chain and the CNO cycles, could provide the energy 
needed to understand the present solar luminosity (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: ENERGY GENERATION). The reactions involved 
in the conversion of hydrogen to helium depend on the 
temperature and density of the stellar interior. In fact, for 
the present solar central temperature, the p—p chain is the 
most energetic (more than 98% of the total luminosity), 
but when temperature increases, the CNO cycles quickly 
become the most efficient. One of the main consequences is 
that low-mass stars (<1.5M©), governed by p-p reactions, 
have aslower evolution than the others, governed by CNO 
cycles. 


The stellar structure: the basic equations 

Today, the origin of the Sun’s stability is clearly established 
and it seems reasonable to treat the evolution of a star as 
a succession of static equilibrium models. Of course, the 
rapid contraction of the protostar which ignites the nuclear 
reactions must be examined with more caution. The 
main hypotheses are the following: the star is spherical, 
without the effect of rotation or a magnetic field. The 
internal structure of the star is described by four structure 
equations. The first assumes hydrostatic equilibrium (each 
gas shell is balanced by the competition between the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


downward gravitational force and the outward pressure 
force): 


dP M(r)G 

ee Sy 4 
dr r2 (4) 
where P and p are the pressure and the density. M(r) 
represents the mass enclosed within a sphere of radius r: 


—_— = 2 
a A4nr’p. (5) 


One further assumes thermal equilibrium. The energy 
(4xr*pe) produced by nuclear reactions balances the 
energy flux L(r) emerging from the sphere of radius r. 
To this energy flux must be added the energy loss by 
neutrinos (which is small in hydrogen burning but not 
in a supernova explosion). Taking into account quasistatic 
gravitational readjustment and composition variation, one 
must incorporate a heat transfer term TdS where S is the 
total entropy per gram of the gas and the energy book- 
keeping yields: 


dL Tds 
dr i Arr’ p (<u = =) : (6) 


At the end of hydrogen burning, the nuclear energy 
vanishes and again contraction produces the energy for 
the luminosity. 

Finally, the temperature gradient depends on the 
luminosity and the physical process of energy transport. 
Ina radiative region of a star, the diffusion approximation 
is appropriate, and the relation between temperature 
gradient and luminosity is 


dT _ —3 «xp L(r) 
dr 4ac T3 42 


(7a) 


When the opacity coefficient « increases too much, as in the 
external part of smaller stars with M < 1.5M. or when the 
luminosity is very high (in the internal part of stars with 
mass >1.5Mo), the radiative gradient increases so much 
that matter becomes convectively unstable. The resulting 
temperature gradient is then nearly adiabatic: 


dT (dT h=1 TP 
— = , (7b) 
dr dr / a Tl, Pdr 


The adiabatic exponent I’, is defined by 


P!-!271'2 = const. 


Boundary conditions (typically for pressure and 
temperature at the surface and for mass and luminosity at 
the center of the star) are added to complete the problem 
of stellar structure and evolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The physical quantities 

The initial composition 

The first ingredient of the calculation is the initial detailed 
composition of the Sun deduced from the observation of 
the present photospheric abundances. The determination 
of this composition is described in the article SOLAR 
ABUNDANCES. As it is now clear that there is some 
gravitational settling of elements during the lifetime of 
the Sun from the surface down to the center (see below), 
this composition is chosen to get the detailed photospheric 
composition at the present solar age and the whole 
calculation is iterated to get the observed present Z/X ratio 
at the surface (mass fraction of the elements greater than 
helium over hydrogen). Helium is not measured in the 
photosphere but helioseismology gives serious constraints 
on this abundance. 

Recent calculations consider the 21 most important 
elements from hydrogen up to nickel. All elements up to 
'8O contribute to calculation of the nuclear energy of the 
present Sun. The 21 elements are useful for precise opacity 
calculations. 


The nuclear reaction rates 
The nuclear reaction network is presented in the article on 
SOLAR INTERIOR: ENERGY GENERATION. That article includes the 
complete proton—proton chain and CNO cycles. 

One can consider three types of species: 


e@ Those which are only slowly produced or destroyed 
during stellar evolution (e.g. H, *He, C). The evolution 
of the abundances is computed using a linearization 
method, semi-implicit or implicit. 


@ The very rapidly reacting minor species are assumed to 
be in local equilibrium and calculated separately (D, "Li, 
7Be). 


e *He, an intermediate case, is treated analytically, 
assuming that deuterium has reached equilibrium 
and that the hydrogen abundance remains constant 
during a small nuclear time step. The assumption 
of ?He in equilibrium is completely justified in the 
core of the Sun and becomes a rough approximation 
at 0.20Ro. The treatment of He is crucial for energy 
generation because the production of this element and 
its destruction by the reaction *He+*He contributes to 
80% of the total luminosity. 


All nuclear reactions involving nuclei have been 
measured in the laboratory, except the p-p and pep 
reactions which are inaccessible due to the weak 
interaction. The most important cross sections have been 
generally measured in a higher energy range than needed 
for the Sun, therefore a theoretical extrapolation is often 
necessary. This effort is pursued nowadays at low energy 
in the laboratory to approach solar plasma conditions (see 
Adelberger et al 1998). Specific attention is paid to the 
Coulomb enhancement effect of the interaction, mainly 
due the presence of the negative cloud of the free electrons. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The equation of state 

The relationship between pressure, temperature, density 
and composition called the equation of state must be known 
for very different conditions of matter (plasma, neutral 
atoms, molecules). The total pressure P is the sum of the 
gas pressure and radiation pressure. 

The radiation pressure Pg = LaT', where a is the 
radiation density constant. is negligible in the solar center 
(1/1000 of the gas pressure), but not near the photosphere 
(0.6Pc). When the temperature is high and the density low 
enough, interactions between the particles are negligible 
and the gas can be reasonably well considered as perfect: 

N okT 

P. C= —kT = 

V u(r) 

where V is the volume of the gas. This approximation is 

relatively correct in the central part of the Sun for ions (see 

below for the treatment for electrons). But the large range 

of solar temperature (5 x 10° to 10” K) and density (10-? 

to 10? g cm~°) requires a more detailed description of the 

equation of state. As the Sun is made up of a mixture 

of different species, one introduces the notion of mean 
molecular weight 1, defined by 


eS > ni@my/mi). (9) 


(8) 


In this expression, n; is the number of free particles: Z 
electrons + 1 nucleus for each atom of atomic number Z. 
More generally, this number depends on the degree of 
ionization of the considered species. In astrophysics, X, 
Y and Z represent the mass fraction number (normalized 
to 1) of hydrogen, helium and other elements (heavier 
than helium) respectively. In the central conditions of the 
Sun, all the species (except iron and nickel) are completely 
ionized. The solar value ww decreases from the central 
region where helium is produced down to the nuclear 
edge. In the intermediate region of the Sun, the heavy 
elements become progressively partially ionized but this 
has little impact on 4 which increases outward due to 
the partially ionized elements and the appearance of 
molecules. 

Even though the correct treatment of the heavy 
elements affects the total pressure very little due to 
their small fraction number, this knowledge is important 
for opacity calculations (see below). The appropriate 
treatment of the degree of ionization of hydrogen and 
helium, together with a correct treatment of atomic and 
molecular hydrogen, is crucial to determine the pressure 
below 20000 K. 

The central solar density is sufficiently high to cause 
partial degeneracy of the electrons, so electron number 
and electron pressure must be expressed as functions of 
the degeneracy parameter 7: 


An 
Ne = ape 2k TY"? Fam) (10) 
8rkT 
P. = apa mk TY Faja(—) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where F1/2 and F3/2 are the Fermi-—Dirac functions. In the 
case of the Sun, the effect of degeneracy is small (7 is of 
the order of —1) but when stars continue to evolve, this 
effect becomes dominant, leading to an increase in the 
pressure and a quasi independence of the pressure on the 
temperature. 

Relativistic and Coulomb effects must be taken 
into account to correct the gas pressure for electrostatic 
attraction. With the development of helioseismology, 
a sophisticated equation of state including all these 
processes and a large number of species may be checked 
in great detail, transforming the Sun into a real laboratory 
(cf SOLAR INTERIOR: EQUATION OF STATE AND OPACITY). 


Energy transport 

Two processes dominate the transport of energy in a solar- 
type star: radiation and convection. Conductivity plays 
no role in the Sun and acts only in higher-density stars (for 
example in a supernova core). In the same way, the energy 
transported by neutrinos is very small. In the central 
part of the Sun, radiation is the most efficient process, 
contrary to the case in more massive stars where energy 
is transported by convection due to the extremely high 
temperature produced by the CNO cycle. 


Radiative transport 

In the Sun’s interior, the average energy per photon 
is in the keV range, which is characteristic of x-rays, 
whereas the light escaping from the surface is in the visible 
spectrum, corresponding to an energy 10° times smaller. 
The cause of this degradation in photon energy is the 
coupling between radiation and matter. The effect of the 
interaction of photons with electrons, atoms, ions and 
molecules is evaluated and is summarized in what one 
calls the ‘Rosseland mean opacity’ «, which is a function 
of temperature, density and composition. The equation 
of radiative transfer adapted to stellar interiors is given 
by equation (7a). The opacity of the gas really governs 
the rate at which energy escapes, and plays a crucial role 
in determining the age of a star and the evolved central 
temperature. The sources of opacity are the following: 


@ electron scattering (Thompson and Compton scatter- 
ing): scattering of the photon on free electrons; 


e@ bound-bound transitions: the photon induces a 
modification of level at a bound electron; 


e@ bound-free (photoionization) transitions: a bound 
electron becomes free after interaction with the photon 
or the reverse situation; 


@ free-free transitions (inverse bremsstrahlung): the 
electron stays free after the interaction with the photon; 


@ molecular transitions. 


Except for the first one, the computation of all 
these processes necessitates detailed calculations of atomic 
physics. Frequency-dependent opacities are needed for 
detailed stellar models: kio(v) = 0; «i(v), where i 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


represents the different processes. It is important to 
notice that the mean Rosseland opacity is not obtained 
by averaging the frequency-dependent opacity, but by 
averaging its reciprocal, that is the radiative conductivity 
(the weight function f(v) is the temperature derivative of 
the Planck function): 


= ( = cv) (11) 
7 Ki (V) 

The mean Rosseland value clearly favours peaks around 
4—6hv/kT where the Rosseland weighting is maximum. 
This adds to the already nonlinear character of the 
processes and gives a supplementary reason to perform 
computations with an extremely refined grid well adapted 
to the problem. Moreover, due to the non-additive 
character of the opacity coefficients, the spectrum must be 
calculated for the correct mixture before determining the 
Rosseland mean value. This leads to extensive calculations 
which must take into account the detailed abundance of 
the 21 elements considered. 

The main reason for the difficulty of such calculations 
is that one single source of opacity may exceed all the 
others. For example the bound-bound processes may 
introduce cross sections which are one or two orders of 
magnitude greater than the competing contributions. 

So, evena trace element may produce anon-negligible 
contribution to the mean opacity. In the case of the Sun or 
solar-like stars, knowledge of radiative processes in detail 
is crucial. Indeed, in low-mass stars, the contribution of 
heavy elements (about 2% in mass fraction and 0.14% in 
number fraction) to the equation of state does not exceed 
1 or 2%, but their contribution to the opacity is about 40% 
in the central part of the Sun, and 80% in the intermediate 
region. When oxygen (the most abundant heavy element) 
becomes partially recombined, the temperature gradient 
largely increases. Then nitrogen and carbon have the same 
behavior and the increase of « is so important that the 
radiative temperature gradient exceeds the adiabatic one: 


Ail eR 


dT 
dr 


dT 


S (12) 


rad ad 


This is the criterion for the onset of convective instability, 
called the Schwarzschild criterion. In the Sun, there is 
a large convective solar region below the photosphere 
which corresponds to such conditions, that oxygen then 
nitrogen, carbon and finally helium and hydrogen have 
important bound—bound contributions (figure 1). But at 
about 0.995 Ro, hydrogen and helium become neutral, the 
opacity decreases, radiative flux comes in competition 
with convective flux and a superadiabatic regime must be 
considered. 


Convective transport 

In any case, the energy must escape from the star. When 
the opacity increases too much, one would require a very 
steep temperature gradient to maintain the energy flow, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ry 
K (cm4g) 
130 100 70 50 40 30 a % 61 10805 0,2501706 T (105k) 
aan rn ra r-- st = ack oe, 
Phoboue Teenie { 
108 lo orid tu 
He H 
REGION 
104+ 
109+ 
wozb 
a CZ 
10L Cae 


Soman LITTINEV LILIA 


OLLIE SUMALLLL 
————————a 
RRR 


SUPER ADIABATIC 
REGION 


Lt 
0.98 0.99 1 


2 4 6 8 1 
r (Ro) 


Figure 1. Present solar radial dependence of the total opacity « 
(cm? g~'). The Sun has a large radiation region from the center 
down to 0.71Ro. « increases from the center to the photosphere 
with bound-bound processes. In this figure we show the radial 
position where the elements begin to be partly ionized. One 
notices that the base of the convective zone (broken lines) 
appears when oxygen (the third most abundant element) begins 
to have bound-bound contributors. A zoom of the external 
layers shows the role of partial ionization of helium then 
hydrogen; finally the formation of molecules induces a 
reduction of the opacity coefficients and new competition 
between convection and radiation in the superadiabatic region. 
The outermost layers are totally radiative. 


leading to an unstable situation. When the instability 
criterion is fulfilled, the real temperature gradient exceeds 
the adiabatic gradient and the difference is called the 
superadiabatic gradient: 


dr a dr dr i) 


AdT dT ( dT ) 

Convection is a very efficient means of energy 
transport. In fact, near the base of the convective envelope, 
the radiative flux is so small that we can ignore the 
superadiabatic gradient and use the adiabatic one as the 
temperature gradient (this is also the case in the central 
part of massive stars). Unfortunately, this is not the case 
in the outer layers of the Sun. Evaluating this difference 
would require a theory of convection which is yet lacking; 
the simulation of such effects for stellar conditions is 
extremely complex (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION THEORY), 
the size of the cells and the associated turbulence is not 
well established; so one usually restricts the calculation to 
an order of magnitude calculation in the framework of the 
‘mixing length theory’. This approximation conceptually 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


replaces the real situation of ‘plumes’, convective eddies 
of different sizes, by an average situation where each 
convective element travels, on average, a distance A, 
before mixing with the surrounding matter. This distance 
is generally scaled to the pressure scale height! by a 
parameter a called the mixing length parameter: 


-1 
a=area(<F*) (14) 
dr 


In this calculation, one must estimate the relative amount 
of energy carried by convection and by radiation. Two 
different cases must be studied: the convection in the 
central part of the star and in the outer layers. These 
two regions differ by their density values, respectively 
about 100 g cm™ and 10~° g cm’, and the typical 
lengths of A, 700000 km and 200 km, so the difference 
between the temperature of a convective element and the 
average temperature of the surrounding matter is really 
very different in the two situations. In the central part 
of stars, the temperature gradient is about 10-* K cm"! 
to be compared with the absolute value of 10’ K anda 
convective time of about 1 to 100 days. Therefore if such an 
instability exists (for stars greater than 1.5M.), convection 
is an extremely efficient process of energy transport and 
the temperature gradient can safely be approximated by 
the adiabatic one. In the outer layers, the temperature 
variation between shells is of the order of 100 to 1000 K, to 
be compared with the gas temperature of 5000 to 10000 K, 
the convective time is shorter, 1 to 100 min, and we really 
need an adapted treatment of the convection. In that case, 
due to partial ionization of hydrogen or helium, I’; drops 
to a value near unity and the adiabatic gradient becomes 
relatively small. This favors convective transfer but the 
radiative flux is still important and cannot be neglected. 
In the solar case, the value of the mixing length 
parameter is in fact calibrated in solar models by the 
knowledge of the solar radius at the Sun’s present 
age. In this specific case, therefore, one may consider 
that this small superadiabatic region just below the 
photosphere is rather correctly treated. The extension 
of this solar value to other stars with rather different 
surface temperatures is more uncertain due to the fact 
that it is, amongst other things, largely dependent on 
the opacity in the superadiabatic part of the convection 
zone. This is why theoretical efforts to model convection, 
largely encouraged by the development of solar local 
helioseismology measurements are extremely promising. 


The evolution of the Sun with time 

The Sun is approximately in the middle of the first, 
longest (about 10 Gyr) and calm stage of stellar evolution, 
corresponding to the burning of hydrogen. A theoretical 
description of the evolution of the Sun with time is 
obtained by considering a succession of static equilibrium 
models described by the basic equations (4) to (7). The 


1 The pressure scale height is the distance corresponding to a 
pressure decrease of a factor e: 2.718. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


time evolution of each chemical species X; is given by three 


terms: 
dX; dx; dX; dx; 


= } 15 
dt dt nud 7 dt aitt >) 


dt turb. 

The first term is the major one for the evolution of a 
star. It determines the evolved composition due to the 
differing destruction and creation of elements through 
nuclear reactions. It allows also us to determine the 
nuclear energy €nua of equation (6). Starting from an 
initial mass fraction of 0.71, the present relative abundance 
of hydrogen in the central region is 0.34 and the helium 
has increased in consequence (from 0.27 to 0.63). The 
main important elements and their radial distributions 
are shown in figure 2. One notices very different 
compositions and largely different radial distributions 
due to nuclear processes. The second term has recently 
been introduced into the equations to take into account 
microscopic diffusion. This very slow process of elemental 
diffusion with a characteristic time-scale of 10!° years, is 
theoretically studied as a partial solution to the observed 
deficit of some ‘fragile’ element such as lithium, which 
is destroyed at about 2.4 x 10° K in typical solar mass 
conditions. 

The introduction of such a process has been 
largely validated by the capability of helioseismology 
to determine the photospheric solar helium. The 
value of 0.249 + 0.003 in mass fraction is very near the 
cosmological value (0.23-0.24) but rather incompatible 
with the assumption that the initial solar composition is 
the present photospheric one. Effectively the initial helium 
abundance of 0.27, obtained by the standard solar model, 
shows a reasonable galaxy enrichment between the Big 
Bang and the formation of the solar system. Consequently 
this second term is definitively introduced in the equations 
describing the standard solar model. 

The diffusive velocity V; of an element i, typically 
some 10° cm s“!, is the result of several processes 
with opposing directions, including gravitational settling, 
radiative and thermal terms. The net result is a slight 
migration of all elements heavier than hydrogen towards 
the center with time. At the present time, the photospheric 
abundances are depleted by about 10% in comparison with 
their initial value due to these processes. 

The last term in equation (15) represents a turbulent 
term which simulates macroscopic motion inside the Sun. 
This term is generally ignored in the standard model but 
begins to be considered at the basis of the convective 
zone. In this region of transition between radiation 
and convection, macroscopic motions and mixing could 
be induced by the differential rotation, which is now 
observed rather precisely by seismology. Such a process 
partly inhibits the microscopic diffusion. 


Confrontation of standard models with 
observations 

The stellar evolution codes were developed in the 1960s 
and early 1970s when computers were expanding in 
power, memory and speed. The codes solve the basic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Radial dependence of the abundances of the most crucial elements which have been modified by nuclear reactions. The 
maximum values are the following: H = 0.7204, 3He = 0.003 09, *He = 0.6350, Be = 1.718 x 10-!, 2c = 0.0030, 8C = 0.000 44, 


MN = 0.0045, ©O = 0.0085. 


equations (4) to (7) generally expressed in Lagrangian 
coordinates following the motion of mass elements. The 
starting point is usually an isolated non-rotating, non- 
magnetic spherical mass of gas. In that early period, 
methods and codes were developed by Iben, Paczynski 
and Kippenhahn. The most recent ones have introduced 
numerical methods which guarantee a high accuracy 
(typically 10-7), useful to avoid any numerical effect in 
the interpretation of the present solar observables. 

At each time step, the spatial stellar structure is 
described with the help of 300 to 600 mesh points 
the nonlinear differential equations are solved with the 
five structural variables, pressure P = P(p,T, Xj), 
opacity coefficient « = x(p,T,X;), energy production 
e = e(p,T, X;), entropy S = S(p,T, X;) and adiabatic 
exponent [. = [2(p,7, X;). The initial model is built 
in such a way that it simulates the stellar equilibrium 
corresponding to the moment when the contraction of the 
star is stopped by the onset of hydrogen burning; it may 
also be built to include the gravitational contraction of 
the pre-main sequence (see PRE-MAIN SEQUENCE STARS). One 
then follows stellar time evolution through a succession 
of hydrostatic equilibria. The time step is automatically 
adjusted and determined by the maximum acceptable 
variation of the principal variables. 

The simulation of the present Sun is based on the 
previous concepts. The peculiarity of the Sun as a star 
is due to direct comparison with a variety of observed 
phenomena. The known present luminosity Lg and radius 
Ro, as well as the age, avoid the two main difficulties of 
the theory of stellar evolution: the absence of a precise 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


determination of helium abundance and of an ab initio 
theoretical formalism for convection. 

Table 1 summarizes the results obtained by standard 
model calculations, compared with present observations. 
Starting with a star of 1Mo, just on the arrival of the 
main sequence or in the pre-main sequence contracting 
phase, with an initial composition provided by present 
observation, we solve the structure equations (4) to (7) 
and (15) and progress in time by successive steps of 
the equilibrium state, including nuclear and diffusion 
processes, up to the present time estimated to be 4.52- 
4.55 Gyr. The computation is done ab initio, without any 
free parameters. The computation of the reference model 
is iterated with small modifications of the initial helium 
content Y, the initial heavy element composition, and the 
parameter a in order to obtain the observed values Lo, Ro 
and Z/Xo at to. The solar structure is more and more 
under control, from a standard model without diffusion 
to a standard model including microscopic diffusion and 
some turbulent mixing at the base of the convective zone, 
with very good agreement for the photospheric helium 
and the position of the base of the convective zone between 
the latest model and the results obtained by inversion 
of the sound speed and the adiabatic exponent T°; (c? = 
1; P/) (See HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY). 

Figures 3(a) and (b) present the corresponding 
squared sound speed difference between the Sun and these 
models. The present errors on the solar sound speed vary 
from about a few parts in 10° near the surface to a few 
parts in 10? in the solar core. Such an accuracy allows us 
to check some reaction rates ((p,p) or *He,*He) or opacity 
questions at the level of some 1% or equation of state ones 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Standard solar models. Thermodynamical quantities and neutrino predictions obtained in the computation of the standard 
t 0.004) x 10°3 ergs s~! respectively, a is the 

mixing length parameter; Y;, Z;, (Z/X); are initial helium, initial heavy element and initial ratio heavy element to hydrogen; Y;, Zs, 
(Z/X)s are the same for photospheric compositions; Rp-z, Thcz are the radius and temperature at the base of the convective zone; Y¢, 
Zc, Tc, Pc are central helium, heavy element contents, central temperature and density; 37C], 1Ga, °B respective neutrino predictions 


model: the present Ro and Lo are adjusted to (6.9599 + 0.0002) x 10!° cm and (3.846 4 


for the chlorine, gallium and water detectors. 


Parameters Observations Without diffusion With diffusion With diff. + turb 
a 1.71 1.77 1.76 

Y; 0.265 0.272 0.272 

Zi 1.757 x 10-2 1.898 x 10-2 1.898 x 10-2 
(Z/X); 0.0245 0.0277 0.0277 

Y, 0.249 + 0.003 0.265 0.243 0.251 

Zs 1.757 x 10-2 1.803 x 10-2 1.858 x 10-2 
(Z/X)s 0.0245 x (140.1) 0.0245 0.0245 0.0255 
Roez/Ro 0.713 + 0.003 0.729 0.713 0.714 

Thez X 10° (K) 2.055 2.190 2.194 

Y. 0.614 0.640 0.641 

Zs 1.807 x 10-2 2.094 x 10-2 2.094 x 10-2 
Te x 10° (K) 15.44 15.71 15.71 

Pe (g em) 147.80 153.1 153.1 

37Cl (GNU) 2.55 + 0.25 SNU 5.65 7.04+41.8 7.0441.8 
71Ga (SNU) 76 +8SNU (cal = 0.91+0.08) 119.4 127.149 127.149 

8B (10°cm~*s-!) 2.44 + 0.26 3.66 5.41.25 5.41.25 


at the level of some 0.1%. So, comparisons with precise 
helioseismological data push astrophysicists to use the 
best physical developments available in atomic, nuclear 
and plasma physics, and the results are representative of 
this knowledge. 

Nevertheless, figures 3(a) and (b) show regions of 
mismatch where the differences on the squared sound 
speed between model and Sun is about 10 times the 
experimental determination of such a quantity. These 
regions are useful to correct the physics used or to 
introduce a new phenomenon, as has been done for 
the two processes explicitly discussed here. The 
residual difference may be attributed to uncertainties on 
abundances, opacities or reaction rates. 

The results are reproducible, except to some extent in 
the solar nuclear core where solar results are sensitive to 
the data used and the model results depend on the details 
of most of the physical inputs. The core of the Sun is 
not totally under control, and this justifies complementary 
efforts to try to detect gravity waves which will help us to 
better investigate this region of the Sun and to disentangle 
different physical effects. 

The neutrino fluxes obtained by the standard 
models are not in agreement with the observations. 
Helioseismology constrains the situation offered by the 
stellar structural problem even if it does not at present 
sufficiently constrain the region of interest located below 
0.15Ro. Nuclear reaction rates in the secondary channels 
(as the ppIII chain) or absorption cross sections play 
a crucial role in these predictions. Experimental and 
theoretical efforts in these disciplines continue to be 
useful as they are potentially able to explain some of the 
discrepancy. In parallel the study of the properties of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


neutrinos is also required to get a definitive understanding 
of solar neutrino fluxes on the ground (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
NEUTRINOS). 


Toward a dynamical representation of the stars 
The present theoretical description of the Sun is a 
static monodimensional representation of our star where 
rotation and magnetic field are not yet introduced 
explicitly. The development of local seismology and 
three-dimensional simulation of convection contribute to 
progress towards a dynamical representation of the Sun. 
Nowadays the differential rotation coupled with turbulent 
convection improve the agreement with observations and 
encourages three-dimensional representation of the Sun 
in order to disentangle the internal competitive physical 
processes. 

Some complementary indicators are specific abun- 
dances such as photospheric *He, ’Li and °Be abundances, 
which have a certain sensitivity to internal mixing as they 
are destroyed outside the nuclear core (see figure 2). One 
may notice that the destruction of lithium occurs partly 
during the pre-main sequence and the main sequence. The 
understanding of the observed deficit of present photo- 
spheric lithium is largely dependent on the competition of 
photon-matter absorption, element segregation and tur- 
bulent diffusion. 

The development of asterosismology (seismic study 
of solar-like stars) may contribute to refining our 
representation of the Sun by properly introducing the 
dynamical processes of the young Sun. 

The internal magnetic field is still rather poorly 
known; a global history of the angular momentum of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Interior: Standard Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.020F 


0.0105 


x 0.000 


0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 


0.006 
0.004 |- 


0.002 F 


won) /C'tn 


0.000 


(c* 


—0.002 - 


—0.004 L 


Figure 3. Sound speed squared difference between the Sun 
measured by GOLF+LOWL experiments and standard models. 
The seismic uncertainties are reported on the difference itself. 
No theoretical uncertainty is included. (a) corresponds to 
standard models without (full) (model 1, table 1) and with 
microscopic diffusion (full line with experimental error bars, 
model 2, table 1). (b) corresponds to the model including 
microscopic diffusion (model 2, table 1) and to the model where 
a turbulent term is added at the base of the convective zone 
(model 3, table 1). 


Sun coupled to temporal seismic studies along the solar 
cycle could help progress in this direction. 

The very specific study of the solar interior is crucial 
for the understanding of general astrophysics problems 
such as the age of the universe, galactic evolution, the 
role of convection etc. It also plays a crucial role in 
understanding the properties of neutrinos. 


Bibliography 

Adelberger E et al 1998 Solar fusion cross sections Rev. Mod. 
Phys. 70 1265 

Brun S, Turck-Chiéze S and Morel P 1998 Standard solar 
models in the light of new helioseismic constraints: I 
The solar core Astrophys. J. 506 913-25 

Brun AS, Turck-Chiéze S and Zahn J P 1999 Standard solar 
models in the light of new helioseismic constraints: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


II Mixing below the convective zone Astrophys. J. 525 
1032-41 

Proffitt C R and Michaud G 1991 Microscopic diffusion 
Astrophys. J. 380 238 

Turck-Chiéze S, Dappen W, Fossat E, Provost J, Schatz- 
man E and Vignaud D 1993 The solar interior Phys. 
Rep. 230 57-235 

Turck-Chiéze S, Nghiem P, Couridat S and Turcotte S 2000 
Solar Physics to be published 

Zahn J P 1998 Macrophysics: large-scale advection, 
turbulent diffusion, wave transport Space Sci. Rev. 85 
79-90 


Sylvaine Turck-Chiéze 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Irradiance 


Irradiance is the power from a source of radiant energy 
that is incident on unit area of a surface located at some 
distance from the source. The Sun’s total irradiance is 
1365 +2 Wm. This is the total radiant energy per 
unit time (ie. power) at all wavelengths that the Earth 
receives on unit area of its surface from the entire solar 
disk when separated from the Sun by one astronomical 
unit (1 AU = 1.49 x 10'° cm). 

Spectral irradiance is the power per unit area 
attributable to radiation within a specified wavelength 
interval. The Sun emits radiation that ranges in 
wavelength across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, 
from very short-wavelength x-rays, to ultraviolet (UV), 
visible, infrared (IR) and very long-wavelength radio 
waves. Figure 1 illustrates the dependence of solar spectral 
irradiance on wavelength, a dependence that covers more 
than six orders of magnitude and peaks in the visible 
spectrum. 

Solar irradiance is not constant. Although the 
total irradiance has in the past been termed the solar 
‘constant’, levels of total and spectral irradiance fluctuate 
continuously in concert with solar activity (see SOLAR 
activity). During recent epochs of high solar activity, 
near maxima of the 11 year solar cycle (see SOLAR CYCLE), 
mean levels of total irradiance increased by about 0.1% 
(1.3 W m7”) relative to solar cycle minima levels. Spectral 
irradiance also increases with solar activity, by different 
amounts depending on wavelength, as shown in figure 1 
for a recent 11 year cycle. Small increases of less than a 
few tenths of a per cent occur at visible and near-infrared 
wavelengths, whereas radiation at the shortest x-ray and 
longest radio wavelengths can change by factors of two 
and more. Note that the actual radiant energy falling 
on the Earth varies by +3% annually because of regular 
changes in the distance of the Earth from the Sun. This 
wavelength-independent fluctuation is not intrinsically 
solar but, rather, a geometrical effect. Solar irradiance 
variability refers to changes arising in the Sun itself, 
specified at a fixed Sun—Earth distance of 1 AU. 

Acquiring reliable observations of solar irradiance 
has proven a challenging technological task. The 
longest continuous irradiance database—that of total 
(i.e. spectrally integrated) irradiance—has yet to cover 
two 11 year solar activity cycles. Since the late 1970s, 
more than five total irradiance instruments on various 
space platforms have utilized electrical substitution cavity 
pytheliometers to achieve total irradiance measurements 
with uncertainties approaching +0.2% and long-term 
repeatabilities of the order of +0.01%. Spectral irradiance 
observations are less reliable and less frequent than 
are total irradiance observations. Even in the UV 
spectrum, where most spectral irradiance measurements 
have been made, uninterrupted monitoring has yet to 
be accomplished for a complete solar cycle. Using 
combinations of redundant gratings and filters (to achieve 
spectral dispersion), photoelectric detectors and on-board 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


calibration tracking, solar UV spectroradiometers that 
have operated continuously in space since late 1991 are 
at present achieving uncertainties in the range +6—-10%, 
and long-term repeatabilites approaching +1%. Regular 
monitoring of the Sun’s visible and infrared spectrum 
remains to be undertaken. 

Close physical relationships between the Sun’s 
radiative output and magnetic fields in the solar 
atmosphere (see SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD) facilitate the primary 
mechanisms of solar irradiance variability. Magnetic 
fields, when present in the Sun’s atmosphere, perturb its 
radiative processes by altering temperature and density 
(see, for example, SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS). 
Thus, magnetic active regions (see ACTIVE REGIONS) are 
sites of local enhancement or depletion of solar radiation. 
Particularly important for their effects on solar irradiance 
are dark sunspots—in which radiation is depleted (see 
suNspots)—and bright faculae—which are sources of 
enhanced radiation (See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE). The variable 
occurrence and inhomogeneous distribution of both 
sunspots and faculae on the solar disk throughout the 
solar cycle produce net fluctuations in irradiance (ie. 
the emission from all radiative sources integrated over 
the entire disk), with strong wavelength dependences. 
Particularly significant perturbations (>100%) occur in 
emissions at the shortest (x-ray) and longest (radio) 
wavelengths that are formed in the highest and hottest 
layers of the solar atmosphere. 

Past and future solar irradiance variability potentially 
exceed the range detected by space-based solar irradiance 
observations. Compared with historical proxy records of 
solar activity, including sunspot and geomagnetic records, 
and cosmogenic archives in ice cores and tree rings, current 
solar monitoring has been accomplished during an epoch 
of overall high levels of solar activity and larger than 
average 11 year cycle amplitudes. Associations of modern 
magnetic sources with historical solar activity proxies 
suggest that total irradiance may have increased a few 
tenths of a per cent since an epoch of anomalously low 
solar activity during the seventeenth century. Called 
the Maunder minimum, this episode of solar quiescence 
appears to be but the most recent of similar episodes that 
have occurred semiregularly in the Sun’s multicentennial 
past, and are expected in its future. 

Solar irradiance is the primary energy source for 
the Earth. Thus it is a crucial geophysical quantity 
for modeling and understanding a myriad of terrestrial 
processes including global climate change and space 
weather (see SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION). Radiation at 
wavelengths longer than 300 nm penetrates though most 
of the Earth’s atmosphere to within 15 km of the surface. 
This radiation comprises 99% of total irradiance and its 
fluctuations have long been speculated to alter surface 
temperatures and other climatological phenomena on 
decadal and centennial time scales, vying with greenhouse 
gases and sulphate aerosols in the industrial epoch. The 
Earth’s atmosphere absorbs the remaining 1% of the 
Sun’s irradiance, including the high-energy UV, extreme 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


XRAY EUV UV VIS IR RADIO 
L spectral irradiance | 
1 

E 100 | < 
> 
7 2 
E 410 a 
E | a 
= 1.0 1.0 = = 

Ww ro) 
oO 
S 70.1 fi nn 
< caters 
4 spectral irradiance \ 0.01 <7 
a 0.01 variability : = L 
= 5 A 
L 0.001. 64 
Ss) 
0.0001 L_1 1 inl poi iil ritiul 1 iii os 

10! 107 10° 104 10° 


Wavelength (nm) 


Figure 1. The spectrum of the Sun’s radiation incident on top of the Earth’s atmosphere (thin dark curve), and of a blackbody at 5770 K 
(thin dashed curve). The Sun’s total irradiance is the integral over all wavelengths of this spectral irradiance. The broad spectral bands 
identified along the top of this figure are designated the extreme ultraviolet (EUV), ultraviolet (UV), visible (VIS) and infrared (IR). The 
x-ray spectrum lies shortward of the EUV spectrum and at wavelengths longward of the IR is the microwave or radio portion of the 
solar spectrum. Also shown (thick gray cuvre) are estimates of the variations in solar spectral irradiance for a recent 11 year activity 
cycle. At wavelengths longer than 400 nm these estimates are speculative because very limited observational data exist. 


ultraviolet (EUV) and x-rays. These radiations would 
have detrimental biological effects were they able to 
penetrate to the Earth’s surface. Rather, short-wavelength 
solar radiation provides the primary energy input to the 
atmosphere, where it initiates and controls the ozone layer 
in the stratosphere and, at higher altitudes, the ionosphere 
and thermosphere. More variable by orders of magnitude 
than the total irradiance, solar ultraviolet emissions 
may impact global change indirectly through middle 
atmosphere coupling with the biosphere. Solar heating 
and ionization perturbations of the upper atmosphere 
by highly variable extreme ultraviolet radiation impact 
communications and satellite drag. 


Spectrum of the Sun’s radiation 
The spectrum of the Sun’s radiation—its distribution 
of irradiance with wavelength, shown in figure 1—is 
a combination of continuum, emission and absorption 
features. Solar continuum radiation has a smoothly 
varying spectral shape similar to that of a black body near 
5770 K (also shown in figure 1), which is the approximate 
temperature of the Sun’s visible surface. The Sun’s surface 
is defined as the layer of its atmosphere from which 
radiation at 500 nm (near peak irradiance levels of the 
blackbody spectrum) emerges with unit optical depth. 
Most (>99%) of the Sun’s irradiance—that at wavelengths 
from 160 nm to 5 w~m—also emerges from the vicinity of 
the solar surface, in a layer of the Sun’s atmosphere a few 
hundred kilometers thick called the photosphere. 
Numerous emission and absorption lines are super- 
imposed on the dominant solar continuum. Gases in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sun’s atmosphere cause these spectral features by either 
absorbing the underlying continuum radiation (produc- 
ing, for example, Fraunhofer lines) or by augmenting the 
continuum radiation with local emission processes. Least 
absorption by the solar atmosphere of the underlying pho- 
tospheric continuum emission occurs in the vicinity of 
1.6 xm (1600 nm). This radiation thus emerges from the 
deepest observable layers of the Sun and is the least vari- 
able region of the solar spectrum (see figure 1). 

Many species in the solar atmosphere, for example 
Al, Mg, Ca, O, Fe, He and H, absorb radiation at UV, 
visible and IR wavelengths. In the visible and infrared 
spectrum their absorption lines are superimposed on 
the dominant 5770 K blackbody continuum. In the 
UV spectrum, however, this line absorption is so strong 
that it depletes significantly the underlying continuum 
radiation. At about 500 km above the Sun’s visible surface 
the solar atmosphere temperature has a minimum value 
of 4500 K that delineates the upper boundary of the 
solar photosphere from the overlying chromosphere and 
corona. The solar spectra near 160 nm and from 75 jm to 
300 zm originate near this temperature minimum region. 

Radiation at wavelengths increasing shortward of 
160 nm and longward of 300 wm emerges from 
increasingly higher, and generally hotter, layers of the 
solar atmosphere. In the solar chromosphere and corona 
temperatures in the range of 10* to 10° K produce 
excited and ionized states of atoms. Emission processes 
of these species emit radiation with characteristic 
spectral signatures whose strengths depend on the local 
temperature and composition of the solar atmosphere. Of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


these features, the emission by Hydrogen I produces the 
strongest line, at 121.57 nm, clearly evident in figure 1. 
Although the net irradiance of line emission at EUV and 
x-ray wavelengths is many orders of magnitude less than 
the visible continuum irradiance, it nevertheless exceeds 
by orders of magnitude the blackbody radiation in this 
short-wavelength spectral regime. 


Observations of total irradiance 

Attaining reliable observations of the Sun’s total 
irradiance—the energy radiated at all wavelengths—has 
been a goal for more than a century, motivated by the need 
to specify fluctuations in the radiative energy input to the 
Earth. On the basis of observations made with ground- 
based instrumentation from 1874 to 1976, the total irradi- 
ance of the Sun was considered to be invariant with time, 
and hence designated the solar ‘constant’. But the mea- 
surements lacked the accuracy and repeatability to estab- 
lish either the correct absolute value of the irradiance, or 
its variability, to better than about half a per cent. 

During the past two decades, solar radiometers flown 
on orbiting spacecraft (to eliminate interference by the 
Earth’s atmosphere) have detected real total irradiance 
variability at levels of tenths of a per cent. These observa- 
tions have achieved uncertainties in absolute calibration of 
+0.2% and long-term repeatabilities better than 0.01% by 
utilizing the technique of electrical substitution radiome- 
try, combined with detailed characterization and monitor- 
ing of in-flight sensitivity changes in the radiometers. A 
cavity in the instrument collects solar photons indepen- 
dently of their wavelength. The inside surface of the cav- 
ity is blackened and shaped so that every absorbed photon 
contributes thermal energy when a shutter permits solar 
radiation to reach the cavity. With the shutter closed, elec- 
trical power substitutes for the radiant power to maintain 
the cavity at a constant temperature. Knowing the aper- 
ture of the cavity then provides a direct measure of the in- 
cident total irradiance in absolute units of power per unit 
area (W m~”), at the known distance of the cavity from the 
Sun. 

The five or more radiometric instruments that have 
observed the Sun’s total irradiance at various times 
during the past two decades have each realized a 
slightly different absolute scale, uncertainty and long- 
term stability. The various instruments have different 
cavity, baffle and aperture geometries, thermal losses, drift 
compensations and electronic readouts, and have flown 
on space platforms with different thermal stabilization 
and pointing capabilities. Figure 2 shows a composite 
record of daily mean total irradiance obtained from the 
cross-calibration of overlapping datasets to adjust for scale 
differences, taking into account drifts in the sensitivities 
of the individual radiometers during different phases 
of their missions. Whereas the time series in figure 2 
presents the most probable observational record of the 
Sun’s total irradiance, individual radiometric data at times 
deviate notably from this composite record, and from 
each other, because of instrumental sensitivity drifts. A 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


primary cause of these drifts is solar exposure itself, 
which alters the blackness of the cavity surface and affects 
the thermal energy conversion. Drifts in temperature- 
sensitive electrical components and in the orientation 
of the cavity to the Sun also contribute. The most 
successful observations of total irradiance are achieved 
from instruments that utilize a number of redundant 
cavities with widely different duty cycles to effect in-flight 
calibration tracking, and that are mounted on thermal- and 
view-stabilized platforms. 

Time scales of variability present in the observational 
record of total irradiance range from decades to minutes. 
Prominent in the composite record in figure 2 is an 11 year 
cycle that tracks closely the solar activity cycle, represented 
in this figure by the smoothed sunspot number. Monthly 
to yearly irradiance changes reflect the impact of the 
evolution of magnetic complexes that comprise sunspots 
and faculae. Significant irradiance dips of a few tenths 
of a per cent on a monthly and semimonthly cadence are 
associated with the impact on solar irradiance of the Sun’s 
rotation on its axis. This rotation modulates irradiance 
by presenting different populations of magnetic active 
regions to the Earth’s view. Peaks in the power spectrum 
shown in figure 2 identify these effects near 13 and 30 days 
and in additional longer period peaks. Total irradiance 
responds as well to the 5 min pressure mode oscillation of 
the solar interior (see HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY, HELIOSEISMIC 
OBSERVATIONS), and possibly to the hourly time scales of 
gravity modes as well, but these fluctuations are not 
resolved in the daily mean data in figure 2. 

At present two instruments are monitoring the Sun’s 
total irradiance from space: the Active Cavity Radiometer 
Irradiance Monitor (ACRIM II) on the Upper Atmosphere 
Research Satellite (UARS, launched in 1991) and the 
Variability of Irradiance and Gravity Oscillations (VIRGO) 
instrument on the Solar Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO, 
launched in 1995). NASA’s Earth Observing System (EOS), 
the European Space Agency (ESA) attached pallet to the 
International Space Station (ISS), France’s CNES and the 
US National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental 
Satellite System (NPOESS) each have programs for 
subsequent measurements. Acquiring reliable knowledge 
of the Sun’s total irradiance variability on decadal time 
scales, independent of instrumental drifts, will require 
the indefinite continuation of solar irradiance monitoring 
using radiometers with greater stability than those that 
have flown in the past two decades, mounted on space 
platforms with highly stabilized thermal and pointing 
environments. 


Observations of spectral irradiance 

Reliable observations of the Sun’s spectral irradiance must, 
like those of total irradiance, be made from space to 
avoid contamination by the Earth’s overlying atmosphere. 
In particular, the solar spectrum at wavelengths shorter 
than 310 nm can only be observed from space as 
the Earth’s atmosphere absorbs this radiation entirely. 
Because of their importance for understanding processes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SOLAR IRRADIANCE (Wm7?) 


80 85 


eZee oes stes 
te cycle 27 cycle 22 


SUNSPOT 
NUMBER 


13 30 100 400 
12 Coe 


POWER 
a 


1 10 100 1000 
PERIOD (days) 


90 95 


Figure 2. Daily mean values of the Sun’s total irradiance are shown from 1979 to 1997. This composite irradiance record was 
constructed from observations made by four different solar radiometers at various times throughout the epoch. Evident is a 
pronounced 11 year cycle with an approximate peak-to-peak magnitude of 0.1%, on which are superimposed larger weekly to monthly 
fluctuations of a few tenths of a per cent. The 11 year total irradiance cycle tracks the general level of solar activity, indicated by the 
sunspot numbers in the lowest plot. The subset of data shown in the upper left hand plot provides details of rotational modulation, 
and the power spectrum in the upper right hand plot summarizes various apparent cycles in the composite total irradiance record. 


in the Earth’s atmosphere, the UV, EUV and x-ray 
regions of the solar spectrum have been monitored 
far more frequently than has any other part of the 
solar spectrum. But even these shorter-wavelength 
measurements have, over the past two decades, been 
made only intermittently. Except for two narrow x-ray 
bands, which Geostationary Operational Environmental 
Satellites (GOES) have monitored operationally since the 
1970s, continuous reliable time series of solar spectral 
irradiance have not been procured for even one 11 year 
solar cycle. Figure 3 provides a sample of UV 
spectral irradiance monitoring—that made of the upper 
photospheric emission at 200 nm by instruments on the 
UARS and Solar Mesosphere Explorer—and of the coronal 
soft x-ray 0.1-0.8 nm fluxes. 

Solar spectral irradiance instruments typically op- 
erate only over a limited wavelength range. They 
achieve wavelength discrimination by employing optical 
elements, usually gratings or spectral band filters, to dis- 
perse or select specified bands of the solar spectrum. Since 
narrow wavelength bands comprise significantly less so- 
lar power than the 1365 W m® total irradiance, spectral 
irradiance instruments utilize detectors, typically photo- 
multipliers or diodes, which have sensitivities higher by 
many orders of magnitude than that of an electrical sub- 
stitution cavity. These detectors amplify the small signal 
incident on them from the dispersing element when it is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


positioned at a known wavelength setting. Unlike total ir- 
radiance radiometers, spectral irradiance instruments are 
not electrically self-calibrating. Rather, pre-flight labora- 
tory calibrations and characterizations establish the abso- 
lute irradiance scale at each wavelength by using standard 
irradiance sources and detectors. For all but the most re- 
cent UV spectral irradiance measurements, whose uncer- 
tainties approach +6%, pre-flight calibrations of instru- 
ments typically achieve uncertainties in the range +10- 
50%. On-orbit sensitivity degradation can introduce addi- 
tional large uncertainties to long-term monitoring of spec- 
tral irradiance variability. Only the most recent UV spec- 
tral irradiance instruments, those flying on the UARS, have 
the capability for on-orbit calibration tracking of these 
changes, and achieve long-term repeatabilities approach- 
ing +1% at some UV wavelengths. 

Significant instrumental uncertainties are present 
in the historical database of solar spectral irradiance 
observations, arising from different realizations of 
absolute spectral irradiance scales combined with in-flight 
sensitivity drifts of the instruments. Exposure to solar 
radiation degrades the reflectivities and transmittances 
of optical elements in solar spectroradiometers; slippage 
in grating drive mechanisms contributes uncertainties in 
the wavelength of the radiation. At most wavelengths 
in the solar spectrum, the uncertainties in the historical 
irradiance database are comparable to, or exceed, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a. UV IRRADIANCE: 200 nm 


8% 


b. X RAYS: 1—8A background 


10°> wm"? 


1980 1985 


cycle 21 


GOES 


200% 


f \) | 


| 
MN Uh 


1990 1995 


cycle 22 


Figure 3. Variations occur in the Sun’s radiation at wavelengths throughout the spectrum, and are shown in (a) the UV 200 nm 
irradiance measured by instruments on the SME and UARS spacecraft and (b) the GOES 1-8 A background flux measured by a series 
of operational spacecraft. These spectral irradiance variations occur in concert with solar activity, whose long-term changes produced 
the variable sunspot record in figure 2. An empirical solar variability model that utilizes a facular proxy to estimate the 200 nm 
irradiance is also shown (gray line) for comparison with the SME and UARS 200 nm irradiance observations, which do not overlap in 
time and which cannot therefore be cross-calibrated to remove instrumental calibration scale differences. 


amplitude of the solar cycle variability itself. In the visible 
and infrared solar spectrum, monitored by only a very 
few filter radiometers, instrument sensitivity changes in 
the range 5-50% far exceed the real solar variations which 
are thought to be in the range of a few tenths of a per 
cent; reliable observational determination of solar visible 
and infrared spectrum variability has thus far not been 
achieved. Knowledge of the irradiance and variability 
of even the strongest line in the entire solar spectrum— 
the emission of hydrogen Lyman o (121.6 nm)—remains 
uncertain by 30% to 50%, as does that of most EUV 
emission lines. Only in the spectral region from 250 to 
120 nm have instrument sensitivity drifts been tracked 
with a repeatability of a few per cent, sufficient to estimates 
solar cycle changes of order of 3-30%, but these data exist 
thus far for less than one 11 year cycle. 

In spite of their limitations, the available spectral 
irradiance measurements have established beyond doubt 
that the solar spectrum varies in concert with solar activity 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


over multiple time scales. As shown in figure 1 for 
a typical 11 year activity cycle, the amplitude of the 
variability is strongly wavelength dependent. Spectrum 
variability occurs on time scales shorter than the solar 
cycle because active region evolution, solar rotation and 
interior oscillation also modulate spectral irradiance, in 
different degrees depending on the source of the irradiance 
within the solar atmosphere. In general, the emissions 
formed in higher, hotter solar atmospheric layers vary 
the most. Coronal x-rays are seen in figure 3(b) to 
vary by two orders of magnitude; these emissions are 
highly sensitive to magnetic activity, especially eruptive 
instabilities that produce flares, but they are insensitive 
to interior oscillations. EUV radiation from the solar 
chromosphere and transition region can vary by factors 
of two or more and UV radiation by a few to 50%; the 
200 nm fluxes shown in figure 3(a) decreased by 8% from 
the maximum to minimum of the most recent 11 year cycle. 
Radiation formed in the vicinity of the Sun’s surface is the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


least variable with solar cycle amplitudes of no more than 
a few tenths of a per cent. This radiation is insensitive 
to flares and sensitive to interior oscillations, which are 
detectable in irradiance time series made with sufficiently 
high time resolution. 

At present, two instruments also on board the VARS 
are measuring solar spectral irradiance at wavelengths 
from 120 to 420 nm in 1 nm bands. These are the Solar 
Stellar Irradiance Comparison Experiment (SOLSTICE) 
and the Solar Ultraviolet Spectral Irradiance Monitor 
(SUSIM). GOES spacecraft continue operational solar x- 
ray monitoring, augmented since mid 1991 by soft x- 
ray observations made using an imaging (rather than full 
disk flux) instrument on board the Yohkoh spacecraft. 
Apart from VIRGO’s filter radiometers on SOHO, which 
cover three selected near-UV, visible and IR narrow 
(5 nm) bands, the solar visible and IR spectrum is 
not monitored at present. Future programs include 
observations of the total and spectral irradiances by 
EOS, ESA and NPOESS, and of the EUV spectral 
irradiance by the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere 
Energetics and Dynamics spacecraft. Apart from NPOESS, 
these programs are of insufficient duration to determine 
long-term spectral irradiance trends, but they will 
advance significantly knowledge of shorter-term spectral 
irradiance variability. 


Mechanisms of present irradiance variability 
Mechanisms of solar irradiance variability arise from 
the fundamental connections between radiation and 
magnetism in the Sun’s atmosphere. The prominent 
11 year cycles in the total and spectral irradiance in 
figures 2 and 3 are simply global manifestations of 
these connections. So too are irradiance fluctuations 
that track multimonthly evolution of active regions, 
the 27-day rotation of the Sun on its axis, and 
a range of shorter time scale variability related to 
meso- and super granulation (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
MESOGRANULATION; SUPERGRANULATION). In each case, the 
eruption, rearrangement and disappearance of magnetic 
fields in the solar atmosphere modify the Sun’s radiative 
output. Magnetic fields perpetrate distinctive features 
in different solar atmosphere regimes, as displayed in 
the images in figure 4. These features, which include 
dark sunspots and bright faculae, affect solar irradiance 
at different wavelengths in different ways. Thus, the 
three time series in figure 4, of total, UV and x-ray 
irradiances emitted from respectively the photosphere, 
upper photosphere and corona, exhibit markedly distinct 
temporal variability even though solar magnetism is 
ultimately their common origin. 

In the photosphere near the Sun’s surface, from 
whence emerges near-UV, visible and IR radiation, 
sunspots are the pre-eminent signature of solar mag- 
netism. Formed by compact clumps of magnetic fields, 
sunspots are darker and cooler than the surrounding pho- 
tosphere because the magnetic fields inhibit the upward 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


flow of energy from the Sun’s convection zone to its vis- 
ible surface. Less compact aggregates of magnetic field 
lines also abound in the photosphere. Being only slightly 
brighter than the surrounding photosphere, and much less 
compact than sunspots, these features, the faculae, are 
barely detectable in images of the solar disk recorded with 
visible continuum radiation, except near the limb. How- 
ever, because of their greater dispersion over the entire 
solar surface they are equally important in modifying the 
net radiative output of the Sun (See FACULAE, SOLAR PHOTO- 
SPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). 

Hundreds of kilometers above the Sun’s surface the 
primary evidence of magnetic fields are bright, rather 
than dark, activity features. In the largest of these 
regions, called plage, magnetic fields clump together 
to form complexes of activity that extend over much 
more of the solar disk than do the compact sunspots. 
Bright emission is also present in a network that covers 
most of the solar surface, and in a range of interspersed 
magnetic features that have smaller spatial scales than 
active regions. Plage and network are evident as regions of 
enhanced emission in the image of the Sun’s chromosphere 
in figure 4 made in the core of the Ca K Fraunhofer 
line. These bright magnetic features are the chromospheric 
counterparts of photospheric faculae, and are sources of 
significantly enhanced UV and EUV emission from the 
upper photosphere, chromosphere and transition region. 
Thus the fluctuations in solar UV and EUV spectral 
irradiance track closely the evolution of bright faculae, 
with little discernible sunspot influence. Higher still, 
in the Sun’s corona, magnetic fields form bright loops 
and extended magnetic complexes that obliterate distinct 
connections to sunspots, plage and network below. As 
seen in the Yohkoh soft x-ray images in figure 4, coronal 
magnetic structures at times extend over much of the 
solar disk; they emit prodigious levels of x-ray, EUV 
and radio flux and control irradiance variability at these 
wavelengths. 

Specific knowledge of the areas and brightnesses of 
the various magnetic features present in different solar 
atmospheric regimes permits the empirical modelling 
of solar irradiance variability for comparison with 
directly observed irradiance data at different wavelengths. 
Ground based, visible light solar images record areas and 
locations of sunspots that are used to calculate sunspot 
darkening contributions. Other spectroheliograms, such 
as the Ca K images in figure 4, record the locations and 
areas of enhanced emission in plage, faculae and the 
surrounding bright network. Solar variability models that 
combine, in different amounts, global parametrizations 
of these two components can explain much of the 
observed irradiance variability from the photosphere and 
chromosphere. A model with significant contributions 
from both sunspot darkening and facular brightening 
accounts for almost 90% of the variance in the daily mean 
total irradiance data over nearly two decades, shown in 
figure 2. In comparison, the model estimates shown in 
figure 3(a), used to cross-calibrate two on-overlapping 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Corona 


Chromosphere 


16 JAN 92 31. JAN 92 


a. SOFT X RAYS 


Counts 
N 
° 
ro) 


b. 200 NM IRRADIANCE 


c. TOTAL IRRADIANCE 


92.00 92.10 92.20 92.30 92.40 
TIME (years) 


Figure 4. Solar activity and solar rotation alter the distribution of magnetic features in the solar atmosphere, viewed from Earth, as 
shown in two types of solar images made in 1992 near maximum levels of solar activity. These changes generate irradiance variability. 
Soft x-ray (upper) images measured by the Yohkoh spacecraft display the changing occurrence of global-scale magnetic features in the 
corona. Ca II K (lower) images measured at the Big Bear Solar Observatory show related but less extended magnetic features present 
in the chromosphere on the same days. Soft x-rays fluxes measured by Yohkoh (a), the UV 200 nm irradiance measured by UARS (5) 
and total irradiance (c) measured by ACRIM on UARS track the changing distributions of active regions projected toward Earth during 
solar rotation and over the solar cycle. 


datasets of UV 200 nm irradiance, utilizes the facular and geophysics both motivate the need for this under- 


component alone. standing. Examining long-term variability of other stars 
like the Sun can provide clues about broader aspects of 
Irradiance variability on historical time scales stellar evolution (see SOLAR-STELLAR CONNECTION); and long- 


How might solar irradiance have varied in the past, and _ term solar variability has implications for terrestrial cli- 
what are the prospects for future variability? Astrophysics | mate and global change on centennial time scales and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK Z 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a. SOLAR TOTAL IRRADIANCE: 11 year cycle 
a ae aaa Toe eee Oe Ae ee ey eee 


Ss 
= 
b. SOLAR TOTAL IRRADIANCE: 11 year cycle + background 
total irradiance reconstruction 4 =40 
1366 tly 
=] }70.5__ 
r, oO 
1365 | e -20 
* | é 
E 1364 41.0, 4 
= 4 ro) 
4 ww fe) 
1363 2 1 £ 
us Be ice—core . 714 
1362 mmm ‘*C tree—rings 4 20 
1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 
YEAR 


Figure 5. Reconstructions of the Sun’s total irradiance, assuming in (a) an 11 year cycle alone and in (b) the 11 year activity cycle and a 
longer-term component based on the average amplitude of each sunspot cycle. This latter irradiance reconstruction (dark solid curve) 
is compared with !°Be (small squares) and 'C (thick gray curve) cosmogenic isotope records. 


longer, thereby aiding in the specification of natural cli- 
mate variability for comparison with anthropogenic in- 
fluences (see SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: LONG-TERM AND 
SHORT-TERM CLIMATE VARIABILITY). 

A variety of solar, geomagnetic and geological 
records contain information about long-term solar activity 
fluctuations and the irradiance changes that presumably 
accompanied these fluctuations. Images of the Sun that 
depict sunspots have been made from ground based 
observatories since the seventeenth century, including 
during the Maunder minimum when for many years 
sunspots occurred only very infrequently. Conceptually, 
the sunspot record indicates that solar activity increased 
from anomalously low levels during the Maunder 
minimum to the present epoch of frequent sunspot 
occurrence with numbers as high as any witnessed during 
the past 400 years. Furthermore, indices of geomagnetic 
activity recorded at the Earth during the past 150 years 
indicate an overall upward activity trend concurrent with 
increasing solar cycle amplitudes. Geological records of 
“C and '°Be cosmogenic isotopes in, respectively, tree 
rings and ice cores confirm that overall levels of solar 
activity have increased during the past three centuries. 
The isotope levels reflect variations in the terrestrial flux 
of galactic cosmic rays that arise from solar activity 
modulation of the magnetic coupling of the Sun and 
the Earth. Consistent with the evidence from sunspots, 
geomagnetic data and cosmogenic isotopes, the Sun’s 
present activity is in the high range of levels seen in a 
collection of solar-like stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Two decades of space-based solar irradiance moni- 
toring has thus been conducted during an era of overall 
high solar activity compared with levels during the past 
few centuries. This suggests the plausibility of solar ir- 
radiance levels lower than any yet observed in recent so- 
lar cycle minima, for example during the Maunder min- 
imum. Speculated longer-term changes are not yet de- 
tectable in the limited-duration observational irradiance 
record. However, estimates of historical solar irradiances 
are possible by using solar activity proxies to parametrize 
irradiance variability mechanisms—such as the influences 
of sunspots, faculae and network as quantified for the 
present-day irradiance record. Figure 5(a) shows a re- 
construction of the 11-year total irradiance cycle, alone, 
since 1610, whereas in figure 5(b) the 11 year irradiance cy- 
cle is combined with an assumed longer-term irradiance 
variability component. Adopting this longer-term com- 
ponent permits better agreement between the irradiance 
reconstruction and both the geomagnetic and cosmogenic 
isotope records, the latter of which are also shown in fig- 
ure 5(b). 

Total irradiance increased by about 0.25% from 1650 
to the present, according to the historical reconstruction 
shown in figure 5. A variety of similar techniques yield 
estimates of long term total irradiance variability in the 
range of 0.2 to 0.5%. At UV wavelengths, long term 
spectral irradiance changes are estimated to be factors of 
two larger than the solar cycle changes. But these estimates 
of the Sun’s irradiance variability on historical time scales 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Irradiance 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are by necessity highly speculative; and they will remain 
so until the observational record is of sufficient length to 
establish that long-term irradiance variability is in fact 
present, in addition to the confirmed variability during 
the 11 year cycle and on shorter time scales. 


Bibliography 

Cox AN, Livingston W C and Matthews M S 1991 Solar 
Interior and Atmosphere (Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) 

Foukal P V 1990 Solar Astrophysics (New York: Wiley) 

Hufbauer K 1991 Exploring the Sun: Solar Science since 
Galileo (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press) 

Lean J 1997 The Sun’s variable radiation and its relevance 
for Earth Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 33-67 

Sonnet C P, Giampapa M Sand Matthews MS 1991 The Sun 
in Time (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


Judith Lean 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Magnetic Field 


Electrical currents flowing in the solar plasma generate a 
magnetic field, which is detected in the SOLAR ATMOSPHERE 
by spectroscopic and polarization measurements (SOLAR 
MAGNETIC FIELD: INFERENCE BY POLARIMETRY). The SOLAR WIND 
carries the magnetic field into interplanetary space where 
it can be measured directly by instruments on space 
probes. 

The structure of the solar magnetic field comprises a 
wide spectrum of spatial and temporal scales. A global 
order is apparent in the periodic reversals of the magnetic 
polarity in connection with the 11 yr cycle of sOLARACTIVITY. 
In the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE the magnetic field is highly inho- 
mogeneous with small-scale filaments formed through its 
interaction with the convective flows. In the upper layers 
of the solar atmosphere, the magnetic force dominates over 
all other forces, so that the magnetic field acquires a less 
intermittent structure and fills all available volume. Mag- 
netically ‘open’ regions with diverging field lines reaching 
into interplanetary space and ‘closed’ regions pervaded by 
loop-like structures characterize the magnetic field in the 
CORONA. Further out, the solar wind dominates the dynam- 
ics and, in concert with solar rotation, imprints a spiral 
structure onto the magnetic field. 

It is generally assumed that the magnetic flux 
observed in the solar atmosphere is generated by a 
hydromagnetic DYNAMO mechanism working near the 
bottom of the convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
CONVECTION ZONE). Due to MAGNETIC BUOYANCY, the field rises 
through the convection zone in the form of magnetic flux 
tubes. In the solar atmosphere, the emerging magnetic 
flux forms magnetically bipolar SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS and 
sunspot groups. The various manifestations of solar 
activity are all intimately related to the magnetic field. 
Apart from its variability on timescales determined by 
the dominant convective patterns and the modulation of 
flux emergence in the course of the activity cycle, a long- 
term variability of the solar magnetic field is indicated by a 
marked variation of the intensity of the 11 yr cycles and by 
extended periods of very low solar activity, like the second 
half of the 17th century when sunspots were almost absent 
(See SOLAR ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM RECORDS). 


Large-scale structure and active regions 
A magnetogram (i.e. a map of the magnetic field on the 
solar surface, figure 1) exhibits bipolar magnetic regions 
(active regions) as well as large areas of apparently 
unipolar field in a network pattern, which outlines the 
boundaries of large convection cells (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
SUPERGRANULATION). In particular, such unipolar regions can 
nearly always be found around the solar poles. They 
suggest the existence of a global dipole component of 
the solar magnetic field, which is nearly aligned with the 
rotation axis. The orientation of this dipole field reverses 
in phase with the 11 yr cycle of solar activity (SOLAR CYCLE). 
The network structure of the magnetic field outside 
active regions continuously rearranges itself in response 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Map of the magnetic field in the solar photosphere on 
25 July 1993. Black and white indicate positive and negative 
magnetic polarity, respectively. The dominant features are 
bipolar active regions and extended unipolar domains with a 
network structure outlining the convective flow pattern of 
supergranulation. (Courtesy National Solar Observatory, USA.) 


to the birth and decay of supergranules with a timescale 
of several days. Together with an analogous process 
on the much smaller scale of granulation (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION), this effectively represents a 
diffusion process, spreading magnetic flux over large areas 
and thereby allowing flux elements of opposite polarity 
to cancel. Besides such turbulent diffusion, two other 
processes contribute to the distribution and transport of 
magnetic flux at the solar surface. Firstly, a meridional 
flow of about 10 m s~! directed from the equator to 
the poles and, secondly, latitude-dependent DIFFERENTIAL 
ROTATION. Computer simulations incorporating local flux 
emergence and the various transport processes reproduce 
the evolution of the magnetic field on large spatial scales 
remarkably well, including the reversals of the global 
dipole field. 

The most conspicuous magnetic phenomena in the 
visible layers of the solar atmosphere are sunspots. Their 
magnetism was discovered in 1908 when G E Hale derived 
magnetic field strengths of a few 100 mT from the Zeeman 
splitting of spectral lines. Sunspots are found in active 
regions and typically appear in groups comprising spots 
of both magnetic polarities. The magnetic polarities in 
sunspot groups and active regions are roughly oriented 
in the east-west direction of solar rotation. They obey 
systematic polarity rules: during one 11 yr cycle, all active 
regions have the same east-west polarity orientation in 
the northern hemisphere of the Sun, while the opposite 
orientation is found in the southern hemisphere. All 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


polarities are reversed in the subsequent activity cycle. 
These properties reveal the magnetic nature of the 11 yr 
cycle and show that a full magnetic cycle has a duration 
of 22 yr. The polarity rules can be understood in terms of 
a large-scale, east-west oriented (toroidal) magnetic field 
below the visible surface. This field is antisymmetric about 
the equator and gives rise to active regions and sunspots 
at the surface through the emergence of magnetic loops 
(SOLAR INTERIOR: EMERGING MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). 

Active regions and sunspots appear on the Sun within 
broad activity belts on both sides of the equator. In the 
course of the 11 yr cycle, these zones migrate from about 
35 degrees latitude toward the equator. Upon dissolution 
of an active region, its magnetic flux spreads over an 
increasing area until it merges with the general network 
pattern of the background field. 

The magnetic flux emerging at the solar surface shows 
abroad spectrum in both area and amount of magnetic flux 
of bipolar active regions: from large sunspot groups with 
a total flux (sum of both polarities) of more than 104 Wb 
and with dimensions exceeding 100 Mm down to the small 
ephemeral active regions with diameters of some tens of 
Mm, containing a few times 10'° Wb. The number of 
active regions emerging per unit time on the solar surface 
increases strongly with decreasing total flux of the region: 
ephemeral active regions are capable of replenishing the 
magnetic flux of the background field within about 2 d. 
Since the total magnetic flux is not observed to accumulate 
in time, similarly effective processes of flux removal or 
flux cancellation must be at work. Apparently due to 
their small intrinsic length scales, however, these processes 
are difficult to observe and not well understood. While 
the ephemeral active regions obey the magnetic polarity 
rules (at least in a statistical sense) and so are part of 
the global solar cycle, at smaller length scales (below 
1 Mm) magnetic flux is continuously reprocessed by 
fragmentation, clustering, collision and advection of small 
flux elements by convective flows, mainly granulation. 

The polarity rules of active regions, the latitude 
migration of the activity belts, and the reversals of the 
dipole field demonstrate the global nature of the solar 
magnetic field. On the other hand, this large-scale 
organization is accompanied by strong fluctuations on a 
wide range of spatial scales. 


Photospheric flux tubes 

The inhomogeneous distribution of magnetic flux on 
large spatial scales (active regions and network structure) 
illustrated in figure 1 continues down to the smallest 
scales that are accessible to observation (see figure 2 as 
an example of a medium-resolution magnetogram): the 
major part of the magnetic flux permeating the solar 
photosphere is filamented into a spectrum of flux tubes 
(SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES) With field strength 
above 100 mT and mainly vertical orientation. These 
flux tubes contain almost all of the magnetic energy. 
The largest photospheric flux tubes are sunspots with 
diameters between a few Mm and 50 Mm and central 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Magnetogram showing the intermittent magnetic field 
distribution in a ‘quiet’ region of the solar photosphere (size 
~160 x 160 Mm). Black and white indicate negative and 
positive magnetic polarity, respectively. Most of the magnetic 
flux is contained in patches of strong field appearing in a broad 
range of sizes down to the resolution limit of the observation; 
there is no dominant polarity. (Courtesy C Denker, Big Bear 
Solar Observatory, New Jersey Institute of Technology.) 


magnetic field strengths between ~200 mT and 350 mT. 
Sunspots represent the biggest accumulations of magnetic 
flux in the photosphere. Large sunspots are composed of 
a dark core (see SUNSPOT UMBRA) Surrounded by a striated 
annular region called penumbra (see SUNSPOT PENUMBRA). 
Small sunspots without a penumbra are called pores 
(see SUNSPOT PORES); they comprise the size range between 
about 0.5 Mm and 5 Mm. Flux tubes smaller than pores 
appear bright in white light and in selected spectral bands 
containing many spectral lines; they are called magnetic 
elements (figure 3). 

The (relative) darkness of sunspots is caused by 
the suppression of convective energy transport due 
to their strong magnetic field (MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: 
MAGNETOCONVECTION). On the other hand, a small flux tube 
appears brighter than the average solar surface because 
its partially evacuated interior is efficiently heated by 
radiation from its surroundings in the deeper layers and, 
presumably, also by dissipation of mechanical energy in its 
higher atmospheric layers. Note that, for a cylindrical flux 
tube, the ratio of the heating surface area of its ‘wall’ and 
the internal volume to be heated is inversely proportional 
to the tube radius. The hot walls of small flux tubes become 
best visible near the limb of the Sun, where the combined 
effect of many flux tubes gives rise to bright FACULAE. 
Averaged over the whole Sun, the enhanced brightness of 
the magnetic elements dominates over the reduced energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Size-dependent brightness signature of magnetic flux 
tubes in the solar photosphere: large tubes (sunspots and pores) 
are darker than the average solar surface, while small flux tubes 
(magnetic elements) appear as bright dots, often strung together 
like chains. The roughly polygonal pattern is due to convective 
motions (granulation). The darker intergranular lanes are cool 
downflow regions while the brighter granules are formed by hot 
upflows. The magnetic elements are predominantly located in 
the intergranular lanes. The image has been taken with a 10 nm 
wide filter around 468 nm wavelength. (Courtesy G Scharmer, 
Stockholm Observatory.) 


flux in the sunspots, so that the total solar radiation output 
increases with growing magnetic flux in the photosphere. 
As a consequence, the brightness of the Sun increases by 
about 0.1% from minimum to maximum of the activity 
cycle (SOLAR IRRADIANCE). 

In contrast to the rather strong variation in brightness, 
the field strength inside flux tubes depends only weakly on 
their size. In fact, the average over their full cross section 
remains nearly constant at values between 150 mT and 
200 mT. Only the very smallest flux tubes show indications 
of a significantly reduced field strength. Note that the 
magnetic pressure (MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS) of a field of 
150 mT is comparable to the gas pressure at the base of 
the photosphere, so that the magnetic flux tubes must be 
nearly evacuated at that height in order to attain force 
balance. 

Observations with low spatial resolution average over 
the intermittent structure of the magnetic field and thus 
yield amean magnetic flux density. The range of measured 
values between roughly 0.1 mT in magnetically ‘quiet’ 
areas and up to 30 mT in active regions (outside sunspots) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


can be understood in terms of a varying area fraction 
occupied by strong flux tubes: values between less than 
0.1% in quiet areas and 20% in active regions are indicated. 

Spectroscopic observations in circularly polarized 
light, which originates exclusively from the magnetic 
regions in the photosphere, reveal details of the internal 
structure of magnetic flux tubes. This has led to semi- 
empirical models for the thermodynamic and magnetic 
structure of flux tubes in the network and in plage regions. 
These results indicate that the photospheric layers of small 
flux tubes are hotter than their environment and that 
the plasma within a tube is in rapid motion caused by 
flows, waves, oscillations and shocks. The tubes are 
embedded in downflowing gas and often show rapid 
horizontal displacements. This dynamical nature of the 
tubes is probably relevant for transporting mechanical 
and magnetic energy into the upper atmosphere, where 
it contributes to the heating of these layers (CHROMOSPHERE: 
HEATING MECHANISMS; CORONAL HEATING MECHANISMS). 

If the area fraction occupied by flux tubes is not too 
large, the distribution of the magnetic flux tubes over the 
photospheric ‘surface’ of the Sun reflects the convective 
flow patterns: magnetic flux tends to accumulate in the 
downflow lanes. On the scale of supergranulation, this 
leads to the large-scale network pattern with a typical 
mesh size of 30 Mm. A similar structure is repeated on 
the scale of granulation. Such a distribution indicates 
the operation of flux expulsion, ie. the sweeping of 
vertically oriented magnetic field lines into the downflow 
regions by the horizontal convective flows. This process 
is capable of enhancing the field to about equipartition 
of the magnetic energy density with the kinetic energy 
density of the flow, leading to a field strength of about 
50 mT. In fact, freshly emerging magnetic flux appears 
in the photosphere with about this equipartition field 
strength. Theoretical studies and numerical simulations 
suggest that further intensification of the field strength up 
to 150 mT is caused by the combined effects of the strongly 
superadiabatic stratification of the convective region just 
below the photosphere, the suppression of convective 
motions by a magnetic field of sufficient strength, and 
the efficient cooling of the photospheric region due to 
radiative losses. These processes conspire in exciting an 
instability of convective type. This results in a strong 
downflow and cooling within the magnetic region, leading 
to a partial evacuation of its photospheric layers. The 
pressure force exerted by the external plasma causes a 
contraction of the tube and thereby amplifies the field. 
This process continues until the magnetic field becomes 
sufficiently strong to suppress the instability and maintain 
lateral force balance. The principle of this convective 
collapse mechanism is schematically sketched in figure 4. 

The collapse process loses its efficiency for flux tubes 
with a diameter smaller than the photon mean free path 
of about 100 km at the base of the photosphere. At that 
limit, the tube interior is kept at the temperature of its 
environment and the evacuating downflow is throttled, 
so that the equipartition limit cannot be exceeded. In 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


—— 


ianas ioe nar vm a aac a a: 
S654 Se Se at 


ee em 


t 

\ 

i 

| i i} 
l Hel 
[ A jt 
! SHH 
i \it Hl 
‘I \y if 
1" nt 
rd Vint 


Figure 4. Schematic sketch of the processes that lead to intensification of magnetic field in the solar (sub)photosphere. Left: the 
horizontal flows of granular convection sweep magnetic flux towards the downflow regions (full: streamlines, dashed: field lines). 
Middle: magnetic forces suppress the convective motions when the magnetic energy density becomes comparable to the kinetic 
energy density. This throttles the energy supply into the magnetic region, the gas cools off due to radiative losses and the internal 
downflow is enhanced. The superadiabatic stratification further amplifies the flow. Right: the downflow has evacuated the upper 
layers and the magnetic field in the quenched tube has increased accordingly to maintain lateral force balance. 


fact, observations in the infrared spectral range reveal 
the existence of small magnetic features with about 
equipartition field strength in the photosphere. This 
relatively weak field is dominated by the convective 
motions; the corresponding field direction is found to be 
predominantly horizontal (PHOTOSPHERE: INTRANETWORK AND 
TURBULENT MAGNETIC FIELDS). 

An illustration of the coexistence of strong vertical 
flux tubes and weaker horizontal field in the solar 
photosphere is given in figure 5, which shows a snapshot 
from a numerical simulation of the interaction between 
magnetic field and convective flow in the photosphere. 
A vertical flux tube with a strong field has formed by 
the convective collapse process in a downflow region. 
Magnetic flux that has not been swept to the flux tube 
is wrapped up by the convective pattern and brought to 
the surface by upflows, where it forms patches of mainly 
horizontal field with about equipartition field strength. 
Such simulations are also consistent with the observed 
dynamic nature of the flux tubes: they show strong 
internal flows, wave and shock propagation, as well as 
a horizontal swaying of the flux tube. 

Besides the flux tubes and the equipartition-field 
features, a third component of the photospheric magnetic 
field is indicated by measurements of the Hanle 
depolarization in spectral lines. In contrast to the 
measurements based on the circular polarization, this 
method is most sensitive to weak fields and the signal 
does not vanish for mixed magnetic polarity within the 
observational resolution element. Measurements based 
upon this technique suggest the existence of a small-scale 
turbulent magnetic field with no preferred direction and a 
field strength in the range of 0.44 mT. 


Upper atmosphere 

In the atmospheric layers above the photosphere, magnetic 
field measurements are difficult. Since the temperature 
rises to values of about 2 x 104 K in the chromosphere 
and up to a few times 10° K in the corona, the atoms 
become highly ionized and most of their spectral lines shift 
into the (extreme) ultraviolet range, where the Zeeman 
splitting is very small while the lines are thermally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


600 


400 


Figure 5. Magnetic field distribution arising during numerical 
simulation of the interaction between magnetic field and 
convective flows under conditions prevailing in the solar 
photosphere. Shown are magnetic field lines in a ‘box’ spanning 
a horizontal distance of 2400 km on the Sun, while the vertical 
coordinate ranges from 800 km below the surface (optical depth 
unity at 500 nm wavelength for a mean solar atmosphere model) 
to 600 km above it. The mainly horizontally running line located 
around y = 0 indicates optical depth unity (from 
Grossmann-Doerth et al 1998). 


broadened due to the large temperature of the gas. 
Moreover, the magnetic field strength in the flux tubes 
decreases with height due to the diminishing external gas 
pressure. Alternatives to the Zeeman effect are the Hanle 
effect (SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS) and 
gyro-synchrotron emission (SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: CONTINUUM 
RADIO EMISSION AND DIAGNOSTICS), but the precision of the 
measurements and their spatial resolution are much lower 
than for the magnetic field in the photosphere. Field 
strengths obtained by these methods range from 1-10 mT 
in PROMINENCES and reach 10 mT at the base of the corona 
in active regions; above sunspots, values up to 100 mT are 
found. Further out, a typical field strength at two solar 
radii is 0.1 mT. 

For increasing height in the solar atmosphere, 
the magnetic field becomes dynamically as well as 
energetically dominant: while the gas pressure decreases 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


exponentially with height, the magnetic field strength 
follows a radial power law above the height of 
the magnetic canopy (CHROMOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY), 
where the photospheric flux tubes merge; above this 
level, the magnetic field occupies all available space. 
As a consequence, in quiet regions the magnetic 
pressure becomes comparable to the gas pressure in 
the chromosphere and lower corona, while it exceeds 
the gas pressure in active regions. Apart from very 
dynamic phenomena like SOLAR FLARES Or SOLAR CORONAL 
MASS EJECTIONS, the magnetic energy density also exceeds 
the kinetic energy density contained in the bulk motion of 
the plasma. 

Since there is no component of the magnetic Lorentz 
force along the magnetic field lines, material motion in 
the upper atmosphere is strongly guided by the magnetic 
field. Moreover, the particle collision rate decreases with 
height and thermal conduction in the corona becomes 
anisotropic, i.e., heat is conducted much easier parallel to 
the field lines than in the perpendicular direction. Under 
these circumstances, the magnetic field channels the mass 
and energy flows in the upper atmosphere, so that any 
structure visible in absorbed or emitted radiation naturally 
tends to outline the pattern of magnetic field lines. The 
overall arrangement of the field can thus be inferred from 
the geometry of intensity structures. Examples are the 
myriads of CORONALLOOPS, which are best observable in soft 
X-rays (SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS: X-RAY EMISSION), 
the chromospheric fibrils and spicules visible in the 
hydrogen H,, line (CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS; SPICULES), and the 
white-light morphology of the corona as observed during 
total eclipses or with coronographic telescopes (SOLAR 
TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: GROUND). All this structure owes 
its existence to the magnetic field since the magnetic forces 
can easily balance the corresponding pressure gradients. 

The magnetic topology of the corona is divided into 
‘closed’ regions dominated by coronal loops connecting 
regions of opposite magnetic polarity in the photosphere 
(like active regions) and large unipolar ‘open’ regions with 
roughly radial field lines. While the closed regions are 
bright in x-ray and EUV emission, the open regions are 
more tenuous and, therefore, show much less emission 
(CORONAL HOLES). The magnetic force hampers the flow of 
the solar wind in the closed regions, while matter can freely 
stream outward along the field lines in open regions. This 
is consistent with the observation that the coronal holes 
are the source regions of the fast solar wind while only a 
relatively low-speed and unsteady outflow emanates from 
the closed regions. Because the field lines are rooted in the 
rotating solar body, the field develops a spiral pattern in 
interplanetary space (SOLAR WIND: MAGNETIC FIELD). 

A relatively simple configuration develops around 
the phases of minimal solar activity: the polar regions 
are open while closed fields dominate near the equator; 
further out, the kinetic energy density of the solar wind 
dominates also in the equatorial regions and draws the 
field open, so that coronal streamers form. During solar 
activity maximum, many bipolar regions dominate the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic field distribution so that the closed regions cover 
a larger part of the corona and the magnetic configuration 
becomes more complicated. 


Generation of magnetic flux 

What is the origin of the solar magnetism? The electrical 
conductivity of the solar plasma is sufficiently large to 
prevent the dissipation of a large-scale magnetic field 
permeating the whole Sun over its lifetime. Consequently, 
if the Sun inherited a magnetic field from the interstellar 
cloud that it was formed from, the large-scale part of 
this field could still remain as a slowly decaying fossil 
field. However, if such a field exists, it must be buried 
in the solar interior since no indication for its existence 
is found in the solar atmosphere. On the other hand, 
the nearly rigid rotation of the solar radiative core below 
the convection zone found by HELIOSEISMOLOGY can be most 
easily understood in terms of magnetic stresses exerted by 
a weak fossil field of the order of 0.1 mT (SOLAR INTERIOR: 
ROTATION). 

The magnetic field observed at the surface varies 
on a broad range of timescales and even the large-scale 
dipole component reverses during each 11 yr cycle. This 
indicates that induction processes due to plasma motion 
play a crucial role in the generation and evolution of 
the solar magnetic field (DYNAMO THEORY). Two kinds of 
such motion are of particular relevance: convection and 
differential rotation. The latter is capable of generating a 
toroidal (east-west directed) magnetic field from a field 
in meridional planes (poloidal field). The existence of 
a strong toroidal field component is inferred from the 
east-west orientation and the polarity rules of sunspot 
groups. The dynamo cycle is completed by the generation 
of a poloidal field from the toroidal field through the 
systematic twist of convective motions under the influence 
of the Coriolis force. If the new poloidal field has reverse 
polarity with respect to the original field, the toroidal field 
generated, in turn, from that field is reversed as well. The 
full dynamo cycle is closed when a poloidal field of the 
same polarity as the original field has been generated. This 
sequence is in accordance with the characteristics of the 
22 yr magnetic cycle of the Sun. 

Theoretical considerations show that indeed differen- 
tial rotation and convective flows are capable of sustaining 
a self-excited hydromagnetic dynamo that generates a pe- 
riodically oscillating magnetic field. Models agree with 
many observed properties of the solar cycle provided the 
adjustable parameters of the models (typically related to 
the turbulent part of the velocity field) are properly cho- 
sen. Therefore, it is widely accepted that a hydromagnetic 
dynamo working in the convection zone generates the so- 
lar magnetic field. On the other hand, there is as yet no 
consensus about its detailed modus operandi. Currently 
discussed models propose that the dynamo mechanism 
operates near the lower boundary of the convection zone, 
some 200 Mm below the solar surface. There are two main 
reasons for this conjecture: (1) helioseismology has shown 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that in a layer at the bottom of the convection zone the ro- 
tational velocity varies rapidly with radius thus producing 
a strong local shear flow; (2) magnetic flux must be pre- 
vented from rapidly rising to the surface due to magnetic 
buoyancy before it could be sufficiently amplified by the 
dynamo process. Buoyancy can be suppressed in a layer 
of overshooting convection at the bottom of the convec- 
tion zone. It is thought that where the field has grown 
sufficiently strong it becomes unstable and magnetic flux 
tubes start to rise towards the surface due to the strati- 
fication of the convection zone. Emerging at the photo- 
sphere, a magnetic flux tube forms an active region. In 
order to be compatible with observed properties of active 
regions (emergence latitude, orientation, asymmetry) the 
field strength at the bottom of the convection zone must 
be in the range of 3-10 T. This puts a tight constraint on 
the operation of the dynamo since the associated magnetic 
energy density is 1-2 orders of magnitude larger than the 
kinetic energy density of the convective motions. 


Bibliography 

Grossmann-Doerth U, Schiissler M and Steiner O 1998 
Convective intensification of solar surface magnetic 
fields: Results of numerical experiments Astron. 
Astrophys. 337 928-39 

Priest E 1982 Solar Magnetohydrodynamics (Doredrecht: 
Reidel) 

Schmelz J T and Brown J C (eds) 1992 The Sun: A 
Laboratory for Astrophysics (NATO ASI Series C 373) 
(Amsterdam: Kluwer) 

Schiissler M and Schmidt W 1994 Solar Magnetic Fields 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Solanki S K 1993 Small-scale solar magnetic fields: an 
overview Space Sci. Rev. 63 1-188 


Manfred Schiissler 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by 
Polarimetry 


Most solar structure and phenomena occurring in the solar 
atmosphere arise from the presence of magnetic fields. 
This article describes techniques for remote sensing of 
the solar magnetic field, primarily via analysis of the 
polarization it imparts to the radiation emitted by the Sun. 

The ZEEMAN EFFECT provides by far the most useful 
diagnostic of the solar magnetic field. Accordingly, 
most of this article is devoted to polarimetry of spectral 
lines sensitive to the Zeeman effect. As a result of 
recent advances both in technology and in techniques 
for interpretation of solar polarimetry, it is now possible 
to infer routinely not only the strength of the field in 
the solar photosphere but also its orientation. These 
vector magnetic field measurements provide powerful 
new diagnostics of solar phenomena; accordingly, much 
of this article is devoted to these techniques. A few 
different polarimetric diagnostics are described which 
provide different information about the magnetic field. 
This article does not embrace in situ measurements of the 
interplanetary magnetic field. 


Importance of the magnetic field 

Solar magnetic fields arise within the Sun, and also within 
its atmosphere, as a result of fluid motions interacting with 
the magnetized ionized gas (plasma) of which the Sun is 
composed. Because the gas is ionized, it is an excellent 
conductor of electricity. Electric currents are quickly 
established, which in turn induce magnetic fields, which 
in turn may then react back on the plasma, sustaining 
a dynamo (see DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR). A glance 
through this volume will quickly convince the reader of the 
extraordinary, pervasive importance of magnetic fields in 
solar physics. They give rise to many phenomena such as 
SUNSPOTS, SOLAR FLARES, PROMINENCES, coronal structure and 
SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS and the intrinsic variability 
of the Sun itself. Inference of this fundamental property 
of the solar plasma is central to advancement in our 
understanding of these phenomena. 

Over many decades, qualitative measurements of so- 
lar magnetic fields have given us a glimpse of the evo- 
lution of the global soLaR MAGNETIC FIELD as well as insight 
into solar activity. Recent advances in instrumentation and 
analysis techniques have placed the measurement of solar 
magnetic fields on a quantitative footing, so that it is now 
possible to provide strong observational guidance for the 
rapidly advancing theoretical understanding of solar pro- 
cesses. 


Polarimetry and the Zeeman effect 

The presence of a magnetic field in the solar atmosphere 
breaks the degeneracy of atomic levels, causing wave- 
length shifts of transitions between levels. The orientation 
of the magnetic field also establishes a reference frame for 
preferred interaction of these atomic states with polariza- 
tion states of electromagnetic radiation. The strengths of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the magnetic fields encountered in the solar atmosphere 
are such that bound-bound transitions may be character- 
ized by the ZEEMAN EFFECT, the article on which in this vol- 
ume describes its origin and its influence on the polariza- 
tion of atomic transitions observed in the solar spectrum. 
Figure 1 illustrates the polarization of spectral lines in and 
around a sunspot. It is this polarization, along with the ob- 
served intensity, that permits one to infer both the strength 
and the orientation of the magnetic field. 

Polarized light may be described by four quantities 
known as the Stokes 4-vector S = [/,Q,U,V]’ (the 
superscript 7 indicates transpose of the 4-vector). The 
components of the Stokes vector may be generated by a set 
of ideal polarization measurements: / is the intensity, Q 
is the difference of intensity between measurements with 
an ideal linear polarizer with polarization axis oriented 
vertically minus the measurement with the polarizer 
rotated by 90°, U is obtained in a similar fashion to Q 
except that the orientations of the polarizer are rotated 
by 45° with respect to those defining Q, and V is the 
difference measurement of ideal circular polarizers: right- 
minus left-handed. Figure 1 illustrates that the measures 
of linear polarization (Stokes Q,U) are fundamentally 
symmetric about the center of these absorption lines and 
Stokes V is fundamentally antisymmetric. Furthermore, 
the magnitude of the splitting is proportional to the 
strength of the magnetic field; linear polarization is 
present only if the field vector B is inclined to the line 
of sight, and circular polarization is present only if the 
field has a component along the line of sight. The 
complete polarization information represented by the 
Stokes 4-vector, when provided for the spectral variation 
of solar absorption lines, contains almost (except for an 
ambiguity of a in the azimuth angle of the field: see 
below) enough information for a complete description of 
both the strength and the orientation of the magnetic field 
in the solar atmosphere. Indeed, the magnetic field is a 
physical quantity that now may be measured remotely 
with considerably higher accuracy than many of the other 
thermodynamic properties of the solar atmosphere. A 
device that provides a map of the magnetic field at the 
solar surface is known as a magnetograph. 


‘Longitudinal’ magnetometry 

At wavelengths of visible radiation, even those atomic 
transitions with the greatest Zeeman splitting show atomic 
states fully separated in wavelength (i.e. greater than the 
thermal broadening of the lines) only for the strongest 
fields (>2000 G) present in the solar atmosphere. Note 
this splitting in spectra from the dark sunspot umbra 
in figure 1, where the field strength typically is in 
excess of 2000 G. Weaker fields produce splitting that 
is incomplete, and the degree of circular polarization 
(Stokes V) then approaches a proportionality with the 
wavelength splitting and hence with the field strength 
|B|. Additionally, V depends on the angle of the field 
with respect to the line of sight y. In the limit of weak 
magnetic fields, the peak amplitude of Stokes V is given 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Advanced Stokes Polarimeter 
NOAA Active Region 7722 
17 May 1994, 16:03 UT 


U V 


Figure 1. Polarization spectra of a sunspot. Spectral observations of the Stokes parameters J, Q, U, V characterizing the complete state 
of polarization of a narrow range of a sunspot spectrum near 630 nm are shown in the lower four panels. The upper-right panel shows 
the location of the spectrograph slit over the sunspot. The two broader spectrum lines due to absorption by neutral iron atoms form in 
the solar atmosphere and show both solar structure and polarization. The two narrow, polarization-free lines arise from oxygen 
molecules in the Earth’s atmosphere. The horizontal lines near the top and bottom are present for calibration purposes. The white 
lines indicate the location of the spectral profiles shown in figure 4. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


300 


200 


100 


0 100 


200 
Arcseconds 


300 400 


Figure 2. Longitudinal magnetogram from SOHO/MDI measured on 30 August 1997. 


by Vinx « |B| cosy: the component of the field along 
the line of sight. Hence, magnetographs which measure 
the amplitude of the circular polarization signal are called 
longitudinal magnetographs. The measured difference 
between right- and left-handed circular polarization at one 
(or more) wavelengths in a Zeeman-sensitive spectral line 
(see figure 1) constitutes a magnetographic measurement. 
Systematic longitudinal magnetography of solar magnetic 
fields began with the Babcock magnetograph at the Mt 
Wilson Observatory in 1951, and it has continued and 
improved up to the present, as embodied by the superb 
data from the Michelson Doppler Imager (MDI) aboard 
the NASA/ESA Solar Heliospheric Observatory mission 
(SOHO), an example of which is shown in figure 2. 

The great advantage of magnetograms like the one 
shown in figure 2 lies in their ability to reveal the temporal 
evolution of the fields. Operating continuously outside 
of the Earth’s atmosphere, the MDI instrument is giving 
the first steady view of this evolution, ranging from large 
time and spatial scales corresponding to the disk passage 
of magnetic regions to the rapid evolution of small-scale 
flux elements. 

Longitudinal magnetographic measurements pro- 
vide approximate, nonetheless extremely useful, measures 
of the solar magnetic field. The magnetic field in the so- 
lar photosphere is highly structured at small scales. Out- 
side of sunspot umbrae, magnetographic measurements 
are very far from resolving this structure. Longitudinal 
magnetographs in fact do not present us with a measure 
of the line-of-sight component of the field, but rather they 
provide some indicator of the magnetic flux (B-d.A) within 
the spatial resolution element dA of the instrument. Note 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


also that dA is defined in the plane of the sky, not the 
local normal to the solar surface. Calibration of magne- 
tographic data to a quantitative scale of magnetic flux is 
often hindered both by incomplete resolution of the spec- 
tral line shapes and by approximate ‘calibration constants’ 
that do not account for variation in the structure of the so- 
lar atmosphere from point to point on the solar disk. 


Vector magnetometry 

The magnetic field is a vector quantity. Many solar 
processes involving the magnetic field will be best 
understood with knowledge of the full magnetic vector. 
There are numerous examples of the utility of vector 
magnetometry, of which the following is only one. Distinct 
modes of wave and oscillatory motions are possible in a 
magnetic field, and certain of these modes may transport 
mechanical energy of convection from below the surface 
into the upper layers where they heat the atmosphere 
(MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES). One may distinguish these 
modes by the direction of the motions with respect to the 
field vector, so it is important in this example, as in many 
other problems, to precisely establish the orientation of the 
field. When one needs to specify individual components 
of the magnetic vector, the field measurement becomes 
a highly quantitative endeavor. Vector magnetometry 
thus demands high precision from both the polarimetric 
measurements and the analysis. 

The circular polarization from the Zeeman effect 
is commonly much greater than the linear polarization 
because, in the limit of small |B|, the total linear 
polarization is approximated by P, = (Q? + U*)'? « 
(|\Blsiny)*. Offsetting this difficulty is the great 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1994 May 17 16:05 UT 
NOAA 7722: N8 E 


Flux(kG)<— — a 


Figure 3. Vector field map. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 53. 


advantage that linear polarization is sensitive to the 
component of the field transverse to the line of sight. 
Advances in technology for both detectors and data 
acquisition, coupled with parallel developments in 
techniques for analysis of polarimetric data, have made 
possible routine vector magnetometry of the Sun. 
Modern spectropolarimeters provide low-noise po- 
larimetry from which it is possible to infer the components 
of the field vector in the solar atmosphere within a few per 
cent accuracy. This accuracy is achieved through a combi- 
nation of the following attributes of the measurement: 


@ measurement of the complete, spectrally resolved 
absorption profiles of the solar spectrum lines; 


® simultaneous measurements of two or more lines 
having similar thermodynamic sensitivity but differing 
sensitivity to the Zeeman effect; 


e@ high signal-to-noise ratio of the measurements— 
typically S/N = 10° in the spectral continuum, or better; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


@ high-cadence polarization measurements to minimize 
image distortion from the Earth’s atmosphere. 


The measurements shown in figure 1 satisfy these 
requirements. The two broad solar absorption lines arise 
from neutral iron (Fe I) in the solar atmosphere. They 
are members of the same multiplet (816) of Fe I, and 
hence they respond similarly to point-by-point variations 
in temperature, pressure and ionizing radiation in the solar 
atmosphere. They differ principally in their sensitivity 
to the Zeeman effect: this difference is evident in the 
sunspot umbra where the splitting is noticeably smaller 
in the spectrum line on the left. 


A sequence of such measurements, where the 
spectrograph slit is stepped in small increments in the 
direction perpendicular to its length, allow one, after 
involved analysis, to construct the vector field map shown 
in figure 3. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Analysis of polarization data 

The fundamental data for vector magnetic field measure- 
ment are the spectral profiles of the Stokes parameters, as 
shown in figure 1 and also in figure 4 for the single spec- 
trum highlighted in figure 1. Three quantities are needed 
to completely specify a vector. From the perspective of 
analysis of polarimetric data, a useful representation of 
the vector is the magnetic field strength (the length of the 
field vector) |B|, the azimuth angle ¢ of the field vector 
in the plane of the sky relative to some coordinate frame 
(usually measured counterclockwise from the solar West 
direction) and the inclination angle y of the field relative 
to the line of sight. 

The field strength, or flux density |B], is normally 
presented in cgs-emu units of gauss. Even when the 
Zeeman splitting of the lines shown in figures 1 and 4 
is less than the intrinsic (thermal + nonthermal) Doppler 
broadening of the solar plasma, subtle differences in the 
line shapes of the spectral profiles of the two lines permit 
an accurate measurement of the field strength when the 
S/N ratio of the observations is adequate. Thus, it is 
not necessary to rely solely on the amplitude of the ratio 
of Stokes V// for a field strength measurement, as that 
quantity often leads to severe underestimate of |B] owing 
to the magnetized plasma filling only a small fraction of 
each spatial resolution element. Because the multiple-line 
analysis is independent of this magnetic fill fraction f, it 
is then possible to extract a crude measure of f from the 
data as well. 

The linear polarization Stokes parameters Q, U are 
related to field azimuth ¢ through a simple rotation 
of the coordinate system for the linear polarization. 
Neglecting the magneto-optical effect', ¢ is determined 
by a simple rotation of the coordinate system to minimize 
the Stokes U profile from the solar lines. When precision 
linear polarization measurements are available, ¢ is well 
determined. 

The ratio P;’”/ V provides an approximate measure of 
the inclination angle y. The differing sensitivity of P, and 
Stokes V to |B| demands that y be determined in concert 
with |B]. Underestimates of |B] that result from ignoring 
the possibility of f < 1 may lead to spurious values of y 
which are far more inclined to the line of sight than reality. 
This potential source of error is circumvented by the full 
line profile analysis described below. 

At present, the most practical way to extract measures 
of the vector magnetic field from spectropolarimetric 
measurements is by numerical fits to the Stokes spectral 
profiles. The result of such a fit is indicated by the 


1 When the optical thickness of the spectrum lines becomes 
considerably larger than unity, Faraday rotation, also known 
as the magneto-optical effect, causes the direction of linear 
polarization to rotate as a function of wavelength near the centers 
of spectral lines. It also causes an anomalous ‘reversal’ in the core 
of the Stokes V profile to the right in figure 4. This effect may 
be accounted for in the least-squares fitting described below, and 
it actually helps to establish the optical depth of the lines in that 
analysis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


171 141 


16 


etrtr T T T q 

O85 z| 

OF : 

-.08F J 

=, Eatiiit rit | 
ae -04 0 .04 

-04 0 .04 
630.25 


biteiiiriiiviit 


; 4 -.04. 0.04 
04 -04 0 04 
630.25 630.15 


' 
— 
a 
= 
S- 
a 


630.15 


630.25 


Figure 4. Polarization profiles and least-squares fits. A set of 
individual Stokes spectra from the location indicated in figure 1 
are shown (dots), along with least-squares fits to the two solar 
spectrum lines (solid curves). The wavelength scale is indicated 
in nanometers. The extracted magnetic field parameters for this 
location in the sunspot are |B| = 2206 G, ¢ = 140°, y = 134°. 


solid curves in figure 4. In this particular case, an 
analytic solution to the transfer of polarized radiation in 
a somewhat simple model solar atmosphere provides the 
basis for the fitting procedure. Of order nine parameters 
are needed to obtain reliable fits to the Stokes profiles: 
the vector field (three parameters), the fill fraction (one), 
the Doppler shift (one) and the thermodynamics of the 
atmosphere (four). This technique gives an accurate 
indicator of the field vector averaged along the line of sight 
within the range of heights in the solar atmosphere where 
the Zeeman-sensitive spectral lines form. Even though this 
analysis technique uses a simple model of the magnetized 
solar atmosphere, it usually gives a good fit to the Stokes 
profiles, and much experience with the technique shows 
that the results of this fitting are robust and accurate. 

The standard analysis technique allows only the 
temperature to vary along the line of sight; it does 
not permit estimates of line-of-sight gradients of the 
field, the line-of-sight velocity component or the other 
important thermodynamic properties. Such gradients 
may break the symmetries of the Stokes profile shapes 
about the central wavelength of the line, and the degree 
of asymmetry carries important information about the 
sign and magnitude of gradients. Recently, sophisticated 
fitting procedures have been developed which are based 
on more realistic models of the solar atmosphere, including 
gradients. The knowledge of local gradients of all 
components of B allows one to extract the electric current 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


density (J_ = (c/42)V x B) vector: an important 
diagnostic of the solar plasma. Furthermore, it provides a 
glimpse of the 3-dimensional structure of the atmosphere, 
albeit limited in extent to the few scale heights in the 
atmosphere over which the diagnostic spectral lines form. 

The Zeeman effect carries no information on the parity 
of the component of the vector field transverse to the 
line of sight B,. That is, B, is said to be ambiguous to 
within a multiple of z rad because the linear polarization 
introduced by the Zeeman effect responds identically to 
either B, or —B,. Resolution of this ambiguity in the field 
azimuth angle ¢ requires additional information about the 
field or about its origin. Such information may take the 
form of an assumption. As examples, the azimuth may 
be chosen such that it is closest to that of the potential 
field defined uniquely by the locally vertical component 
of the field B,, or one may choose the azimuth such that 
discontinuities of the field vector from one point in the 
magnetogram are minimized. A few techniques have been 
proposed to add different information to the problem, but 
none has yet seen practical use. In large measure, the 
resolution of the azimuth ambiguity remains an art, and, 
in special cases, errors of may persist in the transverse 
field component of vector magnetograms. 


Infrared field diagnostics 

The Zeeman effect causes a splitting in the energy of atomic 
states proportional to |B]. The splitting in wavelength is 
thus proportional to |B|A?, but the Doppler broadening 
of an atomic transition is proportional only to A. As 
a result, the Zeeman splitting relative to the intrinsic 
width of spectrum lines varies as |B|A. Spectrum lines 
forming in intrinsically weak solar magnetic fields of less 
than 1000 G do not show a separation of the Zeeman 
components at visible wavelengths, but the splitting of a 
line in the infrared (See INFRARED ASTRONOMY) can be nearly 
complete (i.e., comparable with or larger than the Doppler 
broadening; see figure 5). 

Infrared measurements then offer a clear advantage 
for the study of weak-field regions in the solar atmosphere. 
The large splitting in the infrared relaxes the requirement 
for precision polarimetry. One drawback of solar 
magnetometry in the infrared is that the diffraction limit 
of the telescope is also proportional to 4. This limitation 
is a practical concern, particularly for measurements in 
the thermal infrared. Countering the reduced resolution 
are the improvements in atmospheric seeing and the 
polarizing properties of optics at infrared wavelengths. 
More importantly, when the Zeeman components of the 
line are fully or nearly split, magnetic elements unresolved 
within the observing element which differ only in |B| are 
easily identified based on their differing Zeeman splitting. 
Detailed analysis of the separate components is possible 
even without resolving them spatially. Furthermore, 
the size, efficiency and availability of infrared array 
detectors has increased in recent years. Infrared vector 
magnetometry has become progressively more useful as it 
provides unique tools to study weak solar magnetic fields. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


— 

= 1.0 

oO 

x 9 

n 8 

co) 

pce 

2 7 
6 


1564.6 1564.8 1565.0 1565.2 1565.4 


= 
Co 


Stokes I/Ic, V/Ic 
on 


630.1 630.2 630.3 
Wavelength (Nanometers) 


Figure 5. Comparison of Zeeman splitting in visible and 
infrared. The bottom panel shows Stokes / (top) and V (bottom) 
spectral profile shapes for a typical plage region as seen in the 
neutral iron line at 630 nm. The top panel shows analogous 
spectra, and correspondingly much larger Zeeman splitting, for 
a plage region observed in the neutral iron lines at 1565 nm 
(courtesy of I Riiedi). Dashed lines indicate the level of V = 0. 


Prospects for magnetic field measurements above 
the photosphere 

Most solar magnetograms sample magnetic fields in the 
photosphere—the thin layer of the solar atmosphere near 
the visible surface of the Sun—but many of the interesting 
physical challenges of solar physics arise from phenomena 
and processes in the higher layers: the chromosphere and 
corona. Thus, it is of great scientific interest to pursue 
analagous diagnostics of the chromospheric and coronal 
magnetic fields. 

Several circumstances hinder efforts to measure fields 
above the photosphere. There are only a handful of 
spectral lines accessible to ground-based observations that 
form significantly above the photosphere, and these lines 
are not as sensitive to the Zeeman effect as those lines 
commonly used as photospheric field diagnostics. Owing 
to the larger nonthermal velocities, the chromospheric 
lines are intrinsically broader than photospheric lines 
and thus they produce smaller polarization signals. 
Most importantly, however, the magnetic fields of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


chromosphere and corona are commonly very much 
weaker than photospheric fields. 

Although there is as yet no fully satisfactory means 
of measuring magnetic fields above the photosphere, 
routine longitudinal measurements are carried out daily 
for a line forming in the upper photosphere and low 
chromosphere (figure 6). These measurements graphically 
illustrate that the field has ‘fanned out’ considerably 
from the concentrated fields of the photosphere, mostly 
because of the combination of highly localized fields at 
the photospheric level and the rapidly decreasing density 
with height in the atmosphere. 

Several research programs are aimed at improving 
chromospheric field measurements. For chromospheric 
lines forming in the visible and near-ultraviolet, it will 
be necessary to increase substantially the polarization 
sensitivity of the measurements over that commonly used 
for the photosphere. Infrared measurements would be 
ideal for this purpose, but few suitable spectral lines 
have yet been identified. The chromospheric neutral 
helium line at 1083 nm shows promise as a diagnostic of 
chromospheric fields. 

Under most circumstances, the magnetic forces acting 
on the tenuous corona are far greater than the pressure 
forces of the gas itself. Magnetic fields thus play a 
dominant role in coronal structure and dynamics, and 
therefore any measurement of coronal magnetic fields is 
highly desirable. Because of the intrinsic weakness of 
coronal fields and the difficulty of observing the weak 
coronal emission outside of eclipse, there are few prospects 
for coronal field measurements. This situation may change 
in the future, as a few emission lines in the infrared could 
prove to be useful coronal field diagnostics: the Stokes 
V signature arising from the Zeeman effect should be 
measurable. 


Other diagnostics of the solar magnetic field 

The Zeeman effect introduces polarization into the solar 
spectrum. Another valuable diagnostic is the Hanle 
effect (See SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS). 
When a weak magnetic field is present, the Hanle effect 
causes a reduction of the degree of linear polarization, 
accompanied by a rotation of the polarization direction, 
in spectrum lines which scatter an anisotropic radiation 
field. The degree of depolarization is a sensitive 
diagnostic of intrinsically weak magnetic fields in the 
solar atmosphere, and it has been used to reveal the 
presence of a weak, ubiquitous ‘turbulent’ field in the 
photosphere, presumably arising from the turbulent 
convection. Anisotropy of the radiation is most commonly 
encountered near the edge of the solar disk, owing to the 
variation of the brightness of the Sun with angle from 
the normal to the solar surface (limb darkening). Similar 
radiative processes acting in SOLAR PROMINENCES make 
the Hanle effect very useful for sensing the orientation 
of magnetic fields in these structures, thus helping to 
constrain theoretical models of the magnetic fields which 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 6. Expanding fields with height. The bottom image 
shows a photospheric longitudinal magnetogram of a typical 
active region near the southwest solar limb on 15 May 1998. The 
top image is a magnetogram of the same active region as 
observed in the singly ionized chromospheric calcium line at 
854.2 nm, showing a considerably more diffuse appearance as a 
result of the expansion of the magnetic field with height in the 
solar atmosphere. Images supplied courtesy of J Harvey. 


suspend the cool, dense prominences in the hot, tenuous 
solar corona. 

Anisotropy of the photospheric radiation also induces 
polarization at certain wavelengths corresponding to 
forbidden transitions of highly ionized atomic species, 
just as it does for transitions subject to the Hanle effect. 
Here, however, the Zeeman effect modifies the atomic 
level populations and thus alters the linear polarization 
of light scattered by these atoms. This emission line 
polarization may be used as a diagnostic of the orientation 
of the magnetic field, interpretation of the polarization is 
complicated by the presence of many magnetic structures 
along the line of sight through the optically thin solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetic Field: Inference by Polarimetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


corona. If the usual circular polarization from the Zeeman 
effect can be measured at the same time, it will provide an 
indication of the strength of the field. 

The microwave emission of the solar plasma provides 
another magnetic field diagnostic, based on rapid changes 
of the opacity of the chromosphere and low corona near 
the gyroresonance frequency for electrons precessing in 
the magnetic field. This technique can yield an indication 
of those temperatures of the upper atmosphere at which 
specific field strengths are encountered, but so far it seems 
to be limited to the very strong fields encountered over 
sunspots. 


Future instrumentation 


The magnetic field in the solar photosphere is structured 
on very small scales, and many processes of importance 
to heating and dynamics of the upper solar atmosphere 
occur principally at these small scales. It is therefore of 
utmost importance to describe the dynamical behavior 
of magnetic fields at these scales, accompanied by 
observations of the consequences in the upper layers 
at equally high angular resolution. The upcoming 
Japanese-USA mission soLar-B will provide continuous, 
high-resolution imaging polarimetry and spectroscopic 
polarimetry, along with imaging and spectroscopy of 
the upper layers. When this mission is launched in 
early 2004, it will provide the first space-based high- 
resolution quantitative vector field measurements. Efforts 
are also underway to develop space instrumentation of 
even higher resolution which should be able to actually 
resolve the tiny, intense photospheric flux elements and 
their accompanying dynamical interaction with the solar 
convective motions. In the meantime, one continues to 
improve the resolution of solar magnetometry from the 
ground using various image reconstruction and real-time 
image correction techniques. 

The recent advances in techniques for vector 
magnetometry reveal the need for more comprehensive 
observations of this nature in order to better understand 
the workings of the solar cycle. To this end, the 
National Solar Observatory has begun development of 
instrumentation to provide frequent vector magnetograms 
of the entire solar disk, based on quantitative spectral 
measurements of the type shown in figure 1. This 
instrument is part of the SOLIS package for long-term, 
synoptic observations of the Sun. 


Bibliography 

Jefferies J, Lites BW and Skumanich A 1989 Transfer of line 
radiation in a magnetic field Astrophys. J. 343 920-35 

Lites B W and Low B C 1997 Flux emergence and 
prominences: a new scenario for 3-dimensional field 
geometry based on observations with the Advanced 
Stokes Polarimeter Solar Physics 174 91-8 

Skumanich A, Lites B W and Martinez Pillet V 
1994 Vector spectropolarimetry with the Advanced 
Stokes Polarimeter (ASP) for quantitative solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetometry Solar Surface Magnetism ed R Rutten 
and C J Schrijver (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 99-125 
Stenflo J O 1994 Solar Magnetic Fields (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Bruce Lites 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Magnetographs 


The Sun’s disk is covered with magnetic fields, not only 
the strong kilogauss concentrations of suNsPots, but also as 
slightly weaker flux in pLAcgs, the network, and probably 
as truly weaker flux everywhere (see also CHROMOSPHERE: 
NETWORK). These fields may be mapped using the Zeeman 
effect: a spectral line formed in the presence of a field splits 
into components, the separation of which is proportional 
to the field strength, and the components are polarized 
depending on the orientation of the field (see also SOLAR 
MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS). An instrument 
that measures magnetic fields using the Zeeman effect is 
called a magnetograph, it is a tool central to solar research. 


History 

A Sun without magnetism would be a featureless sphere 
and would exhibit no activity. That the Sun possesses 
surface magnetism had been suspected already for two 
centuries in 1900, since the structure of the corona at a total 
eclipse mimics the patterns of iron filings on a paper over a 
bar magnet (figure 1). In 1896 Pieter ZEEMAN discovered in 
the laboratory the effect that bears his name. Soon after, in 
1908, George Ellery HALE demonstrated Zeeman splitting 
in the spectrum of sunspots. His observations were both 
visual and by photography (figure 2). This was the first 
cosmic magnetism ever detected. For the next 3 decades 
the Sun’s ‘general field’ outside of sunspots was pursued 
without any being found. 

Finally, in 1953, Horace Bascock at the MOUNT 
WILSON OBSERVATORY, taking advantage of WWII technology, 
invented the solar magnetograph (although credit should 
also be given to G Thiessen and K O Kiepenheuer for earlier 
developments). Using a large spectrograph, Babcock 
arranged for a double exit slit to bisect a Zeeman-sensitive 
spectral line. The light from the line wings was directed to 
a pair of photomultiplier tubes (PMTs). An electro-optic 
modulator (EOM) at the entrance slit, actually an image 
slicer, alternated the transmission of first right-circular and 
then left-circular incident light. Output from the two PMTs 
was connected to a difference amplifier which yielded a 
signal at the EOM switching frequency of 120 Hz. Even 
minute Zeeman shifts produced a clear signal. Although 
the splitting in the quiet Sun was a small fraction of the 
line width, the signal had a low noise owing to the high 
efficiency of the PMTs. Some polarization is introduced by 
oblique reflections at the telescope feed mirrors, but this 
unwanted component is common to both input channels 
and cancels at the difference amplifier. 

Fields were mapped by slowly scanning in a raster 
pattern the entire solar disk. Spatial resolution was 
sacrificed, being only about 20 arcsec x 20 arcsec, in order 
to have enough light to detect weak fields the order of 
a gauss. Magnetism was found over the entire disk. 
What Babcock and other contemporary workers did not 
appreciate was that in reality the fields are strong, mostly 
at least 1000 G, but highly fragmented into sub-arcsec 
elements except in sunspots. A 1000 G element whose 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Corona at total eclipse. 


Figure 2. Zeeman splitting in the spectrum of a sunspot. 


size is 0.5 arcsec x 0.5 arcsec will appear as 0.6 G at 
20 arcsec x 20 arcsec resolution. Solar magnetographs 
based on Babcock’s design were built at observatories 
world-wide. 

Today most magnetographs have a spatial resolution 
more like an arcsec and the fields they measure are 
accordingly much stronger. High resolution is achieved 
by using diode arrays or CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs) 
instead of PMTs. For space applications the spectrograph 
is replaced with an optical filter whose passband is 
comparable with line width. A few such instruments are 
described below. 


Spectral lines for magnetographs 


Depending on the height of the solar atmosphere to 
be probed, there are a few especially favorable lines 
for magnetometery. Zeeman splitting is proportional to 
gi”, where g is the Landé factor, which depends on the 
term values of the spectroscopic transition, and A is the 
wavelength. Landé g ranges from 0 to 3, but is typically 
about 1. As spectral line width increases linearly with 
A, the effective splitting is actually gi. Obviously there 
is an advantage to the red and infrared wavelengths. 
Other considerations include the height of line origin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Some useful lines for magnetographs. 


Species A(um) Landég = gar Origin Problems 

Fe 0.5250 3.00 1.57. Photosphere Temperature 
Fe 0.6302 2.5 1.57. Photosphere 

Ha 0.6562 1 0.65 Chromosphere Broad 

Ni 0.6768 = 1.5 1.02 Photosphere 

Fe 0.8688 1.66 1.44 Photosphere 

Fe XIII 1.0747 1 1.07. Corona 

Fe 1.5648 3.00 4.69 Photosphere 

Ti 2.2310 2.5 5.6 Photosphere Umbral only 
Fe 4.1364 1.7 7.0 Photosphere Blends 

Mg 12.32 1 12.32. Highphotosphere No quiet Sun 


(photosphere, chromosphere or corona), line strengths and 
telluric or other blends. 

Babcock chose Fe 0.5250 wm which has g = 3 and 
is unblended. Also, its wavelength is well matched to 
the maximum of PMT response. Because this line arises 
from an excitation state near ground level, it is somewhat 
temperature sensitive and weakens in plages which are 
hotter than the average quiet Sun. Less affected by 
temperature is Fe 0.6302 wm, g = 2.5. The availability of 
InSb near-IR arrays makes Fe 1.5648 um, g = 3, a winner. 
By a wide margin Mg 12.32 wm, g = 1, is the best, but 
this line is found only in active regions and near the Sun’s 
limb; it is absent on the quiet disk. Table 1 lists a few useful 
lines. 


Modern magnetographs 

The Kitt Peak vacuum system 

This is basically a Babcock-type magnetograph except that 
the detector is a 512 x 242 CCD chip. Anamorphic optics 
demagnify the 10.7 m Littrow spectrograph focal plane by 
1/6 in the dispersion (wavelength) direction and 1/18 in 
the spatial. The 242 pixel width of the CCD means that 
information on line shape and intensity can be recorded 
for some observations. Circular polarization modulation 
is done with a liquid crystal device. A full disk observation 
using Fe 0.8688 zm with a 1 arc-sec pixel size requires 
about 45 min. This is done daily and the results are 
distributed around the world by the US Government Space 
Environment Laboratory in Boulder, Colorado. Figure 3 is 
an example of an active Sun magnetogram; figure 4 shows 
a quiet Sun magnetogram (see also KITT PEAK NATIONAL 
OBSERVATORY). 


The Marshall Space Flight Center vector magnetograph 

Fields directed toward or away from the observer are 
called longitudinal and give rise to oppositely circularly 
polarized light in the line wings. This is easy to detect by 
the means described above. Transverse fields result in an 
undisplaced linearly polarized line and split components, 
which are both linearly polarized in the same direction and 
at right-angles to the central part. Unless the splitting is 
comparable with line width, as in a sunspot umbra, there 
will be no ‘difference’ signal as in the longitudinal case 
and the field is difficult to measure and separate from any 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Active Sun magnetogram. 


telescope polarization. Nevertheless, many instruments 
have been constructed that propose to measure vector 
fields (see Bray and Loughhead (1965) for examples). 

One vector magnetograph that has seen much 
use is that at MSFC. This uses a beautifully built 
Zeiss birefringent filter of 0.125 A bandwidth centered 
at 0.5250 wm. Modulation is by a combination of 
rotating quartz waveplates and a potassium dideuterium 
phosphate (KD*P) EOM. To avoid telescope polarization 
the instrument points directly at the Sun without any 
oblique reflections from feed mirrors. Sensitivity is about 
4 G for longitudinal fields and 60 G for transverse. The 
main use of this system has been to try to understand the 
role of transverse fields in the production of solar flares 
(see also MARSHALL SPACE FLIGHT CENTER). 


The Michelson Doppler Imager magnetograph on the satellite 
SOHO 

The MDI instrument has a tunable Michelson interferom- 
eter with a 0.094 A bandpass that can be tuned across the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Magnetographs ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Quiet Sun magnetogram. 


Ni 0.6768 xm, g = 1.5 line. Rotating wave plates are satis- 
factory in the absence of (atmospheric) seeing. Also many 
magnetograms can be averaged to reduce noise without a 
loss of resolution for the same reason (see also SOHO). 


The vector spectromagnetograph for SOLIS 

Synoptic Optical Long-term Investigations of the Sun 
(SOLIS) represents a next generation program to monitor 
the Sun. At the heart of this telescope cluster 
of instruments is a vector magnetograph. Using a 
ferroelectric liquid crystal as the polarization modulator, 
a 2048 x 1 pixel (1 arcsec) CCD detector, and using the 
favorable Fe 0.6302 ym line, full-disk vectorgrams are the 
end product. The aim is not one but several full disk 
observations per day. Much of the system is automated 
and may be remotely controlled. 


Bibliography 

Babcock H W 1953 Astrophys. J. 118 387 

Bray R J and Loughhead R E 1965 Sunspots (New York: 
Wiley) 

Jones H P, Duvall T L Jr, Harvey J W, Mahaffey C T, 
Schwitters J D and Simmons] E1992 The NASA/NSO 
spectromagnetograph Sol. Phys. 139 211 

Scherrer P H and the MDI team 1995 The Solar Oscillations 
Investigation—Michelson Doppler Imager Sol. Phys. 
162 129 


William Livingston 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) 


NASA satellite designed to study solar flares during the 
peak of the solar cycle. Launched in February 1980. 
Carried seven instruments to record flares in visible, x-ray, 
ultraviolet and gamma ray wavelengths. Also measured 
the solar constant. Discovered x-rays originating from the 
bases of loop structures in flares. Failed after nine months, 
but was repaired by Shuttle astronauts in 1984. Re-entered 
the atmosphere in 1989. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Solar Photosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere 


The photosphere (Gr ¢w¢, light) of the Sun are those layers 
in its atmosphere that one observes in white light (broad 
band visible light). An image in such light (figure 1) shows 
asharp edge, asif the light were emitted froma single layer, 
the ‘visible surface’ of the Sun. Since stars are gaseous, 
they do not have sharp surfaces, however. Moreover, 
the radiation at different wavelengths is generally emitted 
from different heights in the atmosphere of a star. A more 
precise and generally applicable definition of the term 
‘photosphere’ is often needed. The observed photons are 
produced in the atmosphere, which also absorbs these 
same photons. The probability that a photon, newly 
produced at some depth in the atmosphere, escapes from 
the star depends on the optical depth. Ifa, is the extinction 
coefficient (cm—!) (see SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS) 
at a wavelength A, and if z is a depth coordinate in the star 
such that z > —oo outside the star, then the optical depth 
at this geometrical depth z is defined as 


2p 
hL= / Qj, dz. (1) 


CO 


The probability that a photon created at depth t escapes 
from the star without being absorbed or scattered is e~*. In 
the deeper layers where t is large, this probability is small: 
the photons are trapped, diffusing outward by repeated 
scattering or absorption and re-emission processes. These 
regions are not directly observable. From higher layers 
where the optical depth is small, photons can escape 
freely, but the atmosphere is also tenuous there, and 
produces only few photons. A common definition of 
the photosphere at wavelength A is now the layer in the 
atmosphere from which the bulk of the observed photons 
are emitted, roughly from t, = 0.1 to t = 3. Since 
the optical depth is a function of the wavelength of the 
photons, photons of different energy each escape from 
their own photosphere. For this reason, one often speaks 
of a visible photosphere, an infrared photosphere, a radio 
photosphere, etc. If the term photosphere is used without 
reference to a particular wavelength, the wavelength range 
is implied in which the bulk of the energy is radiated. The 
Sun emits its energy mostly in the visible range of the 
electromagnetic spectrum; anominal photospheric surface 
is sometimes defined for the Sun as the surface t599 = 2/3, 
i.e. at a wavelength of 500 nm (green light). 

For stars, the photospheric surface so defined is 
roughly spherical, but the definition allows it to be 
corrugated (for example by GRANULATION, below) or 
deformed (for example flattened by rotation of the star). 


Equilibrium structure 

The type of radiation emitted reflects the temperature 
and density of the plasma at the photosphere as well 
as the physical processes producing the radiation. The 
bulk of the energy emitted by normal stars is in the 
UV to near-infrared range. The processes producing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Image of the Sun in visible light, showing the 
photosphere with sunspots (dark) and plages (irregular brighter 
regions visible near the limb). Note general darkening towards 
the limb. Courtesy T Pettauer (Sonnenobservatorium 
Kanzelhohe, Graz, Austria) and J A Bonet (Instituto de 
Astrofisica de Canarias, Tenerife, Spain). 


this radiation are known with high accuracy (see SOLAR 
SPECTROSCOPY), SO a detailed comparison between theory 
and observed radiation is possible. The situation is 
complicated, however, by the presence of flows and 
magnetic fields in the atmospheres of stars. In particular 
the magnetic processes cannot as yet be computed from 
first principles, and their manifestations are noticeable in 
the entire electromagnetic spectrum. They even dominate 
the radiation in the radio and x-ray ranges. Nevertheless, 
important aspects of the physics of the photosphere can be 
understood by pretending that the atmosphere is static and 
without magnetic fields (See STELLAR ATMOSPHERES). It is then 
in hydrostatic and radiative equilibrium, and the structure 
of the atmosphere is determined by the basic parameters 
of the star: its luminosity L, radius R and mass M. 

In hydrostatic equilibrium, the pressure drops with 
height in the atmosphere according to the barometric 
height formula, as in the Earth’s atmosphere. The pressure 
P increases with depth z as dIn P/dInz = 1/Hp, where 
the pressure scale height Hp is 


RT 
Ap Sa 
Ms 


(2) 
Here R is the gas constant (8.134 x 10’ erg K~! mol"), yu 
the mean atomic weight per particle (1.28 for un-ionized 
gas of solar composition), g the acceleration of gravity at 
the surface, 

g=GM/R (3) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and G is the constant of gravity. 

If the energy radiated by the star is transported 
from the interior entirely by photons, the star is in 
radiative equilibrium. This is not the case in the Sun, 
since the energy is actually carried to the photosphere 
by convection, but for the observable layers it is still a 
fair approximation which is also of significant historical 
interest. The energy flux per unit surface area through 
the atmosphere is F = L/42R?. This flux has to be 
carried by photons diffusing outward; hence the density 
of photons has to decrease outward. Where photons are 
created and destroyed rapidly, the temperature of the gas 
is in equilibrum with the radiation (local thermodynamic 
equilibrium or LTE). Under this assumption, a decrease of 
the photon density requires a decrease of the temperature. 
The photosphere is cooled by radiation into the 3 K 
vacuum of space, and heat flows towards it from the 
hotter interior in the form of photons. A simple but 
useful estimate of the temperature variation through 
the atmosphere is obtained by assuming the extinction 
coefficient to be independent of photon energy (setting 
it equal to the value at the mean energy of the emitted 
photons, for example; this is called a grey atmosphere). 
Then the temperature T varies with the optical depth t as: 


oT*(t) © 3F(t + 2). (4) 


Here o = 5.669 x 10° erg s-' cm K~ is the radiation 
constant appearing in Stefan—Boltzmann’s law, which says 
that a black body of temperature T radiates an energy flux 
F = oT per unit area of its surface. At t = 2/3, the 
temperature in this simple model is equal to the so-called 
effective temperature of the star, about 5780 K for the Sun. 

In reality the extinction is not independent of photon 
energy. At wavelengths where it is low, one looks deeper 
into the atmosphere, where the temperature is higher, 
than at wavelengths where the extinction is high. If the 
dominant radiation processes are absorption and emission 
of photons (rather than scattering), the radiation generated 
in the atmosphere is close to that of a black body (ie. the 
Planck function at the temperature of the plasma). Since 
the temperature in the atmosphere depends on depth, the 
temperature seen at each wavelength is different. This 
reflects itself in the spectral energy distribution of the star 
(the wavelength dependence of the emitted radiation), 
which can differ strongly from a black-body spectrum. 
This effect is responsible, in part, for the appearance of 
dark lines in the spectrum of a star at the wavelengths 
of atomic transitions. Through these deviations from 
a black-body spectrum, the spectrum can be used to 
make inferences about the composition and the thermal 
structure of the atmosphere. 

Although the photosphere extends over a depth range 
in the atmosphere of a few hundred km, this is only 
a tiny fraction of the solar radius (Ro ~ 700000 km, 
see SUN: BASIC PROPERTIES). Even when seen with the best 
existing telescopes, which reach angular resolutions of 
about 0.25 arcsec (corresponding to 180 km), the Sun 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(figure 1) has a sharp edge. This sharpness is related to 
the temperature T and the acceleration of gravity g at the 
surface. Neglecting for the present purpose the deviations 
from hydrostatic equilibrium caused by oscillations (see 
HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS) and convection, we can apply the 
barometric height formula (2). This gives Hp ~ 150 km 
for the scale height of the photosphere, only 1/5000 
of the solar radius, and too small (0’2) to be resolved 
with existing telescopes. That this is indeed the scale 
height of the photosphere can be verified, however, during 
a solar eclipse. The moon moves about 0.5 arsec s"! 
across the sky. Projected at the distance of the Sun, the 
lunar limb therefore occults the atmosphere at a rate of 
300 km s“!, or about 2 scale heights sl, By measuring the 
brightness variation in the last second before totality of the 
eclipse, one can accurately measure the extent of the solar 
atmosphere. 

With the isothermal sound speed c; = (RT/p)'/” 
(about 6 km s7! for the solar photosphere), the ratio of 
pressure scale height to stellar radius can also be written 
as 

Ap/R= cf /ve (5) 


where vu, is the escape speed from the surface, ve = 
(GM/R)'?, about 440 km s~! for the Sun. For red 
supergiants such as Betelgeuse or Mira, which are about 
200 times larger than the Sun but have similar masses 
and surface temperatures, this ratio is about 0.1. Such 
stars will therefore look much fuzzier when seen close 
up (techniques for such close-ups are becoming available 
through OPTICAL INTERFEROMETERS). 


Determination of the temperature structure 
Moving up into the atmosphere, the temperature declines 
from a value around 6400 K at ts99 = 1 to around 4100 K 
at a height of 500 km (ts) ~ 1073). Above this height, the 
so-called temperature minimum, the average temperature 
starts inceasing again owing to the mechanical heating 
processes that produce the CHROMOSPHERE and CORONA. This 
variation of temperature with height in the photosphere 
can be deduced directly from the center-to-limb variation 
and from the strengths of spectral lines (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: CENTER-TO-LIMB VARIATION; THE LIMB EFFECT AND 
GRAVITATIONAL REDSHIFT). An image of the Sun in the visible 
(figure 1) is noticeably darker towards the limb; the degree 
of this darkening depends on wavelength. For parts 
of the surface observed near the limb, the optical depth 
between the observer and a given level in the atmosphere 
is larger than for parts seen near the center of the disk, 
since the line of sight passes through a larger amount 
of mass. Near the limb, one therefore receives radiation 
from somewhat higher layers in the atmosphere. A 
limb darkening results if the temperature decreases with 
height at the observing wavelength, a limb brightening 
if the temperature increases. This effect is one of the 
classical ways for deriving empirical models for the solar 
atmosphere. 

The second, equally classical, method can also be 
used for stars, where the disk cannot be resolved. It 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


uses the shape and strength of spectral lines. Quiet 
stellar atmospheres show spectral lines in absorption, i.e. 
dark, because the opacity in a spectral line is higher than 
in the nearby continuum. The known variation of the 
opacity with wavelength through the profile of the line 
can be used to invert the observed profile into a variation 
of (brightness) temperature with height, assuming that 
the line is formed under conditions of LTE. Such direct 
inversion of limb darkening and line profiles is not 
used in practice any more, since forward modeling by 
spectral synthesis (see SOLAR ATMOSPHERE: EMPIRICALMODELS and 
SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: VISIBLE EMISSION) is necessary to properly 
account for the radiative transfer process, in particular 
deviations from LTE. 

Since the solar surface is inhomogeneous and not 
quite static, there are limits to what can be deduced 
from average limb darkening and line profiles. For 
example, line profiles are strongly affected by the Doppler 
shifts due to the convective flows. These distortions 
are an important test and diagnostic of the radiation— 
hydrodynamic simulations of granulation (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: CONVECTION THEORY). 


Physical conditions 

With a temperature around 6400 K, the photospheric 
plasma is only partially ionized. At t509 = 1 there 
are less than 0.001 electrons per hydrogen atom. These 
few electrons come mostly from less abundant elements 
with low ionization potentials such as magnesium, while 
hydrogen and helium are almost completely atomic. In 
spite of this low degree of ionization, the plasma is 
almost infinitely conducting, for most purposes. The 
electron—hydrogen collision rate (the dominant rate at 
photospheric conditions) is about 10" s~!, and the mean 
free path of the electrons carrying the electric currents 
about 10-7 cm. With these values, the behavior of magnetic 
fields embedded in the plasma is described accurately 
by the ideal MHD approximation, at the length scales 
of interest (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS). In particular, the 
magnetic field and the gas are intimately tied to each other: 
the gas can move along the field lines without changing 
it, but in the direction perpendicular to the field either the 
gas is carried with the field, or the gas flow carries the field 
with it. One says that the field is frozen in to the gas. 

The degree of ionization increases very steeply with 
depth. At a depth of only 50 km below the surface 
T5900 = 1 of a granule, the temperature is 11000 K. At this 
temperature some 10% of the hydrogen is ionized, 100 
times more than at the surface. (In the cooler intergranular 
lanes, the increase is less strong.) With this increasing 
ionization, the opacity of the plasma increases by similar 
factors. This is mostly because the abundance of the H™ 
ion, the main source of continuum opacity in the solar 
photosphere, is proportional to the electron density. At 
the same time, the population of excited levels in all 
atomic species increases when partial ionization sets in, 
so that a great variety of atomic bound-free and bound-— 
bound transitions starts adding to the opacity. Under these 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


conditions, the horizontal mean free path of photons (in 
the visible continuum) is only 1 km, down by a factor of 
50 from its value at t = 1. 


Convection 

The high opacity of a partially ionized plasma impedes 
the flow of heat through the outer envelope of a star like 
the Sun. To transport the heat emitted at the surface 
by radiation alone, through this opaque layer, a very 
steep temperature gradient would be needed. However, a 
stratification with a temperature gradient steeper than an 
adiabatic gradient (the ‘adiabatic lapse rate’) is unstable to 
convection (as in the earth’s troposphere). The partially 
ionized envelopes of low-mass stars (M < 2Mo) are 
therefore convective. By overturning fluid motions, heat 
is carried bodily to the surface of the star, bypassing 
the inefficient transport by radiation, and is radiated 
away at the photosphere. The convective flows in the 
solar envelope are the cause of all its activity, including 
its magnetic fields (see SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD), the corona, 
SOLAR FLARES, SUNSPOTS and its p-mode oscillations (see 
HELIOSEISMOLOGY). 

The convection process can be observed in detail 
in the photosphere in the form of its granulation. A 
granule forms where the hot opaque gas from the 
envelope approaches the photosphere. As it is exposed 
to the interstellar vacuum it cools suddenly and becomes 
transparent. By cooling, the gas also becomes denser than 
its surroundings, and starts dropping down, a process 
observed in the form of intergranular lanes. In response to 
this disappearing cool gas, hot gas flows up from below to 
replace it. In this way the entire flow field making up the 
granulation is driven by the cooling at the photosphere. 
In fact, the flow field in the entire convection zone is 
probably a consequence mostly of this surface process. 
This is unlike the case of, for example, daytime convection 
in the troposphere, where thermals form by gas rising 
from the heated surface of the Earth. It is also different 
from laboratory convection where top and bottom surfaces 
of the container contribute equally to the production of 
convective flows. Heating from below plays such a minor 
role in the case of a stellar envelope because of the extreme 
stratification of density. At the base of the solar convection 
zone (at 200000 km, or 30% of a solar radius below the 
surface), the density p is a million times higher than at 
the surface. The relative temperature excess AT/T in 
upward plumes generated at the base is also roughly a 
million times lower than at the surface. The acceleration 
of a convective flow, which is proportional to gAp/p ~ 
gAT/T, is therefore roughly a million times weaker at the 
base of the convection zone than at the surface. 

In the granulation one thus observes the primary 
process of stellar envelope convection. The solar 
granulation can presently be reproduced with high fidelity 
with ab initio numerical simulations, which use only 
the equations of hydrodynamics, radiative transfer and 
the (large amount of) atomic physics of ionization and 
radiative processes. Other manifestations of convection 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


visible at the surface are flows on larger scales than 
granules: the mesogranulation, supergranulation and 
large scale flows (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: MESOGRANULATION; 
SUPERGRANULATION). 


Magnetic fields 
Apart from the granulation, the main sources of structure 
seen in the photosphere are magnetic fields. In addition to 
the conspicuous sunspots, there are structures on smaller 
scales (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FILIGREE; FACULAE, and SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES), down to and probably 
well below to the resolution limit of current telescopes. 
The field strength in these structures can be measured 
through the Zeeman effect on spectral lines (see SOLAR 
MAGNETIC FIELD: INFERENCE BY POLARIMETRY). This is done most 
accurately in the infrared, where the Zeeman splitting is 
larger relative to the line width than in the visible. The field 
strengths found range from about 1000 G in the smallest 
structures to 3000 G in sunspots. At 1000 G, the magnetic 
pressure P,, = B?/8z is 4 x 10* erg cm™, a significant 
fraction of the gas pressure P att = 1, P © 10°. Magnetic 
structures with such field strengths are therefore called 
‘strong fields’. (In addition to these strong fields, there is 
evidence for a less conspicuous weaker field component in 
the photosphere with strength of 300 G or less; see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE INTRANETWORK AND TURBULENT MAGNETIC FIELDS.) 
The structures in this strong field component are sharply 
bounded: the normal photosphere in which they are 
embedded is only weakly magnetic, and the transition 
between the structure and its surroundings usually is 
sharper than can be resolved with current instruments. 

Although all magnetic structures evolve in size and 
shape, the time scales for these changes are long compared 
with the time it takes a sound wave to cross their width. 
These structures are therefore approximately in pressure 
balance with their environment. This is possible only if 
the gas pressure inside the structures is less than in the 
surrounding photosphere, since the magnetic field exerts 
an additional pressure that has to be balanced. At the 
photospheric level, magnetic structures are thus confined 
by the gas pressure in their surroundings. The reduced 
internal pressure also makes the plasma more transparent, 
so that the photosphere is locally depressed inside the 
magnetic structures: they are dimples in the surface. This 
depression ranges from about 150 km in the smallest 
structures to 600 km in sunspots. In spots, the effect 
is large enough to cause an easily observable distortion 
(called Wilson depression, see figure 1 in SUNSPOTS: WILSON 
EFFECT) when they are seen near the solar limb. This effect 
also applies to small magnetic structures; they appear as 
little dimples in the surface. In the smallest elements of 
the magnetic field, the side walls of these dimples radiate 
extra heat from the hot subsurface layers, making them 
bright when seen near the limb of the Sun. Clusters of 
these elements make up the faculae. 

Magnetic fields are most easily observed, through 
the Zeeman effect, in the photosphere. Field lines 
have no ends, however, and extend both above into the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


coronal 
loops ™ 


750 km (quiet) 
500 km (active) |! 


photospheric 
flux tube 


a 


Figure 2. Vertical cross section through the solar atmosphere 
showing its magnetic structure (sketch). Below the surface, field 
lines are bundled into magnetic ropes with field-free convecting 
gas between; above the surface, the field lines fan out to occupy 
all available space. Sunspots are the locations where large 
magnetic ropes cross the surface. 


chromosphere and corona, and below into the convection 
zone. The magnetic patches seen as spots at the surface 
are only the intersections of this surface with three- 
dimensional magnetic structures. The rapid decrease of 
the gas pressure with height in the atmosphere means 
that, at a height of a only few hundred km above t = 
1, the gas pressure is insufficient to confine a magnetic 
field of 1000 G. The magnetic structures adapt to this by 
expanding or ‘fanning out’ with height (figure 2). At 
a height of 500-1000 km, they have expanded so much 
that the fields of neighboring structures meet. Above 
this level (which depends on the average field strength, 
or ‘degree of magnetic activity’ of the photosphere), the 
entire atmosphere is magnetic. This situation applies to 
the higher atmospheric levels which one observes in the 
cores of strong spectral lines in the visible, such as Hg, as 
well as in all wavelengths longer than a few cm. These 
wavelengths probe the chromosphere and corona. 

The atmosphere as seen, for example, in H, (figure 1 
in CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS) looks very different from an image 
in the visible continuum: instead of granules the surface 
is covered with filamentary structures. These so-called 
fibrils trace field lines, much like iron filings around a bar 
magnet. In this magnetically dominated atmosphere the 
gas pressure is generally less than the magnetic pressure. 
Rather than being confined by the gas, the field here is 
in equilibrium with itself, with the magnetic pressure and 
tension forces balancing each other. The presence of the 
gas causes only small changes in the magnetic field: it 
is approximately force free. A familiar example of such 
a force-free field is the vacuum field (current-free field) 
around a bar magnet. A force-free field cannot exist 
entirely on its own: its internal stresses must be taken 
up at some boundary. In the case of the bar magnet, 
these stresses are taken up by the solid-state forces in 
the bar. In the case of the solar atmospheric magnetic 
field, the stress is taken up by the dense plasma in the 
convection zone into which the field lines are anchored 
(figure 2). In the atmospheric magnetic field, on the other 
hand, the motion of the gas is restricted. Flows along 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the field lines are unimpeded, but strong Lorentz forces 
limit displacements perpendicular to the field lines. The 
transition from the gas pressure dominated interior to the 
magnetically dominated atmosphere of the Sun happens 
to lie roughly at the photosphere. This is a coincidence 
that applies to most stars with convective envelopes but 
not to some other stars, such as strongly magnetic A stars 
and white dwarfs. 

Although the convection zone is of course far from 
solid, it is able to take up the magnetic stresses acting in the 
atmosphere by its large inertia. This inertia is conveniently 
expressed in terms of the Alfvén speed va = B/(4p)'/”, 
where p is the gas density. This is the speed at which bends 
in the field, for example imparted by convective flows, 
propagate along the field lines. At 1000 G (a typical field 
strength in small-scale magnetic structures), the Alfvén 
speed at photospheric densities is of the order 5 km sl, 
while the typical convective velocity is around 2 km sl. At 
a depth of only 10000 km, the density is 2500 times higher, 
and the Alfvén speed at the same field strength is only 
100 ms7!. This is of the order of the convective velocities, 
or smaller. At these high densities, the convective flows 
can displace field lines faster than an Alfvén wave can 
react to restore the shape of the field lines. The flow then 
effectively carries the field around as an inclusion. At the 
low gas densities in the photosphere, on the other hand, 
the field lines at the same field strength of 1000 G behave 
much more ‘stiffly’ and to a large extent resist bending by 
flows. 

Since the gas density is also lower inside the 
photospheric magnetic structures (because of the lower 
pressure), they are buoyant. The lower density makes 
them behave like ‘tethered balloons’: they follow the 
motion of their feet in the deeper layers but tend to 
stay vertical in the atmosphere. Small structures, and 
those with weaker fields, are more easily bent and 
displaced by flows than large structures such as spots. 
The strongest flows in the photosphere are those due 
to the granulation. Accordingly, the small-scale field is 
found almost exclusively in the intergranular lanes and 
the vertices between granules, where the horizontal flows 
converge. Large structures such as spots behave much 
more independently. For example, they are observed 
to form by coagulation of many small fragments, each 
of which finds its way to the spot under construction 
independently of, and often opposite to, the photospheric 
flow field (See SUNSPOT EVOLUTION). 

In this way, the magnetic fields seen at the 
photosphere and their evolution are only very partially 
governed by local processes at the photospheric level. 
In order to interpret their observed evolution, one has 
to envisage the entire three-dimensional structure. This 
immediately raises the question at what depth inside the 
Sun one should locate the ‘roots’ of a spot or a small scale 
structure. Current understanding of the solar magnetic 
cycle puts the source of the magnetic field near the base 
of the convection zone. In this picture, the photospheric 
magnetic structures are connected to the base of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


convection zone by approximately vertical fields. At the 
base of the convection zone, there is believed to be a layer 
of horizontal field which is the source of the magnetic fields 
seen at the surface. The appearance of a new ACTIVE REGION 
at the surface is an event that has lifted a bundle of fields 
lines from this layer and has made them loop up through 
the photosphere, like a stitch of yarn pulled from a woollen 
sweater. After the eruption of the active region, in this 
view, the connection between the surface manifestations, 
suchas spots, and source layer is by approximately vertical 
field lines, as sketched in SOLAR INTERIOR: EMERGING MAGNETIC 
FLUX TUBES. Apart from disturbances due to the kicking 
and shoving around by flows in the convection zone, the 
evolution of the surface field might actually be an image 
of the evolution of its roots in the source layer. 

The magnetic fields at the photosphere have a small 
effect on the brightness of the Sun (see SOLAR IRRADIANCE). 
Sunspots, being dark, cause a decrease in brightness, 
plage areas an increase. The areas outside plages and 
spots remain unaffected: the darkness of spots is not, 
for example, compensated by increased brightness of the 
nonmagnetic parts of the surface. This is understood 
theoretically as a consequence of the heat transport and 
heat storage properties of the concvection zone. 


Bibliography 

Foukal P V 1990 Solar Astrophysics (New York: Wiley) 

Priest E R 1982 Solar Magneto-hydrodynamics (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) 

Spruit H C and Roberts B 1983 Magnetic flux tubes on the 
sun Nature 304 401 

Stix M 1989 The Sun, an Introduction (Berlin: Springer) 


Henk Spruit 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Center-to-limb Variation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: Center-to-limb 
Variation 


Many phenomena which are observable on the Sun’s 
‘surface’ change in characteristic ways between the 
center and LIMB of the apparent disk (e.g. the shapes of 
sunspots, the profiles of Fraunhofer lines, etc). The most 
obvious and easily noticeable (e.g. at sunrise or sunset, or 
on a good photograph) center-to-limb variation is the 
decrease of brightness from the disk center towards the 
limb. This so-called limb darkening is treated in the 
present article, in particular for wavelengths representing 
the continuous spectrum between the FRAUNHOFER LINES. 


Limb darkening and angular distribution of 


radiation 

Actually, limb darkening is a direct consequence of the 
fact that the intensity (J in W cm” ster ') of the radiation 
emerging from the photosphere depends on the angular 
distance (9) from the direction of the solar radius (see 
figure 1). Ignoring any small- or large-scale structures of 
the photosphere (e.g. granulation, spots, faculae, etc), and 
a possible (but not yet clearly proved) dependence on 
heliographic latitude, we suppose here that the intensity 7 
depends on 7/R (or 8) only and exhibits at any time an 
exact rotational symmetry. In other words, in this article 
the intensity distribution across the solar disk is treated as 
an ideal smooth function J = J(r/R) (see figure 2), which 
can be approximated by one or other mathematical 
formulae and which represents then the average for the 
whole disk and for an appropriate interval of time (e.g. 
near the minimum of solar activity). 


The wavelength dependence of solar limb 


darkening 

The decrease of intensity towards the Sun’s limb depends 
on wavelength A (unit nm). If special exceptions are 
ignored, the dependence follows the rule that the shorter 
the wavelength the stronger the decrease. This rule is 
illustrated in figure 2, which displays the center-to-limb 
variation of the intensity J, (unit W cm” ster ' nm!) for 
two wavelengths, one in the UV (A = 350 nm) and one in 
the infrared (A = 950 nm). For both wavelengths, /, is 
shown as a function of 7/R (limb-darkening ‘curves’) and 
of 6 as well. As a consequence of the A rule, also the 
color of the Sun’s disk exhibits a center-to-limb 
variation: it reddens from the center towards the limb 
(see also SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: THE LIMB EFFECT AND 
GRAVITATIONAL REDSHIFT). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Direction 


Figure 1. Geometric relations. R = angular radius of apparent 
solar disk as viewed from Earth (16'16" in early January, 15'44" 
in early July), r = angular distance of observed surface element 
from center of disk, 6 = angle at solar ‘surface’ between the 
normal at position r and the direction towards the Earth. Two 
special cases are shown: suffix F refers to the position where 


the intensity equals the average disk intensity (07 = 50°,rp/R = 
0.76), suffix Z to a position about 14" from the limb (0; = 


80°,r,/R = 0.985). One notes easily that 7/R = sin 0. 


© wR 605 00 


OS sin@ 10 
Figure 2. Solar limb darkening for 4 = 350 and 950 nm from 
observations made with the McMath&ndash;Pierce Solar 
Telescope of Kitt Peak National Solar Observatory in 1975/76 
and in 1986/87. (a) L, = L(7/R) = (sin 9); (6) L, = 58) (for 6 = 
0°, 30°, 60°, 90°). In both cases the intensities are normalized to 
the disk-center intensity: 1359 (0) = 3.35, [oso (0) = 1.41 W m? 
ster ‘nm |. The full circles refer to the positions specified in 


figure 1 (0¢ = 50°, 0; = 80°). 


The reason for solar limb darkening and 


limb reddening 

Usually, the intensity (,) of the radiation from any 
homogeneous, hot, solid or fluid surface of uniform 
temperature T (unit K) does not depend on the angular 
distance (8) from the direction perpendicular to the 
surface: the brightness of such a surface does not depend 
on the angle from which it is viewed. In this case, the 
intensity (4) for any direction (8) is simply given by the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Center-to-limb Variation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


product e,B,(T), where e, denotes the (dimensionless) 
emissivity of the surface material (e, < 1) and B,(7) the 
intensity given by the Planck law of radiation; B,(7) is a 
universal function with 2 and T as the only essential 
parameters (unit W cm” ster ' nm‘); actually, B,(Z) also 
depends on the refractive index of (or on the velocity of 
light in) the medium (vacuum, air) where the radiation is 
observed or analysed. 

But the radiation from the Sun is not emitted by a 
well-defined surface; instead, it emerges from a gaseous 
layer about 300 km deep, the so-called SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE. Inside this photosphere, almost all 
physical parameters depend on the depth ¢ (unit m; 
counted from an arbitrary level ‘zero’). For limb 
darkening two of these parameters are essential: the 
temperature 7 and the (continuous) absorption coefficient 
k, (unit m”') (= fraction of radiation lost along a unit of 
length; roughly, the complement to the transparency). 
Note that «, refers to the radiation between the 
Fraunhofer lines. Both parameters increase with 
increasing depth. x, defines, together with the angle 0, 
the photospheric layers contributing the essential part of 
the emerging radiation, and the temperatures T define the 
amount of radiation emitted by these layers. The role of 
the angle 8 may be inferred from figure 1: the larger 0, 
the smaller are the depths of the layers being relevant for 
the observed radiation. Noting that these depths vary 
(approximately) with cos 8, one realizes easily that limb 
darkening just reflects the decrease of temperature from 
the ‘bottom’ to ‘top’ of the photosphere. At the limb (7/R 
= 1, cos 0 = 0), we receive of course only radiation from 
its highest layer (at level ‘zero’). 


Recording the solar limb darkening 

Measurements of solar limb darkening need a telescope 
yielding a solar image that is as large as possible (e.g. the 
McMath-Pierce Telescope of Kitt Peak National Solar 
Observatory; focal length ~87 m, diameter of solar 


image ~81 cm), a spectrometer to select the desired 


wavelength 2 and a_ suitable detector (e.g. 
photomultiplier) plus electronic equipment. The 
observations are usually made by sampling the 


spectrometer output as the solar image drifts across the 
spectrometer entrance slit (telescope drive off, center of 
disk must pass the slit center!). The resulting ‘drift 
curves’, which then yield the intensity distribution along 
the solar diameter defined by diurnal motion, resemble of 
course the curves shown in figure 2(a); they yield the 
intensities of the Sun and of the (preceding and 
subsequent) skies in arbitrary units (‘counts per second’), 
as a function of time (daily motion: | solar diameter in 
about 2.2 min). 

However: the actual, individual drift curves differ 
from any ‘true’ mean distribution in two important 
aspects: 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) The Sun’s GRANULATION (and rare phenomena of 
solar activity) causes an appreciable ‘noise’ 
(standard deviation at 350 nm about 1.5%, at 950 nm 
0.6%). 

(b) Phenomena of the EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE (seeing, 
blurring, scattered light) and imperfections of the 
telescope (stray light) lead to systematic errors in the 
intensity signals, in particular near the Sun’s limb. 
Also, imperfect electronics may cause small errors, 
but these can be avoided with special care (e.g. 
multiplier hysteresis). 


For the reduction of the actual drift curves also the 
determination of the ‘limb’ positions is problematic. 
Even the true intensity cut-off at the limb is not perfectly 
sharp: the intensity drops exponentially within about 1". 
Thereby, the position of the steepest gradient (by 
definition the limb) depends on wavelength: at the local 
maximum of the continuous absorption coefficient near 
2950 nm, the true solar radius is about 0.1" larger than at 
the minimum near 350 nm. Seeing and blurring not only 
cause considerably larger ‘smearing’ of the limb, but also 
lead to noticeable displacements of the ‘limb inflection 
points’. Even for the averages of many drift curves these 
displacements don’t cancel out completely: depending on 
both the size of the seeing (blurring) parameter and the 
shape of the drift curve, the solar radii are shortened 
systematically by amounts between about 0.05" (seeing 


parameter 1", 2 ~ 950 nm) and more than 0.5" (3", A = 
350 nm). 


Mathematical treatment of limb darkening 


observations 

We don’t discuss here the rather complex treatment of 
the intensity signals to account for the errors caused by 
the phenomena of the Earth’s atmosphere and the 
instrumental imperfections. Supposing that the necessary 
corrections are made in one way or the other, the next 
and final step is then to fit a mathematical expression 
representing the limb darkening ‘law’ to the observed 
signals. Thereby one must realise that a theoretically 
reasoned, mathematical ‘law’ (comparable to, for 
example Planck’s law of radiation, or the shape of a 
planetary orbit), does not exist a priori. Therefore, one 
has to find empirically a solution which fits the 
observations as well as possible, and, if possible, also 
fulfils special physical requirements. 

In figure 3(a) the same two intensity distributions are 
plotted as in figure 2, but here versus 1 = cos @ instead of 
r/R = sin 8. Both curves can be considered as being 
composed of two terms: a linear term M(y) = m+ (1 - 
m)w (note m359 < mo59), and a term D() which represents 
the deviations from the linear relation. The characteristic 
behavior (D(u) > 0 except for D(0) = D(1) = 0; maxima 
between p = 0.3 and 0.5) is found for all wavelengths 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Center-to-limb Variation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


I(cos®)/I(cos@=1) 


---- 950nm 
—— 350mm 


00 02 04 06 zcosQ@ 10 


Figure 3. (a) Observed /,(7/R)/L,(0) plotted versus 1 = cos 0 
(heavy curves), from same data as in figure 2. Again, the full 
circles refer to the positions specified in figure 1. Vertical 
dashed lines indicate distances from the ‘limb’ of 1", 2", 5" and 
14". Weak, straight lines indicate the linear relations M(u) = m 
+ (1—m)u defined by the intensities at the center (u = 1: M@= 1) 
and ‘limb’ (= 0: M@ =m) of the solar disk; thereby, the 
deviations D(1) of the observed limb darkening from linearity 
are clearly noticeable. (b) Functions y,(1) which are the 
physically most reasonable functions to represent the deviations 
D(u), shown for 7 = 2, 3 and 18; maximum positions are marked 
for j = 2 to 6 and 18. Note that maximum(y,;) = 1.00 for all 7, 
and that (max) increases with increasing j from p = 0.302 for j 
= 2 toa limit near p = 0.42. 


X > 330 nm, while one finds for 4 < 320 nm D(w) < 0, 
with shallow minima instead of lowly maxima. So, 
searching for the appropriate, mathematical relation 
which fits the observed limb-darkening curves, one must 
‘just’ find a general relation which represents the terms 
D(u). 

The most reasonable relation approximates D() by a 
series of very special (and more or less complex) 
mathematical functions, yu) (7 = 2), which all have the 
same characteristics: y(0) = y1) = 0, maximum (w;) = 
1.00. Three of these functions are shown in figure 3(). 

Accordingly, the most appropriate, empirical limb 
darkening ‘law’ is: 


Ftp) 


—_ —_ =Ltwi=eottl— + our; (42). 
Te sw scott come Dowie 


j= 


(1) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The meaning of the coefficients is clear: co is a measure 
for the ‘limb’-intensity and defines the linear term of the 
limb darkening function, and the coefficients c; (j = 2) 
measure the maximum contributions of the functions 
wu) to the deviations D(). In practice it is sufficient to 
choose n = 4. 

The functions Z,(u) yield of course also the ratios 
between average disk intensity F, and disk center 
intensity 1,(6 = 0), which are defined by equation (2): 


f Qari) dr 


Ff i(@ =0) = 1,,(0) f Jar dr 


m2 1.(@ 

Su al Pa oaiin dé. 
Jo  4£,(0) 

(2) 


Specifying n = 4 and presenting just numerical values 
instead of the explicit, rather complex mathematical 
formula, the result following from relations (1) and (2) is: 


{F3/F, (Oh, =Ft i (cot 1.665c3 + 1.764c3+ 1.798c4). 


(3) 
Now we recall that the intensity distribution across the 
Sun’s disk depends on the vertical distribution of 
temperature (7) and (continuous) absorption coefficient 
(k,) inside the Sun’s photosphere. This dependency can 
be treated even exactly by using equation (4): 


1,0) =[h,(0)/1,(0)}F,(0) 
[aa 

= [ B, (T(t) exp(—ty/12) d(t/p). 
0 


2 
3 


(4) 
Here, ™ is the optical depth of the layer with the 
geometrical depth ¢ (m) below the level zero: 


f 
b= [ Ka dr. 
0 
(5) 


Note that relation (4) describes the intensity /,(0) of the 
observed radiation as the sum of all contributions from 
the ‘visible’ photospheric layers below the ‘surface’: 
implying local thermodynamic equilibrium, — the 
contribution from the layer with temperature T is given 
by the intensity following from Planck’s law of radiation, 
multiplied by a factor (<1) which accounts for the 
absorption along the light-path from that layer to the 
‘surface’; the length of this path is proportional to 1/u 
(further details are found in almost any relevant text- 
book; see, e.g. Minnaert (1954)). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Center-to-limb Variation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In case of the limb darkening law presented by 
equation (1) it can be stated that it corresponds precisely 
to a well defined ‘source function’, B,(t,): 


B,(t,) = 5,(0) {ko +kit,+ Cy) 


j=2 


(6) 
where the £js are the so-called exponential integral 
functions defined by 


Es) = | * fexp(—t0)/1!] di 
1 


(7) 
while the coefficients &; are well defined functions of the 
coefficients c;. Although the basic functions entering the 
solution (y((u),Z,(t)) are rather complex (but present no 
problems in the PC era!), compared to other solutions 
they provide the important advantage that they don’t lead 
to physically unrealistic structures in the limb darkening 
curves and—in particular—in the source function, which 
could be introduced by the natural scatter in the 
observations. 

For example, if observed limb darkening curves are 
fitted by polynomials P,, in u 


hw) /h(e = 1) = P,(w) = Do api 


i=0 
(8) 
as was usually done in the pre-computer era, then even 
slight errors in the coefficients a; may cause large, 
unrealistic fluctuations in the corresponding polynomials 
representing then the source function: 


Bit.) = 7,(0) oe A,ti with A; = a flily. 
i= 
(9) 


In particular, in this case the source function also does 
not have the correct asymptotic behavior for both t—0o 
and t—0. But observational scatter does not harm the 
resulting ratios of average to disk center intensity: 


{F./E,O}e, =2 50 a,/(i+2). 
= (10) 


Wavelength dependence of the limb 


darkening coefficients (c;) 

Once any functions like those defined by equations (1) or 
(8) have been fitted to limb darkening observations made 
at many different wavelengths, the 4 dependence of the 
coefficients (c;,a;) can be analysed. However, it seems 
that reliable results are obtained only if (a) the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


observations were made in a relatively short time interval 
(about 1 month; possibly near the minimum of solar 
activity), and (b) the data were fitted by curves defined 
by equation (1). Only very recently (1997) could it be 
shown (by means of data obtained in 1986/87 in two 
four-week observing seasons), that in this case the 
coefficients (c;) of the limb darkening functions (L4) and 
the corresponding function {F//,(0)}z, depend on A in a 
very obvious, simple way: 


Co = Coo t+ nok 
(lla) 


for } = 2, 3, and 4 
(11b) 
Ff HO) = fot fia + fam 


5 
c= Cyot csr 


(12) 


with—according to relations (3) and (11la,b) — 


fo —— + (cog + 1.665c2 + L.764e%9 + 1.798c45) 
3 3 


(13) 
f= $Co1 
(14) 
hh — £(1.665c2; + 1.764¢3) + 1.798e41). 
(15) 


The good definition of these functions is demonstrated in 
figure 4, which exhibits the 4 dependence of co and of 
F/K(0). Different sets of coefficients must of course be 
used for the spectral regions ‘left’ or ‘right’ from the 


Balmer ‘jump’ (at log >’ = 2.6). Another obvious 
peculiarity is the ‘bump’ at log 4 = 3.2 (A = 1650 nm); it 
is due to the minimum of H absorption between the 


spectral regions with bound-free and _ free—free 
transitions. 


Possible variations of solar limb darkening 
Usually, the coefficients of published limb darkening 
functions show—when plotted against A—a considerable 
scatter, which prevented realistic fits by handy functions 
in the past. In this respect one should realize that there 
are no sets of limb darkening data which come from just 
one short-term ‘snapshot’. 

The usual observing procedure (wavelength after 
wavelength, day after day, some observing campaigns 
extending even over months or years) necessarily yields 
results which are influenced by all sorts of variable 
phenomena. In particular, in the case of the polynomials 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Center-to-limb Variation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


— log A[nm) ~— 


2.5 3.0 35 4.0 


Figure 4. ) dependence of the coefficient cy and of the ratio 
F/(0) in the case of the limb darkening function Ly; co from 
observations made in two 1 month seasons in 1986 and 1987; 
the smoothing functions are: cy = 0.400-1032 ' (log A < 2.6), 
and cy = 0.756-268 | (log 4 > 2.6, for log A> 3.04 
extrapolated). F/J(0) adopted from a compilation of 14 
independent observations published from 1946 to 1983 (log a < 
3.38), and from a recent paper published in 1996 (log;A > 3.38); 
the smoothing functions are: F/J(0) = 0.861-34% '-18.10!°A* 
(log A < 2.58) and F/I(0) = 0.975-912 '-24.10'° >, (log A> 
2.58). Arrows mark the two wavelengths with data in figures 2 
and 3(a). 


Pw) (e.g. with n = 5), even minor variations in the true 
intensity distribution (granulation!) may cause large 
responses in the coefficients a;. But different signs lead 
here to an almost complete compensation in the 
corresponding A plots of /(u)/1(0) and F/I(0). 

However, a significant scatter was also found in i 
plots of the coefficients c; of the functions L3, which 
resulted from observations obtained over long periods of 
time (months, years). This is possibly a hint that even the 
‘average’ solar limb darkening may be slightly variable 
in time, with time-scales larger than a month. The fact 
that also in this case the scatter of the coefficients c; is 
not transferred to the A plots of the corresponding ratios 
F/O) would then indicate that limb darkening variations 
occur in such a way as to leave these ratios nearly 
constant. 

Other hints for possible limb darkening variations 
come from special, systematic searches. But the question 
of whether the observed effects just reflect well-known 
characteristics of the solar photosphere (random 
fluctuations in distribution, size and brightness of the 
granules, variable structure of the supergranulation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


network, all sorts of oscillation patterns, intensity 
excesses of deficits connected to active regions), or do 
indicate occasional variations of the temperature 
distribution in the upper photosphere, cannot yet be 
answered definitively. 


Bibliography 


For general background see, e.g., 


Minnaert M 1954 The photosphere The Sun ed G Kuiper 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press) pp 88-106 

Gibson E G 1973 The Quiet Sun (NASA Special Publication 
303) (Washington, DC: NASA) pp 93-106 

Stix M 1989 The Sun (Berlin: Springer) pp 133-5 


For numerical data see 


Pierce K 2000 Limb darkening Allen's Astrophysical Quantities 
ed A N Cox (Berlin: Springer) pp 335-7 


For detailed information on limb darkening functions, the 
constants involved and further literature, see 


Neckel H 1996 Sol. Phys. 167 9-23 
Neckel H 1997 Sol. Phys. 171 257-68 


Heinz Neckel 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Faculae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: Faculae 


Photospheric faculae, often called white-light faculae, 
are best seen away from the center of the solar disk 
beginning ata heliocentric angle of about 60°. They appear 
as irregular bright patches whose contrast increases 
towards the solar Limp, and are more extensive when they 
accompany sunspot groups. Near the limb they tend to 
appear as facular granules. The facular granules consist 
of aggregations of mostly vertical magnetic flux tubes. 

Figure 1 shows half of a photometric image obtained 
on 1 July 1998 at a wavelength of 672.3 nm using a filter 
with a bandwidth of 10 nm. The limb darkening of the 
quiet sun has been removed to show more clearly the 
increasing contrast of the faculae as the limb is approached. 
The patchy or intermittent nature is obvious. 

Faculae consist of magnetic flux tubes with a 
typical magnetic field strength of approximately 1.5 kG. 
Magnetograms of facular regions usually do not resolve 
these flux tubes and the observed magnetic field strengths 
depend on the filling factor and sEEING conditions at the 
time of observation. 

The increasing continuum contrast of faculae with 
decreasing distance from the limb suggests an increasing 
temperature difference between faculae and the quiet sun. 
Models of facular flux tubes are unable to completely 
account for this steadily increasing contrast of faculae as 
the limb is approached. The contrast of faculae increases 
toward the limb for continuum wavelengths as well as 
for many absorption lines that are formed well below 
the temperature minimum. When viewed in the center 
of absorption lines, faculae are seen all across the solar 
disk in a photospheric network. Faculae seen near the 
limb in white light are morphologically identical to those 
seen in absorption lines. This behavior suggests that 
the appearance of faculae at different wavelengths and 
different positions is due to an interplay of geometry and 
thermal structure of the individual flux tubes. 

Figure 2 shows the observed contrast of faculae from 
several sources (see Chapman 1994 for references). The 
scales are affected by the differing spatial resolution of 
the observations. Some progress in untangling the effects 
of filling factor on the contrast has been made by the 
Lockheed solar group by sorting their observations of 
facular contrast against the observed magnetic flux. 

The source of the excess emission is not well 
understood. The emission appears to be a combination 
of the ‘hot-wall’ effect and an elevated temperature in 
the upper photosphere. The hot-wall effect is caused 
by the deeper layers of the photosphere shining through 
the partially evacuated flux tube (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC 
MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES: OBSERVATIONS for more details). It has 
even been suggested by Stenflo and others that electric 
currents could be responsible for heating of the flux tubes. 

Faculae and sunspots both contribute significantly to 
variations in the total solar irradiance which is the amount 
of energy reaching the Earth. Sunspots produce the 
largest short-term decrease because of their high contrast. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Photometric half-image of the Sun at 672.3 nm with a 
10 nm bandpass filter on 1 July 1998. Facular contrast, seen with 
broad-band filters, increases towards the limb. This increase is 
especially notable between the limb and the sunspot near the 
lower left limb. Limb darkening has been removed to more 
clearly reveal the presence of faculae. Pixel size is 2.5 arcsec. 


However, because faculae have a much larger area (at 
least a factor of 15 larger than sunspots) they make a 
positive contribution to solar irradiance variability that 
is approximately the same magnitude as the negative 
contribution of sunspots (Chapman et al 1996). 

Figure 3 shows the change in facular area during the 
descending part of solar cycle 22 and the beginning phase 
of solar cycle 23. The data are from the Cartesian Full Disk 
Photometric Telescope No 2 (CFDT2), which has square 
pixels with a size of 2.5 arcsec. Both filters are near the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Faculae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Summary of CLV of faculae 
12 
Sa 
L & C(88) cubic fit 
10-5 eee ne ee tener n eee ee nee eee e mene meee nen ene nmeneneneeenee men eeeneeenmeeens —— 
ELP, slope only 
Ke 
Be ereneeeeeeeeeeee i cee neettnneeennnertnnetenneettneentnneetanenes ELP 
8 + 
3 F,H,H 98 
a 
a 8 ae 
8 Lak, 84 
5 — 
a Face ai a Oe a L & C(88) observed 
24. 


"0.35 05 065 O08 0.95 
cosine (theta) = mu 


o4———— 
0.05 02 


Figure 2. Facular contrast from a variety of sources versus j. 
The vertical scale has not been adjusted for the different filling 
factors of the observations. 


40000 - 
narrow k-line | 


32000 


24000 


16000 


CFDT2 - FACULAR AREA (ppm) 


wide k-line | 


8000 } -----------' 1.-----45-fa a 


0 
1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 
YEAR 


Figure 3. Facular area as measured with the Cartesian Full Disk 
Photometric Telescope, no 2. The narrow K line area was 
measured with a 0.3 nm bandpass filter. The wide K line area 
was measured with a 1 nm bandpass filter. 


center of the calcium K line at 393.5 nm. The narrow 
filter has a bandwidth of 0.3 nm and the wide filter has 
a bandwith of 1 nm. One can see that the detected area 
of faculae is strongly dependent on the bandwidth of the 
observations. The areas shown here are much greater than 
one would detect in white light. 

White-light faculae near the limb are morphologically 
identical to the photospheric network seen in absorption 
lines. However, the faculae seen in absorption lines have 
a higher contrast than white-light faculae. The identical 
morphology near the limb shown by Wilson supports 
the view that both thermal structure and geometry 
determine the appearance of faculae at different positions 
and different wavelengths. Above the photosphere, the 
field lines expand in the chromosphere, and the contrast 
increases in selected wavelengths. If there is a large 
concentration of flux, such as in an ACTIVE REGION, the area is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


called a PLAGE when seen in the light of strong FRAUNHOFER 
LINES. 

The lifetime of an individual facula is not well 
established as it depends strongly on the spatial resolution 
of the observation as well as the evolution of the individual 
magnetic flux tubes that make up the facula. At 
moderate resolution, the lifetime is of the order of tens of 
hours but at higher resolution away from the solar limb 
(where foreshortening is less) the lifetime is less, from 
minutes to tens of minutes as smaller elements such as 
filigree and bright points are seen (See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
FILIGREE). Unfortunately, the determination of the lifetimes 
of individual faculae is difficult because the flux tubes can 
move and merge as the granulation buffets them (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION). 

Models of facular flux tubes have been reviewed by 
Spruit et al and have been compared with observations by 
Grossman-Doerth et al (1994) and, more recently, by Topka 
et al (1997) who conclude that a high contrast very near the 
solar limb requires something besides emission from hot 
walls. 


Bibliography 

Chapman G A 1994 Photometric observations of the Sun 
The Sun as a Variable Star: Solar and Stellar Irradiance 
Variations ed J M Pap, C Frohlich, H S Hudson 
and S K Solanki (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) pp 117-29 

Chapman G A and Ziegler B 1996 An analysis of 1983 
observations of facular contrast with an extreme limb 
photometer Sol. Phys. 168 259-72 

Chapman G A, Cookson A M and Dobias J J 1996 
Variations in total solar irradiance during solar cycle 
22 J. Geophys. Res. 101 13 541-8 

Grossmann-Doerth U, Knodlker M, Schtissler M and 
Solanki S K 1994 Solar magnetic elements: models 
compared with observations Solar Active Region 
Evolution: Comparing Models with Observations (ASP 
Conf. Ser. 68) ed KS Balasubramaniam and G W Simon 
(San Francisco, CA: ASP) pp 96-101 

Lawrence J K and Chapman G A 1988 Photometric 
observations of facular contrasts near the solar limb 
Astrophys. J. 335 996-1004 

Topka KP, Tarbell T D and Title A M 1997 Properties of the 
smallest solar magnetic elements: II. Observations 
versus hot wall models of faculae Astrophys. J. 484 
479-86 


Gary A Chapman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Filigree 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: Filigree 


The SOLAR FILIGREE (figure 1) is a pattern of strings of small 
bright points, visible in the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE located in the 
dark lanes which separate granules. Its origin is magnetic, 
and each bright point is the site of a magnetic flux tube (see 
the fourth section). The solar filigree was first observed in 
the wings of the Ha line at 6563 A, at the Sacramento Peak 
Observatory, in 1972, by Dunn and Zirker (1973). 

The pattern is found in the quiet Sun (at the 
boundaries of the supergranular cells, where it forms 
the so-called photospheric network), as well as in ACTIVE 
REGIONS, where it corresponds to the photospheric faculae, 
visible near the Limp as bright extended pLaces. In active 
regions, they often form rings, 2-3” in diameter, which 
surround a single or a few granules. 

The bright points forming the filigree are very clearly 
visible in wideband (about 10 A) filtergrams taken in the 
Fraunhofer G-band lines of the CH molecule, centered 
at 4307 A, where they appear much brighter than the 
surrounding granules (Muller 1985). They can also be 
seen in white-light images, but with a lower contrast. 
The difference of contrast observed in G-band (or Ha) 
filtergrams and in white-light images is due to the fact that 
the light comes from different layers in the photosphere: 
G-band filtergrams are formed in upper layers, near 
the middle of the photosphere, where the difference 
of temperature between the filigree elements and the 
surrounding atmosphere is larger than in deeper layers. 


Size and shape 

Although a majority of bright points forming the filigree 
are nearly circular, many of them are significantly 
elongated. One does not find bright points larger than 0"6 
(450 km). Their size distribution has a peak at 0"3 (220 km) 
at A 4307 A and at 0"33 (240 km) at 4.5750. It must be noted, 
however, that the size distributions have been obtained 
with the finite resolution of 50 cm telescopes, which means 
that a much larger number of bright points of size smaller 
than 0"3 could be revealed by larger telescopes, and that 
the lower size limit is still unknown. 


Brightness 

The brightness of the real bright points is not well known 
either, because they are so small that they are strongly 
blurred by the finite size of the telescope, even when the 
seeing degradation is negligible. The fact that they are 
embedded in dark lanes makes the situation even worse: 
their contrast drops to zero for a resolution of 0"4. In 
white light, at 5750 A, their brightness is, on average, 
1.08 times the brightness of the mean photosphere, when 
the observation is made with a 50 cm telescope; maxima 
of 1.25 are measured for the brightest points. The mean 
relative brightness increases toward the limb, and reaches 
a maximum of 1.25 at uw = cos@ = 0.25; closer to the limb, 
it decreases. The brightness, corrected for the finite size 
of the telescope, is 1.25 at the solar disk centre and 1.40 at 
pe = 0.25. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In the G-band, which is formed higher in the 
atmosphere, the contrast is larger: it is 1.30 at the disk 
center, relative to the surrounding photosphere; this value 
is not corrected for blurring. For more details about the 
filigree bright points contrast, see the review by Muller 
(1994). 


Dynamics of filigree bright points 

The filigree bright points are always constrained to stay 
in the intergranular lanes, by converging granular flows. 
Because of this strong interaction with the dynamic 
and energetic granules, they are very unstable: their 
timescale is of the order of the lifetime of granulation 
(typically 10 min) and they often split and merge (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION). However, they usually 
first appear in a relatively wide dark space at the junction 
of several converging granules. It thus seems that 
converging granules concentrate the magnetic flux into a 
flux tube of small cross section and high field strength, 
giving rise to a bright point. The maximum brightness is 
reached after 4 to 5 min, on average. The mean lifetime is 
about 10 min, but a few bright points can be identified for 
nearly one hour. 

They are continuously buffeted by the moving 
expanding granules to speeds reaching several kilometers 
per second. Such large velocities reflect, in fact, the 
expansion rate of granules. 


The magnetic origin of filigree bright points 

The filigree bright points are closely associated with the 
small-size magnetic elements visible in high resolution 
magnetograms: each point is spatially associated to 
a magnetic element, which has nearly the same size. 
However, the magnetic elements do not always show 
up as a brightening, suggesting that the magnetic flux is 
more stable than the bright points, which may correspond 
to occasional flashes. The bright points are believed 
to be cross sections of nearly vertical magnetic flux 
tubes of field strength 1-1.5 kG, which extend from 
the top of the convection zone to the corona, through 
the CHROMOSPHERE and the TRANSITION REGION. Flux tube 
diameters are smaller than 400 km at the photospheric 
level; they expand upward. In the models, simplified 
flux tubes are considered, with sharp walls separating the 
magnetic plasma inside, from a magnetic-free atmosphere 
outside. The magnetic configuration of a real flux tube is 
certainly more complex (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC 
FLUX TUBES). 

The flux tubes are in quasi-static equilibrium; 
consequently, the existence of a magnetic pressure makes 
the gas pressure inside the field smaller than outside: 
the tube is partly evacuated. Because of the lower 
density inside, the gas is heated by the hotter atmosphere 
outside, through the walls, on the one hand, and one 
sees deeper layers on the other hand: the combination 
of these two effects makes the magnetic elements appear 
brighter than the surrounding atmosphere. The more 
the field is concentrated, the more it is shining. In fact, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Filigree 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SVST 20-Sep-93, AR 7581, G-Band 4305 A Filter 


T. Berger 17-Mar-95 


Figure 1. The solar filigree visible against the granulation pattern in a 4305 A G-band filtergram of an active region; it is formed with 
more or less elongated bright grains located in intergranular lanes. Tickmarks are arcseconds. The filtergram was taken with the 
Swedish Vacuum Solar Telescope at La Palma, Canary Islands (courtesy of T Berger and the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory). 


1600 


2400 


x [km] 


Figure 2. A schematic presentation of a nearly vertical magnetic flux tube, crossing the surface of the Sun (from a two-dimensional 
theoretical model computed by Steiner et al (1998)). The vertical lines represent the magnetic field lines. The horizontal line is the 
surface of the Sun, separating the convection zone below from the photosphere above. The white short vectors represent the 
convective flows, corresponding to granular cells. The gas pressure is lower inside the tube than outside; it is heated by the radiation 
from the hot, non-magnetic, atmosphere surrounding the tube. A filigree bright point corresponds to the cross section near the surface 


of the Sun, of a nearly vertical magnetic flux tube. 


some observational details like the non-exact coincidence 
between the location of bright points and magnetic 
elements, or like the non-exact coincidence between the 
time of maximum brightness and of maximum field 
strength, is better explained with dynamical rather than 
static models (Steiner et al 1998). The rapid evolution and 
structural changes also demonstrate, of course, that the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic flux tubes are not static. 

The physical origin of the magnetic flux tubes is still 
unknown: are they formed locally by some mechanism at 
work near the surface, and destroyed within a short time 
interval, or are they small fragments of sunspots, pulled 
out by convective flows, and spread over the surface of 
the Sun by large-scale convective motions ? But, whatever 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Filigree 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the formation process may be, it seems that the magnetic 
flux, which is of the order of 10'7-10'8 Mx, is temporarily 
concentrated into a flux tube, visible as a small bright 
point in high resolution filtergrams, by the compression 
of converging granules; during this phase it is visible as a 
filigree bright point. 


Filigree bright points, magnetic flux tubes and the 
heating of the solar corona and chromospheric 
features 

The bright points visible in high-resolution filtergrams 
are used to track the chaotic motion of magnetic flux 
at the surface of the Sun. Magnetic waves, transverse 
to the magnetic field, are generated by these motions 
in the top of the convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
CONVECTION ZONE), and propagate upward, through the 
chromosphere, the transition region and the corona, with 
an exponential growth of the amplitude. The dissipation 
of this energy (various kinds of dissipation processes 
have been proposed) may heat the solar corona and some 
chromospheric features as well. 


Distribution at the surface of the Sun 

Filigree bright points are found everywhere, in SOLAR 
ACTIVE REGIONS as Well as in the quiet sun, where they are 
concentrated at the boundaries of supergranules by the 
convective supergranular flows, forming the photospheric 
network. Further, the density (number of bright points by 
surface unit) of the network is not uniform at the surface 
of the Sun: it is minimum at the sunspot belt latitudes 
(where the filigree is present mainly in active regions) and 
maximum at the poles. Polar faculae consist of bright 
point concentrations (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FACULAE). The 
surface distribution is not constant in time: it varies with 
an 11 y period. More precisely, the density at the equator 
and at the poles varies almost in antiphase to the sunspot 
number, with a 1-2 y shift. 

The size and field strength histograms of the observed 
bright points in the network are narrow; this means 
that each bright point carries nearly the same amount 
of magnetic flux, of the order of 2.5 x 10!7 Mx. The 
spatial density of bright points is thus equivalent to a 
magnetic flux, and their spatial and temporal variations 
reflect magnetic flux variations in the quiet atmosphere of 
the Sun. Neither this weak network flux, corresponding 
to the very quiet Sun, nor its time variation are detectable 
with conventional full disk SOLAR MAGNETOGRAPHS. 


Bibliography 

Dunn R B and Zirker J B 1973 Solar Phys. 33 281 

Muller R 1985 Solar Phys. 100 237 

Muller R 1994 Solar Surface Magnetism ed RJ Rutten and 
CJ Schrijver (Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 73 

Steiner O, Grossmann-Doerth U, Knolker M and 
Schiissler M 1998 Astrophys. J. 495 468 


Richard Muller 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Granulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: Granulation 


Under good atmospheric seeing conditions observations 
of the Sun’s surface with a telescope of at least 
30 cm aperture reveal a rugged or polygonal pattern of 
bright elements separated by darker lanes that form an 
interconnected network; this pattern is called GRANULATION 
and was first described by Sir William Herschel in 1801. 
The granulation represents the top of the solar convection 
zone (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE), Where hot gas rises to the 
surface, cools by radiation and sinks back into deeper 
layers. The observed size of granules ranges from 
approximately 150 km (the observational limit of ground- 
based telescopes) to approximately 2500 km, with 1.3 x 
10° km? mean cell area of the granular elements including 
one-half of the surrounding dark lanes. The root-mean- 
square contrast of the granular pattern, after correction 
for degradation by telescope, stray light and seeing, is 
about 13% at a wavelength of 550 nm. Horizontal and 
vertical motions measured in granules and intergranular 
lanes are of the order of 2 km s7! peak to peak. Granules 
change their shape and identity on time scales of 8-16 min; 
they evolve mainly by expansion, fragmentation, merging 
or dissolution. Numerical simulations of convection at 
the solar surface are capable of predicting many details 
of the granular structure (horizontal and vertical velocity, 
temperature and size distribution, evolution, vorticity etc) 
that agree rather well with the observations—one has to 
keep in mind, however, that the smallest structure of the 
models is not accessible to observation. 


Observations of the granulation 

Ground-based observations of the solar granulation (see 
SOLAR TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: GROUND) are hampered by 
two basic effects: the limited resolution of the telescopes 
employed and the image degradation due to refractive 
index inhomogeneities in the terrestrial atmosphere called 
SEEING. An order-of-magnitude consideration illustrates 
the difficulties. A telescope of D = 60 cm aperture, 
working at 4 = 500 nm under diffraction-limited 
conditions, offers a resolution, defined as r = 1.22A. D1, of 
0.21 arcsec or 150 km on the Sun. This means that, because 
of the telescope’s optical modulation transfer function, the 
contrast of features of 0.2 arcsec extent is reduced by a 
factor of order 10. Any optical aberration in the telescope 
increases this factor. Moreover, daytime atmospheric 
conditions usually limit the attainable resolution to values 
larger than 1 arcsec. Only the combination of carefully 
selected sites with optically nearly perfect telescopes and 
refined observing techniques, such as real-time frame 
selection or speckle interferometry (see INTERFEROMETRY: 
GROUND), makes quantitative studies of the granulation 
down to the smallest scales possible. Only a few telescopes 
in the US (Sacramento Peak), France (Pic du Midi) and 
Spain (Canary Islands) are capable of doing such work. 
Figure 1 shows the granular pattern observed with speckle 
interferometric techniques; here details of approximately 
150 km diameter can be studied. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Solar granulation at disk center, observed with the 
German Vacuum Tower Telescope (VTT) at the Observatorio del 
Teide (Tenerife), and restored with speckle interferometric 
techniques by V Wilken and coworkers (Gottingen) 1997. Field 
of view 20 x 14.5 Mm’. 


Size distribution, shape and structure of the 
granulation 

The solar granulation represents a continually changing 
pattern on the Sun. Nevertheless, most observers 
select individual granules for further study; to this end 
different algorithms are applied (cf Muller 1999). One 
consists of a combination of high-pass and low-pass 
filtering in the spatial frequency domain with subsequent 
thresholding close to the mean photospheric intensity; this 
defines iso-intensity contour lines and thus segments the 
image into granules and intergranular lanes. Alternative 
procedures are ‘lane-finding’ schemes (cf Spruit et al 1990), 
algorithms based on local gradients of the intensity, or 
the determination of the intensity inflection points which 
mark the edges of granules. As an example, figure 2 gives 
the size distribution of granules derived with the latter 
technique. The smallest granules, near the observation 
limit, here 0.4 arcsec or 290 km on the Sun, are the most 
frequent ones with a slow decline in number up to a 
diameter near 2 arcsec, and a subsequent rapid decline 
towards the largest granules. Counting the number of 
granules per unit area on the quiet Sun, different authors 
arrive at similar values: on average a granule with the 
surrounding half of the intergranular lane covers 1.3 x 
10° km/?; this is called the mean cell area. 


Intensity contrast and temperature fluctuations 

The best images taken from the ground exhibit a root- 
mean-square intensity contrast (without correction for the 
telescope point spread function and scattered light) of 
~10.7% at } = 468 +5 nm. Contrasts of up to 8-9% 
rms have been measured at 570 nm. After correction for 
the above-mentioned effects, values between 11% and 20% 
were obtained. Conservative estimates, e.g. from speckle- 
reconstructed images like figure 1, arrive at a contrast 
around 13% at 550 nm. This would correspond to rms 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Granulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


d, [arcsec] 


0.3 0.5 1.0 26 4.0 
4 Es T T T T 
3p ; 
= 
‘w 27 1 
Bh \ 
[ ih 
i 
at Vy | 
[ ae | | 
oe | oh 


Ab "530 BS 60, OBS 0 
log(A,) [km*] 


Figure 2. Plots of the granular areas and diameters published in 
1997 by J Hirzberger and coworkers (Graz, La Laguna, 
Ondfejov). Full line, whole sample of 61 138 granules; 
dash-dotted line, 9656 granules from images with granular 
contrasts Alims/I > 5.5%. 


temperature fluctuations of order 200 K; according to arule 
of thumb the peak-to-peak differences are 3 times larger, 
ie. 600 K (see also figure 4). 

On the other hand, numerical models predict 
temperatures around 10000 K for the granular upflows 
and of 6000 K for the intergranular downflows, if one 
refers to the same geometrical depth level near the surface. 
Why does one not observe this? The reason is the very 
high temperature sensitivity of the H~ opacity («T'®): 
at the same optical depth (tc = 1) the temperature 
fluctuations are much smaller than at the same geometrical 
levels. Additionally, the limited spatial resolution of the 
observations plays a role. 


Evolution, lifetime and horizontal proper motions 


The study of granular evolution and lifetime requires time 
series of high spatial resolution that are available from 
space, e.g. from the Solar Optical Universal Polarimeter 
(SOUP) instrument on Spacelab 2, or from exceptional 
ground-based observations (cf Brandt and Wé6hl 1998). 
Granules evolve in several different ways. Frequently they 
expand and split into smaller components that drift apart, 
thus forming an exploding granule. The fragments may in 
turn grow and fragment, or merge with others; shrinking 
and dissolution of granules are also observed. Again, the 
numerical simulations help us to understand the basic 
physics behind this: when a fluid parcel approaches the 
solar surface, radiative cooling carries away its energy; in 
a few tens of seconds the density increases above that of 
its surroundings. Then the vertical motion is decelerated 
and diverted horizontally. Further cooling lets the density 
grow further, and finally gravity pulls the parcel back 
down in the lanes between granules. This whole process 
takes several minutes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


15 RL 


PPT ry tres t 


0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 
AX [nm] 


Figure 3. High-resolution slit spectrogram taken with the 
German VTT at Izafia (Tenerife). The weak line near 

Ad = 0.057 nm is the Fe I line at 1 = 491.15 nm. Note the strong 
blueshifts in the granules (bright horizontal streaks) and the 
redshifts, frequently connected with line broadenings, in the 
intergranular lanes. First published in 1996 by A Nesis and 
coworkers (Freiburg). 


Experimentally determined values of the granular 
lifetime depend on the method used. If the intensity pat- 
tern is autocorrelated, then (after removal of oscillatory 
intensity variations) lifetimes around 8 min are obtained; 
here, lifetime is defined as drop to 1/e of the autocorrela- 
tion function. If individual granules are followed through- 
out their evolution, then visual identification schemes 
yield a mean lifetime of approximately 16 min (with a 
standard deviation ~5 min), whereas objective algorithms 
again give values of 8-10 min. The reason for this large 
discrepancy is not clear; on the other hand it should not 
be taken too seriously, since each identification scheme 
involves some arbitrariness of the definitions: e.g. when 
two granules merge, which of the predecessors ‘continues 
to live’? 

An important feature of granular evolution is the 
horizontal proper motion of granules. It can be 
determined by local correlation tracking, a method 
that searches for the best spatial correlation in small 
subfields of consecutive granulation pictures. With 
this method a larger pattern of 4000-8000 km mesh 
width was found, the mesogranulation (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: MESOGRANULATION). In certain parts of the 
mesogranulation granules consistently move horizontally 
towards a common center (converging region) while in 
other parts diverging motions prevail; the typical speed 
of the horizontal motion is 0.5 km s~!. The lifetime of the 
mesogranulation appears to be of the order of hours—but 
is not well established yet. There are indications that some 
properties of granules, such as area, brightness, lifetime 
and expansion or shrinking rate, depend on their position 
in the mesogranular field. 


Vertical and horizontal velocities 
At photospheric levels and above the whole Sun is 
covered by a pattern of oscillatory elements with vertical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Granulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


amplitudes of several 100 m s-! and a wide range of sizes 
(See SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY); these also show 
up as intensity oscillations. For studies of the granulation 
the effects of these oscillations have to be separated from 
the intensity and velocity variations of the granulation 
pattern. From high-resolution slit spectrograms taken at 
disk center (like the one shown in figure 3) one can measure 
the vertical velocity related to granular motion and obtain 
peak-to-peak values in the range 1.5-2 km s“!, after 
removal of the velocity components due to the oscillation. 
The horizontal velocity components can be investigated 
by observations near the solar limb where they show up 
as line-of-sight velocities. In this way values are found that 
are a factor of ~1.5 larger than the vertical components. 

The vertically ascending material does not stop its 
motion at the very surface but penetrates into higher layers 
owing to excess momentum; this is known as convective 
overshooting. Velocity measurements in lines of different 
strength reveal that the convective overshooting at 
granular scales extends several hundred km above the 
photosphere but the exact height dependence of the 
velocities is still not well established. Figure 4 shows 
an empirical model of an average granule derived 
from 2-dimensional spectroscopic observations of a large 
number of granules. An inversion technique was used to 
obtain the height dependence of temperature, density and 
line-of-sight velocity; horizontal velocities were derived 
from mass conservation considerations. Between the 
upflow in the center of the granule and the downflow 
in the intergranular lane there is a velocity difference 
of ~2 km s7!; also the decrease of velocity with height 
is clearly visible from this figure. At height levels 
below 140 km, upward velocity is correlated with higher 
temperature near the granule center, which implies 
upward transport of energy, and lower temperature with 
downward motion above the intergranular lane. Above 
140 km the temperature stratification reverses. 


Granulation in active regions and near sunspots 


The granular pattern in magnetic regions near sunspots 
and in ACTIVE REGIONS (see SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC PLAGE) 
exhibits lower contrast and reduced vertical velocity as 
well as smaller mean cell area; it is called abnormal 
granulation. Also the temporal evolution is slower, and 
horizontal flow speeds as measured by local correlation 
tracking are one-half those in the quiet photosphere. When 
observed in the wings of strong lines, such as Ha, or in the 
band head of the CH radical at 430 + 5 nm (the G-band) 
these regions show small bright features of ~200 km extent 
that frequently sit in the spaces between granules. They 
were first seen in 1973 by R Dunn and J Zirker and were 
called filigree (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FILIGREE). Apparently, 
the presence of a magnetic field (See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
INTRANETWORK AND MAGNETIC FIELDS) modifies the convective 
energy transport in these regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


z (km) 


Figure 4. Velocity and temperature field measured for an 
average granule. The arrow length is proportional to the 
velocity, with a maximum vertical upward velocity of 

1.6 km s~!. The distance from granule center to the 
intergranular lane center has been scaled to 940 km. Published 
in 1996 by B Ruiz Cobo and coworkers (La Laguna). 


Numerical simulations—agreement with 
observations 

In the recent decade numerical simulations of the solar 
convection, particularly of the granulation, have attained 
a high degree of sophistication (SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
THEORY). Despite their limitations, e.g. in the very small 
volume that can be modelled, some ambiguity in the 
boundary conditions, in the treatment of viscosity etc, 
the simulations are capable of describing many aspects 
that are confirmed by observations. For example, spatial 
intensity distribution and size spectrum, amplitudes of 
horizontal and vertical motion, evolution and topology 
of the granular pattern are rather well reproduced— 
for comparison the numerical results have to be slightly 
degraded spatially in order to account for the limited 
spatial resolution of the observations. Simulations help 
us to arrive at a basic understanding of the top of the 
solar convection zone and to infer details that are not 
accessible by observation. We learn that solar convection is 
driven by both buoyancy forces at subphotospheric levels 
and by radiative cooling at the surface thermal boundary 
layer, that the cooled plasma turns over and converges into 
the dark intergranular lanes and further into the vertices 
between granulation cells forming narrow ‘fingers’ of 
high-velocity downdrafts, which penetrate many scale 
heights. Recent observations have shown that some 
intergranular vertices are much more stable in space and 
time than the rest of the granular pattern. Such persistent 
intergranular features may mark at the photospheric level 
the locations of the high velocity downdrafts. 

Moreover, the numerical simulations suggest that 
downdrafts are surrounded by high-vorticity regions 
while upflows are essentially laminar. Spectrograms 
of very high spatial resolution (cf figure 3) frequently 
exhibit increased linewidth near the edges of granules 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Granulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where vertical velocity gradients are large. Here shear 
flows are surmised to create turbulence—more cautiously, 
some authors use the term unresolved velocities. When 
measured in lines that originate 70-200 km above the 
photosphere values of the rms turbulent velocity wi» ~ 
0.5 km s~! are found, which increase with decreasing 
height; extrapolation to photospheric levels yields wy, ~ 
1.5 km s7“!. In this case the turbulent pressure associated 
with the turbulent velocity: Pap = (1/2)pw?,,,, where p 
is the density, may locally attain a significant fraction (of 
order 0.3) of the gas pressure, and thus play an important 
role in the dynamics of granular evolution. 


Bibliography 

Brandt P N and Wohl H 1998 The Solar Granulation, 
Video Movie Tape (Gottingen: Institut fiir den 
Wissenschaftlichen Film) 

Bray R J, Loughhead R E and Durrant C J 1984 The 
Solar Granulation (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Muller R 1999 The solar granulation Motions in the 
Solar Atmosphere ed A Hanslmeier and M Messerotti 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Rutten R J and Severino G (ed) 1989 Solar and Stellar 
Granulation (Dordrecht: Kluwer). Contains extensive 
bibliography up to 1989 

Spruit H C, Nordlund A and Title A M 1990 Solar 
convection Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 28 263-301 


Peter N Brandt 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Intranetwork and Turbulent 


Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: Intranetwork and 
Turbulent Magnetic Fields 


The names ‘intranetwork’ and ‘turbulent magnetic fields’ 
are used to represent the solar magnetic fields of mixed 
polarities at the smallest scales of the spatial spectrum. 
Since the spatial separation of the opposite polarities is 
small, and since the magnetic flux of each small-scale 
magnetic element is tiny, they can only be made partly 
visible in ‘deep’ magnetograms obtained with both high 
spatial resolution and long integration times. If the 
magnetic elements are much smaller than the photon 
mean free path (optically thin regime) they may not be 
spatially resolved even in principle. Yet such optically 
thin magnetic structures may be diagnosed by indirect 
methods, in particular with the Hanle effect (see SOLAR 
MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS). 

While the word ‘intranetwork’ generally refers to 
the spatially resolved mixed-polarity field, the phrase 
‘turbulent field’, when used in the context of interpreting 
spectro-polarimetric observations, usually refers to the 
spatially unresolved, ‘hidden’ mixed-polarity field, which 
remains practically invisible in solar magnetograms owing 
to cancellation of the contributions from the opposite- 
polarity elements within the spatial resolution element. 

Figure 1 illustrates the typical spatial distribution 
of the resolved mixed-polarity magnetic fields on the 
quiet Sun in the form of a ‘deep’ magnetogram of the 
line-of-sight component of the magnetic field. Such a 
magnetogram is a map of the circular polarization that is 
produced by the longitudinal Zeeman effect in a selected 
spectral line. The opposite polarities are represented 
by the brighter and darker patches against a neutral 
background, giving a ‘salt and pepper’ appearance when 
the polarities are mixed. 


Intranetwork fields 

The choice of the word ‘intranetwork’ is made to contrast 
these magnetic fields with those that are related to the 
emission network that is seen as a brightness pattern in 
chromospheric and TRANSITION REGION spectral lines (see 
CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK). This emission is located at the 
boundaries of the velocity cells of the supergranulation 
(with a cell diameter of 30 000 km) (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
SUPERGRANULATION). Since the magnetic field is frozen into 
the plasma, it is carried by the flow pattern of the 
supergranulation and converges to the downdraft regions 
at the cell boundaries. The supergranulation flow thus 
organizes the large-scale pattern of magnetic flux and 
emission. 

Because of the organizing effect of the supergranu- 
lation flow, most of the magnetic flux becomes concen- 
trated in the network, and it is this network flux that is 
the source of the large-scale magnetic field that reaches 
up in the corona and beyond. The magnetic fluxes in the 
network are predominantly of one polarity over scales of 
the supergranulation size. This flux occurs in the form 
of highly intermittent magnetic flux tubes, which occupy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. ‘Deep’ magnetogram of a 280 x 280 arcsec” portion of 
the quiet Sun at the center of the solar disk, obtained on 1 July 
1998, by Jongchul Chae at BBSO. The opposite-polarity magnetic 
fluxes are represented by the brighter and darker patches 
against a neutral grey background. 4096 separate frames have 
been added to enhance the sensitivity and bring out the weaker 
magnetic fluxes. Courtesy of Big Bear Solar Observatory /New 
Jersey Institute of Technology. 


typically 1% of the volume in the photosphere and have 
field strengths on the order of 1 kG. 

In magnetograms with insufficient polarimetric 
sensitivity and spatial resolution one may get the 
impression that all the photospheric magnetic flux is in 
the form of network flux with a typical magnetic filling 
factor of 1% , while the remaining 99% appears as if it were 
field free. No portions of the solar plasma can, however, 
be strictly field free, since the flux concentration by the 
supergranular and granular flows is of finite efficiency 
(see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION), and any left-over, 
unconcentrated weak magnetic flux will be acted upon 
by the convective and turbulent motions and tangled 
up until some magnetoturbulent equilibrium between 
magnetic and kinetic energies is reached. Many of these 
magnetoturbulent processes may also take place deep in 
the convection zone before the fluxes emerge at the solar 
surface (See SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE). 

What we see in figure 1 is actually a mixture 
of network and intranetwork fields. The more 
prominent flux patches are due to the network, while 
the rather inconspicuous dot-like features represent the 
intranetwork field. These features can only be seen in 
‘deep’ magnetograms under good seeing conditions. 

If an observed magnetic element carries a small 
magnetic flux, this does not necessarily imply that the field 
strength is also small, since the measured flux is a product 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Intranetwork and Turbulent 


Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


[arcsec | 


15650 


15652 15654 
[wavelength (A)] 


Figure 2. Spectral image in the near-infrared of the circular 
polarization, recorded in 1997 at the National Solar Observatory 
(Sunspot, New Mexico) with the spectrograph slit positioned at 
the center of the solar disk. The two spectral lines of neutral iron 
at 15 648 and 15 652 A show the characteristic Zeeman-effect 
signatures of a magnetic field that exhibits variations of sign or 
polarity on scales of a few arcsec along the spectrograph slit. At 
each spatial position the circularly polarized line profile is 
antisymmetric, but the sense of the antisymmetry depends on 
the polarity. Courtesy H Lin and T Rimmele, NSO/Sacramento 
Peak. 


of field strength and magnetic filling factor. For fluxes 
larger than about 2 x 10” Mx (corresponding to 20 G Mm’; 
1 Mm = 1000 km, corresponding to 1.4 arcsec on the 
Sun) the field strength depends very weakly on flux (and 
is about 1.0-1.5 kG), which may be understood in terms 
of the convective collapse mechanism for the formation 
of kG flux tubes. For smaller fluxes the field strength 
decreases rapidly with decreasing flux, since the diameter 
of kG flux tubes with such small flux would be optically 
thin, which would prevent the collapse mechanism from 
working (owing to damping by the effective heat exchange 
between flux tube interior and exterior). 

In the visible spectral range the Zeeman splitting 
is generally incomplete (smaller than the spectral line 
width), which has the consequence that the observed 
circular polarization mainly carries information on the 
magnetic flux but not directly on the field strength or filling 
factor. To extract information on the field strength one 
has had to develop indirect methods by forming ratios 
between the circular-polarization amplitudes measured in 
spectral lines with different sensitivities to the Zeeman 
effect. In the infrared, however, the Zeeman splitting is 
much larger and becomes complete even for moderately 
strong fields. This allows us to extract direct information 
on both flux and field strength (and thus also on magnetic 
filling factor) without having to use tricks such as 
polarized line ratios. Figure 2 gives an example of a 
spectro-polarimetric recording of intranetwork magnetic 
fields in the wavelength region around 1.565 ym. The 
spectrograph slit has been placed at the center of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


solar disk, and the spectrogram shows the characteristic 
antisymmetric circularly polarized line profiles due to the 
longitudinal Zeeman effect. The polarity reversals occur 
on a scale of a few arcsec, close to the scale of the solar 
granulation. Such recordings allow the magnetic flux, field 
strength, and filling factor to be determined for each spatial 
location along the spectrograph slit. 

The relation between the network and intranetwork 
magnetic fields is not clear. It is generally believed that the 
magnetic flux that is the source of solar activity originates 
by dynamo processes inside the Sun (see DYNAMOS: SOLAR 
AND STELLAR), preferentially near the bottom of the Sun’s 
convection zone. New magnetic flux emerges from the 
interior in bipolar form on different scales. The bipolar 
regions with the largest amount of flux form the ACTIVE 
REGIONS with suNspors and appear at low heliographic 
latitudes. Smaller bipolar regions without sunspots on 
typical scales of 10-20 arcsec are called ephemeral active 
regions because of their shorter lifetimes. They are 
more abundant with a larger latitudinal spread. It is 
possible, although controversial, that the still smaller-scale 
and ubiquitous intranetwork fields with scales of a few 
arcsec may be considered as the small-scale portion of 
a continuous spectrum of bipolar magnetic regions that 
includes active regions in its large-scale portion. While the 
flux emergence rate for active regions is 10°” Mx day“, it 
is 10% Mx day~! for ephemeral regions and 1074 Mx day™! 
for intranetwork fields (Zirin 1987). The smallest scales 
thus dominate the flux budget. 

The large bipolar magnetic regions (active regions) 
are highly organized, with the magnetic polarities being 
oriented in the east-west direction and evolving with the 
22 year solar magnetic cycle according to Hale’s polarity 
law (see SOLAR CYCLE). The ephemeral active regions also 
obey Hale’s polarity law in a statistical sense, but with 
a much larger spread in their orientations. It is not yet 
known whether the orientations of the intranetwork fields 
are entirely random or not. If their directional distribution 
contains a non-random component, they could even be the 
dominating contributor to the global magnetic flux pattern 
owing to their extremely high flux emergence rate (which 
is 10000 times that of active regions). Their possible role 
in the operation of the solar dynamo is still a controversial 
subject. 

The large emergence rate needs to be balanced by a 
similar rate of flux removal, otherwise the photosphere 
would become ‘choked’ by all the emerging flux. Flux 
removal can occur mainly either by (i) submergence, 
whereby flux ropes are retracted down below the solar 
surface, or by (ii) annihilation, when opposite-polarity 
fields meet and reconnect on the Ohmic diffusion scale 
(on the order of 1 km). Reconnection can also release field 
lines from being anchored to the solar body and allow the 
liberated flux loops to be convected into the heliosphere. 
It has not yet been possible to determine the relative role 
of these various mechanisms for the overall flux budget. 

Large active regions as well as ephemeral active 
regions are localized bipolar structures that only cover a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Intranetwork and Turbulent 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetic Fields 


1.0 


0.5 


Stokes Q/I & U/I (%) 


0.0 -—— 


3 T T T T T T T T r T T r T 


Stokes Q/I & U/I (%) 


-0.5f¢ tae 4 


4077.5 4078.0 4078.5 
Wavelength (A) 


4077.5 4078.0 4078.5 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 3. Illustration of spectral signatures of the Hanle effect in the Sr 1 4077.7 A line at four locations on the solar disk. The curves 
represent the degree of linear polarization oriented parallel to the nearest solar limb (Stokes Q/J, full curves) and at 45° to the limb 
(Stokes U/I, dotted curves). The shapes of the polarized line profiles change from place to place on the Sun because of varying Hanle 
depolarization in the line core of the Q/J profiles (while the line wings are almost unaffected). Partially resolved magnetic fields with 
a net orientation cause a rotation of the plane of linear polarization, which shows up as a U/J signal in the line core. From Bianda et al 


(1998). 


small fraction of the solar surface. Likewise the network 
magnetic fields, which represent the footpoints of the 
large-scale coronal field, are highly intermittent in the 
photosphere with kG fields and a magnetic filling factor 
on the order of 1%. The intranetwork magnetic fields 
retain some degree of intermittency, although much less 
pronounced, and have substantially lower field strengths 
(in the range of hundreds of G or less). Other properties 
of the small-scale and intranetwork fields are discussed in 
Stenflo (1989), Martin (1990) and Wang et al (1995). 


Turbulent fields: beyond the spatial resolution 
limit 

It is not known to what extent the magnetic field 
retains some degree of intermittency when going to still 
smaller scales. The theory of magnetoconvection (see 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: MAGNETOCONVECTION) in a highly 
stratified medium is not in a position to make any 
clear prediction about this, and the scales that we 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are now considering are too small to be spatially 
resolved. Still it is possible to obtain information on the 
spatially unresolved turbulent magnetic fields via spectro- 
polarimetric methods involving the Hanle effect. 

Spectral lines are linearly polarized by coherent 
scattering processes, but in the presence of a turbulent 
magnetic field the amount of polarization is reduced 
depending on the strength and degree of intermittency of 
the turbulent field. To apply this method one first has to 
describe the spatially unresolved field with an idealized 
model that is characterized by some free parameters, 
the values of which are constrained or determined by 
the amount of observed Hanle depolarization. With a 
one-parameter model, characterized by a volume-filling 
field with a random orientation of the field vectors (note, 
however, that the spatial topology is not constrained to 
be random) and a single-valued field strength as the free 
parameter, one finds field strengths in the range of 4—40 G, 
depending on position on the solar disk. If the field would 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Intranetwork and Turbulent 


Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


be intermittent with a filling factor smaller than unity, the 
field strength would be correspondingly larger. 

Figure 3 illustrates the kinds of spectral signatures 
used to extract information on both spatially unresolved 
and partially resolved magnetic fields via the Hanle effect. 
The figure shows four recordings at four different locations 
on the solar disk of the linear polarization produced by 
coherent scattering in the spectral line Sr II 4077.7 A. The 
Hanle effect is only effective in the line core but not in the 
wings, and it manifests itself in the form of depolarization 
and rotation of the plane of polarization. The four full 
curves show various degrees of depolarization, while 
the dotted curves show a polarization signal in the line 
core if the plane of polarization has been rotated. The 
interpretation of the observations is complicated, but such 
data give access to a different parameter regime than can 
be studied via the ordinary Zeeman effect. 

It is natural to expect that the field would become 
ubiquitously tangled by the turbulent motions until 
some equipartition between the magnetic and kinetic 
energies is reached at the smallest scales, where 
the convective collapse mechanism is inoperative and 
magnetic diffusion plays an increasing role. The nature 
of the magnetoturbulent spectrum, however, remains 
unknown. With future multiline applications of Hanle 
diagnostics it should be possible to make the interpretative 
models more sophisticated and realistic. 

If the turbulent field strength is determined by the 
kinetic energy spectrum of the granulation and smaller- 
scale turbulence, and if this kinetic spectrum is the same at 
all places on the quiet solar disk, then one would expect the 
turbulent field strength to be independent of position on 
the quiet Sun (outside active regions). Hanle observations, 
however, show (Stenflo et al 1998) that the turbulent field 
strength is not spatially invariant but exhibits variations 
by an order of magnitude. It is a quantity that needs to be 
mapped across the solar disk. 


Outlook 

Progress in understanding the intranetwork and turbulent 
magnetic fields requires improved spatial resolution com- 
bined with high polarimetric accuracy and spectral reso- 
lution. The near-infrared spectral region is particularly 
suited for Zeeman diagnostics of the spatially resolved 
fields, since the large Zeeman splitting of infrared lines al- 
lows a determination of both field strength and magnetic 
filling factor (cf Solanki 1995). The Hanle effect as a di- 
agnostic of spatially unresolved turbulent magnetic fields 
is best applied with lines at shorter wavelengths in the 
visible domain, where scattering polarization occurs with 
larger amplitudes. 

Small-scale structures evolve on small time scales, 
so high spatial resolution also demands moderately high 
temporal resolution. The four observational parameters 
of spatial, temporal and spectral resolution as well as 
polarimetric accuracy form a 4D parameter space that 
characterizes the observations. The observations will 
always be photon starved, since it will always be necessary 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to make trade-offs between these four parameters, even 
with the largest foreseeable future telescopes. The chosen 
trade-offs depend on the emphases and objectives of the 
particular observing program. With adaptive optics it will 
become possible to combine high spatial resolution with 
high-precision spectro-polarimetry requiring relatively 
long integration times. This, in combination with larger 
telescope apertures, will provide access to unexplored 
territory in the 4D parameter space, allowing for major 
advances in understanding magnetoconvection and the 
operation of the solar dynamo. 


Bibliography 

Bianda M, Stenflo J O and Solanki S K 1998 Hanle 
diagnostics of solar magnetic fields: the Sr 11 4078 A 
line Astron. Astrophys. 337 565-78 

Martin S F 1990 Small-scale magnetic features observed in 
the photosphere IAU Symp. 138 129-46 

Solanki S K 1995 Magnetic field measurements in the 
infrared Infrared Tools for Solar Astrophysics: What's 
Next? ed J R Kuhn and MJ Penn (Singapore: World 
Scientific) pp 341-53 

Stenflo J O 1989 Small-scale magnetic structures on the Sun 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 1 3-48 

Stenflo J O, Keller C U and Gandorfer A 1998 Differential 
Hanle effect and the spatial variation of turbulent 
magnetic fields on the Sun Astron. Astrophys. 329 319- 
28 

Wang J, Wang H, Tang F, Lee J W and Zirin H 1995 Flux 
distribution of solar intranetwork magnetic fields 
Solar Phys. 160 277-88 

Zirin H 1987 Weak solar fields and their connection to the 
solar cycle Sol. Phys. 110 101-7 


J O Stenflo 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Mesogranulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: Mesogranulation 


Mesogranulation is a horizontal cellular pattern in the 
convective motions at the surface of the Sun with sizes 
of 5-10 Mm. Convection is the transport of energy 
by rising warm fluid and sinking cool fluid. How 
convection appears at the solar surface depends on 
how it is viewed. In the emergent intensity, solar 
convection is visible as a cellular pattern called granulation 
(See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION). Observed as quasi- 
steady fluid velocity averaged over times of order 1 h, 
a larger-size cellular pattern of diverging horizontal 
flows appears, called mesogranulation, with diameters of 
5-10 Mm. Horizontal velocity flows also reveal an even 
larger pattern of supergranulation (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
SUPERGRANULATION). 

Mesogranulation was first observed as a pattern in the 
persistent (time-averaged) vertical velocity observed as a 
Doppler shift in photospheric and chromospheric spectral 
lines. It is most clearly seen in the quasi-steady divergence 
of the horizontal surface velocity, which can be determined 
by following the motion across the surface of features 
in the granulation using local correlation tracking. This 
technique calculates the cross correlation between images 
at two different times as a function of their displacement. 
The local motion between the two times is taken to be 
the displacement that maximizes the cross correlation 
at each location in the image. Using the quasi-steady 
horizontal motions to calculate the trajectories of markers 
in the flow shows that they end up after a few hours in 
thin lanes surrounding the mesogranule cells (figure 1). 
Magnetic fields are shuffled about in a similar fashion by 
the fluid motions and as a result are observed to collect 
on the mesogranule boundaries and then be swept to 
the supergranule boundaries where the magnetic field 
produces the chromospheric network (See CHROMOSPHERE: 
NETWORK). 

The mesogranular component of solar convection 
affects the properties of the smaller-scale granules. By 
conservation of mass, regions of horizontally diverging 
flow are regions of upflowing fluid and regions of 
horizontally converging flow are regions of downflowing 
fluid. Bright, long-lived, rapidly expanding granules are 
found preferentially in upflowing, diverging interiors of 
mesogranule cells. Small, faint, short-lived granules are 
found preferentially in the downflow lanes of converging 
flow at the edges of the mesogranule cells. 

Solar convection is driven by radiative cooling in a 
very thin layer at the solar surface of that small fraction 
of fluid that reaches the surface. This cool fluid forms 
the low-entropy cores of downdrafts that descend into 
the interior and is the primary site of the buoyancy work 
that produces the convective motions. The convective 
flow pattern is determined by mass conservation. Warm 
fluid ascending into lower-density layers is like a fountain 
(figure 2). Most of it must turn over and become entrained 
in the downdrafts within a density scale height (the 
distance in which the density decreases by a factor of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e = 2.7). With increasing depth, the temperature increases 
and the scale height increases, which leads to larger-size 
cells of ascending fluid (figure 3). Thus mesogranular- 
scale upflows become dominant about 2 Mm below the 
surface and supergranular-scale upflows dominate at 
about 10 Mm below the surface. 


Bibliography 

Brandt P N, Ferguson S, Scharmer G B, Shine R A, 
Tarbell T D, Title A M and Topka K 1991 Variation 
of granulation properties on a mesogranular scale 
Astron. Astrophys. 241 219-26 

November L J 1989 The vertical component of the 
supergranular convection Astrophys. J. 344 494-503 

November LJ and Simon G W 1988 Precise proper-motion 
measurement of solar granulation Astrophys. J. 333 
427-42 

Topka K Pand Title A M 1991 High resolution observations 
of solar granulation Solar Interior and Atmosphere 
ed A N Cox, W C Livingston and M S Matthews 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 727-47 


Robert Stein 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Mesogranulation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sa oi 


after 0 hours 


after 1.0 hours 


S 


alter 4 hou rs 


after 2 ho 


urs 


Figure 1. Sequence of images showing the velocity divergence (dark is diverging) and the motion of corks (fluid parcel tracers that 
move with the horizontal fluid velocity as determined by local correlation tracking). Tick marks denote 10 Mm intervals. After 1 h the 
corks have collected at the boundaries of the diverging flow cells which mark the mesogranules. After a longer time (4 h), the corks 


become concentrated on the larger supergranule boundaries. 


(Mm) 


Figure 2. Image of entropy fluctuations and velocity arrows in the x—-z-plane. A broad, high-entropy, upflow at depth (a mesogranule) 
breaks up into smaller upflows near the surface (the granules). A downdraft of low-entropy fluid penetrates the entire computational 
domain near 4.0 Mm horizontal location. The flow topology is similar to a fountain, with most rising fluid turning over and going 
back down within a scale height. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Solar Photosphere: Mesogranulation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


6.0 


5.0 
4.0 fe 
_—. 
e a » 
3 3.0 


1,0 


Figure 3. Image of entropy fluctuations and horizontal velocity arrows at four depths: surface, 0.5 Mm, 1.0 Mm, 2.0 Mm below surface 


(from left to right, top to bottom). Dark is low-entropy descending fluid and light is high-entropy ascending fluid. The scale of the 
horizontal cells increases with depth from granulation to mesogranulation size. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Supergranulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: Supergranulation 


The surface of the Sun is covered by convection cells 
called GRANULATION, which can easily be seen in white 
light through a telescope under good SEEING conditions. 
These cells, typically 1 Mm in diameter, are visible 
because their centers are hotter (brighter) than their 
cooler (darker) boundaries. Granules float on top of a 
much larger convection pattern called supergranulation. 
Supergranules, with diameters of about 20 Mm, are the 
tops of plumes (bubbles) which probably form 5-10 Mm 
below the solar surface in the Sun’s convection zone 
(See SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE). Supergranulation is 
invisible in ordinary photographs, but can be seen in 
Dopplergrams. In a supergranule gas flows radially 
outward from its center to its periphery. This motion 
drags with it magnetic flux tubes, which pile up at the 
supergranule boundary to form a magnetic network (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES) and define the locus 
of the Sun’s chromospheric network (see CHROMOSPHERE: 
NETWORK). 


Solar convection and mixing-length theory 

In 1801 the great English astronomer William Herschel 
first observed that the Sun’s visible surface, the SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE, has a granular appearance. Seventy-five 
years later the first high-resolution photographs of the Sun 
revealed that this granulation was composed of closely 
packed cells having bright (hot) centers surrounded by 
dark (cool) lanes. In the 1930s the German theoretician 
Ludwig Biermann realized that, in the outer 30% of 
the Sun, heat from the interior is transported to the 
surface by convection, and granules are the surface 
manifestation (the boiling bubbles) of this convective 
process. However, theory was incompatible with the 
observations. According to then-accepted mixing-length 
theory, convective bubbles should have sizes proportional 
to the local scale height H (the distance in which density 
or pressure changes by a factor e ~ 2.7). Thus a large 
range of cell sizes was expected. Why was it then that 
only granular-sized bubbles (~ 1 Mm) were seen, while 
H ranged over three orders of magnitude, from 100 km at 
the Sun’s surface to 100 Mm at the base of the convection 
zone? 


Discovery of supergranulation 

Not until the 1960s was this mystery finally solved, 
thanks first to an invention by the brilliant American 
physicist Robert Leighton and second to a simple theory 
of heat transport through the convection zone. Leighton 
modified the well-known SPECTROHELIOGRAPH so that it 
could not only take ordinary brightness photographs of 
the Sun but also obtain Dopplergrams and Zeemangrams. 
That is, with the new instrument, he was able to 
visualize line-of-sight velocities and magnetic fields at 
the solar surface. Immediately thereafter (in 1961) 
he and his colleagues made two major discoveries 
that spawned two new disciplines of solar research. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A full-disk Dopplergram of the Sun obtained by MDI. 
Dark and bright features indicate line-of-sight approaching and 
receding velocities. Supergranules, not visible at disk center, 
appear as elliptical structures, each with a dark and a bright half. 
(Courtesy of R Bogart, Stanford University, and G Simon, Air 
Force Research Lab.) 


The first was the Sun’s five-minute oscillations which 
opened the field of HELIOsEIsMoLocy. The second was 
supergranulation, which started the study of solar 
magnetoconvection. Supergranules were the second scale 
of solar convection to be discovered. Their area is 400 
times that of granules. Mixing-length theory, already 
seriously weakened because only one scale of convection 
(granulation) had been observed, was further destroyed 
by the discovery of supergranulation. Instead of many 
convective size scales, now two discrete scales of widely 
disparate sizes had been seen. In 1968 Nigel Weiss and 
George Simon suggested a model of rising plumes which 
predicted the existence of three or four cell sizes, the two 
that had been observed, a giant cell formed at the base 
of the convection zone and perhaps an intermediate scale. 
Lawrence November discovered the last of these scales in 
1981, calling it mesogranulation, and giant cells were first 
observed in 1997. 


Properties of supergranules 

Convection cells typically have depths from 1/4 to 1/2 
the size of their diameters; they look like very thick 
pancakes. So supergranules, which have mean diameters 
of 20 Mm, are generally believed to originate 5-10 Mm 
below the solar surface. By the time these hot bubbles 
reach the surface they have given up their excess heat 
to the surrounding gas. Hence they show so little 
brightness contrast between their warmer centers and 
cooler boundaries that they are invisible in ordinary 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Supergranulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


photographs. Only their motions, revealed in the 
Dopplergrams, can be observed. Recent helioseismology 
measurements, by the MDI instrument on the sono 
spacecraft (launched in 1995), indicate that supergranules 
extend about 8 Mm below the surface, exactly in the 
expected depth range. Helioseismology is permitting the 
first three-dimensional view of the Sun’s subsurface layers 
and holds much promise for understanding convection 
processes below the Sun’s visible surface. In stark 
contrast to pancake observations, one theoretical model 
suggests that supergranules may be tall vertical cylinders, 
extending from the bottom to the top of the convection 
zone. Future helioseismological data may be able to 
discriminate between pancake and cylinder models of 
supergranules. 

Hot gas rises (50-100 m s“') at a supergranule’s 
center, flows horizontally outwards (200-500 m s~') and 
then sinks (100-200 m s~') at the cell boundary. Most 
of the downflow occurs at vertices of the irregular 
polygonal structure of supergranulation. At the Sun’s 
surface one sees primarily the horizontal flow pattern. 
In a full-disk Dopplergram (figure 1), supergranules are 
elliptical features, half-bright, half-dark. None is seen at 
disk center. The round supergranules appear elongated 
owing to foreshortening. This photograph is explained 
schematically in figure 2. Since Dopplergrams show 
only line-of-sight motions, horizontal motions will not be 
visible at disk center. Away from center, one observes 
supergranules at a slant angle, so a component of the 
horizontal motion projects into the line of sight, and 
appears either dark (approaching) or light (receding). 
The slant angle of view produces the geometrical 
foreshortening such that, when viewed from Earth, the 
supergranule looks smaller (broken arrows) than at disk 
center. The gas circulation within the supergranulation is 
shown schematically by the solid arrows. In figure 3 we 
show a high-resolution Dopplergram, taken at the Sun’s 
south limb by MDI. Here we have enclosed eight typical 
supergranules in boxes. Each has its darker half closer to 
disk center (located above the image, at x, y = 300 arcsec, 
975 arcsec). If the supergranule has a circular cross-section 
and a horizontal radial outflow from its center, the Doppler 
effect and foreshortening give it an elliptical shape, with 
its long axis dividing the dark and bright halves. This 
long axis is parallel to the solar limb and perpendicular 
to the line we have drawn along a solar radius from the 
supergranule toward disk center. 

Until recently it has been impossible to measure 
accurately the lifetime of supergranules, since they were 
known to live 1 day or longer. Because of the day-— 
night cycle, ground-based observations of supergranules 
were interrupted at sunset, and by the following sunrise 
the cell had either died or changed shape sufficiently 
so that identification was uncertain or impossible. 
Now the space-based MDI instrument has, on several 
occasions, provided uninterrupted Dopplergrams (at a 
1 min cadence) for 60-90 days. Special feature-tracking 
algorithms have been applied to these data sets. From 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


<-—-=> 


GRAY 


EARTH 
SUPERGRANULE 


SUN 


Figure 2. Schematic diagram (enlarged) of supergranules, at and 
away from disk center, to explain features seen in figure 1. and 
figure 3. The actual sizes of supergranules and the Earth, 
relative to the Sun, are shown as small circles. 


A 
x 
g 
Vv 


arcsec 
60 120 180 240 300 360 420 480 540 


5 
— 


Figure 3. Appearance of supergranules near the solar limb. 
Eight are enclosed in boxes. Lines connect the centers of these 
supergranules with Sun center. Note that each line is 
approximately perpendicular to the line (not drawn) that 
separates the dark and bright halves of that supergranule. 
(Courtesy R Shine, Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics 
Lab, and G Simon, Air Force Research Lab.) 


measurements of many thousands of supergranules it has 
been learned that, while most supergranules live between 
15 and 30 h, a small number have lifetimes exceeding 
2 days, a few even over 4 days. 


Supergranular advection of granules 

The supergranular flows carry granules, much like flotsam 
is transported in ariver. Thus it is possible to observe these 
flows indirectly, by measuring the motions of the granules, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Supergranulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


using the technique of local correlation tracking (LCT), 
first developed in the 1980s and since then a powerful 
tool for describing the Sun’s surface velocity structure. 
Since granules are such small features, LCT only works 
with ground-based observations under very good seeing 
conditions (times of low atmospheric turbulence) or with 
space-based telescopes. Otherwise the granule shapes 
are distorted or even disappear and cannot be used as 
supergranular tracers. LCT wonderfully complements 
Doppler measurements, since it works best at disk center, 
where Dopplergrams are ineffective. Because LCT can 
also be used far from disk center where the Doppler 
signal is strong, it has been possible to confirm that the 
two techniques give consistent values for supergranular 
velocities. 


The magnetic network 

Not only granules but also small magnetic flux tubes 
are carried by the supergranular flow field. Since 
supergranules cover the solar surface in a close- 
packed polygonal-shaped cellular structure, this topology 
requires that the outflows from adjacent supergranules 
meet at their common boundary. Some of this gas, 
which had risen to the surface at the supergranule 
centers, falls back down along this boundary line. The 
remainder moves along the boundary to vertices in the 
pattern, where the downflow is concentrated into small 
plumes, and often shows a vortex (twisting) motion. The 
magnetic flux is forced to the cell boundaries by the 
flows, where it gathers into a network pattern, which is 
especially concentrated at the vertices. The study of such 
interactions between convective gas motions and magnetic 
field is called magnetoconvection. Models of solar 
magnetoconvection attempt to describe how magnetic flux 
is carried, concentrated, dispersed, diffused, twisted and 
stretched by motions of the ionized solar gas and how, 
at the same time, the magnetic field reacts against this 
motion, thus altering the nature of the gas flow. While the 
supergranular interactions described here occur probably 
at and within 10 Mm of the solar surface, similar forces 
acting far below the surface, near the base of the convection 
zone (200 Mm depth), are probably responsible for the 
formation of suNspots and the solar dynamo (see DYNAMOs: 
SOLAR AND STELLAR) Which produces the solar activity cycle 
(See SOLAR CYCLE). 

The magnetic network causes localized heating at the 
solar surface and directly above it in the chromosphere. A 
chromospheric network, consisting of rising and falling 
jets of hot gas called spicules, forms at the loci of the 
magnetic flux. In figure 4, a filtergram taken in the 
light of Ha, a spectral line of hydrogen that originates 
in the chromosphere, the spicules correspond to the 
dark elongated structures. The distinct network pattern 
resembles hedgerows that separate farm fields. (The 
complex bright and dark region in the foreground is an 
ACTIVE REGION containing two small sunspots. This is not 
part of the network pattern which is visible in the central 
and upper portions of the filtergram.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The chromospheric network (seen in this Ha 
filtergram) is coincident with a network of magnetic flux 
elements and marks the boundaries of supergranules. The 
network consists of dark fibrillar vertical structures (spicules). 
Black crossed lines indicate the long and short axes of two 
foreshortened supergranules. (Courtesy of R Dunn, National 
Solar Observatory.) 


Magnetic diffusion and kinematic modeling 
Knowledge of the supergranule lifetime is important 
for studies of solar magnetoconvection. It is believed 
that large-scale long-term transport of magnetic field 
across the Sun is related to the solar activity cycle. 
This transport may be due to a diffusion mechanism 
controlled by the supergranulation. As we have pointed 
out, the supergranular flow concentrates magnetic flux 
into a network pattern. This pattern undergoes little 
change during the supergranule’s life, but when the cell 
disappears it is replaced by a new supergranule 5, 10 
or 20 Mm removed from the former cell. The magnetic 
network must now rearrange itself to conform to the flow 
pattern of this new supergranule. The continual birth and 
death of supergranules creates a random-walk diffusion 
that steps the magnetic field across the Sun. This diffusion 
is directly proportional to the square of the step size, and 
inversely to the time between steps, i.e. to the area of a 
supergranule divided by its lifetime. 

Kinematic modeling of solar magnetoconvection (in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: Supergranulation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


240 pots 
LAst=Oh 
1804. 


1204 


60 eee RE AOE EE Ys Gti 


- ee 
240 cE } — 
180] ee Fy AE YS / e+ 


120; f oy itd AL | 


8, 
‘ 
é 

\ 


Figure 5. Formation of the magnetic network. In this numerical 
simulation, supergranular flows carry an initially uniform 
distribution (A) of tracer particles (representing magnetic flux 
tubes) to the boundaries of the supergranules. After 6 h (B) the 
evolving network can easily be recognized, and it is almost fully 
formed in 12 h (C). After 24 h (D) the network is very thin, and 
beginning to concentrate into small clumps at vertices of the 
pattern. 


which the magnetic field does not react back against the 
velocity field, and thus the magnetic flux tubes act as 
simple tracers of the flow) can be used to illustrate the 
concentration, dispersal and diffusion of magnetic flux at 
the solar surface. If one uses the observed sizes, lifetimes 
and velocity field of supergranules to create a slowly 
changing artificial grid of convection cells, one can observe 
the effect of this evolving flow pattern on an initially 
uniform randomly distributed set of tracer particles (called 
corks) and compute the rate of diffusion. Results from such 
a model calculation by Simon, Title and Weiss are shown in 
figure 5. The visualization shows the evolution of the cork 
pattern over 1 day, from a uniform random distribution 
to a well-defined network structure, with concentrations 
of particles forming at vertices of the flow pattern. While 
they are not correct representations of magnetoconvection 
of strong magnetic fields, these models are sufficiently 
accurate for weak fields. They can be quickly computed 
for large areas of the solar surface and thus provide 
useful descriptions of magnetoconvection and magnetic 
diffusion on the quiet Sun, away from sunspots and active 
regions. 


Bibliography 

Leighton R B, Noyes R W and Simon G W 1962 Velocity 
fields in the solar atmosphere. I. Preliminary report 
Astrophys. J. 135 474-99 

Simon G W and Weiss N O 1968 Supergranules and the 
hydrogen convection zone Z. Astrophys. 69 435-50 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Simon G W, Title A M, Topka K P, Tarbell T D, Shine R 
A, Ferguson S H, Zirin, H and the SOUP Team 1988 
On the relation between photospheric flow fields and 
the magnetic field distribution on the solar surface 
Astrophys. J. 327 964-7 

Simon G W, Title A M and Weiss N O 1995 Kinematic 
models of supergranular diffusion on the sun 
Astrophys. J. 442 886-97 


George Simon 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: The Limb Effect and Gravitational 
Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photosphere: The Limb Effect 
and Gravitational Redshift 


The ‘limb effect’ is the observational finding that many 
spectral absorption lines formed in the photosphere 
(FRAUNHOFER LINES) Show a REDSHIFT of their mean wave- 
length when comparing limb observations with observa- 
tions from the solar disk center. The magnitude of this 
effect is different for each spectral line and equals some 
100 m s~! when explained as a DOPPLER EFFECT. 

The ‘gravitational redshift’ is the redshift of spectral 
lines originating near a mass concentration as described 
by Einstein’s theory of GENERAL RELATIVITY. 

Both historic terms are related to wavelength shifts 
and spectral line shape changes when analysing the center- 
to-limb variation of the spectral absorption lines formed 
in the photosphere (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: CENTER-TO-LIMB 
VARIATION), Which is the topic of this article. 


Wavelength shifts and line shapes 

Using present knowledge of the physical conditions within 
the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE One expects several effects on the 
wavelengths and line shapes of the spectral lines formed 
there, which depend on each other: 


(a) Due to the gravitational force on the Sun, which is 
much larger than that on the Earth, the wavelengths 
of spectral lines are shifted to longer wavelengths 
as compared with the same spectral lines on Earth. 
The effect amounts to an equivalent Doppler shift 
of 636 m s-!. This amount is the same at the 
disk center and at the solar limb because the 
gravitational redshift depends on the gravitational 
potential energy at the emitting location. This energy 
is the same everywhere on the surface of the Sun 
(which is an equipotential surface). 

(b) The convective motions, especially those of the 
GRANULATION, which exhibit upward motions of about 
2 km s-! in their centers and downflows in the 
intergranulation, cause spectral line wavelength 
shifts. A shift towards shorter wavelengths due to 
the Doppler effect can be expected for spectral lines 
originating in the central region of the disk, because 
most of the light originates from bright granules 
moving upward. 

(c) Each solar absorption line is formed within a certain 
layer of the photosphere. The line centers are formed 
higher in the atmosphere than the wings. Since the 
pattern of convective motions in the photosphere 
depends on the depth in this atmosphere and the 
velocity components depend on the position on the 
solar disk, besides wavelength shifts spectral line 
asymmetries also occur. These effects depend on the 
selected spectral line and in addition show a center- 
to-limb variation, which means that the spectral line 
shape is most often different in the central disk region 
as compared with that observed near the limb. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


To investigate the line shifts, those caused by large- 
scale motions, like solar rotation or supergranulation, have 
to be removed, either by correction or by averaging in 
space or time. 

Several methods are used to determine spectral line 
positions from digital line profile data, only two of which 
are mentioned here: (i) a parabola can be fitted to the 
lower third of the spectral line and the deepest point of 
that parabola represents the position of the spectral line; 
(ii) the bisector points (a definition and examples are given 
in this article) can be used to fit the spectral line position. 


Historic observations 

The first detection related to these effects was published by 
J Halm in 1907, who found that the wavelengths of two iron 
lines in the solar spectrum were larger at the solar limb as 
compared with the disk center. The shifts found by Halm 
amounted to Doppler velocities of about 600m s~! and had 
the same magnitude at the poles and at the equator of the 
Sun. This finding is nowadays called the ‘limb effect’. It 
was confirmed in 1907 by W S Adams, who later measured 
the limb effect for many other spectral lines. 

After the successful testing of Einstein’s theory of 
general relativity, attempts were made to measure the 
redshift of solar spectral lines as compared with the same 
lines produced on Earth. Indeed C ESt John found in 1928 
that the spectral lines observed at the solar limb showed 
about the expected redshift due to the gravitation, but 
the redshift in the disk center was only about half of that 
amount. He was the first to explain the observed limb 
effect as compared with a reference wavelength on Earth 
as a combination of convective motions and gravitational 
redshift. 

After 1950 when the first models, which included 
convective motion, were created to compute solar spectral 
lines, it became evident that besides the upward motion 
of hot gas within the granules, downward motion of 
cooler gas also had to be taken into account. At that 
time these different motions could not yet be detected 
by spectroscopic methods, but the models suggested that 
another effect should be the result of the mixture of 
upward and downward motions, namely the asymmetry 
of most solar spectral lines and in addition a center-to- 
limb variation of the asymmetry. When the detection 
of the asymmetry of solar spectral lines was reported, it 
was first doubted. Only after 1960 was the observational 
material good enough to determine more precisely the 
amount of asymmetry: the bisector of a spectral line, 
which is the average of the wavelengths at which the 
line flanks on the blue and the red side have the same 
measured intensities, exhibits for many spectral lines a 
shape like the character ‘C’. Therefore it was later called the 
‘C shape’ of a spectral line. When taking the deepest point 
of the spectral line, where the bisector crosses the spectral 
line profile, as the wavelength reference, the bisector 
shows a maximum difference of less than 1 ppm towards 
the shorter wavelength. Such small deviations from the 
symmetric profile could only be measured by electronic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: The Limb Effect and Gravitational 
Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


methods and taking into account possible falsifications of 
the spectrometer used. In 1975 a first collection of line 
shapes and their center-to-limb variation for about 100 
different solar spectral lines in the wavelength range from 
575 nm to 660 nm was published by E A Gurtovenko et al. 


Historic models 
The Einstein shift of solar spectral lines is given by 


AAA! = GMR-'c? = 2.12 x 10° 


with G the constant of gravitation, M the solar mass, R the 
solar radius and c the velocity of light. For all absolute 
wavelength comparisons this effect has to be included 
in the computations. Since the absolute comparison of 
wavelengths with a precision of better than 1 ppm is 
still a problem, in general only relative comparisons of 
wavelengths are performed. 

In 1954 K H Bohm included the convection in a model 
for computing solar spectral lines in the photosphere, as 
Doppler shifts of upward moving gas, downward moving 
gas and static gas. H H Voigt in 1956 added a higher 
layer without vertical motions to this model. This model 
allowed spectral line asymmetries to be computed. In 1957 
E H Schroter published a model, which could explain the 
limb effect with only two moving components of gases. 
The static component was not necessary in his model. 

All these models support the basic idea that the 
observed limb effect as compared to laboratory reference 
wavelengths is caused by the gravitational redshift, which 
is reduced on the disk, especially near its center, by the 
vertical upward motion of the hot granules. For strong 
Fraunhofer lines, like for example Na D, Mg b and the 
K line at 770 nm, no limb effect is found, because they 
are formed in higher layers, where no vertical motions are 
present. But these lines exhibit the gravitational redshift. 

Although the explanation of the solar spectral 
line asymmetry and the relative limb effect by mainly 
convective motions seems to be rather successful, other 
mechanisms have been discussed. A few of them will be 
given in historical order: 


(a) When J Halm published the detection of the limb 
effect in 1907 he also gave his explanation that 
pressure differences should be the cause of the limb 
effect and that these pressure differences should 
change during the soLar cycle. He explicitly argued 
against the possibility of explaining the limb effect by 
gas motions. 

(b) In 1967 G Erikson and P Maltby discussed the 
influence of sound waves on the spectral line 
wavelengths, but they could only reduce the 
gravitational redshift at solar disk center and did not 
obtain the observed blueshifts for any line. 

(c) In 1974 M H Hart tried to include a Lennard-Jones 
potential for the pressure to explain the limb effect. 
It was only possible to explain some sodium lines 
using his model, but it failed for all other spectral 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lines. Directly related to Hart’s publication was a 
publication by J M Beckers and P de Vegvar in 1978. 
They showed that pressure effects could not be used 
to explain the limb effect of iron lines. 

(d) In 1977 HH Plaskett combined several mechanisms: 
the motions were the most important, but he included 
also a pressure effect and correction for a gravitational 
effect. 


Further investigations 

Besides the vertical motions of the solar granular gas, 
horizontal motions were also detected. By including these 
horizontal motions of granular gas in their model, J M 
Beckers and G D Nelson could explain in 1978 two special 
details of the limb effect of spectral lines: 


(a) The limb effect shows for many lines a minimum 
of the wavelength not in the disk center but near to 
the center-to-limb position of cos 6 = 0.8, where @ is 
the angle between the line-of-sight and the vertical 
direction on the Sun. This will be discussed again 
later and is also shown in figure 3. 

(b) Often a redshift of the spectral lines is found at the 
solar limb, which is larger than the Einstein shift. This 
effect is called supergravitational redshift. 


Only after 1980 was it possible, as for example 
in work by A Nordlund, to solve numerically the 
hydrodynamic equations under conditions typical of the 
solar photosphere and compute the convective motions 
self-consistently, including their depth dependence. Using 
these models it was possible to compute spectral lines 
which show the observed C shapes and also their center- 
to-limb variation. Some details of these models and an 
investigation of the C shape of many iron lines from a 
digital solar spectral atlas were published by Dravins et al 
in 1981 and also presented in a review on spectral line 
asymmetries and wavelengths shifts by Dravins in 1982. 

Within more recent investigations, the number of 
spectral lines used from different elements and of 
different excitation potentials increased. In addition, the 
investigations concentrated on the formation heights of 
the spectral lines. Balthasar (1984) published results from 
analyses of 143 selected lines, which were observed with a 
Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS) in the wavelength 
region 500 nm to 630 nm: he described three different 
classes of C shapes and center-to-limb variations. In 
figures 1 and 2 examples of typical spectral line C shapes 
of the three classes are given for the disk center and a limb 
position respectively. 

Although the number of spectral lines within 
each class was quite different, he found a convincing 
dependence on their formation heights and their lower 
excitation potentials. Some general findings are: 


(a) There are a few spectral lines formed in deep layers, 
which show a red asymmetry (right part of figure 2). 

(b) Lines formed in higher layers show larger asymme- 
tries in the disk center. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: The Limb Effect and Gravitational 
Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solar disk center 


C—shape of iron lines: 


1.0] SS 


(o>) 


es 


intensity [continuum = 1. 


relative wavelength shifts: AX [pm] 
Figure 1. The C shapes of typical iron lines in the disk center: Fe 
524.25 nm (full curve), Fe 507.47 nm (dotted curve), and Fe 
507.97 nm (dashed curve). The wavelength positions of the 
deepest points in the spectral lines are taken as reference. The 
spectral lines are typical examples of classes I, II and III of 
Balthasar (1984). The plot was produced using data obtained 
from Balthasar. 


C—shape of iron lines: solar limb 


0] 
/ 


G 
ioe 
r 
/ 
/ 
/ 
7, 


sity [continuum = 1 
7 


T 


inten 
ND 


Figure 2. The C shapes of typical iron lines at the solar limb (at a 
position of cos 6 = 0.112): Fe 524.25 nm (full curve), Fe 507.47 
nm (dotted curve), and Fe 507.97 nm (dashed curve). The 
wavelength positions of the deepest points in the spectral lines 
are taken as reference. The spectral lines are typical examples of 
classes I, II, and III of Balthasar (1984). The plot was produced 
using data obtained from Balthasar. 


(c) When reducing all wavelength shifts to 500 nm it was 
possible to determine a limb effect curve for 96 lines 
of neutral iron. The best fit was possible for a variable 
(1 — cos 6): 


AX(6) = cos 6)’, 


0.027 — 0.320(1 — cos 8) + 1.212(1 


with the shifts given in pm. This relation and that 


of subsamples of spectral lines formed deeper and 
higher in the photosphere is given in figure 3. (The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


imo effect of neutral iron lines 


gth shift 


7 


/ 


Wav 
/ 


0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 


U 
cos (6) 


Figure 3. The mean limb effect for the 96 spectral lines of neutral 
iron is given as the full curve. The mean limb effect of a 
subsample of 21 lines formed in deep layers (log t = 0 to —1) is 
given as the dotted curve. The mean limb effect of another 
subsample of 10 lines formed in high layers (log t = —3 to —5) is 
given by the dashed curve. The plot was produced using data 
from Balthasar (1984). 


fit procedure allowed small deviations from a zero 
value in the disk center.) 


In 1985 Balthasar published another paper, where he 
used a subsample of 20 iron lines from the FTS spectra 
at disk center, which are formed at different depths. He 
corrected their wavelengths for a laboratory reference 
wavelength. For this sample he found the following 
numerical value of the vertical velocities, depending on 
their formation depths: 


Uver = 684 — 1922.8 exp(1.3577 log(t))(m s~!) 


It is interesting that there are already some spectral lines 
showing a redshift larger than the gravitational redshift. 
For the horizontal velocities, depending on their formation 
depths, he found from this sample 


Unor = (510 + 23) — (199 + 8) log(t)(m s7'). 


The contribution of the horizontal motions to the line 
asymmetries is explained by a geometrical model, taking 
the roughness of the atmosphere into account. 


Further problems 

Although the occurrence of solar spectral line shifts and 
their C shapes is now quite well understood, there are 
several findings which need further investigation: 


(a) For the non-split iron line at 557.61 nm P N Brandt 
and E H Schroter in 1982 found a more pronounced 
limb effect on the east-west diameter as compared 
with the north-south diameter of the Sun, while 
J M Beckers and W R Taylor had found in 1980 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photosphere: The Limb Effect and Gravitational 
Redshift 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


just the opposite relation—which they explained as a 
meridional motion towards the poles. 

(b) Since reports exist about changes of the granulation 
during the solar activity cycle, it can be speculated 
that there should also be changes of the limb effect, 
the C shapes of spectral lines and their center-to-limb 
variation during the activity cycle. Maybe the finding 
described under (a) is an example. 

(c) For the modeling of C shapes the real formation 
heights of spectral lines in the photosphere are still 
not well enough known. The atomic parameters, 
the physical conditions of the photosphere and 
their changes have to be investigated further. 
These uncertainties also influence the results of 3D 
modeling. 

(d) Using the best spatial resolution available, it has been 
possible for some years to determine line profiles of 
different parts of the granules and the intergranular 
space separately. This topic is a very promising 
tool for understanding both the granulation and the 
spectral line formation within it much better. 


Acknowledgments 

The author thanks H Balthasar and M Stix for discussions 
of the text and H Balthasar for data supplied to produce 
figures 1 and 2. 


Bibliography 

Balthasar H 1984 Asymmetries and wavelengths of solar 
spectral lines and the solar rotation determined from 
Fourier-transform spectra Solar Phys. 93 219-41 

——1988 The centre-to-limb variation of solar spectral 
lines Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 72 473-95 

Dravins D 1982 Photospheric spectrum line asymmetries 
and wavelength shifts Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 20 
61-89 

Dravins D, Lindegren L and Nordlund A 1981 Solar 
granulation: influence of convection on spectral line 
asymmetries and wavelength shifts Astron. Astrophys. 
96 345-64 

Nordlund A 1984 Modelling of small-scale dynamical 
processes: convection and wave generation Small- 
scale Dynamical Processes in Quiet Stellar Atmospheres 
ed S Keil (Sunspot, NM: National Solar Observatory) 
pp 181-221 


Hubertus Wohl 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux 
Tubes: Observations 


The magnetic field on the solar surface (SOLAR MAGNETIC 
FIELD) is highly filamentary, with a considerable fraction 
being in the form of flux tubes (roughly speaking bundles 
of concentrated field lines). Small-scale flux tubes have 
diameters below approximately 400 km. They appear 
bright and are the basic magnetic features underlying 
the magnetic network and active region plages (SOLAR 
CHROMOSPHERIC PLAGE). 

Averaged over the solar disk the magnetic field 
strength varies between a few gauss and a few tens of 
gauss, whereas the field strength inside the flux tubes, 
B, is around 1500 G at the solar surface. Consequently, 
flux tubes cover only of the order of 1% of the solar 
surface. Although a weak and probably turbulent field 
(SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: INTRANETWORK AND TURBULENT MAGNETIC 
FIELDS) is expected to fill the space between the flux tubes, 
they nevertheless contain the dominant fraction of the 
magnetic energy, since it is proportional to B?. Inaddition, 
flux tubes, in particular the small-scale ones, are the main 
source of energy transfer from the solar interior to the Sun’s 
outer atmosphere and hence are important players in the 
heating of the solar CHROMOSPHERE and solar CORONA. 

Magnetic flux tubes with a wide range of sizes or 
cross-sectional areas are present on the Sun. The largest 
and best known are sunspots (diameters 4000-50000 km). 
Somewhat smaller flux tubes are called pores (diameters 
roughly in the range 400-5000 km; suNspor pores), with 
the smallest pores often also referred to as magnetic 
knots. Finally, the smallest magnetic flux tubes (with 
diameters less than approximately 400 km) are called 
magnetic elements and are the main subject of this article. 
Whereas sunspots are clearly distinguished from pores 
by the presence of a fully developed penumbra in the 
former, the distinction between knots and normal pores or 
between knots and magnetic elements is not so clear-cut. 
In addition to the size this distinction rests on differences 
in brightness. Magnetic elements are brighter than knots, 
which in turn are brighter than pores. Magnetic elements 
emit a larger radiative flux than the quiet Sun (i.e. the 
field-free part of the solar atmosphere), while larger flux 
tubes are at least slightly darker. A high-resolution 
magnetogram is plotted in figure 1, together with the 
white-light image of the corresponding region. Examples 
of magnetic features that are bright (e.g. at 8” horizontal 
and 4” vertical) and dark (at 11” and 11”) are present in 
white light in the images. 

The basic theoretical picture of each of these types of 
feature is that of a flux tube (or possibly a tight bundle 
of very small flux strands) which passes more or less 
vertically from the solar interior into its atmosphere, so 
that it is seen in cross section in magnetograms or in other 
images of the solar surface. In principle, the magnetic field 
of the flux tube may be twisted, in which case it is called a 
magnetic flux rope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Flux tubes are not directly accessible to observations 
in the interior of the Sun, are seen in cross section at 
the surface at wavelengths ranging from the ultraviolet 
to the infrared and are outlined by x-ray emitting gas 
in the corona (SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: ULTRAVIOLET AND EXTREME 
ULTRAVIOLET EMISSION, VISIBLE EMISSION, INFRARED EMISSION, SOLAR 
SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS: X-RAY EMISSION). The magnetic 
field of flux tubes can be best studied in the photosphere 
due to the significant Zeeman splitting of spectral lines in 
the photospheric spectrum (SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: INFERENCE 
BY POLARIMETRY), the relatively simple formation physics 
of these spectral lines and the high spatial resolution 
achievable in the visible. Also, at greater heights the field 
from the flux tubes has expanded, so that neighboring 
flux tubes have generally merged, making it difficult to 
separate and identify individual flux tubes in these layers. 

Sunspots, pores and magnetic elements differ in 
numerous respects. The largest sunspots possess 10°- 
10° times as much magnetic flux as magnetic elements. 
Sunspots and pores are dark relative to the quiet 
Sun, whereas magnetic elements are on average bright, 
particularly when observed near the solar limb. Sunspots, 
and to a large extent also pores, are present only in 
SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS, Which are restricted to the activity 
belts (roughly within 30° of the solar equator), whereas 
magnetic elements are present at all latitudes. They 
are not completely homogeneously distributed, however. 
The number density of magnetic elements is considerably 
larger in active regions (where they cluster to form 
plages or faculae) than in the quiet Sun. Even outside 
active regions the magnetic elements are concentrated at 
the boundaries of supergranule cells (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
SUPERGRANULATION) forming the so-called magnetic network 
(CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK). Flux tubes can also be present 
inside the supergranule cells, but these intranetwork fields 
generally have a smaller magnetic flux per flux tube and 
also lower intrinsic field strengths than their counterparts 
in the network. At a smaller spatial scale magnetic 
elements are observed to prefer the dark downflow lanes 
of the granulation (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION) and to 
avoid the bright, upflowing granules. 

The photospheric layers of magnetic flux tubes 
ranging from sunspots to magnetic elements possess 
remarkably similar field strengths (averaged over the flux- 
tube cross section). At the solar surface the field strength 
lies between 1200 and 1800 G, with magnetic elements 
having a field strength of around 1500 G. 

The brightness of magnetic elements makes them 
important contributors to the variable component of 
SOLAR IRRADIANCE. The magnetic network and active region 
faculae or plages owe their excess brightness at all 
atmospheric layers to excess radiation from the magnetic 
elements. Numerous lines of evidence suggest that they 
are dominantly responsible for the fact that the Sun is 
brighter at the maximum of magnetic activity, although in 
that phase of the soLar cycLe the number of dark sunspots 
on the solar surface is largest. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


white light intensity 


arcsec 


arcsec 


magnetogram signal 


arcsec 


Figure 1. High-resolution white-light image (left) and magnetogram (right). Regions with a magnetic field (i.e. with significant net 
circular polarization) appear bright in the magnetogram. The pattern of relatively bright cells surrounded by dark lanes in the 
white-light image are granules. Note the increased small-scale structure at the location of the magnetic field. (Figure kindly provided 


by CU Keller.) 


Two-component model of magnetic elements 
An important parameter determining the way in which 
a solar feature is described by empirical modelers is 
its size relative to the spatial resolution element of 
typical observations. If the feature is spatially resolved 
and does not show significant internal structure then 
one-component, i.e. purely plane-parallel, modeling is 
sufficient. Solar magnetic elements, however, are usually 
not completely resolved, so that two components are 
required. The first component describes the magnetic flux 
tubes, the second their (relatively) field-free environment. 
Since the Zeeman effect (SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN 
AND HANLE EFFECTS) not only splits spectral lines, but also 
polarizes them, the polarization in spectral lines, described 
by the Stokes parameters, serves as a diagnostic of flux 
tubes. For a two-component model the observed Stokes 
profiles (which are averaged over the spatial resolution 
element) can be written as 


Tops = 1m + (1 — a) Is (1) 


Pobs = & Pm (2) 


where J is the intensity profile arising from the magnetic 
feature, /, is the intensity from the surroundings, a is the 
magnetic filling factor (i.e. the fraction of the surface area 
within the spatial resolution element covered by magnetic 
field) and P = Q, U or V represents in turn the two linearly 
and the circularly polarized Stokes parameters. It is clear 
from these equations that in the context of this simple 
model Qops, Usps and Vops are formed in the magnetic 
element only. Hence it is possible to obtain information 
on unresolved flux tubes by observing one or more of the 
polarized Stokes parameters. 

Since the magnetic filling factor is generally far 
smaller than unity, the intrinsic field strength B of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic elements is correspondingly larger than the 
spatially averaged field strength (B). The latter quantity 
is a measure of the magnetic flux in the spatial resolution 
element. Typical values of the filling factor a are 1% or 
less in the quiet Sun, 5-10% in the network and 10-30% in 
active-region plage. 


Flux tube sizes and magnetic fluxes 

The true sizes of magnetic elements are highly controver- 
sial, since they are either close to or below the size of the 
spatial resolution element, which can, in the best cases, be 
as small as 150 km on the Sun, corresponding to an angular 
resolution of roughly 0.2”. One problem is that achieving 
this high a resolution in magnetograms is extremely diffi- 
cult. Standard techniques such as freezing the distortions 
due to the Earth’s turbulent atmosphere by making short 
exposures fail due to the low signal level in magnetograms 
(these receive orders of magnitude fewer photons than the 
brightness images, which can have a much broader wave- 
length band). Hence most estimates of the sizes of mag- 
netic elements are indirect, based on the sizes of features 
in an image taken in some proxy of the magnetic field (e.g. 
bright points in a filtergram taken in the core of a spec- 
tral line) under the assumption that there is a one-to-one 
correspondence between the two sizes. This assumption 
is difficult to test and is, due to the strong dependence of 
the contrast of magnetic features on their size, at the most 
only partly correct. 

Magnetic elements probably have no unique size. For 
example, the sizes of bright points in an active region have 
been found to be log-normally distributed (just as the sizes 
of sunspots), with an average value of 220 km. Also, 
the center-to-limb variation (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: CENTER- 
TO-LIMB VARIATION) of the continuum contrast of faculae 
(SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FACULAE) is best reproduced if they are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


composed of a mixture of flux tubes of different sizes 
(see the section on thermal structure). Direct observations 
with as high a spatial resolution as possible as well as the 
comparison of spectral diagnostics with theoretical models 
suggest that on average magnetic elements are somewhat 
larger in regions with a greater magnetic filling factor 
(e.g. in active-region plage) than in regions with a lower 
average field strength (e.g. in the quiet Sun network). In 
other words the average diameter of magnetic elements 
increases with a or (B). This relation may break down for 
the smallest (B) values, where the intrinsic field strength, 
B, instead depends on (B). 

An open question is whether individual magnetic 
elements are themselves formed of smaller flux strands 
and, if yes, what the size of these flux strands is. It has been 
argued that such flux strands are indeed present and that 
they are far below the photon mean-free-path in diameter, 
making them less than 10-20 km broad. At present there is 
insufficient evidence to confirm or reject this hypothesis. 

The magnetic flux per element varies between 
typically 5 x 10!° Mx for intranetwork elements (i.e. weak 
magnetic features present within supergranules) over 5 x 
10!”-5 x 10'8 Mx for typical (bright) magnetic elements 
to increasingly larger values for points, knots, pores and 
sunspots. Note that because the intrinsic field strength is 
almost the same for differently sized flux tubes there is an 
almost linear relation between flux tube size and magnetic 
flux. Therefore, the flux per magnetic element also slowly 
increases with (B). 


Magnetic field strength and orientation 

The most accurate field strength values are probably 
provided by observations in the infrared (at 1.5648 jm) 
due to the linear dependence of the Zeeman sensitivity of 
spectral lines on wavelength. (The Zeeman sensitivity is 
given by the ratio of Zeeman splitting to Doppler width of 
the line.) Recent inversions of spectral lines in the visible 
should also give relatively accurate results. The greatest 
currently achievable accuracy is roughly 20 G at a given 
geometrical height in the atmosphere, corresponding to 
a relative uncertainty of 1-2%. This accuracy allows the 
small variations in field strength as a function of magnetic 
filling factor a to be measured. In figure 2 the intrinsic 
field strength B of magnetic features is plotted versus the 
spatially averaged field strength (B), whichis proportional 
to a over most of the plotted range. 

In active regions, i.e. for (B) = 100G, B increases very 
slowly with (B). At significantly smaller fluxes (below 
approximately 25 G, corresponding to the network and 
intranetwork), however, B depends strongly on (B). The 
features with smallest (B) are most likely intranetwork 
magnetic elements. They have field strengths of only a 
few hundred gauss. 

This observed dependence of B on (B) is predicted 
relatively accurately by models describing the formation 
of intense photospheric flux tubes by the convective 
collapse mechanism (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX 
TUBES: THEORY). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
[Gta T ae ae a a a T TTY 
@ 
L ® (4) 4) a 
1500 F 2 % @® a 
s | 
oN r 4500 T T et. <F 7 
q lm @ | 
aM [ J 
o t 3] 
£ 1000 4 
2 I. 1000+ 4] 
2 
= [ 
© f | os * | | 
3 
7 a a 1 
oO 500- 4 
@ 500 4 
= [ a 
= = 
C 0 J 
[ () 5 10 15 20 2 | 
0 Se | a ees | 4. 1 4 
0 100 200 300 400 s00 600 700 800 900 


Spatially averaged field strength <JB cosé[> [G] 


Figure 2. Intrinsic magnetic field strength at the solar surface 
B(z = 0) versus the unsigned, spatially averaged longitudinal 
field strength (|B cos 6|), where 6 is the angle between the 
magnetic vector and the line-of-sight. Plotted are binned values 
resulting from quiet Sun (squares) and active region plage 
observations (circles). The inset shows only the leftmost part of 
the main figure, with the squares being identical to those in the 
main figure. 


Due to the requirement of horizontal pressure balance 
(which is a consequence of the so-called thin-tube 
approximation) field strengths of 1500-1700 G at the 
solar surface imply that the flux tubes are significantly 
evacuated, i.e. that the gas pressure and density is less 
than roughly 20-30% of that in the surroundings (at the 
same geometrical height). Hence, like sunspots, magnetic 
elements are also thought to possess a Wilson depression, 
although this has not been directly confirmed (suNspots: 
WILSON EFFECT). 

This large evacuation implies that the magnetic 
energy density, B?/8z, in the flux tubes is considerably 
larger than the energy density of the gas inside the flux 
tube. Equivalently, the plasma beta 8 = 82 p/B* < 1inthe 
flux tube (where p is the gas pressure). The measured B 
implies 6 ~ 0.3. On the other hand, the high evacuation of 
the flux tubes also means that the magnetic energy density 
in the flux tubes is similar to the energy density of the 
gas in the surroundings and much larger than the average 
kinetic energy density of photospheric motions. For the 
intranetwork elements the situation is quite different. The 
intranetwork fields are in equipartition with the kinetic 
energy density (i.e. equality of magnetic and kinetic energy 
density) and thus only weakly evacuated. 

The 1.56 wm lines of neutral iron, on which figure 2 
is based, are formed deep in the solar atmosphere, near 
the continuum-forming layer. When spectral lines formed 
at greater heights are observed then lower values of B are 
obtained. Consider lines formed at increasingly greater 
heights in active region plage: the Fe I 6302 Aline gives on 
average 1400 G, Fe I 5250.2 A gives 1000-1200 G and the 
Mg I 12.32 um line (formed in the upper photosphere just 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


below the traditional temperature minimum) gives 200- 
500 G. This decrease of B with height is consistent with 
the roughly exponential height dependence predicted by 
horizontal pressure balance, suggesting that this is indeed 
the confining mechanism of the field. The observations 
therefore suggest that the thin-tube approximation is a 
good description of magnetic elements. 

Theory also predicts that the magnetic field expands 
with height. This follows from the decrease of the field 
strength with height and magnetic flux conservation. 
Various observations confirm this prediction. For 
example, magnetograms recorded in lines formed at 
chromospheric heights are far more homogeneous than 
those recorded in lower-lying, photospheric lines. Also, 
the spectral shapes of the polarized Stokes profiles of 
Zeeman sensitive lines formed in the upper photosphere 
or over a large height range reveal the expansion of the 
field. 

Allin all, measurements of the magnetic field strength 
support the description of magnetic elements as flux tubes 
shaped by pressure equilibrium. 

By using all four Stokes parameters it is possible 
to determine the orientation of the magnetic vector 
(with some remaining ambiguity in the orientation of 
the field component perpendicular to the line of sight). 
Such observations reveal that magnetic elements have 
an average inclination of approximately 10° or less 
to the vertical in both active region plages and the 
network. Isolated, compact groups of magnetic elements, 
particularly in active regions, appear to form rosettes, i.e. 
the flux tubes near the center of the group are vertical, 
while with increasing distance from the center the flux 
tubes become increasingly inclined to the vertical. These 
rosettes have been called azimuth centers. In active 
regions they are often associated with considerably larger 
filling factors than the average plage. 

There is also evidence that flux tubes with weaker 
magnetic fields are often considerably more inclined than 
the kG flux tubes. Thus the weaker intranetwork fields 
appear to be directed almost isotropically. 

A special case of weak fields that are predominantly 
horizontal are freshly emerging fields. The tops of 
loops just emerging from the convection zone into the 
atmosphere are horizontal and have a strength of a few 
hundred gauss. These freshly emerged fields exhibit 
a nearly linear relationship between B and inclination. 
It is speculated that the field intensifies and becomes 
increasingly vertical as time elapses after its emergence. 


Thermal structure 
The following three points summarize the main observed 
thermal properties of magnetic elements. 


(a) Small flux tubes are hotter and brighter than larger 
flux tubes. Equivalently, magnetic elements in 
regions with small magnetic filling factor are hotter 
than in regions with large filling factor. 

(b) In the continuum-forming layers magnetic elements 
are cooler than the average quiet Sun at the same 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


geometrical depth, but are hotter in the higher layers 
of the photosphere and in the chromosphere. When 
converted to equal optical depth, however, the 
smaller magnetic elements turn out to be brighter 
than the quiet Sun in all observable layers. 

(c) The chromospheres of magnetic elements are partic- 
ularly hot and bright. The chromospheric tempera- 
ture rise starts 200-300 km below where it is located 
in standard models of the average quiet Sun atmo- 
sphere. 


In the following the above points are discussed 
in greater detail. The thermal structure of magnetic 
elements depends sensitively on their size, particularly 
in the lower photosphere. The continuum-forming layer 
in small flux tubes is generally hotter than the average 
quiet Sun. Consequently, these flux tubes appear bright. 
This is the case, for example, in the magnetic network. 
As the magnetic flux and hence the average size of 
the magnetic features increases they become increasingly 
darker (examples of bright and dark magnetic features are 
visible in figure 1). Although this qualitative dependence 
of continuum or white-light brightness on size has been 
confirmed by different types of observations the absolute 
value of the brightness is far more controversial. Values 
of the continuum contrast (i.e. the ratio of the continuum 
brightness of flux tubes to that of the quiet Sun) range 
between 1.8 and 0.9 for typical flux tubes. This is because 
the contrast also depends strongly on other properties such 
as wavelength, position on the disk and spatial resolution. 
The highest contrast values are usually obtained at high 
spatial resolution in broader and bluer wavelength bands, 
which are more contaminated by spectral lines and thus 
do not entirely reflect the continuum contrast. A critical 
assessment of the different determinations in the literature 
suggests that continuum contrast values of magnetic 
elements at 500 nm probably lie between 0.9 and 1.3. 

Spectral lines are formed at greater height in the 
atmosphere than the continuum and they clearly indicate 
an increased contrast. This is illustrated by the G-band 
(430 nm) image shown in figure 3. At least some of 
the flux tubes are visible as small bright points. This 
increased contrast in spectral lines is due to three main 
reasons. Firstly, it is due to an increasing temperature 
difference between flux tubes and surroundings with 
height. A second contributing factor is the large 
temperature sensitivity of some lines, for example lines 
of minor ions or molecular lines. Finally, the increased 
contrast at greater height is due to the expansion of the flux 
tube with height, so that the atmosphere is increasingly 
filled with hot gas at greater heights. Since individual 
flux tubes are usually not resolved this increased filling 
enhances the brightness. 

Figure 4 shows the empirically derived temperature 
of active region plage and network flux tubes as a function 
of log(ts509), the logarithmic continuum optical depth at 
500 nm. In this representation the network flux tube model 
is hotter than the quiet Sun in all layers, whereas the plage 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


SVST 12-May-98 15:09 UT: AR 8218 G-band 4305A Filtergram 


Arcseconds 


0.0 10.0 20.0 30.0 40.0 50.0 60.0 70.0 80.0 
Arcseconds 


Figure 3. Image of a part of the solar surface obtained in the 
G-band at 430 nm. In addition to the granulation and the dark 
sunspot, numerous small bright points are visible. These 
correspond to magnetic elements or small flux tubes. The high 
contrast in this image is due to the presence of spectral lines due 
to the CH molecule in the imaged wavelength band. (Figure 
kindly provided by T E Berger.) 


flux tube model, which describes somewhat larger flux 
tubes, is cooler in the lowest layers. If geometrical height 
were to be used instead of optical depth, then the flux tube 
curves would have to be moved to the right due to the 
Wilson depression, so that in the lower photosphere the 
temperatures of both flux tubes would lie below that of 
the quiet Sun. 

The difference between the two flux tube curves 
is mainly restricted to the lower photosphere. In the 
upper photosphere the models are relatively similar. In 
particular, they show almost identical chromospheric 
temperature rises. Other observations also suggest that 
the size dependence of the thermal structure is primarily a 
property of the lower layers, as long as we don’t consider 
very large flux tubes and extremely high filling factors. In 
sunspots, for example, the chromosphere starts decidedly 
higher in the atmosphere than in magnetic elements. 

The chromospheric temperature rise seen in figure 4 
within the flux tubes sets in 200-300 km lower than in 
the quiet Sun. This explains the high contrasts seen, for 
example in Ca II K. The contrast continues to increase 
with height, so that the contrast in transition region lines 
(observed in the EUV) is larger than in the visible. 

One observation that needs to be reproduced by 
theory is that whereas the flux tube magnetic field expands 
rapidly with height in chromospheric layers (forming a 
magnetic canopy), the brightness structures associated 
with the field in the chromosphere and transition region 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
9000 PUTT T TTT TTT TTT TTT TTT TTT TTT TTT TUTTI TTT TTT TTT TT TTT TIT] 
__.. Network ! 1 
_ Plage i ] 
g000- — HSRA ee 
2 : 
» 7000 ft + 
K 
: : 
w ] 
u J 
: 
a. ] 
qd 6000F 4 
val | 
v [ ] 
ee ] 
: 
5000 | 
[ 1 
| 
| 
| | 
AQ OO title niall nite Ei fain iol 


a) 4 3 2 1 0 1 
log(T 500) 


ae) 


Figure 4. Temperature versus logarithmic continuum optical 
depth (log ts509) of three empirical model atmospheres. Solid 
curve: quiet Sun model HSRA; dashed curve: model describing 
the magnetic elements found in active region plage; dot-dashed 
curve: magnetic elements forming the network. 


are much more compact than expected from such an 
expansion, partly lying at the resolution limit of 1” of EUV 
observations (see CHROMOSPHERE: MAGNETIC CANOPY). Only 
the central parts of the flux tubes appear to get significantly 
heated. 

Magnetic regions exhibit a definite center-to-limb 
variation of the continuum intensity. At low and 
intermediate resolution the continuum contrast is small at 
the center of the solar disk, but increases rapidly towards 
the limb. This dependence can be explained by a hot cloud 
model, in which the temperature difference at a given 
optical depth increases rapidly with height in the lower 
and middle photosphere. This, however, does not agree 
with the temperature stratification derived from Stokes 
profiles, in particular for network flux tubes (indicated 
by the dot-dashed curve in figure 4). The center-to-limb 
variation can also be explained by a geometrical effect, 
such as the change in visibility of the hot walls of a partially 
evacuated flux tube as it moves across the disk. In order to 
reproduce the observations in this manner a mixture of flux 
tubes of different sizes needs to be present, with smaller 
flux tubes being bright closer to the center of the disk, while 
larger flux tubes exhibit the largest contrast near the limb. 
High-resolution filtergrams support this view. Whereas 
near the center of the disk the bright features associated 
with network or facular flux tubes are mainly bright points, 
often lying at the limit of the spatial resolution, the bright 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


structures forming faculae near the limb are dominantly 
the considerably larger facular granules. 


Lifetimes 

The lifetime of a magnetic flux tube can be defined as the 
time that it exists as a coherent structure before it either 
splits, merges with others, submerges, etc. Note that 
the question of a flux tube’s lifetime is distinct from the 
question of how long magnetic flux remains on the solar 
surface before it is expelled or submerges again. 

Determining lifetimes of individual flux tubes is even 
more difficult than determining their sizes, since the 
lifetime of a magnetic feature can only be determined if 
it can be resolved, or at least separated from its neighbors 
over its whole lifetime. As pointed out in the section on 
flux tube sizes and magnetic fluxes this is generally not the 
case, even on individual frames of magnetograms, not to 
say for whole time series. 

Therefore, mainly two types of observations are used 
to estimate flux tube lifetimes; those which determine the 
lifetime of a group of flux tubes (e.g. a part of the magnetic 
network) since only the whole group can be resolved, and 
those which determine the lifetime of some proxy of the 
magnetic field (such as bright points seen in filtergrams). 

Both methods have their problems, since neither 
the lifetimes of flux-tube groups nor of proxies need 
correspond to the actual lifetimes of individual flux tubes 
(not even by an order of magnitude). For example, the 
brightness of a magnetic element can fluctuate, due to 
dynamic processes, in the course of its lifetime (only some 
fraction of the flux appears bright at any given time). 

The former method generally gives relatively long 
lifetimes for stable structures such as network features (50- 
100 h), whereas the latter gives extremely short durations 
(5-20 min). Therefore there is an uncertainty of almost 
three orders of magnitude in our knowledge of flux tube 
lifetimes. 

Time series of proxies and, in particular, images in 
the G-band at 430 nm, show a continual motion of bright 
points along intergranular lanes, together with splittings 
and mergings, apparently driven by the evolution of the 
neighboring granules. 


Dynamics 

Flux tubes harbour a wide variety of dynamic phenomena, 
such as lateral motions of the whole flux tube, steady flows 
along the field lines and waves supported and guided by 
the flux tubes. 


Stationary flows in flux tubes 
A direct indicator of flows within magnetic elements is the 
zero-crossing wavelength Ay of Stokes V. Stokes V is the 
difference between right and left circularly polarized light 
and Ay corresponds to its central wavelength, at which 
Stokes V becomes zero. 

Inactive region plage no average Ay shifts greater than 
250 m s~! are observed. This is true for all lines formed 
between the low photosphere and the lower to middle 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


chromosphere. There is, however, also evidence for a 
small redshift in the magnetic features of approximately 
100 ms7! at large j, with indications of a small blueshift at 
small x. Evidence also exists for an increase of the average 
Ay shift with decreasing magnetic filling factor. 

In contrast to spatially averaged values of Ay, the 
spatially localized snapshots of Ay often show significant 
blue and redshifts (up to 1 km s~'). 

The largest line shifts in the photospheric layers of 
small-scale magnetic features are, however, associated 
with magnetic neutral lines. Simultaneous observations 
of the field strength and flow speed on both sides of the 
neutral line suggest that these shifts are due to siphon 
flows along small magnetic loops connecting the opposite 
polarities, with the flow becoming supersonic near the top 
of the loop. Siphon flows along magnetic loops are driven 
by the difference in gas pressure in the two footpoints of 
the loop, which in turn is coupled to a difference in field 
strength. 

The origin of the line shifts (of both signs) seen in 
high-resolution spectra is less clear. One explanation 
also invokes siphon flows along many thin (but probably 
long) loops. Since matter flows from the footpoint of 
the weaker field to the more intense field, a distribution 
of field strengths among neighboring flux tubes could 
produce up- and downflows in the neighboring flux tubes. 
Another possibility, namely that these shifts represent 
snapshots of non-stationary motions, is discussed in the 
next subsection. Finally, at present we also do not know 
the cause of the small shifts (~100 m s~') of the spatially 
averaged V profiles. Even such small velocities would 
drain the corona on a time scale of hours to days in open- 
field regions unless sufficient matter can diffuse across 
the field lines into the flux tube, which appears unlikely 
according to current understanding. An alternative 
explanation involves a net Doppler shift produced by non- 
stationary velocities within the flux tube. 

Another diagnostic is the observed strong blue—-red 
asymmetry of Stokes V profiles. Both the absolute value 
of the area, A,, and amplitude, a,, of the blue Stokes V 
wing differ from the absolute value of the red wing area, 
A,,and amplitude, a,, respectively. An asymmetric Stokes 
V profile is illustrated in figure 5. Quantitatively, this 
asymmetry may be expressed by the relative amplitude, 
da, and area, 5A, asymmetry defined as 


—~ Ur A —A, 
Sa=—~—* and sA= 2, 
ap + a, Ap + A, 


(3) 


Close to solar disk center both 6a and 6A are positive for 
photospheric lines, although 6A almost disappears for the 
strongest lines. In general, 5a > 5A. Closer to the limb 
both 6a and 5A change sign, ie. the red Stokes V wing 
becomes stronger than the blue wing. 

It is now generally accepted that for photospheric 
lines cospatial gradients of the line-of-sight velocity 
and magnetic vector produce the Stokes V asymmetry. 
Downflows of 1-2 km s~! in the immediate surroundings 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ap 


Stokes V 
O 
(e) 


0.6 7 7 7 1 
5250.2 5250.4 


Wavelength » (A) 


Figure 5. Stokes V profile, i.e. net circularly polarized light, of 
the Fe I line at 525.2 nm observed in the magnetic network near 
the center of the solar disk. The zero-crossing wavelength, Ay, 
the amplitude, a), and area, Aj, of the blue wing of Stokes V and 
the corresponding red wing parameters, a, and A,, are 
indicated. Note the larger amplitude and area of the blue lobe 
than of the red lobe. 


of the magnetic elements can reproduce the observed 
6A values without producing any zero-crossing shift 
if the surroundings are also approximately 200-300 K 
cooler than the average quiet Sun, highly suggestive 
of intergranular lanes. This picture of magnetic 
elements located in the downflowing intergranular lanes 
is confirmed by direct imaging. 

A different view of the production of Stokes V 
asymmetry is based on the picture that magnetic features 
are composed of many narrow strands of field, each 
thinner than the horizontal photon mean-free path. These 
strands are interleaved with flowing material. Such 
a model can also reproduce 5A and even 6a, if two 
different sets of velocities are assumed to be present in 
the surroundings. 


Traditional flux-tube models with downflows in the 
surroundings can also simultaneously reproduce 6A and 
da if flows inside the flux tubes are also allowed. The 
internal flows may be either a downflow increasing rapidly 
with depth, or a combination of up- and downflow, 
suggestive of oscillatory or wavelike motion. Both of these 
models reproduce the observations equally well, but the 
latter is to be preferred since it fulfils mass conservation in 
the flux tube. 


In summary, the 6A observed in magnetic elements 
appears to be largely a product of the granulation 
surrounding the magnetic elements. Conversely, 5A 
can constrain the velocity and the temperature of 
the convection in active regions, so-called abnormal 
granulation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Non-stationary velocities inside flux tubes 

The detection of MHD waves in flux tubes is of 
particular interest, since these are one prime candidate 
for transporting the energy which heats the chromosphere 
and which may contribute to the heating of the corona. 

Anumber of diagnostics support the presence of non- 
stationary velocities in magnetic elements, for example 
flux tube waves. The most direct of these, time-series of 
Ay, have so far mainly uncovered oscillations or waves 
with a period close to 5 min and an amplitude of 0.2- 
0.3 km s~! in photospheric spectral lines that increases 
slowly with height. There are indications that the 
waves are propagating upwards with a phase velocity 
of approximately 100 km s-!. The results appear to be 
relatively independent of the spatial resolution of the 
observations, which varies between 1” and 8”. 

There is one significant exception to the 5 min periods, 
however. In an isolated magnetic feature near disk center 
100 s periods in Ay, with a 280 m svt amplitude have been 
detected, corresponding to an estimated energy flux of 
(1.6-2.3) x 10’ erg cm~* s~', sufficient to heat the associated 
chromospheric network if the wave is not significantly 
radiatively or acoustically damped on the way. According 
to linear theory this period corresponds to propagating 
longitudinal tube waves, i.e. acoustic waves modified 
by the magnetic field propagating along the flux tube. 
Unfortunately, only a single magnetic feature was found 
to exhibit such oscillations and confirmation is important. 

The widths of the V profiles of relatively Zeeman- 
insensitive lines suggest that non-stationary velocities 
with much larger amplitudes than those deduced from 
time-series of Ay are present in magnetic elements. Typical 
rms values of such velocities lie around 1.5-2.5 km s7! 
for photospheric and lower chromospheric lines. These 
values are equivalent to or larger than those obtained 
from fits to quiet Sun Stokes / profiles. In the quiet Sun, 
however, most of the line broadening comes from the 
granulation, which is, of course, not present within the 
magnetic features. Therefore, the broadening must be due 
to an oscillatory or wave-like velocity field, or due to the 
presence of stationary up- and downflows within different 
spatially unresolved magnetic elements (e.g. siphon flows 
on small scales). A fraction of the broadening velocity (10- 
20%) is detected as the rms of the Ay spatial fluctuations 
seen in high-resolution observations (see the section on 
stationary flows in flux tubes). 

The velocity amplitudes deduced from line broaden- 
ing near the limb are almost the same as near disk center. 
Similarly, the rms of the Ay of high-resolution observations 
does not decrease towards the limb. These two observa- 
tions suggest that transverse wave modes (e.g. kink mode, 
torsional Alfvén mode) are just as strongly excited as lon- 
gitudinal modes (e.g. sausage or tube mode, overstable 
oscillations). Some evidence of quasi-periodic transverse 
motions of small-scale magnetic features has indeed been 
determined (although only for a single feature). 

Another possible source of horizontal velocity visible 
in Stokes V is the motion of complete magnetic elements 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Observa- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that are continually being shuffled around by the evolving 
granulation. Velocities of 0.5-5 km s-! are mentioned 
in the literature. These have been derived by tracking 
features in time series of filtergrams or magnetograms. 
Of interest in this respect are the observations of short- 
duration rapid horizontal movements of bright points. If 
bright points are identified with flux tubes the amount of 
energy generated in the form of an upward-propagating 
kink-wave pulse along a slender flux tube by the observed 
rapid horizontal movements may be estimated. It turns 
out to be sufficient to heat the quiet solar corona, even in 
the presence of reflections at the SOLAR TRANSITION REGION. 

The final parameter indicating non-stationary veloci- 
ties in magnetic features is the Stokes V amplitude asym- 
metry, da. It can be reproduced along with 6A and Ay by 
a simple representation of a nonlinear wave with differ- 
ent up- and downflow velocity amplitudes, along with a 
downflow outside the flux tube (see the section on station- 
ary flows in flux tubes). 

In summary, some diagnostics indicate the presence 
of broadening velocities up to 3 km s7! (both Stokes V 
line broadening and 6a give similar velocity amplitudes), 
but Ay time series only show rather low-amplitude 
perturbations, while snapshots at high spatial resolution 
yield Ay with an intermediate rms. These results suggest 
that (a) many flux tubes with tube waves having different 
phases are present in the resolution element of a given 
observation, or (b) the tube waves have a very short 
wavelength and consequently also a short period (if it 
becomes smaller than the half-width of the Stokes V 
contribution function of a particular line, the waves 
become invisible in the Ay time series of that line), or 
(c) the dynamical thin-tube approximation breaks down 
and most of the power is present in higher-order modes 
having multiple nodes or at least different phases across 
the cross section of the tube. Such waves are extremely 
difficult to detect, due to the cancellation of phases when 
averaging over even a single flux tube. 


Bibliography 

Photospheric flux tubes are fascinating and heavily 
investigated objects, so that only some of the many 
observational results on them could be included in the 
present article. There are a number of reviews which 
provide a good introduction to the subject and the 
literature, some of which also go into greater detail then 
the present article. General introductory reviews covering 
both magnetic elements and sunspots have been written 
by Stenflo (1989, 1994) and Solanki (1998), while reviews 
dealing with magnetic elements alone (but including 
both observational and theoretical aspects) have been 
published by Spruit et al (1992), Schiissler (1992) and 
Solanki (1993), with the last being the most comprehensive 
in its literature coverage. 


Schiissler M 1992 Small-scale photospheric magnetic fields 


The Sun—a Laboratory for Astrophysics ed J T Schmelz 
and J C Brown (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 191-220 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Solanki S K 1993 Small-scale solar magnetic fields: an 
overview Space Sci. Rev. 61 1-188 

Solanki S K 1998 Solar magnetic fields Space Solar Physics 
(Berlin: Springer) pp 41-76 

Spruit H C, Schtissler M and Solanki S K 1992 Filigree 
and flux tube physics Solar Interior and Atmosphere 
ed AN Cox, W Livingston and MS Matthews (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 890-910 

Stenflo JO 1989 Small scale magnetic structures on the Sun 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 1 3-48 

Stenflo J O 1994 Solar Magnetic Fields: Polarized Radiation 
Diagnostics (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Sami K Solanki 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux 
Tubes: Theory 


The magnetic field in the photospheric layers of the 
Sun is found to occur not in a homogeneous form 
but in discrete concentrations of intense field. The 
most obvious form of magnetic flux (magnetic field 
strength times surface area occupied by the field) is 
seen in suNspPoTs but it turns out that much smaller 
arrangements of magnetic field are to be found in the lanes 
between granules where downdraughts occur (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION). These are the photospheric flux 
tubes: small-scale concentrations of intense magnetic field. 
The tubes have diameters of a few hundred kilometers 
or smaller and field strengths of 1-2 kG. Generally found 
in intergranular lanes, they are subject to the dynamical 
nature of the photospheric environment with its sound 
waves and flows. The tubes are isolated flux tubes in that 
their immediate surroundings are essentially field-free. 
See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES: OBSERVATIONS. 

The small-scale tubes of the photosphere may be 
thought of as the elemental building blocks of solar 
magnetism, so an understanding of intense flux tubes has 
implications for a wider understanding of solar and stellar 
magnetic phenomena. Theoretical progress in modelling 
small-scale flux tubes builds on the fact that in such tubes 
variations across the interior of a tube are less important 
than variations along the tube. 

The elemental photospheric flux tube is taken to 
be a cylinder of magnetic flux embedded in a field-free 
environment; the photospheric flux tube is thus a region 
of locally high Alfvén speed. Two basic speeds prove 
central to an understanding of tube dynamics: the slow 
tube speed c, and the kink speed c,. These speeds are 
in turn defined in terms of the sound speed and Alfvén 
speed. Fora tube of magnetic field strength By with plasma 
density po and pressure po, the sound speed c,; and Alfvén 
speed v, of the tube are defined by 


1/2 2\1/2 
B 
Ee (*#) piece (=) (1) 
Po L-Po 
where y (generally taken to be 5/3) is the ratio of specific 
heats of the plasma and yj is its magnetic permeability. 


From the speeds c, and v4 we may construct the slow 
magnetoacoustic speed c, and the kink speed c;, of a tube: 


ys ee) 


here p. denotes the plasma density of the field-free 
environment of the tube. The slow tube speed and the 
kink speed are important in coronal flux tubes too (see 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES). 

A photospheric flux tube is typically a region of 
plasma density depletion: the presence of the magnetic 
field leads to a plasma pressure reduction inside the tube, 
in keeping with the requirement of transverse pressure 


A CsUA 7 ( Po 
(cg + vay? po + Pe 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


balance, and unless there are substantial temperature 
differences between the tube and its environment then 
this reduction in plasma pressure is accompanied by a 
reduction in plasma density. In other words, the magnetic 
field of a photospheric flux tube partially evaculates 
the plasma. This is in contrast to the coronal flux 
tube which is generally a region of plasma enhancement 
and reduced Alfvén speed, achieved without violation 
of pressure balance because the strong and pervasive 
magnetic field of the solar corona can easily accommodate 
any enhancements or reductions in the plasma pressure. 

The thermal structure of a photospheric flux tube 
is complicated. The tube may exchange heat with its 
surroundings, through radiative transport and convective 
energy transport. Detailed numerical studies suggest that 
photospheric magnetic flux tubes are hotter than their 
surroundings in their upper layers but cooler than their 
surroundings in their deeper layers. 

The speeds c, and c, of a photospheric flux tube 
are sub-Alfvénic, and the slow speed is also sub-sonic; 
whether the kink speed is sub-sonic depends on the 
specific parameters of the tube. A numerical illustration 
is of interest. In a photospheric flux tube with By = 2 kG 
and plasma density po = 2.2 x 10-* kg m™, the Alfvén 
speed is va = 12 km st, Taking the sound speed c, of 
the photosphere to be 8 km s~' then gives a slow speed 
of c = 6.7 kms@!. For a flux tube that has depleted its 
plasma density to some 50% of its environment (so that 
po = pe/2, consistent with an environment sound speed 
of 9.6 km s~'), we obtain c, = 6.9 km s~!. Thus the slow 
speed c, is some 56% of the Alfvén speed and the kink 
speed c, is about 57% of the Alfvén speed. The precise 
ordering of the two speeds depends on the details of the 
modelling. 

The speeds c; and c,, are associated with the dynamics 
of flux tubes, arising in both wave phenomena and flows 
in tubes. The speed c,, made up in equal measure of 
the sound speed and the Alfvén speed, is evidentally 
associated with the compressibility of the tube. Any 
squeezing of a tube results in increases in the magnetic 
pressure and plasma pressure in the tube, which act to 
restore the undisturbed state. This is a feature shared by 
all elastic tubes and consequently the equivalent of the 
speed c arises in a variety of other physical situations, 
with the role of the Alfvén speed being played by the 
appropriate elastic speed of an elastic tube. For example, 
in the case of a blood vessel the equivalent of the speed va 
is simply the elastic speed in the membrane of the blood 
vessel. The speed of sound c, in blood is much larger 
than the elastic speed and so the slow speed is close to 
the elastic speed of the blood vessel. For water in a pipe, 
the relative magnitudes of the two basic speeds depend 
on the material of the pipe. In a metal pipe, the elastic 
speed is much larger than the sound speed in water and 
so the effective slow speed is close to the sound speed in 
water (about 1.4 kms~'). By contrast, in a plastic pipe the 
orderings in the two speeds are reversed and the effective 
propagation speed is close to the elastic speed in plastic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(about 10 m s~'), lying far below the speed of sound in 
water. 

The kink speed involves both the tube and its 
environment. The kink wave which propagates with this 
speed (see below) involves the magnetic tension force 
in the tube and the kink wave displaces both the tube 
and its surroundings by about equal measures, hence the 
combined occurrence of the densities pp and pe. The speed 
also arises in the description of magnetoacoustic surface 
waves on an interface between two plasmas of different 
properties. 

An important question in the physics of photospheric 
flux tubes is how are they formed. A flux tube 
with kilogauss field strength requires strong forces 
to bring about its intense state, with the magnetic 
pressure Bi/2u being far in excess of the pressure 
of converging flows that granulation may provide; 
the tube finds equilibrium through evacuation of its 
interior, reducing the plasma pressure and thus allowing 
magnetostatic pressure balance between the flux tube 
and its environment to occur. It is envisaged that 
granulation acts to ‘shepherd’ flux tubes into the regions 
where downdraughts between the granules occur. The 
process is an example of flux expulsion (by advection), 
whereby the convective flows of the photosphere move 
magnetic field into intergranular lanes, in keeping with 
the frozen flux concept of ideal MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS. 
The process is not of itself sufficient to account for the 
observed field strengths; it brings about the ‘seedlings’ 
of photospheric flux tubes but other effects are needed 
to produce the observationally determined intense field 
strengths. The additional process that comes into play 
is driven by the super-adiabatic temperature gradient of 
the solar convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
ZONE), which in field-free regions drives the convective 
flows (granules and supergranules; see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
SUPERGRANULATION) that distinguish the Sun’s convection. 
In flux tubes, convectively driven flows are channelled by 
the tubes. The fact that photospheric flux tubes reside 
in a plasma that is stratified by gravity means that any 
downdraught generated within a flux tube brings less 
dense plasma from the higher reaches of the stratified tube 
to the deeper layers within the tube, allowing the high 
plasma pressure of the environment to squeeze the tube 
further. An increase in magnetic field strength results. The 
process is referred to as convective collapse. It may be 
described in mathematical detail for a thin flux tube (see 
below). 

A flow in a magnetic flux tube may also develop 
because of pressure differences between the footpoints of 
the tube. For example, if the footpoints of a tube are rooted 
in regions that are magnetically distinct from one another, 
such as one footpoint in a sunspot and the other in a field- 
free region, then plasma pressure differences arise and a 
flow may be driven in the tube. Such motions of the plasma 
within the tube are called siphon flows. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Waves in photospheric flux tubes 
To give a detailed description of the magnetohydrodyan- 
mic waves that an isolated photospheric flux tube sup- 
ports we consider the equations of ideal MHD. Consider 
an equilibrium magnetic field Bo = Bo(r)z aligned with 
the z-axis of a cylindrical polar coordinate system (r, 6, z). 
To begin with we will ignore the effects of gravity. Then 
the equilibrium plasma pressure po(r) of a radially struc- 
tured magnetic atmosphere is such as to maintain total 
pressure balance: the sum of the plasma pressure po(r) 
and the magnetic pressure Bor) /2u is a constant. Where 
the field is strong, as in the center of a flux tube, the plasma 
pressure is correspondingly reduced. 

Small-amplitude motions v = (v,, v9, v;) about a 
structured equilibrium state satisfy the coupled wave 
equations 


3? 2 0? 0° pr 

mirza hiOgs) "+ Fa =o 8) 
2 , 8 1 &2pr 

min (5 RO) WEDS aang sO (4) 


- . 0? cr) 1 d*pr 
cr) Uv, = = =39 
ar? az2 c2(r) + va(r) po(r) dzat 
with the evolution of pr(r, 6, z) described by 


(5) 


PE = pir = pile) + ROMKiv». 6) 
Here c,(r), cs(r) and va(r) denote the slow speed, sound 
speed and Alfvén speed within the radially structured 
plasma, of density po(r). Equations (3)-(5) come from 
the components of the momentum equation in which 
the magnetic force has been expressed in terms of the 
perturbation in total pressure pr, defined as the sum of 
the perturbation p in the dynamical plasma pressure and 
the magnetic pressure perturbation Bo(r)B./u, with B, 
being the component of the perturbed magnetic field in 
the direction of the applied magnetic field Bo. Equation 
(6) results from a combination of the isentropic (adiabatic) 
equation and the induction equation of ideal MHD. 

One solution of the above equations is the torsional 
Alfvén wave, which propagates motions vu», independent 
of 6, according to the wave equation 


(7) 


Torsional oscillations, which have v, = 0, v, = 0 and pr = 
0, have a radial dependence determined by the manner 
in which the oscillations are generated. The oscillations 
exhibit phase mixing by which radial gradients of the 
motion grow rapidly in regions where the Alfvén speed 
va(r) varies sharply in r. 

In addition to torsional Alfvén waves there are 
motions that are compressive, with p # 0 and pr # 0. 
We examine the elemental magnetic flux tube that models 
photospheric conditions, taking the applied magnetic field 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bo(r)z to be confined within a cylindrical tube of radius 
a. The plasma pressure and density within the tube are po 
and o; the corresponding plasma pressure and density in 
the tube’s field-free environment are p, and p,. The tube is 
in magnetostatic pressure balance with its surroundings: 
Pe = po + B5/2u. With cs and va now denoting the 
sound speed and Alfvén speed within the tube and c, the 
sound speed in the tube’s environment, pressure balance 
combined with the ideal gas law then shows that the 
plasma density p within the tube is related to the density 
Pe in the tube’s environment through 


2 

PO Co 
dg V2 
Pe Cs + 5¥UA 


(8) 
Thus, for sound speeds c, and ce that are roughly 
comparable, a photospheric flux tube is a region of density 
depletion (i.e. p9 < pe). 

Now the media inside and outside the elemental 
flux tube are uniform, and this affords a considerable 
simplification. In a uniform medium, the wave equations 
(3)-(6) may be combined to yield an equation for pr. 
Writing 


pr(r, 6, z,t) = pr(r) exp i(wt +n — k,z) 


provides a Fourier description of the motions, of frequency 
w, longitudinal wavenumber k, and azimuthal number 
n. The integer n(= 0,1, 2,...) describes the geometrical 
form of the perturbations. The case n = 0 gives the 
sausage wave and corresponds to symmetric squeezings 
and rarefactions of the tube; these are compressional (pr 4 
0) oscillations. The case n = 1 describes the kink wave of 
the tube; in such waves the motion of the tube resembles 
a wriggling snake, with the whole tube being displaced 
without changing its cross-sectional shape. Finally, there 
are also waves with n > 2; these are the fluting waves. 
For a uniform tube, pr satisfies 


d2 d 
2 2 + ro - (mor? +n’) pr =0 (9) 


where 
(k2c2 - ow) (ku, —’) 


(c2 + va (keep — w’) 


2_ 
mo = 


This is a form of Bessel’s equation with solution pr = 
I,(mor) inside (r < a) the tube; J, is a modified Bessel 
function. Similarly, in the field-free environment (r > a) 
of the flux tube, where the sound speed is ce, a solution 
pr proportional to the modified Bessel function K, (mer) 


arises, where 


wa 


(hana 7 eae 
me = k; 2 : 

It is usual to examine modes for which m is positive, 

corresponding to selecting waves that are confined to near 

the tube. Then, matching pr and v, across r = a results in 


1 a T,(moa) 1 A Kj} (mea) _ 
po(k20% — 0) Tn(moa) peo °K, (mea) 


0 (10) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where a prime (’) denotes the derivative of a modified 
Bessel function (e.g. [/(moa) = dI,(x)/dx evaluated at 
x = moa, etc). This is the dispersion relation for tube 
waves in an isolated magnetic flux tube, requiring that 
me. > 0; surface waves arise whenever ms > 0, and body 
waves occur if ms < 0. It is evident that tube waves are 
dispersive, their phase speed c(= w/k,) depending on the 
wavenumber (in the combination k,a). 

Solution of the dispersion relation (10), for conditions 
appropriate for an isolated photospheric flux tube, show 
that there are slow body waves (both sausage and kink) 
with phase speeds c that lie between c, and c; and slow 
surface waves which have phase speeds that are less than 
cy. Also, there is a surface wave with a phase speed close 
to the kink speed c, and another surface wave with phase 
speed near ce. Fluting modes also have speeds close to cx. 

There is particular interest in waves that are much 
longer than a tube diameter, corresponding to k,a < 1. 
This is the thin flux tube limit, of special interest for 
photospheric flux tubes. Since generally w ~ k,va, the 
condition k,a < 1 corresponds to requiring that periods 
t(= 2m/w) are such that t > 27a/va, giving t > 50s for 
a tube of radius a = 100 km. P-modes, for example, have 
periods around 300 s, roughly meeting this criterion. With 
k,a < 1, the slow surface wave has phase speed close to 
Ce 

Dispersion relations such as equation (10) are 
important in the development of a nonlinear wave theory 
for a tube. Indeed, it has been shown that slow (sausage) 
surface waves have motions v(z, t) along a thin tube which 
satisfy the nonlinear integrodifferential equation 


OU 9.5 OY ace av | ae re v(s, t) ds =, 
yi Ca, ou Ae 0573 oo a2 + (z—s)2y2 
(11) 


The constants a, Bo) and A depend on the various 
parameters of the tube. 

Equation (11) is sometimes referred to as the 
Leibovich—Roberts equation. An explicit form of its 
solution is not known although it is amenable to numerical 
solution. It is of particular interest because it is associated 
with soliton behavior. Solitons are nonlinear waves with 
specific interaction properties that make them worthy of 
special study. For the related problem of a magnetic slab— 
the Cartesian equivalent of a flux tube—the equation 
describing the weakly nonlinear slow surface wave is the 
Benjamin—Ono equation, i.e. 


dv dv dv a ®% v(s,t) 
tC + ds =0 12 
rad: az pu az ven az2 he S—Z : a?) 


for constant a;. The Benjamin-—Ono equation has been 
studied extensively and its soliton solution is known 
explicitly. | Equations (11) and (12) may be derived 
using thin flux tube theory (see below) or from the 
full equations of ideal MHD, assuming that motions are 
weakly nonlinear and weakly dispersive. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thin flux tube theory 

The restriction to thin tubes, in the sense that waves 
are much longer than a tube radius (so that k,a < 1), 
leads to a considerable simplification in the description 
of the dynamics of photospheric flux tubes, so much so 
that it becomes possible to include a number of other 
effects ignored in the discussion of an elemental magnetic 
flux tube. Of particular importance is the influence of 
stratification brought about by gravity. The pressure scale 
height in the photosphere is comparable with a tube radius 
so the effects of gravity are particularly significant in the 
photospheric layers of a tube. Other effects, such as 
radiative transport, may also in principle be included in 
thin flux tube theory. 

To describe motions in a thin tube in the presence 
of gravity the so-called thin flux tube equations are 
used. These equations have been used extensively for 
both analytical and numerical investigations of flux tube 
dynamics. The sausage and kink modes are treated 
separately. The thin tube equations for the sausage mode 
(in ideal MHD) are 


0 re) 
—pA+—pvA= 1 
57? ore 0 (13) 


dv dv 1 dp 
a = 14 
ot aE p 0Z - (14) 


r) r) ) 
OP OP: VP £00: 80 (15) 
ot az p \ ot Oz 
BA = constant (16) 
B2 
pt on = Pe- (17) 
iu 


In these equations, B(z,t) is the field strength of a 
thin tube with cross-sectional area A(z, ft), and v(z, ft) is 
the longitudinal flow speed within the tube, where the 
plasma pressure and density are p(z,t) and p(z,t). The 
gravitational acceleration is g(=274 m s~’), acting in the 
negative z-direction. The external gas pressure pe(z, t) 
is calculated on the boundary of the tube and may vary 
in response to motions in the tube or its environment; 
pressure balance across the tube is maintained at all times 
(as expressed by equation (17)). 

In equilibrium (v = 0,0/dt = 0) the thin tube 
equations for a magnetic flux tube in temperature balance 
with its surroundings (so that c, = ce) yield 


N Ao (0) 


= -N 
Po(z) = po(0) Aa@) e 


Po(z) = po(O) e~ 


Ao(z) = Ao(0)e%/?—Bo(z) = Bo(0)e"“/?_— (18) 


ya fo ae 
ads AGG 


is the integrated pressure scale height; Ao(z)(=po(z)gp0(z)) 
is the pressure scale height inside the tube. See figure 1. 


where 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Equilibrium state of a thin magnetic flux tube ina 
stratified plasma. The tube is confined by the external plasma 
pressure pe in the field-free environment of the tube. The region 
within the tube is generally of lower plasma density than the 
environment. 


The linear form of the thin tube equations is readily 
found for the equilibrium (18). Ignoring contributions 
from variations in pe, longitudinal motions are found to 
satisfy the Klein—Gordon equation 

a2 a) 02 

+ - car + Q2(2)0 =0 (19) 
where Q(z,t) is related to the flow v(z,t) and 2(z) 
depends on the details of the equilibrium state. 


In an isothermal atmosphere, Ag, c, and 022 are all 
constants, with 


4 9 2 4c? 1 
eo ( ) 4s (1 )]. (20) 
4A, L\4  v Yun y 


The Klein—Gordon equation (19) then yields the dispersion 
relation 


w= ko, + 8 (21) 
which shows that Qs is a cutoff frequency (for sausage 
waves in a thin tube). 22 may be viewed as made up of 
two contributions, the first (corresponding to the first term 
on the right-hand side of equation (20)) arising from the 
geometrical shape of the undisturbed tube and the second 
(corresponding to the second term on the right of equation 
(20)) being determined by the tube’s elasticity. A rigid 
tube with exponential cross-sectional area (determined 
according to the equilibrium (18) with Ao constant) has 
cutoff frequency (9/4 — 2/7)'/2c,/2Ao, whereas a straight 
and vertical rigid tube has cutoff frequency c,/2A9. In 
general the cutoff frequency for the sausage mode in a 
tube is less than the cutoff frequency of a rigid tube. 

The Klein—Gordon equation also describes the kink 
mode ina thin tube. Thin tube equations for the kink mode 
may be used to describe the transverse displacements 
&(z, t) of a vertical tube, leading to the wave equation 


0°§ v§ Po — *) 0g 


2 
— =c(z + : 
at? x 5g “(2 + Pe) dz 


(22) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Equation (22) may be cast into an equation of the Klein— 
Gordon form, just as for the sausage mode. For an 
isothermal medium, the dispersion relation for the kink 
mode is 

wo = ston +%K (23) 


where the cutoff frequency for the kink mode is 


Ck 
Qk= re (24) 

The forms (19)-(24) allow a direct comparison 
between sausage and kink modes. For example, with 
again va = 12 kms-!,c, = 8 kms“! and Ap = 140 km, 
sausage and kink modes both grow in amplitude by a 
factor of e in propagating a distance of 560 km (four scale 
heights). The sausage wave, propagating with a speed 
ce = 6.7 kms!, has a cyclic cutoff frequency, Qs/27, of 
4.2 mHz (period 240 s). The kink wave has a speed of 
ck = 6.9kms |, close to the sausage mode’s, but its cutoff 
frequency at 2 mHz (period 500 s) is very different. The 
sausage mode’s behavior is similar to that of a vertically 
propagating sound wave, which has a propagation speed 
of 8kms-! and cutoff frequency of 4.5 mHz (period 220 s), 
although it e-folds in just 280 km (two scale heights); 
consequently, sound waves are expected to form shocks 
lower in the atmosphere than tube waves. The fact that 
the cutoff frequency of the kink mode is considerably 
smaller than the cutoff frequency of the sausage wave or 
a sound wave suggests that kink waves may survive to 
higher levels in the solar atmosphere than sausage waves 
or sound waves. 

The dispersion relations (21) and (23) imply that an 
impulsively generated wave (sausage or kink) results in a 
wavefront which propagates with the speed c; or c,, the 
wavefront supporting an oscillating wake which rises and 
falls with the frequency Qs or Qk. 


Convective collapse 

Convective collapse, the process by which a photospheric 
flux tube may be formed with kilogauss field strengths, 
may be demonstrated from the thin flux tube equations 
for the sausage mode. The differential equation satisfied 
by the longitudinal flow, Fourier analyzed by writing 
v(z, t) = u(z) expGar), is 


Bo d ( poc? du 2 (CQ ye 
— 2) 
aa ( EE +]o— a, 2 + 22 u=0 (25) 


where ; 
See (ai eee ) 
g Ao y 


is the square of the Brunt—Vaisdla (or buoyancy) frequency 
of a plasma element in a stratified atmosphere. In 
the atmosphere of a flux tube embedded within the 
solar convection zone, w, is negative and this drives an 
instability within the tube. The magnetic field may quench 
the instability if it is sufficiently strong. This is readily 
illustrated by an approximate solution of equation (25). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


With the illustrative boundary conditions that u = 0 at 


levels z = 0 and z = —d, we obtain the approximate 
solution 
Zz (RZ 
u(z) = uo exp (=) sin (=) (26) 
with 


2 
2_ 2|7 1 1 Y 2 
wae E a “(3 +E) ea]. 


Hence, if w, < 0 then a mode with w* < 0 may arise, 


corresponding to an instability. The instability amounts to 
a flow of plasma within the stratified tube; a downdraught 
brings the more tenuous plasma in the higher levels of the 
tube to layers deeper within the tube, allowing the external 
plasma pressure to squeeze the tube. A stronger field 
results. This is convective collapse. The process is halted 
when the field strength Bo is sufficiently large to resist 
the compression of the tube, and so quench the instability 
(reducing w* to zero). A flux tube with only moderate field 
strength finds itself subject to the instability until it has 
strengthened itself, through convective collapse, to a state 
where it may resist the process. Consequently, intense and 
isolated magnetic flux tubes are the expected norm in any 
medium such as the solar photosphere where convective 
effects operate in the presence of magnetic field. 

A determination of the field strength necessary to 
quench the instability depends on the precise details of 
the modelling. Studies of the process under conditions 
appropriate for the solar convection zone show that 
kilogauss field strengths are required before the collapse 
is halted. However, what precisely is the ensuing state 
of a collapsed flux tube remains uncertain, mainly as a 
result of the need to take into account a number of detailed 
and complicated effects ignored in the above treatment. In 
particular, it is necessary to include the effects of RADIATIVE 
TRANSFER, nonlinearity and a more realistic choice of flow 
boundary conditions. 


Numerical simulations 

Numerical simulations allow the inclusion of a variety of 
effects that complicate the description of the basic modes 
of behavior of photospheric flux tubes, and this promotes 
a more direct comparison with solar observations. By 
following the motion of a parcel of magnetized fluid (using 
a so-called Lagrangian approach), it proves possible, for 
example, to explore the linear and nonlinear sausage and 
kink modes in a vertical tube or to simulate the convective 
collapse process. These problems are usually addressed 
through numerical solution of thin flux tube equations, 
allowing for the important effects of stratification. Broadly, 
analytic theory for an ideal plasma has provided valuable 
insights for the more complex modelling of flux tubes 
under conditions representative of the solar photosphere. 
Thin flux tube theory for the kink mode has also been 
applied to modelling the behaviour of a nonvertical flux 
tube, addressing in particular the important question of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Photospheric Magnetic Flux Tubes: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


how magnetic field stored below the convection zone is 
transported to the solar surface. 

An important question still under active considera- 
tion is how to incorporate the environment’s back-reaction 
ona moving flux tube. The effect has been explored for the 
sausage mode and leads to the formation of solitons; the 
influence of stratification on flux tube solitons has not so 
far been explored. The back-reaction of the environment 
on the kink mode is somewhat uncertain, with several al- 
ternative possibilities suggested in the literature. 

The behaviour of shocks excited within tubes and 
also the formation of shocks and downflows as a result 
of the convective collapse of a tube have been modelled 
in two-dimensional simulations. Numerical simulations 
have also permitted realistic estimates of the energy flux 
carried by the various waves, allowing applications to the 
Sun and stellar atmospheres more generally to be explored. 


Bibliography 

Hollweg J V 1990 MHD waves on solar magnetic flux tubes 
Physics of Magnetic Flux Ropes (Geophys. Monogr. 58) ed 
CT Russell, E R Priest and LC Lee (Washington, DC: 
AGU) p 23 

Parker E N 1979 Cosmical Magnetic Fields (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) pp 841 

Roberts B 1992 Magnetohydrodynamic waves in struc- 
tured magnetic fields Sunspots: Theory and Obser- 
vations ed J H Thomas and N O Weiss (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) p 303 

Roberts B and Ulmschneider P 1997 Dynamics of flux tubes 
in the solar atmosphere: theory Solar and Heliospheric 
Plasma Physics ed G M Simnett, C E Alissandrakis and 
L Vlahos (Berlin: Springer) p 75 

Ryutova M P 1990 Waves and oscillations in magnetic 
flux tubes Solar Photosphere: Structure, Convection, 
and Magnetic Fields (IAU Symp. 138) ed J O Stenflo 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) p 229 

Schiissler M 1990 Theoretical aspects of small-scale pho- 
tospheric magnetic fields Solar Photosphere: Structure, 
Convection, and Magnetic Fields (LAU Symp. 138) ed J 
O Stenflo (Dordrecht: Reidel) p 161 

Spruit H C 1981 Magnetic flux tubes The Sun as a Star 
(NASA SP-450) ed S Jordan (Washington, DC: NASA) 
p 385 

Spruit H C and Roberts B 1983 Magnetic flux tubes on the 
Sun Nature 304 401 

Spruit H C, Schtissler M and Solanki S K 1991 Filigree and 
flux tube physics Solar Interior and Atmosphere ed A 
N Cox, W C Livingston and M S Matthews (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) p 890 


B Roberts 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Probe ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Probe 


Proposed NASA mission to fly through the Sun’s corona. 
Planned launch date 2007. Inserted into an eccentric orbit, 
it would approach within 3 solar radii of the surface to 
take in situ measurements of the corona, flying from pole 
to pole. A second flyby may occur in 2015. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Solar Prominence Chirality 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Prominence Chirality 


A prominence is a relatively cool sheet of dense plasma 
embedded in the hot tenuous corona. They are easily 
seen as bright clouds at the ‘limb’ or edge of the solar 
disk. When viewed on the solar disk, prominences are 
long narrow features, i.e. ‘FILAMENTS’. Prominences are 
permeated by weak magnetic fields that are thought to 
support the plasma against the pull of gravity, and to guide 
its flows. 

In recent years, a global pattern has been recognized 
in the orientation of magnetic fields inside prominences, 
especially those ‘quiescents’ located far away from 
sunspots. The pattern is characterized by a preferred 
chirality or handedness in the northern and southern solar 
hemispheres. The origin of the pattern is controversial at 
the time of writing, but may shed some light on the large- 
scale processes involved in the 11-year SOLAR CYCLE. 

D Rust discovered the pattern in 1967 from his 
measurements of the Zeeman effect in prominences that 
form an east-west chain or crown at high latitudes 
around the poles of the Sun. (In a magnetic field some 
spectral lines split into two or more circularly polarized 
components. This is the ZEEMAN EFFECT.) 

Those prominences at the northeast limb had negative 
field components along the line of sight, those at the 
northwest limb, positive fields. So both suggested that 
the component of the field along the long axis of the 
prominences pointed from east to west. At the same time 
axial fields in the southern hemisphere pointed east. Rust 
predicted this pattern would reverse in the next sunspot 
cycle, cycle 21. 

In 1970, J-L Leroy, V Bommier and S Sahal-Brechot, 
at the Pic du Midi Observatory, began a long series 
of observations of prominence magnetic fields. They 
measured the Hanle effect in a strong spectral line of 
neutral helium, the so-called D3 line at 587.6 nm. This line 
is emitted by the chromosphere that surrounds and lies 
under a prominence. When the light in the line is scattered 
by the helium atoms in the prominence, it becomes linearly 
polarized. But the magnetic field in the prominence tends 
to depolarize the scattered light. By measuring the amount 
of depolarization, the French group was able to determine 
the direction and strength of the magnetic fields. 

Leroy’s group confirmed Rust’s finding of a hemi- 
spheric pattern for the axial component of the field in a 
large sample of quiescent prominences and also confirmed 
his prediction that the directions of the axial fields would 
reverse with the onset of cycle 21. Figure 1 is an example 
of the French group’s results. It is a map that shows all 
the filaments visible on the solar disk during a solar ro- 
tation. The arrows show axial field components pointing 
to the west in the northern hemisphere and to the east in 
the southern hemisphere. The + and — signs designate the 
polarity of the weak magnetic fields around the filaments, 
and the shadings indicate bright Ha active regions. 

S F Martin and her associates at Big Bear Observatory 
extended the Rust—Leroy pattern to lower-latitude promi- 
nences. In 1992 they were able to infer the direction of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the axial field in a filament from the orientation of small 
thread-like features (‘fibrils’) that cluster around a filament 
in the neighboring chromosphere (see CHROMOSPHERE: FIB- 
RILS). 

They discovered a pattern which is implicit in figure 1. 
The majority of quiescent filaments are either left-handed 
(‘sinistral’) or right-handed (‘dextral’) depending on the 
direction of their axial fields as seen by a hypothetical 
observer who stands in the positive magnetic region 
adjacent to the filament (figure 2). Moreover, most dextral 
filaments are found in the northern hemisphere, most 
sinistrals in the southern hemisphere. This relationship 
remains unchanged, cycle after cycle. Although the 
absolute direction (eastward or westward) of the axial 
fields reverses from one cycle to the next, so does the 
relative position of the neighboring positive magnetic 
zone. 

Filament channels, in which filaments form, are also 
either dextral or sinistral and also display this hemispheric 
preference (See SOLAR FILAMENT CHANNELS). 

Martin and her colleagues also pointed outa structural 
pattern of chirality in filaments. As seen from above, the 
‘feet’ or ‘barbs’ of a filament project from the axis in only 
one of two possible ways, a fact that P Foukal had noticed 
in 1971. Sinistral filaments are always ‘left-bearing’, 
dextral filaments are always ‘right-bearing’ (figure 2) 


Interpretations 
D Rust and A Kumar have extended a conceptual model of 
the solar cycle, due to H Babcock, to explain the chirality 
of filaments. In Babcock’s model (see DYNAMO THEORY) 
the subsurface magnetic field at the beginning of a cycle 
extends north-south to connect the poles. As the cycle 
progresses, differential rotation of the plasma (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: ROTATION) wraps the meridianal field lines around 
the Sun, and forms a system of subsurface magnetic 
‘ropes’ that are inclined from northeast to southwest in 
the northern hemisphere and oppositely in the southern 
hemisphere. In the same way that Babcock used these 
ropes to explain Hale’s laws of sunspot polarity, Rust and 
Kumar use them to explain the handedness of filaments. 
They picture a filament as a twisted magnetic rope that 
erupts into the atmosphere, properly oriented with the 
correct handedness (but see SOLAR PROMINENCE FORMATION). 
In an elaboration of their filament model, Rust and 
Kumar discuss the generation and loss of helicity, the 
‘twist’ of solar magnetic fields. Filaments often disappear 
by erupting bodily from the Sun. In many cases a helical 
structure in the filament is seen to unwind during the 
eruption. Rust and Kumar propose that this helical 
field is created somehow during the subsurface formation 
of a filament. Moreover they claim the sense of the 
filament’s twist (clockwise or anticlockwise) is correlated 
with the direction of its axial field: sinistral filaments 
are right-handed helices and dextrals are left-handed. 
Rust and Kumar support their proposal by showing that 
interplanetary magnetic clouds, which originate in the 
eruption of a filament, have the same helicity as their 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Chirality 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Peet 


shh 
Set ee 


al 
CLEP | pis 
a peer | 
ysisuueanscuen 
Seean We 


Pe er 


Ju 


scraneetc 
Sea ter 


ee 


ae 


@ 10 20 30 406 50 60 70 80 80 100 810 120 130 140 150 160 176 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 260 270 280 260° 300 310 320 330 340 350 360 


Figure 1. A map of the axial magnetic fields in filaments, over the whole Sun. (Courtesy of J-L Leroy.) 


igs sinistral 


Figure 2. A diagram of sinistral and dextral filaments, showing 
their axial fields. The small appendages (‘barbs’) also indicate 
chirality: as seen from either side of the filament, they bear to 
the left in the sinistral and to the right in the dextral. 


associated filaments. So not only the axial fields of 
filaments, but also the twist in these fields, may show a 
hemispheric preference. 

E Priest and his colleagues also invoke differential 
rotation to form subsurface magnetic ropes in each 
hemisphere that have the correct orientations to explain 
filament handedness. But instead of postulating that the 
ropes emerge as a whole, they suggest that small loops bob 
up to the surface and link up, end to end, to form the axial 
field in a filament (figure 3). 

Recently A Van Ballegooijen and his collaborators 
have explored another scheme, in which only surface 
fields and surface motions are involved. They made 
numerical simulations of the solar cycle, allowing bipolar 
active regions to emerge at the observed rates, sizes and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


latitudes. Simultaneously, three well-known surface flows 
act on these regions: differential rotation distorts the 
regions, supergranule cells diffuse their magnetic flux and 
poleward drifts carry their flux to the poles. The result 
is the formation of so-called switchbacks, hairpin turns 
in the curves that divide large areas of opposite magnetic 
polarity in the photosphere. The authors then examine 
the coronal fields these processes produce. They find 
that filaments forming on the preceding branches of such 
switchbacks would obey the hemispheric rule, but those 
on the following branches would not, in contradiction to 
the observations. 

It does seem therefore that subphotospheric fields and 
flows are necessary to explain the observed hemispheric 
pattern of the chirality of filaments. Other magnetic 
chirality patterns have been recognized in recent years. 
A global view of the patterns seems to be emerging. 


Bibliography 

Leroy J-L, Bommier V and Sahal-Brechot S 1984 New data 
on the magnetic structure of quiescent prominences 
Astron. Astrophys. 131 33-44 

Martin S F, Billamoria R and Tracadas P W 1994 
Magnetic configurations basic to filament channels 
and filaments Solar Surface Magnetism ed R J Rutten 
and C Schrijver (Berlin: Springer) pp 303-38 

Priest E R, Van Ballegooijen A A and MacKay D H 
1996 A model for dextral and sinistral prominences 
Astrophys. J. 460 530-43 

Rust D M and Kumar A 1994 Helical fields in solar 
prominences Solar Phys. 155 69-97 

Van Ballegooijen A A, Cartledge N and Priest E R 1998 
Astrophys. J 501 866-81 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Chirality 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(e) Preparation (sinistral) 


‘c) Filament formation Dextral field before eruption 
(c) 0] p' 


Figure 3. The formation of either a sinistral or dextral filament, 
according to Priest et al 1996: (a) differential rotation (heavy 
arrows) shears the subsurface magnetic field (dotted lines); (b) 
small loops erupt to form a filament channel; (c) small loops link 
to form a filament. The coronal arcade does not participate in 
the formation. (Courtesy of E Priest.) 


Jack Zirker 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Eruption 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. An ejective filament eruption exploding out of an 
active region near the limb. The expanding filament magnetic 
flux rope is seen to have overall twist and complex substructure. 
At this point, about 10 min into the explosion, the filament flux 
rope has increased in volume by a factor of ~1000. This 
photograph is an Ha filtergram (from the Big Bear Solar 
Observatory); it shows plasma in the erupting filament that is at 
chromospheric temperatures (5000-10 000 Kk). 


Solar Prominence Eruption 


The prominence in a solar prominence eruption is a 
magnetic structure in the chromosphere and corona (see 
SOLAR PROMINENCES; SOLAR PROMINENCE: ACTIVE). Prior to its 
eruption, the prominence is visible in chromospheric 
images by virtue of chromospheric-temperature plasma 
suspended in the magnetic field, and belongs to that 
large class of solar magnetic structures appropriately 
called solar filaments because of their characteristic sinewy 
sigmoidal form. Hence, the term ‘filament eruption’ 
is used interchangeably with the term ‘prominence 
eruption’. The magnetic field holding a filament is prone 
to undergo explosive changes in configuration. In these 
upheavals, because the filament material is compelled 
by its high conductivity to ride with the magnetic field 
that threads it, this material is a visible tracer of the field 
motion. The part of the magnetic explosion displayed 
by the entrained filament material is the phenomenon 
known as a solar filament eruption, the topic of this article. 
Figure 1 shows a filament eruption in progress, exploding 
up into the corona. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This article begins with a description of basic ob- 
served characteristics of filament eruptions, with attention 
to the magnetic fields, flares, and coronal mass ejections in 
which erupting filaments are embedded (see SOLAR FLARE 
OBSERVATIONS; SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS). The 
present understanding of these characteristics in terms of 
the form and action of the magnetic field is then laid out 
by means of a rudimentary three-dimensional model of 
the field (see SOLAR FLARE MODELS; SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJEC- 
TION: THEORY). The article ends with basic questions that 
this picture leaves unresolved and with remarks on the 
observations needed to probe these questions. 


Observed characteristics 
Every stationary filament, whether or not it eventually 
erupts, stands over and tracks a neutral line (i.e. a polarity 
dividing line) in the photospheric magnetic flux (see 
SOLAR FLARE MAGNETIC FIELDS). The width of the opposite 
polarity flux areas bracketing the neutral line is typically 
considerably greater than the height of the filament, and 
coronal images show a magnetic arcade rooted in the 
opposite polarities and arching high over the filament. 
That is, the filament is centered low in the tunnel of the 
coronal arch of the overall magnetic bipole, suspended 
in the core magnetic field, the field that is rooted near the 
neutral line and closely envelops the neutral line. The 
filament and substructure striations within the filament 
run nearly parallel to the neutral line. This shows that the 
core field threading the filament runs nearly parallel to 
the neutral line rather than arching right over the neutral 
line as it would if it were near its relaxed, minimum- 
energy potential configuration. In contrast to the core 
field, the loops of the overall arch of the bipole are more 
nearly orthogonal to the neutral line. Thus, the form of 
the filament and its location within the bipole show that 
the core field is greatly deformed from the potential field 
configuration, being sheared so that it stretches along the 
neutral line, and that the core field is more strongly sheared 
than is the field farther out in the envelope of the bipole. 
In a filament eruption, the active agent is the core 
field in and around the filament; it is the core field that 
explodes, exploding both itself and the filament that it 
carries. Thus, the size of a filament eruption is set by 
the length of the sheared core field traced by the filament 
at eruption onset. This length is a measure of the overall 
size of the closed magnetic bipole in which the filament 
and sheared core field are seated. Accordingly, the range 
of sizes of filament eruptions is more or less the range of the 
lengths of filaments found on the Sun, and this is roughly 
the range in the size of magnetic bipoles that occur on 
the Sun. This range extends from as large as half a solar 
radius (~300 000 km) to as small or smaller than the larger 
bipoles found in the magnetic network (10000 km). The 
magnetic bipoles forming active regions with sunspots, 
and the filament eruptions in these regions, are usually 
medium sized, typically ~30000 km, but ranging up to 
as large as 100000 km at eruption onset. The filament 
eruption in figure 1 is seated in an active region and is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Eruption 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


larger than average: the erupting filament and sheared 
core field were initially ~50000 km long. Although the 
largest (in span) of all filament eruptions do not occur in 
active regions, the larger of the filament eruptions in active 
regions, in particular filament eruptions from between 
large impacted opposite-polarity sunspots, mark the Sun’s 
most powerful magnetic explosions. This is so because 
sunspots have the strongest magnetic fields found on the 
Sun, and consequently the sheared core fields between the 
largest impacted sunspots have the largest store of non- 
potential magnetic energy. The very largest filaments and 
filament eruptions are in quiet regions, on the neutral lines 
of the bipolar arcades under large coronal streamers. The 
strength of the filament core field in these is only ~10 G, 
a hundred times less than in the most powerful filament 
eruptions from large sunspot regions. The eruption of one 
of these largest quiet-region filaments is spectacular, as 
in the example shown in figure 2, even though the total 
energy of the explosion is 10 to 100 times less than for 
the strongest ones in active regions. While the largest 
filament eruptions occur in only the largest bipoles, which 
are all in quiet regions, small filament eruptions can occur 
wherever small bipoles occur, which can be within active 
regions as well as in quiet regions. However, most of 
the smallest filament eruptions (from bipoles $10 000 km 
across) occur in quiet regions, due to the ubiquity of 
such bipoles in the magnetic network (see CHROMOSPHERE: 
NETWORK). Because many macrospicules look like small 
versions of the filament eruptions in figures 1 and 2, it 
is likely that many macrospicules are small (~10000 km) 
magnetic explosions similar to filament eruptions, and 
this raises the possibility that many spicules (which are 
rooted in the network and are similar to macrospicules but 
smaller) are still smaller analogues of filament eruptions 
(See CHROMOSPHERE: SPICULES). 

There is enough magnetic flux all over the Sun, in all 
quiet regions as well as in active regions, that the entire 
solar atmosphere above the photosphere is permeated 
with magnetic field strong enough to impose its structure 
on the chromosphere and corona. Consequently, none 
of the bipoles in which filaments and filament eruptions 
are seated is totally isolated; instead each is hemmed 
in to some degree by adjacent magnetic fields. When 
these adjacent fields are weak relative to the eruption 
bipole, the eruption proceeds about as it would if there 
were no adjacent field. Often, some of the adjacent 
fields, weak or strong, are in other bipoles that have 
their own sheared core fields. In these cases, a filament 
eruption in one bipole can trigger and interact with another 
eruption in one or more adjacent bipoles. The morphology 
and development of these multiple-bipole eruptions is 
naturally more complex than in single-bipole events. All 
of the figures in this article show examples or models of 
single-bipole events. 

The filament eruption in any one bipole, whether 
or not it is part of a multiple-bipole eruption, is either 
ejective or confined. In an ejective filament eruption, the 
erupting core field becomes an expanding, twisted, arched 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. A large filament ejectively erupting from a quiet region 
on the limb. The many long striations show that the filament 
material is strung in a twisted magnetic flux rope. This image is 
an He II 304 A spectroheliogram (from the Naval Research 
Laboratory’s extreme ultraviolet spectroheliograph on Skylab); 
it shows plasma at transition-region temperatures (~80 000 K). 


magnetic flux rope, the top of which escapes far out of the 
originally closed bipole while the ends remain rooted in 
the surface. This requires that the envelope of the bipole 
also eject along with the filament flux rope, the filament 
rope riding inside the distending bubble of envelope field. 
The filament eruptions in figures 1 and 2 are ejective. In 
a confined filament eruption, there is no distinct formation 
of a monolithic rising flux rope. Instead, there is complex 
eruptive untwisting and restructuring of the core field as 
the erupting core field undergoes an overall expansion. 
The whole eruption is confined and arrested within the 
enveloping bipole, and the overall magnetic arch of the 
bipole remains closed throughout the eruption. Figure 3 
shows a confined filament eruption from beginning to end. 
This eruption spans the interior of an active region; so 
it is of average size and is seated in strong field. As do 
ejective eruptions, confined filament eruptions occur in 
quiet regions as well as in active regions, over the same 
wide range of size and field strength. The factors that 
dictate whether an eruption is to be confined or ejective are 
probably specifics of the pre-eruption field configuration 
and the strength of the envelope field relative to the core 
field. 

Every filament eruption, confined or ejective, is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Eruption 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. A confined filament eruption in an active region. In 
this 20 min sequence, the filament core field untwists and 
expands as it erupts to become a magnetic arch in the interior of 
this overall bipolar active region. The active-region’s 
opposite-polarity sunspots are seen at opposite ends of the 
erupting filament and final arch. These images are blue-wing 
Ha filtergrams from the Big Bear Solar Observatory. 


accompanied by increased coronal heating (see CORONAL 
HEATING MECHANISMS) in the bipole in which it is seated, and 
every ejective filament eruption, in addition, accompanies 
the ejection of the corona in and above the bipole, i.e. 
is an intrinsic part of a larger surrounding coronal mass 
ejection, the core of which is the ejected filament. Figure 4 
shows the coronal mass ejection bubble around an ejected 
quiet-region filament. The bright twisted loop in the 
core of the bubble is the filament flux rope from a quiet- 
region filament eruption like that in figure 2, but at a 
later phase, farther out in the corona. The corresponding 
coronal mass ejections for ejective filament eruptions from 
active regions are similar in overall form to those from 
quiet regions, but usually accelerate more rapidly to final 
speeds that are two to five times faster (as fast as 1000- 
2000 km s~'). Because these fast ejective filament eruptions 
are always accompanied by a strong flare in the ejective 
bipole, they are aptly called flare sprays. The burst of 
heating in any large strong-field filament eruption in an 
active region produces a major flare in coronal emission, 
increasing the Sun’s total x-ray luminosity by a factor of 
10 to 1000. In these eruptions and in many quiet-region 
eruptions, the enhanced coronal heating begins in the 
erupting core field at eruption onset, rendering this field 
visible in coronal images. Coronal images during the onset 
phase often show the whole core field to have the overall 
shape of an S or backward S. Later in ejective eruptions, 
after the filament flux rope has been ejected far out of the 
bipole, the coronal images show a bright, growing coronal 
arcade straddling the neutral line. In large weak-field 
ejective eruptions like those in figures 2 and 4, the coronal 
heating can be so weak as to be hardly noticeable in the 
global x-ray luminosity, but is usually strong enough to be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The filament flux rope in the core of the coronal mass 
ejection from a large quiet-region ejective filament eruption. The 
ejecting magnetic field, which is traced by and carries the 
ejecting plasma within it, is seen in the act of exploding out 
through the corona and into the solar wind. The occulting disk 
extends half a solar radius above the limb. This white-light 
image is from the High Altitude Observatory’s coronagraph on 
the Solar Maximum Mission. 


seen in coronal x-ray images, at least in the post-ejection 
coronal arcade. In active-region eruptions the heating 
also produces flare brightening of the chromosphere at 
the feet of the field lines threading the coronal heating. 
In confined eruptions and early in ejective eruptions, this 
chromospheric brightening occurs close along the neutral 
line under the filament, as the filament erupts (as in figures 
1 and 3). In confined eruptions, coronal images show 
the filament core field brightening and expanding as it 
transforms into an arch standing on the chromospheric 
brightening, as does the chromospheric arch that appears 
in figure 3 as the eruption ends. In ejective eruptions after 
the filament is ejected, the chromospheric flare brightening 
is in two separating ribbons at the feet of the coronal 
arcade. 


Form, energy and action of the magnetic field 

The filament eruptions in flares and coronal mass ejections, 
together with magnetograms (maps of the strength and 
distribution of the photospheric roots of the magnetic 
field) reveal that these events are fundamentally magnetic 
explosions, and that the exploding magnetic field has 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Eruption 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Eruption Onset 


Before Onset 


Confined Eruption, Ending 


Figure 5. Three-dimensional sketches of the magnetic field 
before and during filament eruptions. The dashed curve is the 
polarity neutral line in the photosphere. The diagonally hatched 
object in the upper left panel is the pre-eruption filament; for 
clarity of the eruption of the core field that carries the erupting 
filament material, this material is not shown in the other panels. 
The gray areas are chromospheric flare brightenings. The ragged 
arc in the background in the chromospheric limb. Early in the 
eruption, reconnection occurs in the sheared core field in or 
under the filament, as in the upper right panel. In ejective 
eruptions, after the filament flux rope forms and ejects, the 
ejected envelope field of the pre-eruption arcade is wrapped 
around the filament core flux rope and forms much of the 
surrounding expanding coronal mass ejection bubble that 
envelops the filament core rope, and the stretched legs of the 
envelope field reconnect to form the growing coronal arcade 
rooted in the separating chromospheric flare ribbons, as in the 
lower right panel. 


the following characteristics: (a) The pre-eruption field 
is a closed bipole. (b) The field along the neutral line 
through the core of the bipole is greatly sheared and has 
an overall sigmoidal form, so that it traces the neutral 
line through the bipole and has oppositely curved elbows 
on opposite ends. (c) The pre-eruption core field has a 
large store of non-potential magnetic energy. (d) Much of 
this energy is released by the untwisting and expansion 
of the filament core field as it erupts. (e) The released 
energy is comparable to the total energy expended in the 
accompanying flare and/or coronal mass ejection (up to 
~10” erg in the largest active-region events). 

The evidence for the field configuration and its 
transformation in the filament-eruption explosion is 
outlined in the previous section. The sketches in 
figure 5 show the three-dimensional form, action and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reconnection of the magnetic field implied by the observed 
characteristics of filament eruptions and their observed 
involvement in flares and coronal mass ejections. In 
confined eruptions, the overall bipole remains closed, 
containing and arresting the eruption within it. In 
ejective eruptions, the entire bipole eruptively opens and 
simultaneously recloses via the sequence and topology of 
the reconnection. The expanding ejected filament flux rope 
and envelope field can continue on to become a coronal 
mass ejection that blasts out into the solar wind. 


Current research 


The model sketched in figure 5 displays, for single-bipole 
filament eruptions, the typical three-dimensional form 
of the magnetic field and its change in topology as it 
explodes, to the extent that these have been revealed by 
the best magnetograms and chromospheric images from 
the ground together with the best transition-region and 
coronal images from space. These observations indicate 
that reconnection occurs, beginning low in the sheared 
core field early in the eruption, but it is not clear why 
the reconnection starts or whether the reconnection is 
essential for the explosion. Basic questions left unresolved 
by present observations are: 


(a) How does the metastable pre-eruption field configu- 
ration originate? 

(b) How does the configuration destabilize to explode? 

(c) Is reconnection necessary for either the triggering or 
the growth of the explosion? 


The observations most needed for answering these 
questions are vector magnetograms of substantially better 
sensitivity, spatial resolution and continuity than are now 
possible from the ground. Vector magnetograms provide 
a direct measure of the shear in the magnetic field in the 
photosphere. To probe why and how filaments erupt, the 
vector magnetograms need to track the development of 
the entire bipole in which the sheared core field builds up 
and explodes. It is anticipated that the required improved 
vector magnetograms, along with simultaneous high- 
resolution images of the chromosphere, transition region 
and corona, will be provided from space by the Solar-B 
Mission currently being developed by Japan, jointly with 
the United States and the United Kingdom, for launch in 
2004. 


Bibliography 

Kahler S W 1992 Solar flares and coronal mass ejections 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30 113-41 

Moore RL 1988 Evidence that magnetic energy shedding in 
solar filament eruptions is the drive in accompanying 
flares and coronal mass ejections Astrophys. J. 324 
1132-7 

Moore R L, Schmieder B, Hathaway D H and Tarbell T D 
1997 3D magnetic field configuration late in a large 
two-ribbon flare Solar Phys. 176 153-69 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Eruption ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rust D M et al 1980 Mass ejections Solar Flares ed 
P A Sturrock (Boulder, Co: Colorado Associated 
University Press) pp 273-339 

Svestka Z, Jackson B V and Machado M E 1992 Eruptive 
Solar Flares (Berlin: Springer) 


Ron Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Solar Prominence Fine Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Prominence Fine Structure 


Aclear feature of high-resolution observations of quiescent 
PROMINENCES, both on the disk and at the limb, is the 
presence of fine-scale fibril structures. The fine structure 
of prominences provides vital clues to questions such 
as how prominences form and how they are supported. 
Magnetic fields permeate the prominence plasma and 
play a decisive role in shaping the fine structure and its 
dynamics. Conversely, the shape, orientation and possibly 
the strength of the magnetic field may be inferred from the 
observed substructures. 


Observations 

Limb observations leave little doubt that prominences 
consist of thin threads and knots. The threads are typically 
5000-35 000 km long, and from 200 km to 2000 km thick. 
The thread thickness appears to increase with height above 
the solar limb. Threads and bright knots are of similar 
sizes (figure 1). Since the observed widths of the thinnest 
threads are of the same size as the instrumental resolution 
limit, their true widths may be a lot less. 

In filaments viewed from above against the disk many 
threads are inclined to the direction of the long axis of 
the filament by about 30° (figure 2). Observations near 
or above the limb reveal a lot of fine-structure inclined by 
similar amount relative to vertical. 

Characteristic properties of prominence threads are 
listed in table 1. 


Threads and the overall structure of prominences 
The thin threads (fibrils) of prominences constitute 
characteristic medium-scale structures. 

At some distance from the disk center, quiescent 
filaments often display a well-defined, sharp upper edge, 
which is called the filament spine. A spine often consists 
of several to many thin, long absorbing threads. When 
observed at the solar limb the threads which are associated 
with prominence spines are not always conspicuous, 
depending on the perspective from which the prominence 
is viewed. But overall, the threads then appear to run more 
or less parallel to the solar surface. They also run parallel to 
a polarity reversal boundary in the photospheric magnetic 
fields below. In addition to the threads along the top of the 
spine, there can be low or intermediate horizontal threads, 
as well. 

Often the ends of a filament fan out in the shape 
of a thin ‘shroud’. This is where the magnetic fields of 
the threads are thought to connect to the chromosphere; 
the splayed threads at ends are associated with opposite 
polarity magnetic fields in the photosphere below. In other 
cases, at the ends of filaments, the fine threads become 
vanishingly thin and only an occasional flowing knot of 
mass reveals the connection of the body of the filament to 
the chromosphere. 

At semiregular intervals along a filament, some 
threads converge towards one or more points in the 
chromosphere to the side of the spine. These structures are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A quiescent prominence showing numerous vertical 
treads observed in the Ca II K line with the Vacuum Tower 
Telescope of National Solar Observatories. (Courtesy of Dr R B 
Dunn.) 


identified as major ‘barbs’. However, amid the multiple- 
thread barbs, single-thread barbs also join the spine to the 
chromosphere. These barbs typically curve downward 
to the chromosphere and, hence, have a large vertical 
component. Because prominences are dynamic, at any 
moment in time, some threads can be in transit and might 
not appear to connect to the chromosphere. 


The visibility of prominence threads 

The observability of prominence threads is restricted by 
their contrast against the background and the resolution of 
the observing instrument. High-resolution Ha filtergrams 
from La Palma have resolved threads with thickness down 
to about 5 arcsec (250 km on the Sun). However, the 
true visibility of a prominence thread in hydrogen Balmer 
lines is a function of temperature and density of the ‘cold’ 
plasma. The full length of a magnetic flux tube that forms 
a thread may escape detection if the plasma parameters 
vary along the tube. 


Number density and filling factor 

The number of thin and barely resolvable threads in the 
line of sight may be estimated by assuming that all threads 
have the same brightness and that the distribution of 
velocities is Gaussian. The observed intensity will then 
increase in proportion to the number of threads. Few 
threads in the line of sight give rise to large variations in 
line shift and in line widths, whereas averaging over many 
threads will produce less variation and wider line widths. 
Multithread models that are based on Ha spectral data 
give numbers of threads ranging from a very few up to 
100 per resolution element (a few arcsec’). A recent study 
based on N V 1238 A line spectra of a large prominence 
observed with the sono/SUMER instrument gives 15-20 
unresolved threads. 

It is common practice in solar physics to specify the 
fraction of the overall volume filled with emitting matter, 
ie. emitting and/or absorbing threads, as the filling factor 
f. Values of f between 0.01 and 0.1 are commonly quoted 
for prominences. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Fine Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. A large polar crown prominences observed with the 
Swedish Vacuum Solar Telescope on La Palma on 19 June 1998. 
The Ha filtergram shows that the prominence consists of 
numerous fine threads which are oriented at an angle of 20°-30° 
relative to the long axis of the filament. 


Lifetimes 

In hedgerow prominences (Tandberg-Hanssen 1995) the 
lifetime of vertical threads is <10 min. High-resolution 
Ha filtergrams obtained with the SVST, La Palma (see 
figure 2), show individual thin filament threads appearing 
and disappearing in the course of 1 min. This suggests that 
prominence plasma may be undergoing rapid variations 
in temperature and/or density. Such short lifetimes might 
imply that the prominence plasma is not in a stationary 
radiative state. 


Dynamics 
The term quiescent is somewhat misleading in describing 
stable, large prominences, since their small-scale structure 
is strikingly dynamic. One sees small-scale line-of- 
sight velocities of a few km s-', both in horizontal and 
vertical directions. Limb observations show an apparent 
random motion of the threads at velocities up to about 
8kms~'. Doppler measurements in disk filaments show 
both upwards and downwards mass motion (cf Schmieder 
1988). The dominant vertical motion in the main body 
of filaments appears to be oscillatory. SOLAR PROMINENCE 
OSCILLATIONS in velocity and intensity have periods ranging 
from less than 1 min to hours; the shorter periods are 
presumably associated with the small-scale structure. 
Time series of Ho filtergrams of large quiescent 
prominences show bidirectional motions lasting for up 
to 7h. Such motions, which are noticed throughout the 
full body of prominences, in the spine as well as in the 
more vertical bundles of threads in barbs, suggest that the 
prominence plasma is flowing along the magnetic field 
lines. 


Interpretation of observations 

The magnetic nature of prominence threads 

It is generally assumed that prominence threads outline 
a fine-scale structure of the magnetic fields of solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


prominences. This view is supported by the fact that 
threads typically are inclined by 20°-30° relative to the 
prominence long axis, which is similar to the general 
orientation of the magnetic field. 

Since the pLasMA 6 < 1 in solar prominences, i.e. 
the ratio of gas pressure to magnetic pressure, it is 
somewhat surprising that their magnetic fields are so 
highly structured. Therefore, could the fine threads seen 
in Ha rather be ‘veins’ of denser and ‘cooler’ plasma in 
a relatively uniform magnetic field, instead of individual 
flux ropes? A uniform field would seem to be at variance 
with the observed fluctuation in line-of-sight velocity of 
individual neighboring threads, which seems to imply that 
the threads represent separate flux tubes. A possible weak 
interaction between neighboring threads is indicated from 
observations showing that the velocity threads seem to be 
slightly thicker than the density—intensity threads. 


Table 1. Characteristic values of prominence threads. 


Value 

Width 200-2000 km 
Length 5000-35 000 km 
Lifetime 1-10 min 
Velocity along spine 5-15 km s7! 
Velocity variation 

_L threads +5-12 km s7! 

|| threads +1-5 km s7! 
Magnetic flux density 4-20G 

Temperatures 


The strong EUV line emissions (see SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: 
ULTRAVIOLET AND EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET EMISSION) show that 
solar prominences contain gas at all temperatures between 
10* K and 10° K. Recent observations with the SUMER 
instrument on board SOHO show that the thread-structure 
prevails up to temperature ~10° K. Emission measure 
studies of EUV line emission from quiescent prominences 
show that the emitting structures have subresolution 
geometries. The nature of these geometries is still 
unknown, but the following two scenarios are being 
considered: 


1. Being situated ina hot coronal cavity with cold cores, 
the threads are ‘wrapped’ in a thin transition region 
in a direction perpendicular to the magnetic field. 

2. The individual threads are essentially isothermal, 
but a given thread may attain various temperatures 
between 10* K and 10° K. 


The tenuous interthread medium could be either 
hotter or cooler than the threads themselves. It is 
generally assumed, however, that prominences and their 
substructures are embedded in hot CORONAL CAVITIES. 


Relation to photosphere below 
Assuming that single fibrils or threads form on individual 
thin magnetic flux tubes, these must evidently tie back 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Fine Structure 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


down onto the chromosphere and photosphere on both 
sides of the prominence. This tying is most conspicuous 
where several threads cluster and form barbs. Recent 
observational results suggest that the magnetic fields 
of many barbs do not connect to the well-known 
magnetic network that is located at the boundaries of 
the supergranulation cells below (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
SUPERGRANULATION), but rather to the weaker intra-cell field. 
Additionally, the lack of merging or embedding of the barb 
footpoint into the network implies that many barb ends 
are rooted in the half of the bipolar intra-cell fields that are 
opposite in polarity to the network magnetic fields. This 
would be consistent with the few examples of barbs whose 
rooting is associated with the relatively strong magnetic 
fields of ephemeral ACTIVE REGIONS or very small active 
regions. In these cases, the rooting has been identified 
with the polarity opposite to the network instead of to the 
polarity that is the same as the network (Martin, 1998). 

It is likely that an exchange of mass between the 
prominence and the photosphere below takes place via 
these magnetic anchor points. 


Modeling of threads 

The physical cause of threads or fibrils and their effects on 
the MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS of prominences are not well 
understood. 

Various static models have been put forward to 
explain the thread-like substructure of prominences. 
These models all assume a basically horizontal magnetic 
field to support the plasma. 

It is likely that the thermal instability which might be 
triggering the formation of a prominence as a whole does 
so preferentially in a filamentary manner. Equilibrium 
solutions are found that seem to reproduce well the 
horizontal threads of prominence spines. 

On the other hand, modeling of vertical threads that 
are perpendicular to a horizontal magnetic field meets 
severe difficulties. At a temperature of 8000 K the 
hydrostatic scale height in the lower solar corona would be 
about 200 km. Observations show, on the other hand, that 
vertical threads are much longer by at least two orders 
of magnitude. The length-scale associated with normal 
thermal conductivity perpendicular to the magnetic field 
becomes very short compared with the length of a 
typical thread. It has therefore been suggested that 
anomalous perpendicular thermal conduction, possibly 
due to turbulence, might produce length scales similar 
to observed thread lengths. Another idea is that vertical 
threads could be the result of gravitational Rayleigh— 
Taylor instability, but such a mechanism would require an 
extremely high viscosity in order to produce the observed 
width of a thread. 

Other studies of stationary prominence thread models 
include ambipolar diffusion perpendicular to a horizontal 
magnetic field. Furthermore, from magnetostatic theory 
one may derive equilibrium solutions that give long 
vertical fibrils whose weight may be supported by locally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


bowed magnetic fields (Lorentz force), which implies 
strong localized electric currents. 

However, none of the static models seems able to 
explain the dynamic character of prominence threads. 
The inferred field-aligned flows would suggest that 
the magnetic fields in prominences barbs are nearly 
vertical, in which case one would expect to see the cool 
prominence plasma in the threads sliding down towards 
the photosphere at ‘free fall’ velocities. Neither Doppler 
shifts in prominences seen against the solar disk nor 
movies of prominences at the solar limb show evidence 
for ‘free fall’ velocities at locations where vertical thread 
structure is clearly developed. The propelling force 
exerted by weakly damped, high-frequency Alfvén waves 
is currently being investigated in a search for mechanisms 
that may counteract gravity in nearly vertical magnetic 
flux tubes. 


Future prospects 

Today’s solar physicists do not yet fully understand how 
solar prominences are formed, supported and finally 
destroyed. More high-angular-resolution, high-cadence 
studies of the enigmatic fine structure will provide better 
insight in the basic physics of prominences. Lifetimes of 
only a few minutes and flow velocities of some km st 
along horizontal and vertical prominence threads, as 
determined from the best observations of today, could 
imply that the mass contained in an individual fine 
thread is continuously being drained and replenished. 
The notable dynamical and small-scale character of the 
substructure is an important feature and consideration in 
modeling of prominence support in the field of gravity. 
Likewise, the mechanism by which mass is supplied to 
prominences, through either condensation or inflow from 
the photosphere below, awaits further observational and 
theoretical investigations. 


Bibliography 

Engvold O 1998 New Perspectives on Solar Prominences: IAU 
Colloq. 167 (ASP Conf. Ser. 150) ed D Webb, D Rust and 
B Schmieder, p 23 

Martin S F 1998 Solar Physics 182 107 

Ruzdjak V and Tandberg-Hanssen E (eds) 1989 Dynamtics 
of Quiescent Prominences: Proc. IAU Colloq. 117 (Hvar, 
SR Croatia, Yugoslavia, 1989) 

Schmieder B 1989 Dynamics and Structure of Quiescent Solar 
Prominences ed E R Priest (Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 15 

Tandberg-Hanssen E 1995 The Nature of Solar Prominences 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Oddbjern Engvold 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Prominence Formation 


Most aspects of PROMINENCE formation are only observable 
against the solar disk where prominences are called 
‘FILAMENTS’. The formation of filaments can be described asa 
two-stage process: (1) the development of an environment 
necessary for filaments and (2) the formation of the 
filament. After the filament environment is established, 
the physics of formation of the filament involves two 
interrelated processes: the formation of the filament 
magnetic field and the filling of a volume of space within 
or around that magnetic field with the mass of the filament. 
Although prominences have been frequently modeled as 
if they were static structures, there is both old and recent 
evidence that the formation is a continuous process. Mass 
is continuously entering and exiting the filament magnetic 
field throughout its lifetime. It is likely, but not proven, 
that the magnetic field is also continuously increasing, 
decreasing or changing. If so, it is necessary to know 
the properties of the filament environment in order to 
understand the source of the magnetic field and mass flows 
in filaments. 


The features of a filament environment 

The photospheric and chromospheric filament channel 
Characteristic features of the filament environment are 
revealed in the photosphere, the chromosphere and 
corona. Filaments only form in close association with 
photospheric magnetic field boundaries where there is 
a sharp reversal in the direction of the photospheric 
magnetic field from outward to inward or vice versa. 
While filaments are not found along all such boundaries, 
the presence of an apparent ‘polarity reversal boundary’ is 
anecessary condition for prominence formation (reviewed 
in Martin 1990, 1998). 

Vector magnetograms have been successfully used 
to further identify the photospheric magnetic field 
environment of filaments in active regions. Filaments 
selectively form only at those boundaries where the 
magnetic field is both along the polarity reversal 
boundary and nearly parallel to the photospheric solar 
surface. When this condition exists, the magnetic 
field at the polarity reversal boundary does not have 
a loop configuration across this boundary at either the 
photosphere or the chromosphere or within the volume 
of the filament. Instead, in the dimension across the 
boundary, the magnetic field has a rotational component; 
precisely at the polarity reversal boundary, the magnetic 
field, at the photosphere, chromosphere and within the 
filament above, is parallel or nearly parallel to the 
boundary (Martin et al 1994). This field configuration 
across the polarity reversal boundary is also described as 
“magnetic shear’. 

In magnetograms at the photosphere, the polarity 
reversal boundary is identified by a series of sites where 
positive and negative network or active region magnetic 
fields come into contact. Thus, at any given time, the 
polarity reversal boundary has a precise location; the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


change in direction of the field at the photosphere occurs 
in a volume smaller than the spatial resolution of current- 
day magnetograms. However, this polarity inversion is 
also a flexible boundary; its exact location at any time 
is dependent on the slow migration of active region and 
network magnetic fields of either polarity toward or away 
from the opposite polarity. 

In and around active regions, the chromosphere 
is largely composed of ubiquitous fine structure called 
‘fibrils’. They are aligned with the magnetic field. When 
the fibrils are aligned along a polarity reversal boundary, 
one of the conditions of filament formation has been 
satisfied; a chromospheric ‘filament channel’ has formed 
and its magnetic field pattern is like the photospheric field 
pattern (see SOLAR FILAMENT CHANNELS). The channel is more 
clearly seen when not occupied by a filament. An example 
of an empty filament channel near an active region with 
sunspots is shown in figure 1. 

In active regions the channel is often extremely 
narrow, sometimes only 1000 km wide. The length is 
typically a few to many tens of thousands of kilometers. 
As the magnetic fields of active regions disperse with 
age, the magnetic flux density decreases and the scale 
of the filament channel increases proportionately. In 
intermediate cases, filament channels are more typically 
10000-30000 km wide and several hundred thousand 
kilometers long. 

Filament channels also exist along polarity reversal 
boundaries where the magnetic flux density of the network 
is very low such as in the polar areas. In these cases, the 
polarity reversal boundary is identified in magnetograms 
only by a series of discrete points at the boundaries of 
the supergranule solar convection cells where opposite- 
polarity network magnetic fields have become abutted. In 
these circumstances of low magnetic flux density, the fibril 
orientations are nearly random. However, the channel 
(excluding the filament) is characterized nevertheless by 
an absence of vertical coronal structures and a dominance 
of horizontal fields. The horizontal fibril structure simply 
lacks the organization found in filament channels of higher 
magnetic flux density. 


The overlying arcade 

Every filament forms beneath a coronal loop system which 
resembles a tunnel. This system of CORONAL Loops is also 
known as the ‘overlying arcade’ as it arches over the 
filament and connects opposite-polarity magnetic fields 
in the photosphere on the two sides of the filament. These 
loops and photospheric magnetic fields are the fields of 
active regions or decaying active regions, fields between 
adjacent active regions (as in figure 1) or those between 
merged remnant fields of many active regions. More 
filaments form beneath coronal arcades joining adjacent 
active regions than between the loops within an original 
bipolar active region. There is a relatively large separation 
between the overlying arcade and the filament both in 
height and laterally. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


17 Jun 1981 


~ 


Figure 1. The S-shaped trail of fibrils in the middle of this image is a filament channel. A filament channel typically lies between 
opposite-polarity magnetic fields at the sides of the channel. Its ends connect to other opposite-polarity magnetic fields. In this case, 
the channel joins the active region with sunspots in the upper part of the image and another filament channel containing a filament in 
the lower right. When a filament forms, its axis is aligned with the channel. This H alpha image was recorded at the Big Bear Solar 


Observatory on 17 June 1981. 


The cavity around prominences 

Another key feature of the filament environment is the 
‘filament cavity’. It is a volume of space above and to the 
sides of prominences where the coronal density is very 
low at all wavelengths. The physical nature of the cavity 
has been a mystery. On the quiet Sun, the magnetic flux 
density at the photosphere beneath the cavity is much 
less than at the base of the overlying arcade; additionally, 
the aligned fibrils indicate that the network field becomes 
mostly horizontal at the base of the cavity. This means that 
there is very little photospheric magnetic field threading 
through this part of the corona between the filament and 
the coronal arcade which defines the outer boundary of 
the cavity. For pressure balance, the low plasma density 
implies a slightly higher magnetic field in the cavity rather 
than a lower magnetic field. This apparent discrepancy 
of implied higher magnetic field without any associated 
source of observable photospheric magnetic flux might be 
resolved by further consideration of new information on 
the opposing chiralities of the filament channel and the 
filament (See SOLAR PROMINENCE CHIRALITY). Currently, there 
is no consensus on the physics of the cavity. 


Chirality of filaments and their environment 

The chromospheric and photospheric filament channel 
and the overlying coronal arcade have a property known 
as ‘chirality’ which means ‘handedness’. The chirality of 
the pre-filament environment is a new key to filament 
formation. A filament only forms with the same sign of 
chirality as its channel. For active-region and intermediate 
filaments, this leads to the partial alignment of some of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


filament structure with the chromospheric fibrils as seen in 
figure 2 (see also CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS). The sinistral (left- 
handed) filament and channel are on the left in figure 2 and 
the dextral (right-handed) filament and channel are on the 
right. The handedness is defined for each solar feature by 
the orientation of its fine structure relative to the polarity 
reversal boundary or to the axis of the filament. Looking 
along the long axis of the filaments in figure 2, the filament 
fine structures form acute angles to the right of the long 
axis on the dextral filament but to the left on the sinistral 
filament. 

The coronal arcade is the first condition to be 
established before a filament can form. The coronal loops 
within the arcade are either left skewed or right skewed 
relative to the polarity reversal boundary which it 
straddles (Martin and McAllister 1995). Again, looking 
along the polarity boundary, if a coronal loop makes an 
acute angle to the right, it is defined as right skewed 
and similarly, if it makes an acute angle to the left, it is 
left skewed. 

The filament channel begins its existence with the 
reorientation of the chromospheric fibrils; the direction 
of reorientation determines the chirality of the channel. 
The fibrils become skewed relative to the polarity reversal 
boundary in the opposite sense to the overlying arcade. 
Hence the channel develops the opposite chirality relative 
to the arcade. When the fibrils above the polarity reversal 
boundary are completely aligned with the boundary, the 
channel is fully formed. At this stage, the environmental 
conditions are suitable for the formation of a filament of 
the same chirality as the filament channel and opposite 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


’ + 
pee CA 


¥ 


Figure 2. Example of a sinistral filament (left) and a dextral filament (right). This perspective, mostly looking at the filament from 
above, reveals the approximate alignment of the fine structure of the filament barbs with the chromospheric fibrils. From photographs 


recorded though an H alpha filter at the Big Bear Solar Observatory. 


in chirality to the overlying arcade. The seminal example 
of channel formation followed by filament formation is 
illustrated by Gaizauskas et al (1997). 


Features of the same chirality merge with one another. 
Examples are the merging of filaments and filament 
channels on the Sun to make much longer channels and 
filaments. Filaments and other solar features of opposite 
chirality remain separate and do not merge (Martin et al 
1994). Because filaments and their overlying arcades are of 
opposite chirality, they too should be expected to remain 
isolated from each other; indeed, they are observed to be 
separated by the filament cavity. For this reason, it now 
appears that filaments cannot be formed from the magnetic 
fields of their overlying arcades. This is a significant new 
constraint not previously imposed on filament models. 


Chirality can be directly interpreted as helicity of the 
same sign. The significance of helicity in the development 
of filament channels and filaments and their overlying 
arcades is not yet fully understood. Filaments and filament 
channels might develop the opposite sign of helicity from 
their overlying coronal arcades as a requirement of the 
conservation of helicity. Another idea is that the eruption 
of filaments (Rust 1994; see also SOLAR PROMINENCE ERUPTION) 
and their overlying arcades is a means by which the 
build-up of excess helicity is removed from the Sun. 
It has been shown that the chirality of filaments (Rust 
1994) and coronal arcades (Martin and McAllister 1997) 
is directly related to the helicity of interplanetary clouds. 
Interplanetary magnetic clouds are the expelled parts of 
coronal arcades and their embedded filament magnetic 
fields. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Filament formation 

Definition of terms 

The formation of the magnetic field of a filament can be 
considered as two stages. The first is the formation of 
the axial magnetic field along the spine. The spine is the 
highest horizontal part of the filament. It is thought to be 
common to all filaments. The mass which forms the spine 
of filaments only accumulates precisely along and above 
the boundary between the opposite polarity magnetic 
fields at the photosphere. The spine lies beneath a coronal 
loop system but is separated from the loop system by the 
volume of space called the prominence cavity. 

Barbs are appendages along the sides of filaments 
which extend from the spine to the chromosphere (see 
figure 2). The pattern of deviation of the barbs from the 
spine is related to their chirality while the average angle of 
deviation appears to be inversely related to the magnetic 
flux density of the surrounding active region or network 
magnetic fields. 


Formation of the spine 

There are many alternative models for the structure and 
formation of the magnetic field of filaments (see SOLAR 
PROMINENCE MODELS). Until recently, most models have only 
attempted to explain the spine. There is no consensus 
on a model for magnetic field structure or mode of 
formation of spines or barbs. However, there are specific 
observed properties and dynamics which are relevant to 
the formation. 

The dynamics of filaments, as well as their location 
along polarity reversal boundaries, indicates that changes 
in the magnetic field precisely at the polarity inversion 
are important to the formation of the spine. Filaments 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


only form when opposite polarity network magnetic fields 
converge and encounter one another. On encounter, 
the opposite polarity patches of magnetic field disappear 
or ‘cancel’. Cancellation is defined as the mutual 
disappearance of magnetic flux of both polarities at a 
common boundary. The convergence and cancellation of 
active region or network magnetic fields is a necessary 
condition for the formation of a filament spine (Martin 
1990) but the cancelling magnetic fields can be interpreted 
inanumber of different ways. There is yet no consensus on 
a single interpretation. Hence prominence models differ 
widely. 

After the specific environment is established, and 
convergence and cancellation are occurring, pre-filament 
mass begins to accumulate along the polarity inversion 
within the cavity of the coronal arcade. The mass can 
appear as condensations along the polarity inversion 
above the chromospheric fibrils. It can also appear to be 
injected along the polarity inversion by surges associated 
with small flares. In other cases, as in figure 3, the 
filament appears to grow as an extension of the spine of an 
initial small filament. The initial development by apparent 
injection is common in active regions while apparent 
condensations are more characteristic of filaments forming 
on the quiet Sun. However, even when apparent 
condensation is observed, the filament mass is thought 
to come from the chromosphere. It was previously 
assumed that the injection was usually not seen because 
the temperature is too high or the density too low for the 
mass to be visible. However, high-resolution observations 
of filaments at diverse wavelengths now reveal some mass 
inflows from the chromosphere. 

The example of filament formation in figure 3 shows 
a continuity between the classic active region filament and 
a quiescent filament; the upper end is characteristic of 
active region filaments and the lower end is characteristic 
of quiescent filaments. Such examples demonstrate that 
separate models are not required for filament formation in 
active regions and on the quiet Sun. 


Formation of barbs 

If barbs are seen on active-region filaments within bright 
plage, they are nearly aligned with the spine. Such 
filaments are low and narrow and are bounded by regions 
of high magnetic flux density. They do not necessarily 
have barbs. Therefore, the barbs are regarded as secondary 
to the formation of the spine. Barb formation is prevalent 
at the stage when the active-region fields are dispersed by 
the large convection cells known as supergranules. 

The complete nature of barbs is not known but a 
number of properties have been identified. There is 
an anticorrelation of barb ends with network magnetic 
fields (Engvold 1998). Many chromospheric barb ends 
are associated with extremely weak magnetic fields. 
However, recent observations of the formation of some 
barbs, in concert with the evolution of ephemeral active 
regions, confirm that some barbs are also associated with 
strong magnetic fields (Martin 1998). In these cases the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. The formation and growth are seen over a 3 day 
interval from 10 to 12 October. The growth appears as an 
extension of an initial small filament in the active region. As the 
filament extends away from the active region, it begins to form 
conspicuous barbs characteristic of intermediate and quiescent 
filaments. From a photographic series recorded in H alpha at the 
Big Bear Solar Observatory. 


barb ends appear to be only linked to the polarity that is 
opposite to the dominant network magnetic polarity on 
each side of the filament. This observed linkage implies 
that the magnetic fields in these barbs has a component 
opposite in direction to the magnetic component in the 
overlying arcade that is perpendicular to the filament axis. 

The formation of some barbs in conjunction with 
the small, short-lived, bipolar fields of ephemeral active 
regions is additional evidence that the filament barbs 
are secondary to the spine. That is, without the spine, 
barbs would not form. However, mass is not necessarily 
visible along the entire magnetic field of the spine in 
observations of filaments in the light of H alpha. The 
mass of filaments tends to vary with the magnetic flux 
density in the adjacent photosphere and with the age of 
the filament. Among magnetic fields of low flux density, 
filaments can consist only of a series of tufts of mass along a 
polarity reversal boundary. These tufts are not necessarily 
perpendicular to the chromosphere but most have large 
vertical components and semiregular spacing. They can 
erupt in unison, which implies that there is a magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


field composing the spine of the filament which links the 
tufts together even though the density of mass along the 
spine can be too low to be visible. 

In regions of high to intermediate magnetic flux 
density, the barbs also maintain a specific pattern in 
relation to the fibril pattern in the filament channel. 
While the barbs, except for their endpoints, are above 
the chromosphere, they have an axis with a horizontal 
component that is nearly aligned with the fibril structure 
below. This relationship is readily seen when intermediate 
filaments are observed from above (as in figure 2). This 
pattern of the barbs is related to the local magnetic field and 
identifies their chirality or handedness. The pattern is such 
that the barb magnetic fields on both sides of a filament 
always have a component in common with the direction 
of the magnetic field along the spine of the filament and a 
component perpendicular to the spine. 


Maintenance of a filament 

With the discovery of bi-directional streaming in the spines 
and barbs of filaments (Zirker et al 1998), the formation 
process is more clearly recognized as a continuous process 
of mass transport into and out of the filament magnetic 
field. The relative rates of mass inflow and outflow into 
a prominence magnetic field are important to filament 
visibility. A filament cannot form unless the rate of plasma 
inflow exceeds the rate of outflow. To be sustained, 
the inflow must be equal to or greater than the outflow. 
The time that mass resides or is recycled along the 
filament magnetic field is still unknown owing to the 
difficulty of tracking discrete packets of mass observed 
in filaments. The duration of any mass in filaments could 
be only minutes to a few hours. This would mean that 
a continuous recycling of mass from the chromosphere 
into the filament magnetic structure and back to the 
chromosphere is always a normal part of their formation 
and existence. 

The extent to which the magnetic field changes in 
filaments, along with mass input, is not known. However, 
many factors indicate the filament magnetic fields are 
continuously changing by small amounts. These are 
intermittent cancellation of opposite-polarity magnetic 
fields along the polarity reversal boundary, the continuous 
formation and dissolution of barbs, the migration of the 
barb endpoints, the merging of two filaments to create a 
single longer one and the formation of anew filament at the 
location where one has erupted. New filaments commonly 
develop immediately after the eruption of a filament in an 
active region. On the quiet Sun, new filaments sometimes 
form within a few days after the eruption of a quiescent 
filament. However, reconfiguring of the magnetic field 
environment, in either case, can also eliminate the 
conditions necessary for filament reformation. 

High-resolution velocity data and magnetic field 
observations are still needed to answer many remaining 
questions about filament formation. One of the 
outstanding questions is how mass is continuously guided 
into and out of filament magnetic fields 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Engvold O 1988 Observations of filament structures and 
dynamics New Perspectives on Solar Prominences(ASP 
Conf. Ser. 150) ed D Webb, DM Rust and B Schmieder, 
pp 23-31 

Gaizauskas V, Zirker J B, Sweetland C and Kovacs A 1997 
Formation of a solar filament channel Atrophys. J. 479 
448 

Martin S F 1990 Observational conditions for the formation 
of prominences Dynamics of Quiescent Prominences 
(Lecture Notes in Physics, vol 363) ed V Ruzdjak and 
E Tandberg-Hanssen (Berlin: Springer) pp 1-48 

Martin S F 1998 Conditions for the formation and 
maintenance of filaments Sol. Phys. 182 107-37 

Martin S F and McAllister A H 1995 The skew of 
x-ray coronal loops overlying H alpha filaments 
Magnetodynamic Phenomena in the Solar Atmosphere 
(IAU Collog. 153) ed Y Uchida, H S Hudson and 
T Kosugi, pp 497-8 

Martin S F and McAllister A H 1997 Predicting the sign of 
magnetic helicity in erupting filaments and coronal 
mass ejections Coronal Mass Ejections (AGU Geophysics 
Monogr. Ser. 99) ed N Crooker, J A Joselyn and 
J Feynman pp 127-38 

Martin S F, Bilimoria R and Tracadas P W 1994 Magnetic 
field configurations basic to filament channels and 
filaments Solar Surface Magnetism ed R J Rutten and 
CJ Shrijver (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 339-46 

Rust D M 1994 Spawning and shedding helical magnetic 
fields in the solar atmosphere Geophys. Res. Lett 21 241 

Zirker J B, Engvold O and Martin S F 1998 Counterstream- 
ing flows as evidence for vertical magnetic fields in 
prominences Nature 396 440 


Sara F Martin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Prominence Models 


SOLAR PROMINENCES are ribbons of cool dense gas embedded 
in the hot tenuous corona, which forms the outer 
atmosphere of the Sun. Prominence models aim to 
describe the physical conditions in and near prominences 
and the physical processes involved in their formation, 
maintenance and disappearance. 

PROMINENCES are located tens of thousands of kilome- 
ters above the visible ‘surface’ of the Sun (the photosphere) 
and have temperatures ~10* K, a hundred times lower 
than the temperature of the surrounding corona. The par- 
ticle densities in prominences range from 10" to 10!” m-3,a 
hundred times greater than coronal values. When viewed 
above the solar limb, prominences appear as bright fea- 
tures against the dark background. They can also be ob- 
served on the solar disk by taking images of the Sun in 
certain narrow wavelength bands corresponding to strong 
Fraunhofer lines in the solar spectrum. The higher opacity 
of the solar atmosphere in a spectral line allows observers 
to see structures higher up in the atmosphere which are 
not visible in broad-band ‘white’ light. One spectral line 
often used for such studies is the hydrogen Ha line at a 
wavelength of 6563 A, which is formed in the solar chromo- 
sphere. When observing in Ha on the disk, prominences 
show up as dark filaments overlying the chromosphere. In 
the following we refer to these filaments as ‘prominences’ 
since they really are one and the same phenomenon. 

Prominences are always located at the polarity 
inversion lines separating regions with opposite magnetic 
polarity in the photosphere (i.e. lines where the radial 
component of the photospheric field changes sign). They 
form in so-called filament channels, regions where the 
chromospheric fibrils (thread-like fine structures in the 
chromosphere) are aligned parallel to the inversion 
line (See SOLAR FILAMENT CHANNELS and SOLAR PROMINENCE 
FORMATION). The magnetic field in a filament channel is 
mainly horizontal and directed along the polarity inversion 
line. Filament channels can be classified as dextral or 
sinistral, depending on the direction of the axial field 
as seen by an observer standing on the positive-polarity 
side. Quiescent prominences in the northern hemisphere 
are predominantly dextral, while those in the south are 
predominantly sinistral (see SOLAR PROMINENCE CHIRALITY). 

Prominences are large, long-lived structures which 
can persist for many days, but they usually contain thread- 
like fine structures which last only a few minutes (see 
SOLAR PROMINENCE FINE STRUCTURE). Some of these threads are 
clearly aligned with the local magnetic field, but this is 
not so obvious for the vertical threads frequently seen 
in quiescent prominences above the limb. It is unclear, 
for example, whether the magnetic field in these vertical 
threads is vertical or horizontal. 

Magnetic fields play a key role in many aspects 
of prominence physics, including their support against 
gravity and thermal insulation from the surrounding 
corona. It the following we discuss some of these aspects 
in more detail. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Prominence support 

The outer atmosphere of the Sun is permeated by magnetic 
field, and this field is also present within prominences, 
where it provides the magnetic force necessary to support 
the dense prominence gas against gravity. This magnetic 
force is made possible by the fact that prominences (and 
the surrounding corona) consist of partially ionized gas, or 
plasma, in which there is a high concentration of unbound 
electrons. The electrical conductivity of this plasma is 
very high, and electric currents can easily flow through the 
plasma. Insucha highly conducting medium the plasma is 
forced to move along magnetic field lines and cannot easily 
cross from one field line to another. Therefore, a parcel of 
dense prominence plasma will stay on the field line on 
which it was originally located. Under the influence of 
gravity, the parcel will slide down along the field line until 
it reaches the chromosphere or encounters a ‘dip’ in the 
field line where the field is locally horizontal and curved 
upward. Various models of magnetic configurations with 
dipped field lines have been proposed (see figure 1). 
Prominences are thought to be cool plasmas which have 
come to rest in such dipped (or nearly horizontal) field 
lines. 

Kippenhahn and Schltiter (1957) were the first 
to develop a model of the equilibrium and stability 
of prominence plasma in a magnetic configuration 
with dipped field lines. They assumed a so-called 
normal polarity configuration in which the field lines 
pass through the prominence from the region of 
positive polarity (radially outward magnetic field in 
the neighboring photosphere) to the region of negative 
polarity (figure 1(a)). Kuperus and Raadu (1974) later 
proposed a different model in which the prominence 
has inverse polarity compared with the neighboring fields 
(figure 1(b)). These figures show vertical cross-sections of a 
prominence in a plane perpendicular to the long axis of the 
prominence. It should be kept in mind that in general there 
is also a component of magnetic field along the prominence 
(into or out of the plane), which often is stronger than the 
component within the plane. However, as we will see 
below, this axial component of the field is not essential for 
prominence support. 

The magnetic force in a plasma is given by the Lorentz 
force, j x B, where B(r) is the magnetic induction and j(r) 
is the electric current density, i.e. the electric current per 
unit area perpendicular to the current. Hence, to support 
the weight of the prominence in the dips of field lines, 
there must exist an electric current which flows through 
the prominence in a horizontal direction which crosses the 
magnetic field lines. An important difference between the 
Kippenhahn-Schliiter and Kuperus—Raadu models is the 
direction of this electric current: in figure 1(a) the current 
flows out of the plane of the figure (toward the observer), 
whereas in figure 1(b) the current flows into the figure 
(away from the observer). Moreover, in the Kuperus— 
Raadu model the current is present not only inside the 
prominence, but also in the ‘magnetic island’ just above 
the prominence, as indicated by the cross in figure 1(b). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) 


(b) 


Figure 1. Two models of the magnetic field supporting a solar prominence: (a) Kippenhahn-Schliiter model; (b) Kuperus—-Raadu 
model. These figures show the projection of the field lines onto the plane perpendicular to the long axis of the prominence (shaded 
region). The horizontal line at the base indicates the solar photosphere. 


The plasma within the prominence is subject to three 
forces: (1) the Lorentz force, 7 x B; (2) the gravitational 
force, —pgZ, where p(r) is the mass density, g is the 
acceleration of gravity and Z is the radially outward 
direction on the Sun; (3) the force due to the gradient of gas 
pressure, p(r). In equilibrium these forces must balance 
each other: 


—Vp—pgz+jxB=0. (1) 


Using Ampére’s law, the electric current density can be 
written as 7 = yw 'V x B, where jy is the magnetic 
permeability. The mass density can be written as 


mp 

p= 7 (2) 
where 7 (r) is the temperature, k is the Boltzmann constant 
and m is the mean mass per particle (m lies between 0.6 
and 1.3 times the proton mass, depending on composition 
and ionization state of the plasma). Kippenhahn and 
Schliiter (1957) modeled the prominence as a thin vertical 
sheet in which the pressure p(x), density p(x) and 
vertical magnetic field B,(x) depend only on the horizontal 
coordinate x perpendicular to the sheet. The temperature 
T and horizontal field components B, and By are assumed 
to be constant. Then the x- and z-components of 
equation (1) reduce to 


: B =0 3 

ak pt a (3) 
B, dB, 

—pg + — =0. (4) 
pw dx 


The boundary conditions far away from the sheet (x > 
+00) are p > Oand B, > +B... Integrating equation (3) 
yields 

B?., — B? 


om (6) 


p= 


and, using equations (2) and (5), equation (4) yields 
a differential equation for B, which has the following 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


solution: 


BrooX 

2B, Hp 

B2., Brox \* 

DL (cosh DB. *-) . 

Here H, = kT/mg is the so-called pressure scale height 
which describes how rapidly the pressure and density fall 
off with height along the field lines (H, ~ 200 km within 
the prominence). Note that the plasma pressure at the 
center of the prominence sheet is equal to the external 
magnetic pressure associated with the vertical component 
of the magnetic field and that the width of the sheet is 
of order 4(B,/ Bo.) Hp. The observed widths of quiescent 
prominences (~8000 km) can be reproduced with B,.. ~ 
0.1B,, in other words, the support of the prominence 
requires only a minor perturbation of the surrounding 
magnetic field. 

In general there is also a component of magnetic 
field along the prominence (B,), so the normal polarity 
field shown in figure 1(a) is actually a sheared arcade 
(with dips at the loop tops), and the circular field lines in 
figure 1(b) are actually helical windings which are wound 
around a horizontal axis that runs parallel to and above the 
prominence. Therefore, to obtain a more accurate picture 
of the prominence magnetic field we must consider its full 
three-dimensional structure. 


B.(x) = Byoo tanh 


p(x) = 


Prominence magnetic structure 

There exist a variety of methods for measuring the 
magnetic fields in and around prominences, most of which 
are based on the Zeeman effect (the splitting of atomic 
energy levels in the presence of a magnetic field). The 
Zeeman effect causes the light emitted in a spectral line to 
become circularly polarized. By measuring the degree of 
circular polarization it is possible to deduce the component 
of magnetic field along the line of sight in a prominence. 
Another method is based on the fact that much of the light 
emitted by a prominence above the solar limb is actually 
scattered light which originates from the chromosphere 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Twisted flux tube model for solar prominences. The 
prominence sheet is indicated by the shaded region. 


below. The magnetic field affects the scattering properties 
of the atoms, and manifests itself as a change in the 
state of linear polarization of the scattered light in certain 
spectral lines. This so-called Hanle effect allows observers 
to deduce both the strength and direction of magnetic 
fields in prominences. Observational studies have shown 
that the magnetic fields in quiescent prominences are in the 
range (3-30) x 10~* T and that the field is mainly directed 
along the length of the prominence: the magnetic vector 
is inclined to the prominence axis at an average angle 
of about 25° (Leroy 1989). Most quiescent prominences 
have inverse polarity, i.e. the magnetic field traverses the 
prominence from the region of negative polarity to the 
region of positive polarity, opposite to what would be 
expected for a coronal arcade. The field strength increases 
with height in the prominence. 

These observations are consistent with the idea that 
a quiescent prominence is located within a large, twisted 
flux tube or flux rope (see figure 2). A number of authors 
have developed prominence models based on this idea 
(e.g. Priest et al 1989). According to these models, an 
arched flux tube is anchored in the photosphere at two 
ends, and the field lines in the coronal portion of the tube 
make one or two revolutions about the tube axis, forming 
a helical field. Overlying this helical field is a coronal 
arcade, which probably plays an important role in the 
equilibrium and stability of the field. Cool prominence 
plasma is supported at the troughs of the helical windings 
where the field lines are curved concave-upward. This 
twisted flux tube model has many features which agree 
with observations, including the inverse polarity of the 
magnetic field in the prominence and the fact that when a 
prominence erupts it sometimes looks like a twisted tube 
(See SOLAR PROMINENCE ERUPTION). 

How does the Sun produce such helical fields? One 
possibility is that the twist is produced by vortical motions 
of the photospheric footpoints of the tube, but this would 
require persistent twisting over several revolutions, which 
is not observed. Another possibility is that the twisted 
flux rope is created in the convection zone below the 
photosphere and emerges through the photosphere with 
its twisted structure already formed (e.g. Rust and Kumar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1995). A third possibility is that the helical field is produced 
by magnetic reconnection, i.e. the reconfiguration of 
magnetic field lines due to plasma resistivity effects (see 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION). For example, Pneuman (1983) 
proposed that the radial outward distension of a bipolar 
region by gas pressure gradients could lead to an inward 
collapse of the region, causing the field lines to reconnect. 
If the initial field is significantly sheared along the polarity 
inversion line, reconnection produces helical field lines in 
the region above the reconnection site. 

Observations indicate that prominences tend to form 
in regions where opposite-polarity flux is being cancelled 
at the polarity inversion line. In a sheared coronal 
arcade magnetic flux cancellation can proceed only if 
reconnection occurs in the region just above the inversion 
line (van Ballegooijen and Martens 1989). The process 
is illustrated in figure 3, which shows the evolution of 
a sheared arcade in response to converging motions of 
the photospheric footpoints. The initial field is assumed 
to be sheared (figure 3(a)), which may have been caused 
by flows along the inversion line or by some other effect. 
When the footpoints of the coronal loops are pushed to the 
inversion line, the loops become more and more aligned 
with the inversion line, eventually causing different 
loop systems to reconnect (figure 3(b)). The model 
assumes that the short, highly curved loops produced 
by such reconnection are pulled below the photosphere 
by magnetic curvature forces, causing magnetic flux 
to disappear from the photosphere (flux cancellation). 
However, the reconnection also produces longer loops 
which remain in the corona because their curvature radii 
are too large to overcome the buoyancy forces at and below 
the photosphere. As overlying loops are pushed to the 
inversion line, further reconnection produces helical loops 
in which a prominence can form (figures 3(c) and 3(d)). As 
more and more flux is forced to reconnect at the inversion 
line, the width of the helical flux tube gradually increases 
and the axis of the tube slowly rises. Eventually the 
magnetic structure becomes unstable, causing the helical 
field to erupt. 


Origin of prominence plasma 

How do prominences acquire their mass? One viewpoint 
is that prominences are formed by the cooling and 
‘condensation’ of plasmas from the surrounding corona 
(see Priest 1982, chapter 11). To understand how this 
happens, we must consider the energetics of the coronal 
plasma. A hot gas such as the corona is subject to 
radiative cooling, ie. the loss of thermal energy due 
to collisional excitation of ions by electrons and the 
subsequent emission of radiation at extreme ultraviolet 
and x-ray wavelengths (the corona is optically thin, so 
this radiation can freely escape into space). The rate 
of energy loss per unit volume is approximately given 
by n2A(T), where n, is the electron density, T is the 
temperature and A(T) is the so-called radiative loss 
function, which depends on atomic parameters and the 
chemical composition of the plasma. In a coronal loop 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(d) 


Figure 3. Flux cancellation in a sheared coronal arcade. The rectangle represents the solar photosphere, and the broken line is the 
polarity inversion line. (a) Initial sheared field subject to converging flows. (b) Reconnection produces a long loop AD and a shorter 
loop CB, which subsequently disappears below the photosphere. (c) Overlying loops EF and GH are pushed to the inversion line. 
(d) Reconnection produces the helical loop EH and a short loop GF, which again submerges. 


these radiative losses are balanced by heating due to 
dissipation of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) waves or 
other disturbances. Electron thermal conduction plays 
an important role in redistributing this heat along the 
coronal loop. However, as coronal conditions change, 
the density and/or loop length may slowly increase with 
time, causing radiative losses to become more important 
relative to conduction. Eventually, the coronal loop may 
reach a point where a stable equilibrium between energy 
gains and losses is no longer possible. The plasma then 
rapidly cools and settles into a new equilibrium with much 
lower temperature but higher density. This condensation 
process occurs for a wide range of forms of the heating 
function. 

A difficulty with the above scenario is that the mass 
of a quiescent prominence (~10" kg) typically exceeds 
the mass available in the surrounding corona before the 
prominence is formed. Therefore, additional mass must 
somehow be supplied to the prominence. One possibility 
is that the mass is injected along the field lines that connect 
the prominence with the chromosphere below. This could 
be in the form of a siphon flow driven by a possible pressure 
difference between the chromosphere and the prominence. 
Another possibility is that cool plasma is lifted up by 
magnetic fields as they rise through the chromosphere. 
For example, in the flux rope model of Rust and Kumar 
(1995), the twisted flux rope emerges from the convection 
zone and sheds most of its mass on it way up into the 
corona (the density in the corona is much less than that 
in the convection zone). However, a small fraction of 
the initial mass remains trapped in the troughs of the 
helical windings. This remnant is believed to form the 
prominence. 

Observations suggest that prominences are very 
dynamical structures, with plasma continually draining 
downward and new material being injected into the 
prominence. Priest et al (1996) propose a model in which 
the prominence is maintained by a continual input of mass 
and magnetic flux from below. In this model the correct 
dextral and sinistral patterns for high-latitude, east-west 
prominences are produced by the combined effects of 
differential rotation acting on subphotospheric flux, its 
subsequent emergence by magnetic buoyancy and its 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


rearrangement by reconnection to form a filament channel 
with magnetic flux oriented along its axis. Continual 
emergence and reconnection creates a prominence as a 
flux tube along the filament channel and filled with cool 
plasma which is lifted up from the photosphere and 
chromosphere by the reconnection process. According to 
this model, reconnection occurring in the chromosphere 
yields prominence densities in rough agreement with 
observations. 


Thermodynamic modeling 

The temperature within a prominence is determined by the 
balance between heating and cooling of the prominence 
plasma. There are several possible contributions to 
the heating: (1) energy may be transported into the 
prominence by thermal conduction from the hot corona, 
but this is not very effective in the low-temperature 
prominence material; (2) the plasma can be heated by 
dissipation of MHD waves or other disturbances which 
propagate into the prominence from the sides; (3) the 
prominence may be heated by absorption of ultraviolet 
radiation from the chromosphere. The energy losses occur 
mostly in the form of radiation in hydrogen spectral lines 
and continua (Lyman and Balmer series). The radiation 
transport is complicated by the fact that prominences are 
optically thick at these wavelengths, which means that the 
ultraviolet radiation is reabsorbed and reemitted many 
times before it finally escapes. Another complication is 
that prominences have a filamentary structure, with thin 
(sometimes vertical) threads of dense plasma embedded in 
a much more tenuous medium. This allows the ultraviolet 
radiation to penetrate deep into the prominence, greatly 
enhancing the excitation rate compared with models 
without such fine-scale structures (Heasley and Mihalas 
1976). The cause of these fine structures is not yet 
understood. 


Bibliography 

Heasley J N and Mihalas D 1976 Structure and spectrum 
of quiescent prominences: energy balance and 
hydrogen spectrum Astrophys. J. 205 273-85 

Kippenhahn R and Schltiter A 1957 Eine Theorie der 
solaren Filamente Z. Astrophys. 43 36-62 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kuperus M and Raadu M A 1974 The support of 
prominences formed in neutral sheets Astron. 
Astrophys. 31 189-93 

Leroy J L 1989 Observation of prominence magnetic fields 
Dynamics and Structure of Quiescent Solar Prominences 
ed ER Priest (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 77-113 

Pneuman G W 1983 The formation of solar prominences by 
magnetic reconnection and condensation Sol. Phys. 88 
219-39 

Priest E R 1982 Solar Magnetohydrodynamics (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) 

Priest E R, Hood A W and Anzer U 1989 A twisted flux tube 
model for solar prominences: I general properties 
Astrophys. J. 344 1010-25 

Priest E R, van Ballegooijen A A and Mackay D H 
1996 A model for dextral and sinistral prominences 
Astrophys. J. 460 530-43 

Rust D M and Kumar A 1995 Helical magnetic fields in 
filaments Sol. Phys. 155 69-97 

van Ballegooijen A A and Martens P C H 1989 Formation 
and eruption of solar prominences Astrophys. J. 343 
971-84 


AA van Ballegooijen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Oscillations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Prominence Oscillations 


SOLAR PROMINENCES are continuously subject to oscillations 
in response to ambient atmospheric perturbations. These 
vibrations can be of global nature, for example when 
a large-scale disturbance, carrying considerable energy, 
impinges on the broad side of the prominence body 
and shakes its whole structure, or of local nature, when 
the prominence material is perturbed by motions in 
the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE, CHROMOSPHERE Or CORONA. In any 
case, the response of the pLasMa is directly related to its 
physical parameters, so the investigation of this type of 
phenomenon can provide information on the physics of 
prominences. 

The research of prominence oscillations, also known 
as prominence seismology, seeks to achieve a success sim- 
ilar to that of HELIOSEISMOLOGy from the comparison be- 
tween observations and the theoretical analysis of promi- 
nence vibrations. This task is not an easy one because 
of the complicated three-dimensional structuring of these 
objects, whose theoretical modelling is extremely complex 
(See SOLAR PROMINENCE MODELS). With the investigation of 
prominence oscillations we expect to improve our knowl- 
edge on the nature of these exotic objects. 


Flare-initiated filament oscillations 
Observations of solar FILAMENTS through a narrow Ha FILTER 
made during the first half of the 20th century revealed 
that prominences can be activated by FLARES as far away 
as 500000 km, a considerable distance compared with 
the 4.4 x 10° km length of the solar circumference. This 
activation often leads to the disappearance of the filament, 
or the appearance of a previously undetected filament, in 
the Ha image. The associated optical effect gave rise to the 
term ‘winking filament’ for this kind of filament behavior. 

The first reports on prominence oscillations came 
from the detection of ‘winking filaments’ that disappear 
and reappear at regular intervals after being disturbed by 
a wave emanating from a distant flare. In 1966 H Ramsey 
and S Smith made an in-depth study of this type of filament 
activation by using three narrow filters, one centered in 
the Ha line and the other two in the red and blue wings 
of the line, +0.5 A from the centre. An unperturbed 
prominence is only visible in Ha, but invisible at the 
other two wavelengths; however, Ramsey and Smith 
discovered that, on the passage of the flare-induced wave, 
the absorption wavelength of the prominence material 
oscillates about the Ha line center, with an amplitude of 
at least 0.5 A, for a few periods before the oscillations 
are damped. They also found that this process is more 
or less periodic, with periods between 6 and 40 min for 
different filaments. In addition, they were able to study 
the perturbations induced by four flares on a particular 
filament in three consecutive days and found that its 
frequency of oscillation remained almost unchanged. 

A few years later, J Kleczek and M Kuperus 
gave a theoretical explanation of these flare-induced 
oscillations. The complicated prominence magnetic field 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


was represented by an ‘effective’ uniform magnetic field 
in the direction of the prominence main axis and with 
its endpoints tied at a fixed position (simulating the 
photospheric line-tying effect). The magnetic tension in 
this kind of configuration provides the force required to 
counteract the pull of gravity and also a restoring force 
that tends to bring the prominence to its equilibrium 
state after suffering a disturbance. Then, the passage of 
a large-amplitude wave induces horizontal prominence 
motions which result in a periodic variation of the line- 
of-sight velocity component (of course, this is not true 
when the filament is near the center of the solar disk 
and the line of sight is almost perpendicular to the 
oscillatory motions, but this was not the case with Ramsey 
and Smith’s observations). The consequence of these 
periodic mass motions is a periodic Doppler shift of the 
filament absorption wavelength about the Ha line centre, 
alternatively towards the red and blue wings, inagreement 
with observations. The Doppler displacements detected 
by Ramsey and Smith, of at least 0.5 A, point to an 
oscillatory amplitude in excess of 20 km st, arather large 
value. 

Kleczek and Kuperus also gave an expression for 
the oscillatory period in terms of the prominence’s mean 
magnetic field and density. The fact that in this model 
different filaments have different effective magnetic fields 
and densities implies that a given prominence will oscillate 
at its own characteristic frequency as long as its overall 
properties do not change in time (as is the case with 
Quiescent prominences over a few days). Using values 
of density and magnetic field typically found in these 
objects, these authors obtained periods and damping times 
around 20 min, also in reasonable agreement with the 
observations. 


Small-amplitude oscillations: observations 

In contrast with the previous large-amplitude, global 
oscillations triggered by a flare, quiescent prominences 
are also subject to small-amplitude, small-scale periodic 
vibrations not related to flare activity. In 1969 J Harvey 
examined in his PhD thesis the Doppler velocities of a 
sample of 68 non-ACTIVE REGION prominence oscillations. 
He concluded that 31% of the objects presented no 
significant velocity change along the line of sight, 
28% showed apparently random line-of-sight velocity 
variations and 41% displayed an oscillatory behavior. The 
measured periods were distributed between 1 and 13 min, 
with a tendency of periods between 3 and 7 min to occur 
more frequently. In addition, the line-of-sight velocity 
amplitude in most cases ranged from 0.1 kms™! (the signal 
noise level) to 2 km s71. 

Following this preliminary investigation the subject 
received little attention in the next decade, after which 
systematic observations were undertaken. The analyses 
made at the beginning of the 1980s served to confirm 
Harvey’s results, with regard to periods and amplitudes, 
but they also indicated the presence of an apparently new 
kind of small-amplitude prominence vibrations. Velocity 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Oscillations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


oscillations with periods between 40 and 80 min and 
amplitudes around 1-2 km s-! were abundantly reported. 
The large values of these periods led to the classification 
of prominence vibrations into short- and long-period 
oscillations and to the belief that they are of different 
nature. Nevertheless, according to theoretical models (see 
below), long and short periods are the consequence of the 
same physical processes and intermediate values do also 
exist, in agreement with later observations. 

The instrumental setup normally used to study 
prominence oscillations involves placing a SPECTROGRAPH 
slit on a quiescent prominence or filament so that the 
emission or absorption spectrum of the plasma along 
the slit can be investigated. A selected spectral line, 
such as Ha or Ca II K, can then be used to deduce the 
temporal dependence of the line-of-sight velocity for the 
points of the prominence along the slit (see figure 1). 
Some instruments, such as the MSDP spectrograph, 
allow observers to gain spectral information of a two- 
dimensional field of view, thus making feasible a better 
understanding of the spatial distribution of oscillations. 
Subsequent analysis of the data, e.g. using the FFT, yields 
information on the presence of periodic vibrations at each 
of the prominence locations. Sometimes more than one 
period will be present in a given Doppler signal at a 
given spatial point. On the other hand, just as Harvey 
found, it is common to obtain velocity signals which do 
not change periodically in time. The reason for this is 
either that the velocity amplitude or its projection along 
the line of sight is too small to be detected or that the 
prominence material does not actually oscillate, which 
must be understood as an indication that prominence 
oscillations are episodic phenomena that are continuously 
excited by external agents and last for a moderate time 
before being damped by some dissipative processes. 

Regarding the sizes of regions where oscillations with 
a given period are detected, they range from the telescope 
resolution limit (i.e. a few hundred km) to as much as 
20000 km, a considerable length compared with typical 
quiescent prominence dimensions. Therefore, periodic 
vibrations seem to be excited both at local and global 
scales. Some authors have even been able to associate the 
oscillating portions of prominences with the fibril structure 
of these objects (see SOLAR PROMINENCE FINE STRUCTURE). This 
is not surprising since, after motions are excited in a fibril, 
its enhanced magnetic field can act as a waveguide (see 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES) and the perturbations will 
spread over the whole fibril. 

Approximate or limiting values for other parameters 
have also been determined from the study of the vibrating 
areas. Wavelengths are typically found to lie between 
10 000 and 100000 km, while phase speeds lie between 25 
and 100 km s“!, although values outside this range have 
also been reported. 

Researchers face a number of problems when trying 
to detect periodic changes in quiescent prominences. 
First of all, there are the inevitable consequences of the 
Earth’s atmosphere, mostly by means of SEEING conditions, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gpa gg Ne pe pi 


50 700 
t (min) 


S 


7150 


Figure 1. Time variation of the Doppler velocity observed in a 
quiescent solar prominence. The data can be fitted by a function 
of the form vp cos(27t/T + @) exp(—t/t), with amplitude 

vp = 4.8kms7!, period T = 70 min and damping time 

t = 140 min (solid curve). The well-defined periodic variation 
readily recognizable in this figure provides good support for the 
existence of prominence oscillations, although in most data sets 
they are usually harder to detect visually because of their 
smaller amplitude and/or higher noise level. Courtesy 

R Molowny-Horas. 


imperfect telescope guiding and limited spatial resolution, 
which generally result in a slight degradation of the data. 
A more fundamental source of data corruption, however, 
may arise from the fact that light emitted or absorbed by 
various plasma elements along the line of sight is collected 
together by the detector, so the observed spectral line 
contains contributions from all the elements and incorrect 
Doppler velocities follow. This is probably the reason why 
oscillations seem easier to identify where the prominence 
looks fainter. 


Small-amplitude oscillations: theory 
Theoretical investigations of prominence oscillations are 
based on the assumption that an external perturbation 
excites eigenmodes of the prominence structure. At 
present very little is known about the mechanism 
responsible for generating small-amplitude waves in 
prominences, although it has often been claimed that 
some short-period oscillations can be the response of the 
prominence to a forcing produced by the chromospheric 3 
min oscillations and photospheric 5 min oscillations (see 
SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC OSCILLATIONS), whose influence could 
propagate along magnetic field lines and induce motions 
of the prominence plasma. Nevertheless, this explanation 
leaves out most of the detected periods, whose origin could 
be in small-scale, impulsive disturbances coming from the 
surrounding corona that would shake the prominence and 
would excite its normal modes of vibration. 

To illustrate the kind of theoretical progress accom- 
plished so far let us consider a basic prominence equilib- 
rium made of a cold and dense plasma slab embedded ina 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Oscillations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Prominence 1* 


Corona 


Figure 2. Sketch of an elementary equilibrium used in 
modelling prominence oscillations. The drawing represents a 
cut across the prominence, devised as an infinitely high and long 
plasma slab of width 2a embedded in the solar corona. Dashed 
lines represent the horizontal magnetic field threading the 
system and anchored at x = +L. 


hotter and rarer corona (figure 2). The system is threaded 
by a uniform, horizontal magnetic field and the photo- 
spheric line-tying is simulated by placing two vertical 
boundaries symmetrically with respect to the prominence 
center (x = 0). A Cartesian coordinate system is used in 
which the prominence long axis lies in the y-direction, the 
vertical lies in the z-direction and the x-axis is transverse 
to the prominence body. Gravity is neglected in this sim- 
ple equilibrium and, to ensure total pressure (magnetic 
pressure plus gas pressure) balance at the prominence- 
corona interface, the product of density and temperature 
must be equal in the two uniform regions. This equilib- 
rium model is very idealistic since the physical parameters 
are assumed uniform, although it is well known that qui- 
escent prominences are highly structured. Nevertheless, 
this model will be helpful to introduce the basic concepts 
in theoretical studies of prominence oscillations. 

To fully understand the dynamics of this structure 
one must first investigate its normal modes, which 
in our particular case have a velocity of the form 
v(x) exp(—iky y) exp(—ik,z) exp(iar). This expression 
represents a standing wave in the x direction, with 
frequency w and wavenumbers k, and k, inthe prominence 
long direction and in the vertical direction, respectively. 
After making the simplifying assumption k, = 0, one is 
left with the task of solving a pair of ordinary differential 
equations for v, and v, decoupled from a third equation for 
vy only. The large photospheric density prevents coronal 
motions from displacing magnetic field lines or perturbing 
the photosphere, so the velocity vector must vanish at 
x = +L. With these boundary conditions, the velocity 
v(x) and frequency of normal modes can be calculated. 
Owing to the symmetry of the equilibrium configuration 
and the boundary conditions, solutions to the first two 
equations are called even or odd depending on whether 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


15[ T T TF T T 


{2 esses ee eS ek eek ote a ed 4 


WA/Co, 


Os ge eg e saree 


1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 
ka 


Figure 3. Frequency versus vertical wavenumber for slow and 
fast magnetoacoustic modes with v, even about x = 0. The 
quantity csp, coming into the dimensionless frequency, is the 
adiabatic sound speed in the isothermal prominence. Solid lines, 
internal slow modes; dashed lines, external slow modes; dotted 
line, hybrid slow mode; dot-dashed line, internal fast mode. A 
similar dispersion diagram is obtained for slow and fast odd 
modes, the central difference being that the hybrid slow mode is 
replaced by the hybrid fast mode. For a description of the 
properties of MHD modes see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES. 


v, is even or odd about x = 0. The dispersion diagrams 
of even and odd modes are thus drawn separately 
(figure 3). The two types of curves in this diagram 
(straight and parabolic lines) betray the different physical 
nature of slow magnetohydrodynamic modes and fast 
magnetohydrodynamic modes (magnetohydrodynamic 
waves). The first one is essentially non-dispersive (i.e. w 
independent of k,) and gives rise to motions practically 
parallel to magnetic field lines (that is, v, >> v,) which are 
driven by the pressure gradient force. On the other hand, 
fast modes present a wavelength-dependent frequency, 
have basically vertical motions (v, >> v,) and are driven 
by the magnetic Lorentz force. 

A more detailed inspection of figure 3 and of the 
velocity perturbations associated to each of the modes 
reveals they can belong to an internal, external or hybrid 
class. The main features of internal (external) modes are 
determined from the characteristics of the prominence 
(corona) but are little influenced by the existence of the 
other region. According to this classification scheme, 
hybrid modes are internal and external at the same time. 
Thus, for example, modifying the width 2L of the system 
results in a variation of the frequency of external and 
hybrid modes, while internal modes remain unscathed. 
The eigenfunctions (v, for slow modes and v, for fast 
modes) are also useful in determining the character of 
modes: hybrid modes are the ones with the simplest 
possible structure in the x-direction, showing two nodes 
at x = +L and a single maximum (at x = 0), external 
modes achieve a much larger amplitude inside the corona 
than in the prominence and, finally, the velocity amplitude 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominence Oscillations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of internal modes is as large in the prominence as in the 
corona. 

The third possible orientation of gas motions, in the y- 
direction, corresponds to solutions driven by the magnetic 
tension in which the density remains unperturbed. These 
are basic features of the Alfvén mode, for which the 
subdivision into internal, external and hybrid is also 
pertinent in the present case. 

At this point the obvious question is how well 
the periods of the three magnetohydrodynamic modes 
compare with the observed ones. Using reasonable values 
of the equilibrium parameters one recovers long periods 
(accounted for by the hybrid slow mode), intermediate 
periods (hybrid fast and Alfvén modes) and short periods 
(slow, fast and Alfvén internal modes). External modes are 
of no interest because of their presumed minute velocity 
inside the prominence. 

Apart from reproducing the values of periods, this 
naive theoretical work has important implications for the 
detectability of periodic Doppler variations caused by 
the three magnetohydrodynamic modes. For example, 
the chances of observing the vertical motions generated 
by the fast mode are largest for a filament at the solar 
disk center, whereas they are practically null for a limb 
prominence. The velocity polarization associated with 
each mode is then an essential result of theoretical 
investigations. This study was later extended to include 
other basic ingredients of quiescent prominences, such as 
the curvature of magnetic field lines, the magnetic field 
shear with respect to the prominence long axis (See SOLAR 
PROMINENCE CHIRALITY), the prominence—corona TRANSITION 
REGION and the internal fibril structure. The addition of 
these complexities is fundamental for progress in this area 
as they substantially modify the picture given here with 
respect to the frequency and velocity polarization of the 
magnetohydrodynamic modes. 


Bibliography 
A theoretical description of flare-initiated prominence 
oscillations can be found in 


Kleczek J and Kuperus M 1969 Oscillatory phenomena in 
quiescent prominences Sol. Phys. 6 72-9 


Examples of the techniques used in obtaining and 
analysing observational data can be found in 


Suematsu Y, Yoshinaga R, Terao N and Tsubaki T 
1990 Oscillatory and transient features detected 
simultaneously in the Call K and Hf line spectra of a 
quiescent prominence Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 42 187— 
203 


and in 
Molowny-Horas R, Oliver R, Ballester J L and Baudin F 


1997 Observations of Doppler oscillations in a solar 
prominence Sol. Phys. 172 181-8 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A detailed study of a more complex prominence 
equilibrium can be found in 


Oliver R and Ballester J L 1996 The influence of the 
temperature profile on the magnetohydrodynamic 
modes of a prominence-corona system Astrophys. J. 
456 393-8 


Theoretical work on the influence of prominence fine 
structure on the normal modes was developed by 


Joarder P S, Nakariakov V M and Roberts B 1997 
Oscillations in prominence fine structures Sol. Phys. 
173 81-101 


Ramon Oliver 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Prominences 


Prominences are clouds of relatively cool and dense gas 
in the solar atmosphere. These clouds change shape and 
come and go, but they do not drift like terrestrial clouds. 
Prominences are suspended above magnetic channels (see 
SOLAR FILAMENT CHANNELS) that change little from day to 
day. They are trapped in magnetic fields in the solar 
atmosphere, but they churn slowly, at heights of up to 
100 000 km above the photosphere (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE). 
They peek brilliantly over the Moon’s limb during eclipses. 
The magnetic fields thread them through and balance 
the force of gravity, and some prominences live, thus 
suspended, for months. The magnetic fields also inhibit 
heat flow from the surrounding corona (see CORONA), where 
the temperature is 200 times higher than their 6000 K. Thus, 
prominences emit the visible radiation of hydrogen and 
helium. 

Prominences take on many forms and their frequency 
of appearance generally parallels the sunspot cycle. 
Also, while they have long been distinguished for their 
comeliness (e.g. figure 1) and for the challenges they 
pose to theorists, they have recently been the focus 
of heightened interest because they appear to play a 
fundamental role in the 11 yr solar cycle of magnetic field 
generation and dispersal (see SOLAR CYCLE). 


History of prominence research 

Prominences, or protuberances, were recorded during 
eclipses as early as 1239, but their true character was not 
understood until the solar eclipse of 1868. It was then 
that spectroscopy revealed the distinctive emissions of 
hydrogen and calcium, which had earlier been detected in 
the solar spectrum. At the same eclipse, the great French 
astronomer, Pierre-Jules-César Janssen, first obtained 
evidence from prominence spectra for an unknown 
element. The element was later named helium for its solar 
origins, after it was identified in terrestrial minerals in 
1895. 

The hydrogen spectral lines in prominences are 
so bright that they can be seen without an eclipse 
and, at the turn of the century, G Hale in the 
United States and H Deslandres in France independently 
invented the spectroheliograph to study them. In the 
spectroheliograph, the entrance slit of a spectrograph 
moves across a solar image formed with a telescope. In 
unison, an exit slit passing only a single spectral line moves 
over a photographic plate which records a monochromatic 
image of the Sun. Spectroheliograms of hydrogen and 
calcium emission revealed that prominences are almost 
always present at the sun’s limb (edge). They also revealed 
dark threads, filaments, on the disk. L d’Azambuja at the 
Meudon Observatory outside Paris and Hale in California 
showed that filaments are just prominences seen with the 
chromosphere (see CHROMOSPHERE) instead of the dark sky 
as background. 

In the first half of the 19th century, E Petit, D 
Menzel and others classified prominences according to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. An eruptive prominence (left) and a quiescent filament 
(upper center) photographed on 15 June 1998 with a SOHO 
telescope. 


their shapes and motions. The names convey the variety 
of forms seen—tornado, spray, surge, loop, coronal rain, 
hedgerow—but little physical insight was achieved until 
the spectroscopic analyses of the 1950’s and 1960’s. H 
Zirin and E Tandberg-Hanssen and others established 
that prominences can have a range of temperatures and 
densities with some parts as cool as 6000 K and other parts 
above 50000 K. 

Two advances in instrumentation by B Lyot greatly 
aided the study of prominences: the CORONAGRAPH in which 
a disk inside the telescope serves the function of the moon 
and allows viewing of prominences and the surrounding 
corona as in an eclipse, and the Lyot filter, which replaced 
the spectroheliograph and gives monochromatic images of 
the whole sun with exposure times as short as 0.2 s. These 
instruments allowed films of prominences and filaments 
to be made. The most interesting motions are the sudden 
eruptions or disparitions brusques by which prominences 
leap from the Sun. Many eruptive prominences have been 
recorded since the International Geophysical Year (1958— 
1959) by a worldwide network of telescopes with Lyot 
filters. Eruptive prominences (figure 2) leave the Sun at 
300-1000 km s~! and are associated with SOLAR FLARES. 

Shortly after H Babcock developed the solar magneto- 
graph in 1953, H Zirin and A Severny made the first promi- 
nence magnetic field measurements. D Rust established 
that the magnetic field strength in quiescent prominences 
averages about 10 G and that there is a global pattern to 
their fields (see SOLAR PROMINENCE CHIRALITY). J Harvey found 
fields up to 100 G in active prominences (see SOLAR PROMI- 
NENCES: ACTIVE), and J—L Leroy and his coworkers at Pic- 
du-Midi in France established that the fields are predomi- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Hedgerow prominence photographed in light emitted by helium ions by the Extreme Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope aboard 
the SOHO spacecraft. 


Figure 3. A solar active region with many dark filaments. The arcades of short, curved filaments near the center are called arch 
filament systems. The very bright ribbons show that a solar flare is taking place (19 September 1979 picture from the Holoman Solar 
Observatory). 


nantly horizontal, a result that confirmed that prominence = Munro and others established a statistical link between 
gases are supported by the magnetic fields against the pull prominence eruptions and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) 
of gravity. (See SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS). L Burlaga 

With the advent of observations from space, R detected cool gas clouds in the solar wind near Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Solar Prominences 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Typically, one of his magnetic clouds will arrive at Earth 
about 4 days after a prominence eruption from the 
center of the visible solar disk. Many such clouds have 
elevated levels of helium and this may be a sign that 
they originated in an eruptive prominence. Furthermore, 
they are embedded in the hot interplanetary magnetic 
clouds that fly past the Earth and which are associated 
with CMEs. As solar telescopes in space improve and 
as more interplanetary plasma detectors are distributed 
about the heliosphere, it should be possible to sample 
eruptive prominences systematically and link the sampled 
plasmas to their precise origins on the Sun. 


Morphology and dynamics 

Solar prominences take on a bewildering variety of shapes 
because of their complex fine structure and their large 
size. The best observations show structure down to a few 
hundred kilometers, and prominences (or filaments; the 
terms are used interchangeably) may stretch to nearly a 
solar radius (700000 km) in length across the face of the 
Sun. Eruptive prominences are frequently 500 000 km long 
or longer because they expand radially as they stream 
outward (figure 2). 

Prominences that appear in regions well removed 
from SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS are called quiescent. They belie 
their name because films and spectra frequently show 
motions of 10-20 km s7! at their edges, especially at 
the top. Nevertheless, quiescent prominences usually 
maintain their overall shape for days. They often 
resemble leafy trees or hedgerows on the limb and 
long (10000-500000 km), thin (500-10000 km) threads 
on the disk. Quiescent filaments invariably overlie the 
borders between oppositely directed magnetic fields in 
the underlying photosphere and chromosphere. They 
seem confined to 10000 km wide zones where magnetic 
fields of opposite polarities mingle in a sort of no man’s 
land between large patches of positive and negative fields. 
The stability of these large field patterns on the Sun no 
doubt accounts for the stability of the quiescent filaments. 
However, the mingling magnetic fields underneath may 
be just as important for their maintenance as for their 
stability. The underlying fields are thought to be magnetic 
flux ropes which merge in the filament channel and expand 
upward, possibly carrying mass and twisted magnetic 
fields upward from the chromosphere. Maintaining the 
10'° g of mass in a typical filament may therefore be a 
matter of dynamic balance between updrafts in expanding 
magnetic fields and downdrafts where the horizontal 
fields are too weak or disordered and material falls into 
the chromosphere. 

Active prominences (figure 3) are those that occur near 
active regions, of course. They are thinner, darker and 
more changeable than quiescent prominences and have 
names that convey it (surges, sprays, loops). Quiescent 
and active prominences can be distinguished not only by 
their morphology and motions but also by their spectra. 
The neutral hydrogen spectral lines and the so-called 
H and K lines of ionized calcium dominate quiescent 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. Loop prominences photographed in the emission of 
atomic hydrogen with a Lyot filter at the Sacrament Peak 
Observatory. 


prominence spectra, but there are many cool spectral 
lines, such as those of neutral and singly ionized iron, 
titanium and chromium. These are also characteristic 
of the photospheric spectrum, which is emitted by a 
5800 K gas. The spectra of active prominences have much 
brighter and wider hydrogen and helium lines and fainter 
photospheric lines. Sometimes very highly ionized lines 
such as the yellow line of Ca XV appear. The latter occurs 
only in loop prominences (figure 4), which are really a 
component of solar flares. The presence of Ca XV reveals 
temperatures above 2 million kelvins. Active prominence 
spectra also frequently reveal highly broadened lines that 
vary in brightness, possibly indicative of ion beam heating. 
Quiescent prominences have remarkably repeatable and 
stable spectra, which suggests that one of the explanations 
for their stability may be that the radiation rate is well 
balanced with the heat input. 

Flares, flare waves, and filaments appear in 
monochromatic images obtained at the wavelength, 
6563 A, of the hydrogen Balmer line, which is commonly 
called Ha by astronomers. The hydrogen line sometimes 
shows red and blue Doppler shifts starting when a flare 
wave reaches a filament. Vertical oscillations can be in- 
duced. Some observers suggest that a particularly strong 
flare wave can cause a filament to erupt from the Sun, but 
definitive observations are lacking. Whether a filament 
erupts or not appears to depend mostly on the magnetic 
fields in and around it. 

Quiescent prominences oscillate even in the absence 
of flares. The oscillations are horizontal and have 
periods anywhere from less than 5 min up to 90 min, 
with 7.5 min being most frequently reported. They 
last only a few cycles and are not well understood 
theoretically. Considering, however, that prominences are 
held in place by magnetic tension and that the underlying 
atmosphere is always oscillating (see SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL 
HELIOSEISMOLOGY), oscillations are practically inevitable. 


Prominence plasma and environment 

While most quiescent prominences have very similar 
spectra, monochromatic images obtained in ‘hot’ and 
‘cold’ emission lines of the same prominence may differ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. An eruptive prominence showing the transformation of cool, absorbing material (dark feature, left center, left image) into a 
bright spray (center and right images) emitting the radiation of Fe XII, which exists only at temperatures above one million kelvins. 


considerably in appearance. For example, an image 
formed from the emissions of ionized helium (‘hot’) may 
show a high, diaphanous cloud, while an Ha (‘cold’) image 
would show a low, dense hedgerow. This means that, 
although the average properties of prominences are fairly 
stable, the temperature may vary considerably from 6000 K 
to 50 000 K from point to point within a single entity. There 
is some evidence that the local heating rate may change 
and a prominence may then just ‘evaporate’ when the 
delicate normal balance among heat input, radiation rate, 
density and gravity is lost. 

Prominences literally reflect their environment be- 
cause most of the radiation they emit originated in pho- 
tons absorbed from the underlying chromosphere. Fila- 
ments appear darker against the chromosphere because 
they absorb most of the upward-directed photons and re- 
emit them in all directions. They appear bright against 
the dark sky for the same reason. Prominences also ra- 
diate from their interfaces with the million kelvin corona, 
showing that some of the intense heat there is penetrating 
the magnetic barriers. These radiations are in the ultravio- 
let region of the spectrum and are indicative of a 100000 K 
gas. 

Images from the Solar and Heliosphere Observatory 
(See SOLAR TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: SPACE) provide 
dramatic evidence of how efficient the hydrogen and 
helium of prominences are at absorbing radiation 
(figure 5). The first image (left) of figure 5 shows a 
quiescent prominence as a dark feature in the corona. This 
is because the helium atoms in it are absorbing the extreme 
UV emission at 195 A from the corona behind it. However, 
in the other two images, we see the prominence erupt 
and begin to emit strongly the same high-temperature 
radiation that comes from the million kelvin corona. Thus, 
this sequence of images traces the dramatic heating of 
prominence material at the same time as it is ejected from 
the coronal cavity in which it rested. Theory suggests that 
turbulence and reorganization of the magnetic fields heat 
the material. The heating is too rapid and localized to be 
explained by thermal conduction. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 6. The S-shaped feature on the right is the signature of an 
eruptive prominence in this image of the Sun in x-rays, from the 
Yohkoh satellite. 


Magnetic fields 


In the presence of a magnetic field, the spectral line 
emission of hydrogen and other elements becomes 
partially polarized and broadened, so a sensitive 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1 SEP SA 
17-35 


Figure 7. The two filaments shown here have opposite chiralities (sinistral and dextral), yet they spring from nearly the same point 
(center) in the chromosphere. The sinistral filament on the right clearly resembles a left-hand screw. 


polarimeter attached to a telescope will reveal much about 
the magnetic fields inside prominences. The Zeeman 
effect, for example, causes circular polarization when the 
magnetic field is parallel to the line of sight. It produces 
linear polarization when the field is perpendicular. The 
sense of polarization changes with increasing wavelength 
through the spectral line, so a magnetograph measures 
the rate of change of polarization with wavelength. There 
is no net polarization in prominence lines because of the 
Zeeman effect. 

The light emitted by prominences is scattered incident 
light that comes only from the solar disk (i.e. the light is 
anisotropic). This scattering of anisotropic light causes 
weak linear polarization parallel to the limb. In the 
presence of a magnetic field, the plane of polarization 
will rotate. This is called the Hanle effect (see SOLAR 
MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS). It depends in a 
complicated way on the direction and strength of the field 
and the height of the prominence, but it has been carefully 
calculated and measured by J—L Leroy and his colleagues, 
and it is the most useful diagnostic of the magnetic fields 
in prominences. 

The Zeeman and Hanle effects reveal that a 
prominence’s magnetic field vector will be generally 
within 25° of its long-axis direction. The fields are 
predominantly horizontal and actually strengthen slightly 
with height. Theory shows that these characteristics 
are required for prominence stability and support 
against gravity. The fields in quiescent prominences 
most likely resemble twisted ropes called magnetic 
flux tubes (see SOLAR INTERIOR: EMERGING MAGNETIC FLUX 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


TuBES). However, the resolving power of present-day 
magnetographs is considerably less than the smallest 
features in prominences, so there is some uncertainty 
about the field’s fine structure. 

Magnetic fields in active prominences are much 
less well understood than in quiescent prominences, 
of which hundreds were measured over three solar 
cycles. Active prominences are much more difficult to 
catch. One measurement of fields in a loop prominence 
gave 60 G fields, which is about 10 times the field in 
quiescent prominences. However, the morphology of the 
fields in loop prominences is possibly one of the least 
controversial issues, because loops (See SOLAR PROMINENCES: 
ACTIVE, figure 5) look so much like the loops of magnetic 
field lines seen in textbooks. The smooth slippage of 
plasma down the legs of a loop prominence and the 
ease with which the loops’ shapes can be matched by 
elementary models suggests that the magnetic fields in 
loop prominences have been drained of most of their 
energy. This is not surprising considering that loop 
prominences appear only after solar flares. Presumably 
most of the available energy, in the form of electric currents, 
has been drained from the fields to produce the flare. 

The magnetic fields in eruptive prominences are of 
great interest because they may be a vital clue to the 
instability that causes eruptions. However, from its 
onset to its disappearance from the field of view of most 
telescopes, an eruptive prominence is visible for only 
about 20 min. This is hardly enough time to obtain a good 
measurement of its magnetic fields, so solar physicists 
have to rely on theoretical models. The models are helped 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


along by a curious feature of eruptives, however. The first 
stage of many eruptions is an apparent simplification of 
its structure. What had looked like a hedgerow for a week 
may, in the course of a few hours, turn into a well-defined 
dark thread. As it rises off the Sun’s limb, an eruptive 
prominence may resemble a coiled spring. The pitch of 
the coil is sometimes easy to measure and it decreases as 
the prominence lengthens. The total number of turns from 
end to end remains the same even as the length increases. 

How can we explain the observations of magnetic 
fields in prominences? See the article on SOLAR PROMINENCE 
MODELS for details, but from observations we are drawn 
to eruptive prominences which often have a characteristic 
twist. They become unstable and expand outward, and 
they still have enough internal energy to overcome solar 
gravity and accelerate 10° g of plasma up to speeds as 
high as 1000 km gut. Many theorists have pointed out 
that fields twisted beyond a certain point, usually about 
one full turn from end to end, will become unstable. 
The best evidence that prominences erupt as the result of 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC INSTABILITIES Was obtained with the 
x-ray telescope aboard the Yohkoh satellite. As shown in 
figure 6, a sigmoid (S-shaped) brightening appears at the 
onset of filament eruption. The ratio of sigmoid length to 
width in a large sample of eruptives peaks at a value of 5, 
and this is exactly the shape of the most likely helical kink 
instability of a twisted magnetic field. 


Birth and death 

The origin of the cool plasmas of prominences is 
a controversial subject. It is almost impossible to 
discover from limb observations how a prominence forms. 
Observations usually show that a small bright feature 
grows upward from the Sun’s limb. However, this could 
sometimes be explained simply as a filament rotating 
onto view, because the Sun rotates completely every 27 
days. Other possible explanations are condensation from 
the surrounding corona or injection of chromospheric 
material from below. There do not seem to be any 
convincing observations of clouds condensing from the 
corona, except in the special case of loop prominences. On 
the disk, filaments appear to form from the coalescence 
of thin chromospheric threads that lie parallel to the 
border separating positive and negative magnetic fields. 
This may indicate operation of a kind of siphon, 
or it may suggest that magnetic fields are emerging 
from beneath the surface parallel to the boundary and 
carrying material with them as they expand into the 
corona. Doppler observations of filaments usually show 
blueshifts, indicative of rising material. 

Prominences nestle inside so-called coronal cavities 
which are so dark that none of the usual emissions from 
the corona is detected there. This suggests an explanation 
for the origin of prominence material. Maybe material 
could somehow be squeezed or condensed from the 
surrounding corona, in some way that has so far eluded 
detection. There are many theories for condensation, 
and a key element of them all is that the million kelvin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


coronal gases must cool to 10000 K and even less. The 
process seems to occur in loop prominences where a 
great quantity of hot, dense gas is created in the corona 
and conditions are right for condensation by thermal 
instability. A hot gas radiates energy, which cools it. It 
then becomes more dense and then radiates more, because 
the radiation rate is proportional to the square of the 
density. This instability nicely explains loop prominences 
where stages of ionization indicative of temperatures from 
10 million kelvins down to 10000 K are present. In 
normal prominence formation, however, there are no high- 
temperature emissions. Another problem is that the mass 
deficiency of a typical coronal cavity is much smaller than 
the mass of a typical prominence. 


Global patterns 

Filaments form along the magnetic polarity borders in 
active regions, between adjacent active region remnants 
and between active region remnants and the polar fields. 
These three families of filaments occupy three tiers of 
latitude in each hemisphere. The active ones lie between 
the equator and 30°, the next between 30° and 50°, and, 
finally, the polar crown filaments between 50° and 80°. 

The orientation of the axial magnetic fields in active 
region filaments follows Hale’s law of sunspot polarities. 
A filament’s axial field will have its western end in or near 
the leader spots. The eastern end will be near the follower 
spots. The axial fields flow from near the leader polarity 
spots to near the follower polarity spots. Of course, the 
direction changes each 11 yr, and it is opposite in the 
opposite hemispheres, consistent with Hale’s law. 

As active regions age and spread out, new filaments 
form along their high-latitude borders. In these filaments 
the axial fields flow from the follower fields of one active 
region remnant eastward to the leader fields of the next 
remnant. The average latitude of these filaments increases 
as the active region remnants expand toward the poles. 
Shortly after the beginning of a new cycle, the filaments of 
this ‘first tier’ begin to appear. By the beginning of the next 
cycle, these filaments form two crowns around the Sun at 
about 50° north and south latitude. Individual filaments 
will come and go, but the loci of active region, first tier 
and polar crown filaments are stable features on synoptic 
maps of the chromosphere. 

The polar crowns persist until about 1 yr before the 
maximum of the sunspot cycle. Then, in the course of 
1 yr, they shrink toward the poles. The average latitude 
increases quickly from 50° to 80° and at about sunspot 
maximum all the polar crown filaments disappear as the 
sign of the polar fields changes. To summarize, the axial 
fields of filaments in the low-latitude sunspot zones point 
to the west when negative spots follow (are westward 
of) positive spots. At the same time, the axial fields in 
the first tier of filaments point eastward, and those in 
the polar crown point westward. It is as though sections 
of the global toroidal fields of three sunspot cycles were 
manifested piecemeal in the corona by solar filaments. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Until 1992 no one suspected that filaments in the north 
were any different from those in the south. Then, S Martin 
noticed that barbs along the sides of polar crown filaments 
and those in the first tier are consistently slanted one way 
in the north and another way in the south. Northern 
hemisphere filaments somewhat resemble right-handed 
screws. Martin called them dextral filaments. Those 
in the south resemble left-handed screws and are called 
sinistral filaments. The pattern is less evident in active 
region filaments, but even they seem to differ statistically 
between north and south. Sometimes a dextral filament 
and a sinistral filament each have one end in a common 
point in the chromosphere (see figure 7), but, otherwise, 
the two filament types are never connected. 

It now appears, although there is still some 
controversy, that most magnetic fields in the northern 
hemisphere are composed of flux ropes with a left-handed 
twist. Those in the south have a right-handed twist. Why 
filaments threaded by fields with a right-handed twist 
should resemble left-handed screws is not clear. 

The importance of the chirality segregation by 
hemisphere rests on theories of the solar cycle, which 
predict that the magnetic helicity (tendency to twist) 
of northern and southern fields should be opposite. 
This is just what has been inferred from solar filament 
observations, and it has been confirmed by measurements 
of the fields in space plasmas and in active regions. 

Eruptive prominences preserve their sense of twist. 
Recent studies indicate that those erupting from the north 
become left-handed magnetic clouds in space. Similarly, 
measurements of the magnetic fields in the eruptive 
prominences from the southern hemisphere, as they pass 
by Earth, reveal magnetic flux ropes with a right-handed 
twist. Quite a lot of magnetic flux and helicity leave the 
Sun each solar cycle in eruptive prominences and coronal 
mass ejections. The total flux and helicity measured in 
space during each 11 yr solar cycle is equal to the total 
flux and helicity of the eruptives and CMEs. Also, these 
values agree with the total flux and helicity that the solar 
cycle generates, according to theoretical calculations. It 
appears, then, that eruptive prominences and CMEs carry 
off very nearly all of the magnetic fields generated in each 
solar cycle. 


Future research 

Solar prominences are much better understood today than 
acentury ago, of course, but many fundamental questions 
remain. There is no consensus on how prominences form. 
Dark threads develop in filament channels, but it has been 
impossible from the images at hand to determine where 
the material comes from. Observations eventually will 
show whether it comes up from the chromosphere or 
condenses from the surrounding corona. 

Although some puzzling details remain unresolved, 
the stability of prominences and their resistance to heat 
conduction from the corona are generally understood. 
Magnetic tension supports the material, and the extremely 
low rate of thermal conduction across magnetic field lines 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


prevents temperature changes. When prominences do 
become unstable, it is probably because of the helical 
kink instability. With sufficient magnetic helicity, any 
prominence will become unstable. However, we do not 
know how the magnetic helicity accumulates. 

No theory explains the fine vertical and horizontal 
threads of a hedgerow prominence. Perhaps three- 
dimensional images will reveal them to be part of a simple 
pattern of concentric coiled fields. Future observations of 
prominences will be carried out with matched telescopes 
operating from two or more widely separated points in 
the heliosphere. The arrival of stereoscopy will add a new 
dimension to prominence research. 


Bibliography 

Foukal P V 1990 Solar Astrophysics (New York: Wiley) 

Tandberg-Hanssen E 1995 The Nature of Solar Prominences 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Webb D, Rust D and Schmieder B 1998 New Perspectives on 
Solar Prominences (San Francisco, CA: Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific) 

Zirin H 1988 Astrophysics of the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


D Rust 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences: Active 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Prominences: Active 


Solar prominences may be divided into two classes, 
quiescent and active objects (See SOLAR PROMINENCES). 
While quiescent prominences form a fairly homogeneous 
group, active prominences comprise a bewildering array 
of objects, from filament-like prominences in active 
regions to surges, sprays and loop structures associated 
with solar flares (See SOLAR FLARES and flare SURGES). 
The many morphological classifications published in the 
1920s-1960s that tried to describe the many aspects of 
active prominences now mainly have historical interest. 
Nevertheless, several of these classifications invoked 
crucial physical parameters, e.g. velocity, association with 
active regions or flares, and helped to establish the nature 
of these active objects. 

In the following we shall discuss in some detail some 
common and fairly easily discernable classes of active 
prominences, i.e. active region filaments and associated 
sprays as well as surges and loops. Quiescent prominences 
often ascend in a spectacular eruption called a disparition 
brusque. These eruptive, quiescent prominences are 
treated separately (See SOLAR PROMINENCE ERUPTION) and are 
not to be considered active prominences per se. Note that 
when both quiescent and active region prominences are 
seen in absorption, e.g. in the H-alpha line, against the 
solar disk, they are often referred to as filaments. 

Both surges and loops occur in conjunction with 
flare activity and may be considered part of an overall 
flare phenomenon. However, they are also bona fide 
prominences, i.e. contain ‘cool plasma’ in the hot corona, 
and as such will be discussed below. A number of 
descriptive names are given to other active prominences, 
e.g. coronal clouds, caps and fast ejections, but we shall 
concentrate on the classes mentioned above that constitute 
the large majority of active objects. Figure 1 illustrates the 
activity that can be seen in the solar atmosphere when the 
Sun’s prominences put on their impressive show. 

As a general rule, the magnetic field in active 
prominences is considerably stronger than the roughly 
1D G field that characterizes quiescent prominences. In 
surges and loops the field may search values of 100-200 G. 


Active region filaments 

These prominences always occur in, or very close to, active 
regions, normally with sunspots, and are also referred to as 
sunspot filaments. Figure 2 shows, in addition to several 
large, quiescent prominences, a number of small active 
region filaments. 

Filaments, both quiescent and active, are found in 
regions between opposite magnetic polarities. These 
regions form narrow lanes between the extended plages 
of magnetic field, and are referred to as the polarity- 
inversion zone where we find the filament channel (see 
SOLAR FILAMENT CHANNELS). The occurrence on filament-type 
prominences seems to be intimately linked to the concept 
of chromospheric fibrils (See CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS). These 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(0) 


Figure 1. Development of active prominences observed in 
H-alpha on 30 July 1990: (a) at 1400 UT; (b) at 1644 UT. Notice 
eruption of prominence on south-east limb, appearance of surge 
at east limb, and major change in prominence near north pole. 
(Courtesy Observatoire du Pic-du-Midi and J-C Noens.) 


are one of the most conspicuous features seen in the H- 
alpha line in and around active regions. In the central 
part of active regions the fibrils are arranged in patterns 
connecting spots and plages of opposite magnetic polarity. 
However, before a filament will form, the fibrils will no 
longer connect these areas of opposite polarities, but will 
curve into the polarity- inversion zone. In the middle of 
this channel the fibrils will thereby be more or less aligned 
along the direction that will become the long axis of the 
forming filament. 

The long, thin fibrils typically have lengths of 11000 
km, a width of from 700 to 2200 km and a lifetime of 
10-20 min. Active filaments come in nearly all sizes, 
from small structures barely larger than fibrils, to long— 
always low-lying—filaments measuring 100000 km or 
more. While the two ends of the filament dip down into 
chromospheric plages of opposite magnetic polarities, the 
main body of the filament forms a long, nearly horizontal, 
magnetic flux tube. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences: Active 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Spectroheliogram in H-alpha taken 16 March 1990 
showing three large quiescent prominences on western 
hemisphere (right) and several active region prominences, in 
particular inverse S-shaped filament in north-west quadrant 
(upper right). (Courtesy Observatoire de Paris-Meudon and P 
Mein.) 


No generally accepted theory exists for the formation 
of these prominences. Models range from invoking a 
coalescence of fibrils, pre-existing in the filament channel, 
to picturing the emergence from subphotospheric layers 
of the already complete magnetic flux tube anchored in 
plages of opposite polarity. 

Since the magnetic field is oriented along the long axis 
of the filament, material motion along this axis will not 
be impeded, and under favorable conditions a continuous 
mass flow is seen in most active filaments. This flow is one 
of the strongest descriptive differences between active and 
quiescent filaments, and it demands a completely dynamic 
model for the former. 

Active region filaments may last from hours to 
several days. Their disappearance is preceded by an 
activation that may manifest itself either by increased 
internal motion, up to 30 km sl, along the axis of 
the filament, or—in spectacular cases—by a genuine 
disparition brusque. These activities normally precede 
flares and hence furnish a good flare precursor (see SOLAR 
FLARE FORECASTING). Particularly violent expulsions of active 
filaments may result in sprays. 


Sprays 

Sprays are violent, flare-associated ejections of plasma 
which are frequently disrupted into clumps. They reach 
velocities of 500-1200 km s“! in a few minutes owing to 
an initial very high acceleration of a few km s~’. Figure 3 
shows an example of a spray prominence. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Spray prominence observed in H-alpha, 28 October 
1972. Climax Station of the High Altitude Observatory, Boulder, 
co. 


When sprays originate on the visible disk one sees that 
the ejected material comes froma pre-existing active region 
filament which undergoes increased absorption some tens 
of minutes prior to the abrupt chromospheric brightening 
at the start of the spray. Often most of the spray material 
from the filament is confined within a steadily expanding 
loop-shaped envelope with parts of the material draining 
down both legs of the loop. In other instances the material 
is sprayed out in a seemingly chaotic fashion. Some 
material may escape the Sun as its velocity exceeds the 
velocity of escape. The nature of the expelling force is not 
known, but energy freed in magnetic reconnection seems 
a likely candidate. 


Surges 

Surges are prominences that seem to be shot out of active 
regions as long straight or curved columns and return 
along the same trajectory; see figure 4. As the material falls 
back, it often triggers a new surge. Surges may reach to 
great heights (several hundreds of thousands of km), and 
their velocity may exceed several hundred km s~!. Some 
active regions produce nearly identical surges during part 
of their life (homologous surges). As the material is 
ejected, it often performs a spiraling motion on its way 
out. A flare is often seen at the foot point of a surge, and 
the phenomenon may be considered as part of the flare 
complex. 

The trajectory of the moving plasma and _ its 
collimation indicate that surges are confined by more or 
less radial magnetic fields. From combined H-alpha, UV 
and x-ray data one can study both the cool and the hotter 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences: Active 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


{837 UT, 


Figure 4. Development of surge prominence, 12 June 1946. 
Climax Station of the High Altitude Observatory, Boulder, CO. 


components of the surge plasma, and one finds that cool 
and hot material follow parallel but separate paths. It 
seems that different parts of the surge may be ejected 
into adjacent, but separate, flux tubes. The nature of the 
explosive force that propels material into a surge is not 
known, but magnetic reconnection in the active region 
field again has been suggested. 


Loops 

Some of the most beautiful examples of gracious motion of 
material in the corona are provided by loop prominences 
and coronal rain; see figure 5. In these objects matter 
is observed to flow down along curved trajectories into 
active regions, seemingly after condensing out of the 
corona, often at great heights. These prominences are 
intimately connected with the late phase of the flare 
phenomenon and are, therefore, referred to as post-flare 
loops. They occur after the disparition brusque of a 
filament (quiescent or active), forming an arcade of loops 
connecting the two strands of emission appearing as a two- 
ribbon flare. The systematic motion in these loops reveals 
material streaming down the two legs of the loops from 
their apexes. The streaming motion follows a single arc; 
one does not observe the spiraling motion often seen in 
surges and in erupting quiescent prominences. During the 
next several hours the loop system expands and reaches, 
typically, a height of 50 000 km. It is important to note that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0820 UT 1991.06.15 


Figure 5. Composite H-alpha picture showing loop-prominence 
system in the corona above the solar limb (at 1213 UT) and the 
flares near the loops’ feet in active with sunspots (at 0820 UT), 14 
June 1991. (Courtesy Astronomical Observatory, Wroclaw, 
Poland, and B Rompolkt.) 


the individual loops do not grow or expand much; rather, 
the system expands by generating higher and higher loops, 
while the lower ones fade away. The resulting apparent 
velocity of expansion is quite small, ~5 km s“!. The 
real downward flow motion in the two legs of the loop 
is considerably faster. (Free fall of 8-10 min. would 
give 130-160 km s-', but much lower values have been 
observed.) The density and the magnetic field in the loops 
strongly influence the velocity of the downward flow. 

Oscillations of loop-type prominences have been 
reported and may be associated with the flaring activity. 
These post-flare loops should not be confused with the 
loop-like structures that at times are seen during a flare 
display or other plage activity, when material is ejected 
into radial flux tubes, giving surges, or into loop-shaped 
flux tubes that bend over toward the surface. In the latter 
case the motion is along the loop, moving up one leg and 
down the other. In particularly large loop structures that 
reach high into the corona, the ejected material may form 
so-called flaring arches. 

In coronal rain material is often seen to rain down 
into active regions from coronal clouds suspended in 
the corona. The trajectories followed by the streaming 
material generally are strongly curved, apparently 
following the lines of force of coronal magnetic fields. The 
velocities along these paths are comparable with the flow 
velocities observed in loop prominences. 

Models for post-flare loops have been worked out (see 
SOLAR PROMINENCE MODELS and SOLAR FLARE MODELS) and imply 
magnetic reconnection in the arcade field that surrounds 
the pre-existing quiescent prominence involved. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Prominences: Active ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
Tandberg-Hanssen E 1995 The Nature of Solar Prominences 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Einar Tandberg-Hanssen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics 


Solar spectroscopy and diagnostics provide the opportu- 
nity for determining the physical parameters in different 
parts of the solar atmosphere. 

The story of solar spectroscopy really began in 1666, 
when Isaac NEWTON studied the phenomenon of colors using 
a triangular glass prism which he bought in a local market. 
In his early experiments, he split sunlight into the colors of 
the rainbow. The radiation from the photosphere is similar 
to that of a black body with a characteristic temperature 
of 6000 K, which peaks in the visible wavelength range. It 
was only much later, in 1814, when FRAUNHOFER determined 
that the hundreds of dark lines in the solar visible spectrum 
were actually a property of the sunlight, rather than any 
earthly phenomenon (see FRAUNHOFER LINES). During a total 
eclipse of the Sun, the Fraunhofer spectrum, normally seen 
as absorption lines, is briefly replaced by an emission-line 
or flash spectrum from the chromosphere, the thin layer 
just above the photosphere. 

QUANTUM THEORY, developed in the 1920s and 1930s, 
provided an explanation for spectral emission and 
absorption lines in terms of changes of energy state 
of atoms by discrete amounts—quanta, related to the 
wavelength of the radiation. Each atom has characteristic 
fingerprints of spectral lines which enable us to dissect the 
spectrum and determine the nature of the solar plasma 
where it originated. A plasma is a gas in which the atoms 
have been ionized. 

At the time of totality, the corona is visible in all 
its glory—the crown around the Sun. Normally, the 
visible emission from the corona cannot be seen, since 
it is very weak, only a millionth of the intensity of the 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE or surface of the Sun. During an 
eclipse, the Moon blocks out exactly the photosphere 
and allows us a brief glance at the corona. Skilled 
work by a gifted French astronomer called tyor, provided 
in 1930 an instrument, a coronagraph, which could 
simulate a total eclipse, allowing the visible coronal 
spectrum to be continuously observed. The coronal 
visible spectrum comprises emission lines (the brightest 
are the coronal green, red and yellow lines). These lines 
provided an intriguing puzzle for many years, indeed, 
a new element called coronium was invented to explain 
them. Although Lyot noted that the width of the green 
line indicated a characteristic temperature much higher 
than the photosphere, it was the painstaking scientific 
investigations by Grotian and Edlen around 1940 which 
eventually led to the identification of these lines from ions 
which only exist at very high temperatures (above 10° K). 
The green line comes from Fe XIV (iron with 13 electrons 
stripped off), the red line from Fe X and the hottest line, 
the yellow line, is from Ca XV. Thus it was established that 
the corona is very much hotter than the photosphere—a 
fascinating phenomenon, which solar physicists are still 
seeking to explain. 

Modern technology has enabled us to move far 
beyond the visible wavelength range into the ultraviolet, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


x-rays, infrared and radio wavelength ranges. From 
space observatories, we are able to monitor the corona 
continuously in the UV and x-rays. At these wavelengths 
we see hundreds of emission lines, covering a wide range 
of temperatures. Spectroscopic diagnostics encompasses 
the study of techniques which have been developed to 
deduce plasma parameters, such as electron density and 
temperature, elemental abundances and mass motions 
from spectral lines. A comprehensive review of 
spectroscopic diagnostics for solar and stellar plasmas 
in the VUV (100-2000 A) was published by Mason and 
Monsignori Fossi (1994). To use these techniques it is 
necessary to build accurate atomic models, including 
all the important processes and using the best available 
atomic data. 


Electron temperature 
As the temperature increases in a gas, the particles become 
very energetic, so more and more electrons get stripped off 
the ions. For example, neutral oxygen has eight electrons, 
but at a temperature of 10° K, four electrons have been 
removed. The ion formed is O V (or O* in notation used 
by atomic physicists). So, if we make images of the solar 
atmosphere in different spectral lines, we are in fact able 
to take ‘slices’ at different temperatures. For example, 
the Coronal Diagnostic Spectrometer (CDS) on the Solar 
and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) was designed to do 
just that. Simultaneous rasters, up to 4’ x 4’ in size, can 
be obtained at different wavelengths, with a high spatial 
resolution (approximately 3”) (see figure 1). The SOHO- 
CDS instrument covers lines from ions formed over a wide 
temperature range (2 x 10*-6 x 10° kK), including the low- 
temperature emission from He I at 584 A (2 x 10* kK), 
transition region emission from O V 630 A (2.5 x 10° K); 
the Mg IX 368 A line at coronal temperatures (10° K) and 
the Fe XVI 335 and 361 A lines observed in active regions 
(2x 10° K). From the CDS rasters it is evident how different 
the solar atmosphere looks at various temperatures. 

During solar flares, the temperature can exceed 10’ K, 
and many lines from highly ionized iron ions can be 
observed in the x-ray wavelength range. Figure 2 is 
an observation made with the Bent Crystal Spectrometer 
(BCS) instrument on the YOHKOH satellite (ISAS, Japan). 
The presence of the Fe XXVI lines indicates a very high 
temperature of around 30 x 10° K. 

In the simplest coronal model approximation, we find 
that the emission line intensity from a volume of plasma 
V can be expressed as 


Ty) = 70 | G(T)N? dV (photons s“! sr!) 
Vv 


where Aj; is the wavelength for the transition between 
energy level j and i in the ion, Ab(X) is the element 
abundance and N, is the electron number density (cm~°). 
The contribution function, G(T), contains all of the relevant 
atomic physics parameters—it is strongly peaked in 
temperature (see figure 3). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


He | 584.30 A 


Mg IX 368.06 A 
I 


SOHO/CDS NIS Raster, 


O V 629.62 A 


Fe XVI 360.79 A 


6—-Sep-—1996 06:24:33 


Figure 1. SOHO-CDS rasters of an active region, showing emission from He I, O V, Mg IX and Fe XVI. 


Lya, 


Fell Kg 


FeXXVI 


Counts s' 


FeXxv J 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. Fe XXVI lines observed with the YOHKOH BCS 
instrument. (Courtesy of Pike.) 


From a study of the intensity of spectral lines formed 
at different temperatures, it is possible to deduce the 
amount of material in each temperature range, which 
is called the emission measure distribution. With further 
assumptions about the geometry of the region, one can 
directly compare the observations with theoretical models. 

Vast quantities of atomic data are required to simulate 
the observed spectra. For example, the CHIANTI atomic 
database and analysis software (Dere et al 1997), has been 
developed as a collaboration between the USA, Italy and 
the UK to provide a comprehensive dataset for ions of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


CHIANT] SPECTRAL CODE 


= 1 1 1 

iT Abund. : grevesse_anders 

"7 lon Eq. : arnaud_rothenflug 
oat Pressure : 1.000e+15 [ cm? *K ] 

0) 

: Mg IX 

< 5 g 

om 24.557 

& 

© 

ii 

@ —25.0fF 


BL 
o.U 


Figure 3. The contribution functions (G(T) Ab(X)/4:7) for 
various ionization stages of Mg: Mg V (353.09 A), Mg VI 
(349.17 A multiplet), Mg VII (363.77 A), Mg VIII (315.04 A), 
Mg IX (368.07 A), Mg X (624.94 A). 


astrophysical interest. A comparison of the simulated and 
observed CDS spectrum is given in figure 4. Several other 
atomic databases and packages are available such as the 
Atomic Data and Analysis Structure (ADAS) developed at 
Strathclyde University. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CHIANTI Synthetic Spectrum 

0.030 1 = 
0.025 aml 
020F | 
0.0156 4 
010 _ 
0.005 am 
0.000 & a 

356 358 360 362 364 366 368 
| 1 1 1 1 1 1 | —L 
Mg IX S 
Fe XVI 5 
200E = 
100 a 


Figure 4. A sample CDS-NIS active region spectrum (355-370 A) is shown in the lower plot—the dashed curve is a multi-Gaussian fit 
with background. The upper plot is a standard active region spectrum from CHIANTI. 


Electron density 

The electron pressure is an important parameter in any 
theoretical model for the plasma. This is proportional 
to the product of the electron density and temperature. 
Experience from solar observations is that the plasma often 
exists in the form of unresolved filamentary structures, 
even down to the best spatial resolution which has yet been 
obtained. At one extreme is the solar transition region, 
where only a very small fraction of the observed emitting 
volume is actually filled with plasma. 

An estimate for the electron density can be deduced 
from the absolute intensity of one emission line, if the 
relevant atomic parameters are known. However, this 
method depends on several assumptions and breaks down 
if any filamentary structure exists. 

Techniques have been developed to determine 
electron density from spectral line intensity ratios for the 
same ion. These methods make no assumption about the 
size of the emitting volume or the element abundance 
value. They therefore provide a powerful and important 
diagnostic for the solar plasma. Spectral lines may be 
grouped into different categories according to the way 
in which they are produced. In the coronal model 
approximation the spectral line intensity is a function of 
N?2 ; however, for some transitions, the dependency on N, is 
different. The atomic processes within each ion determine 
the way in which the spectral line intensities vary with N.. 

For example, Si X, formed at around 1.3 x 10° K, 
provides a useful electron density diagnostic with lines 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Line ratios relative to 347.40 


11 12 


u bosiiiiy boiiitis rotirriis 


7 8 9 10 
log (dens) 
\ / 


Figure 5. The Si X density sensitive 356.03 /347.40 ratio (the 
observed 356.03 A line is a blend of two Si X lines). 


at 347.4 A and 356.0 A. The intensity ratio (356.0/347.4) 
varies with electron density as shown in figure 5. 


In the hottest parts of active regions the 356.0 A line 
can be found to be around twice as intense as the 347.4A 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


line, implying a high electron density >10!° cm™°. In 
contrast the characteristic electron density for the quiet 


Sun is around 108 cm~? and in coronal holes it is even less. 


Elemental composition 

There has been a great deal of discussion and controversy 
about variations in the elemental abundances in the 
solar atmosphere (see SOLAR ABUNDANCES). The element 
abundances measured in the solar wind differ from those 
in the photosphere. The coronal abundances also differ 
from those in the photosphere, in fact they seem to vary 
in different solar features. This behavior depends on the 
value for the first ionization potential (FIP)—which is the 
energy required to ionize the neutral atom. The ions with 
FIP greater than 10 eV appear to behave differently from 
those with FIPs less than 10 eV. It is believed that this 
could reflect the ionization and acceleration processes for 
the solar corona, low down in the solar atmosphere. 

The intensity of a spectral line is directly dependent on 
the elemental abundance. One approach to determining 
element abundances is to use the detailed shape of the 
emission measure distribution for ions from the same 
element and apply an iterative procedure to normalizing 
the curves for different elements. Another procedure is to 
use the intensity ratios for individual spectral lines which 
have very similar G(T) functions, but different FIPs. For 
example, neutral neon, with an FIP of 21.6 eV, has a closed 
shell structure which is difficult to ionize, whereas it is 
much easier to ionize magnesium, with an FIP of 7.6 eV. 
Studies of the Mg/Ne relative abundances indicate that 
some low-lying dense structures in active regions have 
photospheric abundances, whilst other larger more open- 
loop structures have coronal abundances. This could 
indicate the emergence and heating of dense flux tubes 
from beneath the solar suface. 

Elemental abundance determinations in a CORONAL 
STREAMER have recently been made with the Ultraviolet 
Coronagraph Spectrometer (UVSP) on SOHO. The UVSP 
team find a depletion of the high-FIP elements in the center 
of a quiescent streamer and suggest that gravitational 
settling may be partly responsible. It is important to 
attempt to relate the elemental abundances determined in 
the solar atmosphere with those measured further out in 
the solar wind. 


Spectral line profiles 
Line shifts and broadenings give information about the 
dynamic nature of the solar atmosphere. The transition 
region lines, formed at around 10° K, are characterized 
by broadened and irregular line profiles, which put 
constraints on possible heating processes. These profiles 
show evidence for small explosive events which occur 
around the edges of the magnetic network. They could 
be linked to coronal heating processes in the quiet Sun. 
Transient brightenings in transition region lines, called 
blinkers, have been observed by SOHO-CDS. 

Many detailed studies have been carried out for a 
variety of solar features. For example, figure 6 shows a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


macrospicule-like feature at the limb, which was recorded 
by SOHO-CDS (Pike and Mason 1998). The left-hand side 
shows the OV intensity raster and the right-hand side 
shows an OV velocity map. If an axis is defined through 
the center of the OV feature and extended above the 
limb from the footpoint region, the emission is apparently 
blueshifted (black) on one side of the axis and redshifted 
(white) on the other. It is likely that a combination of 
both rotating and accelerating plasma would explain these 
observations. 

Outflows of coronal material have been correlated 
with CORONAL HOLES, the source of the fast SOLAR WIND. 
The excess broadening of the transition region and 
coronal lines could be due to macroturbulence and 
provides valuable information on the heating of the solar 
atmosphere and the SOLAR WIND ACCELERATION. 

The SOHO-UVCS instrument is designed to carry out 
diagnostic studies of the extended corona, in particular 
to measure coronal line intensities and profiles. For the 
O VI lines, a process called Doppler dimming enables 
a determination to be made of the solar wind outflow 
velocity. In the equatorial streamers, the outflow velocity 
reaches a value of around 100 km s~! at four solar 
radii. Bright ray-like structures have been observed in 
coronal holes which could be related to POLAR PLUMES. The 
SOHO-LASCO (Large Angle Spectroscopic Coronagraph) 
instrument comprises three coronagraphs which cover 
different distances out into the extended corona. The inner 
coronagraph has the capability of observing in the green, 
red and yellow lines as well as in white light. Dynamic 
features can be tracked from close to the solar surface right 
out to 30 solar radii. In particular LASCO has observed 
many CMEs (coronal mass ejections), streamers, polar 
plumes and comets. 


Conclusion 
Spectroscopy provides a powerful opportunity for 
probing the nature of the solar atmosphere. This is 
illustrated by recent advances in UV observations of the 
transition region and corona by SOHO. In particular, 
examples have been given for diagnostic techniques 
involving optically thin emission lines. Lower down in 
the solar atmosphere (photosphere and chromosphere), it 
is necessary to solve the radiative transfer equations to 
study emission or absorption features. 

The x-ray spectrum has only briefly been mentioned. 
The SOLAR MAXIMUM MISSION (SMM) Satellite flown in the 1970s 
and the more recent YOHKOH satellite have provided 
extensive observations of active regions and solar flares 
in the x-ray wavelength range. A multitude of diagnostic 
possibilities exist and have been explored with these data. 

From diagnostic studies of the solar atmosphere, 
we now know that the transition region is dynamic 
and filamentary in nature. MAGNETIC RECONNECTION at the 
network boundaries is correlated with enhanced transition 
region emission, indicative of heating. The corona is 
confined by small- and large-scale magnetic features. In 
active regions, the temperature is high and the measured 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


OV intensity OV velocity 


60 60 
50 50 
& 40 40 
e 
Ss 30 30 
~ 90 20 
10 10 
0 of 
0 20 40 60 80 0 20 40 60 80 


X (arcsec) 


Figure 6. OV intensity (Ihs) and velocity (rhs) maps for a solar tornado. The contours on the rhs velocity map are OV intensity. (From 
Pike and Mason 1998.) 


electron densities are at least an order of magnitude higher 
than the quiet Sun. However, the densest, hottest parts of 
active regions are often low down, close to the regions of 
greatest magnetic shear. Large, cool (around 10° K) loops 
are a common feature of active regions. These are not 
stable and large velocities (around 100 km s~') have been 
recorded. In coronal holes, diagnostic studies give a low 
electron density and a characteristic temperature below 
10° K. Aheated debate is in progress about whether it is the 
polar plume or inter-plume regions which are the source of 
the high-speed solar wind. Initial velocity measurements 
from SUMER indicate that it is the latter, but further studies 
are in progress. 

One has to stop and ponder what Newton would 
have thought about the advances which have been made 
in spectroscopy. Space technology has provided the 
opportunity to go far beyond the colors of the rainbow. 
Would he have shared our enthusiasm and excitement for 
studying the intricate features of the Sun? 


Bibliography 

Dere KP, LandiE, Mason HE, Fossi BC and Young P R 1997 
CHIANTI—an atomic database for emission lines 
Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 125 149-73 

Fleck B and Svestka Z (ed) 1997 The First Results from SOHO 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Mason H E and Monsignori-Fossi B C 1994 Spectroscopic 
diagnostics in the VUV for solar and stellar plasmas 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 6 123-79 

Phillips K J H 1992 Guide to the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Pike C D and Mason H E 1998 Rotating transition region 
features observed with SOHO-CDS Solar Physics 182 
333-48 

Vial J-C, Brocchialini K and Boumier P (eds) 1998 Space 
Solar Physics (Berlin: Springer) 


Helen Mason 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics: X-ray Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics: 
X-ray Emission 


X-ray emission from the Sun arises primarily from the solar 
outer atmosphere, particularly the hot corona. During 
transient events, such as flares and coronal mass ejections, 
there is also enhanced emission of both soft and hard x-rays 
from plasma above ten million kelvins (see SOLAR FLARES: 
RELATION TO CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS). Outside of flares, the 
bulk of the coronal plasma is at temperatures in the range 
1-10 MK, leading to radiation primarily in spectral lines 
from ions of heavy elements in the atmosphere formed at 
these temperatures. Above 10 MK, the atoms of the coronal 
plasma are stripped of most of their outer electrons and 
continuum emission gains in importance. 

Figure 1 shows a calculation of the soft x-ray emission 
(to 100 A) of the coronal plasma at a temperature of 
3 MK, which is typical of SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS. The 
quantity plotted is the spectral emissivity P(T, 4), which 
is the plasma emission summed over all spectral lines 
and continuum processes, but kept as a function of 
wavelength. P(T,) is therefore the spectrum emitted 
by a unit volume of the coronal plasma; it has units 
erg cm? s-? At. 

The emission spectrum is seen to be dominated 
by individual strong emission lines, especially at 
wavelengths 10-20 A; there are also some strong emission 
lines in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) between 170 and 
600 A, not discussed in this article (see SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: 
ULTRAVIOLET AND EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET EMISSION). At lower 
temperatures the spectrum shifts to longer wavelengths, 
while at higher temperatures it is dominated by shorter- 
wavelength lines. This is determined by the ionization 
stages attained by the ions in the coronal gas at each 
temperature, as described in the main article for this 
section. In the following we discuss the mechanics of 
emission specifically with reference to x-ray emission from 
the solar atmosphere. 


Abundances and ionization balance 
If we assume local thermodynamic equilibrium, then the 
x-ray emission from a given region of the solar atmosphere 
is determined by the composition of the plasma and its 
temperature. The abundances of all elements heavier than 
helium in the solar atmosphere are very small relative 
to hydrogen, in the range 10-*-10~° as a proportion by 
number. Table 1 gives estimates of abundances for the 
most important elements (see also SOLAR ABUNDANCES). 
Coronal abundances differ from photospheric values 
for some elements. Known as the first ionization potential 
(FIP) effect, elements such as C, N and O having FIP > 
10 eV are underabundant compared with elements such 
as Mg, Si and Fe. The difference can amount to nearly 
an order of magnitude in some cases, and the size of the 
effect also varies from one place to another in the corona. 
A discussion of this effect and references to literature on 
the subject are found in Golub and Pasachoff (1997, ch 3.3). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


° ro) ee 
I | io} 
ny aH 
TT I TT] 
pool 1 titi 


TITTY 


wut 


Toy 
sul 


107 Fee eee Joa L ree | 
ie} 20 40 60 80 100A 


Figure 1. The spectral emissivity of the solar corona for a unit 
of plasma at T = 3 MK. The vertical scale is in units of 
10-3 erg cm? s~! A~!. Courtesy E DeLuca, SAO. 


Table 1. Coronal abundances, normalized to hydrogen. 


Element Coronal abundance 
H 1 

He 0.10 

Cc 2.3 x 1074 
N 3.9 x 10-5 
O 2.4 x 10-4 
Ne 3.5 x 10-5 
Na 2.7 x 1076 
Mg 3.7 x 10-5 
Al 2.7 x 1076 
Si 3.9 x 10-5 
S 8.6 x 10-° 
Ar 2.1 x 10-6 
Ca 2.9 x 1076 
Fe 3.9 x 10-5 
Ni 2.2 x 10-6 


The most abundant element, hydrogen, has no strong 
emission lines in the x-ray region; the strongest line of 
helium arises from the Lyman-a transition of He* at 
304 A, in the EUV. At temperatures between 100 000 K and 
1 MK the most important contributors to the total power 
emitted by the solar atmosphere, taking into account the 
combined emission from all of the relevant ionization 
stages of each element, are C and O; above 1 MK, the 
most important contributor is Fe. The fraction, f, of an 
element that is in a given ionization stage is a function 
of temperature, determined by the balance between the 
formation and removal processes: ionization from a lower 
stage, ionization to a higher stage, recombination from a 
higher stage and recombination to a lower stage; see main 
article for further details. A list of the most prominent 
emission lines in the corona and the temperatures at which 
they are maximally present is given in table 2. 

If the energy balance at a given location in the corona 
is variable, the abundance of a given ionization stage will 
change. Timescales for such changes show considerable 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy and Diagnostics: X-ray Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Prominent coronal emission lines. 


Line identifier Wavelength (A) log(Tinax) 
Fe XVII 15 6.6 
Fe XVII 17 6.6 
O VII 19 6.5 
OVI 21.6 6.3 
CVI 33.7 6.1 
Fe IX 171 5.9 
Fe X 174.5 6.0 
Fe XI 180 6.1 
Fe XII 192.4, 193.5 6.2 
Fe XIV 211 6.3 
Fe XV 284 6.3 
He II 304 4.7 
Fe XVI 335, 361 6.4 
Ne VII 465 5.8 
Mg X 610 6.0 
Flare lines 

Fe XXVI 1.51, 1.78 8.0 
Fe XXV 1.85, 1.86 7.8 
Ca XX 3.02 7.7 
Ca XIX 3.17, 3.19, 3.21 7.5 
Si XIV 6.18 “a 
Si XIII 6.65, 6.68, 6.74 6.9 
Mg XII 8.42 6.9 
Mg XI 9.17, 9.23, 9.32 6.8 
Fe XVII 13.8, 13.9 6.7 
Fe XVIII 14.3, 14.4, 14.5 6.8 
Fe XVII 15.0, 15.3 6.7 
O VII 19.0 6.5 
OVI 21.6, 21.8, 22.1 6.3 


Table 3. Variability of the timescale rt for selected coronal ions. 


Ion log(Tinax) —log(f)*  t (s) 


Ne®t 5.7 0.5 1.6 
Fe’t = 5.9 0.5 0.4 
Mg** 6.1 0.7 14 

of 6.3 0.3 0.4 
o”* 6.4 0.3 103 
Felt 6.4 0.1 10 

Fe+ = 7.2 0.5 206 


 f is the fraction of the element in the 
given ionization stage at the stated 
temperature. 


differences among the various elements and ionization 
species. Table 3 gives some examples of the timescale 
for the appearance of a given ion from the next lower 
ionization stage, at pressure N,T = 3 x 10% cm’? K, 
in response to a sudden increase in temperature. These 
values are calculated at the temperature of maximum 
formation for the listed species. This subject is discussed 
in Golub and Pasachoff (1997, pp 232-3). 


Emitted power 

The power emitted by a unit volume of coronal plasma 
at a given wavelength is N.N,P(T,4), where N.,, are 
the electron and proton number densities, respectively. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Log P(T) + 23. 


Log T 


Figure 2. The radiative loss function P(T) for the coronal 
plasma. Top curve is the total, bottom curves are individual 
sums for O, C, Fe and Si. Courtesy J Raymond, SAO. 


The total radiative loss rate is found by integrating over 
all wavelengths, Eg = N.N,P(T). The quantity P(T) 
is known as the radiative loss function; it has units 
erg cm? s~!, so that the radiative loss rate Eg has units 
erg cm~* s-!. At typical coronal temperatures P(T) is of 
the order of 10-*°; a calculation of P(T) from T = 104 K to 
T = 10° K is shown in figure 2. 


Bibliography 

Golub L and Pasachoff 1997 The Solar Corona (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Meyer J-P 1985 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 57 173 


Leon Golub 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Atomic Processes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy: Atomic 
Processes 


A Greek philosopher called Democritus (c. 460-370 BC) 
first introduced the concept of atoms (which means 
indivisible). His atoms do not precisely correspond 
to our atoms of today, which are not indivisible, but 
made up of a nucleus (protons with positive charge and 
neutrons which have no charge) and orbiting electrons 
(with negative charge). Indeed, in the solar atmosphere, 
the temperature is such that atoms are often ionized (to 
form ions), that is they have lost one electron or two or 
more. It is the interaction of the atoms and ions with 
electrons, protons and the radiation field which we refer 
to as atomic processes. These atomic processes in a PLASMA 
(ionized gas) determine the intensity or brightness of the 
radiation which we observe at all wavelengths from the 
SOLAR ATMOSPHERE. In particular, the transitions give rise to 
emission and absorption spectral lines. 


The birth of quantum mechanics 

In 1900, Max PLANCK presented a derivation of the black- 
body law in Germany, and the theory of quantum physics 
was born. In his derivation for the intensity of radiation 
as a function of wavelength and temperature, Planck set 
aside classical physics and made an ad hoc assumption 
that light energy, E, was emitted and absorbed in packets 
(photons) (E = hv) by oscillators with a natural frequency, 
v, Where h is a fundamental constant of nature, now 
known as Planck’s constant. Planck himself was not at 
all happy with his own idea, and he tried for many years 
to disprove it and understand black-body radiation with 
classical physics. The radiation from the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE 
can be approximated to a black body of temperature just 
below 6000 K. 

ALBERT EINSTEIN, in 1905, went on to explain the 
photoelectric effect. When light is incident on a metal 
surface, electrons are ejected. He proposed that the 
energy in the beam of monochromatic light comes in 
parcels, hv. This quantum of energy, a photon, could be 
transferred completely to the electron. This explanation of 
the photoelectric effect added substance to Planck’s earlier 
supposition. QUANTUM MECHANICS was born. 


Solar and stellar spectral lines 

The first sPECTROSCOPE, created by JOSEPH VON FRAUNHOFER in 
1814, combined a prism with a small viewing telescope 
focused on a narrow slit. He used this instrument to view 
the Sun’s spectrum and saw not a continuous spectrum of 
light, but many, many dark lines. It was later found that 
any chemical compound, gas or vapor, which emitted light 
produces its own unique spectrum. 

The pattern in emission lines was established by 
BALMER in 1885, from studies of the hydrogen lines in the 
spectrum of stars. It was the theory put forward by Bohr 
in 1913, using Planck’s ideas, which accounted for the 
Balmer analysis of the hydrogen spectrum. Bohr’s model 
for the atom was based on Rutherford’s model comprising 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a positive core, nucleus, surrounded by negatively charged 
electrons. However, Bohr proposed that electrons could 
only exist in discrete orbits. In these orbits, they did 
not radiate energy, but when they jumped from one orbit 
to another, they emitted a quantum of light. With this 
hypothesis, everything fell into place. 

The FRAUNHOFER LINES are absorption lines from many 
different elements. The radiation passing through the 
layers in the solar atmosphere is absorbed by the atoms 
and ions to excite electrons to higher orbits. 

Bright emission lines from PROMINENCES Were recorded 
by Sir JOSEPH NORMAN LOCKYER in 1868. Laboratory 
experiments were carried out to try and reproduce these 
lines, but without success. He suggested that the lines 
were due to an element named helium after the Greek Sun 
god Helios. It was 25 years before the existence of helium 
was confirmed on Earth. 

We now know that the Sun is composed mainly of 
hydrogen, with some helium and traces of many other 
elements. The spectral line patterns from these atoms and 
ions can be very complex, reflecting the intricacy of their 
atomic structure. 


Atomic processes 

There has been a close association between the study of the 
Sun and developments in atomic collision physics. The 
formulation of the so-called coronal equilibrium equations 
over fifty years ago pointed to the importance of excitation, 
ionization and recombination collisions in determining the 
state of the plasma and the nature of the spectral emission 
lines. In earlier local thermodynamic equilibrium models, the 
plasma state was determined by its temperature and the 
laws of statistical physics. 

In the solar atmosphere, the ionization and recombi- 
nation processes can usually be solved separately from the 
statistical equilibrium equations for the atomic processes 
amongst the low lying levels in the ion. 

In a hot (T > 2 x 104 K) and low electron density 
(Ne < 10 cm~?) plasma, such as the outer atmosphere 
of the Sun and stars, it can be assumed that the spectral 
lines are optically thin. Low down in the atmosphere, it is 
necessary to solve the RADIATIVE TRANSFER equations. 

The notation used is such that Fe XIV (or Fe!**) is the 
element iron with thirteen electrons stripped off. Taking 
Fe XIV as an example, the ground configuration 3s?3p has 
two levels—P,2 and *P3/2.—the transition between these 
two levels gives rise to the coronal green line at 5303 A.The 
transitions between the excited configurations 3s3p* and 
3873p are at around 300-400 A and those between 3s23d 
and 3873p are at shorter wavelengths around 200 A. 


Spectral emission line 
An ion in an excited state can spontaneously emit 
radiation: 

XY > XP thy; (1) 
where an atom X of charge state m, in a bound state (orbit) 
j emits a photon of energy AE; ; (= Avi; = he/d;,;) to 
arrive at a lower energy state i. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Atomic Processes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fe XIV 
38° 3d 
2p 
J 
& J 
4p — &g S) 3s 3p" 
iS 
387 3p 


Figure 1. A diagram illustrating the strongest EUV transitions. 
Wavelengths are given in angstroms. 


Ionization and recombination 

The degree of ionization of an element is obtained by 
equating the ionization and recombination rates that relate 
successive stages of ionization. 


N"* (deol + dau) = Neb (Qty oF da). (2) 


The dominant processes in optically thin plasmas 
are direct electron impact ionization (qc\)and excitation 
followed by autoionization(qau); radiative recombination (c,) 
and dielectronic recombination(a4). The fractional ionization 
ratio for each ion 


Rm = N(X""*)/N(X) (3) 


is significant over a small range of temperatures and peaks 
at a different Tmax for each ion stage. As the temperature 
increases, so does the ionization stage, as more and more 
electrons are stripped off (Arnaud and Raymond, 1992). 
Direct electron impact ionization from the inner and 
outer shells of the ground configuration can be expressed 
as: 
(m+1)+ 
nl 


xm +ea X +e’ +e” (4) 


with n and n’ being the quantum state of the ions. 
The process of radiative recombination is: 


Xod* te = xX" + hy. (5) 


The inverse process is photoionization, which is a 
dominant process for many low-density astrophysical 
plasmas, but not for the outer atmospheres of the Sun and 
stars. 

For the solar corona, the main ionization and 
recombination processes were originally thought to 
be direct electron impact ionization and radiative 
recombination. However, early calculations gave values 
of Tmax for the coronal forbidden lines (due to Fe X 
and Fe XIV) much lower than the temperatures deduced 
from their spectral line profiles. This discrepancy 
was eventually resolved by Burgess, who showed the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


importance of dielectronic recombination, a process which 
can proceed via doubly excited autoionizing states. The 
process of dielectronic recombination is: 


Xo pe => (XM > XM + hv (6) 


where an electron is captured by an ion with charge 
(m + 1)+ to form a doubly excited state ( )** of an ion 
X with charge m+. This ion can then either autoionize 
back again or undergo a spontaneous radiative transition 
of the inner excited electron to a state below the first 
ionization limit. Dielectronic recombination isnow known 
to be the dominant recombination mechanism at high 
temperatures, for example in the solar corona. It is at least 
a factor of twenty higher than radiative recombination. 

The inverse process to dielectronic recombination is 
autoionization: 


(XM) my KODE 4 ol, (7) 


The coronal model approximation 

The atomic processes which determine the populations of 
the low-lying levels in an atom or ion in the solar corona 
are excitation by electron (e) or proton (H*) impact: 


XP +e (") > XP +e (A) (8) 


and radiative processes, spontaneous ratiative decay 
and photoexcitation (the excitation by absorption of 
photospheric radiation) 

For optically allowed (electric dipole transitions) 
which give rise to spectral lines in the UV, EUV and x-ray 
wavelength ranges, the coronal model approximation is 
usually valid. The population, N;(X""*), of the upper level, 
j, is determined by electron collisional excitation from the 
ground state i and radiative decay from j back down to i. 


Ni(X"™*)NeC8; = Nj (X"*) Aj, (9) 


where the spontaneous radiative decay rate is Aj; 
and the electron number density is Ne. The electron 
collisional excitation rate coefficient, Cf jr is obtained by 
integrating the electron impact collision cross section 
over a Maxwellian electron velocity distribution with a 
temperature T.(K). 

For a typical EUV transition, for example from Fe XIV, 
at coronal densities and temperatures, we find that Aj;,; is 
approximately 10’° s~', whereas NeCf; is around unity. 
The population of the upper level j is negligible in 
comparison with that of the ground level i. 

The solution of the electron-ion scattering problem is 
complex and takes a great deal of computing resources. 
The accuracy of a particular calculation depends on two 
main factors. The first is the representation which is 
used for the target, the atom or ion, and the second 
is the type of scattering approximation chosen. The 
main approximations used for electron-ion scattering 
are distorted wave (DW), Coulomb-Bethe (CBe) and the 
more elaborate close-coupling (CC) approximation. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Atomic Processes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NIS. spectrum; 330, — 360 angstroms 


70 

60 4 E 
me Fe XIV Fe XIV 
r 334.2 353.8 
5 504 
7 
o 
* aod Eb 
~ 40 
oO 
2 
® 304 Ee 
2 
® 204 E 
oO 
= 

: oie E 

Le 
0 T if T 4 T 
330 335 340 345 350 355 360 


Wavelength [ angstroms ] 


Figure 2. NIS spectrum in the range 330-360 A taken above an active region on the solar limb. The Fe XIV 334.2 and 353.8 A lines are 


clearly seen. 


DW approximation neglects the coupling of the channels 
(target + scattering electron). Since the scattering electron 
sees a central field potential, the DW approximation is 
only valid for systems which are a few times ionized. 
For high partial wave values of the incoming electron, 
the CBe approximation is valid, when it is assumed 
that the scattering electron does not penetrate the target. 
In the CC approximation, the scattering electron sees 
individual target electrons, the channels are coupled and 
a set of integro-differential equations are solved. The CC 
approximation is the most accurate (better than 5%) but it 
is also the most expensive in terms of computing resources. 

The proton collisional excitation and de-excitation 
rates become comparable with electron collisional pro- 
cesses for transitions where AE; ; < kT., where k is the 
Boltzmann constant. This happens for transitions between 
fine structure levels at high temperatures, for example the 
Fe XIV transition in the ground configuration: 3s73p ?P1/2 
- Psp), 


Solar EUV spectral emission lines 
The EUV wavelength range provides a wealth of spectral 
emission lines from many different elements and ion stages 
(See SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: ULTRAVIOLET AND EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET 
EMISSION). Fe XIV is one of the most important diagnostic 
ions in the solar corona. It is abundant at a temperature 
of about 2 x 10° K. Transitions within Fe XIV give rise to 
spectral lines in the visible (green line, 5303 A) and extreme 
ultraviolet (EUV) wavelength ranges. The transitions 
between the ground configuration (3873p) and excited 
configurations (3s3p?, 3s73d) give rise to strong lines in 
the EUV wavelength range. These have been extensively 
observed with the Coronal Diagnostic Spectrometer on 
SoHo and can be used to determine electron density in the 
solar atmosphere. The transitions and observations are 
illustrated in figures 1 and 2. 

New CC atomic calculations have recently been 
carried out as part of the IRON project for Fe XIV and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


many other coronal ions. The results provide a significant 
advance over previous work. In particular, many of the 
persistent discrepancies between observed and theoretical 
intensity ratios now seem to have been resolved. 


Summary 

The story of solar spectroscopy and the corresponding 
study of atomic processes has been fascinating to follow. 
The requirement for high accuracy atomic data to interpret 
astrophysical spectra has provided the stimulus for the 
development of new techniques in atomic physics. These 
new atomic data have provided the means to probe and 
define the physical parameters in the solar atmosphere. 
The two fields of study have been closely interwoven, 
with a very fruitful return for each. From recent solar 
observations, we know that the solar atmosphere is 
dynamic, constantly changing on all spatial scales. This 
poses an exciting challenge for atomic physics, to interface 
the theoretical solar models with atomic processes. The 
strong possibility exists that the solar plasma is not 
in equilibrium, that assumptions such as Maxwellian 
velocity distributions and ionization equilibrium may no 
longer be tenable. 


Bibliography 

Arnaud M and Raymond J C 1992 Astrophys. J. 398 39 

Fleck B and Svestka Z. (eds) 1997 The First Results from 
SOHO (Amsterdam: Kluwer) 

Gabriel A H and Mason H E 1982 Solar physics Applied 
Atomic Physics Theory vol 1, ed H S W Massey and 
DR Bates (New York: Academic) pp 345-97 

Mason H E and Monsignori-Fossi B C 1994 Spectroscopic 
diagnostics in the VUV for solar and stellar plasmas 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 6 123-79 

Vial J-C, Brocchialini K and Boumier P (eds) 1998 Space 
Solar Physics (Berlin: Springer) 


Helen Mason 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Coherent Plasma Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy: Coherent 
Plasma Emission 


Radio emission from the Sun is highly variable, and often 
much brighter than can be explained in terms of thermal 
radiation from the solar CORONA. The various kinds of non- 
thermal radio emission are called solar radio bursts. 


Frequency ranges 

Solar radio bursts are classified first according to the 
(cyclic) frequency of observation, v, or wavelength, A = 
c/v. The bursts discussed in this section are at decimeter- 
A (v ~ 0.3-3 GHz) and meter-A (v S$ 300 MHz) or longer. 
Decimeter-A bursts are generated low in the corona, meter- 
A bursts at heights ~1 Ro and kilometer-) bursts (observed 
from spacecraft) originate in the interplanetary medium 
(IPM). Emission at higher frequencies in the radio range 
(mm-A and microwaves at 23 GHz) is discussed in SOLAR 
FLARES: RADIO BURSTS. 


Dynamic spectra 

The classification of a radio burst is based primarily on its 
appearance ona dynamic spectrum, which shows v versus 
time t with the intensity of emission represented by a gray 
scale, cf figure 1. Important characteristics of bursts are 
their drift rate, ) = dv/dt, their bandwidth Av (at fixed 
t), their duration At (at fixed v), harmonic structure and 
other fine structures. 


Polarization 

Solar radio bursts are usually partially circularly polar- 
ized. This is interpreted in terms of the birefringence of 
the coronal plasma, whose ordinary mode (o-mode) and 
extraordinary mode (x-mode) have their electric vectors 
rotating in the opposite and same senses, respectively, as 
electrons gyrate in the magnetic field. 


Brightness temperature 

The brightness temperature, 7,, is related to the specific 
intensity, /(v) (the power per unit area, per unit solid 
angle per unit frequency), by [(v) = 2v’kT,/c”, where k 
is Boltzmann’s constant. A RADIOTELESCOPE measures the 
flux density, and this is divided by the relevant solid angle 
to find /(v). A radioheliograph uses interferometry to 
measure the angular size of sources directly. Emission 
is non-thermal if 7, exceeds the temperature of the 
plasma in the source region. For incoherent emission 
kT, cannot exceed the energy of the emitting particles. A 
coherent emission mechanism is required when this limit 
is exceeded. 


Emission mechanisms 

Most meter-A and decimeter-A solar radio bursts require a 
coherent emission mechanism and most are interpreted 
in terms of plasma emission, which results in either 
fundamental (F) emission near the plasma frequency, 
vp = 90(n-/10® cm~?)"* MHz, or second harmonic (H) 
emission at v © 2vp. Theory predicts that the F component 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


+ 1973 JUNE 28 


Frequency (MHz) 


23h7m 2ahzgmn 23h 29m 


Figure 1. Example of a dynamic spectrum showing type III 
bursts drifting rapidly from higher to lower frequencies. The 
horizontal lines are interference. 


should be highly polarized in the sense of the o-mode, 
and the H component weakly polarized in the same sense. 
This contrasts with the x-mode polarization typical of 
gyromagnetic emission, which is due to electrons gyrating 
in a magnetic field, B. Incoherent gyromagnetic emission 
by mildly relativistic electrons, called gyrosynchrotron 
emission, is the emission mechanism in solar microwave 
bursts. _Gyromagnetic emission can lead to coherent 
emission through electron cyclotron maser emission (ECME), 
which occurs when gyromagnetic absorption by non- 
relativistic particles is negative. ECME causes x-mode 
radiation to grow at just above the cyclotron frequency, 
vp = 2.8 x 10'°B Hz, where B is in gauss. Plasma emission 
is effective in weakly magnetized plasmas (vg < vp), 
and ECME requires v, < 0.3vg. The coherent emission 


~N 


mechanisms are discussed in more detail below. 


Meter-A and decimeter-\ bursts 

Meter-A bursts were originally classified (in 1950) into 
three types, denoted type I, type II and type III, according 
to their appearance on a dynamic spectrum. Later 
(circa 1960) this classification was extended to include 
types IV and V bursts. Detailed investigation of bursts 
at decimeter-A started in the late 1970s. 


Type III bursts and related bursts 

Type III bursts were originally identified due to their rapid 
drift (b ~ —0.01v'**, with v in MHz), short duration 
(At ~ 220/v, with v in MHz) and a relatively broad 
bandwidth (Av ~ At |v|) at a given time due to their high 
drift rate. A significant fraction of type III bursts exhibit 
harmonic structure: the F and H components are seen 
simultaneously with their frequency ratio, ~1:1.8. There 
is a broad range of 7, for type III bursts in the corona, from 
the lowest detectable value ~10° K to a maximum value 
that increases with decreasing frequency from ~10!' K 
at ~100 MHz to ~10'° K at ~30 kHz. Proportionally 
higher values of 7, are implied if the apparent sizes are 
scatter images of much smaller actual sources; a strong 
indication that they are scatter images is that the height 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Coherent Plasma Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in the corona of an apparent source is determined by 
its frequency, rather than by whether it is an F or a H 
component. The bursts at ~100 MHz are usually weakly 
circularly polarized (<0.15) in the sense of the o-mode, and 
occasionally the polarization is moderately high (~0.5) 
for the F component. The H component is more weakly 
polarized in the same sense. 

There are various subclasses of type III bursts. 
Inverted-U bursts turn over at some minimum frequency 
and then drift back from lower to higher frequency 
(interpreted as an electron beam propagating along a 
magnetic loop that closes very high in the corona). J 
bursts are similar to U bursts without the return stroke. 
In type V bursts the turnover in frequency is replaced by a 
long-duration continuum. About 10% of F components 
of type III bursts are type IIB bursts, which consist of 
stria bursts (fine structures with double or triple splitting 
drifting more slowly than a type III burst), with an 
envelope similar to the profile of a type III burst. 

Type II bursts are characteristic of the impulsive 
phase of solar flares: groups of several to several tens of 
type III bursts are associated with small to moderate-sized 
flares. There are also non-flare associated storm type III 
bursts. The exciting agency for a type III burst is a beam 
of energetic electrons propagating outward through the 
corona. These beams often continue through the IPM past 
the orbit of the Earth (vy, ~ 30 kHz), and to beyond the 
orbits of the GIANT PLANETS. The properties of the electron 
beams can be measured in situ at the orbit of the Earth, 
where a typical electron beam contains ~10° electrons 
over an area ~1 AU’. The fastest electrons (v ~ 0.6c) arrive 
first, after which a power-law spectrum builds up and joins 
on smoothly to the ambient thermal distribution when 
the slower electrons arrive. A single interplanetary event, 
which lasts for ~1 h, corresponds to many overlapping 
groups of type III bursts at ~100 MHz. The mean energy of 
the electrons in storm type III events is significantly lower, 
~2 keV, than in flare-associated type III events, ~10 keV. 


Type II bursts 

Type II bursts are slowly drifting (~MHz s~') and narrow- 
band (a few MHz at ~100 MHz). They are excited by flare- 
generated shock waves propagating outward through the 
corona. Both F and H components may be present, and 
they have polarization similar to type III bursts. The 
bursts sometimes exhibit band splitting in which the F 
and/or H component splits in two (Av/v ~ 0.1) or 
multiple-lane structures in which multiple splitting occurs. 
Some bursts exhibit herringbone structure in which type- 
Ill-like bursts emanate from a ‘backbone’ of emission, 
and propagate either to lower or to higher frequencies. 
Type II bursts are sometimes seen in the IPM, although 
most fade from view at <1 MHz, and most shocks in the 
IPM are not associated with type II bursts. Type II bursts 
are statistically associated with coronal transients, but the 
relation is not one-to-one. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Storms: type I emission 

Type I emission is not associated with flares, but occurs 
in storms that can last for hours to days. Storms can 
include type I bursts, a type I continuum and type III 
bursts (type I-III storm). Type I emission is restricted 
to 2100 MHz, and storm type III bursts to S100 MHz; 
it appears that these originate from, respectively, closed 
and open magnetic structures in the solar corona, with the 
type L-III transition indicating the boundary between the 
closed and open regions. Type I emission is restricted to a 
few tens of megahertz, suggesting that the source is high 
in the corona, just below this transition. 

Type I emission differs from types II and III emission 
in that it is strongly (~100%) circularly polarized, and in 
that there is only F emission with no H component. Type I 
bursts have Av ~ 5 MHz, At ~ 0.3 s at 200 MHz and 
T, < 10° K. The bursts can drift to either higher or lower 
frequencies, with most bursts having negligible drift. 
Sometimes bursts line up on a dynamic spectrum to form 
a chain which drifts to either higher or lower frequencies 
at ~0.3 MHz s7!. Type I sources are directional, and are 
rarely visible near the solar limb. The type I continuum, 
which may occur with or without type I bursts, appears 
to be a distinct phenomenon rather than many unresolved 
bursts. 


Continuum emission: type IV bursts 

There are several different classes of radio continuum, 
that is, broad emission in frequency and time with 
little structure on a dynamic spectrum (see SOLAR 
SPECTROSCOPY: CONTINUUM RADIO EMISSION AND DIAGNOSTICS). 
The name type IV bursts was originally defined to describe 
continuum emission, but it is appropriate to use more 
specific descriptive names, such as flare continuum which 
is directly associated with flares, type I continuum which 
occurs in storms, and moving type IV bursts which drift to 
lower frequencies and are interpreted as gyrosynchrotron 
emission from plasmoids drifting out through the corona. 


Decimeter-d bursts 
Type IIIDM bursts are type-III-like bursts at decimeter-A. 
They are related to flare-associated meter-A type III bursts. 
Spike bursts are short-duration (0.1 s) narrow-band 
(Av/v < 0.03), highly polarized bursts which may have 
very short (~10 ms) rise or decay times. They can occur in 
the range ~300 MHz-8 GHz, and at the highest frequencies 
can occur in clusters of up to 10* bursts. They are 
strongly correlated with flares, but are observed in only 
a few per cent of flares. The favored (but still uncertain) 
interpretation is: (a) that they are due to ECME generated 
by beams of electrons, and (b) that they represent the basic 
fragmentation of the energy release in flares. 


Theory of solar radio emission 

The basic concepts in the theory of the coherent emission 
mechanisms for solar radio bursts are well established but 
uncertainties remain in the details of the applications. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Coherent Plasma Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


coalescence of 


two Langmuir waves 


second harmonic 
transverse waves 


Electron stream 


streaming instability 
Langmuir turbulence 


scattering by 


ion acoustic waves 


scattered 
Langmuir waves 


scattering by 
ion acoustic waves 


fundamental 
transverse waves 


Figure 2. Flow diagram for the generation of plasma emission. In this variant of the theory the nonlinear processes involve ion 


acoustic waves. 


Plasma emission 

The first detailed theory for plasma emission was due to 
Ginzburg and Zheleznyakov in 1958, and although the 
details of the plasma physics have since been updated, 
the basic ideas are unchanged, cf figure 2. The first 
stage involves generation of Langmuir waves, which 
are longitudinal electron plasma oscillations just above 
the plasma frequency. These waves grow in a plasma 
instability, which in the simplest case is the bump-in-tail 
instability due to a beam of suprathermal electrons with 
distribution function, f(v), with a bump, df(v)/dv > 0, 
at the beaming speed, uv». Growth of Langmuir waves 
is a maximum for waves propagating along the beam 
direction (9 = 0) with phase speed, vg S vp, and growth 
is effective only for small ranges of 6 and vy. The 
evolution of the waves and of the particles is described 
by a pair of quasilinear equations. The back reaction 
on the distribution of particles, referred to as quasilinear 
relaxation, involves a smoothing out of the bump to 
form a plateau, df(v)/dv ~ 0. In an inhomogeneous 
beam model, faster electrons outpace slower electrons 
tending to increase d f(v)/dv near the front of the beam, 
and quasilinear relaxation drives the distribution function 
back toward marginal stability where the growth rate 
(xd f(v)/dv at vg = v) is just large enough to overcome 
any damping or losses of the waves. 

The other stages involve nonlinear processes that 
result in partial conversion of the energy in Langmuir 
waves into either F or H transverse waves. The 
nonlinear processes can be either weak turbulence effects, 
involving three-wave interactions, or strong turbulence 
effects. The weak turbulence effects indicated in figure 2 
require that low-frequency (e.g. ion-acoustic) waves be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


present, and these must be generated independently 
of the Langmuir waves. The three-wave processes 
saturate when the 7, of the F or H emission reaches 
approximately the effective temperature of the Langmuir 
waves, which can be estimated from the theory of the 
bump-in-tail instability. The required low-frequency 
waves have wavenumbers approximately equal to those 
of the Langmuir waves generated in the instability, and the 
three-wave interactions favor producing either transverse 
waves, resulting in F emission, or backward Langmuir 
waves, which can coalesce with the initial Langmuir 
waves to produce H emission. The evolution of the 
spectrum of Langmuir waves due to these three-wave 
interactions is toward higher phase speeds until they 
collect in a condensate at very high vg. Three-wave 
interactions involving even lower frequency waves, which 
are a common feature in the IPM, tend to scatter the 
Langmuir waves with little change in vy, so that they 
diffuse in 9. A Langmuir wave spends only a small fraction 
of its time in the small cone of angles about the beam 
direction where it grows, and a much larger fraction of its 
time in other directions where it damps. As a consequence, 
the growth rate has to be quite large to result in net wave 
growth. 

Strong turbulence effects include parametric instabil- 
ities that are counterparts of weak-turbulence effects. One 
example is a decay instability in which the beam-generated 
Langmuir waves act as a pump that produce daughter ion- 
acoustic waves and either (backward) Langmuir waves 
or (F) transverse waves. Another example is a modula- 
tional instability which involves a four-wave interaction 
that tends to drive Langmuir waves to lower vy until they 
approach the thermal speed of electrons when Landau 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Coherent Plasma Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


damping by thermal electrons acts as an energy sink. An 
intrinsically strong turbulence effect is Langmuir collapse, 
in which the Langmuir wave energy collects in localized 
regions called cavitons. A caviton grows due to refraction 
of Langmuir waves into the underdense region increasing 
the local energy density in the waves, and the ponderomo- 
tive force due to the gradient in this energy density drives 
plasma out of the caviton, further decreasing its density. 


Interpretation of in situ data 

Direct confirmation of the theory of plasma emission 
comes from in situ data on type III events in the IPM and 
from analogous emission from planetary bow shocks. The 
Langmuir waves observed in association with the type III 
electrons are highly spatially inhomogeneous, in the form 
of localized clumps. The data have not proved definitive in 
deciding between weak and strong turbulence effects, with 
evidence supporting both. The shape of the distribution 
function is consistent with the inhomogeneous beam 
model, and the observed values of J, are of the same order 
as those expected for the saturation model. There is direct 
evidence for the decay instability: ion-acoustic waves 
with the expected properties are observed, especially in 
planetary bow shocks. However, there is no compelling 
evidence for Langmuir collapse: the clumps of Langmuir 
waves are too large to be cavitons. A statistical distribution 
of the electric fields in the clumps is consistent with a 
stochastic growth theory in which an individual burst of 
growth increases the energy density from Wo to W = eoWo, 
with G a random variable. 


Electron cyclotron maser emission (ECME) 

ECME results when gyromagnetic absorption by nonrel- 
ativistic particles is negative. The most favored case is 
for a loss-cone instability, in which there is a deficiency of 
electrons with small pitch angles. A loss cone is present 
in the reflected electrons when precipitation preferentially 
removes the electrons with small pitch angles at a foot- 
point of a magnetic loop. ECME causes x-mode radiation 
to grow at just above vg. A serious problem with applica- 
tion of ECME to solar radio emissions is that it should be 
reabsorbed by thermal electrons at the second (v = 2vg) 
harmonic layer. Suggestions as to how this difficulty might 
be overcome or avoided include (a) emission at higher 
harmonics above the second harmonic absorption layer, 
(b) tunneling through this layer and (c) escape through 
windows in @. However, each of these introduces other 
difficulties, and interpretation of any solar emissions in 
terms of ECME should be regarded as tentative until it can 
be shown how the radiation can escape. An interpretation 
in terms of plasma emission should not be excluded. 


Propagation through the solar corona 

Local inhomogeneities in the coronal plasma cause local 
variations in the refractive index n(v) = (1 — ve /v?)'/? of 
transverse waves, and hence lead to coronal scattering. 
This scattering tends to increase the angular size of 
the source, which opposes the systematic refraction into 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the radial direction due to the average coronal density 
gradient. In addition to scattering, there is strong evidence 
for ducting for some bursts, in which the radiation is 
guided from its actual source to a much greater height 
where it is scattered to produce an apparent source. 
Observations suggest that the observed meter-A sources 
are scatter images, that are much higher and larger than 
the actual sources. Propagation effects also modify the 
polarization. In particular, although the ~100% o-mode 
POLARIZATION of many type I bursts confirms the prediction 
of the theory of plasma emission for plausible values of 
B in the source region, the much weaker polarization in 
type III and type II emission, and for type I sources as they 
approach the solar limb, imply that depolarization occurs. 
Depolarization is probably due to reflections off overdense 
structures in the corona converting pure o-mode radiation 
into a mixture of o-mode and x-mode radiation. 


Bibliography 

Bastian T S, Benz A O and Gary D E 1998 Radio emission 
from solar flares Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 131- 
87 

McLean D J and Labrum N R 1985 Solar Radiophysics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Melrose D B 1986 Plasma Astrophysics vols I and II (New 
York: Gordon and Breach) 

Melrose D B 1991 Collective plasma radiation processes 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 29 31-57 


DB Melrose 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Continuum Radio Emission and 
Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy: Continuum 
Radio Emission and Diagnostics 


The Sun is a strong radio source (one of the first objects 
detected by radio telescopes) and radio observations can 
provide information on structures throughout the solar 
atmosphere. Radio techniques allow high-quality images 
with arcsecond resolution to be achieved, and different 
radio frequencies provide access to different layers of 
the solar atmosphere. This section discusses incoherent 
emission from thermal plasma in the non-flaring solar 
atmosphere; other relevant material may be found in SOLAR 
SPECTROSCOPY: COHERENT PLASMA EMISSION and. in SOLAR FLARES: 
RADIO BURSTS. 


Emission mechanisms 

Three different emission mechanisms are the dominant 
sources of continuum radio opacity in the non-flaring solar 
atmosphere, and their contrasting properties allow them 
to be exploited in different ways. An important feature 
of radio emission from the solar atmosphere is that the 
presence of magnetized plasma breaks the degeneracy 
between the two electromagnetic modes and leads in 
general to very different opacities for them. In particular, 
the mode in which the electric vector rotates with the 
same sense as the gyration motion of an electron about 
a magnetic field (known as the extraordinary or X mode) 
interacts more strongly with radiating electrons than the 
mode with the opposite sense of rotation of the electric 
vector (the ordinary or O mode). RADIO TELESCOPES typically 
make images in the two oppositely circularly polarized 
electromagnetic modes which correspond to the natural 
radiation modes of the plasma: differences between the 
two modes result in polarized emission which reflects 
the conditions in the radio source and is often a valuable 
diagnostic. 


Free-free or bremsstrahlung emission 

This is the name given to the electromagnetic interaction 
occurring when a free electron collides with a positively 
charged ion. In the solar atmosphere protons and helium 
make up the bulk of the ions: at temperatures of 10* Kand 
higher, all hydrogen atoms are ionized and the atmosphere 
is a plasma dominated by free electrons and protons. The 
opacity of this mechanism is proportional to the product 
of the electron and ion charge densities and inversely 
proportional to the square of frequency and to temperature 
to the power 1.5. It is therefore particularly effective at high 
densities, low frequencies and low temperatures. This 
mechanism can produce mildly polarized emission. 


Thermal gyroresonance emission 

An electron moving in a magnetic field gyrates about the 
field direction with a characteristic frequency called the 
electron gyrofrequency, vg = 2.8 x 10°B Hz, where the 
magnetic field B is measured in gauss (G). The acceleration 
associated with the gyromotion provides opacity in the 
radio regime at frequencies which are integer multiples 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(harmonics) of vg for magnetic field strengths in the 
range 10-3000 G, which corresponds well to the range 
of magnetic fields seen in the solar atmosphere above 
active regions. Gyroresonance opacity increases strongly 
with temperature, and is much larger when viewed nearly 
orthogonal to the magnetic field direction in the source 
than when viewed parallel to the magnetic field. This 
is the dominant source of opacity in regions of strong 
magnetic fields in the corona, such as above SUNSPOTS. 
This mechanism can produce highly polarized emission 
because of the large difference in the opacities of the X and 
O modes. Strictly speaking this is a resonant mechanism 
(i.e. a given radio frequency is associated with a particular 
value of magnetic field strength), but may be regarded as 
a source of continuum opacity since B varies continuously 
throughout the atmosphere. 

Gyroresonance opacity drops dramatically as har- 
monic number increases. In conditions typical of the so- 
lar corona (electron densities of order 10°-10'° cm-3, tem- 
peratures of order 10° K, length scales 10? cm), the third 
(and lower) harmonic of the gyrofrequency will be opti- 
cally thick in the more strongly interacting polarization 
(the X mode) as long as the line of sight is not nearly par- 
allel to the magnetic field. Since magnetic field strength 
generally decreases with height, emission from the first 
and second harmonic layers originates below the opaque 
third harmonic layer and is not seen, although in the O 
mode the third harmonic layer may be optically thin and 
then the second harmonic layer dominates. Thus a radio 
image of optically thick gyroresonance emission at a given 
frequency v GHz in the polarization corresponding to the 
X mode can be regarded as a map of the temperature on the 
layer corresponding to a constant magnetic field strength 
of v/8.4 x 10° G. 


HT opacity 

As one goes deeper into the solar atmosphere the 
temperature drops below 104 K and the dominant species 
(H and He) become neutral. The total electron and 
proton densities can remain high in the chromosphere 
(temperatures between 5000 and 10000 K) because 
the total density increases rapidly with depth while 
the fractional ionization decreases, but below 5000 K 
essentially all hydrogen is neutral. Free electrons are 
still present at these temperatures due to ionization of 
metals such as sodium, but there are insufficient free 
protons to provide significant free-free opacity. In this 
situation a mechanism involving free electrons and neutral 
H dominates the radio opacity: the electron polarizes 
an H atom and the interaction between the electron and 
the dipolar atom provides opacity known (somewhat 
confusingly) as H~ opacity. From the relevant temperature 
range it is clear that this mechanism is only important 
in the lower atmosphere near the temperature minimum, 
probed by very high frequencies (millimeter wavelengths). 
Circular polarization in the radiation from this mechanism 
is expected to be weak. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Continuum Radio Emission and 
Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The appearance of the Sun at different radio 
frequencies 

The Sun can usefully be studied at all radio frequencies, 
from the ionospheric cutoff of the order of 10 MHz 
(wavelength 4 = 30 m) up to the submillimeter domain 
above 300 GHz (A < 1 mm). Different frequencies 
penetrate to different depths in the solar atmosphere, 
depending on local conditions, so that the appearance of 
the Sun changes dramatically over the radio frequency 
range. 

An important feature of solar radio emission is that 
every frequency becomes optically thick (ie. opaque) at 
some point in the solar atmosphere. Just as we cannot 
see below the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE in visible light, in a radio 
image at a given frequency we cannot see material below 
the optically thick layer. Radio wavelengths lie in the 
Rayleigh-Jeans limit, hv « kT, and therefore the radio 
flux is proportional to the brightness temperature. In the 
optically thick layer the brightness temperature is equal to 
the local electron temperature so that (unlike most other 
diagnostics of the solar atmosphere) radio images can 
often be interpreted directly as temperature maps. Since 
temperature in the solar atmosphere generally increases 
outwards from the temperature minimum (just above the 
photosphere), it is also possible for a radio image to show 
both the emission from the low-lying cooler optically-thick 
layer as well as contributions from hotter optically-thin 
plasma in the overlying atmosphere. 

As noted above, free-free opacity increases rapidly as 
frequency decreases and it dominates the quiet radio Sun 
at low frequencies (plasma emission is also prevalent at 
low frequencies, and is discussed in SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: 
COHERENT PLASMA EMISSION). The whole solar corona is 
optically thick at frequencies below 500 MHz, so that the 
Sun appears as a large relatively featureless source with a 
dimension larger than the solar radius, usually elongated 
in the equatorial direction due to the fact that the solar 
atmosphere is generally of higher density at the equator 
than at the poles. The fact that the low-frequency radio 
Sun had a brightness temperature of the order of 10° K 
was one of the important pieces of evidence which led to 
the discovery of the solar corona. Propagation effects can 
make the radio Sun appear to be larger than the actual 
height of the optically thick surface. Scattering off small- 
scale turbulence in the outer atmosphere and solar wind 
(See SOLAR WIND TURBULENCE) can also supply a frequency- 
dependent lower limit to the spatial resolution which can 
be achieved in an observation. Since the whole corona 
is at a temperature of the order of 1-2 million K, there is 
little contrast between quiet features on the solar disk at 
low frequencies. As is often the case at low frequencies, 
the brightest radio feature in the 0.3 GHz image shown 
in figure 1 (the feature at the right edge of the 0.3 GHz 
disk) is not due to free-free opacity at all, but rather is 
a noise storm (also called type I continuum, a form of 
broadband coherent emission commonly found over very 
active regions in the frequency range 200-500 MHz). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.3 GHz 


500 


arcsec 
oO 


-500 


500 


arcsec 
oO 


-500 


500 


arcsec 
oO 


-500 


-1000 -500 0 500 1000 
arcsec 


Figure 1. The appearance of the Sun at three different radio 
frequencies. The intrinsic resolution is different in each image: it 
is 220” at 0.3 GHz (top), 50” at 1.4 GHz (middle) and 12” at 

4.8 GHz (lower panel). These images were made with the Very 
Large Array radiotelescope on 7 November 1993 (courtesy S 
White). White contours highlighting the brightest features are 
plotted at brightness temperatures of 0.8, 1.2, 1.6, 2.4, 3.2, 4.0, 4.8 
and 5.6 x 10° K. The color table saturates (is black) at 0.8 x 10° K 
at 0.3 GHz, 0.6 x 10° K at 1.4 GHz and 0.1 x 10° K at 4.8 GHz. 
Solar west is to the right. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Continuum Radio Emission and 
Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


As frequency increases above 500 MHz the quiet 
solar atmosphere starts to become optically thin and its 
brightness temperature drops, while the enhanced density 
in the corona above active regions maintains a high 
optical depth and hence high brightness temperatures. 
Thus at 1.4 GHz radio images of the Sun show much 
more contrast between features, depending on their 
density. The background disk has a temperature of 
the order of 10° K at this frequency. In CORONAL HOLES 
and FILAMENT channels where the density is low, the 
brightness temperature is below this value, while in ACTIVE 
REGIONS and PLAGE the brightness temperature remains 
above 10° K. Virtually all the non-flaring radio emission 
seen at 1.4 GHz is believed to be produced by free—free 
emission. Gyroresonance emission is only rarely seen 
at this frequency, possibly because the gyroresonance- 
emitting layers lie below optically thick free—free sources. 

At 4.8 GHz, on the other hand, gyroresonance 
emission produces the brightest features observed in radio 
images. Optically thick free-free emission has never been 
clearly identified at frequencies this high, so that any 
feature with a brightness temperature in excess of 10° K 
at frequencies of 4 GHz or higher is almost certainly a 
gyroresonance source. This is true in the image shown, 
where two sunspots in an active region southwest of 
disk center show up as the only features on the disk 
with coronal brightness temperatures. These are the only 
two locations in the solar corona on this particular day 
where the magnetic field strength exceeded the value 
600 G needed to produce gyroresonance emission at 
4.8 GHz. The other bright features, such as those near 
the east limb, are due to optically thin free-free emission 
from dense structures in the corona (these also show 
up prominently as bright sets of loops in x-ray images), 
and have brightness temperatures of the order of 10° K, 
compared with 10° K over the sunspots. Low-density 
features clearly show up as regions of reduced brightness, 
e.g. within the active-region complex near the east limb, 
and in the filament channel stretching across the northwest 
quadrant. The disk at this frequency is at a brightness 
temperature of the order of 20 000 K, corresponding to the 
lower TRANSITION REGION/Upper CHROMOSPHERE. Optically 
thin coronal emission from features such as active regions 
appears as an additional contribution to the brightness 
temperature, but since it is transparent the underlying 
optically thick chromospheric contribution can still be 
seen. The size of the radio disk at 4.8 GHz is of the order 
of 30” larger than the optical photosphere. 

The brightness temperature contribution of optically 
thin free—free emission scales as v~?, so that at yet higher 
frequencies the optically thin contributions from hot dense 
coronal material diminish rapidly, while the solar disk 
component, being due to optically thick emission from the 
chromosphere, diminishes less rapidly: at 17 GHz it is 
10 000 K. Gyroresonance emission, on the other hand, can 
continue to produce features with brightness temperatures 
in excess of 10° K as long as sufficiently strong magnetic 
fields are present in the corona. The upper limit to coronal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic field strengths is not known, but may be of the 
order of 3000 G (the largest observed field strengths in 
the photosphere are of the order of 5000 G), which could 
produce gyroresonance emission up to 25 GHz. This 
results in contrasts of up to 300 between the brightest 
radio features and the background ‘disk’ brightness 
temperature at frequencies such as 17 GHz. Above the 
highest frequency at which gyroresonance emission is 
effective, there is no form of opacity available which can 
make coronal features optically thick in the quiet solar 
atmosphere and consequently there are no features with 
coronal brightness temperatures: the contrast between 
the disk brightness temperature and the brightest features 
in the radio image is greatly reduced. The height of 
the layer in which a given frequency becomes optically 
thick continues to drop through the chromosphere as 
frequency increases: the brightness temperature of the 
disk component is of the order of 6700 K at 100 GHz and 
5800 K (corresponding to the vicinity of the temperature 
minimum) at 300 GHz, with contrasts only of the order 
of 10% being seen in the images. At these temperatures, 
free-free emission is probably still the dominant source of 
opacity, although H~ opacity may also be contributing. 


Radio continuum diagnostics 

The value of radio diagnostics lies in a number of 
unique characteristics which complement those available 
in other wavelength ranges: (i) radio data provide a 
direct measurement of electron temperature; (ii) again, 
in contrast to most other diagnostics which are optically 
thin above the chromosphere and thus show the emission 
integrated along the line of sight, radio emission is 
optically thick in the solar atmosphere and by using the 
fact that different frequencies become optically thick at 
different heights, multifrequency observations can be used 
to ‘peel away’ successive layers of the atmosphere; and 
(iii) the influence of magnetic fields on radio emission 
allows coronal magnetic fields to be measured directly. At 
present radio observations are the best technique available 
for studying magnetic fields in the corona. 

Free-free emission can be used to study densities 
and temperatures in the solar corona. Radio observations 
of free-free emission complement x-ray and EUV 
observations of the corona well: both are sensitive 
to the dense loops found in the corona above active 
regions, but the radio data are often optically thick 
whereas the x-ray/EUV data are optically thin. The 
fact that the radio emission is optically thick makes 
it particularly sensitive to temperature gradients. The 
radio emission is weighted towards cooler plasma due 
to the (temperature)~'> dependence of free-free opacity. 
Information on abundances can be derived from a 
comparison of the different wavelength regimes, since 
x-ray fluxes depend on the number densities of ions such 
as Fe in specific charge states, while the radio flux depends 
on the number density of protons. 

Observations of gyroresonance emission have wide 
usage in the study of coronal properties above active 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Continuum Radio Emission and 
Diagnostics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


regions, where magnetic fields are strong enough for 
gyroresonance emission to dominate. The fact that it 
is a resonant mechanism results in emission at a given 
frequency coming from a very thin layer of constant 
magnetic field strength: typically B varies by less than 
2% across a gyroresonant layer. The optical depth may 
vary by a factor of 1000 from one harmonic layer to the 
next, which simplifies interpretation since it means that 
only one layer is likely to be contributing to the observed 
flux. Thus observations of gyroresonance emission pick 
out physical conditions in a highly localized region of 
the corona; changing the observing frequency picks out 
a different layer, so that in principle a three-dimensional 
picture of the corona may be developed. There are some 
complications, however, in interpreting gyroresonance 
emission: (i) the highest optically-thick harmonic layer 
is not known in advance: for typical conditions it occurs 
where v = 3vz in the X mode and v = 2vz in the O mode, 
but where the line of sight is parallel to the magnetic field 
the opacity is greatly reduced and one sees down to a lower 
harmonic layer; and (ii) the radio data do not contain any 
independent information on spatial scales, so that one does 
not know what the height of each gyroresonance layer is 
from the radio data alone. 


Solar radio telescopes 

The Sun was first identified as a radio source during 
World War II. In 1942 J S Hey was investigating bursty 
interference in meter-wavelength radar receivers in Britain 
when he noticed that it coincided with a solar flare. Almost 
simultaneously G C Southworth in the U.S. looked for 
and detected steady emission from the Sun at centimeter 
wavelengths. After the war years many veterans of 
the radar effort turned to RADIO ASTRONOMY. A group in 
Australia led by Joe Pawsey developed radio instruments 
for the study of the Sun and carried out pioneering work 
on the classification of solar radio bursts. 

A number of instruments are routinely used to make 
radio images of the Sun at the time of writing. Solar- 
dedicated telescopes include the Nangay radioheliograph 
in France operating at frequencies in the range 150- 
450 MHz, the Owens Valley frequency-agile array in 
the USA in the range 1-18 GHz, and the Nobeyama 
radioheliograph in Japan at 17 and 34 GHz. In Russia 
the RATAN-600 telescope observes in the range 1-20 GHz 
and the Siberian Solar Radio Telescope at 5 GHz. Low- 
frequency facilities previously operated at Culgoora (40- 
320 MHz) in Australia and at Clark Lake (20-110 MHz) in 
the USA. The Very Large Array radiotelescope in the USA 
(0.3-22 GHz) is used for solar observing on an occasional 
basis, and provides a powerful combination of sensitivity, 
spatial resolution and frequency coverage. 


Bibliography 

Bastian T S, Ewell M W Jr and Zirin H 1993 The center- 
to-limb brightness variation of the Sun at 4 = 
850 microns Astrophys. J. 415 364 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dulk G A 1985 Radio emission from the Sun and stars Ann. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 23 169 

Kundu M R 1965 Solar Radio Astronomy (New York: 
Interscience) 

White S M and Kundu M R 1997 Radio observations of 
gyroresonance emission from coronal magnetic fields 
Solar Phys. 174 31 

Zirin H, Baumert BM and Hurford GJ 1991 The microwave 
brightness temperature spectrum of the quiet sun 
Astrophys. J. 370 779 


Stephen White 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Infrared Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy: Infrared 
Emission 


The solar infrared spectrum extends from 1 pm to 
1 mm, nestled between the well-studied visible and 
radio bands. The infrared is rich in spectral proxies of 
temperature, velocity and magnetic field. These range 
from high-excitation He I 1.083 ym, to low-excitation 
molecules like carbon monoxide, hydroxyl, and even 
water vapor (in sunspots), to magnetically sensitive 
atomic iron absorptions near 1.5 wm, and to the curious 
high-Rydberg emissions of Mg I near 12 wm. Local 
thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) applies to many of the 
line formation processes; infrared features are generally 
better tracers of physical conditions than the scattering 
lines of the visible and ultraviolet intervals. Seeing 
(distortions of the telescope images by turbulence in 
the Earth’s atmosphere) also tends to improve toward 
longer wavelengths. However, even the world’s largest 
optical solar telescope—the 1.5 m McMath-Pierce on Kitt 
Peak—is limited by diffraction in and beyond the key 
5 wm region; atmospheric absorption blocks large stretches 
of the thermal IR; and infrared sensor technology lags 
behind its counterparts in the visible and ultraviolet. 
Nevertheless, the fast pace of discoveries makes IR solar 
physics one of the exciting areas of modern astronomy. 


Background 


The infrared generally is considered to extend from 
1 wm on the short-wavelength side, to perhaps 1 mm at 
the longer wavelengths. The lower boundary is about 
where optical CCD camera technology gives way to 
specialized infrared sensors, and the long-wavelength side 
corresponds to the highest frequencies of the radio band. 
Both of these boundaries are somewhat vague, particularly 
the upper side where sub-mm radio technology is making 
serious inroads. Indeed, much of the region between 
20 wm and 1 mm is blocked by the Earth’s atmosphere, 
and the Sun’s disk intensity distribution in that interval 
appears to be a featureless continuum; more akin to the 
radio regime than to the highly structured aBsoRPTION 
SPECTRUM seen at shorter wavelengths. 

Aside from the 1.083 wm triplet of atomic helium, 
there are no prominent high-excitation disk features in 
the spectrum longward of 1 zm. Instead, the infrared is 
dominated by low-excitation species: neutral atoms and 
molecules. 

By their nature, the low-excitation species must arise 
in relatively quiescent gas that is not strongly heated (by 
the processes that cause, for example, the chromospheric 
temperature inversion). Such conditions are found in 
the outer SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE in the supergranulation cell 
interiors (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: SUPERGRANULATION), in the 
interstices between the magnetic network elements (see 
CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK), and in the hearts of SUNSPOT 
UMBRAE (cold because intense vertical magnetic fields 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


suppress the convective heat flux). One of the key low- 
excitation species—carbon monoxide—has given birth to 
the current dominant controversy of infrared solar physics. 
On the one hand, a stigmatic spectrogram of the 
violet Ca II K line (0.393 zm) recorded over a quiet area 
on the solar disk shows unmistakable core emission— 
classic signature of the chromospheric temperature rise— 
over much of the slit length. On the other hand, 
extreme-limb observations of the Av = 1 fundamental 
vibration-rotation bands of CO near 4.7 um reveal 
unexpectedly cool material (T < 4000 K) at high altitudes 
where one traditionally would place the hot chromosphere 
(T ~ 7000 K). That behavior is difficult to reconcile 
with the best available one-dimensional models of the 
solar chromosphere, and forces one to consider a highly 
inhomogeneous description of those ‘layers’. 


Infrared diagnostics 

Several general characteristics of infrared diagnostics will 
be mentioned, followed by more detailed descriptions of 
specific cases. Figure 1 provides examples of some of the 
spectral regions that will be described later, from the quiet 
Sun as well as a mature sunspot umbra. 


General characteristics 

Low-excitation species that form close to LTE. Aside from 
the true ‘chromospheric’ tracer He I 41.083 wm, most of 
the important spectral features longward of 1 wm are 
sensitive to cool gas in the stellar photosphere. Many of the 
infrared features form quite close to local thermodynamic 
equilibrium, particularly the molecules (a very desirable 
attribute from a diagnostic point of view: in LTE, the 
brightness temperature of the core of an absorption line 
corresponds closely to the kinetic temperature in the layers 
in which the line becomes optically thick). 

Furthermore, between 1 4m and 1 mm the continuous 
opacity is dominated by H~ in the photosphere, and by 
p-e” collisions (‘H free-free’ (f-f)) at higher temperatures 
in the chromosphere. The negative hydrogen ion has 
a lone bound-free (b-f) edge at 1.64 wm. There, the 
background opacity of the solar atmosphere reaches its 
minimum value, and tc = 1 penetrates about 20 km 
deeper than at visible wavelengths. Longward of the H™ 
b-f edge, tc = lascends rapidly in altitude owing to the Na 
dependence of the f-f cross section. Beyond about 300 1m, 
the continuum arises at chromospheric altitudes. For all 
intents and purposes, the infrared continuous opacities are 
completely in LTE. 


Linear temperature averaging. An often-cited benefit of the 
spectrum beyond 1 jzm is the linear temperature averaging 
property of the infrared Planck function. In other words, 
the amount of thermal emission is directly proportional to 
the local temperature. That means the average intensity of 
a scene containing a jumble of discrete structures should 
be an evenly weighted mean of the surface temperatures 
of those features. In the ultraviolet, on the other hand, the 
thermal emission is exponentially sensitive to temperature 
(‘Wien limit’ of Planck function). In that situation, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Infrared Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


LAGE TIS It iS Se ae ee a a Oa | 

1105 Mg! E el 4 

Mor ty ow rie a q HN yt (igen 

0.955 Fay ‘1 | 

O90 beet erie pee ie Pe ep eg 

12.228 12.316 12.320 12.324 
T 


NI APTA 


1.0 


0.8 


0.6 
Carbon Monoxide Av= 1 


Tt 


0.4 


ESE cae Pee er ee) eS Wn Yl [i ae eI ey He oe Ee 


4.55 4.60 4.65 4.70 4.75 
1.0 eee 
3 \ ‘aye Vall, ME ‘ iN, Vv 

\ 1 


4.664 4.666 4.668 4.670 


RELATIVE INTENSITY 


1.0 xT SE == a 
0.8F fe] (o] 
0.6 Fe] Vy 7 


4 
Piritiiitiiit J 


T 

ie) 
a5) 
fo) 
a 


0.45 


1.5652 1.5654 


WAVELENGTH (jm) 


1.5656 1.5658 


Figure 1. Selected wavelength intervals from the IR spectrum of 
the quiet photosphere (solid curves), and a sunspot (dashed). 
The sunspot shows generally greater spectral complexity than 
the quiet photosphere, owing to enhancement of low-excitation 
species in the cold umbra, and to Zeeman splitting (the ‘o’ 
components of Fe I 41.565 in the bottom panel) of magnetically 
sensitive lines in the multi-kilogauss fields. (Courtesy National 
Solar Observatory Digital Archive.) 


the average intensity of a scene can be completely 
dominated by a single hot spot, and the deduced average 
temperature could be quite misleading. Of course, the 
best approach (although technically challenging) is to view 
a region simultaneously in the ultraviolet and infrared, 
to utilize the complementary temperature responses to 
better constrain the mix of thermal structures present. 
The full benefit of the linear temperature averaging is 
achieved for diagnostics that form close to LTE, like the 
CO Av = 1 bands or the f-f continuum. However, one 
must be cautious in practical applications. In particular, 
one views the thermal emission at the ‘surface’ where 
the gas becomes optically thick (opaque). Where that 
surface occurs, and thus what temperature is sampled, 
depends on the opacity of the medium at the wavelength of 
observation. Even though the infrared thermal emissivity 
depends linearly on temperature, there is no guarantee 
that the opacity does as well. For example, the f- 
f optical depth depends on the electron and proton 
densities, which vary exponentially with temperature over 
the narrow range 5000-8000 K owing to the ionization 
of atomic hydrogen. Thus, in a jumble of structures, 
the tc * 1 surfaces could occur at a wide range of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


physical heights and temperatures: the hotter structures 
become opaque high up, while the colder ones are more 
transparent, allowing one to view conditions deeper in. 
The temperature averaging might well be linear, but it 
could be an uncontrolled average over a wide range of 
heights, and thus of little diagnostic value. 


Magnetic leverage. Magnetic fields are pivotal in shaping 
the discrete thermal features of the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE, 
CHROMOSPHERE, and CORONA, and are probably responsible 
for a large proportion of the mechanical heating, 
particularly at high altitudes. The central role of magnetic 
fields in the solar atmosphere is probably replayed among 
all late-type convective stars in the cool half of the 
HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM. The Zeeman splitting of a 
spectral line in the presence of a magnetic field goes as 


Akg ~ gL Bi 


where gy, is a factor that depends on properties of the 
radiating atom, B is the strength of the longitudinal 
component of the surface magnetic field, and A is the 
wavelength of the spectral line. The intrinsic, non- 
magnetic width of the line usually is controlled by random 
thermal and turbulent motions in the gas, and scales as 


Ady ~ (v/c)a 


where v is the velocity dispersion and c is the speed of light. 
Thus, the magnetic splitting becomes more prominent 
with respect to the non-magnetic line width as one moves 
to longer wavelengths, and correspondingly easier to 
measure. Accordingly, the infrared is well-suited for 
magnetic investigations, particularly of intrinsically weak 
fields. Furthermore, cool surface features like sunspot 
umbrae show much less intensity contrast against the 
surrounding hotter photosphere in the infrared than in 
the visible (again, due to linear temperature averaging at 
the longer wavelengths, versus exponential at the shorter). 
Consequently, dilution of the umbral light by scattered 
photospheric radiation is much less of a problem. Thus, 
the infrared is a good place to measure fine structure in the 
strong fields of sunspots. 


Specific examples 

He I 41.083 wm. The He I A1.083 ym triplet is the 
most prominent high-excitation feature that falls in the 
infrared, and one of the most widely used in ground- 
based monitoring of chromospheric and coronal structure. 
The importance of the He I absorption is in how it forms. 
The high-lying metastable state in the He I term system is 
populated primarily by recombination of He* ions. The 
latter are produced by photoionization of chromospheric 
atomic helium by coronal XUV radiation that penetrates 
into the lower atmosphere. The absorption of the outward 
streaming photospheric continuum by the highly excited 
chromospheric He I strengthens in areas that are strongly 
illuminated by the hard coronal radiation and weakens 
in areas where the coronal back-radiation is less. High 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Infrared Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


contrast x-ray features like CORONAL HOLES (which play a 
central role in the soLaR WIND and are thus prime targets for 
SPACE WEATHER PREDICTIONS) leave an imprint on He I 41.083 
absorption maps, and can be identified routinely from the 
ground. He I also is used in studies of SOLAR FLARES and 
SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION. High-resolution spectroscopy 
yields the total absorption strength, the line depth and 
the Doppler shift. Relating these empirical quantities 
to the dynamics, heating, and XUV back-illumination of 
the upper chromosphere requires sophisticated numerical 
simulations. 


Other high-excitation lines. A few features formed under 
truly coronal conditions (temperatures in excess of a 
million K) are known in the infrared; mostly forbidden 
ground-state fine structure transitions in coronal ions, such 
as a pair of Fe XII lines near 1.08 xm and Si X 41.43 wm. 
Although the lines are quite faint, and must be recorded 
off-limb away from the glare of the photosphere, they have 
diagnostic potential for coronal densities and perhaps 
magnetic fields. The infrared coronal spectrum is still 
largely unexplored at high sensitivity, however, owing to 
the lack of a suitable large-aperture coronagraphic facility, 
although the McMath-Pierce telescope undoubtedly will 
see more use in this area over the coming years. 


The opacity minimum. The H~ opacity minimum at 1.63 wm 
allows one to ‘see’ deeper into the solar atmosphere 
than at any other wavelength. By comparing infrared 
opacity minimum pictures with simultaneous, co-spatial 
filtergrams taken at shorter continuum wavelengths and in 
Ca K, one can follow the vertical divergence, for example, 
of hot gas entrained in flux tube fields from the deep 
photosphere out to the chromosphere itself (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). The recent availability of 
large-format high-sensitivity infrared cameras has made 
such experiments practical. The diffraction limit of the 
McMath-Pierce at 1.6 wm is about 0.3”, comparable to 
the optical resolution of the (smaller) windowed evacuated 
solar telescopes typically used for visible imaging. (The 
vacuum telescopes are often suitable for 1.6 zm work, but 
with a correspondingly poorer diffraction limit.) 


Magnetic field measurements beyond 1 wm. Solar infrared 
magnetography was pioneered by J Harvey and DNB Hall 
in the mid-1970s. Hall’s 1974 Atlas of the Infrared Sunspot 
Spectrum contains many low-excitation absorption lines 
that are completely split ina ~2 kG longitudinal field: Til 
42.23 um (a°P;-z°D§) is the premier example. Solanki, 
Biémont and Muiirset have published a list of interesting 
lines in the interval 1.5-1.8 wm, including many that 
exhibit large Stokes V amplitudes in the quiet network. 
A popular target of recent magnetic studies has been 
the simple Zeeman triplet Fe I 41.565 wm. The high- 
Rydberg transitions of Mg I at 12 4m (see below) also have 
substantial magnetic sensitivity, although the observations 
are challenging and the spatial resolution is limited by 
diffraction. POLARIMETRY in the He I 41.083 zm line allows 
magnetic fields in the chromospheric layers to be mapped. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Molecules. Awide variety of diatomic molecules, including 
many isotopic variants, are found in the infrared spectrum 
longward of 1 um. The only triatomic species known is 
water vapor, and it is found exclusively in the deep high- 
density layers of cold sunspot umbrae (the formation of 
polyatomic species generally requires high pressures, in 
addition to cool temperatures). Many of the abundant 
diatomics have their principal vibration—rotation bands 
(arising within the electronic ground state of the molecule) 
in the 1-15 wm interval. 

The low-energy rotationally split vibrational tran- 
sitions are collisionally excited (and quenched) by the 
abundant moderate-speed hydrogen atoms, and the 
‘collisionally-controlled’ lines thus form quite close to LTE. 
Typical atoms and ions, on the other hand, have higher- 
energy visible/ultraviolet transitions that are collisionally 
coupled mostly to the much rarer high-speed electrons in 
the gas. For such lines, photon scattering delocalizes the 
radiation formation, and degrades the diagnostic poten- 
tial. 

Another advantage of the molecular bands is 
that they typically contain thousands of very similar 
lines. The redundancy allows statistical techniques 
to be applied, and is valuable in the infrared where 
the spectrum is fragmented by molecular absorptions 
in the Earth’s atmosphere (see §58 of C W Allen’s 
Astrophysical Quantities ). Furthermore, the populations 
in the vibrational ladder of a typical molecule are very 
sensitive to temperature, and the molecular spectra are 
thus nearly ideal ‘thermometers’, at least for the cooler 
zones of the solar atmosphere. 

The infrared contains strong absorption bands from 
CO, CH, OH and NH. Of these, carbon monoxide 
completely dominates the spectral character of the 
1-10 wm region, contributing about half of the strong 
lines of solar origin. CO is the most abundant molecule 
at the relatively warm temperatures of the high solar 
photosphere (T < 5000 K), owing to its large dissociation 
potential (11 eV) and the fact that its photoionization 
and photodissociation thresholds fall shortward of H I 
Lya (121 nm), the strongest emission feature of the 
ultraviolet chromospheric spectrum. Molecular hydrogen 
also is quite abundant, but is a homonuclear species and 
thus lacks the significant dipole moment required for a 
(permitted) vibration—rotation spectrum. 

Near limb observations (for which the extreme slant 
angle causes the t ~ 1 emitting surface to move upward 
to high altitudes) of the Av = 1 fundamental bands of CO 
at 4.7 um show surprisingly cool gas, with temperatures 
as low as ~3700 K, at heights where one ordinarily would 
place the chromosphere (with its ~7000 K temperatures, 
too hot for molecules to form). The existence of CO 
at high altitudes is completely at odds with the best 
available one-dimensional reference models (e.g., of the 
‘Harvard school’). The dichotomy—hot chromosphere 
seen in Ca II K and cold ‘comosphere’ deduced from the 
CO infrared bands—highlights the present uncertainties 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Infrared Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


concerning the crucial interface where the radiation- 
dominated photosphere gives way to the mechanically 
heated chromosphere. 

Further discussion of the CO fundamental bands can 
be found in the entry on CHROMOSPHERE: THERMALBIFURCATION. 


The 12 ym High-Rydberg emission lines. In the early 
1980s, F Murcray and his collaborators, and independently 
J Brault and RW Noyes, called attention to several curious 
emission features in the 12 4m region of the solar spectrum. 
These quickly were identified as high-Rydberg transitions 
of magnesium and aluminum. Mg 7h-6g (12.22 wm) and 
Mg 7i-6h (12.33 wm), in particular, exhibit striking Zeeman 
sensitivity. 

Subsequently, it was found that Mg I 412.33 wm 
showed a large velocity response to the photospheric 
p-mode oscillations at disk center, with a peak-to-peak 
amplitude of more than 1000 m s~!, comparable with what 
is seen in strong CO Av = 1 lines. Curiously, however, 
intensity oscillations like those in CO were lacking. The 
velocity response pegged the line formation altitude in the 
high photosphere (rather than the chromosphere where 
traditional ‘emission’ lines arise), and the lack of intensity 
oscillations pointed to a non-LTE formation mechanism. 

The latter has been clarified recently by a number 
of authors, who have demonstrated that population 
inversions can happen naturally in the high-Rydberg 
systems of species for whom the next ionization stage up 
is the most abundant under the conditions of the upper 
photosphere (e.g. Mg*, here). The uppermost levels of 
the neutral atom near the ionization limit are strongly tied 
by collisions to the (fixed) ion ground state population, 
but levels further down the ladder are progressively more 
coupled to the lowest-lying states of the atom by radiative 
transitions; the resulting ‘photon suction’ depletes the 
lower levels of the high-Rydberg transitions more than 
the upper levels, producing a population inversion that in 
turn drives the line cores into emission, without the usual 
agency of a chromospheric temperature rise. 

The large Zeeman sensitivity of the 12 jm lines 
makes them appealing for magnetic studies, although 
substantial improvements in sensor technology and 
telescope aperture will be required to fully exploit their 
diagnostic promise. 


Far-infrared continuum. Sub-millimeter continua provide 
a unique view of the solar chromosphere at a wide 
range of altitudes, complementary to the more familiar 
visible tracers like Ca K and Ha. 850 um maps of 
the solar chromosphere have been obtained by raster- 
scanning the 15 m James Clerk Maxwell Telescope 
(7CMT) on Mauna Kea across an ACTIVE REGION. The 
resulting sub-millimeter image closely resembles Ca K 
pictures: the dense hot PLAGE surrounding the spot groups 
appears strongly enhanced in sub-millimeter brightness 
temperature. Counterintuitively, the sunspots themselves 
also are bright, with intensities comparable with their 
surroundings. Thus, while the heat flux through the 
lower atmosphere of the sunspot is strongly suppressed, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


producing the dark umbra at visible wavelengths, 
the outer atmosphere apparently receives a normal 
dose of mechanical heating, leading to more uniform 
chromosphere at the high altitudes where the 850 wm 
radiation arises. 

As with the 12 um Mg I lines, significant advances in 
instrumentation will be required to fully utilize the 150- 
850 xm continuum region (the lower end of which also 
is mostly blocked by terrestrial absorption and must be 
recorded from high-altitude balloons). The most pressing 
need is for higher angular resolution: the JCMT can 
achieve a diffraction-limited beam of only about 15”. 


Summary 

The infrared spectrum contains valuable diagnostics of 
physical conditions in the solar photosphere, chromo- 
sphere and corona. Infrared solar studies have a long 
history, although the pace of discovery has speeded up 
considerably in the 1990s with the development of sensi- 
tive large format cameras for the 1-5 wm region. Detection 
of ultra-cool gas in the hot chromosphere, traced by carbon 
monoxide, remains the major controversy that the infrared 
has brought to present-day solar physics. The infrared un- 
doubtedly will yield additional puzzles, and perhaps new 
contradictions, as it is further explored; and exploited as 
a complement to traditional visible and ultraviolet remote 
sensing of solar atmospheric structure. Nevertheless, a 
major impediment is the lack of a large-aperture infrared- 
optimized solar telescope to achieve the high spatial reso- 
lution that is mandatory for modern investigations of our 
nearby star. 


Bibliography 

Kuhn J R and Penn M J (ed) 1995 Infrared Tools for 
Solar Astrophysics: What’s Next? (Singapore: World 
Scientific) 

Rabin D M, Jefferies J T and Lindsey C (ed) 1994 Infrared 
Solar Physics (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


T R Ayres 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Ultraviolet and Extreme Ultravi- 
olet Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy: Ultraviolet and 
Extreme Ultraviolet Emission 


Vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) emission is defined as that 
electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths shorter than 
2000 A. Its name comes from the fact that light shorter 
than 2000 A is strongly absorbed by most gases and, in 
particular, the atmosphere. VUV is usually divided into 
far ultraviolet (FUV) extending from 1200 to 2000 Aand the 
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) in the range 300 to 1200 A. The 
spectral features of these wavelengths will be discussed 
with the focus on the spectral emission lines. Continuum 
radiation will only be discussed briefly. One can ask why 
is it interesting to observe the VUV emission from the Sun? 
There are several important reasons for this as it provides 
important information on: 


@ physical properties of the solar and stellar atmospheres 


e fundamental mechanisms responsible for heating the 
corona and accelerating the solar wind 


e@ how VUV variability alters the dynamics and chemistry 
of the Earth’s upper atmosphere 


@ possible influence on the Earth’s climate due to 
variations in the VUV irradiance from the Sun. 


In this article the main focus will be on the first two 
items while the latter two are discussed in more detail 
elsewhere (see EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE, SOLAR IRRADIANCE, SOLAR- 
TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: LONG-TERM AND SHORT-TERM CLIMATE 
VARIABILITY. 


Historical background of VUV observations 

The solar ultraviolet (FUV) and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) 
emission contain a number of strong emission lines and 
continua well suited for quantitative plasma diagnostics 
of the solar atmosphere. Our entire knowledge of 
temperatures, densities, emission measures, mass motions 
and elemental abundances comes from high-resolution 
spectral observations in the vacuum ultraviolet. 

The VUV wavelength range is absorbed by oxygen 
and ozone in the Earth’s atmosphere and hence is 
totally inaccessible to even the largest ground-based 
telescopes. Below 2000 A the radiation dissociates 
molecular oxygen in the upper atmosphere, indirectly 
resulting in the formation of ozone (O3). To observe the 
Sun, stars and other celestial objects in this wavelength 
range, the instruments must be carried above the 
absorbing atmosphere by means of sounding rockets, 
Earth satellites or space vehicles. Space astronomy 
started in 1946 in the United States when captured V- 
2 rockets became available to navy scientists for use 
as free-flying, high-altitude observatories. It was not 
surprising, under these circumstances, that a group from 
the US Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in Washington, 
DC, became the first to observe the Sun’s ultraviolet 
radiation with a spectrograph mounted on the tail fin 
of a V-2 rocket. Since then much progress has been 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


made in solar high-resolution spectroscopy from space 
(See SPACE INSTRUMENTATION, SPECTROGRAPHS: HIGH-RESOLUTION 
SPECTROGRAPHS). A large number of experiments have been 
launched to observe the EUV and UV portions of the solar 
spectrum. 

Measurements of the solar UV spectral energy 
distribution are often divided into two groups. Some 
instruments use only a spectrometer and observe the 
spectral irradiance of the integrated solar disk. The 
irradiance measurements are designed to study the Sun’s 
radiant energy output and its variability, and thus require 
very high photometric accuracy and instrument stability. 
Other instruments employ an imaging device followed by 
the spectrometer and observe the radiance from a limited 
area of the solar disk. The primary goal with the radiance 
measurements is to differentiate between various emitting 
regions on the Sun. However, it is much more difficult to 
achieve high photometric accuracy because of the more 
complex optics and the often larger number of reflecting 
surfaces. 


Calibration and instrument degradation 

Quantitative measurements of the properties of the solar 
gas should be carried out from intensity calibrated spectra. 
Even without an absolute calibration one can extract useful 
information from the spectral data such as the shapes 
of spectral lines, their wavelength positions as well as 
line ratios. However, to determine how many photons 
actually entered the instrument from the Sun an absolute 
calibration needs to be applied where the reflectivity 
of each optical element of the instrument needs to be 
accounted for. The fact that the reflectivity of the coatings 
used in UV/EUV instruments often degrades with time 
complicates the calibration effort. 

Ultraviolet intensity measurements are particularly 
difficult because the very solar radiation to be measured 
with high precision is itself the main cause of instrument 
degradation. The effect is attributed to contamination 
by organic material, which is outgassing from materials 
used in the instrument design and is subsequently 
photoactivated and deposited on irradiated surfaces. 
The process, although now well understood, is very 
difficult to prevent in complex optical instruments for 
space flight. Comprehensive cleanliness control programs 
during integration of the instruments are used to reduce 
degradation. Most EUV/UV instruments still suffer from 
some sensitivity losses during their operation. Thus, 
intercalibration between different instruments, both on 
satellites and rocket payloads, is being used to determine 
the absolute level of emission from single features on the 
Sun. 


VUV emission lines 

The high-temperature solar atmosphere is the only 
astrophysical plasma source that can be studied with 
high spatial resolution. Much of our understanding 
of STELLAR ATMOSPHERES is based on the understanding of 
plasma processes that occur in the upper solar atmosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Ultraviolet and Extreme Ultravi- 
olet Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


t 
ve} be} Ke) 
107}- BS N oe iN ite) aig | 
7 N s = o> i Sf Ses x 4 Be te 
7 : 25 5 8 8 RK AigSaN 3 2 Te a 
‘ 4gik = eee = ae = 7 SP e-= - 2 ae 
“ So One or = = oft 200 @- 2 ie) nw 
¢ = OT es xo Zz o) 
= =_S_ 
= 10° So OL ME | = 
| 
a | 
3 100° I 
2 i 
3 i} 
10°? | 4 
(3) iH 
o Detector A; slit: 1*120 arcsec’: 01:13 — 03:40UT 
” 49-3 Pointing: W = 3 — 22 arcsec; N = O arcsec 
Sampling time: 115 s 
PY OE We swe AY We OY CO SAA hr YC 14 era Wer aot Peer at wae veer Bh 8 [ie ae ne oe a J 
800 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 


Wavelength, A 


Figure 1. Quiet Sun spectrum from 800 A to 1500 A shown as spectral radiance. Selected prominent emission features are identified. 


ant N NK Ca rr) “—a 

co tO oO 40 OD 5 ° ao : era 

a ste 66 KS @ iN 3 2 e 3 ome 

9 ss os? 3 0 ” os) 68 

™ SES M= =S oe) =s = Sete 

KP KX ge KO xX x x & 4 ox& 

aX a. sitet Po =. a 

z ese wH BB trata (7) 2e 2 bie 
oS Sane re ns 4 
FE ly ! il l | | | I q 
E ry | ey Ely q 
i | I fa iy | hy l l q 
le 1 td pte | De I | at 

< l itl! a 
~ - | I | | I | | | 

I | I | | 

o> fe) oe papal Ny | 

G ~1O™ Ee | | | | Loy | | a 
Oo FE l I Ly I q 
a E a 
iS. C Uh | 4 
a im 4 
10 ES 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. Integrated spectrum of the Sun observed with the normal incidence spectrometer (NIS) on CDS showing a number of highly 
ionized emission lines. The irradiance spectrum was derived by adding the emission from 690 different exposures distributed over the 


solar disk. 


T 
UARS SOLSTICE 


nm‘) 


Rocket 


- ot4L | ¢ _| 
n = z 

hey i: H Cont | 7 -d| 
3) [a © 

a 10 = - 2 : =| 
cS Ut ; | : 
‘6 3 OE 

» 10 : | 4 
o 

BT L 1992/301 | 
ac) Woods et al. [1998] 

: 8 

= 10 mii I L 1 

0) 1000 2000 3000 4000 


Wavelength (Angstrom) 


Figure 3. Solar VUV irradiance spectrum obtained with a LASP/NASA rocket instrument (4 < 1200 A) and by the UARS/SOLSTICE 
instrument (4 > 1200 A). At longer wavelengths the spectrum is dominated by the continuum emission and absorption lines while at 


shorter wavelengths the spectrum is dominated by emission lines. 


Although some of the plasma processes can be studied 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by high-resolution images of the solar atmosphere much 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Ultraviolet and Extreme Ultravi- 
olet Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of our knowledge on temperatures, densities, emission 
measures, mass motions and elemental abundances comes 
from high-resolution spectral observations in the far 
ultraviolet (VUV) to the x-ray wavelength range (2000- 
1.7 A). 

The solar spectrum in the range 1150-1700 A contains 
a large number of bright lines, mainly from plasmas of 
the CHROMOSPHERE and the lower TRANSITION REGION, i.e. at 
electron temperatures T, < 2.5 x 10° K. However, no 
lines from the upper transition region (2.5 x 10° < T. < 
1 x 10°) are strong enough to be observed, and only a few 
lines originating at coronal temperatures appear mainly in 
PLAGES and LIMB spectra. In comparison, the solar spectrum 
in the range 100-1150 A includes a large number of lines 
from the upper transition region and corona in addition to 
lines from the chromosphere and lower transition region. 

At wavelengths longward of 1150 Ahigh spectral and 
spatial resolutions were achieved by several instruments. 
In the UV wavelength range there are in particular two 
instruments that made great impact on solar spectroscopy: 
the NRL/SO82B EUV spectrograph on Skylab ATM 
(Apollo Telescope Mount) and the NRL/High Resolution 
Telescope and Spectrograph (HRTS). More than 3000 
emission lines have been observed in the 1150-1700 A 
spectral range by these instruments and most of them 
have been identified. At shorter wavelengths, however, 
the spectral and spatial resolution was relatively poor 
and only the strongest lines could be identified. Recent 
observations with EUV spectrometers on the Solar and 
Heliospheric Observatory (SoHo) have greatly improved 
our knowledge about the emission at shorter wavelengths 
down to 150 A. The Coronal Diagnostic Spectrometer 
(CDS) and the Solar Ultraviolet Measurement of Emitted 
Radiation (SUMER) complement each other since CDS 
relies heavily on diagnostics to determine the physical 
parameters in the solar corona and SUMER is designed 
to study the dynamical aspects of the chromosphere, 
transition region and corona in more detail. Selected 
line ratios give the electron temperature and the electron 
density. Absolute line intensities provide the differential 
emission line (DEM) distribution, the ion and elemental 
abundances. The line shift and broadening give 
information about dynamical phenomena of the emission 
plasma. 

The SUMER spectrometer can observe emission lines 
in the spectral range 500-1600 A. Figure 1 shows the quiet 
Sun spectral radiance spectrum from 800 A to 1500 A 
shown as spectral radiance. Selected prominent emission 
features are identified. In particular the wavelength 
range below 1175 A has never before been observed with 
such high spectral resolution, and it contains a wealth of 
spectroscopic detail. More than 1000 emission lines have 
been observed and many of them have been recorded 
for the first time. About 98% of the observed spectral 
features have been identified. SUMER provided for the 
first time detailed information of high members of the 
hydrogen Lyman series which are important not only 
for understanding properties of the solar chromosphere 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


but also of the O I excitation process in the Earth’s 
atmosphere. SUMER is also the first instrument to provide 
comprehensive spectroscopic information on the solar 
corona above the limb out to two solar radii. In contrast 
to past observations, where only a very small number of 
lines were observed above the limb, more than 600 coronal 
emission lines have been observed in the quiet corona by 
SUMER, from which about 400 are still unidentified. 

CDS is a dual extreme ultraviolet (EUV) spectrometer 
covering most of the wavelength range 150-780 A. It has 
given the first detailed observations of this wavelength 
range with higher spectral, spatial and temporal resolution 
than previous instruments. The different wavelength 
bands have been carefully selected to cover useful 
spectroscopic diagnostic lines. An example of a quiet 
Sun spectrum observed with the normal incidence 
spectrometer on CDS is illustrated in figure 2. The 
wavelength range (310-380 A) is dominated by Mg Ix 
368 A and a number of lines from highly ionized ions, in 
particular from iron. A number of line pairs in this band 
are useful for density diagnostics using ratios such as the 
Si X 347/356, Si IX 345/349 and Fe XIII 359/348 lines. 


Continuum emission 

The UV radiation emitted by the Sun between 1400 A 
and 1680 A originates from the temperature minimum 
region and the low chromosphere according to calculated 
model atmospheres. The absolute value of the continuum 
intensity in the spectral range around 1600 Ais important 
since it reflects the value of the temperature minimum used 
in model calculations of the solar atmosphere. 

The quiet solar radiation shortward of 1680 A is 
primarily due to free-bound transitions from lower 
lying energy levels of neutral silicon in the temperature 
minimum region, about 500 km above t5999 = 1 accordin, 
to model calculations. At wavelengths shorter than 1521 A 
the emission is almost entirely caused by recombination 
to the ground state (3p? 3P) with smaller contribution 
to the emission from C I and from the Ly, wing. At 
wavelengths longer than 1521 A recombination to the 
first excited level (3p* 'D) of Si I is the main source 
of emission together with Fe I and Mg I. Ultraviolet 
line emission from higher temperatures (and heights) 
also contributes to the photoionization rate of neutral 
silicon in the temperature-minimum region. For quiet 
Sun conditions this contribution is small but is greatly 
increased during flares. 

The continuum emission at shorter wavelengths is 
also a useful diagnostic tool. The C LH I and He I 
continua have upper bounds of 1100 A, 911 A and 504 A 
respectively. However, few observations of this weak 
continuum emission have been made until recently when 
the improved instrument sensitivity on the SOHO satellite 
became available. The H-continuum (also called the 
Lyman-continuum) is fairly free from emission lines as 
can be seen in figure 1. The C I continuum shortward 
of 1008 A is contaminated by the He I continuum which 
tends to appear in the spectral second order of the grating. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Ultraviolet and Extreme Ultravi- 
olet Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectral irradiance and solar variability 

Only about 1% of the Sun’s total energy is emitted at 
VUV wavelengths less than 3000 A, while approximately 
50% is emitted between 4000 and 8000 A. However, the 
variability in the VUV portion of the Sun’s spectrum 
exceeds that at visible wavelengths and contributes 
significantly to the solar irradiance variability in spite of 
its minor contribution to the total irradiance itself (see 
SOLAR IRRADIANCE for more details). The VUV radiation is 
furthermore the dominant source of energy for heating and 
ionization in the terrestrial upper atmosphere at altitudes 
above 90 km. Thus, a good knowledge of the solar 
EUV spectral irradiance is of critical importance for many 
analyses of the photochemistry and energy balance of 
the ionosphere and the thermosphere. Solar UV light is 
primarily responsible for both creation and destruction 
of ozone in the Earth’s stratosphere and mesosphere (see 
OZONE HOLE). Stratospheric ozone densities are known to 
vary with the 11-year soar cyYcLe. Solar variability over 
the solar cycle also causes expansion and contraction of the 
outward extension of the Earth’s atmosphere into space. 
Thus, satellites in low orbit will feel an increased drag 
when the Sun is active and the result is reduced lifetime. 
Another important issue is that changes in the Earth’s 
upper atmosphere induced by variations in solar UV 
radiation could affect the surface climate through feedback 
mechanisms. It is therefore important to obtain a reliable 
specification of the Sun’s radiative output variability in 
order to isolate anthropogenic global changes from natural 
variability. 


Bibliography 
For further reading about the VUV emission a few selected 
pointers to key books and papers are listed below. 


Mariska J T 1992 The Solar Transition Region (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Mason H E and Monsignori Fossi B C 1994 Astron. 
Astrophys. Rev. 6 123 

Vernazza J E, Avrett E H and Loeser R 1981 Astrophys. J. 
Suppl. 45 635 

Woods TN, Rottman G J, Bailey S M, Solomon S C and 
Worden J 1998 Solar Phys. 177 133 


P Brekke 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Visible Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Spectroscopy: Visible Emission 


There are several perspectives from which to consider the 
solar spectrum. One is obviously as a tool for studying the 
Sun itself. The temperature and pressure variation with 
depth, the composition, the magnetic fields, the changing 
structure and velocity fields on the surface can be derived 
from high-resolution, high signal-to-noise spectra that also 
have high spatial and temporal resolution. 

A second perspective is that the Sun is the brightest 
star; we can study it in the same way that we study 
other stars, but at higher resolution and higher signal-to- 
noise. The spectrum must be integrated or averaged over 
the solar disk to produce the flux spectrum. This is the 
spectrum seen by all the bodies in the solar system and that 
determines their atmospheric chemistry and weather. The 
flux spectrum at the mean distance of the Earth from the 
Sun is called the irradiance spectrum because it irradiates 
the top of our atmosphere (see SOLAR IRRADIANCE). However, 
the high-resolution flux spectrum has not been observed 
above the atmosphere. It is apparently too basic and 
fundamental to interest ESA or NASA. The available flux 
atlases have been made through the Earth’s atmosphere 
and include the telluric absorption by O2, HO, and 
other molecules. Figure 1 (color plate xx) shows the 
spectrum observed through the atmosphere from KITT PEAK 
in Arizona at 2000 m. It is plotted as a ‘residual’ spectrum 
with the upper envelope defined to be unity. In this form 
the overall energy information has been factored out of 
the spectrum. The actual energy spectrum is discussed 
below. The strong features in the spectrum were given 
letter designations in the nineteenth century that are still 
in use and are marked on the plot. Wavelength regions 
with strong telluric absorption are indicated. Our eyes 
have evolved to be sensitive only to the light that passes 
through the window of maximum transmission which we 
see as the colors shown in the plot. 

The third perspective for studying the solar spectrum 
is that it serves as a spectroscopic data source for atoms 
and molecules that goes to higher temperatures and is 
more stable than what is available in the laboratory. There 
are many cases where lines can be seen in the Sun that 
have been difficult or impossible to see in the laboratory. 
Comparisons of predicted spectra to observed spectra 
providea test of theoretical model atmosphere calculations 
(see also SOLAR ATMOSPHERE: EMPIRICAL MODELS). 

In every case we want high signal-to-noise and high 
resolution, high enough to allow recovery of the true 
spectrum with instrumental degradation removed. This 
is resolving power, wavelength/ Awavelength, of one half 
million or more (0.001 nm at 500 nm) if there are no 
telluric lines, or resolving power of two million or more 
(0.00025 nnm at 500 nm) if there are. Telluric lines 
are generally much narrower than solar lines because 
the Earth’s atmosphere is much cooler than the Sun’s 
atmosphere such that thermal line widths are about one 
fourth as great. Physical processes, such as RADIATIVE 
TRANSFER, always take place at high spectral resolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Reviews by the author that list the atlases of observed 
solar spectra in the visible are given in the bibliography. 
The reviews include very compressed plots of the spectra 
like that shown in figure 1 (color plate xx), which is from 
the Kitt Peak Solar Flux Atlas. Since the Sun is rotating 
at about 2 km s~!, one limb of the solar disk is moving 
away from us and is redshifted while the opposite limb is 
moving toward us and is blueshifted by 2 km s~!. Since the 
flux spectrum is an average over the disk, it is broadened 
by this rotation. A spectrum taken from a small area of 
the disk does not have this broadening so has more detail 
and reflects local physical conditions. For this reason there 
are also atlases of intensity spectra taken at the center of 
the disk, such as the Jungfraujoch atlas, and near the limb 
(see also SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: CENTER-TO-LIMB VARIATION). The 
central intensity spectrum is a better spectroscopic source 
than the flux spectrum. Most of the atlases are available 
as large scale plots on paper. The atlases can be found in 
digital form on the World Wide Web. All existing atlases 
need much improvement in quality, both in signal-to-noise 
and in resolution. 


Line identifications 

The reviews also list published tables of line identifica- 
tions. However, except for the far infrared, where some 
lines are isolated, lists of line identifications are not very 
useful because the features we see in the solar spectrum 
are not single lines. They are blends of many lines, from 
atoms and molecules of various species, some with iso- 
topic components or hyperfine components, and both so- 
lar and telluric lines. Only a computed spectrum can indi- 
cate in any meaningful way what actually makes up each 
feature. Figure 2 shows a small section of spectrum be- 
tween 599.0 and 599.2 nm that is relatively free of lines. It 
shows a theoretically computed solar flux spectrum, a the- 
oretically computed transmission spectrum for Kitt Peak 
at the time the observation was made, the computed flux 
spectrum transmitted through the atmosphere to the top of 
Kitt Peak, and the flux spectrum observed at Kitt Peak. The 
stronger lines used in the calculation are labelled. These la- 
bels provide the indentifications for the observed spectrum 
(see also SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS. The computed 
and observed spectra do not match because of missing or 
inaccurate line data. At present one-half of the lines in the 
solar spectrum are not identified. Corrections to the line 
data can be determined by iterating on the spectrum calcu- 
lations to improve the agreement. The computed spectra 
in figure 2 have been iterated in this way. Major improve- 
ments await new laboratory spectrum analyses and new 
line strength data for the atomic and molecular species that 
appear in the spectra. 


In progress 

New atlases for the flux, central intensity and limb 
intensity are in preparation with spectra taken by James 
Brault at Kitt Peak. These atlases will show the computed 
spectra and line identifications together with the observed 
spectrum as in figure 2. The irradiance spectrum, the true 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Visible Emission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


KITT PEAK SOLAR FLUX ATLAS 


CKURUCZ, FURENLID, BRAULT, AND TESTERMAN 1984) 


— i 7 i 
Hi Ab 1 1 
alli | u " 
| bul ee oe nai |p 4 
$10 520 630 540 330 560 S70 580 590 600 
hoe . nT - 7 : ee é 
| V Hil : 
. | TERRESTRIAL J 
f mite 0, 8 BAND el 
610 620 630 640 650 BE0 670 680 690 700 
ae z : eer ; _ a 
osth | | r tt | | t q id H 
I; i | i 
TERRESTRIAL | if it 
0, A BANG HA 
750 760 : 710 780 780 B00 
T 7 TY T TTY i Or MTR TATE 
{ i Vf na Wd 
la wba miner] i} 
CA INFRAREO TRIPLET a: 
800 850 860 
oo fat a i 
350. : sais 


Figure 1. The solar flux spectrum observed through the atmosphere in true color from 300 to 1000 nm. It is plotted as a ‘residual’ 
spectrum with the upper envelope defined to be one. The strong features in the spectrum were given letter designations in the 
nineteenth century that are still in use and are marked on the plot. Wavelength regions with strong telluric absorption are indicated. 


This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 49. 


solar spectrum, must still be determined. As the quality 
of the calculations improves it will be possible to remove 
many of the telluric features from the observed spectra. 


Absolute calibration 

Much of the actual irradiance energy distribution has 
been determined in 2 nm bands by Neckel and Labs. 
The residual flux spectrum can be integrated in those 
bands and normalized to produce the corrrect energy scale. 
Figure 3 shows the absolute irradiance spectrum derived 
from the Kitt Peak Solar Flux Atlas. In sections where there 
are telluric lines, the upper envelope of the spectrum is the 
upper bound to the true irradiance and the spectrum is the 
lower bound. 


Bibliography 

Kurucz R L 1991 The solar spectrum The Solar Interior 
and Atmosphere ed A N Cox, W C Livingston and 
M Matthews (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) pp 663-9 

Kurucz R L 1992 Atomic and molecular data for opacity 
calculations Rev. Mex. Astron. Astrofis. 23 45-8 

Kurucz R L 1993 Atomic data for interpreting stellar 
spectra: isotopic and hyperfine data Phys. Scr. T47 
110-17 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Kurucz R L 1995 The solar spectrum: atlases and 
line identifications Laboratory and Astronomical High 
Resolution Spectra ed A J Sauval, R Blomme and N 
Grevesse (San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific) pp 17-31 

Neckel H and Labs D 1984 The solar radiation between 
3300 and 12500 A Solar Phys. 90 205-58 


Robert Kurucz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Spectroscopy: Visible Emission ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


eect 


I w20 756 992 202 «0 «50 
53920 610 985203 +0 +50 


610 120 610 968 209 +5 -20 

245 120 -399:937 371+? -50 

315 607 12 7+ 2.350999 -10 +0 
fer 


687 607 12 12- 6 330 998 


27.90 16778 999 
145 24.00. 27382 992 +9 +500 
a1 26.01 25428 623 -15 -250 


260 26,00 40842 979 -15 +430 
S12 26,00 36975 $91 -10 -380 
a2) 24.00 37244 995 -21 
23 26,00 24335 998 -10 -170 

]j999 26.00 34017 904 -10 -470 


0 


0 


599.0 - 59.1 “599.2 599.3 


Figure 2. A small section of the solar flux spectrum at 599 nm plotted at full scale and at 10x scale. The heavy black lines show the 
observed spectrum from James Brault at Kitt Peak. The resolving power is 523 000 and the signal-to-noise is about 3000 which is poor 
for this work. The thin lines are the computed spectra: in red for the solar flux, in blue for the telluric atmospheric transmission and in 
purple for their product which should be compared with the observed heavy black lines. There are solar lines of Ca I, Ti I, Cr I, Cr I, 
Fe I, Fe IL, Co |, Yb IL, Co, CN, and telluric lines of H2O. The first number in each line label is the last three digits of the wavelength and 
the fourth number is the per mil line depth if the line were computed in isolation. The middle numbers are either the lower energy 
level in cm! for atoms or quantum numbers for molecules. Two of the Co I lines have been divided into hyperfine components. The 
hyperfine and isotopic splittings have not yet been determined for the other lines. Some splittings may be negligible. There are many 
missing lines. The lines that are present have been adjusted to improve agreement between calculation and observation. That process 
is continuing. This sample will be part of a forthcoming atlas of Brault’s solar spectra. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 50. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Solar Spectroscopy: Visible Emission ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


KITT PEAK SOLAR FLUX ATLAS WITH NECKEL AND LABS IRRADIANCE CALIBRATION 


4 " " 
FULL SCALE = 2.3831 Wm? nm! 


: r T T 1 
600 610 620 630 640 680 660 670 680 6390 700 


2 
i= 
°° 
2 
So 
2 
ES 
3 
2 
wo: 
o 
ca 
= 
o 
2 
a. 
o 
oo 
D 
o 
o 
= 
So 
oo 
©: 
o 
2 
o. 
oS 
oe 
=? 
oS 


Hdiiiiti) 


AAT TAC MO TINT : 


960 970 ; 980 980 1000 


Ee aaa > ane - A A ih 
900 310 920 930 940 


Figure 3. The absolute irradiance spectrum, the solar flux at the top of the atmosphere, derived from the Kitt Peak Solar Flux Atlas by 
normalizing it to the low-resolution irradiance measurements of Neckel and Labs. The wavelength range is 300 to 1000 nm. All the 
telluric oxygen and water lines must be edited out to determine the true irradiance. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar System 


The region of the universe in which we live, the Solar 
System, is but one of many clusters of stars and planets 
in space. Our Solar System lies in a particular region of 
the universe called the ‘Milky Way Galaxy’. 

The Solar System originated some 4.6 billion years 
ago through the accretion of gases and dust grains. Four 
groups of objects constitute the Solar System: the Sun, 
the terrestrial planets (including Earth’s moon), the Jovian 
planets and their satellites, and the small bodies (asteroids 
and comets) (figure 1). Recent discoveries prove that our 
Solar System is not alone. Astronomers have discovered 
planets orbiting several other stars. 

All the planets move around the Sun in the same 
direction, and nearly in the same orbital plane, the ecliptic 
plane. The ecliptic plane is roughly in the equatorial plane 
of the Sun’s rotation. The planets’ axes of rotation are 
nearly perpendicular to this plane, with the exceptions of 
Uranus and Pluto, which are tilted on their sides (table 1). 
Other small bodies, such as comets, are in elliptical orbits. 
Some travel as far out as Jupiter and return close to the Sun, 
repeating these orbits until disturbed by the gravitational 
attraction of a passing planet. 


The Sun 

Most of the mass of the Solar System is contained within 
the Sun which mass is 330000 times Earth’s mass. It is 
composed primarily of hydrogen and helium with tiny 
amounts of other elements, including carbon, nitrogen, 
oxygen, silicon, and iron. The Sun is more than 
1390 000 km across. Like the planets, the Sun rotates on its 
axis; its rotation period is 27 d. At its center temperatures 
are thought to reach nearly 15 000 000 °C. The Sun’s energy 
comes mainly from the thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen 
to form helium. This thermonuclear reaction takes place 
in the Sun’s core (see also SUN: BASIC PROPERTIES). 

This energy works its way gradually outward through 
the Sun’s inner layers (i.e. the radiative and convective 
zones) until it reaches the photosphere, the visible surface 
of the Sun and the site of the sunspots and (boiling) 
convective motions. Above the photosphere is the 
chromosphere into which huge flares and loops of hot 
gas often shoot, extending tens of thousands of kilometers 
above the Sun’s surface; the flares shoot electrically 
charged particles into the Solar System, causing aurorae 
when they reach the Earth. The CHROMOSPHERE is the 
transition from photosphere to the Sun’s outermost region, 
the corona, which consists of a very thin layer of extremely 
hot gas. 

The SOLAR WIND is a gale of relatively low-energy 
atomic particles, protons and electrons, that form a hot, 
magnetized gas, a plasma. Solar wind comes from great 
rips in the Sun’s corona, called coronal holes. These 
holes appear to be predominant in the polar regions 
and are fairly small. The fast wind blows at a steady 
750 km s“!, but the typical solar wind emerging from the 
Sun’s equatorial zone is variable but relatively slow, at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


350-400 km s~!. The solar wind flows straight out in all 
directions and carries the magnetic field lines with it. 

The Sun’s magnetic field is generated by plasma 
motions below the Sun’s surface and extends out to 
shape and control the solar atmosphere and the entire 
heliosphere. It is uniform at all latitudes in the heliosphere. 
Close to the visible surface of the Sun, the magnetic field 
is strongest over the poles. The magnetic field lines carry 
other particles that have greater energy than those in the 
solar wind (see also SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD). Each of the high- 
energy particles has an energy of up to millions of electron 
volts. The highest-energy particles are few in number, so 
their density is low compared with that of the solar wind. 


The terrestrial planets 

The terrestrial planets consist of Mercury, Venus, Earth, 
Mars, and the Earth’s moon. Although by strict definition 
Earth’s Moon is not a planet, it is usually included in the 
terrestrial planets’ category because of its large size, its 
rock composition, and the similarity of its early geologic 
history to the other terrestrial planets. 

The terrestrial planets, also called the inner planets 
because of their place in the Solar System, show several 
common characteristics. Their relatively high densities 
suggest that, like Earth, they are composed of elements 
such as silicon, iron and nickel. These dense elements 
would have been retained close to the Sun, while 
lighter elements, such as hydrogen and helium, would 
have escaped to the outer reaches of the Solar System 
during its formation and early evolution (see SOLAR 
SYSTEM: FORMATION). The individual planets evolved by 
the collection of smaller bodies, planetesimals, through 
accretion. As they grew in size, their increasing mass 
attracted still more bodies. Within the first half-billion 
years of Solar System history much of the debris had 
been swept up by the planets. The terrestrial planets 
began to cool and form crusts as elements combined and 
crystallized as rocks and minerals. Various combinations 
of silicon, oxygen, iron, magnesium, sodium, calcium, 
potassium and aluminum produced the silicate minerals 
of most rocks composing the Earth and lunar crusts, 
and probably most of MERCURY, VENUS and Mars. With the 
formation of a crust, the geologic evolution was initiated, 
and each developed along different paths. 

Venus, Earth, and Mars all have significant atmo- 
spheres. Probably some gases were accumulated by each 
protoplanet from the original solar nebula, but these orig- 
inal atmospheres have been lost to space. Secondary at- 
mospheres were outgassed from their hot interiors (with 
a possible contribution also coming from meteoritic im- 
pacts) and subsequently modified by chemical interactions 
with their surfaces. Mercury and the Moon are too small 
to retain anything but the most tenuous atmospheres. 

Mercury is the planet closest to the Sun. It has the 
most elliptical orbit of any planet except Pluto. Because of 
its elliptical orbit, Mercury’s closest distance to the Sun is 
only 46 million km while its greatest distance is 70 million 
km. Because Mercury is so close to the Sun, noontime 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Solar system planet data. 


Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto 
Mean distance from 57.9 108 150 228 778 1426 2868 4494 5900 
the Sun (10° km) 
Mean distance from 0.39 0.72 1.00 1.52 5.20 9.54 19.18 30.06 39.44 
the Sun (AU) 
Revolution period (yr) 0.24 0.62 1.00 1.88 11.86 29.46 84.07 164.82 248.6 
Orbital eccentricity 0.206 0.007 0.017 0.093 0.048 0.056 0.047 0.009 0.246 
Inclination to ecliptic (deg) 7.00 3.40 0 1.85 1.30 2.49 0.77 1.77 LAT 
Rotationt (d) 58.65 243.0(R) 1.00 1.03 0.41 0.44 0.65 (R) 0.76 6.39 (R) 
Diameter (km) 4878 12102 12756 6788 142984 120536 51118 50538 2300 
Mass (Earth = 1) 0.06 0.82 1 0.11 317.89 95.18 14.54 17.15 0.002 
Density (g cm~>) 5.4 5.2 5.5 3.9. 13 0.7 13 17 2.0 
Escape velocity (km s~!) 4 10 1 5 60 36 21 23 1 
Surface (main materials) Silicates Basalt, Basalt, Basalt, None None None None CH, ice 

granite? granite, ice 
water 

Atmosphere traceNa CO2 Np (78%), = COz Hp, He, Hz, He, Hp, He, Hp, He, trace CH 
(main components) (98%) Op» (21%) (95%) CHy, NH3 CHy, NH3 CHy, NH3 CHy, NH3 


t (R) = retrograde 


Figure 1. Our Solar System (NASA lithograph LG-1997-12-475-HQ). 


temperatures soar to 370°C. But because it has almost no 
atmosphere to hold in the heat, temperatures plummet to 
almost —185°C at night. Mercury rotates on its axis once 
every 58.6 d and circles the Sun once every 87.9 d. Mercury 
is smaller than any other planet except Pluto, and is about 
one-third the size of Earth. However, Mercury’s density 
(5.4 g cm”) is about the same as Earth’s and, therefore, 
it is assumed to have an enormous iron and nickel core 
some 75% of the planet’s diameter (42% of the volume), 
surrounded by a rocky mantle and crust only 600 km thick. 
As Mercury spins on its axis, the iron in its core generates 
a weak magnetic field that surrounds the planet. 
Although the surface of Mercury superficially 
resembles that of the Moon, there are significant and 
geologically important differences. Like the Moon, it has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


heavily cratered upland regions and large areas of smooth 
plains that surround and fill impact basins. The heavily 
cratered terrain records the period of heavy meteoroid 
bombardment that occurred throughout the Solar System 
during its early history and ended about 3.8 billion years 
ago. Unlike the Moon, however, Mercury’s heavily 
cratered terrain contains large regions of gently rolling 
intercrater plains, the major type of terrain on the planet. 
Both the smooth plains and intercrater plains are attributed 
to volcanism early in Mercury’s history. Mercury also has 
experienced a unique history of crustal deformation which 
has resulted in a global system of compressive structures. 
The general geologic history of Mercury is that soon after 
the planet formed it nearly melted by heating from the 
decay of radioactive elements and the inward migration of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the large amount of iron to form its enormous core. This 
led to expansion of the planet and extensional fracturing 
of the surface that provided an exit for lavas to reach 
the surface and form the intercrater plains. As the core 
and mantle began to cool, Mercury’s radius decreased by 
about 2-4 km, and the crust was subjected to compressive 
stresses. At about this time, a large basin was formed by 
a gigantic impact. Further eruptions of lava within and 
surrounding this large basin and other large impact craters 
formed the smooth plains. Volcanism finally ceased when 
lithospheric compressive stresses became strong enough to 
close off magma sources. All these events probably took 
place very early, perhaps in the first 700 or 800 million 
years, in Mercury’s history. 

Venus is the hottest world in the Solar System. It 
is blanketed by a thick layer of clouds that generate a 
greenhouse effect and consequently heat its surface up 
to 480°C. The atmospheric pressure at the surface is 90 
times more than that at Earth’s surface. The atmosphere 
of Venus is 98% carbon dioxide and contains virtually no 
water vapor. The upper clouds are composed of sulfuric 
acid droplets. Astronomers have called Venus Earth’s 
twin because of their apparent similarities: their mass 
and volume (and hence their density and gravity) are 
remakably alike. However, Venus is very different in other 
respects. Venus has no satellite. A magnetic field has not 
been detected. A day on Venus (243 Earth days) is longer 
than its year (225 Earth days). Venus rotates in a direction 
opposite that of Earth and most other planets. 

Venus’ surface consists of about 27% lowlands, 65% 
rolling plains, and 8% highlands. The density of craters on 
Venus is much lower (about two craters per million square 
km) than densities on the Moon and Mars, which suggests 
a relatively young average surface age. Volcanism (vast 
lava plains, thousands of volcanoes) and tectonism (highly 
fractured elevated terrains, mountains over 11 km high 
above the plains) are widespread and fundamentally 
important processes in the formation and evolution of 
Venus’ crust. Models of the rate of volcanic resurfacing 
based on crater inventory suggest that local surfaces can 
have an age from very young to 800 million years old. 

Like the other terrestrial planets, Venus was probably 
formed by accretion of small bodies about 4.6 billion years 
ago. With time and cooling, a crust, mantle, and core 
developed. The lithosphere could be 100 km thick, and 
the core could be about the same size as Earth’s core. The 
lack of abundant impact craters on Venus suggests that 
most of the crust that formed early in its history has been 
destroyed by burial by lava flows. The formation of both 
large and small volcanoes and the presence of extensive 
lava flows over hundreds of millions of years on Venus 
were accompanied by crustal deformation that led to the 
development of large tectonic structures (e.g. faults and 
rifts). 

Earth is surrounded by a gaseous atmosphere 
composed primarily of nitrogen and oxygen (see EARTH'S 
ATMOSPHERE). Beneath the atmosphere, the solid surface is 
nearly (70%) covered by a global, 4 km deep ocean. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


atmosphere and ocean balance incoming solar radiation 
and outgoing terrestrial radiation to maintain surface 
temperatures whithin the small range which permits life. 
Earth is special in many respects. Of all the planets in our 
Solar System, Earth is the only one that can support life. 
No other planet has oceans of water and an oxygen-rich 
atmosphere. It is also the largest body in the Solar System 
with a solid surface and the only planet with ongoing plate 
tectonics. However, Earth is just an average planet. It is 
bigger than four planets in the Solar System and smaller 
than the other four (table 1). 

Earth formed about 4.6 billion years ago, and it is still 
evolving. Earthquakes and volcanoes are violent proofs 
of Earth’s shifting crust. In the early stages of its history 
(4.6-4.0 billion years ago), heat from planetary accretion 
melted most, if not all, of the mass. It is usually thought 
that volatile elements such as oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen 
were implanted in the accreting Earth by planetesimals. 
Dense elements, such as iron, settled into the interior of the 
molten protoplanet to form the core, while lighter elements 
rose to the surface, leading to chemical differentiation of 
our planet (see EARTH'S INTERIOR). Cooling of the surface 
of the protoplanet led to the formation of a thin crust. 
However, continued impact bombardment fractured the 
crust, allowing parts of the still molten interior to flow to 
the surface. Gases trapped in the interior were released 
to the surface from these volcanic processes and formed 
Earth’s early atmosphere. With time, rainfall accompanied 
the evolution of the early atmosphere and led to the 
accumulation of liquid water on the surface. The constant 
weathering and renewal of Earth’s crust have obliterated 
nearly all of the craters which were formed during this 
period of time. 

Tectonic deformation of the crust and volcanism 
contributed to the formation of mountains and valleys, 
generating topographic relief. | Erosional processes, 
including running water, glaciers and weathering, have 
continually reduced the high areas, and deposition of 
transported sediments have filled up the low areas to form 
plains. However, much of the Earth’s surface results from 
internal processes, i.e. convection within the mantle. The 
mantle that surrounds the iron—nickel core is composed 
mostly of hot, plastic, silicate materials and is subdivided 
into the mesosphere, the astenosphere (a plastic layer 
about 250 km thick), and the lower part of the lithosphere 
(a cool rigid layer about 100 km thick). The upper part 
of the lithosphere corresponds to the crust whose average 
thickness ranges from 8 km (the oceanic crust composed 
of silicate rocks rich in iron and magnesium) up to 70 km 
(the continental crust composed of silicate rocks rich in 
aluminum, silica, and calcium). The lithosphere consists of 
seven major plates, and many smaller plates, sliding about 
on the underlying astenosphere. The energy responsible 
for the plate motion comes from the heat generated by 
the decay of radioactive elements, plus residual heat 
resulting from planetary accretion some 4.6 billion years 
ago. Because of plate motion, most of the record earlier 
than 600 million years ago has been lost through plate 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tectonics and crustal recycling. Consequently, some 80% 
of Earth’s history is not well understood. 

Because of synchronous rotation, the Moon revolves 
once on its axis each time it orbits the Earth, thus always 
presenting the same face, the nearside, toward our planet. 
The lunar nearside shows two contrasting types of land- 
scape: dark, plains-like areas of low relief, and brighter, 
more rugged regions which cover about two-thirds of the 
surface. The smooth dark areas were named maria, and the 
name terrae was given to the bright upland regions. The 
terrae are seen to be densely cratered highlands. Craters 
of all sizes up to about 250 km across are scattered over 
the surface in great profusion, frequently overlapping one 
another. The maria vary from almost circular features to 
more irregular-shaped regions. Their dark surfaces are 
apparently smooth, broken only by a few large craters. The 
maria are younger than the terrae whose cratered surfaces 
may be relics of a primordial landscape. 

Two different processes have been responsible for the 
present-day landscape: crater-forming impact of countless 
meteorites, and igneous and volcanic activity from within 
the Moon. Early in its history the Moon was subjected to 
intensive meteorite bombardment, including catastrophic 
basin-excavating impacts of massive asteroidal bodies. 
The crust probably has been intensely fractured by those 
basin-excavating impacts to a depth of 20 km or more. 
These huge basins, which range in size from 300 to 
more than 2500 km across, were subsequently filled by 
tremendous surface outpourings of volcanic lava (i.e. 
basalts) to form the maria. Although lacking the large, lava- 
filled basins so characteristic of the nearside, the farside 
of the Moon displays a mostly terra-type landscape, 
formed almost entirely by heavily cratered highlands, and 
several large crater-like basins. Since large impact basins 
are evenly distributed over the Moon’s surface, impact 
histories for the two sides are about the same. The absence 
of extensive spreads of lava in farside basins may be related 
to the tidal forces exerted by the Earth on a partly molten 
Moon in its history. It may also reflect the farside presence 
of a much thicker layer of crustal rocks through which 
there were no large-scale outpourings of lava like those 
through the comparatively thin-crusted nearside. The 
lunar crust appears variable in thickness, ranging from a 
few tens of km beneath some basins to more than 100 km 
under some highland regions. 

The Moon may have formed during a collision 
between the early Earth and a Mars-sized rocky planet 
about 4.6 billion years ago. The collision of this object 
with the proto-Earth threw a cloud of debris into orbit 
around Earth. This debris, which probably formed a 
disk-like body in Earth orbit, quickly collected into a 
single, large body, our Moon. The rapid rate of lunar 
formation released large amounts of heat which produced 
near-global melting, a stage called the magma ocean. As 
minerals began to crystallize in this magma ocean, the low- 
density, aluminum-rich minerals floated upward, forming 
the lunar crust (about 70 km thick). High-density, iron- 
rich minerals crystallized in the lower levels of the magma 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ocean, forming the lunar mantle, which represents most of 
the mass of the Moon, and probably an iron-rich core that 
may be partly molten and is perhaps 800 km in diameter. 
This differentiation of the Moon was accomplished around 
4.5 to 4.4 billion years ago. The early Moon was very hot, 
and magma continued to permeate the solidified crust 
for at least the next 300 million years. Some magmas 
produced by the melting of the lunar mantle flowed 
out onto the Moon’s surface as volcanic eruptions that 
began about 4.3 billion years ago. Most surfaces of these 
lava flows were obliterated by large impacts. The dark 
plains that dominate the lunar nearside are lava flows 
that erupted mostly between 3.8 and 3.0 billion years ago. 
The principal process operating on the Moon for the last 
3 billion years has been impact cratering, dominated by 
bodies in the microscopic size range. This bombardment 
of micrometeorites has ground up the lunar bedrock into a 
chaotic mass of powdery, fine debris and rock fragments, 
several metres thick. This material, called regolith, is 
directly exposed to both cosmic radiation and the solar 
wind. Thus, the regolith preserves a record of the history 
of the Sun’s output for the past 3 billion years. 

Mars is the outermost of the terrestrial planets. At 
6788 km, its diameter is intermediate in size between Earth 
and Mercury. Mars is generally redddish-orange in color 
due to abundant iron oxide in its surface materials. Mars 
moves in a distinctly elliptical orbit, in contrast to the 
Earth’s nearly circular orbit. Its orbit is so elliptical that 
Mars varies in distance from the Sun by 20%, which results 
in a 45% variation in solar radiation received at the surface 
and a 30°C range in temperature at the subsolar point. 
This effect, combined with the effects from the Martian 
seasons and the absence of an ocean that acts as a heat 
sink, produces an extraordinarily wide range in surface 
temperature. The surface warms to about 22 °C in summer 
at mid-latitude and cools to about —125°C at the south 
pole during mid-winter. Mars has a thin, cool atmosphere 
made primarily of carbon dioxide. The average pressure 
at the surface is about one hundredth that of Earth’s 
atmosphere. The global circulation of the atmosphere 
is dominated by the seasonal exchange of volatiles as 
they migrate from the summer pole to the winter pole. 
Occasionally winds on Mars are strong enough to raise 
dust and initiate a dust storm. 

The surface of Mars has recorded evidence of a wide 
range of geological and atmospheric processes that have 
operated over the history of the planet. On a global 
scale the Martian surface is divided into roughly two 
hemispheres separated in places by a kilometre-high scarp. 
This escarpment extends around the planet at a 35° angle 
from the equator. To the north of the escarpment are 
sparsely cratered lowlands, the northern plains, and to 
the south are regions of elevated and heavily cratered 
terrain. On a regional scale the northern plains are 
featureless with only a few impact craters. But locally 
these plains exhibit a wide variety of surface features 
indicative of wind action, water erosion, ground ice action, 
and volcanism. The high density of impact craters in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the southern terrain suggests that this terrain is ancient 
(about 4 billion years old). Channel systems are common 
in the old cratered terrain, suggesting fluvial erosion and 
dramatic climate change early in Martian history, from 
a warmer wetter environment to the present cool dry 
conditions. Because liquid water cannot exist on the 
surface of Mars under present conditions (the atmosphere 
is too thin and cold), Mars probably had a warmer, denser 
atmosphere at the point in its history when the channels 
were eroded. However, frozen water still might exist in 
Martian subsurface layers. 

Located just north of the equator is the Tharsis dome, 
a gigantic volcanic and tectonic bulge, 5000 km across and 
7 km high. Three enormous volcanos, the Tharsis Montes, 
are located in line near the top of the bulge. They are all 
300-400 km across. Olympus Mons, the tallest volcano on 
Mars, is located on the northwest flank of the Tharsis bulge. 
It is about 600 km across, and like the other large volcanos 
its absolute elevation is about 27 km. An extensive array 
of faults radiates from the Tharsis bulge. A 5000 km long 
interconnecting canyon system, called Valles Marineris, 
radiates outward on the eastern flank of the Tharsis bulge. 
In places, the single canyon is 700 km across and 7 km deep. 
Enormous landslides are common along the canyon’s wall. 
This canyon system is one of the major tectonic features of 
the planet and may have resulted from tectonic extension, 
or rifting. Valles Marineris merges eastward with canyons 
that contain arrays of jumbled blocks that appear to have 
formed by collapse. Large outflow channels originate in 
this area and extend northeast into the lowlands. These 
channels are thought to be produced by the catastrophic 
release of subsurface ground water. 

Mars probably has a central, high-density core 
composed mostly of iron with small amounts of sulfur, 
oxygen, and nickel. Outward from the core is a thick 
iron-rich mantle. The outermost shell is the low density 
crust, a few tens of km thick, and probably composed of 
basaltic rocks. Though Mars is made of generally the same 
materials as the other terrestrial planets, its mean density 
is3.9¢ cm. 

Two small moons, PHOBOS AND DEIMOS, orbit the planet. 
They are thought to be captured asteroids composed of 
dark, carbon-rich rock. Each satellite has been heavily 
cratered. 


The Jovian planets 

JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS, and NEPTUNE are referred to as the 
Jovian planets. All are gaseous objects and lack solid 
surfaces. Unlike the terrestrial planets, they are enormous 
and contain most of the mass in the Solar System outside 
the Sun. 

The Jovian planets formed by the accretion of smaller 
solid bodies to form a nucleus of sufficient size to capture 
gravitationally the lighter elements that escaped from 
inner parts to the outer parts of the Solar System. As 
this process continued, the Jovian planets grew to consist 
mostly of hydrogen and helium. They grew and evolved 
to have a family of smaller bodies in orbit about them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


These moons are typically composed of ices as well 
as rocky materials. One of them, Titan, a satellite of 
Saturn, has a thick atmosphere of nitrogen, along with 
methane, ethane, acetylene, ethylene, hydrogen cyanide, 
and other carbon-nitrogen components. The satellites 
of the Jovian planets represent a collection of objects 
of different sizes, compositions, and geologic histories. 
Some, such as the Jupiter moons Ganymede and Callisto, 
are about the size of Mercury. Others, suchas the Saturnian 
satellite Enceladus and the Uranian satellite Miranda, 
have experienced spectacular crustal deformation. Others 
appear to have remained relatively unaltered since their 
initial formation. Two of them, Jupiter’s lo and Neptune’s 
Triton, are currently volcanically active. 

Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System. 
The characteristics of its interior are highly speculative. 
Toward the center of the planet, the pressure is estimated to 
be 100 million times greater than the atmospheric pressure 
on the Earth’s surface, and the temperature may reach 
30000°C. Under this conditions, hydrogen would have 
a density of 4 g cm? and would form a metallic phase. 
Some models suggest a central solid core as large as 20 000 
km across, which may contain small amounts of rocky 
material. The planet completes one orbit of the Sun each 
11.8 yr and its day is 9h 55 min. The rapid spin rate may 
explain the huge magnetic field that surrounds Jupiter. 
The cloud patterns (i.e. zonal jets, eddies, storms, Great 
Red Spot) apparently result from convection cells that are 
driven by the escape of heat from Jupiter. A faint dusty ring 
of material encircles Jupiter. Its outer edge is 129000 km 
from the center of the planet, and it extends inward about 
30000 km. 

Jupiter is now known to possess at least 16 satellites 
(see JUPITER: SATELLITES). The Galilean satellites, lo, Europa, 
Ganymede, and Callisto, are the largest. Io is the most 
famous satellite because active volcanos dot its surface. 
They erupt frequently, spewing sulfur dust up to 300 km 
high. Io’s volcanos are apparently due to heating of 
the satellite as it is perturbed in its orbit by Europa and 
Ganymede then pulled back again by Jupiter. It appears 
that volcanism on Io affects the entire Jovian system, in that 
it is the primary source of matter that pervades Jupiter’s 
magnetosphere. Europa, the next farthest moon from 
Jupiter, is covered by a thin crust of water ice (30 km 
thick), possibly floating on a H,O ocean which might 
be about 50 km deep. The surface of the next satellite, 
Ganymede, shows two distinct types of terrain, cratered 
and grooved, suggesting that its entire icy crust has been 
under tension from global tectonic processes. Callisto, 
the Galilean farthest from Jupiter, has a very old, heavily 
cratered surface showing remnant rings of enormous 
impact craters. 

Jupiter’s rings and satellites exist within an intense 
radiation belt of electrons and ions trapped in the planet’s 
magnetic field. These particles and fields comprise the 
Jovian magnetosphere, which extends 3-7 million km 
toward the Sun, and stretches in a windsock shape at least 
as far as Saturn’s orbit, a distance of 750 million km. As the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


magnetosphere rotates with Jupiter, it sweeps past Io and 
strips away about 1000 kg s-! of material. The material 
forms a torus, a doughnut-shaped cloud of ions. The 
torus’s heavy ions migrate outward, and their pressure 
inflates the Jovian magnetosphere to more than twice its 
expected size. 

Saturn is the second largest planet in the Solar System 
and takes 29.5 Earth years to complete one orbit of the Sun. 
Saturn has at least 18 satellites and a complex ring system 
(See SATURN: SATELLITES; RINGS). Measured from edge to edge, 
Saturn’s rings span about one million km. Saturn’s rings 
are made of ice and rock. They are not solid, but consist 
of small chunks of frozen material in a relatively thin 
layer. Some of the rings show elaborate structures such as 
kinks and spokes that are due to the gravitational effects of 
nearby satellites. Radial, spokelike features are believed 
to be composed of fine, dust-size particles. Electrostatic 
charging may create spokes by levitating dust particles. 

Saturn shows broad atmospheric banding similar 
to but much fainter than that found on Jupiter, and 
ovals and other atmospheric features are generally smaller 
than those on Jupiter. An enormous white cloud has 
been discovered near the equator that grows and spreads 
rapidly, and rises higher and higher in the atmosphere. 
This cloud is believed to be composed mainly of ammonia 
ice crystals. 

Saturn holds a wide variety of satellites in its orbit, 
ranging from Phoebe, a small satellite that travels in an 
orbit in the opposite direction from the other satellites 
(probably a captured asteroid), to Titan, the planet-sized 
satellite with a thick nitrogen—methane atmosphere which 
may strongly resemble the Earth’s atmosphere before life 
evolved. The most active surface of any of Saturn’s 
satellites is that of Enceladus. Its bright surface is 
marked by faults and valleys, showing evidence of tectonic 
motions of the icy crust. One other satellite, Mimas, is 
scarred with a crater so huge that the impact that caused 
it nearly broke the satellite apart. 

Uranus has a cloudy atmosphere of primarily 
hydrogen and helium with a small amount of methane 
that causes its bluish-green color. Uranus is unusual in 
several ways. Unlike any other planet in the Solar System, 
it spins sideways. Uranus also rotates in the opposite 
direction from most of the other planets. Its magnetic field 
is also tipped by about 50° with respect to the planet’s axis, 
making the magnetic field of Uranus, along with that of 
Neptune, unique among the planets. Surrounding Uranus 
are several very thin dark rings, similar to those around 
Jupiter. 

Five large moons, OBERON, TITANIA, MIRANDA, UMBRIEL, 
and ARIEL, and 10 smaller ones orbit Uranus. Their orbital 
paths are sideways compared to other planets and moons 
because of Uranus’ sideways spin. The largest moon, 
Titania, is 1610 km in diameter and its icy surface shows 
a lack of large craters that may have been erased by some 
internal process. Miranda is the smallest of the five large 
satellites of Uranus. Its icy crust displays a puzzling 
array of geologic forms, including huge oval features and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


complex systems of faults and ridges that may result from 
either internal processes, or the random reassembly of 
Miranda’s fragments after it was broken apart by impact 
with an asteroid-sized body. 

Neptune is the fourth, outermost, and smallest gas 
giant of our Solar System. Even though Neptune receives 
only 3% as much sunlight as Jupiter does, it is a dynamic 
planet. Neptune’s atmosphere, mostly composed of 
hydrogen with methane in its upper part, exhibits several 
large, dark spots reminiscent of Jupiter’s Great Red Spot. 
The magnetic field of Neptune, like that of Uranus, is 
highly tilted (47° from the axis of rotation). 

Neptune has at least eight satellites. TRITON, the 
largest, is one-third as massive as Earth’s Moon. Triton 
is also the most unusual moon, because it orbits Neptune 
in the opposite direction from all the other satellites (see 
also NEPTUNE: MINOR SATELLITES). Triton has an extremely 
thin atmosphere extending to about 800 km above its 
surface. The atmospheric pressure at the surface is 
about 1/70 000th the surface pressure on Earth, and the 
surface temperature is about —235°C. Triton’s surface, 
mostly frozen methane and nitrogen, shows evidence 
of a remarkable geologic history, with active geyser-like 
eruptions spewing invisible nitrogen gas and dark dust 
particles several kilometres into its tenuous atmosphere. 


Small bodies and Pluto 
ASTEROIDS, COMETS, and the smaller planetary satellites are 
often called small bodies. However, some are not so small; 
the largest asteroid, Ceres, is more than 1000 km across. 
Most asteroids occur in the zone between the orbits 
of the planets Mars and Jupiter, the ‘asteroid belt’. In 
addition to the asteroid belt, asteroids are found elsewhere 
in the Solar System. Two sets of asteroids, named 
Trojan asteroids, are found in the same orbit as Jupiter. 
Three populations of asteroids, referred to as near-Earth 
asteroids, reside in the inner Solar System. Among these 
three populations, two of them, the Atens and the Apollos, 
cross Earth’s orbit and occasionally collide with the Earth 
and the Moon. The third population, the Amors, is found 
between Earth and Mars. More than 18000 asteroids 
have been identified, of which the orbits of some 5000 
have been determined. It is estimated that there are at 
least 1000 asteroids larger than 30 km, of which some 200 
are larger than 100 km. Asteroids are classified both by 
type, related to their inferred composition, and by their 
location in the solar system. Because many meteorites 
seem to be derived from asteroids, a classification of 
asteroids is based on the comparison of their spectral 
reflectance measurements with compositional signatures 
of meteorites. This classification includes three groups: 
C-type for carbonaceous asteroids, rich in carbon and 
complex organic compounds, considered to be the most 
primitive, with unaltered material similar in composition 
to the terrestrial planets; S-type for siliceous asteroids, 
composed of silicate materials lacking the carbon-rich 
compounds, considered to be slightly processed; M- 
type for metallic asteroids, considered to be chemically 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


differentiated as the result of extreme heating. In addition, 
a unique asteroid, Vesta, appears to consist of rocks similar 
to the basaltic lava flows found on Earth and the Moon. 

Comets are probably primordial material left over 
from the early stages of the Solar System’s formation. 
Commonly described as ‘dirty snowballs’, comets appear 
to be composed of solid dust grains embedded in water 
ice. The main component of a comet is the nucleus, a mass 
of ice and dust that typically is 1-10 km across. As comets 
travel toward the Sun, at about the distance of the orbit 
of Mars they begin to release gases in response to solar 
energy. The released gases forma glowing mass, the coma, 
surrounding the nucleus, 100000 km across. Streaming 
away from the coma is the cometary tail which extends 
over 1-10 million km and is always oriented away from 
the Sun, regardless of the comet's trajectory. The cometary 
tail includes two components: the plasma tail composed 
of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and water ions and a broad, 
slightly curved tail composed of dust grains. Most comets 
reside in the ‘Oort cloud’, and the ‘Kuiper belt’, beyond 
the orbit of Pluto. It is assumed that perturbations from 
passing stars may reset the orbits of some comets residing 
in the Oort cloud. Once travelling on an elliptical path 
through the inner solar system, comets may not survive 
in terms of Solar System history. Many of them are 
thought to collide with planets (e.g. the collision of Comet 
Shoemaker-Levy 9 into Jupiter in July 1994), satellites, the 
Sun, or other objects. With each fly-by of the Sun, a comet 
loses material into deep space by gas jetting at a typical 
rate of about a million tons per day. At this rate, comets 
would shrink by several meters with each orbit and would 
have lifetimes of only thousands of years. 

Pluto does not fit into the subdivision of planets as 
well as terrestrial and Jovian objects. Little is known 
of its properties; almost nothing is known of its surface. 
Although Pluto is the outermost of the Sun’s known 
planets, its elliptical orbit occasionally brings Pluto inside 
the orbit of Neptune. Pluto has a satellite, Charon, 
which is 1190 km in diameter, or about half the size of 
its parent planet. Thus, the Pluto system is considered 
to be a double planet. Moreover, PLUTO AND CHARON are 
dynamically locked, always showing the same face to 
each other. Ground-based observations and from the 
Hubble Space Telescope show that Pluto’s surface contains 
methane, while Charon is mostly water ice. Pluto also has 
a thin atmosphere of methane and may contain carbon 
dioxide or molecular nitrogen. Both Pluto and Charon are 
dense objects (>2 g cm~’), and are thought to consist of a 
rocky core surrounded by a water-ice mantle. Because of 
their peculiar orbits and high densities, the origin of Pluto 
and Charon remains speculative: they could be either 
satellites of Neptune that escaped, or remnants of a large 
satellite of Neptune that was broken apart by a collisional 
impact, and knocked out from Neptune’s orbit. 


Bibliography 

Beatty J K and Chaikin A 1990 The New Solar System 3rd 
edn (Cambridge: Sky Publishing Corporation and 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Carr M H 1984 The Geology of the Terrestrial Planets 
(Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration) Special Paper 469 

Greeley R and Batson R M 1997 The NASA Atlas of the Solar 
System (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Taylor S R 1992 Solar System Evolution—A New Perspective 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Philippe Masson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Dating of Events 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar System: Dating of Events 


The formation of the solar system began with the 
collapse of a fragment of an interstellar molecular cloud 
to a protoplanetary disk (the solar nebula) and continued 
through a complex process of accretion, coagulation, 
agglomeration, melting, differentiation and solidification 
to build the planets. Added to this were the secondary 
influences of aqueous alteration and thermal meta- 
morphism and the tertiary effects of bombardment, 
collision, break-up and re-formation. Since all traces of 
the original materials that formed the Earth have been 
obliterated by bombardment and by geological process- 
ing, the rocks that are accessible for study at the Earth’s 
crust are not representative of material that aggregated 
from the solar nebula. Thus the chronology of events 
taking place during the early solar system can only 
be determined by the study of meteorites and lunar 
material brought back to Earth by the Apollo and Luna 
missions. 


Chondrites 

Meteorites are pieces of rock and metal that fall to the 
Earth — fragments broken from asteroids — with vary- 
ing compositions that span a wide range of planetary 
materials, from completely unmelted and unfractionated 
stony chondrites to highly fractionated and differentiat- 
ed iron meteorites. These materials and the components 
within them carry records of all stages of solar system 
history. 

The most significant meteorites for early solar sys- 
tem chronology are the chondrites, which are the most 
primitive of all meteorites, having experienced only mild 
thermal or hydrothermal metamorphism since accretion 
into parent bodies. Chondrites are composed of high 
temperature components — CAIs (calcium, aluminum- 
rich inclusions) and chondrules (spherical to subspheri- 
cal assemblages, up to ~5 mm in diameter, of iron- and 
magnesium-rich silicate minerals that were partially or 
totally melted prior to parent-body accretion) — set in a 
matrix of fragmented chondrules mixed with sulfides, 
metal and minerals formed at lower temperatures (clay 
minerals, carbonates, sulfates, organic matter). The CAIs 
are refractory inclusions (up to ~1 cm in size) of spinel, 
hibonite, melilite, etc. 


Radioactive isotope dating 

The principle behind radioactive isotope dating is the 
fixed rate with which an unstable radioactive isotope 
(the parent) decays to a stable isotope (its daughter). The 
time taken for a radionuclide to decay to half its initial 
abundance is the half-life (T1/2) of the system. The half- 
lives of several radioisotope systems used for chrono- 
logy are given in table 1. In practice, absolute abun- 
dances are not measured; rather, the isotopes are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Table 1. Radionuclide decay systems used for solar sys- 
tem chronology. 


Parent Daughter Half-life 
147§m 143Nd 106 Gyr 
87Rb 87Sr 48.8 Gyr 
238U 206Pb 4.45 Gyr 
40K 40Ar 1.25 Gyr 
235U 207Pb 0.70 Gyr 
41Ca 41K 0.15 Myr 
26A] 26Mg 0.73 Myr 
10Be 10B 15 Myr 
60Fe 60Ni 15 Myr 
53Mn 53Cr 3.7. Myr 
107Pd 107Ag 6.5 Myr 
182} 182W 9 Myr 
129] 129Xe 16 Myr 


normalized to the amount of a related stable isotope, and 
isotope ratios measured. 

Several isotope systems with different half-lives are 
used to measure different events in solar system history. 
Long-lived radionuclides (given in the top section of 
table 1) are used to date the age of formation of mete- 
orites. Short-lived radionuclides (lower half of table 1) 
date specific processes that meteoritic material has expe- 
rienced. So, for example, the Al-Mg and Ca-K systems 
are used to determine the formation interval between 
stellar processing of material and its incorporation into 
meteoritic components, while the I-Xe chronometer is 
used to investigate the formation of secondary salts pro- 
duced by aqueous processes, and the Hf-W system is 
used to trace planetary core formation. 


Stages in Solar System formation 

The main stages resulting in formation of the Earth 
and the solar system can be summarized as follows in 
figure 1. 


Aggregation of planets 

Gravitational instability within an interstellar molecular 
cloud resulted in the collapse of a fragment of the cloud 
to form a protoplanetary disk. The mechanism that 
triggered cloud collapse is not clear but, whatever the 
mechanism, the collapse of the cloud and the subsequent 
aggregation of material must have been sufficiently fast 
to carry a complement of ‘live’ short-lived radionuclides 
into the protoplanetary disk. Evidence for the speed of 
this process comes from the presence of 26Mg (from the 
decay of 26Al) within CAIs in chondritic meteorites. 
It has been generally accepted that freshly synthesized 
26Al and other short-lived radionuclides (such as 41Ca) 
were injected into the molecular cloud fragment from a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Dating of Events 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


supernova just prior to solar system formation (indeed, 
the supernova is assumed to have triggered cloud col- 
lapse). The occurrence of 26Mg in the inclusions shows 
that the CAIs formed while 26Al was still ‘live’ in the 
solar nebula, that is agglomeration took place over a very 
short timescale, < 3 Myr. The 41Ca—41K chronometer, with 
even shorter half-life, implies even more rapid formation 
of CAIs, with an interval between nucleosynthesis and 
agglomeration of < 0.3 Myr. Absolute dating of the com- 
ponents within meteorites uses the U-Pb isotope system, 
which is very precise, and places the time of formation of 
CAIs as 4566 Myr ago. Chondrules, which are the most 
abundant component within chondrites, show little evi- 
dence for live 26Al, implying that the chondrule-forming 
process took place ~2-3 Myr after the formation of CAIs. 
The aggregation of interstellar dust (< 0.1 um in dia- 
meter) into increasingly large bodies, eventually forming 
kilometer-sized planetesimals and culminating in the 
asteroids and planets, took place over a time interval of 
some 8 Myr following formation of the CAIs. The 
chronology of these different events is shown schemati- 
cally in figure 1. 

Note, however, that use as a chronometer of isotope 
abundance differences between chondritic components 
is dependent on the models of short-lived isotope forma- 
tion. Over the past few years, an alternative mechanism 
for short-lived radionuclide formation has been pro- 
posed, whereby the species are formed by nuclear reac- 
tions in the energetic X-wind of a young stellar object. In 
this scenario, no chronological significance can be 
attached to the lack of daughter products from short- 


Time towards present 


lived isotopes in chondrules — the effect is spatial, rather 
than temporal. 


Differentiation 

Igneous activity on differentiated stony asteroids is 
traced by data from Mn—Cr chronometry. For the 
basaltic achondrites (a group of meteorites whose parent 
body is believed to be the asteroid 4 Vesta), core forma- 
tion apparently occurred < 4 Myr after CAI formation; 
subsequent volcanic activity on the asteroid continued 
for a further 4 Myr or so (see figure 1). This compressed 
timescale indicates the relatively short period that 
elapsed between accretion of primordial dust into small 
protoplanets and the onset of volcanism, melting and dif- 
ferentiation. 


Core Formation 

Once the proto-Earth had aggregated, internal heat from 
radioactive decay, combined with gravitational energy 
and collisional energy from planetesimal bombardment, 
kept the planet molten. As the proto-Earth cooled, reduc- 
tion reactions within the convecting system resulted in 
the production of a metal-rich core and silicate-rich 
crust-mantle structure. The timescale over which core 
formation occurred can be deduced using several radio- 
metric decay schemes, one of the most telling of which is 
the newly established 182Hf-182W chronometer. The 
strongly lithophilic 18Hf is partitioned into silicates, rel- 
ative to the more siderophilic W, during differentiation, 
and subsequent variations in Hf/W are caused by decay 
of 182Hf to 182W. Models based on the 182Hf-182W 
chronometer indicate that formation of the Earth’s core 


= 
Formation of the Earth 
@ | cal 
Metamorphism 
~<----)--—~« Chondrules 
[ME == 22-2 o nnn econ ee poneneeccc nn <—__—_@ | Basaltic achondrites 
Differentiation 
—— 8Ma 
Final Earth 
4.450 4.500 4.558 4.566 
Figure 1. Schematic chronology of early solar 
Age (Gyr) system history (after Allegre et al, 1995). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Dating of Events 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


took place gradually, some 50 Myr or so after the differ- 
entiation of iron meteorite parent bodies. 


Formation of the Moon 

The last major event in the history of the proto-Earth was 
the formation of the Moon. The most widely accepted 
hypothesis is that in which a Mars-sized body collided 
with the Earth. Refinements of this hypothesis indicate 
that the impact occurred after the Earth’s core had 
formed and that the crust-mantle regions of both the 
impactor and the proto-Earth were vaporized and then 
mixed during the impact. This hypothesis accounts 
satisfactorily for the geochemical, mineralogical and iso- 
topic compositions of the lunar samples as represented 
by material returned by the Apollo and Luna missions. 
The timing of the giant impact event is set at around 4.51 
Gyr ago. 


Bibliography 

Allégre C J, Manhés G and Gépel C 1995 The age of the 
Earth Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta. 59 1445-1456 

Lugmair G W and ShukolyukovA 2001 Early solar sys- 
tem events and timescales Meteorit. Planet. Sci. 36 
1017-1026 

Shu F H, Shang H, Glassgold A E and Lee T 1997 X-rays 
and fluctuating X-winds from protostars Science 277 
1475-1479 

Wadhwa M and Russell S S 2000 Timescales of accretion 
and differentiation in the early solar system 
Protostars and Planets IV ed Boss A, Mannings V and 
Russell S S (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 


Monica M. Grady 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar System: Exploration 


We are now close to the 40th anniversary of the first 
missions to the Moon: the LUNA 1 fly-by, which set a very 
low upper limit on the magnetic field of the Moon, the 
suicide mission Luna 2, which impacted the nearside, and 
the Luna 3 fly-by, which imaged the far side for the first 
time were launched by the Soviet Union in 1959, less than 
two years after the first Sputnik. These 40 yr of exploration 
of the solar system by spacecraft have represented one 
of the major scientific and technical adventures of the 
20th century. Our view of the solar system is now vastly 
different from that provided by ground-based planetary 
astronomy in the first half of this century. There is no 
example of a major planetary mission which did not 
discover quite unexpected features. Each of the dots 
of light or marginally resolved objects which could be 
observed from the ground is now revealed as a diverse 
and complex world in its own right. 

This long-term effort was initiated as a spin-off of 
the development of intercontinental missiles at the peak 
of the cold war. The commitment of the US to the first 
manned landing on the Moon was mainly motivated as 
a demonstration of the American leadership in launchers, 
which was challenged by the launch of Sputnik 1 in 1956 by 
the Soviet Union. These political and military undertones 
justified budgets of more than 1% of the GNP in the US 
during the 1960s and even more for the Soviet Union. After 
the APOLLO program, space budgets sharply decreased, 
reaching a plateau which has remained nearly level (with 
wide fluctuations) until recently. A new technological 
impetus was given by the American ‘star wars’ program 
in the early 1980s, which triggered major advances in the 
miniaturization of spacecraft subsystems. The 10 yr since 
1989 can be considered as a transition period, with the 
demise of the Soviet planetary program and budgetary 
limitations in the US and Europe, Japan constituting an 
exception with its expanding planetary program. 

The exploration of the solar system can therefore be 
separated in three phases. From 1956 to 1972, programs 
are dominated by political considerations and are mainly 
focused on the race to the Moon. From 1972 to the mid- 
1990s, the missions are mainly driven by scientific goals, 
and the emphasis is on very ambitious programs such 
as Viking and Voyager for NASA, or Phobos 1 and 2 
on the Soviet side. The third phase is characterized by 
much smaller missions with a handful of experiments, the 
major missions of ESA’s program such as CASSINI (in 
collaboration with NASA) and ROSETTA constituting an 
exception. Considerations of public interest (‘outreach’ is 
the present catch-word) became increasingly important, 
in particular in the US, with emphasis on such topics 
as extraterrestrial life, ‘resources’ (another catch-word) 
or potential catastrophes (asteroidal or cometary impacts 
on the Earth). The 4 m class telescopes equipped with 
increasingly sensitive instrumentation, the development 
of interferometry and adaptive optics have completely 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


renewed ground-based planetary astronomy which plays 
an increasing role in the exploration of the solar system. 

From the point of view of science, there is a logical 
sequence of investigations of solar system bodies, which 
will be presented in the next section. The political 
and programmatic hazards have strongly biased the 
mission definition process, so that there are significant 
inconsistencies in the present status of knowledge on 
the three major types of solar system bodies: the 
inner planets, the giant planets and their environments 
(satellites, rings, magnetospheres) and the small bodies, 
comets and asteroids. 

The solar system is the only stellar environment 
which can be studied in situ. This unique status is 
unlikely to change until well into the next century (or 
millenium). However, with the recent discoveries of 
planetary companions around more than 30 stars, the 
solar system is now revealed as one of possibly billions 
of planetary systems in our galaxy alone. Its exploration 
can therefore be put in this more general context, so as 
to define what is generic and what is specific about our 
star and its companions. The characteristics of other 
planetary systems and the information from the new 
generation of missions to small bodies will much improve 
our understanding of the formation of planetary systems, 
one of the major goals of the quest for knowledge since the 
origins of science. 


Physical constraints for the exploration of the 
solar system 

The major breakthrough provided by space exploration for 
planetary science has been the capability to get very close 
tosolar system bodies. Up tonow, planetary missions have 
all relied on chemical propulsion systems derived from 
the missile technology developed in the years following 
the Second World War. The hot gases formed in the 
combustion chamber leave the rocket at a speed of 3- 
4.5kms-!. The highest velocities are obtained with liquid 
hydrogen and oxygen as reactants, a technology which 
requires cryogenic temperatures and very large systems 
such as the Shuttle (NASA) or Ariane 4 and 5 (ESA). The 
higher the velocity increment, the larger the proportion 
of the mass in fuel. As a rule of thumb, a single rocket 
stage can provide a velocity change similar to the ejection 
velocity. This is why three-stage rockets are needed to 
leave Earth, as its escape velocity is 11.2 km st. 

Even higher velocities are needed to reach directly 
solar system bodies. The optimum transfer is not possible 
all the time. These ‘planetary windows’ occur when 
the Earth and the planetary body return to the optimum 
relative position. After the body is reached, more fuel is 
needed to get into orbit, and even more to land, unless 
one can take advantage of the atmosphere (if any). The 
total velocity changes give a measure of the difficulty of 
the missions. These parameters are listed in table 1 for 
the different classes of planetary bodies, together with the 
repeat interval between mission opportunities, which is 
a major constraint for space programs. The values given 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Constraints on missions to various bodies. 


Launch velocity Orbit insertion Window 

— escape velocity (3day period) repetition 

(km s~) (km s~1) (yr) 
Moon —0.17 0.24 Daily 
Venus 0.3 0.6 1.6 
Mars 0.35 0.73 2.1 
Mercury 3.5 4.5 1.0 
Jupiter 3.0 17 11 
Saturn 4.1 14 1.03 
Asteroid (main belt) 1.3-1.7 3-5 1.25-1.5 
Comet (short period) 3-3.3 0.9-1.5 5.5-6 


do not take into account the inclination and eccentricity 
of actual orbits except for Mercury and comets, for which 
these parameters are so large that they severely constrain 
the transfer trajectories. 

Table 1 clearly separates two classes of objects. The 
Moon, Mars and Venus are relatively easy targets, for 
which the launcher requirements are close to the escape 
threshold, and a single chemical stage is adequate even 
for an orbiter mission. Mercury, outer planets and small 
bodies require either a very large launcher or a more 
efficient mission scenario. A direct rendezvous with 
Mercury or a main belt asteroid is particularly difficult 
as it requires the largest on-board propulsion capabilities. 
A lander or entry probe mission is much easier if there 
is an atmosphere (Venus, Mars, giant planets, Titan), in 
which case it is less demanding than an orbiter mission. 
The return of a sample from a planetary body is the most 
demanding of all missions, requiring a launch capability 
from the object back to the Earth. 

With chemical propulsion systems, the only solution 
for such ambitious missions is to trade mass against time 
using planetary swing-bys. Such ‘gravity assists’ can 
provide large velocity changes at little or no cost in fuel. 
The first mission of this type was MARINER 10, which used 
VENUS to perform three fly-bys of mercury in 1974. The 
strategies can be quite surprising: recent missions to the 
giant planets first visited Venus, which is closer to the Sun 
than the Earth. The drawback is the very long mission 
time: 8 yr of travel are required to rendezvous with 
Saturn or a comet with large spacecraft, which has an 
impact on mission costs and sets an interval of 15 years 
between the definition of instruments and the scientific 
results. The brilliant successes and promises of the gravity 
assist strategy will be described later. The limits of this 
approach are being reached, and new technologies such 
as ion propulsion must be developed for the future. 

These dynamical constraints have defined to a large 
extent the sequence of missions to solar system bodies, 
from the easiest to the most difficult. Fortunately, this 
is also what is needed for a logical sequence of scientific 
investigations. 


Experimental techniques 
Once a spacecraft has succeeded in getting close to 
a planetary body, the range of possible scientific 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


investigations is quite broad. They can be separated into 
two major categories: remote sensing techniques and in 
situ or laboratory techniques. 

Remote sensing techniques take advantage of the 
whole electromagnetic spectrum to obtain information on 
a solar system body at distances of hundreds or thousands 
of km. High-energy photons such as gamma-rays and x- 
rays give information on individual nuclei and atoms, and 
hence the chemical composition. Electronic transitions 
dominate the UV region, with the best signatures of 
radicals and ions. The visible part of the spectrum 
provides the best spatial resolution, giving it a privileged 
role for photogeology and topography. At longer 
wavelengths, molecular vibrations and rotations dominate 
the infrared and submillimeter parts of the spectrum, 
and hence information on the molecular composition 
of atmospheres and the mineralogical composition of 
surfaces. Finally, the bulk physical characterisistics 
(porosity, conductivity and dielectric constant) are critical 
for radar observations which, together with laser echos, 
also provide accurate altimetric information. Radio 
techniques are extremely useful for characterizing the 
dynamics of the ionized environment, which can be 
studied in situ by particle detectors. Apart from photons, 
the gravitational and magnetic fields can also be measured, 
providing critical information on the internal structure and 
the state of the core. 

Remote sensing techniques have been extensively 
used on space missions, from Earth orbit (Hubble Space 
Telescope, TUE, ISO) and from the ground at observable 
wavelengths. They can be considered relatively mature, as 
such experiments are now close to the limit in performance 
set by the statistical noise on collected photons over most of 
the electromagnetic spectrum. This was not the case even 
10 yr ago for infrared detectors. Technological advances 
can still be expected in terms of mass and power budgets, 
but the photon noise links directly the size of the collecting 
optics to the science return, so that going too far down in 
size and mass does jeopardize the science. 

In situ techniques require direct contact to the surface, 
the atmosphere or the ionized environment of the object 
to be studied. The whole range of Earth, atmosphere and 
plasma sciences can then be considered, but they have to be 
adapted to very stringent constraints in mass and power. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Among the most important techniques, one can quote 
seismology and electromagnetic sounding for the internal 
structure, gas chromatography and mass spectrometry 
of neutral species and ions for analyses of the surface, 
atmosphere and environment. These experiments are 
improving very rapidly in terms of capabilities, making 
possible within a few kg investigations which required 
quite large laboratory experiments in the early 1980s. 

On the basis of these experimental capabilities and 
the constraints of table 1, it is possible to define a logical 
sequence of scientific missions for the exploration of a solar 
system body. 


e The discovery mission (or missions). This first step is a 
fly-by mission which provides the first high-resolution 
remote sensing information on the body. It reveals its lot 
of unexpected features and helps to define the specific 
scientific goals of future missions. The Luna 3 image 
of the far side, in 1959, was the first to demonstrate 
the discovery potential of such missions (figure 1), as 
it revealed a hemisphere drastically different from the 
near side, with little or no dark flat regions (the mare). 
Other examples are the PIONEER and voyYAGER fly-bys of 
the systems of giant planets, from 1977 to 1989, which 
discovered the bewildering diversity of the satellites and 
ring structures, or the ciotro and veca fly-bys of comet 
P/Halley in 1986. 


@ The in-depth exploration missions. The second step is 
a series of orbiter missions which make possible a 
comprehensive mapping of the planetary bodies by 
a wide range of remote sensing techniques. These 
missions provide the first global view of the body and 
make possible the selection of areas of interest for in situ 
studies. VIKING orbiter, in 1976, around MARS, and GALILEO, 
which has orbited JuriTER since 1995, are good examples 
of such missions. 


e The in-situ studies missions. This third step is provided 
by modules which land on the planet, providing 
information on its atmosphere, if any, during the 
descent. Such missions are required to obtain detailed 
and direct information on the internal structure and 
composition of the body. Only a few points can 
be characterized (eventually traverses with a rover or 
balloon). However, the in situ results provide ‘ground 
truth’ which calibrates the remote sensing techniques, 
hence improving our knowledge for all the regions of 
the body. 


e@ The sample return mission. Because of the mass and 
power constraints, many critical investigations cannot 
be done in situ, even accounting for technological 
advances. The high-precision determination of isotopic 
abundances is particularly critical, as it provides the 
only absolute chronometers and information on solar 
system formation processes (isotopic anomalies). The 
return of samples to the laboratory is then required. The 
potential of such missions has been demonstrated by the 
wealth of data obtained from the lunar samples returned 
from 1969 to 1983. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. This image of the far side of the Moon obtained by 
Luna 3 is the first example of the discovery potential of space 
missions for solar system exploration. The far side, which can 
never be observed from the Earth, appeared completely 
dominated by the bright continents which constitute only 60% of 
the near side. 


@ The field geology mission. Given the enormous cost impact 
of a manned mission, such a step cannot be proposed 
on the basis of science alone. If a manned mission is 
decided for political or technological reasons (the Apollo 
program to the Moon, possibly a future lunar base or 
manned Mars mission), there are significant advantages 
in having a field geologist on site, such as improved 
procedures for the selection and documentation of 
samples. 


In this sequence, each step is required as a stepping 
stone for the next. The comprehensive coverage defines 
the regions of interest for in situ studies, which in turn 
prepare the selection of sample return sites. This sequence 
also ranges from the easiest (fast fly-by of discovery 
missions) to the most demanding in terms of mission 
capabilities (orbiter, then landers, then sample return, 
then a huge gap to manned missions). It is therefore 
not surprising that it has been followed for most solar 
system objects, the exceptions resulting from political 
considerations or from a specific favorable condition such 
as the presence of an atmosphere, which greatly helps for 
landers or entry probes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The inner planetary bodies 

Apart from the Earth, there are four large inner planetary 
bodies: Mercury, Venus, Mars and the Moon. As we have 
seen, the Moon, Venus and Mars are the easiest to reach 
in the solar system, in particular the Moon which is only 
400 000 km away. Therefore all planetary missions during 
the first 20 yr of the space era have been dedicated to inner 
planets. 

The Moon is unique in the history of PLANETARY 
EXPLORATION. With its proximity and modest mission 
requirements, it was the obvious stepping stone to other 
planets. In 1963, J F Kennedy defined the landing of 
an American on the Moon before the end of the 1960s 
as a national goal, demonstrating the US leadership in 
rocket technology (and hence nuclear strike capabilities) 
as a response to the Soviet achievements in space (the first 
artificial satellite, in 1956, then the first man in space, Yuri 
Gagarin, in 1961). This greatly accelerated the sequence of 
missions: after the first fly-bys, in 1959, only 3 yr separated 
the first lander (Luna 9) and orbiter (Luna 10) from the 
first manned landing and sample return, Apollo 11, in July 
1969. The sixth and last Apollo landing, in 1972, and then 
the last automated Soviet sample return, in 1976, marked 
the end of the first phase of lunar exploration. The ‘lunar 
jeeps’ implemented by the Apollo program and two soviet 
automatic rovers have traveled several tens of km on the 
lunar surface. 400 kg of rocks and soil samples have been 
brought back from nine sites, six from Apollo and three 
with Soviet robotic missions. 

The wealth of science results from this hectic sequence 
of missions is impressive, and the Moon is indeed in 
many respects the best-known solar system body apart 
from the Earth. However, the ‘race to the Moon’ left 
much on the roadside. Indeed, the orbiter missions 
were mainly focused on the characterization of potential 
landing sites and the remote sensing techniques of the 
1960s were much less sophisticated than what is now 
available. Only a few per cent of the surface were 
covered at a resolution of less than 10 m, and there were 
big gaps in information on the mineralogy, chemistry 
and internal structure (the Apollo seismometers were 
quite close to one another). The sample distribution is 
extremely biased, with very little continental material 
and no sites at high latitudes or on the far side. These 
gaps are now being filled by a new generation of lunar 
missions. Two small American missions, CLEMENTINE in 
1994 and LUNAR PROSPECTOR in 1998, have much improved 
the global characterization of the surface, with altimetry, 
color imaging, chemical mapping, determination of the 
magnetic and gravity fields. Lunar Prospector has 
provided convincing evidence for significant ice crystal 
deposits in the very cold regions near the lunar poles. 
The next step is the Japanese mission LUNAR-A, in 2002, 
with two antipodal seismometers which should set strong 
constraints on the size of a possible lunar iron core. 
The Japanese have programmed for 2003 a major remote 
sensing and landing mission, SELENE, Which will complete 
the global characterization phase for the Moon. These 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


missions will help to define anew program of lunar sample 
returns. A manned lunar base is unlikely to be built until 
at least 2010. 

Venus was a high-priority target during the early 
phases of planetary exploration. Its size and mass make it 
a near twin to our Earth, and hence it has a great interest 
for comparative planetology. As shown in table 1, it is 
an easy target for fly-by and orbiter missions, and the 
dense atmosphere (90 bar) can be used to deploy entry 
probes and balloons. Indeed, the first planetary fly-by, 
the American mission Mariner 2, was performed as early 
as 1962, and the first succesful in situ mission, the Soviet 
VENERA 4 descent probe, was in 1967. Venus has been the 
main target of the Soviet planetary exploration effort, with 
15 successful missions from 1967 to 1984: entry probes, 
landers with cameras and chemical analyzers, and finally 
balloons deployed by the VEGA missions on the way to 
comet P/Halley. The two major American missions have 
been PIONEER VENUS in 1979 (an elliptical orbiter associated 
with a set of 4 entry probes) and MAGELLAN, in 1989, a radar 
mapping mission. The thick atmosphere is nearly opaque 
to all but the longest wavelengths, severely complicating 
the remote sensing characterization of the surface. The 
altimetric information of PIONEER VENUS revealed a surface 
radically different from that of the Earth, with smaller 
altitude variations. The radar images obtained in 1983 
by Venera 13 and 14 of the northern hemisphere and then 
the global coverage of Magellan in 1989 (with a higher 
resolution of a few hundred meters) showed extensive 
signatures of a volcanic activity driven mainly by hot spots 
(similarly to Hawaii) and not by plate tectonics as on the 
Earth. 

The major problem for the next steps in the 
exploration of Venus is the extremely high surface 
temperature (700 K) which has restricted the probe lifetime 
on the surface to less than 1 h. High-temperature 
technologies are required for the in situ phases, seismic 
stations and rovers, or the sample return. Until they 
become available, the exploration of Venus will be limited 
to the middle and upper regions of the atmosphere, such 
as the Venus multiple-probe mission which is now being 
considered by NASA. 

The exploration of Mars is mainly driven by 
comparative planetology objectives. Mars is nearly twice 
as small as the Earth, but its surface and atmosphere 
processes are much more similar in many respects than in 
the case of Venus. In terms of mission requirements, Mars 
is equivalent to Venus. Missions to Mars are unfortunately 
unique in the history of planetary exploration for their 
failure rate. 20 spacecraft were launched to this planet 
from 1964 to 1996. None of the 11 Soviet missions and 
only six of the nine American missions were complete 
successes. The discovery phase, with the two first fly-bys 
of Mariner 6 and 7 in 1969, revealed a surface pockmarked 
with craters, so that Mars was then considered as a larger 
version of the Moon. This view was completely reversed 
by Mariner 9, in 1971, an orbiter which observed for 
the first time the northern hemisphere and revealed the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


giant volcanoes and canyon systems which are now the 
trademark of the planet. This episode underlines the 
importance of global coverage before drawing conclusions 
on a given planetary body. The Moon, Mars and 
even the Earth, with its Pacific Ocean exhibit such a 
planetary dichotomy. The first major step for the global 
characterization phase has been the American mission 
Viking Orbiter, in 1976, which obtained a global coverage 
in the visible at medium resolution (100 m), very high 
resolution images and broad band spectrometry in the near 
and thermal infrared with a resolution of about 10 km. 
The Soviet mission PHOBOS 2, in 1989 (Phobos 1 failed 
one month after launch) was mainly dedicated to a very 
close rendezvous with Phobos, the largest satellite of Mars. 
It was lost during approach, but it obtained significant 
information on Mars during its two months in orbit, such 
as the first spectral images in the near infrared. 

The recent failure of two ambitious global character- 
ization missions had a major impact on Mars exploration. 
In 1992, the American Mars Observer mission was lost 
during orbit insertion. Its extensive set of instruments in- 
cluded a very-high-resolution camera, several spectrom- 
eters dedicated to the study of the surface and the at- 
mosphere, a gamma-ray chemical mapper and a plasma 
package. The MARS GLOBAL SURVEYOR recovery program is 
based on small orbiters each carrying part of the spares of 
Mars Observer. The first orbiter was launched in 1996 and 
started close-range observations in the fall of 1998, after 
a long phase of progressive orbit reduction by the atmo- 
sphere of Mars. This recovery program will be completed 
in 2002. The Russian Mars 96 mission which failed during 
launch in November 1996 was arguably the most ambi- 
tious mission to Mars, with a 400 kg orbiter payload as 
well as four entry modules. There was a large interna- 
tional collaboration involving most European countries. 
Asmaller mission, MARS EXPRESS, has been programmed by 
the European Space Agency for a launch in 2003. It will 
include five instruments derived from Mars 96 and tackle 
new scientific goals, such as the detection of subsurface 
ices with a radar. 

The in situ phase was initiated by the Viking landers in 
1976, which obtained panoramas of the surface, chemical 
analyses of the surface and atmosphere, climatological 
information on winds and seasonal cycles at two sites 
of the northern hemisphere. After a gap of 20 yr, an 
intensive phase of surface missions was initiated by 
NASA's MARS PATHFINDER, Which deployed a small rover 
and obtained information on the chemical composition of 
soils and rocks. A landing mission is programmed by 
NASA for each Mars window, every 2 yr (see table 1). 
That launched in 1998 is targeted for the polar caps. 
A sample return is scheduled for a launch in 2005. 
Such an ambitious program requires a high level of 
international collaboration, with major contributions now 
being considered from Europe (among others, a French- 
provided Ariane 5 launcher and ESA’s Mars Express as a 
relay satellite). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Mercury is a very difficult target. As the innermost 
planetary body, it is critical to our understanding of 
the planetary formation sequence in the solar system. 
The Mariner 10 mission, in 1974, imaged nearly half of 
the surface. The smooth plains and ubiquitous craters 
show many similarities and significant differences to lunar 
features. The other hemisphere is expected to be similar, 
although some caution is required (as shown by the 
example of Mars). Orbiter missions are now considered 
by ESA as part of its long-term program, NASA and Japan. 
Given its proximity to the Sun, Mercury is a very good 
target for a mission using solar energy to drive a plasma 
or ion engine. 


The outer planets 

The four outer planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and 
Neptune, have complex satellite and ring systems and 
extensive magnetospheres (with the possible exception of 
Uranus). The discovery phase has been accomplished by 
two pairs of missions: Pioneer 10 and 11, launched in 1973, 
and Voyager 1 and 2, launched in 1977. After encountering 
Jupiter, Pioneer 10 was set on a trajectory leaving the solar 
system, while Pioneer 11 was retargeted to saTURN, which 
it reached in 1979. The more capable Voyager spacecraft 
used the gravity assist strategy and a unique configuration 
of the giant planets (which repeats only every 200 yr) to 
visit all four outer planets from 1979 to 1989 (fly-by of 
NEPTUNE by Voyager 2). 

The Pioneer missions obtained the first information 
on the interplanetary medium beyond the orbit of 
Mars. They also obtained high-quality images during the 
planetary encounters. These results have been superseded 
by the outstanding scientific results of Voyager, one of 
the most successful missions in the history of planetary 
exploration. Possibly the most remarkable discovery is 
the bewildering variety of the satellites of giant planets, 
from the lunar-like, frozen surface of icy CALLISTO to the 
tidally driven sulfur volcanism of 1o, the innermost satellite 
of Jupiter, the billiard ball look of EUROpa, the tectonic 
processes on icy satellites of Saturn and URANUs and the 
thick nitrogen atmosphere of TITAN, the largest satellite 
of Saturn. One can also mention the fractal structure 
of Saturn’s ring systems, the discovery of rings around 
Jupiter, the demonstration of the relationship of the great 
red spot of Jupiter to large-scale cyclonic and anticyclonic 
structures and the observation of similar features on 
Saturn and Neptune. 

Two global characterization and in situ missions have 
been defined to address the wide range of scientific 
issues opened by Voyager for surface, atmosphere and 
plasma sciences: Galileo for Jupiter and cassin-Huygens 
for Saturn. The launch of Galileo, arguably the most 
complex spacecraft ever built, was delayed owing to 
Shuttle development delays and the Challenger disaster 
from 1983 to 1989. Galileo reached Jupiter late in 1995 
and was injected in a highly elliptical orbit after releasing 
an entry probe in the atmosphere. Orbital changes using 
satellite swing-bys have been programmed to explore as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The surface of Io as observed by Galileo is extremely young. No impact craters are observed and sulfur volcanoes 
completely dominate the landscape. Major features have markedly evolved from Voyager (1981) to Galileo (1996). 


much as possible of the Jovian environment. The failure 
of the main antenna to deploy resulted in a reduction 
of the available data rate from 100 kbits s~! to a few 
10bitss~'. In spite of this severe limitation, an outstanding 
science return has been obtained, such as the first profile of 
temperatures and chemical composition in the atmosphere 
of Jupiter, the first high-resolution images of the satellites 
(figure 2) and the discovery of an internal magnetic field 
for GANYMEDE, the largest of the four satellites discovered 
by Galileo. These successes have led to an extension by 
3 yr of the mission until the end of 2000. 

The next major step in the exploration of the 
giant planets is Cassini-Huygens, a collaborative mission 
between NASA, which has the responsibility for the 
orbiter, and ESA, which provides an entry probe in the 
atmosphere of Titan. This mission was successfully 
launched in 1996 and will reach Saturn in 2004 after 
swing-bys of Venus, the Earth and Jupiter. A orbital tour 
of four years will visit all the major satellites, explore 
the magnetosphere at various latitudes, characterize the 
ring systems and provide continuous coverage of the 
meteorology of Saturn. Titan, Saturn’s largest satellite, 
constitutes a major target of the mission. The European 
entry probe will perform a descent of several hours in 
the dense nitrogen atmosphere, rich in hydrocarbons and 
aerosols, and is likely to reach the surface itself. Similarly 
to Venus, Titan’s atmosphere is nearly opaque in the 
visible. Radar and near-infrared observations will map 
the surface during the 40 scheduled fly-bys of Titan. 

The next steps will include small missions focused 
on specific scientific questions, such as the Europa orbiter 
mission dedicated to the characterization of a possible 
ocean buried under the smooth ice shell of Europa, which 
has been selected by NASA for a launch in 2004. Global 
characterization missions to Uranus or Neptune similar 
to Galileo and Cassini will eventually be programmed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Because of the very long travel times using classical 
propulsion (already 7 yr for Saturn), it is likely that such 
missions will require advances in technology, such as an 
ion drive powered by a nuclear reactor. The huge gravity 
well of giant planets precludes the implementation of 
sample return missions until well into the next century. 


The small bodies of the solar system 


The small bodies, CoMETS and ASTEROIDS, are late comers on 
the scene of solar system exploration. The main science 
driver is to obtain information on the formation of the 
solar system, as these small bodies are the last survivors 
of the vast swarm of planetesimals which participated in 
the accretion of planetary bodies. 

The first discovery missions were the five fly-by 
missions to comet P/Halley in 1986: two distant Japanese 
fly-bys dedicated to plasma measurements, the two Soviet 
VEGA spacecraft which came within 10000 km of the 
nucleus and the kamikaze GIOTTO mission of ESA which 
approached the nucleus at a distance of 600 km. The 
nucleus as revealed by these missions (figure 3) was 
much darker and hotter than expected, showing that these 
objects are covered by a refractory mantle. 

For main belt asteroids, the discovery phase was 
initiated by Galileo on its way to Jupiter, which observed 
two medium-size objects, GAsprA and IDA, in 1991 and 
1993. The highlights of these fly-bys were the discovery 
of a satellite a few km in size around Ida and the 
observation of a magnetic field around Gaspra. These 
two main belt asteroids were rocky (‘S’ type). These 
results were complemented by the fly-by of Mathilde, a 
carbonaceous asteroid, by the American NEAR mission in 
1997. The evolution of the surface of asteroids appears 
to be dominated by collision processes, the surfaces being 
saturated by craters at all scales. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The nucleus of Halley as imaged by the camera of the 
European mission GIOTTO. The very low albedo (3%) and small 
proportion of active areas were quite unexpected and led to the 
revision of the ‘dirty ice ball’ model of cometary nuclei in favor 
of a much higher proportion of refractory material. 


This discovery phase is far from complete. There is of 
course no chance of visiting each of the hundred of comets 
and thousands of asteroids. This comprehensive coverage 
is a key objective of Earth-based observations. However, 
the close-range observations of a few short-period comets 
and of the major missing types of asteroids (metallic and 
basaltic) would provide extremely useful information. 
Most missions to the outer solar system will include as 
many asteroid fly-bys as possible. Two cometary fly-by 
missions are programmed by NASA before 2008, starDusT 
and CONTOUR. 

The global characterization of asteroids has started 
with the first rendezvous with asteroid 433 ERos by 
the NEAR mission in early 2000. The major global 
characterization and in situ mission for comets is the 
ROSETTA mission of ESA, which will carry a comprehensive 
set of remote sensing instruments and two analyzers 
for dust and gas in the cometary environment. <A 
lander provided by a collaboration of European countries 
will perform analyses of the physical and chemical 
characteristics of the cometary material and serve as a 
beacon for a radar sounding of the internal structure. 
This ambitious mission will be launched in 2003 for a 
rendezvous in 2011. 

The ground-based discovery of a second belt of small 
bodies, the KUIPER BELT, beyond the orbit of Neptune, 
has significantly modified our view of the outer solar 
system. There are now only four outer planets, pLuTO 
AND CHARON, its companion, being considered by most 
planetary scientists as the largest members of this new 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The surface of Titan as imaged by the Hubble Space 
Telescope in the near-infrared. The dark and light features 
reveal a significant surface differentiation. The relationship to 
topography and much higher resolution will become available 
with the Cassini-Huygens mission in 2004. 


family. A discovery mission to one or several Kuiper belt 
objects is now being considered by NASA, so as to obtain 
information on objects dynamically related to short-period 
comets. 


The role of Earth-based observations 

Earth-based observations have made major progress dur- 
ing the last 10 yr with the development of adaptive op- 
tics, which correct most of the atmospheric perturbations, 
the large ground-based interferometers (VLA, IRAM), the 
launch (and repair) of the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE of NASA 
and the launch of the Infrared Space Observatory of ESA. 
Apart from direct imaging, much can be learned from oc- 
cultations of stars about the environment of solar system 
bodies. Among the most important discoveries made with 
Earth-based observations, one can mention the rings of 
Uranus and Neptune, the Kuiper belt (already more than 
30 objects larger than 200 km on orbits similar to that of 
Pluto), the detailed composition of the atmosphere of gi- 
ant planets or the recent images of the surface of Titan 
obtained by Hubble in the near-infrared (figure 4). The 
discovery in 1995 of planets around other stars by ground- 
based telescopes sets the exploration of the solar system in 
the broader context of the characterization of stellar envi- 
ronments. 

Three main objectives can be set for Earth-based ob- 
servations: continuity, diversity and very-high-resolution 
spectrometry. They can fill the long gaps between space 
missions for observing variable phenomena, such as me- 
teorology. For small bodies, Earth observations extend the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Exploration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


knowledge obtained from the few visited targets to hun- 
dreds of objects, providing statistical information and cri- 
teria for selecting the next targets of space missions. The 
highest spectral resolutions still require large instruments 
incompatible with spacecraft resources. The recent obser- 
vations of solar system objects by ISO have demonstrated 
the interest of such methods, in particular for planetary 
atmospheres and comets. 


The future of planetary exploration 

All the major classes of solar system objects have been 
observed at close range, with the exception of Kuiper belt 
objects. Past, present and programmed missions should 
go a long way to complete the global characterization 
phase: SELENE for the Moon, the MGS series and 
Mars Express for Mars, Galileo for the system of Jupiter, 
Cassini-Huyghens for the system of Saturn, ROSETTA 
for short-period comets and then a Mercury orbiter 
mission. After the turn of the century, the emphasis 
will progressively shift to in situ and sample return 
missions. After 30 yr of very large programs, it is however 
likely that much will be done by smaller missions (the 
‘faster, better, cheaper’ approach first implemented by 
NASA with its Discovery program) with a limited set of 
instruments. This new type of mission has been made 
possible by the technological developments triggered 
by the Strategic Defense Initiative (miniaturization of 
subsystems) and the growing industrial capabilities 
worldwide for building cheap spacecraft. The short 
development and implementation time (4-5 yr) provides 
more flexibility, increases the frequency of missions 
within a given budget and gives a chance for the latest 
instrumental developments to be used. The reduction of 
travel times is a major constraint for such missions. It 
requires the development of high-capability propulsion 
systems, such as the ion and plasma drives, with ejection 
speeds 10 times higher than those of classical rockets. 
Small test missions of this type have been approved by 
NASA, by Japan and by ESA, so that this technology 
should be fully demonstrated by 2005. A balance will 
eventually be reached, as the ambitious science objectives 
of the in situ and sample return phase cannot all be 
reached with such missions, which are also more risky as 
demonstrated by a series of minor and major problems. 
There will still be a need for large-scale international 
missions such as that building up for a Mars sample return 
before 2010. 

The discovery of other planetary systems (EXOPLANETS) 
will eventually link solar system exploration to interfer- 
ometric missions able to image other planetary systems. 
Indeed, once this is achieved, it is likely that exploration 
missions to the closest stars with planetary systems will be 
considered. 


Yves Langevin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar System: Formation 


Cosmogony tells us about the origin and evolution of our 
SOLAR SYSTEM in general, and of the planets in particular. 
Planet formation seems to be a by-product of star birth. 
Current models have indicated the births of stars observed 
now occur in almost the same conditions as the formation 
of the Sun and its planets 4.55 billion years ago. 

Recent observations of what we interpret as PROTO- 
PLANETARY NEBULAS (the first has been seen around £ Pictoris, 
see figure 1), together with the detection—although 
indirectly—of planets orbiting other stars (more than 20 
already known; see EXOPLANETS) confirm our current ideas. 
Very young stars have been observed by the Hubble 
Space Telescope, the new VLT (the European Very Large 
Telescope) and space infrared telescopes (like ISO). Some 
young stars seem to be naked while others are dressed by 
disks of gas and dust which probably live for only a few 
million years; this is the most interesting period for us here, 
because we think that our own planetary system formed 
from such a disk. 

The study of meteorites, of lunar rocks (brought back 
by the Apollo astronauts and Soviet automatic machines) 
and of interplanetary dust (analysed by space probes 
which have encountered comets, e.g. Giotto when it visited 
the nucleus of Comet Halley in March 1986) has allowed us 
to give a precise value for the age of the solar system and to 
better understand the processes which lead to formation of 
planets from an interstellar cloud. Among the difficulties 
of modelling such a process a particular problem is 
how to separate fundamental general mechanisms from 
fortuitous local ones; comparison with other planetary 
systems would be very useful. This is a very rapidly 
developing field of study. 


The solar nebula 

General ideas about the formation of the solar system arose 
in the seventeenth century, when Copernicus’ heliocentric 
model became credible after Galileo’s observations and 
Kepler’s laws of planetary motion; the origin of this 
planetary system then became a subject of scientific 
research. One of the firsts models was proposed by René 
Descartes in 1644: primordial matter, rotating globally 
as a fluid, shows vortices; most of the matter may then 
accumulate in the center of a large central vortex and there 
the Sun forms; at the other vortices planets form and, due 
to the global rotation, they orbit the Sun. Although this 
explanation is obsolete, it contains a fundamental element 
which will be found in almost all subsequent models: the 
formation of the planets is linked to the formation of the 
Sun. 

In the following century, Emmanuel Kant, in his 
Natural Philosophy (1755), proposed an explanation of the 
origin of the solar system by condensations ina flat rotating 
cloud, i.e. a disk of gas and dust rotating around the center 
where the Sun was forming; condensations in the disk gave 
birth to the planets. Although some basic elements, suchas 
the condensation mechanism, were then still unexplained, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The beta Pictoris protoplanetary disk. Image taken 
with the 3.6 m ESO telescope using the adaptative optics system 
Adonis by David Mouillet (Observatoire de Grenoble) and 
colleagues; high resolution allows us to observe the disk at less 
than 25 AU from the star, and to distinguish the warping of the 
disk which could be induced by gravitational perturbations of a 
massive planet on an inclined orbit. (See http://www.iap.fr/ 
LaboEtActivites /ThemesRecherche/BetaPic/images) This 
figure is reproduced as Color Plate 58. 


the concept of a rotating disk, what we call the solar 
nebula, is the basis of modern theories. A little later, Pierre 
Simon de Laplace, in his Exposition du Systeme du Monde 
(1796), proposed a mechanism to explain this structure 
where a few large planets rotate in almost circular orbits 
largely separated from each other: contraction of the disk 
increases the rotation velocity so that the centrifugal force 
separates matter into several concentric rings, from which 
planets may then form. 

But this model did not explain convincingly why 
matter should separate into a vast amount which contracts 
(the Sun) and a minor quantity in which contraction 
is stopped, or why the latter separates into rotating 
rings (the planets) instead of staying as a disk with 
continuously varying density. In particular the Sun 
should rotate considerably faster than it does, because its 
current rotation rate is much too slow for centrifugal force 
to counterbalance gravity. These (temporary) failures 
prevented the solar nebula hypothesis from receiving 
serious consideration for more than a century. 

There have been attempts to explain planetary 
formation independently from that of the Sun; the most 
well known is the catastrophe thesis, where a comet— 
following Buffon—(or, more impressively, another star— 
following Jeans) passed very near the Sun (already 
formed) and pulled out some of the solar matter which 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| number of atoms = 10 power n 
127 4 
9g ‘= = 
6 
3 = =f 
0) 
H He C N OMgAl Si S CaFe Ni 


Figure 2. Cosmic abundances of the elements. 


they orbited the Sun and finally formed the planets. These 
ideas have now been abandoned. 

The nebula hypothesis, indirect descendant of the 
Cartesian theory, came back into favour at the end of the 
first half of the twentieth century, and eventually came to 
be the ‘standard model’. Theories have been constructed 
to describe how gravitation could bring about the collapse 
of an interstellar cloud; in particular a fundamental 
criterion has been defined with regard to the limiting 
mass necessary to trigger gravitational instability, called 
the Jeans’ mass. Astronomers now think that formation 
of the solar system began with the collapse of such an 
interstellar cloud, a very dense, very cold cloud where 
molecules might form—an INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR CLOUD. 
The collapse was followed by the fast structuring of a 
rotating disk and the fall of the remaining matter of the 
cloud down this ACCRETION DISK, at the heart of which the 
Sun was forming. 


Some properties of the nebula 

Chemical elements can be placed in the well-known 
Periodic Table, where their position depends upon the 
number of protons in the atom’s nucleus. The increase in 
this number, from the light elements (essentially hydrogen 
(H) and helium (He)), produced soon after the ‘Big Bang’, 
to heavier elements made through nuclear reactions in 
the center of stars and then ejected into the interstellar 
medium, is reflected in the so-called Cosmic ABUNDANCES 
which, at least in the vicinity of the Sun, do not vary much 
through space, particularly for the INTERSTELLAR MATTER (gas 
and grains) which will give birth to the next generation of 
stars. 

Hydrogen and helium are very much more abundant 
than the other elements (figure 2); moreover, they are still 
gaseous down to temperatures very near 0 K (0 K = 
—273.16°C, ‘absolute zero’), which implies that almost 
98% of the solar nebula remain gaseous even at very 
low temperatures. The behavior of the other elements 
is different; they are often assembled into molecules 
which can condense at much higher temperatures, up 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to tens or even a hundred kelvin; these molecules are 
called ices and their constitutive elements are essentially 
hydrogen, carbon (C), nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O), the 
latter three being the most abundant (almost 2%) apart 
from H and He; for example, CO (carbon monoxide), 
although very volatile, condenses at around 25 to 30 K, 
and H,O (water) condenses at more than 110 K; it could be 
deduced that ices may be very frequent in all sufficiently 
cold parts of the nebula, i.e. the outer regions. All other 
elements (less than 0.3%) react above all with oxygen to 
form oxides; an important process is formation of silicon 
dioxide (SiOz, silica) with which other elements (such as 
magnesium (Mg), sulphur (5S), iron (Fe), aluminum (Al) 
or nickel (Ni)) react to form silicates. These molecules 
condense at high temperatures, up to 1000 degrees, and are 
called refractories (which are therefore essentially silicates 
and metals), and which therefore could exist as solids even 
in the innermost parts of the nebula. 

Let us compare the planetary compositions with the 
nebula. Telluric planets are essentially refractories: amore 
or less large metallic nucleus covered with a thick mantle 
of silicates, the amount of ices and volatiles being almost 
negligible. Therefore, the Earth could form in the solar 
nebula only if an Earth’s mass of refractories was available. 
However, refractories contribute only 0.3% to the nebula’s 
mass (i.e. around 1/300); then we need 300 Earth’s masses 
(M_;) of the nebula to form the Earth; the same estimates 
can be done for Mercury (15Mz), Venus (300M;), Mars 
(30M) and the asteroids (0.15M;z). Jovian planets are 
different and contain essentially hydrogen and helium, 
with a small proportion of ices and refractories (probably 
more in the case of Uranus and Neptune than for Jupiter 
and Saturn), which is not far from nebula abundances; this 
implies that the nebula mass in the region of formation of 
the Jovian planets can be estimated respectively as 1000Mz 
(Jupiter) and 500M, for Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. 
When we add all these values, we obtain around 3000M¢z, 
which is 1% of the mass of the Sun. Even if the nebula did 
not end steeply at Neptune’s orbit, taking into account 
the nebula mass corresponding to the KUIPER BELT would 
not significantly increase this value. Such a nebula mass 
of even several per cent of the solar mass is a model 
of a light NeBuLa; there also exists a model where this 
mass can increase up to several tenths of a solar mass 
and even one solar mass; this is a massive nebula. Until 
now, observations have not allowed us to clearly decide 
between the two models, but here we will discuss the light 
nebula model. 


Observations of nebulae around other stars 
To our eyes, regions of star birth are very dark: they are 
interstellar clouds of high density (high compared with the 
common interstellar medium) where dust and grains are 
sufficiently numerous to hide the stars which lie behind. 
Fortunately, radio telescopes allow us to observe 
inside these clouds and, particularly, to verify that these 
dark clouds are very rich in molecules. The most easily 
observed is CO, but the most abundant is dihydrogen, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Proplyds in Orion. A Hubble Space Telescope view of a small portion of the Orion Nebula star-birth region; several very 
young stars are surrounded by gas and dust which are possibly protoplanetary disks, or ‘proplyds’, that might evolve on to 
agglomerate planets; the field of view is only 0.14 light-years across; image taken on 29 December 1993 with the HST’s Wide Field and 
Planetary Camera 2. (STScI-PR94-24b; credit: C.R. O’Dell/Rice University—NASA,; see also http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/) This 


figure is reproduced as Color Plate 59. 


H2. The measured temperatures are very low, down to 
10 K. This extreme cold has two origins: first, the infrared 
radiation emitted by the molecules escapes easily out of the 
clouds, an efficient mechanism for exhaust of heat; second, 
dust prevents star light and heat from penetrating. We 
observe that gas is concentrated in a disk rotating around 
a central mass, an indication in favor of Kant- and Laplace- 
like models. Moreover, the rotation of the disk obeys 
Kepler’s laws, so that we can estimate the value of this 
central mass. In the internal regions, which have almost 
the dimension of our planetary system, this value barely 
exceeds one solar mass; this looks good for the light nebula 
hypothesis, nevertheless it is possible that the actual disk 
extends beyond the visible part. 

In the beginning the molecular clouds were very dark 
and cold. At a certain time, the gravitational instability 
was triggered so that a central source of energy ‘switches 
on’, surrounded by dark dust which, when warmed, emits 
infrared radiation. 

Later, the newborn star and its disk become 
progressively clear of the cloud, allowing visible light 
emitted by the star to travel very large distances, to the 
Earth for example. The Hubble Space Telescope, as well 
as the first unit of the VLT, due to their very high angular 
resolution, have observed such disks, for example in the 
great molecular cloud in Orion where numerous structures 
have been identified as accretion disks (named proplyds, 
for ‘proto-planetary disks’; see figure 3), although classical 
observations showed only simple stars, known for a long 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


time as T TAURI STARS from the variable star of this name 
in Taurus. The luminosity of this class of stars varies 
because of their very turbulent environment, and they are 
often identified through spectral lines characteristic of the 
surrounding gas. 

During this early stage of a star’s life, the star itself 
ejects large quantities of gas in every direction. This 
stellar wind progressively blows the disk away, and we 
observe a class of T Tauri stars which have no disk: we call 
them ‘naked’ T Tauri. A chronology has been established; 
emerging from the cloud to the blowing away of the disk 
(i.e. the lifetime of the solar nebula) occupies a time interval 
of only some million years—a mean estimation is around 
5 million. This corresponds to only one-thousandth of the 
age of our solar system, and this is during this very small 
fraction of time that the formation of the planets occurs. 


From dust to planetesimals 

The composition of the solar nebula was almost 99% gas 
(hydrogen, helium and volatiles) and 1% solid grains; 
these latter are very tiny, of the order of 0.1 wm, but they 
are the most interesting objects from the point of view of 
the history of solid matter in the solar system. 

These grains already had a long history; born in 
the atmospheres of giant red stars by condensation of 
the chemical species (depending on the conditions of 
temperature and pressure), they progressively acquired 
a three-layer structure (figure 4): a nucleus of refractories 
(silicates and metals), a mantle of carbonaceous materials, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


carbonaceous mantle 


refractories 


(silicates and metals) 


Figure 4. Model of an interstellar grain. 


which can also be considered as refractories but 
condensing at lower temperatures (around 500 to 
400 K), and which have suffered physico-chemical 
transformations due to irradiation by cosmic rays, for 
example; and finally this mantle is covered by ices. The 
main ice species is amorphous H20O, a form different from 
the crystals we know on Earth and which exists only at 
very low temperatures; several other molecules can be 
found—like CO, carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CHs), 
ammonia (NH3) and so on—in proportions which depend 
on the place where ices form because the ability of H2O ice 
to incorporate them varies with temperature. 

The hydrogen and helium molecules of the cloud 
move randomly and collide with each other due to 
Brownian motion. Grains, although very tiny, are real 
giants in comparison with these simple molecules; they are 
nevertheless slightly knocked and then gain some thermal 
velocity. These grains therefore encounter each other 
from time to time and, as we assume that their surface is 
somewhat sticky, aggregate into larger structures. Because 
the mass of these aggregates is of course heavier than 
the masses of individual grains, their thermal velocity 
decreases when they grow; when their size increases to 
several jm the influence of shocks becomes negligible and 
the process stops. 

At least it would stop if there was not the turbulence 
of the gas, because the solar nebula in which grains and 
aggregates exist and grow is a very turbulent medium. 
Micrometer-sized particles are indeed sufficiently small 
to stay strongly coupled with the motion of the gas 
in which they live, and are pulled by vortices of the 
turbulence. Then, when two vortices encounter each 
other, pulled particles can come into contact and, as 
long as the relative velocity is sufficiently low, form 
larger and larger aggregates. Nevertheless, such growing 
aggregates uncouple progressively from the motions of 
the gas, because more and more powerful vortices are 
necessary to move them. Their width may then attain 
several centimeters. Figure 5 presents an example of such 
a particle, which can be described as a kind of porous fluffy 
aggregate, and is therefore of low density. Note that the 
porosity of the flakes may decrease during collisions when 
the relative velocity becomes sufficiently high to induce 
an increase in compactness and density; moreover, the 
velocity may attain a critical value where particles begin to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Numerical simulation of an aggregate (from Blum et al 
1994). 


break instead of sticking together. At this point, turbulent 
aggregation is no longer efficient. 

Fortunately, another mechanism takes over. Centime- 
ter sized particles, once decoupled from the turbulence of 
the gas, fall down to the equatorial plane of the nebula, 
and their velocities follow Kepler’s laws. But gas moves 
more slowly because the effect of gravity is partially com- 
pensated by its internal pressure, which increases toward 
the interior. Therefore the flakes have to move against a 
kind of contrary wind, thus they lose energy and velocity, 
and their motion becomes a slow spiral toward the cen- 
ter. This spiral motion is the last step where the biggest 
flakes catch and ‘eat’ the others. The resulting size of the 
particles is estimated to be around several tens of meters. 

These ‘super-grains’ form a very flat disk. It has 
been shown that such a disk is not stable if its constituent 
particles do not have sufficiently high relative velocities: 
otherwise, it fragments into condensates which orbit 
around the center. However, this is precisely what we 
need, at least in the light nebula model proposed by the 
Russian physicist V S Safronov and, later, the Americans 
P Goldreich and W R Ward. This is called a gravitational 
instability, which results in a new disk composed of the 
‘lumps’ formed during the condensation: each lump 
has an approximate size of 5 to 10 km; these are the 
PLANETESIMALS, really the bricks for building the planets. 

As has been said, the scenario of the formation of 
the planetesimals is linked to the light nebula hypothesis 
and the corresponding relatively thin disk. The massive 
nebula model gives a different evolution: there is neither 
flat dust disk nor gravitational instability of this disk, 
instead it is probably the entire nebula (not only its 
dust) which becomes unstable and fragments into large 
condensations of gas and dust from which planets form. 
But observations seem more and more to indicate that 
the four giant planets could have a rock-ice core and that 
these central masses each have about the same quantity of 
refractories (around one-tenth of Earth mass). This would 
be relatively easy to explain with the planetesimals, i.e. 
in the light nebula hypothesis, but much more difficult 
with the great condensates of the massive nebula model. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This is one of the arguments which convinces a majority 
of astronomers of the validity of the planetesimal scenario; 
and this is the scenario which is considered here. But how 
can we date its different steps? 


The age of the chondrites and isotopic anomalies 

When searching for the time-scale of the origin of the solar 
system, it would be useful to have small bodies whose 
composition and internal structure have not been modified 
by geological processes, such as occur inside the main 
planets by differentiation of minerals. On Earth, the most 
ancient rocks are 3.8 billion years old (sedimentary rocks, 
Isua, Greenland), and the most ancient minerals (zircons, 
4.2 to 4.3 billion years) are the only remnants of continents 
from this epoch; but both had already lost the memory 
of the organization of primitive matter from which our 
planet formed. Some of the lunar rocks brought back 
from the Apollo missions date from 4.4 billion years, but 
they are transformed too. We hope that samples from 
comets and asteroids will be at our disposal relatively soon; 
fortunately every day Earth receives extraterrestrial matter 
in the form of meteorites, among which CHONDRITES are the 
most frequent (almost 85%) and the most primitive and 
therefore the most interesting for us here. Chemical and 
isotopic analysis of chondrites has led to two conclusions: 
(a) their age is almost 4.6 billion years, given with a good 
precision; (b) their composition is almost the same as in 
the cosmic abundances and then in the solar nebula, at 
least for refractories (because they contain few ices and 
very little gas; nevertheless, variations of elementary ratios 
among chondrites are very much less compared with the 
other types of meteorites, whose minerals come from 
differentiated parent bodies). 

Sometimes, chondrites have very refractory inclu- 
sions, in which we can find particularly calcium (Ca) and 
aluminum, and even the most refractory solids (for exam- 
ple Al,O3). Mineralogical analysis of chondrites reveals 
the presence of unstable isotopes, some of which have a 
very long half-life, for example, rubidium-87 which de- 
composes into strontium-87 with a half-life of 49 billion 
years. This allows to measure the ages of very ancient 
minerals—in fact, this is the ‘solidification age’, i.e. the time 
elapsed since the agglomeration of the minerals. By this 
method, and other analogous ones (like lead—lead), ages 
of refractory inclusions in the Allende meteorite (which 
fell at Pueblito de Allende, in Mexico, in 1968) have been 
measured: these ages are the greatest ever found in the so- 
lar system, and these inclusions indeed represent the first 
bodies which formed at the beginning of our history; the 
age of the solar system is then 4.560 billion years. On the 
contrary, the ages of chondrites without refractory inclu- 
sions is around 4.555 billion years, that is 5 million years 
after the formation of the refractory inclusions. But 5 mil- 
lion years is precisely the lifetime of the solar nebula we 
have discussed previously: the inclusions would there- 
fore have formed during the initial process of the fall of 
the cloud downward into the nebula, while the chondrites 
themselves formed at the end of the life of the nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Finally, carbonaceous chondrites (one of the three 
most important groups of chondrites, the composition 
of which seems the nearest to the solar one) comprise 
minerals which survived even the thermal processes inside 
the nebula; this brings us back to the interstellar grains 
wandering through the Galaxy before the birth of our 
solar system. This is the case of microscopic grains of 
silicon carbide and diamond which have been studied only 
recently using new techniques: although quantification is 
not yet possible, it is hoped that the abundances of the 
different isotopes will allow us to ascertain their great age. 

ISOTOPIC ANOMALIES can give us other important 
information. Let us consider for example the three 
stable isotopes of oxygen: '°O, '7O and '8O; '°O is the 
most abundant one on Earth and, more generally, in 
the universe; however, '’O and '8O ratios with '°O vary 
enormously from place to place in the Galaxy, because 
isotopes come from nuclear reactions inside stars and each 
star produces its own isotopic ratios depending on its mass 
and history. Let us take as reference the isotopic ratios 
in water of the Earth’s oceans: a plot of '"O/'°O versus 
8Q/1°O shows clearly that all terrestrial matter lies on a 
line of slope 1/2 (because in the Earth’s gravitational field, 
any fractionation of the '7O and '8O isotopes with respect 
to °O is proportional to the difference of their masses, 
that is 70/*O = 1/2 80/10), called the fractional line, 
and the global composition of the Earth plus the Moon— 
as for ordinary chondrites and Martian SNC meteorites— 
is not much different (figure 6). Besides, the refractory 
inclusions of the carbonaceous chondrites have a clearly 
different behavior: they lie along a line of slope 1, which 
implies the presence of a pure '°O component in these 
inclusions. There were therefore several oxygen reservoirs 
in the nebula, coming from several pre-solar sources; 
among which one, maybe a supernova, had furnished 
almost pure !°O. But what should have been oxygen’s fate 
if all the matter of the nebula were entirely gaseous (i.e. 
have been sufficiently hot everywhere) at a given time? 
In this case, all isotopes would have been mixed into a 
‘hot soup’, and we could not now distinguish between the 
initial reservoirs. An important conclusion can then be 
made: the refractory minerals of carbonaceous chondrites 
never did evaporate, and so kept the memory of their pre- 
solar history in the interstellar grains. 

The carbon isotopes C and °C tell the same story; 
in comets, it is even clearer. 


The final step to planets 

The basis of the scenario is that any planetary mineral 
passed through the planetesimal stage during the 
formation process of the Sun and the solar system in the 
solar nebula. It is highly probable that the planetesimals 
had primary compositions varying with distance from 
the center. In the internal regions, where the terrestrial 
planets formed, planetesimals consisted mainly of rocks 
and metals but, farther, where we now find the giant Jovian 
planets, they were ‘icy’, i.e. they contained much ice and 
volatiles. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


: T i T , T : T T T 
me 017/0'8 ancees ordinary chondrites 


Earth's oceans water 


1 L ! L 1 1 


0'8/0'° excess 
1 
6 


8 10 


Figure 6. Isotopic anomalies for oxygen in Earth’s materials and 
in meteorites. 


The sizes of the planetesimals are estimated to be 
of the order of some tens of kilometres, their masses 
were therefore of the order of 10° kg (a thousand billion 
tons). To build the Earth with such bricks, we would need 
about 10!° of them, i.e. ten billion. Here is the disk of 
planetesimals: several tens of billions of bodies only in 
the region of the terrestrial planets, orbiting the proto- 
Sun nearly circularly almost in the same plane. In each 
region, they move on almost concentric orbits with almost 
the same velocity but, given their enormous number, 
collisions frequently occur and, when they collide, they 
encounter each other with a slow relative velocity, of 
the order of some meters per second. During such low- 
velocity collisions, a kind of ‘gluing’ occured and therefore 
formation of greater and greater aggregates. This is 
how a population of aggregates of different sizes was 
progressively established, where the size distribution is 
simply the result of a game of probabilities: the greater 
the aggregate, the smaller the probability of forming it 
in a given time. But an important process will perturb 
this simple game, when the gravity of the aggregates 
becomes sufficiently high to attract other aggregates and 
planetesimals: an aggregate which initially has the luck to 
become large increases its efficiency to attract others; then 
the more it grows, more its gravity increases, and the more 
it grows, and soon.... 

We have here an unstable process, which led to 
runaway ACCRETION, where the largest body in a given 
part of the disk enlarges at the expense of the others and 
so forms embryonic planets. When they attain the size 
of the Moon or of Mercury (i.e. around 1/4 to 1/2 of 
the Earth), they have exhausted the building blocks in 
their immediate neighborhood and their growth stops. 
This seems to have been the case in the region of the 
terrestrial planets, but how many Moons or Mercuries 
do we need to form these latter? Probably around a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hundred. Then, after the runaway stage, which lasted 
maybe several million years, a sparse stage follows where 
a hundred planetary embryos revolve around the proto- 
Sun on orbits much more widely spaced than the orbits 
of the previous planetesimals. In this scenario, Jupiter 
has grown faster and accreted much of the gas of the 
nebula, so that its gravity perturbs the orbits of these 
embryonic terrestrial planets which then will cross each 
other; we are then in the final stage of the formation of 
the terrestrial planets where giant impacts occur between 
bodies width sizes of hundreds to thousands of kilometres. 
These impacts may be hard indeed, and we can see their 
scars on the surface of many bodies, for example on the 
Moon and Mercury (the impact craters on Earth and on 
other planets with an atmosphere have been mostly eroded 
away); moreover, such an impact can completely destroy 
anembryonic planet or, at least, fragment it into two bodies 
and so give birth to a ‘binary planet’ as, for example, Earth 
and the Moon (see the entry on the Moon for more details 
about its origin). 

We know that the total mass in the asteroid belt is 
very much less than the masses contained in the other 
planetary regions, i.e. the region of the terrestrial planets 
as well as the region of the Jovian planets; the Kuiper 
Belt shows the same lack of mass. It does not seem 
likely that the density of the solar nebula should have 
decreased so much either in the asteroid zone or just 
beyond Neptune; so we may suppose that matter in 
these regions was blown away during stages after the 
formation of the planetesimals (asteroids and Kuiper Belt 
objects are probably ‘fossils’ of the early formation of the 
solar system). And indeed a mechanism still operates 
nowadays; for example, the resonances which cross the 
asteroid belt (mean motion resonances between asteroidal 
orbits and the orbit of Jupiter, as well as the so-called 
‘secular resonances’ between some orbital elements of 
asteroids and the two largest Jovian planets) are like traps 
where any body inside is blown away in a relatively short 
time because of the planetary perturbations. The result 
is that the asteroidal orbits become very eccentric and 
so cross the orbits of the terrestrial planets (or even fall 
into the Sun), which may lead to catastrophic collisions 
with these latter and explains—at least in part—the lack 
of mass in the asteroidal region. In the Kuiper Belt, too, 
many objects have probably been ejected by planetary 
perturbations since the beginning of the solar system. 


But stars are not all alone... 

Up to now we have considered only, although implicitly, 
processes occurring around the Sun, which is a single 
star. Our star, although accompanied by several bodies 
like planets or comets, is indeed alone, because its nearest 
neighboring star, Proxima Centauri, is more than 4 light- 
years away, i.e. almost 8000 times farther than Neptune. 
But more than half of all stars are not alone: they exist 
mainly in pairs, the ‘binary stars’, and even sometimes 
in threes ... or more. Two questions then arise: can 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 7. Protoplanetary disks around each component of a young double star in a molecular cloud designated L1551, in the 
constellation Taurus. VLA image: the colors represent relative intensity, or brightness, of the radio emission coming from these disks, 
red is strong emission and blue is weak emission; the scale bar corresponds to a distance of 20 AU; for comparison, in our own solar 
system, the planet Uranus is about 19 AU from the Sun. (Credit: L.F. Rodriguez et al National Radio Astronomical Observatory.) This 


figure is reproduced as Color Plate 60. 


planets form in such environments and, if yes, do long- 
term stable orbits exist for such planets? Recently, more 
and more theoretical studies seem to show that the answers 
to these questions may be positive. Moreover, recent 
observations of what we may interpret as protoplanetary 
disks in binary systems (see for example figure 7), as well 
as several examples among the indirectly detected exo- 
planets being in double systems (e.g. around 16 Cyg B 
or Gl 86 A, detected by the radial velocity method, and 
the gravitational microlensing event MACHO-97-BLG- 
41), are very encouraging. 


Some open problems 

Since late 1995 the discovery, although indirect, of dozens 
of giant gaseous planets (the first around 51 Pegasi, 
discovered by Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz from 
Geneva Observatory in Switzerland with the 1.93 m 
telescope of Saint-Michel de Haute-Provence Observatory 
in South France) very near their ‘sun’ (i.e. very muchnearer 
than Mercury’s orbit), such a position for the formation of 
such a Jovian planet previously being ruled out by the 
theoreticians, led to the idea that these planets actually 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


formed at large distance then migrated to their present 
place through interactions with either the solar nebula (not 
yet evaporated) or the disk of planetesimals. Even our own 
solar system, which seemed so perfectly constructed (let 
us recall Bode’s ‘law’ ...) that the actual positions of the 
planetary orbits correspond to the location of their birth, 
may too have been affected by this kind of mechanism. 
For example, some new theoretical models describing 
the distribution of the Kuiper Belt objects imply that the 
structure of the Kuiper Belt give clues about the history 
of the Jovian planets and, particularly, indicates that the 
latter’s orbits would had progressively changed after their 
formation, e.g. Neptune moved outwards by several AU 
over some tens of millions of years, Uranus and Saturn 
moved outwards too but by a smaller amplitude, while 
Jupiter moved inwards only a little. Nevertheless, note 
that there exist rival explanations about the distribution of 
the Kuiper Belt objects. 

Moreover, we may have an example of another 
planetary system, around the star v And (upsilon 
Andromedae), studied by Paul Butler and co-workers, 
where three Jovian planets (of masses respectively, at least, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Formation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.7, 2 and 4 Jupiter masses) orbit their star at respectively 
0.06, 0.8 and 2.5 AU; but here theoretical models of distant 
formation followed by migration have great difficulties in 
explaining the actual structure of this planetary system. 

As a conclusion, astronomers need much more time 
before they can confirm a theory which presents a 
convincing explanation of all details of the formation and 
the evolution of planetary systems in general and of our 
solar system in particular. 


Daniel Benest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Solar System: Nomenclature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar System: Nomenclature 


This article describes the various schemes used for 
assigning names to solar-system objects with visible 
surfaces, other than the Earth, and their surface 
features. The schemes are known collectively as planetary 
nomenclature. 


Planets and satellites 

The outer planets that were discovered in modern 
times were named after principal figures from Roman 
mythology, following the tradition for the planets known 
in antiquity (though the first two letters of ‘Pluto’ also 
commemorate Percival Lowell, whose calculations led 
to its discovery). Planetary satellites, discovered from 
the seventeenth century onwards, were given names of 
figures from mythology and literature associated with 
that of the parent planet, a practice which has been 
adhered to for the many minor satellites discovered in 
the late twentieth century. For example, the Galilean 
satellites of Jupiter were named by Simon Mayr (or 
Marius) after four paramours of the god Jupiter; names 
of other female figures in the Jupiter myth have been 
assigned to the smaller satellites. Likewise, most of the 
minor satellites of Uranus are named after characters from 
William Shakespeare’s plays, the precedent having been 
set when John Herschel gave names to the planet’s four 
largest satellites in the nineteenth century. 

Satellites are also given numerical designations. For 
example, the first two outer satellites of Uranus to be 
discovered were temporarily referred to as $1997 U1 
and S1997 U2, indicating that they were respectively the 
first and second new Uranian satellites to be detected in 
1997. Once their orbits were confirmed they received the 
permanent designations Uranus XVI and Uranus XVII, 
labeling them as the sixteenth and seventeenth of all the 
planet's satellites to be discovered. 


Comets 
Comets are identified by name and number. In the 
great majority of cases a comet’s name commemorates 
its discoverer(s). The numbering system, similar to that 
used for asteroids, specifies the year and month in which 
a comet was discovered. In addition, a prefix identifies the 
comet as of short or long period, and short-period comets 
are given permanent numbers, in order of their discovery. 
The practice of naming comets dates from the 
eighteenth century, after Edmond Halley demonstrated 
in 1705 that the comets of 1531, 1607 and 1682 were one 
and the same object, which became known as Halley’s 
Comet. Similarly, in 1819 Johann Encke showed that 
four apparitions between 1786 and 1818 were of the same 
comet, now known as Encke’s Comet. (‘Comet Halley’, 
‘Comet Encke’, and so on, are preferred in more formal 
usage.) Other comets were named after their discoverers. 
Some comets bear two or even three names. Comet Grigg— 
Skjellerup, for example, was found by John Grigg in 1902, 
and by Frank Skjellerup at a later apparition in 1922. On 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the night of 23 July 1995, Alan Hale and Thomas Bopp 
independently discovered the comet subsequently named 
after them. Comet IRAS—Iraki-Alcock was discovered 
independently by Genichi Iraki and George Alcock, and 
also detected by the IRAS satellite, in 1983. Since 1995 such 
triple-barreled names have not been admitted. Different 
discoveries by the same individual(s) are distinguished 
by the addition of an arabic numeral: Comet Shoemaker-— 
Levy 9, for example, was the ninth discovery by the team 
of Carolyn and Eugene Shoemaker and David Levy. 

Numerical designations for comets were introduced 
by the editors of the Astronomische Nachrichten (AN) in 
1846. In the original scheme, comets were assigned 
roman numbers according to the order of their perihelion 
passages in a particular year; in 1870 the AN editors 
introduced subsidiary designations in which comets were 
assigned a lower-case roman letter reflecting the order 
of discovery announcements in a particular year. Both 
schemes had their problems: some perihelion times turned 
out to be inconsistent with the numbers assigned; comets 
received a new designation with each apparition; some 
comets mistakenly had more than one letter applied to 
them. 

Despite these problems, the systems persisted until 
the 1990s. In 1994 the International Astronomical Union 
announced (in Minor Planet Circulars numbers 23803 and 
23804) new designations, to take effect from 1 January 
1995. A comet’s designation consists of the year of its 
discovery, a letter for the half-month in which it was 
discovered, and an arabic numeral indicating its order 
of discovery in that half-month. So A is January 1-15, B 
is January 16-31, C is February 1-15, D is February 16- 
28/29, and so on (I and Z are not used). Prefixes are 
assigned as follows: ‘P/’ for a short-period comet, ‘C/’ 
for a long-period comet, ‘D/’ for defunct comets (such 
as Shoemaker-Levy 9), ‘X/’ for comets for which orbits 
cannot be computed (or whose existence is doubtful) and 
‘A/’ for any comet that might turn out to be an asteroid. 
Once the orbit of a short-period comet is well established, it 
receives an arabic number indicating its order of discovery; 
the first in this sequence is 1P/Halley. 

One example will illustrate the old and new systems. 
Comet Pons-Brooks, with a period of 70 years, was 
discovered by Jean-Louis Pons in 1812, before numerical 
designations were introduced. When it was rediscovered 
in 1883 by William Brooks, it received the designations 
1884 I (the first comet to perihelion in 1884) and 1883b (the 
second comet discovery announced in 1883). On its return 
in 1954, it was given the additional designations 1954 VII 
and 1953c. Under the new system the three corresponding 
designations are 1812 O1, 1883 R1, and 1953 M1; the first of 
these indicates that the comet was first seen in the second 
half of July 1812. The comet has the prefix 12P/, putting it 
twelfth in the sequence of established short-period comets. 
It is therefore referred to as ‘12P/Pons—Brooks’; if one 
wanted to specify its most recent apparition, ‘Comet 1953 
M1’ would be the form to use. Correspondences between 
all the old- and new-style designations are give in Marsden 
and Williams (1999). See also METEOR SHOWER. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Nomenclature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Asteroids 

Like comets, asteroids are identified by name and number. 
The system of provisional and permanent numerical 
designations is similar to that used for comets (see above). 
Unlike comets, asteroids are given names chosen by their 
discoverers. The sheer number of asteroids discovered in 
recent times has seen a steady increase in the number of 
categories from which asteroid names are chosen. Names 
of people (from all walks of life, famous or otherwise), 
mythological figures and geographical names are the main 
sources. 

When the first asteroids were discovered in the early 
1800s, nomenclature was not an issue. As ‘minor planets’ 
they were simply named for classical figures, following 
the established practice for the major planets. In 1850 
the naming of the twelfth asteroid as Victoria in honor 
of the reigning British monarch (though also the name 
of the Roman goddess of victory) sparked a controversy 
that persisted for decades. At the end of the century 
the classical rule was relaxed, and any female name was 
deemed acceptable. This rule too was stretched, feminine 
endings ‘-a’ or ‘-ia’ being added to geographical names, 
giving for example ‘Washingtonia’. After the Second 
World War the female rule too was relaxed. 

Naming of asteroids is now under the control of 
the IAU’s Minor Planet Names Committee. The present 
rules actually proscribe very little. Names must be 
pronounceable, of sixteen letters or fewer, and should 
not commemorate military or political figures who died 
less than a hundred years previously. Other than that, 
discoverers have free rein; they must, however, justify the 
significance of the name they choose. The largest category 
is personal names. As well as astronomers (e.g. Hubble) 
and other scientists (e.g. Turing) there are composers 
and musicians, both ancient and modern (e.g. Mozartia, 
Zappafrank); other names commemorate relatives, mostly 
wives and children, of discoverers. Geographical names 
include Dresden and Hanoi, and the fictitious Neverland 
(from Peter Pan). Observatories (e.g. Goethe Link), and 
telescopes (e.g. Spacewatch) are also represented. Some 
choices are unusual or even whimsical. Swissair is 
named for the discoverer’s favorite airline. The name 
Tooting, a district of London, was inspired by the asteroid’s 
provisional designation, 1992 SW17 (SW17 being Tooting’s 
postal code). 

There are special rules for two groups of asteroids. 
The Trojan asteroids, which orbit at the L, and L; 
Lagrangian points of Jupiter’s orbit, take their names from 
figures from the Trojan War legend, such as Achilles (in the 
L, group) and Patroclus (in the L; group). The Centaurs, 
which orbit in the outer solar system, are given appropriate 
names: the largest two are Chiron and Pholus. 

The numbering of asteroids was begun by Benjamin 
Valz, who named the asteroid Massalia in 1852, and added 
the number 20, written in a circle, to indicate that it was 
the twentieth to be discovered. This system of permanent 
numbering is still used today, but with the number in 
parentheses rather than a circle. Thus the first asteroid to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


be discovered is designated (1) Ceres; the ten-thousandth 
is (10000) Myriostos. In the nineteenth century, the 
editors of the AN assumed responsibility for numbering, 
assigning asteroids a number on the announcement of 
their discovery. Confusion over the order of discovery 
arose as the pace of discovery quickened. Also, as some 
‘discoveries’ failed to be confirmed, ‘spare’ numbers began 
to accumulate. 

A solution was proposed in 1892 by Adalbert Kriiger, 
then editor of the AN: henceforth new discoveries would 
first be assigned a provisional designation consisting of 
the year of discovery plus a capital letter to indicate 
the order of the discovery in that year. Once the orbit 
had been satisfactorily established, the editors of the 
Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch would assign a permanent 
number. Kriiger’s system, which was soon expanded 
to accommodate increasing numbers of discoveries each 
year, forms the basis of the system currently used by the 
IAU’s Minor Planet Center. A provisional designation 
consists of the year of discovery plus two capital letters 
and, as is usually necessary, a number. The first letter 
indicates the half-month of discovery, in the same way as 
for comets (see above). The second letter indicates the 
order of discovery within that half-month. The letter I is 
not used here, allowing for 25 discoveries per half-month. 
For the 26th discovery in a given half-month the second 
letter returns to A, but with ‘1’ appended. For discoveries 
51 to 75, a ‘2’ is appended, and so on. Where typography 
allows, it is recommended that these numbers be written 
as subscripts. 

Thus, for example, the sequence of discoveries in 
the first 15 days of January 2000 are assigned provisional 
designations in the following order: 2000 AA, 2000 AB, 
..., 2000 AZ, 2000 AA;, 2000 AB, ..., 2000 AZ,, 2000 
AAy, and so on. The asteroid with the provisional 
designation 1992 SW;7 mentioned above—now with the 
permanent designation (8380) Tooting—was the 542nd to 
be discovered in the second half of September 1992. 


Surface features 
In the seventeenth century the first selenographers 
(makers of Moon maps) all devised their own schemes 
for naming lunar features, and the same thing happened 
in the nineteenth century when observers first mapped 
Mars. In the twentieth century the IAU assumed the task 
of standardizing planetary nomenclature, which became 
all the more important with the mapping of increasing 
numbers of planets and their satellites by space probes 
from the 1960s onwards. Assigned names are binomial, 
consisting of a generic term describing the type of feature, 
plus a specific name. Terrestrial placenames, names of 
famous people, and names from the world’s mythologies 
and literature are the main sources of specific names. 
For each body, appropriate themes are chosen for each 
category of surface feature. See also MOON Maps. 

With the advent of the telescope, selenographers 
began to chart the surface features of the Moon. They 
assumed that the surface they saw was Earthlike, and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Nomenclature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that the dark areas were water, to which they gave 
Latin names representing among other things terrestrial 
weather and states of mind, for example Mare Serenitatis 
(the Sea of Serenity) and Lacus Timoris (the Lake of 
Fear). Craters were named after prominent people, a 
practice begun by Michael Van Langren with his map 
of 1645; in 1651 Giovanni Riccioli set the precedent for 
naming them after ancient and modern astronomers and 
scientists, such as Plato and Copernicus. A consistent 
nomenclature for the most prominent features, based on 
Riccioli’s scheme, emerged during the nineteenth century, 
but for the smaller features there was no consensus and 
selenographers frequently assigned names of their own 
choosing. 

A similar situation had arisen with Mars. A 
combination of improved telescopes and favorable 
oppositions allowed the first good maps to be prepared 
in the late nineteenth century. Several astronomers had 
mapped the planet’s elusive features, each applying their 
own nomenclature. The system that would eventually 
prevail was that adopted by Giovanni Schiaparelli on 
his map of 1877, for which he used names derived from 
classical literature and the Bible. 

The chaotic state of lunar and Martian nomenclature 
was a concern of the IAU from the time of its foundation 
in 1919. Building on preliminary work by Mary Blagg, 
the first IAU planetary nomenclature committee tackled 
the problem of lunar nomenclature. The result was Named 
Lunar Formations (1935) by Blagg and Karl Miiller, the first 
systematic nomenclature for the Moon. This work was 
greatly expanded in the 1960s with the publication of The 
System of Lunar Quadrants (in four parts) by D W G Arthur 
et al. In 1958 the nomenclature for Mars was put on a 
firm basis when an IAU committee under Audouin Dollfus 
adopted a standard list of albedo features (areas appearing 
light or dark) based on Eugéne Antoniadi’s expansion of 
the system introduced by Schiaparelli. 

With the dawn of the space age came the realization 
that a systematic approach to planetary nomenclature was 
necessary. In the 1960s, ad hoc committees dealt with 
naming the host of new lunar features imaged by the 
Zond, Lunar Orbiter and Apollo missions, and also with 
the Martian features photographed by the Mariner probes. 
In 1973 the IAU set up the Working Group for Planetary 
System Nomenclature (WGPSN), which continues to be 
the body with responsibility for assigning new names. 
It operates through six task groups, covering the Moon, 
Mercury, Venus, Mars, asteroids and comets, and the outer 
solar system. 

When a body is first imaged, a few prominent features 
are assigned names based on an appropriate theme. 
Initially names are suggested by, for example, project 
scientists, but thereafter anyone can propose a name to the 
appropriate task group. When the IAU was faced with the 
task of naming several hundred newly mapped features of 
Venus, for example, members of the public were invited 
to submit names of women whose achievements they felt 
deserving of honor. The task groups are guided by various 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


rules and conventions. Nearly all names are binomial in 
form: one part is a ‘descriptor’ (see table 1), a generic 
term derived from Latin or Greek that characterizes the 
type of feature—thus continuing the scheme used by the 
early selenographers; the other, which is the specific name, 
goes before the descriptor in some cases, after it in others. 
Exceptions, which bear only a specific name, are craters, 
albedo features (on Mercury and Mars), volcanic eruptions 
and plumes (on Io and Triton), and some large ringed 
structures (e.g. Valhalla on Callisto). Other rules prohibit 
the use of names of political or military leaders, and 
encourage the task groups to draw on a broad selection 
of the world’s cultures. 

For each body, the appropriate IAU task group is left 
to develop interesting and appropriate conventions for 
naming surface features. Some examples will suffice. 

Craters on Mercury are named after celebrated figures 
in the arts. Examples are Beethoven, Chekhov, Okyo 
(Japanese painter), and Vyasa (Indian poet). Planitiae 
take their names from words for ‘Mercury’ in different 
languages, for example Budh Planitia (Hindu) and Tir 
Planitia (Norwegian). The names of rupés are those 
of famous ships of discovery: Discovery Rupes, for 
example, commemorates James Cook’s flagship on his last 
Pacific voyage. Radio telescopes, with which important 
discoveries about the planet have been made, lend their 
names to valles; an example is Arecibo Vallis. 

For Mars the lunar practice of naming craters after 
scientists is followed, and many large craters bear the 
names of those who have contributed to the study of 
the planet, such as Lowell, and writers who have used 
Mars as a setting for their fiction, such as Verne. After 
the Moon, Mars has more charted craters than any other 
body, and to avoid duplication of lunar names, smaller 
craters are named after towns and villages with fewer 
than 100000 inhabitants. Valles are given the names for 
‘Mars’ or ‘star’ in various languages if they are large (e.g. 
Bahram Vallis, Persian) or terrestrial rivers if they are small 
(e.g. Mad Vallis, in Vermont). An exception is the huge 
canyon system Valles Marineris, which takes the name 
of the Mariner probes which returned the first close-up 
images of the planet. The names of albedo features charted 
by Schiaparelli are not lost: they are transferred to nearby 
or coincident topological features. Thus, for example, the 
light-colored albedo feature Hellas becomes the impact 
basin Hellas Planitia. 

Satellites also have their own appropriate themes for 
nomenclature. In the Uranian system, for example, surface 
features take their themes from the satellites’ names: on 
Oberon, from tragic Shakespearean heroes (e.g. the crater 
Romeo); on Titania, from female Shakespearean characters 
(e.g. the crater Elinor); on Umbriel, from malevolent spirits 
(e.g. the crater Gob, king of the gnomes); on Ariel, from 
benevolent spirits (e.g. Pixie Chasma); and on Miranda, 
from characters and settings from Shakespearean drama 
(e.g. Verona Rupes). 

Asteroids too have themes assigned to them. Gaspra, 
the first to be imaged from close hand, by the Galileo probe, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Nomenclature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Descriptors for planetary nomenclature used by WGPSN. A blank in the descriptor column indicates that only the plural form 


is in use, and a blank in the plural column that only the singular form is used. 


Descriptor Plural Meaning Description Example 
Catena Catenae Chain Chain of craters Kraken Catena (Triton) 
Cavus Cavi Hole Hollow, irregular depression Sisyphi Cavi (Mars) 
Chaos — Chaos Distinctive area of broken terrain Arsinoes Chaos (Mars) 
Chasma Chasmata Chasm Deep, elongated, steep-sided depression | Avalon Chasma (Mimas) 
_— Colles Hills Small hills or knobs Scandia Colles (Mars) 
Corona Coronae Circle Ovoid-shaped feature Heng-o Corona (Venus) 
Dorsum Dorsa Back Ridge Kepler Dorsum (Phobos) 
Facula Faculae Little torch Bright spot Lyctos Facula (Amalthea) 
Farrum Farra Farro (variety Pancake-like structure, or a row of Seoritsu Farra (Venus) 
of grain) such structures 
Flexus Flexiis Bend Very low curvilinear ridge with a Sidon Flexus (Europa) 
scalloped pattern 
Fluctus Fluctis Flow Flow terrain Tung Yo Fluctus (Io) 
Fossa Fossae Ditch Long, narrow, shallow depression Nike Fossae (Venus) 
Labes Labés Blemish Landslide Tus Labes (Mars) 
Labyrinthus — Maze Complex network of intersecting Noctis Labyrinthus 
valleys (Mars) 
Lacus Lactis Lake Small plain on the Moon Lacus Oblivionis 
Lenticula Lenticulae Lentil Small dark spot on Europa (not yet used) 
Linea Lineae Thread Dark or bright elongate marking, Telephassa Linea 
may be curved or straight (Europa) 
Macula Maculae Spot Dark spot, may be irregular Akapura Maculae 
(Triton) 
Mare Maria Sea Large circular plain Mare Ingenii 
Mensa Mensae Table Flat-topped prominence with cliff- Nepenthes Mensae 
like edges (Mars) 
Mons Montes Mountain Mountain Maat Mons (Venus) 
Oceanus — Ocean Very large dark area on the Moon One instance only: 
Oceanus Procellarum 
Palus Paliis Swamp Small plain on the Moon Palus Putredinis 
Patera Paterae Shallow dish _ Irregular crater, or a complex one Shakuru Patera (Io) 
with scalloped edges 
Planitia Planitiae Plain Low plain Sipapu Planitia (Triton) 
Planum Plana Plain Plateau or high plain Planum Angustum (Mars) 
Promontorium Promontoria Cape Headland on the Moon 
Regio Regiones Region Large area marked by reflectivity or Nicholson Regio 
color distinctions from adjacent areas (Ganymede) 
Reticulum Reticula Net Reticular (net-like) pattern on Venus (not yet used) 
Rima Rimae Crack Fissure on the Moon Rima Hyginus 
Rupes Rupés Cliff Scarp Pourquoi-Pas Rupes 
(Mercury) 
Scopulus Scopuli Crag Lobate or irregular scarp Xanthe Scopulus (Mars) 
Sinus Siniis Bay Small plain Sinus Iridum 
Sulcus Sulci Furrow Subparallel grooves and ridges Samarkand Sulci 
(Enceladus) 
Terra Terrae Land Extensive land mass Lada Terra (Venus) 
Tessera Tesserae Mosaic tile Tile-like, polygonal terrain Kutue Tessera (Venus) 
Tholus Tholi Cupola Small domed mountain or hill Apis Tholus (Io) 
—_— Undae Waves Dunes Al-Uzza Undae (Venus) 
Vallis Valles Valley Valley Niger Vallis (Mars) 
Vastitas Vastitates Wasteland Extensive plain Vastitas Borealis (Mars) 


Source: Based on Batson and Russell (1995), on-line version. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Nomenclature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is named after a spa resort in the Crimea. Its craters take 
their names from other spa towns; examples are Aix, and 
Spa itself. Regiones, such as Yeates Regio, are named after 
Galileo project scientists. 


Bibliography 

Batson R M and Russell J F (ed) 1995 Gazetteer of Planetary 
Nomenclature 1994 (US Geological Survey Bulletin 
2129) (Washington, DC: United States Govern- 
ment Printing Office) (For an updated version, see 
http:/ /wwwflag.wr.usgs.gov /USGSFlag/Space/ 
nomen/nomen.html) 

Blagg M and Miiller K 1935 Named Lunar Formations 
(London: Lund, Humphries) 

Marsden B G and Williams G V 1999 Catalogue of Cometary 
Orbits 13th edn (Cambridge, MA: IAU Central Bureau 
for Astronomical Telegrams / Minor Planet Center) 

Schmadel L D 1999 Dictionary of Minor Planet Names 
4th edn (Berlin: Springer) (available with CD- 
ROM) (See also the lists of numbered asteroids 
maintained by the Minor Planet Center at http: / /cfa- 
www.harvard.edu/iau/lists/NumberedMPs.html) 

Whitaker E A 1982 NASA Catalogue of Lunar Nomenclature 
(NASA Reference Publication 1097) 

Whitaker E A 1999 Mapping and Naming the Moon 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


John Woodruff 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar System: Stability 


The question of the stability of the SOLAR SYSTEM was 
raised with the discovery of Newton’s law of gravitation, 
published in 1687. Since then, for 300 yr mathematicians 
and astronomers have searched for evidence for the 
stability of the planetary motions, and this quest led to 
many mathematical developments, and several successive 
‘proofs’ of stability for the solar system: first by Laplace 
and Lagrange, in the 18th century, then Poisson and 
more recently by the Russian mathematician V I Arnold 
in 1963. With Poincaré (1898), one can be surprised by 
this succession of proofs. ‘Were the old demonstrations 
insufficient, or the new ones unnecessary?’ In fact, all this 
evidence of stability was based on approximations, and 
it was shown recently, using numerical simulations, that 
the motion of the solar system is chaotic: although over 
10 million years the motion of the planets can be forecast 
with great accuracy, there is no hope of extending these 
predictions beyond about 100 million years owing to the 
exponential divergence of the orbits. 


Historical introduction 

The problem of the stability of the solar system 
has fascinated astronomers and mathematicians since 
Antiquity, when it was observed that, among the 
seemingly fixed stars, there were also ‘wandering stars’— 
the planets. Efforts were first focused on finding a 
regularity in the motion of these wanderers, so their 
movement among the fixed stars could be predicted. 
For Hipparchus and Ptolemy, the ideal model was a 
combination of uniform circular motions, the epicycles, 
which were continually adjusted over the centuries to 
conform to the observed course of the planets. Astronomy 
had become predictive, even if its models were in continual 
need of adjustment. 

From 1609 to 1618, Kepler fixed the planets’ 
trajectories: having assimilated the lessons of Copernicus, 
he placed the Sun at the center of the universe and, 
based on the observations of Tycho Brahe, showed that 
the planets described ellipses around the Sun. At the 
end of a revolution, each planet found itself back where 
it started and so retraced the same ellipse. Although 
seductive in its simplicity, this vision of a perfectly stable 
solar system in which all orbits were periodic would not 
remain unchallenged for long. 

In 1687 Newton announced the law of universal 
gravitation. By restricting this law to the interactions 
of planets with the Sun alone, one obtains Kepler’s 
phenomenology. However, Newton's law applies to all 
interactions: Jupiter is attracted by the Sun, as is Saturn, 
but Jupiter and Saturn also attract each other. There is no 
reason to assume that the planets’ orbits are fixed invariant 
ellipses, and Kepler’s beautiful regularity is destroyed. 

In Newton’s view, the perturbations among the 
planets were strong enough to destroy the stability of 
the solar system, and divine intervention was required 
from time to time to restore planets’ orbits to their place. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Moreover, Newton’s law did not yet enjoy its present 
status, and astronomers wondered whether it was truly 
enough to account for the observed movements of bodies 
in the solar system. 

The problem of solar system stability was a real one, 
since, after Kepler, Halley was able to show, by analyzing 
the Chaldean observations transmitted by Ptolemy, that 
Saturn was moving away from the Sun while Jupiter 
was moving closer. By crudely extrapolating these 
observations, one finds that 6 million years ago Jupiter and 
Saturn were at the same distance from the Sun. In the 18th 
century, Laplace took up one of these observations, which 
he dated 1 March 228 BC: at 4:23 am, mean Paris time, 
Saturn was observed ‘two fingers’ under Gamma in Virgo. 
Starting from contemporary observations, Laplace hoped 
to calculate backward in time using Newton’s equations 
to arrive to this 2000 yr old observation. 

The variations of planetary orbits were such that, in 
order to predict the planets’ positions in the sky, de LALANDE 
was required to introduce artificial ‘secular’ terms in his 
ephemeris tables. Could these terms be accounted for by 
Newton’s law? 


Laplace—Lagrange stability of the solar system 

The problem remained open until the end of the 18th 
century, when Lagrange and Laplace correctly formulated 
the equations of motion. Lagrange started from the 
fact that the motion of a planet remains close, over a 
short duration, to a Keplerian ellipse, and so had the 
notion to use this ellipse as the basis for a coordinate 
system (figure 1). Lagrange then wrote the differential 
equations that govern the variations in this elliptic motion 
under the effect of perturbations from other planets, thus 
inaugurating the methods of classical CELESTIAL MECHANICS. 
Laplace and Lagrange, whose work converged on this 
point, calculated secular variations, in other words long- 
term variations in the planets’ semi-major axes under 
the effects of perturbations by the other planets. Their 
calculations showed that, up to first order in the masses of 
the planets, these variations vanish (Poisson and Poincaré 
later showed that this result remains true through second 
order in the masses of the planets, but not through third 
order). 

This result seemed to contradict Ptolemy’s observa- 
tions from Antiquity but, by examining the periodic per- 
turbations between Jupiter and Saturn, Laplace discovered 
a quasi-resonant term (2Ajupiter — 5Asatum) in their longi- 
tudes. This term has an amplitude of 46'50” in Saturn’s 
longitude, and a period of about 900 yr. This explains 
why observations taken in 228 BC and then in 1590 and 
1650 could give the impression of a secular term. 

Laplace then calculated many other periodic terms, 
and established a theory of motion for Jupiter and Saturn 
in very good agreement with 18th century observations. 
Above all, using the same theory, he was able to account 
for Ptolemy’s observations to within 1 minute of arc, 
without additional terms in his calculations. He thus 
showed that Newton’s law was in itself sufficient to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Elliptical elements. At any given time, a planet (J) can 
be considered to move on an elliptical orbit, with semimajor axis 
a and eccentricity e, with the Sun at one focus (O). The 
orientation of this ellipse with respect to a fixed plane I, anda 
direction of reference OX, is given by three angles: the 
inclination 7, the longitude of the node &, the longitude of 
perihelion w = Q +, where w is the argument of perihelion (P). 
The position of the planet on this ellipse is given by the mean 
longitude A = M + @w, where M (mean anomaly) is an angle 
which is proportional to the area OPJ (Kepler’s third law). 


explain the movement of the planets throughout known 
history, and this exploit no doubt partly accounted for 
Laplace’s determinism. 


This result, where Laplace and Lagrange demon- 
strated that the planets’ semimajor axes undergo only 
small oscillations and do not have secular terms, was the 
first major result of stability for the solar system. At the 
same time, Laplace firmly established Newton’s law as the 
universal explanation for the motion of the celestial bodies. 


The problem of the eccentricities 


The stability of the semimajor axes of the planets is 
not sufficient to ensure the stability of the solar system. 
Indeed, if the eccentricity of the Earth becomes larger than 
0.1 and the eccentricity of Mars becomes larger than 0.3, 
then collisions between these two planets can occur. The 
problem of the stability of the eccentricities and inclination 
of the planets was addressed by Laplace and Lagrange in 
an additional set of papers. 


Taking into account only terms of first order in 
the perturbation series, they showed that the system of 
equations describing the mean motions of eccentricities 
and inclinations may be reduced to a system of 
linear differential equations with constant coefficients 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


depending on the planetary masses and semimajor axes: 


LS Lo 


where for each planet j, z; = e;expV—laj, 6; = 
sin(i;/2) exp J-19,, A; and B, are (k,k) matrices with 
real coefficients depending on the values of the planetary 
masses and semimajor axes. 0, is the (k,k) zero matrix 
and (aj, ej;,ij,4;, @;, 2;) are classical elliptical elements 
(figure 1). 

Using the conservation of ANGULAR MOMENTUM, Laplace 
demonstrated that, provided that all the planets rotate 
around the Sun in the same direction, polynomial or 
exponential solutions cannot exist for this system. He 
concluded that the eigenvalues g;, s; of A, and B, are 
real and that the solutions for this differential system are 
quasiperiodic expressions of the form 


k k 

igit — isjt 

Sj°= ) aj; a8 cj = ) Bij 
i=1 i=1 


where @;; and £;; are complex quantities. The frequencies 
gi, 5; are called the secular frequencies of the solar system, 
and their values, as computed witha more complete model 
(Laskar 1990), are given in table 1 (see also figure 2). 


Table 1. Fundamental frequencies of the precession motion of 
the solar system (excluding Pluto). These values are taken as the 
mean values over 20 million years from the recent solution La90. 
For the inner planets, because of chaotic diffusion, the 
frequencies can change significantly with time (Laskar 1990). 


v (yr!) Period (yr) 

81 5.596 231000 
82 7.456 174000 
g3 17.365 74 600 
g4 17.916 72300 
85 4.249 305 000 
86 28.221 45900 
87 3.089 419 000 
88 0.667 1940000 
s1 5.618 230.000 
sg —7.080 183 000 
33 —18.851 68 700 
sq —17.748 73 000 
55 0.000 

56 —26.330 49 200 
87 —3.005 431000 
sg —0.692 1870000 


The inclinations and eccentricities of the orbits are 
therefore subject to only small variations about their mean 
values. However, it must be stressed that Laplace’s 
solutions are very different from Kepler’s, because the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.02 


inclination of the Earth 


Figure 2. The solutions of Laplace-Lagrange for the motion of 
the planets are combinations of circular and uniform motions 
with the precession frequencies g; and s; of the solar system 
(table 1). The eccentricity e3 of the Earth is given by OP, while 
the inclination (i3) of the Earth with respect to the invariant 
plane of the solar system is OQ (Laskar 1992). 


orbits are no longer fixed. They are subject to a double 
precessional motion with periods ranging from 45000 to 
several million years: precession of the perihelion, which 
is the slow rotation of the orbit in its plane, and precession 
of the nodes, which is the rotation of the plane of the orbit 
in space. 

Later, Leverrier, famed for his discovery in 1846 
of the planet Neptune through calculations based 
on observations of irregularities in the movement of 
Uranus, took up Laplace and Lagrange’s calculations and 
considered the effects of higher-order terms in the series 
(Leverrier 1856). He showed that these terms produced 
significant corrections and that Laplace’s and Lagrange’s 
calculations ‘could not be used for an indefinite length of 
time’. He then challenged future mathematicians to find 
exact solutions, without approximations. The difficulty 
posed by ‘small divisors’ showed that the convergence of 
the series depended on initial conditions, and the proof of 
the stability of the solar system remained an open problem 
(see Laskar 1992 for more details on this point). 

Between 1892 and 1899, Poincaré formulated a 
negative response to Leverrier’s question. In so doing 
he rethought the methods of celestial mechanics along 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the lines of Jacobi’s and Hamilton’s work. In _ his 
memoir ‘On the three body problem and the equations 
of dynamics’, Poincaré showed that it is not possible to 
integrate the equations of motion of three bodies subject 
to mutual interaction and not possible to find an analytic 
solution representing the movement of the planets valid 
over an infinite time interval, since the series used by 
astronomers to calculate the movement of the planets were 
not convergent. 

In the 1950s and 1960s, the mathematicians Kol- 
mogorov and Arnold took up Poincaré’s work and showed 
that, for certain values of the initial conditions, it was 
nonetheless possible to obtain convergent series. If 
the masses, eccentricities and inclinations of the plan- 
ets are small enough, then many initial conditions lead 
to quasiperiodic planetary trajectories, similar to the 
Laplace-Lagrange solutions. However, the actual masses 
of the planets are much too large for this result (known as 
the KAM theorem) to apply directly to the solar system 
and thereby prove its stability. 

Although the constants required for the application of 
Arnold’s theorem correspond to extremely small values of 
the planetary masses, this result reinforced one more time 
the idea that the solar system was stable, by any reasonable 
acceptance of this term, on a time comparable with its age. 

The results obtained through numerical integration in 
the past decade show the contrary. 


Recent studies 

In very recent years, the problem of solar system stability 
has advanced considerably, largely as a result of computers 
which allow extensive analytic calculations and numerical 
integrations over model time scales approaching the age 
of the solar system. 

One part of these efforts consists of direct numerical 
integration of the equations of motion (Newton’s equa- 
tions, sometimes with additional relativistic corrections or 
perturbations due to the Moon). Initial studies were lim- 
ited to the motion of the outer planets, from Jupiter to 
Pluto. In fact, the more rapid the orbital movement of a 
planet, the more difficult it is to numerically integrate its 
motion. To integrate the orbit of Jupiter with a conven- 
tional integrator, a step size of 40 days will suffice, while 
a step size of 0.5 days is required to integrate the motion 
of the whole solar system (Cohen et al 1973; Kinoshita and 
Nakai 1984; Carpino et al 1987). These studies, reaching 
100 million years, essentially confirmed the stability of the 
system and the validity of the old perturbative approach 
of Laplace and Lagrange. At about the same time, calcu- 
lations of the same system were carried out at MIT over 
even longer periods, corresponding to times of 210 and 
875 million years. These calculations were carried out on 
‘Orrery’, a vectorized computer specially designed for the 
task (Applegate et al 1986; Sussman and Wisdom 1988). 
This integration showed that the motion of Pluto is chaotic, 
exhibiting exponential divergence with respect to the ini- 
tial conditions, with a characteristic (Lyapunov) time of 
20 Myr. However, since the mass of Pluto is very small 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(1/130 000 000 the mass of the Sun), this does not induce 
macroscopic instabilities in the rest of the solar system, 
which appeared relatively stable in these numerical stud- 
ies. 

The other possibility, in order to overcome some of 
the limitations of numerical integrations, consists in a 
semi-analytical approach. Using perturbation methods 
developed by Lagrange, Laplace and Leverrier, Laskar 
(1989) derived an extended averaged system for the whole 
solar system except Pluto, including all contributions up 
to second order with respect to the masses, and through 
degree 5 in eccentricity and inclination. For the outer 
planets, some estimated corrections of third order were 
also included. The system of equations thus obtained 
comprises some 150000 terms and does not model the 
motion of the planets, but rather the averaged motion 
of their orbits. It thus can be integrated numerically on 
a computer using a very large step size, on the order of 
500 yr. An integration over 200 million years showed that 
the solar system, and more particularly the system of inner 
planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars), is chaotic, with 
a Lyapunov time of 5 million years (Laskar 1989). An error 
of 15 m in the Earth’s initial position gives rise to an error 
of about 150 m after 10 Myr, but this same error grows to 
150 million km after 100 Myr. Itis thus possible to construct 
EPHEMERIDES Over a 10 million year period, but it becomes 
essentially impossible to predict the motion of the planets 
with precision beyond 100 million years. 

This chaotic behavior essentially originates in the 
presence of two secular resonances among the planets: 
6 = 2(g4 — g3) — (s4 — 53), Which is related to Mars 
and the Earth, and o = (g; — gs) — (51 — 52), related 
to Mercury, Venus and Jupiter (the g; are the secular 
frequencies related to the perihelia of the planets, while the 
s; are the secular frequencies of the nodes) (Laskar 1990). 
The two corresponding arguments change several times 
from libration to circulation over 200 million years, which 
is also a characteristic of chaotic behavior. 

The improvement of computer speed and the 
development of new methods for numerical integration 
allowed most of these results to be confirmed by the direct 
integration of Newton’s equations (figure 3) (Quinn et al 
1991; Laskar et al 1992; Sussman and Wisdom 1992). 


Evolution of planetary orbits 
Over less than 1 million years, a quasiperiodic model 
such as the one of Laplace—Lagrange (figure 2) gives a 
fair representation of the evolution of the planetary orbits. 
This linear model, although not very precise, provides 
in particular a good account of the variations of the 
eccentricity and inclination of the Earth which will be at 
the origin of the variation of the orientation of its axis of 
rotation, and thus of the insolation on its surface. Indeed, 
a similar model derived by Leverrier (1856) was used by 
Milankovitch for the establishment of his astronomical 
theory of paleoclimates (see CLIMATE). 

Over a longer period, of a few millions of years, 
a quasiperiodic approximation of the solution is still 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.06 


0.04 


y 


2 
° 
i) 


eccentricit: 


4 
- CAE ENS EEN Cate ch iy wali 


0.1 H j 


y 


od 

° 

a 
T 


eccentricit: 


‘ sa pt 
0 regu ean ive ean nen neal] ANY 
. 


-2 0 2 
t (Myr) 


Figure 3. The eccentricity of the Earth (top) and Mars (bottom) 
during a 6 Myr timespan centered at the present. The solid 
curve is the numerical solution from Quinn et al (1991), and the 
dotted curve the integration of the secular equations (Laskar 
1990). For clarity, the difference between the two solutions is 
also plotted (from Laskar et al 1992). 


possible, but it should take into account the effect of the 
resonances between the secular motion of inner planets. 
It will thus not be possible to obtain it with the classical 
perturbative method of Leverrier and its successors. On 
the other hand, such approximation can be obtained 
by some refined Fourier techniques, after the numerical 
integration of the averaged equations (Laskar 1988, 1990). 

The question of the maximum possible variations 
of the planetary orbits over the age of the solar system 
becomes now even more difficult to answer, as, because of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.5 


Mercury 


0.4 


0.3 


0.2 


eccentricity 


0.1 


o 


Jupiter” 
i a jt a ae a a ae eae 11 
0 5 10 15 
Time (Gyr) 


a 
-_ 
oO 
1 
ol 


Figure 4. Numerical integration of the averaged equations of 
motion of the solar system 10 Gyr backward and 15 Gyr 
forward. For each planet, the maximum value obtained over 
intervals of 10 Myr for the eccentricity is plotted versus time. 
For clarity, Mercury, Venus and the Earth are plotted separately 
from Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. The large 
planets’ behavior is so regular that all the curves of maximum 
eccentricity appear as straight lines. On the contrary the 
corresponding curves of the inner planets show very large and 
irregular variations, which attest to their diffusion in the chaotic 
zone (Laskar 1994). 


the exponential divergence of the orbits, we know that it 
will notbe possible to obtain precisely the orbital evolution 
of the solar system after more than 100 Myr. 

The computation of the evolution of the solar system 
over 5 billion years may thus appear illusory, but one 
does not seek here to predict the precise evolution of the 
system, but to look only for its possible behavior. With this 
intention, the integration of the orbits was even pushed 
over durations going well beyond the age of the solar 
system (Laskar 1994, 1995). The results (figure 4) provide 
a very clear vision of the stability of the planetary orbits. 
In this figure is represented the computed evolution of 
the eccentricity of the orbits of planets of the solar system 
over a duration of 25 billion years (from —10 to +15 billion 
years). 

In fact, for better clarity, the plotted curve represents 
only the variation of the maximum eccentricity reached 
by the planetary orbits over intervals of 10 million years. 
Indeed, the oscillations of the eccentricity resulting from 
the linear coupling of the solutions (figure 3) are removed 
by this procedure. In doing so, the only variations which 
appear in figure 4 are thus the variations due to the chaotic 
diffusion of the orbits. 

For all external planets, the maximum eccentricity is 
almost constant. That reflects the fact that these trajectories 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are very close to regular and quasiperiodic trajectories; 
possible instabilities are insensitive with the scale of the 
the drawing. 

For Venus and the Earth, one observes moderated 
variations, but still significant. The maximum eccentricity 
of the Earth acquired through chaotic diffusion reaches 
about 0.08, whereas its current variations are approxi- 
mately 0.06. This situation is about the same for Venus. 

The two curves of the maximum eccentricity of the 
Earth and Venus are very similar, because of the linear 
coupling between these two planets. The evolutions of 
the orbits of Mars and Mercury are very spectacular. The 
diffusion of the eccentricity of Mars can bring this to 0.2 
in a few billion years, whereas the variations of Mercury’s 
orbit can lead its eccentricity to values exceeding 0.5. 

In fact, the system is still constrained by angular 
momentum conservation, which constrains strongly the 
most massive planets, and it is remarkable to note that, in 
the system of interior planets, the less massive a planet 
is, the larger is the possible diffusion of its orbit. The 
behaviors of the inclinations are very similar to those of 
the eccentricities. 

Because of the chaotic character of the orbits, a very 
small modification of the initial conditions will lead to 
a solution different from the preceding one after a few 
hundreds of million years, but the general aspect of the 
solutions will undoubtedly remain the same. To evaluate 
which are the possible maximum variations for the orbits 
of planets over 5 billion years, one can seek, by very small 
modifications of the initial conditions, the trajectory which 
leads to the strongest variations of the orbits. 

More systematically, Laskar (1994) calculated five 
trajectories of very close initial conditions over 500 Myr. 
The trajectory leading to the strongest Mercury eccentricity 
is then retained, and, in the vicinity of this maximum, five 
new trajectories are computed again for a new duration of 
500 Myr. For Mercury, this method then makes it possible 
to obtain in ten such stages an orbit which comes to cut 
Venus’s orbit in less than 3.5 billion years. Let us note 
that, brought back to the initial position, because of the 
exponential divergence of the orbits, the displacements 
of initial conditions correspond to a displacement of 
the position of the Earth smaller than Planck’s length 
(10-* cm). 

It should, however, be noted that, to arrive at this 
possible collision between Mercury and Venus, the model 
was used beyond its rigorous field of validity, which does 
not includes the vicinity of collisions. In addition, the 
solution was carefully chosen, so in any case it is surely 
not a very probable one, and the majority of the solutions 
of close initial conditions will not lead to this possible 
collision. 

The same method was applied to all other planets, 
but the chaotic diffusion of their orbits did not allow for 
a collision in less than 5 billion years. The planet which, 
with Mercury, has the most unstable orbit is the planet 
Mars, whose eccentricity can, by this same method, reach 
approximately 0.25 in less than 5 billion years, while the 
Earth’s eccentricity barely reaches 0.1. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar System: Stability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Estimates of the zones possibly occupied by the inner 
planets of the solar system over 5 Gyr. The circular orbits 
correspond to the bold curves, and the zones visited by each 
planet resulting from the possible increase of eccentricity are the 
shaded zones. In the case of Mercury and Venus, these shaded 
zones overlap. Mars can go as far as 1.9 AU, which roughly 
corresponds to the inner limit of the asteroid belt (Laskar 1995). 


Marginal stability of the solar system 

If one summarizes these results on a plane graph 
representing the zone swept by the planetary orbits for 
the maximum values of their eccentricity (figure 5), one 
notes that the solar system is ‘full’: there is no place for 
an additional body. One needs at least 3.5 billion years 
to allow a collision between Mercury and Venus, but an 
additional body placed in this system will probably collide 
more rapidly with one of the already existing planets. 

This observation leads then to the concept of marginal 
stability for the solar system: the solar system is unstable, 
but catastrophic phenomena leading to the destruction of 
the system in its current form can take place only in a 
time comparable with its age, that is to say approximately 
5 billion years. The observation of this present state then 
makes it possible to suppose that the chaotic evolution of 
the orbits was a determinant process for the structuring 
of the system after the early stages of its formation (see 
SOLAR SYSTEM: FORMATION). At that time, some bodies other 
than the current planets could have remained, but in this 
case the system would have been much more unstable, 
and a collision or an ejection could have taken place (an 
example could be the impactor of the Earth which was 
at the origin of the formation of the Moon). After this 
event, the remaining system becomes much more stable. 
We thus obtain a self-organization of the system towards 
increasingly stable states. This vision is in agreement 
with the models of formation of planets by accretion 
of PLANETESIMALS (Safronov 1969), because it shows how 
the residual bodies could disappear, in particular in the 
internal solar system. It is remarkable that the zone swept 
by the orbit of Mars to its maximum eccentricity reaches 
the limits of the asteroid belt. 

Concerning the system of the outer planets, things 
are appreciably different, because the direct gravitational 
short-period perturbations are more significant. The 
recent numerical simulations show that particles placed 
among the outer planets do not remain beyond a few 
hundreds of million years, apart for some particular zones 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of stability or beyond Neptune, in the Kuiper belt, where 
objects explicitly were found. 

Finally, these observations also make it possible to 
have an idea of the general aspect of a planetary system 
around a star (see EXOPLANETS). Indeed, if the process 
of planetary formation from planetesimals is correct, it 
becomes possible that, in their final states, planetary 
systems will always be in a state of marginal stability like 
our own solar system. At the end of the phase of formation 
of the system a great number of bodies can remain, but 
in this case the system is strongly unstable, and is led 
to a collision or an ejection. After this event, the system 
becomes more stable. In particular, a system with only one 
planet, or even with two planets like Jupiter and Saturn, 
will not be able to exist, because this system would be too 
stable so that gravitational instabilities could not evacuate 
all the other bodies initially present. More precisely, if such 
a system exists, a multitude of small bodies will have to 
also remain, which will not have been evacuated by these 
gravitational instabilities. 


Bibliography 

Laskar J 1989 A numerical experiment on the chaotic 
behavior of the solar system Nature 338 237-8 

Laskar J 1990 The chaotic motion of the solar system. A 
numerical estimate of the size of the chaotic zones 
Icarus 88 266-91 

Laskar J 1992 La stabilité du systéme solaire Chaos et 
Déterminisme ed A Dahan et al (Paris: Seuil) (partially 
translated and reprinted as Laskar J 1995 The stability 
of the solar system from Laplace to the present General 
History of Astronomy ed R Taton and C Wilson, vol 2B, 
pp 240-8) 

Laskar J 1995 Large scale chaos and marginal stability of 
the solar system XIth ICMP Meeting (Paris, July 1994) 
(International Press) pp 75-120 (also in Celest. Mech. 
64 115-62) 

Quinn T R, Tremaine S and Duncan M 1991 A three million 
year integration of the Earth’s orbit Astron. J. 101 
2287-305 

Sussman G J and Wisdom J 1988 Numerical evidence that 
the motion of Pluto is chaotic Science 241 433-7 

Sussman G J and Wisdom J 1992 Chaotic evolution of the 
solar system Science 257 56-62 


Jacques Laskar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: 
Ground 


Solar observations require special telescopes and instru- 
ments. They share the basic optical principles with their 
nighttime companions, but there are also some substan- 
tial and characteristic differences between solar and stellar 
telescopes. 

The most obvious distinction is caused by the target 
of observation: the Sun. It irradiates the Earth’s surface 
with a power of about 1 kW m~*, and a solar telescope has 
to withstand this heat input while maintaining its optical 
quality. 

The Sun, as an extended object, allows the study of 
details on its surface. In order to achieve the highest 
spatial resolution possible, the solar image scale has to 
be adapted to the pixel size of the detector in the focal 
plane. This requires a large focal length and a large 
f-number for a given entrance aperture diameter, and 
that again distinguishes a high-resolution telescope from 
any other astronomical instrument. The properties of 
the telescope site are important for the achievable image 
quality. In addition to the high-resolution telescopes there 
are special-purpose solar telescopes which investigate 
global properties, such as the solar oscillations or the large- 
scale effects of the Sun’s magnetism. 


Resolution aspects 

The most important characteristics of a telescope are its 
resolution and light collection power. Since the Sun 
appears at least 10'° times brighter than any star in the 
sky, one may think that the second parameter is rather 
irrelevant for a solar telescope, but we will see later that 
this is indeed not the case. 

The image of a point source is completely described 
by the point spread function (PSF) for a perfect telescope. 
For a circular clear (unobstructed) aperture we obtain the 
well-known Airy pattern PSF = (1/z)[Ji(Br)/Br]’, where 
B=aD/,f and J; is the Bessel function of order 1; D and 
f are the aperture and the focal length of the telescope 
and i is the wavelength used for the observation. An 
important quantity derived from the PSF is the resolution 
angle a, = ri/f = 1.22A/D, or a, = 2.52 x 10°4/D, where 
r, is the radius of the first dark Airy ring and a, expresses 
the resolution in arcseconds. The imaging of extended 
objects, such as the Sun, with its low-contrast structures 
depends strongly on factors in addition to the PSF. These 
factors include the imperfection of the optical elements of 
the telescope, atmospheric distortion and image motion, 
as well as the degradation effects of the detector. 

The modulation transfer function (MTF) describes the 
reduction in contrast between the object and the image, as 
a function of spatial frequency: MTF(k) = C,(k)/C(k). 
The MTF is the modulus of the optical transfer function 
(OTF), and the OTF and the PSF are Fourier pairs, so the 
MIF is easily computed from the PSF. For a circular clear 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


aperture the MTF is 


2 k k A 2541/2 
MTFy(k) = = fans (=) — é|) = (;] 


where k, is the cutoff wavenumber of the telescope 
(MTF(k.) = 0). The resolution angle corresponds to a 
wavenumber km = 21r,~' and the contrast reduction 
factor at this wavenumber is 0.09 (figure 1). In a complex 
optical system each component is described with its own 
transfer function and the total MTF is just the product of 
the individual functions: 


MTFiot = MTFp x MTFr x MTFs x MTFe 


where the indices denote diffraction, telescope aberra- 
tions, seeing and detector. 


Telescope aberrations 

Deviations from a perfect figure of an optical surface are 
specified as wavefront error, 7, expressed in units of the 
incident wavelength. The PSF provides a simple criterion 
for the overall quality of a telescope: if the central intensity 
is at least 80% of the value for a perfect system, the 
instrument is called diffraction limited. The ratio Sp = 
Ip*© /Ip'***! is called the Strehl ratio. For small aberrations 
the relation Sg = 1 — k?o0* holds and we find the well- 
known criterion for the acceptable amount of wavefront 
errors for a diffraction-limited system, 0 = 0.0712 = 
4/14. 


The disturbing Earth's atmosphere 

The image degradation caused by the Earth’s atmosphere 
is due to thermal inhomogeneities causing local fluctua- 
tions in the index of refraction. The most commonly used 
parameter to describe this effect is the Fried parameter 
ro = 0.299D[(ko)*]-*/3, where o? is the averaged mean 
square wavefront error (in rad). The value of rp depends 
on the telescope site, the time of the day and on wave- 
length. Even under best conditions ro does not exceed 
20 cm at visible wavelengths. Good sites for solar tele- 
scopes are high mountain peaks, sites on islands or places 
surrounded by a lake. Water surfaces, both nearby and 
more distant ones, produce a smooth temperature profile 
of the overlying air—an important ingredient of good see- 
ing. Another important factor is wind, which prevents the 
buildup of turbulence in the immediate surroundings of a 
telescope caused by heating of the soil. Qualitatively, see- 
ing conditions corresponding to a certain value of rp permit 
(on average) the same spatial resolution as a telescope with 
a diameter of ro. The Fried parameter is a time-averaged 
value of the statistically varying seeing, and a sequence 
of many short-time exposures (with exposure times of a 
few milliseconds) therefore will contain some frames with 
a quality much better than the limit given by ro. Frame 
selection techniques are used to extract these high-quality 
frames from the sequence. The spatial resolution of solar 
telescopes is usually seeing-limited for spectroscopic mea- 
surements with exposure times longer than some 10 ms, 
and ADAPTIVE OPTICS is needed to overcome this limitation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MTF 


Figure 1. Modulation transfer function of an ideal telescope 
(thin full curve), a CCD camera (with two pixels per resolution 
element of the telescope, dashed curve) and their product (thick 
curve) plotted as a function of normalized spatial wavenumber. 


Detector transfer function 

Solid-state digital detectors nowadays have replaced 
analog media as recording devices. The commonly 
used CCD cameras have smaller pixels and a much 
higher sensitivity (quantum efficiency) compared with 
photographic film. From sampling theory it is known that 
correct sampling is required in order to avoid spurious 
signals in the recorded image. The smallest structure, x, = 
if D1, ina telescope image is given by the diffraction limit 
of the instrument. Critical sampling requires two pixels 
per resolution element, p = 0.5x,, where p is the pixel 
size. The length x, corresponds to the cutoff wavenumber 
k, = 2n/x,. The pixel size defines the maximum frequency 
of the digitized data, ky = 2m/2p, sok, = ky for 
critical sampling. In addition to the transfer effects of 
pixel size, the transfer function of a CCD camera has a 
second component, which describes diffusion processes 
in the photosensitive layer: MTFc = MTFp x MTFp. The 
pixel contribution is MTFp = sin(kp/2)/(kp/2), where p is 
the pixel pitch, which is assumed to equal the pixel size 
(modern CCDs have indeed 100% fill factor, i.e. no gaps 
between pixels). At the Nyquist frequency, kn, the pixel 
MTF has dropped to 0.637, so critical sampling leads to a 
significant contrast reduction at high spatial frequencies 
(figure 1). The (usually small) diffusion contribution 
depends on wavelength and on pixel size. For a given 
image scale, smaller pixels increase the contrast transfer, 
ie. the resolution, but this improvement has to be traded 
against the concomitant decrease in dynamical range, 
which is inversely proportional to the pixel size. 


Correlation tracking 

Atmospheric seeing causes image degradation due to 
blurring and also image motion within the field of view 
which leads to distortion. The local image motion can be 
compensated by means of a high-speed correlation tracker. 
A fast camera records images of the solar granulation at 
a rate of at least 1000 frames per second. The image 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10 


Photon flux 
=) 
T 
i 


1000 10000 
Wavelength [nm] 


Figure 2. Photons per resolution element of a telescope, for a 
wavelength interval of 1 nm and perfect telescope transmission. 
The dashed curve shows the same function for a telescope 
efficiency of 0.05 and a wavelength band of 1 pm. 


displacement is computed with a suitable algorithm, e.g. 
cross-cortelation, and a fast tip-tilt mirror finally corrects 
the image motion in a servo-loop. Correlation trackers 
need a closed-loop bandwidth of more than 50 Hz for 
proper functioning. 


How bright is the Sun? 

The spectral flux of the Sun measured outside the Earth’s 
atmosphere peaks in the green wavelength region. At 
a wavelength of 550 nm it is f, = 1.96 J m?s}. 
This corresponds to a photon flux of f, = 5.4 x 10° 
photons m~? nm™! s-!. Compared with the canonical 
value of 10° photons m~* nm! s~! for a zero-magnitude 
star, the Sun is indeed a bright source. Very seldom, 
however, is the Sun observed as a star, and high-resolution 
measurements are better characterized by the photon flux 
per resolution element of a telescope: 


_ i fp? 
 & RZ 


Tes 


where /, is the photon flux, 4 the wavelength and Ro 
the angular radius of the Sun (4.65 mrad). This quantity 
is a property of the Sun and is independent of the 
telescope size. Any increase in light-collecting area is 
exactly compensated by a corresponding decrease of the 
resolution element. The wavelength dependence of fies 
is shown in figure 2, together with a curve computed for 
a realistic telescope efficiency of 0.05 and a wavelength 
bandwidth of 1 pm, a typical value for narrow-band 
spectroscopy. 

Small-scale objects on the Sun are highly dynamic 
or transient; typical time-scales range between several 
minutes to just a few seconds. Obvious examples are the 
formation or disappearance of a thin magnetic flux tube 
or a flare event. The temporal and the angular resolution 
of an observation are coupled: the smaller the feature, 
the faster is the cadence needed for adequate sampling of 
the evolution. Figure 2 demonstrates the lack of photons 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


30F 


Number of Telescopes 


a 
oa 

LL LL 

peg ton gf eh peg ee ag Pep ped pepe a 


0 Oe L 1 Ll i 1 1 1 ! i 
15 30 45 60 75 90 105 120 135 150 
Telescope Aperture [cm] 


Figure 3. Distribution of telescope apertures, excluding 
helioseismic instruments. 


especially for narrow-band measurements in the blue part 
of the visible spectrum. 


Telescope types 
Optical solar telescopes can be divided in three groups, 
according to their main purpose: high-resolution, synoptic 
and helioseismic instruments. About 100 such telescopes 
are installed world-wide. Figure 3 shows the distribution 
of apertures of the first two groups. Most of these 
telescopes have diameters of less than 50 cm, and 
there is only a single one (the 1.5 m McMath—Pierce 
Telescope at KPNO) with an aperture of more than 
1m. It may be worthwhile to mention that most 
high-resolution telescopes are older than 15 yr. This is 
related to the dominating effect of day-time atmospheric 
SEEING on the achievable spatial resolution. Even at 
the best sites, narrow-band spectroscopic observations 
are almost always seeing limited. A Large Earth-based 
Solar Telescope (LEST) had been thoroughly studied and 
discussed for many years; its realization has finally been 
indefinitely postponed owing to lack of sufficient funding. 
The breakthrough in solar adaptive optics in 1999 
will revolutionize high-resolution solar observations: 
diffraction-limited observations will become possible in 
the near future even for large-aperture telescopes and for 
a significant fraction of the time (whenever the seeing 
quality exceeds a certain threshold value), and this will 
eventually lead to the development of a new generation of 
telescopes with apertures of 2 m and beyond. 


High-resolution telescopes 

This class of telescopes is designed for diffraction-limited 
observations and therefore their image scale is adapted to 
the resolution (pixel size) of the focal plane detectors. In 
order to image one resolution element onto two pixels, a 
focal length of f = 2AxA,a;! is needed, where Ay is the 
astronomical unit, a, the size of a resolution element and 
Ax the pixel size. Using the above relation for a, we obtain 
f 2Ax 


D Xr 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for the focal ratio (~60 for a pixel size of 20 pm). The field 
of view is only a small fraction of the solar disk, with a 
diameter of typically just 2 or 3 arcmin. 

Tower telescopes have been the classical design of a 
solar instrument, and the main advantages are (i) simple 
optics (one mirror with optical power suffices), (ii) large 
focal length of primary mirror (no hot focal plane, large 
field of view), (iii) slender, tall building (telescope entrance 
at large height, above local turbulence layer) and (iv) non- 
moving telescope and focal plane instrumentation, only 
few moving parts (feed optics). In order to avoid image 
degradation caused by internal turbulence, many of these 
telescopes have been built as evacuated systems, with 
high-quality entrance and exit windows. Either coelostat 
systems or alt-azimuthal two-mirror configurations are 
used as feed optics. The main advantage of the former is 
the non-rotating solar image, while a turret is much more 
compact and can be included in the evacuated light path. 

The 70 cm Vacuum Tower Telescope on Tenerife is 
shown as an example in figure 4. Most of the vacuum 
tube is indeed empty and only needed to accommodate 
the large focal length of 45 m. The size of the entrance 
window is one of the limiting factors for the aperture of 
such vacuum telescopes: at diameters beyond 1 m either 
the window becomes too thick or bending stress near 
the circumference, caused by the atmospheric pressure 
force (8 tons-force for a 1m window), leads to unwanted 
polarization effects. Therefore the LEST had been planned 
as a helium-filled system, with a very thin window to seal 
the helium from the ambient air. Helium has a smaller 
index of refraction, (3.6 x 107°, compared with 2.93 x 
10~*) than air, higher thermal conductivity and larger 
kinematic viscosity. These properties result in very small 
temperature variations and consequently little wavefront 
disturbance ina helium-filled telescope. However, helium 
technology is costly and the fabrication of a thin, optical- 
quality entrance window with a diameter larger than 2 m 
is a challenging task. 

Compact designs with two or more image-forming 
mirrors are also used for solar telescopes. These telescopes 
can be installed in much smaller buildings and have much 
less steelwork. Different optical designs have been used, 
including Newton-, Gregory- and Ritchey—Chrétien-type 
configurations. The focal length of the primary mirror 
is rather short, producing a ‘hot’ primary image, and 
therefore all optical elements between the primary and 
the first image need to be cooled. A modern example 
is the French THEMIS telescope on Tenerife, a 90 cm 
Ritchey—Crétien-type telescope, evacuated, and with very 
low instrumental polarization. 


Open-air versus closed telescopes 

The evacuation of a telescope completely eliminates 
internal telescope seeing, and filling such a tube with 
helium would produce the same effect. Future large 
telescopes of the 3-4 m class will be neither evacuated 
nor helium filled, owing to insurmountable problems with 
the necessary entrance window of any closed system. In 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


80 cm Coelostat _ 
mirrors 


75 cm entrance _~ 
window 


i nat 
+ clong 
Feed mirror for aan Tr sit 
guiding telescope 
am 
ay or 
a 
LA 
Y gers 
Folding flat ~ 
_jr 
Guiding telescope ee 
6m: 
Toor YF 
wT 
Vacuum tank 
Full disk 
guiding image 
70 cm Main ~~ 
mirror, spherical 
tL [le 
Correlation tracke: ne 
optics —m % = 
a 
pate 
Fokal plane, __ aid 
4.59 arcsec/mm ——™ = 


Figure 4. Sectional cut through the 70 cm German Vacuum 
Tower Telescope on Tenerife. The image shows the main optical 
components at the correct geometrical scale (T Kentischer, KIS). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


addition, closed telescope are limited in spectral range 
to wavelengths shorter than 2.7 wm, where the window 
material becomes opaque. 

The main source of internal telescope seeing is not 
the direct heating of the air inside the telescope tube; it is 
rather caused by the heating of the front side of the primary 
mirror which in turn heats the air in front of it. 

Using a value of 1000 W m” for the solar irradiance 
at a high-mountain site, the absorbed heat amounts to 
about 100 W m~?. From the known properties of Zerodur, 
the commonly used material for mirror blanks, and of 
aluminum one can estimate a temperature increase of 
about 20 K above ambient temperature. The elimination 
of mirror seeing in an open telescope therefore will require 
active cooling of the main mirror. The use of mirror 
materials with high thermal conductivity would make 
mirror cooling much easier. 


Synoptic telescopes 

During the first half of this century many solar 
observatories have been dedicated to routine or patrol 
observations of the Sun, and a wealth of phenomena have 
been described. Recently, the variability of the Sun and 
the possible dependence on the magnetic activity cycle of 
its luminosity and other quantities have initiated a new 
generation of synoptic telescopes, both space-borne and 
ground-based ones. 

Synoptic telescopes have a large field of view and 
most of them observe the full Sun. Their main purpose 
is the investigation of large-scale properties and the 
observation of long-term variations of the Sun. For full- 
disk observations apertures of 10-20 cm are normally 
sufficient, and the focal lengths f are in the range 1- 
2m, producing images of the Sun with diameters of 
d = 0.01f. With an image size of 20 mm, a large- 
format CCD camera with 2000 pixels x 2000 pixels and 
a pixel size of 10 um, a spatial resolution of 2 arcsec 
can be achieved (assuming critical sampling). Synoptic 
observations monitor the solar atmosphere at different 
layers, from the photosphere through the chromosphere 
to the transition layer (the corona is not accessible from 
ground, but synoptic observations are carried out from 
space, e.g. by SOHO or TRACE; see also SOLAR TELESCOPES 
AND INSTRUMENTS: SPACE). Medium-bandwidth filtergrams 
(FWHM * 50 pm) are produced using Lyot filters or 
interferometers, e.g. Fabry—Pérot etalons. 

NASA, NOAA and other data centers provide 
(incomplete) databases of a variety of daily synoptic 
images from different observatories, including 


photospheric images in ‘white light’ (sunspots), 
magnetograms (photospheric magnetic field), 

Ha images (chromosphere), 

Ca II K images (chromospheric network), 

He 1083 images (chromosphere, transition region), 
coronographic images (corona). 


Daily images are sufficient to study the long-term behavior 
of the Sun, on the time-scale of months or years, including 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1 2 


10 7 7 


Figure 5. Schematic layout of the SOLIS 
vector-spectromagnetograph: 1, window; 2, 3,50 cm 
Ritchey—Chrétien; 4, calibration optics; 5, polarization 
modulation and calibration; 6, agile mirror; 7, guider; 

8, spectrograph slit; 9, grating; 10, polarizing beam splitter and 
detector (C Keller, NSO). 


variations due to the 11 yr activity cycle. In addition, there 
are observing programs that study large-scale flows in the 
photosphere or the emergence of magnetic flux. These 
measurements require cadences in the order of minutes 
and high accuracy. Sucha program is envisaged e.g. within 
the SOLIS (Synoptic Optical Long-term Investigations of 
the Sun) project. SOLIS consists of three telescopes with 
apertures between 8 mm and 50 cm and it will also observe 
integrated sunlight (‘Sun as a star’) and investigate the 
possible cycle dependence of spectral lines. Figure 5 shows 
the schematic layout of one of the instruments, the 50 cm 
vector-spectromagnetograph. 

Atmospheric seeing, image quality and photon short- 
age are normally not an issue for synoptic observations, 
because diffraction-limited imaging is not required. Pho- 
tometric accuracy is critical for the measurement of the 
vector magnetic field, and SOLIS will therefore use an 
‘oversized’ 50 cm telescope for that purpose. Important 
criteria for the quality of such long-term observations are 
completeness, time coverage and consistency of the data 
over the full time interval. Completeness and time cover- 
age could be achieved by organizing networks of similar 
telescopes across the globe and by automated operation of 
the instruments. 


Helioseismology instruments 

Helioseismic experiments are probing the dynamics and 
structure of the solar interior with very high precision and 
they allow us to test the standard model of stellar evolution 
by measuring the global solar oscillations. These consist 
of a superposition of millions of modes with velocity 
amplitudes of a few cm gs! per mode, and frequencies 
between 2 and 4 mHz. Frequency resolution Af is 
equivalent to the total duration T of ameasurement (Af = 
T~'), and, therefore, long-term observations are necessary. 
Different observing strategies are possible: (1) repeated 
observations at a single site, (2) continuous observations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from the south pole or (3) network observations from 
stations around the Earth. The first method is certainly 
the simplest one and it has been used for years, e.g. at the 
Observatorio del Teide, where the first station of the BISON 
(Birmingham Izafia Solar Oscillations Network) NETWORK 
has been operated since 1975. The obvious disadvantage is 
a strong contribution to the power spectrum at a frequency 
of 1 per day (=11.57 Hz) and overtones, which corrupt 
the spectrum. The south pole measurements have no 
such effect, but for practical reasons measurement cycles 
are limited to 3 months and bad weather interruptions 
may occur at any time. The network approach is the 
most promising one, since it offers basically unlimited 
observing time. It is especially important to have virtually 
identical instruments. At present, three major networks 
are operated around the Earth. With six stations, more 
or less equally distributed in longitude, there is sufficient 
overlap in operating time to compensate for technical 
failures or bad weather conditions. With improving 
reliability and increasing degree of automation, duty 
cycles of more than 90% have been reached. 

Different approaches are used to achieve the 
necessary sensitivity for the velocity measurements: 
some network telescopes observe integrated sunlight and 
use atomic resonance spectrometers for the wavelength 
measurements, reaching an accuracy of a few mm s°!. 
These experiments measure only the lowermost modes 
with / < 4. The GLOBAL OSCILLATION NETWORK GROUP (GONG) 
instruments use a Michelson interferometer and a Fourier 
tachometer technique to measure the position of the line 
of neutral nickel at 676.8 nm. GONG has a spatial 
resolution of about 8 arcsec (an upgrade to 5 arcsec is 
planned) and can resolve modes up to / = 250. In 
a 30 day data set, frequencies can be measured with 
an accuracy of about 50 nHz (about one-seventh of the 
nominal frequency resolution) and a 1 yr observation will 
provide an accuracy of 15nHz. Asa result, the frequencies 
of the solar oscillations are by far the most accurately 
known parameter of the Sun. 


Focal plane instruments 

Focal plane equipment can be divided in two major 
subgroups: (1) broad-band imaging and (2) spectroscopic 
instruments. In the simplest case, an imaging instrument 
is just a camera and a filter to select the wavelength 
band of interest. Imaging instruments play an important 
role for synoptic observations and morphological studies 
of the solar atmosphere. With high-speed cameras 
and suitable post facto image reconstruction techniques 
diffraction-limited images can be obtained. Sequences 
of images are used to study horizontal flows using a 
local correlation tracking algorithm. For the measurement 
of physical parameters of the Sun (e.g. temperature, 
element abundance, magnetic field strength) spectroscopic 
instruments are needed. Strictly speaking, an instrument 
can only collect photons from the Sun, ie. measure 
intensity, 

T=I1(x,y,4,t, p) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and all physical information is derived therefrom (x, y are 
coordinates on the Sun, A, t and p denote wavelength, 
time and polarization state, respectively). Focal plane 
instruments are distinguished by the corresponding 
measurement techniques and the range and resolution 
limit of one or more of the aforementioned variables. 

Grating spectrographs measure simultaneously one 
spatial dimension, defined by length of the entrance slit, 
and wavelength. The basic characteristics are derived 
from the grating equation 


. : mh 
sina + sin B = — 
& 


where a and are the angles between the grating normal 
and the incoming and outgoing beam, m is the diffraction 
order and g the grating constant. For the Littrow 
configuration the two angles are nearly identical, so the 
grating equation simplifies to mA = 2g sin 8. According to 
the Rayleigh criterion two neighboring spectral lines are 
‘resolved’ if the diffraction maxima of one line coincides 
with the diffraction minima of the other line. This 
eventually leads to the equation for the resolving power 


_ A _ 2Wsin B 
“ARO 


where W denotes the width of the wavefront at the 
grating. The resolving power is independent of the grating 
constant. The angular dispersion is derived from the 
grating equation: 5 = 2tan BA~", and is also independent 
of the grating constant. The linear dispersion D(=f6, 
where f is the focal length of the imaging system) is of 
high practical importance, since it defines the image scale 
in the focal plane of a spectrograph and, together with the 
pixel size of the detector, the actual spectral resolution of 
a measurement. 

From the above equation we conclude that high 
spectral resolution requires large gratings used at high 
(and nearly equal) angles of incidence and diffraction. 
The resolution is sometimes written as R = nm, where 
n denotes the total number of illuminated grooves and 
m the diffraction order. This is mathematically correct, 
but it may lead to the erroneous conclusion that the 
number of grooves or the diffraction order contributes to 
the resolution power of a grating spectrograph. 

The observation of a certain area on the Sun is done 
by scanning the solar image across the spectrograph slit. 
The quality of such a measurement depends mainly on 
the precision of the scanning. This kind of measurement 
is rather sensitive to image distortion, which in this case 
is nearly uncorrectable. With successful adaptive optics, 
this problem will more or less disappear. 

In contrast to prisms, gratings produce overlapping 
spectral orders, so that additional filters are required to 
select a specific wavelength. Echelle spectrographs make 
best use of this multi-line capability and are therefore very 
versatile for diagnostic spectroscopy. A typical echelle 
grating has 79 grooves mm“! and is used at (or near) an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


angle 6 of 63.4° (tanB = 2). These gratings are blazed 
to maximize the grating efficiency at that angle. Visible 
wavelengths correspond to diffraction orders between 30 
and 50 with a free spectral range FSR = A/m (= 13 nm for 
m = 40). The spectral order(s) of interest are chosen via 
a pre-disperser in front of the main spectrograph or with 
medium-band interference filters in the focal plane. This 
allows to simultaneously record several wavelength bands 
from different parts of the spectrum. In contrast to stellar 
echelle spectrographs, where a cross-disperser displaces 
overlapping orders perpendicular to the dispersion axis, 
the pre-disperser selects short wavelength bands that are 
imaged in the focal plane along the dispersion axis. This 
imposes a serious limit on the choice of spectral regions: 
‘degenerate’ wavelengths, with the same value of md, 
cannot be observed simultaneously. 

Filter spectrometers are basically narrow-band imag- 
ing devices with wavelength tuning capability. They pro- 
vide spatial information in two dimensions for a specific 
wavelength and a complete spectrum is obtained by taking 
filtergrams at different wavelength positions. The spectral 
resolution and coverage are determined by the type of fil- 
ter used. In the past, tuneable Lyot filters (or a universal 
birefringent filter, UBF) have been used for that purpose. 
The main disadvantage of this filter type is its low trans- 
mission. The spectral resolution ranges between some 10 
pm and 50 pm, and the main application has been the spec- 
troscopy of strong chromospheric lines. 

The first Fabry—Pérot interferometer (FPI) had been 
builtin 1899, long before the first Lyot filter. The commonly 
used name for these devices, étalon (=standard of measure) 
reminds to its original purpose. Etalons are characterized 
by the following (simplified) equations for the free spectral 
range, FSR, and the resolving power, R, which both 
depend on the spacing t between the interferometer plates: 


Nes nN 2Ft 

FSR = oF R= 17 tae 

The finesse F is the ratio between the FSR and the width of 
the instrumental profile. It is independent of the spacing 
and is a measure of the quality of an FPI (reflectivity, 
parallelism and smoothness of the interferometer plates). 
It is obvious from the above relations that for a reasonably 
high spectral resolution of, say, 250 000 at a wavelength of 
550 nm, the FSR is very small, of the order of 0.1 nm and 
hence a very narrow filter is needed to suppress adjacent 
passbands. As a consequence, several spectrometers have 
been built as a combination of a UBF, acting as prefilter, 
with an FPI. The main drawback of that solution is again 
the low transmission and difficulties in coherent tuning of 
the two components. 

Another solution is the combination of two or more 
etalons with different spacings. Coarsely speaking, 
the largest spacing determines the resolution, while the 
narrowest etalon increases the FSR. The efficiency of a 
triple-etalon system is at least one order of magnitude 
higher compared with a UBF. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Ground 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Filter spectrometers and grating spectrographs com- 
plement each other in many respects: a filter spectrometer 
observes a fixed field of view and the time needed to obtain 
a full data set J (x, y, 4) depends on the number of wave- 
length steps, while a grating spectrograph always records 
a fixed wavelength range and the field of view is coupled 
to the measurement time through the number of scan po- 
sitions. Measurements which require a very fast cadence 
can easily be made with a filter instrument, at the cost of 
wavelength information, but without loss of spatial field. 
Grating instruments are especially valuable, when precise 
wavelength information, e.g. the shape of line profiles, is 
needed. Filter and grating spectrographs are used for Po- 
LARIMETRY by adding the capability to discriminate between 
the polarization states of the incoming light. SOLAR MAGNE- 
TOGRAPHS usually measure the line-of-sight component of 
the magnetic field on the Sun. The investigation of the 
strength and orientation of the magnetic field vector re- 
quires complicated spectropolarimeters (see POLARIMETRY: 
SPECTROPOLARIMETRY) and a rather involved inversion tech- 
nique to deduce the relevant physical quantities from the 
polarization measurements. 


Bibliography 

Durrant C J 1981 Landolt Bornstein, New Series 2 13 

Rimmele T J et al (ed) 1999 High Resolution Solar Physics 
(ASP Conf. Ser. vol 183) 

Schroeder D J 1987 Astronomical Optics (New York: 
Academic Press) 

Stix M 2000 The Sun, An Introduction 2nd edn (Berlin: 
Springer) 


Wolfgang Schmidt 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: 
Space 


The first solar space observations 

Fifty years of development in solar space instrumentation 
have demonstrated the close relation between technical 
and scientific progress. 

Solar physics from space, and indeed space astron- 
omy, started in 1946 in the United States, when captured 
V-2 rockets, capable of rising 160 km above the ground, 
became available for use as free-flying, high-altitude labo- 
ratories. It was not surprising under these circumstances 
that a group from the US Naval Research Laboratory 
(NRL) in Washington, DC under Richard Tousey became 
the first to make use of the fortunate opportunity. 

An initial attempt was made on 28 June 1946 to 
observe radiation in the hydrogen Lyman alpha line from 
the Sun. However, the camera was never retrieved from 
the crater made when the V-2 impacted on the desert floor 
of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The next 
attempt, on 10 October 1946, was a success, giving us the 
first ultraviolet spectrum of the Sun, 220-340 nm (nm— 
nanometer, i.e. 10-? m), shown in figure 1. At altitudes 
above 55 km, rising through the ozone layer, the solar 
spectrum appeared all the way down to 220 nm. The first 
observations of solar x-rays followed in 1949 when Herbert 
Friedman, also of NRL, flew a payload of Geiger counters 
ona V-2 rocket (see also ROCKETS IN ASTRONOMY). 

Further rocket observations in the 1950s established 
that the Lyman alpha line of hydrogen was emitted from 
the solar CHROMOSPHERE. The radiation in this line was 
measured quantitatively in 1949 on the same flight that 
detected solar x-rays and also measured the Schumann 
ultraviolet continuum at 142.5-160 nm. The line profile 
of Lyman alpha was measured later, and the narrow 
absorption core at its center, detected in 1959, established 
the presence of an extended geo-corona. The first solar 
spectrum below Lyman alpha was recorded in 1960. 
Emission lines at these short wavelengths were classified 
as lines from high ionization stages, mainly of iron, and 
shown to come from the hot coronal plasma at 1.5- 
2.5 MK (MK—megakelvin, i.e. million kelvins). The strong 
enhancement of x-ray emission during solar flares was 
detected in 1956. When a rocket was flown during a 
solar eclipse in 1958, it was determined that solar x-rays 
originated in the Corona, particularly above ACTIVE REGIONS. 
The first image of the Sun in x-rays was recorded in 1960, 
using a pinhole camera on board a rocket. Finally, it may be 
mentioned that the first CORONAGRAPH was flown in space 
in 1963. 

Looking back it is amazing that these early days 
of rocket experiments and our first established, simple 
knowledge about the ultraviolet and x-ray emission from 
the Sun are only 40-50 years behind us. The early 
discoveries are now so familiar that we hardly reflect on 
how difficult they were to obtain and on the fact that they 
were not obvious. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ALTITUDE (KM) 


3000-2800) 2600 2400) 2200 
ANGSTROM UNITS 


3400 863200 


Figure 1. The first ultraviolet spectrum of the Sun. Recorded on 
a V-2 rocket flight on 10 October 1946. 


Early technical developments 

Technical developments in many fields conditioned the 
early progress. Contributions to these developments came 
from universities and research laboratories in the US, 
France and the UK. 

Magnesium fluoride lenses, transparent to 110 nm, 
were used in the first rocket observations. Development of 
mirror coatings with high reflectivity in the far ultraviolet 
was, however, crucial for progress beyond the first simple 
experiments. Oxidized aluminum, used on mirrors in 
the visual wavelength range, does not reflect radiation at 
far-ultraviolet wavelengths. However, fresh unoxidized 
aluminum is an efficient reflector down to 100 nm. The 
solution was to coat the fresh aluminum with a layer 
of magnesium fluoride. This stopped oxidation and 
preserved the high reflectivity. Below 110 nm other 
reflecting materials were found, notably gold, used in 
instruments On ORBITING SOLAR OBSERVATORIES (OSOs) (see 
below) and Skylab, but also osmium and silicon carbide. 
Today, multilayer mirror coatings can be produced with 
reflectivities up to 30% in narrow ultraviolet and x-ray 
wavelength bands. 

Another important concern is to avoid contamination 
by stray light. The Sun radiates the overwhelming part 
of its energy in the visual spectral region. Even a small 
fraction of this light scattered off the instrument surfaces 
will completely swamp the ultraviolet signal that we want 
to study. This problem was solved when an aluminum 
filter, consisting of a freely suspended aluminum foil of 
100 nm thickness, was developed in France and the US. 
The filter reflected visual light but was transparent to 
ultraviolet radiation. 

Detector development was no less essential. In 
the 1950s and 1960s Kodak increased the sensitivity of 
their ultraviolet-sensitive Schumann emulsions, originally 
developed around 1900. In these emulsions the silver 
halide grains are sticking out of the gelatin layer to avoid 
absorption of ultraviolet radiation in the gelatin. This 
makes it sensitive to mechanical pressure and a roll film 
camera that could hold large amounts of this film was not 
made until the 1980s for the High Resolution Telescope 
and Spectrograph (HRTS), on Spacelab 2. Indeed, since 
photographic film quickly records vast amounts of image 
data, it has continued to be used almost until this day. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Photoelectric detectors were used in the near 
ultraviolet in instruments flown on rockets already in 1952. 
Channel electronic multipliers came into use with the first 
satellite instruments. Array detectors in two dimensions 
proved difficult to make for ultraviolet wavelengths. The 
first spectral and image scans were therefore made with 
pinhole devices. This meant slow scans and low time 
cadence for images and spectra. A modern solution is to 
convert the ultraviolet radiation to visual light before it is 
registered with a conventional CCD. 

The years of early rocket and satellite experiments 
also saw the development of increasingly accurate 
pointing systems. The first rockets flew without pointing 
and for some time instrument resolution did not put any 
stringent demands on pointing accuracy. However, it 
became obvious that much of the extreme ultraviolet and 
x-ray emission is concentrated in active regions a few 
arcminutes in extent consisting of even smaller structures. 
Thus, good instrument resolution and pointing became 
decisive in order to make any sense of the observations. 

A biaxial pointing system, stable in pitch and yaw, 
was designed by the University of Colorado in 1954 
and improved versions were used for all ultraviolet 
and x-ray observations in the subsequent decade. A 
triaxial pointing system, developed at the Atomic Energy 
Research Establishment in England in 1965, prevented 
variations in roll. Pointing could now be stabilized to 
2 arcsec. Today pointing stability is better than 1 arcsec 
on modern satellite platforms. 

In this perspective satellite observatories may be 
regarded as a final step among the early technical 
developments. The first decade of satellite observatories 
saw increased sophistication in satellite platforms as well 
as in instrumentation. Space solar physics outgrew its 
beginnings and reached maturity with the instruments on 
the Apollo Telescope Mount on Skylab in 1973-4. 


Satellites, balloons and rockets in the 1960s 

The first registration of solar ultraviolet and x-ray radiation 
using instruments on a satellite came on the Soviet 
Sputnik 2 in 1957. The first US satellite with solar 
instruments, Vanguard 3 in 1958, was a failure. However, 
close observations of its orbit led to the discovery of 
the expansion and contraction of the Earth’s ionosphere 
caused by diurnal and long-term variations in the solar 
ultraviolet and x-ray emission. 

Solrad 1, launched in 1960, was the first in a 
series of satellites observing various wavelength bands 
in ultraviolet and x-rays. These satellites provided long- 
term coverage of wavelength and intensity changes of the 
solar radiation until 1976. Solrad demonstrated the strong 
solar variability in x-rays compared with the much lower 
variability in the ultraviolet. The satellite instruments did 
not have imaging capabilities in x-rays, but observations 
during the solar eclipse in 1966 showed that the solar 
x-ray emission was concentrated in small regions, less than 
1 arcmin in diameter, i.e. the hot cores of active regions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Model of the OSO satellites. OSOs 1-7 all looked 
similar. 


1962 saw the beginning of a new series of solar 
satellites, the OSO missions (figure 2). The intent was to 
follow the Sun through an entire 11 year cycle with nearly 
identical ultraviolet and x-ray instruments. The OSO 
satellites had three axis-stabilized platforms. Pointing 
stability exceeded the imaging quality of the scientific 
instruments, but solar imaging was possible with a 
resolution of about 1 arcmin for the earliest OSOs. Studies 
could be made of coarse active region structures and of 
emission associated with the solar supergranulation in 
several spectral lines formed at different temperatures. 
OSO-8 (1975-78), the last in the series, came after Skylab 
(1973-4), differed from the earlier OSOs and is mentioned 
below. 

Rocket experiments continued after 1960 in the US 
and in other countries. In France we may note the rocket 
and balloon flights in the 1960s and early 1970s that 
carefully measured the solar ultraviolet radiation from 
~200 nm down to Lyman alpha at 121.6 nm and its 
variation from Sun center to limb. The solar spectrum 
at these wavelengths comes from the upper photosphere, 
the lower part of the chromosphere and the temperature 
minimum layer between them. The strong discrepancy, 
as much as a factor of 10 at wavelengths of 150- 
180 nm, between the observed and theoretically calculated 
intensities inspired improved efforts at modeling these 
layers in the solar atmosphere. The lowest observed 
radiation temperature in the ultraviolet continuum at 
150 nm was much discussed. Successive experiments 
found different results. This was not trivial since the value 
of the minimum temperature on top of the photosphere 
was considered to be connected to the amount of non- 
thermal energy passing from the photosphere to the corona 
and heating the corona. 

The UK launched its first satellite for solar research, 
ARIEL 1, in 1962. Ariel 1 carried instruments that measured 
the solar spectrum in x-ray wavelengths, 0.4-1.4 nm. The 
enhancement of the solar x-ray intensity by factors of 
10 or more during SOLAR FLARES was recorded on many 
occasions. This was of great interest at the time for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


understanding the enhanced ionization in the D-layer in 
the Earth’s ionosphere during flares, leading to disruption 
of radio communications. Groups in the UK also took 
part with far-ultraviolet and x-ray instruments in the OSO 
program, i.e. OSO-4, -5 and -6, leading up to their later 
strong participation in SMM, Yohkoh and the Solar and 
Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). 

The UK Skylark rockets launched several ultraviolet 
instruments starting in 1964. In 1968 they obtained for 
the first time spectra of both the solar limb and the disk 
in the spectral range 150-220 nm. These observations 
were aimed at deriving the temperature structure of the 
outer solar atmosphere at ~100 000 K using a method that 
did not rely on uncertain instrument calibration, atomic 
cross sections or element abundances. Grazing incidence 
observations at shorter wavelengths, 15-80 nm and 1.5- 
5 nm, were added to study the corona at temperatures of 
1 MK or more. 

Slitless spectrographs launched into the total solar 
eclipse on 7 March 1970 by British and US investigators 
revealed that the emission from spectral lines emitting 
at temperatures of 10 000-300 000 K was not limited to a 
range in altitude of a few tens of kilometers as predicted by 
theoretical models, but extended over more than 1000 km. 
The true significance of this observation did not, however, 
make a strong impression at that time. 

Finally, one might mention two tests of the NRL 
ultraviolet spectrometers, SO82A and SO82B, on Skylab. 
The test rocket for SO82A was launched during a solar 
flare on 4 November 1969. For the first time the small hot 
kernel of a flare was revealed. It was only a few arcseconds 
across and it showed up in highly ionized iron lines 
emitting at temperatures of several million kelvins. The 
corresponding test flight for SO82B in August 1970 led to 
the first published measurement of the large non-thermal 
widths of lines formed around 100000 K, pointing to the 
presence of strong dynamics and waves in the transition 
region between the solar chromosphere and corona. 

Early observations of the spectral region 20-150 nm 
showed that it contained a number of emission lines. 
Many of these lines had been identified and absolute 
intensities had been established. Analysis techniques had 
been developed in response to the new observations, to 
determine plasma densities and temperature structure 
of the emitting layers. In the resulting models the 
temperature above the chromosphere rose sharply from 
10000 K to 300000 K in only about 100 km. It was at 
first not recognized that this result disagreed strongly 
with the observation that solar plasma in the 100000 K 
range extended several thousands of kilometers above the 
chromosphere. 


Skylab 
SKYLAB is covered in a separate article in this encyclopedia 
and will only be described briefly here. The Skylab 
instruments were much larger than the corresponding 
OSO instruments. Angular resolutions in x-ray and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


extreme ultraviolet approached 2-4 arcsec. These high- 
resolution pictures showed that the solar transition region 
and corona are built up by magnetic loops containing the 
hot solar plasma. Solar flares occurred in the loops and 
the high-temperature components of flares were detected, 
having temperatures up to 20 MK. Loops and prominences 
were seen to tear loose from the solar surface to form what 
have later been termed coronal mass ejections (CMEs). 
CORONAL HOLES, extended regions where the emission in 
spectral lines from the corona was strongly depressed, 
were discovered and the occasional fast solar wind near 
the Earth, with wind speeds twice as high as the ‘normal’ 
solar wind, was found to be coming from the equatorial 
coronal holes. It was recognized that the Sun might have 
more permanent polar coronal holes. 

Skylab missed out on dynamics and rapid time 
variability. Observations could be made only on a limited 
supply of photographic film or the photoelectric scans of 
wide fields of view took too long a time. Thus, high- 
cadence observations of loop structures were few. The 
Skylab spectrometers also lacked combined good spectral 
and spatial resolution. Thus, they could not detect the 
high velocities, 40-100 km st, commonly occurring in the 
100 000-500 000 K temperature range now observed with 
the ultraviolet spectrometers on the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory (SOHO). 


Modern rockets and satellites 
Many advanced instruments have flown in the more than 
25 years, since Skylab. The Soviet Union had solar 
instruments on several satellites, an early example being 
OST-1, on Salyut 4 in 1975. This far-ultraviolet telescope, 
constructed by the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory, 
obtained new characteristics of plages and solar flares. 
The Japanese Astro A, also known as HINOTORI, was 
launched in 1981. Its main objective was the detailed 
study of solar flares. One of its instruments imaged flares 
in x-rays, at energies of 10-40 keV or around 0.1 nm 
wavelength. Another instrument performed spectroscopy 
of x-ray flares in the wavelength range 0.17-0.2 nm, using 
a Bragg spectrometer. Investigations recorded the time 
profile and spectrum of x-ray flares and looked for gamma 
rays from flares at energies from 0.2 to 9.0 MeV. Hinotori 
was a forerunner for Japan’s highly successful solar x-ray 
satellite, YOHKOH, launched in August 1991 and still in 
operation. 


Orbiting Solar Observatory 8 

OSO-8 was launched in June 1975 and operated until 
September 1978. It was the first solar satellite to attempt 
observations of the solar atmosphere with simultaneous 
high spatial and spectral resolution. It was also the 
first satellite to operate on a near-real-time basis with 
the science teams on the ground. It had two pointed 
instruments: an ultraviolet spectrometer, wavelengths 
120-200 nm, and a multichannel ultraviolet and visible 
polychromator with six wavelength channels. These 
channels registered the strong resonance lines from singly 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ionized calcium and magnesium and the Lyman alpha and 
beta lines from hydrogen. The wavelength border regions 
of the channels contained visual and ultraviolet continua 
and the lines from doubly ionized silicon at 120.6 nm 
and five-times ionized oxygen at 103.2 nm. Thus, the 
instruments could study the solar plasma at temperatures 
from 6000 K to 250 000 K, i.e. the chromosphere and lower 
transition region. Spectral resolutions ranged from 2 to 
10 pm (pm—picometer, i.e. 107! m). The best possible 
angular resolution of both instruments was 1-2 arcsec. 
However, the slit spectrometer took most of its data with 
a2 arcsec x 20 arcsec slit and the multichannel instrument 
was mainly run in a coarse mode with 10 arcsec resolution. 
These two instruments were built and operated by the 
University of Colorado and the French National Space 
Agency, CNRS, respectively. 

OSO-8 demonstrated that the energy in the 150-300 s 
oscillations was several orders of magnitude lower than 
the radiative losses from the upper solar atmosphere. 
Thus, the solar corona could not be heated by acoustic 
waves, the most commonly held view at the time. 
Persistent redshifts in lines emitted from the transition 
region, equivalent to down-flow velocities of ~10 km an 
were also recorded for the first time. Since flows of 
this magnitude will drain the corona of gas in a few 
minutes, alternative explanations have been sought. The 
most promising involve disturbances generated near the 
top of magnetic loops by processes heating the corona, 
then progressing downward along the loop legs. Similar 
redshifts have been noted in stars and may be a general 
property of stellar atmospheres. 


High Resolution Telescope and Spectrograph 
The High Resolution Telescope and Spectrograph (HRTS) 
(figure 3) had the high angular resolution not realized with 
OSO-8. HRTS was built and operated by the US Naval 
Research Laboratory and flew on 10 rocket flights between 
1975 and 1997 and was a part of Spacelab 2 in 1985. On 
most flights the spectrograph operated at wavelengths 
between 117 and 170 nm, covering the full range or 
registering selectable narrow bands, 1.4nm wide, centered 
on strong emission lines. HRTS was the first ultraviolet 
spectrograph with stigmatic imaging of an extended slit, 
1000 arcsec long, at high angular resolution (1 arcsec). 

HRTS made several important discoveries. Notable 
are the detection of explosive events on the first HRTS 
flight and the investigation into the possibly small filling 
factors for the emission in the solar atmosphere. Explosive 
events are small regions, with diameters of ~2 arcsec, with 
a velocity dispersion amounting to +100 km sys They are 
seen in the 100 000 K plasma and last typically 1 min. They 
could be caused by magnetic reconnection in the solar 
atmosphere and may thus be the observational signature 
of one of the main mechanisms proposed for heating of the 
solar corona. 

The study of filling factors with HRTS was made 
possible by the good spatial resolution of the instrument 
and its spectral coverage that included density sensitive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. The HRTS, flying on the space shuttle as part of 
Spacelab 2, July-August 1985. HRTS is the long tube to the right 
in the figure. 


line pairs. From the derived densities, the total emission, 
and the overall size of the emitting structures it was 
concluded that only a small fraction of the volume is filled 
with plasma, ie. filling factors amount to between 1% and 
0.01% of the total volume of the structures. 

HRTS also discovered that rapid down-flows of 
plasma in the transition region over sunspots are common, 
with in-flow velocities of 50-100 km s-! or more. 
Another discovery was that transition region line profiles 
frequently have a multiple structure as if several distinct 
and different velocities exist inside the 1 arcsec resolution 
element of HRTS. This could be connected to the low 
filling factors if dynamic conditions are different in the 
small substructures that the transition region may consist 
of. Finally, clear connections were discovered between 
line intensities, wavelength shifts and line widths, and 
the underlying photospheric magnetic fields. The relation 
between fields and line shifts is asymmetric for red- or 
blueshifted profiles. A probable reason for an asymmetry 
would be if waves running in one predominant direction 
are present in the transition region. 


Solar Maximum Mission 

The SOLAR MAXIMUM MISSION (SMM) satellite (figure 4) was 
launched in February 1980. The primary goal was to make 
coordinated studies of solar activity, particularly solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


flares and eruptions, at a period of high solar activity. Over 
less than 10 years SMM observed more than 12000 flares 
and over 1200 eruptions, called CMEs. The history of SMM 
was at times dramatic. The attitude control system of the 
satellite malfunctioned in January 1981 but was repaired 
in orbit in April 1984 and SMM continued observing until 
November 1989. 

Four of the instruments on SMM registered the 
energetic solar radiation from gamma ray energies 
to soft x-rays. These instruments measured the 
spectral intensity of flares continuously over several 
years. A comprehensive set of coordinated data on this 
phenomenon was collected, throwing new light on all 
kinds of flare processes and on solar activity in general. 

The Gamma Ray Spectrometer (GRS) provided 
gamma ray flare intensities as a function of time as well as 
the spectral distribution of the radiation. The Hard X-ray 
Burst Spectrometer (HXRBS) observed time series of hard 
x-ray bursts from flares in 15 energy channels between 
20 keV and 260 keV (1 keV corresponds to a wavelength 
of 1.23 nm; higher-energy photons have proportionally 
shorter wavelengths). Thus spectra of the bursts could be 
built up. Continuous observations were made with a time 
resolution of 128 ms, but shorter intervals were possible. 
The soft X-ray Polychromator (XRP) monitored individual 
emission lines that are strong in active regions and 
flares. The selected lines give information on temperature, 
density, velocity, element abundance and non-equilibrium 
states in the flare and active region plasma. The Hard X- 
ray Imaging Spectrometer (HXIS) delivered simultaneous 
images of solar flares in six energy bands between 3.5 keV 
and 30 keV. The instrument had a coarse field of view 
corresponding to the size of an active region, with a spatial 
pixel of 32 arcsec, and a high-resolution field of view 
centered in the coarse field, with a spatial pixel of 8 arcsec. 
Time resolution could be automatically varied from 1.5 s 
in the early stages of a flare to 7 s in the decaying phase. 
Except for HXIS, which ended its life in November 1980, 
the high-energy instruments lasted until the end of the 
mission. 

SMM also had three low-energy instruments that sup- 
ported the studies of flares and solar activity. The Ul- 
traviolet Spectrometer and Polarimeter (UVSP) produced 
monochromatic raster images at any wavelength between 
115 nm and 360 nm with selectable wavelength bandwidth 
and angular pixel size down to 1 arcsec x 1 arcsec. Images 
in four lines could be observed simultaneously, or wave- 
length bands might be placed in the opposite wings of lines 
to measure Doppler shifts (i.e. velocities) or make polariza- 
tion measurements. Time cadence for observations with a 
single pixel could be a fraction of a second. However, in 
most practical situations it took several minutes to build 
up a raster image. In April 1985 the UVSP grating drive 
failed. Observations were still possible but only at a fixed 
wavelength around 138 nm. 

A main objective of UVSP was to study the flare 
plasma at temperatures below 200000 K in the transition 
region lines available in its spectral range. However, all 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The SMM satellite. The aperture openings for the 
instruments are visible in the front plate. An astronaut is 
working on the satellite. 


types of solar features were studied: prominences, solar 
active regions, sunspots, the quiet Sun. An interesting 
attempt was made to observe explosive events and relate 
them to solar magnetic fields. Since they have short 
lifetimes, explosive events might come and go in less time 
than it took to record a UVSP raster. Explosive events have 
a considerable velocity dispersion and could be detected 
by registering strong intensity variations in the far wings 
of the 154.8 nm line emitted at 100 000 K. Explosive events 
and other micro-flaring activity were found to be located 
in areas where magnetic fields of opposite polarity came 
close together and could well be caused by magnetic 
reconnection. 

The High Altitude Observatory Coronagraph/Po- 
larimeter on SMM produced images of a selected quadrant 
of the corona in the range from 1.6 to 6 solar radii with 
a spatial resolution of 10 arcsec set by the detector pixel 
size. Observations in seven wavelength bands in the visual 
spectral range made it possible to distinguish between 
various features of the solar corona and discriminate 
between ejected plasma at coronal and chromospheric 
temperatures. A major outcome of this instrument 
was a long-term study of CMEs and their relation 
to solar activity. _SOLWIND, operating from March 
1979 to September 1985, carried a similar coronagraph, 
also adding to our knowledge of coronal structure and 
dynamics. 

CMEs were first detected with the coronagraph on 
OSO-7 and were routinely observed on Skylab. _ It 
soon became obvious that CMEs were the cause of 
strong gusts in the solar wind affecting the Earth’s 
magnetosphere, causing beautiful polar auroras, but also 
potentially damaging effects to telecommunications and 
electric power transmissions. The SMM coronagraph had 
much better time coverage than Skylab, 87% for SMM 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


against 38% for Skylab. This allowed thorough statistical 
investigations of the connection between CMEs and solar 
activity, such as flares and eruptive prominences. Studies 
found that only half of the CMEs were clearly related 
to recognized active phenomena. Of the CMEs with 
such relations 40% were associated with flares, but more 
than 70% were associated with eruptive prominences. 
The measured average CME velocities were furthermore 
considerably lower than those found previously from 
Skylab. These new results led to a lively discussion on 
the origins of CMEs and the mechanisms causing them, a 
discussion that is still going on. 

SMM also carried the Active Cavity Radiometer 
Irradiance Monitor (ACRIM). It measured the solar 
radiation from the entire solar disk integrated over all 
wavelengths (total irradiance). For the first time it became 
possible to measure variations in the solar radiation with 
time and thus with solar activity. This objective had been 
pursued from the ground for several decades, without 
reaching any definitive results (See also SOLAR TELESCOPES 
AND INSTRUMENTS: GROUND). However, with ACRIM the 
required accuracy of 0.1% was more than achieved. 
ACRIM later flew on several space shuttle flights and 
on the UARS satellite, where it is still in operation. 
Instruments supplementing ACRIM and giving similar 
results have been the less accurate ERB on the Nimbus 
7 satellite and its successor ERBE. 

ACRIM on SMM and in later flights have produced 
several exciting new results. These include the first 
unambiguous detection of a decrease in total solar 
irradiance when a large sunspot crosses the visible solar 
surface, the so-called ‘sunspot deficit’. A corresponding 
‘excess’ effect has also been demonstrated for active 
regions with large facular areas. Finally, ACRIM has found 
that the total solar irradiance varies with solar activity, 
showing a maximum in the period of highest solar activity 
around year 1990 and minima in 1986 and 1996. Typical 
rate of change is 0.015% per year. A possible real increase 
of 0.0036% per year between irradiance minima in 1986 
and 1996 is less certain. 


The 1990s 


The 1990s have seen two extensive and very successful 
solar space observatories, the Japanese Yohkoh satellite, 
with US and UK collaboration, and souo, a collaboration 
between the European and US space organizations, ESA 
and NASA, with ESA as the main partner. The objective 
of Yohkoh is to study the high-energy radiation from solar 
flares as well as quiet structures and pre-flare conditions. 
The instruments on SOHO investigate physical conditions 
from the innermost core of the Sun to its outer corona 
and the heliospheric space. Two factors have particularly 
added to the quality of solar physics from Yohkoh and 
SOHO data. The first is the open data access and the 
collaborative spirit of the investigators. Secondly, the real 
improvement of SOHO and Yohkoh over earlier missions 
comes more from the high time resolution and continuous 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


coverage than from the modest increase in instrument 
resolutions. 

The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS), 
launched in September 1991 and still in operation, is 
intended for studies of the Earth’s atmosphere but 
contains relevant solar instruments. ACRIM has been 
mentioned. SOLSTICE and SUSIM on UARS observe the 
solar ultraviolet spectrum from 112 nm to 440 nm. The 
emphasis is on highly accurate absolute calibration that is 
stable over several years. The record from SOLSTICE and 
SUSIM constitutes a reference spectrum of the full Sun in 
ultraviolet and its variation with solar activity. 

The main instruments on Spartan 201 are an 
Ultraviolet Coronal Spectrometer (UVCS) of the type 
flown on SOHO, and a coronagraph observing in the visual 
wavelengths. Spartan 201 has flown on five occasions 
between April 1993 and October 1998, partly supporting 
observations with Ulysses and SOHO. 

Ulysses was launched in October 1990 (see SOLAR WIND: 
uLyssEs). It is the first satellite to investigate solar and 
heliospheric conditions at high solar latitudes. It carries 
no instruments for remote sensing of the Sun, as had 
been the original plan, but registers heliospheric magnetic 
fields, plasma waves, dust and solar wind particles, their 
speed, composition and stage of ionization. The trajectory 
of Ulysses first took it to Jupiter, where the gravity of 
the planet accelerated the satellite out of the ecliptic 
plane and into an orbit at nearly 90° inclination with 
the ecliptic. Ulysses passed over the south solar pole in 
June—November 1994 and over the north pole a year later, 
near solar activity minimum. The measurements showed 
the well-known slow solar wind, velocity 400 km st, at 
low latitudes. However, at latitudes above 30° this was 
replaced by the fast solar wind, with a speed of 750 km st 
or more. To the fast winds from equatorial coronal holes 
had now been added a fast wind streaming out of the 
coronal holes in the polar caps. Furthermore, this wind 
fanned out quickly above the solar surface and extended 
to latitudes much lower than the borderlines of the polar 
coronal holes, lying near 60° latitude. The magnetic fields 
from the Sun must similarly fan out in the heliosphere. It 
will be interesting to see what Ulysses will register on its 
second pass over the poles in 2000-1 at maximum solar 
activity when polar coronal holes will be more ‘filled in’. 

A final mission in the 1990s was the Transition Region 
and Coronal Explorer (Trace), launched in April 1998. 
TRACE observes the solar corona with an unprecedented 
angular resolution, 1 arcsec in the temperature range 
from 1 MK to 2.5 MK. The solar emission is observed in 
EUV wavelength bands centered at 17.1 nm, 19.5 nm and 
28.4nm. Other wavelength channels isolate emission from 
the chromosphere (10 000-30 000 K) in Lyman alpha from 
hydrogen, in the resonance lines from three-times ionized 
carbon at 155 nm (100000 K) and in the near ultraviolet 
and white light continuum. 


The future 
Plans for the future are many and for most part uncertain. 
The Japanese sOLaR-B Satellite is a likely project, scheduled 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Telescopes and Instruments: Space 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to be launched in 2004. This satellite will contain a 
visual telescope to measure photospheric magnetic fields 
with extremely high spatial resolution and ultraviolet 
and x-ray telescopes to measure and monitor the coronal 
emission. The mission aims at understanding the detailed 
relationship between magnetic fields and coronal heating 
and emission in the Sun. 

NASA has sketched an entire ‘road-map’ of satellites. 
Only a few of these are likely to fly and at present none 
is securely financially confirmed. Interesting possibilities 
include a solar probe, going to 4 solar radii to make in situ 
observation of the acceleration region of the solar wind, 
and Stereo, which will be a pair of satellites flying in 
the Earth’s orbit around the Sun at a significant distance 
in front of and behind the Earth. The steroscopic view 
of solar and heliospheric phenomena will allow a three- 
dimensional mapping of CMEs. 

Europe and ESA are considering a solar orbiter, flying 
at 45 solar radii from the Sun, and in an inclined orbit to 
the ecliptic reaching heliographic latitudes of 40°. These 
plans are still at a preliminary stage, and joining the US in 
a continuation of SOHO with instruments having super- 
high resolution should also be considered. 


Bibliography 

Lemaire P 1987 La physique solaire Atlas de L’espace 
(Encyclopaedia Universalis) pp 216-19 

Liller W (ed) 1961 Space Astrophysics (New York: McGraw- 
Hill) 

Massie H and Robins M O 1986 History of British Space 
Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
pp 90, 200-2, 339-53 

Strong KT, SabaJ LR, Haisch BM and Schmelz J T (ed) 1999 
The Many Faces of the Sun, a Summary of the Results from 
NASA's Solar Maximum Mission (New York: Springer) 

Tousey R 1961 Solar spectroscopy in the far ultraviolet 
J. Opt. Soc. Am. 51 384-95 


Olav Kjeldseth-Moe 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Transition Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Transition Region 


The solar transition region can generally be defined as 
those plasmas at temperatures between 2 x 10* and 1 x 
10° K, a temperature regime bridging the CHROMOSPHERE 
and corona. Prior to the space age, the transition region 
was unobserved although the existence of the higher- 
temperature corona was known. Spectral lines formed at 
transition region temperatures are found primarily below 
2000 A where they are strongly absorbed by the Earth’s 
atmosphere. It was termed the transition region since it 
was thought to be a thin region of the atmosphere where 
an abrupt transition from a relatively cool, dense plasma to 
a hot, highly ionized, tenuous extended plasma occurred. 
Understanding the solar transition region is an important 
piece of the great puzzle of determining how the outer 
solar atmosphere is heated. More recently, interest in the 
transition region has increased as it is recognized that these 
plasmas are highly dynamic, displaying such events as 
jets, explosive events and high-speed flows. 


Spectroscopy of the transition region 

Observation of the solar transition region requires the use 
of spectroscopic techniques to isolate spectral lines formed 
at transition region temperatures. For example, helium 
has three ionic species: He I, neutral helium, He II, singly 
ionized helium, and He III, completely ionized helium. 
In the solar transition region, all three species are present 
but He II is the dominant species. The ionization state, 
the relative fractions of the three species, is determined by 
a balance between the competing processes of ionization 
and recombination of free electrons with the ions. At 
6x 10* K, He Il is the most populous helium ion since at that 
temperature the free electrons have sufficient energy to 
ionize neutral helium (He I) but not enough energy to strip 
away the remaining bound electron to transform He II into 
completely ionized He III. The emission of He II spectral 
lines is produced by the collisional excitation of the bound 
electron to excited levels which then spontaneously decay 
to lower levels. The Lyman a line (the 1s—2p transition) 
of He II at 304 A is a very strong line. It is much 
stronger than other lines at nearby wavelengths so that 
it can be fairly easily isolated and observed. Images of 
the Sun in the light of He II 4304 are shown in figures 1 
and 2. These images were obtained with the Extreme- 
Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (EIT) instrument on the 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) which uses 
narrow-bandpass coatings on the telescope mirrors to 
isolate strong spectral lines. Figure 1 was obtained near 
the minimum of the solar activity cycle and figure 2 was 
obtained when the Sun was more active. 


Temperatures, Densities, Emission Measures, Elemental 
Abundances 

Essentially all of our information about the solar transition 
region comes from the analysis of spectral lines. Figures 1 
and 2 show that much can be learned from images of the 


intensity of spectral lines. More detailed observations of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


EIT He II 304A 
1 Nov 1996 01:40 


Figure 1. The solar transition region near the minimum of the 
solar activity cycle seen in He II 1304. 


EIT He II 304A 
7 Nov 1998 07:19 


Figure 2. The solar transition region as the Sun approached the 
maximum of the solar activity cycle seen in He II A304. 


the transition region are made with spectrographs which 
can disperse the solar spectrum in order to pick out spectral 
lines of particular interest. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Transition Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The most direct piece of information that can be 
obtained about a spectral line is its intensity. The intensity 
of a line depends on how efficiently the line is produced 
and how many of the ions that produce the line are in 
the observed plasma. In the transition region and corona, 
most lines are produced by collisional excitation of the 
ion by free electrons. The emission rate is the product 
of two factors, the electron flux (the electron density 
multiplied by the electron velocity) and the collision 
cross section. The cross section is typically large for 
allowed or resonance transitions and small for forbidden 
transitions. The number of ions producing the line in the 
observed plasma is given by the products of the relative 
population of that ion with respect to all other ions of 
that element, the density of that element with respect 
to hydrogen (the elemental abundance) and the density 
of hydrogen (essentially equal to the electron density) 
in the observed plasma. Consequently, if we know the 
temperature, from the calculated ionization balance, the 
elemental abundance (from other measurements) and the 
collision cross section, from calculations, we can derive 
the emission measure ({ N2dV) at a given temperature 
directly from the line intensity. The emission measure 
provides considerable information about the temperature 
and density structure of the solar plasma. 

A variety of techniques for determining the tempera- 
tures and densities of transition region and coronal plas- 
mas are discussed in the article SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DI- 
AGNOSTICS. 


Velocity measurements 

The spectroscopy of the solar transition region can be taken 
one further step further to look at spectral line profiles. 
The object of this is to use the DOPPLER EFFECT to provide 
information about the velocities in the regions producing 
the spectral line. If a plasma is moving along the line of 
sight to the observer, the spectrum of the emitting plasma 
is shifted in wavelength by the amount Ad = (v/c)A where 
v is the velocity of the observed plasma along the line 
of sight, and c is the speed of light (in the same units 
as v) and A is the rest wavelength of the spectral line 
(in the same units as AA). Plasmas moving toward the 
observer are shifted to shorter wavelength (blueshift) and 
plasmas moving away from the observer are shifted to 
longer wavelength (redshift). If these shifts are observed 
near disk center, a blue shift corresponds to an outflow and 
a redshift corresponds to a downflow. At the limb, these 
shifts indicate horizontal flows. 

Figure 3 shows profiles of C IV 41548 and 41550 in 
an active region and sunspot. The profiles are dispersed 
in wavelength from left to right and position in the quiet 
Sun runs from top to bottom. Large redshifts can be seen 
in the sunspot and indicate downflow velocities of 100- 
150 km s~!. Above the sunspot spectra, one can also see a 
very small region with exceptionally wide line profiles. 
These are signatures of explosive events which will be 
discussed later. These spectra were obtained with the High 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


HRTS—1 Sunspot Spectra 


Oh we 
Te i 


— 
Sunspot © 


wry ote 
wy 


1548A4 cay. 1550A 


_= 
oe - 
a 


Figure 3. HRTS spectral line profiles of C IV, formed at 
1 x 10° K, in an active region and sunspot. 


Resolution Telescope and Spectrograph (HRTS) during a 
rocket flight. 

Spectral observations often show that the line has a 
width that is wider than the spectral resolution of the 
spectrometer. Part of this excess line width is caused 
by the motions of the ions which follow a Maxwellian 
velocity distribution specified by the temperature of the 
plasma. On examination, one finds that transition region 
profiles are even broader than would be predicted from 
the temperature of the ion that emits the line. This excess 
broadening is called the nonthermal width of the line and is 
apparently due to motions in the plasmas on spatial scales 
below the spatial resolution of ultraviolet spectrographs 
currently in operation. The thermal and nonthermal 
broadening results in line profiles that have a shape that 
is nearly Gaussian. Also evident is the net Doppler shift 
of spectral line profiles of the order of 10 km s-! caused 
by plasma flows in spicules, loops or other structures. 
Even more interesting are the occasional line profiles that 
are non-Gaussian and highly Doppler shifted. These are 
found in more spectacular events such as jets, ejecta and 
explosive events. 


Elemental abundance variations 

For many years, it has been assumed that the relative 
abundance of elements in solar plasmas does not vary. 
For example, the standard abundance of iron is about 
4 x 10-5 that of hydrogen. The abundances are the result 
of nuclear processes that ended many years ago. For 
every parcel of solar plasma, this ratio is now expected 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Transition Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to be the same. Once the variability of relative elemental 
abundances was considered a possibility, it was found that 
relative abundances in the corona were not the same as 
in the photosphere, that abundances seemed to change 
during flares and structures with nonstandard abundances 
were found fairly commonly. The key ingredient in 
the elemental abundance variations is the first ionization 
potential (FIP) of the element, or, the energy needed to 
ionize the neutral species of the element. Elements with 
low FIP values, such as Mg, Ca, Si and Fe, are enhanced 
in coronal plasmas relative to photospheric plasmas. The 
fact that the effect is correlated with the FIP indicates that 
the separation occurs at fairly low temperatures. 

A more detailed discussion of this topic is given in 
SOLAR TRANSITION REGION. 


Structure 

Large-scale structure of the transition region 

Lines formed at transition region temperatures are emitted 
in most of the large-scale structures that appear on the Sun: 
the quiet Sun, coronal holes, active regions, prominences, 
sunspots and solar flares. All of these structures are a result 
of the interplay between magnetic fields and plasmas. 

In the quiet Sun, the magnetic fields are dominated 
by fields associated with the supergranulation. Here, 
the supergranular motions in the photosphere sweep the 
magnetic flux elements from the supergranular cell centers 
to the cell boundaries. The new magnetic flux that 
emerges in the cell centers appear to include both positive 
and negative polarities (upward- and downward-pointed 
magnetic fields), as if they were the emergence of small 
kinks in a magnetic flux rope. Consequently, the magnetic 
fields at the cell boundaries are also bipolar. As a result 
of the continuous reconnection of magnetic fields, the net 
result is a complex web of magnetic field lines connecting 
opposite magnetic field polarities. This magnetic field 
structure is reflected in the patterns of transition region 
line emissions. At relatively low temperatures, mostly the 
base of these short loops is outlined. The corresponding 
structures in the chromosphere are spicules. At 10° K, for 
example in C IV lines, structures that are the extensions 
of the cooler chromospheric models are typical. At 
higher transition region temperature, longer and more 
complete loops become apparent. A high-resolution image 
of the quiet transition region obtained with the SUMER 
instrument on SOHO is shown in figure 4. 

The magnetic field in coronal holes is predominantly 
of one polarity so that the large-scale field extends outward 
from the Sun and participates in the high-speed solar 
wind streams. The unipolar nature of coronal hole fields 
is the result of remnants of active region fields that are 
swept to the poles during the declining phase of the solar 
cycle. Nevertheless, the fields in the coronal hole are 
still pushed around by a supergranular flow pattern that 
arranges the fields into a supergranular pattern similar to 
that found in the quiet Sun, except that the fields are mostly 
of a single polarity. Bipolar fields continue to emerge 
in the cell centers but, since these have no net polarity, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


SUMER Image of the Quiet Sun in O VI 


Figure 4. The quiet transition region seen in O VI, formed at 
3 x 10° K, obtained with the SUMER instrument on SOHO. 


the polarity of the coronal hole fields is unchanged. In 
transition region lines, the intensity pattern is still that of 
the supergranular network although it is somewhat less 
intense than in the quiet Sun. A characteristic structure of 
the transition region in coronal holes is the macrospicule. 
These are similar to chromospheric spicules but are about 
10 times larger. They typically jet out above the limb and 
either fade in place or fall back towards the photosphere. 
Macrospicules can be seen at the top and bottom of the 
solar images shown in figure 1. 

SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS, consisting of sunspots and 
plage regions, contain the most concentrated large-scale 
magnetic fields. The strongest fields are in the sunspots 
but these have no clear signature in transition region 
lines. Sunspots on average are neither particularly bright 
nor dark and cannot be located simply from an image 
of the transition region. Active region plages are often 
simply regions of relatively bright emission, particularly 
at low transition region temperatures. For increasing 
temperatures, the bases of coronal loops and extended 
portions of loops are outlined. As temperatures approach 
1 x 10° K, the loops become more complete as is seen in 
coronal lines. 

SOLAR PROMINENCES are relatively cool plasmas that are 
typically situated along magnetic ‘neutral’ lines where 
the dominant photospheric magnetic polarity reverses. 
Prominence neutral lines are found in active regions and 
in the quiet Sun. A number of prominences can be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Transition Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


seen in figure 2 in He II. On the disk they are relatively 
dark and above the limb they are relatively bright. The 
apparent reason for their darkness on the disk is that they 
contain cool material with neutral hydrogen and helium 
with absorbs the emission of extreme-ultraviolet lines. 
However, this is a matter of current research. Prominences 
also often erupt from time to time as a component of 
coronal mass ejections. 


Transition region loops and coronal heating 

The heating of the transition region and corona is a cen- 
tral, long-standing problem in solar physics. The radia- 
tive losses of transition region and coronal plasma occur 
fast enough that the outer atmosphere of the Sun would 
collapse in minutes if there was not a constant supply 
of energy deposited into these plasmas to maintain their 
high temperatures. The solar transition region is a com- 
ponent of a complex magnetohydrodynamic system. In 
other words, the temperatures, densities, velocities and 
magnetic fields of the corona and their evolution are all 
governed by the equations of magnetohydrodynamics. A 
complete physical understanding of the solar transition re- 
gion is only possible if the complete system is understood. 
The problem of coronal heating encompasses this com- 
plete system including the photosphere, chromosphere, 
transition region and corona (see CORONAL HEATING MECHA- 
NISMS). Perhaps the greatest difficulty lies in our inability to 
measure the Sun’s magnetic field above the chromosphere 
where much of this heating takes place. 

The simplest models of the transition region and 
corona consider the magnetic field as a passive element 
that constrains plasma flow and heat conduction along 
the magnetic field lines. The static energy balance models 
of coronal loops assume that the plasma located along a 
magnetic field line resembling a coronal loop is uniformly 
heated along its length by some unspecified mechanism. 
At the top of the loop where the maximum coronal 
temperature is reached, the energy input balances the 
radiative losses and the thermal conduction losses down 
the field lines to the cooler parts of the atmosphere. 
In the transition region, the radiative losses are much 
larger than the local heating rate and are balanced by a 
dissipation of the thermal conduction flux from the hot 
corona. These models generally produce an extended 
corona, resembling the observed CORONAL LOOP structures, 
and a thin transition that supports the high conductive 
flux needed. Emission measures of transition region lines, 
derived from observations, indicate that the volume of the 
emission measure is small and, in some sense, consistent 
with a thin transition region. 

However there are a number of difficulties with this 
model. The observed emission measure distribution of the 
transition region reaches a minimum around 10° K with 
increasing values toward higher and lower temperatures. 
The static energy balance models are unable to explain 
the transition region emission measure distribution at 
temperatures below about 3 x 10° K, in other words, most 
of the transition region. All of the conductive flux from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the corona is radiated away before reaching the middle 
of the transition region, much less the chromosphere. 
Further, high-resolution observations of the transition 
region indicated that it is considerably more extended than 
predicted by these models. This indicates that it cannot 
maintain the necessary conductive flux and must itself be 
locally heated. 

Other problems indicate the need for more sophisti- 
cated models. For example, the general downflow of tran- 
sition region plasmas cannot be addressed by the static 
models but are the basis of steady flow models. These 
models are capable of reproducing the observed down- 
flows in only the most artificial way and still produce a 
very thin transition region. The solution to problems of 
this sort led to models that could include time-dependent 
flows and heating. 

Many of the one-dimensional models continue to 
predict a very thin transition region. One consequence 
of this is that hot electrons from the corona are able 
to penetrate to considerably lower temperatures. In 
this case, the electron velocity distribution is no longer 
Maxwellian and greatly complicates the construction of 
physical models and the spectroscopic diagnostics of 
these plasmas. The observation that the transition region 
has a rather shallow temperature gradient indicates that 
this may not be a real problem but it cannot be totally 
discounted at this point. 

A further discussion of TRANSITION REGION MODELS is 
presented by V Hansteen. 


Very-fine-scale structure and coronal heating 

One of the more intriguing properties of the solar 
transition is the need to invoke the existence of very- 
fine-scale structures that only sparsely fill the observed 
transition region structures. In other words, when the 
transition region is observed at high spatial resolution, 
it is possible to discern such discrete structures as loops, 
macrospicules etc. We feel confident that we can measure 
the volume of such an object. Density-sensitive line ratios 
are then used to derive electron densities. With the electron 
density and volume, the emission measure ({' N? dV) can 
be calculated and compared with the emission measure 
determined simply from line intensities. This comparison 
generally indicates that the actual volume of emitting 
material must be much less than what is observed in 
images of these structures and the actual volume must be 
only about 1% of the ‘observed’ volume or less. This can be 
visualized as the break-up of transition material into thin 
filamentary strands that follow the magnetic field lines but 
only fill a fraction of the transition region volume. When 
a similar analysis is applied to coronal loops, the coronal 
material seems to completely fill the observed structure. 
However, the coronal measurements are perhaps not so 
definitive as in the transition region. 

As we will see below, there is evidence for flow 
patterns in the transition region that are also on very fine 
spatial scales. These fine-scale structures and flows may be 
significant in trying to understand how the solar transition 
region is heated. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Transition Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Surge 


High Speed Downflows 


Figure 5. HRTS C IV image of the transition region in an active region at the limb. 


Dynamics 

As the spectroscopic capabilities of solar ultraviolet 
instrumentation have improved, it has become clearer that 
the plasmas at transition region temperatures are highly 
dynamic. Time sequences of images of transition region 
structures in the quiet Sun show acontinual rearrangement 
of the network elements and the continual intensity 
changes in these elements, called ‘blinkers’. In the quiet 
corona, there seems to be a more gradual evolution of the 
hot structures. Doppler information in transition region 
spectra also reveals a variety of flows and ejecta, indicating 
a truly dynamic state. 


Flows 
Smooth laminar flows of transition region plasmas 
apparently along magnetic field lines are commonly 
observed. The speed of sound in solar plasmas varies 
roughly as the square root of the temperature and has a 
value of about 40 km s"! at 10° K. Flow speeds in the 
transition are usually subsonic and, in fact, are usually 
downflows. The typical downflow velocity is about 
6 km s“! both in the quiet Sun and in active regions and 
may approach about 20 km s~!. The net transition region 
downflow is difficult to understand. There is a net outflow 
of solar plasma into the solar wind, but the flow velocity 
associated with this mass loss would be quite small in the 
transition because of the relatively high densities there. 
Otherwise we would expect to see a general balance 
between upflowing and downflowing material but this is 
not the case. 

Persistent supersonic downflows with velocities of 
100 kms“! or greater are often seen in and near sunspots, as 
seen in figure 3. The suspected source for these downflows 
is the large-scale filamentary transition region structures 
seen above active regions at the limb. Figure 5 shows 
filamentary C IV structures above an active region where 
a surge is in progress. 

Further information on TRANSITION REGION FLOWS can be 
found in the article by P Brekke. 


Explosive events 


Explosive events have one of the most dramatic signatures 
in transition region spectra, as seen in figure 6. These 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Si IV A1393 


<> 20" 


— = 
— 


<—>) 200 km s™ 


Figure 6. HRTS profiles of Si IV, formed at 7 x 10* K, showing 
signatures of explosive events in the quiet Sun (arrows). 


are most noticeable from their Doppler shifts of about 
100 km s! to the red and/or blue wing of the line in small 
regions only about 1-2 Mm inextent. Their typical lifetime 
is about 60 s. The origin of these events can be attributed 
to magnetic reconnection in a variety of situations. They 
occur in association with rapidly emerging magnetic flux 
in active regions, suggesting that the plasma flows are 
the RECONNECTION jets predicted by the emerging flux flare 
model. When the positions of explosive events in the 
quiet Sun are mapped, it is clear that they tend to occur 
adjacent to magnetic flux elements in the supergranular 
network boundary. This suggests that explosive events are 
the result of magnetic reconnection as intranetwork fields 
are driven by the supergranular flows into the network 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Transition Region 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


boundaries. The details of this scenario are now being 
examined with the SUMER data from SOHO which has 
been able to directly observe explosive events in conjuction 
with magnetic flux reconnection. 

Further information on EXPLOSIVE EVENTS can be found 
in the article TRANSITION REGION: EXPLOSIVE EVENTS by D Innes. 


Ejections 

One of the more puzzling aspects of explosive events is that 
the accelerated plasma is not observed to travel very far. 
Nevertheless, there are many examples of transition region 
plasmas that are ejected outward into the corona. Doppler 
shifts of small 7 Mm loops that are repeatedly accelerated 
to 500 km s“! are observed. Doppler blueshifts (outflows) 
are commonly found at the top of the supergranular 
network indicating a continual process of plasma ejection 
taking place there. Macrospicules, with outward velocities 
as high as 100 km s“1, are a common feature of coronal 
holes. 

In active regions, SURGES are often observed in 
chromospheric lines such as Ha as well as in the transition 
region. These are tongues of plasma that are shot out of 
active region at velocities as high as 100-200 km s-!. Small 
plasmoids have been observed to traverse large portions of 
an active region at velocities of 100 km Soy Figure 5 shows 
examples of a surge, a jet and prominence material, all ina 
single observation. Prominences often erupt and form an 
essential part of a coronal mass ejection. In some cases, the 
prominence eruption is the first sign of an incipient mass 
ejection. 


Very-fine-scale dynamics 

The nonthermal component of spectral line broadening is a 
signature of random plasma motions with a characteristic 
velocity of about 20 km s-!. The typical variations in the 
velocities of the observed larger-scale flows are only on the 
order of 6kms7!. Consequently, the fine-scale motions are 
not simply the continuation of a distribution of velocities 
over a wide range of spatial scales, as might be expected 
for a turbulent plasma. The large-scale velocity variations 
do have the characteristic velocity spectrum of a turbulent 
Kolmogorov plasma but the fine-scale velocity variations 
predicted by this spectrum are much less than the observed 
value of 20 kms7—!. 

The evidence for fine-scale motions and structures 
appears to offer a clue for solving the problem of coronal 
heating. Where this energy comes from and how it is 
dissipated is a complex problem with no certain solution 
at this time. For most coronal heating models the source 
of the energy is the fluid motions of plasmas in the solar 
convection zone which contort the magnetic fields ina way 
that amplifies their field strength and creates magnetic 
topologies that are at a higher energy level than the 
minimum energy potential field state. As a result, there 
are currents and mass motions in the outer atmosphere 
of the Sun that can be dissipated into thermal energy 
to replace the losses due to radiation. For example, the 
currents could be dissipated by Joule (resistive) heating 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and the mass motions through viscous dissipation. The 
main problem is that the corona is highly conducting and 
not very viscous. The electrons are quite free to respond 
to electric fields so that a potential drop is very difficult to 
maintain. The main source of resistivity is collisions with 
the heavier ions but this is not very effective. The induced 
magnetic field from a current sufficient to maintain the 
corona would result in magnetic loop structures that are 
extremely twisted, much more so than observed coronal 
loops which, at most, display only a mild degree of twist. 

One way around this problem is to invoke small-scale 
currents and flows. One suggestion is that coronal heating 
occurs in many fine-scale magnetic reconnection events 
called ‘nanoflares’. The small-scale motions deduced from 
transition region line profiles may be evidence for these 
nanoflares. The nanoflare theory has also been studied 
with computer simulations which seem to confirm the 
idea that motions induced by the large-scale photospheric 
driving motions result in small-scale stochastic energy 
release events that resemble nanoflares. The small-scale 
motions and structures in the solar transition region are 
probably consistent with the nanoflare theory of coronal 
heating but, as with many of these issues, this is a topic of 
current research. 


Bibliography 

Cook J W and Brueckner G E 1991 Fine structure 
of the solar transition region—observations and 
interpretation Solar Interior and Atmosphere ed A N 
Cox, W C Livingston and M S Mathews (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 996-1028 

Mariska J T 1992 The Solar Transition Region (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Parker E N 1987 Why do stars emit X-rays? Phys. Today 40 
(7) 36 


Kenneth Dere 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind 


The continuous outward flow of charged particles 
(predominantly electrons and protons) from the Sun into 
interplanetary space. This outflow of plasma ‘blows’ past 
the planets at speeds that fluctuate between 200 km s-tand 
900 km s~!, and causes the Sun to lose about one million 
tonnes of mass per second. At a distance of 1 AU from the 
Sun, the mean density of the solar wind is about 5 x 10° 
particles per cubic meter and its temperature (a measure 
of the random kinetic motions of the solar wind particles 
relative to each other) is about 10° K. 

Close to the plane of the ecliptic, the average wind 
speed is about 400 km s~'. The particles that comprise 
this ‘slow’ wind emerge predominantly from streamer- 
like structures in the solar corona that tend to be located 
relatively close to the solar equator. A fast wind, with a 
mean speed of about 750 km s~|, flows out of coronal holes 
that are centered permanently on the solar poles. When 
coronal holes extend down to, or across, the solar equator, 
high-speed streams flow out past the Earth and planets. 
The combination of the Sun’s axial rotation and the Earth’s 
orbital motion causes these streams to recur at intervals of 
26 to 27 days as viewed from the Earth. Results obtained 
by the SOHO spacecraft indicate that solar wind particles 
originate at the boundaries of supergranular cells on the 
solar surface, where magnetic fields are concentrated. 

The solar wind carries with it lines of force of the solar 
wind, which spread out to form the weak interplanetary 
field. The Sun’s rotation, combined with the radial 
outward flow of the solar wind, causes the interplanetary 
field lines to take up a spiral form. The solar wind and 
interplanetary field interact with the magnetospheres of 
planets and the tails of comets. The pressure exerted by the 
solar wind squeezes a planetary magnetosphere inwards, 
towards the planet, on the Sun-facing side, and drags it 
out into a tail on the ‘downstream’ side. The wind drags 
ions out of the head of a comet to form a long ion tail. 
Fluctuations in the wind and interplanetary field, caused, 
for example, by bursts of particles from flares and by 
coronal mass ejections, distort planetary magnetospheres 
and sometimes cause ion tails to disconnect from their 
parent comets. 

The solar wind continues to flow outward until it is 
halted by the weak pressure exerted by the interstellar 
medium. The boundary of the region within which 
the solar wind and interplanetary field predominate (the 
heliosphere) is called the heliopause and is believed to lie 
at a distance of about 100 AU. The radius of the heliosphere 
is expected to vary with the solar cycle. 


See also: corona, coronal holes, flare, granulation, 
magnetosphere of Earth, SOHO (Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory), solar coronal mass ejection. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Acceleration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Soft x-ray Yohkoh image from 12 April 1993. The 
image shows a very distinct low-emissivity coronal hole region 
(large white area surrounding the north pole and stretching all 
the way to the equator). There is also a coronal hole present at 
the south pole, but this is veiled by denser material from 
surrounding regions and is therefore not visible at the time of 
the observation (see YOHKOH.) 


Solar Wind Acceleration 


Solar wind acceleration is the increase of the flow speed of 
the solar wind plasma from close to zero in the lower SOLAR 
ATMOSPHERE to the values observed in interplanetary space, 
which can range from 200 km s~! for the slowest speeds in 
the ecliptic plane to 750 km s-! for streams originating in 
the large polar CORONALHOLES. The exact height in the solar 
atmosphere at which the plasma starts its outflow is still 
being debated. Until recently it was thought that the solar 
atmosphere was more or less static out to distances of 5 to 
10 solar radii. With new observations from both ground 
and space based instruments, it has become clear that at 
least the fast solar wind streams accelerate at much lower 
heights in the solar atmosphere than previously thought, 
starting their outflows probably even below the TRANSITION 
REGION. 


Properties of solar wind streams 

Solar wind streams that differ significantly in speed will 
also differ in other plasma properties such as density 
and temperature. Different parts of the global solar 
magnetic field seem to give rise to streams with different 
properties. The large-scale magnetic field on the Sun can 
be approximated to first order by a dipole. Near the 
dipole equator inside of 1.5 to 3 solar radii the magnetic 
field is strong enough to withstand the outward plasma 
pressure, the magnetic field lines are therefore closed, and 
the plasma is confined in these regions called CORONAL 
STREAMERS. Further away from the Sun the magnetic field 
becomes weak compared with the plasma pressure, and 
the plasma forces the field lines to open, permitting 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a steady outflow of plasma into interplanetary space. 
These open field lines fill the space between the streamer 
boundaries and the solar poles. Plasma conditions in 
the open field regions differ from the conditions in the 
streamers. Observations show that electron densities and 
temperatures as well as emission at visible, UV and x-ray 
wavelengths are lower in the open field regions. Regions 
of extremely low emission are called coronal holes. The 
fastest solar wind originates from the large polar coronal 
holes which, particularly during solar minimum activity, 
might have extensions all the way to the solar equator (see 
figure 1, white areas on the solar disk). Measurements in 
interplanetary space show that this high-speed solar wind 
has rather constant plasma properties. At the Earth’s orbit 
the flow speed is 750 km s~! (which is 2.7 x 10° kmh“), the 
proton density is about 2 x 10° m~°, and the electron and 
proton temperatures are (1-2.5)x10° K respectively. The 
abundance of alpha particles relative to protons is about 
4.5%. The alpha particles are almost six times hotter than 
the protons and exceed their speed by about 50 km sl, 
which is close to the local Alfvén speed. The small traces 
of other heavy ions, such as O%, C>* and Mg', that are 
also found in the solar wind, flow with the same speed as 
the alpha particles. The increase in the flow speed between 
0.3 and 1 AU was determined during the HELIos I and II era 
to be of the order of 1% in the high-speed wind. Generally 
plasma properties of the fast solar wind originating from 
the polar coronal holes vary by less than 10%. (For a more 
detailed description of the HELIOS I and II solar wind 
probes see Schwenn and Marsch (1990, 1991).) 

In reality the large-scale magnetic field is more 
complicated than a pure dipole field and several closed 
field regions can be present at the same time (See SOLAR 
WIND: MAGNETIC FIELD). The slower solar wind originates 
from the open magnetic field regions on top of the 
different streamers, the edges of the streamers and the 
regions between streamers and coronal holes. These 
slower streams have plasma properties that are extremely 
variable. Their speed ranges from 200 to 600 km s"!, their 
density from 2 x 10° to more than 10 x 10° m~, the electron 
and proton temperatures range from (10-20) x 10* and (2.5- 
15)x10* K respectively. Heavy ions in these streams flow 
either with the same speed as the protons or are slightly 
slower. The ratio of the alpha to proton temperature is 
reduced to 3, and the abundance of alpha particles relative 
to protons ranges from close to 0% to almost 20%. The 
increase of the flow speed between 0.3 and 1 AU is of the 
order of 10%, thus larger than in the high-speed wind. 


Flow speeds in the near Sun regions 

The sound speed in the solar wind plasma is about 40 
to 70 km s~! at the Earth’s orbit. In solar wind, even 
the slowest streams are therefore highly supersonic. The 
transition from sub- to supersonic occurs somewhere 
close to the Sun, probably between 1.5 to 3.5 solar radii 
in the high-speed polar wind, and between 3.5 and 8 
solar radii in the slower streams. The exact distance 
from the Sun at which the solar wind speed reaches the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Acceleration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10 pB intensely 


Pen [e teak d. fl Melee | ate bated 


ABS 


ASS >yP BR. 


Figure 2. Polarized white light intensity measurements carried out every 3° along the circle shown in figure 1. These ground based 
measurements are made daily with the Mauna Loa K-coronameter, operated by the High Altitude Observatory (NCAR/HAO). The 
intensities are normalized to the lowest coronal hole intensity. Position angle 0 corresponds to heliographic north. Shown here are the 
measurements from 12 March to 19 May 1993. The low intensities from position angle 120° to 220° correspond to the southern coronal 
hole. Note the large daily intensity variations both inside the hole and in the surrounding regions. 


= 
ow 
LL LL 


nm) 
3. 
Nn 


Coronal Hole Region 


=) 
vil 


| 


ne (m™) 


iS 
ul 


r/R, > 


Equatorial Region 


ul 


r/R, 3 4 


1000 
100-4 
wn 
E 
10 = 
fs) 
1 
0.1 
1000 
100242 
n 
E 
TOS 
Sy 
1 
0.1 


Figure 3. Electron densities derived from polarization brightness measurements in the inner corona (n-) and estimates of the flow 
speed (v) derived from the mass flux measured in situ, these densities and the law of mass flux conservation for a radial expansion of 
the flow tubes (lower limits) and an expansion seven times more than radially. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Acceleration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


sound speed is not yet known, partly because we are 
not sure of the flow speeds in the inner corona, but also 
because we do not know the particle temperatures (sound 
speed) very accurately. Given the different properties 
of streams in interplanetary space one has to assume 
that their acceleration, as well as other characteristics 
in the inner corona, are different. The only means to 
determine these characteristics is by remote observations 
since no spacecraft has approached the Sun closer than 
about 60 solar radii. (A spacecraft to probe the solar 
wind plasma at distances of 5 to 10 solar radii is being 
planned.) The analysis of remote observations always 
requires a series of assumptions and approximations, and 
the results are therefore often a question of interpretation. 
For example, remote observations of the coronal plasma 
are always intergrated measurements along a line-of- 
sight. An example is given in figure 2. This figure 
shows Thompson scattered polarized white light intensity 
measured clockwise along the circle shown in figure 1, 
as a function of position angle, where 0 corresponds to 
the Sun’s north pole. These measurements were carried 
out daily from day 75 to 135, 1993. The southern polar 
coronal hole extends roughly from position angle 120° 
to 220°. It can be seen that the intensity measured 
inside that region varies significantly both along the 
time axis and along the position angle, even though the 
plasma properties measured in situ in the high-speed solar 
wind are rather constant. The intensity changes seen 
when observing coronal holes remotely are mostly due to 
changes in the regions surrounding them. At times these 
surrounding denser regions can veil the coronal holes 
completely or partially, as in figure 1 at the southern pole. 
Parameters derived from remote observations represent 
the plasma properties averaged along the line-of-sight. 
Thus, particularly measurements carried out in coronal 
holes will be biased by surrounding regions, and the 
measurements can only serve as guidelines. Figure 3 
shows the electron densities, n,, derived for a coronal 
hole region (upper panel) and an equatorial region (lower 
panel) using polarized white light observations (e.g. Fisher 
and Guhathakurta 1995). 

An estimate of the lower limit on the outflow speed 
of the electron—-proton plasma close to the Sun can be 
obtained from the mass flux measured in situ; these 
electron densities and the law of mass conservation which 
states that the flux of protons must be conserved from 
the solar surface into interplanetary space where in situ 
measurements can be carried out. (The proton flux is 
defined as the number of protons per m? times the proton 
flow speed times the area expansion of the flow tubes, 
which is the ratio between the flow tube area on the solar 
surface, where the stream originates, and the area that this 
stream covers at a given distance from the Sun.) 

The lower limits of the flow speed, v, shown in 
figure 3, are for the smallest possible flow tube expansion 
(radial), and the upper limits are for a very large expansion 
(seven times more than radially). The flow speeds derived 
from this estimate show that the solar wind accelerates 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


very rapidly in the inner corona, and achieves its almost 
final flow speeds between 5 and 10 solar radii. This is in 
agreement with the in situ Helios observations which show 
that there is basically no acceleration of the flow at large 
distances from the sun. Observations from soHo indicate 
that the heavy O** ions already flow faster than the protons 
in the inner corona. It seems that, at least in the high-speed 
wind, the differences between minor ions and protons, 
seen in the in situ measurements, originate in the inner 
corona with subsequent modification in interplanetary 
space. 

Solar wind speeds of 200 km s~! can be achieved by 
the pressure gradient force alone. To accelerate the wind 
to higher speeds, additional energy is needed that has 
to be deposited in the corona. At present it is not well 
understood where this additional energy comes from. It is 
usually assumed that plasma waves play a significant role 
(See SOLAR WIND: THEORY and CORONAL HEATING MECHANISMS). 


Summary 

The acceleration of the solar wind plasma to the speeds 
measured in interplanetary space happens close to the Sun, 
below 5 solar radii in the fastest streams and at slightly 
larger distances in the low-speed wind. During this 
acceleration process the solar wind passes from subsonic 
to supersonic speeds. The energy source necessary for the 
acceleration to happen is not yet known but is thought 
to be high-frequency plasma waves originating either in 
the lower solar atmosphere or higher up in the corona 
via a cascade from lower-frequency waves or via locally 
generated microinstabilities. 


Bibliography 

Fisher R and Guhathakurta M 1995 Physical properties 
of the polar coronal rays and holes as observed with 
SPARTAN 201-01 coronagraph Astrophys. J. 447 L139- 
L143 

Schwenn R and Marsch E 1990 Physics of the Inner 
Heliospehere vol 1 (Berlin: Springer) 

——1991 Physics of the Inner Heliospehere vol 2 (Berlin: 
Springer) 


Ruth Esser 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Composition 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind Composition 


To first order the solar wind composition reflects the 
composition of the source material, which is photospheric 
(SOLAR ABUNDANCES). However, there are some important 
distinctions between the solar wind and solar abundances 
which will be discussed in the following paragraphs. Since 
solar wind particles feed the corona, and solar energetic 
particles (SEPs; see SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES) largely 
originate in the corona, elemental and isotopic abundances 
of matter in the corona, in the solar wind and in solar 
energetic particles have much in common. 

The first solar wind composition measurements 
were carried out soon after the experimental discovery 
of the solar wind in the early 1960s. Gradually 
improved techniques have revealed many details about 
the acceleration and heating processes operating in the 
solar atmosphere and corona. With recent improvements 
of resolution in mass spectrometers carried on the WIND, 
SOHO and AcE missions, it has also become possible to 
study abundances of the major isotopic species and hence 
to gain direct information about the isotopic composition 
of solar matter. This information is not accessible with 
optical methods because the natural line widths are much 
wider than isotopic shifts in spectra. Thus the interest 
in solar wind composition is twofold and the topics of 
interest are interrelated. Depending on the viewpoint and 
the application, studying the solar wind composition and 
its variability provides on the one hand knowledge about 
the ways solar matter propagates into the interplanetary 
space. On the other hand, it provides access to the 
nuclidic composition of solar matter, information which 
is relevant for a multitude of astrophysical applications 
since solar matter is the most important reference point 
for the isotopic evolution of the solar system. An example 
of a high-resolution solar wind mass spectrum is shown 
in figure 1. 

An interesting minority within the solar wind 
population are the so-called ‘pick-up ions’ which mainly 
originate from interstellar gas flowing through the inner 
heliosphere. The elements helium and neon, having 
the highest first ionization potentials (FIPs), penetrate as 
neutrals to radial distances of less than 1 AU before they 
become ionized and can be picked up by the magnetic 
field which is traveling with the solar wind. Depending 
on their location of ionization, they relax more or less 
efficiently to local conditions in the plasma. However, 
they generally remain in low ionization states which leaves 
them distinguishable from the rest of the solar wind 
population. Freshly picked-up particles perform cycloidal 
motions about the outwards propagating magnetic field; 
hence their energy distributions reach beyond typical solar 
wind energies. They are thus particularly susceptible to 
acceleration in the fields associated with interplanetary 
shock fronts which are formed e.g. from coronal mass 
ejections (CMEs) or co-rotating interaction regions (CIRs). 
In addition to interstellar pick-up ions, other species with 
low FIPs have been found in the pick-up ion population. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


These particles originate from evaporating dust grains 
released from cometary debris and from interstellar dust 
particles which also can penetrate deep into the inner solar 
system. 


Feeding of the corona with solar matter 

Coronal structure and solar wind composition 

The corona exhibits a complex spatial and temporally 
variable structure which becomes visible to the naked 
eye during solar eclipses. The coronal structure 
with many details and its dynamic evolution are 
essentially determined by the configuration of the surface 
SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD. Coronal structure and solar wind 
composition are interrelated in many ways. For a 
rough characterization two terms are frequently used: 
‘interstream solar wind’ and ‘coronal-hole-associated streams’. 
Interstream solar wind is believed to be supplied from 
the fringes of the equatorial closed loop system. Solar 
wind particles travelling along open structures on the 
borderline of magnetic loops exhibit strong variations in 
composition. This observation has been taken as evidence 
for multiple sources rapidly connecting and disconnecting 
thereby producing expanding plasma blobs with complex 
spatial and magnetic topology which move outwards 
through the corona. On the other hand, coronal-hole- 
associated fast streams are generally much more stable in 
their composition. 

The balance between the gravitational attraction of 
the Sun and the Coulomb friction force exerted from 
outwards travelling protons on minor species seems to 
play a crucial role in establishing solar wind abundances. 
In a corona at thermal equilibrium with a temperature 
of typically 10° K, only protons (together with electrons 
to maintain charge neutrality) reach the escape velocity 
and move into the interplanetary space. One possibility 
to visualize the interaction between coronal structures 
and solar wind composition, which has been extensively 
studied, uses coronal magnetic flux tubes as elements 
that guide the solar wind flow. Depending on the 
flux density or—more precisely—on the phase space 
density (m~° s~%) in a given flux tube, and depending 
on the divergence of the flux tube in the solar wind 
acceleration region, protons couple to minor ions via 
Coulomb collisions and tend to drag heavy species more 
or less efficiently according to the individual Coulomb 
drag factors of each species. An alternative to interplay 
between coronal structures and the solar wind plasma to 
populate the solar wind with minor ions involves magnetic 
fields as carriers of magnetohydrodynamic waves which 
interact with charged particles. This seems particularly 
important for coronal-hole-associated solar wind where 
Coulomb friction seems insufficient to drag minor species. 
Nevertheless, in this type of solar wind, minor ions are 
at least as abundant as in the interstream wind, and 
even helium—although still depleted relative to its solar 
surface abundance—is better represented in coronal-hole- 
associated wind than in the typical interstream wind. 
Hence, momentum added through waves to protons, to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Composition 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SOHO/CELIAS/MTOF 1996 


‘old’ elements: C, O, Ne, Mg, Si, S, Ar, Fe 
‘new' elements: N, Na, Al, K, Ca, Ti, Cr, Ni 
‘new' isotopes: bao Lo fi 5g, 76g, 


1E+6 


1E+5 


# of counts 


1E+4 


1E+3 


12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 


29., 30 


34 
Si, 


i Ra SF e, ON 


52 56 60 64 


Atomic masses [amu] 


Figure 1. Solar wind elements and isotopes as observed with the MTOF sensor of the CELIAS experiment on SOHO. Elements and 
isotopes which have been identified for the first time in the solar wind thanks to isochronous mass spectrometry are shown in grey. 


helium and to minor species seems crucial to obtain the 
typical properties of coronal-hole-associated solar wind. 
This has recently been confirmed with optical observations 
from the SOHO spacecraft, indicating that ion-cyclotron 
resonance wave-particle interaction brings minor ions to 
temperatures as much as a hundred million kelvins, thus 
exceeding the main gas temperature by one or more orders 
of magnitude. 

Magnetic reconnection is another process to link 
the magnetic field structures to solar wind abundances. 
It occurs in the innermost corona and this link to 
abundances has not yet been extensively explored. 
Rapidly changing magnetic topologies in reconnection 
regions around the equatorial streamer belt, which 
supplies matter to the interstream solar wind, lead to 
dissipative heating, generation of EUV and soft x-ray 
radiation, and electric fields which could selectively 
accelerate particles according to their charge per mass 
ratio. The EUV radiation originating in the dissipation 
region and in shock fronts controls the ionization of matter 
in the underlying chromosphere and thus selectively 
regulates the replenishment of fresh ions in the corona. 


Fractionation effects 

Elements 

As discussed in more detail elsewhere in this encyclopedia 
(See TRANSITION REGION: FIRST IONIZATION POTENTIAL EFFECT), the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


most important elemental fractionation process occurs in 
the ionization layer situated in the upper chromosphere 
where species with short ionization times (or low 
FIPs) are enriched over species with long ionization 
times typically by factors of 3-5 over photospheric 
abundances in the interstream solar wind. This effect 
seems much weaker in coronal-hole-associated wind. 
Further up in the atmosphere, it appears that wave— 
particle interaction, which plays a dominant role in the 
acceleration of coronal-hole-type solar wind, acts in a 
much more democratic manner than Coulomb drag— 
including also weakly ionized species—which would 
otherwise hopelessly remain behind. A summary of solar 
wind elemental abundances is given in table 1. One 
conspicuous feature of abundances, in both types of solar 
wind, is the depletion of helium by typically a factor 
of 2 relative to hydrogen. Since this feature of helium 
depletion is also found in the otherwise ‘democratically 
elected’ solar abundance representation in coronal holes, it 
is generally ascribed to the ion—neutral separation process 
which leaves its imprint on all types of solar wind. 


Isotopes 

Table 2 is a compilation of recent data on the isotopic 
composition of the solar wind. The refractory elements 
which have uniform isotopic composition throughout the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Composition ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Solar wind elemental abundances. 


Abundance (logarithmic scale), Abundance (linear scale), 


[O] = 8.78 [O] = 1000 
Element Z  FIP(eV) FIT(s) Interstream Coronal hole Interstream Coronal hole 
H 1 13.6 70 12.2140.13 11.8940.12 2.700000 + 600000 1280000 + 320000 
He 4 245 260 10.68+0.10 10.52+0.10 80000 + 20000 55 000 + 20 000 
Cc 6 412 20 8.60 + 0.07 660 + 100 
O 8 13.6 74 =8.78 =1000 
Ne 10. 21.5 81 8.01 + 0.06 170 + 20 
Mg 12 7.6 0.3 8.01 + 0.10 7.69 + 0.10 171 +35 81+18 
Si 14 8.1 0.6 8.08 + 0.10 7.49 + 0.08 200 + 30 5247 
S 16 =10.3 11.6 7.55 + 0.05 7.50 + 0.06 5947 53 +6 
Ar 18 15.7 50 6.35 + 0.13 3.7+1.0 
Fe 26 7.8 2 7.84 + 0.10 7.58 + 0.10 115+ 15 6348 
Kr 360 «14.1 20.3 3.25 3.0 x 10-3 
Xe 5412.1 10.1 2.63 7.1 x 10-4 


This is a compilation of results obtained with the Apollo/SWC experiment, from lunar soil investigations, from 
ISEE3/ICI, the SWICS Instrument and the Plasma Ion Spectrometer on Ulysses, and from CELIAS on SOHO (see 
Bochsler 2000 for more details and a complete list of references). [O] = 8.78 is used as a normalized value for both 
types of solar wind. It reflects the photospheric abundance of oxygen in dex units as recommended by Holweger 
(private communication). The standard first ionization times (FITs) are taken from Geiss (1998) and references 


therein. 


solar system and whose solar isotopic composition is 
presumably well known (e.g. Mg and Si) show no evidence 
of fractionation between the solar surface and the solar 
wind to the level of precision which has been achieved 
to date. In contrast, the volatile elements, i.e. helium, 
neon and nitrogen, show rather strong variations in the 
isotopic composition in different solar system samples, 
such as terrestrial and solar wind. In view of the absence 
of fractionation effects in the case of the refractories, it can 
be concluded that the solar wind is generally a faithful 
representation of the isotopic composition of the solar 
surface. For the case of the very light element helium 
with a large relative mass difference between the two 
stable isotopes, variations of the *He/*He ratio of the 
order of 10% have to be taken into account under normal 
conditions. Hence, the observed differences between 
isotopic abundances of solar wind volatiles from planetary 
volatiles are differences which originate at the source; they 
reflect different histories of solar volatiles and volatiles 
in the rest of the solar system. Isotopic solar wind data 
represent important benchmarks for models of the early 
geochemical evolution of the solar system and also put 
rigid constraints for models describing the acceleration of 
heavy species in the inner corona. 

Since all quantitative models on the FIP effect 
published heretofore ascribe the depletion of high-FIP 
elements in the corona essentially to atomic properties, 
it is no surprise that they predict virtually no isotopic 
fractionation concomitant with the ion—neutral separation. 
In view, however, of the sometimes strong variability 
of the He/H ratio it is possible than an overall isotopic 
fractionation of the order of 1% per mass unit results for 
medium-mass elements between the solar surface and the 
solar wind due to selective acceleration in the corona. This 
effect is at present, however, still below the detection limit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 2. Isotopic abundances. 


Solar wind Terrestrial 
4He/>He 2350 + 70 740 000 
MN /N 200 + 55 272 
16O/18O 450 498.8 
20Ne/?*Ne 13.7403 9.80 
?Ne/*INe 3144 34.5 
4Mig/Mg 0.7857 + 0.0076 0.7899 
>Meg/Mg 0.1020 + 0.0048 0.1000 
2°Mg/Mg —0.1123 + 0.0071 0.1101 
285i /Si 0.9220 + 0.0026 0.9223 
Si /Si 0.0454 + 0.0020 0.0467 
30Si /Si 0.0326 + 0.0021 0.0310 
36 Ar/8Ar 5.58 + 0.03 5.32 
4Ca/"Ca 128 + 47 149.8 
Ca/#Ca = 50 + 8 46.47 
54Fe/Fe 0.0604 + 0.0053 0.0580 
56Fe/Fe 0.9148 + 0.0053 0.9172 
BK /8Kr 0.01945 +0.00015 0.01995 + 0.00008 
80K /8Kr 0.1274 + 0.0006 0.1296 + 0.0004 
82ky/86Kr 0.6573 + 0.0020 0.6617 + 0.0016 
8Ky/86Kr 0.6586 + 0.0017 0.6600 + 0.0014 
84K y/86Kr 3.279 + 0.007 3.273 + 0.007 
124X@/190Xe 0.0290 + 0.0007 0.023 35 + 0.0014 
126Xe/39Xe 0.0259 + 0.0009 0.021 76 + 0.0014 
128Xe/190Xe 0.5038 + 0.0028 0.4708 + 0.0017 
129Xe/190Xe 6.354 + 0.0017 6.505 + 0.0015 
131Xe/0Xe 4.988 + 0.0011 5.224 + 0.0012 
132Xe/39Xe 6.062 + 0.0016 6.614 + 0.0012 
134X@/190Xe 2.239 + 0.0008 2.567 + 0.0007 
136Xe/139Xe 1.818 + 0.0006 2.182 + 0.0006 


For details and a complete list of references see Bochsler 


(2000). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Composition 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ionic composition 

Solar wind particles (as well as SEPs), after passage 
through the coronal temperature maximum, are usually 
strongly ionized. Figure 2 is an illustration showing a mass 
versus mass/charge distribution as obtained with the 
SWICS instrument of ACE. Protons are suppressed in this 
instrument to avoid counting overflows; helium appears 
exclusively as ‘He** together with some traces of *He”*. 
Carbon and oxygen are almost fully ionized whereas the 
heavier species usually conserve their innermost electron 
shells, e.g. Fe is most conspicuous in the mass per charge 
range from 4.67 to 7.0 (Fe!?* through Fe**). The ionization 
balance of minor species is predominantly established via 
electron collisions in the corona at about a distance of 
1Ro from the solar surface. The ionization rates, and to 
some degree also the recombination rates, depend on the 
local electron temperatures. In the dense, inner parts of 
the corona, collisions are sufficiently frequent to establish 
a quasi-equilibrium distribution of charge states. As 
the ions move further out, the ambient electron density 
decreases, collisional reactions are gradually supressed 
and the result is a relatively wide distribution of charge 
states which ‘freezes’ and remains unaltered throughout 
the heliosphere. Charge states of minor species measured 
far from the Sun provide a useful means to deduce the 
electron temperatures in the corona. Another application 
is reminiscent of hydrological methods: because of their 
conservative properties, charge states of minor ions are 
now frequently used as reliable tracers to map distorted 
solar wind flux tubes back to their source in the solar 
corona. 


Coronal mass ejection related solar wind 
composition 

Only recently has it become possible to reliably determine 
the rapidly varying composition of minor ions in CME- 
related solar wind. A long-known feature is the 
sometimes enhanced He/H ratio which has been taken as 
evidence for gravitational stratification in the undisturbed 
corona. Similar effects might be responsible for the 
sometimes observed mass-dependent fractionation. The 
most surprising recent discovery, however, is a temporary 
strong enrichment of *He, probably due to the same 
mechanism which produces the even more dramatic 
enrichments of *He in impulsive flare particles. With 
the improved time resolution of modern instrumentation, 
less surprisingly, extremely unequilibrated charge state 
distributions, e.g. large amounts of O***** together with 
otherwise common solar wind species O% and O7*, have 
been observed with ACE and WIND. 


Historical solar wind 

Lunar soil and also the soil in the surface layers of asteroids 
are constantly exposed to the solar corpuscular irradiation. 
Particles at solar wind energies penetrate typically to 
depths of 0.1 4m into dust grains and are stored within 
these grains for extended periods depending on their 
diffusive behavior within the mineral and depending on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the further history of the grains. Lunar soil undergoes 
continuous sputtering from solar and cosmic ray particles, 
combined with erosion from micrometeorite impacts. 
Because of the occasional covering of soil layers with 
freshly excavated material from larger impacts, it is 
possible that some solar particle records are buried within 
the asteroidal and lunar regolith for billions of years, thus 
storing an archive of most of the solar wind history in 
the near-Earth environment and the inner solar system. 
Some tracers such as “Ar, which is a decay product 
from *°K, and volatile fission products from decaying 7°U 
emanating from the lunar interior and re-implanted with 
the solar wind into surface material make it possible to 
reliably date the irradiation epochs. The lunar record has 
been intensively investigated. The results are somewhat 
controversial. One major problem is the allocation of 
suprathermal particles and SEPs which exhibit somewhat 
different isotopic abundances and seem overabundant 
with respect to the solar wind population. There is general 
agreement that the isotopic composition of the solar wind 
has not changed significantly during the last few billion 
years, except for the case of the “N/'“N abundance 
ratio which, however, must be attributed to extrasolar 
contributions. The apparent invariance of the 7He/+He 
abundance ratio in the solar wind over this extended 
period bears some significance for the history of the Sun, 
since it indicates that the outer part of the Sun (from 
M, > 0.5Mo to the base of the outer convective zone) has 
never undergone mixing since the ignition of the nuclear 
fuel. 

The elemental abundances of the heavy noble 
gases indicate, however, that there has been a secular 
modification in solar wind composition over the past 
few billion years which is possibly related to a change 
in solar activity (i.e. that the ancient, in-ecliptic solar 
particle fluence contained significantly more CME-related, 
transient solar wind than the more recent record). This 
provides an additional boost to the study of CME-related 
composition which has only recently become possible 
owing to the considerably improved time resolution of 
modern particle instrumentation. 


Bibliography 

Bochsler P 2000 Charge states and abundances of particles 
in the solar wind Space Sci. Rev. (in preparation) 

Geiss J 1998 Constraints on the FIP mechanisms from 
solar wind abundance data Solar Composition and 
its Evolution—from Core to Corona ed C Fréhlich, 
M C E Huber, S K Solanki and R von Steiger 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 241-52 

Von Steiger R, Geiss and Gloeckler G 1997 Composition 
of the solar wind Cosmic Winds and the Heliosphere 
ed J R Jokipii, C P Sonett and MS Giampapa (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 581-616 

Wieler R, Kehm K, Meshik A and Hohenberg Ch 
1996 Secular changes in the xenon and krypton 
abundances in the solar wind recorded in single lunar 
grains Nature 384 46-9 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Composition 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ACE/SWICS data 


250 | 
Eat 
| 
200 Mg"°** = Mg°* 
[ 8 6 
3 Qos - Qe 
c } 
= 150 | 
£ | 
pe 
@ 100 ‘He 
E “He 
50 | H* b. 
0 = 
@ 10000F Jy TT 
S Poh 1 \, 
1, 
8 1000 | ‘wa! ‘ad 
rf \ ff *y 
ws 100 ff Patlfiyy 
0 200 400 


; + 
g 
3 
‘ o'é 
a 
a 
8 +h 2 
£ 
ba | 
fe} 
oO 2° 
24 
2° 


600 800 1000 


mass per charge channel 


Figure 2. Mass versus mass per charge distribution in the solar wind as observed on day 29, 1998, with ACE/SWICS. This figure is 


reproduced as Color Plate 56. 


Peter Bochsler 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


Numerous types of waves exist in the SOLAR WIND. Since 
the solar wind is a plasma (i.e. an ionized gas) these 
waves are usually called plasma waves. Plasma waves 
play a fundamental role in determining the physical 
properties of the solar wind. In an ordinary gas, the 
gas is maintained in a state of thermal equilibrium by 
collisions. In thermal equilibrium the particle velocities 
have a universal isotropic form called a Maxwellian 
velocity distribution (see Haliday and Resnick 1981). Since 
the solar wind is very tenuous, collisions are extremely 
rare. An energetic particle from the Sun can reach the 
Earth without suffering a single large-angle collision. 
Under these conditions waves play a role similar to 
collisions. As the solar wind streams outward from the 
Sun, various dynamical effects cause the particle velocity 
distributions to deviate from a Maxwellian, often in the 
form of beams aligned along the magnetic field or various 
types of anisotropies. These non-equilibrium features 
eventually cause the growth of waves via various types 
of plasma instabilities. As the waves grow to large 
amplitudes, the waves interact with the particles in such 
a way as to eliminate the non-equilibrium feature that 
is responsible for the wave growth, thereby driving the 
velocity distributions toward thermal equilibrium, i.e. a 
role very similar to collisions. Waves also carry energy 
and momentum over long distances, and are believed to 
play a fundamental role in heating the solar corona and 
accelerating the solar wind. In this article we will describe 
the various types of waves that occur in the solar wind 
and discuss the role these waves play in determining the 
properties of the solar wind (see also SOLAR WIND: GLOBAL 
PROPERTIES; KINETIC PROPERTIES). 


Plasma wave modes 

Many types of waves can exist in a plasma. Figure 1 
shows a plot of the propagation velocity, v, as a function of 
frequency, f, for the most commonly observed waves in 
the solar wind. This plot is representative of conditions at 
a radial distance of 1 AU (astronomical unit), near the orbit 
of the Earth. The propagation velocity is determined by a 
number of parameters, including the speed of light, c, the 
magnetic field strength, B, the particle number densities, 
N,y, of the various species in the plasma (s = e for electrons, 
and s = i for ions) and the temperatures, T,, of these 
species. It is convenient to convert these parameters into 
a series of characteristic frequencies and speeds. The most 
important characteristic frequencies of a plasma are the 
electron cyclotron frequency, foe = (1/27 )eB/me, the ion 
cyclotron frequency, fci = (me/mi) fre, the electron plasma 
frequency, fpe = (1/27) (Nee?/eome)'/”, and the ion plasma 
frequency, fpi(me/mj)'/? foe. In these formulas e is the 
electronic charge, €) is the permittivity of free space, me 
is the electron mass and m; is the ion mass. The most 
important characteristic speeds of a plasma are the Alfvén 
speed, Va = B/(0Pm)'/?, the electron sound speed V. = 
(ykTz/me)!/* and the ion sound speed V; = (ykTe/m)', 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where [Up is the permeability of free space, Pm is the mass 
density and y is the adiabatic compression factor. For 
a further discussion of these various quantities, see Stix 
(1992). 

As can be seen in figure 1 the propagation velocity 
breaks up into a number of clearly defined branches, 
each of which corresponds to a well-defined mode of 
propagation. These modes are given specific names. 
Starting at the lowest frequencies, there are three modes 
of propagation called the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) 
modes. These modes can be ordered according to 
the propagation velocity and are often called the fast 
magnetosonic mode, the Alfvén mode and the slow 
magnetosonic mode. The propagation velocities are given 


up = 4 (VK + Vg) + Z1(Vx — Ve)? + 4VA Ve sin? 0]? (1) 


v2 = V2 cos? 6 (2) 
v2 = 1(V2 + Ve) — 3I(V2 — V2)? + 4V2V2 sin? ay? (3) 


where v,, va and v, are the propagation velocities of the 
fast, Alfvén and slow modes. The angle @, called the 
wave normal angle, is the angle between the direction 
of propagation and the magnetic field. As the name 
MHD implies, these modes involve a mixture of both 
magnetic and hydrodynamic (fluid) effects. The magnetic 
effects are represented by the Alfvén speed, Va, which 
is proportional to the magnetic field strength, and the 
hydrodynamic effects are represented by the sound 
speed, V,, which is proportional to the square root of 
the temperature. All three modes have electric and 
magnetic fields of the type that are usually associated 
with an electromagnetic wave. The fast and slow 
magnetosonic modes both have compressional motions 
of the type normally associated with sound waves 
(hence the dependence on the sound speed, Vs) and 
transverse motions of the type usually associated with 
electromagnetic waves (hence the dependence on Va). The 
Alfvén mode on the other hand is a purely transverse mode 
and has no compressional motions (hence no dependence 
on the sound speed, Vs). The Alfvén mode was first 
discovered by Alfvén (1942) and is often called the shear 
Alfvén mode. For a discussion of MHD WAVES, see also 
Alfvén and Falthammer (1963). Under normal conditions 
the propagation velocities of all three MHD modes are 
substantially less than the solar wind velocity, Vsw, which 
is usually about 400 km s7! (see figure 1). 

Proceeding upward in frequency, one can see from 
figure 1 that as the frequency approaches the ion cyclotron 
frequency, fi, the propagation velocities of the fast 
magnetosonic mode and the Alfvén mode begin to deviate 
from the constant values given by equations (1) and (2). 
As the frequency approaches the ion cyclotron frequency 
the propagation velocity of the Alfvén mode begins to 
decrease rapidly, and it goes to zero at a frequency 
slightly below the ion cyclotron frequency. The exact 
frequency of the propagation cutoff depends on the wave 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SOLAR WIND 
AT | AU 


FAST 
MAGNE TOSONIC 


v, PROPAGATION VELOCITY, KM sec! 


FREE SPACE ELECTROMAGNETIC a ora —c 


LANGMUIR 
MODE 


WHISTLER MODE 


!ON-ACOUSTIC MODE 


f, FREQUENCY, Hz 


Figure 1. The propagation velocity of various plasma wave modes in the solar wind as a function of frequency for typical conditions at 


1 AU. 


normal angle. In this frequency range, near the ion 
cyclotron frequency, the Alfvén mode is usually called the 
ion cyclotron mode. Above the ion cyclotron frequency 
the Alfvén mode cannot propagate at any wave normal 
angle. For the fast magnetosonic mode, the propagation 
speed increases as the frequency crosses the ion cyclotron 
frequency, eventually varying as the square root of the 
frequency. This increase continues until the propagation 
velocity reaches a peak and then decreases rapidly, going 
to zero at a frequency slightly below the electron cyclotron 
frequency, fce. The exact frequency of this propagation 
cutoff depends on the wave normal angle. Above the 
electron cyclotron frequency the whistler mode cannot 
propagate at any wave normal angle. In the frequency 
range between the ion cyclotron frequency and the electron 
cyclotron frequency, the fast magnetosonic mode is usually 
called the whistler mode, after whistling signals generated 
by lightning that were discovered by Storey (1953). As the 
frequency of the slow magnetosonic mode increases the 
propagation velocity remains essentially unchanged as the 
frequency crosses the ion cyclotron frequency. Although 
the slow magnetosonic mode is an electromagnetic wave, 
at high frequencies, above the ion cyclotron frequency, 
the wave magnetic field becomes very weak and the 
wave takes on the properties of an electrostatic wave, 
with an electric field but no magnetic field. In this high- 
frequency regime the slow magnetosonic wave has many 
of the properties of an acoustic wave and is often called 
an ion acoustic wave. As the frequency approaches the 
ion plasma frequency, the propagation velocity of the ion 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


acoustic mode goes to zero at the ion plasma frequency. 
The ion acoustic mode cannot propagate at frequencies 
above the ion plasma frequency. The ion acoustic mode 
is strongly damped by a collisionless damping process 
called Landau damping (Landau 1946). This damping 
arises because the propagation velocity is comparable 
with the ion thermal speed, which allows some of the 
wave energy to be absorbed by resonant interactions with 
ions moving at approximately the same velocity as the 
wave. The damping becomes particularly strong when the 
frequency is near the ion plasma frequency. This region of 
strong damping is shown by a dashed curve in figure 1. 
The damping is weak only if the electron temperature is 
substantially greater than the ion temperature, T, >> T;,, 
which raises the propagation speed of the wave well above 
the ion thermal speed (note that the ion sound speed, Vs, 
depends on the electron temperature and not on the ion 
temperature). The condition 7. >> 7; is only rarely satisfied 
in the solar wind. 

At frequencies above the ion plasma frequency, no 
waves can propagate until the frequency reaches the 
electron plasma frequency, fpe. At frequencies near 
and above the electron plasma frequency two modes of 
propagation occur, the free space electromagnetic mode 
and the Langmuir mode. The free space electromagnetic 
mode is a purely transverse wave with the electric and 
magnetic fields oriented perpendicular to each other 
and to the direction of propagation. The free space 
electromagnetic mode propagates at a speed given by 
v =c/[1—(fpe/f)*]'*. Note that the propagation velocity 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


4 = alt T “TT TTY. ir a oa Ie] a | 
8 Al 
7 LANGMUIR 
WAVES a 
f& foe 
lox a IE TYPE I 
1 Pe RADIO BURSTS “| 
“ae a IVAVAVAG Se te 
# ‘ 
~- IOP 
1) 
Zz 
5 4 
go 0 ION-ACOUSTIC 
tr WAVES 
4 ow | ti S| 
2 WHISTLER-MODE 
Or WAVES 
ALFVEN fsfce 
o L WAVES e 
FS foj 
(sa Ss it we PTT pe ie Sg Sipe aap [es = et 
LO ie) 100 


R, HELIOCENTRIC RADIAL DISTANCE, Re 


Figure 2. A plot of various characteristic frequencies of the solar wind plasma as a function of the heliocentric radial distance from the 
Sun in solar radii, Rs. The Earth is at a heliocentric radial distance (1 AU) of about 200Rs. 


of the free space electromagnetic mode goes to infinity at 
the electron plasma frequency and approaches the speed 
of light, c, at high frequencies. Since the propagation 
velocity is always greater than the velocity of any of 
the particles in the plasma, this mode cannot interact 
resonantly with the plasma particles and, therefore, does 
not experience Landau damping. The Langmuir mode 
is a purely longitudinal electrostatic wave (i.e. it has an 
electric field, but no magnetic field) and propagates at 
a speed given by v = V/[1 — (fpe/f)"]'”. Note that 
the propagation velocity of the Langmuir mode goes to 
infinity at the electron plasma frequency, and approaches 
the electron sound speed, Ve, at high frequencies. Since 
the characteristic propagation speed of this wave is near 
the electron thermal speed this wave is subject to strong 
Landau damping. The region of strong damping is 
indicated by a dashed curve in figure 1. The damping is 
small only for wave frequencies very close to the electron 
plasma frequency, f ~ fpe, where the propagation speed 
goes to infinity. Thus, the Langmuir wave propagates with 
low damping only in a narrow frequency band around the 
electron plasma frequency, essentially a pure oscillation at 
the electron plasma frequency. The wave is also sometimes 
called an electron plasma oscillation. 

To develop a complete understanding of the propaga- 
tion of plasma waves in the solar wind we must consider 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the radial variation of the various characteristic frequen- 
cies of the plasma. Figure 2 shows a plot of the ion cy- 
clotron frequency, the electron cyclotron frequency, the ion 
plasma frequency and the electron plasma frequency as a 
function of heliocentric radial distance. As one can see, all 
of the characteristic frequencies decrease with increasing 
radial distance from the Sun. To understand the detailed 
radial dependence we must discuss the radial variation of 
the magnetic field strength and the electron density. In 
the radial distance range from about 2Rs to 100Rs, the 
magnetic field is directed almost radially outward from 
the Sun (Hundhausen 1972). Under these conditions con- 
servation of magnetic flux shows that the magnetic field 
strength must vary approximately as 1/ R?. Therefore, the 
cyclotron frequencies, f,j and f-., vary as approximately 
as 1/R? over this radial distance range. Because of strong 
multipole magnetic fields near the Sun, inside of about 2Rs 
it is not possible to give a specific prediction for the radial 
variation, except to say that it is likely to be steeper than 
1/R*. Beyond about 100Rs the magnetic field develops 
a significant azimuthal component due to solar rotation, 
eventually varying as 1/R at large distances from the Sun. 
At radial distances beyond about 7 Rs (Hundhausen 1972), 
where the solar wind is supersonic, conservation of parti- 
cle flux shows that the electron density must vary as 1/R?. 
The ion and electron plasma frequencies, fp; and fpe, which 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


+4 : A ‘ 
ba O Pay coy wd Wary 
= i ‘ | @ 1 
4 i" Y 
1 | 
+4 
f nf y at ‘y) Ww Wied 
by oh gM Ma Ae 
-4 ¥ | } 
a. 
ha 
+4 ‘Ay f) Dad 
ANT aY ir fs 
b oh by I aval Hy 
Ny i N ( | f Ry 
-4 is | 
ay : 
+4 N 
BO 
8 12 


25 
; 4 O Yr 
} -25 


TIME (HRS) 


Figure 3. Alfvén waves in the solar wind as detected by the magnetic field and plasma instruments on the Mariner 5 spacecraft. From 
Davis (1972) with kind permission from Kluwer Academic Publishers. 


are proportional to the square root of the electron density, 
must then vary as 1/R in this region. Inside of about 7 Rs, 
where the solar wind flow is subsonic, it is not possible 
to give a simple prediction for the radial variation of the 
plasma frequency, except to say that it is likely to be steeper 
than 1/R. 


Observations 

To illustrate the types of plasma waves that are observed in 
the solar wind, we next show examples of each of the wave 
modes discussed in the previous section. To be consistent 
with the previous discussion, we start with the lowest 
frequencies and proceed to the highest frequencies. 


Alfvén waves 

Alfvén waves were first discovered in the solar wind by 
Unti and Neugebauer (1968) and Belcher et al (1969) using 
data from the Mariner 2 and 5 spacecraft. These waves 
are illustrated in figure 3, which is from Davis (1972). The 
top three plots shows three orthogonal components of the 
wave magnetic field, bg, by and by. These components 
were obtained by subtracting the average background 
magnetic field from the measured field. Superposed on 
the same plots are the corresponding components of the 
plasma flow velocity fluctuation, up, uy and uy. The 
bottom plot shows the magnitude of the magnetic field, B, 
and the plasma density, N. The highly irregular variations 
in the magnetic field and flow velocity, on time scales 
ranging from a few hours to a few minutes, are Alfvén 
waves. Note that there is no evidence of corresponding 
variations in either the magnetic field magnitude or 
the plasma density. The absence of fluctuations in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic field magnitude and in the plasma density 
indicates that the waves are non-compressional, thereby 
uniquely identifying the mode of propagation as the 
Alfvén mode. Note that the flow velocity variations 
are in phase (positively correlated) with variations in 
the corresponding magnetic field components. From the 
direction of the average background magnetic field during 
this event (directed inward, toward the Sun) and the 
positive correlation between the wave magnetic field and 
the flow velocity fluctuation, one can show that the waves 
are propagating outward, away from the Sun. 

It is now widely believed that the Alfvén waves 
observed in the solar wind are excited by turbulent 
fluctuations near the Sun and that the waves propagate 
outward to great distances from the Sun, probably several 
AU or more. Although fast and slow magnetosonic 
waves are sometimes detected, the dominant wave 
energy is almost always in the shear Alfvén mode. 
The small amounts of energy in the fast and slow 
magnetosonic modes are most likely due to the fact that 
these modes are compressional, which leads to strong 
damping. In contrast, the Alfvén mode has very little 
damping, primarily because of the transverse (i.e. non- 
compressional) nature of this mode. 


Ion cyclotron and whistler mode waves 

As the Alfvén wave propagates outward from the 
Sun the ion cyclotron frequency decreases, eventually 
approaching the frequency of the wave (see figure 2). 
As the ion cyclotron frequency approaches the wave 
frequency the propagation velocity begins to decrease 
(see figure 2), and the wave becomes strongly damped 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


by a process called ion cyclotron damping. Ion 
cyclotron damping occurs when the Doppler-shifted wave 
frequency seen in the frame of reference of an ion moving 
along the magnetic field matches the cyclotron frequency 
of the ion. The resulting interaction accelerates the ion 
and causes a loss of wave energy. The net effect is that the 
wave energy is absorbed as the ion cyclotron frequency 
approaches the wave frequency, thereby transferring the 
wave energy to the solar wind. This cyclotron resonant 
absorption process is believed to provide a significant heat 
input into the solar wind. 

Evidence of this ion cyclotron absorption process 
is illustrated in figure 4, which shows a magnetic field 
spectrum observed by the Helios 2 spacecraft at a radial 
distance of about 0.3 AU. At the lowest frequencies, below 
about 10-7 Hz, the spectrum is mainly due to Alfvén 
waves. The intensity can be seen to vary as approximately 
f~!. Proceeding upward in frequency a noticeable change 
in the spectral slope, from about f~! to f~'7, can be seen 
as the frequency approaches the ion cyclotron frequency, 
foi, followed by a very abrupt decrease in intensity above 
the ion cyclotron frequency. The change in slope and 
the rapid decrease in the intensity near the ion cyclotron 
frequency are believed to be due to absorption of the 
Alfvén wave energy by either ion cyclotron damping or 
possibly Landau damping (Leamon et al 1998). Proceeding 
to higher frequencies, above the ion cyclotron frequency, a 
weak but persistent level of magnetic noise can be seen at 
frequencies extending up to about the electron cyclotron 
frequency. These frequencies are much too high to be 
caused by MHD waves and are almost certainly due 
to whistler mode waves (see figure 1). An alternative 
possibility, that they might be ion acoustic waves, is 
ruled out by the fact that, at these frequencies, the ion 
acoustic wave is almost purely electrostatic and would 
have no magnetic field. The origin of these whistler 
mode waves is poorly understood. Since whistler mode 
waves experience a significant level of cyclotron damping 
due to interactions with the relatively hot electrons (TJ. ~ 
10° K) present in the solar wind, it seems unlikely that 
the waves could reach the spacecraft from a source near 
the Sun. The most likely explanation is that they are 
generated locally by anisotropies in the solar wind electron 
distribution. Anisotropic velocity distributions are known 
to be a free energy source for whistler mode waves (Kennel 
and Petschek 1966). 


Ion acoustic waves 

Since the ion acoustic mode is normally very heavily 
damped by Landau damping, one would not expect to 
detect ion acoustic waves in the solar wind. Nevertheless, 
electrostatic waves have been detected in the solar wind 
that are believed to be ion acoustic waves. A frequency— 
time spectrogram showing a series of electrostatic bursts 
extending up to about 6 kHz that are believed to be ion 
acoustic waves is shown in figure 5. These waves were 
detected by the plasma wave electric field antenna on the 
Voyager 2 spacecraft at a heliocentric radial distance of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
of 
er 
HELIOS-2 t 
. ow APRIL [4, 1976 
= R=0,3 AU 
> te KY = 
nN ALFVEN +7 
= 9 wf 
ig? | WAVES L 
= ci 
fe ' r 
9 10°4 10N cycLoTRON . \ 
3 | WAVES a [ 
a Nt 
2 \ Mu 
am) I et 
Th | 3 
oO 
Qo 4 
7 ike) r 
= 
5 L 
= 196 
a 4 WHISTLER MODE 
a iG8 WAVES 
ig 0 


ioe wot 102 10 jo? 107 
f, FREQUENCY, Hz 


Figure 4. A magnetic field spectrum showing Alfvén waves, ion 
cyclotron waves and whistler mode waves detected by the 
Helios 2 spacecraft at a heliocentric radial distance of 0.3 AU. 
Illustration adapted from Denskat et al (1983). 


1.66 AU. The ion plasma frequency at this time is estimated 
to be about 300 Hz. Since the ion acoustic mode cannot 
propagate at frequencies above the ion plasma frequency, 
one may wonder how the frequencies could extend 
upward to frequencies as high as 6 kHz. The reason is that 
ion acoustic waves have very short wavelengths, which 
cause very large Doppler shifts. Under the conditions 
present in the solar wind near 1 AU, the frequency is 
almost entirely determined by Doppler shift, so there is 
no simple relationship to the ion plasma frequency. The 
Doppler shift is approximately Af = Vsw/A4, where i 
is the wavelength. The minimum wavelength of an ion 
acoustic wave is 27Ap, where Ap is the Debye length 
(Stix 1992), so the maximum frequency is approximately 
fax = Vew/27Ap. For typical conditions at 1.66 AU 
the Debye length is about 10 m, which for a solar wind 
velocity of 400 km s7} gives a maximum frequency of 
about 6 kHz, in good agreement with the observed upper 
frequency limit of the emissions in figure 5. Since the 
Debye length varies inversely with the square root of the 
electron density, the maximum frequency is predicted to 
increase inversely with radial distance from the Sun, in 
agreement with observations (Gurnett et al 1979). 

At present the mechanism by which ion acoustic 
waves are produced in the solar wind is poorly 
understood. The intensity of these waves has been shown 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ION-ACOUSTIC WAVES 


a ('2 f 

fan ES 

ane 

2 6 

a 4 

B+ saad | | ‘a 
10) pi 

UT 0233:40 :50 34:00 10 720 


HELIOCENTRIC RADIAL DISTANCE = 1.66 AU 


VOYAGER 2 


DECEMBER 6, |977 


Figure 5. An electric field frequency-time spectrogram of ion acoustic waves detected in the solar wind by the Voyager 2 spacecraft at 


1.66 AU. 


FREQUENCY (Hz) 


UT (HR MIN) 0800 


TYPE I 
Po 


ss “ty 


: LANGMUIR WAVES 
; ge aay? 


03900 1000 1100 


GALILEO, DAY 344, DEC.10, 1990 


Figure 6. An electric field frequency-time spectrogram of a type III solar radio burst and associated Langmuir waves detected in the 


solar wind by the Galileo spacecraft at 0.98 AU. 


by Gurnett et al (1979) to increase rapidly with decreasing 
distance from the Sun, which would seem to imply a 
solar origin. However, since the ion acoustic mode is 
strongly damped, it is highly unlikely that the waves 
could have propagated to the spacecraft from a source near 
the Sun. It is much more likely that they are produced 
locally. Both laboratory and theoretical studies show 
that the ion acoustic mode can be driven unstable by 
a shift between the average electron and ion velocities, 
such as occurs when a strong electrical current is present. 
The threshold current for the onset of the current-driven 
ion acoustic instability is very high when the electrons 
and ions have comparable temperatures, as it often is in 
the solar wind, but decreases rapidly as T./7; increases. 
Although evidence exists that ion acoustic waves are more 
likely to be observed when T,/ 7; is large, electrical currents 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sufficiently strong to trigger the ion acoustic instability are 
usually not present in the solar wind. However, the heat 
flux carried outward from the Sun by solar wind electrons 
causes a similar shift between the core electron and ion 
velocities. Our present view is that the ion acoustic waves 
are probably driven by the solar wind heat flux. If so, ion 
acoustic waves could play a significant role in regulating 
the heat flux carried outward from the Sun. For a further 
discussion of ion acoustic waves in the solar wind, see 
Gurnett (1991). 


Langmuir waves and type III solar radio bursts 

For many years it has been known that a class of solar 
radio emissions called the type III radio bursts occurs 
in which the frequency drifts rapidly downward with 
increasing time (Wild 1950; see also SOLAR FLARES: RADIO 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bursts). The time scale of the frequency drift varies from 
a few seconds at frequencies in the hundred MHz range 
to tens of minutes in the hundred kHz range. In a classic 
paper, Ginzburg and Zheleznyakov (1958) proposed that 
these radio bursts are produced by a two-step process in 
which (1) Langmuir waves are first excited by the energetic 
electrons emitted by a solar flare and (2) the Langmuir 
waves are converted to electromagnetic radiation at /, 
and 2f, by non-linear mode conversion processes. The 
downward frequency drift is caused by the decreasing 
electron plasma frequency encountered by the solar flare 
electrons as they stream outward from the Sun. The 
radiation at f, is believed to be generated by a non- 
linear interaction between the Langmuir wave and a low- 
frequency wave such as an ion acoustic wave, and the 
radiation at 2f, is believed to be generated by a non- 
linear interaction between two oppositely propagating 
Langmuir waves. The two-step generation process was 
confirmed by Gurnett and Anderson (1976) who made 
the first direct in situ observations of the Langmuir waves 
responsible for a type III radio burst using wave electric 
field measurements on the Helios 2 spacecraft. 

A frequency-time spectrogram of a type III radio burst 
and its associated Langmuir wave emissions is shown in 
figure 6. This event was detected by wave electric field 
measurements on the Galileo spacecraft at a heliocentric 
radial distance of 0.98 AU. Although several type III radio 
bursts can be seen, the one of interest starts at 0745 UT 
(UNIVERSAL TIME). This event is associated with a solar flare 
that occurred at 0730 UT. As can be seen the type III radio 
burst associated with this flare was first detected at a 
frequency of about 6 MHz. The radio emission rapidly 
sweeps downward in frequency, eventually reaching a 
frequency of about 40 kHz after about 1 h. The Langmuir 
waves responsible for this radio emission can be seen 
from about 0835 to 1010 UT at a frequency of 23 kHz, 
which is the local electron plasma frequency. This onset 
time corresponds almost exactly to the arrival time of 
electrons with energies of about 100 keV from the solar 
flare, as determined from the energetic particle detector on 
Galileo; see Gurnett et al (1993). For this event the primary 
emission is believed to be at 2 f,, which would produce 
radiation at a frequency of about 46 kHz. Note that the 
Langmuir waves responsible for radiation at frequencies 
higher (or lower) than 46 kHz cannot be detected, since 
these waves must occur closer to (or farther from) the Sun. 
Other studies have shown that both the intensity of the 
Langmuir waves and the emissivity of the type III radio 
events decrease rapidly with increasing radial distance 
from the Sun (Gurnett et al 1980), more or less in agreement 
with expectation for the 2, mode conversion process. 
However, the details of the mode conversion process, and 
the relative importance of emission at /, and 2 f,, remain 
poorly understood. For a discussion of the dynamics 
of Langmuir waves and the possible mode conversion 
processes that could be involved, see Robinson ef al (1993). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Future research 


In the sections above we have reviewed the basic 
characteristics of plasma waves in the solar wind. 
Although much is known about these waves at radial 
distances in the vicinity of the Earth’s orbit, very 
little is known in the near vicinity of the Sun. The 
intensities of almost all the waves discussed increase 
rapidly with decreasing distance from Sun. Since many 
of the waves, such as whistler mode waves, ion acoustic 
waves and Langmuir waves, are locally generated, it is 
important that direct in situ measurements be made in the 
region close to the Sun, where the primary heating and 
acceleration of the solar wind are occurring. At present 
the closest measurements to the Sun are from the Helios 2 
spacecraft, which approached to within 0.29 AU of the 
Sun. Hopefully, in the not-too-distant future a mission 
called the SOLAR PROBE Will be sent much closer to the Sun, 
possibly to as close as 4Rs, and will be instrumented to 
study plasma waves. 


Acknowledgment 

The research at the University of lowa has been supported 
by NASA through contracts 959193 and 958779 with the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA. 


Bibliography 

Alfvén H 1942 Existence of electromagnetic— 
hydrodynamic waves Nature 150 405-6 

Alfvén H and Falthammer C G 1963 Cosmical Electrodynam- 
ics, Fundamental Principles 2nd edn (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) 

Belcher J W, Davis L Jr and Smith E J 1969 Large- 
amplitude Alfvén waves in the interplanetary 
medium: Mariner 5 J. Geophys. Res. 74 2302-8 

Davis L Jr 1972 The configuration of the interplane- 
tary magnetic field Solar Terrestrial Physics, 1970 
ed E R Dyer, J G Roederer and A J Hundhausen (Dor- 
drecht: Reidel) pp 32-48 

Denskat K U, Beinroth H J and Neubauer F M 1983 
Interplanetary magnetic field power spectra with 
frequencies from 2.4 x 10-° Hz to 470 Hz from Helios 
observations during solar minimum conditions 
J. Geophys. Res. 54 60-7 

Ginzburg V L and Zheleznyakov V V 1958 On the 
possible mechanism of sporadic solar radio emission 
(radiation in an isotropic plasma) Sov. Astron.—AJ 2 
653-8 

Gurnett D A 1991 Waves and instabilities Physics of the 
Inner Heliosphere ed R Schwenn and E Marsch (Berlin: 
Springer) pp 135-57 

Gurnett D A, Anderson R R and Tokar R L 1980 Plasma 
oscillations and the emissivity of type IT radio bursts 
Radio Physics of the Sun ed M R Kunduand T EGergely 
(International Astronomical Union) pp 369-79 

Gurnett D A and Anderson R R 1976 Electron plasma 
oscillations associated with type III radio bursts 
Science 194 1159-62 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Plasma Waves 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gurnett D A, Hospodarsky G B and Kurth W S 1993 Fine 
structure of Langmuir waves produced by a solar 
electron event J. Geophys. Res. 98 5631-7 

Gurnett D A, Marsch E, Pilipp W, Schwenn R and 
Rosenbauer H 1979 Jon acoustic waves and related 
plasma observations in the solar wind J. Geophys. Res. 
84 2029-38 

Haliday D and Resnick R 1981 Fundamentals of Physics 
(New York: Wiley) p 391 

Hundhausen A J 1972 Coronal Expansion and Solar Wind 
ed J G Roederer (Berlin: Springer) 

Kennel C F and Petschek H E 1966 Limit on stably trapped 
particle fluxes J. Geophys. Res. 71 1-28 

Landau L 1946 On the vibrations of the electronic plasma 
J. Phys. USSR 10 (1) 85-94 

Leamon R J, Smith C W, Ness N F, Matthaeus W H 
and Wong H K 1998 Observational constraints on 
the dynamics of the interplanetary magnetic field 
dissipation range J. Geophys. Res. 103 4775-87 

Lin R P 1970 The emission and propagation of 40 keV solar 
flare electrons Sol. Phys. 12 266 

Robinson P A, Willies A J and Cairns I H 1993 Dynamics 
of Langmuir and ion-sound waves in type III solar 
radio sources Astrophys. J. 408 720-34 

Stix T 1992 Waves in Plasmas (New York: American Institute 
of Physics) 

Storey L R O 1953 An investigation of whistling 
atmospherics Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 246 113-41 

Unti T W J and Neugebauer M 1968 Alfvén waves in the 
solar wind Phys. Fluids 11 563-8 

Wild J P 1950 Observations of the spectrum of high- 
intensity solar radiation at metre wavelengths, 
Ill. Isolated bursts Aust. J. Sci. Res. A3 541 


Donald A Gurnett 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Shock Waves and Discontinuities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind Shock Waves and 
Discontinuities 


Shock waves in a fluid are observed as abrupt changes in 
all physical parameters of the fluid, such as flow speed, 
density, pressure and magnetic field, but, most important, 
in temperature, which ensures that entropy increases from 
the upstream to downstream side of the shock ramp. 
For an ordinary shock wave to exist in a fluid, its speed 
through the fluid must be faster than the speed of sound 
in the fluid. However, when a magnetic field is present, 
other characteristic signal speeds, which depend on the 
magnetic field’s strength and direction, are also important 
in characterizing the shock. Shock waves in the solar 
wind, which is an ionized and magnetized fluid or PLasMA, 
are often referred to as interplanetary shocks. These 
rich events are of interest in themselves, for example, 
in studying steepened nonlinear waves in a so-called 
collisionless plasma, and as solar wind consequences 
of solar events, such as ejected solar mass or strong 
magnetic fields ramming into the upstream solar wind 
(See COLLISIONLESS PROCESSES IN ASTROPHYSICAL PLASMAS). They 
are also important as accelerators of energetic particles, 
as generators of radio waves and plasma waves and as 
triggers of geomagnetic phenomena. 

In general, relatively abrupt changes in the intensity 
and/or direction of the magnetic field of the solar wind, 
ie. in the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF), are called 
directional discontinuities, or simply discontinuities. In a 
sense shock ramps are a special class of discontinuities but 
will be treated separately here. Non-shock discontinuities 
are also important in the solar wind and are of interest 
in understanding its characteristics as a whole, especially 
in defining the boundaries of its various specific internal 
structures. The boundary of the Earth’s magnetosphere is 
a directional discontinuity (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH). 

The observations of interplanetary shocks and 
discontinuities have been the source of special interest 
to the space science community for over three decades, 
starting with their first observations by MARINER MISSION 2 
and the early IMP spacecraft in the middle 1960s. 
In particular, it has been shown that generally these 
structures obey MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC (MHD) theory, 
but their very fine-scale features, which lie outside 
of the range of applicability for MHD theory, are 
not as well understood. The ability to make rapid 
measurements of magnetic field and plasma quantities 
by state of the art instruments on spacecraft provides 
an opportunity to investigate interplanetary shock waves 
and discontinuities on a fine scale for a broad variety 
of types of events and conditions. By contrast, widely 
separated multiple spacecraft allow study of the poorly 
known large-scale shape, evolution and coherence of 
these structures. The latter studies can be done even 
for distances encompassing the outer reaches of the 
solar system by observations from the Voyager 1 and 2 
spacecraft, which are now (1999) farther than 70 AU from 
the Sun. We know, for example, that a shock wave may 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


travel from the Sun past Earth’s orbit for many 10s of 
AU. Hence, a very broad range of spatial scales are being 
investigated, i.e. from ~40 km to ~80 AU (12 x 10° km). 


Shock waves in the solar wind 

Definition and types of shocks 

To qualify as a shock wave in a magnetized fluid, 
the changes in the fluid quantities (ie. N, density; 
T, temperature; B, magnetic field; V, flow velocity) across 
its typically abrupt ramp must satisfy special equations of 
MHD, called the Rankine-Hugoniot equations, which are 
expressions for the conservation of energy, mass flux, and 
momentum flux, and Maxwell’s equations of electricity 
and magnetism, including magnetic flux conservation. 
The shock parameters of general interest that help to 
characterize the shock include the following: upstream 
Mach number (which is proportional to the shock’s 
speed relative to that of the upstream fluid and is also 
a measure of its ‘strength’), mode or type (signifying 
its wave nature: fast, slow, or intermediate), obliquity 
(parallel, perpendicular, oblique, depending on the angle 
between the upstream magnetic field direction and the 
shock surface normal), sense of travel (forward or reverse, 
ie. moving generally ‘along with’ or ‘against’ the solar 
wind flow direction, respectively), and sometimes shocks 
are separated according to their cause. 

What separates the nature of solar wind shocks from 
those we experience on Earth (that are caused, say, by a 
fast-moving jet airplane) is the very low density of the solar 
wind and the existence of a magnetic field ‘frozen into’ the 
ionized solar wind’s gas. The magnetic field’s presence 
complicates the study of shocks in space. For example, 
for ordinary gasdynamic shocks in our atmosphere there 
is only one ‘type’, the sound wave mode, and obliquity 
has no meaning. The magnetic field, however, plays a 
crucial role in the solar wind by coupling its constituent 
particles, so that this otherwise low-density collisionless 
plasma acts as if it were a collisional ionized gas. Both 
ordinary gasdynamic shocks and solar wind shocks are 
characterized by Mach numbers. The ordinary one is 
defined as the ratio of the relative speed of the shock 
(i.e. with respect to the fluid’s upstream flow speed) to 
the speed of sound, and is called the sonic Mach number. 
The relative speed is the speed of the fast ‘piston’ that is 
responsible for causing the shock, such as the speed of the 
fast jet plane. This Mach number must be greater than 
1.0. Hence, high Mach number shocks are ‘strong’ ones 
that move fast. However, for a magnetized fluid several 
Mach numbers can be defined. These are characterized by 
the strength and direction of the magnetic field, as well 
as depending on the speed of sound as ordinary shocks 
do. An example of such an MHD Mach number is the 
Alfvén Mach number, which is the ratio of the shock speed 
(relative to the fluid) to the ALFVEN SPEED, a characteristic 
signal speed in a plasma. The Alfvén speed depends 
directly on the magnetic field strength and inversely on 
the square root of the solar wind density. Other MHD 
wave speeds are called the slow- and fast-mode speeds 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Shock Waves and Discontinuities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and the related Mach numbers depend on combinations 
of the Alfvén and sound speeds. 

The most common types of shocks in the solar 
wind at 1 AU are fast forward shocks. In the case 
of fast shocks generally both the upstream sonic and 
Alfvén Mach numbers must be greater than 1.0. Modern 
spacecraft observations are revealing many slow shocks, 
apparently because of the increased sensitivity of the 
advanced measuring instruments; for these the upstream 
Alfvén Mach numbers are less than 1.0, but the upstream 
sonic Mach numbers must be greater than 1.0. So-called 
intermediate shocks are very rare and, in fact, are believed 
by some not to be stable enough to be observed at all. 
However, a team of scientists in 1993 using Voyager data 
are believed to have identified such a shock. Of further 
interest is whether the shock is traveling in a forward 
or reverse sense with respect to the Sun in a solar wind 
frame of reference. Hence, four categories of shocks are 
generally of interest in solar wind studies: fast forward, 
fast reverse, slow forward and slow reverse, each having 
its unique signature. Figure 1 shows the sense of change 
of physical quantities for these four types of shocks. The 
Earth’s bow shock is a fast reverse shock, for example, 
because the shock travels against the solar wind flow 
direction, and it is of a ‘fast-mode wave’ nature. Even 
though a bow shock of a planet occurs in the solar wind, 
and is therefore an interplanetary shock, it is not always 
classified as one, because it is viewed as a standing shock 
associated witha planet. All solar system planets that have 
been visited by spacecraft (i.e. all but Pluto) have been 
observed to have bow shocks. Figure 2 shows how the 
magnetic field (B) and solar wind velocity (V) change in 
strength and direction across the ramp for various kinds 
of interplanetary shocks, as denoted. A perpendicular 
shock signature (in N, T, B, V) appears to be very abrupt 
and squared-off like those shown in figure 1. However, a 
parallel shock, often referred to as a pulsation shock, has 
an oscillatory field nature, and the average change in B 
across it is ideally zero, but N, T and V all change across 
it. 

Shock ramp thickness can vary considerably depend- 
ing on the upstream conditions and on the shock type and 
obliquity; the abrupt vertical change of the physical quan- 
tities in figure 1 denotes the ramp. In actuality there is 
often a shock ‘foot’ before the ramp and an ‘overshoot’ 
region after the ramp whose specific signatures depend 
on the surrounding plasma’s properties, specifically the 
values of N, T and B. A typical oblique shock ramp thick- 
ness is about 100 km-150 km at 1 AU from the Sun, i.e. 
at most about the distance between Baltimore, MD, and 
Philadelphia, PA. Very rapid sampling magnetometers in 
space allow the field measurements of such a thin ramp. 
Parallel shocks are much thicker. 


Sources of shocks 

Blast waves at the Sun, solar wind corotating stream 
interactions, caused by fast streams ramming into slow 
ones, rapid gas clouds (called driver gas or coronal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Fast Forward Slow Forward 


Figure 1. Profiles of solar wind density (NV), temperature (T), 
magnetic field intensity (B) and flow speed (V) across an 
interplanetary shock ramp, as seen in a spacecraft frame of 
reference. 


mass ejections) from the Sun and/or fast-moving, strong, 
twisted magnetic field structures in the solar wind acting 
like huge driving magnetospheres (called magnetic clouds 
or magnetic flux ropes), plowing into the upstream solar 
wind, are all possible causes of interplanetary shock 
waves (see CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS: OBSERVATIONS, CORONAL 
MASS EJECTIONS: THEORY). Most of the interplanetary shocks 
seen in the solar wind near Earth, especially during the 
active part of the SOLAR CYCLE, arise near the Sun and 
travel to the Earth, usually driven by some fast-moving 
interplanetary structure. Bow shocks are a separate type 
again. These are standing shocks which arise from the 
solar wind ramming, at a fast enough speed, into a planet’s 
outer environment, which is the magnetic field in Earth’s 
case and the ionosphere in Venus’ case (see MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH: BOW SHOCK, VENUS: INTERACTION WITH SOLAR WIND). 
The large-scale shapes of interplanetary shock surfaces 
are only approximately known, mainly from models, 
because there have not been many spacecraft mission 
opportunities to provide vastly separated and properly 
positioned observing points in the solar wind. However, 
some studies have shown that the radius of curvature of 
an interplanetary shock surface, at the Earth’s distance 
from the Sun, is close to, but probably smaller than, 
1 AU. Hence, these surfaces appear to move out almost 
uniformly from the Sun on a large scale. Undoubtedly 
on smaller scales these shocks have surface wrinkles, and 
other physical variations, that are caused by irregularities 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Shock Waves and Discontinuities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PERPENDICULAR FAST SHOCK 


PARALLEL FAST SHOCK 


OBLIQUE FAST SHOCK SLOW SHOCK 


Figure 2. A vector representation of how the magnetic field (B) 
and velocity (V) change in strength and direction across a shock 
ramp for four various kinds of shocks, as denoted. The 
numbers ‘1’ and ‘2’ represent the up- and downstream states 
around the shock ramp, respectively, and n is the vector normal 
to the shock surface. When n is perpendicular (parallel) to the 
upstream IMF, the shock is referred to as a perpendicular 
(parallel) shock, otherwise it is called oblique. 


in the solar wind as the shocks travel through it. Some of 
these variations are due to waves and discontinuities that 
the shock wave encounters, causing new discontinuous 
features to be generated, in turn. 


Discontinuities in the solar wind 
Definition and types of discontinuities 
An interplanetary directional discontinuity is a relatively 
abrupt change in direction of the magnetic field ‘carried’ 
by the solar wind and sometimes accompanied by a 
change in magnitude (or intensity) of the field. Even 
though, by definition, a discontinuity requires a relatively 
rapid change in magnetic field, there is almost always a 
measurable thickness to the transition region in which the 
field’s direction and other physical parameters change. 
This usually thin region is often called the ‘discontinuity 
plane or sheet’. Within this sheet flows an electrical 
current composed of moving electrons, protons and to a 
lesser extent other positive ions. The state of the solar 
wind plasma on each side of the discontinuity plane must 
satisfy the fundamental MHD conservation conditions 
listed above for shock waves. 

There are various kinds of directional discontinuities 
in the solar wind. They are usually classified according to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the solar wind states on either side of its transition plane. 
In particular, there are tangential discontinuities in which 
ideally the component of the field perpendicular to the 
discontinuity plane, i.e. the ‘normal component’, is of zero 
magnitude, but the field’s total magnitude does change 
from one side to the other. This kind of discontinuity 
is ‘frozen into’ the solar wind and travels along with it, 
because of its very high electrical conductivity. Such a 
discontinuity can have any size angle change of the field 
across its plane, including the special case of zero. A 
rotational discontinuity, on the other hand, under typical 
conditions, has no change in field intensity across the 
discontinuity plane but has a non-zero normal magnetic 
field component to that plane, and it propagates with 
respect to the solar wind. The magnitude of the normal 
component of the field is directly proportional to the 
propagation speed, which also depends on the local 
density of the solar wind, which is constant across the 
discontinuity. The propagation speed is the normal 
Alfvén speed. This kind of discontinuity is sometimes 
referred to as an Alfvén ‘shock’, but is not a real shock 
across which entropy always changes. Marked thermal 
anisotropy of the plasma on either side of a rotational 
discontinuity will cause a magnitude change of the field 
across it. A contact discontinuity is one in which there 
is a nonzero normal component of the field across the 
discontinuity surface (like a rotational discontinuity), is 
frozen into the solar wind and travels with it (like a 
tangential discontinuity), and has a constant field intensity 
across it. Both tangential and contact discontinuities have 
a density change across the discontinuity surface. Contact 
discontinuities are not as commonly observed in the solar 
wind as tangential or rotational discontinuities. Figure 3 
provides a representation of how B and V change across 
various kinds of directional discontinuities. 

The newly discovered Whang double discontinuity 
(1998) is a combination of an abrupt slow shock 
intimately accompanied by a much broader rotational 
discontinuity; such compound structures are not observed 
very often. Another structure in the solar wind, 
sometimes empirically referred to as a discontinuity, is a 
usually abrupt change in the magnetic field’s magnitude, 
appearing as a sharp dip in intensity with rapid recovery 
reaching a minimum value only a small fraction of 
the intensities on either side; these are called magnetic 
holes and may or may not possess accompanying field 
directional changes. 


Discontinuity thickness and rate of occurrence 

The thickness of a tangential discontinuity plane in the 
solar wind, i.e. the thickness of its electrical current layer, 
depends primarily on the gyroradius (rp) of the ions in 
the layer, mainly the protons. Hence, its thickness depends 
mainly on the ions’ temperature and the ambient magnetic 
field. The temperature is important because it provides 
the ions’ random (or thermal) speeds with which they 
revolve around the field lines penetrating from one side 
of the discontinuity plane to the other according to some 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Shock Waves and Discontinuities 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TANGENTIAL DISCONTINUITY 


ROTATIONAL DISCONTINUITY 


CONTACT DISCONTINUITY 
—> 
Bo 
By 
By 
ee 
n 9 


Figure 3. A vector representation of B and V changes across 
three different kinds of discontinuities, tangential, rotational, 
and contact, in the same format as figure 2. 


measure of rp. It has been shown that it usually takes 
many times a single gyroradius to account for the full 
thickness of a tangential discontinuity, about 30rp, which is 
not fully understood. Hence, on average, a discontinuity 
thickness at 1 AU from the Sun is about 3000 km. Data 
from the Mariner 10, HELIOs and voyAGER spacecraft show 
that discontinuities generally become thinner as regions 
closer to the Sun are considered, because the IMF becomes 
stronger, causing rp to become smaller. Observations of 
rotational discontinuity thicknesses are quite comparable 
with those of the tangential discontinuities on average. 
Hence, at 1 AU either kind of discontinuity is much thicker, 
and usually by more than an order of magnitude, than 
almost all observed interplanetary shock ramps. The 
estimate of the rate of occurrence of discontinuities in the 
solar wind depends on how strictly they are defined, i.e. on 
how large an angle is required across the discontinuity in 
some unit of time. Generally, however, the rate decreases 
with distance from the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Examples of discontinuities 

The very large-scale structure in the solar wind called 
the heliospheric current sheet which separates the solar 
magnetic sectors is observed locally by spacecraft to be 
either a rotational or tangential discontinuity. Similarly, 
large magnetic flux rope structures from the Sun, 
apparently caused by erupting SOLAR PROMINENCES, called 
magnetic clouds, as seen at 1 AU very often have a 
sharp front boundary that is a directional discontinuity. 
However, numerous discontinuities exist all throughout 
the solar wind that are not associated with any other 
obvious solar wind structures. 


Effects of shocks and discontinuities on Earth’s 
magnetosphere 

A forward interplanetary shock wave may cause a 
sudden commencement of a magnetic storm at the Earth, 
because it causes a dramatic increase in the solar wind’s 
dynamic pressure, which depends on the wind’s speed 
and density, exerted on the boundary of the Earth’s 
magnetosphere. On the other hand, a magnetic field 
directional discontinuity in the solar wind may rapidly 
alter the solar wind’s electric and magnetic connection to 
the Earth’s magnetosphere by allowing (or disallowing) 
the IMF, depending on its direction, to interact with the 
Earth’s magnetic field. When the dramatic process called 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION (between the IMF and the Earth’s 
field) occurs, the related discontinuity at the interface is of 
a rotational type. This interaction may lead to a magnetic 
substorm or major magnetic storm depending on the 
strength and duration of the magnetic field reconnection 
process (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC STORMS 
AND SOLAR WIND ORIGINS, MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). 
These processes of magnetic reconnection and shock wave 
impingement at the Earth’s magnetosphere’s boundary 
are prominent components in the study of space 
weather (see SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: SPACE WEATHER 
PREDICTIONS). 


Bibliography 

Balogh A and Riley P 1997 Overview of heliospheric 
shocks Cosmic Winds and the Heliosphere ed J R Jokipii, 
C P Sonnett and M S Gianpapa (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) p 359 

Burgess D 1995 Collisionless shocks Introduction to Space 
Physics ed M G Kivelson and C T Russell (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) ch 5 

Burlaga L F 1995 Interplanetary Magnetohydrodynamics 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press) 

Colburn D S and Sonett C P 1966 Discontinuities in the 
solar wind Space Sci. Rev. 5 439 

Tidman D A and Krall N A 1971 Shock Waves in Collisionless 
Plasmas (New York: Wiley) 

Whang Y C, Zhou J, Lepping R P, Szabo A, Fairfield D, 
Kokubun S, Ogilvie K O and Fitzenreiter R 1998 
Double discontinuity: a compound structure of slow 
shock and rotational discontinuity J. Geophys. Res. 103 
6513 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Shock Waves and Discontinuities ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


R P Lepping 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Solar Wind Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind Turbulence 


There are fluctuations in all quantities that describe 
the local plasma state of the solar wind. For 
example, fluctuations in plasma velocity, magnetic field 
and plasma density are superposed upon the large- 
scale relatively smooth flow of the wind at speed 
V, the relatively organized large-scale interplanetary 
magnetic field Bo, and slow radial variation of the 
density e. These fluctuations, known as solar wind 
turbulence in anticipation of their likely connection to 
complex nonlinear dynamical activity, have been routinely 
observed by instruments aboard spacecraft for several 
decades, starting with early observations by spacecraft 
suchas Mariner 2 in 1962 and Pioneer 6 in 1965 (see MARINER 
MISSIONS, PIONEER MISSIONS). Because of the large amount of 
in situ data that have been accumulated from spacecraft, 
solar wind turbulence may be the most extensively probed 
of all turbulent plasmas in nature or in the laboratory. 
Certain spacecraft missions stand out in terms of their 
contribution to knowledge of interplanetary turbulence, 
notably Mariner 10 and HEtIos (exploration of the inner 
heliosphere), ISEE-3 and IMP (near-Earth orbit), Pioneer 
10 and 11 and Voyager 1 and 2 (outer heliosphere) 
and Ulysses (high solar latitude (see SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES, 
VOYAGER MISSION)). Advances are continuing through recent 
missions such as ACE and WIND. Missions that are currently 
in the planning stages, such as SOLAR PROBE, May answer 
fundamental questions regarding the origin of solar wind 
turbulence and its many influences in the heliosphere. 


Scales of turbulence 

Solar wind turbulence occurs over a wide range of 
length and time scales, but most of the energy resides 
in fluctuations for which time and length scales are 
long compared with the gyromotions of thermal particles 
about the magnetic field. In this regime, the solar 
wind plasma can be reasonably well approximated by 
the equations of MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD). The 
complex dynamical activity of such a magnetofluid, MHD 
turbulence, is closely related to hydrodynamic turbulence, 
which is well studied in a variety of terrestrial contexts 
(see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: MAGNETIC RECONNECTION AND 
TURBULENCE). It is in this perspective that low-frequency 
solar wind turbulence, as well as the large-scale solar wind 
flow itself, is most often studied. 

A convenient approximation, called frozen in flow, is 
often invoked to interpret the time series of observations 
at a single spacecraft as a snapshot of the plasma 
fluctuations at nearby spatial locations. The mean 
solar wind flows at speeds ranging from 250 km s7! to 
750 km s~!, but the characteristic speeds associated with 
dynamical activity of MHD fluctuations (sound speed, 
Alfvén speed, typical fluctuation speed) are much less 
(10 to 50 km s“'). Therefore structures described by 
MHD cannot significantly distort during their time of 
transit past the spacecraft instruments. This frozen-in 
property allows the structure and the statistical properties 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of MHD turbulence to be probed in the solar wind 
for scales ranging from tenths of an astronomical unit 
(1 AU = 1.5 x 10% cm) or more down to scales 
associated with the thermal proton gyroradius (about 
50 km). Discussion of the distribution of energy over scales 
usually refers to the fluctuation energy spectrum, defined 
in terms of a Fourier transform of the two-point correlation 
function. For example, the magnetic energy spectrum 
is Ex(k) = (22) f dr(b(@) - bw + r))e*".  Single- 
spacecraft data give information only about the reduced 
spectrum, a function of radial wavenumber k,, obtained 
from the spectrum by integrating over the components of 
k transverse to the radial direction. 


Energy cascade 

Observed near Earth orbit at 1 AU, solar wind turbulence 
exhibits features that are suggestive of fully developed 
MHD turbulence, and also properties that are reminiscent 
of MHD waves. The power spectra of MHD fluctuations 
exhibit a characteristic appearance. Due to the frozen- 
in flow property, the frequency (f) spectra correspond 
to reduced wavenumber spectra through the relation 
f = Vwk-/20 for solar wind speed Vsy. Magnetic 
energy spectra, for example, typically display a power 
law, Eg(k,) ~ k,%, for a range of frequencies (f) 
and wavenumbers k, corresponding to spacecraft frame 
periods from about 10 s up to several hours. The 
spectral index a frequently has a value near a = 
5/3 corresponding to an inertial range or Kolmogoroff 
spectrum in hydrodynamic turbulence, and can be 
understood by an analogous argument: beginning with 
a reservoir of MHD energy at large energy-containing 
scales, turbulent interactions produce a cascade of energy 
through eddies (vortices), or magnetic structures of 
progressively smaller size. At sufficiently small scale, 
the dissipative effects become significant and this direct 
cascade terminates by damping of fluctuation energy and 
a corresponding production of heat. For scales that 
are much smaller than the energy-containing size, and 
much larger than the dissipative scales, the dynamics 
of the cascade may be self-similar, that is, invariant 
under a multiplicative transformation of length scale, 
thus producing a distinctive power-law distribution. The 
occurrence of the inertial range in a typical solar wind 
magnetic field spectrum near 1 AU is illustrated in figure 1. 


There continues to be some debate concerning 
whether there is an active energy cascade involving solar 
wind fluctuations. However, there are features that seem 
to require its presence. The proton temperature at 1 AU 
is difficult to explain unless heat is added in transit from 
the solar wind source region. The temperature profile in 
the solar wind from the inner Helios orbit (0.29 AU) to 
several tens of AU exhibits a non-adiabatic profile, again 
suggesting deposition of heat. Turbulent energy can be 
injected by instabilities (e.g. Kelvin-Helmholtz instability) 
associated with regions of large velocity shear near edges 
of high-speed streams (velocity change AV ~ 200 kms’), 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wind Spacecraft 
MFI Instrument 


T | 


1.0e+04 € 


1.0€+03 | 


1.06102 1 


1.0e+01 | 


1.0e+00- Wt 


Magnetic Power [nT2/Hz] 


1.0¢-01 “i 


1.0e-02 | = 88 
1.0e-04 1.0e-03 1.0e-02 
Spacecraft Frame Frequency 


Figure 1. Reduced magnetic energy spectrum from several days 
of wind data at 1 AU, beginning on 13th October 1997, showing 
power-law inertial range with index close to the ‘Kolmogoroff’ 
value of —5/3 (broken line). (Wind data courtesy of Wind/MFI 
team.) 


Wind Spacecraft 
MFI and SWE Instruments 


°o 
a 


Normalized Cross Helicity 
(oe) 
(oe) 
— 
- 
c 


“0.5 ie Ve 1 
-1 me) L 1 i L J 
0.000 0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 


Spacecraft Frame Frequency [Hz] 


Figure 2. Normalized cross-helicity spectrum 

Oclky) = 2Re(va (ky) » v(kr))/(v (kr) + v2(k,)). Values near —1 
indicate outward traveling Alfvénic fluctuations. (Wind data 
courtesy Wind MFI and SWE teams.) 


or near microstreams observed at higher latitudes (AV ~ 
40 km s“'). In the outer heliosphere, turbulence may be 
driven by injection of energy due to the ‘pick-up’ process 
that occurs in connection with freshly ionized hydrogen 
or helium of interstellar origin. Taking these sources into 
account, a cascade and subsequent dissipative heating 
would be required to prevent build-up of fluctuation 
energy to levels higher than what is observed. 


Alfvénic fluctuations and turbulence 

Wave-like properties are also evident in typical observa- 
tions of solar wind fluctuations. The so-called Alfvénic 
correlation between the fluctuating components of veloc- 
ity and magnetic fields are often seen in data at 1 AU. When 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the correlation is strong, a near proportionality is seen in- 
volving the fluctuating magnetic field b and the fluctuat- 
ing velocity field v, in the sense that v4 = b/./4ip © +u 
where p is the local plasma mass density. This relation cor- 
responds to an MHD Alfvén wave and the sign of the cor- 
relation usually indicates a direction of propagation away 
from the Sun. It is frequently possible to identify intervals 
of data that possess a substantial broad band correlation 
of this type by visually inspecting the v, and v time series. 
Figure 2 shows evidence of the presence of these large- 
amplitude Alfvénic fluctuations in spacecraft data, using 
a more sensitive technique that extracts the degree of cor- 
relation at various scales. In MHD turbulence theory, the 
quantity (v4 -v), called the cross helicity, provides a quan- 
titative measure of the Alfvénic correlation, where (. . .) de- 
notes an appropriate ensemble average. For pure Alfvénic 
correlation, the cross helicity takes on the maximum value 
compatible with the fluctuation energy per unit mass, so 
that o, = 2(v,4 + v)/(vj + v?) = £1. Figure 2 shows, for 
a particular data interval, the Alfvénic correlation over a 
broad range of frequencies. 

High cross helicity intervals are most frequently seen 
closer to the Sun (Helios) and at higher latitudes (Ulysses). 
Voyager observations suggest a decrease in Alfvénic 
correlation in the more distant solar wind. The most 
obvious interpretation of the Alfvénic fluctuations is that 
they represent outward propagating waves that escape 
from the inner corona at the Alfvénic critical point (see 
SOLAR WIND: CORONAL ORIGINS). In a purely wave picture, the 
wave spectrum is determined at this inner source surface 
(at about 10-15 R,) and propagates outwards as ‘fossil’ 
turbulence in accordance with geometrical optics (also 
called WKB theory). However, in this view, since there 
is no active turbulence in the super-Alfvénic wind, it is 
difficult to explain the proton temperature at 1 AU, and the 
non-adiabatic temperature radial profile. Several effects 
are routinely observed that are in apparent violation of 
WKB transport theory, such as systematic radial decrease 
of cross helicity and decrease of the ratio of turbulent 
velocity and magnetic field energies. For these reasons 
the Alfvénic property has also been studied as a property 
of active MHD turbulence. Theoretical studies have 
shown, for example, that the normalized cross helicity 
tends to increase in time for undisturbed freely evolving 
homogeneous dissipative turbulence. Therefore the 
decrease of the cross helicity with increasing heliocentric 
distance points to the existence of some additional process 
or disturbance. Two such effects have been identified, 
associated with either non-WKB transport effects, or the 
injection of turbulent energy near regions of large shear 
near the boundaries of high-speed streams. Solar wind 
Alfvénic fluctuations are actively studied using nonlinear 
models that appear to be able to explain a variety of 
other features including the presence of discontinuities 
and distinctive ‘arc-polarization,’ in which over time the 
field vector traces a section of a sphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind Turbulence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Density fluctuations 

Averaged over a suitably large, statistically stationary, data 
interval, interplanetary density fluctuations are relatively 
small. Typically the root mean square fluctuation 
normalized by the local mean density is 5p/p ~ 1/10. 
Wavenumber spectra of density fluctuations frequently 
have a ‘Kolmogoroff’ k~*/° form. This can be explained 
if the medium is weakly compressible, and the density 
fluctuations are a linear response to pressure fluctuations 
associated with the energy cascade. In this perspective, 
solar wind turbulence is a form of ‘nearly incompressible’ 
(NI) MHD turbulence, which requires low turbulent Mach 
number M, and that the flow not be dominated by 
longitudinal compressive magnetosonic waves. Such 
compressive waves are expected to be heavily damped in 
the inner heliosphere, while one typically finds that M ~ 
1/3 for stationary samples. Other features, including the 
frequent appearance of anti-correlated magnetic pressure 
fluctuations and density fluctuations, sometimes called 
pressure balanced structures, emerge naturally from this 
picture. While some of the same features can be 
interpreted in terms of magnetosonic waves, the NI 
picture provides a conceptual link between the statistical 
properties of the density and other MHD turbulence 
parameters. 


Anisotropic turbulence 

In contrast to classical hydrodynamic turbulence which 
is usually assumed to be statistically isotropic, solar 
wind turbulence is typically anisotropic. Since early 
observations, it has been known that the variances 
of the Cartesian components of magnetic and velocity 
fields are not rotationally symmetric. Various studies 
also have concluded that the spectral distribution of 
fluctuation over wavevectors is also anisotropic. Radio 
scintillation studies, analysis of in situ spectral data, as 
well as inferential studies based upon analysis of cosmic 
ray scattering, have all concluded that the spectrum of 
fluctuations (velocity, magnetic field or density) might 
contain a spectral ingredient in which a significant fraction 
of the energy is localized in wavevectors that are nearly 
perpendicular to the local mean magnetic field. An 
apparently useful model is one in which the fluctuations 
consist of two components: a ‘slab’ ingredient with 
variations essentially only along the mean field By and 
a ‘quasi-two-dimensional’ component that varies mainly 
in the two directions transverse to Bo. This model is 
useful in cosmic ray scattering theory, transport theories 
and heating theories, in which the rotational asymmetry 
of the fluctuations has substantial influence. In addition 
to the mean field direction, another important preferred 
direction for solar wind turbulence is the radial direction, 
which can also induce anisotropy, especially through 
expansion and transport effects. 


Dissipation, magnetic helicity and scattering of 
charged particles 

Many features of MHD turbulence in the solar wind, 
notably in the energy-containing range and inertial range, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


can be understood principally in terms of MHD theory. 
At shorter scales, however, kinetic processes must come to 
dominate the dynamical interactions and ultimately must 
be responsible for converting fluid-scale energy to heat (see 
SOLAR WIND: KINETIC PROPERTIES). The standard view is that 
fluctuations that have the character of magnetosonic wave 
modes are damped rapidly by Landau damping. At scales 
approaching the gyroradius of thermal protons, significant 
damping of incompressive MHD fluctuations must occur, 
presumably through cyclotron resonance damping, which 
depends upon the polarization or MAGNETIC HELICITY of 
the fluctuations, along with mechanisms akin to Landau 
damping, which are of the non-resonant type, and which 
are therefore insensitive to helicity. These crucial links of 
fluid-scale processes to kinetic processes are incompletely 
understood at present. 

It is noteworthy that couplings of interplanetary 
MHD turbulence to non-thermal particle populations 
(cosmic rays, and suprathermal particles such as pick- 
up ions) can also be classified as either resonant 
interactions, such as pitch angle scattering, or non- 
resonant interactions, such as stochastic acceleration by 
induced turbulent electric fields (see Cosmic RAYS, DYNAMO 
THEORY). Resonant interaction of turbulence with charged 
particles is also sensitive to the spectrum of magnetic 
helicity, i.e. the spectrum of (b+ a) where b = V x a for 
vector potential a. Of the spectral quantities typically 
extracted from solar wind data, the helicity spectrum is 
least well understood, and is characterized by random 
helicity fluctuations, of both right- and left-handed types 
throughout the inertial range. 


Bibliography 

Barnes A 1979 Hydromagnetic waves and turbulence in the 
solar wind Solar System Plasma Physics ed C Kennel, 
L Lanzerotti and E Parker (Amsterdam: North- 
Holland) pp 249-319 

Goldstein M, Roberts D and Matthaeus W 1995 Magneto- 
hydrodynamic turbulence in the solar wind Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 33 283-325 

Jokipii J R, Sonnett C P and Giampapa M S (eds) 
1997 Cosmic Winds and the Heliosphere (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) 

Matthaeus W, Bieber J and Zank G 1995 Unquiet on any 
front: anisotropic turbulence in the solar wind (Rev. 
Geophys. Suppl.) 609 

Tu C Y and Marsch E 1995 MHD Structures, Waves and 
Turbulence in the Solar Wind (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


William Matthaeus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Coronal Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Coronal Origins 


To establish the coronal origins of the solar wind is to find 
its source regions at the Sun. Dominated by electrons and 
protons, this outflow of fully ionized atoms also carries 
traces of neutral hydrogen and heavier elements, such as 
alpha particles, oxygen and iron ions. There are two types 
of winds detected so far: the fast and the slow (see SOLAR 
WIND: GLOBAL PROPERTIES). Since they are distinguishable not 
only by their associated speeds but more importantly by 
their thermodynamic and compositional properties, their 
corresponding sources at the Sun must have different 
characteristics. 

The complex magnetic structure of the solar atmo- 
sphere is revealed by the electromagnetic spectrum (see 
SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS) of the solar corona (see 
CORONA). This complexity contributes to the ambiguity in 
establishing the source regions of the fast and the slow so- 
lar wind. For the pLAsma to escape from the solar surface, 
it must be connected to magnetic field lines (see SOLAR MAG- 
NETIC FIELD) that stretch out into interplanetary space. How 
to identify these ‘open’ field lines is the key to finding the 
coronal origins of the solar wind. 

At present, two distinct and complementary observa- 
tional techniques have been used to characterize the prop- 
erties of the solar wind: remote sensing observations and 
in situ measurements. In remote sensing observations, the 
characteristics are inferred from the electromagnetic spec- 
trum originating from the solar disk and its outer atmo- 
sphere to within 30R, (where R, represents a solar radius) 
from the solar surface. The field of view is two dimen- 
sional, and the information gathered from an extended 
region of space along the line of sight is heavily weighted 
by the contributions in the plane of the sky. In situ measure- 
ments, on the other hand, are local or point measurements 
made by spacecraft typically beyond 60R,. They pertain to 
the parcel of plasma that intercepts the detector, and hence 
are limited to a very small volume of space. To establish 
the coronal origins of the solar wind, the connection be- 
tween these two types of measurements is essential. 


Coronal observations 
The corona is revealed in a broad range of wavelengths, 
and its complex magnetic and density structure is best 
apparent in the ultraviolet, extreme ultraviolet and x-ray 
emission which can be achieved from space observations. 
Because of the intense disk emission in the visible 
wavelength range, the visible corona can be seen only 
when the disk radiation is blocked. The invention of the 
coronagraph (see CORONAGRAPHS) by Lyot in 1930 enabled 
daily observations of the broad band coronal white light 
emission, which for centuries was limited to total solar 
ECLIPSES. Since the solar wind has no detectable emission, 
simultaneous density and velocity measurements are 
necessary to establish its coronal sources. 

Spectral line observations are weighted by the 
temperature at which the line is optimally formed. Space 
observations in the ultraviolet, extreme ultraviolet and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


x-rays, characteristic of plasmas over one million kelvins 
in temperature, reveal a complex magnetic structure, 
with three distinct regions. The most evident are arch- 
like structures or active regions characterized by intense 
emission. The other extreme are the polar caps, dubbed 
CORONAL HOLES, Where the emission is practically absent. 
Coronal holes can also appear on the solar disk at 
low latitudes. The fraction of the solar surface that is 
neither coronal holes nor active regions, and appears as 
diffuse emission with faint large-scale arches, is called 
the quiet Sun or quiet regions (although far from being 
quiescent). The intensity of emission from spectral lines 
varies typically with the square of the density. As the 
density decreases rapidly as a function of distance away 
from the Sun, spectral line observations are of value only in 
the inner corona, within approximately half a solar radius 
from the solar surface. 

The white light or broad band visible emission 
whose dominant component below 2R, is the polarized 
K-corona is produced by the photospheric radiation 
scattered by free electrons traveling along magnetic 
field lines threading and shaping the corona. Since 
the K-corona is due to electron-scattered radiation it 
varies linearly with density as a function of distance. 
Consequently, polarized brightness (pB) measurements 
trace the coronal magnetic field to much larger distances 
than spectral line observations and have currently reached 
30R, with space-borne coronagraphs such as the Large 
Angle Spectroscopic Coronagraph (LASCO) onboard the 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) (see SOLAR 
TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: SPACE). 

The broad band white light emission has proven to be 
critical in establishing the coronal source of the solar wind. 
Shown in figure 1 is a sketch of the large-scale coronal 
magnetic field configuration based on coronagraph images 
of the Sun and the assumption that the field is basically 
that of a dipole. The magnetic field lines shown stretching 
outwards are those forming an envelope around the 
large-scale arches, also known as streamers (see CORONAL 
STREAMERS) With the exception of the example of figure 1(a) 
where a few radially extending field lines originate at low 
latitudes. Coronal holes shown as dark areas are assumed 
to have only open field lines (not drawn here) and to be 
the source of the fast solar wind. If coronal holes are the 
only source of the fast solar wind then this wind can reach 
spacecraft in the ecliptic plane along the field lines drawn 
stretching outwards, either from an equatorial extension 
of the coronal hole, such as in figure 1(b), or from a tilt 
in the dipole, such as in figure 1(c). Recent observations, 
however, have modified this picture. 

Comparable with the broad band white light 
emission, remote sensing radio occultation measurements 
have played a pivotal role in establishing the coronal 
density structures associated with the fast and the slow 
solar wind. Such measurements are made when the 
radio signal from either a natural source or a spacecraft 
intercepts coronal density structures and produces a 
characteristic scintillation pattern such as shown in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Coronal Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CORONAL 
HOLE 


QUIET 
SUN 


QUIET 
SUN 


1 o° men Ge eee ee 
> pB @ 1.15 Ro 
* C3 Intensity #@ 5.5 Ra 


10? 
90 60 30 0 -30 -60 -90 


Position Angle (deg) 


Figure 3. Extension of the coronal hole and the quiet Sun outwards from the solar surface. Top left: composite soft x-ray and pB image, 
with the coronal hole boundaries shown as derived from He I 18030 A disk observations. The dashed lines trace the radial boundaries 
of the northern coronal hole. The solid line gives the radial boundaries of the quiet Sun. Lower left: composite pB and C2 white light 
intensity images. The dashed and solid lines are the same as in the top panel. Right: profiles of the pB intensity at 1.15R, (circles) and 
LASCO C3 white light intensities at 5.5R, (triangles) as a function of position angle. 


figure 2. The Doppler scintillation is directly proportional 
to the electron density fluctuation along the line of sight. 
While these measurements lack the two-dimensional 
imaging characteristics of the broad band white light 
emission, they are more like point measurements. Because 
of their high sensitivity to changes in electron density 
over small distances they provide high spatial resolution 
measurements. 

Using Doppler scintillation measurements together 
with in situ velocity measurements, Woo and Martin 
showed that the slowest wind coincided with conspicu- 
ously high levels of density fluctuation associated with 
coronal streamer stalks. (Streamer stalks are the nar- 
rowing of the streamers that extend into interplanetary 
space.) On the other hand, low levels of density fluctua- 
tions were found to be characteristic of the fast solar wind 
(see figure 2). By comparing radio ranging measurements 
with simultaneous broad band white light observations, 
Woo and Habbal found that low levels of density fluctu- 
ations could be traced back not only to coronal holes but 
also to quiet Sun regions. 

Further evidence for the origination of the fast 
solar wind from the quiet Sun as well as from coronal 
holes emerged from the comparison of density profiles 
in the corona measured at different radial distances, 
as shown in the right panel of figure 3. A density 
profile is obtained by measuring the pB or white light 
intensity as a function of latitude, or position angle (PA) 
(measured counterclockwise from 0° north) for a given 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


radial distance. As seen in figure 3, the two profiles at 
1.15R, and 5.5R, match over a wide angular extent. The 
separation of the two profiles occurs at the stalks of the 
streamers. The angular extent of the coronal hole was 
established from the radial extension of the boundaries 
of the coronal hole from disk observations in the He I 
10830 A line which is commonly used to determine coronal 
hole boundaries on the solar disk. Beyond the radial 
boundaries of the coronal hole lies the quiet Sun. The outer 
radial boundaries of the quiet Sun are determined at the 
position angle where the two profiles no longer match. 
That the coronal density profile can be preserved out to 
several solar radii implies that magnetic field lines tied to 
the solar wind plasma extend radially outwards from both 
coronal holes and the quiet Sun. 

Velocity measurements provide further support for 
this view. The only outflow velocity measurements in 
the corona that are spatially resolved are those recently 
obtained by the Ultraviolet Coronagraph Spectrometer 
(UVCS) on SOHO. (Doppler shifts of spectral lines 
observed on the solar disk do not yield unambiguous 
results, since the derived downflows or upflows can 
be connected with closed as well as open magnetic 
structures.) These measurements extend to 3.5R,; in the 
tenuous polar regions and to 10R, in denser coronal 
plasmas. One of the unique advantages of this instrument 
is the measurement of coronal spectral lines, in particular 
doublets, such as the O VI 1032 A and 1037.6 A 
lines, formed primarily by the resonance scattering of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Coronal Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(c) 


@) 


Figure 1. A sketch by Hundhausen of the boundaries between 
closed and open magnetic field lines, and large-scale closed 


magnetic field lines, at different times of the solar activity cycle. 


The sketch is based on visual impressions from the white light 
emission of the corona. The black shaded areas represent 
coronal holes. In (a) the smaller polar caps and small isolated 
coronal holes are representative of the magnetic field 
configuration around the peak of the activity cycle. Panels (b) 
and (c) are likely to mimic the configuration between 
minimum (d@) and maximum (a). The case of a tilted dipole is 
sketched in (c). N points to heliographic north. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2 
$ & 


8 


Normalized Coppler Scintillstion {mkz} 
~ 
s 


oor 


Figure 2. Top: white light image from the LASCO C3 
coronagraph taken on 22 January 1997. The innermost circle 
traces the solar disk. The next circle is the occulter of the C3 
coronagraph. The field of view extends from 3.7R, to 30R,. The 
dark region in the lower left quadrant is the support arm of the 
coronagraph. Jupiter, the bright saturated object on the right, is 
at the point of closest approach of the line-of-sight radio path 
from the GALILEO SPACECRAFT Which was orbiting Jupiter. North is 
up. Bottom: radio Doppler scintillation measurements by 
Galileo during its solar conjunction from 15 January to 

4 February 1997, or day of year (DOY) 15-35, when it traversed 
the plane of the sky from east to west, almost parallel to the 
equator. The enhanced scintillation from Galileo coincides with 
the location of Jupiter shown in the top panel, when the radio 
path intercepted a streamer stalk. 


chromospheric (See CHROMOSPHERE) Or transition region (see 
SOLAR TRANSITION REGION) radiation by ions flowing in the 
corona. The diagnostic which places limits on solar wind 
velocities is based on the Doppler dimming effect first 
described by Hyder and Lytes in 1970. As ions flow 
outwards in the corona, the fraction of the spectral line 
formed by resonance scattering becomes Doppler shifted 
out of resonance with the disk emission. Subsequently, the 
relative ratio between the intensity of the lines forming a 
doublet changes drastically. In the case of the O VI lines, 
the intensity ratio of 1032 to 1037 times equals 4 when 
resonant scattering is dominant and reduces to 2 when 
only the collisional components are left. The intensity ratio 
of 1032 to 1037 lines of 2 occurs for an outflow velocity of 
94 km s~' and depends only on the velocity distribution 
along the flow direction. 

Shown in figure 4 is an example of UVCS observations 
taken during the Galileo solar conjunction shown in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Coronal Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. White light image of the corona taken with LASCO C2 
on 17 January 1997. The bright object in the east below the 
equator is Jupiter and indicates the approximate location of the 
Galileo spacecraft. The field of view spans (2-6)R,. Shown as 
black vertical lines are the slit positions of the UVCS detector 
which is approximately 2R, wide. They are located at 1.9, 2.5, 3, 
4, 4.7 and 5.5 solar radii on the east limb at PA= 97°, at 1.9R, in 
the south polar coronal hole at PA= 180°, and at 4, 4.7 and 5.5 
solar radii at the west limb at PA= 247°. The white contours 
mark the velocity contour value of 94 km so): 


figure 2. The slit positions of the UVCS detector were 
chosen to coincide with the passage of the radio signal 
from Galileo through the corona. By measuring the 
intensity of the two oxygen lines and their ratio along 
the slits for different heliocentric distances, contours of 
the intensity ratio equal 2, shown as white lines in 
figure 4, were obtained. This contour showed a sharp 
latitudinal gradient in wind speed close to the stalk of the 
streamers and a more uniform distribution as a function 
of heliocentric distance over a large fraction of the inner 
corona. 

The inverse distance of this contour is shown in 
figure 5(a) together with the corresponding latitudinal 
profile of density from the same time. The density or pB 
profile again carries the distinct imprint of the coronal hole 
and the quiet Sun. The corresponding latitudinal velocity 
profile clearly indicates how the fast wind coincides with 
the angular extent of the coronal hole and the quiet Sun as 
determined from the coronal density profile. 


Connection between coronal and interplanetary 
measurements 
The connection between coronal velocity and density 
measurements and their interplanetary counterparts is 
the only approach currently available to establish the 
source regions of the different solar wind streams without 
ambiguity. The advent of Ulysses (see SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES), 
the first spacecraft to orbit the Sun ina plane perpendicular 
to the ecliptic and to reach 80° latitude, has made possible 
the comparison of observations from the same latitudes in 
the corona and the heliosphere. 

Shown in figure 5(b) are the Ulysses density and 
velocity measurements of the south polar region above 
—30° latitude when the wind speed was consistently 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Distance to 
94 km/s Contour (Fo) 


180 «#1700 «©6160 06«©6150 140 130s“ 120—s—s«*10 
Position Angle (deg) 


1) 


wo) Aysuag UOIOd PezPEWON 


Solar Wind Spead (km 8 


(c 


Latitude (deg) 


4107 


310? 


2107 


pBatti5Ao(10 Bo) 


feo 170 160 #«+150 + +« 140 130 120 
Position Anale (dea) 


Figure 5. (a) pB at 1.15R, and the inverse heliocentric distance of 
the 94 km s~! velocity contour level versus PA from data 
corresponding to figure 4. (b) Daily averages of Ulysses velocity 
and normalized density measurements during the slow scans of 
the south polar region. The larger symbols represent 27-day 
sliding window averages. (c) 19 representative pB profiles at 
1.15R, for PA= —30 to —90° latitude for the same time period of 
the data in (b). The black solid line is the average of 253 profiles 
covering the whole time period. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Coronal Origins 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


higher than 650 km s-! characteristic of the fast solar 
wind. The data were collected during the slow scans of 
the south polar region for latitudes from —30° to —80.2° 
from 3 May 1993 to 15 September 1994. The daily averaged 
data are shown in grey and the 27-day averages are given 
as bold symbols. The corresponding averaged coronal pB 
profile from the same time period is shown in figure 5(c). 
Representative individual pB profiles from which the 
average was made are shown in grey. 

Comparison of the coronal and interplanetary density 
profiles shows a remarkable resemblance indicating a 
preservation of the density profile from the corona out 
to interplanetary space. While the density is minimal 
between —68° and —80°, and from the corresponding PA= 
158°-180°, the subsequent gradients also match in both 
measurements. X-ray and HeI 10830 Aobservations of the 
solar disk indicate that the latitude at which this rise occurs 
corresponds to the coronal hole—quiet Sun boundary at the 
Sun. Its appearance in the Ulysses measurements indicates 
that this boundary too is preserved. Given that the 
corresponding velocity measured in interplanetary space 
is typical of the fast wind, this provides direct evidence 
that the fast wind originates from both coronal holes and 
the quiet Sun. 

The anticorrelation between density and velocity 
in the Ulysses measurements and the slow decline of 
the solar wind speed at the boundaries of the polar 
coronal holes are also remarkably similar to the pattern 
observed in the inner corona which is shown in figure 5(a). 
The remarkable resemblance of the density and velocity 
profiles in the corona (figure 5(a)) and in interplanetary 
space (figure 5(b)) indicates not only that the density 
is anticorrelated with velocity in both regions but that 
the fast solar wind can be traced back to both coronal 
holes and the quiet Sun. In particular, a clearly defined 
transition between the radial extension of the polar coronal 
holes, where the density is lowest, and the surrounding 
quiet Sun is detected in both measurements, with the 
angular extent of both regions being preserved from 
the Sun out into interplanetary space. The distinction 
between coronal holes and quiet Sun is also evident in 
the latitudinal profiles of velocity. Anticorrelated with 
density, the solar wind speed is highest within the angular 
extent of the polar coronal holes and decreases gradually 
beyond their boundaries. The connection between coronal 
and interplanetary measurements provides unambiguous 
evidence that the fast solar wind detected at mid latitudes 
by Ulysses around solar minimum originates from the 
quiet Sun, while the faster wind at latitudes above 60° has 
its origin in the polar coronal holes. 

That the fast solar wind can be traced back to the 
quiet Sun as well as polar coronal holes implies that it 
originates from a large fraction of the solar surface. The 
coronal source regions of the slow solar wind remain 
more elusive. Radio occultation measurements clearly 
identify streamer stalks with the slow wind and with 
magnetic field polarity reversal, while the slowest wind is 
systematically connected to the heliospheric current sheet 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in interplanetary space. The heliospheric current sheet is 
then undoubtedly identified with the extension of these 
stalks. At present, the coronal source of the slow solar 
wind is not established. Given that the composition of the 
slow solar wind is different from that of the fast, it is likely 
to be associated with the interaction of the closed arch- 
like magnetic structures and the magnetic field lines that 
extend into interplanetary space. 


Future prospects 

Despite the wealth of space- and ground-based observa- 
tions, the coronal origins at the Sun of both the slow and 
fast wind remain a puzzle. While present-day observa- 
tions indicate that the fastest winds measured so far origi- 
nate from polar coronal holes, and that the quiet Sun is also 
a source of the fast wind, the exact origin at the Sun is un- 
known. In particular, what defines an open versus a closed 
magnetic field line is still a mystery since both coronal 
holes and quiet regions have a very intricate magnetic field 
pattern and are indistinguishable when observed in photo- 
spheric or chromospheric spectral lines. Future space mis- 
sions which can reach to within 30R, of the Sun and which 
combine remote sensing and in situ observations, such as 
the proposed SOLAR PROBE, are the key to unraveling some 
of these mysteries. 


Bibliography 

Habbal S R, Woo R, Fineschi S, O’Neal R, Kohl J L, Noci G 
and Korendyke C 1997 Origins of the slow and the 
ubiquitous fast solar wind Astrophys. J. 489 L103-6 

Hundhausen A J 1977 An interplanetary view of coronal 
holes Coronal Holes and High Speed Wind Streams 
ed J B Zirker (Colorado University Press) pp 225-329 

Woo R and Habbal S R 1999 Radial evolution of density 
structure in the solar corona Geophys. Res. Lett. 26 
1793-6 


Shadia Rifai Habbal and Richard Woo 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Corotating Interaction Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Corotating Interaction 
Regions 


For several years around each solar activity minimum 
corotating interaction regions are the dominant and 
most extensive feature in the heliosphere except for the 
termination shock. At this time the solar atmosphere 
shows a well developed and long-lasting stable structure 
of polar CORONAL HOLES, often extending far down to low 
latitudes, and a well-developed narrow streamer belt 
region encircling the solar equator. A quasi-stationary flow 
of high-speed soar WIND originates from well above the 
coronal holes and from above a certain height propagates 
radially out into the heliosphere at about 800 km s~!. From 
above the streamer belt region a much slower solar wind 
originates and starts propagating into the heliosphere. 
Due to the ~26 day rotation of the Sun and depending 
on the shape of the coronal holes the faster wind starts 
pushing the slow wind ahead. This is the origin of 
corotating interaction regions (CIRs) ahead of fast solar 
wind streams which develop high-pressure regions and 
eventually shocks bounding them. As the solar wind 
is carrying out frozen-in solar magnetic field lines the 
different plasma packets cannot mingle with or penetrate 
into each other. CIRs, however, undergo substantial 
developments with solar distance and latitude which are 
not yet fully investigated due to the limited simultaneous 
observations throughout the heliosphere. They are able 
to accelerate charged particles up to the MeV region and 
cause recurrent decreases of the galactic and anomalous 
CosMIC RAYS. The origin, development and effects of CIRs 
are discussed in this article. 


Origin and formation of corotating interaction 
regions 

The solar wind (see SOLAR WIND: GLOBAL PROPERTIES) results 
from the supersonic expansion of the solar coRoNA, the 
Sun’s hot outer atmosphere. It consists of ionized gas 
or plasma that propagates out into interplanetary space 
with velocities between about 250 and 850 km s~!. The 
coronal expansion is modulated by the solar magnetic field 
that originates from the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE and penetrates 
the corona. The interaction between the field and the 
expansion of the corona results in a highly structured solar 
corona which varies considerably with the solar activity 
cycle (see figure 3 of SOLAR WIND: GLOBAL PROPERTIES). Near 
solar minimum the solar corona generates basically two 
very different types of solar wind: the fast solar wind 
originating from coronal holes and the slow solar wind 
related to the streamer belt region. 


Coronal holes and the fast solar wind 

Coronal holes appear dark on images of the corona because 
they have lower than average temperatures. They are 
regions of open magnetic fields and the source of fast solar 
wind streams with speeds above 600 km s!, low plasma 
densities (3 cm~*) and high temperatures (3 x 10° K). 
During the decline of the solar activity cycle large-scale 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


coronal holes develop in the polar regions of the Sun and 
often create extensions towards the equator. They rotate 
rigidly with the equatorial rotation rate of the Sun (in 
contrast to the photosphere which rotates more slowly 
at higher latitudes than at the equator). High-speed 
streams generally originate from unipolar magnetic field 
regions and often develop into stable large-scale structures 
observed for many months at decreasing and low solar 
activity. The high-speed flow is a remarkably stable 
equilibrium state of the solar wind which often lasts for 
many months. 


The streamer belt region and the slow solar wind 

The CORONAL STREAMER belt is a region of closed magnetic 
loops containing dense and hot plasma. The magnetic 
equator is usually completely covered by magnetic 
arcades. The fields are sufficiently strong to constrain 
the plasma from expanding outward. At larger coronal 
heights the magnetic field weakens and the arcades can 
be opened by the pressure of the coronal plasma which 
is then free to expand outward. This outflow is observed 
as helmet-like streamers in the corona and as slow and 
dense solar wind far from the Sun. The slow solar wind 
with speeds of about 250 to 400 km s-!, is generally 
less ordered, denser with ~10 cm~* and has a lower 
helium content indicating a higher release location in the 
corona. A magnetic field polarity reversal is embedded 
in the slow solar wind, which reflects magnetic control 
of the expansion. It is possible that the slow solar 
wind is purely transient and associated with intermittent 
reconfigurations of the coronal magnetic fields in the 
streamer belt region. 

At solar minimum, the CORONAL Loops and the 
streamers are mainly observed in a narrow belt around 
the solar equator. The coronal magnetic field can be 
approximated by a dipole which is slightly tilted against 
the rotation axis of the Sun with the tilt increasing with 
solar activity. At higher solar activity the tilted streamer 
belt reaches higher heliolatitudes until at solar maximum 
most of the corona is covered by loops and appears bright 
so thata dipole field approximation is no longer applicable. 


The formation of a corotating interaction region 

Acorotating interaction region develops in the heliosphere 
when a quasi-stationary high-speed solar wind stream 
follows and compresses a slow solar wind steam along 
the same radius-vector from the Sun. This happens due to 
the solar rotation when a coronal hole (or a coronal hole 
extension), as a quasi-stationary source of fast solar wind, 
is situated to the east of a source region of slow solar wind 
at the same heliographic latitude. The radially aligned 
parcels of plasma have different solar origin and carry 
different magnetic field lines inhibiting interpenetration. 
At the stream interface a region of compressed plasma 
starts to build up. The interaction region develops 
to a corotating pattern aligned with the Parker spiral 
(Parker 1958). While traveling out, the compression region 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Corotating Interaction Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ct 


Corotating 
Interaction 
Region (CIR) 


| 
522 NS ee Plasma Temperature 
I 
ee ee MI 
| Solar Wind Speed 
pie. ae 
| Density 


Magnetic Field 


aH Intensity 


ill 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of two CIRs corotating with the 
Sun and solar wind and magnetic field signatures associated as 
observed for example at 1 AU. (From Richardson I et al 1993 J. 
Geophys. Res. 98 13.) 


widens, becomes more pronounced, and develops shock 
waves at the leading and trailing edges. 

Figure 1 shows schematically the solar wind plasma 
and magnetic field properties in the ecliptic plane 
associated with CIRs. The circular dashed arc represents 
the orbit of a 1 AU spacecraft. Solar wind streams 
are denoted S (slow wind), S’ (compressed, accelerated 
slow wind), F’ (compressed, decelerated fast wind) and 
F (unperturbed fast wind). The S’ and F’ regions 
together, separated by a stream interface (SI), constitute 
the corotating interaction region (CIR). In the outer 
heliosphere it is bounded by a forward and a reverse shock. 
Interplanetary magnetic field lines (dotted) link the shocks 
to the observer, e.g. at 1 AU where the lower parts of 
figure 1 show schematic changes in plasma temperature, 
speed, density and flow angle (compared to radial). 

CIRs are well developed at 1 AU except for the shocks. 
A prominent feature is the stream interface (SI) separating 
the originally slow dense plasma from the originally fast 
thin plasma. Stream interfaces are identified by abrupt 
simultaneous drops in plasma density and rises in the 
proton temperature. The pressure peaks close to the 
interface. In the process of pressure release the slow and 
dense plasma ahead of the interface is deflected in the 
sense of the corotation motion while the less dense plasma 
behind the interface is oppositely deflected. 

Coronal origin of the stream interface and the 
corotating interaction region in general is the western 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


border of a coronal hole. Details of this border structure 
are often propagated out into interplanetary space, where 
changes observed within the corotating interaction region, 
despite temporal evolution and dynamics, can often be 
traced back to the source region with remarkable accuracy 
of about 2°. This is confirmed by measurements of the 
elemental and charge state composition of the solar wind. 
Compositional signatures (e.g. Mg/O ratios) are the best 
indicators of coronal origin and can be used to define the 
complex interfaces between different solar wind types (see 
SOLAR WIND COMPOSITION). 


Interplanetary development of CIRs 

The formation and evolution of CIRs is a strong function 
of coronal morphology and temporal characteristics of the 
source regions and the transition region between closed 
and open magnetic field lines. 

In the inner heliosphere the transitions between slow 
and high velocities are commonly steeper at 0.3 AU than 
beyond 0.5 AU. When the plasma streams and the interface 
propagate outward the continuing interaction between the 
streams increases the pressure in the region considerably. 
The interface becomes more azimuthal. The velocity 
difference across the interface exceeds the local wave 
speeds and two shocks bounding the interaction region 
develop. As the wave speed is lower in the slower, cooler 
stream the forward shock is generally formed first at the 
downstream border of the interaction region whereas the 
reverse shock at the up-stream edge develops at larger 
distances. Forward-reverse shock pairs are commonly 
observed beyond 2 to 3 AU. 

Beyond 10-18 AU the forward shocks start to 
encounter the reverse shock of a CIR released about half 
(in the case of two CIRs per rotation) or one solar rotation 
earlier (which is actually the same CIR). At these distances 
merged interaction regions (MIR) develop and all solar 
wind material has at least been shocked once. 

CIRs and their successors continue to evolve while 
convected to greater heliocentric distances. Shocks decline 
in frequency and strength and MIRs are replaced by 
corotating pressure enhancements. 


CIRs and energetic particles 

Origin, injection and acceleration of energetic CIR particles 
The first hints of CIRs in the early 1970s were 27- 
day recurrent particle events with specific features, 
for example slow rise times and no obvious velocity 
dispersion due to particle propagation. Beyond 1 AU 
corotating energetic particle events, as they are now called, 
usually consist of two reasonably well separated particle 
intensity peaks centered approximately on the locations 
of the forward and reverse shock. Above 0.5 MeV the 
intensities at the reverse shock are usually larger than at 
the forward shock. This is shown in figure 2 for an event in 
January 1993 observed by Ulysses (see SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES) 
at 5 AU and at 24°S. It is obvious that around 100 keV the 
peaks of the proton intensities are about equal at the two 
shocks F and R whereas above 3 MeV there is hardly any 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Corotating Interaction Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10°77] 
to*L (a) 


10. 


particles/(cm’ s sr MeV) 


Lat ~ 24°S “T 
R~5.0 AU 


0.025 
0.020 


0.015 
0.010 
0.005 


P (nPa) 


- 

= 

ao 
10 

~~ 700 

2) 

= 600 / 

=< 500 I it 1 

=> 400 ; i ; Solar wind speed a 
SOG [aaa eT pt ep i 
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 


Day of Year 1993 


Figure 2. Hourly averages of (a) the 50 keV to 20 MeV proton intensities measured by two Ulysses instruments, (b) the pressure, P, (c) 
the magnetic field magnitude, | B|, and (d) the solar wind speed, V, from day 19, 1993, to day 26, 1993. The intensity measured in each 
of the 11 discrete energy channels is denoted by the geometric mean of the upper and lower energy bounds of that channel. The solid 
(marked F) and dashed (marked R) vertical lines denote the times of arrival of the forward and the reverse shock, respectively. The 
dashed vertical traces, marked S, denote the arrival times of the stream interfaces. (From Mason G et al 1999 Space Sci. Rev. 89 327.) 


increase left at the forward shock. The intensities decrease 
considerably, especially at low energies near the stream 
interfaces marked S in figure 2. 

It took several years until CIRs were established as a 
cause for the recurrent particle increases. We now know 
that CIRs are capable of accelerating particles from the 
solar wind or suprathermal particles to energies between 
tens of keV up to ~10 MeV at a wide range of solar 
distances and latitudes (see SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES). 
Highest intensities are observed at ~4 AU witha 1/r? fall- 
off at large distances and a decay rate in the direction of 
the Sun of ~300%/ AU. Highest intensities versus latitude 
are observed around 20° with an e-folding angle of ~8°. 
Ulysses observed the transport of CIR ions to latitudes 
well above the shock locations up to the highest latitudes 
of 80° in certain cases. CIR particles propagate away from 
source region along the magnetic field lines connecting the 
shock with the observer as shown in figure 1. At 1 AUa 
sunward flow is generally observed. However, non-field- 
aligned flows at peak intensities were reported at 1 AU as 
well. Generally, a strong inhibition of particle transport 
across stream interfaces is observed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The spectral forms of CIR ions can be described by 
a power law spectrum from 30 keV/n to 1 MeV/n and 
a steepening spectrum above. At the high-energy end 
the spectrum merges with the ambient cosmic ray and 
anomalous cosmic ray (ACR) spectra. At the reverse shock 
the spectrum is generally harder than at the forward shock, 
but the forms do not change out to distances of several tens 
of AU. 

The ion intensity peaks in the streamer belt region 
coincide with forward and reverse shock observations. 
Low-energy ions (tens of keV), however, are observed at 
and below 1 AU even in the absence of shocks. The time 
profiles are the same from He through Fe. Compositions 
are similar to the solar system observations except for 
factors of two to three enhancements of He and C relative 
to oxygen. The He/O and Ne/O ratios increase with the 
solar wind speed. The He/H abundance increases from 
1 to 5 AU. The Mg/O ratio is the same for both forward 
and reverse shock periods and close to the average in solar 
wind slow and fast streams. Electrons are observed from 
50 to hundreds of keV at several AU; however, only small 
intensities are observed at 1 AU. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Corotating Interaction Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3 shows the time history of CIRs and related 
particle increases for 12 solar rotations observed by Ulysses 
near 5 AU in 1993. A major restructuring of the corona is 
reflected in the time profiles of the particle intensities as 
well, e.g. by the shift in longitude between events 9-12 and 
13-14. Sequences like this one are typical for the period 
prior to and at solar minimum displaying either one or 
two CIRs per rotation. 

The huge three-dimensional extent of CIRs and its 
importance in structuring the quiet heliosphere became 
obvious only from Ulysses observations at higher latitudes 
in 1994. The maximum latitude extent of CIRs correlates 
well with the highest latitudes of the coronal streamer belt 
(which can also been described as tilt of the heliospheric 
current sheet) with the tendency of the reverse shock 
extending to somewhat higher latitudes and the forward 
shock extending only to lower latitudes than the streamer 
belt at larger radial distances. 

The observation of CIR related accelerated particles 
(and modulation effects on galactic and ACR particles) 
almost up to the poles even in the absence of local shocks is 
surprising. Observed effects can best be ordered by field 
line connection to remote shocks and particle transport 
along the field lines with transit-time-dependent loss rates. 

It is generally agreed that diffusive or first- 
order Fermi acceleration at the shocks is responsible 
for corotating energetic particle events. Charged 
particles originally from the high-speed solar wind are 
multiply scattered between the shock front and magnetic 
irregularities upstream. Acceleration is most efficient in 
the region of well developed shocks at about 3-5 AU. 
Energetic ion increases have also been observed at trailing 
edges of compression regions even when no reverse shock 
was detected, suggesting that the presence of the shock is 
not mandatory for moderate acceleration. 

Pick-up ions are also accelerated within the coro- 
tating interaction regions, e.g. by stochastic acceler- 
ation in the magnetosonic turbulence. A possible 
injection/acceleration mechanism for pick-up ions at 
(quasi-)perpendicular shocks is shock surfing where par- 
ticles are trapped between the electrostatic shock poten- 
tial and the upstream Lorentz force. Some of the pick-up 
ions already constitute a suprathermal particle population. 
These ions becomes further accelerated by shock drift ac- 
celeration or in a Fermi type shock acceleration process if 
they are able to diffuse across field lines. 


Modulation of cosmic rays and ACRs by CIRs 

In addition to the CIR related intensity increases (from the 
acceleration of charged particles) above about 30 MeV/n 
recurrent decreases are also observed. These particles 
originate from the local interstellar space outside the 
heliosphere (galactic cosmic rays) or from local sources 
within the heliosphere (ANOMALOUS COSMIC RAYS or ACRs). 
The cosmic ray flux is lowest close to the reverse shock. 
This is in good agreement with 1970s observations from 
the PIONEER spacecraft. Ulysses found at high latitudes 
that in contrast to the solar wind speed galactic cosmic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


90 10 49? 10 
45 [+ wf 
0 45 9 45 
45 - b 107 
a 
90 LTE Ere Her T TPO yg 4 Lit 0 
12 38 212 38 
90 = 10 40 10 
45 «fl 
of aS ds 
: al 10 
45 — a b 10 
-20 jail im HO yg Toi im 0 
38 64 38 64 
90 10 40? 10 
45 L wt 
0 -\ ae 5 ag 
2 
Le 10 
4b ¢ b 
90 4H | | Lert ag ia 0 
90 5 90 
90 10 40 10 
45 | aa 
-—| 10 
of | eee ae 5 12 45 
2 
[Be 10 
45 c b 
-90 uu MUINAPet rt} 0 ag im iwi 0 
90 116 390 116 
90 10 10 10 
45 > 
|_| @ 10° | 
go fF 
® Boal 
2 10 
545 a o 
N 
S -90 ri a 0 F 49-4 ian mo 0 2 
= 416 142) 116 142 5 
& 90 10 5 10 10 = 
a4 a i= 
Sas aD 
@ Diag E CME o 
f=} J Ee 
ao Ph 455 45 
3 21926 2 
45 | a 7 2 
<= 
@ -90 im ia 0 S10 uo iam 0 2 
= 142 168 = 142 168 
5 90 10 £49 10 2 
5 as 5 
3 le = ol £ 
e © 10 
o -& 45 5 15 45 
Es 2107 
45 d a 2 
-90 1 Loser 0 & 
168 194 6} 
90 0 
N 
45 L a 
oPK_] a 5 
a: ee ere 
-20 fan 0 
194 220 
90 10 


-90 i 0 49-4 i TH) 0 
220 246 2220 246 
90 10 40 10 

45 | 
lie 0’ 
0 eases = 5 45 
aL 
45 [F 10 1 
-90 fi 0 494 fil 0 
246 272 246 272 
90 10° 40? 10 


i 
I 


90 theft a 4g 0 
272 298 2272 298 
90 10 40 10 

45 
10° | 
0 ae eas, 5 45 
aL 
45 10 20 
20 a 4p 0 
298 324 298 324 


Day of Year, 1993 


Figure 3. Data from 12 solar rotations, each of 26 days, starting 
on 12 January 1993. Time runs from left to right. The left column 
shows, in blue, the expected latitude of the current sheet at the 
position of the spacecraft. The black trace shows the position of 
the spacecraft, while the red trace shows the magnitude of the 
magnetic field. The right column shows, in blue, the 1.8-3.8 MeV 
proton intensity. The vertical lines show the observed times of 
reverse shocks, whilst the solid bars show the expected positions 
of the interaction regions. (From Kunow H et al 1999 Space Sci. 
Rev. 89 221.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 57. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Corotating Interaction Regions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rays continued to be modulated on the time-scale of one 
solar rotation. The amplitude of the recurrent cosmic ray 
decreases show a maximum at 35° and is highest between 
1 and 2 GeV for galactic cosmic ray protons. 


Bibliography 

Balogh A, Gosling J, Jokipii R, Kallenbach R and Kunow 
H (ed) 1999 Corotating Interaction Regions (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) (see also Space Sci. Rev. 89 1-411) 

Parker E N 1958 Dynamics of the interplanetary gas and 
magnetic fields Astrophys. J. 128 664-75 

Schwenn Rand Marsch E (ed) 1990/1991 Physics of the Inner 
Heliosphere vols I and II (Berlin: Springer) 


Horst Kunow 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


The energetic particle populations that we observe in the 
SOLAR WIND are accelerated in a variety of local and 
distant sources. We distinguish different populations by 
their temporal, spatial and angular distributions, energy 
spectra, abundances and ionization states. They tell us the 
physics of acceleration mechanisms and the properties of 
remote sites that are otherwise invisible or inaccessible. 


Sources 

The acceleration of particles to high energies is a 
remarkably common occurrence in the ionized plasmas 
of the heliosphere and presumably throughout the 
Galaxy. Often the presence of energetic particles in 
distant sources is inferred from observations of the 
photons they produce as they collide with matter. Radio 
emission, hard x-rays and gamma rays are produced 
when energetic electrons and ions interact with magnetic 
fields or with material in the ambient plasma. However, 
at times it is also possible to observe directly a sample of 
the accelerated material that has propagated to us at high 
speed along the often-tangled magnetic fields in space. In 
the heliosphere these energetic particles have disclosed a 
variety of new acceleration sites where the matter is too 
tenuous for photon production. 

Particles are known to be accelerated to MeV and 
even GeV energies in solar FLARES, at the shock waves 
driven out from the Sun by SOLAR CORONAL MASS 
EJECTIONS (CMEs), in planetary MAGNETOSPHERES and 
at planetary bow shocks. They are also accelerated at co- 
rotating interaction regions (CIRs) between high- and 
low-speed streams in the solar wind (see SOLAR WIND: 
COROTATING INTERACTION REGIONS) and at the solar 
wind termination shock at the outer edge of the 
heliosphere (see SOLAR WIND SHOCK WAVES AND 
DISCONTINUITIES). In addition, we observe the galactic 
cosmic rays that have probably been accelerated by 
shock waves from supernovae. We distinguish these 
different populations of energetic particles and identify 
their sources by the particle arrival timing and 
associations with other phenomena, by their spatial 
distribution and arrival directions, by their energy 
spectra, and by the abundances of elements and the 
ionization states of the ions in these populations. 

As measurements have become more sensitive and 
complete, it has become possible to distinguish particle 
sources that were previously unclear. One important 
example has been the identification of different sources 
for the impulsive and gradual solar energetic particle 
(SEP) events as flares and CME-driven shocks, 
respectively. Once it was believed that all of these 
particles came from flares, the so-called ‘flare myth’. 
Another example has been the new evidence that 
particles upstream of the Earth’s bow shock are actually 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


accelerated by that shock and are not merely escapees 
from the magnetosphere (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH: BOW SHOCK). 


Impulsive solar flares 

Impulsive solar flares are sources that provide us with 
considerable information on particle acceleration. We can 
observe the accelerated particles in space and the photons 
produced near the Sun. Most of the acceleration in flares 
takes place on closed magnetic loops in the CORONA. As 
these loops become tangled from circulation at their 
photospheric footpoints or as new magnetic flux emerges 
from the photosphere, energy can be suddenly released by 
magnetic reconnection. The associated wave turbulence is 
the probable source of energy for stochastic acceleration 
(see SOLAR FLARES: PARTICLE ACCELERATION 
MECHANISMS). As particles scatter into the loss cone, they 
plunge into increasingly dense material near the footpoints 
of the loops where they lose energy by Coulomb 
interactions. A small fraction of the electron’s energy is 
lost to x-ray bremsstrahlung and a small fraction of the 
ions interact to produce y-ray lines from excited nuclei in 
the beam or the ambient material. Electrons escaping along 
open field lines produce type III radio bursts as they 
stream out along the magnetic field through plasma of 
decreasing density. Finally, satellites in space can observe 
both the energetic electrons and ions directly. 

As the particles stream out along magnetic field lines 
they are scattered somewhat by Alfvénic fluctuations of 
the magnetic field, although the scattering mean free path 
of ~1 AU is comparable with the distance to the Sun. 
This, together with different particle velocities and pitch 
angles with respect to the field, can spread the particle 
arrival times over a period of several hours. Typical 
profiles of particle intensity versus time for a series of 
impulsive events are shown in figure l(a). Different 
particle speeds produce ‘velocity dispersion’ in the 
earliest arrival times, a sophisticated way of saying that 
the fastest particles arrive first. The propagation time, t = 
L/uv, where L is the distance along the field line, p is the 
average cosine of the pitch angle and v is the particle 
velocity. Photons and relativistic particles take at least 8 
min to propagate 1 AU, 50 keV electrons or 
100 MeV amu’ ions take 18 min, and 1 MeV amu ions 
take 2.9 h. This relationship can be used to associate all 
particle species and energies with a particular flare at the 
Sun, within measurement errors of a few minutes. Type 
III radio observations provide additional information that 
can track the 10-100 keV electron population in direction 
and distance as it moves out from the Sun along the field 
line. Particles from impulsive events are only seen over a 
solar-longitude interval of ~30° where field lines are 
fairly well connected to the flare (see SOLAR FLARES: 
IMPULSIVE PHASE). Although poorly measured, this 
longitude interval is of interest because it is controlled by 
the random walk of magnetic field lines. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


12 13 14 #15 16 WF «18 
1982 August 


(C) CIR 
High Speed Stream 


19 21 
1989 October 


Particlesi(em2 sr s MeV/n} 


June 


1995 May 


0 39-82 MeV 
* 84-200 MeV 
= 110-500 MeV 


23 25 27 28 


44- 79 keV/n 
79- 154 keVin 
154- 312 keVin 
312- 620 keVin 
0.62- 1.28 MeVin 
1.75- 2.10 MeVin 
2.50- 3.20 MeV/n 
5.00- 6.20 MeV/n 


»>prpxe e000 + 


Figure 1. Intensity-time profiles are shown for various sources using the same time and intensity scales for each. (a) Electron and 
proton data from ISEE 3 are shown for a series of flares at the times and solar longitudes indicated. (b) Proton intensities from the 
NOAA/GOES spacecraft are plotted for a series of gradual events at the energies shown. Times and longitudes of CME launch at the 
Sun and the shock arrival at Earth are indicated. (c) Intensities of He at various energies are shown during a CIR event as observed 


on the WIND spacecraft. 


Particle abundances are one of the most distinctive 
features of impulsive-flare events. We often find the ratio 
of abundances of isotopes of He, *He/*He~1 in these 
events while this ratio is ~5 x 10° in the solar 
atmosphere or the solar wind. For this reason, these 
impulsive-flare events are often called *He-rich events. 
High electron abundances and more modest 
enhancements of heavy ions also occur. On average, 
Ne/O, Mg/O, and Si/O are enhanced by a factor of ~3 
and Fe/O by a factor of ~7 in these events, relative to the 
corresponding coronal or solar wind abundances (see 
table 1 and SOLAR ABUNDANCES). Element abundances 
derived from the intensities of broad y-ray lines emitted 
by energetic particles inside the flares are consistent with 
those measured for the energetic particles in space. These 
abundances are taken as evidence of resonant wave— 
particle interactions during stochastic acceleration. The 
huge enhancement of *He may occur because intense 
beams of streaming electrons excite electromagnetic ion 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


cyclotron waves between the gyrofrequencies of the 
dominant species, H and “He, in the flare plasma. The 
rare isotope *He, the only species whose gyrofrequency 
lies in this region, is preferentially accelerated as it 
absorbs energy from these waves. Heavy ions may be 
enhanced by other wave modes or by second-harmonic 
interaction with the same waves. Acceleration of 
particles by resonant interaction with waves also occurs 
in other regions of high magnetic field energy, such as 
the auroral region of the Earth where both the particles 
and resonant waves have been observed together in the 
phenomenon known as ‘ion conics’. 

Measurements of ionization states of the energetic 
ions show that all elements up to Si are fully ionized, 
while Fe has ~20 of its 26 electrons removed, 
corresponding to an electron temperature of ~15 MK (1.5 
x 10’ K). This is not surprising for a flare temperature; 
atomic spectral lines of highly ionized Fe are often seen 
from flares. However, if the elements C, N, O, Ne, Mg, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and Si were fully ionized before acceleration, they would 
all have the same charge-to-mass ratio, O/A = 0.5, hence 
the same magnetic gyrofrequency. In this case, it would 
be impossible to produce relative enhancements since all 
ions would resonate with the same waves. Actually, the 
pattern of enhancement is consistent with the values of 
Q/A that would exist in a 3-5 MK plasma, a typical 
active-region temperature. This suggests that the ions are 
drawn from the ambient plasma and accelerated early in 
flare; stripping then occurs later as the electron 
temperature rises. 


Gradual events and CME-driven shocks 

The most intense energetic-particle events we see near 
Earth are the ‘gradual’ events produced by particles 
accelerated at shock waves driven out from the Sun by 
fast CMEs. Essentially all (>96%) large proton events are 
associate with CMEs. Since most CMEs have speeds that 
are near or slightly above that of the solar wind, they do 
not produce shocks, nor do they accelerate particles. 
Particle acceleration only occurs for the fastest ~1% of 
CMEs. Shocks with speeds >500 km s! usually 
accelerate particles while those with speeds >750 km s! 
nearly always do. The largest SEP events of a solar cycle 
are produced by shocks with speeds of 1500- 
2000 km s'. Shock speeds can decrease by as much as a 
factor of 2 between the Sun and Earth. Acceleration of 
protons up to ~10 MeV usually continues to 1 AU and 
beyond in most moderate events. Acceleration of 100 
MeV-1 GeV protons occurs primarily near the Sun in 
most events but continues out to 1 AU in the largest 
events. In the large 19 October 1989 event shown in 
figure 1(b), particle intensities peak at the time of shock 
passage (on 20 October) even at energies of ~1 GeV. 


Acceleration occurs at shock waves as particles are 
scattered back and forth across the shock surface, gaining 
an increment in speed on each transit. The upstream and 
downstream scattering centers serve as approaching 
‘walls’ from which the particles are reflected. The 
distribution of particles streaming away from the shock is 
itself unstable to generation of Alfvén waves that add to 
the scattering of particles that follow behind. This 
nonlinear process serves to trap particles near the shock 
and increase the efficiency of acceleration. However, in 
shock acceleration, the energy of the particles comes 
from the kinetic energy of the shock, not just from the 
energy in the waves. 

Ionization-state measurements have provided the 
clearest and most compelling evidence on the origin of 
the ions in the large gradual events. The ionization states 
are characteristic of a 1-2 MK plasma. Even C and O are 
not fully ionized and the mean ionization state of Fe, Of, 
~ 14. These ions could not come from the hot plasma of a 
flare; they represent ambient unheated coronal plasma. 
Ionization states of Fe have now been measured over an 
energy interval of 0.3-600 MeV amu’ by 6 different 
experiments on 4 spacecraft. The highest-energy 
measurements were made in some of the largest events of 
the last solar cycle. Not only do these ions place an upper 
limit on the source temperature, but also the high-energy 
ions would be stripped of electrons in seconds at 
densities of 10'? cm™ found in the low corona where 
flares occur. The ions must have been accelerated from 
ambient coronal plasma at low density. This conclusion 
is in agreement with observations that the peak intensities 
of GeV protons are produced when the leading edge of 
the CME is at 5—10 solar radii. 


Table 1. Element abundances in energetic particle sources. 


Z FIP Photosphere Gradual events CIR events Impulsive Anomalous Galactic CR 
(SEP corona) (Coronal hole) flares CR source 
H 1 13.53 1.35 x 10° (1.57+0.22) x 10° (1.81+0.24) x 10° ~1 x 10° ~1000+500 (1.74+0.43) x 10° 
He 2 24.46 132 000+11 000 57 00043000 159 000+1000 46 00044000 5000+1000 23 50041600 
C 6 11.22 479455 46549 890436 434430 <20 843467 
N 7 14.48 126+20 124+3 140414 157+18 120+10 61424 
oO 8 13.55 10004161 1000410 1000437 1000+45 1000+10 1000+40 
F 9 17.34 0.05+0.03 <0.1 <2 <2 <5 
Ne 10 21.47 162422 152+ 170+16 400428 70£10 125+16 
Na 11 5.12 2.90.2 10.4+1. 3448 <0.2 11+7 
Mg 12 7.61 5146 196+4 140414 408429 1.2+0.3 207412 
Al 13 5.96 4.040.6 15.7+1.6 68+12 <0.1 2048 
Si 14 8.12 48+5 152+4 100+12 352427 1.7+0.3 196+12 
P 15 10.9 0.38+0.04 0.65+0.17 4+ <0.1 <5 
S 16 10.3 2947 31.8+0.7 5048 117415 0.6+0.2 2544 
Cl 17 12.95 0.4+0.3 0.24+0. <2 <0.1 <3 
Ar 18 15.68 4.5+1.0 3.30.2 30+ 4.2+0.5 5.9+1.4 
K 19 4.32 0.18+0.05 0.55+0.15 242 <3.7 
Ca =. 20 6.09 3.09+0.14 10.6+0.4 88413 <0.1 1.743.5 
Ti 22 6.81 0.14+0.02 0.34+ <2 <0.1 <4.7 
Cr 24 6.74 0.63+0.04 2.1+0.3 12+ <0.1 <5.7 
Fe 26 7.83 42.743.9 13444 97411 1078446 <0.9 182+11 
Ni 28 7.61 2.4+0.05 6.4+0.6 42+9 <0.05 1041.7 
Zn 30 9.36 0.054+0.010 0.11+0.04 6+4 <0.05 0.13+0.02 


FIP: first ionization potential. 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


At energies of a few MeV amu, most element 
abundances in gradual SEP events do not vary 
significantly from event to event and the average 
abundances seem to directly reflect the abundances of the 
source plasma in the solar corona. In fact, SEP 
abundances provide the most complete information we 
have on coronal abundances on a total of 22 elements 
(see table 1). Element abundances in the corona differ 
from those in the photosphere in a way that depends upon 
their first ionization potential (FIP), or perhaps upon their 
first ionization time scale. Elements with FIP < 10 eV 
(e.g. K, Na, Al, Mg, Si and Fe) have abundances that are 
enhanced by a factor of ~4 relative to high-FIP elements 
(e.g. C, N, O, Ne, Ar). Low-FIP elements are ionized in 
the photosphere, while high-FIP elements are neutral. An 
ion—neutral fractionation occurs because ions and neutral 
atoms are transported differently from the photosphere 
into the corona. Once elements reach the 1-2 MK corona 
they all become highly ionized long before they are 
accelerated. 

A characteristic feature of gradual SEP events is 
their large and complex spatial structure that produces a 
wide variety of time profiles when viewed by spacecraft 
at different longitudes relative to the CME. Figure 2 
shows time profiles of proton intensities seen by 3 
spacecraft whose configuration relative to the CME is 
shown in the inset. As the spiral interplanetary field lines 
are swept over a spacecraft, the longitude of the magnetic 
connection point to the shock swings eastward with time. 
In this event, the 3 spacecraft become better connected to 
the intense acceleration region near the nose of the shock 
as time increases. HELIOS | is best connected. Here the 
intensity rises to a flat profile where the intensity is 
controlled by limits on the rate particles can stream away 
from the shock. A sharp peak in intensity is seen as the 
shock passes the spacecraft. The other two spacecraft see 
lower intensities around the flank of the shock; intensities 
increase as their connection point moves toward the nose 
of the shock. Behind the shock all 3 spacecraft enter an 
invariant-spectral region where particle intensities 
decrease slowly with time as the containment volume for 
the particles slowly expands. 

Energy spectra of ions from the 20 October 1995 
event are shown in figure 3(b). These spectra were 
obtained during the invariant spectral period in this 
relatively small event by the WIND spacecraft. The proton 
spectrum from the plateau region in the large event of 19 
October 1989 is also shown in the figure for comparison. 
This event, shown in figure 1(b), was the largest event 
that occurred during the last solar maximum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


10 a “TT T 7 
10° Helios 1 
10° 
10! 
40° 
4 Sun 
10°! IS | 
2 /les8 “me 8 
~ 10°fT /" \ “ 7 
@ 31 3.6MeV Prot fuel 1 ¥he! 2 
S 40° r “6 Me rotons 4 | 
ae 
f 10 
5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
4 79 Mar 
& T T wiry T T T "7 TTT T TT TTT 
& % —t— Time Interval A ] ‘* Time Interval B 
10° [ — ie 
Se o 
10! r \ 17 = 
10° Fe ] r = 
1 “| : 
101 = * 
eee» b i. 
107+ ~ If wy 
‘ D 
3 * | x 
10 2] * 
| 
4 sitisel 4. 4 sensed shel 1 fewer | rat 
1 2 4610 2 40 1001 2 4619 2 40 100 
Energy (MeV) Energy (MeV) 


Figure 2. Intensity—time profiles of 3-6 MeV protons observed 
by 3 spacecraft are shown for a gradual event of modest extent. 
Spacecraft locations around the CME are shown in the inset. 
Lower panels show proton energy spectra taken early in the 
event (a) and during the ‘invariant’ spectral period (b). 


Acceleration at the Earth’s bow shock 

The bow shock produced when the solar wind encounters 
the Earth’s magnetosphere is also a source of accelerated 
particles. These were first observed as intense bursts of 
particles (and resonant waves) seen by the ISEE spacecraft 
in the region sunward of Earth. Since magnetic flux tubes 
contact the Earth’s bow shock for a short time, the 
energies of the accelerated ions are usually below 100 
keV amu’. Bursts were observed only during periods 
when the magnetic field connected the spacecraft to the 
bow shock. As the solar wind sweeps field lines past the 
Earth, they remain in contact with the bow shock for a 
limited period. For the nominal field direction, this 
contact point is usually swept across the sunward face of 
the shock from the dusk to the dawn side; the field 
direction becomes increasingly parallel to the shock 
normal. However, it was not possible in the early 
measurements to distinguish which elements comprised 
the ‘ions’, or to clearly establish that the particles were 
accelerated at the shock rather than simply leaking out 
from the Earth’s radiation belts. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(A) Impulsive Events 


Particles((cm2 sr s MeV/amu) 
Qa o Qa a4 82 Qa =) ao Qa a4 @& 


a 
ort anw kt & w 


(B) Gradual Events 


soil 


(C) CIR, ACR, GCR 


CIR 
«. — May-June 95 | 


soil s siil 4 


= 
Q 


0.1 


1.6 160 1066 


Energy MeVfamu 


Figure 3. Energy spectra of various particle species indicated are shown for different particle populations. (a) Spectra for a small 
impulsive-flare event on 2 April 1995 observed on the WIND spacecraft are shown. (b) Spectra for various species in the small 20 
October 1995 event observed on the WIND spacecraft are shown and a proton spectrum observed by NOAA/GOES during the large 
19 October 1989 event (see figure 1(b)) is shown for comparison. (c) Spectra of He during the May—June 1995 CIR event (see figure 
1(c)) show variation with time. The low-energy GCR spectra of various species during solar minimum are shown, and the low- 
energy rise in O from the presence of ACRs is noted on the figure. 


The first measurements of element abundances in 
these ‘upstream events’ were made aboard the WIND 
spacecraft. It was found that the ions had the same 
element abundances as the high-speed solar wind and 
that events were much more common during high-speed 
solar-wind streams when the bow shock was strongest. In 
one case an upstream event even occurred during a small 
solar *He-rich event so that the intense burst of ions 
flowing upstream from the shock was also *He-rich. 
Clearly the source of the accelerated ions was these 
available particles from the upstream solar wind, not 
those from the magnetosphere. 


Co-rotating interaction regions (CIRs) 

CIRs are formed when high-speed solar-wind streams, 
emitted from coronal holes on the Sun, overtake the low- 
speed solar wind emitted earlier in the solar rotation. This 
interaction produces a pair of shocks: a forward shock 
propagates outward into the slow solar wind and a 
reverse shock propagates sunward into the high-speed 
solar wind. The shocks usually begin to form outside 1 
AU and they continue to strengthen out to several AU. 
Particles are accelerated at both shocks, although the 
reverse shock seems to produce greater intensities and 
harder energy spectra. Thus particles from the reverse 
shock are most easily observed near Earth flowing 
sunward through the high-speed stream. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The time evolution of He intensities from a large 
CIR is shown in figure l(c). Particles from the forward 
shock are seen on 29 May. As the Sun rotates, the Earth 
crosses the stream interface from the slow to the fast 
solar wind on 30 May. At first, low-energy particles 
predominate from the newly formed shock. Later, as we 
become connected to the strengthening shock farther 
away from us, high-energy particle intensities increase 
while those at low energies are attenuated by the greater 
transport distances. This behavior is the inverse of the 
velocity dispersion seen in both impulsive and gradual 
SEP events. For the unusual event of May-June 1995, 
particles were seen for 17 d while the sun rotated through 
an angle of ~225° and the reverse shock propagated 
across the high-speed stream and far into the following 
low-speed solar wind. The evolution of the energy 
spectra of He in this event is shown in figure 3(c). 

Averaged element abundances of energetic particles 
from CIRs are included in table 1. These abundances are 
most similar to those of the high-speed solar wind that 
serves as the source. The enhancement of low-FIP 
elements relative to high is only a factor of ~2, indicating 
that abundances of the material from coronal holes 
suffers less fractionation than that in the corona and in 
active regions. However, departures from solar-wind 
abundances are also seen. Elevated abundances of H and 
He, for example, probably result from the acceleration of 
interstellar pickup ions (see below) although O, the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


talisman of this source, is not enhanced relative to C, N 
or Ne, for example. 


Anomalous cosmic rays (ACRs) 

ACRs are yet another shock-accelerated particle 
population with unique element abundances. In the 
interstellar material outside the heliosphere, elements 
with FIP less than the ionization potential of H, 13.6 eV, 
are ionized while those of higher FIP are neutral. 
Interstellar H absorbs the photons of higher energy. As 
the solar system moves through this gas, neutral atoms 
easily penetrate, but ions are largely excluded by the 
magnetic fields. As these interstellar neutrals approach 
the Sun they are ionized by solar photons or, in the case 
of H, by charge exchange with the solar wind. These new 
ions are suddenly able to sense the presence of the 
magnetic fields of the solar wind. Thus they are “picked 
up’ by the solar wind and they acquire a velocity 
distribution that extends to twice the solar-wind speed. 
The ions are eventually convected out to the solar-wind 
termination shock that is estimated to be formed 
=100 AU from the Sun. Here, the higher initial injection 
speed of the pickup ions leads to their preferential 
acceleration. The energetic ions are modulated as they 
propagate back to 1 AU where they are observed (see 
COSMIC RAYS). 

The ACRs were first observed by the anomalously 
high intensities of O (relative to C, for example) at ~10 
MeV amu ' near solar minimum (see figure 3(c)). O, as 
well as He, N and Ne, persisted during solar minimum 
but were then modulated with the 11 yr solar cycle in a 
manner similar to the galactic cosmic rays. The theory of 
the singly ionized interstellar pickup ions and of their 
acceleration at the termination shock was advanced 20 
years before pickup ions were first observed in the solar 
wind. Recently, ionization states of ACRs have also been 
directly measured, confirming that most are singly 
ionized while a small fraction have become more highly 
ionized during acceleration and transport. Approximate 
abundances of ACRs at the termination shock are 
included in table 1; these abundances depend upon 
assumptions made to correct for solar modulation. 


Galactic cosmic rays (GCRs) 

Cosmic rays, probably accelerated at SUPERNOVA shock 
waves in the Galaxy, have a constant presence 
throughout the heliosphere (see COSMIC RAYS: 
PROPAGATION IN THE HELIOSPHERE). GCRs are easily 
distinguished from other particle populations by their 
high energies and their unusual element abundances. As 
observed, GCRs contain unusually high abundances of 
Li, Be and B that are produced in nuclear reactions with 
interstellar matter during the ~10’ yr lifetime of the 
GCRs. It is possible to correct for this matter traversal to 
derive GCR source abundances that are shown in table 1. 
The first suggestion of the existence of an ion—neutral 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


fractionation process based upon FIP was made for the 
GCR source abundances by comparing them with the 
‘universal’ abundances of elements derived from 
meteorites (essentially equivalent to solar photospheric 
abundances). Similarities between the abundances of 
GCRs and those of large gradual SEP events were noted 
many years ago, suggesting that stellar coronae or stellar 
energetic particles provide the seed population for the 
GCRs. Competing theories explain the enhancement in 
low-FIP elements in GCRs by the preferential 
acceleration of INTERSTELLAR GRAINS that are rich in 
those elements. However, we have seen that the process 
of separating ions and _ neutral atoms across 
electromagnetic fields, seen in the SEP, CIR and ACR 
abundances, is quite common in the heliosphere. It would 
be surprising if this process were confined to the 
heliosphere while an entirely different mechanism 
governed the GCR abundances. 

The low-energy portion of the spectra of the 
dominant species in the GCRs is shown in figure 3(c). 
Above ~1 GeV amu’! the differential intensity spectra 
attain an E~° dependence that continues to 
~1 TeV amu where the spectrum steepens to form a 
‘knee’. The low intensities of particles here and at higher 
energies can only be measured indirectly by large 
detector arrays at ground level. Hence, element 
abundances and their evolution as a function of energy 
have not been measured here. 


Solar cycle variations 

Different epochs in the 11 yr solar cycle bring an 
enormous change in the character of the energetic 
particles we see in the solar wind near Earth. The most 
favorable ‘season’ for observing ACRs and low-energy 
GCRs is at solar minimum when their intensities are 
highest. These particles are suppressed as the solar cycle 
increases. In fact, ACRs have never been observed 
during the years around solar maximum. 

It is not surprising that the numbers of both 
impulsive and gradual SEP events increase as solar 
activity increases and more flares and CMEs occur. The 
number of impulsive-flare-related events varies from a 
few per year at solar minimum to a few hundred per year 
at solar maximum. The number of gradual events varies 
from about 5 yr"! at minimum to 30 yr! at maximum. Of 
course these numbers depend upon the intensity threshold 
and the particle species and energy used to count events. 
However, the numbers are not the whole story. The 
events at solar minimum are also smaller and have softer 
energy spectra than those at solar maximum (see the 
proton spectra for the two gradual events in figure 3(b)). 
These are the products of less-energetic flares or of 
weaker shocks. 

For CIR events, the variation is more complicated. 
Energetic particles from CIRs can be seen at most phases 
of the solar cycle. However, they are difficult to observe 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Energetic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(or to count) during solar maximum because they are 
often obscured by SEP events and the CIRs themselves 
are disrupted by CMEs. Thus the events are best studied 
near solar minimum. However, at times very near solar 
minimum, such as during 1996, the heliospheric current 
sheet becomes very flat and lies near the solar equatorial 
plane. Thus, the polar high-speed streams and the 
equatorial low-speed streams can flow out radially with 
no regions of interaction. During these times there are 
few CIRs formed and few particles accelerated. 


Bibliography 

Fisk L, Kozlovsky B and Ramaty R 1974 An interpretation of 
the observed oxygen and nitrogen enhancements in the low 
energy cosmic rays Astrophys. J. 190 L35 

Gosling J T 1993 The solar flare myth J. Geophys. Res. 98 
18 949 

Reames D V 1990 Energetic particles from impulsive solar 
flares Astrophys. J. Suppl. 73 235 

Reames D V 1995 Coronal abundances determined from 
energetic particles Adv. Space Res. 15 (7) 41 

Reames D V 1999 Particle acceleration at the sun and in the 
heliosphere Space Science Reviews 90 413. See 
http://kapis 1.wkap.nl/oasis.htm/231960 


Donald V Reames 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


The most fundamental problem in solar system research is 
still unsolved: how can the Sun witha surface temperature 
of only 5800 K heat up its atmosphere to more than a 
million K? In fact, the solar atmosphere is so hot that not 
even the Sun’s enormous gravity can contain it. Part of 
it is continuously evaporating into interplanetary space: 
the SOLAR WIND. As a highly ionized magnetized plasma it 
dominates a huge volume around the Sun which is called 
the heliosphere. Only far beyond the outermost planets is 
a transition into the interstellar gas flowing through our 
Galaxy expected to occur. 

On the rare occasions of solar eclipses, every observer 
is stunned by the high degree of structure in the then 
uncovered coroNA. No wonder that the solar wind 
emerging from there is similarly inhomogeneous and 
creates a complicated three-dimensional shape of the 
plasma heliosphere. Interactions between outflowing 
streams of different speeds and solar transient phenomena 
cause further complications. Thus, the solar wind as 
we see it from the Earth’s orbit is characterized by an 
enormous variability in all its basic properties. It is this 
very variability that allows the solar wind to have a 
surprisingly large impact on the Earth. Some effects even 
make it down to the ground! 

The solar wind proves to be one key link between 
the solar atmosphere and the Earth. Although the energy 
transferred by the solar wind is miniscule compared to 
both sunlight and those energies involved in the Earth’s 
atmosphere, the solar wind is capable of pin-pricking the 
Earth system until it eventually reacts in a highly nonlinear 
way. 

In this article the chief characteristics of the solar wind 
in context with its sources in the corona will be presented. 
The next section first describes the basic properties of 
the solar wind as observed in the comparatively simple 
situation around solar activity minimum. Next the corona 
and inner heliosphere are discussed in their full 3D 
extent. The fate of the stream structure as it evolves with 
increasing distance from the Sun is then dealt with. Finally 
we summarize the current knowledge of the different 
types of solar wind, ending with the admission that none 
of them is really explained yet. 


The solar wind at 1 AU 
Basic properties 
The existence of the solar wind was theoretically modeled 
by E Parker in 1958 and experimentally verified in 1962. 
Since then, it has been observed throughout wide parts 
of the heliosphere, as close as 0.29 AU and as far as (by 
now) 70 AU from the Sun, mainly in the ecliptic plane, but 
also above both solar poles. Some typical parameters as 
measured at the Earth’s orbit (i.e. at 1 AU distance from 
the Sun) are given in table 1. 

The solar wind flow speed is usually much higher 
than the local sound and Alfvén speeds, and typical Mach 
numbers are around 10. This implies that the plasma 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Typical parameters of the slow solar wind at 1 AU. 


Flow speed vp 350 km s7! 

Proton density np 9cm~3 

Flux density npup 3 x 10° cm? s7} 
Composition 96% protons, 4% He* ions, 


minor constituents, plus 

an adequate number of 
electrons to maintain nearly 
perfect charge neutrality 


Proton temperature Tp 4x 104K 
Electron temperature J. 1.5 x 10° K 
Magnetic field B 4nT 


dynamic pressure is much higher than both the magnetic 
pressure and the thermal pressure. It also means that 
the magnetic field is frozen-in in the expanding flow. 
The field lines can be regarded as ‘stream lines’ of the 
flow. Generally, they maintain their identity on their 
way through the entire heliosphere since, due to the 
near absence of collisions in the tenuous plasma, the 
particles can hardly ever leave their original field lines. 
All particles move, on the average, radially away from 
the Sun. Therefore, the stream lines interconnecting 
particles emerging from the same source on the rotating 
Sun are curved like Archimedean spirals. The curvature is 
determined by both the flow speed and the distance from 
the Sun. The average Parker angle between the stream 
lines and the radial direction to the Sun at 1 AU amounts 
to about 45°. With increasing distance to the Sun the Parker 
spiral winds up further and further: from Jupiter’s orbit in 
the direction of the local magnetic field can be considered 
almost perpendicular to the solar wind flow. Actually, the 
plasma keeps moving radially, in analogy to the needle in 
the spiral grooves of an old-fashioned record. 


Solar wind stream structure 

The solar wind exhibits a remarkable variability, even at 
times of low solar activity. As a typical example, figure 1 
shows the main solar wind parameters obtained near 
the Earth’s orbit during a whole solar rotation. They 
were recorded in early 1974, i.e. close to a solar activity 
minimum, and the basic pattern seen then remained 
almost unchanged through several months: 


e For two intervals of some 60° in longitude (corre- 
sponding to a durations of several days) the flow 
speed exceeds 600 km s7!. 

e Inboth these high-speed streams the plasma density 
is lowest and the proton temperature is highest (while 
the electrons are somewhat cooler), just opposite to 
the low-speed regions in between. 

e Both high-speed streams are regions of unipolar 
magnetic fields (indicated by the + and — signs), 

e In a short interval in the middle of the figure, 
interplanetary shock waves went by, characterized by 
abrupt increases in speed, density, temperature and 
magnetic field strength (not shown here). This type 
of shock wave is caused by transient activity on the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2 shockwaves 


Figure 1. The solar wind proton parameters (flow speed, density, temperature and flow angles relative to the radial direction) during a 
full solar rotation in early 1975, as observed by the Helios 1 solar probe close to 1 AU. Typical for this phase of minimum solar activity 
are the two large high-speed streams with the extended compression regions in front. Note also the two transient-related shock waves. 


Sun, e.g. SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS (CMES). Usually, 
not more than one such event occurs per solar rotation 
at solar minimum. 

e = The left part of the figure shows a less well-ordered 
pattern of flow speeds and polarities. 

e The flow angles ep (out of the ecliptic) and ap 
(azimuthal) fluctuate within about 10° around the 
radial direction. More pronounced deflections are 
observed in compression regions ahead of high-speed 
streams and at shock waves. 


Observations as shown in figure 1 revealed that solar 
wind variability cannot be attributed to just transient 
disturbances of an otherwise quiet or structureless solar 
wind. In particular the persistent occurrence of high-speed 
streams with flow speeds up to 800 km s“! was realized to 
be an intrinsic feature of the solar wind phenomenon. With 
decreasing solar activity in the years 1973-75, these high- 
speed streams developed into stable large-scale structures. 
Some of them were observed at the same solar longitude 
for several months, i.e. they were stationarily corotating 
with the Sun through several solar rotations. 

In the Skylab era the coronal sources of the high- 
speed streams could be identified: these are regions of 
diminished brightness at soft x-ray and EUV wavelengths 
(so-called CORONAL HOLES), indicating significantly lower 
electron densities and temperatures. The boundaries 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


are remarkably sharp and coincide in detail with those 
of the high-speed streams properly mapped back to the 
Sun. Coronal holes mark the regions in which coronal 
magnetic field lines open freely into interplanetary space 
(see articles by Kohl and de Forest). At times of low solar 
activity they cover mainly both polar caps. In contrast, 
closed loop-like structures are always related with active 
centers such as sunspots which most often are located at 
lower heliographic latitudes. Coronal holes and the high- 
speed streams emerging from them have to be regarded as 
features of the quiet Sun, not the active Sun. 


The solar wind in three dimensions 
The 3D heliosphere in terms of the ‘ballerina model’ 
On the basis of these early discoveries, a three-dimensional 
model of the heliosphere and the stream-structured solar 
wind emerged. It is most adequately visualized in terms 
of the ballerina model first proposed by H Alfvén in 1977. 
Figure 2 is an artist’s view of the inner heliosphere as 
it may appear immediately before a typical solar activity 
minimum, e.g. in 1975. We find the Sun’s poles to 
be covered by large coronal holes. They are areas of 
open magnetic field lines, the northern hole being of 
positive (outward directed) polarity, the southern hole 
being negative. One solar cycle later the polarity reverses, 
of course. Some tongue-like extensions of the coronal holes 
reach well into the equatorial regions. The Sun’s equatorial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. The ‘ballerina model’ of the 3D heliosphere, according to H Alfvén. 


region is governed by bright active centers (including 
some sunspots left over from the past cycle) and their loop- 
like and mainly closed magnetic structures. 

What looks like the skirt of a spinning ballerina 
is the warped separatrix between positive and negative 
solar magnetic field lines dragged out into interplanetary 
space by the radially outflowing solar wind plasma. This 
heliospheric current sheet is formed on top of the closed 
magnetic structures at the transition between closed and 
open flux tubes, ie. generally in the middle of the near- 
equatorial ‘belt’ of activity. If the spinning skirt passes an 
observer sitting, say, at the earth, he would notice a polarity 
switch and call it a crossing of a magnetic sector boundary. 
The size and number of magnetic sectors is closely related 
to the structure of the underlying corona. i.e. the shape 
of the activity belt and the coronal holes, respectively (for 
more details see the article SOLAR WIND: MAGNETIC FIELD). 


The heliospheric current sheet: shape and origin 

The coronal holes are the sources of high-speed solar wind. 
The emission of slow solar wind is sharply confined to 
a belt centered at the warped current sheet of about 40° 
width in latitude. The warps of both the current sheet 
(which can be taken to be the heliomagnetic equator) 
and the coronal hole boundaries with respect to the 
heliographic equator allow some high-speed streams to 
extend to low latitudes so that they become observable 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


at times even in the plane of the ecliptic. This occurs 
preferentially in the 2 years before activity minimum, 
when the large-scale coronal structure is rather stable, 
and high-speed streams reappear at the same heliographic 
longitudes for many solar rotations. 

At times of minimum solar activity there are almost 
no warps left in the current sheet which is then planar like 
a disk lying very close to the plane of the heliographic 
equator. This is demonstrated in figure 3 where two 
images registered by the LASCO coronagraphs on board 
SOHO in early 1996 were merged. They give a very typical 
example of the appearance of the extended corona at the 
most recent activity minimum. The inner part was taken in 
the light of the green corona line at 530.3 nm produced by 
Fe XIV ions at temperatures of 2 x 10° K. This spectral line is 
particularly well-suited to outline hot magnetic structures 
in the inner corona. The outer part taken in white light 
shows the larger-scale electron density distribution. 

Images of this type taken during the months around 
solar activity minimum have revealed that: 


e the appearance is nearly symmetric about the solar 
axis, with a flat high density sheet right in the 
equatorial plane, 

e _ the green (inner) patterns merge well into the white 
(outer) patterns, indicating that hot magnetic loops 
are closely associated with high density streamers on 
top, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. A coronagraph view of the extended minimum corona (on 1st February 1996), composed by a green-line emission image and 
a white-light image taken by the LASCO coronagraphs on-board SOHO. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 54. 


e the dense sheet emerges from bright apparently 
closed loop systems (called helmet streamers) 
centered at latitudes of 30-45° in both hemispheres; 
the loop tops usually reach out to about 1.5 R,, in 
some cases to well beyond 2 R,; their helmet-like 
outer extensions are clearly bent towards the solar 
equator, 

e around the equator, there is a more diffuse bright 
pattern, clearly separated from the high latitude loops 
and strongly varying with time, 

e there is no detectable green-line emission above 
either of the poles, confirming that the density and 
temperature in polar coronal holes is rather low; 
their edges appear to be sharp and well-defined and 
remain stable on time scales of several days. 


The structure of the corona is governed by the solar 
magnetic field. The magnetic topology is not just 
that of a simple magnetic dipole, not even at the 
comparatively quiet minimum phase. Higher-order 
multipole components are always involved. A coronal 
image like figure 3 leads to the immediate impression 
that there are several magnetic loop systems anchored 
at the Sun. As a consequence, there must be a series of 
polarity changes around the limb, apart from the global 
polarity switch from ‘positive’ at the northern coronal 
hole to ‘negative’ in the south. The radial extent of these 
multipole moments is much more limited than that of the 
overall magnetic dipole centered in the polar coronal holes. 

Comparison of coronal images like figure 3 with 
photospheric magnetograms shows that the mid-latitude 
loop systems are located well on top of magnetic neutral 
lines which often reach all around the visible half of the 
Sun. This is also the location of polar crown filaments well 
known from H-alpha observations. The near-equatorial 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic features are more variable, both with space 
and time, due to the dynamics of some remaining active 
regions. They cause the green-line corona to vary in 
intensity by a factor of 10 and more. This variability 
in conjunction with the smaller scale and often inclined 
magnetic structures may be the reason for the more diffuse 
appearance in the equatorial regions. 

The formation of antiparallel magnetic fields beyond 
the closed loops would require the existence of current 
sheets. Since large streamers coexist at different latitudes, 
multiple current sheets must also exist, unless they merge 
somewhere. They form a streamer sheet of initially 
1 solar diameter width. Processes still to be explored 
may eventually lead to the formation of the large-scale 
interplanetary heliospheric current sheet imbedded in a 
flow of slow solar wind. Note that the transition from 
closed to open magnetic topology at the top of a streamer 
is generally not yet understood, nor is the release of slow 
solar wind from these regions. 

The flatness and stability of the distant heliospheric 
current sheet(s) is probably due to the persistence of the 
mid-latitude streamers. In other words, the current sheet 
is determined by mid-latitude phenomena rather than by 
streamers above the near-equatorial activity belt. The mid- 
latitude streamers are apparently bent towards the equator 
by the more than radially expanding polar coronal hole 
magnetic field and high-speed plasma flow. After all, that 
would mean that the heliospheric current sheet close to the 
Sun’s equator is being shaped by forces originating in the 
Sun’s polar regions! 

More information can be found in the articles CORONAL 
LOOPS, CORONAL STREAMERS, and. FILAMENTS. 


Solar wind stream boundaries 
Coronal holes attract attention not only by their 
surprisingly sharp boundaries. The high-speed solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-90° 9/94 


+90° 8/95 


OO) B-field outward 
) B-fiela inward 


Figure 4. Solar wind and magnetic field polarity observations during the passage of Ulysses across both solar poles. (Courtesy of 


J Woch, Max-Planck-Institute fiir Aeronomie.) 


wind streams emerging from them are also very distinctly 
separated from adjacent slow flow. The boundary layer 
between high-speed wind at 600 kms“! and slow wind at 
300 km s™! is often found to be less than 1.5° with respect 
to heliographic latitude! In longitude, mutual interactions 
between flows of different speeds tend to smooth the 
originally steep profiles with increasing distance to the 
Sun. Only when the Helios solar probes approached the 
Sun as close as 0.29 AU were similarly thin boundary 
longitudinal boundary layers confirmed and a ‘mesa-like’ 
shape of high-speed streams was recognized. In high- 
speed wind, remnant signatures of the coronal network 
could be identified, proving its originally filamentary 
nature. Close to the Sun, all the transition from slow to fast 
wind was observed to occur apparently as the transition 
from one flux tube to the next! These discoveries led to 
the conclusion that high- and slow-speed wind are very 
different in nature, emanate from well-separated sources 
in the corona, and are due to basically different acceleration 
mechanisms. 

Figure 4 is an impressive experimental confirmation 
of what has been said in this subsection. This unusual 
polar plot shows the solar wind speed as measured 
from the Ulysses space probe during its passage across 
both solar poles in the years 1992-97. The magnetic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


polarity is also indicated. Clearly, high-speed wind is 
encountered predominantly at latitudes beyond 20° in 
either hemisphere. During the fast passage through the 
ecliptic plane (left part of figure 4) abrupt changes from fast 
to slow and wind and back occurred. In contrast, the rather 
slow orbital motion of Ulysses away from and towards the 
ecliptic (right part) allowed mid-latitude fast streams and 
interstream slow flow to be observed alternately for many 
solar rotations. Beyond about 35° no slow wind and no 
‘wrong’ sector polarity were found any more. For more 
details about Ulysses see the article SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES. 


Further signatures of stream structure 

There are some more signatures indicating the basically 
different nature of high-speed wind from coronal holes 
and low-speed flow in the streamer belt. They are mainly 
associated with constituents other than protons and their 
ionization states (for details see the article SOLAR WIND: 
COMPOSITION). 


e The helium abundance is 3.6% in high-speed wind, 
very constant in time and almost identical for all 
streams. In slow wind the abundance is only 2.5% 
and highly variable. This is one strong indication 
that high-speed wind is released at lower altitudes in 
a gravitationally stratified corona. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e The ionization state of heavy ions is significantly 
lower in fast flow, indicating a lower coronal 
temperature in its source region. 

e In the slow solar wind there is a much more 
pronounced first ionization potential (FIP) effect, 
i.e. the elements with a FIP of less than 10 eV 
are significantly overabundant in comparison to 
photospheric values (see the article by von Steiger). 

e The angular momentum carried away by the solar 
wind from the rotating Sun is almost completely 
contained in the slow flow. This is another strong 
indication that the fast wind starts from rather close to 
the solar rotation axis, while the slow wind is released 
only beyond 30 Rx. 


On the other hand, there are also some stunning 
similarities between the two types of solar wind: 


e The momentum flux density np v5 mp does not differ 
by more than 5%. Using this quantity alone no stream 
structure at all would be discernible! That means that 
both types of wind put identical dynamic pressure 
on any obstacle, e.g. planetary magnetospheres or 
the pouring up interstellar gas, implying important 
consequences for the 3D shape of the heliosphere as 
a whole. 

e Similarly, the total energy flux density summoned by 
the Sun in order to release the solar wind is equal 
all around the Sun. Of course, the fast flow carries 
more kinetic energy np v5 Mp, With it, but the Sun 
has to bring up much more energy np Up Gimp Ms/Rs, 
in order to lift the high density slow wind out of 
its gravitational field, and the sum of both remains 
constant. 


There is no conclusive answer yet as to whether these 
invariances happen by chance, whether they are intrinsic 
solar phenomena, or are the result of global rearrangement 
of the different flows beyond the corona. The solution of 
this problem might hold a key to the understanding of the 
corona and the generation of the solar wind . 


Solar wind streams on their way out into the 
heliosphere 

Solar wind streams and their interactions 

A fast stream may follow a slow one if the coronal hole 
boundary is inclined by some angle to the Sun’s rotation 
axis which is almost perpendicular to the equatorial plane. 
These two types of plasmas flow side by side in the first 
place, but start interacting with each other with increasing 
distance from the Sun. The Parker spiral of a fast plasma 
stream is less tightly wound up and thus pushes the 
slow plasma with the more strongly curved field lines. 
Compression and deflection of the plasma on both sides 
of the stream interface finally yields the typical profiles 
found at 1 AU as shown in figure 1. The transition from 
slow to fast flow in these corotating interaction regions 
(CIRS) now extends over some 10-30° in longitude (see 
SOLAR WIND: COROTATING INTERACTION REGIONS). In many cases, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the stream interface survives as a tangential discontinuity 
which allows us to still recognize what was originally fast 
and slow flow. The total range filled with plasma affected 
(ie. compressed and deflected) by these interactions 
amounts to some 30° at 1 AU. However, the plasma 
packed into that range stems from coronal source regions 
originally spanning some 90° in longitude! Generally, at 
about 1 AU distance from the Sun all solar wind in the 
ecliptic plane will have undergone some processing due 
to stream-stream interactions. In other words: no longer 
will there be any solar plasma in its original state, and 
primordial coronal imprints on the plasma will be lost by 
then. For this reason, one may draw a borderline between 
the inner and the outer heliosphere near 1 AU. 

At the backside of fast streams no interaction of the 
flows occurs and no CIRs develops since here the different 
Parker angles lead to a separation of the flows rather thana 
compression. The stream boundaries are found to extend 
over some 60° at 1 AU (see, e.g., the stream in figure 1 on the 
right-hand side). However, mapping back the flow to the 
Sun assuming a strictly radial flow at the locally measured 
speed, the original rectangular profile at the Sun is nicely 
reconstructed! 

At even larger distances from the Sun, the compres- 
sion waves at the CIRs steepen to finally form corotat- 
ing shock waves. There are fast forward shocks at the 
frontside, i.e. traveling to the slow wind side, and fast re- 
verse shocks traveling seemingly backward, i.e. into the 
fast wind coming from behind. Thus, the originally steep 
stream profiles are further eroded (see also the article so- 
LAR WIND: COROTATING INTERACTION REGIONS). The corotating 
shocks at CIRs, similar to transient-related interplanetary 
shock waves, can accelerate ionized particles to consider- 
able nonthermal energies, as explained in the article SOLAR 
WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES. 

Beyond several AU, the CIRs themselves interact 
and merge by a variety of processes to form merged 
interaction regions (MIRS). They may be purely corotating 
MIRs (CMIRs), or include ejecta and shocks from CMEs 
to form global MIRs (GMIRs). After all, there is an 
increasing loss of detail of the solar source conditions 
with further increasing distance from the Sun, such that 
even the signatures of the solar rotation are lost beyond 
about 40 AU. At much larger distances, by interaction with 
the local interstellar medium the solar wind undergoes 
the termination shock of the heliosphere where it is 
diverted and decelerated. This region of subsonic flow, the 
heliosheath, is separated from the impinging interstellar 
plasma at the heliopause. Inside, the solar wind flow is 
diverted into the heliotail which is many thousands of AU 
long. On the upstream side, outside the heliopause, a bow 
shock may form to divert the interstellar material around 
the heliospheric obstacle. For details see the article SOLAR 
WIND: INTERACTION WITH THE LOCAL INTERSTELLAR MEDIUM. 


Radial variations of average solar wind parameters 
The radial profiles of the basic solar wind plasma 
parameters are of special importance in that they narrow 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


down the degrees of freedom available for modeling 
solar wind expansion. In-situ measurements as close as 
0.29 AU (i.e. 60 R, from Sun center) have recently been 
complemented by optical observations from close to the 
Sun’s limb out to 32 R,. On the other hand, the Pioneer 
and Voyager spaceprobes are currently expanding our 
knowledge of heliospheric signatures to beyond 70 AU. 
In the inner heliosphere, the local properties of the flow 
and its radial expansion are basically determined by the 
coronal sources and their topology. From about 1 AU 
distance on, stream-stream interactions and local plasma 
processes begin playing a dominant role in the solar wind’s 
radial evolution. 


e The flow speed profile of the slow wind close to 
the sun has been inferred from the coronagraphs on 
SOHO: small density blobs could be traced which 
are thought to float along with the flow. It begins 
to accelerate from about 3 R, only, and by 10 R, 
it is barely faster than 250 km s-!. This profile 
is consistent with an isothermal expansion at a 
temperature of about 1.1 MK and a sonic point near 
5 Rs, in good agreement with the simple Parker 
model. There is a further speed increase of about 
50 km s~! until about 1 AU. 

e The UVCS instrument on SOHO by applying the 
Doppler dimming technique was able to determine 
the fast wind acceleration profile. This type of flow 
starts in the very low corona and attains a speed of 
300 km s~! at 3 R, and 800 km s“! at 10 R,. From 
there on it travels at constant speed. Further details 
of solar wind acceleration and expansion in the sun’s 
vicinity are found in SOLAR WIND: CORONAL ORIGINS. 

e In the outer heliosphere, the speed differences 
between fast and slow flows are wiped out, and the 
heliospheric plasma expands at an average constant 
speed of 400 to 500 km s~!. A slowdown of the solar 
wind by action of the interstellar gas has not yet been 
noted. 

e The density is consistently found to drop off as 
R~ as would be expected for a medium which 
expands spherically at constant speed. However, 
inside 1 AU the average gradient is R~*!, according 
to the mentioned speed increase of the slow wind. 
Also, there is a slight relative over-expansion of 
the slow wind (by some 10%), at the expense of a 
commensurate fast wind compression. 

e The proton flux density goes most accurately as 
R~*, on the grand average, from at least 0.3 AU 
on outward. However, inside 1 AU, the mass flux 
in fast streams grows by some 15% and decreases 
accordingly in slow wind. The conclusion is that 
flux tubes carrying the fast, low-density wind are 
compressed by some 15% in cross section by the flux 
tubes carrying the slow, high-density plasma. 

e UVCS measured strikingly large line widths of Oo 
lines in fast flow from polar coronal holes. _ If 
interpreted in terms of kinetic ion temperatures, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


values of more than 100 MK would be obtained! 
Also, there is an extreme temperature anisotropy, 
i.e. the temperature perpendicular to the magnetic 
field directions is much higher than that parallel to it. 
These findings support the concept of ion cyclotron 
heating in this type of solar wind inferred from in-situ 
observations at 0.3 AU from the Helios solar probes 

e The proton temperature in slow wind drops with 
distance from the sun as R~'*%. That is exactly 
what would be expected for an adiabatic expansion. 
Extrapolation back to the corona leads right to the 
observed coronal temperatures of about 2 x 10-6 K. 
That means that this type of solar wind escapes 
wave heating by originating from sources with 
closed magnetic fields without intense MHD-wave 
emission. In contrast, the fast wind cools off as 
RS, thus indicating substantial additional heat 
input beyond the corona due to heat conduction and 
local dissipation of convected wave energy. In the 
range between 1 and 20 AU temperature variations 
of R~°> to R~°” were reported. Apparently, that is 
a result of compression heating caused by stream- 
stream interactions. 

e The electron temperature falls off, by and large, 
significantly slower than expected for adiabatic and 
isotropic expansion. For details the reader is referred 
to SOLAR WIND: KINETIC PROPERTIES and. the specialized 
literature. 


Signatures of what is affecting the earth system 
Generally, the solar wind flow is diverted around the 
Earth by its magnetosphere which is maintained by the 
Earth’s intrinsic magnetic field (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 
EARTH). Solar wind particles cannot enter, unless there 
occurs a MAGNETIC RECONNECTION of interplanetary and 
planetary field lines. That may happen if the northward 
pointing Earth field on the front of the magnetosphere 
is hit by solar wind carrying a southward pointing 
interplanetary field. Insuch cases, significant geomagnetic 
disturbances of various kinds are initiated (see, e.g. the 
article SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: COUPLING BETWEEN SOLAR 
WIND, MAGNETOSPHERE, IONOSPHERE, AND NEUTRAL ATMOSPHERE, 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC STORMS AND SOLAR WIND 
ORIGINS and others). 

In the present context it is important to discuss by 
which means the usually radially pointing interplanetary 
field can be tilted in such an abnormal way. 


e Compression and deflection of the solar wind 
flow in CIRs has important consequences for its 
magnetic field, too. Naturally, it undergoes the 
same compression and participates in the deflection 
process. Thus, there may arise enhanced out-of the- 
ecliptic field components, particularly in the vicinity 
of magnetic sector boundaries which often happen to 
be embedded in CIRs at 1 AU. The action of potential 
magnetic reconnection is enhanced by the pressure 
pulse from the compressed plasma. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e High-speed streams are also characterized by the 
occurrence of large amplitude transverse Alfvén 
fluctuations. They are easily recognizable by large 
excursions in the directions of both the interplanetary 
magnetic field (including geo-effective southward 
excursions) and the plasma flow. The field 
magnitude and the plasma density remain about 
constant. Typical fluctuation periods at 1 AU range 
from fractions of a minute to a few hours. Probably, 
these waves are remnants from coronal activity since 
they travel outward only, without evidence for local 
damping (for details see the chapters by Roberts 
and Gurnett). There is a close correspondence 
between the southward pointing of the interplanetary 
magnetic field in the course of Alfvénic fluctuations 
and geomagnetic activity, leading to clear association 
between medium-level geomagnetic activity and 
high-speed solar wind. 


The recurrence of this particular type of geomagnetic 
activity every 27 d, ie. exactly in the rhythm of solar 
rotation, had led J Bartels to postulate the existence of 
M regions on the Sun already in the 1930s. He thought 
they were long-lived stable regions on the Sun which emit 
certain particles capable of stirring geomagnetism. After 
all, he was strikingly right except for one aspect: these M 
regions are not to be sought in active regions on the Sun, as 
he thought, but rather in the inactive parts: the M regions 
are to be associated with the coronal holes representative 
of the inactive sun, and the geomagnetism is stirred by the 
streams of high-speed plasma emanating from them. 

The major geomagnetic storms are also due to large 
southward excursions of the interplanetary field, but these 
are caused by transient processes on the Sun, e.g. coronal 
mass ejections and their interplanetary counterparts. The 
interested reader is referred to the articles on CMEs 
and geomagnetic effects, and SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: 
SPACE WEATHER PREDICTIONS. 


Slow variations during the solar activity cycle 
What does the interplanetary medium sense from changes 
in solar activity during the solar cycle? That can best be 
described using the ballerina model (figure 2). It shows 
the slightly warped heliospheric current sheet separating 
inward and outward going magnetic field lines around 
activity minimum. Starting from this state the warps in the 
skirt begin to grow with increasing activity. They finally 
break up and turn over at activity maximum. Then, the 
current sheet begins reorganizing itself according to the 
overall magnetic field of the Sun which has just undergone 
a global polarity reversal. The warping diminishes, and at 
the following minimum the ballerina skirt is flat again; just 
the magnetic polarity is reversed. Thus, a full magnetic 
cycle of the Sun (called the Hale cycle) takes 22 yr, ie. 
two activity cycles. This is described in more detail in the 
article SOLAR WIND: MAGNETIC FIELD. 

According to the structural changes of the corona, the 
solar wind also changes. The remarkably stable shapes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of both coronal holes and solar wind high-speed streams 
in the years before minimum activity are replaced by 
increasingly irregular patterns. The few remaining fast 
streams are smaller in size and amplitude, and they come 
from small, isolated, transient coronal holes. 

Almost all around the Sun now emits slow wind. 
That applies to the poles as well, as indirect measurements 
using interplanetary scintillations of radio pulsar signals 
have shown. It is hard to conceive that this can be the same 
type of slow flow as is found in the streamer sheet at solar 
minimum. This ‘maximum type’ slow solar wind is found 
to emerge from substantially larger areas often located far 
from any current sheet. It is highly variable and usually 
contains some 4% of helium, thus indicating its release 
at lower altitudes in the corona than the ‘minimum type’ 
slow wind.. 

The whole structure is additionally confused by 
abrupt disturbances due to interplanetary shock waves 
driven by CMEs. (see articles on CMEs and SOLAR WIND 
SHOCK WAVES AND DISCONTINUITIES). Naturally, the occurrence 
rate of big solar transients follows solar activity very 
closely, and one would expect to find considerable 
variations of the average solar wind’s properties going 
in parallel. It turns out, though, that this is actually not 
the case, at least not for the plane of the ecliptic where 
most long-term observations were made so far. There is 
not much change: the average speed drops from some 
500 km s~! at minimum to 400 km s~! at maximum. Other 
quantities such as particle densities, and the fluxes of mass, 
momentum, and energy are modulated by not more than 
about 20%. It is interesting to note that that they all reach 
their minima at activity maximum, despite the many CME 
and shock events at that time! 

Outside the ecliptic plane and especially at very high 
solar latitudes the solar cycle modulation can be expected 
to be completely different. At solar minimum there is 
only fast wind characterized by its high speed and very 
low density. With increasing activity and the associated 
disappearance of the polar coronal holes the share of slow 
type solar wind grows, with its high values of particle and 
mass flux densities. Thus, the modulation of the average 
solar wind properties at high latitudes is expected to be 
much more pronounced than in the ecliptic plane. We will 
certainly learn more details once the spaceprobe Ulysses 
has performed its second run across the Sun’s poles. 


Summary 

In conclusion, it can be stated that the ballerina model (see 
figure 2) as conceived in the mid-1970s describes the 3D 
heliosphere at activity minimum in connection with the 
solar corona fairly well. 

It is now well established that there are two basic 
types of quasi-steady solar wind which differ markedly by 
their main properties, the location and magnetic topology 
of their sources in the corona, and probably in their 
acceleration mechanism. Therefore, in table 2 the more 
specific values are given separately for both types: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Global Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Average solar wind parameters at 1 AU, for the time around solar activity minimum. 


Slow wind 


Fast wind 


Flow speed up 


250-400 km s~1 


400-800 km s~1 


Proton density np 10.7 em73 3.0 cem-3 

Proton flux density npup 3.7 x 108 cm~? s7! 2.0 x 10° cm~? s~! 
Proton temperature Tp 3.4 x 10*K 2.3 x 10°K 
Electron temperature T. 1.3 x 10° K 1x 10°K 


Momentum flux density 
Total energy flux density 
Helium content 

Sources 


Some further characteristics of different solar wind 
types at solar activity minimum are: 


e = The fast solar wind emerges from magnetically open 
coronal holes which are representative of the inactive 
Sun, ie. the ‘quiet’ Sun. Consistently, the ‘quiet’ 
type solar wind is found in high-speed streams. 
Although the major coronal holes usually cover the 
polar caps at latitudes beyond 40-60°, the solar wind 
emerging there over-expands significantly and fills 
up all heliosphere except for the 40° wide streamer 
belt close to the heliomagnetic equator. 

e = The slow solar wind of the minimum type originates 
from above the more active regions on the Sun. 
It is constrained to the warped streamer belt and 
comprises the large-scale heliospheric current sheet. 
The low helium content in this type of solar wind 
indicates a larger release height. It is not clear yet 
how slow solar wind can be released at all. The 
transition from closed loops down below to an open 
field topology of the free solar wind flow above 
requires some kind of reconnection, be it in a steady- 
state mode or involving transient phenomena. It 
is conceivable that the slow solar wind might be 
released in a transient mode, in analogy to water 
drops dripping from the ceiling of a limestone cavern. 
(A thorough discussion of solar wind acceleration 
processes can be found in the articles SOLAR WIND: 
THEORY and SOLAR WIND ACCELERATION.) 


Note that there is no continuous transition between these 
two types. Rather, the boundary layers between them are 
very thin close to the Sun and correspond in detail to the 
boundaries of the coronal holes. 

There are two additional types of solar wind which 
can be considered products of the active Sun rather than 
the quiet Sun: 


e the slow wind of the maximum type emerges from 
substantially larger areas distributed all over the Sun 
and often located far from any current sheet. It 
contains twice as much helium than the minimum 
type, 

e plasma clouds released in huge eruptions at the sun 
can often be discerned by the unusually high helium 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2.12 x 108 dyn cm-? 
1.55 erg cm~? s~ 
2.5%, variable 
Streamer belt 


2.26 x 108 dyn cm-? 
1.43 erg cem~* s~1 
3.6%, stationary 
Coronal holes 


1 


percentages (up to some 30%) and other signatures 
(see the article SOLAR WIND: MANIFESTATIONS OF SOLAR 
activity). Around activity maximum, these clouds 
contribute about 10% to the total solar wind flow, on 
the average. 


In conclusion, it is only fair to state that for none of 
the mentioned types of solar wind is there a unique and 
generally accepted theoretical model. At present, existing 
theories are highly controversial. For example, an exciting 
alternative model for generating the fast or even all solar 
wind is acceleration in the form of numerous smallest- 
scale high-velocity jets (other terms in use: microflares, 
nanoflares, coronal bullets) that were discovered in very 
high resolution UV observations of the Sun (see TRANSITION 
REGION: EXPLOSIVE EVENTS). Apparently, such a model is in 
extreme contrast to Parker’s classical thermal expansion 
model and its derivatives. This clearly illustrates that the 
understanding of solar wind acceleration is not yet on firm 
ground, and further research is needed. 


Bibliography 

Burlaga L F 1995 Interplanetary Magnetohydrodynamics 
(New York: Oxford University Press) 

Cravens T E 1977 Physics of Solar System Plasmas 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Golub L and Pasachoff J M 1997 The Solar Corona 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Schwenn Rand Marsch E (ed) 1990/1991 Physics of the Inner 
Heliosphere vols I and II (Berlin: Springer) 

Vial J C, Bocchialini K and Boumier P (ed) 1998 Space Solar 
Physics (Lecture Notes in Physics) (Berlin: Springer) 


Rainer Schwenn 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


Cometary plasma tails are formed by the interaction of 
solar wind plasma with ionized gaseous material from a 
cometary nucleus over large volumes of space. The elec- 
tromagnetic interaction proceeds as mass is added into, 
and slows, the solar wind flow near the comet. 

The concept of a continuously flowing, but gusty, 
solar wind was postulated in the 1950s by Biermann to 
explain observations of cometary plasma tails. These 
spectacular tails are one of two effects of the solar wind 
that can be seen from the Earth’s surface, the other being 
Earth’s aurorae. Plasma tails were observed to point 
away from the Sun, with a small aberration angle due to 
the comet’s orbital speed. Early theories included only 
the effects of solar wind particles, which proved to be 
inadequate, but later the crucial role of the magnetic 
field, frozen into the flow, was realized by Alfvén. The 
field should drape around an active cometary coma, ulti- 
mately forming the tail. 

The earliest space probes confirmed the existence of 
both the solar wind itself and its magnetic field, frozen in 
to the highly conducting, radially flowing plasma at the 
Sun, but direct cometary exploration by spacecraft did 
not occur until the mid-1980s. So far four COMETS have 
been explored at close range with instrumentation to 
study the solar wind interaction: Giacobini—Zinner (by 
NASA’s ICE in 1985), Halley (by ESA’s cGlorro, Russia’s 
Vega 1 and 2 and the Japanese SUISEI and SAKIGAKE in 
1986), Grigg-Skjellerup (by ESA’s Giotto in 1992) and 
Borrelly (by NASA’s DEEP SPACE 1 (DS1) in 2001). In addi- 
tion, the Ulysses spacecraft encountered the distant (3.8 
AU) tail of COMET HYAKUTAKE in 1996. 

We now know that the interaction of a comet with the 
solar wind is quite different to that of a magnetized plan- 
et. As a comet approaches the Sun in its orbit, neutral 
atoms and molecules sublime away from the icy cometary 
nucleus, taking dust with the expanding flow of gas. The 
neutral atoms and molecules are ionized, on a timescale 
longer than a week, by sunlight or by charge exchange 
with the solar wind. Following ionization they interact 
with the electric and magnetic fields in the solar wind, 
slowing the flow. The solar wind drapes around the 
cometary nucleus, ultimately forming the comet’s plasma 
tail. The solar wind interaction is thus quite different to 
that of a magnetized planet, where a magnetopause forms 
a blunt obstacle in the supersonic solar wind flow. These 
general concepts, which were predicted prior to cometary 
encounters by spacecraft, have been confirmed by space- 
craft observations. Although many aspects of the interac- 
tion process have been elucidated, others are not yet 
understood and many unexpected results were gained. 
These are left as problems for future space missions. 

Here we describe the evolution of the solar wind 
interaction with a comet as it nears the Sun, how parti- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


cles are ionized and how they interact with the highly 
conducting solar wind plasma. We consider the expected 
boundaries and plasma regions in the solar wind-comet 
interaction together with the physical processes which 
are involved and the results from the cometary space 
missions of the mid-1990s. We then look at the outstand- 
ing problems for future space missions in this area. 


Gas emission from comets 

As well as the properties of the solar wind itself, the gas 
production rate of the comet is a vital parameter which 
determines the size and nature of the comet-solar wind 
interaction region. During the approach of a comet 
towards the Sun, the gas production rate increases owing 
to the increased surface temperature and the interaction 
changes from that of a bare nucleus to the fully developed 
coma structure. Also, different comets have different gas 
production rates, for example the production rates of 
Grige—Skjellerup, Giacobini—Zinner and Halley were in a 
ratio of approximately 1:10:100 at the times of the encoun- 
ters; for Halley the rate was 6.9x1029 molecules s-!, corre- 
sponding to about 20 t s-l. The Borrelly production rate 
was comparable with that of Giacobini— Zinner. 

At distances greater than approximately 3 AU from 
the Sun the surface of a cometary nucleus is cold and no 
gas emission occurs. The bare nucleus interacts with the 
solar wind in the same way as unmagnetized, inactive 
asteroids or moons. A wake is formed behind the nucle- 
us devoid of ions, assuming that the nucleus size is larg- 
er than or comparable with the solar wind ion gyrora- 
dius. The more mobile electrons set up potential struc- 
tures which close the wake and may charge the night 
side of the nucleus, producing potentials of volts to kilo- 
volts. The solar wind particles ram straight into the 
cometary nucleus, perhaps affecting the surface layers, 
while the solar wind magnetic field diffuses rapidly 
through the object. On the side of the nucleus facing the 
Sun, sputtering processes due to the incoming solar wind 
ions may produce neutral particles which move away 
from the comet perhaps to be ionized and picked up by 
the solar wind. 

As the comet approaches the Sun more closely, sub- 
limation processes begin to produce an outflow of gas. 
The species driven away and the rates at which this hap- 
pens depend critically on the surface temperature and 
therefore the position in the orbit. A dense ‘ionosphere’ 
forms near to the comet, bounded by a contact surface. 
New, ‘pick-up’ ions are produced on a much larger dis- 
tance scale of ~106 km, forming an enormous region over 
which the comet-solar wind interaction occurs. The new 
ions form an electromagnetically unstable population in 
the flowing solar wind. The solar wind is slowed, form- 
ing a bow shock and several other features. The interac- 
tion of a comet with the solar wind at large and small 
heliocentric distances is shown in figure 1. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Giotte-JPA IIS data 
Pp 


20:00 ae oa a4-00 
Tima (SCET) 1986 Dey @72 to @73 

Figure 2. Summary of the Johnstone Plasma Analyser (JPA) 
Implanted Ion Spectrometer (IIS) results from Giotto covering 
1.5 million kilometers each side of comet Halley, with closest 
approach at 00:03 spacecraft event time (SCET). The three pan- 
els show different look directions of the instrument, and in each 
panel the color scale shows number of particles. The solar wind 
is the lower trace in each panel, below 1 keV and decreasing in 
energy closer to the comet. The upper traces, at over 10 keV but 
decreasing closer, are the cometary water group ions. The num- 
ber of cometary ions increases nearer to the comet and the solar 
wind slows, illustrating the interaction process. The bow shock 
is seen at ~19:35 inbound and ~02:45-03:15 outbound. 


The Borrelly results in particular contain what may 
be evidence for an extended although well-defined 
source of neutral particles in the cometary coma, and an 
association with dust/gas jets from the nucleus is being 
sought. The observation in the plasma data, which leads 
to this tentative conclusion, was of a significant asymme- 
try in the cometary ion spectra in the interaction region. 
However, it is not clear why this should be much more 
pronounced at Borrelly than at the earlier cometary 
encounters. 


LOW ACTIVITY 


Ionization and interaction with the solar wind 
Before the encounters with any comets by spacecraft, the 
process of ion pick-up and implantation into the solar 
wind flow, which loads the flow with additional mass, 
was expected to be the key to the comet-solar wind inter- 
action. Following the spacecraft encounters, the impor- 
tance of pick-up ions has been confirmed (e.g. figure 2) 
and we now have a better understanding of the 
wave-particle interactions, particle distributions and 
wave properties which are key features of the decelera- 
tion of the solar wind in the cometary environment. 

When a cometary neutral atom or molecule is ion- 
ized, it immediately responds to the electric and magnet- 
ic fields in the solar wind. In real space its path follows a 
cycloid; the exact form depends on the relative orienta- 
tion between the solar wind velocity and the magnetic 
field. In its simplest form, where the electric and magnet- 
ic fields are perpendicular, the path is analogous to that of 
the valve ona bicycle wheel: rotation around the magnet- 
ic field (axle) superimposed with a drift speed (along the 
ground) given by ExB/B2. In velocity space, which uses 
velocities rather than distances as coordinates, this corre- 
sponds to a ring distribution. Because the ring distribu- 
tion is unstable, plasma waves are produced. 

Prior to the spacecraft encounters, it was expected 
that particles would scatter in pitch angle to form a shell 
distribution from the ring as the instabilities developed, 
and a first look at the data from Vega, Suisei and Giotto 
confirmed this. For a ring distribution, the maximum 
energy of a pick-up ion in the comet frame is 
2MVgw2sin2t, where m is the picup ion mass in amu, Vy 
is the solar wind speed and t is the angle between the 
solar wind and magnetic field vectors. This compares 
with a maximum of 2mv,,2 for a shell distribution. Note 
that, for an average solar wind energy of 1 keV, and for 
ions of mass 18 (H2O+), the maximum shell energy is 72 


HIGH ACTIVITY 
cata cia 


or tonopaune (de~ 2ALI} 


Figure 1. Comet-solar wind interaction (a) at large heliospheric distances (low activity) and (b) closer to the Sun (high activity). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Velocity space diagram illustrating the ion pick-up 
process. Particles scatter from the original ring RR (onto the 
bispherical shell BD, due to interactions with upstream (B) and 
downstream (D) propagating waves. 


3.89 x 106 km 
0819 SCET 


104 190°? 


Power Spectral Density ((nT)2m) 


108 


104 


keV. The Giotto HS covered from 70 to 85 keV in order to 
cover fully the bulk of the pick-up ion distribution. 
Sensors on Suisei, Vega and ICE could only measure part 
of the pick-up ion distribution, in the last case only the 
high-energy tail. 

From the shell, velocity diffusion was expected to 
broaden the shell in energy. Given enough time, a 
Maxwellian would finally be produced. Results from 
Giotto show that this later stage may only be approached 
in the very inner regions of COMET HALLEY. 

More accurate theory reveals that simple shells are 
an approximation because the energy of the waves and 
the energy lost by the particles must be taken into 
account and energy must be conserved. This led to the 
idea of a ’bispherical shell’ distribution for the cometary 
ions, which was subsequently confirmed in the data 
from Halley. The situation is illustrated in figure 3, 
where the scattering of particles in pitch angle from the 
ring R onto the spherical arcs RB and RD can be seen. In 
these cases, energy from the particle distribution goes 
into plasma waves. These ideas have been developed 
further in simulations and models; in particular, a 
bispherical model was used to predict the wave spec- 
trum successfully and to compare the energy available 


1.87 x 108 tan 


107 


198 


10° 


108 108 10@ 


to? 


Wavenumber (m1) 


Figure 4. Observed (full curve) and predicted (broken curves) magnetic wave power spectra at different distances from comet Halley. 
The predictions are made using a bispherical shell model and the resonance of particles with different wave frequencies depending 


on their position on the shell, with no parameters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1.. Summary of observed boundary crossings at comets. 


Comet Giacobini-Zinner Halley Grigg—Skjellerup 
ICE V1 v2 Suisei Giotto Giotto 
Bow shock Y x x Y Y v 
Mystery boundary ? ? ? ts Y ¥ 
Cometopause — — ¥ — — — 
Magnetic pileup boundary — N N — Y Y¥ 
Discontinuities _ _ — — Y = 
Ion pileup boundary = Y Y = Y ? 
Cavity boundary — — — — Y — 


from the ring distribution with the energy released and 
the energy in the waves. In this elegant model, produced 
by Huddleston and Johnstone in 1992, particles at dif- 
ferent positions on the shells resonate with specific fre- 
quencies of plasma waves and this can explain the 
observations without the need for further parameters in 
the theory (see figure 4). 

From the Giotto data at comet Halley, well upstream 
of Halley the cometary ion distributions were found to 
follow the ring prediction, while closer to the comet the 
distributions were more shell like. The velocity distribu- 
tions in the solar wind frame show a small amount of 
acceleration in the upstream region, significant enough 
to be seen by the energetic particle instrument, but the 
most significant acceleration was seen downstream of 
the cometary bow shock. The bulk velocity of the pick-up 
heavy ion population was found to be consistent with 
bispherical distributions in the region of the shock, 
despite the particle acceleration seen in that region. 

In the case of comet Grigg-Skjellerup, it was shown 
that the ion distributions were ring like almost up to the 
bow shock, except that one-sided distributions were 
seen for a time outbound. Non-gyrotropic distributions 
were found particularly in the inner regions at 
Grigg—Skjellerup, owing to the different ion implanta- 
tion rates between adjacent cusps of the cycloid in those 
regions. This can cause additional instabilities to oper- 
ate. 

One of the most dramatic features in the 
Grigg—Skjellerup results was the existence of large ampli- 
tude waves in the magnetic field and modulations of the 
particle distributions. It is thought that this is due to the 
textbook conditions of the encounter, as the solar wind 
velocity and magnetic field were mutually perpendicular 
at the time of encounter. 

Mass loading by cometary ions was predicted and 
observed at comets. Models for the deceleration were 
compared with the measurements at comet Halley and 
good agreement was found. 

Comet-associated energetic ions beyond the pick-up 
prediction had not been expected at comets, except in 
one paper immediately before the 1980s encounters. 
However, they were seen at all of the comets visited so 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


far (except Borrelly as DS1 had no energetic ion detector) 
and mechanisms have been suggested for their accelera- 
tion. These included adiabatic acceleration, the interac- 
tion of ions with waves across a sharp gradient in solar 
wind flow speed (Fermi I) or the interaction with 
upstream and downstream propagating waves (Fermi 
Il). The form of the bulk of the cometary ion distribution 
function depends on the point in the mass-loaded flow at 
which the observation is made. Well upstream of the 
comet the one-dimensional distribution function is a 
delta function modified on the low energy side owing to 
the bispherical distributions. Closer to the comet, where 
the solar wind speed is lower and some mass loading has 
occurred, the distribution is modified both by the slow- 
ing solar wind and by adiabatic acceleration. 
Downstream of the bow shock, two populations are 
found owing to the velocity jump across the shock. All of 
these distributions are further modified by the Fermi I or 
II processes. Comparison of models with data showed 
that Fermi II alone may not be sufficient to explain the 
Halley observation. The proportion of downstream prop- 
agating waves was larger than expected, which may 
account for some additional acceleration. Additional 
energy may go into particle acceleration from the solar 
wind deceleration. 


Boundaries and regions in the comet-solar wind 
interaction 
Two boundaries in the mass-loaded flow were expected 
in the 1970s and 1980s by workers including Wallis, 
Biermann and Schmidt, separating plasmas with differ- 
ent properties. These were the bow shock and the contact 
surface. The reality turned out to be much more complex 
with several new boundaries seen by the spacecraft. 
Figure 5 is a schematic diagram which shows the 
trajectories and boundary observations of all the 
cometary encounters so far (except Borrelly as no peer- 
reviewed papers have appeared thus far). As mentioned 
above, the bow shock and cavity boundary were the only 
boundaries predicted to form prior to the spacecraft 
encounters. The data have added at least four additional 
features: the mystery boundary, the cometopause, the 
magnetic pile-up boundary (MPB) and the ion pileup 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Schematic of the comet-solar wind interaction, with 
spacecraft trajectories and boundary crossings. For comparison, 
the DS1 Borrelly encounter was similar to the GEM 
(Grigg—Skjellerup) geometry. 


boundary (IPB). The observations are summarized in 
table 1. We will now discuss each of the boundaries in 
turn. 


Bow shock 

he bow shock was one of the predicted boundaries in the 
comet-solar wind interaction region. In the predictions, 
the mean molecular weight of the flow reached a critical 
value of 4/3 in the first simple one-dimensional model 
before a strong singularity, the bow shock, occurred. In 
more realistic two- and three-dimensional simulations a 
weak bow shock forms at a value lower than 4/3, depen- 
dent on the gas production rate. The Mach numbers of 
these weak shocks were approximately 2. 

Observations at comets showed that this boundary 
was present at all of the spacecraft encounters but its 
properties changed dramatically between crossings at 
the same comet depending on the interplanetary mag- 
netic field orientation. In all cases the cometary ions 
dominated the dynamics in terms of pressure. The 
width of the feature varied from a few water group ion 
gyroradii in the quasi-perpendicular case to many 
gyroradii in the quasi-parallel case. Where sufficient 
data were available, the bow shock was shown to occur 
at the predicted point in the mass-loaded flow. Also, 
the Mach number of the features between 1 and 2 sup- 
ported the interpretation of a weak bow shock. The 
various particle populations (electrons, protons, alpha 
particles, cometary water ions) also increased in tem- 
perature across the boundary. While there is some evi- 
dence that the GZ data can be explained in terms of a 
reforming shocklet model and the Suisei and 
Giotto-Halley inbound data could have been affected 
by interplanetary disturbances, there is broad agree- 
ment that the boundary seen in the various cases was a 
bow shock. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Mystery boundary 

One of the dramatic plasma discoveries at comet Halley 
was the clear bifurcation of the cometary ion peak in the 
‘cometosheath’ region between the bow shock and con- 
tact surface. The explanation for the bifurcation has 
already been alluded to, namely the different velocities 
either side of the bow shock which give different pick-up 
shell radii. However, this does not explain the very sud- 
denly enhanced splitting of the water group ion popula- 
tion which occurs at approximately 500000 km from the 
nucleus caused by a change in solar wind velocity there. 
This boundary, called the mystery boundary as its origin 
is still not understood, is also characterized as the end of 
a region of significantly enhanced densities of hot 
(0.8-3.6 keV) electrons. The mystery boundary also ends 
a region of higher solar wind density and velocity, and 
following the boundary the number of ions in the ram 
direction increases sharply. There is no strong effect in 
the magnetic field to match these sharp and significant 
features in the plasma data. 

The boundary is still present on the outbound pass 
(although suitable electron data are not available) and 
also appears to be at comet Grigg-Skjellerup. Also, it has 
been argued that comparable boundaries were also 
observed by Vega, Suisei and ICE. However, it is not pre- 
sent in any of the MHD or multifluid models and its ori- 
gin has still not been explained. Although the boundary 
itself is still a mystery, it is conceivable that the increased 
numbers of hot electrons in the region it bounds could 
play a role in the x-ray emission from comets discovered 
in the 1990s. 


Cometopause 

Analysis of the data from Vega-2 has shown the existence 
of a relatively sharp boundary some 160000 km from 
comet Halley separating regions of different chemical 
composition, according to measurements in the ram 
direction. In these data the protons showed a sudden 
decrease in density and the cometary ion density also 
suddenly increased, as seen in the ram direction. In addi- 
tion, the proton velocity and water group velocity was 
quite different each side of the transition. It was suggest- 
ed that the cometopause is a permanent boundary in the 
comet-solar wind interaction. The analysis of Giotto data 
from a similar region revealed a much broader transition 
between a mass-loaded solar wind region and a heavy 
ion dominated region with no significant velocity differ- 
ence. 

In this region it is certainly clear that charge 
exchange collisions are becoming more important, which 
would give a shift from a solar wind dominated flow to 
cometary ion domination. This is the physics which has 
been put forward to explain the cometopause transition 
but it remains to be explained why the transition was 
seen to occur more rapidly on Vega than Giotto. A sharp 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


boundary is not predicted by models and one possibility 
is that a convected change of interplanetary conditions 
could explain the Vega observations. 


Magnetic Pile-up Boundary (MPB) 
In the Giotto data, it is more widely accepted that a sep- 
arate MPB is seen some 45000 km or 11 min later than the 
cometopause. The main characteristics of this boundary 
on the inbound pass were a sudden magnetic field jump 
(tangential discontinuity), a slowing and reduction of 
electron density and a decrease in the electron perpen- 
dicular pressure. A dramatic increase in the rate of charge 
exchange and a proton density decrease was also seen. 
There are signs of a similar boundary outbound in the 
magnetometer data. This boundary, inside which the 
magnetic field drapes strongly around the contact sur- 
face, was not predicted by models and, interestingly, was 
absent in the Vega data at comet Halley. This, and the 
observation that the cometary ion density shows no sig- 
nificant discontinuity, has led some to speculate a solar 
wind origin while others have postulated that on the 
night side it becomes the plasma tail boundary. 

An MPB was also observed at Grigg—Skjellerup; in 
the magnetic field, electron and ion data. 


Discontinuities X, X’, Y and Z 

Three additional boundaries have been pointed out in 
the Giotto data between the MPB and the IPB, called X, Y 
and Z. Discontinuity X is in a region where cometary 
ions are gradually being lost by charge exchange; there is 
also a sudden, significant drop in proton density there. A 
similar boundary X’ occurs a little later. Transition Y is 
the start of a sharp decrease in ion temperature. 
Discontinuity Z, 4 min before closest approach, marks 
the transition from radial outward flow of cometary ions 
away from the nucleus to stagnant plasma. 


Ion Pile-up Boundary (IPB) 

In the Giotto data at approximately 10000 km, a signifi- 
cant unexpected peak in counts was found. The gradient 
of the log count rate changed from r-! (inside) to r 
(outside). This can be interpreted as the limit of ionos- 
pheric plasma. A magnetic field maximum also 
appeared at this point. In this region, significant chemi- 
cal changes are occurring, for example the fraction of the 
H3O0+ ion became dominant close to this point. This 
boundary was also seen by the Vega probes at comet 
Halley. It was not predicted in models and it remains the 
most significant deviation from these models in the 
inner regions. 

The early interpretations of this region, including 
temporal effects in the neutral gas, change of upstream 
solar wind parameters and local electron impact ioniza- 
tion, were all rejected in favor of a reduction of the rate of 
recombination of ions and electrons caused by increased 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


electron temperature. Observations and theory now back 
up this explanation. 


Cavity boundary 

Giotto was the only spacecraft to cross the expected cav- 
ity boundary; nevertheless, it is reasonable to suppose 
that this is one of the permanent boundaries in the 
comet-solar wind interaction. The Giotto observations 
showed that the magnetic field was excluded from the 
cavity, and the boundary itself was approximately 25 km 
wide. Near the cavity boundary, bursts of ions were seen. 
The position of the boundary can be understood by a bal- 
ance between inward magnetic gradient forces and out- 
ward ion-neutral drag. The pile-up of ions just inside the 
cavity boundary was predicted by models and this per- 
haps plays the role of the inner shock, a long-predicted 
structure in the inner coma. Inside the cavity boundary 
the cometary plasma is stagnant. 

One interesting feature discovered in the inner 
regions was the existence of negative ions. The density 
variation with distance is steeper inside the cavity 
boundary compared with outside, and the existence of 
these ions was not predicted by models. What is now 
clear is that their existence is an important clue to the 
photochemical processes at work. 


Remote observations 

While spacecraft encounters have added immensely to 
our knowledge of the comet-solar wind interaction, 
there is still a vital role for remote studies of comets from 
the ground and from space. From the ground it is possi- 
ble to use the plasma tail of any comet as a probe of the 
solar wind. Study of tail features such as kinks and knots 
can reveal the solar wind speed. In particular, disconnec- 
tion events, where the plasma tail is removed from a 
comet and a new one forms, can be used to infer the pres- 
ence of discontinuities in the solar wind. One of the curi- 
ous features is the formation of rays in the cometary 
coma. It is still not clear precisely what relation this bears 
to tail formation and to the in situ results. 

Composition may also be studied from the ground; 
indeed, one of the early discoveries was that the blue 
color of a plasma tail is due to emission mainly from the 
CO* ion. Many other species were found from telescopic 
measurements and confirmed by in situ measurements. 

The use of different wavelengths has also revealed 
new features. The discovery of x-ray emission from 
Comet Hyukatake, and subsequently also from 
Hale-Bopp and Encke, using the Rosat satellite, has 
shown that unexpected discoveries are still possible from 
remote observations. Several mechanisms have been 
suggested for the emission but the most likely appears to 
be that the x-rays are from the decay of excited states 
formed as a result of charge exchange between heavy 
solar wind ions and cometary ions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Comets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The 1996 discovery, made using the Ulysses space- 
craft, that the ion tail of comet Hyukatake was at least 3.8 
AU long opens up a new area of remote observations of 
comets using particles and fields instruments on inter- 
planetary spacecraft. Associations of magnetic signatures 
in Pioneer Venus Orbiter (PVO) data with an unknown 
comet had in fact already been made using data from 
1982. This was the largest of other similar signatures 
from PVO and other spacecraft, and searches of data 
from other interplanetary spacecraft are in progress for 
this type of event. However, the Ulysses-Hyakutake 
event is unique in that there was a clear association with 
a comet and there were also indications of cometary ions 
even at that large distance. 


Outstanding problems 

It is clear that the solar wind interaction with a comet is 
radically different to that with a magnetized planet. An 
induced magnetosphere forms, owing to the implanted 
cometary ions loading the flow over vast regions of space 
and causing the draping of magnetic field within the 
extended ‘obstacle’. The unstable implanted ion distribu- 
tions cause plasma waves, which scatter the ions to form 
a bispherical distribution in velocity space. Particle accel- 
eration is caused by wave-—particle interactions in the dis- 
turbed cometary environment. Non-gyrotropy of the ion 
distributions is significant where the ion implantation 
rate varies significantly over the cycloid. This is particu- 
larly relevant at small, or weakly outgassing, comets. 

Of the various boundaries observed in the interac- 
tion region, only the bow shock and contact surface were 
predicted. These were confirmed as permanent features 
of the developed solar wind interaction. Other perma- 
nent boundaries are the mystery boundary and the IPB. 
Other boundaries, which may not be permanent, are the 
cometopause and the MPBs. Although the latter was 
seen both at Halley and Grigg-Skjellerup it was absent 
during the Vega flybys of Halley and hence it may not be 
permanent. 

The encounters thus far have left us with a number 
of intriguing questions about the areas they visited, 
including the following. How important is the Fermi I 
mechanism in particle acceleration? Is the inner shock 
really a layer just inside the cavity boundary? How per- 
manent are the boundaries in the comet-solar wind 
interaction, and what is their formation mechanism? 
How does the cometary plasma tail form and what is the 
importance of tail rays? Could the mystery region hot 
electrons cause x-ray emission in the cometary environ- 
ment? 

There are also significant questions about the 
regions not visited, or only fleetingly sampled, so far. 
These include many features of the cometary ionosphere, 
photochemical interactions and the formation of nega- 
tive ions, the exploration of the tail formation region, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


dependence of features on gas production rate as the 
comet approaches the Sun, the role of reconnection in the 
interaction processes and the dependence on different 
solar wind conditions. Some of these questions should be 
answered by ESA’s ROSETTA mission which will ren- 
dezvous with comet Wirtanen in 2011 and fly with the 
comet as it nears the Sun and its activity develops. At 
present this is the only planned mission with suitable 
instrumentation to explore further the solar wind—comet 
interaction. 


Bibliography 

1991 Cometary Plasma Processes (Geophysical Monograph 
61) (Washington, DC: American Geophysical 
Union) 

1993 Giotto’s encounter with comet Grigg-Skjellerup J. 
Geophys. Res. Space Physics 98 (A12) (special issue) 

Grewing M, Praderie F and Reinhard R (ed) 1987 
Exploration of Halley’s comet (Heidelberg: Springer) 
(reprinted from 1987 Astron. Astrophys. 187 (1 and 2) 

Neugebauer M 1990 Spacecraft observations of the inter- 
action of active comets with the solar wind Rev. 
Geophys. 28 231-52 

Newburn R L Jr, Neugebauer M and Rahe J (ed) 1991 
Comets in the Post-Halley Era (Dodrecht: Kluwer) 


Andrew Coates 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local 
Interstellar Medium 


The solar wind forms a bubble, called the heliosphere, 
in the local interstellar medium (LISM), within which 
the solar system resides and whose size and properties 
are determined by the manner in which the solar wind 
plasma and the partially ionized LISM are coupled. 
In the last decade, great progress has been made in 
our understanding of the physical processes thought to 
describe the outer heliosphere. Fundamental to these 
advances has been the recognition that the interstellar 
medium is coupled intimately to the heliosphere itself 
and that much of outer heliospheric physics cannot 
be understood independently of the local interstellar 
medium. With the possibility that the aging spacecraft 
Voyager 1,2 and Pioneer 10,11 might encounter the 
heliospheric boundaries in the not too distant future, 
interest in the far outer reaches of our solar system and 
the LISM has been rekindled (see also PIONEER MISSIONS, 
VOYAGER MISSION). A convenient, if slightly vague, definition 
of the outer heliosphere, and one that is adopted here, 
is that it is that region of the solar wind influenced 
dynamically by physical processes associated with the 
LISM. Thus, for example, neutral interstellar hydrogen 
is the dominant (by mass) constituent of the solar 
wind beyond an ionization cavity of ~6-10 astronomical 
units (AU) in the upstream direction (the direction 
antiparallel to the incident interstellar wind). The neutral 
hydrogen is coupled weakly to the solar wind plasma 
via resonant charge exchange—a coupling which leads to 
the production of pick-up ions that come to dominate the 
internal energy of the solar wind. The solar wind changes 
then from a small plasma beta Bsw (the ratio of plasma 
pressure to magnetic field pressure) environment to one 
in which Bow > 3. 

Figure 1 shows the complex interaction between so- 
lar wind plasma and the LISM. While clearly simplistic, it 
serves to illustrate the primary physical processes. The in- 
terstellar plasma may or may not impinge supersonically 
on the heliosphere. The LISM flow is diverted about the 
heliospheric obstacle either adiabatically or by a bow shock 
(BS). The LISM plasma is coupled to the neutral interstellar 
hydrogen (H) primarily through charge exchange. Charge 
exchange corresponds to a neutral atom surrendering an 
electron to a passing ion (typically a proton), so creating a 
new charged particle and (a hydrogen) atom. Thus, when 
neutral H charge exchanges with LISM plasma that has 
been decelerated, heated and diverted about the helio- 
sphere, the neutral H acquires a subpopulation that too 
is heated, decelerated and diverted. This neutral hydro- 
gen, together with the LISM H, is called component 1 and 
is created in region 1 of figure 1. If the charge exchange 
mean free path is sufficiently small in the region of decel- 
erated LISM flow, a ‘wall’ of neutral hydrogen will form 
in the upstream direction (the hydrogen wall). This is be- 
cause resonant charge exchange is essentially a scattering 
rather than an extinction process. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


BS(?) - 


\ Region 3 


—_ 


Figure 1. Schematic of the solar wind-local interstellar medium 
(LISM) boundary regions which act as neutral hydrogen sources 
whose characteristics are identifiably distinct. The solar wind is 
enclosed by the termination shock (the curve labelled TS) and is 
identified as region 3, the shocked solar wind, the heliosheath, is 
bounded by the termination shock (TS) and the heliopause (HP) 
and is identified as region 2, while the interstellar medium is 
found beyond the heliopause. The interstellar medium may or 
may not form a bow shock (BS) depending on whether the 
interstellar flow velocity Viism is supersonic. The radial solar 
wind flow vector is denoted by Vsw. 


A boundary, called the heliopause, separates the 
heliosphere and the LISM plasma, and is either a contact 
or a tangential discontinuity. The supersonic solar wind 
is decelerated, diverted and heated by a reverse shock 
called the termination shock (TS). (See the accompanying 
article On SOLAR WIND SHOCK WAVES AND DISCONTINUITIES by R. 
Lepping for definitions of terms related to hydrodynamic 
and MHD discontinuities.) The location of the termination 
shock is determined by the steady and temporal solar wind 
pressure exerted on the LISM. 

Neutral interstellar hydrogen that crosses the he- 
liopause into the heliosphere can also experience charge 
exchange. Neutral H atoms that are created by charge ex- 
change with the very hot subsonic plasma downstream 
of the heliospheric termination shock possess thermody- 
namic attributes that correspond to their origin, ie. very 
hot (~10° K) with an outwardly directed velocity compo- 
nent. This population of neutral atoms is called compo- 
nent 2, is created in region 2 (figure 1), and it streams away 
from the heliosphere and is quite distinguishable from 
component 1. By means of secondary charge exchange 
with the LISM plasma, component 2 acts to transport heat 
from the heliosheath (the region located between the he- 
liospheric termination shock and the heliopause) into the 
LISM and this leads to an increase in the LISM tempera- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ture in the immediate vicinity of the heliopause. The final 
neutral component, component 3, possesses characteris- 
tics quite distinct from the other two components and has 
its origin in the supersonic solar wind (region 3, figure 1). 
Component 3 has large outward radial velocities and rel- 
atively low temperatures but is dynamically unimportant 
owing to its very low energy density. 

The ions born of charge exchange in the supersonic 
solar wind, the pick-up ions, are, however, of considerable 
dynamical importance since they remove both momentum 
and energy from the bulk solar wind flow. The solar 
wind is decelerated, so reducing the ram pressure and 
hence the expected size of the heliospheric cavity, and the 
solar wind acquires a tenuous non-thermalized population 
of suprathermal ions (typical energies ~1 keV). The 
initial pick-up ion population is unstable, generating low- 
frequency magnetic turbulence which can scatter both 
pick-up ions and cosmic rays. Some fraction of the pick-up 
ions is further energized, possibly by shock acceleration, 
to form the anomalous cosmic ray component, although 
the precise injection mechanism awaits clarification. 

Clearly, a heliosphere mediated by neutral interstellar 
hydrogen possesses qualities that are likely to be very 
different from a heliosphere in which the role of neutral 
hydrogen is neglected. Below, we shall concentrate 
primarily on global models of the heliosphere in which 
interstellar neutral hydrogen is accounted for self- 
consistently. It should be noted that LISM conditions were 
very different in the past than they are at present (and 
indeed will be in the future) and thus the structure of the 
heliosphere may have been very different from the models 
discussed here. 

The material presented here has been reviewed 
extensively by Holzer (1979) and Zank (1999) and the 
reader is referred to these works for more detail and an 
extended bibliography. 


The local interstellar medium 

Many of the pertinent physical parameters of the LISM are 
poorly constrained and so, by implication, the detailed 
solar wind-LISM interaction is not yet well understood. 
Our best inferences about the LISM flow velocity and 
temperature have been made from observations of neutral 
interstellar hydrogen (H) and helium (He) within the 
heliosphere, using either resonantly scattered solar UV 
light techniques (since H atoms in the heliosphere are 
illuminated by the Sun in the HI resonance line, i.e. the 
Lyman-a line) or in situ spacecraft measurements of the 
He distribution. The bulk velocity of the LISM flow 
is ~26 km s~! and the plasma temperature is ~8000 K. 
The H and H* number densities are not well determined, 
although approximate limits can be derived. For HI (i.e. 
neutral H only), number densities lie in the range of ~0.15- 
0.34 cm~%, while for H II (ionized H), the range is ~0.03- 
0.14 cm-3, depending on whether the EUV radiation field 
is included or not. This leads to a limit on the total number 
density of both neutral and ionized interstellar hydrogen 
in the range ~0.15-0.34 cm~?. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Although most models assume that the relative 
motion of the heliosphere through the interstellar medium 
is supersonic, it is by no means clear that such an 
assumption is completely warranted. Our knowledge 
of both the local interstellar magnetic field strength and 
orientation and the energy density in interstellar cosmic 
rays is somewhat rudimentary. Cosmic rays with energies 
of 300 MeV/nucleon and less may contribute ~(3 + 2) x 
10-8 dyn cm~, which can yield an interstellar flow that 
is subsonic. The magnetic field orientation appears to be 
perpendicular to the interstellar flow velocity vector and 
estimates for the magnetic field strength range from ~1.3-— 
2 uG. 

Evidently, our knowledge about important LISM 
plasma and neutral H parameters is rather poor and this 
must therefore be taken into account when evaluating 
models of the global heliosphere. Nonetheless, the basic 
underlying physical processes appear to be reasonably 
well understood. 


Global heliospheric structure 

The dynamical or ram pressure (given by pu”, p being 
the fluid mass density and u the flow speed) and thermal 
pressure p of the solar wind decrease with increasing 
heliocentric distance and must reach a value which 
eventually balances the pressure exerted by the LISM. 
The relaxation towards pressure equilibrium between the 
solar and interstellar plasmas is characterized by (a) a 
transition of the supersonic solar wind flow to a subsonic 
state, and (b) a divergence of the interstellar flow about 
the heliospheric obstacle. The transition of the supersonic 
solar wind is most likely accomplished by means of a shock 
transition, the termination shock (denoted by TS), and 
it is anticipated that at least the Voyager spacecraft will 
encounter this boundary in the early twenty-first century. 
The divergence of the LISM flow about the heliosphere 
may be accomplished either adiabatically (if the relative 
motion between the Sun and the LISM is subsonic) or 
by means of a bow shock in the case of supersonic 
relative motion. If we neglect both the deceleration of 
the solar wind by resonant charge exchange and temporal 
variations in the solar wind ram pressure, the minimum 
radius Ry s of the solar wind shock transition can be 
estimated from 


1/2 
Ros =( y+3 ou)" 


1 
NIG Dos @) 


where pou; is the solar wind ram pressure at ro = 
1 AU, y the solar wind adiabatic index and p.. the total 
LISM pressure. The LISM pressure term can include the 
thermal gas, cosmic rays, the interstellar ram pressure, the 
magnetic field pressure and MHD turbulence, and may be 
expressed as 


Po = pu- + Pt 1B? /81 + Por + Paust + p(6B") 


where the terms are all evaluated in the LISM and the factor 
n attempts to include the effects of interstellar magnetic 
field obliquity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-400 -200 0 


1.57x10° 
7.38x10° 
3.47x10° 
1.63x10° 
7.68x10* 
3.62x10* 
1.70x10* 


8.00x10° 


200 400 


Figure 2. Gray-scale plot of the log,, (temperature) and streamlines for a 2D two-shock model of the solar wind-LISM interaction in 
the absence of neutral interstellar hydrogen. The termination shock (TS), heliopause (HP) and bow shock (BS) are identified. 


Although one can estimate the location of the TS 
and the heliopause, the discontinuity separating solar 
wind material from the interstellar plasma (a contact 
discontinuity in the case of gas dynamics), using simple 
pressure balance arguments, the interaction of the solar 
wind with the LISM is fundamentally multi-dimensional. 
Thus, the main advances in our understanding of global 
heliospheric structure since the original analytic models 
have been more recent and based largely on computer 
simulations. The initial simulations were of purely one- 
fluid gas dynamic models and only now has the inclusion 
of neutral interstellar hydrogen been considered self- 
consistently. 

To model the interaction of the solar wind with a 
partially ionized LISM, the following set of 3D MHD 
equations must be solved 


— +V-pu=Q, (2) 


pos + pu-Vut(y Ver V x B)x B=Qn (3) 


1 B? 1 
- (Sou? +e + ac) t¥-| (Sou + ve) u 


+ Bx (ux B)] = 0. (4) 

4a 

oo -V x (wx B)=0 (5) 
V-B=0 (6) 


together with the equation of state e = ankgT/(y — 1) = 
p/(y — 1). Here a = 2 if only electrons and protons are 
considered as part of the LISM plasma, otherwise a can be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10° 


< 
S Fd 
B 10" E 
E f 
cd z 

ie 
is 10? 


10° 


10° 10' 10° 10° 
AU (UPSTREAM) 


Figure 3. One-dimensional cuts along the stagnation axis in the 
upstream direction of the plasma-only 2D simulation shown in 
figure 2. The solid curve shows the plasma density and the 
dashed curve the plasma temperature profile. The termination 
shock (TS), heliopause (HP) and bow shock (BS) are marked. 


larger when, for example, cosmic rays are included. The 
charge exchange terms Q,, Q,, and Q, represent pick-up 
ion source terms for the density, momentum and energy 
equations; p, u and p denote plasma density, velocity, and 
total pressure, and the electrons and ion temperatures are 
assumed to be equal. The adiabatic index y = 5/3. The 
source terms couple the plasma and neutral H distribution 
and, in principle, one needs to compute the evolution of 
both distributions simultaneously. 

Two approaches have been taken to evaluate the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-400 -200 0 


600 


500 


400 


AU 


300 


200 


100 


-400 -200 0 


1.54x10° 
6.41x10° 
2.67x10° 
1.11x10° 
4.62x10° 
1.92x10* 


8.00x10° 


200 400 


3.15x10" 
2.63x10" 
2.11x10" 
1.59x10" 
1.07x10" 
5.44x10° 


2.29x10° 


200 400 


Figure 4. (a) A 2D plot of the global plasma structure for the two-shock model when neutral H is included self-consistently. The 
shading refers to log,, (temperature). The streamlines are included. (b) A 2D plot of the corresponding component 1 neutral 
distribution, where the shading now refers to the number density. The hydrogen wall is clearly visible between the bow shock (BS) 


and the heliopause (HP). 


neutral H distribution. 
Boltzmann equation 


One approach is to solve the 


Zrovs+(Z-v)r-Pp-b 
ot m 


for neutral H directly. Here, f(x, v,t) is the neutral 
hydrogen distribution function expressed in terms of 
position x, velocity v and time t. F is the force acting 
on a particle of mass m, typically gravity and radiation 
pressure. The terms P and L describe the production 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and loss of neutral particles at (x, v, t) and both terms are 
functions of the plasma and neutral distributions. 

An alternative approach, and one that is much 
less prohibitive computationally, is to recognize that 
the heliosphere-LISM environment comprises three 
thermodynamically distinct regions: the supersonic solar 
wind (region 3), the very hot subsonic solar wind 
(region 2), and the LISM itself (region 1) (figure 1). 
Each region acts as a source of neutral H atoms whose 
distribution reflects that of the plasma distribution in the 
region. One may identify neutral components 1, 2 and 3 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with neutral atoms originating from regions 1, 2 and 3. 
Each of these three neutral components is approximated 
by a distinct Maxwellian distribution function appropriate 
to the characteristics of the source distribution. This 
observation allows the use of simpler production and loss 
terms for each neutral component. The complete highly 
non-Maxwellian H distribution function is then the sum 
over the three components, i.e. 


3 
f(x.v.) = >> filer, 0). 
i=1 


Under the assumption that each of the neutral com- 
ponent distributions is approximated adequately by a 
Maxwellian, one obtains an isotropic hydrodynamic de- 
scription for each neutral component, and thus a closed 
multifluid model describing self-consistently the interac- 
tion of the solar wind with the partially ionized LISM. 

Before discussing the models which include interstel- 
lar neutrals self-consistently, consider briefly the 2D struc- 
ture of the heliosphere in their absence. Figure 2 illus- 
trates the 2D plasma temperature and streamlines for the 
H* fluid at steady state. This particular model does not in- 
clude either interplanetary or interstellar magnetic fields 
and assumes a supersonic interstellar wind. Three ma- 
jor boundaries or interfaces are present: the bow shock 
which compresses and diverts the interstellar flow about 
the heliosphere, the heliopause which separates the inter- 
stellar medium and the solar wind, and the termination 
shock at which the supersonic solar wind is decelerated 
abruptly. The termination shock possesses a character- 
istic bullet shape, quite unlike the approximately spheri- 
cally symmetric heliosphere that is assumed typically. The 
supersonic solar wind velocity is constant until the very 
strong shock (Mach number ~ 170), and figure 3 illus- 
trates the radial density and temperature profiles along 
the stagnation line in the upstream direction. The termi- 
nation shock is located at ~120 AU for this simulation. The 
solar wind temperature decays adiabatically with increas- 
ing heliocentric distance. An extended and very hot tail of 
subsonic solar wind is formed (called the heliotail) in the 
downstream direction. 

A major effect of charge exchange on the heliospheric 
interfaces is to decrease the distances to the TS, HP and BS, 
illustrated in figure 4(a). The decrease in distance results 
primarily from the reduction in solar wind ram pressure, 
due to the mediation of the wind by charge exchange. 

Besides the distance to the various heliospheric 
boundaries, charge exchange affects the shape of the 
termination shock, making it more spherical than the 
purely ionized gas dynamic description. This is a 
consequence of charge exchange in the heliosheath, which 
ensures that the shocked solar wind plasma remains 
subsonic in this region. 

Owing to the deposit of interstellar protons in the 
solar wind when charge exchange is included, the solar 
wind flow now departs slightly from simple spherical 
symmetry, and the contribution to the internal energy of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


DENSITY (CM-3) 
TEMPERATURE (K) 


ital and = oN 
10° 10" 10° 10° 
AU (UPSTREAM) 


Figure 5. One-dimensional cuts along the stagnation axis in the 
upstream direction of the coupled plasma-neutral 2D simulation 
shown in figure 4(a). The solid curve shows the plasma density 
and the dashed curve the plasma temperature profile. 


2.5x10° 
€ 
2 E 
a 2.0x10* 
5 i 
= E 
E fi 
9 o 
i zi 
a E 
1.5x10* 
1.0x10* 


ee a a ee 1 1 ve 
10° 10 10° 10° 
AU (UPSTREAM) 


Figure 6. One-dimensional cuts along the stagnation axis in the 
upstream direction of the coupled plasma-neutral 2D simulation 
shown in figure 4(b). The solid curve shows the component 1 
density and the dashed curve the component 1 temperature 
profile. 


the supersonic solar wind by pick-up ions is substantial. 
This is illustrated in the 1D radial plots of the plasma 
density and temperature along the upstream stagnation 
axis (figure 5). The tail region is also cooler when the 
proton fluid and neutral fluid are coupled compared with 
no-charge exchange models. The cooling is a consequence 
of the very hot heliotail being cooled by charge exchange 
with cooler component 1 neutrals. 

To enter the heliosphere, a hydrogen atom has to 
cross three thermodynamically distinct regions. Through 
resonant charge exchange, the diverging LISM flow and 
the shocked solar wind flow act to divert some fraction 
of the incident interstellar neutral H flux away from 
the heliosphere. This effective swapping of trajectories 
by an interstellar neutral and a proton can also lead 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to an enhancement in the neutral interstellar density 
and temperature in the vicinity of the solar wind—LISM 
stagnation region. 

Figure 4(b), a 2D plot of the component 1 neutral 
H density distribution, shows that inflowing component 
1 neutrals are substantially decelerated and filtered by 
charge exchange with the interstellar plasma between 
the BS and HP in the upstream direction. This leads 
to the formation of a hydrogen wall with maximum 
densities ~0.2-0.3 cm~3, column densities ~10'* cm~* and 
temperatures ranging from 18 000 to 28 000 K (depending 
on the assumed LISM parameters). The pile-up in the 
neutral gas results from the deceleration and deflection of 
the neutral flow by charge exchange with the interstellar 
plasma, which is itself decelerated and diverted due to the 
presence of the heliosphere. Note that the charge exchange 
mean free path is typically less than the separation distance 
between the heliopause and bow shock and so a large 
part of the incident interstellar neutrals experience charge 
exchange. 

Component 2, produced via charge exchange be- 
tween component 1 and hot shocked solar wind plasma be- 
tween the TS and HP, streams across the HP into the cooler 
shocked interstellar gas and heats the plasma through a 
second charge exchange. This leads to an extended ther- 
mal foot abutting the outside edge of the HP. This heat- 
ing of the plasma by component 2 serves to broaden the 
region between the BS and HP, as well as to (indirectly) 
further heat the component 1 interstellar neutrals after 
subsequent charge exchanges. Some minor heating of the 
unshocked LISM also occurs upstream of the BS, thereby 
marginally reducing the Mach number of the incident in- 
terstellar wind. 

The temperature of component 1 neutrals once inside 
the heliosphere remains fairly constant in the upstream 
region, and represents a substantial increase over the 
assumed LISM temperature. A further increase in the 
component 1 temperature occurs in the downstream 
region. 

The number density of component 1 crossing the TS 
is approximately half the assumed incident LISM number 
density, an effect termed ‘filtration’. The density varies 
only weakly between the TS and ~10 AU from the Sun 
in the upstream region. In the downstream direction, 
component 1 densities are lower within the heliosphere. 
The 1D component 1 density and temperature profiles 
are plotted in figure 6, and the heated hydrogen wall is 
exhibited clearly. 

A further effect of filtration is to decelerate the 
upstream neutral gas from 26 km s-! in the LISM to 
~19 km s7! at the TS in the region of the nose. Deflection 
of the flow also reduces the radial velocity component at 
angles away from the nose. Sucha deceleration is in accord 
with observations which measure the Lyman-a resonance 
line scattered by neutral H in the heliosphere. 

Models which assume a subsonic LISM flow do not 
havea bow shock. Instead, upstream of the heliopause, the 
LISM flow is compressed adiabatically. This more gradual 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


compression leads to the formation of a lower-amplitude 
hydrogen wall that is more extended in the radial direction. 
It is also less extended in the transverse direction because 
of the localized nature of the adiabatic compression. The 
maximum density of the wall in the upstream direction is 
smaller than that of the two-shock counterpart (though still 
larger than the incident LISM number density). However, 
because it is wider, the column density is comparable with 
the two-shock case. 

The heliosphere is less distorted along the axis of 
symmetry than for the two-shock case, and is smaller due 
to the higher assumed LISM pressure. 

Three-dimensional models of the solar wind during 
solar minimum introduce some interesting differences 
from the 2D models discussed above. The presence of an 
anisotropic solar wind with a high-velocity, low-density, 
high-temperature polar stream acts to divert both the 
subsonic solar wind and the LISM plasma flow into the 
ecliptic region of the heliosphere. The presence of a high- 
density band of plasma about the ecliptic plane increases 
the filtration of neutrals compared with the higher polar 
regions. With an increased neutral flux of H over the 
poles, the polar wind experiences comparatively greater 
deceleration than the ecliptic wind, so reducing the degree 
of anisotropy seen in 3D gas dynamic simulations. In 
addition, the global distribution of neutral H is anisotropic 
in heliolatitude. Structurally, the heliosphere at low 
latitudes can revert to a ‘bullet’ shape, typically seen only 
in models which neglect to include interstellar neutral 
hydrogen. It should be borne in mind that these remarks 
pertain primarily to the period of solar minimum observed 
by the Ulysses spacecraft. 

Very few simulations include either the interplanetary 
or interstellar magnetic fields dynamically, and those that 
do neglect neutral H completely or use an extremely 
simplified description. Nonetheless, it appears that the 
magnetic field in the heliosheath can acquire a very 
interesting structure. Along the stagnation line in the 
heliosheath, the flow velocity decreases approximately 
as r-* (r the heliocentric radial distance), leading to 
an amplification in the azimuthal magnetic field in the 
region. This, together with the J x B force causes 
the equatorial current sheet to bend either upward or 
downward (depending on solar cycle) away from the 
equatorial plane. This leads to the formation of an 
asymmetric 3D magnetic shell or wall in the outer region of 
the upstream heliosheath with a gap in the neighborhood 
of the displaced current sheet. The region between the 
termination shock and the magnetic wall is occupied by 
solar wind originating from the middle and high latitudes 
whereas, thanks to the gap in the magnetic wall, the 
solar wind in the region between the magnetic wall and 
heliopause originates from the low-latitude equatorial 
neutral sheet region. 


Inferred structure of the heliosphere 
Until Voyager 2 encounters the termination shock and 
heliopause, we are forced to rely on remote observations to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TIYEE TTI 


0.5 


Tot at tal 


0.0 Li Whey asenieh inttilasinit ant tetarchnichd tres {1 : 
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 
Wavelength from Solar—Frame Line Center (A) 


(a) 


Observed Flux (107° erg cm? s7 Av) 


0.5 


0.0 


Observed Flux (107'° erg cm™? s7! Av!) 


-0.3  -0.2 —0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 
Wavelength from Solar—Frame Line Center (A) 


(6) 


Figure 7. The solid jagged curves are GHRS Lyman-a absorption profiles towards (a) w-Cen A and (b) a-Cen B. The uppermost solid 
curve is the assumed intrinsic stellar Lyman-a emission profile. The smoothed solid curve which exhibits saturated absorption 
corresponds to the intrinsic stellar emission line after absorption from the LISM only. Corresponding theoretical absorption profiles 
are plotted for an M = 1.5 (M the Mach number) LISM (the dashed curve), an M = 0.7 LISM (the dotted curve) and an M = 0.9 LISM. 
All three theoretical models show that additional Lyman-a absorption on the red side results from the presence of a heliospheric 
hydrogen wall and a marginally subsonic model appears to fit the data best. 


infer the structure of the heliosphere. The most promising 
approach presently is to use the Lyman-a absorption line 
in the direction of nearby stars. A neutral hydrogen pile- 
up or wall may be detectable in directions where the 
decelerated H is red-shifted out of the shadow of the 
interstellar absorption if the interstellar column density is 
sufficiently low. Red-shifted excess absorption in HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE GHRS Lyman-a observations towards a- 
Cen (seen previously by Copernicus and IUE) have been 
interpreted as evidence for the existence of the solar 
hydrogen wall. 

Shown in figure 7 are Lyman-a observations towards 
a-Cen A and B (the jagged solid curves), and the 
wavelength scale is relative to the Lyman-a line center in 
the heliocentric rest frame. The upper solid curve is the 
assumed intrinsic stellar Lyman-aw emission profile. The 
accurate representation of the intrinsic stellar profile is 
unimportant since the absorption features of interest vary 
sharply. The remaining smooth solid curve (the saturated 
absorption curve) in figure 7 gives the attenuation of the 
stellar Lyman-a emission by interstellar H. The column 
density for H was fixed by scaling to the deuterium column 
density, assuming the commonly accepted value of D/H = 
1.6 x 107°. Figure 7 shows very clearly that additional 
absorption is required both redward and blueward of 
the interstellar feature if the fit is to be completed. 
Furthermore, the fit must be applied preferentially to the 
redward side, so arbitrarily changing the D/H ratio is 
unacceptable. The additional redward absorption has 
been interpreted as evidence for the detection of the 
hydrogen wall. The blueward absorption suggests the 
possibility of a hydrogen wall about a-Cen A and B. 

Since the column depth of the hydrogen wall is three 
orders of magnitude smaller than the column depth in the 
LISM toward a-Cen, it may be surprising at first glance 
that the heliospheric optical depth at +0.1 A is of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


same order as the LISM optical depth at that wavelength. 
The key difference is that the hydrogen wall is heated 
and decelerated, which both broadens and redshifts the 
heliospheric component away from the —0.07 A centroid 
of the LISM absorption and toward the +0.1 Awavelength 
of interest. 

Figure 7 also shows the Lyman-a absorption at 
the red edge of the LISM feature for three heliospheric 
models—a subsonic LISM model (dotted line), a barely 
subsonic LISM model (dash-dot line), and a supersonic 
model (dashed curve). The primary and very important 
conclusion to emerge from such modelling is that the 
synthetic Lyman-a profiles support the interpretation of 
the observed additional redward Lyman-a towards a- 
Cen as evidence for the remote detection of the hydrogen 
wall. Thus, it appears that the hydrogen wall has indeed 
been observed! The unprecedented accuracy of the 
Hubble GHRS observations suggests further that, with 
the refinement of solar wind—LISM interaction models, the 
question of whether the heliosphere has a one- or a two- 
shock structure may be answered in the foreseeable future. 


The future 

Evidently, many more physical processes remain to be 
incorporated in models describing the interaction of the 
solar wind with the LISM. This will undoubtedly be 
accomplished in the next decade as computational power 
increases and the underlying physics is better understood. 
However, the most important limitation that the field 
currently faces concerns the paucity of information about 
the state of the local interstellar environment. 

Ingenious efforts have been made to obtain in situ 
and remote sensing measurements of interstellar pick-up 
ions and neutrals, which have advanced our theoretical 
understanding of the solar wind-LISM interaction 
considerably. Possible future missions dedicated to solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interaction with Local Interstellar Medium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


wind/LISM questions, such as Interstellar Probe, will 
advance the field (and others) tremendously and in 
directions that we may not yet even fully appreciate. 

In concluding, we should not lose sight of the fact 
that the interaction of the solar wind with the LISM 
represents only one, admittedly important, astrophysical 
example of the interaction of a stellar wind with a partially 
ionized interstellar medium. This subject, although only 
cursorily studied so far, may well prove fundamental to 
our understanding of the evolution of stellar winds in 
the warm interstellar medium and to the evolution of the 
interstellar medium itself. In this respect, the solar wind 
interaction with the LISM is truly a subject at the interface 
of space physics and astrophysics. 


Acknowledgements 

This work is supported in part by an NSF Presidential 
Young Investigator Award ATM-9357861, an NSF-DOE 
grant ATM-9713223, a NASA grant NAG5-6469, a Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory contract 959167, and a NASA Space 
College Grant. The NSF San Diego Supercomputer Center 
provided computational support. 


Bibliography 

Holzer T E 1979 The solar wind and related astrophysical 
phenomena Solar System Plasma Physics ed EN Parker, 
CF Kennel and LJ Lanzerotti (Amsterdam: North- 
Holland) pp 101-76 

Zank G P 1999 Interaction of the solar wind with the local 
interstellar medium: a theoretical perspective Space 
Sci. Rev. 89 1-275 


Gary P Zank 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interplanetary Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Interplanetary Radio 
Bursts 


Solar radio emissions at long wavelengths (A greater than 
10 m or frequencies smaller than 30 MHz) are produced 
in the upper corona and in the interplanetary medium, 
sometimes at very large distances from the Sun, up to the 
orbit of Jupiter and beyond. They are essentially produced 
by local instabilities, resulting from the interaction of 
the ambient sOLAR WIND with disturbances: streams of 
subrelativistic particles, and shock waves, whose origin is 
mostly in the solar corona; they provide a unique means to 
detect perturbations originating from SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS 
and to track their progression through the solar wind. 
These emissions are produced in a frequency range over 
which the Earth’s ionosphere transmits either poorly or 
not at all; a spacecraft in orbit well above the ionosphere 
must carry the instruments. 


Solar radio astronomy at long wavelengths: 
specificities and problems 

Electromagnetic waves at long wavelengths cannot reach 
the Earth because the ionosphere stops them. The cut- 
off frequency depends on the ionosphere peak electron 
density and is about 20 MHz by day and 10 MHz or less 
by night. Observations at long wavelengths thus require 
putting the radio instrument on a spacecraft well above 
the ionosphere. Table 1 shows a few typical frequencies 
and the corresponding wavelength regimes. 


Table 1. The frequency /wavelength regimes. 


Frequency Wavelength Band Distance range 
from center of Sun 
300 MHz Im 
metric lower corona 
up to 2-3 Ro 
30 MHz 10m 
decametric 2-3 to ~10 Ro 
3 MHz 100m 
hectometric ~10 to ~60 Ro 
300 kHz 1km 
kilometric beyond ~60 Ro 
30 kHz 10 km 


Figure 1 shows the observed radio frequency of 
interplanetary radio bursts as a function of heliocentric 
distance (distance from the center of the Sun). A strong 
dependence is clearly seen, which is simply due to the fact 
that most radio sources consist of a narrow band emitted 
near the local plasma frequency and/or its harmonic. 
Since the plasma frequency is directly proportional to 
/Ne (Ne is the local electron density), the distribution 
of frequencies as a function of distance closely follows 
that of the densities, with the usual dispersion. In a 
way radio observations in a large band provide a radial 
imaging of solar sources. This interpretation is very 
important, since most phenomena considered here are 
traveling phenomena that propagate outward from the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1 GHz 


GROUND-BASED 
OBSERVATIONS 


IONOSPHERE 


CUTOFF 
10 MHz 


SOLAR 
RADIO 
SOURCES 


SPACE-BORNE 
OBSERVATIONS 


100 kHz 


10 kHz 


iene 0.01 0.1 1.0 10 


HELIOCENTRIC DISTANCE (A.U.) 


Figure 1. Heliocentric distance of radio bursts in the solar 
corona and interplanetary medium. The two regimes of 
observation—ground-based and space-borne—complement 
each other in order to study the physical processes involved in 
the radio bursts. 


Sun (streams of subrelativistic particles, shock waves, see 
below), mostly in the radial direction. 

An important feature of radio observations from 
space is that they give access to sources in the 
interplanetary medium. In some cases, the spacecraft is 
even inside the radio source itself and local conditions 
of the solar wind plasma and of its perturbations can 
be measured. In the latter case, the observation of 
interplanetary radio bursts actually links phenomena on 
the Sun to in situ phenomena. 

The antennas on spacecraft are usually wire antennas 
or booms from a few meters long to a few hundred 
meters long. Wire antennas require spinning spacecraft. 
The antenna length is generally short compared with 
the wavelength, so that they can be considered as pure 
dipoles, with no spatial resolution. Imaging radio 
sources is very difficult at low frequency (very long 
baseline arrays are required and have never been used as 
yet). Direction finding techniques are currently used on 
spinning spacecraft: from the analysis of the modulation 
of the radio signal over a spin, it is possible to deduce 
the source direction (direction of the source centroid), an 
estimate of its angular size, and its degree of circular 
POLARIZATION. Thus, the present radio instruments on 
spacecraft are essentially sPECTROGRAPHS, some of which 
have the direction finding capability. We note here that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interplanetary Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10” 


( 
— 
2 

= 


E it SHOCK 


FLUX DENSITY 
3 


8 


10 


10 kHz 


100 kHz 


1 MHz 10 MHz 100 MHz 


RADIO FREQUENCY 


Figure 2. Flux densities of a variety of common radio sources in the range 1 kHz to 100 MHz. 


the radio astronomy receivers on spacecraft are often part 
of more extensive radio and plasma wave investigations 
yielding information on in situ waves as well. These are 
observed by the same instruments and displayed on the 
same ‘dynamic spectrum’ and are sometimes essential to 
the understanding of radio wave production mechanisms. 

Figure 2 shows instantaneous spectra of various radio 
events. Intense, sporadic sources are easily identified, 
sometimes more than 50 dB above the background. They 
originate from solar disturbances in the interplanetary 
medium and from radiation near magnetized planets, 
including the Earth. Above a few 100 kHz, all 
other sources, Galactic or extragalactic, merge into a 
background, which is well observed but not resolved; it 
is called the ‘Galactic background’. Below 100 kHz, the 
background is determined by the electron quasithermal 
noise near the local plasma frequency. The radio intensity 
or flux density (in Wm? Hz"') is often displayed on a 
‘dynamic spectrum’ where it is coded with a gray (or color) 
scale as a function of frequency and time. If time is usually 
displayed on the x-axis, frequency is represented on the y- 
axis, either increasing or decreasing upwards. In the latter 
case, the y-axis suggests the increasing distance from the 
Sun, which varies as 1/f, since N. ~ R~* in the solar wind, 
and f ~ fp ~ No”. 

The intrinsic properties of the radio source may 
be masked by propagation effects, on both large and 
small scales. Stereoscopic observations are required to 
assess these effects; they have shown that the radiation 
can be strongly beamed, sometimes in a non-radial 
direction. These effects provide additional information 
on the medium between the source and the observer. 
Such observations have been made in the past, either 
with dedicated stereoscopic missions or by combining 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


simultaneous observations from different spacecraft on 
widely different orbits. 


Radio signatures in the solar wind 

Radio sources in the solar wind are sporadic and highly 
variable. A smaller variety of sources are seen than in 
the lower corona: only the type II (shock wave) and 
type III (electron stream) bursts are currently observed. 
Recent observations from the WIND spacecraft suggest the 
presence of type IV bursts and of fine structures associated 
with energetic particles. 

A type II burst is detected in the dynamic spectrum 
plots as one or a few narrow bands of emission slowly 
drifting from high to low frequencies. The type II bursts 
are usually faint but can sometimes be tracked for several 
hours up to a day or more. Their observation proves 
the existence of a shock wave. Indeed, it is believed 
that a shock is needed to accelerate electrons to about 
10 keV, where the distribution becomes unstable to the 
production of Langmuir waves, which are converted into 
radio waves through processes similar to the type III 
radiation. Thus, type II emission provides a unique means 
of tracking shocks remotely. It is particularly important 
in the interplanetary medium, where it can help track 
the progression of interplanetary shocks from the upper 
corona to the Earth (see table 1). 

Type II bursts are produced by beams of subrelativis- 
tic electrons (1-100 keV) originating from active regions; 
they propagate along open magnetic field lines from the 
solar corona throughout the interplanetary medium. They 
produce the most frequent solar radio bursts in the inter- 
planetary medium, which certainly are the most exhaus- 
tively studied and best understood. Radiation is emit- 
ted near the plasma frequency and/or its harmonic. As 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interplanetary Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the electrons move out from the Sun, they encounter de- 
creasing plasma densities and therefore emit at lower and 
lower frequencies. The radio signature shows a frequency 
drift seen on spectrograms—the dynamic spectrum. At a 
given frequency, the duration of the burst is about the time 
it takes for the beam to cross the corresponding ‘plasma 
level’. The duration thus increases as the beam expands 
and spreads out in the interplanetary medium. 


Type III bursts sometimes occur in storms which 
consist of thousands of overlapping individual type III 
bursts. These interplanetary radio storms are the extension 
through the solar wind of the type III storms which are seen 
at metric and decametric wavelengths and are themselves 
often associated with the type I storms seen in the metric 
and decimetric regime. These radio events trace long- 
lasting storms of suprathermal electrons injected near 
active regions. They may help trace the expansion of the 
slow solar wind above active regions. 


Generation mechanisms and source structure 


Radio bursts in the interplanetary medium are caused by 
the interaction of beams of energetic electrons—produced 
during solar flares and at shock fronts—with the ambient 
solar wind plasma. The beam free energy is converted 
into Langmuir waves, and then some Langmuir wave 
energy is converted to radio waves at the fundamental 
and/or the harmonic of the local plasma frequency. This 
is known as the plasma mechanism and can account for 
almost all radio bursts in the interplanetary medium. On 
rare occasions type IV-like events have been observed up 
to 10 or 15 solar radii and on one occasion a group of very 
intense type III-like bursts was convincingly interpreted 
as being due to synchrotron emission caused by energetic 
electrons confined in a magnetic trap created behind an 
interplanetary shock wave. 


The size of an interplanetary radio burst may be very 
large. Typically, the extent of the radio sources grows as 
the distance to the Sun, with a factor of proportionality 
close to 1. As already mentioned, propagation effects may 
be important and may account for a significant portion 
of the observed source sizes—up to 50%; the source 
position, beaming and polarization may also be modified. 
Stereoscopic observations have been shown to provide 
essential clues in order to understand and correct those 
effects and even gain information from them. 

It is accepted, both on observational and theoretical 
grounds, that the radio emission is generated in localized, 
unresolved regions of the interplanetary medium, rather 
than uniformly along the path of the electron beam for 
the type IIIs, or along the shock front for the type Ils. In 
general, interplanetary radio sources can be modeled by 
taking into account two essential factors: the known finite 
extent of the radio source and the directivity of the radio 
emission. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Large scale structure and dynamics of the solar 
wind from radio burst observations 

Type III bursts and the large-scale magnetic field 

The interplanetary medium is structured by the flow of 
the solar wind, a fully ionized, magnetized plasma. Radio 
bursts can provide unique information on the structure of 
this medium because they reflect mostly local conditions 
at their source. 

The interplanetary magnetic field assumes an 
Archimedean spiral shape, due to the combination of the 
solar wind expansion with the solar rotation. The ener- 
getic electrons, because of their small gyro-radius, have to 
follow (or spiral around) the average field lines. Thus, the 
analysis of the source location of interplanetary type IIT ra- 
dio bursts should, in principle, yield a large-scale mapping 
of the interplanetary magnetic field, with an indication of 
electron density along it, and a tracking of the evolution of 
beams of electrons over large distances. When one space- 
craft only can determine the direction of the centroid of the 
radio source, a hypothesis has to be made on the radiation 
mode and on the average density model. This works quite 
well up to 0.5 Astronomical Units (AU) but the deduced 
trajectories tend to show anomalous behavior beyond this 
distance, because of propagation effects, increasing source 
sizes and proximity effects. The use of a second spacecraft 
helps resolve some of the latter effects and eliminate the 
hypothesis of a density model and radiation mode. 


Radio storms and the slow solar wind 

The long-lasting interplanetary radio storms (type III 
storms) can be seen in the interplanetary medium at a 
variety of radio frequencies, rotating from east to west, 
as the Sun rotates. The analysis of these structures yields 
information on the solar wind density and velocity above 
active regions (where they are observed). The derived 
velocities tend to be smaller than the average solar wind 
velocity, consistent with a slow solar wind above solar 
active regions. 


Type II shocks and coronal mass ejections 

The observation of a type II burst is believed to 
demonstrate the passage of a collisionless shock wave, 
which cannot generally be witnessed by any other means. 
The first extensive studies of interplanetary type II radio 
shocks were made with the ISEE-3 data (essentially 1978- 
1984) and now with the WIND spacecraft (launched in 
November 1994). Many questions related to the nature of 
the type II source and its association with the shock front 
remain unsolved, although they often are basic questions 
if one desires to really use the type II observations as a 
tool for diagnosing the shock progression and evolution 
in the solar corona and interplanetary medium. It is 
generally believed that the interplanetary shock is (piston-) 
driven by the SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION (CME), but 
there is no direct observational proof as yet. This is 
generally supported by timing considerations. However, 
the estimation of the shock velocity depends strongly 
on the choice of the density model, which remains an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interplanetary Radio Bursts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CME vu par TNR & RAD1 S O6—JAN-—97 OH 


12—JAN-97 24H 


1000 


Fréquence ( kHz) 
O 
fo) 


6 ep 8 9 


( moyennes) 


li il 


ar - i 
Wt 


f 


Figure 3. Dynamic spectrum obtained by the WAVES investigation on the WIND spacecraft, for the period 6-12 January 1997, and for 
the range from 4 kHz (in situ waves, bottom of y-axis) to 1 MHz (about 15 Ro, top of axis). The fluctuating line which runs through the 
plot (between about 10 and 60 kHz) is the plasma line which follows the fluctuations of the electron density at the spacecraft. The 
type II-like emission is seen as slowly drifting emission bands from 8 to 11 January. 


unknown, and of the radiated mode, which is sometimes 
hard to identify. The situation is rather unclear for coronal 
shocks, even up to several Ro from the Sun: some type II 
shocks could trace pure blast waves. Observations have 
not yet determined the precise location of the source 
with respect to the shock front, radially (upstream or 
downstream) or along the shock front: it is not known 
whether the shock radiates uniformly or if the radiation 
is only produced in regions where special conditions are 
met (for instance, parallel or perpendicular shock front, 
special range of Mach number, etc). There is sometimes 
evidence for multiple shocks, associated with single flare 
or CME events. The absence of spatial resolution often 
leads to oversimple models. Stereoscopic observations 
are expected to help resolve a number of these issues, in 
particular the location (centroid) of the radio source and 
the shock velocity. 

Radio emissions may also reflect complex situations 
when the CME interacts with large-scale structures in 
the interplanetary medium, such as corotating interaction 
regions (CIR) or the heliospheric current sheet (HCS). This 
again may provide unique information on events that 
are otherwise difficult to detect but may have a strong 
terrestrial impact. As an example, figure 3 shows the 
dynamic spectrum of a very unusually strong type II-like 
radiation associated with the 6-11 January 1997 coronal 
mass ejection (CME). This event started on the Sun as a 
halo CME and was associated with a (faint) disappearing 
FILAMENT on the solar disk. Even though it is complex 
and hard to model, it yields definitive information on the 
strength of the interplanetary shock and its progression 
through the solar wind. 


Shock-associated (SA) events 

A class of large interplanetary type III bursts closely 
associated with meter-wave (coronal) type II bursts was 
proposed to be produced by electrons accelerated by shock 
waves in the solar corona: some events appeared to be the 
extension of ‘herringbone structures’, which are generally 
accepted to show evidence for shock acceleration. It 
was found that the shock-associated (SA) events are well 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


correlated with major proton events, which are known to 
be mostly associated with interplanetary shocks. 

This interpretation was challenged by some authors 
who argued that, in many cases, the good correlation 
between the SA time profiles and the concurrent 
microwave burst and/or hard x-ray burst strongly 
suggested that the SA events were caused by electrons 
accelerated in or near the microwave or x-ray source 
region, i.e. near the chromosphere rather than in coronal 
shock waves. Thus, there is an ongoing controversy on 
the origin of the electrons responsible for the SA events. 
Global observations of the full range of radio emissions 
(observed from both ground and space) associated with x- 
ray, EUV and optical observations are certainly necessary 
to fully assess the origin of the energetic particles, whose 
radio signature appears in the decametric and hectometric 
range. 

In conclusion, interplanetary radio bursts provide 
a unique signature of energetic phenomena in the solar 
wind, including shock wave tracking. The difficulties 
encountered in their observation and interpretation testify 
to the complexity and richness of the radio diagnostic. The 
field of radio astronomy at long wavelengths is very active 
and much remains to be done. Stereoscopic observation 
is a first step towards a better tracking of disturbances 
in the solar wind and a better modeling of beaming and 
propagation effects: NASA's Solar TErrestrial RElations 
Observatory (STEREO) will have a major role in this step. 
Asecond step would be to do imaging at long wavelengths, 
which would require an array of small spacecraft. The 
long wavelength range is indeed the last window of the 
electromagnetic spectrum never to have been observed 
with spatial resolution. 


Bibliography 
Extensive information on this topic can be found in the 
American Geophysical Union (AGU) monograph: 


Stone R G et al (ed) 2000 Space-Based Radio Observations at 
Long Wavelengths (AGU) to be published 


which also includes papers and reviews on astronomy 
at long wavelengths. Propagation effects and the infor- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Interplanetary Radio Bursts ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mation they yield on the structure of the interplanetary 
medium were discussed by 


Hoang S and Steinberg J L 1987 Radio wave propagation 
in the heliosphere Phys. Scripta T18 45 


For the association with CMEs and a discussion on the SA 
events, see the articles in AGU Monograph 99: 


Crooker N et al (ed) 1997 Coronal Mass Ejection (AGU) 


Jean-Louis Bougeret 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Solar Wind: Kinetic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Kinetic Properties 


The sOLAR WIND consists of electrons, protons, alpha 
particles and heavy ions. Its kinetic physics deals with 
the collective behavior of these particles in a statistical 
ensemble. Space-borne particle spectrometers enable 
us to measure the composition and three-dimensional 
velocity distribution functions (VDFs) of the particles. 
Vlasov kinetic plasma theory provides the adequate means 
for their theoretical description. Key issues of kinetic 
physics are to address the coronal origin and acceleration 
of the wind and the spatial and temporal evolution of 
the particles’ VDFs (See SOLAR WIND: CORONAL ORIGINS, SOLAR 
WIND ACCELERATION). They are shaped through the forces 
of the Sun’s gravitational field, the average-macroscale 
and fluctuating-mesoscale electric and magnetic fields of 
interplanetary space, and through multiple microscale 
kinetic processes such as binary Coulomb collisions and 
collective wave-particle interactions. 


Velocity distribution functions (VDFs) 

General considerations 

The global solar magnetic field varies over the activity 
cycle, but the coronal field always consists of three main 
components: long-term open CORONAL HOLES (CHs), closed 
CORONAL STREAMERS and transiently open or closed CORONAL 
Loops. These components are respectively associated with 
uniform fast solar wind, filamentary slow wind, and 
transient variable-speed wind such as that related to 
SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS. These three types differ 
substantially in their kinetic properties because of different 
solar boundary conditions and interplanetary plasma 
dynamics. The radial evolution of the internal state of the 
wind resembles a complicated relaxation process, in which 
the particles’ free (as compared with local kinetic and 
magnetohydrodynamic equilibrium conditions) energy is 
converted into thermal, wave and turbulence energy on 
a wide range of scales. Spherical expansion and large- 
scale inhomogeneity compel the wind plasma to attain a 
variable state of dynamic statistical equilibrium between 
the particles and field fluctuations. In principle, these 
processes are described by the full Boltzmann—Vlasov 
equation for the phase-space distribution, fj(x, v,f), 
which is a measure of the number of particles ina volume 
surrounding position « and with velocities in a certain 
range around v, and which evolves according to 


a a ej yan 3 a 
ae ah Gare 
d 
7 (Si) @) 


with the interplanetary magnetic field, B(a, t), electric 
field, E(«, t) and the Sun’s gravitational acceleration, g(x). 
Coulomb collisions or wave—particle interactions are also 
included and described by the Fokker—Planck collision 
integral or the quasilinear diffusion operator on the right- 
hand side of equation (1). Here the particle charge is e;, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


its mass m;, speed v and space coordinate x. The speed of 
light is c. In addition to equation (1), Maxwell’s equations 
have to be solved with the self-consistent current and 
charge density of the multicomponent wind, as calculated 
from the velocity moments of this equation. This complex 
problem has not been solved, but solutions of simplified 
versions of this problem, restricted to a single particle 
species, do exist. 


Ion velocity distribution functions 

The observed distributions of ions and electrons exhibit 
various shapes and change widely with the local in 
situ conditions, heliographic coordinates and the phase 
of the solar cycle. The proton VDFs range from 
Maxwellians in slow wind, embedding the heliospheric 
current sheet (HCS), to highly non-thermal ones in fast 
streams emanating from CHs. In fast solar wind the proton 
temperatures are anisotropic, with T,, > T,. Frequently, 
strong field-aligned proton beams with a drift speed larger 
than the local Alfvén speed occur. 

The electrons are cooler than the protons in fast wind 
(T. = 0.1-0.2 MK and 7, = 0.5-0.8 MK at 0.3 AU), 
but hotter in slow wind, which is more variable in 
abundance, more compressive and comparatively cold, 
with all particle temperatures becoming minimal at the 
HCS(T, =5 x 104 K at 1 AU). The fast wind is permeated 
by Alfvén waves from coronal holes, which are broad-band 
in frequency and play a significant role in maintaining, 
through their dissipation, the ion temperatures above the 
level expected for adiabatic cooling. Whereas high-energy 
extensions are a universal property of the protons, they 
are less frequently seen in the alpha particles. Some 
typical proton distributions in fast wind are presented in 
figure 1, together with the radial profile of the average 
magnetic moment, 1, = T,,/B, of the particles, which 
is displayed as a function of radial distance from the Sun. 
That jz, increases radially indicates continuous ion heating 
perpendicular to the magnetic field in the interplanetary 
medium. The solid line in figure 1 shows results of a 
turbulence model which explains the heating by wave 
dissipation. 

The heavy minor ions seem to trace wave effects 
in the wind. They stream faster than protons by the 
local Alfvén velocity, Vi < V, + V4, and tend to surf on 
the ubiquitous Alfvén waves. This differential streaming 
originates in the CORONA and is observed by HELIOs to 
fade away with increasing heliocentric distance. Speed 
differences between protons and alpha particles are seen 
also by Ulysses beyond 1 AU and appear to be generated 
locally at shocks and stream interaction regions (see SOLAR 
WIND: ULYSSES). In fast wind, heavy ions have a high kinetic 
temperature, with 7; ~ A;T, and A; being the atomic 
mass number of the ion. They come in various ionization 
stages and have about coronal abundances in fast wind, 
but show element fractionation in slow wind. Helium is 
an exception. Its sizable relative abundance of about 3-5% 
on the average differentiates it from a minor constituent. 
In slow wind, the higher density and lower temperature 
enforce a state near collisional equilibrium. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Kinetic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Os 


0.4 


0.3 


HH 


0.2 


U, = Tos 1B (107 °K/nT) 


fast wind 


618 kms" 717 


Figure 1. The observed proton magnetic moment versus heliocentric distance (top) and selected velocity distribution functions 
measured in high-speed wind. The solid isodensity contours correspond to 20% steps of the maximum, and the last broken contour is 
at 0.1%. Note the large temperature anisotropy in the core and the strong beam along the magnetic field. 


Log (F/yax) 


CORE 
HALO 
AT 


Vy (102 km so!) 


Vy (103 kms“) Vy [103 km s*] 


4 04 12 20 -200 -12 


-4 0 4 


12 20 <-%e -“ho oO 4 


TOWARDS THE SUN 


DIRECTION 


| ALONG =f 


Figure 2. Electron velocity distribution functions as energy spectra (top) and velocity-space contours (bottom) for fast (left), 
intermediate and slow (right) wind. Isodensity contours are in 10% steps. Note the core—halo structure and the strahl of suprathermal 


electrons in fast solar wind. 


Electron velocity distribution functions 

The electrons are, because of their small masses, 
dynamically less important for the solar wind. Yet 
they ensure quasineutrality, constitute an electric field 
through their thermal pressure gradient and carry heat 
in the skewness of the bulk and the suprathermal tail of 
their VDFs. The distribution functions are determined 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mainly by the large-scale interplanetary magnetic field 
and the self-generated electrostatic potential, by Coulomb 
collisions in the thermal energy range at a few 10 eV and by 
various kinds of wave-particle interactions. The electrons 
are subsonic, i.e. their mean thermal speed considerably 
exceeds the solar wind (ion) bulk speed. Suprathermal 
electrons (at several 100 eV) may be considered as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Kinetic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


test particles that quickly explore the global structure 
of the heliospheric magnetic field. It may attain the 
form of open field lines anchored in CHs, of bottles 
and loops originating around the solar equator or of 
flux ropes. This topology shapes the distributions, 
which can observationally be decomposed into two main 
components, a cold and almost isotropic collisional core 
and a hot variably skewed halo population. The VDFs 
are often modeled by two convecting bi-Maxwellians as 
illustrated in the top part of figure 2. On open field lines 
in the fast wind, the halo usually develops a high-energy 
extension with a very narrow pitch-angle distribution only 
10°-20° wide. This electron population has been named 
the ‘strahl’ and responds sensitively to the local field 
orientation. 

Common observations of the same plasma parcel of 
the wind by instruments on different spacecraft, when 
being radially aligned, allow one to characterize the 
radial gradients of electron thermal parameters. The core 
temperature is found to vary widely between isothermal 
and adiabatic, while the halo temperature behaves more 
isothermally. The halo density falls off more steeply in 
dense plasma. Electron parameters have been studied by 
Ulysses in the distance range from 1 to 4 AU. The halo is 
found to represent always about 4% of the total electron 
number. Since there is no reason for this ratio to be constant 
if the halo and core particles were completely decoupled, it 
appears that halo particles are not entirely decoupled from 
the core. The break-point energy in the electron spectra of 
figure 2 scales on average like 7 times the core temperature, 
a result which is predicted by a kinetic theory for electrons 
mediated by Coulomb collisions. Such a value of the 
break-point energy is also consistent with its interpretation 
as being equal to the electrostatic interplanetary potential 
trapping the thermal electrons. 

Significant progress has been made, with the 
Ulysses electron measurements, in the understanding 
of the electron heat flux regulation. An empirical 
heat conduction law has been suggested, in which the 
heat flux is carried mainly by the halo electrons and 
scales like the halo particle flux times the halo thermal 
energy. This proportionality has experimentally been 
verified, demonstrating that solar wind heat conduction 
has nothing to do with the local temperature gradient 
but with the thermal energy convected by halo electrons. 
Their drift speed is closely tied to the Alfvén velocity. This 
supports the evidence for a regulation of the heat flux by 
whistler-mode waves. 


Wave-particle interactions 

It is widely recognized that plasma waves in the 
collisionless solar corona and wind play a role similar to 
collisions in ordinary fluids (see also SOLAR WIND PLASMA 
waves). In the expanding inhomogeneous solar wind 
particle distributions develop velocity-space gradients 
and deviations from Maxwellians, which drive plasma 
instabilities and lead to wave growth or damping. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


kinetic wave modes of primary importance are the ion- 
cyclotron, ion-acoustic and whistler-mode waves, which 
are the high-frequency extensions of such fluid modes as 
the Alfvén, slow and fast magnetoacoustic waves. 

Usually, the multicomponent plasma is analysed 
locally for stability, by Fourier decomposing linear 
fluctuations of the fields into plane waves with wave 
vector k. Each species contributes a distinct dispersion 
branch for kinetic waves that are weakly damped normal 
modes or unstable in the presence of free energy. As an 
example, the dispersion equation for parallel propagating 
left (— sign) and right (+ sign) handed circularly polarized 
electromagnetic waves with wavevector component ky 
along the background magnetic field, By, reads 


Vay ceinieats 
(ky Va _ iy (=) ir > pj &F (Zky ky) (2) 
J. 


where the fractional mass density of species j has been 
used, defined as 6; = njmj/>°,neme. The Alfvén 
velocity based on the total mass density, V? = B%/4zp, 
is used to normalize the phase speed properly. The 
plasma frequency is given by w7 = 4mejnj/mj, and 
the gyrofrequency, carrying the sign of the charge, by 
Qj = e;Bo/mjc. For a given real wavevector, k,, complex 
solutions of the frequency zx = Wg, + iV, are sought, 
whereby a positive j;, signifies a plasma microinstability. 
The dielectric constant involves a resonance integral over 
velocity-space derivatives of the VDF, corresponding to 
the pitch-angle gradient for a particle in the wave frame 
as defined by the phase speed, and reads 


w,/2 


BF (Ze ; ky) =2n / dw, WL / dw 
0 —0o 


x WwW Zhy @ 
! ky Ow, 


The symbols w ,; refer to velocity components 
perpendicular and parallel to Bp in the species j proper 
frame, with w = v — U Bo. The prime at Zky indicates 
the Doppler shift into the rest frame of species j, drifting 
at bulk velocity Uj, i.e. z,, = zm — kKU;. The VDF here 
is understood to be normalized to the particle number 
density n;. Numerical investigations of equation (2) have 
been carried out in the literature under various conditions. 
The multicomponent solar wind plasma is usually at the 
margin of microscopic stability. Interacting with a wave, a 
particle sees a stationary electric field if its velocity meets 
the condition for cyclotron resonance, where wy = w7 = 
Zi + Q;)/k,. Energy and momentum between particle 
and wave are exchanged as a result of this wave-particle 
interaction. The velocity distributions are reshaped, until 
the free energy in the form of temperature anisotropy, 
beam drift or ion differential motion, and skewness or 
heat flux are reduced or removed. These processes are 
analytically described by quasilinear theory, based on 
equation (1) with the fields being decomposed into means 


Wy — Wj 


a 
gas | fjW., Wy). (3) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Kinetic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and fluctations, and are visualized by direct numerical 
simulation. 

In addition to electromagnetic modes, electrostatic 
waves frequently occur with variable intensity in various 
regions of the heliosphere. Below the proton plasma 
frequency one has the ion acoustic modes and above 
the electron plasma frequency the electrostatic Langmuir 
oscillations and the free-space electromagnetic waves. 
These waves are derived from the simple dispersion 
equation 


e=r8 [du ik Ae 
— ’ oe ———— “(Ww 
; Fe yes k-w-—z, dw’? 


where k; is the Debye wavenumber of species j, 
given by kj = @;/V;. The thermal speed is V; = 
(kgT;/m;)"", with the Boltzmann constant kg. The 
dielectric function involves the Landau-resonance integral 
over the derivative of the VDF in the k-direction. 
The dispersion relation (4) gives the wavevector k in 
dependence on the propagation direction & and phase 
speed z,,/k. The wavelength may vary between infinity 
and the very short electron Debye length 4, = kt. 
Observationally, the occurrence of ion-acoustic waves is 
determined by the electron to proton temperature ratio, 
T./T,, and the magnetic field direction. Highest wave 
intensities are observed around the HCS, where usually 
T./T, > 1, implying weak Landau damping. 

Most of the stability analyses carried out are based 
on idealized model distributions such as drifting bi- 
Maxwellians or Lorentzians with high-energy tails. Even 
the measured VDFs are implemented in dispersion codes 
to diagnose their stability or predict the associated wave 
activity. In summarizing our understanding of the role 
of microinstabilities in the solar wind, we see that the 
VDFs are generally found to be marginally stable but prone 
to instability. The four salient modes (and free energy 
sources) are (1) ion acoustic wave (ion beam, electron heat 
flux), (2) electromagnetic ion cyclotron wave (proton core 
temperature anisotropy), (3) magnetosonic wave (proton 
beam, ion differential streaming) and (4) whistler-mode 
and lower-hybrid wave (core-halo drift, electron heat 
flux). The quasilinear evolution of these wave instabilities, 
let alone their nonlinear evolution or possible saturation, 
and the associated spatial evolution of the VDFs in the 
nonuniform interplanetary medium have not yet been 
explored. 


Bibliography 

Feldman W C and Marsch E 1997 Kinetic phenomena in 
the solar wind Cosmic Winds and the Heliosphere ed J R 
Jokipii, C P Sonett and M S Giampapa (Tucson, AZ: 
Arizona University Press) pp 615-76 

Marsch E 1991 Kinetic physics of the solar wind Physics 
of the Inner Heliosphere vol Il, ed R Schwenn and E 
Marsch (Heidelberg: Springer) pp 45-133 

Marsden R G (ed) 1995 The High Latitude Heliosphere 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) (reprinted from Space Sci. Rev. 
72) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Neugebauer M 1981 Observations of solar wind helium 
Fundam. Cosm. Phys. 7 131-99 


E Marsch 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Magnetic Field 


The ‘heliosphere’ is the region surrounding the Sun that 
contains material and magnetic fields carried away from 
the Sun by the soar winp. It extends from the Sun, to 
the orbit of Pluto and out to the boundary of the solar 
wind with the interstellar medium. The ‘heliospheric 
magnetic field’ is the magnetic field that pervades the 
heliosphere. The ‘interplanetary magnetic field’ is that 
part of the heliospheric magnetic field which occupies the 
region between the planets, near to the EcuIPTic plane. 

The heliospheric magnetic field has been measured 
directly by instruments carried on several spacecraft which 
explored the region from 0.3 AU to beyond 65 AU (1 AU 
is the distance from the Sun to Earth). The heliospheric 
magnetic field has also been measured over a range of solar 
latitudes from ~80° S to ~80°N in the region between 1 AU 
and 5 AU. 

The magnetic field and the velocity of a fluid are 
vector fields, specifying a vector at each point in the 
region of interest. At a given instant, a vector field has 
a direction and a magnitude (magnetic field strength and 
speed respectively) at each point of the region. The 
direction of the vector field at any point is specified by two 
angles relative to a coordinate system whose origin is at 
that point. The location of a point in the heliosphere (e.g. 
a spacecraft position) is specified by another coordinate 
system, whose origin is at the center of the Sun. 

When one places a piece of paper with a thin layer 
of iron filings on top of a bar magnetic, each filing lines 
up with the direction of the magnetic field at the filing’s 
location. One can see a pattern in the set of iron filings, 
an imaginary set of curves that reveals a dipole pattern for 
the magnetic field lines. 


Parker spiral 

EN PARKER introduced a model for the basic structure of 
the heliospheric magnetic field based on the following 
assumptions: 


(a) The solar wind moves radially away from the Sun at 
a constant speed V. 

(b) The Sun rotates at an angular speed 2, given by 27 
divided by the solar rotation period. 

(c) The solar wind is azimuthally symmetric about the 
solar rotation axis. 

(d) The interplanetary magnetic field is frozen-in the 
solar wind and anchored at the Sun. This means that 
the solar wind, which flows radially relative to an 
inertial frame, flows along the magnetic field lines 
when viewed from the rotating Sun. 


Consider a point in the heliosphere given by the 
coordinates R (the radial distance from the Sun), 6 (the 
elevation angle above the solar equatorial plane) and ¢ 
(the azimuthal angle) in a Sun-centered coordinate system. 
At that point one can define a local coordinate system 
with unit basis vectors r, 6, ¢ pointing in the radial 
direction, the meridional direction and the azimuthal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spiral Field to 70 AU 


Figure 1. A spiral magnetic field line from the Sun to 70 AU 
according to Parker’s model of the interplanetary magnetic field. 


direction respectively. Parker showed that, for a stationary 
magnetic field, the components of the magnetic field along 
these directions are given by the following expressions: 


B,(R, 0, &) = B,(R1, 9,6 — RQ/V)(Ri/RY (1) 


B,(R, 0, ¢) =0 (2) 
By(R, 0, 6) = B,(R1, 0, 6 — RQ/V)(RiQ/V)(Ri/R) cos 0. 
(3) 


Here R; is a reference radius (typically either 1 AU ora 
few solar radii), and B, is related to the strength of the 
magnetic field near the Sun. Thus, the radial component 
of B decreases as R~?, the azimuthal component decreases 
as R~!, and the meridional component is zero. 

From the components of the magnetic field vector 
given above, one can calculate that a magnetic field line in 
the solar equatorial plane has the form of an Archimedes 
spiral, which is the shape of a rope coiled around itself on 
a surface. This is illustrated in figure 1 for a magnetic field 
line extending from the Sun to 70 AU in the solar equatorial 
plane. The angle between the magnetic field and the 
radial direction in the equatorial plane is determined by 
arctan(B,/B,). Near the Sun, the heliospheric magnetic 
field is approximately radial. At the orbit of Earth (1 AU) 
the magnetic field line makes an angle of 45° with the radial 
direction. Far from the Sun the spiral is tightly wound 
and the magnetic field is nearly orthogonal to the radial 
direction. A magnetic field line at a heliographic latitude 
@ has the form of a spiral wrapped on a cone whose axis 
is the solar rotation axis and whose angular half-width is 
90° — 6. Over the poles of the Sun, By < B,, unless R 
becomes very large. The magnetic field wraps around the 
same degrees of longitude regardless of the latitude. 

Observations in the interplanetary medium from 
the Sun to Pluto and within ~+30° of the ecliptic 
have confirmed the spiral pattern predicted by Parker. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


However, the observations by the Ulysses spacecraft 
(which surveyed latitudes between +80° at relatively 
low levels of solar activity) suggest that the magnetic 
field lines might not be wrapped on cones of constant 
latitude, but rather extend from the polar regions toward 
the equatorial regions (See SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES). This model 
was introduced to explain the observations that (a) the 
radial component of the magnetic field did not vary with 
latitude along the trajectory of Ulysses, and (b) energetic 
particles that were presumably accelerated by shocks at 
low latitudes and large distances were observed at high 
latitudes closer to the Sun. The new model should be 
regarded as preliminary, and its applicability to periods 
of high solar activity and to large distances remains to be 
determined. 


Sector structure and the heliospheric current sheet 
Measurements of the direction of the magnetic field in 
the solar wind at a point near the orbit of Earth often 
show the field pointing away from the Sun (positive 
magnetic polarity) for approximately half a solar rotation 
and pointing toward the Sun (negative polarity) for the 
remaining part of the solar rotation. Each interval of 
uniform (positive or negative) magnetic polarity is called 
a ‘sector’, and the magnetic polarity pattern observed 
during one or more solar rotations is called the ‘sector 
pattern’. The ‘two-sector pattern’ just described is 
typically observed during the period of declining solar 
activity. Near solar minimum, a ‘four-sector pattern’ 
is frequently measured during a solar rotation. The 
four-sector pattern consists of four sectors of alternating 
positive and negative polarity, each passing the spacecraft 
in approximately one-quarter solar rotation. Since the 
solar rotation period is approximately 27 days as seen by a 
spacecraft near the orbit of Earth, the duration of a sector 
is approximately 14 days and 7 days for a two-sector and 
four-sector pattern respectively. Near solar maximum the 
polarity pattern of the magnetic field is complex, and a 
sector pattern is not always present. 

Assuming that the solar wind is stationary, the 
temporal pattern of magnetic polarities observed ata given 
location during a solar rotation is equivalent to a spatial 
pattern of magnetic polarities. Figure 2 illustrates the 
spatial configuration of a four-sector pattern. Each sector 
is a region of uniform polarity in the ecliptic plane (the 
plane in which the planets move), extending from the Sun 
to at least the orbit of Earth and bounded by Archimedes 
spirals. Thus, each sector in the ecliptic is topologically 
equivalent to the shape of a piece of a pie, hence the name 
sector. 

The origin of the sector pattern is ultimately related 
to the large-scale pattern of the magnetic field at the Sun. 
The two-sector pattern is related to a dipolar magnetic 
field configuration and the four-sector pattern is related 
to a quadrupole component. Consider the singular case 
of a magnetic dipole whose axis is exactly along the solar 
rotation axis. The solar wind draws the field lines of the 
dipole into spiral field lines, but the polarity of the field 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


7 SDA ORBIT NO. 


~ * 


gett 


(eon) Hey 
+ +. aon 
ait ae te, +. 
* rms 
sets 
te 


Figure 2. The four-sector pattern of the polarity of the 
interplanetary magnetic field. 


lines is preserved in this process. Consider a SOLAR CYCLE 
for which the magnetic fields in the northern hemisphere 
have positive magnetic polarity. Then the heliospheric 
magnetic fields above the solar equatorial plane would 
have positive magnetic polarity and those below the solar 
equatorial plane would have negative polarity. The solar 
equatorial plane in this idealization is a singular surface at 
which the magnetic field strength is zero and across which 
the magnetic field polarity changes. 

The Sun’s rotation axis is tilted 7.5° with respect to 
the ecliptic, so that the solar equatorial plane is inclined 
relative to the ecliptic plane. Since the solar equatorial 
plane rotates with the Sun, an observer in the ecliptic 
plane will be below the solar equatorial plane for half a 
solar rotation and above it during the second half of the 
solar rotation. When the dipole axis coincides with the 
rotation axis, an observer in the ecliptic will alternately 
observe positive and negative magnetic polarities; he will 
measure a two-sector pattern. An observer located at 
heliographic latitudes >7.5° or <—7.5° would observe a 
uniform magnetic polarity. The sector structure would 
not be observed above or below the zone within +7.5° of 
the solar equator, the ‘sector zone’. 

A second model for the sector pattern was discussed 
in the early literature on sectors. In this model, the sectors 
extend from pole to pole, like the pieces of an orange. 
According to this model, an observer would see a sector 
pattern at all latitudes. 

In both models described above, the sectors are 
bounded by surfaces, which are planes in the region near 
the Sun. In the dipole model, the plane is the solar 
equatorial plane. In the orange model, the plane passes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The shape of the heliospheric current sheet in the 
region within several solar radii of the Sun. 


through the dipole axis. Obviously, these two models are 
diametrically opposed and mutually exclusive. 

A third model of the heliospheric sector structure, 
which avoids the extreme and singular assumptions of the 
two models described above while retaining some features 
of each, was proposed many years ago. This model focuses 
on the form of the surface separating the positive and 
negative sectors, the ‘heliospheric current sheet’ or ‘HCS’. 
According to this ‘HCS model’ the structure of the HCS can 
vary with the phase of the solar cycle. Near solar minimum 
and close to the Sun, the surface is approximately a plane 
that is basically the equatorial plane of the solar magnetic 
dipole. However, the surface can be distorted by an 
additional quadrupole component of the solar magnetic 
field such that it has folds near the Sun (figure 3). A 
four-sector pattern (see figure 2) can be produced by such 
a warped surface. The northern and southern extent 
of the sector pattern can exceed 7.5° when the dipole 
axis is tilted with respect to the solar rotation axis and 
when the quadrupole distortion of the HCS is large. The 
northern extent can differ from the southern extent; i.e. an 
asymmetry in the sector pattern can also be produced by 
quadrupole components of the solar magnetic field. 

The heliospheric current sheet model has been 
confirmed by measurements at various latitudes. When a 
spacecraft is at sufficiently high latitude during the period 
of decreasing solar activity and near solar minimum, it will 
observe a single magnetic polarity, while a spacecraft in the 
sector zone at lower latitudes will observe a sector pattern 
at the same time. This result has been demonstrated by 
observations from HELIOs 1 and 2, PIONEER 11, VOYAGER 1 and 
2, and Ulysses. For example, figure 4 shows a situation in 
which Voyager 1 was above the sector zone and Voyager 
2 was in it. Voyager 1 observed a single magnetic polarity 
above the sector zone, while Voyager 2 observed both 
positive and negative magnetic polarities within the sector 
zone. This figure illustrates a hypothetical meridional 
cross section of the HCS, which appears as a wavy line. 
In reality periodic crossings of the HCS are not observed 
at large distances, owing to dynamical interactions in 
the outer heliosphere that distort the HCS. However, 
the latitudinal extent of the HCS, marked by the dotted 
lines in figure 4, does not change greatly with increasing 
distance, since the solar wind expansion is approximately 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1994 


60 40 -20 0 20 40 60 


Figure 4. The sector zone illustrated here is the region in which 
both positive and negative polarity regions (sectors) are 
observed, not necessarily periodically as suggested in the 
idealized sketch here. Above the sector zone the polarity is 
positive (negative), and below the sector zone the polarity is 
negative (positive). 


radial. Thus, the sector zone is well defined even when a 
periodicity of the sector pattern is not observed. 

The foot-points of the heliospheric current sheet on an 
imaginary surface centered on the Sun and with a radius 
of a few solar radii (the ‘source surface’) can be calculated 
by extending the measurements of the photospheric field 
to the source surface. There are various ways to do this, 
but the simplest procedure assumes that the magnetic field 
is radial on a spherical source surface, and that there are 
no electric currents in the region between the photosphere 
and the source surface. Then one can use the photospheric 
magnetic field measurements to calculate a curve on this 
surface where the magnetic polarity changes from positive 
to negative. This curve is called the ‘neutral line’, and it 
corresponds to the foot-points of the HCS on the source 
surface. 


Solar cycle dependence 

Magnetic field strength 

The strength of the interplanetary magnetic field varies 
with the solar activity, being weakest near solar minimum 
and strongest near solar maximum. This is illustrated 
in figure 5. The middle panel of figure 5 shows the 
suNsPpoT number, which is a measure of solar activity, as 
a function of time from 1977 to 1996. The bottom panel 
of figure 5 shows yearly averages of the magnetic field 
strength measured by spacecraft at 1 AU as a function of 
time. The magnetic field strength varies approximately 
sinusoidally (as illustrated by the dashed curve), from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


700 


Voyager 1 


600 


500 


Viys(km/s) 


400 


150 


100 


Sunspot # 


50 


B,(nT) 


wn Om N © © © 


80 85 90 95 
Year 


Figure 5. The Sunspot number versus time (middle panel) 
illustrating the solar activity cycle. The magnetic field strength 
at 1 AU (bottom panel), which is a measure of the solar magnetic 
field strength, varies with the solar activity cycle. The estimated 
solar wind speed along the trajectory of Voyager 1 (top panel) 
also shows a solar cycle variation. 


x6 nT near solar minimum to ¥9 nT near solar maximum. 
Thus, the strength of the magnetic field varies by 50% 
relative to its minimum value during the course of the 
solar cycle. 

The solar cycle variation of the heliospheric magnetic 
field could be a consequence of two factors. First the quasi- 
stationary, large-scale magnetic field (e.g. the dipole and 
quadrupole components) might vary with solar activity. 
Second, transient ejecta have relatively strong magnetic 
fields and are more frequent when the Sun is more active, 
so that they will contribute to the variation in the magnetic 
field strength over the solar cycle. 


Sector structure 
Both the calculations based on the source surface model 
and the in situ observations show that the amplitude of 
the excursions of the neutral line on the source surface, and 
hence that of the HCS, increase with solar activity. Near 
solar minimum, the HCS is close to the solar equatorial 
plane. The maximum deviation of the HCS from the 
equatorial plane increases as solar activity increases. In 
other words, the width of the sector zone increases with 
increasing solar activity. 

The sectors and the sector structure are less well 
defined and less persistent when solar activity is more 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


intense. Intrusions of ‘foreign’ magnetic polarity are 
produced by ejecta from the Sun, which are associated 
with dynamical solar processes such as SOLAR FLARES and 
CORONALMASSEJECTIONS. For example, there are often regions 
of negative polarity in positive sectors when the Sun is 
active, often making it difficult to identify a given sector or 
sector boundary. Nevertheless, an observer in the sector 
zone will typically measure a polarity distribution with 
two distinct peaks corresponding to positive and negative 
polarities at the spiral field directions even when the Sun 
is active. 

Two possible sources for the magnetic fields in the 
sectors were considered in the early literature: (a) compact 
local sources (nozzles) and (b) the entire surface of the 
Sun. Itis now known that the truth is somewhere between 
these extremes. The quasi-steady streams of uniform 
magnetic polarity, which often fill most of the heliosphere, 
originate in CORONAL HOLES, which are regions where the 
magnetic field lines are open to the heliosphere and the 
density is low. The coronal holes do not occupy the entire 
surface of the Sun, and the fraction of the solar surface 
that they occupy decreases with increasing solar activity. 
However, coronal holes do cover the polar caps during 
most of the solar cycle, they can extend from the polar 
regions to the equatorial regions over a limited range of 
longitudes in each hemisphere, and isolated coronal holes 
are occasionally observed near the solar equator. The 
origin of the magnetic field lines in the slow solar wind 
is not completely understood. 


Elevation angles of B 

The elevation angle 6 = arctan[ By /(B? + B3)'/”] is the angle 
between the magnetic field vector and its projection on the 
r — plane. For a spacecraft in the solar equatorial plane, 
6 is the elevation angle of the magnetic field with respect 
to that plane, positive for a northward directed magnetic 
field. According to Parker’s model, 5 = 0 at all latitudes 
because By = 0. However, there are always fluctuations 
in the magnetic field direction. The elevation angles of B 
have a Gaussian distribution, but the average and the most 
probable values of the distribution are zero at any epoch 
of the solar cycle. 

Transient ejecta from the Sun carry magnetic fields 
whose configuration is not that of a Parker spiral. There 
is a class of ejecta called magnetic clouds for which the 
magnetic field direction rotates smoothly through a large 
angle, and in many cases the rotation tends to be from 
either south to north or vice versa. For most ejecta, the 
magnetic field configuration is more complex, but there is 
generally a relatively large meridional component By of 
the magnetic field. When the Sun is active, there are many 
ejecta in the heliosphere and the distribution of elevation 
angles is relatively broad. The width of the distribution of 
elevation angles varies with the solar cycle, being smallest 
at solar minimum and largest at solar maximum. Itis likely 
that this variation is primarily the result of a solar cycle 
variation in the frequency with which ejecta leave the Sun. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Magnetic field strength 

Parker’s model 

According to Parker’s model, the strength B of the 
magnetic field at any point in the heliosphere should be the 
square root of the sum of the squares of the components 
of B given by equations (1) to (3) above. Thus, Parker’s 
model can be used to describe the large-scale heliospheric 
magnetic field strength to lowest order. In this case, 
one considers averages of the magnetic field over one or 
more solar rotations, and the ¢ dependence drops out of 
the equations. The source-field strength might change 
with both the time ¢ throughout the solar cycle and the 
heliographic latitude 6. Similarly, the solar wind speed V 
changes with time t and 6. Thus, according to Parker’s 
model, the strength of the magnetic field varies as 


B,(R,t, 0) = B,a(t, 9)R~[1 + (419.5R cos(@)/ V(t, 0))?}! 

(4) 
when the rotation period of the Sun is assumed to be 26 
days independent of latitude, and the units of 6, V and R 
are degrees, km s-! and AU respectively. Here, the factor 
B,1(t, @) is the radial component of the magnetic field at 
1 AUasa function of @ and time, which we measure in units 
of a year. The first term in the brackets on the right-hand 
side of (4) is from the radial component of the magnetic 
field, which decreases as R~?, and the second term is from 
the tangential component By, which varies as R71. 

Since the Ulysses data indicate no latitude depen- 
dence of the radial component of the magnetic field during 
the high-latitude passes, we shall assume that there is no 
latitude dependence in the source term at all phases of 
the solar cycle, i.e. we take B,1(t,9) = B,i(t). From (4) 
with R = 1 and 6 = 0 we obtain B,, = B,(t)a(t), where 
a(t) = [1+(419.5/Vi(t))?]-/?. Vi(t) and By(t) are the speed 
and magnetic field strength respectively, measured at 1 AU 
over the course of a solar cycle. Thus, in the absence of a 
latitude dependence of B,;, Parker’s equation (4) becomes 


B,(R,t, 0) = {By(t)[1 + (419.5/ V(t)" 7} 
x R~7[1 + (419.5R cos(@)/ V(t, 0))7]}'7. (5) 


Note that (5) has no free parameters, since B(t), Vi(t) 
and V(t,@) can be determined from measurements, as 
discussed below. 

Beyond a few AU, (5) has the simple form 


B,(R,t, 0) = By(t)a R(t)! cos()(419.5/V(t,8)). (6) 


In particular, beyond 5 AU the difference between (6) and 
(5) is only 2% at @ = 0. This means that beyond several AU 
the radial component of the magnetic field is negligible and 
the magnetic field strength is determined by the azimuthal 
component of the field. The magnetic field strength would 
vary with heliocentric distance as R=, if all other factors 
were constant. In general, however, the magnetic field 
strength at a spacecraft such as Voyager 1 will vary with 
time ¢ (in particular, with the solar cycle) and with 6, 
because it is proportional to the source term B,(t) and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Voyager 1 


ee ee ee | 


Parker's model 


B(nT) 


0.1 


11 47 


0.01 


80 85 90 95 
Year 


Figure 6. The variation of the heliospheric field strength 
measured by Voyager 1 (full circles) between 3 AU and 65 AU 
from 1978 to 1996 is described by Parker’s model (solid curve). 


inversely proportional to the solar wind speed V(t, @) at 
the spacecraft. 

The results for B, presented in the following 
paragraph are based on equation (5), but essentially the 
same results were obtained from (6) with w = 0.72 + 0.02. 
This value of a is obtained with (V1) = 446 + 32 kms"! 
which is computed using measurements of speed at 1 AU 
from 1978 through 1996. The value a = 0.72 is consistent 
with a spiral angle of 45° at 1 AU. The small uncertainty 
in @ indicates that it is not sensitive to variations of V(t), 
which is why (6) is an excellent approximation to (5). 

Measurements of the variation of the magnetic field 
strength by Voyager 1 as it moved from ~3 AU to ~65 AU 
are shown in figure 6. The measurements were made from 
1978 to 1996. If the magnetic field strength at 1 AU did not 
vary with the solar cycle, and if the speed were constant 
with time and latitude, then one would expect from (6) 
that B would decrease monotonically with increasing time 
as the spacecraft moved away from the Sun. The bottom 
panel of figure 5 shows that the magnetic field at 1 AU does 
vary with the solar cycle. The top panel of figure 5 shows 
that the speed at Voyager 1 also varied with time, as a result 
of the increasing latitude of the spacecraft and the solar 
cycle variation of the speed. When these variations are 
considered, Parker’s model (6) predicts the result shown 
by the solid curve in figure 6. Parker’s model, which was 
introduced 40 years ago, provides an explanation for the 
observed magnetic field strength out to at least 60 AU. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Magnetic Field 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lognormal Distribution of B (hr avg.) 


0.3 


F = AB" exp{-[In(B) - u]°/2w} 
w = 0.58 | 
u= In(0.06) 


0.2 


Voyager 1, 1988 


Fraction 


0.1 


0.0 
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 


B(nT) 


Figure 7. The distribution of hour averages of the magnetic field 
strength (full circles) is generally a log-normal distribution (solid 
curve). 


Magnetic field strength fluctuations 

The heliospheric magnetic field strength is highly variable 
over a large range of scales. To a first approximation 
the distribution of hour averages of the magnetic field 
strengths observed during a given year is log-normal, 
i.e. the distribution of InB is a normal distribution. This 
result is illustrated for the distribution of hour averages 
measured by Voyager 1 during 1988, shown in figure 7, 
where the points are the observations and the curve is 
a best fit to a log-normal distribution. A log-normal 
distribution of B implies that relatively strong magnetic 
fields are observed far more frequently than one would 
expect for a normal distribution. The strongest magnetic 
fields are produced by the compressions of the front 
of streams, by shocks and by the ejection of plasmas 
carrying strong fields from solar disturbances. Log- 
normal distributions of the hour averages of B have been 
observed from 1 AU to 65 AU, from —20° to 30° in 
heliographic latitude, and at all phases of the solar cycle. 
The variance of the log-normal distribution of B relative 
to the mean magnetic field for a given year tends to be 
constant, independent of solar activity and position in the 
heliosphere. This means that near solar maximum, when 
the heliospheric magnetic field strength tends to be high, 
the variance in the log-normal distribution of B is also high. 
It implies that the intervals with the strongest magnetic 
fields occur near solar maximum, when transient ejecta are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


most abundant and when departures of the elevation angle 
of the magnetic field from Parker’s model are greatest. 
The distribution of magnetic field strength generally 
shows a scaling symmetry that is described by a 
multifractal distribution over a large range of scales. This 
means that the magnetic field strength has a fractal pattern 
in various parts of the structures carried by the solar 
wind, but the fractal dimension can vary within these 
structures. The situation is analogous to a landscape 
containing mountains and river basins. The fluctuations 
in altitude can vary greatly from place to place, much more 
so than one would expect from a Gaussian distribution of 
elevations such as one sees on the surface of a lake. Yet the 
shape of some large regions resembles the shape of smaller 
regions, etc. The dynamical causes for these invariant 
properties of the magnetic field strength distributions 
throughout the heliosphere are not yet known. 


Bibliography 

Burlaga L F 1995 Interplanetary Magnetohydrodynamics 
(New York: Oxford University Press) 

Hundhausen A J 1972 Coronal Expansion and Solar Wind 
(New York: Springer) 

Hundhausen A J 1977 An interplanetary view of coronal 
holes Coronal Holes and High Speed Wind Streams ed J B 
Zirker (Boulder, CO: Colorado Associated University 
Press) pp 225-329 

Parker E N 1963 Interplanetary Dynamical Processes (New 
York: Wiley-Interscience) 

Sheeley N R Jr, Wang Y-M and Phillips J L 1997 Near- 
sun magnetic fields and the solar wind Cosmic Winds 
and the Heliosphere ed J R Jokipii, C P Sonett and 
M S Giampapa (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) pp 459-84 

Smith E J 1997 Solar wind magnetic fields Cosmic Winds 
and the Heliosphere ed J R Jokipii, C P Sonett and 
M S Giampapa (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) pp 425-58 


Leonard F Burlaga 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar 
Activity 


The Sun’s outer atmosphere, the corona, is continually 
heated and expands to create the solar wind. Solar 
activity waxes and wanes with the 11 yr cycle of the 
Sun’s magnetic field, and these activity changes also affect 
the solar wind. The brightest structures in the corona 
are a bright belt of streamers, the source of the slowest 
solar wind. These streamers are occasionally disrupted as 
coronal mass ejections (CMEs) which spew large amounts 
of gas and magnetic fields into the solar wind. CMEs 
appear to be a fundamental way in which the Sun loses 
mass and releases the magnetic flux and field twist built 
up during the cycle. 


The solar magnetic field and the solar wind 
The Sun’s magnetic field controls much of its surface 
activity which evolves with an 11 yr period. The field 
tends to simplify with height in the corona, but the corona, 
and its outward expansion as the solar wind, also evolves 
on time scales related to the evolution of the surface 
field. The simplest magnetic configuration of the Sun 
occurs during activity minimum. At this time the Sun’s 
magnetic field can be approximated as a dipole whose 
axis is tilted slightly with respect to the axis of rotation. 
Large CORONAL HOLES cover the Sun’s polar regions and 
extend toward the equator. These open-field regions are of 
opposite magnetic polarity. The polar holes are separated 
by a wide band centered over the heliomagnetic equator 
within which lie the magnetically closed structures near 
the surface, i.e. active regions and sunspots. CORONAL 
STREAMERS extend over these regions forming a bright band 
around the Sun. The high-speed wind flowing from the 
polar holes constricts the oppositely directed fields over 
the streamers to a narrow current sheet which has the 
appearance of a ballerina’s skirt (figure 1). This rotating, 
warped heliospheric current sheet (HCS) appears as a 
sector boundary crossing at Earth, such that during one 
solar rotation the Earth will be immersed in a minimum 
of two large sectors of opposite polarity each with the 
relatively high-speed wind of its parent hole. During 
the solar cycle new magnetic flux emerges at higher solar 
latitudes leading to a more complex and disturbed corona. 
The streamer belt and heliomagnetic equator become more 
complicated and more inclined to the rotation axis, and 
the magnetic sector structure observed in the solar wind 
is more chaotic. Near maximum activity a simple, single 
current sheet surrounding the Sun may not even exist. 
On a global scale the slow solar wind is confined 
to the streamer belt and the HCS (see soLAR WIND: GLOBAL 
PROPERTIES). It now appears that this band is the source 
of most transient activity which affects the heliosphere, 
except possibly near sunspot maximum. Near the solar 
surface most activity occurs on smaller scales within 
regions of strong magnetic fields (see ACTIVE REGIONS) in 
the form of flares and active region loop expansions. 
However, in the corona the most rapid, dramatic and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Schematic model of the coronal streamer belt as a disk 
of variable thickness forming a conduit for transient outflow 
from (a) steady-state helmet streamers, (b) small-scale ejections 
and (c) large-scale CMEs, some with flux rope structure. After 
Crooker et al (1993). 


energetic form of evolution occurs in large events called 
CMEs. Most CMEs tend to cluster within ~30° of the 
coronal base of the HCS over the cycle. Thus, there is 
a close relationship among coronal streamers, the HCS 
and CMEs and their evolution. Since CMEs dominate the 
transient activity in the solar wind, they are the focus of 
this article. 

CMEs are immense structures of plasma and magnetic 
fields that are expelled from the Sun into the heliosphere. 
As such they are the nearest example on a large 
scale of the common process of magnetohydrodynamic 
(MHD) expulsion of material from objects throughout the 
universe. Although the range of CME speeds is large, even 
the slowest CMEs (slower than the in-ecliptic solar wind) 
never fall back to the Sun. This suggests that their internal 
magnetic fields control the dynamical evolution of CMEs 
near the Sun. CMEs can cause large geomagnetic storms at 
Earth and their attendant effects, such as auroral displays. 
Faster CMEs drive transient interplanetary shocks, which 
in turn can accelerate solar energetic particle (SEP) events. 
At the Sun the onset of CMEs can be associated with 
both flares and filament eruptions, but most flares occur 
without CMEs and some CMEs cannot be associated 
with any surface activity. Other articles discussing the 
origins and early evolution of CMEs are SOLARCORONALMASS 
EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS, SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: THEORY, 
SOLAR PROMINENCE ERUPTION and SOLAR FLARES: RELATION TO 
CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS. 


CMEs near the Sun 

CMEs are best viewed in white light from space-borne 
coronagraphs; these reveal that, even near the Sun, a 
CME can dwarf the solar disk. CMEs often appear 
to have a bright leading looplike structure followed 
by a dark cavity and a bright core of denser material, 
suggesting the eruption of a pre-existing prominence, its 
overlying coronal cavity and the ambient corona (figure 2). 
Prominences are elongated regions of dense, cooler 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


17 Aug 1980 20:42/18:29/22:58 UT 


18 Aug 1980 12:15 UT 


18 Aug 1980 17:18/18:09/19:34 UT 


Figure 2. ACME and prominence eruption on 17-18 August 
1980. The first and fourth panels are composites of an Ha (inner) 
image from Mauna Loa Observatory showing the prominence, 
an MLO kK-coronameter image of the mid white light corona 
from 1.2 to 1.8 solar radii, and a solar maximum mission (SMM) 
coronagraph image of the white light corona from 2 to 5 solar 
radii. The second and third panels show only SMM data. The 
inner circle on each panel marks the solar limb and the arrow 
points to solar north. From Hundhausen (1997). 


material suspended in the low corona in helical magnetic 
fields (See SOLAR PROMINENCE MODELS). Large prominences 
are surrounded by dark voids called cavities which have 
less coronal material but may be shaped by strong, helical 
magnetic fields (discussed later). There is a large range in 
the basic properties of CMEs. Their speeds, masses and 
energies range over 2-3 orders of magnitude, and their 
widths exceed by factors of 3-10 the sizes of flares and 
active regions. Occurrence rates of CMEs vary in phase 
and amplitude with the sunspot cycle. 

CMEs arise in large-scale, closed structures, such 
as coronal streamers, where the magnetic field is strong 
enough to prevent the plasma from expanding outward. 
The temporal and latitudinal distributions of streamers 
and prominences are similar to those of CMEs, being 
confined to low latitudes about the current sheet near 
sunspot minimum and becoming broadly distributed near 
maximum. This evolution is very different from that of 
active regions, flares or sunspots, which migrate from mid 
to low latitudes during the solar cycle. Many energetic 
CMEs result from the disruption of a pre-existing streamer, 
which increases in brightness and size for days before 
erupting as a CME (figure 2). Possible causes of such 
disruptions include the emergence through the surface of 
new magnetic flux, the dynamical evolution of arcades and 
the shearing of field lines. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Signatures of CMEs in the solar wind 

The CME’s plasma is entrained on magnetic field lines and 
transported into the solar wind, where it can be detected 
by remotely measuring the plasma along the line of sight or 
by measuring directly its properties as the material passes 
over a spacecraft. CME plasma in the solar wind has 
been remotely detected by white light photometers on the 
Helios spacecraft and by measurements of interplanetary 
scintillation (IPS) of galactic radio sources from the 
ground. 

The two Helios spacecraft were placed into highly 
elliptical solar orbits ranging from 0.3 to 1 AU from 
the Sun and operated from 1974 to 1983. The on- 
board photometers were able to produce crude images 
of +200 CMEs out to the orbit of Earth. The occurrence 
rates, widths and speeds of these CMEs were consistent 
with those of the coronagraph observations within 30° 
of the Sun. In these views of CMEs in the inner 
heliosphere, the CMEs are obviously expanding but 
otherwise their shapes are unchanged, with two brighter 
‘legs’ behind and flanking a tenuous leading front. The 
interplanetary (IP) masses and energies of the Helios 
CMEs were factors of 2-10 higher than those determined 
by the earlier coronagraphs. However, the more sensitive 
measurements from the sono LASCO coronagraphs now 
indicate that mass flows out of the corona behind 
the leading edges of CMEs for a prolonged period of 
time, yielding higher masses consistent with the Helios 
observations. CMEs can contribute a sizable fraction of 
the total mass and energy flux of the solar wind, especially 
at solar maximum and in or near the ecliptic. The mass 
contribution ranges from a few percent at minimum to 
possibly as much as 40% at maximum. 

The IPS technique detects transient disturbances 
in the solar wind as enhanced scintillation of distant 
astronomical sources in the sky along the line of sight. 
The scintillation is caused by small-scale turbulence in the 
wind due to the enhanced density of a transient such as 
a CME. By observing daily changes in the scintillation 
of a large number of sources distributed over the sky, 
crude maps of IP transients can be produced. A related 
technique involves the tracking and analysis of signals 
from deep-space spacecraft such as Pioneer Venus, Ulysses 
and Galileo as the extended solar corona transits between 
the spacecraft and the Earth. This technique is particularly 
sensitive to the enhanced density and density fluctuations 
in the compressed plasma between a CME and a shock 
if there is one and in the CME itself. However, these 
techniques have poor spatial and/or temporal coverage 
and are most useful when combined with other data sets 
on a particular event. 

Most of our understanding of CMEs in the solar 
wind has come from direct measurements of the plasma 
and magnetic fields as the CME material passes over 
a spacecraft which is situated outside of the Earth’s 
magnetosphere. A variety of signatures have been 
proposed as identifiers of CME ejecta in the solar 
wind. Table 1 summarizes those signatures which 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Signatures of CMEs in the solar wind. 


Transient interplanetary shock waves 
He abundance enhancements 
Unusual ionization states (e.g. He*) 
Brief density enhancements and longer-duration 
density decreases 
Proton and electron temperature depressions 
Bidirectional field-aligned flows of halo electrons 
and/or low-energy protons 
Magnetic field variations usually associated with 
magnetic ‘clouds’ or flux ropes: 

Strong magnetic field 

Smooth field rotation 

Low plasma B 

Low field strength variance 


are different from the normal solar wind and usually 
observed for at least several hours. These include shock 
waves, density changes, depressed temperatures, flows 
with enhanced helium abundances and magnetic field 
structures consistent with looplike topologies. Although 
the front and sides of a CME are visible near the Sun 
because they are denser than the ambient solar wind, 
expansion of the CME can yield lower than average 
densities further from the Sun. Many of these signatures 
were first identified in the plasma which followed an IP 
shock by several hours and was considered to be the piston 
(CME) driving the shock (see figure 3). Some signatures 
can also be observed elsewhere in the solar wind where 
they may identify relatively slower CMEs not driving 
shocks. 

More sensitive instruments show that the abundances 
and charge state compositions of elements and ions are 
systematically different in CME flows as compared with 
other kinds of solar wind (see SOLAR WIND COMPOSITION). 
As the solar wind-corona expands outward from the 
Sun, the electron density decreases so rapidly that the 
plasma becomes collisionless and the relative ionization 
states become constant, thus reflecting the conditions 
in the corona where this occurs. The charge states of 
so-called ‘minor ions’ (Z > 2) in CME flows usually 
suggest slightly hotter than normal coronal conditions at 
their origin (i.e. >2 MK). However, mixtures of charge 
states and, therefore, ionization temperatures are also 
found. In addition, transient flows often exhibit element 
and ion abundances (especially He and Fe) that are 
enhanced relative to the nominal solar wind. The 
coronal composition of transient flows are also seen 
in the systematic enhancement of elements with low 
first ionization potentials (FIPs) (see TRANSITION REGION: 
FIP EFFECT). Abundances of elements with FIPs <10 eV 
are enhanced by a factor of ~4 relative to those high- 
FIP elements, an effect which is typical of coronal, not 
photospheric material. Finally, the Ulysses spacecraft (see 
SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES) Showed not only that is there a latitude 
dependence on the speed of IP CMEs but also that their 
compositional dependence is different. The He and minor 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1000 


F. Shock R. Shock 


Theta (Deg) 


Phi (Deg) 
Qo 


10 
June 1993 


Figure 3. Ulysses plasma and magnetic field observations of an 
expanding CME-magnetic flux rope in the solar wind. From top 
to bottom the parameters plotted are bulk flow speed, plasma 
pressure (ions plus electrons), plasma 8, magnetic field strength, 
field polar angle and field azimuthal angle. The bar marked 
‘CME’ defines the region of bidirectional electron streaming. 
Ulysses was at 4.6 AU from the Sun and at a heliographic 
latitude of S33°. From Gosling (1996). 


ion abundances and charge states become more and more 
similar to coronal hole flows the higher the ecliptic latitude. 
Infrequently, unusually low ionization states of He 
and minor ions such as O, Fe and C are detected in 
CME flows. Although rarely observed before this decade, 
enhanced He* flows have been detected in at least 
four Earth-directed CMEs with the SOHO and WIND 
spacecraft during 1997-1998. In each of these events 
an erupting filament-CME could be associated with an 
unusually dense and narrow ‘plug’ of cool plasma at 
WIND in the trailing edge of a magnetic cloud. It is 
likely that such material is the solar wind signature of the 
filament itself and, therefore, is chromospheric in origin. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Although the speeds of the leading edges of CMEs 
near the Sun exhibit a wide range from ~50 to 
>2000 km s~!, the average speed is slightly less than the 
typical solar wind speed in the ecliptic. The speeds of 
most CMEs beyond several solar radii appear constant, 
indicating that they are rapidly accelerated low in the 
atmosphere. In the ecliptic within 1 AU of the Sun it 
appears that the fastest CMEs decelerate as they interact 
with the slower ambient plasma, while the slowest CMEs 
are accelerated, possibly by the same forces acting on the 
normal solar wind. At high heliographic latitudes the 
speed profiles of CMEs are different. Using bidirectionally 
streaming events observed at Ulysses as CME proxies, 
the speeds of high-latitude CMEs (730 km s~’ on 
average) were much higher than in the ecliptic plane 
and comparable to the surrounding solar wind flow 
characteristic of polar coronal holes (figure 3). This 
again suggests that CMEs are accelerated along with the 
surrounding solar wind. 

In a hydrodynamic plasma regime, a dense region 
moving through a uniform, background flow at a 
sufficiently faster speed will produce a shock wave which 
stands out ahead of the driver (see SOLAR WIND SHOCK 
WAVES AND DISCONTINUITIES). Such shocks are frequently 
observed throughout the universe, but our detailed 
understanding of them comes from direct measurements 
of their properties made in the interplanetary medium 
and in Earth’s bow shock. Within 1 AU of the Sun the 
strongest shocks are driven by CMEs whose leading edges 
are often a few hundred km s~! faster than the normal 
wind speed. A spacecraft sees a forward-moving shock 
as a discontinuous increase, or jump, in most plasma and 
magnetic field parameters. In figure 3 a shock at Ulysses 
is encountered first (left) and stands off from the leading 
edge of the CME driver by about 20 h. Between the shock 
and the CME lies a turbulent region where the ambient 
solar wind plasma and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) 
are compressed ahead of the CME. Depending on the 
signatures used, approximately 1/3-1/2 of all ejecta in 
the solar wind within 1 AU follow IP shock waves. When 
these shocks first develop is unclear, but there is evidence 
that most CMEs moving outward in the low corona with 
speeds greater than the local Alfvén speed (~400 km s~') 
are associated with coronal shock waves. Coronal shocks 
are remotely detected as Moreton waves at the surface 
and metric radio type II bursts in the corona. At heights 
and densities typical of the solar wind, shocks can be 
tracked outward at kilometric wavelengths (see SOLAR WIND: 
INTERPLANETARY RADIO BURSTS). 

Simple hydrodynamic model simulations have been 
successful in reproducing the basic speed and pressure 
profiles of shocks and CMEs even out to large distances 
from the Sun. Usually a simple pressure pulse 
of appropriate duration and amplitude is initiated 
into a uniform ambient flow with characteristic solar 
wind parameters. As the front of the faster CME 
overtakes the slower wind, a strong gradient develops 
and pressure waves eventually steepen into a forward 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. Results of a 3D simulation of a CME moving through a 
typical ambient solar wind. Here the CME is injected in the 
center of the HCS-streamer belt (left), specified as a 
high-density, low-temperature, slow-speed structure tilted to the 
solar rotation axis. The CME is represented as a 30° wide, 12h 
duration pressure pulse. The resulting CME interaction with the 
solar wind flow is shown as the slices in heliolongitude and at 
distances 2.5-5 AU from the Sun 12 days after launch. The slices 
are through four different heliolatitudes and show that the 
CME’s shape, pressure and speed will vary significantly 
depending on the characteristics of the ambient medium it 
encounters. Courtesy V Pizzo, NOAA Space Environment 
Center. 


shock propagating into the ambient wind ahead and, 
occasionally, a reverse shock that propagates back through 
the CME towards the source (the Sun). Because of its 
interaction with the ambient plasma, the CME slows until 
it eventually ‘rides along’ at the solar wind speed. This 
may not occur until several AU from the Sun. A different 
class of forward-reverse shock pairs was observed by 
Ulysses at high latitudes. In the event shown in figure 3, 
the speed declined from the front to the rear of the CME 
and the pressure was maximum immediately downstream 
from the shocks. Since the CME was not traveling faster 
than the solar wind ahead of it, the shocks were not caused 
by the relative motions between the CME and ambient 
wind but by expansion of the CME due to its high internal 
pressure. Simulations show that such features can be 
reproduced by the ejection of a dense CME into a uniform, 
high-speed solar wind. Initial propagation pressure waves 
steepen into shocks at a distance of about 3 AU. 

In recent two-dimensional (2D) and 3D hydrody- 
namic simulations attempts are being made to include 
more realistic solar wind conditions in which to inject the 
transient. For example, if an initially large but homoge- 
neous CME is injected into a more realistic, latitudinally 
inhomogeneous solar wind, it will evolve very differently 
in the fast and slow wind regimes. Figure 4 demonstrates 
one such 3D simulation wherein a pressure-pulse CME is 
injected into a bimodal solar wind which is slow and dense 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


at low latitudes and fast and tenuous at higher latitudes. 
The CME extends across the boundary between the two 
regimes and is distorted into two sections. The parts sep- 
arate radially owing to the strong velocity shear between 
the slow and fast ambient wind and latitudinally as a result 
of pressure gradients associated with rarefaction regions 
as the CME moves outward. This simulation also incor- 
porates features of the wavy ‘ballerina skirt’ HCS which 
adds to the complexity of the interaction in the longitu- 
dinal direction. Full 3D MHD simulations using the ob- 
served photospheric magnetic field as an inner boundary 
condition have been successful in replicating gross coronal 
structure near the Sun, as well as the initiation of transients 
by shearing of the magnetic footpoints. However, none of 
these efforts is as yet sufficiently developed to reproduce 
the complex magnetic and plasma structure of the actual 
solar wind or the transients that flow through it. 

Adding to the complexity of the real solar wind 
are interactions which occur between the transient flows, 
including their shock waves, and pre-existing faster or 
slower flows and the interaction regions bounding them. 
For example, a fast CME can overtake a slower CME or a 
fast flow can overtake a slow CME. In the inner heliosphere 
these interactions produce compound streams. These 
systems can continue to evolve and merge with other 
CMEs and shocks as they move outward. Eventually, 
well beyond the 5 AU orbit of Jupiter, such structures can 
form what are called merged interaction regions. These 
regions can become very extensive, sometimes essentially 
encircling the Sun like a distant belt. Such regions 
can diminish the flux of high-energy particles which 
continually stream into the heliosphere, called galactic 
COSMIC RAYS, causing solar-cycle-dependent decreases in 
their flux. 

Energetic particle events associated with solar activity 
(SEPs) are also commonly associated with IP shocks (see 
SOLAR WIND: ENERGETIC PARTICLES). Solar activity produces two 
classes of SEPs, gradual and impulsive, depending on 
their energy versus time profiles. About 10 gradual events 
occur per year near maximum and each can last for several 
days. Although flares were once considered the source 
of SEP events, we now know that most of these particles 
are accelerated directly from the coronal and solar wind 
population by CME-driven IP shocks. Impulsive events 
are much more frequent, ~100 per year near maximum, 
but last for only a few hours. They are generally much 
weaker than the gradual events and are only observed in 
space when a spacecraft or Earth intersects the pre-existing 
field lines which connect back to the flare—active region 
site. These are also called *He-rich events because the 
3He/*He ratio in them is much higher than in the normal 
solar wind. During impulsive events is about the only time 
we can sample flare material and its associated accelerated 
particles in the solar wind. 


The magnetic field topology of CMEs 
Recent research has focused on those solar wind signatures 
indicative of the topology of the ejected magnetic fields. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Schematic diagram of a reconnection model of 
magnetic flux rope formation at the Sun. In the top row from left 
to right rising, sheared field lines reconnect to form a rising flux 
rope and a closed arcade at the surface. Bottom: the flux rope 
structure as it would appear later and further out in the solar 
wind. Adaptation courtesy of J Gosling. 


Most such studies involve observations and modeling of 
magnetic clouds and bidirectionally streaming particle 
flows (see below). Magnetic clouds are long-lived solar 
wind flows having enhanced field strengths which exhibit 
smooth, coherent rotations. Figure 3 shows an example of 
such a cloud embedded in an expanding CME; note the 
strong and smooth magnetic field strength, B, the smooth 
rotation of the polar field angle, 6 and the low plasma B 
(ratio of plasma to magnetic pressure). Such a structure 
can be modeled as a force-free flux rope, which is a series 
of helical field lines, like the coils of a spring (figures 1(c),5) 
with pitch angles increasing towards the outer edge. 
Some magnetic clouds have been associated with 
solar filament disappearances. Since filament plasma 
is embedded in helical, horizontal magnetic fields, the 
close association of CMEs with filament eruptions and 
shearing fields near the surface has led to the modeling 
of CMEs as flux ropes. One idea is that the interior 
fields of a rising, sheared CME reconnect, resulting in an 
ejected flux rope and new, closed coronal loops at the Sun 
(figure 5). (Magnetic reconnection is a dynamic plasma 
process whereby field line systems interact, resulting in a 
change in their topology.) At least 1/3 of all CMEs in the 
solar wind appear to be flux ropes but this fraction may be 
higher considering the limited sampling available from a 
single spacecraft. In several studies magnetic clouds have 
been found to have the same orientation and polarity as 
associated erupting filaments at the Sun. Furthermore, 
larger filaments always have twist in the same sense in a 
given hemisphere, even though the hemispherical polarity 
reverses every solar cycle. These suggest that the sign 
of the magnetic helicity (or sense of twist) of the erupted 
structure in the solar wind can be predicted from a given 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solar filament eruption. Filament eruptions and CMEs 
may be important ways that the Sun sheds magnetic 
helicity as well as flux built up over the solar magnetic 
cycle. 

Although CMEs clearly involve the ejection of 
magnetic fields from the Sun, our understanding of the 
strength and topology of these structures is poor. Partly 
this is because instruments such as coronagraphs view the 
optically thin coronal material in projection against the sky. 
The circular CME structures we see (figure 2) are likely to 
be 2D projections of 3D structures such as arcades, flux 
ropes or shells. A prominence and its associated helmet 
streamer can be modeled as a dual flux system, one part 
of which is a flux rope and its surrounding coronal cavity 
which may help to drive the eruption once the streamer 
is disrupted. It appears that the prominence itself may 
be only a small part of this system, lagging the bulk of 
the CME-flux rope in the solar wind. This seems to be 
supported by the recent WIND observations. 

In the normal solar wind field lines are ‘open’, 
i.e. connected to the hot corona at only one end. This 
results in an outward flux of hot electrons from the Sun 
streaming along the IMF. Bidirectional flows of these 
electrons are occasionally observed in which the electrons 
flow in both directions along the field lines. These are 
interpreted as evidence that the associated transient field 
lines are closed with both footpoints connected either to 
the Sun (a bottle) or to each other (a plasmoid) and, thus, 
a good proxy for CMEs in the solar wind. Bidirectional 
proton flows have also been detected, often but not always 
in association with shocks and ejecta flows. Although 
both magnetic clouds-—flux ropes and bidirectional flows 
are usually considered good evidence for closed structures 
and CMEs, it is still difficult to ascertain the field topology 
of a given structure, i.e. entirely closed (bottle or plasmoid), 
entirely open or a hybrid (flux rope). 

Reconnection of magnetic field lines is thought to 
be an important energy release and heating process 
near the surface of the Sun, especially in flares. The 
disconnection from the Sun of the field lines stretched 
outward during CMEs and their associated reconnection 
in the low corona may also be fundamental to the ejection 
process. In a popular eruptive flare model, field lines 
stretched open during the eruption of a prominence and 
CME reconnect near the surface to form a magnetic 
arcade, accounting for the long-duration optical and x-ray 
events commonly associated with CMEs (e.g. figure 5). 
Other observations, such as the ejection of plasmoid- 
like structures and evidence for newly forming streamers 
beneath CMEs, support this concept. Some degree of 
disconnection-reconnection of transient field lines seems 
necessary to prevent a continual increase of the net IP 
magnetic flux, which is not observed. For instance, it has 
been estimated that, in the absence of any reconnection, 
CMEs should double the field magnitude in the ecliptic 
every 9 months. There are several ways of alleviating 
this problem. First, recent LASCO observations suggest 
that the occurrence of structures within CMEs having 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a concave outward appearance is much greater than 
recorded with older, less sensitive coronagraphs. Nearly 
half of LASCO CMEs show evidence for such features, 
which are prime candidates for loops disconnecting from 
the Sun. (However, in some CMEs these structures 
could be the projection of a rising pre-existing cavity— 
flux rope in the skyplane which would, therefore, not 
require reconnection—disconnection.) Second, there are 
a few observations and a model of outward-moving 
‘U-shaped’ structures suggesting the disconnection of 
previously open field regions at the top of streamers, 
resulting in the expulsion of a detached structure open 
to the heliosphere. These might be associated with so- 
called ‘heat flux dropout’ events, intervals in the solar 
wind devoid of the normal halo electron flux. Third, it 
is evident that the bidirectional streaming signature is not 
always present throughout all parts of an IPCME, or canbe 
missing entirely from CMEs identified by other signatures 
such as a magnetic cloud. This suggests that some field 
lines within the CME may be ‘open’ in the sense that 
they do not have both ends connected back to the Sun. 
Although the CME may begin at the Sun as a pre-existing 
flux rope connected to the surface at two ends, continual 
small-scale reconnection associated with the CME may 
produce a mixture of closed, open and disconnected field 
lines as it moves through the solar wind. 

As mentioned earlier, CMEs tend to arise in coronal 
streamers which form a belt that encircles the Sun and is the 
base of the HCS. The HCS is essentially the heliomagnetic 
equator of the Sun, separating the opposite-polarity fields 
in the northern and southern hemispheres. A recent model 
suggests that the base of the HCS may often be broad, 
encompassing multiple helmet streamers and their current 
sheets. Most CMEs might then be spatially associated with 
the HCS (figure 1). In this view the HCS and its associated 
plasma are more dynamic than previously thought, acting 
as a conduit for a range of activity from slowly evolving 
streamers to large CMEs. 

Indeed, it appears that in many, if not most, cases, 
CME-flux ropes in the solar wind expand through the 
current sheet in such a way that they carry the sector 
boundary, or polarity change, in the form of a large- 
scale rotation rather than a radially expanding current 
sheet (figure 1(c)). Reconnection near the Sun then re- 
establishes the current sheet behind the CME. In the solar 
wind following transients at sector boundaries there is 
evidence of small intertwined flux ropes which might 
result from disconnection and distension of the fields. In 
addition, quiet, radially aligned fields are often found 
in the trailing portions of CMEs and may be the legs of 
magnetic structures carried out by the CME. The Helios 
photometer images and the bidirectional electron data also 
indicate that the closed-field regions of CMEs can extend 
well beyond the magnetic cloud portion. 

Finally, such transient activity can also compress, 
amplify and align pre-existing magnetic discontinuities in 
the HCS and at the leading edge of high-speed streams. 
In addition, since the closed fields of a CME effectively 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Manifestations of Solar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


isolate its interior from the surrounding solar wind, the 
ambient IP field and its associated plasma will be deflected 
around the oncoming CME. This interaction causes the 
ambient field to be compressed and to drape about the 
CME, much asa moving body ina fluid pushes the ambient 
medium aside. Compression will increase the ambient 
field strength and draping can reorient its direction, 
especially ahead of a fast CME. 

The effects of CMEs on the solar wind also help 
explain why CMEs cause the largest geomagnetic storms. 
Geomagnetic storm indices are well correlated with the 
speed of the solar wind and the strength and direction 
(southward) of the IMF (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
GEOMAGNETIC STORMS AND SOLAR WIND ORIGINS) parameters, 
which are also enhanced during the passage of CMEs. 
For example, compression and draping of magnetic fields 
at the leading edge of CMEs and of the ambient IP 
field are prime causes of strong southward fields. Good 
associations are also found between storms and other IP 
proxies of CMEs, in particular strong southward fields 
in magnetic clouds and compound streams (formed by 
faster streams overtaking slower ones), rapid decreases 
in the galactic cosmic ray flux, enhanced He abundance 
events and filament disappearances which can be isolated 
from flares. Storms are often preceded by sudden 
commencements which are well correlated with the IP 
shocks driven by faster CMEs. In general, CMEs which are 
associated with storms are among the largest and fastest 
structures in the solar wind. Since the occurrence rate 
of CMEs follows the solar activity cycle so that they are 
much more frequent around activity maximum, it is not 
surprising that geomagnetic storms are also more frequent 
and stronger during maximum. 


Other sources of transient activity in the solar 
wind 

Finally, we briefly mention several other kinds of solar 
activity that may have an influence on the solar wind. 
There is some evidence, although controversial, from 
global IPS measurements that solar active regions provide 
a source of small-scale density variations in the quiet 
solar wind. If they directly add denser-than-ambient 
plasma to the flow, then active regions can contribute 
to the mass flux of the solar wind. Previously, active 
regions had been thought to be small-scale, entirely closed 
magnetic structures with no direct access to the solar wind. 
The revisionist view is supported by x-ray images from 
the YOHKOH satellite showing that loops overlying active 
regions are continually expanding outward in the corona. 
There is also some evidence that open field lines overlie 
some active regions and could act as conduits for mass 
flow into the wind. Although it is well known that most of 
the material in the slow component of the quiescent solar 
wind originates from the vicinity of the coronal streamer 
belt, the details of where this material comes from and how 
it is transported outward are unknown. Recent results 
from LASCO, IPS and total solar eclipse data suggest that 
the streamer belt is very filamentary and highly structured. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Blobs of material can now be observed being ejected from 
the cusps of streamers, probably through a quasi-steady 
reconnection process. Although the fast component of 
the solar wind, known to originate from the open fields 
of coronal holes, has low density, it does contain small- 
scale plasma structures whose source is not known. It 
has long been conjectured that the source of this material 
might be POLARPLUMES, bright, radially elongated structures 
that emanate over polar coronal holes. Plumes often, but 
not always, have bipolar magnetic fields at their base, 
suggesting that reconnections with the prevailing open 
fields drive plasmoid-like structures into the wind. Recent 
observations from SOHO show upward motions of plasma 
in plumes, supporting this view. 


Bibliography 

Burlaga L F E 1991 Magnetic clouds Physics of the Inner 
Heliosphere vol 2 ed R Schwenn and E Marsch (Berlin: 
Springer) pp 1-22 

Crooker N U, Siscoe G L, Shodan S, Webb D F, Gostling J T 
and Smith E J 1993 Multiple heliospheric current 
sheets and coronal streamer belt dynamics J. Geophys. 
Res. 98 9371-81 

Crooker N, Joselyn J and Feynman J (ed) 1997 Coronal Mass 
Ejections (Geophysical Monograph 99) (Washington, 
DC: American Geophysical Union) 

Gosling J T 1996 Corotating and transient solar wind flows 
in three dimensions Annual Review of Astronomy and 
Astrophysics vol 34 ed G Burbidge and A Sandage 
(Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews) pp 35-74 

Hundhausen AJ 1997 Coronal mass ejections Cosmic Winds 
and the Heliosphere ed J R Jokipii, C P Sonett and 
M S Giampapa (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) pp 259-96 

Webb D F 1995 Coronal mass ejections: the key to major 
interplanetary and geomagnetic disturbances Rev. 
Geophys., Suppl. 577-83 


D F Webb 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Radio Techniques for Probing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Radio Techniques for 
Probing 


The solar wind is a complex magnetized plasma 
containing large-scale magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) 
structures, waves and turbulence (see SOLAR WIND PLASMA 
WAVES and SOLAR WIND TURBULENCE). The structure of the 
solar wind is modulated in both time and space by 
solar variability. The solar activity cycle modulates the 
structure of the solar wind over a time scale of years 
while transient energetic phenomena such as coronal mass 
ejections (see SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION: OBSERVATIONS) can 
strongly perturb the solar wind on short time scales. 
Many direct and remote sensing techniques are 
available for exploring the basic structure of the solar 
wind and its variation in time and space. Direct 
sensing techniques require in situ measurements by 
instrumentation on board spacecraft located outside of 
the Earth’s magnetosphere. Remote sensing techniques 
employ a variety of ground-based and/or space-based 
instrumentation. A powerful class of remote sensing 
techniques exploits the use of radio waves to probe the 
solar wind. Beginning in the early-1960s, observations 
of radio waves from natural radio sources (e.g. quasars), 
spacecraft radio beacons and radar signals have been 
used to deduce the solar wind velocity and constrain 
its acceleration profile, to map three-dimensional MHD 
structures in the heliosphere, to determine the spatial 
spectrum of electron density inhomogeneities and to place 
constraints on the magnetic field in the inner heliosphere. 


Scattering of radio waves in the solar wind 

The solar wind is a plasma composed of electrons and 
ions, the bulk of the ion population being protons. The 
propagation of radio waves in the solar wind is determined 
by the refractive index of the medium, jy. For rarefied 
plasmas such as the solar wind and the wavelengths 
typical of radio experiments designed to study the solar 
wind, the refractive index f(r) at position r is 4(r) = 1 — 
red? N,(r)/2x, where N,(r) is the electron number density, 
i is the wavelength of the radio radiation and r, is the 
classical electron radius. In addition to the overall decline 
in electron density with distance from the Sun, there are 
variations in the plasma density due to large-scale MHD 
disturbances and turbulence which cause fluctuations in 
the refractive index: du(r) « A76N.(r). The mean radial 
gradient in N. can cause significant refraction of radio 
waves. Fluctuations in the refractive index du cause a 
variety of additional effects that are generally referred to 
as ‘scattering’. 

Scattering phenomena depend on 6?._ The mean 
density of the solar wind declines nearly as N.(r) « 
r~*. With 5N.(r) « N.(r) we have 6u? « r~*. Hence 
radio waves propagating through the solar wind are most 
strongly affected when they are closest to the Sun, as 
illustrated in figure 1. It is therefore useful to think of the 
solar wind as a thin scattering screen between the radio 
source and the observer. Consider a distant background 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


-4 sw 


weighting «r. 


v 


Figure 1. Radio emission from a natural or man-made source 
passes through the solar wind and is detected by ground-based 
radio telescopes. The spectrum of electron density 
inhomogeneities impresses position-dependent phase changes 
in the incident wave front. These yield both angular broadening 
and scintillation. 


source of radio waves—a QuASAR, for example. The radio 
waves incident on the thin screen are plane waves. The 
effect of density inhomogeneities in the plasma screen 
is to change the phase ¢ of the incident wave in a 
position-dependent manner: (x,y) = k f L(x, y, z) dz, 
where k = 27/i. The magnitude of the phase change 
therefore depends on the nature of the electron density 
inhomogeneities from location to location in the screen. 
The wave emerging from such a screen is no longer planar, 
but is instead ‘rumpled’ owing to the phase changes 
imposed by the plasma screen. In other words, the wave 
now propagates into a range of directions—it has been 
scattered into an angular spectrum. 

A useful statistic of the scattering medium is the wave 
structure function. Consider a Cartesian coordinate system 
where the scattering screen lies in the x—y plane at z = 0 
and an observer is located at a distance L along the z-axis 
in the x-y plane. Let r = (x, y, L) and s = (x, y,0). The 
wave structure function is D(r) = ([¢(r) — ¢(r+s)]*), 
where ¢(r) = red f N.(r) dz is the phase deviation along a 
straight-line path from the source to the observer. The 
spatial spectrum of electron density fluctuations ®y,(q) 
(where g = 2z/s) is the Fourier transform of the 
spatial correlation function of the electron number density 
fluctuations (5N.(r)5N-(r + s)). Generally speaking, the 
spatial spectrum of electron density fluctuations describes 
the nature of electron density inhomogeneities in the solar 
wind. Under certain simplifying assumptions, it can often 
be inferred from the wave structure function. A practical 
advantage of the wave structure function is that it is 
straightforward to measure. 

The diffractive scale, rgirr, sometimes referred to as the 
coherence scale, is defined by D(rgirs) = 1, i.e. the transverse 
scale over which the phase varies by a radian or less. The 
angle into which the incident radiation is scattered by the 
solar wind is 6. = 1/krgiry. The projected size of the source 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Radio Techniques for Probing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on the scattering screen is a second spatial scale, commonly 
referred to as the refractive scale: r,.f = LO. = AL/2nTrgirs. 
Note that a third scale can be identified. The Fresnel 
scale is rr = (AL/2x)/? and we have rgirfTrep = 1z- The 
Fresnel scale provides a convenient demarcation between 
two scattering regimes. When rr < raise, we refer to the 
weak scattering regime; when rr > rairs, we refer to the 
strong scattering regime. 

In weak scattering, inhomogeneities of a size 
comparable with ry cause weak focusing and defocusing 
of the wave front, causing weak flux variations, or 
SCINTILLATIONS, on the ground. Instrong scattering the wave 
will constructively and destructively interfere with itself 
as it propagates from the screen to the observer, producing 
a diffraction pattern on the ground. If the plasma screen 
were fixed, the diffraction pattern on the ground would be 
a fixed, random distribution of bright and dark patches. 
However, the solar wind moves away from the Sun with 
a speed of several hundred km s7!. The electron density 
inhomogeneities being effectively ‘frozen’ into the solar 
wind plasma, the diffraction pattern sweeps across the 
ground at a similar speed and direction to the solar wind. 
An observer measuring the intensity of the background 
source at a fixed location on the ground therefore observes 
strong scintillations. Scintillations are often characterized 
by the scintillation index m = o,/1, the rms fractional 
intensity fluctuation. In weak scattering m « 1; in strong 
scattering m ~ 1. Radio scintillations have an analog in 
the visible part of the spectrum: stars twinkle as a result 
of their light being scattered in the Earth’s atmosphere. 


The use of cosmic radio sources 

There are many cosmic sources of radio emission (e.g. 
quasars, radio galaxies, pulsars; see also RADIO EMISSION 
FROM BINARY STARS) that are spatially coherent—that is, point 
like—which lend themselves as probes of the foreground 
solar wind. As the Earth orbits the Sun, these sources 
are viewed at various elongations from the Sun. A 
variety of experiments can be performed which exploit 
natural sources of radio emission. One of the simplest 
is to measure the apparent angular size of the source. 
As discussed in the previous section, radio waves are 
scattered into an angular spectrum. As measured on the 
ground, the source is broadened in its angular extent. Since 
the source is, in the absence of the foreground solar wind, a 
point source, any angular broadening is solely the result of 
scattering in the solar wind. The spatial coherence of radio 
sources is measured using interferometric techniques. 
A RADIO INTERFEROMETER measures the mutual coherence 
function, T(s) = (E(r)E*(r + 8))/(|E*|), of the incident 
radiation, where E(r) is the electric field at location r. 
The mutual coherence function is related in a particularly 
simple way to the wave structure function when observing 
a distant, point-like source of radio emission: ['(s) = 
exp[—D(s)/2]. As discussed in the previous section, 
the angular width of the scatter-broadened source is 
conveniently expressed as 6, = 1/krair;, i.e. where [(s) = 
Trap) = exp(—1). It is worth mentioning that the Van 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


6F 4 
1433-155 YEN 
3 Nov 92 \I/ | 
4 
r=S.0°R 
=81° 
2 
oO 
oO 
8 of : 
ie) 
Die | 
-—4APr malt 
VLA 6.1 cm 
-65 | l l l J 
—6 —4 —2 0 2 4 6 


arcsec 


Figure 2. An observation of 1433-155 with the Very Large Array 
radio telescope at a wavelength 4 = 6.1 cm. The radial distance 
of the source from the Sun and its position angle are as 
indicated. Note that the source is displaced by a fraction of an 
arcsec from its nominal position due to refraction. The heavy 
arrow indicates the direction toward the center of the Sun, while 
the lighter arrow indicates the direction of the electron density 
inhomogeneities, presumed to be aligned with the local 
magnetic field. 


Cittert-Zernicke theorem shows that the inverse Fourier 
transform of the mutual coherence function (suitably 
normalized) yields the radio brightness distribution on 
the sky. This is the underlying basis of Fourier synthesis 
telescopes such as the VERY LARGE ARRAY NATIONAL RADIO 
ASTRONOMY OBSERVATORY. An example of an observation of a 
scatter-broadened source made by the Very Large Array is 
shown in figure 2. The image is anisotropic, and hence the 
scattering is anisotropic, implying that the electron density 
inhomogeneities are themselves highly anisotropic near 
the Sun. 

Other experiments exploit the fact that, since the radio 
flux of many cosmic sources is constant over timescales of 
days to months, any short-term variation in the radio flux 
density is due to the passage of the radiation through the 
solar wind, i.e. scintillations. Scintillations are commonly 
exploited in three ways. First, scintillation is caused by 
the movement of the diffraction pattern of the incident 
radiation across the ground as the solar wind travels 
outward from the Sun. The intensity fluctuations can 
be measured by a single antenna and the autocorrelation 
of a time series of such measurements can be formed. 
The Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function of 
the intensity fluctuations is the power spectrum P(f) of 
the intensity fluctuations at the location of the antenna. 
In the weak scattering regime, P(f) « ®y,(q), the 
spatial spectrum of electron density fluctuations, where 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Radio Techniques for Probing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


q = 2nf/Vsw. Hence, single-station measurements of 
scintillations of background radio sources can be used to 
constrain ®y,(q) at various elongations from the Sun. 

A second way in which scintillations are exploited is 
to use them as a passive tracer of solar wind velocity. Ina 
procedure similar to that outlined above for one antenna, 
the temporal cross-spectrum P.(f) can be measured by 
each pair of antennas and the diffraction pattern velocity 
vector can be extracted from the cross-correlation function 
(the Fourier transform of the cross-spectrum), or the cross- 
correlation function can be measured directly. As the 
background source changes in solar elongation, V,,, can be 
measured as a function of elongation and its acceleration 
profile can be inferred. While conceptually simple, 
complications enter into such measurements in practice. 
One of the main complications is the fact that the solar 
wind is composed of both slow-speed and high-speed 
streams. In addition, the electron density inhomogeneities 
are anisotropic. 

A third use of scintillation in the weak scattering 
regime is to observe a grid of background cosmic sources 
and to compute the scintillation index m and its mean 
value (m) in each case. The Cambridge disturbance 
factor is then computed as G = m/(m). Typically, 
hundreds of measurements are made each day to provide 
a dense sampling of the scintillation properties of the 
IPM in the form of a ‘G map’. Lines of sight along 
which enhanced regions of electron density occur yield 
enhanced values of G. Coherent density structures in 
the IPM can be mapped out using G maps and their 
evolution in time can be tracked by forming daily G 
maps. For example, heliospheric structures that corotate 
with the Sun have been observed using this technique. 
Recently, tomographic techniques have been exploited to 
infer the three-dimensional structure of such disturbances 
(figure 3). 


The use of artificial radio beacons 


Radio beacons on the ground (radar) or on board 
spacecraft offer another means of probing the solar 
wind. Temporally coherent radio signals—that is, those 
which are sufficiently narrow band to be regarded 
as monochromatic—have been used to exploit the 
phenomena of spectral broadening and phase scintillation 
to study the solar wind. Whena spacecraft is in opposition 
to the Earth, onboard transmitters can be employed as 
beacons to study the effect of the solar wind on the signal 
as it passes through the solar wind. Radar experiments 
have used VENUS as a passive reflector. As Venus moves 
into opposition behind the Sun, a radio signal can be 
transmitted from Earth to Venus. There, the signal is 
reflected and returns to Earth, where it is detected and 
spectrum analysed. Both spacecraft signals and reflections 
from Venus are sufficiently local that the wavefronts 
involved are no longer planar. Furthermore, in the case of 
radar experiments, the wave makes a double pass through 
the solar wind (see VENUS: INTERACTION WITH SOLAR WIND). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. An example of a tomographic reconstruction of the 
inner heliosphere, to a distance of 1.5 AU, which was derived 
from a combination of IPS intensity level data and velocity data 
obtained over one solar rotation period (23 June 1994 to 20 July 
1994, Carrington Rotation 1884). Earth’s orbit is as indicated. 
The technique is described in detail by Jackson et al (1998). 


These complications aside, radar and spacecraft signals 
have been successfully employed for a variety of studies. 

Spectral broadening of a monochromatic signal 
emitted by a spacecraft is caused by differential Doppler 
shifts from angular scattering on electron density 
inhomogeneities in the solar wind. A ground-based 
receiver can measure the power spectrum of the signal 
emitted by spacecraft. The Fourier transform of the power 
spectrum can then be related to the spatial spectrum, 
®y,(q), of the solar wind turbulence. In addition, such 
measurements can be used to constrain the solar wind 
velocity. Similar analyses are employed for a radar signal 
reflected from a planet. 

It is possible to infer ®y,(q) by measuring the phase 
variations (phase scintillation) of the incoming radio signal 
directly. In practice, observations are made at two separate 
radio frequencies in order to recover both the free space 
and plasma contributions to the phase. The temporal 
structure function of the phase is then constructed as 
D(t) = ([¢(t) — $( + t)*). The temporal phase structure 
function is then transformed to the spatial structure to the 
spatial structure structure function using D(s = tVsw). 


Future prospects 

While in situ measurements of the solar wind plasma 
have been made in the ecliptic plane for decades, and 
more recently at high latitudes by Ulysses (see SOLAR WIND: 
ULYSSES), Such measurements have only been possible at 
distances of ~1 AU or more from the Sun. Remote sensing 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Radio Techniques for Probing 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


techniques at radio wavelengths offer the only means 
of probing the inner heliosphere at present. Although 
a future satellite mission designed to probe the outer 
corona and inner heliosphere directly is in the planning 
stages, high-quality synoptic measurements of the solar 
wind at critical distances from the Sun will continue to 
rely on remote sensing techniques. With improvements 
to the sensitivity of groundbased RADIO TELESCOPES, greater 
numbers of cosmic background sources will be available 
for routine monitoring of the solar wind. 


Bibliography 

Jackson B V, Hick P L, Kojima M and Yokobe A 1998 
J. Geophys. Res. 103 12 049 

Narayan R 1992 Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A 341 151 

Narayan R, Anantharamaiah K R and Cornwell T J 1989 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 241 403 

Rickett B J 1990 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 28 561 


Tim Bastian 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Theory 


The supersonic outflow of electrically charged particles, 
mainly electrons and protons from the solar CORONA, is 
called the soOLAR WIND. The solar wind was described 
theoretically by EN PARKER, in 1958. Parker’s theory was 
verified experimentally by in situ observations by Soviet 
and American spaceprobes. On its way to Venus, in 1962, 
the MARINER II spacecraft observed the solar wind for 104 
days. The average flow speed was more than 500 km st, 
This observation showed that the coronal plasma expands 
into a supersonic solar wind as Parker had predicted. 


Parker’s solar wind theory 

Parker was familiar with the work on comet tails that 
had been carried out in Germany in the late 1940s and 
early 1950s under the leadership of LUDWIG BIERMANN (see 
COMETARY TAILS). The ‘ionic’ comet tails were observed to 
be pointing radially out from the Sun. This required a 
radial force much larger than the force that the photons 
from the Sun can provide, and Biermann concluded that 
the ‘corpuscular’ radiation from the Sun may play an 
important role in forming the radially pointing comet tails. 

Parker based his solar wind theory on the fact that 
the solar corona has a temperature of more than a million 
kelvin. He argued that the electron density and the 
pressure in such a hot atmosphere decrease rather slowly, 
and the pressure, far from the Sun, is orders of magnitude 
larger than the pressure of the interstellar gas surrounding 
the solar system. According to Parker, this imbalance 
between the pressure in the outer corona and the local 
interstellar medium would lead to an expansion of the 
coronal gas into a supersonic solar wind. 

The coronal gas, at a temperature of one million kelvin 
or more, is fully ionized; the number of neutral atoms is 
very small. However, the thermal energy of the plasma is 
not large enough to overcome the gravitation field and 
escape from the Sun. In the inner corona the pressure 
decrease is determined by gravity, so the gas is in static 
equilibrium. However, an ionized gas at a temperature 
of more than a million kelvin is a good conductor of 
heat. Hence, the coronal temperature does not decrease 
significantly with increasing distance from the Sun. The 
thermal energy of the plasma is almost constant whereas 
the energy needed to overcome the gravitational field 
decreases. In the outer corona the thermal energy is larger 
than the escape energy, and the gas can escape. 

In Parker’s solar wind model, the energy transport 
(in the form of heat conduction) from the inner corona 
plays an important role for supplying the energy needed 
to bring the plasma out of the solar gravitational field. 
The electrons are much better at conducting this heat than 
are the ions, owing to their smaller mass, but most of 
the energy flux goes into increasing the energy of the 
ions. This transfer of energy from electrons to ions is 
achieved through an electric field. This electric field must 
be consistent with the force and energy balance in the flow. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Parker described the coronal gas as a fluid. This 
allowed him to take into account the coupling of electrons 
and ions, without calculating the electric field explicitly. In 
his first study he assumed that the heat conductivity is so 
high that the coronal plasma has a constant temperature. 
On the basis of this assumption he could illustrate how the 
coronal plasma reaches supersonic speed around 5 solar 
radii from the Sun, and expands into interplanetary space 
with a steadily increasing flow speed. The equations also 
allow for subsonic flow, but the pressure far from the Sun 
in such solutions is almost the same as the pressure in a 
static, isothermal corona. Hence, the subsonic solutions 
do not describe an outflow that is in force balance with the 
local interstellar medium. 

In the supersonic flow the flow speed is larger than 
the thermal motion in the gas, and the dynamic pressure 
(associated with the directed motion) is larger than the 
thermal pressure (associated with the random motion). 
The dynamic pressure of the spherically expanding solar 
wind decreases with distance from the Sun. At a distance 
where the dynamic solar wind pressure is equal to the 
pressure of the interstellar gas a shock is formed: the 
flow speed is reduced, the density increases and most of 
the flow energy is transferred into thermal energy. The 
solar wind termination shock, at 100 AU or so (1 AU = 
Sun-Earth distance), has not yet been observed, but the 
Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft may cross this boundary in a 
not too distant future. 

Parker’s solar wind theory has formed the basis for 
our understanding of the expanding solar corona as well 
as the outflow of ionized gas from galaxies and stars, and 
other celestial bodies, and the outflow of light ions from 
the polar regions of the Earth (the polar wind). 


History 

Studies of the Sun have a long history in many cultures, 
but it was the studies of aurora and geomagnetic storms 
that led to the studies of the solar wind. 

The aurora was part of the mythology and the life of 
peoples living in the Arctic, but when Celsius and Hiorter 
in Uppsala, Sweden, started systematic observations of 
the ‘the magnetic needle’, in the 1740s, the correlation 
between aurora and fluctuations in the geomagnetic field 
was first found. Their collaboration with Graham in 
London showed that geomagnetic fluctuations occurred 
both in London and in Uppsala when aurora was seen in 
Sweden. These findings seem to be the first to establish 
the link between aurora and GEOMAGNETIC STORMS. 

It took some time to find the common cause of aurora 
and geomagnetic disturbances. The 11 year SUNSPOT CYCLE 
was noticed by the German amateur astronomer Schwabe 
in 1843, and several investigations showed a correlation 
between auroral and geomagnetic activity, and sunspot 
number. In the 1850s Broun found that geomagnetic 
storms had a tendency to recur after 27 days, a time close 
to the rotation period of the Sun, seen from the Earth. 
On 1 September 1859, a large solar flare was observed by 
Carrington and by Hodgson, and approximately 18 h later 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


there was a large geomagnetic storm with aurora at very 
low latitudes. This event served as an indication that there 
is a connection between solar ‘storms’ and geomagnetic 
storms (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC STORMS AND 
SOLAR WIND ORIGINS). Throughout the last part of the 19th 
century there were several studies of the possible link 
between solar activity and geomagnetic storms. ‘At the 
end of the century it was established that aurora and 
geomagnetic storms should be regarded as manifestations 
of an unknown cosmic agent of solar origin’, Kristian 
Birkeland wrote in 1908. 

One hundred years ago Birkeland set up an 
impressive research program in Norway to investigate the 
effects of charged particles from the Sun on the near Earth 
environment. Together with his assistants he carried out 
laboratory experiments, observations from field stations 
around the world and theoretical studies. This was the first 
comprehensive research effort in solar—terrestrial physics. 
(Birkeland financed the research program with money he 
earned from working with industry.) 

Birkeland is best known for his Terella experiments, 
where cathode rays interact with a magnetized sphere, 
placed in a low-density gas. The experiment showed 
that the cathode rays impacted on the sphere in regions 
around the two poles, much like the auroral zones at high 
latitudes. However, what is less known is that Birkeland 
also used his magnetized sphere as a cathode to study the 
emission of ‘electric corpuscules’ from the Sun. On the 
basis of observations of continuous geomagnetic activity 
at stations in the Arctic, Birkeland concluded that there is a 
continuous flow of charged particles from the Sun. These 
particles interact with all bodies in interplanetary space, 
and the interaction with comets leads to the formation of 
comet tails. To study this process in the laboratory he let 
cathode rays impinge upon an anode of coal. On the basis 
of many years of studies of the Sun and of geomagnetic 
activity he was convinced that all stars, in the course of 
their evolution, emit electrons and ions into space, and he 
went on to speculate that most of the mass in the universe 
is not in stars and nebulae but in ‘empty’ space. 

At the time when Birkeland carried out his work it was 
not known that the outer solar atmosphere, the corona, is 
hot. It was first in the 1930s that the picture of a corona 
with a temperature of more than a million kelvin began to 
emerge. This was made possible by the development of 
the CORONAGRAPH by BERNARD LyOT. By shielding the solar 
disk with a circular plate it was possible to carry out 
observations of the corona on a regular basis. Previously, 
such observations could be made only during eclipses. 
Lyot measured the width of the green line (5303 A) to 
0.9A (1 A = 10-" m). He suggested that the broadening 
could be due to thermal motions, but the element emitting 
the line was not known, so a temperature could not be 
determined. 

Grotrian argued, from the early 1930s, that the corona 
is hot, but it was the identification of coronal lines, 
as emission lines from highly ionized elements, that 
established that the corona is hot. Edlén identified the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


green line (5303 A) as an emission line from iron atoms that 
have lost 13 electrons, Fe XIV, and he showed that many 
of the other coronal lines were emitted by highly ionized 
elements. These elements cannot exist in the corona unless 
the temperature is a million kelvin or more. With such a 
high temperature one could describe the relatively slow 
electron density fall-off and the widths of the coronal 
spectral lines. However, it was not easy to understand 
how it is possible to maintain a hot corona overlaying 
a ‘cold’ CHROMOSPHERE. The rapid increase in temperature 
from the chromosphere to the corona is consistent with a 
heat conductive energy loss from the corona. This energy 
loss must be balanced by coronal heating. Biermann 
and Schwarzschild claimed that acoustic waves could 
transport energy into the corona from the lower layers 
in the solar atmosphere, whereas ALFVEN suggested that 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES (later called Alfvén waves) 
may carry the energy necessary to heat the corona. 

Already in 1941, Alfvén had published a model of a 
hot static corona, extending out to 10 solar radii, and in the 
early 1950s there were indications that the solar corona 
extends even further into interplanetary space. Hewish 
and Vitkevich observed fluctuations in radio signals that 
pass through interplanetary space relatively close to the 
Sun. They found electron density irregularities extending 
out to at least 20 solar radii and that the ‘super corona’ 
changed over the sunspot cycle. Latitude variations 
were also observed. These observations, together with 
Biermann’s observations of ionic comet tails and Forbush’s 
observations of the variations of the low energy cosmic ray 
intensity over the sunspot cycle, were known when Parker 
formulated his solar wind theory. 


The solar wind 
In 1958 Parker published a paper on the ‘dynamics of the 
interplanetary gas and magnetic field’ in the Astrophysical 
Journal. In this paper he presents a model of an expanding 
solar corona; the coronal gas is allowed to flow out from 
the Sun in the form of a solar wind. With this model 
Parker could describe the transition from a quasi-static 
inner corona to a supersonic solar wind with speeds of 
several hundred kilometers per second at the orbit of 
Earth. Parker used hydrodynamic equations, and he 
considered an isothermal, spherically symmetric, radial 
flow. This model suffers from several shortcomings, where 
the most severe may be that the energy balance in the 
flow is not addressed. However, with this very simple 
model, Parker could illustrate how the hot coronal gas 
expands and expels the interstellar gas from interplanetary 
space. Parker’s solar wind model bears some similarities 
to Bondi’s and McCrea’s models of accretion of interstellar 
gas onto a central object. Formally, the two problems are 
identical, but the physics of Parker’s solar wind model 
is more difficult to understand than the physics of the 
accretion flow. 

The simplicity of the model invited criticism. 
Chamberlain pointed out that the temperature in the flow 
is determined by degradation of the heat conductive flux 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and adiabatic cooling, whereas in the Parker model it was 
taken to be constant. This also implied that the energy 
per unit mass in Parker’s model is infinite. Chamberlain 
argued that the energy per unit mass should be set to zero. 
This assumption led to a low-speed ‘breeze’ solution of 
the fluid equations. Parker included the energy balance in 
the flow in his model and showed how heat is conducted 
outward from the inner corona and converted into flow 
energy by the pressure gradient force. This model could 
also describe the supersonic solar wind. 

Opponents argued that a fluid treatment of the 
coronal gas is not valid, and that a kinetic approach should 
be used. During the 1960s there were several attempts 
to construct exospheric solar wind models. Many of 
these studies gave results in better agreement with the 
breeze solution than with the supersonic wind solution. 
One reason some of the exospheric models gave low flow 
speeds is that the electric field in the models was too small. 
This electric field is set up by the plasma to balance the 
pressure gradient force in the electron gas. In the fluid 
model the electric field does not appear explicitly. In the 
kinetic models this is not the case. Many of the exospheric 
models used the electric field of a static corona. This is 
smaller than the field in a subsonic-supersonic solar wind 
and gives rise to a smaller acceleration of the protons than 
is found in the hydrodynamic model. 

In Parker’s model the solar magnetic field is ‘dragged 
out’ by the solar wind. Because of the high electric 
conductivity the electric field in the expanding gas is 
small. As a consequence, the magnetic field is connected 
to the source region at the Sun. When the Sun rotates, 
the gas emitted from one region in the corona is situated 
on a spiralling field line, and the direction of the field 
depends on the polarity in the corona. In the ECLIPTIC, 
the average magnetic field is in the ecliptic plane, and the 
angle between the average field and the radial direction is 
around 45° at the orbit of Earth. 

It took only a few years before the solar wind 
‘controversy’ could be settled. In situ observations of 
the interplanetary plasma were carried out by the Soviet 
spacecraft Lunik 2 and the American spaceprobe Explorer 
10. However, it was not until the fall of 1962, after the 
Mariner II observations of the solar wind, that Parker’s 
solar wind model was accepted. On route to Venus, 
Mariner II obtained 104 days of observations. It measured 
an average solar wind flow speed of 504 km s-!. The 
proton density was around 5 cm~°, much lower than the 
density in a static corona. The average interplanetary 
magnetic field showed a spiral structure very similar to 
the model proposed by Parker. 

The Mariner II flight took place during the declining 
phase of the sunspot cycle. There were several high-speed 
solar wind streams, with a recurrence period of 27 days 
(seen from the Earth), during the mission, that gave rise 
to recurrent geomagnetic storms with the same period. 
Thus, the source of recurrent geomagnetic storms could be 
identified as high-speed solar wind streams, but the solar 
source regions of these streams, often called M-regions, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


were not identified. It was 10 years later that ‘coronal 
holes’, were first identified as the source regions of quasi- 
steady high-speed solar wind; coronal holes are regions in 
the corona, with unipolar magnetic field and low electron 
density. During the declining part of the sunspot cycle 
the polar regions develop into large coronal holes, and the 
high-speed solar wind from these regions fills up a large 
fraction of interplanetary space. 


Solar wind from a given corona 

When Parker formulated his solar wind theory he took the 
inner solar corona to be a reservoir of particles and energy 
for the outflowing solar wind. Therefore it can be argued 
that he made the assumption that the energy balance in 
the corona is between coronal heating and inward heat 
conductive energy loss and that the energy loss in the 
solar wind is not large enough to significantly change the 
structure of the inner corona. 

This model can describe the basic dynamics of the 
corona-solar wind system quite well, i.e. the expansion of 
the coronal gas into a supersonic solar wind. However, 
Parker realized that the model could not describe the 
quasi-steady high-speed solar wind streams that were 
observed, mainly during the declining phase of the 
sunspot cycle. He found that energy has to be added 
beyond the inner boundary to speed up the flow. Many 
years later Leer and Holzer showed that this energy has to 
be deposited in the supersonic region of the flow; energy 
deposition close to the Sun increases the solar wind particle 
flux whereas energy deposition in the supersonic flow 
increases the energy per unit mass in the flow and therefore 
the flow speed. 

There are several problems with a model where the 
electron density and temperature in the inner corona are 
taken to be independent of the solar wind outflow. If 
we assume that the electron (proton) density at the inner 
boundary is fixed, and let the temperature increase, the 
solar wind proton flux increases rapidly. By varying the 
temperature from one to two million kelvin the solar wind 
proton flux changes by a factor of 100 or so. However, the 
solar wind proton flux is observed to be fairly constant 
whereas the coronal temperature shows considerable 
variation. This inconsistency cannot be resolved in a 
reasonable manner within the framework of a traditional 
solar wind model. In order to obtain a more complete 
description of the solar wind we must include the coronal 
energy balance in the model. 


Formation of the corona and acceleration of the 
solar wind 

In Parker’s theory the solar wind is a consequence of the 
coronal heating process, so the inclusion of the coronal 
energy balance would be a natural extension of his model. 
This can be done by moving the inner boundary from 
the corona into the upper chromosphere. A significant 
energy flux is needed to balance the radiative losses from 
the chromosphere, but the energy flux deposited in the 
outermost part of the solar atmosphere, where the electron 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


density is very small, is not radiated away locally. The 
temperature increases until some other loss mechanism 
balances the heat input. In magnetically closed regions, 
where the coronal plasma is trapped by the magnetic field, 
inward heat conduction is the most significant energy loss, 
whereas in regions where the magnetic field extends into 
interplanetary space, and the coronal plasma is free to 
escape, energy may also be lost in the solar wind. How 
much of the energy that is lost as inward heat flux and 
as solar wind energy flux may depend on the amplitude 
of the energy flux and how and where this energy flux is 
deposited in the corona. 


Energy balance in a static corona 


Let us first consider the energy balance in magnetically 
closed regions, where the energy deposited as heat is lost as 
inward heat conduction. To make the problem as simple as 
possible we can consider a spherically symmetric corona, 
with a ‘lid’ on it. This outer boundary does not allow 
transport of either plasma or energy. 

If this static corona is heated by an energy flux from 
the Sun, say 100 W m~? at the solar surface, and this 
energy flux is deposited in the corona over a length 
scale comparable with a solar radius, we find a coronal 
temperature in the range 1.5—2.0 million K; a corona at this 
temperature will lose 100 W m ~~? into the TRANSITION REGION 
in the form of an electron heat flux. However, the heat 
conductive loss from the corona depends sensitively on 
the coronal temperature; a corona at 0.5 million K loses 
only 1 W m~? as inward heat flux. Because of the very 
strong temperature dependence of the heat conduction in 
an ionized gas we find that a small heat input is sufficient 
to maintain a rather hot corona. 

In a corona where the electron (proton) density is 
so low that the electrons and protons are not thermally 
coupled, the proton heating must be balanced by heat 
conduction in the proton gas. As there is no reason to 
expect that the protons are heated less than the electrons, 
the lower heat conductivity in the protons leads to a proton 
temperature that is higher than the electron temperature. 

The electron density in the inner corona is determined 
by the pressure in the chromosphere-corona transition 
region, and this pressure is determined by the heat 
conductive flux from the corona. If we assume that the 
radiative losses from the transition region are balanced 
by the heat flux from the corona, we find that an inward 
heat flux of 100 W m~? corresponds to a transition region 
pressure of pre = 7 x 10°? Nm”. The pressure is 
proportional to the heat flux, so a heat flux of 10 W m~* 
corresponds to 7 x 10-* N m™. A large inward heat flux 
leads to a high transition region pressure, a large electron 
density in the inner corona and strong collisional coupling 
between electrons and protons. A small inward heat flux 
is consistent with a low pressure in the transition region 
and a low electron density in the corona. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Energy balance in coronal holes 

In magnetically open regions the energy that is deposited 
in the corona can be lost as inward heat flux and as solar 
wind energy flux. Which of these two loss mechanisms is 
the most important one may depend on how and where 
energy is transferred to the coronal plasma. If most of the 
energy is added to the electrons, as heat, a large fraction 
may be lost as inward heat flux. However, if most of the 
energy is added to the ions the inward heat flux may be 
reduced significantly. 

In order to investigate the energy balance of coronal 
hole regions we can construct mathematical models 
extending from the upper chromosphere, through the 
transition region and corona, and far into interplanetary 
space. The heating of the corona is specified through the 
amplitude of the energy flux and how and where this 
energy flux is deposited. These types of studies show that 
heating of the very inner corona leads to a large inward 
heat flux, whereas only a small fraction of the energy flux 
is lost in the solar wind. Heating further out from the 
Sun leads to a larger solar wind energy loss, but there is 
a significant difference between models with electron and 
proton heating. 

In models with extended electron heating the inward 
heat flux is a significant fraction of the energy flux, and 
because of the high heat conductivity in the electrons the 
temperature in the corona does not exceed 1.5 million K 
for a reasonable heat input. The large inward heat flux 
is consistent with a large transition region pressure and 
a quite large electron density in the inner corona. The 
solar wind emanating from such a corona does not reach 
a high flow speed far from the Sun. A typical value is 
300 km s~!. In these models, where the electrons are 
heated, a large fraction of the outward energy flux from 
the corona is carried as electron heat conduction. This 
energy is transferred to the ions via the polarization electric 
field. This model has many similarities to the ‘classical’ 
solar wind model, where electron heat conduction from 
the inner corona supplies the energy flux that is needed to 
drive the solar wind. 

If most of the energy is added to the protons, the 
inward heat flux is much smaller, the transition region 
pressure is low, the electron density in the inner corona 
is low, the thermal coupling may be weak and the coronal 
proton temperature may be quite high. In models with 
extended proton heating most of the energy deposited in 
the corona is lost in the solar wind. The density in the 
corona and the solar wind proton flux are small, so the 
energy per unit mass in the flow, and the flow speed far 
from the Sun, can be quite large. In order to obtain flow 
speeds of 800 km s~’, measured in the high-speed wind by 
the Ulysses spacecraft, a large fraction of the energy must 
be deposited in the outer corona where the proton density 
is so low that the heat cannot be conducted away. Then, 
the heating leads to a high proton temperature and rapid 
acceleration of the flow. 

This type of model study of the corona-solar wind 
system is limited by the assumptions made, but some 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


general results seem to emerge. High-speed solar wind 
streams cannot be found in models where most of the 
energy is deposited in the very inner corona. In models 
with significant electron heating the inward heat flux is 
too large, the coronal electron density is too high and 
the coronal temperature is too low to generate high-speed 
wind. The high-speed streams can be obtained in models 
where most of the energy is deposited in the protons. The 
energy may be deposited as heat or it may go into direct 
acceleration of the flow, but none of these processes will 
lead to a large flow speed unless the energy is deposited 
sufficiently far out in the corona. Most of the energy flux 
deposited in the corona, in these models, is lost in the solar 
wind. As the asymptotic flow speed is comparable with 
the escape speed of the Sun, the solar wind mass flux is 
proportional to the the energy flux deposited in the corona. 


Ulysses and SOHO 

In the 1990s there have been two successful space missions 
that have contributed significantly to our understanding 
of the solar wind. The Ulysses spacecraft has observed the 
solar wind at all solar latitudes (see SOLAR WIND: ULYSSES). 
The first orbital period was during the declining phase of 
the sunspot cycle. The observations showed a fast and 
steady solar wind at latitudes larger than 20°. Close to the 
ecliptic the flow speed was lower and more variable. The 
solar wind mass flux showed little variation with latitude. 

The fast solar wind streams originate in large coronal 
holes. Observations of spectral lines from large polar 
coronal holes, with instruments on board the Solar and 
Heliospheric Observatory (SoHo), show that heavy ions 
are warmer than protons which themselves are warmer 
than the electrons. These observations support a model 
of high-speed wind, with significant energy deposition in 
the protons and not in electrons. The fact that we observe 
heavy ions in the corona may be taken as an indication 
that their temperature is high. If the temperature of heavy 
ions were equal to the proton temperature, the density 
of heavy ions would fall off so rapidly with heliocentric 
distance that it would be difficult to see them in the corona. 
However, does a high temperature tell us that a heavy ion 
is preferentially heated? 

Particle escape seems to be the most important energy 
loss process for protons and heavy ions in coronal holes. 
As the flux of escaping particles is an exponential function 
of the thermal energy over the escape energy a modest 
heating of heavy ions leads to a high temperature. If 
the energy input per unit mass is the same for protons 
and heavy ions the temperature should be proportional 
to mass. However, if the ion temperature increases with 
mass, more rapidly than proportional to mass, we can 
conclude that the heavy ions are preferentially heated. So 
far, only a few ion temperatures have been measured in 
large coronal holes with the Ultraviolet Coronagraph and 
Spectrograph (UVCS) on board SOHO, but observations of 
spectral lines from oxygen atoms that have lost 5 electrons, 
OVI, seem to indicate that there are heavy ions in the 
corona that are preferentially heated. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Summary 
Parker’s solar wind theory forms the basis for our 
understanding of the interplanetary plasma. The 


dynamics of the solar wind is described by models 
developed more than 40 years ago. The extension of these 
models, which includes the coronal energy balance, has 
led to a fairly good understanding of the acceleration of 
the solar wind. 

The solar wind is driven by the energy deposited in 
the corona. This process is not understood. In the future 
the emphasis will therefore be on trying to understand 
coronal heating. A better understanding of how energy is 
transported into the corona and transferred to the gas will 
also give us a deeper understanding of how the solar wind 
is accelerated. 


Bibliography 

Eather R H 1980 Majestic Lights (American Geophysical 
Union) 

Golub L and Pasachoff J M 1997 The Solar Corona 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Jokipii J R, Sonett C P and Giampapa M S (eds) 1997 Cosmic 
Winds and the Heliosphere (Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) 

Parker E N 1958 Dynamics of the interplanetary gas and 
magnetic fields Astrophys. J. 128 664-76 


Egil Leer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Ulysses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar Wind: Ulysses 


Ulysses is the first space mission ina polar orbit around the 
Sun, and the first to make observations in the previously 
unvisited regions of the heliosphere over the polar regions 
at high heliolatitudes. The objective of the Ulysses space 
mission, launched on 6 October 1990, is the exploration 
of the dependence on heliolatitude of the heliospheric 
medium and its relationship with the Sun’s coronal 
structure and dynamics. The heliosphere is the large, 
three-dimensional region of space around the Sun filled 
with the SOLAR WIND and the remnant of the SOLAR MAGNETIC 
FIELD carried in it. The outer boundary of the heliosphere 
is determined by the interaction between the solar wind 
and the local interstellar medium. 

The properties of the heliospheric medium and their 
dependence on solar and coronal phenomena have been 
studied since the early 1960s by numerous spacecraft in 
Earth orbit, by planetary probes during their cruise to the 
target planets and by dedicated interplanetary missions. 
Most of the direct, in situ observations have been confined 
to the vicinity of the ecliptic plane (the plane of the 
Earth’s orbital motion around the Sun). In heliographic 
coordinates, this corresponds to a range of +7.25° in 
heliolatitude, the angle between the ecliptic plane and the 
solar equatorial plane. Solar observations from the ground 
clearly show that solar and coronal phenomena strongly 
depend on heliolatitude. In particular, observations 
during solar EcLirses make clear that the CORONA usually 
has an appearance and structure in the polar regions very 
different from those near the Sun’s equator. As the solar 
wind, which forms the heliospheric medium, is a result of 
the expansion of the solar corona into space, its properties 
are also expected to depend strongly on heliolatitude. This 
dependence of the heliospheric medium on heliolatitude 
had been recognized, but, prior to Ulysses, no space 
mission had been undertaken to study the heliospheric 
medium in three dimensions. 

This delay was due, in part, to the difficulties involved 
in placing a spacecraft into an orbit out of the ecliptic plane. 
Ulysses’ unique orbit was achieved by first targeting 
the spacecraft to Jupiter and using gravity assist (the 
maneuver which allows, during the close flyby of a planet, 
use of the gravitational potential of the planet to modify 
the orbit of a spacecraft) to deflect the trajectory of Ulysses 
out of the ecliptic plane. The Jupiter flyby took place 
in February 1992, and since then Ulysses has been in 
a nearly polar orbit around the Sun. Its orbital plane 
makes an angle of about 80° with the solar equatorial 
plane, its aphelion (the furthest distance from the Sun) is at 
5.4 astronomical units (AU, the mean distance between the 
Sun and the Earth), its perihelion (closest approach to the 
Sun) is at 1.4 AU. The orbital period of Ulysses is 6.2 years; 
its first complete polar orbit is shown in figure 1. Ulysses 
is equipped with a comprehensive payload to make 
observations in the solar wind. Instruments to measure 
the speed, density, temperature and composition of the 
solar wind plasma are complemented by instruments to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


measure the magnetic field, radio and plasma waves, as 
well as energetic particles from the Sun and COsMIC RAYS. 
Following the Jupiter flyby, the spacecraft first 
explored the region of the heliosphere over the south 
pole of the Sun, in 1993-4. It then moved relatively 
rapidly, between September 1994 and August 1995, from 
the southern polar regions to the northern polar regions. 
This passage from south to north allowed a unique survey 
of the latitudinal dependence of the solar wind. Ulysses 
completed its first full solar polar orbit in March 1998. The 
timing of the mission during the declining and minimum 
phases of the soLARCYCLE, with the polar passes taking place 
in 1994 and 1995, has yielded a unique set of observations 
of the configuration of the heliosphere and the properties 
of the heliospheric medium at solar minimum activity. 
The key results of Ulysses are: 


(a) The confirmation of the very nearly uniformly high 
solar wind velocities (>750 km s~!) from the polar 
coronal holes. 

(b) The significant over-expansion of the polar solar 
wind when compared with the areas occupied by 
coronal holes. 

(c) The clear differentiation, as determined by ion com- 
position and freezing in temperature measurements, 
between the characteristics of fast and slow solar 
wind streams. 

(d) The latitudinal independence of the radial compo- 
nent of the magnetic field, constraining solar wind 
models. 

(e) The high levels of mostly Alfvénic, transverse fluctu- 
ations associated with high-speed wind streams. 

(f) Theslower evolution of the turbulence in the uniform 
solar wind in the polar regions when compared with 
the near-ecliptic regions of the heliosphere. 

(g) The less than expected latitudinal gradient of cosmic 
rays, calling into question established cosmic ray 
modulation models. 


These findings of Ulysses are described in more detail in 
the following paragraphs. 

It has been known from previous solar and 
interplanetary observations that there are two kinds of 
solar wind. The slow solar wind, with speeds not 
exceeding about 450 km Sod; originates from above coronal 
regions in which magnetic fields lines are generally closed 
in large-scale loops. The fast solar wind, with speeds 
in excess of 550 km s7!, but usually about 750 km s7! 
or more, originates from regions of the solar corona, the 
so-called CORONAL HOLES, in which magnetic field lines 
rooted in the solar surface at one end spread out into the 
heliosphere. The configuration of the solar corona around 
solar minimum is dominated by two large coronal holes 
in the polar regions and a belt of closed magnetic fields in 
the equatorial region. This was the coronal configuration 
during the polar passes of Ulysses in 1994 to 1996. The 
observations of the solar wind onboard Ulysses confirmed 
that the polar regions of the heliosphere were filled with 
fast solar wind, carrying magnetic field lines of opposite 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Ulysses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


North Polar Pass 1996 


Jun-Sep 1995 


Earth Orbit 


Perihelion ' 
Mar 1995‘ Oct 1990 


\ 
\ 


1995, 


1991 


South Polar Pass 
Jun-Nov 1994 


Jupiter Orbit 


1994 


Figure 1. The first solar polar orbit of the Ulysses mission. 


IVI (km/s) 


40°S 


IBI (nT) 


1991 1992 1993 1994 


80°S 0° 


80°N 30°N 7°N O° 7°S 30° 


Nk Mr 


1995 


Year 


1996 1997 1998 1999 


Figure 2. The solar wind speed (upper panel) and the magnitude of the magnetic (lower panel) observed by Ulysses from launch 


through its first orbit. 


polarity from the two polar coronal holes. When Ulysses 
was close to the solar equator, at latitudes less than 35° 
south in 1993 and about 25° north in 1996, the solar wind 
reached the spacecraft both from the equatorial band of 
solar streamers (the heliospheric extension of the regions 
above the closed magnetic regions in the corona) and from 
the equatorward extensions of the polar coronal holes. 
This was due to the small inclination and warping of the 
band of slow solar wind with respect to the equatorial 
plane, so that as the Sun rotated, Ulysses was immersed 
alternately in slow and fast solar wind in each period 
of solar rotation. When Ulysses passed poleward of the 
equatorial region, the speed of the solar wind was found 
to be uniform, at about 750 km s7!, ina very large volume 
of space over the two solar poles. Only small variations 
in this high speed were found, explained by small-scale 
dynamic effects (‘microstreams’) and by the effect of very 
large-amplitude, long-wavelength Alfvén waves which 
dominated the large-scale fluctuations in the magnetic 
field. The overview of the two key parameters, the solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wind speed and the magnitude of the magnetic field 
measured by Ulysses since launch, is shown in figure 2. 

The areas covered by coronal holes near the Sun’s 
poles are relatively small, only about 20% of the solar 
surface at the base of the corona, yet Ulysses observed that 
more than 75% of space (measured in terms of solid angle) 
around the Sun was filled with solar wind originating 
from those coronal holes. This means that the solar 
wind does not simply expand radially in the corona but 
considerable expansion takes place in latitude, from the 
poles towards the equatorial regions, as the solar wind is 
accelerated away from the Sun. Several previous models 
of coronal expansions had considered this possibility, but 
only Ulysses’ observations were able to establish this 
important aspect of the origin of the solar wind. 

The composition of the solar wind is different in slow 
and fast streams, a result well established in observations 
made in the ecliptic plane. Partly because of its polar 
orbit, partly because of the instrumentation carried, 
Ulysses provided the first very strong and comprehensive 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Ulysses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


evidence that the compositional differences between the 
two kinds of solar wind represented the coronal conditions 
in which they originated. Slow solar wind originates 
in regions where the coronal plasma is very hot, about 
1.5 MK or so, so that elements such as oxygen, iron 
or magnesium are highly ionized. But coronal holes 
are cooler and the lower temperature is reflected in the 
degree of ionization of the elements. Using ratios of the 
ionization states of elements (for example, the abundance 
ratio of O”* and O, respectively oxygen ions with 7 and 
6 electrons stripped away) measured in the solar wind, it 
is possible to determine the temperature of the corona at 
the height where the ionization/recombination time scale 
of the ions (which is increasing with distance from the 
solar surface due to the decreasing density) overcomes 
the expansion time scale of the accelerating solar wind. 
This is the ‘freezing-in’ temperature which can be used 
to differentiate between the regions of origin of the solar 
wind. The major result from Ulysses is that the boundaries 
between slow and fast solar wind streams are extremely 
sharp in the corona; in addition, it appears that the fast 
solar wind is accelerated much lower in the corona (at 
heights less than four solar radii) than previous models 
suggested. This, together with more detailed elemental 
abundance data, provides strong constraints on the major 
unsolved question as to how the solar wind is accelerated. 
Observations of the magnetic field carried in the solar 
wind, along the high-latitude orbit of Ulysses, yielded 
three results which had not been predicted. One of these 
is that the magnetic field does not depend on latitude, but 
remains constant over the whole polar region of the Sun. 
It had been assumed that however complex the coronal 
magnetic field may be, at large distances it will appear to 
be approximately like a dipole, with stronger fields near its 
axis. As this is not the case, the implication is that magnetic 
fields become more evenly distributed in latitude close to 
the Sun than the dipole model implies. This finding is 
related to the non-radial expansion of the fast solar wind 
from the coronal holes to lower latitudes and confirms the 
overall structure of the heliosphere at solar minimum. 
Two other properties of the high-latitude heliospheric 
magnetic field differentiate it from the interplanetary 
magnetic field observed near the ecliptic. Fluctuations in 
the direction of the magnetic field in the high-speed solar 
winds from the polar coronal holes were found to be very 
much greater than at low latitudes; it is important to note 
that the magnitude (or strength) of the magnetic field was 
relatively constant, only varying as a function of distance 
from the Sun. The directional fluctuations were most 
pronounced perpendicular to the radial direction from the 
Sun. These large-scale directional fluctuations, transverse 
to the flow of the solar wind, were identified as Alfvén 
waves, driven by the tension of the magnetic field lines. 
Such waves had been first identified in low-latitude data 
in fast solar wind streams, and attributed to a population 
of waves which travelled in the solar wind from the corona 
far into interplanetary space. At high latitudes, however, 
the waves had much larger amplitudes and covered a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


significantly wider range of periods than previously seen. 
This property of the high-latitude heliosphere is the result 
of a considerably reduced rate at which long-wavelength 
waves decay with distance from the Sun. The heliospheric 
medium is fundamentally a turbulent flow, in which 
lower-frequency (longer-wavelength) waves decay to give 
rise to waves of higher frequency. Turbulent processes in 
the solar wind are not well understood. The results of 
Ulysses at high latitudes indicate, when compared with 
the turbulent decay of waves in the equatorial region, that 
the large speed differentials in the solar wind found at low 
latitudes are responsible for the faster decay rate observed 
there. In the more uniform (and faster) flow speed of the 
solar wind in the polar regions large-amplitude magnetic 
fluctuations remain a prominent feature of the medium 
over larger distances than near the ecliptic. 

This result leads directly to another unexpected 
observation made by Ulysses. Before these observations 
were made, it had been thought that the intensity of cosmic 
rays would be significantly higher over the poles of the 
Sun than in the ecliptic. As cosmic rays (highly energetic 
ions and electrons originating elsewhere in the galaxy) 
follow the lines of force of the magnetic field, they were 
expected to find access to the inner solar system easier 
over the solar poles where the magnetic field lines are 
less wound up into spirals by the rotation of the Sun. 
However, the intensity of cosmic rays showed a much 
less pronounced increase than expected as Ulysses reached 
high heliolatitudes. It appears that the large amplitude 
magnetic fluctuations at high latitudes effectively act as 
barriers which impede the propagation of cosmic rays 
into the heliosphere. This conclusion was well supported 
by the cosmic ray observations during the period when 
Ulysses moved rapidly from the south to the north pole 
in 1994-5, when the dependence on heliolatitude was not 
significantly complicated by either temporal changes or 
by a dependence on heliocentric distance. A summary 
of the cosmic ray intensity, as a function of heliolatitude, 
measured on Ulysses, is shown in figure 3, together with 
the model predictions based on our knowledge before 
Ulysses. As a result of Ulysses’ observations, models of 
cosmic ray propagation in the heliosphere need significant 
revisions (see COSMIC RAYS: PROPAGATION IN THE HELIOSPHERE). 

Overall, the observations made at high heliolatitudes 
by Ulysses have provided the basis for a_ better 
understanding of the solar wind and the heliosphere. 
Many of the results were seen as welcome confirmation 
of models extrapolated from the observations near the 
ecliptic plane. However, there were enough unexpected 
results to provide an a posteriori justification for the 
mission. Ulysses remains in orbit around the Sun to 
explore the same regions that it visited during solar 
minimum, to observe the changes in the solar wind caused 
by the increased solar activity at high latitudes during 
the next solar maximum in 2000-1. It is likely that these 
observations, which are likely to remain unique as no 
similar space mission is being planned at present, will 
provide a data base for future, possibly more refined, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar Wind: Ulysses ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1.6 } model protons >106 MeV | 

+ J 
5 L | 
5 14 1 
Et [ | 
< measurements 4 
1.2 7 | 
3 - 4 
S L 4 
1 ee ee ee | 


-80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 80 
heliographic latitude [deg] 


Figure 3. The enhancement of the intensity of cosmic rays 
observed by Ulysses with respect to observations in Earth orbit 
during the passage of the spacecraft from the south to the north 
pole of the Sun in 1994-5, and, for comparison, the model 
prediction which had assumed that cosmic ray access over the 
poles would be significantly easier than was found to be the case. 
(Figure courtesy of H Kunow, University of Kiel, Germany.) 


models of the solar wind and the three-dimensional 
heliosphere. 


A Balogh 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Solar X-ray Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar X-ray Jets 


X-ray jets have been discovered on the Sun by the soft 
x-ray telescope aboard the Japanese YOHKOH satellite as 
transitory x-ray enhancements in the solar CoRONA with 
apparent collimated motion. They are associated with 
small flares (microflares or subflares), which occur in x- 
ray bright points (XBPs, see SOLAR CORONA: X-RAY BRIGHT 
POINTS), emerging flux regions (EFRs, see CHROMOSPHERE: 
EMERGING FLUX REGIONS) and ACTIVE REGIONS (ARs). Whereas 
many XBPs occur in quiet regions and CORONAL HOLES, X- 
ray jets occur throughout the solar corona. As the spatial 
resolution and exposure time of soft x-ray observations 
increased, more and more x-ray jets were found. Hence, it 
could be that the solar corona is full of tiny unresolved x- 
ray (coronal) jets which are responsible for coronal heating 
and acceleration of the high speed soLar winp. 

There is a lot of evidence for MAGNETIC RECONNECTION 
in x-ray jets. In this sense, x-ray jets are also useful for 
studying the basic physics of magnetic reconnection. 

Figure 1 shows a typical example of an x-ray jet that 
occurred in active region NOAA 7001 on 11 January 1992. 
This x-ray jet is one of the largest observed so far and could 
be a prototype of many other, smaller jets. 


Observed properties 

Structure/morphology and dynamics 

Most jets are associated with small SOLAR FLARES (mi- 
croflares, subflares) at their footpoints. The length of the 
jets is a few 104-4 x 10° km (average ~ 1.5 x 10° km), their 
width is 5 x 10°-10° km (average 1.7 x 10* km), their aspect 
ratio (= length/width) is 3-27 (average ~ 10), their appar- 
ent velocity is 10-1000 kms“! (average ~ 200 kms~') and 
their lifetime ranges from a few minutes to more than a 
few hours. The number of jets decreases as the length, 
the velocity or the lifetime increases. The histograms (fig- 
ure 2) are similar to those of flares and EUV explosive 
events. Many jets (~ 68%) appear in or near to active re- 
gions (ARs). Among the jets ejected from bright-point like 
features in ARs, most (~ 86%) are observed to the west of 
the active region. The x-ray intensity distribution along an 
x-ray jet often shows an exponential decrease with distance 
from the footpoint. 


Temperatures, densities and energies 

The average temperatures of jets are ~ 3-7 MK, which is 
comparable to that of the microflares at the footpoints of 
the jets, and the average electron densities are 0.3-4 x 10° 
cm~?. The total thermal energy is 10°°-10°8 erg, which is 
about 1/10 of the total (released) thermal energy of the 
footpoint flare. The masses of the jets are 10''-10° g and 
their kinetic energy is estimated to be 107-10” erg. 


Magnetic fields and evidence of reconnecting fields 

Co-alignment of soft x-ray images with magnetograms 
(taken at ground-based observatories) revealed that 72% 
of jets occur in mixed polarity or satellite polarity regions. 
This gives direct evidence for the presence of neutral points 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


06:02:58UT 06:52:02UT 07:00:34UT 


07:11:14UT 


07:19:46UT 08:43:00UT 
Size of Earth 


Figure 1. An x-ray jet occurred in NOAA7001 on 11 January 1992 
(Shibata et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 431 L51). The size of each frame 
is 1200” x 1040” (~ 8.6 x 10° km by 7.5 x 10° km). These are 
negative images. North is at the top and west is to the right. The 
maximum length of the jet was greater than 3 x 10° km and the 
width was about 7.5 x 104 km. The apparent velocity changed 
with time and was 90-230 kms~!. The active region at the 
footpoint of the jet looks like a sea anemone, and so is called an 
anemone-AR. The surrounding region is a coronal hole. During 
the ejection of the jet, a bright loop appeared (as a result of a 
small flare) about 3 x 10+ km south of the footpoint of the jet, 
while the loop system just below the jet disappeared at 0721 UT. 
The boundaries of the jet moved apart at a speed of ~ 20 kms?, 
increasing the apparent width of the jet. The west boundary of 
the jet continued to move even after the east boundary had 
disappeared, giving an impression of whip-like motion. 


(or current sheets) near the footpoint of jets. X-ray jets 
favor regions of evolving magnetic flux (increasing or 
decreasing). This suggests that x-ray jets are produced 
by magnetic reconnection. 

There is much direct and indirect evidence for 
magnetic reconnection in jets: 


(a) Two types of interaction between emerging flux 
and coronal field: There are two types of interaction 
(reconnection) between emerging flux and coronal field: 
the anemone-jet type and the two-sided-loop/jets type (figure 
3). The former occurs when emerging flux appears in 
coronal holes. In this case, a jet is ejected in a vertical 
direction. On the other hand, the latter occurs when 
emerging flux appears in quiet regions, and two-sided 
loop brightenings (or jets) occur in the horizontal direction 
on both sides of the emerging flux. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar X-ray Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Histogram of the Length of X-Ray Jets 


40F 
E Ave = 1.5 X 10°km 
y 30- : 
® F 1 
72 c q 
xe) E | 
@ 20F 
Ho} E q 
€ E 4 
3 | | 
I | I i , 
, LI = —— 
0) 
rar (104 a 
Histogram of the Velocity of X- Ray Jets 
255 
[ Ave = 200 km/sec 
20+ 1 
wn r 4 
@ [ | 
2 156 4 
fe) [ ] 
8 : ] 
€ 107 7 
Ss L 4 
Zz L J 
i i fl | 
01 so 
100 200 


300 400 
Velocity (km/sec) 


Figure 2. Histograms of velocity and length of x-ray jets 
(Shimojo et al 1996 Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 48 123). 


(b) Converging shape of jets: The width of the jets often 
decreases with height (i.e., converging shape), which is 
similar to the shape of Ha surges observed in emerging 
flux regions and EUV macrospicules. This shape suggests 
that the cross-section of the flux tube decreases with 
height, ie., the field strength increases with height. 
Such situations arise if there is a neutral point near the 
footpoint of a jet as in the anemone-jet model in figure 
3. This situation is expected also when the satellite 
spots appear in an opposite polarity region, and in fact 
such magnetic field properties have been confirmed by 
comparing magnetograms with soft x-ray images of many 
jets as discussed above (figure 4). 

(c) A gap between the footpoint of a jet and the brightest 
part of a footpoint flare: Though the footpoints of jets 
roughly correspond to small flares, close examination of 
the footpoints has revealed that often small flares (or 
loop brightenings) occur separately (by more than a few 
thousand km) from the exact footpoints of jets. This 
characteristic is also seen in tiny XBP jets. Such a gap 
is expected for the magnetic reconnection mechanism, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) (b) 
Anemone Jet Two Sided Loop 


9 Feb, 1993 4:07:41UT 23 Apr, 1992 7:08:49UT 


oe 


35 660 kin 35, bop kin 


(c) (d) 


Bright Loop 


Figure 3. Soft X-ray Telescope images (from Yohkoh) of two 
types of interaction of emerging flux with overlying coronal 
magnetic fields. (a) Anemone-Jet type observed on 9 February 
1993. (b) Two-sided-loop type observed on 23 April 1992. 
Schematic illustration of (c) anemone-jet type and 

(d) two-sided-loop type (Yokoyama and Shibata 1995 Nature 375 
42). 


because the heated reconnected field lines are quickly 
ejected in opposite directions to form one bright loop and 
a separate jet in the other direction (figure 3). 

(d) Change of topology of a footpoint active region: When 
the ARs at the footpoints of jets can be resolved well, their 
morphology changes substantially during the occurrence 
of a jet. For example, a loop system disappeared during 
the jet of 11 January 1992 (figure 1). 

(e) Whip-like motion of jet: In some cases, a jet moves 
perpendicularly to the jet axis ata few 10 kms7! during the 
ejection of the jet, which has been referred to as whip-like 
motion (figure 1). This might be evidence of a dynamical 
rearrangement of the magnetic field configuration as a 
result of reconnection. 


Relation to other dynamic phenomena 

Ha surges: Sometimes, x-ray jets are observed to be 
associated with Ha surczs, nearly simultaneously and in 
nearly the same direction. There are also cases with no 
x-ray jet when Ha surges are observed. This is probably 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar X-ray Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SXT:23-Nov-91 
11:22:04UT 


%. 
X 


SXT:23-Nov-91 
16:02:20UT 


Ld 


a 


X-Ray Jet 


| — X-Ray Jet 


Mag:23-Nov-91 
15:56UT 
Single Pole 8% 


Mag:23-Nov-91 
15:56UT 
Bipole 12% 


SXT:1-Nov-91 SXT: 25-Feb-92 
13:05:36UT 15:52:44UT 


ae | 4 
. 


X-Ray Jet 


Mag:1-Nov-91 
14:48UT 
MixedPolarity 24% 


Mag:25-Feb-92 
16:00UT 
Satellite Polarity 48% 


Figure 4. Examples of the magnetic field properties of x-ray jets (Shimojo et al 1998 Solar Phys. 178 379). The first row shows x-ray jet 
images taken by the Yohkoh Soft X-ray Telescope. The second row are the corresponding magnetograms with white circles indicating 
the footpoint of the jets. The third row shows schematic illustrations of magnetic field configuration types. 


because the density of the hot jet is too low to be observed 
by a soft x-ray telescope. 

Type II bursts: Type III radio bursts (see SOLAR FLARES: 
RADIO BURSTS) are often associated with x-ray jets. This 
implies the existence of high-energy electrons in these 
small flares and jets, and supports the view that the 
generation mechanism of x-ray jets and microflares may 
be physically similar to that for larger flares. 

Nanoflares: It was found that very faint transient 
soft x-ray brightenings occur in polar regions. The 
absolute soft x-ray intensity of these brightenings is two 
orders of magnitude smaller than those of active region 
transient brightenings, and fluctuates on a timescale of 
a few minutes. The total (released) energy is probably 
comparable to 10” erg, i.e., that of nanoflares. The polar 
coronal holes are found to be very active and full of 
nanoflares, and tiny x-ray jets often occur from these 
nanoflares. 

X-ray plasma ejections: The Yohkoh soft x-ray telescope 
has discovered another new ejection feature, x-ray 
plasmoids (or x-ray plasma ejections). X-ray plasmoids are 
blob-like hot plasma ejections, and are sometimes seen as 
an erupting x-ray loop. They are ejected not only from long 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


duration flares but also from compact impulsive flares, 
so that they may be evidence for magnetic reconnection 
occurring above the soft x-ray loop. Although x-ray 
plasmoids are morphologically very different from x-ray 
jets, there are common properties in both hot plasma 
ejections. Table 1 summarizes the physical conditions of 
both x-ray jets and x-ray plasmoid ejections. 

Coronal mass ejections: Some large jets have shapes 
intermediate between well-collimated jets and loop-like 
ejections which resemble a SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTION 
(CME). 


The physics of x-ray jets/mechanisms of formation 
Various observations suggest that magnetic reconnection 
is actually occurring during the ejection of x-ray jets. 
Hence the magnetic reconnection mechanism is a most 
promising energy release mechanism for x-ray jets. The 
current sheet for the magnetic reconnection mechanism is 
created in the following situations: (1) the current sheet 
is created between emerging flux and the coronal field 
(emerging flux model; see figure 5), (2) the current sheet 
is created between a horizontally moving bipole and the 
network field (converging flux model), (3) the current 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar X-ray Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Physical quantities of x-ray jets and x-ray plasmoids (based on Ohyama et al 1997 Adv. Space Res. 19 1849). 


X-ray jets X-ray plasmoids 
Temperature (10° K) 4-6 5-16 
Density (em~°) 3x 108-4 10? 109-1010 
Mass (g) 10"-1015 10-1014 
Thermal energy content (erg) 1076-1078 1078-10? 
Kinetic energy (erg) 107-107” 1077-1078 
Thermal energy of flare (erg) 1027-1079 1029-109 
GOES class of flare B-C class M class 


& Lume. 


spLune,= 105.0 esieo 


\ 


Figure 5. Emerging flux reconnection model of x-ray jets (from a 2D MHD numerical simulation of reconnection driven by emerging 


flux (Yokoyama and Shibata 1996 Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 48 353)). 


sheet is created between sheared flux and pre-existing flux 
(sheared flux model). 

There is no doubt that x-ray jets exist along magnetic 
field lines, and hence are collimated by a magnetic force. 
As for the acceleration mechanism of x-ray jets, there still 
remains a fundamental question: How are jets accelerated 
in the magnetic reconnection process described above? 
There are three possible processes. 


Evaporation flow (jet) 

An evaporation flow (jet) occurs as a result of a flare 
that is produced by the reconnection. In this case the 
jet is accelerated by the gas pressure gradient force, which 
is enhanced by sudden heating of plasmas in the upper 
chromosphere due to heat conduction flux or high energy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


electron beams propagating from the flare energy release 
site. The maximum velocity of an evaporation jet is of the 
order of 


rT \i2 
is “4 

Vev-jetamax ~ 3Cs ~ 1500 (rx) kms (1) 
where C, and T are the sound speed and temperature of 
the flaring plasma, respectively. The apparent velocity of 
the constant density part of the jet is about 30-300 km s-| if 
the density of the jet is 20-40% of that of the flare, consistent 
with the apparent velocities of many x-ray jets. 


Magnetic twist 
A magnetic-twist jet is accelerated by the magnetic pressure 
force ina relaxing magnetic twist as a result of reconnection 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar X-ray Jets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


between a twisted loop and an untwisted loop. If the 
density of the jet is much higher than that of the ambient 
corona, the maximum velocity of the magnetic-twist jet 
becomes 


-1/2 

Vien C0 2000 = (rons) kms (2) 
where v, is the Alfvén speed, B is the magnetic flux 
density and n is the hydrogen number density, but again 
the apparent velocity of the constant-density part of the jet 
is of the order of 15-300 kms“! if the density of the jet is 
20-40% of that of the flare. 


Reconnection jet 

A reconnection jet is accelerated (like a slingshot) by the 
magnetic tension force in the reconnection process. The 
velocity of the jet is of the order of the local Alfvén speed 


B n -172 “4 
Viec-jet ~vVA => 1000756 (os) kms™. (3) 
The velocity of magnetic islands (or plasmoids or 
expanding helical loops ejected from current sheet) is also 
comparable to the local Alfvén speed. 


Since the observed velocities of many jets are within 
the range of possible speeds from the above mechanism, 
at present it is not possible to identify which jets belong 
to which type. We need more detailed theoretical 
modeling as well as finer observations such as Doppler 
shift measurements. 


Bibliography 

Shibata K, Ishido Y, Acton L et al 1992 Publ. Astron. Soc. 
Japan 44 L173 

Shibata K 1996 Adv. Space Res. 17 (4/5) 9 

Shibata K 1998 Proc. Solar Jets and Coronal Plumes (ESA SP- 
421) p 137 

Shimojo M et al 1996 Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 48 123 

Yokoyama T and Shibata K 1995 Nature 375 42 


Kazunari Shibata 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar—Stellar Connection 


The solar-stellar connection refers to the complementarity 
of solar and stellar studies in general, and to those con- 
cerning dynamic phenomena in stellar outer atmospheres 
in particular. The most important agent in these phenom- 
ena is the stellar magnetic field, although wave motions 
associated with convection also play a role. 

The Sun is the only star that offers the potential to 
observe its internal structure (through helioseismology) 
and the dynamic geometry of its (outer) atmosphere 
(SOLAR TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: GROUND, SPACE) in great 
detail. On the other hand, observations of stars like 
the Sun provide tests of our understanding of the 
physical processes that determine solar structure and 
dynamics because we can use the diversity of the 
stellar population to probe dependences on, for example, 
chemical composition, mass, rotation rate or binarity. 
In traditional astrophysics, the combined study of the 
quasi-steady properties of Sun and stars in general have 
deepened our understanding of the solar interior, of solar 
evolution and of radiative transfer in stellar atmospheres 
(SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS). 

Whereas effects of solar magnetic activity have 
been studied ever since the discovery of sunspots by 
European observers in the early 17th century (although the 
phenomenon was already reported on at least 23 centuries 
ago), the study of the stellar equivalent had to wait until 
the second half of this century. Pioneering studies of 
stellar chromospheres, that is of the relatively warm layers 
immediately above the stellar surface, in the 1950s by 
Olin C WILSON at MOUNT WILSON OBSERVATORY, gave the study 
of stellar magnetic activity its initial momentum, which 
has continued to grow over the years. By now we know 
that stellar outer atmospheric processes that occur on time 
scales of up to centuries rather than millions of years are the 
result of the fact that most stars like the Sun have magnetic 
fields threading their surfaces. 

Stellar magnetic activity is characterized by highly 
structured magnetic fields at the stellar surface that 
persist for times much longer than the local time scales 
for convection. The fields at the stellar surface lie 
beneath volumes within the outer atmosphere in which 
the temperatures significantly exceed that of the surface 
and which show up as bright at selected wavelengths. 
The details of the mechanisms heating those domains are 
still unclear, but models either rely on the dissipation 
of electric currents or on the damping of a variety 
of waves traveling through the magnetic field. The 
amount of energy involved and the way it is distributed 
over the different temperature domains in stellar outer 
atmospheres depends on the magnetic flux density at the 
surface, and appears to adhere to the same rules regardless 
of stellar structure: the Sun and almost all other cool 
stars define simple relationships between radiative losses 
from different domains in their outer atmospheres that are 
independent of stellar properties. The energies involved in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


any outer-atmospheric layer extend well beyond the range 
seen on the Sun, however. 

Through the solar—stellar connection we have learned 
that the Sun is a rather inactive star, typical of its class. 
We now know that some stars show activity cycles, like 
the Sun, but that these actually form a minority. The 
levels of activity in cool stars cover an enormous range. 
The most active stars have more than 50% of a visible 
hemisphere covered by dark starspots, suggesting that 
most of their surface is in fact covered by a strong magnetic 
field, only part of which ‘condenses’ into dark spots. In 
inactive stars, the coverage by spots is insufficient to be 
detectable by current white-light instruments, but there 
the associated emissions from the hot outer atmosphere 
can be used as a measure of activity. Inactive giant stars 
have been observed for which the entire stellar corona, 
with temperatures exceeding 1 million kelvin, is dimmer 
than the darkest coronal regions on the Sun (the so-called 
coronal holes). 

We have also learned that tidal interaction between 
companion stars in compact binary systems enhances 
activity, that stellar rotation is slowed over time by stellar 
winds flowing away from cool stars, that heating of the 
outer atmosphere occurs both because of the action of 
the magnetic field and because of the damping of purely 
acoustic waves, and that convection requires rotation to 
excite a globally functioning dynamo that can generate and 
maintain the stellar magnetic field. The following sections 
provide more information on each of these topics. 


A brief historical perspective 
Signatures of stellar magnetic activity have been observed 
for almost a century now through the white-light 
modulation caused by the stellar equivalent of large 
sunspots, or clusters of these, rotating onto and off stellar 
disks. Early this century, emission components were 
discovered in the cores of the chromospheric H and K 
resonance lines of singly ionized calcium in the spectra of 
many stars of spectral type G and cooler (the solar spectral 
type is G2V). The discovery paper by Karl scHWARZSCHILD 
and Eberhard, published in 1913, was followed by a stream 
of usually brief papers publishing results on one or a few 
stars. In the early 1950s, a vigorous study of the Ca II 
H and K resonance lines in stellar spectra was started 
by Olin C Wilson at Mount Wilson Observatory. This 
research has continued to date, and has resulted in records 
of stellar chromospheric activity, with frequent if not daily 
observations spanning more than two decades for about 
100 stars in the solar neighborhood. 

In the last two decades of the twentieth century, 
a series of spacecraft were launched to observe the 
(extreme) ultraviolet and (soft) x-ray signatures of 
stellar activity. The HEAO-B EINSTEIN Observatory and 
the INTERNATIONAL ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER were the first to 
observe extensive samples of cool stars at these short 
wavelengths with low but useful spectral resolution. Later 
the spectroscopic capabilities of the EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET 
EXPLORER and of instruments on the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


provided much more detailed spectral information from 
which atmospheric densities and temperatures could be 
derived. 


Convection and acoustic phenomena 

As we work down in mass from heavier (hotter) to 
lighter (cooler) stars on the main sequence (generally 
referred to as dwarf stars or even simply as dwarfs), 
near-surface convection sets in around a surface effective 
temperature of ~9000 K (Sun: 5770 K) and persists 
down to the coolest red dwarf. For evolved (sub-)giant 
stars, in which the hydrogen in the core is exhausted, 
the convection sets in at progressively lower surface 
temperatures with decreasing surface gravity. Stars with 
a surface temperature below this onset temperature are 
referred to as cool stars. For main-sequence stars, the 
ratio of the depth of the convective envelope to the stellar 
radius increases with decreasing effective temperature; 
the coolest main-sequence stars are entirely convective. 
In absolute terms, however, the depth of the convective 
envelope is about the same for all of these stars cooler 
than the Sun, but the stellar radius decreases with 
surface temperature. For giant stars, the convective 
envelope deepens steadily with decreasing temperature, 
and therefore with age, at least during the initial phases 
of post-main-sequence evolution; for these evolved stars, 
the convective envelopes become very deep as the stars 
expand, reading depths up to ten times the solar radius. 

Stars with masses M, < 1.3 Mo, where Mo is the solar 
mass, maintain a convective envelope throughout their 
main-sequence and post-main-sequence evolution up to 
the giant branch, i.e. as long as nuclear fusion persists. In 
contrast, more massive stars have no convective envelope 
on the main sequence or in the early post-main-sequence 
phase, but develop one after crossing the dividing line for 
convective envelopes in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM. 

Convective motions generate sound waves. This 
happens most efficiently just below the stellar surface 
where the plasma velocities are largest in order to be 
able to transport the stellar luminosity despite the low 
specific heat of the plasma at the low densities there. With 
the velocity, the wave power increases with decreasing 
surface gravity, and of course with increasing luminosity. 
Waves that are reflected near the surface (either directly or 
after being deflected upward after traveling inward) are 
used in helioseismology. Waves with a frequency above 
the acoustic cut-off frequency penetrate into the outer 
atmosphere, i.e. into the part of the atmosphere above the 
layers emitting the bulk of the stellar luminosity. 

In the outer atmosphere, the density decreases 
rapidly within the first few hundred kilometers above 
the surface as a consequence of the strong stratification: 
the pressure scale height is only of the order of 100 km 
in main-sequence stars. Energy conservation results 
in a dramatic increase in the amplitude of the sound 
waves as they travel upward, until the waves develop 
into rapidly dissipated shock waves. The chain of 
processes involved, from radiation damping in the stellar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


10000 


1000 


£8 (G) 


100 


10 


7/P 


Figure 1. The measured average surface flux density of 
magnetic field versus the Rossby number in a sample of 
main-sequence stars. The Rossby number is the ratio of the 
convective turnover time scale t,. for convection at the bottom of 
the convective envelope to the stellar rotation period P, and thus 
a measure for the effectiveness of Coriolis forces in affecting the 
circulation of mass. The figure shows how magnetic activity 
increases with rotation rate. 


photosphere to the dispersive and dissipative behavior of 
weak shocks, strongly reduces the dependence of acoustic 
energy deposition on surface gravity. Complementary 
solar and stellar observations suggest that sound waves 
result in a so-called basal emission from, primarily, 
the chromosphere. The basal emission depends on 
surface temperature, but little on gravity or chemical 
composition. The basal atmosphere consists of rapidly 
evolving, localized, fluctuating brightenings that recur a 
few times as trains of shock waves travel by. 

The basal emission was discovered initially in stellar 
data through the comparison of radiative losses from 
different temperature domains in the outer atmospheres 
of cool stars. It found subsequent empirical support 
in solar data with spatial and temporal resolution that 
demonstrated the absence of intrinsically strong magnetic 
fields at those locations from which this basal, pulsating 
chromospheric emission originates. 


Solar and stellar magnetic fields 

Magnetic field at the stellar surface 

Cool stars other than the Sun have similar magnetic 
fields, but attempts to measure these fields by means 
of the polarization of Zeeman components in spectral 
lines necessarily fail, because the polarities of the field 
are strongly mixed, so the net polarization signals from 
neighboring unipolar patches cancel almost entirely (see 
SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS). Strong 
fields with sufficiently large filling factors are detectable, 
however, by a broadening of Zeeman-sensitive spectral 
lines even in the unpolarized intensity spectrum. Note 
that measurements in the visual spectrum severely 
underestimate the contributions of starspots to the total 
magnetic flux because of their relative darkness. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Moderately active stars of spectral types G and early K 
have intrinsic field strengths B ranging from 1.0 to 1.9 kG, 
and fractional surface coverage (or surface filling factor) 
f ranging from about 1.5% to 35% (see figure 1). The 
very active Ke and Me stars (i.e. stars with chromospheric 
lines in emission over the nearby continuum) exhibit B 
up to 4.2 kG and f up to 70%. These field strengths 
are compatible with predictions from stellar atmospheric 
models based on the solar example, which have the field 
strength dictated by a balance between gas and magnetic 
pressures. For evolved giant stars, B decreases from 
B ~ 650 G for early G-type giants to 400 G at K5 III, in 
accord with the decreasing gas pressure at the surface. 


Starspots and stellar active regions 

As stars rotate, their outer atmospheric signal as detected 
on Earth is modulated, because of the inhomogeneous 
coverage of their surface by magnetic field. This causes the 
observed signal to change as regions rotate into and out of 
view. The resulting signal is too confusing to interpret for 
stars with rotation rates like that of the Sun. For much more 
active stars, such as the rapidly rotating tidally interacting 
binaries, the signal is less ambiguous. Their active regions, 
the regions of strong, bipolar magnetic activity, can be 
very different from solar ones. Observations of one such 
binary, AR Lac, for example, show that the surface filling 
factor for active regions varied from 2% to 20% over the 
years. The associated mean radiative flux density from 
its active regions in the chromospheric Mg II resonance 
lines somewhat exceeds the very top of the flux range 
observed for stars as a whole, as one would expect. It 
is, however, three times larger than the flux from the 
brightest non-flaring parts of SOLAR ACTIVEREGIONS, while for 
the areas surrounding these bright regions, a flux density 
was inferred comparable to the flux density for an average 
solar active region. Clearly, the activity of this binary star 
is not reflected by a solar counterpart. 

Modeling light curves of spot-studded stars is often 
the only way to obtain information on active regions on 
stars, but the derived information can be ambiguous. The 
observed signals may show reasonably large amplitudes, 
with long-term coherence, so that simple light-curve 
analyses require only a few, typically two, spot groups 
to match much of the modulation curve. Yet many more 
spots or spot regions may exist that would result in a 
similar light curve. What is abundantly clear, however, is 
that these spots or spot complexes can be very substantial. 
XX Tri and II Peg are extreme examples, with amplitudes 
in the visible of 0.6 and 0.5 magnitudes, or factors of 
1.7 and 1.6 respectively. For II Peg this amounts to a 
spot coverage of 60% of one hemisphere, whereas for 
the Sun the spot filling factor never exceeds 0.2%. Spot 
temperatures (generally taken to be the same for all spots 
on a star, averaging over the dark umbrae and the less 
dark, more horizontally structured penumbrae) appear 
to lie some 500 K to 2000 K below the ambient surface 
temperature, with an average temperature difference of 
the order of 1000 K. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


For sufficiently rapidly rotating stars, emissions from 
various features on stellar disks are subject to Doppler 
shifts associated with the line-of-sight component of the 
rotational velocity. These shifts can be used to make 
crude Doppler maps of the surface. In two thirds of 
the active stars for which such surface maps have been 
made, indications have been found for spots at high 
latitude or even at the rotational poles. This set of stars 
is dominated by tidally interacting RS CVn binaries, but 
also includes young T Tauri stars, single rapidly rotating 
FK Comae stars, and W Uma (near-)contact systems. No 
clear correlation has been found between stellar class and 
the occurrence of polar starspots. The existence of high- 
latitude starspots in rapidly rotating stars may be the 
consequence of strong Coriolis forces on flux rising from 
deep within the star, which are expected to deflect rising 
flux bundles towards latitudes of up to 60°. Truly polar 
spots could result either from flux eruption originating 
very deep in stars with relatively small radiative interiors, 
or by a pole-ward slip of the previously anchored deep 
segments of flux rings following an earlier eruption of flux 
at mid latitudes elsewhere on that ring. 

The distribution of sizes and lifetimes of stellar active 
regions have not yet been determined, leaving the Sun 
as the only star for which this information is known. 
A lower limit to the lifetimes of stellar active regions is 
probably given by the lifetimes of (clusters of) starspots, 
but even these are difficult to determine. The most active 
stars, the tidally interacting RS CVn binaries, have had 
spots reported that appear to live from a few months up 
to several years, although significant changes from one 
rotation to the next have been reported, suggesting that 
small-scale changes to the spots, or more likely to spot 
groups or nests, occur on a time scale of no more than 
weeks. 

For the Sun, the size distribution of active regions 
is a monotonically decreasing function of region size, 
extending from the smallest ephemeral regions up to the 
largest active regions. For regions larger than ephemeral 
regions, that distribution is independent of the phase of 
the solar cycle, only changing by a multiplicative factor. 
Lifetimes increase from only hours for ephemeral regions 
to about two weeks for the largest active regions, before the 
flux is effectively distributed into the surrounding quiet 
regions. 


Atmospheric structure 

Diagrams relating the radiative losses from the different 
temperature domains in the outer atmospheres of cool 
stars show a remarkably high degree of correlation 
(figure 2). It appears that the radiative flux densities are 
related through power-laws, such that two flux densities 
F,,; are related through F; « EY . These power- 
law relationships are independent of the stellar effective 
temperature or surface gravity, provided that the basal 
emission component is removed. The relationships then 
hold for stars ranging from early F-type where convection 
sets in, to mid M-type stars, and from main-sequence 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


<IfI> (Gauss) 


10-2 1071 1 40 102 103 


F, (erg cmr2s-1) 


0.001 6.01 01 10 10 


“han (a.u) 


Figure 2. Relationship between the soft x-ray flux density, Fx 
(0.05-2 keV; observed with EXOSAT’s CMA/L1 assembly), and 
the Ca II H+K excess flux density A Fcar (one unit equals 

1.3 x 10° erg cm~* s~'). The line is a power-law with slope 1.5. 
EXOSAT and Mount Wilson Ca II H+K measurements were 
obtained within three days for 13 of the stars, and within three 
months for the others. Small dots are used for the comparison of 
Einstein IPC and Mount Wilson Ca II H + K flux densities that 
were measured up to several years apart. The scale at the top of 
the diagram translates the Ca II H + K emission to the equivalent 
average magnetic flux density. 


stars up to at least luminosity class II-III of the semi- 
bright giants; the only exception is formed by the M-type 
main-sequence stars beyond B — V ~* 1.3. The scatter 
about the mean relationships is caused by measurement 
uncertainties, intrinsic stellar variability, and differential 
limb darkening. The steepness of these relationships 
increases as the difference in the formation temperature of 
the two diagnostics used increases, with the most extreme 
cases being close to quadratic relationships. 

Solar data observed with moderate spatial resolution 
of several thousand km up to about 10000 km exhibit 
the same relationships as the disk-integrated signal for 
stars. Surprisingly, stellar power-law relationships extend 
beyond the range of flux densities seen in spatially 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


resolved solar data: in the coronal soft x-ray emission, 
the stellar relationship spans more than five orders of 
magnitude, ranging from an order of magnitude dimmer 
than a solar coronal hole, to more than two orders of 
magnitude brighter than an average solar active region. 
The combination with solar data has allowed a calibration 
of the stellar radiative losses in terms of magnetic 
fields (figure 2), showing that chromospheric losses scale 
roughly as the square root of the magnetic flux density, 
and coronal soft x-rays scale roughly linearly. 

The agreement of the solar and stellar relationships 
between radiative losses is surprising given their nonlinear 
character. After all, simply increasing the number of 
active features on a stellar disk should have resulted in 
linear scaling relationships for stars, even if the locally 
valid relationships are nonlinear. The analysis of solar 
information has shown that the distribution of magnetic 
flux over the solar surface is the key behind this invariance 
of relationships: the histogram of flux densities over the 
solar and (by inference) stellar surfaces is such that it 
preserves the nonlinear character upon integration over 
the visible hemisphere. The requirements this puts on the 
dynamo and the surface dispersal of flux have yet to be 
explored. 

Chromospheric modeling for stars is complicated 
because of the high degree of structure and the effects this 
has on radiative transfer. A comprehensive atmospheric 
model is hampered by the fact that for a star like the Sun, 
the chromospheric emission is dominated by the relatively 
quiet regions, while the coronal emission is dominated by 
the active regions, thus making it impossible to develop 
a consistent model in the absence of knowledge of the 
detailed surface distribution of magnetic field. 

Main-sequence stars of moderate activity show a 
dominant coronal emission component at about 2-4 MK, 
which is generally assumed to be directly comparable 
to the most common component in the quiescent solar 
corona, i.e. a combination of relatively stable active- 
region and quiet-region magnetic arches or loops. A 
hotter component exists on more active dwarf stars, and 
on evolved stars in general, even in the absence of 
obvious large-scale flaring. The peak contribution of this 
component lies between about 7 MK and 15 MK. 

The determination of dimensions of coronal magnetic 
loops in stellar coronae can be made if the characteris- 
tic mean coronal electron density within the loops con- 
tributing most to the observed spectrum is known. For 
the handful of stars for which coronal density diagnostics 
have been measured, the characteristic densities estimated 
from diagnostics for coronal components around 3 MK are 
typically about three orders of magnitude lower than those 
found for the hotter components around 10-15 MK. The 
associated high volume emission measure (proportional 
to the square of the electron density) of the hotter compo- 
nent implies that the volume filling factors of the hotter 
components are several orders of magnitude smaller than 
those associated with the 3 MK component. Perhaps we 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


-06 -0.4 -02 Oo o2 04 
Jog ( Pip. / Te?) 


Figure 3. The ratio Rj,, of the emission from the chromosphere 
in the cores of the Ca II H and K lines, after subtraction of a 
photospheric contribution (including the basal flux), to the total 
bolometric emission of these main-sequences stars versus the 
ratio of the rotation period to a color-dependent scaling function 


1 that resembles the convective turnover time at the bottom of 
the convective envelope for a mixing-length model with a 
mixing length of two pressure scale heights. Open and closed 
circles indicate stars below and above the so-called 
Vaughan-Preston gap, respectively, separating stars with 
predominantly regular cycles below the gap from those with 
irregular cycles or non-cyclic behavior above it. 


are looking at the signature of a multitude of small, com- 
pact, short-lived brightenings occurring over a substantial 
part of the stellar surface but with a small volume filling 
factor. 


The magnetic dynamo 

The outer-atmospheric activity in cool stars has its roots in 
what is referred to as the dynamo. No comprehensive 
theoretical model for stellar dynamos has yet been 
developed (see DYNAMO THEORY). Empirically, however, we 
have inferred a substantial body of information. For 
example, we know that a dynamo resulting in magnetic 
activity appears to operate in all rotating stars with a 
convection zone directly beneath the photosphere. In 
single stars, the dynamo strength is a continuous, and 
largely monotonic, function of rotation rate (figure 3), at 
least down to the intrinsic scatter associated with stellar 
variability. It also depends on some other stellar property 
or properties, but that dependence has not yet been 
unambiguously determined. 

Atmospheric radiative losses associated with mag- 
netic activity observed for main-sequence stars of a 
given rotation period—and by inference also the dynamo 
efficiency—increase rapidly with increasing depth of the 
convective envelope from the onset of convection up to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


about B — V & 0.6. A similar increase is inferred for 
(sub)giants. 

A globally functioning dynamo requires only vigor- 
ous envelope convection and rotation, but not necessarily a 
boundary layer between a radiative interior and a convec- 
tive envelope, because even the fully convective M-type 
dwarf stars exhibit magnetic activity. 

Among the cool main-sequence stars, there is a variety 
of patterns of variability in their activity; only a minority 
fraction of these stars show cyclic variations that resemble 
that of the Sun. For main-sequences stars with moderate 
to low rotation rates, activity tends to be cyclic, but no 
clear trend of cycle period with stellar parameters has 
been found. For truly active stars, various variability 
patterns exist, but generally no unambiguous activity cycle 
is seen. The relatively active stars never reach low states 
of activity on the timescale of years to decades; perhaps 
multiple sunspot cycles are present on the surface (i.e. a 
more extreme overlap of successive cycles than seen for the 
solar cycle), or perhaps the dynamo merely varies around 
an average state of quasi-permanent activity. 

The atmospheric radiative losses appear to ‘saturate’ 
for stars with rotation periods below about one or two 
days, but it remains unclear whether this reflects (i) 
a saturation in the dynamo action, (ii) in the heating 
mechanism, or (iii) in the photospheric flux content 
through increased annihilation of opposite polarities. 

The presence of a companion star enhances the 
dynamo action in cool components of tidally interacting 
binaries not only by enforcing rapid rotation through tidal 
interaction (see below), but presumably also by affecting 
the pattern of differential rotation. 


Stellar winds 

Measuring the properties of STELLAR WINDS that, like the 
solar wind, are at coronal temperatures of around a million 
degrees is difficult, because the tenuous material has little 
effect on the x-ray, UV and visible spectra emitted by 
the central star and its outer atmosphere. Winds may be 
detected through radio and near-IR free—-free emission, but 
only with difficulty even in favorable cases. That mass loss 
occurs is primarily an inference based on the solar example 
and the observed effects on the stellar rotation rates. 

Despite the existence of at least some potential 
diagnostics, only upper limits have been derived for 
mass loss rates of cool stars on the main sequence or 
in the early phases of post-main-sequence evolution. 
For late-A and early-F type stars and for a few M-type 
dwarfs, upper limits to the mass loss have been found of 
10-1°-10-? Mg yr!, which may be far above actual values 
(the solar mass loss is ¥2 x 107'4 Mg yr7'). 

For most stars well away from the main sequence, 
the mass loss rates are large, and the winds cool; in 
late-K and M-type (super-)giants, (much of) the wind is 
at chromospheric temperatures, which makes detecting 
signatures of the wind easier. One case for a cool main- 
sequence star is V741 Tauri, in which a white dwarf 
revolves around a K2V star. It has a wind at a velocity 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of 600-800 km s~!, a wind temperature of no more than 
a few times 10* K, and a mass loss rate of a few times 
10-"' Mg yr“, ie. a thousand times the solar mass loss 
rate, possibly dominated by coronal mass ejections rather 
than a steady outflow. 

For the coolest giants and supergiants that have no 
detectable coronal emission in their outer atmospheres, the 
mass loss rates scale roughly with the surface area of the 
star, M,./Mo © 2.5 x 107 (R,/ Ro). 


Indirect effects of winds: stellar spin down 
Outer-atmospheric activity is accompanied by loss of 
stellar angular momentum, which in all stars up to and 
including at least giant stars is an important process in the 
deceleration of stellar rotation. 

The rotational velocities of subgiants decrease 
strongly within a period of roughly 50 million years 
following the onset of deep envelope convection. During 
this phase of the stellar evolution, the moment of inertia 
of the envelope, Icg, is less than 1% of the stellar value, 
I,. As the stars evolve, the convective envelope deepens. 
If the wind torque would act only on the envelope with 
little interaction between envelope and interior, then the 
interior would be left rotating substantially faster than the 
envelope, and the deepening envelope in the evolving star 
would dredge up angular momentum from the radiative 
interior, and then spin up. Such a resurgence of rotation 
rate and associated activity is not observed, and so much 
of the interior’s angular momentum must have been 
removed before Jcg reaches a substantial fraction of I,, i.e. 
well before an effective temperature of about 5250 K (at 
about G2 III), requiring at least moderately strong coupling 
between most layers in the interior of the stars. 

Stars are born with a broad range of initial rotation 
velocities. The rotational evolution of young stars can 
be studied particularly well using data on open clusters. 
By the age of the a Persei cluster, some 50 Myr, there 
is a substantial spread in rotation velocities, which 
narrows remarkably by the age of the Pleiades cluster, 
at only 70 Myr for the G and K-type stars. The swift 
change implies a spin-down time scale of the order of 
the age difference between these two clusters, i.e. only 
~20 Myr. By the age of the Hyades, some 600 Myr, 
the spread has been reduced strongly, and a reasonably 
well-defined, monotonically decreasing relationship exists 
between rotation rate and effective temperature, extending 
from about FO down to late of K. 

An important property of stellar rotational history 
is the convergence of rotation rates that occurs for ages 
beyond ~1 Gyr: for stars of solar age, the details of the 
initial dispersion in rotation rates have been effectively 
lost, both where the surface rotation rate and where 
internal differential rotation are concerned. It is this 
reduction of the initial dispersion that allowed Skumanich 
to find the age-activity relationship for mature main- 
sequence stars veq(t) « t'/. This convergence now 
appears to be the consequence of the nonlinear response 
of angular-momentum loss to angular velocity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


An interesting side effect of the loss of stellar angular 
momentum through the magnetized stellar wind occurs 
in tidally interacting binaries. Let us start with a system in 
which the two component stars have been synchronized 
with the orbital motion. As one or both of the stars lose 
angular momentum, the tidal coupling will tend to keep 
the stars rotating at the orbital period. But that means 
that part of the orbital momentum is transferred into the 
rotational momentum. As a result the orbit shrinks. This 
leads to a higher rotation rate, higher activity and thus 
a more effective loss of angular momentum through the 
wind. The result is that the stars spiral in towards each 
other, until they ultimately merge. This has been proposed 
as the explanation for rapidly rotating, apparently single 
evolved FK Comae stars that should, had their evolution 
been that of a single star all the time, have only a very low 
amount of angular momentum left. 


Bibliography 

Jokipii J R, Sonnett C P and Giampapa M S 1997 Cosmic 
Winds and the Heliosphere (Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) 

Schrijver C J and Zwaan C 1999 Solar and Stellar Magnetic 
Activity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Strassmeier K G and Linsky J L 1996 Stellar Surface 
Structure: Proc. [AU Symp. 176 (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Ulmschneider P, Priest E R and Rosner R 1991 Mechanisms 
of Chromospheric and Coronal Heating (New York: 
Springer) 


Carolus J Schrijver 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection: 
Changes of Solar-Type Stars 


Activity and Brightness 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar-Stellar Connection: Activity 
and Brightness Changes of 
Solar-Type Stars 


The surface and outer atmosphere of the Sun are 
dominated by the presence of localized magnetic fields. 
They influence the structure of and energy transport 
through the solar atmosphere and wind, outward to 
the distance of the heliopause (See SOLAR WIND: MAGNETIC 
FIELD). In addition, the occurrence of the magnetic features 
varies on characteristic time scales. Chief among them 
is the roughly 11 yr cycle of the number of sunspots, 
which has been recorded telescopically by Galileo and 
contemporaries since the early 17th century. 

With the advent of satellite observations, changes of 
the total SOLAR IRRADIANCE on time scales of years have been 
recorded. The total solar irradiance varies with the 11-year 
activity cycle and by as much as 0.14% from minimum to 
maximum of the activity cycle; the irradiance is highest at 
solar maximum. 

Any successful theory of the origin and nature of solar 
surface magnetism would require that similar phenomena 
be present on stars that are close in mass and age to 
the Sun, i.e. the solar-type or Sun-like stars. In recent 
decades it has become possible to measure changes in 
spectrophotometric and photometric fluxes that indicate 
changes in both surface magnetism and brightness of Sun- 
like stars over time scales of years. The characteristics 
of the observed variations in surface magnetism and 
brightness resemble those of the Sun and appear to be a 
universal feature of Sun-like stars. 


Surface magnetism 

On the sun, the disk-integrated Ca II H (396.8 nm) and 
K (393.4 nm) emission fluxes increase as coverage by 
surface magnetic features such as sunspots increases. The 
magnetic fields provide energy to the CHROMOSPHERE and 
other outer layers of the solar atmosphere; that energy 
is shed by emission lines such as Ca II formed in those 
regions. With the benefit of satellite-based observatories, 
many other emission lines similarly energized by the 
magnetic fields are available for study in the ultraviolet 
and x-ray spectrum regions. However, the Ca II H and 
K fluxes have historically provided much information on 
magnetic activity in lower main sequence stars because 
the spectrum features are accessible to ground-based 
instruments. 

Measurements of Ca II H and K emission fluxes 
of stars are necessarily integrated over a star’s visible 
hemisphere. It is assumed that the observed variations 
of the Ca II emission fluxes in Sun-like stars are caused by 
changes in surface coverage or magnetic field strength on 
the unresolved stellar disks, and therefore the Ca II fluxes 
contain information on stellar surface magnetism. 

Two aspects of surface magnetism derived from 
spectroscopic indicators of magnetic activity in solar- 
type stars are the fluxes averaged on evolutionary time 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


scales (i.e. a billion years or so) and their year-to-year 
variability. Both cross-sectional (time-averaged) and time 
serial studies have been made in order to investigate the 
origin and nature of magnetic activity in Sun-like stars. 


Cross-sectional studies of surface magnetism 

Olin C Wilson, working at the 100 in Hooker telescope 
at Mount Wilson Observatory, and other astronomers 
established four decades ago the basis of cross-sectional 
studies of average Ca II fluxes in lower main sequence 
stars. 

The average surface magnetism, indicated by the 
time-average value of the Ca II fluxes, shows a dependence 
on axial rotation. In addition, rotation is observed to slow 
on long time scales, i.e. with increasing main sequence age. 

The body of evidence suggests that, shortly after a 
solar-mass star arrives on the main sequence, its rotation 
rate and time-averaged flux of Ca II emission show similar 
values among stars close to itin age, and the values of those 
parameters decrease gradually with age. That means that 
the observed parameters of age, rotation and Ca II fluxes 
are closely coupled in Sun-like stars. A similar relation 
can be found among lower main sequence stars of different 
masses. In other words, the average Ca II emission and the 
rotation rate of a lower main sequence star, including the 
Sun, are determined primarily by the star’s main sequence 
age and mass. 

The problem of creating, maintaining and transform- 
ing magnetic fields by means of plasma fluid motions, 
which is relevant to planetary, solar, stellar and galactic 
magnetic fields, can be studied with the magnetohydrody- 
namic dynamo. Briefly, DYNAMO THEORY suggests that sur- 
face magnetism can be described by the dynamo number, 
D, which depends on mean helicity and differential rota- 
tion shear. In a lower main sequence star, those plasma 
motions may be linked to the observable parameters of 
mass (depth of the convection zone) and age (or axial rota- 
tion, which may be related to internal differential rotation). 
It is the concept of the dynamo number that leads to the 
expectation that stars close in mass and age (i.e. rotation) 
would show similar attributes in surface magnetic activity. 
In contrast, stars differing greatly in mass and age (i.e. ro- 
tation) should exhibit magnetic activity that is dissimilar. 

The interpretation of the observational results is that 
the production of magnetic fields causes a star’s surface 
angular momentum to decrease with age. The slowing of 
rotation with time is a sign of a gradual loss in angular 
momentum caused by the presence of a magnetized 
stellar wind, which presumably obtains throughout the 
star’s main sequence lifetime. As a consequence of the 
production of magnetic activity, the dynamo’s efficacy 
decreases with increasing age, and angular momentum 
is lost. The slowing rotation weakens the production of 
magnetic fields and the fluxes of emission lines that are 
driven by the presence of magnetic fields. 

The coupling between Ca II emission, age and 
rotation is so close among lower main sequence stars that 
knowledge of any one parameter, along with an estimate 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection: 
Changes of Solar-Type Stars 


Activity and Brightness 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2 1Q 4 = (Ri wx)R” ol 
: 2, 
os | L = MR®/Pyot 28 6 | 
= s is 3 a R 
= slope +0.60, r +0.90 aN | 
th om % 
aS) 
- 0.0 
2 | =| 
a | a] 
= 
S) | a = 
2 1.0 A Cyclic 
ie 
yD HO Double—cyclic 
= eHD 95735 1 
x Flat 
20 | | | 
—1.0 1.0 2.0 


Rotational Moment log(L4/Lo) 


Figure 1. The magnetic moment is plotted against rotational moment, both values normalized to those of the Sun, for the Sun and 

112 stars from Wilson’s sample of stars on or near the lower main sequence. Measured rotational moments are denoted by filled 
circles; estimated rotational moments are denoted by open circles. The slope for the log(w)—log(L) relation is d ~ +0.60 and the 
Pearson correlation coefficient is ~+0.90. The three classes of variability in Ca II fluxes based on the 25 yr records discussed in Baliunas 
et al (1995) are also indicated. Points enclosed by triangles denote stars with a periodic cycle; points enclosed by squares denote stars 
with two distinct periods (‘doubly cyclic’); points with crosses denote stars with little Ca II variability. (Reproduced from The 


Astrophysical Journal by permission of the authors.) 


of a star’s mass, leads to good estimates of the other two 
parameters. One of several possible depictions of the 
relation among those parameters in a sample of lower main 
sequence stars, whose spectral types extend from mid-F 
to late K, is illustrated in figure 1. There the magnetic 
moment, calculated from the Ca II emission fluxes, is seen 
to depend on the rotational moment. The existence of the 
close relation is tantamount to saying that the mechanism 
generating magnetic activity is affected by and affects a 
star’s rotation. The process by which magnetic fields are 
produced influences angular momentum to the extent of 
erasing differences in rotation among lower main sequence 
stars of similar mass and age that surely must have held 
in the pre-main-sequence phase. 


Decade-scale variations in Ca II fluxes 

Between 1966 and 1978, Wilson carried out a program at 
Mount Wilson Observatory of monthly monitoring of the 
Ca II H and K emission fluxes in 91 lower main sequence 
stars. Variations of Ca II emission fluxes on time scales of 
years seen in the records of Sun-like stars are assumed to 
be produced by a mechanism similar to that causing the 
11 yr solar activity cycle, e.g. the magnetohydrodynamic 
dynamo. 

Wilson’s purpose was to provide records on the 
counterpart of the solar activity cycle in lower main 
sequence stars. Since 1978, not only have the records of 
Wilson’s sample been continued, but also the program has 
expanded in scope. The longest records now stretch back 
more than three decades. Monitoring of a much larger 
sample of nearly 150 Sun-like stars began in 1991. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


At times, stars in the program have been observed 
as often as nearly every night. Such densely sampled 
records reveal axial rotation from the modulation of Ca II 
fluxes when magnetic surface features, asymmetrically 
distributed on the surface, persist for several weeks. 
Analysis of densely sampled records suggests the presence 
not only of surface differential rotation but also of features 
stable on time scales as long as several years, although not 
particularly for the stars close in mass and age to the Sun. 


The three classes of magnetic variability 

Across the sample of lower main sequence stars, Wilson 
found in the Ca II H and K records three broad classes of 
variations on time frames of years: (1) cyclic; (2) variable; 
(3) non-variable. The cyclic, or periodic, variations 
show a pronounced periodicity like the 11 yr solar cycle. 
The variable records display major fluctuations but no 
persistent periodicity. The non-variable records are 
essentially constant with time, to the limits of detection. 
Examples of each class of magnetic variability in Sun-like 
stars are shown in figure 2. 

The cyclic records can be found among lower main 
sequence stars of nearly any age and mass. The variable 
records tend to occur in the younger stars. The flat records 
may be occurring only in the Sun-like stars. 

Figure 2 may be interpreted as a crude evolution of 
surface magnetism in Sun-like stars. A young star (with an 
age less than 2 billion years or so) of about one solar mass 
is rapidly rotating and often presents a variable record (top 
panel). An older star (with an age beyond two billion years 
or so) near one solar mass, i.e. a sun-like star, shows either 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection: 
Changes of Solar-Type Stars 


Activity and Brightness 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Mount Wilson Observatory - HK Project 


‘5 : : T P : / T a 

0.45 F 4 

[ HD 206860 (GO V) J 

0.40 - 4 

E [ : ; 
cm [ @e 7 
[ oe i: 

MM 0.35 Sehay as 4 
asl [ . Bete 1 
a 0.30 L HD 4628 (K4 V) + 
5 L ¢ | 
o [ e J 
E 0.25 [- oss oF 
2 [ Pas : 
4% 0.20 ok 4 
| HD 143761 (G2 V) | 

0.15 Pe Pbatereann$y Saendtadanpanwes 6966 - 
Bo 

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
Year 


Figure 2. Records of Ca II H and K fluxes in three stars whose masses are similar to the Sun’s. The record of a star whose age is about 1 
billion years (upper panel) is usually variable with little indication of a preferred periodicity. The records of Sun-like stars—those close 
in mass and age to the Sun—are generally either cyclic (middle panel) or essentially non-variable (lower panel) to within the precision 


of the observations (~1% rms over the length of the record). 


a cyclic (middle panel) or a flat (bottom panel) record. 
The two patterns of records for the Sun-like stars may be 
the result of sampling relatively short intervals of solar- 
type variability on time scales of centuries. That is, the 
Sun shows cyclic magnetic changes a large part of the 
time. At other times, the Sun’s magnetism decreases to a 
sustained state of little variability, similar to the Maunder 
minimum (ca 1640-1720 CE) and other periods of low 
surface magnetism revealed by the cosmogeochemical 
records of radiocarbon (*C) and !°Be. 

At present the Sun is in the cyclic phase and exhibits 
an 11 yr period. The cyclic phase lasts roughly several 
centuries. Every few centuries or so, the Sun enters and 
remains in a low-magnetic state, with a low-amplitude, 
long-period cycle, if any, and low average flux. This 
state roughly lasts a century. The low-magnetic states 
are assumed to be similar to the essentially non-variable 
records of Ca II fluxes in Sun-like stars. An analysis of 
the statistics of the number of cyclic and flat records in the 
relatively short records (~30 yr) of Sun-like stars suggests 
a comparable frequency and duration of cyclic and flat 
phases of surface magnetic variability. 

It is still unclear whether, for main sequence stars 
much older than the Sun, further and more subtle changes 
in magnetic activity records would occur, for example an 
increase in the frequency or duration of the Maunder- 
minimum phase, along with a lengthening of the cycle 
period during the cyclic phase. 


Explanation by the dynamo theory 


The evolution of the Sun’s magnetism may be further 
illuminated by dynamo theory. As mentioned above, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the dynamo number, D, depends on the product of 
differential rotation shear and mean helicity. For the 
youngest solar-mass stars, which are rapidly rotating, 
the dynamo number is large, with the consequence that 
several dynamo modes may be simultaneously excited, 
producing surface magnetism that is variable, with no 
clear periodicity. As a solar-mass star ages and its rotation 
slows, the dynamo number diminishes and a characteristic 
periodicity, indicating a single excited mode, persists. At 
smaller dynamo numbers, a star’s surface magnetism may 
have acyclic periodicity combined with occasional periods 
of low surface magnetism and little variability. At greater 
ages, and slower rotation, still smaller dynamo numbers 
suggest that the dynamo may barely operate, and a star 
may show little variability in surface magnetism. For 
the smallest dynamo numbers, the dynamo may not be 
globally sustainable. 

It remains difficult to compare results from dynamo 
theory with empirical results. One reason why comes from 
consideration of the common argument that the observed 
cycle period depends on the dynamo number through a 
power law, Pryce & D', where i is estimated from theoretical 
considerations. A comparison of various predictions 
yields a range of possible values for the parameter, i, 
from —1.0 < i < +0.5; that is, not even the sign of the 
dependence is reliably known. Furthermore, it is difficult 
to know which theoretical parameters are to be compared 
with which empirical parameters. 


Correlation between magnetic changes and 
brightness changes 

Satellite-based radiometry measurements of the Sun made 
over the last 20 yr (See SOLAR TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Stellar Connection: 
Changes of Solar-Type Stars 


Activity and Brightness 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SPACE) show that, over the course of the 11 yr cycle, 
changes in magnetic activity are positively correlated 
with changes in total solar irradiance. The total solar 
irradiance variations arise from changes in the sum of 
the irradiances of individual surface features, each with 
a different irradiance, whose surface coverage varies with 
time. For example, consider just two varying components, 
visibly dark sunspots and bright faculae, at one phase, 
activity maximum. Sunspots are dark compared with 
the magnetically quieter surface and so subtract from 
the the total irradiance that would result in the absence 
of sunspots. However, faculae are bright. At activity 
maximum the area coverage by faculae is more extensive 
than by sunspots, and the positive irradiance contributions 
of the faculae more than compensate for the loss by 
sunspots. As a result, the net irradiance change over the 
sunspot cycle shows a positive correlation with surface 
magnetism. 

Roughly analogous observations of Sun-like stars 
reveal a similarly positive correlation over their activity 
cycles. Techniques that emphasize highly precise 
differential photometry, e.g. rapid measurement of close- 
by, non-variable comparison stars, have been used to 
measure variations of Sun-like stars in the visible (e.g. 
b and y Stromgren passbands). The corresponding 
amplitude of solar brightness change over recent activity 
cycles is estimated to be roughly 0.1% in the visible 
spectrum. In Sun-like stars, the photometric brightness 
is observed to change with the Ca II fluxes over the 
activity cycle, ie. the photometric brightness changes 
are positively correlated with surface magnetism through 
the activity cycle. Amplitudes of photometric brightness 
change over the activity cycle as low as the Sun’s have been 
observed for Sun-like stars. Amplitudes several times 
larger than the Sun’s have also been observed. 

The existence of the positive correlation between 
brightness change and activity change over the activity 
cycle is another important aspect of the similarity of 
surface magnetism in Sun-like stars. The different 
amplitudes of observed photometric amplitudes seen 
among the Sun-like stars suggests that at times the Sun can 
vary substantially more during an activity cycle than it has 
during the limited period of recent satellite measurements. 
In other words, there may exist components of total solar 
irradiance change that occur on time scales of several 
decades or longer. Sustained observations of the total 
solar irradiance should reveal any long-term components 
of solar irradiance change. It may also be possible to study 
decades-long changes in one star, the Sun, by considering 
the cycles observed in a large sample of Sun-like stars, 
despite their relatively short records. 


Applications to studies of extra-solar planets and 
terrestrial climate change 

Studies of the variability of sun-like stars have been used in 
two topics removed from the study of the theory of surface 
magnetism. First, stars with little variability, because they 
are in a temporary or chronic state of low variability, are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


good candidates for searching for EXOPLANETS by techniques 
using Doppler or photometric variations. The reason is 
that the condition of little activity variability produces 
photometrically and spectrally quiet backgrounds against 
which to see the subtle planetary effects, if present. 
Second, if the records of a large sample of Sun-like stars can 
be considered as different phases of changes in the Sun on 
time scales of decades to centuries, then information can 
be obtained on the long-term variability of the Sun and its 
potential impact on terrestrial cLimaTE change. 


Bibliography 

Baliunas S L and Soon W 1995 Astrophys. J 450 896-901 

Baliunas S L et al 1995 Astrophys. J 438 269-87 

Baliunas S L, Sokoloff D and Soon W 1996 Astrophys J. 457 
L99-L102 

Radick R R, Lockwood G W, Skiff B A and Baliunas S L 
1998 Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 118 239-58 

Wilson O C 1978 Astrophys. J 226 379-96 


Sallie Baliunas 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar—Terrestrial Connection 


Radiation from the Sun and the energy from the SOLAR WIND 
that crosses the magnetopause have a profound influence 
on the Earth and its surrounding atmosphere (see also 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE). The consequences 
range from the formation of ozone to the flickering 
aurorae in both polar regions. The most significant 
solar variations cause long-term changes in the Earth’s 
atmosphere and intense storms in space. Such storms can 
damage spacecraft and power generation networks. 


The Earth’s atmosphere 

The EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE is, to a first order, horizontally 
stratified largely through the effects of gravity. Its structure 
is best described by temperature (figure 1), which results 
from a balance between absorption of solar radiation and 
re-radiation, and horizontal and vertical transport. In the 
troposphere (0-12 km altitude), the temperature decreases 
by ~7K km~!, the key radiatively active molecules being 
water vapor (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO) and methane 
(CHy). Above the troposphere lies the stratosphere 
where there is a modest rise in temperature owing to 
the absorption of ultraviolet radiation in the range 290- 
360 nm by ozone (O3). Radiative cooling, particularly by 
nitric oxide (NO), causes a sharp reduction in temperature 
around 85 km altitude, which lies near the center of 
the mesosphere. This is the coldest part of the Earth’s 
environment with temperatures of about 150 K. Above 
this altitude, extreme ultraviolet and x-rays are absorbed 
leading to temperatures that rise to about 1500 K at 
300 km altitude, a region known as the thermosphere. 
Above 1000 km, the atmosphere remains at a constant 
temperature with altitude, because diffusion processes 
dominate. This regime is called the exosphere. 

The pressure of the atmosphere, p, at an altitude z, is 
given by the following equation, where po is the pressure 
at a reference height zo, m is the mean molecular mass, T 
is the temperature, g is gravitational acceleration and k is 
Boltzmann’s constant: 


P = poexp [-« 7 zo) | ; (1) 


The parameter kT /mg is knownas the scale height. Typical 
values are about 7 km at the Earth’s surface, 5 km in the 
mesosphere and 50 km at 300 km altitude. 

The mean molecular mass of the atmosphere is 
constant below about 70 km, because the atmosphere is 
turbulent and mixing occurs. Above about 70 km, the 
scale height begins to change, because solar radiation 
causes molecules, especially oxygen (O2), to dissociate. 
Then above about 115 km altitude, turbulence no longer 
dominates so that the gases begin to separate by diffusion, 
i.e. each gas responds according to its own atomic mass, 
as given in equation (1). Thus for a given temperature the 
scale height of hydrogen (H) is 28 times greater than that 
of molecular nitrogen (Nz). Above about 1500 km altitude, 
hydrogen is the dominant gas species. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Neutral Gas lonised Gas 
Exosphere 
iw Magnetosphere 
1000 + 1000 + 
Thermosphere F Regi 
“ egion 
> 1004 —~ 100 + F Region 
§ Mesosphere & 
6 i D Region 
8 Stratosphere g 
= 404 < iot+ ‘ 
— Day 
--- Night 
Troposphere 
17 ! ne | H s 


10° 10° 10” 10% 
Plasma Concentration (m~*) 


0 400 800 1200 1600 
Temperature (K) 


Figure 1. Left: The temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere as a 
function of altitude, identifying the various spheres of the 
neutral atmosphere. Right: The vertical distribution of 
ionization both for daytime (full curve) and at night (broken 
curve). The D, E and F regions are identified. The region above 
about 1000 km altitude is the magnetosphere. 


The ionized atmosphere 

Solar radiation ionizes some of the neutral atmospheric 
constituents in the mesosphere and thermosphere leading 
to the formation of the ionosphere, which may be defined 
as the region where there are sufficient free electrons 
and ions to affect the propagation of radio waves. The 
ionosphere is embedded within the thermosphere, and it 
is only above 1000 km altitude that the concentration of the 
ionized atmosphere exceeds that of the neutral component, 
and this upper region is known as the magnetosphere (see 
MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH). 

The plasma concentration in the ionosphere and 
magnetosphere may be described by the continuity 
equation (2), where q is the ionization rate of free electrons 
(N). The ionosphere and magnetosphere is an electrically 
neutral plasma, and hence the concentrations of electrons 
and ions are the same. The parameter, /, is loss rate due to 
recombination. The final term in equation (2) is a transport 
term due to the divergence of the flux (VV) where V is the 
plasma velocity. 


aN /at = q —I(N) — div(NV). (2) 


The ionosphere comprises three main regions, the D region 
(70-95 km), the E region (95-150 km) and the F region 
(>150 km). These names were chosen early in the 20th 
century in case additional layers were found at lower 
altitudes. 

In the D and E regions, the electron concentration is 
dominated by local production and loss. The collision 
frequency of ions with the neutral particles is so high in 
these regions that, to a first order, the ions move with the 
neutral particles. The collision frequency of the electrons 
is much smaller, and thus they are free to move under 
the actions of electric fields. Therefore this leads to the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


possibility of ions and electrons moving with respect to 
each other, which is in essence a current. 

The production of plasma depends on the flux of 
x-rays and EUV, the solar zenith angle, the atmospheric 
composition and density, the last two parameters 
combining to form what is termed the optical depth. 
The height of maximum production is a balance between 
the increasing density of the atmosphere with decreasing 
altitude and the diminishing intensity as the ionizing 
fluxes are absorbed as they penetrate further into the 
atmosphere. The maximum photo-ionization occurs at 
different altitude for each wavelength. For example, 
the peak ion production occurs at about 105 km for 
A = 1-14nm, 115 km for 4 = 80-103 nm and 150 km for 
A = 14-80 nm. Integrating across all wavelengths the 
peak production occurs about 110 km for an overhead 
Sun. In general, the ionization in the D and E regions is 
dominated by molecular species (NO* and O;), whereas 
in the F region O* is the dominant species. 

Molecular ions are lost through dissociative recombi- 
nation, a process whereby molecules break apart during 
recombination. The atomic ions are lost through radiative 
recombination, a process that requires the emission of a 
photon to conserve both momentum and energy. Radia- 
tive recombination is a much slower process than dissocia- 
tive recombination, by a factor of 10°. The typical lifetimes 
of ions (and hence electrons) at D, E and F region altitudes 
are approximately 1 s, 1 min and 1h respectively. Because 
there is only a minute amount of photoionization at night 
from scattered Lyman a and £ from the Earth’s geocorona 
the plasma concentration in the D and E region is very low 
(figure 1). 

The F region peak plasma concentration occurs 
where diffusion of plasma along the magnetic field 
line is approximately equal to the loss rate of plasma. 
Above the F region peak, diffusion dominates plasma 
processes. Equation (1) can be used to describe the 
plasma distribution but using the average ion and 
electron temperatures, (7, + T.)/2, rather than the neutral 
temperature, T. Above about 110 km for electrons and 
300 km for ions, there are insufficient collisions to maintain 
thermal equilibrium with the neutral particles. Near the F 
region peak, the ion temperatures are 5—20% greater than 
the neutral temperatures, but the electrons are between 
2 and 5 times greater. Therefore the scale height of the 
plasma in the ionosphere is considerably larger than that 
of the neutral atmosphere. 

By chance, the ionization potentials of O* and H* 
are almost identical, and thus the charge exchange readily 
occurs (O* +H = O+H1?*). The formation of H* contributes 
significantly to the increase of the plasma scale height 
and is a major reason for the ionosphere acting as a 
major source of plasma for the magnetosphere. During 
daytime, the upward fluxes through 1000 km altitude are 
~ 10% m~* s7!. During the night, cooling occurs and 
some of the magnetospheric plasma falls back into the 
ionosphere, acting to maintain the F region concentration 
through the night. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


During the day, the absorption of solar radiation 
causes the thermospheric temperature to rise by ~400 K, 
resulting in a large pressure bulge on the dayside of 
the Earth at F region altitudes compared with night- 
time values. A major consequence is that winds blow at 
speeds of 100-400 m s~’ from the dayside to the nightside 
thermosphere. The expansion of the atmosphere at E 
region heights causes differential motion of the electrons 
and the ions, which causes current to flow, as discussed 
above. This current changes the intensity of the magnetic 
field at the Earth’s surface by ~50 nT, and the associated 


dynamo electric field is about 10 mV mt. 


Solar-induced variations in the neutral 
atmosphere 

The total solar irradiance is remarkably constant, although 
there is about an 8% increase in the flux reaching the 
ground in January compared with June owing to an 
eccentricity in the Earth’s orbit. Since space-based 
measurements of solar irradiance began in the 1970s, the 
variation has been less than 0.2%. Such measurements 
must be made from space to ensure that observations are 
not affected by the Earth’s atmosphere. It is estimated 
that a 1% increase of solar irradiance is required to cause a 
1 K increase in global temperature. Therefore the solar 
irradiance variation (~0.2%) is of minor importance in 
recent global climate change. However, there are over 2000 
papers which show statistically significant correlations 
between tropospheric parameters (e.g. temperature and 
rainfall) and the 11 yr solar cycle. Therefore there must be 
less direct physical processes that have an impact on the 
troposphere (see SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: LONG-TERM 
AND SHORT-TERM CLIMATE VARIABILITY). 

The daily and seasonal changes in the temperature 
of the atmosphere are very large compared with those 
resulting from the increase of greenhouse gases. In 
the troposphere, models predict that a doubling of CO, 
will lead to a few K rise in surface temperature. The 
corresponding variation through a year at a given site is 
of the order of 20-30 K. The mesosphere would cool by 
~10 Kas a result of increased CO) owing to the additional 
radiative cooling. The natural seasonal variation is 
about 20 K. In the thermosphere, a 50 K reduction in 
temperature would occur, witha corresponding variability 
over a season of about 400 K. Therefore the effects of 
changes in greenhouse gas concentration are much smaller 
than the natural changes caused by normal diurnal and 
seasonal changes at each level in the atmosphere. These 
comparisons also show that the mesosphere is the best 
level in which to search for global change effects, because 
the predicted changes are comparable with the natural 
variability, whereas in other levels the predicted changes 
are a small fraction of the natural variations. Alas, 
mesospheric measurements are difficult as the mesosphere 
is too high for aircraft and balloon-borne measurements 
and too low for satellites, but new techniques using optical 
methods for remote sensing the mesosphere are being 
developed. The longest data series of the ionosphere 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


extend for only a few decades, short in comparison with 
meteorological data series. However, even these data 
sets are indicating a reduction in the altitude of the peak 
concentration in the F region of up to 1 km yr“!. There 
is still considerable regional variability in the level of 
change, but the sense is consistent with increased CO, 
concentrations (Jarvis et al 1998). 


Solar-radiation-induced variations in the ionized 
atmosphere 

The intensity of the solar radiation in the wavelength 
range critical for the ionosphere and magnetosphere 
(~1-140 nm) varies on average by a factor of about 
2.5 between sunspot maximum and minimum, although 
some specific lines may be enhanced by a factor of >100. 
The consequence for the ionosphere is that the electron 
concentration increases by approximately the same factor 
between sunspot minimum and maximum. Similarly, 
a 27 day modulation of solar flux can be detected in 
the ionospheric electron concentration both at E and F 
region altitudes. The 27 day modulation is difficult 
to identify owing to the large day-to-day variability in 
the ionosphere caused by geomagnetic storms and wave 
energy propagating upwards from the troposphere and 
stratosphere. Measurements of sunspot number and 
the intensity of the solar radio flux at 2800 MHz (A = 
10.7 cm) are often used in ionospheric models because 
these parameters are easy to determine at the Earth’s 
surface. However, they are at best only a guide to the 
general level of activity, rather than a reliable indicator 
of EUV and x-ray fluxes. These fluxes must be known 
accurately if ionospheric concentrations are to be predicted 
reliably. 

Solar flares last 1-100 min and release ~1077-107° J 
of energy. The largest flares, C class, give an energy flux 
at the Earth (1 AU) of 10-°-10-> W m~ near 1 nm. This 
produces a corresponding increase of ionization in the D 
and E regions of the dayside ionosphere that has profound 
effects on radiowave propagation, as discussed later. 


Solar-wind-induced variations in the ionized 
atmosphere 

Typically 1% of the 10'° W of solar wind power that 
impinges upon the magnetopause is transferred into 
the magnetosphere when the interplanetary magnetic 
field (IMF) has a southward component. Under such 
conditions, reconnection is likely to occur, this being 
the major physical mechanism by which energy enters 
the magnetosphere-ionosphere system. When the IMF 
is northward the energy crossing the magnetopause 
falls by 2 orders of magnitude. The solar wind 
energy is redistributed in the magnetosphere by the 
effects of electric fields, currents, energetic particles 
and waves, which in turn have significant effects on 
the stratosphere, mesosphere, thermosphere, ionosphere 
and magnetosphere (See SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: 
COUPLING BETWEEN SOLAR WIND, MAGNETOSPHERE, IONOSPHERE AND 
ATMOSPHERE). The resultant changes also have a major and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


increasing effect on human activities (See SPACE WEATHER 
PREDICTIONS). 

The heliospheric current sheet is the boundary 
between the northern and southern lobes of the Sun’s 
magnetic field. At the Earth, which lies close to the 
heliospheric equator, the current sheet is distorted and 
is often likened to a ballerina’s skirt. These two factors 
combined mean that the north-south component of the 
IMF varies from northward to southward on average every 
5 h. Therefore reconnection at the dayside magnetopause 
is switched on and off frequently, thus the energy flow 
from the solar wind to the magnetosphere is highly 
irregular both in space and time. 

There is still considerable uncertainty over some of 
the detailed response of the coupled magnetosphere— 
ionosphere system to southward turnings of the IMF and 
thus increased energy transfer. There is general agreement 
that the electric field across the magnetosphere and the 
currents that couple the ionosphere to the magnetosphere 
both increase within minutes. After about 1 h, there is 
a major reconfiguration of the geomagnetic tail, known 
as a substorm, which leads to majestic displays of 
the AuRorA in the nightside ionosphere, among other 
phenomena. Intense currents (1 MA) are driven from the 
magnetosphere through the ionosphere, which results in 
enormous Joule (Ohmic) heating. These currents deposit 
~10"-10" W in the ionosphere and thermosphere which 
is about twice as much as the energy deposited by the 
energetic particles that cause the aurora. Substorms 
typically last about 5 h and recur on average every 
3-5 h. Hence there are about 1500 substorms per annum. 
Energetic ions and electrons with high pitch angles injected 
during the substorm process drift around the Earth at 
(2-3.5) x 10* km altitude. Their motions are controled by 
the gradient and the curvature of the Earth’s magnetic 
field and the azimuthal drift are in opposite directions for 
ions and electrons, hence the formation of the ring current 
(See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RING CURRENT). Typically about 
10" W power is stored in the ring current, the energetic 
particles eventually being scattered by waves and ending 
up precipitated in the stratosphere, mesosphere and 
thermosphere. 

The major exception to the continually oscillating IMF 
occurs during the passage of a coronal mass ejection (CME) 
event. Although CME events occur about twice per day 
on the Sun, only a small fraction of these impact upon 
the Earth’s magnetosphere. When they occur, the IMF 
magnitude and direction change very slowly with time. 
Thus the IMF may have a northward component for 1 
day, the consequence of which would be that the aurorae 
diminish markedly in intensity and move progressively 
poleward. Similarly the southward component of the IMF 
may last for 1 day also, and hence considerable energy is 
transferred to the magnetosphere. During these intervals, 
frequent and intense substorms usually occur, and their 
cumulative effect is known as a magnetic storm. 

The occurrence of magnetic storms varies over the 
solar cycle. In general, storms are most frequent up to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Annuai Number of Magnetic Storms with aa* > 40 nT 


1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 
ni A A n Iuplevrene Fee 1 eeirreever| Ja siepeseel Welvervew : 


15 3 H H 
70 4 | 
65 
60 
55 
50 i 
454: 
“of 
35 4 
304 if: 
25 4 
204 
15 4 
10 4 
54 


Number of storms in each year 


Year 


o4 
1865 1875 1885 1895 1905 1915 1925 1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985 1995 


Smoothed sunspot numbers 


Figure 2. The sunspot number and the number of magnetic storms since 1865. A storm is defined as an occasion when the aa magnetic 
index exceeds 40 nT. The number of storms at all epochs of the solar cycle has increased markedly in the last 100 yr. (From Clilverd et al 


1998.) 


2 yr after sunspot maximum (see figure 2). However, 
the number of storms at each phase of the solar cycle has 
increased markedly over the last 100 yr. Figure 2 shows 
the number of storms per annum, storms being defined 
as when the geomagnetic aa index exceeded 40 nT. The aa 
index is a measure of the deviation of the Earth’s magnetic 
field from its quiet level in each 3 h epoch of the day, 
as determined from two mid-latitude observatories. The 
broken vertical lines show the times of sunspot maximum 
and minimum and the second curve shows the sunspot 
number. 

One of the effects of storms and substorms is to 
increase the temperature of the thermosphere by up 
to 400 K. This causes the atmosphere to expand and 
the density at a fixed altitude near 400 km altitude to 
increase by an order of magnitude. Also the atmosphere 
becomes less molecular, i.e. the O/N> ratio decreases. The 
recombination rate increases and the plasma concentration 
falls. This is most marked at F region altitudes where 
the concentration falls by up to an order of magnitude. 
Winds in the thermosphere also increase by a factor of 
2-3, reaching up to 1 kms7!. Although the initial energy 
from substorms is deposited in the thermosphere near the 
auroral oval, all latitudes are eventually affected through 
the transport of energy through winds and atmospheric 
gravity, or buoyancy waves. The latter propagate away 
from the auroral oval at close to the speed of sound in the 
thermosphere (750 m s~'). 

Solar proton events are when protons with energies 
of 1-500 MeV are ejected from the Sun. Such events, 
although infrequent, cause substantial changes to the 
minor species chemistry, especially O3 and NO,, in the 
atmosphere between 20 and 80 km altitude. They last 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from a few hours up to 10 days. Relativistic electron 
events (energies 1-20 MeV) are also observed inside the 
magnetosphere. The sources of these very energetic 
particles are still unclear. There are plausible arguments 
suggesting that the Sun, Jupiter, the dayside cusp or the 
geomagnetic tail may be the source of such particles. Like 
the solar proton events, their atmospheric consequence 
may be very significant in the aerosol chemistry. Both 
energetic ion and electron precipitation may also affect 
the global electric circuit. This is the cumulative effect 
of all the thunderstorms which charge the ionosphere to 
a potential of several 100 kV with respect to the Earth’s 
surface. This potential difference drives vertical electric 
currents downward from the ionosphere to the ground 
in regions where thunderstorms do not occur. The fair 
weather electric current, as it is called, varies spatially 
and temporally according to the ionospheric potential and 
the total column resistance between the ionosphere and 
the ground. This column resistance may vary when very 
energetic proton or electron events are in progress. 


The human impact of solar variability 

All Earth-orbiting satellites fly in the ionosphere and 
magnetosphere, and satellites are used for a wide variety 
of purposes now. Modern communications use satellites 
to an ever-increasing extent. Geostationary satellites are 
used for television transmissions, and there is a massive 
increase of global mobile telephone systems that use 
satellites in a variety of orbits. Most navigation now 
uses the Global Positioning System (GPS), an extensive 
constellation of satellites in highly elliptical orbits. Earth 
observations, e.g. meteorological forecasting, hurricane 
track predictions and agricultural crop assessments, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


extensively use space-based data. Marconi first used high- 
frequency (HF) (3-30 MHz) radio communications via the 
ionosphere a hundred years ago. Despite the advent of 
many new means of communication, HF communications 
are still of great importance in many areas of the world, 
being both cheap and usually reliable. All of these features 
underpin much of civilization today but they are adversely 
affected by solar variations that causes perturbations in the 
ionosphere and magnetosphere. Even the distribution of 
electricity by the power industry, and corrosion of long 
pipelines at high latitudes is affected by solar-induced 
changes, which are now known as space weather, the 
consequences for humanity being outlined below. 


Spacecraft environment 


Many satellites operate at geostationary orbit (~40 000 km), 
a region where the effects of energetic particles on space- 
craft operations are very important. During storms, the 
particle fluxes of energetic electrons and protons increase 
by many orders of magnitude. This is particularly preva- 
lent in the outer radiation belts (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
RADIATION BELTS). The high fluxes cause severe damage to 
spacecraft. The most energetic particles (energies ~MeV) 
penetrate deep into the body of the spacecraft and into 
coaxial cables. This can lead to deep dielectric charging 
which results in damage to spacecraft components, and in 
turn leads to spurious signals and occasionally to complete 
failure of some or all of the spacecraft. The less energetic 
particles (~keV) tend to cause surface charging and dis- 
charging which in turn can cause anomalous operation of 
the spacecraft. 

Solar cells are also vulnerable. A modest solar flare 
can reduce their efficiency by ~3% per event, ultimately 
affecting the lifetime of the satellite itself. 

There are a variety of mitigating actions that can 
be taken to reduce the effects, many of which can be 
incorporated into the design of the satellite. Shielding 
of key elements and cables is the primary mechanism. 
Also during the operational phases avoidance of sensitive 
maneuvers during the storms is attempted. 


The human perspective 


The exposure of humans in space to the various radiations 
described above is a very significant hazard. US Shuttle 
flights have been curtailed to prevent astronauts receiving 
high dosages of radiation. Although the fluxes of particles 
at ~15 km are tiny compared with the ionosphere, there is 
still a modest threat to the operation of high-flying aircraft, 
such as Concorde. Again electronics may be vulnerable 
and the total radiation dosage, especially to the crew, is an 
issue. The aeroplanes carry radiation monitors. If fluxes 
increase, the aircraft lowers its cruising altitude to reduce 
the damaging effects. The next generation of passenger 
aircraft will fly near 15 km and thus monitoring of the 
fluxes of energetic particles from geospace will be required. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Radio propagation 

The presence of free electrons in the ionosphere and 
magnetosphere affect the propagation of radio waves from 
very low frequencies (3-30 kHz) up to the frequencies 
used to communicate with satellites (10 Hz). Much of 
the knowledge of the ionosphere and magnetosphere has 
been determined by observing and then understanding the 
effects of radio waves that are refracted by the plasma. Toa 
first order, the attenuation of radio signals is proportional 
to the inverse of the square of their frequency. 

Propagation conditions change markedly as a result 
of the effects of the Sun on all time scales from seconds 
to a solar cycle. On a time scale of seconds, solar flares 
cause enhanced ionization in the D and E regions which 
results in additional attenuation of the radio signal. The 
normal diurnal variation of solar zenith angle causes the 
maximum electron concentration at F region altitudes 
to increase by up to 200% at sunspot maximum from 
midnight to noon. Thus the ionosphere can refract much 
higher frequencies at noon than midnight. As described 
above, the effect of storms is to reduce the electron 
concentration compared with quiet times owing to the 
composition changes, thus reducing the bandwidth for 
effective radio propagation. 

At frequencies used in satellite communications, it is 
not the attenuation of the ionosphere that is important but 
the scattering of radio waves by small-scale (1 cm—10 km) 
plasma irregularities. These irregularities cause rapid 
fading of the signal. In practical terms, they can introduce 
errors into global positioning and cause distortion of 
images collected with synthetic aperture radars. 


Spacecraft orbital decay 

About 5000 spacecraft have been placed in Earth orbit, 
and about half of these remain there. The rest have re- 
entered the atmosphere. Of the remaining satellites, only 
25% are still operational. In addition, many missions 
leave space junk, including booster rockets and explosive 
bolts. Satellites have blown apart and there are now 
approaching 10000 pieces of spacecraft that can be tracked 
from the ground, i.e. items larger than ~1 m, although 
the size that can be tracked depends on distance from 
the Earth. In addition, there are millions more pieces of 
space debris <1 m. There is a natural decay of spacecraft 
orbit due to atmospheric drag for all satellites below about 
1500 km altitude. The atmospheric density increases by 
over an order of magnitude at F region altitudes at sunspot 
maximum compared with sunspot minimum. Thus much 
greater orbital mass falls to Earth during periods of high 
solar flux. This is illustrated in figure 3. In the years 
centered about the 1989-90 solar maximum, over 550 t 
of material re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere, causing a 
noticeable fall in the satellite population. 


Ground-based effects of solar variability 

During substorms, very large currents (1 MA) flow 
horizontally in the E region of the ionosphere in 
the auroral oval. The magnetic variation from such 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


500 


10000 


400 


Population decreases 
as solar flux increases 


300 


200 


Solar Radio Flux (x104s~! m7?Hz7") 


100 


1957 1970 


Year 


8000 


6000 


4000 


2000 


Official Earth Satellite Population 


1980 1990 1998 


Figure 3. The 10.7 cm solar radio flux over the last 40 yr together with the satellite population. Here satellite is defined as any piece of 
spacecraft or debris >1 m in diameter. The shaded regions are about sunspot maximum. During these periods, the density of the 
atmosphere increased, resulting in enhanced satellite drag, faster decay to the orbit, and thus more debris burning up in the Earth’s 


atmosphere. 


Magnetic Field from electrojet induces voltage 
potential on surface of Earth 


-~ - 


Geomagnetically Induced Current 
enters power system through 
ground connections 


——>> 


Voltage Gradient 


Electric potential induced on Earth's 
surface up to 6 Volts/km causes 
Geomagnetically induced Currents 


Large currents can be induced to flow 
through highly conductive seawater 


— 


Coastal areas cause abrupt transition in 
conductivity between resistive rock 
geology and seawater 


Figure 4. The electromagnetic coupling that occurs between the auroral electrojet in the ionosphere (110 km), the underlying 
geological features and the power systems. In regions of high resistivity (igneous rock) the Earth’s potentials over large regions can 
cause large induced currents in powerlines. Also there may be induced currents in coastal areas when currents induced in sea water 


encounter the land. 


currents, which are called the auroral electrojets, is 
<4000 nT. This represents about 10% of the Earth’s 
field at the latitude where these currents occur. These 
ionospheric currents induce currents in the sea, on land 
and in power lines (figure 4). The main process for 
producing geomagnetically induced currents in electric 
power systems is induced Earth-surface potential due 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to geomagnetic field fluctuations during storms. The 
potential (~5 V km™') is imposed across grounded 
neutral points of three-phase transformers. This potential 
essentially acts as a voltage source and has a frequency 
range of a few mHz. The induced current biases the 
excitation characteristics of transformers causing half- 
cycle saturation, and hence distortion, and is thus 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2 
for) 


o 
ip 


Typ rt 


=) ° 
oO N 


H 
-_ 
i) 


Temperature (K with respect to 1961-1990 mean) 


+4 


Annual mean 4 
—— 10-year mean 


---- 10-year mean (extrapolated) 


Ty Se et 


1880 1900 


1920 1940 1960 1980 
Year 


Figure 5. The mean annual global surface temperature (K) from 1856 to 1995 with respect to the mean for the period 1961-90 (dotted 
curve). The full curve is a 10 yr running mean. The broken curve is an extrapolation of the 10 yr mean. 


rich in harmonics. The consequence is additional 
dissipation within the transformer itself which can lead 
to overheating and occasionally transformer failure. The 
best-documented event occurred in March 1989 when the 
entire province of Quebec in Canada was blacked out for 
more than 9 h. The economic effect of the failure was put 
at ~ $5 billion, i.e. similar to that of a hurricane. 

Traditionally the Earth’s magnetic field has been 
used for navigation, but with the development of GPS 
this is much less common nowadays. Variations in the 
apparent location of the magnetic pole can be several 
degrees during a storm, depending on the latitude of the 
observer. This is clearly an important effect for accurate 
navigation, but these large deviations last the duration 
of a substorm (<1 h). Ground, aircraft and, to a lesser 
extent, satellite measurements of the Earth’s magnetic 
field are still important in geological survey work. This 
needs to be carried out during periods of quiet solar 
conditions, otherwise the required signals are corrupted 
by a combination of the ionospheric and induced currents, 
which are driven ultimately by solar variations. 


The Sun and weather 

There are >2000 papers published in the refereed scientific 
literature describing meteorological phenomena that have 
a Statistically significant relationship with solar variability, 
and especially the 11 yr solar cycle. Over the last 
30 yr during which accurate measurements have been 
possible, the output of the Sun has been remarkably 
constant (1460 W m~? + 0.5% at the Earth’s surface). The 
small uncertainties cannot account for the observed Sun— 
weather relationships directly. It is also interesting to 
note that the increase of global mean surface temperature 
(figure 5) and the occurrence of magnetic storms (figure 2) 
both increased markedly from about 1915. There are no 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


generally accepted physical processes that can explain the 
data; however, in recent years several promising theories 
have been developed. On a longer time scale, the Earth’s 
climate is known to be directly affected by variations in the 
Earth’s orbit. These are known as the Milankovich cycles. 


Predicting space weather 


The requirement for accurate prediction of space weather 
is likely to become increasingly important with time. 
There is greater reliance on satellite-based communica- 
tions and navigation systems, together with the prospect 
of much increased high-flying commercial passenger air 
transport and long-duration manned space flight to the 
International Space Station and other planets. The predic- 
tion of space weather is in its infancy, with the first com- 
prehensive models of geospace under construction. There 
are two key elements where further scientific understand- 
ing of the coupled system is essential before accurate pre- 
dictions can be a reality. The first is identification of the 
features on the Sun that lead to the severe storms. CME 
events that impact the Earth are certainly one important 
factor, but not the only one. Second, severe storms occur 
when the IMF is southward. There is at present no way of 
predicting the IMF remotely. The best input parameters 
for the present forecasting models are solar wind and IMF 
conditions from satellite measurements at the L1 libration 
point. (The L1 point is where the gravitational forces of 
the Sun and the Earth are equal, about 1.5 million km up- 
stream in the solar wind.) These data give about a 1h 
warning of the impacts on Earth, which is insufficient to 
take all the actions required to minimize the possible dam- 
aging consequences of magnetic storms which are caused 
by variations in solar processes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Clilverd M A, Clark T D G, Clarke E and Rishbeth H 
1998 Increased magnetic storm activity from 1868- 
1995 J. Atmos. Sol.-Terr. Phys. 60 1047-56 

Jarvis M J, Jenkins B and Rodgers G A 1998 Southern 
hemisphere observations of a long-term decrease in 
F-region altitude and thermospheric wind providing 
possible evidence of global thermosphere cooling 
J. Geophys. Res. 103 20 774-87 


A S Rodger 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 8 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Coupling 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: 
Coupling Between Solar Wind, 
Magnetosphere, lonosphere, and 
Neutral Atmosphere 


The particle flux from the Sun and the magnetosphere 
represents a large source of energy and ionization for 
the lower thermosphere and ionosphere. The energy 
flux, which ranges from <10-* J m7? s7 to over 
0.1 J m~ s"!, is deposited by particles with energies 
that range from hundreds of eV to several hundred 
MeV. The intensity, spectrum, and localization of the 
precipitation are functions of solar and geomagnetic 
activity (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC STORMS AND 
SOLAR WIND ORIGINS). The mean values also show longer- 
term dependence on the soLar cycLe. The particle- 
induced ionization leads to dissociation of tightly bound 
N» molecules and to the formation of the reactive 
nitrogen compounds NO and NO;. These compounds, 
when transported to lower altitudes, participate in a 
catalytic cycle leading to the destruction of ozone. 
Continuing research seeks to understand the impact 
of magnetospheric and solar energetic particles on the 
chemistry and electrodynamics of the middle atmosphere. 


Atmospheric processes 

During the last 25 years intensive efforts have been 
underway to develop an understanding of variations in 
middle-atmospheric ozone (O3) due to natural processes 
and due to the effects of mankind (see OZONEHOLE). Itis now 
reasonably well understood that the global balance of O3 
is governed in part by the balance between the production 
of O3 and its destruction by reactions within the NO,, Cl,, 
HO,, and O, chemical families. One of the most important 
catalytic cycles in this global balance is that due to the 
following reactions: 


NO +0; — NO» +O, 
NO, +O > NO+0O, 


O3 +O — 202 


The bulk of the odd nitrogen (i.e. NO,, oxides of nitrogen) 
in the stratosphere is formed from the oxidation of NO by 
O(‘D) (excited atomic oxygen) forming NO. It is known, 
however, that middle-atmospheric NO, is formed by 
ion chemistry initiated by the precipitation of energetic 
particles into the upper atmosphere (see SOLAR WIND: 
ENERGETIC PARTICLES). 

The first step in determining the production of 
NO, due to the precipitation of energetic particles 
is the calculation of the deposition of energy from 
particle penetration. The particle energy is absorbed by 
the atmosphere through collisions with, and scattering 
by, atmospheric constituents which result in either 
dissociation or ionization of the atmospheric constituents. 
Production of each electron pair within the atmosphere 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


requires an energy deposition of approximately 35 eV. 
In addition to the energy imparted directly to the 
atmosphere during collisions, a certain amount of energy 
is converted to x-rays by the bremsstrahlung process. 
This is associated with the rapid deceleration of energetic 
electrons during their penetration into the atmosphere, 
providing additional ionization down to altitudes of 
20 km. 

The ion and neutral odd-nitrogen chemistry initiated 
by energetic particles produces secondary electrons, 
e*, which in turn ionize and dissociate the major 
atmospheric species. This ionization is followed by a series 
of interchange and recombination reactions involving 
nitrogen and its ions which produce additional atomic 
nitrogen. The resulting atomic nitrogen may either be 
in the ground 4S level or excited to the *D level. Nitric 
oxide is formed by the reaction of atomic nitrogen with O). 
Reactions involving excited nitrogen are faster than those 
with the ground-state N atom. The destruction of odd 
nitrogen proceeds through the reaction of N atoms with 
NO to produce molecular nitrogen and atomic oxygen. 
In the sunlit atmosphere the photodissociation of NO is 
important; however, in the fall, winter, and spring in the 
polar region, the photolytic reaction is negligible and the 
resulting NO lifetime is sufficient for transport to bring the 
NO into the mesosphere and stratosphere. 

Current numerical models take into account the 
details of the photochemical complexities and are 
capable of calculating the odd-nitrogen production rates 
as functions of the energy-dependent ionization and 
deposition rates. Thus, if energetic particle precipitation 
can be measured, the auroral-induced emissions and 
the NO can be specified. As the NO produced in the 
thermosphere and mesosphere is transported to lower 
altitudes it reacts with ozone to form NO, and remains 
as this form of odd-nitrogen for the remaining time of 
transport. 

There have been several studies of these effects 
suggesting that precipitating electrons could lead to the 
formation of oxides of nitrogen and hydrogen. These 
could affect O3 near 60 km and the ion formation rates due 
to these electrons could dominate those of other processes 
down to approximately 40 km. Baker et al (1987) found 
ion formation rates using electron measurements from 
geostationary orbit that showed that the fluxes of energetic 
electrons and hence the ion formation rates were strongly 
modulated by solar activity. Callis et al (1991), using 
estimates of the precipitating electron fluxes derived from 
geostationary data and 2D simulations, concluded that the 
precipitating electrons could have a significant effect on 
the budgets of both NO, and O; within the stratosphere. 
This coupling mechanism between solar activity, solar 
wind structures, the energetic particle populations within 
the magnetosphere, and the chemical state of the middle 
atmosphere represents an important linkage which must 
be understood to assess the natural variations in the global 
chemical state of the middle atmosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Coupling 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Energetic particle sources 

The energetic particle flux into the atmosphere has 
characteristic spectral features and temporal and spatial 
scales depending on latitude and local time. The most 
important sources include the solar energetic particles 
within the polar cap, the diffuse and discrete auroral 
precipitation within the auroral zone, the energetic 
magnetospheric electrons extending from midlatitudes 
throughout the auroral zone, and the ring current particles 
precipitating at midlatitudes. Table 1 summarizes the 
known particle input characteristics; in the following 
sections we discuss each type of particle input separately. 


Solar energetic particle influx 
Solar energetic particle (SEP) events extending in 
energy up to hundreds of MeV can produce dramatic 
enhancements in the ionization and NO, production rates 
in the polar regions. Figure 1 shows instantaneous 
production rates of NO calculated for several solar particle 
events. These particles enter via the open magnetic field 
line regions. Also shown are the average production rates 
due to galactic cosmic Rays (GCRs) at solar maximum, and 
estimated production rates due to precipitating electrons 
(Brasseur and Solomon 1984). Note that solar protons can 
havea large effect between the altitudes of ~20 and 100 km. 
Of the solar proton events shown in figure 1, that 
of 4 August 1972 was one of the largest on record, the 
kind that occurs roughly once a decade. However, SEP 
events of the size of the other two typically occur several 
times per year during solar maximum. Reid et al (1991) 
have calculated the ionization rates and resulting effects 
on NO, and O; for the series of large solar proton events 
in late 1989 that were comparable in intensity to those of 
August 1972. They predicted NO increases as large as a 
factor of 20 near 60 km altitude, with corresponding peak 
Os; depletion as large as 20% near 40 km in late October 
1989. Furthermore, calculation of the latitudinal range 
over which the deposition occurs requires information of 
the geomagnetic cutoff. Because the cutoff can be lowered 
by several degrees at the time of these events due to 
associated GEOMAGNETIC STORM activity, the cutoff needs to 
be monitored at the same time. The scale on the right 
of figure 1 indicates the minimum energy proton that can 
penetrate to a given altitude, which shows that calculation 
of the ionization rate due to solar protons from 20 to 80 km 
requires information on the proton energy spectrum from 
about 3 to 500 MeV. 


Relativistic electron precipitation 

Baker et al (1986, 1987) reported observations of the fluxes 
of energetic (1-15 MeV) electrons at geostationary orbit 
(6.6 Rx) for the period 1979 to 1986, from solar maximum 
conditions to solar minimum. Their results indicated 
that large enhancements in the electron population 
were sporadic in the 1979-1981 solar maximum period. 
However, during the declining phase of the solar cycle, 
from late 1981 until mid-1986, frequent large increases in 
this population were observed. The average intensity and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


100 Te 
1 & 4 

aad oO 
3] 
80 L3 6-4 
ae 
c | 
10 S54 
60 2] 
Yn 4 
> J 
se 2 
re SPE 2/25/69 el 
100 € | 
E | 
£4 

56 300 ‘é 
SPE 8/4/72 S| 
oL : fat eas Pr et ta fe eg ea = og I 
10° 10! 102 10° 10° 10° 108 


NO Production Rate (cm7* s7') 


Figure 1. NO production from solar proton events (SPE), 
relativistic electron precipitation (REP), and galactic cosmic rays 
(GCR). 


frequency of these events increased dramatically so that 
the 6-month average of the flux of these electrons was 
larger by a factor of 8 or 9 than a similar average observed 
during 1979-1980. 

The population of relativistic electrons is known 
to be closely related to the occurrence of high-speed 
(Vsw = 600 km s~!) solar wind streams and often shows 
a periodicity of 27 d. Since high-speed solar wind 
can be associated both with sOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS 
and with the cyclical development of solar CORONAL 
HOLES, their occurrence is temporally associated with the 
11 y solar cycle. The maximum frequency of energetic 
electrons develops during the declining sun-spor phase, 
but even near solar maximum conditions, very strong 
relativistic electron events appear in association with 
coronal mass ejections and the related magnetic clouds 
interacting with the Earth’s magnetosphere. A dramatic 
example is the event of 24 March 1991, when a strong 
interplanetary shock struck the Earth’s magnetosphere 
and generated several orders of magnitude increases 
in the fluxes of multi-MeV electrons and protons in 
the inner magnetosphere (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH). 
These results provide support for and strengthen the 
suggestion that relativistic electron precipitation may 
significantly influence the photochemical state of the 
middle atmosphere. 


Auroral particle influx 

The particle flux precipitating from the magnetospheric 
plasma sheet represents a large source of energy and 
ionization for the lower thermosphere and ionosphere 
(See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMA SHEET). The energy 
flux, which ranges from less than 10-3 J m~? s“! to over 
0.1Jm~?s"!, is mainly deposited by particles with energies 
that vary from hundreds of eV to several hundred keV. The 
intensity, energy, and localization of the precipitation are 
functions of geomagnetic activity: higher localized fluxes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Coupling 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Particle input characteristics. 


Total Tangent 
Latitude Longitude Time Flux Energy energy column 
range range scale range range input NO production 
(deg) (MLT) (d) Gi ss") (keV) (10° J) (cm) 
SEP >60->70 24 1-3 10-5—-10-4 10°-5 x 10° 3-80 6.2 x 10!4-1.2 x 1016 
REP 55-72 24 2-5 10-6-10-4 10°-1.5 x 10* 1-300 1.2 x 10'4-3.1 x 1016 
Diffuse 65-72 24 _ 5 x 1074-05 0.5-50 3.6-3600 1.3 x 105-1.2 x 1017 
aurora perh perh 
Discrete 1-10 2-4 0.02-0.125  2.5x10-4*0.1  0.5-30 0.005-2600 3.1 x 10!4-7.8 x 10!” 
aurora 
Ring 55-65 24 13 10-5—-10-3 10-500 4-1000 6.2 x 10!4-1.2 x 10!” 
current 


and higher mean energies are found during substorms, 
and the mean values also show longer-term dependence 
on the solar cycle. 

The discrete AuRORAS are highly structured and 
localized, and their occurrence frequency maximizes in the 
premidnight sector at auroral latitudes. Individual auroral 
arc widths vary from a few km to 100 km in latitude, but 
during substorms the discrete auroras can cover a region 
of about 1000 km in latitude and several thousand km in 
longitude. The discrete precipitation consists mainly of 
electrons in the energy range from a few hundred eV toa 
few tens of keV, often accelerated by field-aligned potential 
structures which produce a characteristic monoenergetic 
peak in their spectrum. Electrons in the 0.5-30 keV energy 
range make a significant contribution to the energy input 
to the lower ionosphere, and are important for maintaining 
ionization levels in the ~100 km altitude region during 
the night when photoionization stops and particle impact 
ionization is dominant. Their energy and ionization inputs 
are thus important for the study of external influences on 
the mesosphere. 

The diffuse auroras are less structured and persist 
in the auroral latitudes almost continuously. This more 
uniform precipitation consists mostly of electrons and ions 
with energies from a few hundred eV to many tens of 
keV. In particular, during the substorm recovery phase, 
energetic (tens of keV) electron precipitation is often found 
in the morning sector of the auroral oval affecting the 
chemistry at about 80 km altitude. 


Ring current ion precipitation 

At mid-latitudes the precipitation from the ring current 
just inside the plasmapause (See MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
RING CURRENT) consists mainly of ions in the 10-200 keV 
energy range. The ions are anisotropic, with a peak 
near 90° pitch angle, and have been observed down to 
an altitude of about 120 km. The energy flux increases 
with magnetic activity from 10-7 to 10° J m7? s7!. 
For disturbed conditions, the precipitating ions and 
neutrals are the primary source of nighttime ionization 
at these altitudes and latitudes. Ring current ions 
interact with the outer edge of the plasmasphere, where 
they excite ion cyclotron waves (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


EARTH: PLASMASPHERE). These waves lead to scattering of 
the ring current ions, which most likely produces the 
observed precipitation. Outside the plasmapause there 
is another region of ion precipitation, where the observed 
precipitating flux is more isotropic. The filled loss cone 
suggests that a mechanism for strong pitch angle diffusion 
exists in the outer magnetosphere with energy deposition 
near 10°° J m~* s7!. 

Precipitation of energetic ions and neutrals ionizes 
and heats the thermosphere. Good agreement is found 
between the ionization rate based on the energetic ion and 
neutral precipitation with measurements of the electron 
density profile. The ionization profiles show a nearly 
constant rate of ionization from 120 to 200 km, and the 
ionization rates increase with magnetic activity from 1071 
to 107 cm=3 s*1. 


Present evidence of energetic particle coupling to 
atmospheric chemistry 

The extensive thermospheric NO data set acquired by the 
Solar Mesosphere Explorer (SME) satellite has quite clearly 
shown that NO is produced above 100 km by impact of 
auroral particles with energies less than 10 keV. On the 
other hand, the observational evidence of the significance 
of NO, production in the middle atmosphere and its 
subsequent downward transport has been limited: regular 
mesospheric NO measurements have become available 
only after the 1991 launch of the Halogen Occultation 
Experiment (HALOE) onboard the UARS satellite. These 
data have provided evidence that large amounts of NO 
are being produced in the mesosphere. Further evidence 
suggests transport to the stratosphere. 

Callis ef al (1996) looked at specific events and 
compared the observed NO changes with concurrent 
electron measurements by the SAMPEX satellite. They 
found significant NO increases (up to a factor of ten 
from 60 to 120 km) during longlasting electron events. 
A good correlation was found between the E > 30 keV 
electron measurement and the NO response measured 
by HALOE. Backed by 2D model calculations of ozone 
decreases due to enhanced NO,, Callis et al (1996) made the 
provocative suggestion that NO, enhancements such as 
discussed above were responsible for the ozone depletions 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Coupling 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


7 Solar EUV and 
Soft X—ray 


7 Relativistic Electron 
Precipitation 


Solar Proton Event 


Galactic Cosmic Rays 


eieersraer) sual 
102 10° 104 10 
lonization Rate (cm? s7!) 


a_eren ee 


Figure 2. Comparison of energy inputs and subsequent 
ionization rates in the atmosphere due to energetic particle 
sources, solar EUV, x-rays, and galactic cosmic rays. 


in the lower stratosphere. Thus, the current observational 
database suggests that the influence of energetic particle 
precipitation on atmospheric chemistry extends to as low 
as 25 km. Dedicated measurements of both NO, and O3 
throughout the polar winter are clearly required to prove 
this contention. 

In summary, as shown in figure 2, there are a wide 
variety of coupling processes between the Sun, solar wind, 
and magnetosphere on the one hand and the various layers 
of the atmosphere on the other. This coupling affects 
both the chemical and the electrodynamic properties of the 
middle and upper atmosphere. Thus, it is quite possible 
that solar wind and magnetospheric coupling to the lower 
layers of the atmosphere can have substantial effects on 
NO, and O3 concentrations. 


Bibliography 

Baker D N, Blake J B, Klebesadel R W and Higbie P R 
1986 Highly relativistic electrons in the Earth’s outer 
magnetosphere, 1, Lifetimes and temporal history 
1979-1984 J. Geophys. Res. 91 4265 

Baker D N et al 1987 Highly relativistic electrons: A role 
in coupling to the middle atmosphere? Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 14 1027 

Brasseur G and Solomon S 1984 Aeronomy of the Middle 
Atmosphere Atmospheric Sciences Library (Hingham, 
MA: D Reidel) 

Callis LB et al 1991 Precipitating relativistic electrons: their 
long term effect on stratospheric odd nitrogen levels 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 96 2939 

Callis L B et al 1996 Precipitating electrons: Evidence for 
effects on mesospheric odd nitrogen Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 23 1901 

Reid G C, Solomon S and Garcia R R 1991 Response of 
the middle atmosphere to the solar proton events of 
August-December 1989 Geophys. Res. Lett. 18 1019 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


D N Baker 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Long-Term and Short- 
Term Climate Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: 
Long-Term and Short-Term Climate 
Variability 


The Earth’s CLIMATE expresses the combined response of the 
atmosphere, the OCEANS and the continents to the energy 
that is received from the Sun. Any variation in the energy 
received from the Sun or radiated away from Earth and 
any change in the distribution of energy over the Earth’s 
surface will therefore have an effect on climate (see also 
EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE). 

By climate we usually understand the average state of 
the atmosphere over several years. Superposed on that is 
the large seasonal variation caused by the annual change 
of the solar zenith angle and the daily variation due to 
changes in the energy distribution over the Earth caused 
by the rotation of the Earth around its axis. 

The observed climate is a mixture of many different 
atmospheric processes including a number of complex 
feedback mechanisms. Some of these processes are 
directly affected by human activity such as burning 
of fossil fuel. However, there is also a large natural 
variability, which it is necessary to understand in order 
to assess the possible contribution of humanity to climate. 


Causes of climate changes 

Causes of climate change can be divided into two main 
categories: those that are due to external forcing of the 
climate system and those that are due to an internal 
redistribution of energy and matter within the global 
climate system. 

The internal redistribution has a significant effect on 
short time scales ranging from years to decades. The 
most prominent example of the interannual variability in 
the climate is the El-Nifo-Southern oscillation (ENSO). 
It is due to a complicated interaction between various 
air masses in the tropics and anomalous warming of 
the eastern and central tropical Pacific Ocean. The heat 
capacity of the oceans and the nature of the ocean currents 
play a major role in controlling the state of the atmosphere 
and hence the climate. Ocean currents are in general 
not yet known with sufficient accuracy to enable us to 
predict their effect on climate. In addition, their effect is 
probably associated with chaotic behavior that may make 
it impossible to predict such changes. Indications of the 
probable range of such variations in a statistical sense may, 
however, be acquired from numerical climate models. 

Changes in the energy budget of the Earth will result 
in persistent climate changes. The Sun’s radiation is the 
source of the energy that drives the weather and climate. 
The Sun emits radiation at various frequencies. As a 
first approximation the Sun radiates energy corresponding 
to a black body with a temperature of 5770 K, the solar 
surface temperature. Integrated over all wavelengths the 
total irradiance from the Sun at the position of the Earth 
is approximately 1368 W m7”, the solar constant. The 
cross section exposed to the solar energy corresponds 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to an area of 2 R? whereas the total surface area of the 
Earth including the night side is 477 R?. Distributed evenly 
over the Earth’s surface we therefore need to divide the 
number by 4 to yield an average power of 342 W m2 
at the top of the atmosphere. In a steady state with 
no climate change the Earth would reradiate the same 
amount of energy as a black body at the global average 
temperature, approximately 288 K. This corresponds to 
a longer wavelength with a peak in the infrared part of 
the spectrum. The short-wave radiation from the Sun 
reaching the Earth’s surface and the long-wave radiation 
from Earth to space have to pass through the Earth’s 
atmosphere, which acts like a filter. The effect of the filter 
depends on the wavelength of the radiation and it has 
therefore a different effect on the incoming and outgoing 
radiation. The net effect of these processes, also called the 
Earth’s radiation budget, is therefore highly dependent 
on the composition of the atmosphere. At present, the 
composition of the atmosphere is such that it keeps the 
global temperature about 31 K higher than the Earth 
would be without an atmosphere. The dominant gases 
contributing to this warming effect, the natural GREENHOUSE 
EFFECT, are water vapor and carbon dioxide (CO)). 

The composition of the atmosphere may change for a 
number of reasons. Volcanic activity is often accompanied 
by emission of considerable amounts of sulfur in the 
stratosphere. These emissions create aerosols that reflect 
sunlight and the effect is therefore a cooling of the Earth. 
Since the aerosols remain in the atmosphere for several 
years the effect on the Earth’s average surface temperature 
may be quite significant. Energy balance calculations 
indicate that volcanic activity may have contributed to the 
observed global average temperature variations during 
the past 150 yr. In the stratosphere another gas, ozone 
(O3), is varying because of the solar cycle variation in 
the ultraviolet radiation that produces O3. However, the 
ozone layer is also depleted owing to the accumulating 
amount of anthropogenic chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). 
Both CFCs and Os; are very effective greenhouse gases but 
their combined effect on climate is significantly reduced 
because of the destructive effect of CFCs on O3 (See OZONE 
HOLE). 

Most concern is, however, associated with the effect 
of the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases 
such as CO, and methane (CH,). We know that these 
concentrations have increased considerably over the past 
150 yr, after the start of industrialization and the rapid 
increase of the population of our planet. The gases absorb 
the long-wave radiation from the Earth’s surface and are 
supposed to be responsible for at least part of the global 
warming that has characterized this century. The effect 
of human activity is rather complex, because the burning 
of fossil fuel that causes the increased concentrations of 
CO, has also caused an increase in the contents of sulfate 
aerosols in the troposphere. The effect of this may be a 
cooling similar to the effect of volcanic aerosols. Whereas 
the production of CO, is proportional to the amount of 
fossil fuel used, the emission of sulfate aerosols may 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar—Terrestrial Connection: 
Term Climate Variability 


Long-Term and Short- 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.2° 
0.1° 
0.0° 
-0.1° 
-0.2° 


Temperature anomaly 


-0.3° 
-0.4° 


1860 1880 1900 1920 


1940 1960 


Year 


9.5 


10.0 


10.5 


Years 


11.0 


11.5 


1980 2000 


Figure 1. Smoothed length of the solar cycle (L) and the 11 yr running average of the northern hemisphere land temperature (T). 
(Figure taken from Friis-Christensen E and Lassen K 1991 Length of the solar cycle: an indicator of solar activity closely associated 


with climate Science 254 698-700.) 


be affected considerably by various measures to clean 
the exhaust, for instance the use of filters. The relative 
importance of these two atmospheric constituents that are 
products of fossil fuel burning has therefore changed in 
time and so has their expected impact on climate. 


Long-term changes of climate 

On very long time scales, billions of years, we know that 
the solar luminosity has been increasing monotonically 
with time. At the time of the formation of the 
Earth the Sun’s output was only 70% of its present 
output. According to paleoclimatic records this huge 
change in luminosity has not, however, been associated 
with an expected corresponding increase in the average 
temperature of the Earth. This ‘faint young Sun’ paradox 
may be explained in several ways. Some of the most 
plausible ones are related to changes in the atmosphere 
and its composition. In particular, the large amounts of 
carbon trapped in carbonate sediments indicate that the 
abundance of CO, in the atmosphere must have been 
much larger during times in the past. An interesting 
theory by James Lovelock, called the Gaia hypothesis, 
even suggests that on very long time scales life itself is 
capable of modifying the Earth’s environment, including 
the atmosphere, in order to optimize conditions for its own 
continued existence. 

The history of Earth shows that climate has been 
varying on many time scales. Most prominent during the 
last two million years has been the repeated occurrence 
of glaciation with a period of approximately 100000 yr. 
Reconstruction of past climate variations shows that, on 
top of this dominant quasi-cycle, shorter quasi-cycles of 
roughly 41000 and 21000 yr are superimposed. The 
apparent regularity of this phenomenon and the calculated 
periods has called for an astronomical explanation that 
was first quantitatively formulated by MILANKOviTCH in the 
1920s. According to the Milankovitch theory the climatic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cycles are related to the variations in the received solar 
energy and in particular its distribution over the Earth’s 
surface. These variations can be predicted by changes in 
the rotational and orbital parameters of the Earth. The 
major period of about 100000 yr is related to the variation 
of the eccentricity of the Earth’s orbit around the Sun. The 
other parameters are related to the variation of the tilt of 
the Earth’s axis between about 22° and 25° (~41000 yr) 
and the precession of the equinoxes and solstices around 
the Earth’s orbit (~21000 yr). Although the changes may 
seem rather small, they have apparently been sufficient to 
initiate large oscillations in the Earth’s climate in a manner 
still poorly understood. Model calculations show that 
the response to the orbital forcing is non-linear and that 
it involves internal processes and feedback mechanisms. 
These feedback mechanisms may involve changes in the 
atmospheric composition, in the amount of snow and ice, 
and in the biological cycle. It is still an open question, 
however, whether the external orbital forcing drives the 
internal processes or whether they act as a pacemaker 
for the free oscillations in the internally driven system. 
However, the apparent large climate sensitivity to small 
changes in the amount and latitudinal distribution of solar 
radiation has contributed further to the concern of possible 
effects of a humanly induced enhanced greenhouse effect. 


Climate variations on shorter time scales 
In addition to these crucial variations in the Earth’s climate 
our records of past climate do show that climate has 
been varying also on time scales that are too short to be 
possible manifestations of orbital parameters. Some of 
these oscillations may be the result of internal oscillations 
but during the last century there has been an increasing 
number of scientific reports that indicate that some of them 
may be attributed to variations in the Sun. 

Usually we regard the Sun as just an eternal source of 
energy that sustains life on Earth. Until recently the energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Long-Term and Short- 
Term Climate Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3300-200, 35 
R E aa 
3400|- 180 |- 
3500/ 160 + 30 
3600+ 140 
3700+ 1204 4 25 
3800} 100 
3900/ ~—s-80 | 20 
4000+ 60 
4100- = 40 FF +45 
4200+, 20 
ago06 gh Mid ag 


1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 


aa 


R ——CR(13) 


Figure 3. Variation of the cosmic ray flux (CR) observed at Climax station, USA, the yearly sunspot number (R) and the geomagnetic 


activity index aa. Note the reversed scale of the cosmic ray flux. 


N 


cLRC 


$s 
wo & oa a 
f 1 f f 


ie) 
n 


Solar Source Magnetic Flux, F (10"4 Wb) 


Sunspot number, <R> 


0 


1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 
Year 


Figure 2. This figure shows estimates back to 1868 of the total 
solar magnetic flux emanating through the coronal source 
sphere. (Figure 3 in Lockwood M, Stamper R and Wild M N 
1999 A doubling of the Sun’s coronal magnetic field during the 
past 100 years Nature 399 437.) 


received from the Sun was believed to be constant, as the 
term ‘SOLAR CONSTANT’ for this value indicates. However, 
in astronomical terms the Sun is a variable star. This has 
been known for many centuries during which scientists 
have performed systematic observations of the Sun’s 
surface. The observations demonstrate periodic variations 
on different time scales. Most pronounced among these 
is the nearly 11 yr cycle in the number of suNspoTs (see 
also SOLAR CYCLE). Direct indices for solar activity are not 
really available before the start of the use of telescopes 
around 1610. However, recently a promising tool has 
been developed which may enable us to derive indices 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of solar activity on much longer time scales. This method 
is based on indirect proxies, for example the cosmogenic 
radionuclides *C and 'Be. These nuclides are caused 
by cosmic ray particles and, because they are electrically 
charged, both the geomagnetic field and the magnetic 
field in the heliosphere modulate their production rate. 
The magnetic field in the heliosphere has its origin in 
the solar surface magnetic activity. Therefore the inferred 
production rate of radionuclides in the atmosphere may be 
used to provide an index of solar magnetic activity back 
in time (see SOLAR ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM RECORDS). 

Such estimates of solar activity variations in the past 
have made it possible to examine a possible relationship 
with past climate. A number of studies showing a 
striking correlation have been reported. During the last 
millennium the major historically recorded deviations 
from the present climate are the Medieval warm period 
during the 11th and 12th centuries, when the Vikings 
settled in Greenland, and the cool period in Greenland 
and Europe in the 17th century known as ‘the Little Ice 
Age’. The warm period is associated with a period of 
high solar activity as deduced from the estimated very low 
production of radionuclides. On the contrary, the Little 
Ice Age is associated with a prominent minimum in solar 
activity, known as the Maunder minimum, during which 
the production of radionuclides was very high. 

The occurrence of sunspots indicates only one 
manifestation of solar activity. However, it is by no way 
obvious that the sunspot number is the most relevant 
parameter for a possible direct effect on climate. Another 
index of solar activity is the duration of the solar cycle. On 
the average a solar cycle is about 11 yr but high-activity 
cycles are generally shorter whereas solar cycles with low 
peak activity are longer. During this century solar cycles 
were long at the beginning of the century whereas they 
were short at the end. In figure 1 the change in solar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Long-Term and Short- 
Term Climate Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


cycle length during the last 130 yr is compared with the 
11 yr running average of the northern hemisphere land 
temperature. The striking similarity between the two 
curves indicates that the Sun may have played a major 
role in global temperature change during this century. 


Possible physical mechanisms for solar activity 
induced effects on climate 

In order to claim a direct cause-and-effect relationship it 
is necessary to point at a plausible physical mechanism. 
An obvious candidate is the possibility that the total solar 
irradiance (the solar ‘constant’) varies in accord with solar 
activity. Accurate observations of the total irradiance are 
not possible from the ground because variations in the 
atmospheric composition by far dominate any changes 
that might be attributed to variations in the solar ‘constant’. 
It was therefore not until direct measurements from 
satellites became available in the 1980s that the hypothesis 
of a solar cycle variation in total irradiance could be tested. 
These measurements did in fact demonstrate that changes 
exist, both on short time scales (days to weeks) and on 
longer time scales (decades). The competing effects of 
sunspot darkening and faculae brightening could account 
for the short-term variations. The variations on the 
decadal time scale did unambiguously show a variation 
in phase with the sunspot cycle but these variations 
only amounted to 0.1% between sunspot maximum and 
sunspot minimum. 

The effect on the global temperature of such a 
change is, however, small compared with other radiative 
climate forcing parameters associated with changes in the 
composition of the atmosphere. Even if changes in total 
irradiance may amount to ~0.25% over longer periods 
as has been suggested to be the case for the Maunder 
minimum, they may only be of minor importance for 
climate. Whereas the global warming during this century 
could be mainly due to the enhanced greenhouse effect 
this cannot be the case for the significant past climate 
variations. Since many of the past climate changes 
have been demonstrated to be correlated with changes in 
solar activity variations, people have looked for indirect 
mechanisms by which solar activity variations could 
modulate climate. 

One possibility concerns the ultraviolet part of the 
solar irradiance. Solar cycle variations in this spectral band 
are much larger than for the visible light. Attempts have 
therefore been made to model the climatic effect of solar 
cycle variations taking into account also the modulating 
effect of the varying ultraviolet radiation on the lower 
stratospheric ozone. The models show an increased 
tropospheric Hadley circulation during high solar activity 
consistent with observations, although the observations 
also indicate a larger effect than the models predict. The 
effect may contribute to the observed very clear solar cycle 
signature in the height of constant pressure levels in the 
stratosphere, seen consistently during the last four solar 
cycles in particular between 20°N and 45°N in the Pacific— 
Atlantic area. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Cloud fraction 


A% 


oO 
© bap 
ol 


80 85 90 


Year 


Figure 4. Variation of total cloud cover and cosmic ray flux 
observed at Climax. (Figure taken from Svensmark H and 
Friis-Christensen E 1997 Variation of cosmic ray flux and global 
cloud coverage—a missing link in solar—climate relationships 

J. Atmos. Sol.-Terr. Phys. 59 1225-32.) 


Even more pronounced manifestations of solar cycle 
effects in the solar energy output are associated with the 
solar wind, the emission of particles and fields from the 
solar surface. Although the energy in the solar wind is 
negligible compared with the energy in the ultraviolet and 
visible spectral bands, the relative variations are much 
larger. A direct effect of the varying solar wind is seen 
in the fluctuations in the geomagnetic field due to electric 
currents in the magnetosphere and the ionosphere. The aa 
index has been derived from such fluctuations recorded at 
two geomagnetic observatories in England and Australia 
since 1868. From the time series of this index it has been 
inferred the total magnetic field leaving the Sun may have 
increased by a factor of more than 2 during this century 
(see figure 2). Such an increase is most likely the cause of 
the decreasing cosmic ray flux during this century, which 
has been observed from the ground since the 1930s and 
which has also been inferred from the Be data from 
ice cores in Greenland. Figure 3 shows the cosmic ray 
flux observed at the Climax Neutron Monitor station in 
Colorado. Note the reversed scale indicating a clear solar 
cycle modulation nearly in antiphase with the variation 
of the sunspot number, R. The figure also shows the 
geomagnetic activity index, aa, which has a solar cycle 
variation quite different from the sunspot cycle. 

One of the major uncertainties in climate models is the 
role of clouds (see also CLOUDS IN PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). 
In particular there are large difficulties associated with 
the parameterization of these effects in general circulation 
models used in climate studies. Recent studies indicate 
that cloud formation may be influenced by Galactic cosmic 
rays through ionization changes that cause microphysical 
changes in the atmosphere. Hereby nucleation and growth 
of ice particles may be affected. 

A change in cloud cover would indeed be a 
very effective amplifying mechanism for climate forcing 
because the energy necessary to condense water vapor is 
small compared with the resulting changes in energy of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Long-Term and Short- 
Term Climate Variability 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solar radiation received at the Earth’s surface. Figure 4 
shows the result of an examination of the compiled 
International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) 
data. The 12 months running mean of the total cloud 
cover (thick curve) is shown together with the 12 months 
running mean values of cosmic ray intensity measured 
at the Climax Neutron Monitor station, Colorado. The 
correlation between the cosmic ray flux and the global 
cloud cover is very high and indicates a direct relationship 
although a detailed mechanism is still lacking. 


Summary 

The Earth’s climate is a very complex system with a 
number of elements and with many feedback mechanisms. 
Various processes including variations in solar activity 
can cause climate changes. The detailed mechanisms and 
the relative importance of the different processes are still 
not very well known but increased understanding of our 
environment including the processes on the solar surface 
and in the heliosphere will considerably improve our 
ability to estimate the effect on climate of human activity. 


E Friis-Christensen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Space Weather Predic- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar—Terrestrial Connection: Space 
Weather Predictions 


‘Space weather’ refers to the dynamic state of the 
magnetosphere and ionosphere, which is determined by 
the SOLAR WIND. Interest in the ability to predict space 
weather, and its effects on Earth, really began during 
World War II. For the first time, electronic technologies, 
such as radars and radio communications, were heavily 
relied on, and it soon became clear that these technologies 
could be seriously disrupted by solar activity. After the 
war, more uses were developed for electronic technologies, 
including the start of the space program. Since then, our 
need to be able to forecast solar activity has continued 
to increase as technology becomes more widespread. 
Under disturbed conditions, satellite- and ground-based 
technological systems, e.g. communications networks, 
electric power grids and satellites, can suffer harmful 
effects. Such systems are particularly vulnerable during 
severe GEOMAGNETIC sToRMS. Large storms are relatively 
infrequent but, when they occur, they can stress the 
susceptible systems for prolonged periods of time over 
large geographic areas. Secure operation of systems can 
still be maintained and hazards can be minimized if the 
occurrence, duration and severity of impending storms 
can be accurately predicted in a timely manner. Thus, 
space weather forecasting is important for protecting 
national assets in both the commercial and military sectors. 

In the early days of solar forecasting, it was assumed 
that when a large FLARE occurred on the Sun there would 
be a very predictable geomagnetic disturbance on Earth 
within a few hours or days. Later it was realized that it was 
the SOLAR CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS (CMEs) that had a greater 
effect on Earth. It was therefore believed that improved 
forecasting was just a matter of making better observations 
of the Sun so that flares and CMEs could be detected 
immediately after they occurred. Experience, however, 
soon showed that the effects on Earth did not correlate 
so simply with events on the Sun and, moreover, not all 
mass ejections had a noticeable effect on Earth. Sometimes 
geomagnetic storms occurred when there was no apparent 
eruptive activity on the Sun. We now know that how 
the Sun’s magnetic field connects with the geomagnetic 
field makes a big difference in how solar activity affects 
Earth. When a mass of PLasMaA is ejected from the Sun, the 
plasma travels outward in the solar wind. These plasma 
bursts have their own magnetic fields, which are carried 
along with the plasma. How these fields are oriented 
when they arrive at Earth determines whether or not 
the event will be effective. When the direction of the 
solar wind field is opposite the direction of Earth’s field, 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION occurs, and the magnetosphere 
essentially becomes joined to the solar magnetic field. In 
this condition, Earth is much more prone to the effects 
of the solar wind. Solar wind particles can enter the 
magnetosphere more easily, and those already within the 
magnetosphere are energized. If the magnetic field of 
the solar wind is in the same direction as the Earth’s 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1997/04/07 
15:52 


(0) 


Figure 1. Coronagraph observations of the solar corona from the 
SOHO spacecraft: (a) shows a clear halo CME propagating away 
from the Sun and (b) shows a limb event. 


field, then magnetic reconnection does not occur and the 
magnetosphere is much more separated and protected 
from the solar wind. Under these conditions, the effects of 
CMEs are much less significant. In order to know what is 
going to happen on Earth it is important to know not only 
what happened on the Sun but also the characteristics of 
the magnetic fields that are carried along with the solar 
wind. Accurate forecasts of large storms are difficult to 
achieve because the propagation of solar disturbances to 
the Earth and magnetic field characteristics are difficult 
to predict with high accuracy. Using the solar wind 
and interplanetary magnetic field quantities measured 
upstream from the Earth as input, however, can warn of the 
impending arrival of solar wind structures and, therefore, 
predict their geoeffectiveness, that is to say, their effect on 
the Earth. Forecasters have reviewed large amounts of 
historical solar wind data and have found that they can 
identify and predict the occurrence of large storms, with 
accuracy in the range 70-80%. 

Recently, a number of spacecraft have been launched 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Space Weather Predic- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wind/WAVES 


Radio Tracking of CME 
Sun to Earth and Beyond 


Radio Emission from CME Shock 


4/t (in kHz) 


7 8 


Shock Arrival 
at Earth 


January, 1997 


Figure 2. Dynamic spectra of radio data taken by the WIND spacecraft during 6-11 January 1997 in the frequency range 23-245 Hz. 
Radio emissions from the CME shock are marked on the figure and decrease in frequency as the CME moves further from the Sun. The 
cartoon above the spectrogram represents the progress of the CME as it expands away from the Sun towards the WIND spacecraft 


located about half a million miles in front of the Earth. 


which have improved our ability to forecast space 
weather disruptions. soHo (Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory), a joint NASA (National Aeronautical and 
Space Administration) and ESA (European Space Agency) 
mission, provides near-real-time images of the Sun and its 
corONA, Clearly showing ACTIVE REGIONS, flares and CMEs. 
Events occurring on the side of the Sun—the limb—are 
regularly seen which will not affect the Earth. Sometimes, 
however, CMEs occur on the side of the Sun facing Earth. 
These events appear to be very different when viewed 
from Earth. Instead of looking like a ‘bubble’ of plasma, 
they form a circle of light around the Sun. This light is 
much dimmer than the Sun itself, so it is necessary to 
put an occulting disk in front of the Sun in order to see 
what goes on around it—like an artificial solar eclipse. 
The instrument used to do this is called a CORONAGRAPH. 
An example of such a ‘halo’ event is shown in figure 1, 
together with one occurring on the limb for comparison. 
The faster CMEs have outward speeds of up to 
2000 km s7!, considerably greater than the normal solar 
wind speeds of about 400 km s~!. These produce large 
shock waves in the solar wind as they plow through 
it, much like a jet breaking the sound barrier drives a 
sonic boom into the atmosphere. In the case of the CME 
shock, however, the sonic boom takes the form of very 
intense, low-frequency radio emissions known as solar 
type II bursts. (Instruments on Earth cannot detect the 
type II bursts because the ionosphere blocks the waves. 
Only a radio receiver in space can detect them.) As the 
shock approaches Earth, these type II bursts drift down in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


frequency (see figure 2) because the electron density of the 
interplanetary medium to which the solar bursts are ‘tied’ 
is also constantly decreasing. Space-borne instruments 
are capable of detecting these radio bursts from a great 
distance, long before the CME arrives at Earth. These 
radio receivers can also determine the direction from 
which the waves are arriving. Combined with the known 
propagation speed of the shock, this information allows 
forecasters to track the CME shock front nearly from the 
time that it is no longer visible to the solar telescopes, all 
the way to Earth. Finally, as mentioned above, it is critical 
to have a satellite between the Sun and Earth so that the 
nature of the solar wind can be observed before it arrives. 
In August of 1997, NASA launched ace, the Advanced 
Composition Explorer satellite, which is located a million 
miles upstream of the Earth. This location allows ACE to 
detect the Earth-directed solar wind about 1 h before it 
impacts us. 

The NOAA Space Environment Services Center 
(SESC) in Boulder is one of the world centers making 
forecasts of solar and geomagnetic activity (see figure 3). 
Daily predictions are issued for the likelihood of solar 
flares, proton flares, x-ray events and magnetic storms. 
Longer-range forecasts are also made so that the launches 
of manned space flights can be planned with more safety. 
The SESC receives about 1400 data streams daily, including 
x-ray and particle flux data from the GOES satellites, 
Ha images and magnetograms from observatories around 
the world, measurements of the geomagnetic field at 
many locations, and 10.7 cm radio levels from several 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-Terrestrial Connection: Space Weather Predic- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The new NOAA Space Environment Forecast Center. In a similar manner to meteorologists checking temperatures, winds 
and pressure to predict the weather on Earth, scientists monitor the Sun and the space environment to help forecast space weather. 


radio telescopes. Each day the features of the solar 
disk are mapped by hand so that the evolution of active 
regions, coronal holes, filaments, and neutral lines may 
be carefully studied. Forecasters attempt to consider all of 
this information when making their daily forecasts of solar 
effects on Earth. At the present time, these forecasts are 
not very reliable; major flares are sometimes not forecast 
and predictions that are made often do not come true. 
Even though forecasters have a large amount of data to 
work with, the physics of the Sun, the magnetosphere and 
the interplanetary medium is not well understood. At 
the present time, many partial mathematical models have 
been developed, but there is no comprehensive model of 
the solar—terrestrial environment. 

In most cases, the ability to predict the behavior of 
nature comes from a mathematical model. Earth weather 
forecasters have been trying for the last 30 yr to construct 
a mathematical model of the global weather using the 
very complex equations of fluid dynamics to describe the 
circulation of the oceans and atmosphere. Even with the 
best supercomputers to run these models, it has proven 
impossible to precisely model Earth weather. Modeling 
the solar-terrestrial environment is vastly more complex. 
The physics necessary to do this includes not only fluid 
dynamics but also Maxwell’s equations. This combination 
is known as MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS (MHD), and at the 
present time the equations of MHD cannot be completely 
solved analytically. 

Research to improve solar forecasting is occurring 
in three major areas. The first is improving the basic 
understanding of the way in which eruptions from the 
Sun occur, namely of prominence eruptions and CMEs. In 
particular, a workable two-dimensional model of the way 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a coronal arcade loses equilibrium and erupts as an MHD 
catastrophe is being developed into a three-dimensional 
model. Also, models are being developed for the three- 
dimensional evolution of coronal structures before they 
erupt. The second area is the correlation of observable 
phenomena with effects on Earth. For example, a strong 
correlation has been observed between sunspot cycles and 
disturbances on Earth. However, this correlation is very 
coarse; it is known that during a certain period of years 
there will be high levels of solar activity and accompanying 
disturbances on Earth. It is not yet possible to accurately 
predict these disturbances as happening over specific 
days or hours. Many researchers are trying to refine 
the correlations between observable symptoms, such as 
increased radio emission, and subsequent eruptions of 
mass. Some of the best correlations yet are those that have 
been found between the evolution of sunspot groups and 
eruptions. 

The third area of work is that of constructing a model 
for the solar—-terrestrial environment. In addition to the 
complexities of MHD, the problem is difficult because 
there are three different domains involved, which all 
couple together. The first domain is that of the Sun; to 
simply construct a mathematical model of the Sun is far 
beyond researchers at the present time. There are still 
many mysteries about what processes occur inside the 
Sun, what triggers flares and even why sunspots form. 
The second domain is the interplanetary medium, once 
thought of as empty space. This space is filled with the 
solar wind plasma, which is not fully understood. The 
third domain is the Earth’s magnetosphere, with its many 
regions and currents. The magnetotail, extending for 
millions of kilometers out from Earth, has been difficult to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-—Terrestrial Connection: Space Weather Predic- 
tions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


study directly and remains poorly understood. Models for 
any one of these domains by themselves are not even close 
to completion, but the final complication arises because 
these three domains are not at all separate. A change in 
one of these domains can have major consequences on the 
Earth. Scientists and forecasters alike continue to analyze 
misses and false alarms in detail to better understand 
the performance characteristics of the prediction methods, 
and a number of improvements have been developed to 
deal with the known failure modes. It is hoped that 
one day there will be a comprehensive model for the 
entire solar—terrestrial environment but this is certainly 
a problem for physicists of the future. Forecasters will 
continue to make forecasts based on present knowledge 
and available data, and hopefully the forecasting ability 
will continue to improve. The physics of the solar— 
terrestrial environment is still one of the great frontiers, 
awaiting new generations of scientific explorers. 


Nicola J Fox 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solar-B ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar-B 


Japanese-US-UK mission to study the Sun’s corona, 
scheduled for launch in 2004. Expected to carry a 50 cm 
optical telescope, an imaging x-ray telescope and an 
extreme-ultraviolet imaging spectrometer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


SolarSoft 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SolarSoft 


The SolarSoft system (SSW) is a set of integrated software 
libraries, databases, and system utilities which provide 
a common programming and data analysis environment 
for solar physics. The SolarSoft environment provides 
a consistent look and feel at widely distributed co- 
investigator institutions to facilitate data exchange and 
to stimulate coordinated analysis. Commonalities and 
overlap in solar data and analysis goals are exploited to 
permit application of fundamental utilities to the data from 
many different solar instruments. The use of common 
libraries, utilities, techniques and interfaces minimizes 
the learning curve for investigators who are analyzing 
new solar data sets, correlating results from multiple 
experiments or performing research away from their home 
institution. 

SolarSoft is primarily written in the Interactive Data 
Language (IDL) which is ideal for manipulating and 
visualizing image, spectral, time series and other data 
types common in solar physics. The extensibility of 
IDL and large number of SSW contributors, coupled 
with SolarSoft automated upgrade and software exchange 
utilities, stimulates rapid evolution of analysis capabilities. 
The SolarSoft system was originally built from the Yohkoh, 
SOHO, Solar Data Analysis Center (SDAC), and the 
Astronomy IDL software libraries and it draws upon 
contributions from many members of those projects. 
More recent participants in SolarSoft include TRACE, 
HESSI, SXI, and many ground-based optical and radio 
observatories. 


Principal goals of SolarSoft 
The primary goals of SolarSoft include: 


e Provide a large reusable software library. The shared, 
general purpose SSW library provides a large and 
growing collection of observatory and instrument 
independent software. This permits instrument 
Principal Investigator (PI) teams to concentrate software 
efforts on detailed analysis and calibration issues rather 
than reinventing general use development and analysis 
software. 


e@ Promote an evolutionary environment. Feedback and 
contributions from the many SSW institutes and 
users are strongly encouraged. Utilities to simplify 
remote SSW upgrades and accept user contribution are 
designed to make the system evolutionary instead of 
stagnant and divergent. 


@ Promote the use of standards that will facilitate coordinated 
data analysis. Through use of a minimal set of suggested 
standards, many powerful applications are immediately 
available for the analysis of new data sets. 


@ Provide easy access to supporting ancillary databases. Access 
to supporting data sets from ground-based and satellite- 
based solar observatories are provided with consistent 
interfaces to facilitate coordinated analysis. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


@ Provide a file-format-independent analysis environment. To 
accommodate the largest number of solar data sets, file 
I/Ois isolated and analysis applications are designed to 
operate on objects which are independent of file type. 


@ Provide a hardware- and site-independent analysis system. 
Fundamental shared software is written in a hardware- 
independent and site-configuration-independent form. 
The SSW setup utilities support local configuration files 
to tailor the site and user’s environment. 


e Permit simplified and customized installation and environ- 
ment definition. Due to the large number of contributing 
instruments and libraries, integrated function should be 
preserved when any desired subset of libraries is in- 
cluded in a local installation or individual analysis ses- 
sion. 


@ Maximize Principal Investigator team control of instrument 
level software. Within the integrated system and 
analysis environment, allow PI teams full control of 
the instrument specific analysis software and provide 
system utilities and suggested guidelines to faciliate 
integration. 


@ Provide integrated access to other IDL packages. When 
IDL libraries that provide a useful extension to SSW 
capabilities are identified, they are integrated into the 
SSW system. 


The reusable software library 


The reusable software library is the heart of the SolarSoft 
system. Routines in this library are instrument and 
mission independent, and available to all users for analysis 
and application development. This library represents 
an evolutionary system, dating back to SMM analysis at 
the Solar Data Analysis Center at Goddard Spaceflight 
Center (GSFC). It has since evolved through the Yohkoh 
and SoHO missions, and now includes contributions from 
TRACE, HESSI, and from many other solar instrument PI 
team members. 

A very small sample of existing library capabilities 
include: 


@ time series analysis, time conversions, time series 
plotting 


@ spectral fitting 
@ image and image cube (movie) processing and display 


e solar image data routines (limb fitting, image and grid 
overlay, coordinate transformations, feature tracking, 
co-alignment, etc) 

@ file 1/O (generic binary, ASCII, FITS, etc) 


e IDL data manipulation (structure, string, array, mathe- 
matics, etc) 


e@ WWW interface (HTML conversion, file conversions, 
FORM handling, WWW server mode) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SolarSoft 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SSW 


site 


gen file /O 


time plotting 
image processing 
spectral fitting 
etc. 


yohkoh 


gen 
bcs 
hxt 
sxt 
wbs 
soho 

gen 
cds 
eit 
mdi 
sumer 


trace 


hessi 


packages ane 


binaries 
chianti 
stereo 
ztools 


Figure 1. SolarSoft directory tree structure. The software 
libraries for each instrument are organized into a number of 
functional subdirectories which are not shown. 


SolarSoft system overview 

Library and path organization 

A schematic of the upper level SolarSoft library and 
directory hierarchy is illustrated in figure 1. 

The topmost level includes a SITE branch for local 
configuration files, the GEN branch which contains the 
SSW general purpose library and an extensible number of 
mission level branches. For clarity, only a representative 
subset of missions are included in the figure. In this 
context, a mission is a set of one or more related 
instruments or observatories. Mission branches include 
single instrument observatories, such as TRACE and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


HESSI, multi-instrument observatories, such as Yohkoh 
and SoHO, and groupings of related ground based 
observatories, such as optical and radio. 

This intermediate level of organization by mission 
facilitates access to shared libraries among the related in- 
struments or observatories. The contents of those libraries 
are mission dependent but instrument independent. For 
example, all of the instruments on a multi-instrument or- 
bital observatory desire access to spacecraft ephemeris 
software and data bases. The gen branches under the mis- 
sion level provide common, single source software to all 
of the related instruments (Yohkoh-gen and SoHO-gen for 
example). 

The instrument level branches contain the calibration 
files and software which are required for detailed or 
specific instrument data analysis. With the exception of 
very minimal library and setup file naming conventions, 
the contents and organization of the branches under the 
instrument levels is (and must be) defined by and controlled 
by the the instrument PI teams. 


Mastering, integration, and verification 

The master copy of SolarSoft and support utilities is 
maintained at the Solar Data Analysis Center at GSFC. This 
is also the master site for the general purpose SSW library. 
Only a few core SSW members are authorized to update 
the general library. Since this is automatically distributed 
to all remote SSW sites, routines must remain backwardly 
compatible and continued support for older IDL versions 
must be considered. All additions and modifications 
are logged, and backup copies of modified modules 
are maintained by the SSW online utility. Additional 
protection is provide by the SDAC system facilities, which 
include multiple levels of automated backup and disk 
recovery. 

Principal Investigator (PI) teams from each participat- 
ing instrument define and control the master libraries and 
databases for the individual instruments. These instru- 
ment and mission level master sites are widely distributed, 
and currently include institutes in Japan, England, France, 
Switzerland, and many institutes within the United States. 

SolarSoft utilities running on the SSW master site 
at GSFC update from the various instrument master 
sites into the SSW master for centralized integration and 
distribution. Due to the very large number of contributing 
sites and routines, background utilities (written in SSW) 
monitor incoming additions and flag potential conflicts 
within the integrated system. Additional SSW utilities 
monitor modifications and sizes of software libraries 
and data bases to generate system files required by the 
installation and upgrade utilities. 

Now that the SolarSoft organization, monitoring, and 
distribution system is in place, adding new instrument 
libraries into the infrastructure approaches ‘plug and play’ 
simplicity, assuming that the PI teams are willing to 
address any conflicts which are flagged by the system. 
There is an intermediate level of integration available 
which allows new libraries to take advantage of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SolarSoft 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


conflicts checking and distribution portions of SSW 
without requiring more rigorous, conflict-free standards 
suggested for fully integrated libraries. 


Remote installation and upgrades 

SolarSoft is easily installed through a web-based interface. 
Although the number of instrument libraries and 
databases under SSW is extensive, a primary design goal 
was to permit remote sites to install any desired subset 
of SSW while still preserving the integrated function. 
The SSW installation FORM allows the WWW client to 
select the desired instrument libraries and generates a 
customized installation script. When executed on the 
local machine, the script creates the necessary directories, 
automatically transfers the required installation files from 
the designated SSW host, and installs them to produce the 
local customized SolarSoft tree. Due to the evolutionary 
philosophy of SolarSoft, frequent periodic upgrades are 
strongly suggested (daily is typical) and utilities are 
included in the SSW distribution to automate upgrades 
of the local SSW system. The installation and upgrade 
utilities use a programmable SSW host internet address 
for file transfers to permit use of the SSW ‘master’ with 
the best internet connection to the local site. Following the 
initial installation and configuration, it is sufficient to add 
instrument or mission names to a SSW site configuration 
file to automatically include new branches in the local SSW 
system. The upgrade process is incremental so that only 
new or modified software is transferred. 


The history of SolarSoft 

The overall organization and philosophy of the SSW 
system structure draws heavily from the Yohkoh data 
analysis system. Even though Yohkoh observatory 
included four very different science instruments, it was 
obvious that there were a large subset of common analysis 
goals and that the use of some common definitions would 
permit use of fundamental cross instrument software. For 
example, all four instrument teams required access to 
Yohkoh ephemeris and supporting ancillary databases— 
those commonly desired software functions should be 
written once, not rewritten four times. The analysis of 
data from each Yohkoh instrument is greatly enhanced 
by crucial context provided by the other instruments. A 
minimal set of parameters, such as observation time, were 
defined in common formats to simplify cross-instrument 
access and facilitate coordinated analysis. 

A key requirement and innovative feature of the 
Yohkoh system was a simple, internet-based installation, 
upgrade and feedback infrastructure. Since the Yohkoh 
co-investigator institutes included widely distributed sites 
in Japan, the UK, and several states in the US, it 
was important to propagate changes and incorporate 
contributions quickly enough to avoid divergent libraries 
at the remote institutes. Installation and upgrade utilities 
developed prior to Yohkoh launch (and predating the 
WWW) greatly simplified this task. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Another design goal was platform independence. 
At the time of Yohkoh design, many different computer 
platforms were in use at the Institute for Space and 
Astronautical Science (ISAS) in Japan and at many co- 
investigator institutes in the UK and USA. Systems 
designated for Yohkoh analysis included DEC VMS, DEC 
Ultrix, and Sun and RISC workstations running Unix. 


Selection of IDL 

The Interactive Data Language (IDL) software package 
written by Research Systems Inc. (RSI), Boulder, Colorado 
was ideal for analysis of the disparate science data sets 
on Yohkoh, which include images, spectra and time 
series. The use of IDL also moved the majority of the 
system dependency burden from Yohkoh programmers 
to the RSI/IDL programmers. Some of the Yohkoh team 
members had previously worked at the SDAC on the 
Solar Maximum Mission (SMM)—several of the SMM 
instrument teams and SDAC members were using IDL for 
data analysis and this provided an experience base and the 
starting seed for a general purpose IDL library. 

Initially, some Yohkoh teams tried to maintain 
portions of the software using heritage Fortran programs. 
They rapidly discovered that, in order to support the 
different platforms used for Yohkoh analysis, five or more 
executables needed to be built for each task. Updating and 
propagating an application to the distributed investigator 
sites in a timely fashion was nearly impossible, since 
the multiple executables required verification on each of 
the architectures. It was therefore decided to translate the 
bulk of the remaining Fortran software into IDL. There are 
still a very few tasks written in Fortran or C, but these 
are primarily applications which have specialized use and 
only need to be run at a restricted number of sites. 

By following a few simple programming rules 
and extending the language as required with a few 
key interface routines, the Yohkoh IDL-based system 
was easily transportable. For example, filenames are 
never specified with an explicit directory or path— 
environmental variables, or their equivalent are used to 
indicate file locations located within the computer file 
system. The mapping of several key environmentals to 
the local, hardware specific pathnames is accomplished 
by simple modification to setup files in the site branch. 
Relative pathnames are then constructed dynamically by 
interface routines which use the context of the current 
operating system. Yohkoh contributors were encouraged 
to prefix instrument-specific routine filenames with their 
instrument acronym in order to minimize potential 
collisions in routine names. 


From Yohkoh to SolarSoft 

Prior to the launch of the Solar and Heliospheric 
Observatory (SoHO) it was decided to review the Yohkoh 
utilities, identify all of the truly mission independent 
routines and place them into a shared library. A prime 
motivator for this was that quite a few of the Yohkoh 
science and programming team were now members of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SolarSoft 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


various SoHO instrument or analysis teams and they 
desired to continue using and extending familiar analysis 
and programming utilities. A common library was then 
available for Yohkoh, SoHO and future missions for 
applications development and analysis and offered future 
potential for coordinated analysis. A mission level layer 
was added to the existing Yohkoh instrument level library 
and path infrastructure and SolarSoft was created. 


Recent trends—SolarSoft and the World Wide 
Web 

Anextensive set of SolarSoft routines and techniques have 
evolved which leverage WWW technologies and offer 
great potential for distributed solar physics analysis. In 
addition to extensive file converters, movie making tools 
and HTML generators written in IDL, SolarSoft also in- 
cludes an innovative set of utilities for executing SolarSoft 
applications through any WWW client (browser). This 
system uses a very simple (about five line) CGI script to 
pass information from an WWW FORM to an IDL server 
which is running the SolarSoft environment. An SSW IDL 
interface function converts the FORM stream directly into 
an IDL data structure. This infrastructure implies that all 
data base searching, access, analysis, and display functions 
which are available within an interactive SolarSoft session 
are also available through a WWW client. Examples of 
this server mode SSW application include the remote So- 
larSoft software and data base installation FORMS, cus- 
tomized Yohkoh/SXT movie maker, the TRACE WWW 
catalog search and data request system and many others. 
The HESSI team and Max Millennium Program is using 
this SSW server technology to provide WWW client ac- 
cess to the ancillary data bases available at the SDAC. 


Instruments supported by SolarSoft 

By 1999, analysis capabilities for a large number of 
instruments from many different solar missions were fully 
integrated into SSW, including: 


Yohkoh: BCS, HXT, SXT, WBS 

SoHO: MDL EIT, CDS, SUMER, LASCO 
TRACE: TRACE 

CGRO: BATSE 

GOES: Soft X-ray Monitor 

Spartan: Spartan 

SMM: XRP, HXIS, HXRBS, CP UVSP, GRS 
Radio: ETHZ, Nancay, Nobeyama 
Optical: SOON, La Palma 


Descriptions of the space-based instruments may be found 
in SOLAR TELESCOPES and INSTRUMENTS: SPACE. The ground- 
based radio and optical observatories are described in 
SOLAR TELESCOPES and INSTRUMENTS: GROUND. 

Other missions which are expected to participate, 
with the planned launch dates indicated, include: 


HESSI: Hessi (2000) 
GOES: Soft X-ray Imagers M,N,O (2000-2005) 
Solar-B: SOT, XRT, EIS (2004) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Software packages by other individuals or groups 
which provide useful extensions are integrated and 
distributed with SSW. These SSW packages include: 


Chianti: UV and EUV diagnostics; K Dere 
ANA: public domain data analysis; R Shine 
Stereo: dynamic stereoscopy; M Aschwand 
Ztools: vector and solar tools; C DeForrest 
SPEX: spectral analysis; R Schwartz 


Acknowledgments 

The success and evolution of solarsoft depends upon 
contributions from its many users and SSW instrument 
team members. Special thanks are due to members of 
the Yohkoh and SoHO co-investigator institutes, the Solar 
Data Analysis Center at GSFC, and the Yohkoh Data 
Archive Centre (YDAC), at the Mullard Space Science 
Laboratory. A portion of the work for design and 
administration of SolarSoft is supported under NASA 
contracts NAS8-40108, NAS5-32966, and NAS5-38099. 


Bibliography 

Freeland S http://vww.Imsal.com/SolarSoft/ SolarSoft de- 
scription and links to SSW installation, analysis con- 
cepts, standards, and other related documents (World 
Wide Web) 

Svestka Z and Uchida Y (eds) 1991 The Yohkoh (Solar-A) 
Mission (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Fleck B, Domingo V and Poland A (eds) 1995 The SOHO 
Mission (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Samuel L Freeland and Robert D Bentley 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Solstices 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solstices 


The point on the ecliptic at which the Sun reaches its 
maximum declination north or south of the celestial 
equator. The greatest northerly declination corresponds 
to the summer solstice, the greatest southerly declination 
to the winter solstice. In the Northern Hemisphere 
the summer solstice occurs on 21 or 22 June and the 
winter solstice on 21 or 22 December. In the Southern 
Hemisphere, where the seasons are reversed, the situation 
is exactly the opposite. 

Inthe Northern Hemisphere at the time of the summer 
solstice, the North Pole is tilted 23.45° towards the Sun. 
Because the Sun’s rays are shifted northward by the same 
amount, the vertical noon rays are directly overhead at the 
Tropic of Cancer. Six months later, the south polar end of 
the Earth is inclined 23.45° towards the Sun. On this day of 
the summer solstice in the Southern Hemisphere, the Sun’s 
vertical overhead rays progress to their southernmost 
position, the Tropic of Capricorn. 


See also: celestial coordinates. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sombrero Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sombrero Galaxy 


Popular name for M104, a spiral galaxy in the constellation 
of Virgo which is almost edge-on as seen from the Earth. 
The disk that surrounds its unusually large central bulge 
contains a very prominent lane of obscuring dust which, 
because the disk is tilted to the line of sight by a small angle 
(about 6°), cuts across the face of the bulge. These features 
cause the galaxy to look rather like a wide-brimmed 
sombrero hat. 

Located at a distance of about 60 million light-years, 
the Sombrero Galaxy is a massive spiral with a bright com- 
pact nucleus that is star-like in appearance. Spectroscopic 
observations reveal high rotational velocities inside this 
nucleus, and imply that about a billion solar masses of ma- 
terial is concentrated very closely together, possibly within 
a supermassive black hole, at the center of M104 


See also: active galactic nucleus, black hole, Doppler 
effect, Messier Catalog, spectrum, spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Somerville, Mary [née Fairfax] (1780-1872) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Somerville, Mary [née Fairfax] 
(1780-1872) 


Physicist and mathematician, born in Jedburgh, Rox- 
burghshire, Scotland, self-educated, and educated with 
the aid of her brother’s tutor. With the early death of 
her husband, she found herself a widow of independent 
means and took up mathematics, studying astronomy and 
dynamics. She carried out experiments on magnetism and 
the solar spectrum. She wrote a popularized rendition of 
Laplace’s Mecanique Celeste and Newton’s Principia called 
The Mechanism of the Heavens, and an account of The Con- 
nection of the Physical Sciences. Her discussion of a hypo- 
thetical planet causing the orbital perturbations of Uranus 
inspired JOHN ADAMS to make calculations of the position 
of Neptune. Mary Somerville and Caroline Herschel (see 
HERSCHEL FAMILY) were the first two women to write papers 
read to the Royal Society. Somerville College in the Univer- 
sity of Oxford was named after her. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sosigenes of Alexandria (c. 50 or 90 Bc—?) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sosigenes of Alexandria (c. 50 or 90 
BC—?) 


Peripatetic Greek philosopher, born in Alexandria, 
astronomer and mathematician who advised Julius Caesar 
on calendar reform. He recommended a year of 365.25 
days, and inserted extra days into the year 46 Bc to 
bring the calendar back in register with the seasons. 
His account of Eudoxus’s planetary system is the most 
complete surviving account. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


South African Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


South African Astronomical 
Observatory 


The South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO) is 
the national facility for optical and infrared astronomy in 
South Africa. Its prime function is to further fundamental 
research in astronomy and astrophysics at a national 
and international level through the provision and use 
of a world-class astronomical facility. There are strong 
international links to other countries worldwide through 
scientific collaboration and technological exchange. The 
SAAO contributes to the future development of South 
Africa by providing training in a scientific and high- 
tech environment; by stimulating young people to follow 
careers in science and technology through a school and 
teacher science education program; and by helping to 
create a culture of science and technology amongst all 
communities by a vigorous science awareness program. 

The SAAO is one of a number of research facilities 
in South Africa run by the National Research Foundation 
and it is financed by a government grant. SAAO’s 
headquarters are in Cape Town (at the Royal Observatory, 
Cape of Good Hope, founded in 1820) and the telescope 
facilities are located at Sutherland in the Northern Cape. 
The four main telescopes range in aperture from 1.9 m 
to 0.5 m. The major new facility will be the souTHERN 
AFRICAN LARGE TELESCOPE (SALT) to be constructed by South 
Africa and international partners. This 10 m class telescope 
will be based on the Hobby—Eberly Telescope at MCDONALD 
OBSERVATORY, Texas and is of tilted-Arecibo design. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.saao.ac.za. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South African Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


South African Astronomy 


Prior to the middle of the eighteenth century almost all 
of the astronomical observations made in South Africa 
were those necessary for the determination of position— 
particularly that of the Cape of Good Hope. Some 
exceptions were the independent discovery of bright 
comets, of which van Riebeeck’s comet of 1652, named 
after the first Governor of the Cape, is an example. 

Because of the need for a comprehensive survey and 
catalog of the southern sky, in 1751 the French Academy of 
Sciences sent Nicolas Louis de la Caille (1713-62; usually 
known as LACAILLE) to the Cape for two years. Establishing 
a small observatory in Strand Street, Cape Town, during 
the 12 month interval starting in August 1751 Lacaille 
measured the positions of over 9800 stars. With this came 
knowledge of about 40 nebulae and clusters. In order to 
give classification numbers to the brightest stars, Lacaille 
invented many of the southern constellations that are in 
use to this day: Horologium, Octans, Microscopium etc. 

During his second year Lacaille measured an arc of 
meridian in order to determine the radius of the Earth at 
the southern latitude of 34°. 


The Royal Observatory, Cape of Good Hope 

No further significant astronomical observations were 
made in South Africa until the founding of the Royal 
Observatory, Cape of Good Hope (RO CGH, figure 1) in 
the third decade of the nineteenth century. The foundation 
of this observatory, located about three miles east of Cape 
Town, was motivated by the fact that British astronomy 
was falling behind that on the European continent. The 
two responses were the founding of the Astronomical 
Society (later the Royal Astronomical Society) and the 
observatory at the Cape. 

The RO CGH was built during 1825-8 and was 
directed by Fearon FaLtows (1788-1831) who had been 
a Cambridge mathematician and exact contemporary of 
John HErscHEL. The observatory was equipped for meridian 
astronomy—with a transit instrument and meridian circle 
identical to those employed at the ROYAL OBSERVATORY, 
GREENWICH. 

Fallows died in 1831 from the effects of scarlet fever 
before he could prove the worth of the instruments. 
He was succeeded in 1831 by Thomas HENDERSON (1798— 
1845) who only remained a year, but his extensive use 
of the meridian instruments resulted in his detection and 
measurements of the parallax of ALPHACENTAURI—one of the 
first of measured distances to stars. In 1833 Henderson left 
to become the first Astronomer Royal for Scotland, at the 
ROYAL OBSERVATORY, EDINBURGH. 

Henderson was succeeded in 1834 by Thomas 
MACLEAR (1794-1879), who labored successfully to make 
the RO CGH into a world-class institution. Maclear 
and his principal assistant Charles Piazzi smyTH (1819- 
1900), who succeeded Henderson in Scotland in 1845, 
were deeply engaged from 1837 to 1850 in re-measuring 
and extending Lacaille’s arc of meridian with the result 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The Royal Observatory, Cape of Good Hope. 


that fewer stellar positional catalogs were produced than 
expected. When Maclear’s principal work, the results 
of the arc of meridian, was published in 1866 it was 
considered the finest of its kind, and Maclear is known 
more as the founder of trigonometric survey in South 
Africa than for his contributions to positional astronomy. 

During his first four years at the RO CGH Maclear 
worked closely with Sir John Herschel, who resided at 
the Cape from 1834 to 1838, providing him with accurate 
positions of the bright stars needed by the latter for 
reducing his ‘sweeps’ of the sky for nebulae, clusters and 
double stars. 

Edward James Stone (1831-1897), who had been Chief 
Assistant to the Astronomer Royal, George Biddell airy, 
at Greenwich, became director of the RO CGH in 1870 
and until he left in 1879 concentrated on preparing for 
publication all of the positional observations made by 
Maclear and his assistants. His ‘Cape Catalogue’ of 12 441 
stars, published in 1880, included the extensive work of 
himself and his predecessor. 

The RO CGH continued into the twentieth century 
as the only professional observatory in South Africa. 
Stone was replaced in 1879 by David cm (1843-1914) 
who was later described (by Sir Robert BALL) as ‘the 
most distinguished practical British astronomer since 
BRADLEY who has presided over one of our national 
observatories’. Gill’s exceptional talents in design and 
application of astronomical instrumentation raised the RO 
CGH to the equal of any observatory in the world. His 
measurement of stellar parallaxes and (among many other 
examples) of the positions of Jupiter’s satellites, using a 
heliometer of his own design, gave fundamental data of 
the highest available precision. His invention of wide- 
field photography for use in construction of catalogs of 
positions of stars led directly to the ‘Cape Photographic 
Durchmusterung’ and to the ‘Astrographic Catalogue’. 

David Gill’s organization of an international cam- 
paign of observation of the minor planets Iris, Victoria and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South African Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sappho, led to his deducing a solar PARALLAX and (indi- 
rectly) a mass determination for the Moon that were both 
accurate and not improved upon for many decades. As 
with Maclear, Gill participated in and supervised a major 
trigonometric survey, extending into what is now Zim- 
babwe. After retirement in 1906, Gill (knighted in 1900) 
returned to Britain; his principal occupation was the pro- 
duction of his book History and Description of the Royal Ob- 
servatory, Cape of Good Hope, which was modeled on F G W 
Struve’s similarly monumental description of the Pulkova 
Observatory, which had strongly influenced Gill in his de- 
velopment of the RO CGH. 

Among the new instruments that Gill had designed 
and had built at the Cape Observatory were a unique 
Reversible Transit Circle, a twin 18/24 in refractor and the 
astrographic telescope. These continued to be employed in 
the first half of the twentieth century by Gill’s successors: 
Sydney Samuel Hough (1870-1923; director 1907-23), 
Harold sPENCER-JONES (1890-1960; 1923-33), John Jackson 
(1887-1958; 1933-50) and Richard Hugh Stoy (1910- 
1994; 1950-68). During this time the work of the RO 
CGH was largely to produce another multivolume star 
catalogue—the Cape Photographic Catalogue, but new areas 
of astrophysical measurement were introduced in support 
of the catalog: in particular photometry and spectral types 
for most of the brighter stars. 

A large effort was made in production of stellar 
parallaxes, using the photographic 24 in refractor, and 
Spencer-Jones organized an international campaign of 
observing the minor planet ERos from which he deduced 
another value for the solar parallax. 

As, in effect, the national observatory, although it 
continued to be run by the British Admiralty until 1965, 
the RO CGH provided the time service for South Africa— 
initially through time balls, then electric telegraph and 
from 1925 by radio transmission. To this day the noon- 
day cannon on Signal Hill in Cape Town is fired by electric 
impulse from the observatory. 

At the end of 1971, through an agreement between 
the British and South African governments, the RO CGH 
ceased to exist and was reorganized at the beginning 
of 1972 as the SOUTH AFRICAN ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY 
(SAAO). 


The Union (later Republic) Observatory 

The first truly South African observatory was opened 
in Johannesburg on 17 January 1905 as the Government 
Meteorological Observatory. Its director was Robert 
Thorburn Innes (1861-1933), who had worked at the 
RO CGH under Gill. When Gill was asked to 
recommend a director for the meteorological observatory 
he undoubtedly knew that Innes would soon expand that 
institution’s work to include astronomical observations— 
Innes was a dedicated observer of visual DOUBLE STARS. By 
1907 he had installed a 9 in refractor and in 1909 the 
South African government agreed to the purchase of a 
263 in refractor from the Dublin optical firm of Sir Howard 
Gruss. This was only installed in 1925. However, as a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gift from the English amateur astronomer John FRANKLIN- 
ADAMS, in 1909 a 10 in photographic refractor was acquired 
and the resulting Franklin-Adams photographic atlas of 
the southern sky was the standard reference for the 
subsequent 50 years. 

In 1912 what had been known as the Transvaal Obser- 
vatory was Officially designated the Union Observatory, 
with its director entitled the Union Astronomer. Alto- 
gether there were four Union Astronomers in the work- 
ing life of the observatory: Innes (1912-27), H E Wood 
(1927-41), W H van den Bos (1941-56) and W S Finsen 
(1957-65). The work of the observatory (renamed the Re- 
public Observatory in 1961) was largely the measurement 
and computation of double-star orbits—in later years the 
measurements of very close double stars were made with 
an ingenious ‘eyepiece’ interferometer invented by Fin- 
sen. Some 3000 southern double stars were found with 
the large refractor. However, much photographic survey 
work was also carried out, leading to the discovery of 
PROXIMA CENTAURI by Innes, the discovery of asteroids by 
Wood—up to the end of Wood’s directorship about 600 
asteroids had been found—and tens of thousands of pho- 
tographs of Mars by Finsen. 

The Republic Observatory was effectively closed in 
1972 when the recently (1968) acquired 20 in reflector 
was moved to the site of the new national observatory 
in Sutherland. The 265 in refractor remains at its 
original location and is used occasionally for public 
demonstrations. 


The Boyden Observatory 

In 1927 Harvard College moved its Boyden Observatory 
from Arequipa in Peru to the resort of Mazelspoort, near 
Bloemfontein. Equipped with the Bruce astrograph, the 
60 in Rockefeller reflector and a 13 in Alvan Clark refractor, 
a variety of observational programs were possible. The 
first director, John Stefanos Paraskevopoulos (1889-1951) 
carried out all-sky photographic patrols of variable stars 
and made detailed studies of variable stars, particularly in 
the LARGE and SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. 

Later collaboration with other northern observations 
resulted in the acquisition of the ADH (Armagh—Dunsink-— 
Harvard) Schmidt telescope of 36 in aperture. 

The observatory was given to the University of the 
Orange Free State in 1972, after which it operated at only 
a very low level. The 60 in reflector is currently being 
modernized and should soon be brought into full-time 
operation. 


The Leiden Southern Station 

In 1923 Innes at the Union Observatory negotiated an 
agreement that enabled astronomers from the LEIDEN 
OBSERVATORY in Holland to make use of the Union 
Observatory’s facilities. In 1938 the South African 
government provided funds for a building in the Union 
Observatory’s grounds to house the Leiden Observatory’s 
twin 16 in astrograph, known as the Rockefeller Telescope. 
In 1954 a dark site, remote from the Johannesburg 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South African Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


city lights, was chosen at Hartebeespoort and first the 
Franklin-Adams telescope and then the twin astrograph 
moved there. This site was operated by Leiden 
observers, although officially an outstation of the Union 
Observatory. A 36 in reflector devoted to multichannel 
stellar photometry was established there in 1957 by 
Theodore Walraven. This telescope was later moved to 
the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY in Chile; the Franklin- 
Adams telescope remains, used for educational purposes. 


The Yale Observatory, Johannesburg 

A 26 in visual refractor was established in 1925 by Yale 
Observatory, on the campus of the University of the 
Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. This was a southern 
station used for photographic parallax measurements. 
The directors were H D Alden (from 1925 until 1945) and 
C Jackson from 1945 until the telescope was transferred to 
Canberra, Australia, in 1952. 


The Lamont—Hussey Observatory 

In 1927 the University of Michigan established a 27 in 
visual refractor on Naval Hill at Bloemfontein. The 
director was R A Rossiter (1886-1977) who, by the time of 
his retirement in 1951, had discovered 7120 new southern 
double stars. F Holden was director from 1952 until the 
observatory was closed in 1974. The optics of the refractor 
returned to Michigan; the observatory dome remains, the 
property of Bloemfontein City Council. 


The Natal Observatory 

Edmund Nevill (alias Edmund Neison, 1849-1940), 
Government Chemist for the Province of Natal, was the 
first and only director of the provincial observatory erected 
at Durban in 1882. Neison is best known for his book 
The Moon, published in 1876, before he went to South 
Africa. Lack of funds prevented the Natal Observatory 
from publishing the work (mostly meridian observations) 
carried out. The observatory closed in 1911. 


The Radcliffe Observatory, Pretoria 
The Radcliffe Observatory in Pretoria (figure 2) was 
established in 1939 from the proceeds of the sale of the 
observatory in Oxford, owned by the Radcliffe trustees. 
The observatory was equipped with a 74 in reflector 
by Grubb Parsons (this was the largest in the southern 
hemisphere at the time), but the mirror’s arrival was 
delayed by the Second World War, so the telescope only 
started work in 1948. The first director was Harold Knox- 
Shaw (1885-1970), transferred from Oxford. He retired 
in 1951 and was replaced by Andrew David Thackeray 
(1910-78) who directed the observatory until it was sold 
to the South African government in 1974 and the telescope 
moved to Sutherland, where it came into operation in 1976. 
During its 26 years of active life, and operating on 
a very small annual budget, the staff and visitors at the 
Radcliffe Observatory put astrophysics in South Africa 
into the world class. Initially the observational program 
concentrated on radial velocities of OB stars with a view 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


+. 


Figure 2. The Radcliffe Observatory, Pretoria. 


to determining the dynamics and structure of the Galaxy, 
but later usage expanded into studies of the spectra of 
peculiar stars, production of color-magnitude diagrams 
for southern clusters, and particularly spectroscopy and 
photometry of stars in the Magellanic Clouds. 


The Astronomical Society of Southern Africa 

This society was founded in 1922, from an amalgamation 
of societies in Cape Town and Johannesburg—the 
former having been formed in 1910 through the interest 
stimulated by Halley’s Comet that year. The society 
comprises mostly amateur astronomers, with the addition 
of most of the professionals. There is a policy of electing 
presidents alternately between amateur and professional 
status. The society’s postal address is at the South African 
Astronomical Observatory in Cape Town. It publishes 
a regular journal (the Monthly Notes) and an annual 
almanack known as the Handbook. There are active local 
centers in many parts of the country. 


Astronomy at South African universities 

The only South African university that possesses an au- 
tonomous Department of Astronomy is at the University 
of Cape Town. A sub-department exists at the University 
of South Africa (a distance-learning university) in Preto- 
ria. The Physics and Electrical Engineering Department 
at Rhodes University, Grahamstown, specializes in radio 
astronomy and uses the national HARTEBEESTHOEK RADIO AS- 
TRONOMY OBSERVATORY (HARTRAO). Active astronomical re- 
search is carried out by individuals in science departments 
at the University of the Orange Free State (Bloemfontein), 
the University of the Witwatersrand (Johannesburg) and 
the University of Natal (Durban). 


Bibliography 

Moore P and Collins P 1977 The Astronomy of Southern Africa 
(London: Robert Hale) 

Warner B 1978 Astronomers at the Royal Observatory, Cape of 
Good Hope (Cape Town: Balkema) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South African Astronomy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Warner B 1995 Royal Observatory, Cape of Good Hope 1820- 
1831 (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Brian Warner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


South African Atronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


South African Astronomical 
Observatory: from 1972 to the Present 


In the late 1960s the Science Research Council (SRC) in 
the UK seriously considered closing the Royal 
Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope (see soOuUTH 
AFRICAN ASTRONOMY), but the observatory (located in 
Cape Town) was saved by the establishment in January 
1972 of a joint agreement between the SRC and the 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) of 
South Africa, whereby the two Councils would fund and 
run the observatory. To make it possible to compete in 
astrophysical research it was necessary to move the prin- 
cipal telescopes in South Africa to a better site, away 
from the lights and bad winter weather of Cape Town, 
and away from the lights and cloudy summer weather of 
Johannesburg. As a result, a site was chosen at 
Sutherland, in the Northern Cape Province, roughly 380 
km by road from Cape Town, which lies between the two 
heavy rainfall areas and is consequently non-seasonal 
and has low rainfall (annual average about 20 cm) (figure 
1). This semidesert area has about 50% photometric 
nights and a further 25% usable for spectroscopy and dif- 
ferential photometry. The Sutherland site is in essence a 
field station, with a modest size technical support staff. 
The headquarters of the South African Astronomical 
Observatory (SAAO) is housed in buildings of the old 
Royal Observatory in Cape Town and that is where the 
astronomers and the majority of the support staff are 
located. The staff complement of the SAAO, including 
astronomers, technical and administrative support team, 
is about 70. 

The 1 m reflector from Cape Town and the 50 cm 
reflector from the Republic Observatory in Johannesburg 
were moved to the new site in 1972, and, following the 
decision of the Radcliffe Trustees to withdraw from sup- 
port of astronomy, the 1.9 m reflector which had been in 
Pretoria since 1939 was sold to the South African 
Government, moved to Sutherland in 1975, and was back 


Figure 1. The Sutherland Observatory of the South African 
Astronomical Observatory (SAAO). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in operation at its new location by 1976. There are still 
small telescopes, including an 18 in reflector as well as 
the 24 and 18 in Maclean refractor, at the old site in Cape 
Town, but these are now rarely used for research pur- 
poses. 

The agreement between the British and South 
African scientific Councils lapsed in 1986, since when the 
SAAO has been funded entirely from within South 
Africa and has fallen under the administrative control of 
the CSIR and its successors the Foundation for Research 
Development and the National Research Foundation. 
Telescope instrumentation that had been contributed by 
UK institutions was made the legal property of the 
SAAO. The SAAO is a National Facility, with its own 
research staff, which makes time available both to uni- 
versity astronomers within South Africa and to visiting 
researchers. Approximately 50% of the observing time is 
used by SAAO staff, 12% by South African universities 
and the remainder by overseas visitors. 

Under successive directors (Sir Richard van der Riet 
Woolley 1972-76, Dr Michael Feast 1977-92, Dr Robert S. 
Stobie 1992-present) the SAAO has maintained an inter- 
national standing in several areas of astrophysical 
research, specializing largely in optical spectroscopy 
and in optical and infrared photometry of stars and 
galaxies. Although possessing only telescopes of rela- 
tively modest apertures, the availability of adequate 
amounts of observing time over extended periods has 
enabled long-term programmes to be carried out by staff 
researchers and university users (principally from the 
University of Cape Town: for further information see 
http:/ /artemisia.ast-uct.ac.za) that are often not practica- 
ble at other observatories. Some general examples are 
long-term light curves in the optical and infrared of MIRA 
VARIABLES and other long-period variables, monitoring of 
QUASARS, extensive photometry of Cepheid variables in 
the Galaxy and the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS, discovery of 
variable stars in clusters and towards the Galactic centre, 
asteroseismology, and studies of cataclysmic variables. In 
recent years major campaigns were undertaken on the 
SUPERNOVA (1987a) in the Large Magellanic Cloud and as 
part of PLANET, which is searching for extrasolar plan- 
ets through the effects of GRAVITATIONAL LENSING. An 
important support programme at the SAAO and its 
predecessor has been the provision of accurate photo- 
metric standard stars in the southern hemisphere—both 
the 18 in reflector in Cape Town and the 20 in reflector at 
Sutherland have for three decades been equipped only 
for standard star photometry, which has resulted in great 
stability of the photometric system. 

The Sutherland site hosts a number of international 
instruments. Since 1990 one of the telescopes in the glob- 
al system of the Birmingham Solar Oscillation Network, 
used for HELIOSEISMOLOGY, has been in operation. A 0.75 
m robotic telescope (the Automatic Photometric 
Telescope) for stellar photometry, a joint project of the 
SAAO, the University of Cape Town and the University 
of South Africa, came into operation in 2001. Other 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


South African Atronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


robotic telescopes are under construction. A 1.4 m reflec- 
tor, the Infrared Survey Facility, constructed in Japan for 
the Nagoya University, started work at Sutherland in 
November 2000. Details of the telescopes and observing 
facilities at the SAAO can be found at 
http: / / www.saao.ac.za/. 

There are also seismographs, operating as parts of 
national and international networks, housed at the 
Sutherland site. In 2000 a Geodynamic Observatory, 
installed by the GeoForschungsZentrum, Potsdam, and 
employing a superconducting gravimeter, came into 
operation. 

A major project for the period 2001-04 is the con- 
struction at Sutherland of the Southern African Large 
Telescope (SALT), which is a near copy of the 
Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) run by the University of 
Texas at MCDONALD OBSERVATORY. This is an international 
project, involving the Governments of South Africa and 
Poland, and institutions in Germany, New Zealand, the 
UK and the USA. SALT and HET, each with 91 hexago- 
nal mirrors of 1 m diameter mounted to simulate a tele- 
scope of about 11 m aperture, are designed largely to spe- 
cialize in spectroscopy—both of very faint objects for 
work, for example, in extragalactic research, and of 
bright objects at very high dispersion, which can be used, 
for example, for discovery of extrasolar planets. There 
are agreements in place that will enable researchers to 
use both large telescopes, thereby gaining access to most 
of the sky with similarly powerful telescopes. SALT is 
expected to be commissioned towards the end of 2004. 
Information about the SALT Project can be obtained from 
http: / / www.saao.ac.za/salt/. In parallel with the SALT 
Project, an Information Centre is to be developed in the 
Sutherland village and a large Education Centre at the 
Observatory site itself. 


Brian Warner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


South American Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


South American Astronomy 


South America is a region where astronomy has reached 
a fairly good level of development and has produced a 
substantial number of outstanding astronomers. However, 
the development of astronomy in that part of the world 
has been always heavily dependent on governmental 
financial support which has not always been as generous 
as necessary. 

The South American countries where astronomy has 
grown stronger are, in alphabetical order, Argentina, 
Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela. To a smaller 
extent, some astronomy is also carried in Bolivia and in 
Colombia, and is developing in Paraguay and Peru. Table 
1 illustrates the situation by quoting the present status of 
the South American membership of the INTERNATIONAL 
ASTRONOMICAL UNION (IAU). 

Peru in 1984, and Paraguay, in 1986, adhered to the 
Visiting Lecturers Program established by the IAU in 
1983, and a few of the young people that attended the 
courses later graduated, particularly in Brazil but also in 
Argentina, and are returning to their home countries to 
help start a tradition in astronomical research. 


Argentina 

In Argentina, astronomical activities started with the very 
progressive-minded President Domingo Faustino 
Sarmiento, who, in 1869, invited Benjamin Apthrop 
Gould, the founder of The Astronomical Journal—whom 
Sarmiento had met in the US while he was Argentine 
Ambassador—to become the first Director of the 
Argentine National Observatory. This was erected in the 
outskirts of the city of Cordoba and had its dedication on 
24 October 1871, being transferred to the local university 
in 1955. Cordoba produced excellent astrometric work 
and was well known for the Uranometria Argentina, an 
atlas of all stars visible with the naked eye from Cordoba, 
produced before any instrumentation became available at 
the site, and a series of stellar catalogs and the stellar 
atlas known as the Cordoba Durchmusterung. In the 


Table 1. The South American Countries and the International 
Astronomical Union. 


Country Year of Number of Country 

adherence individual status 
members 

Argentina 1927 89 

Brazil 1961 108 

Chile 1957 44 

Uruguay 1970 3 

Venezuela 1953 11 

Bolivia 1997 0 Associate 

Peru 1988 1 Associate 

Colombia 3 Non-member 

Ecuador 0 Non-member 

Paraguay 1 Non-member 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


early days the observing conditions were so good that 
stars as of magnitude 7 were visible with the naked eye. 

An important step was taken in 1909 when Director 
Charles Dillon Perrine, from the LICK OBSERVATORY, in 
California, decided that Cordoba ought to engage also in 
astrophysical work, and asked for funds for a 1.50 m 
telescope, that, because of the attempt to figure the mirror 
in-house, was not dedicated until 6 July 1942, as the 
main instrument of the observatory’s Bosque Alegre 
Astrophysical Station, some 40 km southwest of the city 
at an elevation of 1250 m. For many years the world’s 
first stellar spectrograph with all-reflecting optics, giving 
a dispersion of about 40 A mm’, designed and built in- 
house by physicist Enrique Gaviola with the cooperation 
of physicist Ricardo Platzeck, was used at the Cassegrain 
focus of the telescope. At present a Russian-built 
multifunction instrument (a spectrograph and a 1024 
CCD direct imager) is in use. 

Over the course of time, several additional 
astronomical institutions were established in Argentina. 
Chronologically, the second one is the LA PLATA 
OBSERVATORY that started in 1882 in the charge of the 
Province of Buenos Aires and which was transferred to 
the local university in 1905. The main instrumentation, 
acquired in France, consisted of an 80 cm reflecting 
telescope, a 43 cm refractor, used extensively for the 
measurement of visual double stars, particularly by 
Michigan graduate Bernhard H Dawson, a comet-seeker 
and a Carte du Ciel astrograph. In 1935 La Plata 
established, during geodesist Félix Aguilar’s directorship, 
the first University curriculum in astronomy in the 
country. In 1938 there were only three registered students 
attending, but at present this figure is of the order of 100 
for the introductory courses. In 1957 Cordoba also started 
offering astronomical courses towards a PhD degree in 
astronomy. In both places one may become a Licenciado 
(a somewhat higher degree than that of Master) and, then, 
a Doctor in Astronomy. Altogether, La Plata and 
Cordoba produce about 13 Licenciados and four to five 
PhDs a year. 

In 1958 the La Plata Observatory, with the strong 
support of the university’s rector Danilo Vucetich, 
decided to engage in the acquisition of a modern 
instrument and in extended site surveying. A 2.15 m (84 
in) telescope, similar to the telescope then recently 
acquired by the US KITT PEAK NATIONAL OBSERVATORY, 
was aimed at. Early in 1971 the instrument and the 
figured Pyrex discs were already in La Plata but different 
problems delayed the continuation of the project and the 
dedication of the new observatory only occurred in 1986. 
Erected on top of one of the peaks in the El Leoncito 
astronomical reservation in the province of San Juan, at 
an elevation of 2500 m, in the Andes, this place is now a 
national observing facility, the CASLEO (El Leoncito 
Astronomical Complex), run by the National Research 
Council (CONICET) and the universities of La Plata, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South American Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cordoba and San Juan. A recent addition to the 
instrumentation is a submillimeter solar radiotelescope 
(SST), a joint collaborative effort between the University 
of Berne, Switzerland, the Brazilian CRAAM (Center of 
Radioastronomy and Space Applications), IAFE and 
CASLEO. Soon a solar spectrograph for the ranges of 
3700-4400 A and of 5500-8000 A will also become 
operational. In addition, the 60 cm Canadian reflector 
that had been at Cerro Las Campanas in Chile will be 
installed on top of another peak in the area. The auxiliary 
equipment for the 2.5 m telescope, named the Jorge 
Sahade Telescope at CASLEO’s tenth anniversary 
celebration, consists, at present, of two stellar 
spectrographs, a CCD camera and a photopolarimeter 
belonging to the Torino Observatory. 

The El Leoncito area had previously been chosen as 
a good astronomical site by astronomers of the 
University of San Juan for the installation of a Yale— 
Columbia double astrograph for proper-motion work, at 
what is now known as the Carlos U Cesco High Station. 
This installation is part of the University of San Juan’s 
Félix Aguilar Observatory that was built on the outskirts 
of the city of San Juan and dedicated in 1953. It has 
carried out fundamental work with the modernized 
meridian circle of the Cordoba Observatory and in 
cooperation with the US Naval Observatory and with 
Russian and Chinese astronomers. At the end of 1998, 
Cesco’s Station obtained an automated mirror 
coronograph from the Max-Planck-Institut-fiir- 
Aeronomie, Lindau, and a 10 cm telescope with Lyot 
filter for 6563 A from the Max-Planck-Institut-fiir- 
Extraterrestriche Physik, Garching. The University of 
San Juan has recently established its own school of 
astronomy. 

Other astronomical institutions in Argentina are the 
Argentine Radioastronomy Institute (IAR) and the 
Institute of Astronomy and Space Physics (IAFE), both, 
at present, mostly on CONICET’s payroll. The IAR was 
established about 20 km north of La Plata because of the 
interest of the Province of Buenos Aires Research 
Council (CIC) in the matter, and dedicated on 26 March 
1966, the instrumentation being two 30 m parabolic 
antennas provided by the Carnegie Institution of 
Washington, with receivers for around 21 cm 
wavelength. The IAFE has been formally in existence 
since 1971, as an outgrowth of the former National 
Center for Cosmic Radiation. The idea for setting up the 
IAFE was to have a center that would cover modern 
topics outside the realm of interest of the other Argentine 
astronomical institutions, and, in fact, early on research 
with balloons, space projects and _ high-energy 
astrophysics were the main subjects. At present, the 
IAFE’s principal endeavours are centered on solar 
physics and cosmology, participating in the analysis of 
data collected with the German solar instruments at El 
Leoncito’s Cesco Station. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Astronomy is also being done by small groups at the 
University of Rosario, at the University of Tucumain and 
at the CRICYT Institute in Mendoza, and there is a Naval 
Observatory entrusted with the country’s official time 
service. 

Argentina has an astronomical association (AAA) 
founded in 1958, at present with over 300 members, 
about half of them holding PhD degrees. Argentina 
spends about 5 million US dollars a year on astronomy, 
including a 2.5% participation in the Gemini Project. 

In Argentina there are quite a number of amateur 
groups, the most important and largest being the 
Argentine Association Friends of Astronomy (AAAA) in 
Buenos Aires, founded over 70 years ago, that has had 
and continues to have close connections with well known 
professional astronomers like the late Bernhard H 
Dawson and José Luis Sérsic. 


Brazil 

Brazil is one of the South American countries where 
astronomy received official attention at an early date. Its 
Imperial Observatory was created in Rio de Janeiro on 25 
October 1827, and the first director was appointed in 
1845. When Brazil became a Republic, the Imperial 
Observatory became the National Observatory, and in the 
1920s it experienced one of the most brilliant periods of 
its history, being equipped with a 46 cm Cooke refractor 
of short focal length and a Heyde zenith tube for the 
study of latitude variations. The difficult economic times 
Brazil experienced for a number of years afterwards were 
instrumental in damping down any possible interest in 
supporting astronomy. Neither the success abroad of the 
Brazilian scientist Mario Schénberg, who worked with S 
Chandrasekhar and George Gamow, nor the fact that very 
important foreign groups had come to the country for the 
1947 total eclipse of the Sun, helped to reverse the 
situation. A great change took place only when Professor 
Abrahao de Moraes, a celestial mechanician, took over 
the directorship of the Institute of Astronomy and 
Geophysics (IAG) of the University of Sao Paulo in 
1955. He strongly believed that the growth of astronomy 
in Brazil required that interested young people be sent 
abroad for training. Fortunately for the plan, the Fund for 
the Support of Research in Sao Paulo (FAPESP) was set 
up and, in 1962, Sylvio Ferraz Mello and Giorgio 
Giacaglia started the program that has continued steadily 
ever since. In carrying out such a program the traditional 
ties Brazilian astronomy had with French astronomy 
were not forgotten. 

The country’s financial support for astronomy has 
grown steadily and, at present, Brazil not only 
participates in the Gemini Project, also with 2.5% of the 
total cost, but is also the main partner (31%) in the 
SOAR (Southern Observatory for Astrophysical 
Research) Project , and pays a considerable amount of 
money to have the right to use ESO’s (European 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South American Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Southern Observatory’s) 1.5 m telescope at La Silla, in 
Chile. The SOAR Project instrument is a 4 m telescope to 
operate on the same peak as the Gemini South telescope, 
on top of Cerro Pachon, in Chile. 

The largest telescope now in operation in Brazil is a 
Perkin-Elmer 1.6 m reflector located in Brasopolis, 
Minas Gerais, at the National Astrophysical Laboratory, 
together with a Zeiss telescope and a Boller and Chivens 
60 cm telescope. The location was chosen after a long 
site survey effort led by the National Observatory, then 
under the active directorship of Luiz Muniz Barreto, the 
facility having been dedicated in 1981. 

In Brazil there are several institutions engaged in 
astronomy teaching and/or research, namely: 


e The National Observatory, in Rio de Janeiro, 
equipped with a 46 cm Cooke & Sons telescope and 
a Danjon astrolabe. 

e The Institute of Astronomy and Geophysics of the 
Sao Paulo University. 

e The Astrophysics Group of the Physics Institute, 
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, MG. 

e The Physics Department of the Federal University of 
Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, RN. 

e The Astronomy Department of the 
University of Rio de Janeiro, RJ. 

e The National Institute of Space Research (INPE), 
Sao Jose dos Campos, SP. 


Federal 


For observing, besides the National Observatory and 
the National Astrophysical Observatory already 
mentioned, Brazil has several small observatories at 
different places: 


e The Abrahéo de Moraes Observatory at Valinhos, 
SP, equipped with a meridian circle with CCD. 

e The Antares Observatory at Feira de Santana, BA, 
equipped with a Danjon astrolabe. 

e Piedade at Belo Horizonte, MG, with a 60 cm Zeiss 
telescope equipped with a Zeiss spectrograph and a 
single-channel photometer with CCD. 

e The VALONGO OBSERVATORY at Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 
equipped with a 30 cm Cooke & Sons telescope. 


The observing conditions are, however, not too good and 
this explains why the Brazilians are participating in 
projects in other countries. 

In addition, we have to refer to the important 
Itapetinga Radioastronomical Observatory in Atibaia, SP. 
The attempt to do radioastronomy in Brazil started in 
1959 and provides a long and interesting story. The most 
important installation at present is located in Itapetinga 
and it was achieved through the help of a number of 
people and organizations. The main instrument is an 
Essco 13.7 m diameter precision telescope in a 19.4 m 
radome, maximized for the frequency of 22 GHz and 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


used for frequencies between 7 MHz and 94 MHz. Pierre 
Kaufmann is the soul of this enterprise, which cooperates 
with several organizations in the US and Russia. 
Research is done on the Sun, on interstellar molecules, on 
active nuclei of galaxies, etc. As mentioned earlier, a 
solar telescope for submillimeter waves has been 
installed at CASLEO, in Argentina, as a cooperative 
effort between Itapetinga, the University of Berne, 
Switzerland, IAFE and CASLEO. 

Brazilian astronomers are all members of the 
Brazilian Astronomical Society (SAB) that was 
established in 1974, and the present membership 
numbers about 400, nearly half of them with PhD 
degrees. The yearly government spending in astronomy 
of about 15 million US dollars covers Rio, Sao Paulo, the 
National Astrophysical Laboratory, the participation on 
the SOAR and Gemini Projects and the fellowship 
program, of some 100 fellowships a year. This is the 
largest support for astronomy among the South American 
countries, and it does account for the very large growth 
that Brazilian astronomy has experienced in the past few 
decades. 


Chile 

Chile is characterized, in its northern half, by extremely 
good astronomical skies, similar to those of the southern 
coast of California in the early days of the MOUNT 
WILSON OBSERVATORY. 

Astronomical activities in Chile began in 1849 when 
Lieutenant James M Gilliss, of the US Navy, started 
carrying out observations of Mars near opposition and of 
Venus near its stationary phases, to determine the solar 
parallax. The instrument, a 16.5 cm equatorial telescope, 
was installed at the Cerro Santa Lucia (Santa Lucia Hill) , 
in Santiago. Stellar positions in the declination range of 
—65°—90° were also measured with a Pistor and Martins 
meridian circle. In 1852, at the end of Gilliss’s mission, 
both instruments were bought by the Chilean 
Government and the observations were continued under 
Karl Wilhelm Moesta without interruption. During 
Moesta’s directorship the observatory was moved down 
from the hill in 1856 and there was a cooperative 
undertaking with Pulkovo and Washington for the 
observation of the declination of Mars at its 1862 
opposition. 

Another American expedition came to Chile in 1903, 
namely the D O Mills expedition from the Lick 
Observatory, under William H Wright, with the plan of 
measuring radial velocities of southern stars with a 92 cm 
reflecting telescope that was installed at Cerro San 
Cristobal, close to Santiago. At the end of the mission in 
1909, the instrument was bought by the Catholic 
University at Santiago, with the idea of developing an 
astronomy department. 

Within the long history of astronomy in Chile, we 
should point out that, early in the century, astronomy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South American Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


found a strong supporter in President Pedro Montt, who 
was in power from 1903 to 1910. During his term of 
office the observatory was under the active leadership of 
Friedrich Wilhelm Ristenpart, who also encouraged 
cooperation between South American observatories and 
the production, down to magnitude 10, of stellar charts 
south of declination —42°, that were missing in the 
Cordoba Durchmusterung. 

In 1927, the National Observatory was transferred to 
the University of Chile and not much actually happened 
until 1950 when Federico Rutllant Alcina took over as 
director. He moved the observatory to its present location 
on Cerro Calan, 860 m above sea level and at some 14 
km northeast of the center of Santiago, and things 
changed in such a way that the University of Chile was 
able to establish in due course an astronomy department. 
It is possible now to work for a Magister in Astronomy 
degree, and it is envisaged in the near future to make it 
possible to work for a PhD degree. 

Rutllant not only undertook the moving of the 
observatory but also encouraged Gerard Kuiper, then 
director of the YERKES OBSERVATORY, to consider a joint 
project between the universities of Chicago, Texas and 
Chile to take advantage of the excellent climatic 
conditions of the latter country for astronomy. This initial 
proposal and the site survey carried by Jiirgen Stock 
finally gave rise to the CERRO TOLOLO INTER-AMERICAN 
OBSERVATORY (CTIO) with the involvement of AURA 
(the Associated Universities for Research in Astronomy) 
and the financing of the National Science Foundation 
(NSF). CTIO was dedicated in November 1962, and was 
followed by the installations of the EUROPEAN SOUTHERN 
OBSERVATORY (ESO) at Cerro La Silla, dedicated seven 
years later, by those of the Camegie Institution of 
Washington at Cerro Las Campanas, in 1976, and the 
huge ESO set-up of four 8 m telescopes at Cerro Paranal, 
the Very Large Telescope (VLT) Project, in the north of 
Chile, VLT1 having been officially dedicated in 
December 1998. Chilean astronomers do have access to 
10% of the observing time on all the foreign telescopes 
on Chilean soil. Moreover, the country is also a partner in 
the Gemini Project (5% of the total cost), a fact that 
implies an additional percentage of observing time for 
the Chilean astronomers. 

Under Rutllant and his successor, Claudio Anguita, 
who took over in 1964, Cerro Calan turned into an 
important research center from both the astrometric and 
the astrophysical point of view. Moreover, the access to 
the telescopes and to the fellowships granted by the 
foreign organizations involved in the different 
astronomical projects in Chile have opened unique 
possibilities for interested young people. 

In 1959 the then Soviet Academy of Sciences sent to 
Cerro Calan a group of astrometrists headed by Pulkovo 
astronomer M S Zverev, that observed stellar positions to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


serve as astrometric standards for the southern 
hemisphere. Later, the Russians built an astrometric 
observatory at Cerro El Roble, 80 km north of Santiago, 
equipped with a double-meniscus Maksutov astrograph 
that was erected in 1962, and planned for an 
astrophysical extension. When President Salvador 
Allende was overthrown, the Russians abandoned the 
country and the El Roble station, together with the 
instruments, were transferred to the university. 

At Maipt, some 30 km southwest of Santiago, there 
has been important radioastronomical activity, first in 
cooperation with the Carnegie Institution of Washington 
and then with the University of Florida. 
Radioastronomical research is still continuing but Maipu 
is no longer active. 

As we have already mentioned, the Catholic 
University in Santiago, has its own astronomy 
department which is growing at a fast pace. At present 
the department offers courses that lead to the degree of 
Licenciado in astronomy and plans to soon extend the 
course to PhD level. At present it is possible to work on 
an astronomical subject for a degree in physics. 

A large radioastronomical project, known as the 
ATACAMA LARGE MILLIMETER ARRAY (ALMA), is under 
consideration at the present time as a Europe—US 
collaborative project, but it may tum out to become a 
truly global astronomical undertaking. Its location will be 
at Chajnantor, in the Atacama Desert in the northern part 
of the country, at some 5000 m altitude. 

In view of the extraordinary observing possibilities 
that exist for astronomers working in Chile, some 
universities, like those at Antofagasta, at Concepcion and 
at Tarapaca, have astronomers on their teaching staffs 
and may offer degrees in astronomy in the future. In 
Santiago itself there is a very small group of astronomers 
at the Isaac Newton Institute. 

At the moment there is no astronomical society 
established in Chile. The country’s expenditure in 
astronomy was estimated to be some 3.5 million US 
dollars in 1999. 

The impact of the erection of so many foreign 
observing facilities on Chilean soil with so much 
observing time at the disposal of Chilean astronomers is 
beginning to show its beneficial effects upon the 
development of Chilean astronomy and promises a very 
bright future for the field. Now, in regard to the effect 
upon astronomy in the rest of the South American 
countries, CTIO could be singled out for accepting 
observing proposals from their own astronomers, 
something that has been also true in the case of Las 
Campanas and, in a very few special cases, of La Silla. 
On the contrary, the present very large telescope projects 
reserve observing time for the members of their 
partnership and for Chile. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South American Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 2. Web pages of astronomical organizations in South America. 


Country Society Web page 
Argentina Astr. Society www.casleo. gov.ar/webAAA/indexaaa.htm 
CASLEO www.casleo.secyt.gov.ar 
La Plata www.fcaglp.unlp.edu.ar 
IAFE www.iafe.uba.ar 
IAR www.iar.unlp.edu.ar 
Cordoba Wwww.oac.uncor.edu 
San Juan Wwww.unsj.edu.ar 
Brazil Univ. Federal Rio de Janeiro acd.ufrj.br/ov 
Itapetinga www.craae.mackenzie.br 
INPE www.das.inpe. br 
Sao Paulo Wwww.lagusp.usp.br 
Astr. Society www.iagusp.usp.br/sab 
Rio Grande do Sul www.if.ufrgs.br/ast 
Laboratorio Nacional www.!|na.br 
Obs. Nacional Wwww.on.br 
Chile Catholic Univ. Santiago www.astro.puc.cl 
CTIO www.ctio.noao.edu/ctio.html 
Cerro Calan www.das.uchile.cl 
ESO-Paranal Wwww.eso.org/paranal 
ESO-La Silla www.ls.eso.org/lasilla 
Univ. Concepion phys.cfm.udec.cl 
Las Campanas www.ociw.edu/lco/ 
ESO-Santiago Www.sc.eso.org/santiago 
Colombia www.observatorio.unal.edu.co 
Uruguay www.fisica.edu.uy/astronomia 
Venezuela CIDA www.cida.ve/ 


Inst. Venezolano Inv. Cientificas 
Univ. Los Andes 


Uruguay 

Astronomy has been present in Uruguay since the end of 
the eighteenth century when observations of the transit of 
Mercury were made in Montevideo by an expedition led 
by Alejandro Malaspina. Moreover, astronomy has been 
taught, as a subject in secondary schools, since 1889. 

A small observatory equipped witth a Zeiss 20 cm 
fi\5 refractor was dedicated in 1938 and Comet 1947IV 
was discovered with it. In 1955 a Spitz Planetarium was 
opened in Montevideo, thanks to the fact that the City 
Mayor was then an amateur astronomer. 

A Chair of Astronomy was established in 1946 at the 
new Faculty of Humanities and Sciences of the 
University of Montevideo by Félix Cernuschi, a 
Cambridge PhD in Physics who had _ post-doctoral 
training in Zurich and at Harvard. Cernuschi, successful 
in setting up a Department of Astronomy in 1955, was 
very active in developing theoretical astronomy in 
Uruguay (and also in Argentina), but his efforts were 
impaired by political problems in both countries, and 
suffered an interruption during the military regime 
(1973-85). In the interval 1966-70, thanks to 
Cernuschi’s endeavors, a radiointerferometer operated in 
the outskirts of Montevideo for the study of solar 
radiobursts. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


WWww.ivic.ve 
www.ula.ve 


In 1985 the situation experienced an improvement. A 
faculty of sciences was established at the University of 
Montevideo, and within it a physics institute with an 
astronomy department. A Master’s degree in astronomy 
is offered, and the main areas of research relate to the 
solar system, in particular to comets, asteroids and planet 
formation. Since 1994 there has been a small observatory 
at Los Molinos, near Montevideo, equipped with a 35 cm 
Cassegrain telescope with a CCD camera, that is used to 
train students and to carry out small programs of 
photometry and astrometry of asteroids and comets. 

Uruguay has an Astronomy Society with about 25 
members, but not all of them are professional 
astronomers. Urugauy has a yearly astronomy budget of 
the order of 150 000 US dollars. 


Venezuela 

The history of modern Venezuelan astronomy actually 
starts in 1953, when the Director of the Cagigal Naval 
Observatory, Eduardo R6hl, with Presidential approval, 
ordered from Askania and Zeiss, in Germany, seven 
astronomical instruments—a meridian circle, a 
photozenith tube, a refracting telescope, a Schmidt 
camera, a reflecting telescope, a double astrograph, and a 
planetartum—that arrived in Venezuela in 1957. In order 
to decide what to do with the instruments, R6hl’s 
succesor, José Abdala, asked the US National Academy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South American Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of Sciences for advice. Then a committee of seven 
astronomers from the US, one from Mexico, one from 
Argentina and the Executive Secretary of the US 
Academy, who was a physicist, met in Caracas, in 1962, 
to consider the situation. As a result, Jiirgen Stock, who 
had carried out the site surveying for Cerro Tololo in 
Chile, was entrusted to find the best possible site for an 
observatory in Venezuela, and the compromise was 
found in the region of Mérida, where there was already a 
university. CONICIT, the recently — established 
Venezuelan Research Council, decided, then, in 1971, to 
set up a National Institute of Astrophysical Research and, 
in 1973, a governmental decree created the Francisco J 
Duarte Foundation Center for Research in Astronomy 
(CIDA) in Merida. The observatory is 50 km from the 
city, at an elevation of 3600 m. 

The Naval Observatory remains in Caracas with the 
meridian circle, the photozenithal telescope and the 
transit instrument. 

Astronomy is taught at the University of Los Andes, 
Merida, at the University of Zulia in Maracaibo, and at 
the Universities in Caracas. At the Central Venezuelan 
University there is an important group engaged in 
cosmology and relativity. 

The University of Los Andes has about 10 students 
that take astronomy as their subject, and perhaps one 
student graduates every year at either of the levels of 
graduation. In Caracas, maybe one student graduates in 
astronomy every three years. 


Bolivia 
Perhaps because of the altitude of the mountainous 
regions and the high temperature on the lowlands, 
professional astronomy in Bolivia has only started 
recently. The scientific or technical activities that have 
characterized Bolivia are those for which very large 
altitudes or the geographic coordinates are ideal factors, 
like those related to cosmic radiation research, for which 
Chacaltaya, at an altitude of over 5000 m, is a good 
example, or the installations at Patacamaya to track 
Russian artificial satellites. As for professional 
astronomy, the story starts in 1982 when the Bolivian 
National Academy of Sciences and the then USSR 
Academy of Sciences signed a cooperative agreement. 
As a result, the Pulkovo Observatory installed a 
Bolivian—Russian Astronomical Observatory, 15 km 
southeast of the city of Tarija, at an altitude of 2000 m, 
close to the boundary with Argentina. The 
instrumentation consisted of several telescopes, the 
largest one being a 60 cm Zeiss reflector. The work 
performed includes stellar catalogs, proper motion 
determinations, studies of supernova 1987A, polarimetry, 
etc. At present the activity continues in the same fields. 
In Bolivia there are also a few small observatories 
that belong to educational institutions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Colombia 
The National Observatory, which was transferred to the 
National University of Colombia when this educational 
institution was created, in 1867, and indeed to its Faculty 
of Sciences in 1965, was built between May 1802 and 
August 1803. The instrumentation available is old and 
present-day research is mostly based on observations 
carried out elsewhere or on celestial mechanics problems. 
There have been plans by Jorge Arias de Greiff and 
Eduardo Brieva to build a modern observatory at a 
suitable site, at a certain distance from Bogota, but the 
required financial support has not materialized and, in 
addition, the site became seriously affected by an 
earthquake. 

Small groups interested in astronomy have existed 
and exist elsewhere in Colombia, but they have tended to 
be short-lived. 


Peru 

Peru is well known in astronomical circles because 
towards the end of the nineteenth century, in Arequipa, a 
city in the southern part of the country, Harvard 
Observatory carried out the observations for the southern 
extension of the Henry Draper Catalog. The 
instrumentation was moved to South Africa in 1926 
because apparently the observing conditions had become 
poorer. 

In Lima there are a few universities interested in 
astronomy, in particular, the Universidad Nacional 
Mayor de San Marcos, which is the one that participated 
in the IAU’s Visiting Lecturers Program. There is an 
association of amateur astronomers in Lima that is active 
and has existed for nearly 40 years. 


Acknowledgments 

I am very much indebted to Claudio Anguita, Felipe 
Barrientos, Eduardo Brieva, Gloria Cassab, Alejandro 
Clocchiatti, Julio Fernandez, Sylvio Ferraz Mello, Emilio 
Lapasset, Dante Minniti, Marta Rovira, Jiirgen Stock, 
Jeanette Stock, Rodolfo Zalles Barrera and the IAU 
Secretariat for information that has permitted me to write 
the present article. 


Bibliography 

Arias de Greiff J 1993 La Astronomia en Colombia (Academia 
Colombiana de Ciencias Exactas, Fisicas y Naturales) 

Bajaja E 1985 Rev. Mex. Astron. Astr. 10 21 

Barbuy B, Braga J and Leister N (eds) 1994 A Astronomia no 
Brasil: Depoimentos (Sociedade Astronémica Brasileira) 

Bruzual A G and Magris C G 1996 Revista Academia Mérida 
no 4 

Chaudet E 1926 La Evolucion de la Astronomia (1872-1922) 
(Sociedad Cientifica Argentina) 

Keenan P C, Pinto S and Alvarez H 1985 The Chilean National 
Observatory (1852-1965) Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y 
Naturales, Universidad de Chile (bilingual) 

Sérsic J L 1971 Sky Telescope 42 347 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


South American Astronomy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stock J 1981 Astronomia en Venezuela Rev. Mexicana Astron. 
Astrof. 6 13 


Jorge Sahade 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 


Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 7 


South Pole—Aitken Basin (SPA Basin) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


South Pole—Aitken Basin (SPA Basin) 


The largest and deepest multiringed impact structure on 
the Moon. It lies almost entirely on the Moon’s farside, 
and extends for over 2500 km from the south polar region 
to the 135 km diameter crater Aitken, at 16.8 °S, 173.4°E. 
The impact that produced the basin is estimated to have 
occurred around 4.1 billion years ago, near the beginning 
of the solar system’s great cratering episode known as late 
heavy bombardment. At its deepest point the SPA Basin 
is nearly 13 km below the Moon’s mean surface level. 
It was first revealed by the Lunar Orbiter photographic 
reconnaissance of the mid-1960s, but its full extent was not 
appreciated until the Moon was revisited by spacecraft in 
the 1990s. Galileo photographed it in 1992 and showed it 
to have a darker coloration than its surroundings. Its size 
was established by the Clementine orbiter in 1994, which 
also found that the basin’s floor is rich in titanium and 
iron oxides. It has been suggested that this compositional 
anomaly indicates that the impact reached a depth of 
120 km, penetrating the crustal rocks completely and 
excavating metal-rich material from the mantle. 


See also: Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sporer, Gustav F W (1822-95) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sporer, Gustav F W (1822-95) 


German astronomer, investigated sunspots. Discovered 
the progressive drift in average latitude of sunspots 
towards the solar equator over a solar cycle (Sporer’s law) 
and the scarcity of sunspots between 1645 and 1715 (the 
MAUNDER minimum). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Space and Time References: Concepts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space and Time References: 
Concepts 


Space and time are generally considered as separate 
unrelated concepts. This is deeply rooted in our common 
sense and is basically postulated in Newtonian mechanics 
in which they play completely separated roles. The 
Theory of Relativity introduced a deep linkage between 
these concepts and one has to modify one’s way of 
thinking whenever it is not possible to ignore this theory, 
particularly in its general form. But for many cases in 
astrometry, it is legitimate to keep them separated. 

In order to specify quantitatively the position of a 
celestial body in astronomy, one uses a system of spherical 
coordinates. The direction is defined by two angles: 
for instance right ascension along the celestial equator 
and declination along the celestial meridian. A third 
parameter, the distance, is added whenever appropriate, 
whether it is measured directly by the duration of transit 
of an electromagnetic wave or measuring the parallaxes 
of stars (the parallactic effect is the apparent angular 
displacement of the direction of a star when the Earth 
circles the Sun; see PARALLAXES). Within the solar system, 
rectangular (Cartesian) coordinates are used for dynamical 
studies, but astrometric work is done always in spherical 
coordinates. Similarly, on the Earth, one uses longitudes, 
latitudes and heights, or three rectangular geocentric 
coordinates. 

The triad that defines the coordinate system cannot 
be materialized. It is a virtual ensemble called a reference 
system, whether celestial or terrestrial. Among all possible 
systems, one chooses a conventional reference system. Then 
its realization consists in providing an operational method 
to obtain the coordinates of a point on the sky or on the 
Earth. In practice, the system is realized by providing the 
coordinates in the reference system of a certain number of 
objects, together with the variations of their positions with 
time. Such an ensemble, which can either be a catalog or 
ephemerides of objects, is called a reference frame. It may 
be supplemented by secondary catalogs with many more 
objects linked to the reference frame. 


Celestial reference systems 

In a celestial reference system, the coordinates of objects 
without detectable proper motions (because they are very 
far) must remain fixed. This is the condition that is used 
to define a kinematic celestial reference frame. This is the 
case of the present system chosen in 1995 and called the 
International Celestial Reference System (ICRS) defined at the 
barycenter of the solar system. Its definition states that, 
in the mean, an ensemble of remote extragalactic radio 
sources does not present any residual rotation. It became 
in 1998 the official celestial reference system for all uses in 
astronomy and celestial mechanics. 

In this latter case, applications to the motions in the 
solar system require the addition of the third component 
so as to have access to the three-dimensional space. With 
the present level of our knowledge of the motions in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


solar system, this has to be done in the framework of the 
theory of General Relativity. The level at which this has 
to be applied was specified in 1991 by the International 
Astronomical Union. The status is that the four space-time 
coordinates (x° = ct, x!, x*, x) must be selected in such a 
way that in a coordinate system centered at the barycenter 
of the solar system, the squared interval ds? is expressed 
in the form: 


ds* = —c*drt? = —(1 — 2U/c*)(dx°)? + (1 + 2U/c’) 
x [(dx!)? + (dx)? + (dx3)7] 


where c is the velocity of light, t the proper time, and U 
is the sum of the gravitational potentials of the ensemble 
of masses, and of a tidal potential generated by bodies 
external to this ensemble, the latter potential vanishing at 
the barycenter. In the coordinate x°, t is the coordinate 
time. The system of coordinates so defined is such that 
the proper local triad (x, y, z) at the barycenter of the solar 
system coincides with the triad of the ICRS. Similarly, one 
can define a geocentric reference coordinate system used 
to describe the motion of artificial satellites. 

Another way to force a celestial system to be fixed is 
based on the fact that if the motion of planets is referred 
to a rotating or accelerating system of coordinates, the 
bodies are accelerated. This is detectable and hence can 
be suppressed by choosing an adequate reference. This 
dynamical definition of celestial reference systems requires 
a Newtonian space. It was used until recently in the 
absence of observations allowing a kinematic definition, 
but its definition in the framework of General Relativity is 
not well understood, and in any case cannot be extended 
to the Galaxy and even less so to the universe. 


Celestial reference frames 

The realization of the ICRS was made using observations 
of positions of extragalactic radio-sources by VLBI (see 
EXTRAGALACTIC REFERENCE FRAMES). About one-third (the best 
observed) of the 608 sources in the catalog constitutes the 
International Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF). These objects 
are not observable optically with a sufficient accuracy 
to serve as fiducial points in optical astrometry. So a 
secondary star catalog, the Hipparcos Catalogue, was 
linked to the ICRF (see HIPPARCOS AND TYCHO CATALOGUES) and 
is the realization of the ICRS in optical wavelengths. In 
the case of a dynamical definition of the celestial reference 
frame, the observed positions of planets are the moving 
fiducial points to which a fundamental catalog of star 
positions and proper motions is referred (see DYNAMICAL 
REFERENCE FRAMES). 


Terrestrial reference system and frame 

The concept of a terrestrial reference system is analogous 
to its celestial counterpart. It is represented by a set of 
fiducial points on the surface of the Earth. The system 
is so defined that, despite the motions of the tectonic 
plates on which the points are located, their ensemble has 
no global residual rotation. This is how the International 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space and Time References: Concepts 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Terrestrial Reference System (ITRS) is defined. It is realized 
by a set of positions and motions of geodesic stations 
(See TERRESTRIAL COORDINATE SYSTEMS AND FRAMES), Called the 
International Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF). 


Time scales 

To be complete, a reference system of coordinates must 
include the time dimension. The equivalent of a 
coordinate for time is a time scale. Historically, a time 
scale was conceived as the independent variable of the 
dynamics in the solar system. At present, the basis of time 
is derived from the fact that the frequency of an atomic 
transition in given conditions is a constant. A time scale 
is obtained by integrating basic periods produced by an 
atomic frequency standard (see TIME SCALES: ATOMIC). It is a 
(local) proper time in the theory of General Relativity. 

To extend the scale outside the laboratory, one has 
to apply the relativistic ds? and to define precisely the 
coordinate system by the metric form to which it belongs. 
The time scale that results is called a coordinate time. This 
is the case of the Terrestrial Time (TT), obtained by the 
addition of seconds of the International System of Units 
on the geoid (see TIME SCALES: TERRESTRIAL). The Geocentric 
Coordinate Time (TCG) is attached to the geocentric 
coordinate reference system and differs from TT by a 
constant rate. It is used for the dynamical studies and 
monitoring of artificial Earth satellites. The Barycentric 
Coordinate Time (TCB), which is to be used in studying 
the motions in the solar system, differs from TT not only 
by a constant rate, but also by some periodic terms. 


Bibliography 

Arias E F, Charlot P, Feissel M and Lestrade J-F 1995 The 
extragalactic reference system of the International 
Earth Rotation Service (IERS) Astron. Astrophys. 303 
604-8 

Bergeron J (ed) 1992 Resolution A4: Recommendation 
from the Working Group on Reference Systems Proc. 
21st General Assembly of the [AU XXI B 41-63 

Kovalevsky J, Mueller I I and Kolaczek B 1989 Reference 
Frames in Astronomy and Geophysiscs (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

Ma C, Arias E F, Eubanks T M et al 1998 The international 
celestial reference frame as realized by the very long 
baseline interferometry Astron. J. 116 516-46 


Jean Kovalevsky 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Geodesy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Geodesy 


Geodesy is the science studying the size and the figure 
of the Earth including the determination of the Earth’s 
gravitational field. Geodetic astronomy is that part of 
astronomy dealing with the definition and realization of 
a terrestrial and a celestial reference frame (see TERRESTRIAL 
COORDINATESYSTEMS AND FRAMES). By space geodesy we mean, 
then, those aspects of geodesy and geodetic astronomy 
studied by using natural or artificial celestial bodies as 
observed objects or as observing platforms. In the older 
literature the term cosmic geodesy is sometimes used 
as a synonym. Space geodesy is thus defined through 
the observation techniques, below referred to as space 
geodetic techniques or methods. 

Space geodesy evolved rapidly in the second half 
of the twentieth century. The space age was initiated 
by the launch of the first artificial satellite, Sputnik I, on 
4 October of the International Geophysical Year 1957. In 
the space age it became possible to deploy and use artificial 
satellites either to study the size and figure of the Earth 
from space or to observe them as targets from the surface of 
the Earth. The use of artificial Earth satellites for geodetic 
purposes is also referred to as satellite geodesy. The second 
essential development consists of the technique of very 
long baseline interferometry (VLBI) as a new tool to realize 
an extraordinarily accurate and stable inertial reference 
system and to monitor Earth rotation using quasars (see 
EXTRAGALACTIC REFERENCE FRAMES). 

Today, space geodetic techniques are the primary 
tools to study size, figure and deformation of the Earth, 
and its motion as a finite body in the inertial reference 
system (See SPACE AND TIME REFERENCES: CONCEPTS). Space 
geodetic techniques are thus the fundamental tools for 
geodesy, geodetic astronomy and geodynamics. 

Space geodetic observations contain information 
about the relative positions and/or motions of the 
observed object and the observer. Let GO(t;) be the 
position of the observer at some time ¢, in the terrestrial 
reference frame and G'S(¢,), the position of the satellite in 
an inertial reference frame. An observation O(t,;) made 
at that time and corrected for various perturbing effects 
described below, can be expressed mathematically as 


O(t,) = F(GO(t), GG@O(t)/dt, GS(t,), G@S(t,)/dt) 


or usually only of some of the components of these vectors. 
For instance: 


@ several observations of a satellite in a known position 
at the same time from several observatories provide 
equations linking the positions of these observatories; 


@ several observations of the same satellite performed 
at the same observatory provide equations containing 
information on the trajectory of the satellite, and 
consequently also on the forces acting on it; 


@ observations of several satellites of known positions by 
a single station provide the geocentric position of the 
observer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In scientific space geodesy, several ‘geodetic’ satellites 
are observed many times from many stations. The set 
of equations so obtained is solved for the satellite orbits 
(Tapley 1989), the gravitational field of the Earth (Reigber 
1989), the relative positions of the observing stations or 
any of these quantities if others are known. Because 
the positions of the stations and of the satellites are in 
different reference frames, space geodetic observations 
also contain information concerning the transformation 
between the terrestrial and the inertial systems. The Earth 
orientation parameters, i.e. polar motion, UT1, precession 
and nutation (see EARTH'S ROTATION: THEORY, POLAR MOTION AND 
LENGTH OF Day) define this transformation. 


The role of the Earth’s atmosphere 

In space geodesy the signals of the observed or observing 
celestial bodies have to cross the Earth’s atmosphere. This 
changes the paths and the travel times of the signals. 
These are referred to as refraction effects. Refraction is 
usually considered a nuisance in astronomy, geodesy and 
geodynamics—as a matter of fact it is the motivation 
for many spaceborne experiments related to this field 
of science. In recent years refraction effects have been 
considered and understood as a primary source of 
information for atmospheric science and are monitored 
through space geodesy methods. Let us point out that 
the same signals and space geodetic analysis methods 
are used to study the Earth’s atmosphere as for geodetic 
and geodynamic purposes. Interdisciplinary studies and 
projects have become important aspects of modern space 
geodesy. 

Whether the atmosphere-related signal is useful 
depends on the wavelengths of the analysed signals. If 
we measure, for example, distances or distance differences 
to satellites using optical signals, refraction effects may 
be computed with subcentimeter accuracy using pressure, 
temperature and humidity registrations at the observing 
sites. We may therefore conclude that laser ranging is 
not capable of contributing to atmosphere monitoring. 
This fact may also be formulated in a positive way: 
laser observations are well suited for calibrating other 
techniques, which are more prone to atmospheric effects. 

For microwave techniques (Doppler, GPS, VLBI) 
we have to distinguish between ionospheric refraction 
stemming from the ionized upper part of the atmosphere 
(extending up to about 1500 km) and _ tropospheric 
refraction, stemming from the lower, neutral layers of 
the atmosphere. Jonospheric refraction is wavelength- 
dependent and may be (almost completely) eliminated 
if coherent signals are sent through the atmosphere on 
different carrier wavelengths. In the VLBI technique 
this is achieved by observing the quasars in different 
wavelengths, in the Doppler or GPS technique the same 
is achieved by using two different wavelengths for signal 
transmission. 

For microwave techniques tropospheric refraction is 
the ultimate accuracy-limiting component in the error 
budget. As opposed to range observations in the optical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Geodesy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


band, we have to take into account the so-called ‘wet 
component’ of tropospheric refraction, which is highly 
variable in time and space. This fact forces analysts 
using microwave observations to introduce station- and 
time-specific parameters (or to model the effect as a 
random process). It allows, on the other hand, analysts to 
determine the water vapor content above an observatory 
with high accuracy and high temporal resolution (Bevis et 
al 1992). 


Optical period 

For centuries, optical (astrometric) observations were the 
only type of observation available in astronomy. In the 
pre-space era a series of astrometric instruments was 
used for the purpose of defining a terrestrial reference 
frame and for monitoring the rotation of the Earth. The 
photographic zenith tube and the Danjon astrolabe were 
probably the most advanced of these instruments. They 
were widely used by observatories contributing to the 
International Polar Motion Service (IPMS) and the Bureau 
International de l’Heure (BIH) to determine the geographic 
latitude of a station with a precision of about 10-40 mas 
(milliarcseconds) in one night. We refer to Moritz and 
Mueller (1988) for more information. 

Optical observations were made by the first gener- 
ation of artificial Earth satellites, like Sputnik 2 and Ex- 
plorer 1. The balloon satellites Echo 1 and 2 and PAGEOS 
(passive geodetic satellite), which could be seen by the 
naked eye, were observed by a worldwide optical track- 
ing network. These satellites were (supposedly) spheri- 
cal, and consisted of layers of aluminized mylar foil, and, 
thanks to their brightness, their tracks could easily be pho- 
tographed against the star background. It was not trivial to 
assign time-tags to specific points of the track. Much more 
suitable from this point of view, although more difficult to 
track, were smaller satellites like Geos 1 (Explorer 29) and 
Geos 2 (Explorer 36) equipped with flash lamps allowing 
for tens of thousands of high-precision optical observa- 
tions. Obviously, quasi-simultaneity of observations from 
different sites was possible. 

Fascinating results came out of this first phase of 
satellite geodesy. The geodetic datums on different 
continents could be related to the geocenter and thus to 
each other with an accuracy of about 5 m. The first reliable 
coefficients of the gravity field (spherical expansion up to 
degree and order 12-15) could be also derived. 

The astrometric technique, when applied to artificial 
satellites in the 1960s and 1970s, had serious disadvan- 
tages. The star catalogs were not of sufficiently good qual- 
ity and the processing time (time between observation and 
availability of results) was of the order of a few weeks in 
the best case. This, and the advent of new observation 
techniques promising higher accuracy, actually ruled out 
astrometric techniques for a number of important applica- 
tions. The optical technique no longer played a significant 
role in space geodesy after about 1975. 

In view of newly developed observation techniques 
(CCD (CHARGE COUPLED DEVICE) techniques) and much better 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


star catalogs based on astrometry missions (e.g. the 
HIPPARCOS mission) it may well be that optical observations 
will again play a role in space geodesy in the future. 


Doppler period 

The US Navy Navigation Satellite System (NNSS), 
also called the Transit system after the survey transit 
instrument, had a significant impact on the development 
of space geodesy. It proved that a system based on the 
measurement of the Doppler shift of a signal generated 
by a stable oscillator on board a satellite could be used 
for relative positioning with remarkably high accuracies 
(0.1-0.5 m relative, about 1 m geocentric). The satellites 
sent information on two carrier frequencies (400 MHz and 
150 MHz) near the microwave band. 

The two frequencies allowed for a compensation of 
ionospheric refraction. Rather small receivers connected 
to omnidirectional antennas made the technique well 
suited to establish regional or even global geodetic 
networks. Observation periods of a few days were 
required to obtain the above mentioned accuracy. 

The NNSS satellites were in polar, almost circular, 
orbits about 1100 km above the Earth’s surface. Only one 
satellite at a time could be observed by one receiver. As 
opposed to astrometry the Doppler technique is weather 
independent. Until a significant part of the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) was deployed (around 1990) the 
NNSS played a significant role in space geodesy. Many 
Doppler campaigns were organized to establish local, 
regional or global networks. With the full deployment of 
the GPS in the 1990s the geodetic community eventually 
lost interest in the Doppler system. The Transit system was 
shut down as a positioning system in December 1996 but 
continued operating as an ionospheric monitoring tool. 
For more information concerning the Doppler system we 
refer to Kouba (1983). 


Satellite and lunar laser ranging (SLR and LLR) 
‘Laser’ stands for light amplification through stimulated 
emission of radiation. The laser technique, developed in 
the 1950s, is able to generate highly energetic short light 
pulses (of a few tens of picoseconds (ps) (1 ps = 10" s)). 
These pulses are sent out by a conventional astronomical 
telescope, travel to the satellite (or the Moon), are reflected 
by special corner cubes (comparable to the rear reflectors 
of bicycles) on the satellite (Moon) back to the telescope, 
where they are detected. The measurement is the travel 
time At of the laser pulse from the telescope to the satellite 
and back to the telescope. Apart from refraction this light 
travel time, after multiplication by the speed of light c in 
a vacuum, equals twice the distance p* between satellite 
and telescope at the time the light pulse is reflected from 
the satellite p: ~ At x c/2. Today’s satellite laser ranging 
(SLR) technique is used to determine the ‘true’ distances 
between observatories and satellites with an accuracy of 
a few millimeters and, if required, with a high repetition 
rate (several times per second). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Geodesy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. The Lageos II spacecraft. 


SLR techniques may be used for every satellite 
equipped with corner cubes. Figure 1 shows Lageos II, 
a typical SLR-dedicated satellite which was launched in 
1992. Lageos II is a spherical satellite with a diameter of 
0.6 m and a weight of 405 kg. 426 corner cubes are inlaid 
in its surface. Lageos II is a close relative of Lageos I, 
which was launched in 1976. The two Lageos satellites are 
in stable, almost circular orbits about 6000 km above the 
surface of the Earth. 

The two Lageos satellites are the primary scientific 
tracking targets for the International Laser Ranging 
Service (ILRS). The two satellites have contributed in a 
significant way to the determination of the Earth’s gravity 
field. Many more targets are regularly observed by the 
ILRS. Some, like the French low-orbiting satellite Starlette, 
witha diameter of 24cm, are similar in design to the Lageos 
satellites and serve a similar purpose. For others SLR 
is just the primary or backup technique for precise orbit 
determination. 

With the exception of UT1, the SLR technique 
is capable of determining all parameters of geodetic 
interest (station coordinates and motion, Earth rotation 
parameters, gravity field). The unique and most valuable 
contributions lie in the determination of the Earth’s 
(variable) gravity field, in the determination of the 
geocenter (i.e. the location of the polyhedron formed by 
connecting the SLR stations with respect to the geocenter), 
and in calibrating geodetic microwave techniques. 

From the technical point of view there is no major 
difference between SLR and LLR (lunar laser ranging): 
light travel times are measured from the observatory to one 
of the laser reflectors deployed on the Moon by the Apollo 
space missions or the Russian unmanned Lunokhod 
missions. The scientific impact of LLR is significant. LLR 
was capable of measuring directly the secular increase of 
the Earth-Moon distance (3.8 cm per year), an effect which 
is in turn coupled with the deceleration of the angular 
velocity of Earth’s rotation. Also, LLR is well suited to the 
evaluation of gravitational theories (See REFERENCE FRAMES 
AND TIMESCALES IN GENERAL RELATIVITY). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Very long baseline interferometry 

Very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) is the only 
non-satellite geodetic technique contributing data to the 
International Earth Rotation Service (IERS). Its main 
features are discussed in the article on EXTRAGALACTIC 
REFERENCE FRAMES. 

Its unique and fundamental contribution to geodesy 
and astronomy consists of the realization of the inertial 
reference system and in the maintenance of the long-term 
stability of the transformation between the celestial and 
terrestrial reference frame. 

The ICRS (International Celestial Reference System) 
was defined by the International Earth Rotation Service 
(Arias et al 1995). It was adopted by the International 
Astronomical Union (IAU) as the primary celestial 
reference system replacing the optical predecessors. 

An accurate and stable celestial reference frame is a 
prerequisite for a terrestrial reference system. In this sense 
VLBI plays a decisive role in the definition of the terrestrial 
reference system, and in establishing the transformation 
between the two systems. In particular, VLBI is the 
only technique providing the difference UT1 — UTC, ie. 
the difference between Earth rotation time and atomic 
time with state-of-the-art accuracy and excellent long- 
term stability. Also, VLBI is the only technique capable 
of determining precession and nutation with an angular 
resolution below the milliarcsecond level. 

The observation and analysis aspects are today 
coordinated by the IVS, the International VLBI Service (see 
table 1). 


The global positioning system (GPS) 

GPS is probably the best known space geodesy technique 
today. The system has an impact on science and 
society reaching far beyond space geodesy. GPS 
has revolutionized surveying, timing, car and aircraft 
navigation. Millions of hand-held receivers are in use 
today. Spaceborne applications of the GPS have a deep 
impact on geodesy and atmospheric sciences. 

GPS is a navigation system allowing for instanta- 
neous, real-time, ‘absolute’ positioning on or near the sur- 
face of the Earth with an accuracy of a few meters. An 
unlimited number of users may use the system simulta- 
neously. ‘Absolute’ means that the estimated coordinates 
may be established using only one receiver and that they 
refer to a geocentric Earth-fixed coordinate system. This 
coordinate system, the WGS-84 (World Geodetic System), 
is today aligned with sub-meter accuracy to the ITRF, the 
International Terrestrial Reference Frame maintained by 
the IERS. 

The space segment of GPS nominally consists of 24 
satellites (21 operational satellites plus three active spares). 
The satellites are in almost circular orbits distributed in six 
planes approximately 20 000 km above the Earth’s surface. 
These planes are separated by 60° on the equator and 
inclined by 55° with respect to the equator. The revolution 
period is half a sidereal day (11h 58m), which means that 
for a given location on the Earth’s surface the satellite 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Geodesy 


Table 1. Space geodetic services. 


Internet 


Acronym /Name Mission address 


CSTG/Commission on International Coordi- 
nation of Space Techniques 
IERS/International Earth Rotation Service 


Coordinate space geodetic organizations, organize 
projects 

Establish and maintain celestial and terrestrial refer- 
ence frame, generate combined Earth orientation pa- 
rameter series 

Make available GPS data from its global network, 
producing and disseminating high-accuracy GPS 
orbits, Earth rotation parameters, station coordinates, 
atmospheric information, etc 

Collect, archive and distribute SLR and LLR datasets. 
Generate scientific and operational products 

Operate or support VLBI programs. Organize geodetic, 
astrometric, geophysical research and operational 


http:/ /hpiers.obspm. fr 


IGS/International GPS Service http:/ /igscb.jpl.nasa.gov 


ILRS/International Laser Ranging Service http: / /ilrs.gsfc.nasa.gov 


IVS/International VLBI Service for Geodesy 
and Astrometry 


http: / /ivscc.gsfc.nasa.gov 


activities 


Figure 2. Block II satellite. 


constellation above horizon repeats itself after one sidereal 
day (solar day minus four minutes). Figure 2 shows the 
Block II satellite. This is the satellite with which the 
first full GPS generation was built. We distinguish the 
main body of the satellite with the antenna array pointing 
to the center of the Earth and the solar panels. The 
attitude is maintained by momentum wheels, which have 
to guarantee that the antenna array is always pointing to 
the center of the Earth and that the solar panel axes are 
perpendicular to the Sun-satellite direction. The satellite 
is capable of rotating the solar panels into a position 
perpendicular to this direction. 

Each satellite broadcasts on two carrier frequencies 
L1 and L2 of 1.575 42 GHz and 1.227 60 GHz respectively, 
corresponding to wavelengths of A; ~ 19 cm and Az ~ 
24 cm. Two types of codes are sent out, allowing users 
to reconstruct the so-called pseudorange p* (definition in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


equation (1)). 

The pseudorange p* and the geometric distance 
between the satellite at signal emission time and the 
receiver at signal reception time are related through 


Di = pi +c(At, — At) + Apatm (1) 


where Af* is the error of the satellite clock with respect 
to the ‘true’ (or system) time, Az, is the receiver clock 
error. Apatm is the correction of the light travel time due 
to the atmosphere (sum of ionospheric and tropospheric 
refractions). 

In addition, and among other important information, 
broadcast orbits allowing computation of the satellite 
position at emission time and satellite clock corrections 
mitigating the satellite synchronization error Af* w.r.t. the 
‘true’ or system time are sent out continuously using the 
phase modulation technique on L1 and L2. 

Two kinds of code have to be distinguished, the 
so-called C/A code (coarse acquisition code) allowing 
an accuracy of about 3 m, and the P code (precision 
code) allowing an accuracy of about 0.3 m. Modern 
digital receivers show a much better performance. The 
P code is currently only available to privileged (i.e. US 
Department of Defense authorized) users. The C/A code 
is transmitted on L1, an encrypted version of the P code 
on both carriers. The broadcast orbits usually have an 
accuracy of about 3 m. Prior to 1 May 2000 the satellite 
clock information was made available to non-authorized 
users only with moderate accuracy, limiting the real-time 
‘absolute’ positioning accuracy to about 100 m. On 1 May 
2000 the Press Secretary of the White House issued the 
‘Statement by the President regarding the United States’ 
decision to stop degrading Global Positioning Accuracy’. 
In consequence, since 2 May, 4:00 h UT (Universal Time), 
the satellite clock information has been made available 
to all GPS users without restrictions. This implies in 
particular that real-time ‘absolute’ positioning using dual- 
band receivers is now accurate to usually better than 
about 5 m (rms error) in all three coordinates. ‘Absolute’ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Geodesy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


positioning with L1 receivers (based on the C/A code) is 
limited by ionospheric refraction but still is usually better 
than 10 m in all coordinates. 

Let us briefly address the principles of absolute 
GPS positioning and navigation: a GPS receiver is 
simultaneously observing several satellites (ideally all that 
are above the horizon). Using broadcast orbits to compute 
the satellite positions in the Earth-fixed system, standard 
atmospheric models to account for refraction, and the 
broadcast clock information to adjust the satellite clocks 
to system time, we are left with only four unknowns in 
equation (1), namely the three coordinates of the receiver 
position and the receiver clock error At,—provided we 
consider only simultaneous observations. It is thus 
necessary and sufficient that a receiver tracks four satellites 
simultaneously in order to compute an instantaneous 
position (and a receiver clock error) with an accuracy of 
a few meters or about 100 m for users having no access to 
P code respectively. The GPS constellation was designed, 
as a matter of fact, to ensure that (to the extent possible) 
four or more satellites are available all the time at each 
location on the surface of the Earth. 

For scientific purposes phase observation plays a 
decisive role. It is in essence identical to the so-called 
accumulated Doppler observation of the NNSS and it 
is closely related to the GPS code observation as well. 
From the mathematical point of view, there are ‘only’ two 
essential differences between phase and code, namely the 
much higher measurement accuracy of phase (millimeters 
rather than meters), and an additional unknown, the initial 
phase ambiguity parameter N°, per satellite pass. All GPS 
receivers used for high-accuracy geodetic applications 
record the phase observations on both carriers L1 and L2, 
in addition to the code. 

The phase observations yield local GPS networks 
with millimeter accuracy, regional and global networks 
with about centimeter accuracy. This is only possible 
if precise satellite orbit and clock information, such as 
that generated by the International GPS Service (IGS), is 
available. Figure 3 shows the IGS network as of October 
1998. 

Over 200 IGS sites, distributed all over the globe, 
permanently observe all satellites in view, transmit their 
observations (at least) on a daily basis to IGS data centers. 

The data are then analysed by IGS analysis centers, 
which deliver rapid and final products. Rapid IGS 
products are available with a delay of about one day, final 
products with a delay of about eleven days. Daily products 
include satellite orbits with an accuracy of about 0.05- 
0.1 m, satellite clocks with an accuracy of about 0.3 ns, 
daily values of polar motion components accurate to about 
0.1 mas (milliarcseconds), corresponding to 3 mm on the 
Earth’s surface, and length of day (lod) estimates with an 
accuracy of about 30 ws d~!. These products are essential 
contributions to the monitoring of the EARTH'S ROTATION. 

In addition the IGS analysis centers perform weekly 
global coordinate solutions of their portion of the IGS 
network. These results are used, together with the results 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the other space techniques, for the establishment of the 
International Terrestrial Reference Frame. 

The IGS products (orbits, Earth rotation parameters, 
coordinates and velocities of IGS stations) are used 
as known 4 priori information to establish regional 
networks for crustal deformation studies (e.g. the 
Californian SCIGN (http://www.scign.org), the Japanese 
1000-receiver network for Earthquake monitoring) or for 
regional reference frame establishment and maintenance 
(e.g. the EUREF network http://www.oma.be:/KSB- 
ORB/EUREF/eurefhome.html, or the South American 
SIRGAS network http://www.dgfi-badw-muenchen.de/ 
gps/sirgas.html). 

More and more, the IGS network is used for purposes 
other than space geodesy. Let us mention that the 
IGS network has been enhanced to include time and 
frequency transfer and that it is able to monitor the 
ionosphere. For more information concerning the IGS and 
its interdisciplinary impact we refer to Beutler et al (1999). 

From the point of view of space geodesy, GPS 
is a ‘work horse’ with important contributions to the 
establishment and maintenance of a dense terrestrial 
reference frame, and which provides Earth rotation 
parameters with a high time resolution. It should not 
be forgotten, that the GPS—like every satellite geodetic 
method—is not able to maintain a long-term stability of 
UTI or of precession and nutation. Moreover, despite the 
fact that GPS is a satellite geodetic technique, it is not well 
suited to determine the Earth’s gravity field or the motion 
of its station polyhedron w.r.t. the geocenter. The height 
of the GPS satellites is one of the limiting factors. 

For more information concerning GPS as a tool for 
geodesy and geodynamics we refer to Teunissen and 
Kleusberg (1998). 


Other satellite microwave techniques 

The Russian GLONASS (Global Navigation Satellite 
System) is so closely related to the GPS that there are 
a number of combined GPS and GLONASS receivers 
available. These receivers were used in the first global 
GLONASS tracking and analysis campaign, the IGEX- 
98 (International GLONASS Experiment 1998). The 
experiment revealed that a combined analysis of GPS and 
GLONASS is very promising for science and navigation. 

The French DORIS system (Doppler Orbitography by 
Radiopositioning Integrated on Satellite) has proved to be 
avery powerful tool for orbit determination. Itis one of the 
orbit determination system used in the TOPEX/Poseidon 
mission (see below). Also, DORIS possesses a very well 
designed ground tracking network. This is one reason 
why DORIS was accepted as an official space technique 
by the IERS (see table 1). 

The German PRARE (Precise Range and Range- 
rate Equipment) system may be viewed as the German 
counterpart of the DORIS system. It is used as an orbit 
determination tool on the European Space Agency’s ERS- 
2 (Earth Remote Sensing) spacecraft. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Geodesy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ur 


‘p28 
ek 
ANG ai 


algae enti g 


gode eystia 
usno¥ solt 


U2 os ia; & 
ai 7 > 
é usu 
“y$ not es xiang mel 


gisv I) 


*o 


gala) * boot 


oe wuhn® ff shao 
kunm® tai 


October 1998 


Figure 3. The international GPS service network. 


Satellite missions 

There have been many satellite missions in the past and 
there will be more in the future in which the satellite is 
used as an observing platform to study aspects of the Earth 
relevant to geodesy and geodynamics. Let us mention 
in particular that altimetry missions have significantly 
improved our knowledge of the sea surface topography, 
ocean currents, tidal motions of the oceans, etc. 

Figure 4 shows the TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft. The 
mission is acombined US and French altimetry mission. It 
is actually the first mission which was specially designed 
to investigate ocean currents. One entire volume of the 
Journal of Geophysical Research was devoted to this mission 
(JGR, 1994). For space geodesy the TOPEX/Poseidon 
mission was a kind of ‘Rosetta stone mission’ because its 
orbit was determined using three independent systems, 
the French DORIS system, SLR tracking and the GPS. 
All three systems proved their capability. The radial 
component of the orbit (which is of crucial importance 
for altimetry missions) could be established with an 
accuracy of a few centimeters. Let us mention that 
TOPEX/Poseidon was neither the first nor will it be the 
last altimetry mission. 

For geodesy, geodynamics and atmospheric physics 
the upcoming missions CHAMP (Challenging Mini- 
Satellite Payload for Geophysical Research and Applica- 
tion, German mission), GRACE (Gravity Recovery and 
Climate Experiment, US/German mission) and GOCE 
(Gravity field and Ocean Current Explorer, ESA mission) 
are fascinating. It is expected that our knowledge of the 
gravity field (using spaceborne GPS receivers, accelerom- 
eters or gradiometers) to measure the non-gravitational 
forces with respect to gravity gradients will significantly 
increase through such missions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


+2 (YAW) 


Figure 4. The TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft. 


Also, CHAMP, GRACE and GOCE are able to produce 
atmosphere profiles using the occultation method: the 
signal (phase and code) of a GPS satellite is monitored 
by a spaceborne GPS receiver on a low-Earth orbiter 
(LEO) during the time period in which the line of sight 
LEO-GPS satellite scans through the Earth’s atmosphere. 
These developments support our initial statement that 
interdisciplinary aspects are becoming more and more 
important in space geodesy. 


Organizations 
Table 1 gives an overview of the institutions relevant for 
space geodesy. 

They are all IAG (International Association of 
Geodesy) services. The IERS and the IVS are in addition 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Geodesy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


IAU services (International Astronomical Union). The 
IERS and the IGS are members of FAGS (Federation of 
Astronomical and Geodesical Data Analysis Services). 

IGS, ILRS and IVS are technique-specific services. 
The IERS is a multitechnique service. It was established 
in 1988 as successor to the International Polar Motion 
Service (IPMS) and the Earth rotation branch of the Bureau 
International de l’Heure (BIH). The IERS products are 
based on the products of the technique-specific services. 

CSTG is a commission of IAG and a subcommission 
of COSPAR (Commission on Space Research). It has a 
coordinating function within space geodesy. During 1995-— 
9 it was, for example, responsible for creating the ILRS 
and the IVS, and it organized the first global GLONASS 
experiment IGEX-98. 

More information about these services may be found 
at the internet addresses in table 1. 


Bibliography 

Arias E F, Charlot P, Feissel M and Lestrade J-F 1995 
The extragalctic reference system of the International 
Earth Rotation Service, ICRS Astron. Astrophys. 119 
604-8 

Beutler G, Rothacher M, Schaer S, Springer T A, Kouba J 
and Neilan R E 1999 The International GPS Service 
(IGS): an interdisciplinary service in support of Earth 
sciences Adv. Space Res. 23 631-53 

Bevis M, Businger S, Herring T A, Rocken C, Anthes R A 
and Ware R H 1992 GPS meteorology: remote 
sensing of atmospheric water vapor using the Global 
Positioning System J. Geophys. Res. 97 75-94 

JGR 1994 J. Geophys. Res. 99 

Kouba J 1983 A review of geodetic and geodynamic 
satellite Doppler positioning Rev. Geophys. Space Phys. 
21 27-40 

Moritz H and Mueller I I 1988 Earth Rotation, Theory and 
Observation (New York: Ungar) 

Reigber C 1989 Theory of Satellite Geodesy and Gravity Field 
Determination ed F SansO and R Rummel (Berlin: 
Springer) pp 197-234 

Seeber G 1993 Satellite Geodesy (Berlin: de Gruyter) 

Tapley B D 1989 Theory of Satellite Geodesy and Gravity 
Field Determination ed F Sansod and R Rummel (Berlin: 
Springer) pp 235-60 

Teunissen P J G and Kleusberg A (ed) 1998 GPS for Geodesy 
2nd edn (Berlin: Springer) 


G Beutler 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Infrared Telescope Facility 
(SIRTF) 


Fourth of NASA’s ‘Great Observatories’, due for launch in 
2001-2. Planned as a 1 metre, cryogenically cooled space 
telescope for infrared astronomy. Can be serviced by the 
Shuttle or at a manned space station. Instruments will 
provide high sensitivity and spatial resolution. Designed 
to study circumstellar dust clouds, brown dwarfs, infrared 
galaxies and quasars. Instruments include a wide field and 
high resolution camera covering the 2-30 micron region; 
an imaging photometer covering 3-700 microns, and a 
spectrometer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Astrometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Instrumentation: Astrometry 


ASTROMETRY is the measurement of accurate positions of 
stars or other celestial objects, and is the basis of many 
of the most fundamental measurements in astronomy. 
Precision astrometry makes possible the determination 
of distance to stars via annual PARALLAX. The HIPPARCOS 
astrometry satellite, launched in 1989 by the European 
Space Agency, was the first mission designed for precision 
astrometry. 

Precision astrometry opens up many areas of 
astronomy and astrophysics, by providing unambiguous 
distances to stars out to large distances in the Galaxy. 
Accurate distances enable accurate measurement of the 
absolute luminosity of stars, which has applications 
for fundamental stellar astrophysics and also in firmly 
calibrating the stars which form the basis of the UNIVERSAL 
DISTANCE SCALE. An important goal from space-based 
astrometry is the detection of planets orbiting nearby stars, 
using the ‘wobble’ in the position of the parent star due to 
the gravitational pull of the planet. Detection of planets as 
small as a few Earth masses should be possible. 

Astrometry with ground-based instruments is funda- 
mentally limited by instabilities in the Earth’s atmosphere. 
Space-based instruments overcome this limitation, and al- 
low a much wider range of astronomical uses for precision 
astrometry, by attaining microarcsecond levels of accuracy. 
Several new missions have been proposed for astrometry 
from space. The Full-sky Astrometric Mapping Explorer 
(FAME) mission, which builds on experience with Hip- 
parcos, was recently approved for development by NASA. 
The NASA SPACE INTERFEROMETRY MISSION (SIM) is currently 
in the design phase, with the goal of reaching a precision of 
a few microseconds on targets as faint as V magnitude 20. 
The European Space Agency is currently studying GAIA 
as a future Cornerstone Mission of the science program. 
Also building on the very successful experience of Hip- 
parcos, GAIA would conduct a very large sky survey with 
an astrometric accuracy comparable to that of SIM, down 
to V magnitude 15. 


Science with precision astrometry 
Hipparcos represents the current state of the art in 
astrometry, with around 1 milliarcsecond accuracy in the 
positions and parallaxes of 118000 stars and complete 
at around ninth magnitude. Applying the definition of 
annual parallax, this corresponds to 10% accuracy in the 
distance of stars out to 100 parsecs. Among the important 
science results from Hipparcos are: distances and ages of 
globular clusters, using parallaxes of local subdwarf stars; 
the internal dynamics, distance and age of the Hyades 
open cluster; a measurement of the distance to the Pleiades 
cluster; and limits to the masses of planets around stars 
for which radial velocity detections of planets have been 
made. 

Ground-based instruments can achieve an accuracy 
of around 1 milliarcsecond in global astrometry—the 
measurement of large arcs across the sky. These 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


measurements must be referenced to a global reference 
frame in which parallax and PROPER MOTION of stars are 
defined. Accurate distances require parallax in an absolute 
reference frame, or a close approximation to one. Similarly, 
problems in Galactic structure require measurements in a 
frame which does not share in the Galactic rotation. 

Global astrometry on the ground is done by 
long-baseline optical interferometers (see INTERFEROMETRY: 
GROUND), such as the Navy Prototype Optical Interferom- 
eter (NPOI) located near Flagstaff, Arizona. This instru- 
ment features a Michelson interferometer design, and is 
carefully optimized for astrometry by minimizing the ef- 
fects of atmospheric turbulence, and is expected to achieve 
a limiting magnitude of around V = 8. 

Extending the reach of parallax distances to include 
most of the Galaxy (say 10 kpc) would require a further 
factor of 100 improvement in global astrometry, or an 
accuracy of around 10 microarcseconds. In addition, 
such measurements have to be more sensitive, because 
the targets are much fainter. For instance, a solar- 
type star at 10 kpc is almost twentieth magnitude. The 
Space Interferometry Mission is being designed with the 
precision and sensitivity to perform such measurements. 

With much of the Galaxy accessible to direct distance 
measurements, many indirect methods of calculation of 
distance become unnecessary. Distances to globular 
clusters can be measured simply from the parallax of a 
few member stars. SIM will allow a calibration of the 
long-period Cepheids which are one of the fundamental 
distance indicators in the universe. The spiral structure of 
the Galaxy, and the dynamics of the Galactic halo can be 
studied using the proper motions of stars selected as ‘test 
particles’ in the gravitational potential. Distances to spiral 
galaxies may be measurable, by detection of the proper 
motions of stars due to rotation around the Galactic center. 


Space astrometry with survey instruments 

There are currently two approaches to space astrometry: 
survey instruments and pointed instruments. Hipparcos, 
FAME and GAIA are examples of survey instruments. 
SIM is a pointed instrument. Fundamentally, survey 
instruments achieve a lower astrometric accuracy, and 
that accuracy depends on star brightness. The number of 
observations and the integration time are typically fixed 
by the mission design. A pointed instrument can achieve 
higher accuracy, and go fainter, by increased integration 
time and more frequent observation. However, survey 
instruments are more efficient by a very large factor: FAME 
will observe approximately 40 million stars, whereas 
SIM will observe around 40000 stars. So in practice, 
these instruments are complementary. Studies of Galactic 
structure in which a large star sample is essential to 
average out random motions, may be more suited to a 
survey instrument, whereas a pointed instrument is better 
suited to very demanding studies of carefully selected 
samples, as in the search of few-Earth mass planets around 
nearby stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Astrometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Sketch of the FAME spacecraft. During operation the 
spacecraft rotates about the (vertical) symmetry axis. Solar 
pressure on the combined sunshade and solar array (bottom) 
results in slow precession of the spin axis. The two fields of view 
are perpendicular to the spin, and separated by 81.5°. (Figure 
courtesy of Astronomical Applications Department, US Naval 
Observatory.) 


The Full-sky Astrometric Mapping Explorer (FAME) 
is a space telescope designed to obtain highly precise 
position and brightness measurements of stars. Due 
to launch in 2004, it will operate, like Hipparcos, by 
simultaneously imaging two small fields separated by a 
fixed, large angle. The spacecraft rotates steadily about 
an axis which passes star fields from one camera to the 
other (figure 1). Precession of the spin axis allows all- 
sky coverage over a period of few weeks. Over an 
observing lifetime of 2.5 years, each target brighter than 
ninth magnitude will be observed almost 1000 times. For 
targets brighter than V < 9 the expected precision is 
50 microarcseconds. In addition to astrometry, FAME 
will perform photometric observations through four filters 
with millimagnitude accuracy. 

The European Space Agency is studying a follow-on 
mission to Hipparcos, called GAIA, operating on the same 
basic principles as Hipparcos. This mission, which could 
launch as soon as 2010, is much more ambitious than the 
NASA FAME mission. Reaching much further out into 
the Galaxy, it would yield a catalog of more than a billion 
stars—a factor of 25 more than FAME. GAIA would have 
a limiting magnitude of about V = 20, comparable to SIM, 
and would deliver an astrometric accuracy of about 10 
microarcseconds for stars as faint as V = 15. 

GAIA will create an extraordinarily precise three- 
dimensional map of stars throughout our Galaxy. In 
the process, it will map their motions, which encode the 
origin and subsequent evolution of the stars. Through 
comprehensive photometric classification, it will provide 
the detailed physical properties of each star observed, 
characterizing their luminosity, temperature, gravity and 
elemental composition. This massive stellar census 
will provide the basic observational data to tackle an 
enormous range of important problems related to the 
origin, structure and evolutionary history of our Galaxy. 
By reaching out to large distances, and having the ability to 
process large numbers of stars, GAIA is better suited than 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Artist’s impression of the Space Interferometry 
Mission in orbit. The main structure houses the optical 
telescopes and Michelson interferometric beam combiner. The 
boom supports a system of laser metrology gauges which 
monitor the exact positions of the first optical elements in each 
telescope, a 40 cm siderostat. (Figure courtesy of Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology.) 


SIM to certain problems in Galactic structure. For instance, 
a study of the triaxial nature of the Galactic bulge requires 
a large number of stars as well as high precision, and is 
ideally suited to GAIA. 

A key capability for GAIA will be the collection of 
simultaneous multi-band photometric data and stellar 
radial velocities. Three-dimensional datasets for velocity 
and position in the Galaxy are very important for many 
studies, for instance the abundance and distribution of 
dark matter in the Galactic disk, through its influence 
on stellar motions. A ground-based program to provide 
these supporting data is possible but very difficult and 
expensive. GAIA will yield a truly immense dataset 
of positions, kinematics, photometry and radial velocity 
which will be major a resource to astronomers over the 
coming decades. 


Space astrometry with interferometers 

The Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) is a space- 
based 10 m baseline optical Michelson interferometer, 
due for launch in 2006. Currently it is the only space- 
based interferometer specifically designed for precision 
astrometry. SIM will measure positions and parallaxes to 
about 4 microarcseconds of stars as faint as V = 20 by 
the end of its 5-year mission. One of its principal scientific 
goals is an extremely sensitive search for low-mass planets 
orbiting nearby stars. SIM will also demonstrate the 
interferometry technologies needed by future missions 
such as the Terrestrial Planet Finder. 

This mission will open up many areas of astrophysics, 
via astrometry with unprecedented accuracy—more than 
200 times more accurate than Hipparcos, and with fainter 
targets to much fainter magnitudes than FAME, albeit for a 
much smaller target list. SIM will have two basic operating 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Astrometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


modes: narrow-angle and wide-angle (global) astrometry. 
In narrow-angle mode, the instrument measures the target 
position relative to a ‘local’ set of reference stars within 
about 0.5°. This mode provides the highest astrometric 
accuracy, allows relative (but not absolute) positions to 
about 1 microarcsecond in a 1 h measurement. Relative 
parallaxes and relative proper motions are determined 
by observations repeated during the mission. This mode 
will be used primarily for the search for low-mass planets 
orbiting nearby stars. The sensitivity limit is expected 
to be about a few Earth masses for stars within 10 pc. 
Other narrow-angle problems include: internal dynamics 
of globular and open clusters, binary orbit determinations 
and distances to nearby spiral galaxies using rotational 
parallaxes. 

The intrinsic ‘field of regard’ of the instrument 
(without repointing the spacecraft) is 15°. To measure 
angles larger than this, SIM sets up and monitors a grid of 
approximately 3000 reference stars. Science observations 
are referenced to this grid, and the ultimate accuracy 
of measurements such as parallax is linked to the grid 
accuracy. Included in the grid will be around 50 quasars 
to define an inertial frame, and to tie the SIM catalog 
into the International Astronomical Union’s ICRF system. 
The proper motion accuracy is expected to be around 
2 microarcsec per year, corresponding to a transverse 
velocity of 10m s~! for a star at a distance of 1 kpe. 

SIM will actually operate three interferometers 
simultaneously. Two are dedicated to observing bright 
guide stars, sensing drifts in the spacecraft attitude and 
providing corrections to the third, science, instrument. 
This design makes possible long integrations on very faint 
science targets. 

With precision global astrometry, SIM will be able to 
address a broad range of topics in Galactic astronomy. In 
Galactic dynamics, it will reach stars far out in the halo, 
probing the mass distribution on large scales, as well as in 
the disk. This should also lead to a better understanding 
of the dynamics of stellar populations of different ages. 
By observing the brightest stars in the closest neighboring 
galaxies, SIM will study the dynamics and evolution of 
the local universe outside the Galaxy. SIM can exploit 
astrometric signatures created in a microlensing encounter 
to reconstruct the mass and kinematic properties of the 
lens—not currently possible with the vast majority of 
photometric-only detections. It does this by measuring the 
signature of parallax and proper motion of the unseen lens 
on the gravitational bending. Fundamental astrophysics 
will benefit from extremely accurate luminosities (via 
accurate parallaxes)—for instance of OB stars and 
planetary nebulae, which are relatively rare in the solar 
neighborhood. 

Looking beyond SIM, the next generation of sur- 
vey instrument, the European Space Agency’s GAIA, de- 
scribed above, will usher in an even more exciting era in 
the methodical and detailed systematic exploration of our 
Galaxy and beyond. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Gilmore G F et al 1999 GAIA: origin and evolution of the 
Milky Way Proc. SPIE 3350 541 

Lindegren Land Perryman M AC 1997 Optical counterpart 
of ICRF: Hipparcos Highlights of Astronomy vol 11B 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 287 

Seidelmann P K et al 1999 FAME—Full-sky Astrometric 
Mapping Explorer American Astronomical Society, 
DDA Meeting 31 14.01 

Unwin S C and Turyshev S G 1999 The Space Interferome- 
try Mission Ultraviolet-Optical Space Astronomy Beyond 
HST (ASP Conf. Ser. 164) (San Francisco: Astronomi- 
cal Society of the Pacific) 


Stephen C Unwin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Cosmic Backgrounds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Instrumentation: Cosmic 
Backgrounds 


The COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND (CMB) radiation con- 
tains approximately 99% of the electromagnetic radiation 
energy in the universe, and its photons outnumber the 
known massive particles by a factor of ~108. It is the pri- 
mary observable indicator of conditions in the early uni- 
verse and, according to cose, the Cosmic Background Ex- 
plorer satellite, it is remarkably featureless. Its spectrum is 
indistinguishable from a perfect blackbody spectrum with 
a temperature of 2.725 K. Other than the dipole variation, 
likely due to the motion of the solar system with respect 
to the CMB rest frame, its brightness is nearly isotropic 
with rms variations of only 30 ~K on angular scales of 10°. 
The cosmic infrared background (CIB) radiation recently 
detected by COBE is presumably due to the accumulated 
infrared emission from the first dusty galaxies to form in 
the universe. The observed properties of the infrared back- 
ground will place strong constraints on the star formation 
history of the universe. 

The COBE mission carried three instruments de- 
signed to probe these cosmic background radiations. 
DIRBE was designed to make an absolute measurement 
of the spectrum and angular distribution of the diffuse in- 
frared background. The FIRAS instrument was designed 
to study the spectrum of the CMB, and the DMR was a 
set of differential radiometers designed to measure the 
anisotropy of the CMB. A follow-up mission to COBE, 
called MAP, will carry a set of differential microwave ra- 
diometers that will remeasure the anisotropy of the CMB 
with much higher sensitivity and spatial resolution than 
did DMR. In the years leading up to the launch of MAP 
there have been a number of ground and balloon-based 
measurements of the CMB that have provided the first 
look at degree-scale anisotropy. These measurements are 
covered in the general article on COSMIC MICROWAVE BACK- 
GROUND. A follow-up mission to MAP, planned by ESA and 
called PLANCK, is to follow the MAP satellite and is sup- 
posed to provide the definitive measurement of the CMB 
anisotropy. 


DIRBE 

The DIRBE instrument was designed to make an absolute 
measurement of the spectrum and angular distribution of 
the diffuse infrared radiation. One of the most challenging 
aspects of this experiment is the need to understand and 
remove foreground emission from our own Galaxy and 
solar system, which is known to substantially outshine 
the CIB. This drives the design of the instrument to 
include many well-spaced frequency channels each of 
which requires very accurate absolute photometry. 

The instrument is a cryogenically cooled ten- 
band absolute photometer that covers the wavelength 
range from 1.25 wm to 240 wm in ten bands with 
a design sensitivity per field of view on the sky 
of AL = 10°? W m srt. The instrument 
also measures two perpendicular components of linear 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


polarization in its short-wavelength bands at 1.25, 2.2 and 
3.5 ym. The polarization measurements were included 
to help distinguish the CIB from sunlight scattered 
by INTERPLANETARY DusT. To further aid in separating 
interplanetary emission from more distant sources, the 
DIRBE optical axis is oriented 30° from the spin axis of the 
COBE spacecraft, so it views half the sky every day at solar 
elongation angles ranging from ¢ = 64° to 124° with many 
redundant scans. Over the course of six months, every 
celestial direction is redundantly sampled at all possible 
solar elongation angles in this range. 

The DIRBE optics were carefully designed for strong 
stray light rejection (figure 1). The configuration includes 
extensive internal baffling as well as a reflective forebaffle, 
and a complete light-tight enclosure within the COBE 
dewar to eliminate any optical cross-talk from the dewar 
or the FIRAS instrument. Additional protection from the 
Earth and Sun is provided by the shield surrounding the 
COBE dewar, which prevents any direct illumination of 
the dewar from these strong local sources. The front end 
of DIRBE utilizes an off-axis folded GREGORIAN TELESCOPE 
with a 19 cm diameter off-axis segment of a parabolic 
mirror as the primary. An off-axis segment of an elliptical 
secondary forms an image of the primary at a pupil stop 
(Lyot stop) which is smaller than the image of the primary, 
blocking radiation diffracted from the primary mirror. The 
secondary mirror also images the first field stop ata second 
field stop which is smaller than the first, blocking stray 
radiation scattered or diffracted at the first stop and setting 
the 0.7° x 0.7° instantaneous field of view. An ellipsoidal 
tertiary mirror images the pupil (Lyot stop) at a tuning 
fork chopper with mirrored blades. When the chopper 
is open, sky light reaches the elliptical quaternary mirror 
which images the pupil via a folding flat onto detector 
assembly 2. With the chopper closed, the aspheric mirror 
(M5) reimages the pupil onto detector assemblies 1 and 3. 

In this arrangement, all detector assemblies are 
located at a pupil image and all of the spectral bands 
view the same instantaneous field of view. Each detector 
assembly receives radiation chopped alternately between 
the sky and the cold beam stop. The cold beam stop is 
a black enclosure maintained below 3 K, producing no 
detectable signal at any DIRBE wavelength. DIRBE sky 
measurements are thus continuously referenced to zero 
flux—a crucial feature for reliable absolute photometry. 
Instrumental offsets are determined by blocking the sky 
with a cold shutter located at the prime focus. The 
shutter has been demonstrated to attenuate saturation 
level sky signals to well below instrument noise levels 
at all DIRBE wavelengths. The back of the shutter has 
a mirror which allows light from an internal reference 
source (IRS), located out of the path of the sky beam, 
to reach the detectors via the secondary and subsequent 
mirrors when the shutter is closed. Measuring the 
instrument signal with the shutter closed and the IRS off 
permits determination of instrumental noise levels and 
electrical and radiative offsets. Turning on the IRS at 
fixed levels permits monitoring of system gain stability. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Cosmic Backgrounds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TERTIARY MIRROR {ELLIPSOIDAL) 


PRIMARY MIFROA (PARABOLOIDAL} 


TELESCOPE a 
BAFFLES 


STOP NO. 1 


oe STRUCTURE (OPTICS BENCH) 


SECONDARY MIRROR {ELLIPSOIDAL) 


CHOPPER 


DETECTOR ASSY. NO. 3 BANDS 9-16 


DETECTOR ASSY. NO. 1 BANDS 1-3 


FLAT MIRROR NO. 2 


OETECTOR ASSY. NO. 2 BANDS 4-8 


QUATERNARY MIRROR (ELLIPSOIDAL) 


Figure 1. A schematic overview of the COBE DIRBE ten-channel absolute photometer. 


The instrument readout with the shutter closed and the 
IRS turned off defined zero sky brightness for the DIRBE 
measurements. 


FIRAS 

The FIRAS instrument was designed to study the spectrum 
of the CMB. As with the DIRBE instrument, this 
experiment requires very accurate absolute photometry 
and high gain stability. One of the key features of FIRAS 
is that it is differential: the instrument directly measures 
the difference between the sky signal (in a 7° beam) 
and that from a temperature controlled internal reference 
body (ICAL) whose emission is within 5% of a blackbody. 
The absolute calibration of FIRAS was accomplished in 
orbit by inserting an external blackbody calibrator (KCAL) 
periodically into the mouth of the sky horn. The XCAL 
is a precision temperature-controlled blackbody, with an 
emissivity greater than 0.999. Both the ICALand XCAL are 
temperature controlled by command over the range from 
2 to 25 K. This allows the sky signal to be approximately 
balanced and aids in distinguishing sky signals from 
instrument self-emission. The differential nature of the 
instrument and the commandable temperature controlled 
inputs are the keys to the accuracy of FIRAS. 

The heart of instrument is a four-port Michelson 
INTERFEROMETER With two inputs (used differentially) and 
two outputs (figure 2). The two input ports are fed 
by optically matched quasi-optical horn antennas. The 
interferometer uses polarizing grids as beam splitters and 
creates an interferogram (Fourier transform of the source 
spectrum) by scanning a movable mirror platform. A 
dichroic filter at each output port further splits each beam 
into low- and high-frequency bands. The low-frequency 
band, extending from 0.5 mm to 1 cm, was designed 
to measure the CMB spectrum. The high-frequency 
band, from 0.12 to 0.5 mm, was designed to measure the 
emission from dust and gas in our galaxy and to allow 
the removal of this foreground from the low-frequency 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sky Horn 


Reference Horn 


Mirror Mechanism 


XCAL 


Figure 2. A schematic diagram of the Far Infrared Absolute 
Spectrophotometer (FIRAS). 


CMB data. The objective was to attain a sensitivity of 
vl, ~ 10°? W m® sr! (0.1% of the peak brightness of 
a 2.7 K blackbody) in each 5% wide spectral element, in 
each 7° sky pixel. The FIRAS uses bolometric detectors in 
both frequency channels. 

A movable mirror mechanism modulates the path 
difference, x, between the two optical paths resulting 
in a varying signal at the output ports proportional 
to the cosine transform of the input spectra /(x) = 
f{ dvS(v) cos2xvx. The design symmetry and phase 
delays imposed by the beam splitter and analyser 
polarizers make FIRAS a differential instrument. The 
nearly blackbody ICAL signal is controlled by attached 
heaters to nearly balance the sky input from the CMB. This 
reduces the net input signal by 99% and is responsible for 
the ability of FIRAS to detect deviations of the CMB from 
a perfect blackbody to less than 0.005% (rms) of the peak. 

Absolute measurements of the sky flux require 
knowing the emission of the ICAL and other components 
of the instrument. This is done by examining the 
changes in the observed spectrum with variations in 
the component temperatures. For the ICAL and two 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Cosmic Backgrounds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


horns, variation is produced by commands to attached 
heaters. The overall throughput of the instrument is 
measured by placing an external calibrator, or XCAL, in 
the sky horn aperture—replacing the sky signal with a 
known input. The XCAL signal is known because it is 
a blackbody to within 0.005% both by construction and 
as verified in ground measurements. Its temperature is 
controlled by an attached heater and measured by a set of 
thermometers. Errors in the thermometry of the XCAL are 
the limiting factor when comparing the absolute sky flux 
measurements of FIRAS with other instruments. 

Other design features that contribute to the success 
of FIRAS include a large etendue (throughput) for high 
sensitivity; two path length differences for the mirror 
mechanism (1.2 and 5.9 cm) allowing for higher frequency 
resolution for the longer stroke length; and two scan 
speeds for the mirror mechanism to help distinguish 
instrument errors. The entire instrument is operated in a 
vacuum and cooled to 1.5 K by conduction to a superfluid 
liquid helium tank. A large external conical shield protects 
the cryostat and instruments from direct radiation from the 
Sun and the Earth. 


DMR 


The purpose of the differential microwave radiometers 
(DMR) experiment is to measure large-angular-scale 
anisotropy of the CMB. Measuring the temperature of 
the microwave sky to an accuracy of one part in 10° 
requires careful attention to possible sources of systematic 
errors. Due to the extraordinary isotropy of the CMB, 
one of the primary concerns is instrument stability since 
any small perturbation to the instrument in the form 
stray radiation, electronic pick-up or thermal effects can 
easily produce a false signal that exceeds the anisotropy 
signal. One of the most important safeguards is to 
make the instrument differential. The DMR instrument 
consists of six differential microwave radiometers, two 
nearly independent channels (labeled A and B) at each 
of three frequencies: 31.5, 53 and 90 GHz. Each 
radiometer measures the difference in power, expressed as 
a differential antenna temperature, between two regions 
of the sky separated by 60°. The combined motions of 
spacecraft spin (73 s period), orbit (103 m period) and 
orbital precession (~1° per day) allow each sky position to 
be compared with all others through a highly redundant 
set of all possible difference measurements spaced 60° 
apart. The DMR has three separate receiver boxes, one 
for each frequency, that are mounted 120° apart on the 
outside of the COBE cryostat containing the FIRAS and 
DIRBE. A shield surrounding the aperture plane protects 
all three instruments from solar and terrestrial emission. 
The 31 GHz system operates at room temperature while 
the 53 and 90 GHz systems are passively cooled to 140 K. 

The antennas are wavelength-scaled corrugated 
horns that were chosen for their low sidelobe response, 
low insertion loss and compactness. The main beam 
response is approximately Gaussian with a 7° FWHM. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Each pair of antennas (labeled 1 and 2) feed a Dicke- 
switched radiometer. The output of the ferrite Dicke 
switch alternates the signal from the two input antennas 
at a rate of 100 Hz. This is an essential step in the process 
of reducing systematic effects by reducing the impact 
of low-frequency gain fluctuations and 1/f noise in the 
radiometer amplifiers. The output of the Dicke switch 
is sent through ferrite isolation to a mixer—preamplifier. 
A local oscillator signal obtained from a Gunn diode 
oscillator is used to mix the signal down to intermediate 
frequencies. It is then sent to a lock-in amplifier where the 
signal is square-law detected, converted to a proportional 
voltage and amplified with a lock-in that is synchronous to 
the Dicke switch. The lock-in amplifier includes a circuit 
which integrates this switch-modulated signal for 0.5 s 
producing a voltage that is proportional to the brightness 
difference between the two input signals. The signal is 
calibrated to antenna temperature by periodically injecting 
broad-band power of a known amplitude from a noise 
diode into the throat of each antenna. 


MAP 

The MAP mission is a follow-up to the COBE mission 
that is scheduled to launch in the Spring of 2001. MAP 
will remeasure the anisotropy of the CMB with higher 
sensitivity and angular resolution than COBE DMR. The 
MAP instrument consists of a set of passively cooled 
microwave radiometers with 1.4 x 1.6 m diameter primary 
reflectors to provide the desired angular resolution of less 
than 0.3°. The need to suppress systematic measurement 
errors led to the following instrument features: 


(a) MAP is a differential experiment based on pseudo- 
correlation microwave radiometers. The instrument 
measures temperature differences between two 
points ~141° apart on the sky. 

(b) MAP will orbit about the Sun—Earth L, libration point 
which provides fora very stable thermal environment 
and near 100% observing efficiency since the Sun, 
Earth and Moon are always behind the instrument’s 
field of view. 

(c) MAP will rapidly scan the sky to compare many pixel 
pairs on many different time scales. 


The reflector design incorporates two back-to-back 
off-axis Gregorian telescopes with 1.4 x 1.6 m primary 
reflectors and 0.52 m secondary reflectors. Each primary 
is a shaped elliptical section of a paraboloid, while 
the secondaries are nearly elliptical. This arrangement 
produces two slightly convex focal surfaces on opposite 
sides of the spacecraft spin (and symmetry) axis with plate 
scales of ~15’ cm7!. In order to limit diffracted signals to 
less than 0.5 wK, diffraction shields are employed above, 
below and to the sides of each secondary. In addition, 
the deployable solar panels and multilayer insulation 
guarantee that the secondaries remain in shadow during 
observing. 

The feed design calls for as small an aperture as 
possible consistent with a primary edge taper requirement 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Cosmic Backgrounds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Feed A Side Cold Warm 
Horn <_-— 
Cold HEMT : Warm HEMT Phase Band Detector Differential 
Amplifier Amplifier Switch(2500 Hz) Pass Line 
Filter Drivers 
OMT 
ao Stainless NL 7}---p---[ >— 
Magic Steel to AEU 
Tee Waveguides Tee [AJ TAl--- > = {>> 
OMT 
RXB 


Stainless 


Feed Steel oh 
H B Side Bias Lines jase 
= ™ 4 Switch 
2. Drivers 


\ 
ao to PDU 


Figure 3. A schematic diagram of a single MAP pseudo-correlation radiometer including the cold focal plane assembly (FPA) and the 


warm receiver box (RXB). 


of —20 dB, and a length that places the throat of each 
differential feed pair in close proximity to the other. The 
feed aperture diameters scale inversely with frequency, 
while the primary is equally illuminated at each frequency, 
leading to a frequency-dependent beam size. The feeds are 
corrugated to produce beams with high symmetry, low 
loss and minimal sidelobes. The phase center of each feed 
is kept as close as possible to its aperture, resulting in a 
frequency-independent beam for each feed. 

The microwave system consists of ten four-channel 
‘differencing assemblies’, one for each pair of feeds 
(figure 3). One assembly operates at 22 GHz, one at 
30 GHz, two at 40 GHz, two at 60 GHz and four at 
90 GHz. This gives the spectral coverage required to 
separate galactic foreground emission from the CMB 
and provides roughly equal sensitivity at each frequency. 
Each feed is attached to a low-loss orthomode transducer 
which separates the sky signal into two orthogonal 
polarizations. The A-side signal of one polarization 
is differenced against the orthogonal polarization, B’, 
from the corresponding B-side feed, and vice-versa. The 
differencing is accomplished by first combining the two 
signals A and B’ in a hybrid tee to form (A + B)/V2 and 
(A-B’')/ J/2, then amplifying each in two cold high electron 
mobility transistor (HEMT) amplifiers and sending the 
phase-matched outputs to the warm receiver box (RXB) 
via a waveguide. In the RXB the two signals are amplified 
in two warm HEMT amplifiers, phase switched between 
0° and +90° or —90° respectively, at 2.5 kHz, then split 
back into A and B’ in a second hybrid tee. At this 
point, the two signals are square-law detected, amplified 
by two line drivers, and sent to the analog electronics 
unit for synchronous demodulation and digitization. The 
other pair of signals, A’ and B, are differenced in the 
same manner giving a total of four detector channels per 
differencing assembly. The output in each channel is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


proportional to the temperature difference between the 
A- and B-side pixels. The signal is calibrated by fitting 
the data to the strong dipole signal that was accurately 
measured by COBE. 

The splitting, phase switching and subsequent 
combining of the signals enhances the instrument’s 
performance in two ways. 


(a) Since both signals to be differenced are amplified 
by both amplifier chains, gain fluctuations in either 
amplifier chain act identically on both signals and 
thus cancel upon differencing. 

The phase switches introduce a 180° relative phase 
change between the two signal paths, thereby 
interchanging which signal is fed to which square- 
law detector. Thus, low-frequency noise from the 
detector diodes is common mode and also cancels, 
further reducing susceptibility to systematic effects. 


(b) 


PLANCK 

PLANCK is the third medium-sized mission (M3) of ESA’s 
Horizon 2000 scientific programme. It is designed to 
image the anisotropy of the CMB over the whole sky, with 
unprecedented sensitivity and angular resolution. It is 
now planned to launch in the first quarter of 2007 together 
with the FIRST (FAR-INFRARED AND SUBMILLIMETRE TELESCOPE) 
satellite, ina configuration often referred to as the ‘Carrier’ 
(because FIRST is ‘carried’ by PLANCK in the launcher). 
After launch, PLANCK and FIRST will separate and will 
be placed in different orbits around the second LAGRANGIAN 
POINT of the Earth-Sun system. PLANCK will carry two 
main instruments: the low-frequency instrument (LFI) 
which covers the frequency range 30-100 GHz, and the 
high-frequency instrument (HFI) which will cover the 
frequency range 100-850 GHz. This very wide frequency 
coverage should provide a wealth of information on both 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Cosmic Backgrounds 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the CMB anisotropy and on a number of interesting 
foreground sources such as the SUNYAEV-ZELDOVICH EFFECT 
and emission from our own Galaxy. Further information 
on the PLANCK mission may be found on the PLANCK 
web site at http: / /astro.estec.esa.nl/Planck/. 


Bibliography 
For more information on the COBE mission see: 


Boggess et al 1992 The COBE mission: its design and 
performance two years after launch Astrophys. J. 397 
420 


See also the COBE web site at http://space.gsfc.nasa. 
gov/astro/cobe/. A very complete description of 
the COBE DIRBE instrument is given in the DIRBE 
explanatory supplement located on the COBE web site. 

A very complete description of the COBE-FIRAS 
instrument is given by: 


Mather J C, Fixsen D J and Shafer R A 1992 Proc. SPIE 2019 
168 


This is also available in Postscript form from the COBE 
web site. 
The design of the COBE DMR experiment is given by: 


Smoot et al 1990 COBE differential microwave radiome- 
ters: instrument design and implementation Astro- 
phys. J. 360 685 


Further information on the MAP mission may be found on 
the MAP web site at http://map.gsfc.nasa.gov/. 

Further information on the PLANCK mission may be 
found on the PLANCK web site at http: / /astro.estec.esa. 
nl/Planck/. 


Gary Hinshaw 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Imaging Interferometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Instrumentation: Imaging 
Interferometry 


Because of the degrading effects of the Earth’s turbulent 
atmosphere, the spatial resolution achieved by ground- 
based OPTICAL ASTRONOMY is limited to the extent of the 
SEEING disk—the image of a point source (e.g. a single 
star), taken through the atmosphere. The size of the 
seeing disk is independent of telescope diameter, but 
changes only with wavelength and climatic conditions— 
about 0.5” at the best observing sites in good weather. In 
the absence of atmospheric seeing, e.g. in space, or with 
a perfect ADAPTIVE OPTICS system, a telescope has a 
resolution defined by the DIFFRACTION limit, which 
scales inversely with telescope diameter: the larger the 
mirror, the sharper the image. For example, the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE with its 2.5 m aperture has a 
diffraction limit of 0.05” at a wavelength of 500 nm, 10 
times better than the seeing limit, but still not good 
enough for many areas of astronomical research. Projects 
such as resolving the immediate surroundings of black 
holes in external galaxies, or imaging extrasolar planets, 
require telescope diameters of at least 100 m. To 
manufacture and launch into space such large apertures is 
clearly out of reach of present-day technology. Yet, 
images with such seemingly impossible resolution are 
feasible. They can be obtained with a method called 
synthesis imaging which can achieve basically unlimited 
resolution without unreasonably large telescopes. In this 
article, I discuss the principle of synthesis imaging and 
the advantages of imaging interferometry from space. I 
also briefly describe various projects planned for the near 
future which promise to revolutionize astronomical 
imaging. While the general discussion of synthesis 
imaging is valid for the entire electromagnetic spectrum, 
the degree of difficulty of its realization varies 
dramatically with wavelength. Here, I will focus solely 
on the optical regime and ignore the rich and successful 
history of the RADIO INTERFEROMETER. 


The idea of synthesis imaging 

Figure 1(a) shows a simple star cluster as it would be 
seen by a (hypothetical) diffraction-free 10 m telescope 
in space. Imagine its primary mirror covered by an 
opaque mask with a set of holes along a line. Obviously, 
most of the image information would be lost—but not all 
of it. The image produced through such a mask shows a 
set of INTERFERENCE fringes—alternating stripes of high 
and low intensity (figure 1(b)). These fringes contain 
information about the structure of the object. Different 
rotation angles of the mask produce additional fringe 
patterns. All patterns can be recorded and combined later 
to obtain the complete source image, as demonstrated in 
figures 1(c) and 1(d). In fact, there is no need for the full 
10 m telescope mirror: the fringe patterns can be obtained 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with just a set (at least two) of small mirrors by 
combining their beams in a common focus. This is the 
elegant principle behind synthesis imaging: to mimic a 
large telescope with a number of smaller ones. 

There is, however, one caveat which in the past has 
prevented the successful realization of synthesis imaging 
at optical wavelengths. In order to produce the all- 
important interference fringes, the beams from the 
individual APERTURES must be combined coherently. 
This means that the difference in their pathlengths to the 
common focus must not exceed the coherence length of 
the light. Combining the two signals coherently requires 
accurate control of the pathlengths between the two 
telescopes and the beam combination optics. The 
enormous technological difficulties associated with 
controlling optical pathlengths to the required levels of a 
few wavelengths are described elsewhere (see 
INTERFEROMETRY: GROUND). 


How does it work? 

The mathematical framework of synthesis imaging is 
based on the theory of wave diffraction. The basic result 
is summarized in the van Cittert-Zernike theorem: 


the complex degree of coherence is equal to the 
normalized Fourier transform of the source intensity 
distribution® 


The degree of coherence is a complex quantity, the 
observables measured in practice are its amplitude and 
phase. They can be derived from the interference pattern 
(the fringe) which appears on the detector when scanning 
the delay between the two beams. 

An imaging interferometer measures the degree of 
coherence across the (u,v) plane. Because, in essence, 
this measures the Fourier transform of the source 
structure, the vector between the two telescopes—the 


baseline B-—is usually measured in the spatial frequency 
domain, i.e. in units of wavelengths, u = B,/A and v = 
B,/X. The plane in which the source wavefront is sampled 
is therefore called the (u,v) plane. Different baseline 
vectors are achieved by moving the individual telescopes 
with respect to the source, thus sampling different (u,v) 
points. According to the van Cittert-Zernike theorem, 
this allows the full reconstruction of the source structure 
via an inverse Fourier transform, provided that the (u,v) 
coverage is complete. However, the (u,v) coverage of any 
real interferometer will have gaps, resulting in ambiguity 
in the source reconstruction. The ring-like residuals in 
figure 1(d) are one example of such ambiguities, also 


' Strictly speaking, this formulation of the van Cittert-Zernike theorem 
is correct only for the case of an incoherent light source. Also, both the 
source size and the baseline length must be much smaller than the 
distance to the source (the far-field approximation). However, 
astronomical sources at optical wavelengths always meet all of these 
conditions. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Imaging Interferometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


‘dedel osu ust 


Figure 1. Illustration of the principle of synthesis imaging: (a) model source to be imaged; (b)-(d) image reconstructions (right) for 
various baseline distributions (left). The ring-like residuals around the central source image are called grating rings. They are a 
consequence of the regularly spaced gaps in the (u,v) coverage and can be removed to a large extent by numerical image restoration 


algorithms. 


known as grating rings. The completeness of the (u,v) 
coverage is therefore a critical design parameter for 
imaging interferometers. 


Spatial resolution 

To first order, the resolution of an imaging interferometer 
is defined by the longest baseline. However, in contrast 
to the diffraction limit of a filled aperture, the spatial 
resolution of a synthesis imaging observation is not 
uniquely defined. By varying the weighting of the data 
obtained at different (u,v) coordinates, or even removing 
some baselines completely, one can put more or less 
emphasis on certain spatial frequencies in the 
reconstruction and thus change the effective resolution, 
even after the data are taken. This fact is regularly 
exploited at ground-based telescopes in aperture masking 
observations of bright sources for which collecting area 
is not an issue but the highest possible resolution is 
required. 

Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Field of view 

The FIELD OF VIEW (FOV) of an imaging interferometer 
is limited by the coherence length of the light, / = A’/AA, 
where A and AA are the wavelength and the bandwidth of 
the observation. While the pathlengths from the two 
interferometer elements ideally are equal in the center of 
the field, an angular separation © from the center 
necessarily produces a path difference OD. As long as 
this difference is small compared with /, the fringe 
contrast will not be affected. Thus, © < (A/D)A/AA, or 
O< — Ropatiaspectrae The maximum FOV of an 
interferometer thus can be estimated from its spatial and 
spectral resolution. In practice, however, the FOV is 
likely to be limited by the effects of the incomplete (u,v) 
coverage (see figure 1). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Imaging Interferometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Synthesis imaging in space 

All that has been said so far about synthesis imaging 
applies equally to  space- and _— ground-based 
interferometers. There are, however, important 
differences between the two environments in a number of 
aspects. 


(u,v) coverage 

Most interferometer arrays will consist of relatively few 
elements because of cost constraints. In order to 
overcome the intrinsically sparse (u,v) coverage of such 
systems, many employ movable apertures. In addition, all 
ground-based arrays use the Earth’s rotation during the 
course of the night to sample many different (u,v) points. 
The achievable (u,v) coverage therefore depends on both 
the geographical location of the array and the source 
position with respect to the Earth’s rotation axis. 

In contrast, an interferometer in space cannot rely on 
the Earth’s rotation. It therefore must have movable 
apertures to fill the (u,v) plane. On the other hand, the 
(u,v) coverage can be chosen freely. This allows a 
uniform resolution which can be valuable in survey 
programs which study the statistical properties of large 
numbers of similar objects. 


Aperture size 

The size of the individual apertures of a ground-based 
interferometer is limited to the size of an atmospheric 
turbulence cell—about 30 cm at optical wavelengths. In 
principle, the use of adaptive optics can overcome this 
limit, but the need for a bright reference source (a “guide 
star’) within the isoplanatic patch severely limits the 
number of suitable targets. 

In space, on the other hand, there is no turbulent 
atmosphere. Therefore, the size of interferometer 
elements is limited only by our technical and financial 
ability to manufacture—and bring into space—large 
mirrors. 


Frame time 

Another important obstacle for interferometry on the 
ground imposed by the Earth’s atmosphere is the need to 
record the complex visibility within a coherence time of 
the atmosphere—about 20 ms at a good site for optical 
wavelengths. Together with the above limit on aperture 
size, this severely constrains the target brightness: it has 
to be bright enough to overcome the noise associated 
with the detection system, from both the detector and the 
read-out electronics. 

Even with a perfect adaptive optics system, the 
integration time at each (u,v) point is limited because of 
the Earth’s rotation: the measurement has to be 
completed before the baseline has changed noticeably in 
order to avoid (u,v) smearing. 

In space, the available integration time for each (u,v) 
coordinate is in principle unlimited, so that much fainter 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


objects can be observed. This assumes, however, that 
structural vibrations or slow drifts are perfectly corrected. 


Passbands 

Astronomy from the ground is limited to a number of 
small regions of the electromagnetic spectrum over 
which the Earth’s atmosphere is transparent. In space, no 
such limitations exist, and important wavebands such as 
the ultraviolet or the mid-infrared become accessible. 


Environment 

Clearly, operating an interferometer in space to the 
extreme precision required for successful fringe tracking 
is an extremely challenging task. In the case of single 
spacecraft with a number of apertures on a connecting 
truss, the mechanical vibrations of the structure must be 
minimized, and, even for low-noise structures, residual 
motions must be actively corrected. In principle, 
however, space is a favorable environment because it is 
intrinsically much quieter than the geologically active 
surface of the Earth. Because of this and the limitations 
of a truss with regard to the achievable baseline length, 
future synthesis imaging in space is likely to be realized 
with a suite of free-flying apertures which are 
positionally controlled with respect to each other and the 
beam combining optics by reference laser beams. 


Ongoing and planned projects 
The technology that makes the ambitious methods of 
active pathlength control and fringe tracking feasible has 
only recently become available, mostly through the 
development of ever faster computers that allow real- 
time control of mechanical instabilities. While the 
principles of synthesis imaging are well understood, and 
the technique has been demonstrated on the ground, 
interferometry in space has yet to be realized. Today, a 
number of space-based interferometer projects capable of 
performing synthesis imaging are in the development or 
planning stages in the United States and Europe. 
StarLight is intended to demonstrate the feasibility 
of precision control for free-flying spacecraft. It consists 
of two spacecraft: one that serves as a light collector, and 
one that comprises a second collector, delay line and 
beam combining optics. Launch is planned for 2005. The 
primary goal of StarLight is to demonstrate the 
technological readiness for subsequent science missions. 
The Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) consists 
of a single spacecraft with three interferometer pairs 
along a 12 m truss. The individual telescopes have a 
diameter of about 30 cm. The primary science goal of 
SIM is to perform high-precision astrometry for a 
number of key programs. Because SIM will allow the 
truss structure to be rotated and will cover a yet to be 
determined range of baseline lengths, it will have some 
potential for synthesis imaging of simple astronomical 
sources. SIM is scheduled for launch in 2009. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Instrumentation: Imaging Interferometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Terrestrial Planet Finder (TPF) in its current 
design comprises four free-flying 3.5 m telescopes and a 
fifth spacecraft with the beam-combining optics. The 
design allows maximum baselines of about 1 km for a 
resolution of less than 0.001” at wavelengths around 3 
&mu;m. The main scientific goal of TPF is the detection 
and characterization of Earth-like planets at infrared 
wavelengths by means of interferometric nulling of the 
light from the host star. A tentative launch date for TPF 
is 2012. 

DARWIN is a_ mission concept within the 
cornerstone program of the European Space Agency 
(ESA) with a launch after 2014. Much like TPF, it will 
use free-flying telescopes as the interferometer elemetns. 
It has a similar design concept and scientific goals to 
TPF. 

While the basic technological tools for these 
ambitious missions appear to be in hand or within reach, 
their successful implementation will occur in steps and 
will require time, effort and money. On the way to the 
ultimate goal of taking images of other Earths, major 
advances in many other aspects of astronomy are almost 
certain because of the dramatic increase in spatial 
resolution that only synthesis imaging can provide. 


Bibliography 
The complete treatment of wave diffraction and interference is 
treated in great detail in 


Born M and Wolf E 1980 Principles of Optics 6" edn (Oxford: 
Pergamon) 


A more detailed review about the intricacies of interferometry 
both from the ground and in space can be found in 


Shao M and Colavita M M 1992 Long baseline optical and 
infrared stellar interferometry Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 30 457-98 


Torsten Boker 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) 


Proposed NASA astrometry mission and the first to 
use optical interferometry. Launch is planned for June 
2005. The spacecraft will drift away from the Earth at 
approximately 0.1 AU per year, reaching a maximum 
communication distance of about 95 million km after 
five years. In this orbit, it will receive continuous solar 
illumination. It will carry a science interferometer and 
two guide interferometers with a 10 m baseline. Used to 
determine the position and distances of stars to extremely 
high accuracy and to detect brown dwarf stars and planets. 
It will also pioneer a technique to block out (null) the 
light of bright stars. Possible angular resolution of 10 
milliarcseconds—four times better than the Hubble Space 
Telescope. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Probe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Probe 


An uncrewed spacecraft designed to investigate the 
interplanetary medium or conditions on or in the vicinity 
of another celestial body. A space probe travels along an 
orbit around the Sun or on a trajectory that takes it from 
the vicinity of the Earth to the neighborhood of its target 
(for example, a planet, comet or asteroid). In order to 
reach interplanetary space, a space probe has to exceed 
the escape velocity of the Earth. In order to enter a closed 
orbit around its target planet, a space probe has to reduce 
its speed relative to that planet, usually by firing onboard 
rocket motors (if no action of this kind is taken, the craft 
will fly past its target on a hyperbolic trajectory and recede 
into interplanetary space). The first space probe to leave 
the vicinity of the Earth and enter an independent orbit 
around the Sun was Luna 1, a Soviet probe that passed by 
the Moon at a range of 6000 km on 4 January 1959, and 
continued on into interplanetary space. 


See also: escape velocity, Luna, orbit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Research Institute 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Research Institute 


The Space Research Institute (IKI), located in Moscow, 
is one of the leading organizations in Russia in space 
research. The main fields of research are astrophysics, 
space plasma physics and solar system exploration. 
During its history, from its foundation in 1965, IKI has 
fulfilled many experiments and missions, including 
investigations of the Moon, Venus, Mars, Comet Halley 
(VEGA mission) and Phobos (PHOBOS-?2 mission); and, 
during the last decade, the MIR-KVANT and GRANAT 
space observatories (astrophysics) and the INTERBALL 
program (space plasma research). Main sources of 
funding are the Russian Academy of Sciences and the 
Russian Space Agency. 
For further information see http://www.iki.rssi.ru/ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Research Organization Netherlands 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Research Organization 
Netherlands 


The Space Research Organization Netherlands (SRON) 
initiates, develops and exploits outstanding instruments 
for research in and from space. SRON is responsible for 
the national space research program, which is carried out 
by the two laboratories for space research in Utrecht and 
Groningen. Activities comprise the design, development 
and manufacture of space instruments, as well as the 
processing and interpretation of the data. 

Its principal contributions to astrophysics are: 
Reflection Grating Spectrometer on XMM; Low Energy 
Transmission Grating Spectrometer for Chandra; Wide 
Field Cameras aboard BeppoSAX; Heterodyne Instrument 
for ESA’s Far-Infrared and Submillimeter Space Telescope; 
and ISO Short-Wavelength Spectrometer. 

For further information see 
http://www.sron.nl/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility (ST- 
ECF) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Telescope European 
Coordinating Facility (ST-ECF) 


The ST-ECF, which was established in 1984, is jointly 
operated by the EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY (ESA) and the 
EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY (ESO). It is located at the 
ESO headquarters in Garching, near Munich. 

The facility supports the European astronomy 
community in exploiting the research opportunities 
provided by the Hubble Space Telescope. It provides 
detailed technical information about the HST and its 
science instruments, and supports European astronomers 
in the preparation of HST observing proposals. It also 
coordinates the development of computer software to 
meet the specific data analysis needs of HST users, 
operates and maintains an archive of all the scientific 
data collected by HST, and acts as a European center for 
associated meetings and workshops. 

ST-ECF staff maintain close contacts with the SPACE 
TELESCOPE SCIENCE INSTITUTE (STScI) in Baltimore, which 
is charged with the scientific operation of the HST 
observatory. ST-ECF also provides a contact point for 
European media and public information. 

For further information see 
http://www:stecf.org/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Telescope Science Institute (STScl) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Telescope Science Institute 
(STScl) 


Located on the Johns Hopkins University Homewood 
campus, Baltimore, Maryland. The institute is responsible 
to NASA’s GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER for the scientific 
operations of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). It was 
established by NASA, following a recommendation by 
the National Academy of Sciences, and is operated 
by ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH IN ASTRONOMY 
(AURA) under contract to NASA. 

STScl’s main role is to maximize the scientific 
productivity of HST and to serve the astronomical 
community in its operation. The institute solicits and 
reviews observation proposals and selects observations 
to be carried out. It schedules observations and assists 
guest observers in their work. It also generates an 
integrated science and engineering timeline to support 
all spacecraft activities and provides the facilities and 
software to calibrate, analyse and archive HST data. 

STScI also monitors the HST and its science instru- 
ments for characteristics such as instrument performance, 
pointing accuracy and telescope focus. As part of the 
planning and scheduling system, the STScI Guide Star Se- 
lection System provides reference stars and other bright 
objects so that the HST’s fine guidance sensors can point 
the telescope accurately. 

The institute also played a key role in the early mission 
concept studies for the Next Generation Space Telescope 
(NGST) and has been selected by NASA to manage the 
science and mission operations for this successor to the 
HST. 

STScI is staffed by astronomers, computer scientists, 
technicians and administrative staff from AURA, the 
European Space Agency (which is a partner with NASA on 
the Space Telescope Project), and the Computer Sciences 
Corporation. Of its combined staff of approximately 500, 
approximately 100 are astronomers and scientists. 

For further information see 
http://wwwsstsci.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Space Velocity ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Space Velocity 


A measure of the true velocity in three dimensions of a 
star relative to the Sun, calculated from measurements of 
its radial velocity and tangential velocity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Spacetime 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spacetime 


A four-dimensional geometrical framework that unites the 
three dimensions of space and the dimension of time. A 
point in spacetime (identified by four coordinates) is called 
an event (or ‘world-point’). The history of a particle (a line 
in four dimensions connecting all the events at which it is 
present) is called a world-line. 

The concept of spacetime was devised in 1907 by 
Hermann Minkowski (1864-1909). Whereas Newton 
regarded time as being independent from the three 
dimensions of space, Minkowski contended that they 
are intimately related. Four-dimensional spacetime was 
adopted by Einstein as the framework within which to 
develop his general theory of relativity. According to 
that theory, spacetime is curved in the presence of matter 
and the paths of rays of light and particles of matter are 
determined by the curvature of spacetime. 


See also: general theory of relativity, special relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spanish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spanish Astronomy 


Astrophysics is a very recent development in Spain, but 
its spectacular evolution in itself constitutes a singular 
phenomenon that has aroused the interest of sociologists 
and historians of science alike. 


Historical background 

It is well known that, during the Middle Ages, the 
Iberian peninsula was the European center of astronomical 
knowledge. Not only were the works of classical and 
oriental astronomy rediscovered and made available to 
the world at large (especially through the School of 
Translators at Toledo), but it was here also that new 
instrumentation was developed and advances were made 
in the scientific understanding of the heavens, contributing 
decisively to the empirical and conceptual foundations 
of the Renaissance astronomical revolution. In the 15th 
and 16th centuries the art of navigation, which opened up 
ocean routes to the advantage of Spanish and Portuguese 
mariners, derived its base in the astronomy developed in 
Spain. Significantly, the Prime Meridian, the origin of 
longitude, was first defined to pass through Toledo and 
later through the island of Hierro—it was only in the 19th 
century that it was finally settled to pass through the Royal 
Observatory, Greenwich. 

It was not until the Enlightenment that astronomy 
once more flourished in Spain. The dedication of the 
mariner-astronomers of Cadiz, led by Jorge Juan and 
Antonio de Ulloa, played a decisive role in bringing the 
new science and technology to Spain, and not only in the 
field of astronomy. 

The observatory of Cadiz was founded in 1751 and 
published its first astronomical ephemerides (the third 
oldest in the world) in 1792. The Observatory of Madrid 
was created at the end of the century. 

Spanish Enlightenment astronomers were fully aware 
that the most advanced instrumentation was needed 
in order to pursue modern astronomy. That is why 
the observatories of Cadiz and Madrid have in their 
possession two of the finest instruments of the period. A 
further indication of this was the commissioning of a giant 
telescope, 25 ft long with a primary mirror 2 ft in diameter, 
from William Herschel, who was the foremost telescope 
maker of his time. Unfortunately, before it could enter into 
service this optical marvel was destroyed by Napoleonic 
troops garrisoned at Madrid Observatory. 

Slow progress began to be made in Spanish astronomy 
by the beginning of the present century. The obervatories 
of San Fernando and Madrid were refurbished, and in 
1904 the new obervatories of Fabra (in Barcelona) and 
Cartuja (Granada) were built. However, the Spanish Civil 
War (1936-9) and its aftermath led to a further halt in 
the progress of Spanish astronomy, which stagnated into 
the more routine aspects of ‘positional astronomy’ and 
‘celestial mechanics’. 

After the Second World War European astronomers 
began to seek new telescopic locations in southern regions 
with more favorable climates. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In 1958 the path of totality of a solar eclipse passed 
through the Canaries and astronomers from all over the 
world traveled to the islands. This occasion served to 
recall the 19th-century Tenerife observations of PIAZZISMYTH 
(who later became Astronomer Royal for Scotland). Piazzi 
Smyth made his observations at several different heights 
ranging from sea level to the peak of Mount Teide and 
confirmed Newton’s prediction that the stars would be 
better viewed at greater heights. For this reason, Piazzi 
Smyth’s expedition to Tenerife has come to be regarded as 
the precursor of present-day mountain observatories. 

Also, in 1910, Jean Mascart, an astronomer from 
the Paris Observatory, went to Tenerife to observe the 
return of COMET HALLEY, this expedition forming part of 
a wider undertaking by the World Health Organization 
to study the effects of the toxic gases in the tail of 
the comet, which on this occasion would sweep past 
the Earth. He made his observations at Piazzi Smyth’s 
site and, apart from deducing that the toxic gases of 
comets’ tails were undetectable, he concluded that the 
Canarian skies were of great purity and offered exceptional 
conditions for astronomical observing. Unfortunately, the 
resulting Franco—German initiative to create a European 
observatory on the flanks of the Teide was to come to 
nothing with the advent of the First World War. 

Today, Piazzi Smyth’s Canarian astronomical adven- 
ture is commemorated by the lunar features (christened 
by Piazzi Smyth himself) Montes Tenerife and Pico (after 
the peak of the Teide). 

In the light of these memories of past expeditions, 
it eventually came to be realized that the Canaries might 
offer one of the sites sought after by modern astronomers, 
particularly in the branch of astrophysics. The Spanish 
authorities, in response to international pressure, decided 
to take action and in 1959 the National Ministry of 
Education created the OBSERVATORIO DEL TEIDE, under the 
responsibility of the Rector of the University of La Laguna, 
with the express aim of establishing whether the heights 
of Tenerife could provide the conditions demanded by 
modern astronomical observing and, if so, of promoting 
the setting up of an observatory there. 

Astronomical site testing was undertaken by Spanish 
astronomers in the 1960s and the first telescopes were built 
at the Observatorio del Teide. They were of small aperture 
and were dedicated to the photometry of extended sources 
and solar physics. This led European astronomers to think 
that the Canaries might be a good site for setting up their 
telescopes and they eventually completed the site testing. 

During the 1970s, formal agreements were drawn up 
with various European countries concerning the setting 
up of advanced telescopes in Spanish territory: in 
1972, the Hispano—German Astronomical Centre (CAHA), 
which runs the CALAR ALTO OBSERVATORY (in Almeria), was 
intituted, and in 1979 several European countries signed 
the ‘Agreements on Cooperation in Astrophysics’, through 
which the observatories of the INSTITUTO DE ASTROFISICA DE 
CANARIAS (IAC) are made available to the international 
scientific community. It was during this period that the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spanish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Aerial view of the Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos, on the island of La Palma. It is at this Observatory, at a height 
of 2400 m and bordering the Caldera de Taburiente National Park in the muncipality of Garafia, that the 10 m GTC (Gran Telescopio 


Canarias) will be built. 


Figure 2. Partial view of the Observatorio del Teide, on the island of Tenerife. Astrophysics in the Canaries began on this island in this 
observatory, situated in the district of Izafia at a height of 2400 m, where the municipalities of La Orotava, Fasnia and Giiimar meet. It 


has the most complete array of solar instrumentation in the world. 


infrastructure was provided for the setting up of the most 
advanced group of European optical-infrared telescopes 
of their time. 

Radio astronomy began to be developed in parallel 
with these activities. In 1977 the Yebes Observatory 
(Guadalajara) was created, and in 1982 the INSTITUT DE 
RADIO ASTRONOMIE MILLIMETRIQUE (IRAM) installed a 30 m 
millimetric radio telescope at Pico Veleta (Granada). These 
were followed by NASA space-tracking dishes in Robledo 
and Cebreros (Madrid). 

From the 1980s onwards, this train of circumstances 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


provided Spain, which had not hitherto developed a 
base in astrophysics and had been lacking in any kind 
of modern astronomical instrumentation, with the most 
wide-ranging panoply of optical and radio telescopes in 
Europe. By agreement, the Spanish scientific community 
was to receive between 10% and 25% of the the observing 
time on all foreign instruments. 

The vision, enthusiasm, tireless energy and persever- 
ance of a small group of individuals led eventually to the 
creation of the necessary internal conditions to enable full 
use to be made of this incredible wealth of facilities in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spanish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Three-dimensional view of the building and dome of 
the GTC (Gran Telescopio Canarias). Its primary mirror will 
consist of 36 hexagonal segments, each with a largest diameter 
of 1.9 m and together forming the equivalent of a conventional 
monolithic mirror of 10 m diameter. Its size and design 
innovations will make the GTC the most advanced instrument 
of its generation when it sees first light in the year 2002. The IAC 
is leading the construction of this advanced telescope, to be 
located at its Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos, on the 
island of La Palma. 


the form of the birth and vigorous development of astro- 
physics in Spain. The new influx of foreign instrumenta- 
tion served as a lever to raise Spanish astronomy in record 
time to a par with the most scientifically advanced coun- 
tries. A useful illustration of the activity of the nascent 
science of astrophysics in Spain is given by the fact that 
the 4.2 m Anglo-Dutch William Herschel Telescope is five 
times oversubscribed by Spanish applications for observ- 
ing time. 

The present quantity and quality of scientific 
production, the number of Spanish groups heading 
lines of research and the construction of instrumentation 
have together won the admiration of the international 
scientific community, especially when the rapidity and 
determination with which this high level of achievement 
has been reached are taken into account. Some even speak 
of ‘Spain’s astronomical miracle’. 


The present situation 

In order to gain an overall view of present-day Spanish 
astronomy, it would be useful to follow its main lines 
of development in terms of the recent flood of new 
instrumentation into Spain, the training of researchers, 
the creation of new administrative structures, an open 
policy of fostering public awareness of astronomy and the 
building of new instrumentation. 

However, before entering into these aspects it might 
be opportune to mention the fields in which Spanish 
astronomy has made important contributions. Among 
these I cite, in alphabetical order and with no attempt at 
being comprehensive, active galaxies, astrometry, brown 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. June 1985 saw the official inauguration of the Canarian 
astrophysical observatories, presided over by the Spanish Royal 
Family and royalty and heads of state from Denmark, the 
Federal Republic of Germany, Great Britain, Ireland, the 
Netherlands and Sweden. Among the representatives of the 
international scientific community were five Nobel Laureates in 
physics. 


dwarfs, circumstellar dust shells, cool stars, the cosmic 
microwave background and the large-scale structure of the 
universe, interstellar molecules, nebulae and H II regions, 
neutron stars, normal galaxies, relativistic astrophysics, 
solar physics, star formation and stellar populations, white 
dwarfs and x-ray binaries. 


A deluge of new instruments 

Table 1 summarizes the main astronomical resources at 
present located on Spanish soil. Only the collecting area 
has been highlighted since it is a telescope’s diameter 
that determines its resolving power and light-grasping 
capacity (as well as its cost). 

Special mention must be made of the IAC’s 
international observatories, in which more that 30 
scientific institutions from 14 countries participate, and 
which effectively constitute the European Northern 
Observatory (ENO). There are nine telescopes with mirrors 
of diameter over 1 m, not counting the 10 m Gran Telescopio 
Canarias (GTC) now under construction (figure 3). The 
observatories were inaugurated in 1985 by the King and 
Queen of Spain in the presence of six other heads of state 
and a distinguished selection of scientists (figure 4). 

The excellence of the Canarian skies is specifically 
protected as an ‘astronomical reserve’ by Spanish law. 


The training of researchers 

The training of astrophysicists was begun in the 1960s, 
opportunities being provided for young researchers to 
travel to foreign research centers. It was necessary for 
Spain to have its own investigators if it was to derive 
any benefit from the numerous instruments set up in its 
territory. The training of good astrophysicists was then, 
and continues to be, a prime objective. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spanish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Main astronomical resources. 


Collecting 
surface (m7) 


Observatorio del Teide (Tenerife) 


4 solar telescopes 1.20 
1 infrared telescope 1.77 
3 general-purpose telescopes 1.48 


Various radiotelescopes for CMBR 
Various helioseismological instruments 
Total 4.45 


Participating countries: Belgium, Germany, 
France, Italy, Spain, Taiwan, United Kingdom, 
United States of America 


Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos (La Palma) 
2 solar telescopes 0.48 
1 meridian circle 0.03 
6 general-purpose telescopes 34.46 
Multiple cosmic-ray detectors 
Total 34.96 
(With the coming into service of the GTC this 
total will rise to 113.46 m2.) 
Participating countries: Denmark, Finland, 
Germany, Holland, Ireland, Italy, Norway, 
Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom 


Centro Astronémico Hispano-Aleman (Almeria) 


1 Schmidt camera 0.50 
4 general-purpose telescopes 16.31 
Total 16.81 


Participating countries: Germany, Spain 


Observatorio de Sierra Nevada (Granada) 
2 general-purpose telescopes 2.40 
Total: 2.40 


Participating country: Spain 
Observatorio de Pico Veleta (Granada) 


1 radio telescope 
Total: 


706.50? 
706.50 


Participating countries: France, Germany, Spain 


Centro Astrondémico de Yebes (Guadalajara) 


1 radio telescope 153.86 
1 astrograph 0.13 
Total: 153.86 


Participating country: Spain 


* The collecting area of a radio telescope is not comparable 
with that of an optical telescope. 


In 1975 Spain’s Ministry of Education and Science 
granted the IAC the facilities to pursue ‘a national program 
for the training of researchers in astrophysics’ that was to 
last for 4 yr and produced the first small group of PhDs in 
astrophysics. Since then, the IAC has run a postgraduate 
school that continues to generate an average of nine PhDs 
each year. 

However, this educational undertaking is also shared 
by other astrophysics centers and university departments 
throughout Spain, bringing the mean annual total of new 
doctorates in astrophysics up to about 20. 

Hence, today it may be said that Spain’s main 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


‘astronomical resource’ is not only the telescopes installed 
in its territory but also its highly competitive workforce 
of young astrophysicists, who have already earned 
international recognition and prestige. In 1998 there were 
462 astronomers in Spain, 305 of whom had doctorates 
(data provided by the Sociedad Espafiola de Astronomia). 


New administrative structures 

The successful creation of centers adapted to confront new 
situations and conceived to derive the fullest benefit from 
international cooperation has undoubtedly been a decisive 
factor in the development of astrophysics in Spain. 

In 1959, the National Ministry of Education set up 
the Observatorio del Teide in the Canaries. In 1972, the 
first chair in astrophysics was created at the University of 
La Laguna, which, in 1973, inaugurated the ‘University 
Institute of Astrophysics’. Soon after, in 1975, the 
University of La Laguna, the National Research Council 
(Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, CSIC) and 
the Association of Local Governments (Mancomunidad 
de Cabildos) of the province of Santa Cruz de Tenerife 
(which includes the island of La Palma) jointly created 
the present Instituto de Astrofisica de Canarias (IAC). In 
1982, this institute gained the legal status of a ‘public 
consortium’, made up of the State Administration, the 
Canarian Autonomous Community, the University of La 
Laguna and CSIC; the Observatorio del Teide (on Tenerife) 
and the OBSERVATORIO DEL ROQUE DE LOS MUCHACHOs (on La 
Palma) are in turn governed by the IAC. 

In Andalusia, the Instituto de Astrofisica de An- 
dalucia (IAA) was set up in 1975 by CSIC. The IAA had its 
first headquarters in Almeria and later in Granada. The 
creation of the IAA was the culmination of the combined 
efforts of the Cartuja Observatory and the University of 
Granada. In 1982, a chair and a department of astrophysics 
were created at the University of Granada. In its turn, the 
IAA built the Sierra Nevada Observatory in the 1990s. 

CSIC also has astrophysicists in other institutes and 
at the Centre d’Estudis Avancats de Blanes (Catalonia); 
it also participates in other centers such as the Instituto 
de Astronomia y Geodesia of Madrid’s Complutense 
University and the Instituto de Fisica of Cantabria 
University. 

The Instituto Geografico Nacional (which runs 
Madrid Observatory) created the Centro Astronémico 
de Yebes, an observing station at Calar Alto and, more 
recently, an astronomical center at Alcala de Henares. 

The Royal Institute and Naval Observatory (in San 
Fernando) participates in the Meridian Circle at the Roque 
de los Muchachos Observatory; in 1997, it became a key 
institution in astrometry when it set up its own meridian 
circle at El Leoncito (Argentina). 

The Instituto de Técnica Aeroespacial (INTA) became 
involved in astrophysics in 1972 and, together with 
scientists at the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales 
(National Council of Space Research), created the 
Laboratorio de Astrofisica Espacial y Fisica Fundamental 
(LAEFF) in Villafranca de Castillo. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spanish Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Other Spanish universities eventually followed suit 
and joined in the astronomical ‘boom’. At the present 
time the following universities are, to a greater or 
lesser degree, active in astrophysics: Alicante, the 
Balearic Islands, Barcelona (Autonomous), Barcelona 
(Central), Barcelona (Polytechnic), Cantabria, Granada, La 
Laguna, Madrid (Autonomous), Madrid (Complutense), 
Murcia, the Basque Country, Santander, Santiago de 
Compostela, Seville, Tarragona, Valencia, Valladolid, Vigo 
and Saragossa. 


Promoting public awareness of astronomy 

Spain’s new astronomy has been nurtured with a 
deep commitment towards fostering a public awareness 
of astronomical knowledge. Astrophysicists play a 
prominent role in the popularization of astronomy 
throughout the country, the IAC’s participation in the 
events of the Seville 1992 Exposicién Universal and the 
Science and Cosmos Museum (Tenerife) being clear 
examples of this commitment. 

Interest in the universe around us is growing fast 
in Spain, especially among the young, a fact that is 
reflected in the frequent media coverage of astronomical 
topics. Astronomy is always mentioned in popular science 
magazines, some of these being exclusively devoted to 
astronomy. 

However, perhaps the clearest evidence of social 
assimilation of astronomy is given by the burgeoning of 
active AMATEUR ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETIES. Here there has also 
been a boom, from a mere handful in the 1960s to the 
creation of organized amateur groups innearly all the cities 
(indeed, there are several societies in some cities). 


The construction of astronomical instrumentation 

The first instruments built in Spain were simple, but 
little by little these have evolved in their complexity and 
refinement. Today, there are highly sophisticated Spanish- 
built focal-plane instruments mounted on some of the most 
advanced telescopes in the world. 

Also outstanding in this regard are Spain’s recent 
efforts in space-borne instrumentation. In 1995 ISO 
(Infrared Space Observatory) was launched by ESA and 
SOHO (Solar Heliospheric Observatory) by NASA; both 
observatories carried on board instruments built by 
Spanish industry led by the IAC. Later, the University of 
Valencia provided instrumentation for MINISAT (INTA). 
In the CASSINI and ROSETA missions the IAA led Spain’s 
participation; in the very near future, the University of 
Valencia and LAEFF will play the leading role in the 
INTEGRAL satellite. 

Instrumentation for the forthcoming ESA-NASA 
PLANCK and FIRST missions will be provided by groups 
of Spanish astrophysicists. 

However, the culmination of all Spain’s endeavors 
in the building of new astronomical instrumentation 
is the Gran Telescopio Canarias (GTC), with its latest- 
generation 10 m diameter segmented mirror, for which the 
segment blanks have already been ordered. There is now 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


funding to complete the construction of the telescope and, 
consequently, the participation of other countries has now 
been limited to a maximum of 30%. The project is running 
to schedule and first light is expected for 2002, with the 
GTC entering into service in 2003. 


Future prospects 

Observation is, and will continue to be, a key element 
in the development of models and theories that aid our 
understanding of the universe. After the spectacular 
advances made in this century, astrophysics is now at the 
threshold of new enigmas, whose unraveling will require 
the use of large telescopes located in the best sites on the 
planet. Spain possesses one such site: the Observatorio del 
Roque de los Muchachos. For all these reasons, and for its 
direct impact on Spanish science, technology and industry, 
the IAC has spearheaded the initiative to build the Gran 
Telesopio Canarias (GTC) and will continue to commit itself 
to the large telescopes of the future. 

The take-off of astronomical research in Spain has 
been greatly favored by access to advanced instrumenta- 
tion. In order to consolidate these gains it will be necessary 
for Spain to bolster its theoretical element while at the same 
time reinforcing its observational capacity. It will also be 
necessary to dedicate manpower and means to opening 
and exploiting all windows of observation, both ground 
and space based. 

The high human potential available to Spanish astron- 
omy and the astronomical quality of its observatories and 
the inevitable growth of research and development invest- 
ment in Spain together promise an extremely productive 
future in this science. 


Francisco Sanchez 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
for Astronomy) 


Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous 
Research Tool for Astronomy) 


Small NASA satellite deployed and retrieved by the Space 
Shuttle. First flew in June 1985. The most recent (fifth) 
flight in November 1998 carried an ultraviolet coronal 
spectrometer and white-light coronagraph to study the 
solar corona and acceleration of the solar wind. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Special Astrophysical Observatory, Russia 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Special Astrophysical Observatory, 
Russia 


The Special Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences was organized in 1966 
as a managing institution for operating the 6 m mirror 
optical reflector BTA (Bolshoj Azimuthal Telescope) and 
the 600 m aperture radio telescope RATAN-600. The 
observatory is located near the valley of Zelenchuk river 
(North Caucasus). The 6 m telescope site is at the 
altitude of 2100 m above sea level. In addition to the 
BTA telescope, a few smaller instruments of 0.6 to 1.0 m 
diameter are based at the site. Radio observations are 
made with the RATAN-600, situated on the southern 
outskirts of Zelenchukskaya village, about 20 km to 
the north from BTA. An administrative center, library, 
scientific laboratories and dwelling houses are located 
in Nizhnij Arkhys settlement, which is about halfway 
between the SAO main instruments. 

Both telescopes were built in 1975, but regular obser- 
vations started two years later. The observational time 
at the telescopes is scheduled by international alloca- 
tion committees. Today SAO is the main Russian center 
for ground-based astronomical observations. About one- 
third of scientific programs at the telescopes are carried 
out in cooperation with European astronomers. 

BTA was the world’s largest telescope till the 
beginning of 1990s. First use of the alt-azimuth mounting 
for the giant telescope became an example for further 
large instrument projects. The radio telescope RATAN- 
600 was designed as an antenna with a changeable surface, 
allowing application of the method of aperture synthesis. 

The activity of the observatory is supported by the 
Russian Academy of Sciences and the Ministry of Science 
and Technology. Staff of the Observatory numbers 480 
people. There are two members of the Russian Academy, 
14 ScD and 60 PhD among 114 SAO researchers. Research 
activity includes the space distribution of galaxies, active 
galactic nuclei and quasars, stellar atmospheres and 
magnetic fields, study of binary and multiple stars, 
relativistic objects, interstellar medium structure, and 
solar radio astronomy. 

For further information see 
http://www.sao.ru. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Special Relativity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Special Relativity 


The special theory of relativity (SR), developed by ALBERT 
EINSTEIN in 1905, represents a revolutionary change in 
the human conception of the nature of space and time. 
According to SR, space and time are not absolute but 
must be viewed as components of a single entity, sPACE- 
TIME. This idea has numerous important implications, both 
conceptual and practical. 

SR provides a framework for formulating the laws 
of physics in the absence of gravitational fields. When 
gravity is included, the GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY (also 
developed by Einstein) must be employed. Because 
gravity is a very weak force, SR is adequate for most 
problems. 

A central role is played in SR by the inertial frame, 
defined as a frame of reference in which Newton’s law of 
inertia holds: a body subject to no external forces moves 
with constant velocity. Whenever two such frames move 
rapidly relative to one another, SR departs markedly from 
Newtonian physics. 

SR is based on two postulates: 


(a) (principle of relativity) every law of nature has the 
same form in any two inertial frames; 

(b) the speed of light in a vacuum, c, is the same in all 
inertial frames. 


A principle of relativity had been proposed many 
years earlier by GALILEO, but was long believed to apply 
only to mechanical phenomena; Einstein’s first postulate 
extends Galileo’s principle to encompass all physical laws. 
The second postulate is contrary to intuition, which 
suggests that the measured speed of a light beam (like that 
of any moving body) should depend on the motion of the 
observer. 

SR is by now supported by a vast body of 
experimental evidence. Some of its major implications are 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 

Simultaneity. Observers in different frames will in 
general assign different times to a given event. Two events 
that are simultaneous in one frame of reference occur at 
different times according to observers in another frame. 

Time dilation. A clock that is moving in a given frame 
runs slow when compared with clocks that are stationary 
in that frame. The ratio between recorded time intervals 
is (1 — V*/c*)~'/”, where V is the velocity of the ‘moving’ 
clock. 

Length contraction. A body is shorter when measured 
in a frame in which the body is moving than it is in its 
own rest frame. The ratio between the measured lengths 
is again given by the factor (1 — V*/c?)"*. Only the 
dimension in the direction of motion is contracted. 

Velocity transformation. Let v be the velocity of a body 
in frame S and v’ be its velocity in frame S’, which moves at 
velocity V relative to S. Let v) and v, be the components of 
v parallel to and perpendicular to the direction of V. The 
components transform as follows: 


, yy —V 


vy = To @,V/e2) = @ V/e) (1a) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


uid = 2/224? 


vU= 1 oti, = @ V/e2) (1b) 


In pre-Einsteinian relativity, 
relations are simply 


the corresponding 


vy, = uy — Vz (2a) 


vi, = UL. (2b) 


Relativistic beaming. Consider a transformation in 
which V is close to c. Equations (1) imply that if v; and 
v, are of the same order of magnitude, v’, is much smaller 
than v;. It follows that if a source moving at almost the 
speed of light emits either particles or radiation more 
or less isotropically in its own rest frame, the radiation 
observed in the laboratory is highly concentrated in the 
direction of the source’s velocity. (Equations (1) apply to 
radiation as well as to material particles.) 

Relativistic Doppler effect. SR leads to a modification in 
the classical formula for the change in wavelength detected 
when the source of a light wave moves relative to the 
observer. The relativistic Doppler formula is 


1/2 
f _ ho G F *) (3) 


fo 2% \1EB 

where 1 and f are the observed wavelength and frequency 
and Ay and fo are the corresponding values when source 
and observer are at rest with respect to one another. The 
upper signs apply when source and observer are receding, 
the lower ones when they are approaching. (For oblique 
relative motion, a somewhat more complicated formula 
applies.) 

Mass-energy relation. When a body’s energy changes 
by an amount AE, its mass (inertia) changes by an amount 
Am = (AE)/c?. Arest energy Ey = mc? can be associated 
with a body of mass m. 

Relativistic energy and momentum. Conservation of 
momentum holds in SR provided momentum is defined 
as p = ymv, with 


vet=rjo* (4) 
Relativistic kinetic energy is given by 
K =(y —Wme’. (5) 


The total energy of a body with velocity v is E = ymc’. In 
the limit v < c, momentum and kinetic energy reduce to 
their Newtonian forms p = mv, K = imv>. Momentum 
and total energy satisfy the useful relation 


E? = p*c? + (mc?)’. (6) 


Newton’s law of motion holds in the form F = dp/dt 
(but not in the form F = ma). 

Photons, electromagnetic waves and particles. Maxwell's 
equations of electromagnetism are consistent with the 
principle of relativity: they have the same form in all 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Special Relativity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


inertial frames and can therefore be used to calculate the 
radiation emitted by an accelerated charge of any speed. 

Photons (light quanta) can be incorporated into the 
theory provided their mass is taken to be zero. The energy— 
momentum relation fora photonis E = pc, consistent with 
equation (6) if m = 0. 

Particles can be created and annihilated, subject to 
the appropriate conservation laws (energy, momentum, 
charge, lepton number, baryon number, etc). For example, 
an electron and a positron can annihilate into two or 
more photons. (One-photon annihilation is forbidden by 
conservation of momentum.) 

The role of c as a limiting speed. If the relative velocity 
between two frames were greater than c, the second 
postulate could not be satisfied. According to equation 
(1), vj; = O and v, = c implies vy, = V; if V > c, v’ cannot 
equal c. 

Equation (4) shows that as v — c the kinetic energy 
of a body approaches infinity. Hence a body of non-zero 
mass cannot be accelerated to speed c. 

The velocity transformation implies that if v < c and 
V <c, then v' < c. The hypothesis that c is a limiting 
speed is therefore consistent with the first postulate: if a 
body’s speed is always less than c in one inertial frame, 
the same is true in all frames!. 

Relativity and causality. An intriguing consequence 
of SR is that the time order of spatially separated events 
can differ in two inertial frames. If that were true of 
events between which a cause-and-effect relation exists, 
observers in some frame would detect the effect before 
its cause. This logical catastrophe is avoided by the 
hypothesis that no signal can propagate faster than c. If 
event £) is the cause of £), a signal of some kind must 
travel between them. If the speed of the signal is bounded 
by c, the time interval between the events must be at 
least L/c, where L is their spatial separation. It can be 
shown that whenever that condition is satisfied, the time 
order of the events is absolute: the cause precedes the 
effect in every frame. A ‘superluminal’ signal could lead 
to violation of causality and would have other bizarre 
consequences. 


Applications to astronomy and astrophysics 

The presence in the cosmos of relativistic particles (i.e. of 
particles whose speed is very close to c) is confirmed by 
detecting either the particles themselves (in cosmic rays) 
or the radiation they emit. Most non-thermal sources 
of radiation are interpreted as being due to relativistic 
electrons. 


1 One can show also that if v > c and V < c, thenv’ > c: a 
body moving faster than light in one frame moves faster than 
light in all frames. During the 1960s physicists investigated the 
possibility that faster-than-light particles, named tachyons, might 
exist. A consistent theory can be constructed if the tachyon’s mass 
is assumed to be imaginary. A tachyon’s energy then becomes 
infinite as its speed approaches c from above; hence it cannot 
be slowed below c. All experimental searches for evidence of 
tachyons proved unsuccessful, however. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Cosmic rays 
Particles with energies as high as 10° eV have been 
detected in cosmic rays. The cosmic-ray flux has both a 
Galactic and an extra-Galactic component; except for those 
of the very highest energies; however, most cosmic rays 
are believed to originate within the Galaxy, probably from 
supernovas. 

The characteristic signature of a high-energy cosmic 
ray is the extensive air shower. The primary particle emits a 
gamma-ray photon by bremsstrahlung in the electric field 
of an atom in the atmosphere. The photon subsequently 
creates an electron—positron pair, each member of which 
emits more photons. A cascade thus develops; in addition 
to electrons and photons the shower can contain muons, 
pions, neutrinos and other particles. Showers containing 
as many as 10° particles have been detected. They can 
extend over several square miles; because of relativistic 
beaming, however, most of the shower is confined to a 
small central core. 


Synchrotron radiation 

A charged particle in a magnetic field follows a helical 
path, with the field direction as axis. Being accelerated, 
the particle radiates. At low velocity the radiation is 
primarily at the gyrofrequency v9 = qB,/2mymc. At 
relativistic velocity, however, the emission is dominated 
by high harmonics of vp and is effectively a continuum, 
peaked at the frequency v,, = 0.45y3vp = 10°y?B,. (The 
numerical expression is for electrons, with B in gauss and 
frequency in Hz.) The radiation is emitted preferentially 
in the forward direction, within a cone of opening angle 
1/y, and is strongly linearly polarized. The spectrum falls 
off exponentially for v >> v,,. The radiated power varies 
as E*B?. 

Many acceleration mechanisms lead to a power-law 
distribution of electron energies, N(E) ~ E~". The 
synchrotron spectrum from such a source likewise follows 
a power law, I, ~ v~*; the spectral index of the radiation, 
a, is related to the index of the electron energy spectrum 
by a = (n — 1)/2 and the degree of linear polarization is 
Il = (n+1)/(n+7/3). 

Power-law spectra, at frequencies from radio to x- 
rays and even gamma rays, are observed from a variety 
of Galactic and extra-Galactic sources and are generally 
interpreted as SYNCHROTRON RADIATION. Typical spectral 
indices range from about 0.2 to 1.5. In some sources the 
spectrum steepens in the optical and x-ray regions. 

In the CRABNEBULA, a supernova remnant, the magnetic 
field is estimated to be a few times 107+ G. If the observed 
luminosity is synchrotron radiation, the energy contained 
in relativistic electrons is ~10"8 ergs, about 10~* times 
the energy released in a typical supernova explosion. 
Electrons that emit in the x-ray band have energies about 
101° eV. 

The radiative lifetime of a particle emitting syn- 
chrotron radiation varies as E~!B~?. For electrons emit- 
ting x-rays in the Crab, the lifetime is only about 20 years, 
much less than the age of the remnant; hence the electron 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Special Relativity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


energy must be continuously replenished. The mechanism 
responsible for the replenishment was a puzzle until the 
discovery of the PULSAR (a rotating neutron star) within the 
nebula. The loss in kinetic energy associated with the ob- 
served decrease in the pulsar’s rotational speed is enough 
to accelerate the electrons. 

The pulsar’s own radiation is also interpreted as being 
synchrotron radiation in a much higher magnetic field, 
estimated to be 10° G or more. Some high-energy electrons 
escape from the remnant entirely, accounting for at least 
part of the cosmic- ray electron flux. 

Other sources of synchrotron radiation include radio 
galaxies and quasars, as well as the non-thermal radio 
emission from our own Galaxy. The presence of relativistic 
electrons indicates violent activity in a source. 


Inverse Compton radiation 

In the Compton effect, a photon scatters from a stationary 
electron and is slightly degraded in energy. If a photon 
collides with a relativistic electron, the process can be 
described as Compton scattering in the electron rest frame. 
When the collision is transformed to the laboratory frame, 


the photon’s lab energy is multiplied by a factor of roughly 


y. 


The inverse Compton process is quite similar to 
synchrotron radiation. An electron’s energy loss is 
proportional to y? times the energy density of either the 
local photon field (inverse Compton) or the static magnetic 
field (synchrotron); in each case a power-law distribution 
of electron energies leads to a power-law spectrum of 
radiated energy, with the same relation between spectral 
indices. 

The inverse Compton effect plays an important role 
in X-RAY and GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY. Relativistic electrons 
interact with photons in the microwave background as 
well as with optical photons in starlight. A 100 MeV 
gamma ray can be produced by a 4 GeV electron scattered 
off an optical photon or by a 150 GeV electron scattered off 
a photon from the microwave background. 

The interaction with the microwave background is 
strong enough to exclude a metagalactic origin for high- 
energy cosmic-ray electrons: because of Compton losses 
an electron with energy ~10" eV cannot reach the solar 
system even from the nearest radio galaxy, at a distance 
~4 Mpc. 

When a cloud of relativistic electrons emits syn- 
chrotron radiation, the electrons lose energy by Compton 
scattering off the synchrotron photons. This effect sets 
an upper limit on the possible intensity of synchrotron 
sources. 


Cerenkov radiation 

Although no material particle can travel faster than light 
in vacuo, the speed of light in a medium is only c/n, 
where n is the index of refraction of the medium. Hence 
a charged particle can exceed the speed of light in the 
medium. The particle then emits a characteristic radiation 
called Cerenkov radiation; it is analogous to the shock 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Pes ae 


vr cos @ 


Figure 1. Model for superluminal emission. 


wave emitted by a body traveling faster than sound in 
a medium. Cerenkov radiation is emitted within a cone 
of opening angle 1/y; it is commonly used to detect high- 
energy particles. 


Limitation on source dimensions 

If acosmic source exhibits substantial variation in intensity 
over a time 7, one can argue from causality that its 
dimensions cannot be much greater than cT. This 
argument has been used to infer upper limits on the sizes of 
Quasars and other active regions, whose intensity has been 
observed to vary over months or even less. Care must be 
taken in making such arguments, however. 


Superluminal effects 

In recent years an interesting phenomenon has been 
observed in several extra-Galactic compact RADIO SOURCES: 
material appears to be ejected from a central core at a 
speed that exceeds c, sometimes by a factor as high as 
10. If matter were actually moving that fast, SR would 
be violated. What one observes, of course, is the angular 
separation between the ejected material and the core; if 
one determines the distance of the source from its red 
shift (assumed to be cosmological), the inferred transverse 
velocity exceeds c. 

The commonly accepted explanation of the effect is 
shown in figure 1. If a source of radiation moves at a 
small angle 6 to our line of sight, at speed v close to c, the 
source nearly keeps up with its own radiation. The sketch 
shows two pulses of radiation emitted at times separated 
by an interval T. When it emitted the second pulse, the 
source was closer to us by vT cos 6. The interval between 
arrivals of the two pulses is therefore T[1—(v/c) cos 0]. The 
transverse displacement of the source during the interval 
between the two emissions is vT sin 6; hence its apparent 
transverse velocity is 


Vapp = v sin 6/[1 — (v/c) cos 6]. (7) 


The maximum of this function, for 9 = sin !(1/y), is 
Vapp = Yv, which is arbitrarily large. 

Although the a priori probability that a source moves 
nearly in the direction of our line of sight is small, the 
relativistic beaming effect, described above, increases 
the probability that such a source will be detected. 


L Sartori 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Speckle Imaging of Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Speckle Imaging of Binary Stars 


In addition to their ability to detect faint and distant objects 
in the universe, large telescopes can, in principle, resolve 
fine detail in celestial objects. The theoretical limit of 
resolution for a telescope is linearly related to the APERTURE 
(or diameter of the primary light-collecting mirror or lens 
of the telescope) and by the wavelength at which an 
observation is made (see RESOLVING POWER). Hence larger 
apertures and shorter wavelengths enhance resolution. 
Unfortunately, for telescopes beyond 10-20 cm apertures, 
atmospheric turbulence thwarts the attainment of the 
full diffraction-limited performance otherwise permitted 
by theory. This turbulence reveals itself in the form of 
‘twinkling’ of starlight to the unaided eye. However, when 
a star is observed through a telescope of modest or larger 
aperture, one sees a boiling distribution of intensities 
which spread the starlight out in a blurred and distorted 
‘seeing disk’ typically 1 arcsec in angular extent, many 
times larger than would otherwise by the case. 

In 1970, the French astronomer Antoine Labeyrie 
announced an elegant new technique for analyzing 
these so-called ‘speckle’ images from large telescopes 
to extract information about the structure of the object 
being observed on scales down to the theoretical limit. 
Labeyrie’s method of ‘speckle interferometry’, which 
was diversified by Labeyrie and others to become more 
generally known as ‘speckle imaging’, involved the 
analysis of snapshot exposures (approximately 0.01 s 
in duration) of stars taken at high magnification and 
relatively narrow spectral bandwidths using power 
spectrum or autocorrelation methods (see also CORRELATION 
FUNCTION AND POWER SPECTRA IN COSMOLOGY). The observing 
requirements limit the method to relatively bright objects 
in most cases. 

While speckle imaging has been applied to a variety 
of objects at visible and infrared wavelengths, the greatest 
successes of the technique have been in the field of binary 
star studies. Binary stars are pairs of stars gravitationally 
bound in mutual orbits (see BINARY STARS: OVERVIEW). The 
majority of the stars exist not as single objects like the Sun 
but in binary or higher-order gravitational systems. The 
measurement of the orbital period of a binary system and 
the linear size of the orbit provides a direct determination 
of the mass of the components of the binary. This is 
the only observational means available to astronomers 
for measuring the masses of stars, and much of our 
understanding of how stars form, evolve and die is 
ultimately tied to how well we know the masses of stars. 
Unfortunately, although some 100 000 binary star systems 
have been discovered, most have long orbital periods, and 
hence their orbits are poorly known. 

The enhanced resolution of speckle imaging, when 
carried out at telescopes with apertures larger than 2 m or 
so, allows the resolution of binaries that otherwise appear 
as single stars when observed through the turbulent 
atmosphere. Classical methods for resolving binaries 
utilize the human eye and have led to the discovery of pairs 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The double star 57 Cancri, with an angular separation 
of 1.5 arcseconds, is shown here. Note the similarity between the 
speckle patterns of the two stars in this speckle image taken with 
the 4 m telescope on Kitt Peak, Arizona. 


with angular spacings on the sky as small as 0.15 arcsec. 
Speckle imaging extends this down to 0.03 arcsec, or even 
smaller when one of the few existing telescopes larger than 
4 mis utilized. This increase in resolution coupled with the 
much higher measurement accuracy of speckle imaging 
very significantly improves the quality of binary star orbit 
determinations. Furthermore, where classical methods 
tended to select binaries with orbital periods of decades 
or centuries, speckle imaging can resolve systems with 
periods of years or decades, permitting the determination 
of the orbit within a reasonable timescale. More than 20 000 
measurements of several thousand binary stars have 
resulted from speckle imaging, including the discovery of 
several hundred bright binary systems. 

Speckle imaging of binary stars has now made 
obsolete the visual study of these systems. The most 
active center for speckle imaging at present is the US NAVAL 
OBSERVATORY in Washington, DC, which also serves as a 
clearing house and archive for all types of measurements 
for resolved binary star systems. 

While speckle imaging techniques are applicable to 
single telescopes, related ‘interferometric’ methods em- 
ploying two or more telescopes separated by baselines up 
to hundreds of meters in length permit the resolution of 
binaries much closer than those accessible to speckle imag- 
ing (see INTERFEROMETRY: GROUND). Several interferometric 
arrays of telescopes are operational and others are com- 
ing on line. The current generation of such instruments 
will resolve systems with angular spacings as small as 
0.0001 arcsec, corresponding to orbital periods on the time 
scales of hours and days. As with speckle imaging at single 
telescopes, these telescope arrays must also cope with at- 
mospheric turbulence, but interferometric arrays promise 
a very substantial contribution to the imaging of binary 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Speckle Imaging of Binary Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars and to the determination of the basic physical pa- 
rameter for stars—their mass. 


Bibliography 
McAlister H A 1996 Twenty years of seeing double Sky 
Telescop. 92 (November) 28 


Harold A McAlister 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Spectrographs: Fiber-fed Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectrographs: Fiber-fed 
Spectrographs 


Fiber-fed spectrographs exploit the unique properties of 
optical fibers to increase the performance of astronomical 
instruments. The most important applications are in 
multi-object spectrographs which enable simultaneous 
observations of many astronomical targets, as image 
reformatters for area spectroscopy, and as a means to feed 
high-stability bench-mounted spectrographs. 

Optical fibers are cylindrical glass light guides of 
small diameter (typically 10-300 1m). The most common 
type used in ASTRONOMICAL SPECTROSCOPY are known as 
multi-mode step-index fibers which rely on total internal 
reflection at the boundary between the fiber core and a 
lower refractive index cladding. The critical angle 6.,i¢ for 
total internal reflection defines the numerical aperture (NA) 
of the fiber which depends on the refractive indices of the 


. = . , — 2 = 2 
core and cladding as NA = sin 6crit = \/ Mere — Mdadding” 


Commercially available fibers have numerical apertures 
typically in the range 0.15-0.35 which imply a minimum 
input focal ratio Fmin © /1—NA/2NA for light to be 
efficiently transmitted. Silica glass fibers have excellent 
transmission in the optical (0.4—2.0 wm) range and lengths 
of several tens of metres can be employed without 
significant internal absoption. In the ultraviolet these 
losses increase rapidly (as 4~*) due to Rayleigh scattering 
by density and composition variations within the fiber. 
At longer wavelengths the transmission of silica drops 
dramatically due to hydroxyl ion absoption, but heavy- 
metal fluoride (e.g. zirconium fluoride) and chalcogenide 
glasses with improved infrared transmission are now 
becoming available. 

An important property of optical fibers for the design 
of astronomical spectrographs is the decrease in FOCALRATIO 
of the transmitted beam known as focal ratio degradation 
(FRD). The degree of FRD depends on several factors, the 
most important of which is internal stresses within the 
fiber. The relative change in focal ratio is proportional 
to the input focal ratio F, so that optical fibers work best 
with fast (small F-ratio) beams (so long as F > Fyin). 


Multi-object fiber spectrographs 


One of the most successful applications of optical fibers 
in astronomy has been the development of multi-object 
spectrographs which can obtain the spectra of many 
objects simultaneously. Single optical fibers are positioned 
in the telescope focal plane so that each acquires the 
light from a separate target object. On passing through 
the optical fiber, any spatial information about the target 
is largely scrambled (at least azimuthally) so entrance 
diameters of 1-2 arcseconds are usually chosen to match 
the mean angular sizes of the objects of interest (limited 
by the seEING for point sources). The output ends of the 
fibers are aligned to form a long slit which then feeds a 
conventional dispersive spectrograph. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The 2dF multi-fiber spectrograph can deploy up to 400 
optical fibers across a 2 degree diameter field at the prime focus 
of the 3.9 m Anglo-Australian Telescope. At the core of the 
instrument, seen here at the top of the telescope tube, is an 
advanced robotic positioner capable of repositioning an 
individual fiber to an accuracy of a few wm in < 10 seconds. To 
maximise efficiency, two sets of 400 fibers are available so that 
observations can continue using one of them whilst the second is 
being reconfigured. Changeover between fields takes only a few 
minutes. The fibers feed two spectrographs which are equipped 
with CCD detectors and are also mounted on the top of the 
telescope. ©Anglo-Australian Observatory 


Most of the engineering difficulties are associated 
with accurately positioning the fibers in the focal plane 
(typical requirements being 20 um accuracy across a 
200 mm diameter field). The first multi-object fiber- 
fed spectrographs, developed in the late 1970s, used 
a manual plug-board approach but these have now 
mostly been replaced by automated robotic positioning 
mechanisms. The latter fall into two main classes: (i) 
multiple positioner devices where individual fiber probes 
are actively controlled using stepper motors; (ii) single 
positioner devices where the fiber probes are moved 
sequentially by a single pick-and-place robot and held in 
position passively (usually by a permanent magnet on the 
base of the probe). The first method allows very rapid 
(< 1 minute) reconfiguration of the field but is limited 
in multiplex capability by the size of the active control 
mechanisms (typically to 20-50 fibers). Using the second 
approach, multi-object fiber-fed spectrographs have been 
constructed (see figure 1) which can obtain spectra for 
several hundred astronomical targets simultaneously, at 
the cost of some limitations in reconfiguration time. 

The tremendous gains in observing efficiency, when a 
sufficient density of targets is available, have ensured that 
multi-object fiber-fed spectrographs have been developed 
for most of the world’s major observatories. Currently 
around 30 systems have either been built or are in the de- 
sign phase. Calibration observations which monitor in- 
dividual fiber throughputs are required when using these 
systems to observe faint targets. Unlike multi-slit spec- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Fiber-fed Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


trographs (see SPECTROGRAPHS: MULTISLIT SPECTROGRAPHS), the 
sky-background signal cannot be sampled contiguously 
with the object. The sky spectrum is therefore usually de- 
rived from separate fiber probes which may take very dif- 
ferent optical paths through the spectrograph making sky- 
subtraction difficult. However, close to Poisson-noise lim- 
ited spectra have been demonstrated by ‘beam-switching’ 
of objects between close pairs of fibers. 


Integral-field fiber spectrographs 

Fiber-fed integral-field spectroscopy is a means to obtain 
area spectroscopy of extended targets using optical fibers 
to dissect the image. The simplest systems use dense packs 
of bare fibers at the input, but the efficiency is limited 
(typically to < 60%) by the packing fraction achievable 
with a given core/cladding ratio. The most effective 
method is to use a high fill-factor hexagonal or square 
microlens array to couple the input light into a matrix of 
individual fibers. These input optics can simultaneously 
condition the input focal ratio to an optimum value 
(F/3-F/5) for propagation down the fiber with minimal 
FRD. The spatial coverage and spectral resolution of such 
instruments are largely determined by detector size, with 
devices containing 1000+ spatial elements now becoming 
available. Their advantages relative to other forms of 
imaging spectrographs (e.g. Fourier transform, Fabry- 
Perot) are the relatively wide spectral coverage, fixed 
format on the detector, and the efficient use of detector 
pixels. 


High-stability fiber spectrographs 

The use of flexible fibers as optical feeds from the telescope 
focal plane to the spectrograph presents the opportunity to 
remove the spectrograph from the telescope entirely and 
mount it on a stationary platform. Although limiting the 
throughput at ultraviolet wavelengths, the advantages of 
doing so are increased stability (and decreased cost) due to 
the stable gravity vector, and the absence of flexure during 
telescope motion. In addition, the image scrambling 
properties of optical fibers can be used to advantage to 
remove the wavelength errors associated with focal plane 
image motion (from seeing or telescope guiding errors). 
Although the radial scrambling of light in an optical fiber 
is incomplete, particularly at fast F-ratios, the azimuthal 
scrambling leads to an order of magnitude improvement 
in centroid stability compared to that of a conventional 
slit spectrograph. Because they are sited off the telescope, 
fiber-fed high-stability spectrographs can also be kept in 
a controlled environment to minimize thermal effects. 
Using these techniques, wavelength precisions of 1 part in 
10° are achievable, comparable to that required to detect 
Jupiter-size planets around solar-type stars via their reflex 
Doppler motions (see also EXOPLANETS). 


Conclusions 

Over the past two decades, optical fibers have made 
a major impact on the design and use of astronomical 
spectrographs. With the continuing development of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


new types of optical fiber with improved performance, 
for the telecommunications and fiber sensor markets, 
it appears likely that this trend will continue for the 
forseeable future. Extending their range of operation 
into the thermal infrared using cooled fibers, and 
combining the advantages of integral field spectroscopy 
with the efficiency gains of multi-object spectroscopy via 
deployable mini-integral field units (see SPECTROGRAPHS: 
INTERNALFIELD UNITS), are areas currently under active study. 


Ray Sharples 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution 
Spectrographs 


Definitions 
A spectrum (plural: spectra) is the wavelength or 
frequency distribution of radiation emitted by any radiant 
source. Visually, it is the familiar band of colors seen 
through a prism or in a rainbow. When the spectrum is 
observed by eye the instrument used is a ‘spectroscope’. 
If recorded on a photographic emulsion, the instrument is 
a ‘spectrograph’. When the photometric precision is high 
the process is called ‘spectrometry’ and the instrument 
is a ‘spectrometer’ or ‘spectrophotometer’. The term 
‘spectrograph’ has been extended to mean any instrument 
that uses any image detector to record the spectrum. 
Spectral resolving power or resolution is the power 
of a spectrograph to distinguish between adjacent spectral 
features, or lines. Numerically, it is the ratio of the 
wavelength of a spectral line, 4, and the separation da 
between two just-resolved lines: 


ps 
~ di’ 


In this article we will deal with the history, 
design principles, and implementation of high-resolution 
astronomical spectrographs. 


The role of spectroscopy in astronomy 

Radiation from astronomical sources spans the full 
spectrum from low-energy long-wave radio emissions 
to highly energetic hard x- and gamma-rays. Only a 
narrow band of wavelengths visible to the human eye 
was accessible to astronomers of the 18th and earlier 
centuries. With the invention of photography in 1839 
and its application to astronomy in 1840 we could detect 
light into the near ultraviolet and the near infrared. The 
discovery of radio waves from space, by Karl Jansky in 
1933 at Bell Laboratories, revealed the existence of very- 
long-wavelength radiation from astronomical sources. 
The far ultraviolet blocked by the Earth’s atmosphere 
was first detected by high-altitude balloon and rocket 
experiments. Ultraviolet light and x-rays originating in 
far distant sources are now routinely observed from space- 
borne telescopes. 

Throughout most of history, objects seen in the 
night sky could only be understood in terms of human 
interpretation of their visual appearance and motions. 
With the invention of spectroscopy the physical nature of 
the stars became a subject of legitimate investigation— 
thus the term ‘astrophysics’. It became possible to 
determine not only the chemical composition of the stars, 
but their atmospheric temperatures and pressures as well 
as their velocities through space and orbital motions 
about previously unseen companion stars, from which 
we could measure their masses. The spectrograph could 
distinguish between spectral features due to separate 
stars in otherwise unresolved multiple-star systems. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The large spectrographic survey known as the Henry 
Draper Catalog revealed that hydrogen—not iron—is the 
dominant chemical element in the universe. Spectroscopy 
permitted, for the first time, an unambiguous distinction 
between the two primary types of nebulae (Latin: clouds)— 
those that are composed primarily of rarefied gases such 
as the great nebula M42 in Orion, and unresolved stellar 
systems such as the Andromeda galaxy M31. This gave 
science its first unequivocal proof that a universe filled 
with galaxies extends far beyond the borders of our home 
Milky Way Galaxy. That view was further reinforced by 
Edwin Hubble and Milton Humason, in 1929-1930, when 
they discovered the expansion of the universe through 
spectroscopy of extra-Galactic nebulae. 

The next step in understanding the nature of the 
universe has taken place in the last third of the 20th century, 
through high-resolution spectrographic revelation of the 
fine details of spectral lines. Its most recent and famous 
application has been the detection and measurement 
of the minute changes in the motions of nearby stars 
indicating that unseen planets are in orbit about them. 
High-resolution spectrography is critical to studies of the 
abundances of specific isotopes of the chemical elements, 
from which much is being learned of the evolution of the 
chemical elements in stellar interiors. 


History of astronomical spectroscopy 

Sir Isaac Newton (1643-1727) founded the science of 
spectroscopy in about 1665 with his investigations of the 
nature of light, published in 1704. A century later, in 1802, 
chemist William Wollaston discovered dark lines crossing 
the spectrum of the Sun; he thought that these were gaps 
separating the colors. JOSEPH FRAUNHOFER disputed this 
assumption when he observed, in 1814-1815, that the solar 
spectrum is marked with large numbers of dark lines 
superimposed on an otherwise continuous gradation of color. 
He saw some 600 lines and cataloged the positions of 324 
of them (see FRAUNHOFER LINES). He designated the more 
prominent lines by letters of the alphabet and some of 
these designations are still in use. In 1859 GUSTAV KIRCHHOFF 
demonstrated that the dark lines are due to absorption of 
light of certain wavelengths in an overlying atmosphere of 
the Sun and he stated his three laws of spectral analysis. 


(1) A luminous solid or liquid emits light as a continuous 
spectrum. 

(2) Ararified luminous gas emits a bright-line spectrum. 

(3) Certain wavelengths are absorbed from the light of a source 
of a continuous spectrum when passed through a rarified 
gas, resulting in a dark-line or absorption spectrum. 


An important characteristic of any rarified gas is that 
its dark lines due to law (3) correspond in wavelength to 
its bright lines due to law (2). For the first time in history, 
science began to realize the possibility of identifying the 
chemical elements in the Sun, through spectroscopy. 

Kirchhoff’s work marked the origin of the science of 
astrophysics. In the 1860s he and Robert Bunsen first 
demonstrated that the chemical elements in the Sun are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the same as those found on Earth. By 1864 British astronomer 
SIR WILLIAM HUGGINS identified spectral lines in the stars 
with those of known chemical elements found on Earth, 
and he discovered that some nebulae have pure emission 
spectra and must therefore be gaseous. This series of 
events heralded an understanding of the commonality of 
the chemical nature of stars everywhere in the universe. 
Huggins had attempted photographing the spectrum of 
the bright star Vega, in 1863, but he was unable to 
photograph the Fraunhofer absorption lines. It was left 
to HENRY DRAPER (1837-1882) to obtain the first successful 
stellar spectrograms. 

Draper’s father, American scientist John W Draper, 
was among the first to experiment with photography 
and in 1840 obtained the first photographs of the Moon 
showing the lunar ‘seas’, on Daguerreotype plates. 
He successfully photographed the solar spectrum with 
a prism spectroscope. Being dissatisfied with the 
wavelength scale of the Fraunhofer lines, he had a 
diffraction grating ruled on a tiny speculum metal mirror 
and succeeded in obtaining useful solar spectrograms’. 

Draper encouraged his son Henry to continue these 
investigations, and in 1858 Henry began construction of 
an observatory complete with a 71 cm reflecting telescope 
with silvered glass mirror. He abandoned speculum metal 
on the advice of Sir John Herschel. On 1 August 1872, 
Henry Draper obtained the first photographic spectrum of 
a star—Vega—complete with Fraunhofer lines. Following 
the death of Henry Draper at age 45, in 1882, his wife and 
scientific collaborator Anna carried a number of his stellar 
spectra to Harvard College Observatory, where director 
Edward Pickering had offered to reduce the plates. This 
led to a scientific collaboration that eventually resulted in 
the Henry Draper Catalog of Stellar Spectra, which together 
with the Henry Draper Extension cataloged the spectra of 
over 350000 stars. This was one of the most important 
contributions to the science of astrophysics in modern 
times. Among other discoveries resulting from the Henry 
Draper Catalog, Miss Cecilia Payne in her PhD thesis 
research (1921-1924) recognized that the strengths of the 
spectral lines indicated an abundance of hydrogen in 
stellar atmospheres that was a million times greater than 
that of the metals, in particular iron. This discovery forever 
exploded the contemporary belief that iron was the most 
abundant element in the universe. 

In the meantime German astronomer HERMANN 
VOGEL (1841-1907) was experimenting with photographic 
spectroscopy at the Potsdam Astrophysical Observatory, 
where he was director. He was the first to observe radial 
velocities of stars with sufficient precision to discover 
spectroscopic binary stars, and with Julius Scheiner he was 
the first to accomplish the spectroscopic determination 
of stellar diameters and masses. They proved in 1889, 


1 A diffraction grating isa reflective or refractive surface on which 
is ruled a multitude of parallel, closely spaced grooves which 
break up the reflected or refracted light into separate wavelets. 
Through mutual interference, the directions of propagation of the 
transmitted rays are redistributed according to their wavelengths. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


through its radial velocity changes, that the variable star 
Algol is an eclipsing binary. 

Acommon problem in early photographic spectrogra- 
phy was the difficulty of obtaining reliable exposures. This 
was blamed on degradation of the quality of the emulsion 
on the wet collodion plates during long-time exposures 
and on instability of the image on the plate due to flex- 
ure of the instrument. The stability question was solved 
when Walter S Adams built large stationary prism spec- 
trographs at the coudé (French: elbow) foci of the Mt Wil- 
son 1.5 m (1911) and 2.5 m (1925) telescopes. The spec- 
trographs were mounted solidly on the concrete structure 
of the coudé room, where it became practical not only 
to use very long focal lengths but also to support large 
lenses and prisms free of flexure. At the 2.5 m telescope a 
series of increasingly improved spectrographs culminated 
in 1934 in the coudé spectrograph of Theodore Dunham, 
using large diffraction gratings. His was the first use of 
the Schmidt camera to photograph the very wide angular 
extent of high-dispersion spectra. 

In the meantime work had been proceeding on the 
art of making finely ruled diffraction gratings. In 1785 
Rittenhouse had experimented with a diffraction grating 
made with 53 slits in a width of 1.2 cm. Fraunhofer had 
ruled a grating with 4000 grooves on a 1.2 cm mirror as 
early as 1823 and in 1846 Nobert generated a grating of 
6000 grooves over a width of 2.5 cm. Lord Rayleigh used 
Nobert’s gratings in his experiments on the physics of 
light. By 1870 L M Rutherford had made a grating with 
35000 grooves over a width of 5 cm. This was the first 
diffraction grating to actually equal the resolution of the 
available glass prisms. 

About 1882 Henry A Rowland, at Johns Hopkins 
University, built ruling engines with which he made 15 cm 
gratings having more than 100000 grooves and resolving 
power exceeding 150000. This earned him the distinction 
of ‘father of the modern diffraction grating’. Additional 
ruling laboratories were set up at Mt Wilson Observatory 
and at the University of Chicago, where gratings were 
made with up to 15 cm ruled width, giving resolving 
power up to 350000. These three laboratories produced 
the world’s supply of large gratings through the 1930s. 
Michelson’s engine at Chicago made one grating of width 
24 cm with resolving power 600 000. 

Early reflection gratings were ruled in speculum 
metal, an alloy of tin and copper, with a diamond tool. 
Speculum metal had been widely used for telescope 
mirrors (e.g. by Sir William Herschel). It is brittle and 
somewhat granular and the diamond tools tended to wear 
out during the ruling, limiting the size of grating that could 
be made. In 1933 John Strong, at Johns Hopkins University, 
introduced vacuum deposition of aluminum on glass. This 
made a soft, smooth surface on which larger gratings could 
be ruled, enabled by much longer diamond life, and it 
made for brighter reflection and lower scattered light. 

A major loss of efficiency in gratings is due to 
diffraction of light into multiple orders of interference. 
Wood, Babcock and others experimented with methods 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of controlling these losses. In 1944 they succeeded in 
controlling groove shape by shaping the diamond ruling 
tool. This allowed directing as much as 60% of the light 
into a selected spectral order. The term ‘blazed gratings’ 
was coined by George R Harrison to describe this effect. By 
1949 Harrison was ruling the first gratings working in very 
high spectral orders and optimized at very large ‘blaze 
angles’, a type of diffraction grating he named an ‘echelle’. 
Typical echelle blaze angles are 60° and greater. He built 
the MIT B and C ruling engines and, with interferometric 
control of the screw used to define the groove spacing, 
these have become the standards of excellence for gratings 
up to 30 cm ruled width and echelles up to 40 cm. The B 
engine is now at the Richardson Grating Laboratory of 
Spectronic Instruments, Inc, and the C is at the National 
Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO). 


Theory of high-resolution spectrography 

Definition of high resolution 

For the purposes of astrophysical research, resolving 
power is considered ‘high’ if all the detail in the spectral 
lines can be distinguished. This can be achieved if the 
resolution of the spectrograph is somewhat sharper than 
the widths of the narrowest lines in the source spectrum: 


zy c 
Repectrograph = di zd V 


where c is the speed of light (300000 km s~’) and V is 
the combined thermal and microturbulence velocity of the 
atoms constituting the star’s atmosphere. For the vast 
majority of stars, the range of thermal velocities is between 
3 and 15 km s~! with microturbulence lying between 1 
and 7 km s"!, so that high resolving power ranges from 
20000 to 120000. For cool planetary atmospheres and 
cold interstellar medium, resolving power of 500000 to 
1000 000 has been found useful. 


Principles of high-resolution grating spectrograph design 
There are many excellent optical texts describing diffrac- 
tion of light by parallel slits. From these we derive the 
grating equation; the parameters are illustrated in figure 1. 
Light of wavelength 4 is diffracted froma reflection grating 
with d~! grooves mm! in accordance with 


dad : 
A = —(sina@ + sin B) cosy (1) 
m 


in which m is an integer (0, +1, +2,...) giving the order 
of interference and a and £ are angles of incidence and 
dispersion relative to the normal to the grating’s ruled 
surface”. The angle y is the orthogonal component of the 
angle of incidence and is usually near zero; we will neglect 
y in what follows. The reciprocal angular dispersion is the 
derivative of equation (1): 
da 


d ° 
— = — cosf (Arad! 2 
dip = CO8P Arad) Q) 
2 In the sign convention used for these equations, the angles a 


and 6 both have the same numerical sign if both incident and 
dispersed rays lie on the same side of the normal. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Segment of an echelle grating with blaze angle 6g, the 
tilt of the active side of the grooves. Parameters used in the text 
(equations (1)—(4)) are 

e angle of incidence of the rays (the arrow pointing toward the 
echelle), a, 

e orthogonal component of the angle of incidence, y, 

e angle of dispersion of the rays (arrow pointing away), B, 

e distance between the adjacent grooves, d. 


since @ is normally constant. 
dispersion is 


The reciprocal linear 


da d = 

aa > a cos 6B (A mm) 
where F is the focal length of the spectrograph camera 
in millimeters and d is the spacing between grooves in A 
(1 A =10-! m). In most gratings, d is comparable with 
or somewhat greater than the wavelength of the light; in 
echelles it can be greater than the wavelength by factors of 
order 30-100. 

A more illuminating relation results if we divide 

the dispersion equation (2) by the grating equation (1), 
eliminating m and d: 


dA _—s_ AcosB 
dp sina+sinp’ 


(3) 


This equation shows that dispersion by a grating at 
wavelength 2 is a function only of the angles a and f. 
The spectral order m and the groove width d have been 
eliminated. Particularly for an echelle grating, m and d 
are freely selectable to meet any desired geometry in the 
spectrograph design. 

We can rewrite equation (3) to obtain the spectral 
resolving power: 


Xr sina + sin B 


R= = 
di cos B dp 


The image at the detector is the monochromatic image of 
the spectrograph slit, of angular width df. This can be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


expressed in seconds of arc on the sky if we incorporate 
the telescope and spectrograph apertures: 


sina + sin B Dc 


x 206 265. (4) 
cos B Dr 


This is the throughput equation for a grating spectrograph. 
Here, y is the width of the object in the sky or of the 
spectrograph entrance slit, in seconds of arc. The constant 
206 265 is the conversion factor from radians to seconds of 
arc; Dc and Dy are the apertures of the collimated beam 
and of the telescope. The equation is general and serves 
for any grating spectrograph. The throughput equation is 
the critical relationship for the design of any spectrograph 
in which the resolving power is controlled by the size 
of the stellar image due to seeing or to the width of the 
entrance slit, whichever is smaller. The product Rg is a 
useful figure of merit for any spectrograph. Typically, if we 
select R = 60000 as the required resolving power then it is 
useful to design so that Rg = 60000”. In this case the slit 
is 1” wide, letting through most of the stellar image under 
typical atmospheric conditions. The main parameters of 
the spectrograph, the size and blaze angle of the grating, 
are completely determined by equation (4). The remaining 
tasks are selection of the number of grooves mm!, which 
controls the free spectral range between adjacent orders, 
and the focal length of the camera. This should match the 
image of the spectra to the size of the CCD and the spectral 
resolution to the pixel spacing on the image detector. 


The modern era 
New detectors for spectrography 
From its first use in stellar spectrography in 1872 
until 1974, the dominant detector was the photographic 
plate. However, with a maximum detective quantum 
efficiency of only 4%, 96% of all photons that managed to 
reach the photographic emulsion failed to darken a grain of 
silver. Furthermore, in high-resolution spectrography the 
light of the star image is spread over a large number 
of pixels, greatly diluting the total photon count per 
pixel. As a consequence, high-resolution photographic 
spectrography was limited to long exposures on relatively 
bright objects, and the use of large telescopes for high- 
resolution spectrography experienced a lull during the 
1960s. At the same time renewed interest in extra-Galactic 
research fueled by the newly discovered Quasars and 
PULSARS took up much of the large telescope time. 
Arenaissance in high-resolution spectrography began 
with the completion of the McDonald Observatory’s 
Harlan J Smith 2.7 m telescope and coudé spectrograph 
in March 1969. These instruments were funded primarily 
for ground-based support of NASA’s planetary research 
programs. A computer-controlled photoelectric spectrum 
scanner was added in May 1969 and a high-resolution 
echelle in 1971. These were applied to research on 
atmospheres of the planets and stars. With the echelle 
in double pass, resolving power of 600 000 was achieved 
in studies of the extremely narrow lines in stellar spectra 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


due to the intervening interstellar medium. With a Data 
General Nova™ computer in place, the time was ripe 
for the first application of solid-state image detectors to 
astronomical spectrography, in 1973. The first device 
was a Reticon™ linear array of 256 pixels on a silicon 
integrated circuit chip. These devices have peak quantum 
efficiencies of about 70%, greatly exceeding those of 
photographic plates. A low-resolution spectrograph was 
built (See SPECTROGRAPHS: LOW-RESOLUTION SPECTROGRAPHS), 
and spectrographic and imaging observations were made 
with the Reticon on the 0.9 m and 2.1 m telescopes. 
Development of an intensified Reticon array, which 
worked by photoelectron bombardment of the silicon chip, 
followed. This was an image amplification technique 
to overcome the high read-noise level characteristic of 
Reticon arrays. The first successful device was put 
into routine operation in high-resolution spectrography 
at the 2.7 m coudé spectrograph in 1974. This device 
had a single linear array of 1024 pixels. The intensified 
Reticon was dubbed the self-scanned Digicon, following 
Edward Beaver’s pioneering work at San Diego on the 
parallel-readout Digicon later used on the Goddard High- 
Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS) on the Hubble Space 
Telescope. Self-scanned digicons remained in service at 
McDonald Observatory until 1988. In 1976 a bare Reticon 
array was put into operation alongside the self-scanned 
digicon, advantage being taken of the high quantum 
efficiency of the silicon integrated circuit chip. It exhibited 
a particularly great advantage in the near infrared, where 
photoemissive devices have poor sensitivity. The Reticon 
array became the most widely utilized image detector in 
high-resolution spectrography at McDonald Observatory 
until CCDs phased it out in 1992. The Reticon was 
adopted at many observatories worldwide during the 
decade immediately preceding application of the first fully 
successful CCDs. 

In the mid-20th century, a wide variety of electronic 
devices capable of single-photon image detection came 
under development, largely to meet the needs of 
astronomical research from space-based telescopes. These 
included TV cameras, image tubes with photographic 
output, and a variety of techniques for direct readout of 
amplified photoelectronic images. Parallel development 
efforts led, in the 1980s, to availability of high- 
quality ‘science grade’ CCDs of large area and high 
resolution. These activities have led to the nearly complete 
replacement of the photographic plate in astronomy. In 
parallel with all this, a renaissance of ground-based 
telescope construction began in the early 1980s when 
a series of conferences sponsored by ESO, NOAO and 
SPIE pointed the way to the 1990s construction boom 
in telescopes with apertures up to 10 m. All of these 
have included high-resolution spectrographs as part of 
their initial suite of instrumentation. This has led directly 
to the first-ever confirmed discoveries of planets outside 
the solar system—some 29 now known through their 
gravitational tugs on their parent stars, detected through 
high-resolution spectrography and precision stellar radial 
velocities (see EXOPLANETS). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


te} 
u 
le} 
o 
u 
A] 
= 


Corrector 2a 


Prisms 
Echelle 2 
Corrector 2b 


Figure 3. The coudé spectrographs of the 2.7 m HJ Smith telescope at McDonald Observatory. Optical path 1 (dashed rays): 2.7 m 
coudé spectrograph, completed by Robert G Tull in 1969; shown without its photographic cameras, which were removed in 1988. 
Available foci are as follows: auto-collimated focus of collimator 1 (CCD 1a) (Rmax = 600000), echelle in double pass); Newtonian 
focus of camera 1 (CCD 1b) (Rmax = 200000). Optical path 2 (solid rays): 2dcoudé spectrograph, completed in 1992 by Robert G Tull, 
Phillip J MacQueen and John Good. Access is obtained by removing the grating ‘echelle 1’. Available foci are as follows: focal surface 
of the pupil mirror (CCD 2a) (Rmax = 200000); folded Schmidt camera focus (CCD 2b) (Rmax = 70000). 


New spectrographs for very large telescopes 


Four technological advances characterize the modern 
high-resolution astronomical spectrograph: (1) electronic 
image detectors with two-dimensional formats and high 
quantum efficiency, (2) efficient echelle gratings well 
matched to detector formats, (3) computer-controlled 
automation and data retrieval and (4) computerized 
optical design methods and new optical glasses. The 
dispersion of light by an echelle is much greater than that 
of a conventional diffraction grating, owing to its high 
blaze angle. For that reason the resolving power can be 
high even though the slit is wide open, yielding greatly 
improved efficiency. The echelle disperses the spectrum 
in a narrow ray-fan of width typically 6°-7° containing 
many overlapping spectral orders. Cross-dispersion with 
a prism or grating separates these orders and the resulting 
stack of spectra is imaged ona large-format CCD, exposing 
many spectral orders simultaneously. These advances 
have vastly increased overall efficiency, pushing the limits 
of research to much fainter sources. A typical echellogram 
is illustrated in figure 2. In some cases the classical Schmidt 
is not the best camera choice. The CCD may be too large 
to fit inside a Schmidt camera without excessive blockage 
of the incident light. Recent developments in optical 
design combined with a broad range of newly available 
optical glasses have led to refractive cameras with fast 
focal ratio and flat, aberration-controlled external focal 
surfaces well matched to large-area CCDs over a broad 
spectral range (see CAMERAS). Examples of spectrographs 
using these techniques will be given here. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Hubble Space Telescope (HST) On 25 April 1990 the 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE and GHRS were launched into 
low Earth orbit aboard the space shuttle Discovery. 
With a selection of five first-order gratings and one 
echelle giving resolving powers of 2000-80 000, extensive 
programs of spectrography were carried out over a 
period of 7 yr, with observations on stars as faint as 
14th magnitude. Two Digicon intensified linear diode- 
array image detectors, each with 512 photon-counting 
pixels, served to record the spectrum. The spectral range 
was in the ultraviolet, a region totally inaccessible from 
ground-based observatories. Being above the influence 
of the Earth’s atmosphere, the telescope delivered nearly 
diffraction-limited stellar images to the spectrograph, 
greatly improving its resolving power and efficiency. 

During a service mission in February 1997 the GHRS 
was removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and 
replaced by the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph 
(STIS). STIS has a CCD for use in low- and intermediate- 
resolution spectrography from far ultraviolet into the 
infrared and two MAMA (multianode microchannel array) 
imaging detectors, each with 1024 x 1024 pixels which 
operate at 2048 x 2048 in high-resolution mode. When used 
for high-resolution echelle spectrography with the four 
echelles, these photon-counting detectors have broader 
ultraviolet spectral coverage per exposure than could be 
obtained with GHRS, at higher resolving power. 


McDonald Observatory 2.7 m H J Smith Telescope A 
spectrograph completed in 1992 and operating in parallel 
with the original coudé spectrograph has been named 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PRIMARY 
ACCESS DOOR 


y- HATCH 


CAMERA MIRROR 


FIELD FLATTENER/ 
FOCAL PLANE 


CORRECTORS 


CROSS—DISPERSER 


COLLIMATORS 
of 


FUTURE 


DOOR 


EXPANSION 


TOP VIEW 


Pe 


SUT 


ECHELLE | 


CROSS—DISPERSER 


/0 


COLLIMATOR 


a 


6 FT 


P6105.4/1—31-92 


Figure 4. HIRES spectrograph of the 10 m Keck I telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. Its resolving power is about 60000. Built by a team 
headed by Steven S Vogt, it came into operation in 1993. Figure reproduced from Vogt et al 1994. HIRES: the high resolution echelle 
spectrometer on the Keck ten-meter telescope Instrumentation in Astronomy VIII Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng. 2198 362, by 


permission of Steven Vogt. 


‘2dcoudé’ (figure 3). Itusesa 79 grooves mm! echelle with 
blaze angle 63.9° (R-2) which is interchangeable with a 52 
grooves mm! echelle blazed at 65.3°. Cross-dispersion is 
accomplished by a train of four 15° fused silica prisms in 
double pass, directly in front of the echelle. The collimator 
aperture is 19 cm. The detector is a Tektronix CCD with 
2048 x 2048 24 wm pixels. Resolving power at the folded 
Schmidt camera is 70000. There is an intermediate focus 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with resolving power of order 200000. Stars of magnitude 
V = 11.2 can be recorded at R = 60000 with an exposure 
time of an hour at signal-to-noise ratio 100, in average 
seeing conditions. 


Keck HIRES The best-known example of a modern high- 
resolution spectrograph ona very large telescope is HIRES, 
built by Steven Vogt on the 10 m Keck I telescope on Mauna 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Keck H 


LyB/OVI 


i 


50 


RELATIVE INTENSITY 


(e) 1 ign 


IRES Spectrum of QSO 1422+2309 


Lya 


5000 


4600 4800 


WAV 


50 [ 


L 1 L 
5600 5800 


ELENGTH (A) 


NV 


40 b 


30 


O1/Sill 


CH 


20 F 


RELATIVE INTENSITY 


SilV 


et ipeee Ts 3 ao 
5800 6000 6200 


WAVI 


L l L 
6400 
ELENGTH (A) 


i — pe Ng pe 
6600 6800 7000 7200 


Figure 5. High-resolution spectrum of the quasar QSO 1422 + 2309. This spectrum was obtained in a 7.5 h exposure using the Keck 
HIRES spectrograph by Wallace L W Sargent. The resolution is 45000. This figure demonstrates the power of a modern 
high-resolution spectrograph on a very large telescope. The broad emission line at wavelength 5605 A is due to the far ultraviolet 
Lyman a line of hydrogen in this heavily redshifted Z = 3.61 quasar (the line is shifted 3.61 times its rest wavelength of 1216 A). 
Nearly all the spectral absorption lines to the left (blue) of the emission peak at 5605 A are due to Lyman «@ absorption in intervening 
intergalactic hydrogen clouds at redshifts distributed from 0 to 3.61 by the expansion of the universe. Such a distribution of absorption 
lines has become known as the ‘Lyman @ forest’. Note the nearly complete absence of absorption lines with wavelengths greater than 
5605 A. This quasar, with total brightness V = 16.2, is among the most distant objects known in the universe. Figure reproduced by 
permission of W L W Sargent, with thanks to the Keck observatory. 


Kea (figure 4). It uses a mosaic of three echelles with blaze 
angle 70.5° and total ruled width 1.2 m cross-dispersed by 
a mosaic of two first-order diffraction gratings. The f/1 
catadioptric camera designed by Harland Epps has a 1.1m 
diameter image-forming mirror and 75 cm aberration- 
control lenses at its entrance aperture. Its 30 cm beam 
diameter is adequate to ensure minimal light blocking at 
its internal CCD housing. This spectrograph went into 
operation in 1993 and quickly demonstrated its power in 
research on extra-Galactic objects as faint as magnitude 
19.6. Its spectra of the ‘LYMAN ALPHA FOREST’ seen against 
background quasars are well-known examples (figure 5). 


ESO VLT The Ultraviolet—Visible Echelle Spectrograph 
(UVES) is on a Nasmyth platform of one of the four 
8 m telescopes constituting the European Southern 
Observatory’s Very Large Telescope (VLT) on Cerro 
Paranal in Chile. Built by Hans Dekker and Bernard 
Delabre, it combines two independent spectrographs, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


enabling simultaneous exposures in the red and blue 
ranges of the spectrum. Each utilizes an echelle with blaze 
angle 75°. The ruled width of each echelle is 84 cm, and 
each is a mosaic of two replications on a single Zerodur 
blank. Made at the Richardson Grating Laboratory, these 
are the largest diffraction gratings currently in existence 
for visible light spectroscopy. The beam diameter is 20 cm. 
The two channels are separated by means of a dichroic beam- 
splitter (a mirror that transmits red light and reflects the 
blue). Each uses a grating for cross-dispersion. Because of 
the very high dispersion of the echelles, UVES is a highly 
compact instrument for its resolving power of 120000. 
With the excellent seeing conditions at the site in Chile, 
this spectrograph should see very little loss due to the slit 
width. 

Robert Tull has built a single-channel adaptation of 
the UVES, called simply HRS. It is at the 9.2 m Hobby- 
Eberly Telescope at McDonald Observatory. It differs from 
UVES in that the starlight is conducted to the spectrograph 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. A typical echelle spectrogram: sunlight at the 2dcoudé 
spectrograph of the McDonald Observatory 2.7 m telescope. The 
resolving power is R = 4/da = 200000. The spectrum was 
exposed on a 2048 x 2048 Tektronic, Inc, CCD. The image covers 
a fraction of the observable spectrum in echelle spectral orders 
56-36 (top to bottom) covering parts of the wavelength region 
6126 A-9550 A in the red and near infrared. The strong, broad 
lines in order 45 (near the centre of the figure) and the strong 
sharper lines in order 50 are the ‘A’ and ‘B’ bands of molecular 
oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere. Atmospheric water vapor 
produced the strong lines in order 42. 


by an optical fiber originating at the telescope focus. 


The future of high-resolution spectrography 

It is risky to attempt predictions too far into the future. 
Changes over the second half of the 20th century have 
been surprising and dramatic; we are not sufficiently wise 
to out-guess the route technological progress will take 50 yr 
hence. There are, however, two emerging technologies to 
watch. 


Adaptive optics 

Star images are degraded by atmospheric turbulence 
(‘SEEING’), typically to a second of arc or greater diameter. 
The equations in the section on the theory of high- 
resolution spectography show that heroic measures must 
be taken to build spectrographs with large enough slit to 
accept most of the light and at the same time to maintain 
high spectral resolution, when used on telescopes as large 
as 10 m. ADAPTIVE OPTICS, an artificial means to shrink the 
diameter of the star image, has been proven effective on 
a number of telescopes, notably the 1 m ESO NTT, the 
2.5 m Hooker telescope on Mt Wilson and the 10 m Keck 
II on Mauna Kea. With adaptive optics, there is hope 
to concentrate the star image diameter by a factor of 20. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This in turn allows design of far more compact diffraction- 
limited spectrographs, yielding a gain in efficiency at 
much-decreased cost for the spectrograph. 


Direct energy detection 

There are under development solid-state image detectors 
capable of recording not only the time and location of 
arrival of a photon but also its energy (i.e. its optical 
frequency). It would be tempting to speculate that some 
day the energy resolution for such devices could be high 
enough that a single chip of silicon might replace the 
entire optical system now needed for high-resolution 
spectrography. 


Bibliography 

For a biography and related articles on Henry Draper, the 
first to obtain successful photographs of stellar spectra, see 
papers of 


Symposium on the Orion Nebula to Honor Henry Draper 1982, 
Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 395 


The first spectrographic use of the Schmidt camera 
was at the coudé focus of the Mt Wilson 2.5 m telescope in 
1934: 


Dunham T Jr 1956 Methods in stellar spectroscopy Vistas 
Astron. 2 1223-83 


A detailed history of the diffraction grating and the 
first echelle gratings is described in 


Harrison G R 1949 The production of diffraction gratings 
I. Development of the ruling art J. Opt. Soc. Am. 39 
413-26 

Harrison G R 1949 The production of diffraction gratings 
II. The design of echelle gratings and spectrographs 
J. Opt. Soc. Am. 39 522-8 


The state of astronomical spectrographs up through 
the 5 m Hale telescope is summarized in 


Bowen IS 1952 The spectrographic equipment of the 200- 
inch Hale telescope Astrophys. J. 116 1-7 

Bowen IS 1955 Astronomical spectrographs: past, present, 
and future Vistas Astron. 1 400-5 

Struve O 1957 Stellar spectrographs Sky Telesc. (September) 
536-9 

Struve O 1957 Stellar spectrographs Sky Telesc. (October) 
577-80 


Pioneering use of the digital computer for astronomi- 
cal spectrograph control and direct recording of spectra is 
described in 


Wells D C 1972 The computer-controlled spectrometers 
at McDonald Observatory Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 84 
203-6 


A symposium, “The Renaissance of High Resolution 
Spectroscopy—New Techniques, New Frontiers’ was held 
at Kona, Hawaii, June 1983. Selected papers are in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: High-Resolution Spectrographs ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1983 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 85 (September-November) 


Included is an excellent review of image detectors 
used in modern spectrography. Here J G Timothy 
describes his MAMA detector, as used in the Hubble Space 
Telescope STIS: 


Timothy J G 1983 Optical detectors for spectroscopy Publ. 
Astron. Soc. Pac. 85 810-34 


Robert G Tull 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 9 


Spectrographs: Integral Field Units 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectrographs: Integral Field Units 


Most astronomical objects display extended structures. 
For example, the bulge of a spiral galaxy looks quite 
different from its spiral arms. Indeed multicolor imaging, 
which is no more than very-low-resolution spectroscopy, 
shows us that the disk is bluer than the bulge, indicating 
that young stars form preferentially within the spiral arms. 
This, however, does not tell us how stars are moving within 
the spiral arm and what are the composition, temperature 
and pressure of the interstellar medium in various parts of 
the galaxy. Acquiring spectra at different locations will 
help us in answering these questions. More generally, 
understanding the chemical composition and kinematics 
of extended objects relies on obtaining spatially resolved 
spectrographic information. 

The spectrophotometric information content of an ex- 
tended object is inherently of three dimensions: two di- 
mensions for the sky plane and one dimension in wave- 
length. Present detectors are unfortunately of a two- 
dimensional nature only. This makes it a major problem 
to pack this three-dimensional spectrophotometric infor- 
mation content of celestial objects on the detector plane. 
This, in turn, explains the still very prevalent use of classi- 
cal long-slit spectrographs because of their perfect match 
with available digital detectors (figure 1) and despite their 
total loss of one spatial coordinate (across the slit width). 

For simple objects, one can generally obtain enough 
information using multiple exposures with judicious slit 
orientations. However, for a complex object this rapidly 
becomes difficult as the geometry of the object rarely 
matches the geometry of the slit, not to speak of the 
increasing cost in telescope time. In ground-based 
telescopic observations, the non-simultaneity of the long- 
slit observations lead to inhomogeneous data as SEEING 
and weather conditions usually change between two 
successive exposures. Itis then strictly impractical to cover 
completely and homogeneously a given field of view with 
a number of long-slit exposures. 

Three-dimensional spectrographs are intended to 
give three-dimensional data for a fully sampled field 
of view. There are two general classes of instruments: 
scanning spectrophotometers and integral field units 
(IFUs). 

In a scanning spectrophotometer, time scanning is 
used to provide the missing third dimension. This type 
of instrument has a large FIELD OF VIEW, every detector pixel 
being a spatial element, but its use is restricted to relatively 
bright objects because of the need for time scanning. At 
the end of the observation the data cube is obtained 
by a concatenation of all individual exposures. As for 
multiple-slit exposures, time of variation of the weather 
or instrumental conditions may cause inhomogeneities in 
the data. 

The most famous example of a scanning spectrometer 
is the scanning Fabry—Pérot INTERFEROMETER. It is based ona 
two-parallel-plates etalon, whose separation can be tuned 
via a piezoelectric system. Such an instrument allows 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Focal Plane 
Long Slit 


Collimator 


Dispersor 


Camera 


Detector 


Figure 1. Basic principle of a long-slit spectrograph. A slit 
aperture, located at the telescope focal plane, masks everything 
of the observed object except along the slit. The slit orientation 
matches the orientation of the detector, so that each point of the 
object along the slit gives a spectrum on the detector. This 
simple technique avoids spectral overlap because neighboring 
points are located perpendicularly to the slit. 


scanning in wavelength by making successive exposures 
at different separations of the etalon plates. To scan the 
complete free spectral range generally requires a large 
number of exposures (up to 50). The scanning Fabry—Pérot 
is limited to a small wavelength range, which restricts their 
use practically to the kinematical study of a single emission 
line. There are a number of such devices in operation 
throughout the world, such as Taurus at RGO (Taylor and 
Atherton 1980), HIFI at University of Hawaii (Bland and 
Tully 1989) and CIGALE at Marseille (Boulesteix et al 1980). 

Another approach is to use an imaging Fourier 
transform spectrometer (FTS). This instrument is a 
Michelson-like interferometer, which allows the recording 
of interferograms by a step-by-step scanning of the path 
difference between the two arms. Increasing the path 
difference increases the spatial resolution. While there 
are many FTSs in operation, most of them have only one 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Integral Field Units 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spatial dimension and are generally used for high spectral 
resolution spectroscopy in the infrared. An exception is 
the imaging FTS called Bear operated at CFHT (Maillard 
1995). 


Basic principle of an integral field unit 

In contrast to scanning spectrophotometers, IFUs manage 
to cram the full three-dimensional data ina single exposure 
on the detector. An IFU is made of two successive stages: 
the spatial stage whose function is to reformat the field of 
view and the spectral stage whose function is to disperse 
and focus the light on the detector. The latter is nothing 
else than a classical spectrograph that deserves no special 
comment (but see SPECTROSCOPE/SPECTROGRAPH). The spatial 
stage is the most critical part. There are currently three 
types of IFU (figure 2): lenslet unit, fibers unit and slicer 
unit. They differ in the geometrical arrangement of the 
spatial elements. 

An important parameter of an IFU is the packing 
efficiency: this is the number of spatial elements 
multiplied by the length of a spectrum in pixels divided 
by the total number of pixels of the detector. An ideal 
IFU will have a packing efficiency of 100%. For example 
with a detector of 2048? pixels, one is limited to 45 x 45 
spatial elements if each spectrum covers a full column or 
line of the detector. This explains why IFUs usually have 
a relatively small spatial field of view, even with the large 
detector format available nowadays. In the real world, 
however, packing efficiency is limited by the geometrical 
packing and the optical quality of the spatial and spectral 
stages. 


Lenslet IFU 

Lenslet IFUs use an array of lenses to sample the field 
of view. The light intercepted by each lenslet is focused 
in a spot called the micropupil which is an image of 
the telescope pupil. Micropupils are then dispersed by 
the spectrograph in a conventional manner. The ratio of 
the lenslet diameter to the micropupil diameter must be 
large (typically 50). It is this demagnification that saves 
space on the detector to store the spectral dimension. 
A slight rotation between the dispersion direction and 
the microlens array orientation avoids spectral overlap 
in one dimension. In the other dimension, a wide-band 
interference filter limits the spectral range to a finite length 
to prevent overlap. The lenslet size is typically of the order 
of mm which does not generally match the sampling scale 
at the telescope focal plane (for example, the lenslet size 
should be as small as 14 4m to sample 0.1 arcsec at the focal 
plane of a 3.6 m f/8 telescope). An enlarger, preceding 
the lens array, is thus added to adapt the spatial sampling 
to the expected spatial resolution. Throughput of this 
type of IFU is generally good: square or hexagonal lenslet 
shapes provide a 100% covering efficiency and the lenslet 
can be made in optical glass and coated. A drawback 
is that a significant fraction of spectra are truncated if 
spectra are too long: in practice, the maximum spectral 
length should be less than 25% of the detector format in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the dispersion direction to minimize this effect. The total 
packing efficiency on the detector is limited by the need to 
separate each spectrum from its neighbors as neighboring 
pixels do not share the same wavelength. When using a 
low spectral resolution grating at the order n, then +1 and 
n — 1 orders could cause some overlap with other spectra. 
In that case using a prism should be considered, especially 
at blue wavelengths where this effect is more pronounced. 

The first lenslet IFU was called TIGER (Bacon et 
al 1995) and has been operated at the Canada—France— 
Hawaii 3.6 m telescope (CFHT) between 1987 and 1996. 
Starting in 1997 it has been replaced by OASIS (figure 3): 
a lenslet IFU with 1600 hexagonal lenses dedicated to the 
CFHT adaptive optics bonnette. Since TIGER, a few other 
instruments have been realized with the same design: one 
for the SAO 6 m telescope (Afanasiev and Sil’chenko 1991), 
another for the Kyoto three-dimensional spectrograph for 
the 1.88 m Okayama telescope (Ohtani 1995) and recently 
the SAURON spectrograph for the 4.2 m William Herschel 
Telescope. 


Fiber IFU 

Fiber IFUs use optical fibers arranged in a close-packed 
bundle at the telescope focal plane and then reformatted 
into a pseudo-slit, which is then fed into the spectrograph. 
This presents an advantage compared with lenslet IFUs in 
the sense that the spectra can be as long as the detector 
format allows. On the other hand, fiber IFUs suffer from a 
lower efficiency owing to limited packing efficiency at the 
entrance (generally less than 75% owing to geometrical 
loss and cladding) and FocaL RaTIO degradation. The 
latter is due to diffusion by imperfections within the fiber 
and diameter variation along it. This effect introduces 
some light loss and becomes more important with large 
f numbers. This strongly constrains the designs of the 
spectrograph and the spatial stage. Fiber IFUs need to 
be calibrated carefully to control the fiber-to-fiber point 
spread function and transmission variations. 

The first fiber IFU that has been extensively used at 
a telescope was SILFID at CFHT (1986) (Vanderriest and 
Lemonnier 1988), later replaced by MOS-ARGUS (1993). 
Other development took place at the Kitt Peak 3.5 m 
telescope with DensePak (1988) (Barden and Wade 1988) 
and at the William Herschel 4.2 m telescope with Hexaflex 
(1989) (Arribas et al 1991), 2D-FIS (1994) (Garcia et al 
1994) and INTEGRAL (Arribas et al 1997). All of these 
instruments worked in the visible. 

Adding lenses in front of the fibers helps to increase 
the packing efficiency and to solve the problem of focal 
ratio degradation. Each lenslet forms an image of the 
telescope pupil at the entrance of each fiber in the bundle. 
At the output, a linear array of lenslets forms a pseudo- 
slit fed to the spectrograph. Working examples are the 
SMIRFS at the 4 m UK infrared telescope (Haynes et al 
1998) and SPIRAL at the 4 m Anglo-Australian telescope 
(Kenworthy et al 1998). There are a number of fiber IFUs in 
development for the 8-10 m class telescope (e.g. VIRMOS 
IFU for VLT, GMOS IFU for Gemini); most of them include 
lenslets. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Integral Field Units 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Telescope 
focal surface 


Lenslets 


Lenslets 
+ fibres 


Image 
slicer 


Spectrograph 
input 


Spectrograph 


output spectrum 


Detector 


Figure 2. Schematic of IFU types (from Content 1997). 


Focal 
Plane Enlarger Lens Array 


——— fC? 


Filter 


Collimator 


Wedge Grism Camera CCD 


Figure 3. OASIS optical layout. 


Slicer IFU 

The slicer IFUs use mirrors in the telescope focal plane 
to cut the field of view into a number of strips which are 
then rearranged into a one-dimensional long strip. The 
slicer is composed of two sets of mirrors: the first set slices 
the field of view in a number of strips and reflects them 
into different directions while the second set rearranges 
the strips and aligns them into one continuous long strip. 
Slicer IFUs are comparable with fiber IFUs in terms of 
spectral coverage, but they are more efficient in terms of 
packing efficiency as the spatial sampling is continuous 
along each strip. The tilt of each submirror produces a 
defocus between the two edges of each slice. This defocus 
translates into losses in spatial resolution and throughput. 
This gives a practical limit to the maximum number of 
slices that can be accommodated by such an IFU as defocus 
increases with the number of slices. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The only working slicer IFU in operation today is the 
three-dimensional instrument built at MPE (Weitzel et al 
1996). It operates in the near infrared (H and K band) 
and has been successfully used on a number of 4 m class 
telescopes. 

A variation of this principle which limits the defocus 
has been proposed by Content (1997) (figure 4): the mirrors 
have curved surfaces to allow the pupil-relay mirrors to be 
reduced in size. The tilt of each component is then reduced 
and consequently the defocus aberrations are decreased. 


Applications 
IFUs have been successfully used on a large variety of 
objects, from the study of PLANETARY SURFACES to the most 
distant QUASARS. 

A good example of IFU possibilities is given in the 
study of the Einstein cross, the gravitationally lensed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Integral Field Units 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to spectrograph collimator 


A A 

i] | 

i] | Pe . 

I I front view image plane 

\ pose ia 
image}slice B image|slice 2 image|slice1 = slice 1 

————— I slice2 | 
qT eR = oS ee ee slice3 = 

1 , A Livete cones. oe 4 


| 


Figure 4. Principle of the slicer IFU (from Content 1997). 


slicing 
mirror 


| 

Ls 
| 
I 
I 
I 
| 
I 
I 
I 


from 
pickup 
mirrors 
and 
telescope 


imaging mirrors 


system 2237 + 0305. An exposure taken with the IFU 
TIGER (lenslet type) gave 400 spectra covering the central 
part of the galaxy with a 0.4 arcsec sampling. The spectra 
(figure 5, panel A) at the four quasar image locations show 
a mixture of galactic light and quasar light. One can see 
indeed the strong line emission of C III] 1909 A redshifted 
to 5200 A as well as stellar absorption lines typical of 
a galaxy. Integrating the flux over the whole spectral 
range for each spectrum allows the reconstruction of the 
equivalent of a direct image within that wavelength range. 
This image (panel B) shows the well-known cross shape 
of this object with five maxima, the central one being the 
nucleus of the galaxy. This image is obviously dominated 
by the continuum, which is an unknown combination of 
the quasar and galaxy fluxes. However, it is quite easy to 
properly subtract the continuum independently for each 
spectrum. The continuum-free C III] reconstructed image, 
displayed in panel C, is now free from most of the galactic 
contribution and it no longer shows the galaxy nucleus. 
Using simultaneously spectral and spatial information, 
it was thus possible, in this example, to disentangle the 
contributions of the quasar and of the galaxy (Fitte and 
Adam 1994). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. IFU study of the Einstein cross. Panel A: spectrum at 
one of the quaser image locations. Panel B: reconstructed image 
with the whole spectral range. Panel C: reconstructed image of 
the continuum-free C III] emission. 


Prospects 


Integral field spectrographs in operation are not very 
common yet, but a number are being designed for the 
new 8 m class telescopes. In parallel with multiobject 
spectrographs, which are ideally suited to the study of 
large collections of objects, IFUs will become more and 
more popular for the detailed study of individual objects, 
or alternatively for very dense fields such as GLOBULAR 
CLUSTERS. 

The success of adaptive focus on ground-based 
telescopes and the launch of large-aperture space 
telescopes has emphasized the need for high spatial 
resolution spectroscopy. Decreasing the slit width is no 
longer a valid solution and IFU capabilities then become 
essential to understand the physics and the complex 
morphology generally displayed by astronomical sources 
at high spatial resolution. 

Recently the first three-dimensional detector, with 
direct measurement of the photon energy, has been tested 
ona telescope (Peacock et al 1998). These superconducting 
photon-counting cameras have an excellent quantum 
efficiency over a broad wavelength range (UV to IR). 
Although their spectral resolutions are still very modest 
(~20) and their number of pixels quite small (8 x 8), 
they have the potential to replace most of the existing 
spectrographs in the future. 


Bibliography 
Afanasiev V L, Vlasiouk V V, and Green R F 1995 ASP Conf. 
Ser. 71 p 266 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Integral Field Units 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Arribas S, Mediavilla E and Rasilla J L 1991 Astrophys. J. 
369 260 

Arribas S, Carter D, Cavaller L, del Burgo C, Edwards R, 
Fuentes F J, Garcia A A, Herreros J M, Jones L R, 
Mediavilla E, Pi M, Pollaco D, Rees P, Sos N and 
Worswick S 1997 Fibre Optics in Astronomy III (Tenerife) 
(ASP Conf. Ser.) ed S Arribas, E Mediavilla and F 
Watson 

Bacon R, Adam G, Baranne A, Courtes G, Dubet D, Dubois 
J P, Emsellem E, Ferruit P, Georgelin Y, Monnet G, 
Pecontal E, Rousset A and Sayede F 1995 Astron. 
Astrophys. Suppl. 113 347 

Barden S and Wade R 1988 ASP Conf. Ser. 3 113 

Bland J and Tully R B 1989 Astron. J. 98 723 

Boulesteix J, Georgelin Y, Marcelin M and Monnet G 1983 
Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng. 5 445 

Content R 1997 Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng. 28711295 

Fitte C and Adam G 1994 Astron. Astrophys. 282 11 

Garcia A, Rasilla J L, Arribas S and Mediavilla E 1994 Proc. 
Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng. 2198 15 

Haynes R, Content R, Lee D and Allington-Smith J 1998 
Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng. 3354 419 

Kenworthy M, Parry I and Taylor K 1998 Proc. Soc. Photo- 
Opt. Instrum. Eng. 3355 926 

Maillard J P 1995 ASP Conf. Ser. 71 p 316 

Ohtani H 1995 ASP Conf. Ser. 71 p 195 

Peacock T, Verhoeve P, Rando N, Erd C, Bavdaz M, Taylor 
B Gand Perez D 1998 Astron. Astrophys Suppl. 127 497 

Taylor K and Atherton P 1980 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 191 
675 

Vanderriest C and Lemonnier J P 1988 Instrumentation for 
Ground Based Astronomy IXth Santa Cruz Workshop 
ed L Robinson (Berlin: Springer) p 304 

Weitzel L, Krabbe A, Kroker H, Thatte N, Tacconi-Garman 
LE, Cameron M and Genzel R 1996 Astron. Astrophys 
Suppl. 119 531 


Roland Bacon 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Low-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectrographs: Low-Resolution 
Spectrographs 


Low-resolution spectrographs typically record the spec- 
trum of astronomical objects at resolution (A/AA) in the 
range 10°-10*. This resolution is adequate to reveal many 
strong absorption lines in stellar spectra, or emission lines 
in nebular spectra, and to resolve the typical range of 
velocities exhibited within a galaxy, for example, but it 
is not sufficient to resolve the intrinsic line profiles of 
solar-type stars or individual interstellar clouds. Low- 
resolution spectroscopy is particularly applicable to faint 
objects where photon noise from the source and sky places 
a practical limit on the resolution which can be achieved 
while maintaining an adequate signal-to-noise ratio. 


Overview 

A spectrograph contains four parts: the slit or entrance 
aperture, a collimator which converts the cone of light 
emerging from the slit to a parallel beam, a prism or 
grating which disperses the parallel beam through a range 
of angles which depends on wavelength and the camera, 
which focuses the parallel beams into new images of the 
slit at a corresponding range of positions. The detected 
intensity as a function of position is then a measure of the 
spectrum, or intensity as a function of wavelength. The 
same arrangement is used for spectrographs in the UV, 
optical and IR portions of the spectrum. 

The development of optical spectrographs through 
the mid-1960s was driven largely by the characteristics of 
photographic plates, which were the typical detectors of 
the time (see DETECTORS: PHOTOGRAPHY). The photographic 
speed of the spectrograph camera was critical, so that the 
image of the spectrum would be bright enough to produce 
a useful photographic exposure in a reasonable period 
of time. Low-dispersion instruments with particularly 
fast CAMERAS were called nebular spectrographs because 
of the low intensity of nebular images compared with 
stellar images. Even for nebular spectrographs the limiting 
photographic magnitude was sufficiently bright that the 
effect of sky background was modest. 

The advent of more modern detectors, initially 
image intensifiers and more recently CHARGE-COUPLED 
DEvices (CCDs), has resulted in a gain of more than 
100 in the effective limiting brightness of low-dispersion 
spectrographs. One consequence of this change is that 
modern spectra are often dominated by sky background, 
and the spectrograph must be designed to maximize the 
contrast of the object against sky and to provide accurate 
calibration and subtraction of the sky background. 

Most modern optical spectrographs being built for 
large ground-based telescopes are imaging spectrographs. 
The collimator and camera have a significant field of 
view, typically equivalent to several arcminutes on the sky. 
Without a disperser the detector can make a direct image of 
the spectrograph field of view. The scale of the final image 
is reduced by the ratio of the focal length of the collimator 
to the focal length of the camera. Often this scale results 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in a better match between the image size and the pixel 
size, and a larger field of view, than would be obtained 
with the same detector placed directly in the telescope 
focal plane. Within the field of view there may be many 
objects of interest brighter than the limiting spectroscopic 
magnitude. In place of a single slit, an aperture plate 
can be inserted with a number of small slits cut at the 
locations of interesting objects (see SPECTROGRAPHS: MULTISLIT 
SPECTROGRAPHS). When viewed through the disperser, the 
image contains a spectrum for every slit. Care must be 
taken in placing the slits so that the dispersed spectra 
do not overlap. In some cases even larger fields of view 
are covered by employing several spectrographs, each of 
which images a separate portion of the telescope focal 
plane in what is sometimes called a fly’s-eye arrangement. 

An alternative approach to multi-object spectroscopy 
is to use a number of optical fibers, positioned in 
the telescope focal plane at the locations of interesting 
objects. The other ends of the fibers, which are flexible, 
can be lined up in place of a long slit in an imaging 
spectrograph, producing a separate spectrum for each 
object (see SPECTROGRAPHS: FIBER-FED SPECTROGRAPHS). In some 
cases the size of the field accessible to fibers can be much 
larger than the size of the field for a mullti-slit spectrograph. 

When observing an extended object, a conventional 
slit spectrograph produces a one-dimensional series of 
spectra, spatially resolved in the direction along the slit. 
In some cases it is desirable to extend the spatial sampling 
to two dimensions, in order to cover the entire area of 
the object. This can be accomplished by using an array 
of closely packed fibers, a modified optical slit assembly 
called an image slicer, or an array of field lenses which 
spatially re-sample the image. Such a spectrograph is 
called an integral-field spectrograph (see sPECTROGRAPHS: 
INTEGRAL FIELD UNITS). 


Detailed considerations 
The slit serves two purposes. (1) Sky background adjacent 
to the object (and the associated photon noise) is rejected 
by the slit jaws. (2) In the case where the slit is narrower 
than the telescope image, the wavelength resolution in 
the final spectrum is determined by the width of the slit 
rather than by the distribution of light across the source. 
Single-object slits are sometimes made from two jaws with 
a mechanical adjustment for changing the slit width, or 
else by machining or etching a number of discrete slits 
with a selection of widths. In single-object spectrographs 
it is common to polish the surface of the slit jaws and tilt 
the slit at an angle to the incident beam, so that an auxiliary 
TV camera can be used to view the reflected image of the 
telescope focal plane in order to check the placement of an 
object on the slit. Multiple slits for imaging spectrographs 
have been made using multiple mechanical slit jaws, 
by machining custom aperture plates using mechanical 
tools or high-powered lasers, or by making photographic 
images on very fine-grained emulsions. 

Typical collimated beam diameters for low-dispersion 
spectrographs are in the range 5-20 cm. Larger diameter 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Low-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is achieved by increasing the focal length of the collimator, 
resulting in higher resolution for a given slit width be- 
cause the range of angle subtended by the slit decreases. 
Larger size also makes the optical design problem more 
tractable by reducing the angular field of view required of 
the collimator in order to image a field of a given diameter, 
and of the camera in order to illuminate a CCD array of a 
given size. Cost and mechanical flexure, however, increase 
rapidly with size, and the available rulings for DIFFRACTION 
GRATINGS become increasingly limited. 

Usually the prism or grating is placed near the exit 
pupil of the collimator, where an image of the primary 
mirror is formed by the collimator optics. For a single- 
object spectrograph the small entrance aperture tends to 
form a pinhole image of the primary at a range of positions 
along the parallel beam. However, for an imaging 
spectrograph with a wide-angle field of view, the location 
of the exit pupil is critical. Reflecting collimators have the 
disadvantage that the exit pupil is reflected back toward 
the slit, and an off-axis or folded design must be used 
in order to extract the collimated beam to an accessible 
location. Refractive collimators have the advantage of 
more easily producing an external pupil, but must contend 
with chromatic aberration which is absent in reflecting 
designs. In a wide-field imaging spectrograph the design 
of the collimator can be considerably more challenging 
than the design of the camera, because the required control 
of the pupil position does not permit the arbitrary use of 
a field flattener in the collimator image plane (see also 
WIDEFIELD CCD IMAGERS). 

The disperser can be either a prism or a diffraction 
grating. Prisms have the potential advantage of very high 
efficiency but suffer from a number of disadvantages. The 
dispersive power of a prism is relatively low compared 
with a diffraction grating, and dense glasses with the 
highest dispersion do not transmit well at the blue end 
of the spectrum. The dispersion of a prism is highest in 
the blue while most astrophysical sources are brighter in 
the red, resulting in a very uneven exposure. The optical 
homogeneity of glass is difficult to maintain through 
a sufficiently long optical path, and reflection losses at 
strongly oblique surfaces can also be difficult to control. 

For these reasons most spectrographs make use of 
either transmitting or reflecting diffraction gratings. The 
gratings must be blazed in order to concentrate the 
diffracted light efficiently into a single diffracted order. 
Transmission gratings are blazed by cutting each groove 
into the face of the grating at an angle so as to create a 
tiny prism which refracts light at approximately the angle 
of diffraction. Reflecting gratings are blazed by cutting 
each groove at an angle so as to form a tiny mirror which 
reflects light at approximately the angle of diffraction. 
Because refraction for typical optical materials is weaker 
than reflection, the angular dispersion achievable with 
transmission gratings is a factor of two or so lower than 
with reflecting gratings. 

When using a diffraction grating to cover a wide range 
of wavelengths, care must be taken to avoid overlapping 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


spectra from different orders of diffraction. An order- 
separating filter may be required. In some cases a dichroic 
mirror is used to direct red and blue wavelengths into 
two separate spectrographs. Each side of such a double 
spectrograph can be optimized for maximum performance 
over a more limited wavelength interval. Sometimes a 
weak cross-disperser is introduced in order to separately 
detect spectra in several low orders of diffraction. Such a 
spectrograph is said to be working in echellette mode (see 
SPECTROGRAPHS: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROGRAPHS). 

In a spectrograph which uses transmission gratings 
the optical axis will be bent through some angle which 
depends on the grating being used. In order to avoid 
having to pivot the camera of the spectrograph to various 
angles (in particular to allow the camera to be fixed in 
the straight-through position where a direct image of the 
telescope field can be made by removing the grating) the 
transmission grating is often replicated on a prism which 
compensates for the diffraction angle of the grating. The 
combination is often called a grism. 

Avariation of the reflecting grating which can achieve 
still higher angular dispersion illuminates the ruling 
through the substrate. This allows the diffraction to occur 
in the resin with which the grating was replicated, rather 
than in air. The wavelength is shorter in the resin in 
proportion to the index of refraction, and the angular 
dispersion is correspondingly higher. The disadvantage 
of such immersion gratings is that the reflective coating is 
typically less efficient when illuminated from inside the 
material than it is when illuminated from air. 

Typically some angle is introduced between the 
incident and diffracted beams of a reflecting grating 
spectrograph, in order to separate the collimator and 
camera optics. Order zero of a reflecting grating always 
emerges at the angle of reflection (for this order the grating 
is acting as a mirror). Diffraction of increasing order can 
occur on either side of the zero-order image. Orders which 
emerge on the same side of the zero-order image as the 
incident beam are called interior orders. Orders which 
emerge on the opposite side of the zero-order image are 
called exterior orders. 

A critical property of such a spectrograph is the 
anamorphic factor, r (for a diffraction grating, the ratio 
of the cosine of the angle of incidence to the cosine of the 
angle of diffraction). The anamorphic factor can become 
substantial for gratings with high angular dispersion. For 
interior orders the anamorphic factor is less than 1 and the 
angular width of the slit is reduced in the diffracted beam 
by the factor r, but the physical size of the diffracted beam 
is increased (in one direction) by 1/r. Interior orders have 
the advantage that the wavelength resolution is higher 
because the projected slit is narrower, but the optics must 
be larger in order to accept all of the diffracted beam, which 
can make the optical design problem significantly more 
challenging. Exterior orders are subject to light loss on 
the back facet of each groove and are generally used only 
under special circumstances. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Low-Resolution Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The spectrograph camera can be either reflecting 
(typically using Schmidt-type optics) or transmitting. 
The reflecting designs again suffer from the difficulty of 
separating the image plane and the pupil plane. Prime- 
focus Schmidt cameras require a special dewar to suspend 
a cooled detector in the middle of the optical system. 
Folded Schmidt cameras use a flat mirror to extract the 
final image to an external location. In either case, optical 
performance is limited by the field flattener which is 
required in order to match the curved focal plane to a 
flat detector. Cassegrain Schmidt designs produce a flat 
focal plane, but the light loss caused by obscuration on the 
secondary mirror can be substantial. Refracting cameras 
can produce wide, flat fields, but must contend with 
chromatic effects which usually require the incorporation 
of special low-dispersion glasses or other low-dispersion 
materials, such as calcium fluoride. 

The entire optical assembly of the spectrograph must 
be mounted in a mechanical framework with adequate 
structural and thermal stability, in order to minimize drift 
of the spectrum on the detector. Drift causes a loss of 
spectral and spatial resolution, as well as changes in the 
intensity calibration of the detector. This is especially 
true for thinned CCD arrays which are subject to high- 
frequency fringing effects caused by optical interference 
within the thickness of the array. The intensity calibration 
is particularly critical when subtracting sky determined 
at one location along a slit from the spectrum of a faint 
object at another location. For large spectrographs it 
can be particularly difficult to achieve adequate stability, 
and various measures have been considered, including 
active optical compensation and distributed mechanical 
flotation. 


Recent developments 


The most ambitious low-resolution spectrographs built 
in recent years have aimed to maximize the advantages 
of multi-object spectroscopy. Fiber systems capable 
of observing from 300 to 600 objects at one time, 
in some cases incorporating multiple spectrographs or 
double (dichroic) spectrographs, have been constructed, 
typically in order to measure galaxy redshifts and large- 
scale structure, to survey faint quasars and to study 
stars in the halo of the galaxy. Multi-slit systems are 
under construction incorporating multiple spectrographs 
or large CCD mosaics, generally with the intention of 
studying the evolution of more distant samples of galaxies. 

A new type of diffraction grating, called a volume- 
phase holographic grating, has begun to attract attention. 
These gratings work by introducing periodic high- 
frequency modulations of the index of refraction in a 
layer of suitable transparent material. Volume-phase 
gratings can be somewhat more efficient than surface- 
relief gratings, and may be especially useful if they can 
be produced in larger sizes than conventional diamond- 
ruled gratings. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 
The classic paper on spectrograph design from the 
photographic era is 


Bowen I S 1962 Spectrographs Astronomical Techniques 
ed W A Hiltner (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press) pp 34-62 


A useful textbook is 


Schroeder D J 1987 Astronomical Optics (San Diego, CA: 
Academic) 


The best source for detailed information about modern 
instrumentation is the continuing series of proceedings 
from the periodic conferences Instrumentation in Astron- 
omy, sponsored and published by the SPIE. 


Stephen Shectman 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Multislit Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectrographs: Multislit 
Spectrographs 


A multislit spectrograph is similar to a standard-slit 
spectrograph, except that the FIELD oF view on the sky is 
greatly expanded to allow placement of entrance slits on 
many objects in the field. 

This instrumental field of view on modern large 
telescopes is typically 5-20 arcmin and a considerable 
advantage is gained over single-slit spectrographs when 
there are many possible targets in this size of field. 

Access to even larger fields of view (for example 
several degrees) is limited by the cost and design 
complexity of large optical elements; in this regime the 
preferred solution is to use fiber-fed spectrographs which 
use fibers to reformat light into a smaller entrance slit 
(see SPECTROGRAPHS: FIBER-FED SPECTROGRAPHS). In contrast 
in a multislit spectrograph the contiguity of the image 
of the full field is preserved throughout the optical 
train, although it is dispersed in wavelength. This 
of necessity involves greatly expanding the size of the 
optics, even when working at a low spectral resolution, 
to accommodate the size of the beam. Multislit 
spectrographs are also sometimes referred to for this 
reason as ‘beam-fed spectrographs’ to distinguish them 
from fiber-fed systems. 

The particular niche occupied by multislit spectro- 
graphs in astronomy is the spectroscopy of very faint 
objects in crowded fields, especially the measurement of 
REDSHIFTS of very distant galaxies. By retaining the use of 
a slit which measures the background adjacent to the ob- 
ject much better subtraction of night sky emission can be 
obtained than by using fibers; this is critical because tar- 
gets are usually much fainter than the sky. Because of 
the orientation towards faint targets simple designs are 
generally employed with the minimum number of opti- 
cal elements in order to maximize the throughput of light 
through the instrument. A direct imaging capability is also 
common which gives rise to a very versatile instrument; 
because of this a multislit spectrograph is almost a stan- 
dard facility on the largest telescopes. 

Modern examples of multislit spectrographs are the 
Low Dispersion Survey Spectrographs (LDSS-1 and LDSS- 
2) on the Anglo-Australian and William Herschel 4 m 
telescopes and the Low Resolution Imaging Spectrograph 
(LRIS) on the W M Keck 10 m telescope. These have 
all been used for progressively fainter and more distant 
redshift surveys; the current state of the art is redshift 4-5 
galaxies and quasars from LRIS. 


Optical layout 
The typical layout is shown in figure 1 which illustrates the 
LDSS spectrograph on the Anglo-Australian Telescope. 
The focal plane of the telescope is occupied by a slit 
mask; this is a piece of opaque material (usually metal 
or carbon fiber) in which multiple slits have been cut. 
The positions of the slits on the mask correspond to the 
relative positions of the images of the targets formed at the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Telescope 
focal plane 
(slit masks) 


Grism S 


ric 
assembly era OF 


ccD 
detector 


Figure 1. Optical diagram of the Low Dispersion Survey 
Spectrograph (LDSS), a multislit spectrograph on the 
Anglo-Australian 3.9 m telescope. A collimator re-images the 
telescope focal plane (where the slit masks are located) into a 
pupil which accommodates a dispersing element (a grism) 
and/or filters. The dispersed spectra are then re-imaged by the 
camera optics on to the CCD detector. 


telescope focal plane. A provision is made for swapping 
slit masks and removing them completely to give a clear 
aperture for imaging (for LDSS-2 this is accomplished by 
mounting them on a wheel). 

A requirement for observing is to prepare the slit 
masks in advance; various technologies have been used 
for making slits such as photo-etching, cutting with a 
mechanical drill bit and laser cutting. 

Next in the optical train comes a collimator which is 
usually the largest optical element. This usually consists 
of several lens elements which takes light from each point 
in the focal plane and produces parallel rays (for more 
details see sPECTROSCOPE/SPECTROGRAPH). 

Behind the collimator these rays form a real pupil 
(where there is an image of the telescope entrance aperture) 
and at this point in the optical train are put optical filters 
for wavelength range selection and diffraction gratings to 
disperse the light into spectra. The LDSS case uses a grism 
which consists of a prism bonded to a transmission grating; 
the prism refracts the spectra so they stay on axis. Thus 
removing and inserting the grism into the pupil allows 
one to instantly swap between imaging and spectroscopy 
of the full field, a very convenient feature. 

After the pupil comes the camera, another optical 
element assembly which focuses the spectra (or direct 
images) onto a second focal plane where a detector of some 
kind is placed. Usually the camera includes some kind of 
focal reduction to shrink the image of the field down on to 
a small detector. 

The standard modes of operation are imaging in 
various filters and slit spectroscopy by inserting a mask 
anda grism and/or grating. It is also possible to do ‘slitless 
spectroscopy’ by just using the grism and/or grating with 
a clear aperture; however, in this case the background 
emission is greatly enhanced so it is not commonly used 
for faint targets. 


Design variations 
Many variations are possible. For example, LRIS uses 
reflection gratings rather than grisms. In this case to swap 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Multislit Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mitt Wat 81) wy 
ww 


Figure 2. Stages of image formation in a multislit spectrograph 
(data shown are for LDSS-1). (a) An image of the sky is formed 
at the telescope focal plane. (b) A slit mask selects objects for 
spectroscopy via position in the focal plane. (c) Each slit in the 
mask forms a spectrum of object + sky on the detector. (Note 
that the holes at the top and bottom of the mask are for 
alignment of the mask on reference stars in the field; this is done 
in direct imaging mode.) 


between imaging and spectroscopy one must remove the 
grating and insert a flat mirror. LRIS also uses a reflective 
collimator mirror; it would also be possible in principle 
to also have a reflective camera. Another variation could 
be to have multiple channels; for example the beam could 
be split by a dichroic after the pupil and sent to multiple 
cameras (to optimize for blue and red wavelength range). 


Data and reduction 


Images are formed on a large detector such as a CHARGE- 
COUPLED DEVICE (CCD). Figure 2 shows a typical raw data 
image, illustrating spectroscopy through a slit mask. Each 
slit forms a rectangular spectrum, its position on the 
detector corresponding to the position of the slit on the 
mask and hence the object on the sky. This leads to a 
design constraint in the making of the mask: objects must 
be chosen for slits so that their resulting spectra do not 
overlap. This geometric effect can be seen in the figure. 

Ina typical setup with faint objects either unresolved 
or a few arcseonds in size a slit would be about 10 arcsec 
in size. Thus with a typical 10 arcmin field of view up 
to 60 spectra could be obtained in a tier. If the spectra 
are short compared with the detector multiple tiers can be 
used giving an increased multiplex advantage. One way 
of achieving this is to use a bandwidth limiting filter to 
reduce the wavelength range of the spectra; another is to 
simply observe at a very low resolution so even the full 
spectrum is short. 

For data reduction the individual slit spectra must 
be located, then they can each be reduced as a single- 
slit spectrum (although each will have a wavelength scale 
offset by the departure of the slit from the field center in 
the direction of the dispersion). As for a single slit the 
background is subtracted by interpolating the data values 
either side of the object on the slit. Some example spectra 
from the LDSS-2 redshift survey (Glazebrook et al 1995) 
are shown in figure 3. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Technological developments 
Multislit spectrograph technology is far from static and 
several developments are actively being pursued. 


Infrared instrumentation 

The same optical principles can be applied to infrared 
instruments. To operate out to a wavelength of 1.6 wm 
the only fundamental change required is the use of an 
infrared sensitive detector (see also INFRARED ARRAYS). To 
go redder than this it then becomes necessary to cool the 
entire instrument in a dewar to avoid too much thermal 
radiation, especially from the mask. This causes a problem 
because masks need to be accessed to be changed, which 
necessitates removing them from the dewar. A proposed 
solution to this is use of a separate, smaller, fore-dewar 
just for the masks and which can be thermally cycled 
much more quickly. Thermal radiation from outside the 
telescope aperture must also be blocked; this is done by 
placing a cold aperture stop in the pupil space. Mulltislit 
spectrographs based on this concept are being built for the 
Anglo-Australian and Kitt Peak 4 m telescopes and are 
being proposed for the new large telescopes. 


Microslits 

The number of objects one can fit on a mask is limited by the 
size of the slits. If they can be made smaller the multiplex 
can be increased; ideally one want small apertures (often 
called ‘microslits’) which are just big enough to cover the 
objects. 

This leaves the problem of how to do the sky- 
subtraction. In principle one can take separate sky 
observations through the slits. One problem with this is 
that the sky brightness can change in minutes while with 
a CCD one must take much longer exposures to overcome 
noise. Research in progress at the Anglo-Australian 
Observatory has demonstrated that this limitation can be 
overcome via a special CCD controller mode known as 
‘charge shuffling’ where spare pixels on the detector are 
used to store the sky signal. Using microslits fields of up to 
200 objects have been observed at once with large spectral 
ranges. This is a powerful technique for very dense fields. 


Larger fields 

Going to larger fields than the normal limit of about 
10 arcmin requires fabrication of large and expensive 
optical components. Nevertheless there are proposals 
to do just that. For example the US National Optical 
Astronomical Observatories has designed an 8 m telescope 
with a 1.5° field of view which will feed four large multi- 
slit spectrographs. 


Future mask technologies 

The flexibility of the multislit design has led to the 
desirability of having a multislit spectrograph on the Next 
Generation Space Telescope (NGST) due to be launched 
in 2008 (see SPACE INSTRUMENTATION: NEXT GENERATION SPACE 
TELESCOPE). However, for a space instrument which will 
never be serviced after launch there is a problem in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrographs: Multislit Spectrographs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10.332 Q=1 (STAR) 


13.402 Q=2 z = 0.830 


fou) | 
+ 


ww \v yu]! 


! L L 
4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 
Wavelength / A 


03.723 Q=1 


1 
6000 
Wavelength / A 


10.040 Q=1 z = 0.476 


way a 


«= 
©O 
= 

a 
oc 
= 


: rt \ \ 
5000 6000 7000 
Wavelength / A 


: eS 1 
6000 7000 


Wavelength / A 


Figure 3. Example spectra of faint stars and galaxies from the LDSS-2 redshift survey (Glazebrook et al 1995). 


provision of slit masks; because of this new technologies 
are being researched to provide mechanically configurable 
slit masks, which can be operated remotely. 

Two such technologies are being developed at the 
Goddard Space Flight Center using microelectromechani- 
cal devices which are arrays of mechanical devices made 
on a silicon substrate. One possibility is a ‘micromirror 
array’: a 4096 x 4096 array of tiltable mirrors is envisioned 
which could move between an ON position, which would 
direct light into a spectrograph, and an OFF position which 
would be virtually opaque. Every position in the array 
would be rapidly configurable to form a series of slits. A 
related concept is ‘microshutter arrays’; these are arrays of 
small shutters which open and close, operating in trans- 
mission like a conventional slit mask. At the time of writ- 
ing the size of test arrays is of order 3 x 3 elements. 

A more conventional proposal for NGST, from the 
Dominion Astrophysical Observatory, is to use a stack 
of mechanical slits, up to 75, which are scrollable 
side to side on metal rolls. Similar ideas have been 
implemented before on the ground; for example the 
‘multislit mechanism’ on the Multiple Mirror Telescope in 
Arizona provides eight configurable slitlets in a 3 arcmin 
field of view. 


Bibliography 

A detailed description of the LDSS-1, LDSS-2 and LRIS 
spectrographs can be obtained from the following journal 
publications: 


Allington-Smith J R, Breare J M, Ellis R S, Gellatly D W, 
Glazebrook K, Jorden P R, MacLean J F, Oates A P, 
Shaw G, Tanvir N, Taylor K, Taylor P, Webster J and 
Worswick S 1994 LDSS-2: A low dispersion survey 
spectrograph (LDSS-2) for the William Herschel 
Telescope Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 106 983 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Oke J B, Cohen J G, Carr M, Cromer J, Dingizian A, Harris 
F H, Labrecque S, Lucinio R, Schaal W, Epps H and 
Miller J 1995 LRIS: the Keck low-resolution imaging 
spectrometer Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 107 375 

Wynne C G and Worsick S P 1988 LDSS-1: alow dispersion 
survey spectrograph The Observatory 108 161 


A detailed description of instrument proposals for the Next 
Generation Space Telescope including the latest research on 
micromirror and microshutter arrays is best obtained from 
the NGST web site 


http://ngst.gsfc.nasa.gov 
The LDSS-2 redshift survey is described in 


Glazebrook K, Ellis R S, Colless M M, Broadhurst T J, 
Allington-Smith J R and Tanvir N R 1995 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 273 157 


Observations of high-redshift galaxies with LRIS are 
described in 


Steidel C C, Giavalisco M, Dickinson M E and Adelberger 
KL 1996 Astron. J. 112 352 


Karl Glazebrook 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroheliograph/specitrohelioscope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectroheliograph/spectrohelioscope 


An instrument that allows the Sun to be studied in 
light of one particular wavelength (by imaging the 
Sun photographically, or electronically, in the case of a 
spectroheliograph, or by direct vision in the case of the 
spectrohelioscope). Basically, the instrument consists of 
a spectrograph, or spectroscope, which is used to isolate 
one particular spectral line (e.g. one of the hydrogen or 
calcium lines), combined with a mechanical or optical 
means of scanning the disk of the Sun. In the case 
of a spectrohelioscope, provided that the solar disk, or 
the region of interest, can be completely scanned at 
least ten times a second, persistence of vision allows 
the observer to see a stationary monochromatic (single- 
wavelength) image. The instrument enables features such 
as prominences and filaments to be studied 

The amount of detail that can be seen increases as the 
width of the slit is decreased. By isolating different parts of 
a particular spectral line (a spectral line has a finite width) 
an observer can observe to different depths within the solar 
atmosphere. 


Seealso: filament, prominence, spectroscope/spectrograph, 


Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscope/spectrograph 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectroscope/spectrograph 


A device that enables the spectrum of a light source 
to be viewed directly (spectroscope) or recorded by 
photographic or electronic means (spectrograph). A basic 
spectrograph consists of the following principal elements: 
a narrow slit, through which light is admitted to the 
instrument, a collimator, a dispersing element, an imaging 
system, and a detector. Light from the source (for example, 
a star) falls on the slit, which is placed at the focal plane of 
the telescope. Light diverging from the slit is brought into 
a parallel beam by the collimator which, like the imaging 
element, may consist of lenses or mirrors. The beam 
of light then encounters the dispersing element, which 
separates the light into its constituent wavelengths, or 
colors. The dispersing element may be a prism (or series 
of prisms) or a diffraction grating (a finely ruled grating 
which transmits or, more usually, reflects light and splits 
it into its constituent wavelengths). A system that uses 
reflecting optics and a reflection grating permits the study 
of wavelengths that cannot pass through glass. Finally, 
the imaging system focuses the spectrum (the spread- 
out band of wavelengths) onto the detector, which may 
be a photographic emulsion, an image tube or a CCD. 
In a spectroscope used for visual observation, a small 
telescope, with an eyepiece, is placed after the dispersing 
element. 

The focused spectrum consists, in essence, of a 
very large number of overlapping monochromatic images 
(each corresponding to a different wavelength of light) 
of the entrance slit. In order to produce a sharply 
focused spectrum, the slit should be as narrow as possible. 
However, the narrower the slit, the fainter the spectrum, 
and the longer the exposure time that is needed in order 
to record the spectrum. Because the spectrum of a point- 
like source such as a star would consist of a thin strip of 
light, too narrow to analyze effectively, a further optical 
component, called a widener, is usually placed between 
the slit and the collimator. This broadens the spectrum at 
right angles to its length. Alternatively, the observer can 
achieve the same effect by moving the telescope during 
the exposure so as to trail the image of the star a little way 
up and down the slit. 

Two key factors that characterize the performance 
of a spectrograph are dispersion and spectral resolution. 
Dispersion is a measure of the extent to which the 
constituent wavelengths are spread out, the linear 
dispersion being the change in wavelength over a given 
physical length of the spectrum. Dispersion is normally 
quoted in nanometers per millimeter (nm mm), a 
dispersion of 1 nm mm! corresponding to a change 
in wavelength of 1 nanometer over 1 millimeter of the 
imaged spectrum’s length. Spectral resolution (R) is a 
measure of the instrument’s ability to reveal fine detail 
in the spectrum and is defined by R = A/AA, where i 
denotes the wavelength of interest and AA the smallest 
wavelength interval that can be distinguished within the 
spectrum. For example, when used to study light with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wavelengths of around 500 nm, a spectral resolution of 
500 would correspond to being able to distinguish two 
idealized spectral lines that were separated in wavelength 
by 1 nm. The dispersions of astronomical spectrographs 
range from about 100 nm mm’ to about 0.01 nm mm7! 
and their resolutions from about 10 to about 100000. 


Seealso: diffraction grating, dispersion, focus, spectrohe- 
liograph, spectrum. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


Historically, spectroscopic binary stars were binary 
systems whose nature was discovered by the changing 
DOPPLER EFFECT or shift of the spectral lines of one or both 
of the component stars. The observed Doppler shift is 
a combination of that produced by the constant RADIAL 
VELOCITY (i.e. line-of-sight velocity) of the center of mass of 
the whole system, and the variable shift resulting from the 
orbital motion of the component stars about that center of 
mass. If the variable orbital component is large enough 
and the two stars are comparable in luminosity, then 
two spectra are periodically seen and can be measured, 
although the system appears as a single star in even the 
largest telescopes. (Sometimes only one star is bright 
enough for its spectrum to show in the combined light, 
but still the variable radial velocity of that one star can be 
measured. Extreme examples of such ‘single-spectrum’ 
systems are provided by the planetary systems discovered 
in recent years around several stars other than the Sun.) 
Spectroscopic binaries, therefore, are distinguished from 
visual binaries, the components of which can be resolved, 
often by quite small telescopes. 

Astronomers were not able to detect spectroscopic bi- 
naries until astronomical spectroscopy had been devel- 
oped sufficiently for reliable measurements of radial ve- 
locity to be possible. This, in turn, depended on the appli- 
cation of photography to such measurements, so that no 
spectroscopic binaries were known until late in the 19th 
century. In 1889, Pickering in Harvard and Vogel in Pots- 
dam independently published radial-velocity studies of 
Mizar and ALGOL, respectively, which thus became the first 
two known spectroscopic binaries. Visual binaries, on the 
other hand, were known at least from the late 18th cen- 
tury, and their study became a significant part of astron- 
omy after the publication in 1803 of an important paper by 
Sir William Herschel in which he announced that the two 
components of Castor which he recognized were in orbital 
motion about their center of mass (see VISUAL BINARY STARS). 
Herschel, in fact, coined the term ‘binary star’ to describe 
this kind of association of two stars. Interestingly, we now 
know that each of those visual components of Castor is 
itself a spectroscopic binary, and these two bright binaries 
are also accompanied by a more distant faint spectroscopic 
binary, YY Geminorum. The first ‘binary’ system to be dis- 
covered, therefore, is in fact a sextuple system. 

A third kind of binary—ec.iPsING BINARY sTARS—has 
also long been recognized. John Goodricke, again in the 
late 18th century, suggested that the light variations in 
Algol might arise from periodic eclipses of the primary star 
by ‘a large body’. His conjecture was not confirmed until 
Vogel’s work showed it to have been correct, so the serious 
study of eclipsing binaries began at about the same time 
as that of spectroscopic binaries. It should be immediately 
obvious that the distinction between these two classes 
is quite artificial. All eclipsing binaries are potentially 
spectroscopic binaries, although it is hard to observe 
spectroscopically, at adequate dispersion, the faintest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ones known—and that was especially true when we 
were completely dependent on photographic emulsions 
for recording spectra. Similarly any spectroscopic 
binary would display eclipses, if its orbit were so 
oriented that each component star passed between us 
and the other one, once in each orbital period. The 
methods of observation and analysis are very different 
for spectroscopic and eclipsing binaries, however, and it 
is often convenient in text-books and encyclopedias to 
treat them as two distinct classes. Nevertheless, whenever 
possible, spectroscopic and photometric observations 
should be discussed together in the analysis of any given 
binary system. 

It is less obvious whether visual and spectroscopic 
binaries are really distinct classes or, again, merely appear 
to be so because of the limitations of the methods of 
observation. Most visual binaries have orbital periods 
measured in years, decades or even centuries. The 
overwhelming majority of spectroscopic binaries have 
periods less than 100 days and several well-defined 
subclasses have periods of much less than a day. This large 
range of periods between visual and spectroscopic binaries 
corresponds to a similarly large range of separations and 
suggests that there might be a real physical distinction 
between close (i.e. spectroscopic and eclipsing) binaries on 
the one hand, and wide (i.e. visual) binaries on the other 
(See CLOSE BINARY STARS). The notion of such a distinction 
gained strength from the fact that, for a long time, few 
binaries were known with orbital periods in the range 
between those of the two apparent classes. In recent 
decades, however, improvements in both the speed and 
precision with which we can measure radial velocities 
have permitted the detection of the slow, small- amplitude 
variations to be expected from binaries in the ‘missing’ 
period range. At the same time, the development of, 
first, speckle interferometry (see SPECKLE IMAGING OF BINARY 
sTaRS) and, more recently, interferometry with optical 
arrays has permitted the resolution of pairs that were 
previously considered long-period spectroscopic binaries. 
The apparent minimum in the period distribution is by 
no means as clear as was once thought. Whether or not 
there is a real distinction between close and wide binaries 
is perhaps not finally decided, but evidence against one 
is mounting and it is this writer’s opinion that such a 
distinction does not exist. Again, whenever possible, 
spectroscopic observations, that reveal the projection of 
the orbital motion on the line of sight, and visual or other 
observations, that reveal its projection on the plane of 
the sky, should be analyzed and discussed together. We 
may, perhaps, re-define spectroscopic binary systems as 
binary systems in which the radial velocity of at least one 
component can be measured, regardless of whether or not 
the components are resolved. 

Binary systems offer many problems of their own for 
study, such as their origin, evolution and, in the close 
pairs, the mutual non-gravitational interactions of the 
components. Historically, however, the main motive for 
studying binaries of all kinds has been the opportunities 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


they provide for the determination of stellar properties, 
particularly stellar masses. Spectroscopic and eclipsing 
binaries are specially attractive in this respect, since 
their relatively short orbital periods enable data to be 
accumulated much more quickly for them than for visual 
binaries. For the best results, however, many precautions 
must be taken to ensure that the measured velocities are 
as precise as possible and do indeed correspond to the 
velocities of the centers of mass of the component stars. 
If observed values of stellar mass are to be of any use 
in the testing of theories of stellar structure and stellar 
evolution, the most precise measurements possible must 
be made of the radial velocities, and the systems chosen for 
measurement must be free of the complications found in 
systems in which the components are mutually interacting. 
For this reason, the best mass determinations come only 
from the so-called detached binary systems (see BINARY 
STARS: DETACHED). 

Spectroscopic binary systems form a considerable 
fraction of the stellar population and, contrary to earlier 
beliefs, there is no particular evidence that their numbers 
are fewer among the late-type stars than among those 
of early type. If all known eclipsing binaries were 
included, the total number of known and suspected 
spectroscopic binaries would be very large. A compilation 
of spectroscopic binaries with known orbital elements (see 
below), published in 1988, contained information for over 
1400 systems. Some of these may eventually be found 
not to be binaries at all, but other known systems were 
missed in the compilation. The observational effort put 
into the detection and measurement of new systems since 
then has greatly intensified and a rough estimate would be 
that the number of systems with known orbital elements 
is now double the 1988 number. Stellar multiplicity is 
not confined to binary systems: many binaries belong to 
more complex groupings—as already mentioned, Castor 
is a sextuple system. More common are triple systems, 
especially those in which a close pair is accompanied by a 
more distant companion. It is intuitively obvious that such 
a configuration is relatively stable since, at large distances, 
the close pair acts gravitationally almost as a mass point. 
If a visual orbit is known for the distant companion, the 
total mass of the triple system may be obtained and the 
individual masses of all three components, even if the close 
pair is not eclipsing. The existence of multiple systems is 
of significance for theories of binary formation (see CLOSE 
BINARY STARS: FORMATION AND EVOLUTION). 


The orbital period 

It should now be clear that the orbital period is one of 
the most important things to be determined for any kind 
of binary system. For spectroscopic binaries, the basic 
observational data consist of a series of measurements of 
the radial velocity (usually expressed in km s~') of one or 
both components at given times. Unless the orbital period 
is already known, the times are likely to be arbitrarily 
spaced. Often, the period is known, at least approximately, 
either from earlier spectroscopic observations or from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


photometric observations of an eclipsing binary or from 
visual observations. If the period is not known, the first 
step is to determine it. This used to be more of an art 
than a science, but modern computers have made possible 
extensive series of trial and error, and most observatories 
at which binaries are routinely studied have programs 
available that will search for all possible periodicities in a 
given set of data and give an estimate of the significance of 
those found. Sometimes the program will indicate two or 
more possible periods—in which case future observations 
can be planned to choose between them. Even with 
computer aid, however, the investigator must be on 
guard against possible erroneous periods. A multiple or 
submultiple of the true period may be found, for example. 
Confusion is particularly likely if the two components 
have very similar and almost equally strong spectra, since 
there may be doubt at any phase at which both spectra 
can be seen which one is the primary (i.e. more luminous) 
component. More subtle are the errors that creep in if the 
true period is close to a sidereal day. Since observations are 
often made at just such an interval, a spurious (or so-called 
alias) longer period may be found, imposed on the data 
by the pattern of observing. The same effect can work in 
reverse, a long-period system appearing to have a period 
close to a sidereal day. 

Once the orbital period, P, has been found (usually 
it is expressed in days) the phase ¢ of an observation 
made at time f can be found from the fractional part of 
the expression 


(t — t)/P 


where fp is some convenient zero of time—it might be the 
time of the first observation or, for an eclipsing binary, 
the time of the middle of the deeper eclipse. Clearly 
@ always lies between 0 and 1. It is now possible to 
plot the observed velocities against the phase to give the 
velocity curve of the binary. This is a representation of the 
observed velocity variation as if all the observations had 
been made in one orbital cycle (similar to the light curve 
of an eclipsing binary) and is the first step to determining 
the other characteristics of the system (see figure 1). 

It often happens, even for a newly observed binary, 
that a few older observations of the star exist. They 
are sometimes useful for refining the value of the orbital 
period since they give isolated velocities at some time well 
in the past and can be used to estimate the number of 
cycles between the two sets of observations and therefore 
to improve the preliminary value of the period. A word 
of warning is again necessary, however: orbital periods 
either can appear to vary or actually do vary. If the binary 
revolves around its center of mass with a third star (as we 
have seen, a not uncommon situation) the orbital period 
will appear to vary cyclically because of the changing light- 
travel time across the larger orbit. The orbital period of a 
binary will also appear to vary cyclically if the major axis 
of the binary orbit (the line of apsides) is rotating because 
of tidal interaction between the components. Finally, in 
systems in which the stars are interacting by mass transfer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


200 


—100 


—200 


4 0.6 
Phase 


Figure 1. A modern velocity curve of the eclipsing and 
spectroscopic binary OX Carinae; reproduced with permission 
from Andersen J et al 1983 Astron. Astrophys. 121 271-80. The 
orbital eccentricity is 0.28 and the longitude of periastron 124° 
for the primary star. 


from one to the other, or in which mass is leaving the 
system, the orbital period really will change, usually in 
an irregular fashion. It used to be fashionable to quote 
orbital periods to very many decimals of a day, but such 
optimism is rarely justified. 


The orbital elements 

Once the orbital period is known and the velocity curve 
has been drawn, we can use the latter to determine the 
other characteristics of the orbit, which will in turn lead 
us to the goal of determining the masses of the component 
stars. As with planetary orbits in the solar system, the orbit 
is completely known if certain quantities called the ORBITAL 
ELEMENTS are known. Two angles are needed to define 
the orientation of the orbital plane in space, a third angle 
defines the orientation of the major axis of the elliptical 
orbit in that plane, a quantity e, lying between 0 and 1, 
defines the eccentricity of the orbit and the major semiaxis, 
a, gives the size of the orbit. It is also necessary to specify 
where a star is in the orbit and this can be done if the time of 
periastron passage is known. In planetary orbits, it is not 
necessary to specify a and P separately; they are related 
by KEPLER’S THIRD LAW 


a?/P? = constant. 


The mass of the Sun is overwhelmingly greater than that 
of any of the planets, so the ratio just given is constant to 
a very high degree of precision. In binary orbits, however, 
with two comparable stellar masses moving under their 
mutual gravitation, we must use the generalized form of 
Kepler’s law: 


a 


_ G 
P22 Ax? 
where m and my are the masses of the two stars (usually 


my is less than m,) and G, of course, is Newton’s constant 
of gravitation. Since m; and mz are not known in advance, 


(m, + mz) (1) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a and P are usually regarded as separate elements. In 
summary, we seek to know for a binary orbit the following. 


$3 the longitude of the ascending node (the point in the 
orbit at which the receding star crosses ‘the plane of 
the sky’). 

i the inclination of the orbital plane to the plane of the 
sky. 

w commonly called the longitude of periastron, al- 

though by strict analogy with the practice in plane- 

tary astronomy that term should be reserved for w+2. 

The angle w is the angle between the direction of the 

ascending node and the direction of periastron. 

the orbital eccentricity. 

the major semiaxis. 

the orbital period. 

the time of passage of the two stars through the 

periastron point. 


Sw ws 


In addition, for spectroscopic binary systems we usually 
consider as an element 


Vo the radial velocity of the center of mass of the system. 
Note, however, that this quantity is variable ina triple 
system and that may cause problems if the interval 
covered by the observations is an appreciable fraction 
of the longer orbital period. 


These quantities refer to the relative orbit of one star with 
respect to the other. If we are interested in the absolute 
orbits of either or both stars, relative to the center of 
mass of the system, we can distinguish the elements for 
each component by the suffixes 1 and 2. Clearly, P must 
be the same for each component and 82, i, e, T and Y 
should be, while @, should equal w, + 180°. In practice 
accidental and systematic errors in the observations will 
often lead to slightly different values of these elements for 
each component. We finally note that 


ad=a,+a) 


and, by simple moments, 


Y m2 


=. 2) 
a2 my 

Determination of the orbital elements 

The basic equation for the radial velocity, V, of a binary 

component in its orbit is 


V=V)+ Kecosw+ K cos(v+ a) (3) 


where 2K is the total observed range of radial velocity and 
v is the true anomaly in the orbit, i.e. the angle between 
the radius vector at time ¢ and the direction of periastron. 
It is simple to compute the mean anomaly, M (in radians), 
at any time f, since 


iia Gas 
~ ?P 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and v and M are related by a well-known series expansion 
in e or, less directly, by Kepler’s equation. It can also be 
shown that 

20a sini 


= Bae (4) 


We thus see from equation (3) that radial-velocity 
observations by themselves give us no information about 
the angle 82. (They do, however, when combined with 
visual or interferometric observations, which define the 
line of the nodes, tell us which of the two nodes is the 
ascending one.) We also see that we cannot separate a sini 
since, by eliminating P from equations (1) and (4), we find, 
for a given eccentricity and total mass, 


K = constant x a7!" sini 


and we do not know whether a small K arises from a 
large a or a small sini. However, if i is known from 
photometric, visual or interferometric observations, then 
a can be determined and hence, by equation (1), the total 
mass of the system. Equation (2) then serves to give us the 
individual masses. 

The earliest methods of determining orbital elements 
were all graphical, a method devised by Lehmann- 
Filhés in 1894 being the most popular. Even today, an 
experienced investigator may roughly estimate the orbital 
elements from the appearance of the velocity curve. For 
example, if the latter is sinusoidal, the orbit is circular (and 
Vo is then simply the mean observed velocity), and the 
greater the departure from a sinusoidal curve, the greater 
is the orbital eccentricity. The condition for finding Vo if 
the orbit is eccentric is that the areas between the Vp-axis 
and the velocity curve lying above and below the former 
should be equal. If the velocity curve is symmetrical 
about the maximum observed velocity, then w = 0° (by 
convention, w is zero when the major axis of the orbit 
is perpendicular to the line of sight and the ascending 
node coincides with periastron). If the velocity curve 
is symmetrical about the Vo-axis, but the ascent from 
minimum to maximum observed velocity takes longer 
than the following descent, then w is 90°. Again, the 
greater the disparity between the two times, the more 
eccentric the orbit (see figure 2). 

Such visual estimates are, of course, only of use 
as a rough guide to the investigator, and the graphical 
methods of determining orbital elements have become 
of historical interest only. It is important to use a fully 
objective computational method that will also give realistic 
values for the uncertainties in the elements. Lehmann- 
Filhés showed how his method could be adapted to a 
least-squares solution, although he believed (correctly for 
his time) that such a solution would rarely be worth the 
trouble of making it. 

Equation (3) cannot be directly adapted to least 
squares since it is not linear in the unknowns, which are 
often of very different magnitudes, and the unknowns 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Schematic velocity curves for (upper left) a circular 
orbit, (upper right) an elliptical orbit with e = 0.25 and w = 90°, 
(lower left) an elliptical orbit with e = 0.5 and w = 270° and 
(lower right) an elliptical orbit with e = 0.5 and w = 0°. The 
scale of velocity is arbitrary. The horizontal line represents the 
Vo-axis, velocity of the center of mass of the system. In the first 
two elliptical orbits, periastron passage occurs when the steeper 
branch of the velocity curve crosses the Vo-axis, and in the last at 
the time of maximum velocity. 


T and P appear in it only implicitly. Lehmann- 
Filhés differenced the equation and collected all the 
corresponding terms together to give 


AV = AV) + (cosu+ecosw)AK — (sinu+esinw)K Aw 


sin u sin v 


+ {| cosw — (2+ecosv)}]K Ae 
1-—e? 


Apu 
KwAT 


— sinu(1+ecosv)*(t — T) 


+sinu(1 + ecosv)? (5) 
where, for brevity, u = v + @, 4 = 2n/P. In practice, 
scale factors are often introduced into the coefficients 
of Ae, Aw and AT, so that all the unknowns will be 
similar in magnitude (the solution might give, for example, 
100K Aw). Although, in principle, a correction can be 
computed to the period (through Aj.) that is rarely done 
(i.e. Ayt is assumed to be zero). Including a correction 
for the period reduces the weight of the whole solution 
and, if the period needs refinement, this can often be 
better achieved by the method already described. To make 
the solution, one must obviously begin with preliminary 
values of the elements, and the quantities AV are the 
residuals of the observed velocities from those computed 
with the preliminary elements, while the other differences 
are the corrections to be made to the preliminary values 
of the several elements. In the days of hand-operated, or 
even electrically driven, calculators, it was worthwhile to 
spend some time deriving as good a set of preliminary 
elements as possible by some graphical method, in order 
to avoid the need to iterate with a second solution to find 
the final elements. Nowadays, however, since electronic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


computers can perform several iterations very quickly, 
rough estimates of Vo, K, e, w and T are often sufficient 
to start the solution. 

Equation (5) works well if the orbital eccentricity, e, 
is appreciable. When e is small, however, the coefficients 
of Aw and AT become more nearly proportional to each 
other, and the system of normal equations is indeterminate 
when e = 0. Since a very considerable portion of 
spectroscopic-binary orbits is circular or nearly circular, 
that is a serious defect of the Lehmann-Filhés method. 
Until the 1940s it was common practice to fix the value of 
T or w arbitrarily and to solve for the other elements. This 
led to largely meaningless values of T and w and, more 
seriously, to gross underestimates of the uncertainties of 
those two quantities. Solutions made in this way may 
still mislead the unwary investigator who happens to find 
one of the original papers and is unfamiliar with the early 
practice. Extensive modern recomputations have been 
made both by Luyten and by Lucy and Sweeney. 

In 1941, Sterne published an alternative method of 
orbital solution, specifically designed to overcome the 
problem posed by small eccentricities. He gave up 
the attempt to determine T and w directly, when the 
eccentricity was small. Instead he defined a quantity, L, 
called the mean longitude, where 


L=o+M 


and M is again the mean anomaly. Sterne also defined a 
time 7p at which the mean longitude is zero, so 


L=wu(t — Th). 


When the orbit is exactly circular, then 7 is the time of 
nodal passage, or of maximum radial velocity. For small 
eccentricities, the equations of condition then take the form 


AV = AV) +cosL AK +cos2L Kecosw+sin2L Kesinw 
+sinL wK ATy — sin L (t — To) K Ap. (6) 


Once again, in practice, only rarely is the term Ay 
included, and scaling factors may be needed to bring all 
the unknowns to the same order of magnitude, but e cos w, 
esinw and Ty may be determined without difficulty, even 
when e is small, and from them e, w and T may be 
found. Equations (5) and (6) together should suffice for 
the determination of all orbital elements. 

It may turn out, however, that even if an apparently 
significant value is found for e, the orbit should be 
treated as circular. The representation of a given set of 
observations is always improved by the use of an extra 
parameter; the question we have to ask is whether that 
improvement carries with it any physical significance for 
the orbit. This question was answered in 1971 by Lucy 
and Sweeney, who devised a test based on computing 
the amount by which the residuals are decreased, when 
an eccentricity is used to represent the observations, 
compared with those obtained from a circular orbit. They 
found, and subsequent experience has confirmed, that 
often a computed eccentricity should be ignored, even if it 
meets the usual criterion for statistical significance. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Determination of the masses 


Our chief interest in obtaining the orbital elements is to 
determine the masses of the components of the binary 
system. We have already seen from equation (1) that the 
total mass is proportional to a’, and from equations (2) and 
(4) 


Ky.2 & Gy,2(& mp1). 


Thus we have two equations for the masses of the two 
stars in the system (provided that we know the orbital 
inclination i). Usually K is expressed in km s!, Pin days, 
a in km and m in units of the solar mass (2 x 10% kg). 
These units may seem a little strange to those brought up 
ina strict SI system, especially since two different units are 
used for time. They have been found convenient, however, 
and, in these units, 


a2 sini = 13751(1 — e*)/* Ky 2P 
my sin? i = 1.0385 x 1077(1 — e*)9/2(Ky + Ky)? Ko P. 


Note that m is proportional to K 3. That is the principal 
reason why great care is needed to determine K, + K2 as 
precisely as possible, since the percentage error in m + mz 
is at least three times that in K; + K2. To make useful 
comparisons with computed stellar models, a precision of 
about 1% in the individual masses is needed. Challenging 
though this is, it has now been achieved for an appreciable 
number of systems. 

If the two stars are very different in luminosity, 
then the spectrum of only the brighter can be seen and 
measured. Obviously, the total mass of the system cannot 
then be determined, but the so-called mass function, f (m), 
can be computed from 


= 1.0385 x 1077(1 — e”)°/7 Ky; 3P. 


Even this permits some inference to be made about the 
masses, since we can write 


mo sin? i 
OSS aaa 
The vast majority of stars obeys the mass—luminosity 
relation, the more massive star being the brighter. 
Therefore m/mz is usually greater than unity and the 
denominator in equation (7) is thus greater than 4. In 
general, each star in a single-spectrum binary system must 
have a minimum mass of 4f(m). There are occasional 
exceptions. In 6 Lyrae, the spectrum of the more massive 
component is largely concealed by matter surrounding 
that star—for a long time, no certain detection of that 
spectrum was made. The system is massive, but some 
astronomers who studied the system were misled into 
supposing that it was several times more massive than 
it really is. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Modern problems 

It has been tacitly assumed in most of the foregoing that 
the measured radial velocity of a binary component is 
at all times that of the center of mass of the star. When 
that is so, good spectroscopic observations combined with 
good photometric observations (if the binary is eclipsing) 
can lead to the determination of not only precise stellar 
masses but also precise stellar radii and luminosities. Such 
binaries are our principal source of fundamental stellar 
data and are of fundamental importance in providing 
observational tests of theories of stellar structure and 
evolution. In many of the most interesting binaries, 
however, the measured radial velocity may differ from 
that of the center of mass of the star. This can come 
about for any of three reasons, all of which may have effect 
simultaneously in some binary systems: (i) the surface of 
the binary component is irradiated by that of the other and 
the isophotes of the surface of the irradiated component 
are no longer concentric circles about the center of the 
stellar disk (‘reflection effect’); (ii) one or both components 
are non- spherical in shape, because of tidal or rotational 
distortion and, since the luminous flux emerging from any 
point on the stellar surface is proportional to the local value 
of the acceleration due to gravity, the stellar isophotes 
again depart from circular symmetry (‘ellipticity effect’); 
(iii) streams of matter between or around the components 
contribute to the line profiles in the observed spectrum— 
especially to those of the hydrogen lines—so that the 
measured velocity is affected by the presence of the stream 
and is not simply the orbital velocity of the star. 

The reflection and ellipticity effects were well known 
early in the history of spectroscopic binaries, because 
the same two underlying causes also affect the light 
variations of eclipsing binaries. They affect the measured 
radial velocity because, in each case, they deflect the 
effective light center of the stellar disk from the geometrical 
center so that any rotational velocity the star may possess 
contributes to the observed velocity. Both effects are 
present in any binary system in which the separation of 
the two components is no more than a few times their 
own radii. They become very pronounced, however, 
in W Ursae Majoris systems. These are binaries with 
periods of less than a day whose components are so 
highly distorted as actually to be in contact over a small 
region of their surfaces. The velocity curves often show 
appreciable departures from the kind of variation expected 
from a star moving ina Keplerian ellipse and only recently 
has it become possible to use the observed velocities to 
obtain reliable orbital elements for these systems. This is 
done by computing the flux distribution over each stellar 
surface and then computing the expected departures of 
the measured velocities from simple Keplerian motion and 
comparing the computations with the actual observations 
(figure 3). 

The distortion of velocity curves by the effects of 
circumstellar matter was first pointed out by Struve in the 
1940s. It was especially noticeable in systems resembling 
Algol. The velocity curve might still look Keplerian in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


160 


0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 


Figure 3. A recent velocity curve for the W Ursae Majoris system 
BV Draconis, showing the departures from Keplerian motion. 
The true orbit is circular: compare these curves with the upper 
left section of figure 2. Reproduced with permission from 
Rucinski S and Katuzny J 1986 Astron. J. 92 666-72. 


form but suggest an orbital eccentricity that could not be 
reconciled with the timing of eclipses. (In a circular orbit, 
the eclipse of one star necessarily occurs halfway between 
two successive eclipses of the other; in an elliptical orbit 
that is true only if w is equal to 90° or 270°.) In fact, the first 
clue to this kind of distortion emerged in 1930 when E F 
Carpenter found a large orbital eccentricity for the velocity 
curve of U Cephei that completely contradicted the 
photometric evidence, but the interpretation of this result 
had to await the work of Struve some 10-15 yr later. Struve 
also predicted that novae and recurrent novae would be 
found to be members of binary systems—a prediction 
first confirmed by Kraft from ground-based observations, 
and then more spectacularly by the discovery of x-ray 
binaries from space. Such systems, now usually referred 
to aS CATACLYSMIC BINARIES, contain compact components 
(WHITE DWARFS, NEUTRON STARS or possibly even BLACK HOLES). 
Streams of gas within these systems reach very high 
velocities and create ‘hot spots’ when they collide with 
the stellar surfaces or with each other. These hot spots can 
dominate the light of the system, at least at some phases, 
so both the observed light and velocity variations depart 
considerably from the expectations based on simple binary 
motion. Although Struve’s hypothesis of gas streaming 
long remained controversial, modern observations in the 
ultraviolet, x-ray and radio wavelengths, as well as in 
the optical region of the spectrum, have left little room 
for doubt of its basic correctness. Indeed, modern 
techniques of tomographic analysis (a principle also 
used in medicine in which ‘pictures’ taken from several 
angles—as the binary revolves—are built up into a three- 
dimensional representation) have made it possible to 
begin to understand the characteristics of the gas streams 
themselves. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectroscopic Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The gas streams transfer mass between the compo- 
nents of a system, or remove it from the system altogether. 
These streams arise because evolving stars expand and the 
presence of a companion limits the amount by which a star 
can expand and remain stable. Even in systems in which 
the components are far enough from each other to permit 
considerable expansion without destroying each other’s 
stability, tidal action between the enlarged components 
may modify their individual evolution. A possible exam- 
ple of this is provided by the well-known, bright binary 
CAPELLA, Which can be observed both as a spectroscopic 
and interferometric binary. 

In binaries with eccentric orbits, tidal action often 
betrays its presence by the rotation of the major axis of 
the orbit, or the line of apsides, which has already been 
mentioned. The presence of a third body, or general 
relativistic effects, can also give rise to apsidal rotation, 
but in most systems tidal distortion is the most important 
cause. It produces apsidal rotation because stars are 
not infinitely concentrated to their centers, and do not, 
therefore, act gravitationally exactly as mass points. This 
has been known for a long time, and the basic formulae 
were published by H N Russell in 1928. Because apsidal 
periods are long, however, and the rate of apsidal rotation 
is proportional to the fifth power of the stellar radius 
expressed in units of the separation of the two stars, only 
in recent decades has sufficient precision been reached for 
useful deductions from the observations to be possible. 
Apart from the observation of non-radial oscillations and 
solar neutrinos, which still give problematical results, 
measurements of apsidal motion provide the only direct 
means we have of probing the internal structure of a star. 
Results tend to confirm the predictions of stellar models. 

In most binary systems displaying apsidal motion, 
the relativistic contribution is small compared with the 
Newtonian contribution arising from the facts that the 
stars are not mass points and are tidally distorted. In 
some close massive systems, however, the relativistic effect 
can be significant, or even dominant. In DI Herculis, for 
example, it is the Newtonian effect that is expected to be 
insignificant compared with the relativistic. Surprisingly, 
the observed rate of motion is much less than relativity 
predicts, which led some people to question that theory. 
On the other hand, binaries containing pulsars provide 
a very sensitive test of relativity, because the orbital 
elements can be determined with much greater precision 
from the variations in the arrival times of the pulses 
than from radial velocities, and apsidal motion is much 
more rapid in these systems (about 90° in 20 yr in PSR 
1913+16) than in ordinary binaries. There is, however, an 
even more important test of relativity that can be made 
with this system—the change in orbital period caused by 
gravitational radiation from the binary. The measured rate 
agrees to within half a per cent with the predicted rate. 
Such close agreement leaves little room, if there had been 
any earlier, to doubt the correctness of general relativity. 
The result earned a Nobel prize for Taylor and Hulse who 
obtained it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

The best review of current state of our knowledge of stellar 
masses and dimensions and its implications for theories of 
stellar evolution is given by Andersen in 


Andersen J 1991 Accurate masses and radii of normal stars 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 3 91-126 


A longer and more detailed account by the present writer 
of some of the modern problems of binary-star studies may 
be found in 


Batten A H 1995 Stellar evolution in binary systems Rep. 
Prog. Phys. 58 885-928 


A discussion of how modern observations of apsidal 
rotation can help in the study of stellar structure will be 
found in 


Claret A and Giménez A 1991 The effect of core overshoot- 
ing and mass loss on the internal density concentra- 
tion of main sequence stars Astron. Astrophys. 244 319- 
26 


Alan H Batten 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrum (pl: spectra) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectrum (pl: spectra) 


In general terms, the distribution of intensity of 
electromagnetic radiation with wavelength. Thus when 
we examine the spectrum of star we are looking at a map of 
this brightness distribution. In the context of visible light, 
the visible spectrum is the band of colors produced when 
white light is passed through a glass prism, which has 
the effect of spreading out light according to wavelength. 
From long to short wavelength the colors so obtained are 
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. These are 
the colors that make up the rainbow (although in practice 
not all of these colors may be discerned). 

Such a spectrum is a continuous spectrum, or 
continuum (i.e. a continuous distribution of radiation 
over all wavelengths) and is emitted by a hot solid 
body or hot gas under high pressure. A continuum is 
also emitted by the free-free radiation and synchrotron 
radiation processes, but the form of the spectrum is 
different in each case. 

A line spectrum is emitted by a gas under low 
pressure. If an electron in a high-energy orbit (i.e. of large 
radius around the atomic nucleus) makes a downward 
transition to an orbit of lower energy, then the difference 
in energy between the two orbits, AE, is released as a 
quantum (or ‘packet’) of radiation having a particular 
wavelength, 4, and frequency, f. The relationship 
between AE, i, and f is as follows: 


AE =hf =he/a, 


where c is the velocity of light and h is Planck’s constant. 
Each possible transition results in its own characteris- 
tic spectral line. In the hydrogen atom, the simplest atom, 
there are a number of series of spectral lines due to the pos- 
sible transitions. For example, all the possible transitions 
down to the lowest energy level give rise to the Lyman 
series of emission lines at ultraviolet wavelengths, and all 
the possible transitions down to the second energy level 
(the first excited level gives rise to the Balmer series of lines 
in the visible spectrum). These lines are characteristic of 
hydrogen and hydrogen alone. Heavier elements have 
more complex spectra, and the spectra of molecules are 
complicated by vibrational and rotational energy states. 
Dark absorption-line spectra are produced when 
atoms and molecules absorb radiation (from a background 
source) at the same wavelengths at which emission takes 
place by the mechanism described above. For example, 
a dark line of wavelength 4 is produced when electrons 
of a given element absorb energy AF and make upward 
transitions from lower to higher energy orbits. 


See also: electromagnetic spectrum, hydrogen spectrum, 
quantum mechanics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spectrum-X Gamma ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectrum-X Gamma 


Much delayed international x-ray mission. Originally 
scheduled for launch in 1993, unlikely to fly before 
2000. Carries the Soviet-Danish Roentgen Telescope 
(SODART) for imaging, as well as spectroscopes for 
extreme ultraviolet and gamma ray studies. Also carries 
two US instruments and the Joint European Telescope for 
X-ray astronomy (JET-X) to study faint x-ray sources. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Spencer Jones, Sir Harold (1890-1960) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spencer Jones, Sir Harold 
(1890-1960) 


Astronomer, born in London, England. He was chief 
assistant to Frank Dyson at Greenwich and worked at the 
Royal Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope. Following 
in the tracks of Davip GILL, he repeated Gill’s photographic 
survey of the southern sky (Cape Photographic Catalogue, 
CPC). He then organized the international project to 
determine Earth-Sun distance by repeated measurements 
of the asteroid Eros during its close approach to the Earth in 
1930-1 (if the distance to any one object in the solar system 
can be determined, then the distances between the rest can 
be found by Kepler’s laws). Under his direction, the Royal 
Observatory at the Cape photographed Eros more than 
1200 times; he reduced this and the equal amount of data 
from other observatories—but it transpired that Gill was 
nearer the mark. Spencer Jones returned to Greenwich 
and became Astronomer Royal in 1933. Probably his most 
significant discovery was of the irregularities in the Earth’s 
rotation, which he proved by showing that the planets all 
seemed to be together in pulling ahead and falling behind 
their calculated positions at given times as measured by 
the Earth’s rotation. He replaced the concept of ‘universal 
time,’ based on Earth’s rotation, by ‘ephemeris time’, a 
system of time measurement at first based on the motion 
of the planets in their orbits and then superseded by the 
frequency of oscillations in quartz and then cesium atoms. 
Having experienced the clarity of South African skies, he 
was depressed by observing conditions in London, and set 
in train the removal of the Royal Observatory to the Sussex 
countryside. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spherical Aberration 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spherical Aberration 


The inability of a spherical lens or mirror to bring all 
parallel rays of light to the same focus. When light reflects 
from a mirror, the surface of which has a shape that is part 
of asphere, the position at which an incident ray is focused 
depends on its distance from the optical axis (the line that 
passes through the center of the mirror, perpendicular to 
its surface). Rays that reflect from points closer to the rim 
of the mirror are brought to a focus closer to the mirror’s 
surface than rays that reflect from points closer to the 
optical axis. A similar effect applies to rays of light passing 
through a simple lens, the surfaces of which have shapes 
that are parts of spheres. 

Spherical aberration causes the image of a point 
source of light (such as a star) to be spread out into a disk. 
Between the focal positions for the central and peripheral 
rays there is a plane at which the smallest image, known as 
the circle of least confusion, occurs. In the case of a mirror, 
spherical aberration can be eliminated for rays parallel to 
the optical axis by making its surface a paraboloid (the 
profile of a cross section of sucha surface is a parabola). For 
a lens, the effects can be reduced by giving its two surfaces 
different radii of curvature (the radius of curvature is the 
radius of the circle that matches the curve of the surface). 

As with chromatic aberration (a defect peculiar to 
lenses), the effects of spherical aberration can be reduced 
by using lenses with very high focal ratios. During the 
seventeenth century, this approach led to the construction 
of very long and unwieldy refractors. 


See also: chromatic aberration, focal length, focal ratio, 
objective lens, reflector, refractor. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The star a Virginis, a blue-white giant star, spectral type 
B1V, of apparent magnitude 0.98. Ata distance of 260 light- 
years, parallax 0.012”, its absolute magnitude is —3.5. The 
name means ‘the Spike’ or ‘Ear of Wheat’, which the Virgin 
Mary is portrayed holding in the ancient constellation 
figures. 

Spica is a rotating ellipsoidal binary, comprising two 
large, close components which are elongated towards each 
other by the strong gravitational attraction between them. 
Its magnitude varies very regularly between 0.95 and 1.05 
over a period of 4.0146 days, as a result of the changing 
combined surface area of the component stars presented 
towards us. The primary component is also a regular 
pulsating variable with a period of 0.17 days. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Spiral Arms 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spiral Arms 


Lanes of gas, dust and hot young stars that spiral out- 
wards from the central bulges of spiral and barred spiral 
galaxies. The most prominent features of spiral arms are 
clusters and associations of O and B type stars (highly 
luminous, high-temperature stars) and HII regions 
(luminous nebulae), both of which are indicative of 
recent and ongoing star formation. At radio wave- 
lengths, spiral arms may be identified by measuring the 
distribution of neutral hydrogen clouds, which radiate at 
a wavelength of 21 cm, and molecular clouds. Infrared 
observations reveal clouds of warm dust heated by 
newly formed stars along the spiral arms. 

In some galaxies (‘grand design’ spirals), the spiral 
arms are long, narrow and well defined, in others (‘floc- 
culent’ spirals), they are more clumpy and fragmented, 
consisting of large numbers of shorter arm segments. 

Within our own galaxy, the Milky Way Galaxy, lanes 
of dust absorb starlight and prevent optical astronomers 
from seeing stars in the plane of the galaxy at distances 
much beyond about 10000 light-years. Nevertheless, 
enough O, B associations and HII regions can be seen to 
identify the spiral arms in the neighborhood of the Sun. 
Radio and millimeter-wave observations of emissions 
from hydrogen clouds and, more particularly, from mol- 
ecular clouds, reveal the overall spiral structure. Our 
galaxy’s spiral pattern consists of two or more major 
arms and a number of shorter segments, one of which— 
the Orion arm, or ‘spur’—contains the Sun. The 
Sagittarius arm, which includes the stars and interstellar 
clouds that lie in the general direction of the constellation 
of Sagittarius, lies closer to the galactic center than the 
Orion arm and the Perseus arm lies further out. 

The galaxy NGC 4622, imaged by the Hubble Space 
Telescope in 2002 appears to be rotating in the opposite 
direction to that which is expected. The clockwise rota- 
tion is puzzling because of the direction in which the 
outer spiral arms are pointing. Most spiral galaxies have 
arms of gas and stars that trail behind as they turn, but 
this galaxy has two leading outer arms that point toward 
the direction of the galaxy’s clockwise rotation. To add to 
the conundrum, NGC 4622 also has a trailing inner arm 
that is wrapped around the galaxy in the opposite direc- 
tion it is rotating. Astronomers suspect that NGC 4622 
interacted with another galaxy as its two outer arms are 
lopsided, meaning that something disturbed it. NGC 
4622 may have consumed a small companion galaxy. The 
galaxy’s core provides additional evidence for a merger 
between NGC 4622 and a smaller galaxy. This informa- 
tion could be the key to understanding the unusual lead- 
ing arms. 

See also: BARRED SPIRAL GALAXY, MILKY WAY GALAXY, 
SPIRAL GALAXY 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Spiral Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spiral Galaxy 


A galaxy in which a central bulge of stars is surrounded 
by a flattened disk that contains a spiral pattern of hot 
young stars and luminous nebulae. Within the Hubble 
classification scheme, spiral galaxies, denoted by the let- 
ter ‘S’, are categorized according to the size of the central 
bulge, the tightness of the spiral pattern and the degree 
of patchiness in the spiral arms. Sa galaxies have rela- 
tively large central bulges, tightly wound and relatively 
smooth arms. Sb galaxies have somewhat smaller bulges 
and more open arms that often contain conspicuous HII 
regions (luminous nebulae) and clumps of hot blue stars; 
Sc galaxies have small central bulges and loosely wound, 
‘knotty’ arms that typically contain numerous HII 
regions and clumps of stars. Galaxies with clumsy, chaot- 
ic and poorly defined arms are called ‘flocculent’ spirals, 
while those with thinner, longer, well-defined arms are 
termed ‘grand design’ spirals. 

Spiral galaxies contain significant quantities of gas 
and dust, the relative proportions (by mass) of gas to 
stars ranging from as little as 2%, for some Sa galaxies to 
10-15% in Sc galaxies. The masses of spiral galaxies (i.e. 
the combined mass of the stars, gas and dust that they 
contain) range from about one billion (10%) solar masses 
to several hundred billion (~4-10™) solar masses, and 
their diameters from about 15000 to about 150000 light- 
years. Analyses of the rotation curves of spiral galaxies 
(plots of the rotational velocities at different distances 
from the centers of galaxies) imply that spiral galaxies 
contain up to ten times as much dark matter as luminous 
matter and that their overall masses, therefore, are up to 
ten times greater than the figures quoted above. 

There are two principal candidate mechanisms to 
account for the existence of spiral structure—self- 
propagating star formation, and density waves. The self- 
propagating star formation theory suggests that within 
major regions of star formation, high-mass stars evolve 
rapidly and explode as supernovae, the blast waves from 
these events compressing neighboring gas clouds and 
triggering further star formation in that part of the 
galaxy. Within an extensive star-forming region, bright 
stars and HII regions (luminous nebulae) closer to the 
galactic center will move ahead of those that are further 
out, so drawing out the star-forming region into a curv- 
ing arc. In this way, random bouts of star formation pro- 
duce a succession of arc segments that make up the 
clumpy arms of flocculent spirals. According to the 
density-wave theory, the spiral arms are a wavelike pat- 
tern that moves through a galaxy, rather like ripples on a 
pond, causing stars and gas clouds to bunch together 
temporarily to form the spiral arms. Individual stars and 
gas clouds revolve round the center of the galaxy in their 
own orbits, slowing down and bunching together tem- 
porarily each time they encounter a density wave, just as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


vehicles slow down and bunch together at roadworks or 
lane closures, travel slowly through the resulting traffic 
jam, then speed up and spread out at the other end. 
When a gas cloud enters a spiral arm, it is slowed down 
and compressed. This initiates a bout of star formation, 
so giving birth to the hot young stars and HII regions 
that delineate the arm. The density waves themselves are 
probably initiated by the asymmetric gravitational field 
of a central bar structure or by gravitational disturbances 
caused by neighboring galaxies, or by a combination of 
both. 

Although both processes may have a role to play in 
any galaxy, self-sustaining star formation seems more 
appropriate to flocculent spirals and density waves to 
grand design spirals. 

The galaxy NGC 4622, imaged by the Hubble Space 
Telescope in 2002 appears to be rotating in the opposite 
direction to that which is expected. The clockwise rota- 
tion is puzzling because of the direction in which the 
outer spiral arms are pointing. Most spiral galaxies have 
arms of gas and stars that trail behind as they turn, but 
this galaxy has two leading outer arms that point toward 
the direction of the galaxy’s clockwise rotation. To add to 
the conundrum, NGC 4622 also has a trailing inner arm 
that is wrapped around the galaxy in the opposite direc- 
tion it is rotating. Astronomers suspect that NGC 4622 
interacted with another galaxy as its two outer arms are 
lopsided, meaning that something disturbed it. NGC 
4622 may have consumed a small companion galaxy. The 
galaxy’s core provides additional evidence for a merger 
between NGC 4622 and a smaller galaxy. This informa- 
tion could be the key to understanding the unusual lead- 
ing arms. 

See also: GALAXY, HUBBLE CLASSIFICATION, MILKY WAY 
GALAXY, SPIRAL ARMS. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Spitzer, Lyman, Jr (1914-97) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spitzer, Lyman, Jr (1914-97) 


US astrophysicist, became professor at the Princeton 
faculty where he founded the Princeton Plasma Physics 
Laboratory (PPPL). He researched spectral line formation, 
stellar motions, star formation and the physics of the 
interstellar medium. He showed that there must be at 
least two phases of material in the interstellar medium— 
high-temperature clouds around hot stars and cooler inter- 
cloud regions. He led the project to make and operate the 
ultraviolet astronomy satellite, Copernicus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Spole, Anders (1630-99) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spole, Anders (1630-99) 


Swedish astronomer, studied in Germany, became 
professor of astronomy on the foundation of Lund 
University, and professor at Uppsala University in 1679. 
His observatory on the top of his house was completely 
destroyed, together with all his work, in Uppsala’s great 
fire of 1702. He observed dust lanes in the tail of the great 
comet of 1680, and sunspots, which he believed caused 
comets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Sporadic Meteor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sporadic Meteor 


A meteor that does not belong to an identifiable meteor 
shower. The meteoroids that produce sporadic meteors are 
part of the zodiacal dust cloud, which pervades the inner 
solar system, and are swept up by the Earth as it proceeds 
in its orbit. On average about five sporadic meteors are 
visible from any given location on any clear night. The 
actual number varies with time of night and time of year. 
Sporadic meteors seen by an observer in the evening can 
be produced only by incoming meteoroids traveling fast 
enough to ‘catch up’ with the Earth, whose rotation is 
carrying the observer away from the direction from which 
the meteoroids are coming. But after midnight, when the 
Earth’s rotation carries the observer into the dust cloud, 
the sporadic rate increases. The seasonal variation has 
to do with the altitude of the Earth’s apex—the point on 
the celestial sphere toward which its motion at a given 
time appears to be taking it. The higher the apex is in the 
sky, the greater is the sporadic hourly rate. For northern- 
hemisphere observers the apex reaches its greatest altitude 
at the autumnal equinox and the contemporaneous sporadic 
background (the sporadic hourly rate at a specified time of 
year) is then 8-10 per hour. The apex is nearest the horizon 
at the spring equinox, when the rate is just 2-3 per hour. 


See also: interplanetary dust 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Square Of Pegasus ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Square Of Pegasus 


A conspicuous asterism of four bright stars forming a 
square of approximately 15° a side, notable for the absence 
of any but very faint stars within it. It is formed by the stars 
B,a and y Pegasi (apparent magnitudes 2.44, 2.49 and 2.83 
respectively) and a Andromedae (magnitude 2.07), and is 
prominent in the evening sky in autumn. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Sripati (1019-66) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sripati (1019-66) 


Born in (probably) Rohinikhanda, Maharashtra, India, 
wrote on astronomy and the mathematics associated with 
astronomy. He wrote Dhikotidakarana, about eclipses, 
Dhruvamanasa, about calculating the motion of the planets, 
and Siddhantasekhara about mathematics and astronomy in 
general. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


SS Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SS Cygni 


SS Cygni (SS Cyg) is a long orbital period (Po, = 6.6 h) 
cataclysmic variable of the dwarf nova (DN) subclass, 
characterized by semiperiodic brightness changes due to 
outbursts. This CLOSE BINARY STAR consists of a WHITE DWARF 
primary which accretes matter from a low-mass, ROCHE- 
Lose-filling secondary star. 

SS Cyg was discovered in 1896 by Miss Louisa 
Wells while examining Harvard College Observatory 
photographic plates. Wells noted that the star varied in 
photographic magnitude from 7.7 to 12.4. During the 
1897 objective prism survey for the Henry Draper catalog, 
a spectrum of SS Cyg was obtained. However, it was 
not until detailed observational work in 1943 revealed 
radial velocity motions that SS Cyg was shown to be a 
spectroscopic binary, i.e. a close double star. SS Cyg was 
the second DN discovered; U Geminorum being the first, 
found by J R Hinds in 1855. 

The DN subclass of cataclysmic variables consists 
of close binary stars in which the mass accreted from 
the secondary star forms a disk around the primary star. 
Semiperiodic outbursts, during which time the emitted 
light from the DN increases greatly, are the signature of 
a DN type of cataclysmic variable. The DN SS Cyg has 
outbursts about every 50 days which brighten the system 
from its normal quiescent level at visual (V) magnitude 
11.7 to a maximum level near V = 8.2, a factor of 25 
in brightness. From the Earth, we view SS Cyg at an 
inclination angle on the sky of 30°-60° and it is at an 
estimated distance of 150-180 pc. 

At visual wavelengths, the emitted flux from SS Cyg 
is dominated by light from the ACCRETION Disk but contains 
a small contribution from the secondary star. The hot 
inner disk and the white dwarf dominate at ultraviolet 
wavelengths with the secondary star and the outer disk 
being the major contributors in the infrared. X-ray 
observations of SS Cyg imply that, during quiescence, the 
hot inner disk regions are likely to be a single-temperature 
plasma. During outburst, a spherical x-ray-emitting 
corona forms around the white dwarf and mass is lost 
from the system in the form of a wind. Extreme ultraviolet 
observations (70-130 A) made at outburst show strong 
emission due to highly ionized Ne, Mg and Si produced 
within a region of temperature equal to 290000 K. 


The accretion stream, disk and hot spot 

Figure 1 shows an optical spectrum of SS Cyg at 
quiescence. In the figure, it can be seen that the dominant 
spectral features are emission lines, due to hydrogen 
and helium, which are produced in the accretion disk 
and hot spot. These strong, broad emission lines allow 
determinations of many physical parameters within the 
binary, foremost of which are estimates of the stellar 
masses. As the binary rotates, the accretion disk 
follows the orbital motion of the white dwarf. Thus, 
measurements of the radial velocity changes of the disk 
emission lines provide an approximate tracer of the true 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


‘ ee 


i : \ 
3500 4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500 7000 
WAVELENGTH (A) 


Figure 1. The optical spectrum (3500-7000 A) of SS Cyg, shown 
during quiescence, is dominated by emission from the accretion 
disk. Prominent emission lines due to hydrogen (particularly 
Ha (6563 A) and Hf (4861 A)) and weaker helium (He I (4471, 
5876 A)) are easily seen. The underlying continuum begins to 
rise at the blue end of the spectrum where the Balmer jump is 
seen in emission. 


orbital motion of the primary star. Using Kepler’s law, 
slightly reconfigured for our purposes, we have 


K3P - 
sin? i ery q+1 
21 GM) qd 


where i is the binary inclination, M2 is the mass of the 
secondary star, P is the orbital period, G is Newton’s 
gravitational constant, K; is the observed maximum shift 
of the radial velocity curve, and q is the mass ratio of the 
binary defined as Mz/M,. Typically, the orbital period and 
the K, amplitude are measured from observation, while 
M, is assumed! and i is approximated in various ways. 
The result is that g can be determined, and from it, the 
mass of the white dwarf (Mwp). 

The gas stream leaving the secondary star falls 
towards the primary but is curved in the direction of 
orbital motion owing to its stored angular momentum. 
This stream strikes the edge of the accretion disk and forms 
what is termed the hot spot. At the hot spot, the gas stream 
and the Keplerian orbiting accretion disk material mix, 
producing a region of enhanced density, temperature and 
light emission. 

The material orbiting within the accretion disk slowly 
loses angular momentum through viscous heating and 
spirals inward, eventually accreting onto the white dwarf 
equatorial regions. The rate of quiescent mass transfer (M) 
from the secondary star in SS Cyg is 8 x 107"! Mo yr“! (5 x 
10 gs“), typical of DN with similar orbital periods. This 
value is not necessarily the rate of mass accretion onto the 
white dwarf surface, as the accretion disk provides a buffer 
and storehouse for the material. The accretion disk mass, 
~0.1Mo5, remains nearly constant during interoutburst 
periods but some small fraction of it (~10%) is accreted 
onto the white dwarf during an outburst. Gravitational 
energy release by the accreted material is the cause of the 
disk heating and brightening observed during outburst. 
Accretion disks in DN have radii approximately given by 
Ra/a ~ 0.3, where a is the distance between the two stars. 


1 A further relation can be derived which yields the radius of the 
Roche lobe of a secondary star given the binary orbital period. 
One then assumes the secondary star to be a main sequence star 
of this radius, hence a mass estimate can be made. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SS Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


For SS Cyg, Ra ~ 4.5 x 108 m, in good agreement with 
observation. 

Models of accretion disks in long-period DN, such as 
SS Cyg, are based on the belief that the material within the 
disk is optically thick and mass and energy, within the disk, 
are conserved. This model, usually referred to as a a-disk 
model, predicts a temperature structure which varies with 
radius as 

Teer) (MwpM)4r9"*. 


In SS Cyg, we find that its accretion disk has a high 
temperature (T ~ 20000 K) inner (optically thin) edge, 
cooling to ~4000 K or less at the outer edge. Since optically 
thick material radiates as a blackbody, the output spectrum 
predicted from an accretion disk is simply a summation 
of various annuli, each of some characteristic emission 
temperature (See BLACK-BODY RADIATION). Thus, the output 
continuum flux distribution will be of the form 


Fy «A778 


in the optical and IR bandpasses. 

As the material in the accretion disk and hot spot 
region interacts with itself, small brightness changes occur 
of order a few tenths of a magnitude. These changes occur 
randomly or, at times, with quasi-periodic time-scales, 
and are termed flickering. Flickering is a tell-tale sign of 
a stellar system in which accretion is occurring. Power 
spectral analysis of the flickering in SS Cyg has shown that 
the amplitude increases towards the blue, indicative of a 
higher level of activity occurring in the hotter, inner disk 
regions (see also CORRELATION FUNCTION AND POWER SPECTRA IN 
COSMOLOGY). 

During minimum light, photometric observations 
of DN can be used to estimate the inclination of the 
binary system. This type of observation assumes that the 
photometric signature from the disk and hot spot can, in 
principle, be interpreted to indicate whether the accretion 
disk is seen edge-on (i = 90°) or tilted at some angle. 
In SS Cyg, minimum light optical photometry generally 
shows no modulations, indicating a low inclination (i ~ 
38°); however, occasional low-amplitude humps appear 
in both the optical and the UV, implying a higher binary 
inclination, i ~ 50°. This uncertainty in the inclination at 
which we view SS Cyg leads directly to an uncertainty in 
the masses derived for its stellar components. 


Outburst behavior 

SS Cyg is probably the best-studied DN, having 
photometric information available from before 1900 up 
to the present. Figure 2 presents a small segment 
of photometric data for SS Cyg showing a number of 
outbursts. Outbursts occur every 49.5 + 15.4 days in SS 
Cyg and have durations which are near either 7-8 days 
or 15 days. Other DN, similar to SS Cyg, show this 
bimodal structure as well. Sometimes the outbursts in SS 
Cyg tend to occur in a ‘short-long-short-long’ sequence 
with the outburst amplitude being correlated with the 
time since the last outburst and the time until the next 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2138+43 


50102 60200 52300 
UNBVALUATED DATA JO 2.400, 000+ 


50400 
AAVSO 


Figure 2. A typical 500 day light curve segment for SS Cyg. 
Notice that the outbursts are only semi-periodic and do not 
exactly alternate between long and short duration. The 
quiescent magnitude of SS Cyg is near 12 and the outbursts rise 
to near 8.5, a factor of about 25 in brightness. The x-axis is 
labeled in days starting with Julian day 2 450 000. 


one. The brightest outbursts have an optical luminosity of 
Lopt ~ 5 x 10** erg s~! or an integrated luminosity (over 
the entire outburst) of 3 x 10% erg s7!. 

The cause of DN outbursts is thought to be a disk 
instability, not an increase in mass transfer from the 
secondary star. This disk instability, known as the thermal 
limit cycle, occurs when the material in the accretion disk 
has its local temperature and density values increased 
beyond some critical level (typically when T > 8000 K), 
causing a rapid ionization of the (mostly) hydrogen gas. 
This leads to a heating front which propagates throughout 
most of the disk, ionizing some fraction of it. The 
alternating ‘long-short’ outburst cycle is thought to be 
caused by this heating front moving throughout the entire 
disk at times and not making it to the outer disk edge at 
other times. 

During outburst, optical oscillations have been seen 
in SS Cyg with periods of 7.3-10.9 s. These short- 
period modulations have also been seen at x-ray and EUV 
wavelengths. Because of their high frequencies, these 
brightness variations are thought to be associated with the 
very inner regions of the accretion disk close to or at the 
surface of the primary star. 


The stellar components 

SS Cyg contains a (1.1 + 0.30)Mo white dwarf with a 
radius about equal to that of the Earth and with an 
effective temperature of 34 000-40 000 K. The mass-losing 
secondary star is a main sequence star of approximate 
spectral type K5 V with a mass of (0.70 + 0.20)M,. The 
two stars orbit their common center of mass with a 
period of 6.6031 h, having a separation of only about the 
diameter of the Sun. Because of their close proximity and 
the gravitational influence of the primary, the secondary 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SS Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SS Cygni Roche Geometry 


10° [LT T T T T T T ] T T T T T T T | T T T T T T T T _] 
5x10° -— Speen e 
@ | 

2 
“4 es = 
EO | 

a> 
-5x10° — a eeccl an 
[ Diameter of Sun “| 

9 

We pr tlir srr ti pee Po a 
-10° -5x10° 5x10° 10° 1.5x10° 


x (meters) 


Figure 3. The Roche geometry for the DN SS Cyg. The oo shape is the critical Roche surface of the binary. The secondary star (right) 
fills its Roche lobe, transferring mass through the L1 point via a ballistic gas stream to form an accretion disk (dotted circle) 
surrounding the primary (left). The gas stream impacts the accretion disk at the hot spot (large filled dot). The small ‘x’ is the center of 
mass of the binary and the white dwarf (small dot) is shown to scale. The binary orbital motion is counterclockwise in this cartoon and 


the diameter of the Sun has been added for a size comparison. 


star completely fills its Roche lobe, causing matter to be 
transferred through the L1 point towards the primary star. 
This material forms an accretion disk surrounding the 
primary star. Figure 3 illustrates the Roche geometry and 
other aspects of SS Cyg. 

The original binary components of SS Cyg were a 
massive main sequence star (>6.5M,) in a wide orbit 
with a low-mass main sequence star, fairly similar to the 
present-day secondary. The massive primary evolved 
off the main sequence and expanded greatly, engulfing 
the orbiting secondary in a common envelope, while 
its core became essentially the present-day white dwarf. 
Orbital angular momentum lost by the secondary caused 
expansion and loss of the common envelope, while 
greatly reducing the orbital separation. When the binary 
emerged from this so-called common envelope stage, it 
probably had an orbital period of a few days or less and 
was detached, the secondary star not filling its Roche 
lobe. GRAVITATIONAL RADIATION losses eventually shrunk 
the orbital separation of the two stars enough to cause 
the binary to become semidetached, synchronizing the 
rotation of the secondary. At this point, mass transfer 
commenced and the binary became a cataclysmic variable. 
SS Cyg has been a mass-transferring binary for only a short 
time, about 0.2-0.3 Gyr. 

The secondary star becomes distorted in shape once 
it is confined by the Roche equipotential surface. This 
causes its properties to deviate from those of a single main 
sequence star. Continued mass exchange and magnetic 
braking will rapidly decrease the orbital separation of SS 
Cyg (Por will be ~3 h in another 0.1-0.2 Gyr), leading toa 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


non-equilibrium configuration of the secondary star. The 
secondary will expand, in response to continued mass loss, 
becoming up to 10-20% larger than a main sequence star 
of the same mass. 

Single main sequence K5 stars are known to show 
stellar activity, such as starspots, and to show activity 
cycles similar to those which are seen in our own Sun. 
Thus, it is not surprising to think that such cycles might 
also exist on the secondary star in SS Cyg. SS Cyg has 
been observed to show a cyclic variation in its outburst 
interval and a 20% change in its quiescent brightness. Both 
of these variations occur within a period of about 7.3 yr 
and they have been attributed to solar-type starspot cycles 
occurring on the secondary. 

Because of the closeness of the stellar components 
and the high temperature of the white dwarf, irradiation 
of the secondary star occurs. Emergent flux from the 
white dwarf illuminates the face of the secondary, near 
L1, with ~i of its total flux. (The accretion disk 
provides some shielding of the secondary star from direct 
illumination by the white dwarf.) Radiation from the 
accretion disk and hot spot region is also present, but much 
weaker owing to their lower temperatures. The effects 
of irradiation in SS Cyg cause very weak secondary star 
Balmer line emission (not visible in figure 1) and slight 
expansion of the secondary atmosphere near L1. During 
outburst, the inner disk becomes much hotter, emitting 
larger amounts of high-energy radiation. This radiation 
causes increased secondary star heating leading to phase- 
dependent secondary star spectral properties. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


SS Cygni 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 
Work describing the long-term light curve of SS Cyg can 
be found in 


Cannizzo J and Mattei J 1992 Astrophys. J. 401 642 


while detailed models of the accretion disk and outbursts 
of SS Cyg can be found in 


Cannizzo J 1993 Astrophys. J. 419 318 


The evolution of all types of cataclysmic variable is 
discussed by 


Howell S, Rappaport S and Politano M 1997 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 287 929 


A complete summary of this field of research is 
presented by 


Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Steve B Howell 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


$S433 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


$S$433 


A complex binary system within a SUPERNOVA REMNANT 
(‘W50’) in the constellation Aquila, which has proved to be 
of great astrophysical significance since it was discovered 
by the x-ray satellite ARIEL5 in 1976. The unusual name 
derives from its inclusion in a catalogue of emission-line 
stars published by B Stephenson and N Sanduleak in 1977. 
As it is a variable star system it is also designated “V1343 
Aquilae’. 

In addition to the x-ray observations, 55433 has 
also been studied at optical, radio and gamma-ray 
wavelengths. The combined results indicate that it 
is a system of great complexity and have stimulated 
considerable interest among both observational and 
theoretical astrophysicists over many years. 

Particular attention was first drawn to the object by 
observed peculiarities in its optical spectrum. In addition 
toa background continuum, there are also strong emission 
lines due to hydrogen and helium—not in itself unusual. 
What is much more puzzling is that these emission lines 
seem to have a dual nature: normal, broad, ‘stationary’ 
lines are present, but so too are narrower lines which vary 
considerably in wavelength over a period of 164 days. 
These variations in wavelength indicate Doppler red- and 
blue-shifts alternately. The stationary emission lines also 
exhibit a more modest variation, with a period of 13.1 days. 

Several conflicting interpretations have been pro- 
posed, which for many years could not be reconciled. A 
measure of agreement has been reached, however, and it 
is now generally accepted that the most likely structure for 
this remarkable object is substantially as follows. 

A binary system, of orbital period 13.1 days, 
comprises a hot, massive star (estimated at between 10 
and 20 solar masses) and a NEUTRON STAR (presumably 
the W50 supernova remnant) of perhaps 1.5 to 3 solar 
masses. A stellar wind from the massive star transfers 
matter through the LAGRANGIAN POINT, feeding an ACCRETION 
DISK surrounding the neutron star. Not all of this matter 
reaches the surface of the neutron star, however, part being 
ejected at enormously high velocity (of the order of 80000 
kilometres per second) via two opposed, narrow jets which 
precess in a period of 164 days, sweeping out two conical 
volumes of space of about 40° angle. 

The massive star, and possibly the accretion disk, 
contribute the background continuum. The stellar wind 
produces the broad component of the stationary emission 
lines, and the mass-transfer from the massive star to the 
accretion disk produces the narrow emission lines. The 
changing aspect of the accretion disk through the 164-day 
period explains the variation in total light from the system, 
and its periodic partial eclipses account for the lesser 13.1- 
day variation. The precessional motion of the jets explains 
the moving emission lines with their observed Doppler 
effects. Some minor variations in the emission spectrum 
have also given rise to the suggestion that there may be a 
‘hot spot’ in the accretion disk. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


No doubt observation and discussion of $S433 will 
long continue, with a view to gaining further insight into 
the structure of this enigmatic object, which has rightly 
been described as ‘unique in astronomy’. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


St Andrews University Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


St Andrews University Observatory 


The University Observatory, St Andrews, has the largest 
optical telescope ever constructed in Scotland, the 0.94 m 
James Gregory Telescope (JGT), plus smaller teaching 
telescopes. The JGT is used for CCD photometry of short- 
period binary stars, and stellar clusters. The Astrophysics 
group in the School of Physics and Astronomy has six 
permanent staff plus postdocs and research students. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www-star.st-andrews.ac.uk/astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


St Petersburg State University Astrophysical Observa- 
tory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


St Petersburg State University 
Astrophysical Observatory 


The Astronomical Institute of St Petersburg University 
is located in Stary Peterhof, some 40 km from St 
Petersburg, Russia. The staff members also take an active 
part in teaching astronomy students of the university’s 
mathematics and mechanics faculty. 

Areas of research cover a variety of fields of as- 
trophysics, stellar dynamics, celestial mechanics and as- 
trometry. They include studies of stellar atmospheres, 
planetary nebulae, intergalactic clouds, interacting galax- 
ies and blazars. 

Observations are made with the 23 cm telescope 
in St Petersburg, the 0.7 m telescope of the Crimean 
Observatory, the 6 m and 1 m telescopes of the Special 
Astronomical Observatory, and the RT-7.5 radio telescope 
of Moscow Technical University. 

For further information see 
http://www.astro.spbu.ru/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Standard Model of Particle Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Standard Model of Particle Physics 


The Standard Model describes all the confirmed data 
obtained using particle accelerators and has enabled many 
successful theoretical predictions to be made. It has been 
tested with per mille accuracy, at which level its calculable 
quantum corrections play an essential role. Its only 
missing feature is a particle, called the Higgs boson, whose 
coupling to the other particles is believed to generate their 
masses. However, the Standard Model is theoretically 
unsatisfactory despite its many successes, and possible 
extensions to provide a more unified picture of the 
different particle interactions, the apparent proliferation 
of different particle species and the origin of their masses 
are being proposed. Evidence has recently been presented 
that NEUTRINOS may alter their nature when they propagate 
over long distances. This is expected if neutrinos have 
masses, which are not predicted by the Standard Model. 
If confirmed, this may be the first evidence for particle 
physics beyond the Standard Model. 

The FUNDAMENTAL PARTICLE interactions described by 
the Standard Model are the electromagnetic, weak and 
strong nuclear forces. Electromagnetic forces have long 
been known, since the discovery of electromagnetic wave 
radiation by Hertz in 1885 and the early days of quantum 
physics, to be mediated by the exchange of the photon 
(see figure 1), a massless boson of unit angular momentum 
(spin 1) with two polarization states. The long-established 
quantum theory of electrodynamics is called QED. 
Yukawa conjectured that the weak interactions such as 
B decay were mediated analogously by the exchange of 
massive intermediate bosons, as also shown in figure 1. 
This hypothesis was put on a firm theoretical basis by 
Glashow, Weinberg and Salam in their unified theory 
of the weak and electromagnetic interactions, and the 
intermediate bosons (weighing about 80 and 91 GeV) 
were discovered at CERN in 1983. The strong nuclear 
interactions are known also to be mediated by massless 
bosons called gluons, see also figure 1, which were 
discovered at DESY in 1979. Thus all the fundamental 
interactions have very similar structures, but why only the 
weak bosons are massive is a puzzle to which we return 
later. 

The first elementary matter particle to be identified 
was the spin-1/2 electron (weighing about 1/2 MeV), 
followed by the unstable muon (weighing about 100 MeV) 
that was first detected in cosmic RAYS. These were shown 
each to have an associated neutrino, the electron neutrino 
being produced in weak f decay and the muon neutrino 
being produced either in association with a muon or in 
muon decays. These particles do not have strong nuclear 
interactions, only weak and (in the case of the electron 
and muon, which are charged particles) electromagnetism, 
and are called Lerrons. A third type of charged lepton 
(the t weighing about 1.78 GeV) was discovered in 
accelerator experiments at SLAC in 1975 and is also 
believed to have its own associated neutrino. Accelerator 
data have established upper limits on the possible masses 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


quarks, leptons quarks, leptons quarks 
photon wé, Z° gluon 
quarks, leptons quarks, leptons quarks 


Figure 1. The fundamental forces between elementary particles 
are mediated by intermediate bosons: the photon of 
electromagnetism, the massive W~ and Z° bosons of the weak 
interactions and the gluons of the strong interactions. 


of the neutrinos, which are much less than those of the 
corresponding charged leptons. 

From the 1940s onwards, many strongly interacting 
particles (HADRONS) were discovered. It was proposed 
in 1964 that these could all be understood as composite 
bound states of more elementary entities called QuARKs. At 
that time, all the known hadrons could be constructed out 
of just three quark species of spin 1/2 and fractional charge 
Q: up (Q = 2/3), down and strange (Q = —1/3). Such 
pointlike constituents inside protons were discovered by 
experiments at SLAC in 1968. Initially it was a puzzle 
how quarks could appear almost free at high energies, 
corresponding to short distances, but were never seen 
singly, only confined inside hadrons. This puzzle was 
resolved when it was demonstrated that the couplings of 
gluons became weaker at high energies (short distances), 
a property known as asymptotic freedom. 

Shortly afterwards, a key step in the establishment 
of the Standard Model was the discovery in a neutrino 
experiment at CERN in 1973 of a novel type of weak 
interaction, called neutral currents, in which the charges 
of the participating particles do not change, in contrast 
to the familiar weak interactions, called charged currents, 
in which the charges of participating quarks and leptons 
do change. Such neutral-current interactions were 
predicted by many unified theories of the weak and 
electromagnetic interactions, and their discovery provided 
the first circumstantial evidence that some such unified 
theory might be correct. The second piece of evidence for 
sucha theory was provided by the discovery in accelerator 
experiments at BNL and SLAC in 1974 of hadrons 
containing a fourth quark constituent weighing about 
15 GeV. This was baptized charm and had been predicted 
by unified electroweak theories, in order to explain the fact 
that neutral-current interactions that would change quark 
type, e.g. strange — down, are very suppressed, whereas 
there do exist charged-current interactions: strange > 
up. The charm discovery briefly pre-dated the t lepton 
discovery mentioned earlier. Consistency of the simplest 
unified electroweak theory then required the existence of 
two more quark types, and the first of these (bottom), 
weighing about 5 GeV, was discovered in an accelerator 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Standard Model of Particle Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


experiment at FNAL in 1977. The spectrum of quarks was 
apparently completed by the discovery at FNAL in 1995 
of the top quark, which weighs about 175 GeV. 

The mathematical framework for theories of particle 
interactions is provided by gauge theories, which offer the 
only consistent description of the interactions of spin-1 
particles. A gauge theory is based on a continuous internal 
symmetry, e.g. changing the phase of the quantum- 
mechanical wave function in the case of the prototype 
gauge theory, QED. When one makes this symmetry local, 
i.e. allows space-dependent phase transformations, one 
must introduce a spin-1 gauge field. This is analogous 
to the way Einstein realized general coordinate invariance 
with a spin-2 metric field. Gauge theories differ in their 
choice of gauge group and in the group transformation 
properties of the matter particles. In the case of the 
Standard Model, the strong interactions are described by a 
theory transforming the wave functions of quarks, called 
QCD. The unified electroweak interactions are described 
by acombination of transformations acting on both quarks 
and leptons, first written down by Glashow in 1961, 
Weinberg in 1967 and Salam in 1968. 

The establishment of the Glashow—Weinberg—Salam 
modelas the correct unified electroweak theory proceeded 
in several steps over the following decade. A series of 
detailed experiments refined measurements of the neutral 
currents, verifying that their properties were consistent 
with the Glashow—Weinberg—Salam model. A crucial step 
was the observation at SLAC in 1978 of parity violation 
in deep-inelastic electron—proton scattering, which was 
followed by similar observations in atomic physics. 
The culminating step was the discovery of the weak 
intermediate bosons, W* for the charged-current weak 
interactions and Z° for the neutral currents, in proton— 
antiproton collisions at CERN in 1983. 

Subsequent developments have been dominated by a 
series of precision tests of the Standard Model, including 
both its strong and its electroweak sectors. In a number of 
experiments at energy scales varying from about 1 GeV to 
about 200 GeV, it has been shown that the strong nuclear 
interactions indeed weaken at higher energies, as seen in 
figure 2. The ‘strong’ interactions are truly strong only at 
energy scales 1 GeV, corresponding to distances 20.2 fm, 
where quarks are confined within hadrons. Detailed 
calculations of hadron spectroscopy require extensive 
numerical simulations of discretized (lattice) versions of 
QCD on powerful computers. These are currently able 
to reproduce experimental measurements to within a 
few per cent. Calculations at higher energies (shorter 
distances) may be made using techniques from quantum 
field theory. They predict an energy dependence of the 
strong coupling that is in very good agreement with 
the experimental measurements shown in figure 2. This 
concordance confirms that there are no other light strongly 
interacting elementary particles beyond the gluons and 
quarks introduced earlier. The present data shown 
in figure 2 indicate that the strong coupling strength, 
analogous to the fine-structure constant of QED, has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.5 


a(Q) Data 


Deep Inelastic Scattering 
ete Annihilation 
Hadron Collisions 
Heavy Quarkonia 


Theory 


0.4 | 


AGS Os(Mz) 


275 MeV --- 0.123 
0.3 | oe 220 Mev — 0.119 
O(as) 
175 MeV —- 0.115 
0.2 | 
0.1 4 
1 100 


” Q[Gev] 


Figure 2. Weakening of strong interactions at high energies. 


the value 0.119 + 0.004 when measured at an energy 
corresponding to the mass of the Z° weak intermediate 
boson. 

Tests of the electroweak sector of the Standard Model 
have been dominated by high-energy experiments on e*e— 
collisions at CERN, using the LEP accelerator, and at 
SLAC, using the SLC accelerator. A compilation of LEP 
measurements of the cross sections for ete~ annihilation 
into charged-lepton and quark—antiquark pairs is shown 
in figure 3. This is dominated by the Z° resonance peak, 
which must be one of the most carefully studied Breit- 
Wigner resonances in physics, with about 2 x 10’ decays 
observed and measured. The height and width of the 
peak depend not only on the observed Z° decay modes 
butalso on possible unseen decay modes such as those into 
neutrino-antineutrino pairs. Extra invisible decays would 
shorten the Z° lifetime and hence, by the UNCERTAINTY 
PRINCIPLE, increase the natural width of the Z° resonance 
peak. The measurements shown in figure 3 tell us that 
there are precisely three neutrino species, no more and 
no less. These correspond to the three known charged 
leptons, the electron, muon and tau. According to the 
Standard Model, there can only be three corresponding 
pairs of quarks. We therefore think there can be no further 
quarks beyond the six already known. 

The data shown in figure 3 provide a very accurate 
determination of the mass of the Z°: 91.1867 + 0.0021 GeV. 
To arrive at this precision, it was necessary to take into 
account many effects that were considerably larger than 
the quoted error. These included terrestrial tides, which 
caused the LEP machine to expand and contract, and hence 
its energy to vary by O(10) MeV, and even the passing 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Standard Model of Particle Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


I OPAL 


| preliminary 


<10° 


acol 


10 


+O @rP Oe 
o 
o 
= 


cross-section / pb 


10 


s‘/s>0.7225 


10? 


10 


Al 
a a re a ee a er eo oe ae Ce ee ee ee ee ee 
an 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 


\s/GeV 


Figure 3. Cross sections for ete~ annihilation into 
charged-lepton and quark—antiquark pairs. 


of nearby electric trains, which generated stray electric 
currents that perturbed the magnets of LEP and thus its 
beam energy. 

In addition to the cross-section measurements shown 
in figure 3, LEP and the SLC have provided many 
other precision measurements, including branching ratios 
for Z° decays into different modes such as heavy 
quarks, forward—backward production asymmetries and 
polarization effects. Many of the measurements have 
per mille accuracy, and none differs significantly from 
the Standard Model prediction, and all measurements 
are within 1 or 2 standard deviations. These predictions 
require detailed calculations in quantum field theory, 
which were shown to be possible by ‘t Hooft in 1971. 
As was emphasized by Veltman, in particular, these 
calculations are sensitive to the masses of heavy particles 
that are too heavy to be produced directly at LEP or 
the SLC. The successes of these calculations were used 
successfully to predict the mass of the top quark, before 
it was discovered. 

Referring back to figure 3, we see that LEP mea- 
surements extend to centre-of-mass energies considerably 
above the Z° peak. One of the principal Standard Model 
tests possible with higher-energy data is the production of 
pairs of W~* bosons, as shown in figure 4. According to 
the Standard Model, this reaction receives contributions 
from the exchanges of the neutrino, photon and Z°. The 
first of these is required by the role of the W* bosons in 
B decay, the second by the electric charge of the W* and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Preliminary 


@ Data 
— Standard Model 
--- no ZWW vertex 


o(e"e >W'W (7) [pb] 


v, exchange 


160 170 180 190 


Vs [GeV] 


200 


Figure 4. Production of W*W~ boson pairs. 


the third by the characteristic ZWt*Ww- coupling of the 
unified electroweak theory. As seen in figure 4, all these 
three contributions are required to explain the LEP data, 
and the values of the couplings extracted from the data 
are in good agreement with the Standard Model. These 
data may also be used to measure the mass of the W~, and 
the results are also in good agreement with the Standard 
Model predictions. 

Thus far, we have seen that the Standard Model is 
passing its experimental tests with flying colors. However, 
there are still some key features of the Standard Model that 
have not yet been tested. One of these is the origin of the 
particle masses. According to the Standard Model, the 
underlying field theory is formulated in terms of massless 
particles, and one must find some way to incorporate their 
masses without spoiling the successes of the theory. This is 
possible if there exists an additional, as yet unseen, particle 
called the Higgs boson. The precision electroweak data 
described earlier are sensitive to the mass of this particle, 
and currently indicate that it weighs about 100 GeV, with 
an uncertainty of a factor of about 2. The search for the 
Higgs boson has been one of the continuing objectives of 
the LEP experimental program. At the time of writing, 
these searches have so far been unsuccessful and have 
established that its mass must exceed about 108 GeV. By 
the end of its operation, experiments at the LEP accelerator 
should tell us whether the Higgs boson weighs less than 
about 114 GeV. Beyond this mass, the full range of possible 
Higgs masses up to about 1 TeV can be explored at CERN’s 
LHC accelerator, which is scheduled to start taking data 
in 2005. 

Another missing element in tests of the Standard 
Model is its mechanism for matter-antimatter asymmetry. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Standard Model of Particle Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The weak interactions were shown in 1957 to violate 
not only parity (mirror) symmetry, but also charge 
conjugation. At first, it was thought that the combination 
of parity and charge conjugation, called CP, might 
yet be a good symmetry. However, an experiment 
in 1964 discovered that CP was also violated in the 
weak decays of some neutral composite particles called 
kaons. This means that matter does not behave in 
exactly the same way aS ANTIMATTER, even if one reflects 
the experiment in a mirror in an attempt to recover 
the symmetry. In 1973, Kobayashi and Maskawa 
realized that this matter—antimatter asymmetry could be 
accommodated within the Standard Model if there were 
at least six quark species, as we now know to be the 
case. Subsequently, much theoretical effort has been 
devoted to evaluating the Standard Model predictions 
for matter-antimatter asymmetries in different processes, 
and there is an extensive experimental program to test 
these predictions. Follow-up experiments on neutral 
kaon decays are consistent with the Standard Model, but 
have not yet reached the sensitivity required to verify 
the characteristic predictions of the Standard Model. 
A number of experiments are planned to explore its 
predictions for CP asymmetries in the decays of mesons 
containing bottom quarks. There is good reason to expect 
that these experiments will be able to explore these matter— 
antimatter asymmetries at the levels predicted by the 
Standard Model. 

It may be appropriate at this stage to mention 
some ways in which astrophysics and cosmology are 
sensitive to aspects of the Standard Model (see also 
PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS). The energy production of main- 
sequence stars is controlled by nuclear physics and 
weak 6 decay, but details of the Standard Model are 
not directly relevant. These are, however, relevant to 
objects that are denser and/or hotter, such as collapsing 
supernovae. Weak neutral-current processes are essential 
to the understanding of neutrino emission from the 
collapsing core, and perhaps to the ejection of outer layers 
of the supernova progenitor. The nuclear equation of state 
of the remnant may also be sensitive to the underlying 
QCD theory of the strong interactions. In particular, it is 
often conjectured that under certain circumstances there 
may be a transition from conventional nuclear matter to 
quark matter, possibly with a high fraction of strange 
quarks. 

Looking back to early cosmology, weak neutral- 
current processes also played an essential role in the 
reheating and decoupling of neutrinos around the epoch 
of big bang NUCLEOSYNTHESIS. Prior to that, in standard big 
bang cosmology the temperature of the early universe, 
and hence the characteristic particle energies, is believed 
to have increased as the inverse square of the age of the 
universe. When it was less than about 10-5 or 10-° s 
old, hadrons would have been ‘ionized’ into quarks and 
gluons, and the Standard Model must be used to describe 
the behavior of the universe at these early times. The 
laboratory successes of the Standard Model described 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


earlier imply that we possess the basis for a quantitative 
description of physics in the early universe. 

When it was less than about 10-! or 10-” s old, it 
is thought that the Standard Model underwent a phase 
transition, before which all the particles of matter would 
have appeared massless, as well as the weak intermediate 
vector bosons and the Higgs boson. In addition to the 
familiar weak interactions, it is thought that other effects in 
the Glashow—Weinberg—Salam model, that have not been 
seen in the universe today, would have been important at 
this early epoch. These effects would have the distinctive 
feature of violating both baryon and lepton number by 
3 units. Hence they must be taken into account in any 
attempt to understand the baryon density in the universe. 

Although the Standard Model of particle physics 
is very successful, with no confirmed accelerator data 
that contradict it, there are many theoretical reasons to 
consider it unsatisfactory and to expect some physics 
beyond the Standard Model. For example, even if one 
accepts the quantum numbers of the quarks and leptons 
as given, the Standard Model contains 19 free parameters 
that are taken from experiment. These include three 
independent interaction strengths and a CP-violating 
parameter for the strong interactions, six quark masses 
and four parameters to describe how they are mixed by 
the weak interactions, three charged-lepton masses, the 
W* and Higgs boson masses. Having so many parameters 
is surely unacceptable for any candidate for a theory 
of everything, and attempts to go beyond the Standard 
Model typically try to simplify one of its aspects. 

In a GRAND UNIFIED THEORY one regards the strong, weak 
and electromagnetic interactions as different aspects of a 
single interaction with a universal coupling strength. This 
is made possible by the fact that coupling strengths vary 
with energy, as exemplified by the asymptotic freedom of 
the strong interactions shown in figure 2. Calculations 
indicate that the coupling strengths may become equal 
at an energy around 10'°-10'® GeV. Many grand unified 
theories predict additional perturbative interactions that 
violate baryon and/or lepton number. These exotic 
interactions may cause baryons to decay and/or give 
neutrino masses. There have been many unsuccessful 
searches for proton decay, and its lifetime must be at 
least 10° yr. Evidence has recently emerged from studies 
of solar and atmospheric neutrinos that they may have 
masses. If confirmed, this would constitute the first 
concrete evidence for physics beyond the Standard Model. 

Other proposals for possible physics beyond the 
Standard Model try to understand the complicated pattern 
of lepton masses and quark masses and the way they are 
mixed by the weak interactions. One of the ideas often 
discussed in this context is the possibility that leptons and 
quarks are not elementary but composite bound states of 
more fundamental constituents. So far, no compelling 
model of this type has emerged, so it will not be discussed 
further here. 

A third set of proposed extensions of the Standard 
Model arises from attempts to understand better the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Standard Model of Particle Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observed magnitudes of particle masses. The principal 
issue here is that the physical values observed seem 
to require very delicate fine tuning of the parameters 
of the Standard Model, which strikes many physicists 
as unnatural. One way to avoid this is to postulate 
that the Standard Model particles are accompanied 
by partners with identical internal properties and 
interactions, but with spins differing by half a unit. These 
‘supersymmetric’ particles would have opposite statistics 
from the familiar Standard Model particles—normal 
matter particles such as quarks and leptons are fermions, 
and would be accompanied by new bosonic particles, 
whereas intermediate bosons such as the photon would 
be accompanied by new fermions (see SUPERSYMMETRY). 
The fine-tuning problem of the Standard Model would be 
avoided if the supersymmetric partners of Standard Model 
particles weigh less than about 1 TeV. 

These possible extensions of the Standard Model 
may provide the frameworks for resolving many of 
the fundamental issues in astrophysics and cosmology. 
One of these is DARK MATTER. The cold component may 
be provided by massive stable neutral particles, for 
which one candidate is the lightest supersymmetric 
particle, that is expected to weigh O(100) GeV. This 
possibility will be explored by forthcoming accelerator 
searches at the proton—antiproton collider at FNAL and 
at the LHC proton-proton collider at CERN. A hot 
dark matter component may be provided by massive 
neutrinos. The indications for neutrino masses from the 
solar and atmospheric neutrino data do not, however, 
require any neutrino to be heavy enough to make a 
significant contribution to the overall dark matter density, 
although there could be some consequences observable by 
astronomers. 

A second cosmological issue that may be addressed 
by extensions of the Standard Model is the origin of the 
matter in the universe. This can be calculated in terms 
of elementary-particle interactions if they violate baryon 
number, if they exhibit a matter—antimatter asymmetry 
and if they depart from thermal equilibrium. As 
has been discussed above, there are Standard Model 
interactions that violate baryon number and matter— 
antimatter asymmetry. Whether they departed from 
thermal equilibrium in the early universe depends in the 
Standard Model on the mass of the Higgs boson. The 
LEP lower limit on its mass, combined with theoretical 
calculations, indicates that there would have been no 
significant departure from thermal equilibrium if the 
Standard Model was sufficient to characterize early 
cosmology. Therefore some extension of the Standard 
Model appears necessary to explain the baryonic matter in 
the universe (see also BARYOGENESIS), Which may be possible 
with grand unification and/or supersymmetry. 

Grand unified theories may also be needed to explain 
the size, age and flatness of the universe via cosmological 
INFLATION. The measurements of perturbations in the 
COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND radiation suggest that they 
originate from physics at an energy scale of 10'°-10'* GeV. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This is far beyond the scale of particle masses in the 
Standard Model and comparable with the scale of grand 
unification estimated using data from LEP and other 
accelerators. 

Finally, we note that many theorists believe that 
the underlying theory of everything that resolves all 
the open problems of the Standard Model should be 
provided by some incarnation of STRING THEORY. This is an 
apparently consistent quantum theory of gravity, requires 
supersymmetry and is rich enough to accommodate a 
grand unified theory. If the self-coupling of the string 
is strong, it may provide a correct numerical estimate 
of the scale of grand unification. Astrophysics and 
cosmology, via inflation, gravitational waves and perhaps 
a cosmological constant may provide the most important 
tests of this ultimate extension of the Standard Model. 


John Ellis 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Star Clusters 


Even a small telescope shows obvious local concentrations 
of stars scattered around the sky. These star clusters are 
not chance juxtapositions of unrelated stars. They are, 
instead, physically associated groups of stars, moving 
together through the Galaxy. The stars in a cluster are 
held together either permanently or temporarily by their 
mutual gravitational attraction. 

The classic, and best known, example of a star cluster 
is the Pleiades, visible in the evening sky in early winter 
(from the northern hemisphere) as a group of 7-10 stars 
(depending on one’s eyesight). More than 600 Pleiades 
members have been identified telescopically. 

Clusters are generally distinguished as being either 
GALACTIC OPEN CLUSTERS OF GLOBULAR CLUSTERS, corresponding 
to their appearance as seen through a moderate-aperture 
telescope. Even in a relatively small telescope, the stars 
in an open cluster can be individually distinguished 
right at the center, whereas a globular cluster typically 
appears to consist of a sprinkling of bright, resolved stars 
superposed on a continuous background of unresolved 
fainter stars. Although the original distinction of the two 
classes of clusters was based almost entirely on their visual 
appearance, we now know that the globulars and the open 
clusters are very distinct from one another in almost every 
respect. 

At the opposite extreme of concentration from the 
globular clusters are the stellar associations, loose, un- 
bound groups of stars with particular spectral properties. 
Associations are normally observed as widespread regions 
with an excess density of spectral type O and B stars (‘os 
ASSOCIATIONS’) OF T TAURI STARS (‘T associations’). In princi- 
ple, there could be other types of association as well. It 
is not uncommon to find one or more open clusters at the 
core of a stellar association. The implication is that the 
stars in the central cluster or clusters and the surrounding 
association all formed more or less at the same time out 
of the same material. Since the association is not a gravi- 
tationally bound system, after a relatively short period of 
time, its stars will disperse and the association will lose 
its identity; for that reason, associations always consist of 
young stars. 

The stars in an unbound association or a cluster 
that is evaporating will nevertheless all be moving with 
almost identical velocities, so at some later time, one 
might expect to find stars spread out in space, but still 
moving with similar velocities. Stars selected by velocity 
are sometimes called MovING Groups. The best known of 
the moving groups is called the Hyades moving group. It 
consists of anumber of stars, located in all directions from 
the Sun, which share the space motion of the Hyades star 
cluster. However, it is uncertain whether these stars share 
a common origin with the Hyades cluster. 

The category of moving groups is not to be confused 
with moving clusters. These are clusters near enough to 
the Sun that all three dimensions of their motion through 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Galaxy can be used to derive the cluster distance, 
independently of parallax measurements. 

A final category of clusters has recently been identified 
based on observations with infrared detectors. These are 
the embedded clusters—star clusters still in the process of 
formation, and still embedded in the clouds out of which 
they formed. Because it is possible to see through the dust 
much better at infrared wavelengths than in the optical, 
these clusters have suddenly become observable. 

Star clusters are of considerable astrophysical impor- 
tance to probe models of stellar evolution and dynamics, 
explore the star formation process, calibrate the extragalac- 
tic distance scale and most importantly to measure the age 
and evolution of the Galaxy. 


Definition of a star cluster—cluster catalogs 

Just what is a cluster? How many stars does it take to 
make a cluster? Trumpler in 1930 defined open clusters 
as ‘Star groupings which undoubtedly form physical 
systems (stars situated at the same distance and probably 
of the same origin) and which at the same time are 
sufficiently rich in stars for statistical investigation.’ Since 
virtually all clusters have been discovered either by visual 
examination of the sky with a telescope, or from inspection 
of photographic or electronic images in the visual or 
infrared, an operational definition of a star cluster is 
suggested: 


A star cluster is defined to be an obvious 
concentration of several stars or more above 
the surrounding stellar background, apparently 
localized in space and identifiable on visual or 
infrared images covering a suitable field of view. 


While this definition may seem imprecise, it conveniently 
includes most of those objects (in our Galaxy at least) 
listed in the existing cluster catalogs. At the same time, it 
excludes galaxy-sized systems or objects with insignificant 
numbers of stars. Presumably most clusters defined in 
this way are physical systems, although they may or may 
not be gravitationally bound systems. So some of the 
embedded clusters or slightly older, optically revealed 
clusters may be unbound star-forming regions in the 
process of dispersing. The above definition avoids the 
difficulty of distinguishing bound systems from unbound 
ones—if it looks like a cluster, it is a cluster. 

From the theoretical point of view, a cluster might 
be better defined as a self-gravitating system of stars 
residing within the Galactic gravitational potential. Using 
this definition, unbound embedded clusters or young 
optically revealed clusters would not be considered to be 
true clusters. In addition, a star that has achieved escape 
velocity from a cluster but is still within the tidal radius 
of the cluster would be considered to be a nonmember by 
this theoretical definition, but would be a member by the 
observational definition. 

Few objects have been catalogued as extensively as 
star clusters. The MESSIER CATALOG of 107 nonstellar objects 
includes 59 objects now known to be star clusters. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


first major catalog that includes clusters is the NEW GENERAL 
CATALOG (NGC), listing 487 clusters. The update to the 
NGC, the IC, contains another 30 clusters. 

There have been at least a couple of dozen other 
more or less systematic attempts to search for and 
catalog additional star clusters. The entire sky has now 
been searched for clusters to the limiting magnitude 
and resolution of the wide-field Schmidt telescope 
photographic surveys. Unfortunately, the large number 
of partly redundent catalogs has generated a considerable 
amount of confusion about cluster names, and some 
clusters have almost a dozen aliases. The existing cluster 
catalogs are almost certainly biased in various ways, 
and any statistical results based on them are subject 
to systematic errors and selection effects of one sort or 
another. 

As the number of catalogs has grown, and as 
the astrophysical importance of star clusters has been 
more appreciated, the number of secondary catalogs, 
summarizing the known properties of clusters, has also 
grown. Some useful catalogs are given in the Bibliography. 


Summary of cluster properties 

Table 1 summarizes the properties of star clusters. While 
there is a considerable dispersion in the properties of 
individual clusters, as well as a substantial uncertainty in 
some of the values, these numbers are representative of 
the cluster systems. 

Table 1 shows that there is a rather sharp distinction 
between the globular clusters, which are representative 
of the Population II stars of the galaxy, and the open 
clusters (including the OB associations, moving groups 
and embedded clusters), which are Population I stars. The 
most massive of the open clusters are roughly the same 
as the least massive globulars, and the oldest of the open 
clusters is no older than the youngest of the globulars. 


Globular clusters 

The known globular clusters in our Galaxy number 
about 147 and, taking into account obscured regions of 
the Galaxy, the total Galactic population of globulars is 
probably about 200. Most of the ‘missing’ globulars are 
likely to be located close to the Galactic center or near the 
Galactic plane on the far side of the Galaxy. 

The globulars are substantial stellar systems. Even 
the smallest of them contain some 10000 solar masses of 
stars and a few, such as M22 and Omega Centauri, exceed 
one million solar masses. 

As described later in this article (see also STELLAR 
DYNAMICS), the stellar distribution within a globular cluster 
is well represented by King models, which can be 
characterized by two parameters: the central surface 
brightness and the core radius, defined to be the radius 
at which the brightness drops to one-half the central 
value. Once these two parameters are determined, the 
appropriate King model will yield a tidal radius for the 
cluster. The globular clusters cover a substantial range in 
size. The median core radius is close to one parsec, but a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


few clusters in the outer halo of the Galaxy have core radii 
in excess of 10 parsecs. The median tidal radius is about 
35 parsecs, but again there are some in the outer halo with 
much larger tidal radii. 


Open clusters 
Some 1200 open clusters have been catalogued, but 
as many as 250 of these appear to be simply slight 
enhancements in the stellar density along a line of sight 
or small asterisms of unrelated stars. Such asterisms 
should not be considered as clusters by either of the 
definitions of clusters given above. Most of the open 
clusters in the Galaxy have probably not yet been found, 
since open clusters are found near the Galactic plane where 
the interstellar dust is the most opaque. There may be as 
many as 10° open clusters in the Galaxy. 

The smallest of the open clusters contain fewer than 
a dozen stars, so the minimum mass for an open cluster 
is about 10 M,>. At the other extreme, some of the most 
massive open clusters are old ones such as NGC 6791, 
with more than 10 000 members, again with typical masses 
near one solar mass. The most populous younger clusters 
contain a few thousand stars, but since their most massive 
stars are substantially more massive than the Sun, the total 
mass of some of the younger clusters exceeds 10* Mo. 

Few if any open clusters have enough members 
to be characterized in terms of dynamically meaningful 
quantities, such as the core radius or tidal radius. Instead, 
open cluster sizes are based on the ‘angular diameter’ 
measurement where the diameter is the apparent size of 
the cluster as measured on the appropriate sky survey 
photographs. Even when the distance to the cluster is well- 
known, the angular diameter does not yield a well-defined 
linear dimension to the cluster. Nevertheless, there is a 
rather small spread in measured cluster diameters, the 
typical open cluster being between 4 and 5 pc in diameter. 
A few clusters are more than twice this size, and some are 
only one or two parsecs in diameter, but the majority fall 
rather close to this value. The core radius of open clusters 
is probably roughly 1 pc, that is to say, about the same 
as the typical core radii of globular clusters. There is no 
strong correlation of cluster size with age, although several 
of the oldest clusters are somewhat larger and some of the 
very youngest clusters are also larger. Nor is there any 
correlation of cluster size with Galactic location or with 
the number of members. 


OB associations 

OB associations are areas on the sky with a higher than 
normal density of O and B stars, They are both large and 
diffuse; they are in fact sufficiently amorphous that distinct 
boundaries are hard to define. They typically cover many 
tens of parsecs and often contain one or more discrete 
clusters within their borders. Their diffuse nature makes 
it impossible to identify fainter stars as being members of 
associations, although there may well be large numbers 
of lower-mass stars that formed from the same molecular 
cloud. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Summary properties of star clusters. 


Globular Open OB Moving Embedded 
clusters clusters associations groups clusters 
Numbers of clusters: 
Catalogued 147 1200 70 < 10 ~ 25 
Likely Galactic total 200 10° > 1000 — — 
Typical Sizes (pc): 
Core radius (median) 1.0 —_ unbound unbound — 
Tidal radius (median) 35 — unbound unbound — 
Apparent diameter — 4 > 100 — 1 
Masses (Mo): 
Minimum 104 10 1000 — 100 
Maximum 10° 104 104 _ > 1000 
Ages (yr): 
Minimum 8 x 10° 5 x 10° 5 x 10° — < 10° 
Maximum 16 x 10° 9 x 10° 2x 107 _ 5 x 108 
Metallicities ([Fe/H]): 
Range —2.3to+0.2 —0.7to0.3 Popl Pop I Pop I 


Approximately 70 OB associations have been cata- 
logued. An association may consist of as few as a dozen 
luminous O and B stars, but because they range in mass 
from about 10 Mo to some 70 Mo, the total mass of the as- 
sociation may range from about 1000 M, to more than ten 
times that number. 


Moving groups 

Several moving groups have been identified, but because 
the group may be spread out over a large region of the 
galaxy, the membership of a group is likely to be seriously 
incomplete, assuming that the group has a common origin 
at all. No reliable estimates of the total mass of a moving 
group exist. 


Embedded clusters 

At the other extreme of size from associations are the 
embedded clusters. This newly identified class of object 
consists of groups of stars still deeply embedded in the 
nebulosity out of which they have just formed. They 
range from a few tenths of a parsec to about two parsces 
in diameter. They are found only through IR imaging 
surveys—it is important to stress that these surveys 
are now sufficiently extensive that the apparent small 
size of the embedded clusters is not just a result of 
inadequate sampling. They really are rather compact 
objects. Although a few, like the Orion Trapezium region, 
are rich systems with hundreds of stars, most of them 
consist of small aggregates of stars. 

No comprehensive catalog exists, but as many as 25 
embedded clusters have been described; the total Galactic 
population of embedded clusters probably exceeds this 
number by several orders of magnitude. Since the 
stars in an embedded cluster have not yet reached the 
main sequence, even the relatively low-mass stars are 
rather luminous. Consequently they are relatively easily 
observable (in the infrared). They are compact, very dense 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


regions, containing hundreds to thousands of solar masses 
of stars. 

If the embedded clusters are all smaller than the 
ordinary, optically visible open clusters, does the one class 
evolve into the other? That is to say, when the molecular 
clouds surrounding these embedded clusters dissipate ina 
few million years, will there be an apparent ordinary open 
cluster there, or will the stars dissipate as fast as the gas? 
The answer to this question is not yet known and is the 
subject of much discussion at the present time. Embedded 
clusters are sometimes called ‘stellar aggregates’ rather 
than clusters because of this ambiguity, but based on the 
definition of a cluster given here they should be considered 
as star clusters. 


Cluster distances and the cosmic distance scale 
Star clusters provide a critical step in the determination 
of the cosmic distance scale. The starting point for cluster 
distances, and a primary step in the distance scale, is the 
Hyades star cluster. As a result of the HIPPARCOS project, 
the distances to the individual stars in the cluster have 
been measured well enough that the three-dimensional 
structure of the cluster can be determined. The Hipparcos 
data plus additional support from other measurements 
show that the Hyades distance modulus is (m — M)) = 
3.33 + 0.01, that is, the center of the Hyades cluster is 
46.3 + 0.2 pc from the Sun. 

To find the distances to more remote clusters, a 
standard technique is to relate the properties of the 
Hyades to those of the cluster in question. The primary 
mechanism for that comparison is the color-magnitude 
diagram, a form of HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM. The 
Hertzsprung—Russell diagram shows the relation between 
the luminosities of stars and their temperatures; in a color— 
magnitude diagram the luminosity is presented as either 
the absolute or apparent magnitude and the temperature 
is represented by a color index. The color-magnitude 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


diagrams of two clusters will in general have the same 
shape, but willbe shifted in magnitude by an amount equal 
to the difference in distance modulus between the two. 
There may also be additional shifts in magnitude and color 
index resulting from interstellar absorption. The general 
procedure is to apply the effects of absorption, if known, 
and then slide the diagrams of the two clusters until they 
match, according to some goodness-of-fit criterion. 

The principal limitations of this method are the 
accuracy of the magnitudes and colors of the stars in 
both the Hyades and the target cluster, the amount of 
interstellar absorption to the target cluster (the interstellar 
absorption to the Hyades is effectively zero) and the 
effects of chemical composition on the location of the 
main sequence. The Hyades is rather unusually metal- 
rich (approximately [Fe/H] = +0.15) compared with most 
star clusters, which must be taken into account. 

Figure 1 shows the color-magnitude diagrams of 
several star clusters, corrected for distance. M92 is an 
old, metal-poor globular cluster; 47 Tucanae is another old 
globular cluster, but less metal-poor; M67 is an old open 
cluster of solar composition, and the Hyades is a younger 
metal-rich open cluster. For comparison, the zero-age 
main sequence (ZAMS) for solar composition stars is 
shownas well. This diagram presents the combined effects 
of stellar evolution and chemical composition. The M92 
main sequence lies the lowest in the diagram, as would 
be expected from its composition, 47 Tuc is next, then 
M67 and finally there are the individual Hyades stars, 
the most metal-rich ones in the diagram. The ZAMS line 
corresponds approximately to solar-compositon stars. 

Figure 1 also shows that it is critical to have the right 
distance to a cluster. Except for the horizontal branches, 
the shapes of the color-magnitude diagrams for the two 
globular clusters are virtually identical. Unless both the 
distance and composition of a cluster are known very well, 
the age uncertainties that result are large. 


Clusters and stellar evolution—cluster ages 
Star clusters represent snapshots of the process of 
stellar evolution—they are frozen in time from a human 
perspective. Since all the stars in a star-forming region 
begin their protostellar phase within a few million years 
of one another, the stars in a cluster much older than a few 
tens of millions of years canbe considered to be all the same 
age. Thus the color-magnitude diagram of a star cluster 
represents the properties of stars differing in mass, but all 
of the same age and chemical composition. A critical test 
of the validity of STELLAR EVOLUTION models is to be able to 
predict the observed properties of cluster stars, as seen in 
the color-magnitude diagram. 

To compare the models with the actual stars in 
a cluster, a series of model evolutionary sequences is 
computed for stars selected to have a range of masses. 
An isochrone is derived by interpolating in this series of 
models to find the parameters for stars all the same age. 
The isochrone is in effect a theoretical color-magnitude 
diagram. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A composite of color-magnitude diagrams of the 
globular clusters M92 (from Stetson and Harris 1988) and 47 
Tucanae (Hesser et al 1987) and the open clusters M67 
(Montgomery et al 1993) and the Hyades (Perryman et al 1998). 
The zero-age main sequence (ZAMS) of Schmidt-Kaler (1982) is 
shown for comparison. 


In going from the theoretical predictions of the model 
isochrone to the observed color-magnitude diagram, there 
are a number of serious complications. In addition to 
the various physical and numerical uncertainties of the 
models themselves, a major complication relates to the 
transformation of the theoretical parameters, effective 
temperature and luminosity, into the derived absolute 
magnitude and color index. To make this transformation, 
a good knowledge of the stellar flux distribution is needed 
(a good model atmosphere), plus a knowledge of the 
details of the spectral response of a typical photometric 
system. The latter includes atmospheric transmission, 
telescope plus filter spectral response and the spectral 
sensitivity of the detector, all of these integrated over the 
flux distribution of the model star. 

The problem of measuring the ages of star clusters 
appears to be a simple one. As figure 1 shows, the main 
sequence turn-off of a star cluster—usually defined as 
bluest point (i.e., the smallest value of the color index) 
along the cluster sequence—is a function of the age of 
the cluster. This follows naturally from the basic fact 
of stellar evolution that the massive, more luminous, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars evolve away from the main sequence before the 
less massive stars have significantly changed. But at a 
given mass the actual age when this occurs depends on 
the chemical composition of the star, and possibly other 
factors as well, such as rotation. There are a number of 
theoretical uncertainties in addition to the observational 
uncertainties. Furthermore, as can be seen in figure 1, the 
shapes of the main-sequence/turn-off/red-giant region of 
old cluster color-magnitude diagrams are all roughly the 
same. So errors in the distance, interstellar reddening or 
composition can lead to a cluster being matched to a stellar 
model of the wrong age. 

The most important of these difficulties is the 
distance. For example, if a cluster is measured to be too 
close by, say, 10%, then the measured luminosities of its 
stars will be too small by 21%. But the luminosity of a 
star is just a measure of the rate at which it is burning its 
nuclear fuel. So in this case, the distance error would mean 
that the nuclear-burning rate will be underestimated, and 
the cluster age would be overestimated by that same 21%. 
Very few clusters have their distances known to 10%, so 
while there are additional constraints that can be put on 
the age calculation, the uncertainties are still substantial. 

The distance problem enters in two ways. First, 
the distances to individual clusters have random errors 
relating to the particular data for that cluster, but of 
more significance to astrophysics is the problem of the 
distance scale itself. The Hipparcos satellite has helped 
the situation considerably, but there is still considerable 
controversy over the ages of globular clusters. 


Galactic distributions of clusters 

Globular clusters 

The globular clusters, containing the oldest stars in the 
Galaxy, are located in a nearly spherical distribution about 
the Galactic center. They make up the most visible 
component of the Galactic halo, and as a practical matter 
they define the stellar halo. Because they can be identified 
so readily and their distances measured reliably, Harlow 
Shapley was able to determine the direction and distance 
to the Galactic center in the 1920s. The globular clusters 
were later shown to define the Population II stars of the 
Galaxy. 

Close examination of the statistics of the globular 
cluster properties shows that they can be divided into three 
subpopulations on the basis of cluster composition and 
the shape of the horizontal branch (see HORIZONTAL-BRANCH 
stars). The ‘old halo’ clusters have horizontal branches 
consistent with a great age; the ‘young halo’ clusters 
have horizontal branches sugessting a somewhat younger 
age; and the ‘disk globulars’ are rather more metal-rich 
(with [Fe/H] > —0.8) than the other populations and are 
distributed in a thick disk shape. 

The three subpopulations of clusters may have 
originated in two or three distinct processes. The old 
halo clusters probably formed in the initial collapse of the 
Galaxy and so their stars are the oldest. The disk globular 
clusters appear to be members of the thick disk population 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and may be significantly younger in addition to being 
more metal-rich. The young halo clusters may actually 
have been formed outside our Galaxy in nearby dwarf 
spheriodal galaxies that subsequently merged with our 
own Galaxy. The young halo clusters show no evidence for 
a correlation between Galactic position and composition, 
consistent with their having been injected into the Galaxy 
in random events. The old halo and disk subsystems 
do show correlations between galactocentric radius and 
composition, and there is a possibility that the old halo 
and thick disk populations may form a single system. If 
indeed this is true, then there is a regular, systematic trend 
between composition and position in the old halo plus 
thick disk subsystems, as well as between composition and 
age. 


Open clusters 
The open clusters, including associations, moving groups 
and embedded clusters, belong to the disk population of 
the Galaxy (the Population I stars). The vast majority of 
them are located close to the Galactic plane. Consequently, 
most known open clusters are within a couple of kpc of the 
Sun. 

Assuming a distribution perpendicular to the Galactic 
plane of the form 

N x e&/20 


the scale length, zo, for clusters with ages < 700 million 
years is about 55 pc, whereas the older clusters have a scale 
height of 350 pc. There is otherwise no correlation between 
composition and age or distance from the Galactic plane. 
There is, however, a distinct correlation between [Fe/H] 
and galactocentric radius, with the most metal-poor stars 
located in the far outer reaches of the Galactic disk. 

The open clusters show no systematic trend of 
metallicity with age. At each age, there is a substantial 
range in composition, but on the average the oldest ones 
are approximately the same composition as the youngest 
ones. 


Cluster dynamics 
Star clusters are ideal laboratories for studies of stellar 
dynamics—they are simple systems consisting of what 
are essentially point masses, moving freely under the 
action of a single force, gravity. Consequently it is 
possible to model in some detail the dynamical evolution 
of star clusters. It is important to note, however, that the 
formalism of classical celestial mechanics is not directly 
applicable to star clusters. In celestial mcahanics, one 
usually considers the motion of one body in the potential 
field of another body (the two-body problem) or perhaps 
two other bodies (the three-body problem). However, a 
cluster consists of several (i.e., more than three) more or 
less equal masses moving in their mutual potential field, 
perhaps also perturbed by external (Galactic) forces. 
Most dynamical models begin with the assumption 
that they are collisionless systems—that is, the forces 
acting on individual particles (stars) are long-range forces 
only, resulting from the gravitational potential field of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Clusters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


aggregate of all the stars in the system. The occasional 
close encounters between pairs of stars, if they are 
included at all, are dealt with separately. More distant 
encounters may, however, be common in a stellar system. 
These encounters will gradually change the motion of an 
individual star, so that after enough such encounters, the 
star will have changed in velocity by an amount equal to 
the velocity. The time it takes for such a complete exchange 
of energy to take place is the relaxation time. 


King models 

Star clusters are approximately equivalent to isothermal 
spheres, that is to say, the velocities of stars in the cluster 
have a distribution that is independent, or nearly so, of 
the position of the star in the cluster. However, a singular 
isothermal sphere has infinite density at the origin (i.e, 
the center) and therefore infinite mass. To represent an 
isothermal sphere in a well-behaved manner at the origin, 
it is possible to define dimensionless variables, where the 
radius variable 


is defined by the King radius, 


9a? 
y= a 
4 Gpo 


At the radius ro, the density within the system has fallen 
to 0.5013 of its central density. Since the core radius, r,, as 
defined observationally is the radius at which the density 
has fallen to just half the central density, ro is often called 
the core radius. 

For a system with gravitational potential @, where 
a single particle has velocity v and total energy E, the 
relative potential Y and relative energy € of the particle 
can be defined as 


and €=—-E+%=0-}v’ 


VU =-04+% 1 


where ®p is some constant. A modified form of an 
isothermal sphere is the King model, which resembles 
the isothermal sphere at small radii, where most of the 
particles (stars) have large values of €, but gradually 
becomes less dense than the isothermal sphere at larger 
radii where € tends to be lower. By suitably defining the 
constant ®o so that at some critical relative energy €) = 0, 
the phase-space distribution function of the King model 
can be defined so that for € >> 0 the King model and the 
isothermal sphere are identical, and for € < 0 the King 
model distribution function is zero. 

This leads to a family of models for the density 
distribution within the system that are defined by the 
central relative potential, ¥ (0), where the radius is in units 
of the King radius, rp. At the radius where ¥ falls to zero, 
the density also falls to zero. This is the tidal radius, 7. 
The log of the ratio of the tidal radius to the King radius 
defines the concentration of the cluster, 


c = log,)("%/10). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


King models with c between 0.75 and 1.75 fit globular 
clusters well. 

Observationally, the central surface brightness, Ux, 
and the core radius, r,, can be used in place of Y(0) and ro. 


Bibliography 
Much of the information from older cluster catalogs and 
other sources is now online in the SIMBAD database. 

A rather complete catalog of information on the 
known globular clusters is maintained by W E Harris on 
the website: 


http: //physun.physics.mcmaster.ca/Globular.html 
This catalog is also discussed in 


Harris W E 1996 A catalogue of parameters for globular 
clusters in the Milky Way Astron. J. 112 1487 


The ages of the globular clusters are discussed in 


Chaboyer B, Demarque P, Kernan P J, Krauss L M 1998 
The age of globular clusters in light of Hipparcos: 
resolving the age problem? Astrophys. J. 494 96 


The dynamics of the globular clusters are described 
in detail in 


Binney J and Tremaine S 1987 Galactic Dynamics (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press) 


Open cluster data can be found in the SIMBAD 
database, which includes the Catalogue of Open Cluster 
Data, Fifth Edition (1987) compiled by G Lynga (Lund 
Observatory). 

A database of photometric and spectroscopic infor- 
mation on open clusters called WEBDA is maintained at 
the Geneva Observatory at: 


http://obswww.unige.ch 
Stellar associations have been reviewed by 


Garmany C D 1994 OB Associations: massive stars in 
context Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 106 25 


Some key references for individual clusters men- 
tioned in the article are the following: 


Hesser J E, Harris W E, VandenBerg D A, Allwright J W B, 
Shott P and Stetson P B 1987 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 
99 739 

Montgomery K A, Marschall LAand Janes K A 1993 Astron. 
J. 106 181 

Perryman M A C, Brown A G A, Lebreton Y, Gomez 
A, Turon C, Cayrel de Strobel G, Mermilliod J C, 
Robichon N, Kovalesky J and Crifo C 1998 Astron. 
Astrophys. 331 81 

Stetson P B and Harris W E 1988 Astron. J. 96 909 


Finally, data for the ZAMS can be found in 
Schmidt-Kaler T 1982 Landolt-Bornstein VI vol 2b (Berlin: 
Springer) p 1 


Kenneth Janes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Diagonal 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Star Diagonal 


A device that fits in the draw-tube of a telescope to enable 
an object to be viewed at right angles to the direction in 
which the telescope is pointing. In such a device, light 
is reflected through a right-angle either by a flat mirror 
inclined at an angle of 45° to the optical axis or by means 
of total internal reflection in a prism. The resulting image 
is reversed left-to-right. 

It is often convenient to use a star diagonal when 
observing objects close to the zenith so as to avoid placing 
the observer’s head at an awkward angle. 

A related device, the solar diagonal, uses an 
unsilvered mirror, or a thin prism called a Herschel wedge, 
so as to reflect only a small proportion of the incoming 
solar radiation (typically about 5%), thereby reducing the 
amount of light and heat that reaches the eyepiece. 


See also: telescope, zenith. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Star Formation 


The formation of stars is an ongoing process that continues 
to the present day. Star formation is most easily observed 
in the Milky Way, and these observations, the focus of this 
article, have led to a working model for the formation of 
low mass stars like our Sun. In this picture, stars form from 
the gravitational collapse of the cold, molecular interstellar 
material (gas and dust) that resides in structures known as 
INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR CLouDS. In the dynamical collapse 
and accretion of infalling matter, a circumstellar disk 
forms around the accreting star as a consequence of the 
finite ANGULAR MOMENTUM of the molecular cloud. Stars 
obtain a significant fraction of their mass by accretion 
through their disks, and disk matter is a reservoir for the 
formation of stellar and planetary mass companions (see 
ACCRETION DISKS). Additional processes such as winds and 
magnetic accretion flows are believed to be responsible for 
the removal of angular momentum that allows the star to 
continue to grow in mass. These processes are combined in 
our current view of how Sun-like stars obtain their initial 
masses and angular momenta, i.e., the initial conditions 
for subsequent STELLAR EVOLUTION. The extent to which this 
picture, developed to explain the formation of low mass 
stars, applies to the formation of more massive stars, is an 
active area of research. 


Observed properties of young stars 

Infall 

As is well known, molecular clouds are the reservoirs 
of mass and angular momentum from which stars form. 
However, while it has been appreciated for some time that 
star formation probably involves a phase of dynamical 
collapse (rather than quasi-static contraction, for example), 
the actual detection of infalling motion associated with the 
star formation process has only been made convincingly 
in the last few years. Since the mid-1970s, the many 
molecular line studies of molecular cores, the centrally 
concentrated regions within molecular clouds from which 
stars form, have typically revealed evidence for gas 
engaged in outflowing rather than infalling motion. The 
now apparent ubiquity of stellar outflows has remained 
one of the primary obstacles to the detection of infall owing 
to their often significant impact on the dynamics of the gas 
surrounding the star. 

As a result, the successful detection of infalling 
motion has hinged on the choice of appropriate targets 
and suitable line diagnostics. The very young, so-called 
‘class 0’, sources have turned out to be particularly fruitful 
sources for study. This is in part because the outflows in 
these sources are less well developed than in older sources 
and are often directed in the plane of the sky, thereby 
minimizing their contribution to line profiles. 

The signature of dynamical infall seen in these sources 
is a double-peaked line profile with the blue peak stronger 
than the red (e.g. Zhou et al 1993; see also figure 1). 
This characteristic profile arises from the centrally peaked 
density and temperature distributions of the infalling 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gas, which produce an outwardly decreasing excitation 
gradient. In the simple but illustrative case of spherical 
infall, the central absorption is produced by low-velocity, 
low-excitation foreground gas in the core which is seen 
in absorption against the emission from more centrally 
located, higher-excitation gas. Because in general low- 
excitation, redshifted gas is seen in absorption against 
higher-excitation, redshifted gas further along the line of 
sight, while the situation is reversed for the blueshifted 
gas (higher-excitation gas lies in front of lower-excitation 
gas), the red side of the profile is preferentially weakened 
relative to the blue side (see, e.g., figure 8 in Zhou et al 1993). 
A key factor in the detection of this dynamical signature 
is the choice of appropriate line diagnostics. These must 
be sufficiently excited in regions where the excitation 
gradient is large and have optical depths sufficient to 
manifest the effect. 

As described by Zhou et al (1993) in their multiline 
transitional study of the class 0 source B335, the theoretical 
solution of spherically symmetric dynamical collapse (Shu 
1977), when coupled with a radiative transfer analysis, 
provides an excellent fit to the suite of observed CS and 
HCO line profiles (see also Choi et al 1995; figure 1). 
Because physical situations other than infall can also 
produce a double-peaked profile (e.g. broad emission plus 
an unrelated foreground absorber; alternatively, outflow), 
multitransitional studies are important in confirming infall 
and in ruling out other possibilities. For example, 
in regions undergoing infall, higher-excitation lines are 
predicted to be broader than lower-excitation lines, an 
effect which would not be observed in the absence of 
systematic motions. Additionally, stronger blueward line 
asymmetries are predicted for more optically thick lines in 
the case of infall, an effect which is observed. 

Since the infall velocity gradient is measurable, albeit 
only on small size scales (~20” for the nearest sources), 
spatial maps of line emission from molecular envelopes 
have been obtained in order to confirm that the gas is 
undergoing dynamical infall. Such studies find larger 
linewidths and line asymmetries closer to the forming star 
(e.g. Myers et al 1995) and can even be used to diagnose the 
presence of rotational motion in the infalling gas (Zhou et al 
1996). Line profiles observed in the latter case are in good 
agreement with theoretical models of dynamical collapse 
that include the effects of rotation (Terebey et al 1984). 

From the modeling of multiple line profiles, it is 
possible to extract physical and dynamical information 
about the infalling gas, such as the mass accretion rate, the 
mass of the star + disk and the time period over which 
collapse has been occuring (e.g. Zhou et al 1993; Choi 
et al 1995; Zhou et al 1996). In a recent development, 
infalling motions have been detected in a molecular cloud 
core that is not known to have a star embedded within 
it (Tafalla et al 1998). This development opens up the 
possibility of studying the very early stages of the star 
formation process using the above techniques. The detail 
with which the infall process can now be studied and 
the close agreement between observations and theoretical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PrVryprrer pr rrr perry ry Trt oe a0 a 
E HeCO 140 + 225° 
bp ales q 
=) 2 Re Panes oa Obs. 
g C ac q 
= C r eS Sas Model 
ey C a5 q 
i ey ais ‘a 
Of fae A 
1 H + ton ee oe TeTTy Trt yt] 
C r ait 5-4 J 
3 = aie 4 
at Ok a2 ar: J 
x C ae T 7 
eae + = : 
ae + ston, : 
1 E sicheaenasb haa Senaticle ee eictnlew’e a Pose katt CER aatecrtiannelteaael 


7 8 9 10 


& 9 1 FF 8 @ 10 


V (km/s) 


Figure 1. Rotational transitions of H2CO (140 and 225 GHz) and CS (J = 2-1, 3-2 and 5-4) observed toward the very young class 0 
source B335 (histogram) and the best-fit model spectra (dashed curve) under the assumption of dynamical ‘inside-out’ collapse (Choi 
et al 1995). The close agreement between the data and the theoretical model provides strong evidence for a phase of dynamical collapse 


in the process of star formation. 


predictions together appear to provide the long-sought 
observational evidence that stars build up their masses 
and angular momenta through molecular cloud collapse 
and a dynamical accretion process. 


Outflow 

As described above, outflows are a ubiquitous and 
unexpected signature of star formation. At the very early 
stages of stellar evolution, when the star is still embedded 
in the molecular cloud from which it formed, the outflow 
process manifests itself in several ways. On the largest 
size scales (parsecs) are molecular outflows which are 
typically detected in molecular emission lines at millimeter 
wavelengths (e.g. Lada 1985; Bachiller 1996). The outflows 
commonly display a bipolar morphology with physically 
separated lobes of cold red- and blue shifted gas (e.g. 
L1551—Snell and Schloerb 1985). The low velocities 
(~10 km s~) and large masses (21Mo) of the outflows 
indicate that they are swept-up molecular cloud material. 
This interpretation is sometimes supported by molecular 
line observations which show that the outflowing gas is 
distributed in a shell-like structure that surrounds a lower- 
density cavity (e.g. L1551—Moriarty-Schieven et al 1987). 
Since the large momenta of the outflows suggest that they 
may reverse the motion of the infalling gas and thereby 
limit the mass of the star, the origin of outflows is of 
considerable interest. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Support for the idea that molecular outflows are 
swept up by an energetic wind originating close to the 
star comes from the morphology of REFLECTION NEBULAE 
within ~1000 AU of the star which also imply a cleared 
polar region (e.g. L1551—Davis et al 1995). Often collinear 
with the lobes of molecular outflows are highly collimated 
emission line jets (e.g. L1551—Davis et al 1995) which 
are detected at optical and now IR wavelengths (see e.g. 
Edwards et al 1993; Stanke et al 1998). The jets have 
terminal velocities of hundreds of km s“', as indicated 
by both radial velocities and the proper motions of jet 
features. Recent wide-field imaging of star forming 
regions has revealed that jets can extend over very large 
size scales, comparable with the extent of molecular 
outflows (e.g. Reipurth ef al 1997). On much smaller 
size scales, HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) observations of 
the emission line jets associated with the nearby sources 
HH30 and DG Tau (Burrows ef al 1996; Kepner et al 1993) 
demonstrate that the flows are collimated on solar system 
size scales, within 40 AU of the star. 

At the smallest size scales, as probed by high- 
resolution spectroscopy, are dense, high-velocity (hun- 
dreds of km s~') winds which produce the strong 
blueshifted absorption features in the profiles of lines such 
as Ha and Na ID (e.g. L1551—Mundt et al 1985; see also 
Mundt 1984). These wind signatures are observed not 
only among the young, embedded population but also 


1 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


among more evolved, optically revealed young stars (see 
‘Disk accretion rates and stellar inflows’ below). The den- 
sities and temperatures required to excite the hydrogen 
and NaI D lines strongly favor formation within ~10R,, of 
the star. When combined with the large velocities of the 
broad blueshifted absorption features, the implication is 
that winds are accelerated to high speed within a few stel- 
lar radii of the stellar surface. For the most active of the op- 
tically revealed young stars, winds are inferred to be cool 
(~6000 K) and energetic (~10~’ Mo yr’) (e.g. Giovanardi 
et al 1991; Najita et al 1996b). The momenta contained in the 
wind appear sufficient to drive the associated molecular 
outflows. For example, the dynamical lifetime of molec- 
ular outflows (ratio of linear extent to outflow velocity) is 
typically 10° yr. Awind with the above properties blowing 
for this length of time would provide a momentum input 
of a few Mo km s"! which is comparable with the mo- 
mentum contained in the associated molecular outflows 
(cf Levreault 1988). We will return in ‘Origin of initial stel- 
lar mass and angular momenta’ to the origin of winds and 
jets and their role in the solution of the angular momentum 
problem for star formation. 


Circumstellar disks 

Because of the finite angular momentum of molecular 
cloud cores (e.g. Goodman et al 1993), cloud collapse is 
expected to result in the formation of a circumstellar disk 
with a characteristic size comparable with that of the 
solar system. In addition to their role as the reservoir of 
mass and angular momentum from which stars accrete a 
substantial fraction of their mass, the likelihood that disks 
are also the environments in which planets form has led 
to long-standing interest in their existence and physical 
properties. 

One of the earliest studied and most commonly 
observed signatures of disks is the infrared excesses that 
disks contribute to the spectral energy distribution of 
the young star system owing to the processes of active 
accretion (e.g. Lynden-Bell and Pringle 1974) and passive 
reprocessing of stellar light (e.g. Adams et al 1987). Simple 
modeling of disks as a radial sequence of blackbodies 
weighted by emitting area provides a good fit to spectral 
energy distributions and implies disk temperatures of 
thousands of K at a few R, and temperatures of a few tens 
of K at 100 AU. If infrared excesses are taken as an indicator 
of the presence of a disk, disk dispersal times in nearby star 
forming regions are found to be a few Myr, although with 
a large dispersion among the sources in a given region 
(e.g. Kenyon and Hartmann 1995; Hillenbrand and Meyer 
1999; Meyer et al 1999; figure 2). 

While the agreement between spectral energy 
distributions and the predictions of simple physical 
models strongly suggests the existence of disks, we need 
to turn to techniques with greater spatial or spectral 
resolution in order to confirm their flattened, centrifugally 
supported nature. The excellent spatial resolution of HST 
has been used to provide perhaps the best evidence for 
a flattened, disk-like morphology. WFPC2 observations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


08 —¢ 


disk fraction 


04 hs 


avrepe 


Figure 2. A preliminary result from Hillenbrand and Meyer 
(1999) which shows the fraction of stars that have disks, as 
diagnosed by near-infrared excesses, in clusters of different ages. 
The results appear to indicate that disks disperse on a timescale 
of <10 Myr. 


of systems such as HH 30 (Burrows et al 1996) strongly 
suggest an edge-on disk system where the outline of a 
flared disk is revealed by scattered stellar light. The 
sillouette disks in the Orion nebula (McCaughrean and 
O'Dell 1996) also provide dramatic evidence for cool, 
dusty, disk-like structures 50-1000 AU in size that are seen 
in absorption against the bright emission line background 
of the nebula. 

An alternative approach is the use of millimeter and 
submillimeter interferometry to study the structure and 
kinematics of disks on solar system size scales (~50 AU). 
The subarcsecond angular resolution now achieved by 
interferometers (e.g. the CSO-JCMT Interferometer', the 
Berkeley Illinois Maryland Association (BIMA) Array and 
the Very Large Array (VLA) at 7 mm) is well suited 
to the angular scales of solar system sized disks at the 
distances of nearby star forming regions (~150 pc distant). 
Multiwavelength continuum measurements are used to 
study the dust emissivity and column density distribution 
of the disk as a function of radius, from which disk masses 
canbe estimated. For example, using the 40 milliarcsecond 
resolution of the VLA at 7 mm, Wilner et al (1999) showed 
that the dust surface density distribution of the disk 
associated with HL Tau has a shallow slope (flatter than 
or!) over the range ~5-100 AU (figure 3). The inferred 
mass of the disk is ~0.6Mo (e.g. Mundy et al 1996). 

Disk kinematics at solar system size scales can 
be probed by interferometric studies of molecular line 


1 A system connecting the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory 
and the James Clerk Maxwell Telscope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HL TAU 


QO "Disk"! 5 


North Offset (arcsec) 


7mm continuum 


O ie "Wind" 

- “2 © 
-0.1 - = os : ae O | 
a 
02}, _ my 


10 AU 


East Offset (arcsec) 


1 
-1.7 


Figure 3. Images of the T Tauri star HL Tau obtained with the VLA at 7 mm with 40 milliarcsecond resolution (Wilner et al 1999). The 
right panel shows the reconstructed image obtained from data taken at baselines longer than 1000 ka which reveals jet-like emission 
from an ionized wind. Given the angular scale of the image, this result suggests that jets are collimated very close to the star. The left 
panel shows a lower-resolution map obtained after subtracting the wind component, which reveals dust emission from a disk. The 


absence of a steep increase in surface brightness toward the star argues for a surface density distribution that is flatter than ~r 


emission at millimeter wavelengths. Such. studies 
typically detect molecular line emission on size scales 
(~500 AU) larger than that of the continuum emission. The 
kinematics of the emitting gas sometimes shows relatively 
clear evidence for rotation (e.g. Koerner and Sargent 1995), 
but the signature of radial inflow (e.g. Hayashi et al 
1993) and/or outflow can often dominate the kinematics, 
making the detection of rotational motion difficult. 

At much smaller size scales (r < 5 AU), disks are 
currently studied using infrared spectroscopy, where high 
spectral resolution is used in lieu of high spatial resolution 
to probe disk properties. Because of the high densities and 
warm temperatures (100-5000 K) of disks within 5 AU, 
molecules are abundant in the gas phase, and their infrared 
vibrational—rotational transitions sufficiently excited that 
molecular spectroscopy in the near- and mid-IR is a 
powerful probe of disk structure and dynamics. For 
example, R = 20000 spectroscopy of 2.3 ~m CO overtone 
emission from young stars reveals a spectral shape that 
strongly suggests a disk origin (figure 4; Carr et al 1993; 
Najita et al 1996a; see also Chandler et al 1993). These 
observations currently provide some of the best evidence 
for the existence of centrifugally supported structures 
around young stars. 


Disk accretion rates and stellar inflows 

The rate of mass accretion through disks can be measured 
from the excess emission in both the infrared and the 
optical-UV that the accretion process contributes to the 
composite spectral energy distribution of the young stellar 
system. As described in the previous section, the infrared 
excesses arise in part from the dissipation of gravitational 
potential energy as disk matter spirals in toward the inner 
disk boundary (Lynden-Bell and Pringle 1974). While 
infrared excesses have frequently been used to infer the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


-1 


mass accretion rates of embedded sources, their utility 
as a measure of the disk accretion rate is compromised 
by the the fact that other physical processes, such as the 
reprocessing of stellar light by the disk (e.g. D’Alessio et al 
1998) and other circumstellar matter (e.g. Natta 1995), also 
produce infrared excesses which must be accounted for in 
order to extract an accurate accretion rate. 

In comparison, the UV excesses arise from the 
dissipation of additional gravitational potential energy as 
disk matter makes its way from the inner disk boundary 
onto the star. Since the origin of the emission is 
more uniquely associated with the accretion process, UV 
excesses can be regarded as a more robust measure of disk 
accretion rates (e.g. Bertout et al 1988; Calvet et al 1999). 
Because UV excesses are difficult to measure except in the 
case of optically visible accreting stars, i.e. the population 
knownas the classical TTAURISTARS, this section and the next 
focus more specifically on the properties of these stars. The 
classical T Tauri stars are in a later phase of evolution than 
the embedded sources among which molecular outflows 
and stellar jets are more common (see ‘Outflow’ above) 
and are characterized by lower levels of mass accretion 
and mass loss. 

Until the early 1990s, it was believed that circumstel- 
lar disks extended essentially up to stellar surfaces and 
that UV excesses arose from the dissipation of rotational 
energy as disk matter spun down in a boundary layer to 
join the slowly rotating star (i.e. a star rotating much below 
breakup). The hot boundary layer was then believed to 
produce the Balmer continuum emission and much of the 
rich emission line spectrum that is characteristic of T Tauri 
stars. However, the origin of these spectral features has 
recently been reinterpreted within a physical picture that 
offers an explanation for both the slow rotation rates of 
T Tauri stars and the origin of their winds. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1.4 
M17 CEN24 red: pealk ] 
L a | 
12 shoulder. 4 
L SS _ 
| blue wing 4 
te zl 
p+—+—+_|_+ + }—+—+—+} ++ 
f 1548C27 J 
1.55 - 
Bea 4 
= [ J 
i (Fieve. qe fhe = j oe | 
> -—+—+—+—_|—+—+4 |—+—+—+ +++ 
ol L 4 
@ L WL16 . | 
oO r aN 4 
uu 
Pe ai 
iE 1 
-—+-++_++++4 }—+—+—+ +++ 
1.1 DG Tau q 
te 4 
OG, a ee [YA 2s 39 __ 
=400 —200 0 200 400 


velocity (km/s) 


Figure 4. The spectroscopic signature of bandhead emission 
from a rotating disk (a blue wing, shoulder and red peak) is 
commonly observed in young stars over a range of masses, from 
the T Tauri star DG Tau (~1M9), WL 16 (~2Mo) and 1548C27 
(~4Mo), to a high-mass star (~10Mo) in the M17 cluster (Carr et 
al 1993; Najita et al 1996a; Carr et al 1999; Najita et al 1999). In the 
DG Tau spectrum, the signature is less clear owing to strong 
stellar CO bandhead absorption. 


A variety of observations now support the view 
that accreting disk matter joins the star not through 
a boundary layer but through accretion along stellar 
magnetic field lines. Evidence for stellar inflows within 
a few stellar radii of the star comes from the inverse 
P Cygni profiles of the upper Balmer lines of some T Tauri 
stars (Walker 1972) which indicate infall velocities of 
several hundred km s~!. Further evidence comes from 
the almost ubiquitous presence of blueward asymmetries 
in the upper Balmer and Brackett line profiles (Edwards 
et al 1994; Najita et al 1996b) which are interpreted as 
arising in gas infalling onto the star, a situation which 
results in preferential absorption on the red side of the 
line profile (cf ‘Infall’ above). The interpretation that 
these line profile properties are signatures of magnetic 
accretion is supported by RADIATIVE TRANSFER models of 
idealized magnetic accretion flows which reproduce many 
of the observed line profile features and trends (Calvet and 
Hartmann 1992; Muzerolle et al 1998a,b). In this revised 
picture, the post-shock gas at the base of the magnetic 
accretion flow is identified as the source of the optical-UV 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


excess formerly attributed to emission from a boundary 
layer (K6nigl 1991; see also Bertout et al 1988). 

Several other observations support the idea of a 
close dynamical relationship between stellar inflows and 
winds. Evidence for stellar inflows in the upper Balmer 
lines is often observed simultaneously with the signature 
of mass loss (i.e. P Cygni profiles) at Ha (cf ‘Outflow’ 
above; Edwards et al 1994). Since excitation considerations 
require that the hydrogen lines are formed close to the star, 
these observations provide evidence for the simultaneous 
presence of winds and stellar inflows within a few stellar 
radii of young stars. Additional evidence comes from 
synoptic observations of hydrogen line profiles in T Tauri 
stars. In the T Tauri star SU Aur, the depths of both a 
blueshifted absorption component (seen in Ha and Hf) 
and a redshifted absorption component (seen in Hf) are 
observed to vary at the 3 day rotation period of the 
star but are 180° out of phase (Johns and Basri 1995). 
These observations can be explained as the result of the 
interaction between the disk and a dipole stellar magnetic 
field that is tilted with respect to the stellar rotation axis 
(cf figure 15 in Johns and Basri 1995). Because stellar 
fieldlines bend inward toward the star, favoring inflow, 
in one region of the magnetosphere, and bend outward, 
favoring outflow, 180° away in azimuth, the rotation of 
the magnetosphere at the rotation period of the star can 
account for the observed period and phase difference. 

Yet further evidence, of a more statistical nature, 
comes from the correlation between wind mass loss rates 
and stellar and disk accretion rates (Edwards et al 1993; 
Hartigan et al 1995). Although the errors associated with 
the measurements are large, current estimated values 
for these mass loss and mass accretion rates appear 
comparable within an order of magnitude. Gullbring et 
al (1998) have reexamined stellar accretion rates implied 
by the optical-UV spectrum of T Tauri stars in the context 
of the magnetic accretion scenario and find a broad 
distribution of accretion rates with a median value of 
~10-°Mo yr7'. Estimates of wind mass loss rates based 
on the profiles and fluxes of traditional diagnostics such 
as the hydrogen and Na I D lines (e.g. Calvet 1997; see 
also Giovanardi et al 1991; Najita et al 1996b) and optical 
forbidden line emission (e.g. Hartigan ef al 1995) also 
result in a broad distribution averaging ~10-°Mo yr7! 
(e.g. Calvet 1997), although there is considerably larger 
uncertainty associated with these values compared with 
the estimates for stellar accretion rates. A hypothesis for 
the simultaneous presence of mass accretion and loss, and 
their comparable mass flux rates, is presented in ‘Origin 
of initial stellar masses and angular momenta’ below. 


Stellar rotation 

The rotation rates of young stars are measured both 
from the rotational broadening of stellar photospheric 
absorption lines and from the observation of periodic 
photometric variability. The latter is attributed to 
rotational modulation of the stellar flux by the presence 
of hot or cool spots on the stellar surface. While cool 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spots are believed to be the equivalent of large sunspots, 
the hot spots are now interpreted as arising from the 
non-axisymmetric components of stellar inflows (Bertout 
et al 1988, 1996; see ‘Disk accretion rates and stellar 
inflows’ above). A multitude of rotational broadening 
and photometric variability studies have shown that the 
rotation rates of classical T Tauri stars are low, typically 
much less than the breakup rotation rate, vsini ~ 
15 km s7! or Q, ~ 0.1Qbreakup (e.g. Vogel and Kuhi 1981; 
Hartmann and Stauffer 1989; Bouvier et al 1993). This 
result might be considered surprising since these stars 
are actively accreting, and the accretion of high angular 
momentum material from a disk might be expected to spin 
the star to breakup speed. 

An important clue to the reason for the slow rotation 
rates of classical T Tauri stars came from the discovery 
that these stars, which possess circumstellar disks, rotate 
more slowly than stars of similar spectral type and age (the 
weak T Tauri stars) that show no evidence for circumstellar 
disks (Edwards et al 1993; Bouvier et al 1993; Choi & 
Herbst 1996). In these studies, classical T Tauri stars 
were found to have rotational periods in a fairly narrow 
range about ~8 days, while weak T Tauri stars were found 
to have a mean period 24 times smaller. These results 
were interpreted as evidence that, in the T Tauri phase, 
stellar angular momenta are regulated by the presence of 
a disk, presumably through a kind of magnetic coupling 
between the stellar field and the inner circumstellar disk 
(Konig] 1991; Shu et al 1994; Cameron and Campbell 1996; 
Armitage and Clarke 1996). 

While the different theories describing this process 
disagree in their treatment of the radial extent of the 
coupling region and the nature of the angular momentum 
redistribution that allows continued slow stellar rotation, 
all of the theories share the idea that through disk coupling 
the star continues to rotate slowly even as it accretes 
some high angular momentum material from the disk 
and contracts toward the main sequence. In the context 
of this picture, the timescale for disk dispersal, and the 
consequent cessation of disk coupling, is an important 
factor in setting initial stellar angular momenta. Some 
degree of variation in initial stellar angular momenta 
would then appear to be expected, even at ages of a few 
Myr, given the known dispersion in disk dispersal times, 
as based, for example, on the intermixed distributions of 
classical and weak T Tauri stars in the HR diagram for the 
Taurus star forming region (Kenyon and Hartmann 1995). 

These ideas have interesting implications when 
placed in the context of studies of stellar angular 
momentum evolution over Gyr timescales. For example, 
in figure 5 from Bouvier et al (1997a), the rotation rates of 
classical and weak T Tauri stars in Taurus are compared 
with those of post-T-Tauri stars in Taurus (10-40 Myr old), 
and stars in the aPer (50 Myr), Pleiades (100 Myr) and 
Hyades clusters. If interpreted as a pure evolutionary 
trend, these results might be taken to indicate that on 
average stellar rotation increases with age owing to stellar 
contraction until ~100 Myr, then decreases with age owing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


15 TT_TTTT T a Fs er a a T T 


10 - 


Number 


Period/day 


Figure 5. Distribution of rotation periods for stars in the young 
cluster NGC 2264 (Makidon et al 1999). Although stars with 
disks (solid line) generally rotate slower than stars without disks 
(dotted line), the distribution of both populations is quite broad. 


to the increasing importance of angular momentum loss 
in a magnetic solar-type wind (e.g. Bouvier et al 1997b). 
The large breadth of the rotational distribution that is seen 
at all ages can then be interpreted largely as the result 
of a dispersion in disk dispersal times (e.g. Bouvier et al 
1997a), i.e. a spread in initial stellar angular momenta 
rather than dispersion introduced through subsequent 
stellar evolution. (See Keppens et al (1995) for a somewhat 
different view.) 

One of the potential difficulties with this picture is 
that, in order to explain the population of slow rotators 
at ages of ~50 Myr, disks must persist much beyond 
10 Myr, and stars must couple effectively to them, in a 
fair fraction of systems. This seems rather unlikely given 
that disk dispersal times for T Tauri stars appear to be 
much shorter (see ‘Circumstellar disks’ above). Other 
questions for the future include issues such as whether 
the initial conditions imposed by molecular clouds (e.g. 
cloud angular momenta, infall accretion rate) and the 
effects of early dynamical evolution (e.g. development of 
close companions) are sufficiently homogenized during 
the epoch of disk coupling that observations of different 
clusters and associations can be thought to represent a 
purely time-dependent sequence. 

As a final caveat, it is interesting to note that the study 
of rotational periods in other star forming regions (e.g. 
NGC 2264) may end up altering somewhat our picture of 
rotation rates at early times. Using synoptic observations 
that are sensitive to a broad range of rotation periods, 
Makidon et al (1999) find a broad period distribution with 
a significant population of both slow (Pro. ~ 30 days) and 
fast (Prot < 1 days) rotators at ages of ~3 Myr. While they 
confirm the trend that stars with disks rotate slower on 
average than stars without disks, the period distribution 
for both populations is quite broad (figure 5). Whether 
and how such observations fit into our understanding of 
the rotational evolution of stars is an interesting issue for 
the future. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar magnetic fields 

As indicated in the previous sections, the processes of 
stellar accretion and angular momentum loss appear to 
be closely tied to the strength and geometry of stellar 
magnetic fields at early evolutionary times. Magnetic 
activity among the T Tauri stars has long been suspected 
based on a variety of observations including strong x- 
ray and non-thermal radio emission and photometric 
evidence for large starspots. One of the most exciting 
recent developments in this field is the detection of 
hard x-ray emission from the much younger protostellar 
population (Koyama et al 1996). In this case, hard x-ray 
emission was used to penetrate the large column densities 
toward protostars (Ay ~ 100) in order to probe the region 
close to the stellar surface. This result indicates that stellar 
magnetic activity begins very early in the evolution of low- 
mass stars. 

Exciting progress has also been made in the direct 
measurement of stellar field strengths and geometries. 
Measurements of stellar magnetic field strengths in 
T Tauri stars are complicated by the rotational broadening 
of the photospheric lines (see ‘Stellar rotation’ above) 
which typically exceeds Zeeman broadening at optical 
wavelengths. For this reason, studies in the optical have 
ignored line profiles and instead used the enhancement in 
equivalent width that results from Zeeman broadening as 
a more indirect measure of stellar field strength. To date, 
field strengths ~1-2.5 kG have been measured for a few 
T Tauri stars using this approach (e.g. Basri et al 1992). 
The more direct detection of kilogauss strength fields 
through the study of Zeeman-broadened line profiles can 
be made by going to longer wavelengths where Zeeman 
broadening (A?) dominates over rotational broadening 
(xd). Using this approach, a clear signature of Zeeman 
broadening has been detected in the Zeeman-sensitive Ti I 
42.2 wm line in the spectrum of the classical T Tauri star 
BP Tau (Johns-Krull et al 1999b; figure 6). The average 
field strength implied by the line profile is 3.3 kG which 
is in excellent agreement with stellar field values required 
by theories of magnetic accretion (e.g. K6nig] 1991; Shu et 
al 1994; Cameron and Campbell 1996; see ‘Disk accretion 
rates and stellar inflows’ above). 

Several other observations support the existence of 
an organized component to these strong fields. For 
example, our ability to measure photometric variability 
due to the rotational modulation of hot or cool spots (see 
‘Stellar rotation’ above) indicates the existence and long- 
term stability of an organized magnetic field component. 
An exciting recent development in the study of the 
magnetic field geometry of young stars comes from 
spectropolarimetric studies of certain T Tauri star emission 
lines. In the classical T Tauri star BP Tau, the He I 15876 
emission line is strongly polarized and the wavelength 
shift between the left- and right-circularly polarized 
components of the line profile implies a field strength 
~2.4 kG (Johns-Krull et al 1999a; figure 7). Since the 
He I line is believed to originate at the base of the 
magnetic accretion flow onto the star, these observations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1.05 ; T aa 


eee Til 


itt 


m1 
+ 


Fi 


Loriitiisatiiiritiiin 


0.95 


0.90 


Residual Intensity 


0.85 


B=0 Model 


0.80C 
2.2225 


2.2230 2.2235 
Wavelength (um) 


2.2240 


Figure 6. Detection of Zeeman broadening in the Til 42.2 um 
line in the spectrum of the classical T Tauri star BP Tau 
(Johns-Krull et al 1999). The Ti I line (plus signs) is found to be 
significantly broader than a Zeeman-insensitive photospheric 
line (solid curve). Modeling of the Ti I line indicates a 
distribution of field strengths on the stellar surface (1-10 kG) 
with a mean field of ~3.3 kG. 


2.0[ T T T T T T ] 
L He | | 
L il | 7 
2 it 5 | 
245+ 4 
a) k 4 
= L | 
o) f 4 
2 [ | 
ee c 1 
ae L AX =70 mA eae 
r B, = 2.46 + 0.12 kG i 
0.5L 


5875 5876 _ 9877 5878 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 7. Detection of circular polarization in the He I 5876 
emission line in the spectrum of the classical T Tauri star BP Tau 
(Johns-Krull et al 1999a). The wavelength shift between the 
right- and left-circularly polarized components indicates a field 
strength of 2.46 kG. Since the He I line is believed to form in the 
base of the magnetic accretion flow, these observations argue 
that organized fields are associated with accretion onto the 
stellar surface. 


provide clear evidence for a strong, organized field that 
is associated with accretion onto the stellar surface. Such 
strong, globally organized fields are necessary if the star is 
to couple magnetically to a disk several stellar radii away 
and participate in the processes of stellar accretion and 
angular momentum regulation. 


Origin of initial stellar masses and angular 
momenta 

Remarkably, a large fraction of the observations described 
in the previous sections support and/or find a common 
explanation within our current understanding of how low- 
mass stars acquire their initial STELLAR Masses and angular 
momenta. <A possible synopsis of the story might be 
as follows. Mass and angular momentum are accreted 
from molecular clouds in a phase of dynamical infall. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(Following an extended observational search, compelling 
evidence for this phase of evolution has been obtained; see 
‘Infall’ above.) The finite angular momentum of infalling 
cloud material leads to the formation of a circumstellar 
disk. (Following another observational search, compelling 
morphological and kinematic evidence for centrifugally 
supported structures has been obtained; see ‘Circumstellar 
disks’ above.) As a result of disk angular momentum 
transport, disk matter spirals in toward the star. The 
star accretes mass and angular momentum from the disk, 
producing a rapidly rotating star. Rapid rotation coupled 
with the fully convective STELLAR INTERIOR leads to the 
production of a strong stellar magnetic field. (We now 
have good evidence for strong, organized stellar fields and 
the early onset of magnetic activity; see ‘Stellar magnetic 
fields’ above.) 

In the picture of Shu et al (1994; see also Shu et al 1999; 
Konig] 1991; Arons 1986; Camenzind 1990; Shu et al 1988) 
that describes the interaction of the stellar magnetic field 
with the disk, the stellar field truncates and couples to the 
disk ata distance, typically a few stellar radii, that depends 
on disk accretion rates and stellar parameters including 
the magnetic field strength (figure 8). As a result of the 
magnetic disk coupling, the stellar rotation rate is slowed 
and regulated so that it equals the rotation rate at the disk 
truncation radius (cf Shuet al 1997). For typical T Tauri disk 
accretion rates, stellar parameters and the mean (~8 day) 
period of classical T Tauri stars, stellar field strengths of 
a few kilogauss are required, in good agreement with 
measured values. 

In the Shu et al picture, disk accretion pinches the 
stellar magnetic field at the truncation radius, producing a 
magnetic geometry that favors dynamically the generation 
of magnetic accretion flows and winds from the truncation 
region. Thus, disk matter reaching the inner disk radius 
can be channeled into either an accretion flow onto the 
star or into an outflowing wind, providing an explanation 
for the observed simultaneous presence of stellar accretion 
flows and winds within a few stellar radii of the star (see 
‘Disk accretion rates and stellar inflows’ above). The back 
torque of the wind and magnetic accretion flows on the 
magnetic field footpoints in the disk truncation region act 
to maintain the pinched magnetic field in the truncation 
region. 

The magnetocentrifugal action resulting from the 
combination of strong stellar fields and the rapid rotation 
of the disk (or star) is capable of driving cool, massive 
winds with terminal velocities and mass loss rates that 
are in good agreement with the properties of winds from 
T Tauri stars (and embedded protostars), as described 
by Najita and Shu (1994). The magnetocentrifugally 
driven winds play an important role in the solution 
of the angular momentum problem for star formation. 
They remove significant angular momentum from the 
young star system, which allows the star to continue 
to rotate slowly despite ongoing accretion. For T Tauri 
stars, the observed kilogauss-strength fields are capable 
of removing sufficient angular momentum that the wind 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


mass loss rate is a comparable fraction of the disk and 
stellar accretion rates (My /Mp = 0.1-0.3; M, = Mp — Mw) 
in reasonable agreement with observationally derived 
ratios (see ‘Outflow’ above). 

At distances of tens of parsecs, the wind collimates 
magnetically into a jet embedded in a wider-angle wind 
(Shu et al 1995), in good agreement with HST observations 
of jet collimation distances. The wind and jet together 
sweep up the surrounding molecular cloud material, 
creating a molecular outflow (see ‘Outflow’ above). At 
the same time, the outflowing material acts to halt further 
infall, thereby limiting the mass of the star. At some 
later time, the disk disperses. The star and disk are 
consequently decoupled, and the star is free to spin 
up as it contracts. This picture, as it currently stands, 
provides a viable framework for understanding the origin 
and interrelation of many of the observed phenomena 
associated with young stars and their role in the origin 
of the initial masses and angular momenta of low-mass 
stars. 


Unsolved problems 

Despite the success of the above picture, there are 
numerous issues that remain to be addressed, including 
several basic aspects of this picture. For example, it is as 
yet unclear theoretically whether the magnetic interaction 
between the star and disk is likely to be time steady or not. 
Various recent simulations (Hayashi et al 1996; Goodson et 
al 1997; Miller and Stone 1997) suggest that the interaction 
is much less quiescent than in the Shu et al (1994) picture. 
Observational evidence for time-dependent behavior may 
be uncovered in synoptic observations of T Tauri line 
profiles which are notoriously variable. 

Another important issue is the origin of angular 
momentum transport in disks. Gravitational instabilities 
are efficient when the circumstellar disk mass is a fair 
fraction of the stellar mass, a situation which may be 
relevant at early times. In the T Tauri phase, where 
disk masses appear to be too low to support significant 
gravitational instabilities, magnetic instabilities such as 
the Balbus—Hawley instability (Hawley et al 1995) appear 
to be the most promising. 

Our understanding of the stellar rotational properties 
of young stars is still in its early stages, despite several 
conclusions having already been drawn from the existing 
data. From an observational perspective, observations of 
large numbers of stars will be needed to study rotation 
as a function of mass and age and to average over the 
differences that may be inherent in trying to compare 
stars with different formation histories (e.g. molecular 
cloud initial conditions, etc). Various groups are currently 
engaged in expanding the original work on young stars in 
the Taurus and Orion regions to a larger number of stars 
and clusters. These results are eagerly awaited. 

As discussed above, the longevity of inner accretion 
disks may be an important issue for the understanding of 
the origin of slow rotators and the spread in stellar angular 
momenta that exists in 10-100 Myr old clusters. The factors 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Coronal 
Wind 


Funnel Flow 


Soft 
Dipole X-Rays 


Star Field 


Reconnestid 


X/Region 


Coronal 
Wind 


X-Wind 


Accretion Disk 


Figure 8. Schematic drawing of the X-wind model (Shu et al 1994, 1999). In the interaction between a stellar dipole magnetic field and 
a surrounding accretion disk, the disk is truncated and the magnetic configuration of the star (thin lines) is altered, allowing mass 
inflow onto the stellar surface in magnetic accretion flows, and energetic mass loss in a magnetocentrifugal wind. 


that control disk dispersal are at present unclear, although 
some of the relevant processes have been identified. For 
example, since disk structure is known to be affected by 
the presence of stellar companions (e.g. Mathieu 1994), the 
longevity of inner disks may similarly be affected by the 
presence of close stellar or planetary companions. 

Another generic issue is the extent to which this 
picture, developed to explain the formation of isolated, 
low-mass stars, applies to stars in clusters and/or to stars 
of higher masses. It may be necessary to consider other 
physical processes (e.g. fragmentation, mergers of stars 
and/or clouds) in order to understand the origin of stellar 
masses and angular momenta in dense clusters. Further 
work is needed to understand these processes. 

On the issue of the applicability of this picture to high- 
mass stars, an issue that also remains unresolved, there 
is some observational evidence that suggests that similar 
physical processes may be involved. High-resolution 
spectroscopy of the CO overtone emission from a high- 
mass star in the young cluster M17 has revealed the 
spectral shape of emission from a rotating disk, providing 
kinematic evidence for disks around young high mass 
stars (Najita et al 1999; figure 3). This indicates that stars 
may evolve from low to high mass by accretion through 
disks (e.g. Palla and Stahler 1993). These observations also 
support the view that radiation pressure is not a barrier to 
the formation of high-mass stars and that consequently 
the high end of the stellar initial mass function should be 
independent of metallicity, as is observed (Massey et al 
1995). 


Acknowledgments 


I am very grateful to Neal Evans, Lynne Hillenbrand, 
Michael Meyer, David Wilner, Steve Strom, Russ Makidon, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Jeff Valenti, Chris Johns-Krull and Frank Shu for providing 
illustrations for this review. 


Bibliography 

Interested readers in search of additional information and 
opinions on both observational and theoretical aspects of 
the subject may wish to consult the comprehensive reviews 
presented in Protostars and Planets IV (Mannings et al 2000). 
The review by Bodenheimer (1995) on the more specific 
topic of the angular momentum evolution of young stars 
is also a valuable reference. 


Adams F C, Lada C J and Shu F H 1987 Spectral evolution 
of young stellar objects Astrophys. J. 312 788-806 
Armitage P J and Clarke C J 1996 Magnetic braking of 
T Tauri stars Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 280 458-68 

Arons J 1986 Plasma Penetration into Magnetospheres 
ed N Kylafis, J Papamastorakis and J Ventura 
(Iraklion: Crete University Press) p 115 

Bachiller R 1996 Bipolar molecular outflows from young 
stars and protostars Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 
111-54 

Basri G, March G W and Valenti J A 1992 Limits on the 
magnetic flux of pre-main sequence stars Astrophys. J. 
390 622-33 

Bertout C, Basri G and Bouvier J 1988 Accretion disks 
around T Tauri stars Astrophys. J. 330 350-73 

Bertout C, Harder S, Malbet F and Mennessier C 1996 
Photometric observations of YY Orionis: new insight 
into the accretion process Astron. J. 112 2159-67 

Bodenheimer P 1995 Angular momentum evolution of 
young stars and disks Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 33 
199-38 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bouvier J, Cabrit S, Fernandez M, Martin E L and 
Matthews J M 1993 Coyotes-I—the photometric 
variability and rotational evolution of T-Tauri stars 
Astron. Astrophys. 272 176-206 

Bouvier J et al 1997a COYOTES IV: the rotational periods 
of low-mass post-T Tauri stars in Taurus Astron. 
Astrophys. 318 495-505 

Bouvier J, Forestini M and Allain S 1997b The angular 
momentum evolution of low-mass stars Astron. 
Astrophys. 326 1023 

Burrows CJ et al 1996 Hubble Space Telescope observations 
of the disk and jet of HH 30 Astrophys. J. 473 437-51 

Calvet N and Hartmann L 1992 Balmer line profiles for 
infalling T Tauri envelopes Astrophys. J. 386 239 

Calvet N 1997 Properties of the winds of T Tauri stars 
Herbig—Haro Flows and the Birth of Low Mass Stars (IAU 
Symp. 182) ed B Reipurth and C Bertout (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) pp 417-32 

Calvet N, Hartmann L and Strom S 2000 Evolution of disk 
accretion Protostars and Planets IV ed V Mannings, 
A P Boss and S Russell (Tuscon, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) pp 337-99 

Camenzind M 1990 Reviews in Modern Astronomy 3 
ed G Klare (Berlin: Springer) p 259 

Cameron A C and Campbell C G 1996 Rotational evolution 
of magnetic T Tauri stars with accretion disks Astron. 
Astrophys. 274 309-18 

Carr JS, Tokunaga AT, Najita J, Shu F H and Glassgold AE 
1993 The inner-disk and stellar properties of the 
young stellar object WL16 Astrophys. J. 411 L37-40 

Carr J S et al 2000 in preparation 

Chandler C J, Carlstrom J E, Scoville N Z, Dent W R F and 
Geballe T R 1993 Infrared CO emission from young 
stars: high resolution spectroscopy Astrophys. J. 412 
L714 

Choi M, Evans N J II, Gergersen E M and Wang Y 1995 
Modeling line profiles of protostellar collapse in B335 
with the Monte Carlo method Astrophys. J. 448 742-7 

Choi P I and Herbst W 1996 Rotation periods of stars in 
the Orion Nebula cluster: the bimodal distribution 
Astron. J. 111 283-98 

D’ Alessio P, Canté J, Calvet N and Lizano S 1998 Accretion 
disks around young objects. I. The detailed vertical 
structure Astrophys. J. 500 411-27 

Davis C J, Mundt R, Eisl6ffel J and Ray T P 1995 
Near-infrared and optical imaging of the L1551- 
IRS 5 region—the importance of poorly collimated 
outflows from young stars Astron. J. 110 766-75 

Edwards S, Hartigan P, Ghandour L and Andrulis C 1994 
Spectroscopic evidence for magnetospheric accretion 
in classical T Tauri stars Astron. J. 104 1056-70 

Edwards S, Ray T and Mundt R 1993 Energetic mass 
outflows from young stars Protostars and Planets III 
ed E H Levy and J I Lunine (Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) pp 567-602 

Giovanardi C, Gennari S, Natta A and Stanga R 1991 
Infrared spectroscopy of T Tauri stars Astrophys. J. 367 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


173-81 

Goodman A A, Benson P J, Fuller G A and Myers P C 1993 
Dense cores in dark clouds. VIII—velocity gradients 
Astrophys. J. 406 528-47 

Goodson A P, Winglee R M and Boehm K-H 1997 
Time-dependent accretion by magnetic young stellar 
objects as a launching mechanism for stellar jets 
Astrophys. J. 489 199 

Gullbring E, Hartmann L, Bricefio C and Calvet N 1998 
Disk accretion rates for T Tauri stars Astrophys. J. 492 
323 

Hartigan P, Edwards S and Ghandour L 1995 Disk 
accretion and mass loss from young stars Astrophys. J. 
452 736-68 

Hartmann L and Stauffer J R 1989 Additional measure- 
ments of pre-main sequence stellar rotation Astron. J. 
97 873-80 

Hawley J F, Gammie C F and Balbus S A 1995 Local three- 
dimensional magnetohydrodynamic simulations of 
accretion disks Astrophys. J. 440 742-63 

Hayashi M, Ohashi N and MiyamaS M 1993 Adynamically 
accreting gas disk around HL Tauri Astrophys. J. 418 
L71-4 

Hayashi M R, Shibata K and Matsumoto R 1996 Astrophys. 
J. 468 L37—40 

Hillenbrand L and Meyer M R 2000 in preparation 

Johns C and Basri G 1995 The line profile variability of SU 
Aurigae Astrophys. J. 449 341-64 

Johns-Krull C M, Valenti J A, Hatzes A P and Kanaan A 
1999a Spectropolarimetry of magnetospheric accre- 
tion on the classical T Tauri star BP Tauri Astrophys. J. 
510 L41-4 

Johns-Krull C M, Valenti J A and Koresko C 1999b 
Measuring the magnetic field on the classical T Tauri 
star BP Tauri Astrophys. J. 516 900-15 

Kenyon S J and Hartmann L 1995 Pre-main-sequence 
evolution in the Taurus—Auriga molecular cloud 
Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 101 117-71 

Kepner J, Hartigan P, Yang C and Strom S 1993 Hubble 
Space Telescope images of the subarcsecond jet in DG 
Tauri Astrophys. J. 415 L119-21 

Keppens R, MacGregor K B and Charbonneau P 1995 On 
the evolution of rotational velocity distributions for 
solar-type stars Astron. Astrophys. 294 469-87 

Koerner D W and Sargent AI 1995 Imaging the small-scale 
circumstellar gas around T Tauri stars Astrophys. J. 109 
2138-45 

Konig] A 1991 Disk accretion onto magnetic T Tauri stars 
Astrophys. J. 370 L39-43 

Koyama K, Hamaguchi K, Ueno S, Kobayashi N and 
Feigelson E 1996 Discovery of hard X-rays from a 
cluster of protostars Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 48 L87-92 

Lada C J 1985 Cold outflows, energetic winds, and 
enigmatic jets around young stellar objects Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 23 267-317 

Levreault R M 1988 Molecular outflows and mass loss in 
pre-main-sequence stars Astrophys. J. 330 897-910 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Star Formation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lynden-Bell D and Pringle J E 1974 The evolution of 
viscous discs and the origin of the nebular variables 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 168 603-38 

Makidon R et al 2000 in preparation 

Mannings V, Boss A P and Russell S (eds) 2000 Protostars 
and Planets IV (Tuscon, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 

Massey P, Johnson K E and DeGioia-Eastwood K 1995 
The initial mass function and massive star evolution 
in the OB associations of the northern Milky Way 
Astrophys. J. 454 151-71 

Mathieu R D 1994 Pre-main-sequence binary stars Ann. 

Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 32 465-530 

McCaughrean M J and O’Dell C R 1996 Direct imaging of 

circumstellar disks in the Orion nebula Astron. J. 111 

1977-86 

Meyer M R, Beckwith S V W, Stauffer J R and Schultz B 

2000 in preparation 

Miller K A and Stone J M 1997 Magnetohydrodynamic 

simulations of stellar magnetosphere-accretion disk 

interaction Astrophys. J. 489 890-902 

Moriarty-Schieven G H, Snell RL, Strom S E, Schloerb F P, 
Strom K M and Grasdalen G L 1987 High-resolution 
images of the L1551 bipolar outflow: evidence for an 
expanding, accelerated shell Astrophys. J. 319 742-53 

Mundt R 1984 Mass loss in T Tauri stars: observational 

studies of the cool parts of their stellar winds and 

expanding shells Astrophys. J. 280 749-70 

Mundt R, Stocke J, Strom S E, Strom K E and Anderson E R 

1985 The optical spectrum of L1551 IRS 5 Astrophys. J. 

297 L41-5 

Mundy L Get al 1996 Imaging the HL Tauri disk at A = 2.7 

millimeters with the BIMA array Astrophys. J. 464 

L169-73 

Muzerolle J, Calvet N and Hartmann L 1998a Magneto- 

spheric accretion models for the hydrogen emission 

lines of T Tauri stars Astrophys. J. 492 743-53 

Muzerolle J, Hartmann L and Calvet N 1998b Emission- 

line diagnostics of T Tauri magnetospheric accretion. 

I. Line profile observations Astron. J. 116 455-68 

Myers P C, Bachiller R, Caselli P, Fuller G A, Mardones D, 

Tafalla M and Wilner D J 1995 Gravitational infall in 

the dense cores L1527 and L483 Astrophys. J. 449 L65-8 

Najita J and Shu F H 1994 Magnetocentrifugally driven 
flows from young stars and disks. III. Numerical 
solution of the sub-Alfvénic region Astrophys. J. 429 
808-25 

Najita J, Carr JS, Glassgold A E, Shu F Hand Tokunaga AT 
1996a Kinematic diagnostics of disks around young 
stars: CO overtone emission from WL16 and 1548C27 
Astrophys. J. 462 919-36 

Najita J, Carr J S and Tokunaga A T 1996b High-resolution 
spectroscopy of Bry emission in young stellar objects 
Astrophys. J. 456 292-9 

Najita J, Greene T P and Lada C J 2000 High resolution 
spectroscopy of CO overtone emission from massive 
young stars, in preparation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Natta A 1995 The effect of the environment on the 
temperature profile of circumstellar disks Rev. Mex. 
Astron. Astrofis. 1 209-15 

Palla F and Stahler S 1993 The pre-main-sequence 
evolution of intermediate-mass stars Astrophys. J. 418 
414-25 

Reipurth B, Bally J and Devine D 1997 Giant Herbig-Haro 
flows Astron. J. 114 2708-35 

Shu F H 1977 Self-similar collapse of isothermal spheres 
and star formation Astrophys. J. 214 488-97 

Shu FH, LizanoS, RudenS and NajitaJ 1988 Mass loss from 
rapidly rotating magnetic protostars Astrophys. J. 328 
L19 

Shu F H, Najita J, Ostriker E C and Shang H 1995 
Magnetocentrifugally driven flows from young stars 
and disks. V. Asymptotic collimation into jets 
Astrophys. J. 455 L155-8 

Shu FH, NajitaJ, Ostriker E, Wilkin F, RudenS and LizanoS 
1994 Magnetocentrifugally driven flows from young 
stars and disks. I. A generalized model Astrophys. J. 
429 781-96 

Shu F H, Najita J, Shang H and Li Z-Y 2000 X-winds: 
theory and observations Protostars and Planets IV 
ed V Mannings, A P Boss and S Russell (Tuscon, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 789-813 

Shu F H, Shang H, Glassgold A E and Lee T 1997 X-rays 
and fluctuating X-winds from protostars Science 277 
1475 

Snell R L and Schloerb F P 1985 Structure and physical 
properties of the bipolar outflow in L1551 Astrophys. J. 
295 490-500 

Stanke T, McCaughrean M J and Zinnecker H 1998 First 
results of an unbiased H, survey for protostellar jets 
in Orion A Astron. Astrophys. 332 307-13 

Tafalla M, Mardones D, Myers P C, Caselli P, Bachiller R 
and Benson P J 1998 L1544: a starless dense core with 
extended inward motions Astrophys. J. 504 900-14 

Terebey S, Shu F H and Cassen P 1984 The collapse 
of the cores of slowly rotating isothermal clouds 
Astrophys. J. 286 529 

Vogel S N and Kuhi L V 1981 Rotational velocities of pre- 
main-sequence stars Astrophys. J. 245 960-76 

Walker M 1972 Studies of extremely young clusters: 
spectroscopic observations of the ultraviolet-excess 
stars in the Orion nebula cluster and NGC 2264 
Astrophys. J. 175 89-116 

Wilner D J, Ho P T P and Rodriguez L F 2000 7 millimeter 
imaging of HL Tauri at 5 AU resolution Astrophys. J. 
in preparation 

Zhou S, Evans N J II, Kompe C and Walmsley C M 1993 
Evidence for protostellar collapse in B335 Astrophys. J. 
404 232-46 

Zhou S, Evans N J II and Wang Y 1996 Small-scale 
structure of candidates for protostellar collapse. 
I. BIMA observations of L1527 and CB54 Astrophys. J. 
466 296-308 


Joan Najita 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Star Formation and Radio Emission 
from Normal Galaxies 


The radio continuum properties of normal DISK GALAXIES are 
shaped primarily by sTaR FORMATION. This article reviews 
the relationship between the radio continuum emission 
and the star formation process in normal spiRAL and 
IRREGULAR GALAXIES. The most common tracers of global star 
formation in external galaxies are optical emission lines 
and far-infrared (FIR) continuum emission. The former 
arises from photoionized gas while the latter is from 
dust grains heated by stellar photons. One component 
of radio continuum emission is thermal bremsstrahlung 
emitted by the same photoionized plasma that produces 
the optical emission lines. If that were the only source 
of radio emission one would expect a strong correlation 
between, say, Ha and the radio continuum. However, 
except for the highest frequencies the radio continuum 
emission is dominated by SYNCHROTRON RADIATION emitted 
by relativistic electrons gyrating in magnetic fields so that 
any correlation between thermal radio emission and Ha is 
easily obscured. Surprisingly, the strongest correlation is 
that between the FIR and the nonthermal radio continuum. 
The most likely explanation for the correlation is that star 
formation drives both forms of emission. Within this 
scenario lie two fundamental mysteries: (i) why is the 
FIR-radio correlation one of the strongest in astrophysics? 
(ii) what is the connection between star formation and 
the production of cosmic rays? This article focuses on 
the physical underpinnings of these problems. In the 
process, the relationship between star formation and radio 
emission is fully explored. 


Historical overview 
By the end of the 19th century it was well known that 
there existed a background level of highly penetrating 
radiation. The issue of whether this radiation emanated 
from the Earth or from space was a matter of considerable 
debate and was not settled until a daring experiment by 
the Austrian physicist Victor Hess in 1912. Hess piloted 
a balloon to a height of 5 km and recorded the radiation 
flux as a function of altitude. His measurements showed a 
steady increase in flux with altitude, proving their ‘cosmic’ 
origin. The term ‘cosmic Rays’ was born because at the time 
it was believed that cosmic rays were photons similar to 
y-rays but with greater penetrating power. Their particle 
nature was uncovered by Bothe and Kolhorster in 1929 
using coincidence techniques. By this time, however, the 
term ‘cosmic ray’ had stuck and remains in use today. 
Even after the recognition that cosmic rays were 
particles of an extraterrestrial origin, their distribution in 
space remained unknown. The cosmic rays appeared to 
arrive from all directions with equal likelihood. Their 
isotropic distribution shed little light on their origin 
indicating only that the cosmic ray particles are heavily 
scattered before reaching the Earth. Though rapio 
ASTRONOMY was born in 1935 through the work of Karl 
Jansky, no connection with cosmic rays was made until it 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


was realized, many years later, that Galactic radio emission 
is, in fact, synchrotron radiation emitted by cosmic ray 
electrons. 

In the 1940s Grote Reber mapped the distribution 
of radio emission and showed that it closely followed 
the Milky Way plane (e.g. Reber 1940). This led to the 
suggestion that the radio emission was associated with 
stars. This was probably the first step in connecting star 
formation to radio emission. However, it was quickly 
realized that the thermal emission of normal stars would 
fall well short of the observed level of radio emission. 
The radio emission was shown to have a nonthermal 
spectrum. A special class of ‘radio stars’ was therefore 
proposed. In 1950, Alfvén and Herlofson proposed 
that relativistic particles in the atmospheres of these 
radio stars produced radio emission via the synchrotron 
mechanism. Kiepenheuer (1950) generalized the idea to 
broadly distributed cosmic ray electrons and magnetic 
fields in the interstellar medium (ISM). As it turned out 
Kiepenheuer’s idea was correct (although it took another 
10 yr to be accepted) but Alfvén and Herlofson’s origin 
idea proved not to be viable. 

The connection between cosmic rays and Galactic 
radio emission was fully cemented in the review paper 
by Ginzburg and Syrovatskii in 1965. Thus, some 50 yr 
had passed since the discovery of cosmic rays and some 
30 yr since the advent of radio astronomy before the two 
were linked and it was realized that cosmic rays fill the 
Milky Way Galaxy. 

The connection between radio emission and star 
formation has not been an easy one to establish. Fritz 
Zwicky was the first to propose that SUPERNOVAE provide 
the needed link (Zwicky 1939). The currently favored view 
is close to Zwicky’s original insight. 

The most favored hypothesis of the origin of cosmic 
rays combines SUPERNOVA REMNANTS (SNRs) with the theory 
of diffusive shock acceleration (DSA) (e.g. Bell 1978; 
Axford 1981; Drury 1983; Blandford and Eichler 1987; 
Jones et al 1998). A supernova explosion is believed to 
typically release in excess of 10°! erg of energy much of 
which is carried by the subsequent SNR in the form of 
kinetic energy. The rapid expansion of the SNR causes the 
SNR to couple with the ISM through a supersonic shock. 
According to the DSA theory, particles can be accelerated 
at the shock front to cosmic ray energies. It is this coupling 
which allows the SNR to convert some of its kinetic energy 
into relativistic particles. 

It is now well established that all disk galaxies have 
relativistic cosmic ray gas as a major constituent and 
that this gas plays an important role in the chemical 
and kinematical evolution of individual galaxies. In our 
Galaxy, the relativistic gas contributes as much energy 
density as the interstellar magnetic field and the thermal 
gas (table 1). This equipartition of energies is probably a 
feature of most disk galaxies (e.g. Duric 1988). In table 1, 
the various phases of the ISM are shown (including the 
cosmic rays), along with recent estimates of their filling 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Components of the ISM. 


Phase f n(cm-3) kT (eV) nkT (eV cm-) 
Molecular clouds 10-3 +100 <10~2 - 

Cold neutral medium 0.025 ~1072 ~0.4 

Warm neutral medium ~0.5 ~0.5 ~1 ~0.5 

Warm ionized medium ~0.25 0.2 ~1 0.2 


Hot ionized medium = ~0.2 
Cosmic rays x1 


factor, f, the number density, n, the thermal energy per 
particle and the energy density. 

Although the relativistic gas contains a mix of 
nuclei, electrons and other more exotic particles, it is the 
electrons that produce all the observable synchrotron radio 
emission, the same emission seen by Jansky and Reber 
in the case of our Galaxy. This radiation mechanism 
dominates the radio continuum spectra of spiral and 
irregular galaxies for wavelengths longer than about 1 cm. 

Star formation plays a much broader role in shaping 
the integrated properties of galaxies. An appreciation of 
this broader picture is necessary in order to understand 
fundamentally important observations such as the radio— 
infrared correlation of galaxies and to define the tools 
needed to study the details of the relationship between 
star formation and radio emission of galaxies. 


The basic picture 


Itis now generally accepted (although not proven) that star 
formation drives the radio—FIR correlation and that it also 
accounts for a (somewhat weaker) correlation between Ha 
and radio emission. A schematic view of this scenario 
is presented in figure 1. The essential points are that 
(i) photons from the young massive stars photoionize 
surrounding gas which gives rise to emission line radiation 
and thermal bremsstrahlung, (ii) massive stars heat dust 
grains which in turn radiate in the FIR and (iii) the same 
stars quickly become supernovae, producing remnants 
that accelerate the cosmic ray electrons which in turn give 
rise to nonthermal radio emission. 

According to figure 1, of all the radiative processes 
shown, synchrotron emission is the most removed from 
the young stars (it is at the endpoint of the longest of the 
three arms in the schematic). In order for the FIR and 
radio emission to be tightly correlated, for example, it is 
necessary for the SNRs to play a direct and dominant role 
in converting stellar energy into relativistic particles. 

We now describe the radiative processes along each 
of the three arms shown in the schematic. We confine 
our discussion to the radiation mechanisms associated 
with recently formed stars as opposed to the processes 
that operate during pre-main-sequence evolution since it 
is the young massive stars that appear to drive the radio 
properties of galaxies. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


~3 x 107-3 ~102 ~0.3 
~10~? 


10° ~1 


f net 
Photon heatin; —— 
see ia ~~ 


[ STAR FORMATION | 
\ 


~— 


Evolution of 
High-Mass Stars 


Cs Siperovae & The >) 
<i _Remnants —_ 


Particle 
Acceleration 


C_ Cosmic Rays > 


Propagation and 
Energy Losses 


Synchrotron Radio. > 
CO Emission 


Figure 1. The currently favored scenario for explaining the 
connection between star formation and the radio emission. The 
relevant radiation mechanisms are noted. 


Photoionization 

Stromgren (1939) first proposed that hot, luminous stars 
should ionize the gas around them and form what we now 
call H I regions. The more luminous, massive stars evolve 
very quickly such that their evolutionary time scales can 
be shorter than the time scale of star formation for a given 
star forming region. The presence of such luminous stars 
and their associated HI REGIONS therefore marks regions of 
recent and ongoing star formation. The detection of H II 
regions is therefore synonymous with tracing star forming 
regions. 

For an H II region in ionization balance, the ionization 
rate is balanced by the recombination rate so that (Shu 
1991) 

N,=3x10-'n2v s} 


where N; is the ionization rate in photons per second, n, is 
the density of the ionized gas and V is the volume of the 
HII region. It is this relationship that establishes the size 
of an H II radius (via V) for a given ionizing rate. 


Free-free radiation. The ions and electrons in the ionized 
gas undergo Coulomb interactions which lead to thermal 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


bremsstrahlung or free—-free radiation (sometimes referred 
to as thermal radio emission). At radio frequencies, the 
free-free radiated power from an H II region is given by 
(Tucker 1975) 


—0.1 


v 
= oe IO nev, 
i "e’ 5 GHz 
for an assumed temperature of 10* K. Note the relatively 
flat spectrum compared with the steeper spectrum 
associated with synchrotron radiation. 

The relationship between the 6 cm radio power and 
the ionizing luminosity is given by combining the above 
equations, yielding 

0.1 


L# =24 x 10-N, erg 5"! Hz __. 
; x ergs Hz” Soap 


Emission line radiation. A similar relationship exists 
between the Balmer line fluxes and the ionization flux. In 
the case of the Ha line luminosity, 


Lua = 1.3 x 10°? N, ergs}. 


Imaging of galaxies in the light of Ha has become a 
common method for tracing global star formation in 
external galaxies. It should be noted that all kinds of 
emission lines are produced by H II regions. The most 
common types of lines are recombination lines (such as 
the Balmer series, including Ha) and collisionally excited 
lines from atoms having low-lying energy states. These are 
generally forbidden lines such as the 4995, 5007 A doublet 
of O ITI. However, in most instances, the Ha is the strongest 
and therefore easiest to detect. 

The properties of an H II region are determined 
by the nature of the embedded star and the density 
and composition of the surrounding medium. Table 2 
summarizes some basic properties of H II regions ionized 
by various stars. The first column indicates the spectral 
type of the main sequence star responsible for ionizing the 
HII region. The corresponding ionizing, free—free and Ha 
luminosities are shown in the other three columns. 


Table 2. Radiative properties of H II regions. 


Spectral type logN; L&(ergs-tHz7!)? Lua(ergs~!) 
O5 50.0 2.4 x 1074 1.3 x 10°8 
BO 48.7 1.2 x 1073 6.5 x 10% 
AO 42.7 1.2 x 10!” 6.5 x 10% 


4 Evaluated at 5 GHz. 


Ha and free-free emissions can both be used to 
trace star forming regions in galaxies. The former 
has the advantage that it can be readily detected with 
great efficiency to very faint levels. However, unlike 
the radio emission the Ha emission is attenuated by 
dust. The thermal free-free radio emission therefore 
represents a more direct measurement of the ionizing flux. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The drawback to the radio method is that the emission is 
quite weak, thereby limiting the number of H II regions 
that can be detected relative to the Ha method. For 
example, an H II region from a BO star would have a 
flux density of only about 0.1 mJy, barely detectable at 
the 30 level with the VLA. Ha emission, on the other 
hand, can be detected much more easily from the same 
H II region. The use of Ha to study star formation is 
therefore quite common. Studies of free-free emission are 
now possible but only for the nearest galaxies, using the 
VLA (e.g. Devereux et al 1997). However, neither approach 
is completely satisfactory. 


FIR emission 

The dust grains that fill the disks of normal galaxies are 
heated primarily by stellar photons. A good fraction 
of these photons are nonionizing photons and leaked 
ionizing photons from recently formed stars. The exact 
fraction that can be attributed to young, massive stars is 
the subject of considerable debate. However, it is generally 
agreed that star formation generates a significant enough 
portion of the dust heating that the resulting FIR emission 
can be used as an indicator of global star formation. 

The stellar radiation heats dust grains to temperatures 
of 15-30 K. At these temperatures the dust re-radiates 
emission in the FIR, mainly between about 25 and 200 ym. 
The dust acts as a bolometer, accurately measuring the 
energy it absorbs. 

The FIR luminosity between 40 and 1000 xm can be 
estimated from measurements at the standard IRAS bands 
of 60 and 100 um using the formula 


Seo — Stoo d \ 
Lrr = 6. 10° {| 2.58— + —— —]L 
erase o( a ey dams) ' 


which typically represents over 80% of the bolometric IR 
flux (2-1000 zm). A major advantage of FIR emission over 
He in tracing star formation is its relative immunity to 
extinction and that it measures much of the bolometric 
luminosity emanating from the star forming regions. 
A major drawback is the limited sensitivity to surface 
brightness and relatively poor angular resolution offered 
by FIR instruments. However, this field promises to 
leap forward with the launching of SIRTF, a new high- 
resolution, high-sensitivity IR telescope. 


Synchrotron emission 

According to the model shown in figure 1, SNRs accelerate 
electrons to relativistic energies. A single relativistic 
electron emits radiation whose intensity and spectral 
properties are determined by the kinetic energy of the 
electron and the strength of the magnetic field in which 
it is gyrating. The shape of the spectrum, J(v, E), is given 
by 


J(v, E)dv = 


3 fore) 
v3e B sin 6 — dv / Ks3(n)dn (1) 


me? Ve /Ve 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where v is the frequency of the emitted radiation, E is 
the kinetic energy of the electron, B is the strength of the 
magnetic field, 6 is the angle between the instantaneous 
velocity vector of the electron and the magnetic field, m 
is the mass of the electron and Ks,3 is a modified Bessel 
function. The quantity v, is commonly referred to as the 
critical frequency and is given by 


Bsind 


E 
(2) 


om 4amc 
where the dependence on the electron energy, E, is now 
explicit. The critical frequency is closely related to the 
frequency of the peak of the spectrum, Vmax, such that 
Vmax = 0.3v,. In typical interstellar magnetic fields, 
relativistic electrons radiate in the radiofrequency portion 
of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

Integration of equation (1) over all frequencies (e.g. 
Shu 1991) yields the total power radiated by a highly 
relativistic electron, 


1 EB : 


P) = —-——cor7B 
a 6x m2ct | 


(3) 
where (P) indicates a statistical average expected from 
an isotropic distribution of 6 and oy = 87e*/3m?c* is the 
Thomson cross section. 

It is interesting to note the mass dependence in 
equations (2) and (3). The critical frequency and the 
radiated power are both very strong functions of the 
mass. It is easy to see that only electrons contribute 
significantly to the synchrotron emission in a typical 
galactic environment. Ions are simply too heavy to 
contribute significantly to the radio emission of a galaxy. 

The synchrotron radiation we see from a galaxy arises 
from an ensemble of electrons following some energy 
distribution n(E). With equation (3) we can define a 
volume emissivity 


piv = / (P,(E))n(E) dE. (4) 


me? 


Direct observations of cosmic rays near the Earth suggest 
that 
N(E) dE = NoE~? dE (5) 


with p © 2.5. Now substituting equations (3) and (5) into 
equation (4) and integrating over frequency and volume 
(assumed homogeneous) yields (Pacholezyck 1970) the 
luminosity of an ensemble of electrons: 


Ly =i Pjv dV x NoBO MA OYA, 
Vv 


where No is the number of cosmic ray electrons in the 
source volume. It is clear from the above that the spectrum 
is a power-law spectrum with an index 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


so that 
Ly « NoBMv~*, 


Observations of normal galaxies indicate that a is 
universally around 0.75. These numbers indicate that the 
electrons follow an energy distribution that is also a power 
law, consistent with the observed energy distribution of 
cosmic rays near the Earth. The universality of the electron 
energy distribution among normal galaxies suggests that 
cosmic rays may be accelerated by a common mechanism. 
In other words, whatever is found to work for one disk 
galaxy may apply to all galaxies, including our own. 

It is interesting to note that nothing in the above 
equations directly relates to the young stellar content of 
a galaxy. 


The link between star formation and radio 
emission 

It is clear, from the above discussion, that the FIR, emission 
line radiation and free—free emission can be used to directly 
trace the recently formed stars in galaxies. Similarly, 
nonthermal radio emission (synchrotron radiation) can 
be used to trace the cosmic ray electrons. Consequently, 
the link between star formation and the production of 
cosmic rays (the bottom arm in figure 1) is best studied by 
comparing FIR, emission line and radio data of galaxies. 

Figure 2 shows a 60 xm and a 6 cm image of M33 
smoothed to the same resolution. Note that the radio—FIR 
correlation appears to hold even inside galaxies. It is clear 
that some form of a relationship must exist between star 
formation, traced by the FIR emission, and the relativistic 
electrons, traced by the radio emission. 

As noted above, the link between star formation and 
radio emission is more complicated than that for the other 
radiation mechanisms. The chain of events starting with 
star formation and ending with synchrotron emission is 
much longer than that required to explain FIR, emission 
line and free—free emission. The critical link in this chain 
is the role of the SNRs. 

If the SNRs are to be the primary source of cosmic 
rays they must provide sufficient energy to maintain the 
cosmic ray population of a galaxy. Thus, there must be a 
sufficient number of supernovae to be able to continuously 
replenish the cosmic rays over the duty cycle of the 
medium. Consider, for example, a cosmic ray medium of 
a disk galaxy that has an energy (kinetic energy of all the 
relativistic particles) of 10° erg and which escapes from the 
disk over a period of 10” yr. The energy needed to maintain 
the relativistic medium is 108 erg yr~'. This requires the 
energy of 10* SN over the duty cycle of the relativistic 
medium or 1 SN per 10° yr. However, it is unlikely that 
an SN converts all of its energy into relativistic particles. 
The conversion efficiencies are not known. A conversion 
efficiency of 1%, for example, would require an SN rate 
of 1 every 10 yr. Thus, the ability of SNRs to maintain the 
cosmic ray population depends on the efficiency of cosmic 
ray production. 

Once free of the SNR the newly accelerated electrons 
and ions diffuse through the ISM, establishing a general 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Left: a 60 wm image of M33. Right: a 6 cm image of M33. The left image traces emission from dust heated by young stars. 
The right image traces relativistic electrons emitting synchrotron radiation. The well-known radio-FIR correlation of galaxies appears 
to extend to spatially resolved regions of galaxies, thereby strongly strengthening the argument that star formation plays a key role in 
shaping the radio emission of galaxies. Except for the radio source to the right, the condensations and spirality of the galaxy show 


similarly in both pictures. 


disk distribution of cosmic rays. This relativistic gas forms 
what is essentially a phase of the ISM. The relativistic 
phase of the ISM can remain ina steady state configuration 
because a balance between cosmic ray production and 
cosmic ray losses (via energy losses and escape) is 
established when the production and loss rates are equal. 
Such a balance is exacted when the supernova rate is 
constant over time scales long compared with the loss time 
scale. 


The maintenance of the cosmic ray gas is accom- 
plished via a continuous injection by a continuously evolv- 
ing population of SNRs. Consider a simple model in which 
SNRs are the sole injectors of relativistic particles in the 
disk of a galaxy. Particles are injected on the time scale of 
the SNR lifetime, t,,,. Estimates of such a time scale range 
from 104 to 5 x 104 yr (Smith 1991; Woltjer 1972; Gordon 
et al 1998). We adopt a value of 2 x 10° yr in this analy- 
sis (corresponding to the oldest SNRs in the Sedov—Taylor 
phase in the M33 sample; see Smith 1991; Gordon et al 
1998). The other important time scale is that over which 
the relativistic medium would dissipate in the absence of 
new particles. In cosmic ray terms this is the residence 
time, t,, of the relativistic particles in the disk of a galaxy 
and is governed by a combination of escape and energy 
losses. 

The average rate, Us, at which the SNR population 
produces energy in the form of relativistic particles can be 
expressed as 


. U. 
Us = ¥ 


(6) 


Tsnr 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The relativistic particles escape from the disk at a rate of 


Up 


Tr 


Up = (7) 


Consider now a steady state scenario in which the energy 
content of the cosmic rays is independent of time over the 


time scale, t,. Then, U; = —Up and, from equations (6) 
and (7), 
Us _ Up > Us _ Tone (8) 
Tsnr Tr Up Tr 


The prediction is that Us / Up should roughly equal tsnr/tr, 
a quantity which for our galaxy is ~ 0.003. Measurements 
of Uy and Up can test whether SNRs can do the job. 

In the above scenario, the SNRs provide the link 
between star formation and radio continuum emission. 
Since only the highest-mass stars end up as supernovae 
and since the highest-mass stars evolve the most rapidly 
there is a very tight link between the presence of star 
formation and the production of cosmic rays. In fact, 
cosmic rays can be established on time scales small 
compared with the duration of the star forming episode 
of a galaxy. Thus, to first order, any changes in the radio 
continuum emission of a galaxy can be correlated with 
changes in the star formation rate (Deeg et al 1977). It is 
for this reason that radio continuum emission has been 
used as a tracer of star formation in galaxies (e.g. Condon 
1992). Although the above theoretical considerations are 
compelling, supporting empirical evidence is relatively 
limited. 

Studies of relativistic gas in disk galaxies have taken 
three basic approaches. The first utilizes integrated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


60 14 


DECLINATION (J2000) 


08 -— 


©) 


04 | | | | 


20 35 30 15 00 


34 45 30 15 


RIGHT ASCENSION (J2000) 


Figure 3. A 20 cm radio continuum image of NGC 6946. The resolution is roughly 60”. The open circles show the location of SNRs 
which are emitting detectable synchrotron radiation. These are the SNRs that are also producing cosmic ray electrons. The crosses 
mark the positions of an optically selected sample of SNRs which, for the most part, have no detectable radio emission and are 
therefore producing cosmic ray electrons in significantly lesser amounts. The correlation of the radio-emitting SNRs with the 
synchrotron arms of NGC 6946 suggests that these SNRs have high-mass stellar precursors and that they play a role in establishing the 
relativistic medium of that galaxy. The anti-correlation of the radio-quiet SNRs with the arms suggests that many of these SNRs not 
only are poorer sources of cosmic ray electrons but may well have an origin associated with the older, lower-mass stars. These 
observations are consistent with the scenario in which only those SNRs with high-mass stellar precursors play a leading role in 


shaping the radio continuum emission of galaxies. 


properties of galaxies and is essentially a statistical 
study of samples of galaxies. The radio—FIR correlation 
(Wunderlich et al 1987) is a good example of this approach. 
This remarkably tight correlation between an indicator of 
star formation (top left arm in figure 1) and an indicator 
of cosmic ray electrons (bottom arm in figure 1) argues 
strongly for a physical relationship between star formation 
and cosmic ray production (Harwit and Pacini 1975). The 
scenario that has evolved from this argument is that SNRs 
produced by type II supernovae (resulting from recently 
formed high-mass stars) explosions produce relativistic 
particles through their interactions with the interstellar 
medium (Volk 1989; Condon et al 1991; Helou and Bicay 
1993; Xu et al 1994). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The second approach entails analyzing and compar- 
ing light profiles in individual galaxies. Comparisons be- 
tween optical light distributions at various wavelengths 
and high-resolution radio continuum images have been 
used to correlate STELLAR POPULATIONS with the relativistic 
gas (e.g. Duric et al 1996; Condon 1992). Recent results 
suggest that Ha and radio continuum distributions corre- 
late the best (e.g. Duric et al 1996). Thus, there is an implied 
relationship between the very young stars (as represented 
by the Ha emission—top right arm in figure 1) and the 
relativistic gas (represented by the synchrotron emitting 
electrons—bottom arm in figure 1). 

The two different approaches have yielded similar 
results in that they have established a plausible relation- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ship between star formation and the relativistic gas in disk 
galaxies. There is little doubt that this relationship is real. 
However, the physical chain of events that leads to the 
production of the relativistic medium can only be inferred 
from these studies; it cannot be directly demonstrated. In 
particular, the connection between SNRs and the produc- 
tion of relativistic particles needs to be more directly ex- 
amined. This latter consideration forms the basis of a third 
approach, first applied to M33 (Duric ef al 1995). In this 
approach, Uy, Up and t, are determined empirically for 
a given galaxy, thereby enabling a direct test of the hy- 
pothesis that SNRs produce the bulk of the cosmic rays in 
normal galaxies. 

In the prototype study of M33 the above approach was 
used to ascertain whether the population of SNRs resident 
in M33 could account for the cosmic ray electrons present 
in the disk of M33. It was found that the collective cosmic 
ray content of the SNRs is approximately 10°* erg whereas 
the entire disk contains about 10™ erg worth of cosmic rays. 
In other words, only about 1% of the cosmic rays actually 
reside within SNRs at any given time. This makes sense 
because the lifetime of a cosmic ray electron is much longer 
than the lifetime of an SNR. As indicated by equation (8), 
the ratio of energies should equal the ratio of lifetimes in a 
steady state configuration. Consequently, the figure of 1% 
is roughly what is needed to make SNRs the source of most 
cosmic rays in the disk of M33. The results of this study 
support the hypothesis that SNRs produce the bulk of the 
cosmic rays in galaxies, thereby supporting the chain of 
events that make up the bottom arm in figure 1. 

An ongoing study presents an alternative approach 
in which the distributions of cosmic ray-producing SNRs 
are compared with large-scale synchrotron features in a 
galaxy. In figure 1, the bottom arm contains a link between 
the SNRs and the large-scale distribution of cosmic rays. 
Until now few data existed to support the view that the 
cosmic rays propagate from the SNRs (where they are 
formed) into the extended relativistic medium where they 
emit most of their radiation. Astudy of NGC 6946 by Lacey 
(1998) has helped fill in this gap. Her results suggest that 
active SNRs are spatially correlated with synchrotron arms 
of the galaxy NGC 6946. 

Figure 3 shows a 6 cm radio continuum image of 
NGC 6946 (courtesy of Tom Pannuti, University of New 
Mexico, and Rainer Beck, Max Planck Institute for Radio 
Astronomy) made from combined Effelsberg 100 m single 
dish data and D-array VLA data. Plotted are the radio- 
emitting (and therefore cosmic ray producing) SNRs as 
circles. It is evident that the SNRs are located along ridge 
lines of extended radio continuum emission indicating 
a possible relationship between the SNR population 
and the large-scale distributions of cosmic ray electrons. 
Interestingly, those SNRs that are not radio sources (and 
therefore do not appear to be producing measurable 
quantities of cosmic rays) are not correlated with any 
large-scale enhancements of synchrotron emission. These 
may well be SNRs evolving from type supernovae whose 
progenitors are the older population II stars. These stars 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


tend to be found in regions of the galaxy containing lower 
densities of gas compared with the population I stars. 
Consequently, the resulting SNRs interact with a less dense 
medium and produce fewer cosmic rays. These results 
support the standard picture in which only the SNRs with 
the massive stellar precursors contribute to the production 
of cosmic rays. 

Examination of the empirical evidence in its totality 
points to a consistent picture in which SNRs play a 
central role in producing and maintaining the CR gas in 
normal galaxies. It therefore appears that SNRs of type II 
supernovae are the most likely link between star formation 
and the radio continuum emission of normal galaxies. Ina 
broader context, star formation via the action of the SNRs 
explains not only the radio continuum emission of galaxies 
but also the radio—FIR correlation and the Ha correlation 
of galaxies. 


Bibliography 

Alfvén H and Herlofson N 1950 Phys. Rev. 78 616 

Anderson M C and Rudnick L 1993 Astrophys. J. 408 514 

Axford W I 1981 Proc. 20th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf. vol 12, 
p 155 

Bell A R 1978 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 182 147 

Blandford R D and Eichler D 1987 Phys. Rep. 154 1 

Bothe W and Kolherster W 1929 Z. Phys. 56 751 

Condon J J 1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30 575 

Condon J J, Anderson M Land Helou G 1991 Astrophys. J. 
37695 

Deeg H-J, Duric N and Brinks E 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 323 
323 

Devereux N, Duric N and Scowen P 1997 Astron. J. 113 236 

Duric N 1988 Space Sci. Rev. 48 73 

Duric N, Glenn J, Grashuis R, Kunkle J and Collins A 1996 
Astrophys. J. 470 814 

Duric N, Gordon S M, Goss W M, Viallefond F and Lacey 
C 1995 Astrophys. J. 445 173 

Drury L O’C 1983 Rep. Prog. Phys. 46 973 

Ginzburg V L and Syrovatskii S I 1965 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 3 297 

Gordon S et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 117 89 

Gordon S M, Duric N, Kirshner R P, Goss W M and 
Viallefond F 1999 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 120 247 

Harwit M and Pacini F 1975 Astrophys. J. Lett. 200 L127 

Helou G and Bicay M D 1993 Astrophys. J. 415 93 

Hess V 1912 Phys. Z. 13 1084 

Jansky K H 1935 Proc. IRE 23 1158 

Jones T W et al 1998 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 110 125 

Kipenheuer K O 1950 Phys. Rev. 79 738 

Lacey C K 1998 PhD Thesis University of New Mexico 

Pacholezyk AG 1970 Radio Astrophysics (San Francisco, CA: 
Freeman) 

Reber G 1940 Astrophys. J. 91 621 

Shu FH 1991 Radiation (Mill Valley, CA: University Science 
Books) 

Smith R C 1991 PhD Thesis Harvard University 

Stromgren B 1939 Astrophys. J. 89 526 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star Formation and Radio Emission from Normal 
Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tucker W H 1975 Radiation Processes in Astrophysics 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press) 

Volk HJ 1989 Astron. Astrophys. 218 67 

Woltjer L 1972 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 10 129 

Wunderlich E, Klein U and Wielebinski R 1987 Astron. 
Astrophys. Suppl. 69 487 

Xu C, Lisenfeld U and Volk HJ 1994 Astron. Astrophys. 282 
19 

Zwicky F 1939 Phys. Rev. 55 986 


Neb Duric 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Star of Bethlehem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Star of Bethlehem 


The biblical Star of Bethlehem, which heralded the birth 
of Jesus Christ, is only mentioned in the Gospel of St 
Matthew 2. The astrologically significant 7 BC triple 
conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in the constellation 
of Pisces is the most likely candidate, although a 
COMET/ NOVA in 5 BC and a comet in 4 BC cannot be ruled 
out. There is also the possibility that the star was simply 
fictitious. 


Introduction 

The Jesus biblical nativity story was added, somewhat 
belatedly, as a prelude to only two gospels. Luke has a 
peculiar census/taxation system, a journey from 
Nazareth, an over-booked inn, a manger, a visitation of 
shepherds in the fields on the birth night, circumcision, 
purification and a journey home. Matthew has a family 
living in Bethlehem, a star, Herod, magi, gifts, the mas- 
sacre of the innocents, a flight into Egypt and a relocation 
to Nazareth in the first year of the reign of Archelaus. 

There is no star in Luke, and in Matthew 2 the word 
‘star’ is used only four times. The stellar facts are as fol- 
lows. 

(1) As Jesus was born in the last four or so years of 
the reign of Herod the Great (Matthew 2:1), the star 
occurred sometime between 8 BC and Herod’s death 
around Easter 4 BC. (A few, however, put Herod’s death 
as late as January 1 BC.) This time interval considers both 
the Lukean census (the Roman Monumentum Ancyranum 
of Caesar Augustus dates this as 746/747 ab urbe condita, 
i.e. 8/7 BC) and the massacre of the innocents (two years 
old and under, Matthew 2:16) and the two years in which 
the Holy Family were in Egypt, sheltering from the 
wrath of Herod the Great. In dating the star we must 
ignore the hijacking (around AD 336) by early Christians 
of the pagan winter solstitial feast of dies solis invicti 
natalis for the celebration of the birthday of Christ. Also 
Dionysius Exiguus was considerably in error, in AD 525, 
when he based his new calendrical year numbering on 
the calculation that Jesus was born on 25 December, 1 BC 
and was about one week old on 1 January, AD 1. Jesus 
was six months younger than John the Baptist (Luke 
1:36). Early Christian and Muslim tradition suggests that 
Jesus was born in the autumn and on the day after the 
Jewish Sabbath. It is most unlikely that the shepherds 
would be ‘in the field, keeping watch over their flock by 
night’ (Luke 2:8) in an Israeli December. Modern 
Christmas celebrations owe much to ancient pagan mid- 
winter Sun-worshipping customs. 

(2) The magi were most probably learned 
Babylonian Zoroastrian priests and astrologers, and cer- 
tainly not ‘kings’, their later beatification and royalty 
being mainly due to Psalms 68:29, 72:10, Isaiah 49:7 and 
60:3, 60:10. They first saw the star heliacally ‘in the east’, 
‘en te anatole’, in the pre-dawn sky (Matthew 2:2). 

(3) Two thousand years ago the word ‘star’ was a 
generic term for any astronomical object. Planets were 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wandering stars, nOvae were new stars, comets were 
hairy stars and meteors were shooting stars. All could 
have been the ‘star’ of Bethlehem. 

(4) The magi talked of ‘his’ star (Matthew 2:2). It 
clearly had an astrological association with the birth of a 
new ‘King of the Jews’ (not the expected Messiah). They 
then traveled to Jerusalem (not Bethlehem), as ambassa- 
dors, to pay homage to this king and to present gifts. 
Visits by Magi were commonplace in those days. The 
association of stars with kings and new rulers was not 
unusual at the time (see Numbers 24:17). 

(5) Herod and all Jerusalem had not noticed the star 
(Matthew 2:3) and had not witnessed its first appearance 
(Matthew 2:7). This indicates that the star was insignifi- 
cant. Gross exaggerations as to its brightness were intro- 
duced later on by St James (Protoevangelium, 7, written 
about AD 150), Ignatius (Epistle to the Ephesians, XIX) and 
Origen (Contra Celsum, 1:58). Terms such as ‘indescribably 
great’, ‘its light was unspeakable’ and ‘new’ must be con- 
trasted with the adjectivaly unadorned Matthean star. 

(6) The star appeared twice. It was first seen at dawn 
from the magi’s home town (Matthew 2:2). Its second 
appearance, probably in the evening southern sky, was 
after they had met Herod in Jerusalem, and were on the 
short 10 km southward journey to Bethlehem (Matthew 
2:9). Their exceeding great joy on witnessing the second 
appearance indicates that this had been predicted, and 
they were pleased with the confirmation. 

(7) The star ‘went before them, until it came and 
stood over where the young child was’ (Matthew 2:9). 
This is an astronomical stumbling block. Stars do not ‘go 
before’. Comets have, however, been noted by contem- 
porary historians such as Dio Cassius (Roman History, 
54:29) and Josephus (Jewish War, 6:5:3) to ‘stand over’ 
individual cities. Artists also have often used comets as 
Stars of Bethlehem in their nativity scenes, the AD 1303 
fresco in the Arena Chapel in Padua by Giotto being a 
famous example. 

(8) The star’s circumstances were uncommon. 
Regular astronomical events such as the stunning 
evening and morning appearances of Venus, and the 
zodiacal light, annual meteor showers, occasional 
fireballs and lunar occultations of Jupiter are surely so 
unremarkable that they would not regularly encourage 
magi to buy gifts and to travel long distances. 


Astronomical possibilities 

The facts and time frames must now be related to con- 
temporary astronomical events. Fortunately Chinese 
observational astronomy was flourishing, and careful 
records were kept of unusual occurrences such as 
comets, novae, sunspots and shooting stars, for astrolog- 
ical purposes. Babylonian planetary astrology was also 
active but unfortunately only a few of the relevant clay 
tablets have been found. Ho (1962) recorded contempo- 
rary Far Eastern diary records. His object number 61 was 
Comet Halley. This was seen in 12 BC, as a po-hsing (a 
comet without a tail), but was too early. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Star of Bethlehem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


For 70 days between 9 March and 6 April 5 BC a sui- 
hsing (a comet with a tail) was recorded in Capricornus 
near the asterism Chhien-niu (RA 20.25 h, dec 15°). As no 
details are given as to the motion of this object, Clark et 
al (1977) take it to be a nova. The long duration is taken 
to indicate that it was bright. 

A comet (po-hsing) was seen in April 4 BC near Ho- 
Ku in Aquila (RA 19.6 h, dec +8°). Duration details are 
not given so this comet was probably faint and short- 
lived. 

Ho’s object number 65, a comet seen in December 
AD 13, is far too late. 

The Star of Bethlehem might have been a planetary 
conjunction. Here the Earth-based observer sees two or 
more PLANETS nearly along the same line of sight, this 
producing an impressive grouping on the celestial 
sphere. There was a significant triple conjunction of 
Jupiter and Saturn in 7 BC in Pisces. These planets have 
orbital periods of 11.9 and 29.5 yr respectively and thus 
pass each other in the sky every 19.9 yr. Every 120 yr or 
so, the Sun is also close to the Earth—Jupiter-Saturn line 
giving three conjunctions in about six months. Every 
796.4 yr these triple conjunctions take place in Pisces, the 
last being in April 1573. In February 6 BC Mars joined 
Jupiter and Saturn forming a ‘massing’ only 8° across. 

One advantage of a planetary conjunction ‘star’ is 
that the astronomical and astrologically uninterested 
would most likely not know it was happening, and, with 
the exception of point (7), it fits the facts. A planetary con- 
junction would have a clear message to astrological magi. 
It would tell them where to go, when to go and what to 
expect when they got there. Kennedy and Pingree (1971) 
noted how an 8th century AD astrological world history 
by Masha’allah, based on earlier Babylonian and Iranian 
ideas, stressed the role of Jupiter-Saturn ‘great’ conjunc- 
tions as heralds of important religious and _ political 
events. The Noachian deluge and the births of Jesus and 
Mohammed were mentioned particularly. In AD 1497 
Don Isaac Abrabnel stressed that the constellation Pisces 
was specifically associated with Israel in Magian astrolo- 
gy. Saturn was regarded as the old ruler (and father), with 
Jupiter as the new king, and son. Both interpretations are 
unfortunately post facto. Predictions of the 7 BC triple con- 
junction have also been found on Babylonian clay tablets 
(see Sachs and Walker 1984). 

A Jupiter-Saturn—Mars massing was observed in 
1604 by Johannes Kepler. The contemporary appearance 
of the supernova of 1604 convinced Kepler that the latter 
was the Star of Bethlehem. 

Other conjunctions have been suggested. Sinott 
(1968) and Mosley (1987) concentrated on the rather late 
June 2 BC close conjunction of Jupiter and Venus near 
Regulus in Leo. Much is made of the Judea-Lion associ- 
ation and of the possibility that Herod might have lived 
until just after the total lunar eclipse of 10 January 1 BC 
as opposed to the partial lunar eclipse of 13 March 4 BC. 

Molnar (1999) reinterprets the astrological evidence. 
He is convinced that the constellation associated with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Israel was not Pisces but the adjacent sign Aries. This is 
not only favoured by the Egyptian—Greek astronomer- 
astrologer Ptolemy, in his Tetrabiblos, but is also 
supported by Syrian coinage which shows a leaping Ram 
peering over its shoulders at a star. A diligent search is 
then made of the astronomical records for events that 
take place in Aries. Molnar also assumed that the Magi 
are Hellenistic astrologers, and comparisons are made 
with the natal horoscopes of other ‘kings’ such as the 
Emperor Hadrian and Antiochus I of Commagene. 
Jupiter and the Moon have important roles to play in 
these regal horoscopes, and there were two lunar occul- 
tations of Jupiter, in Aries, in 6 BC, one on 20 March, and 
the other on 17 April. As the first was ‘weakened’ by the 
nearness of the Sun in the sky Molnar chooses the second 
and suggests that Jesus was born on 17 April in 6 BC. 

Unfortunately this thesis has certain problems. Both 
events were invisible. The 20 March occultation of Jupiter 
by the Moon occurred just before sunrise, and the 17 
April occultation occurred at local noon. So the fact that 
Matthew stresses that the ‘star’ was ‘seen’ twice is 
ignored. Molnar surmises that astrologers only needed to 
calculate that something happened for it to be significant. 
However, even though Babylonian astronomers could 
easily predict planetary conjunctions and massings, the 
fact that the Moon is only 0.5° across, and lunar theory is 
extremely complicated, means that predicting occulta- 
tions was way beyond them. We have to wait for the 17th 
century and a genius like Edmond Halley before lunar 
occultations could be predicted with any accuracy. Also, 
lunar occultations of Jupiter are most probably just too 
common to be the Star of Bethlehem. Jupiter is in Aries 
for 1 yr in every 12, and the Moon, in that year, moves 
through Aires 12 times. 

Let us now consider the nova/ comet in Capricorn, 
seen during March and April 5 BC, and the tail-less 
comet, or nova, seen in Aquila in April 4 BC. The former 
is favoured by Humphreys (1993) and by Clark et al 
(1997). Comets (which in those times were regarded as 
meteorological phenomena) have the advantage of 
‘standing over’ specific places for short times. However, 
astrologically, comets are regarded as rather broad-brush 
indicators of doom, diseases, disaster and the death of 
kings. Needless to say, the death of one king could be 
good news for his successor. The snag with comets and 
novae is that they are completely unexpected. The astrol- 
ogy of comets is associated with the constellation that 
they appear in and the form and direction of their tails. 
Neither Capricornus nor Aquila has anything to do with 
Judea. Novae and comets brighten and then decay. They 
are not seen twice, as the Star of Bethlehem was. Comets 
are usually only seen after they have passed the Sun. It is 
an unusual comet that is seen both on its way in to the 
Sun and again on its way out. In this unusual case, we 
have had to wait for Isaac Newton, in the 1680s, to show 
that the same object was being seen on both occasions. 

So the ‘exceedingly great joy’ of the magi, a joy 
that is often taken to indicate that one of their celestial 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Star of Bethlehem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


predictions had come true, and the same object had been 
seen twice, does not apply to comets or novae. Also, the 
5 BC comet, that is seen for 70 days, will be bright at max- 
imum, and it is then difficult to explain why Herod had 
not seen it and was taken by surprise by the Magi’s visit. 

Let us return to the triple conjunction of 7 BC. Both 
Jupiter and Saturn were in opposition in Pisces and were 
moving around their retrograde loops. During late 8 BC 
and early 7 BC the planets approached each other at 
about 3.5° per month. On 27 May 7 BC they were only 1° 
apart (twice the lunar diameter). They then separated 
slightly, and by 27 July were 2.9° apart. Coming together 
again they were 1° apart on 6 October, 1.2° apart on 1 
November and 1.05° apart on 1 December. During 6 BC 
they moved away from each other, as quickly as they 
had come together in early 7 BC. A 1° separation is not 
startling. This sight could easily be ignored by the astro- 
logically uninterested. The close conjunctions in May 
and October-November provide an ideal ‘two stars’. The 
six months between these two events also gives ample 
time for the Magi’s preparation and travel. Proponents of 
this theory (for example Hughes 1976, 1979) regard 
Jupiter as the Star of Bethlehem. The date of the birth of 
Jesus is still uncertain but the astrologically minded Magi 
would have possibly associated it with the acronychal 
rising of the two planets, ie. Tuesday 15 September 7 BC. 
The magi would have predicted this. There was no rush. 
They did not have to pay homage to the new King of the 
Jews on his actual day of birth; any time when he was a 
young child would do. Unfortunately, like most astro- 
nomical interpretations, the ‘going before’ and ‘standing 
over’ is still a problem. 


Conclusion 

The astrological interpretation of the Star of Bethlehem 
has one great snag. It gives a degree of credence and 
verisimilitude to a subject that is a quagmire of subjec- 
tive, unscientific partiality. This interpretation has the 
star as a tangible physical phenomenon. 

There are two other possibilities. One abrogates the 
scientific interpreter of all responsibility and regards the 
whole phenomena as miraculous. The passage of one age 
and the dawn of the next is thus heralded by a miracu- 
lous occurrence, and as such the star is inexplicable. 

A more appealing proposal is that the star is an 
example of midrash. Thus it is nothing more than a ficti- 
tious invention giving fulfilment to the Old Testament 
prophecy of Balaam in Numbers 24:17 (‘there shall come 
a star out of Jacob’). The Star of Bethlehem would then 
join a host of other fascinating historic stars and comets 
that were thought to foretell the birth and death of 
heroes, kings and emperors. Matthew would have used 
it to add credence to the messianic nature of Jesus and to 
encourage more of his Jewish audience to convert to 
Christianity. 

However, if it was an invention, why did Matthew 
omit one of his favourite phrases, ‘that it should be ful- 
filled’, and why did he invent such an ordinary star, or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


one that had such similarities to an actual celestial occur- 
rence? To me the Gospel of St Matthew rings true. Its 
message is unembellished. I believe that the Star of 
Bethlehem actually existed, and that astronomical histo- 
rians will enjoy searching for it for many years to come. 


Bibliography 

Brown, R E 1977 The Birth of the Messiah: A Commentary on 
the Infancy Narratives in Matthew and Luke (London: 
Geoffrey Chapman) 

Clark, D H, Parkinson, J H and Stephenson, F R 1977 An 
astronomical re-appraisal of the star of Bethlehem 
—anovain5 BC, Q. J. R. Astron. Soc. 18 443-9 

Edwards, O 1986 The time of Christ: a Chronology of the 
Incarnation (Edinburgh: Floris) 

Ferrari D’Occhieppo, K 1977 Der Stern der Weisen 
Geschichte oder Legende (Vienna: Herold) 

Ho P-Y 1962 Ancient and mediaeval observations of 
comets and novae in Chinese sources Vistas Astron. 
5 127-225 

Hughes, D W 1976 The Star of Bethlehem Nature 264 
513-7; 268, 565-7 

Hughes, D W 1979 The Star of Bethlehem: an Astronomers 
Confirmation (New York: Walker) 

Humphreys, C 1993 The Star of Bethlehem Sci. Christ. 
Belief 5 83-101 

Kennedy, ES and Pingree, D 1971 The Astrological History 
of Masha’allah (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press) 

Kidger, M 1999 The Star of Bethlehem: an Astronomer’s View 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Maunder, E W 1908 The Astronomy of the Bible (London: 
Sealey Clark) 

Molnar, M R 1999 The Star of Bethlehem: the Legacy of the 
Magi (Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press) 

Mosley, J 1987 The Christmas Star (Los Angeles, CA: 
Griffith Observatory) 

Sachs, A J and Walker, C B F 1984 Kepler’s view of the 
Star of Bethlehem, and the Babylonian Almanac for 
7/6 BC Iraq 46 43-55 

Sinnott, R 1968 Thoughts on the Star of Bethlehem Sky 
Telescope 36 384-6 

Teres, G 2000 The Bible and Astronomy: The Magi and the 
star in the Gospel (Budapest: Springer Orvosi Kiad 
Kft) 

Scarola, J V 1991 A Chronographic Analysis of the Nativity 
(New York: Vantage) 


David W Hughes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Starburst Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Starburst Galaxies 


A starburst galaxy is one undergoing a brief episode 
of intense STAR FORMATION, usually in its central region. 
The massive stars in the burst generate most of the 
total luminosity of the entire galaxy. Starburst galaxies 
are fascinating objects in their own right and are the 
sites where roughly 25% of all the massive stars in the 
local universe are being formed. They offer unique 
laboratories for the study of the formation and evolution 
of massive stars, the effects of massive stars on the 
interstellar medium and the physical processes that were 
important in building galaxies and chemically enriching 
the INTERGALACTIC MEDIUM. 


What is a starburst? 

Overview 

There is no rigorous definition of a starburst galaxy, but 
several different criteria are often used. These are clear 
conceptually, but each is subject to uncertainties in its 
application. 

Starbursts are usually located in the centers of 
galaxies, and have typical radii of 100-1000 pc (1-10% of 
the size of their ‘host’ galaxy). Despite their small size, 
they are converting gas into massive stars at a rate that 
exceeds that found throughout the rest of their host galaxy. 
The starburst is ‘fueled’ by a copious supply of interstellar 
gas (primarily in the form of molecular hydrogen) that has 
been accumulated in the center of the galaxy. The available 
gas supply is sufficient to sustain the current rate of star 
formation for only of order 10° yr (~1% of the age of the 
universe). The dust grains associated with the molecular 
gas usually absorb most of the radiation produced by the 
burst’s stars. This can make it difficult to determine many 
of the basic properties of starbursts. 


Star-formation rates 

We do not directly measure the star-formation rate in 
a starburst but must infer it from measurements of the 
starburst’s luminous output. Two techniques are routinely 
used. 

The first is to use the bolometric luminosity of the 
starburst (Lpo1), which is the luminosity integrated over 
the entire electromagnetic spectrum. Lyoi for a starburst is 
dominated by the emission from hot, massive, short-lived 
stars. These have masses greater than about 8 times the 
mass of the Sun (M > 8Mo) with lifetimes of less than 
about 40 million years. The bulk of the radiation from 
these stars is emitted in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum. 
Dust grains in interstellar medium of the starburst absorb 
this radiation, are heated, and cool by emitting far-infrared 
radiation. Thus, a good approximation of Ly. is given 
by the sum of the starburst’s ultraviolet and infrared 
luminosities. 

The second technique uses measurements of the 
amount of ionizing radiation produced by the starburst 
(often denoted by Q, the total number of photons 
produced per second that are capable of ionizing atomic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hydrogen). The production of these ionizing photons 
is dominated by the most massive, shortest-lived stars 
(M > 25Mo and lifetimes less than 7 million years). 
Measurements of Q are based on measurements of the 
rate at which H ions and electrons recombine, which 
in turn is measured by the luminosity of the so-called 
recombination emission lines of hydrogen (after the 
luminosity is corrected for absorption due to dust inside 
the starburst). 

Given a measurement of Ly.) or QO, we can estimate 
the mass of the population of massive stars required to 
produce this quantity. If we divide this mass by the lifetime 
of the appropriately massive stars we obtain an estimate 
of the mean formation rate of the massive stars. This 
technique tells us almost nothing about the rate at which 
low-mass stars (like our Sun) are being formed, since these 
stars contribute only a negligible amount to Lp or Q. 
Indeed, it is entirely possible that starbursts form only 
massive stars (unlike the mode of star formation in normal 
galaxies like our own). If we assume that starbursts form 
anormal complement of low-mass stars, the implied star- 


formation rates usually range from 1Mo to 100Mo yr“. 


The burst intensity 

A useful way to define a starburst is to consider the burst 
intensity—the rate of star formation per unit area (Xsgpr— 
typically given in units of Mo per year per kiloparsec’). 
In normal star-forming galaxies like our own Milky Way, 
the star-formation rate is a few Mg per year throughout a 
galactic disk with a radius of about 10 kpc (e.g. Usgr has a 
typical value of 10-*Mo yr~' kpc~’). Ina typical starburst 
galaxy, the star-formation rate would be 10M, yr! ina 
region with a radius of 0.5 kpc. The implied Ugpr is then 
10M. yr~' kpc~?, or 10° times greater than in a normal 
galaxy. 

It is important to emphasize that there is no particular 
‘magic’ value for Usrr that separates normal and starburst 
galaxies. A continuum of values is observed, spanning at 
least 6 orders of magnitude from the most quiescent star- 
forming normal galaxies to the most intense starbursts. 

Although calculating a global value for Uspr isa useful 
way to quantify a starburst, star formation is not uniformly 
distributed throughout the bursting region. Instead, the 
star formation occurs both in compact (few parsec scale) 
star clusters and in a more smoothly distributed mode. 
The most massive CLUSTERS (the ‘super star clusters’) have 
estimated masses of (10°-10°) Mg and may be close analogs 
to young GLOBULAR CLUSTERS. 


The burst duration 

A starburst is by definition a transient event. The duration 
of a starburst (At) must be much smaller than the age of 
the galaxy in which it occurs (At « 10! yr). Another 
way of stating this requirement is that the present rate of 
star formation must greatly exceed the past rate averaged 
over the age of the galaxy. Unfortunately, it is difficult to 
accurately determine how long starbursts last. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Starburst Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Perhaps the most commonly used technique to 
estimate At is to calculate the gas-depletion time: the mass 
of interstellar gas in the starburst divided by the present 
rate of star formation. This is then a rough estimate of 
how much longer the starburst can be sustained before 
running out of gas. Gas-depletion times in starbursts 
are usually of order 10° yr, but they are highly uncertain 
for many reasons. For one thing, the mass of molecular 
gas is difficult to determine to better than a factor of a 
few since the determination relies on indirect arguments 
and observations of a trace molecule (usually CO). The 
estimated molecular gas masses range from 10°Mo to 
10!°Mo, increasing as a function of the luminosity of the 
starburst. In addition, the star-formation rate itself is quite 
uncertain, primarily because we do not know the rate at 
which low-mass stars are being formed (see above). 

More sophisticated estimates of the duration of 
starbursts utilize measurements of Q, Ly. and the 
starburst mass plus detailed information on the stellar 
population (for example the relative numbers of massive 
main sequence and post-main-sequence stars such as red 
supergiants and Wolf-—Rayet stars). These measurements 
are then compared with models for the evolution of 
a population of massive stars (see STELLAR EVOLUTION). 
Resulting estimates for burst duration range from a few 
million years for the smallest and least powerful starbursts 
(which occur in dwarf galaxies), up to 10’ or 10° yr for 
powerful starbursts. 

More generally, the minimum possible duration of a 
starburst is set by considerations of causality: the duration 
of star formation cannot be significantly less than the time 
for gas on one side of the starburst to ‘communicate’ 
with gas on the other side. Such ‘signals’ will travel at 
speed of sound in the gas or the velocity induced by the 
gravitational field in the starburst. These velocities will 
be of order 10? km s“!, so At > 10’ yr for a starburst 
with a diameter of 1 kpc. The most powerful and intense 
starbursts seem to turning gas into stars as fast as allowed 
by causality. 


How do we find starburst galaxies? 

The massive stars that power starbursts are mostly very 
hot (T ~ 20000-50000 K) and emit most of their radiation 
in the ultraviolet between 912 A and roughly 2000 A. 
Thus, one technique for finding starbursts is to search for 
galaxies that are unusually bright in the ultraviolet. The 
spectral region below about 3200 A is inaccessible from 
the surface of the Earth, so most ultraviolet surveys for 
starbursts in the local universe have been conducted in the 
near-ultraviolet region just longward of the atmospheric 
cut-off. This will change in the near future as space- 
based ultraviolet imaging surveys are conducted at shorter 
wavelengths. 

Starbursts are rich in interstellar gas and dust (the raw 
material for star formation). The primary radiative output 
from the massive stars (ultraviolet radiation) is absorbed 
by this interstellar material which then re-radiates the 
energy in other forms. The gas absorbs nearly all the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stellar photons with energies sufficient to photoionize 
neutral hydrogen (E > 13.6 eV, or A < 912 A). 
The subsequent recombination of hydrogen or helium 
ions and resulting radiative cascade produce H and He 
recombination emission lines. The free thermal electrons 
in the gas can also collisionally excite ions, whose radiative 
decay produces emission lines. Many of the strongest 
lines of both types are in the visible part of the spectrum, 
and together constitute a few per cent of the bolometric 
luminosity of the starburst. Thus, another way to find 
starbursts is to search for galaxies with unusually bright 
emission lines. 

The dust grains in the starburst are effective at 
absorbing ultraviolet photons of all wavelengths. The 
grains are heated by this radiation and cool by emitting 
radiation. The equilibrium temperatures that result from 
balancing heating and cooling rates are usually in the 
range 10-100 K, and the emitted radiation therefore lies in 
the mid- and far-infared spectral region (A ~ 30-300 xm). 
The survey by the INFRARED ASTRONOMY SATELLITE (IRAS) in 
the 1980s (which surveyed nearly the entire sky in the mid 
and far infrared) has produced the most extensive and 
best-studied sample of starbursts. 

These three types of surveys select samples of 
starbursts that overlap one another but nevertheless 
have important systematic differences. The most direct 
difference is that dusty starbursts are preferentially 
detected in the far-infared surveys, while the less dusty 
starbursts are preferentially found by the ultraviolet 
and emission-line surveys. Dust grains are made of 
elements heavier than H or He (‘metals’). Thus, the 
dust-content of starbursts correlates well with chemical 
composition: typically only a few per cent of ultraviolet 
radiation escapes ‘metal-rich’ starbursts (having chemical 
composition like the Sun) while the majority of the 
ultraviolet light escapes the most ‘metal-poor’ starbursts. 
Metal-poor starbursts tend to be less powerful and to occur 
in smaller and less massive galaxies (as a result in part of 
the well-known mass-metallicity relation for galaxies). 


What causes a starburst? 
From a purely empirical point of view, the causes of star- 
bursts become increasingly clear for starbursts of greater 
and greater luminosity. The most luminous starbursts 
in the local universe are the so-called ‘ultra-luminous in- 
frared galaxies’, which have bolometric luminosities of 
roughly 10!2L (nearly all of which is emitted in the mid- 
and far-infrared). The power source is deeply buried in- 
side a dense, dusty region of molecular gas only a few 
hundred parsecs in size and may consist of a combination 
of a starburst and a dust-enshrouded Quasar. The mass 
of molecular gas (~10'°M.) is comparable with the entire 
mass of the interstellar medium in a big sPIRAL GALAXY. 
These ultraluminous galaxies almost invariably 
have highly disturbed morphologies that are strongly 
suggestive of the ongoing or recently completed merger of 
two large DISK GALAXIES. Specific morphological structures 
indicative of mergers include long narrow ‘tidal tails’ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Starburst Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of stars and gas (the remnants of the outer disks of 
the merging galaxies) and double nuclei. For less 
powerful starbursts the evidence suggests that more 
mild gravitational interactions between galaxies are an 
important triggering mechanism (e.g. the close passage of 
two galaxies, without their subsequent merger). 

During the close passage of two galaxies, tidal stresses 
act to strongly perturb the orbits of the stars and gas in 
the galaxy disk. The dissipation of kinetic energy as gas 
collides with gas allows the gas to become sufficiently 
displaced from the stars that gravitational torques act 
between the stars and gas to transfer significant amounts of 
angular momentum from the gas to the stars. The gas can 
thereby flow into the center of the galaxy, where it can fuel 
a starburst. If the passage of the two galaxies is slow and 
interpenetrating enough, dynamical friction can transfer 
enough kinetic energy from the stars to the galaxy dark- 
matter halos to allow the two galaxies to merge into a single 
galaxy. Such mergers or strong interactions should take a 
few times the galaxy rotation period (about 10° yr), with 
the intense starburst phase being significantly shorter (see 
GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). These timescales are 
loosely consistent with independent estimates of starburst 
lifetimes discussed above. 

However, many starbursts are not found in obviously 
interacting systems. In such cases, a stellar bar is often 
present in the inner disk of the starburst galaxy. A bar 
can act to rob gas of its angular momentum, and transfer 
gas into the center of the galaxy where it can fuel a 
starburst. The mechanism for triggering starbursts is most 
uncertain in the lowest-power starbursts, which occur in 
DWARFGALAXIES. In some cases it appears that the dwarf may 
have recently collided with an extragalactic gas cloud, but 
in most cases there is no clear evidence for any type of 
interaction or stellar bar. 


Starbursts from a cosmological perspective 
Starbursts in context 

How important are starbursts? The far-infrared IRAS 
survey produced the best-studied sample and shows that 
starbursts provide about 10% of the bolometric luminosity 
of the entire local universe. Using the luminosities of the 
H recombination lines to estimate the star-formation rate 
(as described above), it appears that roughly 25% of all the 
massive stars in the local universe are formed in starbursts, 
while the rest are formed in the many-kpc-sized disks of 
normal galaxies like our own. While the measurements 
are difficult, and their interpretation is uncertain, a similar 
situation seems to hold out to a REDsHIFT of about 1 (over 
half the way back to the big bang). 

At still higher redshifts, it becomes almost impossible 
to measure the amount of star formation in the large-scale 
disks of normal galaxies. The great distances and redshift- 
dimming of the light mean that only intense and luminous 
regions of star formation can be readily detected. The 
detected objects appear rather similar to local starbursts 
(see below), and by themselves can plausibly account 
for much of the early star formation in the universe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Thus, starbursts are indeed highly significant components 
of the universe, past and present. 


Starbursts as analogs to high-redshift galaxies 

As described above, starbursts in the local universe are 
often selected by either their ultraviolet or their far- 
infrared continuum emission or by visible-band emission 
lines. At high redshifts (z > 2) the rest-frame ultraviolet, 
visible, and far-infrared emission from a star-forming 
galaxy will be observed in the visible near-infrared, and 
submillimeter spectral regions respectively (See GALAXIES 
AT HIGH REDSHIFT). With the Hubble Space Telescope and 
modern 10 m class ground-based telescopes operating 
in the visible and near infrared, and rapid advances in 
submillimeter astronomy, it is now possible to detect and 
study such high-redshift galaxies. 

The ultraviolet-selected galaxies at high redshift 
strongly resemble similarly selected local starbursts: they 
have similar values for Xspr, similar ultraviolet colors 
(suggesting a similar amount of reddening due to dust 
absorption), and their ultraviolet and visible spectra 
show that they have similar stellar populations and gas 
dynamics. One important difference is that the regions 
of star formation in the high-redshift galaxies are typically 
larger and more luminous than in ultraviolet-selected local 
starbursts. Depending on the uncertain corrections for 
dust extinction, the ultraviolet luminosities of the most 
powerful high-redshift galaxies imply star-formation rates 
that can reach several hundred Mo per year over aregiona 
few kpc in size. To date, less is known about the nature of 
the submillimeter-selected galaxies at high redshift. The 
available information suggests that these objects resemble 
the local ultraluminous galaxies described above. 

It appears that the physical processes that we can 
study in considerable detail in local starbursts are directly 
applicable to high-redshift galaxies. 


Galactic ‘superwinds’ 

One of the most important processes that has been 
observed in both local starbursts and star-forming galaxies 
at high redshift is the bulk outflow of warm and 
hot gas at velocities close to or even exceeding the 
escape velocity from the galactic gravitational potential 
well (a phenomenon sometimes called a ‘superwind’). 
Superwinds are driven by the collective effect of the kinetic 
energy that is deposited in the interstellar medium by 
stellar winds and supernova explosions. It is believed that 
this kinetic energy is converted (via shocks) into thermal 
energy inside the starburst. The resulting hot gas has a 
pressure much greater than its surroundings, and so it will 
expand most rapidly along the direction of the steepest 
pressure gradient in the interstellar medium (e.g. along 
the minor axis of the galaxy’s gas disk). This leads to a 
poorly collimated bipolar outflow. 

In local starbursts, there are a variety of probes of 
superwind physics. The hot outflowing gas produces 
thermal x-ray emission, and spectroscopy of this gas 
implies temperatures of 3-10 million K. This hot gas can 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Starburst Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


be traced out to radii of 10-30 kpc from the starburst 
(well out into the halo of the galaxy). The inferred 
outflow speeds for the hot gas are of order 10° km s7!. 
Warm gas mixed into the outflow (T ~ 104 K) produces 
recombination and collisionally excited emission lines in 
the visible, and the measured Doppler shifts imply outflow 
speeds ranging from 10* to 10° km s~!. Spectroscopy 
in the ultraviolet probes gas seen in absorption against 
the starburst. The measured blueshifts provide direct 
evidence for the outflow of warm and cool gas at velocities 
of 10?-10° kms7!. The ultraviolet signature of superwinds 
is by far the easiest one to observe in high-redshift galaxies, 
and it shows that outflows were common in the most 
actively star-forming galaxies in the early universe. 

The data on both local and high-redshift superwinds 
establish that the outflowing material is enriched in the 
heavy elements (metals) that are the nucleosynthetic 
byproduct of massive stars (see NUCLEOSYNTHESIS). Where 
do these metals go? In CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES today, the 
amount of metals in the intergalactic medium exceeds 
that contained in all the stars in all the cluster’s galaxies. 
Observations of the intergalactic medium at high redshift 
show that it contains at least trace amounts of metals. 
Thus, superwinds operating over the history of the 
universe are probably responsible for ‘polluting’ the 
intergalactic medium with metals. 


T Heckman 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stardust ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stardust 


Fourth mission in NASA’s Discovery programme, 
launched in February 1999. The first US mission to a comet 
and the first mission to bring back material from outside 
the Earth-Moon system. It will encounter Comet Wild-2 
on 2 January 2004. The main objective is to capture dust 
particles from the comet in aerogel and return them to 
Earth. The sample return capsule is due to parachute onto 
the US military’s Utah Test and Training Range near Salt 
Lake City on 15 January 2006. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Steady-State Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Steady-State Theory 


A theory which postulates that the large-scale appearance 
of the universe does not change with time. The theory, 
devised in 1948 by Hermann Bondi, Thomas Gold and 
Fred Hoyle, satisfies the so-called ‘perfect cosmological 
principle’ that the universe is the same everywhere at all 
times. This theory avoided the necessity for a ‘Big Bang’ 
origin to the universe, but required the continuous creation 
of matter in order to maintain a constant uniform density in 
the universe at all times (new galaxies formed as the older 
ones moved apart, thereby maintaining the same average 
number of galaxies in each large volume of space). The 
discovery, in 1965, of the cosmic microwave background 
radiation, which could not naturally be explained by the 
steady-state theory, led to the rejection of the theory. 


See also: cosmological model, cosmological principle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stebbins, Joel (1878-1966) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stebbins, Joel (1878-1966) 


American photometrist, became director of the University 
of Illinois Observatory and the University of Wisconsin’s 
Washburn Observatory. Pioneered the use of photoelectric 
detectors to replace photographic photometry. With 
ALBERT WHITFORD, investigated eclipsing binary stars, the 
reddening of starlight by interstellar dust, colors of 
galaxies, pulsating variable stars and the spectrum of the 
Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Stellar N-body Systems: Dissipation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar N-body Systems: Dissipation 


The motions of the stars are usually assumed to be 
perfectly frictionless, whereas in everyday life objects slow 
down by the action of friction, and heat is generated. Large 
collections of stars do, however, behave in ways which are 
reminiscent of this more familiar behavior. 

Stellar N-body systems (e.g. STAR CLUSTERS, GALAXIES, 
MULTIPLE STARS) can be treated to a high degree of 
approximation as collections of point masses!, moving 
according to Newton’s Laws? of motion and gravitation. 
In this approximation they conserve energy*: if the stars 
fall together (figure 1) then they lose potential energy, 
but gain an equal amount of kinetic energy. In familiar 
situations such behavior is rare: a falling tennis ball also 
converts potential energy to kinetic energy as it descends, 
but it loses energy at each bounce, and by friction with 
the air. Eventually it loses all its energy and comes to rest. 
‘Dissipation’ is a term applied to any process by which a 
system (like the bouncing ball) loses energy. By contrast, 
stellar N-body systems are dissipationless to a very good 
approximation. The stars do not come to rest. 

Though the energy of a bouncing ball is dissipated it 
does not disappear. It is lost in the sound energy produced 
when the ball hits the ground, and in the thermal energy 
produced by distortions in its shape as it bounces. Thus 
the energy is simply converted from one form to another. 

In much the same way the energy of a stellar N-body 
system can decrease if stars escape. This is analogous to 
the sound waves generated by a bouncing ball (though 
sound waves, unlike escaping stars, carry no mass). 

Similarly the energy of a stellar N-body system can 
be transformed in a manner analogous to the generation 
of heat. To understand this, imagine a system in which 
all stars are initially at rest. They start to fall towards 
each other, like a dropped ball falling to the ground 
(figure 1). They pass beyond the point at which they are 
all close together, and then the system expands again. By 
a process referred to as violent relaxation (see below) the 
subsequent recollapses and re-expansions become weaker, 
like the weakening bounces of a ball. The system appears 


1 Point mass: in classical dynamics, a point in space endowed 
with a mass, and moving according to Newtonian dynamics. It 
is a good approximation for a body if its dimensions are much 
smaller than the distances between the bodies, as in a star cluster. 
2 Newton's Laws: the principal Law of Motion (the second of the 
three) states that f = ma, where f is the force on a body of mass 
m, and a is the resulting acceleration; the Law of Gravitation states 
that each body exerts on every other body an attractive force of 
magnitude GMm/ r2 along the line between them, where m, M 
are their masses, r is their distance apart, and G is the universal 
constant of gravitation. 

3 Energy: in classical gravitation, the sum of the potential and 
kinetic energies. The potential energy depends only on the 
position and mass of the bodies (if treated as point masses), and 
increases as their separation increases. In gravitating systems it 
is usually taken to be negative, increasing to zero as the bodies 
move infinitely far apart. The kinetic energy depends only on 
their speeds and masses, and increases with increasing speed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


oO 
pee 


Pn bashed 

iy THE EH A 
2 BN Sok BP Peete a 
oF of. ae OL boa 
Pall as pike [. 4 

+ hi Pebeu fire MUERTE 
of ae ot ch eect eet ae 4 
Bee ee abe af 2 [ 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


2-101 22-101 22-101 22-101 22-101 2 


Figure 1. Collapse of a stellar N-body system. Initially the 
particles are at rest and distributed uniformly inside a sphere. 
The frames are read from left to right within each row, and the 
rows are read from top to bottom. 


to settle down, but close examination would show that 
the individual stars are now moving in rather random 
directions within it: it is in dynamic equilibrium. What 
has happened is that the kinetic energy of the original 
contraction, which is an ordered motion like that of a 
falling ball, has been converted into kinetic energy of 
random motions, like the thermal motion of atoms and 
molecules. Indeed the collapse in the first few frames of 
figure 1 is called cold collapse, and the final configuration is 
referred to as a hot system. 

Ona much longer time scale the further evolution of a 
hot stellar system is determined by the way it cools down. 
Like ordinary objects, stellar systems become denser 
as they lose heat, but paradoxically their temperature 
increases! This intensifies the flow of heat, and leads to 
an accelerating collapse of the central part of the system. 
This process is known as ‘core collapse’. It is eventually 
halted when the stars are so crowded together that triplets 
of stars can interact energetically enough. Then the 
system reaches a sort of equilibrium, but is gradually 
losing stars. Eventually the remnants of the system are 
indistinguishable from their surroundings, and the life of 
the system has come to an end. 


Violent relaxation 

First we consider in detail why the oscillations in figure 1 
appear to damp out. Initially the stars are randomly 
distributed inside a sphere, and, by Newton’s Theorem’, 


4 Newton's Theorem: a uniform sphere of matter attracts an outside 
particle as if the entire mass of the sphere were concentrated at its 
centre. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar N-body Systems: Dissipation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on average the gravitational force a star experiences 
is directed towards the center of the sphere. In this 
approximation, all stars would arrive at the center at the 
same time. If the initial density of the stars (i.e. their mass 
per unit volume) is p, then this time is the ‘free-fall’ time 


eae 3x 
gia helena 


In fact each star is particularly affected by its 
neighbors and by fluctuations in the distribution of stars 
around it. Consequently, some stars arrive late at the 
center, some early, and most stars pass on one side or other 
of the exact center. The result is that the system reaches 
a finite maximum density at the end of the collapse, from 
which the stars re-emerge in a phase of expansion. 

The fact that stars do not quite arrive at the center at 
the same time is partly an effect of phase mixing. Roughly 
speaking, we say that motions are ‘in phase’ if they all 
arrive at one configuration at one time, and ‘phase mixed’ 
if they arrive at various times. 

Another factor which helps to explain the gradual 
emergence of random motions is an instability of cold 
systems like the initial conditions in figure 1. This results 
in an increasing clumpiness in the distribution of the stars, 
as can be seen in the seventh and eighth frames in figure 1. 
The instability is analogous to the Jeans instability of cold 
self-gravitating gases. The effect of these clumps is that 
large groups of neighbors can influence each other en masse 
(or ‘collectively’). 

Such processes continue to affect the motions of stars 
during the first re-expansion and subsequent collapses, 
though these are difficult to see in figure 1. Eventually the 
oscillations die away, and all that is left are the random 
motions of the stars. This decay of ordered motions 
is a rather common feature of stellar systems, and the 
various processes which give rise to it are referred to as 
‘collisionless relaxation’ or ‘violent relaxation’. 

These words require some explanation. A process 
is called ‘collisionless’ if it is dominated by collective 
interactions, in contrast with ‘two-body’ relaxation, 
described below. The word ‘relaxation’ itself is applied 
to many processes which lead to equilibrium. In this case 
it is a ‘dynamic’ equilibrium, in which the stars are all in 
motion, but the overall distribution of density is nearly 
static. The word ‘violent’ is commonly used because it 
captures the time dependence of the overall distribution 
of matter (cf figure 1). The time scale on which violent 
relaxation acts is given in order of magnitude by the 
free-fall time. The hot system to which it gives rise is 
approximately in virial equilibrium’, and so the process 
is often also referred to as ‘virialization’. 


5 Virial equilibrium: the potential energy, W, and the kinetic 


energy, T, of a system of gravitating bodies in dynamic 
equilibrium are related approximately by 2T + W = 0. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Escape 
Consider a stellar system similar to that in the last frame of 
figure 1. The density of stars is nearly stationary and can 
be described approximately by the stellar density p, which 
will depend on position but not on time. By Poisson’s 
equation, i.e. 

V-6 =4nGp 


where G is the universal constant of gravitation, the mass 
generates a potential ¢, in which the stars move. In this 
context the energy of a star of mass m is 


2 
E= oe +mod 
where v is its speed. (The two terms are the kinetic and 
potential energies, respectively.) Since E is constant and 
@ may be defined so that it vanishes at large distances, 
a star may escape ‘to infinity’ provided that E > 0, ie. 
v > /—2¢. The quantity on the right is the escape speed. 
In the stellar N-body systems in nature, escape is 
complicated by the gravitational attraction of stars outside 
the stellar system. At some finite distance from a stellar 
system their gravity begins to dominate the motion of a 
receding star. Therefore escape is possible at slightly lower 
energies, and in consequence is easier. In addition, the 
force exerted by outside matter may vary with time, as 
when a star cluster passes by the dense central part of its 
parent galaxy. Then the energy of the star is no longer 
constant, and may change sufficiently to lead to escape. 


Two-body relaxation 

If all stars ina system have energy E < 0, it does not follow 
that escape will never happen (even if we ignore stars 
outside the system). Though we stated that EF is constant, 
this was true only because we chose to describe the stellar 
system in terms of a steady density p. In reality, when two 
stars come close together this approximation is not valid, 
and at such times the energy of the two participants will 
change. Even if both stars initially had insufficient energy 
to escape, one or other of them may gain enough energy 
in the encounter to escape subsequently. 

This process, by which the energy of a star may 
change because of encounters, is called two-body relaxation 
or collisional relaxation, and its role is not restricted to 
escape (see the section on ‘Collapse’ below). Though the 
description ‘two-body’ is self-explanatory, the other terms 
require some explanation. As before, ‘relaxation’ refers toa 
process which leads toa steady state (cf ‘violent relaxation’, 
above). Here the steady state refers to the particular 
(‘Maxwellian’) distribution of velocities v to which two- 
body encounters would give rise in the absence of escape, 
i.e. a distribution function 


2 
fw)= " exp ( uy ) 
(21 02)3/2 202 


where n is the number of stars per unit volume, and a is the 
root mean square value of one velocity component. This 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar N-body Systems: Dissipation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


corresponds to a state of thermal equilibrium (a steady 
state in which all parts of a body or system have the same 
temperature) in gases, where similar effects occur. In the 
classical theory of gases, however, the relaxation is caused 
by actual collisions between the atoms or molecules. 
Though the term ‘collisional’ is also used in the theory 
of stellar systems, it is misleading, as the interaction of a 
pair of stars is purely gravitational. Real collisions do take 
place in extreme circumstances (see below), but have no 
role in relaxation. 

The time scale on which relaxation acts is called the 
relaxation time, and varies according to the density p, and 
other factors. For a stellar system of the type we are 
considering, a convenient measure is the so-called half- 
mass relaxation time 


N1/2,3/2 
tn = 0.138 aa 

where N is the number of stars, m is the mass of a single 
star, A is roughly equal to N (tn is rather insensitive to the 
exact value) and the half-mass radius rp is the radius of an 
imaginary sphere centered at the center of the cluster, and 
enclosing half of its total mass. Stars escape from a stellar 
system on a roughly comparable time scale. Another 
process acting on this time scale is called dynamical friction, 
because rapidly moving stars tend to lose kinetic energy 
to the stars which they encounter. 

This formula applies to the idealized case of a stellar 
system in which all stars have the same mass. In more 
realistic cases, the effects of relaxation depend on the stellar 
mass. In particular, massive stars suffer greater dynamical 
friction than stars of low mass. One result of this is that 
the rate of escape of stars decreases with increasing mass. 
Another result is mass segregation (see below). 


Collapse 
As we have seen, a star may escape from a stellar system 
following a close encounter with another star. This 
dynamical process is dissipationless: the total energy of 
all stars is constant. The escaping star removes some 
energy, however, and so the energy of the remaining stars 
decreases. In this section we consider how the stellar 
system evolves as it loses mass and its energy decreases. 
Because the system is nearly in virial equilibrium its 
kinetic energy, T, is related to its total energy, E, by 


ad et 


As E decreases, following escape, T necessarily increases. 
As this kinetic energy is also shared among fewer stars, it 
follows that the velocities of the stars increase on average. 
It is not difficult to see why this happens. Consider a planet 
in circular orbit about the Sun, and suppose we decrease 
its energy by slowing it down slightly. It now falls towards 
the Sun somewhat, but in doing so it picks up speed. In 
fact it now moves, on average, faster than it did before we 
slowed it down. For the same reason, though an Earth 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


[N=2k 7 
0) ad A 


0 200 400 600 
Scaled N-body Time 


Figure 2. Core collapse in several computer simulations. The 
central density is plotted against time, scaled in proportion to 
tyh. The first ‘spike’ marks the end of core collapse and the start 
of a phase of gravothermal oscillations. (After Makino J 1996 
Astrophys. J. 471 796-803. Reproduced by permission of the 
American Astronomical Society.) 


satellite suffers from friction if it dips into the top of the 
Earth’s atmosphere, it actually speeds up as it descends. 

This remarkable property of gravitating systems is 
sometimes described by saying that they have ‘negative 
specific heat’. The ‘specific heat’ of a substance describes 
the effect on its temperature of the addition of some energy, 
and for familiar substances like water or air it is positive. 
This increase in temperature corresponds to an increase in 
the speeds at which the atoms in the substance move. By 
contrast we have seen that gravitating systems respond to 
a decrease in energy with an increase in the speed! 

This removal of energy by an escaping particle not 
only causes the remaining stars to speed up; just as with the 
planet which moves closer to the Sun after being slowed 
down, the stars in the system move closer together. Thus 
the effect of escaping stars is to make those that remain 
crowd into asmaller space. Indeed a similar process occurs 
even if stars do not escape. Relaxation causes stars to leave 
the dense central parts of a stellar system on the relaxation 
time scale, and, as a result, the central parts contract and 
become denser (figure 2), and the motions there become 
faster. As the central part of a stellar system is called the 
‘core’, this process is called ‘core collapse’. The time of 
relaxation in the core decreases as the core collapses, and 
the collapse accelerates as it proceeds. Even so it is a very 
gentle and slow collapse compared with that shown in 
figure 1, because the ratio of time scales t/t is of order 
N/log N, which is large for a rich stellar system. The 
process is faster if stars of different mass are present; and 
by a process known as mass segregation, which is an effect 
of two-body relaxation, the more massive stars settle into 
the core more rapidly 

The resulting ‘runaway’ is sometimes referred to 
as the ‘gravothermal catastrophe’, but it is not very 
catastrophic: the rest of the system hardly notices what 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar N-body Systems: Dissipation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is taking place in the tiny core. The word ‘gravothermal’ 
means that the collapse is governed by the way in which 
self-gravitating systems respond to loss or gain of heat. 


Dense stellar systems 

When the core reaches a high enough density, other 
processes intervene and halt the collapse. These usually 
involve three- and four-body interactions, either between 
a BINARY STAR and a single star, or between two binaries. If 
the system initially contained many binaries, they would 
settle to the core more rapidly than other stars, by mass 
segregation. Even if there were no binaries, interactions 
involving three single stars would create binaries (one 
of the stars being needed as a catalyst to carry off some 
energy). 

From a gravothermal point of view the importance 
of these reactions is that they are a source of heat (see 
the article on the THREE-BODY PROBLEM), and this eventually 
balances the flow of heat by two-body relaxation into the 
outer parts of the system: this is how core collapse is 
halted. Henceforth the system retains a dense core, though 
in certain situations the balance in the flow of energy is 
achieved only sporadically, and the core may exhibit large- 
scale oscillations (figure 2). Like core collapse itself, they 
are gravothermal in nature. 

At these high stellar densities in the core, and in 
the presence of binary stars, one can no longer entirely 
treat the stars as point masses. Real stellar collisions can, 
and indeed must, occur in large numbers in many dense 
stellar systems in nature. These processes are genuinely 
dissipative (though the loss of energy is not thought to be 
important for the energy balance of the system as a whole). 
Their importance is that they can modify the kinds of stars 
seen in dense stellar systems, and affect the efficiency of 
the binary interactions which are needed to maintain the 
system against further core collapse. 

After core collapse the evolution of the system is 
determined by the loss of mass, through escaping stars. 
In realistic situations, all the mass is lost after a few tens of 
relaxation times. 


Bibliography 
Makino J 1996 Astrophys. J. 471 796-803 


Standard treatments on the topics of this article are: 


Binney J and Tremaine S 1987 Galactic Dynamics (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Spitzer L Jr 1987 Dynamical Evolution of Globular Clusters 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 


Recent advances are reviewed in: 


Merritt D 1999 Elliptical galaxy dynamics Publ. Astron. Soc. 
Pacific 111 129-68 

Meylan G and Heggie D C 1997 Internal dynamics of 
globular clusters Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 8 1-143 


Douglas C Heggie 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Activity 


Energy deposited in the tenuous gas above the visible sur- 
face (i.e. photospheres) of stars leads to a range of phe- 
nomena collectively referred to as stellar activity. The en- 
ergy deposition heats the gas producing chromospheres, 
at temperatures ~ 104 K, and coronae with temperatures 
from a few to tens x10° K. The intermediate temperature 
region is generally called the transition region. These parts 
of the STELLAR ATMOSPHERE are particularly prominent in the 
x-ray and ultraviolet spectral regions where emission from 
the stellar photosphere is weak. Stellar activity is seen for 
a wide range of types of star, and occurs on dwarf stars 
with spectral types from F through M. Stellar activity is 
directly related to the presence of subphotospheric con- 
vection and the generation of a magnetic field by dynamo 
processes(see DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR). The stellar rota- 
tion rate is also a key controlling parameter (See STELLAR RO- 
TATION ON THE MAIN SEQUENCE). The heating processes are pri- 
marily magnetic, with acoustic energy deposition playing 
aminor role. The strength of the magnetic fields in the pho- 
tosphere can be large (several kilogauss) and this field is 
associated with large starspots and the occurrence of large 
flares (see SOLAR-STELLAR CONNECTION). For the most active 
stars the energy radiated from chromospheres/coronae 
and liberated by flares can be at least a thousand times 
larger than seen in the solar atmosphere. Stellar activity is 
particularly intense in CLOSE BINARY STARS where rapid rota- 
tion is imposed by tidal interaction. Evolved F, G, K and 
M stars all possess chromospheres but coronae become 
weaker or absent for the cooler giants and supergiants and 
stellar mass loss becomes much more significant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Astronomy (to the Rise of Astrophysics in the 
Mid-Nineteenth Century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Astronomy (to the Rise of 
Astrophysics in the Mid-Nineteenth 
Century) 


Variable stars 

According to ARISTOTLE, whose world picture dominated 
Greek, Islamic and Western Latin civilizations until the 
seventeenth century, the celestial region of the cosmos— 
the Moon and beyond—is unchanging except for cyclic 
motions that return the celestial bodies to their original 
positions. Changes in the brightnesses of stars were 
therefore deemed impossible, and so VARIABLE STARS went 
unnoticed. Even reports of SUPERNOVAE are excessively rare, 
until a bright star-like object appeared in Cassiopeia in 
1572. Many observers considered it atmospheric, but the 
young TYCHO BRAHE was able to show convincingly that it 
was celestial. The possibility of change among the stars 
was established beyond doubt by the appearance of a 
second (super)nova in 1604, in Ophiucus. 

Meanwhile the Frisian astronomer DAVID FABRICIUS 
claimed that a less dramatic new star had appeared in 
Cetus in 1596. Another nova appeared and disappeared 
in cETUS in 1638; but this time the star reappeared, and 
in due course was identified with Fabricius’s nova. In 
1667 ISMAEL BOULLIAU showed that although Mira Ceti (‘the 
wonderful star in the Whale’) was not always at the same 
brightness when at maximum, its maxima did occur at 
regular intervals of 11 months, and to this extent the 
variable was predictable. Boulliau also offered a physical 
explanation, by analogy with sunspots: the star had dark 
patches and its light diminished cyclically when these 
patches were presented to the observer as the star rotated; 
but just as sunspots varied, so the dark patches varied, and 
this resulted in irregularities in the light curve of the star. 

Claims to the discovery of variables were by now 
commonplace. But such claims were almost impossible 
to verify or refute, and so interest in variable stars 
lapsed, until late in the eighteenth century. Beginning 
in 1796, William Herschel provided a means of testing 
whether a star was varying, by publishing extensive 
‘catalogues of the comparative brightness of the stars’, 
in which each star was compared with others of almost 
the same brightness; any change would then disturb the 
published comparisons. By using much simpler sequences 
of stars arranged by brightness, two young English 
amateur observers, Edward Pigott and John Goodricke, 
had already detected four stars whose periods were 
measured in days. The first of these, Beta Persei (ALGOL), 
had long been reputed to vary, and after monitoring the 
stars for some weeks, on 28 December 1782 the two friends 
saw it brighten from third (or fourth) magnitude to second, 
before their very eyes. Pigott suspected at once that Algol 
was being periodically eclipsed by a planet; but eventually 
the friends abandoned this explanation, perhaps because 
of apparent irregularities that in fact were caused by 
changes in viewing conditions, but perhaps because no 
such explanation was possible for the other variables they 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


discovered, two of which were Cepheids. Thereafter study 
of variables made little progress until the development of 
astrophysics. 


Proper motions and the solar apex 

By the later seventeenth century RENE DESCARTES had 
persuaded most astronomers that the stars were simply 
distant suns, and Isaac NEWTON concluded that stars were 
isolated bodies free to move in seemingly empty space. 
But it was not until 1718 that Edmond Halley, who was 
studying ancient star catalogs for a new determination of 
precession, was able to announce that three bright stars 
were no longer in the places they had occupied in antiquity. 
However, it would be some decades before proper motions 
were determined in any quantity: John Flamsteed’s great 
star catalog, published in 1725, had been compiled just 
before JAMES BRADLEY'S discovery of aberration and nutation 
(see below), and so accurate past positions of stars were 
unavailable in the mid eighteenth century. 

Bradley himself pointed out that such motions could 
arise either from the motion of the solar system or from 
movements of the stars themselves, and Tobias Mayer 
in 1760 argued that patterns of proper motions should 
be ascribed to the former and deviations from patterns 
to the latter. The first to detect such a pattern was 
William Herschel (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). Working with far 
from reliable data, he proposed in 1783 that the solar 
system was moving towards Lambda Herculis, close to 
modern determinations. For reasons as yet unexplained, 
F W Bessell, after reducing Bradley’s star observations 
for his Fundamenta astronomiae (1820), was unable to 
find any such pattern. But in 1837 F W A Argelander 
published the results of an investigation into no fewer than 
390 proper motions, a number large enough for him to 
divide them by size into three groups which he treated 
independently; each yielded an apex not far from that 
proposed by Herschel. The matter was put beyond dispute 
in 1847 when Thomas Galloway analysed proper motions 
of southern stars not previously taken into account, and 
derived a similar apex. 


Distances of stars 

In the cosmologies of Aristotle and Ptolemy, the stars were 
located immediately beyond the outermost planet. When 
Copernicus in 1543 argued that the Earth orbits the Sun 
and that we therefore observe the stars every six months 
from opposite ends of a diameter of the Earth’s orbit, 
opponents demanded to know why no annual parallaxes 
had been detected. By the later seventeenth century, after 
Kepler had taught astronomers to see the massive Sun as 
the centre of the planetary system, annual parallax had 
developed into the hoped-for means of determining the 
distances of stars. But if Descartes was right and the 
stars were physically the equal of the Sun, their distances 
must be vast, and the detection of annual parallax with 
instruments subject to shrinking and warping with the 
passage of the seasons was a daunting task. However, if 
the brightness of a star (such as sirtus) could be compared 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Astronomy (to the Rise of Astrophysics in the 
Mid-Nineteenth Century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


with the brightness of the Sun, then since light diminishes 
with the square of the distance this ratio could be converted 
to a ratio of distances. The best-known attempt at this 
comparison was by CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS, in his posthumous 
COSMOTHEOROS (1698). Huygens viewed the Sun through a 
pinhole made in a screen, hoping that the fraction of the 
Sun that was thereby visible would be equal in brightness 
to Sirius. The technique was clumsy, but his conclusion, 
that Sirius lay at 27 664 astronomical units, showed that 
the scale of interstellar distances was vast. 

Amuch better method was advanced by JAMES GREGORY 
in 1668, ina little-noticed work on geometry. He proposed 
replacing Sirius by a suitable planet, at a time when the 
planet was of the same brightness as Sirius; the required 
ratio was then equal to the ratio of the light received 
directly from the Sun, to the light received from the Sun 
via the planet. This calculation had the merit of involving 
only quantities related to the solar system. Even when 
working with values that he knew to be obsolete, Gregory 
placed Sirius at 83190 AU; the true distance would be 
much greater, in fact about 10° AU according to Newton 
when drafting The System of the World around 1685. But this 
work appeared only in 1728, after Newton’s death, and 
until then his estimate was known only to his intimates. 

Meanwhile a remarkable attempt to measure annual 
parallax was made by ROBERT HOOKE. The known hazards in 
the way of such measurements were the possible warping 
of the instrument with the change of the seasons, and 
the uncertain effect of refraction. The latter problem 
Hooke sought to overcome by selecting as his target GAMMA 
DRACONIS, a star that passed directly overhead his home in 
London; the former, by incorporating the tube carrying 
the object glass into the fabric of the roof of his house. 
The resulting zenith telescope was designed to resolve 
one single problem (stellar parallax), by observing one 
single star but only when the star was specially positioned: 
a remarkably mature use of a scientific instrument. 
Unfortunately, Hooke made only four observations before 
the object glass broke, and his claims to have detected 
parallax were discounted by other astronomers. But his 
method was promising, and it was revived in 1725 by an 
English amateur, Samuel Molyneux, who commissioned 
a zenith telescope from George Graham. His collaborator, 
James Bradley, found the movements of Gamma Draconis 
were three months out of phase from those expected from 
annual parallax. Commissioning a second instrument 
with a wider field of view, Bradley was able to establish 
the pattern of movements displayed by a number of stars. 
Later, the explanation came to him: the speed of light, 
though great, is finite, and the apparent position of a star 
is affected by the velocity of the observer on Earth. 

The discovery of ‘the aberration of light’ was proof of 
the motion of the Earth around the Sun. It also revealed 
an unexpected error in all existing star catalogs, including 
Flamsteed’s. And because Bradley had failed to detect 
annual parallax, he could estimate from the accuracy of his 
measures that the stars must be at least 400000 AU from 
the Sun. His publication in 1729 of this minimum distance 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of stars was fully compatible with Newton’s estimate of 
the actual distance of Sirius, based on the hypothesis 
that Sirius and the Sun were physically equal; and the 
appearance of these two results within a few months of 
each other convinced astronomers that light even from the 
nearest stars took several years to arrive on Earth. 

Not surprisingly, it was decades before attempts to 
measure such tiny annual parallaxes were resumed, and 
even then successive claims proved to be mistaken. It 
was essential to single out for measurement the stars 
that were nearest to Earth, and an important advance 
came in 1837 when WILHELM STRUVE at Dorpat published an 
assessment of the relevant criteria. By now proper motions 
were available in quantity, and there was evidence—for 
example from binary stars—that apparent brightness was 
an unreliable guide to distance. Stars with large proper 
motions could more confidently be taken to be near, and 
Giuseppe Piazzi and BEsseL had both drawn attention to 61 
cYcNl, ‘the flying star’. Also, the craftsmanship of Joseph 
Fraunhofer had equipped both Bessel at Kénigsberg and 
Struve at Dorpat with precision instruments of a quality 
hitherto unavailable. 

In 1835 Struve selected veca for study. The star was 
bright and had a large proper motion, and in 1837 he 
deduced from 17 observations a parallax of one-eighth of 
a second of arc. Encouraged by Struve’s apparent success, 
Bessel subjected 61 Cygni to a year’s scrutiny, observing 
the star many times on the same night, and at the end 
of 1838 he announced a parallax of about one-third of a 
second of arc. Bessel’s many observations closely matched 
the pattern predicted from theory, and it was this that 
convinced astronomers that a genuine measure of parallax 
had at last been achieved. 


Double stars 

Struve and Bessel had used distant stars as reference 
points against which they measured the motions of the 
stars under examination, and in doing this they had 
been applying a method proposed by GALILEO in 1632 to 
facilitate the measurement of annual parallax. Galileo 
understood very well the immense practical difficulties 
involved in tracking tiny stellar movements spread over 
many months; however, if the star under investigation 
chanced to lie in almost the same direction as another and 
much more distant star (so that the two formed a ‘DOUBLE 
star’), the distant star could act as a quasi-fixed reference 
point provided by a helpful Nature. 

Characteristically, Galileo himself did nothing to 
follow up this insight, nor did any observers prior to 
William Herschel. In the late 1770s, Herschel was 
systematically familiarizing himself with the brighter 
stars, and he took the opportunity to watch out for double 
stars. In 1782 and 1785 he published two catalogs of 
doubles totalling 703 specimens. 

However, unknown to Herschel, John Mitchell had 
published a paper in 1767 in which he pointed out 
that the number of double stars was far greater than 
would be expected if the doubles occurred merely by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Astronomy (to the Rise of Astrophysics in the 
Mid-Nineteenth Century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


chance: most of them must be neighbors in space, lying 
at the same distance from Earth and therefore useless for 
the measurement of parallax. And when Herschel re- 
examined some of his doubles after an interval of two 
decades, he found several instances in which the two stars 
had indeed orbited around each other. But was the force 
that bound them together in fact gravitational attraction, 
as everyone assumed? To decide this, more details were 
needed of the orbits. At length, in 1827, Félix Savary was 
able to confirm that the two stars of Xi Ursae Majoris did 
indeed move in elliptical orbits about their common centre 
of gravity, as Newtonian theory required. Newton himself 
had assumed that gravitational attraction was a universal 
force; now there was at least proof that it operated among 
the stars. 


The system of the stars and the darkness of the 
night sky 

Despite these various developments in the theory of 
certain individual stars, until the rise of astrophysics in the 
later nineteenth century the stars as a whole remained little 
more than a backcloth to the motions of the bodies of the 
solar system. Even Newton in the Principia displays almost 
no interest in the stars, and this despite his claim that 
gravity was a universal force: for forces cause movements, 
and if each star was being attracted by every other star then 
it was far from obvious how every single star continued 
(as it seemed) to rest motionless in the position recorded 
for it in the star catalogs of antiquity. Although Newton 
had a better understanding of the immensity of interstellar 
distances than any other living person, it did not occur 
to him that the stars might indeed be in motion, but 
that because of their remoteness their motions had not 
yet been detected. Perhaps he was mesmerized by his 
own use of the traditional Latin stella fixa as the term for 
‘star’. At all events, when challenged to expound his 
cosmology he attempted to reconcile the immobility of 
the stars with the universality of gravity by arguing that 
the system of the stars was infinite and almost symmetric. 
This being so, each star was being pulled almost equally in 
every direction by the other stars, and therefore remained 
(almost) at rest. 

However, the symmetry (which he defended by 
comparing the numbers of stars predicted from a 
theoretical model with the numbers found in star catalogs) 
is clearly not perfect, and Newton accepted that in the 
long term the stellar system would be threatened with 
gravitational collapse. How could this be reconciled 
with the accepted image of God as the great clockmaker? 
Descartes had portrayed a God who created the universe, 
set it in motion, and then abandoned it to run itself. 
Newton, by contrast, believed that God must display a 
continuing concern for the welfare of his creation. He had 
revealed himself not only through the Book of Scripture 
but also through the Book of Nature. The scientist 
investigating the star system and uncovering its near 
symmetry (and therefore medium-term stability) learned 
from the Book of Nature the concern for mankind that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


God had displayed at the creation. And God displayed an 
on-going concern for mankind by intervening whenever 
gravitational collapse threatened, and restoring the 
original order. G W Leibniz condemned this conception as 
portraying God as a bungling clockmaker who resorted to 
miracles to repair bad workmanship; Newtonians replied 
that these divine interventions were not miracles, but 
regular acts foreseen from the beginning. Both parties 
agreed that the structure of the stellar universe was 
essentially permanent and would show no development 
with time. 

About 1720 a young physician, William Stukeley, 
in conversation with Newton, diverted the discussion 
away from the consequences of gravity and towards 
consideration of the cumulative light of infinitely many 
stars. If the star system was infinite, he argued, the whole 
sky would have ‘the appearance of that luminous gloom 
of the milky way’. In 1721 EDMOND HALLEY breakfasted 
with Stukeley and Newton and discussed astronomical 
topics, a few days before Halley read two short papers 
on cosmology to the Royal Society in which he remarked: 
‘Another Argument I have heard urged, that if the number 
of Fixt Stars were more than finite, the whole superficies 
of their apparent Sphere would be luminous.’ Halley 
offered a defective defence of the infinity of the stars, 
but the publication of his papers brought the Newtonian 
universe—anonymously—into the public domain. 

In 1744 the Swiss astronomer J-P L de Chéseaux 
showed that even if only a tiny fraction of starlight was 
lost in traveling the distance from one star to the next, 
the cumulative effect of these losses would be decisively 
to reduce the total amount of light received from the 
innumerable stars at great distances. That is, the darkness 
of the night sky was no obstacle to belief in the infinity 
of the stars. Much the same argument was advanced 
in 1823 by H W M Olbers, and it is his name that has 
become attached to the so-called ‘OLBERs’ PARADOX’, though 
nineteenth-century astronomers found no difficulty in 
offering a variety of explanations for the darkness of the 
night sky. 


The Milky Way 

The MILKY way GALAXY was, one might think, a decisive 
disproof of Newton’s claim that the system of the stars 
is symmetric, but his lack of interest in this phenomenon 
was typical of his generation. Serious astronomers were 
preoccupied with the solar system, and it was only after 
a group of speculators in the mid eighteenth century 
proposed explanations of the Milky Way that the problem 
of the structure of the stellar system began to enter 
mainstream astronomy. 

The first of these speculators was THOMAS WRIGHT of 
Durham, a self-taught itinerant lecturer. In 1734 he 
prepared a public lecture on cosmology in which the stars 
were portrayed as occupying a spherical shell of space 
that surrounded the Divine Centre, the region beyond the 
shell forming the Outer Darkness. As the stars could not 
be permitted to fall into the Divine Centre, each was in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Astronomy (to the Rise of Astrophysics in the 
Mid-Nineteenth Century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(circular) orbit within the shell. Wright illustrated his 
lecture with a representation of a cross section of the 
universe, in which he also showed how his stellar system 
would appear from Earth, which of course was a planet of 
one of the stars within the shell. The light of the numerous 
stars within the cross section that were distant from Earth 
but still visible to humans would, he argued, merge to give 
the effect of a milky circle in the sky. He thought he had 
thereby explained the Milky Way, until he realized that the 
plane of the Milky Way is unique whereas the plane of his 
cross section was arbitrary. 

Having considered the matter further, in 1750 Wright 
published An Original Theory or New Hypothesis of the 
Universe, with two alternative explanations of the Milky 
Way. In the preferred alternative the Sun was, as before, 
a member of a spherical shell of stars that surrounded 
what was now one of many Divine Centres. But now the 
shell was thin, and of vast diameter, so that an observer 
facing inwards or outwards would see only a few stars 
(which were near and therefore bright) before looking into 
empty space. But when facing tangentially to the shell, the 
observer would see great numbers of stars, whose light 
would merge to give the effect of the Milky Way. The plane 
of the Milky Way, therefore, was the tangent plane to the 
shell of stars at the place where the terrestrial observer was 
located. 

An alternative explanation saw the system of stars as 
forming a broad, flat ring surrounding the (local) Divine 
Centre, in which case the visible stars would occupy a disk- 
shaped region of space internal to the ring. The observer 
looking in any direction within the plane of the ring would 
see innumerable stars whose light would merge to give a 
milky effect. 

Wright disliked the second model because he had no 
explanation for the particular plane of the ring, but both 
models were described in a summary of his book (but 
without illustrations) that was published the following 
year in a Hamburg periodical. This came to the eyes of 
the young IMMANUELKANT, who, misunderstanding Wright, 
thought the Divine Centre was elsewhere in the universe. 
This being so, he saw no reason why the ring should 
not extend continuously from one side to the other, so 
that the system of the stars would occupy a space whose 
shape was not that of a hollow ring but of a disk. He 
also knew of observations by P L M de Maupertuis, 
which Kant interpreted as being of other star systems 
that had an elliptical outline. A spherical system viewed 
from without will always have a circular outline, but a 
disk-shaped system will appear elliptical. Kant therefore 
adopted Wright’s second model, as duly modified, and he 
concluded that our star system is disk-shaped. 

Wright’s book had limited circulation, distribution 
of Kant’s work was undermined by the bankruptcy of 
the bookseller, and a work by J H Lambert, an Alsatian 
living on the fringes of the scientific community and who 
had somewhat similar ideas, also found a limited public. 
It may well be, therefore, that when William Herschel 
turned his attention to the problem of the Milky Way, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


he was unaware of these earlier speculations. Herschel 
took it for granted that the Milky Way was the optical 
effect of our immersion in a layer of stars, and he saw 
that he could establish the detailed shape of the layer if 
he allowed himself two assumptions. The first, obviously, 
was that his telescope could penetrate to the borders of 
the system in all directions, for unless this was so his quest 
was hopeless from the start. The second was that within 
the borders of the space occupied by stars, the system 
was roughly symmetric. Obviously this was by no means 
strictly true; Herschel hoped that it would be true enough 
for his purpose. 

Granted these assumptions, the number of stars 
visible in any particular field of view of Herschel’s 
telescope would be directly proportional to the volume 
of space within the Galaxy within that field of view, and 
a simple calculation would convert this volume into the 
distance to the border in that direction. Herschel did 
not have time enough to carry this pioneering exercise in 
stellar statistics to a conclusion, but in 1785 he completed 
the examination of a great circle of the sky and converted 
the resultant star counts into a cross section of the Galaxy. 

The experience of later years convinced him that 
neither assumption was even approximately correct. His 
40 ft reflector completed in 1789 revealed many stars 
hitherto hidden from him, and his studies of nebulae and 
clusters showed how very non-uniform is the distribution 
of the stars of the Galaxy. He therefore abandoned his cross 
section of the Galaxy, but as for many decades nothing 
comparable was advanced to fill its place, the diagram 
continued to appear until late in the nineteenth century. 


The riddle of the nebulae 


This investigation, however, was a distraction from the 
great campaign to which Herschel had dedicated himself, 
a systematic search for NEBULAE and clusters. Mention of 
nebulous stars goes back to antiquity, but much-needed 
clarity was introduced into the subject by Halley in 1715 
when he published a list of six nebulae; these he believed 
to be formed of a ‘lucid medium’. Others, however, 
adopted the simpler view that a nebula was astar cluster so 
distant that the individual stars could not be distinguished. 
Observations could help settle the issue in two ways. First, 
new and bigger telescopes might resolve into stars objects 
that had appeared nebulous in lesser instruments. Second, 
if it was shown that a nebula had changed in appearance 
over a few years or even decades, then the nebula could not 
be a distant and therefore vast star system, for the widely 
scattered components of such a system would not have 
been able to travel such great distances in so short a time. 
Herschel shows an awareness of this latter consideration 
on the very first page of his first observing book, dated 
March 1774. For the rest of that decade he was able to 
make only occasional observations of a single nebula, the 
ORION NEBULA, but these were enough to satisfy him that it 
was indeed altering shape. This being so, it must be a true 
nebula. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Astronomy (to the Rise of Astrophysics in the 
Mid-Nineteenth Century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


How then to distinguish between true nebulae and 
distant star clusters? Herschel decided that true nebulae 
revealed themselves by their smooth, milky appearance, 
while distant star clusters had a mottled look. But no 
sooner had he proposed this in a 1784 paper to the Royal 
Society, than he came across two nebulae in which both 
forms of nebulosity were intermingled. This forced him 
to reinterpret the evidence. He now decided that mottled 
nebulosity indicated stars at middle distance, while milky 
nebulosity indicated stars further away. All nebulae were 
systems of stars. 

In 1783 he had embarked on a systematic search 
for nebulae. With his 20 ft reflector facing south, he 
allowed the sky to drift past as he waited for a nebula 
to come into view; he would then shout out details of its 
appearance to his sister Caroline who was seated at a desk 
at an open window nearby. In 20 years of observing, the 
team of brother and sister collected 2500 nebulae, to add 
to the hundred or so listed by Charles Messier in 1781. 
They thereby introduced into astronomy the methodology 
of the natural historian, for they were collecting and 
classifying specimens in great numbers. Furthermore, 
Herschel realised that since gravity was a universal force, 
a scattered star system would become more concentrated 
as time passed. This allowed him to develop a cosmogony, 
set out in papers published in 1785 and 1789. He envisaged 
the process as beginning with widely scattered stars; then, 
as time passed, the gravitational pull of the stars that 
happened to be in greater concentrations than elsewhere 
would draw in the surrounding stars, leading to the 
formation of systems of ever increasing density. Where 
Newton had seen in the heavens the stability of clockwork, 
Herschel saw development analogous to that of the life- 
story of a person. 

In November 1790 Herschel was ‘sweeping’ as usual 
when he came across NGC 1514, which he saw as a star 
surrounded by a luminous halo. He had already seen 
several ‘PLANETARY NEBULAE’ as he termed them, objects that 
had planet-like disks but shone with the pale light of a 
nebula, and he was greatly puzzled by them. To modern 
astronomers NGC 1514 is another planetary nebula, but to 
Herschel it was a ‘nebulous star’. Indeed, it was a star that 
was condensing out of the nebulosity that surrounded it. 
Clearly, (true) nebulosity existed after all. 

Herschel thus found himself forced to alter his 
opinion once more. In papers published in 1811 and 
1814, he extended his earlier cosmogony back in time, 
before stars had formed out of the diffuse nebulosity; he 
described the formation of concentrated nebulous clouds, 
out of which stars condensed, which in turn developed 
into more and more tightly packed clusters. 

William Herschel was in his fifties when his son 
John was born, and in his late seventies when John 
embarked on a career as a Cambridge don. Eager to 
transmit his skills and experience while he still had 
strength, William prevailed upon John to return home 
and become in effect his apprentice. Late in 1820 
William’s 20 ft reflector deteriorated to the point where 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


John undertook the construction of a replacement; and 
with this in 1821 he carried out two trial sweeps, with 
his aged aunt as his mentor. In 1825, after his father’s 
death, he commenced a systematic re-examination of his 
father’s nebulae. Unfortunately William’s catalogs of 
nebulae were arranged by type and so quite unsuited 
to John’s needs. Caroline, by now living in her native 
Hanover, came to the rescue, and undertook the immense 
labor of rearranging the catalogs into a form suitable for 
‘sweeping’, a task for which she was awarded the Gold 
Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society. 

John’s re-examination of the northern nebulae 
resulted in a catalogue of 2306 nebulae and clusters 
published in 1833. John then set sail for the Cape of Good 
Hope, and in four years of intense activity extended to the 
southern skies all aspects of his father’s researches. His 
Results of Astronomical Observations Made ... at the Cape of 
Good Hope, published in 1847, listed over 1700 nebulae and 
clusters and over 2100 double stars, as well as thousands 
of star counts and much else besides. 

Whereas his father had left no one in any doubt as to 
his opinions, John was more circumspect, and sometimes 
inhibited by his reluctance publicly to differ from his 
father. Meanwhile the debate continued: were all nebulae 
star clusters that appeared nebulous simply because they 
were so distant, or were some star clusters and others truly 
nebulous? Because of its brightness and apparent size, the 
Orion Nebula became a test object: could it, or could it 
not, be resolved into stars under examination by a truly 
massive reflector? 

In 1839, at his estate at Birr Castle in central Ireland, 
William Parsons (the future THIRD EARL OF ROSSE) succeeded 
in building a reflector on the Herschelian model, with a 
segmented mirror 3 ft in diameter; the following year, 
he cast a solid mirror of the same size. He persuaded 
himself that the instrument had resolved into stars a 
number of prominent nebulae, and he determined to build 
a still bigger instrument, with mirrors no less than 6 ft in 
diameter, to carry this process to a convincing conclusion. 
The ‘Leviathan of Parsonstown’ first saw light in February 
1845, and within a few weeks Rosse was able to announce 
that the nebula M51 had a spiral structure. A year later, he 
claimed decisive evidence of the resolvability of the Orion 
Nebula, a feat that many saw as proclaiming the end of 
belief in ‘true’ nebulosity. Rosse has been criticized for 
seeing what he wanted to see, but in fact his great reflector 
was capable of seeing stars that are indeed embedded in 
the nebula, and it is not surprising that he interpreted this 
as evidence that the nebula is stellar. 

There were, however, doubters, notably observers 
who believed they had seen changes in nebulae, changes 
that had happened too quickly for the nebulae to be vast 
stellar systems. This seemed indisputably the case when 
a nebula discovered in 1852 by John R Hind completely 
disappeared in 1861. Three years later, the new techniques 
of astrophysics brought the long debate to a conclusion, 
when William Huggins demonstrated beyond argument 
the existence of gaseous nebulae. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Astronomy (to the Rise of Astrophysics in the 
Mid-Nineteenth Century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Bennett J A 1976 ‘On the power of penetrating into space’: 
The telescopes of William Herschel J. Hist. Astron. 7 
75-108 

Hoskin M 1982 Stellar Astronomy: Historical Essays 
(Chalfont St Giles: Science History Publications) 

Hoskin M (ed) 1997 The Cambridge Illustrated History 
of Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

——1999 The Cambridge Concise History of Astronomy 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) ch 7 
Whitney C A 1971 The Discovery of Our Galaxy (New York: 

Knopf) 


Michael Hoskin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Atmospheres 


The atmosphere of a star is the boundary between the 
stellar interior and the interstellar medium. It spans the 
layers from which photons can escape to the surrounding 
space. Direct information about the physical state of the 
stellar atmosphere can therefore be derived from the 
emergent radiation. This is, however, not the case for 
deeper layers, because photons that are emitted in these 
layers are reabsorbed or scattered numerous times before 
escaping. A physical description of the stellar interior can 
be inferred only indirectly: the atmosphere as a boundary 
layer reflects the conditions in the stellar interior. The 
only direct probes of the stellar interior are neutrinos 
emitted in the core and gravitational waves, but there are 
considerable difficulties in detecting them (only 
neutrinos emitted by the Sun and SN 1987A have been 
observed so far). In the last decade, helioseismology has 
developed very rapidly, and the study of numerous 
oscillation modes has allowed us to probe the Sun’s 
interior. Asteroseismology will follow in the coming 
years, but the very low amplitude of stellar oscillations 
has limited its current application to pulsating stars. 
Therefore, our present understanding of stellar structure 
and evolution hinges primarily on our ability to model 
stellar atmospheres and on analysing the emergent 
radiation. 

This article describes stellar atmospheres very 
broadly. It discusses the general structure of stellar 
atmospheres, line formation, stellar atmosphere theory, 
opacities and non-thermal phenomena. More details can 
be found in the articles on STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: COOL 
STARS, STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: EARLY-TYPE STARS, 
EXTENDED ATMOSPHERES, CHROMOSPHERE, CORONAE 
and the SOLAR WIND. 


General structure 

The atmosphere might be quite extended in space. 
However, the bulk of the radiation is emitted in a thin 
layer, the photosphere. The solar photosphere is about 
600 km thick as illustrated in figure 1. Hotter stars have 
thicker photospheres, but in general the extent of the 
photosphere corresponds to about 1/1000 of the stellar 
radius. 

The structure above the photosphere differs 
markedly between cool and hot stars. Cool stars (spectral 
type A7 and later on the main-sequence, or Te < 7500 K) 
are characterized by increasing temperature in their outer 
layers. Figure | illustrates the temperature structure of 
the solar atmosphere. The chromosphere, with typical 
temperatures ranging from 7000 to 20 000 K, is 
diagnosed from emission lines in the far-ultraviolet and 
emission reversal in the core of very strong optical lines 
(Ha, Ca II H and K). Above the chromosphere, there is a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Semi-empirical solar mode atmosahere 
Ie 
Transition eg’on 


Fhotesphere 


on Chromosohere 
= 10600 - + 
= 

8080 

6000 

40co + 

ate ar a NEO ga a ob TR a a Vas bs a a Ee Sa ie 
2000 606 1260 aco 400 ia] 
b [km] 


Figure 1. Semi-empirical temperature—height distribution for 
the average, quiet Sun (adapted from Vernazza et al 1973 
Astrophys. J. 184 605), illustrating the general atmosphere 
structure of late-type stars. The origin of the height scale 
corresponds to optical depth unity, and the solar interior is to 
the right. 


hot, million-degree corona seen in solar eclipses and 
detected in the x-ray and extreme ultraviolet domains by 
various satellites. Obviously, there is also a transition 
region between the chromosphere and the corona with 
intermediate temperatures where emission lines of 
ionized species like He II, C IV and Si IV are formed. 
While the exact heating mechanism(s) of the 
chromosphere and corona are not yet fully understood, 
chromospheres and coronas have been detected only in 
low-mass stars having a sub-photospheric convection 
zone. 

Strong, fast winds typify the atmospheres of early- 
type main-sequence stars (O and early B-type) and O, B 
and A-type supergiants. The characteristic spectral 
features of these winds are strong P-Cygni line profiles 
and an infrared excess due to free—free emission in the 
wind. These fast, supersonic winds are driven by 
radiation pressure generated by absorption of photons in 
spectral lines. X-ray emission has also been detected in O 
and early B-type stars, but this is not a signature of a 
corona. This emission is attributed to shock-heated 
material in the wind. 

Winds are also present in cooler stars. In cool main- 
sequence stars, the high coronal temperature results in a 
large gas pressure inducing a weak pressure-driven stellar 
wind. This is a fast wind, but so tenuous that it is 
optically thin throughout and cannot be detected 
spectroscopically. In this respect, this wind is not really a 
part of the stellar atmosphere as defined. In evolved cool 
stars, a much denser wind is observed. Due to the low 
surface gravity of such stars, the mass loss rate of a 
coronal wind would be larger, but other mechanisms like 
radiation pressure on dust grains formed in the outer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


layers or like acceleration in pulsating layers become 
more efficient drivers. In contrast to the winds of cool 
main-sequence stars, the winds of red supergiants are 
slow. 


Atmospheric parameters 

For most stars, a radius, R, can be defined quite naturally 
by the distance of the photosphere from the center of the 
star. The total luminosity, L, radiated by the star is given 
by 


Le 
E=4nz Rf F,.dv = 4x R*0 T;, 
i) 
(1) 


where the flux integral is the total radiated power per unit 
area. The effective temperature, T.;, is defined in an 
analogous form of the Stefan—Boltzmann law, making 
Tere the temperature of a black body radiating the same 
energy per unit area as the star. The stellar spectrum may, 
however, differ dramatically from a black body spectrum. 
From this relation and the limited extension of the 
photosphere, it follows that the electronic temperature in 
the photosphere is typically of the order of the effective 
temperature. This temperature is the first fundamental 
parameter describing a stellar atmosphere. 

Apart from the temperature, the emergent spectrum 
will reflect the density of the absorbing and emitting 
material in the photosphere. The total mass density in the 
photosphere is set by the balance between gas and 
radiation pressures on the one hand and gravity on the 
other. The gravitational acceleration, g = GM/R’, is 
constant since the photosphere is a thin layer (M is the 
mass of the star). The surface gravity is thus the second 
fundamental parameter, and is usually expressed as log g, 
in cgs units. Absorption and emission processes will also 
depend on the chemical composition of the atmosphere, 
which is the third major parameter. Additional 
parameters may be defined to describe an atmosphere, 
e.g. turbulent velocities, magnetic field strengths or wind 
parameters. 


Geometry 

Because the radial extent of the photosphere is much less 
than the stellar radius (i.e. the curvature is mostly 
negligible), most stellar photospheres can be modeled 
like plane-parallel slabs. The scale height is the 
characteristic distance on which pressure and density 
decrease in the slab, and thus depends on the surface 
gravity. Spectroscopic analyses of the photospheric 
spectrum with plane-parallel model atmospheres 
therefore yield an estimate of log g, but do not provide 
the stellar radius directly. 

There are, however, some important cases, like 
supergiants and Wolf—Rayet stars, for which the 
geometrical extension of the photosphere becomes 
comparable to the stellar radius. This makes any 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


definition of the radius much less obvious, and 
parameters like Tr and log g lose much of their meaning 
if a radius is not defined properly. Usually, the radius is 
defined as the distance from the center where the mean 
Rosseland optical depth reaches unity (see the discussion 
on the gray case later in this article), and the spectrum 
provides direct information on the stellar radius. A 
spherical geometry must be assumed to model these stars. 


General theory 

A physical theory providing a description of the structure 
of a stellar atmosphere will essentially express how 
energy is transported from the stellar interior (where it is 
generated by nuclear reactions) through the atmosphere 
(to be radiated in the interstellar medium). Radiation is 
the major mode of energy transport through the surface 
layers. In cool stars with sub-photospheric convective 
zones, convection carries a significant fraction of the 
energy in the deep photosphere. However, in upper 
layers, convection becomes rapidly inefficient. A hot 
convective cell rising from deeper layers will quickly 
radiate all its extra energy and reach an equilibrium with 
the local gas. Some spectral features are nonetheless 
sensitive to convection and are used to check convection 
theories. At much lower densities, as in the solar corona, 
heat conduction becomes an important process. In the 
upper atmosphere, energy may also be transported by 
MHD or acoustic waves that are responsible for heating 
the corona non-radiatively. These waves have been 
generated by strong and geometrically complex magnetic 
fields, which in turn are created by a dynamo effect in the 
convection zone (see the section on non-thermal 
processes later). 

Radiation therefore not only probes the physical 
conditions in stellar outer layers, but is a major 
constituent that structures the whole atmosphere. It is a 
non-local process that drives the atmosphere away from 
thermodynamic equilibrium (as we see a star, there are 
energy losses). Because non-equilibrium situations are 
always difficult to model, a number of simplifications 
have historically been made to describe the geometry, the 
dynamics and the thermodynamics of _ stellar 
atmospheres. Early models assumed one-dimensional 
geometry (plane-parallel slab, spherical symmetry), a 
static medium, local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) 
and a frequency-independent opacity (gray atmosphere). 
Some of these assumptions have since then been lifted to 
model different stellar types (e.g. departures from LTE 
are especially important in hot stars), but the full 3D, 
non-LTE, radiation-hydrodynamics problem still remains 
intractable. The main emphasis was first put, on the one 
hand, on LTE metal line-blanketed model atmospheres 
incorporating the detailed opacity of millions of atomic 
lines, and on the other hand on non-LTE model 
atmospheres with much fewer opacity sources. Later, the 
emphasis shifted to non-static models to interpret the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


observations of stellar winds. In recent years, non-LTE 
metal line-blanketed models have been developed for 
static photospheres and stationary winds. Solving the 
non-LTE radiation hydrodynamics problem with detailed 
opacities and constructing multidimensional non-LTE 
model atmospheres are major avenues of research today. 


Radiation transport 

While radiation transport may be expressed most 
generally by the kinetic (Boltzmann) equation for 
photons (similarly to the case of massive particles), it is 
more customary to derive the radiative transfer equation 
phenomenologically. Let us consider radiation traveling 
in a direction s. The specific intensity J, is the amount of 
energy transported by units of surface, solid angle, time 
and frequency. Along the path s, the change in specific 
intensity, d/\/ds, is the sum of the energy losses and 
sources: 


d/,. = —x,.J,.ds+ J, ds 
(4) 


or 


df, /dt, = —I, + 5, 

(3) 
where the source function, S,, is the ratio of the emission 
and absorption coefficients, and dt, = «, ds is the optical 
depth along the radiation path. The absorption 
coefficient, k,, describes the removal of energy from the 
radiation field by matter, and the emission coefficient, j,, 
describes the energy released by the material. Thus these 
two coefficients describe the interaction between matter 
and radiation. Actual expressions are given by the 
microscopic state of the plasma. A more general form of 
the radiative transfer equation may be written by 
replacing the derivative along s by the total derivative 
(d/ds — 1/co/ot + n-V). 

The formal solution of this equation follows a 
standard integration. The specific intensity emerging 
from a slab having an optical depth 1, is: 


i,(O) = 1,(t,)e7" + [ Sy(t,)e7" dt. 
: (4) 


The first term expresses the attenuation of the incoming 
intensity and the second term is the source term. This 
solution, however, hides the actual difficulty of solving 
the radiative transfer equation. The source function 
contains a thermal emission term and a scattering term. 
The scattering term depends on the mean intensity of the 
radiation field (specific intensity averaged over all 
directions) resulting in a non-linear equation in most 
cases. 

A numerical solution of the radiative transfer 
equation may be obtained by different methods 
depending on the complexity of the problem at hand. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Equation (4) provides a formal solution if the source 
function is fully specified. For a long time, a direct 
quadrature was viewed as extremely inefficient due to the 
required exponentials. This limitation has mostly 
disappeared with present-day computers. Other methods 
can be divided into two main classes: first-order form and 
second-order form of the transfer equation. First-order 
methods have been recently revived by an adaptation of 
the discontinuous finite element method. The specific 
intensity is assumed to be given as a linear function of 
optical depth. Straightforward analytic manipulations 
result in simple expressions for the discretized specific 
intensities. The solution is obtained independently for 
each angle (direction) and for each frequency. The 
second-order method, usually known as the Feautrier 
method, has long been the method of choice, because it 
allows easy expression of the angle coupling arising from 
the scattering term in the source function. The basis of 
the Feautrier method is to introduce the symmetric and 
antisymmetric angle averages of the specific intensity 
and to combine the transfer equations in the upward and 
downward directions. Some simple algebra results in a 
second-order differential equation. With proper boundary 
conditions, a tridiagonal set of discretized equations is 
solved by a straightforward Gaussian elimination 
scheme. 

Generally, the source function is not known fully. 
The source function may be written as: 


Sy = Oy + Byd 

(5) 
where a, describes the thermal processes, B, the 
scattering processes and J is an appropriate average of 
the specific intensity over angles and (line) frequencies. 
The details of the frequency average depend on the 
assumed correlation in frequency of absorption and 
emission processes (the so-called complete and partial 
redistribution functions). Scattering is mostly due to 
electron Thomson scattering (Compton scattering is 
unimportant except in the hottest atmospheres); 
additional scattering processes may be present. Although 
the source function may remain linear in the specific 
intensities in some special circumstances (two-level atom 
case), scattering introduces a coupling between the 
specific intensities at different angles and frequencies. 
The radiative transfer equation must now be solved 
simultaneously at a number of angles and frequencies. 
This coupling may easily be expressed in the Feautrier 
scheme and a single-step solution is still possible in the 
linear case. However, the Gaussian elimination scheme 
requires matrix inversions where the matrix size is the 
product of the number of angles times the number of 
frequencies. Nonlinear, multilevel atom problems are 
classically solved by linearizing the equations and 
iterating. The complete linearization method is based on 
such a Newton—Raphson method. The radiative transfer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is solved using the Feautrier scheme, thus taking fully 
into account the angle—frequency couplings. This method 
converges rapidly because all couplings are treated 
explicitly, but the computing cost quickly becomes 
prohibitive. An iterative method that avoids explicitly 
solving the coupling would thus be preferable. 

The straightforward iteration method, the so-called A 
iteration, consists in solving the transfer equation by 
assuming a starting estimate of the source function, then 
recalculating the source function with the first estimate of 
J, and then iterating. This iteration scheme has long 
been known to fail in the case of strong scattering (most 
strong resonance lines, e.g. Lyman a, C IV, Mg IID). 
Scattering decouples the radiation field from local 
sources and sinks and involves global transport of 
photons over large distances in the atmosphere. The 
iteration process propagates information on the changes 
of J over a mean free path (At ~ 1) at each iteration. 
This scheme therefore requires a very large number of 
iterations to converge at large optical depths (and, more 
seriously, the solution seems to be converged while still 
far from the exact solution). 

Recent progress was achieved upon the realization 
that not all the parts of the coupling should be treated on 
the same footing. Some parts of the coupling are more 
important and must be treated explicitly to ensure 
convergence, while the rest may be treated iteratively (as 
in A iteration). This is the basis of the method of deferred 
corrections that is at the heart of the accelerated lambda 
iteration (ALI) methods. The radiative transfer operator 
is split into a local part that may be easily inverted (thus 
solved cheaply in a single step) and a non-local 
correction applied to the fully specified, previous 
estimate of the source function. Such methods yield fast 
convergence and are further described in the article on 
RADIATIVE TRANSFER. 


Opacities 

Stellar atmosphere theory and spectral analyses depend 
heavily on atomic physics. The opacity of the 
atmospheric plasma is the basic physical quantity that 
determines the radiation transport, and thus determines 
the atmospheric structure as well as the emergent 
spectrum. The total absorption coefficient describes the 
interaction between radiation and matter, and depends on 
the chemical composition of the atmosphere and its 
thermodynamical state as expressed by the temperature, 
the electronic density and the populations of the energy 
levels of all species. 

The total opacity includes four general contributions: 
the bound—bound, the bound—free, and the free—free 
opacity, and a scattering term (mostly electron 
scattering). Detailed expressions for these opacity 
sources may be found in Mihalas (1978). For hydrogen, 
analytical expressions exist for the different contributions 


to the opacity. For heavier elements, detailed calculations 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the atomic structures are required to obtain the cross 
sections. Thanks to huge efforts in the last 20 years, 
extensive and reliable atomic data are now available. 
Good starting points to retrieve the necessary atomic data 
are the Opacity and Iron Projects which provide detailed 
photoionization cross sections, line transition 
probabilities and collisional data for the most abundant 
light elements up to iron, the Kurucz line list, which is 
widely used in stellar atmosphere modeling and spectral 
analyses, and the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) which provides critically evaluated 
atomic databases (level energies, oscillator strengths) and 
an extensive bibliography. 

With the exception of atomic level energies, the bulk 
of the required atomic data have been obtained 
theoretically. Some line transition probabilities and very 
few photoionization cross sections have been measured 
in the laboratory, in part due to the difficulty of creating 
the necessary physical conditions to measure them. To 
check the theoretical data, stellar atmospheres may 
provide a different laboratory where such conditions are 
met. This approach was mainly followed to derive 
oscillator strengths, matching the solar (or stellar) 
spectrum with model spectra. These data may be affected 
by systematic effects due to imperfections in the solar 
(stellar) model atmosphere used to compute the 
spectrum, but these systematic errors cancel out when 
performing a differential analysis (i.e. the oscillator 
strengths are derived from the solar spectrum and applied 
to the analysis of solar-type stars). Such sets of oscillator 
strengths are particularly valuable for chemical 
abundance studies. 

Major effects resulting in departures from LTE are 
shifts of the ionization equilibria. Reliable 
photoionization cross-sections are therefore essential data 
in non-LTE model atmospheres. Detailed atomic 
structure calculations of atoms and ions having many 
electrons yield very complex photoionization cross- 
sections, with resonances due to autoionization 
processes. Available laboratory data are very limited 
(mostly cross sections from the ground state of neutral 
atoms). In this case, stellar atmospheres are not as useful 
for line strength, because the continuum spectrum 
reflects the total bound—free and free—free opacities of all 
atoms and ions present in the photosphere. This opacity 
is usually dominated by the hydrogen opacity because 
hydrogen is the major constituent of the atmosphere. In 
the presence of strong chemical anomalies, the total 
opacity may be dominated by other opacity sources. This 
is particularly the case in the far-ultraviolet spectrum of 
silicon-rich Ap stars. The bound-free Si II opacity 
becomes dominant, and the observed spectrum reflects 
these cross-sections. Figure 2 displays the UV spectrum 
of the ApSi star HD 34452. The observations are 
compared with theoretical spectra calculated with new 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3.0x197 18 EF 4 


wetter ty 4 
2.9x10 0% 3 4 


= aa 

e at nis : 
wt 2ax107 SE, Me 7 4 
¢ [ é tes 1 
Gu 

= = 

2 1.510 

i& 

x 7 

eT Oe 


5.0x10— 


1200 1300 1408 1500 1600 “700 
Wavelength [A] 


Figure 2. [UE low-resolution spectrum of HD 34452 (thick 
curve) compared with a theoretical spectrum synthesis (thin 
curve). Continuum spectra (H + C: dotted curve; H + C + Si’: 
broken curve) are also shown to illustrate the huge effect of Si 
II autoionization resonances (from Lanz et al 1996 Astron. 
Astrophys. 309 218). 


cross sections computed with the R-matrix method. The 
atomic data calculations are very similar to those of the 
Opacity Project. The model spectrum reproduces very 
well the positions and widths of the broad autoionization 
resonances, and therefore provides supporting evidence 
of the reliability of this set of atomic data. Additional 
evidence of the quality of Opacity Project data includes 
good predictions of atomic level energies and 
comparisons with large samples of oscillator strengths 
from other theoretical studies or laboratory 
measurements. 


Line formation 

Let us assume that the structure of the atmosphere 
(temperature, density, atomic level populations) is 
known, and let us examine first the limited problem of 
line formation. Why do most stellar spectra display 
absorption lines? What can we learn from emission line 
spectra? 

We can recast equation (4) in the case of a semi- 
infinite atmosphere. The emergent intensity seen by an 
external observer (t = 0) at an angle @ to the normal of 
the surface (1 = cos 8): 


pe] 
I,(t = 0, u) = [ Sylty) e-*# dy fe. 
o 
(6) 


The emergent intensity is a weighted average of the 
source function along the line of sight. If we suppose 
further that the source function is a linear function of 
depth, S,(t,) = Soy + S\y T, then equation (6) yields: 


f(t = 0, 2) = So, + Sy we = §.(t, = 2) 
(7) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which is known as the Eddington—Barbier relation. This 
result states that the emergent intensity is characteristic 
of the value of the source function at about optical depth 
unity along the line of sight. In a spectral line, we 
encounter optical depth unity in higher layers for 
frequencies with high opacity (line core) and in deeper 
layers for frequencies with low opacity (line wings, 
continuum). Therefore, emergent line profiles map the 
depth dependence of the source function. If we further 
assume LTE, S, = B,, the temperature structure can in 
principle be inferred. Absorption line stellar spectra 
indicate that the line source function decreases with 
increasing height in photospheres. In cool stars, line core 
emissions are observed in the strongest lines (e.g. Ca II H 
and K) showing that the source function increases in the 
highest layers. This has been _ straightforwardly 
interpreted as indicating a temperature decrease in the 
photosphere and a temperature rise in the upper layers 
(chromosphere). Recent hydrodynamical simulations 
suggest, however, that the real structure of the solar 
chromosphere may be more complicated; hot regions 
which are responsible for the line core emissions are 
embedded in a _ low-temperature, photosphere-like 
medium. 

While the line profiles map the source function 
behavior, a straightforward interpretation in terms of 
temperature should be approached with caution. First, 
equation (6) shows that the source function at different 
depths contributes to the emergent intensity. Limiting the 
contribution to a single depth of formation is quite useful 
at first, but is still an oversimplification. The concept of 
contribution functions seems a preferable approach. 
Second, the source function contains a thermal term and 
a scattering term (equation (5)). While the mean intensity 
decreases with height as photons escape, the thermal term 
depends on the details of photoexcitations and 
recombinations. Therefore, an interpretation of the line 
profiles in terms of physical parameters requires a careful 
and detailed non-LTE analysis. 

In extended atmospheres and in winds, line profiles 
provide additional information on the geometry and the 
dynamics of the atmosphere. The most typical signatures 
of stellar winds are asymmetric P Cygni line profiles. 


Structural equations 

A model atmosphere specifies all atmospheric state 
parameters as functions of depth (actually as discretized 
values along the depth coordinate because the problem is 
solved numerically). The list of parameters required to 
describe a model atmosphere depends on the basic 
assumptions of the model, but traditionally includes only 
electron temperature, total density electron density and 
atomic level populations. The detailed radiation field is 
generally not stored because it can be recalculated 
through a simple formal solution of the radiative transfer 
equation when all other state parameters are known. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


predicted emergent spectrum alone is sometimes stored 
separately, because this is the most interesting output to 
compare with observations. 

The state parameters of a model atmosphere are most 
generally described by distribution functions, which are 
calculated by solving the kinetic equation. The set of 
equations to solve is in general truly enormous because 
the individual particles are not just the atoms and ions, 
but all excited states of atoms, ions and molecules. It is 
standard in kinetic theory to simplify this system by 
constructing equations for the moments of the 
distribution functions. After summation over all kinds of 
particles, one obtains the well-known hydrodynamic 
equations, namely the continuity equation, the 
momentum equation and the energy balance equation. In 
addition, particles of each type must satisfy a 
conservation equation. The moment equations form the 
set of equations that are actually solved. In full 
generality, this system remains still intractable, and some 
simplifying assumptions have to be made. Let us 
consider the classical model atmosphere: a_ one- 
dimensional, stationary and static medium. The system of 
equations simplifies to: 


Dn; 
=0 
Dt coll 
(8) 
dP/dz = —gg 
(9) 
VFing =O => Foa = o Toe 
(10) 


where (DnjDf).o1 is the collision term in the kinetic 
equation that describes creations and destructions of 
particles of type i, P is the total pressure, z the 
geometrical coordinate, p the total density, g the 
gravitational acceleration at the stellar surface, Fg the 
radiative flux, o the Stefan—Boltzmann constant and Tor 
the effective temperature. These equations are called the 
statistical equilibrium, hydrostatic equilibrium and 
radiative equilibrium equations. The explicit form of the 
statistical equilibrium equation incorporates all individual 
radiative transitions (rates depend on J ) and collisional 
transitions (rates depend on 7 and n,) that populate and 
depopulate every individual energy level 7 of all atoms 
and ions. Therefore, the basic structural equations must 
be solved simultaneously with the radiative transfer 
equation at a large number of frequencies to compute the 
radiative rates and the total radiative flux (equation (10)). 
While the structural equations depend on the radiation 
field, the absorption and emission coefficients appearing 
in the radiative transfer equations depend on the local 
temperature, density and populations n;. All these 
equations therefore form a highly coupled, highly non- 
linear system of equations. It may be solved using 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


linearization techniques and ALI schemes for radiative 
transfer. 

The description of a plasma is greatly simplified if 
thermodynamic equilibrium holds. In this state, the 
particle velocity distribution (Maxwell distribution), the 
ionization (Saha formula) and the excitation (Boltzmann 
law) equilibria are specified uniquely by two 
thermodynamic variables, usually chosen as the absolute 
(electron) temperature 7 and the electron density (n,). 
Because a stellar atmosphere is essentially a boundary, 
thermodynamic equilibrium cannot hold. As photons 
escape, there are energy and momentum losses that give 
rise to significant gradients in the state parameters. 
However, even if thermodynamic equilibrium cannot be 
assumed for the whole stellar atmosphere, we may still 
use the concept of local thermodynamic equilibrium 
(LTE). The Maxwell and Saha—Boltzmann distributions 
cannot be applied globally, but may be used locally for 
the local values of 7(r) and n,(r). On the other hand, the 
radiation field (which is by essence non-local) is allowed 
to depart from its equilibrium, Planckian, distribution. In 
non-LTE (NLTE) model atmospheres, some populations 
are allowed to depart from their LTE, Saha—Boltzmann 
distributions. A Maxwellian velocity distribution is still 
assumed to hold in most NLTE models. 

Microscopically, LTE holds if all atomic processes 
are in detailed balance (i.e. the number of any given 
processes is balanced by the same number of opposite 
processes). Since electrons have a Maxwellian velocity 
distribution, collisions between atoms and electrons will 
distribute this temperature information among the atomic 
levels and will tend to maintain the local equilibrium. 
LTE is therefore a good approximation where collisions 
far outnumber radiative transitions. When radiative 
transitions dominate, LTE remains a good approximation 
as long as all radiative transitions are in detailed balance. 
This is verified in deep layers where a photon has a very 
low probability of escaping, but LTE will break down in 
upper layers. As photons escape, the number of 
photoexcitations will drop below spontaneous 
deexcitations, and the detailed balance requirement will 
not be met. Departures from LTE are thus most likely in 
hot stars (strong radiation field) and low-density 
atmospheres (supergiants). The validity of LTE is further 
discussed in the article on STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: 
EARLY-TYPE STARS. 


The gray case 

There is one further simplification that allows derivation 
of an analytical expression for the temperature structure: 
the gray case. Besides its historic importance, gray model 
atmospheres are the most obvious starting point for 
constructing more sophisticated model atmospheres. The 
opacity is assumed to be a constant, frequency- 
independent value. Usually, the Rosseland mean opacity 
is adopted: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


= dB ([- 1 dB, 4 ol 
_— = SS es 3 z 
w= i= mn ar(f scar) 


(11) 
The Rosseland mean opacity is also used in modeling 
stellar interiors, because it yields the exact total radiative 
flux at depth using the diffusion approximation, and it 
will therefore give the correct temperature structure in 
the deepest layers of the atmosphere. The system of 
equations is greatly simplified by using frequency- 
averaged moments of the radiation field: J, the mean 
intensity, H, the flux, and K the second-order moment. 
The radiative equilibrium reduces to 


J=B=oT* 
(12) 


and the second moment of the radiative transfer equation: 


dK 
dr 
(13) 


Invoking the Eddington approximation, K = J/3, which is 
a good approximation in the deep atmospheric layers 
where the radiation field is close to isotropic, one obtains 


rt = 313, (c+5). 
4 3 
(14) 


A rigorous solution obtained by Chandrasekhar leads to a 
very similar temperature structure. The constant 2/3 is 
replaced by a slowly varying function of optical depth, 
the Hopf function g(t), ranging from g(0) = 0.577 to q(«) 
=0.71. 


H. 


Non-gray LTE model atmospheres 

Gray model atmospheres are not very useful when it 
comes to interpreting real stellar spectra. Spectroscopic 
analyses require construction of non-gray model 
atmospheres, solving the radiative transfer at a number of 
frequencies using the proper values of the absorption and 
emission coefficients. Constructing LTE model 
atmospheres requires a solution of the basic structural 
equations (e.g., equations (8)-(10)), where the statistical 
equilibrium equations are replaced by the Saha—Boltzmann 
equations. The absorption and emission coefficients are 
therefore functions of the local temperature and electron 
density. There is still a non-local coupling of the radiation 
field and matter properties via the radiative equilibrium 
equation that fixes the local temperature. The temperature 
structure is often derived via a temperature correction 
scheme, starting from the gray structure. The local density 
is derived by a direct quadrature of the hydrostatic 
equilibrium. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The numerical difficulty in LTE model atmospheres is 
the complex dependence of the absorption (and emission) 
coefficient on frequency. Heavy atoms and ions, like iron- 
peak elements, have millions of spectral lines, requiring 
solution of the radiative transfer for a huge number of 
frequencies. A statistical approach (frequency sampling) or 
a rearrangement of the absorption coefficient (opacity 
distribution functions, ODFs) must be used to reduce the 
number of equations to solve. The ODF technique is 
particularly efficient in LTE, because all opacity 
contributions from different sources can be grouped 
together (this is not possible when radiative transition rates 
are required to solve the statistical equilibrium equations). 
The combined effect of the opacity due to many spectral 
lines significantly steepens the temperature gradient in the 
atmosphere. This effect, known as line blanketing, may be 
explained qualitatively as follows. In the continuum- 
forming layers (where the continuum optical depth is about 
unity), photons are absorbed preferentially at frequencies 
corresponding to bound—bound transitions where the 
opacity is still large enough. The flux is blocked at these 
frequencies and thus has to increase at frequencies with 
low opacity so that the same total amount of energy is 
transported. This increase requires a steeper temperature 
gradient. The deepest and the shallowest layers are not 
affected by this effect (the optical depth is either very large 
or very small), thus implying that line opacity results in a 
higher temperature in the continuum-forming region. The 
cumulative effect of millions of lines alters the temperature 
structure of the atmosphere significantly and, therefore, 
line blanketing is an essential ingredient of model 
atmosphere construction (thus requiring complete and 
detailed opacities). Indeed, the change of the temperature 
gradient results in significant differences in the emergent 
spectrum. 

Fully —line-blanketed LTE model atmospheres 
calculated by Kurucz have become a standard. These model 
atmospheres incorporate the opacity of over 40 million 
atomic, ionic and molecular lines. Currently, these model 
atmospheres are available for a wide range of stellar 
parameters (7.,, log g, chemical composition) — that 
characterize O-type to K-type stars of different metallicities. 
Spectral models of stellar populations make a broad use of 
Kurucz model atmospheres. LTE model atmospheres of 
very cool stars (M-type and cooler stars) have been 
constructed independently with several computer programs, 
designed by Gustafsson and co-workers, Tsuji, Johnson and 
co-workers, and Allard and Hauschildt. Complex molecular 
and dust chemistry occur in these cool atmospheres that are 
not included in Kurucz model atmospheres. The article on 
STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: COOL STARS provides additional 
discussion. 


NLTE model atmospheres 
Departures from LTE are expected when radiative rates 
dominate collisional rates, which typically occurs at high 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


temperatures and low densities. Therefore NLTE model 
atmospheres will be most important to interpret 
observations of hot stars (spectral types O, B and A), of 
extended atmospheres of supergiants and of stellar winds. 
Early, simple NLTE model atmospheres confirmed this 
trend. The Hertzsprung—Russell diagram was then 
roughly divided into two zones, one where LTE was 
deemed a good approximation, and another where non- 
LTE effects are important. However, in high-opacity 
regions like the extreme ultraviolet, the spectrum is 
formed very high in the atmosphere and thus is prone to 
non-LTE effects even in cooler stars. Moreover, this 
division of the HR diagram was based on a rough 
quantitative criterion. In the last 20 years, progress in 
observational techniques has resulted in spectroscopic 
data of much higher quality. The question of the 
necessity of non-LTE models should therefore be 
reconsidered in terms of the required accuracy in a given 
spectral range. 

The construction of NLTE model atmospheres 
requires the solution of large systems of nonlinear 
equations. Iterative procedures based on the A iteration 
technique do not work due to the importance of the non- 
local coupling introduced by the radiation field. Upon 
this realization, Auer and Mihalas introduced the method 
of the complete linearization, in which all equations are 
treated on the same footing. This method requires 
inversion of matrices whose sizes are equal to the number 
of equations, and is therefore rapidly limited to a small 
number of atomic levels that are allowed to depart from 
LTE (generally, H, He and few CNO levels). These early 
NLTE model atmospheres confirmed that LTE is an 
inadequate assumption for modeling hot stellar 
atmospheres. During the same period, however, the 
importance of line blanketing was stressed. It was then 
quite unclear which of the simple NLTE models or LTE 
line-blanketed models had to be preferred to model hot 
stars. The emergence of the ALI methods broke the 
limitations of the complete linearization method and led 
to more sophisticated NLTE model atmospheres. In 
recent years, NLTE line-blanketed model atmospheres 
incorporating fully consistent non-LTE  iron-peak 
element opacity have been constructed. Extensive grids 
like the Kurucz LTE grid of model atmospheres still do 
not exist, but are expected to become available in the 
near future. 

Early NLTE wind models also were relatively 
simple, including only a few non-LTE atomic levels, a 
simple photosphere as a boundary condition and using 
the Sobolev approximation throughout the wind. Here 
again, the ALI methods allowed the incorporation of 
more species with more detailed model atoms, including 
also the effect of iron-line blanketing, at least in a 
statistical sense. The energy balance and the momentum 
equations are not solved in most wind models, but an 
empirical temperature and velocity structure of the wind 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is assumed. The temperature often follows a gray 
structure, while the velocity is given as a simple 
parametric law (B-type law). In the last decade, a group at 
Munich University led by Kudritzki has put a tremendous 
effort into constructing so-called unified model 
atmospheres. Unified models treat the photosphere and 
the wind on the same footing, and they solve the energy 
balance and the momentum equations assuming a 
parameterized force due to line radiation pressure. 
Further discussion of NLTE wind models may be found 
in the article on RADIATIVELY DRIVEN STELLAR WINDS 
FROM HOT STARS. 


Non-thermal phenomena 

Thanks to the significant advances in x-ray 

instrumentation during the last 20 years, it has become 

clear that x-ray emission is widely present in stars of 
different spectral types. This emission indicates the 
presence of hot, coronal, million-degree material. From 
pressure and radiative equilibria, this implies that the 
emitting regions have very low densities, are very high in 
the atmosphere and are heated by non-radiative energy 
deposition in these layers. 

The main properties of stellar x-ray emissions can be 
summarized as follows: 

e Essentially all cool main-sequence stars of spectral 
types F to M are x-ray emitters, with x-ray 
luminosity in the range 10°°*! erg s"'. The full range 
of x-ray luminosity is observed within all spectral 
types, and the average luminosity is nearly 
independent of spectral type. 

e O- and B-type stars have an x-ray luminosity, Ly, in 
the range 10°°** erg s''. The x-ray luminosity is 
approximatively proportional to the bolometric 
luminosity, Ly/Lyo) ~ 10°. It is also correlated to the 
momentum flux in the wind or, alternatively, to the 
wind kinetic energy flux. 

e Main-sequence stars in the spectral range B8 to AS 
are not detected, with the exception of some 
magnetic Ap stars. 

e X-ray emission in cool giants and supergiants shows 
a cut-off in emission level corresponding to a 
transition between strong winds and _ coronal 
emission. 


The observed relation between the x-ray luminosity 
and the wind properties of early-type stars indicates that 
x-rays are emitted in fast, massive radiatively driven 
winds. Instabilities in the wind lead to the formation of 
shocks and to the associated non-thermal radiative 
emission. This mechanism cannot, however, explain the 
x-ray emission of later-type stars, because the predicted 
luminosity would fall far short of the observations due to 
the steep decrease of the total luminosity. 

The first standard models of the solar corona heating 
were based on energy deposition by acoustic waves. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Based on this mechanism, it was expected that the Sun 
would be close to the top of the distribution of stellar x- 
ray luminosities. Moreover, the amount of energy carried 
by the outer convective envelope that could be 
transported by acoustic waves decreases rapidly towards 
later spectral types. However, x-ray surveys did not 
reveal such a decrease of the x-ray luminosity towards 
later spectral types, and the solar x-ray luminosity is 
rather below average. Acoustic waves are therefore not 
the source of coronal heating. They are, however, the 
most likely source of chromospheric heating. 
Observations recorded with the Solar Heliospheric 
Observatory (SOHO) are showing that acoustic waves 
are damped in the upper chromosphere and do not 
propagate through the transition region. 

While the level of coronal emission does not 
correlate with spectral type, a clear correlation with the 
rotation rate has been established. Moreover, the solar 
data indicate a connection between activity and magnetic 
field strength. The magnetic field is generated by a 
magnetic dynamo with an efficiency depending on the 
rotation period of the star. By themselves, rotation or 
magnetic fields do not result in coronal emission. 
Detailed solar models indicate that magnetic fields must 
be embedded in a strong convective pattern in order for 
mechanical energy to be transported to and deposited in 
the upper atmosphere. With the disappearance of the 
outer convective zone in stars with spectral types earlier 
than A7, this heating mechanism vanishes. Indeed, no 
coronas or related x-rays are observed in early-type stars. 
At the other end of the spectral sequence, stars are 
becoming completely convective at spectral type MS. 
The dynamo efficiency and related emission might thus 
decrease in stars later than M5. Finally, activity is 
decreasing with age too: the weak solar-like wind of cool 
stars carries away angular momentum and spins down 
these stars on timescales of the order of 10° years. 

Despite this general understanding, the physics of 
the outer atmosphere of solar-like stars is still poorly 
understood. High spatial resolution images of the Sun in 
the x-ray and extreme ultraviolet domains reveal the 
complex structure of the solar upper atmosphere. Active 
cool stars reveal similar complexity with large spots on 
their surface. The simultaneous study of the Sun and late- 
type stars (the so-called solar—stellar connection) has so 
far been quite fruitful and will remain an essential avenue 
towards a better understanding of late-type stars and non- 
thermal phenomena in stellar atmospheres. 


Future developments 

Progress and success in NLTE modeling of stellar 
atmospheres and winds has been tremendous during the 
last three decades. Now it remains to make NLTE models 
as common as the very successful LTE model 
atmospheres constructed by Kurucz. This step is essential 
to benefit from the improved physics of NLTE model 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


atmospheres in analyzing the huge number of spectra that 
will be recorded by the new generations of large 
telescopes and multiaperture spectrometers. In this 
respect, the availability of grids of NLTE line-blanketed 
model atmospheres is a necessary step. Such grids of 
models will be particularly important for stellar 
population studies too. On the other hand, progress in 
including iron-line blanketing and consistently solving 
the momentum and energy balance equations in unified 
model atmospheres should be very rewarding in the 
analysis of the spectra of the brightest individual objects 
in external galaxies as far as the Virgo cluster. Unified 
model atmospheres should put the spectral analysis of 
these objects on the best physical footing to derive the 
surface chemical composition and the mass loss rate of 
these objects; prime quantities to understand the effect of 
stellar evolution on the evolution of galaxies. Most 
importantly, such analyses will provide an independent 
method of deriving the stellar distances of these distant 
objects. In cool stars (including brown dwarfs and giant 
planet atmospheres), future emphasis will be given on 
improving molecular and dust chemistry, in particular in 
the presence of shocks. The opacity and thus the 
emergent spectrum can be altered significantly by 
changing the molecular equilibria and by the formation 
of dust. 

While considerable progress remains to be made in 
1D model atmospheres, we may expect that more and 
more attention will be devoted to multidimensional 
geometries. The methodology for solving radiative 
transfer in 2D or 3D is well known. The fastest method is 
based on the short characteristics method (integration of 
the formal solution between any two spatial grid points). 
However, the number of directions in which the radiative 
transfer must be solved to compute angle-averaged 
quantities like the mean intensity increases dramatically 
to obtain a good accuracy (typically by up to two orders 
of magnitude). This is especially true when the radiation 
field is strongly peaked or in the presence of strong 
gradients, because the photons can escape much more 
easily in one direction than in others. The additional 
spatial dimension(s) in the model could therefore alter 
significantly the structure of the model and the predicted 
emergent spectrum. The requirement to solve the transfer 
equation in many directions results, however, in very 
demanding computer simulations, even for a simple 
description of the plasma including very few NLTE 
atomic levels. Examples of astrophysical objects 
requiring multidimensional simulations and currently 
under investigation include models of rotating winds, of 
colliding winds, of circumstellar disks, of solar 
prominences and other structures in the solar atmosphere. 
Multidimensional radiation hydrodynamics is a field in 
its infancy that is now developing thanks to the available 
computing power. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Web update 

For the first time, an optical coronal line from a star other 
than the Sun has been detected. The UV-Visual Echelle 
Spectrograph (UVES) on the VLT 8.2 m KUEYEN 
telescope at the ESO Paranal Observatory has observed a 
coronal emission line in nearby variable star CN Leonis 
from iron ions that have lost 12 electrons (Fe XII). CN 
Leonis, a cool star, is located at a distance of 8 light- 
years. 


Bibliography 
The fundamental textbook of the field is: 


Mihalas D 1978 Stellar Atmospheres 2nd edn (San Francisco: 
Freeman) 


Theoretical and observational aspects of the stellar atmospheres 
are both covered in a good textbook and some lecture notes 
from a recent European Astrophysics School: 


De Greve J P, Blomme R and Hensberge H 1997 Stellar 
Atmospheres: Theory and Observations (EADN 
Astrophysics School IX, Brussels 1996) Lecture Notes in 
Physics (Berlin: Springer) 

Gray D F 1992 Observations and Analysis of Stellar 
Photospheres 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Recent textbooks on the outer regions of stellar atmospheres 
are: 


Golub L and Pasachoff J M 1997 The Solar Corona 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Lamers H J G L M and Cassinelli J P 1999 Introduction to 
Stellar Winds (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Other related textbooks on physical aspects of radiative transfer 
include: 


Rybicki G B and Lightman A P 1979 Radiative Processes in 
Astrophysics (New York: Wiley-Interscience) 

Shu F H 1991 The Physics of Astrophysics I. Radiation (Mill 
Valley, CA: University Science Books) 


An elementary-level textbook is: 


Bohm-Vitense E 1989 Introduction to Stellar Astrophysics II. 
Stellar Atmospheres (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


A grid of LTE model atmospheres is described in: 
Kurucz R L 1979 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 40 1 


Some recent non-LTE line-blanketed model atmospheres are 
described in: 


Aufdenberg J P, Hauschildt P H, Shore S N and Baron E 1998 
Astrophys. J. 498 837 

Dreizler S and Werner K 1993 Astron. Astrophys. 278 199 

Hubeny I and Lanz T 1995 Astrophys. J. 439 875 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sources for atomic data include: 


Seaton M J etal 1995 The Opacity Project vol 1 (Bristol: 
Institute of Physics Publishing) 

Wiese W L, Fuhr J R and Deters T M 1996 Atomic transition 
probabilities of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen. A critical 
data compilation J. Phys. Chem. Ref: Data Mon. 7 


A good site on the Web pointing to many useful atomic 
databases for stellar atmosphere modeling and spectroscopic 
analyses is: http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/DBfA PP. html 


Thierry Lanz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


The term ‘cool stellar atmosphere’ is generally applied to 
the atmospheres of stars with effective temperatures less 
than that of the Sun. In this spirit, this article describes 
the basic physics of stellar and substellar atmospheres 
with effective temperatures below about 5000 K. This 
category includes two common subclasses: dwarf stars 
and giant stars. From the point of view of the STELLAR 
ATMOSPHERE, the main difference between these 
subclasses is a question of geometry: plane parallel 
geometry for dwarfs and spherical symmetry for giants. 
The types of stars that fall in the ‘cool’ category reach 
from evolved M giants and AGB stars to M dwarfs and 
the new spectral class ‘L’ proposed for extremely low- 
mass dwarf stars and brown dwarfs. Although these 
objects have very different astrophysical origin and 
history, their atmospheres are described by the same 
equations and input physics. 

Model atmospheres for cool stars are used not only 
to determine stellar parameters such as_ effective 
temperatures and elemental abundances but also as input 
data for STELLAR EVOLUTION models (very low-mass 
stars) and population synthesis modeling. Thus the 
accuracy and quality of our understanding of cool stellar 
atmospheres has far-reaching impact on other fields of 
astrophysics. 

Cool stellar atmospheres are extraordinarily 
complex, which makes them hard to understand and 
model. The main reasons for this are 


1. the importance of molecules for the chemical 
equilibrium and the radiative transfer, 

2. the extraordinary importance of spectral line 
opacities and line broadening, 

3. convective energy transport into the outer optically 
thin regions of cool dwarf atmospheres, 

4. formation of dust for very low effective temperatures 


(S 2500 Kk), 
5. deviations from local thermodynamic equilibrium 
(LTE) and local chemical equilibrium. 


Further complications can include for example STELLAR 
PULSATIONS and winds in giant stars or fast rotation and 
chromospheric activity in young dwarf stars. The 
following sections will concentrate on the most important 
problems. 


Basic physical picture 

In the classical approach a cool stellar atmosphere is 
assumed to be in_ time-independent hydrostatic 
equilibrium. The atmospheres can furthermore be 
described by using either plane parallel geometry for 


dwarf stars with gravities log(g) 2 3.5 or spherical 
geometry for giant stars with lower gravities. 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The luminosity L of the star is parameterized through 
the effective temperature Tare via 


L=oT;An R* 


where o is the Stefan—Boltzmann constant and R is the 
radius of the star. The pressure structure of the 
atmosphere in spherical geometry is given by 


dP ; : 

—=-sirpir) 

dr 
where the total pressure P is the sum of the gas pressure 
Peas and the radiation pressure P,aq (in some cases an 
additional turbulent pressure term has to be considered), r 
is the distance from the center of the star and 


GM 


7 


er)y= 
F 
is the gravity where G is the gravitational constant and 
M is the mass of the star. For dwarf stars with a 
negligible radial extension of the atmosphere (A7/R « R) 
the gravity can be set constant and used as one parameter 
of the atmosphere. 
The energy generated in the deep interior of the star 
is transported through the atmosphere predominantly by 
radiation and by convection so that 


E= banalh + Loony (F) = comst 


where Lyaq(r) is the luminosity carried by photons and 
con’) is the convective luminosity. Cool atmospheres 
typically have an outer radiative zone where Leony = 0 and 
an inner convective zone where L ~ Leony. In very low 


mass dwarf stars (M S 0.5Mgy,) the convective region 
reaches out into the optically thin regions of the 
atmosphere and from there up to the center of the star, 
leaving only a thin outer radiative layer (‘fully 
convective stars’). There is currently no detailed 
analytical or quantitative theory of convective energy 
transport and thus parameterized approaches are 
generally used in the context of detailed stellar 
atmosphere models. The most common approach is the 
mixing length theory with a single free parameter 0, 
called the mixing length (typically 0.5—1.5 times the local 
pressure scale height of the atmosphere). The convection 
in cool dwarf atmospheres (M dwarfs and later) is 
extremely efficient and becomes practically adiabatic; 
this removes partly the ambiguity of the mixing length 
parameter for these stars. 
In order to calculate the radiative luminosity 


oo 
Lea(F) = 4rr* i Frir, A) da 
0 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the radiation flux F, (7,4) must be known at all 
wavelengths 4. For the cases of plane parallel and 
spherical geometry Fy, is given by 


1 
FF, = an f Lira, pe dy 
=] 


where pt = cos(8) and @ is the angle of a beam of radiation 
with the specific intensity ,(7,A,) to the radially outward 
direction. The specific intensities J = 4(7,A,W) are 
obtained from the solution of the radiative transfer 
equation, which is given for the general case of a special 
relativistic flow in spherical symmetry by 


i. 


7 a. 
e—+—(fl4+g—AD+hi=n-— x! 
Op oA 


or d 
with 
pe) = 
c 
y =1/(1- 6) 
elr, #) = y(ut B) 
[1+ 4 a 
fir, w=yd1-p) pan —¥"(u He 
F ar 
' fs ~ Ay 2. a 
gsr. =y¥ PERO rns ne 
F ar 
(1 — =) ™ a a 
her,w=y oa +y (lt +26 | 
Fr 


where vr) is the flow velocity. For static atmospheres, 
v(r) = 0, and for static plane parallel atmospheres one has 
in addition f(r,u) = 0. To solve the radiative transfer 
equation, the emissivities n = 7,(7,A) and the extinction k 
= k(r,A) + o(7,A) coefficients must be known. Here, «(7,A) 
is the total absorption coefficient and o(r,A) is the total 
extinction coefficient. For simple isotropic scattering the 
emissivity n can be written in the form 


Hr AIH KF, ABA, To+or AA, A) 


where J(r,A) is the mean intensity. The first term 
describes the thermal sources present in the atmosphere 
whereas the second term describes scattering. Thus, in 
order to calculate the radiation field inside the 
atmosphere, k and o must be known. This requires the 
detailed knowledge of the partial pressures of each atom, 
ion and molecule present in the atmosphere through a 
solution of the equation of state (EOS) for cool 
atmospheres as well as the detailed knowledge of the 
interaction of each species with radiation through, e.g., 
photoionization and spectral lines. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Equation of state 

The EOS describes the distribution of the available nuclei 
in a volume element (say, 1 cm*) to atoms, ions and 
molecules. Within the atmosphere, the EOS is usually 
assumed to be that of an ideal gas. This assumption is 
justified for all but the deep layers of very cool 
atmospheres where non-ideal gas effects become 
important. In addition, the assumptions of local chemical 
equilibrium and LTE are typically made in order to 
simplify the calculation of the concentrations of 
individual species (atoms, ions and molecules). The low 
temperatures in cool atmospheres lead to the formation of 
a large number of different molecules, which makes their 
EOS extremely complex. Although there are only a few 
molecules with large concentrations, such as molecular 
hydrogen H,, carbon monoxide (CO), titanium oxide 
(TiO) and water vapor (H2O), there are many more 
molecules with smaller concentrations. These cannot be 
neglected, however, because their spectral lines can be 
very strong and thus significant for the energy transport 
in the atmosphere. Some examples of these important 
trace molecules are vanadium oxide (VO) and metal 
hydrides such as MgH, CaH and FeH. The concentrations 
of these molecules are low but they have important bands 
of spectral lines that dominate the emitted spectrum at 
certain optical and red wavelengths. In addition to the 
important opacity sources, many more molecular species 
with trace concentrations have to be included because the 
dependences of the formation and dissociation of all 
molecules as well as the concentrations of atoms are 
highly non-linear and even small changes in the 
concentration of trace species can have significant effects 
on molecules with important spectral lines. Therefore, the 
EOS typically includes several 100 molecular species in 
addition to a number of atoms and ions. 

In very cool atmospheres with effective temperatures 
below about 2500 K the formation of dust grains 
becomes important and has to be considered in the EOS. 
This is shown in figure | which shows the species with 
the highest concentrations for both the gas and the 
condensed phases for a model atmosphere with To = 
1000 K under the assumption that no settling of the dust 
particles took place. The figure shows for example that 
iron condenses from the gas phase (labeled ‘Fe’) to the 
solid phase (labels ‘Fe/c’ and ‘Fe/cl’ for different 
condensate forms) around an optical depth of 1. High- 
temperature condensates such as Al,O3 and CaTiO; form 
in small concentrations but can have a significant impact 
on the total opacity of the atmosphere. At lower 
temperatures condensates such as Fe,;0, and water ice 
form. The main thermodynamic effect of grain formation 
is to remove the condensed elements from the gas phase, 
thus changing the concentration of the complete set of 
molecules. This reduces the opacity of important 
molecules such as TiO. In addition, the condensates 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(a) 


(b) 


ee | 


Figure 1. The most important (by concentration) gas phase and condensed phase species in a cool atmosphere with an effective 
temperature of 1000 K, a gravity of 10°° cm s~ and solar abundances (roughly equivalent to the parameters of the brown dwarf Gl 
229B). The x-axis gives the optical depth in the continuum at 1.2 um, the y-axis gives the relative concentration. 


themselves have an effect on the opacity and thus the 
structure of the atmosphere; see below. 

The molecular EOS is a coupled non-linear system 
of equations even in the simplest case of complete local 
chemical equilibrium and LTE. This system can in 
principle be solved by any appropriate numerical 
technique, e.g. Newton’s method or free energy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


minimization algorithms. The assumption of local 
chemical equilibrium and LTE is not always a good 
approximation. For example, the process of dust 
formation in cool giant atmospheres is not well 
understood and deviations from local chemical 
equilibrium are likely important. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Opacities 


Atomic opacities 

The opacities in cool stellar atmosphere are dominated by 
spectral lines of molecules. Atomic processes are 
important mostly through individual spectral lines that 
are useful as diagnostics of the structure of the 
atmosphere and as abundance indicators for individual 
elements; however, most of the line blanketing is 
provided by molecular spectral lines. Atomic 
photoionization and recombination processes lose their 
importance toward lower effective temperatures and are 
completely dominated by spectral line absorption and 
emission. At low temperatures, when molecules form and 
condensation begins, the strengths of some atomic lines 
are gradually reduced as the elements are either tied up in 
molecules (with their own, different set of spectral lines) 
or as they condense into grain particles (which become 
important opacity sources themselves). At the same time, 
however, the atmosphere becomes more transparent in 
certain wavelength regions which leads to an increase in 
the strength of other spectral lines. In giants these 
depletion processes are reduced owing to the lower 
pressures in the atmospheres so that atomic lines are 
relatively more important for a cool giant atmosphere 
than in a cool dwarf atmosphere with comparable 
effective temperature. The number of atomic lines 
important in cool atmospheres also drops quickly as the 
effective temperature drops because exited levels are less 
and less populated at lower gas temperatures. The strong 
line blanketing by millions of spectral lines from atoms 
and ions (e.g. singly ionized iron, Fe II) typical for hotter 
atmospheres has been reduced to only a few remaining 
resonance lines (originating from the ground state) of 
atoms. See also STELLAR OPACITY. 

Only the strongest resonance lines of alkali metals 
remain observable in very cool atmospheres: important 
atomic lines are the Na I-D lines at 1 5889, 5896 A, NaI 
lines at A 8183, 8195 A and A 10 746, 10 749, 10 835 A 
and at 2.2 um, K I at A 6911, 6939, 4 7665, 7699, A 9950, 
9954 and A 10 480, 10 482, 10 487 A. Resonance lines of 
Rb I at 4.7950 A, and Ba I at 4 7911, 7913 A are also 
particularly strong in very cool dwarf atmospheres and 
Cs I A 8521, A 8944 A lines appear strong in class ‘L’ 
dwarfs. The resonance lines of neutral lithium between 
6708 and 6710 A are important indicators of the 
substellar nature of cool dwarfs because lithium is 
destroyed by thermonuclear reactions in stars. Only 
objects below the hydrogen burning limit will conserve 
their initial lithium abundance. 

Atomic lines in cool atmospheres are very broad 
owing to van der Waals (vdW) interaction of the parent 
atom with neutral particles in the gas (mostly He and H2). 
This effect perturbs the energy levels of the atoms 
leading to strong vdW broadening of atomic lines in cool 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


atmospheres. The vdW broadening leads to a Lorentzian 
line profile with form 


p(Aa) = SE __ 
“On Al? + Ad /4 


The vdW linewidth can be written in the form 


3 


AAL = aw 


ent 


with the vdW damping constant 
2/5 3/5 
Yaw « Ce we N, 


where v is the relative speed between the absorbing— 
emitting particle and the perturber and N, is the number 
density of the perturbers. The interaction constant C, can 
be calculated with reasonable accuracy only for fast 
(compared with the lifetime of the transition) 
perturbations with neutral hydrogen. However, in cool 
atmosphere the most important perturbers are molecular 
hydrogen and helium and the perturbations relatively 
slow. For these cases, no general quantitative theory 
exists and approximations are generally used, such as 
Uns6ld’s modified hydrogenic approximation of the form 


Cg = 1.01 x 10-7(Z + | Es ad 


(E-Ey (E-E,P 


where Z is the charge of the absorber, E the ionization 
energy, £| and £,, are the lower and upper level excitation 
energies of the absorber and the result has the units cm® 
s |. This approximation works reasonably well for alkali 
metals but for other elements correction factors ranging 
from 10 to ~65 had to be introduced to provide 
reasonable results. 


Molecular bands 

Figure 2 gives an overview over the most important 
opacity sources present in the atmosphere of a dwarf star 
with an effective temperature of 2800 K and solar 
elemental abundances. The figure clearly shows the 
overall importance of TiO and water vapor lines in the 
optical and near-infrared (NIR) spectral regions, 
respectively. The number of spectral lines per molecule is 
vastly greater than for atoms or ions. For example, 
modern line lists include about ~175 million lines of TiO 
and ~300 million lines of water vapor. The spectral lines 
of molecules are clustered in molecular bands. This has 
led early on to the development of approximate 
treatments of molecular opacities by methods such as the 
just overlapping line approximation (JOLA) or simple 
straight means techniques. These methods assume that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


OPACITY SPECTRUM IN A MODEL LAYER WITH T=T_,,=2800K AND [M/H]= 6.0 
F T T Tr T T T T r T T T Tr T T T T T 


2 


log k, (em*g*A7') 


1.5 
Wavelength A (jem) 


-, metals *-:; 


is 25 


Figure 2. Most important absorbers in a cool stellar atmosphere with an effective temperature of 2800 K, a gravity of 10° cm s~ and 
solar abundances of all elements. This graph does not include the effects of dust settling observed in very cool atmospheres. From 


Allard F and Hauschildt P H 1995 Astrophys. J. 445 433. 


the fine structure of the molecular bands is completely 
smeared out and that the lines overlap without being 
saturated. This tends to overestimate the molecular line 
blanketing by preventing photons from escaping through 
narrow gaps between molecular lines, resulting in 
significantly higher temperatures in the atmosphere as 
compared with the temperature structure obtained with 
detailed treatment of the individual molecular lines. 
However, detailed and complete line lists exist only for a 
limited number of molecules; for many important 
molecular absorbers only approximate treatments based 
on the JOLA are available (and even then many times 
only with estimated band strengths). This is currently the 
case for such important molecular absorbers as VO, FeH 
and CaH. 

The most important molecular bands in the optical 
spectral region are TiO and VO for stars with SOLAR 
ABUNDANCES. For stars with metallicities less than solar, 
hydrides such as FeH (stars later than M6), MgH, and 
CaH become important opacity sources, partly because of 
reduced TiO opacity at lower metallicities. A number of 
molecules have individual bands that can be important in 
localized wavelength ranges, e.g. MgH, SiH, OH, CaOH 
(among the strongest band systems in cool M dwarf stars) 
and CH. TiO and VO are often used as temperature 
indicators owing to the sensitivity of the lines to the 
temperature structure of the atmosphere. The hydride 
lines appear stronger with increasing gravity, thus 
making these bands useful as gravity indicators. In low- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gravity carbon-enriched atmospheres, species such as 
CN, ZrO, LaO (S stars) and YO can show important 
bands in individual wavelength ranges. Although none of 
these trace molecules contributes significantly to the 
overall line blanketing in normal cool stars (which is 
provided mostly by TiO, VO and HO) they do absorb in 
optical spectral regions where TiO is relatively weak and 
they thus provide local traps for photons trying to escape 
from the atmosphere. 

The NIR and infrared (IR) spectral range in cool 
dwarf stars with solar abundances is dominated by the 
opacity of water vapor, which is typically 1-2 orders of 
magnitude stronger than the next closest opacity sources 
in this spectral region. The exceptions are the first 
overtone band of CO between ~2.3 and ~2.4 um which is 
very prominent in cool stellar atmospheres and the CO 
fundamental band at ~4.5 um, making CO a good 
temperature indicator in the IR. One of the biggest 
current challenges in modeling cool stellar atmospheres 
is to obtain better line lists for water vapor. The problem 
is the complexity of calculating accurate line positions 
and strengths for a triatomic molecule such as water at 
the relatively high (compared with Earth standards) 
temperatures in the atmospheres of cool stars. This 
actually means that the water opacity problem is larger 
for higher effective temperatures, as the low-temperature 
lines of water vapor are generally better known. 
Similarly, better line data for VO and methane are also 
urgently needed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


FIT TO ¥B 10 / STRAIGHT MEAN TREATMENT OF OPACITIES 


{ iA 


! 110 & VO Jf 


Made! 
Observed spectrum 
‘——-: Blackbody of same T),, 


1s 2 88 


Wavelength A (sem) 


Figure 3. [llustration of the importance of molecular spectral line opacities of cool stellar atmospheres. The plot shows the spectrum 
of the star VB10 compared with a simple model. The molecular species with the strongest features are indicated. For comparison, a 
blackbody spectrum with the same effective temperature and the run of the H’ continuum are also given. From Allard F and 


Hauschildt P H 1995 Astrophys. J. 445 433. 


The large number of molecular spectral lines makes 
the classical notion of the ‘continuum’ basically useless 
for cool stellar atmospheres. This is demonstrated in 
figure 3 for a dwarf star synthetic spectrum with an 
effective temperature of 2800 K (for comparison, the 
observed spectrum of the star VB10 is also shown). The 
curve labeled ‘H continuum’ shows the spectrum 
calculated by omitting all molecular opacities and 
retaining only the opacity of the negative hydrogen ion 
H.. This shows clearly the importance of the molecular 
lines in the overall energy distribution of cool stars. In 
addition, figure 3 shows how much the spectra emitted 
by cool stellar atmospheres deviate from the blackbody 
energy distribution (shown as dot-dashed curve) for the 
same effective temperature. The strong overlap between 
molecular lines actually helps to reduce the problem of 
the largely unknown damping constants for molecular 
lines by effectively masking the details of the line wings. 


Dust opacities 

The opacity of dust particles becomes important in very 
cool dwarf stars or in the outermost atmospheres of cool 
giant stars. Once condensates start to form, the opacity 
due to the grains can dominate the formation of the 
spectrum. The opacity of dust particles follows from the 
Mie theory for given shape, size and optical properties of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the particles. Two important differences from the other 
opacity sources discussed above are (1) dust particles 
cause a significant amount of non-isotropic photon 
scattering in cool atmospheres and (2) they have very 
broad features that affect nearly the whole spectrum. For 
example, dust grains tend to very effectively absorb 
photons in the optical spectral range. The absorbed 
energy is thermalized and re-emitted in the IR range. 
This leads to a strong re-processing of photons from the 
optical to the IR and to a heating of the atmosphere. 

The presence of dust particles increases the number 
of parameters of the atmosphere significantly as the size 
and shapes of the grains must be known. In principle, this 
could be calculated using a non-equilibrium model for 
the formation and growth of the dust particles, but this is 
currently not feasible within the simulation of a cool 
atmosphere itself. Thus statistical approximations are 
used and suitable averages over grain size and shape 
distributions are made. In addition, the optical parameters 
of each dust species have to be known, e.g. from 
databases. Some of the important dust opacity sources 
include species such as MgSiO3, Mg,SiOu, soot, FeS, 
condensed metals (e.g. Fe, Cu, Ti), Al,O3 (corundum and 
sapphire), Fe.03, Fe304, water ice, ZrO», CaTiOs, 
MgAl,0,, CaSiO; and other calcium silicates. For many 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


[M/H] SENSITIVITY OF THE FLUX DISTRIBUTION 


[M/H]= 0.0 
[M/I]- -2.0 
[M/H]- 4.0 


3 a ! ‘ : 
12 2 2.5 


Wavelength A (y2m) 


Figure 4. Low-resolution synthetic spectra for cool atmospheres of different metallicities corresponding roughly to the young disk 
({M/H] = 0.0), halo ([M/H] =-—2.0) and population III ([M/H] = —4.0). The effective temperature is 2800 K and the gravity is log g 
= 5.0 for all models. From Allard F and Hauschildt P H 1995 Astrophys. J. 445 433. 


of the important species the optical properties are either 
not or only poorly known. 

A further complication is the apparent settling of 
dust particles in the coolest known brown dwarf 
atmospheres. The IR spectra of these objects indicate less 
dust opacity than expected from condensation models. 
This is corroborated by the presence of stronger atomic 
lines than predicted by condensation models. However, 
the relatively weak water vapor bands indicate the 
presence of dust in the layers where the water bands 
form. The current model for this effect is that the dust 
particles have partially settled below the photosphere. 
This delivers the desired effect and results in improved 
fits to observed brown dwarf spectra. For objects with 
effective temperatures above about 2000 K the dust does 
not seem to settle and the best results are achieved using 
full dust opacities. The reason for this might be the fact 
that the convection zone reaches far into the outer 
atmosphere for temperatures above 2000 K but retracts 
from the surface for cooler models. The convection zone 
could provide the mixing and turbulent motions required 
to prevent the settling of the dust particles and/or 
replenish the photospheric layers with refractory 
material. However, within the framework of the mixing 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


length theory it appears that the convection zone never 
reaches into the layers of dusty atmospheres where the 
spectrum forms. This suggests that other mechanisms 
such as fast rotation or acoustic waves generated by the 
convection zone might be important. 


NLTE effects 

Because of the very low temperatures of cool stellar 
atmospheres, the electron density is extremely low. 
Collisions with particles other than electrons, e.g. H» or 
helium, are not as effective as electron collisions in 
restoring LTE, because both of their smaller cross- 
sections and their much smaller thermal velocities. 
Therefore, collisional rates which tend to restore LTE 
tend to be very small in cool stars. This in turn could 
significantly increase the importance of non-LTE 
(NLTE) effects in cool atmospheres (with effective 
temperatures below about 4000 K) when compared with, 
e.g., solar-type stars with much higher electron densities 
and temperatures. Departures from LTE in_ the 
photospheres of cool stars have been investigated in 
detail in the line transfer and dissociative equilibrium of 
Hin RED GIANT atmospheres and NLTE effects of CO 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


[|WHK L’ M 


Log F, {mJy} 


S44 NICMOS 
180 
SOFIA/GEMINI 


10 15 20 
» (um) 


Figure 5. Examples of calculated energy distributions from very cool atmospheres, from the top to the bottom: 2000 K, ~1000 K and 
500 K. The letters indicate the location of important broad-band filters. Detection limits for objects of the indicated effective 
temperature at a distance of 50 pc are given for some space- and ground-based telescopes. From Allard F et al 1997 Ann. Rev. 


Astron. Astrophys. 35 137. 


have been investigated both in the Sun and in red giant 
atmospheres. These studies led to the conclusion that 
even after the passage of pulsationally driven shocks the 
recombination of H, and CO must proceed rapidly, 
leading to number densities very close to LTE values. 
However, in cool atmospheres it has been shown that the 
equivalent widths of the Li I and Na I resonance lines are 
affected by NLTE effects and NLTE curves of growth 
have been derived for a range of model parameters. 
Departures from LTE of the Ti I atom, and thus indirect 
changes in the concentration of the important TiO 
molecule, could therefore have severe and measurable 
consequences for the atmospheric structure and spectra of 
cool stars. However, although the NLTE effects in Ti I 
are noticeable they do not affect the formation of the TiO 
molecule and its opacity. 

One of the open problems is a better understanding 
of the effects of NLTE on the formation, dissociation and 
line formation of important molecular species (CO, TiO 
and H,O) in cool atmospheres. The main issues are the 
availability of data, in particular collisional cross- 
sections, and the technical problems due to the extremely 
large number of energy levels and spectral lines found in 
even simple molecules. The latter problem can be 
addressed by using modern numerical methods such as 
the operator splitting approach. The data problem, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


however, is still a major obstacle for detailed NLTE 
calculations for molecules. 


Spectra 
The richness of the spectrum emitted by a cool stellar 
atmosphere is apparent in figure 3. The identification of 
individual spectral lines is only possible for the strongest 
resonance lines of atoms. For molecules, only broad 
features can be identified. The spectrum shown is typical 
for dwarf stars in this effective temperature range. The 
peak of the energy distribution is locked at a wavelength 
~1.1 um by the combined effects of TiO lines in the 
optical and water vapor lines in the IR. Lowering the 
temperature, which shifts the peak of the corresponding 
blackbody energy distribution toward larger wavelengths, 
increases both the TiO and the H,O opacities rapidly. 
This leaves only a few small windows open in the 1- 
2 um range through which the atmosphere can radiate its 
thermal energy. Therefore, the location of the peak of the 
energy distribution of cool dwarf stars is not a good 
temperature indicator. The slope of the spectrum in this 
wavelength interval is a more useful temperature 
indicator. This situation is changed only when dust 
opacity starts to become important in the optical spectral 
range at lower effective temperatures. 

A similar effect leads to an unexpected behavior of 
the emitted spectra for a given effective temperature as a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Cool Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


function of metallicity as illustrated in figure 4. For lower 
metallicities, the opacities of both TiO and water vapor 
are reduced owing to the smaller concentration of the 
molecules. At the same time, collision-induced opacities 
due to H.-H, and H,—He become very strong in the IR 
and thus block the escape of photons. The trapped energy 
is then emitted in the optical spectral range, thus making 
low-metallicity cool atmospheres appear much bluer than 
solar abundance atmospheres at the same effective 
temperature. 

Figure 5 gives a few more examples of the spectra 
emitted by cool brown dwarf atmospheres. The figure 
also gives the location of some important filters as well 
as detection limits for an object at a distance of 50 pc. 
The spectra correspond to atmospheres with effective 
temperatures of 2000 K (young brown dwarf), ~1000 K 
and 500 K (evolved brown dwarf or gas-giant planet). 
The broad-band absorption features are due to water 
vapor and, for lower temperatures, bands of methane 
(CHa). 


Web update 

For the first time, an optical coronal line from a star other 
than the Sun has been detected. The UV-Visual Echelle 
Spectrograph (UVES) on the VLT 8.2 m KUEYEN 
telescope at the ESO Paranal Observatory has observed a 
coronal emission line in nearby variable star CN Leonis 
from iron ions that have lost 12 electrons (Fe XII). CN 
Leonis, a cool star, is located at a distance of 8 light- 
years. 


Bibliography 


The latest reviews of cool stellar atmospheres are 


Allard F, Hauschildt P H, Alexander D R and Starrfield S 1997 
Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 137-77 


Gustafsson B and Jorgensen U G 1994 Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 
6 19-65 


These reviews are more specific to brown dwarfs and very low- 
mass stars: 


Bessell M S and Stringfellow G S 1993 Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 
31 433-71 
Burrows A and Liebert J 1993 Mod. Phys. Rev. 65 301 


A general collection of formulae and data for stellar atmosphere 
modeling is given in 


Scholz M and Baschek B 1982 Physics of stellar atmospheres 
Landolt-B6rnstein, Numerical Data and Functional 
Relationships in Science and Technology vol V12b, ed K- 
H Hellwege, K Schaifers and H H Voigt, pp 91-152 


Peter H Hauschildt 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


The topic ‘Stellar atmospheres of early type stars’ has two 
individual ingredients, a (stellar) atmosphere, and an early 
type star. We shall specify these two terms in turn. 

An atmosphere of a star is generally any material 
connected physically to a star from which the photons 
escape to the surrounding space. In other words, it is 
a region where the radiation, observable by a distant 
observer, originates. Traditionally, the term atmosphere 
has been understood in a limited sense as a thin layer on 
the surface of a star. However, the more modern view is 
that the atmosphere encompasses a region extending far 
from the star. For instance, the solar corona, which extends 
even beyond Earth orbit, is understood as a part of the solar 
atmosphere; from this point of view we all live in a stellar 
atmosphere. 

The term early type stars is somewhat loose. Although 
this class could be meant to comprise all stars that are 
indeed in the early stages of their evolution, the typical 
use of this term specifies early type stars as massive hot 
stars, not necessarily young. Using the common stellar 
classification, the early type stars typically include stellar 
classes O, B and early A, but also more evolved stars 
like luminous blues variables (LBV) and Wolf—Rayet (WR) 
stars. 

The fundamental parameters of a star are mass 
(M), effective temperature (Te) and total luminosity (L). 
Effective temperature quantifies the total radiation flux 
emergent from a surface; precisely, it is the temperature 
that a black body would have if it was radiating the same 
total energy fluxas the unit area of the actual stellar surface. 
Typical values of these parameters are M ~ 8-100 (or 
more) times the mass of the Sun (Mo), Ter *~ 10000- 
50000 K, and L * 103-108 times the solar luminosity (Lo). 

One of their most significant properties is a strong 
outflow of matter from their surfaces, reaching velocities 
up to several thousand km s7!, ie. of the order of 1% 
of the speed of light. This outflow is called stellar wind 
(See RADIATIVELY DRIVEN STELLAR WINDS FROM HOTSTARS). Typical 
values of the mass loss rate from early type stars are 
M ~ 10-°-10-5 solar masses per year, although in extreme 
cases of LBV and WR stars the mass loss rate may reach 
up to M ® 10° Mo yr!. The wind has a profound 
significance. First, it significantly changes the path of 
stellar evolution, because the star may actually lose a 
large part of its initial mass. Second, the mass loss from 
young, massive stars significantly enriches the interstellar 
medium in helium and light metals (the enrichment in 
heavier elements comes from supernova explosions). 

In the global astrophysical context, the early type stars 
have special significance. They physically influence a large 
space around them. Most importantly, they produce a 
large portion of ionizing photons for their host galaxy 
and surrounding intergalactic space (the only competing 
objects are quasars, which in some cases may provide 
the bulk of ionizing radiation). As pointed out above, 
they enrich the interstellar space in He and light metals 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


because of their wind. From the diagnostic point of 
view, they also have special significance. They are very 
bright, and therefore may be studied spectroscopically 
as individual objects in distant galaxies. Reliable model 
atmospheres for these stars may therefore yield invaluable 
independent information about distant galaxies, like 
chemical composition, and, possibly, reliable distances. 


Basic physics of stellar atmospheres 

There is a separate article on STELLAR ATMOSPHERES, where 
this term is explained in substantial detail and generality. 
Here we present a brief summary of the stellar atmosphere 
theory to the extent that is relevant to stress particular 
features of early type atmospheres. 

From the physical point of view, a stellar atmosphere 
is generally a plasma composed of many kinds of particles, 
namely atoms, ions, free electrons, molecules or even dust 
grains. In an early type stellar atmosphere, because of 
the high temperature and strong radiation field, there are 
typically no molecules or dust grains present, at least in the 
layers that are traditionally considered as an atmosphere. 
Nevertheless, molecules and dust may still be present in 
the very remote parts of an atmosphere. 

The total particle density ranges from, say, 10° to 
10!° cm~-3. It can be shown that under these densities the 
elastic collisions between particles are frequent enough to 
yield very nearly a Maxwellian velocity distribution for 
all particles; moreover with the same associated kinetic 
temperature. We refer to it as the electron temperature, 
or simply temperature. It should be stressed that 
this temperature is shared only by massive particles; 
massless particles, like photons, do not generally possess 
an equilibrium distribution and thus a corresponding 
temperature. This point will be discussed in detail later 
on. 

What makes atmospheres of early type stars so special 
is the fact that because of the strong and energetic radiation 
field generated in their interiors, the radiation in their 
atmospheres is not merely a passive probe of the physical 
state of the atmosphere, but rather an important energy 
balance agent. In other words, radiation in fact determines 
the structure of the medium, yet the medium is probed 
only by this radiation. Another important feature is that 
photons have, under the conditions met in the early type 
stellar atmospheres, a much larger mean free path than 
massive particles. This means that radiation is able to 
transport information to large distances; in other words, 
radiation couples the physical states of rather distant 
regions of the atmosphere. 

The other critical feature that follows from the 
presence of radiation-induced processes is that the 
medium is prone to departures from thermodynamic 
equilibrium. Indeed, the simple fact that we do see a star 
means that photons must escape from the atmosphere (in 
fact, this is a very definition of an atmosphere). Hence the 
photons must be missing from the atmosphere, and thus 
some elementary atomic transition processes can no longer 
be balanced, which leads to a non-equilibrium situation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ates 
{NJ 
eas 
Lee S 
ed 
\ \ ir 
| 8) 
be FRAG ARIS < 
| | 
INTERIOR | | WIND 
hee] 
2h PPAPAPDTS 
/ 
| i= | 


Figure 1. A sketch of basic stellar atmospheric layers. The stellar 
photosphere is not shown in scale; it would be much thinner. 


We shall expand upon this point later. Because of this 
feature, atmospheres of early type stars have played, and 
continue to play, an important role not only in the stellar 
atmosphere theory, but in overall astrophysical radiative 
transfer theory in general. The whole non-LTE theory 
(see later) was first developed and tested on early type 
stellar atmospheres. Consequently, modelling early type 
stellar atmospheres is a mature field, which may serve 
as a methodological guide to other astrophysical objects 
where the radiation also plays an important role, as, for 
instance, accretion disks in active galactic nuclei (AGN) 
and in cataclysmic variables (CV), HII regions and others. 


Atmospheric layers 

Traditionally, an atmosphere of an early type star is 
divided into two basic regions, schematically displayed 
in figure 1; the photosphere and the stellar wind. 

The photosphere is the innermost part of the 
atmosphere. The mass outflow velocities are typically very 
small there, smaller than the local sound speed, so that 
they can be neglected. The photosphere is thus assumed 
to be an essentially static region; one of the basic structural 
equations is thus the hydrostatic equilibrium equation. 
The radial extent of the photosphere is typically very small 
compared with the stellar radius, even for hot massive 
stars. 

The stellar photosphere is characterized by the 
condition of hydrostatic and radiative equilibrium. The 
hydrostatic equilibrium stipulates that the gradient of the 
total pressure is balanced by the local gravity acceleration. 
Because the radial extent of the photosphere is small 
compared to the stellar radius, the gravity acceleration is 
essentially constant. The explicit form of this equation is 
(for a spherically symmetric star) 


dP 
aR = 7 PGMe/R° ~ —pGM./R. = —p8 (1) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where P is the total pressure, generally composed of 
three parts (the gas pressure, P,.s, the radiation pressure, 
Prad, and the turbulent pressure, Pru»), R is the radial 
coordinate, M, and R, are the stellar mass and radius 
respectively, g is the gravity acceleration at the stellar 
surface and p is the mass density. 

The radiative equilibrium simply states that the only 
energy transport mechanism is radiation. In other words, 
it says that the total radiation energy absorbed in a given 
elementary volume of material in the photosphere is equal 
to the total radiation energy emitted in the volume 


/ (Ky Jy — Ny) dv = 0 (2) 
0 


where x, is the absorption coefficient, n, the emission 
coefficient and J, the mean intensity of radiation. (As is 
customary in astrophysical radiative transfer, a functional 
dependence on the frequency v is typographically denoted 
as a subscript v standing at the corresponding quantity.) 
Equation (2) also states that the energy is only transported 
in the photosphere; there is no energy generated there. This 
makes a sharp distinction from the stellar interior (where 
the energy is generated by nuclear reactions), and from 
the other atmospheric layers (e.g. stellar chromospheres, 
coronas or winds), where the energy is generated by 
dissipation of various wave motions. 

It can be easily shown that the atmospheres of early 
type stars are convectively stable; this feature marks 
a significant difference from the atmospheres of cooler 
stars (type late A and later), where convection is another 
significant mechanism of energy transfer. Roughly 
speaking, the convection is a transport of energy by 
rising and falling bubbles of material with properties (e.g. 
temperature) different from the ambient medium. 

The stellar wind is the region where the outflow 
velocities are comparable to or larger than the local sound 
speed. The radial extent of this region may be comparable 
to or, in some cases, significantly larger than, the radius 
of the stellar photosphere. This region is comprehensively 
reviewed in a separate article. 

In some cases there may be a third, more remote, 
layer which may contain molecules and dust. For instance, 
very young stars may still be enveloped by their placental 
matter. These regions are probed by the infrared and radio 
radiation (see also STAR FORMATION, INTERSTELLAR MOLECULAR 
CLOUDS, etc). 


Microscopic processes 

From the very nature of stellar atmospheres it is clear that 
the detailed description of the processes of interaction 
between radiation and matter is a crucial ingredient of 
the stellar atmospheres theory. These processes determine 
(a) how the radiation is transported in the atmosphere, and 
(b) what is the distribution of the microscopic degrees of 
freedom of the massive particles (e.g. the excitation and 
ionization state of the individual atomic species, etc). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The interaction between radiation and matter is 
described phenomenologically through the radiative 
transfer equation 


10d 
(C5 +n: v) TQ,r,n,t) 
c 
= nv, r,n, t) = xO, r,7, tl (v, Tr, 1, t). (3) 


Here, / is the specific intensity of radiation, defined such 
that it is the energy transported by radiation in a unit 
frequency range at the frequency v, across a unit area 
perpendicular to the direction of propagation, n, into 
a unit solid angle, and in a unit time interval. The 
specific intensity provides a complete description of the 
unpolarized radiation field from the macroscopic point of 
view. (This description can be generalized to an arbitrarily 
polarized light by introducing the Stokes vector instead of 
the scalar intensity, but we will not consider this concept in 
this article, and assume an unpolarized radiation, which 
is quite appropriate in the context of early type stars.) 

Quantities y and 7 are phenomenologically defined 
as absorption and emission coefficients, respectively. They 
are defined analogously to the specific intensity, namely as 
the energy removed or added to a beam of radiation at unit 
frequency range, solid angle, area and time. 

It is known from the quantum theory of radiation that 
there are three types of elementary processes that give rise 
to an absorption or emission of a photon: (a) induced 
absorption—an absorption of a photon accompanied by 
a transition of an atom/ion to a higher energy state; 
(b) spontaneous emission—an emission of a photon 
accompanied by a spontaneous transition of an atom/ion 
to a lower energy state; and (c) stimulated emission—an 
interaction of an atom/ion with a photon accompanied by 
an emission of another photon with identical properties. 
In the astrophysical formalism, the stimulated emission is 
usually treated as negative absorption. 

In thermodynamic equilibrium, the microscopic 
detailed balance holds, and therefore the radiation energy 
absorbed in an elementary volume in an elementary 
frequency interval is exactly balanced by the energy 
emitted in the same volume and in the same frequency 
range, ie. XJ = 7. Moreover, in thermodynamic 
equilibrium, the radiation intensity is equal to the Planck 
function, J = B, where 


2hv? 1 
c2 exp(hv/ KT) —1- 


BQ, T) = (4) 
We are then left with an interesting relation that in 
thermodynamic equilibrium /x = B, which is called 
Kirchhoff’s law. 

The absorption and emission coefficients are written 
explicitly as 


X= ys Veli — (81/8 j)nj loi) 
i j>i 


+ On; = nf )o;¢(v) 
i 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


+ > ney Fee (v, T/A — /*7) + neo (5) 


where the four terms represent, respectively, the contri- 
butions of bound—bound transitions (i.e. spectral lines), 
bound-free transitions (continua), free-free absorption 
(also called bremsstrahlung), and of electron scattering. In 
the stellar atmospheric conditions the electron scattering 
is to a good approximation coherent (i.e. without a change 
of photon frequency—Thomson scattering). A more gen- 
eral case, with a decrease or increase of the photon en- 
ergy (frequency), is called Compton or inverse Compton 
scattering respectively. Typically, the effects of Compton 
scattering are negligible in the atmospheres of early type 
stars (they may be important in the atmospheres of very 
hot subdwarfs, white dwarfs and pre-white dwarfs). In 
principle, other scattering terms, like for instance Rayleigh 
scattering, may also be added if needed. 

In equation (5) n; is the occupation number 
(population) of an atom in the energy level labelled i, 
g; the corresponding statistical weight and n; denotes 
an equilibrium population of level i corresponding to 
temperature T and electron density ne. o(v) are the 
corresponding cross sections; subscript « denotes the 
‘continuum’, and n, the ion number density. The 
negative contributions in the first three terms represent 
the stimulated emission. There is no stimulated 
emission correction for the scattering term, because this 
contribution exactly cancels with ordinary absorption. 
The relation between the bound-bound cross section 
o;;(v) and the well-known Einstein coefficients for the 
photoexcitation is oj;(v) = (hvo/41)Bijh(v); @(v) is the 
so-called absorption profile coefficient, normalized to unity, 
fo@)dv = 1. It represents the conditional probability 
density that if a photon is absorbed in the transitioni > j, 
it is absorbed in the frequency range (v, v + dv). 

Analogously, the thermal emission coefficient is given 


by 
_ 2hv® 


Hy = 2 (SE caren ier* Daiauonene 


i j>i i 


+ >. NN Ox (V, T) ni ; (6) 


The three terms again describe the bound—bound, bound-— 
free and free—free emission processes respectively. 

The absorption and emission coefficients are thus 
described through the corresponding cross sections— 
given by the atomic physics, the local thermodynamic 
parameters, T and n-, and the atomic level populations for 
all the levels involved in the microscopic processes that 
give rise to an absorption and emission at frequency v; 
such a number may be enormous. The chief difficulty of 
the stellar atmospheres theory is that the level populations 
generally depend on other state parameters and the 
radiation field. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


LTE versus non-LTE 

It is well known from statistical physics that a description 
of material properties is greatly simplified if the 
thermodynamic equilibrium (TE) holds. In this state, the 
particle velocity distributions as well as the distributions 
of atoms over excitation and ionization states are specified 
uniquely by two thermodynamic variables. In the stellar 
atmospheres context, these variables are usually chosen 
to be the (kinetic) temperature (7), and the total particle 
number density (NV), or the electron number density (n-). 
From the very nature of a stellar atmosphere it is clear 
that it cannot be in thermodynamic equilibrium—we see 
a star, therefore we know that photons must be escaping. 
Because photons carry significant momentum and energy, 
the elementary fact of photon escape has to give rise to 
significant gradients of the state parameters in the stellar 
outer layers. 

However, even if the assumption of TE cannot be 
applied to a stellar atmosphere, we may still use the 
concept of local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE). This 
assumption asserts that we may employ the standard 
thermodynamic relations not globally for the whole 
atmosphere, but locally, for local values of T (r) and N(r) or 
ne(r), despite the gradients that exist in the atmosphere. 
This assumption simplifies the problem enormously, for 
it implies that all the particle distribution functions may 
be evaluated locally, without reference to the physical 
ensemble in which the given material is found. Notice 
that the equilibrium values of distribution functions are 
assigned to massive particles; the radiation field is allowed 
to depart from its equilibrium, Planckian, distribution 
function (i.e. J = B is valid only in strict TE). 

Specifically, LTE is characterized by the following 
three distributions: 


@ Maxwellian velocity distribution of particles; 
@ Boltzmann excitation equation; 


@ Saha ionization equation. 


Microscopically, LTE holds if all atomic processes are 
in detailed balance, i.e. if the number of processes A — B 
is exactly balanced by the number of inverse processes 
B — A. By A and B we mean any particle states between 
which there exists a physically reasonable transition. For 
instance, A is an atom in an excited state and B the 
same atom in another state (either of the same ion, in 
which case the process is an excitation/de-excitation; or 
of the higher or lower ion, in which case the term is an 
ionization/recombination). 

In contrast, by the term non-LTE (or NLTE) we mean 
any state that departs from LTE. In practice, one usually 
means that populations of some selected energy levels of 
some selected atoms/ions are allowed to depart from their 
LTE value, while the velocity distributions of all particles 
are assumed to be Maxwellian, all at the same local kinetic 
temperature, T. 

One of the big issues of modern stellar atmosphere 
theory is whether, and if so to what extent, departures 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from LTE should be included in numerical modelling. 
Generally, to understand why and where we may expect 
departures from LTE, let us turn to the microscopic 
definition of LTE. It is clear that LTE breaks down if the 
detailed balance in at least one transition A — B breaks 
down. We distinguish the collisional transitions (arising due 
to interactions between two or more massive particles) 
and radiative transitions (interactions involving particles 
and photons). Under stellar atmospheric conditions, 
collisions between massive particles tend to maintain 
the local equilibrium (because velocities are Maxwellian). 
Therefore, the validity of LTE hinges on whether the 
radiative transitions are in detailed balance or not. 

Again, the fact that the radiation escapes from a 
star implies that LTE should eventually break down at a 
certain point in the atmosphere. Essentially, this is because 
detailed balance in radiative transitions generally breaks 
down at a certain point near the surface. Because photons 
escape (and more so from the uppermost layers), there 
must be a lack of them there. Consequently, the number 
of photoexcitations (or any atomic transition induced by 
absorbing a photon) is less than the number of inverse 
processes, spontaneous de-excitations (we neglect here, 
for simplicity, stimulated emission). 

These considerations explain that we may expect 
departures from LTE if the following two conditions 
are met: (a) radiative rates in some important atomic 
transition dominate over the collisional rates; and 
(b) radiation is not in equilibrium, i.e. the intensity does not 
havea Planckian distribution. Because the collisional rates 
are proportional to the particle density, the departures 
from LTE tend to be small for high densities. Likewise, 
deep in the atmosphere, photons do not escape, and so 
the intensity is close to the equilibrium value. Departures 
from LTE are therefore small, even if the radiative rates 
dominate over the collisional rates. On the other hand, 
departures from LTE are important for low-density media 
immersed in a strong radiation field, which are precisely 
the conditions met in the atmospheres of early type stars. 


Model atmospheres 

By the term model stellar atmosphere we mean a 
specification of all the atmospheric state parameters as 
functions of position. These parameters are obtained by 
solving appropriate structural equations, which, in the 
case of stellar photospheric models, are the equations of 
hydrostatic equilibrium, radiative equilibrium, radiative 
transfer equation, and the set of statistical equations 
(rate equations) for the atomic level populations. In the 
case of LTE models, the rate equations are not needed 
because the level populations are given by the Saha— 
Boltzmann distribution. Because the problem is very 
complex, it is impossible to find analytical solutions. 
Therefore, we have to resort to numerical simulations. In 
order to make the overall problem tractable, one has to 
make a number of simplifications by invoking various 
approximations. The quality of an appropriate model, 
and consequently its applicability to the individual stellar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


flux [erg cm™’*s"'A7'] 
fs) 


1000 


wavelength [A] 


fee) 
Tyr yr 


flux [10° erg em™’s'A™’] 


800 1000 


1200 1400 1600 


wavelength [A] 


Figure 2. A comparison of the predicted flux from the fully blanketed NLTE model atmosphere with Ter: = 35 000 K, log g = 4 (heavy 
curve); the Kurucz LTE line-blanketed model for the same parameters (thin histogram); and a black-body flux for T = Tog = 35000 K 
(dotted curve). The upper panel dispays the flux in a wide range of wavelengths (notice the logarithmic ordinate), while the lower 
panel shows the flux (in the linear scale) in the vicinity of the Lyman limit. The flux was convolved with Gaussian broadening with 


FWHM = 5A. 


types, is closely related to the degree of approximation 
used in the construction of the model. Needless to say, the 
degree of approximation critically influences the amount 
of computational effort to compute it. It is fair to say that 
the very art of computing model stellar atmospheres is to 
find such physical approximations that allow the model 
to be computed with a reasonable amount of numerical 
work, yet the model is sufficiently realistic to allow its 
use in reliable interpretation of observed stellar data. The 
adopted approximations are therefore critical. There are 
several types of approximations that are typically made 
during model construction; we shall describe the most 
important types in turn. 


Approximations of the geometry 

By geometrical simplification we mean that either some 
prescribed geometrical configuration is assumed, or some 
special kind of overall symmetry is invoked. The goal of 
those simplifications is to reduce the dimensionality of the 
problem from a spatially three-dimensional problem to a 
1- or 2D problem. The most popular approximations are 
(from simplest to more complex): 


(a) Plane parallel geometry, with an assumption of 
horizontally homogeneous layers. This decreases 
the number of dimensions to one: the depth in the 
atmosphere. This approximation is typically quite 
reasonable for stellar photospheres, which indeed 
are thinner by several orders of magnitude than the 
stellar radius, so the curvature effects are negligible. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The assumption of horizontal homogeneity is 
made for the sake of simplicity—there is no 
plausible verification of this approximation, and, 
moreover, observational evidence mostly shows that 
stellar surfaces are far from being homogeneous (a 
notorious example being detailed pictures of the 
solar surface). Nevertheless, even in the presence 
of inhomogeneities, 1D models still have their value 
since in many cases one may construct different 1D 
models for the individual ‘patches’ on the surface. 

(b) Spherical symmetry. Again, the problem is one- 
dimensional. The approach is used for extended 
atmospheres, for which the atmospheric thickness in 
no longer negligible with respect to the stellar radius. 
Typically, we have to consider such models for early 
type giants and supergiants, as well as for earliest 
types of main-sequence O stars. 

(c) Multidimensional geometry. This field is in 
its infancy. A numerical solution is extremely 
demanding on computer time and memory, and only 
very recently has computer power reached a stage 
that calculating such models is becoming feasible. 
Some detailed model atmospheres including 2D and 
3D geometry have been constructed for a solar 
atmosphere, and some 2D simulations of early type 
stellar winds have been performed. 


Approximations of the dynamical state of the atmosphere 
This is basically a specification of the realism of the 
treatment of the macroscopic velocity fields. From the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1460 1462 1464 1466 1468 1470 


70 1472 1474 1476 1478 1480 


lLooluutlut 


0 1482 1484 1486 1488 


RO 
Co 
~ 
oO 
fa 


Told 


>» NON 
fs 1a 0 


ow ot 


tootiiili 


oc 
zou 


1490 


ice) 
aN 
oO 
Nh 

aN 
ico) 
as 
aN 
oO 
Oo 
w 
oO 
Co 
on 
(o) 


Figure 3. A comparison of the observed HST/GHRS flux for 10 
Lac (heavy curve) and the predicted flux from the fully blanketed 
NLTE model atmosphere with Tog = 35000 K, log g = 4 and 
vsini = 25 kms !, and for the solar abundances of all species. 
The predicted flux is convolved with instrumental broadening 
with FWHM = 0.06 A. The abscissa is the wavelength in A, and 
the ordinate is the flux in 10~° erg cm~? s~! A-!. Most spectral 
features are lines of Fe IV, Fe V, Ni IV and Ni V. 


simplest to the most complex the approaches are the 
following: 


(a) Static models, in which the macroscopic velocity field 
is set to zero. As discussed above, these models 
describe a stellar photosphere. 

(b) Models with an a priori given velocity field. In these 
models the velocities are taken into account explicitly, 
and their influence upon other state parameters, 
in particular the emergent radiation, is studied in 
detail. In these models, one can either consider 
only a dynamical region (i.e. the wind) and take the 
incoming radiation from the photosphere as given 
a priori—the so-called core-halo model—or a model 
which treats the photosphere and the wind on the 
same footing. Such models are called unified models. 

(c) Models where the velocity field is determined self- 
consistently by solving the appropriate hydrodynam- 
ical equations. This problem is very complicated 
because the wind driving force is given by the ab- 
sorption of photons in thousands to millions of metal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lines (the so-called line-driven wind, so the hydrody- 
namical equations should be solved together with at 
least an approximate treatment of radiative transfer 
in spectral lines. 


Approximations of the opacity sources 
In real stellar atmospheres, there are an enormous number 
of possible opacity sources. It is impractical to take all 
of them into account in full detail. The light elements 
(H, He, C, N, O) have a comparatively small number of 
lines per ion (say 10” to 10*) because of a relatively simple 
atomic level structure. The number of lines generally 
increases with increasing atomic number, and for the iron- 
peak elements (Fe and Ni being the most important ones), 
we have of the order of 10° to 10’ spectral lines per 
ion! Therefore, the opacity (and emissivity) may be an 
enormously complicated function of frequency. 

There are several approximations that are to meant to 
reduce this complexity considerably: 


(a) Models constructed using certain frequency-averaged 
opacities; these models are called grey models. The 
approach is based on the implicit assumption that the 
behaviour of the frequency-averaged intensity of ra- 
diation is well described by means of some frequency- 
averaged opacities. There are several possible mean 
opacities, depending on exactly how the averaging is 
done. The most used averaged opacity is the Rosse- 
land mean opacity, defined by 


te Jo” A/ x») (AB, /AT)dv 
xe (AB, /dT) dv 


(7) 


where x, is the opacity (per gram of stellar material). 
Because averaging is done for 1/x, the largest weight 
is given to regions of lowest opacity, which are the 
most efficient regions for the energy flux transport. 
This explains why the Rosseland mean opacity is 
well suited for describing the total radiation flux. 
The grey model atmospheres are no longer used 
for spectroscopic analysis, but they are useful for 
providing an initial estimate in any iterative method 
for constructing more realistic model atmospheres, 
and they are very useful for pedagogical purposes 
because they allow one to understand a rough 
behaviour of temperature and radiation field as a 
function of depth in the atmosphere. 

(b) Apossibility is to use stepwise frequency averages for 
anumber of subintervals (frequency bins), sometimes 
called the multifrequency/multi-grey method. This 
approach is used in constructing model stellar 
atmospheres only rarely, but is used in other branches 
of astrophysical and laboratory radiative transfer. 

(c) A completely different approach is to construct 
a model atmosphere neglecting the line opacity 
completely. Although this may seem very crude, 
such models may actually provide reasonable results 
for very metal-poor stars because, as was pointed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


put above, H and He posses only a small number 
of lines, which occupy only a very small frequency 
range and therefore have a small influence on the 
model structure. (Strictly speaking, this is not 
completely true, because just three of the most 
important hydrogen lines, La, L6 and Ha, may 
already have an important indirect effect upon the 
temperature structure in the outer layers of early 
type photospheres.) In any event, this approximation 
was introduced at the early stages of development of 
the non-LTE model atmospheres, and was motivated 
by limitations of the then available computers and 
numerical techniques. 

(d) The obvious next level of approximation is to con- 
sider a small number of lines (typically tens to hun- 
dreds) explicitly, while neglecting the bulk of metal 
lines; the selected lines are those which presumably 
have the largest effect upon the atmospheric struc- 
ture. 

(e) Finally, one can take into account, one way or another, 
‘all’ metal lines. Such models are traditionally called 
metal line-blanketed model atmospheres. The problem 
of constructing such models is computationally 
very demanding. Under the assumption of LTE 
it is, however, considerably simplified because the 
opacity and emissivity is a function of only local 
temperature and electron density; the only problem 
is the complicated frequency dependence of the 
opacity. Without the approximation of LTE the 
problem is significantly more difficult because one 
has to determine all the atomic level populations and 
temperature self-consistently with the radiation field. 


Approximations concerning the thermodynamic equilibria 
Here, as we discussed above, the issue is whether the 
approximation of LTE is adopted or not. If we assume 
LTE, the resulting model atmospheres are called LTE 
models. Two state parameters, the temperature, T, and 
density, p (or electron density, n.), suffice to describe the 
physical state of the atmosphere at any given position. 
In practice, LTE models may be useful only for stellar 
photospheres, because for extended atmospheres and/or 
stellar winds this approximation breaks down completely 
and its application would yield erroneous and misleading 
results. 

The models that take some kind of departure from 
LTE into account are called non-LTE (or NLTE) models. 
This term is rather ambiguous because it is not a priori 
clear what is actually allowed to depart from LTE in a 
given model. In early models, the populations of only a 
few low-lying energy levels of the most abundant species, 
like H and He, were allowed to depart from LTE; the 
rest were treated in LTE. During the development of the 
field, progressively more and more levels were allowed 
to depart from LTE. The situation is similar for stellar 
photospheres (static models), as well as for stellar winds 
and for unified models. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Existing model atmospheres 

Because stellar winds are covered in a separate article, we 
concentrate here on static models, i.e. models of early type 
stellar photospheres. 

The most extensive grid of LTE line-blanketed models 
is that of Kurucz; the grid covers effective temperatures 
between 3500 K and 50 000 K, so that it includes stars much 
cooler than early type stars. 

During the last three decades, it has been amply 
demonstrated that departures from LTE are crucial 
for spectroscopic studies of early-type stars, even the 
photospheric layers. Early non-LTE models were 
constructed as early as the late 1960s and in the first half of 
the 1970s by Mihalas and co-workers. Nevertheless, the 
numerical problems and the sheer amount of computer 
time and memory needed for computing non-LTE metal 
line-blanketed model atmospheres precluded computing 
such models until the late 1980s. Thanks to the 
development of a very efficient numerical method for 
solving the radiative transfer equation simultaneously 
with other state equations, called the accelerated lambda 
iteration (ALI) method (see RADIATIVE TRANSFER), this last 
barrier to tackling the classical stellar atmosphere problem 
was broken, and non-LTE metal line-blanketed models 
including literally millions of spectral lines in non-LTE 
are now being constructed. Because sufficiently efficient 
computer codes for mass production of non-LTE line- 
blanketed models were being developed only during the 
mid 1990s, there is no comprehensive grid of non-LTE line- 
blanketed models which would cover the same range of 
parameters as the Kurucz grid, currently available, but 
they will very likely be built in the coming years. 

From the practical point of view, the most important 
result of model atmospheres is the prediction of emergent 
radiation, which is then compared with the observed 
spectrum in order to deduce basic stellar parameters. Also, 
theoretical predictions are indispensable for estimating the 
radiation in unobservable spectrum regions, in particular 
in the hydrogen Lyman continuum (wavelength less than 
912 A), which produces ionizing photons but which cannot 
be directly detected for early type stars because of the 
absorption by interstellar hydrogen. (Only two early type 
stars, € and 6B CMa, which are relatively close, and which 
lie in the direction of a ‘tunnel’ of low density in the local 
interstellar medium, have detectable Lyman continuum 
flux as observed by the EUVE satellite.) 

Figure 2 presents a comparison of predicted flux for a 
star with Tog = 35000 K, log g = 4, which corresponds to 
a main-sequence late O type star. The difference between 
the LTE and non-LTE predictions is important, particularly 
in the extreme UV region. For completeness, a black-body 
flux for T = Tog is also displayed. The black-body flux 
is obviously no longer used for any analysis of spectra of 
early type stars, but is still sometimes being used in other 
branches of astrophysics, like cosmology, for estimating 
the total number of ionizing photons produced by young, 
massive stars. As this figure shows, such estimates may 
be wrong by several orders of magnitude. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Atmospheres: Early Type Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


As an example of a detailed predicted spectrum 
from a modern, non-LTE metal line-blanketed model 
atmosphere, we present in figure 3 a sample of the 
predicted flux for a non-LTE model for Tet = 35000 K, 
logg = 4, and a high-resolution, high signal-to-noise 
observation of a late O main-sequence star 10 Lac 
secured by the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph 
(GHRS) aboard the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). 
The agreement between observations and predictions is 
excellent, and demonstrates the power of the present-day 
model atmospheres of early type stars. 

Model stellar atmospheres are basic tools for 
analysing observed stellar spectra. By fitting the observed 
spectrum with a grid of theoretically predicted spectra 
one can derive the basic parameters used for constructing 
the models, i.e. the effective temperature, surface gravity, 
chemical composition, and, in the general case, the mass 
loss rate. From those parameters, one can derive the 
fundamental stellar parameters, like the mass, radius and 
luminosity. Besides these, there are anumber of secondary 
parameters, such as the rotational velocity, or auxiliary 
parameters describing the nature of atmospheric velocity 
fields, etc. Detailed techniques for determining those 
parameters are described in separate articles (CHEMICAL 
COMPOSITIONS OF STARS, STELLAR DISTRIBUTIONS, LUMINOUS BLUE 
VARIABLES, STELLAR MASSES, CLASSIFICATION OF STELLAR SPECTRA). 
Here we just mention that thanks to modern, sophisticated 
model atmospheres, the typical accuracy of determining 
the effective temperature of early type stars is about 5%, 
the accuracy in log g about 0.1-0.2 dex, and the accuracy 
of chemical abundances about 0.2-0.3 dex. 


Bibliography 
The fundamental textbook of the field is 


Mihalas D 1978 Stellar Atmospheres 2nd edn (San Francisco: 
Freeman) 


A good textbook that covers both the theoretical and 
observational aspects of the stellar atmospheres is 


Gray D F 1992 Observations and Analysis of Stellar 
Photospheres 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Other related textbooks on physical aspects of radiative 
transfer include 


Rybicki G B and Lightman A P 1979 Radiative Processes in 
Astrophysics (New York: Wiley-Interscience) 

Shu F H 1991 The Physics of Astrophysics I. Radiation (Mill 
Valley, CA: University Science Books) 


An elementary-level textbook is 
Bohm-Vitense, E. 1989 Introduction to Stellar Astrophysics 


II. Stellar Atmospheres (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There are two books which present a collection of 
reviews on various mathematical and numerical aspects 
of radiative transfer 


Kalkofen W (ed) 1984 Methods in Radiative Transfer 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Kalkofen W (ed) 1987 Numerical Radiative Transfer 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


An excellent review paper of properties of early-type stars 
is 


Kudritzki R P and Hummer D G 1990 Amn. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 28 303 


A grid of LTE model atmospheres is described in 
Kurucz RL 1979 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 40 1 


Some recent non-LTE line-blanketed model atmospheres 
are described in 


Aufdenberg J P, Hauschildt P H, Shore S N and Baron E 
1998 Astrophys. J. 498 837 

Dreizler S and Werner K 1993 Astron. Astrophys. 278 199 

Hubeny I and Lanz T 1995 Astrophys. J. 439 875 


Finally, there are several conference proceedings which 
contain many excellent review papers on the stellar 
atmospheres theory, e.g. 


Crivellari L, Hubeny I and Hummer D G (ed) 1991 
Stellar Atmospheres: Beyond Classical Models (NATO 
ASI Series C 152) (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Heber U and Jeffery C J (ed) 1992 The Atmospheres of 
Early-Type Stars (Lecture Notes in Physics 401) (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Howarth I D (ed) 1997 Boulder-Munich II: Properties of Hot 
Luminous Stars (PASP Conf. Ser. 131) (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 


Ivan Hubeny 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Diameters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Diameters 


The radius of a star is one of several fundamental stellar 
parameters, including its mass and the luminosity, that 
characterize the physical and the evolutionary state of 
a star. A combination of parameters such as mass, 
luminosity, effective temperature and radius determines 
the location of a star in the H-R diagram. 

Over the past century a number of direct and indirect 
methods of measuring stellar radii have been developed. 
The most straightforward method is by measuring the 
angular diameter ¢ and combining it with the known 
distance to the star: 


R = distance x @¢. 


However, because of the very large distances of stars, 
and in spite of their large size (ranging from 0.01Ro 
to over 1000R,), their angular diameters are very small 
and difficult to measure directly. For example Proxima 
Centauri, the closest star to the Sun, has an angular 
diameter of only 0.006 arcsec. Even the largest stellar 
angular diameters are only a few hundredths of an 
arcsecond. 

Furthermore, it is not easy to define a radius of a star 
even assuming that the stellar surface can be approximated 
with a sphere. If the stellar surface was uniformly bright 
and there was a sharp limb at a distance R from the center 
of the stellar disk where the intensity drops to 0, then we 
could say that R corresponds to the radius of the star. 
However, since stars are gaseous objects their continuum 
intensity, 1,(6), varies from the center (9 = 0) toward the 
limb (6 > 0), where 6 is the angle between the line of 
sight and the radial vector. Even for relatively compact 
stars such as our Sun the brightness of the photosphere 
varies from the center toward the limb. The center-to-limb 
intensity variation of a solar-type star can be described by 
the following relation: 


1,(0)/L,(0) = 1 — uz — vo +. u2 cos + v2 cos? 8 


where the average values for the Sun are uw. = +0.84, 
V2 = —0.20; the dependence on wavelength for 0.20 wm < 
A < 10 wm is given in Cox (2000). 

In the following we describe several direct and in- 
direct diameter measurement techniques and highlight 
results obtained from ground- and space-based observa- 
tions. 


Angular diameters 


Measurement techniques 

Direct measurements of stellar angular diameters can 
be obtained using several high-angular-resolution tech- 
niques including imaging with large-aperture telescopes, 
lunar occultation and interferometry. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Diffraction-limited HST images of Mira (right) and its 
companion (left) at 5010 A. 


Large-aperture telescopes. Large-aperture telescopes are 
necessary to measure stellar angular diameters because 
the larger the APERTURE, the smaller is the angle on the 
sky that can be resolved. The size of the aperture of 
a telescope determines its theoretical diffraction-limited 
angular resolution at a given wavelength. The resolving 
power of a telescope increases as the wavelength of 
observation decreases. For example, to resolve Proxima 
Centauri at optical wavelengths one needs a telescope with 
an aperture of about 25 m. 

A telescope image of an astronomical source obtained 
in the absence of atmospheric turbulence (e.g. from space) 
can be mathematically described as the convolution of 
the brightness distribution of the source with a blurring 
function introduced by the limited aperture of the 
telescope and the finite size of detector pixels. According 
to the Nyquist criterion, detector pixel size must be less 
then 1/2 the diffraction limit of the telescope in order to 
obtain diffraction-limited observations. 

As an example of diffraction-limited observations 
from space, figure 1 shows an image of the Mira AB system 
obtained using the 2.5 m aperture Hubble Space Telescope 
(HST) and the Faint Object Camera at 5010 A (Karovska 
et al 1997). The primary o Ceti (Mira), the prototype of 
Mira-type variables, is an evolved giant, and the secondary 
VZ Ceti is a white dwarf. The separation between the 
components is only 0.6 arcsec (or about 60 AU using a 
distance to Mira of 100 pc). 

The diffraction-limited image of Mira appears 
substantially larger than the image of the companion and 
is clearly resolved by the 2.5 m telescope. The companion 
is unresolved by the telescope and one can discern the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Diameters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


diffraction ring in its image. The diffraction limit of 
the HST in the optical is about 50 marcsec (mas). The 
size of the detector’s pixels is approximately three times 
smaller, 14 mas. The measured size of Mira’s atmosphere 
at this wavelength is 60 mas, which corresponds to 
approximately 6 AU. 

If similar observations of this system were carried out 
using a 2.5 m ground-based telescope, the binary would 
have been barely resolved because the images would 
have been blurred by the atmospheric SEEING. The seeing- 
limited size of each individual image would have been 
comparable with the size of the binary separation in the 
system. 

Modern adaptive and/or active optics techniques 
are used to correct and compensate for the seeing 
effects which degrade the resolution of the ground-based 
observations. These techniques allow reaching the full 
diffraction-limited resolution of large-aperture ground- 
based telescopes (See INSTRUMENTATION: ADAPTIVE OPTICS). 

Lunar OCCULTATION is another way to measure angular 
diameters in the presence of Earth’s atmosphere. The lunar 
occultation technique uses the diffraction phenomenon 
occurring as the Moon’s sharp limb occults the stellar disk. 
The resolution in this case is not limited by the diffraction 
limit of the single-aperture telescope. Several hundred 
angular diameter measurements have been made so far 
(Richichi et al 1996). This method is limited only to a set of 
stars that can be occulted by the Moon. 

Interferometric techniques using two or more aper- 
tures provide another means of improving the resolution 
in the ground-based observation, and of measuring an- 
gular diameters. These techniques are also very promis- 
ing for future high-angular-resolution observations from 
space. 


Interferometry. In 1920 Michelson and Pease found a 
way to enhance the resolution of the ground-based 
observations degraded by the atmospheric seeing effects 
by using a technique based on the interference of the light 
from two mirrors in an INTERFEROMETER. The baseline (the 
separation between the interferometer mirrors) defines 
the resolution power of an interferometer; at a given 
wavelength, the resolution power increases as the baseline 
increases. 

At Mt Wilson Michelson and Pease constructed 
two interferometers (with approximately 7 m and 17 m 
baselines). They used these interferometers to make 
the first direct measurements of the angular sizes of 
stars other then our Sun. For example, they measured 
diameters of two variable stars, the red supergiants o Ori 
and a Sco over a period of 17 yr. Assuming uniform 
brightness distribution on the stellar disk, they obtained 
diameter measurements of a Ori ranging from 34 mas to 
54 mas. For a Sco, the measured diameters range from 
28 mas to 40 mas. Other interferometric measurements 
followed, including diameter measurements of early-type 
stars using the Narrabri Stellar Intensity Interferometer 
(Hanbury Brown et al 1974). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


In 1975, Labeyrie applied a novel approach to 
eliminate the degrading effects of the atmosphere on the 
ground-based images. Using a technique called speckle 
interferometry, which is based on light interference in a 
single-aperture telescope, he resolved the components of 
the binary system Capella (separated at only 50 mas) using 
the Mt Palomar 5 m aperture telescope. The separation 
between the components of this system is 10-20 times 
smaller than the size of the direct image of the system 
degraded by the atmospheric seeing (see also SPECKLE 
IMAGING OF BINARY STARS). 

Labeyrie and his group measured the diameters of 
several VARIABLE STARS using the speckle interferometric 
technique, including evolved giants such as Mira and R 
Leo. The measurements were made assuming a uniform 
brightness distribution on the stellar disk (Labeyrie et al 
1977). The results showed that within the same pulsation 
phase there is a significant variation in the diameter 
measurements obtained using filters centered in different 
spectral regions. These variations are explained as due to 
stratification of the extended atmosphere of these evolved 
stars. 

Today there are more then a dozen ground- 
based interferometers around the world operating at 
wavelengths ranging from optical to IR, and at radio 
wavelengths. Their baselines range from a few meters 
to several hundred meters (see INTERFEROMETRY: GROUND). 
Other groups are successfully applying single-aperture 
interferometric techniques, such as speckle interferometry 
and non-redundant aperture masking, for high-angular- 
resolution observations of stars. 

Several feasibility studies are at present being carried 
out for interferometers in space. The beginning of the 
21st century may see the first prototype interferometers in 
space (e.g. SIM; DARWIN), which will open new frontiers 
in stellar astrophysics. 


Examples of angular diameter measurements 

A plethora of multiwavelength measurements of the an- 
gular size of many stars have been obtained using various 
high-angular-resolution techniques at wavelengths rang- 
ing from UV to radio spectral domain. Recently, diam- 
eter measurements have also been made from space us- 
ing direct imaging with the HST and interferometry with 
the HST Fine Guidance Sensors (see ASTROMETRY WITH HUB- 
BLE SPACE TELESCOPE). In the following we highlight some of 
these results. 


Giants and supergiants 

High-angular-resolution observations of evolved giants 
and supergiants can provide important information on the 
structure of their extended atmospheres and circumstellar 
environments. For example, accurate determination 
of their photospheric angular diameters is crucial for 
establishing the effective temperature scale (Ridgway and 
Joyce 1980). The effective temperature can be determined 
from the relation 


Tes = (AF /ag*)'" 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Diameters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where F is the apparent bolometric flux received on the 
Earth, ¢ is the photospheric angular diameter and o the 
Stefan—Boltzmann constant. 

For pulsating stars such as MIRA VARIABLES, an 
accurately measured photospheric angular diameter when 
combined with the measured distance to the star yields 
its linear diameter which can then be used to determine 
the mode of pulsation (Ostlie and Cox 1986). At present, 
it is uncertain whether the oscillation mode of Mira-type 
variables is a fundamental or a first overtone. Once the 
pulsation mode is determined, it will be possible to better 
define the evolutionary place of Mira variables and their 
relation to other types of long-period variables (LPVs) 
(Willson 1982; van Belle et al 1996). 

Angular diameter measurements of numerous giants 
and supergiants have been carried out at wavelengths 
ranging from the optical to the radio spectral domains. 
Diameters as small as few milliarcseconds have been 
measured using interferometric and lunar occultation 
techniques in optical and infrared. These include for 
example the high-precision diameter measurements of 
cool giants at optical wavelengths obtained using the 
Mk III stellar interferometer (Quirrenbach et al 1993) and 
in the near-infrared using IOTA (van Belle et al 1996). 

High-angular-resolution observations of evolved 
giants and supergiants have been carried out in the 
optical using large single-aperture telescopes (using 
non-redundant aperture masking technique and speckle 
interferometry) and lunar occultation techniques (e.g. 
White 1980; Bonneau et al 1982; Haniff et al 1995). 

Recent observations made using ISI have measured 
for the first time the diameters of several late-type evolved 
stars in the mid-infrared spectral domain, at 11 wm 
wavelength range. They detected dust shells around most 
of the stars on their list. The measured inner radius of these 
dust shells ranges from about 2 to several dozen stellar 
radii. The results of this survey are described in Danchi et 
al (1994). 

The sizes of the radio photospheres of several LPVs 
(Miras and semiregular variables) have been measured 
using the VLA at the centimeter wavelength range (Reid 
and Menten 1997). Their observations suggest that these 
stars have a radio photosphere near 2 stellar radii, where 
the stellar radius is defined by line-free regions of the 
optical spectrum. 

The multiwavelength diameter measurements were 
made using models ranging from uniform disk and Gaus- 
sian distribution to brightness distributions calculated 
from various model atmospheres, to estimate the affects of 
brightness non-uniformity (e.g. Haniff et al 1995; van Belle 
et al 1996). The current models often produce a very sim- 
plified and usually incomplete description of the physical 
characteristics of the extended atmosphere because they 
do not simultaneously incorporate crucial elements such 
as pulsation, opacities and dust. Stellar size measurements 
based on inadequate models produce a large scatter in the 
estimated diameters (e.g. van Belle et al 1996) which can 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


bias the calculated effective temperature scale and will af- 
fect the accuracy of the derived mode of pulsation. 

In addition, current models assume that the atmo- 
sphere is spherically symmetric, despite the fact that 
currently there is substantial evidence that the late-type 
evolved stars arenotsymmetric. Recent imaging of several 
giants and supergiants carried out using ground-based 
telescopes and the HST detected substantial asymmetries 
in the extended atmosphere of these stars (Karovska et al 
1991; Haniff et al 1992; Wilson et al 1992; Tuthill et al 1994; 
Karovskaet al 1997). The cause(s) of the observed asymme- 
tries are being explored. The asymmetries could be due to 
unresolved bright spots on the surface of the star or in the 
extended atmosphere. They could be related to the pulsa- 
tion process; plausible mechanisms include instabilities in 
the pulsating atmospheres and non-radial pulsation. 

It is clear that detailed modeling of the extended 
atmospheric structure is necessary for an accurate 
determination of the photospheric diameter. Key input 
parameters that must be measured with high accuracy 
include diameters in selected spectral regions and the 
brightness distribution across the stellar disk as a function 
of wavelength and pulsation phase. 

Further progress in understanding the structure 
of the atmosphere of evolved giants and supergiants 
depends not only on the results of the multiwavelength 
interferometric observations but also on the further 
development of more realistic models incorporating 
asymmetries, proper abundance information and physical 
processes such as propagation of shock waves and 
dust formation. These models should produce phase- 
dependent brightness distributions in selected spectral 
regions important for atmospheric structure diagnostics 
such as different molecular bands, the continuum (UV, 
optical and especially in the near-IR) and emission lines 
carrying shock signatures (see also STELLAR ATMOSPHERES). 


Cepheids. Among the pulsating stars, Cepheids are most 
notable because of their importance for establishing the 
primary distance scale. Currently, the calibration accuracy 
of the zero point of the distance scale is about 10%. 
With the advent of long-baseline interferometers operating 
in the optical and infrared a new opportunity appears 
to improve the accuracy of the Cepheid distance scale 
using the Baade—Wesselink (BW) techniques (Sasselov and 
Karovska 1994). A precise interferometric measurement 
of the change of the angular radius of a Cepheid, 
combined with the radial displacement computed from 
the Cepheid’s integrated radial-velocity curve, will allow 
a direct and very accurate distance determination. 
Measurements of mean diameters of several Cepheid 
variables of less than a few mas are now being carried 
out using several long-baseline interferometers including 
the GI2T (Murrard 1997) and NPOI (Nordgren et al 
1999). Currently, the diameter measurements are made 
using uniform brightness distribution on the stellar disk. 
However, Sasselov and Karovska (1994) showed that 
the differences in model brightness distributions have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Diameters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


significant effects on the interferometric angular size 
measurements of Cepheids. They demonstrated that 
using a uniform brightness distribution will lead to an 
underestimate of the size of the Cepheid of up to 40% in 
the continuum and an overestimate of approximately 25% 
in the strong lines due to high level of scattering above the 
limb and sensitivity to local dynamic disturbances (shock 
waves, velocity gradients, etc). 

With the ongoing development of very-long-baseline 
(more than 100 m) stellar interferometers it will soon be 
possible to measure the small changes of the angular 
radius as a function of the pulsation process of many 
galactic Cepheids (see Davis 1994). A combination of 
accurate interferometric diameter measurements using 
model-predicted center-to-limb brightness distributions 
will provide a new venue for determining Cepheid 
distances via the Baade—Wesselink method (Sasselov and 
Karovska 1994) and a reliable zero point of the Cepheid 
distance scale. 


Indirect diameter measurement methods 


In addition to direct measurements of angular diameters 
there are several indirect methods that provide measure- 
ments of stellar diameters. In the following we highlight 
these methods. 


Eclipsing binaries 

Traditionally the most common source of stellar diameters, 
detached ECLIPSING BINARIES still offer one of the most precise 
means to measure stellar diameters today. The analysis 
of their light curves yields complete orbital elements of 
the binary system, including accurate relative radii. The 
diameters of the two stars in units of the orbital radius can 
be determined from the duration of the eclipses provided 
that all four contacts are well observed (figure 2). If in 
addition we can also measure the radial velocities of the 
two stars, we can express their radii in linear units. Such 
precious double-lined detached eclipsing binaries are very 
rare. Roughly 45 systems are known and they provide 
the most accurate (at 1% level) stellar radii in astronomy 
(Andersen 1991). The binaries in the sample include very 
massive (O stars), as well as a couple of low-mass stars 
(M1 V), mostly on the main sequence. Unfortunately, only 
two red giants are represented. The average mean error of 
the stellar radii is 1.5%, the best being EK Cep A (0.35%). 
The main difficulty in determining individual radii for 
stars in many eclipsing binaries is that the computed 
light curves may be nearly identical for a wide range 
of geometric configurations. This does not occur when 
eclipses are total (or nearly so). Values from partially 
eclipsing systems should not be trusted to an accuracy of 
1-2% unless verified by detailed spectroscopic evidence. 
Only one such binary system has been studied outside 
our Galaxy—HV2274 in the Large Magellanic Cloud—and 
accurate radii derived (Guinan et al 1998). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Primary eclipse 


Secondary 
eclipse y 
To Earth 
Secondary Primary 
eclipse eclipse 
4 \—_/ 4 r 
t, ‘i i) t, P 
3 ty ty 
5m 
= 
4 4 
t, t - ty 
0 fe & > 
0 t 


Figure 2. If the orbital plane of a binary happens to be nearly 
edge-on as seen from the Earth, then ecilpses will occur as one of 
the components passes in front of the other. The eclipse 
geometry is shown above, and a schematic light curve for the 
case in which the smaller star has the greater surface brightness 
is shown below. The binary period is P. 


Stellar radii and the Stefan—Boltzmann law 
A traditional and basic, but not very accurate, indirect 
method of measuring a stellar radius is using the definition 
of stellar effective temperature in terms of the Stefan— 
Boltzmann law, 

L=4nR’o Ti 


o =5.6x10°Js''m?*k* 


where the assumption is that of a star as a blackbody 
sphere. With a temperature derived from the stellar 
spectrum or multicolor photometry, and a luminosity 
inferred from the apparent brightness of the star and 
its distance, the stellar radius is determined. The 
apparent brightness is evaluated from the apparent 
magnitude measured at the Earth and the distance can 
be estimated using the parallax measurements or other 
indirect methods. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Diameters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A refinement of this method is the infrared flux 
method (Blackwell and Lynas-Grey 1994) to derive 
stellar angular diameters and effective temperatures 
by measuring the monochromatic flux at an infrared 
frequency and the bolometric flux and using theoretical 
model atmospheres to estimate the flux at the star’s 
surface. With distances, e.g. from PARALLAXES, the angular 
diameters thus obtained can be converted to absolute 
diameters. In a different approach, one could employ 
theoretical models of STELLAR EVOLUTION, and combined 
with distances (and for some types of stars) these can 
provide stellar radii estimates as well. 

The accuracy of these techniques is not very high (10- 
15%) and depends strongly on the type of star involved. 
For stars similar to the Sun, the accuracy in determining 
their radii could be as high as 6%. 


Baade—Wesselink techniques 

Doppler shifts of spectral lines originating in moving 
photospheres may be used to derive absolute stellar 
diameters, e.g. in radially pulsating variable stars and 
expanding supernova ejecta. The method relies on a 
combination of kinematic and thermodynamic relations 
and works very well for pulsating stars such as Cepheids 
and RR Lyrae (or any stellar surface in radial motion). It is 
generally called the Baade—-Wesselink method (Gautschy 
1987). The method is based on the idea that an emitting 
surface in radial motion can be observed directly and 
simultaneously through the Doppler shift in the spectra 
as well as in flux and temperature variation. The 
Doppler shifts provide radial velocities, which, when 
integrated over a certain time (or cycle), yield the linear 
displacements of the moving stellar surface, AR. The 
flux and temperature variation yield the ratio of the radii 
of the stellar surface at different times, through the use 
of the expression for the stellar luminosity, L, and the 
definition of effective temperature, To (L = 4 R’o T4,). 
This approach constitutes the classical application of the 
BW method to Cepheids (Baade 1926), where for phase 
pairs of equal color (assumed Toj¢(2) = Tor (1)) we obtain 


2 
ROT LO ipramm ay 
R() Ld) 


where m; is the stellar magnitude. Calculating these ratios 
and integrating the radial-velocity curve of a Cepheid 
over its entire pulsation cycle then can give us the mean 
linear radius of the star. The method has the potential 
to obtain 3% accuracy, although this potential has not yet 
been realized. 


Gravitational microlensing 

The gravitational lensing of a star’s light by another distant 
(point-like) star is called MICROLENSING and can provide 
a direct measurement of the diameter of the lensed star. 
When the lensing star transits across the face of the lensed 
star, the ratio of the angular impact parameter to the 
angular radius of the lensed star is determined from the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


shape of the photometric light curve. In this case an 
astrometric measurement of the Einstein ring radius (with 
precision of 10 was) can give the angular diameter of the 
lensed star with very high precision (1%). Such events are 
not common but have already been observed (MACHO 95- 
30). More common are microlensing events in which the 
lens is a binary star, with caustic crossing the face of the 
lensed star. Given precise astrometry, accurate diameters 
can be derived in these events (Paczynski 1998). 


Degenerate stars and black holes 

The diameters of WHITE DWARFS, NEUTRON STARS and BLACK 
HOLES are poorly known. The majority of estimates are 
based on theoretical models and there is very little input 
from observational data. Combining luminosities with 
effective temperatures is the most common approach 
to deriving white dwarf radii. Photometry (color and 
flux) and model atmospheres allow an estimate of the 
radiation flux at the white dwarf’s surface. With a 
distance from parallaxes (more than 100 white dwarfs 
have accurate ones), the radius can be determined. A 
different approach is afforded by the high gravity at the 
surface of white dwarfs which is responsible for large 
gravitational REDSHIFTS (up to 90 km s~1). These redshifts 
can be measured accurately for a few white dwarfs in 
detached binary systems, in which the white dwarfs’ 
masses are very well determined. As a result accurate 
radii for the white dwarfs can be estimated (Lang 1992). 
An example is Sirius B with R = (0.0078 + 0.0002)Ro. 
Typical white dwarf radii havea very narrow range around 
0.01Ro. 

For neutron stars and black holes certain constraints 
on their diameters can be placed if they happen to be in 
accreting binary systems with normal stars as companions. 
Neutron stars in such systems are often the source of x- 
ray emission, which is often variable and exhibits bursts. 
Strong x-ray bursts show photospheric radius expansion 
which can be used to derive the radius if time-resolved 
spectra are obtained (Damen et al 1990). An alternative 
method relies on high-resolution x-ray spectroscopy and 
spectral line broadening (Paerels 1997), much like the 
traditional technique used in stellar spectroscopy. The 
latter should become available with x-ray telescopes 
such as CHANDRA and XMM. In all these techniques 
the knowledge of the neutron star radius is strongly 
dependent of the mass estimate. This is especially true 
in the case of black holes in such binary systems (Menou 
et al 1999). Current estimates of neutron star radii (e.g. 
Golden and Shearer 1999) are in the theoretically expected 
range 8-10 km. 


Bibliography 

Andersen J 1991 Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 3 91-126 

Baade W 1926 Astron. Nachr. 228 359 

Bester M, Danchi W C, Hale D, Townes C H, 
Degiacomi C G, Mekarnia D and Geballe T R 1996 
Astrophys. J. 463 336 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Diameters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Blackwell D E and Lynas-Grey A E 1994 Astron. Astrophys. 
282 899 

Bonneau D, Foy R, Blazit A and Labeyrie A 1982 Astron. 
Astrophys. 106 235 

Cox A N (ed) 2000 Allen’s Astrophysical Quantities 
(New York: Springer) 

Damen E et al 1990 Astron. Astrophys. 237 103 

Danchi W, Bester M, Degiacomi C G, Greenhil L J and 
Townes C H 1994 Astron. J. 107 1469 

Davis J 1994 Very High Angular Resolution Imaging 
ed J G Robertson and W J Tango (IAU) 

Gautschy A 1987 Vistas Astron. 30 197 

Golden A and Shearer A 1999 Astron. Astrophys. 342 5 

Guinan E F et al 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 509 L21 

Hanbury Brown R, Davis J and Allen L R 1974 Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 167 121 

Haniff C A, Ghez A M, Gorham P W, Kulkarni S R, 
Matthews K and Nagebauer G 1992 Astron. J. 103 (5) 
1667 

Haniff C A, Scholz M and Tuthill P G 1995 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 276 640 

Karovska M, Hack W, Raymond J and Guinan E 1997 
Astrophys. J. Lett. 482 L175 

Karovska M, Nisenson P, Papaliolios C and Boyle R 1991 
Astrophys. J. 374 L51 

Labeyrie A, Koechlin L, Bonneau D, Foy R and Blazit A 
1977 Astron. Astrophys. 218 L75 

Lang K R 1992 Astrophysical Data: Planets and Stars 
(New York: Springer) 

Menou K et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 520 276 

Murrard D 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 317 789 

Nordgren T E et al 1999 Astron. J. 118 3032 

Ostlie D A and Cox A N 1986 Astrophys. J. 311 864 

Paczynski B 1998 Astrophys. J. 494 L23 

Paerels F 1997 Astrophys. J. Lett. 476 L47 

Quirrenbach A, Mozurkewich D, Armstrong JT, 
Buscher D F and Hummel C A 1993 Astrophys. J. 406 
215 

Reid M and Menten K 1997 Astrophys. J. 476 327 

Richichi A, Baffa C, Calamai G and Lisi F 1996 Astron. J. 
112 2786 

Ridgway S T, Joyce R R, White N M and Wing R F 1980 
Astrophys. J. 235 126 

Sasselov D and Karovska M 1994 Astrophys. J. 432 367 

Tuthill P G, Haniff C A and Baldwin J E 1994 Very High 
Angular Resolution Imaging ed J G Robertson and 
W J Tango (IAU) p 395 

van Belle G T, Dyck HM, Benson J A and Lacasse M G 1996 
Astron. J. 112 2147 

White N M 1980 Astrophys. J. 242 646 

Willson LA 1982 Pulsating Classical and Cataclysmic Variable 
Stars ed J P Cox 

Wilson R W, Baldwin J E, Busher D F and Warner P J 1992 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 257 369 


Margarita Karovska and Dimitar Sasselov 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Distributions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Distributions 


Our Galaxy is a collection of stars moving in orbits 
through the Galaxy’s gravitational field (see GALAXY: 
STRUCTURE). A ‘stellar distribution’ is a description of the 
distribution (in real space and in velocity space) of the 
stars in our Galaxy. Different kinds of stars have different 
distributions. A knowledge of the distribution of stars, 
obtained from counts of stars of many kinds, leads to an 
understanding of the structure and dynamics of groups 
of stars in general and to a description of our Milky Way 
Galaxy in particular. It also leads to interesting conclu- 
sions about the origin and history of our Galaxy. 

Censuses of stars began some two centuries ago 
with star counts; that is, numbers of stars at each dis- 
cernible level of apparent brightness. It is easy to see that 
fewer bright stars are seen than fainter ones; with each 
fainter magnitude the number of visible stars triples. 
However, what are the reasons and to what faintness 
does this observation extend? In the 20th century, after it 
had been discovered that stars vary greatly in both 
intrinsic brightness and distance, distance estimates of 
large numbers were needed in order to distinguish 
between the stars that happened to be near our solar sys- 
tem and the truly luminous stars and to distinguish the 
faint cut-off in star numbers, because a minimum bright- 
ness to stars is known to exist and because the Galaxy 
stops at a certain distance from us. 

Stellar properties such as brightness, color and dis- 
tance must be carefully evaluated for many thousands of 
stars for this separation to be made with precision. From 
such data, and from stellar motions, one can derive the 
underlying structure and dynamics of our Galaxy. An 
understanding of stellar distribution and galactic struc- 
ture therefore requires the accurate determination of 
these stellar parameters for all of the principal star types: 
the main sequence or dwarf stars, the giants and the 
supergiants and, lately, the faint sub-main-sequence 
brown dwarfs as well. 


Background 

In 1543, Copernicus proposed and published the concept 
that the Sun rather than the Earth lay at the center of the 
solar system. Soon thereafter, as his heliocentric system 
gained adherents, it became accepted that the stars were 
not just beyond Saturn, then the farthest known planet, 
but were many many times its distance from the Sun, for 
they showed no observable parallax as they must if the 
Earth moves. 

Research into stars and their distribution in space 
remained dormant until Sir William Herschel, discoverer 
of Uranus in 1781, initiated the study of their arrange- 
ment. Herschel made systematic and extensive counts of 
stars by magnitude and found that their density in space 
decreased in all directions with distance from the solar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


system. Along the plane of the Milky Way the decline 
was gradual, but in the perpendicular directions it was 
more precipitate. He was led to a model of the distribu- 
tion of stars as a disk—a grindstone-shaped universe of 
stars with the Sun near its center. 

The 19th century saw little progress in this field, but it 
witnessed the development of photography, spectroscopy 
and other tools that would later be used to expand the 
field of stellar astronomy. Above all was the successful 
measurement of the first stellar parallaxes in 1838 and dis- 
tances to the stars became known directly from these 
heliocentric parallaxes. This stellar motion, reflecting the 
orbital motion of the Earth about the Sun and constituting 
proof of that motion, had been sought by Aristotle and 
many others since. Only after 1838 could distances to stars 
be individually assigned. With parallax and proper 
motion (the apparent angular motion of a star across the 
sky) the true stellar motion could be derived and galactic 
dynamics could begin. By the end of the 19th century par- 
allaxes were known for about 70 stars. (See PARALLAXES.) 

Around 1900, the Dutch pioneer J C Kapteyn initiat- 
ed the modern period of the study of stars and their dis- 
tribution in space. Concurrently, Frank Schlesinger at the 
Yerkes Observatory introduced photography into 
astrometry and quickly increased the number of known 
parallaxes to over a thousand. Shortly before World War 
| E Hertzsprung and H N Russell used these many hun- 
dreds of new parallaxes to discover the characteristics of 
the distribution of stars by surface temperature (as 
deduced from spectral type or color) and intrinsic lumi- 
nosity. Their representation of this distribution is now 
called the Hertzsprung—Russell (HR) diagram, or in a 
more common form, the color-magnitude (CM) dia- 
gram. The astrophysics of its features was not explained 
for many years, but the main sequence and the giant and 
supergiant domains gave form to further stellar study 
and classification. In whichever form, the diagram repre- 
sents a plot of intrinsic luminosity of stars versus their 
surface temperatures; it and the loci of the major star 
groupings are shown in figure 1. 

One of the features that arose in the wake of this dia- 
gram was the stellar luminosity function, the frequency 
distribution of stars ordered by intrinsic brightness 
(absolute magnitude). It became possible to give a quan- 
titative description of the distribution of star luminosities 
as they really are, as an aid in deducing spatial distribu- 
tion of stars from their observed distribution. Surveys 
were created that distinguished the nearby fainter stars 
by their proper motion from their numerous distant and 
brighter counterparts. A quantitative description of the 
distribution of nearby stars in space could be provided as 
an aid in deducing the distribution of star luminosities 
from their observed distribution. Clearly these two 
developments have to meet in a consistent picture of the 
distribution of stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Stellar Distributions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A [ Supergiants 


it Red giants 
Subgiants 
£ 
2 
5 
oO 
a 
a 
+10 7- 


White dwarfs Red 


dwarfs 


Spectral type 


Figure 1. The HR diagram shown schematically. The regions 
inhabited by the main sequence stars (normal dwarfs), giants 
and supergiants are shown. (Upgren A R 1998 Night has a 
Thousand Eyes: A Naked-Eye Guide to the Sky, its Science and Lore 
(New York: Plenum)) 


The first of these developments resulted from the 
studies at Leiden by Kapteyn, P J van Rhijn and their 
associates and the second was due to W J Luyten among 
others. These astronomers realized that apparent magni- 
tudes and proper motions could be determined for stars 
by the thousands. It is worth noting that, until very 
recently, these were the only properties known for the 
majority of even the nearest stellar neighbors. In fact, 
their faster proper motion became the single stellar para- 
meter by which most faint nearby stars could be recog- 
nized as such. 

Astrometric surveys based only on apparent bright- 
ness and proper motion were known even then to be 
fraught with biases and systematic errors, but for the 
middle third of the 20th century they formed the obser- 
vational data for the distribution of stars in space. Much 
ingenuity was demonstrated in the avoidance of the 
worst pitfalls due to incomplete counts of even the near- 
est stars. It was recognized that, for a full understanding 
of stellar distribution, the three spatial coordinates and 
their three first derivatives with time must be well 
known for every kind of star. Expressed in a coordinate 
system of a radial (or line-of-sight) direction and two 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


transverse directions (the two orthogonal axes in the 
tangent plane of the sky at the position of the star), all 
but one of the six derive from the equations of condition 
for stellar motion. The distance is set by the parallax 
with the direction cosines appropriate for the star’s posi- 
tion in the sky, and the two mutually orthogonal trans- 
verse velocities, T(x) and T(y), are derived from the 
proper motion in each of the two directions divided by 
the parallax. Only R, the velocity in the radial direction, 
remained to be found. The problem then was that this 
radial velocity could only be obtained for bright stars, 
and the distances and transverse velocities were only 
available for nearby stars. Far too few stars made both 
lists for an accurate picture of stellar distributions and 
motions to be made. 


Recent results 

The last few decades have been a time of rapidly improv- 
ing stellar samples and a more faithful representation of 
the stars in general. Photoelectric photometry, which 
allows stellar brightnesses to be measured with high pre- 
cision, has become an alternative method of establishing 
a star’s approximate distance, with greater rapidity and 
extended to more distant stars than the measurement of 
stellar parallax could achieve. Together with the stellar 
spectrograph, photometry is able in most cases to locate 
a star’s proper position on the HR diagram and thus its 
distance. Larger telescopes with more sensitive equip- 
ment have extended star counts to much fainter stars. 
The newer surveys have been active particularly in the 
infrared spectral regions, where the faintest stars are 
more visible. 

Although several thousand stars had parallaxes by 
1989, only a minority of them had parallaxes sufficiently 
larger than their errors to be of any real value in setting 
an adequate distance scale. Then, in that year the 
European Space Agency launched Hipparcos, a satellite 
devoted to positions, parallaxes, and proper motions. 
The mission was first conceived by Pierre Lacroute and 
the acronym stands for ‘high precision parallax collecting 
satellite’. The name also honors Hipparchus, the 
astronomer who first catalogued the stars and their 
brightnesses and positions in the 2nd century BC. On 
completion of the mission about 1993, it delivered paral- 
laxes and proper motions of almost 120000 stars; most of 
the data were enough larger than their errors for galactic 
research. Hipparcos allowed the precise calibration of the 
luminosities of all but the intrinsically brightest stars. 
Only the supergiants, Cepheid variables and their like do 
not yet have reliable luminosities from their individual 
parallaxes because even the closest among them are still 
too far away. 

Hipparcos, the Hubble Space Telescope launched by 
NASA at about the same time and other large ground- 
based telescopes have revolutionized the field, having 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Stellar Distributions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


i 
or: 0.1 < G_/n< 0.2 (11125) 


Absolute mogritude, M(Hp) 
5 


19 


—0.5 ce] 05 1 Ws 2 
B—V (magi 


Figure 2. The CM diagram for 10793 stars with accurate paral- 
laxes determined by the Hipparcos satellite. Notice the main 
sequence and giant regions. Only one supergiant (Canopus) is 
close enough for a good parallax. (Perryman M A C et al 1995 
Parallaxes and the Hertzsprung-—Russell diagram from the pre- 
liminary Hipparcos solution H30 Astron. Astrophys. 304, 69-81) 


provided the means for surveys, particularly in the 
infrared, where the faint stars and brown dwarfs are 
most detectable. The potential from the data in the final 
catalogue of Hipparcos results is not yet likely to be fully 
exhausted. 

Two programs, now in the planning stage, will fur- 
ther greatly improve the precision in stellar distances 
and motions. Both make use of large telescopes in space 
and interferometric techniques and, if successful, can 
achieve errors as low as a microsecond. They could then 
produce a reliable parallax for almost every resolvable 
object in our Galaxy as well as some in the Magellanic 
Clouds. One of these is GAIA (Global Astrometry 
Instrument for Astrophysics), a program of the European 
Space Agency and named for a goddess of the Earth. 
Another is known as SIM (Space Interferometry 
Mission), an American program. At last notice, both 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


efforts are a decade or more away from launch. In the 
just-published second edition of his book, Modern 
Astrometry, Professor Jean Kovalevsky outlines in detail 
Hipparcos, as well as these and other future projects vital 
to the further understanding of the arrangement of stars. 
Figure 2 shows a CM diagram for several thousand 
stars plotted from Hipparcos data of high precision. We 
see that the majority of stars form a sequence extending 
from the upper left (hot and bright) to the lower right 
(cool and faint). This is the main sequence, and it is now 
known to represent a sequence in the masses of stars as 
well as their luminosities. The sequence extending from 
it to the right near the center of this main sequence is 
known as the giant branch, and the few stars in the lower 
left (hot and faint) are the degenerate stars or white 
dwarf stars. Just above the top of the figure would be the 
supergiants, the brightest of all stars (see figure 1 for a 
schematic representation). The features of the CM dia- 
gram must be inferred from a large amount of data. 


Current models of stellar distribution 

A broad picture of stellar distributions emerged early in 
the 20th century and has been substantiated in its basic 
features and improved by more recent observations. Star 
counts made in all directions reveal that the one or two 
thousand brightest stars, those readily visible to the 
naked eye, maintain a reasonably uniform distribution 
all around the sky. The luminous stars of the Milky Way 
delineate its plane, seen edge on from within, of our 
great spiral Galaxy. They thin out very rapidly with 
angular distance from this plane, represented by a great 
circle called the Galactic Equator centered within the vis- 
ible Milky Way. Distant stars are relatively rare anywhere 
near the directions perpendicular to the Equator, known 
as the Galactic Poles. The major component of the Milky 
Way is thus a great disk some 100000 light-years or more 
in diameter but only a few hundred to a thousand light- 
years in thickness. The disk is centered on a much denser 
core or nucleus and is surrounded by the thinly populat- 
ed galactic halo. 

Stars fall into two or more main groups or popula- 
tions, with fundamental differences between them in 
their chemical constitution and location in the Galaxy. 
The primary difference is one of age; that is, time since 
formation. The globular clusters and a few other stars 
form a nearly spherical halo about the disk and contain 
the oldest stars, whereas the younger stars are more con- 
fined to the disk region. Recent work indicates the pres- 
ence of a division within the disk population into young 
‘thin-disk’ stars and an older middle-aged group, the 
‘thick-disk’ stars. Each group is distributed roughly nor- 
mally about the plane along the perpendicular or z-axis 
direction. The dispersions of the groups are not precisely 
known and are found to differ from one investigation to 
another, but are of the order of 100-200 pc for the thin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Stellar Distributions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


disk and 500-1000 pc for the thick disk. The very old 
‘halo’ population is more nearly spherically distributed 
with a dispersion in z of several thousand parsecs. 

Within the thin-disk population, some evidence sug- 
gests fine structure in the form of ‘moving groups’ of 
stars, not unlike widely extended open star clusters and 
possibly spawned by those that have dissipated into the 
general stellar background. Such star streams range from 
the proven (the closest of which is the so-called Ursa 
Major or Sirius moving group, counting among its 
brighter members Sirius and most of the stars forming 
the Big Dipper (or Plough)) to the very tentative. The 
number of groups and their percentage of the total stel- 
lar population are not yet known. Galactic dynamics 
indicates that stars older than about a billion years are 
well mixed and would show little star streaming or other 
preferential motion. 


Distributions in surface temperature, luminosity 
and metal abundance 
It is now widely recognized that stars vary over a great 
range in three distinct parameters: luminosity, surface 
temperature and an age-related parameter measured by 
the abundance of metals in their atmospheres. This is one 
of the outstanding achievements in galactic structure and 
kinematics of recent years. After distances became 
known through the parallax process, the variation due to 
distance could be removed from consideration and some 
order could be made among the kinds of stars we really 
see. In recent decades, the nature of stars was made clear 
by means of plots of their spectral types against their 
intrinsic luminosities (absolute magnitudes) in the HR 
and CM diagrams. Because the spectral type was found 
to correlate with the colors of stars, both diagrams mea- 
sure the basic stellar properties of surface temperature 
and luminosity. The two properties depend overwhelm- 
ingly on the star’s initial mass. Recently the third dimen- 
sion related to chemical composition has been well sur- 
veyed. We have found that the commonest measure of 
chemical composition is the abundance of metals pre- 
sent. We know that the Milky Way has become enriched 
in metals from its early days when almost all matter was 
in the form of hydrogen. As stars evolved and died, the 
metals produced in their cores dissipated throughout the 
system and now amount to about 3% of younger stars by 
mass. In its early days the Milky Way collapsed from a 
near-sphere onto a disk, much as did the matter in the 
solar system later on. Correlations were discovered 
between the age of a star, its metal content and its galac- 
tic orbit. The metal-poor stars were formed first when the 
Galaxy was more nearly spherical and the others came 
along much later. 

The main sequence contains the great majority of 
stars, and we now know that all stars start out on the 
main sequence in a location determined by stellar mass. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The giants and supergiants have experienced major 
changes in their interiors, which cause them to become 
cooler and brighter; thus, they have become much larger 
in diameter and of reddish appearance. The main 
sequence stage accounts for most of a star’s total lifetime 
and, since more massive stars are far more luminous than 
smaller dwarfs, they exhaust their energy and pass 
through this stage much more quickly. The thermonu- 
clear fusion processes by which hydrogen is converted 
into helium and energy at and near the core is the source 
of energy that drives the star during this stage. 
Supergiants last only for a few million years, whereas the 
red dwarfs forming the lower main sequence can endure 
for tens of billions of years, longer than the age of the 
Galaxy. We have a picture of the stars not unlike a single 
snapshot of a forest, from which we must infer the types 
of trees and shrubs, and, from saplings and mature 
plants, the growth and life cycle of each species. 

A star is a furnace composed of its own fuel. In the 
interiors of massive bright stars the energy derives from 
their convective cores passing up through radiative 
envelopes. In intermediate-mass stars such as the Sun, 
the two means of energy transport are reversed, with the 
energy passing outward from a radiative core through 
the outer layers forming the surrounding envelope via 
convection. As we descend in mass farther down the 
main sequence, we encounter the faint red dwarf stars, 
the predominant stellar component of the galaxy and 
presumably the universe. Energy transport in stars 
below 0.3 solar masses seems to be fully convective. All 
such small stars ever formed are still alive, since their 
energy exhaustion rate is low. At about 0.08 solar masses, 
we reach the limit below which the central temperature 
does not reach the point at which the fusion of hydrogen 
into helium can begin, and the star cools off after a short 
period of luminescence through gravitational contraction 
to become a brown dwarf. The procession on down in 
mass from 0.08 to 0.001 solar masses brings us to the 
mass of Jupiter, our largest planet. 

In the last few years with larger telescopes and sub- 
tler ancillary photosensors now available, astronomers 
have delved into these less massive objects in the galaxy. 
Ten years ago we knew of no object outside the solar sys- 
tem less massive than a full-fledged star, defined as an 
object with fusion going on in its core. In order for this to 
take place, a central temperature of at least three million 
kelvins must be maintained. Because core temperatures 
of stars rise with gravitational pressure, which in turn 
rises with stellar mass, stars as they contract from inter- 
stellar material must be above a minimal mass in order 
for the thermonuclear fusion, the conversion of hydro- 
gen into helium plus energy, to begin. 

Less massive stars, these almost-stars, are now 
known as brown dwarfs despite their red color, since the 
term ‘red dwarfs’ has been reserved for the faintest stars 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Stellar Distributions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


that do shine by fusion processes. Brown dwarf stars were 
presumed to exist for some time, but their confirmation 
came only in the last few years with improved sky sur- 
veys. Curiously, planets orbiting other stars were also 
proven to exist at about the same time. Through gravita- 
tional perturbations affecting nearby stars, we are now 
aware of planets within an order of mass of Jupiter orbit- 
ing other stars; that is, masses from about one-half to 
about ten times the mass of Jupiter, far smaller than the 
brown dwarfs. Jupiter-sized masses have been detected 
around some 50 stars similar to the Sun since 1995. Jupiter 
and these other planets never were and never will be stars. 
However, they are now a part of a continuous distribution 
in mass of the common objects in our galaxy, and their 
abundance has become a matter of interest for the future. 
This is because smaller brown dwarfs have been found 
that are only a little more massive than the largest extra- 
solar planets, and soon the final gap in mass may be filled 
in, thus providing a continuity in mass from the smallest 
debris in the solar system to the mightiest of stars. 

It is yet too early to know with any certainty the 
space density of brown dwarfs or of planets. A recent 
estimate places the number of main sequence stars of 
spectral classes F, G and K (between about 0.5 and 1.5 
solar masses) with one or more planets at about 7% of 
their total number. The planets we have detected are of 
the size of Jupiter and Saturn, but it is widely assumed 
that Earth-sized planets are also present in large numbers 
and that we may be able to discover some of them in the 
next decade. 


Metallicity in stars 

With the recent advent of the measurement of metallici- 
ty—the quantity of elements heavier than helium—in 
stars, we are able to put together a much more coherent 
picture of the stars and the development of the Galaxy. 
To an astrophysicist, the term ‘metals’ includes all ele- 
ments except the lightest two, hydrogen and helium, but 
in fact only carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, iron and a few in 
between have noteworthy abundances. Elements heavier 
than iron are found only in trace quantities if at all. 

The abundance is defined by the ratio between a star 
and the Sun of the percentage of metals, sometimes 
specifically limited to iron alone, compared with hydro- 
gen (which is known to account for the great majority of 
stellar material) and is specified as [M/H] where 


[M/H] = log|(M/H)star/ (M/F) sunl 
or, in the case of iron alone, 
[Fe/H] = log| (Fe/H) star/ (Fe/H) sun] 


The Sun is a rather young metal-rich star, and others with 
the same chemical composition will show [Fe/H] near 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


zero. Old stars such as those in globular clusters reveal 
[Fe/H] to be near -2; that is, iron is down by a factor of 
100 compared with its relative abundance in the Sun. 
Stars of intermediate age lie near —1 (one-tenth the solar 
iron abundance). Although the parameter has not been 
extended to enough stars to properly map the prevalence 
of metals (iron) throughout the Galaxy, or even the solar 
neighborhood, studies made in connection with the 
kinematics of stars have revealed a calibration of stellar 
populations into two or, more likely, three stellar popula- 
tions. The first group is comparatively rich in metals 
((Fe/H] near zero, the solar abundance) and is associat- 
ed with the thin disk, extending to only a few hundred 
parsecs on either side of the galactic plane. The second 
group, corresponding to the thick disk, is of intermediate 
age and has a metallicity near -1, with faster motions 
perpendicular to the plane in the so-called z direction, 
and thus they carry to about a kiloparsec above and 
below the plane. The reality of this thick disc is still in 
some doubt—the evidence is strong, if not yet conclu- 
sive. 

The oldest stars are of metallicity -2 or less and 
form the galactic spheroid or halo. They consist of glob- 
ular clusters and their component stars, along with a 
few old field stars, and fill a nearly spherical region with 
a diameter equal to the disk and a thickness above and 
below it of several kiloparsecs. In the plane, the halo 
stars make up less than 1% of the total, and the interme- 
diate stars about one-quarter of the total. We find that 
the metal-rich stars move slowly in the z direction, with 
an average velocity of 12 km s-! at the plane (z = 0), so 
that they move to only one or two hundred parsecs 
above and below the plane before the gravitation of the 
material in the plane pulls them back into it. The inter- 
mediate stars average near 30 km s-!, so that with 
increasing z distance they take over. Then come the halo 
stars, which become the majority in regions more than 1 
kpc from the plane. 


Stellar samples and their biases today 

With the newer generation of large telescopes and 
charge-coupled devices and other detectors of advanced 
sensitivity, we are now aware that stars do not keep 
tripling with each additional fainter magnitude forever. 
At a magnitude of about 12, about the faintest magnitude 
visible in a telescope of aperture 6 in, the newer data 
show that fainter stars fall off more rapidly. At some 
point this must occur, since our Galaxy is not infinite. Its 
several hundred billion stars must run out at some point. 
Work has also been done to improve the stellar luminos- 
ity function, both as to its fainter end and with regard to 
the relative space densities of the brown dwarfs. Since 
the brown dwarfs shine for only a limited time before 
going dark, the abundance of visible and no-longer visi- 
ble brown dwarfs is unknown and may be quite large. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Stellar Distributions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The stellar population increases markedly with 
faintness along the main sequence. The faint red dwarfs 
dominate the stellar component in mass, although not in 
luminosity. Each brilliant supergiant may be a billion 
times as luminous as a faint dwarf, even if millions of 
times less numerous. Since most of the stellar mass is in 
the form of small red stars and possibly also brown 
dwarfs—including those that no longer shine—it 
becomes very important to know just how many there 
are in a given volume of space. Such information is vital 
to any study of the mass distribution and dynamics with- 
in our Galaxy. Selection effects abound in this effort, 
since identifying dwarfs from the many background 
stars that appear just as faint because of their greater dis- 
tance involves detection by proper motion or by spectral 
or color characteristics. Now that surveys singling out 
the faint stars are not limited to astrometric means, and 
also extend from the visible spectral region into the 
infrared, this work is proceeding apace. 

The determination of an accurate stellar luminosity 
function requires care in both the observations and the 
underlying theories and the story of stellar distribution is 
largely one of ever-improving observational techniques 
and statistical analyses applied to ever-increasing num- 
bers of stars of all kinds. At this time, the census of stars 
is known very accurately only to a distance of about 5 
parsecs (about 16.3 light years) from the Sun. Table 1 lists 
the number of stellar systems and of individual stars 
known to be within that distance as a function of the year 
of publication of a reference to those data. Note that the 
numbers of known stars are always increasing over time 
but appear to be nearing a constant. Any extension of the 
distance beyond 5 parsecs quickly shows a decline in 
space density, first for the faintest red dwarfs, but then 
for stars of ever-increasing luminosity. 


Table 1. The numbers of stars known within 
5 pe of the Sun. 


Year of publication Number of stars | Number of systems 


1945 48 37 
1957 56 42 
1974 60 45 
1981 63 47 
1987 65 50 
1993 67 51 


Stars and the dynamics of the Galaxy 

Half a century ago, it became clear that the disk of our 
Galaxy is not homogeneous throughout its extent, but 
rather resembles many other large galaxies in possessing 
a spiral structure, and lately possibly a barred structure 
as well. Objects known to be very young include the 
supergiants, especially the blue ones at the very top of 
the main sequence, the Cepheids and the HII regions or 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


emission nebulae. These were the objects found to delin- 
eate spiral arms in other galaxies, and studies of their 
distribution in this one confirmed the presence of spiral 
arms here. When we consider the loci of even moderate- 
ly older stars, such as the main sequence A stars like Vega 
and Sirius, the arms are no longer recognizable among 
the background stars. Star formation regions lie along the 
arms, but the stars produced gradually drift away and 
diffuse throughout the disk between the arms. 

The total mass density of all matter is a number of 
great significance. Galactic dynamics depends on the 
mass distribution within the Galaxy as a function of loca- 
tion. J H Oort showed that the distribution of motions of 
stars in the direction normal to the galactic plane is gov- 
erned by the total mass density from all matter in the 
galactic plane in the general region near the Sun. Stellar 
motions here and at some distance from the plane are not 
known with high precision, but they indicate a mass den- 
sity of between 0.15 and 0.18 solar masses per cubic par- 
sec. This number is now called the Oort limit. The 
observed mass density in the region of the Sun summed 
up over all known stars and interstellar material does not 
seem to reach the Oort limit. It may be about 0.10 solar 
masses per cubic parsec, with the interstellar gas and 
dust accounting for one-third to one-half of the total. The 
rest, the so-called missing mass, is presumed to exist in 
the form of dark matter. None of these numbers is of suf- 
ficiently high accuracy to settle the problem to the 
desired degree for the best galactic dynamical theory. 
This confirms the need to press on for ever more depend- 
able stellar censuses, especially near the Sun, where we 
have some chance of achieving completeness. 


Future developments 

Future developments in our understanding of stellar 
distributions will require both an increasing number 
and precision of observations. However, many of the 
problems that remain arise from the fact that radial 
velocities and metal abundances are still only known 
for a handful of stars. Is there a gradient in metallicity 
across the galactic disk or outward from its center or in 
the direction perpendicular to the plane as some have 
found? How many discrete stellar populations are there, 
and do they represent distinct waves or bursts of past 
star formation or a continuity in age-related stellar prop- 
erties? 

For the lack of radial velocities as much as any other 
data, we lack space motions. Without precise quantita- 
tive measures of the equivalent widths of spectral lines 
and related observations, we lack metal-to-hydrogen 
ratios. These quantities are ineluctably closely correlated, 
but how? Despite improvements in theory, the solution 
of these problems will require programs dedicated to 
observations of many common nearby objects. It is pos- 
sible that the search for stars with planetary systems of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Stellar Distributions 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


various kinds will stimulate a new wave of observations 


of this type. 


Bibliography 

Basri G 2000 Observations of brown dwarfs Annu. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 38 485-519 

Binney J and Merrifield M 1998 Galactic Astronomy 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Chabrier G and Baraffe I 2000 Theory of low-mass stars 
and substellar objects Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
38 337-77 

1997 Hipparcos Venice ‘97 (European Space Agency) 

Kovalevsky J 1998 First results from Hipparcos Annu. 
Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 99-129 

Kovalevsky J 2002 Modern Astrometry, 2nd edn (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Lebreton Y 2000 Stellar structure and evolution: deduc- 
tions from Hipparcos Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
38 35-77 

Majewski S R 1993 Galactic structure surveys and the 
evolution of the Milky Way Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 31 575-638 

Morrison L V and Gilmore G F (eds) 1994 Galactic and 
Solar System Optical Astrometry (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Arthur Upgren 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Dynamics 


Stellar dynamics describes systems of many point 
mass particles whose mutual gravitational interactions 
determine their orbits. These particles are usually 
taken to represent stars in small GALAxy CLUSTERS with 
about 107-10? members, or in larger GLOBULAR CLUSTERS 
with 10*-10° members or in GALACTIC NUCLEI with up to 
about 10° members or in galaxies containing as many as 
10! stars. Under certain conditions, stellar dynamics can 
also describe the motions of galaxies in clusters, and even 
the general clustering of galaxies throughout the universe 
itself. This last case is known as the cosmological many- 
body problem. 

The essential physical feature of all these examples 
is that each particle (whether it represents a star or 
an entire galaxy) contributes importantly to the overall 
gravitational field. In this way, the subject differs from 
CELESTIAL MECHANICS where the gravitational force of a 
massive planet or star dominates its satellite orbits. Stellar 
dynamical orbits are generally much more irregular and 
chaotic than those of celestial mechanical systems. 

Consequently, the description of stellar dynamical 
systems is usually concerned with the statistical properties 
of many orbits rather than with the detailed positions and 
velocities of an individual orbit. Thus it is not surprising 
that the KINETIC THEORY OF GASES developed by MAXWELL, 
Boltzmann and others in the late 19th century was adapted 
by astrophysicists such as Jeans to stellar dynamics in the 
early 20th century. Subsequent results in stellar dynamics 
contributed to the first analyses of kinetic plasma physics 
in the 1950s. Then rapid evolution of plasma theory 
in the second half of the 20th century, stimulated partly 
by prospects of controlled thermonuclear fusion, in turn 
contributed to stellar dynamics. This was an especially 
productive interdisciplinary interaction. 

After describing basic physical processes such 
as timescales, relaxation processes, dynamical friction 
and damping, this article derives the virial theorem 
and mentions some applications, discusses distribution 
functions and their evolution through the collisionless 
Boltzmann equation and the BBGKY hierarchy, and 
outlines the thermodynamic descriptions of finite and 
infinite gravitating systems. The emphasis here is on 
fundamental physics rather than on detailed models. 


Basic ideas 


We start with simple ideas that are common to most stellar 
dynamical systems. For point masses to represent their 
components, physical collisions must be rare. In a system 
of objects, each with radius d, this means that the total 
internal volume of all the objects must be much less than 
the volume over which they swarm. Two spherical objects 
of radius d will have an effective radius 2d for a grazing 
collision whose cross section is thereforeo = 47 d?. If there 
is a number density n of these objects and they move on 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


my 


Figure 1. The deflection of a star mz by a more massive star m1, 
schematically illustrating two-body relaxation. 


random orbits, their mean free path to geometric collisions 
is 


(1) 


where R is the radius of a spherical system containing N 
objects distributed approximately uniformly. 

This has two easy physical interpretations. First, the 
average number of times an object can move through its 
own diameter before colliding is essentially the ratio of the 
cluster’s volume to that occupied by all the stars. Second, 
the number of cluster radii the object can traverse before 
colliding is essentially the ratio of the projected area of 
the cluster to that of all the objects. In many astronomical 
systems, these ratios are very large. As examples, 10° stars 
in a globular cluster of 10 pc radius have 4¢/R © 3 x 10" 
and 10° galaxies in a cluster of 3 Mpc radius have Ag/R © 
30. Therefore stellar dynamics is a good approximation 
over a wide range of conditions. It may, however, break 
down in the cores of realistic systems where only a few 
objects dominate at the very center and orbits are more 
regular. 

Although geometric collisions may be infrequent, 
gravitational encounters are common. These occur when 
one object passes by another, perturbing both orbits. 
Naturally, in a finite system all the objects are passing by 
each other all the time, so this process is continuous. In a 
system which is already fairly stable, most perturbations 
are small. However, their cumulative effects over long 
times can be large and affect the evolution of the system 
significantly. To see how this works, we introduce the 
fundamental notion of a ‘stellar dynamical relaxation 
time’. This is essentially the timescale for a dynamical 
quantity such as a particle’s velocity to change by an 
amount approximately equal to its original value. 

As an illustration of the general principle, consider 
two-body relaxation. Suppose, as in figure 1, that a 
massive star m,, deflects a much less massive star mp. 
Initially, mz moves with velocity v perpendicular to the 
distance b (the impact parameter) at which the undeflected 
orbit would be closest to m,. 

There is a gravitational acceleration Gm,b~* which 
acts for an effective time 2buv~! and produces a component 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of velocity 


(2) 


approximately perpendicular to the initial velocity. Since 
Av < v, the effects are linear and they give a scattering 
angle y ~ Av/v. Amore exact version follows the orbits 
in detail, but this is its physical essence. It shows that large 
individual velocity changes, Av ~ v, and large scattering 
angles occur when two objects are so close that the 
gravitational potential energy, Gm m2/b, approximately 
equals the kinetic energy, m2v?/2. Such close encounters 
are rare. Typical encounters in a spherical system of 
total mass M and radius R containing N objects have an 
impact parameter about equal to the mean separation, 
b = RN-'3. The average mass m; ~ M/N, and the 
initial velocity is given by the approximate balance of the 
system’s total kinetic and potential energy, v2? ~ GM/R. 
(This last relation follows from the virial theorem below.) 
Therefore from equation (2) 


Av 
Se ye NP ©) 


for N > 1, and most gravitational encounters involve 
little energy or momentum exchange. Exceptions may 
occur in the centers of clusters, particularly among more 
massive particles, where the core is relatively isolated and 
the effective value of N is low. 

Although most individual deflections are small, their 
cumulative effects are not. Over long times, uncorrelated 
deflections from the nearly randomly moving orbits 
cause each particle’s velocity to randomly walk around 
its original value. Thus the root-mean-square velocity 
increases from its initial value in proportion to the square 
root of the number of encounters, or the square root of 
the time. To estimate this change, we multiply the square 
of each velocity change from equation (2) by the number 
of encounters with a given velocity and impact parameter 
during a unit time and then integrate over the whole range 
of velocities, impact parameters and times of interest. 
Finally setting (Av)? = v? gives the stellar dynamical 
relaxation time for the cumulative small changes to modify 
the velocity by an amount equal to its initial value. For 
homogeneous systems near equilibrium with GM ~ Rv? 
and a Maxwellian distribution of velocities, this is 


0.2N 


* in(w 2)“ a 


TR 


where 1, = R/v © (Gp) '/? is the dynamical crossing time 
for a particle with average velocity and p is the average 
density. 

In globular clusters, galaxies and rich clusters of 
galaxies N > 10° so tz > t.. Cumulative small deflections 
do not amount to much over any one orbital period, but 
their secular effect can dominate after many orbits. The 
relaxation time tr will vary depending on the geometry, 
range of masses and velocity and density distributions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


within a system. For most systems, Tr exceeds the lifetime 
of the system, so it cannot have been the primary process 
for a system’s formation and currently relaxed regular 
roughly spherical appearance. 

Systems in which tr > t, are essentially ‘collisionless’ 
in the sense that their nearly smooth global gravitational 
force dominates the average orbits of their particles. Other 
systems in which strong local fluctuations in gravitational 
forces dominate particle orbits are ‘collisional’, since 
these fluctuations produce large-angle scatterings of the 
orbits. (This standard terminology does not refer to 
bodily collisions of objects.) Realistic astronomical 
systems usually combine aspects of both of these idealized 
categories. For example, local gas clouds, star clumps 
or dark matter inhomogeneities may scatter stellar orbits 
from their average smooth paths in GALAXIES. 

Even for maintaining a relaxed system near a state 
of equilibrium, gravitational encounters cannot be the 
whole story. If they were, the constant average increase 
in the root-mean-square velocities of all the particles 
would eventually cause them all to escape, defying the 
conservation of energy. Asecond, balancing, process must 
operate. This is dynamical friction. 

Imagine yourself on a particle moving faster than 
the average speed of the particles around it. Ina 
stationary reference frame attached to your particle, the 
other particles will appear to stream by. More particles 
will stream by in the direction you are moving toward 
than in other directions. The orbits of these excess 
particles will be deflected slightly by the gravity of your 
particle. This deflection causes a slight convergence of 
the orbits behind your particle, opposite the direction of 
its motion. On average, therefore, there is a statistical 
excess of particles behind yours. Their excess gravity 
decelerates the motion of your particle, and tends to 
reduce it to the average velocity. Conversely, if the speed 
of your particle is slower than average, there will be a 
statistical excess of particles passing it in your direction 
of motion. Their orbits will converge slightly in front of 
the motion of your particle, and their excess gravitational 
force will speed up your particle. Thus dynamical 
friction is a great leveller of velocities. The balance 
between dynamical friction and two-body acceleration 
keeps the system close to equilibrium. Therefore tp 
must also be the approximate timescale for relaxation by 
dynamical friction. Mathematically, a second-order non- 
linear partial differential—integral equation, known as the 
Fokker—Planck equation, describes this balance, and it is 
usually solved numerically. 

Dynamical friction also plays another important role 
in stellar dynamics. If a massive object M (such as a high- 
mass star in a galaxy, or a large black hole in a galactic 
nucleus or even a small galaxy in the halo of another 
larger galaxy) moves rapidly through a field of much 
less massive objects, m, dynamical friction will cause it 
to lose kinetic energy, fall deeper into the surrounding 
gravitational well, speed up while falling, lose more 
energy and consequently spiral into the center of the larger 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


system. This helps promote the merging of galaxies, 
for example (see GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). The 
relaxation time tr of equation (4) is decreased significantly 
by a factor of order m/M. This is because the large 
mass difference induces gravitational excitations, known 
as grexons (also from the Latin ‘grex’ meaning ‘herd’ or 
‘flock’): a collective gravitational excitation in the wake 
of a massive particle moving through a system of less 
massive particles. It generally takes the form of a region 
of statistical overdensity among the less massive particles 
passing through the wake. These gravitating collective 
modes of many small masses interact with each other, 
enhancing their lifetimes and producing a larger effective 
statistical condensation behind M through which particles 
of mass m move but linger longer than they would for 
M ~ m. These grexons arise when M >> m and amplify 
the gravitational drag. 

Other forms of collective excitations can also amplify 
relaxation in systems which are initially far from 
equilibrium. This collective relaxation—of which ‘violent 
relaxation’ is an extreme case—is much faster than tg and 
closer to the crossing timescale t,. Let us start by thinking 
about a relatively simple case. Suppose one star of mass m 
initially has zero velocity at the edge of an already relaxed 
cluster of stars with total mass M and radius R. Details of 
its orbit would depend on the density distribution of the 
cluster and the building up of small perturbations, but the 
star would roughly follow the equation of motion mr ~ 
GmM R~. Since? © R/t’, this would give a characteristic 
infall timescale ~(Gp)~'/?, which is just the crossing time 
t-. We may think of this as the star being scattered by the 
average force of the entire cluster, i.e. by the ‘mean field’. 
As the star falls inward, the small discrete perturbations of 
nearby stars will also scatter it, and this ‘fluctuating field’ 
will impart some net angular momentum to the star so that 
itis unlikely to reach the exact center of the cluster. Instead, 
it will join the other stars in their complicated orbits. The 
net relaxed orbit of the star comes from the joint effects of 
the smooth global mean field and the two-body relaxation 
of the local fluctuating field. 

Now let us make the process a little more exciting. 
Suppose the cluster is not itself relaxed. Then it 
will not be quasi-static. Parts of it will be falling 
together, interpenetrating, separating, streaming in 
different directions and generally flopping around. These 
represent larger-scale fluctuations—collective modes— 
which will scatter the incoming star in addition to its 
scattering by the global mean field and the shorter- 
scale fluctuations of nearby individual stars. Moreover, 
the large-scale fluctuations will also be scattering and 
interacting with each other. With high-amplitude large- 
mass collective modes fluctuating over a wide range of 
lengthscales, and on corresponding timescales shorter 
than t, for the entire cluster, individual orbits will relax on 
timescales closer to t, than Tz. This is collective relaxation, 
and it may apply to the formation of clusters of stars, 
galaxies and clusters of galaxies, particularly if they build 
up by the merging of smaller systems. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Violent relaxation occurs in the extreme limit when 
collective modes are so chaotic on all scales that each of 
them lasts for only a short time but is quickly replaced 
by another such mode elsewhere in the system. None of 
these modes correlates with one another. Each star moves 
in a mean field which changes quickly in time as well as 
in space. Consequently, the energy of each individual 
star along its orbit is not conserved; only the energy 
of the entire system remains constant. If this process 
could continue indefinitely, the velocity distribution of 
the stars would generally become similar to the Maxwell— 
Boltzmann distribution for a perfect gas after a timescale 
Ts 

However, it does not. On this same gravitational free- 
fall timescale, t., damping mechanisms destroy the ideal 
conditions for violent relaxation. In stellar dynamics, as 
in other systems, damping mechanisms reduce departures 
from an equilibrium state. Most damping is characterized 
by dynamical dissipation—the roughly random transfer 
of relatively ordered (low-entropy) energy into relatively 
disordered (high-entropy) energy. The transfer may 
occur among ‘particles’, as when a stellar cluster or a 
forming cluster of galaxies ejects a high-energy member 
so that the remaining cluster becomes more tightly bound. 
Another example of particle dissipation is the phase 
mixing of orbits. Generally this involves interactions of 
stars at slightly different phases of the same, otherwise 
unperturbed, orbit. As a simple illustration, suppose an 
isolated spherical cluster of stars, initially completely at 
rest, starts falling together. The stars will not simply all 
plunge together into the center. Instead, stars at different 
distances from the center, i.e. at different phases of their 
radial orbits, will perturb each other. These perturbations 
can be large among stars with low relative velocities, 
and can occur on the dynamical crossing timescale r,. 
Most stars will acquire some angular momentum from 
these perturbations, although the cluster’s net angular 
momentum remains zero. This further mixes the phase of 
the orbits, dissipating some of the initially highly ordered 
radial infall velocities into more random transverse 
velocities. Eventually, a component of random kinetic 
energy builds up as a form of heat whose effective pressure 
resists further collapse of the cluster on the free-fall 
timescale t.. Similar phase mixing of orbits, combined 
with heat generated by collective relaxation itself, can 
occur to damp more general collective motions such as 
those of violent relaxation. More gentle phase mixing can 
also occur in relaxed galaxies over longer timescales to mix 
up streaming motions of stars. 

Dissipation and damping may also result when 
particles and waves interact. The waves are moving 
periodic density perturbations. The best-known case 
was first found for plasmas by Landau and then 
applied to stellar dynamics. It occurs even in idealized 
collisionless systems where particles do not scatter one 
another significantly. The physical reason for collisionless 
damping arises from the detailed interaction of a wave 
with the orbits of background stars which are not part of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the wave. Thus this process would not show up ina pure 
continuum approximation. What happens is that some of 
the background stars will move a bit faster than the wave, 
others a bit slower, even though their average background 
number density is constant. The wave exerts a force on 
these stars and thus exchanges energy with them. On 
average, the wave gains energy from the fast-moving stars, 
which therefore amplify the wave, and loses energy to the 
slow-moving stars, which damp the wave. The net result 
depends on whether there are more fast or slow stars with 
velocities near the phase velocity v = w/k of the wave. 
Moreover, the strength of the growth or damping depends 
on the total net number of fast or slow stars involved. 
A detailed analysis of this result is complex but, for a 
roughly Maxwellian velocity distribution of background 
stars, damping is greatest for waves whose phase velocity 
w/k is near the velocity dispersion (v) of the background 
stars. These waves decay on a timescale 4/(v) during 
which the stars are able to move through the wave. 

Phase mixing, Landau damping and other processes 
such as trapping by clusters, tidal disruption and small- 
angle scattering all combine with violent relaxation into a 
form of collective relaxation which randomizes velocities 
ona timescale ~(Gp)~'”, provided that the system starts 
out very far from its eventual quasi-equilibrium state. 
Whatis left is a system in quasi-equilibrium with a roughly 
Maxwellian velocity distribution. No direct collisions are 
responsible for this end result—unlike the case of a perfect 
gas—only the non-linear encounters among particles and 
collective modes. 


The virial theorem 
This is perhaps the most astronomically important 
dynamical property of a quasi-equilibrium system. 
Therefore we describe the virial theorem in some detail. 
With it, we can estimate the system’s total mass from 
observations of the positions and velocities of its particles. 
The virial theorem is essentially just a position moment 
of the self-consistent gravitational equations of motion 
within the system. To illustrate it in the simplest 
case, consider a satellite of mass m™ in a circular orbit 
around a much more massive object of mass m®. The 
balance between centrifugal and gravitational forces gives 
my? /r = Gm m)/r?, Multiplying through by r gives 
2K + W =Owhere K = my”/2 is the kinetic energy and 
W = Gm™m/r? is the gravitational potential energy. 
In this circular orbit the instantaneous value and the time 
average of the energy are identical. For more complicated 
configurations, we might suspect that this result will still 
hold for the more general time averages of K and W. It 
does. 

The most general Newtonian equations of motion for 
a system of gravitating particles are 


d ag 
aw (a), (@)\ __ (@) _ m@ 
ane BSE ax ax® 
= —Gm9 Dm A= 
ZoSane 
pHa 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for the ith components of position and velocity, where the 
gravitational potential 


m) 


i G) gw ahh 2 (6) 


results from all the other particles. This derivation is 
general enough to let the particle masses vary with time, 
by mass loss or accretion, isotropically as we will assume, 
or even anisotropically with a net ‘rocket effect’. 

Now multiply equation (5) by a and sum over a 
to take its lowest-order position moment. Since a and B 
are just dummy indices, we could just as validly multiply 
through by ae : Equivalently, and more elegantly, we 
could represent the right-hand side as half the sum of both 
these multiplications, i.e. as 


= =-2 yom mi 


a pHAa 


a _ XPV — xi) 


(7) 


@) — g)/3 
|x x?) 


which is symmetric to an interchange of the a and B 
particles. This is known as the potential energy tensor, 
Wij. 

Rewriting the left-hand side of equation (5) multiplied 


d 
my ie mo (a), (a) (a) , (a), (@) 
ig a ae Daa) 
d 1 
~ dt D5 


ey o 


m@ [xs (a) es 


|- S ao (8) 
Qa 


Pace (a) 
Xj Uj ) 


+ Po — 20h) 


The terms in parentheses separated by a minus sign 
are antisymmetric, and since all the other contributions 
to the moment of equation (5) are symmetric, these 
antisymmetric terms must be zero. This proves 
that angular momentum is conserved, since these 
antisymmetric terms are just the total angular momentum 
of the isolated system. The symmetric terms in equation (8) 
may be written as 


5 = ee (a) yO + 
(a) Oy i 
=3a 2D" 


a es @) ve — So mum. (9) 
t 


a 


Oy) — (@),)(@),.(@) 
a) in YU; 
a 


Now each of the three summations over a on the right- 
hand side of equation (9) has a physical interpretation. The 
first summation is the usual inertia tensor J;;, the second 
we shall call the mass variation tensor J;; and the third is 
twice the kinetic energy tensor 7;; which incorporates all 
the motions of all the particles. Combining equations (7) 
and (9) for the moment of equation (5) then gives the tensor 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


virial theorem for a system of gravitationally interacting 
particles: 
1d77,, 1d 
2 dr? 2 dt 

This is an exact result, without any approximations 
so far. It provides an overall constraint on the system’s 
evolution. Further constraints follow from taking higher- 
order moments of the equations of motion. Multiplying 
equation (5) by x’"v" and summing gives the (m + n)th 
combined spatial and velocity moment. This forms an 
infinite sequence of virial moments. The more moments 
are used, the tighter are the constraints on the system’s 
evolution. All the moments taken together usually become 
equivalent to a complete solution of the original equations 
of motion (5). 

In practice, most astronomical calculations are 
content with a simplified version of the lowest-order virial 
equation (5). If the mass loss rate m© = 0, then J; ; =O0 
and the form reduces to that quoted in many texts. For 
the special rate of mass loss proportional to the mass, 
m@ = f(t)m™(t), the mass loss tensor is proportional 
to the moment of inertia tensor. A great simplification 
follows by taking the time average of the virial theorem. 
For example, the time average of the first term gives 


2 T 4 
(; | eget =f Ot =i IQA IO 4 
0 dt To T 


dt? T>00 T 


This time average can be zero either if the system is 
localized in position and velocity space so that /(t) has 
an upper bound for all t or if the orbits are periodic so that 
I(t) = 1(0). Similarly the time average of J;; can be zero if 
m/(t) does not increase as fast as t fort > oo. The terms on 
the right-hand side of equation (10) remain non-zero over 
any time average, so 


2(Tij) + (Wij) = 0. (12) 


The usual (contracted) form of the virial theorem is 
obtained by setting i = j and summing over i = 1, 2, 
3 to give 

2(T) + (W) =0 (13) 


where T and W are the entire kinetic and potential energies 
of the system. 

The virial theorem describes reasonably bound, 
quasi-stable clusters of stars and galaxies. Its usual 
application is to estimate the mass of these clusters by 
writing equation (13) in the approximate form 


GM 
V7 =y—. 14 
aoe (14) 


This is similar to the form for a circular satellite orbit 
discussed earlier, but now V? is the velocity dispersion 
of objects in the cluster, R is the cluster’s radius and 
M is its total mass. The constant y is usually of 
order unity and depends on the precise operational 
definitions of V, R and M, especially if the particle 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


masses are not identical. Other factors which influence 
y when trying to deduce M are projection effects 
in transverse positions, loss of one position and two 
velocity components, departures of time averages from 
the instantaneous snapshots of observations, questions of 
cluster membership and selection of a limited number of 
particles for observation. Each of these effects depends on 
the particular circumstances of an individual cluster. Their 
combination introduces considerable uncertainty into y, 
but this can often be estimated with computer simulations. 

Virial estimates of the masses of CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES 
have been made since the 1930s. A succession of more 
accurate results with more complete samples and better 
simulations, which continues to the present, revealed clear 
discrepancies between the virial mass of many clusters 
and their mass estimated from the luminosities of their 
individual galaxies. Unless cluster formation proceeded 
by a radically different route from the condensation 
processes discussed currently, this discrepancy suggests 
that the amount of ‘DARK MATTER’ in clusters is about five 
times the amount of luminous matter in galaxies. This 
gives roughly one-fourth of the total mass needed for a 
closed Einstein—Friedmann universe. The form of this 
dark matter and its total amount are two of the main 
problems of modern astronomy. 


Distribution functions 
Rather than dealing with the positions and motions of 
each identifiable particle individually, stellar dynamics 
often finds a less detailed description based on distribution 
functions to be more useful and solvable. These 
distributions represent the probability that any arbitrary 
particle in the system has a particular property of interest. 
Usually stellar dynamics is concerned with the single- 
particle distribution f(r, v) for the number of particles 
having position r and velocity v. Integrated over all 
velocities, this gives the density as a function of position. 
Integrated over all positions, this gives the velocity 
distribution. Integrated over both position and velocity, it 
gives the total number of particles in the system. When 
f(r, v) is normalized to this total number, it becomes 
a probability distribution. Then f(r,v)drdv is the 
probability that a particle is in the differential volume dr 
around r and has a velocity in the range dv around v. 
Other types of distribution functions are also useful. 
For example, the two- particle distribution f (11, r2, v1, v2) 
describes the probability that of any two particles one is 
in the volume dr, with velocity in the range dv, and the 
other is simultaneously in drz with velocity in dv2. This 
two-particle distribution may be written as the product of 
two single-particle distributions plus terms representing 
any correlations that may be present between particles in 
the two volumes or the two velocity ranges. Similarly, 
a hierarchy of three-, four-, etc particle distributions and 
correlations may be built up. Eventually it will reach the 
N-particle distribution which gives a complete description 
of the positions and velocities of all N particles in the 
system. This would then be equivalent to specifying the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


position and velocity of every particle—the most detailed 
description possible. A related form of distribution 
function, f(N), concentrates on cells rather than particles 
and specifies the probability that a cell of given size and 
shape contains N particles. 

All these distribution functions may generally have 
anisotropic dependences on position and velocity and 
will evolve with time unless they are in a stationary 
equilibrium state. Anisotropic distribution functions and 
their properties have been widely explored in recent years. 
Their complexity provides useful descriptions of stellar 
motions in both spiral and elliptical galaxies. 

The simplest evolution for the one-particle distribu- 
tion function f(r, v, t) occurs in collisionless systems and 
follows the collisionless Boltzmann equation. Here colli- 
sionless means that particle orbits proceed smoothly un- 
der the influence of just the mean field. There are no scat- 
terings by other particles or by local fluctuations. Under 
these conditions f(r, v, t) satisfies an equation of continu- 
ity. This is equivalent to its total time derivative, follow- 
ing the motion through a 6-dimensional position—velocity 
phase space, being zero: 


Df of : 
ob tu -Vf+0-Vif =0. (15) 
Equation (15) is the collisionless Boltzmann equation—one 
of the most useful descriptions of stellar dynamics. Notice 
that the gradients in position and in velocity space are 
treated equivalently. Although, written this way, it looks 
like a fairly simple linear partial differential equation for 
f(r, v, t), it is really a complicated non-linear differentio- 
integral equation. This is because the gravitation force, 
proportional to the acceleration’ = V¢, isa function of the 
density which is itself an integral of f(r, v, t) over velocity 
space. This relation is obtained from Poisson’s equation, 
Vo(r,t) = —4nGp(r, t), and together with the relevant 
initial and boundary conditions leads to self-consistent 
solutions. 

Very few solutions are known in closed analytic 
form; most are results of numerical integrations or 
perturbation theory. The best-known solution occurs 
for an idealized homogeneous, isotropic, uncorrelated 
equilibrium distribution. It is the Maxwell-Boltzmann 
distribution with a Gaussian distribution of velocities. 
Solutions of equation (15) also provide a zero-order 
approximation for systems of particles such as globular 
clusters and rich clusters of galaxies. Their corresponding 
spatial density is spherically symmetric, decreasing with 
radius. Such isothermal spheres have to be truncated to 
describe clusters of finite mass. Truncation by tidal cutoffs, 
evaporation, inflow, etc for realistic systems will modify 
their distribution functions. 

Spatial and velocity moments of the collisionless 
Boltzmann equation, similar to those leading to the 
virial theorem and its generalizations described earlier, 
yield the Jeans equations of ‘stellar hydrodynamics’. 
These are analogous to the usual fluid equations 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of hydrodynamics. However, because short-range 
atomic interactions dominate fluids, it is a much better 
approximation to truncate the moment equations at low 
order for fluids than it is in the stellar dynamical case. 
Moreover, the general stellar hydrodynamical equations 
are anisotropic in their spatial and velocity coordinates. 

Generalizations of the collisionless Boltzmann equa- 
tion have been developed to incorporate local fluctuations, 
such as those described earlier, which lead to dynamical 
relaxation, evaporation and other instabilities. The most 
useful of these is the Fokker—Planck description which rep- 
resents the total gravitational field as the sum of two parts: 
the smooth average long-range field and the local fluctuat- 
ing field due to near-neighbor particles. These fluctuations 
cause the particles to diffuse in velocity space as well as in 
configuration space. They also incorporate the dynamical 
friction effects, mentioned earlier, which prevent excessive 
velocities from being reached. The Fokker—Planck equa- 
tion provides a more accurate account of processes such 
as evaporation, core collapse and oscillations which can 
occur in globular clusters. 

The most general and rigorous description of stellar 
dynamics, and therefore the least solvable, is known as the 
BBGKY hierarchy (after the initials of its early developers 
in other subjects, Born, Bogoliubov, Green, Kirkwood and 
Yvon). It starts from Liouville’s equation which is an 
equation of continuity similar to equation (15) but in a 
6N-dimensional (Gibbs) phase space rather than in the 
6-dimensional (Boltzmann) phase space. Here N is the 
number of physical particles in the system and each point 
in the Gibbs phase space of 3N position plus 3N velocity 
dimensions represents the state of the entire system of 
6N particles at a given time. As the system evolves, its 
representative point moves continuously and smoothly 
through this phase space because there are no external 
forces outside the system to perturb it. Thus the Liouville 
continuity equation is exact. It is a first-order linear 
differential equation. The problem is that it has 6N 
variables, plus time. In fact, it is just a condensed way 
of representing the orbits of all the particles in the system. 

To make this description useful, it is necessary to 
successively integrate out all but 6(N — 1), 6(N — 2),...,6 
of the 6N variables in the full distribution function. This 
leaves a set of N coupled non-linear integro-differential 
equations for all the N, N — 1, N — 2,..., one-particle 
distribution functions—the BBGKY hierarchy. The entire 
set is equivalent to the equations of motion for all 
N particles. Truncating the lowest-order equation for 
f(r, v,t) by neglecting its coupling to f(ri, r2, v1, v2, t) 
is equivalent to the collisionless Boltzmann equation. 
Retaining this coupling, but neglecting any higher-order 
coupling, gives essentially the Fokker—Planck equation. 
This formalism has been much studied and gives great 
insight into the physical nature and relations among 
different stellar dynamical descriptions. It has found 
important applications in understanding the linear growth 
of two- and three-particle correlation functions in galaxy 
clustering, as well as for plasma physics and the theory of 
imperfect fluids. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thermodynamic descriptions 

Particle and distribution function descriptions are math- 
ematically complex because they contain much detailed 
microscopic information about a stellar dynamical system. 
Thermodynamic descriptions are mathematically much 
simpler because they deal mainly with macroscopic infor- 
mation which averages over the microscopic detail. This 
relative simplicity has provided considerable physical in- 
sight into the behavior of stellar dynamical systems. 

Since the macroscopic properties generally change 
with time (e.g. even in virialized clusters, particles 
slowly evaporate), stellar dynamical systems cannot be 
in equilibrium. Therefore it might be thought that 
thermodynamics, which is primarily an equilibrium 
theory, could not apply. Often, however, the timescales for 
departures from equilibrium are very long, and singular 
states are essentially unattainable over shorter times. As 
a result, thermodynamics provides a good approximation 
for the periods of interest. The system may be in quasi- 
equilibrium, during which it evolves through a sequence 
of equilibrium states. In simple systems, each state 
can be described well in terms of average macroscopic 
thermodynamic variables such as temperature, pressure, 
chemical potential, internal energy, volume, total number 
of particles and entropy, but these quantities change on a 
timescale which is slow compared with the timescale for 
a local microscopic configuration of particle positions and 
velocities to change. 

Symmetry properties of different physical systems 
strongly influence their thermodynamic descriptions. For 
example, infinite statistically homogeneous systems— 
which may represent galaxy clustering—have rotational 
and translational symmetry everywhere. However, 
finite spherical systems have rotational symmetry only 
at their center and translational symmetry nowhere. 
Consequently these infinite systems are described by a 
grand canonical ensemble in which energy and particles 
can move across boundaries. Finite, isolated clusters, on 
the other hand, are described either by a microcanonical 
ensemble with no transport across boundaries or by a 
canonical ensemble with only energy transport. (An 
ensemble is a collection of systems with the same 
average macroscopic properties but different microscopic 
configurations consistent with the macroscopic averages.) 
This leads to differences in their distribution functions and 
fluctuation spectra. 

Thermodynamic behavior in systems dominated by 
gravity is often ‘counterintuitive’, although really just in 
the sense that they behave differently from more familiar 
systems of particles without long-range, unshielded, 
attractive forces. For example, if one removes energy 
from a self-gravitating cluster of stars, it becomes hotter. 
Adding energy makes it cooler. Thus it has a negative 
specific heat. In fact, this follows simply from the virial 
theorem for a bound system. Slowly adding energy 
makes the system’s gravitational well less negative. To 
maintain their changing quasi- equilibrium state, the 
particle velocities must decrease on average, and the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


system grows cooler. It is essentially the same effect as 
adding energy to a satellite orbit around a massive body, 
and so it should be, since the virial theorem applies to both 
cases. 

Applied to finite, isolated spherical clusters of stars, 
gravitational thermodynamics has been especially useful 
in elucidating their global instabilities. The isothermal 
sphere, where all particles have the same mass and 
temperature, provides a relatively simple illustration. Its 
density is obtained by solving the collisionless Boltzmann 
equation and Poisson’s equation for these conditions, or, 
more easily but less accurately, by solving the gravitational 
hydrostatic equations with an isothermal gas equation of 
state. It has a central core, and density p « r~* in the 
outer parts, and is usually truncated to keep its mass finite. 
(Other stellar clusters with more general equations of state 
similar to polytropic stars can also be manufactured to 
provide simple models.) 

The stability of such an isothermal sphere depends 
on the relation between its total energy and its total 
entropy. Systems of the same total energy may have 
different entropies depending on their size and internal 
distribution. If the entropy has a local maximum for a 
given energy, then that configuration is stable to small 
fluctuations (but possibly metastable to large changes). 
If the entropy does not have a local maximum, then the 
system of a given energy can redistribute itself internally 
to increase its entropy, and the situation is unstable. Such 
analysis, originally done by Antonov, for an isothermal 
sphere confined to a spherical box shows that, if the 
ratio of the central to the boundary density exceeds 709, 
the system becomes unstable. It tends to evolve away 
from the isothermal sphere density distribution into a 
denser central core surrounded by a much less dense halo. 
Similar core-halo evolution is also found in numerical 
simulations. Its underlying dynamical mechanism is the 
slow evaporation of stars which have accumulated just 
enough energy to escape by their interactions with the 
fluctuating gravitational field of neighboring stars. Since 
the total gravitational energy of the isolated sysem is 
conserved, its core becomes denser with its energy more 
negative in order to compensate the positive total energy 
of the escaping stars. 

An infinite statistically homogeneous system pro- 
vides a contrasting application of gravitational thermo- 
dynamics. The cosmological many-body problem is an 
example. In its simplest case, we start with a uniform 
random (Poisson) distribution of identical point masses 
throughout the universe and ask how this distribution 
changes as the universe expands. In the usual Einstein— 
Friedmann cosmological models, the cosmological expan- 
sion exactly compensates the smooth long-range compo- 
nent of the gravitational field. This leaves only the rela- 
tively local fluctuations caused by the discreteness of the 
particle gravitational fields and by any clustering. These 
fluctuations can be described by an equation of state which 
incorporates the gravitational interaction into thermody- 
namic quantities such as the internal energy and pressure. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Dynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Because the universe generally expands more slowly than 
the timescale for particle configurations within local fluc- 
tuations to change, it undergoes a quasi-equilibrium evo- 
lution. At any time an equilibrium thermodynamic state 
provides a good description of the clustering. Its thermo- 
dynamic quantities change slowly as the universe expands 
adiabatically. 

Infinite statistically homogeneous systems have a 
uniform density when averaged over sufficiently large 
scales or over an ensemble of smaller scales. These infinite 
systems are characterized by the fluctuations over various 
scales of macroscopic quantities around their averages. 
The fluctuations most closely related to observations are 
the particle distribution functions f(N,V) which give 
the probability for finding N particles (e.g. galaxies) 
in a randomly placed volume of size V. Applying 
thermodynamic fluctuation theory to the cosmological 
many-body equation of state gives a relatively simple 
formula for this distribution: 


N(1—b) 


aS Oa NEY Nee) 


f(N,V) = 


Here N = AV is the average number in the volume 
V for the average number density n. The quantity 
b = —W/2K is the ratio of the gravitational correlation 
energy to twice the kinetic energy of random motions, 
averaged over all volumes of size V having a particular 
shape. The correlation energy, W, is the integral of the rol 
interparticle gravitational potential multiplied by the two- 
particle correlation function &(r) over the volume. &(r) is 
the average excess over the random Poisson probability 
for finding a particle in a differential volume element at a 
distance r from another particle. 

In a completely uncorrelated initial Poisson distribu- 
tion, &(r) = 0, W = Oand consequently b = 0. In this limit, 
the distribution function of equation (16) does indeed re- 
duce to the standard Poisson form. As the system evolves, 
regions where near-neighbor points happen to be closer 
than average cluster as a result of their enhanced gravity. 
These clusters subsequently cluster themselves and a hier- 
archy of non-linear clustering, with a wide range of ampli- 
tudes and scales, represented by the increasing value of b, 
gradually builds up. In the Einstein—Friedmann universe, 
this non-linear evolution of b can be calculated analytically 
and it asymptotically approaches unity as the universe ex- 
pands. This asymptotic limit represents bound clustering 
on all scales, and is strictly reached only for Qo = 1. 

A velocity distribution function can also be derived 
from equation (16). Compared with the Maxwell-— 
Boltzmann distribution for finite isothermal spheres, the 
velocity distribution function for the cosmological case 
is much broader. This is because it includes all levels 
of clustering, from isolated field galaxies to the richest 
bound clusters. Numerical computer simulations of 
the cosmological many-body system verify equation (16) 
as well as its associated velocity distribution function. 
Observations of galaxies on the sky and in three 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


dimensions, using COUNTS IN CELLS as Well as volD and near- 
neighbor statistics, are also in very good agreement with 
equation (16). The currently observed value of b is about 
0.75. 

The BBGKY kinetic hierarchy, mentioned earlier, has 
also been used to examine hierarchial galaxy clustering. 
It is partially solvable for the two- and three-particle 
correlation functions in the linear regime. However, it 
generally contains less usable observational information 
than the distribution functions. There are also many more 
complicated models of galaxy clustering, involving hot 
and cold dark matter, various forms of initial density and 
velocity perturbations, biases between the galaxies and 
dark matter, etc, but their detailed applicability to our 
universe remains unclear. 

Many applications of these main physical descrip- 
tions of stellar dynamics—particle orbits, kinetic theory, 
distribution functions and thermodynamics—have devel- 
oped over the last century. They have helped provide an 
understanding of the formation, relaxation and dynami- 
cal evolution of star clusters within galaxies. They help 
explain the streaming motions and arms of spiral galaxies, 
as well as the triaxial shapes of elliptical galaxies. Com- 
bined with the possible existence and effects of massive 
black holes in galactic nuclei, stellar dynamics helps de- 
scribe the evolution of the nuclei and the feeding of their 
black holes. On a larger scale, stellar dynamics gives a 
background for understanding the formation, relaxation 
and evolution of galaxy clusters, incorporating effects of 
their internal dark matter. Even more generally, the princi- 
ples of stellar dynamics play an important role in account- 
ing for the structure of matter over the largest scales in the 
universe. 

Although stellar dynamics is an old and well- 
established subject, it is often rejuvenated by new insights 
and new applications. Some interesting areas for future 
further developments include the detailed links between 
dynamics and thermodynamics, implications for galaxy 
clustering, galaxy and cluster merging, distributions 
around black holes in galactic nuclei, counterstreaming in 
galaxies and the development of stellar motions in large 
star-forming regions. 


Bibliography 

Binney J J and Tremaine S 1987 Galactic Dynamics 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Chandrasekhar S 1960 Principles of Stellar Dynamics 
(New York: Dover) 

Ogorodnikov K F 1965 Dynamics of Stellar Systems 
(New York: Pergamon) 

Saslaw W C 1985 Gravitational Physics of Stellar and Galactic 
Systems (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Saslaw W C 2000 The Distribution of the Galaxies: 
Gravitational Clustering in Cosmology (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 


William C Saslaw 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Evolution 


Stars evolve because they lose energy through radiation 
from their hot surfaces. As a result, there is a general 
tendency for the star to contract under gravity. This is 
partly stopped by the release of energy from nuclear 
reactions. However, once the nuclear fuel is exhausted, 
gravity gets the upper hand and the star ends its life as a 
compact object: a white dwarf, a neutron star or a black 
hole, the last representing the ultimate victory of gravity. 
In the nuclear reactions lighter elements are fused 
into heavier; it is generally believed that all elements but 
the very lightest have been formed in this way. Because 
of mass loss the elements so formed can later be 
incorporated in new generations of stars and _ their 
planetary systems. Thus we are all made of star-dust. 


An overview of stellar evolution 

The energy radiated from the star must be supplied from 
changes in the stellar interior. A star essentially has three 
sources of energy: the release of gravitational energy 
through contraction which makes the star more tightly 
bound; cooling through emission of the internal thermal 
energy; the generation of energy through nuclear fusion 
whereby the ligher nuclei fuse into heavier, more tightly 
bound nuclei. During most of the life of a star, the nuclear 
processes dominate the energy production; this requires that 
the temperature is sufficiently high that the nuclei can 
overcome their mutual Coulomb repulsion. Fusion leads to 
the build-up of successively heavier elements in the core of 
the star (see NUCLEAR REACTION RATES). These changes in 
the composition of the deep interior cause dramatic changes 
in the star’s structure and surface properties such as 
luminosity and surface temperature, reflected in the 
observable characteristics of the star. 

The general principles of stellar evolution may be 
described on this background. Stars form from 
condensations in interstellar clouds. During the initial 
contraction the energy output comes from the gravitational 
energy released as a result of the contraction. At the same 
time, this leads to heating of the stellar interior. When the 
temperature becomes sufficiently high, nuclear reactions set 
in. Generally speaking, the first reactions are those between 
nuclei of the smallest charges, and hence with the lowest 
Coulomb barrier. Thus the initial reaction is the fusion of 
hydrogen into helium. Once the nuclear energy generation 
balances the energy loss from the stellar surface, the 
contraction essentially stops. Evolution then takes place on a 
nuclear time scale, as a result of the gradual change in the 
structure of the star as hydrogen is converted into helium. In 
the solar case, this phase of central hydrogen ‘burning’ lasts 
around 10 Gyr. 

When hydrogen has been consumed at the center, the 
star is left with a core consisting of helium and the original 
heavier elements; outside this core the temperature is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


typically sufficiently high for hydrogen fusion to continue, 
in what is called a shell source. This adds helium to the core, 
causing it to contract; the resulting release of gravitational 
energy partly leads to heating of the core, until the 
temperature becomes sufficiently high that the next nuclear 
reactions, the fusion of three helium nuclei into a carbon 
nucleus, can take place. At the same time the star may still 
have a hydrogen-fusion shell source. This sets the general 
pattern of the nuclear evolution of the star: fusion reactions 
in the core, alternating with core contraction and heating 
until the next stage of nuclear reactions can take place, and 
with possible shell sources outside the core with fusion of 
lighter elements. 

The evolution of stars is conveniently illustrated in the 
theoretical Hertzsprung—Russell diagram (see also 
HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM), where the _ stellar 
luminosity is plotted against surface temperature (more 
precisely the effective temperature; see below) as shown in 
figure 1. Following observational convention, — the 
temperature increases towards the left. The ZAMS marks 
the stars that have just started core hydrogen burning. Also 
marked is the termination of the main sequence where core 
hydrogen burning has finished. The evolutionary sequences 
shown end on the red-giant branch where the stellar radii 
grow dramatically; later evolutionary stages will be 
illustrated below. 


ile 


12000 


16000 8000 7000 6060 4600 


Surface temperature {K) 


4000 


Figure 1. Evolutionary tracks of stars in terms of surface 


temperature and total luminosity (Lo is the solar luminosity) are 
shown by the solid curves (a few are labeled by the stellar mass, 


in units of the mass Mo of the Sun). The zero-age main 
sequence (ZAMS; dashed) marks stars just starting fusion of 
hydrogen into helium, while the dotted curve shows the end of 
core hydrogen burning. Bolder curves show parts of the tracks 
where the star has a convective core. Stars with surface 
temperatures below 7000 K, indicated by the hatching, have 
convective envelopes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


An important consequence of stellar evolution is the 
fusion of lighter elements into heavier, starting from the 
lightest, hydrogen. These processes take place in the deep 
interiors of the star; however, during late stages of 
evolution the products of the reactions may be spread 
through mixing by convective motions throughout the 
star, hence becoming visible in its observable surface 
composition. Also, mass loss from the star, either gradual 
or explosive, may distribute the elements generated in the 
stellar interior in the interstellar matter where it can be 
incorporated into newly formed stars and planets. Indeed, 
there is strong evidence that essentially all elements 
heavier than helium have been formed in this manner, 
from the mixture of hydrogen and helium resulting from 
the big bang (see COSMOLOGY: STANDARD MODEL and 
NUCLEOSYNTHESIS). Thus to understand the origin of the 
chemical elements and, finally, our own origins, we need 
to understand the structure and evolution of stars. 


Modelling stellar evolution 

Most of our understanding of stellar evolution is based on 
rather simplified numerical models (see also STELLAR 
INTERIORS); interestingly, despite their simplifications, 
the models are generally in good overall agreement with 
the available observational data. The models are mostly 
taken to be spherically symmetric (thus neglecting effects 
of rotation) and most often neglect possible mass loss or 
accretion. Also, many _ potential hydrodynamical 
instabilities, which might cause mixing of regions of 
otherwise inhomogeneous composition and hence affect 
the evolution, are ignored. In contrast, the detailed 
properties of stellar matter such as equation of state, 
radiative transport and energy generation, often referred 
to as the microphysics, are treated in considerable detail. 
This defines what might be called the ‘standard’ theory 
of stellar evolution and will be the basis for most of the 
discussion here. These simplified models are in fact able 
to reproduce quite successfully many aspects of the 
observed properties of stars. In particular, the models are 
in reasonable agreement with the detailed helioseismic 
inferences of solar internal structure (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS), although there remain 
highly significant discrepancies indicating remaining, 
and so far not definitely identified, deficiencies in the 
calculations. In the case of other stars, the comparison 
between observations and models is generally based just 
on the overall surface properties of the stars, which may 
well hide problems of potentially serious consequences in 
the modelling of late stages of stellar evolution. 

Further complications arise in the, not uncommon, 
case where stars are members of close binary-star 
systems. Here there are dramatic episodes of mass 
transfer, when one star expands as a result of its 
evolution, completely changing the subsequent evolution 
of the system. The result is a bewildering richness of 
evolutionary scenarios, which is only beginning to be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


explored; many types of such interacting binary stars 
have been identified observationally, including also 
possible end products of the evolution, such as binary 
pulsars (e.g. Hulse-Taylor pulsar). This is discussed 
briefly at the end of the article. 


Basic properties of stars 

The properties of stellar interiors are treated in some 
detail in STELLAR INTERIORS and SOLAR INTERIOR: 
STANDARD MODELS as well as in several articles on the 
physical properties of stars. Here some simple aspects are 
considered which will be useful in the following. 

The ways in which energy is transported in a star, 
from the central region where energy generation takes 
place to the surface, play an important role in its structure 
and evolution. Very generally, energy transport 
determines the temperature gradient in the star; as in any 
physical system, heat flows towards lower temperature, 
at a rate determined by the effective thermal conductivity 
and the decrease in temperature. The precise relation 
depends on the mechanism of heat transport. In large 
parts of most stars, energy is transported by radiation; 
here the rate of energy transport is characterized by the 
opacity «, defined such that the mean free path of a 
photon is 1/kp, p being the density (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
EQUATION OF STATE AND OPACITY). However, in some 
parts of the star the temperature gradient required for 
radiative transport becomes so steep that an unstable 
situation arises: matter displaced outwards, adiabatically, 
finds itself lighter than the surroundings and hence 
continues to rise. In this way convective motion is set up, 
whereby rising hot elements of fluid and cold sinking 
elements dominate the energy transport (for a more 
precise definition of the instability condition, and a 
description of how convection may be treated, see 
STELLAR INTERIORS and SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
THEORY). 

The distribution of convective regions plays a major 
role in the evolution of stars. This is illustrated for ZAMS 
stars in figure 2. In low-mass stars the comparatively low 
temperature in the outer layers results in a high opacity 
and hence in a convective envelope, whose depth 
increases rapidly with decreasing mass of the star; at M@ 


S 0.25Mo the stars become fully convective. In a 1Mo 
ZAMS star the convective envelope contains only about 
3% of the mass, although it extends over almost 30% of 
the radius. Stars only slightly more massive than the Sun 
develop convective cores, the extent of which increases 
with increasing mass. This is caused by an increasing 
concentration towards the center of energy generation, 
reflected in figure 2 by the curves marking where 50% 
and 90% of the luminosity is generated. The change in 
the distribution of energy generation, in turn, arises 
because of a change in the dominant processes by which 
hydrogen is fused to helium (see also SOLAR INTERIOR: 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


r ; 1 ot + + 10 


Ce Lena 


4 


2 


08 
7 
| 
; 
4 


Figure 2. Structure of ZAMS stars. The horizontal axis shows 
the logarithm of the mass of the star (in solar units), whereas 
the vertical axis indicates position in the star, in terms of the 
mass m interior to a given point. ‘Cloudy’ areas indicate the 
presence of convection. The two solid curves show the 
positions where the distance 7 to the center is 0.25 and 0.5 times 
the surface radius. The dashed curves show the positions 
interior to which 50% and 90% of the stellar luminosity is 
generated. 


ENERGY GENERATION). At lower mass, for MS 1Mo, the 
reactions are dominated by the pp chains, controlled by 
the fusion of two hydrogen nuclei, with a moderate 
temperature sensitivity. In contrast, at higher mass the 
dominant reaction is the CNO cycle, where the 
controlling reaction is the fusion of hydrogen and ''N; 
the higher Coulomb barrier makes this reaction far more 
temperature sensitive than the pp chains, leading to the 
stronger concentration of the reactions towards the 
center. 

Realistic studies of stellar structure and evolution 
requite detailed numerical calculations. However, several 
aspects can be understood, at least in a qualitative sense, 
from simple scaling relations. (These can be given a 
more precise meaning under rather restrictive 
assumptions on the physics of the stellar interior.) From 
the condition of hydrostatic equilibrium it may be shown 
that the internal pressure P scales as 


* 
GM- 
ca 
R+ 
where G is the gravitational constant and M is the mass 
of the star. Assuming also that the stellar matter 


approximately satisfies the ideal gas law, the internal 
temperature may be estimated as 


P 


RR 
(1) 
where u is the mean atomic weight of the constituents of 


the gas and & is the gas constant. 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


It is important to realize the meaning of these 
relations. They do not provide accurate estimates of 
conditions in stellar interiors (although, for example, the 
relation for T does reproduce the central temperature of 
detailed stellar models reasonably well). However, they 
do indicate how these conditions depend on the overall 
properties of the stars, ic. their masses, radii and 
chemical composition. For example, equation (1) shows 
that as the star grows older, converting hydrogen into 
helium and thereby increasing pw, there is a general 
tendency for the temperature to increase. 

If energy transport occurs predominantly by 
radiation, equation (1) can be used to estimate the 
luminosity of the star. The result depends on the detailed 
dependence of opacity on temperature and density. In 
relatively low-mass stars where the temperature is 
generally rather low, the opacity is approximately given 
by Kramers’ approximation, « « Z(1+X)pT°°, where X 
and Z are the abundances by mass of hydrogen and 
elements heavier than helium, respectively. In higher- 
mass, and hence hotter, stars, on the other hand, the 


opacity is dominated by scattering on free electrons, k = 
0.02(1 +X) m* kg™'. Accordingly, we obtain as estimates 
of the luminosity 


Lex (14 X)7'Z7'1 MPR p> low — mass stars 


(2) 


Lx (14+ X)7'M3p* high — mass stars. 3) 

From an observational point of view, it is convenient 
to characterize the star by its surface luminosity and 
temperature. More precisely, one introduces the effective 
temperature T. of the star, as the surface temperature of 
the star at the given radius and luminosity, had it been 
radiating as a black body (cf EFFECTIVE TEMPERATURE 
SCALE AND BOLOMETRIC CORRECTIONS). Thus the radius 
R, luminosity Z and effective temperature T. are related 


by 


7 A 
L=4noR*TS 
(4) 
where o is the Stefan—Boltzman constant. Hence equation 
(2) may also be written as 


Ee (1+ Pee Maat" Waar oa low — mass stars. 


(5) 

This reflects, for example, roughly speaking the relation 

between the change in luminosity and_ effective 

temperature as the star evolves towards the red-giant 

branch. For  higher-mass_ stars, evidently, the 
corresponding relation is given directly by equation (3). 

These expressions for the luminosity are based on 

the assumption that the stars are dominated by radiative 

energy transport. As the stars approach the red-giant 

branch they develop deep outer convective envelopes and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hence this assumption no longer holds. For 
predominantly convective stars, the structure is to a large 
extent controlled by the surface conditions. As a result, 
the stars occupy the Hayashi track, at an effective 
temperature which depends little on the luminosity or 
mass of the star. This corresponds to the nearly vertical 
red-giant branch in figure 1; the Hayashi track joins the 
main sequence at low stellar mass where, as noted above, 
the stars become fully convective. Also, it may be shown 
that the region on the cool side of the Hayashi track is 
‘forbidden’: it is not possible to construct stable stellar 
models in hydrostatic equilibrium in this region. 


Stellar energy sources 

Gravitational contraction reduces (makes more negative) 
the gravitational potential energy of the star. It follows 
from the virial theorem that of the energy so liberated 
approximately half goes into increasing the thermal 
energy of the gas whereas the other half is lost from the 
star, in the form of radiation from the surface. In general, 
the increase in the thermal energy leads to an increase in 
the temperature of the stellar interior. It is this increase in 
temperature which allows the nuclear fusion reactions to 
take place. 

Fusion of two nuclei requires that they overcome 
their mutual Coulomb repulsion. For this to be possible, 
their thermal energy has to be sufficiently high, requiring 
a temperature of at least several million K. Even so, the 
energy of the nuclei is far below the Coulomb energy of 
repulsion when the two nuclei are brought so close 
together that they touch. Thus, according to classical 
mechanics no reaction is possible. What enables the 
reactions to take place is the quantum-mechanical 
phenomenon of tunnelling, leading to a finite probability 
for the two nuclei to interact even if according to 
classical mechanics they are kept apart. However, in 
most stars this is an exceedingly slow process: the 
average lifetime of a given hydrogen nucleus at the 
center of the Sun is of order 5 Gyr (billion years). 
Consequently, the rate of energy release per unit mass is 
modest: the average rate of energy generation in the solar 
core is only around 0.001 W kg™', about 3 orders of 
magnitude below that of an average human. On the other 
hand, because of the large mass of the Sun, the total 
energy generation is enormous, around 4 x 10° W. 

However, fusion can only provide energy as long as 
the nuclei become more tightly bound when they fuse. 
The nuclear binding energy has a maximum among the 
iron-group elements; thus the nuclear energy generation 
stops when matter has been converted into these 
elements. At this point gravitational contraction is the 
only remaining effective energy source: the central parts 
of the star undergo catastrophic collapse, releasing vast 
amounts of gravitational potential energy and causing the 
star to explode as a supernova (see SUPERNOVAE). This 
stage, however, is only reached for massive stars; in stars 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of mass below around 10 times the mass of the Sun, the 
core temperature never becomes so high that the final 
nuclear reactions take place. Such stars undergo 
substantial mass loss, leaving behind the compact core of 
the star, in the form of WHITE DWARFS, which 
subsequently cool through radiation of its internal 
thermal energy. This is the likely final fate of the Sun, for 
example. 

It is instructive to consider the amount of energy 
available to the star from gravitational contraction and 
nuclear reactions. The typical energy, per unit mass, 
available from gravitational contraction is determined by 
the gravitational potential of the star, whose magnitude 
may be estimated as GM/R, where G is the gravitational 
constant, and M and R are the mass and surface radius of 


the star. Using the solar mass, Mo = 1.989 x 10°” kg and 


the solar radius Ro = 6.96 x 10° m, the result is 2 x 
10'' Jkg"'. The energy available from fusion may be 
obtained, according to the relativistic equivalence 
between mass and energy, from the difference in mass 
between the nuclei taking part in, and the nucleus 
resulting from, the reaction. In fusion of hydrogen to 
helium, the energy lost is approximately 0.7%. Thus the 
available energy from this reaction, per unit mass, is 
0.007c? = 6 x 10'* J kg™', where c is the speed of light. 
The maximal energy available from fusion results from 
the, hypothetical, reaction where hydrogen fuses to iron- 
group elements, the most tightly bound nuclei; the 
resulting relative mass difference is 0.9%, corresponding 
to 8 x 10'* J kg. (It should be noticed that the first of 
the series of fusion reactions, from hydrogen to helium, 
produces 75% of the total amount of energy available.) 
From these energy estimates we can obtain rough 
estimates of the characteristic time scales of different 
phases of stellar evolution. The total energy available to a 


1M. star from gravitational contraction is, assuming 
again solar radius, approximately 4 x 10"! J; at the solar 
luminosity of around 4 x 10°° W, this would last for 
about 10'° s, or around 30 Myr (million years). This, 
therefore, is the characteristic lifetime for a star whose 
energy comes from gravitational contraction; it is 
generally known as the Kelvin-Helmholtz time scale. 
(From the fact that it is much shorter than the age of the 
solar system, around 5 Gyr, it immediately follows that 
other sources of energy are required for the Sun.) To 
estimate the total energy available from nuclear 
reactions, we must take into account that only in around 
10% of the mass of a star is the temperature sufficiently 
high for the reactions to be efficient; thus the total energy 


produced from hydrogen fusion, in a 1Mo star, is around 
1.2 x 10“ J. At solar luminosity this corresponds to a 
lifetime of 3 x 10'’ s, or 10 Gyr. Thus the Sun is 
approximately half-way through the phase of central 
hydrogen fusion. It should also be noticed that since the 
luminosity of stars generally increases with age, and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


given the smaller energy release in later fusion reactions, 
the phase of hydrogen fusion occupies the dominant part 
of a star’s active life; thus we may expect that most of the 
stars observed are in this phase. 

It should finally be noted that collapse to a much 
smaller radius may release very large amounts of energy. 
This is the case during a supernova explosion, where the 
central parts of the star collapse to nuclear densities, 


resulting in a core with a mass of order 1Mo and a radius 
of around 10 km. Here the gravitational potential is of 
order 10'° J kg', ie. around 10% of the rest-mass 
energy. The total energy released in this collapse, of 
order 2 x 10°° J, is what powers the supernova explosion. 


Early life of a star 

The birth of a star takes place in a dense interstellar cloud 
(a so-called molecular cloud), when a part of the cloud 
becomes unstable to gravitational collapse and begins to 
contract. The initial phases of the cloud collapse occur on 
dynamical time scales and undoubtedly involve effects of 
turbulence, magnetic fields, rotation, mass loss and 
accretion, none of which is understood in detail. These 
processes give rise to spectacular observational effects 
such as extended jets, and the formation of disks around 
young stellar objects which may later develop into 
planetary systems. For further details on these processes, 
see STAR FORMATION. 

In the early phases the evolution is dominated by the 
interaction between the protostar and the surrounding 
material which continues to be accreted (see PRE-MAIN- 
SEQUENCE STARS). This also determines the main 
observational characteristics of the forming star, since it 
is shrouded in this material and hence predominantly 
radiates in the infrared. 

As the main parts of the star come into hydrostatic 
equilibrium the simplified treatment of the ‘standard’ 
modelling becomes at least partly applicable. The energy 
output from the star comes predominantly from 
gravitational contraction, with half the gravitational 
potential energy released going to heat matter in the star 
and the other half being radiated from the surface. 
However, fusion of deuterium with ordinary hydrogen, 
which can take place at relatively modest temperatures, 
also plays a significant role. In the early parts of this 
phase the star is still relatively cold; as a result, the 
opacity is high and the star is completely convective. As 
discussed above, such stars are on the Hayashi track, 
moving down it with the continuing contraction. 

With the increasing central temperature the opacity 
is reduced until the core regions of the star become 
convectively stable. As this region with radiative 
transport expands, the star moves away from the Hayashi 
track, towards higher effective temperature. During this 
phase, the evolution essentially follows the behavior 
given by equations (3) or (5). Finally the central 
temperature reaches a point where nuclear reactions may 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


provide the required energy and the star settles down on 
the main sequence. As is clear from figure 3, this occurs 
in two steps for more massive stars: the initial step 
involves the fusion of '7C and hydrogen, which occurs at 
a slightly lower temperature than the main processes of 
hydrogen fusion. After '"C has been consumed the 
contraction continues until the main reactions start. 

The time scale for these initial phases is essentially 


given by the Kelvin-Helmholtz time scale; for a 1Mo star 
evolution until the start of hydrogen burning takes around 
50 Myr. 

The onset of nuclear reactions requires that the 
central temperature reaches around 6 million K. In very 
low-mass objects this never happens: here matter 
becomes strongly degenerate and the thermal energy 
provided by the gravitational contraction is taken up by 
the degenerate electrons, rather than increasing the 
temperature. Such objects end up as brown dwarfs (see 
PLANETARY COMPANIONS AND EXTRASOLAR BROWN 
DWARFS), luminous because of the continuing 
contraction. The critical mass below which stable nuclear 


burning is not achieved is around 0.08Mo. 


Evolution on the main sequence 
The evolution on the main sequence is driven by the 
gradual conversion of hydrogen to helium in the core of 
the star. This increases the mean molecular weight p of 
the gas; to maintain the pressure, the density has to 
increase through contraction of the core, and this in turn 
causes an increase in temperature. As a result the rate of 
energy generation and the efficiency of radiative energy 
transport increase, causing an increase in the luminosity 
of the star; this is clearly visible in figure 1. Indeed, the 
increase in luminosity with increasing follows directly 
from equations (2) and (3). 

3 


-1 
4.00 3.90 3,86 3.70 3.60 3.50 
log Tete 


Figure 3. Pre-main-sequence evolution tracks for 1Mo and 


2Mo stars. The initial evolution is down the Hayashi track but 
continues to higher effective temperature as a radiative core is 
established. The tracks end on the ZAMS where hydrogen 
fusion begins to contribute most of the stellar luminosity. (Data 
kindly provided by D A VandenBerg.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In the case of the Sun, the luminosity has increased 
by approximately 30% from the ZAMS to the present. 
This change is sufficiently large to have substantial 
effects on the Earth’s climate, unless other factors 
compensate; indeed, the effect has been known as ‘the 
faint early Sun problem’ and various attempts have been 
made to circumvent it. In fact, the luminosity increase is 
an essentially unavoidable consequence of the basic 
physics of stellar evolution, as is also suggested by the 
simple analysis above. Rather than tinkering with the 
stellar models, a far more likely solution to the problem 
would be changes in the Earth’s atmosphere, e.g. such 
that the greenhouse effect was stronger in the past. Even 
so, it is interesting that feed-back mechanisms are 
apparently at work in the Earth’s climate such as to 
maintain a nearly stable temperature despite the changes 
in solar radiation. 

While the central parts of the star contract, the outer 
parts expand. This is visible from figure 1, using equation 
(4), by noting that the effective temperature remains 
constant or decreases while the luminosity increases. 
Such opposite behavior of the core and envelope of a star 
is a characteristic feature of stellar evolution, for which 
no satisfactory simple explanation seems to be available. 

The details of the evolution on the main sequence, in 
particular how it ends, depend strongly on the mass of the 
star, as is also seen in figure 1. This is related to the 
possible presence of a convective core and its effects on 
the composition profile in the central parts of the star. 
Figure 4 shows the hydrogen abundance X by mass at 


various ages for stars of masses 1Mo and 2.5Mo. In the 


1Mo star the core is radiative and there is no mixing 
(within the assumptions of the ‘standard’ model). Hence 
the hydrogen abundance decreases most rapidly at the 
center, where the temperature is highest. When hydrogen 
is exhausted at the center, energy production still 
continues in a region immediately away from the center, 
and hence there is a gradual transition to the subsequent 
evolution phase, with fusion in a shell around a core 
consisting of helium and heavier elements. In contrast, 


the convective core in the 2.5Mo star is fully mixed on a 
time scale much shorter than the fusion time scale, and 
hence the hydrogen abundance decreases uniformly 
throughout the core. Although, as shown, the core 
generally shrinks with increasing age, hydrogen is 
essentially exhausted simultaneously throughout the 
central energy-producing region. In the final stages of 
central hydrogen fusion, the star contracts in an attempt 
to maintain the energy production by increasing the 
central temperature; this is visible in the evolution tracks 
in figure | by the left-ward ‘hook’, which is reminiscent 
of the earlier contraction phase before the main sequence 
(cf figure 3). Finally, as the central hydrogen is being 
totally exhausted, the star establishes a shell source 
around the helium core. The final evolution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


corresponding to the hook is rapid, compared with the 
preceding main-sequence evolution; thus few stars are 
found in this phase, as can be verified from observations 
of stellar clusters (see STAR CLUSTERS). 

It is evident from figure 1 that the luminosity of the 
stars increases rapidly with stellar mass. This is 
consistent with equations (2) and (3). It also has dramatic 
implications for the time spent by the stars on the main 
sequence. Since the available nuclear energy is, 
approximately, proportional to the mass of the star, the 
nuclear lifetime scales as M/Z or, according to the 
estimates of Z, as M to an inverse power of at least 2. In 


fact, for stars of mass less that 0.9M. the main-sequence 
lifetime exceeds the current age of the universe, while 


stars of more than 60Mo end their evolution in less than 4 
million years. 


X(m/M) 


0.00 0.10 6.20 0.30 0.40 


X(m/M) 


0.00 


0.10 6.20 


m/M 
Figure 4. Evolution in the hydrogen abundance X by mass, as a 


function of time, against the fractional mass m/M in the star. 
The homogeneous initial models had_X = 0.692. Top panel: 


1Mo, at ages 0, 2.47 Gyr, 4.53 Gyr, 6.49 Gyr, 9.29 Gyr, 10.81 


Gyr and 11.62 Gyr. Lower panel: 2.5Mo, at ages 0, 174 Myr, 
306 Myr, 400 Myr, 462 Myr and 487 Myr. 


0.30 0.40 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Evolution after core hydrogen burning 

After the end of central hydrogen fusion, the star has a 
helium core surrounded by a shell source where 
hydrogen fusion continues. As the shell source consumes 
hydrogen, the helium core grows and as a result contracts 
under gravity. This leads to heating of the core until the 
temperature is reached where the next fusion reaction, 
where three helium nuclei combine to form carbon, can 
take place. The star now has two sources of energy 
generation: the core helium fusion and the shell hydrogen 
fusion, with the latter generally supplying the larger part 
of the energy. This sets the pattern for the subsequent 
evolution and leads to what can be regarded as an onion 
structure of the star: central nuclear fusion alternating 
with core contraction and heating, and the establishment 
of shell sources outside regions where a given ‘fuel’ has 
been exhausted. An example of this structure is 
illustrated schematically in figure 5. 


The shell-burning ‘law’ 

The behavior of the star during these changes in the core 
can to some extent be rationalized in terms of a simple 
principle, known as the ‘mirror principle’ or ‘the shell- 
burning law’. This principle states that contraction or 
expansion reverses at a shell source: thus if the region 
inside a given shell contracts, the region outside the shell 
expands, and vice versa. No entirely satisfactory simple 
explanation has been given for this principle, but it is 
strikingly successful in explaining computed stellar 
evolution. It should be noticed that the same tendency for 
core contraction and envelope expansion was found 
during the main-sequence evolution phase. 

The effect of this principle is immediately visible in 
the evolution tracks in figure 1. After the establishment 
of the hydrogen shell source, the contraction of the 
helium core leads to an expansion of the envelope; as the 
star is still predominantly radiative, luminosity and 
effective temperature are related by equation (3) or (5), 
and hence, with the expansion, the effective temperature 
decreases and the star moves towards the red-giant 
branch. When the star reaches the Hayashi track, a 
further decrease in Ts would take the star into the 
‘forbidden’ region on its cool side; since this is not 
possible, the continuing expansion takes the star up the 
red-giant branch. It is quite striking that these changes in 
the surface properties are essentially a reversal of the 
evolution before the main sequence. This phase continues 
to the point where the core temperature is sufficiently 
high for helium fusion to carbon to take place. In the 
solar case, that leads to a radius close to the radius of the 


Earth’s orbit and a luminosity of approximately 2500Lo. 

The subsequent evolution depends rather sensitively 
on stellar mass. In many ways the intermediate-mass case 
is the simplest and is therefore considered first. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. Schematic structure of a star with hydrogen and 
helium shell sources. The vertical arrows indicate the expansion 
or contraction of the corresponding regions. The thin hatched 
regions indicate the hydrogen- and helium-fusion shell sources. 


Later evolution of intermediate-mass stars 


This covers stars in the mass range of roughly (2-10)Mo. 
An example of an evolutionary track is shown in figure 6. 
The evolution up to helium ignition follows the general 
description given above although the luminosity at the tip 
of the red-giant branch will not in general be as high as in 
the solar case. When helium fusion starts, the core 
expands as a result of the extra supply of energy. This 
expansion also helps stabilizing the temperature, such 
that helium fusion takes over in a controlled fashion. 
According to the shell-burning law, the core expansion 
leads to a contraction of the envelope, reflected in the 
evolution down the red-giant branch and later towards 
higher effective temperature. The relation between 
effective temperature and luminosity is again largely 
controlled by the usual relations, so evolution proceeds 
parallel to, although at a somewhat higher luminosity 
than, the earlier part of the track. In fact, during this stage 
the hydrogen shell source still contributes more than 70% 
of the total luminosity. With the continuing helium 
fusion, the core starts to contract again, and the envelope 
consequently expands, leading to evolution towards 
lower Tsp. 

This continues to the point where helium is 
exhausted in the core, which now consists of carbon, 
oxygen (also a product of the helium fusion) and heavier 
elements. As in the case of hydrogen, the core exhaustion 
of helium is followed by the establishment of a helium 
shell source. The situation is now as_ illustrated 
schematically in figure 5, with an inert and contracting 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


carbon-oxygen core. It is tempting to apply the shell- 
burning law to the two shells, as indicated by the arrows: 
the intermediate region might be expected to expand 
while the envelope of the star contracts. In fact, the 
expansion of the intermediate region leads to a reduction 
of the temperature in the region of the hydrogen shell 
source which therefore becomes inactive. At that point 
energy is provided essentially only by the helium-burning 
shell; the contraction of the core leads to a strong 
expansion of the envelope and the star moves back to and 
up the Hayashi track on the so-called asymptotic giant 
branch, to very high luminosity (cf. figure 6). 

As the star evolves, the hydrogen shell is reactivated 
and takes over as the dominant source of energy. The 
subsequent detailed evolution is in fact complex, with 
developing thermal instabilities that cause both shell 
sources to be active in an oscillatory fashion. As shown 
in the insert in figure 6, this causes a large number of 
oscillations in the evolution track. The resulting changes 
in location of convective regions play an important role 
in the synthesis of the heaviest elements (beyond the iron 
group) through neutron capture and in bringing the 
products of these reactions to the surface of the star, 
where they can be observed as abundance anomalies. 


4.2 4.0 3.8 3.6 3.4 
Log Terr 


Figure 6. Evolution track for a 4Mo model, from the ZAMS to 
the asymptotic giant branch. As discussed in the text, the 
behavior in the diagram can be understood in terms of changes 
in the regions of nuclear energy generation. The insert shows 
the last phases in more detail, to illustrate the oscillations 
caused by the thermal instability between the hydrogen and 
helium shell sources. (Data kindly provided by A V Sweigart.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


An observation that three metal-poor stars are more 
rich in lead than in any element heavier than iron fits 
with the prevailing theory about the late, ‘asymptotic 
giant branch’ (AGB) phase of the evolution of stars 0.8—8 
times the size of our Sun. It is thought that nuclei— 
mainly iron—deep inside an AGB star slowly capture 
neutrons, progressively building up heavier elements in 
what is known as the ‘s-process’, which in the case of old 
stars will produce a pile-up of synthesized material with 
atomic weights between lead and bismuth. The new data 
(Van Eck et al) support this view, which hitherto had 
little observational support. 

It might perhaps be expected that the further 
evolution would follow a pattern similar to the onset and 
development of helium burning, i.e. that the contraction 
of the core would lead to the ignition of the next nuclear 
reaction, fusion of carbon, followed by the establishment 
of yet another shell source. However, in this mass range 
the core never becomes hot enough for carbon fusion to 
start. There are two reasons for this. Firstly, the density 
of the contracting carbon—oxygen core becomes so high 
that the electrons become strongly degenerate; as in the 
case of low-mass pre-main-sequence stars this tends to 
limit the temperature increase, as the thermal energy 
obtained from the contraction goes into the degenerate 
electrons. Secondly, the core is cooled by various 
neutrino-generating processes in very dense plasmas; the 
neutrinos escape the core essentially unhindered, 
removing thermal energy. 

The final stages of evolution for intermediate-mass 
stars are quite dramatic, although the underlying physics 
is poorly understood. The very extended outer envelope 
becomes unstable towards rapid mass loss, which over a 
period of probably less than 50 000 yr strips off 
essentially the entire envelope outside the carbon—oxygen 
core. That core remains behind as a very compact, 


degenerate object with a mass of (0.5—1)Mo and a radius 
comparable with that of the Earth. It is initially extremely 
hot, with a surface temperature exceeding 100 000 K; it 
radiates predominantly by losing thermal energy, 
gradually cooling down. Such objects develop into white 
dwarfs. The matter ejected around the star shines for a 
few thousand years as a PLANETARY NEBULA, as a result 
of fluorescence caused by the ultraviolet radiation from 
the central object, before the matter is dispersed in the 
interstellar medium. 


Later evolution of low-mass stars 


For stars of mass below about 2Mo the onset of helium 
burning, at the tip of the red-giant branch, takes place in a 
rather more dramatic way than at higher masses. The 
main difference is that at lower masses the helium core is 
dominated by the pressure of degenerate electrons. The 
core is still heated, although mainly by the increasing 
temperature in the hydrogen shell source as it adjusts to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


provide the high luminosity of the star. When the ignition 
temperature of helium (around 10° K) is reached, helium 
fusion starts, the release of energy causing an increase in 
the temperature of the gas. Since electron degeneracy 
dominates the pressure, it does not increase as a result of 
the temperature increase; this is unlike the situation in 
more massive stars, where the temperature increase 
causes an increase in pressure, which in turn leads to an 
expansion of the core and hence a stabilization of the 
burning. In the low-mass case, the temperature increase 
is not so controlled but rather leads to a further increase 
in the helium fusion rate and hence in the temperature. 
The result is a thermal run-away, in what is called the 
helium flash: during a few hours the rate of energy 


generation in the core reaches of order LO” Le: 
comparable with the total luminosity of the Galaxy. This 
ends when the temperature of the core increases 
sufficiently that electron degeneracy becomes 
unimportant; at that point the core expands, reducing the 
temperature and stabilizing the burning. 

The evolution of the outer parts of the star during the 
helium flash is rather uncertain. Most of the energy 
released during the flash is probably absorbed in an 
expansion or partial ejection of the already very extended 
envelope, on a dynamical time scale. When the star 
finally settles down to stable helium fusion, it is on the 
horizontal branch (see HORIZONTAL BRANCH STARS), at a 
position which probably mainly depends on the extent of 
the remaining hydrogen envelope. 

The subsequent evolution is rather similar to that of 
the intermediate-mass stars discussed above; after 
completing central helium fusion, the star in general has 
both a hydrogen and a helium shell source, evolving 
through loops in the Hertzsprung—Russell diagram and 
finally up the asymptotic giant branch. During this phase 
of the evolution of the Sun, its radius is likely to exceed 
the radius of the Earth’s orbit. As in the previous case, 
degeneracy and neutrino cooling prevent the core 
temperature reaching the values required for carbon 
fusion, and the star ends as a carbon-oxygen white 
dwarf, surrounded briefly by a planetary nebula. 


Later evolution of high-mass stars 


For masses higher than around 10Mo the core 
temperature after the end of helium fusion continues to 
rise, to a point where carbon fusion and later fusion 
reactions can take place. The end result is that the star 
ends its life in a supernova explosion (see SUPERNOVAE 
for further details). 

The final series of nuclear reactions, starting with 
carbon fusion and leading up to the formation of a core 
consisting of iron-group elements, takes only a few 
hundred years, short even compared with the lifetime of 
massive stars. With the formation of the iron core the star 
has exhausted the possibilities of energy generation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


through nuclear processes: these elements have maximal 
nuclear binding energy, and further fusion would require 
energy. As a result, the core can only make up for its 
continuing energy loss through gravitational contraction; 
this causes further heating, to the extent that iron nuclei 
are dissociated to their basic constituents, protons and 
neutrons. The energy required for the dissociation further 
accelerates the contraction which takes the form of a 
dynamical collapse. With the increasing density, it 
becomes energetically favorable for the electrons to 
combine with the protons to form neutrons, with the 
emission of neutrinos. The collapse only halts when the 
core reaches nuclear densities and the neutrons become 
degenerate; the shock waves generated at the resulting 
sudden stop of the collapse, together with the neutrinos 
from the electron capture, transfer energy to the envelope 
which is ejected in the supernova explosion. 

The energy powering the explosion comes entirely 
from the gravitational energy released in the collapse of 


the central (1-2)Mo to a radius of around 10 km. In fact, 
the energy emitted in the form of light is only a small 
fraction of the total energy available; the largest fraction 
is taken up by the neutrinos emitted in the collapse. 

The matter ejected in the explosion forms an 
interstellar gas cloud which is gradually dispersed (see 
SUPERNOVA REMNANTS). It is enriched by elements 
formed in the late stages of nuclear reactions, including 
rapid neutron capture during the explosion. The core of 
the star is left as an extremely compact object. If its mass 


is below (1.5—2)Mo it forms a neutron star (see NEUTRON 
STARS), dominated by degenerate neutrons, and with a 
density corresponding to the density of nuclear matter. 
Such objects are observed as PULSARS. If the core is more 
massive, even the pressure from the nuclear matter 
cannot resist gravity, and the core collapses to form a 
BLACK HOLE. 


Tests of stellar evolution 
The evolution sequences presented above provide a 
detailed history of stars, solidly founded in the ‘standard’ 
theory of stellar evolution. However, testing these results 
in detail is difficult. Helioseismology has provided very 
detailed inferences of the solar internal structure, which 
are generally well matched by the models. Similarly 
detailed information is entirely out of reach for distant 
stars, whose surfaces, even with planned space 
experiments, will only be resolved to a limited extent. On 
the other hand, studies of a broad range of stars allow 
tests of our understanding of stellar evolution under 
conditions far more extreme than found in the Sun and 
including phenomena, such as convective cores, which 
are not relevant in the solar case. 

Substantial efforts are being invested in 
asteroseismic investigations of stars, using oscillation 
frequencies to probe stellar interiors. Detailed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


information has been obtained in the case of white 
dwarfs, leading to accurate determinations of their 
masses, as well as estimates of the thickness of the outer 
hydrogen and helium layers. Studies of double-mode 
Cepheids demonstrated gross errors in the opacity tables, 
subsequently confirmed by improved opacity 
calculations; this has led to substantial revisions also of 
other aspects of stellar modelling. For other types of 
stars, data on oscillation frequencies are being 
accumulated, although uncertainties in the mode 
identification have so far precluded their use for detailed 
studies of stellar interiors. This is likely to change with 
the ongoing and planned observational and theoretical 
efforts, including observations from space. In 2001, 
solar-like oscillations in the stars beta Hydri and alpha 
Centauri A were detected. 

More classical observations have also provided 
stringent tests of stellar-evolution calculations, at least as far 
as the global properties of the stars are concerned. 
Particularly important are observations of binary stars in 
eclipsing variables, where accurate determinations of the 
stellar masses and radii are possible (see ECLIPSING BINARY 
STARS). This, together with the highly probable assumption 
that the stars have the same age and original chemical 
composition, places strong constraints on the stellar models. 

In almost all cases the relevant time scales are too long 
to allow direct observation of the consequences of stellar 
evolution. However, a powerful alternative is provided by 
observing ensembles of stars of the same age but different 
masses: since the evolution time scale varies strongly with 
mass such a collection of stars contains stars in a broad 
range of evolutionary stages. Such ensembles are provided 
by star clusters, collections of stars that are clearly 
physically associated. It may generally be assumed that the 
stars in a cluster were formed from the same interstellar 
cloud at approximately the same time. Thus they have a 
common age and original chemical composition, while 
differing in mass. Furthermore, all stars in a cluster are at 
approximately the same distance. Thus the correction from 
the true luminosity of the stars to the apparent luminosity at 
the (generally a priori unknown) distance of the cluster is 
the same for all the stars. 

The observed distribution of stars in a cluster can be 
compared directly with computed isochrones, i.e. curves 
corresponding to models of the same age but different mass. 
This comparison also provides an estimate of the age of the 
cluster; furthermore, the shift between the computed 
luminosity and the observed apparent luminosity of the 
main-sequence stars is a measure of the distance to the 
cluster. An interesting example, for the globular cluster 
M92, is illustrated in figure 7. The distribution of observed 
stars clearly reflects the evolutionary pattern: stars of the 
lowest masses are still on the main sequence, with core 
hydrogen burning. Somewhat more massive stars, where 
hydrogen is exhausted at the center, occupy the subgiant 
branch, starting at the turnoff, and the red-giant branch, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


whereas the stars originally of the highest mass have gone 
through a helium flash and are found on the horizontal 
branch or, in a few cases, at the beginning of the asymptotic 
giant branch. The very large number of stars in a globular 
cluster ensures that all stages of evolution are well 
represented. Computed isochrones are shown for a few ages, 
a reasonable fit being obtained for an age of 14 Gyr (the 
shift of the red-giant branch relative to the observations may 
be due to an error in the atmosphere models used to calibrate 
the models from effective temperature to color index). It is 
remarkable that the inferred age is rather larger than some 
values of the estimated age of the universe, as obtained from 
cosmological measurements. This problem suggests serious 
deficiencies in either the commonly used cosmological 
models or in the calculation of stellar models. 

A second example, for the open cluster NGC 3680, is 
shown in figure 8. In this case, the cluster has been strongly 
affected by dynamical evolution, leading to very substantial 
loss of stars (furthermore, in the analysis care was taken to 
include only single stars that definitely belong to the 
cluster); as a result the diagram is sparsely populated, 
compared with figure 7. Two isochrones are shown: one for 
a ‘standard’ evolution calculation and the second for models 
including penetration and mixing from the convective cores 
(see below). There is clearly strong evidence that the models 
with such additional mixing provide the better fit to the 
observations. 


-2 


8 ° 
-0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 
(v-y) 


Figure 7. Hertzsprung—Russell diagram for the globular cluster 
M92. The abscissa is color index (in the Strémgren system), 
which provides a measure of the effective temperature, whereas 
the ordinate is apparent magnitude. The curves show isochrones 
corresponding to ages (from the top) of 10, 12, 14, 16 and 18 
Gyr. (Kindly provided by F Grundahl.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 
{b-y) 


Figure 8. Hertzsprung—Russell diagram for the open cluster 
NGC 3680, showing apparent magnitude against color index. 
The dashed curve shows an isochrone of age 1.5 Gyr for a 
standard evolution calculation, whereas the isochrone shown as 
a solid curve, of age 1.7 Gyr, is based on models including 
penetration from the convective core. (Kindly provided by J 
Andersen.) 


Beyond the ‘standard’ model 

Although the analysis of stellar evolution, as presented 
here, is quite successful in rationalizing many observed 
properties of a wide range of stars, its intrinsic 
simplifications should be kept in mind. A few examples 
will be considered here. 

Mass loss undoubtedly plays a very important role in 
many phases of stellar evolution. This has already been 
mentioned in connection with asymptotic-giant-branch 
stars, where rapid mass loss is observed and must 
presumably be involved in the formation of planetary 
nebulae and white dwarfs. Lower-mass main-sequence 
stars also show mass loss as in the solar wind (see SOLAR 
WIND: GLOBAL PROPERTIES) although probably not at a 
rate that substantially affects stellar evolution. However, 
in high-mass stars, the very strong radiation field seems 
to drive quite strong stellar winds, which are probably 
implicated in the formation of WOLF—RAYET STARS. 

The hydrodynamics of stellar interiors is treated in a 
very simple manner in_ normal  stellar-evolution 
calculations, yet could have important effects. The most 
important problems concern mixing of otherwise 
chemically inhomogeneous regions of the star. For 
example, there is little doubt that motion extends beyond 
the convectively unstable regions, in the form of 
convective penetration into the stable regions and 
possibly internal gravity waves induced by such 
penetration. This would cause mixing outside convective 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cores and hence would increase the amount of hydrogen 
available for fusion as well as the extent of the helium 
core left after the end of core hydrogen fusion; yet the 
extent of such penetration is highly uncertain. In stars 


above about 10M@Mo, additional uncertainties are 
introduced by possible instabilities outside convective 
cores which may lead to the so-called semiconvection, 
probably causing additional mixing. 

Stars are observed to rotate, often rapidly (see 
STELLAR ROTATION ON THE MAIN SEQUENCE), yet most 
evolution calculations ignore rotation. Rapid rotation 
deforms the star, with direct effects on its structure. 
However, even slow rotation may cause circulation (the 
so-called Eddington—Sweet circulation) which could 
cause mixing, and gradients in the rotation rate could 
lead to hydrodynamical instabilities that might also mix 
the material. Particular problems are related to the 
slowing down of rotation in low-mass stars from a likely 
state of initial rapid rotation, probably as a result of 
angular-momentum loss from the outer parts of the star in 
a magnetic stellar wind; this has at least in the solar case 
led to roughly uniform rotation of the solar interior (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). However, the mechanisms 
coupling rotation of the deep solar interior to the surface, 
and their possible effects on other aspects of stellar 
evolution, are not understood. 

Evolution in close binary systems adds a great deal 
of complication to this already complex situation (see 
CLOSE BINARY STARS). As the more massive of the two 
components evolves and expands, possibly reaching the 
red-giant stage, mass transfer to the other component, or 
mass loss from the system, may take place. This in turn 
causes changes in the orbital parameters of the system. 
With continuing evolution, mass may be transferred back 
and forth between the components, greatly affecting their 
evolution. The detailed behavior evidently depends 
sensitively on the initial parameters of the system. Mass 
transfer, particularly onto compact objects such as white 
dwarfs and neutron stars, also gives rise to spectacular 
observational phenomena (see CATACLYSMIC BINARIES). 
In particular, the so-called supernovae of type Ia are 
believed to occur when white dwarfs become unstable 
after accretion of matter from a companion star. 


Acknowledgments 

I am very grateful to J Lattanzio and A V Sweigart for 
illuminating discussions on late stellar evolution and to 
Sweigart, J Andersen, F Grundahl and D A VandenBerg 
for providing data for figures. I thank the many authors 
who have kindly provided drafts of their articles, which 
have substantially assisted the writing of this article. 


Bibliography 
Andersen J 1991 Accurate masses and radii of normal stars 
Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 3 91-126 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Stellar Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Chiosi C, Bertelli G and Bressan A 1992 New development in 
understanding the HR diagram Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 30 235-85 

Hansen C J and Kawaler S D 1994 Stellar Interiors. Physical 
Principles, Structure, and Evolution (New York: Springer) 


Iben I 1985 The life and times of an intermediate mass star—in 
isolation/in a close binary Q. J. R. Astron. Soc. 26 1-39 
Iben I and Renzini A 1983 Asymptotic giant branch evolution 
and beyond Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 21 271-342 
Kippenhahn R and Weigert A 1990 Stellar Structure and 

Evolution (Berlin: Springer) 

Renzini A and Fusi Pecci F 1988 Tests of evolutionary 
sequences using color-magnitude diagrams of globular 
clusters Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 199-244 

VandenBerg D A, Bolte M and Stetson P B 1992 The age of the 
galactic globular cluster system Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 34 461-510 

Van Eck S, Goriely S, Jorissen A and Plez B 2001 Discovery of 
three lead-rich stars Nature 412 793-795 


Jorgen Christensen-Dalsgaard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


12 


Stellar Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Interiors 


The subject of stellar interiors is concerned with the 
determination of the run of density, temperature, 
luminosity (the energy flow rate through a closed three- 
dimensional surface) and composition from the center to 
the surface of stars. The determination of these quantities 
requires the solution to the conservation laws of mass, 
momentum and energy at each point in the model. These 
conservation laws have terms which directly include the 
pressure of the material and the energy produced by 
nuclear reactions in the interior. In order to fully solve the 
energy conservation equation, a relationship between the 
thermal structure and the energy transport must also be 
specified. The relationship will be different for each of the 
three mechanisms—radiation, convection and conduction. 
From the density, temperature and composition, the 
pressure may be determined from atomic physics, the rate 
at which nuclear energy is generated from nuclear physics 
and the mode of energy transport and its efficiency from 
atomic (radiation) and classical (convection) physics. 

The form that conservation of momentum takes 
in most stars is defined by the concept of hydrostatic 
equilibrium. Hydrostatic equilibrium is the condition that 
forces at all locations inside a star just balance. Most 
commonly, these are the internal pressure forces balancing 
the self-gravitational forces of the stellar material. Most 
stars satisfy hydrostatic equilibrium to a great degree, 
although there are stars which oscillate about hydrostatic 
equilibrium (pulsating stars), and stars that are either 
collapsing or exploding are far removed from hydrostatic 
equilibrium. Significant departures from hydrostatic 
equilibrium occur on the free fall time, which is generally 
so short (about an hour for the Sun) that they are readily 
observable. 

The relationship between the density, temperature, 
composition and pressure is called the equation of state, 
and its functional form is quite different in different 
temperature—-density regimes. For stars on the main 
sequence, those stars which are converting hydrogen to 
helium at the very center of the star, the relation is that of 
an ideal gas pressure produced by the motion of the nuclei 
and free electrons plus the radiation pressure produced by 
the photons. As stars evolve both the central density and 
the central temperature increase, and there may be other 
contributors to the equation of state. For densities that are 
sufficiently high (how high depends on the temperature), 
the pressure may be supplied by degenerate electrons, 
which are governed by the Pauli exclusion principle which 
holds that identical fermions cannot be too close together. 
The resistance of the identical electrons to being squeezed 
together provides the pressure. In very late stages of stellar 
evolution, at much higher densities, the pressure may be 
supplied by degenerate neutrons for the same reason. 

Although the focus here has been on the pressure, 
rotation and magnetic fields also provide forces which 
should be included in hydrostatic equilibrium, but gen- 
erally are not because they are generally of secondary im- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


portance and they complicate the mathematical problem 
significantly. 

The conservation of energy requires that the amount 
of energy produced inside a volume equals the net amount 
of energy flowing out of the volume. This requires 
knowledge of nuclear reaction rates to determine the 
energy produced and knowledge of the energy transport 
mechanism to determine the energy transport. The 
energy-producing reactions for most stars are fusion 
reactions combining light nuclear species into heavier 
nuclear species, which occur in the deep interior. As 
the star ages it first converts hydrogen into helium at the 
center on the main sequence and then in a shell about a 
hydrogen-depleted region as a subgiant and then a RED 
GIANT STAR. The hydrogen burning may occur in either 
of two ways. The first, called the p-p chain, starts 
with two protons reacting, while the second, the CNO 
cycle, starts with a proton reacting with a carbon nucleus. 
The net effect of both is to convert four protons into 
a helium nucleus and an array of other particles and 
radiation. The next evolutionary phase converts three 
helium nuclei at the center into carbon by the triple alpha 
process, and other more complex reactions follow. The 
evolution of the composition causes the internal structure 
of the star to change, and the star is said to evolve (see 
STELLAR EVOLUTION). This evolution is said to occur on a 
nuclear timescale, which is dependent on the rate of 
change of the composition in the nuclear burning regions. 
During transitions from one set of nuclear processing 
reactions to another, the star may have to undergo some 
structural readjustment via slow gravitational contraction 
or expansion, on a timescale called the Kelvin-Helmholtz 
time, in order to create the necessary conditions for the 
next nuclear processing sequence to begin. 

The energy generated by nuclear reactions will clearly 
depend on the number of the available reactants, the 
energy produced by the nuclear reaction and the cross 
section which indicates the likelihood that the reaction 
between the two nuclei takes place. In stellar interiors 
the relative motion between the interacting nuclei is 
provided by thermal motion, while experimentally this is 
provided by accelerating one of the nuclei to high velocity 
where it hits a stationary target of the other nucleus. 
The relative motion is much larger in our experiments 
than in stars, and the cross sections determined must be 
extrapolated to lower energy for stellar conditions. It can 
be shown that the thermal energies are not sufficient to 
overcome the Coulomb repulsion between two positively 
charged reactants, but one nucleus can ‘tunnel’ beneath 
the potential because of the small quantum mechanical 
probability of the nucleus penetrating the Coulomb barrier 
of the other. The nuclear reaction cross section may 
also be greatly enhanced by the presence of resonances 
produced by the nature of the wavefunction inside and 
outside the Coulomb barrier. For more information, see 
NUCLEOSYNTHESIS and NUCLEAR REACTION RATES. 

The nuclear energy generation rates are very strong 
functions of the temperature. If we express the energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


generation rate as a power law in the temperature over a 
limited range of temperature, we find that the power for 
the p-p chain is 4-6, depending on the temperature, about 
16 for the CNO cycle and approximately 30 for the triple 
alpha process. 

The other component of the energy equation is the 
transport. Radiative transport in the deep interior of a 
star is relatively simple, primarily because the distance 
any photon can travel, its mean free path, is very short 
compared with the distance for a significant temperature 
gradient to occur. Thus all the matter and all the photons 
in a volume whose size is determined by the photon mean 
free path have essentially the same temperature. This is 
one description of a black body, for which the radiation 
field is homogeneous and isotropic and the intensity is 
given by the Planck function, B,. We start with the 
first-order moment of the radiative transfer equation by 
multiplying the transfer equation by the cosine of the 
angular variable and integrating over all angles to obtain 
(See RADIATIVE TRANSFER), 


1 dK 1 dK 
a= [ nav= i: “dv= “dv 
K, dz KR dz 


where H is proportional to the energy flux and K to the 
radiation pressure. The isotropic nature of the Planck 
function allows the intensity to be factored out of the 
angular integrals, so that K, > 5 By. Since the Planck 
function is only a function of temperature, we may write 
dK,/dz = + dB, /dz = ; (dB,/dT) dT/dz. Substitution 
defines a calculable quantity, the Rosseland mean opacity 


(kr) 
1 1 dB dB 
—= | ——d “d 
KR I< dT | aT ° 


and an expression for the total flux: 


From this last expression, called the diffusion approxima- 
tion, one can see the relationship between radiative trans- 
port and a normal thermal conductivity. A similar expres- 
sion to the above can be derived for thermal conduction, 
which is important only when degenerate conditions ex- 
ist. The total flux would be the sum of the radiative and 
conductive fluxes, so that the total opacity is the harmonic 
mean of the radiative and conductive opacities. Note that 
the Rosseland mean opacity conserves the total flux and 
gives the greatest weight to those frequencies where the 
opacity is lowest. The diffusion approximation does not 
hold in the optically thin upper region of the stellar en- 
velope, and it is strictly speaking necessary to use a dif- 
ferent formulation to obtain the temperature stratification 
(although this is not always done). Generally, the logic is 
that the stellar structure and evolution can be determined 
quite well even when the surface is treated somewhat cav- 
alierly. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Convection poses a significant challenge to our 
knowledge of stellar structure. However, convection is 
very important because it is expected that the composition 
is uniformly mixed in a convection zone, so that convection 
is an important mechanism for transporting material that 
has been processed by nuclear reactions deep inside a 
star to other locations. Indeed, current theoretical and 
observational results indicate that there is some mixing 
of material beyond the formal boundary of a convective 
region. This is important from an evolutionary point 
of view, because it means that material is mixed into 
the convective core from just outside it and thus is 
processed by nuclear reactions. This prolongs the lifetimes 
during these phases of evolution. In the core, the 
expectation is that the convective efficiency is so great 
that the relationship between the density, temperature and 
pressure is adiabatic. 

In the layers near the stellar surface, the convective 
efficiency will not be very great because the material 
densities are so low, and a relatively simple mixing length 
formalism has traditionally been used to determine the 
convective structure. This model has one major free 
parameter, the mixing length, which governs how far a 
convective element will travel before depositing its energy 
in the surrounding medium. As might be imagined, 
the farther the element travels, the more efficient the 
convective transport. The major effect of uncertainties 
in the convective envelope structure is uncertainty in 
interpretation of stellar properties such as the stellar radius 
and the relationship between the observed color and the 
effective temperature. 

This simple model continues to be used because no 
alternative model or method with more tightly constrained 
free parameters has been able to demonstrate that it yields 
answers that agree more closely with observations. These 
alternative models may be crudely classified into two 
categories—analytical one-dimensional models which 
are meant to be incorporated into the traditional one- 
dimensional methods of solution (see below), and models 
which are based on multidimensional hydrodynamical 
simulations of astrophysical convection. These are not 
mutually exclusive, as there are analytical models which 
have been based on the results of multidimensional 
hydrodynamic simulations. 

Multidimensional simulations of turbulent convec- 
tion are not trivial. In a simple-minded picture of turbu- 
lence, convective motion is produced on the largest scales 
(here presumably the size of the convection zone) and cas- 
cades down to progressively smaller scales until the scale 
is sufficiently small that the viscous forces convert the ki- 
netic energy of the convective motion into heat. In stars, 
the size of the convection zone can be very large, some- 
thing on the order of a typical stellar radius (10" cm for 
an order of magnitude), while the length scale on which 
the viscosity can convert the kinetic energy into heat may 
be seven orders of magnitude smaller. Trying to resolve 
all of these length scales in hydrodynamic calculations is 
beyond the capabilities of current computers and likely to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


remain that way for some time. The general approach for 
hydrodynamic simulations is to divide the calculation into 
two components—that which can be spatially resolved 
and that which cannot. The first is directly included in 
the solution of the appropriate equations, while the terms 
involving the second must be approximated by models 
which contain only the spatially resolved component. This 
has been done in many ways, and much work remains to 
translate these results into something that can be used to 
determine the structure in general stellar situations. For 
more discussion, See STELLAR INTERIORS: THERMODYNAMICS. 

Supposing it possible to calculate the interior 
structure for a model of stipulated mass and composition, 
what techniques are available to determine whether the 
model bears any resemblance to a given observation? 
The answer is qualified by what is known about the star. 
From the spectral energy distribution and absorption line 
strengths of the light emitted from the stellar surface, we 
can obtain an estimate of its effective temperature, surface 
gravity and surface composition. Information about the 
interior may be gained in some cases from elements which 
have been processed in the interior and mixed to the 
surface. For example, the amount and the isotopes of 
lithium and beryllium, which capture protons at relatively 
low temperatures, indicate whether the surface convection 
zone has penetrated to such temperatures at some time 
in the past. If we have some method of determining the 
star’s distance, we can obtain its luminosity, and we can 
determine its mass if it is in an eclipsing binary system. 

Clusters (See STAR CLUSTERS) provide an opportunity 
to obtain more information. Clusters are groups of stars 
which formed at nearly the same time out of material with 
nearly the same composition. Thus, the stars in a cluster 
provide a sequence of stars whose primary difference is 
the stellar mass. Combining a number of stellar model 
calculations of stars with the same initial composition 
and age but different masses allows comparisons with 
the HR diagrams (plot of luminosity versus effective 
temperature—see HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM). 

The Sun presents a special case because of its 
proximity and thus the level of detail we can detect. 
Detected neutrinos from the Sun should yield information 
about the structure of the solar center, but models have 
not yet been able to produce the observed neutrino flux 
while matching all the other available solar data (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: NEUTRINOS). 

We also observe a very large number (about 10°) of 
low-amplitude pulsation modes believed to be powered 
by the solar turbulent convective envelope. These periods 
convey information about the sound travel time from 
the surface to a depth which depends on the mode, 
with longer-period pulsation modes ‘sounding’ to greater 
depths. Thus the period difference between two modes 
which are very close in period, and thus penetrate to 
nearly the same depth, contains information about the 
sound speed in the region between the effective depths 
of the two modes. This is similar to seismic waves 
sampling different depths inside the Earth, leading to this 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


study of the Sun being termed HELIOsEIsMOLOcy. With the 
many modes available, the sound speed, and hence the 
internal structure, has been observationally determined 
for the outer 80% of the solar radius. From this structure, 
we can determine the depth of the surface convection 
zone, a constraint that any convective model must match. 
Furthermore, by examining modes which are effectively 
the same radially but differ horizontally, the solar rotation 
rate as a function of depth and solar latitude can be 
determined to the same depth. 

The major surprises resulting from this comparison 
were that the solar convection zone extended to greater 
depth (about the outer 30% of the radius) than previously 
thought and that the solar rotation rate in the convective 
envelope is approximately proportional to the radius with 
different coefficients at different latitudes. The depth 
of the convection zone is matched by increasing the 
value of the mixing length to something like 1.7 pressure 
scale heights (the precise value depends on the mixing 
length formulation used) from the previously traditional 
range of 1.0-1.5 pressure scale heights. Current solar 
models provide agreement with the sound speed data to 
within a few tenths of a per cent, while models before 
helioseismology are now known to be about 1.5% in error. 

Can such an approach be extended to other stars 
(asteroseismology)? The obstacles are formidable because 
of the distance to other stars. The most promising stars 
would appear to be 6 Scuti variable stars, white dwarfs, 
and perhaps high-mass stars near the main sequence. 
However, no other star currently has more than 200 modes 
known, and our less detailed knowledge about any given 
star makes mode identification much more difficult than 
for the Sun. 

We now turn to a more detailed discussion of how the 
interior structure of a model is calculated and some simple 
models. 


The equations of stellar structure 

We begin with the conservation of mass and the conditions 
of hydrostatic equilibrium (excluding all forces but self- 
gravity and the internal pressure) and thermal equilibrium 
for spherically symmetric models: 


dM, . dp GM, dL, ‘ 

eo a  °, dr ERS 
where M, is the mass interior to radius r, p is the density, 
P is the pressure, L, is the luminosity flowing through 
radius r and « is the nuclear energy generation rate. Both 
the pressure and the nuclear energy generation rate are 
expressed as functions of the density and temperature 
for a given composition. Assuming the composition is 
stipulated a priori, we see that we have three equations 
with the four unknowns (p, T, M, and L,). The missing 
equation is one relating the thermal structure to the energy 
transport. Writing V = dIn7/dInP, we have three 
possibilities for this equation: 


3x PL, 


V = Vrad = 
l6zacGT‘*M, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


radiative, conductive,V,aq < Vad 


V = Vaa efficient convection, Vag < Vyad 


or 


V = Vaet inefficient convection, Vaq < Vac: < Vrad: 
The first equation is used in the convectively stable (Via > 
Vad) tegion where the energy is carried by radiation or 
conduction or both, the second in convectively unstable 
(Vaa < Vraa) deep layers where the convection is so 
efficient that the structure may be taken to be adiabatic 
and the third in convectively unstable regions where the 
convection is inefficient and the gradient is supplied by 
some convective transport algorithm such as the local 
mixing length theory. 

These equations then determine the stellar structure. 
However, they are usually not solved in this form, because 
the radius is generally not the most useful independent 
variable. Rather, the independent variable is taken as the 
interior mass, M,. One obtains the equations in terms of 
this variable by solving for dr in the mass conservation 
equation and substituting this in the other equations to 
obtain derivatives with respect to M,. Since there are 
four first-order differential equations, we require four 
boundary conditions. At the stellar center, the values of 
M,,r and L, are zero. The conditions at the stellar surface 
have a little more latitude. The density and pressure 
are so low compared with those at the stellar center that 
P =p = 0 (called the zero boundary conditions) are often 
a good approximation. More sophisticated techniques use 
stellar atmosphere models to fit all variables (i.e. o, T,r and 
L,) at a given location (i.e. M,) below the stellar surface. 

Most determinations of stellar interior conditions 
are now made with computational numerical models, 
but some historical and somewhat instructive analytical 
models were developed before extensive numerical 
simulations became possible. 


Simplified models 

Before numerical computers it was necessary to simplify 
the stellar structure equations to obtain either analytical 
solutions or solutions which required only a limited 
amount of calculation. The simplest of these approaches 
is for a polytrope, which is defined by the relation P = 
Cp"*)/", Thus, one may write P = P.6"*' and p = p,6". 
To obtain an equation utilizing this definition, divide 
the hydrostatic equilibrium equation by r?/pG, take the 
derivative with respect to r and use the mass conservation 
equation to obtain 


= —Amr*p. 


d /(r? dP _ dM, 
dr \pG dr) — 


With the above definition for 6, this becomes 


(n+ DP 1d (40), 
A4nGp2 r? dr ar) , 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This equation may be simplified by introducing a length 
scale, r,, by r =r,x. Defining 


2 (n + 1)P. 
"s ~ “An Gp2 


leads to the Lane-Emden equation 


1d (eS) acpi 

x? dx dx] — , 
From the definition of 6,6 = 1 at x = 0. Also, spherical 
symmetry requires that dé/dx = 0 at x = 0. The surface 
boundary conditions (P = o = 0) are met at x; where 
6(x,) = 0. Clearly, both P and p must be positive, so that x, 
corresponds to the first zero of 6. The attractiveness of this 
equation is apparent in the need to solve the Lane-Emden 
equation only once for a given n, a tedious but performable 
task. There are analytical solutions for n = 0,1 and 5, and 
there are published tables of 6(x) for 1 <n < 5 in steps of 
0.5. Once P, and p, are selected and 6(x) is computed, one 
may solve for P, p, M and R. 

The advantage of polytropes from a computational 
point of view is undeniable, especially when calculations 
had to be done by hand or with mechanical calculators. 
However, do polytropes ever resemble real stars? More 
specifically, are there situations in which a combination of 
the equation of state and the structure required by energy 
transport produces a polytropic relation? 

The most noteworthy case for which polytropes 
resemble real stars is for white dwarfs. If the electrons 
are fully degenerate throughout the entire white dwarf, the 
degenerate equation of state requires a polytropic structure 
with n = 1.5 if the electrons are non-relativistic and n = 3 
if they are extremely relativisitic. With the temperature 
absent in the equation of state, hydrostatic and thermal 
equilibria decouple. The hydrostatic structure is that of 
a polytrope, while the thermal structure is determined 
by the thermal structure when the star became a white 
dwarf and its cooling as the thermal energy is transported 
to the surface and radiated. Chandrasekhar was thus 
able to demonstrate that degenerate electrons allowed the 
possibility of stars with a solar mass of material inside a 
volume about that of the Earth and, furthermore, that there 
was an upper limit to the mass allowed for a white dwarf. 

While less dramatic than the theoretical possibility of 
white dwarfs, both fully convective stars and parts of other 
stars resemble polytropes. The chief virtue of the latter 
is a variety of models in which the solution for the stellar 
structure is somewhat less laborious than for the full stellar 
structure equations. 

With the current environment in which it seems that 
there is a computer on every desk, these models are of 
limited interest, and the methods by which stellar structure 
is currently calculated are now examined. 


Numerical solution of the stellar structure 
equations 

Once sufficient computing power became available, it 
became possible to develop numerical algorithms to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solve the equations of stellar structure using with either 
numerical tables or analytical fits to describe the equation 
of state, opacity and nuclear reaction rates. There have 
been two numerical algorithms which have been used 
successfully, a fitting technique and an implicit finite 
difference method. Current calculations are dominated 
by finite difference techniques. 

The simple reason why one cannot use ordinary 
integration techniques, such as the Runge-Kutta method, 
is that the boundary conditions are divided between 
the surface and the center of the stellar model. The 
fitting technique tries to remove this problem by making 
plausible assumptions for the conditions one does not 
know, say the central density, central temperature (or 
equivalently central pressure), surface luminosity and 
surface radius, and integrating from both the model center 
and the model surface and meeting at some interior 
location (the fitting point, callit M,o). Ifall the selections for 
the four unknowns were correct, the temperature, density, 
luminosity and radius from the two integrations would 
agree at M,o. Thus, we have four conditions which must be 
satisfied and four unknowns, so the problem in principle 
can be solved. The problem can be simplified slightly 
by choosing M, to be exterior to the energy generation 
region, performing the core integration first and using the 
luminosity at M,o as the guess for the surface luminosity. 

In practice there are some difficulties. One is that 
the guesses for the central unknowns must be fairly good 
or the integration may not even reach M,9. Another is 
that we have not considered the possible composition 
variations, whose values at any given location may depend 
on whether it is in a thoroughly mixed and therefore 
uniform composition convective region and how much 
mass the convective region may contain (and which for 
convective cores may not be known until the convective 
core boundary is reached in the outward integration 
from the center). Thus, the fitting technique is now 
used primarily for determining a guess for a uniform 
composition zero-age main sequence model. 

The finite difference approach divides the stellar 
model into a finite number of discrete zones and replaces 
the first-order differentials by differences between two 
adjacent zones. The model is then determined by 
evaluating these finite difference equations in all zones 
along with the boundary conditions for all the variables 
in all the zones. 

The Henyey method is the most common way these 
solutions are generated. For simplicity, suppose that there 
is only one second-order differential equation to be solved 
with the form 

a d 


fay) = aur +80) 7 +h(y,x) =0. 
XxX XxX 


dx 
The second-order differential means that the finite 
difference representation involves values of y in three 
adjacent zones. Assume that there is a guess for the 
solution y(x) of this equation, then perturb the guess and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


keep only the linear term in the perturbations (dy). For 
each zone, i, there will be an equation of the form 


Aj bYj-1 t B; by; t C; OVi41 t D; =0. 


D; is the value of the function f evaluated in zone i with 
the current guess and 


) a 
ee ee ee 
OYi-1 OY; OYiv1 


i 


Note that as D approaches zero for alli, all the dy; go to zero 
as well. Suppose that there is one boundary condition at 
the center of the stellar model (i = 1) and one at the surface 
(i =n). The central boundary condition may be used to 
eliminate Sy from the equation for i = 1, and the surface 
condition to eliminate dy, from the equation for i = n. 
Thus, the difference equations will have the form 


By, dy, + Cy, by2 + Di = 0 


A; 6y;-1 + B; dy; + C; dy;41 + D; = 0 ee 
An bYn—1 + By bY, + Dy, = 0. 


For i = 1, it is possible to write 
dy, = ay Sy2 + By 


where 
aqy= —-B'C, Bx = —BD,. 


Substituting these expressions into the equation for i = 2 
leads to 


A2(a1 dye + Bi) + Bo dy2 + C2 dy3 + Dy = 0. 


Combining terms and using the definition of a and 6 for 
i = 2, one obtains 

Oy = —(Anay + Br) 'Cy Bo = (Apa + Bo)! (An Bi + Do). 
Continuing this exercise for all zones generates a set of 
recursion relations for the a and 8. One virtue of these 
relations is that generally the a; are of order unity, which 
tends to eliminate mathematical errors when the various 
terms have much different orders of magnitude. 

The result for i = n is 


(AnQn—1 Te B,) 5Yn + AnBn-1 + Dy, =0 
so that 
5Yn = —(AnOn-1 + Bn) '(AnBn-1 a D,). 


From this all the other dy; can be found from the relations 
defining the a; and f;. 

Finding the 45y; obtains the solution of the best 
linear correction to solving the equation. However, the 
corrections may be so large that dropping the higher-order 
corrections is unwarranted. The whole process is therefore 
repeated until all of the corrections are below some desired 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tolerance. Because the lowest omitted term is of order dy, 
convergence is quadratic. 

Furthermore, there is nothing limiting about having 
only one equation with one independent variable. If there 
are several (N) differential equations (fi, ..., fv) with the 
dependent variables (q1,..., qn), the same methodology 
can be used. The A, B, C and a now become N by N 
matrices, and the D, 6 and dy become column vectors of 
length NV. 


Unresolved issues in stellar structure 

With these methods models of stellar structure can be 
generated routinely. Yet even after many models our 
knowledge of stellar interiors is incomplete. There are 
significant disagreements over elements that are produced 
in the interiors of some stars and mixed to the surface 
which models do not predict. Other issues are the times 
some stars spend is some portions of the HR diagram. 
From a purely theoretical point of view, knowledge of the 
effects of rotation and magnetic fields remains uncertain. 
As previously mentioned, the treatment of inefficient 
convection in stars remains a major impediment to our 
ability to model the interiors of stars. 


Bibliography 

There are a great many books and review articles on stellar 
interiors and evolution. One that is somewhat dated, but 
excellent on the general concepts, is by Schwarzschild 
(Structure and Evolution of the Stars, Princeton University 
Press, 1958). The book that is the most detailed on 
the physics of stellar structure and evolution, although 
virtually unobtainable outside of university libraries and 
older professional astrophysicists, is by Cox and Giuli 
(Principles of Stellar Structure, Gordon and Breach, 1968). 


Robert G Deupree 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors: Thermodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Interiors: Thermodynamics 


Material properties and stellar models 
Thermodynamic quantities of stellar matter are, together 
with opacity and nuclear reaction rates, the fundamental 
properties of stellar matter that enter stellar models. 
These quantities are responsible for the resulting overall 
parameters of stars and their differentiation according to 
chemical composition. These material properties determine 
the coefficients of the equations of stellar structure (see 
STELLAR EVOLUTION). Otherwise, the type of stellar matter 
would not enter these equations, which express the result 
of (i) a balance of forces, (ii) a balance between the energy 
loss at the stellar surface and energy generation in the 
core, and (iii) stationary energy transport between the 
core and the surface. Thermodynamics is most directly 
relevant for the balance of forces, which settles in the 
hydrostatic equilibrium, whichis a relation between the local 
pressure gradient and gravitational acceleration. The force 
of gravity is determined by the density distribution in the 
star: thus stellar modeling requires a relation between 
density and pressure through the specific properties of the 
matter. More precisely, the relevant properties of stellar 
matter are expressed by the equation of state, connecting 
pressure p, density p, temperature T, and composition. A 
simple example is the perfect gas law for a fully ionized 
gas, which may be written as p = RpT/; here R is 
the gas constant, and y is the mean molecular weight 
of the various species contained in the gas. Clearly ju 
depends on the composition, which is often characterized 
by the fractional mass abundances X, Y and Z of hydrogen, 
helium and heavier elements. 

However, thermodynamics is also important for other 
parts of stellar models. In particular, the bulk of most 
convection zones is essentially adiabatically stratified, 
that is, the pressure-density-temperature relation is an 
adiabat. The adiabat is the integrated form of the local 
adiabatic gradients, which are purely thermodynamic 
quantities. One of the adiabatic gradients is related to 
adiabatic sound speed: c* = (dp/dp), (s being specific 
entropy). This thermodynamic quantity has another 
important stellar application, because adiabatic sound 
speed is the key quantity that determines the frequency 
of acoustic oscillation modes (for a solar illustration 
see HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY); however, thermodynamics 
is also crucial when assessing the importance of non- 
adiabatic effects (See STELLAR PULSATION). This is understood 
by realizing that the temperature of the stellar interior is 
determined by the local energy balance of the outward 
flux of energy, which begins in the hot stellar core that is 
driven by nuclear reactions, and ends at the surface when 
the energy leaves the star in the form of radiation (see 
STELLAR INTERIORS). 

Inside a normal star, the two prevailing modes of 
energy transport are radiation and convection. Radiative 
transport is easy to formulate when opacity is high 
and the limiting diffusion approximation works well. 
The reciprocal of the opacity is the radiative conductivity 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which determines the energy throughput in this situation. 
The opacity results from absorption coefficients, which are 
obtained from atomic physics, although thermodynamics 
also enters, because it has to provide ionization 
equilibrium concentrations and level populations of all the 
absorbing species. 

The problem with radiative energy transport is not 
so much that the diffusion approximation would be bad 
(in general, opacities in stellar interiors are high), but 
rather that a literal application of the equations of radiative 
transport could result in a temperature gradient so steep 
that a star becomes convectively unstable: the ensuing 
convective motion, where hot elements of gas rise, dump 
their excess heat and then, will in general dominate the 
energy transport. Following Karl Schwarzschild (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR), the radiative transport equation is replaced by 
the one describing convective stratification if the local 
temperature gradient exceeds the adiabatic temperature 
gradient. To a good approximation, in the majority of 
convection zones, the convective stratification is adiabatic. 
In this case, it is the direct result of a thermodynamic 
quantity. 

However, away from the aforementioned limiting 
cases, knowledge of thermodynamics is still required. 
The first case is when convection is not efficient. Then, 
a significant part of the energy is still being carried by 
radiation. In this case, material properties (mainly specific 
heats) are needed to model the real (not just the adiabatic) 
temperature gradient. The second case is when opacity 
is not very high (in the layers close to the surface of a 
star). Then, the diffusion approximation breaks down. 
Since the mean-free path of radiation becomes large, 
heat can be instantaneously transported from one part to 
another. Such non-local effects cannot be treated anymore 
by differential equations, but by the more complex set of 
equations of radiation hydrodynamics, for which material 
properties are again crucial. 


Ideal and nonideal plasmas 

A useful practical introduction to the equation of state is 
the book by Eliezer et al (1986). On a higher theoretical 
and systematic level is the book about the physics of 
Coulomb systems by Kraeft et al (1986). The most 
important classification when dealing with plasmas of 
stellar interiors is the one in ideal and nonideal plasmas. 
The simplest model is given by a mixture of nuclei and 
electrons, assumed fully ionized and obeying the classical 
perfect gas law. However, this is not the most general 
model of an ideal-gas equation of state: it may include 
deviations from the perfect gas law, namely ionization 
or dissociation reactions, radiation and degeneracy of 
electrons, as long as the underlying microphysics of these 
additional effects is still ideal, that is, does not contain 
interactions. The ‘particles’, however, can be classical 
or quantum, material or photonic. In such an ideal 
framework, bound systems (molecules, atoms, ions) are 
allowed to have internal degrees of freedom (excited states, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors: Thermodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spin). All such ideal effects can be calculated as exactly as 
desired. 

Nonideal effects in plasmas can be assessed by the so- 
called coupling parameter I’. Ina plasma of temperature T 
and density such that particles of charge e have an average 
distance (r) from each other, one can define [ as the ratio of 
average potential binding energy over mean kinetic energy 
kgT (kg being the Boltzmann constant) 


T = (e7/(r))/kpT. (1) 


For simplicity, this expression is restricted to the 
case of hydrogen; generalizations to other elements are 
straightforward. Plasmas with T > 1 are strongly coupled, 
those with Tl < 1 weakly coupled. A famous example of a 
strongly coupled plasma is the electron gas in the interior 
of white dwarfs, where the coupling can become strong 
enough to force crystallization. Another example is given 
by the electrons in the conduction band of a metal at room 
temperature. Weakly coupled plasmas are, for instance, 
the interiors of stars with masses ranging from the slightly 
sub-solar ones to the largest. 


Basic concepts and dimensional parameters 
To describe a degree of ‘nonideality’ or ‘degeneracy’ 
of the plasma, it is convenient to introduce a few 
dimensionless parameters to express the relative strength 
of the particular effects, such as the Coulomb interaction 
or quantum degeneracy. These parameters are defined as 
combinations of various ‘characteristic lengths’ resulting 
from simple physical estimates. 

The strength of the Coulomb interaction is given by 
the density-independent Landau length I, 


ejej 


= Gr (2) 


I 
Although the Coulomb potential has infinite range, the 
Landau length represents an effective radius of the 
interaction between particles i and j, i.e. for distances >/, 
the potential energy is negligible compared to the thermal 
energy kgT. 

The Landau length clearly reflects a degree of 
nonideality of the plasma and the case of an ‘ideal’ plasma 
corresponds to /, = 0. 

Another purely classical characteristic length is the 
mean distance between two particles of the same species k 


(k = {e, i}) . 


Here, n; is the particle density N/V of species k. Note that 
d, is the generalization of the quantity (r) in equation (1). 
It does not depend on temperature. 

The most evident quantum mechanical characteristic 
length is the thermal de Broglie wavelength 


h 


_ = .. 
: /2nmekgT 


(4) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The limits of applicability of various theoretical models 
of the equation of state are usually described by different 
dimensionless parameters. The degeneracy of species k 


na? 


is very closely related to the well known degeneracy 
parameter n (sometimes also denoted y) by 


Jm Ne 
F; SS 5 
1/2(7) Vv (5) 
where F; is the Fermi integral 
Fi(y) = i, x'[1+ exp(y + x)]1 dx. (6) 
0 


In the case of a stellar plasma with heavy nuclei and light 
electrons, the heavy particles become degenerate only at 
much higher densities than electrons. 


Screening and the Debye—Hiickel approximation 
All characteristic lengths defined so far demonstrate 
either purely density- or purely temperature-dependent 
behavior. No collective behavior of particles has been 
considered. Here screening is discussed, which for normal 
stars is the most important deviation from ideality. 

The seminal study of collective behavior in a plasma 
was the Debye-Hiickel theory of electrolytical solutions. 
Despite its phenomenological approach this theory proved 
to be immensely successful not just for electrolytes, but 
also for plasma calculations. 

Basically, one mixes two ideas. First, assuming 
nondegenerate electrons, and considering one particular 
ion being fixed, the mean electron distribution around that 
ion is given by the Boltzmann factor 


+ep(r) 
kpT ; 


n.(r) =n, exp | (7) 


The mean ion density around the same ion is similarly 
given by 


|. (8) 


kpT 
Second, one assumes applicability of Poisson’s equation 
for mean charge distributions (instead of point charges) 


nj(r) =Nn; exp | 


Ag(r) = —Are[n;(r) — n(r)]. (9) 


The resulting system of equations is complicated and 
nonlinear; however, if the system is only slightly nonideal, 
that is, ifep(r)/kgT < 1, the linearized system has the well 
known solution of the static-screened Coulomb potential 
(SSCP) 


(r) = <e*", (10) 
r 


where x is the reciprocal of the Debye length rp 


[kt 
= | ——__—_.. 11 
we An (n,e2 + nje?) oh) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors: Thermodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This is the electrostatic and weak-screening approximation 
to a more general dynamic situation, which plays not only 
an important role in stellar thermodynamics, but equally 
in the determination of nuclear reaction rates (see NUCLEAR 
REACTION RATES). 


The chemical picture 

With the exception of neutron stars, in stellar interiors 
the thermal de Broglie wavelength of nuclei, atoms, ions 
and molecules is always tiny and they can all be treated 
classically. Only electrons have to be treated according 
to quantum mechanics. Here, there is a bifurcation into 
two distinct classes of approach, the ‘chemical picture’ 
and the ‘physical picture’ (see the book by Kraeft et 
al 1986). While in the more conventional chemical 
picture bound configurations (atoms, ions and molecules) 
are introduced and treated as new and independent 
species, only fundamental particles (electrons and nuclei) 
appear in the physical picture. In the chemical picture, 
reactions between the various species occur, and thus the 
thermodynamical equilibrium must be sought among the 
stoichiometrically allowed set of concentration variables 
by means of a maximum entropy (or minimum free- 
energy) principle. In contrast, the physical picture has 
the aesthetic advantage that there is no need for a 
minimax principle; the question of bound states is dealt 
with implicitly through the Hamiltonian describing the 
interaction between the fundamental particles. See the 
section on the physical picture below. 


The free-energy-minimization method 

The development of computational methods was strongly 
stimulated by the requirements for stellar evolution, 
where data for a wide range of parameters are 
needed. The chemical picture is very well suited for 
powerful, approximative models such as the free-energy- 
minimization method, which became computationally 
feasible since about 1960. Given a mathematical model for 
the Helmholtz free energy F(T, V, {N;}), where {N;} isa set 
of particle numbers for all species i present in a plasma, 
one minimizes F subject to the stoichiometric relations 
governing possible reactions among the particle species in 
the plasma. The underlying principle is that nature adjusts 
the reaction equilibrium such that entropy is maximum 
(for given energy) or the free energy is minimum (for given 
temperature). 

One starts from the canonical partition function. 
Consider a physical system (with Hamiltonian #) 
confined in a box of volume V in contact with a heat 
reservoir at temperature T. Then the canonical partition 
function is a trace (denoted by Tr) 


Z=Tr(e 4/7), (12) 
From that, the free energy is obtained by the formula 
F(T, V,{N}) = —kpT In(2). (13) 


Here, the volume V is implicitly contained in the 
Hamiltonian operator. The free energy is calculated for all 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


{N} which are allowed by the stoichiometric relations and a 
given initial composition. Equilibrium concentrations are 
those {N} that minimize F(T, V, {N}) for given T, V under 
the stoichiometric constraints. This gives ionization and 
dissociation equilibria. Numerically, this will be a task of 
finding a minimum of a nonlinear function F(T, V, {N}) 
in the {N}-space under the stoichiometric constraints. 

The major assumption in any practical realization of 
the free-energy minimization method is that the total 
partition function Z = Ziota1 factorizes, that is, 


Ztotal = ZeZtransZconf Zint» (14) 


where Z, here stands for the electronic contribution, Ztrans 
is the result of the integration over momentum space for 
the heavy particles, Zoon¢ is the configurational integral 
over configuration space coordinates, and finally Zin: is 


ioe} 
Sey an = by 81; EXP(—Eij/keT), (15) 


j=l 


where £;; and g;; denote energy and degeneracy of the 
state j of species i, respectively. 

When going from the partition function to the free 
energy, the consequence of the assumed factorizability 
of the partition function is additivity, or modularity, of 
the free energy. This modularity accounts for the great 
appeal of the chemical approach from both a modeling 
and a computational point of view. Modularity basically 
tells us that all the interactions can be split into separate 
parts with clear physical meaning. And if, for example, 
one part needs to be modified to implement a higher 
order correction, it can be done without having to worry 
about consistency with the other parts. Terms can be 
introduced simply by adding or changing subroutines 
in a computer program, without a major overhaul of 
the previous work. That is why sometimes for the 
sake of modularity even relatively crude approximations 
are maintained, because a rigorous treatment, in the 
framework of the exact nonfactorizing partition function, 
would be entirely prohibitive. 


Recovering the Saha equation 
By retaining only ideal terms, the free-energy-minimization 
method falls back to the time-honored Saha equation. To il- 
lustrate, consider the simplest case, hydrogen ionization 
(H ~ Ht +e"). Aneutral mixture of H-atoms, protons and 
electrons with particle numbers of Ny, Np, and Ne, respec- 
tively, has only one degree of freedom, because of the two 
relations (Ny, being the total number of protons, bound and 
free) 

Ny + Np = Ney = const, 


Ne = Np. (16) 


The degree of freedom is the ionization degree. Its 
equilibrium value is the one for which the free energy is 
minimum. The minimum condition is then 


Ny Boy oS E; 
SZ =) 8 -~—+}, 17 
NN. vy int A &j &Xp eT (17) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors: Thermodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(with E; and g; denoting the negative energy states of 
hydrogen and their orbital statistical weight, respectively). 
This is the well known Saha equation in astrophysics 
(known as the law of mass-action in physical chemistry). 
The infinity of the internal (hydrogenic) partition function 
is notorious; it has plagued statistical mechanics of 
plasmas for the last 70 years. The usual argument goes 
that excited states of hydrogen atoms become infinitely 
large with increasing quantum number j. Because of 
this, the infinite partition function would only occur for 
a single atom in the whole infinite universe. Remedies of 
the infinity have been involving more-or-less sophisticated 
truncations of the summation at some level; a judicious 
choice allows us to model real, interacting plasmas. 

Let us note in passing that even the most radical 
truncation to the ground state of hydrogen (whose orbital 
statistical weight is one) 


N. 3 E 
He, ete exp ( 2 ) (18) 
NoNe V kpT 


is not devoid of problems because, as one sees easily, it 
leads to spurious recombinations at high densities and 
relatively low temperatures. Specifically, in the center 
of a typical star, the Sun, this equation would predict 
about 30% neutral hydrogen, which is clearly nonsensical 
for the prevailing density of 150 g cm-°. The reason 
for this pathology is that the Saha equation does not 
contain information about the size of the hydrogen atom. 
Bringing in correction terms that do contain atomic radii 
amounts to modeling so-called ‘pressure ionization’. Only 
nonideal interaction terms between the species can treat 
this important physical effect. 


Nonideal effects in the chemical picture 

Re-deriving the Saha equation with a new method gives 
no gain though. However, the power of the free- 
energy-minimization method is precisely that it allows 
us to include nonideal effects consistently. The reason 
is that any modification to the thermodynamics is only 
made at one single place (the free energy). Since 
the ionization degree and all thermodynamic quantities 
follow from the free energy by purely mathematical steps, 
all these quantities are consistent with each other. For 
instance, they automatically obey all Maxwell relations. 
The corresponding shifts in the ionization equilibria are 
correct. 

Achieving such consistency would be difficult in an 
approach where one considers the Saha equation and the 
corresponding thermodynamic quantities separately, all 
to be modified individually. There would be no general 
systematic procedure. The free-energy-minimization 
method, however, achieves it nicely and simply. It is 
therefore the natural nonideal extension of it to incorporate 
interactions into simple equations of state which are based 
on the Saha equation. 

As an example, to include screening at the level of 
the Debye—Htickel approximation, it suffices to add to the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


total free energy the ‘module’ for the Debye—Hiickel free 
energy 


bsT 
pS (19) 


F. = . 
on 12xr3 


Weakly-coupled stellar plasmas 

High-mass stars are distinguished by high temperatures, 
so that even in their center, the kinetic energy kgT 
of particles largely dominates the electrostatic potential 
energies. The Sun is somewhat an exception, not so much 
because it would not qualify as a moderate-mass star, but 
rather because the helioseismic data put such constraints 
on the thermodynamic quantities that even very small 
nonideal deviations are needed in solar models and can 
therefore be studied in great detail (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
EQUATION OF STATE AND OPACITY). 

For weakly-coupled plasmas, perturbational ap- 
proaches are effective. An example is the equation-of-state 
and opacity effort of the international Opacity Project (OP; 
see the book by Seaton (1995)). A necessary part of OP is 
the so-called Mihalas-Hummer—Dappen (MHD) equation 
of state, which deals with the heuristic concept of modi- 
fied atoms and ions due to the plasma environment. More 
specifically, the MHD equation of state is based on an occu- 
pation probability formalism. The internal partition func- 
tions Z'™' of species s adopted by MHD are sums that are 
made convergent by weights 


Eis 
Zin= Wis is EXP ( - es} (20) 


Here, the index is labels the state i of species s. E;, and 
Sis are their energies (in MHD assumed to be unshifted) 
and statistical weights, respectively, kg is the Boltzmann 
constant, T is the temperature, and the weights w,, are 
the occupation probabilities that take into account charged 
and neutral surrounding particles. In physical terms, w;, 
gives the fraction of all particles of species s that can exist in 
state i with an electron bound to the atom orion, and 1—w;, 
gives the fraction of those that are so heavily perturbed by 
nearby neighbors that their states are effectively destroyed. 

Although the MHD equation of state was originally 
designed to provide the level populations for opacity cal- 
culations of stellar envelopes, the associated thermodynamic 
quantities of MHD can none the less be reliably used also 
for stellar cores. This is due to the fact that in the deeper 
interior the plasma becomes virtually fully ionized. This 
rather fortuitous circumstance is the reason why the MHD 
equation of state fares very well in models of the entire Sun 
and even in lower-mass models, down to 0.4 Mo (for ref- 
erences, see Dappen and Guzik 2000). 

A special effect appearing in higher-mass stars is 
the modification of thermodynamic quantities due to the 
fact that electrons can become significantly relativistic. 
Inclusion of relativistic electrons is not difficult, however, 
since it is an ideal-gas effect. It is amazing that the 
relativistic effect has been detected even in the Sun, 
despite its tiny amount, because of the superb quality of 
helioseismological techniques. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors: Thermodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Strongly-coupled stellar plasmas 

Thermodynamics is more complicated for the interior 
of low-mass stars, because the kinetic energy of the 
particles does not dominate the electrostatic potential 
energies. In the deep interior of these stars, the plasma 
can become strongly coupled. In addition, temperature 
alone cannot ionize matter fully, and pressure ionization 
occurs, which requires more elaborate modeling. The 
configurational free energy Frons stems directly from 
the configuration integral Z.ons. Besides containing the 
Coulomb interactions that lead in the classical weakly- 
coupled approximation to the Debye—Htickel free energy 
Front, it also contains excluded-volume effects of neutral 
particles. The well known van der Waals equation of state 
is based on such an excluded volume effect, but there are 
more elaborate formalisms of hard-sphere or softer types. 
Such excluded volume effects become very important in 
the relatively cold plasmas of low-mass stars or planets 
(see Saumon et al 1995). Note that the sophisticated nature 
of hard-sphere potentials does not change the basically 
heuristic nature of the free-energy minimization methods. 
Only the physical picture can overcome this fundamental 
limitation (see the following section). 


The physical picture 
Like the MHD equation of state, the alternative physical- 
picture activity expansion was also developed as part of 
an opacity effort, the one pursued by the OPAL group 
at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (Rogers et 
al 1996). The underlying equation of state is based 
on a sophisticated systematic method for including 
density effects in a plasma. It is clear from the 
preceding sections that the advantages of the free-energy- 
minimization method and the chemical picture lie in the 
possibility to model complicated plasmas, and to obtain 
numerically smooth and consistent thermodynamical 
quantities. Nevertheless, the heuristic method of the 
separation of the atomic-physics problem from that of 
statistical mechanics is not satisfactory, and attempts have 
been made to avoid the concept of a perturbed atom in 
a plasma altogether. This has suggested an alternative 
description, the physical picture. In such an approach one 
expects that no assumptions about energy-level shifts or 
the convergence of internal partition functions have to be 
made. On the contrary, properties of energy levels and the 
partition functions should come out from the formalism. 

There is an impressive body of literature on the 
physical picture (Kraeft et al 1986; Rogers et al 1996; and 
references therein). However, the majority of work on 
the physical picture was not dedicated to the problem 
of obtaining a high-precision equation of state for stellar 
interiors. Such an attempt was made for the first time 
by the OPAL group at Livermore as part of their opacity 
project (See STELLAR OPACITY). 

To explain the advantages of this approach for 
partially ionized plasmas, it is instructive to discuss the 
activity expansion for gaseous hydrogen. The interactions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in this case are all short ranged and pressure is determined 
from a self-consistent solution of the equations 


=7+2bo +2 bytes, (21) 


z (dp 
=| =); 29 
p on?) (22) 


where z = A> 3 exp(1/kgT) is the activity (with A, being the 
thermal de Broglie wavelength of electrons, see above), 
and yw is the chemical potential. The b, are cluster 
coefficients such that bz includes all two particle states, 
bz includes all three particle states, etc. 

In contrast to the chemical picture, which is plagued 
by divergent partition functions, the physical picture 
has the power to avoid them altogether. An important 
example of such a fictitious divergence is that associated 
with the atomic partition function. This divergence is 
fictitious in the sense that the bound-state part of b» is 
divergent but the scattering state part, which is omitted 
in the Saha approach, has a compensating divergence. 
Consequently the total bz does not contain a divergence 
of this type. A major advantage of the physical picture 
is that it incorporates this compensation at the outset. A 
further advantage is that no assumptions about energy- 
level shifts have to be made; it follows from the formalism 
that there are none. 

As a result, the Boltzmann sum appearing in 
the atomic free energy for atoms and compound ions 
is replaced with the so-called Planck—Larkin partition 
function (PLPF), given by 


En En 
PLPE = Le «oes (- =) = Ty aa (23) 


The PLPF is convergent without additional cut-off criteria 
as are required in the chemical picture. However, despite 
its name the PLPF is nota partition function, but merely an 
auxiliary term in the second expansion (virial) coefficient 
of pressure. 

Currently available OPAL equation-of-state tables are 
described in the article by Rogers et al (1996). They can be 
used to model stars down to 0.8M5. A newer version of 
OPAL equation-of-state tables is now being released. It 
will allow the modeling of much less massive stars, down 
to 0.1M>. However, models of brown dwarfs and giant 
planets still need configurational-integral approaches, 
such as that of Saumon et al (1995). 


Practical recommendations 

When constructing a stellar evolution or pulsation code, 
opacity and equation of state formulations are necessary. 
These may be in the form of analytical or in-line routines 
that calculate the desired opacities or thermodynamic 
quantities, given as input the temperature, density, and 
chemical composition. Pre-calculated opacity or equation 
of state tables may also be used, with appropriate 
look-up and interpolation routines. Sometimes several 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Interiors: Thermodynamics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tables or analytical fits covering different regions of T, 
p, and composition space must be smoothly joined. 
The hydrostatic structure calculation may require fewer 
thermodynamic quantities or derivatives than a pulsation 
calculation; for example, in pulsation calculations, smooth 
derivatives of opacity with respect to temperature 
and density, as well as additional derivatives of 
thermodynamic quantities, are required. 

There are advantages and disadvantages of using 
tables versus in-line analytical formulations. Tables are 
often limited in coverage of T, and composition space, 
and so may not be useful for stellar models over a wide 
range of masses, compositions, and evolutionary states. 
Tables do not always include all of the thermodynamic 
quantities needed for a calculation, and these quantities 
cannot always be constructed from the information 
provided. Interpolation within and between tables, or 
extrapolation off the edges of tables can be difficult 
and risky, and introduces significant uncertainty into the 
calculations. The grids of table entries are not always 
fine enough for good interpolation, or for construction 
of derivatives using differences between table quantities. 
On the other hand, tables often include superior physics 
compared to simple analytical schemes, and can be less 
computationally expensive than a sophisticated analytical 
routine. 

Analytical procedures can be more flexible, for 
example in taking into account variations in element 
mixtures and composition, or in providing smooth 
derivatives. They also may be modified easily to 
generate additional thermodynamic quantities. Analytical 
procedures can also be useful to explore the importance of 
various physical processes, since these processes can easily 
be turned on and off, exaggerated with multipliers, etc. 

The book by Eliezer et al (1986) contains many 
valuable resources, formulas, and tables for practical 
calculations of thermodynamic quantities. More rigorous 
theoretical concepts are discussed in the book by Kraeft 
et al (1986). Finally, references to some commonly used 
thermodynamic data (and opacity), both analytical and 
tabular and including information about how to obtain 
them, are found in the article by Dappen and Guzik (2000). 
Ashort version is given elsewhere in this volume (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: EQUATION OF STATE AND OPACITY). 


Bibliography 

Dappen W and Guzik J A 2000 Astrophysical equation 
of state and opacity Variable Stars as Essential 
Astrophysical Tools (NATO-ASI, Cesme, Turkey, 1998) 
ed C Ibanoglu (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 177-212 

Eliezer S, Ghatak A and Hora H 1986 An Introduction 
to Equations of State: Theory and Applications 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Kraeft W D, Kremp D, Ebeling W and Ropke G 
1986 Quantum Statistics of Charged Particle Systems 
(New York: Plenum) 

Rogers F J, Swenson F J and Iglesias C A 1996 Astrophys. J. 
456 902-8 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Saumon D, Chabrier G and Van Horn H M 1995 Astrophys. 
J. Suppl. Ser. 99 713 

Seaton M J 1995 The Opacity Project vol 1 (Bristol: Institute 
of Physics) 


Werner Dappen 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Masses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Masses 


The mass of a star is arguably its most important 
property. In this article we will answer four questions 
concerming stellar masses. How do the properties of stars 
depend on their masses? What is the smallest and largest 
mass possible for a star, and why? How do we determine 
the masses of stars? What distribution of stellar masses 
occurs when stars form, and why? 


Dependence of other stellar parameters on 


mass 

The Russell—Vogt theorem states that, if we know a star’s 
mass and its CHEMICAL COMPOSITION, we can use the 
laws of physics to determine all of its other properties: its 
luminosity, its radius, its temperature and density 
profiles, and how these properties change with time. (We 
know that this is a slight simplification; for instance, the 
amount of net ANGULAR MOMENTUM will also affect a 
star’s structure and evolution.) Compared with the 
possible range of masses a star may have ((0.08- 
150)Mo), there is only modest variation possible in the 
initial composition, and thus it is primarily a star’s mass 
at birth which determines the basic essentials of its 
structure and future life. 

Some of the properties of stars are given in table | as 
a function of stellar mass for stars on the main sequence, 
the core H-burning phase that accounts for 90% of a 
star’s life. These values have been taken from stellar 
models computed with a composition that is initially 
solar. We list the stellar parameters at the beginning and 
end of the main-sequence lifetimes, except for the 
lowest-mass stars, for which we adopt the parameters 
corresponding to an age of | Gyr, by which time these 
stars are stably burning hydrogen. 

Generally the behavior of the stellar parameters with 
stellar mass is quite different for the higher-mass stars 
((25-120) Mo) than for solar-type stars ((0.8-1.2) Mo). 
The dependence of luminosity on stellar mass is shown in 
figure 1. This mass—luminosity relationship is considered 
one of the most fundamental descriptions of stellar 
properties; the ability to reproduce this by stellar models 
was one of the great vindications of theory (see also 
HERTZSPRUNG—RUSSELL DIAGRAM). EDDINGTON first 
demonstrated that radiative diffusion in stars requires that 
the stellar luminosity will depend on mass roughly as the 
fourth power, i.e. L ~ M*. However, it is clear from figure 
1 that no single exponent describes the dependence of 
luminosity on mass over the entire range of stellar 
masses. If we consider different mass ranges we would 
find that the following are good approximations: 


L ~ M'* (M = 100M5) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


L ~ M?1(M = 10Mo) 


L ~ M*" (M = 1Mo) 
and 


L ~ M*" (M = 0.1Mo). 


The drastic changes seen in the mass—luminosity relation 
with mass are primarily due to the different opacity 
sources at work. At the high interior temperatures that 
characterize high-mass stars, all of the atoms are fully 
ionized and scattering of x-rays from free electrons 
dominates the opacity, with no temperature dependence. 
At lower temperatures, atoms are only partially ionized, 
and there is a strong temperature dependence in the 
number of ions. At the very cool temperatures that 
characterize the lowest-mass stars, molecular hydrogen 
(H2) forms, removing the dominant opacity source for 
solar-type stars, H (see also STELLAR OPACITY). 

Stellar lifetimes t,,, as a function of mass also show 
a marked change from solar-type stars to high-mass stars, 
as evidenced by table 1. For solar-type stars the main- 
sequence lifetime changes rapidly with mass, while for 
higher-mass stars the change is far more modest with 
mass. For most stars, roughly the same fraction of a star’s 
mass (10%) is involved in nuclear burning regardless of 
mass, and so the relative main-sequence lifetime t,,, will 
be roughly proportional to the mass (the amount of fuel) 
and inversely proportional to the luminosity (how quickly 
the fuel is consumed), i.e. Tns ~ M/L. Given the mass— 
luminosity relations above, we can thus estimate the 
dependence of lifetime on mass as Ts ~ M*” for solar- 
type stars, and t,,, ~ °6 for very-high-mass stars. This 
rule of thumb breaks down for the lowest mass stars, as 
the stars are fully convective, and the hydrogen-burning 
main sequence lasts a good deal longer than one would 
expect. As shown in table 1, a 0.1Mo star will last 10 
trillion years (1.0 x 10'° yr) in a core-H-burning phase, 
roughly 1000 times as long as the Sun will, rather than 
the factor of 100 that one would expect, since the entire 
star provides the nuclear fuel. 

During the main sequence the highest-mass stars 
lose a significant fraction of their mass owing to stellar 
winds. A star that begins life with 120Mo will lose 50Mo 
(40%) of its mass, while a 60Mo star will lose 12Mo 
(20%), by the end of its main-sequence life. Below 25Mo 
the amount of mass lost during main-sequence evolution 
is negligible, although stellar winds do affect the 
evolution of even solar-type stars by carrying off angular 
momentum. Such mass loss is expected to scale with 
metallicity and thus will be less significant in galaxies of 
lower metallicity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Masses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Properties of main-sequence stars as a function of stellar mass. 


Beginning of main sequence 


End of main sequence 


Mass (Mo) Ting Tog (K) Spectral log L/Lo Toy (K) Spectral log L/Lo Radius 
type Radiu type (Ro) 
Ss (Ro) 
120 Mo 2.56 Myr 53 300 03 V +6.25 16 32 900 O9! +6.34 48 
60 Mo 3.45 Myr 48 200 04 V +5.73 10 12 000 B7I +5.99 230 
25 Mo 6.51 Myr 37 900 O08 V +5.29 6.5 29 000 BOI +5.29 18 
12 Mo 16.0 Myr 28 000 BO.2 V +4.01 4.3 24 400 BO.5 I +4.46 9.5 
5 Mo 94.5 Myr 17 200 B5 V +2.74 2] 15 100 BSI +3.15 5.5 
2.5 Mo 585 Myr 10 700 BI V +1.60 1.8 9000 A2 Ill +1.92 3.8 
1.25 Mo 4.91 Gyr 6380 F5 V +0.32 1.2 6070 G0 V +0.66 1.9 
1.0 Mo 9.84 Gyr 5640 G8 V 0.16 0.9 5790 G2V +0.22 1.3 
0.8 Mo 25.0 Gyr 4860 K2V 0.61 0.7 5360 KO V -0.09 1.1 
0.5 Mo 100 Gyr 3890 MO V -1.42 0.4 — — — — 
0.2 Mo 4000 Gyr 3300 M4 V —2.2: 0.2 — — — 
0.1 Mo 10000 Gyr 2900 M7 V —3.0: 0.1 — — — — 


Log Luminosity [Solar Units] 


-1 -0.5 9] 


Main Sequence - 


End of 


Zero—Age 
Main Sequence 


05 1 1.5 2 
Log Mass [Solar Units] 


Figure 1. The mass—luminosity relationship as predicted by stellar models is shown by the solid curve for stars with zero age and by 
the dotted curve for stars at the end of their main-sequence lifetimes, for masses of 0.8 Mo (log M = —0.1) and greater. Below that 
mass, the curve shown is for models with an age of 1 Gyr, as stars of this age have begun to burn hydrogen stably with constant 
luminosity. (The vast majority of low-mass stars will be at least that old.) The points show the masses and luminosities of ‘real’ stars 
for comparison, with the crosses denoting the best determinations from double-lined spectroscopic binaries, and the open circles 


denoting the best determinations from visual binaries. 


It is inappropriate to speak of a spectral type to mass 
relationship for higher-mass stars: stellar evolution 
results in a progression from higher effective 
temperatures to cooler during the core-H-burning 
lifetime, and during this evolution stars of different 
masses will pass through a particular spectral type 
‘stage’. For lower-mass main-sequence stars this is not 
true, and there is only a slight change of spectral type 
with evolution (i.e. little change of the effective 
temperature). For example, a _ star which is 
spectroscopically classified as ‘O4 V’ star may be a zero- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


age 60Mo star, or a slightly older (0.5 Myr) 85Mo star, 
but all stars of spectral type G2 V will have a mass 
roughly that of the Sun. 


Range of stellar masses: the lowest- and 


highest-mass stars 
The masses of stars span the range from 0.08 to 150 (or 
more) times the mass of the Sun. 

At the low-mass end, the 0.08Mo limit is set by the 
stellar core not being hot enough to ignite hydrogen 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Masses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stably. Objects with masses slightly below this limit are 
called brown dwarfs, and are ‘star like’ in the sense that 
nuclear burning of deuterium occurs in their core. Below 
a mass of 0.015Mo (roughly 16 times the mass of Jupiter) 
not even deuterium burning can occur, and these objects 
are perhaps best called planets. Thus there is a natural 
lower limit to what constitutes a star, although we expect 
that the mass function (discussed below) should be 
unaware of this division. We note that the distinction 
between brown dwarfs and bona fide stars is subtle in the 
following sense: both low-mass stars and brown dwarfs 
burn primordial deuterium at first, but a ‘real’ star will 
‘eventually’ settle down to stable H burning; we expect 
in the case of a 0.08Mo star that this will take 
approximately a billion years (1 Gyr). 

In 2001, a very low mass star (lower than a tenth of a 
solar mass), located at a distance of only 13 light years, 
designated as DENIS-P J104814.7-395606.1, was found 
on the infrared survey DENIS images. On the night of 30 
May 2000, the 10 m Keck I telescope was used to obtain 
a high-resolution spectrogram that showed the presence 
of a strong cesium absorption line, as well as titanium 
and vanadium oxide bands. The signature of lithium was 
not present in the spectrum of the object. The Keck data 
demonstrated that this object must be a very nearby 
dwarf (cesium is not detected in giants), with a 
temperature of about 2200 K and a mass between 90 and 
60 Jupiters. The lack of lithium implies that the mass 
must be larger than 60 Jupiter masses, but does not rule 
out that it could be a massive brown dwarf. A very 
nearby dwarf should have an apparent motion with 
respect to the background of more distant stars. 
Astronomers at the Observatory of Paris searched for 
DENIS-P J104814.7-395606.1 in old photographic plates 
and found it in images obtained during the last 30 years. 
It has moved considerably between 1986 and 1999. The 
large proper motion (1.5 arcsec per year) confirms that 
this is one of our nearest neighbors. The astronomers 
estimate a distance of about 13 light years. This distance 
is still uncertain because it is based on comparisons with 
objects of the same spectral type. 

At the other extreme, we do not understand what, if 
anything, limits how large a mass a star may have. At one 
time it was thought that radiation pressure acting on 
grains limited how large a star could form, but we now 
understand that disks play an important role in the 
formation of stars. There may be sufficient shielding by 
the inner part of the disk to mitigate the effects of 
radiation pressure. It is not clear at this time what role the 
mergers of protostellar clumps may play in the formation 
of stars. If the role is appreciable, then there may be no 
natural limit to how massive a star may actually form. 

Even if star-formation processes fail to limit the 
mass of a star, other processes may. Eddington proposed 
in 1926 that stars more massive than some amount would 
be pulsationally unstable and should blow off their outer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


layers, thus limiting their mass. Early estimates of this 
limit were as low as 60Mo. Modern estimates, however, 
place this limit as high as 440Mo, although this is still 
based on the same classical perturbation linerarization 
methods used by Eddington. Recent ‘nonlinear’ analysis 
(i.e. direct numerical integration of the equations of 
stellar structure) suggests that the mass loss from such 
instabilities would only be comparable with the mass loss 
of radiatively-driven stellar winds in any event. 

In this context it is interesting to note that the highest- 
mass stars we know do all show signs of prodigious mass 
loss. The highest-mass main-sequence stars known are 
located in the R136 cluster at the heart of the 30 Doradus 
nebula in the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC). These 
stars have masses which have been conservatively 
estimated as being as high as 155Mo. Spectroscopically 
the eight most massive of these stars show evidence of 
extremely high mass-loss rates (mimicking the appearance 
of WOLF-RAYET STARS), and so one could argue that 
indeed these stars are not ‘stable’ in the sense that they are 
losing a considerable amount of matter. 

The luminosities of the most luminous R136 stars 
are 10°°Lo. Other stars which are of comparable 
luminosity include HD 5980, a Wolf—Rayet star in the 
SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUD (SMC), 1 CARINAE, a 
luminous blue variable (LBV) in the Milky Way, Sk — 
67° 211, an O3 III star in the LMC, and the Pistol Star, an 
LBV located near the Galactic center. It is hard to 
determine masses for LBVs and Wolf—Rayet stars, as 
these are in an He-buming phase, where the interior 
models (and hence the mass—luminosity relationship) for 
massive stars are quite uncertain, but it is clear that these 
stars evolved from stars of mass similar to that of the 
highest-mass R136 stars. The mass inferred for the main- 
sequence star Sk — 67° 211 is also like that of the R136 
stars, suggesting that the stars in R136 do not have some 
kind of special origin. Studies of the youngest OB 
associations and clusters (i.e. young enough so that not 
even the highest-mass stars would have evolved) show 
that the richer the cluster is in stars, the higher the mass 
of the highest-mass star seen. We now understand that 
although physics may indeed impose a limit on how 
massive a star may be, we have not yet encountered this 
limit in nature. 


Determination of stellar masses 

How do we determine stellar masses? There are two 
basic ways: (1) direct determination of masses 
observationally using binaries and (2) inference of stellar 
masses using models. 


Stellar binaries 

Simple Newtonian mechanics, specifically Kepler’s third 
law of planetary motion, allow us to directly determine 
the masses of stars in some BINARY STAR systems. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Masses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


‘Double-lined’ spectroscopic binaries are stars 
whose spectra show the signature of two stars. The 
orbital periods of these systems are usually a few days or 
months, and the line-of-sight (radial) velocities of each 
component can be directly measured as the DOPPLER 
EFFECT causes the spectral lines of one star to first appear 
blueshifted and then redshifted relative to the lines’ 
average position. Masses can be determined directly if 
the orbital inclination can also be found via light 
variations (i.e. eclipsing or ellipsoidal) or by the direct 
resolution of such systems through techniques such as 
speckle imaging or long-baseline interferometry. The 
masses and luminosities determined from the best, well- 
separated binaries are shown in figure 1, and we see that 
the mass-luminosity relationship inferred from such 
systems is in excellent agreement with that predicted by 
modern stellar interior models. 

Missing from the figure are any high-mass stars; 
many of these systems are in physical contact or are 
sufficiently close to have undergone some mass transfer. 
Searches for high-mass spectroscopic binaries whose 
components are cleanly detached are continuing. 

For visual binaries, masses can be determined if the 
period is short enough to be observed and the distance to 
the system is known. However, the distance needs to be 
known to high accuracy for the method to yield useful 
results: a 7% error in the parallax of the system leads to a 
20% accuracy in the masses. There are only 14 systems 
for which good radial-velocity orbits and parallaxes are 
known, and we include these data in figure 1. New 
parallax determinations with the HIPPARCOS satellite will 
provide improved data on many more systems. Since the 
orbital periods of these visual binaries are tens or even 
hundreds of years, reliable measurements over a 
substantial time period are needed for orbit 
determinations. High-resolution imaging studies with the 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE or new _ ground-based 
techniques are providing important new fundamental data 
on such systems. 


Stellar models 

If the effective temperature and luminosity of a star are 
known (from spectroscopic observations of a star whose 
distance is known, either from parallax or from 
membership in a cluster with a known distance), then 
stellar interior models can be used to approximate the 
star’s mass. This method is the basis for most of the 
masses inferred in determining the initial mass function 
(discussed in the next section). 

It is also possible to estimate a star’s mass from 
STELLAR ATMOSPHERE models. Again, spectroscopy is 
needed of a star with known distance. By fitting the 
stellar lines and comparison to model atmospheres, it is 
possible to determine the effective temperature T.¢¢ and 
surface gravity g. Since the star’s luminosity L is also 
known, it is possible to determine the stellar radius R 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


since L ~ R°T.'. The mass of the star can then be found 
since g ~ M/R’. 

For the most massive stars, there appears to be a 
significant ‘mass discrepancy’ between the masses 
derived from stellar atmosphere and stellar interior 
models, stellar atmospheres predicting masses which are 
systematically smaller. The reason for this discrepancy is 
unknown at present, but is largest for the most luminous, 
massive supergiants, for which there may be factors of 2 
differences between the two methods. Attempts to 
resolve this discrepancy by means of spectroscopic 
binaries have been frustrated by the same lack of 
identified high mass ‘detached’ systems described above. 


Distribution of stellar masses 
If we were to count stars as a function of mass in the 
solar neighborhood, we would find that there were far 
more low-mass stars than high-mass stars. The reasons 
for this are basically two-fold. Low-mass stars live much 
longer than do high-mass stars, and so have accumulated 
over most of the life of the Galaxy, while high-mass stars 
quickly consume their fuel and die. The second reason, 
however, is that in a typical star-forming event many 
more low-mass stars are formed than are high-mass ones. 
Knowing the distribution of stellar masses that is 
obtained when stars form from clouds of gas and dust in 
Space is important for two reasons. First, because the 
light observed from star clusters and galaxies is 
dominated by a few of the brightest stars (the tip), it is 
important to know how many low-mass stars are 
associated with the iceberg as a whole. Indeed, in a 
stellar system such as our own Milky Way galaxy, most 
of the observed luminosity comes from stars greater than 
10Mo, while most of the mass is locked up in stars with 


masses below 1Mo. Secondly, the distribution of stellar 
masses at birth (the initial mass function (IMF)) provides 
clues to the processes of stellar formation. Changes in the 
shape of this distribution function with mass provide 
evidence for the critical scales associated with the star 
formation process. 

In general the IMF can be thought of simply as a 
probability function o(), representing the likelihood of 
forming a star with a mass between M and M + dM. In 
1955 SALPETER found that the IMF of stars near the Sun 
was well represented as a power law, with o(M) ~M~?*. 
Modern estimates from studies of OB associations in the 
Milky Way and LMC suggest that for stars of mass 
greater than 5Mo the IMF is indeed very similar to 
Salpeter’s result, with an exponent of —2.3+0.3 obtaining 
regardless of cluster density or metallicity (figure 2). 

For intermediate- and low-mass stars, studies of the 
IMF have traditionally been done using volume-limited 
samples of stars found in neighborhood of the Sun. Using 
a variety of techniques (photometric, spectroscopic and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Masses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| 
@ 
tn 


| 
re) 


Initial Mass Function Exponent » 
\ to 
a in 


| 
a 
an 


Ff, rm Ce Ce a EM er EE 


Milky Way 


i a | 


Figure 2. The universality of the IMF for high-mass stars is demonstrated in this figure showing the IMF exponent y (where the 
distribution function (/) ~ M") for massive stars in the OB associations of the SMC, LMC and Milky Way. The dashed line is for a 
Salpeter exponent of —2.35. The metallicities change by a factor of 4 between these three systems. 


parallactic) a luminosity function can be constructed 
for an unbiased sample of stars. Adopting a mass— 
luminosity relationship appropriate for the sample in 
question then allows one to transform the luminosity 
function into a mass function. In practice, one must 
take into account the metallicity and evolutionary state 
of the sample, as well as correct for the relative life- 
times. The derived IMFs will also depend on what 
assumptions have been made about the star-formation 
of the region, with increased dependence at lower 
masses, where the star-formation history over the 
entire life of the galaxy is relevant. Such studies now 
suggest that the power law may be somewhat less steep 
for (1-5)Mo stars than for stars of higher mass. For 
stars of even lower mass, studies are hampered by the 
additional uncertainty of the mass—luminosity 
relationship for very cool objects. Most work is 
consistent with o(M) ~ M'°*°° over the range (0.1- 
1)Mo. There is disagreement, however, as to whether 
or not the number of low-mass stars that are formed 
continues to rise to lower and lower masses, or 
whether the relationship flattens out or even turns over 
somewhere near the low-mass end of this range. 
Another technique that has been exploited in 
determining the IMF is the use of star clusters in which 
all stars appear to have roughly the same age. By using 
such coeval groups of stars, problems inherent in 
correcting for star-forming histories are eliminated, 
although other concerns (such as dynamical evolution) 
need to be addressed. Studies of GLOBULAR CLUSTERS 
with ages greater than 1 Gyr derive IMFs consistent 
with the field down to a limiting masses of (0.2- 
0.3)Mo. GALACTIC OPEN CLUSTERS with ages 30-500 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Myr, perhaps the best place to constrain the IMF near 
1Mo, confirm that the IMF is less steep than at masses 


greater than 5Mo. Recent studies of nearby young open 
clusters such as the Pleiades and a Per have begun to 
probe the IMF down below the hydrogen-burning 
limit. Finally, by studying clusters still embedded in 
the molecular cloud cores from which stars form, we 
can attempt to relate different outcomes of the star- 
forming process to the initial conditions of formation. 
Thus far, IMFs derived from a wide variety of stellar 
populations in the Milky Way and local group galaxies 
are consistent with having been drawn from the same 
distribution as stars found in the neighborhood of the 
Sun. However, these comparisons are still in their 
infancy: there could be significant, more subtle 
variations present in the IMF that have gone 
undetected. 

We have not yet touched at all upon the physical 
causes of the IMF: when an interstellar cloud of dust 
and gas collapses, what processes dominate and result 
in the distribution of masses we would observe at some 
future time? One might naively expect that the 
dominant physics could be readily deduced from the 
observed IMF, but this turns out not to be the case, 
primarily because the IMF appears to be so featureless. 
Instead, the observed IMF can only be used to 
constrain star-formation theories at present. Power-law 
distributions may result from a variety of different 
scenarios, including so-called ‘fragmentation’ theories. 
The earliest of these was proposed in 1953 when 
HOYLE suggested that the Jeans mass (the minimum 
mass needed for gravitational collapse) could result in 
a hierarchical distribution of masses. The Jeans mass 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Masses 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


depends on both temperature and density, and as a 
cloud collapses the density will increase, while 
radiation from newly formed stars controls the gas 
temperature. However, it is not clear whether this 
elegant model would apply in a real molecular cloud. 
Alternatively, the agglomeration of protostellar clumps 
has been suggested as a way to produce a power law. 
Yet another theory involves feedback from the 
formation process itself: ignition of a powerful outflow 
from the protostar might halt further accretion once a 
characteristic mass has been reached. The resulting 
distribution of stellar masses would then depend on the 
ranges of initial values of a variety of physical 
parameters. A crucial component in evaluating current 
theories of star formation is whether or not the IMF is 
‘scale free’ (such would be the case if it were well 
described by a single power law), or whether there is a 
characteristic mass scale, as is suggested by current 
observational evidence that the IMF begins to flatten 


out around 1Mo. Solid observational knowledge of the 
shape of the IMF at even lower masses, and under 
differing physical conditions, is a prerequisite to 
understanding star formation. 


Bibliography 

The following is a list of interesting papers organized in the 
same order as the topics discussed in this article.</p> <p> In 
terms of understanding the physics of stars, and how other 
stellar parameters depend upon stellar masses, we can do no 
better than to recommend the following three classics: 


Cox J P and Giuli R T 1968 Principles of Stellar Structure 
(New York: Gordon and Breach) 

Hansen C J and Kawaler S D 1994 Stellar Interiors (New 
York: Springer) 

Schwarzschild M 1958 Structure and Evolution of the Stars 
(New York: Dover) 


The realization of these principles can be best seen in actual 
stellar evolutionary tracks. The dependence of physical 
parameters on stellar masses used in this article was 
computed using the evolutionary interior models of Andre 
Maeder’s group in Geneva; these models do an excellent job 
of matching observations and are well described in the 
literature. The most recent version of these models can be 
found in the following two papers: 


Schaller G, Schaerer D, Meynet G and Maeder A 1992 New 
grids of stellar models from 0.8 to 120 solar masses at Z 
= 0.020 and Z = 0.001 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 96 
269-331 

Schaerer D, Meynet G, Maeder A and Schaller G 1993 Grids 
of stellar models. I—from 0.8 to 120 solar masses at Z 
= 0.008 Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. 98 523-7 


As for the range of stellar masses, the best discussion for the 
lowest mass stars can be found in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Burrows A, Hubbard W B, Saumon D and Lunine J I 1993 
An expanded set of brown dwarf and very low mass star 
models Astrophys. J. 406 158-71 


For a modern discussion of the importance of the pulsational 
instability that may exist for the highest mass stars, we 
recommend the following: 


Appenzeller I 1987 Theory of vibrational instabilities in 
luminous early type stars Instabilities in Luminous 
Early Type Stars ed H J G LM Lamers and C W H 
Loore (Dordrecht: Reidel) pp 68-72 


The exciting discovery of the highest-mass stars may be of 
interest to some readers: 


Massey P and Hunter D A 1998 Star formation in R136: a 
cluster of O3 stars revealed by Hubble Space Telescope 
spectroscopy Astrophys. J. 493 180-94 


An excellent review of the empirical determination of stellar 
masses in binary systems is given by 


Popper D M 1980 Stellar masses Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 18 115-64 


The first reconsideration of visual binaries based on 
Hipparcos results is given by 


Soderhjelm S 1999 Visual binary orbits and masses post 
Hipparcos Astron. Astrophys. 341 121-40 


A discussion of the ‘mass discrepancy’ for massive stars can 
be found in: 


Burkholder V, Massey P and Morrell N 1997 The ‘mass 
discrepancy’ for massive stars: tests of models using 
spectroscopic binaries Astrophys. J. 490 328-42 


As for the distribution of stellar masses, we recommend 


Kroupa P, Tout C A and Gilmore G 1993 The distribution of 
low-mass stars in the Galactic disc Mon. Not. R. Astron. 
Soc. 262 545-87 

Meyer M R, Adams F C, Hillenbrand L A, Carpenter J M 
and Larson R B 2000 The stellar initial mass function: 
constraints from young clusters and_ theoretical 
perspectives Protostars and Planets IV ed V G 
Mannings, A Boss and S Russel (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) in press 

Scalo J M 1986 The stellar initial mass function Fundam. 
Cosm. Phys. 11 1-278 


and, in particular, a recent conference on the IMF: 


Gilmore G and Howell D (ed) 1998 The Initial Mass 
Function (San Francisco, CA: ASP) 


Philip Massey 
Michael R Meyer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Nomenclature 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Nomenclature 


Stars are identified in various ways. Most bright stars 
have proper names which are universally recognized— 
for example, Antares, Rigel, Vega. A more precise 
designation, applicable to many more stars, including 
all those of naked-eye magnitude, consists of a letter or 
number followed by the Latin genitive of the name of the 
constellation in which the star is situated. This is in fact 
a combination of two systems, the Bayer letter and the 
Flamsteed number. 

Bayer letters were introduced by the Bavarian 
lawyer/astronomer Johann Bayer (1572-1625) in his star 
atlas Uranometria of 1603; they consist of a lower-case 
Greek letter followed by the genitive constellation name; 
thus the Bayer letter for Antares is ‘a Scorpii’, for Rigel 
‘B Orionis’ and for Vega ‘a Lyrae’. The Bayer letters were 
allocated approximately in descending order of brightness 
within the constellation, but this does not hold strictly true 
in all cases, as Bayer was influenced by the detail of the 
constellation figure as drawn in his atlas, and also some 
stars have changed in brightness since Bayer’s time. Thus 
Betelgeuse (a Orionis) is in fact less bright than Rigel (8 
Orionis). Clearly the number of stars in a constellation 
allocated Bayer letters is limited to 24, the number of letters 
in the Greek alphabet. 

To overcome this limitation, fainter stars are 
designated by the numbers allocated to almost 3000 stars 
by the first Astronomer Royal, John Flamsteed (1646— 
1719), in his star catalog Historia Coelestis Britannica, which 
was published posthumously in 1725. Flamsteed allocated 
the numbers in order of increasing right ascension, so the 
brightest stars do not necessarily have the lowest numbers. 
Thus the Flamsteed numbers for the three stars mentioned 
above are 21 Scorpii (Antares), 19 Orionis (Rigel) and 30 
Lyrae (Vega), whereas 1 Scorpii, 6 Orionis and 16 Lyrae are 
very much fainter stars. Itis often convenient to abbreviate 
the constellation name. Atits inaugural General Assembly 
in Rome in 1922 the International Astronomical Union 
adopted a list of three-letter abbreviations which has 
remained the standard; thus our three typical bright stars 
are conveniently designated ‘a Sco’, ‘6 Ori’ and ‘a Lyr’. 

The huge numbers of additional faint stars discovered 
since Flamsteed’s time can only be identified by their 
numbers in various catalogs. These may be designations 
from ‘general’ catalogs, such as the Bonner Durchmusterung 
of 1859-62, or The Bright Star Catalog (Yale, 1930; fourth 
revised edition 1982) which uses the same numbers as the 
Harvard Revised Photometry of 1908, therefore known as 
‘HR’ numbers. Some stars have additional designations 
from catalogs compiled for a specific purpose, for example 
The Henry Draper Catalog of Stellar Spectra (Harvard, 1918- 
24) or the General Catalog of Variable Stars (Moscow, 1958; 
fourth edition 1985-90). A single star may thus have many 
designations, depending on the catalogs in which it is 
listed; hence Vega also has the numbers HR 7001 (from 
The Bright Star Catalog), BD + 38°3238 (from the Bonner 
Durchmusterung) and HD 172167 (from The Henry Draper 
Catalog). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Opacity 


The monochromatic opacity, «,, quantifies the property of 
a material to remove energy of frequency v froma radiation 
field. A harmonic average of k,, known as the Rosseland 
mean, kr, is frequently used to simplify the calculation of 
energy transport in stars. The term ‘opacity’ is commonly 
understood to refer to kp. 

Opacity plays an important role in stellar modeling 
because for most stars RADIATION is the primary mechanism 
for transporting energy from the nuclear burning region 
in the core to the surface. Depending on the mass, 
convection and electron thermal conduction can also 
be important modes of stellar energy transport. The 
efficiency of energy transport is related to the temperature 
gradient, which is directly proportional to the mean 
radiative opacity in radiation-dominated regions. When 
the radiative opacity is large, convection can become 
the more efficient energy transport mechanism. Electron 
conductive opacity, the resistance of matter to thermal 
conduction, is inversely proportional to electron thermal 
conductivity. Thermal conduction becomes the dominant 
mode of energy transport at high density and low 
temperature. 

The removal of energy from a beam of photons 
as it passes through matter is governed by spectral 
line absorption (bound—bound), photoelectric absorption 
(bound-free), inverse bremsstrahlung (free-free) and 
photon scattering. Stimulated emission acts as negative 
opacity by creating photons that add to the beam. Photon 
scattering is not true photoabsorption; it acts to reduce the 
photon flux by redirecting photons out of the beam and is 
not subject to stimulated emission. 

The first step in computing the opacity is the 
determination of the equation of state, followed by the 
calculation of the various absorption and scattering cross- 
sections and finally the integration over frequency to 
obtain kg. Therefore, opacity calculations bring together 
several distinct disciplines, such as equation of state, 
atomic physics, spectral line broadening, as well as plasma 
collective behavior. These provide ion abundances, energy 
level values, radiation transition probabilities, spectral 
line profiles and structure factors needed to carry out the 
calculations. Since atoms from different elements absorb 
energy of a given frequency at different rates, itis necessary 
to also know stellar elemental abundances. 

Molecules can form in the atmospheres of cool stars 
(See STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: COOL STARS). The discussion herein 
is concerned with stellar interior opacities and does not 
encompass the molecular regime. The methods for 
calculating molecular opacities follow a somewhat similar 
path. 


History of opacity calculations 

As long ago as 1926 Eddington identified opacity as one 
of two clouds obscuring stellar model calculations, the 
source of stellar energy being the other. At that time 
it was thought that bound-bound absorption was not a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


significant source of opacity. It was 40 yr later that Cox 
and Stewart included spectral lines in opacity calculations. 
This led to opacity increases exceeding a factor of 3 at 
some temperature—density conditions. These enhanced 
opacities greatly improved the quality of stellar models. 
Even so, several properties of stars known to be sensitive 
to opacity resisted explanation. It was another 20 yr before 
Simon speculated that the most likely explanation was 
that the heavy element contribution to opacity was still 
significantly underestimated. Two independent efforts, 
OPAL and OP, recalculated stellar opacities and found 
that an improved treatment of atomic data leads to an 
additional factor of 3 increase in the opacity under some 
conditions. The OPAL work was carried out by Iglesias, 
Rogers and Wilson. The OP work was carried out by 
Seaton and a international group of collaborators. These 
new opacities helped resolve a number of long-standing 
problems in stellar modeling, particularly in regard to 
pulsating stars. Direct laboratory verification of the 
new opacity calculations has only recently started to 
appear. These show good agreement with the most recent 
calculations and large differences with standard opacity 
results used prior to 1985. 


Definition of «, 
The total extinction from a beam of photons as it passes 
through matter is given by 


where 


0S = (1 eH/ATY Sx (PP + Ph + ac) 
J 
is the total photoabsorption, the sum j is over all elements 
in the mixture, x; is the elemental number fraction, x°®, 
«x! and «/', are, respectively, the bound—-bound, bound- 
free and free-free frequency-dependent photoabsorption 
contributions to opacity, «* is the scattering contribution 
and the factor 1 — exp(—hv/kT) accounts for stimulated 
emission. When the density is low enough that the 
material can be considered to be composed of individual 
particles, the photon extinction due to a process p is given 


by 
KP = De NjoP/ 
J 


where N; is the number density of particles of type j and 
o}” is the cross-section for photons of frequency v. Opacity 
has units of inverse length. However, numerical values are 
generally expressed as «,/p in units of cm? g™!. 


Mean opacities 

The radiation transfer equation describes the transport of 
energy by photons and is equivalent to the Boltzmann 
equation in the kinetic theory of particle transport. For 
steady-state conditions it is given by 


OD) eee yee e 
ds 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where /,(s, n) is the radiation intensity at frequency v in 
the direction n as a function of distance s, and j, is the 
emissivity. 

STELLAR INTERIORS are ‘collision dominated’ so that 
the material can be considered to be in thermodynamic 
equilibrium at the local value of temperature and density. 
Also, because of the small temperature gradient, the 
radiation intensity is very close to Planckian, ie. ina 
state of local thermodynamic equilibrium. Consequently, 
Kirchhoff’s law, 

Jv = Ky B,(T) 


applies, where 


B= Cryo iy 


is the Planck function. In addition, conditions change 
slowly over many photon mean-free paths and the 
radiation flow is nearly isotropic, so that the radiation 
transfer equation greatly simplifies. In this limit, known 
as the diffusion approximation, the solution to equation 
(1) as a function of radius, for a non-dispersive medium, 
integrated over frequency is 
4x 1 dB(r, T) 


FQ) =-F Q) 


where F(r) is the total flux, B(r, T) is the integral of B, 


over frequency and 
Bs [ow 
Gs dT 


defines the Rosseland mean opacity. Equation (2) recovers 
the correct asymptotic solution to the transfer equation 
and the correct flux transport. The harmonic average 
in equation (3) emphasizes regions of weak absorption, 
where most of the energy flux is transported. A large value 
of the opacity indicates strong absorption from a beam of 
photons, whereas a small value indicates that the beam 
loses very little energy as it passes through the medium. 
Near the surface of a star conditions change very 
rapidly and the material becomes optically thin. In 
this limit the assumptions leading to the diffusion 
approximation break down and a straight arithmetic 
average of Kars, known as the Planck mean opacity, 


w= f cwntra | [ dvB,(T) 
0 0 


is more suitable. In contrast to kp, strong absorption 
regions provide the major contributions to the Planck 
mean opacity. Note also that scattering is not included 
in the Planck mean. 

The mean opacities greatly simplify solutions of the 
radiation transfer equation, but there are circumstances 
where it is necessary to use «, directly. An example 
is radiatively driven diffusion in which low-abundance 
species are pushed toward the surface by a net radiation 
force in the field of the dominant species. This is thought 
to be the mechanism that causes large overabundances of 
Mn and Hg in the atmospheres of some late B and A stars. 


(3) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Equation of state 


Equation of state plays an important role in opacity 
calculations by providing the initial state occupation 
numbers needed to obtain «, and also by determining the 
set of final states that exist at particular plasma conditions. 
This is a statistical mechanics problem that is complicated 
by the long-ranged Coulomb interaction between the 
particles. Two types of approaches are used to calculate 
the equation of state. One is the ‘chemical picture’ method 
which is based partly on intuitive reasoning, since it 
postulates the effect of the pLAsMA on bound states to avoid 
the divergence of the atomic partition function. Numerous 
procedures have been proposed, but only one of these 
receives much current use. It is based on occupation 
probabilities, w, that separate the statistical weight for 
a particular state into a part that acts as a localized 
few-body (bound) state and a part 1 — w that acts as a 
delocalized (continuum) state. In this approach the bound 
state energies remain those of an isolated particle, but 
bound states are effectively destroyed by the action of the 
surrounding electric microfields when w — 0. This results 
in a convergent bound state partition function. 

The other approach used to calculate the equation of 
state is known as the ‘physical picture’ because the starting 
point is the Coulomb interaction between electrons and 
nuclei. It is based on an activity expansion of the grand 
canonical partition function for a plasma. This approach 
gives directly from theory the plasma effect on bound 
states and convergent atomic partition functions. 


Photoabsorption and scattering processes 


The physical extent of the absorbing atoms and ions in 
the plasma is generally much less than the wavelength 
of the radiation, so that only single-photon absorption 
through the electric-dipole interaction is of practical 
importance in opacity calculations. Electric-quadrupole 
absorption and magnetic-dipole absorption are smaller by 
several orders of magnitude in the same spectral region. 
Absorption of two or more photons at a time is also much 
less likely than single-photon absorption and has been 
shown to be an insignificant source of opacity in stellar 
plasmas. However, two-photon processes are involved in 
the scattering of radiation. During a scattering event an 
electron absorbs a photon of frequency v and immediately 
re-emits another photon of frequency v’ in an arbitrary 
direction, effectively removing energy from the beam. 


Bound-bound absorption 
P; +hv—> Py. 


Bound-bound transitions in atoms and ions are possible 
when the photon frequency is close to hvig = E;— Ej, where 
E; and E; are the initial and final state energies. The cross- 
section for this process is given by 


ape. 


eé 
Sb), 


ig(V) = 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where 


fe 8x07 mvig 
3g;e7h 


a Wi (r) DY, (r) dr 
0 


is the oscillator strength for the i — f transition, 
D=e me Tn 
n 


is the dipole moment summed over all the electrons in P;, 
m is the electron mass, g; is the statistical weight, and W;' 
and W; are the initial and final state wavefunctions. The 
total bound-bound cross-section is obtained by summing 
over all initial and final bound states in the plasma. 

The line shape function, @(v), includes several 
processes. Natural broadening is a consequence of the 
finite lifetime of excited states in the radiation field. It has 
a normalized Lorentzian profile, 


b(v) = 20 Lv — v9)? + TY] 


where IT’ is the damping constant. The wings of the 
Lorentzian fall off as Av? = (v — v)~?, so that the infrared 
wing of the line can be an important source of opacity at 
very low density. However, the low-frequency line profile 
far from line center is expected to fall off as Av* similarly 
to Rayleigh scattering and ad hoc methods are sometimes 
introduced to force this behavior. The thermal velocity 
distribution of the radiating atoms gives rise to a statistical 
Doppler shift of radiation frequencies that has a Gaussian 
distribution whose wings fall off rapidly compared with 
Av’. 

As the density increases, other particles in the vicinity 
of the radiator increasingly affect the line shape. Electrons 
and ions are the primary perturbers when the ionization 
degree exceeds a few per cent, but neutrals can be 
important at low temperature. There is a large literature 
associated with the theory of one- and two-electron atoms 
and ions and accurate line shapes are available for these 
radiators. For hydrogenic ions, where there is degeneracy 
for levels with the same principal quantum number, the 
major source of line broadening is due to the linear Stark 
shift produced by the electric microfield of neighboring 
ions. In the simplest calculations the ions are assumed 
to be quasi-static and randomly distributed, leading to 
the Holtzmark microfield. At high density Coulomb 
interactions affect the microfield distribution. For practical 
calculations, electronic collisions with the radiator can 
be viewed as random fast events compared with the 
lifetime of the radiator and, since the energy transfers 
are small, the line shape can be treated by perturbation 
theory. For helium-like ions the principal quantum 
number degeneracy is removed for deeply bound states, 
so that ion perturbations occur through the quadratic Stark 
effect. Electronic contributions are more important in this 
situation. 

The theory of multielectron atoms and ions is much 
less complete, and simple methods are generally used to 
approximate ¢is. For radiators with more than two bound 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


electrons, electrons are the major contributor to pressure 
broadening and the contribution of ions is generally 
ignored in opacity calculations. The effect of the much 
faster-moving electrons is usually treated in the impact 
approximation which assumes that only one electron at 
a time collides with the radiator, instantaneously cutting 
off its wave train. This approximation also gives a 
Lorentzian line shape. Assuming that the different 
broadening effects are independent, it is possible to 
convolve the Lorentzian for natural broadening with 
the Lorentzian for impact broadening to obtain a new 
Lorentzian whose half-width at half-maximum (HWHM) 
is just the sum of the HWHMs for natural and pressure 
broadening. Convolution of this Lorentzian with a 
Gaussian to account for Doppler broadening then gives 
a composite shape known as a Voigt profile. Recent line 
width measurements of An = 0 transitions in boron and 
carbon ions indicate that the Voigt profiles may provide 
only a rough approximation. Fortunately, stellar opacity 
is not very sensitive to moderate changes in line shapes, 
but this is a source of uncertainty in the calculations. 


Bound-free absorption 
P,+hv > P7 +e. 


Bound-free transitions are possible when hv is greater than 
the ionization potential, /, of a bound electron. The cross- 
section for this process is 

2 

An? 


Sic 


of'(v) = —(I +e) (4) 


i Wi(r)DY,(r) dr 


where the ejected electron has the energy ¢ = hv — I, 
and W,(r) is the scattering wavefunction of the ejected 
electron. The total cross-section for a given frequency 
interval is obtained by summing over all initial and final 
states. Equation (4) assumes that the photoionization edge 
is sharp. However, because of the merging of high-lying 
lines just below the continuum, the edge is broadened. 
Simple procedures, that redistribute the oscillator strength 
in the vicinity of the edge, are generally introduced to 
approximate this type of broadening. 

For complex ions, bound states can overlap in energy 
with the continuum. If the Hamitonian connects a 
bound and a continuum state, the eigenfunction is mixed, 
introducing resonances into the bound-free continuum, 
as was first recognized by Fano. This has not been 
found to have a significant effect on stellar opacity and 
the autoionizing lines are frequently treated as ordinary 
broadened lines. 


Free-free (inverse Bremsstrahlung) absorption 
P+ethv > P+e. 


For free—-free electronic transitions the initial state density 
is also continuous and its distribution is given by Fermi 
statistics. Dipole-allowed transitions can only occur in the 
presence of ions, otherwise energy and momentum cannot 
be simultaneously conserved. The free—free cross-section 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


can be calculated from the dipole acceleration formulation 
in the form 


4 
fEr) e€ 
f(y) = =o Soi maxti, 1) 6; -l§; £1) 


Kode 
2 


V 
_ pled — pes] (5) 


| 
Y lig 


where /; and /; are the angular momenta of the initial 
and final states, |dV/drl|i¢ is the matrix element of the 
radial derivative of the atomic potential for continuum 
states i and f, p(e;) is the occupation probability of the 
initial state, and 1 — p(é;) is the availability of the final 
state. Relativistic corrections to o* can be significant 
when e; > 10 keV. Relativity increases the solar center 
opacity by about 0.2%. The inverse bremsstrahlung cross- 
section is often normalized to the classical Kramers cross- 
section. This ratio is known as the free—free Gaunt factor. 
Inverse electron—electron quadrupole bremsstrahlung can 
also contribute to the opacity at high temperature and low 
density. 


Photon scattering 


ethv > eth’ free electron 


P+hv > P+hv' bound electron (low energy). 


Photons scatter mainly off of the plasma electrons, 
primarily free electrons at high temperature and bound 
electrons at low temperature. Scattering from nuclei 
is much less important. For most stellar applications 
photon scattering can be considered to be coherent (v = 
v’), but non-coherent scattering (v 4 v’) in which the 
incoming and outgoing photon have different v can also 
occur through high-energy Compton scattering from free 
electrons or by Raman scattering in the molecular regime. 

The classical picture for scattering of a photon from a 
bound electron demonstrates the connection between the 
two most important scattering mechanisms; Rayleigh and 
Thomson scattering. The classical scattering cross-section 
(hv < 0.511 MeV) has the form 


4 


os(v) = op ———_ (6) 
“vet (viv)? 
where 
y = eve /2n*mc? (7) 
and ‘ 
82 e 
ee = (—) (8) 


is the Thomson cross-section. Rayleigh scattering occurs 
when v < vi, so that og « v*. In the other extreme 
(v > vi), where the energy of the incoming photon 
is so high that the scattering electron acts nearly as a 
free particle, og approaches the Thomson free electron 
cross-section. Thomson scattering is low-energy Compton 
scattering. When the energy of the scattered photon is in 


the keV range, as occurs in high-temperature stellar matter, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Configuration LS Intermediate J 


Figure 1. Schematic diagram of possible absorptive transitions 
between the sp and p* configurations in various approximations. 
Configurational (DCA) transition (solid arrow); singlet transition 
(short-dashed arrow); triplet transition (short-long-dashed 
arrow); intercombination transition (long-dashed arrow). J is 
the total angular momentum of the state. 


relativistic effects modify the Compton cross-section and 
pair production can occur. Sampson expressed these 
corrections for the total scattering cross-section in the form 
of the multiplicative factor (Nec /ne)G(u, T'), where Meet 
is the total number of electrons and positrons, ne is the 
number of electrons, u = hv/kT and T’ = kT/mc?. 
Additional corrections are required if the electrons are 
degenerate. 


Atomic data 

Several possible levels of detail in the atomic data needed 
to calculate the energy levels and oscillator strengths are 
illustrated in figure 1. The example is for transitions 
that connect two electrons in an sp configuration to a 
om configuration through a one-electron jump. In the 
simplest case all transitions are assumed to have the same 
energy. Opacity calculations that carry out a sum over 
a large number of configurations in this approximation 
are referred to as detailed configuration accounting (DCA) 
methods. This was the method used in the earliest bound— 
bound calculations. However, the DCA approach neglects 
non-spherical interactions that remove the degeneracy and 
lead to configuration term structure. In light elements the 
dominant non-spherical term is the Coulomb interaction 
between the electrons, which leads to pure LS coupling. 
In LS coupling the single spectral line of the DCA method 
in figure 1 is split into three distinct lines corresponding 
to a triplet and two singlet terms. With heavier elements, 
such as those in the iron group, the interaction between 
the electron spin and the magnetic field resulting from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the electron orbital motion is no longer negligible and 
requires coupling of the LS angular momentum states, 
knownas intermediate coupling. Inintermediate coupling 
the three lines of the LS coupling scheme split into eight 
lines having no net total spin change, AS = 0, and 
six intercombination lines having AS = +1. For more 
complicated configurations the increase in the number of 
spectral lines is more dramatic. For heavy elements this 
results in an enormous array of spectral lines that can be 
treated by statistical methods when the density is high 
enough that these features merge into a quasi-continuum. 

The most accurate atomic data are obtained from rel- 
ativistic self-consistent field methods such as multiconfig- 
uration Dirac—Fock, but this is very computer intensive 
when data for millions of transitions are required. The 
most extensive multiconfiguration atomic data tables have 
been produced by the Opacity Project using the close- 
coupling method. These calculations are mostly non- 
relativistic. 

Fortunately, the important thing for opacity calcula- 
tions is the distribution of oscillator strength. The exact 
location of lines is only of secondary importance. Conse- 
quently single-configuration calculations are usually used. 
Parameterized potentials have proven to work well for 
generating the vast amount of data required with accu- 
racy similar to single-configuration Hartree-Fock. 


The effect of elemental composition on stellar 
properties 

Stars are composed mainly of hydrogen and helium 
whose frequency-dependent absorption spectrum is 
characterized by strong lines separated by regions of weak 
absorption. Because low-abundance heavy ions have 
a more complex absorption spectrum, they contribute 
disproportionately to xr by filling in regions of low 
absorption in the H—He spectrum. 

The total mass of all elements heavier than helium 
generally constitutes less than 2% of the mass of a 
star (see STELLAR MASSES). This percentage is known as 
its ‘metallicity’. Even so, low-abundance elements 
such as nickel can significantly affect the opacity when 
the temperature is in the range where the M shell is 
partially filled. Because type I stars like the Sun are 
not old enough that significant burning of elements 
heavier than helium has occurred, it is normally assumed 
that these abundances pertain throughout the entire 
star. Consequently, for most purposes, it is possible to 
characterize stellar mixtures with just the three variables 
X,Y and Z, where X is the hydrogen mass fraction, Y is 
the helium mass fraction and Z is the heavy element mass 
fraction, i.e. the metallicity. Within this constraint Z can 
vary, but the abundances of heavy elements relative to each 
other are fixed. Even without nuclear burning, however, 
these relative values can vary throughout the star owing 
to diffusion. 

Figure 2 compares the monochromatic opacity for 
a hydrogen-helium mixture with a typical type I stellar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of 2 
= , 
2 | 
e1 4 
on J 
i) q 
a : 
Z=0.00 | 
-1 Behe a ie i Si : 
0 5 10 15 20 


u=hv/kT 


Figure 2. Log x, versus u = hv/kT for T = 316000 K and 
p=1x10° gem. Results are shown for Z = 0 and Z = 0.02 
with X = 0.7 and Y = 1 — X — Z. The heavy element 
calculations were carried out in intermediate coupling. 


composition having Z = 0.02. The assumed temperature— 
density conditions are found in the pulsational driving 
region of Cepheid variables. The small heavy element 
admixture dramatically increases the absorption for u > 3, 
corresponding to photon energies above 80 eV; this results 
primarily from transitions originating in the M shells of 
multiply ionized ions of iron. As a result, even though 
hydrogen and helium are the most abundant species they 
are not the main contributors to the opacity at these plasma 
conditions. They do, nevertheless, play an important role 
by contributing most of the free electrons that determine 
the rate of recombination of the heavier elements. These 
electrons also contribute to electron scattering and free— 
free absorption. 

Figure 3 compares the opacity versus temperature for 
the Sun and a Cepheid variable with a mass 6.5 times 
solar. Because of their mass difference and location on 
the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM these stars follow very 
different temperature—density tracks. The opacity of the 
solar plasma when heavy elements are left out of the 
mixture is also shown. Again heavy elements dominate 
the opacity throughout most of the stellar interior. For 
stars of one solar mass or greater core temperatures can 
exceed 10 million kelvins, so that the plasma is highly 
ionized and even heavy elements such as iron may have 
only a few bound electrons. In this situation the main 
contributors to opacity are bound-free absorption in heavy 
elements, free-free absorption from protons and He nuclei 
and photon scattering from free electrons. For example, 
at the solar center the opacity is 40% bound-free, 30% 
free-free and 30% scattering. In contrast, near the solar 
surface the degree of ionization is very low and, since 
the strongest bound-bound transition energies are large 
compared with kT, atoms make a very small contribution 
to opacity. In this case the opacity of H~, which has a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


3 pi 1 1 . 1 


Log T [K] 


Figure 3. Log xr versus logT for the Sun (solid) and a Cepheid 
variable (dashed). The assumed heavy element content is 

Z = 0.02. For these stellar tracks, X is around 0.7 for 

T <4 x 10° K, but is less at higher temperature due to nuclear 
burning. The upper temperature limit (1.56 x 10” K) 
corresponds to the solar center. Cepheid core temperatures are 
about an order of magnitude greater. Also shown is the opacity 
for the temperature—density conditions along the solar track 
assuming Z = 0 (dot-dashed). 


binding energy of only 0.74 eV, is a major contributor to 
opacity, even though its abundance is generally less than 
10-7. Rayleigh scattering from H and He is also important 
near the surface where all atoms are nearly neutral. In the 
intermediate regions, the opacity is relatively featureless. 
The maximum near T = 40000 K is in the middle of the 
H-He ionization zone and is due mainly to bound—bound 
absorption. 

The Cepheid opacity function in figure 3 is more 
complex than the corresponding solar opacity function, 
displaying two additional local maxima. For the Cepheid 
the H-He maximum separates into a maximum near T = 
10000 K due to H ionization and a maximum near T = 
40000 K due to H-He ionization. The third maximum, 
near T = 200000 K, is due mainly to bound-bound 
transitions occurring in M shell iron. For this reason it 
is known as the ‘Z bump’. The presence of the local 
maximum near T = 40000 K is what drives the pulsational 
instability observed for Cepheids, while the Z bump plays 
a secondary role by affecting the period ratios between the 
fundamental mode and its overtones. The solar opacity 
is much higher at a given temperature because, owing to 
the higher density, the bound states contributing to the 
bound-bound and bound-free opacity are more highly 
occupied. 


Plasma environmental effects 

The opacity cross-sections discussed above assume that 
photon extinction processes occur in isolation and ignore 
the effects due to the surroundings. As the density 
increases these effects can modify the cross-sections but 
are generally small for stellar plasmas. However, for 
some situations, such as the center of the Sun, relatively 
small changes in the opacity affect quantities such as the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1.2 
1.1 


ay 
— 


Se ce 
wm 


TOTTI TTT TTT TT TJ 


= 
N 


Correction factor 


a Not 
ry 


S 
—_ 
S 
—) 
—_ 
i—) 


Figure 4. Plasma dispersion, screening plus ion correlational, 
and degeneracy corrections to inverse bremsstrahlung expressed 
as ratios ger(v)/go(v), where ger is the Gaunt factor including 
one of these effects and go is the Gaunt factor without these 
effects included. Plasma dispersion (solid); screening plus ion 
correlations (short-dashed); degeneracy (long-dashed). The 
location of the plasma frequency is indicated by up. 


neutrino generation rate through small changes in the 
estimated temperature (see also SOLAR INTERIOR: EQUATION OF 
STATE AND OPACITY). Consequently, there has been theoretical 
interest in the effect of collective phenomena on opacity. 
Collective effects due to plasma density oscillations 
become important when the plasma frequency, 


Nee? 
Up = 


Me 


is comparable with the mean photon frequency. 


Dispersion 

In dispersive media the Planck function in equation (3) 
is modified by the factor n? so that the Rosseland mean 
opacity is given by 


1 e 2 dB, oo «dB, 
= / dv” / dv 
KR Vp Ky dT 0 dT 
where n, is the refractive index, which has the approximate 
form (v > vp) 


(9) 


ny = [1— (v/v ]”. 


Collective effects also contribute to x, and should be 
included (see figure 4). 


Multiple scattering from electrons 

When the average photon wavelength is comparable 
with the electron-electron correlation length coherent 
scattering from the electron distribution can occur. When 
v > vp the Thompson cross-section (equation (8)) becomes 


3 l. 
CUS ) dy(1 — w)(1 + uw”) S.(q) 
-1 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Opacity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


q= 5-20 -»)]'” 
JTC 


where yp = cos # and S,(q) is the electron static structure 
factor. Correlated scattering from the electron distribution 
reduces the Thompson cross-section by 27% at the solar 
center. 


Plasma screening and ion correlations 

Plasma screening and ion correlational effects in electron— 
proton bremsstrahlung (equation (5)) can be described 
through the free-free Gaunt factor. In the (non-relativistic) 
Born approximation the Gaunt factor can be expressed in 
the form 


V3 ° dq nn? q mo 
Bcor(@) = exp | ( )] 


l6me* Jo og 2mkT \2 hq 
2 
2 
gvV@) 
x Sp (q) 10 
s(q,@) p\d (10) 


where w = 27v is the angular frequency, V (q) is the Fourier 
transform of the Coulomb potential, 5,(q) is the proton 
static structure factor and ¢(q, w) is the plasma dielectric 
response function. Similar corrections affect other cross- 
sections when the density becomes high enough but are 
not considered in current calculations. In the low-density 
limit S,(q) and e(q, w) > 1, so that equation (10) reduces 
to the usual Coulomb Gaunt factor. 

The effects of plasma dispersion, plasma screening 
plus ion correlations, and electron degeneracy on electron— 
proton inverse bremsstrahlung in the solar center are 
shown in figure 4. Additional dispersion effects appear 
explicitly in the Rosseland integral (equation (6)). The 
magnitude of each effect is normalized to the Gaunt 
factor without these effects included. The corrections are 
small near u = 4 where the largest contributions to the 
Rosseland integral occur. The reductions in xg due to 
plasma dispersion, screening plus ion correlations, and 
electron degeneracy are, respectively, 0.4%, 0.7% and 0.8%. 
Effects of this size are not generally significant, but they are 
large enough to be of interest in helioseismic and neutrino 
flux calculations. 


Bibliography 

Adelman S J and Wiese W L (ed) 1995 Astrophysical 
Applications of Powerful New Databases (ASP Conf. Ser. 
vol 79) 

Alexander D R and Ferguson J W 1994 Low-temperature 
Rosseland opacities Astrophys. J. 437 879-91 

Iglesias C A and Rogers F J 1996 Updated OPAL opacities 
Astrophys. J. 464 943 

Huebner W F 1986 Atomic and radiative processes in 
the solar interior Physics of the Sun vol 1 (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) pp 33-74 

Seaton M 1995 The Opacity Project (Bristol: Institute of 
Physics Publishing) 


Forrest Rogers and Carlos Iglesias 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Photometry 


Photometry is undoubtedly one of the most fundamental 
of all astronomical observations. It is hard to imagine 
any astronomical research of any nature that does not 
use photometric results in some way or another. The 
measurement of brightness and of broad-band spectral 
features in a star or other object’s flux output is at the 
heart of much of what is done in getting the essential 
data needed for our research problems. All astronomers 
do photometry or use the results of someone else’s 
observations. 

Photometry and spectroscopy are very complemen- 
tary, as are photometry and theory. In fact, ‘complemen- 
tarity’ is one of the most operative words relative to ap- 
proaches and to progress in our understanding the uni- 
verse about us. 

However, while basically very simple, photometry is 
very often much misunderstood. To do good research in 
astronomy, it goes without question that we need accurate 
and precise photometry of stars and galaxies. 

What we measure in photometry is really an integral 
of the effect of many things: the flux output of the star 
or other object, including any shells or disks about it (and 
whatever else nature may have put there to confuse us), 
interstellar matter, the Earth’s atmosphere, the telescope, 
the filters, the detectors and other things as well. Most of 
these are changing with time. We are trying to estimate 
something, perhaps the stellar apparent brightness or 
some strong feature in its spectrum. We are trying to avoid 
the adverse impact of other things that may well confuse 
our understanding. The selection of our observing site, our 
telescope, our detector and our filters can all impact upon 
the success of our estimate of the parameter of interest. 
Photometric systems have usually been designed to be 
efficient estimators of what we are trying to understand 
and to avoid the adverse impact of those things that 
are most likely to cause problems. We try to chose the 
photometric ‘system’ that will do the best job. Simple in 
principle, but often difficult in practice. 

Having a good understanding of what is going on is 
critical. There can and often are adverse effects on our 
measurements due to stellar rotation, shape of the star, 
emission, double or multiple stars, line shape, spots, flares, 
shells, disks, the interstellar matter and its uniformity, 
variable stellar or emission background, the faintness of 
our object, atmospheric seeing and variability, clouds, 
filter leaks and cut-off characteristics, temperature effects 
and anything involved, detector changes, and so on. With 
all of this, it seems impossible to think of doing precise 
not to speak of accurate photometry. In addition, there 
are issues such as separation of the observed parameters, 
sensitivity to the feature we are trying to measure, the 
ease of measurement and reduction and analysis, standard 
stars and calibrations, reduction methods, information 
resolution, and so on. How can one manage? It has been 
done, but not as often as one would like, or even as one 
thinks. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Precision and accuracy are key issues in photometry, 
no matter how the photometry is done. This article will 
discuss some of these photometric issues after laying out 
the basics of what astronomical photometry is. 


A few basics 

In astronomy, one is attempting to measure the radiant 
flux (energy per unit time) coming from an astronomical 
object, such as a star or a galaxy, generally as a function 
of wavelength. Such flux measurements can be used in 
many ways. These applications are beyond the scope of 
this article on stellar photometry, but in general one can 
determine the distance to a star, its chemical composition 
and any peculiarities, its age, whether it varies and how 
and many other things. Similar information can be 
obtained about galaxies, and indeed about the interstellar 
matter in the Galaxy, whether the dark absorbing matter 
or the bright emission material in nebula. Essentially all 
methods of determining distance rely on the measure of 
the object’s apparent brightness as we measure it. 

If the radiant energy (in joules) is Q, then the radiant 
flux (in watts), F, is dQ/dt, the radiant flux at a surface is 
dF/dA (in W M7”), the radiant intensity, I, is dF /dw ( 
is the solid angle through which the flux is radiated, the 
unit of J is W sr—!, where sr is steradian), and the radiance, 
E, is dF*/dw dA cos 6, 6 being the angle between the line 
of sight and the normal to the surface considered. Similar 
terms and units exist for light, rather than the total energy 
output, and then the unit of luminous flux is the lumen and 
the luminous flux at a surface is called the illuminance with 
the unit lux. The unit of luminous intensity is the candela 
(cd) and of luminance cd m~?. Astronomical photometry, 
at least in the optical wavelength region, uses its own 
terminology, the magnitude, discussed below. 

One is generally measuring the flux over a range of 
wavelengths so as to get color discrimination or other 
such information rather than total brightness. The Earth’s 
atmosphere limits the range of wavelengths that we can 
observe from the ground from about 320 nm to somewhat 
beyond 1000 nm. 

In astronomy, we measure the brightness in a unit 
called magnitudes. This unit has its origin in antiquity, 
when the naked-eye stars were classified by brightness 
into six groups, called magnitudes. Brightness here means 
the visual sensation obtained by looking at the star. The 
brightest stars were called first magnitude and the faintest 
sixth magnitude. Today we know that the brightest stars 
are somewhat brighter than that and the best eyes can see 
fainter than that, when there is no light pollution (man- 
made sky glow) present. The eye’s response to brightness 
is not linear, but logarithmic. Hence the magnitude scale 
is logarithmic. In 1856, Pogson defined the modern scale 
of magnitudes to be such that the ratio between two 
magnitudes was the fifth root of 100, which is about 2.512. 
This scale fitted well the ancient scale of magnitudes of 
stars that had been used for millennia (see also MAGNITUDE 
SCALES AND PHOTOMETRIC SYSTEMS). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Hence, a source with an observed flux density of F 
has a magnitude defined by m = —2.5log(F/Fo), where 
Fo is a standard flux setting the zero point of the scale. It is 
chosen so as to fit the ancient magnitude scale zero point. 

These magnitudes are called apparent magnitudes, 
for they are what we observe at our telescopes (see below 
for a discussion of other factors involved, however). The 
Sun has an apparent magnitude of —26.7, the full Moon 
of —12.7, Sirius, the brightest star, of —1.5, and the 
approximate faint limit of the largest telescopes or the 
HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE is about +28. 

The intrinsic brightness of the star is called the 
absolute magnitude, M, and M is defined as the brightness 
of the star at a distance of 10 parsecs (the parsec is unit of 
distance in astronomy). M = m — 5log(r/10). We can 
see that if we measure m and can in some way determine 
M (such as from the stellar characteristics we estimate in 
some other way, often from photometric measurements), 
we can determine r, the star’s distance. In fact, m — M = 
5 log(r/10) is called the distance modulus, a logarithmic 
way of expressing distance to the star (or galaxy). The 
distance in these expressions is in parsecs, of course. 

While the use of magnitudes in astronomy is the 
standard (for OPTICAL ASTRONOMY, RADIOASTRONOMY uses 
other more physical units for flux), it has several 
disadvantages. It is a logarithmic scale, and it is not 
directly related to any physical units. Note also that a 
larger value (more positive) of amagnitude means a fainter 
flux. It also has several advantages. The main one is that it 
makes it easy to compare magnitude differences between 
two stars. 

The magnitude difference between two stars is m, — 
m, = —2.5log(Fi/F2). Hence a ratio of 1.001 is a 
magnitude difference of 0.001, 1.01 of 0.010, 2 of 0.75 (a 
double-star system in which both components are of equal 
brightness will look 0.75 magnitudes brighter when both 
components are observed together, for example), 2.512 
of 1.000, 6.3 of 2, 10 of 2.5, 16 of 3, 40 of 4, 100 of 5, 
1000 of 7.5 and so on. Note that a ratio of 10” implies 
a magnitude difference 55, the total range that can be 
observed in astronomy, as noted above. 


Doing photometry 
It is possible to consider photometry as the application of 
the following equation: 


I(Q,t) = cfu —I,)IMATPFDOAX 


where / ((A, f) is the flux we observe and c is a normalizing 
constant; A is wavelength and ¢ is time. The other terms 
are discussed one at a time below. 

I, is the item that we are usually trying to determine, 
the flux from the star (or other object) that we are 
observing. However, sometimes we are just using a star as 
a probe to determine something else, such as atmospheric 
extinction or interstellar reddening values in the direction 
of observation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Most of the terms in the above equation are 
wavelength dependent, vary with time, location in the 
field of view and with other factors such as temperature, 
humidity, telescope position, site location and altitude and 
so forth. Identifying, calibrating and otherwise correcting 
for all these multitude of adverse effects is critical. The 
pitfalls for systematic and accidental errors are huge. 
Errors in any one term can really cause problems. Both 
precision and accuracy require that these effects all be 
understood, calibrated and corrected adequately. That 
takes time and effort, and often such time is not available. 
Without doing the job right, we are lucky to get the ‘right’ 
answer. 

I,(A,t, x, y,...) is the flux emitted by the star we are 
observing. Here x and y are positions on the sky. This flux 
can and does include the continuous and line emission 
and absorption lines, bands, breaks, the effects of any 
circumstellar material, the effects of duplicity (if any), 
including the interstellar material around and between 
the stars, and any and all other effects giving rise to flux 
originating at or in the vicinity of the star or other object. 
The star’s image is not a point source, and adverse effects 
can arise from not allowing correctly for the point spread 
function, including the wings of the image. The image 
may also be contaminated by adjacent stars, duplicity, or 
in a crowded field. 

I,(A,t,x,y,...) is the sky background, for which 
corrections to our observed J, must be made before we 
have the ‘pure’ /, value. There are many ways to do 
this, for both photomultiplier and for CCD photometry. 
Suffice to say here that this correction process is one that 
can lead to lack of precision and accuracy. In addition 
to the ‘process’ itself, we have the problems of variable 
background (coming from a variable background in space, 
due to emission regions, absorption regions, crowding 
of stars in the field, etc) and from effects arising in the 
telescope (vignetting, etc), from variable sensitivity over 
the detector, from variable transmission in the filters, etc. 
For fainter stars, the sky background can even dominate 
the signal, and that too leads to a decrease in precision and 
accuracy. 

IM(A, x, y,...) is the impact of interstellar absorption 
(or interstellar reddening, as the absorption is wavelength 
dependent). Such absorption is likely to present in most 
observations and must be taken into account. If the 
reddening law varies in different regions of the sky, as 
it undoubtedly does, and if the derived corrections for 
this effect are not well handled, then errors creep in easily. 
Systematic effects are quite likely to arise. 

A(A, t,x, y, HA, DEC, ...) is the effect of atmospheric 
extinction, also wavelength dependent. HA is the hour 
angle and DEC the declination of the observation. Clearly, 
the effect is also time dependent, over many time-scales. 
Its determination is not always straightforward. Stebbins 
is quoted as saying that to determine extinction well, you 
must spend all your observing time leaving nothing for 
your program. Probably true. Besides the effects of 
air mass differences, there are temperature and humidity 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


impacts, inversion level altitude, east-west and north— 
south effects (and towards—away from a city or mine or 
whatever), jet trails, light clouds, heavy clouds and so on, 
all of which change on varying time schedules. 

T(A,t,x,y,...) reflects the various things that the 
telescope and its optics can do to you, including the time 
and wavelength dependence of the reflective coatings on 
the optics. There are other effects as well, such as incorrect 
baffling, vignetting, ghost images, dust, and so on. 

P(A,t,x,y,...) are any effects produced by the 
photometer and its elements, optical or otherwise. 

F(A, t,x, y,...) is the impact of the filter (or other 
wavelength discriminator) on the throughput. It is 
our choice of FILTERS (or spectrometer) that gives us our 
information resolution. The careful choice of filters is 
critical to success, for many reasons. However, as in 
so many other items noted here, filters are wavelength 
dependent in themselves, and that dependence changes 
with time, temperature, humidity, dust coverage and other 
perverse reasons. One must be aware of all of this, and 
allow for it if necessary. It is necessary. The detailed 
transmission curve of the filters must be known, and 
allowed for. Central wavelength, shape, bandwidth, tails, 
are all important items. 

D(A, t,x, y,...) isthe impact of the detector. Problems 
also can and do exist with photomultiplier, CCD, and other 
types of photometry. 

O(A, t,x, y,...) is the impact of ‘all other’. There are 
always some of these. Identifying and allowing for them is 
the key. Here we might well include any effects produced 
by differing reduction procedures. 


Problems in doing photometry 
With all these potential and real problems, it is a wonder 
that one can do photometry at all. The pitfalls are so 
many. The time needed to investigate all of them is 
necessarily large, and not often available. Factors change 
with time as well, often on a rather fast time schedule, or 
discontinuously. Is there no hope? Probably there is. After 
all, good photometry has been done. But there is no way 
it can occur without careful attention to all the details, not 
just to getting the data and using a neat reduction package 
(See SOFTWARE: STELLAR PHOTOMETRY). There is a lot more to it. 
A real understanding of what is going on is difficult 
or impossible. It is critical to understand and allow for all 
the issues involved. 


Standard photometric systems 
It is hard to imagine doing much in astronomy without 
a measure of brightness or color or other photometric 
parameters. To be able to do effective research programs, 
it is essential to be able to compare the photometric data 
used with other such data. Hence, we all use standard 
photometric systems, such as U BV, or uvbyB, or Geneva, 
or Vilnius standard systems. 

The section above discussed the factors involved in 
1(A, t). Aphotometric system is one that uses these factors, 
particularly the term F (filter), to define one or more 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


wavelength regions to measure. These are chosen to give 
the observer a number of parameters that can be related 
to stellar (or other) characteristics, such as brightness in a 
limited wavelength range, ‘color’, chemical composition, 
temperature, effects of the intervening interstellar material 
on the star’s flux, and so on. Quite a number of such 
photometric systems have been defined and used over the 
years. Only a few will be mentioned here. 


Visual magnitude 

The magnitude as ‘measured’ or seen by the eye. The 
eye has a certain spectral sensitivity, and that defines the 
wavelength region of the magnitude system. Since eyes 
vary, from individual to individual and with time, and 
indeed even with the level of incoming flux, this is not 
a precisely defined system. But it has been and still is a 
most useful one. It is how bright we see the stars. It has 
also been defined in a more precise way, using filters and 
detectors other than the eye, and in a way so as to match 
the estimates that have been made by observers using only 
the eye (often supplemented by a telescope). 


Photographic magnitude 

With the advent of photographic plates, there of 
course came definitions of a photographic magnitude, 
brightnesses as measured with a photographic plate. Even 
more than with the eye, photographic emulsions vary in 
wavelength sensitivity, so accuracy often suffered. Most 
emulsions were more blue sensitive than the eye, so 
the combination of the two magnitudes could give a 
measure of ‘color’, the ratio of brightnesses at two different 
wavelengths. 


UBV system 

The advent of electronic detectors revolutionized photom- 
etry. They allowed much more precise photometry, and 
with much greater sensitivity than the eye or photographic 
plates. The wavelength sensitivity also became better, and 
we now have magnitude systems ranging from the ultra- 
violet (indeed, even for shorter wavelengths, as observed 
from above the Earth’s atmosphere) to the far infrared. The 
initial systems were patterned after the visual and photo- 
graphic ones, but later ones broadened the range, adding 
more filters and more wavelengths (see also DETECTORS: PHO- 
TOGRAPHY). There were many, but the most used one came 
into widespread use soon after the introduction of the pho- 
tomultiplier tube. It uses three bandpasses, one matching 
the visual magnitudes, one in the blue roughly matching 
the old photographic magnitude and an additional one in 
the ultraviolet. They are called, naturally, V, Band U, and 
the system is the U BV system. 

It is a natural system in two ways. Firstly, the band 
passes fill the region of sensitivity of the photomultiplier 
tubes used, from about 320 nm to 600 nm, dividing this 
region into three magnitudes, the U, B and V. Each 
bandpass is about 100 nm wide. Second, these bandpasses 
offer a great deal of information about the star’s (or other 
object’s) flux output. V gives a visual magnitude that 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tells us the star’s apparent magnitude. B gives another 
band and the two define a ‘color index’, B-V, that can 
be used to estimate the star’s temperature (and other 
things sometimes), U and B also give a color index, U- 
B, that offer another parameter useful to estimate stellar 
characteristics, such as chemical composition, interstellar 
reddening, and absolute magnitude. We have three 
parameters that can be used for our research, V, B-V 
and U-B. Naturally, it is difficult to estimate more than 
three stellar characteristics with only three parameters, but 
sometime it can be done. All such applications are beyond 
the scope of this article. The point to be remembered here 
is well sketched out above, in the discussions of pitfalls. 
In later years, with the advent of detectors sensitive in 
the red region of the spectrum, additional wide-bandpass 
magnitude systems were developed to supplement the 
UBV system, in particular R and J magnitudes, for red 
and infrared regions. 


uvby system, or Stromgren system 

A natural extension of the UBV system was to fill the 
region of sensitivity of the photomultiplier tube with 
four band passes instead of the three of the UBV 
system. Str6mgren proposed such a system and it has 
had widespread usage. It offers additional ‘information 
resolution’, and overcomes several of the observational 
problems of the U BV and other such wide-band systems. 
It is an intermediate bandpass system, with each filter 
being about 20 to 30 nm wide. The y magnitude can be 
related very well to the V magnitude. The color index 
b — y gives a measure of temperature. One defines two 
‘color differences’. The first, m; = (v — b) — (b — y), gives 
an estimate of the ‘blanketing’ due to metallic absorption 
lines in the region of the v band. The second, c) = 
(u—v)—(v—b), gives a measure of the increased absorption 
in the ultraviolet, due in most stars to the continuous 
absorption of the hydrogen. This can be related to absolute 
magnitude in some stars, and to other characteristics as 
well. With four parameters, one can usually do a better 
job of estimating key characteristics of the star’s energy 
output. Again, it is beyond the scope of this article 
to discuss how to use these photometric parameters for 
research. Sufficient to say that they are widely used, 
and are one of the main keys to our understanding of 
stellar structure and evolution, and to the geography of 
our galaxy and of the universe. 


Narrow band systems 

It is possible to develop additional systems, of any band 
width. Narrow band systems can be used to estimate 
the strengths of absorption or emission lines or of other 
features in the spectrum. One, for example, measures the 
strength of the hydrogen Hf line, a parameter related to 
temperature in some stars and to absolute magnitude in 
others. It gives another parameter to supplement either 
the UBV system or the wvby system. Many other such 
standard systems have been developed, and a few are 
widely used. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Systems with CCD detectors 

The recent advent of CCD (CHARGE COUPLED DEVICE) detectors 
has been a big jump forward. Their efficiency is very 
good, and they are areal detectors as opposed to the 
single-element photomultiplier. Hence, one can work 
fainter for a given precision, and do it over a area not 
just for a single object. They combine the best of the 
photographic plate and the photomultiplier. They have 
many advantages therefore, but also some disadvantages. 
They are much more sensitive than either the photographic 
plate or the photomultiplier tube. One can save the 
electronic image for later processing. They respond to 
light linearly, like the photomultiplier tube. They have 
relatively low background noise. But the cost is high, of 
both hardware and analysis tools. The field size is smaller 
than the photographic plate (though increasing, especially 
through the use of mosaic detector arrays (but at high 
cost)), and processing and analysing the images is very 
time complex and time consuming. As in all photometry, 
great care must be taken to ensure precision and accuracy. 


Bolometric magnitude and absolute intensity measurement 
Two other types of photometric systems should be 
mentioned. The first is the bolometric magnitude. This is 
the magnitude measured over all wavelengths. It cannot 
be measured directly, due to the absorption in the Earth’s 
atmosphere and due to the difficulty of having a detector 
with such a range of sensitivity. Its value is that it is an 
estimate of the total flux output of a star. The second 
is the measurement of absolute intensities, rather than 
relative or differential intensities. Clearly, all the systems 
discussed above are differential, relative to some standard 
stars or zero point. It is of value to measure also, though 
very difficult, the absolute intensity in physical units. 
With such a measurement for a few well chosen stars, 
the other systems can then be put on an absolute scale. 
Such a transformation is essential for comparisons with 
theoretical calculations of stellar flux, for example. 


Standard stars 

Itis not always clear to the user how such standard systems 
have been defined or are to be matched, or even how 
they are to be used. Is it by the careful choice of filters 
and detector that match the system? Perhaps, but that 
can be very difficult if not impossible. We don’t use the 
detectors that were used to establish the system originally, 
for example. Is it by careful choice and observation of a 
subset of the standard stars that were used to help establish 
the system? Sometimes, but sometimes not. Sometimes 
not for a good reason: they are all too bright for our current 
telescope and detector system, or there are no standards of 
the stellar type we need. Sometimes not for a bad reason: 
not everyone has the concept of interpolation well in mind, 
or we don’t have the time to do an adequate job. 

In some sense, viable photometric systems are rather 
like the MK spectral classification system: they depend 
a great deal on the usage of standard stars. We can 
(and should) do the best we can in the choice of spectral 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Photometry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


wavelengths and bandwidths for the filters and in our 
choice of detectors and reduction procedures, but the final 
quality and value of the system will depend a lot on the 
quality of the standard stars used to help define the system 
and on the choice of standards used for any observing 
program with the system. Such standards must span 
the range of stellar types that will be observed with the 
system and on the specific observing program. Naturally, 
the standards must be observed and tabulated with high 
precision and high accuracy. Many examples exist in 
the literature of problems that arise when these obvious 
guidelines are not followed. Considerable effort should 
be made by all photometrists to ensure that an adequate 
set of standard stars exist for the most used standard 
photometric systems. 

One must select an adequate number of standards 
of the needed characteristics to ensure a good job of 
interpolation in all phases of the observation and reduction 
process. This may not be easy to accomplish, especially if 
we are observing either a wide range of ‘unknowns’ or 
types of objects for which few if any standards exist. In 
the first case, a rule may be ‘the more the better’. In the 
second case, one may have to try to develop substandards 
of the type of characteristics needed. 

In the observing itself, one must observe so as to 
interpolate. This means that one must be observing 
standards at somewhat higher air masses (and lower) than 
any of the unknowns. One must start and end the night 
with standards, and intermingle them throughout the 
night. Particularly on ‘all sky’ programs, it is helpful if one 
can randomize the intermixing of standards of different 
characteristics, so that no pattern is built in that may later 
cause systematic problems. 

Careful and adequate time spent planning the 
observing program is essential, and will always pay 
off in increased accuracy. So will adequate time spent 
observing standard stars, even in the face of time pressures 
(not enough nights assigned to the program, equipment 
problems, clouds, and learning curve time). Good 
equipment (stable and well understood) is essential as 
well. And a most valuable asset is a quality observing 
site. 

Here are some of the problems facing us in the future: 


(a) Getting adequate observing time to do our programs, 
and to observe standards (and other calibrations). 
The excitement of the field and the increasing number 
of astronomers (in spite of the funding problems 
we all face) coupled with the fact that some of the 
telescopes useful for photometry are actually being 
closed down means that the pressures on time will 
only increase. 

(b) Hence, the time available to investigate standard 
systems and to continue our efforts to establish 
more standards (especially ones of additional 
characteristics, including fainter ones of all types) will 
be sadly lacking. 

(c) Equipment is getting more powerful but more 
complicated. We are getting separated even further 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from the sky than we have been in the past. It 
will be harder to understand the content and the 
performance of our black boxes, both hardware and 
software ones. 

(d) The drive to work fainter and to observe strange 
and wonderful objects means that the extrapolation 
aspects of photometry may be more in evidence than 
good astronomy requires. Even photometrists get off 
the track; imagine what others will be doing. 


The future 
What about the future? If all goes well, and it seldom does, 
we might see: 


(a) New technology, detectors and instrumentation, new 
telescopes, including new generation small ones, an 
essential component in a balanced funding approach 
to astronomy. We need it all, and we will be getting 
some of it without question. 

(b) Better understanding of photometry and photometric 
systems. 

(c) More and better data. And adequate archiving of the 
data. 

(d) More and better standard stars. More tie-ins. 

(e) A wider range of standard stars, in character and 
faintness. 

(f) Better astronomy, better science. Precise and accurate 
photometry is fundamental to it all. 


Summary 

Photometry has always been of the highest value in 
astronomical research. It always will be. Such photometry 
must be of high precision and accuracy. The key is to 
understand the basic principles of photometry, and of 
the potential pitfalls involved. The existence of well 
chosen standard systems and standard stars, both for their 
applicability to the research job and for their intrinsic 
merit, is one of the most powerful tools to ensure that 
reality. 


Bibliography 

Budding E 1993 Introduction to Astronomical Photometry 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Craine E R, Tucker R A and Barnes J 1999 CCD Precision 
Photometry Workshop, Astronomical Society of the Pacific 
Series Vol 189 (San Francisco) 

Crawford D L 1988 Photometry: a new and important 
technique Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 100 887 

Golay M 1975 Introduction to Astronomical Photometry 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Howell S 1992 Astronomical CCD Observing and Reduction 
Techniques, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Vol 23 (San 
Francisco) 

Johnson H L and Morgan W W 1953 Astrophys. J. 117 313 

Sterken C and Manfroid J 1992 Astronomical Photometry 
(Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Straizys V 1991 Multicolor Stellar Photometry (Tucson, AZ: 
Pachart) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Photometry ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Strémgren B 1966 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 4 433 


David L Crawford 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 6 


Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Populations 


A stellar population is a set of stars of the same age and 
chemical composition. Born together at some point in the 
Galaxy, stars of the same stellar population will share the 
same kinematic properties in the Galaxy, whether those be 
their circular velocity with respect to the Galactic center or 
their random velocity in the Galactic halo. 

Examples of such simple stellar populations are the 
stars of the oRION population (Herbig and Rao 1972) 
(figure 1), the nearby os AssociaTIONs (de Zeeuw et al 1999) 
and the GLOBULAR CLUSTER 47 Tuc (figure 2). We can collect 
all the simple stellar populations of roughly the Sun’s 
age and call them the old disk population (Eggen et al 
1974), or all the simple stellar populations of the central 
predominantly old regions of the Galaxy and refer to them 
as the bulge population or the more diffuse collection 
of high velocity stars in random motion in the Galaxy’s 
potential and refer to them as the halo population. Itis easy 
to see that a stellar population is a very broad collective 
term for a sample of stars with what can be, but need not 
be, well-defined statistical kinematic, age and chemical 
composition properties. 

The linkages between old stellar populations were 
originally made by Baade (1944). The prior history of 
the subject and its later development are recounted by 
Sandage (1986), who notes ‘The main thrust and the 
ultimate aim of the work in stellar populations today 
is to achieve an understanding of the formation and 
development of galaxies with time’. 

In the broader extragalactic context the concept of 
a simple stellar population is immensely useful, and 
nowhere more so than in population synthesis, the process 
of constructing a model of a galaxy from its constituent 
stellar populations (see SYNTHETIC STELLAR POPULATIONS). In 
population synthesis a galaxy is the sum of its stellar 
populations of a particular age, weighted by the star 
formation rate (SFR) at that epoch. For example, one 
can model a Magellanic irregular galaxy as the sum of 
MAGELLANIC CLOUD star clusters of every age, t, from a 
million years to ten billion years, weighted by SFR(t). Of 
course, a galaxy will also take a particular path through its 
chemical enrichment history, Z(t) (where Z is the heavy 
element abundance by mass). Therefore, population 
synthesis must also deal with this complication. Other 
complications are conceivable too, such as a changing 
initial mass function. The formalism for dealing with 
simple stellar populations in this way is elegantly 
developed by Renzini and Buzzoni (1984). 


Star formation history 

In principle the color-magnitude diagram of a stellar 
population bears a full record of the star formation 
history (SFH) of that population. There has been 
considerable progress in recent years in extracting the 
desired information from the data. The theoretical 
underpinnings are described by Renzini and Buzzoni 
(1984). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The Orion Nebula, our closest sample of a young 
stellar population, courtesy M Bessell, RSAA, ANU. 


Figure 2. The globular cluster 47 Tuc, courtesy AAO. 


The main sequence 

When stars are formed, they are laid down on a long- 
lived hydrogen-burning main sequence (MS), following 
what approximates, but is unlikely to be exactly, a 
universal initial mass function (a distribution function). 
The stars then evolve away, starting with the most 
massive ones, with lifetimes which are a (weak) function 
of metallicity. The present-day mass function would 
therefore be invertible to a SFH, SFR(t), if Z(t) were also 
known, at least approximately. In practice, the observable 
is a luminosity function (LF), rather than a mass function, 
but the mass—luminosity relation makes the LF a good 
substitute, unless unresolved binary stars distort the LF 
seriously (See LUMINOSITY FUNCTION OF GALAXIES). The solar 
neighborhood (Twarog 1980), the Large Magellanic Cloud 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. The LMC, courtesy M Bessell, RSAA, ANU. 


(LMC) (figure 3) and the Galactic bulge have been good 
laboratories for this approach to learning the SFH. To 
zeroth order the solar neighborhood is a constant-SFR 
population, the LMC is characterized by a recent burst and 
the bulge shows a prominent initial burst. Thus a simple 
range of possibilities has now been explored. 


The giant branch 


Because of the mediating effect of their envelopes, giant 
branches are sensitive to chemical composition and are 
relatively insensitive to age (see also CHEMICAL COMPOSITIONS 
or stars). The stellar populations of early-type galaxies are 
dominated by their light. Nevertheless, post-MS stages of 
stellar evolution do provide tracers of the SFH in stellar 
populations in an indicative manner, if not in the more 
rigorous way that the MS offers. Often this is all that is 
available. 

Useful tracers of young, intermediate-age and old 
stellar populations are as follows: 


Age (yr) 108 10° 10 
Tracer tip of MS upper AGB _ tip of RGB 


The red giant branch (RGB) tip is where the helium flash 
ignites in low-mass stars at around 2000 solar luminosities 
(M, —4 mag; Ferrarese et al 2000). The asymptotic giant 
branch (AGB) is the second ascent of the giant branch 
with a characteristic bolometric luminosity of —5.5 mag 
for 1 Gyr old stars. In populations more metal poor than 
the Sun, upper AGB stars are CARBON sTARS (Mould and 
Aaronson 1986, Frogel et al 1990) and readily recognizable. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Sculptor MSLF 


Zz. 
Vv 
a a .— T T —_'_, 
N ES SaaS =| 
' al 
‘ * 
Te) i 5 
ar ! 4 
i 4 
fad proto cc ccc or re Imam > 4 
7 i : 
T- 
i \ ‘ 
boy f 4 
L boy 1 
Oe f \ & =| 
oF M4 \ rs 
r f \ 7 
L J ; .; 
[ ! \ , 
oO 4 Re 1 rt n 1 n i: 
0 > 10 15 


Time before the present — Gyr 


Figure 4. MS luminosity function for the field studied by 
Monkiewicz et al (1999). We can fit the Sculptor MS with a 
variety of SFHs, as outlined in the lower part of the figure. The 
dotted curve is a simple stellar population of age 15 Gyr, ie. a 
delta function in the lower plot. 


Determining SFH 

These tracers can suggest a coarse SFH for resolved 
galaxies (e.g. LGS 3, Mould 1996) with the aid of Renzini’s 
fuel burning theorem: 


n= B(t)Lt 


where L is the luminosity of the system, t is the lifetime of 
the tracer population and n is the number of tracer stars. 
B is a slowly varying function of age. 

A coarse SFH can be graphically illustrated as in 
figure 4. Hodge (1989) calls these diagrams ‘population 
boxes’. Population boxes for LOCAL GROUP DWARF GALAXIES 
have been compiled by Mateo (1998). He finds (1) 
that no two of these galaxies have the same SFH, (2) 
that many dwarf irregular galaxies contain significant 
old populations (e.g. IC 1613, NGC 6822), (3) that most 
recent star formation episodes are short (10-500 million 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


years in duration), (4) that red horizontal branches are 
common in metal-poor systems (the ‘second parameter 
effect’) throughout the Local Group, (5) that there are no 
purely old galaxies (with the possible exception of the 
Ursa Minor dwarf spheroidal) and (6) that intermediate- 
age galaxies exist (e.g. M32 and Leo I). 

For accurate SFH determination synthesis of the 
color-magnitude diagram can be done. Full population 
synthesis is described by Tolstoy (1995). A method 
of maximum likelihood multi-isochrone fitting has been 
developed by Han, Hoessel and Gallagher (private 
communication). 


Bibliography 

Baade W 1944 Astrophys. J. 100 137 

de Zeeuw P T et al 1999 Astron. J. 117 354 

Eggen O J, Freeman K C and Rodgers A W 1974 Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 36 625 

Ferrarese L et al 2000 Astrophys. J. 529 745 

Frogel J et al 1990 Astrophys. J. 352 96 

Herbig G and Rao N 1972 Astrophys. J. 174 401 

Hodge P 1989 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 27 139 

Holtzman J et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 466 732 

Mateo M 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 435 

Monkiewicz J 1999 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 111 1392 

Mould J 1996 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 109 125 

Mould J and Aaronson A 1986 Astrophys. J. 303 10 

Renzini A and Buzzoni A 1984 Spectral Evolution of Galaxies 
ed C Chiosi and A Renzini (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 

Sandage A 1986 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 24 421 

Tolstoy E 1995 PhD Thesis Groningen University 

Twarog B A 1980 Astrophys. J. 242 242 


Jeremy Mould 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Pulsation 


Pulsating stars are a subtype of variable stars that vibrate, 
and these vibrations cause their brightness to vary. The 
brightness varies because of the changing area and 
temperature of the surface layers (See VARIABLE STARS). The 
vibrations are due to regulation of the outward radiant 
energy flow. Pulsating stars are ubiquitous in that they 
can be found almost everywhere in the Hertzsprung— 
Russell (H-R) diagram, although conspicuous pulsations 
are present in more limited portions of the H-R diagram, 
as shown in figure 1. In addition to their intrinsic interest, 
pulsating stars have played an important role in advancing 
our understanding of physics and the universe. 

Fabricius discovered the first repeating variable star 
in 1596, and it was later called ‘Mira’, which means 
‘wonderful’, because of its changing brightness. By 
coincidence, Mira is a pulsating star and the prototype 
of the MIRA VARIABLES. More important was the discovery 
of periodic light variations of 5 Cephei in 1784. This star 
is now the prototype of the pulsating yellow supergiant 
stars called Cepheids. Cepheids are historically the most 
important class of variable stars, because they follow 
@ CEPHEID PERIOD-LUMINOSITY RELATION, first discovered by 
Henrietta Leavitt in 1912. The period—luminosity relation 
reveals that Cepheids with longer periods are intrinsically 
more luminous (have brighter absolute magnitudes), 
based on Leavitt’s study of a large number of Cepheids 
in the Magellanic Clouds. Later, E Hubble discovered 
Cepheids in the Andromeda galaxy, and the period— 
luminosity relation enabled him to determine the distance, 
placing it well outside our own Milky Way. This 
application makes Cepheids vitally important ‘yardsticks’ 
for measuring the distances to nearby galaxies (see 
UNIVERSAL DISTANCE SCALE). One of the motivations for 
building the Hubble Space Telescope was to detect 
Cepheids in the virco cLusTER of galaxies to provide a 
reliable distance calibration for use in determining the size 
of our universe. There is a growing impression that most, 
if not all, stars pulsate—if measured carefully enough— 
and the maturing field of astroseismology takes advantage 
of the fact that each independent pulsation mode offers a 
probe of the star’s interior. Stellar astronomers are now 
in a position to determine the interior structure of stars 
directly, and to a level of detail unforeseen a generation 
ago. 


A brief history of stellar pulsation 

After the discovery of Mira in 1596 and the establishment 
of its periodicity by about 1660, the pace of discovery of 
variable stars was slow. Only about 20 variable stars were 
known by the 1840s; about this time, F W A Argelander 
and J Herschel put the search for variable stars on a 
more systematic footing. The advent of astronomical 
photography, and in particular, the Harvard Observatory 
photographic patrols, begun in about 1890, provided a 
permanent record of stellar brightnesses and a systematic 
coverage of the sky. The Magellanic Clouds and rich 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


log L/Le 


Figure 1. A ‘pulsating’ Hertzsprung—Russell diagram with the 
location of important variable star classes listed. Representative 
evolutionary tracks are also plotted with the stellar mass (in 
solar units) indicated near each track. Slanted lines are labelled 
with the star’s radius (in solar radii). Pulsating star classes 
labelled here include: luminous blue variables (LBVs), 8 Cephei 
stars (BCep), planetary nebula nucleus variables (PNNVs), 
pulsating PG 1159 stars (DOV), slowly pulsating B stars (SPB), 
Mira and red giant pulsators (M,SR), and pulsating DB and DA 
white dwarfs (DBV and DAV). 


star fields of the southern Milky Way added many 
new variable stars, so that thousands were known by 
1912, when H Leavitt discovered the Cepheid period— 
luminosity relation. 

While the discovery of variable stars accelerated in 
the 1860s, Lord Kelvin laid the theoretical framework 
for non-radial oscillations of liquid spheres in 1863. 
However, it was not until 1879 that A Ritter suggested 
radial pulsations, coupled with temperature variations, as 
an explanation for the light variations of some periodic 
variable stars. In spite of this, it was not until 1914, 
when H Shapley proposed oscillations of the star’s surface 
(pulsations) as being responsible for Cepheid variability, 
that pulsations were seriously considered. By 1918, AS 
Eddington laid the mathematical foundations for stellar 
pulsation theory, and consequently directed much of the 
theoretical work towards considering radial pulsations as 
the explanation for stellar pulsations for the next 50 years 
or so. 

Although radial pulsation theory replicated many 
observational properties of Cepheids, the source of 
pulsation driving was not determined until the 1950s, 
when J P Cox and S A Zhevakin independently proposed 
that cyclical partial ionization of He* to He** was 
responsible for the observed pulsations. Subsequent linear 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and nonlinear calculations confirmed this hypothesis. 
Digital computers started to become available by the 1960s, 
and with these people were able to calculate pulsation 
periods from the linearized pulsation equations as well 
as nonlinear hydrodynamic simulations for increasingly 
realistic stellar models. By the 1970s and early 1980s 
people once again began to consider non-radial pulsations, 
in response to observations of stars that pulsated with too 
many modes in a given frequency range to be explained 
only by radial modes. Also, observations of the variable 
white dwarfs and the 6 Cephei stars revealed pulsation 
periods and radial velocity curves that could only be 
explained by non-radial oscillations. 

In the last ten years, the advent of ever more 
powerful computers and CCD cameras is making 
theoretical calculations and high-precision observations of 
pulsating stars increasingly accessible (see CHARGE-COUPLED 
DEVICE). Observers also took a cue from helioseismology 
and started to look for stars that pulsate in many 
modes to perform astroseismology on them. This 
necessitated the creation of multilongitude multisite 
observing networks that can continuously observe a 
target star for days at a time in order to reduce 
spectral leakage ‘aliasing’ in Fourier transforms caused 
by data gaps. White dwarfs and 6 Scuti stars are 
leading the way in terms of astroseismological potential 
and multilongitude observations. Finally, CCD survey 
projects designed to look for gravitational MICROLENSING are 
turning up large numbers of newly discovered pulsating 
stars, often without previous biases or selection effects 
that mar a statistical understanding of instability strip 
boundaries and/or the incidence of pulsating stars within 
a given instability strip. The present era of precision 
instrumentation and abundant computational resources is 
ushering in a new understanding of the internal structure 
of pulsating stars and a clearer picture of why they pulsate, 
which we describe below. 


Some aspects of the theory of stellar pulsation 
Cepheid variable stars obey a period—luminosity relation 
to considerable accuracy, and this has a rather simple 
physical explanation. First, we know that Cepheids are 
radial pulsators (their motion is strictly in and out), and 
we can approximate the period of a radial mode as the time 
it takes for a sound wave to travel from the surface to the 
center and return 
2R, 


Cs 


I] 


where c, is the average sound speed and IT is the pulsation 
period. Elementary physics texts show that the adiabatic 
sound speed is c? = PI';/p, and we can use hydrostatic 
equilibrium to determine that 


Tx (Gp)? 
where p is the mean density of the star and (= 2/c) 


is the pulsation period. The latter expression is called the 
period—mean density relation. Most Cepheids have spectral 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


type between F5 and KO, corresponding to effective 
temperatures between 7000 and 5000 K. The fairly narrow 
temperature range occupied by Cepheids implies that the 
more luminous Cepheids are brighter mainly by virtue 
of being larger. The most luminous Cepheids have radii 
about 10 times larger than the least luminous ones, but 
the most luminous Cepheids are only about four times as 
massive. This implies that the mean density of a luminous 
Cepheid is about 1/250 that of a less luminous Cepheid and 
thus their periods should be about 20 times longer. This 
agrees reasonably well with the observed period range of 
Cepheids in our galaxy, which lies between about 2 and 
100 days. 

Radial pulsations turn out to be a special subset 
of the more general non-radial pressure modes (also 
called p-modes), where pressure is the restoring force. 
In everyday life, these are the sound waves we hear 
when talking or playing the radio. In this scheme, 
radial modes have a spherical harmonic index (¢) of 
zero, while p-modes in general can have any positive 
value of £, and although their motion is predominantly 
radial, there is some horizontal motion as well. Several 
features of p-modes are particularly useful in the analysis 
of stellar pulsation observations and are derivable from the 
expression for p-mode frequencies in the limit of very high 
overtone number (the number of times the eigenfunction 
crosses zero). The general expression for the frequency 
(nc) is 

One © 2av9(n + £/2 + €) 


s -1 
= (2 / en sr) 
0 Cs 

n is the overtone number and ¢€ is a small constant that 
depends on the structure of the star. There are four useful 
facts we can derive from these expressions. First, for a 
given radial overtone number, the frequency of a p-mode 
increases with €. Second, the p-mode frequency also 
increases withn. Third, in the asymptotic limit of very high 
overtone number, the frequency spacing for consecutive 
overtone p-modes of a given ¢ is constant; this works quite 
well in general for all but the lowest overtones. Finally, 
the p-mode frequencies for modes of different ¢ follow the 
trend set by 


where 


Vv 


S 


On ~ On—1,04+2- 


Non-radially pulsating stars can also pulsate in 
g-modes, where buoyancy rather than pressure, is the 
restoring force. The motions tend to be more horizontal 
than radial, so that material sort of ‘sloshes’ back and 
forth. Buoyancy is what causes a cork to bob up and down 
in water after it has been pushed down, and the natural 
frequency of oscillation is expressed in terms of the Brunt— 
Vaisala frequency 


a ldo 1 dP 
N“=-g 
pdr Pdr 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where N is the Brunt—-Vaisala freqency, g is the local 
gravitational acceleration, and I; is one of the adiabatic 


exponents, given by 
dln P 
dinp /.q° 


An approximate expression for the pulsation frequencies 
of g-modes is 


[eet]? fn 
nt ~ dr 


ni nm 0 


where r, and r, are the upper and lower boundaries of 
the g-mode propagation region. Like the p-modes, g- 
modes also have useful limiting behavior in the limit of 
high overtone number. First, the period increases with 
increasing overtone number n, and the period spacing 
between consecutive overtone modes of a given ¢ is 
constant, to a good approximation. Finally, the periods of 
g-modes with different ¢, but the same overtone number 


are related by 
Ly (1 + 1) 
Ly (5 + 1) 


so that the period of the nth overtone ¢ = 1 mode is about 
/3 times longer than the analogous ¢ = 2 mode, and so 
on. 

The previous discussion treats the existence of 
pulsations as a given, whereas in reality stars must 
somehow excite their own pulsations. The vast majority 
of pulsating stars act as a heat engine, and in their outer 
layers, ionization and recombination of a dominant ion 
species acts to store and release the outward flow of 
energy on a periodic basis. Normally, an increase in 
radiant energy flowing outwards ina star will increase the 
temperature, decrease the opacity (a measure of resistance 
to radiant energy flow), and allow the radiation to escape 
more easily. Thus, under normal conditions, such as 
in fully ionized material, the change in opacity favors 
pulsational stability. In a partial ionization zone, however, 
an increase in radiation flow can be absorbed by the ions, 
resulting in an increase in the fraction of ions present, 
rather than increasing the temperature of the material. As 
a result, the radiant energy flow gets dammed up and 
stored as ionization energy; this mechanism is called the 
y mechanism. In addition, partial ionization zones also 
produce strong opacity gradients, and the region can drive 


pulsations if 
d Kp 
5 (+ 45) >0 


aInT dink 
r3-1l= kr = 
dnp) aa dInT /, 
al 
and “= (Fe*) , 
dInp/, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where 


Regions satisfying the previous inequality are unstable 
to the opacity (or «) mechanism, and the radiant energy 
blocked by this opacity increase is then converted into 
kinetic energy of the oscillations. In most cases of interest, 
the « and y mechanisms work together. Figure 2 shows a 
diagram of a typical pulsation cycle. 

While the « and y mechanisms are capable of 
modulating the outward energy flow from a star, certain 
conditions must be met before the star can modulate 
the energy flow effectively and become a pulsating star 
that we can observe. First, the driving region needs to 
make the structure of a star ‘overshoot’ the equilibrium 
state so that the pulsations have a chance to grow in 
amplitude. For this to happen, the driving region muststill 
be gaining heat at the instant of maximum compression. 
Then, when the star starts to expand, the heat release 
adds an extra ‘push’ to the outer layers, causing the star 
to expand past the equilibrium state. An analogy would 
be a swinging, frictionless pendulum; one must apply an 
extra nudge after the highest point of the swing to add 
to the kinetic energy of the pendulum in order to make 
it swing in a wider arc. The second condition is that the 
energy flow must be modulated with a period similar to a 
natural eigenmode of the star; in other words, the thermal 
timescale of the driving region needs to be roughly equal 
to the pulsation timescale, which may be expressed by 


CoT Ame 
L 


where Am; is the mass of the star from the surface inwards 
to the ‘transition region’, C, is the heat capacity per unit 
volume and L is the stellar luminosity. C,, T and L are 
time-averaged values at the ‘transition region’. In typical 
stars, the ‘transition region’ is quite near the surface; 
typically at about 10-°M, to 107!°M, inwards from the 
photosphere. For an He* to He** region, the temperature 
is about 50 to 100000 K. 


Classes of pulsating stars 


Pulsating stars can be found in many parts of the 
Hertzsprung—Russell diagram as shown in figure 1, and 
opacity mechanisms are responsible for essentially all of 
the observed pulsations (see HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM). 
He?* to He** ionization is responsible for the pulsations of 
the best-known pulsators, such as the Cepheids, RR Lyrae 
and 6 Scuti stars, which occupy a sloping band in the 
H-R diagram. Several new classes of variable stars and 
increasing numbers of stars in previously known classes 
have been discovered over the last 20 years, mainly due 
to increasingly sensitive observational techniques. Given 
the apparent ubiquity of stellar pulsations across the H-R 
diagram, there is some reason to suspect that possibly all 
stars pulsate, and the only question is ‘at what amplitude?’. 
In the next paragraphs, we describe most of the major 
classes of pulsating stars and their astrophysical context 
(see table 1). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Steps in a typical pulsation cycle 


A 
PIZ 
Pigeae ane, + ++ Poe se aon: Time of maximum density. Radiation is 
H+ oe being dammed up due to an increase in 
LIVVVu the opacity with temperature. Radiant 
H+ ated paeaeae 
LVIVVUu ay + WeVatats’ energy is being stored as ionization energy. 
+ +H 
SY Ht 4 HUY 
B 
GIN IG Hy ++ Pate eeaca’, Time of maximum compression (pressure). 
++ 4th Radiation is still being dammed up and the 
+e LYVIVVUu partial ionization zone (PIZ) is still gaining 
LIU ne Ea ++ heat. The temperature rise is outpacing the 
a ++ PacacaTaT density drop, so we have maximum 
LSU } Paeaeaeae pressure here. This is also the time of 
H+ 44+ minimum stellar radius. 


<— to surface 


Cc 
Davavacal ee +E LIS The driving region starts to release stored 
HY a4t up ionization energy and the opacity is 
AWW ett HPV dropping, allowing radiation to flow through 
PAC AC AC Aen tH more easily. The driving region expands 
+ 7 ++ PACACaAcCae rapidly, and soon reaches minimum density 
+ 


due to both expansion and cooling. Time 
of minimum density. 


D 

an an an Ones saa Saxon an Time of minimum pressure and lowest 
at ++ temperature in the driving region. The ions 

AVI. +44 ++ WVU have released their stored up energy and 
+ tH radiated it into space. The pulsation cycle 

WV &u 4t+ +4 AVI VI is ready to begin again. 

PN IN IONS gg eI 


Figure 2. A schematic diagram of the driving region in a star pulsating via the k mechanism. Panel A: As the star compresses, outward 
radiation flow gets blocked due to an increase in opacity. Radiation energy is stored in the ions and kinetic energy. There is relatively 
little increase in temperature. For reference, we will call this the time of maximum density. Panel B: This panel shows the point of 
maximum compression (pressure). Radiation is still dammed up and the region is still gaining heat, but the density is dropping due to 
increasing temperature. Panel C: The driving region is expanding and is getting an extra push due to the release of stored up 
ionization energy. The opacity is dropping as the material expands, which helps the radiation flow out more easily. This is the time of 
minimum density, which is the result of both material expansion and temperature decrease. Panel D: At maximum expansion, the 
material is still losing heat and reaches its minimum pressure. All of the stored up energy is released by the ions (but the material is 


still partially ionized), and the pulsation cycle is set to start again. 


Cepheid variables 

Cepheid variables were among the first pulsating stars to 
be discovered, and their well defined period—luminosity 
relation, coupled with their high luminosity, makes them 
valuable ‘standard candles’ for measuring distances to 
other galaxies out to about 20 Mpc. The prototype star 
is 5 Cephei, and all of these stars pulsate in one (or two) 
radial modes (typically the radial fundamental mode) that 
have very precise periods that range between 2 and 100 
days. Cepheids are yellow (F to G) supergiants with 
masses between 5 and 20M. and luminosities between 
1000 and 100000L,. Most are core helium burning 
objects, although some could be burning hydrogen in a 
shell around the helium core as they evolve to become 
red giants for the first time. The typical Cepheid light 
(or radial velocity) curve has a steep rise to maximum 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


amplitude that takes about 0.21] and a more gradual 
decline, but the exact shape of the curve depends on the 
period, as first noticed by E Hertzsprung in 1926 and 
illustrated in figure 3. For periods less than 6.5 days, the 
curves appear smooth, but between 6.5 and 9 days, the 
curves show a bump on the descending part of the curve 
that moves towards maximum amplitude as the period 
becomes longer. Between 10 and ~15 days, the bump then 
appears on the ascending part of the curve. The theoretical 
explanation for this phenomenon did not appear until the 
1980s, when J R Buchler and collaborators demonstrated 
that the bump is the result of a 2:1 resonance between 
the radial fundamental and the radial second overtone 
mode. In addition to computing theoretical light curves 
that compare well with observations when the resonance 
effects are included, the theory also replicates the observed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Parameters and nomenclature for pulsating star classes. 


Type Acronym Tet ¢ (X 10°K) M/Mo L/Lo Period Mode typet 
Cepheids 6 Cep 5.5 to6.5 5 to 20 10° to 10° 2to 100d R 
Mira Mor Mira 2.5 to 4.0 ~1to2 10? to 104 25 to 400 d R 

Red giant branch or SRa, SRb, 2.5 to 4.0 ~1to8 102 to 104 25 to 400 d R 
asymptotic giant branch Lb, and Lc 

RR Lyrae RR Lyr 6.0 to 7.0 0.5 to 0.8 40 to 50 0.2 to1.2d R 

6 Scuti 5 Sct 7.5 to 8.7 1.6 to 2.6 10 to 100 0.5to6h Rand NR(p) 
Rapidly oscillating Ap roAp 7.0 to 8.5 1.6 to 2.6 10 to 50 4to15m NR(p) 
y Doradus y Dor 6.5 to 7.3 1.4 to 1.7 5 to 20 0.5to3d NR(g) 
B Cephei B Cep 22 to 30 8 to 15 4000 to 20000 3.5to6h NR(p) 
Slowly pulsating B SPB (53 Per) 13 to17 200 to 2000 2.5 to6 0.6 to3d NR(g) 
Line profile LPVs 15 to 40 10° to10° = 5 to. 50 3 to 30h NR(p) 
Variables 

Pulsating PG1159 DOV ~ 100 ~ 0.6 ~ 107 300 to 1200s NR(g) 
DB white dwarf DBV ~ 23 ~ 0.6 ~ 0.03 400 to 1200s NR(g) 
Variables 

DA white dwarf DAV ~11 ~ 0.6 ~ 10-3 100 to 1200s NR(g) 
Luminous blue LBV ~ 20 30 to 100 10° to 10° ~30to50d NR? 
Variables 

R Corona Borealis RCBr 5.0 to 7.0 ~1 ~ 104 ~40d R? 
Subdwarf B stars EC14026 29 to 35 ~ 0.5 20 to 40 100 to 400 s NR(p) 


tMode types: R stands for radial pulsations, while NR stands for non-radial pulsations. (p) stands for p- or pressure 


modes, while (g) stands for g- or gravity modes. 


properties of the light curves when they are decomposed 
into a Fourier expansion of sine waves. 


W Virginis stars 

The classical Cepheids are Population I objects, whereas 
W Virginis stars are low-mass (~1Mq) analogs that are 
evolving towards the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) or 
are engaged in thermal pulses off the AGB. They are also 
called ‘population II Cepheids’ and/or ‘type II Cepheids’. 
Like the Cepheids, the W Vir stars also follow a period— 
luminosity relation, but it is about 1 to 2 magnitudes 
fainter, and it has a shallower slope, as shown in figure 4. 
The W Virginis stars have periods between ~1 and 30 days, 
and then they smoothly merge into RV Tauri stars that have 
light curves with alternating deep and shallow minima, 
along with more or less periodic behavior that is attributed 
to low-dimensional chaos. BL Herculis and a few other 
short-period type II Cepheids with periods of about a day 
are sometimes considered as a subgroup of the W Virginis 
stars; they have a bump on the declining part of the light 
curve about a quarter period after maximum light. 


Red giant pulsars 

Most red giant branch (RGB) and AGB stars pulsate 
with periods ranging from about 25 days to over a year 
(See RED GIANT sTARS). The periods are usually somewhat 
irregular, although a fairly accurate mean period can be 
derived for most of these stars. In visible wavelengths, the 
pulsation amplitudes can vary from a few hundredths of a 
magnitude up to 7 or 8 magnitudes. Objects with extreme 
amplitudes in the visible appear so for two reasons. First, 
the Johnson V filter covers the same wavelength range 
as the most prominent TiO absorption bands, and the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


strength of these absorption bands increases rapidly with 
decreasing temperature. Secondly, the star becomes cooler 
as it becomes fainter, and the energy output shifts towards 
the infrared where our eyes cannot see. In most cases, 
the bolometric amplitude is about 1 magnitude. The 
pulsations are probably driven by partial ionization of H 
and He, but the dominance of convection in the outer 
layers makes theoretical pulsation calculations difficult 
due to pulsation—-convection coupling that is difficult 
to model. These modeling difficulties also contribute 
to the ongoing debate about whether Mira stars are 
pulsating in the radial fundamental or first overtone 
mode. Many variable star classes are known in this 
part of the H-R diagram. The most famous are the 
Mira variables, which have visual amplitudes greater than 
2.5 magnitudes. Other classes include the semiregular 
variables (SRa and SRb) and the irregular variables (Lb and 
Lc); these stars tend to have smaller light curve amplitudes 
(~1 magnitude (mag) in the visual) than the Mira stars. Of 
these, the Lc stars are supergiant stars, and by implication 
are more massive than the other RGB and AGB variable 
stars. As the name implies, the semiregular and irregular 
variables have more erratic light curves than the Mira stars. 
One of the relatively unexplored frontiers is connecting the 
pulsations with mass loss. All of the RGB and AGB stars 
have extended, low-gravity envelopes, and pulsations 
cause appreciable mass loss during the time an RGB or 
AGB star spends in this part of the H-R diagram. It also 
appears that pulsation induces the final episode of mass 
loss as a star leaves the asymptotic giant branch to become 
a planetary nebula. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| 10 km/s 


AD Gem 3.79 
XY Cas 4.50 
& Cep 
U Ser 
Tt Aq! 
W Ser 
S Sge 
S Nor 
¢ Gem 


TW Nor 10.79 


XY Car 12.44 


PHASE 


Figure 3. A sample of Cepheid variable star radial velocity 
curves. The interval between maximum and minimum radial 
velocity (or brightness in a light curve) is called the amplitude 
(A); the time interval between successive maxima is the period 
(11), and the fractional period between one maximum and the 
next is called the phase (#). Note the Hertzsprung ‘bump’ 
progression between 6 and 15 days. 


RR Lyrae stars 

RR LYRAE STARS are also radial mode pulsators, but are 
population II stars that are burning helium into carbon and 
oxygen in their cores. The typical effective temperature 
for an RR Lyrae star is about 6500 + 500 K, and they 
have a luminosity of about 40 to 50L4. The periods of 
RR Lyrae stars are typically 0.2 to 1.2 days, with amplitudes 
ranging from a few tenths to about 2 magnitudes. They 
are frequently called ‘cluster variables’, because most of 
the known examples are located in the GLOBULAR CLUSTERS 
of our galaxy. RR Lyrae stars are bright enough to be visible 
in nearby galaxies and are used as distance indicators, 
because they have a relatively well-determined average 
absolute magnitude. There are subclasses of RR Lyrae 
stars—called RRa, RRb, RRc and RRd—that are classified 
according to the shape of their light curves; the RRa stars 
have asymmetric light curves with steep rises and more 
gradual declines, RRb stars have light curves with lower 
amplitudes (about 0.6 mag), but are otherwise similar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Period Luminosity Diagram 


Crit lp whit orth, joehid jt iby tert. 


Cepheid 


W Virginis 


RR Lyrae 


2 a 
=I —.5 0) 5 1 1.5 


log Period (days) 


NO 


Figure 4. Period—luminosity relations for RR Lyrae stars, 
‘classical’ Cepheids and W Virginis stars. 


in appearance to RRa stars, and both classes pulsate in 
the radial fundamental mode. RRc stars have nearly 
sinusoidal light curves with amplitudes of about 0.5 mag 
and are radial first-overtone pulsators. The RRd stars are 
double-mode stars with both the fundamental and first 
overtone modes excited. In addition, some RR Lyrae stars 
show a periodic modulation of the amplitude and shape 
of their light curves in a quasiperiodic manner called the 
Blazhko effect; however, this modulation leaves the period 
of the pulsation mode unchanged, except for possible 
evolutionary effects. The origin of the Blazhko effect is 
not understood yet, although magnetic field modulation 
and nonlinear effects have been proposed. 


5 Scuti 

Several classes of variable stars lie near the main sequence 
with spectral classes between early A and early F, with 
the most obvious distinction being their pulsation periods. 
The 6 Scuti stars are the most numerous and best known 
of these pulsators. The 6 Scuti stars are spectral class 
AS to F2 stars that are burning hydrogen either in their 
cores or in a thick shell surrounding the core; they have 
masses between 1.6 and 2.6M,. They can be monoperiodic 
or multiperiodic (the record holder has more than 20 
known periods), with periods between 0.5 and 6 h. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


amplitudes range from the photometric detection limit 
(<1 millimag) up to about 1 magnitude. The pulsations 
are a combination of radial and/or non-radial modes; 
most of the non-radial modes are low-overtone p-modes, 
although in some cases we may be seeing low-overtone g- 
modes. Typically, the large-amplitude pulsators are more 
evolved, slower rotators, and have one or a few (mostly 
radial) modes present. Lower-amplitude 6 Scuti stars 
are found throughout the instability strip, and many of 
these stars rotate rapidly, with v sini values ranging up to 
220 km s“!. A plot of the number of 6 Scuti stars versus 
pulsation amplitude shows a rapid rise towards lower 
amplitudes down to instrumental detection limits. This 
suggests that the ~30% of stars in the instability strip that 
are 6 Scuti stars is actually a lower limit, and that many 
more are waiting to be discovered. Pulsation driving for 
5 Scuti stars comes mostly from He* to He?* ionization, 
with some driving from H to H* and He to He?® ionization. 
6 Scuti stars are promising candidates for astroseismology, 
and several stars have been analysed. The observations 
require observing runs of a month or more from several 
sites around the globe to reduce confusion in analysing the 
period spectra and also to reduce the noise level enough to 
detect the low-amplitude modes that are present. Because 
most 6 Scuti stars are rapid rotators, rotational splitting 
effects must be included in theoretical pulsation frequency 
calculations and in the evolutionary models, which is 
challenging. So far, only a handful of stars have been 
analysed, and the analyses to date underscore the need 
to include the effects of rotation to predict the pulsation 
frequencies reliably. 

6 Scuti pulsations also show up in two classes of 
metal-poor stars. First, there are the Pop II SX Phoenicis 
stars, which are large-amplitude radial pulsators. The 
SX Phoenicis stars tend show up in dense open clusters 
and globular clusters as BLUE STRAGGLERS, and it is likely 
that they are binary merger objects. The second type are 
pulsators within the 1 Bodtis spectral class; about 50% of 
these stars are also low-amplitude 6 Scuti type pulsators. 
The existence of pulsations in the 4 Bodtis stars suggests 
that the deficiency of some metals in their spectra is a 
superficial phenomenon and that the driving region is 
probably not metal or helium depleted. Otherwise, we 
would not expect to see pulsations because the required 
partial ionization zone would not be present. 


Rapidly oscillating Ap stars 

The rapidly oscillating Ap (roAp) stars are A stars with 
peculiar spectra that show enhancements of metal lines, 
typically of transition metals and rare-earth elements 
(see PULSATING AND CHEMICALLY PECULIAR UPPER MAIN SEQUENCE 
sTARS). They pulsate in high-overtone p-modes that have 
amplitudes of about 1 to 10 millimag, and the periods 
range from 4 to 15 min. These stars have strong (up 
to kilogauss) magnetic fields and are slow rotators, with 
rotation periods ranging from about 2 to 12 days. The 
combination of a strong magnetic field and slow rotation 
is the key to explaining the light variations using the oblique 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pulsator model. Here, the light variations are due to a 
dipole (¢ = 1) mode that is aligned with the magnetic field, 
causing the aspect angle of the light and dark hemisphere 
to change as the star rotates. The oblique pulsator model 
is quite successful in explaining the observed pulsation 
behavior, including the pulsation phase jumping by z 
radians during a magnetic field reversal. The magnetic 
fields are sufficiently strong that they influence the nature 
of the pulsations, and this is something that has yet to 
be modeled consistently in pulsation calculations. These 
stars occupy much the same region of the H-R diagram as 
the 6 Scuti stars, but there the similarity ends. The short 
periods of the pulsations are consistent with pulsation 
driving due to the « mechanism in the H/He partial 
ionization zone, but this requires models with chemically 
inhomogeneous envelopes to deplete the He* ionization 
zone of enough He to ‘quench’ the 6 Scuti pulsations that 
would otherwise be present. Understanding the nature of 
pulsation driving and the structure of the outer layers of 
roAp stars is an area of active development. 


y Doradus stars 

The final class of pulsating stars in the A to F spectral class 
that we discuss includes the newly discovered y Doradus 
variables. The y Doradus stars lie just coolwards of the 
6 Scuti instability strip with spectral classes between FO 
and F3. They lie on or near the main sequence and have 
masses near 1.5M.. The periods range from about 0.5 to 
3.0 days, which is far longer than the radial fundamental 
mode; the fact that several stars are multiperiodic implies 
g-mode pulsation rather than a rotating, spotted star. At 
present, the pulsation driving mechanism is not known, 
but the likely candidate is the «, y mechanism acting in 
a region enhanced in metal abundances due to diffusion 
witha temperature of about 200 000 K. Thus, the A to F stars 
appear to show the full range of possible opacity driving 
mechanisms, from H/He driving near the surface in roAp 
stars, ‘normal’ Het driving in the 6 Scuti stars, and driving 
due to iron-peak metals in the y Doradus stars. 


B cephei stars 

There are several classes of photometric and spectroscopic 
pulsating stars of spectral type O and B that are on or just 
off the main sequence. Of these, the best known are the 
B Cephei stars, which are BO to B2 stars of luminosity 
class III, IV and V that pulsate with periods between 
3.5 and 6 hours. Most have V-magnitude ranges below 
0.2 mag, radial velocity amplitudes below 50 km s“!, and 
are relatively slow rotators (v sini < 150 kms7'), although 
exceptions exist. The pulsations are radial and non-radial 
p-modes, and are driven by the « mechanism acting oniron 
peak elements. Many 6 Cephei stars are found in young 
GALACTIC OPEN CLUSTERS, and these observations show that 
most are core hydrogen burners, along with some in the 
core contraction and hydrogen shell burning phase of their 
evolution. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Slowly pulsating B stars 

The slowly pulsating B (SPB) stars are mid to late B stars 
on the main sequence that exhibit low-amplitude light 
variations (<0.1 mag) with periods ranging from 0.6 to 
3 days. They are like the 6 Cephei stars in that their 
pulsations are driven by the x mechanism acting on iron 
peak elements, but the driving region is located deep 
enough in the star to drive the longer observed periods, 
which are g-modes. SPB stars have masses between 
2.5 and 6Mo, and they are all core hydrogen burning 
stars. Almost all of these stars are relatively slow rotators 
with vsini < 100 km s7!. Some also show line profile 
variations, where the shape of the spectral line changes in 
a periodic manner as different light and dark patches are 
seen on the rotating star. 


Line profile variables 

A number of O and B stars show line profile variations 
due to non-radial pulsations. Two classes of objects 
have prototype stars; they are ¢ Ophiuchi and 53 Persei. 
Many of these stars are rapid rotators, and the theoretical 
framework is only just now being constructed for us 
to interpret their pulsations. Finally, there are the B 
stars with emission lines in their spectra (BE STARS); a few 
show line profile variations, and many show photometric 
variability with periods of about a day. Currently, there 
is considerable debate on whether the observed light 
variations are due to pulsation or some other mechanism; 
we mention the Be stars here for completeness and as 
a warning that we do not understand their observed 
behavior yet. 


Pulsating white dwarfs 

WHITE DWARFS are the remnants of stars with initial masses 
less than 8Mo, and some of them pulsate in well-defined 
temperature ranges, with typical maximum amplitudes 
up to 0.3 mag. All of these stars are multiperiodic 
g-mode pulsators, and several have precise structural 
and intrinsic properties derived from astroseismological 
analysis of their pulsation periods. Some of these stars 
are still contracting appreciably and are classified as pre- 
white dwarfs (PWDs). The most luminous PWDs are 
the PLANETARY NEBULA nuclei variables (PNNVs), which are 
evolving rapidly from thermally pulsing AGB stars to the 
white dwarf domain. They have typical periods of 1000 
to 2000 s. The hottest pulsators are the pulsating Pc 1159 
(or GW Virginis) stars, which have temperatures between 
80 000 and 160 000 K. Their pulsations are probably driven 
by partial ionization of C and O. The nature of the pulsation 
mechanism of the cooler white dwarfs has been a subject 
of some debate, but evidence is beginning to favor the 
idea that convection zone modulates the energy flow 
due to convective driving, where the pulsation energy is 
modulated by adjustments of the convection zone. At 
about 25000 K, the convection zone in the helium layer 
drives pulsations, and here we find the variable DB 
white dwarfs (called DBV or V777 Herculis stars) (see DB 
PULSATING STARS). Typical periods range from 400 to 1200 s, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and the DB spectral type implies that the atmospheres are 
pure helium. The coolest pulsating white dwarfs have a 
DA spectral type and they are called DAV or ZZ Ceti stars. 
Pulsation driving occurs in the hydrogen layer convection 
zone; they have temperatures between 11 000 and 12 000 K 
and periods ranging from 100 to 1200 s. Astroseismology 
shows that the surface layer of hydrogen for several of the 
ZZ CETI stars has a mass of about 10-*M,. 


Other pulsating stars 

Space prevents a discussion of all the classes of pulsating 
stars, but we will mention a few other classes of stars that 
exist and recommend the reader consult the bibliography 
for further details. The most luminous pulsators are 
the Luminous Blue Variables (LBVs), which appear to be 
massive (M, > 20Mo) stars that are up to 10° times as 
luminous as the Sun (see HIGH-LUMINOSITY STARS). Possibly 
related to the LBV stars are the A-type supergiant a Cygni 
and others like it; they appear to be somewhat less massive 
and cooler than the typical LBV star. Some evolved 
low-mass stars show reduced amounts of hydrogen in 
their atmospheres, and a subset of these stars pulsate. 
First are the spectacular R CORONA BOREALIS STARS, which 
have nearly constant maxima interspersed by dramatic 
dimming episodes. Second are the extreme helium 
pulsators, sometimes also called hydrogen-deficient (H- 
deficient) stars. There are also K giant stars that pulsate, 
although they have not been systematically observed or 
reviewed. The best known example is Arcturus, and all 
of these stars have very low amplitudes, requiring high- 
precision photometry or spectroscopy to detect (see LARGE 
HOT SUBDWARES AND EXTREME HORIZONTAL BRANCHSTARS). Finally, 
there are the EC 14026 stars, or pulsating subdwarf B (SdB) 
stars, which are core helium burning stars with hydrogen- 
rich envelopes that have too little mass for the star to 
ascend the AGB. 


The advent of astroseismology 

In the previous discussion, we alluded to some situations 
where the study of pulsating stars impacts other fields 
of astronomy. Each pulsation mode in a star can be 
thought of as an independent probe of the star’s interior, 
and using this information to determine (or constrain) 
the interior structure of a star is what the subject of 
astroseismology is about. The analogous field for the 
Sun is helioseismology, and this subject is covered by 
other articles in this encyclopedia (see SOLAR INTERIOR, 
HELIOSEISMOLOGY: THEORY, HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS). Even if a 
star pulsates in only one or two modes, this can reveal 
the mean density. This is enough that in the case of 
Cepheids and 6 Scuti stars, N Simon suggested in 1982 
that enhancing the opacities in the region around 200 000 K 
would resolve a number of outstanding discrepancies 
between observation and theory. Two major efforts at 
recalculating the opacities (the Opacity Project with the 
OP tables and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
with the OPAL tables) found the suggested opacity 
enhancements (see SOLAR INTERIOR: EQUATION OF STATE AND 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


opacity). This essentially solved the double-mode period 
ratio problem in Cepheids and the discrepancy between 
the pulsation and evolutionary masses of Cepheids, and 
also revealed the driving mechanism for the 6 Cephei and 
SPB stars. 

More precise determinations of the internal structure 
are possible if many pulsation modes are observed, and 
the present record holders (excluding the Sun) are the 
white dwarfs PG 1159-035 (see the example light curve 
in figure 5) and GD 358, with over 100 modes present 
in each star (see STELLAR INTERIORS). Next best are 6 Scuti 
stars, where some have about 20 modes present. Much 
current theoretical and computational effort is going 
into developing better evolutionary models for various 
classes of stars for pulsation analysis. The other areas 
of intense theoretical effort are as follows: including 
the effects of rotation self-consistently in interpreting 
observational photometry and spectroscopy; computing 
the evolutionary models; and computing the frequency 
shifts induced by rotation. 

Identification of the 2, m and n ‘quantum numbers’ 
for observed pulsation modes is crucial for unlocking the 
internal structure of a star via astroseismology. A variety of 
methods are available for these purposes, although none is 
applicable for all types of pulsating stars, and each has its 
strengths and weaknesses. If enough pulsation modes are 
present (say for some pulsating white dwarfs), one can use 
the regular pattern of period and/or frequency spacings to 
determine the mode identification. This is the only method 
that can, in principle, determine the ¢ value, the overtone 
number (n), and the azimuthal quantum number (m). 
Radial modes, p-modes, and g-modes can also leave their 
signature in the form of line profile variations, changes in 
the equivalent widths of spectral lines, changes in time- 
dependent amplitudes as a function of color, and different 
times of maximum light in different wavelengths. Non- 
radial pulsations, in particular modes with ¢ = |m|, will 
have spectral line profiles that change shape as different 
parts of the non-radial mode become visible as the star 
rotates. This techniques works best on the O- and B-star 
pulsators. The equivalent width method makes use of 
spectral lines whose equivalent width is very sensitive 
to temperature. Comparing these changes to changes 
in the ratio of light curve amplitudes for different color 
photometric filters allows determinations of the ¢ value, 
but not n or m. Other similar methods make use of 
comparisons between the phase of radial velocity curves 
and light curve intensity ratios in different colors. So far 
this method has seen the most application and success with 
5 Scuti stars. These methods do not work for white dwarfs, 
but in this case, the light curve amplitude increases rapidly 
with decreasing wavelength and the rate of the amplitude 
increases is a strong function of £. This method requires 
time-dependent UV amplitudes, and the few white dwarfs 
studied so far have ¢ = 1 or 2. The last method depends 
on knowing the pulsation period and assuming that it is 
a radial mode. Assuming radial mode pulsations, one can 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


estimate the pulsation constant (Q) via 


0 =NV/A/ao 
where fo = 1.41 g cm” and # for variable stars of 
a given class can usually be estimated with tolerable 
accuracy because it is a slowly varying function of stellar 
parameters. The pulsation constant decreases rapidly with 
increasing overtone number, so it offers an estimate of the 
overtone number n instead of the @ value. 

A better understanding of pulsation driving has also 
led to the prediction of some classes of pulsating stars 
before they were discovered observationally. The first 
example was the prediction of the pulsational instability 
of helium atmosphere white dwarfs by D Winget in 1981, 
based on understanding that the same mechanism causing 
the hydrogen atmosphere white dwarfs to pulsate should 
also apply to the helium atmosphere white dwarfs. The 
next predicted pulsating star class was the subdwarf 
B-stars (SdB stars), predicted by S Charpinet 1993. 

One class of pulsating stars that has not been found 
as yet are the solar-like pulsators. After seeing the 
importance of solar pulsations in determining the Sun’s 
structure, people started trying to find similar pulsations 
in other stars, with Procyon and a Centauri being two of 
the favorite targets. To date, none of these searches has 
produced a verifiable detection, although unconfirmed 
detections and upper limits abound. Much of the lack of 
success is due to the extremely low expected amplitudes; 
for the Sun, the amplitudes are on the order of cm s™! or 
AI/I < 10-°, which is at least an order of magnitude more 
sensitive than any search to date. 


Expanding on the future 

For the future, several trends are starting to appear. 
The early 1990s saw the advent of searches for massive 
compact halo objects, and ‘massive photometry’ is 
becoming a powerful new technique for relatively 
unbiased populations of previous and newly discovered 
variable stars, particularly in the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS. For 
example, the MACHO project has discovered thousands 
of new variable stars in the LMC, including RR Lyrae, 
Cepheid, W Virginis and long-period variables; most of 
them are new discoveries. 

Satellites are also sources of new variable star 
detections. The Hipparcos satellite discovered a large 
number of SPB stars, yet only a few new f Cephei 
stars, suggesting that selection effects of previous searches 
severely undersampled the population of SPB stars. 
Multilongitude, multisite networks are becoming the tool 
of choice for observers who wish to disentangle the 
complicated light curves of multiperiodic stars like the 
pulsating white dwarfs and 6 Scuti stars. The Delta Scuti 
Network (DSN) and Whole Earth Telescope (WET) are 
two of the longest running and best-known collaborations, 
although there are many others, including MUSICOS, 
which is probably the only multisite network devoted to 
spectroscopy. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


L unter ses batt ranhertés tal, shisha 
cot GREE i Iie ta att ti 
-0.05- 
280090 260000 270000 280000 


0.05 


-6. 05 


ie 


end peat 


. nati spl OR Hs HRN ae i 


AAA, we iieeyk ‘ sa 


280000 sooaeo 310000 


‘< é , mit y A te best if 
a Ma Dade rin ae that 


3390000 340000 $590000 T 


400000 


op 28 
a t, 
0. G0 eet 
#¥ 13 
0.05 
oe ae) ae 
670000 7 480000 490000 y ‘s00000 


9.05 


9. 00 ONIN IAN whys Wide Keitje fetes Y rwscn ti WEN 


-0. 05 


550000 


AAA MLN 


sso00c 570000 


650000 


840000 


Fa 


780000 790900 #00000 


580005 


lh nna aaiit t helaaamnanae ; 


Se ac 


en SER sil Sha! yah: sa eT aS, Ta a ee ae spats 
az0000" oe ss0000t—CS e000 350000 7a0000 v 


POEM NANDA ESORI Mi 
$10005 520000 $30000 $40000 


Sao gy fs Laps ame 


600000 610000 


v3 HOR anand, yi 


680000 


gtiggat ti 
Wives ye 1 


750000 


740000 760000 


810000 


Figure 5. A sample light curve for the multiply periodic pulsating pre-white dwarf PG 1159-035. Note the ‘beating’ caused mainly by 


interference between the dominant 516 and 539 s pulsation modes. 


Another trend is the appearance of new theoretical 
and computational tools for understanding the observed 
pulsations and exploiting the potential of astroseismology. 
There are three major areas of activity. First, many of 
the 5 Scuti and upper main sequence stars rotate rapidly, 
which requires the inclusion of rotational physics in the 
evolution, pulsation and atmosphere models. Second, 
although many stars are non-radial pulsators, there are 
at present very few theoretical tools for studying the 
nonlinear aspects of non-radial pulsations. Besides 
amplitude variations, many non-radial pulsators also 
show Fourier transform peaks with frequencies equal 
to the sum and/or difference of the larger amplitude 
pulsation modes. These ‘combination’ peaks are not 
regarded as real pulsation modes, but they do contain 
information about the energetics of the driving region, 
mode selection and nonlinear effects that we are ignoring 
at present. People are starting to develop theories for 
understanding this nonlinear behavior, and this should 
become an area of increasing activity in the near future. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Finally, many pulsating stars have convection zones that 
play at least some role in the driving and damping of 
pulsations. To date, most theories for convection are 
either too simplistic, have too many free parameters to 
be predictive, and/or add enough extra complications 
that the computer time required for calculations goes 
Add to this the fact that there is 


no one agreed-upon model, and we have our current 


up enormously. 


situation where convection is either ignored or treated 
simplistically. The return to pulsational stability at the cool 
(red) edge of the instability strip for many stars depends on 
convection /pulsation interactions, as does the existence of 
pulsations in several classes of stars. While some basic 
understanding of stellar pulsation can be gained with 
current simplified models, more effort will be needed here 
before we can make quantitative predictions about mode 
selection and mode amplitudes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Stellar Pulsation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

The topic of stellar pulsations has a vast literature, so we 
only provide references to some key papers and books 
covering the development of the field, along with guides 
to surveys of recent research. Except where noted, one 
should assume the material is technical. 


Good and readable accounts of variable stars in 
general that have much material on pulsating stars are: 


Hoffmeister C, Richter G and Wenzel W 1985 Variable Stars 
(Berlin: Springer) 
Petit M 1987 Variable Stars (New York: Wiley) 


Good discussions on the early history of the theory 
and observations of pulsating stars may be found in: 


Ledoux P and Walraven T 1958 Encyclopedia of Physics ed 
S Fliigge (Berlin: Springer) 

Rosseland 5 1964 The Pulsation Theory of Variable Stars (New 
York: Dover) 


The best general references on stellar pulsation are: 


Cox J P 1980 Theory of Stellar Pulsation (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press) 

Gautschy A and Saio H 1995 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
33 75 

Gautschy A and Saio H 1996 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
34551 

Unno W, Osaki Y, Ando H, Saio H and Shibahashi H 
1989 Nonradial Oscillations of Stars 2nd edn (Tokyo: 
University of Tokyo Press) 


The two most recent conference proceedings devoted 
to stellar pulsation are: 


Bradley P A and Guzik J A (eds) 1998 A Half-Century of 
Stellar Pulsation Interpretations: a Tribute to Arthur 
N Cox (San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific) 

Stobie R S and Whitelock P A (eds) 1995 Astrophysical 
Applications of Stellar Pulsation (San Francisco: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 


P A Bradley 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


11 


Stellar Rotation on the Main Sequence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stellar Rotation on the Main Sequence 


The conservation of ANGULAR MOMENTUM is the one effective 
counterbalance to the inexorable pull of gravity in the 
universe, and so everything rotates. Stars acquire their 
angular momentum when they form, and, indeed, the 
manner in which nearly all this initial angular momentum 
is dissipated remains poorly understood, but without 
substantial angular momentum loss an interstellar cloud 
could never contract enough to become a star. 

Yet stars do form and overcome this problem. When 
hydrogen fuses to helium in the core, the star is on the 
main sequence. The rotation rates of all but a few main 
sequence stars are well below breakup velocity (the speed 
at which centrifugal force balances gravity at the equator), 
and rotation therefore is unlikely to fundamentally alter a 
star’s evolution. In those few cases with excessive rotation, 
the gravity experienced by the star is diminished, and the 
overall evolution can be very different. 

The rotation of a star is usually described by a single 
number: either vsini, the equatorial speed of the star 
projected onto our line of sight, or P,ot, the rotation period. 
However, rotation is presumably three dimensional and 
can vary with latitude on the star (differential rotation) 
or with radius. On the Sun, there appears to be no 
change in rotation with radius (as determined from 
helioseismological studies of the Sun’s interior; see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: ROTATION), but the Sun spins a little faster at its 
equator than at high latitudes. This DIFFERENTIAL ROTATION 
does not affect the deep interior, but it is crucial in 
determining much of the surface phenomenology that 
makes the Sun so fascinating: spots, plages, active regions, 
the corona and so on. 


Observational technique 

The first study of stellar rotation was made by Galileo 
when he associated the apparent motions of sunspots with 
the spin of the Sun. Soon after, Scheiner showed that 
the spots moved at different rates at different latitudes, 
demonstrating the existence of differential rotation and the 
fact that the Sun is a fluid. 

The study of stellar rotation was systematized by 
OTTO STRUVE, a spectroscopist who explored many areas 
of astrophysics. He showed that different line widths in 
different stars were due to rotation, and he refined the 
most basic technique for determining rotation: analysis of 
line breadths in spectra, either by visual comparison or by 
profile fitting. Early-type main sequence stars (types O, B, 
Aandearly F) typically have v sini values of 50-400 kms™!. 
The intrinsic breadth of stellar absorption lines is only 
about 10-20 km s~!, so the effect of rotation is obvious in 
early-type stars. Such stars are also intrinsically bright and 
blue and so were prime targets during the photographic 
era (See STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: EARLY-TYPE STARS). As a result, 
most of the data for early-type stars date from that time. 
This method is calibrated by direct measurement of line 
widths for a range of rotation rates: v sini is then half the 
full width of the line where it meets the continuum. Once 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


suitable standards are established, a well-trained eye can 
reliably estimate v sini down to about 10 km s-! with an 
accuracy of 1 kms}. 

As noted, vsini is that component of the star’s true 
equatorial rotation rate that is projected onto the line of 
sight. Such information is entirely adequate for studying 
the rotation of classes of stars for two reasons. First, the 
rotation axes of stars are randomly oriented in space. This 
has been determined by, for example, observing rotation in 
clusters of stars at different Galactic latitudes and noting 
that high-latitude clusters have the same distribution of 
rate as low-latitude clusters. The immediate conclusion 
from this fact is that stellar rotation does not have its origin 
in Galactic rotation. The orbital axes of visual binaries have 
also been shown to be oriented randomly. Second, for a 
random distribution of axes one is most likely to observe a 
star nearly equator on (for about 87% of stars the measured 
vsini is at least half of the true equatorial velocity), and 
stars are very unlikely to be seen pole on. In other words, 
nature makes it easy. However, the inevitable ambiguity 
of sini makes it impossible to specify the rotation rate of 
an individual star reliably. 

The most massive stars are not as congenial to this 
method as later spectral types. Many of them have very 
high rotation rates (300 km s“! or more), making it difficult 
to define the observed spectrum line. In such cases there 
can also be important physical effects such as gravity 
darkening that influence spectrum formation in the first 
place. Also, the dearth of sharp-lined O stars strongly 
suggests the presence of turbulent broadening, but the 
precise extent of that turbulence is not well understood. 
For most massive stars, rotation is so dominant that this 
uncertainty in the zero point is not critical. 

This same technique of measuring line broadening 
was applied to stars as cool as the Sun but without 
success: they were all rotating too slowly to be resolved on 
moderate-resolution spectra (see also STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: 
CooL stars). The slow rotation of late-type stars (late F, G, 
K and M) is intimately tied to the presence of convective 
envelopes on those stars, as discussed below. More 
recently it has been possible to determine vsini values 
down to about 2 km s“! by obtaining high-resolution 
(R ~ 100000), high signal-to-noise (200 or more) spectra 
and by then applying careful modeling of the entire line 
profile. Fitting of the Fourier transform of the profile 
also helps to deconvolve rotation from other broadening 
mechanisms of comparable magnitude. The uncertainties 
of this procedure are relatively large (about 1 km s~') 
when vsini is small, but it allows the determination of 
rotation in slowly rotating solar-type stars, for which no 
other information exists. 

As discussed below, the fundamental nature of late- 
type stars leads to their exhibiting solar-like phenomena 
such as surface spots. These spots can be significant 
enough to lead to detectable variations in the light of a star 
from which the rotation period, Prot, can be determined. 
This is essentially the inverse of the angular velocity, Q. 
Rotation periods are independent of aspect, and so it 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Rotation on the Main Sequence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is now possible to determine accurately true rotational 
distributions for a sample of late-type stars. Changes 
in the observed P,. or multiple periods in one dataset 
have been interpreted as evidence for differential rotation. 
Differential rotation is a key ingredient of models for 
generating magnetic fields in late-type stars and so these 
observations are valuable, but information is available for 
only a few stars, and those are not old, quiet ones like 
the Sun. An attempt has been made to detect differential 
rotation in some A stars through very careful analysis of 
the line profiles, but none was seen. It has also been 
possible to measure rotation periods for some early-type 
stars because they can also have magnetic fields that lead 
to inhomogeneous surfaces, hence variations. These have 
been especially important for some of the Ap/Am stars. 
More details on technique may be found in Gray’s 
excellent text on stellar atmospheres (Gray 1992). 


Sources of observations 

Because the rotation of early-type stars was well studied 
photographically, most of the observations for those stars 
were compiled into comprehensive catalogs long ago. 
The original catalogs are in fairly obscure observatory 
publications, but all of these data and more can 
now be accessed at NASA’s Astronomical Data Center 
(adc.gsfc.nasa.gov). For individual stars, the best source 
is SIMBAD (simbad.u-strasbg.fr /Simbad). 

As with any database, discretion should be used in 
interpreting data, as not all are of the same quality. Insome 
instances significant misconceptions by some observers 
have led to large systematic errors that propagate into the 
catalogs: see Soderblom et al (1989) for an example. 


General remarks on rotation 

Each type of main sequence star has rotational characteris- 
tics that set it apart from other types, but there is a natural 
break in the mid-F spectral type range. For early spectral 
types (O, B, Aand early F), energy is carried to the surface 
predominantly by radiative processes. For the late-type 
stars (late F, G, K and M), energy transport in the outer 
layers is by convection. The presence of a convective en- 
velope and its interaction with the rotation are fundamen- 
tal to the behavior of late-type stars, as will be discussed 
below. 

Two basic facts apply to rotation in stars. First, the 
rotation axes of stars are randomly oriented. As noted 
above, this means that stellar rotation does not have its 
origins in Galactic rotation, for if it did then rotation axes 
would tend to be aligned with the Galaxy’s rotation. The 
second basic fact is that a mean relation appears to hold 
for the specific angular momentum of a star at the time of 
formation (its angular momentum per unit mass) and the 
star’s mass, first shown by Kraft: 


(1/M) « Mo,” 


where / is the angular momentum and M is the stellar 
mass. This relationship (Kawaler 1987) can easily be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


derived by assuming that all stars form from a medium 
of uniform density, a condition that is surely not true 
in nature. Also, the need to dissipate most of a star’s 
initial angular momentum weakens the tie between initial 
conditions and later behavior on the main sequence, and 
the underlying reason for the above relation is not obvious. 
The Kraft relation is at best a statistical one that predicts a 
typical amount of angular momentum for a star of a given 
mass. There are, for example, well-studied binary systems 
with components of nearly identical mass yet substantially 
different v sini that demonstrate that initial conditions are 
important too. 


The early-type stars: O, B, A and early F 

The most massive stars (O and B types) sometimes 
show evidence of NON-RADIAL STELLAR PULSATIONS and strong 
winds, as well as abundance anomalies that may be driven 
by internal mixing. All these effects are related to rotation 
and complicate the determination and interpretation of 
rotation, and rotation rates can be high enough to influence 
a star’s evolution. Intermediate-mass stars (types A 
and early F) can have dramatic abundance anomalies 
and other effects that are related to diffusion in the 
surface layers, which in turn is affected by rotation. The 
presence of significant rotation in these stars in itself 
complicates studies that depend on measuring weak lines 
(to determine abundances) or on resolving components 
of absorption lines (to measure magnetic field strengths). 
Thus phenomena can take place on rapid rotators that 
cannot be directly observed. 

The distribution of v sini for the O stars, for example, 
has two peaks, one centered at about 100 km s-! and 
the other at 300 km s!, both about 100 km s~! wide. 
The highest vsini values are near 400 km s-!. The 
300 km s“! peak is seen only among the main sequence 
O stars, and it matches the distribution seen in Be stars, 
while the 100 km s~! peak is seen in all luminosity classes 
among the O stars: main sequence, giants and supergiants. 
Significant turbulence (at about the 20 km s7! level) is 
present in O stars as well, and this accounts for the absence 
of stars with sharp-lined spectra. The presence of strong 
radiation-driven winds in O stars means that significant 
mass loss is present, and this implies a trend of rotation 
rate with age while on the main sequence. 

Rotation can play a key role in the evolution of very 
massive stars (10-40Mo). First, rapid rotation can affect 
the stellar equilibrium, reducing the central pressure and 
temperature, leading to lower luminosity. The maximum 
luminosity decrease is ~3%. Second, rapid rotation can 
alter the shape of the atmosphere of the star, creating 
local differences in temperature and pressure. The effects 
depend on orientation and tend to make a star look cooler. 
The most important effect of rapid rotation, however, is its 
influence on mixing of chemical elements and on angular 
momentum transport in the STELLAR INTERIOR. Rotation 
especially influences turbulent diffusion. Higher rotation 
leads to more efficient turbulent diffusion, and that makes 
a star have about double the luminosity it would have 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Rotation on the Main Sequence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


in the absence of the diffusion. Also, rotationally induced 
mixing has been used to explain several features of massive 
star evolution, namely the N and He enrichment of O stars, 
and the lack of a gap (predicted by models) between main 
sequence and post-main-sequence stars in the observed 
H-R diagram. 

For B stars, the typical rotation rate is about 140 km s~ 
for all spectral subclasses, somewhat greater than for the 
more-massive O stars. Acomparison of rotation in B giants 
with B dwarfs shows that early B stars do not rotate as 
solid bodies and that differential rotation is important. 
An important subtype among the B stars is the Be stars 
(B stars with emission lines), which constitute about 15- 
20% of B stars. Be stars rotate at higher rates than non-Be 
stars, with an average equatorial velocity (corrected for 
sini) of 265 km s7! and with a distribution of velocities 
that is not skewed. In other words, the distribution of 
v sin i for Be stars is Gaussian, not the Maxwell—Boltzmann 
function expected for a random distribution of rotation 
axes. Note that the breakup velocity for Be stars is about 
500-550 km s~!, so they are comfortably below that level. 
The winds seen in Be stars are influenced by the rotation, 
being slow and dense in the equatorial regions and fast 
and tenuous at the poles; see Be STARS. 

Most O and B stars are found in star-forming regions 
because they are so young. The distributions of rotation 
for these various clusters of stars do not differ significantly 
from one another, given sample sizes. There are real and 
significant star-to-star differences in angular momenta at 
a given mass, but the distributions of angular momenta 
seem to be independent of initial conditions to a large 
degree. There are suggestions that metallicity plays a role 
in how angular momentum is distributed within clusters, 
but not yet enough information to form a clear picture. 

Most A and early-F stars have moderate rotation rates 
(50-100 km s~') that are consistent with the Kraft relation 
above, but among the A stars are found objects with 
peculiar chemical abundances, and these peculiarities are 
closely related to rotation. The Am, or metallic-line A, 
stars show weak Ca II and/or Sc II features, but enhanced 
lines of heavy elements. Many are found in BINARY SYSTEMS, 
and temperatures range from 7000 to 10 000 K. The Ap, or 
magnetic A, stars show enhanced lines of elements such 
as Si, Cr, Eu and Sr, few are in binaries and temperatures 
range from about 8000 to 15000 K. The HgMn stars have 
enhanced Hg and Mn lines and temperatures from 10000 
to 15000 K. 

All of these types have rotation rates well below 
average for Astars. The average v sini for Amand Ap stars 
is about 40 kms~!,a factor of 3-4 lower than normal stars of 
the same colors. Several arguments indicate that these low 
v sini values are not due to these stars being rapid rotators 
seen pole on. The HgMn stars rotate especially slowly: 
<20 km s! in almost all cases. Very few chemically 
peculiar stars have vsini > 100 km s-!. Thus a low 
rotation rate appears to be a necessary condition for the 
Ap, Am or HgMn phenomenon to arise, but that does 
not explain why these stars have low rotation rates in the 


1 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


first place. Rotation rates for these peculiar stars decline 
with age, suggesting that angular momentum loss enabled 
through a magnetic field (like the late-type stars discussed 
next) or the presence of a close companion plays a key 
role. However, the age relationship does not appear to 
hold for the HgMn stars, leaving their origin uncertain. 
One argument is that the HgMn stars, being cooler, spend 
enough time losing angular momentum in the pre-main- 
sequence phase to achieve the needed low rotation rates. 
The apparent relation between rotation and age for some 
of these peculiar stars may be just that—apparent—and 
the true origins are not fully understood. Note that the 
inverse statement about rotation and peculiar stars also 
holds: there are very few, if any, normal A stars that rotate 
slowly. 


The late-type stars: late F G, K and M 

Rotation is a key determinant of much of the phenomena 
we see on late-type stars because these stars possess 
convective envelopes that interact strongly with the 
rotation. The paradigm for understanding this behavior 
is drawn from what we see up close on the Sun: 
rotation and convection interact in the outer layers to 
produce complex circulation patterns in the ionized stellar 
material. Differential rotation is especially important in 
this mechanism—the dynamo mechanism (see DYNAMOS: 
SOLAR AND STELLAR)—that can regenerate a seed magnetic 
field. The magnetic field, in turn, can grip an ionized 
stellar wind well beyond the star’s surface, forcing angular 
momentum loss, a process we witness on the Sun. Thus 
the Sun by its nature loses angular momentum steadily, 
and, by analogy, other stars with convective envelopes 
and winds do likewise. We are confident that all late-type 
stars possess convective envelopes from basic physical 
considerations. We still know little about winds in stars, 
however, except in cases where they are very strong, and 
so we assume that other late-type stars have some sort of 
wind similar to the Sun’s. 

One consequence of this paradigm is that two stars 
formed at the same time but with different rotation 
rates will tend toward the same rotation rate with time 
because the more rapidly rotating star generates a stronger 
magnetic field and so loses angular momentum faster than 
its slowly rotating sibling. Young stars tend to rotate 
rapidly because they have not yet had time to lose much 
angular momentum, while old stars rotate slowly. 

The magnetic fields of late-type stars give rise to their 
rich phenomenology, collectively described as activity. 
This activity, in turn, can help us study the rotation. 
Surface inhomogeneities (i.e. spots) can be large enough to 
produce observable variations in the light of the star and 
from these the rotation period can be inferred. In general 
only the young, active stars have measurable rotation 
periods, although it should be possible to measure the 
same effect in old stars with observations of sufficient 
quality since space observations of the Sun reveal its 
rotation. Careful long-term observations have yielded 
changes in P,o¢ that indicate the presence of differential 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Rotation on the Main Sequence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rotation on other stars. The strength of activity in whatever 
form it is observed (Ca II H and K emission, Ha, x-rays, 
etc) is strongly correlated with the rotation for late-type 
stars, so that rapidly rotating stars are always active stars 
because of the strong magnetic fields generated, while 
slowly rotating stars are inactive. The rotation—activity 
relations have different slopes for different masses, so that 
lower-mass stars produce more activity for a given rotation 
rate. For reference in what follows, the Sun is 4.6 Gyr 
old and rotates with a period of about 27 days and an 
equatorial velocity of 1.8 kms7!. 

Young stars are studied by observing them in sTAR 
CLUSTERS, both because most zero-age main sequence 
(ZAMS) stars are in clusters and because clusters provide 
good-sized samples of stars of known age. The late-type 
members of clusters are well cataloged only for the few 
nearest of the clusters (e.g. the Pleiades, Hyades, a Persei, 
Praesepe, M34, M67), and so we assume that any one 
of these clusters provides a representative view of any 
ensemble of stars at that cluster’s age. 

The best-studied ZAMS cluster is the Pleiades, at an 
age of 100 Myr, and the Pleiades tells a very interesting 
story. The Pleiades contains stars with P,.. = 1/4 day, 
or 100 times the solar rate. The fastest-rotating G dwarfs 
found in the field rotate at about 10 times the solar rate, 
so these Pleiades stars are extraordinary. These ultrafast 
rotators (stars with vsini > 20 km s~') constitute about 
20% of the G and K dwarfs in the Pleiades, the remaining 
80% typically having vsini values below 10 km s7), 
Thus the distribution of rotation for these ZAMS stars is 
bimodal, with the dominant fraction being stars that rotate 
relatively slowly. Observations of the a Persei cluster (age 
50 Myr), while not as complete, confirm that the Pleiades 
is typical for its age. By contrast, there is very little spread 
in rotation for G dwarfs in the Hyades (age 600 Myr). 
Rotation periods are known for many Hyades stars, and 
the intrinsic spread in rotation about a mean relation is only 
about 10%. Moreover, there is a strong mass dependence 
to the rotation seen in Hyades stars, with a sharp decline 
in going from the late-F stars into the early-G dwarfs, 
whereas Pleiades stars in the same range show little mass 
dependence. These clusters tell us that, in the first billion 
years after reaching the ZAMS, solar-type stars can lose 
a lot of angular momentum and while doing so a strong 
mass dependence to the rotation is introduced and at the 
same time there is a dramatic convergence in the rotation 
rates. The spread in rotation in the Pleiades at any one 
mass is at least a factor of 20, versus the 10% seen in the 
Hyades. 

The details of this convergence are still not clear. 
The fact that it happens so quickly and that such a huge 
spread exists on the ZAMS has led to the suggestion that 
the convective envelope of a solar-type star can decouple 
from its radiative core. This means that we see the less- 
massive envelope spin down quickly, with more gradual 
replenishment with angular momentum from the core 
later. This decoupling model can also help to explain the 
strong mass dependence seen since the ratio of core to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


I T T T T T 
10- . + 
BL 8.° ° al 
‘ L ‘ae _ | 
=a ba © . ° oe . a] 
eo; an “shots : . oe were 
* $3, . * 
Bee, ° oe © % 
1 Co t R oot, ° ce | 
c es : ote , oe ce . os, ; 
0.5L . “Ecos oes er eet te 
Li | | | i L 
0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90 1.00 


(B-V) 


Figure 1. Rotation among solar-type stars. This diagram shows 
estimated rotation rates for stars like the Sun. A B — V color of 
0.50 corresponds to a spectral type of about F7 V and a mass of 
about 1.2Mo, while B — V = 1.00 corresponds to K2 V and 
0.7Mo. The rotation rates were computed from measures of 
activity in the Ca II H and K lines, using a rotation—activity 
relation calibrated on stars of known rotation periods. The 
rapidly rotating stars at a given color are the young ones which 
gradually lose angular momentum to evolve into the slowly 
rotating stars. The Sun is shown at B — V = 0.656. Note that the 
Sun has a very typical rotation rate for an old star of its mass and 
that there is a range in rotation of about a factor of 5 at any mass. 


envelope is very sensitive to the star’s mass. However, it is 
not strictly necessary to invoke core-envelope decoupling 
to explain the observations, and so it is not yet possible to 
be sure whether that is what is going on. 


Figure 1 shows the distribution of rotation rates from 
about 1.2M, down to about 0.7M,. Note that the Sun 
has a very typical rotation rate for an old star of its mass 
(color). The distribution flattens for B — V > 0.8, in part 
because these low-mass stars have main sequence lifetimes 
that exceed the age of the Galactic disk, meaning that we 
cannot yet know how slowly the oldest of them will rotate. 
The upper bound also flattens for these low masses, which 
has been interpreted as indicating that the timescale for 
angular momentum loss becomes longer for lower-mass 
stars. The distribution is independent of mass, indicating 
that over this mass range stars all behave similarly. 


In going to the lowest main sequence masses rotation 
becomes increasingly difficult to study. The small radii 
mean that v sini values tend to be small, and these stars are 
intrinsically faint. A survey of rotation in M dwarfs found 
only 25% to rotate above the detection limit of 2 km s71. 
However, several stars were found with large v sini values 
(30-50 km s7?), all of which were later than M3.5. This is 
consistent with the timescale for spindown increasing with 
decreasing stellar mass. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stellar Rotation on the Main Sequence 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T TT TTT T T T rr L T T 
100 - q 
E vims | 
30 ZAMS e| 
o} 

Co 10k = 
~ E | 
Gi [ J 
3 l= young | 
1 | 
E mature : 
i 1 | pip} ft 1 | 1 | | es 1 | 1 | | 

30 10 3 1 0.3 0.1 


M/Mo> 


Figure 2. Schematic diagram of rotation in main sequence stars. 
This figure was computed from characteristic v sini values as a 
function of spectral type, with masses and radii assumed for 
those spectral types based on model computations. What is 
shown is the surface angular velocity in proportion to the Sun’s, 
and the values are meant to be indicative of the broad trends. 
Normal main sequence stars follow the broad, dark line, 
although little is known for stars below about 0.5Mo. The Be 
stars rotate at about twice the rate of normal stars in the mass 
range indicated. Below ~1Mo, the locus of young stars is taken 
from figure 1, and the ZAMS region shows rotation rates for 
stars up to ~100 Myr in age. The “‘VLMS’ region is for very 
low-mass stars, although no comprehensive information exists 
for this mass range. 


Very low-mass stars: the bottom of the main 
sequence and brown dwarfs 

Only a handful of objects are known with masses at the 
substellar limit and below. These are all very faint, and, 
because they are inherently small objects, we expect very 
low vsini values. Thus very little information is now 
available, yet itis surprising: high-resolution spectroscopy 
has shown significant rotation in all cases (vsini ~ 10- 
20 km s~'). The objects so far studied tend to be young 
(because young brown dwarfs are brighter than old ones), 
but the angular velocities that correspond to these v sini 
values are comparable with the very fastest rotators at, 
say, 1My. More observations are needed to provide a 
fuller context for interpretation, but the explanation for 
these high rotation rates probably lies in what defines these 
very low-mass objects, namely their being fully convective 
objects. 


Summary 

Figure 2 summarizes our knowledge of rotation in main 
sequence stars. The ordinate is the surface angular velocity 
relative to the Sun’s. This declines for the highest-mass 
stars because such stars are less centrally condensed and so 
have large moments of inertia leading to large total angular 
momenta. The Be stars rotate at about twice the rate of 
normal main sequence stars in the mass range indicated, 
while Am and Ap stars rotate well below normal A stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The ZAMS region is broad in both mass and rotation rate 
because stars at and below 1Mo reach the ZAMS with 
widely varying rotation rates. The very low-mass stars 
are shown, but no comprehensive information exists on 
rotation in general below ~0.5Mo. 


Bibliography 
As noted above, the best sources of data are on the web 
(adc.gsfc.nasa.gov and simbad.u-strasbg.fr/Simbad). 


Gray D F 1992 The Observation and Analysis of Stellar 
Photospheres (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Kawaler S D 1987 Angular momentum in stars: the Kraft 
curve revisited Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 99 1322-8 
Soderblom D R, Pendleton J and Pallavicini R 1989 
Calibration stars for cross-correlation studies of 
stellar rotation, and an examination of the archival 

data Astron. J. 97 539-45 


David R Soderblom 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stephan’s Quintet (NGC 7317, 7318A, 7318B, 7319, 
7320) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stephan’s Quintet (NGC 7317, 7318A, 
7318B, 7319, 7320) 


A group of five galaxies in the constellation Pegasus, 
position RA 22 24™, dec. +33° 42’. Four appear to be 
gravitationally interacting, and show similar redshifts. 
The fifth, NGC 7320, has a much lower redshift and is 
thus a foreground object not associated with the others. 
The group was discovered by Edouard Stephan in 1876. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stereo Comparator ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stereo Comparator 


A device that utilizes binocular vision to compare two 
images of the same area. The light paths are arranged 
so that the image seen in the left-hand eyepiece coincides 
with the image viewed in the right-hand eyepiece. Any 
differences between the two images appear to stand out 
from the image plane. 


See also: blink comparator. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Steward Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Steward Observatory 


The Steward Observatory (SO), created in 1916, is the 
research arm of the Department of Astronomy of the 
University of Arizona (UA). Its headquarters are in Tucson, 
Arizona, on the university campus. Its observational 
facilities are on Mount Graham (10 m Heinrich Hertz 
SMT; 1.8 m VATT and the Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) 
with twin 8.4 m mirrors), Mount Hopkins (6.5 m MMT), 
Kitt Peak (2.3 m Bok) and the Catalina Mountains (2 x 
1.5 m) in Arizona, and on Las Campanas, Chile (Magellan 
Project; 2 x 6.5 m). The LBT, Magellan, MMT, SMT and 
VATT are all collaborative projects. The SO components 
of these facilities are used by scientists and students at 
the UA, Arizona State University and Northern Arizona 
University. 

SO is also involved in space astronomy research, 
currently including HST, ISO and SIRTF. It is participating 
in development programs for NGST and TPF of the NASA 
Origins program. SO also operates the Mirror Laboratory, 
located under Arizona stadium. 

SO research programs focus on optical, infrared 
and submillimeter astronomy, on theoretical astrophysics, 
and on astronomical instrumentation. Major areas of 
current activity include: cosmology; the intergalactic 
medium, quasars and active galactic nuclei; dynamics, 
formation and evolution of galaxies; star formation in 
galaxies, including starburst galaxies; star formation and 
the interstellar medium; supernovae; degenerate stars; 
cataclysmic variables; brown dwarfs; and extra-solar 
planets. 

SO has 25 teaching staff, about 25 further research 
scientists and a total staff of around 250. SO is supported 
by State of Arizona funding and by research grants and 
contracts. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.as.arizona.edu/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stingray Nebula (Hen 1357) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stingray Nebula (Hen 1357) 


A planetary nebula in the constellation Ara, position RA 
17 16.4™, dec. —59° 29’. It is the youngest planetary 
nebula known, having formed possibly as recently as 
200 years ago. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Stokes, George Gabriel (1819-1903) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stokes, George Gabriel (1819-1903) 


Born in Skreen, County Sligo, Ireland, became Lucasian 
Professor at Cambridge, best known for his work on 
hydrodynamics and Stokes’ law of viscosity. In 1854 he 
explained the Fraunhofer lines in the solar spectrum as 
being caused by atoms in the outer layers of the Sun 
absorbing certain wavelengths, but when kIRCHHoFF later 
published the same explanation Stokes yielded priority to 
his more complete account. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Stony Meteorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stony Meteorite 


A meteorite having a composition primarily of silicates, 
with only a small (typically 5%) metal content, mostly 
nickel-iron. Stony meteorites are also referred to simply 
as stones; an obsolete name is aerolite. Stones are 
by far the commonest type of meteorite, accounting 
for nearly 93% of all known specimens. Their dark 
fusion crust (where the outer layers have been partially 
melted by frictional heating during their plunge through 
the Earth’s atmosphere, then resolidified) gives them 
a resemblance to terrestrial rocks. There are two 
main classes of stony meteorite: chondrites (96% of all 
stones) and achondrites (4%). Chondrites consist of an 
agglomeration of millimeter-sized chondrules, particles 
believed to represent primordial material that condensed 
from the solar nebula. The rarer achondrites, as the name 
implies, lack chondrules, implying that they are fragments 
of a parent body that has undergone differentiation. 


Seealso: achondrite, carbonaceous chondrite, chondrites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stony-iron Meteorite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stony-iron Meteorite 


A meteorite composed of roughly equal proportions of 
silicate (stony) material and metals (mostly nickel-iron); 
formerly called a siderolite. Stony-irons are the least 
common of the three main types of meteorite, accounting 
for less than 1% of all known specimens. The great 
majority of them fall into either of two main classes: 
the pallasites and the meso-siderites. Pallasites consist 
of a matrix of nickel-iron, the gaps in which are filled 
with olivine (magnesium-—iron silicates), and are inferred 
to have formed near the core/mantle boundary of a 
differentiated body. Meso-siderites resemble breccias: 
they consist of fragments of eucrite and howardite 
(varieties of achondritic material) mixed with nickel-iron, 
and are thought to have been produced by impacts on the 
surfaces of planetary bodies. The largest known single 
fragment at 1.4 tonnes is the Huckitta (Australia, 1924) 
meteorite, which is a pallasite. The fragments of the 
Brenham (Kansas, 1882) meteorite, also a pallasite, that 
were collected had a total mass of 4.3 tonnes. 


See also: achondrite, breccia. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Stromgren, Bengt (1908-87) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Stromgren, Bengt (1908-87) 


Danish astronomer, son of a former director of the 
Copenhagen University Observatory, succeeded his 
father, but was also director of Yerkes and McDonald 
Observatories. Str6mgren calculated what happened 
when a hot star emitted ultraviolet into the gas 
clouds around it, ionizing the hydrogen in a region 
now known as a Stromgren sphere, or the H II 
region. He created the Stromgren photometric system 
measuring the brightness of stars in defined spectral 
bands as a quantitative counterpart to the Morgan— 
Keenan spectroscopic classifications system. With it he 
determined the sizes, luminosities, etc of the stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Streete, Thomas (1622-89) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Streete, Thomas (1622-89) 


Born in Cork, Ireland, became an English government 
clerk, wrote Astronomia Carolina in 1661, which was 
important in disseminating Keplerian astronomy in 
England. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


String Theory/Superstring Theory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


String Theory/Superstring Theory 


A theory of fundamental particles and forces in which 
the basic entity is an exceedingly short one-dimensional 
structure (a ‘string’) rather than a point-like particle. These 
strings are envisaged as being about 10~*° m in length, 
different modes of vibration of the strings corresponding 
to different types of particle with different energies 
and masses. When the ideas of supersymmetry are 
applied to string theory, the outcome is superstring theory. 
Superstring theory requires a ten-dimensional spacetime, 
all but four of these dimensions (length, breadth, height 
and time) being hidden in the present-day universe. 
Superstring theory is one of the prime candidates for a 
‘theory of everything’, which embraces all of the forces 
and particles of nature. 


See also: fundamental forces, fundamental particles, 
spacetime, supersymmetry. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun 
and Stars, 1800-1955 


Evolution by contraction 

The idea that stars formed through gravitational contrac- 
tion of luminous fluids was put on an observational ba- 
sis by William Herschel (see HERSCHEL FAMILY), who worked 
very much in the spirit of late eighteenth century natu- 
ralism that began to ask questions about the origin and 
growth of systems. Whereas Kant, Laplace, Buffon and 
Hutton tended to focus on the origin of the solar system 
and the earth, Herschel considered stars and stellar sys- 
tems, a ‘natural history of the heavens’. Observing some 
2500 NEBULAE, by 1811 he published a classification that de- 
scribed a continuous sequence: diffuse patches condensed 
and circularized into distinct nebulosities with stellar cen- 
ters, and eventually into true stars. In Herschel’s cosmol- 
ogy, nebular fluids were active and self-luminous. 

Aside from the question of the origin of nebular light, 
stars were believed to shine because they were hot and 
so naturally questions were raised about the source of that 
heat, and its maintenance. By the middle of the nineteenth 
century, lingering speculation about the permanency of 
the stars was put to rest by one of the consequences of the 
rise of thermodynamics: the law of energy conservation. 
The gravitational potential of a fluid mass was itself a 
source of mechanical energy that was converted into light 
and heat as the mass contracted. J J Waterston, J R 
Mayer, William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) and Hermann 
von Helmholtz all applied this concept to the origin and 
maintenance of solar heat, and showed that it provided 
an abundant source of energy greater than any other. 
Though inadequate to sustain the Sun’s output over time 
scales demanded by geology and biology, gravitational 
contraction provided the conceptual framework within 
which astronomers thought about the origin and lives of 
stars for most of the following century. The term ‘STELLAR 
EVOLUTION’ came to describe this process of change from 
an indefinite to definite form, in the spirit of Herbert 
Spencer’s First Principles, although the term ‘evolution’ 
itself had been applied to celestial processes as early as 
the late 1840s by J P Nichol. 

During the latter half of the nineteenth century, 
astronomers accepted the Kelvin-Helmholtz theory of 
gravitational contraction only in its generality as the 
source of the Sun’s heat, finding the 1870 speculative solar 
model developed by Washington patent clerk J Homer 
Lane—based upon thermodynamics, the gas laws, and 
a theory of convective equilibrium derived from Espy— 
to be a ‘remarkable fact’ that might have applicability, 
depending upon the state of the Sun’s constitution. In 
the 1870s and 1880s, Lane’s ideas were developed and 
refined independently by August Ritter, a professor in 
Aachen, into a theory of stellar evolution that described 
how the temperature in a glowing globe of gas varied with 
radius from the center to the surface of the star. Ritter’s 
mathematical treatment envisioned stars beginning their 
lives as vastly extended low-temperature gas spheres 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


which heated upon contraction into bright blue and 
white stars to the point where they became too dense to 
maintain the perfect gas state. From there on, subsequent 
gravitational contraction was accompanied by a general 
cooling of the sphere to the point of extinction. Ritter 
published some 18 papers in 6 years to produce a 
comprehensive study of the nature of stars. His work 
remained obscure, however, until revived by Thomson 
and others in the 1890s. 

In 1888, admitting ‘no certain knowledge’ about the 
Sun’s structure, solar specialist C A Young felt the Sun 
had to be gaseous, because of its low mean density, 
following somehow the laws of Boyle, Dalton and Gay- 
Lussac. By the end of the century, the source of the Sun’s 
heat remained gravitational, which was not a problem 
for astronomers, though geologists and biologists found 
it seriously deficient. 


Late nineteenth century scenarios 
Ritter’s theory of stellar evolution was superficially similar 
to one created by the astronomical spectroscopist NORMAN 
LOCKYER at about the same time, and called by him the 
‘meteoritic hypothesis’. Influenced by the coincidence 
of a Nova in the constellation of Corona Borealis in May 
1866, the first to be studied spectroscopically, and by a 
spectacular display of (the now called Leonid) meteors in 
November, Lockyer sought out a connection between the 
two, ultimately seeing meteors as a primary mechanical 
agent of change in stellar evolution. Instead of a 
mathematical theory of convection, however, Lockyer, the 
founder and editor of Nature, relied upon what he believed 
was an empirical correlation between spectral features 
seen in vaporized laboratory samples of meteorites and 
other substances, and the spectra of nebulae and stars. 
From his experiments, Lockyer concluded in the 1870s 
that heat could break down atoms and molecules into 
more fundamental ‘basic’ components, and he used this 
as an explanatory framework to interpret the differences 
seen in the spectra of the Sun and stars as due to 
differences in temperature. By the 1880s, he had also 
concluded that nebulae and nebulous stars exhibited 
spectra indicating they were composed of incandescent 
swarms of colliding and vaporizing meteoritic material, 
and from this constructed a life history for stars which 
began with nebulous meteoritic swarms, condensed and 
heated from red to being yellow, blue and white stars as the 
meteoritic material was consumed, and, having consumed 
all meteoritic fuel, finally cooled back to dull red stars and 
to extinction. Lockyer presented his theory in what has 
come to be known as his temperature arch (figure 1). 
Ritter’s, and especially Lockyer’s, scenario of a 
double-value temperature history for stars ran against 
conventional views of the direct descent of hot stars from 
nebulae, and their subsequent cooling to extinction. HC 
VOGEL and WILLIAM HUGGINS championed the dominant view, 
using as evidence the linear sequence of stellar spectra of 
four major classes which were eventually refined to seven 
classes by the vast spectroscopic classification project at 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CLASS lz of a} 
prepoueant H ABSORETION. 


CLASS Ne . 
Ca ETL aESORPTION 
CLASS tile 
vniete | 
S RSORPTION: 
CLASS Ie 
BRIGHT H. 


CLASS Ila 


Cass, 


Figure 2. A Secchi’s linear sequence of spectra, from blue to red showing the growth of lines. Secchi’s and Vogel’s similar 
classifications represented the dominant view of a linear cooling history for stars. (Figure 223, from Young C A 1898 General Astronomy 
revised edn (Boston: Ginn) p 532.) 


Harvard in the 1890s (figure 2). Although presented 
as an empirical classification originally based upon the 
strengths of the H and K lines of calcium and on the 
Balmer series of hydrogen, the Harvard system (O, B, A, 
F, G, K, M) was also a continuous progression of color 
from white to red. The strengths of the hydrogen lines 
peaked at Harvard spectral type A, however, because the 
alphabetical lettering sequence was altered in the 1890s to 
place stars whose spectra most closely resembled nebulae 
at the head of the series (O and B). This was clearly an 
evolutionary consideration. 


Huggins and Lockyer engaged in many disputes over 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


their work, and none wasas hot as that of stellar evolution. 
Privately, however, Huggins claimed that he was not 
against the idea of a double-valued temperature arch, only 
that he wanted it to be based upon criteria other than those 
Lockyer was promoting. In 1898, he privately admitted to 
colleagues that something like a temperature arch based 
on Lane’s law would surely be found someday, but not 
based upon Lockyer’s criteria. 

At the turn of the century, then, two different scenarios 
for the course of stellar evolution were at play. One argued 
(Lockyer, Ritter) that two classes of red stars (types IIT and 
IV on Vogel’s system) were widely different in age, and the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


other (Huggins, Vogel) that they were not. Astronomers 
generally accepted the latter view of the descent of blue 
stars from nebulae because there was dynamical evidence 
supporting it. J C KAPTEYN’s detection of two star streams 
implied that different groups of stars had different origins, 
and hence that studies of stellar development could 
somehow be informed by kinematical studies. Correlating 
the dynamical behavior of groups of stars to evolutionary 
models was an interest shared by Lick Observatory’s w w 
CAMPBELL, Who had already put much of his telescope time 
and manpower to the task of determining RADIAL VELOCITIES. 
Less interested in star streaming than in data gathering, 
Campbell knew that the observed proper motion of a 
star was statistically an inverse function of its distance, 
while its radial velocity was independent of distance, and 
therefore he was on top of one of the most powerful 
distance-independent techniques for understanding the 
origins of stars. Starting in 1901, Campbell searched for 
correlations between kinematics and spectrum class, and 
by 1910 had found the same increase in velocity with 
Harvard spectral type that Kapteyn had found. Although 
a minor priority dispute ensued between the two, the 
correlation of velocity with age seemed to be an established 
fact. Since the correlation was linear, this lent strong 
support to linear descent theories. 


Stellar evolution as an agenda 

The evolution of the stars, linked closely to the ‘sidereal 
problem’, the history of the form and nature of the sidereal 
universe, both astronomers and astrophysicists claimed 
at the turn of the century, were driving forces propelling 
their industry. GEORGE ELLERY HALE cited the problem as a 
rationalization to build his observatories, and Kapteyn 
capitalized on it to cement their relationship as Hale 
turned to the Dutch astronomer to help him define much 
of the stellar astronomy program at his newly opened 
observatory atop Mount Wilson. As Hale told Kapteyn 
in 1907, ‘many results obtained in the course of your 
investigations will be indispensable, if we are to draw any 
joint conclusions regarding stellar development’. (Hale to 
Kapteyn, 14 March 1907, Hale Papers, California Institute 
of Technology, hereinafter ‘Hale P’.). 

Hale long knew that the pursuit of the deepest 
problems in astrophysics, specifically the origins and 
evolution of the Sun and stars, required many talents. 
On the occasion of thinking through funding priorities 
for American astronomy in 1906, Hale told simon NEWCOMB 
that astronomers were too specialized and had to be 
encouraged to move away from ‘the details and the merely 
technical elements of investigation’. (Hale to Newcomb, 
21 March 1906, Hale P.) By 1908, Hale justified his research 
program at his third observatory, the new Mount Wilson 
Solar Observatory, in terms of stellar evolution, attacking 
the problem ‘along converging lines, leading from solar, 
stellar, and laboratory investigations’. (Hale, The Study of 
Stellar Evolution, x.) 

Huggins’ prediction came to pass in the work of 
HENRY NORRIS RUSSELL Of Princeton. Russell had trained 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


under C A Young, who was partial to the theories of 
Lane and Lockyer, and also became fascinated with the 
origin and history of double star systems, taking a year of 
postdoctoral training under George Darwin at Cambridge 
in 1902 and 1903. Russell saw DOUBLE sTARS as the means 
to explore stellar evolution, mainly in providing a way to 
determine stellar densities—an indicator of relative age— 
and set about to find a way to test Lockyer’s scheme. 
Coincidentally, he was hired by the Cambridge University 
Observatory to assist A R Hinks ina photographic parallax 
program, and saw in this work another opportunity to 
perform the test. Parallaxes yielded absolute magnitudes, 
and by 1908 Russell realized that two very different types 
of red stars existed in space: small dull ones, and huge 
luminous ones. 

From 1909 through 1913, Russell presented his results 
in various ways, highlighting the existence of the two 
classes of red stars, and how they were linked in an 
evolutionary scheme. Though he initially claimed to the 
contrary, he was probably aware that he was not alone 
in this realization. He was the first, however, to use 
direct means (parallaxes and binary studies) to deduce 
the existence of giant suns. EJNAR HERTZSPRUNG, a Danish 
photochemist turned astronomer, had also found that 
two distinct luminosity classes existed. Prompted by the 
spectroscopic classification devised by Antonia C Maury 
at Harvard, Hertzsprung realized that a peculiar subtype, 
stars exhibiting sharp hydrogen lines and stronger metal 
lines than their counterparts on the alphabetical Harvard 
system, all had very small proper motions, yet many were 
among the brightest stars in the sky. This led him indirectly 
to the idea that a collateral series of stars existed, and at 
first he interpreted his findings in an evolutionary scheme. 
Unlike Russell, he soon dropped any speculation about the 
evolutionary place of his ‘giant’ suns. 


Russell’s ‘giant-to-dwarf’ theory of stellar 
evolution 

Russell started publishing his findings in 1909 and by 
August 1910, at a meeting of the Astronomical and 
Astrophysical Society of America at Harvard, Russell 
expanded on his theory of stellar evolution, for the first 
time relating it to Lockyer’s, noting that he had rederived 
it by totally independent means. He also gave it a physical 
interpretation using the convective models of Lane, Ritter 
and Emden. Russell’s ‘giant-to-dwarf’ theory envisioned 
stars beginning as vastly bloated giants in the perfect gas 
state, contracting under gravity and heating, attaining a 
density where, deviating now from the perfect gas state, 
they cooled under continued gravitational contraction. 
Unlike the dominant linear temperature model of stars 
descending from nebulae by contraction and cooling, 
Russell’s theory, following Lockyer, viewed stars passing 
through the observed spectral series twice: once heating, 
then cooling. Russell also linked his findings to Darwin’s 
model for binary fission. With his first graduate student, 
HARLOW SHAPLEY, Russell confirmed that what distinguished 
giants from dwarfs was density, not mass, using eclipsing 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Russell’s first diagram based upon direct parallax 
measurements. The sizes of the dots and circles indicate 
different ranges of probable error. (Figure 1 from ‘Relations 
between the spectra and other characteristics of the stars’ Popular 
Astron. 22 (1914) 285.) 


binary data and a new and highly efficient mode of data 
reduction Russell devised. These efforts culminated in a 
series of talks, and finally in his famous paper which was 
presented in 1913 and 1914 in London and then Atlanta. At 
this time he also devised his version of what has come to 
be known as the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL (H-R) DIAGRAM, Which 
he presented as the embodiment of his theory of stellar 
evolution (figure 3). 

Russell, however, had a lot of convincing to do. 
Relative ages deduced from the old linear theory fit 
nicely Kapteyn’s and Campbell’s observation of increasing 
velocity with spectral type, as well as with the observation 
that the periods of close binary star systems increased with 
spectral class (and hence age), and with the argument 
that stars formed in the plane of the Milky Way and 
then migrated away. Giant suns of late spectral type, 
the youngest stars on Russell’s theory, were found at all 
galactic latitudes, and the kinematics of both giant and 
dwarf red stars were similar, and generally larger than 
those of the earlier spectral classes. In short, Russell’s 
model played havoc with Kapteyn’s neat dynamically 
evolving system. ARTHUR STANLEY EDDINGTON, then at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Greenwich, knew this, but also realized that Russell had 
discovered something fundamental in his diagram. He 
was therefore anxious to reprint a sample and discuss 
its implications in his own studies of the structure and 
evolution of the sidereal universe. He also warmed to 
the existence of giant stars when he found that he could 
describe them very nicely using his theory of radiative 
equilibrium, which he developed over a period of years 
starting in 1916. 

Belief in the existence of giant stars was strengthened 
with the discovery at Mount Wilson by Walter Sydney 
Adams and Arnold Kohlschiitter of a luminosity effect 
in spectra, another example of empirical correlation. 
Although they were asked by Kapteyn to search for 
interstellar absorption, what they found was that some 
spectral lines were sensitive indicators of luminosity, a 
confirmation of what Maury had found and Hertzsprung 
exploited. They took the next step, however, and used 
this correlation to develop their spectroscopic parallax 
technique, and in so doing confirmed the existence of high- 
luminosity red stars, or giants. 

Russell, Adams and others remained concerned, 
however, about the lack of a rational physical basis for all 
these empirical correlations between luminosity, spectrum 
and mass. How closely did stars approximate black-body 
radiation? What really governed the changes seen in 
the spectral classes of the stars: temperature, pressure, 
density, composition? By 1920 Russell’s theory of 
stellar evolution enjoyed greater popularity as Eddington 
championed giants as perfect gas-spheres in radiative 
equilibrium. 


Eddington’s radiative models 

Eddington was not an immediate convert. He initially 
favored the evolutionary interpretation of Kapteyn’s star 
streaming, and worried that Russell’s ‘giant-to-dwarf’ 
theory destroyed the nice association of ‘early type’ white 
and blue stars with nebulae, as the old one could. In 
1916, reconsidering the convective gas theory of Emden, 
partly to explore the behavior of globular clusters, but 
also to explore the nature of pulsating variables then 
suggested by Harlow Shapley, Eddington decided that 
Ritter’s (and hence Russell’s) theory of stellar evolution 
could be put ona rational basis using radiative equilibrium 
to describe the interiors of giant stars, assumed to be 
in the state of a perfect gas. Studying both the effects 
of transfer of energy by radiation and the pressure of 
radiation required a far more sophisticated analysis of the 
behavior of polytropic gas spheres as radiative engines 
than Emden had provided. In a series of papers in 
1916 and 1917, Eddington established his radiative theory, 
and showed that he could describe giant stars as they 
were distributed on Russell’s diagram; in effect, he found 
that the luminosity of a giant star was independent of 
its stage of evolution, as long as it remained in the 
perfect gas state. This nicely described Russell’s giant 
branch (figure 3). Eddington’s subsequent attention to 
the theory of polytropes became the core of physical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and mathematical studies in stellar structure for decades, 
propelled by his seminal text The Internal Constitution of the 
Stars which appeared in 1926. 

Much of Eddington’s work was initiated using little 
more physics than the standard gas laws and the concept of 
local thermodynamic equilibrium developed by Kirchhoff; 
as a case in point, he was constantly frustrated by his lack 
of knowledge of the mechanism of absorption, embodied 
in the opacity of the gaseous stellar interior. Absorption 
coefficients derived from Eddington’s models based upon 
astrophysical data differed widely from theoretical values 
derived by the physicist H A Kramers. 

Russell’s theory of stellar evolution meshed nicely 
with Eddington’s radiative giants at first, and gave both 
great popularity in the early 1920s. Probably the high point 
in their confidence came in 1919, when Russell realized 
how Eddington’s radiative stars, obeying Lane’s law and 
possessing some form of explosive radioactive energy 
source, could still be stable. Since the specific heat of a 
mass of gas obeying Lane’s law is negative, the more heat 
it loses, Russell reasoned, ‘the hotter it gets; and the more 
heat that is added to it internally, the colder it becomes!’ 
Stars were, therefore, ‘automatically self-limited’. (Russell 
to Shapley, 5 May; to Webster 9 June 1919, Russell Papers, 
Princeton.) 

Russell’s theory fitted Eddington’s models until the 
end of 1924, when Eddington realized, in consequence 
of his derivation of the theoretical mass—luminosity 
relationship, that dwarf stars could be in the perfect gas 
state as well as giants. Astronomers had long known 
that there was a relationship between the masses and 
luminosities of stars, but Eddington was the first to show 
why, on a rational basis. If dwarfs stars were also in the 
perfect gas state, however, then they would continue to 
heat upon contraction, and Russell’s theory was untenable. 
The only way to get around this conundrum was to have 
stars lose mass as they aged. 


Time scales, composite models and energy sources 
One of the major considerations that significantly altered 
thinking in the 1920s about the lives of stars and the 
nature of their structure was the realization some years 
prior that the gravitational energy of the Sun was woefully 
inadequate to provide a lifetime of energy output required 
by geology or biology. Eddington, Russell and others 
considered two possible mechanisms for sustaining the 
energy output of the Sun: the annihilation of matter and 
the transmutation of hydrogen into the heavier elements. 
Although the latter was compelling for Eddington, mainly 
because of the careful studies by Aston showing that 
atomic masses were nearly integral, and by Rutherford’s 
transformation of nitrogen into oxygen, both he and 
Russell were drawn to the former, because it offered a 
means to let stars lose mass as they aged. Later in the 
1920s, to further bolster his ‘giant-to-dwarf’ theory, Russell 
invoked two sources of nuclear energy, one occurring in 
giant stars and one in dwarfs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


When Hubble’s velocity—distance relationship lim- 
ited the age of the universe to an intermediate time scale 
of billions of years, the trillions of years of stellar energy 
provided by matter annihilation was no longer required. 
An intermediate time scale was also urged by Bart Bok’s 
studies of cluster lifetimes, and, by the mid-1930s as well, 
with hydrogen accepted as the most abundant element in 
stellar atmospheres and interiors, and refined knowledge 
of isotopic masses by Aston confirming that element syn- 
thesis for hydrogen would work, that mechanism domi- 
nated over matter annihilation. By the end of the decade, 
with improved knowledge of the structure of the nucleus, 
physicists Hans Bethe and Carl F von Weizsacker, a student 
of W Heisenberg, solved the stellar energy problem by de- 
veloping the proton-proton and carbon-nitrogen—oxygen 
cycles. 

During the same two decades that the nuclear energy 
source was sought after, astronomers came to realize that 
even without knowing the specific mechanism, realistic 
stellar models had to account for sucha source acting in the 
STELLAR INTERIOR. Some astronomers, including Eddington, 
argued that fusion processes took place throughout 
stars, since any star in which the energy generating 
process depended too strongly on temperature would be 
unstable. But the trend in the 1930s, led by theorists 
such as S Rosseland and Ludwig Biermann, a student at 
G6ttingen, was to concentrate the nuclear power source 
at the stellar center, removing energy by convection. The 
use of composite polytropic gas-spheres, developed in the 
late 1920s and early 1930s by theorists such as Thomas 
G Cowling, E A Milne, Bengt Str6mgren and Russell, 
allowed stars to be described by a series of concentric 
polytropic distributions. Various solutions existed—one 
devoid of singularities, a centrally condensed solution, or 
a collapsed [degenerate] solution which could be fitted 
together to fit observed characteristics of stars. This 
new versatility eventually paved the way for Cowling, 
a student of Milne, to construct a stable point-source 
model. By the mid-1930s, utilizing a small convective 
core surrounded by a radiative envelope, his model 
became the framework within which physicists von 
Weizsacker, Bethe, George Gamow and Edward Teller 
examined nuclear processes in stars, employing the idea 
that hydrogen was transformed into heavier elements. 

The successful search for the source of stellar energy 
brought nuclear physicists into astronomy. GEORGE 
GAMow, ‘Teller, Charles Critchfield, Robert Marshak 
and others became interested in this new application. 
Gamow pursued it passionately, writing constantly and 
excitedly to astronomers requesting observational data, 
and so became a bridge between the professional worlds 
of astrophysics and nuclear physics. His greatest 
contribution was, quite possibly, as host of a conference 
in Washington, DC in April 1938 which brought the 
worlds together. Bethe attended, and within months had 
worked out the physics to show that von Weizsacker’s 
proton-proton cycle (four hydrogen nuclei fusing into a 
helium nucleus) could indeed provide the right amount of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


energy to power the Sun, and that his own ‘CNO’ cycle, 
where carbon catalysed four protons to fuse into a helium 
nucleus, could also account for the greater luminosities of 
massive main sequence stars. 

The landmark contributions of Bethe and von 
Weizsacker had immediate impact. Matter annihilation 
was no longer in vogue, which made the main sequence 
a locus of equilibrium points, not an evolutionary track. 
And astronomers could opt for an ‘intermediate’ time- 
scale on the order of 10!° years, which agreed reasonably 
with the cosmological and geological time scales. The 
extreme temperature dependence of these new fusion 
mechanisms supported Cowling’s refinement of the point- 
source model for stellar structure. Energy generation acted 
as if it were limited to the centers of stars, and was not 
distributed throughout the stellar volume. The hydrogen 
fusion process also required that hydrogen be a significant 
constituent of stars. 


The place of giants in the aging process 

During the 1930s, the first suggestions that RED GIANTS 
could be old evolved stars rather than young stars 
appeared. In 1932 and 1933, Strémgren explored the 
theoretical distribution of stars on the H-R diagram, 
comparing it with observational data for masses, spectra 
and composition. He found that the position of any star 
on the diagram was determined solely by its mass and 
hydrogen abundance. BENGT STROMGREN then looked to 
see how a star’s position on the H-R diagram would 
change as its hydrogen content diminished, assuming 
with others that hydrogen was expended in some yet 
unknown nuclear process to power the stars. He found 
that evolutionary tracks lay across lines of equal hydrogen 
abundance, and as hydrogen was consumed, stars would 
‘leave’ the main sequence and head up and to the right, 
or toward the region of the giant red stars. He stated 
explicitly that as stars aged, they would expand (figure 
4). 

In the late 1930s GERARD KUIPER and Str6mgren were 
hired by Otto Struve to the Yerkes Observatory staff. 
Kuiper, primarily a double star man, was also very inter- 
ested in re-examining the H-R diagrams of galactic clus- 
ters that Robert Trumpler had produced. Stimulated by 
Strémgren’s theoretical work on diminishing hydrogen 
content, Kuiper placed many clusters on the same dia- 
gram, and found that their main sequences coincided at 
lower luminosities and diverged for the higher luminosi- 
ties. The divergence was systematically correlated with 
the consumption of hydrogen and all the divergences led 
to the giant region. Kuiper only noted that these diver- 
gences were somehow clues to evolutionary change. Nor 
did he discuss explicitly the direction of evolution, as 
Strémgren had before him. There was simply not enough 
physics available, and observational data for masses and 
abundances were far from consistent. Kuiper, an obser- 
vational astronomer, was not able to create a convincing 
picture. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


‘£8 

au 

ee 
hod gf wr Ps 
g 5 gbe 

df afr dF an 


Figure 4. Theoretical distribution of stars by constant hydrogen 
content (full curves) and by constant mass (broken curves). 
(From figure 4 in Stroémgren B 1933 ‘On the interpretation of the 
Hertzsprung—Russell-diagram’ Z. Astrophys. 7 244.) 


At the end of the decade and into the early 
1940s, continued exploration of various inhomogeneous 
stratified models, first suggested by ERNsT J OPIk, led 
Gamow, S$ CHANDRASEKHAR and others to consider what 
happens when hydrogen is exhausted in the stellar core, 
and hydrogen fusion commences in a shell surrounding 
the core. Skeptical about Gamow’s work, Chandrasekhar, 
with Louis R Henrich and Mario Schénberg, developed 
true hydrogen shell burning models. These models 
demonstrated for the first time that changes in composition 
were related to some type of evolution away from the 
main sequence. Out of this came the famous Schénberg— 
Chandrasekhar limit, which placed an upper limit to 
the size of the exhausted core (not to be confused with 
Chandrasekhar’s earlier study of the limiting masses of 
white dwarfs). 

In the post-World War 2 era, the continued application 
of nuclear physics to the problem of stellar energy, 
along with increasingly versatile models made possible 
by improved methods of numerical computation aided 
by high-speed computers, led to an improved ability 
to describe stars in all stages of stellar evolution, 
from red giants to white dwarfs. Along the way, 
several fundamental adjustments in theory and technique 
aided the process of change. In the 1920s and early 
1930s, analytical methods of modelling still dominated 
in theoretical astrophysics in the manner Eddington 
established them. But by the mid- to late 1930s, younger 
theorists in Europe and the United States started to build 
stellar models by numerical techniques making its easier 
to fit together composite polytropic layers. Furthest 
from the analytical tradition so strong at Cambridge, 
Russell always preferred numerical calculations, whereas 
Chandrasekhar, breaking tradition with his mentors Milne 
and Eddington, used both numerical and analytical 
techniques. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In contrast to Eddington, physicists such as George 
Gamow actively sought out astrophysicists to engage 
them in the search for solutions to major questions 
in stellar structure and evolution. After Bethe and 
von Weizsacker established the hydrogen transmutation 
processes active in stars, and Strémgren provided 
astrophysical confirmation of the importance of hydrogen 
content, it was Gamow, Chandrasekhar, Baade and 
then MARTIN SCHWARZSCHILD who opened avenues of cross- 
disciplinary communication to establish the intellectual 
infrastructure out of which the modern picture of post- 
main sequence stellar evolution would emerge in the 
1950s. As a first step, a theoretical group led by 
Schwarzschild in Princeton (where Lyman Spitzer and 
John Wheeler were close at hand), and an observational 
group led by Walter Baade at Mount Wilson, made a 
combined attack on the relative ages of star clusters, 
equating their appearance on the H-R diagram to 
theoretical models of stars with exhausted hydrogen 
cores. The end result in the mid-1950s was that 
giant stars were no longer thought to be stars in pre- 
main sequence formation, but were post-main sequence 
stars with hydrogen-exhausted cores gaining power from 
hydrogen burning in shells surrounding their cores. Two 
major problems had to be cleared up, however, before the 
framework of the picture was complete. 

In April 1952, Cornell nuclear physicist EDWIN SALPETER, 
who had recently become attracted to the field while in 
residence at Caltech working with William A. Fowler, Jesse 
Greenstein and Baade, reviewed concepts of stellar energy 
and evolution, and found the latter in a general state 
of confusion regarding where white dwarfs, red giants 
and intrinsic variables were situated in the evolutionary 
process. Indeed, what maintained red giants in their 
vastly bloated state of existence? All stars that had 
exhausted the supply of hydrogen available for fusion, 
assumed to be rotating and in a well-mixed state, were 
still thought to resume evolving somehow by contraction. 
There were other problems too, such as how to form the 
heavy elements. Bethe and von Weizsacker’s hydrogen 
fusion mechanisms, the proton—proton and CNO cycles, 
could only go so far, and neither of them, nor a speculated 
process of neutron capture by helium in the Bic BANG, 
postulated by Alpher, Herman and Gamow in the 1940s, 
could produce stable elements of atomic mass 5. In 1950, 
Enrico Fermi and A Turkevich at Chicago showed that no 
elements heavier than helium could have been produced 
in the Big Bang, making element synthesis the domain of 
the stars. Soon after, Opik and Salpeter independently 
solved the mass 5 problem, showing that the fusion of three 
helium nuclei could form carbon. They also established 
that helium fusion was capable of acting as a new source 
of energy after hydrogen exhaustion. 

Salpeter’s contribution has been called the ‘triple- 
alpha process’ wherein helium is transmuted into heavier 
elements. With it, astrophysicists could begin to discuss 
what is essentially the second step to the modern picture 
of stellar evolution, where a poorly mixed star consuming 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hydrogen becomes inhomogeneous as helium is produced 
in its core and it becomes incapable of burning more 
hydrogen. When the core grows to some 10 per cent 
of the stellar mass, it becomes unstable. The unstable 
core contracts and heats causing the remaining stellar 
envelope to expand and cool, turning a main sequence 
star into a red giant. Mario Schénberg, Chandrasekhar, 
Opik, A Sandage and Schwarzschild all contributed to this 
modern picture by 1955, which highlighted the importance 
of solving the problem of how elements beyond iron could 
be synthesized in the cores of stars. This was solved 
by a collaboration of an observational astrophysicist, 
two theoretical astrophysicists, and a nuclear physicist: 
Margaret Burbidge, Geoffrey Burbidge, Fred Hoyle and 
William Fowler (known as ‘B*FH’). Spurred on in 1956 and 
1957 in their pursuit of an alternative to the Big Bang as a 
site for the origin of the elements—in the centers of stars 
as opposed to the original big bang—they developed a 
set of neutron capture processes for building the heaviest 
elements in stars, and inaugurated the modern study of 
nucleosynthesis. In the decades since 1955, astrophysicists 
have been working out the details, mainly with the aid 
of high-speed computing machines which have made 
numerical techniques highly effective tools for the study 
of stellar structure and evolution. 

In 1951, as his part in surveying a century of science, 
WHMCCREA argued that the present state of the study of the 
constitution and evolution of the stars was possibly: 


...the crowning achievement of the century 
in physical science. For it has explained 
the properties of a star in terms of those 
of the fundamental particles of laboratory 
physics, and in doing so it has employed every 
fundamental advance in pure physics and has 
depended upon observations made with the 
aid of all the resources of physical technology. 
(McCrea 1951, p 136.) 


McCrea’s point was, however, to argue that a history 
of the subject is difficult to treat in concise fashion, as 
it requires many diversions to appreciate the necessary 
advances on many fronts lurking in the most arcane 
corners of physics and technology. McCrea, a theorist 
and a younger member of the mathematical physics circle 
centered on Eddington, Milne and R H Fowler, considered 
mainly theoretical tools such as quantum and nuclear 
physics. But the tools of the astrophysicist include the 
techniques of the spectroscopist in the laboratory as well 
as at the telescope, and, more recently, in the post- 
World War 2 era, the expertise of electronics, both in 
the development of photoelectric and solid-state devices, 
in radio astronomy as well as in the multitude of non- 
visible astronomies, and in nuclear physics, as practised 
by academic theorists, experimentalists and military 
laboratories. Only when all these facets of the problem 
are addressed by historians and astronomers alike will a 
satisfactory history emerge. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Structure and Evolution of the Sun and Stars, 1800- 
1955 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Burbidge G R and Burbidge M 1958 Stellar evolution 
Handbuch der Physik 51 ed S Fliigge, pp 134-295 

Burchfield J D 1975 Lord Kelvin and the Age of the Earth 
(Chicago) 

Cowling T 1966 The development of the theory of stellar 
structure Q. J. R. Astron. Soc. 7 121-37 

DeVorkin D H 1984 Stellar evolution and the origins of the 
Hertzsprung-—Russell diagram in early astrophysics 
Astrophysics and Twentieth-Century Astronomy to 1950 
ed M A Hoskin and O Gingerich (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) pp 90-108 

DeVorkin D H and Kenat R The changing place of red 
giants in the evolutionary process General History 
of Astronomy 4b ed M A Hoskin and O Gingerich 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) at press 

Hufbauer K 1981 Astronomers take up the stellar energy 
problem, 1917-1920 Hist. Stud. Phys. Sci. 11 277-303 

Hufbauer K 1991 Exploring the Sun: Solar Science Since 
Galileo (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press) 

Hufbauer K 1999 Stellar structure and evolution (1924— 
1938) General History of Astronomy 4b ed M A Hoskin 
and O Gingerich (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) at press 

McCrea W H 1951 The Constitution and Evolution of Stars 
A Century of Science 1851-1951 ed H Dingle (London: 
Hutchinson’s Scientific and Technical Publications) 
ch ix 

Meadows A J 1972 Science and Controversy: a Biography of 
Sir Norman Lockyer (Cambridge, MA) 

Paul E R 1993 The Milky Way Galaxy and Statistical Cos- 
mology 1890-1924 (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press) 


David H DeVorkin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Strutt, John William [Lord Rayleigh] (1842-1919) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Strutt, John William [Lord Rayleigh] 
(1842-1919) 


Born in Langford Grove (near Maldon), Essex, England, 
Nobel prizewinner (1904) for the discovery of argon. 
He worked in many areas of physics, including 
electromagnetism and sound; the Rayleigh theory of the 
scattering of light was the first correct explanation of why 
the sky is blue. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Struve family ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Struve family 


Struve, Friedrich Georg Wilhelm (1793-1864); Struve, 
Otto Wilhelm (1819-1905), son of Friedrich; Struve, Karl 
Hermann (1854-1920), elder son of Otto Wilhelm, brother 
of Gustav; Struve, Gustav Wilhelm Ludwig (1858-1920), 
younger son of Otto Wilhelm, brother of Karl; Struve, Otto 
(1897-1963) [Otto Struve II], son of Gustav. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Struve, Gustav (1858-1920) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Struve, Gustav (1858-1920) 


Born in Pulkova, helped his father at Pulkova Observatory, 
became director of the Kharkov Observatory in 1894. 
Determined the velocities of stars and the motion of the 
Sun through them. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Struve, Karl (1854-1920) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Struve, Karl (1854-1920) 


Born in Pulkova, helped his father at Pulkova Observatory, 
became director of the Berlin Observatory in 1904, moving 
it to Babelberg. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Siruve, Otto (1897-1963) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Struve, Otto (1897-1963) 


Born in Kharkov, Ukraine. In an adventurous and varied 
career, he studied at Kharkov University, joined the White 
Russian army during the Revolution, and fled to Turkey 
at the time of their defeat. Emigrated to the USA, became 
director of the Yerkes Observatory, near Chicago, and 
founded the McDonald Observatory in Texas. Became 
director of the Leuschner Observatory and then the 
National Radio Astronomy Observatory. He was a stellar 
spectroscopist, with achievements in close binaries, the 
interstellar medium and stellar rotation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Siruve, Otto Wilhelm (1819-1905) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Struve, Otto Wilhelm (1819-1905) 


Born in Dorpat, Estonia, assisted and succeeded his father 
as director of Pulkova Observatory, carrying on his work 
with binary stars and discovering 500. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Struve, Wilhelm (1793-1864) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Struve, Wilhelm (1793-1864) 


Born in Altona, Germany, became professor of astronomy 
at Dorpat (now Tartu), Estonia, and director of the Dorpat 
Observatory. Using FRAUNHOoFER’s refractor he began his 
work on double stars. He became director of Pulkova 
(Pulkovo) Observatory near St Petersburg, Russia, which 
was constructed to his specifications by Tsar Nicholas I 
and became arguably the most productive observatory of 
the time in the world. He published a catalog (Mensurae 
Micrometricae, 1837) of over 3000 binary stars, and carried 
out one of the first determinations of stellar distance, 
the parallax of Vega (1837), a star that he selected for 
investigation for this purpose because it had a large 
proper motion and was bright, thus indicating that it 
might be nearby. The measurements were not believed, 
especially since he published a discordant value, twice 
as large, only three years later. It was not until Bessel 
measured the parallax of 61 Cygni in 1838, and showed 
that the measurements contained the expected patterns, 
that astronomers accepted that a parallactic measurement 
had been reliably achieved. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Subaru Telescope, Hawaii 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Subaru Telescope, Hawaii 


The Subaru Telescope, Hawaii is an 8.2 m aperture 
optical infrared telescope being operated by the NATIONAL 
ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY, JAPAN (NAOJ) atop Mauna Kea, 
Hawaii. It is one of the new-generation telescopes with an 
actively controlled large monolithic mirror, and has been 
producing testing-phase observational results on solar 
system, star formation, active galactic nuclei and quasars, 
group of galaxies, gravitational lensing and cosmology, etc 
since its first-light in January 1999. The Subaru Telescope 
aims to explore the universe more deeply and widely with 
its very high imaging capability and rich observational 
instruments mounted at its four foci. After nine years of 
construction since 1991, the Subaru Telescope will start its 
open-operation in the year 2000. The Subaru Telescope 
Base Facility at Hilo, Hawaii holds 50 staff, 20 visiting 
members, a large computer system and laboratories for 
developmental works. 
For further information see 
http: / /www.subaru.naoj.org /. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Subatomic Particles 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Subatomic Particles 


Particles that are smaller than atoms. Subatomic particles 
include the constituent components of atoms and particles 
that are produced in nuclear reactions or in interactions 
between other subatomic particles. They are also found 
among cosmic rays. 

Particles are characterized by their physical proper- 
ties, in particular: mass, charge and spin. Although the 
masses of subatomic particles may be expressed in conven- 
tional mass units (kg), because of the equivalence between 
mass (m) and energy (£) that is a consequence of the special 
theory of relativity (i.e. E = mc”, where c denotes the speed 
of light), the equivalent energy (expressed in electronvolts) 
is usually quoted as the ‘mass’ of the particle, even al- 
though, strictly speaking, mass (m) = E/c?. The unit of 
charge is the charge on the electron (1.602 x 10~!° coulomb). 
Spin is the quantity of angular momentum associated 
with a particle (the particle may be visualized as spin- 
ning around an axis) or an atomic nucleus and takes val- 
ues given by nh/2z, where h is the Planck constant and 
n=3,1, 3,2, etc. 

Particles are subdivided into bosons (particles with n 
equal to an integer: 1, 2,...) and fermions (particles with 
half-integral values of spin: 5, 3,...). Fermions obey the 
Pauli exclusion principle, while bosons do not. Among 
the bosons, the gauge bosons (particles that transmit 
the fundamental forces) constitute an important group. 
The fermions may be subdivided into hadrons (particles 
that are composed of quarks and are acted on by the 
strong nuclear interaction) and leptons (particles that do 
not contain quarks and which do not experience the 
strong nuclear interaction). The hadrons are subdivided 
into baryons (particles composed of three quarks) and 
mesons (composed of quark-antiquark pairs). Among 
the baryons, an important class is the nucleons (protons 
and neutrons). Electrons and neutrinos are examples of 
leptons. 

The term ‘elementary particle’ is sometimes applied 
to particles that have no internal structure and which 
cannot be broken down into more basic constituent 
particles. However, because some particles that were at 
one time considered to be ‘elementary’ (e.g. protons) are 
now known to consist of quarks, the term ‘fundamental 
particle’ is sometimes used to distinguish those (leptons, 
quarks and gauge bosons, so far as is known at present) 
that are genuinely basic particles. 


Seealso: antimatter, atom, baryons, cosmic rays, elemen- 
tary particles, electron, electronvolt, fundamental forces, 
fundamental particles, gauge bosons, hadrons, leptons, 
matter, mesons, neutron, neutrinos, Pauli exclusion prin- 
ciple, photon, proton, quark. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Subbotin, Mikhail Fedorovich (1893-1966) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Subbotin, Mikhail Fedorovich 
(1893-1966) 


Mathematical astronomer, born in Ostrolenka, Lomzhinsk 
Guberniya, Russia (now Poland), worked in astronomy 
and celestial mechanics at Leningrad (St Petersburg), 
nearly dying of hunger in the siege of 1942. He produced 
methods of calculating orbits from three observations 
based on solving the Euler-Lambert equations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Submillimeter Telescope Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Submillimeter Telescope Observatory 


The Submillimeter Telescope Observatory (SMTO), a 
collaboration of the MPIfR and Steward Observatory, 
operates the 10 m Heinrich Hertz Telescope (HHT) 
for observations in the millimeter and submillimeter 
wavelength range. The SMTO is located at an altitude 
of 3186 m on top of Mount Graham, Arizona. The HHT 
has a very accurate surface (12 4m rms) and it is the first 
telescope to use a hot-electron bolometric mixer receiver 
for astronomical observations at frequencies of 690 and 
810 GHz. 
For further information see 
http:/ /maisel.as.arizona.edu:8080/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Submillimeter Wave Astronomy 
Satellite (SWAS) 


NASA Small Explorer mission, launched December 1998. 
Carries a 60 cm telescope to study submillimetre emissions 
from molecular clouds and star-forming regions. Found 
strong water emission lines in spectra of all molecular 
cloud targets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Sudbury Neutrino Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sudbury Neutrino Observatory 


The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO) studies neu- 
trinos from the Sun, supernovae and other astrophysical 
sources. The detector is situated 2000 m underground in 
an active nickel mine near Sudbury, Ontario, Canada and 
observes Cerenkov light from neutrinos interacting with 
1000 tonnes of ultra-pure heavy water (D2O) surrounded 
by 7000 tonnes of light water shielding. Several differ- 
ent neutrino interactions are used to observe the flux and 
energy spectrum of electron neutrinos reaching the Earth 
from the solar core; and the total flux of all three neutrino 
types, to determine if neutrino flavor change (indicative 
of finite neutrino rest mass) has occurred. The project in- 
volves 100 scientists from Canada, USA and UK and began 
observations in May 1999. 
For further information see 
http:/ /sno.phy.queensu.ca. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Suess, Hans Eduard (1909-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Suess, Hans Eduard (1909-) 


Geochemist, born in Austria, professor of Geochemistry 
at UC San Diego, pioneered radio-carbon dating, working 
on the origin of the elements and the evolution of the solar 
system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Suidas (tenth century) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Suidas (tenth century) 


Greek encyclopedist. In the course of reading Suidas’s 
Lexicon, EDMOND HALLEY mistakenly connected the naming 
of the Saros cycle of 223 synodic months by the tenth 
century Greek lexicographer Suidas with the eclipse cycle 
of the same period. The solar eclipse cycle is thus 
now known by the name that Suidas used for another 
phenomenon. Halley’s mistake accounts for the historical 
confusion that the Saros cycle of solar eclipses was 
discovered by the Babylonians (it was not). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Suisei ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Suisei 


Japanese mission to study Halley’s Comet. Launched in 
August 1985, Suisei approached to within 151000 km of 
the comet on 8 March 1986 to observe its interactions with 
the solar wind. Suisei means ‘comet’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Summer Triangle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Summer Triangle 


A conspicuous asterism which dominates the northern 
sky during summer, comprising the bright stars Vega 
(a Lyrae, apparent magnitude 0.03), Deneb (a Cygni, 
apparent magnitude 1.25) and Altair (# Aquilae, apparent 
magnitude 0.76). Vega, by far the most brilliant star in the 
northern summer sky, is also the brightest to pass overhead 
(within 13° of the zenith), with the exception of Capella 
(a Aurigae) which is a winter object. 

The Summer Triangle is crossed by a double band of 
the Milky Way (the galactic equator passes almost axially 
through the triangle). There are many rich star fields and 
interesting objects within its borders, but few bright stars. 
Only two stars of third magnitude or brighter are found 
inside the triangle (6 and y Cygni), and three more along 
its sides. It therefore has asomewhat empty appearance to 
the unaided eye, but is a rewarding area for examination 
with binoculars or a small telescope. 


See also: Altair, Deneb, Vega. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sun 


The nearest star to the Earth and central body of the 
solar system. A main-sequence, yellow dwarf of spectral 
type G2 V, mass 1.989 x 10° kg, diameter 1392000 km, 
luminosity 3.83 x 10° W and absolute visual magnitude 
+4.82, the Sun is the only star whose surface and outer 
layers can be studied close up. From the Earth, a mere 
149 600 000 km away, the Sun’s disk subtends an angle of 
about 30’ and its apparent visual magnitude is —26.78. 

The Sun is composed mainly of hydrogen (about 70% 
by mass) and helium (about 28%), with a small proportion 
(about 2%) of heavier elements. In its central core, which is 
thought to be about 200 000 km in diameter, the maximum 
density is about 148000 kg m~? (so that almost 30% of 
the Sun’s mass is contained in barely 3% of its volume). 
Here the temperature is about 15000 000 K and hydrogen 
nuclei fuse together to form helium nuclei in the proton— 
proton (p-p) chain reaction. The energy liberated by 
the 4.4 x 10° kg of mass lost per second in this reaction 
is radiated through the radiative zone to within about 
200 000 km of the surface, where, the temperature having 
fallen to about 1000000 K, convection takes over. The 
convective zone extends to just below the surface, or 
photosphere, which is an opaque layer several hundred 
kilometers thick that represents the boundary between the 
solar interior and solar atmosphere. 

The photosphere has a mottled appearance called 
granulation, which represents the tops of convection 
currents from below. Within the granulation dark 
markings called sunspots appear, surrounded by lighter 
faculae which are visible well away from the brighter 
central region of the Sun’s disk. Sunspots and faculae mark 
the position of intense, localized magnetic fields, and their 
numbers and mean latitude change over an average period 
of approximately 11 years—the so-called sunspot cycle. 
Observation of the passage of sunspots across the Sun’s 
disk reveals a differential rotation, the synodic period 
increasing with heliographic latitude from 26.87 days at 
the equator to 29.65 days at +40°, beyond which sunspots 
are seldom seen. The mean synodic period is 27.2753 
days (sidereal period 25.38 days), which corresponds to the 
actual period at about +15°. Spectroscopic measurements 
show that the rotation period continues to increase with 
increasing latitude above +40° and that it decreases with 
height above the photosphere, except at the equator, where 
the periods are approximately the same. The reason for 
this differential rotation is not known. 

The temperature of the photosphere decreases from 
about 6000 K at its base to about 4000 K at the so- 
called temperature minimum, where it merges with the 
chromosphere. The chromosphere is a stratum of gases a 
few thousand kilometers thick, in which the temperature 
increases (as a result of processes such as mechanical 
dissipation) to around 50000 K as the density decreases 
exponentially with height. It is the realm of cloud-like 
filaments, or prominences, which have a higher density 
and lower temperature than their surroundings, and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of short-lived explosive events called flares. Sunspots, 
most filaments/prominences and flares constitute active 
regions, which are the most obvious manifestations of 
solar activity and are characterized by enhanced emission 
at x-ray, extreme ultraviolet and radio wavelengths. 

Above the chromosphere lies the transition region, 
only several hundred kilometers thick, in which the 
temperature increases again, to around 500 000 K. Beyond 
this lies the corona, which attains a maximum temperature 
of about 2000000 K at a height of about 75000 km 
and extends for many million kilometers into the 
interplanetary medium, where the solar wind carries a 
stream of atomic particles to the depths of the solar system. 

The Sun is believed to possess a weak general 
magnetic field, but is has proved difficult to disentangle 
this from the remnant magnetic fields of sunspots. 
The intense, localized magnetic fields determine the 
configuration of sunspots, active region filaments and 
other associated phenomena, the occurrence of short-lived 
events such as flares, and even the structure of the solar 
corona. 

The age of the Sun is about 4.6 x 10° years and it is 
expected to maintain its present energy output for at least 
a similar period, whereafter it will expand to become a red 
giant and then expel its outer layers, leaving a white dwarf 
surrounded by a planetary nebula. 


Seealso: active region, chromosphere, corona, differential 
rotation, faculae, filament, flare, granulation, solar 
photosphere, solar wind, stellar evolution, Sun and solar— 
terrestrial physics, sunspot cycle, sunspots. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun and Solar-terrestrial Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sun and Solar-terrestrial Physics 


The Sun is of central importance in astronomy. On the 
one hand, many basic processes that occur throughout the 
cosmos may be well observed in the Sun and, on the other 
hand, the Sun acts as a source of the radiation and plasma 
emissions that affect the Earth in many ways. The study 
of the interaction of the Sun and its solar wind with the 
Earth is the burgeoning field of solar-terrestrial physics. 
The magnetospheres of other planets act as probes for the 
solar wind. However, many of the fundamental processes, 
such as how the Sun’s magnetic field is generated, how 
its atmosphere is heated, how solar flares occur and how 
the solar wind is accelerated, are only just beginning to 
be understood. This article attempts an overview of the 
Sun and solar-terrestrial physics and links the individual 
articles in this encyclopedia into the big picture. 


The Sun 

The Sun is of course the nearest star, seen in greatest detail 
(SUN: BASIC PROPERTIES). The total radiation (SOLAR IRRADIANCE) 
from the Sun is not constant but, like a variable star, the Sun 
varies over a variety of timescales. Treated as a star whose 
properties are more accurately known than most (SUN AS 
ASTAR), the Sun has become a pivotal point in discussion 
of the abundance of the elements (SOLAR ABUNDANCES) and 
stellar evolution (SOLAREVOLUTION). The SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD 
plays a key role in many aspects of Solar Physics. It 
is measured through polarimetry (SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: 
INFERENCE BY POLARIMETRY) and the Zeeman and Hanle Effects 
(SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS). The solar 
magnetic field undergoes a cyclic behavior with a period 
of roughly 22 years (SOLAR CYCLE). Many features of solar 
activity follow this cycle. 

The Sun, indeed most of the Universe, is in the 
fourth state of matter—the so-called plasma state—in 
which a gas is so hot that it has become ionized. Its 
behavior differs from that of a normal gas mainly because 
it interacts ina complex and subtle way with any magnetic 
field that is present. Such an interaction is described 
by the theory of MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS, Which applies 
when the ionized particles are much closer than the 
length-scales of interest, so that the plasma may be 
regarded as a continuous medium. The magnetic fields 
are generated within solar and planetary interiors ina self- 
sustaining way by a process described by DYNAMO THEORY, 
although the parameter regimes and driving processes are 
rather different in the GEODYNAMO and in stellar dynamos 
(DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND STELLAR). 

When the force produced on a plasma by a magnetic 
field dominates all other forces (as is the case, for example, 
in the upper solar atmosphere), and the magnetic field 
is in equilibrium with itself, it is said to be a FORCE- 
FREE MAGNETIC FIELD. Force-free structures can be highly 
complex and, when they are either twisted or braided 
around one another, they possess so-called MAGNETIC 
HELICITY. Equilibrium magnetic fields may be subject to a 
wide variety of MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC INSTABILITIES, Which 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


may produce either a large-scale dynamic behavior or 
a small-scale structuring of the plasma. In the solar 
interior, magnetic flux tubes tend to be lighter than their 
surroundings and so rise by an effect called MAGNETIC 
BuoyYANcy. Also, when heated sufficiently from below, 
a plasma tends to exhibit turbulent motions due to 
a convective instability, which, when it interacts with 
a magnetic field, is known as magnetoconvection (see 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: MAGNETOCONVECTION). 

In most of the cosmos, magnetic fields are attached 
or ‘frozen’ to the plasma and move around with it. The 
exception is in singular regions where MAGNETIC RECONNEC- 
TION can occur and magnetic energy is converted into other 
forms such as heat, kinetic energy and fast-particle energy. 
The energy conversion occurs when magnetic field lines 
are carried into the singularity, broken and rejoined. Sev- 
eral different modes of oscillation (MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC 
waves) can be supported in plasmas and are important for 
transporting energy from one location to another. Sev- 
eral magnetohydrodynamic processes are also crucial in 
astrophysical circumstances (MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS OF AC- 
CRETION DISKS and MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS OF ASTROPHYSICAL 
WINDS). 

SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DIAGNOSTICS are invaluable in 
determining many properties of the plasma such as tem- 
perature, density and velocity. The theoretical background 
lies in atomic physics (SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: ATOMIC PROCESSES). 
To access the most complete information about what is 
happening, astronomers make multiwavelength observa- 
tions across the whole spectrum (SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: CO- 
HERENT PLASMA EMISSION, SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: CONTINUUM RADIO 
EMISSION, SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: INFRARED EMISSION, SOLAR SPEC- 
TROSCOPY: VISIBLE EMISSION, SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY: ULTRAVIOLET AND 
EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET EMISSION and SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY AND DI- 
AGNOSTICS: X-RAY EMISSION). 

Because of the Sun’s brightness, its heat and the 
dynamic range of its phenomena (which may be time- 
variable), a wide range of special instrumentation has been 
employed to study the Sun, both from the ground and from 
space (SOLAR TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: GROUND and SOLAR 
TELESCOPES AND INSTRUMENTS: SPACE). Of the space missions, 
those of particular interest have been the American SKYLAB 
satellite (1973-1974), the Japanese YOHKOH mission (August 
1991 to the present), the European Space Agency/NASA 
sOHO mission (December 1995 to the present), and the 
American TRACE mission (April 1998 to the present). For 
analysing data, the soLarsorr package is particularly 
useful. 

Of growing interest is the link between activity 
on the Sun and effects on the Earth’s atmosphere— 
the SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION. A subtle coupling exists 
between variations in the solar wind, the Earth’s magnetic 
environment or magnetosphere, the ionized or plasma part 
of the Earth’s atmosphere (the ionosphere) and the un- 
ionized or neutral atmosphere (SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: 
COUPLING BETWEEN SOLAR WIND, MAGNETOSPHERE, IONOSPHERE AND 
NEUTRAL ATMOSPHERE). One consequence is that the Earth’s 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun and Solar-terrestrial Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


climate is variable, driven by changes in the Sun (SOLAR- 
TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: LONG-TERM AND SHORT-TERM CLIMATE 
VARIABILITY). Satellite observations are being used to predict 
the effect of the Sun’s activity from day to day on 
the solar wind and the magnetosphere (SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL 
CONNECTION: SPACE WEATHER PREDICTIONS). Looking outwards 
from the Sun, there is also enormous interest in what the 
Sun can tell us about other stars and vice versa (the SOLAR- 
STELLAR CONNECTION) and in particular about solar-type 
stars (SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: ACTIVITY AND BRIGHTNESS 
CHANGES OF SOLAR-TYPE STARS). 


The solar interior and atmosphere 

There are three main regions of the solar atmosphere, 
namely, the surface layer of the Sun (the SOLARPHOTOSPHERE), 
the overlying hotter and rarer CHROMOSPHERE with a 
temperature of about 10* K and the much hotter (about 10° 
K) and rarer corona, which stretches out to the Earth and 
beyond. The plasma that possesses temperatures between 
10* K and 10° K comprises the SOLAR TRANSITION REGION. 

For the SOLAR INTERIOR a series of standard models has 
been developed (SOLAR INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS), based on 
the best available theories of the properties of the interior 
material (SOLAR INTERIOR: EQUATION OF STATE AND OPACITY). 
As a result of the high temperatures and pressures, 
nuclear energy is released in the solar interior (SOLAR 
INTERIOR: ENERGY GENERATION) with the release of neutrinos 
(SOLAR INTERIOR: NEUTRINOS). The plasma in the outer 30% 
of the solar interior is convectively unstable (SOLAR 
INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE and SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
THEORY). Within the SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE FLUX 
TUBES respond to the resulting turbulent motions as well as 
differential rotation and Coriolis forces. Eventually, from 
the SOLAR INTERIOR: EMERGING MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES May create 
sunspots when their flux is large enough. 

The Sun rotates (SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). The rotation 
rate is faster at the equator than the poles and possesses 
a surprising variation with depth. Gross properties of the 
SOLAR INTERIOR: SOLAR DIAMETER, OBLATENESS AND TEMPERATURE 
have dependences on the rotation rate. 

Our understanding of the solar interior has been 
revolutionized by the realization that the Sun is 
globally oscillating in thousands of modes of vibration 
(SOLAR INTERIOR: HELIOSEISMIC OBSERVATIONS). Observations 
have been made both from ground-based networks 
(BISON NETWORK, GLOBAL OSCILLATION NETWORK GROUP) and 
the sono satellite. The observations lead to properties 
of the solar interior (SOLAR INTERIOR: HELIOSEISMOLOGY DATA 
INVERSIONS). HELIOSEISMOLOGY THEORY has been developed 
in detail, including techniques for inferring properties 
close to the surface (SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY). 
MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS is used for deducing the influence 
of magnetic fields (SOLAR INTERIOR: INFLUENCE OF MAGNETIC 
FIELDS). 

For the structure of the atmosphere, empirical 
models have proved invaluable. | Many properties 
of the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE change systematically across 
the face of the Sun (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: CENTER-TO-LIMB 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


VARIATION), and on a smaller scale: faculae are small 
regions that are brighter than normal (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
FACULAE) and filigree are bright crinkle-shaped ribbons 
(SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FILIGREE). Convection exists on several 
scales, about 1 Mm (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION), 
a larger scale (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: MESOGRANULATION) and 
an even larger scale of 15 Mm (SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
SUPERGRANULATION). Over most of the solar surface the 
magnetic field is far from uniform, being concentrated 
into intense SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES at the 
edges of supergranule cells. In the interior of such 
cells, the magnetic fields are tangled by convection (SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE: INTRANETWORK AND TURBULENT MAGNETIC FIELDS). 

The CHROMOSPHERE is even more non-uniform. A 
bright network surrounds the supergranule cell bound- 
aries (CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK). Around sunspots the mag- 
netic field is a few hundred gauss and is associated with 
a brightening of the surrounding region (SOLAR CHROMO- 
SPHERIC PLAGE). Transient brightenings occur near sunspots 
at the feet of surges (SOLAR CHROMOSPHERE: ELLERMAN BOMBS). 
Bipolar magnetic flux tubes break through the solar sur- 
face (CHROMOSPHERE: EMERGING FLUX REGIONS). Dark fibrils due 
to dense plasma along a canopy of magnetic flux tubes 
cross the interior of supergranule cells (CHROMOSPHERE: FIB- 
RILS and CHROMOSPHERE: CANOPY). Jets of plasma (CHROMO- 
SPHERE: SPICULES) are ejected along flux tubes upwards at 
the network boundary. SOLAR CHROMOSPHERIC OSCILLATIONS 
are observed and are related to one of the possible sources 
of the high temperatures in the chromosphere (CHROMO- 
SPHERE: HEATING MECHANISMS). 

The SOLAR TRANSITION REGION is highly dynamic and it 
is not easy to develop theories (TRANSITION REGION MODELS). 
There is a variety of flows and small-scale high-velocity 
features (TRANSITION REGION FLOWS) and TRANSITION REGION: 
EXPLOSIVE EVENTS. Elemental abundances vary by about a 
factor of four from place to place. Elements whose neutral 
atoms have ionization potential larger than about 10 eV are 
less abundant than those whose neutral atoms are more 
easily ionized (TRANSITION REGION: FIRST IONIZATION POTENTIAL 
EFFECT). 

The CoRONA possesses several different types of 
structure. CORONAL HOLES have magnetic fields that are 
open into interplanetary space. POLAR PLUMES are dense 
rays in coronal holes outlining the magnetic field. CORONAL 
Loors have magnetic field lines that have both ends 
anchored to the solar surface. Small bright regions (SOLAR 
CORONA: X-RAY BRIGHT POINTS) occur where magnetic fields 
are reconnecting. Streams of plasma (SOLAR X-RAY JETS) 
are accelerated to several hundred km s~! by magnetic 
reconnection. Large-scale structures (CORONAL STREAMERS) 
are closed below a large fraction of a solar radius above 
the limb and are open above that height. 

The solar corona was traditionally seen only during 
an ECLIPSE but now can be observed by CORONAGRAPHS from 
the ground and direct by EUV and x-ray telescopes from 
space. An important problem is the nature of CORONAL 
HEATING MECHANISMS. Part of this has been solved, since x- 
ray bright points are now known to be heated by driven 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun and Solar-terrestrial Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


magnetic reconnection, but it has not yet been established 
whether coronal loops and coronal holes are heated by 
magnetic waves of some kind or by magnetic reconnection 
in many small current sheets. 


Solar activity 

The term solar activity refers to a wide range of transient 
solar phenomena that vary in complex ways with the SOLAR 
CYCLE. SUNSPOTS are dark regions in the photosphere where 
large thousand-gauss magnetic flux tubes break through 
the surface. SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS surround sunspot groups 
and have fields of a few hundred gauss. SOLAR PROMINENCES 
are huge flux tubes up in the corona, containing a 
vertical sheet of plasma at chromospheric temperatures. 
SOLAR FLARE OBSERVATIONS show how enormous releases of 
magnetic energy are often related to the eruption of 
prominences from active regions. SOLAR CORONAL MASS 
EJECTIONS are large-scale eruptions of mass associated 
with prominence eruptions, either from active regions or 
outside active regions. 

A variety of SOLAR ACTIVITY INDICES has been proposed 
for measuring the strength of solar activity. Indeed, 
solar activity may be traced back many centuries (SOLAR 
ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM RECORDS). SOLAR ACTIVITY COMPLEXES are 
active regions that tend to recur in the same location and 
form. Whereas active regions, like sunspots, occur only in 
two zones of latitude north and south of the equator, much 
smaller bipolar regions appear over the whole solar surface 
ata rate of typically one region per 27* Mm’ per day (SOLAR 
ACTIVE REGIONS: EPHEMERAL). Coronal mass ejections produce 
a wave-like disturbance that propagates ahead of the mass 
and whose intersection with the solar surface sometimes 
shows up aS MORETON WAVES moving outwards from the site 
of the eruption. 

Prominences are referred to as ‘filaments’ when 
observed on the disk, and they form in SOLAR FILAMENT 
CHANNELS, where the magnetic field is mainly horizontal 
and directed along a reversal in the sign of the normal 
component of the field at the solar surface. Quiescent 
prominences can last for many months but are also of 
shorter duration (SOLAR PROMINENCES: ACTIVE). Important 
questions concern SOLAR PROMINENCE FORMATION and SOLAR 
PROMINENCE FINE STRUCTURE. SOLAR PROMINENCE OSCILLATIONS 
of various kinds are often observed and their sense of 
twist exhibits a puzzling global pattern (SOLAR PROMINENCES: 
CHIRALITY). 

SOLAR FLARE CLASSIFICATION has settled to a standard 
method and much effort has been expended on SOLAR FLARE 
FORECASTING. The behavior of SOLAR FLARE MAGNETIC FIELDS is 
crucial to an understanding of SOLAR FLARE MODELS and SOLAR 
FLARES: PARTICLE ACCELERATION MECHANISMS. The connection 
between solar flares and coronal mass ejections was for 
a while a matter of heated debate (SOLAR FLARES: RELATION TO 
CORONAL MASS EJECTIONS). Solar flares often produce small 
ejections of mass called surges and occasionally give a 
continuum brightening in the photosphere (SOLAR FLARES: 
WHITE LIGHT). A solar flare has several phases. Before the 
flare a prominence starts to rise slowly. The flare rapidly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


develops in a few minutes, with a rapid acceleration of 
nonthermal electrons, sometimes producing gamma rays. 
During the main phase, the energy release continues for 
several hours (SOLAR FLARES: PREFLARE PHASE, SOLAR FLARES: 
IMPULSIVE PHASE, SOLAR FLARES: NONTHERMAL ELECTRONS, SOLAR 
FLARES: GAMMA RAYS, SOLAR FLARES: MAIN PHASE). In addition, 
a flare produces different kinds of radio emission (SOLAR 
FLARES: RADIO BURSTS). 

Sunspots often start as small dark patches called 
SUNSPOT PORES and develop into several different types 
(SUNSPOT CLASSIFICATION). The central part of the sunspot 
is dark and is called the umbra (SUNSPOT UMBRA: STRUCTURE 
AND EVOLUTION). The umbra is slightly depressed and so 
changes its appearance as a sunspot rotates across the solar 
disk (SUNSPOTS: WILSON EFFECT). The umbra is surrounded 
by an annulus (the penumbra) with radial striations, since 
the magnetic field is more horizontal (SUNSPOT PENUMBRA: 
STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITY). The penumbra exhibits a radial 
outflow (SUNSPOTS: EVERSHED EFFECT). SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND 
SEISMOLOGY are used to infer the structures of sunspots and 
SUNSPOT MODELS for the structures have been developed in 
detail. SUNSPOT MAGNETIC FIELDS tend to be vertical at the 
centers of sunspots and then to become more horizontal as 
one moves outwards from the axis, as the vertical flux tube 
spreads out through the photosphere. SUNSPOT EVOLUTION 
follows a standard pattern. A radial moat flow of plasma 
away from a sunspot carries magnetic flux outwards 
(SUNSPOTS: MOVING MAGNETIC FEATURES AND MOAT FLOW). 


The solar heliosphere 

The solar wind is the outwards expansion of the corona 
from the Sun. It is described in a general article (SOLAR WIND: 
GLOBAL PROPERTIES). SOLAR WIND: THEORY describes its structure 
and SOLAR WIND ACCELERATION how it gains in velocity. The 
SOLAR WIND COMPOSITION and SOLAR WIND KINETIC PROPERTIES are 
highly complex. Both waves and turbulence and shock waves 
make up its structure (SOLAR WIND PLASMA WAVES, SOLAR WIND 
TURBULENCE, SOLAR WIND SHOCK WAVES AND DISCONTINUITIES) and 
the SOLAR WIND: MAGNETIC FIELD is highly variable. Especially 
interesting is the behavior out of the ecliptic plane as 
measured by the only satellite to orbit in that region (SOLAR 
WIND: ULYSSES). 

Neighboring streams that are flowing out from the 
Sun interact at their boundaries (SOLAR WIND: COROTATING 
INTERACTION REGIONS). Accelerated particles (SOLAR WIND: 
ENERGETIC PARTICLES) of many types are observed; they 
produce bursts of radio waves (SOLAR WIND: INTERPLANETARY 
RADIO BURSTS) Which are a valuable diagnostic (SOLAR WIND: 
RADIO TECHNIQUES FOR PROBING). COSMIC RAYS may give rise 
to showers of electrons and other particles when they 
impact on the Earth’s atmosphere (COSMIC RAYS: EXTENSIVE AIR 
sHoweRs). Their propagation has been modeled in detail 
(COSMIC RAYS: PROPAGATION IN THE HELIOSPHERE). Those with 
energies up to 100 MeV and which lie between the energies 
of normal heliospheric particles and galactic cosmic rays 
are known as ANOMALOUS COSMIC RAYS. 

The solar wind is rooted in the corona (SOLAR WIND: 
CORONAL ORIGINS) and is sensitive to solar activity (SOLAR 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun and Solar-terrestrial Physics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


WIND: MANIFESTATIONS OF SOLAR ACTIVITY). Venus interacts with 
the solar wind as it flows through the heliosphere (vENus: 
INTERACTION WITH THE SOLAR WIND), aS do other planets and 
also COMETS (SOLAR WIND: INTERACTION WITH COMETS). Kreutz 
discovered a family of comets that approach close to 
the Sun (COMETS: KREUTZ SUNGRAZERS), many of which have 
been discovered by the LASCO instrument on the SOHO 
satellite. At the heliopause, the solar wind connects with 
the rest of the Galaxy (SOLAR WIND: INTERACTION WITH LOCAL 
INTERSTELLAR MEDIUM). 

PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES are the magnetized plasma 
environments of the planets. A range of planets have 
been studied, including JUPITER: MAGNETOSPHERE and SATURN: 
MAGNETOSPHERE, aS Well as MERCURY: MAGNETOSPHERE, URANUS 
AND NEPTUNE: ATMOSPHERES, IONOSPHERES AND MAGNETOSPHERES. 
Planetary satellites are of particular interest (SATURN: 
MAGNETOSPHERE INTERACTION WITH TITAN, MAGNETOSPHERES: 
JUPITER, SATELLITE INTERACTIONS, MAGNETOSPHERES: JUPITER, RADIO 
EMISSION, IO: PLASMA TORUS). 


The Earth’s magnetosphere 

Due to its proximity to us, the MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH 
has been extensively studied in great detail and presents 
an opportunity to understand the behavior of many 
basic plasma processes. Since the magnetosphere acts 
as an obstacle to the supermagnetosonic solar wind, 
a bow shock stands in the flow ahead of the Earth 
(MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: BOW SHOCK). The surface that 
separates the Earth’s magnetic field from the solar wind 
magnetic field is called the magnetopause (MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH: MAGNETOPAUSE). Between the bow shock and 
the magnetopause lies the magnetosheath. The Earth’s 
magnetic field is swept downstream by the solar wind to 
form a long tail (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC TAIL), 
the central and densest part of which is called the plasma 
sheet (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: PLASMA SHEET). Between the 
magnetic field that closes on the dayside of the Earth and 
the tail field that is swept down on the nightside lies the 
dayside cusp (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: DAYSIDE CUSP). 

Within the closed part of the Earth’s magnetic 
field there lie: a ring current (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
RING CURRENT) Which flows westward roughly in a circle 
in the equatorial plane about the Earth; the radiation 
belts, consisting of trapped particles in orbits that circle 
the Earth from about 1000 km above the surface to 
about six Earth radii (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: RADIATION 
BELTS); a population of cold dense plasma (plasmasphere) 
that coexists with the radiation belts (MAGNETOSPHERE 
OF EARTH: PLASMASPHERE). Streams of energetic particles 
impacting the Earth’s upper atmosphere in a ring around 
each of the Earth’s poles form the aurorae and excite 
AURORAL KILOMETRIC RADIATION. Within the magnetosphere 
there is a wide range of waves (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: 
waves). Also, the rotation of the Earth and the flow of 
the solar wind cause the plasma and magnetic field 
lines within the magnetosphere to move in a complex 
pattern (MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: CONVECTION). Regions of 
enhanced solar wind flow compress the magnetosphere 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: GEOMAGNETIC STORMS AND SOLAR 
WIND ORIGINS) for 1-5 days. Substorms occur for 1-3 
hours in response to a sustained southward turning 
of the interplanetary magnetic field, after which the 
tail of the magnetosphere goes unstable and reconnects 
(MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: SUBSTORMS). This causes a plasmoid 
to be formed in the tail and ejected downstream and 
accelerates fast particles that greatly enhance the aurorae. 


Eric Priest 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun as a Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sun as a Star 


Observations of the Sun made with instruments on the 
ground or on satellites in near-Earth orbits have the 
enormous advantage over corresponding observations 
of stars in that the Earth-Sun distance is only about 
150000 000 km. Even the nearest star to the Sun (PROXIMA 
CENTAURI) has a distance which is 271 000 times this amount, 
while most of the bright stars visible in the night sky are 
much more distant still. Thus, while ground-based solar 
telescopes are capable of resolving features on the Sun as 
small as 150 km across (0.2 arcsec in angular measure), and 
satellites (in particular the Transition Region and Coronal 
Explorer or Trace, launched in 1998) features as small 
as 725 km (1 arcsec), nothing at all can be resolved on 
stellar surfaces by conventional means. However, using 
techniques developed over the years we have been able to 
deduce the presence of surface and atmospheric features 
in nearby stars that seem to have their counterparts in the 
Sun, and so we are able to make deductions about stellar 
activity along the same lines as we have about solar activity 
since the time of the first telescopic observations in the 
early seventeenth century. 


Quantities characterizing the Sun as a star 

It is important for several purposes to consider certain 
quantities for the Sun as a star so as to compare with other 
stars and to use this information as input into the so-called 
standard model of the solar interior, giving a mathematical 
description of the way pressure and temperature vary with 
distance from the center of the Sun. These quantities can be 
summarized as luminosity, radius, effective temperature, 
age, chemical composition, mass and rotation rate. 

To illustrate, if we know the Sun’s luminosity and 
spectral type (or equivalently the effective temperature), 
we may place the Sun’s position on the familiar 
HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL (HR) DIAGRAM (absolute magnitude 
versus spectral type) or color-magnitude diagram. The 
luminosity can be obtained from accurate spacecraft 
measurements of the solar irradiance (formerly and 
still occasionally known as the solar constant), i.e. the 
amount of radiant energy received at the Earth outside 
its atmosphere per unit area per unit time. There is a small 
long-term variation in the irradiance with solar cycle and 
a short-term one, too, depending on the spottedness of the 
Sun. Broadly, the total variation is 1365 to 1369 W m7? 
(i.e. peak-to-trough variation of 0.3%). Taking the mean 
irradiance to be 1367 W m~ and with 1 AU equal to 
149 597 900 km, we have for the solar luminosity (i.e. total 
radiant power in all wavelengths) 3.844 x 10° W. This is 
equivalent to an absolute bolometric magnitude (defined 
by the apparent magnitude at a distance of 10 pc) of +4.72. 

The radius (or diameter) of the Sun, ie. of its 
photosphere, can be determined in a number of different 
ways, and there are reasonably precise measurements 
that date back to the early 1700s. Direct measurements 
using TRANSIT times of the Sun across the field of a 
meridian telescope were made for many years (e.g. at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Paris Observatory), and though they are considered 
fairly reliable there is little doubt that measurements using 
start and end times of total eclipses of the Sun are the 
best way of determining the solar diameter. HALLEY’s 
1715 measurement using this method gave the mean solar 
diameter as 1920 arcsec (32' 00") which is very close to the 
modern value. Another accurate method of determination 
involves the transits of Mercury which occur only about 
14 times a century. Measurements based on eclipse and 
Mercury transit methods over the past 300 years indicate 
a value for the solar diameter of a small fraction of an 
arcsecond less than 1920 arcseconds, which translates into 
a linear value for the solar radius of 695970 km. Despite 
claims made in the past, the measurements indicate a 
constant value over this period, and there seems to be 
a practically zero value for solar oblateness (excess of 
equatorial over polar diameters). 

The Sun’s effective temperature, obtained from the 
solar irradiance and the Stefan—Boltzmann law for a black 
body, is 5770 K. The equivalent spectral type is G2, 
luminosity class V (i.e. a main-sequence or non-evolved 
star). This places the Sun very nearly at the center of the 
main sequence in the HR diagram when a large variety of 
stars—very luminous as well as very dim—are plotted. 
The Sun’s color, as defined on the UBV photometric 
system, is given by B — V = +0.65 and U — B = 40.13. 

The age of a star is an important quantity, as with 
increasing age a star depletes its hydrogen ‘fuel’ at its 
core and eventually evolves off the main sequence. Stellar 
ages can only be directly determined for members of 
star clusters, but the Sun’s age can be fairly accurately 
determined from the age of the oldest meteorites 
discovered on the Earth; latest estimates are 4.6 x 10? years 
(4.6 Gyr). This is considerably larger than the ages of 
associations of stars known to be evolving towards or just 
recently arrived at the main sequence (e.g. ages of O- or T- 
associations are around 1 Myr) and most open clusters of 
stars (e.g. the Pleiades cluster’s age is 60 Myr, the Hyades 
600 Myr). However, the Sun’s age is much less than the 
age of globular clusters (mean about 10 Gyr) and the latest 
estimates of the age of the universe (12 Gyr). 

Again, for stellar evolution purposes, the chemical 
composition is of great importance. For the Sun, we 
are able to make very accurate measurements of the 
fractional amounts of relatively abundant elements in the 
photosphere because the great amount of light available 
enables us to get high-resolution visible-light spectra. In 
broad terms, the composition is 91% H, 9% He, and only 
0.1% heavier elements (or ‘metals’). The elements C, 
O, N, Ne and Fe feature as some of the most abundant 
heavier elements. Despite what would appear to be the 
small total metal abundance, the Sun is considered to be 
‘metal-rich’ and belongs to POPULATION I (i.e. is a second- 
generation star). (There is some evidence, though this 
remains controversial, that the solar corona has enhanced 
abundances of certain heavy elements, in particular those 
with a relatively small value of first ionization potential.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun as a Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astar’s mass determines the nature of its evolution— 
a large-mass star evolves very fast, a star with small mass 
settles down to a long existence in the low-luminosity end 
of the main sequence, while a body with very small mass 
never achieves stellar status at all, i.e. does not maintain 
its energy output by nuclear fusion reactions at its core. 
The Sun’s mass can be very precisely determined from 
planetary motions using KEPLER’s third Law: the cube of 
a planet’s distance from the Sun divided by the square 
of its period gives G times the product of the sum of 
the Sun’s and planet’s masses. The best estimates for 
the Sun’s mass give 1.989 x 10°° kg. Stellar masses can 
be directly determined for binary systems, i.e. where the 
two components are gravitationally bound, in which the 
orbits can be determined by continued observations over 
a period of time. By such means, stellar masses from 0.1 to 
50 times the solar mass have been found. The Sun’s mass, 
then, is approximately a logarithmic mean of the extremes. 

For stars that have ages of 1 Gyr or more, there is 
an approximate relation between activity (as measured 
by numbers of active regions or propensity to flare) and 
rotational rates, defined by equatorial rotation speeds. 
This is most likely due to the way in which magnetic fields 
are generated by dynamo action in convective zones (or, 
for stars like the Sun, the base of convective zones). The 
Sun rotates with a period that depends on latitude: 25 days 
at the equator and up to 33.5 days at latitude 80°. The 
corresponding rotational speed at the equator is 2 km st, 
Main-sequence stars known to be younger than the Sun 
from their larger rotational speeds are also much more 
active (with huge flares, many times more energetic than 
the largest solar flares), while in general stars with smaller 
rotational speeds have very low or apparently zero levels 
of flaring. 

In summary, the Sun occupies very much an 
intermediate position in comparison with other stars 
by almost any measure: mass, radius, luminosity, age, 
rotation/activity. It lies on the main sequence and is 
approximately at the midpoint of its life: in another 5 Gyr 
it will have depleted its hydrogen fuel at its core, and will 
start to evolve off the main sequence to a red giant phase. 


Global oscillations: observing the Sun’s interior 
With the Sun’s proximity to the Earth, we are able to 
resolve features on its surface under ideal seeing with the 
best ground-based telescopes that are only 150 km across, 
corresponding to 0.2 arcsecond. With sucha high degree of 
image quality available, there would seem to be little worth 
in deliberately degrading the resolution, but for certain 
studies that is what astronomers sometimes choose to do. 
Such a study is HELIOSEISMOLOGY. The Sun is now known 
to have non-radial global oscillations, and these are best 
studied by integrating the visible light output of the entire 
solar disk. 

The outer regions of the solar interior are convective, 
and convective motions excite sound waves which travel 
from the surface towards the interior. As an acoustic or 
resonance cavity is formed when a sound wave travels 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between two solid boundaries, with the possibility of 
standing waves or modes if the distance between two 
boundaries is a simple multiple of the wavelength, so the 
solar interior acts as an acoustic cavity. A sound wave 
that propagates into the interior from the solar surface 
at an angle travels in an arc. The reason for this is that 
the wave front (perpendicular to the wave direction) has 
its deepest part traveling faster than its shallowest part 
since the sound speed is larger at greater depths where 
the temperature is larger. The sound wave is therefore 
refracted until it is directed towards the solar surface 
again where it produces oscillations which are observable 
through the Doppler shifts of absorption lines in the 
photospheric spectrum. Such standing waves are called 
Pp modes (p for pressure which is the restoring force for 
these waves). The degree / of the mode can be defined 
to be the solar circumference divided by the horizontal 
wavelength, and small values of / (J = 0-4) produce global 
oscillations which are observable through Doppler shifts 
in integrated sunlight. Individual oscillation modes have 
only tiny velocity amplitudes, so highly accurate means 
of measuring Doppler shifts must be made, and generally 
over long periods of time. 

Measurements of low-/ p modes have been made for 
a number of years with the University of Birmingham 
(UK) BISON NETWoRK and the French IRIS global oscillations 
network, and since 1995 observations have been made 
from space with the GOLF instrument aboard SOHO. 
The observations indicate the presence of several strong 
peaks in the Fourier spectrum in the region around 3 mHz 
(corresponding to the familiar 5 min period oscillations). 
The peaks are closely spaced pairs, which comparison with 
calculations reveals to be due to modes with / equal to 
0 and 2 or 1 and 3. The spacing between the peaks can 
be directly compared with that predicted by the standard 
solar model where the agreement has been found to be 
reasonably satisfactory. 

The small velocity amplitudes observed in integrated 
sunlight that global oscillations give rise to would give 
little hope that global oscillations would be detectable 
in other Sun-like stars. However, much effort is 
being directed in the field of astroseismology, the stellar 
equivalent of helioseismology. For solar-type stars, we 
would expect the same behavior that has been found 
from helioseismological studies, so the measurements are 
at present only bordering on significant detections of 
oscillations. However, some other stars appear to show 
definite signs of global oscillations, in particular rapidly 
oscillating Ap stars. A major discovery in recent times 
is that of g mode oscillations in y Dor stars (g stands 
for gravitation as the restoring force). The observations 
of solar g modes are equivocal and there is much debate 
regarding their validity. 


Observing the Sun from a nearby star 

When we observe stars from the Earth using either ground- 
based observatories or spacecraft, we are in general 
unable to see surface features, though we can deduce 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun as a Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


their presence by indirect means. Thus starspots can be 
detected through a technique called Doppler imaging, 
which uses the fact that the profile of an absorption line 
is altered in response to a large enough starspot crossing 
the star’s visible hemisphere as the star rotates. Stellar 
chromospheres are detectable with visible-wavelength 
and ultraviolet observations. Cyclical behavior in some 
stars like the Sun’s 11-year cycle has been observed 
through the Ca II H and K emission line intensities, 
since the emission cores result from stellar chromospheres 
which, by analogy with the Sun, show active regions as 
areas of enhanced emission. Similarly, x-ray observations 
reveal the presence of coronas, and for active cool dwarf 
stars especially (dMe and dKe stars: d signifying dwarf 
and e emission in the Ha line) flares are readily observed 
in wavelengths ranging from m-wave radio to x-rays. 

With the Sun, ground-based and spacecraft observa- 
tions give us a highly detailed view of not only surface 
features but of the atmospheric structure, and we find the 
general rise in temperature, above the temperature mini- 
mum region (about 500 km above the surface, defined by 
the optical depth at 500 nm, ts509 equal to unity), going up 
through the chromosphere to the corona. If we were to 
observe the Sun from a distance of 1.3 pc, the distance of 
the nearest star Proxima Centauri, we would find evidence 
for the Sun’s atmospheric structure much more difficult to 
deduce. Whereas for flare stars of type dMe or dKe, and 
even for M dwarfs as a whole, the emission profiles of the 
Ca II Hand K lines are very obvious, in integrated sunlight 
the emission peaks are scarcely visible at all, so it is only 
with high-resolution spectroscopy that the solar chromo- 
sphere would be detectable at visible wavelengths. How- 
ever, ultraviolet observations of the Sun from a nearby star 
might detect the presence of the chromosphere through 
the Lyman-a and Mg II lines (121.5 nm and 280 nm respec- 
tively). The SOLAR TRANSITION REGION (supposed boundary 
layer between the chromosphere and corona but possibly 
due to unresolved structures in the Sun) has a temperature 
of about 10° K, very near the maximum emissivity of lines 
such as the C IV doublet at 155.0 nm. Again, ultraviolet 
observations with a spacecraft similar to the International 
Ultraviolet Explorer (UE) would only just detect this re- 
gion. The total x-ray luminosity of the solar corona is about 
10”° W, a value which is at the lower end of the range of 
x-ray coronal luminosities detected by the ROSAT space- 
craft. 

Doppler imaging shows that starspots on RS CVn 
stars in particular can attain huge dimensions, often a 
substantial fraction of the star’s total surface area. Thus, 
there are perceptible effects both in total brightness and in 
the profiles of absorption lines. Some very large sunspots 
are as much as 100000 km across, many times the Earth’s 
diameter, but even so not more than about 1% of the 
Sun’s area is covered with spots at any one time. Thus, 
an observer at the distance of even the nearest star with 
instruments comparable to those in use at present would 
probably not be able to detect any light modulations or 
changes in line profile. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


SOLAR PROMINENCES are tongues of cool gas (tempera- 
tures typical of the chromosphere, about 10* K) located in 
the solar corona. They are most often seen in Ha light, 
in emission off the limb or in absorption on the solar disk 
(when they are known as FILAMENTS) and may take on enor- 
mous proportions (such as the famous ‘Anteater’ promi- 
nence in June 1946). Their counterparts have often been 
seen in some active stars, in particular through changes 
in the profile of the Ha line as the prominence crosses the 
visible hemisphere of a rapidly rotating star such as AB 
Dor (dKe). Again, these stellar prominences seem to have 
much greater dimensions than solar prominences, and in 
the case of AB Dor are ‘co-rotating’ with the star’s pho- 
tosphere, with distances from the star of up to 9 stellar 
radii. Solar prominences are much too small and tenuous 
to have any perceptible effect on the profile of the Ha line 
as observed from a great distance. 

The flares that are seen on dMe stars and the 
interacting binaries of the RS CVn type are truly enormous 
compared with even the largest observed on the Sun. 
Much of the radiated energy of stellar or solar flares 
appears in the x-ray region. Energies of up to 10” J have 
been observed on RS CVn binaries, and up to 10°” J in the 
case of dMe stars. This compares with only about 3 x 1074 
J for the largest solar x-ray flare ever observed. In fact, 
although solar flares give rise to an enormous increase in 
x-ray emission on occasions, the total energy output of the 
Sun completely overpowers any flare: the energy output 
is increased by no more than 0.001%. The only way a flare 
could be detectable from a great distance would be in the 
x-ray region, since there would be a negligible effect on the 
He or other line profile and the total visible light output. 


Bibliography 

Collier-Cameron A 1999 Stars and stellar systems: 
similarities and differences ASP Conf. Ser. 158 146 

Gabriel A H et al 1997 Performance and early results from 
the GOLF instrument flown on the SOHO mission 
Solar Physics 175 207-26 

Phillips K J H 1995 Guide to the Sun (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) ch 8 


Kenneth J H Phillips 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Basic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sun: Basic Properties 
The standard star 


The Sun is a gaseous sphere in hydrostatic equilibrium. 
It emits light because it is hotter than the surrounding 
space. Such a brief characterization is true for most 
other stars as well. The distinction of the Sun is its 
close vicinity to the Earth, so that it is the only star 
where we can see fine details on the surface (see SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE). Examples are the granulation as well as 
other manifestations of convective energy transport, dark 
spots that are particularly structured in their umbrae and 
penumbrae, or limb prominences that are supported by 
an appropriate magnetic field. It is true that, by indirect 
methods, similar phenomena have been inferred for stellar 
surfaces, but the interpretation of the observations would 
be difficult, if not impossible, without the solar evidence 
(See SOLAR-STELLAR CONNECTION). 

A particular example of solar uniqueness is that 
the Sun is the only star in equilibrium whose neutrino 
luminosity has been measured. From celestial sources 
other than the Sun, only some 19 neutrinos were detected 
on 23 February 1987 after the explosion of supernova 
1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud. 


Fundamental quantities 


In order to determine the most fundamental solar 
quantities one needs to know the distance of the Sun from 
the Earth. The mean distance, or astronomical unit, is 


A = 149597 870 + 2 km. 


This value is the mean distance between the centers of the 
Sun and the Earth. The ‘mean’ is over the eccentric anomaly, 
i.e. the angle between the Sun—Earth line and the direction 
to the perihelion of the elliptical orbit. The most accurate 
measurement of A is obtained from radar echos within the 
solar system, and from Kepler’s third law. The uncertainty 
arises from the uncertainty of the radar echos, which yield 
the light time for unit distance, ts = 499.004 782+0.000 006 s. 
The following is a list of some fundamental solar 
quantities: 
Mass, mo = (1.9889 + 0.0003) x 10°° kg 
Radius, ro = (6.960 + 0.001) x 10° m 
Luminosity, Lo = (3.844 + 0.010) x 107° W 
Age, to = (4.57 + 0.05) x 10° years 
Base of convection zone, rcz = (0.713 + 0.003)ro. 
The chemical composition at the surface, by fractions 
of mass, is 
Hydrogen, Xs = 0.734 + 0.005 
Helium, Ys = 0.248 + 0.005 
Other elements, Zs = 0.018 + 0.002. 
Several remarks concerning these values must be made, in 
particular with respect to the error estimates. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Mass 

Time and distance measurements, and the application 
of celestial mechanics, yield the product, Gmg = 
(132 712438 + 5) x 10 m* s~ of the solar mass with 
the general constant of gravitation. The uncertainty of 
Mg rises entirely from the uncertainty of G = (6.67259 + 
0.000 85) x 107! m3 kg~! s~?. 


Radius 

In a photoelectric measurement the value of rg can 
be derived from the angular distance between the two 
inflection points of an intensity profile across the visible 
solar disk. Recent experiments yield values around 959.6” 
for the angular semi-diameter, remarkably close to visual 
heliometer measurements carried out in the nineteenth 
century (which led to the value 959.63” used in the 
Astronomical Almanac until today). The statistical errors of 
some of the individual experiments are as small as 0.01”. 
However, the systematic uncertainty must be at least 0.1”, 
as is evident from the spread of the results. The more 
conservative error given above accounts for this. 

The solar limb defined by the intensity inflection point 
is ~300 km above the level where the optical depth is 
t = 2/3. For a boundary condition to a solar interior 
model, applied at that level, the radius is therefore r = 
(6.957 + 0.001) x 10° m. A comparison of theoretical and 
observed frequencies of solar f-mode oscillations confirms 
this value of the radius at t = 2/3. 


Luminosity 
The Earth’s atmosphere absorbs or reflects a considerable 
fraction of the solar radiation. Hence an accurate 
measurement can only be made from space. Figure 1 
shows the total solar irradiance obtained from bolometric 
experiments on balloons, rockets and satellites since 
1978. Short-term as well as long-term relative variations, 
measured by the diverse experiments, agree very well 
with each other, thus demonstrating their solar origin. 
Most conspicuous is a variation with the 11-year activity 
cycle of the Sun. This variation is in phase with the cycle: 
the maxima of irradiance and of the number of sunspots 
coincide. The amplitude of the variation is ~0.09%, peak- 
to-peak. The occurrence of solar faculae depends on the 
cycle phase (and on heliographic latitude) and plays the 
major role in models of this variation. 

Figure 1 also demonstrates differences of several 
W m~ between the absolute results of the diverse 
experiments, indicating systematic uncertainties. The 
solar luminosity given in the present list is 47 A? times 
the mean irradiance value 1367 W m~? measured by 
the ‘Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitoring I’ 
instrument on the Solar Maximum Mission. This 
instrument had a precise solar pointing system and, by 
the use of three absorbing cavities operating at different 
intervals, it had the capability to correct for detector 
degradation; its accuracy has been estimated to +0.2%. 
The error of Lg given above is a conservative guess based 
on this number (see SOLAR IRRADIANCE). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Basic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Days since Jan 0, 1980 


0 2000 4000 6000 
| | T T T | | T 
1374 ;-— cee 
L | vl | | - 
L bility il N. HF al 
| | j | Ae ; 
FI AAA _ 
| il li WWW, 
1372}— nG Wie i! a 
| | ie A h i | | 
ii | 
Ma) | ] 
L ) || ij 
~ 1370}— a 
e L a 
é | 
g | 7 
= + pe ACRIM II + 0.123% 4 
—E 1368}— = 
4 ir I | ( SOVA2 A i 1 
5 
3 hiaaa 2 H : 
; hh Mi Ke Oe M : Ml 
- * . ir rs + 
a + tt 
1366 |— + + + ty yt at! |G iv 4r 4 +4 = 
r + te gt a ee 
L ih sa tee RE EP a ht at 4 
at, + rat oe Hi Eh of 
: esti etre et, ATE Geode ; 
He Fe ae ++ 4+ + jt ee 
- + Pe fia 4 i, Se a 4 
1364— ett 4 “. VIRGO _ 
z= m JPL Rocket Exp. r ERBS = + 7 
- m= PMOD Rocket & Balloon Exp. bu 4 
1362 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 
1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 


Year 


Figure 1. Total solar irradiance 1978-98, measured by balloon, rocket and satellite experiments. HF: Earth Radiation Budget, on 
Nimbus-7; ACRIM: Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitoring; SOVA: Solar Variability, om EURECA; ERBS: Earth Radiation 
Budget Satellite; VIRGO: Variability of Solar Irradiance and Gravity Oscillations, on SOHO. (Updated from C Fréhlich and J Lean; 


courtesy J M Pap.) 


Age 

The decay of long-lived radioactive isotopes, notably 
238U, 2351, 232Th, 0K 87Rb, 147Sm and 187Re, yields 
the age of meteorites, defined as the time between the 
melting, i.e. homogenization of isotopes, and subsequent 
crystallization of these objects, and the present. Such age 
determinations are possible with errors as small as a few 
million years. Nevertheless, there is a larger uncertainty in 
the solar age because of the uncertainty in the state of the 
Sun’s evolution at the time of meteorite formation. Both 
the initial collapse of an interstellar cloud and the final 
hydrostatic contraction towards the main sequence in the 
Hertzsprung—Russell diagram have time scales of order 
10” years, which leads to the uncertainty estimate of to 
(See SOLAR EVOLUTION). 


Depth of convection zone 
The best value of rcz is obtained by means of 


helioseismology. The frequencies of the Sun’s acoustic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


modes of oscillation (the p modes) depend on the 
gradient, dc/dr, of the sound speed, and therefore 
on the gradient of the temperature. The temperature 
gradient makes a characteristic transition from the nearly 
isentropic stratification in the convection zone to the 
core stratification that is determined by the radiative 
transport of energy. The error estimate of rcz reflects 
the uncertainty of the inversion of the observed p- 
mode frequencies, and (possibly) an uncertainty in the 
knowledge of the thermodynamic state in the Sun (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE). 


Chemical composition at the surface 

Helioseismology yields the most precise determination 
of the abundance of helium. Since He is an abundant 
element in the Sun, its ionization energy substantially 
contributes—in a zone of partial ionization—to the specific 
heat and hence to the adiabatic exponent and the speed 
of sound. Therefore, the measurement of p-mode 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Basic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


frequencies can be used to determine the helium content. 
The result listed above pertains to the outer solar layer 
between rcz and rg which is permanently mixed by 
turbulent convection. The uncertainty corresponds to 
the uncertainty of the frequency inversion and of the 
thermodynamic state in the layer of partial ionization of 
helium. 

The heavy element mass fraction, Zs, is determined 
essentially from a spectroscopic analysis of the solar 
photosphere, and from abundance ratios found elsewhere 
in the solar system. The uncertainty is essentially 
due to the errors of the spectroscopic results (see SOLAR 
ABUNDANCES). 


Internal constitution 

The internal structure of the Sun is governed by the 
hydrostatic support of the solar mass, the conversion 
of nuclear into thermal energy by fusion of hydrogen 
into helium, and by the mechanisms of radiative and 
convective energy transport. The thermodynamic state of 
the solar interior is close to the state of a perfect gas; small 
deviations of the perfect gas law occur near the solar center 
where partially degenerate electrons contribute ~1.5% to 
the pressure, as well as in the outer part—mainly in the 
envelope where the temperature is below 2 x 10° K and 
where excitation and ionization of neutral or partially 
ionized species make a contribution of up to a few per 
cent. 

In addition to the equation of state, the opacity, defined 
as the mean absorption coefficient « (i.e. properly averaged 
over the photon frequency), plays a major role in our 
knowledge of the stellar interior. It is derived through 
a detailed analysis of the diverse atomic processes that 
absorb or scatter photons. For the Sun, generally opacity 
tables are used, which list « as a function of temperature, 
density and chemical composition. The most recent tables 
(the ‘OPAL’ tables) have been calculated at the Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory (USA). The opacity is 
of crucial importance for the temperature profile in the 
solar core below rcz, where energy is transported by 
radiation; it also is crucial in determining the depth where 
radiative transport becomes inefficient and, therefore, 
the stratification becomes unstable to convection. For 
the solar interior the opacity is still a source of some 
uncertainty; for example, the depth of the convection zone 
in calculated models has changed with the incorporation 
of new opacity tables, and only the recent Livermore tables 
yield models having a rez in close agreement with the 
helioseismological result (See SOLAR INTERIOR: EQUATION OF 
STATE AND OPACITY). 

Over the Sun’s age the helium content in the central 
region has increased, mainly by fusion of hydrogen, and—by 
a smaller amount—by gravitational settling. Evolutionary 
calculations show that gravitational settling has reduced 
the helium content of the convective solar envelope from 
an initial mass fraction Yin; ~ 0.280 to the present value 
Ys © 0.248. For the elements heavier than helium, settling 
is the only mechanism of chemical differentiation. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


change in the envelope is from an original Zj,; ~ 0.020 to 
the present value Zs ~ 0.018. 

The Standard Solar Model is based on the best 
available physical and chemical input, as outlined in this 
section. This Standard Model reproduces, within some 
uncertainties, the observed basic properties of the Sun— 
with one exception, the neutrino luminosity (see below). 
At the solar center, some of the physical quantities are as 
follows: 

Temperature, Tc = 1.57 x 10’ K 
Density, pc = 1.52 x 10° kg m3 
Pressure, Pc = 2.37 x 10'° Pa 

H mass fraction, Xc = 0.34 

He mass fraction, Yc = 0.64 

(See SOLAR INTERIOR: STANDARD MODELS). 


The neutrino discrepancy 
Nuclear energy conversion in the solar interior is 
directly confirmed by the measurement of solar neutrinos. 
However, the observational result quantitatively falls 
short with respect to the prediction based on the Standard 
Solar Model. Radiochemical experiments that use 
neutrino capture by the chlorine and gallium isotopes 
3’C] and 7'Ga yield +28% and ~55% respectively of the 
theoretical expectation. Water Cerenkov detectors that 
record neutrino-electron scattering have demonstrated 
that the neutrinos arrive from the direction of the Sun; 
their yield is slightly less than 50% of the theoretical value. 
The Standard Solar Model predicts not only the 
total neutrino flux from the Sun, but also its energy 
distribution. The diverse experiments are sensitive 
to different ranges of neutrino energy. Although 
the predicted energy distribution may be modified, in 
particular by the construction of a solar model with a 
lower central temperature, it has not been possible to 
calculate models whose neutrino production would be in 
accord with all the observational results simultaneously. 
Moreover, the means to change the model temperature 
(opacity, equation of state, nuclear reaction rates) are rather 
limited. It therefore appears that the discrepancy cannot 
be resolved in the astrophysical context. Instead, physical 
concepts that lie beyond the standard electroweak model 
of elementary particles may be required (see SOLAR INTERIOR: 
NEUTRINOS). 


Oscillations and helioseismology 

The Sun supports two kinds of oscillation around its 
hydrostatic equilibrium stratification. | According to 
their predominant restoring forces, these oscillations are 
classified as pressure or p modes, and gravity or g 
modes. The spherically symmetric p-mode oscillation 
has a fundamental period of ~63 min. This fundamental 
mode as well as the first few overtone modes have not 
yet been observed. But the frequencies of numerous 
higher overtones, with periods in the range of 2 to 20 min, 
have been measured, for spherically symmetric as well 
as for asymmetric, or non-radial, p modes. The non- 
radial modes are characterized by their spherical harmonic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Basic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MDI Medium-—l Power Spectrum 


frequency, mHz 


0) 50 100 150 200 250 300 
angular degree, l 


Figure 2. Power distribution of observed solar p modes in the 
degree-frequency space. (Data from the Michelson Doppler 
Imager on SOHO, cf Kosovichev et al (1997).) 


degree /; oscillations with degrees up to/ ~ 4000 have 
been found. In the degree—frequency diagram the p modes 
are aligned along well-defined ridges, as shown in figure 2 
(See SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY). 


The solar p-mode frequencies are currently deter- 
mined with a relative error of less than 10~3, for some less 
than 10-+. Theoretical eigenfrequencies of the Standard 
Solar Model are calculated with equal accuracy. However, 
the relative deviations between measured and calculated 
frequencies have reached 10-°-10~? for some of the theo- 
retical solar models; such deviations have therefore been 
used to refine the physical input to the model. Modifica- 
tions in the equation of state, more accurate abundances 
of chemical elements, more detailed atomic physics for 
the calculation of opacity tables, and the process of gravi- 
tational settling of helium and the heavier elements have 
thus been incorporated into the Standard Solar Model. 


There is no firm evidence for the existence of g modes 
on the Sun, in spite of considerable observational effort. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Solar rotation 

The rotation of the Sun has been known since about 1610 
when Galileo Galilei and other astronomers began to use 
the newly invented telescope for regular observations of 
sunspots. From such observations R C Carrington by 1863 
had derived the rotation elements, i.e. the two angles that 
define the direction of the Sun’s axis of rotation. These 
angles are the inclination, i = 7.25°, of the axis with respect 
to the normal on the ecliptic plane, and the longitude 
of the ascending node, 83 = 75.73° (for 1998), measured 
in the ecliptic plane from the equinox direction. Due to 
the precession of the Earth’s axis the equinox direction 
recedes by 50.26” per year; 2 increases at the same rate, 
because the direction of the Sun’s axis remains fixed. The 
rotation elements determined by Carrington are still used 
in the Astronomical Almanac, although modern evaluations 
of long-term sunspot observations yield a slightly steeper 
axis, with i ~*~ 7.13°. Carrington’s 83 agrees with the 
modern result. 

From the transit of sunspots across the solar disc 
Carrington derived a mean synodic period of rotation, 
namely 27.2753 days. Time intervals of this length are 
counted as Carrington rotations, with rotation no 1 starting 
on 9 November 1853. The synodic mean angular velocity 
corresponding to the Carrington rotation is Qsyn = 2.67 x 
10-° s-1; the sidereal mean value is Qsig = 2.87 x 10-° s“!. 

Due to the rotation the figure of the Sun is slightly 
oblate. The difference between the equatorial and polar 
radii, req — Tpole © 10-ro, has been measured in a 
number of experiments (See SOLAR INTERIOR: SOLAR DIAMETER, 
OBLATENESS AND TEMPERATURE). 

The solar rotation is non-uniform, i.e. the angular 
velocity Q(r, 8) depends on radius r and colatitude 6. At 
the surface, the 6-dependence is directly observed, both by 
means of tracers such as sunspots and spectroscopically. 
Spectroscopic data from Mount Wilson Observatory yield 
Qsia(To, 7/2) = 2.84 x 10-6 st at the equator and 
Qsia(To, 0) = 2.01 x 10-6 s~! at the poles. Sunspots as 
tracers generally yield a slightly faster rotation, although 
they can only be used at low latitude, up to about +40°. 

Below the surface the Sun’s rate of rotation has been 
determined by helioseismology. Non-radial p modes of 
degree / have a (2! + 1)-fold degeneracy in the case of 
spherical symmetry. Rotation breaks this symmetry and 
removes the degeneracy. The frequencies are split into 
(2/+1)-fold multiplets. Since different modes of oscillation 
penetrate into different depths of the Sun, the frequency 
splitting can be inverted; the angular velocity as a function 
of r can thus be obtained. Moreover, multiplets with non- 
equidistant frequency spacing carry information about the 
dependence of Q on latitude. 

The helioseismological results (figure 3) demonstrate 
that, within the convection zone, the angular velocity has 
approximately the same latitude dependence as at the 
surface. At the base of the convection zone, around r = 
0.7ro, there is a transition region of thickness Ar ~ 0.179 
to a core with approximate solid-body rotation; in the core 
the angular velocity is of the same order as around +30° 
latitude at the surface (see SOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Basic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


500 ss + 
. L 
B 450+ 
. L 
~ = 
oO 
jaa 
4 E 
° 
g f 
§ 
3 400 + 
jaaq 
‘ —= 
convection zone 
350 1 1 1 1 | 1 1 1 | 
0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
r/R 


Figure 3. Solar rotation rate, as a function of r, for three 
heliographic latitudes; an inversion of data obtained with the 
Michelson Doppler Imager on SOHO. The vertical line marks 
the base of the convection zone; the arrows indicate the rotation 
rate measured spectroscopically at the surface. (From 
Kosovichev et al (1997).) 


The magnetic field of the Sun 

Zeeman splitting of spectral lines in sunspots was first 
reported by G E Hale in 1908. The magnetic field in the 
spots that accounts for the splitting has a field strength 
of 0.2-0.3 T. Sunspots preferentially appear in pairs of 
opposite magnetic polarity, oriented in the heliographic 
longitude direction, with the leading spot (in the sense 
of solar rotation) slightly closer to the equator. The 
orientation is the same for all pairs within each hemisphere 
and each 11-year sunspot cycle, but reverses from one cycle 
to the next and is antisymmetric with respect to the equator 
(Hale's rules). The full magnetic cycle therefore lasts 22 
years (see SOLAR CYCLE). 

The magnetic field of the sunspots has its origin in 
the solar interior, where it is generated by a self-excited 
magneto-hydrodynamic dynamo. The seat of this dynamo 
most probably is the transition region at the base of the 
convection zone, around r = 0.7rg. At this depth 
the shearing non-uniform rotation (figure 3) generates a 
toroidal magnetic field from a pre-existing poloidal field. If 
ina tube of magnetic flux the field strength reaches a critical 
value of order 10 T, the tube may become unstable, with 
loops rising to the solar surface. By this process bipolar 
magnetic regions and pairs of sunspots are formed (see 
SUNSPOTS). 

Individual sunspots have a lifetime of days to months. 
At the begin of each 11-year half-cycle, spots form at 
intermediate heliographic latitude, around +35°. In the 
course of the cycle the two zones of sunspot emergence 
migrate toward the solar equator. This is known as the 
‘butterfly diagram’, cf figure 4. The cause of the migration 
is closely related to the solar dynamo. The mechanism is 
modeled in particular in terms of the wQ-dynamo. In this 
model the non-uniform rotation is complemented by the 
interaction of the Coriolis force with loops of magnetized 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Latitude 


1950 1960 1970 1980 i990 
Year 


Figure 4. Butterfly diagram of sunspots (dark areas), and 
contours of the radial component of the mean poloidal magnetic 
field (solid positive, dashed negative). 


material; a new (reversed) parent poloidal field for the 
generation of the toroidal field of the next cycle is formed in 
this way. Figure 4 contains mean contours of the measured 
poloidal field (see DYNAMO THEORY). 

Outside the sunspots, and also outside the latitude 
zones populated by sunspots, the solar magnetic field 
appears in the form of locally concentrated flux tubes. 
These tubes are too small to cause dark spots, and generally 
also too small to be resolved in observed magnetograms. 
But their field strength may reach 0.2 T and, because 
they are so numerous, their total absolute magnetic flux 
is comparable to the flux that is concentrated in sunspots 
(See SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD). 


The outer atmosphere and heliosphere 

The outer atmosphere of the Sun consists of the 
chromosphere, with a mean height of about 2000 km, the 
transition region, where the temperature rapidly changes 
from ~104 K to 10° K, and the corona, which has a 
temperature above 10° K and extends over several solar 
radii. Because of its high temperature, the corona expands 
with a velocity that increases outwards. At a critical 
distance r,, probably between 5rg and 10rg, the expansion 
becomes supersonic and turns into the solar wind. At the 
Earth’s orbit the wind velocity varies between 300 and 
700 km s~!. At a distance of the order of 50 astronomical 
units, according to theory, a shock marks the transition 
to the interstellar medium. There the dynamic pressure 
of the solar wind matches the interstellar gas pressure 
(see SOLAR WIND: GLOBAL PROPERTIES). The diverse regions of 
the outer solar atmosphere are not horizontally uniform 
layers, but rather highly structured. The agent that 
dominates the structure is the magnetic field. The ratio of 
gas pressure to magnetic pressure (the plasma £) is small, 
in contrast to the solar interior where 6B > 1. The main 
elements of the structure are spicules and prominences 
in the chromosphere; arches, streamers and coronal holes 
in the corona; and low- and high-speed streams in the 
solar wind. The interaction of the magnetic field with the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Basic Properties 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


solar wind also leads to breaking of the Sun’s rotation: the 
field acts as a lever arm, reaching outwards to the Alfvén 
radius rx where the magnetic and kinetic energy densities 
become equal. The Alfvén radius should lie between 10 
and 15 solar radii; its position has not yet been determined 
experimentally (nor has the position of r.), because no 
spacecraft has yet approached the Sun closer than 0.29 
astronomical units. 

In addition to the spatial inhomogeneity, the 
outer atmosphere is highly variable in time. As the 
inhomogeneity, the variability is due to the magnetic 
field. Magnetically stored energy is set free by instabilities, 
magnetic lines of force reconnect and accelerate particles. 
Chromospheric flares, bursts of radio emission and 
coronal mass ejections follow (see SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS). 


Bibliography 

Cox A N, Livingston W C and Matthews M S (eds) 1991 
Solar Interior and Atmosphere (Tucson, AZ: University 
of Arizona Press) 

Kosovichev A G et al 1997 Solar Phys. 170 43 

Sonett C P, Giampapa M S and Matthews M S (eds) 1991 
The Sun in Time (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 

Stix M 1999 The Sun, an Introduction 2nd edn (Berlin: 
Springer) 

The Astronomical Almanac (Washington, DC: US Govt 
Printing Office) 


M Stix 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Safe Observation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sun: Safe Observation 


Generally speaking, astronomy is a fairly safe pastime. 
There is, however, one celestial object which is highly 
dangerous: the sun. Even the solar surface is at a 
temperature of well over 5000°C, and deep at the core 
the temperature rises to around 15000 000°C; remember, 
the Sun may be regarded as a vast nuclear reactor. 

Staring straight at the Sun, even with the naked 
eye alone, is emphatically not to be recommended. The 
human eye is delicate, and all too easily damaged; safety 
considerations must always be paramount—as many 
people in the past have found to their cost. Carelessness 
can result in permanent eye damage, or even blindness. 
Therefore let us consider what the dangers are, and what 
precautions need to be taken. 

With the naked eye, a suitably dark filter is safe 
enough, but it must be really dense. Welding glass is to 
be recommended, at least Grade 14, and is easy to obtain. 
There are occasions when sunspot groups become large 
enough to be seen in this way, but it is best to wait until 
the Sun is low down in the sky, preferably shining through 
a certain amount of mist or haze. 

Fully developed, fogged black and white film has 
often been used, but some modern films are not completely 
effective, and so are best avoided. Exposed color film 
should never be used, because it is no barrier to infrared 
radiation which is dangerous to the eye. 

Smoked glass is often recommended, but is not safe. 
By its very nature, the deposit is uneven, and any pinprick 
already present or caused by fingering produces what may 
be termed a ‘pinhole camera’ which will focus onto the 
observer's eye. 

Much the best filter is Mylar, which is a very tough 
proprietary plastic film a few microns thick. For solar 
work, filters are made by coating the film with a very 
thin layer of aluminum. If the filter is to be used with the 
naked eye alone, then Mylar coated on both sides is best; 
for photography single-sided coating is better, because it 
means that exposure times can be shorter. It must never 
be confused with ‘silver paper’, which is a very thin sheet 
of aluminum, and provides virtually no protection at all. 

The only danger with Mylar comes from pinholes. 
Before using the filter, check it carefully, and if there are 
any pinholes throw the filter away. 

Always remember that the Sun is more dangerous 
than it often looks. Low down, shining through thick 
horizon haze, it seems deceptively mild and harmless. 
The temptation then is to take a quick direct look with 
binoculars or a telescope. Eye damage is virtually certain 
to result, and there have, unfortunately, been many cases 
of people who have been blinded in this way. 

Remember, too, that we are not dealing only with 
visual light. The Sun is also very powerful in the 
ultraviolet and infrared wavelengths. If you want to 
demonstrate the heating involved, simply hold up a 
magnifying glass and focus the Sun’s rays onto a piece 
of paper. It does not take long for the paper to become 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Herschel wedge 


To eyepiece 
An 


Figure 1. 


hot, and if the Sun is high in the sky the paper will quickly 
burst into flame (this was, of course, the way in which Boy 
Scouts used to light a camp-fire). It does not take much 
imagination to realize what would happen if this heat were 
focused onto your eye. 

We come next to observing the Sun with a telescope 
(binoculars will be discussed below). It is unfortunate that 
some small telescopes, usually (not always) REFRACTORS, are 
sold together with dark sun-caps. The instructions claim 
that it is then safe to fit the sun-cap over the telescope 
eyepiece, and look direct. This is not true. Such a 
procedure is appallingly dangerous. Dark caps supplied 
with small, cheap telescopes are almost always of inferior 
quality, so that they will not give adequate protection, and 
they are always liable to crack or shatter without warning, 
in which case an observer will not have sufficient time to 
move their eye out of the way. There is an extra hazard, 
too. Some small telescopes are supplied with ‘moon-caps’, 
designed to cut down the glare of the full Moon. So far as 
the Moon is concerned this is safe enough, because the 
Moon sends us only a tiny amount of heat, but it is only 
too easy to confuse a moon-cap with a sun-cap. 

There is, however, an easy way to look at sUNSPOTS: 
use the telescope as a projector. 

First, aim the telescope at the Sun, without putting 
your eye anywhere near the eyepiece; this is easy enough 
by throwing the telescope shadow on to a screen held or 
fastened behind the eyepiece. The Sun’s disk will then be 
projected onto the screen, and any spot-groups or FACULAE 
which happen to be present will be clearly seen; adjust 
the focus of the telescope until the image is sharp. Adjust 
the distance of the screen until the projected disk is of the 
required size (7-8 cm is a good compromise). You can then 
make a sketch of the disk at your leisure. 

Of course, simply holding the screen is awkward, 
because it means that the observer ideally needs three 
hands, but to fix a mounting is very easy. It is also very 
useful to fix a screen over the telescope itself, to cast a 
shadow and allow only the light from the telescope to pass 
through. 

Detailed views of sunspots can be obtained in this 
way; of course different magnifications can be used—low 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Safe Observation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


powers for general disk drawings, higher powers for more 
elaborate sketches of sunspot groups. The Sun rotates in 
a period of around 27 days, so that a spot will be carried 
across the disk from one side to the other until it vanishes 
over the limb; it will reappear at the opposite limb just 
under 14 days later—unless, of course, it has disappeared 
in the meantime! Many spot-groups have short lifetimes, 
though others persist for several revolutions. 

The Sun has a cycle of activity with a mean period 
of about 11 years. At solar minimum the disk may be 
blank for many consecutive days, while at maximum 
many spot-groups may be visible at the same time. The 
next maximum is due around 2000-2001. Faculae (Latin, 
‘torches’) are clouds of incandescent gas lying above the 
brilliant surface; they are easily seen by projecting the 
image with a small telescope. 

Generally speaking, refractors are to be preferred for 
visual observations of the Sun; with a REFLECTOR there is 
always the danger of damaging the secondary mirror. 
Also, with a telescope more than 10 cm in aperture it is 
usually a good idea to stop down the mirror or object- 
glass. After all, with the Sun there is plenty of light to 
spare! 

It is possible to use binoculars as projectors, in the 
same way as a telescope, and sunspots can sometimes be 
seen in this way, though it is never at all satisfactory. 

There are only two sensible ways for direct telescopic 
viewing of the Sun. One is to use a Mylar filter placed over 
the object-glass, or upper end of the tube for a reflector such 
as a Maksutov. Again, exercise the greatest care, and make 
absolutely certain that the Mylar is undamaged. 

The second method is to use a Herschel wedge. This 
is made up of a fitting for the telescope draw-tube, a 
partially reflecting surface, and a fitting for the eyepiece 
(see figure 1). The Sun’s light passed through the eyepiece 
comes from the top surface of a plain glass wedge, while 
the heat, concentrated by the object-glass or mirror, is 
passed straight through the open end. The glass is wedge- 
shaped so that the secondary reflection from its back 
surface is not also passed up to the eyepiece—if it were, it 
would produce a double image. When using a Herschel 
wedge, also add a dark filter, and remember that infrared 
radiation must be taken into account as well as visible light. 

There are various other points to be borne in mind. If 
you use a telescope to project the Sun’s image, remember 
that the heat on the eyepiece may damage it, particularly if 
it is often used in this way—so put aside a special eyepiece 
for the purpose. Remember also to cap the telescope finder. 
One very famous scholar remembered that on one occasion 
he forgot to do this and suddenly realized that his beard 
had caught fire; the finder telescope had focused the Sun’s 
heat in just that position! 

Sunspots can be photographed with an ordinary 
camera equipped with a telephoto lens. Always bear in 
mind that a camera involves a lens system, and therefore 
never look through the viewfinder to make sure that the 
Sun is properly placed; and always use a Mylar filter over 
the camera lens. Otherwise, the only method is to project 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Sun’s image on to a screen, in the usual way, and then 
photograph the screen, but this is not very convenient, 
simply because the telescope itself is bound to get in the 
way. 

ECLIPSES of the Sun are fascinating; total eclipses are 
spectacular by any standards—it has been said that a 
total solar eclipse is the grandest sight in all Nature. 
As soon as the last segment of the brilliant photosphere 
has been covered by the disk of the Moon, the Sun’s 
chromosphere flashes into view, together with the CORONA 
and any PROMINENCES which happen to be present. Because 
the Moon’s shadow is only just long enough to reach the 
Earth, total eclipses as seen from any one locality are rare 
(the English eclipse of August 1999 will not be followed by 
another until 23 September 2090). Partial eclipses are much 
more common. There are also annular eclipses, when the 
Moon is in the far part of its orbit and does not appear large 
enough to cover the Sun completely; a ring of sunlight 
is left showing round the dark mass of the Moon (Latin 
annulus, a ring). 

During totality it is quite safe to look straight at 
the Sun, with the naked eye, binoculars or a telescope. 
But—and this cannot be too strongly emphasized—the 
photosphere must be completely covered. The slightest 
sliver of the brilliant solar disk is just as dangerous as the 
uneclipsed Sun. Therefore, the procedure for the eclipse 
photographer is to take the Mylar filter away only when 
the corona is first seen, and replace it as soon as the 
‘DIAMOND RING’ effect heralds the end of totality. During 
partial and annular eclipses, of course, follow the same 
procedure as with the uneclipsed Sun. 

The notes given here apply to the observer who 
is anxious to follow sunspots, faculae and any eclipses 
which may be visible, but of course serious solar observers 
need specialized equipment. Spectrohelioscopes and 
spectroheliographs are rare in amateur hands, but Ha 
filters are not; these cut out all the light except that of 
hydrogen, and once they are in place direct viewing is 
safe. However, the observer who has acquired equipment 
of this kind will need no reminder of the dangers involved 
in solar work. 

To sum up, therefore: 


(a) TheSunis dangerous, because of its brilliance, its heat 
and its ‘invisible’ radiation (ultraviolet and infrared). 

(b) With the naked eye, never look straight at the Sun for 
more than a second or two, and preferably not at all, 
unless you hold up a dark filter. 

(c) Welding-glass gives good protection, and so does 
exposed, fogged black-and-white film. Exposed 
color film does not, and also avoid materials such 
as silver paper. 

(d) Witha telescope, never use the dark sun-caps so often 
supplied with small, cheap instruments. Ensure that 
your filter is perfect and sufficiently dark; Mylar is 
much the best material. 

(e) A Herschel wedge may be used, but add a dark filter 
to reduce the level of illumination still further. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sun: Safe Observation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(f) 


(g) 


(h) 


filter should preferably be of the type which blocks 
infrared radiation. 

Never point a camera straight at the Sun and look 
through the viewfinder, unless an adequate filter is 
used. 

Remember that the Sun is dangerous even when 
low down and shining through haze or mist. 
The temptation to take ‘one quick look’ through 
binoculars or a telescope which is not fitted with a 
proper filter may well have tragic results. 

Serious solar observers use equipment such as Ha 
filters, but they will by that time be aware of any risks. 


It is true that some astronomers have been accused 


of being paranoid about the dangers of solar work. Yet 
remember that you have only one pair of eyes—and a 
single mistake will be one too many. A cat may look at a 
king, but nobody should look unprotected at the brilliant 
disk of the Sun. 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 
Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sundial 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sundial 


One of three types of timekeeping device based on the 
shadow cast by any fixed vertical object. As the day 
progresses, the Sun moves across the sky, causing the 
shadow of the object to move. Depending on the type of 
device, the object measures apparent solar time with some 
accuracy. 

From about 3500 sc the first device was probably a 
vertical stick knownasa gnomon. By the eighth century Bc, 
more precise devices were in use in Egypt. One example 
has a base inscribed with a scale of six time divisions fixed 
in an east—west direction. The design is still in use in some 
parts of Egypt. Around 300 Bc the hemispherical sundial 
or hemicycle is evident. It was made of a cubical block of 
stone or wood with a hemispherical opening cut into it. A 
pointer was fixed at the center of the opening. The path 
traveled by the shadow of the pointer was, approximately, 
a circular arc, which varied according to the seasons. 
These variations were inscribed on the internal surface of 
the hemisphere and each was divided into twelve equal 
divisions or hours. Because the length of the day varied 
according to the season, these hours also varied in length 
from season to season and even from day to day and 
were consequently known as temporary hours. There are 
records of the dial still being used during the tenth century. 

The Greeks developed and constructed very sophis- 
ticated sundials. One version used the surface of a conic 
section for greater accuracy. The Romans also used sun- 
dials with temporary hours. The Arabs attached much 
importance to sundials and derived the principles and 
design from the Greeks. They increased the variety of de- 
signs available and, at the same time, simplified the pro- 
cesses of design and construction by using the principles 
of trigonometry. With the advent of mechanical clocks in 
the early fourteenth century, sundials with equal hours 
gradually came into general use. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


BIPOLAR 
GROUPS 


UNIPOLAR “(ey Si 
GROUPS ne ar 4 


we 


7 


foe 
; ge 


COMPLEX 
GROUPS 


Figure 1. Solar active region classification from Mount Wilson 
Observatory, based on distribution of magnetic-field polarities 
of sunspots (from figure 6.4 in Bray and Loughhead 1964). p = 
preceding spot dominant; f = follower spot dominant. The 
p-spot ‘leads’ the spot group as solar rotation moves it from east 
to west across the solar disk. An additional category, the 
6-configuration, was introduced in the 1960s. 


Sunspot Classification 


Sunspots, dark ‘blemishes’ on the brilliant solar surface, 
were discovered telescopically by Galileo and his 
contemporaries in 1611. Records of exceptionally large, 
naked-eye sunspots are found in Chinese and Greek 
records as early as 325 BC. The fortuitous occurrence of 
smoke or fog darkened the Sun enough to safely reveal 
the dark spots to the rare observer who would record 
his surprising view. These spots were mistaken to be 
birds or some mythical object passing in front of the Sun. 
It required regular telescopic observations and careful 
reduction of the observations to deduce the fundamental 
importance of sunspots. 

Sunspots are the manifestation of strong magnetic 
fields that erupt from below the solar surface. Because this 
erupting flux is always a system of magnetic-field loops, 
the intersections of the two ‘legs’ of the loop-system with 
the solar surface create a bipolar group of sunspots. Thus 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Drawings of typical sunspot groups in each category 
in the Zurich Sunspot Classification. 


the most meaningful descriptive record of sunspots is their 
appearance in groups. 

The sunspot group provides clues about the potential 
for eruptive activity in an ACTIVE REGION. A description of 
sunspot groups in a formalized system of classification 
provides the basis for SOLAR FLARE prediction. It is also a 
taxonomy of the sunspot phenomenon that becomes one 
of the essential data in the solar climatic record. 

Sunspots are like snowflakes; each one is unique but 
has size and structure similar to other sunspots. The 
similarities are the basis for classifying the groups. Early 
classifications described the evolutionary sequence of a 
typical, large sunspot group. There was no information 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


about magnetic fields involved with these groups. Regular 
measurements of magnetic polarities of sunspots led the 
Mt Wilson Observatory to devise a simple classification 
scheme based on polarity distributions (figure 1). 

The Zurich system (figure 2), in use for most of the 
20th century, is still widely used. It describes nine different 
types of groups. Amodification of this system by McIntosh 
(figure 3) was introduced in 1966 and gradually attained 
worldwide acceptance by the 1980s. Definitions for this 
more precise and detailed classification are given below, 
taken directly from McIntosh (1990). 

The Zurich classification was modified and expanded 
in order to improve the objectivity of the definitions, and 
to add indicators of size, stability and complexity that 
appeared to correlate with solar flares. The Zurich system 
attempts to describe a typical evolutionary sequence for 
the largest sunspot groups. The Zurich classes are retained 
in modified form as the first of three components in the 
new classification. This eases the difficulty in persuading 
observers to change classification systems. The addition of 
new parameters takes the form of two simple sequences, 
expanding the classification to three components. The 
resulting 60 distinct types of groups produce a more 
accurate description of sunspot groups than the nine 
Zurich classes, without demanding much more of the solar 
observer. 


Table 1. Logical sequence for determining McIntosh sunspot 
types. 


Unipolar or bipolar? 

Penumbra or no penumbra? 
Penumbra on one end or both ends? 
Length of group? 

Rudimentary or mature penumbra? 
Symmetric or asymmetric largest spot? 
N-S diameter of largest spot? 

Spots between leader and follower? 
Mature penumbra in interior? 


The general form of the McIntosh classification is Zpc, 
where Z is the Modified Zurich Class, p is the type of 
Principal Spot, primarily describing the sUNSPOT PENUMBRA, 
and c is the degree of Compactness in the interior of 
the group. Figure 3 illustrates the sequence within each 
of the three components of the classification. Table 1 
lists the logical sequence for determining the McIntosh 
classification. 

The definitions are formulated to require only white- 
light observations in the interest of consistency among 
all synoptic observatories. The definitions must begin 
with the distinction between unipolar and bipolar groups, 
implying a difference in magnetic topology, but not 
requiring magnetic-field measurements to make the 
distinction. Rarely will the measured magnetic class 
conflict with the following definitions: 


Unipolar group. A single spot, or a compact cluster of 
spots with the greatest separation between spots <3° 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


heliographic (as in a great circle on the solar surface). 
In the case of a group with penumbra (class H), the 
greatest separation is measured between the center 
of the attendant suNsPoT UMBRA and the nearest border 
of penumbra surrounding the main spot. 


Bipolar group. Two or more spots forming an elongated 
cluster of length >3°. Usually there will be a space 
near the middle of the cluster dividing it into two 
distinct parts. Groups with a large principal spot 
must be >5° in length (i.e., 2.5° plus 3°) to be classified 
as bipolar. 


Modified Zurich class, Z 


The modified Zurich classes are defined on the basis 
of whether penumbra is present, how penumbra is 
distributed, and by the length of the group. A judgment 
of complexity is not required, in contrast to the original 
Zurich definitions. Length is defined in absolute 
heliographic degrees, not as a projection of that length in 
heliographic longitude (see inset diagram in figure 3). This 
differs from some of the definitions already in print. The 
definitions of the classes were adopted from the Zurich 
classification, with the addition of strict limits to group 
length. Zurich classes G and J were omitted because 
they can be described by combinations of these modified 
Zurich classes with the other two McIntosh components. 
The illustrations in the left-hand column of figure 3 show 
typical examples of each class. 


A Unipolar group with no penumbra, representing either 
the formative or final stage of evolution in a spot 


group. 
B Bipolar group without penumbra on any spots. 


C Bipolar group with penumbra on one end of the group, 
in most cases surrounding the largest of the leader 
umbrae. 


D Bipolar group with penumbra on spots at both ends of 
the group, and with length <10°. 


E Bipolar group with penumbra on spots at both ends 
of the group, and with length defined as: 10° < 
length < 15°. 


F Bipolar group with penumbra on spots at both ends of 
the group, and length >15°. 


H Unipolar group with penumbra. The principal spot is 
usually the leader spot remaining from a pre-existing 
bipolar group 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Classification ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MODIFIED McIntosh Ms : 
Sprint aor Sunspot Group Classification 
wl PENUMBRA: LARGEST SPOT 

Interior 
* ‘ So ees 
7 Yo. ‘@ 
> e »-Length—, 
[B) {x] <a rt or Nig 
SE ees 
— * Class 


SUNSPOT DISTRIBUTION 


Figure 3. The three-component McIntosh classification illustrated by photographs of typical examples. Images are enlargements from 
the 15 cm white-light patrol at the Sacramento Peak station of the National Solar Observatory, NOAO. 


Penumbra: largest spot p r Rudimentary penumbra partially surrounds the largest 
The second parameter of the McIntosh classification is spot 

illustrated in the central column of figure 3. The type This penumbra is incomplete, granular rather than 
of largest spot in a sunspot group can be described by filamentary, brighter than mature penumbra, and 
the combination of type of penumbra, size of penumbra, extends as little as 3 arc seconds (2200 km) from the 
and symmetry of penumbra and umbrae within that spot umbra. Rudimentary penumbra may be either 
penumbra. These descriptors specify size, maturity, ina stage of formation or dissolution (McIntosh 1981, 
stability and complexity in terms that are simple and, §2.3; Bray and Loughhead 1964, plate 3.7). 


therefore, conducive to consistent classification. Leet ; 
s Small, symmetric (like Zurich class J) 


x No penumbra (group is class A or B) Largest spot has mature, dark, filamentary penumbra 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Sunspot Classification 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of circular or elliptical shape with little irregularity 
to the border. There is either a single umbra, or a 
compact cluster of umbrae, mimicking the symmetry 
of the penumbra. The north-south diameter across 
the penumbra is <2.5°. 


a Small, asymmetric 
Penumbra of the largest spot is irregular in outline 
and the multiple umbrae within it are separated. 
North-south diameter of penumbra <2.5°. 


h Large, symmetric (like Zurich class H) 
Same structure as type ‘s’, but north-south diameter 
of penumbra >2.5°. Area, therefore, must be >250 
millionths of the solar hemisphere. 


k Large, asymmetric 
Same structure as type ‘a’, but north-south diameter 
>2.5° and area >250 millionths. This type of spot 
sometimes contains spots of opposite polarity, the 
Potsdam 4-configuration (Kunzel 1960), and may 
indicate potential for proton flares (Warwick 1966). 


Sunspot distribution, c 

Asimple ranking of the relative spottedness in the interior 
of a sunspot group gives additional information about the 
area of the group and, more important, whether there 
could be strong spots near the line of polarity inversion 
lying between the principal leader and follower spots. The 
illustrations in the right-hand column of figure 3 show 
the extreme examples of open and compact groups, and a 
typical example of an intermediate degree of spottedness 
in a group’s interior. 


x Undefined for unipolar groups (class as A and H) 


o Open 
Few, if any, spots between leader and follower. 
Interior spots of very small size. Class E and F groups 
of open category are equivalent to Zurich class G. 


i Intermediate 
Numerous spots lie between the leading and 
following portions of the group, but none of them 
possesses mature penumbra. 


c Compact 
The area between the leading and following ends 
of the spot group is populated with many strong 
spots, with at least one interior spot possessing 
mature penumbra. The extreme case of compact 
distribution has the entire spot group enveloped in 
one continuous penumbral area. 


The logic in the definitions of parameters in this 
classification disallows some combinations of parameters, 
producing 60 distinct types of sunspot groups (table 2). 
Correlations of this classification with x-ray flare 
occurrence proved that the classification effectively 
distinguishes between quiescent sunspot regions and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 2. Allowed types of groups in the McIntosh sunspot 
classification. 


Penumbra: Number 
Class largest spot Distribution of types 
(A) (x) (x) 1 
(B) (x) (oi) 2 
(C) (rsahk) (0 i) 10 
(DEF) (x) (0 i) 6 
(DEF) (sahk) (oic) 36 
(H) (rsahk) (x) 5 
Total allowed types 60 


Figure 4. A classic example of a 6-configuration, the inclusion of 
spots of opposite magnetic polarity in a common area of sunspot 
penumbra (gray area). This large Dkc-type sunspot group 
appeared in August 1972. Photograph courtesy of German 
amateur solar observer G Brueckner. 


those that are nearly certain to produce one or more major 
solar flares. The isolated, symmetric spots in the central 
column of figure 3 are typical of those that rarely produce 
numerous or strong flares. This is consistent with the slow 
rate of change in symmetric, isolated spots. 

Figure 4 shows a complex group whose rapid 
evolution correlated with a series of solar flares, with 
several of major proportions. This group, seen in August 
1972, is a classic example of a 5-configuration, defined as 
the inclusion of strong spots of opposite polarity within 
a common area of penumbra. The 6-configuration was 
added to the Mt Wilson magnetic classification after the 
work of Kunzel (1960) at the Potsdam Observatory. 

See McIntosh (1990) for detailed statistics on flare 
productivity versus McIntosh sunspot-group types. 


Bibliography 

Bray R J and Loughhead R E 1964 Sunspots (New York: 
Wiley) 

Kunzel H 1960 Astron. Nach. 285 271 

McIntosh P S 1981 The Physics of Sunspots ed L E Cram 
and J H Thomas (Sunspot, NM: Sacramento Peak 
National Observatory) p 7 

McIntosh P S 1990 The classification of sunspot groups 
Solar Physics 125 251-67 

Warwick C S 1966 Astrophys. J. 145 215 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Classification ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Patrick S McIntosh 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Sunspot Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Cycle 


The periodic increase and decrease in the number of 
sunspots and sunspot groups on the surface of the Sun. 
The number of spots and groups reaches a maximum, on 
average, once every 11 years. At the intervening sunspot 
minima, the solar disk may be devoid of spots for weeks on 
end. On average, the rise to maximum activity takes 4 to 
5 years and the subsequent decline to the next minimum, 
about 6 to 7 years. The level of activity in successive cycles 
can vary substantially. 

At the beginning of each cycle, spots start to appear at 
latitudes of about 30° (occasionally as high as 40°) north (+) 
and south (—) of the solar equator. As the cycle advances, 
the bands of sunspot activity migrate towards the solar 
equator. At solar maximum, the average latitude at which 
spots occur is about +15°, and by the end of the cycle, 
around +8°, by which time the first spots of the next 
cycle may be beginning to appear at latitudes of 30°-40°. 
This cyclic variation in the mean latitudes of sunspots 
was pointed out in 1861 by Friedrich Spdrer (1822-95), 
and is known as Sporer’s law. When the latitude of each 
sunspot is plotted against time over a series of 11-year 
sunspot cycles, the resulting distribution of spot positions 
forms a pattern reminiscent of the appearance of butterfly 
wings and is, therefore, known as the butterfly diagram. 
A diagram of this kind was first plotted in 1904 by the 
English astronomer E W Maunder (1851-1928). 

In each spot pair, the spot which is ahead, in the 
sense of the direction in which the Sun rotates, is called 
the leader, and its companion, the follower. Throughout 
a complete cycle, from one minimum to the next, all of 
the spot pairs and groups in the northern hemisphere 
have the same polarity pattern, and those in the southern 
hemisphere have the opposite. For example, in one 
particular cycle, all the leaders in the northern hemisphere 
will have positive polarity and all the followers negative, 
whereas all the leaders in the southern hemisphere will 
have negative polarity and the followers positive. At the 
end of that cycle, the polarity pattern reverses, so that 
in the subsequent cycle all northern hemisphere leaders 
will have negative polarity and all southern hemisphere 
leaders, positive. The complete magnetic cycle consists 
of two successive 11-year sunspot cycles and is, therefore, 
22 years long. 

During the earlier part of each cycle, the leading 
spot in each pair (or the leading area of net magnetic 
polarity in each group) has the same magnetic polarity 
as the net polar polarity in the hemisphere within which 
it is located. As each spot or group decays, the polarity 
of the follower preferentially diffuses towards the pole. 
The cumulative effect of this process eventually produces 
a reversal of polarity at each of the solar poles. This 
usually occurs around the time of solar maximum, but 
considerable variations occur and, while the piecemeal 
reversal is taking place, the Sun, for a time, may have the 
same net polarity at both poles. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The sunspot cycle is part of an overall solar cycle 
whereby all forms of solar activity, including sunspots, 
plages, prominences, flares and coronal mass ejections, 
together with the shape, extent and structure of the 
chromosphere and corona, undergo cyclic variations with 
a period of about 11 years. Thenumbers, sizes and energies 
of prominences, flares and coronal mass ejections mirror 
the increase and decrease in sunspot numbers and the 
corona is brighter, more extensive and more symmetrical 
around solar maximum than at times of minimum activity. 

In addition to the 11-year cycle, there is some evidence 
to suggest that sunspot numbers, and levels of solar 
activity as a whole, undergo longer-term modulations over 
periods of 80 years and more. Furthermore, historical 
records imply that there have been prolonged periods of 
enhanced and depressed levels of activity in the past. In 
particular, solar activity appears to have remained at an 
unusually low level between 1645 and 1715, a period that 
is known as the Maunder Minimum, having been named 
after E W Maunder, whose analysis of old solar records 
showed that hardly any sunspots at all had been seen 
during that time. 


See also: active region, corona, flare, plage, prominence, 
relative sunspot number, solar coronal mass ejection, 
sunspots. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Evolution 


SUNSPOTS are observed to grow from their first appearance 
at the solar surface to some maximum size and then to 
decay until they disappear after some hours, days, or 
weeks. The characteristics of this growth and decay, 
the changes during the lifetime of a sunspot group in 
its distribution of sunspots, surface orientation, magnetic 
field line inclination, and other characteristic variations 
give us clues to the subsurface origin of sunspots and to 
the dynamo process (See DYNAMO THEORY) which produces 
the magnetic fields that define sunspots. 


Sunspots and sunspot groups 

Sunspots are dark, generally roughly circular areas in the 
solar photosphere where there are strong magnetic fields 
that are approximately vertical to the solar surface in the 
SUNSPOT UMBRA. These magnetic fields are quite strong— 
several thousand gauss near the center of the largest 
sunspots and somewhat weaker in smaller sunspots. The 
darkest central part (umbra) of a sunspot may have an 
intensity in the visible part of the spectrum that is only 
about 5% that of the surrounding solar surface. The outer 
part of a sunspot (SUNSPOT PENUMBRA) has an intensity much 
closer to that of the surrounding atmosphere. 

Sunspots normally appear in groups of two or more. 
These are called ‘sunspot groups’. Single-spot groups 
are rare. Sunspot groups are usually aligned along an 
axis that is oriented approximately (but on average not 
exactly) in the east-west direction on the Sun. Figure 1 
shows an example of a sunspot group with a rather simple 
configuration. Often the westernmost (leading, in the 
sense of solar rotation) and easternmost (following, in the 
sense of solar rotation) sunspots are clearly separated. In 
general, the leading and following sunspots have opposite 
magnetic polarities, and this orientation of polarities is 
predominant in one (north or south) hemisphere during 
a SOLAR CYCLE. The polarity orientations are opposite in the 
other hemisphere. Each 11 yr solar cycle has the opposite 
sunspot-group polarity orientation to the previous solar 
cycle. One can imagine an axis drawn, connecting the 
leading and following sunspots (or the centroids of the 
leading and following collections of sunspots). The angle 
which this axis makes with the local parallel of latitude 
is referred to as the ‘tilt angle’. The average tilt angle is 
about +5°, where the plus sign indicates that the leading 
sunspots are (on average) equatorward of the following 
sunspots in each hemisphere. 


Area development 

Sunspot diameters range from around 2000 km to around 
30000 km. A sunspot first appears as a ‘pore’, which is a 
very small dark speck within the photospheric granulation 
pattern. The great majority of sUNsPoT PorRES live only 
for a few tens of minutes, but on rare occasions a pore 
will grow to become a small sunspot umbra. A sunspot 
group starts with the appearance of one or more pores, 
usually in the western (leading in the sense of rotation) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A typical large sunspot group. Note the leading (on 
the right side) and following (on the left side) sunspots. Also 
note the very small sunspots (pores) distributed near the group. 


portion of the future group. On the second day in the 
lifetime of the group the small but growing sunspots 
spread out into an elongated pattern roughly in the east— 
west direction. This means that individual sunspots move 
(exhibiting what is called ‘proper motion’) systematically 
in such a way as to produce the stretched appearance 
that is common of normal groups. Leading sunspots 
move forward (westward), and following sunspots move 
backward (eastward). This motion often ceases, or slows 
down, when the group reaches its maximum area. There is 
also often latitudinal motion at this time, which produces 
a net rotation of the sunspot group about a vertical axis. 
This is discussed in more detail below. 

As the sunspot group develops in this way, larger 
sunspots form by the coalescence of smaller sunspots 
nearby. The smallest sunspots do not have penumbrae. 
The diameters of penumbrae are generally slightly more 
than twice those of the associated umbrae. The total area 
of a sunspot group increases in the first few days of the 
development of the group, and then quickly the total area 
begins to decrease until the group has disappeared. 

Most sunspots grow rapidly in the first few days after 
their initial appearance. Sunspots and sunspot groups 
show a variety of area developments. Some grow and 
decay slowly. Some groups, especially larger, longer- 
lived groups, grow rapidly and decay slowly. The decay 
of a sunspot is not the inverse of the coalescent process 
that forms sunspots; sunspots decay by the continuing 
outward flow of bits of the magnetic field, in the form 
of very small (~1000 km) parts of the umbra, which 
are observed to move radially outward through the 
sunspot penumbra to the photosphere. It is difficult 
to follow observationally these small magnetic elements 
as they move from the sunspots. It is presumed that, 
once they leave the sunspot, they cancel quickly with 
magnetic fields of opposite polarity in the neighborhood 
of the sunspot, and there is some observational evidence 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


for this. Thus sunspots decay by a directed flow of 
magnetic flux radially outward from the sunspot, which 
is quite different from the decay of the weaker PLAGE 
magnetic fields, which always accompany sunspots. Plage 
magnetic fields decay by the gradual erosion of small 
elements of magnetic flux from the periphery of the 
plage. This erosion is caused by nearby, random, large- 
scale convective motions, which are present at all times 
over the whole solar surface (except within sunspots and 
within the plages themselves). This large-scale cellular 
pattern of convection is called ‘supergranulation’ (see 
SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: SUPERGRANULATION). 


Lifetimes 
The lifetimes of sunspots range from tens of minutes 
to months. More than half of sunspots have lifetimes 
less than 2 days. Ninety per cent of sunspots have 
lifetimes less than 11 days. Only a few sunspots per 11 yr 
solar cycle have lifetimes of more than a few months. 
On average, high-latitude sunspots have relatively short 
lifetimes. Sunspots with lifetimes of more than several 
months are extremely rare. The longest-living sunspots 
are always large, round, single-spot groups, at least in 
the later stage of their lifetimes. They are generally the 
last survivors of large, multispot sunspot groups. It is not 
known why a few sunspots have very long lifetimes, while 
nearly all sunspots of similar size do not live nearly as long. 

A rule of thumb for sunspot group lifetimes is given 
by the formula 

T =0.1Anax 


where T is the lifetime in days and A,,, is the group area 
in millionths of the hemisphere. 

The sunspots with the shortest lifetimes are very small 
(no more than a few thousand kilometers in diameter) 
and have no penumbrae. These smallest sunspots have 
lifetimes of only a few hours, if they do not grow into full- 
sized sunspots, as discussed above. The vast majority of 
sunspots do not develop beyond the pore stage. Pores (that 
do not develop into sunspots) may live for only a few tens 
of minutes. Often sunspot groups, especially in the earlier 
stage of their development, have many pores associated 
with them at any one time. Note the pores associated with 
the sunspot group in figure 1. 


Magnetic fields 
Magnetic fields may be considered to define sunspots. 
That is to say, all sunspots contain strong magnetic 
fields. These magnetic fields, in the highly ionized solar 
gas, impede the convection process which in the normal 
photosphere is the principal mechanism for the transport 
of thermal energy from deep within the solar interior. Thus 
sunspots are darker than the surrounding photosphere 
(although in an absolute sense they are still quite bright). 
Measurements of magnetic field strengths within 
sunspots are difficult because of the presence of scattered 
light from the much brighter photosphere surrounding 
the sunspot. These problems are especially severe for the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


smallest sunspots. Field strengths of several thousand 
gauss are measured in the largest sunspots. These 
represent maximum values, which are generally found at 
the center of the umbra. Field strengths decrease as one 
measures closer to the umbra—penumbra boundary. 

These sunspot field strengths are observed to increase 
rapidly in the initial growth stage of a sunspot and 
then remain relatively constant for a large part of the 
lifetime of the sunspot. A decrease in the field strength 
occurs only in the last stages of decay of the sunspot. 
This is in contrast to the behavior of the sunspot area, 
discussed above, which generally also increases rapidly 
following the first appearance of the sunspot but which 
then begins to decrease shortly after the sunspot reaches 
its maximum size. The magnetic flux, of course, which 
may be considered to be the product of the area and 
the magnetic field strength, shows the behavior of the 
area during the lifetime of the sunspot. That is, the flux 
increases rapidly and then it quickly begins its slow decline 
until the sunspot disappears. 


Orientations 

Surface orientations 

As discussed above, one of the observable characteristics 
of a sunspot group is its tilt angle. There is considerable 
dispersion in the tilt angles around the average tilt angle 
(+5°) mentioned above. In general about 36% of sunspot 
groups have tilt angles within 10° on either side of the 
average angle. Only about 13% of sunspot groups have 
tilt angles more than 45° from the average angle in either 
direction. Extreme tilt angles result in magnetic polarity 
orientations that are reversed from the normal, i.e. where 
the leading magnetic polarity sunspots are located east of 
(or following in the sense of solar rotation) the following 
magnetic polarity sunspots. Nearly 10% of groups show 
such reversed-polarity orientations. Many of these are 
small sunspot groups. 

It is generally believed that the magnetic fields of 
sunspot groups rise to the surface as large loops of 
magnetic field lines from the base of the solar convection 
zone, which means from about one-third of a radius 
below the surface. As these loops rise through the solar 
convection zone, propelled by the buoyant force on the 
ionized gas that is confined to the magnetic field lines, 
they are acted upon by various physical forces. One of 
these forces is the Coriolis force, which will act to twist the 
plane of the loop (which is assumed to start its rise aligned 
in the east-west direction). Another force that acts on the 
rising magnetic flux loop is magnetic tension, which acts 
to restrain the rise of the flux loop and other motions of 
the loop. Mathematical models of these forces indicate 
that the twist of the axis that one would expect from such 
theoretical considerations is about what is observed as 
the average tilt angle in each hemisphere. Moreover, the 
variation of tilt angle with latitude that is observed (known 
as Joy’s law) can also be reproduced in the theoretical 
models. Other observed characteristics of sunspot groups 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


DAILY TILT ANGLE CHANGE (DEG/DAY) 


15 | ! ! | ! ! 


-40 —20 


0 
TILT ANGLE (DEG) 


Figure 2. Average value of the daily rotation of the magnetic axes of sunspot groups (tilt angles) for various values of the starting tilt 
angle. Note that the intercept on the Y-axis of the plot is at 5°, not at 0°. This indicates that sunspot group tilt angles tend to rotate 


toward the average tilt angle, not toward the east-west direction (0°). 


can also be seen in the calculations of these mathematical 
models. 

In addition to these physical forces, the rising 
magnetic flux loops will be subjected to added random 
twisting from large-scale convective motions that exist 
deep within the solar convection zone. It is believed 
that these random interactions are responsible for the 
dispersion in tilt angles that is observed in sunspot groups. 
Smaller sunspot groups show a larger dispersion about the 
average tilt angle than do larger sunspot groups. This is 
what one would expect to find if large-scale motions of the 
gas are responsible for the distribution in the tilt angles: 
the magnetic flux loops of the larger and stronger sunspot 
groups can withstand such buffeting from the convective 
motions better than can the smaller and weaker flux loops, 
and thus they show a smaller dispersion in their tilt angles. 


Magnetic field-line inclinations 

Sunspot magnetic field orientations to the vertical (in the 
east-west direction) can be estimated by examining the 
areas or magnetic field strengths of sunspots east and 
west of the central MERIDIAN of the Sun (the north-south 
meridian that is coincident with the rotation axis on the 
projected image of the Sun). It is assumed that the east— 
west differences in area or magnetic field strength are 
due to east-west orientations of the field lines in the 
solar atmosphere. In principle it should be possible to 
measure inclinations of sunspot magnetic fields by the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


measurement of the vector magnetic field in the sunspots, 
but in practice this is difficult to do with high precision for 
the small inclinations that are known to exist in sunspots. 
The transverse ZEEMAN EFFECT (measuring field strength in 
field lines perpendicular to the line of sight) is not nearly as 
sensitive a measure of field strength as is the longitudinal 
Zeeman effect (along the field lines) measurement. 

On average, using this east-west difference tech- 
nique, the magnetic field lines of sunspots are found to 
be inclined a few degrees to the east, that is, to trail the 
rotation—which is from east to west. The inclinations of 
the leading and following sunspots in the groups are on 
average away from each other by a degree or so. This 
means that the following sunspot magnetic fields are in- 
clined to the east by a slightly greater angle than are the 
leading sunspot magnetic fields. Sunspots whose areas are 
growing (therefore, presumably younger sunspots) show 
greater eastward inclination of their magnetic field lines 
by several degrees than do sunspots whose areas are de- 
creasing. Thus we conclude that during the lifetime of the 
group there is a shift in the inclination angle toward the 
west. 


Tilt angle changes 

Sunspot group tilt angles are sometimes observed to 
change with time. This means that the axes of the groups 
rotate (in the plane of the solar surface). This rotation 
is generally very slow. Very few sunspot groups show 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


rapid rotation about their axes, and, when they do, it is 
usually early in the development of the group. Fully 46% 
of sunspot groups show daily rates of rotation of their axes 
of less than 10° in either direction. Only about 14% of 
sunspot groups on any one day have rotation rates greater 
than 45° day’ in either direction. 

However, although generally sunspot group axis 
rotations are slow, they tend to exhibit systematic motions. 
On average, sunspot group axes rotate in the direction 
toward the average tilt angle in each hemisphere, as may 
be seen in figure 2. Another way of stating this is that on 
average the only tilt angles for which there is no average tilt 
angle rotation is the average tilt angle. This is represented 
in the figure as the intercept on the X-axis. This intercept 
is located at the average tilt angle of about 5° rather than 
at the origin. This is a result that is clearly above the noise 
level. 

This rotation of the axes of sunspot groups is not 
understood by astronomers in the context of our current 
view of the origin of the magnetic fields at the solar surface. 
It is possible that the various physical forces that act on 
the sunspot magnetic flux loop as it rises through the solar 
interior can twist the flux loop, as mentioned above, but 
once the magnetic fields reach the surface it is difficult 
to explain any further rotation of the magnetic axis of a 
group. Because of the motions of the subsurface, large- 
scale turbulent convection, which as we saw above may 
be responsible for the dispersion of the sunspot group tilt 
angles, it is difficult to understand how there can be within 
the convection zone any fixed location where the ends of 
the magnetic loop could be anchored. It is equally difficult 
to understand how the surface orientation could possibly 
be affected by the orientation of the magnetic flux loop at 
the base of the convection zone, which is one-third of a 
radius beneath the solar surface. 

One possible explanation for this curious behavior of 
the magnetic axes of sunspot groups is that there is, in fact, 
no real rotation motion at all of the tilt angle in growing 
sunspot groups. Rather, the plane of the magnetic flux 
loop that makes up the sunspot group has become twisted 
within the convection zone, and as it rises it gives the 
appearance of a rotary motion at the plane of the surface. 


Bibliography 

Balasubramaniam K S and Simon G W (eds) 1994 Solar 
Active Region Evolution: Comparing Models with 
Evolution (Conference Series, vol 68) (San Francisco, CA: 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 

Bray R J and Loughhead R E 1965 Sunspots (New York: 
Wiley) 

Howard R F 1996 Solar active regions as diagnostics of 
subsurface conditions Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 
75-109 

Kiepenheuer K O 1953 Solar activity The Sun ed G P 
Kuiper (Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press) 
pp 322-465 


Robert F Howard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Magnetic Fields 


The magnetic field is the central quantity determining the 
property of a suNspoT. It permeates every part of sunspots 
and by greatly reducing the convective transport of heat 
from below is also responsible for sunspot darkness. 
Conversely, sunspots were the first astronomical objects 
recognized (by G E Hale in 1908) to harbor a magnetic 
field. 

The field strength B is most readily measured in the 
photospheric layers. There it reaches peak values of 2000- 
3500 G (i.e. 0.2-0.35 T) in parts of the sunspot umbra 
(the spread in values is intrinsic—larger sunspots have 
higher maximum field strengths). The field strength drops 
steadily towards the edge of the sunspot, where it is 700- 
1000 G (0.07-0.1 T). The strongest field within a sunspot 
is usually associated with the darkest part of the umbra 
(umbral core) and is generally close to vertical, while at 
the visible sunspot boundary it is inclined by 70-80° to the 
vertical. The magnetic structure of a mature sunspot is 
illustrated in Color Plate 53. 

The magnetic field of a sunspot nevertheless 
continues well beyond its white-light boundary as an 
almost horizontal magnetic canopy with a base in the 
mid to upper photosphere. The field strength above the 
height of the canopy base continues to decrease slowly 
but steadily for increasing distance from the white-light 
sunspot. The field strength also decreases with height, 
with the decrease being more rapid in the photosphere 
than in higher atmospheric layers. 

These observed properties of sunspot magnetic fields 
support the theoretical concept that visible-light sunspots 
are the intersection of the solar surface with a large 
magnetic flux tube emerging from the solar interior into 
the atmosphere. 

At small scales the umbral magnetic field appears to 
be relatively homogeneous, while the penumbral field is 
filamented into two radially directed components. These 
differ by their inclination to the vertical, and possibly also 
their field strength. 

In this article the observed magnetic structure 
of (mature) sunspots is discussed. The theoretical 
description of the field structure is outlined in the article 
SUNSPOT MODELS and the magnetic field of pores (i.e. dark 
magnetic structures without a penumbra) in the article 
SUNSPOT PORES. 

Overviews of the observed magnetic structure of 
sunspots have been given by Martinez Pillet (1997) and 
Skumanich et al (1994), and may be found in the volume 
edited by Thomas and Weiss (1992). 


Large-scale magnetic structure of sunspots 

The field strength 

The magnetic field of sunspots in photospheric layers has 
been measured via the Zeeman splitting of absorption 
lines in the visible and the infrared (see the article 
ON SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: INFERENCE BY POLARIMETRY and 
ON SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: ZEEMAN AND HANLE EFFECTS). The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic field strength is largest near the geometrical 
center of regular, ie. reasonably circular, sunspots and 
drops monotonically and smoothly outwards, reaching 
its smallest values at the outer penumbral edge. This is 
in stark contrast to the brightness, which jumps at the 
boundary between the umbra and penumbra. Hence, the 
umbral boundary is not evident in the field strength. This 
simple picture of a relatively smooth magnetic distribution 
is valid for a spatial resolution of 2-3” or lower. At higher 
resolution the fine-scale structure of the field becomes 
increasingly prominent (see below). 

There is now a consensus on the general form of 
the normalized field-strength distribution, B(r/rp)/Bo, 
although some uncertainty concerning its exact shape 
remains. Here r is the radial coordinate, rp is the radius of 
the outer penumbral boundary and Bo is the (maximum) 
field strength at the center of the sunspot (i.e. at r = 0). 
The radial dependence for typical sunspots of the three 
components of the magnetic field is plotted in figure 1B. 
Magnetic dipole fits to such data are reasonable, but not 
perfect in many cases. 

The maximum field strength (i.e. By) increases almost 
linearly with sunspot diameter from By ~ 2000 G for the 
smallest spots to over 3500 G for the largest spots. At 
the sunspot boundary B(rp) ~ 700-1000 G, which implies 
B(rp)/Bo © 0.2-0.4. The fact that B(r,) is so large suggests 
that sunspots are bounded by a current sheet. 


Magnetic field orientation 

The strongest part of the sunspot magnetic field is in 
general also the most vertical. Inclination to the vertical 
(i.e. zenith angle, ¢) increases steadily as the field strength 
decreases. For symmetric sunspots ¢ also increases 
steadily with r, i.e. the field is increasingly inclined to the 
vertical the further out in the sunspot that it is measured. 
Recent evidence suggests that the inclination is 10—20° to 
the horizontal (i.e. ¢ ~ 70-80°) at the sunspot boundary. 
Typical ¢(r/rp) values are plotted in figure 1C. 

Early vector-magnetograph observations often sug- 
gested that the magnetic field of regular sunspots is signif- 
icantly twisted. These strong twists or spirals were an arte- 
fact of neglecting magneto-optical effects, however. Once 
such effects are included in the analysis the magnetic fields 
of regular sunspots become almost radial. A small resid- 
ual twist of up to 10-20° still appears to persist, however. 
A residual twist is not entirely surprising considering the 
fact that the superpenumbral fibrils seen in Ha are increas- 
ingly twisted with increasing distance from the sunspot. 


Magnetic canopy 

Above the solar surface the magnetic field continues 
beyond the white-light boundary of sunspots. It forms 
an almost horizontal canopy with a base in the middle or 
upper photosphere, i.e. the field is limited to layers above 
the canopy base and overlies mainly field-free gas. The 
magnetic canopy is a natural result of the expansion with 
height of the magnetic flux tube underlying the sunspot. 
Recall that the visible sunspot is just a cross section through 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


pe oe 
Oo ww 


io) 
ioe) 


Continuum Intensity 
i) 
ron) 


Inclination (°) 
Do 
oo 


io) 


0.0 0.2 0.4 06 0.8 1.0 


r 


3000 
2500 


(B) 


© 2000 
oe 

m~ 1500 
me 


“x 1000 
jaa) 


0.2 


filling factor 
° 
S 


Figure 1. Typical intensity and magnetic parameters of sunspots versus normalized radial distance, r, from sunspot center. Vertical 
dotted lines indicate the umbra—penumbra (left) and the penumbra—canopy (right) boundaries. Plotted are the continuum intensity in 
panel A, vertical (B,, solid curve), radial (B,, dotted curve) and azimuthal (By, dashed curve) components of the magnetic field in 
panel B, magnetic inclination in panel C and magnetic filling factor in panel D. 7 is normalized to the radius at which the canopy could 
not be seen anymore. (From Keppens and Martinez Pillet (1996) with permission.) 


this flux tube. In this picture the canopy base corresponds 
to the current sheet surrounding the sunspot. 

B(r/rp > 1) is found to decrease continuously 
without any visible break at the white-light boundary of 
the sunspot. The base height of the canopy increases 
relatively rapidly close to the sunspot. However, this rise 
soon slows, so that the canopy can be followed out to 
almost twice the sunspot radius using purely photospheric 
lines. 

Sunspot canopies were first discovered by W Liv- 
ingston in magnetograms taken in spectral lines formed in 
the upper photosphere and lower chromosphere, where 
they appear as large diffuse patches of field filling the 
limbward and discward superpenumbrae of sunspots ob- 
served near the solar limb. Newer techniques also allow 
canopies to be detected when the sunspot is close to disc 
center. They all give roughly consistent results. 


Return flux and depth of the penumbra 

Inside the penumbra the general inclination of the 
magnetic field suggests that a considerable amount of 
magnetic flux is emerging through the penumbra. An 
analysis based on the premise that the sunspot magnetic 
field is potential inside the bounding current sheet allows 
more quantitative estimates to be made and suggests that 
approximately 1-1.5 times as much magnetic flux emerges 
in the penumbra as in the umbra. The penumbra is thus 
deep, in contrast to a shallow penumbra in which the 
current sheet bounding the flux tube lies along the solar 
surface in the penumbra and no magnetic flux emerges 
there. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A relatively small fraction of the total flux emerging 
in a sunspot returns to the surface inside or just outside 
the sunspot boundary. This so-called ‘return flux’ has 
been observed at some locations along the boundary of the 
sunspot. These locations are co-spatial with downflows 
which are interpreted as a part of the Evershed flow 
draining down into the solar interior again. 


Vertical gradient of the magnetic field 

In addition to the large number of observations in 
the lower and central photospheric layers the sunspot 
magnetic field has been recorded at greater heights as well. 

Basically, the observations suggest that the maximum 
field strength at the center of regular sunspots decreases 
with height, but still has values of 1000-1800 G in the upper 
chromospheric to lower coronal layers. The magnetic field 
is in general more homogeneous in the upper atmosphere. 
It can be followed over a larger distance in the upper 
atmosphere and decreases more slowly with distance from 
the sunspot axis. 

Nevertheless, the field in the coronal layer is often 
more confined than expected from a dipole fit to 
photospheric observations and provides evidence for non- 
potential fields. On the other hand in parts of an active 
region coronal fields are well reproduced by potential field 
extrapolations from the photosphere. 

Knowledge of the magnetic field at different heights 
allows vertical gradients of the field strength to be 
determined (and to be compared with the predictions of 
models). The values of the obtained vertical gradient 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


depend on both the horizontal position in the sunspot and 
the height range over which they are measured (i.e. the 
formation height difference between the two diagnostics 
used). 

First consider measurements comparing lines formed 
in the photosphere, i.e. those determining |dB/dz| over a 
small height range. These give values around 2-3 G km"! 
in the umbra and inner parts of the penumbra, dropping 
to around 1 G km"! in the outer penumbra. 

When lines formed at sufficiently different heights 
are compared (i.e. usually a photospheric line with either 
a chromospheric or transition region line, or a coronal 
diagnostic) then considerably smaller vertical gradients 
are obtained: 0.3-0.6 G km7! in the umbra, which drops 
to 0.05-0.2 G km! near the outer penumbral edge. This 
dependence on radial position can also be parametrized 
as |0B/dz| ~ |B|. 

The observations therefore suggest that the field 
strength drops rapidly with height in the photosphere 
and much more slowly at greater heights. The qualitative 
height dependence agrees with the expectations of a flux- 
tube model. Almost all the observations also indicate a 
decrease of |0B/0z| from the center of the sunspot toward 
its periphery (or from stronger to weaker field). 


Fine-scale structure of the magnetic field 

The fine-scale structure visible in white-light images of 
sunspots is predominantly due to umbral dots and light 
bridges (see SUNSPOT UMBRA: STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION) and to 
penumbral filaments. These and related features are also 
prominent in filtergrams, although at the greater heights 
sampled by some filtergrams somewhat larger scales may 
dominate. As far as the magnetic field is concerned 
the main known inhomogeneities are concentrated in the 
penumbra (see SUNSPOT PENUMBRA: STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITY). 


Umbral dots 

Umbral dots are bright dot-like features with horizontal 
dimensions often lying at the limit of the spatial resolution. 
Various investigators have searched for the signature 
of umbral dots in the magnetic field. Whereas older 
observations showed a huge scatter in deduced field 
strength values, there has been convergence toward a 
rough consensus in recent years. The investigations 
carried out in the 1980s and 1990s suggest that the field 
strength in an umbral dot is at the most 20% lower than in 
the surrounding umbral background. 

Such a reduction in field strength in umbral dots may 
well be due to the fact that B decreases with height and 
the observed radiation is emitted from higher layers in hot 
and bright regions, so that at a given geometrical height 
the field may be equally strong in the dot and outside it. 


Fluted magnetic field in the penumbra 

The azimuthal inhomogeneity on small scales of the 
penumbral magnetic field, in particular of its zenith angle, 
is now well established. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Sketch of the local fine-scale structure of the magnetic 
field in sunspot penumbras. The field is composed of two 
components, a flux-tube component, represented by the 
horizontal cylinder, and a more inclined magnetic field, 
indicated by the field lines crossing the flux tube at an angle 
(from Solanki and Montavon 1993). 


Less clear than the mere presence of fluctuations in 
the zenith angle ¢ is the correlation of the zenith angle 
with brightness at a fixed distance from the center of the 
sunspot. All three possibilities, namely positive, negative 
and no significant correlation have been proposed in 
the literature. There does appear to be a significant 
correlation of ¢ with the velocity, however, with the flow 
being concentrated in the horizontal magnetic filaments. 
The fine-scale structure of the penumbral field remains 
remarkably constant on a time-scale of minutes to hours. 

Another point that is not completely decided 
is whether, in addition to the inclination, also the 
field strength in the penumbra is inhomogeneous in 
the azimuthal direction. Some investigators see no 
fluctuations in B, while others find 100-400 G higher 
B values in dark penumbral fibrils than in their bright 
counterparts. Yet others see evidence for weaker fields in 
cooler parts of the penumbra. A final group of researchers 
observe that the more vertical filaments have a 200 G 
higher field strength. 

From a combination of high-resolution imaging and 
broad-band circular polarization (BBCP) measurements it 
follows that there must be a horizontal boundary between 
the two differently inclined magnetic components in the 
penumbra. Hence they cannot simply be vertical sheets 
of magnetic flux. The penumbral fine-scale field is 
better described by (more or less) horizontal flux tubes 
embedded in an inclined field, as illustrated in figure 2. 
The width of the cross-section of these flux tubes is as yet 
uncertain. 


Magnetic filling factor 

In order to explain phenomena such as umbral dots the 
intrusion of field-free material into umbras at small scales 
has been proposed. In addition, the presence of field- 
free material in penumbras could resolve the mass-flux 
problem of the Evershed effect in a rather straightforward 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Magnetic Fields 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


manner. In general, only upper limits on the area coverage 
by field-free material inside sunspots can be given. The 
exceptions are light bridges, i.e. bright material separating 
two umbras within a single sunspot, which exhibit direct 
evidence for the presence of narrow lanes of field-free 
material in sunspots. 

The upper limit lies at 5% in the central penumbra and 
at 3-4% in the central part of the umbra. Near the umbral 
boundary the upper limit lies around 15% and is also large 
close to the outer penumbral boundary. Figure 1D shows 
an example of less stringent upper limits on the amount 
of field-free material (or rather of a lower limit on the 
magnetic filling factor, ie. the area fraction covered by 
the field). One caveat to keep in mind when considering 
these very tight limits is that they refer mainly to mid- 
photospheric layers. Since the magnetic energy begins to 
dominate over that of the gas at these heights, but does 
not in the lower photosphere, it is far more likely that if 
field-free patches exist that they are located in the lower 
photosphere. In the lower layers of sunpots the upper limit 
is less tight, with the most stringent value being 5% in the 
central penumbra. 


Bibliography 

Keppens R and Martinez Pillet V 1996 Astron. Astrophys. 
316 229 

Martinez Pillet V 1997 1st Advances in the Physics of Sunspots 
Euroconference, Advances in the Physics of Sunspots 
(Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. Ser. 118) ed B Schmieder, J C 
del Toro Iniesta and M Vazquez p 212 

Skumanich A, Lites B W and Martinez Pillet V 1994 Solar 
Surface Magnetism ed R J Rutten and C J Schrijver 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 99 

Solanki S K and Montavon C A P 1993 Astron. Astrophys. 
275 283 

Thomas J H and Weiss N ed 1992 Sunspots: Theory and 
Observations (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Sami K Solanki 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Models 


Models of sunspots aim either to reproduce observed 
properties of sunspots, or to understand the physical 
processes occurring in them. Sunspot models are of very 
diverse types, ranging from empirically derived models 
of their thermal stratification to MHD models of their 
magnetic configuration and evolution. The final aim of all 
modelling is to obtain a consistent and detailed description 
and understanding of the structure and dynamics of the 
magnetic and thermodynamic properties of a sunspot. 
Such comprehensive models are not feasible as yet. Hence 
most models deal with some aspect of sunspots in detail, 
while neglecting or simplifying the other aspects. Most 
numerous among the physical models are those describing 
the magnetic structure of a sunspot (see article SUNSPOT 
MAGNETIC FIELDS) on the basis of an axially symmetric 
vertical flux tube in (approximate) magnetohydrostatic 
equilibrium. Another group of physical models deals 
with the other main characteristic of sunspots, namely 
their darkness relative to the quiet Sun. They model the 
heat flow by radiation and convection in and sometimes 
also around the sunspot. The models with the most 
detailed description of energy transport, e.g. an explicit 
simulation of magnetoconvection, generally treat only a 
part of the sunspot (e.g. a part of the suUNsPoT UMBRA). In 
the most comprehensive models, in which the magnetic 
field structure of the whole sunspot is determined, the 
convection is usually dealt with using the mixing length 
formalism. 

In this article a description of physical models of 
the magnetic and thermal structure of sunspots is given. 
Physical models of other features of sunspots, e.g. the 
Evershed effect or sunspot oscillations, are to be found 
in other articles (See SUNSPOTS: EVERSHED EFFECT, SUNSPOT 
OSCILLATIONS AND SEISMOLOGY). The same is true for empirical 
models, i.e. models of the sunspot magnetic or thermal 
structure that are derived from observations. 

Since the thermal and magnetic structure of sunspots 
is known in considerable detail from observations, rather 
tight constraints can be set on physical models. One 
obvious difference between actual and modeled sunspots 
is that whereas the former are generally irregular, the 
latter almost always possess axial symmetry. However, 
relatively regular sunspots do exist, which can be used 
to test whether the models reproduce the observed 
radial dependence of the field strength, field direction, 
brightness, Wilson depression, etc. Although models in 
many cases provide reasonable descriptions of sunspots 
and can reproduce many observations, they provide 
far fewer ab initio explanations. There is as yet no 
satisfactory explanation for such basic questions as to why 
sunspots have penumbras, or why umbras carry 20% and 
penumbras 75% of the heat flux of the quiet Sun (see 
SUNSPOT PENUMBRA). 

Theoretical models of solar magnetic features can be 
divided into three classes. Firstly, there are numerical 
experiments, usually idealized simulations of some 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


physical process, such as magnetoconvection, thought to 
act in the magnetic feature. The second class is composed 
of static descriptions of symmetric flux tubes that aim to 
reproduce the global observed properties of sunspots at 
the cost of some physical realism. Finally, full-fledged 
simulations make up the third class. These include 
time dependence, compressibility, partial ionization, 
radiative transfer, two- or, ideally, three-dimensionality, 
a fine spatial and temporal grid and a sufficiently large 
computational domain. 

Unfortunately, the large size of sunspots and the 
small-scale structure dominating many of the dynamic 
processes within them conspire to make the third class 
of models beyond current reach. The large spectrum of 
time scales relevant to the problem make it even more 
intractible. Such simulations do exist for small-scale 
magnetic features (magnetic elements), however, and it 
is basically insufficient computing power which keeps 
sunspots from being similarly described. 

Further details, and in particular further references, 
about models of the thermal and magnetic structure 
of sunspots are to be found in the following reviews: 
Nordlund and Stein (1990), Thomas and Weiss (1992), Jahn 
(1997) and Weiss (1997). 


Models of the magnetic structure of sunspots 
Sunspots are thought to be the cross sections at the solar 
surface of large, nearly vertically oriented magnetic flux 
tubes (See SOLAR INTERIOR: EMERGING MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). 
Hence the large-scale magnetic structure of sunspots is 
generally represented by axially symmetric flux tubes. 
Most models of the magnetic structure are calculated in 
the magnetohydrostatic approximation, i.e. they neglect 
evolutionary aspects, convective motions, the Evershed 
effect and the influence of waves and oscillations. For 
the overall structure of the magnetic field this is a good 
approximation since sunspots evolve on time scales far 
longer than the time taken by disturbances travelling at 
the Alfvén speed or sound speed to cross them (the Alfvén 
transit time is only an hour). Dynamic phenomena are 
important, however, for shaping the small-scale magnetic 
(and thermal) structure which is particularly prominent in 
the penumbra (penumbral filaments or fibrils), but is also 
seen in umbras (umbral dots). Most models of the whole 
sunspot neglect the fine-scale structure in the interests of 
tractability. 

The sunspot magnetic field is confined horizontally 
by a combination of the excess gas pressure in the field- 
free surroundings of the sunspot and magnetic curvature 
forces. In contrast to small magnetic flux tubes the 
latter cannot be neglected, making the modeling of 
the sunspot magnetic field far more challenging. The 
magnetohydrostatic equilibrium is described by the force 
balance equation and one of Maxwell’s equations: 


1 
—curlBx B=Vp-—pg 
4a 


divB=0 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where B is the magnetic vector, p is the gas pressure, p 
denotes the density and g is gravitational acceleration. 
Hydrostatic equilibrium along field lines is already 
implicit in the force balance equation. Usually 
significant additional assumptions are made, since the 
computation of the magnetic configuration without 
further assumptions requires the simultaneous and 
consistent solution for the magnetic and thermodynamic 
structures, which in turn requires the solution of an 
energy equation in addition to the above equations. Most 
such ‘comprehensive’ solutions that have been attempted 
are not general since the magnetic structure is often 
partially prescribed and the thermodynamics are greatly 
simplified, although recently significant progress has been 
made on both accounts. Unless the energy equation is 
solved together with the force-balance equation either the 
magnetic field or the temperature must be specified and 
an equation of state must be postulated. Instead of the 
temperature distribution the pressure can also be specified. 
Types of magnetic solutions that have been inves- 
tigated include similarity solutions, return-flux models, 
force-free models, current-sheet models and models with 
arbitrary horizontal pressure distributions. Before con- 
sidering these particular solutions, however, we need to 
distinguish between some basic configurations. 


Monolith versus cluster models 

One basic assumption underlying all attempts to quanti- 
tatively model the global magnetic structure of sunspots 
is the assumption that the sunspot is monolithic below the 
solar surface, i.e. that it can be represented by a single flux 
tube. Since these layers are not directly accessible to ob- 
servations, this assumption cannot be rigorously tested, 
although the techniques of local helioseismology can in 
principle set some constraints on the subsurface field (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY). 

It has been proposed that just below the surface the 
magnetic field of a sunspot breaks up into many small 
flux tubes due to the fluting or interchange instability. 
In this instability, the magnetic energy of the system is 
lowered by the break up of a large flux tube (with strong 
magnetic curvature terms) into many small ones (with 
small curvature terms). Later it was found, however, 
that magnetic buoyancy can save sunspots (¢ > 107° Mx) 
from going unstable to fluting, so that this argument does 
not favor the production of subsurface ‘spaghetti’. This 
model is often referred to as the spaghetti model or jellyfish 
model. Nevertheless, a cluster model of sunspots (see 
figure 1) has the advantage that it can readily explain the 
high thermal flux seen in the umbra, as well as umbral 
dots in a natural manner (as field-free intrusions into 
the sunspot). The complex magnetic structure in the 
penumbra, in which fibrils or filaments of field pointing 
in different directions are interlaced, suggests that the 
magnetic field is indeed concentrated into many small flux 
tubes. 

One argument against the cluster model is that the 
potential field in the observable layers produced by a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) (6) 


Figure 1. Sketch of the monolithic (left) and cluster (right) 
models of sunspots. (From Thomas and Weiss 1992 by 
permission.) 


collection of buried magnetic monopoles held together at 
great depth has a maximum strength that increases too 
strongly with the number of monopoles. It increases much 
more rapidly with the size of the spot than shown by 
the observations. To what extent a flux-tube cluster is 
described by a group of magnetic monopoles is unclear, 
however. Another reason why the cluster is not expected 
to be too loosely constructed is that the observed radial 
dependence of the field is not too different from a buried 
dipole (figure 2), which is prototypical of a monolithic flux 
tube 


Self-similar models 

In such models the radial dependence of B at a given 
constant geometrical height is prescribed and is imposed 
to be the same at all heights, except for a scaling to 
take into account the expansion of the field with height. 
Hence the name similarity models or self-similar models. 
This prescription allows the vertical and radial magnetic 
coordinates to be separated 


B; = f(r/R@)) Bo) 


B= r R dBo 
r= 5 f(r/ Qa @ 


and only an ordinary differential equation for Bo(z), the 
field strength along the flux-tube axis, needs be solved. 
f (r/R) is called the shape function. In most applications 
a Gaussian shape function has been chosen. 

Due to their simplicity such models have attracted 
considerable attention. Some self-similar models include 
a description of energy balance, for others the pressure 
difference between the axis and the field-free surroundings 
of the sunspot is prescribed at all heights (e.g. by taking it 
from empirical models in the observable layers). 

Self-similar models, although straightforward to 
construct, may be too restrictive to describe sunspots 
accurately. For example, classical similarity models 
have great difficulty reproducing the observed continuum 
structure of sunspots composed of a central umbra 
surrounded by a penumbra. These models usually 
produce a bright ring, usually located near the umbra— 
penumbra boundary, contrary to observations. This 
anomaly, which may be an artifact of the particular choice 
of the shape function, has so far only been removed by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vertical component of magnetic field B, (G) 


0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 


Normalized radial distance r/rp 


2000 


1500 


1000 


S00 


Radial component of magnetic field B, (G) 


0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 
Normalized radial distance r/r, 


Figure 2. Fit of a buried dipole (solid curves) to the measured 
B-(r/rp) in (a) and to B,(r/rp) in (b). The observations are 
represented by crosses. Here B, is the vertical and B, is the 
radial component of the magnetic vector, r is the radial 
coordinate measured from the geometrical center of the sunspot 
and r, is the outer radius of the penumbra. 


ad hoc changes in the thermodynamic structure. A more 
basic limitation of self-similar models applies to their 
upper layers. The magnetic field of sunspots, like that 
of small flux tubes, expands nearly exponentially with 
height. If, for example, the field is nearly potential or 
force-free inside a boundary current sheet (which is the 
case above the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE), then the rapidity of 
this expansion influences the radial distribution of the 
field. The more strongly the field expands the more 
strongly the field strength decreases towards the edge of 
the flux tube. Since the rate of expansion itself increases 
significantly from the SOLARINTERIOR to its outer atmosphere 
the correct description of the magnetic field near the solar 
surface does not automatically imply that the field is 
also correctly described below the surface or high in the 
atmosphere (above the lower coronal boundary, where 
radio observations can be used to measure it). 

More realistic self-similar solutions may be obtained 
by including the Wilson depression (see SUNSPOTS: WILSON 
EFFECT) and its observed horizontal variation when 
determining the shape function f (r/R) from the observed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


radial dependence of the magnetic field (which is known 
along a level of constant optical depth). These models 
reproduce a fair number of observations. 


Return-flux models 

Self-similar models have been extended to include field 
lines in the outer part of the sunspot which return to the 
solar surface just outside the visible sunspot (return-flux 
model). In this model the emerging return flux is said 
to constitute the penumbra. Since observations suggest 
that approximately half of the magnetic flux of a sunspot 
emerges in the penumbra this also provides an estimate 
of the amount of return flux that is present according 
to this model. This model, however, finds little support 
from observations, since the amount of opposite polarity 
flux seen in the immediate surroundings of sunspots is 
small. The observed return flux appears to be related to the 
horizontal field strands carrying the Evershed flow and is 
only seen in the lowest observable layers at some locations 
at the periphery of the sunspot. A dominant fraction of the 
flux continues in the magnetic canopy which surrounds 
the sunspot (a layer of almost horizontal field overlying 
a field-free layer). For realistic parameters the predicted 
continuum intensity of return-flux models is not much 
closer to the observations than for the standard self-similar 
models. 


Force-free and potential field models 

The magnetic field is called force free when the terms 
describing the influence of the gas (and the gravity), i.e. the 
terms on the right-hand side of the force balance equation, 
can be neglected (force-free fields) (see FORCE-FREE MAGNETIC 
FIELDS). In that case the force balance reduces to 


curl B =aB. 


In general, a is a scalar function of the spatial coordinates 
and is constant along field lines (as can be seen by taking 
the divergence of the above equation). Solutions are 
particularly simple if a is constant everywhere. Then 
V - B = 0is automatically fulfilled. A final simplification, 
a potential field, is obtained when a vanishes. Force-free 
and potential fields are uncoupled from the rest of the 
atmospheric parameters. Hence it is sufficient to know 
the field at the boundary of the computational domain in 
order to compute it in the whole volume. Conversely, 
this decoupling implies that force-free models can, by 
definition, not reproduce the thermodynamic properties of 
sunspots. They are unable to describe the relatively sharp 
boundary between the sunspot and the surrounding, 
almost field-free gas. 

The magnetic field inside sunspots certainly comes 
close to being force-free in chromospheric and coronal 
layers due to the small gas pressure and density there. 
If small-scale structure is neglected then even a potential 
field provides a good description in these layers. In the 
photosphere this assumption is less secure since the energy 
density of the gas is actually larger than the energy density 
of the field in large parts of the sunspot. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Nevertheless, various models of the sunspot magnetic 
field based on the force-free or potential assumption have 
been constructed. Constant-a solutions approximately 
reproduce early observations of the radial dependence of 
the magnetic field strength, indicating that the constant-a 
approximation is adequate for the visible layers of simple 
sunspots. 


Current-sheet models 

The simplest consistent current-sheet model is composed 
of a flux tube in whose interior the magnetic field is 
potential, ie. current-free, so that all the current is 
concentrated in a sheet at the boundary of the flux tube. 
This sharp boundary is termed the magnetopause. The 
main problem is the determination of the position of the 
boundary between the flux tube and the surroundings in 
the presence of arbitrary stratifications in the flux tube and 
its surroundings. An exact solution to this problem has, 
however, been found. 

There are indications that a potential field bounded 
by a current sheet at the magnetopause is on its own 
inadequate to describe sunspots, in particular the presence 
of the penumbra. Far better agreement with the 
observations is obtained if this model is extended to 
include body currents, so that the field inside the sunspot 
is not purely potential, but is nevertheless surrounded 
by a current sheet. The body currents can be restricted 
to the radially outer part of the sunspot (corresponding 
approximately to the penumbra) and for the surface field 
to match the observations. It turns out that the field does 
not deviate greatly from potentiality anywhere (except at 
the boundary, of course) and is not self-similar. 


Uncombed fields 

On a small azimuthal scale horizontal field lines are 
observed to alternate with inclined ones in the penumbra. 
Various ideas have been proposed to explain the origin 
of these so-called fluted magnetic fields or uncombed 
magnetic fields. Basically these ideas consider the small- 
scale magnetic structure to be dynamic and its complexity 
to result from an instability. 

One proposal for the source of the complex magnetic 
fine structure of the penumbra is due to the convective 
exchange of flux tubes. One possible scenario for 
interchange convection is the following: a flux tube near 
the magnetopause below the penumbra is heated by the 
field-free convective gas with which it comes into contact. 
The heated tube is buoyant and rises. At the surface 
it radiates away its excess energy, loses its buoyancy, 
becomes more horizontal and sinks again. 

The first part of this scenario has been confirmed 
and quantified by 2D numerical simulations. An 
illustration is given in figure 3. A thin flux tube lying 
at the magnetopause (i.e. the outer boundary of the 
penumbra) heats up, becomes buoyant and begins to rise 
(the background penumbral field and gas, are stratified 
superadiabatically). The part of the flux tube near the outer 
boundary of the penumbra reaches the surface first. Below 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the surface the tube rises almost adiabatically, but above 
the surface radiative losses make it denser and reduce 
the buoyancy. Also, the background stratification is no 
longer superadiabatic. Consequently, the parts of the flux 
tube above the surface come to rest, staying horizontal, 
while the surrounding field remains strongly inclined. 
With time, parts of the flux tube ever closer to the umbra 
appear and lengthen the horizontal portion of the flux 
tube. The horizontal flux tube remains in equilibrium, 
since, for example, the negative buoyancy is balanced by 
the upward accelaration due to the expanding background 
field. 

The part of the flux tube passing through the solar 
surface is filled with hot gas and appears bright, the 
other parts of the flux tube lying above the solar surface 
have had time to cool down and appear dark. Hence an 
observational signature of the formation of a horizontal 
flux tube is the movement of a bright point towards the 
umbra. Such moving bright points (called penumbral 
grains) have indeed been observed. 

The other proposal starts with an inclined field and 
produces a horizontal field component by invoking a 
density inversion with height. To produce the density 
inversion a spatially localized impulsive upflow in the 
inclined magnetic component is postulated. In the almost 
vertical field of the umbra such an upflow is expected to 
be visible as an umbral dot. Note, however, that umbral 
dots do not show marked upflows, although it cannot be 
ruled out that such an upflow may be present, yet remain 
invisible in most spectral lines. In the penumbra, at a 
larger inclination of the field to the vertical, the flow, which 
fills a small flux tube up to a certain height, now causes 
dense material to overlie less dense material. A Rayleigh— 
Taylor instability develops which causes the filled flux tube 
to fall and become horizontal. Furthermore, the surplus 
material, which flowed up into the inclined flux tube, is 
now expected to flow outwards along the horizontal tube. 
A detailed numerical treatment of the collapse of a flux 
tube would be of great value to test this scenario, since the 
influence of curvature forces and the force acting on the 
flux tube due to the vertical gradient of the ‘background 
field’ of the penumbra has not been considered in detail 
as yet. These may well quench any instability from 
developing beyond the initial linear stage. 


Brightness and thermal structure 

Sunspot darkness 

Biermann first proposed that the reduced brightness of 
sunspots is due to the inhibition of convective motions by 
the magnetic field. Since convection dominates energy 
transport below the observable layers, a quenching of 
convection turns a sunspot into an obstacle for the heat flux 
flowing outward through the convection zone. This leads 
to a diversion of energy away from the sunspot, which 
reduces the energy flux through the spot and produces a 
darkening. The diverted energy flux is mainly stored in 
the convection zone and released only over a time scale 
of 10° years, the time scale of the thermal adjustment 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


o4 | 
v 
| ay L 
os £ 
= Ss 
S| -§ 4 ¢ © — 
=) 5 
& 1 fF 
N 
-10- quiet sun Es 
~15 T T T T T 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
a) t=0s xin Mm 
07 LL 
g [ 
=) 
& 1 fF 
N 
-~10-— | 
~15 T T T T T 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
b) t= 1200 s xin Mm 
o- 
g 
=) 
& 1 
N 
-10-4 
-15 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
c)t= 5400 s xin Mm 
| km/s 
0 5 10 15 


Figure 3. Vertical cut through a model penumbra. Vertical axis: 
height z, horizontal axis: radial distance x from the center of the 
sunspot (lying to the left). Indicated are the solar surface 
(horizontal lines near z = 0), the magnetopause between 
penumbra and quiet Sun and the current sheet between umbra 
and penumbra. Shown is the buoyancy-driven evolution of a 
flux tube starting at its initial location at the magnetopause until 
it lies partially horizontally at the surface. (From Schlichenmaier 
et al (1998) by permission.) 


of the convection zone, which is much longer than the 
lifetime of a sunspot. Consequently, sunspots lead to a 
semipermanent darkening of the Sun. Due to the high 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


lateral thermal conductivity of the gas in the convection 
zone, the diverted heat flux is distributed throughout 
the convection zone, so that no significant bright ring 
is expected around the sunspot. The convection zone 
also possesses a large heat capacity, which means that its 
temperature is raised only by an imperceptible amount. In 
the outer part of the solar interior convection is so much 
more efficient in transporting energy than radiation that 
a complete quenching of convection would reduce the 
heat flux so effectively that the question to ask in this case 
would not be why umbras and penumbras are so dark, but 
rather why they are so bright, in particular the penumbras. 
Therefore the inhibition of convection below sunspots is 
probably only partial. 

Another proposal for explaining the darkness of 
sunspots is the deviation of the heat flux vector from the 
vertical due to the influence of the sunspot’s magnetic field 
on the convection. Hoyle pointed out that it is mainly the 
motions across the field lines which are suppressed, so that 
the heat flux is channelled by the field. Its expansion with 
height leads to a dilution of the thermal flux. This effect 
on its own does not explain the observed umbral flux. It 
is nevertheless included in recent models. 

Finally, Parker proposed that the heat flux is not 
diverted away from sunspots at all, but rather that umbras 
are actively cooled by the conversion of thermal energy 
into Alfvén waves. This mechanism now seems unlikely, 
since the expected flux of Alfvén waves is not observed. 


Umbral brightness 

Basically two approaches have been taken to solve the 
problem of too cool umbras. The first has been to form 
the sunspot out of a cluster of small flux tubes (spaghetti 
model) as initially proposed by Parker. Due to the tapered 
shape of each small flux tube, increasingly more field- 
free gas is present between them at increasing depth. 
Consequently, below the sunspot convection can penetrate 
relatively unhindered until close to the surface. In 
addition, for a sunspot composed of n small flux tubes the 
surface area of the side walls of the flux tubes, over which 
the convective gas can radiate into the magnetized gas, is 
./n times larger than for a simple monolithic sunspot. A 
larger side-wall surface compared to the horizontal cross- 
sectional area leads to a much more efficient heating of the 
tubes (isolated small-scale tubes can have a bright bottom 
relative to the quiet Sun). This theory, like many other 
aspects of the cluster model, has not been quantitatively 
worked out in detail. If field-free material does penetrate 
to above the solar surface along unresolved hot columns 
then this could provide the missing radiative flux. Even if 
the individual small flux tubes carry no heat flux, then a 
20% area coverage by the field-free columns would suffice 
to produce the observed flux. The columns would have 
to be very thin and numerous, however, since all parts of 
an umbra exhibit a minimum brightness. One advantage 
of this model is that it provides an explanation of bright 
umbral dots in the dark umbral background. They may 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


be considered to be intrusions of field-free material from 
below the solar surface into the photosphere. 

The second proposal incorporates convective trans- 
port within a simple model of a monolithic sunspot (mag- 
netoconvection). Such simulations are generally resticted 
to an initially homogeneous magnetic field in an ideal- 
ized geometry and simplified equations (e.g. neglecting 
radiation) and often relate to plasma parameters far re- 
moved from those present in real sunspots. From a fully 
compressible calculation in an externally imposed verti- 
cal magnetic field it follows that the character of the con- 
vection below a sunspot umbra depends strongly on the 
parameter ¢, the ratio of magnetic diffusivity to thermal 
diffusivity. If ¢ < 1 then the convection is oscillatory, 
whereas if ¢ > 1 then the convection is overturning. At the 
surface ¢ ~ 10°? < 1, but increases rapidly with depth, 
eventually becoming larger than unity. Therefore, the cur- 
rent picture is that oscillatory convection dominates in the 
2000 km immediately below the surface, while the far more 
efficient overturning convection takes over in the deeper 
layers (depths of 2000-20000 km). 

The two forms of convection are coupled through 
nonlinear interactions, so that hot convective plumes form 
which might penetrate right up to the surface. This 
coupled form of magnetoconvection is more efficient 
than purely oscillatory convection and conceivably could 
transport enough energy to explain the brightness of 
umbras even in a monolithic sunspot. 

Another important parameter determining the nature 
of the magnetoconvection in these simulations is the 
Chandrasekhar number Q, which is proportional to the 
square of the imposed field. At sufficiently large Q 
convection is completely suppressed. As Q is reduced 
first weak, steady convection is excited, with isolated 
columns of rising gas and a continuous network of sinking 
fluid. When Q is lowered even further an oscillatory 
bifurcation sets in, with alternate plumes waxing and 
waning in antiphase. At still smaller Q the convection 
becomes more vigorous and chaotic, with the convective 
pattern changing rapidly. In all cases the convection 
introduces an inhomogeneity into the magnetic field. In 
the upper layers the field becomes concentrated in the 
downflowing network, while at greater depth there is a 
strong concentration below the upflowing plumes. 

In most ‘comprehensive’ models of sunspots, i.e. 
models in which the force balance and energy equations 
are consistently solved for in the whole sunspot, 
the convective transport is treated by the mixing 
length formalism and the radiation by the diffusion 
approximation. The efficiency of the convective transport 
is varied by adapting the mixing length parameter A = 
1/H, where | is the mixing length and #H is the pressure 
scale height (e.g. Chitre 1963, Deinzer 1965, Chitre and 
Shaviv 1967, Yun 1970, Jahn 1989). Often even this 
approach is further simplified. For example, when 
combining the similarity assumption of the magnetic field 
with an energy equation, the thermal structure needs to be 
determined only along the axis of the symmetric sunspot 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and outside the sunspot. The horizontal variation of the 
temperature is fixed by the prescribed magnetic shape 
function. Hence the 2D problem of energy transport in 
an axially symmetric flux tube is reduced to a 1D problem. 

One successful approach has been to solve both 
the force balance and energy equations in an iterative 
scheme. The latter includes radiative energy transport 
(in the diffusion approximation) and convective transport 
(in the mixing length approximation). The umbra and 
penumbra are treated separately, in that each has its own 
mixing length parameter 4, which is determined from the 
temperature gradient and is thus depth dependent. In 
addition, the volume below the umbra is assumed to be 
thermally isolated in the horizontal direction, so that the 
heat flux below the umbra is independent of depth. It 
turns out that in order to ensure a constant heat flux A 
must increase rapidly with depth, being approximately 
0.15 near the surface and reaching 0.7-0.8 at greater depths. 
For comparison A = 1 describes the quiet Sun. A larger 
A implies more efficient convection, so that the above 
result says that convection plays an increasingly important 
role relative to radiation with increasing depth below the 
umbra. This result is also consistent with the prediction 
of ¢ going from <1 to >1, since overturning convection 
is more effective than oscillatory convection. The small 
mixing length near the surface also agrees with the fact 
that the empirically derived temperature stratification at 
and just below the surface is close to radiative equilibrium. 


Penumbral brightness 

The above discussion has focused mainly on the umbra. 
The situation in the penumbra is rather different. The 
thermal flux through the penumbra is almost four times 
larger than in the umbra and three-quarters of that in 
the quiet Sun. Also, the field is far less vertical and less 
strong in the penumbra. It exhibits a prominent, radially 
elongated filamentary structure in white light, so that there 
is a rapid azimuthal variation of brightness. On average, 
however, there is a relative absence of a radial or azimuthal 
temperature gradient. 

If the penumbra is thin, i.e. if the field lines lie 
roughly parallel to the solar surface and the magnetopause 
is located just below the surface everywhere in the 
penumbra, it is relatively easy to get a sufficient energy flux 
through the penumbra. Observations, however, suggest 
that over 50% of the magnetic flux of the sunspot emerges 
in the penumbra and field lines are considerably inclined 
to the horizontal there (by between 15 and 50°), signifying 
that the penumbra is thick (i.e. the magnetopause lies 
many scale-heights below the solar surface under most 
of the penumbra). 

The heating of a thick penumbra requires some form 
of magnetoconvective energy transport. As in the case 
of the umbra, convection under the penumbra is often 
described by the mixing length formalism. Again, the 
mixing length must be reduced compared to the quiet 
Sun, but is larger than in the umbra. For example, 
models suggest that A ~ 0.7 below the penumbra. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It is thought that most of the radiative flux emerging 
through the penumbra enters into the sunspot through 
the magnetopause. This feature is driven by the idea that 
most of the heat flux is transported from the magnetopause 
to the surface layers of the penumbra by interchange 
convection. Interchange convection is an inherently 3D 
process in which whole flux tubes rise and fall in the 
convectively unstable stratification below the penumbra. 
Below the solar surface the flux tube undergoes little heat 
exchange with its surroundings, so that it rises basically 
adiabatically. Hence, the gas trapped between the field 
lines of a rising flux tube has the heat content of the 
gas at the magnetopause. It has been suggesting that 
significant energy flows across the magnetopause only 
when it is inclined by more than a critical angle to the 
vertical. Depending on whether this condition is achieved 
or not a sunspot with penumbra (if the energy flows in 
from the sides) or a pore without a penumbra is formed. 

Two-dimensional simulations confirm part of the 
interchange convection scenario. A flux tube lying along 
the magnetopause does indeed rise to the surface once it 
is heated sufficiently. It also brings hot gas to the surface, 
which then radiates away a part of its thermal energy. In 
contrast to the interchange convection scenario, however, 
the simulated flux tube does not sink back down again 
once it has cooled. This may be due to the simplifying 
assumptions underlying the simulations. For example, 
a more realistic treatment of the radiative transfer may 
lead to a more efficient cooling and allow the flux tube 
to sink below the surface again. On the other hand, 
the simulations do show that even after a flux tube has 
emerged and has been lying horizontally above the surface 
for some time, hot material keeps flowing up through its 
footpoint in the inner part of the penumbra. This upflow 
replenishes material that is flowing horizontally outwards 
along the tube. This horizontal outflow, which exhibits 
many of the properties of the Evershed flow, is driven by 
the excess of gas pressure at the inner footpoint, which 
is partly built up during the rise of the flux tube and is 
partly due to the higher temperature of the gas at the inner 
footpoint. The material emerging from the solar interior 
then flows towards the outer boundary of the sunspot, 
radiating away its excess heat on the way. This model 
reproduces the presence of bright penumbral grains and 
partly also bright and dark penumbral filaments, although 
according to it there is more bright material in the inner 
penumbra (i.e. near the umbra), which is not supported 
by observations. But the exact visibility of bright and dark 
filaments will need to be treated using proper radiative 
transfer before they can be compared quantitatively with 
observations. 

Idealized simulations of convective modes in the 
presence of an imposed homogeneous field that is inclined 
to the vertical lead to waves travelling in the direction of 
the magnetic inclination. Both the strength and inclination 
of the field is affected by the waves. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Jahn K 1997 Physical models of sunspots First Advances 
in Solar Physics Euroconf.: Advances in the Physics of 
Sunspots (ASP Conf. Ser. 118) ed B Schmieder, J C Del 
Toro Iniesta and M Vazquez pp 122-39 

Nordlund A and Stein R F 1990 Solar magnetoconvection 
Solar Photosphere: Structure, Convection and Magnetic 
Fields (IAU Symp. 138) ed J O Stenflo (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) pp 191-211 

Schlichenmaier R, Jahn K and Schmidt H U 1998 A 
dynamical model for the penumbral fine structure 
and the Evershed effect in sunspots Astrophys. J. 493 
L121 

Thomas J H and Weiss N 1992 The theory of sunspots 
Sunspots: Theory and Observations ed JH Thomas and 
N Weiss (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 3-59 

Weiss N 1997 Magnetoconvection First Advances in Solar 
Physics Euroconf.: Advances in the Physics of Sunspots 
(ASP Conf. Ser. 118) ed B Schmieder, J C Del Toro 
Iniesta and M Vazquez pp 21-33 


Sami K Solanki 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Oscillations and Seismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Oscillations and Seismology 


Sunspots are known to host a wide variety of waves 
and oscillatory phenomena. The coupling between these 
oscillations and the 5 min acoustic oscillations of the 
surrounding quiet Sun provides a useful diagnostic probe 
of the magnetic and thermodynamic structure of the spot. 

Oscillations in suNspoTs were first recorded during 
the period 1969-1972. The chief difficulty encountered 
in their detection is the suppression of the stray-light 
contribution to the oscillation signal from the surrounding 
quiet Sun. This contamination can be minimized by 
measuring Doppler velocities using molecular lines and 
low-excitation lines of neutral species with low ionization 
potentials, which form exclusively in the cool suNsPorT 
UMBRA, Or by measuring Doppler velocities using the 
polarized components of a Zeeman-sensitive line, which 
form only in a magnetized plasma (see POLARIMETRY). 

Since sunspots are continuously jostled by the 
turbulent convection (GRANULATION) which surrounds 
them, it is probably no surprise that they host a diverse 
array of dynamic and oscillatory motions. It is an open 
question as to what fraction of the observed oscillations are 
the passive response of the sunspot to this external forcing, 
and what fraction are generated within the sunspot 
through magnetoconvection (See MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: 
MAGNETOCONVECTION. It has also been recognized that the 
nature of these oscillations, coupled with the manner in 
which they are forced by the surrounding granulation 
and the solar acoustic oscillations (HELIOSEISMOLOGY), has 
the potential to reveal diagnostic information about the 
magnetic and thermodynamic structure of the subsurface 
sunspot interior (SUNSPOT MODELS). Thus, in more recent 
times, sunspot oscillations tend to be viewed in the 
broader context of local helioseismology, which emphasizes 
the connection between oscillatory wave fields inside and 
outside of sunspots. 


Observations 
For historical reasons, sunspot oscillations are broadly 
classified as falling into one of three categories: 


@ 5 min umbral oscillations are large spatial scale (typically 
a substantial fraction of the entire umbra) coherent 
oscillations with periods between 250-400 s and root- 
mean-square (RMS) velocity amplitudes of 40-90 m s!, 
observed primarily in lines which form in the low soLaR 
PHOTOSPHERE. The RMS amplitudes of these oscillations 
are roughly a factor of three smaller than typical pixel- 
by-pixel 5 min oscillation amplitudes observed in the 
surrounding quiet Sun. There is also a tendency for 
the spatial oscillation pattern to exhibit rapid radial 
propagation from the umbral center out through the 


SUNSPOT PENUMBRA With phase speeds of 50-100 km sot. 


e@ 3 min umbral oscillations are smaller spatial scale (3-4”) 
oscillations observed in lines which form in the upper 
photosphere and CHROMOSPHERE, With periods of order 
140-200 s, and RMS velocity amplitudes of hundreds 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of meters per second in the mid-to-upper photosphere 
to several kilometers per second in the chromosphere. 
‘Saw-tooth’ time series of Doppler velocities measured 
in chromospheric lines with peak amplitudes of several 
kilometers per second indicate that these oscillations are 
fully nonlinear throughout much of the chromosphere. 
Figure 1 illustrates the distinct observational character 
of the 5 min and 3 min umbral oscillations. 


e@ Running penumbral waves are coherent outward- 
propagating wave arcs (subtending angles of 90-270°) 
readily observed in the penumbral chromosphere. The 
measured radial phase speeds of these waves vary be- 
tween 8 and 35 km s~!, with a tendency for the phase 
speed to decrease with increasing radial distance from 
the sunspot center. Typical Doppler motions associated 
with these waves are several hundred meters per second 
and the arc patterns repeat with a 200-300 s cadence. 
There is growing observational evidence that patchy 
downward extensions of these waves to the penumbral 
photosphere are present, but with radial phase speeds 
significantly greater than those measured in the penum- 
bral chromosphere. 


In all likelihood the distinctions between these 
three basic oscillatory motions are dictated more by 
observational issues than by clear physical effects. For 
example, when simultaneous umbral Dopplergrams are 
made in a number of spectral lines which cover a wide 
range of formation heights in the solar atmosphere, the 
detected oscillations exhibit both vertical and horizontal 
coherence at the same frequency, but are incoherent at 
distinct oscillation frequencies. Based on the coherence 
of the oscillations at different altitudes, phase lags can 
be determined. For frequencies below 5.2-5.5 mHz 
(the effective acoustic cut-off frequency for the umbral 
atmosphere), the oscillations are in phase at all overlying 
atmospheric levels, while for oscillations in excess of the 
acoustic cut-off frequency, a phase lag becomes more 
pronounced with increasing height separation. This 
behavior is generally interpreted as evidence for the 
upward propagation of waves for frequencies larger than 
5.5 mHz. Indeed the ‘saw-tooth’ wave trains observed in 
the Ca II K-line may well be interpreted as the nonlinear 
steepening of these upward propagating waves due to the 
rapid decrease in density between the low photosphere 
and the mid-chromosphere. 


Theory 

Theoretical calculations of sunspot oscillations began in 
earnest in the mid-1970s, but have unfortunately not 
progressed much beyond the basic tenets of the initial 
models. The principal reason for this stagnation can 
be traced to the difficulties encountered in solving the 
relevant partial differential equations which describe the 
linear oscillations of a buried-dipole-type magnetic spot 
geometry (see figure 2 in SUNSPOT MODELS). If the magnetic 
field is uniform and aligned parallel (appropriate for the 
umbra), or perpendicular (appropriate for the penumbra), 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Oscillations and Seismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Period (s) 
§00 300 200 150 100; 


2t August [980 
Velocity(V), Fe I 46303 
Umbra 


s 
z 
oa 
a 
Frequency (mHz) 
Period (s) 
500 300 200 150 100 
60 
21 August 1980 
Velocity, H Line Core 
Umbra 

s 
z 
o 
a 


{e] 2 4 6 8 ire] 
Frequency (mHz) 


Figure 1. Temporal power spectra of the photospheric Doppler 
velocity (Fe I 630.3 nm: upper panel) and chromospheric 
Doppler velocity (Ca II 396.8 nm: lower panel), averaged over a 
single sunspot umbra. In the upper panel the photospheric 
oscillatory power is concentrated around periods of 5 min, while 
in the lower panel the power is greater by a factor of 10 and is 
shifted to shorter periods of 3 min at chromospheric levels. The 
precise locations of distinct power peaks, labeled A, B,C, ..., are 
most likely an artifact of the spatial averaging of the 
point-by-point oscillation power spectra. Their numbers and 
locations are time variable within the same data set, and they are 
not reproducible between different observations. The peaks 
labeled D and E correspond to the same P = 197 s period, and 
their coincidence suggests a physical connection between the 
photospheric and chromospheric oscillations. (Adapted from 
Thomas et al 1984 Astrophys. J. 285 368-80.) 


to the prevailing atmospheric stratification, then these 
partial differential equations factor into a set of ordinary 
differential equations connected by several separation 
parameters—typically the horizontal wavevector k and 
the oscillation frequency w. Hence, the somewhat artificial 
distinction between umbral and penumbral oscillations 
noted above is further maintained on the theoretical side 
of the problem. It is possible to extend the separation of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


variables technique to encompass uniform but arbitrarily 
inclined magnetic fields; however the results are not vastly 
different from those encountered for the purely vertical- 
field case. 

When the uniform magnetic field has a component 
parallel to the stratification then the two characteristic 
wave propagation speeds—the adiabatic sound speed 
and the Alfvén speed—both vary with position along 
a given magnetic line of force. Consequently two of 
the three basic uniform MHD wave modes, the fast and 
slow magnetosonic waves, are coupled, while the Alfvén 
wave remains decoupled and propagates independently 
of them (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC WAVES). The mode- 
mixing between the slow and fast magnetosonic waves is 
minimal in the WKBJ limit (wavelength « atmospheric 
scale height) or if the local sound and Alfvén speeds 
are of very different orders of magnitude, but neither of 
these regimes apply to the umbral photosphere. A large- 
scale global umbral oscillation mode may have both the 
character of the slow and fast magnetosonic waves for 
different local height ranges, as illustrated by figure 2. 
This mode mixing has important implications for seismic 
probing of spots. 

A horizontal magnetic field, on the other hand, has 
a unique value of the sound and Alfvén speeds along 
each line of force. The variation of these characteristic 
propagation speeds with height leads to a different type 
of mode-mixing process known as resonance absorption. 
Unlike the more spatially diffuse mode-conversion process 
that applies in vertical magnetic fields, in a horizontal 
magnetic field the mode conversion is localized in the 
vicinity of a particular atmospheric layer, called a critical 
layer, where the local Alfvén or tube speeds match the 
projection of the phase speed of the atmospheric oscillation 
along the magnetic line(s) of force. Through this localized 
mode conversion, steep gradients and large amplitudes 
build within the critical layer until nonlinearities and/or 
dissipation cause the process to saturate or lead to secular 
evolution of the background atmosphere. Theoretical 
calculations employing strictly horizontal, or slightly 
inclined, magnetic fields have met with success in 
reproducing some features of the running penumbral 
waves. Clearly a better representation of all three types 
of sunspot oscillations awaits more sophisticated models 
which are capable of accommodating a smooth radial 
variation of the magnetic field inclination from the umbral 
core out to the periphery of the penumbra. 


Seismology 

It is possible to regard the interaction of ambient solar 
acoustic oscillations with a sunspot as a ‘scattering 
experiment’ of the sort familiar to physicists who employ 
high-energy particle beams to probe the structure of atoms, 
nuclei and elementary particles. In the sunspot ‘scattering 
experiment’ the incident acoustic ‘beams’ are produced in 
a haphazard manner by the surrounding quiet Sun, and 
as noted above, it is possible to detect oscillations within 
the ‘target’ sunspot proper. Three different ‘experimental’ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Oscillations and Seismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2F 
IF 
= E 
& of 
» -1F 
He} E 
Bp E 
o —2E 
a bw 


| 
wo 


A A 


Height [Mm] 


| 
wo 


| 
a 
i uaudlusiddaaassaaae 


= 
o 


Figure 2. Typical examples of umbral oscillations computed for 
a uniform vertical 3000 G magnetic field imposed on a realistic 
sunspot model atmosphere. The four curves indicate the height 
variation of the RMS velocity and magnetic field fluctuations 
aligned with (||), and perpendicular to (L), the magnetic field. 
The amplitudes of these two oscillatory modes are arbitrarily 
adjusted to yield an RMS Doppler velocity of 50 m s~! at the 
base of the photosphere (height = 0 Mm). Notice the relative 
excess of Doppler velocities present in the chromosphere 

(+0.5 < height < +1.5 Mm) for the P = 3 min oscillation period 
relative to its P = 5 min oscillation period counterpart. This 
behavior is basically consistent with the observational data 
presented in figure 1. These vertical-field models suggest that a 
Doppler oscillation amplitude of 50 m s~! translates into RMS 
magnetic fluctuations at the level of a few gauss. This is 
reasonably consistent with the current observational upper limit 
of 5-20 G for magnetic field intensity fluctuations in sunspot 
umbrae. (Adapted from Lites et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 497 464-582.) 


techniques for probing sunspot structure have evolved in 
parallel: 


@ Frequency—wavenumber helioseismology is closest in spirit 
to the particle physics approach since it relies 
exclusively on the oscillations observed in the quiet Sun 
surrounding the sunspot. This wave field is separated 
into waves with radially inward and radially outward 
senses of phase propagation, and each group is then 
further divided into its constituent frequencies (w), 
horizontal wavenumbers (k), and azimuthal degrees 
(m). For identical values of (w,k,m) one finds more 
power in the inward-propagating wave relative to its 
outward-propagating counterpart (by a factor of 1-3), 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and a positive phase shift of the outward- relative to the 
inward-propagating wave (0-150°). Broadly speaking 
these two findings suggest that sunspots absorb some 
of the acoustic oscillations, while the remainder that 
pass through the sunspot intact do so at somewhat 
greater propagation speeds than would apply in the 
surrounding quiet Sun. 


@ Time-distance helioseismology employs temporal cross- 
correlations of oscillation time series measured in the 
sunspot with those obtained in the surrounding quiet 
Sun at various radial distances (A). Inward- and 
outward-propagating waves are now distinguished by 
enhanced cross-correlations that appear at negative 
(—t~) and positive (+t*) time offsets, respectively, of 
the quiet Sun oscillation time series relative to the 
sunspot time series. For spots, t’ < t, and the 
net ‘travel time’, t* + t~, is less than the analogous 
value which obtains when the sunspot is absent (and 
for which the analogous positive and negative time 
offsets are identical). The smaller net ‘travel time’ for 
the spot relative to the quiet Sun is basically consistent 
with greater propagation speeds for waves inside the 
sunspot. The t* # t~ directional asymmetry in the 
cross-correlation coherence maxima is more difficult 
to interpret. It could arise from coherent downflows 
beneath the sunspot, from time asymmetries due to 
dissipative process (absorption), or it could simply be 
a consequence of observational (spatial and temporal) 
peculiarities associated with the detection of the sunspot 
oscillations. 


@ Acoustic holography carries the concepts of time—distance 
helioseismology one step further through the ‘acoustical 
imaging’ of the subsurface environment of a spot. For 
each subsurface “focal point’, an egression of the wave 
field recorded at the solar photosphere is carried out. 
The egression effectively discards that portion of the 
wave field which is not consistent with the signature of 
an acoustic point source located at the specified focal 
point. Maps of the RMS egression computed for a 
subsurface volume over a specified period of time show 
that a relative egression deficit (<50%) is present below 
sunspots. The horizontal extent of the deficit region is 
about twice the visual extent of the spot. 


Beyond general indications of increased propagation 
speeds and acoustic absorption implied by the findings 
noted above, the extant body of theoretical work 
interpreting these robust observational results must be 
viewed as highly speculative and subject to future revision. 
Any program to simultaneously model oscillations within, 
and outside of, a sunspot must be based upon a non-trivial 
sunspot equilibrium model with nonuniform magnetic 
fields. This entails the difficult task of solving the 
partial differential equations which govern the sunspot 
oscillations and connecting these oscillations with those 
in the neighboring quiet Sun. Various attempts aimed 
at circumventing this complicated problem through the 
reliance on ray theory, or its variants, which all derive 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Oscillations and Seismology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


from the WKBJ formalism, run afoul of the acoustic 
analog of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. Recall that 
the spatial and temporal extent of a wave packet is 
inversely proportional to the range of wavenumbers and 
frequencies of the constituent waves from which the packet 
is composed. The distribution of observed oscillatory 
power across the k—w diagram (see figure 4 in HELIOSEISMIC 
OBSERVATIONS) necessarily imposes fundamental limitations 
upon how sharp a ray bundle can be, and for the most 
part, sunspots are probably too small to safely treat their 
interaction with acoustic oscillations in the ‘geometrical- 
acoustics’ limit. 

With these caveats in mind, preliminary work does 
suggest that the mode conversion of the forcing acoustic 
oscillation to magnetic-field-guided slow magnetosonic 
waves, and resonance absorption in critical layers, may 
play crucial roles in accounting for the deficit of outward- 
to inward-going waves in the sunspot environment. 


Bibliography 

Bogdan T J and Braun D C 1995 Active region seismol- 
ogy Proc. Fourth SOHO Workshop: Helioseismology 
ed J T Hoeksema, V Domingo, B Fleck and B Battrick 
(Noordwijk: ESA) pp 31-45 

Chitre S M 1992 Theory of umbral oscillations and 
penumbral waves Sunspots: Theory and Observations 
ed J H Thomas and N O Weiss (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
pp 333-43 

Lindsey C and Braun D C 1997 Helioseismic holography 
Astrophys. J. 485 895-903 

Lites B W 1992 Sunspot oscillations: observations 
and implications Sunspots: Theory and Observations 
ed J H Thomas and N O Weiss (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 
pp 261-302 

Marco E, Aballe Villero M A, Vazquez M and Garcia de 
la Rosa J I 1996 Spatial changes of the oscillatory 
pattern in sunspot penumbrae at the photospheric 
level Astron. Astrophys. 309 284-90 


Thomas J] Bogdan 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Penumbra: Structure and Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Penumbra: Structure and 
Activity 


As viewed in white light, a sunspot consists of the 
dark, central umbra surrounded by the brighter, radially 
striated penumbra. The structure of the penumbra is 
generally more complicated that that of the umbra, and 
our understanding of penumbral structure has developed 
slowly as observations have provided us with increasing 
spatial resolution. 

The relative darkness of sunspots is attributed to 
the inhibiting effect of the spot’s magnetic field on the 
convective transport of heat. The inhibition of convection 
is quite strong in the umbra, which transmits only about 
20% of the average solar heat flux. In the penumbra, 
however, the convection is far more efficient, with the 
penumbra transmitting some 75% of the average heat flux 
with a radial variation of less than 5%. 

The radial striations in the penumbra seen by 
early observers were resolved as alternating bright and 
dark filaments by the balloon-borne Stratoscope in the 
late 1950s. Subsequent high-resolution observations, 
especially at Pic du Midi, showed that the bright filaments 
consist of several elongated grains which migrate inwards 
toward the umbra. Some of these bright grains penetrate 
into the umbra and form the peripheral umbral dots in 
the umbra (see also SUNSPOT UMBRA: STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITY). 
Fully resolving the fine structure in the penumbra poses 
a real challenge for modern high-resolution observing 
techniques (see figure 1). The power spectrum of intensity 
fluctuations is fairly flat down to wavelengths at the 
current limit of angular resolution (about 0.2 arcsec), 
implying that there is a considerable amount of smaller 
fine structure yet to be resolved. 

In Ha the penumbra also displays a filamentary 
structure, but at this higher level in the atmosphere the 
so-called superpenumbra extends radially much further 
outward, to distances as much as twice the sunspot’s 
radius in white light. In the corona, as seen in x-rays, 
filamentary features emanating from the inner penumbra 
extend much further outward, to distances comparable 
with the solar radius. The filamentary structure of the 
penumbra is intimately associated with the structure of 
the sunspot’s magnetic field. 


The magnetic field in the penumbra 
The mean (azimuthally averaged) magnetic field in a 
sunspot at the solar surface is vertical at the center of 
the umbra but flares outward so that the mean field is 
inclined at about 20° to the horizontal at the outer edge 
of the penumbra. The strength of the mean magnetic 
field decreases monotonically with radial distance from 
the center of the sunspot, dropping by a factor of 2 or 3 
at the outer edge of the penumbra. Typical magnetic field 
strengths are 3000 G in the center of the umbra and 1000 G 
near the outer edge of the penumbra. 

The detailed geometry of the magnetic field in the 
penumbra is far more complicated than that of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. High-resolution image of a sunspot taken in May 1998 
with a G-band interference filter (1.2 nm bandpass centered at 
430.5 nm) at the Swedish Vacuum Solar Telescope on La Palma, 
showing the bright and dark penumbral filaments and the bright 
grains that constitute the bright filaments. Some of the bright 
grains extend well into the umbra. The normal solar granulation 
pattern occurs outside the sunspot; the bright points in the 
intergranular lanes correspond to intense magnetic flux tubes 
emerging from the solar surface. (Courtesy of T Berger, 
Lockheed-Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory). 


axisymmetric mean field discussed above, and indeed a 
clear picture has emerged only in the last decade (see 
also SUNSPOT MAGNETIC FIELDS). Formerly it was thought that 
the penumbra is a rather shallow structure formed by 
magnetic field lines emerging through the solar surface 
in the outer umbra and bending over sharply to lie 
horizontally along the solar surface. In this picture, very 
little magnetic flux actually emerges through the solar 
surface within the penumbra. Now, however, we know 
that the penumbra is a deep structure in which a significant 
fraction, more than half, of the sunspot’s magnetic flux 
emerges through the surface. 

Observations by Beckers and Schréter at Sacramento 
Peak in the 1960s suggested that, while the magnetic 
field in the dark filaments is nearly horizontal (relative 
to the solar surface), the field in the bright filaments is 
significantly inclined to the horizontal. More recently, 
high-resolution spectroscopy and precision polarimetry 
have revealed a ‘fluted’ or ‘corrugated’ structure of the 
penumbral magnetic field, with the inclination of the field 
varying azimuthally around the sunspot (see figure 2). 
In the outer penumbra, the inclination to the horizontal 
varies from 0° in the dark filaments to 35°-40° in the 
bright filaments, giving a mean inclination of 15°—20°. In 
the inner penumbra, the mean inclination is about 45° 
with azimuthal fluctuations of +15°-20°. The magnetic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Penumbra: Structure and Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0 100 200 
Position Angle (counterclockwise from West) 


300 


Figure 2. The azimuthal variation of several quantities around a circle (shown in black on the continuum image) in the outer 
penumbra of radius 0.8R, where R is the radius of the circle that just contains the entire penumbra (the outer white circle). Shown here 
are the variations of magnetic field strength |B|, zenith angle y of the magnetic field, line-of-sight Doppler velocity v (in Fe I 630.25), 
continuum intensity J, and line core intensity I), (in Fe I 630.25) with position angle (in degrees, measured counterclockwise from solar 
west). The solid vertical lines mark the locations of significant local maxima in the field strength |B]; note the strong anticorrelation 
between field strength and inclination angle in the ‘fluted’ penumbra. The dotted vertical lines mark the locations of significant local 
maxima of the magnitude of the Doppler (Evershed) flow velocity, |v|; note that these flow channels generally coincide with lower 
intensity (especially line core intensity /;.) and nearly horizontal magnetic field. (From Stanchfield et al (1997).) 


field strength is somewhat weaker where the field is more 
nearly horizontal. The radial ‘spines’ of stronger, more 
inclined magnetic field account for most of the emerging 
magnetic flux in the penumbra. 


Motions in the penumbra 
Observations of persistent motions in the penumbra show 
systematic inward proper motions (toward the umbra) 
of the bright elements in the inner penumbra, while in 
the outer penumbra the dominant motion is the outward 
Evershed flow occurring mostly in the dark filaments. 
The most readily apparent motion in the penumbra is 
the radial, nearly horizontal outflow of gas responsible 
for the Evershed effect seen in spectral lines formed 
in the penumbral photosphere (see SUNSPOTS: EVERSHED 
EFFECT). The flow is generally concentrated in the dark 
penumbral filaments, where the magnetic field is more 
nearly horizontal, and is directed along the magnetic 
field lines (see figure 2). This motion is thought to be 
a siphon flow driven by a pressure difference between 
the footpoints of arched magnetic flux tubes. This 
mechanism has only recently been confirmed by high- 
resolution observations showing the magnetic field lines 
and flow diving below the solar surface near the outer edge 
of the penumbra. The siphon flow mechanism is probably 
also responsible for the reversed, inward Evershed flow 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of gas seen higher up in the penumbral atmosphere, in 
chromospheric spectral lines such as Ha. 

A sunspot penumbra exhibits a range of interesting 
wave motions (see SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND SEISMOLOGY). 
The most conspicuous of these waves are the running 
penumbral waves seen in Ha. These consist of dark 
wavefronts in the form of concentric arcs, sometimes 
extending nearly all the way around the umbra, 
originating at the umbra-penumbra boundary and 
propagating radially outward across the penumbra at 
speeds of 10-20 km s7!, and repeating with a period in 
the range 200-300 s. The high propagation speeds, well 
above the local sound speed, indicate that these penumbral 
waves are largely magnetic in character. The running 
penumbral waves may be related to umbral oscillations, 
but the connection is not really clear. Compared 
with the chromospheric umbral oscillations, the running 
penumbral waves are much less energetic, having velocity 
amplitude of only some 200 m s™! at the base of the 
chromosphere (at the temperature minimum) and 1kms7! 
in the chromosphere (at the height of formation of Ha). 
Other oscillatory motions in the penumbral photosphere, 
with periods around 5 min, are related to the interaction of 
the sunspot with the resonant acoustic modes (p-modes) 
in the surrounding quiet Sun. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Penumbra: Structure and Activity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


On longer time scales, on the order of a half hour, there 
occur slow convective interchange motions of magnetic 
flux tubes. These motions are responsible for the bright 
and dark penumbral filaments, the fluted geometry of the 
penumbral magnetic field, and the vertical heat transport 
in the penumbra. Magnetic flux tubes that initially lie 
along the outer surface of the sunspot’s sheaf of magnetic 
field, in contact with the hotter surroundings, are heated, 
become more buoyant, and rise upward, carrying excess 
heat and appearing bright. The footpoints of these rising 
inclined flux tubes, where the tubes emerge at the solar 
surface, migrate inward producing the inward-moving 
bright grains. Meanwhile, the rising, heated flux tubes 
are replaced by descending, cooler flux tubes (in the dark 
filaments) which, on reaching the outer boundary, are 
in turn heated. This interchange process repeats itself 
continually, producing the quasi-steady vertical transport 
of heat responsible for the penumbra’s relative brightness 
compared to the umbra. 


The formation of a penumbra 

Magnetic flux in emerging active regions first appears in 
the form of suNspoT PoRrES, which then may coalesce to 
form sunspots. A sunspot is distinguished from a pore 
by having a penumbra. The formation of a penumbra 
is apparently the result of a sudden transition in the 
structure of the accumulated magnetic field, from a bundle 
of nearly vertical field lines to a widely fanning sheaf of 
field lines with nearly vertical field in the umbra and nearly 
horizontal field in the penumbra. This transition between 
a pore and a sunspot, as the amount of accumulated 
magnetic flux increases, is a complicated nonlinear process 
involving the onset of overturning magnetoconvection at 
the outer edge of the pore (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: 
MAGNETOCONVECTION). Although sunspots are generally 
larger than pores, there are pores as large as 3.5 Mm 
in radius and sunspots (with rudimentary penumbrae) 
as small as 1.8 Mm in radius. Our understanding of 
this situation is that, if we consider the radius as a 
function of total magnetic flux, there are two families of 
stable solutions which overlap at intermediate radii. The 
transition between the two states occurs when filamentary 
convection sets in suddenly to form a penumbra at the 
outer edge of the pore, where the magnetic field becomes 
more nearly horizontal with increasing total magnetic flux. 
In the language of nonlinear systems, the pore solution 
loses stability at a saddle-node bifurcation. 


Bibliography 

Rucklidge A M, Schmidt H U and Weiss N O 1995 The 
abrupt development of penumbrae in sunspots Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 273 491—8 

Schlichenmaier R, Jahn K and Schmidt H U 1998 A 
dynamical model for the penumbral fine structure 
and the Evershed effect in sunspots Astrophys. J. 493 
L121-4 

Stanchfield D C H II, Thomas J H and Lites B W 1997 The 
vector magnetic field, Evershed flow, and intensity in 
a sunspot Astrophys. J. 477 485-94 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Thomas J H and Weiss N O 1992 The theory of sunspots 
Sunspots: Theory and Observations ed JH Thomas and 
N O Weiss (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 3-59 


John H Thomas 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Pores 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Pores 


Basic properties of pores 

Pores are, roughly speaking, small sunspots without a 
clear penumbra (see SUNSPOT PENUMBRA). While the visual 
appearance of a sunspot is that of a very dark central 
umbra surrounded by a filamentary annular penumbra, 
a pore is a fairly uniform dark spot on the solar disk. Like 
sunspots, they are the surface manifestation of strongly 
magnetized tubes permeating the visible solar surface 
layers Or SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE. Their diameter in continuum 
images is typically only a few (2-4) thousand kilometers 
and they appear for hours to a couple of days at most. 
Their surface magnetic field is of the order of 1000-2000 G 
(the Earth’s magnetic field is about 0.4 G). In contrast, a 
sunspot can easily be 10 times larger in size and can exist 
for weeks or months, while the magnetic field in the centre 
of a sunspot umbra can be twice as large. 

The distinctive property of pores is the associated 
darkening in photospheric intensity. Using the morpho- 
logical definition that labels pores as those magnetic struc- 
tures that lack an observable penumbra, the size distri- 
bution of pores and sunspots overlap. The largest pores 
(3-4 Mm radius judged from their continuum appearance) 
may suddenly form a partial penumbra, turning them into 
sunspots. Both observational and theoretical arguments 
support a scenario for penumbra formation when a critical 
size and field strength is exceeded. The transition would 
take place at a total magnetic flux of order 107° Mx (Mx, 
Maxwell, defined as 10'° Mx = 1 GMm/’). In that sense, 
pores are just a phase in the build-up towards a stable ma- 
ture sunspot. Emerging magnetic flux in an ACTIVE REGION 
rapidly organizes itself into pores, which may gather to 
organize themselves into a sunspot. A similar process acts 
to forma single pore: magnetic elements (250 km diameter 
flux tubes with 1-2 kG fields) coalesce somewhat sponta- 
neously to form a pore. Individual magnetic elements of 
size ~200 km diameter have been observed and constitute 
up to 90% of the net magnetic flux outside sunspots and 
pores. Within several hours, pores can evolve in size, form 
or disappear, so they are truly transient sunspots. 


Formation scenario 

As a rule, pores develop in very young active regions. 
Figure 1 shows a close-up view of the solar photospheric 
layers in continuum intensity. Shown is an area of 
48.12 square arcseconds of the solar surface as seen at a 
wavelength of 6708 A. This continuum image was obtained 
with the Swedish Vacuum Solar Telescope (La Palma, 
Spain) on 10 May 1994. The GRANULATION pattern of bright 
cellular patches separated by darker and cooler lanes is 
seen all over the solar surface, while the three black spots 
are pores. The granulation represents the uppermost layer 
of the solar convection zone (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
ZONE), the superadiabatically stratified outer 30% of the 
solar envelope. The mean distance between the bright 
granule centers is 1.5-2 Mm. Hence, the size of the pores in 
the figure varies from 1 Mm diameter for the smallest one 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Pores seen on the solar disk in white light. The area 
shown is approximately 35 Mm x 35 Mm. Figure courtesy of V 
Martinez Pillet. 


to 3-4 Mm for the largest. Clearly, their shape can be very 
irregular, but they are fairly stable structures compared 
with the surrounding granulation pattern. The bright 
granules typically last for 16 min or so, while (large) pores 
can exist for days. Figure 1 is of exceptional quality, since 
hints of internal structure, reminiscent of umbral dots (see 
SUNSPOT UMBRA) can be detected in the largest pore shown. 
A clear discussion of the fine structure in pores can be 
found in Bonet et al (1995). They observed pores on the 
Sun during a partial solar eclipse, which allowed them to 
correct precisely for the seeing degradation induced by the 
telescope and the atmosphere of the earth. 

While ideally a pore is thought of as a monolithic 
tubular entity, it likely consists of a collection of even 
smaller magnetic elements. These ought to be tightly 
packed and linked deeper down as one magnetic trunk 
(Martinez Pillet 1997). A scenario for the formation of 
strongly magnetized ‘trunks’ is as follows. Large-scale 
flow fields tend to concentrate the magnetic field at the 
photosphere into the intergranular lanes. There, magnetic 
elements and even small pores may form due to a convec- 
tive collapse. Thereby, a downflow in a magnetized tube 
accelerates. As a result, the tube evacuates, which in turn 
leads to a transverse amplification of the field. The result- 
ing 1-2 kG magnetic fibrils are then constantly buffeted by 
the large convective cells. Converging flow fields in the 
local granular or meso-granular convection pattern could 
draw several magnetic elements together and form the 
larger pores. The surrounding downflow adds to the sta- 
bility of the structure. The accumulated magnetic flux will 
eventually affect the local magnetoconvection pattern and 
darken (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: MAGNETOCONVECTION). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Pores 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Keppens and Martinez Pillet (1996) reported the detection 
of pore formation, associated with a 5% continuum con- 
trast, as soon as the magnetic flux reaches (4-5) x 10! Mx 
within a 1.5 Mm radius. 


Temperature structure 

A statistical survey reports few or no pores close to 
the solar limb. This is surely associated with the 
identification of pores as dark structures compared to 
their surroundings. Their internal vertical temperature 
stratification can change their visual appearance from 
dark and cool at the disk center to invisible or brighter 
than the ambient atmosphere at the limb. Continuum 
observations towards the limb actually sample higher 
layers, so that one really needs to determine the 
two-dimensional (assuming axisymmetry in the third 
dimension) temperature structure of a solar pore. Stitterlin 
(1998) presents such a detailed analysis which confirms 
that the temperature difference between the pore center 
and surroundings drops with height and may even reverse 
for small pores. Figure 2 shows the inferred temperature 
structure as a function of height and radial distance for 
a pore with a 3.2 Mm continuum diameter (taken from 
Siitterlin 1998). The temperature range is indicated in 
kelvin on top. Equally important in Siitterlin’s study 
is the determination of the Wilson depression across the 
pore, which is the geometrical height from which most 
continuum radiation escapes freely (optical depth t = 1). 
For the pore in figure 2, the t = 1 surface varied by 200 km 
across the pore. 

Although it is difficult to assess the influence of stray 
light in the continuum intensity of a pore, it has been 
established that the radial variation of the brightness in 
pores is a smooth increase towards its rim. This is quite 
different in sunspots, where the continuum appearance 
is that of a very dark central umbral region, surrounded 
by a plateau of a brighter, more filamentary penumbral 
annulus. The central region of a pore is darker and hence, 
cooler, for larger pores. In cases where a sunspot forms, 
the original pore remains as the umbra. 


Magnetic structure of pores 

The strong magnetic field in pores is immediately 
responsible for their darkness relative to the surrounding 
photosphere. When a significant amount of flux is 
accumulated within a 1.5 Mm radius, this area darkens 
(cools) and turns into a pore. Indeed, a sufficiently 
bundled and localized kG magnetic field will disturb 
the outward convective energy transport towards the 
solar visible surface layers, thus forming the cooler 
pore. The value of the field strength can be determined 
from magnetically sensitive absorption line spectra. 
Polarimetric measurements of, for example Fe I lines, 
are now routinely used to derive the vector magnetic 
field in sunspots, pores and plage regions. The strong 
magnetic fields lift degeneracies in the atomic levels of the 
ions. Stokes polarimetry uses the resulting wavelength 
variation of the intensity, the net circular and both net 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


4200 _K 10200 K 


1000 0 1000 2000 
Distance from center [km] 
Thu Jul 10 1997 


Figure 2. The two-dimensional temperature structure of a pore. 
The white line indicates the t = 1 surface. Figure courtesy of 
P Stitterlin. 


linear polarization effects to determine the magnetic 
field strength, the inclination of the field to the local 
vertical and its azimuth. This inversion process involves 
the tuning of parameters representing the magnetic and 
thermodynamic atmosphere until the profiles closely 
agree with the ones observed. In this way, one can 
construct magnetic maps of the solar surface giving the full 
3D structure of the field. Insuch maps, sunspots and pores 
are readily identified as coherent, strongly magnetized 
structures. In maps of magnetic field azimuth angle, they 
both show a well-defined center about which a full 360° 
range in angle is observed. Keppens and Martinez Pillet 
(1996) selected magnetic features from azimuth maps and 
inferred their magnetic radii. These magnetic structures 
do not always correspond to a continuum dark spot like a 
pore or sunspot. Azimuth centers without pronounced 
continuum contrast were termed ‘ACs’ and these ACs 
sometimes evolve in a pore within a time span of hours. 
Statistics on a sample of 51 pores showed that their 
magnetic extent is always larger than their continuum 
appearance. Whether or not this is to be attributed 
to the existence of a magnetic canopy surrounding the 
pore proper is unclear. Martinez Pillet (1997) proposed 
a cartoon pore model consisting of a densely packed 
dark central part with an outer rim of magnetic elements 
linked together subsurfacely. Since loosely spaced 
magnetic elements insufficiently inhibit convective energy 
transport, a pore then merely seems smaller judged 
from continuum images alone. Only pore seismology, 
combined with high-resolution polarimetric observations 
in infrared wavelengths (which probe deeper layers than 
the Fe I lines) may tell us whether this is indeed the case. 
To determine the magnetic structure across a typical 
pore, Keppens and Martinez Pillet (1996) calculated 
sample mean radial profiles of the azimuthally averaged 
magnetic field. In particular, since each pore in 
their sample had a readily identifiable azimuth center, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Pores 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.0 0.2 


0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 


Figure 3. The magnetic structure of pores compared with 
sunspot magnetic fields. 


averaging the 3D field structure about this center gives 
reliable information on the vertical and radial field 
structure. Grouping the 51 pore sample in three subgroups 
A, B and C of increasingly larger pores, the variation of 
the field structure with size could be deduced. The same 
procedure was used to obtain radial profiles for a typical 
sunspot, and for the ACs (those magnetic structures clearly 
detected in azimuth maps without a clear continuum 
contrast, believed to be candidates for pore formation). 
The results in figure 3 show the vertical magnetic field 
components in the top panel, and the radial ones in the 
bottom panel. The virtually horizontal dashed curves 
correspond to the sample of ACs, which are seen to be 
purely vertical magnetic structures or flux tubes. Their 
maximal field strength is roughly 1400 G. The plot confirms 
that for pores of increasing size (from A to C), the central 
field strength increases from 1700 to 1900 G. Therefore, a 
clear correlation between pore size, continuum intensity 
and magnetic field strength exists. Note further how 
figure 3 indicates that pores are still fairly vertical 
structures (the average inclination at the edge derived 
from the sample was found to be 35°), but a tendency to 
fan open with size is also evident. The largest variation of 
the field structure is found for sunspots (dashed curves), 
where interestingly, the penumbra boundary coincides 
with a 40-45° inclination so that the azimuthally averaged 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


penumbral field is primarily horizontal, while it is almost 
vertical in a sunspot umbra. 

This suggests that when the field inclination at the 
edge of a stable magnetic structure increases beyond 40- 
45°, the concave tube boundary may be susceptible to 
a fluting or interchange instability, thereby fragmenting 
its boundary and forming a filamentary, predominantly 
horizontal ‘penumbra’. In fact, the dynamic and fibril 
nature of a sunspot penumbra suggests that the instability 
is convective in nature. That a semistable horizontal 
penumbra should eventually form could be expected 
from the stabilizing influence of buoyancy, acting at 
sufficiently strong inclination. An observational clue to 
this process was presented by Keppens and Martinez 
Pillet (1996), where part of a large pore showed an 
appreciable change in its continuum intensity within a 
few hours. Analysing the magnetic field evolution in 
time, the magnetic structure changed from almost vertical 
throughout, to a two-component structure very much like 
a typical sunspot. More observations of higher spatial and 
temporal resolution of evolving large pores are needed 
to confirm this scenario. It is thereby vital to have 
simultaneous continuum and polarimetric measurements. 

More measurements of the field inclination in pores 
seem warranted, to test the hypothesis of penumbra 
formation when a critical angle is exceeded. This scenario 
has been investigated by Rucklidge et al (1995). They 
constructed pore and sunspot models taking into account 
flux conservation and a balance between surface emitted 
energy and the energy entering laterally and from below. 
In solution diagrams of spot size versus magnetic flux, 
pores and sunspots form distinct curves which overlap 
in their size range, as observed. The pore solutions 
lose stability at a bifurcation point, indicating the onset 
of a penumbral filamentary convection as soon as the 
edge field tilted beyond a critical angle (taken at 45°). 
Beyond this inclination, the energy balance dictated the 
need for convective transport across the magnetopause 
into the flux tube. Observations reveal that the field 
inclination in pores varies almost linearly with radial 
distance from the center. Edge values up to 60° with 
respect to the surface normal have been reported (Siitterlin 
1998), comparable to inclinations for the bright filaments in 
a sunspot penumbra (the dark ones are nearly horizontal). 
The statistical analysis by Keppens and Martinez Pillet 
(1996) found a mean inclination of 35° at the magnetic 
edge of the pore, after azimuthal averaging. The main 
difference results presumably from the underlying model 
used in the inversion procedure. Although both inversion 
codes used a set of eleven parameters to determine the 
emergent Stokes vector, Siitterlin (1998) emphasizes the 
two-dimensional temperature structure. He included 
parameters related to the vertical thermodynamic (and 
magnetic) variations. Lites and Skumanich (1990) consider 
all thermal, magnetic and dynamic quantities as constant 
through the line forming region, except for the linear t- 
dependence of the source function. In this respect, the 
variation of the Wilson depression as shown in figure 2 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Pores 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


has consequences for interpreting the vector magnetic field 
data. Determinations of the vertical field gradient in pores 
quote values around dB/dz = —4Gkm‘!. 


Pore models and wave modes 

Since pores are rather stable compared with the 
shortlived granules around them, models try to mimick 
a magnetohydrostatic balance in stratified, radiating 
surroundings. First modeling efforts used potential field 
solutions neglecting stratification and radiation. Models 
like those by Rucklidge et al (1995) concentrate on the 
connection between pores and sunspots by penumbra 
formation. Full modeling is difficult when accounting 
for both the superadiabatically stratified convective 
surroundings and the transition to the optically thin 
regime. Two-dimensional time-dependent numerical 
simulations of magnetic elements and pores in non- 
stationary, radiative convection show that the smaller 
magnetic structures are strongly influenced dynamically. 
The photospheric indications of fine structure in pores 
also tell us that full three-dimensional modeling of 
magnetoconvection is required. 

Due to the dynamic surroundings, MAGNETOHYDRODY- 
NAMIC WAVE modes of all types are continuously excited in 
pores. The study of wave modes of and wave interactions 
with flux tubes is a subject in its own right. For small, strat- 
ified magnetic flux tubes, the wave modes can be studied 
by neglecting their radial variation. For the larger struc- 
tures, this radial variation can no longer be ignored. Wave 
modes of purely radially stratified magnetic flux tubes em- 
bedded in wave-carrying surroundings can describe their 
linear dynamics satisfactorily. Radial variations across the 
primarily vertical magnetic field allow for localized wave 
heating. For magnetic elements, one-dimensional stud- 
ies of this process indicated that slow resonant absorption 
can be acting in a layer 400 km above t = 1. In gen- 
eral, both radial and vertical gradients play an important 
role in the interaction (see SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND SEISMOL- 
ocy). Numerical simulations of wave interactions with a 
stratified vertical field showed how impinging P-MoDES can 
also be converted to slow magneto-atmospheric-gravity 
waves, ducted along the field lines. The study of linear 
wave modes yields invaluable insight for the nonlinear 
numerical simulations where the truly dynamic nature of 
the smaller magnetic structures is evident. 


Pore seismology? 

A scenario for pore formation by packing magnetic 
elements in a bundle raises the question whether a pore, 
once formed, is a monolithic or fibril structure. Also, 
the suggested subsurface appearance as a larger magnetic 
trunk should be deduced from observations. Attempts 
to answer such questions for sunspots make use of the 
indirect sampling of the sunspot by impinging p-modes. 
It has been noted that a fibril structure can be more 
efficient in extracting the incident power since multiple 
scattering ensures that the exciting waves revisit the sites 
of energy loss, and the losses add coherently. Large pores 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


can be sampled by techniques developed in sunspot and 
active region seismology. The way pores form suggests 
a fibril model which indicates they could be efficient 
sinks of p-mode energy. Such studies will be hampered 
by the fairly rapid evolution and the short lifetime of 
pores. Moreover, due to their size and intrinsic field 
strengths, they may not correspond to sufficiently strong 
scatterers of acoustic wave energy. However, a full three- 
dimensional reconstruction of the pore structure would 
give valuable indications of the possible scenarios for the 
onset of penumbra formation. 


Conclusions 

Since the size of the smallest pores and the magnetic 
elements is comparable to the best obtainable resolution 
to date, efforts to deduce their three-dimensional 
composition as well as their dynamic properties will 
continue. Model simulations should address the details of 
pore formation and stability. The link between magnetic 
structures of all sizes is still an issue worth studying. 
Ultimately, this will help unravel the relation between 
the surface manifestation of the solar magnetic field and 
the way in which this field is generated and evolves 
subsurfacely. Pore formation and coalesence represent the 
first clear visual clues to the emergence of large Q-shaped 
flux loops. Simulations have confirmed the possibilities 
for storing and amplifying enormous toroidal flux ropes 
in the overshoot region below the convection zone. They 
can rise through the convection zone and finally erupt 
in a tree structure to lead to the surface active region 
development. The determination of the atmospheric and 
magnetic conditions prevailing in pores may guide the 
required modeling of this eruption phase. 


Bibliography 

Bonet J A, Sobotka M and Vazquez M 1995 Photometry 
of sunspot pores from partial eclipse observations 
Astron. Astrophys. 296 241-7 

Keppens R and Martinez Pillet V 1996 The magnetic 
structure of pores and sunspots derived from 
Advanced Stokes polarimeter data Astron. Astrophys. 
316 229-42 

Lites B W and Skumanich A 1990 Stokes profile analysis 
and vector magnetic fields Astrophys. J. 348 747-60 

Martinez Pillet V 1997 Polarimetric measurements of 
sunspots Astronomical Society of the Pacific Advances in 
the Physics of Sunspots (First Advances in Solar Physics 
Euroconference Conf. Ser. 118) ed B Schmieder, J C del 
Toro Iniesta and M Vazquez, pp 212-35 

Rucklidge A M, Schmidt H U and Weiss N O 1995 The 
abrupt development of penumbrae in sunspots Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 273 491-8 

Siitterlin P 1998 Properties of solar pores Astron. Astrophys. 
333 305-12 


Rony Keppens 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Umbra: Structure and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspot Umbra: Structure and 
Evolution 


Sunspots show two main structures: a central dark region, 
the umbra, surrounded by a brighter and filamentary zone, 
the SUNSPOT PENUMBRA (see figure 1 in the article on SUNSPOT 
EVOLUTION). Sunspots without penumbra are usually called 
SUNSPOT PORES. Observed with low spatial resolution, the 
umbra appears homogeneous. However, even by the 
nineteenth century astronomers were able to detect fine 
details. In fact all the structures mentioned below were 
observed at that time. The names of Secchi, Janssen and 
Chevalier should be mentioned in this context. 

An important development in our knowledge of 
the fine structure of sunspots occurred in the 1960s 
with the balloon observations of the Stratoscope Project 
(M Schwarzschild at Princeton University) and with 
ground-based observations reported in the monograph 
of Bray and Loughhead (1967). However, the low 
dynamic range of the photographic plates available at that 
time did not allow reliable photometric measurements 
of the fine details inside the umbra to be made. In 
recent times the use of CCD cameras has solved this 
problem. The application of image-selection techniques at 
observatories with excellent atmospheric conditions (Pic 
du Midi, Sacramento Peak, Tenerife and La Palma) has 
enabled time series of sunspot images to be obtained at 
very high spatial resolution (~0.3"). In the near future, 
the application of two-dimensional spectropolarimetric 
and image reconstruction (speckle interferometry, phase 
diversity) techniques will improve our knowledge of these 
features yet further. 

Very often the umbras of individual sunpots within a 
group are divided into different parts by a bright structure 
known as a light bridge (hereafter LB). We will call these 
individual umbras umbral cores (UCs). A schematic view 
of the detailed structures observed in sunspot umbras is 
shown in figure 1. 


Umbral cores 

Umbral cores have smoothly varying intensities with 
brighter and darker regions, known as the diffuse 
background (DB), which has two principal features, the 
dark nuclei (DN), which correspond to distinctive local 
intensity minima of the core, and umbral dots (UDs), small 
bright structures embedded in the diffuse background. A 
mature sunspot with an umbra displaying all these fine 
structures is shown in figure 2. 


Dark nuclei 

They are the zones around the minima of local brightness 
inside the umbra. The name ‘void’ has also been used. 
The brightnesses are spread in a wide range (see table 
1) depending of the individual characteristics of umbral 
cores (e.g. size). Since the continuum brightness is 
related to the magnetic field strength, DN are also the 
locations of the strongest magnetic fields. The DN are 
not necessarily located at the center of the umbra, but are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. A chart and an idealized scheme showing the different 
fine structures visible in sunspot umbras. 


Figure 2. Mature sunspot observed at the Swedish Vacuum 
Solar Telescope at the Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos 
(La Palma). The black strip on the upper left corner of the image 
is 1” © 725 km long. This image, and that in figure 3, have been 
corrected for the degradation produced by the telescope and the 
average atmospheric conditions at the observing site. 


rather distributed irregularly in the umbral cores and are 
almost free of bright structures. 


The intensity minimum of the umbral core is the 
parameter that best characterizes the thermodynamic 
properties of an umbral core. It is correlated with the 
sunspot size; this means that larger sunspots are darker. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Umbra: Structure and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Solar pore observed at the Swedish Vacuum Solar 
Telescope at the Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos. Two 
faint light bridges are observed at the upper part and a lot of 
umbral dots are embedded in the diffuse background. The white 
strip on the lower left corner corresponds to 1” ~ 725 km. 


Umbral dots 

Due their morphological similarity to photospheric 
granules, the bright structures in the umbra were first 
named ‘umbral granulation’. Stratoscope observations 
showed that they were much narrower and darker 
than granulation (See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: GRANULATION) and. 
they have accordingly received the name ‘umbral dots’. 
However, like photospheric granules, UDs do not have 
a typical size or lifetime, the smallest (0.2") and shortest- 
lived (3 min) ones being the most numerous. 

The brightness of UDs in sunspots is related to the 
brightness of the surrounding diffuse background. On 
average, we have 

Tug © 3X Tap 


where /,q and J, are the intensities of the umbral dots and 
the diffuse background respectively. 

The brightest and fastest moving UDs (0.5 km s7') 
are found far from the DN. The fraction of umbral surface 
occupied by UDs, the so-called filling factor, does not 
exceed 10 per cent. 

UDs in pores (see figure 3) are similar to those in 
mature umbras but are longer-lived and brighter, and have 
a higher filling factor. 

During their lifetime, UDs show variations in 
brightness. Significant peaks at periods between 3 and 
34 min have been detected. 

At least some UDs are connected with other structures 
outside the umbra. This has been demonstrated by using 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


time series of images of mature sunspots, such as that in 
figure 2. These show bright elements in the penumbra 
(penumbral grains) moving into the umbra. A few cross 
the penumbra/umbra boundary, becoming UDs, which 
move further into the umbra. When they meet a DN, 
they brake their motion and disappear. It has been 
observed that the encounter of a UD with a DN produces 
a brightening of the UDs located on the opposite side 
of the nucleus. If these brightenings are produced by a 
perturbation propagating across the DN, the velocities of 
propagation would range between 2 and 7 kms“. 

A complementary view of the dynamics of UDs has 
been provided by time-series observations of solar pores. 
The existence of a direct interface between the photosphere 
and the umbra has allowed the possible relation between 
granules and UDs to be studied. Small granules located 
close to the pore are pushed by the mesogranular flows 
and sometimes penetrate into the pore. From there they 
move inward as features similar to UDs. 


Light bridges 

Umbral cores are crossed by bright structures that in some 
cases completely split the umbra into two separate umbral 
cores. Such features were named bridges because they 
were originally interpreted as structures overlying the 
umbra and were thought to consist of facular material. 
Nowadays we know that they are an intrinsic part of 
the sunspot and represent the first clear manifestation of 
sunspot decay. The oscillations (see SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS 
ANDSEISMOLOGY) observed in LBs are not in phase with those 
of the adjacent UCs; this supports the idea that, although 
both are at the same level in the atmosphere, they are 
physically different structures. 

LBs are classified, according to their width, as: 


(a) Faint light bridges (FLBs; also known as ‘umbral 
bridges’): These are narrow bright streamers, which 
do not split the umbra. Their brightness is similar 
to, or lower than, that of the penumbra. FLBs show 
granule-like structures, ~ 0.5” wide, similar by size 
to UDs and small granules observed in fields of 
abnormal granulation. 

(b) Strong light bridges (SLBs; also known as ‘photo- 

spheric bridges’): Broad structures (>2”) which cross 
the umbra, dividing it into two or more UCs. Their 
brightness is related to their width, and reaches pho- 
tospheric values for the broadest ones. 
SLBs show two different populations of granules. 
One family consists of structures of sizes similar to 
those of FLBs, and the other with granules similar 
in size to photospheric granules. The second family 
begins to dominate with increasing width. 


In complex 6 sunspots, bridges with filamentary 
structure, joining umbral cores of different magnetic 
polarity, are observed. For this reason they are called 
‘penumbral bridges’. They represent a different physical 
process and will not be considered further here. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Umbra: Structure and Evolution 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A unified view of umbral fine structure 
Table 1 summarizes the main observed properties of 
sunspot fine structure. 


Table 1. Characteristics of the main fine structures observed in 
sunspots (excluding pores). For LBs the size and brightness 
correspond to the individual grains, and the lifetime to the 
whole structure. The brightnesses are wavelength dependent 
and here are indicated as a fraction of the mean photospheric 
intensity in the green spectral range. 


Structure Size(’) Brightness Lifetime 
SLB 1.2 0.6-1.0 Days 
FLB 0.5 0.5-0.7 

DN 1.5 0.1-0.4 Days 
UD <0.60 0.2-1.0 Minutes 


All these different acronyms, structures and proper- 
ties are probably just a manifestation of the same physical 
process seen at different levels. In the framework of the 
cluster model of sunspots (see SUNSPOT MODELS) this process 
could be the penetration of field-free material from below 
the solar surface into the sunspot photosphere as a conse- 
quence of the weakening of the sunspot magnetic field. 

We can present the following picture of the formation 
and decay of a sunspot: 

The magnetic flux emerging from the bottom of 
the convection zone appears in the photosphere in a 
fragmented form. A sunspot is formed by the coalescence 
of different bundles of magnetic flux or sunspot fragments, 
which are held together by magnetic buoyancy. 

Some physical parameters associated with the 
emergence, such as the twisting of the bundles or the 
amount of emergent magnetic flux, determine the internal 
magnetic and thermal structure of the sunspot in the 
subphotospheric layers, where the fragments preserve 
their individuality. 

In places where the fragments cannot be held together, 
the subphotospheric material will start to penetrate the 
photosphere giving rise to the observed bright structures 
in the sunspot umbra. The brightness, size and motion 
of these structures will depend on the strength and 
inclination of the magnetic field in the surrounding areas. 

We can assume the existence of two different types 
of UDs: (a) dark and slow-moving UDs located in and 
between dark nuclei, which are produced by intrinsic 
instabilities of the umbra and (b) bright and _fast- 
moving UDs embedded in a relatively bright DB in the 
peripheral parts of the the umbra, and possibly originating 
from the penetration of penumbral grains and/or small 
photospheric granules. 

Some UDs are aligned to form FLBs in the interstices 
of the sunspot fragments. Later, some of these FLBs 
become wider and brighter, converting to SLBs and 
producing the splitting of a UC. In these areas the re- 
establishment of normal photospheric conditions starts, 
which means the presence of granulation. Sunspots witha 
larger area occupied by bright fine structures suffer a more 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


rapid decay. The erosion of the sunspot boundaries by 
the adjacent granules and the splitting of umbral cores by 
LBs is the observational fingerprint of the sunspot decay, 
combined with the outward flow of the moving magnetic 
features. 

All these phases should be controlled by the 
mechanisms that hold together the different components 
of a sunspot in subphotospheric layers. In the near future, 
improvement in the techniques of local helioseismology 
(See SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY) could reveal 
the sub-photospheric component, i.e. the roots, of the 
observed fine structures in the sunspot umbra. So 
far, downflows have been observed in these layers, 
which could make possible the cohesion of the sunpots 
fragments. 

Most of these evolutionary links between umbral 
fine structures remain to be observed throughout the full 
evolution of a single sunspot and we probably need to wait 
for the operation of a large solar telescope in space. 

From the proposed scheme we can expect a reduction 
in magnetic field and the presence of upward motions 
in the bright structures. In fact, magnetic field reduced 
by 20-40% relative to the surrounding umbra has been 
observed in SLBs, also showing more inclined field lines 
giving rise to a canopy-like structure. A reduction of 
1-20% has also been observed in regions rich in UDs, 
but without any fluctuations corresponding to individual 
UDs. This can be explained by taking into account the 
fact that the continuum (where the UDs are observed) is 
formed deeper in the photosphere than the spectral lines, 
where the velocity and magnetic fields are measured. 

Instead of penetrative convection in a cluster model 
of sunspots, we can also assume that the underlying 
physical process consists of convection in the presence 
of a coherent magnetic field (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: 
MAGNETOCONVECTION). In this case, the theoretical prediction 
is also coherent with the observational view of umbral 
bright features presented here, and we cannot decide 
at present which of these two mechanisms, penetrative 
convection or magnetoconvection, is the right one. 


Bibliography 

Blanchflower S M, Rucklidge A M and Weiss N O 1998 
Modelling photospheric magnetoconvection Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 301 593-608 

Bray R J and Loughhead R E 1967 Sunspots (London: 
Chapman and Hall) 

Bray R J and Loughhead R E 1979 Sunspots (New York: 
Dover) (reprint) 

Leka K D M 1997 The vector magnetic fields and 
thermodynamics of sunspot light bridges: the case 
for field-free disruptions in sunspots Astrophys. J. 484 
900-19 

Muller R 1992 Fine structure of umbrae and penumbrae 
Sunspots: Theory and Observations ed JH Thomas and 
N O Weiss (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 175-94 

Sobotka M 1997 Sunspots seen at high spatial resolution 
Advances in Solar Physics Euroconference (Astron. Soc. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspot Umbra: Structure and Evolution ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Pacific Conf. Proc. 118) ed D Schmieder, J A del Toro 
Iniesta and M Vazquez (San Francisco: Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific) pp 258-73 

Sobotka M, Bonet J A and Vazquez M 1993 A High- 
resolution study of inhomogeneities in sunspot 
umbrae Astrophys. J. 415 832-46 


Manuel Vazquez 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Sunspots 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspots 


Sunspots are the sites of strong magnetic fields at the 
surface of the Sun. They are visible as features that appear 
dark because they are cooler than the surrounding SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE, Owing to partial suppression of convective 
energy transport by the magnetic field. Sunspots are 
distinguished from sunspot pores by having a filamentary 
SUNSPOT PENUMBRA Surrounding a dark sUNsPOT UMBRA. Their 
diameters range from 3600 km to 50000 km and a typical 
spot survives for less than a week, though some large spots 
persist for several months. Spots are the most prominent 
signs of solar magnetic activity, and they have been 
observed systematically since telescopes were invented in 
the seventeenth century. They occur in bands centered 
on the equator that extend to latitudes of +30° and their 
distribution varies with the soLaR cycLE, which has an 
average period of about 11 years. Although sunspots cover 
less than 0.1% of the solar surface there are other stars that 
are similar to the Sun but much more active, possessing 
starspots that cover more than half their surfaces (see 
SOLAR-STELLAR CONNECTION). 


Historical introduction 

Though there are early Chinese records of sunspots their 
modern history begins in 1611. In that year Johann 
Fabricius, Christoph Scheiner, Galileo Galilei and Johann 
Kepler all turned their telescopes to the Sun and found 
sunspots. Moreover, Galileo interpreted their motion 
across the visible disk as evidence that the Sun was itself 
rotating with an apparent period of about 27 days (see 
figure 1). He also realized that although they were dark 
relative to their surroundings they were nevertheless as 
bright as the brightest regions of the Moon. The spots 
excited considerable interest, which persisted throughout 
the century. Many observers noticed that sunspots were 
less frequent between 1645 and 1715, and the record of 
routine observations at the Paris Observatory confirms 
that this episode of reduced activity (the Maunder 
Minimum) was indeed a real effect. 

Interest lapsed in the eighteenth century. The early 
observers had already distinguished the dark central 
umbra from the annular penumbra but it was not until 
1769 that Alexander Wilson noticed that spots appeared 
increasingly foreshortened as they rotated towards the 
limb of the Sun. He correctly interpreted this as showing 
that the visible surface of a spot is depressed relative to 
the surrounding photosphere (see SUNSPOTS: WILSON EFFECT). 
Further progress came when William Herschel constructed 
his 10 ft telescope and used it to observe sunspots in much 
greater detail: he asserted that they were openings in the 
solar surface which revealed a cooler layer that might be 
habitable. Heinrich Schwabe, after observing assiduously 
for 17 years, announced in 1843 that the incidence of 
sunspots varied cyclically with a period of about 11 years; 
this pattern was confirmed by Richard Carrington, who 
also noted that the spots first appeared at latitudes of 
around +30° and then filled zones that expanded towards 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


©, Decembris, 
1 Tennariy. 2626. 


a Se 
7 MDCK, 
Lut, Image ob In Cellegis Romane Secictatis 


Lercation 5: && 


fi 


f pak 
Z ‘ \ 
Curfus Macularam ass, Dec: anmaéas,ad 7, lan: anni 5626. 7 


fresilis alite aliers, #unoTom,, \ 


18 aseeest SF tee fxr i 
“ao DECEMBER. 1635. TANVAR wa. Boeidens/ 
eee (oto D_H.O£L | D-H. OE ; 

AOriens. ) Sm ge a Ee adage — tae. temp — bea. f 

" Vim. ge he woe, tee demand — ae. aF. f 

‘ ig. — E38. ate. o re. 4f. ‘a 
a a 16m. __ 32,7. i 
: sam. 40.70. Him — tae, 
' Fim ieh — tie O asnm gd — 8-34. Fem E on 17. 4F ao 
; ~ : we 
= . 
— a — 
es Ww a 


Figure 1. Diagram showing spots moving across the disk of the 
Sun as it rotates, from Scheiner’s Rosa Ursina sive Sol, 1628. 
(Courtesy of the Royal Astronomical Society.) 


the equator, before contracting and then disappearing at 
sunspot minimum, as spots of the next cycle appeared at 
higher latitudes. He also established that the Sun did not 
rotate uniformly and that the rotation period was shortest 
for spots in the vicinity of the equator (See SOLAR INTERIOR: 
ROTATION). 

The development of spectroscopy transformed the 
study of the Sun. Joseph Fraunhofer had discovered 
absorption lines in the solar spectrum in 1814 and Gustav 
Kirchhoff realized that they revealed the composition 
of the solar atmosphere; by 1860 Norman Lockyer 
and Angelo Secchi were comparing spectra of sunspots 
with those from the surrounding photosphere. At the 
turn of the century George Ellery Hale developed the 
spectroheliograph to produce images of the solar surface in 
a single spectral line and in 1908 he exploited the ZEEMAN 
EFFECT (splitting of a spectral line in a magnetic field) to 
measure the magnetic field in sunspots. The Doppler 
shift associated with radial outflows in the penumbra (see 
SUNSPOTS: EVERSHED EFFECT) was detected about a year later. 
Since then, observations have been dominated by the drive 
to obtain more detailed spectroscopic results and higher 
spatial resolution—from the ground, from balloons, and 
increasingly from space. 

These results have stimulated theoretical develop- 
ments. Ludwig Biermann first suggested that sunspots 
were cool because convection, which supplies energy to 
the normal photosphere, was inhibited by their strong 
magnetic fields. The subsequent formulation of MAGNE- 
TOHYDRODYNAMICS by Hannes Alfvén and Thomas Cowling 
led to a description of this interaction which has been ex- 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tended through numerical modelling of nonlinear mag- 
netoconvection (see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: MAGNETOCON- 
VECTION). In parallel with this, the work of Eugene Parker 
and others has led to an understanding of hydromagnetic 
DYNAMO THEORY as an explanation for global features of the 
sunspot cycle. 


Sunspot groups and active regions 
Sunspots typically appear in groups like that shown 
in figure 2. Frequently there is a dominant pair of 
spots, oriented roughly parallel to the solar equator, 
which start close together and move apart as the group 
evolves, achieving separations of up to 20°. Normally the 
preceding spot (in the sense of the Sun’s rotation) is much 
more prominent than the follower and has a longer lifetime 
(See SUNSPOT EVOLUTION). Spot groups lie within SOLAR ACTIVE 
REGIONS, containing pores and smaller magnetic features 
that give rise to bright faculae and fine-scale filigree 
in the solar photosphere (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: FACULAE; 
FILIGREE). There is a continuous family of isolated magnetic 
features that can be parametrized by the magnetic flux 
that they contain. The smallest flux elements have 
fluxes of 0.001 TWb (10’7 Mx) and diameters of about 
100 km, with fields of up to 0.15 T (or 1.5 kG)—sufficient 
to balance the external gas pressure, so that the flux 
tubes are almost completely evacuated at the photosphere 
(See SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). These flux 
elements nestle between the convection cells that give rise 
to the photospheric GRANULATION. Pores are larger: they are 
isolated umbras, both darker and cooler than the normal 
photosphere, with fields of around 2000 G and fluxes of up 
to 7 TWb. Larger flux concentrations invariably develop 
the filamentary penumbra that surrounds the umbra and 
distinguishes sunspots from pores. The lifetimes of 
sunspot groups range from a few days to several months. 
Although most sunspots survive for less than a week there 
are examples of large individual spots that survive for 
much longer and return several times as the Sun rotates. 
The polarities of the magnetic fields in sunspots 
follow Hale’s law. Within any group or active region the 
preceding and following spots have oppositely directed 
fields and most of the magnetic flux that emerges from 
one side of the region returns back through the other. At 
any stage of the solar cycle the preceding and following 
spots have opposite polarities in the northern and southern 
hemispheres. Thus there is a strong azimuthal (or 
toroidal) field emerging through the photosphere which is 
antisymmetric about the equator (See SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD). 
The sense of these fields reverses at the end of each 11 year 
activity cycle, so that the full magnetic cycle has a period 
of 22 years. 


The structure of individual sunspots 

Photospheric structure 

The diameters of sunspots can extend, as in one famous 
case, up to 130000 km—approximately one-tenth of the 
solar diameter or ten times the diameter of the Earth. 
A typical well-developed sunspot, like that in figure 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


2, is roughly circular and has a diameter of 20000- 
30 000 km. Spots have structures that scale with the radius 
R, depending only on the ratio r/R, where r is the distance 
from the center of the spot. The central dark umbra has 
a radius 0.4R and a temperature of about 4300 K, 2100 K 
below that of the surrounding photosphere; as a result 
it radiates at only 24% of the normal photospheric rate. 
Surprisingly, the umbral intensity varies with the solar 
cycle: in the infrared it increases by 20% from sunspot 
minimum to sunspot maximum. Within the umbra there 
are small bright features (umbral dots) with diameters in 
the range from 1800 km to the limit that can be resolved and 
with a typical value of about 250 km. Their temperatures 
are comparable with that of the undisturbed photosphere 
and the larger ones have lifetimes of 30-60 min. 

The umbra is surrounded by a filamentary penumbra, 
occupying 85% of the total area and with an average 
intensity that is 75% of the photospheric value. Figure 
2 shows the irregular filamentary striations, with local 
intensity ratios varying from 60% in the dark filaments 
to 95% in bright filaments. The latter are made up of 
aligned bright grains that migrate towards the umbra with 
velocities of up to 0.5 km s“!, while the dark filaments 
include clouds that move out towards the edge of the 
penumbra. Spectral lines from matter within the dark 
filaments show Doppler shifts that correspond to outflows 
with velocities that rise to a maximum of 6 kms“! at the 
edge of the spot (the Evershed effect). 

The magnetic field at the center of a sunspot is nearly 
vertical, with a magnitude of up to 0.3 T (see sUNsPOT 
MAGNETIC FIELDS). As r increases the azimuthally averaged 
field becomes increasingly inclined, reaching an angle of 
70° at the outer edge of the penumbra, while its strength 
decreases to around 0.1 T before dropping abruptly to 
zero within a distance too small to be resolved. The fine 
structure of the penumbral field is amazingly complex, for 
the field directions in the bright and dark filaments differ 
by 30-35°, with the dark filaments more nearly horizontal. 
Near the umbra, where the mean field is inclined at an 
angle of 45° to the vertical, the bright filaments have an 
inclination of only 30°, while the dark filaments are almost 
horizontal (and parallel to the Evershed flow) at the outer 
boundary. There is as yet no adequate explanation for this 
interlocking comb-like structure. 


The atmosphere above sunspots 

Observations made in the Ha line of the hydrogen Balmer 
series (A = 6562 A) show a rich pattern of radial 
fibrils extending outwards from a sunspot to form the 
‘superpenumbra’. This pattern starts at the edge of the 
umbra and fills an annular region with radius about 
2R. The fibrils exhibit time-dependent behavior with 
ringlike features propagating radially outwards, referred 
to as running penumbral waves (see SUNSPOT PENUMBRA: 
STRUCTURE AND Activity). The Ha line is formed in the 
CHROMOSPHERE at heights around 3000 km above the solar 
surface and the fibrils represent the intersections of slender 
magnetic flux loops with this region of the chromosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. A sunspot group, showing a large preceding spot accompanied by a smaller companion, at top right, and a cluster of small 
spots and pores with opposite polarity at bottom left. This image, taken in the CH G-band by T Berger and G Scharmer at the Swedish 
Vacuum Solar Telescope on La Palma, covers a region 120000 km square on the surface of the Sun with north towards the top left 
corner. The solar granulation is clearly visible and the small bright points in the intergranular lanes are the sites of locally intense 
magnetic fields. For an enlarged image of the big sunspot see SUNSPOT PENUMBRA. (Courtesy of T Berger, Lockheed—Martin Solar and 


Astrophysics Laboratory, Palo Alto.) 


These loops have one footpoint within the spot and may 
return at a great distance from it. Many of them extend up 
into the hot corona and are visible as CORONAL LOoPs in the 
extreme ultraviolet and in soft x-rays. 


The atmosphere above a sunspot supports two 
different types of oscillations (see SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND 
SEISMOLOGY). Those with periods around 3 min are resonant 
oscillations of the magnetized umbral atmosphere itself, 
while the 5 min oscillations are driven by p-mode 
oscillations in the convection zone around the spot. The 
latter provide a means of exploiting HELIOSEISMOLOGY to 
probe the structure of the spot below the photosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Subphotospheric structure 

Continuum observations reveal a surface of constant 
optical depth. In the umbra of a sunspot this surface lies 
about 500 km below its level in the ambient photosphere. 
This Wilson depression implies that the gas pressure in 
the umbra is much less than that outside the spot at the 
same geometric level, and therefore that magnetic stresses 
are required in order to maintain hydrostatic equilibrium 
in any SUNSPOT MODEL. Since magnetic flux is conserved, 
the fields that emerge through the surface of a sunspot 
must continue below the photosphere; the systematic 
behavior of sunspot groups indicates that the resulting 
flux tube extends deep into the convection zone (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: CONVECTION ZONE) and local helioseismology (see 
SOLAR INTERIOR: LOCAL HELIOSEISMOLOGY) confirms that there 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is a coherent flux tube for at least 10000 km below the 
surface. Within this flux tube energy is carried upwards 
by convection, though radiation takes over just below 
the umbral photosphere (see SOLAR INTERIOR: CONVECTION 
THEORY). Thus the flux tube can be regarded either as an 
inhomogeneous plug or as a tight cluster of isolated flux 
tubes, separated by weaker fields or even (in the limit) by 
field-free plasma. Either picture is compatible with the 
observations. 

Outside the sunspot, energy is transported by convec- 
tion and several different horizontal scales, correspond- 
ing to granulation, mesogranulation and supergranula- 
tion, are visible at the photosphere (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: 
GRANULATION; MESOGRANULATION; SUPERGRANULATION). A well- 
developed sunspot is surrounded by an annular moat 
cell—essentially an abnormally large and long-lived su- 
pergranule, stabilized by the flux tube at its core—whose 
diameter may be twice that of the spot. Within the moat 
there is a vigorous radial outflow which sweeps magnetic 
fields to its periphery, leaving the moat free of magnetic 
fields apart from small features (with both polarities) that 
migrate outwards as the spot decays (see SUNSPOTS: MOVING 
MAGNETIC FEATURES AND MOAT FLOW). The field inclination at 
the photosphere indicates that the flux tube contracts be- 
low the sunspot. Models imply that the radius of the un- 
derlying flux tube is less than 0.5R, so the energy radiated 
from the penumbra can be drawn predominantly from 
the plasma below the magnetopause (the sharp bound- 
ary of the flux tube). Such curved boundaries are liable 
to interchange instabilities but here the magnetopause is 
strongly inclined and is stabilized by MAGNETIC BUOYANCY. 
It is nevertheless clear that the observed dynamical sta- 
bility of sunspots requires the presence of a collar around 
the flux tube at some greater depth. Recent observational 
and theoretical results suggest that there may be a slender 
counterflow beneath the penumbra and within the moat 
cell. The resulting inflow could act as a collar and so pre- 
serve the spot. 


Magnetoconvection 

Sunspots provided the original motivation for studying 
the effects of magnetic fields on convection in conducting 
fluids. The simplest models assume the presence of an 
imposed vertical field (as in the umbra), which always 
reduces the efficiency of convection. If the field is strong 
enough, convection is completely suppressed but as the 
field strength is reduced, convection sets in, either as 
oscillations or as steady overturning motion. It is easily 
shown that radiative transport is not able to supply even 
the reduced energy flux emerging from the umbra, so 
convection must take over just below the visible surface. 
Numerical experiments on nonlinear magnetoconvection 
suggest that the umbral dots are just chaotic plumes of hot 
rising gas that penetrate into the photosphere. 

As the field becomes more inclined the pattern of 
convection changes, and rolls with their axes parallel to the 
horizontal component of the field are preferred. In simple 
pore models the inclination increases with increasing flux 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


until it reaches a critical value that favors the development 
of radial filaments and leads to the abrupt formation of a 
penumbra. This new form of time-dependent filamentary 
convection is apparently able to transport energy through 
the penumbra from the magnetopause. 


Systematic properties of sunspots 

The solar cycle 

The butterfly diagram in figure 3 shows the incidence of 
sunspots as a function of latitude and time. Although 
individual sunspots and active regions are irregularly 
distributed, their average behavior is quite systematic 
(see SUNSPOT CLASSIFICATION). The number of spots is 
conventionally measured by the sunspot number, an 
arbitrary measure of activity that is well correlated with 
sunspot areas (shown in figure 3), as well as with, 
for example, SOLAR FLARES or coronal x-ray and radio 
emission (see SOLAR ACTIVITY INDICES). Since 1700 the sunspot 
number has varied cyclically, with a well-defined mean 
period of 11.1 years. The solar cycle varies irregularly 
in amplitude but the available timeseries is not long 
enough to establish whether this variation is deterministic 
(chaotic) or stochastic. 

Since sunspots are caused by magnetic fields erupting 
from the interior of the Sun and those fields obey Hale’s 
law, the underlying magnetic cycle has a mean period of 
22 years. Magnetic activity is a common feature of stars 
with deep outer convection zones and cyclic activity is 
found in middle-aged, slow rotators like the Sun. The 
scale and systematic properties of active regions suggest 
that they are formed near the base of the convection zone 
or even in a region of weak convective overshoot and 
it is generally accepted that these oscillating fields are 
maintained by a hydromagnetic dynamo. 

The solar dynamo is probably located near the 
interface between the convection zone and the underlying 
radiative zone, where there are steep radial gradients in 
angular velocity (See SOLAR INTERIOR). As strong toroidal 
fields, with strengths as high as 10 T, are built up 
they eventually become liable to MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC 
INSTABILITIES driven by magnetic buoyancy. These 
instabilities could grow until they eventually liberate 
isolated M-shaped loops of toroidal flux. The loops would 
float upwards through the convection zone, developing 
a Q-shape as they expand, and then break through the 
surface to form active regions and sunspots (see SOLAR 
INTERIOR: EMERGING MAGNETIC FLUX TUBES). 


Origin of cyclic magnetic activity 

Dynamo theory provides a mechanism for cyclic reversals 
of the toroidal magnetic field, on a timescale very much 
shorter than that for decay through ohmic resistivity 
in the Sun (which is comparable to its lifetime on the 
main sequence). This mechanism relies on two physical 
processes. The first is straightforward: a meridional 
(or poloidal) field in a differentially rotating star will be 
drawn out to give a strong toroidal component. The 
second process invokes cyclonic eddies to generate a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SON 


SUNSPOT AREA IN EQUAL AREA LATITUDE STRIPS (% OF STRIP AREA) 


M>0.0% W>O0.1% —>1.0% 


30N 


908 
1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 
DATE 


1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 


Figure 3. Butterfly diagram showing the observed distribution of sunspots in latitude and time since 1875. At the beginning of the 
activity cycle spots appear around latitudes of +30° and by sunspot maximum activity extends to the equator. The zones of activity 
then dwindle until, at sunspot minimum, the last spots of the old cycle appear at low latitudes as the new cycle starts. The distribution 
of spots is very nearly symmetrical about the equator. (Courtesy of D H Hathaway, NASA/MSFC.) 


reversed poloidal field by distorting the toroidal field; these 
are convective plumes with a mean HELICITY imparted by 
the Coriolis force. The cycle can then proceed. Most 
calculations have relied on a simplified form of the theory 
(mean field electrodynamics), which captures the essence 
of these processes and yields solutions that reproduce the 
essential features of the solar cycle (see DYNAMOS: SOLAR AND 
STELLAR). 

The key parameter in stellar dynamo models is 
the angular velocity 2, which controls both differential 
rotation and helicity. If Q is small, the field-free state 
is stable to magnetic perturbations. Dynamo action is 
only possible if Q exceeds a critical value at which cyclic 
activity appears as a magnetic instability. As Q is increased 
the oscillations grow in amplitude, and more complicated 
patterns of activity may appear. In fact this sequence 
follows the evolution of a star like the Sun in reverse, 
since it arrives on the main sequence spinning rapidly 
and magnetically very active, and is then spun down by 
magnetic braking (see SUN AS ASTAR and SOLAR EVOLUTION). 


Modulation of cyclic activity 

The earliest sunspot observations show that the cycle 
operated then as now but spots became less frequent 
after 1645 until in the last decade of that century only 
one spot was observed. Moreover, there were relatively 
few spots in the cycle that reached its maximum in 1706 
and almost all of those were in one hemisphere (unlike 
the butterflies in figure 3). There were many observers 
active during this period and there is no doubt that this 
episode of reduced activity—the Maunder Minimum— 
was real. Fortunately it is possible to extend the sunspot 
record back by using proxy data: isotopes such as ''C 
and !°Be (which are preserved in trees and polar ice, 
respectively) are formed as a result of galactic cosmic 
rays impinging on the atmosphere. Since the cosmic ray 
protons are deflected by magnetic fields in the solar wind, 
the abundances of cosmogenic isotopes are anticorrelated 
with solar activity. The 'C and 'Be records show not 
only the Maunder Minimum but also many previous 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


grand minima recurring aperiodically every few hundred 
years for the past 10 000 years (see SOLAR ACTIVITY: LONG-TERM 
RECORDS). 

Nonlinear dynamo models are able to reproduce this 
pattern of aperiodic modulation. As Q is increased, 
the periodic cycles may themselves become unstable to 
oscillations with a much longer period. This transition 
leads to periodically modulated cycles. As Q is further 
increased, the amplitude of the modulation grows until 
there is a further transition to behavior that is chaotic. 
Symmetry about the equator may also be broken, 
especially as solutions are emerging from grand minima. 


Sunspots and climatic change 

Ever since sunspots were discovered there have been 
speculations as to their effect on climate. Satellite 
observations show that the solar luminosity varies with 
the sunspot cycle and is greater by about 0.15% at 
sunspot maximum. The estimated increase in SOLAR 
IRRADIANCE since the Maunder Minimum has a similar 
value, which might cause an increase of around 0.3 K in 
global temperature. Comparisons between the sunspot 
and climatic records suggest that temperature fluctuations 
are indeed significantly correlated both with the 11 year 
cycle and with its long-term modulation. The extent to 
which solar activity has contributed to climatic change is 
controversial (See SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL CONNECTION: LONG-TERM 
AND SHORT-TERM CLIMATE VARIABILITY). It seems likely that this 
has, until recently, been a major effect but that global 
warming is now predominantly due to greenhouse gases 
released by burning fossil fuels. 


Bibliography 

Bray R J and Loughhead R E 1964 Sunspots (London: 
Chapman and Hall) (reprinted Dover Publications 
1979) 

Priest E R 1982 Solar Magnetohydrodynamics (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Proctor M R E and Gilbert A D (ed) 1994 Lectures on 
Solar and Planetary Dynamos (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Tayler R J 1997 The Sun as a Star (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Thomas J H and Weiss N O (eds) 1994 Sunspots: Theory and 
Observations (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


Nigel Weiss 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 6 


Sunspots: Evershed Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspots: Evershed Effect 


The Evershed Effect is an observational effect in the 
penumbra of sunspots consisting in displacements of the 
spectral line profiles towards either shorter wavelengths 
(that is, blueshifts) in the zones closest to the Sun’s 
disk center or larger wavelengths (that is, redshifts) in 
those zones closest to the solar limb. Since the first 
detection in 1909, this effect was correctly interpreted 
by its discoverer Evershed (1909) as the consequence 
of mostly horizontal movements of material emanating 
radially from the spot. Soon after the discovery, a strong 
variation of the effect with height was detected: the flow 
was directed inwards when observed in spectral lines 
formed in the high layers of the sunspot’s CHROMOSPHERE 
(the so-called inverse Evershed effect; see Maltby (1997) for 
a review). From then on, the Evershed effect has been one 
of the most prominent dynamical phenomena we see on 
the Sun and is in fact superimposed on several others (most 
certainly caused by different physical mechanisms) that 
take place in the penumbra (see SUNSPOT OSCILLATIONS AND 
SEISMOLOGY and SUNSPOT PENUMBRA: STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITY). 
Hence, disentangling the physical process which gives rise 
to the Evershed effect is one of the most exciting challenges 
facing solar physics. A very good account of current 
knowledge and problems, as well as relevant references 
on this topic, can be found in the two recent reviews by 
Thomas (1994) and by Maltby (1997). 


Main observational features 
Early in this century, the widespread belief was that 
sunspots were made up of strong cyclones or whirls. 
This was indeed what prompted G E Hale to look for 
magnetic fields in them (see SUNSPOT MAGNETIC FIELDS) under 
the assumption of the presence of free, electrically charged 
particles rotating around the spot axis (the magnetic field 
would emerge in very much the same way as in today’s 
electromagnets). With the aim of detecting such gyrating 
motions, Evershed undertook the observation of several 
FRAUNHOFER LINES in different spots as they crossed the solar 
surface as a result of solar rotation. 

All the basic observational features were established 
already as early as this pioneering work. 


(i) All the spots show line displacements of the same 
order of magnitude, at the same distance from the 
disk center, no matter the solar hemisphere they are 
in. 

(ii) The larger the heliocentric angle (angular distance 
from the disk center) the larger the shifts, which 
eventually disappear when the spot is located very 
close to the disk center. 

(iii) Blueshifts always occur in the penumbral half closest 
to the disk center and redshifts in the half closest to 
the solar limb. No shifts are present at 90° from the 
direction of the disk center. 

(iv) The largest shifts take place in the outermost parts 
of the penumbra and seem to cease abruptly at the 
visible penumbral border. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


From these observational facts he concluded that the 
material motions must essentially be horizontal (parallel 
to the solar surface) as witnessed by the center-to-limb 
variation (see SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: CENTER-TO-LIMB VARIATION) 
of the line displacements which only give information 
about the component of the vector velocity along the line 
of sight. Any vortex motion had to be discarded in view 
of feature 3. 

In 1913, C E St John (see reference in, for example 
Maltby (1997)) reported the observation of 506 lines which 
confirmed Evershed’s results, and he complemented them 
by finding a proportionality between wavelengths and 
displacements, clearly obeying the DOPPLER EFFECT due to 
material motions. Moreover, he found that stronger lines 
(assumed to be formed higher in the atmosphere) show 
the opposite effect; that is, material motions towards the 
central parts of sunspot umbrae. Hence, outward motions 
were confined to the photosphere while inward motions 
were located in the chromosphere, with a probably neutral 
velocity layer in between. 

Since those early days, the observational picture of 
the Evershed effect remains virtually unchanged, while, 
naturally, more evidence has been compiled and better 
details obtained because of the increasing degree of 
sophistication in instrumentation and spectral resolution. 
Thus, the effect is known to be time dependent and likely 
to be concentrated in the dark penumbral filaments. Line- 
of-sight velocities of up to 6 or 7 km s~! (and typical 
values around 3-4 km s~!) have been observed and it is 
currently known that absorption lines in the penumbra 
show asymmetric profiles (i.e. that the line wings are more 
shifted than the line cores). Such asymmetries have been 
interpreted as a consequence of a gradient with height of 
the line-of-sight component of the material velocity and of 
the vector magnetic field, hence confirming St John’s and 
Evershed’s results in a modern way. In figure 1 we see 
the typical shape of the four Stokes parameter profiles /, Q, 
U and V (see SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD: INFERENCE BY POLARIMETRY) 
observed in a sample point of the limb-side penumbra. 
The spectral region shows two neutral iron lines located 
at 630.15 nm and 630.25 nm (in a laboratory wavelength 
scale denoted by dotted lines), plus two telluric lines from 
atomic oxygen (the thinner ones in the / plot, formed in 
the Earth’s atmosphere and, hence, with no polarization 
signal in the Q, U and V plots). The Stokes parameters 
are normalized to the local quiet sun continuum intensity. 
Note the redshift and the strong asymmetry displayed by 
the solar profiles. (The shapes of the asymmetric Q and U 
profiles conspire, in this particular case, to hide apparently 
the shift in wavelength.) 

The essentially horizontal character of the material 
motions is in fairly good agreement with the increasingly 
horizontal magnetic field lines present in penumbrae 
as one moves away from the sunspot center, since the 
magnetic field should be frozen to the solar plasma, 
ie. the gas should follow the magnetic field lines 
(see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS). Perhaps the most intriguing 
phenomenon is the claimed sharp disappearance of any 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Evershed Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


VII, 


-0.01F 4 


-0.02 
-0.10 


-0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 


Wavelength (nm) - 630.2 


VA, 


-0.10 0.10 


-0.05 0.00 0.05 


0.00 0.05 0.10 


-0.05 
Wavelength (nm) - 630.2 


Figure 1. Stokes parameter profiles (in units of the quiet Sun continuum intensity) of two neutral iron lines at 630.15 and 630.25 nm as 
observed in a sample point of the limb-side penumbra. Laboratory wavelengths are marked with dotted, straight lines. The spot was 
observed in June 1992 some 72° away from the disk center. The observations were obtained using the Advanced Stokes Polarimeter 
(ASP) of the National Solar Observatory—High Altitude Observatory working at the VIT telescope of the Sacramento Peak 


Observatory (Sunspot, New Mexico). (Courtesy of V Martinez Pillet.) 


Doppler signature outside the outer visible boundary 
of the penumbra: just inside this boundary, that is, in 
the outermost penumbra, it is where the line-of-sight 
velocities are largest (feature 4 above). If the Evershed 
effect is indeed the signature of a material flow, where 
does the mass flux go? 


More observational evidence and a reconciling 
picture 

Some authors still assert that the Doppler signatures of 
the effect cannot be tracked down farther than 1 arcsec 
away from the penumbral limits. However, reports on 
tracing the Evershed effect beyond the outer penumbral 
rim started to appear in the scientific literature by the mid- 
1980s (Thomas 1994) and continue until today. Particularly 
interesting is the detection by Rimmele in 1995 (see Maltby 
(1997) for the reference) of Evershed motions taking 
place along narrow, elevated channels in the penumbra, 
some extending far beyond the outer penumbral rim. 
Through such channels, the material seems to be carried 
from an upstreaming footpoint, always located within 
the penumbra, towards a downstreaming footpoint 
more distant from the sunspot center. This detection 
was possible after careful examination of observations 
performed in two lines with fairly different sensitivity 
to the velocities at different atmospheric layers. The 
debate about whether or not the Evershed signatures 
continue away from the spot is certainly not caused by 
different spatial resolutions since observations with very 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


high resolution (about 350 km on the Sun) have been 
interpreted according to each possibility (see, e.g. Thomas 
(1994) for references). The discrepancy must stem from the 
different sensitivity to the sunspot atmospheric quantities 
(not only the line-of-sight velocity) of the observing and 
analysis techniques used by the various researchers. 

Further evidence of Evershed flows following the 
magnetic field lines has been obtained by Solanki, 
Montavon and Livingston in 1994 (see the reference 
in Thomas (1994)) with the detection of line-of-sight 
velocities of up to 2 km s-! in the magnetic ‘canopy’ 
which extends beyond the visible penumbral boundary 
and above the solar surface as seen in the white-light 
continuum. This detection offered an interesting solution 
to the aforementioned missing-mass problem, since those 
velocities could only be inferred from observations with 
spectral lines sensitive to the elevated layers of the canopy, 
remaining undetectable from observations of normal 
photospheric lines: the material could be carried away 
from the spot through the magnetic canopy. However, 
the exponential decrease of DENsITy with height in the 
solar atmosphere (see SOLAR ATMOSPHERE: EMPIRICAL MODELS 
and SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE) implies that this canopy solution 
is unlikely because only much higher velocities than the 
quoted value of 2 km s-! could account for the total 
mass flux carried within the limits of the penumbra (the 
mass flux is essentially an integral of the product between 
density and velocity). 

A reconciling observational picture was recently 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Evershed Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


25 


20 


15k 


Mm 


10 


180° 


135° 


90° 


45° 


(uy 


Figure 2. Map of the magnetic field inclination of a sunspot as measured from the vertical to the solar surface. The observations were 
obtained with the ASP in June 1992 and correspond to a spot located some 16° away from the disk center. Superimposed are contours 
of the largest line-of-sight velocities retrieved at the lowest optical layer observable (continuum optical depth unity): blueshifts are in 
dark lines (thick, —3 km s~1; thin, —1.5 km s~'), redshifts are in white lines (3 km s~!). The arrow points to the solar disk center. The 
outer visible boundary of the penumbra is indicated with a dashed line. Adapted from Nature (Westendorp Plaza et al 1997). 


obtained by Westendorp Plaza et al (1997) who, by using 
a novel analysis technique of the Stokes profiles, have 
been able to infer the variation with optical depth of the 
vector magnetic field and the line-of-sight velocity from 
an accurate spectropolarimetric map of a sunspot (see 
POLARIMETRY: SPECTROPOLARIMETRY). In this work, evidence 
has emerged that the Evershed effect (as well as the 
sunspot magnetic field) does not stop at the visible 
penumbral boundary in the lowest observable optical 
layer (in which the CONTINUOUS SPECTRUM is formed). 
Moreover, they found a strong correlation (almost all 
around the sunspot) between the velocities and the 
magnetic field inclination: blueshifts (upflows) are mostly 
located in the inner-middle penumbra where the magnetic 
field is pointing upwards, while redshifts (downflows) are 
mostly seen in outer zones, both inside and well outside 
the outer penumbral rim, where the vector magnetic 
field points downwards (see figure 2). A rough account 
of the mass flux inferred from their results yields an 
approximate mass conservation (within a factor 2 at 
maximum). Besides, their results at middle optical depths 
of the photosphere agree fairly well with those reported 
in former analyses of the problem which were unable to 
extract the information from the lower layers, codified in 
the observed Stokes profiles. 

After all these modern observations a more coherent 
picture of the photospheric Evershed effect emerges as 
depicted in the cartoon of figure 3. Most of the mass flux 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


/ fy 
a —| = j— 1 ff 
NTT I 


Figure 3. Cartoon (not to scale) of the (photospheric) penumbral 
structure with the Evershed flow channels (thick tubes with 
small arrows). The large-arrowed lines represent the magnetic 
field lines. The dashed line indicates the optical depth unity 
surface. The outer penumbral rim is marked with the dotted 
line. Adapted from Nature (Westendorp-Plaza et al 1997). 


is carried through arched magnetic flux tubes that re-enter 
the surface at the lower layers of the outer sunspot border 
(either inside or outside it). Some of the mass—but a much 
less significant fraction—follows less arched flux tubes 
that extend through the superpenumbral canopy, whose 
outer footpoints are likely to be located farther beyond the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Evershed Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


spot. At even higher layers, not represented in the figure, 
the inverse (chromospheric) Evershed effect takes place. 


The physical mechanism 

In the mid-1960s two prominent physical mechanisms 
were proposed to explain the observed Evershed effect (see 
references in Thomas (1994) and Maltby (1997)), namely, 
the siphon flow hypothesis and the wave hypothesis. 
In the first model, the gas is driven through an arched 
magnetic flux tube in whose ending footpoints a pressure 
difference is established: the gas flows from the higher- 
pressure footpoint to the lower-pressure one. This 
pressure difference must be produced by the different 
values of the magnetic field strength at the two ends of 
the tube: the existence of a magnetic field introduces a 
magnetic pressure which is proportional to the square of 
the field strength; hence, the flow is driven from the lower 
to the higher field strengths. This provides a very simple 
and neat explanation for the inverse Evershed effect as 
is currently accepted (Thomas 1994, Maltby 1997): high- 
lying (chromospheric) tubes connect the umbra (with an 
intense magnetic field) to the photosphere or other flux 
tubes out of the sunspot that have a lower field strength 
and then the flow is directed inwards. The photospheric 
Evershed effect was not that clearly explained, however. 
Prior to the 1990s, it was difficult observationally to find 
flux tubes out of the sunspot with magnetic fields strong 
enough to consider them as the ending footpoints of an 
outwardly directed, photospheric siphon flow. 

In the wave hypothesis, the characteristic Evershed 
line asymmetry would be caused by the (spatial and 
temporal) observational average of unresolved wave 
motions, i.e. there would be no true outward flows but 
an observational effect due to the limited resolution. 
Different types of waves have been proposed in attempts 
to fit the predictions to the whole observational evidence, 
but, ultimately, these models are not fully satisfactory 
since some of their ingredients (e.g. interface surfaces) or 
their predictions (e.g. horizontal wavelengths) are hardly 
realizables. Some other hypotheses, such as mixture 
between siphon flows and wave-pressure-driven flows 
or dynamic evolution of magnetic flux tubes in the 
penumbra, have very recently been proposed and need 
further check with observations. 

Alongside wave-based models, the siphon flow 
hypothesis has evolved remarkably in sophistication over 
the last few years. Siphon flow models have recently 
been proposed by Thomas (1994) and Montesinos and 
Thomas (1997) whose predictions are in fair agreement 
with the observational results of Westendorp Plaza 
etal (1997) reported above, thus providing significant 
theoretical support for this mechanism to be the physically 
responsible one for the currently known facts of the 
Evershed effect, in both the photosphere and the 
chromosphere. Perhaps, apart from refining the models 
so that they are really able to fit the observations, the 
only (apparently) missing ingredient is the observational 
determination of magnetic fields at the outer footpoints 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with larger strengths than those present in the middle 
penumbra—where the inner footpoints are located. 
However, this is not a drawback in the siphon flow 
hypothesis since observational measurements are only 
able to infer values of the vector magnetic field (and 
of the other quantities) at given optical depths, so that 
the observed footpoints do not correspond to the same 
gravitational potential. Proper observational evaluations 
of the geometrical stratification of the sunspot photosphere 
are needed (and expected) in the near future to shed some 
more light on this exciting problem. 


Bibliography 

Evershed J 1909 Radial movement in Sun-spots Mon. Not. 
R. Astron. Soc. 69 454-7 

Maltby P 1997 Dynamics of sunspots First Advances in 
Solar Physics Euroconference: Advances in the Physics 
of Sunspots (ASP Conf. Ser. 118) ed B Schmieder, J C 
del Toro Iniesta and M Vazquez (San Francisco, CA: 
Astronomy Society of the Pacific) pp 91-110 

Montesinos B and Thomas J H 1997 The Evershed effect in 
sunspots as a siphon flow along a magnetic flux tube 
Nature 390 485-7 

Thomas J H 1994 The cause of the Evershed in sunspots: 
flows or waves? Solar Surface Magnetism (NATO ASI 
Ser. C 433) ed RJ Rutten and CJ Schrijver (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) pp 219-35 

Westendorp Plaza C, del Toro Iniesta J C, Ruiz Cobo B, 
Martinez Pillet V, Lites B W and Skumanich A 1997 
Evidence for a downward mass flux in the penumbral 
region of a sunspot Nature 389 47-9 


Jose Carlos del Toro Iniesta 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Moving Magnetic Features and Moat Flow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspots: Moving Magnetic Features 
and Moat Flow 


Most mature suNspots and some large SUNSPOT PORES are 
surrounded, at least in part, by a zone which is free of 
stationary magnetic field (e.g. PLAGE, network) and which 
exhibits a radially outward horizontal mass flow. This 
zone is called a sunspot ‘moat’. The most notable features 
in the moat are small magnetic structures of mixed polarity 
called moving magnetic features (MMFs). These are 
transient phenomena that can appear anywhere in the 
moat but most often near the outer edge of the sunspot. 
They move outward, usually at a higher velocity than the 
average moat flow, until they either fade away or reach the 
outer boundary of the moat. 

Both sunspots and plages are also surrounded by 
zones that absorb acoustic power called ‘acoustic moats’. 
These are not covered in this article. 

Figure 1 shows an example of an isolated sunspot 
with a well-defined moat. This was a small, mature leader 
spot which was slowly decaying. The magnetogram 
on the right shows the spot’s negative polarity as black 
and opposite magnetic polarity as white. A broken and 
irregular circle of the same polarity of the spot surrounds 
it at a distance of about 15” (11 Mm). This is the outer 
boundary of the moat. The inner boundary is the edge of 
the SUNSPOT PENUMBRA. The MMFs are the small patches of 
magnetic field of both polarities within the moat annulus. 

Early investigators suggested that a moat and MMFs 
were associated only with decaying sunspots. However, 
subsequent work showed that at least a partial moat is 
generally present even in growing sunspots. Mature, 
isolated spots are more likely to have a symmetric moat 
geometry than young, developing spots or those in 
complicated active regions. The width of the moat scales 
with the size of the sunspot. 


Properties of MMFs 
MMs are best studied in movies with the highest possible 
spatial resolution. In addition to the magnetic signal, they 
are also visible as bright features in many photospheric 
lines, molecular bands such as the 3883 A CN bandhead 
and the wings of the Ca II H and K lines. The features are 
larger for lines formed higher in the atmosphere indicating 
a spreading with height. Very small bright footpoints 
are sometimes visible in the continuum and, with much 
more contrast, in G band images. The latter are taken in 
a 12 A band heavily populated by CH lines centered at 
4508 A. In these photospheric lines they look very much 
like small fragments of stationary magnetic field such as 
plage or enhanced network. However, in addition to their 
characteristic motions, MMFs differ by having little or no 
chromospheric or coronal emission associated with them. 
Many aspects of MMFs are near (or below) the limits of 
spatial resolution imposed by atmospheric seeing. Hence 
many details of how they form and evolve are still lacking. 
There seem to be at least three classes of MMFs that 
have been identified in movies. The most prominent 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


variety (type I for reference below) begin as small magnetic 
bipoles that erupt from below and then gradually separate. 
These can appear anywhere in the moat. A second type 
(II) consists of unipolar features that are shed from the 
edge of the sunspot. These have the same polarity as the 
spot and have been suggested as part of the sunspot decay 
mechanism. A third variety (type III) are higher-speed 
unipolar features with the opposite polarity to the sunspot 
that are associated with small, bright continuum points. 


Type I MMFs 

The type I MMFs are the best described. The early phase 
is visible as a small dark area (about 1000 km) in the upper 
photosphere as seen in broad-band (* 3 A) Ca II K line 
movies. With less contrast, this darkening is also visible 
in the continuum, showing dark fibrils characteristic of 
emerging magnetic field (see CHROMOSPHERE: FIBRILS). Over 
a period of about 10-20 min, the dark area expands 
and elongates into a spindle shape with a brightening 
appearing at each end. The latter are also easily visible in 
broad-band K line images and probably any line formed 
in the upper SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE or lower CHROMOSPHERE that 
shows bright plage. At this stage the new MMF is 2000- 
3000 km in size. The bright points are typically 500 km or 
larger as seen in the inner K line wings but may be only 
200 km or smaller in continuum or G band images which 
are formed deeper. Coincident with the bright points 
are two areas of magnetic field with opposite vertical 
components forming a bipole. These are assumed to be 
the footpoints of a magnetic loop arching between them. 
Before this stage, longitudinal magnetograms show little 
or no signal, consistent with a more horizontal field. This 
development of a type I MMF is shown in a set of space— 
time images in figure 2(b). The spatial part of these is a line 
spanning the two bright points labeled b in figure 2(a). The 
initial dark patch is labeled 1, the inner footpoint 2 and the 
outer 3. The edge of the sunspot is on the right-hand side 
of these and has negative (black) polarity. 

Type I MMFs are more likely to appear near the outer 
perimeter of the sunspot but, as already noted, can appear 
anywhere in the moat. The line between the magnetic 
footpoints is generally within 45° of the radial direction 
from the sunspot. Deviations may be more common 
further from the spot. When near the spot they frequently 
appear along a continuation of a dark penumbral filament. 
The inner footpoint has the same magnetic polarity as the 
sunspot. Measurements of the longitudial magnetic field 
range from about 100 to 300 G but are complicated by 
the small size of the features. The magnetic flux for each 
footpoint is typically 2 x 10'° Mx with reported values 
ranging from 10/8 to 107° Mx. 

After appearing, the two footpoints separate at 
approximately 100 m s-! while both move outward at 
about 500-1000 m s! in the moat. Nearby MMFs can 
move at different velocities and most move outward more 
quickly than the overall moat flow (described below). 
Hence they are not just carried along by the visible 
surface motion in the moat. Frequently the two poles are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Moving Magnetic Features and Moat Flow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


* 
. 


mira: «7 


? 3 


Figure 1. (a) A sunspot imaged in the continuum (6328 A) showing the umbra and penumbral regions and the surrounding 
granulation. (b) A magnetogram with the moat between the sunspot and surrounding plage indicated. This zone extends all around 
the spot. The MMFs are the salt and pepper features in the moat. Black is negative field and white is positive. This example is more 
symmetric and regular than most. Both images were taken at the Swedish Vacuum Solar Telescope on La Palma on 29 August 1993. 


not equally visible and the visibility of both against the 
background drops after the initial phase. MMFs move 
outward until they either fade from view or reach the 
outer edge of the moat. Sometimes an interaction at the 
edge is visible in the form of a small brightening and/or 
a magnetic cancelation of the leading point. However, 
details are largely unknown as is the fate of those that fade 
from view. 

Much of the magnetic field in the outer penumbra of 
a sunspot is nearly horizontal and a substantial fraction 
of it seems to re-enter the photosphere at the boundary. 
If filaments of this field continue to extend horizontally 
outward somewhere below the visible surface, then type I 
MMEFs can be understood as upward kinks or embolisms 
in one of these filaments. In this scenario, they represent 
a recycling of magnetic flux from the sunspot and do not 
contribute to a loss of flux or decay of the sunspot field. 
The motion of this ‘kink’ has been modeled as a soliton 
wave in the magnetic filament. 


Type II MMFs 

Type II MMFs are only formed at the edge of a sunspot. 
This is a very dynamic region with continual extensions 
and retractions of the tips of penumbral filaments and 
a strong collar outflow (described below). The type 
IIs appear here with the same magnetic polarity as the 
sunspot but without any apparent connection with a 
nearby point of opposite polarity as with the type Is. As 
such they seem to represent a loss of flux from the sunspot 
and may be related to sunspot decay. However, it is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


not known whether they are more frequent in rapidly 
decaying sunspots. After moving into the moat, they 
behave and appear like a separated inner half of a type 
I MMF with magnetic fields and fluxes within the range 
exhibited by type Is. 


Type III MMFs 

The type II] MMFs are more transitory than the other 
two and exist only for several minutes near the edge of 
a sunspot. A type III begins as a small bright point that 
seems to be emitted from the outer edge of the penumbral 
and travels outward a few thousand km at 2000-3000 ms“? 
before disappearing. They are generally smaller than the 
initial bright points in type Is but often brighter in the 
continuum. Together with their high speed, this makes 
them very eye-catching in movies and they were dubbed 
‘streakers’ when first seen in continuum movies. The 
magnetic polarity is opposite that of the sunspot with a 
smaller total flux than the type Is and Ils. The bright 
point seen in the continuum and G band may lead the 
magnetic feature slightly. They generally seem to catch 
up with a slower-moving type II MMF (perhaps type Is 
as well) whereupon they vanish, sometimes with a local 
brightening. The latter continues to move outward in the 
moat, largely unaffected by the collision and apparent 
merger. Figure 2(c) shows a space-time image of an 
example. The small streaker is labeled 4 and the type II 
MMF that it combines with is labeled 5. The path is labeled 
cin figure 2(a). The edge of the sunspot is to the left and it 
has negative (black) polarity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Moving Magnetic Features and Moat Flow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


time —~> oy 


time —=> © 


K line 


Figure 2. MMF examples. (a) A G band image of a sunspot 
showing the two paths used to construct the space-time images 
for (b) and (c). Tick marks are in arcsec. The left space-time 
images for (b) and (c) are G band intensity, the middle are 
magnetic field, and the right are K line intensity (3 A wide filter). 
(b) shows a type I MMF and (c) shows a type III. The magnetic 
field is scaled from about —50 to +50 G for black and white 
respectively. The vertical ticks are 5 min intervals and the 
horizontal ticks are in arcsec. All data were taken at the Swedish 
Vacuum Solar Telescope on La Palma on 14 June 1994. 


There may well be other types of MMFs and the ad hoc 
classification used here may not bear up as MMFs are 
studied in more detail. The type Is are similar to small 
magnetic flux eruptions seen in the interior of quiet Sun 
supergranules but are much more frequent in the moat (see 


SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE: SUPERGRANULATION ) . 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. A 4 h average of K line images (3 A wide filter) for the 
same sunspot shown in figure 2(a). The bright rays in the moat 
track the preferred paths of bright points associated with MMFs. 
Tick marks are in arcsec. 


Moat flows 

The outer radius of the moat is typically about twice that of 
the associated sunspot. For a large sunspot this may reach 
50 Mm or more. There may be a minimum moat radius of 
8 Mm for very small spots, about the size of an average 
supergranule. Doppler and local correlation tracking 
(LCT) measurements indicate an average outward flow 
of about 400-600 m s~! with no dependence on spot size. 

Just outside the sunspot penumbra, there is also a 
narrower region, sometimes called a ‘collar’ flow, with 
higher outward velocities than the rest of the moat. The 
width of this collar is about 2000-3000 km with velocities 
typically 1000 m s“!, about twice that of the middle moat. 
This blends into the moat flow where the latter exists. 
The collar flow may extend all around the spot, however, 
even where there is not a larger-scale moat flow. It is 
distinct from the Evershed effect (See SUNSPOTS: EVERSHED 
EFFECT) seen in the sunspot penumbra although the two 
may be somehow related. The latter is seen in the dark 
filaments of the penumbra and has a higher velocity than 
the collar flow whichis a motion of granulation just outside 
the spot. 

The LCT method has been used to map details of 
the horizontal motions in sunspots and the surrounding 
moat. When applied to continuum images, it tracks the 
granulation pattern without any significant contribution 
from MMFs. On time scales of an hour or less, the pattern 
is dominated by motions on a mesogranular scale (4000- 
7000 km) just as in the quiet Sun. These can locally 
reduce or cancel the outward motion for a while. Longer 
averages show persistent azimuthal patterns in addition to 
the outward flow. There are rays of alternating azimuthal 
convergence and divergence that extend from the outer 
edge of the sunspot to the moat boundary. These seem 
to cause MMFs (and their associated bright points) to be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Moving Magnetic Features and Moat Flow 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


channeled along preferred horizontal rays as they move 
outward. Figure 3 illustrates this effect with a time- 
averaged image taken with a 3 A Ca II K line filter. The 
bright rays emanating from the sunspot are caused by 
several MMFs traveling along each ray during the 4h 
average. 

The sunspot moat flow represents an organized 
horizontal flow pattern that can be much larger than a 
large supergranule (radius of 50 Mm versus 15 Mm). 
It is thought that this large-scale flow is driven by a 
temperature excess beneath the sunspot. The magnetic 
field in the sunspot inhibits the normal vertical convective 
energy transport, causing the spot to be dark anda buildup 
of excess heat in deeper layers. Horizontal transport in 
the form of the outflow then carries part of this excess heat 
outward although there is evidence that a large portion of 
it may be stored for at least several days. It has also been 
suggested that the faster motion of MMFs may represent 
coupling to faster subsurface flows. A completing theory 
for these faster motions is that MMFs represent traveling 
soliton waves in magnetic filaments that are otherwise 
below the visible surface. 


Current research 

Since their discovery 30 yr ago, MMFs have remained a 
difficult subject for observations, requiring high spatial 
resolution movies for at least several hours. The theory 
is still very rudimentary and it may well be that none 
of the current concepts is really correct. Detailed 
modeling will depend on better observations to better 
constrain the possibilities. Recent and future observations 
from the Solar Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and 
the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) 
satellites will provide material for studies in dozens of 
sunspots. These are only medium (* 1”) resolution 
but provide uniform data sets unaffected by atmospheric 
seeing for several days. They will finally allow meaningful 
statistics to be assembled on MMFs and moat flows and 
their relation to sunspot evolution. Higher-resolution 
studies will be required to study the fine structures in 
MMFs and how they move within the moat faster then 
the general moat flow. Particularly needed are vector 
magnetograms to understand their detailed magnetic 
structure and how MMFs near the sunspot are formed. 
Future telescopes in space and on the ground will 
eventually provide these observations and the next 10 yr 
should see much progress in our understanding of these 
features. 

Current and future work on three-dimensional maps 
of the temperatures and velocities around and underneath 
sunspots using helioseismology looks very promising. It 
should eventually provide details of the heat trapping and 
convective motions associated with sunspots and a clearer 
picture of the role of the moat flow. 


Bibliography 

The outward motions of bright points around sunspots 
were first noted by Sheeley in CN 3883 A spectroheli- 
ograms and Vrabec discovered ‘streaming flux knots’. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


first systematic study of MMFs and sunspot moats is that 
of Harvey and Harvey in 1973. They introduced the term 
‘moving magnetic feature’ and the MMF acronym. The 
earlier discovery papers are cited therein, some of which 
are proceedings from meetings that may be difficult to find. 
The term sunspot ‘moat’ was suggested by Dr Sheeley. 
Brickhouse and LaBonte reviewed moat observations up 
to 1985 and this remains the most thorough study pub- 
lished to date. A recent theory to explain type I MMFs is 
given in Ryutova, et al which also quotes earlier work and 
summarizes known characteristics of MMFs. 


Brickhouse N S and Labonte BJ 1988 Mass and energy flow 
near sunspots. I—observations of moat properties 
Sol. Phy. 115 43-60 

Harvey, J and Harvey, K 1973 Observations of moving 
magnetic features near sunspots Sol. Phys. 28 61-71 

Lee J W 1992 Observational evidence for various models 
of moving magnetic features Sol. Phys. 139 267-73 

Ryutova M, Shine R, Title A and Sakai J I 1998 A possible 
mechanism for the origin of emerging flux in the 
sunspot moat Astrophys. J. 492 402 

Sheeley N R Jr 1969 Sol. Phys. 9 347 


Richard Shine and Alan Title 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Wilson Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunspots: Wilson Effect 


The Wilson effect refers to the depressed appearance of 
suNsPpoTs when positioned close to the solar limb. The 
impression is that sunspots are cavities in the SOLAR 
PHOTOSPHERE. The reason is that the radiation we observe 
is coming from deeper layers in the sunspot than in 
the surrounding photosphere. The detection of this 
depression by Alexander Wilson dates back to 1769. The 
phenomenon is explained, first without mathematical 
expressions and then in greater detail. 


Detection 

The phenomenon was detected by ALEXANDER WILSON, the 
first Professor of Astronomy in Glasgow, in 1769 and 
published in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society in 
1774. Figure 1 is a reproduction of the essential part of one 
figure in his publication. Wilson started his observations of 
a sunspot near the western limb on 22 November 1769. He 
noted that the sunspot was very large and the extent of the 
penumbra, i.e. the medium bright region between the dark 
umbra and the photosphere, was equally large on the side 
closest to the solar limb and on the side closest to the center 
of the solar disk. The next day, on 23 November the 
sunspot was close to the solar limb (see figure 1, position 1), 
and Wilson noted that the shape of the penumbra on the 
side closest to the center of the solar disk had changed 
since his previous observation. The size of this side of the 
penumbra had decreased, whereas the penumbra closest 
to the solar limb was nearly unaltered. The solar rotation 
moved the sunspot to a location even closer to the western 
limb of the Sun on 24 November (see figure 1, position 2). 
Wilson observed that the penumbra closest to the disk 
center had disappeared. 

In his 1774 publication Wilson discusses two possible 
explanations, either there was a real change in the shape 
of the sunspot or the sunspot was ‘a vast EXCAVATION 
in the luminous matter of the sun’. Since digging in the 
solar surface sounds unrealistic we will in the following 
replace the word excavation by cavity or depression. 
Wilson knew that he could discriminate between the two 
possibilities if he could observe the same sunspot close 
to the eastern limb. Fortunately the sunspot was long- 
lived and reappeared with nearly the same size on the 
eastern limb. Wilson observed the sunspot on 11 and 
12 December (see figure 1, positions 3 and 4). He saw 
that the shape of the penumbra closest to Sun’s center was 
undergoing changes. However, the side of the penumbra 
that was changing as a function of time close to the 
eastern limb was the same part of the sunspot that was 
not affected when the sunspot was close to the western 
limb. Hence, he concluded that sunspots are cavities in 
the solar photosphere. 


Explanation 

In the literature on sunspots one often meets the expression 
sunspot darkness. It is important to realize that a 
considerable amount of radiation is emitted from the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sunspot and that the expression sunspot darkness reflects 
the observation that the radiation emitted by the sunspot 
is less than that of the surrounding photosphere. The 
radiation coming from the penumbra exceeds that coming 
from the umbra, but it is less than the photospheric 
radiation. This is illustrated in figure 2 by a darker grey 
color in the umbra than in the penumbra (see also SUNSPOT 
PENUMBRA; SUNSPOT UMBRA). 

Consider a circular sunspot consisting of an umbra 
shaped like a cylinder, surrounded by a penumbra 
shaped like a cylindrical sheet. The intensity levels 
across the umbra and the penumbra are assumed to be 
constants. The symmetry axis of this hypothetical sunspot 
is perpendicular to the solar surface. Figure 2 shows a 
sketch of the sunspot in a plane that contains the symmetry 
axis of the sunspot and the line-of-sight for an observer on 
Earth. Observations show small variations in intensity 
both within the umbra and the penumbra, but these 
variations are neglected here. In figure 2 the sunspot is 
located close to the solar limb, such that an observer on the 
Earth sees the sunspot under a large aspect angle. Itshould 
be pointed out that in figure 2 we have drawn the spherical 
surface as a plane layer, neglecting that the directions from 
different locations inside the sunspot and its surroundings 
to the center of the Sun are not parallel. 

Since the Sun is a sphere of hot gas the solar surface 
is not solid. Therefore the important question is where 
the radiation we observe comes from. The intensity of 
the observed radiation is determined by the emission 
and absorption along the line of sight. Hence, several 
adjacent layers within a certain height interval, or distance 
from the Sun’s center contribute to the observed radiation. 
Within this height interval the temperature decreases with 
increasing height. This implies that the emission decreases 
with height in this height interval, but the probability for 
the photons to escape and reach the observer without being 
absorbed is increased. 

The solar radiation in visible light originates within a 
height interval of approximately 500 km (0.5 Mm). Since 
the solar radius is 696000 km (696 Mm) this layer may 
be regarded as shallow compared with a solar radius. 
In figure 2 the picture is simplified by letting the height 
interval where the visible light originates be illustrated by 
the width of a single line dividing the solar interior from 
the exterior. 

Since the visible light originates within a height 
interval determined by the emission and absorption 
coefficients, this interval may be centered at different 
heights in the umbra, penumbra and photosphere. The 
main ingredients of the gas, hydrogen and helium, have 
a low degree of ionization in the layers that contribute 
to the radiation. The main absorber is the negative 
hydrogen ion, formed by the affinity of free electrons 
to neutral hydrogen atoms. The free electrons are 
supplied by minor constituents of the gas, such as 
iron, with a lower ionization potential than hydrogen. 
With increasing temperature, the number density of free 
electrons increases, the density of negative hydrogen 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Wilson Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


No), Great stpot Var. 23.1769. 
“4 a , 24. 7 


Dec! . for the cccord tine: 
see AE 


Figure 1. Copy of Alexander Wilson’s drawing of the large sunspot he observed in 1769. 


ions increases, the absorption coefficient increases, and 
the corresponding solar feature becomes less transparent. 
We know that the temperature of the penumbra is 
higher than the umbral temperature, but lower than 
the photospheric temperature. This implies that the 
umbra is more transparent than the penumbra and 
the penumbra is slightly more transparent than the 
surrounding photosphere. In order words, we ‘see’ to 
deeper layers in the umbra than in the penumbra and 
to slightly deeper layers in the penumbra than in the 
photosphere. In a more stringent discussion the possible 
differences in density between the umbra, penumbra, and 
photosphere must be taken into account. It follows that 
the umbral radiation originates at a lower height. 

Recall that in figure 2 the dividing line between the 
solar interior and exterior is taken to represent the height 
interval where the visible radiation originates. To illustrate 
that we observe radiation coming from different heights 
figure 2 shows that the radiating layer is located higher in 
the photosphere than in the penumbra and considerably 
higher than in the umbra. For illustrative purposes 
the height differences between the umbra, penumbra 
and photosphere are exaggerated. The height difference 
between the umbra and the photosphere, called the Wilson 
depression, is of the order of 500 km. Hence, it is 
comparable with the height interval that contributes to the 
visible radiation. 

With these height differences in mind consider an 
observation of a sunspot located close to the solar limb. 
Since the penumbral radiation originates at a lower height 
than the photospheric radiation, the photosphere will 
obscure part of the penumbra on the side of the sunspot 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


PHOTOSPHERE 


/ 


/ 


£ 
~ 2 
TO CENTRE 
PENUMBRA 
OF THE SUN i 
~_ 4 ' 
UMBRA y 1 
' ' 
i 4 ' 
y ' i 
“) ' i 
PENUMBRA /| | ; 
tot \ 
ane | TOJOBSERVER 
as | ' ' i 
PHOTOSPHERE / ae ; 
tot \ 
tot \ 
' ' 
' ' 


Figure 2. Sketch of a circularly shaped sunspot located close to 
the solar limb. 


remote from the limb. In figure 2 this part of the sunspot 
is located in the lower half of the sketch. The penumbra 
closest to the limb, on the other hand, will not be obscured 
(see figure 2). Since the umbral radiation originates in 
layers located deeper than the layers contributing to the 
penumbral radiation, part of the umbra will be obscured 
by the penumbra. Hence, the size of the umbra will 
decrease (increase) faster than expected from perspective 
foreshortening as the sunspot is moved by solar rotation 
towards (away from) the solar limb. This simple model 
describes the main characteristics of the Wilson effect. 
Most sunspots change their shape from one day to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Wilson Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the next, and the fraction of sunspots with a lifetime 
comparable with the sunspot shown in figure 1 is minute. 
These factors explain why it is difficult to measure 
accurately the Wilson depression. An interesting way 
of estimating the magnitude of the Wilson depression is 
based on measurement of solar rotation (see Balthasar 
and Wohl 1983; sOLAR INTERIOR: ROTATION). Consider the 
determination of solar rotation from (a) sunspot positions 
during their passage over the solar disk and (b) the time 
difference between two successive passages of the same 
sunspot across the same position on the solar disk. The 
latter method is independent of the Wilson depression, 
whereas the first method depends on its value. The reason 
for this dependence may be understood by comparing 
the apparent positions of two sunspots, one with and 
one without Wilson depression. The sunspot without 
Wilson depression will be at the same height as the 
photosphere and located closer to the limb than a sunspot 
with depression. On the basis of such observations values 
between 500 and 1000 km have been found for the Wilson 
depression. 


Towards a model calculation 

It was suggested by Bray and Loughhead (1964) that 
a sufficient condition for a SUNSPOT MODEL to show a 
Wilson effect is that the transparency increases from 
the photosphere through the penumbra to the umbra. 
However, Jensen and Maltby (1965) showed that the most 
transparent umbral models lead to marked intensity peaks 
on the limb side of the umbra. Such peaks are never 
observed. Jensen et al (1969) neglected the pressure 
and density variations across both the umbra and the 
penumbra and approximated a sunspot by placing models 
of the umbra, penumbra and photosphere side by side. 
Furthermore, they assumed that each model could be 
determined from the hydrostatic equation VP = —pg, 
where P is the gas pressure, p is the density and g 
the gravitational acceleration. To be able to compare 
the results with observations they constructed a series 
of models and calculated the specific intensity, [,, for 
different values of the wavelength, 4, and the aspect angle, 
6, by the expression 


L= / Si(m) ee" dt, 
0 


where the source function, S,(t,), was approximated by 
the Planck function. Special care was taken in calculating 
the optical length, t,, along the ray making an angle 6 with 
the surface normal. The optical length differs from the 
optical depth divided by the cosine of the aspect angle 
when the ray passes from, say, the photosphere into the 
penumbra. They found that a Wilson depression of 400 km 
could satisfy the available observations. 

Observations show that sunspots have strong mag- 
netic fields. The darkening of the sunspot depends on this 
field, as may be illustrated as follows. Consider a time- 
independent case and write the momentum equation as 


pu-Vvu=-VP—-pg+jxB 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where p is the density, v is the velocity, P the gas pressure, 
g the gravitational acceleration and B the magnetic 
induction. Neglecting the displacement current, the 
current density j = m7 V x B, where {uo is the permeability. 
In layers close to the solar surface most velocities 
are subsonic and the darkening of a sunspot is mainly 
determined by the magnetic field (see SUNSPOT MAGNETIC 
FIELDS). In the simple case where the effect of the 
velocity field is neglected and the magnetic field is 
axisymmetrical without an azimuthal component, the 
momentum equation in cylindrical coordinates reads 


7 0z or 


dP B. (dB, AaB, 
or Ww 


= —p8s az ar 


oP B, (= =) 
az m ; 


Integration of the first equation from the center (r = 0) of 
the sunspot to the photosphere (r = a) gives the difference 
in gas pressure 


OB, 
Oz 


1 1° 
P(r =a)~ Pr =0) = 5B =0) +— | B. dr 
0 


= Py + Pr. 


Thus, the lower gas pressure in the sunspot than in the 
surroundings is caused by the magnetic pressure, Py, and 
the tension, Py, in the magnetic field. Close to the surface 
the magnetic field fans out and the tension must be taken 
into account. With the help of the equation of state for an 
ideal gas we may proceed to deduce the ratio between the 
temperature T(r = 0) in the center of the sunspot to the 
photospheric temperature, T(r = a), at the same height z 


T(r =0) _ mr =0) 1— spi (Pu + Pr) 


T(r=a) m(r=a)1+ a (Pu + Pr) 


where the average molecular weight is m(r = 0) in the 
center of the sunspot and m(r = a) in the photosphere. 
H(r = a) is the pressure scale height in the photosphere. 
For a homogeneous magnetic field the expression reduces 
to Tir = 0)/T( = a) = 1— B?/(QuP(r = a)) = 1- 
Py/P(r =a). Following similar arguments magnetostatic 
models for the whole sunspot have been presented and 
recently the velocity field has been included in the 
calculation with the aim of developing a dynamical model 
for the penumbral fine structure and the flow field in 
sunspots. Hitherto these models have not been extended 
to include calculations of the emitted radiation across the 
sunspot. 


Bibliography 

Balthasar H and Wohl H 1983 Solar Phys. 88 71-5 

Bray R J and Loughhead R E 1964 Sunspots (London: 
Chapman and Hall) 

Jensen E, Brahde R and Ofstad P 1969 The Wilson effect 
and the transparency of sunspot models Solar Phys. 9 
397-419 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunspots: Wilson Effect ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Jensen E and Maltby P 1965 Opacity properties of sunspots 
Astrophys. Norveg. 10 17-25 


Per Maltby 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 4 


Sunyaev—Zeldovich Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sunyaev-—Zeldovich Effect 


The Sunyaev—Zeldovich (SZ) effect is a spectral effect 
on the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND (CMB) caused by 
interaction with the electrons in the hot gas inside a CLUSTER 
OFGALAXIES. In the Rayleigh—Jeans portion of the spectrum it 
manifests itself as a small (~0.5 4K) dip in the temperature 
of the CMB in the direction of the cluster. First proposed 
in 1970, about 20 yr of observational effort were required 
before it was reliably detected. Many tens of clusters have 
now detected in the SZ effect, and early predictions of its 
usefulness for cosmology are now starting to bear fruit. 

The basic mechanism of the SZ effect (see figure 1) 
involves scattering of CMB photons by electrons in the 
distributed intracluster gas that exists in clusters of 
galaxies and in fact makes up about a quarter of their total 
mass. A rich cluster may have a total mass >3 x 104Mo 
and gas in hydrostatic equilibrium in the potential well 
of the cluster heats to temperatures of order 10’-10° K. 
The hot electrons in this plasma have two effects: firstly 
they produce thermal bremsstrahlung radiation, which 
provides the cluster x-ray luminosity. Secondly, they 
interact with CMB photons passing through the cluster, 
via Thomson scattering. This preferentially increases the 
energy of the photons involved in the scattering, giving 
an effective shift of the CMB BLACK-BODY RADIATION curve 
to higher frequencies and hence a dip in the Rayleigh— 
Jeans region of the spectrum, and an increment in the 
Wien region. (The precise form of the temperature 
shift as a function of frequency is shown in figure 2.) 
The magnitude of the effect is proportional to the line 
integral of electron pressure through the cluster, and 
hence directly proportional to electron number density, 
ne, and temperature. This is in contrast to the thermal 
bremsstrahlung responsible for the x-ray emission, which 
is proportional to n2. This difference makes the SZ effect 
more sensitive to the broadly distributed component of 
gas, rather than the dense central regions favored in x-ray 
emission. A further, very useful, aspect of the SZ effect is 
that for the same physical gas parameters it is independent 
of REDSHIFT. This makes it as easy to detect at high redshift, 
where optical or x-ray detection of a cluster may be 
very difficult, as at low redshift, thus making it a useful 
cosmological probe. In addition, the combination of x-ray 
and SZ data on a cluster makes possible a determination 
of the HUBBLE CONSTANT independent of the usual distance 
ladder techniques. The results for Hy from this method 
are already of interest and are expected to be of increasing 
importance in the future, as both the systematic and the 
random errors in the technique start to decrease. 


The physics of the Sunyaev—Zeldovich effect 

Probably the best way to derive the SZ effect, including 
relativistic corrections, is in the context of an extended 
version of the Kompaneets equation—this is discussed 
further below. We first begin with a heuristic derivation: 
consider the injection of energy, via Compton scattering, 
from an electron gas into an isotropic photon gas. We shall 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Intracluster 
medium 


“CMB 


pee pee] AF >= / CMB photon 
recombination f iy y 2 ae: 


/ 


fa 
“K 


Cluster of galaxies x 


Observer 


Figure 1. Schematic showing the origin of the SZ effect. Hot 
intracluster gas in a cluster of galaxies gives a small increase in 
the net energy of CMB photons arriving from the early universe. 


suppose that the electron gas is non-relativistic and with 
no bulk motions and that the radiation temperature T;aq 
is < the electron temperature T,. (This is well satisfied 
in practice.) With these conditions it is not immediately 
obvious that there should be any effect—if the scattering 
is elastic, then one cannot change the basically isotropic 
distribution of photons or electrons. It is true there is a 
‘Doppler scattering’ effect 


Av Ve 
— = — x angular factor 
v Cc 


where v, is the velocity of the colliding electron, but 
this will average to zero, since the electron velocities are 
isotropic. (Note that this formula will tell us what happens 
when there is a bulk motion.) The SZ effect arises as 
follows. The scattering mechanism is Thomson scattering, 
for which we know 


«< = orl + cos? 6) 

where 6 is the angle between the photon and electron di- 
rections, i.e. there will be maximum scattering in the for- 
ward and backward directions. We therefore approximate 
the problem as one-dimensional and consider in the cos- 
mological (photon gas) frame the head-on collision of a 
photon with energy hv with an electron with a velocity 
v = fc directed away from the incoming photon. In the 
electron rest frame the photon energy is transformed to 
hv[(1— B)/(1 + B)]!? and there is an equal scattering prob- 
ability in the forward and back directions. In these direc- 
tions there is no frequency shift, from the familiar Comp- 
ton formula 


NM — 4 = 2a, sin*(0/2) 


» 
ay 
ll 


M,C 


Transforming back to the cosmological frame we find that 
the photon has energy hv(1 — £)/(1 + B) (ie. redshifted) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunyaev—Zeldovich Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


if its direction has been reversed in the encounter, or hv 
if not. Now suppose that the photon came from the other 
direction, so that initially in the photon’s frame the electron 
velocity was directed towards it. In this case the same 
analysis yields a blueshift to an energy of hv(1+ B)/(1— B) 
if the photon direction is reversed and a constant energy of 
hv if not. The mean frequency after collision for photons 
with momentum parallel to electron velocity is thus 


1 
/_ 2 
v v5 (2+ 


Thus there is a net second-order effect. 

What happens in the interval of time At? Restoring 
the three-dimensional dependence on scattering angle, the 
mean shift is 


1—p _1+8 
1+68 1-8 


) = =P ~ v(1 + B2). 


(probability of shift inAr x (6 cos 6)?v) 


averaged over the isotropic photon momentum distribu- 


tion, i.e. 
SKT, 
dv = =n,o7cAtv—.. 
3 mc? 


(Here (n,a7)7? is the photon mean free path.) Thus 


1 dv ( kT, ) 
~= = [orene—, } . 
MeC 


e 


The right-hand side has dimensions of (time)~' and we 
write it as dy/dt. Integrating, we obtain 


ty kT, 
y= / orcn,—,, dt. 
F Mec 


i 


The quantity y is called the Comptonization parameter 
and here is worked out for the case of injection of energy 
from an initial time ft; to a final time t;. Equating this to 
the time taken for a photon to traverse a cluster yields the 


final formula 
kT, 
y= | orne— dl 
M.C 


or y = (ork/m,c’) x line integral of pressure through 
cluster. The equation 


ldv_ dy : . 5 
aE ae implies v(t) = v(O)e’. 
In the cluster case we have voy = vine”. This shift in 


frequency yields an apparent deficit in the Rayleigh—Jeans 
region of the CMB spectrum and an increase in the Wien 
region (see figure 2). We have 


Al(vy) =I (=) —I(v) generally 
v\? KTraa 2v?kTrad 
=e ie. c2 (oe 


in the Rayleigh-Jeans region 


= I(v) x (—2y) for small y. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


For a rich cluster, taking the parameters of the COMACLUSTER 
as anexample,! ~ 3Mpc,n,. ~ 10° m7? and T, ~ 7 x 10’ K. 
Thus a typical y is 7 x 10-°, making the assumption of its 
smallness in general well justified. 

The result just quoted for the Rayleigh—Jeans region 
is the correct one (neglecting relativistic corrections), as 
is the general idea of a decrement in the Rayleigh—Jeans 
region and an excess in the Wien region. However, our 
derivation has ignored several important physical factors, 
in particular that the photon energy hv varies after collision 
in the electron frame, that the photons are not isotropic 
in the electron frame and that photons are bosons, the 
latter implying that there is stimulated emission also to 
consider. Putting all this together to find the correct 
equation yields the Kompaneets equation. The general 
solution as a function of frequency, expressed in terms of 
Rayleigh-Jeans brightness temperature (Try = (A7/2k)1), 
is 


2 
x Xx 

ATry = (= = i) e (« coth a 4) Trad 

where y is as above and x = hv/kT,ag. This is what a 

typical heterodyne system would measure. If we were to 

measure flux rather than temperature, i.e. use a bolometer- 


type system, then 
Al « v?(A Try equiv «x x* x above. 


The importance of this is that the effect is thus much 
increased in the sub-mm region, where we are likely to be 
using bolometer techniques anyway. The relevant curves 
are shown in figure 2, which also shows the same curves for 
asimple change in the black-body temperature of the CMB, 
such as would be relevant to primordial perturbations. 
One can see from figure 2 that observing the flux effect 
in three regions, centered at approximately 2 mm, 1.2 mm 
and 0.8 mm say, would give a unique signature for the SZ 
effect, separating it quite distinctly from any anisotropies 
due to primordial perturbations. Pursuing this point of 
different frequency dependences further, we note that if a 
cluster has a systemic radial velocity then the bulk electron 
flow induces Doppler scattering with magnitude given by 
the bulk motion formula above: 


AT uv, 
ee i, SPE p 
T (7 


where t is the optical depth to Thomson scattering through 
the cluster, t ~ fn.o7 dl. The frequency dependence of 
this effect will be that of the black-body curves of figure 2, 
and so by observing at the peak of the black-body curve 
one can separate the direct ‘thermal’ SZ effect, which nulls 
here, from the kinetic or ‘Doppler’ one, which has a peak 
here (when measured in terms of flux). To see what 
the hopes are of being able to map the peculiar velocity 
field of clusters in this way, we take the t appropriate 
to the Coma cluster, ~1%, and assume a cluster velocity 
of 600 km s~!, which may not be untypical of the higher 
velocities which could be expected. This yields a black- 
body temperature change of 0.05 mK. For comparison, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunyaev—Zeldovich Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Change in temperature versus frequency 


ry T T T T T | 


Brightness temperature change due to 1 mK 


change in blackbody temperature 


0.5 


0.5 


|. SZ distortion (1mK in R—J limit) 


| 
500 1000 


Delta Brightness Temperature (mK) 

0 

—— 
HT 
lf 
i 
| 

ee 


0 
Frequency (GHz) 
Change in intensity versus frequency 

x © 1 ; ; ; ; : 
jo) 
x Intensity change due to 1 mK 
Kae change in blackbody temperature 
na L on 
Se ~~ 
N 
a J 
™ 
'E 
naa | 
ab J 
» —_ ea 
ion Se 
a SZ distortion (1mK in R-—J limit) 
~ J 
= 
oT 4 
2 | 
8 ! L f \ f 1 L 

0) 500 1000 


Frequency (GHz) 


Figure 2. Top: Plots of AT (brightness temperature) for a 1 mK 
change in black-body temperature (top curve) and due to the SZ 
effect with a Rayleigh—Jeans limit of 1 mK. Bottom: Same but for 
intensity distortion. 


taking the Coma cluster as an example again, the direct 
SZ effect expected is 0.5 mK, and indeed the measured 
values in several clusters appear to be of this order. Thus 
the mapping of the peculiar velocity field of clusters will 
be a difficult task, but the numbers do not look hopeless. 
Transverse motions of clusters also give a perturbation to 
the CMB via the ‘moving lens effect’, with a distinctive 
polarization signature, but for similar velocities the AT /T 
effect tends to be a few x10~° rather than a few x10~> as 
for the thermal and radial kinetic effects. The angular scale 
of the SZ effect on the sky is set by the angular diameter 
subtended by the cluster, and is typically a few arcminutes. 


Relativistic effects 

For clusters with electron temperature above about 10 
keV, relativistic effects neglected in the usual Kompaneets 
equation must be introduced, if one wishes to match theory 
and experiment together properly, even at the accuracy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


level of the current observations, and certainly for future 
observations. First calculations of the corrections were 
made numerically by Wright and Raphaeli and recently 
Challinor and Lasenby have found an analytical extension 
of the Kompaneets approach, which allows results to 
be derived as power series in the electron temperature 
parameter 6, = kgT./m.c?. As an example, in the 
Rayleigh—Jeans region, one finds 


AT, 17 
Ay (A 6, 
Trad 10 


to first order in 6. To give an example of the magnitude 
of this effect, for typical cluster parameters ignoring this 
correction would give an overestimation by about 5% in 
the value of the Hubble constant derived via the SZ route 
(described below). For clusters with temperature greater 
than about 10 keV there are substantial modifications to the 
frequency dependence of the SZ effect in the Wien region 
of the spectrum (by tens of per cent even at 15 keV) and 
the correct relativistic formulae (including 6? corrections) 
must be used. 


Observations 

Avariety of approaches have been used to try to detect and 
measure the SZ effect. Here we highlight the techniques 
that have been used, roughly in order of their historical 
appearance. 


Single-dish observations 

The effect was first claimed to have been discovered by 
Parijskij, in 1972, in the Coma cluster. This was unlikely 
given the frequency of observation and the fact that Coma 
has a strong cluster halo source, in addition to other radio 
sources near the center. There were further claims in 1978 
and 1981 for a detection in several clusters by Birkinshaw, 
Gull and Northover, using a dish at Chilbolton, UK, at 
10 GHz, but again radio source confusion and possible 
systematic effects in the observations make it unlikely the 
the decrements seen (at about 1 mK amplitude) were real. 
The first reports of a detection that are widely believed, and 
seem to have withstood the test of further accumulation of 
data, came from Birkinshaw, Gull and Hardebeck in 1984, 
using the 40 m Owens Valley dish of Caltech, at 20 GHz. 
It might be wondered why there is any difficulty or 
question about these measurements, given that the effects 
are about 10 times bigger than a 95% confidence blank 
sky limit which had been set with the same telescope in a 
search by Readhead et al for primordial CMB anisotropy. 
The answer lies in the (necessarily) different observing 
strategies adopted in the two cases. For the intrinsic 
anisotropy work, Readhead et al were able to minimize 
telescope movement by working with fields very close to 
the north celestial pole and observing only near transit. For 
observations of specific clusters, there is no such option, 
since the cluster must be followed around an appreciable 
portion of the sky in order to build up sufficient sensitivity. 
This leads to two problems. First, the combination of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunyaev—Zeldovich Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


telescope on-off motions and beamswitching used for both 
experiments in order to reduce atmospheric effects can still 
leave residual systematics due to incomplete subtraction of 
sidelobes of the two beams. This is known as ‘differential 
spillover’. 

The second problem is that, as the source sweeps 
around the sky, the ‘off’ beams themselves sweep over 
circular arcs, displaced from the cluster center by the 
beamthrow. If these ‘reference arcs’ contain radio sources, 
these will produce negative dips in the central signal as 
the beams pass over them, leading to a false impression 
of a decrement having been detected. The only solution 
to this is an independent survey for the confusing radio 
sources. To achieve sufficient sensitivity in such a survey 
requires the power of the Very Large Array, but the area 
that needs to be covered for each cluster means that several 
VLA fields need to be mosaiced together, requiring quite 
large amounts of observing time. 


Bolometer measurements 

A bolometric system is able to achieve great sensitivity 
by having a very large fractional bandwidth and working 
at high frequencies. The disadvantage is that they 
are strongly affected by the atmosphere at these high 
frequencies and so have to be run from mountain tops, 
balloons (which have only limited observation time) or 
space. 

The first really successful ground-based bolometer 
measurements have come from the Caltech SuZie group, 
working on the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory in 
Hawaii. They use a differencing bolometer scheme, 
coupled with drift scans across the source, which provides 
good stability and rejection of atmospheric fluctuations. 
The wavelengths observed are 1.2, 1.4 and 2.2 mm, which 
are properly spaced to make an attempt at separating the 
kinetic and thermal SZ effects. So far only upper limits 
have been found for the cluster peculiar velocities, but 
it is quite possible this instrument will be the first to 
detect non-zero velocities in the future. Scans at high 
signal to noise have been obtained on several clusters 
including A2163, which is the hottest known (T, ~ 14keV), 
making it necessary to use the correct relativistic formulae 
for the frequency dependence and amplitude of the SZ 
effect. Lamarre et al, using a balloon-borne bolometric 
system called PRONAOS, have made a determination of 
the spectrum of A2163 extending all the way to far-IR 
wavelengths (see figure 3), and in conjunction with the 
SuZie results this shows convincing evidence for the full 
expected frequency dependence of the SZ effect, albeit 
mixed in with dust emission at higher frequencies. 


Interferometers 

Interferometers provide currently provide the cleanest 
technique for making images of the SZ effect. An 
interferometer consists of a set of baselines formed by 
taking the elements of the interferometer in pairs. Each 
baseline is sensitive to a particular Fourier component 
on the sky and is relatively insensitive to atmospheric 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


- 7 | 4 0.2 
ee ee 00 
: | 
: E 
i E 
3 r 
& 
Diabolo 
10000 


lambda (micron) 


Figure 3. Spectrum of A2163, from Lamarre J M et al 1998 
Astrophys. J. 507 L5. The solid curve shows a best-fit model 
including both the SZ effect (dot-dash curve) and predicted dust 
emission (dashed). The inset shows the expected contribution 
from the the kinetic SZ effect while the names are of the 
experiments used to trace different regions of the spectrum. 


fluctuations and ground spillover and pickup (the 
problems which bedevilled earlier attempts to measure 
the SZ effect). Furthermore, close-in baseline pairs can 
be used to give a map of the SZ effects, while longer 
baselines can be used to subtract the effects of discrete 
radio sources, which are often variable, making it very 
desirable to measure them simultaneously with the SZ 
measurements. Two groups in particular have been 
pursuing this approach. The first image of the SZ effect 
came from the Ryle Telescope at Cambridge, UK, in 
1993, and subsequently about 10 other clusters have been 
detected and mapped. In figure 4 a map is shown of the 
cluster A1413 made with the Ryle Telescope (Cambridge). 
The more centrally condensed nature of the x-ray emission 
versus the SZ effect is evident. The other group actively 
pursuing this approach have been using the OVRO and 
BIMA millimeter arrays in California, but with centimeter 
wave rather than millimeter wave receivers fitted. The 
lower observing frequency gives them sensitivity on 
angular scales appropriate to the SZ effect and they are 
able to use otherwise fallow summer observing periods to 
conduct the measurements. This campaign has resulted 
in the detection of about 25 clusters in SZ, and the highest 
signal-to-noise maps thus far made. 


Determinations of Ho 

The SZ effect can be used to determine Hp in conjunction 
with x-ray information. We start with the equation for the 
x-ray flux: 


where n, and T, are the electron number density and 
temperature and D, is the luminosity distance to the 
cluster. Via the x-ray and optical information we can 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunyaev—Zeldovich Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


. 


+ 23 42 00 


80 


Figure 4. Ryle Telescope map of the cluster Abell 1413 (contours) 
overlaid on ROSAT PSPC x-ray image (greyscale). Contour 
levels for the radio map are —450 to 75 Jy /beam in steps of 

75 Jy /beam. The numbers at the right are declination in 
degrees, minutes and seconds, indicating the overall angular 
scale. (Taken from Grainge K et al 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
278 L17.) 


determine 7., 6 and z, where 6 is a characteristic angular 
size of the cluster and z is the cluster redshift. The SZ effect 
is determined by 


ATsz a fmt. dl 


ie. a line-of-sight integral of pressure through the cluster, 
and we can relate d/ to the other quantities via 


_ fod, 


Al = ‘ 
(1 +z)? 


Here f is a prolateness factor, which, assuming the cluster 
has an ellipsoidal shape, is the ratio of the length of the 
major axis of the ellipse to the minor axis. The last equation 
uses the angular diameter distance formula to get the 
physical width of the cluster given its angular diameter 
and then converts this to a line-of-sight distance through 
the cluster using this assumed prolateness. This is done 
assuming what will turn out to be a ‘worst case’, where 
the cluster is indeed prolate and pointing straight at the 
observer. If we assume the cluster is at not too high a 
redshift, then the luminosity distance can be approximated 
by D, = cz/Hp. (Obviously more accurate formulae can 
be used for this and other quantities at higher redshift.) 
Eliminating n. via the known S,, and D, in favor of Ho, 
one finds 
Ah x ATz, 

with the constant of proportionality known. We note 
straightaway that if f is assumed to be 1 when it is really 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


>1, i.e. where the cluster is indeed oriented towards the 
observer, then the Hp derived by this method will come 
out too small. Since the Hy values found so far using 
this approach have tended to come out lower than optical 
determinations, it is obviously this case that we need to 
worry about most in the first instance. Furthermore, for 
clusters which are selected on the basis of x-ray surface 
brightness, there would be a tendency for just this effect 
to happen, since the greater line-of-sight distance through 
the cluster would emphasize their x-ray brightness. 
Putting back further factors we obtain 


f 


Hy « 
°" ATZ, 


Si (1) 


T. can be found from the x-ray spectrum obtained, e.g. 
with the ASCA satellite, which covers the range up to 
~10 keV. A typical cluster temperature is T. ~ 6 keV and 
ROSAT only covers the range up to ~2 keV. The x-ray flux, 
S,, can be obtained from e.g. ASCA, with resolution ~2’, 
or the ROSAT PSPC, with resolution ~15”. The cluster 
profile is modelled generally via an assumed isothermal 
atmosphere, with 


n-(0) 


OF TS rE 


Typical values for clusters are 6 ~ 0.6, and core radius 
r- ~ 0.25 Mpc, but one has to fit for these in any given case. 
For elliptical clusters, one needs to introduce different core 
radii along orthogonal axes. These are fitted iteratively 
until they match the x-ray observations. Ideally, one needs 
to include the physics of the pressure and cooling of the 
cluster in this process, and also to use simultaneously the 
SZ observations. 

The values found so far for Ho using this technique 
have encompassed a rather large range, but estimates are 
now beginning to stabilize. Birkinshaw, using results 
from nine well-measured clusters, finds a mean Ho of 
60 + 10 kms7! Mpc"! (although systematic contributions 
to the error could be larger). Further results from the 
much larger samples being built up by the Cambridge and 
OVRO/BIMA interferometer teams are expected shortly. 
Carlstrom et al, working with detailed modeling of a 
single cluster, find good agreement with a value of 
60kms7! Mpc! and moreover have shown that although 
the results for the core radius r, and f are highly correlated 
after fitting, the resulting degeneracy in Hp is quite small, 
which is encouraging for further work. 

As well as estimating Hp, one can also use the SZ 
results to estimate the total baryon content of a cluster. In 
conjunction with information from GRAVITATIONALLENSING in 
the cluster, or alternatively by assuming virial equilibrium 
for the intracluster material, one can then estimate the 
total matter fraction (baryonic plus dark) in the cluster. 
With a final assumption that the proportion of baryons to 
dark matter is similar to that pertaining in the universe 
as a whole, the total matter density of the universe can 
be found. Recently Grego et al, using 18 clusters from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Sunyaev—Zeldovich Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the OVRO/BIMA sample, have obtained the estimate 
Qu ~ 0.234% (for an Hy of 65-10 km s~! Mpc, scaling 
inversely with Hp for other values). This value represents 
that matter fraction relative to the CRITICALDENSITY needed to 
make the universe spatially flat and ties in well with other 
recent indications that, if the universe really is spatially 
flat (as primordial CMB results seem to indicate), then the 
deficit must be made up in some other way than via dark 
matter. This lends extra support to the hypothesis of a 
non-zero COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT. With a sufficiently large 
sample of clusters out to high redshift, it may be possible 
to use the luminosity distance dependence of the SZ effect 
to measure the cosmological constant directly. 


Future uses of the SZ effect 

The redshift independence of the SZ effect makes it an 
excellent tool for investigating the evolution of structure 
with redshift. On the other hand, current instruments are 
severely limited in their ability to do the kinds of ‘blank 
sky’ searches for the SZ effect that would be necessary to 
fully exploit this potential, owing to their relative lack of 
sensitivity and the time it takes to detect just one cluster 
in an already-known position. Accordingly, proposals 
for new ground-based instruments (all interferometers), 
able to make maps of the SZ effect over large areas of 
the sky, are now being made and will, it is hoped, be 
funded. The ‘SZ source counts’ (the number of clusters 
per square degree with SZ effect above a certain level) are 
strong functions of the matter density and geometry of the 
universe and so should provide significant information on 
Qy. In addition, the large number of clusters detected this 
way could act as a ‘finder’ for clusters to be investigated 
by future x-ray missions, which will not have the same 
sensitivity at high redshift as dedicated SZ telescopes. 
As well as ground-based telescopes, some future space 
missions will also be able to detect large numbers of 
clusters via the SZ effect. The PLANCK SURVEYOR mission, due 
for launch by ESA in 2007, has the potential to detect tens of 
thousands of clusters via the SZ effect, and it is hoped that 
for a large number of these a detection of the ‘kinetic effect’ 
will be possible as well, thus making possible a totally new 
kind of mapping of peculiar velocity fields on large scales. 


Bibliography 

The first predictions of the SZ effect were made in two 

papers: 

Sunyaev R and Zeldovich Y 1970 Comments Astrophys. 
Space Phys. 2 66 

Sunyaev R and Zeldovich Y 1972 Comments Astrophys. 
Space Phys. 4 173 


The first image of the SZ effect is presented in 


Jones M, Saunders R, Alexander P, Birkinshaw M, Dillon 
N, Grainge K, Lasenby A, Lefebvre D, Pooley G, Scott 
P, Titterington D and Wilson D 1993 Nature 365 320 


An extensive review of the SZ effect, covering both theory 
and observation, is given in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Birkinshaw M 1999 Phys. Rev. 310 97 


while an up-to-date review of imaging of the SZ effect and 
its future uses is contained in 


Carlstrom J E, Joy M K, Grego L, Holder GP, Holzapfel WL, 
Mohr JJ, Patel S and Reese E D 1999 astro-ph/9905255 


Relativistic corrections to the SZ effect are discussed in 


Challinor A D and Lasenby A N 1998 6th Course on Topics 
in Astrofundamental Physics (Erice 1997) ed N Sanchez 
and A Zichichi (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 409-42 


Anthony Lasenby 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superclusters and the Local Supercluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Superclusters and the Local 
Supercluster 


In the 19th century, William and John Herschel noted the 
uneven distribution of spiral nebulae across the sky (see 
HERSCHEL FAMILY). In the early 1920s, J H Reynolds remarked 
that large non-galactic nebulae cluster along a band and 
10 yr later HARLOW SHAPLEY, providing confirmation with a 
more systematic survey, called the flattened concentration 
of brightest galaxies the ‘Local Supergalaxy’. Gérard de 
Vaucouleurs, in the 1950s, showed that locally there is a 
flattened distribution of galaxies with the viRGO CLUSTER at 
its core and our MILKY WAY GALAXY toward the periphery. 
This structure has come to be called the ‘Local Supercluster’. 
After the mid-1970s, the effort to study the distribution of 
galaxies in the universe intensified and many structures 
similar to the Local Supercluster have now been found. 


Galaxies: the building blocks of large-scale 
structure 

It is currently believed that structure in the universe 
formed from the gravitational self-attraction of matter in 
overdense regions. Dense regions collapsed earlier in time. 
Probably, irregularities with high local density but low 
total mass formed first, then coalesced with other matter to 
form larger entities. Galaxies were forming and growing 
rapidly during the first four to six billion years in the life 
of the universe. All the while, galaxies were being drawn 
closer to each other, so they were becoming substantially 
clumped. The timescales for this gravitational clustering 
are strongly dependent on the overall properties of the 
universe. If the average mass density is in the vicinity of 
the critical density for a closed universe then galaxies are 
falling together in large numbers today to form large-scale 
structures. If the average mass density is much less than 
the critical density then the greatest development in the 
structure formation happened earlier. 

In their gross properties, galaxies can be considered 
to be of two types. Galaxies referred to as ELLIPTICAL 
Or LENTICULAR GALAXIES overwhelmingly contain only old 
stars. They have little cold interstellar gas so they lack 
the resources to form many new stars. On the other hand, 
galaxies called sPIRAL or IRREGULAR GALAXIES do contain cold 
interstellar gas and they have a substantial component of 
young stars. These galaxies can have a wide range of 
STELLAR POPULATIONS, from very young to very old. 

Galaxies of the two types are usually found in very 
different environments. Ellipticals and lenticulars are 
found in large numbers in clusters, the densest, most 
congested parts of the universe. Spiral and irregular 
galaxies are found in filamentary structures outside the 
densest clusters. There are relatively few spirals or gas- 
rich irregulars in clusters. It is possible that those few 
spirals in clusters have fallen into the gravitational wells 
of the clusters recently. There are relatively few ellipticals 
or lenticulars in the low-density regions. Outside of dense 
clusters, most galaxies have a supply of gas for new stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Our own Milky Way Galaxy is a relatively large spiral 
galaxy. The solar system is located in the flattened disk 
near a spiral arm spur far out from the center. 


Groups: the next level of the hierarchy 

Galaxies like to be with other galaxies. Gravity pulls 
them together. Galaxies formed out of the self-attraction 
of matter in overdense regions and galaxies, in turn, are 
embedded in larger-scale overdense regions that collapse 
to form groups. Seventy per cent of galaxies are identified 
to lie in groups that are gravitationally bound and another 
20% are found in looser associations that may not be 
bound. The vast majority of these groups appear to be 
dynamically young. Although the galaxies are usually 
bound gravitationally to each other, they may not have 
had time to make many orbits, or even one orbit, around 
each other. When they do approach, near collisions that 
cause structural disruption are not uncommon. 

The dynamically young groups are predominantly 
populated with gas-rich spiral and irregular galaxies. 
There may also be swarms of dwarf spheroidal systems 
about big galaxies, to judge from our Milky Way 
situation. These DWARF SPHEROIDAL GALAXIES are so faint 
that they are difficult to see at the distances of other 
big galaxies. A small fraction, roughly 5%, of groups 
are predominantly populated by gas-poor ellipticals and 
lenticulars. These groups are dense, have higher motions 
and are undoubtedly more dynamically evolved. 

The LOCAL GRouP is an example of a_ typical 
environment for galaxies. There are two giant spirals, 
Andromeda or M31 (the biggest) and the Milky Way, and 
two intermediate-size galaxies, Triangulum or M33 and 
the Large Magellanic Cloud. In total there are 40 known 
or suspected members but most of these are dwarfs. There 
are two main subgroups within the Local Group, one each 
around the two giant galaxies. There are two other minor 
subgroups around the irregular galaxies NGC 6822 and 
NGC 3109. The two giant galaxies contain 80% of the light 
of the group and are falling toward each other. 


Clusters: the largest collapsed structures in the 
universe 
Rich CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES act as nodal points in the 
filamentary structure of the universe. Clusters can contain 
hundreds of substantial galaxies and thousands of dwarfs. 
The total mass associated with big clusters can reach 10° 
times the mass of the Sun. Less than 10% of this mass is 
directly associated with the stars in the galaxies. Of order 
20% can be associated with hot hydrogen and helium gas 
that fills the space between the galaxies in the clusters and 
radiates thermal x-ray emission. Most of the mass is in an 
unknown form and is part of the ‘DARK MATTER’ problem. 
The galaxies in the richest clusters are ellipticals, 
lenticulars and dwarf spheroidals for the most part. 
Spirals and irregulars fall into the clusters and over time 
must exhaust or be stripped of their cold gas reservoirs. 
Down at the center of the cluster one frequently finds a 
special elliptical galaxy. The central ellipticals are often 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superclusters and the Local Supercluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Great Wall 


22° < 161 < 40° 


Coma Cluster 


Southern Wall 


Figure 1. Large-scale structure (Luiz da Costa (European Southern Observatory), Margaret Geller (Harvard-Smithsonian), and John 


Huchra (Harvard-Smithsonian). 


particularly large and puffed up. They probably grow 
through the AccreTION of galaxies through collisions and 
dynamical friction. The hot intracluster gas can slowly 
condense onto the central galaxy through a cooling flow. 


By far the most prominent nearby cluster is the 
Virgo cluster, usually taken as the center of the Local 
Supercluster. The Virgo cluster is at a distance of 16 Mpc 
(50 million light-years). Galaxies in a spherical region 
within 7 Mpc have decoupled from the expansion of the 
universe and are falling back onto the cluster. 


The nearest rich clusters beyond the Local Super- 
cluster are HYDRA I and CENTAURUS clusters about 2.5 times 
more distant than the Virgo cluster, the Perseus cluster 
about 4 times more distant and the particularly rich 
Coma cluster about 5 times more distant. There are 
occasional aggregates of rich clusters, such as the ‘SHAPLEY 
CONCENTRATION’ of 29 clusters at a distance of roughly 
200 Mpc. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Filaments of galaxies: the cosmic web 

Ninety per cent of galaxies lie outside of rich clusters in 
extended filaments or ‘clouds’. Individual filaments are 
long in one dimension, often intermediate in a second 
dimension, and thin in the third dimension, like a flat pasta 
or a surfboard. Adjacent filaments can share a common 
plane to give the impression of a partially filled surface. 
Other adjacent filaments can lie in layers, analogous to 
window louvers. 

The groups of galaxies lie like beads within the 
filaments. It is thought that filaments have grown through 
self-attraction except that collapse is only partial. Gravity 
has not overcome the expansion of the universe in at least 
the long dimension. In addition to the ~90% of galaxies in 
bound groups or looser associations, about 10% of galaxies 
are not closely linked with other galaxies but still lie in 
the filaments. At most only a few per cent of galaxies lie 
outside these structures (see the complementary article on 
VOIDS). 

Although not conclusively demonstrated, it is 
strongly indicated that filaments essentially never stand 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superclusters and the Local Supercluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


v 
NGC 
5371 
Cluster 


Virgo W 
Cluster 


Figure 2. Detail of part of figure 1 (R Brent Tully (University of Hawaii)). 


alone. Any two places in the universe that are on filaments 
may be interconnected by a path that runs through the 
network of filaments. Simulations of the formation 
of structure demonstrate that matter collapses onto the 
filaments in one or two dimensions and then drains along 
the filaments into the rich clusters. The simulations look 
subtly different in different cosmological models. If the 
universe will expand forever, the filaments seen today 
will eventually dissipate, partly by falling into the clusters 
and partly by the dilution that comes from continued 
expansion. 


Galaxy flows: response to the distribution of mass 


Large-scale structure is evolving. It is now appreciated 
that familiar objects, such as stars and_ interstellar 
gas clouds, contribute only a minor fraction to the 
gravitational fields that cause the formation of galaxies and 
structure on scales larger than galaxies. Mysterious dark 
matter is more important. The amount and distribution 
of dark matter are estimated through observations of the 
flows of galaxies in response to the gravitational fields. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The most certain evidence for motion comes from 
the dipole distribution in the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND 
temperature maps. It is concluded that the Milky Way 
Galaxy has a motion of 600 km s7! toward a well- 
defined position in the southern celestial sky. The motions 
of individual galaxies can be determined, albeit with 
substantial errors. It is evident that galaxies near clusters 
are being attracted toward the clusters and, in general, 
individual galaxies are being attracted toward the largest 
concentrations of galaxies. Overall, nearby galaxies are 
partaking of the motion implied by the dipole in the 
cosmic microwave background radiation. In principle, the 
amplitude of these motions provides information about 
the mean density of the universe. In practise, there is an 
ongoing dispute over the value of the cosmological density 
parameter that ranges over a factor of 5. 


The Local Supercluster and nearby structures 

The Milky Way and ANDROMEDA (M31) GALAXIES, With their 
entourages, reside in the gravitationally bound Local 
Group. At 3-4 Mpc (10-13 million light-years) away are 
the neighboring Sculptor, IC 342—Maffei and M81 groups. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superclusters and the Local Supercluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


These groups and others string along the Coma-Sculptor 
Cloud, a branch filament of the Local Supercluster. The 
Virgo cluster is the central, densest part of the Local 
Supercluster. The main large-scale structure in this local 
region is a band of galaxies that extends across half the 
sky through the Virgo cluster. North of Virgo, the band 
extends to the smaller uRsA Major cluster where one path 
of a bifurcation leads to the Coma-Sculptor cloud. South 
of Virgo, the band extends toward the Centaurus cluster. 
The flow of galaxies indicated by the cosmic microwave 
background dipole anisotropy is in this general direction. 
Viewed from afar, the historical Local Supercluster would 
probably be considered an appendage of a larger Hydra— 
Centaurus-Virgo supercluster. Recent observations in 
the obscured regions of the Milky Way plane suggest 
that the ABELL 3627 CLUSTER may be a particularly important 
component of this supercluster. 

The next nearest important structure is on the 
opposite side of the sky. A prominent filament, somewhat 
resembling a lizard projected on the sky, runs through 
the constellations of Perseus and Pisces. Somewhat 
farther, at roughly 90° to both the Hydra—Centaurus 
and the Perseus—Pisces structures, running through the 
Coma cluster, is a structure called the ‘GREAT WALL’. On 
the opposite side of the sky is the ‘Southern Wall’. As 
our information becomes more complete, connections are 
invariably found between each of these features. 

The two accompanying figures illustrate some of 
these structures. The large scale is shown by figure 1. 
Individual galaxies are represented by small triangles. The 
distance of any given object away from our Milky Way 
Galaxy is given by the radial distance away from the apex 
of the wedge. The units of distance are the redshift units of 
velocity (galaxies that are farther from us are moving away 
with a higher velocity). It is difficult to represent three 
dimensions on a flat page. In this figure one is looking at 
a thin wedge, with hour angle on the sky displayed as the 
opening angle at the apex. A small range of declination 
is projected to the flat page. The Coma cluster is at the 
densest concentration of galaxies in the upper wedge. The 
outstretched arms from the ‘stickman’ body created by the 
Coma cluster is the ‘Great Wall’. The ‘Southern Wall’ is 
seen in the lower wedge. 

The box outline in this figure shows the region which 
is given in greater detail in figure 2. In this case, the data 
have been smoothed to show contours of galaxy density. 
There are many galaxies in the darkest regions, fewer 
within the lighter contours and none in the regions outside 
contours. The second figure illustrates the distribution 
of galaxies in the Local Supercluster. The Local Group 
lies in the Coma-Sculptor cloud, a filament that runs in a 
plane over to the Ursa Major cluster and down to the Virgo 
cluster. 


Bibliography 
Bahcall N A, 1988 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 631 
Geller M J and Huchra J P 1989 Science 246 897 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Giovanelli R and Haynes M P 1991 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 29 499 

Oort J H 1983 Ann. Regv. Astron. Astrophys. 21 373 

Tully R B 1990 Endeavour, New Ser. 14 154 


R Brent Tully 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superior Planets ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Superior Planets 


A collective term for the major planets Mars, Jupiter, 
Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, whose orbits lie 
outside that of the Earth, as opposed to the inferior planets, 
those major planets whose orbits lie inside the Earth’s. 


Compare: outer planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Super-Kamiokande 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Super-Kamiokande 


Super-Kamiokande (SK) found evidence for neutrino 
masses in 1998. The SK detector is located 1000 m 
underground in Kamioka mine in Japan. The detector 
consists of about 50 000 tons of ultra pure water which fills 
a 40 m tall, 40 m diameter cylindrical stainless steel tank. 
Cerenkov radiation produced by neutrino interactions 
in water is viewed with 11146 photomultiplier tubes 
mounted on the inner surface of the tank. The detector 
is used in cooperation with about 120 physicists from 20 
collaborating institutes in Japan and the US. The cosmic ray 
interactions in the atmosphere produce muon-neutrinos 
and electron-neutrinos. SK has found that almost half 
of muon-neutrinos change to tau-neutrinos when they 
travel long distances, such as a diameter of the Earth. 
This phenomenon, called neutrino oscillations, is realized 
only when neutrinos have masses and each flavor state of 
neutrinos is a mixture of different mass states. 

Another objective of SK is a precise measurement 
of solar neutrinos. The observed flux of solar neutrinos 
is about half of the expectation from the standard solar 
model. The deficit may be due to neutrino oscillations 
and the measurement at SK would reveal properties of 
electron-neutrinos. One of the primary objective of SK is 
a search for proton decays. If found, the Grand Unified 
Theory, which unifies strong, electromagnetic and weak 
inteactions, will be proved. 

The data acquisition of SK was started in 1996. The 
predecessor of SK, Kamiokande, observed neutrino burst 
from a supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud in 1987. It 
was the first neutrino observation in astronomical history 
and initiated the dawn of a new era in neutrino astronomy. 

For further information see 
http://www-sk.icrr.u-tokyo.ac.jp /doc/sk/indexl.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superluminal Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Superluminal Motion 


Superluminal motion is a term used to describe rapid 
systematic changes in the appearance of an astronomical 
object, with an observed speed vu.; that appears to be 
faster than the speed of light c. This phenomenon was 
first recognized in the early 1970s, although the possibility 
of very high apparent expansion speeds was recognized 
much earlier. It is seen at radio wavelengths in the nuclei of 
QUASARS and ACTIVEGALAXIES, Where it is relatively common. 
In the 1990s, rapid motions have also been discovered 
in a few objects within our own Galaxy, and the first 
optical detection of superluminal motion in an external 
galaxy has also been obtained. In all cases, the apparent 
physical speed is calculated by multiplying the measured 
(apparent) angular speed by the distance to the source. 

The study of time variations in extragalactic radio 
sources is made possible by the technique of vLBI (VERY- 
LONG-BASELINE INTERFEROMETRY), in which radio telescopes up 
to 1000s of km apart are linked together as an array to 
allow imaging on very fine angular scales, often less than 
0.001 arcsec (1 marcsec). The earliest VLBI observations 
involved only two or three telescopes, and no imaging 
was possible. Instead, simple models comprising two or 
more small components were fitted to the data. These 
simple models yielded the first detection of superluminal 
motion, in the quasar 3C 279 in 1971. In the 1990s, imaging 
arrays such as the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA) have 
allowed astronomers to track motions using images taken 
as often as only a few weeks apart, in the case of rapidly 
variable sources. 

A wide range of apparent speeds is seen in ACTIVE 
GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGN), from more than 10c down to speeds 
which are termed ‘sub-luminal’ (v < c). The most 
extensive compilation of measurements by Vermeulen and 
Cohen (1994) lists 66 extragalactic objects for which speeds 
have been measured, and well over half are superluminal. 
Superluminal sources provide important observational 
evidence for extreme physical phenomena in the centers of 
active galaxies, and the statistics of superluminal motion 
have an important role to play in cosmology. 

The quasar 3C345 is one of the best-known 
superluminal radio sources. Figure 1 shows a series of 
images in which superluminal motion is found in several 
features in the jet simultaneously (Zensus et al 1995). In 
many sources, images at low frequency, with arcsecond- 
scale resolution, show extended radio features on both 
sides of the nucleus, supporting the belief that the jet is 
in fact two sided, but is invisible on one side. In a few 
cases, images with intermediate resolution by the very 
large array (VLA) show two-sided jets. 


Kinematic explanation of superluminal motion 

The simplest, and by far the most widely accepted, 
explanation of superluminal motion, consistent with 
known physics and available astronomical data, is a 
phenomenon of the kinematics of moving bodies. In 
most superluminal sources, the motions are seen along the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Uv 
é 
2 
25 
E 
— 1986.40 
# 
c 
i | Op 
= 1986.87 
10 @ o 2 
” 1987.42 
© 1988.16 
=" i 
-2 + 


Relotive RA (milffaresec} 


Figure 1. A series of six VLBI images of the quasar 3C 345 
(redshift z = 0.6, corresponding to a distance of 2000 Mpc) 
observed over a period of 4 yr. The images are in the radio band, 
at a frequency 22 GHz, arranged vertically, in time order. The 
axes are labeled in units of milliarcseconds. A bright feature on 
the left side is identified as the (stationary) nucleus of the quasar 
and a feature on the right moves away steadily with time. The 
superluminal speed ranges between about 3c and 5c. 


length of a relativistic jet which transports energy from 
the central engine to a pair of radio lobes. To produce 
an apparent speed faster than c requires (1) a true speed, 
in the quasar reference frame, approaching c, (2) a small 
angle between the jet direction and the line of sight and (3) 
an independent measure of the distance to the source. A 
distance is required because the apparent proper motion 
has to be converted into an (apparent) physical speed by 
multiplying by the distance. 

Given these three conditions, the geometric relation 
which gives rise to superluminal motion may be explained 
as follows (see figure 2). At a time fp, a quasar nucleus (N) 
ejects a blob of plasma (shaded dot) traveling at relativistic 
speed v = fc along a ‘jet’ at an angle 6 to the line of sight to 
the observer (shaded arrow). The term relativistic implies 
1— £6 <1. Both the nucleus and the blob emit radio waves 
(black arrows), which result in the schematic VLBI images 
shown at the bottom, corresponding to the blob passing 
points B1 and B2 in the jet. 

In the reference frame of the quasar, the time interval 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superluminal Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Apparent proper motion Pops 


Doppler factor 6 


Figure 3. Kinematic parameter space of a superluminal source. The figure shows contours of constant jet angle to the line of sight 6 
and Lorentz factor y of the relativistic jet flow. The axes represent two geometric observables: the superluminal speed {op in units of c 
and the Doppler factor 5 deduced from X-ray properties of the source. The region Bop, > 1 constraints the values of (0, y) for which the 


speed is superluminal. 


between the events B1 and B2 is simply t; tf. However, the 
time interval between the arrival at Earth of radio waves 
from the two events is much less than t; — t2, because the 
blob moves almost as fast as the radio waves it emitted at 
an earlier time. This is the essence of the phenomenon—if 
the timescale is compressed, than the apparent speed is 
increased: the apparent speed is an over-estimate of the 
true speed. 

This compression can be easily quantified. The 
projected separation of Bl and B2, as deduced from the 
images, is v(t; — f2)sin@. When the blob reaches B2, the 
radio signals from B1 are closer to earth by an amount 
c(t — th) — v(t, — 2) cos 6. Hence the time interval between 
the VLBI images is (tf, — t2) — (v/c)(t, — t2)cos@. The 
apparent speed vops is simply the projected separation 
divided by the time difference between the arrival times 
of signals from B1 and B2. Hence 


Vops = Bobs¢ = v sin @/[1 — (v/c) cos 8]. 


This formula for the apparent speed applies to any angle 
6 and any jet speed v = Bc where f < 1. The regime 
of superluminal motion corresponds to small 6 and v 
approaching c. Hence vp; > cisnotin conflict with special 
relativity. 


Other explanations of superluminal motion 

Many explanations of superluminal motion have been 
proposed. The above geometric explanation, based on 
Einstein’s SPECIAL RELATIVITY, is straightforward and by far 
the most widely accepted. Alternative explanations of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


superluminal motion are possible. The most direct is 
that special relativity is incorrect—in other words, very 
high speeds are acceptable. However, this explanation 
would require a major re-write of the laws of physics as 
currently understood, because special relativity has been 
experimentally verified in a wide variety of situations. 
Furthermore, models allowing speeds in excess of c are 
logically inconsistent with the simple geometric model 
below. 

An alternative explanation which is possible, in 
principle, is that the distance to the superluminal source 
has been overestimated. ‘To compute a speed from a 
measured PROPER MOTION across the sky, one requires the 
distance to the source. Distances to AGN are computed 
using their REDsHIFT and the cosmological interpretation 
of the HUBBLE CONSTANT. Eliminating superluminal motion 
in AGN would require either a non-cosmological redshift 
(ie. that the redshift is not a measure of the source 
distance) or increasing the Hubble constant by a factor of 
10. While these possibilities do not violate any known 
physics directly, they are inconsistent with the body of 
astronomical data on scales from parsecs to megaparsecs. 

The ‘Christmas tree’ model is more plausible. In 
this model superluminal components in a radio source 
are represented by randomly flashing lights. This allows 
arbitrarily large speeds, because there is no causal relation 
between successive images. If this explanation is correct, 
then most superluminal sources would show random 
variations between successive images, with no preference 
for expansions over contractions. In poorly sampled time 
sequences, this may appear to be the case. However, in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superluminal Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


N 
6; V 
0 
P1'--@B1 
P2 '--4-@B2 
/ c| Ic 


@ ty 
@ to 


Figure 2. Geometric explanation of superluminal motion. At a 
time fg, a quasar nucleus (N) ejects a blob of plasma (shaded dot) 
traveling at speed v = Bc (8 < 1) along a ‘jet’ at an angle 6 to the 
line of sight to the observer (shaded arrow). Both the nucleus 
and the blob emit radio waves (black arrows), which result in 
the schematic radio images shown at the bottom, corresponding 
to the blob passing points B1 and B2 in the jet. In the observer’s 
frame, the time interval between events B1 and B2 is greatly 
compressed, resulting in an apparent jet speed which is an 
overestimate of the true speed (see text). 


cases when the images are of good quality, and the time 
sampling is adequate, the motions are highly organized, 
with expansions almost invariably favored. In rare 
cases, GRAVITATIONAL LENSING, due to chance alignment of a 
massive object along the line of sight, can cause distortions 
in quasar images resulting in superluminal motion. Again, 
contractions should be as common as expansions, but this 
explanation remains possible in a handful of cases. 
Another class of non-causal model is termed the 
‘lighthouse model’. A rotating beam from the quasar 
illuminates stationary clouds that reflect the radio waves 
to Earth. Again, because there is no causal relation 
between the emitting regions, very high apparent speeds 
are possible in certain geometric orientations. This 
model yields organized motions, such as are seen, 
but again should show no preference for expansions 
over contractions. A similar non-causal superluminal 
model uses ‘light echos’. A flare propagates out from 
the nucleus, illuminating nearby material, which emits 
radiation toward the observer. Light echos have been 
convincingly seen in a few active galaxies, in the evolution 
of the optical spectra from the nucleus. Images of a light 
echo source should show a maximum speed of 2c, which 
is inconsistent with the bulk of the available active galaxy 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


data (Vermeulen and Cohen 1994). However, the ring 
around supernova SN1987A and the varying intensity of 
its emission are explained well by this model. 


Statistics of superluminal motion 

Observations of superluminal sources are subject to strong 
selection effects, because the brightness of a source 
increases if it is moving toward the Earth (resulting 
in Doppler boosting). The receding jet, or counter- 
jet, is often dimmed by this effect to the point of 
undetectability. Doppler boosting is dependent on a 
geometric combination of 6 and y, just like superluminal 
motion. The boost, relative to a stationary emitter is 5ere 
where a is the power-law spectral index of the emission 
defined by S « v%, where S is the flux density, and v is the 
observing frequency. 5 is the Doppler factor (or blueshift 
factor), and is given by 


6=y '(— Bcosé)"! 


where the jet Lorentz factor y = (1 — B?)~1/. 

6 and Bors are Shown in figure 3, as functions of 6 and 
y. This plot is a tool for deriving the important Lorentz 
factor y and other geometric quantities, since they can be 
derived from measurements of 6 and fs. For instance, 
a measured jet to counter-jet brightness ratio excludes a 
circular region, centered on the origin, in this parameter 
space. 

Many observational consequences result from this 
simple model, and a number are being actively studied. 
Relativistic beaming ensures that most of the quasars well 
studied with VLBI are those that are beamed almost at the 
Earth, since these are the brightest and easiest to observe. 
However, only a small fraction of the parent population 
can be directed toward Earth, if the true orientations are 
random. The identification of a parent population, or 
populations, of objects for the superluminal sources is a 
topic of much current research. Are relativistic motions 
(6 approaching 1) ubiquitous in quasars? The answer 
may be yes, but it depends on how extreme the selection 
effects are in real samples. Does a characteristic (physical) 
speed (ie. Lorentz factor y) for quasars exist? If so, 
then that speed can be used to measure distances out to 
large redshifts. The superluminal phenomenon is rare in 
quasars as a whole, because most are weak radio sources. 
Because superluminal motion involves the redshift, it may 
be used as a tool to study the COSMOLOGICAL EVOLUTION 
of the universe. In a comprehensive statistical study 
of a sample of 66 extragalactic sources with measured 
proper motions, Vermeulen and Cohen (1994) concluded 
that a single Lorentz factor is inconsistent with current 
observations. 


Jet physics 

Superluminal motion is one of the phenomena encoun- 
tered when studying the kinematics of jets. Many extra- 
galactic RADIO souRcES, including the radio-loud quasars, 
show essentially two-dimensional ‘lobe’ structures on 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Superluminal Motion 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


large scales, out to Mpc. Often, but not always, a visible 
narrow jet links an active nucleus at the center of the host 
galaxy with the outer lobes. Basic physical arguments that 
require transport of energy from the nucleus have been 
widely accepted since the 1970s: the diffuse ionized lobes 
require continuous re-supply of energy in order to emit ra- 
dio waves. The jets are streams of particles with high bulk 
kinetic energy which provide this transport of energy and 
matter. The physics of jets remains a very active area of 
astronomical research, because of the wide range of phys- 
ical processes which occur within jets and in their inter- 
actions with the ‘host’ galaxy medium. BLAZARS represent 
the most extreme examples of AGN. Almost all are strong, 
highly variable, radio sources, but also emit so strongly 
in other wavebands (including the hardest gamma rays) 
that they are among the most luminous objects in the uni- 
verse. Jets may remain relativistic to large radii, but most 
are too faint to detect reliably in the radio beyond a few 
milliarcsec. A handful, including the famous 20 arcsec jet 
in quasar 3C 273, are visible in the optical. 

Superluminal motion is just one of a number of 
observations which can help us to understand the physics 
of relativistic jets (see review by Marscher 1998). Doppler 
boosting in jets (the 5°** factor described above) is the 
key to understanding the broad-band energy emission 
from active galaxies. The shape of the overall spectrum— 
from radio waves to gamma rays—is determined not only 
by the intrinsic emission from the nucleus and jet but 
also by Doppler boosting which results from bulk flow of 
emitting material. In the case of 3C 345, Unwin and Wehrle 
(1992) showed that the x-ray emission generated via the 
inverse-Compton process should exceed the actual x-ray 
brightness measured by x-ray satellites, unless Doppler 
boosting is present. Surveys have combined x-ray and 
VLBI data to deduce lower limits to the Doppler boosting 
of samples of superluminal radio sources. 

Not all superluminal sources are quasars or AGN. A 
few objects in the MILKY WAY GALAXY also show superluminal 
motion. An example is GRS1915+105, a relativistic jet 
source, which emits strongly in x-rays as well as in the 
radio (Rodriguez and Mirabel 1999). Because the object is 
within our Galaxy, the apparent speed of 1.25c is detectable 
in less than a day, compared with months to years for 
the much more distant (and powerful) AGN. Galactic 
superluminal sources are of particular interest because of 
the opportunity to study a relativistic jet ‘up close’. While 
important differences exist, the study of these nearby ‘mini 
blazars’ may help our understanding of the most distant 
and powerful objects in the universe. 


Bibliography 

Marscher A P 1998 The blazar paradigm ASP Conference 
Series 144 (San Francisco, CA: ASP) pp 25-32 

Rodriguez L F and Mirabel I F 1999 Repeated relativistic 
ejections in GRS 1915+105 Astrophys. J. 511 398-404 

Unwin S C and Wehrle A E 1992 Kinematics of the parsec- 
scale relativistic jet in 3C 345 Astrophys. J. 398 74-86 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Vermeulen R C and Cohen M H 1994 Superluminal motion 
statistics and cosmology Astrophys. J. 430 467-94 
Zensus J A, Cohen M H and Unwin S C 1995 The parsec- 
scale jet in quasar 3C 345 Astrophys. J. 443 35-53 


Stephen C Unwin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active 
Galactic Nuclei 


QUASARS are among the most energetic objects in the uni- 
verse. We now know that they live at the centers of galax- 
ies and that they are the most dramatic manifestation of 
the more general phenomenon of ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI 
(AGNs). These include a wide variety of exotica such as 
SYEFERT GALAXIES, RADIO GALAXIES and BL LACERTAE OBJECTS. 
Since the discovery of quasars in 1963, much effort has 
gone into understanding their energy source. The suite of 
proposed ideas has ranged from the relatively prosaic, 
such as bursts of star formation that make multiple 
supernova explosions, to the decidedly more colorful, 
such as supermassive stars, giant pulsars or ‘spinars’, 
and supermassive black holes (SMBHs). Over time, 
SMBHs have gained the widest acceptance. The key 
observations that led to this consensus are as follows. 
Quasars have prodigious luminosities. Not uncom- 
monly, L~1046 erg s-!; this is 10 times the luminosity of 
the brightest galaxies. Yet they are tiny, because they vary 
on timescales of hours. From the beginning, the need for 
an extremely compact and efficient engine could hardly 
have been more apparent. Gravity was implicated, 
because collapse to a BLACK HOLE is the most efficient 
energy source known. The most cogent argument is due 
to Donald Lynden-Bell (1969). He showed that any 
attempt to power quasars by nuclear reactions alone is 
implausible. First, a lower limit to the total energy output 
of a quasar is the energy, ~106! erg, that is stored in its 
radio-emitting plasma halo. This energy weighs 1040 g or 
107M,. However, nuclear reactions produce energy with 
an efficiency of only e=0.7%. Then the waste mass left 
behind in powering quasars would be at least M.~109M3. 
Lynden-Bell argued further that quasar engines are 
2R~10'5 cm in diameter because large variations in 
quasar luminosities are observed on timescales as short 
as 10 h. However, the gravitational potential energy of 
109M,,compressed into a volume as small as 10 light- 
hours is ~GM.2</R210% erg. As Lynden-Bell noted, 
‘Evidently although our aim was to produce a model 
based on nuclear fuel, we have ended up with a model 
which has produced more than enough energy by gravi- 
tational contraction. The nuclear fuel has ended as an 
irrelevance’. We now know that the total energy output 
is larger than the energy that is stored in a quasar’s radio 
source; this strengthens the argument. Meanwhile, a 
caveat has appeared: the objects that vary most rapidly 
are now thought to contain relativistic jets that are 
beamed at us. This boosts the power of a possibly small 
part of the quasar engine and weakens the argument that 
the object cannot vary on timescales less than the light 
travel time across it. However, this phenomenon would 
not occur at all if relativistic motions were not involved, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


so SMBH-like potential wells are still implicated. These 
considerations suggest that quasar power derives from 
gravity. 

The presence of deep gravitational potentials has 
long been inferred from the large velocity widths of the 
emission lines seen in optical and ultraviolet spectra of 
AGNs. These are typically 2000-10000 km s-1. If the large 
Doppler shifts arise from gravitationally bound gas, then 
the binding objects are both massive and compact. The 
obstacle to secure interpretation has always been the 
realization that gas is easy to push around: explosions 
and ejection of gas are common astrophysical phen- 
omena. The observation that unambiguously points to 
relativistically deep gravitational potential wells is the 
detection of radio jets with plasma knots that are seen to 
move faster than the speed of light, c. Apparent expan- 
sion rates of (1-10)c are easily achieved if the true expan- 
sion rate approaches c and the jet is pointed almost at us. 

The final pillar on which the SMBH paradigm is 
based is the observation that many AGN jets are well 
collimated and straight. Evidently AGN engines can 
remember ejection directions with precision for up to 
107 yr. The natural explanation is a single rotating body 
that acts as a stable gyroscope. Alternative AGN engines 
that are made of many bodies—such as stars and super- 
novae—do not easily make straight jets. 

A variety of other evidence also is consistent with 
the SMBH picture, but the above arguments were the 
ones that persuaded a majority of the astronomical com- 
munity to take the extreme step of adopting SMBHs as 
the probable engine for AGN activity. In the meantime, 
SMBH alternatives such as single supermassive stars and 
spinars were shown to be dynamically unstable and 
hence short lived. Even if such objects can form, they are 
believed to collapse to SMBHs. 

The above picture became the paradigm long before 
there was direct evidence for SMBHs. Dynamical evi- 
dence is the subject of this article and the following one 
(SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES IN ACTIVE GALAXIES). 
Meanwhile, there are new kinds of observations that 
point directly to SMBH engines. In particular, recent 
observations by the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology 
and Astrophysics (AScA) have provided strong evidence 
for relativistic motions in AGNs. The x-ray spectra of 
many Seyfert galaxy nuclei contain iron Ka emission 
lines (rest energies of 6.4-6.9 keV; see figure 1). These 
lines show enormous Doppler broadening—in some 
cases approaching 100000 km s-! or 0.3c—as well as 
asymmetric line profiles that are consistent with rela- 
tivistic boosting and dimming in the approaching and 
receding parts, respectively, of SMBH accretion disks as 
small as a few Schwarzschild radii. 

The foregoing discussion applies to the most pow- 
erful members of the AGN family, namely quasars and 
high-luminosity Seyfert and radio galaxies. It is less 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0,02 


Q 


Line Flix (arb. wnita} 
0.01 


Rest. energy (keV) 


Figure 1. A composite x-ray spectrum of Seyfert nuclei taken 
with ASCA showing the relativistically broadened Fe Ka line. 
The solid curve is a fit to the line profile using two Gaussians, a 
narrow component centered at 6.4 keV and a much broader, red- 
shifted component. (Figure adapted from Nandra K et al 1997 
Astrophys. J. 477 602.) 


compelling for the more abundant low-luminosity 
objects, where energy requirements are less demanding 
and where long jets or superluminal motions are seen 
less frequently or less clearly. Therefore a small but 
vocal competing school of thought continues to argue 
that stellar processes alone, particularly those that occur 
during bursts of STAR FORMATION, can reproduce many 
AGN characteristics. Nonetheless, dynamical evidence 
suggests that SMBHs do lurk in some mildly active 
nuclei, and, as discussed in the next article, even in the 
majority of inactive galaxies. 


Measuring AGN masses: direct methods 

Very general arguments suggest that quasar engines 
have masses M.~10°-109M,. Gravitational collapse is 
believed to liberate energy with an efficiency of e=0.1; 
Lynden-Bell’s arguments then imply that typical rem- 
nant masses are M,.~108My. Better estimates can be 
derived by asking what we need in order to power 
quasar luminosities, which range from 104 to 1047 erg s-1 
or 10!!L, to 10!4L5. For e=0.1, the engine must consume 
0.02-20M, yr-!. How much waste mass accumulates 
depends on how long quasars live. This is poorly known. 
If they live long enough to make radio jets that are colli- 
mated over several Mpc, and if their lifetimes are conser- 
vatively estimated as the light travel time along the 
jets, then quasars last 2107 yr and reach masses 
M.2105-108M;. However, the most rigorous lower limit 
on M, follows from the condition that the outward force 
of radiation pressure on accreting matter not overwhelm 
the inward gravitational attraction of the engine, a con- 
dition which, admittedly, strictly holds only if the accret- 
ing material and the radiation have spherical symmetry. 
This so-called Eddington limit requires that 
LSLg~(4aiGem, / 07)M.=1.3x1098 (M./Ms) erg sl, or 


2000 


1500 


1000 


Velocity (km/s) 


500 L 1 L it at L L L 


T TI T 


a tet llllrs aoe oa 


Xa = 1.55 4 


Hei ig Pig ey ea ge 
—0.6 —0.4 —0.2 0) 0.2 0.4 0.6 


Position along the slit (arcsec) 


Residuals (km/s) 


Figure 2. (2) HST image of the ionized gas disk near the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. The data were taken 
with the Second Wide Field/Planetary Camera through a filter that isolates the optical emission lines Ha and [N II] AA 
6548, 6583. The left inset is an expanded view of the gas disk; for an adopted distance of 16.8 Mpc, the region shown is 
5°°x5”’ or 410 pex410 pe. The disk has a major axis diameter of ~150 pc, and it is oriented perpendicular to the optical 
jet. Image courtesy of NASA/Space Telescope Science Institute, based on data originally published by Ford H C et al 
1994 Astrophys. J. 435 L27.) (b) Optical emission-line rotation curve for the nuclear disk in M87. The data were taken 
with the Faint Object Camera on HST. The curves in the upper panel correspond to two different Keplerian thin-disk 
models, and the bottom panel shows the residuals for the best-fitting model. (Figure adapted from Macchetto F et al 


1997 Astrophys. J. 489 579.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. (Left) HST image of the central region of the 
giant elliptical galaxy M84; the box measures 22°°x19” or 
1.8 kpex1.6 kpc for an adopted distance of 16.8 Mpc. The 
data were taken with the Second Wide Field/Planetary 
Camera through a filter that isolates the optical emission 
lines Ha and [N II] AA 6548, 6583. The slit of the Space 
Telescope Imaging Spectrograph was placed along the 
major axis of the nuclear gas disk (blue rectangle). 
(Right) Resulting spectrum of the central 3”° (240 pc). The 
abscissa is velocity and the ordinate is distance along the 
major axis. The spectrum shows the characteristic kine- 
matic signature of a rotating disk. The velocity scale is 
coded such that blue and red correspond to blueshifts 
and redshifts, respectively; the total velocity range is 
1445 km s-!. (Image courtesy of NASA/Space Telescope 
Science Institute, based on data originally published by 
Bower G A et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 483 L33 and Bower G 
Aet al 1998 Astrophys. J. 492 L111.) 


equivalently that M.2 8x105(L/10“ erg s-!)M,, Here G is 
the gravitational constant, 7, is the mass of the proton 
and or is the Thompson cross section for electron scat- 
tering. We conclude that we are looking for SMBHs with 
masses M,~10°-109M,. Finding them has become one of 
the ‘Holy Grails’ of astronomy because of the importance 
of confirming or disproving the AGN paradigm. 

AGNs provide the impetus to look for SMBHs, but 
ACTIVE GALAXIES are the most challenging hunting 
ground. Stellar dynamical searches first found central 
dark objects in inactive galaxies (see SUPERMASSIVE BLACK 
HOLES IN INACTIVE GALAXIES), but they cannot be applied 
in very active galaxies, because the nonthermal nucleus 
outshines the star light. We can estimate masses using 
the kinematics of gas, but only if it is unperturbed by 
nongravitational forces. Fortunately, this complication 
can be ruled out a posteriori if we observe that the gas is 
in Keplerian rotation around the center, i.e. if its rotation 
velocity as a function of radius is V(r):1-1/2. We can also 
stack the cards in our favor by targeting galaxies that are 
only weakly active and that appear to show gas disks in 
images taken through narrow bandpasses centered on 
prominent emission lines. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Kinematics of optical emission lines 

High-resolution optical images taken with ground-based 
telescopes and especially with the Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST) show that many giant ELLIPTICAL GALAX- 
IES contain nuclear disks of dust and ionized gas. The 
most famous case is M87 (figure 2(a)). The disk measures 
~150 pc across, and its rotation axis is closely aligned 
with the optical and radio jet. This is in accord with the 
SMBH accretion picture. The disk is in Keplerian rotation 
figure 2(b)) around an object of mass M,=3x109M,. 
Furthermore, this object is dark: the measured mass-to- 
light ratio exceeds 100 in solar units, and this is much 
larger than that of any known population of stars. 
Moreover, the dark mass must be very compact: the 
velocity field limits its radial extent to be less than 5 pce. 
Therefore its density exceeds 107M, pc-3. Another illus- 
tration of this technique is given in figure 3. M84, also a 
denizen of the Virgo cluster of galaxies, is a twin of M87 
in size, and it, too, harbors an inclined nuclear gas disk 
(diameter ~80 pc), whose rotation about the center 
betrays an invisible mass of M.=2x109M,. Other cases 
are reported (NGC 4261, NGC 6251, NGC 7052), and 
searches for more are in progress. 


Kinematics of radio masers 

A related approach exploits the few cases where 22 GHz 
microwave maser emission from water molecules has 
been found in edge-on nuclear disks of gas. Particularly 
strong ‘megamasers’ allow radio astronomers to use 
interferometry to map the velocity field with exquisite 
angular resolution. In the most dramatic application of 
this method, the Very Long Baseline Array was used to 
achieve resolution 0°’.0006—100 times better than that 
delivered by HST—in observations of the Seyfert galaxy 
NGC 4258. This is only 6 Mpc away, so the linear resolu- 
tion was a remarkable 0.017 pc. The masers trace out a 
slightly warped annulus with an inner radius of 0.13 pc, 
an outer radius of 0.26 pc and a thickness of <0.003 pc 
(figure 4, left). The masers with nearly zero velocity with 
respect to the galaxy are on the near side of the disk 
along the line of sight to the center, while the features 
with high negative (approaching) and positive (receding) 
velocities come from the disk on either side of the center. 
High velocities imply that 3.6x107M, of binding matter 
resides interior to r=0.13 pc. What is most compelling 
about NGC 4258 is the observation that the rotation 
curve is so precisely Keplerian (figure 4, right). From this 
result, one can show that the radius of the mass distribu- 
tion must be r$0.012 pe. If the central mass were not an 
SMBH, its density would be extraordinarily high, 
p;>5x1012M, pe-3. This is comparable with the density of 
the dark mass at the center of our Galaxy (see SUPERMAS- 
SIVE BLACK HOLES IN ACTIVE GALAXIES). Under these 
extreme conditions, one can show that a cluster of stellar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


remnants (white dwarf stars, neutron stars and stellar- 
size black holes) or substellar objects (planets and brown 
dwarfs) is short lived. Astrophysically, these are the most 
plausible alternatives to an SMBH. Therefore the dynam- 
ical case for an SMBH is stronger in NGC 4258 and in our 
Galaxy than in any other object. 


Measuring AGN masses: indirect methods 

Direct dynamical measurements are impractical for more 
luminous and more distant AGNs. The tremendous glare 
from the nucleus outshines the circumnuclear emission 
from stars, and the violent conditions near the center are 
likely to subject the gas to nongravitational forces. 
Indirect methods of estimating central masses have been 


Dec. Offsct (mas) 


“0.2 0.0 O02 04 06 
R.A. Offset (mas) 


i L 
© 2E 
e7 
Be a é 
$ oF t we cy 
5 L 
g al 
a L 

5 0 -5 


R.A. Offset (mas) 


devised to provide a reality check for these more difficult 
objects. 


Fitting the spectra of accretion disks 

As material falls toward a black hole, it is believed to set- 
tle into an ACCRETION DISK in which angular momentum 
is dissipated by viscosity. From the virial theorem, half of 
the gravitational potential energy U is radiated. 
Therefore the luminosity is 


1 —1dU _ 1GMM, 
2dr 2 or © 
At sufficiently high accretion rates M., the gas is 


optically thick, and the disk radiates as a thermal black- 
body: 


L=2nroT*. 


zag i a | (PG WT OO | 


1500 


1000 


‘o 
E 
= 

zB 500 
o 
So 
o 
> 
c 
wo 
a 

0 

-500 


§ 8765 432 1 0-1-2 -3-4-5-6-7-8-9 


Distance along Major Axis (mas) 


Figure 4. (Left) Spatial distribution of the water masers in NGC 4258, with redshifted velocities to the left and blueshift- 
ed velocities to the right. The maser spots are distributed in a thin, warped annulus that is only 4° from edge on. For 
an adopted distance of 6.4 Mpc, 1 mas=0.031 pc. The top panel shows an expanded view of the emission near the sys- 
temic velocity of the galaxy. (Right) Light-of-sight velocity as a function of distance along the major axis of the annu- 
lus. The high-velocity features are accurately fitted by a Keplerian model, overplotted as a continuous line. The emis- 
sion near the systemic velocity, magnified in the inset, lies at nearly constant radius in the front part of the disk along 
the line of sight to the center. The linear velocity gradient results from the change in projection of the rotation velocity. 


(Figure adapted from Miyoshi M et al 1995 Nature 373 127.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Here 2ntr? is the surface area of the disk and o is the 
Stefan—Boltzmann constant. The effective temperature of 
the disk as a function of radius r is therefore 


GMM, v4 
4nor3 ) : 


T(r) ~ ( 


Parameterizing the above result in terms of the 
Eddington accretion rate, MpeLp/ ec2=2.2(¢/0.1)-1(M. / 
108M;) Ms yr-!, and the Schwarzschild radius, 
Ro~2GM, / c2=2.95x1013(M, / 108M) cm, gives 


f, 14 . \ 4 —3/4 
T(r) =6 x 10° K(F) (sone) tz) 


In other words, the peak of the blackbody spectrum 
occurs at a frequency Of Viax=2-8kT /h=4x1016 Hz, where 
k is Boltzmann’s constant and h is Planck’s constant. This 
peak is near 100 a or 0.1 keV. In fact, the spectra of many 
AGNs show a broad emission excess at extreme ultravi- 
olet or soft x-ray wavelengths. This ‘big blue bump’ has 
often been identified with the thermal emission from the 
accretion disk. A fit to the luminosity and the central fre- 
quency of the big blue bump gives M, and M, but not 
each separately. Corrections for disk inclination and rela- 
tivistic effects further complicate the analysis. This 
method is therefore model dependent and provides only 
approximate masses. Typical values for quasars are 
M.=(108-1095)M, and M.2(0.1-1) Mg. Seyfert nuclei 
appear to have lower masses, M.=(1075-1085)M,, and 


lower accretion rates, M.=(0.01-0.5)Mg. 


Virial masses from optical variability 

Surrounding the center at a distance of 0.01-1 pc from the 
black hole lies the ‘broad-line region’ (BLR). This is a 
compact, dense and highly turbulent swarm of gas 
clouds or filaments. The clouds are illuminated by the 
AGN’s_ photoionizing continuum radiation and 
reprocess it into emission lines that are broadened to 
velocities of several thousand km s-! by the strong grav- 
itational field of the black hole. Then 


“ 
u'FBLR 
G 
where y=1-3 depends on the kinematic model adopted, 
v is the velocity dispersion of the gas as reflected in the 
widths of the emission lines and rgrp is the radius of the 
BLR. The latter can be estimated by ‘reverberation map- 
ping’, as follows. The photoionizing continuum of an 
AGN typically varies on timescales of days to months. In 
response, the emission lines vary also, but with a time 
delay that corresponds to the light travel time between 
the continuum source and the line-emitting gas. By mon- 
itoring the variations in the continuum and the emission 


M,= 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


lines in an individual object, reverberation mapping pro- 
vides information on the size of the BLR. These studies 
also support the assumption that the line widths come 
predominantly from bound orbital motions. Applying 
equation (5) suggests that Seyfert nuclei are powered by 
black holes with masses M,~(107-108)M;, while quasar 
engines are more massive, with M.~(108-109)M5. Since 
quasars also live in more massive host galaxies, this sup- 
ports the emerging correlation (see the following article) 
between SMBH mass and the mass of the elliptical- 
galaxy-like part of the host galaxy. 


X-ray variability 

AGNs vary most conspicuously in hard x-rays (2-10 
keV). One might hope to use the variability timescale to 
constrain the size of the x-ray-emitting region and hence 
to estimate the central mass. However, no simple pattern 
of variability emerges, and defining a meaningful 
timescale is ambiguous. One approach uses the ‘fastest 
doubling time’, Af, to establish a maximum source size 
Rc At. High-energy photons presumably come from the 
hot, inner regions of the accretion disk or in an overlying 
hot corona. For example, if R=5Rs, as deduced in some 
models, we obtain an upper limit to the mass, 
M.<(c3/10G) At~104 At M; (At ins). Masses estimated in 
this way are generally consistent with those obtained 
from other virial arguments, but they are considerably 
less robust because of uncertainties in associating the 
variability timescale with a source size. For example, the 
x-ray intensity variations could originate from localized 
‘hotspots’ in the accretion flow. 

X-ray reverberation mapping may in the future be a 
more powerful tool. The iron Ka line is widely believed 
to be produced by reprocessing of the hard x-ray contin- 
uum by the accretion disk. The strikingly large width 
and skewness of the line profiles (figure 1), now routine- 
ly detected with ASCA, reflect the plasma bulk motion 
within 10-100 gravitational radii of the center. The tem- 
poral response of the line strength and line profile 
depends on a number of factors that, in principle, can be 
modeled theoretically; these include the geometry of the 
x-ray source, the structure of the disk, and the assumed 
(Schwarzschild or Kerr) metric of the black hole. Time- 
resolved X-ray spectroscopy should become feasible 
with the X-ray Multi-Mirror Mission (XMM) in the near 
future. We can then look forward to constraints on both 
the masses and the spins of SMBHs. 


Summary and prospects 

he black hole model for AGN activity has been success- 
ful and popular for over three decades. It has withstood 
the test of time not—at least until recently—because the 
empirical evidence for SMBHs has been overwhelming 
but because the alternatives are so implausible. Now 
progress has advanced on several fronts. The refurbished 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HST has greatly strengthened the evidence, already 
growing from ground-based observations, that super- 
massive dark objects live at the centers of most galaxies. 
The pace of discoveries is accelerating. The dark objects 
have exactly the range of masses that we need to explain 
AGN engines, but we have had no proof that they must 
be black holes. Then radio interferometry revealed the 
spectacular maser disk in NGC 4258. For its rotation 
curve to be as accurately Keplerian as we observe, the 
central mass must be confined to an astonishingly tiny 
volume. The inferred density of the central object is so 
high that astrophysically plausible alternatives can be 
excluded; an SMBH is the best explanation. The same 
conclusion has been reached for the SMBH candidate at 
the center of our Galaxy. This is a major conceptual 
breakthrough. 

In addition, ASCA has demonstrated that many 
AGNs show iron emission lines with relativistically 
broadened profiles. This is arguably the best evidence for 
the strong gravitational field of a black hole. One of the 
most interesting prospects for the future is time-resolved 
x-ray spectroscopy, because hot gas probes closest to an 
accreting black hole. 

Finally, the AGN paradigm can be turned inside out 
to give what may prove to be the most direct argument 
for black holes. SMBHs were ‘invented’ to explain 
nuclear activity in galaxies. In recent years, an ironic sit- 
uation has developed: some SMBH candidates are too 
inactive for the amount of matter that we believe they are 
accreting. The same is true of some stellar-mass black 
hole candidates that accrete gas from evolving compan- 
ion stars. A number of researchers recently have devel- 
oped a theory of ‘advection-dominated accretion’ in 
which the accretion disk cannot radiate most of its ener- 
gy before it reaches Rg either because it is optically thick 
or because it is too thin to cool. Unless most of the inflow- 
ing material ultimately escapes through an outflow, a 
possibility being explored, the only way to make the 
accretion energy disappear is to ensure that the accreting 
body does not have a hard surface. That is, the inactivity 
of well-fed nuclear engines may be evidence that they 
have event horizons. Finding event horizons would be 
definitive proof that AGN engines are black holes. 


Bibliography 

Initial debate concerning the physical nature of quasars 

is summarized in 

Burbidge G and Burbidge E M 1967 Quasi-Stellar Objects 
(San Francisco: Freeman) 


The three key historical papers that originated the SMBH 
hypothesis are 


Lynden-Bell D 1969 Nature 223 690 
Salpeter E E 1964 Astrophys. J. 140 796 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Zel'dovich Ya B and Novikov I D 1964 Sov. Phys. Dokl. 
158 811 


The argument for ‘gravity power’ was further developed 
in 
Lynden-Bell D 1978 Phys. Scripta 17 185 


Textbook style discussions of AGN physics can be found 
in 


Courvoisier T J-L and Mayor M 1990 Active Galactic 
Nuclei (Saas-Fee Course 20) (Berlin: Springer) 

Peterson B M 1997 An Introduction to Active Galactic 
Nuclei (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


The SMBH paradigm is covered at a more technical level 
in the following review articles: 


Begelman M C, Blandford R D and Rees M J 1984 Rev. 
Mod. Phys. 56 255 

Blandford R D 1990 Active Galactic Nuclei (Saas-Fee Course 
20) ed T J-L Courvoisier and M Mayor (Berlin: 
Springer) p 161 

Rees M J 1984 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 22 471 


The search for SMBHs is reviewed in 


Kormendy J and Richstone D 1995 Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 33 581 
Richstone D et al 1998 Nature 395 


The starburst theory for the origin of AGNs has been 
developed by 


Terlevich R, Tenorio-Tagle G, Franco J and Melnick J 1992 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 255 713 

Terlevich R, Tenorio-Tagle G, Rozyczka M, Franco J and 
Melnick J 1995 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 272 198 


The following conference proceedings explicitly focus on 
the observations and interpretation of the more ‘garden 
variety’ low-luminosity AGNs: 


Eracleous M, Koratkar A P, Leitherer C and Ho L C (ed) 
1996 The Physics of LINERs in View of Recent 
Observations (San Francisco: Astronomical Society of 
the Pacific) 

Schmitt H R, Kinney A L and Ho L C (ed) 1999 The 
AGN/Normal Galaxy Connection (Advances in Space 
Research, vol 23 (5-6)) (Oxford: Elsevier) 


Readers interested in a full treatment of the techniques of 
reverberation mapping should consult 


Blandford R D and McKee C F 1982 Astrophys. J. 255 419 
Peterson B M 1993 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 105 247 


Explicit application of reverberation mapping results to 
derive masses of AGNs was done by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ho L C 1999 Observational Evidence for Black Holes in the 
Universe ed S K Chakrabarti (Dordrecht: Kluwer) p 
157 

Laor A 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 505 L83 


Mass determinations using optical emission-line rotation 
curves include 


Bower G A et al 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 492 L111 

Harms R J et al 1994 Astrophys. J. Lett. 435 L35 

Macchetto F, Marconi A, Axon D J, Capetti A, Sparks W 
B and Crane P 1997 Astrophys. J. 489 579 


The water maser observations of NGC 4258 are described 

in 

Miyoshi M, Moran J, Herrnstein J, Greenhill L, Nakai N, 
Diamond P and Inoue M 1995 Nature 373 127 

Watson W D and Wallin B K 1994 Astrophys. J. Lett. 432 
L35 


Arguments against compact dark star clusters in NGC 
4258 and the Galaxy are presented in 


Maoz E 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 494 L181 


These papers discuss the derivation of M, and M,. by fit- 
ting spectra with accretion disk models: 


Laor A 1990 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 246 369 
Wandel A and Petrosian V 1988 Astrophys. J. Lett. 329 L11 


Attempts to derive masses using x-ray variability have 
been made by 


Wandel A and Mushotzky R F 1986 Astrophys. J. Lett. 306 
L61 


The prediction, discovery and routine detection of broad 
Fe Ka emission lines are described, respectively, in 


Fabian A C, Rees M J, Stella L and White N E 1989 Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 238 729 

Tanaka Y et al 1995 Nature 375 659 

Nandra K, George I M, Mushotzky R F, Turner T J and 
Yaqoob T 1997 Astrophys. J. 477 602 


Prospects for x-ray reverberation mapping are foreseen 

in 

Reynolds C S, Young AJ, Begelman M C and Fabian A C 
1999 Astrophys. J. 514 164 

Stella L 1990 Nature 344 747 


Advection-dominated accretion is reviewed in 

Blandford R D and Begelman M C 1999 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 303 L1 

Mineshige S and Manmoto T 1999 Adv. Space Res. 23 (5-6) 
1065 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Narayan R, Mahadevan R and Quataert E 1998 The 
Theory of Black Hole Accretion Discs ed M A 
Abramowicz, G Bjérnsson and J E Pringle 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) p 148 


Luis C Ho and John Kormendy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supermassive Black Holes in 
Inactive Galaxies 


Several billion years after the big bang, the universe went 
through a ‘quasar era’ when high-energy ACTIVE 
GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGNsS) were more than 10 000 times 
as numerous as they are now. QUASARS must then have 
been standard equipment in most large galaxies. Since 
that time, AGNs have been dying out. Now quasars are 
exceedingly rare, and even medium-luminosity AGNs 
such as SEYFERT GALAXIES are uncommon. The only 
activity that still occurs in many galaxies is weak. A 
paradigm for what powers this activity is well established 
through the observations and theoretical arguments that 
are outlined in the article SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES IN 
AGN. AGN engines are believed to be supermassive black 
holes (BHs) that accrete gas and stars and so transform 
gravitational potential energy into radiation. Expected 


BH masses are M. ~ 10°-10’°Mo. A wide array of 
phenomena can be understood within this picture. 
However, the subject has had an outstanding problem: 
there was no dynamical evidence that BHs exist. The 
search for BHs has therefore become one of the hottest 
topics in extragalactic astronomy. 

Since most quasars have switched off, dim or dead 
engines—starving BHs—should be hiding in many 
nearby galaxies. This means that the BH search need not 
be confined to the ACTIVE GALAXIES that motivated it. In 
fact, definitive conclusions are much more likely if we 
observe objects in which we do not, as Alan Dressler has 
said, ‘have a searchlight in our eyes’. Also, it was 
necessary to start with the nearest galaxies, because only 
then could we see close enough to the center so that the 
BH dominates the dynamics. Since AGNs are rare, 
nearby galaxies are not particularly active. For these 
reasons, it is no surprise that the search first succeeded in 
nearby, inactive galaxies. 

This article discusses stellar dynamical evidence for 
BHs in inactive and weakly active galaxies. Stellar 
motions are a particularly reliable way to measure 
masses, because stars cannot be pushed around by 
nongravitational forces. The price is extra complication 
in the analysis: the dynamics are collisionless, so random 
velocities can be different in different directions. This is 
impossible in a collisional gas. As we shall see, much 
effort has gone into making sure that unrecognized 
velocity anisotropy does not lead to systematic errors in 
mass measurements. 

Dynamical evidence for central dark objects has 
been published for 17 galaxies. With the Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST) pursuing the search, the number of 
detections is growing rapidly. Already we can ask 
demographic questions. Two main results have emerged. 
First, the numbers and masses of central dark objects are 
broadly consistent with predictions based on quasar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


energetics. Second, the central dark mass correlates with 
the mass of the ELLIPTICAL-GALAXyY-like ‘bulge’ 
component of galaxies. What is less secure is the 
conclusion that the central dark objects must be BHs and 
not (for example) dense clusters of brown dwarf stars or 
stellar remnants. Rigorous arguments against such 
alternatives are available for only two galaxies. 
Nevertheless, these two objects and the evidence for dark 
masses at the centers of almost all galaxies that have 
been observed are taken as strong evidence that the AGN 
paradigm is essentially correct. 


Dead quasar engines in nearby galaxies 

The qualitative discussion of the previous section can be 
tured into a quantitative estimate for M. as follows. The 
quasar population produces an integrated comoving 
energy density of 


oD oa dr 
u= i [ O(L, z)LdiL—dz = 1.3 x 107° epgcm™3 
o Jo dz 


where ®(L,z) is the comoving density of quasars of 
luminosity LZ at redshift z and ¢ is cosmic time. For a 
radiative energy conversion efficiency of e, the 
equivalent present-day mass density is p, = u/ec” = 2.2 x 


10* &' Ms Mpc. Comparison of p, with the overall 


galaxy luminosity density, pg ~ 1.4 x 10°2Le Mpe®, 
where the Hubble constant is Hy) = 1004 km s"' Mpc", 
implies that a typical nearby bright galaxy (luminosity L* 


~ 10'°2 Lo) should contain a dead quasar of mass M. ~ 


1.6 x 10° 'h “Mo. Accretion onto a BH is expected to 
produce energy with an efficiency of € ~ 0.1, and the best 


estimate of h is ~ 0.71 + 0.06. Therefore the typical BH 
should have a mass of ~ 10’’Mo. BHs in dwarf ellipticals 


should have masses of ~ 10°Mo. 

In fact, the brightest quasars must have had much 
higher masses. A BH cannot accrete arbitrarily large 
amounts of mass to produce arbitrarily high luminosities. 
For a given M., there is a maximum accretion rate above 
which the radiation pressure from the resulting high 
luminosity blows away the accreting matter. This 
‘Eddington limit’ is discussed in SUPERMASSIVE BLACK 
HOLES IN ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI. Eddington 


luminosities of L ~ 10°” erg s' ~ 10'*Zo require BHs of 
mass M. = 10°Mo. These arguments define the parameter 
range of interest: M. ~ 10°-10°°Mo. The highest-mass 


BHs are likely to be rare, but low-mass objects should be 
ubiquitous. Are they? 


Stellar dynamical searches for central dark 
objects 

The answer appears to be ‘yes’. The majority of 
detections on which this conclusion is based are stellar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


dynamical. However, finding BHs is not equally easy in 
all galaxies. This results in important selection effects 
that need to be understood for demographic studies. 
Therefore we begin with a discussion of techniques. We 
then give three examples that highlight important aspects 
of the search. NGC 3115 is a particularly clean detection 
that illustrates the historical development of the search. 
M31 is one of the nearest galaxies and contains a new 
astrophysical phenomenon connected with BHs. Finally, 
the strongest case that the central mass is a BH and not a 
dark cluster of stars or stellar remnants is the one in our 
own Galaxy. 


Stellar dynamical mass measurement 

Dynamical mass measurement is conceptually simple. If 
random motions are small, as they are in a gas, then the 
mass M(r) within radius r is M(r) = V’r/G. Here V is the 
rotation velocity and G is the gravitational constant. In 
stellar systems, some of the dynamical support comes 
from random motions, so M(r) depends also on the 
velocity dispersion o. The measurement technique is best 
described in the idealized case of spherical symmetry and 
a velocity ellipsoid that everywhere points at the center. 
Then the first velocity moment of the collisionless 
Boltzmann equation gives 


Ver oor dlnw dln a (1 oe ) 


Here 6,, 69 and og are the radial and azimuthal 
components of the velocity dispersion. The density v is 
not the total mass density p; it is the density of the 
luminous tracer population whose kinematics we 
measure. We never see p, because the stars that 
contribute most of the light contribute almost none of the 
mass. Therefore we assume that v(r) o volume 
brightness. All quantities in equation (2) are unprojected. 
We observe brightnesses and velocities after projection 
and blurring by a  point-spread function (PSF). 
Information is lost in both processes. Several techniques 
have been developed to derive unprojected quantities that 
agree with the observations after projection and PSF 
convolution. From these, we derive the mass distribution 
M(r) and compare it with the light distribution L(r). If 
MI/L(r) rises rapidly as r—0, then we have found a central 
dark object. 

There is one tricky problem with this analysis, and it 
follows directly from equation (2). Rotation and random 
motions contribute similarly to M(r), but the o*7/G term 
is multiplied by a factor that depends on the velocity 
anisotropy and that can be less than 1. GALAXY 
FORMATION can easily produce a radial velocity 
dispersion o, that is larger than the azimuthal components 
Ge and oy. Then the third and fourth terms inside the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


brackets in equation (2) are negative; they can be as 
small as —1 each. In fact, they can largely cancel the first 
two terms, because the second term cannot be larger than 


+1, and the first is ~1 in many galaxies. This explains 
why ad hoc anisotropic models have been so successful 
in explaining the kinematics of giant ellipticals without 
BHs. However, how anisotropic are the galaxies? 

Much effort has gone into finding the answer. The 
most powerful technique is to construct self-consistent 
dynamical models in which the density distribution is the 
linear combination p = oNp; of the density distributions p; 
of the individual orbits that are allowed by the 
gravitational potential. First the potential is estimated from 
the light distribution. Orbits of various energies and 
angular momenta are then calculated to construct a library 
of time-averaged density distributions p;. Finally, orbit 
occupation numbers WN; are derived so that the projected 
and PSF-convolved model agrees with the observed 
kinematics. Some authors also maximize oN, In N,, which 
is analogous to an entropy. These procedures allow the 
stellar distribution function to be as anisotropic as it likes 
in order (e.g.) to try to explain the observations without a 
BH. In the end, such models show that real galaxies are not 
extremely anisotropic. That is, they do not take advantage 
of all the degrees of freedom that the physics would allow. 
However, this is not something that one could take for 
granted. Because the degree of anisotropy depends on 
galaxy luminosity, almost all BH detections in bulges and 
low-luminosity ellipticals (which are nearly isotropic) are 
based on STELLAR DYNAMICS, and almost all BH 
detections in giant ellipticals (which are more anisotropic) 
are based on gas dynamics. 


NGC 3115: M. = 10°°°Mo 
One of the best stellar-dynamical BH cases is the 
prototypical SO galaxy NGC 3115 (figure 1). It is 
especially suitable for the BH search because it is very 
symmetrical and almost exactly edge-on. NGC 3115 
provides a good illustration of how the BH search makes 
progress. Unlike some _ discoveries, finding a 
supermassive BH is rarely a unique event. Rather, an 
initial dynamical case for a central dark object becomes 
stronger as observations improve. Eventually, the case 
becomes definitive. This has happened in NGC 3115 
through the study of the central STAR CLUSTER—a tiny, 
dense cusp of stars like those expected around a BH 
(figure 1). Later, still better observations may accomplish 
the next step, which is to strengthen astrophysical 
constraints enough so that all plausible BH alternatives 
(clusters of dark stars) are eliminated. This has happened 
for our Galaxy (see below) but not yet for NGC 3115. 
The kinematics of NGC 3115 show the signature 
of a central dark object (figure 2). The original 
detection was based on the crosses. Already at resolution 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. HST WFPC2 images of NGC 3115. The left panel shows a color image made from 1050 s V- and /-band images. The right 
panel shows a model of the nuclear disk. The center panel shows the difference; it emphasizes the compact nuclear star cluster. 
Brightness is proportional to the square root of intensity. All panels are 11".6 square. (This figure is taken from Kormendy et al 1996 


Astrophys. J. Lett. 459 L57.) 


NGC 3115 Major Axis 
400 


300 


a (km ss“) 


200 


200 


150 


100 


Vv (km s7') 


50F | = HST FOS (ap = 0’'21, 0, = 000) 
© CFHT SIS (a, = 0°24) 
x CFHT Herzberg 


(o, = 0°44) 


r (arcsec) 


Figure 2. Rotation velocities (lower panel) and velocity 
dispersions (upper panel) along the major axis of NGC 3115 as 
observed at three different spatial resolutions. Resolution ox is 
the Gaussian dispersion radius of the PSF; in the case of the 
HST observations, this is negligible compared with the aperture 
size of 0".21. (This figure is adapted from Kormendy et al 1996 
Astrophys. J. Lett. 459 L57.) 


ox = 0".44, the central kinematic gradients are steep. The 


apparent central dispersion, o ~ 300 km s', is much 
higher than normal for a galaxy of absolute magnitude 
Mz = —20.0. Therefore, isotropic dynamical models imply 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


that NGC 3115 contains a dark mass M. ~ 10°*°?Mo. 
Maximally anisotropic models allow smaller masses, M. 


~ 10°Mo, but isotropy is more likely given the rapid 
rotation. 

Since that time, two generations of improved 
observations have become available. The full circles in 
figure 2 were obtained with the Subarcsecond Imaging 
Spectrograph (SIS) and the Canada—France—Hawaii 
Telescope (CFHT). This incorporates tip-tilt optics to 
improve the atmospheric PSF. The observations with the 
HST Faint Object Spectrograph (FOS) have still higher 
resolution. If the BH detection is correct, then the 
apparent rotation and dispersion profiles should look 
steeper when they are observed at higher resolution. This 
is exactly what is seen. If the original dynamical models 
are ‘reobserved’ at the improved resolution, the ones that 


agree with the new data have M. = (1-2) x 10’Mo. 
Finally, a definitive detection is provided by the 
HST observations of the nuclear star cluster. Its true 
velocity dispersion is underestimated in figure 2, because 
the projected value includes bulge light from in front of 
and behind the center. When this light is subtracted, the 
velocity dispersion of the nuclear cluster proves to be o = 
600+37 kms’. This is the highest dispersion measured in 
any galactic center. The velocity of escape from the 


nucleus would be much smaller, Ves. & 352 km s"", if it 
consisted only of stars. Without extra mass to bind it, the 
cluster would fling itself apart in ~ 2 = 10° yr. 
Independent of any velocity anisotropy, the nucleus must 


contain an unseen object of mass M. ~ 10°Mo. This is 
consistent with the modeling results. The dark object is 
more than 25 times as massive as the visible star cluster. 
We know of no way to make a star cluster that is so 
nearly dark, especially without overenriching the visible 
stars with heavy elements. The most plausible 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


explanation is a BH. This would easily have been 
massive enough to power a quasar. 


M31: M. =~ 3 10'Mo 

M31 is the highest-luminosity galaxy in the LOCAL 
GROUP. At a distance of 0.77 Mpc, it is the nearest giant 
galaxy outside our own. It can therefore be studied in 
unusual detail. 

M31 contains the nearest example of a nuclear star 
cluster embedded in a normal bulge. When examined 
with HST, the nucleus appears double (figure 3). This is 
very surprising. At a separation of 2r = 0".49 = 1.7 pc, a 
relative velocity of 200 km s‘ implies a circular orbit 
period of 50 000 yr. If the nucleus consisted of two star 
clusters in orbit around each other, as figure 3 might 
suggest, then dynamical friction would make them merge 
within a few orbital times. Therefore it is unlikely that 
the simplest possible explanation is correct: we are not 
observing the last stages of the digestion of an accreted 
companion galaxy. 

The nucleus rotates rapidly and has a steep velocity 
dispersion gradient (figure 3). Dynamical analysis shows 


that M31 contains a central dark mass M. ~ 3 x 10’Mo. 
The possible effects of velocity anisotropy have been 
checked and provide no escape. Furthermore, the 
asymmetry provides an almost independent check of the 
BH mass, as follows. 

The top panel of figure 3 shows the HST image at 
the same scale as and registered in position with the 
kinematics. It shows that the dispersion peak is 
approximately centered on the fainter nucleus. In fact, it 
is centered almost exactly on a cluster of blue stars that is 
embedded in this nucleus. This suggests that the BH is in 
the blue cluster. This hypothesis can be tested by finding 
the center of mass of the asymmetric distribution of 
starlight plus a dark object in the blue cluster. The mass- 
to-light ratio of the stars is provided by dynamical 
models of the bulge at larger radii. If the galaxy is in 
equilibrium, then the center of mass should coincide with 


the center of the bulge. It does, provided that M. = 3 x 


10’Ms. Remarkably, the same BH mass explains the 
kinematics and the asymmetry of the nucleus. 

An explanation of the mysterious double nucleus has 
been proposed by Scott Tremaine. He suggests that both 
nuclei are part of a single eccentric disk of stars. The 
brighter nucleus is farther from the barycenter; it results 
from the lingering of stars near the apocenters of very 
elongated orbits. The fainter nucleus is produced by an 
increase in disk density toward the center. The model 
depends on the presence of a BH to make the potential 
almost Keplerian; then the alignment of orbits in the 
eccentric disk may be maintained by the disk’s self- 
gravity. Tremaine’s model was developed to explain the 
photometric and kinematic asymmetries as seen at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) 


ao (km s') 


Vv (km s7') 


r (arcsec) 


(b) 


Figure 3. Top: HST WFPC2 color image of M31 constructed 
from J-, V- and 3000 A band, PSF-deconvolved images 
obtained by Lauer et al (1998 Astron. J. 116 2263). The scale is 
0".0228 pixel! Bottom and middle: Rotation curve V(r) and 
velocity dispersion profile o(7) of the nucleus with foreground 
bulge light subtracted. The plots and image are printed at the 
same scale and are aligned in r. The symmetry point of the 
rotation curve and the sharp dispersion peak suggest that the 
BH is in the blue star cluster embedded in the left brightness 
peak. (This figure is adapted from Kormendy and Bender 1999 
Astrophys. J. 522 772.) 


resolution ox ~ 0".5. It is also consistent with the data in 


figure 3 (o« = 0".27). The high velocity dispersion near 
the BH, the low dispersion in the offcenter nucleus and 
especially the asymmetric rotation curve are signatures of 
the eccentric, aligned orbits. 

Most recently, spectroscopy of M31 has been 
obtained with the HST Faint Object Camera. This 
improves the spatial resolution by an additional factor of 
~5. At this resolution, there is a 0".25 wide region 
centered on the faint nucleus in which the velocity 
dispersion is 440+70 km s”'. This is further confirmation 
of the existence and location of the BH. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


We do not know whether the double nucleus is the 
cause or an effect of the offcenter BH. However, 
offcenter BHs are an inevitable consequence of 
hierarchical structure formation and galaxy mergers (see 
GALAXIES: INTERACTIONS AND MERGERS). If most large 
galaxies contain BHs, then mergers produce binary BHs 
and, in three-body encounters, BH ejections with recoil. 
How much offset we see, and indeed whether we see two 
BHs or one or none at all, depends on the relative rates of 
mergers, dynamical friction and binary orbit decay. 
Offcenter BHs may have much to tell us about these and 
other processes. Already there is evidence in NGC 4486B 
for a second double nucleus containing a BH. 


Our Galaxy: M. ~ (2.9+0.4) x 10°Me 

Our Galaxy has long been known to contain the 
exceedingly compact radio source Sgr A* (see 
SAGITTARIUS A). Interferometry gives its major- and 
minor-axis diameters as 63r, and <17r,, where r, = 0.06 
AU = 8.6 x 10"! cm is the Schwarzschild radius of a 2.9 


x 10°Mz BH. It is easy to be impressed by the small size. 
However, as an AGN, Sgr A* is feeble: its radio 


luminosity is only 10° erg s' ~ 10°*Lo. The infrared 
and high-energy luminosities are higher, but there is no 
compelling need for a BH on energetic grounds. To find 
out whether the Galaxy contains a BH, we need 
dynamical evidence. 

Getting it has not been easy. Our Galactic disk, 
which we see in the sky as the Milky Way, contains 
enough dust to block all but ~10°'* of the optical light 
from the Galactic center. Measurements of the region 
around Sgr A* had to await the development of infrared 
detectors. Much of the infrared radiation is in turn 
absorbed by the Earth’s atmosphere, but there is a useful 
transmission window at 2.2 tm wavelength. Here the 
extinction toward the Galactic center is a factor of ~20. 
This is large but manageable. Early infrared 


measurements showed a rotation velocity of V = 
100kms"' and a small rise in velocity dispersion to 
~120km s"! at the center. These were best fitted with a 


BH of mass M. ~ 10°Mo, but the evidence was not very 
strong. Since then, a series of spectacular technical 
advances have made it possible to probe closer and closer 
to the center. As a result, the strongest case for a BH in 
any galaxy is now our own. 

Most remarkably, two independent groups led by 
Reinhard Genzel and Andrea Ghez have used speckle 
imaging to measure proper motions—the velocity 
components perpendicular to the line of sight—in a 
cluster of stars at radii r S 0".5 = 0.02 pce from Sgr A* 
(figure 4). When combined with complementary 
measurements at larger radii, the result is that the one- 
dimensional velocity dispersion increases smoothly to 
420+60 kms at r ~ 0.01 pe. Stars at this radius revolve 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


around the Galactic center in a human lifetime! The mass 
M(r) inside radius r is shown in figure 5. Outside a few 
pe, the mass distribution is dominated by stars, but as 
r—0, M(r) flattens to a constant, M. = (2.9+0.4) x 10°Mo. 
Velocity anisotropy is not an uncertainty; it is measured 
directly and found to be small. The largest dark cluster 
that is consistent with these data would have a central 


density of 4 x 10'"Mo pe. This is inconsistent with 
astrophysical constraints (see below). Therefore, if the 
dark object is not a BH, the alternative would have to be 
comparably exotic. It is prudent to note that rigorous 
proof of a BH requires that we spatially resolve 
relativistic velocities near the Schwarzschild radius. This 
is not yet feasible. However, the case for a BH in our 
own Galaxy is now very compelling. 


BH demographics 

The census of BH candidates as of January 2000 is given 
in table 1. The table is divided into three groups— 
detections based on stellar dynamics, on ionized gas 
dynamics, and on maser disk dynamics (top to bottom). 
The rate of discovery is accelerating as HST pursues the 
search. However, we already have candidates that span 
the range of predicted masses and that occur in 
essentially every type of galaxy that is expected to 
contain a BH. Host galaxies include giant AGN 
ellipticals (the middle group), Seyfert galaxies (NGC 
1068), normal spirals with moderately active nuclei (e.g. 
NGC 4594 and NGC 4258), galaxies with exceedingly 
weak nuclear activity (our Galaxy and M31) and 
completely inactive galaxies (M32 and NGC 3115). 

However, no complete sample has been studied at 
high resolution. The detections in table 1, together with 
low-resolution studies of larger samples of galaxies, 
support the hypothesis that BHs live in virtually every 
galaxy with a substantial bulge component. The total 
mass in detected remnants is consistent with predictions 
based on AGN energetics, within the rather large 
estimated errors in both quantities. 

The main new demographic result is an apparent 
correlation between BH mass and the luminosity of the 
bulge part of the galaxy. This is shown in figure 6. Note 
that the correlation is not with the total luminosity: if the 
disk is included, the correlation is considerably worse. 
Whether the correlation is real or not is still being tested. 
The concern is selection effects. High-mass BHs in small 
galaxies are easy to see, so their scarcity is real. 
However, low-mass BHs can hide in giant galaxies, so 
the correlation may be only the upper envelope of a 
distribution that extends to smaller M.. If it is real, then 
the correlation implies that BH formation or feeding is 
connected with the mass of the high-density, elliptical- 
galaxy-like part of the galaxy. With the possible 
exception of NGC 4945 (a late-type galaxy for which the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1994.27 


1999.45 


Figure 4. Images of the star cluster surrounding Sgr A* (green cross) at the epochs indicated. The arrows in the left frame show 
approximately where the stars have moved in the right frame. Star S1 has a total proper motion of ~1600 km s”. (This figure is 
updated from Eckart and Genzel 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 284 576 and was kindly provided by A Eckart.) 


Table 1. Census of BH candidates. 


Galaxy Type" D? (Mpc) Maputge yg (Mo) logM./Myuize™ 
Galaxy Sbe 0.0085 —17.65 3x10° 3.62 
M31 Sb 0.7 —18.82 3x 10’ 3.31 
M32 E 0.7 —15.51 3 x 10° 2.27 
NGC 3115 S0/ 8.4 —19.90 1x 10° —1.92 
NGC 4594 Sa/ 9.2 —21.21 1x 10° 2.69 
NGC 3377 E 9.9 —18.80 8 x 10’ 2.24 
NGC 3379 E 9.9 -19.79 1x 108 2.96 
NGC 4342 SO 15.3 —17.04 3 x 108 —1.64 
NGC 4486B E 15.3 —16.66 6 x 108 —1.03 
M87 E 15.3 —21.42 3x 10° 2.32 
NGC 4374 E 15.3 —20.96 1 x 10° 2.53 
NGC 4261 E 29 —20.89 5x 108 2.92 
NGC 7052 E 59 —21.31 3x 108 3.31 
NGC 6251 E 106 —21.81 6 x 108 3.18 
NGC 4945 Sed/ 3.7 15.1 1 x 10° - 
NGC 4258 Sbe 75 -17.3 4x 10’ 2.05 
NGC 1068 Sb 15 —18.8 1x 107 — 

“ Hubble type; / means that the galaxy is edge on. 


Distance based on a Hubble constant of 80 km s! Mpc’. 


* Absolute B-band magnitude of the bulge component of the galaxy 


“ BH mass based on isotropic models 


“Ratio of BH mass to bulge mass. The mass in stars is calculated from the 
luminosity via the mass-to-light ratio measured at large radii. 


existence and luminosity of a bulge are uncertain), BHs 
have been found only in the presence of a bulge. 
However, the limits on M. in bulgeless galaxies such as 
M33 are still consistent with the correlation. Current 
searches concentrate on the question of whether small 
BHs—ones that are significantly below the apparent 
correlation—can be found or excluded. 

BH mass fractions are listed in table | for cases in 
which the mass-to-light ratio of the stars has been 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


measured. The median BH mass fraction is 0.29%. The 
quartiles are 0.07% and 0.9%. 


Are they really BHs? 
The discovery of dark objects with masses M. ~ (10° 


9.5 . 7 Eat 
10°”) Mo in galactic nuclei is secure. However, are they 
BHs? Proof requires measurement of relativistic velocities 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


) 
=k 
oO 

™N 


6 
2.9x10° Ma 


4108 -3 
Axo Mo pe 


Enclosed mass (Mo 

r=) 

oD 

ia 

at 

o 

= 

= 


pssst Vs poiisiil 
0.01 0.1 1 10 


Distance from Sgr A* (pc) 


Figure 5. Mass distribution implied by proper motion and 
radial velocity measurements (data points and upper solid curve 
with representative error bars). Long dashes (right) show the 
mass distribution of stars if the infrared mass-to-light ratio is 2. 
The heavy solid curve represents the stars plus a point mass M. 


= 2.9 x 10°Mo. Short dashes (left) provide an estimate of how 
non-pointlike the dark mass could be: its 7° value is 1 o worse 
than the solid curve. This dark cluster has a core radius of 


0.0042 pc and a central density of 4 x 10'’"Mo pe °. (This figure 


is updated from Genzel et al 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 
291 219 and was kindly provided by R Genzel.) 


11 
10 Ma7 
M84, 
9 N3115@ ®@ 
ee *° 

= na2semee,.° 
— 7 a 
=> @ 
on 6 M  Galoxy 
© 

2 

4 

2 

2 

—10 -—15 —20 —25 
Mg, bulge 


Figure 6. Correlation of BH mass with the absolute magnitude 
of the bulge component of the host galaxy. Since M/L varies 
little from bulge to bulge, this implies a correlation between BH 
mass and bulge mass. Filled circles indicate M. measurements 
based on stellar dynamics, diamonds are based on ionized gas 
dynamics and squares are based on maser disk dynamics. It is 
reassuring that all three techniques are consistent with the same 
correlation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


velocities near the Schwarzschild radius, r, = 2 


MJ/10°8Mo AU. Even for M31, this is 8 x 10°’ arcsec. 
HST spectroscopic resolution is only 0".1. The 
conclusion that we are finding BHs is based on physical 
arguments that BH alternatives fail to explain the masses 
and high densities of galactic nuclei. 

The most plausible BH alternatives are clusters of 
dark objects produced by ordinary STELLAR EVOLUTION. 
These come in two varieties, failed stars and dead stars. 


Failed stars have masses m« S 0.08Mo. They never 
become hot enough for the fusion reactions that power 
stars, i.e. the conversion of hydrogen to helium. They 
have a brief phase of modest brightness while they live 
off gravitational potential energy, but, after this, they 
could be used to make dark clusters. They are called 
brown dwarf stars, and they include planetary-mass 
objects. Alternatively, a dark cluster could be made of 
stellar remnants—WHITE DWARFS, which have typical 


masses of 0.6 Mo; NEUTRON STARS, which typically have 


masses of ~ 1.4 Mj and BHs with masses of several Mo. 
GALACTIC BULGES are believed to form in violent 
starbursts, so massive stars that turn quickly into dark 
remnants would be no surprise. It is not clear how one 
could make dark clusters with the required masses and 
sizes, especially not without polluting the remaining stars 
with more metals than we see. However, in the absence 
of direct proof that the dark objects in galactic nuclei are 
BHs, it is important to examine alternatives. 

However, dynamical measurements tell us more than 
the mass of a potential BH. They also constrain the 
maximum radius inside which the dark stuff must live. Its 
minimum density must therefore be high, and this rules 
out the above BH alternatives in our Galaxy and in NGC 
4258. High-mass remnants such as white dwarfs, neutron 
stars and stellar BHs would be relatively few in number. 
The dynamical evolution of star clusters is relatively well 
understood; in the above galaxies, a sparse cluster of 


stellar remnants would evaporate completely in $10° yr. 
Low-mass objects such as brown dwarfs would be so 
numerous that collision times would be short. Stars 
generally merge when they collide. A dark cluster of 
low-mass objects would become luminous because 
brown dwarfs would turn into stars. 

More exotic BH alternatives are not ruled out by 
such arguments. For example, the dark matter that makes 
up galactic halos and that accounts for most of the mass 
of the universe may in part be elementary particles that 
are cold enough to cluster easily. It is not out of the 
question that a cluster of these could explain the dark 
objects in galaxy centers without getting into trouble with 
any astrophysical constraints. So the BH case is not 
rigorously proved. What makes it compelling is the 
combination of dynamical evidence and the evidence 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supermassive Black Holes in Inactive Galaxies 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


from AGN observations. This is discussed in the previous 
article. 

For many years, AGN observations were decoupled 
from the dynamical evidence for BHs. This is no longer 
the case. Dynamical BH detections are routine. The 
search itself is no longer the main preoccupation; we can 
concentrate on physical questions. New technical 
developments such as better x-ray satellites ensure that 
progress on BH astrophysics will continue to accelerate. 


Web update 

The Chandra X-ray telescope has observed a flare of x- 
ray energy produced from where the lip of a 
supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way 
galaxy should be. The flare dimmed and brightened over 
a period of ten minutes, the time taken for light to travel 
about 150 million kilometers, meaning that it originated 
from an object no larger in diameter than the distance of 
the Earth to the Sun. This implies that the mass at the 
center of our Galaxy (about 2.6 million times the mass of 
our Sun) is crammed into that space. According to the 
laws of general relativity, only a black hole can be that 
dense. 


Bibliography 


The search for BHs is reviewed in the following papers: 


Kormendy J and Richstone D 1995 Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 33 581 
Richstone D et al 1998 Nature 395 A14 


In the following papers, quasar energetics are used to predict 
the masses of dead AGN engines: 


Chokshi A and Turner E L 1992 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 259 
421 
Soltan A 1982 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 200 115 


Dynamical models of galaxies as linear combinations of 
individual orbits are discussed in 


Gebhardt K et al 2000 Astron. J. 119 1157 

Richstone D O and Tremaine S 1988 Astrophys. J. 327 82 

Schwarzschild M 1979 Astrophys. J. 232 236 

van der Marel R P, Cretton N, de Zeeuw P T and Rix H-W 
1998 Astrophys. J. 493 613 


The BH detection in NGC 3115 is discussed in 


Kormendy J and Richstone D 1992 Astrophys. J. 393 559 
Kormendy J et al 1996 Astrophys. J. Lett. 459 L57 


The BH detection in M31 is discussed in 


Dressler A and Richstone D O 1988 Astrophys. J. 324 701 
Kormendy J 1988 Astrophys. J. 325 128 


Tremaine’s model for the double nucleus of M31 and new 
evidence for that model are in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Kormendy J and Bender R 1999 Astrophys. J. 522 772 
Tremaine S 1995 Astron. J. 110 628 


HST spectroscopy of the double nucleus of M31 is presented in 


Statler T S, King I R, Crane P and Jedrzejewski R I 1999 
Astron. J. 117 894 


The following are thorough reviews of the Galactic center: 


Genzel R, Hollenbach D and Townes C H 1994 Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 57 417 

Morris M and Serabyn E 1996 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 
645 


The latest measurement of the size of the Galactic center radio 
source is by 


Lo K Y, Shen Z-Q, Zhao J-H and Ho P T P 1998 Astrophys. J. 
Lett. 508 L61 


The remarkable proper motion measurements of stars near Sgr 
A* and resulting conclusions about the Galactic center BH are 
presented in 


Genzel R, Eckart A, Ott T and Eisenhauer F 1997 Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc. 291 219 

Ghez A M, Klein B L, Morris M and Becklin E E 1998 
Astrophys. J. 509 678 


Arguments against compact dark star clusters in NGC 4258 and 
the Galaxy are presented in 


Maoz E 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 494 L181 
John Kormendy 
Luis C Ho 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernova 1987A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supernova 1987A 


Supernova 1987A (SN1987A) in the LARGE MAGELLANIC 
CLOUD (LMC) is the brightest supernova to be observed 
since SN1604 (Kepler), the first to be observed in every 
band of the ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM and the first to be 
detected through its initial burst of NEUTRINOS. Although 
the bolometric luminosity of SN1987A today is ~10-6 of 
its value at maximum light (Lmax~2.5x108L,), it will 
remain bright enough to be observed for many decades 
in the radio, infrared, optical, UV and x-ray bands. 

SN1987A is classified as a type II supernova (SNell) 
(see SUPERNOVAE) by virtue of the strong hydrogen lines 
in its spectrum. It was atypical of SNell in that its light 
curve did not reach maximum until 3 months after out- 
burst and its maximum luminosity was about 1/10 the 
mean maximum luminosity of SNelII. These differences 
can be attributed to the fact that the star that exploded 
was a blue giant, unlike the progenitors of most SNell, 
which we believe to be RED GIANTS. 

The burst of neutrinos observed from SN1987A 
proved beyond doubt that its explosion followed the col- 
lapse of the core of the star, but subsequent observations 
have shown no evidence of the neutron star or black hole 
that we expect to find at the center of the debris. 

The expanding gaseous debris of SN1987A cooled 
rapidly after the explosion. By 1000 days, its temperature 
was less than 2000 K throughout and the heavy elements 
had formed molecules and dust. With a present temper- 
ature <100 K, the inner radioactive debris is perhaps the 
coldest optically emitting source known to astronomers. 

5N1987A is surrounded by a remarkable NEBULA of 
three glowing circumstellar rings (figure 1) that are evi- 
dently part of a complex system of gas that was ejected 
by the progenitor some 20000 yr before it exploded and 


Figure 1. Circumstellar rings of SN1987A. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


then partly ionized by the supernova flash. The approxi- 
mate bipolar symmetry of this system suggests that the 
progenitor was once a binary system, and this interpre- 
tation may also explain why the progenitor was a blue 
giant rather than a red giant. 

The outer part of the supernova debris is driving a 
blast wave that is beginning to strike the inner circum- 
stellar ring at several ‘hot spots’ that are doubling in 
brightness every few months. Within the coming decade, 
more hotspots will appear and merge as the blast wave 
overtakes the entire inner ring. The ring will brighten by 
factors 2103 at all bands of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
giving us unprecedented opportunities to study the 
physics of interstellar shocks and to view heretofore 
unseen circumstellar matter. 


Discovery and neutrino observations 

Supernova 1987A was discovered with magnitude V=5 
by Ian Shelton on February 24.23 UT, 1987. The superno- 
va occurred in the Large Magellanic Cloud near the 
bright star-forming nebula 30 Doradus. Within days, sev- 
eral groups had obtained optical spectra and the 
International Ultraviolet Explorer Satellite had obtained 
ultraviolet spectra, showing that the outer envelope of 
the supernova was expanding with velocities ~0.1c (30 
000 km s-!). Subsequently, earlier observations were 
found showing that the object had magnitude V~6.5 on 
February 23.443 and V27.5 on February 23.39. 

Soon thereafter, two independent groups reported 
detections of a flash of neutrinos from the direction of 
SN1987A that occurred on February 23.316. Electron anti- 
neutrinos produce fast positrons through the reaction 
W,,--n+et. These events are detected in large under- 
ground tanks of water through the Cherenkov light emit- 
ted by the positrons. The Kamiokande II experiment in 
Japan detected 12 such events and the IMB experiment in 
the USA detected eight events over an interval of about 
12 s, during which a net background count of one event 
from the two detectors would be expected. The inferred 
energy (~3x1053 erg), temperature (kT~4 MeV), and 
decay timescale (~4 s) of the neutrino flash were in 
remarkably good agreement with predictions from theo- 
retical models in which a degenerate iron core collapsed 
to form a NEUTRON STAR. 

The initial optical display should follow the neutri- 
no flash after a delay corresponding to the time for a 
blast wave to propagate through the envelope of the 
progenitor star. The fact that this delay was no greater 
than 3 h sets an upper limit R*Z100Rg for the radius of 
the progenitor star, precluding the possibility that the 
progenitor was a red supergiant. 

Observations taken before the explosion of SN1987A 
showed that the progenitor star, Sk-69°202, was in fact a 
spectral type B2 Ja supergiant, with visual magnitude 
V=12, bolometric luminosity ~105L; and radius R*~40R, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supernova 1987A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


4A | 


15 
| <- corrected ground data | 
Debris+ring 


°. 90 oO fe) fe) 
© cco 
5 e 
20 debris e e 


| | | | | | 1 | | | 1 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 
days since outburst 


Figure 2. Light curve of SN1987A. 


Light curve 

SN1987A is unique in that we have recorded its light from 
well before it exploded until the present time (¢~13 yr). 
The light curve of SN1987A (figure 2) was unusual. 
Within hours after first detection, it brightened to V~4. 
Thereafter, it continued to brighten, reaching a maximum 
brightness V=2.9, corresponding to a bolometric luminos- 
ity L,)=10* erg s-l, at t=3 months after explosion. 

SN1987A faded rapidly thereafter. For 120 days 
<t< 800 days, Ly,):e(-t/t), where t; agrees within a few 
percent with the 111.3 d mean life of 56Co. This observa- 
tion supports the interpretation that the supernova light 
is produced by reprocessing of energy deposited in the 
explosion debris by positrons and gamma rays from the 
radioactive decay of 56Co. NUCLEOSYNTHESIS models pre- 
dicted that a core collapse supernova explosion would 
produce a substantial mass of 5¢Ni, which would decay 
into 56Co with a mean life of 8.8 days. The observed 
bolometric luminosity of SN1987A during its exponen- 
tial decay phase implies that the explosion debris origi- 
nally contained 0.07M, of 56Ni. 

This interpretation was confirmed by the direct 
detection of 56Co gamma ray emission lines at 847 keV 
and 1238 keV, which became bright enough to observe by 
t=200 days. The fraction of the bolometric luminosity 
that emerged directly as gamma rays increased from ~1% 
at t=200 days to ~50% at #2800 days. The emergent 
gamma rays were accompanied by a flux of hard (220 
keV) x-rays that could be attributed to gamma rays 
degraded in energy by multiple Compton scattering in 
the supernova debris. 

As the 56Co decayed, longer-lived isotopes dominat- 
ed the radioactive energy input to the debris, principally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


57Co (mean life 391 days) for 1000 days =t= 1700 days 
and 44Ti (mean life 78 yr) for #21700 days. 

Today, the radioactive debris of SN1987A has mag- 
nitude V=20.5 and bolometric luminosity Lp,1~105° erg 
s-l (Le. Lp,)~200L;). Most of this luminosity emerges in 
the far infrared (10-100 um) band. 

The integrated bolometric luminosity of SN1987A, 
Eyad~8.6x1048 erg, is dominated by the radioactive decay 
of 0.07M, of 56Co. (Most of the energy deposited by the 
earlier decay of 5°Ni was converted to kinetic energy of 
the expanding envelope.) 

Models for the optical, x-ray and gamma ray light 
curves require that the supernova debris have a mass 
~(5-15)M;, most of which must be hydrogen and helium. 

The newly synthesized elements remained mostly in 
the inner part (V22500 km s-!) of the supernova debris. 
However, the early emergence of gamma rays implies 
that a small fraction of the newly synthesized 5°Ni was 
deposited near the outer layers of the supernova debris. 
Evidently, instabilities developed during the propaga- 
tion of the supernova blast through the stellar envelope, 
disrupting the laminar segregation of nucleosynthesis 
products that may have existed before the explosion. 


Evolution of the debris 

The optical display of the supernova commenced when 
the blast reached the photosphere of the progenitor, ~2 h 
after the core explosion. As the blast emerged, the photo- 
sphere was heated to ~106 K and produced a flash of 
~1057 ionizing photons during the following several 
hours. 

At t21.6 days, the spectrum of SN1987A was domi- 
nated by a blue continuum, with color temperature 
TC=14000 K, punctuated by strong P-Cygni lines of 
hydrogen and MglII AA2800. The blueshift of the MglII 
2A2800 absorption feature indicated that the gas immedi- 
ately above the photosphere was expanding with radial 
velocities ~30 000 km s-!. The photosphere cooled rapid- 
ly thereafter, with color temperature stabilizing at ~5500 
K after about 2 weeks. The maximum observed blueshift 
in the absorption lines decreased rapidly as the superno- 
va expanded, indicating that the photosphere was mov- 
ing inward with respect to the debris and that the gas 
above the photosphere was becoming transparent. The 
radius of the photosphere reached a maximum ~100 AU 
at <3 months, at which time the absorption lines indi- 
cated a radial expansion velocity ~2500 km s-1. 

From observations of the absorption lines during the 
photospheric phase (t24 months), one can infer that the 
debris has kinetic energy E,jn~1.5x105! erg, roughly 200 
times Eyaq. 

By t=4 months, the photosphere had vanished and 
the nebular phase commenced, in which the optical spec- 
trum was dominated by emission lines, principally Ha, 
[OT] AA 6300, [Ca II] 4A 7300 and Ca II AA 8600. The width 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supernova 1987A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(FWHM) of the emission lines implied that most of the 
optical emission was produced within a sphere expand- 
ing with velocity ~2500 km s-!, evidently the volume in 
which most of the radioactive energy is deposited. By 
this time, the outer part of the debris, which contains 
more than half the mass and most of the kinetic energy, 
had become invisible at optical wavelengths. 

The inner debris cooled rapidly, as indicated by 
infrared emission from vibrationally excited CO, which 
first appeared in the spectrum at f=4 months and 
remained prominent for several months thereafter. 

At t&1 yz, the optical and near-infrared emission 
lines faded rapidly and a strong far-infrared ($4 um) 
continuum appeared. Evidently, dust clouds formed in 
the inner debris and obscured roughly half of the optical 
and near-infrared emission from the emitting region, re- 
emitting the absorbed luminosity as far-infrared continu- 
um. The fact that the redshifted sides of the emission 
lines (which come from the far hemisphere of the line- 
emitting region) are obscured more heavily than the 
blueshifted sides (from the near hemisphere) implies that 
the dust clouds are located within the line-emitting 
region. As yet, no spectral features have been detected in 
the absorption or emission by the dust that would enable 
us to recognize its composition. 

By analyzing the emission line spectrum during the 
nebular phase, one can infer the physical conditions in 
the emission line region. The analysis shows clearly that 
the debris is chemically heterogeneous, with regions of 
different element composition having different evolu- 
tions of density and temperature. The regions composed 
primarily of oxygen and carbon cooled first as a result of 
infrared emission by CO molecules. By t=4 yr, most of 
the line-emitting region had temperatures <200 K, except 
the helium- and hydrogen-rich zones, which had tem- 
peratures ~500 K and ~700 K, respectively. Today, the 
entire line-emitting region has temperature <100 K, and 
the optical and near-infrared emission lines are produced 
mainly by delayed recombination and non-thermal 
positrons from #4Ti decay. 

The fact that optically thick infrared emission lines 
from Fe, Co and Ni were bright at early times (t~1 yr) 
implies that the zones containing newly synthesized 5°Ni 
and its decay products must occupy ~50% of the line- 
emitting region. Since these elements constitute only 
~1-2% of the mass of this region, we conclude that the 
line-emitting region must have a foamy texture, in which 
bubbles of relatively low-density Ni-Co-Fe gas are 
embedded in a more dense substrate of C—O, H, He and 
other elements. This foamy structure is caused by 
radioactive heating and expansion of the Fe-Co-Ni gas 
due to 5°Ni decay during the first few weeks after the 
explosion. 

Today, the debris has been resolved with the Hubble 
Space Telescope. The emitting region has a mean angular 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


diameter ~0.25 arcsec, consistent with a mean expansion 
velocity ~2500 km s~!. The image is slightly (~1.2:1) elon- 
gated with the major axis oriented roughly NS. It has an 
irregular morphology, probably because of differential 
obscuration by embedded dust clouds. 


Circumstellar matter and progenitor star 

Beginning at t=80 days after outburst, narrow (FWHM 
=20 km s-!) optical and UV emission lines of Ha and 
more highly ionized species such as He II, N V, N IV, N IIL, 
O II and C III began to appear in the spectrum of 
SN1987A. These emission lines brightened to maximum 
luminosity L~3.5x10°6 erg s-! by t=400 days and faded 
rapidly thereafter. Images taken later with the Hubble 
Space Telescope (figure 1) show that the source of these 
emission lines is a narrow elliptical ring centered on the 
supernova, with major (EW) and minor (NS) diameters of 
1.66 arcsec and 1.21 arcsec respectively. It is now clear that 
this inner ring is actually a nearly circular ring of emitting 
gas of radius 0.67 ly, inclined at about 45°. This inner ring 
began to produce narrow emission lines when it was illu- 
minated by the flash of ionizing radiation produced dur- 
ing the first few hours after the supernova explosion. 

The narrow emission lines reached maximum light 
after a delay corresponding to the difference of path 
length from the supernova to the far (S) side of the tilted 
ring and then to Earth and the path directly from the 
supernova to Earth. This delay enables us to infer the 
physical diameter of the ring, which we may compare 
with the angular diameter to infer the distance of the 
supernova. The result is D=51+3 kpc. 

The inner ring is expanding, with radial velocity ~ 
~10 km s-!. Assuming that the ring was expelled by the 
progenitor star, we estimate that this event occurred 
~20000 yr before the supernova event. 

Analysis of the emission line spectrum of the inner 
rings shows that the abundance ratio of (C + N + O)/H 
is about 0.3 times the solar ratio, consistent with LMC 
abundances. However, the rings are nitrogen rich, with 
N/(C + O) about 10 times greater than the solar ratio. 
The enhanced nitrogen abundance is believed to be due 
to conversion of C and O to N through the CNO cycle in 
the supernova progenitor before the circumstellar ring 
was expelled. 

After being ionized and heated by the initial super- 
nova flash, the circumstellar rings have faded as the gas 
has cooled and recombined. Today, the inner ring has 
magnitude V~18.5, about a factor of 10 fainter than it was 
at maximum light (t=400 days). From the fading rate of 
the emission lines, we infer that the gas in the rings has 
atomic densities in the range ~(0.6-3.3)x104 cm-3, and 
from the brightness we infer that the glowing gas in the 
inner ring has mass ~0.04Mg. 

As well as the inner ring, SN1987A is surrounded by 
an even more remarkable pair of outer loops that are not 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supernova 1987A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


concentric with the supernova. We believe that these 
loops are actually also circular rings with approximately 
the same polar axis as the inner ring, but not coplanar 
with the inner ring. If so, the outer loops have physical 
radii ~1.5 ly and lie on planes approximately parallel to 
the plane of the inner ring but displaced by +~1.3 ly. 

The radial velocities of the outer loops are consistent 
with the interpretation that they too were expelled 
20000 yr before the supernova explosion. 

The origin of the triple ring system remains a mys- 
tery. Since we see similar morphologies in some PLAN- 
ETARY NEBULAE, many of which have binary central stars, 
we suspect that the progenitor of SN1987A was also a 
binary system. Perhaps the rings were expelled when 
these stars merged. The merged binary hypothesis may 
also explain why the progenitor of SN1987A was a blue 
giant star, in contrast to most known SNell, which result 
from the explosions of red giant stars. 

The glowing ring system is only part of the complex 
and as yet poorly understood distribution of circumstel- 
lar gas around the supernova. About 2 yr after the explo- 
sion, diffuse nebulosity was detected beyond the outer 
loops. The most prominent part was an arc called 
‘Napoleon’s Hat’, the top of which is about 5 arcsec N of 
the supernova and the brim of which extends about +5 
arcsec E and W of the supernova. These diffuse features 
changed rapidly and vanished after about 4 yr. They are 
light echoes caused by scattering of the supernova light 
by dust grains. The dusty gas was probably expelled by 
the supernova progenitor when it was a red giant star. In 
contrast to the circumstellar rings, we can now see no 
trace of the gas associated with the light echoes. 

The initial flash of the supernova was sufficient to 
ionize only ~1M, of circumstellar matter. Therefore, it is 
likely that the glowing gas we see in the circumstellar 
rings is ionization bounded and resides on the inner sur- 
face of a greater mass of still invisible gas. The key to 
understanding the origin of the circumstellar rings may 
be in the detection of this gas. 

In addition to the echoes from dust nearby the 
supernova, astronomers detected several much larger 
(angular radii ~0.5-1 arcmin) expanding rings of light 
after about 1 yr that remained visible for several years. 
From the apparent superluminal velocities, one can infer 
the distances from the supernova of the intervening dust 
clouds. The clouds responsible for the brightest two 
echoes are at distances ~130 and ~360 pc. They have no 
causal connection to the supernova. 


From supernova to supernova remnant 

At t=2 days, non-thermal radio emission was detected 
from SN1987A, evidently the result of acceleration of 
relativistic electrons accelerated due to shocks pro- 
duced by the supernova blast in the wind of the blue 
giant progenitor. This radio emission reached maxi- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


mum at t=4 days and then faded from view after a few 
weeks. 

Non-thermal radio emission reappeared at t~1250 
days after explosion and has continued to brighten ever 
since. The radio image shows that the radio source is 
concentrated in two lobes to the east and west of the 
supernova. The centers of the lobes are located between 
the supernova and the inner ring and they are moving 
with transverse velocities of ~3000 km s7!. 

At nearly the same time, a steadily increasing flux of 
soft x-rays was detected from SN1987A. Observations 
with the CHANDRA observatory in October 1999 showed 
that the x-ray image was also an annulus, roughly coin- 
cident with the radio image. Like the radio image, the x- 
ray image is brightest toward the east. See figure 3. 

Evidently, the radio and x-ray emissions are the 
result of the interaction of the supernova blast with cir- 
cumstellar matter inside the inner ring. Models to 
account for the x-ray flux from the shocked gas require 
that the circumstellar matter must have atomic density 
~100 cm. 

Freely expanding neutral hydrogen atoms in the outer 
supernova debris emit Lya and Ha as they cross a reverse 
shock and enter the interaction zone. Imaging and spec- 
troscopic observations of this emission with the Hubble 
Space Telescope show that the reverse shock is located at a 
radius ~75% of the inner circumstellar ring and that the 
emitting atoms have radial velocities ~15 000 km s-!. 


_ Pa ee 
Flux (10-13 ergs/s/emme2} tux Density (muy) 


NJ am cay 
oO- DM WwW Ai ca oO Co a 
Oo Qa : is 
> £ 
otk > 
a > 
n> Ao 
a = 
zy 3 
a a 
a, g 
5 s 
a | § 
S| x R | > 
Ia a| | ha aia 
= “lA ra) m 4 
Q O)se Q 
ao : 8 a 
g z/= BAe 
G gic S ~l 
a, | Xx ola 
a =~ > al 
a ; Cc N 
a 4 i 7 
a 4 = 
o : { 
2 ry « 
a th 
s pli S & © 
1 
EA a 4 2 3 
e|N ra 6 wy, 
< S 
~~ 
Fa a 
[a] Oo 
Go oO 


Figure 3. Radio (upper) and x-ray (lower) light curves. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supernova 1987A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In 1995, a ‘hot spot’ appeared on the inner ring. It 
has brightened steadily ever since. Beginning in 
November 1998, many new hot spots began to appear on 
the inner ring (figure 4) and to brighten rapidly, with e- 
folding timescales ranging from ~1-2 years. Doppler 
shifts and widths of emission lines from the hotspots 
indicate that they are caused by shocks with velocity 
~250 km s-1, 

The hot shocked gas drives a blast wave ahead of the 
reverse shock. Evidently, this blast wave is entering the 
circumstellar ring at the hot spots, which are inward pro- 
trusions of the ring. More hot spots will appear. Several 
years from now, they will merge to cover the entire inner 
ring. 

The slope of the x-ray light curve increased rapidly 
sometime around 1998 (figure 3). Moreover, recent (May 
2002) observations with the Chandra observatory show 
that the x-ray image is brightest near the optical hot 
spots, suggesting that the x-ray emission is now domi- 
nated by the impact of the blast wave with the circum- 
stellar ring. The x-rays cannot come from exactly the 
same place as the optical emission, however, because the 
shocks responsible for the optical emission are too slow 
to produce observable x-ray emission. Evidently, shock 
velocities ranging from ~250-2500 km s-! exist near the 
hot spots. 

The appearance of these hotspots heralds the birth 
of SUPERNOVA REMNANT 1987A, the stage when its lumi- 
nosity is dominated by the conversion of the kinetic ener- 
gy of the debris to radiation as a result of interaction with 
circumstellar matter. During this stage, the supernova 
will brighten by factors ~103 in radio, infrared and x-rays 
as well and will remain bright for many decades. After a 
few years, the number of ionizing photons from the 
shock interaction will be comparable with the initial flash 
of the supernova. These photons will cause heretofore 
unseen circumstellar matter to become visible, giving us 
anew opportunity to understand the complex history of 
mass loss from the progenitor star. 


OOC 


Sometime between AD 2020 and AD 2030, we will 
begin to see sudden changes in the optical, ultraviolet, 
and x-ray spectra of SN1987A, as the newly synthesized 
elements in the inner debris begin to cross the reverse 
shock. Analysis of the subsequent evolution of the spec- 
tra will give us a 3-dimensional picture of the distribu- 
tion of supernova nucleosynthesis products in the super- 
nova debris. 


The compact object 

Perhaps the outstanding mystery of SN1987A is the 
absence of any evidence (since the initial neutrino flash) 
for a compact object at its center. The bolometric (mostly 
infrared) luminosity of the entire envelope is now 
Leny=fewx100L;, and a brighter compact object could not 
have escaped detection. If the compact object is a neutron 
star, it must be very faint—perhaps because it has an 
anomalously low magnetic field and/or spin rate—and it 
must accrete <10-UM3 yrl. 

Although the duration of the neutrino flash indi- 
cates that a neutron star formed during the supernova 
explosion, it is possible that enough matter fell back in 
the subsequent hours or days to cause it to collapse into 
a BLACK HOLE. 

There is little chance of detecting a compact object in 
the SN1987A with radio (21 cm), ultraviolet or x-ray 
observations, since the debris will probably remain 
opaque in these bands for decades. The compact object 
might also remain obscured at optical and infrared wave- 
lengths if it happens to lie behind one of the dust clouds 
in the inner debris. The best chance might be to detect 
pulsations at millimeter wavelengths, but this will 
require a telescope array with much better angular reso- 
lution and sensitivity than those currently available. 


Bibliography 

Arnett W D, Bahcall J N, Kirshner R P and Woosley S E 
1989 Supernova 1987A Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 
27 629-700 


—— 


Figure 4. WFPC narrow-band Ha images of the inner ring. Left: February 1996. Center: February 1998. Right: May 2002. Both the inner 
ring and the central supernova debris have faded monotonically, while Spot—1, located at P.A. 029°, has evidently brightened by 


February 1998. By May 2002, 16 hot spots have appeared. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supernova 1987A ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


McCray R 1993 Supernova 1987A revisited Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 31 175-216 
McCray R 2002 Supernova 1987A Supernovae and gamma- 
ray bursters ed Weiler K W (Springer: New York) 
Richard McCray 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 
and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Supernova Remnants 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supernova Remnants 


A supernova remnant (SNR) is the aftermath of a stellar 
explosion, including interstellar gas swept up in a shock 
wave, the expanding stellar debris and in some cases a 
compact stellar remnant. Some SNRs are powered by 
pulsars, while others show no sign of a neutron star or 
black hole. The typical kinetic energy of an SN explosion 
is 10°! erg. A strong shock wave transforms much of this 
energy into thermal energy and cosmic ray energy. As the 
SNR ages, more and more of the thermal energy is lost 
to radiative cooling, the shock slows down, and the shell 
of shocked gas merges back into the interstellar medium 
(ISM). During the course of this evolution, an SNR can 
be observed as an expanding shell of hot gas containing 
many solar masses and emitting as much as 10” erg s7! 
throughout the radio to y-ray wavelength range. 

SNRs disperse the elements produced in the cores 
of the pre-supernova stars, along with those produced 
by explosive nucleosynthesis, through the ISM. Thus the 
synthesized elements are available for a new generation 
of star formation. Some of these elements may take the 
form of dust grains, and others will occur as neutrals or 
low-charge ions. During the course of its evolution, the 
interaction of the SNR with the ISM reheats the SN ejecta, 
disrupting dust grains and ionizing the ejected material. 

The energy of SNRs is important for the overall 
structure and evolution of the ISM. The fast shock waves 
of a young SNR heat the interstellar gas to millions 
of kelvins, and it expands to produce a vast bubble 
of tenuous gas. When the shock speed falls below 
about 300 km s“!, radiative cooling becomes effective in 
removing the thermal energy. The remaining energy goes 
into compressing the magnetic field, turbulent motion or 
cosmic ray acceleration. 

SNRs are often observed as shells of hot gas a few 
parsecs to tens of parsecs in size. They produce x-rays at 
100-10 000 eV photon energies by electron-ion collisions in 
hot gas or by synchrotron emission. Many SNRs have been 
discovered through their polarized radio emission, and y- 
rays have been detected in a few cases. The appearance in 
optical images ranges from tiny, fast knots of pure oxygen 
to delicate filaments of pure Balmer line emission. SNRs 
produce infrared emission from dust grains heated by 
collisions with shock-heated electrons and ions. The cold 
gas in SNRs produces strong IR emission in atomic fine 
structure forbidden lines and molecular transitions. 

The following sections summarize the different 
classes of SNRs. Eventually, when the mass of material 
swept up from the ISM is much greater than the mass 
ejected in the stellar explosion, the character of a remnant 
is determined mostly by its age and the density structure 
of the interstellar gas it encounters. However, for the 
first thousand years or so of its life, the SNR is strongly 
influenced by the nature of the explosion. SUPERNOVAE 
themselves are divided into two broad classes. Type Ia 
SNs are thermonuclear explosions of white dwarfs, while 
type IISNs occur when the core of a massive star collapses. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Type Ib and Ic SNs resemble type I events in some ways, 
but they result from the core collapse of a star that has lost 
its hydrogen envelope. All types of SNs inject energies of 
order 10°! erg, but the masses involved are very different. 
Atype IaSN ejects 1.4Mo of iron-rich material, while a type 
II SN ejects an order of magnitude more material at lower 
speeds. Type II SNs can leave compact remnants, either 
black holes or neutron stars. In some cases the neutron 
star is a strong pulsar, able to dominate the energetics of 
the SNR for many years. 


Young SNRs 

SNRs younger than about 1000 yr show strong signatures 
of their origins. sN19874 provides the opportunity to study 
the very early evolution of an SNR as it interacts first 
with material shed by the precursor star and later with the 
ambient interstellar gas. The differences in ejected mass 
and composition and the presence or absence of a PULSAR 
lead to three basic types of young SNRs. 


Type Ia SNRs (Balmer line remnants) 

These are the simplest SNRs, appearing as nearly circular, 
limb-brightened shells in x-ray and radio emission. The 
prototypes are the remnants of the supernovae reported by 
Tycho Brahe in 1572 and by Chinese astronomers in 1006. 
Four SNRs of this class are known in the Large Magellanic 
Cloud. 

The SN ejecta cool very rapidly by expansion, 
becoming a cloud of extremely cold, nearly neutral gas 
expanding at thousands of km s~! into the ISM. A hot 
star observable at ultraviolet wavelengths is fortuitously 
located behind SN1006, and observations with IUE and the 
Hubble Space Telescope show strong absorption in lines of 
Fe I and Si II spread over a velocity range of +4000 km srt, 

When the cold ejecta encounter the ISM at highly 
supersonic speeds, a shock wave forms in the interstellar 
gas and a another shock (the ‘reverse shock’) forms in 
the ejecta. The shocks compress the ISM and ejecta and 
heat them to temperatures ~10 V7, where ju is the mean 
atomic weight of the shocked gas and V is the shock 
speed in km s~!. Thus the SNR at this stage consists of 
a cold, rapidly expanding inner region surrounded by a 
shell of shocked SN ejecta, which is in turn surrounded 
by a shell of shocked interstellar gas. The pressures of the 
shocked ejecta and shocked ISM balance, and a contact 
discontinuity separates the two regions. 

The structure of the shell of shocked gas depends on 
the density structure of the ejected gas, but in general the 
shocked ejecta are cooler and denser. The entire shell of 
shocked material decelerates as it sweeps up mass from the 
ISM, and the contact discontinuity between the shocked 
ISM and shocked ejecta is subject to the Rayleigh-Taylor 
instability, which mixes the two components and generates 
dense clumps. The Rayleigh-Taylor instability is seen on 
Earth when a low-density fluid supports a dense fluid 
against gravity. In the SNR, deceleration of the shell of 
shocked gas plays the role of gravity. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernova Remnants 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The shell of shocked gas produces bright x-ray 
emission. The shocked ejecta, being highly enriched in 
iron and other moderately heavy elements, produce x-ray 
radiation more efficiently, and the emission of this gas is 
further enhanced by its high density. X-ray spectra in the 
1-10 keV photon energy range show strong emission lines 
of highly ionized Si, S, Ca and Fe produced by impact 
of thermal electrons on the ions. Continuum emission 
at moderate x-ray energies arises from bremsstrahlung 
and from radiative recombination of ions and electrons. 
The shocked ISM is somewhat hotter and produces more 
emission at x-ray energies above 10 keV. 

Strong shock waves can accelerate particles to 
relativistic energies. Their velocity distribution takes the 
form of a power law. Ions accelerated by SNR shocks 
constitute a large part of the cosmic ray population. 
Energetic electrons spiraling in the magnetic field produce 
a polarized radio continuum of SYNCHROTRON RADIATION. 
As both the magnetic field and the non-thermal particle 
densities are concentrated in the shell of shocked material, 
type Ia SNRs appear as strongly limb-brightened shells 
at radio wavelengths, well correlated with the x-ray 
emission. 

The non-thermal electrons can also produce hard 
x-ray and y-ray emission. SN1006 shows bright arcs 
of hard x-rays produced by synchrotron emission, and 
TeV y-rays, believed to be produced by inverse Compton 
scattering from energetic electrons, have been detected 
from one of these arcs. The non-thermal x-rays are a 
continuation of the radio spectrum, but with a steeper 
spectral slope. Comparison of the radio and x-ray 
emission constrains the acceleration time of the particles 
and the magnetic field strength. 

Type Ia SNRs are faint at optical wavelengths. They 
show only thin filaments along parts of their peripheries. 
The spectra of these filaments are remarkable in that the 
only optical emission detected is the HI Balmer series. This 
is in sharp contrast to the usual spectra of photoionized 
or shock-excited nebulae, where the forbidden lines of 
[O I], [O II] and [O II] dominate. The shocks in Type Ia 
SNRs are extremely fast. Radiative cooling is ineffective, 
and the hot gas produces very little emission at optical 
wavelengths. However, if the shock encounters partially 
neutral material, each hydrogen atom swept up by the 
shock stands about a 20% chance of being excited to 
produce an Ha photon before it is ionized. It may also 
undergo charge transfer with an ion in the shocked gas. 
Thus the Ha line profile consists of a narrow component, 
with a the velocity width of the pre-shock gas, and a broad 
component whose width is that of the ions in the shocked 
gas. The profile of one filament in Tycho’s SNR has a 
narrow component 44 km s7! wide (full width at half- 
maximum) and a broad component 1900 km s7! wide. 
These line profiles are useful for measuring the shock 
speed and for examining the physical processes in the 
shock. Shock speeds of the known type Ia remnants range 
from 500 to 2300 km s7!. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Type II, Ib and Ic SNRs (oxygen-rich remnants) 

In a few young SNRs, fragments of the core of the 
progenitor star are visible. They appear as knots of 
material completely devoid of hydrogen and helium. As 
products of massive stars, these SNRs often occur in or 
near dense molecular clouds. Some are badly obscured 
by dust, and interaction with a cloud may complicate the 
structure. 

The best-known example of this class is Cas A 
(cassIopEIA A). Like the type Ia SNRs, the O-rich remnants 
display a forward shock-reverse shock structure. The 
SN event ejects tens of solar masses of material that has 
undergone nuclear burning. In some cases an outer 
envelope of unprocessed material is ejected as well. Both 
the radio and the x-ray emissions from the shocked 
shell are very bright, and they are concentrated in small 
knots. X-ray, optical and radio brightness are well 
correlated on large scales, but individual knots do not 
match knots seen at other wavelengths. The high degree 
of clumping is likely to result from advanced Rayleigh 
Taylor instability. Thermal emission dominates the x-ray 
spectrum. Non-thermal emission may be present as well, 
but the brightness of the thermal emission makes it more 
difficult to disentangle than in the type Ia SNRs. The recent 
discovery of y-ray emission from the decay of “Ti from 
Cas A opens a new avenue for the study of core collapse 
in supernovae. 

A remarkable aspect of the O-rich remnants is the 
swarm of fast knots at optical wavelengths. Cas A shows 
several hundred of these knots, which can appear and fade 
over the course of a decade. In Cas A, they show pure 
oxygen emission, oxygen mixed with sulfur, and in some 
cases C, Ar and Ca as well. Little neon is seen in optical 
spectra, but [Ne II] and [Ne III] have been detected in 
infrared spectra. Infrared continuum emission from dust 
grains at temperatures near 200 K has also been detected 
from the knots. 

The Cas A knots travel at around 6000 km s~!. Their 
proper motions and Doppler shifts can be fitted to nearly 
spherical expansion originating at a point in about 1658. 
By combining the line-of-sight component of velocity 
obtained from the Doppler shifts with the component in 
the plane of the sky (obtained from proper motions), it is 
found that the knots lie on a roughly spherical surface. 
Still more remarkable, most of them fall on several large 
circles on that sphere. 

The knots in Cas A are believed to be clumps formed 
during the SN explosion. Initially they move more slowly 
than the more tenuous gas of the outer envelope of the 
exploding star. As the SNR sweeps up interstellar gas, the 
outer layers slow down and the knots overtake the reverse 
shock. When that occurs, a slower shock propagates into 
the dense knot. Models for the infrared, optical and 
ultraviolet emission from such shocks are not entirely 
consistent with the observed spectra, but in general the 
shock wave thermalizes the bulk kinetic energy of the 
ions. Coulomb collisions gradually transfer this energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernova Remnants 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


to electrons, which ionize and excite the ions to produce 
the observed emission. 

Cas A also shows other types of emission knots. 
Relatively slow knots rich in He and N (quasi-stationary 
flocculi) are interpreted as material shed by the SN 
progenitor during an earlier red giant phase of its 
evolution. _When the blast wave encounters dense 
clumps of this material, it drives relatively slow shocks 
(~150 kms“) into them. There are also a few high-velocity 
knots which show He- and N-rich spectra. Some of these 
lie in a high-velocity jet in the northeast which extends 
beyond the apparent boundary of the rest of the remnant. 

Other examples of the O-rich class are N132D and 
1E102.2-7219 in the MAGELLANIC CLOUDS and G192+1.8 in 
the plane of the Milky Way. An extremely luminous 
oxygen-rich remnant in the irregular galaxy NGC4449 is 
unresolved even in Hubble Space Telescope images. N157 
shows O-rich knots along with a pulsar. A few knots 
of processed material are found in the somewhat older 
remnant Puppis A. 

The Magellanic Cloud remnants are the best-observed 
of these objects thanks to the relatively low extinction in 
those directions. Their UV spectra indicate more neon than 
Cas A, along with lines of carbon, oxygen and magnesium. 
The ratios of ultraviolet to optical line intensities imply 
electron temperatures of order 30000 K, confirming the 
basic idea of excitation in modest velocity shocks. 


Crab-like SNRs 

The CRAB NEBULA is a spectacular example of a pulsar- 
driven SNR. It is unique in many ways, although a 
few related SNRs are known. The Crab was created 
in an explosion reported by Chinese astronomers in 
the year 1054. It is an irregular system of rapidly 
expanding filamentary emission and an amorphous cloud 
of polarized synchrotron emission observed from radio 
through y-ray wavelengths. This emission is powered 
by the pulsar, which produces a relativistic wind. Shock 
waves in this wind can appear as moving wisps. 

The network of optical filaments occupies a thick 
shell expanding at 700-1800 km s-!. These filaments emit 
the usual nebular forbidden lines, the hydrogen Balmer 
lines and helium recombination lines. They show signs 
of modest nuclear burning, particularly enhanced helium 
abundances. The composition suggests a progenitor mass 
of order 8Mo. 

The spectra of the optical filaments are generally 
consistent with heating and ionization by synchrotron 
continuum photons. Photoionization alone leads to 
relatively faint emission of ultraviolet spectral lines, 
however, and ultraviolet observations imply that some 
shock heating is also required. Shock heating and 
photoionization are intertwined in the physics of the 
optical filaments. The expanding relativistic cloud drives 
100 km s! shocks into the smooth cloud of SN ejecta. 
As the gas cools, it produces UV line emission, and in 
the process of cooling it becomes more dense, increasing 
its emissivity when exposed to ionizing photons. The 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Rayleigh-Taylor instability condenses the cooled gas into 
sheets and fingers. 

The unshocked outer regions of the stellar ejecta 
are extremely faint owing to their low density. They 
have not yet encounted dense enough interstellar gas 
to have formed a detectable forward-reverse shock pair. 
A cylindrical structure of optical emission filaments 
resembling a chimney protrudes beyond the shell defined 
by the other optical filaments. Apparently, compression 
makes the outer ejecta visible there. 

SNRs similar to the Crab include 3C58 and CTB87. 
They are characterized by non-thermal emission with a 
relatively flat spectrum at radio wavelengths. While the 
type Ia and oxygen-rich remnants show limb-brightened 
shell structures, the surface brightness of a Crab-like 
remnant peaks at the center near the pulsar. The best- 
studied of these objects, 3C58, has faint optical emission 
filaments like those of the Crab and an extended x-ray 
emission region. It may be the remnant of an SN explosion 
in the year 1181. 

A number of other SNRs contain pulsar-powered 
radio and x-ray nebulae along with shells of thermal 
emission. These hybrids include N157 (mentioned above 
for its extreme elemental composition), CTB80, MSH15- 
56 and the Vela SNR. Pulsars are not always apparent, 
perhaps because of the beaming of the pulsar radiation in 
another direction. W50, the SNR containing 55433, shows 
apparently normal shock heating at its boundaries, but the 
non-thermal emission is also present. 

The rarity of SNRs like the Crab indicates that they 
represent a very short stage in the life of an SNR or that 
they are formed only by an unusual type of explosion. 


Older SNRs 

After an SNR has swept up much more interstellar gas than 
the mass of the stellar ejecta, the character of the explosion 
itself becomes unimportant. The explosion energy and the 
density of the ambient material determine the evolution 
and appearance of the SNR. For a typical SN energy of 
10°! erg and an interstellar density of 1 cm~°, an SNR loses 
the memory of its origin after a few thousand years. 

For expansion of a blast wave in a uniform medium, 
the Sedov—Taylor similarity solution predicts the radius 
and velocity of the shock as a function of time. 
Conservation of energy determines the basic evolution. 
The relations are 


R = 13.6(€51/19) 917” pe (1) 
V = 535(é51/no) 54, °" kms! (2) 


where ¢s; is the SN explosion energy in units of 10° erg, 19 
is the ambient density in atomic mass units per cm? and ty is 
the age divided by 10000 yr. The post-shock temperature 
is proportional to the square of the shock speed, so that 
T=3.1~x 10° (€51 /9)2/51, °° Kat the edge of the remnant. 
The profiles of density, temperature and velocity inside the 
SNR are invariant functions of the fractional radius. The 
mass is concentrated near the outer edge, so that the SNR 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernova Remnants 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


appears as a limb-brightened shell with a temperature a 
little above the shock temperature at a given time. 

As the shock slows to about 300 km s~!, the 
radiative cooling time becomes comparable with the age 
of the remnant. The infrared luminosities exceed the 
x-ray luminosities in many remnants, though recent IR 
observations show that much of the IR flux is forbidden 
line emission from cold gas, rather than emission from 
hot dust grains in the hot regions. When a significant 
fraction of the SN energy is radiated away, the temperature 
and pressure drop. A substantial fraction of the energy 
emerges as UV and extreme UV photons, many of the 
latter being absorbed by the surrounding gas. When a 
large part of the thermal energy of the remnant has been 
lost, slower expansion continues in the ‘snow-plow’ phase, 
where conservation of the momentum of the cold SN shell 
governs the expansion. 

Several variants of the Sedov—Taylor picture have 
been computed, including ambient densities which vary 
with distance from the explosion or physical effects, such 
as thermal conduction and cosmic ray pressure. Especially 
in the later phases, the INTERSTELLAR MAGNETIC FIELD can 
play a major role in supporting the cool gas against 
compression. 

Before the onset of strong radiative cooling, an ideal 
Sedov SNR would appear much like a type Ia SNR. 
The model predicts a limb-brightened shell at x-ray and 
radio wavelengths, with a thin layer of faint optical and 
ultraviolet emission from the ionizing gas just inside the 
shock front. Infrared emission from heated dust grains 
should be closely correlated with the x-ray shell. 

Because of the relatively high density and low 
temperature near the edge of the SNR, radiative cooling 
affects that region first. A bubble of hot, x-ray-emitting 
gas remains in the interior, and shocks slower than about 
300 km s7! produce bright optical and UV emission. 
Strong shocks heat the interstellar gas to 1.4 x 10° vi, K 
(where vio is the shock speed in units of 100 km s~}), 
ionize it and accelerate it to three-fourths of the shock 
speed. In the idealized picture, the gas cools at nearly 
constant pressure, becoming more dense as it does so. 
As the density increases, the cooling speeds up, and the 
temperature drops steeply to around 10000 K. At that 
point, hydrogen recombines, and the neutral gas begins to 
absorb ionizing photons from the hotter regions upstream. 
This maintains an ionized layer much like an H II region 
in appearance until the ionizing photons are exhausted. 

The rapid cooling and high density cause the emission 
from the cooling shock to occur in a narrow layer behind 
the shock. Thus the shock produces a thin sheet of 
glowing gas at the edge of the SNR. Ripples in the sheet 
viewed close to edge on take on the appearance of narrow 
filaments, with diffuse emission between. The bright 
filaments correspond to tangencies between the line of 
sight and the emitting sheet of gas, and in those places 
the flow velocity is transverse to the line of sight. Figure 1 
shows a shock wave that has recently entered the cooling 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Ha image of a shock front in the Cygnus Loop from 
the Hubble Space Telescope. The thickness of the rippled sheet 
of emitting gas unresolved even at the 0.1” WFPC2 resolution. 
The long dimension of the image is 2.7 arcmin. (Image courtesy 
of W P Blair.) 


phase. As the shock evolves, the crisp arcs become more 
fragmented and diffuse. 

The optical spectrum of the radiatively cooling shock 
is similar to that of a photoionized nebula, except that a 
broader range of ionization states is present. The [O IIT] 
lines dominate the spectra of most H II regions, while 
[O I], [O IY] and [O III] lines are all bright in SNR shocks. 
There are also indicators of high temperatures in shocked 
gas, in particular the temperature-sensitive ratio of the 
44363 and 45007 forbidden lines of [O IH]. The ultraviolet 
emission lines from a shock are far stronger than those 
from photoionized gas, as the radiative cooling process 
mainly converts thermal energy into UV photons. The 
lines C III 41909, CIV 441548, 1551 and O VI AA1032, 1037 
are especially bright. As the temperature falls to about 
1000 K, much of the cooling occurs by way of infrared 
fine structure transitions. ISO observations reveal strong 
emission in the lines [C II] 157 wm, [O I] 63.2 wm, [Ne II] 
12.8 um, [Si II] 34.8 wm and [Fe II] 26.0 wm. The IR, 
optical and UV spectra provide diagnostics for the density, 
temperature and elemental abundances in the shocked 
gas. 

As the SN shell continues to sweep up mass from the 
ISM, the shock slows still further. Eventually, at shock 
speeds of order 10 kms~!, much of the emission emerges as 
molecular emission in the infrared. The 2.12 wm line of H2 
is the most easily observed signature of such shocks. Lines 
of CO and other molecules are seen at radio wavelengths. 

Older SNRs produce a polarized radio continuum by 
synchrotron emission much like that of the young SNRs. 
While the young SNRs accelerate electrons to relativistic 
speeds, old SNRs probably generate the observed radio 
emission by compressing the cosmic ray electrons and 
magnetic field already present in the ISM (van der 
Laan mechanism). A strong radiatively cooling shock 
compresses the gas and particles by a factor of 100 or 
more, enormously increasing the synchrotron emissivity. 
The compression amplifies the magnetic field component 
perpendicular to the shock flow, and the polarization of 
the radio emission is generally consistent with tangential 
magnetic fields around the SNR periphery. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernova Remnants 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


This basic picture of SNR evolution can be adapted 
to include such effects as magnetic pressure support, 
electron-ion temperature differences or the gradual 
liberation of elements such as C, Si and Fe from dust grains 
by sputtering or grain-grain collisions. A more serious 
obstacle to the straightforward derivation of physical 
parameters from spectra is the instability of the shock 
under various conditions. A dynamical instability occurs 
when the hot interior gas pushes a thin shell into the 
surrounding medium. There is also a catastrophic thermal 
instability in radiatively cooling shocks faster than about 
150 km s~!. These instabilities are especially likely during 
the transition from the Sedov phase to cooling phase, and 
they can lead to the formation of secondary shocks. 

While the Sedov picture is useful as an approximate 
description of SNR evolution, the ISM is not homoge- 
neous. The blast wave in low-density interstellar gas en- 
counters denser clouds, and these encounters determine 
the appearance, and perhaps the evolution, of older SNRs. 
When the blast wave strikes an obstacle, rapid decelera- 
tion pushes a weak shock back into the expanding hot gas, 
increasing the temperature, density and x-ray emissivity. 
At the same time, a slower shock propagates into the dense 
cloud. Approximate constancy of the ram pressure, pv’, 
implies that the cloud shock speed is related to the blast 
wave speed by the square root of the density contrast. If 
the cloud is large on the scale of the supernova remnant, 
as in the northeastern or western sides of the CYGNUS LOOP, 
the interaction will produce enhanced x-ray emission and 
bright optical filaments, and the expansion rate will be 
smaller than in lower-density sectors of the SNR. 

If the dense cloud is small, the same pattern of 
x-ray enhancement and optical emission will occur for a 
short time, but the blast wave quickly sweeps past the 
cloud. A strong shear in the flow past the cloud generates 
turbulence, and the cloud will soon be destroyed. The 
turbulence also tangles and amplifies the magnetic field. 
This may prevent the cascade of turbulence to small scales, 
and it may prevent thermal conduction from evaporating 
the cloud material. If the turbulent cascade proceeds far 
enough, or if thermal conduction is effective, the cloud 
material can merge with the hot gas, greatly increasing its 
density and cooling rate. If the ISM is populated with a 
large number of small clouds, the rate at which dense gas 
enters the hot phase may govern the SNR evolution. 

It is expected that many SNRs occur in atypical 
regions of the ISM. The massive stars that produce type II 
supernovae are formed from massive clouds, and they 
exhaust their supply of fuel before moving far from 
their formation sites. They also produce strong winds 
and powerful ionizing radiation that can modify the 
immediate environment. SNRs such as the Cygnus Loop 
are believed to have occurred inside bubbles of their own 
creation. The luminosity of such an SNR is very low until 
the blast wave reaches the dense outer shell of the bubble. 
Then the pressure and luminosity rise rapidly, and the 
remnant can be far more luminous than a Sedov remnant 
of the same size. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Interaction 

The ultimate fate of SNRs is not known. The low-density 
cavity of an old SNR provides a channel for the energy of 
any subsequent SN explosion in or near it. If the SN rate is 
high enough compared with the cooling time, the tenuous 
gas will be reheated before it is able to cool. The result 
could beasystem of hot tunnels ina denser ISM, or perhaps 
a matrix of hot, low-density gas with embedded dense 
clouds. On the other hand, a lower SN rate, abetted by the 
buffering of magnetic fields, can reduce the likelihood of 
interaction. In that case, the SNR shock gradually slows, 
the interior slowly cools and the shocked gas merges back 
into the ISM. 

If the supernovae are highly correlated events, the 
odds of interaction greatly increase. The stellar winds and 
the high supernova rates of an OB ASSOCIATION are sufficient 
to maintain an enormous low-density bubble with a slowly 
expanding dense shell. Such a bubble may take the form 
of a supershell, resembling an SNR with initial explosion 
energy of 10 or 100 supernovae. Ina disk galaxy, the shock 
tends to break onto the galactic halo, forming a chimney 
for hot gas to flow upwards. Candidate supershells have 
been observed in the Galaxy, the Large Magellanic Cloud 
and other nearby galaxies. 

A possible instance of the reheating of an old SNR by 
a second event is the Local Bubble, a region of hot, tenuous 
gas about 100 pc in size engulfing the solar neighborhood. 
The temperature and density derived from soft x-ray 
measurements are difficult to reconcile with the standard 
model of a single SN explosion, but an old SNR cavity 
reheated by a subsequent explosion can explain the size 
and temperature of the Local Bubble. 


Bibliography 

More information about supernova remnants may be 
found in the review paper by Weiler and Sramer (Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 26 295-341). The physics of interstellar 
shock waves is reviewed by Draine and McKee (Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 31 373-432). 


John C Raymond 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernovae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supernovae 


Supernovae represent the catastrophic explosions that 
mark the end of the life of certain stars. A mass of 
one to ten times the mass of the Sun is ejected with 
velocities of about one to ten percent of the speed of 
light. The corresponding energy is comparable to the 
gravitational binding energy of a star and hence evidence 
that the star is severely, if not completely, disrupted. The 
explosion commonly ejects heavy elements that seed the 
gas of the interstellar medium. This enriched gas then 
condenses to form new stars. The heavy elements can form 
planets and living things. Some supernovae may produce 
compact remnants such aS NEUTRON STARS Or BLACK HOLES. 
Supernovae also produce extended remants as their ejecta 
sweep outward and drive shock waves into the interstellar 
medium. This energy can help to form new stars and blow 
matter entirely out of host galaxies in some circumstances. 
Because of their great brightness, supernovae can be used 
to determine distances and help to determine the age, 
shape and dynamics of the universe. 


Historical supernovae 

Supernovae have been witnessed in our Galaxy, but only 
in the historical past. Historical records, particularly the 
careful data recorded by the Chinese, show that seven or 
eight supernovae have exploded over the last 2000 years 
in that portion of the Galaxy not obscured by dust, about 
15% of the area of the galactic plane. We also see the 
expanding supernova remnants that have been produced 
by supernovae. The youngest of these correspond to 
the historical supernovae, but we also observe the effects 
of several hundred older SUPERNOVA REMNANTS that have 
exploded over the last million years or so. 

The supernova of 1006 was the brightest ever 
recorded, brighter than Venus and perhaps as bright 
as a quarter Moon. It was observed throughout the 
Middle and Far East. The supernova of 1054 is by 
far the most well-known. This explosion produced the 
rapidly expanding shell of gas that modern astronomers 
identify as the Crab Nebula. The supernova of 1054 was 
apparently recorded first by the Japanese and was also 
clearly mentioned by the Koreans, although the Chinese 
have the most careful records. There is a strong suspicion 
that Native Americans recorded the event in rock paintings 
and perhaps on pottery. There is no confirmed record of 
an observation in Europe. The supernova of 1572 was 
observed by Tycho Brahe. Tycho’s discovery helped to 
alter the world view of immutable heavens that began to 
shift during the Renaissance. Tycho’s student, Johannes 
Kepler, in his turn witnessed the explosion of a supernova 
in 1604. Kepler also took careful data by which we 
deduce that he witnessed the same kind of explosion as 
his mentor. Although there are counter-arguments and 
some controversy, both Tycho’s and Kepler’s supernovae 
are widely regarded to be the kind of event modern 
astronomers label Type Ia (see below). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. X-ray image of the supernova remnant Cassiopeia A 
obtained by the Chandra X-ray Observatory. (Courtesy of 
NASA.) 


A young expanding gaseous remnant of an exploded 
star is observed as a powerful emitter of radio radiation 
known as Cassiopeia A (figure 1). From the present size 
and rate of expansion of the remnant, we deduce that 
the explosion that gave rise to Cas A occurred in about 
1680. No bright optical outburst was seen. This explosion 
may have been under-luminous, but the degree is difficult 
to ascertain since there is a great deal of patchy dust 
extinction in this direction. There are reports that Cas A 
was seen faintly by Flamsteed, the first Astronomer Royal 
of England, but there are questions concerning whether or 
not that sighting was in the same position as the remnant 
observed today. Supernovae tend to be brighter if they 
explode within large red giant envelopes. The suspicion 
is that the star that exploded in about 1680 may have 
ejected a major portion of its envelope before exploding or 
that the star was otherwise relatively small and compact. 
That condition, in turn, may have prevented Cas A 
from reaching the peak brightness characteristic of most 
supernovae. SUPERNOVA 19874, the best studied supernova 
of all time, had this property of being intrinsically dimmer 
than usual. 


Supernova types 

All supernovae observed since 1680, and hence all 
supernovae seen by modern astronomers, have been in 
other galaxies. A single galaxy produces a supernova 
only rarely. Supernovae occur roughly once per hundred 
years for SPIRAL GALAXIES like the Milky Way. Astronomers 
observe a huge number of galaxies at great distances. The 
chance that some of these galaxies will have supernovae go 
off in them is appreciable. Before supernova 1987A, about 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernovae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Spectra of SN at maximum 


log(f,) + const 
oo 
© 
ar earl 
Ss 
= 
mony 
‘2 
2 
i ee 


\ . 


Cy | ty | | _ 
2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 
rest wavelength [A] 


Figure 2. Characteristic spectra of various types of supernovae 
near maxiumum light. The features labeled are: Si II—ionized 
silicon; He I—neutral helium; Ca II—ionized calcium; 

O I—neutral oxygen; Ha, HB—neutral hydrogen. (Reprinted 
from Astrophysical Quantities, American Institute of Physics 
Press.) 


30 supernovae were recorded every year. Closer attention 
was paid to discovering supernovae after supernova 
1987A, especially at great distances where they are 
cosmological markers, and the current rate of discovery 
is about 100 per year. 

Categories of supernovae are traditionally defined by 
the spectrum that reveals the composition of the ejected 
matter. Complementary information is obtained from the 
light curve, the pattern of rapid brightening and slower 
dimming followed by each event. From the studies of 
supernovae in other galaxies, astronomers have identified 
two basic types called Type I and Type II. The dividing 
lines of this taxonomy are blurred by events that share 
some properties of Type I and some of Type II (figure 2). 

The spectra of Type I supernovae reveal no detectable 
hydrogen, the most common element in the universe. 
Some Type I supernovae, called Type Ia, appear in all kinds 
of galaxies—elliptical, spiral, and irregular. Type Ia tend 
to avoid the arms of spiral galaxies. Since the spiral arms 
are the site of new STAR FORMATION, Type Ia supernova are 
deduced to explode in older, longer-lived stars. This is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


consistent with their being the only type to explode in 
ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES that lack recent star formation. Type 
Ia show characteristic elements in the spectrum, with 
elements such as magnesium, silicon, sulfur, and calcium 
near maximum light and iron later on. The light curve 
for Type Ia supernovae is also characteristic. There is an 
initial rise to a peak that takes about two weeks and then 
a long slower period of gradual decay over timescales 
of months that is very similar for all these events. The 
data recorded by Tycho and Kepler suggest that they both 
witnessed Type Ia supernovae. For decades, all Type Ia 
supernovae were thought to be virtually identical, but 
more recent careful observations have revealed small, but 
real, variations among them. 

Near the peak of their light output, Type II supernovae 
show normal abundances in their ejected material, 
including a normal complement of hydrogen. These 
supernovae have never appeared in elliptical galaxies. 
Type II supernovae occur occasionally in IRREGULAR 
GALAXIES, but mostly in spiral galaxies and then within the 
confines of the spiral arms. The interpretation is that the 
stars that make Type II supernovae are born and die in a 
short time. Since they are short-lived, the stars that make 
Type II supernovae must be massive. The optical light 
curve of a typical Type II supernova shows a rise to peak 
brightness in a week or two and then a period of a month 
or two when the light output is nearly constant. After this 
time, the optical luminosity drops suddenly over a few 
weeks and then more slowly with a timescale of months. 
This pattern of light emission with time is consistent with 
an explosion in the core of a star with a massive, extended 
red giant envelope. 

Two other varieties of hydrogen deficient supernovae 
are labeled Type Ib and Type Ic. The two types are probably 
closely related. Unlike Type Ia, but like Type II, Types Ib 
and Ic only seem to explode in the arms of spiral galaxies. 
Therefore, Types Ib and Ic are also associated with massive 
stars. Type Ib show evidence for helium in the spectrum 
near maximum light. Type Ic show little or no such 
evidence for helium. On the other hand, both Type Ib and 
Ic show evidence for oxygen, magnesium and calcium at 
later times. Type Ib and Ic show little or no evidence for 
a strong line of silicon that is a major characteristic of the 
spectra of Type Ia. Type Ia supernovae show essentially 
only iron at later times, another factor emphasizing their 
difference from Types Ib and Ic. The composition revealed 
by Types Ib and Ic is similar to that expected in the core 
of a massive star that has been stripped of its hydrogen. 
In the case of Type Ic, most of the helium is gone as well. 
This suggests an origin of Type Ib and Ic in stars much like 
WOLF-RAYETSTARS, but a direct connection to this class of stars 
has not yet been established. The light curves of Type Ib 
and Ic are somewhat similar to those of Type Ia, but are 
dimmer at maximum light. Type Ib and Ic are often strong 
radio sources whereas no radio has yet been detected from 
a Type Ia. Radio emission is thought to be created when 
the supernova shock collides with a surrounding medium, 
so this radio emission may indicate strong mass loss from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernovae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Type Ib/c, again consistent with an origin in a massive 
stellar core. 

A bright supernova observed in 1993, SN 1993], gave 
yet more clues to the diversity of processes that lead 
to exploding stars. SN 1993] revealed hydrogen in its 
spectrum, so this event was a variety of Type II. As 
the explosion proceeded, however, the strength of the 
hydrogen features diminished and strong evidence for 
helium emerged. In this phase, SN 1993] resembled a 
Type Ib. Apparently this star had most, but not all, of its 
hydrogen envelope removed, probably in a binary mass 
transfer process. There is yet no direct observational 
proof for binary companions in Type Ib or Type Ic or 
the transition events like SN 1993], but this seems likely. 
Strong winds from massive stars could play a role in 
stripping the hydrogen and helium from Type Ib and Type 
Icand the relative importance of winds versus binary mass 
transfer has not been resolved. 


Progenitor evolution in massive stars 

Type II and Type Ib/c supernovae thus represent the 
explosion of massive stars. These stars have presumably 
evolved from the main sequence to RED GIANTS and have 
had a series of nuclear burning stages producing ever 
heavier elements in the core. The masses of the stars that 
give rise to these events is estimated to be between about 
ten and perhaps thirty to fifty solar masses. Below the 
lower limit, stars make WHITE Dwarrs that do not explode 
as single stars, but may explode as Type Ia if they occur in 
binary systems with appropriate mass exchange. Above 
the very uncertain upper limit, stars probably collapse to 
make black holes with no associated supernova explosion. 
The statistics of the rate of explosion of these events is 
roughly consistent with this estimate. Stars of this mass 
range are thought to form iron cores that collapse to form 
neutron stars. There is thus a strong suspicion that Type II 
and Type Ib/c supernovae make neutron stars as compact 
remnants of the explosion and that the gravitational energy 
liberated in forming the neutron star is the driving force 
of the explosion. 

At the lower end of the mass range suspected 
to contribute to Type II and Type Ib/c supernovae, 
the evolution may be slightly different. Computer 
calculations show that, for stars with original mass 
between about eight and twelve solar masses, carbon 
burns to produce neon and magnesium, but the oxygen 
that typically co-exists with the carbon after helium 
burning does not get hot enough to burn. The core, now 
composed of oxygen, neon, and magnesium, contracts 
to form a white dwarf. The atomic nuclei of neon 
and magnesium are capable of absorbing an electron, 
thus turning one proton into a neutron, and transmuting 
themselves into an element of lower proton number. 
This process reduces the electrons that are responsible 
for the pressure that supports the core. The result 
is that the core collapses before any of the elements 
in the core begin thermonuclear burning. During the 
collapse, the remaining nuclear fuels—oxygen, neon, and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnesium—are converted to iron. The net result is a 
collapsing iron core, just as for the more massive stars 
where the iron core forms before the collapse ensues. 
These two processes of iron core collapse may give 
identical results, or there may be some subtle difference 
between collapse triggered by absorbing electrons rather 
than by heating and disintegrating the iron. These 
differences could affect the explosive outcome. 

Estimates of the rate of formation of neutron stars in 
the Galaxy are similar to estimates of the rate of formation 
of Type II and Type Ib/c supernovae. This does not 
prove that these supernovae produce neutron stars, but 
the notion that the two processes are directly related is a 
nearly universal working hypothesis. 


Nuclear synthesis in massive stars 

Theoretical calculations show that heavy elements in 
reasonable proportions are produced naturally in massive 
stars in the process of forming an iron core. Stars with 
mass between about 15 and 100 solar masses produce 
substantial amounts of heavy elements. If these stars 
explode and eject their heavy elements, this freshly 
synthesized material will mix with the hydrogen in the 
interstellar gas. New stars form from this enriched 
mixture. Stars in the upper end of this range could collapse 
to form black holes without substantially altering this 
picture. 


Core collapse 

The iron core that forms in the center of a massive star is 
endothermic; it can only absorb energy either by breaking 
down into lighter elements or by forging heavier elements. 
The absorption of energy reduces the pressure support 
and guarantees that the iron core will become unstable 
to collapse shortly after it forms, in less than a day. 
In practice, the dominant process that destabilizes the 
core is that of photodisintegration, when photons of light 
(actually gamma-rays in the hot interior of the core) cause 
some of the iron to break apart into helium nuclei and free 
neutrons. 

In the collapse of an iron core, the protons in the iron- 
like nuclei capture electrons and convert to neutrons. Each 
reaction creates a NEUTRINO. When the collapse reaches the 
density of atomic nuclei, the strong nuclear force has a 
repulsive component. The result of the increased pressure 
is that the collapse halts. A huge amount of energy is 
released when the neutron star forms. This energy is 1000 
times more than is necessary to blow off the outer layers, 
those containing calcium, oxygen, carbon, and helium, 
and any outer envelope of hydrogen. The problem is that 
most of the energy produced in the collapse is lost to the 
neutrinos that can easily diffuse out of the newly born 
neutron star and stream through the infalling matter. 

Uncertainties in the complex physics involved in core 
collapse have prevented an unambiguous understanding 
of the explosion mechanism. When the neutron star 
first forms, the new star overshoots its equilibrium 
configuration giving a large compression to the neutron 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernovae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


core. There is then a rebound. This rebound sends a strong 
supersonic shock wave back out through the infalling 
matter. The core takes about one second to collapse after 
instability sets in. The core bounce creates the shock in 
about one-hundredth of a second. The shock runs out into 
the infalling matter, however. Some of the energy of the 
shock is dissipated by the production and loss of neutrinos. 
The shock also must do the work of breaking down the 
infalling iron into lighter elements, protons and neutrons, 
to form the neutron star. The shock wave can thus stall 
with insufficient energy to reach the outer layers of the 
star. Matter can continue to rain down on the stalled shock 
front. The matter will still be shocked as material hits this 
front, but the shocked matter will continue to fall onto 
the neutron star. If enough matter lands on the neutron 
star, the neutron star will be crushed into a black hole. 
Current calculations show that the core bounce alone is 
not sufficient to cause an explosion. 

One mechanism to create an explosion that is being 
actively considered takes advantage of the tremendous 
stream of neutrinos leaving the neutron star. Normal 
matter, the Sun, is essentially transparent to neutrinos 
since neutrinos interact only through the weak nuclear 
force. The only exception to this is neutron star matter. 
This matter, nearly as dense as an atomic nucleus, is so 
dense that it can be opaque or at least semi-transparent to 
the neutrinos. Although most of the neutrinos will get out 
into space, a small fraction will be trapped in the hot matter 
that lies just behind the shock front created by the core 
bounce even though this matter has a density that is much 
smaller than that of the neutron star. The accumulation of 
neutrino heat over a time of about one second may provide 
the pressure to re-invigorate the shock, driving the shock 
outward and causing the explosion. 

The mechanism for depositing a small fraction of 
the neutrino energy behind the shock may be related to 
the boiling of the newly-formed neutron star. When the 
collapse is first halted and the neutron star rebounds, the 
neutron star is very hot. This heat can cause the neutron 
star to boil, much like a pan of water boils on the stove. 
The boiling provides a mechanism for carrying the heat 
outward in the case of the neutron star by mechanical 
motion. Under the right circumstances, this boiling 
process can be much more efficient in transporting heat 
than a slower process of leaking radiation, or neutrinos. 
Calculations of this process in neutron stars are very 
challenging because the motion is complex. All modern 
calculations that can follow motion in more than one 
(radial) dimension show that neutron stars do boil. There 
is a consensus that explosions will not occur without this 
boiling. There is still debate about whether this process is 
sufficient to cause an explosion. 

Most of the current calculations of core bounce and 
subsequent events treat the configuration as spherically 
symmetric. Even if the neutron star boils, the structure 
of the neutron star may, on average, be spherically 
symmetric. There are a number of lines of evidence, 
however, that the explosions that result from the core 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


collapse process are intrinsically non-spherical. Matter 
may be ejected more intensely in some directions than 
in others. If this is the case, then the current numerical 
calculations may be missing a major ingredient necessary 
to yield an explosion. The most obvious mechanisms 
for breaking the spherical symmetry are rotation and 
magnetic fields. Proper treatment of rotation and magnetic 
fields may be necessary to fully understand when and 
how collapse leads to explosions. Recent calculations have 
suggested that jets of matter associated with the rotation 
and magnetic field of the neutron star could play an 
important role in causing the explosion. This might alter 
the significance of the boiling neutron star and diminish 
the effect of the neutrinos. 


White dwarf explosions 
Type Ia supernovae are thought to explode in old, low- 
mass, long-lived stars. The observed properties of Type 
Ia are also remarkably uniform. Since white dwarfs 
of maximum mass, known as the Chandrasekhar mass, 
would be essentially identical and hence undergo nearly 
identical explosions, the observed homogeneity of Type 
Ia has pointed to an origin in exploding white dwarfs. 
We now know that all Type Ia supernovae are not exactly 
identical, but the basic principle still holds. The idea is 
then that the more massive star in an orbiting pair could 
evolve and form a white dwarf. The low-mass companion 
could then take a long time to evolve, but the companion 
would eventually transfer mass onto the white dwarf. If 
the total mass accumulated by the white dwarf approaches 
the Chandrasekhar mass of about 1.4 solar masses, the 
white dwarf will then explode. 

Careful studies of the observed properties of Type 
Ia supernovae are completely consistent with the general 
picture that the explosion occurs in a white dwarf. The 
information revealed by the evolution of the spectra 
is consistent with a configuration in which the denser 
inner portions of the exploding star burn all the way 
to iron, but the outer parts are only partially burned. 
Computer models of exploding white dwarfs give results 
that match this pattern rather well. The exact nature of the 
combustion is still being explored, but the most successful 
models adopt a progenitor that is a carbon/oxygen white 
dwarf with a mass very near the Chandrasekhar mass. 

There are two different ways of propagating a 
thermonuclear explosion in a white dwarf. One is 
a subsonic burning like a flame, a process called a 
deflagration. The other is a supersonic burning that 
is preceded by a shock front, much like a stick of 
dynamite. This process is known as a detonation. The 
most sophisticated current models, those that best match 
the data, have the unregulated carbon burning begin as a 
boiling, turbulent, deflagration and then make a transition 
to a supersonic detonation. Such models naturally create 
iron-like matter in the center and intermediate elements 
like magnesium, silicon, sulfur and calcium, on the 
outside. These models also predict that the white dwarf 
is completely destroyed, leaving no compact remnant like 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernovae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a neutron star or a black hole. This comparison of theory 
and observation thus strongly points to an interpretation 
of Type Ia supernovae as the explosion of a carbon/oxygen 
white dwarf at the Chandrasekhar limit. 


Type Ia progenitor evolution 

Despite this convergence of opinion on the mechanism, 
there is no generally accepted picture of the evolutionary 
origin of Type Ia supernovae. The question of how the 
white dwarfs grow to the Chandrasekhar mass is still an 
unsolved problem. There is no direct evidence that Type 
Ia supernovae arise in binary systems. Despite this lack of 
direct evidence, all the circumstantial evidence points to 
evolution in DOUBLESTAR systems, and there are few credible 
ways of making a white dwarf explode without invoking 
a binary companion. The challenge is to figure out what 
binary evolution leads to a Type Ia explosion. 

Type Ia supernovae are not all identical. The general 
trend is that Type Ia supernovae that are brighter than 
average decline from maximum brightness a bit slower 
than average. The events that are a bit dimmer than 
average (some by as much as a factor of 2!), decline 
more rapidly. Models of exploding Chandrasekhar mass 
white dwarfs can account for this behavior if the explosion 
in some stars makes the transition from a subsonic 
deflagration to a supersonic detonation a little earlier than 
in others. Why this should be so is the object of current 
research. 


Light curves 

Supernovae display a variety of shapes to their light 
curves. Type Ia supernovae are the brightest. They decay 
fairly rapidly in the first two weeks after peak light and 
then more slowly for months. Some Type II supernovae 
have an extended plateau and some drop rather quickly 
from maximum light. Both types seem to have a very 
slow decay at very late times, several months after the 
explosion. Type Ib and Ic supernovae are typically fainter 
than Type Ia by about a factor of two, but have similar 
shapes near peak light and show evidence for a slow decay 
at later times. 

When a supernova first explodes, the matter is 
compact, dense and opaque. To reach maximum 
brightness, the ejected matter must expand until the 
material becomes more tenuous and semi-transparent. 
The size the ejecta must reach is typically 10 000 times the 
size of the Sun. This is 100 times the size of a red giant 
and 100 times the size of the Earth’s orbit. As the matter 
expands, however, it cools. If the matter must expand too 
far before heat leaks out as radiation, the material may 
have cooled off so that there is no more heat to radiate. 

Most Type II supernova explosions are thought to 
occur in red giant envelopes. These are very large 
structures. After the explosion, large envelopes do not 
have very far to expand before they become sufficiently 
transparent to leak their heat as light. As they begin to 
radiate, Type II supernovae still retain a large proportion 
of the heat that was deposited by the shock wave that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


accompanied the supernova. Near maximum light and 
on the typical plateau that lasts for months, Type II 
supernovae shine by the shock energy originally deposited 
in the star. The deposited energy presumably arises in the 
core collapse process. 

Fora Type I supernova, however, the story is different. 
Whether the exploding star is a white dwarf, as suspected 
for a Type Ia, or the bare core of a more massive star, as 
suspected for Type Ib and Ic, the exploding object is very 
small. The expected sizes range from one tenth to one 
thousandth of the size of the Sun. These bare cores are 
much smaller than the size to which they must expand 
before they can leak their shock energy. The result is that 
the expansion strongly cools the ejected matter and by the 
time the matter reaches the point where it could radiate 
the heat, the heat from the original shock is all gone. This 
kind of supernova requires another source of heat to shine 
at all. All the light from Type I supernovae comes from 
radioactive decay. 


Radioactive decay 

The nature of a thermonuclear explosion is to burn very 
rapidly. If the explosion starts with a fuel—carbon, 
oxygen, or silicon—that has equal numbers of protons and 
neutrons, then the immediate product of the burning will 
also have equal numbers of protons and neutrons. This is 
because the rapid burning takes place on the time scale of 
the strong nuclear reactions. To change the ratio of protons 
to neutrons requires the weak force and thus a longer time. 

Iron is produced in a thermonuclear explosion in a 
three-step process. The first step is to produce an element 
that is close to iron, but that has equal numbers of protons 
and neutrons. This element, like iron, has a nucleus that is 
tightly bound by the nuclear force and has the same total 
number of protons plus neutrons, 56, but with 28 protons 
and 28 neutrons. This condition singles out one element, 
that with the most tightly bound nucleus containing equal 
numbers of protons and neutrons: nickel-56. Nickel-56 
is, however, unstable and therefore undergoes radioactive 
decay. The radioactive decay is induced by the weak force. 
The result is the formation of the element cobalt-56. In the 
process, a neutrino is given off to balance the number of 
leptons. Excess energy comes off as gamma rays. The 
gamma rays can be stopped by collision with the matter 
being ejected from the supernova and their energy used to 
heat the matter. The hot matter then radiates. The power 
of the light falls off as the nickel decays away and as the 
matter expands so that it is less efficient in trapping the 
gamma rays. The cobalt-56 that forms is also unstable and 
decays to become iron-56. This decay again produces a 
neutrino and gamma-ray energy. 

The radioactive decay of these elements is controlled 
by a quantum uncertainty. One does not know what atom 
will decay, but on the average half will decay in a given 
time. For nickel-56, the time for half to decay is 6.1 d. 
Likewise, the cobalt-56 decays with a half life of about 
77 d. The observed light curves of Type I supernovae 
decay somewhat faster than the decay of nickel-56 in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernovae 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


UVOIR Light Curve of SN 1987A 


fE | ae ae TT T 
42 — 
41 
40 | 
is L 
> L 
6 39 Ee 
an lz 
Ss kee 
8 [ 
38 }— 
L Ps Crab Nebula Limit 
37 
36 | 
iy 


0 200 400 600 800 


1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 


days since outburst 


Figure 3. The light curve of Supernova 1987A in comparison with the expected slope for decay of radioactive cobalt-56 and the 
luminosity of the pulsar in the Crab Nebula. (Reprinted from Astrophysical Quantities, American Institute of Physics Press.) 


early phase and of cobalt-56 in the later phases. The reason 
is that not all the gamma-rays produced in the decay are 
trapped and converted to heat and light. Some of the 
gamma rays escape directly into space. 

For Type Ib and Ic, the amount of nickel required 
to power the light curve is about one-tenth of the mass 
of the Sun. This amount of nickel is consistent with 
many computations of iron core collapse. The nickel is 
produced when the shock wave impacts the layer of silicon 
surrounding the iron core. Similar reactions occur in Type 
II supernovae and similar amounts of nickel are ejected. 
Type Ia supernovae are generally brighter and must 
produce more nickel, of the order of 1/2 to 1 solar mass. 
The dimmest Type Ia events require only 0.1-0.2 solar 
masses of nickel. The models of Type Ia supernovae based 
on thermonuclear explosions in carbon/oxygen white 
dwarfs of the Chandrasekhar mass produce this amount 
of nickel rather naturally in the explosion. The amount 
can vary depending on, for instance, the density at which 
the explosion makes the transition from a deflagration to 
a detonation, so the variety of ejected nickel mass can also 
be understood, at least at a rudimentary level. 


Supernova 1987A 

Supernova 1987A was a Type II supernovae that occurred 
in the Large Magellanic Cloud about 150000 light years 
from the Earth. This made it the closest and hence 
best studied supernova ever. Neutrinos were detected 
from SN 1987A, thus confirming the basic picture of core 
collapse. There was insufficient information to determine 
the precise mechanism of the explosion. The neutrinos 
mean that a neutron star formed, at least temporarily. No 
subsequent evidence for a neutron star has been detected 
(figure 3). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


This may be because the neutron star is obscured 
in some way, or because it does not emit a normal flux 
of radiation. The latter could be because it is spinning 
rather slowly or has a rather small magnetic field. Another 
interesting possibility is that sufficient matter fell back 
onto the newly born neutron star to convert it to a black 
hole after the supernova shock was launched. SN 1987A 
also gave direct evidence for the production and decay 
of about 0.07 solar masses of nickel-56. The gamma- 
rays from the decay of cobalt-56 were directly detected. 
SN 1987A exploded as a rather compact blue supergiant 
rather than a red giant. The reasons for this are still not 
clear, but current reasoning suggests that the progenitor 
might have had a binary companion that was consumed 
when the progenitor became a red giant and engulfed 
the companion (figure 4). The relatively compact state 
meant that, unlike most Type II, SN 1987A was powered 
at maximum light by radioactive decay. SN 1987A is 
surrounded by a set of three nested rings of gas that were 
formed prior to the explosion. Their origin is unclear, but 
may be related to the binary interaction. The ejecta from 
the supernova is beginning to collide with the innermost 
ring. This interaction may yield more clues to the origin 
of this structure. 


Supernovae and the universe 

Because they are so bright, Type Ia supernovae have been 
used to determine distances. This information can be 
combined with the expansion velocity of the host galaxy 
to determine the HUBBLE CONSTANT and hence the age of the 
Universe. Subtle differences in the brightness for more 
distant supernovae have given evidence that the Universe 
is accelerating its expansion, contrary to expectation. The 
validity of this conclusion may rest on subtle differences 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Supernovae ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Hubble Space Telescope image of Supernova 1987A 
about 8 years after its explosion showing the central debris and 
the three surrounding rings that pre-existed the explosion. The 
two bright stars are not related to the supernova but fall 
accidently in the image. (Courtesy of NASA.) 


between nearby and distant supernovae that are under 
investigation. 

A recent supernova, SN 1998bw, had characteristics 
of a Type Ic supernova but was excessively bright, 
asymmetric, had large expansion velocity, and produced 
one of the brightest radio sources ever associated with 
a supernova. There is also an indication that this 
supernova may have been associated with a gamma-ray 
burst observed on 25 April 1998. 


Bibliography 

Marshall L 1994 The Supernova Story (Princeton Sciences 
Library) 

Petschek A (ed) 19990 Supernovae (Springer Verlag) 

Wheeler J C 2000 Supernovae, Gamma-ray Bursts and 
Adventures in Hyperspace (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


J Craig Wheeler 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 7 


Supersymmetry 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Supersymmetry 


A set of rules that attempts to link matter particles 
(fermions, such as quarks and leptons) and force-carrying 
particles (gauge bosons) into a single framework, or 
‘family’. Supersymmetry (abbreviation: SUSY), requires 
that each type of particle has a supersymmetric partner. 
For example, a photon (which is a boson) has a 
fermion counterpart (the photino), an electron (fermion) 
is partnered by a selectron (boson), a quark by a squark, 
and so on. The theory therefore predicts the existence of 
a wealth of hitherto unknown (and as yet undiscovered) 
particles. When the ideas of supersymmetry are applied to 
gravity, the resulting theory—supergravity—predicts the 
existence of one or more types of gravitinos (fermions) 
to partner the graviton (the hypothesized force-carrying 
particle for gravitation). 


See also: electron, fundamental forces, gauge bosons, 
leptons, Pauli exclusion principle, photon, quark, string 
theory/superstring theory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Surges 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Surges 


Surges are cool plasma jets ejected from small flare- 
like chromospheric bright points, such as subflares or 
Ellerman bombs (moustaches) near sunspots (see SOLAR 
CHROMOSPHERE: ELLERMAN BOMBS). They are a kind of active 
prominences, usually observed in Ha at ground-based 
observatories, although space observations (such as with 
EUV telescope) also detect surges. Figure 1 shows a typical 
example of an Ha surge observed at Hida observatory 
of Japan, revealing that the surge is emanating from an 
He bright point (subflare) in the periphery of the sunspot 
penumbra. 


Kinematic properties and physical conditions 
Surges are ejected at peak velocities of 50-200 kms“! along 
a straight or slightly curved path, delineating magnetic 
field lines. They reach heights of 10 000-100 000 km and 
typically last 10-20 min. Many surges fall back into 
the chromosphere along the trajectory of their ascent, 
although some surges fall along the other half of the loop. 
Sometimes, small Ha brightenings are observed at the 
footpoint of surges in the falling phase. In some cases, 
a surge moves perpendicularly to the surge axis at a few 
tens of km s~' during its ejection (this is referred to as 
whip-like motion in some literature). 

There are some controversies on the kinematic 
properties of surge material. Some researchers reported 
that the motion of surges is not ballistic; surges are 
continuously accelerated during the ascent phase, while 
they are decelerated in the descent phase. However, 
some other researchers reported that surges show ballistic 
motion; all materials are accelerated in a short time and 
follow only the solar gravitational acceleration after that. 

Some of surges show spinning motion at a few tens 
of km s7! around their axis during the ejection phase. 
The direction of spinning motion is consistent with the 
direction of unwinding motion of their helical twist. 

The electron density of surges is 10''-10!* cm, and 
their temperature is ~10* K. The total mass is 10'S-10"° g, 
and the kinetic energy ranges from 10”’ to 10” erg. 

Surges have a strong tendency to recur at the same 
place ata rate >1h™'. 


Magnetic field properties 

The magnetic field strength at the footpoint of surges is of 
order of 50 G. The footpoint corresponds to small satellite 
spots (or satellite polarities) whose polarity is opposite to 
that of the main sunspot. Hence a neutral point or current 
sheet must be present at or near the footpoint of surges, 
suggesting the occurrence of magnetic reconnection there. 
Usually surges occur when magnetic flux is increasing or 
decreasing, i.e. in an evolving magnetic structure. 

Many surges occur in emerging flux regions, 
especially in their early stage (see CHROMOSPHERE: EMERGING 
FLUX REGIONS). The typical shape of surges in emerging flux 
regions is an inverted Y-shape similar to the Eiffel tower 
(figure 2). This is consistent with the field configuration 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


-— 
30" 


te 


” 


! 
| 23:13:29 UT 


Figure 1. An Ha surge near a sunspot on the disk observed at 
Hida observatory (courtesy of S Sano). Top: Ha + 0.0 A; 
bottom: Ha — 5.0 A. 


including a neutral point near the base of surges, which is 
expected for emerging flux reconnection model. 


Relation to other phenomena 

It is difficult to discriminate large surges whose velocity 
is more than 400 km s~! from sprays, which are non- 
collimated cool plasma ejections expanding into large solid 
angles with velocity often larger than the Sun’s escape 
velocity (~600 km s~'). Sprays are usually associated 
with flares. Sometimes, they show an unwinding helical 
motion. The electron density and temperature of sprays 
are similar to those of surges. (The intermediate case 
between surges and sprays is shown in figure 3.) 

On the other hand, small surges are similar to 
spicules, which are cool chromospheric jets observed in 
Ha and EUV at the network boundary (see CHROMOSPHERE: 
SPICULES). Their velocity and height are ~30 km s7! 
and 5000-8000 km, smaller than those of surges, while 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Surges 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Top: An Ha surge in an emerging flux region, showing 
an inverted Y-shape similar to the Eiffel tower (observed at Hida 
observatory, courtesy of H Kurokawa) (03 UT 1 June; 

Ha — 0.8 A). Bottom: Ha arch filament loops developing 20 h 
after the Ha surge shown in the top part (23 UT 1 June; 

Ha + 0.0 A). 


their temperature and electron density are comparable 
with those of surges. Spicules show also a velocity 
feature suggesting spinning motion. It has not yet been 
established whether spicule motion is ballistic or not. 

Macrospicules are observed in coronal holes and 
show characteristics between spicules and surges. They 
are ejected at ~140 km s~', reaching heights of 10000- 
35 000 km, and show nearly ballistic motion. 

Flaring arches resemble surges. The only difference 
is that in flaring arches plasma is injected into a relatively 
small closed loop structure, whereas in surges the plasma 
injection goes along one arm of a loop or at some occasions 
along apparently open field lines. They consist of hot and 
cool plasmas, and thus can be seen in both Ha and x-rays. 

Type III bursts are radio bursts, often occurring in 
association with surges (see SOLAR FLARES: RADIO BURSTS). 
These are emitted from high-energy electron beams 
propagating along open field lines, possibly the same or 
nearby field lines along which surges are ejected. 

SOLAR X-RAY JETS are sometimes observed to be 
associated with Ha surges, nearly simultaneously and in 
nearly the same direction. There are also cases with no 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. An intermediate case between surges and sprays 
(observed at Hida observatory, courtesy of H Kurokawa). 


x-ray jet when Ha surges are observed. In such cases, x- 
ray bright points are often seen near the footpoint of Ha 
surges. The lack of x-ray jets may be because the density 
of hot jet is too low to be detected by soft x-ray telescopes. 

EUV jets are jet-like features observed in EUV lines, 
first discovered by NRL HRITS experiments and later 
confirmed by SOHO SUMER/CDS/EIT. They are ejected 
at fast speed (~400 km s), extending to an altitude of 
4000-16 000 km (but with a small width ~1500 km), with 
mass of 3 x 10" g and kinetic energy of ~10°° erg. The 
relation between EUV jets and surges has not yet been 
made clear. 

Table 1 summarizes characteristic physical quantities 
of various jet-like mass ejections in the solar atmosphere, 
including not only cool jets but also hot jets. 


Formation mechanism 

It is believed that the energy source of surges is magnetic 
energy stored in the solar atmosphere. In fact, the 
magnetic energy stored at the footpoint of surges (in a 
volume of 10” cm* with a field strength of 50 G) is 
estimated to be ~5 x 10” erg, which is enough to explain 
the observed kinetic energy of surges. 

There is increasing observational evidence for 
magnetic reconnection in surges, such as association with 
satellite polarities, the inverted Y-shape (or Eiffel tower 
shape), whip-like motion which is interpreted as a sling- 
shot-like motion as a result of reconnection, and so on. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Surges 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Various jet-like mass ejections in the solar atmosphere. 


Velocity Length Mass Kinetic energy Temperature 
Mass ejections (kms!) (km) (g) (erg) (K) 
Spicules 30 (5-8) x 10° 108-1012 1074-10 (0.5-1) x 104 
Macrospicules ~140 (1-4) x 104 10!7-10' = 1076-1027 10+ 
Surges 50-200 (1-10) x 104 105-105 1077-10?” 104 
Sprays >200 >10° 104-1015 107°-10°° 104—-10° 
EUV jets 400 (0.4-1.6) x 10# 3x 10! 1076 10° 
X-ray jets 10-1000 104-3 x 10° 1o"%-10!8 = 105-102” (3-7) x 10° 
X-ray plasmoids 50-400 +>10° 10-10" 1027-1078 (5-16) x 10° 
Even spinning motion can be interpreted as a result of © © a Ho cae 
reconnection between a twisted flux tube and an untwisted oe aR y _ Ho. Surge 
flux tube (see figure 4). Hence itis very likely that magnetic : 
reconnection is a key mechanism to produce surges. 
What is the collimation mechanism of surges? It is 
easy to show that magnetic force can collimate surges; (A\ 
the gas pressure of surges is 0.1-1.0 dyn cm while their ie aR ee Sa 
magnetic pressure is 100 dyn cm~ for 50 G, much larger 
than the gas pressure. (6) Stage és 


Even if magnetic reconnection is a key to the 
production of surges, there remains a fundamental 
question: what is the specific acceleration mechanism of 
surges? Namely, is a surge accelerated by gas pressure 
force enhanced by a sudden release of magnetic energy 
or is it accelerated by magnetic force as a result of 
reconnection? Hence, there are basically two accelerating 
forces: one is the gas pressure and the other is the magnetic 
force (J x B force). 


Gas pressure force 

If a sudden energy release occurs in the upper 
chromosphere, the gas pressure increases and directly 
accelerates cool plasmas in the upper chromosphere along 
an open flux tube. 

If an explosion occurs in the photosphere or in the 
low chromosphere, the hydrodynamic shock wave (slow- 
mode MHD shock) propagates along an open flux tube 
through the chromosphere to accelerate cool plasmas in 
the upper chromosphere. 

In both cases, the speed of the gas-pressure- 
driven jet is basically determined by the sound speed 
(i.e. temperature) in the high-pressure region or shock- 
heated region, and is written as 


1/2 
T 
Vise hoe SC, 10 Fe] kms! (1) 


where C, and T are the sound speed and temperature of 
the high-pressure (or shock heated) regions, respectively. 
(This velocity isa maximum speed when the high-pressure 
gas expands into vacuum.) 


Magnetic force 
If a magnetic field line reconnects with another field line, 
magnetic tension force is generated in the reconnected 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Red Shift 


Figure 4. A magnetic twist model for Ha surges (Canfield et al 
1996 Astrophys. J]. 464 1016; see also Shibata and Uchida 1986 
Sol. Phys. 103 299). 


field line as in a sling-shot. Such a magnetic tension force 
accelerates plasmas on the reconnected field line up to the 
Alfvén speed just outside of the current sheet. (See figure 5 
for a magnetic reconnection model of a surge, which shows 
that not only cool jet but also hot jet are ejected from 
reconnection region.) 

If a plasmoid (confined by a magnetic island) is 
created in a current sheet as a result of reconnection and 
if there is a gradient of magnetic field strength in the 
ambient field along the current sheet, the plasmoid would 
be accelerated by the magnetic pressure gradient in the 
ambient magnetic field. This is known as the diamagnetic 
mechanism or melon seed mechanism. 

If a twisted flux tube reconnects with an untwisted 
flux tube, magnetic twist would be suddenly released into 
the untwisted flux tube. During this process, a magnetic 
pressure gradient force appears along the reconnected 
flux tube and accelerates the plasma contained in the 
reconnected flux tube. If the reconnected flux tube has 
a diverging cross-sectional area, a centrifugal force would 
also act as an additional accelerating force. 

In either case, the velocity of magnetically driven jets 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


fe: 
2 
— 
/ 
V 
ul 
wv 


SS eS Gig SN 


| 


(c) 


Fast Shock 
Slow Shock 


Slow Shock 
Cool Magnetic Island 
Hot Jet 


Fast Shock \ 
X-point 


X-point 
Hot Loops 


Figure 5. Illustration of emerging flux reconnection model of a 
surge (Yokoyama and Shibata 1996 Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 48 
353). 


is of the order of the Alfvén speed; 


B n 
a eae (sora 


1/2 
kms. (2) 


Here B is the magnetic flux density and n is the electron 
density. 

Generally speaking, if jets are cool enough, it is 
difficult to accelerate such cool jets by gas pressure 
without raising the temperature, whereas it is quite easy 
to accelerate cool jets by magnetic force while keeping 
a low temperature. Hence the magnetically driven jet 
mechanism has wider applicability as a model for cool jets. 
This is especially true for larger jets (such as large surges 
and sprays), although, as for smaller jets (such as spicules 
and small surges), there still remains the possibility that 
jets are accelerated by gas pressure force or slow-mode 
MHD shock. 

To elucidate the acceleration mechanism of various 
jet-like phenomena in the solar atmosphere (table 1) would 
be a challenging subject for the future. Such study is also 
useful for the study of astrophysical jets ejected from active 
galactic nuclei, close binary systems and young stellar 
objects. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Kurokawa H and Kawai G 1993 The Magnetic and Velocity 
Fields of Solar Active Regions (ASP Conf. Ser. 46) 
ed H Zirin et al, p 507 

Rompolt B and Svestka Z 1996 Adv. Space Res. 17 (4/5) 115 

Schmieder B, Shibata K, van Driel-Gesztelyi L and 
Freeland S 1995 Solar Phys. 156 245 

Yokoyama T and Shibata K 1995 Nature 375 42 


K Shibata 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Surveyor ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Surveyor 


Series of seven NASA automated Moon landers, launched 
1966-68. Designed to send back images and other data 
on potential APoLLo landing sites near the lunar equator. 
Surveyor 1 was the first spacecraft to make a controlled 
soft landing on another world. Surveyors 5-7 carried out 
in situ soil analyses. Surveyor 6 performed the first lift-off 
from the lunar surface. Surveyors 2 and 4 were failures. 
Parts of surveyor 3 were returned to Earth by Apollo 12 
astronauts. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Swasey, Ambrose (1846-1937) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Swasey, Ambrose (1846-1937) 


American mechanical engineer and instrument-maker, 
produced the dividing engine used to make meridian 
circles at the US Naval Observatory, mounted the 36 in 
refracting telescope at Lick Observatory in California. 
Worked with WORCESTER R WARNER in Cleveland, Ohio as 
fellow amateur astronomers, jointly built and donated 
their private observatory to Case Western Reserve 
University, and thus founded the Warner & Swasey 
Observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Swedish Space Corporation (SSC) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Swedish Space Corporation (SSC) 


Located in Solna, near Stockholm. SSC is a government- 
owned commercial company with activities covering 
space systems engineering, space operations and the 
commercial exploitation of space. SSC also offers support 
and technical expertise to the National Swedish Space 
Board. 

It has two establishments at Kiruna in the Arctic— 
the Esrange satellite operations facility and sounding 
rocket range, and Satellitenbild, a subsidiary devoted to 
processing of remote sensing data. 

The corporation provides scientific instruments and 
oversees launches of stratospheric balloons and sounding 
rockets with astronomical and microgravity payloads. It 
also builds small satellites and had overall responsibility 
for the Viking and Freja scientific satellites. 

For further information see 
http://www.ssc.se/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Symbiotic Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Symbiotic Stars 


During the production of the Henry Draper Catalog, 
Wilhemina Fleming identified several M-type stars with 
unusually strong hydrogen emission lines. Paul Merrill 
obtained higher quality spectra of these ‘stars with 
combination spectra’ and found intense emission from 
He II or [O HI] and [Ne II] in addition to H I. All of 
these stars varied by 0.5-1 mag on a timescale of several 
years. A few systems underwent occasional 2-3 mag 
eruptions, where a much hotter continuum overwhelmed 
the red giant spectrum. Louis Berman and Frank Scott 
Hogg suggested that these objects must be double stars. 
Merrill, Otto Struve and Pol Swings later confirmed this 
picture with the detection of periodic radial velocity 
variations. Merrill suggested ‘symbiotic stars’ to describe 
this small class with ‘two objects of quite different kinds 
... living close together in extraordinary interdependence 
and adjustment’. 


Phenomena 

The modern definition of a symbiotic star relies on 
spectroscopic criteria outlined by Merrill and Cecilia 
Payne-Gaposchkin. These are (figure 1) 


(1) a red continuum and absorption features, of a late- 
type giant star (spectral type K or M); and 

(2) ablue continuum with bright H I and He I emission 
lines and either 

(a) additional high ionization emission lines, for exam- 
ple He II, [Ne V], and [Fe VII], with an equivalent 
width exceeding 1 A (quiescent objects and some 
eruptive systems), or 

(b) an A- or F-type continuum with additional absorp- 
tion lines from H I, He I, and singly ionized metals 
(systems in outburst). The absorption features often 
have P Cygni emission components. 


The sample of ~150 known systems includes two 
dozen established in the 1930-1950s and others selected 
from recent spectroscopic surveys. The lack of asystematic 
survey precludes a proper estimate of the symbiotic 
frequency. Current estimates suggest there are 3000 to 
300 000 in the Milky Way. Most systems lie close to the 
galactic plane or in the bulge; some are halo stars. A 
handful are in the Magellanic Clouds; at least one resides 
in the Draco dwarf spheroidal galaxy. 

All quiescent symbiotics are small-amplitude VARIABLE 
stars. Most vary by 0.5-1 mag on a timescale of 1-2 yr. 
Some systems flicker by 0.01-0.1 mag on minute timescales; 
a few show periodic optical and x-ray pulsations with 
10-30 min periods. The amplitudes of the flickering and 
of the pulsations increase toward decreasing wavelength. 
Roughly 20% contain mira variables with pulsation periods 
of 300-500 d. The pulsation amplitudes increase from 0.5— 
1 mag at infrared wavelengths to 1-4 mag in the optical. 

Symbiotic stars undergo complicated outbursts. 
Figure 2 shows optical light curves for the recurrent nova T 
CrB, the classical symbiotic CI Cyg, and the symbiotic nova 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


PU Vul 


1000 3000 5000 8000 


Relative Flux 


AG Peg 


1000 3000 8000 


Wavelength (A) 


5000 


Figure 1. Spectra of symbiotic stars in quiescence (AG Peg; lower 
curve) and outburst (PU Vul; upper curve). In quiescence, the 
spectrum contains a strong hot continuum rising towards short 
wavelengths, strong emission lines and a prominent Balmer 
jump from the nebula, and a red continuum from the red giant. 
The hot component often evolves into an F-type supergiant with 
weak emission lines during eruptions. This spectrum 
overwhelms the red giant except at the longest wavelengths. 


AG Peg. InT CrB, the rise to visual maximum occurs in less 
than one day. The fast decline suggests rapid ejection of 
material as in fast classical NovaE. The eruptions of classical 
symbiotics are slower, with a rise time of weeks to months 
and a decline over several orbital cycles. Symbiotic nova 
outbursts take decades or centuries. AG Peg began an 
eruption c. 1850 and is slowly approaching minimum. 

Despite different timescales, the spectroscopic evolu- 
tion throughout outburst is remarkably similar. In recur- 
rent novae, most classical symbiotics, and many symbiotic 
novae, an A or F-type continuum overwhelms the red giant 
spectrum at visual maximum (see figure 1). Many strong 
emission lines weaken considerably as the brightness in- 
creases and strengthen as the brightness fades. The HI and 
He I lines develop into strong absorption features often 
with P Cygni profiles. In symbiotic novae and some clas- 
sical symbiotic stars, the ejection velocity increases from 
~100-200 km s~! at visual maximum to ~1000-2000 kms“! 
during the decline. The velocity remains large, ~2000- 
3000 km s“!, throughout a recurrent nova eruption. Small 
velocities, 100-200 km s~1, are characteristic of eruptions 
in CI Cyg and other classical symbiotics. 

Many Mira symbiotics undergo less dramatic sym- 
biotic nova eruptions. Despite a similar 3-5 mag optical 
rise, the systems never develop A- or F-type optical spec- 
tra. High ionization emission lines remain strong. Low 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Symbiotic Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Visual Magnitude 


) 
xe) 
=) 
‘c 
DoD 
sv} 
= 
ivi 
5D 
2 
> 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 
Time (Days) 
co) 
xe} 
Z 
r= 
oO 
Oo 
= 
@ 
>) 
2 
> 
1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 
Year 


Figure 2. Outburst light curves of three symbiotic stars (adapted 
from Kenyon (1986)). The recurrent nova T CrB rises 6 mag to 
optical maximum in less than one day, declines to minimum in 
~50 d, and then rises to a secondary maximum 4-5 mag below 
primary maximum. CI Cyg, a classical symbiotic, rises 2 mag in 
several weeks and returns to minimum in 5-10 yr. The vertical 
tick marks indicate eclipses of the hot component by the giant. 
The symbiotic nova eruption of AG Peg began before 1850; the 
system took ~20 yr to reach maximum and is slowly returning 
to minimum. 


velocity mass ejection is not apparent at visual maximum; 
broad emission features similar to those in WOLF-RAYET stars 
appear several years after optical maximum. Several clas- 
sical symbiotic stars sustain similar ‘weak’ eruptions and 
may eject mass at low velocities, ~100-200 km s1. 

These and other phenomena support Berman and 
Hogg’s original notion that symbiotics are BINARY STARS. 
Two stars, red giant and ‘hot component’, account for 
the two continua with color temperatures of ~3000 K 
and >50000 K (figure 1). Energetic photons from the 
hot component ionize a surrounding nebula. Many well- 
studied systems show good evidence for orbital motion 
with periods of 1-3 yr. System masses are ~14 Mo. 
The brightness fluctuations are often phased with the 
orbit and can be explained by (i) illumination of the 
red giant atmosphere by high-energy photons from the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


hot component, (ii) eclipses of the hot component and a 
surrounding nebula by the red giant, or (iii) ellipsoidal 
variations of the tidally distorted red giant. These 
interpretations provide further support for the binary 
picture and allow for detailed studies of the stars and the 
nebula. 


Hot component 

The nature of the hot component remained elusive until 
the 1970s, when satellite ultraviolet observations revealed 
a hot continuum to accompany the high ionization optical 
emission lines. These data show that the quiescent 
luminosity of the hot component is comparable to the 
red giant luminosity. The effective temperature must 
exceed ~50 000 K to explain He II emission. Thus, the hot 
component has a small radius, ~0.1 Rg for a luminosity of 
~100 Lo . The dynamical timescale for this radius, ~300- 
500 s for a stellar mass of 0.5-1 Mg , is consistent with the 
flickering timescale. The escape velocity, ~1000 km sl is 
close to the maximum ejection velocity observed in most 
systems. 

Despite this simple order-of-magnitude consistency, 
the hot component cannot maintain its large luminosity 
for the lifetime of the RED GIANT STAR. The ~10° yr cooling 
time for a 0.6 Mo WHITE DwarrF with a luminosity of 100 Lo 
is 1% of the lifetime of its red giant companion. Both 
of these timescales are short compared to the >10° yr 
main sequence lifetime of either star. The probability 
of finding a hot white dwarf in a binary with a red 
giant is thus small. Perhaps 1-2% of symbiotics are 
produced in this way. The main alternative to such 
‘accidental’ symbiotics is an interacting binary, where the 
hot component accretes material lost by the red giant. 
Generating ~100 Lo from gravitational infall requires 
accretion rates of ~10~> Mg yr7! onto a main sequence star 
and ~10~? Mo yr“! onto a white dwarf star. White dwarfs 
can burn the accreted material in a thin hydrogen shell 
above the white dwarf core, which reduces the needed 
infall rate to <10~8 Mo yr}. 

Detailed studies of individual symbiotic systems sug- 
gest three different types of hot components. Quiescent 
symbiotics with UV continua that rise towards short wave- 
lengths, as in figure 1, contain hot white dwarfs with radii 
of ~0.1 Ro and temperatures that range from ~30000 K 
up to 200000 K. The white dwarfs masses, 0.5-1 Mo, are 
similar to single white dwarfs. The flat UV spectra ob- 
served in roughly 10% of known symbiotics are better ex- 
plained with emission from a disk having a temperature 
that decreases from ~20000 K at the inner edge to less 
than 5000 K at the outer edge. Radiation from the bound- 
ary layer—a ~10° K region where material at the inner 
edge of the disk slows to the rotational velocity of the cen- 
tral main sequence star—ionizes the nebula. Finally, two 
symbiotics are hard x-ray sources and contain accreting 
NEUTRON STARS. One of these, V2116 Oph, has a very high 
ionization optical spectrum and displays interesting x-ray 
variations. Little is known about the other neutron star 
symbiotic, HD 154791. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Symbiotic Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cool component 
The structure of the cool component is best inferred from 
near-IR observations. These data separate symbiotics into 
two broad classes. S-type symbiotics contain G-, K- or M- 
type stars with color temperatures, T, ~ 2500-4500 K at 
1-3 ym wavelengths. These red giants have strong near- 
infrared CO absorption bands and modest emission from 
circumstellar dust at 10-100 zm. Some vary ona timescale 
of 100+ d with 0.1-0.3 mag amplitudes at 1-3 wm. This 
amplitude often increases towards shorter wavelengths; 
radiation from the hot component masks this behavior 
in some systems. D-type symbiotics have smaller color 
temperatures, T. ~ 1000-1500 K, strong near-infrared H2O 
absorption, and significant mid-infrared dust emission. 
Most D types also contain Mira variables that are several 
times more luminous than the red giants in S-type systems. 
The cooler, dusty photosphere must then have a factor of 
~10 larger radius than the radius of an S-type red giant. To 
contain such a large Mira variable within its tidal radius, 
the orbital periods of D-type systems should be 10-100 
times longer than orbital periods for S-type symbiotics. 
All S-type symbiotics have short orbital periods, <3 yr. 
Reliable orbital periods for D types are rare, but most 
estimates range from decades to centuries. 
Understanding mass loss from the cool component 
relies on optical, near-IR and radio observations. Several 
symbiotics have red giants that fill their Roche lobes and 
lose mass tidally at high rates. Most symbiotic red giants 
underfill their Roche lobes by factors of 2-10 and can only 
lose mass via a stellar wind. Two sets of measurements 
indicate high mass loss rates for these red giants. Radio 
spectral energy distributions at 1-20 cm allow estimates 
of the mass, radius, and outflow velocity of the ionized 
nebula in ~50 symbiotics. Combining this information 
yields mass loss rates of ~10~° Mo yr~!. Emission lines 
produced in the optically thin, outer atmosphere of the 
red giant require similar mass loss rates. The gravitational 
range of the hot component suggests that it can accrete 
roughly 1% of the mass lost by the red giant wind. This 
amountis sufficient to power the hot component providing 
a hydrogen shell burns the accreted material. The large 
mass loss rates estimated for the red giants in symbiotics 
exceed mass loss rates of single red giants with identical 
physical properties by 1-2 orders of magnitude. The origin 
of the high mass loss rates is uncertain. 


Nebula 
Despite the similarities of their hot stars, symbiotic 
nebulae have little in common with PLANETARY NEBULAE. 
Prominent forbidden lines and intense radio emission 
indicate smaller, denser nebulae in symbiotics, with 
densities of 10°-10° cm~? and sizes of 1-100 AU. Strong 
intercombination emission suggests densities exceeding 
~ 108 cm”? on scales of 1 AU or less in all S-type systems. 
These lines are rare in D types. 

Photoionization produces most of the emission 
from symbiotic nebulae. Observations over several 
orbital cycles indicate a stratified nebula with density 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


decreasing outwards from each component. Rapid 
eclipses indicate that high ionization lines—e.g. He II 
and N V—form in high-density material near the hot 
component. Slower occultations of lower ionization 
emission suggests formation in high-density material near 
the cool component. Several very high ionization features 
are produced by photoionization and scattering: Raman 
scattering of O VI AA1032,1038 emission lines off H Iatoms 
in the red giant wind produces broad 6830 A and 7088 A 
emission bands. Understanding this process has led to 
direct measurement of the orbital inclination in several 
systems. 

The wind from the hot component is often energetic 
enough to interact with the wind from the cool component. 
The shock front produced by these ‘colliding’ winds can 
produce observable amounts of thermal x-ray and high 
ionization line emission if the kinetic energy in the winds 
is large. A typical 1 Lo x-ray luminosity requires a mass 
loss rate of ~10~8 Mo yr! from the hot component for 
an ejection velocity of 1000 km s~!. In a few cases, the 
interaction is in the form of jets. First proposed to explain 
the variable velocity of [O III] emission in AG Peg, deep 
images of several D-type symbiotics show narrow jets 
of H I emission similar to those observed in planetary 
nebulae and some pre-main-sequence stars. The origin 
and frequency of this emission is unknown. 


Models for symbiotic stars 

Figure 3 shows simple schematics of typical symbiotic 
binary stars. The top panel shows a semi-detached system 
where the lobe-filling red giant transfers material into a 
large disk around a main sequence star. Radiation from 
the disk and boundary layer power the UV continuum and 
ionize the nebula. Ionized material surrounds the disk and 
one hemisphere of the red giant; neutral gas lies behind 
the red giant as viewed from the disk. The dynamics 
and ionization structure of the nebula are poorly known. 
Whether or not the disk ejects material into the ionized 
nebula is also uncertain. By analogy with dwarf novae, 
outbursts in these semi-detached symbiotics occur either 
when an unstable red giant increases the mass transfer 
rate into the disk or when an unstable disk increases 
the mass transfer rate onto the central star. Models and 
observations are currently insufficient to ascertain which 
of these two possibilities causes the outburst of any semi- 
detached symbiotic. 

The middle panel shows the most common type 
of detached symbiotic where a white dwarf or neutron 
star accretes material from the wind of a normal red 
giant. Some material lost by the giant falls into a disk 
surrounding the white dwarf. The dynamics of the red 
giant wind and the material accreted onto the white dwarf 
are poorly understood. The accretion rate is high enough 
to support nuclear burning on the white dwarf, which 
produces a hot ultraviolet source that ionizes most of 
the red giant wind. The most luminous hot components 
eject material that interacts with the red giant wind. This 
interaction produces a bow shock around the red giant, as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Symbiotic Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


/ He THe 
; : 
4 
A 
/ 
t 
I 
—_@———_— { 
i 
\ 
&. 
\ 
\ 
\ 
Be m"N 
Se SL 
N 
1 AU _— 
a 
“, 
\, 
H+ \ H° 
. 
\ 
\ 
e ! 
/ 
/ 
v7, 
vs 
4 
Pf 
Ze 100 AU 


Figure 3. Schematic orbital configurations for three types of 
symbiotic stars. In each schematic, the red giant component is 
on the right and the hot component is on the left. The hot 
component is surrounded by a disk (shown from the side for 
simplicity). A length scale in AU is included with each panel. 
Regions of ionized hydrogen (H*) and neutral hydrogen (H°) 
are marked accordingly. The dashed line in the middle panel 
shows the general region where a wind from the hot star may 
interact with material lost by the cool star. 


indicated by the dashed line between the hot component 
and the red giant. The dynamics of this region and how it 
affects the accretion flow are also poorly understood. 

The bottom panel shows the geometry of a Mira 
symbiotic. The large mass loss rate from the Mira allows 
dust condensation in the wind. Dust condenses well 
outside the Mira photosphere, as indicated by the ring 
surrounding the red giant in the figure. This dust is 
often thick enough to obscure the Mira at optical and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


near-infrared wavelengths. The geometry and dynamics 
of material in the dust shell is not known. Despite the 
very wide orbital separation, the hot component accretes 
enough material from the wind to power an ultraviolet 
continuum and bright emission lines. The hot component 
often cannot ionize a large fraction of the Mira wind, so the 
ionization front curves around the hot component instead 
of around the red giant as in other symbiotics. 

The outbursts of the two classes of detached 
symbiotics are usually interpreted as thermonuclear 
runaways in the hydrogen burning shells of white dwarf 
stars. This explanation accounts for the slow eruptions 
of symbiotic novae such as AG Peg. It fails for the 
rapid eruptions of recurrent novae and classical symbiotics 
unless the white dwarf is close to the Chandrasekhar limit. 
There is good evidence for a massive white dwarf in T CrB, 
but most symbiotics have hot components with masses 
of S1 Mg. Disk instabilities are a possible alternative to 
thermonuclear runaways but have not been studied in 
much detail. 

In the past decade, symbiotic stars have generated 
renewed interest as possible progenitors of type I 
SUPERNOVAE. The small white dwarf masses in symbiotics 
make a carbon detonation supernova unlikely. In some 
accreting white dwarfs, however, hydrogen burning may 
produce a massive helium shell that can undergo a 
different type of supernova. Learning how to distinguish 
supernovae in a symbiotic binary from other types 
of supernovae remains an unsolved problem. There 
is also great uncertainty about the importance of the 
symbiotic contribution to the observed frequency of 
type I supernovae, due to the unknown frequency of 
symbiotic stars in the Milky Way and other galaxies and 
to the uncertain outcome of the helium shell explosion. 
Resolving these unknowns may allow Merrill’s stars with 
combination spectra to contribute to the measurement of 
cosmological parameters such as Hy and qo. 


Bibliography 

Allen D A 1984 A Catalogue of Symbiotic Stars, Proc. 
Astronomical Society of Australia pp 369-421 

Kenyon S J 1986 The Symbiotic Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Mikotajewska J 1996 Physical Processes in Symbiotic Binaries 
and Related Systems (Warsaw: Copernicus Foundation 
for Polish Astronomy) 

Payne-Gaposchkin C 1957 The Galactic Novae (Amsterdam: 
North Holland) 

Swings P 1970 Symbiotic stars and related peculiar objects 
Spectroscopic Astrophysics ed G Herbig (San Francisco, 
CA: University of California Press) pp 189-227 


Scott Kenyon 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synchronous Orbit 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Synchronous Orbit 


An orbit in which the period of revolution of an orbiting 
body is the same as the rotation period of the body it is 
orbiting. In the solar system, the only natural instance of a 
synchronous orbit is that of Pluto’s satellite, Charon. Some 
artificial satellites are put into synchronous orbit around 
the Earth; such orbits are then termed geosynchronous. If 
in addition such an orbit is circular and in the Earth’s 
equatorial plane, it is termed geostationary, since from a 
point on the Earth’s surface a satellite in such an orbit 
appears to keep approximately the same position in the 
sky. Geosynchronous and geostationary orbits are used 
for navigation and communications satellites. 


See also: synchronous rotation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synchronous Rotation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Synchronous Rotation 


The rotation on its axis of a celestial object in the same 
time as it takes to orbit another object, also called captured 
rotation. In other words, the orbiting body’s rotation and 
revolution periods are identical. Synchronous rotation 
results from tidal forces between the two bodies. Most of 
the major satellites in the solar system, the Moon included, 
have synchronous rotation and always keep the same face 
turned toward their parent planet. In the Moon’s case 
libration means that in the course of time rather more than 
50% of the Moon’s surface is visible from the Earth. Pluto’s 
satellite Charon is unique in having both synchronous 
rotation and a synchronous orbit: its period of revolution, 
and the rotation periods of both planet and satellite, are 
identical. From either body, the other is motionless in the 
sky. Synchronous rotation can also occur in binary stars 
with near-circular orbits. 


See also: libration, synchronous orbit 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synchrotron Radiation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Synchrotron Radiation 


Radiation emitted by electrons moving at very high 
speeds (approaching the speed of light) in magnetic 
fields. An electron follows a helical path around a 
magnetic field line and, at relativistic (i.e. close to the 
speed of light) velocities, emits radiation in a narrow 
cone in the direction of its motion. Synchrotron radiation 
has a characteristic spectrum and generally exhibits a 
high degree of polarization. The synchrotron process 
is an important source of radiation from astronomical 
sources. For example, around the planet Jupiter high- 
energy electrons spiraling through the lines of force of 
the planet’s magnetic field give off synchrotron radiation 
at radio wavelengths. In the Crab Nebula synchrotron 
radiation at such wavelengths and at those of visible and 
ultraviolet light is generated by electrons moving in the 
magnetic field associated with the supernova remnant. 
Also radio emissions of the synchrotron variety have been 
detected from other supernova remnants in our Galaxy 
and from extragalactic objects such as radio galaxies and 
quasars. 


See also: electromagnetic radiation, spectrum. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synodic Period 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Synodic Period 


The time interval between two successive similar 
alignments of two celestial bodies. In the case of a planet, 
the synodic period may be taken to be the mean time 
interval between, say, two successive oppositions or two 
successive conjunctions. It is this period that determines 
the times at which particular planets will be visible in the 
night sky. The Moon’s synodic period is the time between 
successive recurrences of the same phase; such as between 
full moon and full moon. 


See also: sidereal period. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


Modern telescopes are built with ever-better angular 
resolution, but for galaxies and clusters outside the local 
group we generally cannot hope to study the stars in them 
one by one. Instead, we see the sum of the light from all 
of the stars. To take this integrated starlight and extract 
information on the ages or heavy-element abundances 
requires a model; a synthetic version of how many and 
what kind of stars are present. To guide the models, we 
rely on nearby stars and star clusters where stars can be 
studied one by one and also on theoretical models of stellar 
evolution and stellar atmospheres. 

A STELLAR POPULATION is a group of stars born at the 
same time and sharing the same initial composition. A 
STAR CLUSTER is an example of a simple stellar population, 
characterized by a single age and a single abundance 
mixture. The MILKY way is an example of a complicated 
mixture of many stellar populations; old and young, metal 
poor and metal rich. 

In the Milky Way, there is a striking concordance of 
age-metallicity with spatial extent and kinematics. The 
GALACTIC METAL-POOR HALO is thought to have formed in the 
first third of the Galaxy’s history and is composed of stars 
and clusters on randomly oriented orbits so that the net 
effect is a large halo of roughly spherical shape. On the 
other hand, if one finds all the stars in the Galaxy younger 
than a billion years, virtually all of them are in the very 
thin Galactic disk. They have orderly, near-circular orbits 
with all stars rotating clockwise as seen from above the 
Galactic north pole (see GALACTIC THIN DISK). This dichotomy 
gave rise to the notion of two distinct stellar populations 
in the Milky Way around 1944 (W Baade is credited with 
this idea). By the 1960s it became evident that there 
were several, rather than two, distinct populations. For 
instance, old but metal-rich stars exist both in the disk 
and in the bulge. Today, we have given up counting the 
number of stellar populations, and instead speak of the age 
and abundance distributions within kinematic subgroups. 

From distant galaxies and clusters, what information 
can one hope to derive from integrated star light? 
Ultimately, one could hope to find the complete star 
formation history of the galaxy, and at each past epoch 
of star formation the population’s dynamic state, a 
distribution of heavy elements, and an initial mass 
function (abbreviated IMF; the number of stars born at 
each mass). Such a detailed picture is out of reach for 
the present. Today, we have clues about each of these 
quantities, but we are far from being able to wrestle such 
a detailed picture from integrated light observations. 


Several types of synthetic stellar population 
models 

Figure 1 shows galaxy spectra covering the range of 
spectral shapes that are seen along with a sampling of 
some of the stellar types out of which the galaxies are 
composed. From the figure one can glimpse similarities 
between the galaxies and the underlying stellar types. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dre 
1 Le area ee | 
6000 8000 104 


r(A) 


| Ls 


i | 
2000 


4000 


Figure 1. Example galaxy (top) and star (bottom) spectra are 
shown, arbitrarily scaled F,, versus wavelength in A. The 
strongest emission lines in the starburst spectrum were 
truncated for clarity, and a few important spectral features are 
marked on the stellar spectra. This is the synthesis problem: 
adding the star spectra together in different combinations and 
with different multiplicative weights, how closely can the galaxy 
spectrum be matched? By eye, one can see that the starburst 
galaxy must have a strong O star component, and the spiral and 
elliptical galaxies must have many G stars. However, TiO 
features appear in the spiral and elliptical spectra, so KM stars 
must also be present. 


Extreme STARBURST GALAXIES emit most of their light in the 
ultraviolet. Their spectra are matched by OB-type stars 
with strongly muted evidence of other spectral types. 
SPIRAL and ELLIPTICAL GALAXIES have minority populations 
of hot stars, as seen by their small ultraviolet fluxes, and 
obviously have a strong G-star component. However, the 
strong, broad TiO features characteristic of M-type stars 
are seen in the red portion of the spectrum, so very cool 
stars are present as well. 

The first type of model is this kind of star-by-star 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


addition problem. Early workers such as Spinrad and 
Taylor would observe, spectrophotometrically, a collection 
of stars and a few galaxies. Then, by method of trial 
and error, they would construct a ‘model’ consisting of 
the relative proportions of the stars that best matched the 
galaxy spectrum. That is, given a galaxy spectrum L, and 
a collection of stellar spectra /;,,, the model consists of the 
weights w; by which the stars are multiplied: 


L.= Do wilia. (1) 


The trial-and-error part comes in because the same set 
of weights must work for all 4. A useful improvement 
came with the work of Faber in the early 1970s. 
Through a careful statement of the problem and judicious 
use of technique (quadratic programming or linear 
programming) the trial-and-error portion of assigning 
weights was replaced by numerical optimization. 

This form of population modeling is often termed 
empirical population synthesis. Empirical population 
synthesis has a couple of drawbacks. First, solutions are 
not unique. For instance, the spectrum of a G dwarf closely 
resembles that of a G giant, and replacement of one by the 
other probably will not noticeably affect the goodness of 
fit. Second, information on galaxy age or metal abundance 
requires interpretation. Suppose the synthesis says that 
GO dwarfs are numerous, but F8 dwarfs are rare. The 
interpretation would be that the main sequence turnoff 
is at spectral type GO. One would then refer to observed 
star clusters or stellar evolutionary isochrones to find out 
the age at which the main sequence turnoff is spectral type 
GO. 

The connection to age and metal abundance can 
be made more direct by considering, not stars, but star 
clusters as the basic building block. The cluster will 
already have the ‘correct’ proportions of the different 
kinds of stars for the cluster’s age and abundance, 
and finding the best match between target (galaxy) and 
template cluster should, in principle, yield a mean age 
and metal abundance for the galaxy. In practice, two 
problems arise. First, in the Milky Way and vicinity, 
open clusters are so diffuse that obtaining an integrated 
spectrum is observationally impossible. One is then 
left with the globular clusters and the clusters in the 
LMC and SMC for possible spectral templates. E Bica 
has made a study of such cluster spectra. While these 
clusters span a considerable range of age and abundance, 
not all possibilities are covered. In particular, the 
high metallicities typical of elliptical galaxies cannot be 
matched by local template clusters. The second problem 
is age—metallicity degeneracy, which is the observation 
that changes in age and metal abundance have very 
similar, almost indistinguishable, effects on the integrated 
spectrum, so that an old, metal-poor population may very 
closely resemble a young, metal-rich population. This 
topic is revisited below. 

The final variant of model was developed by B 
M Tinsley starting in the late 1960s and today is the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


6 (0) Bl B7 AO FO GOKO MO M5 
a 1 Ls LL 
L blue loop 4 
4 mel 
ze main 
; CO Ueue’. asymptotic | 
a 2 | turnoff giant branch | 
(@) a | 
t 0.6 My 1 
iti (eee (Neer er | ria eel oe fl 
4.4 4.2 4 3.8 3.6 3.4 


log Teor 


Figure 2. Isochrone age effects are shown. The isochrones 
plotted are for solar composition, ages 5 million and 15 billion 
years. Approximate spectral type is indicated on the top axis, 
and log To¢(in kelvins) on the bottom. The vertical scale is the 
logarithm of the bolometric (total) luminosity in units of the 
solar luminosity. The masses of main sequence stars are marked. 
The ‘main sequence turnoff’ is the point where the isochrone 
drifts brighter than the zero-age main sequence. Stars in this 
phase often dominate the integrated light and are also crucial for 
age estimation. Post-main-sequence evolution happens on much 
quicker timescales than main sequence lifetimes. Massive stars 
undergo ‘blue loops’ in response to internal structural changes, 
and may also spend some time as M-type supergiants before 
they explode in supernovae explosions. Low-mass stars have 
entirely different post-main-sequence evolution. They evolve up 
a ‘red giant branch’ as they fuse hydrogen in a shell around the 
helium core. At log L ~ 3.4, the helium reaches ignition 
temperature and the star immediately adjusts its structure to 
land in the ‘clump’. In a metal-poor population, the clump may 
spread over a large range of temperature, and in this case is 
called the ‘horizontal branch’. After the clump, the star climbs 
the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) before shedding its outer 
layers, undergoing a planetary nebula phase, and finally 
becoming a white dwarf. 


most widely used variant. It is usually referred to as 
evolutionary population synthesis or isochrone synthesis 
because it uses theoretical stellar evolutionary isochrones 
as its basic unit rather than observed clusters. A stellar 
evolutionary isochrone (isochrone for short) is made 
from a collection of evolutionary tracks for different 
masses of stars. A track describes the luminosity and 
effective temperature of a star of a given mass with 
time. An isochrone shows the locus of luminosities and 
temperatures at one instant in time for stars of all masses, 
and thus is built to mimic a star cluster or a single-age 
stellar population. 

Sample isochrones together with some terminology 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lego 
4 T TTT TTT 
L - 
2 14 E 
4 L 
g 
4 fs 
jo) 
& 
oe 
- 15 Gyr Populations 7 
symbol area proportional to energy spent CRB 20, J 
O5 %, 
Ak 
2 Pape fe uf iE ptt btiiit 1 Soa. 141 
4 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.5 
log T. 
T TTT TTT TTT TTT TTT—-T TTT 
3 4 
i = 0 a 
& 4 
aa 
= 4 
15 Gyr Populations > 4 
8 |—_ symbol area proportional to energy spent “ap al 
L a 4 
Leelee Pe rl OK Me oe 
4 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.5 
log T. 


0 [ual Tel bt Mek etd ay pany, Lg) Fe es TTT 
Poo90900000006, U 7 
ae a 
lr PAGB | 
4 a 
mae | sept | 
fy | -2 E- oses ° a a 
£ Look oe 1 
~~ 2eE =| 
p 8) “E 5 7 
= Pr 4 Edt “| 
i 5 4.5 4 ml 
Be en 
| 15 Gyr Populations “y 
10 }— symbol area proportional to energy spent a8 —S 
Tope hase ptt puis} piu 14 
4 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.5 
log T. 
a a as ee TTT T 
-6 |— 15 Gyr Populations 
iy symbol area proportional to energy spent 
4b 
= 
aD L 
ic] = 
E 
& L 
M 2 
= L 
oF 
ae 
ee pee Tp 


log T. 


Figure 3. The four panels in this figure give a visual impression of which phases of evolution dominate the integrated light at different 
wavelengths. Isochrones of 15 billion year age are shown for [Fe/H] = —0.5, 0.0 and 0.5 dex. The effect of changing the abundance is 
to shift the isochrones in temperature. The [Fe/H] = 0.0 isochrone has a ‘horizontal branch’, an ‘asymptotic giant branch’ and a 
‘post-asymptotic giant branch’ (marked PAGB) showing evolution in and around the planetary nebula phase for two postulated white 
dwarf masses. For clarity, these late stages are not illustrated for the other two isochrones. The horizontal branch is included for 
illustration purposes only; the usual morphology of this phase for a metal-rich population is a clump. Each bin along the isochrone is 
represented by a circle, which changes size according to how much energy is spent at that location. Therefore, most of the light comes 
from where the largest circles are located. The four panels show bolometric (all-wavelength) light in which the light contributions are 
split between main sequence turnoff and giant branch, the ultraviolet U filter in which only the warmer stars contribute, the visual V 
filter which resembles the bolometric panel and the infrared K filter in which the brightest giants, all but invisible in the other panels, 
completely dominate the light. 


are shown in figure 2. There are two essential points 
about isochrones. First, more massive stars have much 
shorter main sequence lifetimes, so the main sequence 
turnoff point will move steadily dimmer and cooler with 
increasing age. Second, the post-main-sequence phases 
of evolution are much shorter than the main sequence 
lifetimes. In most situations stars near the main sequence 
turnoff region will dominate the integrated light. One case 
where this is not true is for an old population where one 
is restricted to looking in the red or infrared. In that case, 
the cool red giant stars dominate the light. The isochrones 
in figure 2 are of SOLAR ABUNDANCE, but model builders also 
consider other abundances. We use the standard bracket 
notation [Fe/H] or [M/H] to mean the logarithmic heavy- 


element abundance in units of the solar heavy-element 
abundance: 


[Fe/H] = log[n (Fe) /n() stars _ log[n(Fe)/n(A)o. (2) 


In addition to the isochrone, a collection of stellar 
spectra is required. These spectra can be empirical, 
theoretical or any combination. The spectra may even 
consist solely of broad-band colors, if that is the only 
information desired of the model at the end. The final 
model spectrum is a weighted sum of the stellar spectra 
mathematically identical to equation (1): 


L, = | N,(M, 6M)I, (Tes, 8, Z) (3) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


where L, is the model spectrum, i is the index over 
points along the isochrone, N;(M,6M) is the number of 
stars associated with each point along the isochrone, and 
L.(Tete, g, Z) is the stellar spectrum, which is typically 
interpolated from a grid of star fluxes indexed by effective 
temperature, surface gravity and abundance. The number 
of stars comes from the IMF, which gives the number of 
stars per interval of mass. A simple power-law IMF is still 
in common use today, for example 


N,(M, 6M) = CM~*5M (4) 


where C is a constant and x = 2.35 is the 1955 Salpeter 
estimate. Masses for each isochrone point are tabulated in 
the isochrones together with temperature and luminosity. 

Examples of how the addition goes are shown in 
figure 3, in which isochrones are plotted point by point. 
The sizes of the points are varied so that the area of each 
is proportional to N x J, the total luminosity coming from 
that isochrone point. Therefore, one can obtain a visual 
impression of what evolutionary phases are important by 
looking for the larger symbols. In total energy output 
(Lpo1) it is evident that the bright red giants are dominant, 
with main sequence turnoff stars secondary. In the U 
filter, the giants contribute almost nothing, with the main 
sequence turnoff stars dominant. The horizontal branch, 
if present, is a significant source of light. In the V filter 
stars of many different kinds contribute, but in the near- 
infrared K filter nothing but the brightest KM giants 
contribute significantly. For populations younger than 
about half a billion years, the giant branch does not 
develop as illustrated, and the main sequence stars are 
more important. 


Synthesis model behavior and uncertainties 

The basic behavior of a stellar population is (1) the 
population becomes dimmer with age, (2) the population 
becomes dimmer with increasing abundance in passbands 
bluer than about 1 ym, brighter in passbands redder 
than that, (3) the population becomes redder with age 
or increasing abundance and (4) neutral metallic lines 
increase in strength and, after about 10° yt, hydrogen 
Balmer lines decrease in strength with increasing age or 
abundance. The age caveat in point (4) arises because 
the hot OB stars present in very young populations 
have relatively weak Balmer lines, and when those stars 
dominate the Balmer lines fade somewhat. The Balmer 
lines peak in strength for turnoff stars at about AO spectral 
type (~7 x 10° yr isochrone age) and fade for cooler 
stars. Metal lines increase monotonically with decreasing 
star temperature. The behavior is shown in figure 4, 
which shows dimming of a population in the V band, and 
reddening of the B — V color. 

The rate of dimming with age is controlled by the IMF, 
which controls how many stars exist at each mass. If there 
are relatively more massive stars in a population, it will 
be brighter when young. The IMF does not strongly affect 
the color evolution and is almost negligible in its effects 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


= 0.5 


Population V Magnitude 
Population B-V color 


V magnitude 


0 5 10 15 
Population Age in Billions of Years 


Figure 4. Population fading in the V band is shown as a function 
of age. The V magnitude of a population of 10°Mj is shown by 
the solid curve, and the left-hand axis gives the scale. Color 
reddening is also shown where B — V color is shown by the 
dotted curve and the right-hand axis gives the scale. 


after a substantial red giant branch develops, a bit shy of 
a billion years of age. This is because almost all the light 
comes from stars near the main sequence turnoff or from 
post-main-sequence stars. All of these stars have nearly 
the same mass (because post-main-sequence lifetimes are 
relatively short) so there is little mass differential for the 
IMF to work on. 

Since we do not know how much the IMF varies from 
environment to environment there is corresponding un- 
certainty in the synthesis models. This is an astrophysical 
uncertainty, but there are technical uncertainties as well 
since most of the ingredients in an isochrone synthesis 
model are suspect at some level. The isochrones them- 
selves appear to be the dominant source of error. Stellar 
lifetimes and luminosities are somewhat uncertain, but the 
temperatures predicted by the isochrones are the most crit- 
ical component and one of the hardest to obtain accurately. 
Temperature errors lead directly to errors in derived ages 
and abundances. The stellar flux libraries have problems 
also. Theoretical fluxes do not match real stars, especially 
in the ultraviolet and infrared where the atomic and molec- 
ular line lists are incomplete. Observed libraries have ob- 
servational error, limited wavelength coverage, uncertain 
flux calibration and often inappropriate resolution. The 
combined effect of these technical problems is estimated 
to render derived ages uncertain by about 35% for popu- 
lations older than a billion years. The uncertainty is larger 
for younger populations. 

There are sometimes problems in the observational 
material that make it difficult to apply a model based solely 
on star light. Dust may be present in the observed galaxy, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


possibly with a variety of geometries. This will affect 
colors owing to scattering and absorption of starlight. If 
stars are currently forming in a galaxy, nebular emission 
lines from H II regions are present. Together with other 
species, the hydrogen Balmer lines are present in emission, 
filling in the stellar absorption lines. This can make the 
Balmer absorptions, which are important age diagnostics, 
very hard or impossible to measure. 

Another significant hurdle for all types of population 
models is age—metallicity degeneracy, in which age effects 
look similar to metallicity effects in integrated light. To 
illustrate the problem figure 5 shows isochrones and 
fluxes for a trio of populations. The 5 billion year old, 
[Fe/H] = —0.1 dex population is the reference population. 
The second population is three times older than the 
reference, the third twice as metal rich, but their spectra 
fall virtually on top of one another. The null-change slope 
is approximately A log(age) = (—3/2)A log Z. 

Is age hopelessly intertwined with abundance? 
Fortunately, it is not. A careful look at the model spectra 
reveals several features that do not participate in the —3/2 
slope. Some metallic absorption features are relatively 
more sensitive to metals. Hydrogen Balmer lines track 
the main sequence turnoff temperature closely without 
much regard for the giant branch temperature and hence 
are relatively age sensitive. Ultraviolet-to-red colors 
behave the same way (but in practice are hampered by 
the presence of a minority of hot horizontal branch or 
post-AGB stars and by dust, if present). The presence 
of luminous red AGB stars has been proposed as another 
age indicator, since the AGB is observed to be very strong 
in clusters less than about 2 billion years of age, but the 
stellar evolutionary details of this are difficult to work 
out. Additional age indicators are being sought by today’s 
researchers. For the moment, it appears that arraying a 
Balmer feature against a sensitive metal feature is the most 
reliable way to estimate simultaneously a mean age and a 
mean metal abundance. Example diagnostic diagrams are 
shown in figure 6. 

Another astrophysical uncertainty is the mixture of 
elements that are used for the ‘abundance’. A scaled- 
solar abundance pattern seems to apply approximately 
throughout the local disk, but metal-poor halo stars have 
light elements that are more abundant relative to Fe-peak 
elements. A similar abundance pattern applies in the 
GALACTIC BULGE and also in large elliptical galaxies (see 
below). The impact of changing the heavy-element ratios 
is primarily on the temperature structure of the isochrone 
and the appearance of the stellar spectra, with secondary 
effects on stellar lifetimes and luminosities. However, the 
modeling that is required to calibrate these changes is only 
now Starting to be carried out, so the ultimate impact of 
differing elemental mixtures is difficult to estimate. As it 
stands now, the local template stars have spectra which 
differ in line strength pattern from the spectra of some 
galaxies and clusters, so a perfect model-to-galaxy match 
is not possible. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


[ T T T T T T T T T T =| 
+  Metallicity and Age effects 4 
3 aes 4 
2 tse camel 
3 = al 
= Fe a 
2 L a 
Ee _| 
| Age 5 Gyr, [Fe/H]=-0. = 
[ See orrerrerae 4 
L Age 5 Gyr, [Fe/H]=+0.2 J 
0 |}—- Age 15 Gyr, [Fe/H]=-0.1 4 
- Li | fatalitte Pes Teh a8 2 | 
3.8 3.7 3.6 3.5 
log T, 
(a) 
0.5 um 1 um 2um 
T T | T 
-2 | 
Pe age=5 Gyr, [Fe/H]=-0.1 > 
ais | 
s L 4 
3% L J 
3 4. Es age=15 Gyr, [Fe/H]=-0.1 =i 
3 FARIS = weer age=5 Gyr, [Fe/H]=+0.2 4 
8 i ] 
s t 4 
£.-Spyt | 
“cal 1 
oft 4 
Aye : 
2 im | 1 } | i 1 | {J 1 1 | oe | oe | oe | on | {| | 1 | i” 


3.6 37 3.8 3.9 4 41 4.2 43 
log [2 (A)] 


(b) 


Figure 5. (a) Matched isochrones and (b) model spectra that 
illustrate age—-metal degeneracy are shown. The base population 
is age 5 billion years, with slightly less than solar metallicity. Of 
the other two populations, one has age tripled, the other has 
metallicity doubled. Despite differing in abundance by a factor 
of 2 and differing in age by a factor of 3 both spectra lie nearly on 
top of one another. 


A final astrophysical uncertainty is the difficulty of 
composite populations, systems that are composed of 
many different ages and abundances. In particular, there 
is a strong masking effect when a young population 
is present together with an underlying old population. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


6 T T T T l T T T T T 


Age-metal degenerate index combination 


dg 


L 


vith 


ia eee 


4 1 4 4 | 1 4 1 | 4 i 1 
4 T T T T | T T T | T T T 
ie Age—metal sensitive 
index combination 


Hp 
1 L | ae OT | i | Lis} L Lotrili yt 


Figure 6. While most index—index diagrams are age—metal 
degenerate, as in the top panel showing an Na D index versus an 
index measuring mostly molecular carbon, some show fairly 
good ability to separate the two effects, as in the bottom panel 
showing Hf. Note that an ‘index’ could be a color, an 
absorption feature index or even an SBF magnitude. The choice 
of indices presented here is arbitrary. Metallicity values and ages 
in billions of years are marked on the grid lines that represent 
simple-population models. 


Since young populations are very much brighter, they 
will dominate the integrated light even when the young 
population represents only a few per cent of the total mass. 
When ‘mean ages’ are derived for galaxies, the youngest 
population present gets far more weight than the older 
ones. 


Applications of synthesis models 


Over the years we have learned a great deal about 
distant GLOBULAR CLUSTERS and galaxies from the study of 
their integrated starlight as interpreted through synthesis 
models. The following examples illustrate some of the 
ways that this class of models has been applied. 


Globular cluster systems are attractive targets because 
allbut the very largest of them appear to be not only co-eval 
but also monometallic so that they can be characterized 
by a model of a single age and metal abundance. The 
first globular cluster system to be studied was the Milky 
Way’s. Direct stellar abundance estimates are available for 
these nearby systems, so the strong connection between 
integrated color (or metal line strength) and abundance is 
obvious. The Milky Way globular clusters are believed to 
have formed at various times during the first third of the 
Galaxy’s life so they are uniformly ancient. They remain 
crucial benchmarks for testing synthesis models. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Colors of globular clusters around other galaxies are 
now becoming available out to ~8000 km s-! and low- 
resolution spectra can be obtained out to ~1500 km s} 
with 8 m telescopes. Clusters around elliptical galaxies 
are the most common target. Metal abundance can be 
derived by assuming old ages and using synthesis models 
to go from observed color to abundance. Note that the 
—3/2 age-metal slope works in our favor when metal 
abundance is sought: a 30% age uncertainty corresponds 
to a 20% abundance uncertainty, which is less than 0.1 dex. 
The typical globular cluster system has both metal-poor 
and metal-rich clusters, some of which have apparently 
greater than solar abundance. The Milky Way is missing 
the metal-rich component seen in most other galaxies. The 
metal-rich component often appears as a separate hump in 
the abundance histogram and is seen to be more centrally 
concentrated than the metal-poor clusters. 


Elliptical galaxies show a color-magnitude relation in 
which brighter galaxies are redder. Since it is unlikely 
that smaller galaxies are all younger than their larger 
brethren, and since synthesis models predict reddening 
with increasing abundance, a higher abundance in the 
larger ellipticals is inferred. 


Mean ages of early-type galaxies without emission 
lines can be estimated from Balmer absorption strength 
arrayed against metallic feature strengths. The results for 
local galaxies show a strong clump of old-appearing ages, 
with a significant trail of galaxies toward young ages. This 
indicates a degree of star formation activity inconsistent 
with a universal primordial formation for all elliptical and 
SO galaxies. 


Light/heavy element ratios in elliptical galaxies are not 
constant. When absorption features rather than colors are 
examined, Fe or Ca features are nearly constant regardless 
of galaxy size, but features sensitive to Mg, Na and N 
abundance are stronger in larger galaxies. This was 
discovered when synthesis models were compared with 
absorption line data. On the positive side, this tells 
us much about the types of sUPERNOVAE responsible for 
the chemical enrichment in galaxies of different sizes. 
On the negative side, this introduces more parameters 
to be encompassed by the synthesis models, increasing 
uncertainty. 


Surface brightness fluctuations are pixel-to-pixel varia- 
tions about the mean brightness of an image of a galaxy 
due to almost-resolved stars. The further away a galaxy 
is, the smoother its appearance because more stars fit into 
each pixel, suppressing the ‘noise’. Tonry and Schechter 
quantified this phenomenon and exploited it as a distance 
indicator with potentially excellent accuracy. The size 
of the observed surface brightness fluctuations depends 
only on galaxy distance and the luminosity function of 
the brighter stars present in the galaxy (see also LUMINOSITY 
FUNCTION OF GALAXIES). The luminosity function can be pre- 
dicted from population models, which show a slope with 
color and predict an absolute zero point for the distance 
scale. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Synthetic Stellar Populations 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Post-starburst objects can be reliably found with 
variations on the technique of using Balmer lines in 
conjunction with features more sensitive to abundance. 
Large numbers of galaxies that look quiescent but in fact 
have had a large burst of star formation in the recent 
past have been discovered in nearby GALAXY CLUSTERS, 
supporting a view in which galaxy clusters are in the midst 
of forming even today. 


Cosmological studies of GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT almost 
always require evolutionary synthesis models to interpret 
the observed magnitudes and colors. The Doppler shift 
moves the spectrum to longer wavelengths, affecting the 
colors. Furthermore, at large look-back times the stars 
seen will be younger than their local counterparts, and 
therefore brighter and bluer. The synthesis models allow 
an accounting of these effects. 


Starburst galaxies are bravely examined, despite dust 
and nebular emission, with the hope of deriving a high- 
mass IMF, among other things. The key observables are the 
CIV and Si IV resonance lines in the vacuum ultraviolet. 
Massive stars have winds that generate P Cygni profiles 
in these lines. More massive stars have faster and denser 
winds, generating stronger P Cygni profiles with larger 
blueshift. This technique offers a sensitive IMF test for 
stars with M > 30M . To date, the evidence suggests that 
the IMF looks about the same in distant STARBURST GALAXIES 
as it does in local group star forming regions. 


The G dwarf problem is the observation that the solar 
neighborhood is deficient in stars of abundance less than 
1/10th of solar abundance compared with the simple 
closed-box model of chemical evolution. Synthesis models 
have been used to estimate the metal-poor population 
fraction present in early-type galaxies by looking at the 
amount of main sequence turnoff light contributed in 
the near-UV and at spectral features sensitive to the 
presence of A-type metal-poor horizontal branch stars. 
The conclusion is that the G dwarf problem is universal. 
Other galaxies, even the nuclei of elliptical galaxies, do 
not contain as many metal-poor stars as the simple model 
predicts. 


Chemo-dynamical models attempt to start with a cloud 
of gas and numerically turn it into a galaxy, with correct 
dynamics and chemistry along the way. These complex 
computer models can also include a population synthesis 
portion so that the surface brightnesses and colors of 
the model galaxies can be simulated as well. Today’s 
models are approximate and underconstrained, but this 
is a promising avenue for future work. 


Bibliography 

For references to recent literature on virtually all of the 
topics touched upon in this article see the conference 
review 


Leitherer C, Fritze-von Alvensleben U and Huchra J (ed) 
1996 From Stars to Galaxies: The Impact of Stellar Physics 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


on Galaxy Evolution (ASP Conf. Ser. 98) (San Francisco, 


CA: Astronomical Society of the Pacific) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Guy Worthey 


Syrtis Major 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Syrtis Major 


A prominent dark, triangular albedo feature (dark by 
contrast with its surroundings) on the Martian equator, 
centered approximately at 10°N, 70°E. It takes its name 
from the historical name for the larger of two quicksands 
off the North African coast. Syrtis Major is prominent in 
telescopic views of the planet, and was in fact the first 
feature of Mars ever to be recorded, in a sketch made by 
Christiaan Huygens in 1659. It continued to be recorded 
by observers of Mars, and appears on various maps made 
during the nineteenth century, including those drawn by 
Nathaniel Green and Eugéne Antoniadi. When spacecraft 
mapped the planet in the 1970s very few of the classical 
albedo features were found to correspond to topographical 
features. Syrtis Major is one of the exceptions, coinciding 
with a volcanic plateau centered at 9.5°N, 70.4°E. The 
plateau, which bears the official name Syrtis Major Planum 
(changed in 1982 from Syrtis Major Planitia), is a flat, 
lightly cratered area that slopes gently down toward 
Isidis Planitia to the east. A low-relief shield volcano on 
the plateau is probably responsible for the dark material 
that covers the region; winds shift this material around, 
causing changes in the appearance of Syrtis Major as seen 
from Earth and creating dune fields. In the southwest 
lies a prominent crater, 456 km in diameter, appropriately 
named Huygens, while in the northwest lies another large 
crater, the 381 km diameter Antoniadi. 


Seealso: Mars: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Syzygy ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Syzygy 

The approximate alignment of three celestial bodies. 
Examples are the Earth, Sun and Moon at new moon and 
full moon, or the Earth, Sun and a planet when the planet 
is at opposition or conjunction. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


T Tauri Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T Tauri Stars 


The T Tauri stars are the most well known class of pre- 
main sequence stars. They are low- to intermediate- 
mass stars with ages of typically a few million years. At 
this stage in their evolution, the newly collapsed stars 
have become optically visible but are still surrounded by 
gas and dust from their formation, typically in a disk. 
In the HR diagram, they are located where one expects 
contracting, fully convective pre-main sequence stars to 
fall. Observationally they appear as cool, luminous stars 
that exhibit emission lines, excess infrared and ultraviolet 
continuum flux, variability and are sometimes associated 
with jets, molecular outflows, winds, accretion or x-ray 
emission. Studies of the T Tauri stars help provide insight 
into the formation of the Sun and solar system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Talbot, William Henry Fox (1800-77) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Talbot, William Henry Fox (1800-77) 


Mathematician, parliamentarian and pioneer in photog- 
raphy, born in Melbury Abbas, Dorset, England, a close 
friend of Sir John Herschel (see HERSCHEL FAMILY), and 
worked with him on problems in light and photochem- 
istry. Invented the modern methods of reproducing pho- 
tographs through the negative process and making prints. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tarantula Nebula (NGC 2070) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tarantula Nebula (NGC 2070) 


An emission nebula in the Large Magellanic Cloud, in the 
constellation Doradus, position RA 05 h 39™ dec. —69° 07’. 
At half a degree across, it is far larger than any emission 
nebula visible in our Galaxy. It is energized by several 
young hot O and B type stars, the brightest of which is 
designated R136. The Tarantula gets it name from its 
spidery appearance. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tarde, Jean (1561/2—1636) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tarde, Jean (1561/2-—1636) 


French parish priest, geographer and astronomer, born in 
La Roque-Gajac, near Sarlat, France, adopted Copernican- 
ism and set up an observatory to view sunspots, which he 
thought were satellites of the Sun. He named them ‘Bour- 
bon stars’, in the same manner that GALILEO had named the 
satellites of Jupiter the Medician stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tartu Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tartu Observatory 


Tartu Observatory (TO) is a research institution in Estonia 
accommodating the northernmost 1.5 m telescope in the 
world. It is located in Estonia, about 20 km south- 
west of Tartu in the village of Téravere (58°16'08".4 N, 
26°27'32" 4 E). TO performs research in astrophysics and 
atmospheric physics and popularizes those branches of 
science. TO was founded in 1808 as an observatory of 
Tartu University and it gained worldwide renown under 
the leadership of F G W Struve (1793-1864, director of 
the Observatory 1820-39). In 1824 TO was equipped 
with a 9 in (23 cm) Fraunhofer telescope which was 
the world’s largest refractor. TO was working as the 
Observatory of the University until World War II. In 1946 
the Observatory was transferred to the Estonian Academy 
of Sciences. In 1958 building works at a new observing site 
(Toravere) were begun, and in 1964 the new observatory 
was opened. Between 1947 and 1995 the observatory had 
various different names. Since 1995 the official name has 
been Tartu Observatory and it is subordinated directly to 
the Estonian Ministry of Education. 

The staff in 1999 was 64, of whom 38 were research 
associates. 

Major observing facilities include the 1.5 m telescope 
(installed in 1975) equipped with a Cassegrain spectro- 
graph, and the 0.6 m telescope (installed in 1998) with a 
CCD photometer. 

The research can be divided into four main projects: 
formation and evolution of galaxies in the expanding 
universe; structure and evolution of stars and stellar 
atmospheres; climate forming factors and dynamical 
weather forecast for Estonia; and the radiation regime 
of the atmosphere and ground surface and optical 
monitoring of the Estonian environment. 

TO is supported mostly from the state budget of 
Estonia. Minor additional finances are obtained from 
a few international projects and contracts with Estonian 
organizations. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.aai.ee. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tata Institute of Fundamental Research 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research 


The Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Department 
of Astronomy and Astrophysics has over 20 scientists 
carrying out research in theoretical astrophysics, optical 
and near-infrared astronomy and space astronomy (far- 
infrared, x-ray and gamma-ray) using balloons and 
satellites. Currently a 2-20 keV x-ray telescope onboard 
an Indian satellite is operational. The institute operates a 
fully fledged balloon facility in Hyderabad that can launch 
500-1000 kg payloads to altitudes of 42-35 km. 
For further information see 
http://www.tifr.res.in. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Taurids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Taurids 


A meteor shower that takes place in October and 
November. There are two radiants in the constellation 
Taurus, at dec. +14° and +22°. The meteor stream 
consists of debris ejected from the now feebly active Comet 
2P/Encke over a period of several thousand years, and is 
one of the most evolved streams encountered by the Earth. 
The stream has spread out over a broad swathe of the 
inner solar system, and Taurid shower activity lasts for six 
weeks, with low but steady rates of slow, bright meteors. 
The Earth also passes through the stream between 5 June 
and 18 July, producing the daytime Beta Taurid shower. 
Although they are not observable visually, as the radiant 
is near the Sun, radio observations indicate that the Beta 
Taurids are highly active. 


See also: meteor shower. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Taurus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Taurus 


(the Bull; abbrev. Tau, gen. Tauri; area 797 sq. deg.) 
Anorthern zodiacal constellation which lies between Aries 
and Orion, and culminates at midnight in late November. 
It is one of the oldest constellations, dating back to when 
the Sun was in that part of the sky at the vernal (spring) 
equinox, between about 4000 and 1800 sc. Later, in Greek 
mythology, it was identified with the form assumed by 
Zeus when he carried away Europa, daughter of King 
Agenor of Phoenicia. On early celestial charts only its 
head and forequarters are shown. Its brightest stars were 
cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A conspicuous constellation, Taurus is easily recog- 
nized by virtue of w Tauri (Aldebaran), a red giant (K5) ir- 
regular variable (range 0.75-0.95), which marks the bull’s 
right eye and is the top-left star of a V-shaped grouping 
of a couple of dozen more distant naked-eye stars, which 
mark the bull’s face and represent the brightest members 
of a scattered open cluster of several hundred stars, the 
Hyades. 

Other bright stars include 6 Tauri (Elnath, formerly 
designated y Aurigae), magnitude 1.7, n Tauri (Alcyone), 
magnitude 2.9 and the brightest member of another open 
cluster, the Pleiades, 9? Tauri, magnitude 3.4, the brightest 
member of the Hyades and the brighter component 
of a wide, naked-eye double with 6, magnitude 3.8, 
separation >5’, which has the same proper motion, and 
i Tauri, an Algol-type eclipsing binary (range 3.4-3.9, 
period 3.95 days). There are ten other stars brighter 
than magnitude 4.0. Other interesting stars include 
the variables T Tauri (range 9.3-13.5), the prototype of 
a class of young stars that exhibit irregular variability, 
which is located in Hind’s Variable Nebula (NGC 1555), 
a small reflection nebula which shows major variations in 
brightness and extent, and RV Tauri (range 9.8-13.3, period 
about 79 days, superimposed on a longer cycle of about 
1224 days), the prototype of a class of highly luminous 
pulsating variables. 

The Pleiades (M45), one of the most beautiful objects 
in the sky, is popularly called the ‘Seven Sisters’, as about 
that number of stars can readily be seen with the unaided 
eye, though there are about 100 stars in the cluster as a 
whole, embedded in a faint reflection nebula, the brightest 
part of which (NGC 1435) extends for about 20’ south 
of 23 Tauri (Merope), magnitude 4.1. Other interesting 
objects in Taurus include the Crab Nebula (M1, NGC 1952), 
the brightest (eighth magnitude) supernova remnant in 
the sky, at the center of which is the Crab pulsar, which 
marks the spot where a supernova was observed in 1054. 
It is a source of strong emission at both radio and x-ray 
wavelengths (where it is known as Taurus A and Taurus 
X-1, respectively). 

The Taurid meteor shower appears to radiate from 
the constellation (as does the Beta Taurid shower, which 
cannot be observed visually as it occurs during June and 
July, when Taurus is close to the Sun). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


See also: Aldebaran, Crab Nebula, Crab pulsar, T Tauri 
stars, Taurids. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Taylor, Joseph H (1941-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Taylor, Joseph H (1941-) 


Radioastronomer, born in Philadelphia, PA, Nobel 
prizewinner for physics in 1993 with RUSSELL HULSE ‘for the 
discovery of a new type of pulsar, a discovery that has 
opened up new possibilities for the study of gravitation’. 
Interested in radio as a boy, he became a professor at 
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and with his 
research student Hulse searched with the Arecibo radio 
telescope for pulsars. They discovered the Hulse—-Taylor 
pulsar, PSR 1913 + 16, a binary pulsar that showed general 
relativistic effects, including loss of energy by gravitational 
radiation. Taylor helped found the Five College Radio 
Observatory, where the observations of the Hulse-Taylor 
pulsar were actually carried out, confirming EINSTEIN’s 
theory of general relativity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tebbutt, John (1834-1916) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tebbutt, John (1834-1916) 


Australian astronomer and meteorologist, born at Wind- 
sor, NSW, discovered the Great Comet of 1861, through 
whose tail the Earth passed, to alarmist predictions of poi- 
soning by cyanide when cyanogen was spectroscopically 
discovered in it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tectonics 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tectonics 


The theory of tectonism—an umbrella term for processes 
that shape the surface features of a planetary body 
through forces generated in its crust by heating or cooling 
in its interior. Tectonic forces can be generated in 
bodies that have undergone differentiation and have 
developed a molten mantle beneath the crust. Global 
heating will cause the entire crust to expand, creating 
tensional forces in the crust; global cooling will cause it 
to contract, creating compressive forces. Lunar rilles are 
examples of features caused by extension of the crust as 
it expanded. On Mercury, extensive lobate scarps—long, 
cliff-like features—have been interpreted as resulting from 
compressive stress caused by global contraction. Wrinkle 
ridges, found on most of the terrestrial planets, are also 
compressive features. Localized heating in the mantle 
producing upwelling of material can cause local uplift of 
the crust above, as has occurred on Venus to create the 
mountainous region Maxwell Montes. The Earth’s crust 
consists of segments known as plates which move slowly 
with respect to one another, driven by convection currents 
in the mantle; plate tectonics, as this process is known, was 
thought to be unique to the Earth, but it may also have 
operated on Venus. Tectonic processes have also shaped 
the surfaces of Europa and Ganymede, and of some of the 
satellites of Saturn and Uranus, including Enceladus and 
Ariel. 


Seealso: Earth: interior. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tektite 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tektite 


A small rounded piece of natural glass, green, black or 
brown and typically centimeter-sized. Once believed to 
have a volcanic origin or to be peculiar meteorites, they 
are now thought to have been formed by the impact 
of kilometer-sized asteroids. Their composition, mainly 
silica with some metal oxide content, is consistent with 
the rapid melting of terrestrial rock under a large impact 
and the subsequent rapid cooling, from a temperature 
of 1500-2000 K, of molten droplets splattered into the 
atmosphere. Their various shapes support this view: 
many are disk-shaped or show flanges, suggesting surface 
reheating during their flight. The ages and geographical 
distribution also support the impact origin theory. They 
are found in four main locations, known as strewnfields 
(see table 1). The tektites found in a strewnfield have 
nothing in common geologically with their surroundings, 
and in three out of the four cases there is an identifiable 
impact structure. The absence of a confirmed impact crater 
for the Australasian strewnfield is problematic. There are 
also microtektites, microscopic glass spherules associated 
for example with the Chicxulub basin, and other types of 
impact glass found close to other craters. 


Table 1. Tektites: the four strewnfields. 


Approximate 
Impact structure number of 
Age (approximate tektites 
Strewnfield (Myr) diameter) recovered 
Australasian 0.8 2 700 000 
North Chesapeake Bay, 
American 35 US (90 km) 2000 
Ivory Coast 1 Bosumtwi Crater, 
Ghana (10.5 km) 2000 
Central Reiskessel, 
European 15 Germany (24 km) 55 000 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Telescope 


An instrument that is used to study distant objects. An 
optical telescope uses a convex lens (the objective, or object 
glass) or a concave mirror (the primary mirror), or in some 
cases a combination of both, to collect light from, and 
form an image of, a distant object. The image produced 
by the collector may be recorded photographically or 
electronically. When used for direct visual observation, a 
telescope also incorporates an eyepiece, a short-focus lens 
that enables the eye to view a magnified (enlarged) version 
of the image produced by the collector. An eyepiece 
may also be used to project an enlarged image onto a 
photographic emulsion or electronic detector. 

If the collector is a lens, the telescope is called a 
refractor, whereas if the collector is a mirror, the telescope 
is a reflector. A catadioptric telescope uses a combination 
of lens(es) and mirror(s) to collect light and form an image. 

A telescope is categorized by its aperture (the clear 
diameter of the collector) and focal length or focal ratio, 
the former being the distance between the collector and the 
image that it produces, and the latter being the ratio of the 
focal length to the aperture. Because a telescope collects 
more light than the unaided human eye, it can reveal 
fainter (and more distant) objects than the eye alone; the 
larger the aperture, the greater the light gathering power. 
The ability of a telescope to reveal fine detail (resolving 
power) also depends on the aperture. The size of the image 
produced by a telescope is directly proportional to the focal 
length of the collector. Additional lenses or mirrors may be 
used to increase the effective focal length of the telescope 
and thereby produce larger images. 

The objective lens of a refractor usually consists of 
at least two components, each of which has front and rear 
surfaces. Consequently there are at least four surfaces that 
must be figured (ground to a precise shape). By contrast, 
because light is reflected from the front surface of an 
astronomical mirror, only one surface needs to be figured. 
Furthermore, lenses can be supported only around the 
perimeter, while mirrors can be supported across the back 
as well as round the edge. For these, and other, reasons, 
large reflectors are easier and cheaper to construct and, in 
most respects, are more efficient. All large modern optical 
telescopes are of the reflecting type, the largest being the 
two Keck telescopes, each with an aperture of 10 m, that 
are located on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. 

The invention of the telescope is usually credited to 
the Dutch spectacle-maker, Hans Lippershey (c. 1570- 
1619), who constructed a simple refractor in 1608. 
However, some historians contend that a form of telescope 
may have been constructed and used by the Englishman, 
Leonard Digges, in or around 1550. Although the Scot, 
James Gregory (1638-75) had produced a design for a 
reflecting telescope in 1663, the first working reflector is 
generally believed to have been designed and constructed 
in 1668 by the English natural philosopher Isaac Newton 
(1642-1727). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The term ‘telescope’ is also applied to instruments 
that collect radiation, and enable images to be produced, 
at wavelengths ranging from x-rays to radio waves. 


See also: Barlow lens, Cassegrain telescope, Dobsonian 
telescope, eyepiece, Galilean telescope, Gregorian tele- 
scope, light-gathering power, magnification, Maksutov 
telescope, mirror, Newtonian telescope, objective lens, ra- 
dio telescope, reflector, refractor, resolving power, Schmidt 
telescope, Schmidt—Cassegrain telescope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Telescope Engineering 


The design and construction of modern astronomical 
telescopes and instruments is one of the most challenging 
domains of engineering encompassing many fields 
including in particular optics, structures, mechanics, 
control systems, thermal and atmospheric physics. In this 
article we examine the main engineering approaches and 
practices in use in modern optical telescopes on the ground 
and in space. 


Astronomical observatories as systems 
Astronomical observatories are tightly integrated systems 
where most subsystems are strongly interacting and 
individual subsystem performances must be traded 
against one another in order to arrive at an optimum 
design. Since the image quality of a telescope is one of 
the most important performance characteristics (others 
include observing efficiency and spectral coverage), an 
essential step in this process is to establish an ‘optical error 
budget’ where all the contributing factors are evaluated. 
An example of such an error budget is shown in figure 1. 
As the design progresses, the individual allocations are re- 
estimated and traded against each other as need be until a 
satisfactory set is obtained. Cost and schedule have to be 
taken into account as well, and observatory performance 
has itself to be traded against scientific goals until the 
overall project optimum is determined. 

The availability of high-fidelity computer modeling 
offers an ideal solution to this problem. It is now possible 
to develop a detailed computer model of the entire system 
(optics, structure, thermal, control systems etc), simulate 
operating conditions and explore the trade spaces to find 
the best configuration according to performance and cost 
criteria. 


Optics 

All large telescopes are of the REFLECTOR type because of 
the difficulty in producing lenses of sufficient purity in 
size larger than 1 m in diameter. Additional reasons 
are that lenses are generally heavy since they cannot be 
‘lightweighted’ and they suffer from chromatic aberrations 
which can be corrected only over a narrow spectral 
range. Optical configurations are relatively simple and 
the Ritchey-Chrétien Cassegrain combination is almost 
universally used. In practice, as many optical surfaces are 
needed as the number of aberrations one wishes to correct. 
With two surfaces, the Ritchey-Chrétien configuration is 
able to correct spherical aberration and coma. Correction 
of astigmatism requires an additional surface which can be 
part of the telescope (three-mirror system) or incorporated 
into each instrument. 

The choice of the f-ratio (ratio of final focal 
length to entrance aperture diameter) is the result of a 
complex tradeoff between imaging quality requirements, 
field of view, size of the secondary mirror, size of 
the instrument entrance optics, focal length of the 
spectrograph collimators and detector pixel size. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


IMAGE 
1.04 
— 
Telescope Atmosph. SI 
0.41 0.95 0.10 
Optics Structure Pointing Hed an: Optics 
06 0.19 0.05 0.73 0.05 
Prim mirr Tilt Wind Bound lay. Alignmt 
0.32 0.71 0.04 0.38 0.08 
Sec mirror] | Decenter Drives Dome ind. Thermal 
0.16 0.71 0.03 0.48 0.01 
Tert. mirr Focus Detector 
0.05 0.15 0.03 
Alignment 
0.05 


Figure 1. Optical error budget of the Keck 10 m telescope 
expressed in diameter of the image in arc seconds that encloses 
80% of the total image energy. 


For the simple case of a space telescope with 
diffraction-limited optics directly feeding a critically 
sampled camera (2 pixels per resolution element, i.e. 4/D), 
the f-ratio needed is given by: 


where A is the wavelength and p is the pixel size. Current 
detectors have pixel sizes ranging from 7 to 13 um for 
CCDs and 18 to 28 4m for near-infrared detectors which 
results in f-ratios in the f/15 to f /30 range, which is well 
adapted to the Cassegrain combination. 

For a ground telescope where atmospheric SEEING 
limits image quality to about 0.4", adequate sampling for 
imaging would require much faster f-ratios—in the f /2 
to f/4 range for an 8 m class telescope. This can be 
obtained directly at a prime focus or with a focal reducer 
at a Cassegrain focus. 

Spectrographs are generally used at the Cassegrain 
focus and fed with an f-ratio between f/8 and f/15. 

The problem with Cassegrain foci is that the volume 
of the instruments is limited by mount clearance. Large 
and heavy instruments are better located at the ‘Nasmyth’ 
focus (figure 2). An additional advantage of the Nasmyth 
focus is that the instruments keep a fixed direction with 
respect to gravity which greatly simplifies their design. 

Very high spectral resolution spectrographs are too 
bulky to be mounted on the telescope itself (even at the 
Nasmyth focus), and are best left Earth-stationary; they 
are fed via a series of flat mirrors at the so-called ‘coudé 
focus’. In such cases a much slower f-ratio is used (f /30 
to f/100) in order to reduce the size of the beam to be 
transferred. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


F 


Cassegrain Coudé 


Nasmyth 


F 


Figure 2. Cassegrain, Nasmyth and coudé focus arrangements 


Materials 
Contrary to many engineering situations, telescope 
structures are not driven by stress conditions, but by 
deflection under load (on the ground) or dynamic effects 
(on the ground and in space). 

The governing equation for the deflection of a mirror 
(plate) under gravity is of the form: 


where k is a constant the value of which depends on 
the geometry of the support, D is the diameter, tf the 
thickness, p the material density and E is the Young 
modulus (elasticity modulus) of the material. 

Similarly, the deflection under gravity of a beam sup- 
porting optical components of negligible mass compared 
with the mass of the beam (which is roughly the case of 
the tube supporting the secondary mirror in a Cassegrain 
telescope) is given by: 


sake 
E 


where k is function of the beam geometry and support and 
1 is the length of the beam. 

In both cases, the material properties enter as the 
ratio of the Young modulus to density (£/,); this ratio is 
referred to as ‘specific stiffness’. The larger this ratio, the 
smaller the deflection will be. The same ratio also enters 
the laws governing dynamic effects due to wind or internal 
disturbances. 

For large telescopes, whether on the ground or 
in space, weight is a dominant issue and the most 
advantageous materials will be those with high specific 
stiffness. As shown in table 1, the materials commonly 
used in making mirrors and telescope structures (glass, 
aluminum, steel) have about the same E/p. It is 
in particular seen that aluminum does not offer any 
advantage over steel. Steel is less expensive and is the 
material of choice for ground-based telescopes structures. 
Three materials stand out, however: silicon carbide, 
graphite epoxy and beryllium. For the same stiffness 
they offer a gain of four to six times in mass over steel 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and aluminum. They are expensive materials to produce, 
however, and are limited to space applications where mass 
is at a premium. 


Table 1. Mechanical and thermal properties of major mirror and 
structural materials used in optical systems. p is the density, E is 
the Young’s modulus, a the coefficient of thermal expansion, 1 
the thermal conductivity and C, is the specific heat. 


p E/p aat300K A/pc; 

Material (kgm-3) (10°s) (10-°K-!) (10-6 m?s~!) 
Pyrex 2500 25 3.3 0.60 
Fused silica 2200 33 0.5 0.86 
ULE 2200 31 0.03 0.77 
Zerodur 2500 36 0.10 0.77 
SiC 2600 96 3.5 86 
Beryllium 1800 162 12 5.4 
Aluminum 2700 26 25 4.0 
Steel 7800 27 12 5.7 
Graphite 

epoxy 1740 61 0.09 29 


Mirrors must also retain their correct surface shape in 
spite of environmental temperature changes which can be 
up to several degrees celsius. Changes in bulk temperature 
induce focus variations and gradients within the mirror 
will induce distortion of the optical surface. For these 
two effects to be negligible the mirror material should 
have a coefficient of thermal expansion of 10~-° or lower. 
Pyrex, first used on the 5 m Hale telescope, was a major 
improvement over regular glass, but the problem really 
only disappeared with the use of fused silica (HST mirror) 
and the development of ceramic glass (Cer-Vit, Zerodur) 
and ULE (ultra-low-expansion fused silica) which have 
coefficients of thermal expansion in the 10~°-10-° range 
and are used in most large ground-based telescopes today. 

Although the mirror may retain its shape in a 
changing thermal environment due to a low coefficient 
of thermal expansion, the temperature difference between 
the mirror and the ambient air can generate convective 
turbulence (‘mirror seeing’) detrimental to image quality 
(see section on local seeing control below). This effect will 
be the smallest for materials which have a high thermal 
diffusivity (A/C,p) where 1 is the conduction and C, is the 
specific heat of the material, so that they track the ambient 
temperature variations well. None of the glass/ceramic 
materials are very good from that point of view and mirror 
seeing has to be mitigated by minimizing mass and by 
ventilation (see ‘controlling man-made seeing’ below). 

In space, where mirror seeing is not a concern, 
high diffusivity can still be useful when the observatory 
is subjected to bulk temperature variation as when re- 
pointing but, in general, it will be more advantageous 
to avoid the thermal effects entirely by having as low a 
coefficient of expansion as possible. The best mirror blank 
materials for space application are thus those which have 
a high intrinsic stiffness and a low-expansion coefficient 
at operating temperature. For ambient temperature 
operation, low-expansion glass-type materials (ULE, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PRIME FOCUS CAGE 


ry 
UPPER END | am 
Scat 


tt 
SERRURIER TRUSSES 


COUDE HANDLING ARH 


MIRROR SUPPORT TUBE CROSS HEAD 


SEKSORS 


DECLINATION AXIS 
PILLAR EQUIPMENT 


NORTHEAST PILLAR 


Figure 3. Main components of a telescope. 


Zerodur) are best in spite of their lower intrinsic stiffness. 
For cryogenic operation (40 K), however, the best materials 
are beryllium and SiC because of their low coefficient 
of thermal expansion at cryogenic temperature (in the 
10-7 K~!) and high specific stiffness. 

Finally, mirror materials must be able to be polished to 
a high degree of smoothness and be dimensionally stable. 
Amorphous materials like glass and ceramics produce 
very smooth surfaces while metals usually end up with 
a much coarser surface finish suitable only for infrared 
application (50 Arms) unless they are coated with nickel 
prior to polishing. 


Mechanical design 
The main components of a ground-based telescope are 
shown in figure 3. 

Because of the extraordinary precision to which 
the optical components must be fabricated (fraction of 
a wavelength or 1/10 to 1/100 of a micron), kept 
aligned (1 to 10 microns), and pointed (1/10 to 1/100 
of an arc second), deflection under gravity, mechanical 
disturbances and temperature variations must be avoided 
or compensated for. In what follows we give an overview 
of the techniques which have been developed over the 
years to reach this goal. 


Kinematic mount 

To avoid deforming the very high-precision figure of the 
optical components, it is essential that strains in their 
supporting structure not be transmitted to the optics. The 
usual method consists of using a kinematic mount. A rigid 
body in space has six degrees of freedom: translation 
along and rotation about each of three orthogonal axes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Zz 


ball on flat 


By 


ball in V-groove 
ball in cone 


Yi) 


Figure 4. Principle of the kinematic mount. Alternate 
implementations, all following the same principle, are diverse. 


The body is fully constrained when each of these possible 
movements is individually prevented. If one movement 
is constrained in more than one way, then the body will 
strain when its support structure deforms. A kinematic 
mount is a mounting system which does not constrain 
more than these six degrees of freedom. The simplest 
example is that of the traditional ‘point/V-groove/plane’ 
support (figure 4). Kinematic mounts are ubiquitous in 
telescopes. They are used not only to mount mirrors 
in their cell, but also to mount the instruments on the 
telescope tube and to support telescope mounts on their 
pier (see also TELESCOPE MOUNTINGS). 


Mirror mounts 

Up to about 30 cm in diameter, a ground-based telescope 
mirror can be made stiff enough to be considered a rigid 
body and mounted kinematically. Larger mirrors would 
bend beyond tolerable limits and it is necessary to have 
additional supports to compensate for gravity but without 
interfering with the stress-free condition afforded by the 
kinematic mount. This is done by ‘floating’ the mirror 
in a set of discrete forces or in pressure/vacuum so as 
to balance its weight (figure 5). This is accomplished 
by counterweight lever systems, regulated air pressure or 
force actuators with feedback control. 

Space telescopes do not suffer from gravity deflection, 
but since gravity release is difficult to measure on the 
ground, force actuators are sometimes placed on the back 
of the mirror to make minute corrections to its figure once 
on orbit. 


Telescope tube 

In a ground telescope the primary and secondary mirrors 
of a Cassegrain system must remain parallel to each other 
and aligned in spite of the changing effect of gravity as the 
tube rotates to follow a target. The cylindrical telescope 
tube which is commonly used on small telescopes does 
not satisfy this condition as the two ends are tilted with 
respect to each other (figure 6). The solution to this 
problem is to use a truss consisting of members arranged 
in isosceles triangles on a square base. This forces the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


fr, 
fry ‘ 


fr, = fty cos O; 
2 fr, cos O; = W, = W sin z 


Xf,=W, = Wcos z 


Axial Compensation Radial Compensation 


Figure 5. Forces are applied to the back and edge of the mirror 
to compensate for gravity and minimize deflection. 


Cy} ES} 


Figure 6. After deflection under gravity the two ends of a 
cylindrical tube do not remain parallel. In the ‘Serrurier truss’, 
the two ends, say the primary and secondary mirrors, stay 
parallel to each other and deflect by the same amount, 
maintaining collimation. 


two ends (supporting the primary and secondary mirrors) 
to undergo parallel translations, and with proper sizing 
of the member sections the two translations can be made 
equal. This design, called the ‘Serrurier truss’ after Max 
Serrurier who invented it for the 5 m Hale telescope at 
Mount Palomar, has been used in most large telescopes 
ever since. 


Balancing systems 

Ground-based telescopes need to be extremely well 
balanced around their axis of rotation in order to minimize 
driving torques and differential flexure. This is done by 
adding or removing fixed weights or using motor-driven 
balancing weights. The procedure has to be done at 
each optical configuration change (e.g. exchange of the 
telescope top unit when changing from Cassegrain to 
coudé) and each time a focal instrument is replaced or 
installed. 


Hydrostatic bearings 

Although the tube and the mount of a ground-based 
telescope are extremely well balanced, the torques 
necessary to rotate the heavy tube and mount of a large 
telescope (of the order of 100 tonnes for the tube and up to 
300 tonnes for the mount) must be small enough to avoid 
torsional deformation and potential optical misalignment. 
Large driving torques would also create heat dissipation 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Rotating part 


a AN 


<— Oil flow 


Figure 7. Principle of the hydrostatic bearing used to support 
the rotating parts of a telescope (tube and mount) with minimal 
friction. 


in the dome, which is detrimental to image quality. 
During observations, the telescope tracking must also be 
extremely smooth. Mechanical bearings such as roller 
bearings suffer from ‘stick-slip’ at very low speed, a 
phenomenon due to stress build-up and relaxation at 
the contact areas, resulting in a jittery motion which is 
generally beyond the correctability of automatic guiding 
systems. These problems are solved by the use of 
hydrostatic bearings (figure 7) first developed for the 5m 
Hale telescope and which are now almost a universal 
choice in modern large telescopes. The tube and mount 
journals are supported on pads which are accurately 
machined to match, and oil is pumped in between at high 
pressure in order to raise them and leave them floating 
on a thin film of oil (of the order of 0.1 mm thick). With 
hydrostatic bearings, the rotation torques are so low that 
they are negligible compared with the resisting torques 
due to the cable wrap-ups or slip rings used to transfer 
energy and data to the moving parts. 


Active optics 

For telescopes much larger than 4 m, the traditional 
measures taken to keep the figure of the mirrors 
undisturbed and the optical train aligned become 
increasingly difficult to implement. Instead of relying 
on passive means to compensate for gravity and thermal 
effects, it becomes advantageous to use an active system 
where the optical quality is monitored in permanence 
using a reference star, and the figure and respective 
positions of the main optics elements are adjusted 
accordingly. This approach is referred to as ‘ACTIVE OPTICS’. 
All telescopes of the 8-10 m class use some form of active 
optics (figure 8). Because gravity and thermal effects vary 
slowly, the bandwidth of active optics is typically of the 
order of 1 Hz or less. This is to by opposition to ‘adaptive 
optics’ which is used for correction of atmospheric seeing 
which has a bandwidth up to 1000 Hz. 


Pointing and tracking system 

Early telescopes were all of the equatorial type which 
once pointed at the desired target only requires rotation 
at a constant rate (15" s-!) around the polar axis to track 
the target. This hour angle motion was accomplished 
in an ‘open loop’ fashion by a clock mechanism and 
more recently by a synchronous motor. With the need 
for better accuracy and regulation, all modern telescopes 
use ‘feedback control’, where the actual motion of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Focus 


Image 
analyzer 


Computer 


Figure 8. Primary mirror cell of the ESO Very Large Telescope. 
The 8 m mirror is supported on actuators which are adjusted 
continuously to compensate for gravity and thermal effects. 


rotating axis is constantly compared with the desired value 
and the error fed back to the drive system to correct 
it. Feedback control is intrinsically more accurate and 
eliminates the need for high-precision gearing and drive 
systems. It also allows for the correction of atmospheric 
refraction, deformations of the telescope structure under 
gravity and of disturbances as long as they are within 
the bandwidth of the control system. With the assistance 
of computers, feedback control is also well adapted to 
producing the variable tracking speed needed for the 
ALTAZIMUTH MOUNTING (alt-az mount). 

The limitation to the accuracy of pointing systems is 
due to disturbances beyond the bandwidth of the pointing 
system, which is generally a few Hertz at most. On the 
ground the main source is wind shake. With the need 
to largely open the dome during observations in order 
to reduce self-induced seeing (see section on man-made 
seeing below) the telescope is left largely unprotected 
from wind action, which results in wind buffeting on 
the primary mirror and on the tube supporting the 
secondary mirror. This effect can be lessened by 
reducing the cross section of the telescope structure 
members, by stiffening the secondary mirror support 
system and by actively controlling the primary mirror. In 
INFRARED TELESCOPES, chopping secondary mirrors used for 
background subtraction are another source of disturbance. 
This can be reduced to a large extent by compensation, 
that is to say by moving a dummy mass behind the mirror 
in the opposite direction so as to eliminate the chopping 
disturbing torque. 

In space, the main source of uncorrected disturbance 
comes from the vibrations induced by thermal snaps or by 
moving parts such as reaction wheels, antennas, fuel slosh 
and tape recorders. 

The absolute pointing accuracy of telescopes is 
typically about 1 arc second rms. Blind offsets from 
calibration stars are accurate to better than 0.1 and 0.01 arc 
second for ground and space telescopes respectively. 
Tracking stability of ground telescopes is typically better 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 9. Reaction wheels are used to point a space telescope. 


than 0.1 arc second without recourse to any guide star over 
periods of several minutes. By closing the loop ona guide 
star (see ‘Guiding’ below), the line of sight jitter is typically 
under 20 milliarc seconds rms for ground telescopes and 
a few milliarc seconds for the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. 


Drives 

Until the 1970s ground telescopes generally used a worm 
gear system because of its high gear ratio and excellent 
intrinsic accuracy which permitted open loop tracking 
using a constant speed motor. Worm gears are expensive 
and limited in size, however, and large modern telescopes 
use spur gears, friction drives or even direct drives, all 
with feedback control from an attitude sensor. Spur 
gears offer more positive control (no risk of slippage), but 
friction roller drives are cheaper and inherently smoother. 
The ultimate choice is a direct drive which eliminates all 
mechanical systems. This is being used in the European 
Southern Observatory Very Large Telescope (VLT) where 
the rotor and stator of each axis motor are integrated in the 
structure. 

Space telescopes cannot be driven by reacting against 
the ground; they use momentum transfer instead. The 
Hubble Space Telescope uses a set of flywheels, one for 
each axis plus a spare, rotating up to 3600 rpm, called 
‘reaction wheels’. To slew the telescope to a new target, 
the reaction wheels’ spin speed is increased or decreased 
depending on the desired direction. Because the overall 
momentum remains constant, the telescope moves in the 
opposite direction (figure 9). To stop it when it approaches 
its target, the reaction wheel speeds are returned to their 
original values. 


Sensors 

On ground-based telescopes the position of each axis is 
measured by encoders which are now almost always of 
the optical type. Incremental encoders with a high angular 
resolution (e.g. 0.1 arc second), but no absolute accuracy 
are used for tracking. They are generally mounted on 
a gear or friction system for increased magnification. 
Absolute encoders, generally mounted directly on a large 
journal are used for absolute pointing determination and 
have an absolute accuracy of about 1 arc second. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Guiding System field of view 


Entrance apertures 
of cameras and 
spectrographs 


Figure 10. Focal plane of the Hubble Space Telescope showing 
the three zones used for guiding. 


For space telescopes, the main attitude sensors are 
generally gyroscopes, the drift of which are corrected by 
star trackers. The star trackers have a field of several 
degrees and the best ones have an absolute accuracy of 
about 2 arc second rms. 


Guiding 

By itself, telescope tracking is not accurate enough for more 
than a few minutes at best. On the ground, the limit comes 
from errors in the gravity compensation systems, encoder 
imperfections, atmospheric refraction and atmospheric 
turbulence. In space, the limit is due to the spacecraft 
star-trackers sensing noise and from gyroscope drift. It is 
necessary to adjust the line of sight finely by monitoring 
the position of a relatively bright star in the vicinity of the 
field being observed. This is referred to as ‘guiding’. Early 
telescopes used GUIDE TELESCOPES mounted on the side of 
the telescope tube. But it is very difficult to ensure that the 
line of sight of the guide telescope remains parallel to that 
of the main telescope whatever its inclination. It is much 
better to guide using a star in the very field of the telescope 
(figure 10). This eliminates line of sight differential errors 
and the guiding system benefits from the full aperture of 
the main telescope, thus improving its sensitivity. 

The error signal supplied by the guider can be fed 
directly into the pointing system, but the bandwidth of 
the correction can be improved by ‘fine steering’ the 
optical beam itself instead of the entire telescope. This 
is accomplished by the tip/tilt of a mirror in the optical 
train such as the secondary mirror, or, better, by using a 
dedicated, low-inertia, flat mirror located at a real pupil 
just before the focal plane. 


Dome and building 
Ground-based optical telescopes are too complex and 
too precise to be left without protection against sunlight, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(op (Qf 


5m MMT 4.5 m Keck 10 m VLT 8m 
HISD 1979 1993 1998 


Figure 11. Evolution of dome and building size compared with 
telescope diameter. 


heat, and adverse weather. Some kind of enclosure is 
necessary. In addition, OBSERVATORIES require a certain 
amount of supporting equipment and storage space for 
scientific instruments, all of which need to be located in 
the immediate vicinity of the telescope. These must also be 
protected from the elements. Contrary to RADIOTELESCOPES, 
optical telescopes are thus always installed inside an 
enclosure which is closed during the day and opened 
during observations. 

The telescope enclosure can amount to 20 to 40% of the 
total cost of the observatory, however, and the recent trend 
has been to keep costs down by using primary mirrors with 
fast f-ratios and by switching from EQUATORIAL MOUNTINGS 
to alt-az mounts. Figure 11 shows how dramatic the 
reduction of enclosure size has been over the last 50 years. 

While the enclosure protects the telescope and 
telescope chamber from heating by the Sun during the day, 
it can be a source of image degradation at night because 
any temperature difference between the enclosure and 
the ambient air will generate convection cells which may 
travel into the line of sight. The problem is due only to the 
mixing of air parcels at different temperatures from the 
ambient, not to pressure fluctuations due to aerodynamic 
effects, as the corresponding change in the refraction index 
of air is negligible. 

In the best astronomical sites, the temperature drop 
at night is small (annual mean of 1.3°C from sunset to 
sunrise at Mauna Kea, Hawaii), but there are frequent 
short-time-scale fluctuations that a large thermal capacity 
system simply cannot track (standard deviation of 0.5°C 
and average time derivative of 0.6°C h7! in the case 
of Mauna Kea). A very short thermal time constant is 
essential. To minimize these effects the current philosophy, 
first implemented in the 1980s on the pathsetting MMT 
Telescope, is as follows: 


e the telescope structure and optics should be designed 
for a very low thermal inertia (lightweighted or thin 
mirrors, ‘open’ structures); 


e the dome should be wide open at night to maximize 
exposure of the telescope to ambient air and thus quickly 
reach thermal equilibrium. 


A fully opened dome results in an airflow which is 
generally fully turbulent with a Reynolds number of ~ 10° 
10’, but turbulence per se is not a source of degradation if 
the flow is isothermal. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Offices/lab spaces 
not touching the 
telescope pier 


Separate 


foundations _-——~» 


\ua 


Bedrock 


Figure 12. Separating the foundation of the building from that of 
the pier to minimize transmission of dome windshake. 


In this new approach it is important, however, that the 
entire enclosure be well flushed. If there are pockets of air 
at different temperatures, then turbulence can mix these 
different regions and contribute to image degradation. 
The more open the enclosure the better, with open-air 
operation being the ultimate. The drawback is that in 
windy conditions, telescope shake will begin to become 
dominant, so that a compromise between thermal effects 
and dynamic effects has to be found. 

The building and dome present a very large projected 
area normal to the direction of the wind. The associated 
overturning moment causes additional forces on the 
building foundations which can be expected to propagate 
through the soil and into the pier supporting the telescope. 
The effects are strongly dependent on the type of soil, on 
whether it is rock or particulate. In general transmission 
is reduced if (figure 12): 


e the building foundation is structurally separate from the 
pier foundation; 


e connections between the building and the pier and 
telescopes (cabling) are minimized and elastic; 


e the building foundations are built over a damping 
layer (sand, lava cinder), while the pier is mounted on 
bedrock; 


e the pier foundation is at a lower level than the building 
foundation. 


Control of man-made seeing 

Temperature inequalities between the ambient air and 
the mirrors, telescope structure and enclosure create 
convective turbulence along the path near the telescope 
which can easily degrade image quality as much as 
poor optics or a misaligned system. Designers of large 
telescopes since the 1960s have taken great care to reduce 
this effect in order to benefit fully from the intrinsic quality 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the observatory sites. As explained above, enclosures 
are designed to have low thermal time constants and 
ventilation gates so that they can be flushed effectively 
either by wind or active ventilation so as to reduce ‘dome 
seeing’. But there are several other possible sources 
of ‘man-made seeing’ which should be minimized or 
avoided. 

Convective turbulence above the primary mirror 
can develop for temperature differences as little as a 
fraction of a degree, especially when the mirror is at 
a temperature higher than ambient (a 1°C temperature 
difference will introduce up to 0.5 arc second of image 
degradation). This is a difficult problem to solve because 
of the enormous mass of the mirror which has a time 
constant of several hours. This ‘mirror seeing’ can be 
reduced by several measures: (a) minimizing the thermal 
time constant of the mirror so that it can follow changes 
in ambient temperature relatively rapidly, (b) cooling the 
dome during the day to a temperature close to that of the 
following night, (c) choosing sites where the temperature 
drop during the night is minimal. The thermal time 
constant can be reduced by decreasing the thermal mass 
of the mirror or by increasing the convective heat transfer 
between the mirror and the atmosphere. For example, a 
ribbed honeycomb structure can be incorporated in the 
back side of a mirror to both make it lighter and increase 
its surface area. Forced convection (fans) can be added to 
further reduce the thermal time constant. 

It is also important to minimize the heat generated in 
the telescope chamber coming from electronic racks and oil 
circulating in the hydrostatic pads, as well as from people. 
This can be done by cooling, active ventilation, exhausting 
the warm air away from the building, and by placing the 
control rooms away from the telescope chamber. 


Costs 

Large astronomical telescopes represent major invest- 
ments which require careful estimating and cost control 
during the design and construction phases. Until the early 
1980s, the cost of equatorial telescopes followed a well 
established cost function of the aperture diameter to the 
2.7th power (figure 13). Using the same technology, build- 
ing 8-10 m class telescopes would have been unafford- 
able. But fortunately a series of technological improve- 
ments made it possible: mastering of the aspheric polish- 
ing process permitted the use of faster primaries (hence 
shorter telescopes), better testing methods and computer 
polishing took the optical figuring process from a black art 
to a deterministic science, the use of the stressed mirror or 
stressed-lap techniques reduced the polishing time drasti- 
cally, the use of the alt-az mount instead of the equatorial 
mount reduced overall mass and thus cost, and the ad- 
vent of computer control made active optics possible and 
allowed for more efficient pointing systems. This lowered 
the cost of telescopes by an order of magnitude, although 
the diameter relationship is still around the same power 
law. To enable the extremely large telescopes (25 to 100 m 
in diameter) which are now under consideration, similar 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Engineering 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


1000 


ri) 


dern alt—az 


Aperture diameter (m) 
im) 


Figure 13. Cost models for ground-based and space-based 
astronomical telescopes (all costs expressed in 1996 US dollars). 


technological innovations will be needed, perhaps by us- 
ing spherical or fixed primary mirrors. 


Bibliography 

Bély P Y and Breckinridge J B (ed) 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996, 
1998 Space telescopes and instruments I to V Proc. 
SPIE 1494, 1945, 2478, 2807, 3356 respectively 

Burbidge G, Barr L D, Mack B and Stepp L M (ed) 1982, 
1984, 1986, 1990, 1994, 1998 Advanced technology 
telescopes I to VII Proc. SPIE 332, 444, 628, 1236, 2199, 
3352 respectively 

Nelson J E, Mast TS and Faber S M (ed) 1985 The design of 
the Keck observatory and telescope Keck Observatory 
Report 90 

Schroeder D J 1987 Astronomical Optics (New York: 
Academic) 

Wertz J R (ed) 1978 Spacecraft Attitude Determination and 
Control (Dordrecht: Reidel) 

Wilson R 1997, 1999 Reflecting Telescopes vols I, II (Berlin: 
Springer) 

Yoder P R 1992 Opto-mechanical Systems Design (New York: 
Dekker) 


Pierre-Yves Bély 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Mountings (for Amateur Astronomers) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Telescope Mountings (for Amateur 
Astronomers) 


Mounting a telescope is of paramount importance. Unless 
the instrument is absolutely steady, it will be quite useless, 
particularly as the field is bound to be comparatively 
small—and, of course, the higher the magnification, the 
more restricted the field. 

The simplest form of mounting is the altazimuth. The 
telescope can move freely in any direction, either up and 
down in altitude, or east and west in azimuth. Some small 
telescopes are sold on what are termed pillar-and-claw 
mounts, which look very nice, but are about as steady as 
blancmanges. A proper tripod is much better, and if need 
be a camera tripod can be adapted, although it must be 
very firm (See ALTAZIMUTH MOUNTING). 

There is an ever-present problem. As the Earth spins 
on its axis from west to east, the entire sky seems to 
rotate from east to west, so that a telescope has to be 
continuously shifted so as to keep the target object in view. 
With an altazimuth there are two separate motions to be 
taken into account, and hand-guiding can be awkward. 
Slow motions can be added, and this certainly helps, but 
it is fair to say that using an altazimuth telescope for 
photography, when a time exposure is needed, is very 
difficult—although with sufficient skill and patience it can 
be done. 

Most telescopes of more than 3-4 in aperture—either 
REFRACTORS OF REFLECTORS—are given EQUATORIAL MOUNTINGS. 
One common type is the German. Here there is a polar axis 
which is aimed at the pole of the sky, so that it is parallel to 
the axis of the Earth; the telescope is mounted on one end 
of the polar axis, and there is a counterweight on the other 
end. When the telescope is moved round in azimuth (right 
ascension) the up-or-down movement will look after itself. 
Manual slow motions can be fitted, but the ideal is toadda 
driving mechanism, usually electrical, so that the telescope 
is moved round at a rate which exactly compensates for the 
rotation of the Earth. Once the target object has been put 
into the field of view, it will stay there—provided that the 
polar axis is correctly aligned and that the driving clock 
is running at the correct rate. For most types of serious 
observational work a driving clock is more or less essential. 
Many older telescopes, usually refractors, were driven bya 
mechanism involving falling weights, and this does at least 
have the advantage of being unaffected by any changes in 
the supply of electricity. 

There are many forms of equatorial mounts. With 
the Fork, the polar axis is mounted between pillars and 
the telescope is pivoted inside it. The English pattern has 
the polar axis fixed at both ends, and this makes for real 
stability, but there is the disadvantage that the telescope 
cannot be pointed near the celestial pole, so that there is 
a part of the sky which is inaccessible; the Mount Wilson 
100 in reflector is mounted in this way. 

With an equatorial mounting, setting circles can be 
added so that the telescope can be pointed to any particular 
object—provided that the right ascension and declination 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the object are known, together with the sidereal 
time. By now there are many computer—controlled small 
telescopes which can be programmed to swing from one 
target to another. These are of particular use to observers 
who are searching for supernovae in external galaxies. 

A coelostat is a form of optical instrument which 
makes use of two mirrors, one fixed and one movable 
(see SOLARS FEEDS). The light is collected initially by the 
movable mirror, and this rotates so that the light is reflected 
in a fixed direction onto the second mirror. This means 
that the eyepiece does not have to move at all, and 
heavy equipment can be set up in the position where an 
eyepiece would have been in former times, when visual 
observation was always used. The Coudé and Nasmyth 
optical systems make use of this principle. 

The first good, large reflectors were made by 
William Herschel in the late 18th century; all these were 
on altazimuth mountings and were awkward to use. 
Equatorials were then developed, and before long were 
in common use, but mention should be made of the most 
remarkable mounting of all—that built by the third Earl of 
Rosse for his 72 in reflector, completed in 1845. The huge 
tube was mounted between two massive stone walls and 
was pivoted at the bottom, so that it could do no more 
than swing from side to side around the meridian—and it 
could cover only a relatively narrow strip of the sky; the 
observer had to wait until the Earth’s rotation brought the 
target object into view. Nothing like the Rosse telescope 
has been built before or since, but within its limitation 
it worked well. It has now (2000) been restored and is 
once more operational, although it is of course of historical 
value only. 

There is, however, one modern development which 
is of great importance. For many years all large telescopes 
were equatorially mounted, because otherwise they could 
not be mechanically driven. This is no longer the case. 
Computers are now so accurate that a telescope on an 
altazimuth mounting can be driven just as precisely as if 
it were on an equatorial, and the altazimuth pattern has 
many practical advantages. The first large telescope to be 
set up on an altazimuth was the Russian 236 in reflector 
at Mount Pastukhov in Russia, completed in 1975. To be 
honest, the telescope itself has never been a real success; 
the optics are below standard, and the observing site is 
mediocre, but the altazimuth mounting set the pattern 
for all large telescopes which followed, and equatorials 
have been more or less abandoned for all new professional 
instruments. 

So far as amateurs are concerned, an altazimuth 
mounting is suitable only when no photography is to be 
undertaken, and the emphasis is on ‘deep sky’ observation 
rather than higher-magnification views of the Moon and 
planets. Actually, the most elementary form of all is the 
Dobsonian, in which the telescope is pivoted just above the 
mirror inside what is to all intents and purposes a box— 
the box itself being on a rotatable base. Large Dobsonians 
are becoming surprisingly common, even up to apertures 
of as much as 24 in, although the fact that they cannot 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescope Mountings (for Amateur Astronomers) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


easily be mechanically guided means that they are limited 
in scope (See DOBSONIAN TELESCOPE). 

Making an equatorial mounting is by no means 
difficult, and an electrical drive can be added if needed. 
There is no doubt that observing becomes much more 
pleasurable when the telescope will keep the object firmly 
in view without having to be constantly adjusted by hand. 

One final point is worth making; it is a principle 
laid down many years ago by W H Steavenson, a well- 
known amateur astronomer who because a world expert 
on telescope construction and even served as President of 
the Royal Astronomical Society. ‘If you mean to construct 
amount fora telescope’, he wrote, ‘work out the maximum 
possible weight that the mounting must be. Once you have 
decided this—multiply by three.’ 


Patrick Moore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Telescopes in History 


The precise origins of the optical telescope are hidden 
in the depths of time. In the thirteenth century Roger 
Bacon claimed to have devised a combination of lenses 
which enabled him to see distant objects as if they 
were near. Others who have an unsubstantiated claim 
to have invented the telescope in the sixteenth century 
include an Englishman, Leonard biccss, and an Italian, 
Giovanni Batista Porta, whose spyglass was manufactured 
in Holland for military purposes. 

However, a Dutch spectacle-maker from Middleburg, 
Hans LIPPERHEY, is usually credited with making the first 
true refracting telescope in 1608. The new instrument was 
soon being used by the English mathematician Thomas 
HARRIOT and by Simon Marius in Germany to study the 
night sky. But it was GALILEO GALILEI, then Professor of 
Mathematics at the University of Padua in Italy, who 
was the first to construct a telescope for systematic 
astronomical observations. 

The news of the Flemish invention reached Galileo 
early in 1609. After a few trials, ‘sparing neither labor 
nor expense’, he succeeded in arranging two lenses, one 
convex and one concave, inside a tube, so that they would 
magnify an object by a factor of three. This rapidly evolved 
into a more powerful instrument capable of magnifying 
objects 30 times (see GALILEAN TELESCOPE). 

With his improved telescope, Galileo was able to turn 
his attention to the heavens. His startling discoveries 
were described in the book, Sidereus Nuncius (The Sidereal 
Messenger), which was published in March 1610. In it he 
wrote: 


(Ihave seen) stars in myriads, which have never 
been seen before, and which surpass the old, 
previously known, stars in number more than 
ten times. But that which will excite the greatest 
astonishment by far ... is this, namely, that I 
have discovered four planets, neither known 
nor observed by any one of the astronomers 
before my time. 


This momentous discovery of Jupiter’s four major 
satellites (now dubbed the ‘Galilean satellites’; see JUPITER: 
SATELLITES) demonstrated that bodies other than the Earth 
might have other objects in orbit around them, and so 
supported the Copernican view of the solar system. 

His telescope also enabled Galileo to produce the first 
maps of the Moon, revealing its rough terrain along the 
terminator as it passed through different phases (see MOON 
Maps). Venus, too, was shown to have phases. Even the Sun 
was shown to be blemished as spots appeared and moved 
across its face (see SUNSPOTS). Evidence from his drawings 
suggests that Galileo even saw NEPTUNE in 1613, when it 
was close to Jupiter, but he failed to observe it for long 
enough to recognize that it was not a ‘fixed’ star. 

Galileo’s arrangement of lenses was soon superseded 
by Johannes KEPLER’s system of two convex lenses, though 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Kepler himself does not seem to have actually built such 
an instrument. This seems to have been left to an enemy of 
Galileo, the German Jesuit observer, Christopher SCHEINER 
(1575-1650), who used his improved version to discover 
faculae on the Sun. 

As the power of refracting telescopes increased, a 
series of fundamental discoveries were made. For exam- 
ple, by learning to grind lenses with exceptional accuracy 
and developing an improved eyepiece, Christiaan HUYGENS 
(1629-95) was able to construct instruments which enabled 
him to discover Saturn’s ring system and its large moon, 
Titan. 

However, refractors had two main disadvantages. 
The tendency for the object glass (the main lens) to 
focus different wavelengths of light at different distances 
caused them to produce rings of false color around stars 
and planets (CHROMATIC ABERRATION). This effect could be 
reduced by building telescopes of extremely long focal 
length, but this, in turn, made them cumbersome and 
unwieldy. 

The largest classical refractor, which was used by 
Johannes HEVELIUS (1611-87), was 47 m (155 ft) long, and 
had to be set in place with a hoist. Giovanni Domenico 
CASSINI (1625-1712) later used a huge refracting telescope at 
the newly built Paris Observatory—described by Moliére 
as ‘an eye-glass to frighten people out of their wits’—to 
discover the gap in the rings which is named after him. His 
tubeless instrument comprised a lens which was placed on 
the balcony of the observatory and pointed more or less 
in the intended direction, while the observer stood 27 m 
(89 ft) below in the courtyard, trying to direct the image 
through a magnifying glass. 

In 1671, the same year that G D Cassini moved to the 
Paris Observatory, Isaac NEWTON presented a revolutionary 
new telescope to the Royal Society in London. Believing 
that it would never be possible to make achromatic lenses 
for refracting telescopes, he designed and built the first 
practical reflecting telescope. Although its dimensions 
were modest—the metal mirror was only 1 in (2.5 cm) in 
diameter, and it was just over 6 in (15 cm) in length— 
Newton remarked that it would ‘discover as much as 
any three or four foot tube’ and he forecast that similar 
reflectors 6 feet (1.8 m) in length would ‘perform as much 
as any sixty or hundred foot [18-30 m] tube made after the 
common way’. 

Although Newton was the first to build a reflecting 
telescope, the principle of the reflector had originally been 
suggested by James GrecorY in 1663. However, his design 
proved extremely difficult to build. Whereas Gregory’s 
instrument relied on a parabolic primary mirror with a 
central hole and an elliptical secondary mirror, Newton’s 
simply comprised a parabolic primary which reflected 
light onto a flat, tilted, secondary mirror (see GREGORIAN 
TELESCOPE). 

Avariation on the Gregorian design soon arrived with 
the introduction of the CASSEGRAIN TELESCOPE in 1672. This 
version used a convex mirror inside the focal length to 
reflect the light back through a central hole in the main 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mirror. Today, it is the most common design for large 
reflecting telescopes. However, it was not until the mid 
eighteenth century that either the Gregorian or Cassegrain 
system was fully developed and became widespread. 
Cassegrain himself was never identified. 

Despite these advances, large reflectors remained 
much more difficult to make than refractors, and half 
a century elapsed before they were able to compete on 
equal terms. No important discoveries were made with 
reflecting telescopes until the time of William HERSCHEL 
(1738-1822). 

Herschel was renowned as the best telescope maker 
of his time. At his home in Bath, which he turned 
into a telescope workshop, Herschel experimented with 
different metal alloys in an attempt to find one with a high 
reflectivity, good resistance to tarnishing and reasonable 
ability to hold its shape during daily temperature changes. 
The best speculum metal alloy for his mirrors was found to 
be 79% copper and 21% tin. In 1778, he used this mixture 
for a 6.2 in (16 cm) reflecting telescope with a focal length 
of 7 ft (2.14 m), which he used for his second and third 
sky surveys. In 1782, a year after he used this instrument 
to discover URANUS, he demonstrated its superiority to the 
skeptical Astronomer Royal, Nevil MASKELYNE, at the Royal 
Observatory in Greenwich. 

Upon receiving patronage from King George III, 
Herschel began to construct a giant 40 foot long (12 m) 
instrument with a mirror 48 in (1.2 m) in diameter. 
Completed in 1789, it remained the largest telescope in 
the world for more than half a century. On his second 
night of viewing with this monster, Herschel discovered 
the sixth moon of Saturn, ENCELADUS. Three weeks later, he 
discovered a seventh moon, mimas. Yet he was generally 
disappointed with his gigantic creation. It was clumsy to 
operate, while the mirror tarnished rapidly in the damp 
climate and distorted under its own weight. 

Most of Herschel’s discoveries were made with the 
18.8 in (48 cm) reflector that he made in 1783. This 
instrument made a major contribution to the advancement 
of astronomy when his son, John, installed it at the Cape 
of Good Hope in 1834-8, and was able to survey the LARGE 
and SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUDS, the center of our Galaxy, and 
the wonders of the southern skies. 

The early nineteenth century saw a number of 
improvements in telescope optics. One of the leading 
telescope makers was the Director of the Physical and 
Optical Institute of Munich, Joseph von FRAUNHOFER (1787— 
1826), the inventor of the equatorial mounting. The most 
famous of his instruments was the Great Dorpat Refractor 
which F G W struve set up at the Dorpat Observatory in 
Estonia in 1824. This 9.5 in (24 cm) refractor was used by 
Struve to discover more than 2000 double stars. 

Fraunhofer’s invention of the diffraction grating 
and the later introduction of photography (first used in 
1840) revolutionized optical astronomy and led to many 
discoveries. However, not until 1845 was Herschel’s 
48 inch telescope overtaken in size. Lord Rossz’s 6 ft 
(183 cm) aperture reflecting telescope contained the largest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


speculum metal mirror ever made, and had a light grasp 
more than double that of Herschel’s instrument. Built 
at Parsonstown (now Birr) in Ireland, this instrument 
enabled Rosse to discover the spiral structure of certain 
nebulae (now recognized as galaxies), and to resolve others 
into star clusters. 

Although Jean roucautT (1819-68) introduced silver 
coating for glass mirrors, major astronomical instruments 
were being equipped with speculum metal mirrors as late 
as 1862. The last of the line was the Great Melbourne 
Telescope, whose 48 in (1.2 m) metal mirror required 
repolishing after a few years’ use, and which was generally 
regarded as a failure. 

Whilst reflectors were becoming the most widespread 
astronomical instruments, there was still considerable 
interest in pushing refractors to the limit. The culmination 
of this was the construction of the largest refracting 
telescopes ever built. The 36 in (0.9 m) instrument was 
installed at Lick OBsERVATORY in 1888, and was followed by 
the 40 in (1 m) telescope at YERKES OBSERVATORY in 1897. 

The driving force behind the Yerkes project, George 
Ellery HALE (1868-1938), went on to promote the 
construction of two gigantic reflecting telescopes. The 
100 in (2.5 m) Hooker Telescope on MOUNT WILSON, Which 
was the largest in the world from 1918 until 1948, was the 
first instrument capable of seeing objects that formed early 
in the history of the Universe. 

The 200 in (5 m) Hale Telescope on Mount PALoMaR, 
completed in 1948, was used for photographic studies 
which opened the way to further discoveries. Its giant 
primary mirror was a ribbed casting of Pyrex glass, while 
its parabolic surface was coated with a thin film of highly 
reflective aluminum. In 1976, an even larger 236 in (6 m) 
telescope was completed on Mount Semirodriki in the 
Caucasus region of the Soviet Union. 

For a while, their great weight and the difficulties 
in casting such monolithic mirrors seemed to present an 
insurmountable barrier to the development of still larger 
telescopes. The primary mirror of the Hale Telescope 
weighs 13 tonnes, and was once considered the practical 
limit for telescope size. 

While the giant reflectors were being used to study 
ever smaller fields of view, Bernhard scHmipt (1879-1935) 
was inventing a telescope which could take wide angle 
photographs. The first Schmidt camera, built in 1930, 
used a thin glass corrector plate to overcome spherical 
aberration. It soon spread around the world’s major 
observatories and was incorporated in various hybrid 
designs such as the SCHMIDT-CASSEGRAIN. 

The next major advance was the replacement of 
mechanical control systems by computers. In contrast 
to the Hale Telescope, which used huge motor-driven 
worm wheels controlled by a quartz crystal clock, the 
ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN Telescope, completed in 1975, set a new 
standard in computer control and pointing accuracy. 

Computer control was also the key to the introduction 
of the multiple mirrors and segmented mirrors that broke 
the telescope size barrier. Leading the way was the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes in History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


MULTIPLE MIRROR TELESCOPE (MMT), which was built on 
Mount Hopkins in Arizona in 1977. By using six 72 in 
(1.8 m) mirrors in a circular array on an alt-azimuth 
mounting, the telescope’s effective light-collecting area 
was equivalent to a single 172 in (4.5 m) instrument. One 
of these mirrors was used in the discovery of the first 
gravitationally lensed quasar. 

The revolutionary MMT system was eventually 
replaced by a modern lightweight mirror with a 
honeycomb construction in 1998. Mirrors of this type 
consist of glass ribs between a thin, but rigid, concave 
mirror and a flat back plate. 

In recent years, adaptive and active optics have 
been introduced in an attempt to compensate for image 
degradation caused by the atmosphere. Meniscus 
mirrors, that are too thin to support their own 
weight, and segmented mirrors can now be adjusted by 
computer-controlled servomechanical actuators so that 
they maintain their optimal shape and position at all times. 
Small adaptive mirrors may also be inserted in the light 
path of the telescope to correct atmospheric distortions. 
The EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY’S 138 in (3.5 m) New 
Technology Telescope was one of the pioneers in the 
development of such active and adaptive optics. 

The largest mirrors in the world today, installed in 
the twin Keck telescopes on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, are 
made from 36 hexagonal 72 in (1.8 m) mirrors which 
fit together like bathroom tiles (see UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII 
INSTITUTE FOR ASTRONOMY). These segments effectively create 
a single mirror, 400 in (10 m) in diameter, with four times 
the collecting power of the Hale Telescope. 

Another new technique that will eventually operate 
on the Keck telescopes is optical interferometry. Light from 
nearby, but separate, telescopes is combined so that the 
resulting image is equal to that received from a single giant 
telescope. 

The European Southern Observatory started con- 
struction of the world’s largest optical interferometer in 
1996. The Very Large Telescope (VLT) in northern Chile 
will eventually combine the light from four 315 in (8 m) 
telescopes, producing a performance equivalent to that of 
a 630 in (16 m) instrument. 

Meanwhile, advances in technology have also 
enabled scientists from the University of Arizona, Ohio 
State University and German and Italian astronomical 
research institutions to cast the largest single-piece mirror 
ever made. The LARGE BINOCULAR TELESCOPE at Mount 
Graham Observatory in Arizona will eventually be 
equipped with two 331 in (8.4 m) primary mirrors which 
have a thickness of only 1.1 in (28 mm) in the center and 
35 in (894 mm) at the edge. These will provide an image 
comparable to that of a single 75 ft (23 m) telescope when 
construction is complete in 2002. 

Such advances have, at least partially, nullified the 
advantages of placing telescopes in space. However, 
despite its relatively small 95 in (2.4 m) mirror, the HUBBLE 
SPACE TELESCOPE (launched in 1990) continues to return 
some of the highest resolution optical images of faint 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


galaxies located billions of light years away. An 8 m 
class replacement with a folding mirror, known as the 
Next Generation Space Telescope, is in the pipeline for 
a 2008 launch(see SPACE INSTRUMENTATION: NEXT GENERATION 
SPACE TELESCOPE). Multiple space telescopes using optical 
interferometry, which will be capable of imaging Earth- 
size planets around nearby stars, are envisaged for the 
following decade. 


Peter Bond 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes of the Future 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Telescopes of the Future 


New telescopes, new detectors and new regions of the 
electromagnetic spectrum have often revealed totally 
unsuspected aspects of the universe. Consider the careful 
spectroscopic observations of nebulae started around 
1912 by Vesto Slipher, using the modest 24 in (61 cm) 
telescope of Lowell observatory. The recession velocities 
of thousands of kilometres per second that he found were 
completely unexpected and, only in 1917 did Willem de 
Sitter begin to understand them as galaxies in an 
expanding universe. Dark matter, a still unidentified form 
that outweighs all normal matter in the universe and 
controls the condensation of matter after the big bang, 
was discovered by Fritz Zwicky and Vera Rubin during 
spectroscopic observations to weigh galaxies. The rapid 
motions reflected a gravitational pull too large to be 
accounted for by ordinary matter in stars and interstellar 
material. The microwave background radiation, the 
cooled light of the big bang itself, was completely 
unforeseen by its Nobel-prize-winning discoverers, Arno 
Penzias and Robert Wilson (although not by others). 

What common threads may be found in these and the 
many other unexpected discoveries in astronomy? Very 
often the observers were pushing new equipment to its 
limits to accomplish a highly focused goal unrelated to 
the actual discovery. Slipher was hoping that the diffuse 
nebulae might turn out to be nearby planetary systems in 
formation. Zwicky and Rubin were using the largest 
telescopes to see fainter objects than ever before. Penzias 
and Wilson were testing a highly sensitive new type of 
radio telescope for communications. 

More generally, unforeseen discoveries are made 
when the range of observations is enlarged. This happens 
whenever new parts of the electromagnetic spectrum are 
opened for observation. New vistas are also opened when 
larger telescopes or better detectors allow us to reach 
fainter objects or bigger samples or to study brighter ones 
in more detail or with better time resolution. 

A major new development in astronomy that is likely 
to drive new instruments in the coming decades is the 
exploration of exoplanets, the planets of other stars. The 
existence of other living worlds like our own has been 
the subject of speculation for centuries. However, 
telescopes have not been powerful enough to discern 
extrasolar planets. In the solar system, the Earth already 
occupies the prime location and our neighbours appear 
too hot or too cold. Now at last, with clear evidence that 
giant planets exist around other stars, we have the 
technical capability and the incentive to build radical new 
telescopes to study them. With them we should be able to 
find planets even as small as Earth and to search their 
spectra for the biochemical signs of life. The potential for 
unforeseen discovery is enormous. The first discoveries 
have already revealed completely unpredicted 
phenomena: planets of Earth’s mass orbiting a pulsar and 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


planets with the mass of Jupiter orbiting closer to their 
stars than does Mercury to the Sun, a place far too hot for 
them to form. 


Ground telescopes come of age 

During the 40 yr after the Palomar 200 in (5 m) telescope 
came into operation, the power of optical telescopes 
increased enormously, even though no significantly 
bigger instrument was built. The gains were made by 
improving detector sensitivity 100-fold to reach the 
fundamental limit set by photon noise, by extending 
detector sensitivity into the infrared and by multiplexing 
so that dozens or hundreds of objects could be analysed 
at once. However, as these advances have reached their 
limits, the past decade has seen the construction of a new 
generation of much larger telescopes. Starting with the 
two 10 m Keck telescopes, there are now around a dozen 
of size 6.5—10 m in operation or under construction. With 
such an increase in collecting area, some profound 
unforeseen discoveries can be expected. This will be 
especially true when these telescopes are able to remove 
atmospheric blurring and are linked together as 
interferometers. Until now, astronomers have had to 
choose between small-aperture telescopes in space that 
are free from blurring (the Hubble Space Telescope or 
HST) or large-aperture telescopes on the ground with 
blurring. Adaptive optics is a new technique that will 
give both advantages at once. In fact, because the natural 
limit to resolution set by diffraction improves in 
proportion to aperture, the bigger ground telescopes will 
be several times sharper than HST. 

The key element in adaptive optics is a mirror whose 
shape can be altered rapidly in response to the measured 
atmospheric distortion. By giving the mirror equal but 
opposite distortion, the original image sharpness is 
restored. It has been difficult to make the measurement 
and correction fast enough to keep up with the constantly 
changing turbulence, but today’s detectors and computers 
make it possible. Correction of bright objects has already 
been accomplished and in a few years we should start to 
see sharp images of even the faintest objects corrected at 
infrared wavelengths. When a target itself is too faint to 
allow fast measurement of atmospheric distortion, an 
artificial star created by a laser searchlight may be used 
as a surrogate. Experimental laser systems are in 
operation, although the combination of exquisite tuning 
and high power needed to excite scattering very high in 
the atmosphere is proving elusive. 

Once adaptive optics is in place, another technique to 
increase the scope for discovery becomes possible. This 
is interferometry, long used by radio astronomers, which 
relies on combining the waves from separate telescopes. 
By measuring the strengthening and weakening of 
intensity as the crests and troughs reinforce or cancel out, 
images with greatly increased angular resolution are 
obtained. Interferometry can be extended to optical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes of the Future 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


wavelengths for very high-resolution imaging, but 
sensitivity is poor unless all the waves from each dish 
add together coherently. In the presence of atmospheric 
distortion, coherent addition is possible only when very 
small apertures are used. However, once the full 
apertures of the large telescopes are corrected with 
adaptive optics and used as interferometer elements, very 
faint objects will become accessible. 

All of the largest telescopes have been built as 
multiple units in anticipation of interferometry: Europe’s 
Very Large Telescope (VLT) consists of four telescopes, 
while the Keck and Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) 
each have two (figure 1). Because the LBT mirrors are on 
a common mounting and closely spaced, as an 
interferometer it will act like a 22 m telescope with a 
resolution of 10 marcsec and high infrared sensitivity to 
complex, faint sources over a wide field of view. It will 
be able to find and analyse the thermal spectrum emitted 
by self-luminous giant planets, younger versions of our 
own Jupiter. The VLT and Keck telescopes are separately 
mounted and widely spaced (up to 100 m) for resolution 
as high as 2 marcsec over a field of | arcsec, but at the 
price of lower sensitivity and some ambiguity in image 
structure. They should be able to resolve those Jupiter- 
sized exoplanets mentioned above that are so close to 
their stars that they are red hot. 

Now that the construction phase of the current 
generation of big telescopes is winding down, their 
designers are looking at ways to build bigger optical 
telescopes. In California, a single telescope of 30 m 
diameter (the California Extremely Large Telescope) is 
being studied; in Europe, one of 100 m (the 
OverWhelmingly Large telescope). Arizona’s focus is on 
an imaging interferometer with two 20 m moving 
telescopes, the 20/20 telescope. With adaptive optics and 
interferometry, their sensitivity and resolution can 
potentially far outstrip what we have now. The tasks 
foreseen for such telescopes include observations of the 
very early universe at much higher resolution and 
sensitivity than possible with HST and the detailed 
spectroscopic study of Jupiter-like exoplanets. If the 
closest stars have Earth-like planets, they should be 
visible in long exposures with the 20/20 telescope. In 
addition, the prospect of unforeseen discovery is a 
powerful motivator. 

New discoveries are likely not only from such larger 
telescopes and higher-resolution images but also from 
automated analysis of deep-sky images. In the past, 
photographic plates from 1.2 m telescopes covering 6° of 
the sky on a side have provided a rich source of data. 
Electronic detectors are now greatly increasing the 
accuracy, sensitivity and spectral range of these 
measurements. Two digital all-sky surveys with 1.2 and 
2.5 m telescopes are in progress now, with charge- 
coupled device detectors for optical wavelengths in a 
mosaic of area 0.1 m’ and near-infrared detectors of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The LBT, with two 8.4 m mirrors side by side. 
(Drawing by European Industrial Engineering, Mestre, Italy.) 


0.001 m?. The coming decade should see the construction 
of the 8 m Large Synoptic Survey Telescope with 3° field 
(0.5 m m’ detector illuminated at /71.25). The data rate 
will be prodigious, with the night sky repeatedly mapped 
every four clear nights, creating 10 terabytes of data per 
map. Two key goals will be finding and measuring the 
orbits of asteroids as small as 300 m that could hit the 
Earth and mapping the spatial distribution of dark matter 
on large scales. Dark matter is detected through the small 
but systematic distortion it induces in the shapes of 
background galaxies. The data reduction for these tasks is 
big, but well defined. The challenge for computer gurus 
will be to spot the unforeseen—for example, new types 
of erratic variable objects or subtle large-scale 
correlations in data. 


The limitless potential of space 
Despite the evolution of much more powerful ground 
telescopes, space still holds unique and fundamental 
advantages. Complete freedom from atmospheric 
distortion in space will remain a major asset. Even when 
laser guide stars are used for adaptive correction on the 
ground, a nearby background star is still needed to sense 
overall jitter of the sharpened image. Stars are dense 
enough for infrared imaging over most of the sky, but 
optical imaging, which demands more accurate and faster 
stabilization because of the shorter wavelengths, will be 
restricted to fields near a bright star. Tomographic, three- 
dimensional mapping of atmospheric turbulence with 
multiple laser guide stars may be able to relieve this 
optical restriction and open wide-field correction. 
Although possible in principle, this will be very 
challenging. 

The second unique capability of telescopes in space 
is for observations in the blocked ultraviolet and infrared 
spectral regions. Even where it transmits in the infrared, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes of the Future 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the atmosphere is bright from heat and molecular 
emission. Additional background heat comes from the 
ground telescope optics themselves, which cannot be 
cooled because that would cause them to frost. Space 
telescopes can be made extremely cold, for a million 
times reduction in sky background. 

The current generation of space telescopes has 
already shown how these advantages can be exploited. 
HST records wide-field optical images typically 10 times 
sharper than for uncorrected ground-based telescopes and 
reaches far into the vacuum ultraviolet. Its capability has 
been steadily improved by astronauts. For example, a 
new instrument was added to extend imaging and 
spectroscopic capability to the near infrared, where the 
natural sky background from sunlit interplanetary dust is 
much darker than on Earth. HST is likely to remain the 
only large optical telescope in space for astronomy for at 
least the next decade. Its dominance will be weakened by 
a strong challenge from ground telescopes, but perhaps 
that will allow time for more speculative use that could 
lead to unforeseen discovery. 

HST’s mirrors are too warm to be useful further into 
the infrared, where on the ground the atmosphere 
completely blocks transmission. Here three other space 
telescopes, the Infrared Astronomical Satellite, the 
Cosmic Background Explorer and the Infrared Space 
Observatory, all cooled with liquid helium to within a 
few degrees of absolute zero, have revealed the very cold 
universe. New discoveries can be expected from the 
Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF), a new 
helium-cooled telescope with 0.85 m aperture and more 
advanced detectors, which is scheduled for launch in 
2002. It will reach to 160 um wavelength. 

Beyond these telescopes, the potential for future 
space astronomy is limitless. In principle, arbitrarily high 
sensitivity and resolution can be achieved at any desired 
wavelength by making the telescope large, accurate and 
cold enough. Space is an ideal environment, because not 
only is atmospheric degradation removed but so also are 
gravity and wind. This is a huge advantage because, 
under such forces, big objects bend more than small ones, 
whereas, no matter how big a telescope is made, the 
mirror surface accuracy cannot be relaxed if the waves 
are to be reflected to a sharp focus. 

What might a future telescope look like, built for 
operation in orbits far from the Earth where distorting 
forces are minimal? The actual working part of a 
telescope mirror is the top layer of the reflecting surface, 
which is only a few hundred aluminum or silver atoms 
deep. Thus there is the possibility in space of using 
extremely thin membrane mirrors covering hundreds or 
thousands of square metres, if a way can be found to hold 
the shape. One way is to stretch a membrane flat from the 
edge and then to curve it very slightly by electrostatic 
force. An experimental telescope made in this way from 
a membrane 600 nm thick (a few thousand atoms) was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


used to record the image shown in figure 2. While very 
small, this mirror paves the way for larger-membrane 
telescopes, with tests planned first on the ground and 
then in space. 

For such gossamer telescopes in space, the main 
disturbance comes from sunlight, which both warms 
spacecraft and pushes them. Light pressure was strong 
enough to disturb noticeably the orbit of the 100 ft 
(30.5 m) Echo balloon satellite launched in 1960 (only 
4yr after Sputnik) and would blow a 600 nm thick 
membrane right out of the solar system. Gossamer 
telescopes thus would have to be shielded from sunlight, 
but the shields must be lightweight too, and held off the 
telescope somehow, for solar pressure would push a 
freely orbiting shield into collision with the shielded 
mirror. Future gossamer telescopes may look more like 
sailing ships than the telescopes we now know. 

Suppose at some time we find a planet that shows 
clear chemical evidence of life. Could we image it? The 
largest space telescopes we can conceive do not use 
mirrors at all and are extremely heavy, focusing light by 
gravitational bending. Figure 3(a) shows how multiple 
images of the same very distant galaxy are formed and 
distorted into magnified arcs by an intervening blob of 
dark matter, traced out by the brighter galaxies held 
in its gravitational field. The distortion was removed to 
yield the image shown in figure 3(b). Our deepest views 
of the distant universe will probably rely on finding 
chance alignments like this to aid our biggest ground and 
space telescopes. There is no chance that a nearby black 
hole will lie conveniently in front of and magnify an 


Figure 2. The moon imaged with a membrane telescope. The 
7/500 primary mirror, curved by electrostatic force, had a 
thickness of 600 nm and a diameter of 6 mm. (Reproduced from 
Angel et al 2000.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes of the Future 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Imaging distant galaxies. (a2) HST image showing multiple blue images of a distant background galaxy magnified by 
gravitational lensing. (From HST archive.) (6) Rectified image of the galaxy. (Reproduced from Tyson et al 1997.) 


interesting planet, but we could use the Sun as a 
gravitational lens by sending a detector out of the solar 
system in the opposite direction to the planet. Once it is 
far enough away, more than 600 times the radius of the 
Earth’s orbit, light from the planet bent around the Sun 
will be brought to a focus, forming a large image. Taking 
a detector to such distance may sound difficult, but it is 
still far easier than interstellar travel to even the nearest 
star, 1000 times further away. 


The next space telescopes 
The astronomy community has identified two key 
scientific goals to shape the development of more 
powerful space telescopes. One is to probe deeply the 
highly redshifted early universe, of which we have 
caught the first glimpse with HST. It is best observed in 
the virtually unexplored 2-5 wm region of the 
electromagnetic spectrum where the natural sky 
background is darkest. The other goal is the exploration 
of other planetary systems, with particular emphasis on 
looking for Earth-like planets, which will be restricted to 
only the very nearest stars from the ground. This is best 
attempted from space by detection of the infrared heat 
emitted by planets (10-20 um) rather than the starlight 
they reflect. Their thermal emission is much brighter 
relative to the star, and the spectroscopic signatures of 
key diagnostic molecules, water and ozone, could be very 
strong, as they are in Earth’s spectrum. Ozone would be 
of enormous interest, as in our atmosphere it is of 
biological origin. 

Remarkably enough, both these major scientific 
objectives involve similar technical advances in the 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


previously neglected shorter wavelengths of the thermal 
infrared spectrum. Both need mirror temperatures in the 
range 30-100 K, which should be reachable without 
expendable refrigerants by carefully shielding against 
solar heating and by lofting so far from the warm Earth 
that it appears no bigger than the Moon. Mirrors even 
larger than HST’s 2.4 m are desirable in both cases, once 
the technology can be developed to make them. The 
extreme lightweighting of membrane structure is not yet 
needed, but the passive, rigid mirrors that are the current 
standard for all space telescopes will no longer be 
adequate. We will have to learn how to transfer to space 
the key technology that has made the new, big ground 
telescopes possible—namely, active control to correct 
distortion caused by mechanical or thermal disturbance. 
Ground telescopes automatically check star images as 
fast as every minute and make appropriate corrections of 
alignment and mirror distortion to maintain optical 
quality. 

Detailed studies are being made of a telescope 
envisaged to succeed HST, the Next Generation Space 
Telescope (NGST), with a primary mirror 8 m in 
diameter operating at a temperature of 50 K (figure 4). 
Because the practical limit for a telescope launched in 
one piece is 4-6 m, depending on the size of future 
rocket fairings, it would be necessary to build the mirror 
and telescope in space. Planning has so far focused on 
automatic deployment from an unmanned payload. The 
whole spacecraft will have to weigh a lot less than HST, 
even though the telescope has ten times the mirror area, if 
it is to be carried a million miles from the Earth. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes of the Future 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. Evolution of infrared space telescopes. Shown to 
relative scale are SIRTF, a 0.85 m cryogenic telescope to be 
launched in 2002, and a concept for the 8 m NGST. Both will 
orbit far from the Earth, with thermal shields on the Sunward 
side. 


The mind-stretching NGST goal has been a most 
effective way to focus research in universities, industry 
and government centres. New technologies have been 
identified and development work is going on in many 
areas. As an example, Jim Burge at the University of 
Arizona has been devising ways to take the mature 
technology used at the Mirror Laboratory for 8 m glass 
mirrors for the ground (weighing 18 tons) and produce an 
8 m mirror in space weighing less than | ton. The idea, 
demonstrated 4 yr ago at the 0.5 m scale, is to keep only 
the first couple of millimeters of the reflecting glass 
surface and replace the rest with an ultralightweight 
carbon fibre truss. Figure 5 shows the 2 m diameter, 2 
mm thick facesheet that will be connected to a truss by 
166 active screw actuators. The whole prototype mirror 
assembly is 1/20 the weight of the 2.4 m HST mirror. 

Although ultralightweight active mirrors are vital, 
they are but one of a range of challenging new 
technologies being studied for NGST. For example, 
passive cooling to cryogenic temperature is new and in 
order to cool an 8 m telescope to 50 K the sunshield 
shown in figure 4 must be the size of a tennis court. It 
must be such a good insulator that less than 1/1000 of the 
heat from the full blast of the Sun is allowed to leak 
through to be radiated into space. If, as currently 
conceived, the huge, flimsy NGST structure and 
sunshade are to deploy automatically, how does one test 
it beforehand in the Earth’s gravity to be sure it will 
work? 

An even more ambitious target has been set for the 
investigation of Earth-like planets. The basic approach is 
to detect their heat with a special form of interferometer 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. A 2 m hexagonal concave glass mirror is lifted clear 
after separation from the support on which it was thinned and 
polished. It is 2 mm thick and weighs just 30 Ib (13.6 kg). 
(Image courtesy of J. Burge.) 


in space. The beams from the different mirrors must be 
brought together with an accuracy of a nanometer despite 
tens of metres separation. Such accuracy is needed to 
fully cancel out the star’s electromagnetic waves by 
maintaining the crests and troughs exactly out of phase, 
while leaving the planet image intact, a technique known 
as nulling interferometry. A mission called Terrestrial 
Planet Finder (TPF) is envisaged to explore not just the 
nearest few stars but over a hundred Sun-like stars out to 
a distance of 50 ly. This would require four or more 
cryogenic 4 m telescopes spread out over 100 m. They 
could be connected mechanically or orbited separately in 
formation. 


Reliable and affordable solutions 

Now that these scientific goals and the range of technical 
challenges required to accomplish them are identified, we 
must find the best path to proving solutions that will 
work reliably and will be affordable. Perhaps the best 
approach is an_ evolutionary process based on 
intermediate missions, each aimed at three goals: first, 
testing out one or more of the key technologies needed 
for the full-scale NGST and TPF missions; second, 
proving that new technology can be delivered affordably; 
third, using it for astronomical exploration. 

The last requirement is crucial. The only way to find 
unanticipated flaws is by attempting challenging 
observations in space. Because each of the multiple 
technological developments for NGST and TPF is 
profound, any one of them alone could be used to open 
new scientific frontiers. Consider what might be done 
relatively soon. Even an old-fashioned, rigid telescope, if 
taken far from the Earth and passively cooled to 30 K, 
could open a new window to the high-redshift universe. 
A warm, 4 m, ultralightweight telescope could test 
autonomous active control for high-contrast images and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopes of the Future 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


see further than HST. A short nulling interferometer with 
proven, | m class cryogenic mirrors in a distant cold orbit 
could already find and obtain images and spectra of any 
Earth-like planets around the very nearest stars. 

Such missions could also be configured to test 
solutions to what may be the most difficult problem, 
namely how to endow remote, cold observatories with 
HST-like longevity and productivity. If there were no 
possibility of repair and refurbishment, any big space 
telescope of HST-level or greater complexity would 
inevitably be risky and become dated. Space Station 
provides a natural solution, as a base where complete 
large telescopes and spacecraft could be assembled and 
tested in the gravity-free space environment. With solar 
cells deployed, the structure would be pretty flimsy, but a 
low-thrust tug could, in a few months, gently push it to 
the cold, stable point a million miles from Earth. By the 
same means, it could be brought back for repairs when 
necessary. The alternative is to leave the observatory in 
the cold and to send out cryogenic robots to fix it in situ. 

These are exciting times. While we sort out the 
challenges of space telescopes, a golden era of discovery 
should come from the much higher resolution and 
sensitivity and data throughput of big ground telescopes 
and interferometers. Then from space we should be ready 
to open wide the relatively unexplored infrared spectrum, 
which holds such promise for discovery, from the 
furthest reaches of the universe to planets of the nearest, 
ordinary stars. 


Acknowledgments 

This article is a modified version of a previously 
published article: Nature 409 427-430 (2001) 
<http://www.nature.com/>. Reproduced by courtesy of 
Nature. 


Bibliography 

Angel J R P and Fugate R Q 2000 Science 288 455-6 

Angel J R P, Cheng A Y S and Woolf N J 1986 Nature 322 
341-3 

Angel J R P, Burge J, Hege K, Kenworthy M and Woolf N J 
2000 Proc. SPIE 4013 699-705 

Burge J H, Cuerden B and Angel J R P 2000 Proc. SPIE 4013 
640-8 

Tyson T, Kochanski G and Dell’ Antonio I 1997 The Universe 
at Low and High Redshift ed W H Waller, M N Fanelli and 
A C Danks (New York: American Institute of Physics) pp 
204-13 

Tyson J A, Wittman D and Angel J R P Gravitational Lensing: 
Recent Progress and Future Goals ASP Conference Series 
ed T Brainerd and C Kochanek (The Astronomical Society 
of the Pacific) in press 


Roger Angel 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Telescopium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Telescopium 


(the Telescope; abbrev. Tel, gen. Telescopii; area 
252 sq. deg.) A southern constellation which lies be- 
tween Ara and Indus, and culminates at midnight in early 
July. It was introduced to commemorate one of the long 
‘aerial telescopes’ used by the Cassinis at the Paris Ob- 
servatory by the French astronomer Nicolas L de Lacaille 
(1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751-2, and it 
originally included stars from the neighboring constella- 
tions of Ophiuchus (which was larger then than it is now), 
Scorpius, Corona Australis and Sagittarius, but is now re- 
stricted to stars to the south of the last two constellations. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Telescopium is a Telescopii, magnitude 3.5. There 
are no other stars brighter than magnitude 4.0. Interesting 
objects include RR Telescopii, a nova-like star (range 6.5— 
16.5) and the only one recognized as a periodic variable 
before its slow (1600 day) rise to seventh magnitude in 
1944, and NGC 6584, a ninth-magnitude globular cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Teller, Edward (1908-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Teller, Edward (1908-) 


American physicist, born in Budapest, Hungary; at George 
Washington University collaborated with George Gamow 
in studying nuclear beta decay, and astrophysics. Worked 
on the atomic and hydrogen bombs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tempel, Ernst Wilhelm Leberecht (1821-89) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tempel, Ernst Wilhelm Leberecht 
(1821-89) 


German astronomer, born in Nieder-Kunersdorf, near 
Lébau, in Saxony; trained as a lithographer, he settled 
in Italy, and took to amateur astronomy, at first using 
the balcony of a Venetian palace and discovering a 
comet in 1859. Discovered the reflection nebula around 
Merope in the Pleiades. Became astronomer at Marseilles 
Observatory, discovered eight comets (including the 
comet associated with the Leonids) and five minor planets. 
Expelled in 1871 from France he returned to Italy, working 
at the Brera Observatory, Milan, adding to his total score 
of 13 comet and 6 minor planet discoveries, and became 
director of the Arcetri Observatory, where he worked with 
decrepit equipment on nebulae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Temperature Scales 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Temperature Scales 


Three different scales for describing temperature are in 
common use, the Celsius scale, the Kelvin scale and the 
Fahrenheit scale. 

On the Celsius scale, which was devised in 1742 
by the Swedish astronomer Anders Celsius (1701-44), 
temperatures are expressed in degrees Celsius (°C), where 
one Celsius degree is one-hundredth part of the difference 
in temperature between the freezing point and the 
boiling point of water (at standard sea-level atmospheric 
pressure). Because it is based on dividing that temperature 
range into 100 parts, it is also known as the centigrade 
scale. Temperatures below 0°C are given negative values. 

On the Kelvin, or absolute, temperature scale, which 
was named after the British physicist Lord Kelvin (William 
Thomson 1824-1907), the unit of temperature is the kelvin 
(kK), one kelvin being equal in magnitude to one degree 
Celsius. The zero of the kelvin scale is absolute zero, 
the temperature at which, classically, the motion of atoms 
would cease completely and which, therefore, is the lowest 
possible temperature. Absolute zero, 0 K, corresponds to 
a temperature of —273.15 °C. Because the kelvin is equal in 
magnitude to the Celsius degree, a temperature expressed 
in kelvin is equal to the temperature in degrees Celsius 
plus 273.15. Thus, for example, the freezing point of 
water (0°C) is equal to (0 + 273.16) = 273.15 K and 
the boiling point of water (100°C) is equal to 373.15 K. 
To convert from °C to K, add 273.15; to convert from 
K to °C, subtract 273.16. Because the Kelvin scale is 
directly related to the physical meaning of temperature, 
it is the most appropriate scale to use in a scientific 
context. The kelvin is the SI unit of temperature (the 
unit of temperature in the International System of Units) 
and is defined more specifically as 1/273.16 of the 
thermodynamic temperature of the triple point of water. 

Although obsolescent, the Fahrenheit scale, which 
was devised by the German instrument-maker Gabriel 
Fahrenheit (1686-1736), is still used in some contexts. 
On the Fahrenheit scale, the unit of temperature is the 
degree Fahrenheit (°F), which is 1/180 of the difference 
in temperature between the freezing and boiling points 
of water. The freezing point of water is 32°F and the 
boiling point of water, 212 °F. Since 180 Fahrenheit degrees 
corresponds to 100 Celsius degrees, one Fahrenheit degree 
is equivalent to 100/180 (=5/9) of one Celsius degree. 
To convert a temperature in °C to a temperature in °F, 
multiply by 9/5 and add 32. For example, 100°C = (100 x 
9/5) + 32 = 180 + 32 = 212°F. Conversely, to convert from 
°F to °C, subtract 32 and then multiply by 5/9 (for example, 
212°F = (212 — 32) x (5/9) = 180 x (5/9) = 100°C. 


See also: absolute zero. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tenma (Astro-B) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tenma (Astro-B) 


Second Japanese x-ray satellite, launched in February 
1983. Detected x-rays in the range 2-60 keV. Also carried 
a transient source monitor. Ceased operations in 1984. 
Tenma means ‘Pegasus’. (See ASTRO.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tenskwatawa (1768-1837) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tenskwatawa (1768-1837) 


Amerindian, Shawnee leader, member of the Shooting Star 
clan, born in Piqua on the Mad River near Springfield, OH. 
He predicted a solar eclipse in 1806 and became known as 
‘The Prophet’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Terminator 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Terminator 


The line marking the boundary between the day and night 
sides of asolar system object, as seen from the Earth or from 
a spacecraft. As the relative positions of the Earth, the Sun 
and the object shift, the proportion of the object’s sunlit 
side visible from the Earth changes and the terminator 
moves across the object’s disk. The terminator thus 
determines the object’s phase. From the Earth, the Moon, 
Mercury, Venus and Mars show terminators. The Moon’s 
rough terrain gives its terminator ajagged appearance, and 
sometimes elevated features just to the night side of the 
terminator are visible, obliquely illuminated by the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Terrestrial Coordinate Systems and Frames 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Terrestrial Coordinate Systems and 
Frames 


A terrestrial reference system (TRS) is a spatial reference 
system corotating with the Earth in its DIURNAL MOTION 
in space. In such a system, the positions of points 
anchored on the Earth’s solid surface have coordinates 
which have only small variations with time, as a result 
of geophysical effects (tectonic or tidal deformations; see 
TECTONICS, EARTH'S INTERIOR, TIDES). A terrestrial reference 
frame (TRF) is a set of physical points with precisely 
determined coordinates in a specific coordinate system 
(Cartesian, geographic, mapping, ...) attached to a TRS. 
Such a TRF is said to be a realization of the TRS. 


Concepts and terminology 

These concepts were redefined extensively in the 1980s 
by the astronomical and geodetic communities (see for 
instance Kovalevsky et al 1989). 


Ideal terrestrial reference systems 

An ideal TRS is defined as a three-dimensional reference 
frame (in the mathematical sense) close to the Earth and 
corotating with it. In the Newtonian background, the 
geometry of physical space considered as a Euclidean 
affine space of dimension 3 provides a standard and 
rigorous model of such a system through the selection of 
an affine frame (O,£). O is a point of the space called 
the origin. E is a vector base of the associated vector 
space. The currently adopted restrictions on E are that 
it is orthogonal with the same length for the base vectors. 
Moreover, one adopts a direct orientation. The common 
length of these vectors is called the scale of the TRS and the 
set of unit vectors collinear with the base its orientation: 


A=JE F=1,2,3. 


Two major types of TRS are in use. 


e@ In the local or topocentric ones the origin is located on 
the Earth’s surface and the orientation uses the local 
vertical direction for the Z axis. In general, Cartesian 
coordinates or plane coordinates are used. 


e In the geocentric ones the origin is close to the geocenter 
and the orientation is equatorial (the Z axis is the 
direction of the pole). In this case, Cartesian coordinates, 
geographical coordinates or plane (map) coordinates are 
used (see GEOCENTRIC COORDINATE SYSTEM). 


The first type is used for technical purposes 
(laboratory experiments, local topography and surveying, 
...) while the second is the current practice for astrometry 
or global geodesy. In the case of geocentric systems, 
one further distinguishes two subtypes, depending on 
the method used to establish and realize such systems 
(classical terrestrial or space techniques). 


e@ The first is true geocentric which means that realizations 
will be close to the geocenter (a few meters at 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the beginning of satellite geodesy, now a few 
centimeters; see SPACE GEODESY) and the zero MERIDIANS 
of the equatorial orientations will be almost identical 
(currently expressed using the name of Greenwich, for 
historical reasons). 


@ The second is quasi-geocentric (this is a better term 
than non-geocentric, which may be too easily confused 
with topocentric) for systems established with terrestrial 
geodetic techniques usually using a fundamental 
station. In such cases, the origin may be separated 
from the geocenter by several hundred meters. Notice 
also that these systems currently use a zero meridian 
linked to some astronomical observatory and therefore 
should be realigned with the conventional Greenwich 
origin by adopting a longitude for this zero meridian 
with regard to Greenwich. For instance, in Europe, 
several conventional origins are still in use for mapping 
purposes (Paris, Rome, Madrid, ...). 


Under these restrictions, the general transformation 
of the Cartesian coordinates of any point close to the Earth 
from any one TRS to any other one will be given by a three- 
dimensional similarity (T is a translation vector, a scale 
factor and R a rotation matrix): 


xXx = T,.2 + Ar2R12X. 


This concept can be generalized in the framework of a 
relativistic background model such as Einstein’s GENERAL 
THEORY OF RELATIVITY, using the spatial part of a local 
Cartesian frame (Boucher 1986). 


Conventional terrestrial reference system 

Such a system designates the set of all conventions, 
algorithms and constants which determine the estimation 
of coordinates of points in a specific ideal TRS. 


Conventional terrestrial reference frame 

A conventional TRF is defined as a set of physical 
points with precisely determined coordinates in a specific 
coordinate system as a realization of an ideal TRS. 
Two types of frames are currently distinguished (this 
is also valid for celestial references), namely dynamical 
or kinematical ones, depending whether a dynamical 
model is applied in the determination process of these 
coordinates or not. 

Examples of dynamical TRF are ephemerides of 
artificial satellites. This approach is currently widely 
used: EPHEMERIDES of navigation satellite systems, such as 
the Global Positioning System (GPS), or ephemerides of 
satellite radar altimeters used to derive sea surface heights 
ina well-realized TRS (Topex Poseidon, or the forthcoming 
Jason 1). 

However, kinematical TRFs are still the most-used 
type, especially with networks of physical points on the 
topographic surface of the solid Earth for which numerical 
values of coordinates are estimated. We can identify three 
major purposes for the use of such a TRF. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Terrestrial Coordinate Systems and Frames 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


@ Ina metrological approach it is a physical realization of 
a TRS, in the way that standards realize units. 


e In a user-oriented approach the points can be used 
to determine other points (densification or expansion). 
This is a major role for networks. 


e In a geophysical approach the points are deformation 
sensors of the solid Earth’s surface. This has the double 
value of providing data for geophysical knowledge and 
improving the estimation strategy for positions by using 
better geophysical models. 


Networks can be global if they cover more or less 
sparsely the whole Earth or regional if they cover a region 
of the Earth, such asa continent or a country. They can also 
be considered according to their type of coordinate system 
and are then specifically qualified by the following: 


@ horizontal if using plane coordinates or geographical 
latitudes or longitudes; 


@ vertical if using heights; 


e three-dimensional if using Cartesian or Geographical 
coordinates (with ellipsoidal heights); 


@ astronomical, if using astronomical latitudes and 
longitudes. 


Another interesting criterion is the nature of the physical 
points. 


e A classical network uses passive markers or bench- 
marks, available as either a station point or a target for 
the user’s measurements. 


e A permanent network consists of beacons or receivers 
operating permanently and providing data suitable for 
precise determination of their position. This is the 
typical case for space geodetic ground tracking systems. 


e In active networks a permanent station provides 
additional information (on their precise position) 
enabling users to determine positions of other points 
in the same TRS. Such current additional data are the 
raw measurements performed by the station or derived 
from differential corrections such as DGPS. Such data 
are available in real time or not, depending on various 
communication media. 


Realizations of the terrestrial reference systems: 
past, present and future 

Until 1960, the epoch of the availability of the first 
artificial satellites of the Earth, the terrestrial reference 
systems were realized at two levels. The primary 
realization was de facto obtained by the set of the various 
astronomical observatories which observed the Sun, Moon 
and planets, as well as star positions. This was therefore 
an astronomical network in which the longitudes were 
unified only progressively, national observatories keeping 
for a long time their own origin. At the end of the 
19th century, an international origin was adopted, initially 
based on the ROYAL OBSERVATORY, GREENWICH in the UK. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The secondary realizations were developed through 
geodetic activities around the world, mainly driven by 
mapping needs. Since the birth of the triangulation 
method attributed to GEMMA Frisius in 1533, geodetic 
control by triangulation (and precise levelling in the 19th 
century) progressively covered the part of the Earth’s 
surface not occupied by oceans or seas. While the 
shape of these networks was provided by angle and 
distance measurements, their orientation and absolute 
position with regard to the Earth’s body were obtained 
by astronomical measurements (latitude, longitude and 
azimuths). Consequently, each set of geodetic coordinates 
(either geographical or plane) of the control points 
belonging to a given geodetic network constituted a 
specific TRF. Such networks were of local, national or even 
continental extension. The progressive unification of these 
regional networks was developed at the end of the 19th 
and beginning of the 20th century by the establishment of 
international junctions (Channel, Baltic Sea, Gibraltar, . . .) 
and the readjustment of control networks of continental 
size (North American Datum, European Datum, ...). (For 
more details, see Boucher (1989).) 

In 1899, the International Latitude Service was 
established and modified into the International Polar 
Motion Service (IPMS) in 1964. Meanwhile, the Bureau 
International de |’Heure (BIH) was created in 1912 to 
realize an international time scale, which also required the 
Earth orientation parameters (EOPs) to be determined. 

In the late 1950s, new methods using space techniques 
appeared providing extensive information on the gravity 
field and EOPs as well as tracking station positions. 
These space techniques progressively superseded classical 
astrogeodetic methods. A few years of international 
cooperation (MERIT campaign; see Wilkins 1988) started 
an intercomparison of these various techniques (VLBI, laser 
ranging to satellites or to the Moon, radio techniques). 
During this campaign, a fundamental change appeared 
as the primary TRF started to be realized by the three- 
dimensional Cartesian positions of tracking stations, 
replacing astronomical coordinates (Boucher and Feissel 
1984). As a result, the INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION 
(IAU) and the International Union of Geodesy and 
Geophysics (IUGG) decided to replace BIH and IPMS by 
a new service, the International Earth Rotation Service 
(IERS), established in 1988. Its mission was to provide 
to the worldwide scientific and technical community 
reference values for the EOPs and reference realizations of 
internationally accepted celestial and terrestrial reference 
systems. 

The IERS is at present the structure in charge 
of realizing, using and promoting the International 
Terrestrial Reference System (ITRS) as defined by the 
IUGG resolution No 2 adopted in Vienna, 1991. 

The ITRS definition fulfils the following conditions. 


e@ It is geocentric, the center of mass being defined for the 
whole Earth, including oceans and atmosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Terrestrial Coordinate Systems and Frames 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


e The unit of length is the meter (SI). This scale is 
consistent with the TCG time coordinate for a geocentric 
local frame, in agreement with IAU and IUGG (1991) 
resolutions (see TIME SCALES: TERRESTRIAL). This is obtained 
by appropriate relativistic modeling. 


e@ Its orientation was initially given by the BIH orientation 
at 1984.0. The IERS Reference Pole (IRP) and Reference 
Meridian (IRM) are consistent with the corresponding 
directions in the BIH directions within +0.005”. The 
BIH reference pole was adjusted to the Conventional 
International Origin (CIO) in 1967; it was then kept 
stable independently until 1987. The uncertainty of the 
tie of the IRP with the CIO is +£0.03”. 


e The time evolution of the orientation is ensured by using 
a no-net-rotation condition with regard to horizontal 
tectonic motions over the whole Earth. 


See the IERS Conventions (1996) for a detailed description 
of ITRS. 

Realizations of the ITRS are produced by the 
Terrestrial Frame Section of the IERS Central Bureau 
under the name International Terrestrial Reference Frames 
(ITRF); these consist of lists of coordinates (and velocities) 
for a selection of IERS sites (tracking stations or 
related ground markers) obtained by combination of 
several space techniques, currently by VLBI, LLR, GPS, 
SLR, and DORIS. General documentation on terrestrial 
reference systems and frames is available on WWW: 
http://lareg.ensg.ign.fr/ITRF/. 

The ITRS can be connected to the International 
Celestial Reference System (ICRS) by use of the IERS EOPs. 
ITRS is also used as a reference for specific products which 
include TRF data. For instance, the World Geodetic System 
(WGS) program uses ITRS; in particular the most recent 
system, WGS84, is carefully linked to ITRS (Malys and 
Slater 1994) 


Bibliography 

Boucher C 1986 Relativistic effects in geodynamics 
Relativity in Celestial Mechanics and Astrometry 
ed J Kovalevsky and V A Brumberg (Dordrecht: 
Reidel) pp 241-53 

Boucher C 1989 Current intercomparisons between 
CTSs Reference Frames in Astronomy and Geophysics 
ed J Kovalevsky, I I Mueller and B Kolacek 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 324-48 

Boucher C and Feissel M 1984 Realization of the BIH 
terrestrial system Proc. Int. Symp. on Space Techniques 
for Geodynamics ed J Somogyi 

Guinot B 1981 Comments on the terrestrial pole of 
reference, the origin of the longitudes and on the 
definition of UT1 Reference Coordinate Systems for Earth 
Dynamics (Proc. [AU Collog. 56) ed EM Gaposchkin 
and B Kolaczek (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 125-34 

Kovalevsky J, Mueller I land Kolacek B (ed) 1989 Reference 
Frames in Astronomy and Geophysics (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Malys S and Slater J 1994 Maintenance and enhancement 
of the World Geodetic System 1984 Proc. ION-94 (Salt 
Lake City, September 1994) 

Sillard P, Altamimi Z and Boucher C 1998 The ITRF96 
realization and its associated velocity field Geophys. 
Res. Lett. 25 (17) 3223-6 

Wilkins G A 1988 Review of the achievements of 
project MERIT for the intercomparison of techniques 
for monitoring the rotation of the Earth The 
Earth’s Rotation and Reference Frames for Geodesy and 
Geodynamics (Proc. IAU Symp. 128) ed A K Babcock 
and G A Wilkins (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 227-32 


Claude Boucher 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Terrestrial Planets 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Terrestrial Planets 


A collective term for the major planets Mercury, Venus, 
Earth and Mars, which are all ‘Earthlike’ in being of the 
order of 10000 km in diameter, with densities of roughly 
5000 kg m?, having a rock/metal composition with a 
solid surface, and possessing a small number of satellites 
or none at all. Pluto was once counted as a terrestrial 
planet, but once its low size and mass became apparent it 
was excluded from this category. The Earth is the largest 
and most massive of the terrestrial planets. Mercury, 
the smallest, is also the densest, and possesses the most 
rarefied atmosphere. The densest atmosphere, with a 
surface pressure 90 times the Earth’s, is on Venus. Mars is 
the least dense terrestrial planet. 


Compare: giant planets. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tethys 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tethys 


Amid-sized icy satellite of Saturn, discovered by Giovanni 
Cassini in 1684. Its diameter is 1060 km, and its orbital 
distance from Saturn is 295000 km. The parts of Tethys 
imaged in the Voyager missions show a variety of terrains 
with different crater densities. The heavily cratered side 
contains a large impact feature, the 440 km diameter basin 
Odysseus, a ‘relaxed’ structure with signs of an inner 
mountain ring. On the hemisphere opposite Odysseus 
is a lightly cratered plain cut by Ithaca Chasma, a huge 
valley system of multiple faults over 100 km across at its 
widest and around 1000 km long, whose formation may 
be linked with the impact that produced Odysseus. The 
plains are a consequence of resurfacing in the distant past. 
The satellite’s overall density is 1000 kg m~, indicating a 
composition largely of water ice. The orbit is shared with 
two co-orbital satellites, Calypso and Telesto. 


See also: co-orbital satellites, Saturn: satellites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Themis 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thémis 

The Thémis ‘Telescope Heliographique pour I’Etude des 
Instabilites Magnetiques sur le Soleil’, telescope has been 
built and is operated in the frame of a cooperation between 
the CNRS-INSU (Conseil National de la Récherche 
Scientifique-Institut National des Sciences de l’Univers, 
France) and the CNR (Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Italy). 

The telescope is located at the ‘OBSERVATORIO DEL TEIDE’ 
in Tenerife (Canary Islands, Spain) which is operated 
by IAC (INSTITUTO DE ASTROFI SICA DE CANARIAS) under the 
International Agreements on Astrophysics between Spain 
and many other countries. The site coordinates are: 
longitude 16 30 31.6, latitude 28 18 13.8, altitude 2456 m 
above sea level. A total of about 15 permanent staff are 
working at Thémis, in cooperation with several French and 
Italian research groups (DASOP-Meudon and DT-INSU in 
Paris, Midi-Pyrenees in Toulouse, Arcetri Observatory and 
University in Florence, University Tor Vergata in Rome). 

Thémis is a 90 cm diameter Ritchey—Chrétien altaz- 
imuthal telescope conceived to observe solar magnetic 
structures in the visible spectrum with high (spatial, spec- 
tral and polarimetric) resolution. The design of the tele- 
scope has been realized to minimize the instrumental po- 
larization. 

The main observing modes offered by Thémis are 
MTR (Multi Lines Spectroscopy), MSDP (Multi Channel 
Subtractive Double Pass Spectroscopy), both with or 
without polarization analysis, and IPM (Italian Panoramic 
Monochromator) without polarization analysis. 

MTR gives high-resolution spectra simultaneously in 
several spectral lines and sequentially in the four Stokes 
parameters. MSDP gives high spectral resolution imaging 
simultaneously in several spectral intervals. IPM allows 
very narrow-band imaging scanning a line profile. 

For further information see 
http: / /www.obs-nice.fr/themis 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Thabit Ibn Qurra, Abu’l-Hasan (836-901) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thabit Ibn Qurra, Abu’l-Hasan 
(836-901) 


Astronomer, born in Harran, Mesopotamia (now Turkey), 
became court astronomer in Baghdad, translated Greek 
works on mathematics and wrote on astronomy, including 
Concerning the Motion of the Eighth Sphere, on the apparent 
motions of the stars, analysed the movements of Sun and 
Moon and wrote treatises on sun-dials. Some of his books 
were translated into Latin by Gherard of Cremona and 
distributed in Europe. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Thales of Miletus (624-546 Bc) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thales of Miletus (624—546 Bc) 


The first known Greek philosopher; also a scientist, 
mathematician and engineer, born in Miletus, Asia Minor 
(now Turkey), believed to have been the teacher of 
ANAXIMANDER. Apparently wrote a book on navigation, 
defining the constellation Ursa Minor and using it as a 
navigation aid. Credited with the prediction of an eclipse 
of the Sun in 585 Bc, although it is not known how, since 
the Metonic cycle was known only for eclipses of the 
Moon at this time (eclipses of the Sun are harder to spot 
since solar eclipses are visible at different places on Earth, 
whereas lunar eclipses can be seen from half the Earth). 
Nevertheless the eclipse stopped the war between the 
Medes and the Lydians, according to Herodotus. Thales 
determined the height of pyramids by measuring the 
length of their shadow at the moment when a man’s 
shadow is equal to his height. He taught that ‘all things 
are water’, which may seem an unpromising hypothesis, 
but was the first expression of the idea of explaining 
different phenomena from a common underlying cause, 
and foreshadowed scientific theory. Like the Egyptians, 
Thales believed that the Earth was a flat disc floating on 
an infinite ocean, explaining earthquakes as the shaking of 
the floating ‘boat’. Thales was gazing at the sky one night 
and fell into a ditch, causing a servant girl to ask ‘How 
do you expect to understand what is going on up in the 
sky if you do not even see what is at your feet’ (the first 
absent-minded professor joke). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tharsis Montes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tharsis Montes 


The official name of the region on Mars known as the 
Tharsis Ridge or Tharsis Bulge, a large raised area in the 
northern hemisphere of Mars, centered at 2.8 °N, 113.3 °W. 
It takes its name from the ancient Spanish town known 
formerly as Tartessus. Tharsis is a large uplifted area, 
measuring 2105 km across at its greatest dimension, which 
contains the planet’s most prominent volcanoes. In a 
1000 km chain from northeast to southwest lie Ascraeus 
Mons (rising to 26 km above Mars’s average surface level), 
Pavonis Mons (18 km) and Arsia Mons (20 km), all of which 
are 150 km or so across, while 1000 km to the northwest is 
the solar system’s largest volcano, Olympus Mons. These 
peaks apart, the highest point on the Tharsis Bulge is 
the complex fractured terrain named Noctis Labyrinthus, 
with an elevation of 11 km. This is part of an extensive 
fracture system aligned approximately on the center of 
Tharsis; other prominent fractures are Ceraunius Fossae to 
the north and Claritas Fossae in the south. From the east 
of the Tharsis region, the giant canyon system of Valles 
Marineris extends eastward. It may be that the whole 
region was uplifted by an upwelling in the underlying 
mantle, possibly as a consequence of the event that created 
the impact basin Hellas on the opposite side of the planet. 


See also: Hellas Planitia, Mars: surface, Olympus Mons, 
Valles Marineris. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 


The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey (2dFGRS) produced a 
three-dimensional map of the distribution of 221000 
galaxies covering 5% of the sky and reaching out more 
than 3 billion light-years to a redshift z=0.3. The survey 
used the Anglo-Australian Telescope’s (AAT’s) 2-degree 
Field facility (2dF), which could observe 400 objects 
simultaneously over a 2° diameter field of view. Survey 
observations began in 1997 and were completed in 2002; 
the final survey was an order of magnitude larger than 
any previous redshift survey. 

The 2dFGRS yielded the first map of the large-scale 
structure in the local (low-redshift) universe to probe a 
statistically representative volume on scales from tens 
of kiloparsecs to hundreds of megaparsecs. Analysis of 
the map gave the first direct evidence that the large- 
scale structure of the universe grew through gravita- 
tional instability, and provided a precise measurement 
of the mean mass density of the universe. The observed 
structure also displayed a weak signature produced by 
the interactions between baryons and photons in the 
very early universe, providing an estimate of the ratio 
of baryonic matter to dark matter. The combination of 
the 2dFGRS observations of the structure in the present- 
day universe with observations of the structure in the 
very early universe from the cosmic microwave back- 
ground (CMB) gave precise measurements of the 
Hubble constant, and the cosmological constant and 
provided an improved upper limit for the mass of the 
neutrino. 

The massive sample of galaxies observed by the 
2dFGRS has also been used to precisely characterize mul- 
tiparameter distributions and relationships within the 
galaxy population: the distribution of galaxies over lumi- 
nosity, surface brightness, spectral type, star-formation 
rate and environment (local density) and the variation in 
clustering for galaxies of different luminosities and spec- 
tral types. The survey also yielded the first measurement 
of the galaxy bias parameter, which links the fluctuations 
in the number of galaxies and the amount of dark matter 
and is a basic constraint on models of galaxy formation 
and evolution. 


The History of the 2dFGRS 

The seed of the 2dFGRS was planted in the late 1980s, 
when a British astronomy review gave high priority to 
converting existing telescopes to wide-field science, 
especially multi-object spectroscopy. For the AAT, the 
case for such a conversion was greatly strengthened 
when Roderick Willstrop and Charles Wynne showed 
that, with suitable correction optics, the telescope could 
be adapted to permit a 2° diameter field of view at the 
prime focus (Willstrop 1987; Wynne 1989). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


The Anglo-Australian Observatory, under Director 
Russell Cannon and instrumentation scientist Keith 
Taylor, combined this opportunity with its established 
strength in robotic multi-object spectroscopy in order to 
develop a wide-field, multi-object spectrograph: the 2dF 
facility (Taylor and Gray 1990; Gray et al. 1993). With 
massive field-correction optics including an atmospheric 
dispersion compensator, a pair of tumbling focal planes 
to minimize dead time, 400 optic fibers mounted in mag- 
netic buttons, a fully robotic positioning system, and 
end-to-end software for control, configuration, data- 
taking and reductions, 2dF was, for its time, a visionary 
instrument. Construction began in 1990. 

From its conception, the main scientific driver for 
2dF was a massive redshift survey, sampling a represen- 
tative volume of the universe in fine detail in order to 
precisely measure fundamental cosmological parame- 
ters. The best existing and ongoing surveys in the early 
1990s (e.g. the IRAS Point Source Catalogue redshift sur- 
vey and the Las Campanas Redshift Survey) either did 
not cover sufficiently large volumes to be statistically 
representative of the large-scale structure or covered 
large volumes too sparsely to provide precise measure- 
ments. An order-of-magnitude increase in the volume 
and sample size of redshift surveys was required to enter 
the regime of ‘precision cosmology’. This idea was devel- 
oped into a concrete proposal by the founding members 
of the survey team during 1993 and 1994. The first survey 
proposal was submitted to the telescope time committees 
and the AAT Board in 1994, and envisaged a survey of 
250000 galaxies over 2000 deg? to a magnitude limit of 
by=19.5. The survey was estimated to require 125 nights 
on the AAT and was projected to be completed by the 
end of 1996. 

In fact, 2dF was placed on the AAT in November 
1995, and the first spectra were taken in mid-1996. 
Scheduled observations with 2dF at full functionality 
began in September 1997, and the first major redshift sur- 
vey observing run occurred in October 1997. Progress 
with the survey was slow to begin with, but the survey 
passed 50000 redshifts in mid-1999 and 100000 redshifts 
in mid-2000 (Colless 1999). The first 100 000 redshifts and 
spectra were released publicly in June 2001 (Colless et al. 
2001), and the 200000-redshift mark was achieved 
towards the end of 2001. The survey observations were 
completed in April 2002, after 5 years and 272 nights on 
the AAT. 


The 2dF Wide-Field Fiber Spectrograph Facility 

As its name implied, the 2dFGRS was tightly coupled 
to the capabilities of the 2dF of the AAT. The crucial 
parameters of 2dF for a massive redshift survey were 
as follows: (i) the wide (2° diameter) field of view, 
which allowed the 1800 deg? of the survey to be cov- 
ered with 900 overlapping fields; (ii) the large number 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


RO 


ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN TELESCOPE 
TOP END RING 


SPECTOGRAPH 


Figure 1. A schematic of the 2dF facility showing the major 
components of the instrument. (K. Taylor, Anglo-Australian 
Observatory.) 


(400) of simultaneous spectra, which allowed the typi- 
cal number of galaxies in the field of view down to 
by=19.5 to be observed at once; (iii) the 4 m aperture of 
the AAT, which allowed redshifts to be measured for 


North Galactic 


galaxies as faint as by=19.5 in 1 h observations; (iv) the 
capacity for rapid reconfiguration, which meant that 
there was no dead-time between observations of differ- 
ent fields. 

To achieve these complex requirements, a complex 
instrument was required. All the components of 2dF are 
contained in the 2dF top-end ring structure, which is 
mounted at the prime focus of the AAT (see figure 1). 

A photon reflected by the AAT’s 4 m primary mirror 
towards the prime focus encounters, first, the wide-field 
corrector optics (including an atmospheric dispersion 
corrector) that provide a 2° diameter field of view with 
good imaging properties; then it is collected at the focal 
plane by the fiber buttons that route it down the optic 
fibers; finally, it enters one of the twin spectrographs, 
each of which measures the spectra from 200 fibers at a 
time. The total system efficiency is about 5%. 

The fiber buttons are magnetically attached to a metal 
plate in the focal plane. They are positioned on the plate 
by a high-precision robot, which moves over the plate on 
an X-Y stage and has a gripper arm that can be raised or 
lowered to pick or place a button on the plate. The robot 
can position a fiber button on the plate with a precision of 
0.3 arcsec (20 um) in 6 s. In order to maximize observing 
efficiency there are two sets of fiber buttons, and the plates 


North Pole 


— Se | Se 
SaaS ~ 


XN 


eae 60 
~ South Galactic 


—-—-— Ra &Dec SSS Sie Cap 
——— Galactic Equator South Pole 
o 2dF fields 


APM scanned UKST fields 


Figure 2. A map of the sky showing the locations of the two 2dFGRS survey strips (NGP strip at left, SGP strip at right) and the ran- 
dom fields. Each 2dF field in the survey is shown as a small blackcircle; the sky survey plates from which the source catalog was con- 
structed are shown as small red squares. The scale of the strips at the typical redshift of the survey is indicated. (S. J. Maddox, 
University of Nottingham.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 2 


The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. A 3° thick slice through the 2dF Galaxy Redshift 
Survey map. The slice cuts through the NGP strip (at left) and 
the SGP strip (at right). It contains 63 000 galaxies and shows the 
large-scale structures in the galaxy distribution. (J. A. Peacock, 
University of Edinburgh.) 


on which they sit are tumbled between the focal plane 
position and the robot position. This allows the robot to 
configure the fibers on one plate while the fibers on the 
other plate are observing the sky. 

A full technical description of the 2dF facility is 
given by Lewis et al. (2002). 


Survey Observations 

The source catalog for the 2dFGRS survey was a revised 
and extended version of the APM galaxy catalog 
(Maddox et al. 1990), which was created by scanning the 
photographic plates of the UK Schmidt Telescope 
Southern Sky Survey. The survey targets were chosen to 
be galaxies with extinction-corrected magnitudes 
brighter than by=19.5. The galaxies were distinguished 
from stars by an image classification algorithm that was 
conservatively designed to include all galaxies at the 
expense of also including a 5% contamination of the sam- 
ple by stars. 

The main survey regions were two declination 
strips, one in the southern Galactic hemisphere spanning 
80° x 15° around the South Galactic Pole (the SGP strip), 
and the other in the northern Galactic hemisphere span- 
ning 75° x 10° along the celestial equator (the NGP strip); 
in addition, there were 99 individual 2dF ‘random’ fields 
spread over the southern Galactic cap (see figure 2). The 
survey covers approximately 1800° and has a median 
redshift depth of z=0.11. An adaptive tiling algorithm 
was used to optimally place the 900 2dF fields over the 
survey regions, giving a highly complete and uniform 
sample of galaxies on the sky. 

Redshifts were measured from 2dF spectra that cov- 
ered the range from 3600 A to 8000 A at a resolution of 
9.0 A. Redshift measurements were obtained both from 
cross-correlation with template spectra and from fitting 
emissioning lines. All redshifts were visually checked 
and assigned a quality parameter Q in the range 1-5; 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


accepted redshifts (Q>3) were found to be 98% reliable 
and to have a typical uncertainty of 85 km s~!. The over- 
all redshift completeness for accepted redshifts was 92%, 
although this varied with magnitude. 

Figure 3 shows a thin slice through the three-dimen- 
sional map of over 221000 galaxies produced by the 
2dFGRS. The observer is at the center of the map, with 
redshift increasing towards the edge and angle on the 
sky (RA) marked around the circumference. This 3° thick 
slice passes through both the NGP strip (at left) and the 
SGP strip (at right). The decrease in the number of galax- 
ies towards higher redshifts is an effect of the survey 
selection by magnitude—only intrinsically more lumi- 
nous galaxies are brighter than the survey magnitude 
limit at higher redshifts. The clusters, filaments, sheets 
and voids making up the large-scale structures in the 
galaxy distribution are clearly resolved. Importantly, 
there are many such structures visible in the figure, 
demonstrating that the survey volume comprises a rep- 
resentative sample of the universe. 


Cosmological Results 

Although survey observations finished in April 2002, as 
of this writing the scientific analysis of the survey is still 
in progress. So far the main results to emerge have been 
cosmological, in keeping with the primary goals of the 
survey as it was envisaged a decade ago when 2dF was 
being built. 

The first step in this analysis is a statistical charac- 
terization of the large-scale structure in the galaxy distri- 
bution, which in most cosmological models is fully 
described, at least on the largest scales, by just two quan- 
tities: the mean density and the variation in the typical 
size of the fluctuations in the density as a function of 
scale. The latter is best quantified on large scales by the 
power spectrum of the galaxy distribution, which 
Percival et al. (2001) measured from the 2dFGRS on scales 
up to 300 Mpc. The shape of the power spectrum is con- 
sistent with a cold dark matter (CDM) model having a 
shape parameter I = Qyh = 0.20 + 0.03, which, for a 
Hubble constant around 70 km s-! Mpc-! (ie. h = 0.7), 
implies a mean mass density Qy ~ 0.3. The power spec- 
trum also showed the weak signature of acoustic oscilla- 
tions produced by baryon-photon coupling in the early 
universe, allowing Percival et al. to also estimate the mass 
fraction in baryons, Q)/Qy = 0.15 + 0.07. 

The galaxy distribution on intermediate scales pro- 
vides another measure of the mass density, and also a test 
of the fundamental assumption that structures grow due 
to gravitational instability. Under this paradigm, small- 
scale structures are undergoing non-linear collapse, 
while on larger scales structures are collapsing coherent- 
ly. These effects lead to a characteristic distortion of the 
galaxy distribution observed in redshift space, with the 
small, high-density clusters of galaxies stretched out 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


along the line of sight and the larger, moderate-density 
filaments and sheets compressed along the line of sight. 
The first unambiguous detection of these redshift-space 
distortions was obtained from the 2dFGRS by Peacock et 
al. (2001), confirming that present-day structures are due 
to the gravitational amplification of small initial density 
fluctuations. The amplitude of the distortion depends on 
the quantity 6 = 20-6/b, where b parametrizes the bias of 
the galaxies with respect to the overall mass distribution. 
By measuring the compression of the galaxy two-point 
correlation function along the line of sight, Peacock et al. 
obtained 6 = 0.54 + 0.09 for galaxies with luminosities 
similar to the Milky Way. If such galaxies are relatively 
unbiased tracers of the galaxy distribution (i.e. b ~ 1), this 
also implies Qy ~ 0.3. 

Stronger constraints on these and other fundamental 
cosmological parameters were obtained by combining 
the power spectrum of the present-day galaxy distribu- 
tion from the 2dFGRS with the power spectrum of the 
mass distribution at very early times derived from obser- 
vations of the anisotropies in the CMB. Such analyses 
have been carried out by Efstathiou ef al. (2002) and 
Percival et al. (2002), and show that the universe has a flat 
or near-flat geometry (Q, = 0 + 0.05), with a low total 
matter density (Qu, = 0.31 + 0.06) and a large positive cos- 
mological constant (Q, = 0.69 + 0.06, consistent with the 
independent estimates from observations of high-red- 
shift supernovae). The physical densities of cold dark 
matter and baryons are w, = Q,h2 = 0.12 + 0.01 and ay, = 
Q,h2 = 0.022 + 0.002; the latter agrees very well with the 
constraints from big bang nucleosynthesis. The joint 
2dFGRS+CMB analysis also provided an estimate of the 
Hubble constant (Hp = 67 + 5 km s-! Mpc!) that is inde- 
pendent of, but in excellent accord with, the results from 
the Hubble Space Telescope Key Project. Elgaroy et al. 
(2002) showed that these combined constraints place a 
strong upper limit on the neutrino mass fraction, Q,,/ Qy 
< 0.13 (95% confidence), which translates to an upper 
limit on the total neutrino mass (summed over all 
species) of m,< 1.8 eV. 

Another first for the 2dFGRS was the measurement 
of the bias, b, between the galaxy distribution and the 
underlying matter distribution, defined as the square 
root of the ratio of the galaxy and matter power spectra. 
Lahav et al. (2002) measured this ratio using the 2dFGRS 
and CMB power spectra, and found that for galaxies 
with characteristic (L*) luminosities the bias parameter is 
b* = 0.96 + 0.08. An independent analysis by Verde et al. 
(2002), using only the 2dFGRS and based on the higher- 
order correlations of the galaxy distribution in the quasi- 
linear regime, obtained a very similar result: b” = 0.92 + 
0.11. The conclusion is that L* galaxies are nearly unbi- 
ased tracers of the mass distribution. However, Norberg 
et al. (2001, 2002a) showed that the bias parameter does 
vary with luminosity and spectral type, ranging from b = 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


1.5 for bright, early-type galaxies to b = 0.8 for faint, late- 
type galaxies. 

The measurement of cosmological parameters from 
the 2dFGRS has made a significant contribution to shap- 
ing the current consensus model for the fundamental 
properties of the universe that has emerged from a range 
of independent observations, including the measure- 
ments of the CMB anisotropies, the distances to high-red- 
shift supernovae and big bang nucleosynthesis. 


Properties of the Galaxy Population 

Alongside these cosmological studies, the 2dFGRS has 
also yielded a wide range of results on the properties of 
the galaxy population and provided strong new con- 
straints for models of galaxy formation and evolution. 
Highlights in this area to date include the following: (1) 
precise determinations of the optical and near-IR 
galaxy luminosity functions (Cole et al. 2001; Norberg 
et al. 2002b); (2) a detailed characterization of the vari- 
ations in the luminosity function with spectral type 
(Folkes et al. 1999; Madgwick et al. 2002); (3) a determi- 
nation of the bivariate distribution of galaxies over 
luminosity and surface brightness (Cross et al. 2001); 
(4) the first precise measurement of the dependence of 
galaxy clustering on both luminosity and spectral type 
(Norberg et al. 2002a); (5) a constraint on the space den- 
sity of rich clusters of galaxies from the velocity dis- 
persion distribution for identified clusters (De Propris 
et al. 2001); (6) separate radio luminosity functions for 
AGN and star-forming galaxies (Sadler et al. 2001; 
Magliocchetti et al. 2002); (7) constraints on the star- 
formation history of galaxies from the mean spectrum 
of galaxies in the local universe (Baldry et al. 2002); and 
(8) a measurement of the environmental dependence of 
star-formation rates of galaxies in clusters (Lewis et al. 
2002). 

These results are just a fraction of the information 
that can be extracted from the 2dFGRS on the properties 
of galaxies and their relation to the large-scale structure 
of the galaxy distribution. Many more results are still to 
emerge from analysis of the survey and from combining 
the 2dFGRS with other large surveys and with detailed 
follow-up observations. 


Bibliography 

The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey web pages 
(www.mso.anu.edu.au/2dFGRS) contain detailed infor- 
mation about the survey, a gallery of images, an access 
point for the survey database, and a list of all 2dFGRS 
publications. The most relevant publications, referenced 
in this article, are as follows: 


Baldry I, et al. 2002 Astrophysical Journal 569 582 
Cole S, et al. 2001 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical 
Society 326 255 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Colless M M 1999 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London 357 105 

Colless M M, et al. 2001 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 328 1039 

Cross N, et al. 2001 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 324 825 

De Propris R, et al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 329 87 

Efstathiou G, et al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 330 L29 

Elgaroy O, et al. 2002 Physical Review Letters 89 061301 

Folkes, S et al. 1999 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 308 459 

Lahav O, ef al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 333 961 

Lewis I, et al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 333 279 

Maddox §S J, et al. 1990 Monthly Notices of the Royal 

Astronomical Society 242 43P 

Magliocchetti M, et al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 

Astronomical Society 333 100 

Norberg P, et al. 2001 Monthly Notices of the Royal 

Astronomical Society 328 64 

Norberg P, et al. 2002a Monthly Notices of the Royal 

Astronomical Society 332 827 

Norberg P, et al. 2002b Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 336 907 

Peacock J A, et al. 2001 Nature 410 169 

Percival W J, et al. 2001 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 327 1297 

Percival W J, et al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society in press 

Sadler E M, et al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 329 227 

Taylor K and Gray P 1990 Proceedings of the Society of 
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers 1236 290 

Verde L, et al. 2002 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 335 432 

Willstrop R V 1987 Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society 229 143 

Wynne C G 1989 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical 
Society 236 47P 


The 2dFGRS was carried out by a team of 30 Australian 
and British astronomers, led by Matthew Colless (The 
Australian National University), Richard Ellis 
(University of Cambridge and the California Institute of 
Technology), Steve Maddox (Universities of Cambridge 
and Nottingham) and John Peacock (University of 
Edinburgh). A full list of team members can be found on 
the 2dFGRS web pages. 

Matthew Colless 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Colors of Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Colors of Stars 


The colors of the stars are real but not apparent. They are 
not seen by the unaided eye because stars are both intrin- 
sically faint and at the same time minute points of light, 
almost always observed by a more-or-less dark-adapted 
eye. However, the colors of the stars are an important 
and quantifiable observational property that is indicative 
of their surface temperature. This in turn is a function of 
a star’s mass and its evolutionary status. These ideas are 
brought together in the well-known color magnitude 
diagram, a cornerstone of stellar astrophysics (figure 1). 
While in general star colors are not obvious to the 
unaided eye, a few stars (such as Antares and Betelgeuse) 
appear distinctly yellow-orange. However, most of the 
stars that appear similarly bright to the eye, such as those 
that define the constellations, are in reality as blue as the 
daytime sky, although this is not mentioned in the long 
history of non-telescopic stargazing. This is because the 
eye is not good at distinguishing delicate shades of blue 
when light levels are low and when the object size is 
small. Even with a telescope, star colors are usually only 
noted by observers of double stars who sometimes com- 
ment on the contrasting colors of closely adjacent stars. 
The range of color from pale blue to deep 
orange-yellow found among the stars is familiar to pho- 
tographers as the concept of color temperature, most 
usually where filters are required to adjust (for example) 
tungsten lighting to a film designed for daylight use. 
More broadly they are known as blackbody colors and 


SURFACE TEMPERATURE (k) 


88g sg 

ooo i=] S o 
Sseaese & & & & 
aa 2 Saar & Bo ¢+ 8 


Color-Temperature 


Relation Getelpeune 


Aldebaran 
° 


Arcturus 
° 


Alpha Centauri 
° 


COLOUR INDEX (B-V) 


Bo AO FO GO KO Mo 
SPECTRAL TYPE 


Figure 1. Most stars spend most of their lives on the main 
sequence, a narrow range of color and luminosity determined 
by the mass of the star. This diagram shows a few well-known 
stars dotted along the main sequence, plotted according to their 
surface temperature and B-V color index. The background color 
represents the color of the star 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


are the visible part of the radiation from any object that 
is at a temperature above about 1000 K (727 °C). The 
universe is full of such thermal radiation and much of it 
is invisible, originating from bodies much cooler than 
1000 K. The ubiquitous microwave background radiation 
is a remnant of a time when the universe was unimagin- 
ably hot but now corresponds to a temperature of just 
2.73 K above absolute zero. 

The reality of star colors can be demonstrated in sev- 
eral ways. One of the simplest is to look at a bright star 
through a defocused telescope. This is normal practice 
when (for example) manually focusing a telescope using 
a Foucalt knife-edge, so that the star’s light fills the field 
of view (the so-called Maxwellian view). Although I did 
this fairly regularly in preparation for photographic 
observing on the Anglo-Australian Telescope, my color 
memory (or maybe my color discrimination) was never 
good enough to distinguish reliably between randomly 
chosen O and B stars which are hot and bluish, but cool- 
er F and G stars were easier to identify and differences 
between the yet cooler K and M stars were obvious. 

A more convincing demonstration of the reality of 
star colors is a simple photographic experiment that 
involves making a star-trail photograph. From a dark 
site and beneath a clear night sky, a time exposure made 
with a camera loaded with color film captures the long, 
narrow trails of the stars, moved across the film by the 
rotation of the Earth. However, if the lens is regularly de- 
focused in a series of steps every 5 min or so during the 
exposure, the stepwise spreading of the star images on 
the film effectively changes the exposure of each star 
image on the film. At some stage the colors of all the stars 
in the field are revealed. The example included here (fig- 
ure 2) is the constellation of Orion, photographed on 
daylight slide film. 

The realization that some stars were much bluer 
than others came in the 1890s when the relative magni- 
tudes of stars in the early photographic catalogues were 
compared with stellar magnitudes obtained visually. It 
was gradually appreciated that the eye and the early 
photographic plates saw things differently. The plates of 
the time were sensitive only to blue and ultraviolet light, 
while the eye’s maximum sensitivity was in the yel- 
low-green part of the spectrum. This difference between 
the blue (B) photographic magnitudes and the visual (V) 
magnitudes was eventually understood as a way of mea- 
suring the colors of stars, and is the origin of the still 
widely used B-V color index. 

Of course, the eye is no longer used for stellar 
photometry, so this deceptively simple system uses 
optical filters with well-defined characteristics to make 
two measurements in two well-separated color bands, 
nowadays using an electronic detector. Only after two- 
color systems were established was it realized that the 
difference in energy in the two passbands amounted to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Colors of Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. Step focus image of the colors of the stars in Orion, 
made on daylight color film by defocusing the camera lens in a 
series of steps during a normal star trail exposure. 


measures of the slope of the blackbody radiation distrib- 
ution. In the visible part of the spectrum this is seen as a 
color shift. Stars are not perfect blackbodies, but 
allowances can be made for this, and thus measuring 
temperatures using the colors of stars became funda- 
mental to understanding and classifying them. 

The zero point (i.e. white point) of the B—-V color 
index system currently used is defined as an AO star, 
which happens to be the color index of Sirius, the bright- 
est star in the sky. However, AO stars have surface tem- 
peratures of 10000 K, a temperature that we would see 
as quite blue if the star was as big as the Sun in the sky. 
Regrettably, this does not stop astronomers describing 
stars such as Sirius as white and stars cooler than Sirius 
as yellow, or even red. If there are some truly red stars 
they are intrinsically extremely faint. The famous bright, 
so-called red giant stars such as Betelgeuse and Antares 
are actually several hundred kelvins hotter (and there- 
fore bluer) than most domestic tungsten filament lamps. 
Although light from these lamps undoubtedly has a 
‘warm’ color, not even an astronomer would describe it 
as red. 

David Malin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 2 


The Cosmological Constant and its Interpretation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Cosmological Constant and its 
Interpretation 


The cosmological constant was first introduced into the 
equations of general relativity by Einstein himself, who 
later famously criticized this move as his ‘greatest blun- 
der’. His main motivation had been to allow cosmologi- 
cal models featuring a static universe, but this possibility 
swiftly became redundant with Edwin Hubble’s discov- 
ery of the expansion of the universe. Despite this, it has 
periodically been invoked by astronomers to explain 
various phenomena and currently is a key part of the 
standard cosmological model, which seeks to explain 
both the evolution of large-scale universe and also the 
development of structures, such as galaxies, within it. 

The most straightforward description of the cosmo- 
logical constant is that it represents the energy of empty 
space. Usually physical laws only concern the difference 
in energy between two states (nature favouring evolu- 
tion with force directed towards the state of lowest 
potential energy) rather than the absolute value of 
energy, but relativity demands that all energy gravitates 
and so the zero point of energy must be specified. The 
Einstein equation can be written 


Guv = guvd + 8% GT yy 


where G,,, is the Einstein tensor measuring the curvature 
of space-time (which gives the gravitational attraction), 
Tuy is the energy-momentum tensor measuring the prop- 
erties of matter, g,,, is the metric of space-time and A is 
the cosmological constant. Throughout the speed of light 
will be set to c = 1. If A = 0, then an absence of matter 
(Tuy = 0) leads to an absence of space-time curvature, 
but if A is non-zero we have gravity associated with the 
vacuum. 

Although Einstein regretted the introduction of the 
cosmological constant, which certainly reduces the ele- 
gance of the equation, once it has been introduced it 
becomes rather hard to argue that it should not be there. 
There is no fundamental principle to exclude it, and 
indeed as we will see modern particle physics requires its 
consideration. 


Cosmological models 

Cosmological models including a cosmological constant 
are described in detail under COSMOLOGY: STANDARD 
MODEL. The Friedmann equation describes the evolution 
of the scale factor of the universe, R(t), according to 


uae 


where p is the density of matter, k measures the spatial 
curvature and the dot indicates time derivative. If pre- 
ferred, the cosmological constant can be included as a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


form of matter by defining p, = A/8xG. The effect of the 
cosmological constant can be seen more clearly from the 
acceleration equation, 


R _4nG 13 A 
Roa (p p)+ 5 


where p is the pressure. While the density p always 
decelerates the expansion, a positive cosmological con- 
stant favors acceleration and hence acts as a repulsion. 
Indeed, in the limit where the cosmological constant 
dominates, the solution is an exponential expansion 


R(t) « exp (VA 7/3t ). 


Studying the way in which A enters these equations 
indicates that it can be considered as a fluid with equa- 
tion of state p, =— Pa. 

There is a characteristic scale for the density, known 
as the ‘critical density’, which gives rise to a spatially-flat 
universe, k = 0. On defining the Hubble parameter, which 
measures the expansion rate, as H = R/R, the critical den- 
sity is 


It is often useful to consider the densities of the dif- 
ferent components as fractions of this, by defining the 
density parameter 2 = p/p, and the cosmological con- 
stant density parameter as 


The condition for a flat universe is therefore that the 
sum of the Q over all types of material is equal to unity. 

In general the cosmological constant adds consider- 
ably to the possible phenomenology of big bang models. 
For example, there are models where the cosmic repulsion 
is so strong that there is no big bang, with the universe 
instead contracting and then bouncing. There can be open 
universe models which recollapse and closed universe 
models which expand forever; it is even possible to con- 
struct closed universe models where an observer can (if 
they wait long enough) see right round the universe. 
Another possibility is a long ‘loitering’ phase where the 
universe stays almost constant in size for a protracted 
period. However, the main focus has been on models 
which expand from an initial singularity and where the 
cosmological constant is negligible at early stages, only 
beginning to manifest itself at recent cosmological epochs. 


Observational evidence for A 

Observations in recent years have established a standard 
cosmological model where the present density of the 
universe is dominated by a cosmological constant. It is 
fair to say that cosmologists have been reluctant to 
include the cosmological constant but have been forced 
into it by the quality of a variety of observations, which 
paint a consistent picture depending on its presence. The 
main supporting evidence falls into two classes. One is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Cosmological Constant and its Interpretation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


direct probing of the expansion rate of the universe by 
measuring the properties of distant objects, in this case 
supernovae. The second is to determine the density of 
matter in the universe and compare with the total densi- 
ty as inferred from the geometry of the universe. 

Distant supernovae of type I, believed to be fueled 
by the collapse of an accreting white dwarf to a neutron 
star, are an excellent probe of the expansion rate of the 
universe because their absolute brightness is believed to 
be nearly the same for each explosion, with empirical 
corrections available to improve the uniformity of the 
sample even more. This means that they can be used to 
study the dependence of the luminosity distance (see 
COSMOLOGY: STANDARD MODEL) on redshift. This relation is 
known as the HUBBLE DIAGRAM, with supernovae now 
able to map this out to redshifts approaching unity. This 
relationship can be related to the expansion history of the 
universe R(t), which the Friedmann equation shows is 
sensitive to the presence of a cosmological constant. 
Constraints on the densities of the cosmological constant 
and of matter are shown in figure 1 as the full and broken 
contours, and almost all the preferred region has a posi- 
tive cosmological constant (and indeed a currently accel- 
erating universe). 

The second observational route concerns the matter 
budget of the universe. Recent cosmic microwave back- 
ground anisotropy measurements have given strong evi- 
dence that the universe is spatially flat, or at least very 
nearly so (also shown in figure 1 as the dark shaded 
region). This requires that the total density of the uni- 
verse, including the cosmological constant, must add to 
the critical density. However, there is plentiful evidence 
that the density of matter is well below this. For example, 
studies of clusters of galaxies show that there is about 
eight times as much dark matter as protons and neu- 
trons, the latter being constrained by the formation of 
light elements to be about 4% of the critical density. 
Alternatively, the observed clustering properties of 
galaxies are known to be reproduced only if the dark 
matter density is around 30% of critical. Finally, direct 
estimates of the amount of matter providing gravitation- 
al attraction always fall well below the critical density. 
There is therefore a substantial shortfall in reaching the 
critical density required by the cosmic microwave back- 
ground observations, a gap which must be filled by a 
form of material which does not clump gravitationally. 
The cosmological constant fits the bill perfectly. 

Accordingly, the currently favoured cosmological 
model features a cosmological constant at around two- 
thirds the critical density, with matter making up the 
remaining third. The latter is mostly dark matter, but 
includes also the conventional matter from which we are 
made as well as the cosmic radiation backgrounds. 

In summary, current observations strongly favor 
cosmological models with a flat spatial geometry (k = 0) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


—— High-Z SN Search Team 


—-— Supernova Cosmology 
Project 


0:0. 0:5 0. 1.46 20 25 


Qi 


Figure 1. Constraints on cosmology from supernovae and the 
microwave background. The horizontal axis is the density of 
matter (including dark matter) as a fraction of the critical densi- 
ty, while the vertical axis is the density of the dark energy. The 
contour lines show the favored region from two separate stud- 
ies of distant supernovae. The shaded diagonal band shows the 
region allowed by measurements of the anisotropies of the 
cosmic microwave background by the Boomerang and Maxima 
experiments. In combination, these allow only the small 
checked region, where the cosmological constant density is 
about twice that of the matter. (Figure courtesy Brian Schmidt; 
see also http: // cfa-www.harvard.edu / cfa / oir / Research / 
supernova /HighZ.html.) 


and which are accelerating at present. The simplest inter- 
pretation of the observed acceleration is that the universe 
possesses a cosmological constant. 


The cosmological constant in particle physics 
Explaining the observed magnitude of the cosmological 
constant is regarded as one of the outstanding problems 
in particle physics. This is because particle physics theo- 
ry indicates that the magnitude of the cosmological con- 
stant should be huge, vastly greater than is observed. 
The reason is that in quantum physics one expects a zero- 
point energy to be associated with every kind of particle, 
and therefore that there should be an energy density 
associated with the vacuum. 

It is not hard to see that the vacuum energy density 
is equivalent to a cosmological constant. If all observers 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Cosmological Constant and its Interpretation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


are to agree that a given state is the vacuum, then its 
energy-momentum tensor must be Lorentz invariant. 
The only tensor with this property is a multiple of the 
metric tensor g,,,, and hence we can write 


Tygcuum = — A .,,, 
which ensures that the vacuum energy density does act 
precisely as a cosmological constant. 

To assess the magnitude of the problem, we should 
first convert the observed value of the cosmological con- 
stant into particle physics units. Its equivalent mass den- 
sity 0, = A/8nG can be taken to be about two-thirds the 
critical density, giving 


Pax~ 6x 10-2” kg m= Pa ~ (0.002eV)4. 


This energy scale, written in electronvolts, is tiny 
compared with known characteristic energy scales of 
particle physics (for example the proton mass-energy is 
around 109 eV). 

In quantum mechanics, unlike in classical physics, 
the vacuum state is a seething state where particles are 
constantly coming in and out of existence. There is a 
zero-point energy (the analog of the residual energy left 
in a gas at a temperature of absolute zero) associated 
with each possible particle state, which can be added up 
to give an estimate of the zero-point energy. 
Unfortunately the most simplistic calculations give an 
infinite answer, as each momentum state gives an equal 
contribution and there are an infinity of them; this indi- 
cates that the theory used to compute the contributions 
cannot be valid to infinite energies. 

However, to what energies should the calculation be 
believed? According to present understanding, we are 
limited by the Planck energy, at which point gravity 
would have to be described by a quantum theory. The 
cosmological constant should therefore be approximate- 
ly equal to the Planck energy density. Unfortunately, this 
is a massive (1028 eV)4, larger than the observed value of 
the cosmological constant by a factor of around 10120 
(earning this calculation the description as ‘the worst 
order-of-magnitude estimate in history’). This situation 
can be improved a little by conceding that actually we do 
not really understand physical laws above the energy 
scales probed by large particle accelerators such as 
CERN, and indeed a popular theory known as super- 
symmetry predicts that at higher energies a new theory 
comes into play that would ensure no contributions to 
the cosmological constant from energies much above 
those currently probed. Particle accelerators operate up 
to energies of around 1012 eV, so plausibly we can reduce 
our estimate to (1012 eV)4, reducing the embarrassment 
to a mere factor of 1060! 

It is currently believed that superstring theory (or its 
more elaborate cousin M-theory) is a strong candidate as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


a theory of quantum gravity. In principle it should there- 
fore make much more definite predictions for the cosmo- 
logical constant, as it is not subject to the cut-offs 
described above. However, current incarnations of 
superstring theory have not been developed sufficiently 
to allow unambiguous predictions to be made at this 
stage. 

The historical cosmological constant problem was to 
explain why the cosmological constant appeared to be 
zero, despite the prediction that it should be huge, and 
investigations focused on various cancellation mecha- 
nisms and symmetry principles which might justify why 
the precise value of zero might be favored. However, the 
astronomical observations just described have, if any- 
thing, made the problem worse, as they demand an 
explanation for why the cosmological constant is both 
tiny and non-zero. No compelling, or even just plausible, 
explanation has yet arisen. 


Dark energy/quintessence 

While a cosmological constant can indeed give the 
observed accelerated expansion of the universe, it is not 
the only explanation. Since the early 1980s, it has been 
popular to suppose that the universe underwent a peri- 
od of acceleration during its extremely early stages, 
known as INFLATION. Such a period of inflation cannot 
continue forever, because that would spoil the out- 
standing successes of the hot big bang model, such as 
nucleosynthesis and the origin of the cosmic microwave 
background. Early universe inflation therefore cannot 
be driven by a pure cosmological constant, but rather 
must be caused by a transient phenomenon mimicking 
a cosmological constant. 

Much effort has gone into modeling inflationary 
expansion, and the standard mechanism is to assume 
that the universe is temporarily dominated by the poten- 
tial energy of a scalar field. A scalar field describes a col- 
lection of spin-zero particles (which are popularly used 
in particle physics models to describe the breaking of 
symmetries), with the potential energy measuring the 
combination of the mass density of the particles and their 
binding energy. Under the right circumstances, such a 
scalar field can drive a temporary period of accelerated 
expansion, which comes to an end with the scalar parti- 
cles decaying into conventional matter (see INFLATION for 
full details). 

These ideas are an equally valid mechanism for dri- 
ving acceleration in the present universe and provide 
an alternative to a pure cosmological constant that 
many cosmologists find attractive. The term ‘dark ener- 
gy’ is now widely used to indicate any method of dri- 
ving accelerated expansion, encompassing both the 
pure cosmological constant and any other method of 
obtaining an acceleration. This phrase is on no account 
to be confused with dark matter (see DARK MATTER: ITS 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Cosmological Constant and its Interpretation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


NATURE), Which has entirely different properties. The 
specific use of a scalar field to drive the acceleration is 
usually referred to as ‘quintessence’ (the other four 
‘essences’ of the universe being the baryons, the pho- 
tons, the neutrinos and the dark matter). In the case of 
quintessence, it is presumed that any pure cosmological 
constant must be identically zero, for some as-yet- 
undiscovered reason. 

This more general setting allows the possibility that 
the density of the dark energy may not be strictly con- 
stant, as in the case of the cosmological constant. This can 
be quantified via the equation of state parameter wo, 
defined by 


PQ= WeaPQ 


where the subscript Q indicates that we refer to the den- 
sity and pressure of the dark energy component. A pure 
cosmological constant has Wa = -1, whereas to drive an 
accelerated expansion requires only wi < — 1/3, where 
Wot is the combined equation of state of the dark energy 
and the other matter components (including dark mat- 
ter) weighted by their densities. With observations indi- 
cating roughly twice as much dark energy as other mat- 
ter, accelerated expansion will result provided that wa is 
less than about -0.5. 

The quintessence energy density appears in the 
Friedmann equation, which for a flat universe reads 


[R] = Bae (P+ Po), 


where we will have 
Po a R314 we), 


If the density of dark energy is varying, the solution for 
the scale factor R(t) will be different to that obtained with 
a pure cosmological constant, and this provides possible 
observational signatures. It modifies the relation 
between luminosity distance and redshift, as probed by 
distant supernovae, and instead of using those data to 
constraint the densities of a cosmological constant and 
conventional matter, one can assume a flat universe and 
attempt to simultaneously constrain the density of dark 
energy and its equation of state. Another effect is that the 
altered expansion rate will change the growth rate of 
density perturbations in the dark matter, modifying the 
structure formation process. Finally, the angular diame- 
ter distance to the last scattering of the cosmic 
microwave background will be modified, leading to a 
shift in the angular size of features (the positions of the 
acoustic peaks). 

Several studies of these effects have been made, and 
as yet no evidence has been found for variation in the 
density of dark energy. The pure cosmological constant 
remains a viable explanation of the observational data, 
and observations require that the equation of state wa be 
less than about -0.7 (at 95% confidence). Upcoming 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


observations, perhaps including a satellite-based super- 
nova search, have the capacity to significantly strengthen 
this constraint and hence may detect a time variation of 
the dark energy if it is sufficiently large. 

If the dark energy is permitted to have time varia- 
tion, it must also be able to support spatial variations, in 
the form of density perturbations. In principle these can 
interact with and affect perturbations in the dark matter, 
modifying the process of structure formation which may 
lead to further observational tests. However in practice 
these effects are highly suppressed in realistic models 
and it is likely to be very hard to determine the proper- 
ties of dark energy through studying these effects. 

If we appeal to the same physical mechanism both to 
drive the inflationary acceleration of the early universe 
and the present-day acceleration, does that mean that the 
same scalar field might be responsible for both? In most 
models the answer is no, because of the vastly different 
energy scales involved; we are using the same physical 
mechanism, but the two fields are not connected. 
However, it is possible to contrive models where the same 
field is responsible; Peebles and Vilenkin called such 
models ‘quintessential inflation’. As the same scalar field 
has multiple duties to attend to, it has many more obser- 
vational requirements that it must satisfy and so such sce- 
narios can be quite strongly constrained. However, fun- 
damental particle physics indicates we should expect 
many scalar fields to exist in nature, so there seems little 
motivation to force one of them into doing all the cosmo- 
logical work. Accordingly, most attention has been direct- 
ed at models where early universe inflation and the pre- 
sent dark energy are separate phenomena. 


The cosmological constant coincidence 

In addition to the daunting task of understanding the 
numerical value of the cosmological constant, it poses a 
further problem known as the ‘coincidence problem’. It is 
an apparent coincidence that we are developing our 
understanding of cosmology during the fairly brief 
epoch (brief by cosmological standards—a few billions of 
years in actuality) where the cosmological constant has a 
density similar to that of other matter. The ratio of densi- 
ties of the cosmological constant to dark matter goes as 
the cube of the scale factor; when the universe was a 
tenth its present size the cosmological constant was 
utterly negligible, while once the universe has doubled 
its present age it will be completely dominant. 

One of the advantages of the dark energy hypothe- 
sis is that, in enabling the density of the effective cosmo- 
logical constant to vary, it may open routes to explaining 
this coincidence. Unfortunately, however, no compelling 
model has yet arisen, despite considerable interest in so- 
called ‘tracker models’ where a quintessence field 
responds to, and in some cases mimics, the behavior of 
conventional matter. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Cosmological Constant and its Interpretation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


An alternative route is to invoke the ANTHROPIC PRIN- 
CIPLE, which states that we should expect to see cosmo- 
logical parameters take on values which give the uni- 
verse which, out of all possible universes, is most 
amenable to the development of life. This approach can 
in principle explain both the numerical value and the 
coincidence, as a very large value of the cosmological 
constant will prevent galaxies from forming, while there 
is some indication that a significant value may enhance 
the number of galaxies produced. In this approach, we 
require fundamental physics to allow a wide range of 
possible values of the cosmological constant (which may 
be realized in widely separated regions of the universe, 
or even perhaps just in possible quantum states of the 
universe), and the precise value which arises in our part 
of the universe has no fundamental significance. 


Bibliography 

Carroll S 2001 The cosmological constant Living Reviews in 
Relativity webpage http: / / www.livingreviews.org 

Carroll S, Press W H and Turner E L 1992 Annual Reviews 
of Astronomy and Astrophysics 30 499 

Goldsmith D 2000 The Runaway Universe (Perseus) 

Kirshner R P 2002 The Extravagant Universe (Princeton 
Publishing Company) 

Peacock J A 1999 Cosmological Physics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Perlmutter S et al. 1999 Astrophysical Journal 517 565 

Riess A G et al. 1998 Astronomical Journal 116 1009 

Weinberg S 1989 Reviews of Modern Physics 61 1 


Andrew Liddle 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Hobby-—Eberly Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Hobby-—Eberly Telescope 


The Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) has an 11 m diame- 
ter spherical primary mirror. It is one of the world’s 
largest optical telescopes. It is located at McDonald 
Observatory in West Texas and its partners include the 
University of Texas at Austin, Pennsylvania State 
University, Stanford University, the Ludwig 
Maximillians University in Munich and the Georg- 
August University in Gottingen. Observing time is divid- 
ed among the partners in proportion to each partner’s 
financial contribution. 

Because of the spherical primary mirror, the tele- 
scope is equipped with a spherical aberration corrector 
which sees a 9.2 m diameter piece of the primary mirror. 
During an observation, in order to compensate for the 
rotation of the Earth, the primary mirror is held fixed 
while the spherical aberration corrector is moved across 
the focal surface of the sphere in order to follow the 
reflected image of the star. The primary mirror is tilted 
with its optical axis 35° from the zenith and is mounted 
on a turntable allowing it to be rotated 360° in azimuth. 
This novel design causes the gravity sag of the primary 
mirror to be constant but limits the telescope to observe 
objects which are crossing a circle, centered on the zenith, 
whose radius is 35°. 

The HET is designed primarily to do astronomical 
spectroscopy. Its initial complement of instruments 
includes a low-resolution spectrograph at the top of the 
telescope into which the light is shone directly and a 
medium-resolution and high-resolution spectrograph in 
the basement, under the telescope, which are fed by opti- 
cal fibres carrying the light from the top of the telescope 
down to the instruments. The telescope is queue sched- 
uled which allows it to observe targets of opportunity, 
such as supernovae, and to make regular observations of 
variable objects. Queue scheduling also allows more effi- 
cient use of the telescope and it allows one to adapt the 
schedule to the sky conditions. 

Visitors to the McDonald Observatory are welcome 
to visit the George T. Abell Visitors Gallery attached to 
the HET. Visitors are welcome seven days a week and a 
new visitor centre will open late in 2001. 


Frank Bash 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


The Telescope (to 1950) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The Telescope (to 1950) 


The TELESCOPE was the single greatest technical innovation 
in the history of astronomy, transforming it from a naked- 
eye study of celestial motions into a physical science. 
It revealed to humans a far richer and more complex 
universe than ever imagined. Its history proceeded 
in stages: a technological discovery led to a series of 
improvements until an impasse was reached. Another 
discovery would entail a different line of development, 
resulting in larger, better instruments. Some of these stages 
overlapped. Astronomical discoveries came in waves, 
as each innovation extended observers’ views. Three 
important needs have driven telescope makers and users: 
greater light-gathering power with attendant resolution; 
sharper, brighter images; sturdier mountings. 

From the astronomer’s viewpoint, the choice of 
instrument depended on the object of research or the area 
of research was driven by the telescopes available. During 
the 18th and 19th centuries, the concentration on stellar 
positions, binary stars and visual planetary observations 
encouraged the development of REFRACTORS. The increasing 
importance of photography in the last quarter of the 
19th century stimulated new optical designs and better 
mountings and drive systems. The 20th-century demand 
for more light-gathering power for spectroscopy and 
photography spurred the development of large REFLECTORS. 


The early telescope 

Invented in the Netherlands in the first decade of the 
17th century—there were several claimants—the telescope 
became an astronomical instrument in the hands of GALILEO 
GALILEL He fabricated his first telescope, essentially a 
spyglass, in 1609. His observations of the Moon, Jupiter’s 
satellite system, Venus and the Milky Way, announced 
in the Sidereus Nuncius the following year, ensured the 
instrument's rapid adoption by astronomers. Galileo thus 
inaugurated the development of the REFRACTING TELESCOPE, 
one that employs an objective lens to capture and focus 
light, and an eyepiece of one or more lenses to straighten 
the light into a beam and to magnify the image. The 
GALILEAN TELESCOPE or Dutch telescope combined a double- 
convex objective lens and a double-concave eyepiece to 
produce an upright image, a limited field of vision and 
low magnification. Such instruments, many fabricated by 
Galileo, spread quickly, with sunspot observations being 
made by mid-1610. Such a design, however, severely 
limited observational discoveries. 

In 1611, KEPLER, in his Dioptrice, suggested an 
alternative arrangement for a refractor, employing two 
double-convex lenses, which would yield a wider field 
and greater magnification, but an inverted image. He 
produced none himself, but, by the late 1640s, Francesco 
Fontana was observing with a Keplerian telescope of 
his own manufacture. Kepler also described spherical 
aberration. Given a lens with a spherical surface, rays of 
light incident near the outer edge will focus closer to the 
lens, while those incident near the center will focus slightly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


farther out, the result being an image that is out of focus. 
He reasoned that a hyperboloidal surface would solve the 
problem, although no optician could have ground such a 
surface. A second major defect of a refracting telescope 
is CHROMATIC ABERRATION. As different wavelengths of light 
are refracted at slightly different angles, the observer sees 
an image with colored rings. The two defects compound, 
giving blurry, colored images. 

The disadvantages of the Keplerian design could 
be overcome somewhat by producing objective lenses 
with less curvature, which had longer focal lengths. 
Alternatively, one could stop down the objective, so 
light passed only through the central portion of the 
lens. The earliest instruments of the Keplerian type, 
like the Galilean form, were wooden tubes with lenses 
fixed in the ends. JOHANNES HEVELIUS, a Danzig brewer, 
was the first systematic observer with long-focal-length 
refractors. With a 12 ft instrument, he produced a lunar 
atlas in 1647. During the next decade, Christiaan and 
Constantijn Huygens, in the Netherlands, produced even 
longer refractors, turning them on the Saturn system. 
This stimulated Hevelius to build larger instruments, 
culminating in a 150 ft telescope, with an open, wooden 
framework tube suspended by ropes and pulleys. Flexure 
and vibration made such instruments extremely difficult 
to manipulate. The Huygens’ solution was to dispense 
with tubes altogether, creating ‘aerial’ telescopes—one of 
which was more than 200 ft long—by joining the objective 
lens to the eyepiece by a thread. Both forms were clumsy, 
yet a surprising number of discoveries came from their 
use. An important center was the Paris Observatory, 
where J D Cassini made planetary observations with 
both forms, employing long-focus lenses provided by the 
Roman optician Giuseppe Campani. While the optical 
quality of many lenses, particularly from Italian opticians 
in the late 17th century, was good, mountings were poor. 
Shorter instruments could be propped up on windowsills 
or wooden frameworks. Almost all telescopes were 
employed out of doors. 

Despite its drawbacks, the Keplerian refractor could 
be adapted to telescopic measurement. A number of 
astronomers, beginning in the 1650s, experimented with 
micrometers, which allowed the angular distance between 
two objects in view to be measured. As Robert Hooke 
showed in the late 17th century, telescopes could be 
mounted upon a variety of hitherto naked-eye instruments 
such as the quadrant, greatly improving the accuracy of 
position determination. 


The reflecting telescope 

Two technological pathways were followed in an attempt 
to make telescopes more effective. One was the 
development of a different optical system, the REFLECTING 
TELESCOPE; the second was to find a solution to the chromatic 
aberration problem in refractors. Although the idea of 
reflecting telescopes or hybrids using both mirrors and 
lenses had been discussed since Galileo’s time, the first 
description of a modern reflecting instrument was made 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


The Telescope (to 1950) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


by James Gregory in 1663. His suggestion of combining 
a perforated parabolic primary with a concave ellipsoidal 
secondary to reflect the image back to an eyepiece was 
beyond the opticians’ art. His contemporary, Isaac 
Newton, investigating chromatic aberration, correctly 
linked dispersion with the refractive properties of a 
transparent medium. Assuming it could not be overcome, 
he produced the first workable reflector in 1672. In the 
familiar Newtonian form, its small primary mirror of 
speculum metal, an alloy of copper and tin with some 
arsenic, had a spherical surface. A small, flat mirror, 
set at an angle of 45°, diverted the light reflected from 
the primary to an eyepiece mounted on the side of the 
tube. However, the NEWTONIAN TELESCOPE suffers from 
SPHERICAL ABERRATION. At the same time, Cassegrain in 
France proposed a system like Gregory’s but employing 
a convex secondary (see CASSEGRAIN TELESCOPE, GREGORIAN 
TELESCOPE), although no examples seem to have been made 
at the time. 

By the 1720s, JOHN HADLEY, the inventor of the octant, 
solved the spherical aberration problem by producing 
mirrors with a parabolic figure. Within 20 yr, London 
optician James Short could provide sufficiently good 
primaries to construct Gregorian reflectors as a commercial 
enterprise. It was Hadley who designed a workable 
altazimuth mounting for reflectors, followed by Short. The 
latter also produced some simple equatorial mountings 
for his brass-tube instruments. As a research instrument, 
however, the reflector came into its own with William 
Herschel’s work. 

Herschel, a self-taught astronomer and optician, 
began casting and polishing his own mirrors in the early 
1770s (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). Over the next decade, he 
produced increasingly larger mirrors, building Newtonian 
instruments with a variety of mountings. By the mid- 
1780s, he undertook his important ‘sweeps’ to discover 
nebulae and undertook star gauging with a 20 ft telescope 
with an 18.8 in primary. For convenience and for 
brightness of image, he dispensed with the Newtonian 
flat, tilting the primary mirror so the focus reached the 
rim of the tube’s upper end, where an eyepiece could be 
laid. The scaffold-work altazimuth mounting allowed the 
tube to be slewed 30° horizontally without moving the 
base; vertical motion was effected by ropes and pulleys. 
By 1789, Herschel erected by far the largest telescope ever 
built, the 40 ft telescope with a 48 in primary. Similar to 
the 20 ft, it was more massive and difficult to operate and 
never much used. 

By the turn of the 19th century, British manufacturers 
supplied a variety of smaller reflectors—Gregorians, 
Newtonians and Cassegrainians—but none followed 
Herschel’s lead in fabricating large instruments. By the 
1830s, John Herschel was still using his father’s 20 ft 
instrument to great advantage at the Cape of Good Hope 
(See HERSCHEL FAMILY). Stimulated by Herschel’s example, 
William Parsons, THIRD EARL OF ROSSE, began experimenting 
with casting and polishing large specula in the 1840s. 
This was a difficult and risky undertaking. Rosse 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


assembled, and trained, a team of technicians who assisted 
in producing a variety of specula, some compound, and 
building innovative polishing machines along with casting 
and annealing equipment. Like Herschel, Rosse’s finest 
instrument was not his largest but a 36 in Newtonian 
built in 1840. It performed well despite its poor site. 
Striving further, and with many technical issues to resolve, 
Rosse soon constructed his 72 in ‘Leviathan’. No larger 
reflector would go into service until 1918, but it was an 
almost useless instrument, despite its role in showing the 
spiral structure of several nebulae. Mounted as a transit 
instrument between two stone walls, with a very small 
lateral motion, it was useful only for lunar or planetary 
work, and then only rarely at full aperture given the 
miserable observing conditions of the Irish midlands. 
Further discoveries would rest with astronomers armed 
with more modest equipment. 


Development of the modern refracting telescope 
The second line of development to improve telescopes 
resulted from experiments to deal with chromatic 
aberration in refractors. In 1729, Chester Moor Hall found 
that, by combining a convex crown glass lens with a 
concave flint glass lens, he could produce an achromatic 
objective. He was no optician and not until the 1750s did 
John Dollond begin producing such lenses commercially. 
The Dollond firm and, later, Jesse Ramsden, manufactured 
a wide variety of instruments with achromats. Although 
a real improvement over anachromatic lenses, the poor 
quality of flint glass limited their value. Still, small, 
specialized instruments were readily available from 
reliable makers such as Troughton, Tulley and Simms in 
England, and from several continental European firms 
such as the Repsolds of Hanover. 

Until the mid 19th century, refracting telescopes were 
strictly visual instruments, used either on their own 
or as part of specialized instruments such as sextants, 
octants, transits and meridian telescopes for navigation, 
celestial mapping and timekeeping. Tubes came in a 
variety of materials, mostly wood and metal, with brass 
becoming dominant until the late 19th century, when steel 
supplanted it. 

The refractor was brought to near perfection during 
the 19th century through a combination of improved 
optical glass technology and accurate, sturdy equatorial 
mountings. Achromatic objective lenses were limited by 
the quality of flint glass. Swiss optician P L Guinand 
developed a method in 1805 that produced flint glass 
with almost no imperfections. During a business venture 
in Munich, he tutored the young JOSEPH FRAUNHOFER in 
his method. Fraunhofer’s later experiments with spectra 
allowed him to calculate lens curvatures and combinations 
that provided superior (although not perfect) images. 
Fraunhofer’s other key contribution was the prototype of 
the modern German equatorial mounting. For his 9.5 in 
Dorpat refractor (1824), a steel polar axis was mounted 
on a wooden frame; the declination axis, attached to the 
top of the polar axis, held the telescope tube on one side, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


The Telescope (to 1950) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the declination circle on the other; the counterweight was 
bolted to a separate arm. The polar axis was turned by a 
weight-driven clock with a centrifugal friction governor. 
With this instrument, then the world’s largest refractor, 
F G W Struve undertook his remarkable work on binary 
stars. 

With the introduction of the uniform driving of 
the polar axis by means of weight-driven clockwork, 
guiding became limited to minor adjustments during 
observation. Without clock-driven equatorial mountings, 
the introduction of photography and spectrography in the 
second half of the century would have been impossible. 

By 1839, Georg Merz, a former assistant of 
Fraunhofer’s, commenced operations of Merz and Mahler, 
the major German telescope firm until the 1880s. With 
high-quality optical glass, Merz provided the 15 in 
Pulkova refractor in 1839. Like the Dorpat instrument, 
it was used by Struve’s son Otto for binary star 
measurements. Merz also supplied the Americans with 
their first large refractors: the 11 in Cincinnati telescope in 
1843 and the 15 in Harvard College Observatory telescope 
for W C Bond in 1847. German manufacturers maintained 
a leading position with the association of two Jena firms, 
instrument maker CARL ZEISS and optician Otto Schott, after 
1884. Zeiss did not produce large refractors until the 20th 
century, with 24 and 26 in instruments for Germany, Serbia, 
Indonesia and Japan in the 1910s and 1920s. 

British manufacturers in the early 19th century could 
only produce modest refractors, having no source of good 
optical glass except for Guinand, by then based in France. 
Chance Brothers of Birmingham purchased the method 
from Guinand’s successor in 1837. They, and Guinand’s 
son and grandson in France, produced most of the world’s 
objective lens blanks during the rest of the century. Better- 
quality glass and improvements in grinding and polishing 
machines and techniques were factors in the production 
of superior lenses. Another was the knife-edge method 
of testing optical performance, announced by Foucault in 
1858. One could measure the focal length and find surface 
curvature imperfections of both lenses and mirrors. In the 
early 20th century, the procedure was supplemented by 
Hartmann’s photographic testing method. 

Although Americans had to obtain telescopes in 
Europe before 1850, their own opticians and mechanics 
quickly became world leaders in refractor technology. 
Henry Fitz produced many medium-sized refractors of 
excellent quality—his largest was 16 in—before the Civil 
War. In the late 1850s, ALVAN CLARK, who had no training 
in optical work, began figuring achromats. Using a 
method developed independently of Foucault’s, Clark 
was able to find surface imperfections. Careful figuring, 
rather than calculating curvature, enabled him to produce 
superb lenses. His 18.5 in objective, intended for the 
University of Mississippi, was completed in 1862. Testing 
the lens, Clark’s son, Alvan Graham Clark, discovered 
Sirius B. Because of the war, the telescope ended up in 
the old University of Chicago and, later, at Northwestern 
University. The Clarks soon produced 26 in refractors for 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the US Naval Observatory and the University of Virginia. 
More instruments were to follow, each in turn the world’s 
largest: the Pulkova 30 in in 1883, the 36 in for the 
Lick Observatory in 1887 and the 40 in for the Yerkes 
Observatory in 1897. The objectives for last two were 
the work of A G Clark and C A R Lundin. With the 
completion of the Yerkes instrument, no larger refractor 
was ever constructed. 

The Clarks, when building the Lick instrument, 
contracted the tube and mounting toa Cleveland machine- 
tool manufacturing firm, Warner and Swasey, which had 
only limited experience in the field. With that success, they 
repeated their partnership for the Yerkes’ 40 in telescope. 
Warner and Swasey worked with both the Clark and 
the Pittsburgh firm of John Brashear on further refractor 
projects before turning to large reflectors. 

European telescope makers were not idle during 
the second half of the century. Thomas Cooke was 
the leading English manufacturer of refractors by mid- 
century and the only one to produce a large one, the 
25 in instrument for R S Newall, completed in 1871. In 
France, Paul and Prosper Henry, working with P Gautier, 
built several French refractors. In Germany, the Steinheil 
firm collaborated with the Repsolds on several projects. 
The Dublin instrument maker, Howard Grubb, produced 
several 15 in telescopes in the 1870s before producing 
his trademark instrument, the 27 in Vienna University 
refractor 1881, which featured a German equatorial 
mounting that became the model for all subsequent 
instruments. Grubb’s works produced another half-dozen 
large instruments into the 1920s when the firm, purchased 
by Sir Charles Parsons (becoming Grubb-Parsons) moved 
to manufacturing reflectors. 

Until the 1860s, astronomical photography, born in 
1840, was practiced with visual refractors, which were 
not corrected for the violet end of the spectrum, to which 
photographic plates of the time were most sensitive. 
American amateur L M Rutherfurd produced special 
objectives for photographic work in the 1860s. By the 
1890s, several firms—Grubb, T Cooke and Sons, Brashear 
and Clark—produced a number of different astrographic 
lenses for specialized instruments. If both visual and 
photographic work were wanted, two telescopes could be 
piggy-backed on one mounting. Alternatively, corrector 
lenses could be introduced to visual refractors for 
photographic work, a method with several drawbacks. 

Other specialized refractors aided positional astron- 
omy. In the late 17th century, Ole Romer devised the 
first transit instrument, mounted on a horizontal axis so 
it moved only in the meridian. A partially circular scale, 
with a micrometer for more accurate readings, allowed the 
star’s declination to be determined. With the better clocks 
by then available, star passages could be timed to deter- 
mine their right ascensions. He also built the first meridian 
circle, which performed both tasks, but had a full-circle 
scale and could reach the entire visible meridian. These 
and variants became features of many observatories over 
the next two centuries. During the 19th century, British 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


The Telescope (to 1950) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


manufacturers such as Troughton and Simms and Thomas 
Cooke produced portable transit instruments that could 
be taken into the field, which, with the use of the electric 
telegraph, allowed longitudes to be determined far from 
observatories. 

We need to note also the evolution of an indispensable 
part of a telescope, the Eyepiece. The basic Galilean 
telescope combined a single objective lens with a single 
biconcave, or negative, eyepiece lens. The Keplerian 
form also employed a single eyepiece lens—in this case 
a biconvex or positive lens. Both magnified the image and 
collimated the rays of light received by the eyepiece from 
the objective. As magnification is the ratio of the focal 
lengths of the objective and eyepiece, long-focal-length 
objective lenses could be paired with short-focal-length 
eyepieces for much higher magnifications in the Keplerian 
form. Single-lens eyepieces continued to be used for more 
than two centuries—William Herschel preferred them— 
but compound eyepieces appeared in the 1640s in Italy. 
HUYGENS developed the first standard compound system, 
comprising two planoconvex lenses (a field lens and an 
eye lens) with both curved surfaces facing the objective. A 
Huygens eyepiece offered a wider field of view. During 
the 18th century, Jesse Ramsden devised a variant using 
two planoconvex lenses of equal focal length in which the 
curved sides faced each other. 

Two other general-purpose systems appeared by the 
mid 19th century. The Kellner or orthoscopic eyepiece 
combined a compound achromatic eye lens with a convex 
field lens to provide a wide field and nearly constant 
magnification over the field. The Steinheil and Zeiss firms 
produced a number of Kellner-type eyepieces. Another 
way to increase magnification was to introduce a concave 
lens in front of the eyepiece, an idea developed by 
Barlow in England. Such eyepieces, in a wide variety 
of magnifications and fields of view, were available to 
astronomers by the later 19th century. In practice, a high- 
powered eyepiece was useful only for lunar or planetary 
work, and then only under the best atmospheric conditions 
and with the sturdiest mounting. 


The modern reflecting telescope 

The later 19th century was the heyday of the large 
equatorial refractor, but the design and construction of 
the reflector was undergoing a quiet revolution. Lord 
Rosse’s Leviathan was a dead-end, given its poor site, 
easily tarnished mirror and inflexible mounting. The last 
two examples of large speculum reflectors were WILLIAM 
LASSELL’s 48 in Malta instrument (1860) and THOMAS GRUBB’S 
48 in Melbourne reflector (1869). Lord Rosse had followed 
Grubb’s lead in supporting his mirrors, and Lassell 
emulated Rosse’s methods for grinding and polishing, but, 
with the failure of the Melbourne instrument, the history 
of speculum reflectors ended. 

A key breakthrough was the introduction of silvered 
glass primary mirrors by Foucault and others in the 1850s. 
When such a mirror tarnished, it need only be re-silvered, 
as opposed to the time-consuming and potentially ruinous 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


refiguring required for speculum mirrors. HENRY DRAPER, a 
pioneer of astronomical photography, introduced the idea 
to America. English optician ANDREW COMMON produced 
a number of medium-sized crown glass mirrors, which 
found homes in several private and public observatories. 
His 36 in equatorial reflector, later donated by E Crossley 
to the Lick Observatory, showed the value of such 
instruments for photography. After C D Perrine built a 
new mounting early in the 20th century, the telescope 
became an outstanding research tool. By the late 1880s, 
Common showed that 60 in glass mirrors, both solid and 
with a hole in the center, could be made. 

Common produced a number of primaries for 
observatories but was soon joined by competitors: the 
Henry Brothers in France, Brashear and the Clarks in the 
USA, Schaer in Switzerland and Zeiss in Germany. Some 
firms produced both the optical and mechanical parts for 
reflectors. An effective reflecting telescope required two 
other important features: a solid EQUATORIAL MOUNTING and 
ameans to support the great weight of large mirrors. While 
refractors typically had German equatorial mountings, the 
reflectors from the mid 19th century featured a variety of 
arrangements. The cross-axis form, originated by Sisson in 
the 18th century, was exemplified by Grubb’s Melbourne 
telescope and French telescope mountings designed by 
Gautier. Common used a fork mounting for his 60 in 
instrument, and others tried the English yoke mounting, 
improved by Ramsden. 

Solving the flexure problem of large mirrors took 
more time. Lord Rosse, Grubb and Common had used 
counterweights on the back of the mirror to compensate 
for any sag when the mirror moved vertically. The 
standard solution for 20th-century instruments was Gc w 
RITCHEY’s method used for the 60 in Mount Wilson reflector. 
The mirror was housed in a massive, cast-iron cell, with 
three adjustable pads for mirror collimation, a set of 
counterweighted pads attached to the back for flexure and 
a ring with counterweights to handle lateral movements. 

Another factor in improved astronomical work was 
the realization that a large telescope necessitated an 
excellent site for the best seeing. Lassell, who worked 
in Malta, was the first to demonstrate this. Even in 
the 20th century, many of the major, especially national, 
observatories such as those in Greenwich, Paris, Pulkova, 
Washington or Ottawa had light-polluted, smoky and 
climatologically poor locations. Beginning with the Lick 
Observatory, astronomers began seeking the best possible 
sites when they could manage to do so economically or 
politically. Although George Ellery Hale had chosen a 
mediocre Wisconsin site for the Yerkes Observatory, he 
recognized the value of a good site and quickly developed 
Mount Wilson in California. 

Although glass-on-silver reflectors of a modest size 
(<1 m) proliferated towards the end of the 19th century, 
it was Ritchey’s fork-mounted 60 in telescope at Mount 
Wilson that demonstrated in 1908 that a powerful, 
accurate instrument for astronomical photography and 
spectrography could be built. Common had produced 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


The Telescope (to 1950) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


equally large mirrors earlier but did not solve the 
mounting problem to build practical instruments. As 
a major focus of astronomical work after the turn of 
the century was stellar spectroscopy, the Cassegrain 
arrangement was considered most convenient to have 
ready access to the spectrograph. One could either cut 
out the hole in a primary or pour the molten glass into 
a mold with a core. Ritchey did not believe optical firms 
could produce blanks with holes without serious flaws and 
followed JAMES NASMYTH’s method of introducing a third 
mirror just in front of the primary to deflect the light beam 
to the side of the tube. JS PLASKETT, in planning the 72 in 
reflector for Victoria, suggested that the St-Gobain works 
should force a core through the molten glass and a mirror 
with few imperfections resulted. Almost all subsequent 
large reflectors had holes cast in them. 

Stimulated by Ritchey’s example, Plaskett designed 
what became the standard model for large reflectors to the 
1960s. He chose the cross-axis arrangement for ease of use 
and adopted Ritchey’s method for mirror mounting and 
support. Because spectroscopy was the most important 
use for such an instrument, it had f/5 primary and f/18 
Cassegrainian focal ratios. The 72 in primary of plate 
glass, provided by St-Gobain, was ground and polished 
by Brashear. Mechanical parts were supplied by Warner 
and Swasey. The telescope featured self-aligning ball 
bearings in the polar axis, electrical control and a quick- 
change method for substituting prime focus, Newtonian 
and Cassegrain arrangements in the upper tube. 

Before 1950, three firms produced large reflectors, 
all using features based on the Dominion Astrophysical 
Observatory instrument. Warner and Swasey build a 
69 in instrument for the Perkins Observatory, a 60 in 
for the Cordoba Observatory and its largest telescope, 
the 82 in McDonald Observatory telescope. The last, at 
Otto Struve’s insistence, included a coudé arrangement 
for spectroscopy. For all Warner and Swasey telescopes, 
engineering design was provided by E P Burrell, later 
involved with the 200 in telescope project. J W Fecker, 
who once worked for Warner and Swasey when the 
Canadian telescope was being built, later provided two 
60 in telescopes for Harvard, while completing the optics 
for the Cordoba instrument. The third firm was Grubb- 
Parsons, successors to Sir Howard Grubb. Its first large 
reflector was the 74 in telescope for Toronto’s David 
Dunlap Observatory in 1935. It too was modelled 
on Plaskett’s instrument. With only slight engineering 
changes—such as the provision for coudé work—Grubb- 
Parsons produced almost identical telescopes for Pretoria, 
Helwan and Canberra. 

The large reflectors were the workhorses of astrophys- 
ical research during the first half of the century, most of 
their time being devoted to spectroscopy. A second evolu- 
tionary line of very large reflectors developed slowly from 
the pioneering work of Ritchey. While the 60 in telescope 
was under construction, GE HALE wished to secure an even 
larger mirror, in the event a 100 in blank of poor quality 
from St-Gobain. Ritchey worked on the mirror for several 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


years, while he and his colleagues designed a massive yoke 
mounting. It went into regular service at Mount Wilson 
in 1918 and, for 30 yr, was the world’s largest telescope. 
In the hands of Edwin Hubble and others, it became the 
front-line instrument for extragalactic studies. Its mount- 
ing was not emulated by manufacturers of conventional 
large reflectors. 

Hale soon desired an even larger telescope and 
with his customary enthusiasm persuaded the Rockefeller 
Foundation to fund a 200 in reflector in 1928. It was clear 
that one could not merely scale up the 100 in instrument 
and new engineering and material problems required 
solution. The crown glass mirror, as used at Mount Wilson 
and Victoria, had too high a coefficient of expansion to 
be useful for such a large instrument. The US Bureau of 
Standards had been able to provide a superior borosilicate 
glass primary for the Perkins telescope. A commercial 
borosilicate glass emerged in Pyrex, manufactured by 
Corning Glass Works. In the early 1930s, while Corning 
experimented to see whether Pyrex would be suitable for 
Hale’s new venture, a test blank for the 74 in Toronto 
telescope was cast. Proving successful in that instrument, 
Pyrex became standard for most large reflectors. 

The weight of a 200 in disk would be enormous 
and a unique method of casting it with a ribbed back 
resulted. A more sophisticated method than Ritchey’s was 
needed for mirror support. Neither a cross-axis nor a yoke 
arrangement for the mounting was suitable; a modified 
yoke, with an open horseshoe-shaped upper end of the 
polar axis provided support, stability and access to all 
parts of the sky. A triumph of pre-war engineering, the 
massive telescope could be moved with ease by small 
electric motors. Because of wartime delays, the 200 in 
telescope did not see first light until 1948. It would remain 
the world’s largest until 1975. 

Most conventional reflectors had primaries of f/5 or 
slightly faster, and f/18—f/20 focal ratios for spectroscopic 
work at the Cassegrain focus. Direct photography, not 
typical before 1950 with such instruments, could be done 
at the prime focus using Ross lenses to correct for coma, 
a defect in reflectors that stretches images away from 
the optical axis. Ritchey and Henri Chrétien proposed 
an alternative scheme which combined a near-parabolic 
primary with a hyperbolic secondary and a concave 
photographic plate. This arrangement produced a wider 
field but was a difficult combination to fabricate. Ritchey 
built two examples, but the system did not come into its 
own until much later. Another way to obtain a wider 
field was the catadioptric arrangement, combining both 
lens and mirror. The first such instrument was BERNHARD 
scHMIDT’s photographic telescope, developed from 1931. 
The SCHMIDT TELESCOPE combined a spherical primary with 
a specially ground corrector lens. The lens compensated 
for both spherical aberration and coma, although it did 
produce a slight chromatic aberration. As the image 
produced is a curved plane, the photographic film had 
to be curved. Such a combination allowed for a very 
fast, short-focal-length system with a wide field for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


The Telescope (to 1950) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


photography. By 1948, two such instruments were at work 
at Palomar Mountain; the larger, with a 48 in corrector 
plate, was central to the National Geographic Society— 
Palomar Observatory Sky Survey. 

Other specialized instruments catered to solar 
astronomy. Hale was a leader in designing solar 
telescopes, beginning with a horizontal arrangement at 
Yerkes and Mount Wilson. Later, he developed vertical 
solar telescopes with pairs of optical flats to reflect sunlight 
downwards to a primary. By reducing thermal currents, 
this was an effective method for spectroscopy. To observe 
the corona, Bernard Lyot invented the CORONAGRAPH in 
1930, an instrument that blocked the solar disk and largely 
eliminated scattered light from the optical system. 

Throughout this period, other technological innova- 
tions increased the power and improvement of these large 
instruments. Production of moving parts requiring a high 
degree of precision stretched the capabilities of mounting 
manufacturers. Steel replaced cast iron for the major parts 
of tubes and mountings. Steel torsion rods to maintain the 
rigidity of tubes gave way to Mark Serrurier’s truss tube in 
the 200 in telescope. Relief from the increasing weight of 
polar axes and the need for smooth motion required roller 
bearings in the late 19th century. Common and Ritchey 
experimented with mercury flotation. Plaskett’s substi- 
tution of self-aligning ball bearings became standard for 
large reflectors, but the 200 in telescope’s designers, con- 
cerned about weight, opted for oil pad bearings. 

Temperature maintenance was also important. 
Ritchey introduced a diaphragm above his primary 
mirrors along with blankets and others chose similar meth- 
ods and a variety of insulation materials. Small electric 
heaters were introduced into spectrographs. Weight- 
driven clock drives were eventually superseded by electri- 
cally synchronized driving systems. Better photographic 
emulsions allowed for faster photography and extended 
spectral coverage. Experiments with aluminizing mirrors 
showed the method’s superiority to silver by the early 
1940s. The introduction of workable photoelectric pho- 
tometers made photometry an exact science. Still, in this 
pre-computer age, the quality of astronomical work de- 
pended on astronomers with great skill at controlling these 
giants. 

Telescopes were not only for professionals. Amateur 
astronomers, in growing numbers in the early 20th 
century, purchased both refractors and reflectors of modest 
aperture from a variety of manufacturers. Reflectors, 
being easier to make, became the focus of a substantial 
amateur telescope-making fraternity in the United States 
from the 1930s. Access to affordable but high-quality 
telescopes allowed amateurs throughout the world to 
make significant contributions to astronomy with lunar, 
planetary and variable-star observations. 

The telescope stands as the technological icon for 
astronomy in much the same way the microscope does 
for biology. Although it appears to be a deceptively 
simple optical device, the telescope, through advances in 
engineering, optical design and materials (see TELESCOPE 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ENGINEERING), has become one of the most sophisticated 
modern scientific instruments. Telescopes have always 
been expensive; by the time the 200 in telescope saw first 
light, the telescope had become symbolic of the newly 
emergent ‘Big Science’. 


Bibliography 

Gingerich O 1984 Astrophysics and Twentieth-century As- 
tronomy to 1950 (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

King H C 1955 The History of the Telescope (London: Griffin) 


Richard A Jarrell 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Theodosius of Bithynia (c. 160—c. 100 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Theodosius of Bithynia (c. 160—c. 100 
BC) 


Born in Bithynia, Anatolia (now Turkey), author of 
Sphaerics, a book on the geometry of the sphere, written 
to provide the mathematics for astronomy, and possibly 
based on pre-Euclidean textbook by EupDoxus. Said to have 
invented a sundial suitable for everywhere on Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Theon of Alexandria (c. 335—c. 395) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Theon of Alexandria (c. 335—c. 395) 


Born in (possibly) Alexandria, Egypt, wrote commentaries 
on PTOLEMY’s Almagest and Euclid’s Elements (his version of 
Euclid was the earliest known until a nineteenth century 
discovery). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Thom, Alexander (1894-1945) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thom, Alexander (1894-1945) 


British engineer and archaeo-astronomer, born in Scot- 
land, became professor of engineering science at Oxford 
University. Accurately surveyed the megalithic sites in 
Britain and the megalithic lunar observatories, identifying 
their shapes and astronomical alignments. He claimed to 
have discovered in the dimensions of the circles, as ap- 
parently used by the megalithic constructors, quanta of 
length that he called the megalithic yard and megalithic 
inch. Possibly he over-interpreted the data 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Thomson, William [Baron Kelvin of Largs] (1824-1907) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thomson, William [Baron Kelvin of 
Largs] (1824-1907) 


Born in Belfast, Ireland, became professor of physics at 
Glasgow, studied thermodynamics, proposed an absolute 
scale of temperature, measured by the Kelvin temperature 
scale. In parallel with HERMANN VON HELMHOLTZ, he 
formulated a theory of stellar evolution, in which a 
star radiated the energy that it released by progressive 
gravitational contraction. The lifetime of a star from this 
theory (the time over which its gravitational potential 
energy is radiated from its surface) is the Kelvin-Helmholtz 
time scale and proved to be too short to be compatible with 
the geological age of the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Three-body Problem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Three-body Problem 


The three-body problem, i.e. the problem of finding the 
motions of three gravitating bodies moving under their 
mutual gravitational attraction, was studied by Isaac 
NEWTON in an attempt to explain the motion of the Moon. 

In the general three-body problem three bodies of 
arbitrary mass start from an arbitrary initial configuration 
and move purely under the inverse square force of 
attraction. There is no general analytical solution, other 
than series expansions, to this problem since typically the 
orbits are chaotic. 

The progress leading to our current understanding of 
the problem has taken centuries and the efforts of leading 
mathematical physicists such as Euler, Lagrange, Jacobi 
and Poincaré, to mention a few classical ones. In 1772 
LAGRANGE found many special solutions of the problem 
(such as the equilateral triangle solution), while Jacobi 
studied the circular restricted three-body problem where 
one body is of negligible mass and the two others describe 
a circular orbit about their common center of mass. In this 
article we concentrate on the astrophysical aspects of the 
stellar three-body problem and purposely neglect many 
of the mathematically interesting solutions which, in fact, 
have physical realizations only in planetary systems (i.e. 
systems with large mass ratios). The existence of chaos 
in the three-body problem was already the conjecture of 
POINCARE in 1899, and that has been amply confirmed by 
recent works. 

One may divide the astrophysically interesting three- 
body systems into three main categories: 


(a) Systems of stars (of comparable masses and initial 
distances) that break up after some dynamical 
evolution. Such configurations are typical in star 
forming regions (See STAR FORMATION). 

(b) Scattering of single stars off CLOSE BINARY STARS. These 
events are important in the dynamics of STAR CLUSTERS. 

(c) Stable hierarchical systems, examples of which are 
the numerous triple stars observed in the galactic 
field. 


(See also CELESTIAL MECHANICS.) 


Close initial configurations 
The first attempts at actually solving the orbits of the three 
bodies date from the early twentieth century. Sundman 
constructed a (formal) series solution which converges for 
all times, but the solution is useless in practice due to 
extremely slow convergence. The first published attempt 
to integrate numerically orbits of three masses was made 
by Burrau. He performed an orbit integration of a special 
problem which is usually called Burrau’s problem. There 
three bodies of masses 3, 4 and 5 units start at rest from 
the corners of a Pythagorean triangle such that the mass 
values scale with the lengths of the sides opposite to the 
body in question. 

Without computers Burrau was able to calculate only 
a short stretch of the orbits; the complete calculation was 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


8 T T T T T T — 
ar M2 ===> 

6 fr m3 ----- 7 
ae 4 
aL 4 
0 = 4 
ob 4 
4b 4 
6 1 1 ! ! L ! 

A BS a Sad 0 1 2 3 4 


Figure 1. Burrau’s three-body problem. 


performed by Szebehely and Peters in 1967. Figure 1 
illustrates the complete orbit solution. 

Even though this particular problem has no special 
astrophysical significance, it illustrates well a typical 
solution of the three-body problem: as a rule, close 
approaches of two of the bodies occur while the third 
body is at a somewhat greater distance. Often the third 
body goes so far away that the other two bodies form 
a temporary binary. This situation is called ejection. At 
other times all bodies stay close to each other and perform 
repeated close encounters at frequent intervals. This type 
of motion is called interplay. When one of the members of 
a temporary binary is replaced by another body, we call 
the event exchange. Finally, one of the bodies leaves the 
binary permanently, in which case we have an escape. In 
figure 1 a single body moves to the upper right, and the 
binary to the lower left at the time of the escape. 

The escape times in a large number of bound triple 
systems occur at random, in the manner of radioactive 
decay. They are best described by the half-life of the triple 
system. The lifetime of Burrau’s system prior to the escape 
is about 20 times the period of the initial temporary binary, 
and this is in fact a rather typical value for the half-life in 
general. 

After the escape the orbits can be approximated by 
Keplerian two-body orbits for all future times. The binary 
is essentially described by its two masses, its semi-major 
axis and its eccentricity. The relative motion of the binary 
and the third body is described by the escape velocity at 
infinity of the third body. If we only need to know this 
final asymptotic state of the three-body problem, then the 
solutions can be stated in a simple way. 

In astrophysics, the finite sizes of the bodies are also 
of importance. Close approaches between the bodies may 
lead to collisions of the celestial bodies, or at least various 
frictional forces may come into play. If the bodies are 
surrounded by tenuous outer layers or disks, the latter 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Three-body Problem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


may be stripped away during the close approaches. The 
distance of the closest two-body approach is not known 
in advance but can be estimated statistically. In case of 
Burrau’s problem the shortest distance is 4 x 10-4 units, 
about 0.01% of the original dimension of the system. 
Typically only 1% of all similar three-body systems have 
approaches closer than this. 

Statistically the final states of the three-body systems 
after the escape may be described by the approximate 
analytical theory of Heggie and Monaghan. One starts by 
writing out the energy Ep of the three-body system after 
the escape as 


1 MsMB +2 
2 M 


1 MaMp .9 
Tr 


Eo G (1) 


5 2 mpg r 

where bodies of mass m, and m, form a binary and 
the body with mass m, is the third body which will be 
considered an escaper. The binary mass is written mg = 
m, +m, and the total mass of the system M = mg+m,. The 
separation vector between the binary members is r and 
the third body is at separation r, from the binary centre of 
mass. G is the gravitational constant. Equation (1) is an 
approximate expression valid for very large separations 
of the the binary and m, (the potential energy due to 
interaction of the binary and m, has been neglected). 

It is now assumed that the probability of a given end 
state of the system is proportional to the volume of the 
phase space available for escape. The density of the end 
states o per unit energy is 


2 
a= [of 0( Fi +80 — fo) ar. dp, dr dp (2) 
2m 


where m = msmz/M, Ez is the energy of the binary, and 
p and p, are the canonical momenta associated with r and 
Ts. 

When equation (2) is integrated over r; and p, 
we obtain the statistical distributions for the binary. 
Correspondingly, we may integrate over r and p, and 
obtain the distributions for the escaper. After carrying out 
the appropriate normalizations the main results are: 


(a) The binary eccentricity e is distributed as 
f (e) de = 2e de (3) 
in a three-dimensional system and 


ede 
V1— 
in two-dimensional systems. 


(b) The probability that the escaper is the body with mass 
my is given by 


f(e)de = (4) 


f (ms) dm; = a : : 2 (5) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(c) The binary energy Ez is distributed 
f (Eg) dEg = 3.5|Eo|**|Eg| *° dEx (6) 


|Ez| = |Eo|. More accurate theories show that the 
power —4.5 of |E,| is approximate (the correct one 
depends somewhat on masses and is 3 + 13/2 * 
4.8 for equal masses). From equation (6) it is 
straightforward to calculate the distribution of the 
escape velocity V,: 


Ms 
|E| 


Ms 
|E| 


—4.5 
FV, )dV, =3:5 v.(1405 v7) dvV,. (7) 


Equations (3)-(7) constitute the complete statistical 
solution of the unstable three-body problem when the 
three bodies are initially in a bound state. 


Scattering off a binary 

The above equations are applicable also in the case of 
scattering of a single body from a hard binary (i.e. the 
total energy Ey < 0). Then one may often consider that 
a temporary bound state, a resonance, has formed and that 
the break up of the resonance state follows the standard 
statistical theory. 

In STELLAR DYNAMICS One often encounters situations 
where the binary is not hard. The theory of soft-binary 
scattering has been derived using the assumption that the 
third body approaches one of the components of the binary 
to a distance which is much less than the semi-major axis 
of the binary, and such that the motion of the third body 
relative to this component is approximately unperturbed 
by the other binary member during the most important 
part of the encounter. After averaging over all relevant 
variables one obtains a cross section for a change in the 
binding energy of the binary, for an exchange of binary 
members, or for a complete disruption (ionization) of the 
three-body system. The applicability of the analytic theory 
has been tested by large numbers of numerical scattering 
experiments. 

The results from the scattering theory may be 
expressed as follows: let the third body of mass m, come 
from infinity with the asymptotic velocity V, relative to 
the binary center of mass, and let the (positive) binding 
energy of the binary be x. After the scattering the binding 
energy has changed to a value x + y. Then the differential 
cross-section dX /dy for an energy change of magnitude y 
i 

: dx 


2 
MaMpm 
—— =41G? 


dy mpg V2y? 


Ss 


F(x, y) (8) 


where 


4 
rowate y <0 (9) 
3y 


A oF ie 
Fa. =(5x+5) (=) ,y>O0. (10) 


Equation (8) may be integrated over y to obtain the 
total cross section X=, for example, for ionization or for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Three-body Problem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


capture, i.e. for the formation of a resonance. Usually the 
result is expressed relative to sa” where a is the semi-major 
axis of the binary. 

The expression is simplified by using the critical 
velocity V., defined by 


1 Gmymp, 

=smV; = —*— 11 

one 2a a) 
which is the critical incoming velocity of the third body 
making the total energy equal to zero (i.e. we have Ey = 0 
when V, = V.). Using this formalism the cross section for 
ionization becomes (V, >> V.-) 


40 mm vy? 
Lx = 2 Ss Cc : 12 
on = E43 mam,M v2 i) 


Corresponding expressions have been derived for the 
cross sections of capture and exchange. 

A convenient semi-empirical expression for the 
differential cross section for energy exchange in case of 
equal masses and hard binaries was given by Spitzer (1987) 


dX 5 13.7V2 1 
RIT td 
dA v2 AIR + Ay 


(13) 


Here A = y/x, and the approximation includes the effects 
of both resonant interactions and distant fly-bys. The 
expression is valid for A > 0, which is by far the the most 
typical case for hard binaries (i.e. binaries with binding 
energy much larger than the typical kinetic energy of single 
stars). 


Hierarchical triplets 

In hierarchical triplets there is a binary well isolated from 
the third body which is ina closed orbit (outer binary orbit) 
about the center of mass of the binary (inner binary). Such 
configurations are stable if the pericenter of the outer orbit 
is distant enough from the binary: typically the pericenter 
distance must satisfy the inequality gmin > 3a, but the exact 
value depends on the masses and orbital elements. 

The interesting property of such systems is that the 
secular perturbations by the distant third body transform 
the inner binary orbit. In 1962 Kozai considered the 
secular perturbations of asteroids due to Jupiter, and the 
predictions of this analytical theory constitute what is now 
known as the Kozai mechanism. There occurs a long-period, 
cyclical exchange of angular momentum between the third 
body and the binary. 

One of the most interesting results is that the 
eccentricity e and inclination i of the inner binary oscillate 
and can have large amplitudes, provided that the initial 
inclination of the outer orbit relative to the binary plane is 
high enough. In particular, if the initial inclination i = 90°, 
the system evolves to e — 1 and a collision between the 
binary members takes place. The length of the eccentricity 
cycle is of the order of P?,,/Pin, where Pout is the period of 
the outer binary and Pi, the period of the inner binary. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Numerical methods 

The orbits of three-body systems are generally extremely 
sensitive to changes in initial conditions. Thus 
numerical calculations must be done with high accuracy. 
Nowadays most numerical integrations of three-body 
systems utilize regularization by the Kustaanheimo- 
Stiefel transformation. For studies of long-term evolution 
of hierarchical systems symplectic methods are also 
available, which do not produce secular errors in constants 
of motion. 


Bibliography 
The three-body problem is dealt with in most textbooks 
on celestial mechanics, which generally deal with 
the restricted three-body problem and the Lagrangian 
solutions. 

Thorough treatments of the three-body problem are 
found in: 


Marchal C 1990 The Three-body Problem (Amsterdam: 
Elsevier) 

Szebehely V 1967 Theory of Orbits. The Restricted Problem of 
Three Bodies (New York: Academic) 


More recent works of interest include: 


Barrow-Green J 1996 Poincaré and the Three Body Problem 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Diagu F and Holmes P 1997 Celestial Encounters: The 
Origins of Chaos and Stability (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press) 


Two classical works on the general three-body problem 
are: 


Burrau C 1913 Numerische Berechnung eines Spezialfalles 
des Dreik6rperproblems Astron. Nachr. 195 113-16 

Sundman K F 1912 Memoire sur le probleme des trois corps 
Acta Math. 36 105-79 


Semi-classics include: 


Heggie DC 1975 Binary evolution in stellar dynamics Mon. 
Not. R. Astron. Soc. 173 729-87 

Kozai Y 1962 Secular perturbations of asteroids with high 
inclination and eccentricity Astron. J. 67 591-8 

Monaghan J J 1976 A statistical theory of the disruption 
of three-body systems—I. Low angular momentum 
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 176 63-72 

Szebehely V and Peters C F 1967 Complete solution of a 
general problem of three bodies Astron. J. 72 876-83 


Useful sources for references are: 


Spitzer L 1987 Dynamical Evolution of Globular Clusters 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 

Valtonen M J 1988 The general three-body problem in 
astrophysics Vistas Astron. 32 23-48 

Valtonen M J and Mikkola S 1991 The few-body problem 
in astrophysics Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 29 9-29 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Three-body Problem 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Recent works on the chaotic aspect of the three-body 
problem include: 


Boyd P T and McMillan S L W 1992 Parameter space 
structure in irregular gravitational scattering Phys. 
Rev. A 15 46, 6277 

Heinamaki P, Lehto H J, Valtonen M J and Chernin A D 
1998 Three-body dynamics: intermittent chaos with 
strange attractor Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 298 790-6 


There is a series of papers on three-body scattering by Hut 
and associates. The latest in the series is 


Heggie D C, Hut P and McMillan S L W 1996 Binary- 
single-star scattering. VII. Hard binary exchange 
cross sections for arbitrary mass ratios: numerical 
results and semianalytic fits Astrophys. J. 467 359-69 


The Kozai mechanism has been recently used in many 
situations. Useful references are: 


Innanen K A, Zheng, J Q, Mikkola S and Valtonen M J 1997 
The Kozai mechanism and the stability of planetary 
orbits in binary star systems Astron. J. 113 1915-19 

Kiseleva L G, Eggleton P P and Mikkola S 1998 Tidal 
friction in triple stars Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 300 
292-302 


Numerical methods can be found in: 


Aarseth SJ and Zare K 1974 A regularization of the three- 
body problem Celestial Mech. 10 185-205 

Mikkola S 1997a Practical symplectic methods with time 
transformation for the few-body problem Celestial 
Mech. Dynam. Astron. 67 145-65 

Mikkola S 1997b Numerical treatment of small stellar 
systems with binaries Celestial Mech. Dynam. Astron. 
68 87-104 


Mauri Valtonen and Seppo Mikkola 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Thuban ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Thuban 


The star a Draconis, a white giant of spectral type AOIII 
and apparent magnitude 3.67. At a distance of 297 light- 
years (parallax 0.011”) it has an absolute magnitude of 
—1.1. It was the pole star c. 2800 sc. The name derives 
from the Arabic name of the whole constellation, meaning 
‘the Dragon’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tibbon, Jacob ben Machir ibn [known as Prophatius] 
(1236-1312) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tibbon, Jacob ben Machir ibn [known 
as Prophatius] (1236-1312) 


Doctor, born in Marseilles, Spain (now France), a 
translator, mathematician and astronomer. He invented 
what is known as Jacob’s quadrant, and the book in which 
he describes it contains a table of 11 stars used in the 
construction of the instrument. He wrote Luhot (Tables) 
a book of astronomical tables giving positions of stars at 
Paris. Tibbon’s work was mentioned in DANTE’s Divine 
Comedy and used by coperNicus in forming his theories. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tides 


Everyone who has lived near the ocean is very much aware 
of the variation in the level of the ocean water that is called 
the tide. On nearly all days there are two high tides and 
two low tides, and the astute observer will notice that 
these extreme tides occur about fifty minutes later on the 
average than they did the day before. The fact that the 
MOON reaches its maximum elevation above the horizon 
with the same average 50 min delay on each successive 
day makes it logical to suspect the Moon as the cause of 
our observed ocean tide. 

In contrast to their awareness of the ocean tide, 
few people know that the solid body of the Earth also 
experiences a tide with an amplitude of about 30 cm. 
This motion is not at all obvious, as all objects on the 
solid surface of the Earth move together, just as the ocean 
tide would not be obvious to an observer on a ship in 
midocean. But the solid-body tide is detectable with 
sensitive instrumentation. There is even an atmospheric 
tide on the Earth that is detectable with a simple barometer. 
However, this tide is caused by the absorption of radiant 
energy from the sun rather than gravitational effects, where 
the atmospheric tide on the Earth caused by the latter is 
negligible by comparison. 

The Moon interacts with the Earth through gravita- 
tional force, and one can generalize the idea that the Moon 
is responsible for the Earth tide to every SOLAR SYSTEM ob- 
ject: each planet or satellite in the Solar System experiences 
tidal distortions due to all the other objects attracting the 
planet or satellite gravitationally. As a first test of this hy- 
pothesis, we expect the Sun to also raise a tide on the Earth, 
and we observe that it does. The Earth tide due to the Sun 
is not as large as that due to the Moon, but it is quite notice- 
able when one considers that the highest and lowest tides 
occur when the Sun and Moon are nearly lined up—a time 
when they both pull on the Earth in the same or opposite 
directions. It is easy to follow the heights of the local tidal 
extremes in newspapers of any coastal city where these 
extremes are maximal at new and full Moon. 

Below, we show how the tidal deformation of a body 
is caused by differences in the gravitational forces exerted 
by the disturbing body on different parts of the disturbed 
body, develop a simple physical model with which we 
can describe the essential features of tidal distortion, and 
indicate the conversion of tidal energy into heat as the tide 
oscillates. It is this change of mechanical energy into heat 
that allows slow changes in the orbits and rotations of 
many objects in the Solar System, and we discuss what 
some of the consequences of such tidal evolution have 
been for each planet and their satellites, if any. Tidal 
forces also affect stars, star clusters, galaxies, clusters of 
galaxies, etc that we discuss briefly, but we shall limit most 
of our examples to the easily observable consequences in 
the Solar System. We end by pointing out current frontiers 
of research. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Theory of tides 

We are all familiar with gravity as the force that attracts 
us and all other objects to the Earth. An object dropped 
near the Earth’s surface accelerates toward the center of the 
Earth at the rate of 980 cm s~?. However, the acceleration 
of the Moon toward the Earth is only 0.27 cm s?, as 
this is the acceleration necessary to keep it moving in its 
almost circular orbit. From these two numbers, we find 
that the acceleration of gravity is proportional to 1/ r’, 
where r is the separation of the centers of the two bodies 
that are being attracted to each other—either the Earth 
and Moon or the Earth and the object we drop. We also 
know that if we double the mass of an object, that is, 
double the amount of material in it, the force of gravity 
on the object is doubled. It is twice as heavy, but since 
the acceleration of an object is inversely proportional to 
its mass (force = mass x acceleration is Newton’s second 
law), the acceleration in the Earth’s field remains the same. 
But we see that the force of gravity on a body must also be 
proportional to its mass. By observing the orbital motions 
of the satellites about the MAJORPLANETS (just as we observed 
the Moon about the Earth), we can infer that the force of 
gravity must be proportional to the mass of the attracting 
object as well, leading to the expression for gravitational 
force between two spherically symmetric bodies, 


F= Gmm3/r? 


where G is the constant of proportionality called the 
gravitational constant. This law of universal gravitation 
was also discovered by NEWTON. 

A gravitational field of force of a Solar System object 
leads to a distortion of another massive object that is 
in the field because the force decreases as the distance 
from the source of the field increases. This means that 
different parts of the object in the field experience different 
gravitational forces. This is illustrated in figure 1, where 
the forces on the small mass elements due to the satellite 
of mass m are represented by arrows at three points on the 
planet M. The separation of M and m is represented by r, 
and the radius of the planet is R. If AM is the mass of each 
element indicated on M, the gravitational force due to m 
on that element is given by 


2 GmAM 


AF 5 


x 


where x is the actual distance of AM from the center of m. 
The fact that A F decreases as x increases fromr—Rtor+R 
is indicated in figure 1 by the decrease in the length of the 
arrows from the points x2 to x, to x;. As the acceleration 
of each AM is AF/AM, from Newton’s second law, we 
see that the side of M closest to m tends to accelerate more 
toward m than the center, and the center tends to accelerate 
more than the far side. If the masses (AM) of the elements 
at x1, X-, and x. were completely free from one another, x2 
would move away from x, toward m, and x; would be left 
behind by x,. Relative to x,, the two points x; and x, would 
accelerate in opposite directions at rates indicated in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


2Gmk _ 
r3 73 


Xe 2GmR 
_ 


Figure 1. How the decrease in gravitational acceleration with 
distance from the perturbing mass m leads to differential tidal 
accelerations on the perturbed body M. 


bottom part of figure 1. These differential accelerations 
tend to stretch M into a prolate ellipsoid, similar to the 
shape of an egg, and they depend on the inverse cube of 
the separation r because they are the differences of two 
forces that depend on 1/r?. 

But the AMs are not free, since they are attracted 
gravitationally to one another and to the remaining mass 
in M. The accelerations toward the center of M due to self- 
gravity acting on the AMs at x; and x; are far stronger than 
the differential accelerations shown in figure 1, so mass 
does not fly off the surface at x; and x2. If the material 
in M were incompressible, the AMs at x, and x. would 
weigh less than they would if m were not there, but one 
might suppose that the AMs would not move relative 
to the center. But M will still distort into an egg shape 
unless it is perfectly rigid as well as being incompressible. 
(When acted on by forces, an incompressible substance 
preserves its volume but may change shape, whereas a 
perfectly rigid substance does not change shape.) The 
reason is that points in M that do not lie on the line 
joining the centers of M and m also experience a differential 
acceleration relative to x... But now the differential 
accelerations are not perpendicular to the surface and 
are therefore not compensated by the self-gravity that 
accelerates mass elements more or less toward the center 
of M. This is shown in figure 2, where the differential 
acceleration at one point is resolved into its equivalent 
components perpendicular and tangential to the surface. 
These components are shown as dashed arrows and are 
equivalent to the solid arrow, in that together the forces 
they represent produce the identical acceleration. The self- 
gravity, shown as an arrow directed toward the center of 
M in the top part of figure 2, compensates the vertical 
component of the differential acceleration but not the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


UNCOMPENSATED TANGENTIAL 
ACCELERATIONS 


BALANCED BY DISTORTION 
AND INTERNAL STRESSES 


Figure 2. Distortion of a planet to bring it into equilibrium with 
an external gravitational field. 


tangential component. If M were entirely fluid, the 
uncompensated tangential components of the differential 
accelerations would cause fluid to flow toward the points 
on M closest to and furthest from m, until M would 
resemble the bottom part of figure 2. In this ellipsoidal 
shape, the self-gravity is now no longer perpendicular 
to the surface but has a tangential component opposite 
to that of the differential acceleration due to m. Only in 
the distorted shape are all the differential accelerations 
compensated and the whole planet is accelerated like the 
center at xX.. 

If M is not fluid but is rigid like rock, part of the 
compensating acceleration is provided by internal stresses, 
and the distortion is not as large as it would be for 
a fluid. Still, no material is perfectly rigid, so there 
is always some tidal bulge. All materials are at least 
somewhat compressible as well, and the expansion of M 
in the directions where the weight of overlying material 
is reduced by the presence of m accentuates the tidal 
distortion. Note that the tidal distortion is independent 
of the velocity of M relative to m and would occur either 
if M and m were in a stable orbit or if they were simply 
falling toward each other. There is no need to invoke 
centrifugal force to account for the tidal bulge on the 
side of M furthest from m, although this has often been 
done in erroneous explanations of tidal deformation. (We 
limit our discussion to a simple tidal bulge whose size 
and orientation depends on the system properties and 
geometry. Practitioners of tidal theory find it expedient 
to decompose the simple bulge into a sum of separate 
tides with distinct frequencies and geometries. This 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


decomposition is a mathematical convenience that is not 
necessary for understanding the essential features of tidal 
theory and evolution.) 

We are now in a position to understand the main 
features of the Earth tides, given that the Earth tends to 
be distorted into an egg shape which is aligned toward 
the Moon and into a lesser distortion aligned toward 
the Sun. First, from the bottom part of figure 1, the 
differential magnitudes of the solar and lunar tides follow 
from the expression for the differential acceleration which 
is proportional to m/r?. The lunar mass is much smaller 
than the solar mass, but it is so much closer to us that the 
r? in the denominator more than compensates for the tiny 
mass and results in a lunar tide about twice the magnitude 
of the solar tide. The ocean tide rises and falls at a given 
point on a coast because the Earth rotates under the Moon. 
The tidal bulge tends to stay more or less aligned with the 
Moon, so for our fixed position on the rotating Earth, we 
are carried through alternate high and low points of the 
tidal deformation. The high tides occur when we pass 
under the Moon and when we are on the opposite side of 
the Earth from the Moon, and low tides occur when we see 
the Moon rise or set. Hence, there are two high and two 
low tides each day. The ocean tide is obvious to us on a 
coast because the solid Earth is rigid and distorts less than 
the fluid ocean. 

Close observation reveals that the ocean tide is more 
complex than the simple picture we have just presented. 
The high tide can occur at times considerably removed 
from the time the Moon reaches its maximum elevation 
above the horizon. This is because the continents interrupt 
the free passage of the tide. The ocean basins are like 
giant bathtubs in which the water likes to slosh with a 
period of oscillations given by w/./gd, where w is the 
width of a given ocean, d is the average depth, and g is the 
acceleration of gravity at the Earth’s surface. This period 
is comparable to the half-day tidal period, which means 
the reflection of the tidal wave off a continental boundary 
and the resulting sloshing of the ocean water can result 
in high tides occurring at odd times relative to the lunar 
position in the sky. As an example, high tide occurs about 
two hours before the Moon reaches its highest point in the 
sky at Santa Barbara, California. Long narrow bays can 
also change the times of various tidal phases relative to 
the Moon’s position. Only the Earth has such a substantial 
ocean interrupted by continents, so all other Solar System 
bodies are more likely to conform to the situation where 
their tidal bulges are nearly aligned with the direction to 
the tide raising body. This simplicity is extremely useful 
when we consider the dissipation of tidal energy in a more 
or less solid satellite or planet with no complicating ocean. 

We pointed out earlier that the lunar tide on Earth 
is about twice as large as the solar tide because this is 
the ratio of the corresponding differential accelerations 
or forces causing the tide. In other words, for the small 
tidal amplitudes observed, the amplitude is proportional 
to the disturbing force. This is exactly the way a spring 
behaves—the stretch is proportional to the stretching force. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Idealized representation of a solid, elastic planet by a 
collection of springs. A fluid planet can be similarly represented 
except the restoring force of the springs is purely gravitational 
instead of elastic. Here the planet is shown distorted by an 
external field. 


So we can represent a solid satellite or planet now as 
a collection of springs such as that shown in figure 3, 
where the restoring force of the springs is a combination 
of gravity and elasticity of the material. (For a fluid planet 
the restoring force would be all gravitational as in figure 2.) 
As the planet or satellite rotates relative to the tide-raising 
body, the springs are alternately stretched and relaxed. No 
material is perfectly elastic, so part of the energy stored in 
the stretched spring is converted to heat. This conversion 
of energy is represented by the dashpots attached to each 
spring in figure 3. (A dashpot is a device for turning the 
kinetic energy of motion of a mass at the end of a spring 
into heat. It can be thought of asa leaky piston ina cylinder 
of oil where the oil is ‘dashed about’ as the piston moves. 
An everyday example of a dashpot is the shock absorber 
on an automobile.) The springs follow the forcing term, 
that is, reach their maximum stretch when the differential 
acceleration is greatest, if the period of variation of the 
disturbing force at a given point on the body is sufficiently 
long compared to the shortest natural period of oscillation 
of the body. On the Earth, the period of variation of 
the disturbing force is, on average, half the time between 
moonrises, whereas the Earth ‘rings’ when struck by a 
large earthquake with periods like an hour. This condition 
of slow variation of the tides compared to natural periods 
of oscillation is satisfied on all the Solar System objects 
subject to tidal deformation. 

The dissipation of mechanical energy (conversion into 
heat) causes each spring to reach its maximum stretch 
slightly after the maximum force is applied by analogy toa 
damped harmonic oscillator, of which a mass on the end of 
a spring with dashpot is the classical example. This means 
that for a planet or satellite (M in figure 1) uncomplicated 
by the interaction of oceans with continents and bays, the 
high tide follows the perturbing body m, but it occurs at a 
point after m has passed overhead. The amount of the time 
delay in the response of the spring representing the planet 
or satellite is proportional to the amount of dissipation per 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


>F, IMPLIES T,> 


Figure 4. Consequences of dissipation of tidal energy, where the 
spin of M is being retarded while m is being accelerated in the 
direction of its orbital motion. 


oscillation cycle when this dissipation is small. If we define 
the dissipation function Q by 


O= 2m Eo 
~ AE 


where £o is the maximum energy stored in a tidal 
oscillation and AE is the energy dissipated (mechanical 
energy turned into heat) ina complete cycle, the time delay 
in the response is proportional to 1/Q. 

This time delay caused by energy dissipation has an 
interesting consequence shown schematically in figure 4. 
The bodies m and M are reproduced as in figure 1, except 
M is shown tidally distorted and rotating relative to m. 
(There is a similar distortion and perhaps a rotation of m 
that we shall ignore for the time being.) The fact that the 
maximum tide occurs at a point on M after m has passed 
over that point means that the tidal bulge is displaced 
in the direction of rotation relative to a line to m. Here 
we assume the rotation of M and the orbital motion of 
m are in the same direction and that the spin angular 
velocity of the former is larger than the orbital angular 
velocity of the latter. If the orbital motion were faster, 
the bulge would be displaced in the opposite direction. 
The angle 5 by which the tidal bulge leads is equal to 
1/2Q. Since low Q implies high dissipation, 5 increases 
with dissipation. The tidal bulges are about equal in size, 
but again because the gravitational force decreases as 1/ r, 
the bulge nearest m experiences a greater force from m than 
the one further away. These unequal forces F, and F) are 
represented by the arrows (vectors) of unequal length. (The 
arrows are drawn in the directions of the forces.) The first 
consequence of this inequality results from the fact that 
the forces are not directed through the center of M. Since 
F, > Fy, a twisting effect or torque is exerted on M ina 
direction which retards the spin angular velocity. Since 
the size of the tidal bulges is proportional to m/r* and the 
torque on the bulges is also proportional to m/r? (again 
the difference of two 1/r? forces), the torque on M due to 
tides raised by m is proportional to m?/r°. 

Forces equal to F; and F, but opposite in direction 
are exerted on m (Newton’s third law). These are 
represented by the appropriate vectors in figure 4 drawn 
from the center of m. These forces are resolved 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


\ 


\ TIDAL 
- MAXIMUM 


To m 


x 


Figure 5. If the equator of M is inclined to the orbit plane, the 
tidal bulge is carried out of this plane resulting in torques that 
change the direction of the spin axis in addition to retarding the 
spin magnitude. 


into two components, one directed toward M and one 
perpendicular to that direction. These components are 
shown as dashed vectors in figure 4. The reaction forces 
on m can be replaced by these components to produce the 
same accelerations of m. The components in the direction 
of M just contribute to the much larger central attraction 
responsible for the orbital motion. Since Fi; > Fy, then 
necessarily T, > T) (figure 4). This acceleration of m causes 
it to spiral away from M as the latter’s spin angular velocity 
is reduced. 

In figure 4, we assume m to be orbiting in the 
equatorial plane of M. However, if the spin axis of M 
is not perpendicular to the orbit plane of m, the tidal bulge 
is carried out of the plane of the orbit by M’s rotation, 
as illustrated in figure 5. This results in a torque on M 
that is not parallel to the spin axis. Part of the torque 
tends to tilt the spin axis and part tends to change the spin 
magnitude. By this means, the obliquity (angle between 
the spin axis and a line perpendicular to the orbital plane of 
m) is changed. There is a corresponding but much smaller 
change in the orbital plane. 

In the isolated two-body case discussed so far, as long 
as there is any rotation of either M or m relative to the 
other, which includes the cases where either the obliquity 
or orbital eccentricity is not zero, torques result that cause 
the orbit and spins to change. If a rapidly spinning 
planet is very massive compared to a single satellite that 
orbits in a relatively close circular orbit, the satellite is 
relatively quickly slowed to SYNCHRONOUS ROTATION by large 
tides raised on the satellite by the planet, as the tides 
raised on the planet by the satellite increase the radius 
of the satellite’s orbit. The planet’s spin slows only a little 
because of its large mass. If the orbit is eccentric, tides 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on the satellite tend to drive its spin to a value that is 
slightly larger than the synchronous rotation. The tide 
is largest at the periapse of the orbit (point of closest 
approach), where the now non-uniform orbital angular 
velocity is maximal. The spin would then tend toward 
that value where the tidal torque, averaged around the 
orbit, vanishes, and this occurs at a spin angular velocity 
that is less than the maximum orbital angular velocity at 
periapse but larger than the mean orbital angular velocity. 
Why then is the Moon rotating synchronously with its 
mean orbital angular velocity in spite of being in a slightly 
eccentric orbit where tides raised on the Moon by the Earth 
are trying to make the spin slightly larger? This is because 
the Moon, or any other satellite, is not axially symmetric. It 
has a permanenteffective egg shape (supported by internal 
stresses as are large mountains on Earth) that is much 
larger than that induced by the tide, and the tidal torque 
from the Earth on this permanent deformation dominates 
that on the gravitationally induced tide, forcing the long 
axis and hence the same face of the Moon to point toward 
the Earth every time the Moon passes the periapse of its 
orbit, where the tidal force is maximal. This can be true 
only if the Moon rotates at a rate synchronous with the 
mean orbital motion—not at the slightly larger rate where 
the tides would take it. 

Dissipation of tidal energy still occurs in a syn- 
chronously rotating satellite in eccentric orbit, since the 
tides wax and wane in magnitude as the orbital distance 
changes, and the position of the tidal maximum rocks back 
and forth on the satellite because the satellite rotates uni- 
formly whereas the orbital motion is not uniform. As the 
eccentricity is the cause of this dissipation, the dissipation 
will lead to a decrease in the eccentricity. At the same time, 
the tide raised on the rapidly rotating planet by the satel- 
lite will try to increase the eccentricity. Recall that the tide 
and hence the torque (« m?/r®) is maximal when the satel- 
lite is at the periapse of its orbit. The greater tidal force 
on the satellite at this point (7, in figure 4) tends to fling 
the satellite to a greater distance at its apoapse (the fur- 
thest point in the orbit) than it would have gone without 
the kick—thereby increasing the eccentricity. Which effect 
wins depends on the magnitude of the rate of dissipation 
in the satellite versus that in the planet (i.e. on Q,,/Qy). 

Now consider a satellite in a circular orbit that is 
spinning rapidly relative to the synchronous rate and 
having a non-zero but small obliquity (equatorial plane 
inclined to the orbit plane). Here the tide raised on the 
satellite tends to drive the obliquity to larger values. This 
is best understood if we represent the spin as a vector 
having a component parallel to the orbit plane and another 
perpendicular to the orbit plane. The tidal torque is 
reducing the magnitude of perpendicular component at all 
points in the orbit, whereas it does not reduce the parallel 
component when that component is pointing toward 
or away from the planet. Averaged around the orbit, 
the fractional decrease in the perpendicular component 
exceeds the fractional decrease in the parallel component, 
and the spin vector represented by the components has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


been tilted more. There is an equilibrium obliquity 
between 0° and 90° toward which the spin is driven where 
the fractional decreases per orbit in the two components of 
the spin are equal. This equilibrium obliquity is near 90° if 
the satellite spins very rapidly, but decreases toward 0° as 
the spin slows from the tides. For a spin angular velocity 
less than 2n (twice synchronous), the equilibrium obliquity 
is 0°, so a satellite in a fixed circular orbit should approach 
synchronous rotation and zero obliquity simultaneously. 

If the planet and satellite are of comparable mass, both 
planet and satellite can approach synchronous rotation 
and zero obliquity as the orbit expands. Once neither 
planet nor satellite are rotating rapidly relative to the 
orbital mean motion, the tides on both bodies eventually 
tend to reduce the eccentricity. So the natural endpoint of 
tidal evolution in this case is both bodies synchronously 
rotating in a circular orbit with both equatorial planes 
coincident with the orbital plane. 

Other outcomes of tidal evolution include a satellite’s 
spiraling into the planet or its disintegration by tidal forces, 
or perhaps by collisions, to form a ring of material in 
the planet’s equatorial plane (see PLANETARY RINGS). Some 
of the many rings of small-mass objects orbiting in the 
equatorial planes of the major planets could have had 
their origin through a tidal disintegration of a larger, 
rubble pile type object. Multi-satellite systems exhibit 
a rich collection of orbital resonances where the mean 
orbital angular velocities are near the ratio of small whole 
numbers, and most of these were most probably assembled 
by differential tidal expansions of initially more random 
orbits. Within the resonances, continued tidal evolution 
forces increasing eccentricities and/or orbital inclinations 
relative to a planet’s equatorial plane. In nearly all real 
cases, the rate of tidal evolution is so slow that the logical 
endpoint of that evolution, where no further changes will 
occur, has not been reached nor will it be reached before the 
Solar System ceases to exist as we know it some 5 x 10? yr 
from now. We examine some of these real situations in the 
examples below, where some of the remaining puzzles of 
tidal evolution are also pointed out. 

We can summarize tidal theory as follows: 


(1) Tides are raised on a Solar System body M by 
differences in gravitational forces across the body due 
to any nearby body m (figures 1 and 2). 

(2) Any relative rotation between M and m causes the 
tides and hence the internal stresses to oscillate. This 
causes some of the tidal energy to be converted into 
heat much like the heating of a paper clip that is bent 
back and forth repeatedly or the warming of a liquid 
in turbulent flow. 

(3) The tides resemble damped harmonic oscillators 
(mass on the end of a spring spanned by a dashpot) in 
many ways (figure 3), where forcing the oscillator ata 
period that is long compared to the natural period of 
free oscillation results in a time lag in the response 
of the oscillator relative to the forcing term. The 
maximum of a tide at a point on the distorted body 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


then occurs after the tide-raising body has passed 
overhead (figures 4 and 5). 

(4) The resulting non-alignment of the tidal bulges with 
the tide-raising bodies results in torques that decrease 
the relative rotations while changing the separation 
between the bodies. The separation of two tidally 
interacting bodies, the obliquities of their spin axes, 
and the eccentricity of their mutual orbit all change 
in predictable directions governed by the geometry, 
spin magnitudes relative to the mean orbital angular 
velocity, and the dissipation factors Q of each object. 

(5) For rapidly spinning planets with a satellite in 
prograde orbit, the most obvious tidal evolution is 
a reduction in the spins of both planet and satellite 
toward rotation that is synchronous with the orbital 
mean angular velocity as the orbit is expanded. 


Consequences of tidal evolution 

The differential tidal force and the dissipation of tidal 
energy described above are responsible for many observed 
phenomena in the Galaxy and universe. Individual stars 
are stripped from galactic and GLOBULAR CLUSTERS of stars 
if the star drifts into a position where the differential 
tidal force exerted by the total galactic mass exceeds the 
gravitational force of the other cluster members attracting 
the star toward the cluster. comets are stripped off the 
Oort cloud of comets that is thought to extend beyond 
10000 astronomical units from the Sun (an astronomical 
unit (AU) is the distance from Earth to Sun). Weakly 
bound comets or ASTEROIDS can be broken up by tidal 
forces as they pass very close to a planet—as was probably 
demonstrated by the disintegration of Comet Shoemaker— 
Levy 9 before the spectacular crashes of the pieces into 
Jupiter in 1994 (see SHOEMAKER-LEVY 9-JUPITER COLLISION). 
CLOSE BINARY STARS are synchronously rotating with their 
circular orbital motion, due to retardation of their spins 
and damping of their orbital eccentricities from the torques 
arising from the dissipation of tidal energy. The same tidal 
mechanism may have circularized the orbits of extra-solar 
planets (EXOPLANETS) discovered orbiting very close to their 
respective parent stars. Great streams of stars, dust and 
gas are observed trailing away from a galaxy after being 
ripped from that galaxy by tidal forces exerted by another 
galaxy that has passed very close. All of these examples, 
except the synchronously rotating binary stars, are the 
results of singular events where transient circumstances 
lead to relatively short timescale dominance of tidal forces. 
The Solar System offers many more immediate examples 
where dissipation of tidal energy over the age of the 
Solar System has led to very interesting and sometimes 
spectacular consequences. We shall consider each planet 
and planet-satellite system in turn to point out how the 
system has been altered by tides. 


Mercury 

MERCURY experiences tides raised by the Sun, and sufficient 
time has elapsed for Mercury’s spin to have been slowed 
to a rate synchronous with its orbital mean angular 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


velocity. It therefore came as quite a surprise when 
radar observations by Pettengill and Dyce in 1965 revealed 
Mercury’s rotation period to be only two-thirds of its 
orbital period. The eccentricity of Mercury’s orbital ellipse 
has the rather large value of 0.206. Because of this high 
eccentricity, Mercury can rotate stably at several values of 
rotational angular velocity that are half-integer multiples 
of its mean orbital angular velocity. These particular 
rotational states are stabilized by the average torque on the 
permanent axial asymmetry. This asymmetry is like a tidal 
bulge, except it is not induced by an exterior gravitational 
field but is supported by internal shear stresses. The 
stability is such that the long axis of the permanent, egg- 
shaped asymmetry is oriented toward the Sun as Mercury 
passes through the perihelion (point in orbit closest to 
the Sun) of its orbit. This same stability was pointed out 
above as a necessary condition for synchronous rotation 
of a satellite in an eccentric orbit. 

The inferred tidal evolution of Mercury’s spin angular 
velocity is a tidal retardation of the spin through a series 
of stable states, where the spin angular velocity vr would 
be 3n, 2.5n, 2n, or 1.5n, where n is the mean orbital 
angular velocity. These spin angular velocities would 
allow the long axis of Mercury’s slight egg shape to be 
nearly aligned with the direction from Mercury to the 
Sun at every perihelion passage. Such a state is stable 
against further tidal evolution if the maximum average 
torque on the permanent deformation exceeds the tidal 
torque. Mercury need not be captured in a stable state 
as it passes through. The probability of capture depends 
on the detailed tidal model, but all tidal models share 
the property that the states corresponding to the spin 
angular velocity y = An, where A is a half-integer, have a 
decreasing probability of capture as A increases, ultimately 
reaching zero probability when A is so large that the state 
is not stable. Thus we find Mercury in that spin state 
(w = 1.5n) which has the highest capture probability of 
any state Mercury could have passed through as the tides 
slowed it toward synchronous rotation. Observations of 
an intrinsic magnetic field on Mercury imply the existence 
of a conducting liquid core. If this core were liquid 
early in Mercury’s history, the tidal evolution may not 
have been as described here. The existence of a liquid 
core with the resulting dissipation of energy through 
any differential rotation with respect to Mercury’s mantle 
drastically increases the probability of capture into the 
spin-orbit resonances. If capture of Mercury into the 2:1 
spin-orbit resonance were certain because of the core— 
mantle interaction, Mercury may have had to start its 
rotation with y < 2n. Mercury is the only example 
known where such spin-orbit coupling has led through 
tidal evolution to a stable state other than synchronous 
rotation. 

But tidal dissipation is still occurring in Mercury, 
making the orbit more circular. The stability of the 
current spin state vanishes when the orbital eccentricity 
gets sufficiently small. Tides could thus eventually bring 
Mercury to synchronous rotation in a nearly circular orbit. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


However, it would take many times the age of the Solar 
System for this to occur. 

That Mercury’s spin axis is very close to being 
perpendicular to its orbital plane (nearly zero obliquity) 
is also a result of tidal evolution. However, because 
Mercury’s orbit is not fixed, but precesses relative to 
the stars with a period of about 250000 yr due to the 
gravitational perturbations by the other planets, the tides 
are trying to drive Mercury’s spin toward an orbit normal 
(vector perpendicular to the orbit plane) that is itself 
moving. The compromise position to which the spin is 
driven is called a Cassini state, where the spin axis lies 
permanently ina plane determined by a line perpendicular 
to its orbital plane and a line perpendicular to the plane 
of the Solar System. This state is very close to the orbit 
normal, and Mercury would have been driven there by the 
tides from virtually any initial obliquity and spin angular 
velocity. 


Venus 

VENUS rotates in a direction which is opposite to the sense 
of its nearly circular orbital motion. This state is described 
by assigning an obliquity « of nearly 180° to the spin 
axis. This retrograde rotation is not the result of tidal 
evolution in the ordinary sense of tides raised by the solar 
gravitational field, since such tides attempt to drive the 
obliquity to zero after Venus’s spin rate became less than 
2n. If Venus began with an obliquity greater than 90°, 
like Uranus whose obliquity is 97°, the friction between a 
liquid core and the solid exterior of Venus called the mantle 
could dominate the ordinary gravitational tide and drive 
Venus to the current 180° obliquity. If Venus started with 
€ < 90°, the core—mantle interaction would have aided the 
gravitational tide in driving Venus eventually toward zero 
obliquity. In this case the only alternative to account for the 
current € ~ 180° seems to be an atmospheric thermal tide. 
There is reason to suspect that such a thermal tide exists on 
Venus, since we observe one on Earth. The absorption of 
solar radiation in our upper atmosphere couples with the 
modes of oscillation of our atmosphere to generate an egg- 
shaped distribution of atmospheric mass whose maxima 
occur at 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. local time. With this 
phase, the gravitational attraction of this thermal tide by 
the Sun tends to accelerate the spinning atmosphere and 
thereby the EARTH’S ROTATION. This is opposite to the effect of 
the gravitational tide which is decelerating the Earth. The 
effect of the atmospheric thermal tide on the Earth’s spin 
is only about 10% of the effect of the gravitational tide. But 
Venus’s atmosphere has nearly 100 times the mass of our 
own atmosphere, so if a similar thermal tide is generated 
on Venus, it may easily dominate the gravitational tide. If 
we can model that tide by a gravitational tide but simply 
reverse the torque on the planet, the atmosphere could 
dominate both the gravitational tide and a core-mantle 
interaction and drive Venus to its current obliquity from 
a primordial obliquity less than 90°. Observation of the 
barometric pressure at the surface of Venus for a Venus day 
would determine the magnitude of the current thermal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


tide and probably indicate whether or not the atmosphere 
was capable of turning Venus upside down. 


Earth 

Tidal evolution of the Earth-Moon system has been 
directly measured. Our day is getting longer at the 
rate of about 0.0016 s each century. The Moon’s mean 
orbital angular velocity is decreasing at the rate of about 
22 arcseconds per century’. This means that each year, 
the Moon is moved further away from us by about 3 or 
4 cm. This rate implies an Earth which is currently more 
dissipative than it was in the past, for if we extrapolate 
the Moon’s orbit backward in time, assuming the Earth’s 
Q was always its current value, the Moon ends near the 
Earth’s surface only 1.6 Gy ago—about one-third the age 
of the Earth-Moon system (1 Gy is 10° yr). Most of the 
tidal dissipation on Earth is in the oceans, and the higher 
Q in the distant past is usually attributed to a different 
configuration of the continents, thereby allowing for fewer 
shallow seas for the dissipation of the tidal energy. 

The effect of the tide raised on the Moon by the Earth 
has driven the Moon’s rotation to the endpoint of its tidal 
evolution consistent with the current orbital configuration. 
The Moon’s rotation is synchronous with its mean orbital 
motion, which we readily ascertain by always viewing 
the same lunar face from Earth. In addition, its spin 
axis has been driven to a stable Cassini state, in which 
the spin remains coplanar with the perpendiculars to the 
Moon’s and Earth’s orbit with an obliquity of 6°41’. (The 
current geometric configuration of the Moon spin axis 
together with its synchronous rotation are collectively 
called Cassini’s laws, from which the name Cassini state 
is derived.) 

Although tidal dissipation in the Moon has been 
sufficient to slow it to synchronous rotation and drive the 
spin axis to a Cassini state, the contribution of the tidal 
heating to the thermal history of the lunar interior has 
been negligibly small. The Moon was, of course, once 
much closer to the Earth, and the rate of dissipation was 
correspondingly much higher than it is now. However, it 
was pushed out too fast toward distances corresponding 
to small dissipation for the interior to heat significantly. 


Mars 

MaRS’ spin has not been significantly affected by tidal 
dissipation. It is too far from the Sun, and its satellites, 
PHOBOS AND DEIMOS, are very small. The two satellites, 
on the other hand, are both rotating synchronously with 
their orbital mean motions. The inner satellite, Phobos, is 
unusual in the sense that it is so close to Mars (orbit radius 
~ 6.8 Martian radii) that its orbital period is less than Mars’ 
rotation period (7.65 h versus 24 h 37 m). Reference to 
figure 4 shows that in this case the tidal bulge is behind 
Phobos and the direction of acceleration of the satellite 
is opposite to its motion. Phobos is therefore spiraling 
into Mars. The measured acceleration of Phobos’ orbital 
angular velocity leads to a Q of Mars of about 100, which 
is comparable to that of rocks on the Earth. If Q remains 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the same as Phobos spirals toward Mars and if Phobos is 
sufficiently strong to remain in one piece, it will strike the 
surface of Mars in about 10° yr. 


Jupiter 

JUPITER is about 300 times more massive than Earth, and its 
satellites, although three of them are larger than our Moon, 
total only a little over 10-4 of Jupiter’s mass. The spin of 
the planet has thus not been significantly altered by the 
tides. 

The satellites have experienced significant tidal 
evolution. All the Galilean satellites (discovered 
by Galileo)—Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto— 
are rotating synchronously with their respective orbital 
motions, as is Amalthea, which is a small satellite inside 
the innermost Galilean satellite, Io (see JUPITER: SATELLITES). 
The orbits have not expanded very far, however, since Io 
is only about 5 Jupiter radii from the planet’s surface. This 
close proximity after 4.6 x 10° yr of evolution means the 
averaged Q of Jupiter must exceed about 6 x 10*. 

The first three Galilean satellite orbits have mean 
orbital angular velocities that obey the relation n| — 3n2 + 
2n3 = 0 (called the Laplace relation), where the subscripts 
refer to 10, EUROPA and GANYMEDE respectively. Io’s angular 
velocity is nearly twice Europa’s and Europa’s nearly twice 
Ganymede’s. The satellites are stably locked together in 
these orbital resonances, and so their orbits must expand 
together while maintaining the relation among their mean 
orbital angular velocities as tides raised on Jupiter push 
them away. It is likely that the differential tidal expansions 
of the orbits assembled the satellites into the resonances. 

The existence of the orbital resonances has had a 
profound effect on Io. The condition that conjunctions 
of Io and Europa (both satellites on the same side of 
Jupiter at closest approach) always occur when Io is at 
the periapse of its orbit, forces the eccentricity of Io’s orbit 
to the value of 0.0041. Even though Io is synchronously 
rotating with its mean orbital motion, the tide raised on 
Io by Jupiter increases and decreases in magnitude and 
the bulge moves back and forth to follow the motion of 
Jupiter in Io’s sky. Io rotates uniformly, whereas the orbital 
motion in an eccentric orbit is not uniform. This causes the 
oscillatory motion of Jupiter in Io’s sky. The tide raised 
on Io is enormous—more than 7 km high if Io were fluid 
and uniformly dense. The variable part of the tide is 
100 m for this fluid Io, so one expects substantial tidal 
dissipation. (Taking account of Io’s central condensation 
reduces these tidal amplitudes somewhat, but they remain 
enormous.) Ordinarily such dissipation would damp the 
orbital eccentricity to zero, and the dissipation would 
cease. However, the eccentricity is maintained by the tides 
raised on Jupiter continuously trying to force Io deeper 
into the orbital resonance, and the accumulated heat has 
been sufficient to melt the entire satellite. Tidal theory 
was used to predict that Io should be extensively melted, 
and the voyaGER spacecraft subsequently found it to be the 
most volcanically active body in the Solar System. This 
is a case where tidal dissipation has dominated all other 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


energy sources in determining the thermal history of a 
Solar System body. 


Saturn 

SATURN, like Jupiter, has not evolved significantly through 
tidal interaction (see SATURN: SATELLITES). But all the satellites 
out to and including IAPeTus are rotating synchronously 
with their orbital mean motions, with the exception of 
HYPERION, aS a consequence of tidal dissipation. Recent 
detection of albedo features on the surface of TITAN through 
a narrow infrared window in its perpetual atmospheric 
haze have verified its synchronous rotation. Voyager 2 
images have shown Hyperion to be slowly rotating 
and therefore tidally evolved in spite of its small size. 
However, Hyperion is so far from spherical symmetry 
and is in such an eccentric orbit that strong gravitational 
torques on the satellite due to Saturn prevent an evolution 
to an orderly synchronous rotation. Hyperion will most 
likely tumble ina chaotic fashion for the remaining lifetime 
of the Solar System. 

There are three sets of orbital resonances among the 
satellites of Saturn that were known before Voyager 1 
and several more among the recently discovered smaller 
satellites. Of the former resonances, the 2:1 resonances 
between mimAs and TETHYS and between ENCELADUS and 
DIONE could have been assembled by differential tidal 
expansion of their orbits. However, the 4:3 Titan— 
Hyperion resonance could have been so assembled only 
if the Q of Saturn was considerably smaller for the tide 
raised by Titan on Saturn compared to the Q appropriate 
to the inner satellites. Even if this were true, Titan’s mass 
is so large that special circumstances would have had to 
prevail to allow its orbit to expand to the 4:3 resonance with 
Hyperion without close approaches that would eliminate 
Hyperion from the system. The proximity of Mimas to 
Saturn establishes the lower bound Q > 16000 for Saturn. 
A lower Q would have pushed Mimas farther away from 
the planet than we find it. This value of Q is too high 
to allow the evolution to the observed state of Titan— 
Hyperion resonance from an initial condition appropriate 
for a presumed tidal assembly. As there are no obvious 
reasons for imposing a sufficient amplitude or frequency 
dependence on Q to preserve both the tidal assembly of 
the inner resonances and that of Titan—Hyperion, it is often 
assumed that the latter resonance must be linked to the 
formation process and therefore not due to tidal evolution. 

Observations by Voyagers 1 and 2 showed that the 
surfaces of several satellites had been reworked by some 
indigenous processes after the major cratering events. 
Especially puzzling is Enceladus, which is an icy satellite 
only 250 km in radius but which has areas on its surface 
that are probably less than 10° yr old. The radioactive 
content of Enceladus is negligibly small, and application 
of the tidal heating hypothesis, which was so successful 
in accounting for the state of Jupiter’s satellite Io, does not 
supply sufficient energy to cause the resurfacing, given the 
eccentricity of 0.0044 maintained by the resonance with 
Dione. Still, tidal heating, by a process of elimination, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


seems to be the only viable source of energy to cause the 
relatively recent resurfacing of Enceladus. If this isso, then 
Enceladus must have participated in one or more orbital 
resonances in the relatively recent past that could force its 
eccentricity to large values, thereby dissipating sufficient 
tidal energy to soften its interior. Earlier resonances, since 
disrupted, with Tethys and with the small moon Janus 
have been proposed, but there is no consensus on the 
details of the orbital history. 


Uranus 

URANUS is too far from the Sun and its satellites too small 
for the dissipation of tidal energy to have affected its 
spin. However, the five largest satellites, MIRANDA, ARIEL, 
UMBRIEL, TITANIA, and OBERON, in order of distance from 
Uranus, appear to be synchronously rotating with their 
orbital motion as predicted by tidal theory. (The largest 
satellite, Titania, has a radius of about 805 km and a mass 
of about 3.3 x 104 g, where the latter is about 4.5% of 
the lunar mass.) The satellite system is unlike those of 
Jupiter or Saturn as none of the satellites is involved in 
an orbital resonance. However, it is almost certain that 
such resonances existed in the past, since some of the 
satellites have apparently been resurfaced by indigenous 
processes and the innermost of the five larger satellites, 
Miranda, has an unusually large inclination of its orbit 
relative to Uranus’s equatorial plane of 4.2°. (Logical 
formation processes would start Miranda and the other 
close satellites in equatorial orbits.) The only reasonable 
way to account for this inclination is to have Miranda 
pushed into a 3:1 orbital resonance with Umbriel by tides 
raised on Uranus where the inclination secularly increases 
to a point where the resonance is disrupted leaving the 
inclination at its high value. There are remaining puzzles 
in the Uranus system whose explanations most probably 
involve the dissipation of tidal energy, but details of 
the resonance history are still uncertain. Ariel, the next 
satellite out from Miranda, has been resurfaced since crater 
counts are drastically reduced in places. Ariel is currently 
outside the 2:1 orbital resonance with the next satellite, 
Umbriel, but an orbital eccentricity sufficiently high to 
have softened the interior of Ariel might have been forced 
by occupancy of this resonance in the past. However, 
the 2:1 resonance is difficult to disrupt, and we would 
expect this resonance to persist if it had ever existed. If 
the 2:1 resonance never existed, the tidal expansion of 
Ariel’s orbit is limited to the range outside this resonance. 
This places an lower bound on the Q of Uranus of 11 000, 
while at the same time, the necessity that Miranda had 
occupied the 3:1 resonance with Umbriel to account for 
its orbital inclination places a upper bound on this Q of 
39000. (If Q < 11000, Ariel’s orbit would have expanded 
sufficiently to have begun inside the 2:1 resonance with 
Umbriel, whereas if Q > 39000, Miranda’s orbit would 
not have expanded far enough to have begun inside the 
3:1 resonance with Umbriel.) Still, the 2:1 Ariel-Umbriel 
resonance may have been disrupted by the perturbations 
of Titania through some subtle resonance interaction yet 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to be discovered. A final puzzle is that Umbriel’s surface 
is uniformly very old, whereas that of Titania, which 
is outside Umbriel, has been resurfaced in places. An 
interesting tidal history of this satellite system remains to 
be discovered. 


Neptune 

Prior to the Voyager spacecraft reconnaissance in 1989, 
NEPTUNE’S known satellite system consisted of one large 
satellite, TRITON, in a close, circular but retrograde orbit 
(orbiting in a direction opposite to the sense of the rotation 
of Neptune) and a small satellite, Neried, in a distant, 
prograde but highly eccentric orbit. Triton is the only 
example in the Solar System where such a large satellite 
orbits in a retrograde sense so close to its primary (14.33 
Neptune radii). The only plausible explanation for this 
unusual orbit is that Triton did not form in the same way 
that the regular satellites of the other major planets had 
formed by the accumulation of debris in the equatorial 
plane of the forming planet, but that it was formed 
elsewhere in the Solar System and captured by Neptune 
in a highly eccentric, but retrograde orbit, where the 
capture was most likely accomplished through collision 
with previously orbiting debris. The damping of the high 
eccentricity would be accomplished by tidal dissipation 
from tides raised both on Neptune by Triton and on Triton 
by Neptune. (Note that the retrograde orbit reverses 
the usual tendency of the tides on the planet to increase 
eccentricity.) Tidal theory was used to predict this history 
before the Voyager encounter, and it placed some severe 
constraints on what we expected to find from the Voyager 
images. First, evidence of tidal heating would be revealed 
by a very young Triton surface with few or no craters. 
Second, Triton would have cleaned out all small satellites 
for some distance outside its current orbit. Voyager found 
Triton to be nearly crater-free, and although 6 small new 
satellites were found orbiting in Neptune’s equatorial 
plane inside Triton’s orbit, none were found outside. 


Pluto 

Pluto is a binary planet in the sense that its satellite, 
Charon, is of comparable size (Pluto radius ~ 1500 km, 
Charon radius ~ 700 km) (see PLUTO AND CHARON). The 
discovery of the satellite occurred fortuitously just before 
the orbital motion of the system swept the orbital plane 
past the Earth. Repeated occultations and eclipses 
involving Pluto and Charon resulted in a detailed 
description of the system. The orbital period is 6.3867 d— 
the same as Pluto’s rotation period. It is also almost 
certain that Charon is also synchronously rotating with 
the orbital motion, making the system the only example 
in the Solar System where tidal evolution has progressed 
to its logical endpoint. The only possible exception to this 
conclusion is that the orbital eccentricity may not be quite 
zero, although observations implying the latter have not 
been independently confirmed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tides 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Future research 

We have pointed out several puzzles of tidal evolution 
of the satellite systems in the Solar System that await 
resolution using essentially the tidal theory outlined 
above coupled with theories of orbital resonances. An 
implicit assumption in this theory is that the tides change 
slowly enough that their magnitudes are assumed to 
have the values a static tide would have. However, the 
circularization of the orbits of the recently found extra- 
solar giant planets orbiting within 0.2 AU of their stars 
presents a special problem. If these planets were formed 
far from their stars and their present close orbits involved 
scattering by a close encounter with another giant planet 
in the system, the orbit initially would have been highly 
eccentric with a very small periapse distance. Such a 
scenario requires that the eccentricity be damped ina time 
less than the estimated age of the central star—presumably 
by tidal dissipation. But both the planet and the star are 
essentially completely gaseous where ordinary schemes 
of dissipating tidal energy, such as turbulence, are very 
inefficient. Until recently, only one scheme, involving a 
phase change in helium in the deep interior, had been 
offered to account for sufficient dissipation in Jupiter 
to account for the tidally maintained set of resonances 
among the Galilean satellites, and it is uncertain whether 
conditions prevail that would allow the mechanism to 
work. However, the distribution of gas in a giant planet 
as well as that in a star are subject to various modes of 
oscillation whose frequencies ordinarily would have been 
thought sufficiently high that the standard tidal treatment 
would suffice. An example where this assumption is 
not appropriate is the thermal tide on the Earth, where 
the excitation is diurnal, but the major response is semi- 
diurnal. Treatment of an atmosphere disturbed by a 
varying tidal force due to rotation apparently requires a 
dynamic rather than a static tidal treatment, where the 
atmospheric response is resolved into a series of oscillation 
modes. Application of such an analysis to Jupiter has 
accounted for sufficient dissipation to accommodate the 
maintenance of the satellite resonances, although, again, a 
special structure that might not prevail is required. The 
frontier of tidal theory thus lies in the development of 
analyses that account for the full dynamics of gaseous 
bodies. The major motivations are to obtain rates of 
tidal dissipation in gaseous bodies that are theoretically 
secure, which give dissipations in the giant planets within 
observational bounds, and which could account for the 
circularization of the orbits of extra-solar planets close to 
their stars. 


Bibliography 

Ioannou PJ and Lindzen RS 1994 Gravitational tides in the 
outer planets 2. Interior calculations and estimation 
of the tidal dissipation factor Astrophys. J. 406 266-78 

Melchior P 1983 The Tides of the Planet Earth (Oxford: 
Pergamon) 

Peale S J 1976 Consequences and inferences from tidal 
interactions in the solar system Ann. Geophys. 33 23— 
30 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Peale S J 1986 Orbital resonances, unusual configurations 
and exotic rotation states among planetary satellites 
Satellites (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 
pp 159-223 

Peale SJ 1999 Origin and evolution of the natural satellites 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 37 37-106 


S J Peale 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Time Scales: Atomic 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Time Scales: Atomic 


Atomic time scales (ATSs) are here considered; in the 
next section the historical reasons that led to an atomic 
definition of the second, adopted by the XIIIth Conférence 
Général des Poids et Mesures (CGPM) in 1967, are given. 
The Comité Consultatif Temps et Fréquence (CCTF), 
meeting every 3-4 yr at the Bureau International des Poids 
et Mesures (BIPM), now performs studies on the Systeme 
Internationale (SI) atomic second and on the ATSs, in Paris. 

In the subsequent section the main characteristics 
of a time scale (TS) are reviewed along the resulting 
requirements, while the final section deals with the 
theoretical and practical construction of TAI (Temps 
Atomique International (INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC TIME)) and 
UTC (UNIVERSAL TIME Coordinated), the TS on which the 
entire everyday life of all nations is regulated. 

Attention is drawn to the fact that the letter ‘C’ in 
UTC denotes ‘coordinated’ and not ‘coordinate’; UTC is 
not a time coordinate in a relativistic meaning, but is 
the result of a coordinated effort by parts of most of the 
national metrological institutions. Each institution keeps 
a local version of TAI (K), where the K in parentheses is 
the name of the individual laboratory, the expression TAI 
being usually reserved to the International Time Scale, as 
calculated by the Time Section of BIPM, on the basis of the 
readings of the individual clocks kept in the participating 
laboratories. UTC (K) differs from TAI by an integer 
number of hours and represents the time reference scale 
to be used inside a given country; with the notation UTC 
is intended the realization of this TS in the 0 time zone, 
around the International Meridian of origin. 


The atomic definition of the second and the 
concept of an atomic time scale 
In the middle of the 20th century, for a number of 
applications the accuracy, precision and stability of the 
second, as the unit of time interval, were not adequate. 
Their requirements of scientific applications—lunar radar 
ranging, spectroscopy research—and technical ones— 
telecommunications and electronic instrumentation— 
were not met by the astronomical definitions, reaching 
relative accuracies between 10~’ and 10°. 

At NPL, England, in 1955 a frequency standard using 
a cesium transition was put in operation: this device 
offered an accuracy of some 10~° and led to a number of 
discoveries, one of which was the first measurement of the 
secular decrement in the speed of EARTH'S ROTATION. 


The definition of the ‘atomic’ second 
The present definition of the second is based on a 
microwave transition of cesium (the official definitions 
are in French): ‘Le seconde est la durée de 9 192 631770 
périodes de la radiation correspondant 4a la transition 
entre les deux niveaux hyperfins de l'état fondamental de 
l’atome de césium 133’. 

The value given for the cesium hyperfine transition 
frequency was obtained by a measurement of cesium 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


frequency in terms of the second of Ephemeris Time; 
in these terms the atomic SI second can be considered 
as linked to an astronomical unit, based on the Earth’s 
revolution. 


The atomic time scale 
ATS is fully identified by two choices: 


@ the unit of scale, i.e. the time interval to be accumulated 
and numbered—in the case of TAI this interval is the SI 
second; 


@ the origin. 


The choice of the origin is fully arbitrary and is a 
matter of agreements and of convenience; the origin was 
chosen as 0 hours UT1 on 1 January 1958. 

The first definition of TAI, translated in English, 
is as follows: ‘International atomic time (TAI) is the 
time reference coordinate established by the Bureau 
International de l’Heure on the basis of the readings 
of atomic clocks operating in various establishments in 
accordance with the definition of the second, the unit of 
time of the International System of Units’ (in 1988, the 
responsibility of TAI was transferred from the Bureau 
International de l’Heure to the Time Section of the Bureau 
International des Poids et Mesures). 

This TAI definition adopted by CGPM in 1971 was 
enlarged in 1980 by CCTF (at that time the name was 
CCDS—Consultative Committee for the Definition of the 
Second) in order to take in to account relativity effects: ‘TAI 
is a coordinate time scale defined in a geocentric reference 
frame with the SI second as realized by the rotating geoid 
as the scale unit’. 

In this situation, the relation between the TAI scale 
unit and a given realization of the SI second as given by 
an atomic clock depends on the position of that clock. 
For clocks at rest, and situated at sea level, the scale 
unit of TAI is equal to the unit of time, the SI second, 
as realized locally. The scale unit of TAI appears to be 
longer by 2.2 x 10-!° s if compared with a clock kept at an 
altitude of 2000 m, owing to the gravitational redshift. A 
complete theoretical definition of TAI in the framework 
of general relativity can be found in the documents of 
the IAU General Assembly held in Buenos Aires, 1991 
(Resolution A4); see also REFERENCE FRAMES AND TIME SCALES 
IN GENERAL RELATIVITY. 

TAI is consequently an artificial TS, formed by 
combining with suitable algorithms the readings of atomic 
clocks kept in metrological laboratories or other scientific 
institutions in different geopotential conditions. 


Characteristic of a time scale 

The features that must be exhibited by a TS—as for most of 
the units and standards of physical quantities—are many 
and in some cases unexpected. 

ATSs adequately fulfil some of these requirements 
but are completely lacking as regards others. The 
requirements are accuracy, precision, stability, universality 
(access availability) and perenniality. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Time Scales: Atomic 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Some links between these properties, their scientific 
use and the relevant consequences are outlined in what 
follows. 


Perenniality 

The ATS being based on artefacts, this property cannot be 
satisfied. Any ATS given by an individual clock is bounded 
by the technical life of that clock and consequently cannot 
be extended in the past and in the future, as is indeed 
possible—at least in principle—with all the astronomical 
TSs. 

It is worth noting that the ATS of a single atomic 
clock is not everlasting or perennial, but ATSs based on 
agreements, such as TAI itself or TT (Terrestrial Time; 
see also TIME SCALES: TERRESTRIAL), can be mutually linked 
to former TSs, in order to ensure perenniality. 

The general lack of perenniality and the need to 
perform time links between clocks or TS calls for three 
features, as regards the formation of an ATS: 


@ redundancy of clocks, also inside a laboratory; 


@ availability of accurate time comparison systems, inside 
a laboratory and between remote laboratories, to 
perpetuate the ‘reading’ of a failing clock; 


@ geographic or topographic ‘dispersion’ of these clocks 
to reduce the consequences of any mishap regarding the 
clocks of a given laboratory. 


These three characteristics to be satisfied inevitably 
have profound consequences for TS formation. 


Universality 

This characteristic had a physical meaning in the pre- 
relativity era; now the term is intended to mean that an ATS 
is accepted, accessible and made available to all classes of 
users. These three characteristics are studied and obtained 
by some international scientific unions (UAI, URSI), 
scientific-technical bodies such as CIPM, via its CCTF, 
and BIPM, via its Time Section, and technical—-regulatory 
bodies, such as ITU-R (International Telecommunication 
Union—Radiocommunications). 


Accuracy 
The time ‘length’, or duration of the second used to 
construct an ATS, must conform as strictly as possible to 
the SI definition. This agreement, estimated to be around 
10~° in 1955, when the first atomic frequency standard 
was put in operation, is progressing by about 1 order 
of magnitude per decade. At the turn of the century 
this agreement reached an accuracy of some 10-" and it 
is expected that an additional 1-2 orders of magnitude 
could be at reach. ATS accuracy can be considered to be 
satisfactory. 

It is important to stress that this level of accuracy 
is available ‘nearby’ the clock and cannot easily be 
transferred to remote locations. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Precision 

This is a measure of the ability to ‘read’ the date of an 
event. Precision depends on the characteristics both of 
the atomic clock (its phase noise) and of the instrument. 
Another obvious limitation exists if the reference ATS is to 
be remotely accessed via a link, rather than being available 
in the same laboratory where the timing is to be performed. 


Stability 
This characteristic is taken for granted (at least as regards 
the flow of time); no experiment so far performed has cast 
doubts on the temporal stability of Planck’s constant or of 
fine or hyperfine constants. 

No variation has been observed at the level of 
10-4 yrot. 


Time scales from pulsars or other astronomical objects 

The lack of perenniality of a TS based on manmade 
devices has promoted, since 1975, the search for clock 
references in the universe; this research so far has offered 
no solutions to TS formation for scientific and technical 
timing but has provided some useful information about 
these extraterrestrial time reference sources. 


Atomic time scale formation 

General consideration on time scale characteristics and 
requirements 

ATS formation is a very complicated affair and it is 
definitely not a trivial one. The reasons for these 
complexities can be grouped into at least five categories: 


(a) final goals; 

(b) characteristics of the clocks; 

(c) characteristics of the comparison systems between 
the remote clocks; 

(d) problems intrinsic to any averaging systems; 

(e) how to evaluate relativity effects, black-body 
radiation effects, etc and how the uncertainty budget 
of primary clocks is established. 


A few examples are given for the five categories. 


(a) Should the final ATS strive for uniformity and 
stability or for accuracy? 

These goals can be conflicting: navigation systems 
are more interested in stability; fundamental con- 
stants research is more interested in accuracy. 

(b) Eachkind of atomic clock is affected by different noise 
processes, very seldom ‘white’: see ‘Noise processes 
affecting atomic clocks’ below. 

(c) The various comparison systems exhibit different 
‘errors’ and noise processes, or phenomena linked 
to the propagation or environmental temperatures; 
the ‘time constants’ required to compensate for these 
effects can be in conflict with the ‘time constants’ 
inside the algorithms chosen to optimize accuracy or 
stability. 

(d) The ‘colors’ (the spectral behaviour) of some noise 
affecting the clocks can prevent an easy statistical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Time Scales: Atomic 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


treatment; moreover, how should the time constant 
be used, what time constant should be used and how 
should the clocks contributing to the TS be weighted? 
(e) The accuracy of a primary atomic clock cannot be 
measured with reference to another primary clock; it 
can only be estimated. To determine the error budget 
of one of these clocks is an operation based on the 
intellectual honesty of the experimenters. 


Another problem, a technical and organizational one 
and typical of TAI formation, is how to collect timely data 
from some 200 atomic clocks, of different types, kept in 
some 50 laboratories scattered around the world. Similar 
problems are encountered for the TS of navigation systems 
or formed in national metrological institutions. 


Formation algorithms 

As an example, the formation of TAI, a two-step process, 
is described. Initially, using a weighted mean of all 
the clocks, a TS called EAL is formed, from the French 
échelle atomique libre—free atomic time scale. EAL 
is optimized for long-term stability and its frequency 
is, with a suitable time constant, corrected in a way 
to conform to the frequency of the cesium primary 
frequency standards. Adopting this two-step process, 
both stability and accuracy can be secured, clearly within 
some given limits. Obviously some criteria to be followed 
in establishing the weights of the individual clocks must 
be adopted. 

The average TS EAL can be defined as follows: 


villi (t) + hi] 
ee Pi 


where h;(t) represents the reading of the ith clock , taken at 
time t, N is the number of atomic clocks, p; is the statistical 
weight of the ith clock and h/(t) is a suitable correction 
needed to offer continuity in time and in frequency in the 
case of the introduction or removal of a clock or the change 
in weight of a clock, while 


EAL = 


xij =hj(t) —h(@) 


is the measure of the difference between the clocks. 

A system of N equations in N unknowns is formed; 
the results are the wanted differences between the average 
EAL and the readings of the individual clocks. 


Noise processes affecting atomic clocks 

One of the subtlest problems in TS formation is the 
consequences for the reading of a clock due to various 
noise processes affecting the frequency and the phase 
of the real devices. This problem is of paramount 
importance in satellite navigation systems in which the 
mutual discrepancy between the some 50-100 atomic 
clocks forming a given system should be kept, at any time, 
below 1 ns. Half of these clocks are placed in orbiting 
satellites and must be kept on time by a complex system of 
monitoring stations, which are also required to determine, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in real time and using time measurements, the position of 
each satellite with errors less than 1 m. 

A number of problems, such as the choice of the 
orbit, the kind and number of atomic clocks kept on 
Earth or in space, the adoption of a given synchronization 
technique and the number and the geographic positions 
of the monitoring stations, are all linked to the noise 
processes affecting the clocks. The reading of any clock 
is indeed divergent as a result of the noise processes, and 
to keep this discrepancy against the TS formed by the 
entire navigation system inside 1 ns requires a frequency 
accuracy of the order of 10-™ and the most accurate 
synchronization techniques. 

The law of divergence of the reading of an individual 
clock against the ‘average’ depends on the kind of noise 
and, in some cases, the divergence and its estimate are not 
linear with the elapsed time, as can be seen in table 1. 


Table 1. Divergence of clock readings for various kinds of noise. 


Uncertainty prediction u(t): 
law of proportionality 


Kind of noise to the elapsed time 


White noise on phase ie 
Flicker on phase [Incr ]!/2 
Random walk on phase 11/2 
Flicker frequency t 


Random walk on frequency 1°’ 


Uncertainties 
Accuracy can be secured only by a comparison with 
primary cesium frequency standards, where ‘primary’ 
means that an uncertainty budget was obtained via a 
number of experiments and calculation. 

At the present state of knowledge an accuracy of a 
few 10~'° seems within reach, provided that a suitable 
integration time is adopted. 


Sigfrido Leschiutta 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Time Scales: Terrestrial 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Time Scales: Terrestrial 


Terrestrial time is at present derived from atomic clocks. 
The SI second, the unit of time of the international 
system of units, has been defined since 1967 in terms of 
a hyperfine transition of the cesium atom and the best 
primary frequency standards now realize it with a relative 
uncertainty of a few parts in 10'°, which makes it the most 
accurately measurable physical quantity. INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC TIME (TAI) is based on more than 200 atomic clocks 
distributed worldwide that provide its stability, while a 
small number of primary frequency standards provide 
its accuracy. From TAI is derived Universal Coordinated 
Time (UTC) thatis the basis of all legal time scales. To allow 
the construction of TAI and the general dissemination of 
time, clocks separated by thousands of kilometers must 
be compared and synchronized. This may be achieved 
with an uncertainty of a few nanoseconds in 1 day or 
less using radiotransmission techniques such as the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) or two-way time transfer using 
geostationary satellites. The definition of TAI must be 
considered within the framework of general relativity; 
it is a realization of a time coordinate in the geocentric 
reference system. In the future a new generation of clocks 
may provide, in the laboratory or on board satellites, an 
accuracy of 10-!” or less. When this happens it may be 
necessary to reconsider both the definition and the way of 
realizing TAI and new time transfer techniques will need 
to be developed to compare the new clocks. 


Relativity: proper and coordinate time 


Relativity distinguishes locally measurable (proper) 
quantities from coordinates which are, by definition, 
dependent on conventions. Therefore one should 
distinguish proper time, which is the output of an 
ideal clock, from coordinate time, which is one of the 
coordinates chosen to represent the four-dimensional 
space-time. In its Resolution A4 (1991), the INTERNATIONAL 
ASTRONOMICAL UNION explicitly introduced general relativity 
as the theoretical background for space-time reference 
frames (see also REFERENCE FRAMES AND TIME SCALES IN GENERAL 
RELATIVITY). For the geocentric system, it defined two time 
coordinates: the geocentric coordinate time (TCG) and 
terrestrial time (TT), which differs from TCG by a constant 
rate so that the scale unit of TT agrees with the SI second on 
the geoid. In this framework, it is clearly stated that TAT is 
a realization of TT (apart from a constant offset of 32.184 s). 
That relativistic point of view had already been adopted 
by the Consultative Committee for the Definition of the 
Second! (CCDS) which declared (1980) ‘TAI is a coordinate 
time scale defined in a geocentric reference frame with the 
SI second as realized on the geoid as its scale unit’. 


1 Now named the Consultative Committee for Time and 
Frequency (CCTF). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Generation of an atomic time scale 

According to a definition of the International Telecommu- 
nications Union, a time scale is an ‘ordered set of time 
markers’. To form an atomic time scale, the efficient com- 
bination of the readings of the atomic clocks requires the 
definition of the expected qualities of the time scale, the 
characterization of the timing data and the design of an 
algorithm (see TIME SCALES: ATOMIC). In addition to the ba- 
sic requirement that a single time marker be attributed to 
one event, one may consider metrological qualities for a 
time scale, such as its stability and accuracy, or practical 
qualities such as its reliability and delay of access. 

Stability may be defined by the ability to keep the 
same frequency over a given time interval. A number 
of statistical tools have been devised to estimate the 
instability of a clock or time scale (or more generally any 
time series of measurements). Among them, the most 
commonly used is the two-sample, or Allan, deviation 
oy(t), which estimates the fractional frequency instability 
over the averaging time t. Figure 1 presents the frequency 
stability of various recent clocks and that of TAI for 
comparison. Accuracy, on the other hand, may be defined 
as the degree of conformity of a value to its definition. At 
present the SI second is defined by a hyperfine transition 
of the Cs atom, and only a few laboratory devices, the 
primary frequency standards, aim at realizing it with 
utmost accuracy. The most accurate primary standard is 
now a Cs fountain developed at the LPTF in Paris, which 
states a frequency accurate to 2 x 10~'°. All clocks that are 
not so specially designed may be very stable but display 
various degrees of inaccuracy. To be accurate, an atomic 
time scale must therefore be compared with one or several 
primary standards. 

A single atomic clock may provide a time scale, 
but it is always subject to failure. To increase the 
reliability, redundancy is necessary. This may simply 
consist in replacing a failed clock by another one, after 
proper synchronization of the clocks during their common 
operation. However, combining the data of several clocks 
to form a time scale will improve the stability, accuracy 
and reliability with respect to those of a single clock. 
To reach this goal, a suitable stability algorithm must be 
used. This approach, which is adopted by many metrology 
laboratories and operation centers for navigation systems, 
has been the basis of the construction of TAI since its 
inception. While the readings of one atomic clock are 
available in real time, an ensemble time scale may be 
designed to be available in deferred time only, e.g. this 
is the case for TAI. Such a delay of access has some 
practical drawbacks, but it has two important advantages: 
it allows a better comparison of the participating clocks 
when they are in different laboratories, by averaging the 
noise of the time comparison technique, and also a better 
characterization of the stability of the clocks, when long- 
term stability is demanded. 

Timing data are time differences between clocks. 
Time markers from a clock may take the form of electric 
pulses (e.g. 1 pulse s~') or, alternatively, the phase of a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Time Scales: Terrestrial 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


40°71 


10° 


10°"8 L 


40°"4 


107° 


10-8 
10° 10' 107 10° 104 108 10° 107 10° 
TIS 


Figure 1. Relative frequency stability versus averaging duration 
t for TAI (1), various atomic clocks (2-5) (2, commercial cesium 
clock; 3, primary clock PTB-CS1 (Braunschweig); 4, cesium 
fountain LPTF-FO1 (Paris); 5, commercial hydrogen maser) and 
the rotation of a best-case millisecond pulsar (6). Dashed parts 
correspond to expected or possible values. 


periodic signal (e.g. 10 MHz) locked to the clock may be 
monitored. For clocks located at the same site, the time 
differences are measured by digital counters (for pulses) 
or heterodyne systems (for periodic signals), and each 
instantaneous measurement may have an uncertainty well 
below 1 ns. For distant clocks, time transfer techniques 
must be used (see below) and the typical uncertainty is of 
the order of a few ns for integration times of minutes to 
hours. 

Given an ensemble of n clocks for which at some 
epoch t the time and frequency differences between clock 
i and the ensemble time TA(t) are designated by x; (ft) 
and y;(t), respectively, then the set of n time differences 
x;(t') at a later time t’ = t + 6t may be computed from 
the n — 1 time differences measured between the clocks at 
time t’ using an additional equation which expresses the 
frequency stability of the clocks as a weighted average: 


So wit ie’) = YO wilt xi) + Yo wi (y(t) bt 


where w;(t’) represents the weight attributed to clock i and 
where the frequency difference at time t’, y;(t’), has to be 
estimated. Variations in the processes used to estimate the 
weights w;(t’) and the frequencies y;(t’) and in the choice 
of the time increment 5t characterize the different stability 
algorithms. Usual features are to assume );(¢t’) = y,(t) 
and to impose some constraints on the weights w;(t’) 
such as a maximum weight for any given clock, whatever 
its apparent stability, or a null weight attributed to new 
clocks. Such constraints increase the reliability of the time 
scale at the expense of a small loss in its stability. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Construction of TAI and UTC, and some of their 
realizations 

The first atomic clocks were built in the 1950s. When 
convenient techniques to compare distant clocks became 
available in the 1960s, it was then possible to realize an 
ensemble time scale. Such a task was undertaken by 
the Bureau International de l’Heure (BIH) in Paris and, 
when international agreement was deemed necessary in 
1970, TAI was defined by the International Committee for 
Weights and Measures as ‘the time reference established 
by the BIH on the basis of the readings of atomic clocks 
operating in various establishments in accordance with 
the definition of the second...’. In 1988 the responsibility 
of establishing TAI was transferred to the International 
Bureau for Weights and Measures (BIPM) in Sévres 
(France). 

As a deferred-time scale, TAI is computed each 
month using data provided by about 50 laboratories 
worldwide (figure 2). Timing data from about 220 clocks 
are combined using an algorithm named ALGOS, resulting 
in an ensemble time scale named EAL. The stability of 
EAL is, by its construction, optimized for an averaging 
time around 1 month, and this is estimated in 1999 to be 
about 0.6 x 10~'°. Out of the 220 participating clocks, about 
120 (mostly high-performance, recently built, commercial 
Cs clocks) contribute to about 85% of the construction 
of EAL. Since EAL is free running, its scale unit (the 
‘EAL second’) may be different from the goal set in the 
definition of TAI. The duration of the scale unit of EAL 
is measured by comparison with a number of primary 
frequency standards and TAI is then derived from EAL 
by applying a frequency correction so that the scale unit of 
TAI agrees with the SI second on the geoid. The relative 
frequency difference between EAL and TAI is at present 
(Spring 1999) 7.14 x 10 and may change slightly over 
time, as needed to ensure the accuracy of TAI. Over recent 
years, only eight primary standards have contributed 
occasionally or regularly to the accuracy of TAI, which is 
estimated to be below 0.5 x 10-4 over 1998-1999. 

It has been known since the beginning of the 
20th century that the EARTH'S ROTATION rate is irregular. 
Nevertheless, as a time based on the rotation of the Earth 
taking exactly 24 h (UNIVERSAL TIME UT1) had been used for 
decades, regulatory bodies tried in the 1960s to adapt the 
new atomic time to the former scale. This yielded in 1972 
the definition of UTC: it differs from TAI by an integral 
number of seconds so that the difference between UT1 
and UTC remains always smaller than 0.9 s. To ensure 
this, the International Earth Rotation Service in Paris issues 
predictions of UT1 — UTC and decides, when appropriate, 
to insert one leap second in UTC or alternatively to remove 
one second from UTC. Such operations are done at the last 
second of the month of June or December. From 10 s in 
1972, the difference between TAI and UTC has increased to 
32 s in 1999 and a leap second is inserted every 18 months 
on average. This is because the SI second has not been 
designed so that 86400 of them match the average solar 
day. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Time Scales: Terrestrial 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


LDS ORB VSLSP SMU AOS GUM_LTP 


ROA 
CAO 


IEN 


OMH 


DTAG 


Figure 2. Schematic map of the laboratories and time links used in the computation of TAI (May 1999). 


With UTC as the basis for all legal time scales, national 
metrology laboratories provide to their customers a real- 
time realization of UTC, denoted UTC(k) for laboratory k. 
Since UTC is not available in real time, UTC(k) may not 
exactly reproduce UTC, but modern clocks easily allow 
it to remain within +100 ns, a goal recommended by the 
CCDS in 1993. In contrast to UTC, the time scales UTC(k) 
must be physically realized, for example by an electrical 
signal at a given point, so that metrology laboratories may, 
in real time, drive time and frequency dissemination or 
comparison systems for national users. The civil time for 
a given country is then generally defined by adding or 
substracting an integral number of hours to UTC. 

The leap second system, although very simple, has 
important drawbacks for those responsible for realizing 
continuous time references, e.g. for satellite systems or 
telecommunications. They may use TAI or generate their 
own time scale (such as GPS time) but, in any case, it 
is necessary to continue to trace the difference between 
this time scale and UTC. Some scientists have suggested 
abandoning the leap second system; there is, however, 
considerable inertia and such a step is unlikely to happen 
soon. 


Clock comparison and time dissemination 
techniques 

In the context of relativity theory, there is no a priori 
definition of simultaneity and therefore synchronization 
or, more generally, comparison of clocks is arbitrary. Since 
TAI is defined as a coordinate time, it is appropriate 
to define coordinate synchronization: two events are 
synchronous if they have the same time coordinate. 
In this framework, there are usually two ways to 
compare distant clocks: one method is to transport a 
portable clock from one clock to the other, properly 
accounting for the coordinate time accumulated during 
the transport (it differs from the proper time measured 
by the portable clock; the difference is usually called 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the ‘relativistic corrections’); another method is to 
send an electromagnetic signal from one clock to the 
other, properly accounting for the coordinate time of 
propagation of the signal. Such procedures have been 
carried out since the development of atomic clocks. The 
distinction between proper and coordinate time, however, 
is only useful when aiming at an uncertainty below 1 jus 
for time comparison and below 1 x 10~” for frequency 
comparison on Earth, which is what we consider in the 
following. At or above this uncertainty level, a number of 
time and frequency dissemination techniques have been 
and are still used, ranging from signals in the VLF (tens of 
kHz) or short-wave (tens of MHz) radiofrequency bands 
to the use of telephone lines or the world-wide web. 

The clock transport technique is rather cumbersome 
but has been much used until the development of the 
GPS in the 1980s. It provided an uncertainty of some 
tens of nanoseconds, mainly limited by the instability 
of the transported clock. Although at present rarely 
used, an uncertainty of about a few nanoseconds is 
attained. Eventually, when the frequency stability of 
clocks reaches the order of 10~'’, an uncertainty of about 
a few picoseconds may be reached which would be a 
challenge for radiotransmission techniques. 

All commonly used techniques for clock comparison 
rely on the transmission of electromagnetic signals. 
They can provide synchronization with an uncertainty 
of some nanoseconds or less within measuring times 
of a few minutes to a couple of hours and therefore 
achieve frequency comparison to within the present 
clock performances (10-'-10-'5) in a matter of hours 
to a couple of days. The main technique uses signals 
from navigation satellites, such as the GPS or the 
Russian GLONASS, to compare the local clock with 
the clock on board the satellite. By differencing the 
measurements taken simultaneously at the two clocks 
(‘common-view’ processing) or at a whole network of 
stations (‘geodetic-like’ processing), the noise of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Time Scales: Terrestrial 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


satellite clocks is eliminated and the resulting uncertainty 
in synchronization is of the order of a few nanoseconds 
or less with proper averaging. The main remaining 
source of uncertainty originates in the hardware delays 
and their variation with the environmental conditions. 
The other technique is two-way time transfer in which 
signals are sent in both directions over the transmission 
path. The link may be a radio signal through 
geostationary communication satellites or a laser pulse 
through dedicated equipment on board satellites or optical 
fibers. In all cases, a two-way technique takes advantage 
of the reciprocity of the path to cancel or reduce some 
sources of error so that the measurement uncertainty is, 
in principle, somewhat lower. 


Future trends 

Important progress has been accomplished in recent years 
in new techniques promising the future development 
of ultrastable clocks that will bring new horizons to 
terrestrial time scales. Two main directions are being 
explored for these clocks: laser cooling of atoms and 
ion traps. It should be noted that the 1997 Nobel prize 
in physics was awarded to S Chu, C Cohen-Tannoudji 
and W Phillips for their work on the development of 
methods for cooling and confining atoms using laser light. 
The first primary frequency standard successfully using 
these techniques has been the Cs fountain at the LPTF in 
Paris which provided a few evaluations of the SI second 
with uncertainties of (2-3) x 10-1. It is expected that an 
accuracy of 1 x 10~!6 may be reached with such a fountain 
and that a fountain using rubidium atoms may be more 
stable. Based on a slow beam of cold atoms, similar 
devices operating in space in zero gravity may reach an 
accuracy of 1 x 10-7". Comparing such clocks at a distance 
will necessitate new developments for radiotransmission 
or laser techniques which are envisioned for the Atomic 
Clock Ensemble in Space (ACES) experiment planned on 
board the International Space Station. It will also be 
necessary to reconsider the definition of TT and TAI which 
are limited to about 1 x 107!” by uncertainties in the 
definition of the geoid. 


Bibliography 
Further reading in time and frequency metrology: 


Audoin C and Guinot B 1998 Les Fondements de la Mesure 
du Temps (Paris: Masson) (in French) 

Guinot B 1989 Atomic time Reference Frames in Astronomy 
and Geophysics ed J Kovalevsky, I I Mueller and 
B Kolaczec (Dordrecht: Kluwer) pp 379-415 (the 
whole book may be read to obtain a broad knowledge 
in reference frames) 

Levine J 1999 Introduction to time and frequency 
metrology Rev. Sci. Instrum. 70 (6) 2567 


See also a collection of more specialized papers in 


Sullivan D B, Allan D W, Howe D A and Walls F L (eds) 
1990 Characterization of Clocks and Oscillators NIST TN 
1337 (US Government Printing Office) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


For time scale formation, specially TAI, see 


BIPM 1998 Annual Report of the BIPM Time Section vol 11 
Tavella P and Thomas C 1991 Comparative study of time 
scale algorithms Metrologia 28 57 


Gérard Petit 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Timocharis (c. 280 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Timocharis (c. 280 Bc) 


Greek philosopher who, with Aristillus, prepared a catalog 
of star positions. The measurement of the position of Spica 
helped Hipparcuus to demonstrate precession. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tisserand, Francois Félix (1845-96) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tisserand, Francois Felix (1845-96) 


Celestial mechanician, born in Nuits-St-Georges, Céte- 
d’Or, France, became director of the Toulouse Observatory 
and of the Paris Observatory and worked on the orbit of 
the Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Titan 


Titan, SATURN’s largest satellite, is a distant world: far away 
from the Sun and its close, warm TERRESTRIAL PLANETS. A fair 
distance from Saturn, too. Seen from Titan, at more than a 
million kilometers away, Saturn looks like a big yellowish 
ball, permanently girdled by an icy hoop. The Sun’s disk is 
hard to see at a distance of close to one billion five hundred 
kilometers, more than nine times farther away than the 
Earth. As a consequence, our star is a hundred times 
dimmer there, and the temperatures prevailing on Titan 
drop to 70 K (—200 °C) in the atmosphere. This atmosphere 
is thick enough to make Titan an important but mysterious 
object in our solar system. Even from a near-by distance, 
as VOYAGER 1 found out in 1980, the dense cloud decks 
surrounding the small world obscure any glimpse of its 
surface, as on Venus. 

The cameras of Voyager 1 afforded a close view of 
the satellite in 1980, from only 4394 km to the surface. 
Voyager 2 flew by Titan nine months later but at a 
distance a hundred times greater. The first images 
of the satellite that were returned in November 1980 
were somewhat disappointing: Titan’s visible appearance 
seemed unexciting—a reddish-brown ball, completely 
covered by a thick haze which allowed no visibility of 
the surface (figure 1). The most obvious feature seen 
by Voyager was a difference in the brightness of the two 
hemispheres, the northern side appearing darker than the 
southern. This difference is of the order of 25% at blue 
wavelengths, and falls to a few per cent in the ultraviolet 
and at red wavelengths. This north-south asymmetry is 
probably related to circulation in the atmosphere pushing 
haze from one hemisphere to the other. When Voyager 1 
approached Titan, the brighter hemisphere had less haze 
than the darker one. Voyager also saw a dark ring above 
the north (winter) pole. This feature, termed the polar 
hood, extending from 70 to 90 degrees north latitude, is 
most prominent at blue and violet wavelengths, and may 
be associated with lack of illumination in the polar regions 
during the winter (since the subsolar latitude extends to 
26.4°) and/or downwelling in global circulation. The 
altitude of vertical optical depth unity is of the order of 
100 km. The asymmetry has been observed to reverse— 
when the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) first observed Titan 
in 1990, a little over a quarter of a Titan year after the 
Voyager encounters, the northern hemisphere was found 
to be brighter than the south. Whereas Voyager only 
observed up to red wavelengths, HST has since imaged 
Titan in the near-infrared. At these wavelengths, the 
asymmetry is reversed, and indeed is somewhat stronger 
than in the visible. This is due to the wavelength 
dependence of the atmospheric brightness (bright at short 
wavelengths due to Rayleigh scattering, dark in the near- 
infrared due to methane absorption) and of the haze 
(presumed to be dark in blue and bright at red and longer 
wavelengths, by analogy with ‘tholin’ material generated 
in the laboratory). The word tholin was first used by Carl 
Sagan and comes from the Greek word, meaning ‘muddy’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. This view of Saturn’s largest satellite was taken from a 
position of Voyager 2 looking almost directly back toward the 
Sun and the Mercury-sized body. Titan’s hydrocarbon-rich 
nitrogen atmosphere scatters sunlight in a forward direction 
over the limb around the entire disk. The surface of Titan is 
obscured due to a deep cloud layer. The diameter of Titan is 
5150 km. (Courtesy NASA/JPL). 


The radio-occultation experiment aboard Voyager 1 
provided a precise value of Titan’s surface radius: 2575 + 
2 km, with a surface temperature of 94 + 2 K and a 
pressure of about 1.45 bar. The main properties of Titan, 
as established at the time, are listed in table 1. The 
atmosphere is mainly formed of nitrogen (a property 
shared only by the Earth) and methane (molecular oxygen 
is lacking). Some 4 billion years ago, our Earth, like Titan, 
may have been shrouded ina thick atmosphere of nitrogen, 
deprived of oxygen and rich in methane. This distant 
object is then indeed tantalizing! Far from the Sun and 
its familiar small planets, this little frozen primitive Earth 
sails alone, lost in the middle of gaseous GIANT PLANETS and 
icy satellites. Where did Titan come from? 


Origin and first insights 


With a size half of that of the Earth’s, Titan was challenged 
from its position as the largest satellite in our solar system 
by GANYMEDE, Jupiter’s biggest satellite, found by Voyager 
to possess a few kilometers more in diameter than Saturn’s 
champion. The latter is, however, still the ninth largest 
object around our star (by far bigger than the Moon and 
Pluto and barely bigger than Mercury), tenth by its mass 
(much lighter than Mercury: 140 billions of billions tons 
for the satellite against 330 billions of billions tons for the 
small planet). The satellite’s mass, made of a mixture of 
water ice and rock (with the ice apparently containing even 
greater amounts of frozen, trapped and adsorbed gases 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Orbital and physical properties of Titan and the Earth. 


Semi-major axis of orbit (AU)t 
Sidereal period of revolution (yr) 
Orbital period around Saturn (day) 
Equatorial radius 
Surface 
Clouds (km) 
Orbital eccentricity 
Inclination of the orbit to the ecliptic plane (°) 
Oblateness 
Obliquity (°)§ 
Volume/V 4 || 
Mass/M@q 
Mean density (10° kg m~) 
Bond albedo 
Surface gravity (m s~*) 
Surface (equator) 
Pressure (bar) 
Temperature (K) 
Atmospheric composition 


+1 AU = 1.496 x 10!! m. 


Titan Earth 
9.54 1 
29.46 1 
15.945 1 
257542 6378 
277542 6393 
0.029 0.017 
19’8 0 
<0.014 0.0034 
26.7 23.45 
0.065 1 
0.022 1 
1.881 5.52 
0.2 0.36 
1.35 9.81 
1.45 1.103 
9442 288 


No, CHy4, H2, Ar? = No, On, Ar, HO, CO2 


$1 sidereal year (yr) = 31.558 150 x 10° sec = 365.256 36 d = 1.000 039 tropical year. 
§ The obliquity is the inclination of the equator to the orbital plane. 


|| Volume of Earth = 1.070 x 107! m°. 
{ Mass of Earth = 5.98 x 1074 ke. 


than the other icy satellites, as the distance from the Sun 
increases), gives Titan a mean density of about 1.90. 

Traveling on an almost circular prograde orbit, in the 
ecliptic plane, Titan takes a little under 16 days to complete 
its trip around Saturn, 1.2 million kilometers away, three 
times the Earth-Moon distance. The orbit of Titan about 
Saturn is significantly eccentric, with e ~ 0.028, which 
is too large to be due to perturbations by existing bodies 
in their present locations and may have been due to 
the relatively recent impact of a large body such as a 
comet. Titan is located in the outskirts of the Saturnian 
system along with Hyperion, Phoebe and Iapetus, the 
other ‘strange’ icy satellites (see SATURN: SATELLITES). But 
Titan is different: it has an atmosphere to boast of. 

Why is Titan unique among the moons of the solar 
system in having a substantial atmosphere? It is perhaps 
not surprising that the other Saturnian moons are airless, 
because they are relatively small, but three of the Galilean 
moons of Jupiter, and Neptune’s large satellite Triton, are 
comparable in size to Titan, while Ganymede is actually 
slightly larger. In contrast to the essentially airless nature 
of the other large satellites of the solar system, Titan has an 
atmosphere which is thicker than that of the much more 
massive planets Earth, Mars and Mercury. 

In the giant planet’s neighborhood, Titan is the only 
giant satellite, since the other seventeen known today 
are a hundred to a hundred million times lighter than 
it is. Titan therefore monopolizes more than 90% of 
the matter, including rings, surrounding Saturn. _ Its 
dimension and orbital parameters set constraints on the 
formation processes: the current consensus is that the giant 
planets and their satellites formed from ‘sub-nebulae’ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


much as the Sun and planets formed from the primordial 
solar nebula. In the outskirts of the Saturnian sub- 
nebula, where the temperatures were low (below 135 K) 
and the solar wind weaker, the gases that were trapped 
in the ice accreted by the satellite were not released 
until after the formation of Titan, becoming the satellite’s 
earliest atmosphere. Ganymede and cALuisto (Jupiter’s 
satellites with similar densities to Titan, but with no 
atmosphere), contrary to Titan, were composed of ice that 
solidified at low temperatures but was later heated above 
135 K in the vicinity of Jupiter, which radiated so much 
thermal energy during its formation that it must have 
glowed. At a mass three times larger that Saturn’s, Jupiter 
generated correspondingly much more heat, so that the 
gas content in its satellites must have been markedly 
depleted through sublimation. Cometary accretion is an 
alternate explanation, investigated in some studies. 

In the case of Titan, additional heat was generated 
later from the decay of short-lived radioactive elements 
in its rocky component. Similarly to the Earth and other 
terrestrial planets, this distant satellite must have formed 
a core of dense rocky material that became surrounded 
by a mantle of ice. Thus Titan recovered a secondary, 
outgassed atmosphere from the same general mechanism 
that produced the early atmospheres of Mars, Venus and 
Earth. Recent measurements of the isotopic ratios in 
Titan’s atmosphere tend to favor outgassing from the 
interior rather than the cometary origin. In the cold and 
calm environment of its planet, at more than 1 billion 
kilometers from the Sun, Titan was able to preserve its 
atmosphere for more than 4.5 billion years; Mercury, the 
Moon, Ganymede or Callisto did not have that chance. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


None of the above explains why Titan has more 
atmosphere than Mars or the Earth. Perhaps the 
atmosphere of Titan was frozen during the epoch when 
Mars’ atmosphere, and to a lesser extent Earth’s, was 
depleted by heavy bombardment. Alternatively, there 
may be a supply of the more volatile ices, such as 
ammonia, methane and carbon monoxide, trapped inside 
Titan by layers of frozen water and able to escape 
only slowly through cracks or ‘cryovolcanoes’. It is 
also conceivable that Titan’s atmosphere has been more 
efficiently replenished by incoming cometary material in 
relatively recent epochs, compared to the inner planets. 
All of these scenarios implicitly favor ammonia as the 
source of Titan’s nitrogen atmosphere, a problem which 
is discussed in the next section. 


The atmosphere: temperature and composition 
Prior to the Voyager 1 encounter knowledge of Titan was 
scanty, albeit intriguing. Discovered on 25 March 1655 
by the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens, orbiting at 
a distance of about 1.2 million km from its primary, or 
some 20.6 Saturn radii, Titan was long known to have a 
substantial atmosphere: Catalan astronomer Jose Comas 
Sola claimed in 1908 to have observed limb darkening 
on Titan (that is a stronger attenuation of the light 
reflected from Titan’s limb rather than by its center, usually 
associated with a thick atmosphere). To test this claim, 
Sir James Jeans decided in 1925 to include Titan and 
the biggest satellites of Jupiter in his theoretical study of 
escape processes in the atmospheres around solar system 
objects. His results showed that Titan could have kept an 
atmosphere, in spite of its small size and weak gravity, if 
low-temperature conditions, that he estimated as between 
60 and 100 K, prevailed. In this case, any gas of molecular 
weight greater than or equal to 16 (such as ammonia, 
argon, neon, molecular nitrogen and methane, among 
those which were present in the mix of gas and dust 
particles that condensed to form the Solar System) would 
not have escaped Titan’s atmosphere since the satellite’s 
formation. In 1944, Gerald Kuiper discovered the spectral 
signature of methane on Titan by observing its absorption 
bands at 6190 A and 7250 A, but it remained uncertain 
whether it was the major atmospheric gas or a minor 
component mixed with another, as yet undetected but 
quite abundant, gas in the atmosphere. 

Before the Voyager encounter, opinions were there- 
fore divided on the principal constituent of Titan’s atmo- 
sphere. One model favored methane as the main compo- 
nent (about 90%) of the atmosphere, and predicted surface 
conditions of T = 86 K at a pressure of 20 mbar. Another 
model expected that dissociation of ammonia would have 
produced molecular nitrogen in large quantities and held 
that the surface temperature and pressure would be quite 
high (200 K and 20 bars). 


Chemical composition 


Voyager 1 came to its rendezvous with Titan in November 
1980. Molecular nitrogen turned out to be by far the major 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


constituent in Titan’s atmosphere, methane accounting 
for only a few per cent. The lightweight hydrogen gas 
rapidly escapes to space, because of Titan’s low gravity; 
it is, however, being continuously generated as well, 
amounting to a relative abundance in the atmosphere 
of about 0.1%, representative of the balance achieved 
between its production and loss. Titan moves in and 
out of Saturn’s magnetosphere (See SATURN: MAGNETOSPHERE 
INTERACTION WITH TITAN). The satellite itself bears no 
significant magnetic field, so that ions and electrons from 
Saturn can interact directly with its upper atmosphere, 
affecting neutral gases. As they become ionized, some 
of them may be swept away by the magnetic field, thus 
causing the loss of more gas (other than hydrogen) to 
space. The infrared spectrometer on board Voyager 1, 
IRIS, sounded the satellite’s stratosphere (that is the part 
of the atmosphere between roughly 200 and 500 km of 
altitude). The infrared data taken by IRIS confirmed the 
presence of some simple hydrocarbons (such as methane, 
acetylene, ethylene and ethane) and proved the existence 
of some more complex ones at a few tens ppb: diacetylene 
(C4H2), methylacetylene (C3H.), propane (C3Hs) and 
monodeuterated methane (CH3D). Also, the signatures of 
some nitriles were found in the spectra: HCN, HC3N, CoNo 
and C,4N> (only in the solid phase). Finally, carbon dioxide 
(CO,) was identified at 667 cm™!. By comparison with 
laboratory spectra the abundances of these species were 
estimated at a few ppb. Today we have established the 
existence, from ground-based observations, of some other 
compounds in the atmosphere, including CO and CH3CN 
(acetonitrile). N>, H, and carbon monoxide are expected 
to be uniformly mixed throughout the lower atmosphere. 
Titan was observed again in 1997 with the Infrared Space 
Observatory (ISO) in the infrared range (figure 2), and 
from these observations more precise abundances for 
the atmospheric components on a global average were 
derived. 

Methane should also be uniformly mixed globally, but 
since it may undergo phase changes in the troposphere, it 
is expected to vary with altitude. Thus, its mixing ratio 
(which is still poorly known) is supposed to be constant 
above the condensation level, below which methane may 
be saturated and could form clouds. Such clouds may be 
necessary to account for the observed opacity in the spectra 
between 200 and 400 cm-!. The methane abundance can 
therefore increase with temperature down to the surface. 
Ultraviolet light from the Sun converts methane into more 
complex hydrocarbon molecules and hydrogen gas. The 
hydrocarbons combine with nitrogen to form nitriles. All 
these organics remain on Titan, eventually condensing at 
low altitudes. After methane, the next most abundant 
hydrocarbons are ethane, acetylene and propane. Unless 
supersaturation conditions prevail, each of these organics 
and the less abundant ones must condense at some level 
in the lower stratosphere and precipitate out, effectively 
reducing its gas phase abundance to smaller amounts 
below this level. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Paryprveayprreeprrer grave ypervegearvpasarzprivaryig 


250 


' 
[ Titan's spectrum observed with the 
| Infrared Space Observatory in 1997 


R209 


150 


FLIX (Jy) 


ipa 


50 }— 


i4 45 16 


10 ii i2 13 
WAVENUMBER (uticron) 


Figure 2. Spectrum of Titan, showing the signatures of the 
atmospheric components (hydrocarbons, nitriles and COz), 
acquired with ISO Short Wavelength Spectrometer in January 
1997 in the grating mode, with a resolving power between 1500 
and 3000. 


Latitudinal variations in the atmosphere were 
observed for some of the least abundant molecules, with 
an obvious enhancement of HC3N and C2Nb, as well as 
of some hydrocarbons, at high northern latitudes, and 
seasonal effects were suggested as the origin of these 
variations. 

Carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO>) 
along with water are currently the only oxygen com- 
pounds found in Titan’s atmosphere. CO was first de- 
tected in 1983 from ground-based observations in the near- 
infrared, with a tropospheric abundance of ~6 x 10-°, in 
fair agreement with the prediction of the photochemical 
models in existence. CO, was identified in the Voyager 
1/IRIS spectra from the emission feature around 667 cm7!. 
Also observed with ISO (figure 2), the CO2 average mole 
fraction in Titan’s atmosphere above the 110 mbar level 
is found to be the same as that found by Voyager, about 
10 ppb (assuming a vertical CO) profile constant with 
height), while the associated mixing ratio of stratospheric 
CO, measured from ground-based microwave and mil- 
limeter observations, is on the order of (1-5) x 107. 

The recent detection of water in Titan’s atmosphere 
with the ISO was an important result because it explains 
the presence of CO and, especially, of CO. The water 
vapor abundance is on the order of a few tens of a ppb 
at an altitude of 400 km. CO is produced by reactions of 
OH with CH) or CH, if the latter is present at sufficiently 
high levels in the thermosphere. OH also destroys CO, at 
lower levels near 500 km, with subsequent re-formation 
of CO. At equilibrium, the photochemical lifetime of 
CO is very long (comparable to the age of Titan itself), 
and as a consequence, the production of CO2 from HzO 
is in fact independent of the amounts of CO present in 
the stratosphere. The inferred value for the water influx 
on Titan is comparable with recent estimates from water 
detection on Saturn by ISO (5 x 10° cm~? s7!). Further 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


progress on the whole question of oxidized molecules in 
Titan’s atmosphere awaits new and more precise values 
for their abundances, which will probably come from 
Cassini/ Huygens measurements in 2004. 

The ultimate sink of the oxygen, coming in at the 
top of the atmosphere as H20, is at the surface of Titan, 
where it precipitates out as frozen CO,. The lower 
atmosphere is, of course, in contact with the ground. 
The upper part or crust of the solid body of Titan is 
expected to consist mostly of water ice, although whether 
this is in direct contact with the lower atmosphere will 
depend on the nature and thickness of any coating of other 
condensates (solid CO2, for example, or the hydrocarbon- 
based liquids and solids discussed elsewhere). If there 
is good contact, the troposphere could be saturated with 
water, albeit at temperatures so low that this corresponds 
to a very low mixing ratio (which explains why the icy 
rings and satellites of Saturn have survived for billions 
of years without vaporizing). The relatively warm upper 
atmosphere, which could hold proportionally more water, 
is probably prevented from doing so (unless there is an 
external source) because of the cold-trap formed by the 
tropopause. It is for the same reason that the stratosphere 
of the Earth is very dry. In other words, the water ice 
on the surface does not participate in the atmospheric 
photochemistry. If Titan was set closer to the Sun, warmer 
surface temperatures would cause the water to sublimate 
and move into the atmosphere. As a result, the oxygen 
provided in this way would rapidly combine with the 
methane and other hydrocarbons and form large amounts 
of carbon dioxide, similar to Venus and Mars. The 
character of Titan’s atmosphere would radically change, 
but not necessarily towards something closer to the Earth. 


Origins of the atmosphere 

It is intriguing that Titan’s primary atmospheric compo- 
nent is the same as the Earth’s. What is the origin of the 
nitrogen in Titan’s atmosphere? In particular, is it derived 
from a source containing molecular nitrogen or was it pro- 
duced by chemical processing of ammonia (or some other 
process)? 

There seem to be four possible scenarios. The first, 
and least probable, is that direct capture of N> from the 
solar or proto-Saturnian nebula took place. Even if this did 
occur, it is believed that Titan’s primitive atmosphere, like 
that of the Earth, was lost long ago as part of the formation 
process, and replaced by a ‘secondary’ atmosphere which 
outgassed from the interior. This, however, could 
have involved devolatilization of nitrogen-containing ices 
condensed from the nebula. 

It seems more likely that the primordial cloud 
contained nitrogen primarily as the hydride, ammonia, 
which is also far less volatile and therefore easier to 
accrete as early Titan cooled. If we imagine, as our 
third possible scenario, a variant of this in which 
Titan’s atmosphere formed from the same mix of gases 
which are present on Saturn, the heavy components, 
primarily ammonia and methane, would be retained while 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hydrogen and helium were lost (on Titan, but not on 
Saturn). Photolysis would eventually produce N2 from 
the NH; and higher hydrocarbons—including those which 
condense as aerosols—from the CHy, so we could end up 
with the atmosphere forming much as we see it today. 
There is no first-order difference whether the gases came 
from the interior, from ices frozen on the surface, or 
directly from the nebula. Titan should then have the same 
isotopic composition as Saturn, for the ratio of deuterium 
to hydrogen in particular, possibly somewhat modified 
after accretion by the impact of volatile-rich comets, or 
by other processes such as possible impacts from debris 
resulting from the apparent damage to HYPERION. 

Deuterium (D), the first isotope of hydrogen, has a 
neutron in addition to the proton of the common hydrogen 
atom. Deuterium is therefore twice as heavy as hydrogen 
and has, accordingly, a different physical behavior. By 
studying its abundance today, we may learn something 
of the chemical processes involved in the atmosphere of a 
planet in the past. On Titan, most of the hydrocarbon is 
in the form of methane (CH,). Recent measurements of 
the D/H ratio on Titan with ISO (7.5 x 10-5 derived from 
the CH3D isotope of methane) are lower by a factor of 4 or 
more than those measured in water in the comets Halley, 
Hyakutake and Hale-Bopp, and therefore tend to rule 
out a pure cometary source for the atmosphere of Titan. 
It seems thereby that the Titan D/H ratio is consistent 
with the formation of the atmosphere by outgassing from 
the interior of the satellite. On the other hand, D/H 
on Titan is somewhat larger than the value for Saturn 
(representative of the protosolar nebula), where D/H is 
believed to be around 2.5 x 10~>. This suggests that Titan’s 
present-day atmosphere has been somewhat enriched 
in deuterium since it formed from the proto-Saturnian 
nebula, by cometary material or in some other way: some 
scenarios suggest that methane in the sub-nebula of Saturn 
could have been enriched in deuterium, relative to that in 
molecular hydrogen, prior to the formation of the satellites 
by a factor of about 1.4. In addition, it is possible that 
some fractionation, mainly due to the photodissociation 
of methane, could have occurred during Titan’s history. 

The basic question of whether the nitrogen arrived 
as N> or NH; could find an answer in measurements 
of the Ar/N2 ratio in the present-day atmosphere. 
Because molecular nitrogen and argon have similar vapor 
pressures, a large argon abundance suggests N2 while a 
small one favors NH3 as the source of the present-day 
nitrogen. Thus knowing whether argon is abundant or 
not on Titan, would enable us to choose between various 
formation models of the satellite. Unfortunately, none 
of the noble gases has yet been detected on Titan. The 
presence of argon has been deduced only indirectly—the 
value of the mean molecular weight of Titan’s atmosphere 
is uncertain enough to allow for up to 7% or none at all, 
in which case the nitrogen fraction would increase, and 
it would seem more likely again that nitrogen arrived as 
ammonia on Titan. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Aerosols 

Titan’s atmosphere is known to contain particles (aerosols) 
in addition to gas. As Voyager 2 flew in the satellite’s 
shadow, Titan’s atmosphere, scattering solar light, formed 
a bright crescent almost entirely circling the dark disk 
(figure 1). The particulate haze around Titan extends to 
an altitude of about 200 km, with a detached and much 
more tenuous layer about 100 km higher. In the Voyager 
images the two layers appear blended. The haze on Titan is 
not very dense; it is, however, deep enough to completely 
hide the surface in the visible. 

Itis established today that the aerosols in Titan’s atmo- 
sphere are condensed forms of the gases mentioned above. 
Condensed ethane, for instance, falling through Titan’s at- 
mosphere, may form clouds or haze, or even possibly near- 
surface mist. Theoretical considerations suggest that thin, 
patchy clouds of methane crystals and a photochemical fog 
of more complex condensates might both be present, the 
latter arising as a result of methane photolysis at ultravio- 
let wavelengths following which the fragments combine to 
produce polymers which condense to form oily droplets at 
Titan’s temperatures. The brownish tarry organic sludge 
produced by photochemistry in Titan’s atmosphere con- 
denses near the tropopause. Although the exact nature 
of these compounds is not known, their size, from Voy- 
ager observations, seems to be on the order of 1 micron in 
diameter. The aerosols are then too heavy to remain sus- 
pended in the atmosphere: they must eventually fall on 
the surface, where they may be exposed or hidden in sub- 
surface reservoirs. Some of these molecules, like hydrogen 
cyanide (HCN), are pre-biotic, similar to those produced 
in experiments on the origin of life on Earth. Existing mod- 
els designate these same products of methane as the pre- 
cursors of organic molecules and hence amino acids and, 
ultimately, the first living cells in primitive Earth’s warm 
oceans. However, more work is needed to show how well 
the products of laboratory simulations (‘tholins’) match 
the aerosols in Titan’s atmosphere. 


Temperature 
By analogy with the Earth, Titan’s atmosphere is subdi- 
vided into layers defined by the temperature variations 
with height (or pressure, through the hydrostatic law). 
On both Titan and the Earth, the mean temperature pro- 
file is characterized by two temperature inversions (loca- 
tions above which the temperature increases with altitude, 
while the opposite takes place beneath). Much of the elec- 
tromagnetic radiation emitted by the Sun and reaching a 
planet is at wavelengths in or near the visible part of the 
spectrum. The aerosol layers scatter the photons and re- 
flect a portion of the radiation back to space, some of it is 
absorbed by the haze and clouds, if any are present, and 
the atmospheric gases. The rest of the energy, about 10% 
on Titan, reaches the ground where it is absorbed. 
However, the analogy between the two atmospheres 
shouldn’t be carried too far: for one thing, the vertical 
extent of each region is different, with Titan’s atmosphere 
generally being more extensive than the Earth’s. In fact, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


LOG PRESSURE, mbor 


Seema Sore 


TEMPERATURE , K 


60 20 (] 1hO 200 


ALTITUDE, km 


Surface: water ice, hydrocarbon lakes ? 


Figure 3. Schematic of Titan’s surface-atmosphere system. (Figure adapted from Thompson and Sagan (1984).) 


Figure 4. Images of Titan’s surface at 0.94 wm (right) and 2 wm (left), obtained with the HST and ADONIS/ESO respectively in 1994. 
Note the large bright equatorial region which is located on the leading hemisphere. (Courtesy of M Combes and P Smith.) 


the extent of Titan’s atmosphere is comparable to the 
radius of the solid body (2575 km), while that of the Earth’s 
is sometimes likened to the skin on a grape. The Earth’s 
tropopause (location of the lower temperature inversion) 
varies in height over about 6 km with latitude, being 
highest (around 16 km) in the tropics where solar heating 
is greatest, but it is generally quite a sharp feature in the 
temperature profile everywhere (See EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE). 
On Titan the troposphere (lower part of the atmosphere) 
extends from the surface up to about 40 km, while the 
stratosphere (middle atmosphere) reaches up to altitudes 
of 500 km. 


Titan’s temperature with height was determined near 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the equator through a combination of data from the radio 
occultation experiment and the infrared spectrometer on 
the Voyager spacecraft. The results show that Titan 
affords a GREENHOUSE EFFECT in its troposphere (the lowest 
40 km). This phenomenon, similarly as on Earth, causes 
the temperature to increase from a minimum (~71 K) at 
the tropopause (the upper boundary of the troposphere 
at 40 km) and down to the surface (94 K). This is 
a consequence of a region of heating in the middle 
atmosphere of both Titan and the Earth, due to the 
Earth’s stratospheric ozone layer in one case and Titan’s 
deep aerosol layer in the other. Both of these absorb 
solar energy and heat the troposphere, producing a local 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


temperature maximum at the surface (figure 3). The 
surface temperature is then about 12 degrees higher 
than the effective temperature of the planet. The upper 
boundary of the troposphere, the tropopause, is the level 
where the minimum temperature is registered and the 
overlying atmosphere is of such a low density that a 
substantial amount of radiative cooling to space can occur 
in the thermal infrared region of the spectrum. At the 
tropopause, an inversion occurs and the temperature 
increases with height, peaking at about 180 K at around 
400 km of altitude. This turnaround of the temperature is 
primarily due to the ultraviolet sunlight entering Titan’s 
upper atmosphere. Its absorption contributes to the 
photochemical processes described below. 

Little is known with certainty about Titan’s tropo- 
sphere. It would seem that it is different from the Earth’s. 
While on Earth the troposphere is dominated by convec- 
tion, on Titan the observed lapse rate is stable against dry 
convection and there is no real indication of moist convec- 
tion. If radiative equilibrium prevails, the presence of a 
greenhouse effect is, however, a puzzle. There may still 
be a small convective region in the deepest few kilometers 
of Titan’s thick atmosphere to explain how the energy de- 
posited at the surface can escape to an optically thin level. 

The gases existing in Titan’s atmosphere condense 
at the tropopause temperature, with the exception of 
hydrogen, carbon monoxide and diacetylene. These 
condensates form bigger and bigger aggregates in the 
lower part of the atmosphere and give rise to haze and 
possibly clouds. The end-products, possibly polymers, 
are finally deposited on the surface. 

Furthermore, there are seasonal variations on Titan, 
causing the atmosphere to change its compositional and 
thermal structure as the moon follows Saturn on its orbit 
around the Sun, approaching our star at 1.35 billion km 
and recoiling to 1.5 billion km away. As the four seasons 
follow one another, each lasting about 7.5 years, the 
temperature on Titan could well vary by 20 degrees or 
more. Meteorological phenomena, such as hydrocarbon 
rain or snow, might then well occur on this satellite, 
shaping a curious landscape. 


The surface 

Titan is the last object in our solar system whose surface 
remains largely unknown to us. The surface pressure on 
Titan is strangely high for a rather small world: 1.5 bar, 
versus 1 bar of pressure on the Earth’s surface. The 
temperature, with so little solar flux reaching the ground, 
is dreadfully low: about —180°C. It is not easy then to 
imagine the real landscape hidden under the thick Titan 
clouds. On Earth, at such temperatures, everything would 
be frozen. On Titan, however, where oxygen does not exist 
in a free state and where water is necessarily trapped in 
the form of ice on or underneath the surface (similarly 
to EUROPA), it is perhaps methane, ethane and nitrogen 
that can play the part of active liquids. At the pressures 
and temperatures prevailing on Titan’s surface, these three 
gases, so difficult to maintain in liquid form on Earth, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 5. This artist’s rendering depicts the NASA Cassini 
spacecraft in orbit around ringed Saturn (lower right 
background). At the lower left, the European Space Agency’s 
Huygens probe descends to the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan 
(in foreground). Cassini was launched on a Titan IV rocket in 
October 1997, with Saturn arrival in June 2004. (Courtesy 
NASA/JPL.) 


are close to their condensation conditions, where they can 
coexist in all three forms: solid, liquid and gas. 

Real observational data on the surface of the satellite 
are scarce, but not totally non-existent. On the one 
hand, nothing is visible in the ultraviolet range either 
from the ground or from space. On the other hand 
though, radar sounding, spectra and images taken in 
the infrared and photometric measurements never fail to 
supply fuel for discussions and speculations. Also, some 
theoretical models exist constrained by known physical 
conditions such as mass, density, chemical composition 
and temperature, vapor pressure, etc. As an example, 
condensed ethane (the main by-product of methane) can 
be found in liquid form on Titan’s surface. It was thus first 
suggested that Titan’s surface could be entirely covered 
with ethane—methane oceans. 

Since 1994, however, observations from space (with 
the Hubble Space Telescope), and from the ground 
(using the new techniques of ADAPTIVE optics in order 
to compensate for the atmospheric turbulence), have 
managed to pierce through Titan’s clouds by aiming at 
specific frequencies in the near-infrared range, where 
atmospheric ‘windows’ (or regions where the methane 
absorption is weak) allow us to sound the lower part of 
the atmosphere and the surface of the satellite. From these 
images, a new picture of Titan’s surface emerged: dark 
and bright areas cover the surface of the satellite (figure 4). 
These images confirm spectroscopic observations from 
1994, which indicated a brighter leading hemisphere and 
a much darker trailing side on Titan. Thus, Titan’s 
surface is certainly inhomogeneous, and cannot be covered 
with uniform hydrocarbon oceans. The observations 
allow though for a number of options, such as local 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


hydrocarbon lakes and rocks to exist on the surface 
and for patchy methane clouds to form in the lower 
troposphere. The most recent and somewhat speculative 
model of Titan’s surface produces an exciting image: Titan 
would be covered mainly with water ice and organic 
deposits, but the morphology would allow for frosty relief, 
perhaps mountains or craters covered with methane snow, 
their shores beaten by the waves produced in the vast 
hydrocarbon lakes .... 

When the ambitious scientific CASSINIMISSION / Huygens 
(figure 5), launched successfully from Cape Canaveral on 
15 October 1997, reaches this distant world, in 2004, as- 
tronomers will discover the true nature of this little hiber- 
nating moon, and ofits ground in particular, from where its 
planet Saturn is barely visible. While the orbiter, Cassini, 
developed by NASA, performs its four-year thorough in- 
vestigation of the Saturnian system, with numerous fly- 
bys scheduled for Titan, the probe Huygens, constructed 
by the European Space Agency, will descend into Titan’s 
atmosphere and should hopefully land on its surface, giv- 
ing us access to the thrilling results of what might be the 
last big space mission for years to come. In the meantime, 
one can always dream of the science fiction landscapes 
which characterize this frozen, dark world and which will 
then be revealed to us. 


Bibliography 

Coustenis A and Taylor F 1999 Titan: the Earth-like Moon 
(Singapore: World Scientific) 

Hunten D M, Tomasko M G, Flasar F M, Samuelson 
R E, Strobel D F and Stevenson D J 1984 Titan 
Saturn ed T Gehrels and M S Matthews (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) pp 671-759 

Lorenz R D and Lunine J I 1997 Titan’s surface reviewed: 
the nature of bright and dark terrain Planet Space Sci. 
45 981-92 


Athena Coustenis 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titania 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Titania 


A mid-sized satellite of Uranus, discovered by William 
Herschel in 1787. Its diameter is 1580 km and it orbits 
at a distance of 191000 km. The part of Titania imaged 
by Voyager 2 consists of a large plain covered with small 
craters, crossed by large canyons where the crust has 
faulted. The most extensive of these is the Messina 
Chasmata system, with an overall length of nearly 1500 km 
and 100 km across at its widest point. The 326 km diameter 
Gertrude is the only large crater; the general lack of large 
craters may indicate that Titania has been resurfaced in the 
past. The surface resembles that of Ariel, another Uranian 
satellite, and the processes that operated there are probably 
those that have shaped Titania’s surface. 


Seealso: Ariel, Uranus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Titius, Johann Daniel (1729-96) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Titius, Johann Daniel (1729-96) 


German astronomer, born in Konitz, Germany (now 
Poland), professor of physics at Wittenberg, built the first 
lightning conductor. He interpolated into the translation 
he had prepared of a book by the naturalist Charles Bonnet 
the relation between the distances of the planets that he 
had discovered. The planets, Titius pointed out, were 
at distances from the Sun that were in proportion to the 
sequence 4,4 +3,4+6,4+12,4+48,4+96. Bonnet 
had commented in respect of the missing number in the 
sequence of 4 + 24 ‘But should the Lord Architect have 
left this space empty?’ and the asteroids were later found 
to correspond to it. Titius’ discovery was popularized by 
BODE and is known as Bode’s law or, only sometimes, as the 
Titius—Bode law. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tombaugh, Clyde William (1906-97) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tombaugh, Clyde William (1906-97) 


Born near Streator, IL, became interested in astronomy as a 
boy and, on the basis of some observations which he sent to 
the Lowell Observatory, was hired as an astronomer there 
to search for ‘Planet X’ beyond Neptune. Photographing 
65% of the sky, he discovered several star clusters, two 
comets, more than a hundred asteroids, dozens of clusters 
of galaxies—and the planet Pluto. He worked on the 
captured V-2 rockets at White Sands, and became professor 
at New Mexico State University, where he confirmed the 
rotation period of Mercury on its axis, determined the 
vortex nature of Jupiter’s great red spot, and looked for 
small, natural Earth satellites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tompion, Thomas (c. 1639-1713) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tompion, Thomas (c. 1639-1713) 


Clockmaker, born in Northill, Bedfordshire, England, 
made the clocks for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, 
the first clocks to keep Greenwich Mean Time and 
demonstrate the uniformity of rotation of the Earth. 
The clocks had 4 m pendulums, with a 2 s swing, 
and were the reason why the observing room (the 
Octagon Room at Flamsteed House) was designed by 
CHRISTOPHER WREN with such high ceilings. Tompion kept 
the cases locked and would not let JOHN FLAMSTEED have 
the key. After Flamsteed’s death, the clocks were re-made 
with conventional meter-long pendulums and sold for 
domestic purposes, but one was recently restored to its 
original location. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


In modern theories of particle physics, an important 
consequence of phase transitions in the early universe 
is the formation of topological defects, that is domain 
walls, cosmic strings, monopoles or textures. These 
defects are essentially trapped fossils of a hot dense early 
phase of matter in the universe. They have well-known 
analogues in the low-temperature laboratory and in other 
contexts, including domains in a ferromagnet and vortices 
in superfluids and superconductors. 

The potential existence of topological defects has 
both troubled and fascinated cosmologists since the late 
1970s. On the one hand, domain walls and monopoles are 
incompatible with the standard hot Bic BANG cosmology 
because they would dominate the energy density of 
the universe today. Such considerations constrain the 
range of viable fundamental theories. On the other 
hand, cosmic strings and some other defect types are 
cosmologically benign and may have had an important 
role in the history of the universe. Because cosmic 
defects can be supermassive, a great deal of interest has 
focused on the idea that they were the primordial seeds 
for large-scale structure formation. This idea is now 
under observational pressure, but a contributory role in 
GALAXY FORMATION cannot be excluded. Defects can also 
form at lower energy scales and, in particular, those 
appearing at the electroweak phase transition are believed 
to have influenced the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the 
universe. In addition, cosmic defects have been invoked 
to explain the origin of missing DARK MATTER, ultra-high- 
energy COSMIC RAYS and a number of other outstanding 
cosmological enigmas. The place of topological defects 
in fundamental theory is secure, but their corresponding 
role in cosmology remains to be fully understood and 
empirically tested. 

In what follows, the sections on ‘Domain walls and the 
Kibble mechanism’, ‘Defect classification’, ‘Gravitational 
effects on cosmic strings’ and ‘Quantitative string 
networks’ are more technical and may be omitted on first 
reading. These sections are indicated between and 4. 


The origin of defects 

Descartes’ theory of vortices, in which the planets were 
swept around the Sun in a giant whirlpool, was probably 
the first proposed role for topological defects in cosmology. 
This vortex theory may have been swept aside by Newton, 
but defects cannot be eliminated from particle physics 
models which unify the forces of nature. The basic 
notion is that some large continuous group G (a Lie 
group) with many symmetries incorporates as subgroups 
those which describe electromagnetism and the strong 
and weak nuclear forces. At high temperatures, the 
particle interactions are unified in this large group G, 
so as the universe cools it undergoes a cascade of phase 
transitions at which the symmetries break and the forces 
of nature begin to differentiate, such as, G —> SU(3) x 
SU(2) x U(A) —> SU(3) x U(1) (see UNIVERSE: THERMAL 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(a) 
vo) 


(b) 


seen cela —n 


Figure 1. (a) Double-well potential V(¢) which breaks a discrete 
Zz reflection symmetry and has two minima at ¢ = £7. (b) A 
field configuration in real space which interpolates between 
these two minima has a localized energy density corresponding 
to a domain wall. 


History). At each stage of the symmetry breaking, at least 
one topological defect species must inevitably emerge, 
although which actual species does appear and for how 
long depends on the exact nature of the symmetry 
breaking. For example, at the first stage when the group G 
is broken, magnetic monopoles are formed. A monopole 
is a point-like object with a magnetic charge which is 
associated with the unbroken circular U(1) symmetry 
of electromagnetism. GRAND UNIFIED THEORIES (GUTs) can 
be very large and may involve several intermediate 
symmetry breaking transitions, so a wide variety of cosmic 
defects can be created. 


Domain walls and the Kibble mechanism 

These points can be illustrated by considering the simplest 
case. Domain walls form when a discrete symmetry is 
broken as in the double-well potential V(¢) shown in 
figure 1. In this model, a real scalar field @ (or order 
parameter) takes particular values at every point in space. 
These values will, if possible, minimize the potential 


energy by being either at 6 = —7n or at ¢ = +n, that is 
in one of the two minima (or vacua) of V(¢). However, if 
the field @ at x = —oo is at ¢ = —n while at x = +o it 


is at @ = +n, then ¢ must smoothly interpolate between 
these two minima as illustrated in figure 1. In doing so 
the configuration will rise up over the top of the potential 
V(@) at ¢ = 0 and so there will be a localized region of 
potential and gradient energies in the field ¢. In three 
dimensions, this will be a two-dimensional domain wall 
separating regions in the two different possible vacua. 
Domain walls inevitably form at any phase transition 
when a discrete symmetry breaks. This is simply due 
to causality and is known as the Kibble mechanism. At 
temperatures above the phase transition T > T- the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


domain walls 


Figure 2. Topological defect formation at symmetry-breaking 
phase transitions—the Kibble mechanism: domain walls form 
between uncorrelated regions which fall into opposite sides of 
the double-well potential. 


potential V(¢) has a minimum at the symmetric value 
d@ = 0; however, below the transition T < T, the field 
must randomly choose between the different discrete 
minimum energy states at @ = +7. Regions witha volume 
associated with the correlation length of the field will 
take one random orientation or the other. However, by 
causality correlated regions are smaller than the horizon, 
so many domain walls must interpolate between the large 
number of regions which are necessarily misaligned. This 
formation process is illustrated in figure 2. 


Defect classification 

The classification of topological defects which form at 
symmetry-breaking phase transitions is most succinctly 
achieved using homotopy theory, but a simpler summary 
will suffice here. For a specific symmetry breaking scheme 
G — H in which the group G is broken to a subgroup H, 
then (i) domain walls form when G contains a discrete 
symmetry which is broken (e.g. Z,) —> J as above), 
(ii) cosmic strings form either if the unbroken subgroup 
H contains a discrete symmetry or if a U(1) symmetry 
is broken (e.g. U(1) — J, as in a superconductor), 
(iii) monopoles form when a U (1) symmetry appears (e.g. 
G — SU(8) x U(1) as in GUT) and (iv) textures appear 
when a non-Abelian group or subgroup of G is completely 
broken (e.g. SU(2) — J as in the electroweak phase 
transition). 4 


Properties of cosmic defects 

The energy scale n at which the defect-forming phase 
transition occurs determines the key properties of a 
topological defect. A domain wall has a width 6 ~ n7! and 
a surface energy density o ~ 7° (in natural units i = c = 
kg = 1). The wall tension in the two tangential directions is 
equal to the surface density o, so curved regions contract, 
oscillate and collide at relativistic velocities. 

A cosmic string is a line-like topological defect 
associated with a trapped winding around a circle as 
illustrated in figure 3(a). The width of the cosmic string 
is 6 ~ 71 and its linear energy density is ~ ~ n?. The 
string has a large tension equal to its linear energy density, 
soa string will oscillate relativistically. String intersections 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(c) 


Figure 3. (a) Field configuration for a vortex string, 
corresponding to a complete winding of a complex scalar field 
around a unit circle (transverse section). (b) The ‘hedgehog’ 
configuration depicting the fields emanating from a magnetic 
monopole. (c) Two-dimensional texture configuration in which 
the field never becomes singular. 


result in reconnection or the ‘exchange of partners’ which 
can lead to the break-up of a long string network into small 
loops. These loops have periodic trajectories and they 
decay by emitting gravitational radiation because they 
have a significant quadrupole moment. 

In string models, Gy (or equivalently 7?) is the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


key dimensionless parameter which determines the 
magnitude of string gravity, that is 


n 2 
oa) 
Mp 
where mp) is the Planck mass (G = ma): For GUT-scale 


strings with 7 ~ 10!° GeV we are in a linearized gravity 
regime with Gu ~ 10-°. However, this corresponds to 
the enormous energy per unit length of ~~ 10% g cm“, 
that is, a 10 km length of cosmic string weighs as much as 
the Earth itself. This gives an indication of their potential 
cosmological role as seeds for structure formation. 

In addition, strings can act like superconducting 
wires, if they possess trapped states of charged particles 
which propagate along the string. The phenomenon is 
a fairly natural consequence of many realistic symmetry- 
breaking hierarchies. Unlike ordinary cosmic strings 
which only act gravitationally, superconducting strings 
can have directly observable electromagnetic effects. 

Magnetic monopoles are point-like objects with a 
radial magnetic field, as in the ‘hedgehog’ configuration 
shown in figure 3(b). The magnitude of this field is B = 
1/er? and the overall magnetic flux is Pg = 47/e, where 
e is the electromagnetic gauge coupling. The mass of the 
monopole is typically m ~ 42n/e, which for GUT scales 
can be as high as m ~ 10!8 GeV (that is, up to m ~ 1 yg). 

It is also possible to envisage a ‘global’ monopole 
without electromagnetic gauge fields. In this case, the 
scalar fields form a similar ‘hedgehog’ configuration but 
the gradient energies at large distances are not cancelled 
by the gauge fields. The global monopole energy is 
consequently linearly divergent with m ~ 427n?R, where 
R is a cutoff set by the nearest antimonopole or the field 
correlation length. Global monopole—antimonopole pairs 
are strongly confined and will approach relativistically 
and rapidly annihilate, unlike their weakly interacting 
magnetic counterparts. 

Textures are non-singular amorphous defects which 
form when non-Abelian symmetries are completely 
broken. A two-dimensional texture configuration is 
shown in figure 3(c). Like monopoles, they can be 
either local or global. For a local texture configuration, 
the scalar and gauge fields can be aligned such the 
texture has zero energy and it can be essentially ‘gauged 
away’. Around the time of the texture-forming phase 
transition, however, the texture field alignments are 
imperfect and transitory topological effects can have 
important consequences. ‘Transitions between texture 
states, known as sphalerons, can occur at these near-critical 
temperatures or, later, by quantum mechanical tunnelling. 
Such sphalerons in the standard electroweak model cause 
baryon number violation which may have influenced the 
matter-antimatter asymmetry of the universe. 

In contrast, global textures have no gauge fields 
to cancel the effects of their long-range scalar fields. 
However, global textures are susceptible to a shrinking 
instability, so they collapse relativistically to a point. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. The conical spacetime about a cosmic string is 
constructed by removing a wedge of angular size A and 
identifying along the edges. Gravitational lensing by the cosmic 
string is also shown with the observer at P seeing a double 
image of the source at Q. 


At this stage the configuration becomes singular and 
topologically unwinds; the global texture disappears in 
a burst of Goldstone boson radiation. 


Gravitational effects of cosmic strings 

A straight string exerts no Newtonian gravitational force 
because the effect of its energy density is cancelled by 
the negative pressure of its tension. The spacetime locally 
appears to be flat but, in fact, the string induces a 
global distortion. Spatial sections transverse to the string 
are conical; to describe the space, a wedge must be 
removed and the remaining edges identified as illustrated 
in figure 4. The angular size of this wedge, known as the 
deficit angle, is given by 


A= 81Gu. (1) 


Gravitational lensing by strings. This conical spacetime has 
a number of observational consequences including the 
formation of double images behind a string. Imagine a 
source such as a quasar located at Q in figure 4, a distance ¢ 
from the observer at P, who is in turn a distance d from the 
string. Provided that the string and source are sufficiently 
aligned, there are two paths by which light can reach the 
observer who will see two identical lensed images with an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


angular separation 
dy = 8(Gul(d + 2) sind 


where 6 is the angle between PQ and the string and we 
have assumed Gu < 1. For a GUT-scale string with 
Gu ~ 107°, this corresponds to a separation of a few 
arcseconds. The probability of a double image for a source 
at redshift z ~ 1 to be lensed by a cosmic string network 
is about P ~ 100Gy. Despite the increasing density of 
strings at higher redshift, this lensing probability only 
grows logarithmically. 


Wake formation with cosmic strings. A moving cosmic 
string can disturb a homogeneous matter background and 
induce density fluctuations. Consider two test matter 
particles moving along parallel trajectories with velocity v, 
on either side of the string. When the line drawn between 
the particles crosses the string, they will both begin to 
move towards each other with a transverse velocity, 


uy, =v,A = 41Gursg. (2) 


In an exactly analogous manner, if a string moves through 
a static homogeneous matter background then matter 
particles on opposite sides will begin to move together 
eventually colliding in a wake or pancake-like region. 
Subsequently, matter will continue to accrete onto this 
planar overdensity. 4 


Cosmological evolution 

Topological defects can only be cosmologically non- 
pathological if their evolution is scale invariant throughout 
the history of the universe. In this case, the defect 
network approaches a ‘scaling’ regime in which the 
average number of defects in each horizon volume remains 
constant and they contribute a fixed fraction of the total 
energy density of the universe, typically of order ~100G7’. 
For GUT-scale defects with Gn* ~ 10~°, this corresponds 
to a density perturbation of about the correct magnitude 
to seed galaxy formation. 

When cosmic strings are created at a phase transition 
they form a network of Brownian random walks with a 
characteristic lengthscale € given by the field correlation 
length at that time (& < H~'). Some of the strings return 
to their starting point to form closed loops, but the vast 
majority are ‘infinite’ (about 85%), stretching across the 
horizon volume and continuing on indefinitely. After a 
period of damped evolution, the strings begin to oscillate 
relativistically and € grows until it ‘scales’ as a fixed 
fraction of the horizon size, that is 


E(t) =yt 


with y ~ O(1). Basically, the network ‘chops’ itself up into 
small loops as fast as is allowed by causality. These loops, 
in turn, decay into a relatively harmless background of 
gravitational waves or other radiation. The energy density 
of a Brownian network of infinite strings is given by 


_ HE 


Sg 2 with ¢ = y~?. 


Poo 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Seg ee 


—_ 


Figure 5. Wake formation induced by a cosmic string. Matter 
flow lines are shown in the rest frame of the string, with the 
density doubled in the shaded region. 


Note that like the background density in an expanding 
universe, the string density p scales as t~*. Numerical 
simulations indicate that there are always about 40 strings 
per horizon volume at any time, with an example of 
a network shown in figure 5. However, their relative 
contribution to the background density changes across the 
matter-radiation transition with ¢ = 13 (+3) during the 
radiation era dropping slowly to ¢ = 4 (+2) in the matter 
era. 

The requirement of scale invariance reveals immedi- 
ately why both domain walls and magnetic monopoles 
are incompatible with the standard cosmology. Even if 
the ‘scaling’ regime only had one domain wall stretch- 
ing across each horizon volume, then their energy density 
would be ppw ~ ot?/t? « t7!. Thus domain walls would 
rapidly come to dominate over the background energy 
density unless their surface density o was very small, that 
is the very low symmetry-breaking scale n < 100 MeV. A 
more stringent constraint arises from the COSMIC MICROWAVE 
BACKGROUND, 7 < 1 MeV, because a domain wall will dis- 
turb large-angle isotropy. 

Magnetic monopoles area generic prediction of GUTs, 
but they redshift like massive particles and so their energy 
density scales as py « t~*/” during the radiation era. Naive 
estimates of their production rate ata GUT phase transition 
suggest that today there should be roughly as many 
monopoles as baryons. This is a drastically unacceptable 
conclusion—known as the ‘monopole problem’—because 
each monopole weighs at least 10!° times more than a 
proton. An observational limit on the monopole number 
density ny arises from their dissipative effect on galactic 
magnetic fields; this is known as the Parker limit and yields 
the tiny value nq < 10-* cm~?. The strongest constraint 
arises from the consequences of baryon catalysis if GUT- 
scale monopoles were captured by neutron stars, yielding 
ny, < 10-7”? cm-. 

Global topological defects with long-range fields, 
whether strings, monopoles or textures, can evolve in a 
scale-invariant manner. Global field correlations will be 
established as fast as allowed by causality, with a fixed 
average number of global defects in each horizon volume 
at any one time. Global string evolution only differs from 
ordinary cosmic strings in a subtle quantitative manner. 
However, global monopoles are dominated by long-range 
forces which correlate them closely with antimonopoles, 
leading to their rapid annihilation. For such a system, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


we would expect the removal of all but one or two 
monopoles in each horizon volume. This has been verified 
numerically, with the number density in the matter era 
given by 

nw = 4(£1.5)dy° 


where dy = 3t is the horizon size. 

The phase ordering of global textures is qualitatively 
similar. Once a sufficient texture winding has fallen 
within the horizon, the configuration reduces its gradient 
energy by collapsing. This unwinding process is again 
only limited by causality. Numerical simulations have 
confirmed that this is a scale-invariant process with a 
constant rate of texture unwindings per Hubble time and 
volume, which in the matter era is given by 


dn 0.09407! 
are ~ UU, H: 


Finally, we note the possibility of hybrid topological 
defects resulting from a series of phase transitions such 
as domain walls bounded by strings or monopoles 
connected by strings. Such configurations can chop 
themselves up, annihilate and completely disappear 
within a Hubble time. For example, if the flux of magnetic 
monopoles is temporarily confined into strings as in 
a superconductor, then monopole-antimonopole pairs 
become highly correlated; they are rapidly drawn together 
by the string tension and annihilate (a possible solution of 
the monopole problem). Alternatively, defect networks 
can also become ‘frustrated’ if there are topological 
constraints preventing annihilation or reconnection. A 
complex interconnected string network will form if there 
are many different string species arising from a non- 
Abelian symmetry breaking (e.g. G — Z, produces n 
strings which interact non-trivially). In general, such 
configurations will dominate the universe unless their 
symmetry-breaking scale 7 is very low, but there are also 
circumstances under which this evolution can be scale 
invariant. 


} Quantitative string networks 

Analytic mathematical modelling, notably the ‘one-scale’ 
model, provides a fairly successful description of the 
gross features of an evolving string network. However, 
it is not adequate for the small-scale dynamics and, 
in any case, there are free parameters in the analytic 
models which must be fixed in some manner. Invariably, 
therefore, quantitative advances in understanding cosmic 
strings have relied on numerical simulations (as with other 
defects). Because of the complexity and non-linearity of 
a network, this has proved to be computationally very 
challenging. This is illustrated by the horizon volume 
string network from the radiation era shown in figure 6; 
a network of ‘wiggly’ long strings permeates throughout 
the universe with an accompanying population of very 
small loops. This wiggliness and the size of these small 
loops have an important impact on the astrophysical 
consequences of strings. Numerically, it is clear that high 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 6. Horizon volume from a numerical simulation of 
cosmic strings during the radiation-dominated epoch. 


resolution is required, but this competes with the need 
for an extended dynamic range. Without an unacceptable 
sacrifice of this small-scale structure, string networks at 
present can only be evolved for a period of about 1 order 
of magnitude in conformal time. For global defects on a 
3D grid, the problem is even more restrictive. This severe 
limitation is an important caveat in all the current literature 
on the cosmological implications of defects. 4 


Large-scale structure formation 

Evolving superheavy defects generate complex causal 
gravitational fields which can induce density fluctuations 
in the background matter. Their scale-invariant evolution 
is reflected in the creation of a nearly scale-invariant or 
Harrison—Zeldovich spectrum of perturbations, which is 
very similar to that of inflationary models. For most 
defects, the density perturbation near the scale of the 
cosmological horizon remains constant: 


5 
“P| x O(10)Gr?. 


However, unlike the adiabatic (or curvature) fluctuations 
of standard inflation which are laid down at some 
early time on all relevant cosmological scales, defect 
perturbations are created throughout cosmic history by 
causal mechanisms which only operate on subhorizon 
scales at any one time. Ever since a phase transition carved 
them from the cosmological background, wherever defects 
exist there is always a diffuse compensating underdensity 
in the background which cancels out their gravitational 
effects beyond the horizon. In other words, defects induce 
isocurvature perturbations. The non-linearity of the defect 
source provides another possible distinction from the 
initially linear and Gaussian inflationary fluctuations. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


~2 -1.5 2 ~0.5 0 
log, olk (h/Mpc)] 


Figure 7. The power spectrum obtained for cosmic strings with 
cold dark matter and a significant cosmological constant 

Qa = 0.7, which is normalized using large-angle CMB 
anisotropy (COBE). Inferred observational points from 
large-scale structure surveys are also included. The Hubble 
parameter is taken to be h = 0.7 and the wavenumber k is in 
units of h/Mpc. 


In order to study the large-scale structure in a specific 
defect scenario we need to solve the linearized Einstein 
equations for a density perturbation with a source term 
given by the energy-momentum tensor of the evolving 
defect network. Given that defect simulations can only 
run for a short period, it is useful to characterize the 
scale-invariant power which they induce using unequal- 
time correlators. These can then be used as a scale- 
invariant source to greatly increase the dynamic range 
in a semianalytic solution of the perturbation equations. 
Nevertheless, this severe numerical limitation makes 
cosmic defect predictions considerably less reliable than 
corresponding results for INFLATION. 

An example of the power spectrum of dark matter 
density perturbations produced by cosmic strings is 
illustrated in figure 7. This is a cold dark matter scenario 
with a COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT and the string source is 
normalized to match the large-angle CMB anisotropies 
measured by COBE. The observational data points shown 
are the Peacock—Dodds compilation of several large-scale 
structure surveys. Several key features are evident, which 
distinguish defect models from standard inflation. Firstly, 
cosmic strings and other defects require considerable 
‘bias’, that is the galaxy distribution must be more strongly 
clustered than the underlying dark matter. Since early 
non-linearity is natural in these models, it may be that 
this can be accommodated. Secondly, although the overall 
power is lower than inflation, defect models induce 
relatively more small-scale power. The consequence of 
these two features is that the shape of the defect power 
spectrum appears to be viable only in open models or those 
with a substantial cosmological constant. 

Some non-Gaussianity is expected in the large-scale 
structure distribution induced by cosmic strings. This 
has been observed by studying the one-point probability 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


density function and other statistics. However, significant 
non-Gaussianity is only evident on scales smaller than 
about 1.5(Qmyh*)"' Mpc, that is on scales today which 
are non-linear in any case. The wake-like structures 
created by a single string are submerged among the many 
contributions from other strings, except paradoxically on 
small scales. This is because string perturbations before 
the equal matter-radiation transition are suppressed, so a 
late-time wake contribution is relatively stronger than the 
background. 

The power spectrum induced by global monopole 
or texture theories appears to be less attractive than that 
from strings. On the one hand, ina flat matter-dominated 
universe (Qy, = 1) the power spectrum has an acceptable 
amplitude at 8h-! Mpc but falls away drastically on large 
scales. On the other hand, in an open universe or a model 
with a significant cosmological constant, the shape of the 
spectrum is improved but the overall amplitude becomes 
seriously deficient on all scales; biases up to an order 
of magnitude can be typical when normalized to large- 
angle CMB anisotropy. Global defect models are expected 
to exhibit a somewhat stronger non-Gaussian signal than 
strings. 


Cosmic microwave sky 
The greatest observational challenge to cosmic defect 
theories arises from the patterns they create on the 
cosmic microwave sky. The temperature fluctuations 
produced in microwave background photons travelling in 
a sky direction n can be summarized by the Sachs—Wolfe 
formula 

Lae [ruil desea ase 

T 3 py 
Here, the spacetime metric perturbation h,; represents 
the gravitational effects of the cosmic defects, while v is 
the matter velocity and p, is the photon density on the 
surface of last scattering. For large angular scales, the first 
term dominates (i.e. the integrated Sachs—Wolfe effect). In 
standard inflation, this merely reduces to the Newtonian 
potential ® on the surface of last scattering. Temperature 
fluctuations are mainly due to photons climbing out 
of the (scalar) potential wells as they decouple; these 
are the same wells around which large-scale structure 
collapses. For cosmic defects, however, large-angle 
CMB anisotropies are created dynamically along the 
whole photon trajectory by the gravitational effects of the 
evolving defect network. This includes additional non- 
scalar contributions (vector and tensor modes) which are 
not directly related to the induced density perturbations. 
These extra modes imply that defect models, when 
normalized by large-angle CMB observations (such 
as the COBE-DMR experiment), generically produce 
less scalar power for density fluctuations relative to 
inflationary models. Nevertheless, the scale invariance of 
defect evolution implies they produce an angular power 
spectrum on large scales which is nearly flat and consistent 
with COBE (i.e. for multipoles € < 30 in figure 8). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


100 
t 
rf 80 [~ Z | 
a B ry) 4 Ly 
“= 60+ U fe LN 
R Ovi 
N iy es bd ‘ 
O 407 nate *: Ty & 
S i soent : ; 
S 20- fee cas aad 
@) ! | Ot 
1 10 100 1000 


Multipole / 


Figure 8. Angular power spectrum for cosmic microwave 
anisotropy from texture simulations (solid curve), a cosmic 
string toy model (dashed) and standard inflation (dotted), all 
with a Hubble parameter h = 0.5. The defect models are in a flat 
cosmology with a significant cosmological constant: textures 

Qa = 0.8 and strings Qa = 0.5. Recent CMB experimental 
points are included for comparison. 


The additional vector and tensor modes created by 
defects can be illustrated by a cosmic string perturbing 
CMB photons when it moves across the line of sight. As 
the string passes in front of a distant source, the observer 
and source experience a small relative boost towards each 
other owing to the string deficit angle A. Thus, in the frame 
of the observer, the emitted light behind the string will 
acquire a relative Doppler blueshift, and so the string will 
create a line-like discontinuity in the CMB temperature 
pattern. Now, on large angular scales, the superposition 
of so many strings between the observer and the surface 
of last scattering means that the signal is very Gaussian. 
However, on very small angular scales approaching the 
interstring distance, this ‘stringy’ signature should be 
detectable; for example, the temperature discontinuities 
are inconsistent with Gaussian fluctuations on angular 
scales below about 2 arcmin. In a similar manner, 
collapsing textures or monopole pairs create hot spots in 
the microwave sky. Such non-Gaussian features are a 
distinct observational signature; they may be detectable 
even if the defect energy scale is below that needed for 
galaxy formation. A feature of defect models is that this 
non-Gaussian signal dies away much more slowly than 
inflation at high multipoles ¢ > 1000. 

On intermediate scales with multipoles 200 < ¢ < 
1000, the second and third terms in the Sachs—Wolfe 
formula become important, that is Doppler shifts due to 
motion at photon decoupling and intrinsic fluctuations 
in the photon density p,. For these effects, defects 
again produce a signature quite distinct from inflation 
because they are isocurvature theories. In inflation, 
superhorizon perturbations begin to oscillate coherently 
as soon as they cross the horizon, providing the so- 
called spectrum of ‘Doppler peaks’ illustrated in figure 8. 
The primary peak due to the intrinsic photon density 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


typically is at a multipole € ~ 200. In contrast, since 
cosmic defects act only on subhorizon scales, they begin 
to oscillate later; they are at least out of phase with 
adiabatic fluctuations, so the primary intrinsic peak is 
expected at ¢ > 300 or greater. In fact, since defects 
act dynamically on scales substantially smaller than the 
horizon, the expected primary (scalar) peak is generally 
at even higher multipoles with simulations suggesting for 
textures £ © 350, monopoles ¢ ~ 400 and strings € ~ 500. 
Secondary peaks, if present at all, are weak because of the 
incoherence of the defect source. Such differences would 
be sufficient to distinguish cosmic defects from inflation, 
but the divergence is even greater when we include 
the integrated Sachs—Wolfe effect discussed earlier. In 
global defect models these dominate even at intermediate 
scales, so that any Doppler peaks are barely discernible as 
illustrated for textures in figure 8. 

If present observational indications of a strong 
primary Doppler peak are confirmed, along with clear 
secondary peaks, then defect models are likely to be 
ruled out as the main seeds for large-scale structure 
formation. However, such a conclusion is subject to 
a number of caveats. First, the evolution of defect 
networks and their non-linear astrophysical effects have 
not been exhaustively studied, so there cannot be complete 
confidence in present predictions. Secondly, broken scale 
invariance in defect evolution may introduce features 
such as peaks in the angular CMB spectrum. This 
occurs already in cosmic string models because of the 
very different network densities before and after matter— 
radiation equality (see figure 8). Thirdly, in alternative 
cosmologies, the primary peak can migrate to smaller 
multipoles, such as in closed FRW models with a large 
cosmological constant. Finally, even if defects were not 
to be the prime cause of structure formation, they could 
still play a subsidiary role. This complementarity has been 
studied, for example, in hybrid and open inflation models. 
Ultimately, however, the unequivocal test for cosmic 
defects will be their distinct observational signature in the 
CMB sky on very small angular scales. 


Primordial backgrounds 

The scale-invariant evolution of a defect network 
depends on the decay of defects into a particle or 
radiation background. This background may well have 
influenced cosmic history and it may be detectable today. 
Supermassive cosmic strings with only local interactions 
oscillate relativistically and decay into gravitational 
radiation. The magnitude of this flat spectrum of 
primordial gravitational waves can be predicted from 
network simulations. However, millisecond pulsar 
timings provide an upper limit on this amplitude, since 
it would disturb their precise regularity. This constraint 
on the string energy scale, Gu < 5 x 10~°, is quite tight 
but consistent with the large-angle CMB normalization. 
Future generations of GRAVITATIONAL WAVE detectors (such as 
LIGOII) will have the sensitivity to detect such a stochastic 
background. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Global defects decay into the massless Goldstone 
bosons to which they are strongly coupled. This 
background of Goldstone bosons, when there are too 
many massless degrees of freedom, can upset primordial 
nucleosynthesis predictions; the fraction of the energy 
density in the universe in Goldstone bosons at t ~ 1s 
must be less than 5.4% for standard light element synthesis 
to work. This does not provide a serious constraint on 
GUT-scale global defects unless they are produced in many 
varieties. 

Supermassive strings which are superconducting 
and carry large currents decay preferentially into 
electromagnetic radiation rather than gravitational waves. 
The resulting radiation pressure that builds up around 
an oscillating loop can push background plasma into a 
thin expanding wall. When these plasma bubble walls 
collide, they heat the surrounding medium and dump 
their energy into radiation which, in turn, can distort the 
Planck spectrum of the CMB. Such an explosion scenario 
was once proposed as a theory for large-scale structure 
formation, but an unacceptable CMB distortion results for 
sufficiently heavy strings Gu > 107’. 


Dark matter 

The observable implications of defect models are not 
restricted exclusively to supermassive GUT-scale defects. 
For low or intermediate energy scales, massive relics of 
defect network decay can provide plausible candidates 
for missing dark matter. Axions are pseudo-Goldstone 
bosons which, in the standard thermal scenario, are 
predominantly produced by radiation from axion strings. 
Uncertain calculations of this complex process produce 
cosmological bounds on the axion string formation scale 
of approximately 7, < 3 x 10!° GeV. This indicates that the 
most likely mass range for a dark matter axion lies near 
ma ~ 0.1 meV. Superconducting strings formed around the 
electroweak scale can leave behind ‘vortons’, that is vortex 
rings stabilized by their currents and charge. They may 
also collect charge into stable Q-ball configurations. Both 
vortons and Q-balls are ultra-massive cold dark matter 
candidates. The collapse of circular cosmic string loops 
could also create a distribution of primordial black holes, 
with a variety of observational consequences. 

As noted previously, certain varieties of strings and 
other defects are unable to reconnect or pass through each 
other, so they become entangled. It is believed that the 
‘frustrated’ defect networks that result do not evolve in 
a scale-invariant manner. Instead, they relax towards an 
equilibrium configuration which is merely stretched by 
the Hubble expansion and slowly comes to dominate the 
energy density of the universe. The network acts like an 
almost smooth dark matter component, but with a strange 
equation of state owing to the negative pressure of the 
defects. If the network dominates, this negative pressure 
causes the universe to expand faster that in the matter- 
dominated phase. 

For non-Abelian strings in a flat cosmology (Q = 1), 
the universe mimics an open model (Q < 1) with the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


scale factor growing as a « t. Since these strings will not 
cluster on galaxy or cluster scales, they must not dominate 
well after structure formation has begun. This constraint 
implies that the strings must be very light forming at the 
electroweak scale or later, that is n < 104 GeV. The mean 
separation today of such strings would be only a few 
astronomical units; however, their direct detection would 
be extremely difficult unless they were superconducting. 

Recent observational evidence favouring a_ flat 
cosmology with a low matter density has renewed 
interest in a non-zero cosmological constant A. Equally, 
however, frustrated defect networks could play a similar 
role, arguably without the severe fine-tuning problems 
associated with A. Observational tests of these models 
must focus on determining the equation of state p = wp 
of this homogeneous background component. Frustrated 
strings can be expected to have w ~ -i, while domain 
walls will have w + — z, as compared with a cosmological 
constant with w = —1. 


Baryogenesis 

Cosmic defects can have interactions which violate baryon 
number B and which could, in principle, generate 
the matter—antimatter asymmetry of the universe (see 
BARYOGENESIS). Of course, B-violating interactions alone 
would tend to act in the opposite direction by erasing any 
pre-existing or primordial baryon asymmetry. However, if 
the B-violating interactions are also C P violating and they 
occur out of equilibrium (i.e. Sakharov’s three criteria), 
then they can create a net baryon number in a baryon- 
symmetric universe. Several speculative defect scenarios 
have been proposed for this including the B- and C P- 
violating decay of heavy particles emitted by string 
cusps or small loops and 8B-violating scattering from 
superconducting strings, as well as monopole annihilation 
and texture collapse. 

Baryon-violating processes can also occur at the 
electroweak phase transition. In this case, sphalerons 
(i.e. local texture transitions) can cause baryon number 
violation. However, it is difficult for these transitions 
to favour baryons over antibaryons in the standard 
electroweak model; the C P violation that does exist in the 
kaon system is insufficient. Instead, various extensions of 
the standard model, such as the minimal supersymmetric 
standard model (MSSM), have been studied to increase the 
level of CP violation. Usually, this entails mechanisms 
occurring on expanding bubble walls during a first-order 
phase transition. A small parameter range in the MSSM 
model remains viable for electroweak baryogenesis but 
this will be tested at LEP in the near future. Amore detailed 
description of alternative models is beyond the scope of 
this article, but it may yet emerge that baryogenesis is 
the most important consequence of topological defects in 
cosmology. 


Cosmic rays 
Topological defects can produce highly energetic massive 
particles through their relativistic accelerations and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


interactions. These can decay and cascade into observable 
cosmic rays over a broad energy range which extends 
to ultrahigh energies (UHEs) with E > 10" GeV. Most 
recent interest has focused on UHE cosmic rays because 
of the difficulty of explaining the observed events with 
the usual astrophysical accelerator mechanisms. Various 
scenarios for their generation by topological defects 
have been discussed in the literature including cosmic 
string reconnections, current loss from superconducting 
strings, monopole—antimonopole annihilation and hybrid 
networks of monopoles connected by strings. The 
problem faced by these models is not achieving exotic 
high energies but rather reaching the required flux levels. 
For UHE cosmic rays, both the proton attenuation length 
and the photon absorption length due to interactions with 
CMB photons are much smaller than the Hubble radius. 
For ordinary or superconducting cosmic strings, this cutoff 
is also much smaller than the mean string separation, so 
the cosmic ray flux they create is generically exponentially 
suppressed. Even if a string were nearby by chance, it 
would generate a highly anisotropic flux. Of course, many 
possibilities remain to be explored such as neutral carriers 
which can evade this limit. 

Nevertheless, several models with GUT-scale mono- 
poles appear to be able to generate the required flux 
of UHE cosmic rays. In one case, the monopoles are 
attached to two strings, so that they form ‘beads’ in 
a ‘necklace’ configuration. If the strings are light (say 
the electroweak scale), then the monopoles can retard 
the evolution such that the network evolves to a much 
denser state than usual with a mean interstring spacing 
of a few kpc. The monopoles and antimonopoles 
trapped on the strings continuously annihilate to produce 
superheavy particles which cascade into a nearly isotropic 
flux of cosmic rays. Another alternative is a primordial 
distribution of monopolonium, that is, bound states 
made from monopole-antimonopole pairs. These slowly 
decay electromagnetically and eventually annihilate. 
Monopolonium (or other localized defect states such as 
vortons) will cluster like ordinary matter, so one would 
expect to observe anisotropy with a peak cosmic ray flux 
from the Galactic center, and also from the Virgo cluster. 
A distinct feature of defect-generated cosmic rays is the 
pion dominance of hadron production, leading to a strong 
electromagnetic cascade; unlike most mechanisms, there 
are more photons than protons. For localized defects 
inside the photon absorption cutoff distance, this will 
result in a directional flux of UHE photons. 

Topological defects are also invoked to account for 
other high-energy astrophysical phenomena which evade 
more conventional explanation. One example is the engine 
driving a y-ray burster (GRB) which must emit in an 
extremely narrow beam. The cusps on superconducting 
strings at the GUT scale 7 ~ 10'* GeV can achieve the 
beamed energy levels required and exhibit a number of 
the key qualitative features of GRBs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Cosmic defects and inflation 

A solution to the monopole problem was a prime 
motivation for inflation; any cosmic defects present before 
inflation would be drastically diluted by the ensuing 
epoch of exponential expansion. Defects and inflation, 
therefore, have become widely regarded as incompatible, 
but this is certainly not the case. Of course, light- 
or intermediate-scale defects can be formed at phase 
transitions which occur after inflation, but itis also possible 
to create heavy defects in significant quantities even if 
their energy scale is higher than the inflationary reheat 
temperature 7 > Tg. Defect-forming phase transitions 
can occur during inflation or they can trigger its end, 
notably in hybrid inflation models. Defect networks can 
be created by quantum fluctuations during inflation. The 
quantum nucleation of symmetric defect configurations, 
such as circular string loops or monopole—antimonopole 
pairs, can also act continuously during inflation to give 
non-negligible final densities. A particularly interesting 
possibility is inflationary pre-heating which can cause non- 
thermal phase transitions. These can naturally give rise to 
superheavy defects even with 7 > 10!° GeV. Together with 
inflation, cosmic defects hold out the prospect of solving 
a number of key cosmological enigmas. 


Bibliography 

The literature on topological defects in cosmology is 
extensive and can be approached through the references 
listed here. A recently updated paperback edition of a 
comprehensive monograph on the subject is 


Vilenkin A and Shellard E P S 2000 Cosmic Strings and 
Other Topological Defects (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 


Another review on cosmic strings is 


Hindmarsh M B and Kibble T W B 1995 Cosmic strings 
and coherence Rep. Prog. Phys. 58 477 


Useful conference proceedings about topological defects 
in cosmology (and other contexts) include 


Davis A-C and Brandenberger R H (ed) 1995 Formation and 
Interactions of Topological Defects (New York: Plenum) 

Gibbons G W, Hawking S W and Vachaspati T (ed) 1990 
Formation and Evolution of Cosmic Strings (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Some of the watershed papers on the cosmological 
implications of topological defects which have sparked 
interest in the field are 


Kibble T W B 1976 Topology of cosmic domains and strings 
J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 9 1387 

Kibble T W B 1980 Some implications of a cosmological 
phase transition Phys. Rev. 67 183 

Preskill J 1979 Cosmological production of superheavy 
monopoles Phys. Rev. Lett. 43 1365 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Topological Defects in Cosmology 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Turok N G 1989 Global texture as the origin of cosmic 
structure Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 2625 

Vilenkin A 1981 Cosmological density fluctuations 
produced by vacuum strings Phys. Rev. Lett. 46 1169 

Vilenkin A 1981 Phys. Rev. Lett. 46 1496 (erratum) 

Vilenkin A 1985 Cosmic strings and domain walls Phys. 
Rev. 121 263 

Witten E 1985 Superconducting strings Nucl. Phys. B 249 
557 

Zel'dovich Ya B 1980 Cosmological fluctuations produced 
near a singularity Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 192 663 


Defect predictions for structure formation and the CMB 
sky used for figures 7 and 8 were gleaned from the 
following papers: for figure 7, 


Avelino P P, Shellard E P S, Wu J H P and Allen B 1998 
Cosmic-string-seeded structure formation Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 81 2008 


for figure 8, 


Allen B, Caldwell R R, Dodelson S, Knox L, Shellard E PS 
and Stebbins A 1997 CMB anisotropy induced by 
cosmic strings on angular scales >15' Phys. Rev. Lett. 
79 2624 

Battye RA, Robinson J and Albrecht A 1998 Cosmic strings 
and a cosmological constant Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 4847 

Durrer R, Kunz M and Melchiorri A 1999 Cosmic 
microwave background anisotropies from scaling 
seeds: global defect models Phys. Rev. D 59 123005 

Pen U-L, Seljak D N and Turok N 1997 Power spectra in 
global defect theories of cosmic structure formation 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 1611 


Observational comparisons were made with the Peacock 
and Dodds and the Tegmark survey compilations. 


E P S Shellard 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Torricelli, Evangelista (1608-47) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Torricelli, Evangelista (1608-47) 


Born in Faenza, Romagna, Italy. He was in his youth 
greatly interested in astronomy and a Copernican but upon 
the condemnation of GALILEO in 1633 he remained silent 
on astronomy, probably regarding it as too controversial. 
He worked as a secretary to Galileo for a year before his 
death, and succeeded him as Mathematician to the Grand 
Duke Ferdinando II of Tuscany. He was the first man to 
create a sustained vacuum and to discover the principle of 
a barometer. He was a skilled optician, making telescopes 
and microscopes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Torun Radio Astronomy Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Torun Radio Astronomy Observatory 


Torun Center for Astronomy is located at Piwnice, 15 km 
north of Torun, Poland. A part of the Faculty of Physics 
and Astronomy of the Nicolaus Copernicus University, 
it was created by the union of Torun Radio Astronomy 
Observatory (TRAO) and the Institute of Astronomy on 
1 January 1997. 

Since 1981 the observatory has been part of a 
worldwide network of radio observatories participating 
in VLBI (very long baseline interferometry). With the new 
32 m telescope and modern sophisticated instrumentation, 
Torun station is the only VLBI site in eastern Europe. 
It recently became a member of the European Pulsar 
Network (EuroToP). 

Research concentrates on observations and theoretical 
interpretation of physical processes in radio galaxies and 
quasars, the timing of pulsars, the search for new planetary 
systems and solar system studies. The development 
of instrumentation for radioastronomy (ultra low-noise 
receivers, spectrometers, frequency converters, digital 
electronics, control systems) is also important. 

For further information see 
http://www.astri-uni.torun.pl/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Towneley, Richard (1629-1707) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Towneley, Richard (1629-1707) 


Wealthy scientist, born in Towneley Hall, near Burnley, 
Lancashire, made meteorological measurements and im- 
proved the micrometer (for use in astronomical observa- 
tions), introducing FLAMSTEED to it. His escapements were 
blamed by THOMAS TOMPION for some initial problems with 
the clocks he made for John Flamsteed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Townes, Charles Hard (1915-—) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Townes, Charles Hard (1915-) 


Physicist, born in Greenville, SC, Nobel prizewinner for 
physics in 1964 ‘for fundamental work in the field of 
quantum electronics, which has led to the construction 
of oscillators and amplifiers based on the maser-laser 
principle’. Worked at Bell Telephone Laboratories and 
Columbia University on microwave spectroscopy to study 
the structure of molecules, atoms and nuclei. Conceived 
the idea of a device for microwave amplification by 
stimulated emission of radiation, coining the word ‘maser’ 
from the acronym. Became professor of physics at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and then at the 
University of California. He used the maser device 
to make sensitive amplifiers for radioastronomy and 
predicted the existence of the OH line in molecules of 
interstellar space. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


TRACE (Transition Region and Coronal Explorer) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TRACE (Transition Region and 
Coronal Explorer) 


The Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) is 
a NASA Small-Explorer (SMEX) satellite developed to 
study the impact of magnetic fields on the solar outer 
atmosphere. The instrument observes the solar surface 
(SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE) and the hotter overlying domains 
(TRANSITION REGION and CORONA) with an angular resolution 
of 1 arcsec, equivalent to 725 km on the Sun, an average 
cadence of about 30 s, and a field of view of 512 by 
512 arcsec (covering one-tenth of the solar disk). The 
TRACE observatory was launched on 2 April 1998 from 
Vandenberg Air Force Base ona Pegasus XL launch vehicle 
built by Orbital Sciences Corporation. The spacecraft is 
in a polar orbit roughly over the day-night terminator. 
This Sun-synchronous orbit allows TRACE to see the Sun 
without interruptions for a period of approximately nine 
months of the year, while there are some ECLIPSES of the Sun 
by the Earth during the other three months. 

The main scientific objective of the TRACE mission is 
to enhance our understanding of the dynamic, hot solar 
outer atmosphere. To achieve this goal, the instrument is 
used to: 


@ Study how the SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELD structures the outer 
atmosphere, from the photospheric surface to the high 
corona, covering a temperature range from 5000 up to 
several million degrees. 


@ Observe how the magnetic fields evolve from their 
emergence onto the solar surface up to their disappear- 
ance, observing both the gradual dispersal and decay 
of the field and the occasional instabilities that occur (in 
FLARES). 


e Investigate the entire range of scales from the 
instrumental resolution (725 km) up to the global field, 
and the way in which these scales influence each other. 


To achieve these objectives the TRACE instrument 
uses a 30 cm aperture CASSEGRAIN TELESCOPE With normal- 
incidence optics to image wavelengths at visible, ultra- 
violet (UV) and extreme-ultraviolet (EUV) wavelengths. 
The instrument was developed by a team composed of 
the Lockheed-Martin Advanced Technology Center, the 
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, NASA /Goddard 
Space Flight Center and Montana State University. 


Instrument description 

The TRACE telescope is divided into four quadrants. 
Each quadrant has an optimized optical coating on the 
primary and secondary mirrors as well as special filters 
for the selection of the wavelength to be observed. The 
appropriate mirror segment is selected with a rotating 
quadrant selector just behind the front window. The 
EUV quadrants are coated with multilayers, i.e. multiple 
layers of very thin coatings that allow the use of normal- 
incidence optics to observe the EUV wavelengths. These 
multilayer coatings were of the highest reflectivity and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


CCD Camera 


Filter Wheels 


Guide Telescope 


Front Door 


Rear Doors 


Sun Sensor 


Figure 1. The TRACE instrument. 


narrowest bandpass ever deployed in space at the time of 
launch. The UV quadrant uses a narrowband multilayer 
on the primary mirror (optimized for 1550 A) and an 
aluminum coating on the secondary to provide for a 
capability to image a wide range of wavelengths in the 
UV and visible (see table 1). A set of filter wheels in front 
of the detector provides the final selection of the desired 
wavelengths. The image is recorded on a lumogen-coated 
charge-coupled display (CCD) to make it sensitive to both 
UV and EUV wavelengths. Typical observing programs 
cycle through multiple wavelengths to observe different 
temperature domains in the solar atmosphere. 


Table 1. Wavelengths observed by TRACE. 


Wavelength Emission Temperature 
(A) (kK) 

173 Fe IX/X 160-2000 

195 Fe XII 500-2000 

284 Fe XV 1250-4000 
1216 HIiLya 10-30 
1550 CIV 60-250 
1600 UV cont, CI, Fe II 4-10 
1700 Continuum 4-10 
5000 White light 46.4 


At the time of launch, the TRACE telescope had the 
highest spatial resolution of any space-borne imaging solar 
telescope, with a angular resolution of 1 arcsec or 725 km. 
The CCD detector (with 0.5 arcsec pixels) is a 1024 x 1024 
array, with a field of view of 8.5 x 8.5 arcmin (equivalent 
to 6.2 x 6.2 Mm at the solar disk center). 

The instrument maintains pointing to an accuracy 
of 0.1 arcsec by a combination of gyrostabilization of the 
spacecraft with further stabilization achieved by moving 
the secondary mirror in response to a signal from an 
external GUIDE TELESCOPE. The satellite points to various 
locations on the Sun directed by the guide-telescope signal, 
in which rotating wedge prisms are used to deflect the 
optical axis of the telescope in the desired direction within 
a cone of +1° away from the center of the disk. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


TRACE (Transition Region and Coronal Explorer) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The onboard computer system is responsible for var- 
ious housekeeping functions, JPEG data compression and 
limited scientific image processing prior to downlinking 
the signal. Normally six downlinks occur daily at Wal- 
lops Flight Facility, Maryland, USA; Poker Flat, Alaska, 
USA and McMurdo Station, Antarctica. This combina- 
tion of operations, data compression and creative planning 
techniques allow TRACE to record one full image roughly 
every minute when operating in a continuous mode, re- 
sulting in a data rate of ~ 0.5 Gbyte day™'. 


Operations and data archive 

Standard science operations are executed from the TRACE 
Experiment Operations Facility (EOF) at Goddard Space 
Flight Center. Operations personnel closely coordinate 
with other observatories, particularly with the Solar and 
Heliospheric Observatory (SoHo). In addition to general 
operations in response to solar conditions and requests 
from other observatories, TRACE covers the entire Sun to 
construct a full-disk mosaic of the central meridian at least 
every other day. 

During the first nine months of operations, up to 
the beginning of the first eclipse season, TRACE acquired 
nearly a million exposures, running at an average cadence 
of three images per minute. The TRACE project has 
a policy of making all data available to colleagues and 
the general public within at most a few days of the 
observation. 


Science highlights 

The TRACE images present a view of the solar outer 
atmosphere not anticipated prior to launch. Many of these 
observations are likely to take some time yet to be properly 
interpreted. Some early highlights are discussed below: 

Perhaps most exciting is the level of structural detail 
and the short evolutionary timescales that are apparent 
in TRACE image sequences. The smallest features are 
still unresolved at 1 arcsec resolution. In fact, entire 
magnetic loops in the corona are seen to have a cross 
section at the instrumental resolution, suggesting that the 
actual widths of such loops are smaller still. Movies 
show significant restructuring of the solar corona down 
to temporal cadences of some 10 s. 

The solar corona shows a wide range of loops, 
ranging from about the instrumental resolution up to 
hundreds of thousands of kilometers. These loops 
connect either opposite polarities in photospheric regions 
that emerged together or reconnect to form connections 
between magnetic flux concentrations that emerged at 
separate times and locations. Over large bipolar active 
regions in the photosphere, the corona shows the following 
thermal pattern. Over the inner parts of the region near 
the polarity inversion line, the corona is relatively hot 
with temperatures typically of 3 to 5 million degrees, 
observable by the Yohkoh/SXT instrument. Surrounding 
that inner core is an ensemble of loops with substantially 
lower temperatures, visible to TRACE. The material in 
these loops, many of which have temperatures throughout 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


their interior of near 1 million degrees, is strongly stratified 
under the influence of gravity, leading to emission 
primarily in their lower segments. 

One particularly interesting feature in TRACE 
observations is the so-called moss. This moss is a low- 
lying, bright emission pattern with many dark inclusions, 
overlying the inner parts of active regions, underneath 
the hot 3-5 million degree corona. The moss has been 
identified as the upper transition region between the 
CHROMOSPHERE and the corona, through which energy is 
transported primarily by thermal conduction. As the 
temperature gradient is very steep, the layer of emission 
is rather thin. Material at chromospheric temperatures is 
injected into this height range from below, by an as yet 
unidentified mechanism, causing rapidly evolving dark 
intrusions in the moss pattern. Ona few occasions, TRACE 
movies have shown patches of the moss evolving in a 
manner akin to a prairie fire following a flare, reflecting 
the thermal evolution of the loops higher up in the corona. 

The TRACE temporal and spatial resolution has 
allowed solar physicists to directly observe for the first 
time oscillations in CORONAL Loops. These oscillations are 
almost invariably observed in the lower segments of 
loops ending in sunspots. Large-amplitude transverse 
oscillations are frequently observed after solar flares, when 
the associated blast wave excites such oscillations. 


Bibliography 

The latest information on mission status, and image 
gallery, and scientific results and observing programs 
may be found at the TRACE web page, http:// 
vestige.1msal.com/TRACE/. 


Handy B N et al 1999 The Transition Region and Coronal 
Explorer Solar Phys. 187 229-60 

Schrijver C J et al 1999 A new view of the solar outer 
atmosphere with the transition region and coronal 
explorer Solar Phys. 187 261-302 


Brian N Handy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transit 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Transit 


The passage of a celestial body across the disk of a 
much larger one. The term is applied most commonly 
to passages of Mercury and Venus across the face of 
the Sun. Such transits were first reliably predicted by 
Johannes Kepler, in his Rudolphine Tables of planetary 
motion. From these predictions Pierre Gassendi became 
the first to observe a transit of Mercury, in 1631; eight 
years later Jeremiah Horrocks, also using Kepler’s tables, 
made the first observation of a transit of Venus. These 
two planets are seen in transit when near one of their 
nodes at inferior conjunction. Mercury is at its ascending 
node in November, and its descending node in May; these 
occasions coincide with inferior conjunction at intervals of 
7, 13 and 46 years (ascending node) and 13 and 46 years 
(descending node). Transits of Venus are much rarer. They 
can happen near June 7 (ascending node) or December 
8 (ascending node), and recur in pairs, 8 years apart, at 
intervals of 1055 years and 121} years. The next pair will 
be on 2004 June 8 and 2012 June 5/6; these will be only the 
fifth and sixth transits since the one Horrocks observed 
in 1639. From the eighteenth century transits afforded 
an important means of determining the scale of the solar 
system. Its relative proportions were known from Kepler’s 
laws. Accurate timings of transits from widely separated 
locations on the Earth’s surface provided a trigonometric 
fix. Early attempts to do this for Venus were frustrated by 
the refraction of sunlight through the planet’s atmosphere, 
which makes the planet appear smaller than usual, and by 
the black drop effect. 

The major satellites of planets may be seen to transit 
the face of their parent planet. The four largest satellites 
of Jupiter, known as the Galilean satellites, frequently 
transit the planet’s disk; the larger inner satellites of Saturn 
may also be observed in transit. A satellite’s shadow 
is sometimes visible crossing the planetary disk in a 
shadow transit. The term ‘transit’ is also used by planetary 
observers to indicate the passage of an atmospheric or 
surface feature across a planet’s central meridian—the 
imaginary line that bisects its visible disk, from the north 
pole to the south pole. Timing such transits provides a 
means of determining a planet’s rotation period. 


See also: black drop, Jupiter: satellites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region Flows 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Transition Region Flows 


Ultraviolet emission lines emitted from the SOLAR TRANSI- 
TION REGION are often shifted from their expected rest wave- 
lengths. Shifts of spectral lines are due to the so-called 
DOPPLER EFFECT, where the source of emission is moving ei- 
ther away from or towards the observer, causing a change 
in the apparent wavelength. The shifted emission lines 
are most often interpreted as a flow of plasma along mag- 
netic field lines or loops with velocities varying from a few 
kms! to several hundreds of kms~!. Flows observed 
in the transition region can be divided into three main 
groups: steady flows with relatively small velocities ob- 
served in the quiet Sun, short-lived high-velocity events in 
the quiet Sun and high-velocity (often supersonic) flows 
connected to SOLAR ACTIVE REGIONS. The latter includes flows 
related to flaring activity and mass ejections. The different 
types of flow are discussed below but one should keep in 
mind that plasma flow is not the only explanation for the 
Doppler-shifted emission lines. Model calculations sug- 
gest that waves propagating through the solar atmosphere 
can also produce line shifts and complex line profiles. 


Systematic flows in the quiet Sun 

One of the most puzzling problems in solar physics is 
the apparent net redshift of emission lines in the solar 
transition region. In recent decades, this phenomenon has 
been observed with several UV instruments with different 
spatial resolutions. For the Sun, the typical value of 
the average downflow velocity, derived from the C IV 
resonance lines at 1550 A, is 5-10 km s~!. The C IV lines 
are formed at temperatures around 10° K. Measurements 
of the variation of the flow with temperature are somewhat 
ambiguous, however. 

In earlier investigations the magnitude of the 
redshift has been found to increase with temperature, 
reaching a maximum at T = 10° K, and then to 
decrease sharply toward higher temperatures (2.5 x 
10° K). These results have been used extensively in 
models trying to explain the mechanisms behind this 
phenomenon. Recent observations from soHo have 
extended the observable temperature range and suggest 
that the average redshift persists to higher temperatures 
than in previous investigations. Shifts in the range 10- 
16 kms7! are observed in lines formed at T = (1.3- 
2.5) x 10° K. Even upper transition region and coronal lines 
(O VIL, Ne VIII and Mg X) show systematic redshifts in the 
quiet Sun corresponding to velocities around +5 km got: 
These results have introduced new constraints on models 
of the redshifts in the solar atmosphere. In coronal holes 
there is evidence for a small net blueshift in the upper 
transition region, while at lower temperatures the lines 
still show a net redshift. 

An interesting feature of the transition region is that 
the average redshifted emissions appear to be a persistent 
phenomenon in both quiet and active regions. The 
estimated downward mass flux around T = 10° K is 
sufficient to empty the corona ina few minutes. It therefore 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


seems likely that upflows also exist that could balance the 
observed downflow unless the Doppler shifts are caused 
by waves propagating through the transition region. Both 
downflows and upflows may occur where, for some 
reason, the downflowing plasma is slightly brighter than 
the upflowing plasma. 

Several hypotheses to explain the redshifted emission 
have been proposed so far and they include: the return 
of spicular material; siphon flows in coronal loops; nano- 
flares followed by downward propagating acoustic waves; 
a different temporal duration of upflows and downflows; 
and asymmetric heating of coronal loops. None of them 
has been found to be entirely satisfactory. Thus, other 
mechanisms should still be considered to explain the 
observed redshifts at higher temperatures. 

Detailed studies of the redshifted emission observed 
on the Sun also are important for the understanding 
of similar observations of stellar spectra. Systematic 
redshifts have also been observed in spectra of late- 
type stars, first with the INTERNATIONAL ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER 
(IUE) and recently by the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE. Below 
temperatures of about 1.6 x 10° K, the line redshifts of the 
Sun, a Cen A, a Cen B and Procyon are all very similar. 
However, at higher temperatures both a Cen Aand a Cen B 
suggest drop-offs in redshifts similar to that suggested by 
the solar data. In comparison, no drop-off in the redshifts 
was found in the spectra from Procyon, which is a hotter 
and somewhat more active star than the Sun. 


High-velocity events 
High-velocity events in the solar transition region 
were first observed in UV spectra obtained with the 
Naval Research Laboratory’s High Resolution Telescope 
and Spectrograph (HRTS). The strength of the HRTS 
instrument is its high spatial, spectral and time resolution 
combined with the extensive wavelength and angular 
coverage. This makes it well suited for studies of fine 
structure and mass flows in the upper solar atmosphere 
and led to the discovery of short-lived transient events 
with high velocities, so-called explosive events (see 
TRANSITION EVENTS: EXPLOSIVE EVENTS). Explosive events are 
found to be short-lived (60 s), small-scale (1500 km) 
high-velocity flows that occur frequently, with a birthrate 
of ~ 600 s-!, over the entire surface of the Sun. 
The observed Doppler shifts correspond to line-of-sight 
velocities of typically 150 kms7! towards and away from 
the observer. Many observations suggest that explosive 
events are bi-directional jets and that they are evidence of 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION above the solar surface. However, 
other mechanisms are also possible, including episodic 
nonlinear MHD disturbances produced by nano-flares 
that will introduce particle motions leading to broad line 
profiles as observed in explosive events. Flows with 
opposite directions within unresolved loop structures 
should also be considered since many explosive events 
show multiple line components. 

The concept of multiple flows is another interesting 
feature seen in the HRTS data and they are most common 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region Flows 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Lob.w: 1402.770 
Ri # 610 1 
FFT == 


FIT 
Exp. 1200 


1402.0 4402.5 1403.0 1403.5 1404.0 14045 
Wovelength fA) 


Figure 1. A complex Si IV 1402 A profile observed with the HRTS 
instrument. The dashed curve shows the raw data. The profiles 
have been fitted with Gaussian line components (solid curve) 
and each separate line component is indicated. The inser shows 
a sketch of a possible explanation of the observed profiles. 


above active regions but are also present in the quiet Sun. 
An example of a complex Si IV 1402 A profile is shown 
in figure 1 and was recorded during a rocket flight in 
1978. The dashed curves are the original observations 
while the solid curve represents the spectrum derived 
from Gaussian fits to the profile components. The shift 
of the fitted line components corresponds to velocities 
of —40, 8, 75 and 105 kms-!. Thus, both subsonic 
and supersonic velocities may coexist within the same 
1 arcsec” resolution element, suggesting the presence of 
an extremely structured transition region. To explain the 
complex profiles with siphon flows would require several 
loop strands each with their own flow. An alternative 
explanation may be episodic nonlinear MHD disturbances 
as mentioned above. 


Flows in active-region loops 
Observations of active regions above the solar limb reveal 
individual loops that are often too faint to be observed 
against the brighter disk. Observations made with 
the Coronal Diagnostic Spectrometer (CDS) on SOHO 
show clear evidence of strong dynamical activity within 
individual loops. The CDS spectrometer builds up images 
of solar features in a series of spectral lines. Each image 
retains detailed spectral information and can be used to 
give maps of total emission, velocities, line widths, plasma 
densities etc. A monochromatic image of an active-region 
loop system above the east limb observed in O V 629 A 
(T ~ 250000 K) is shown in figure 2. The field of view 
of the image is 240 x 240 arsec*. For each single pixel 
element in the CDS raster images one can extract the entire 
line profile to derive line-of-sight velocities. Three spatial 
positions have been marked and the line profiles from 
these locations are displayed in the panel to the right. 
The line shift at location A corresponds to a gas motion 
toward the observer with a velocity of 60 kms7! (216000 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


150 T T T 
A: —60 km/s 


ese B: 0 km/s 
' : G: 50 km/s 
OV 629 A peli eae — Quiet Sun 


100+ 


Solar ¥ [Arcsec] 
Counts/px 


-1100 -1050 -1000 -950 -900 
Solor X [Arcsec] 


Kor: 


bo dilitats \ 
Oli rites titi i Tina 
628.5 629.0 629.5 630.0 630.5 631.0 
Wavelength (A) 


Figure 2. An active-region loop system above the east solar limb 


observed in O V 629 A by the Coronal Diagnostic Spectrometer 
(CDS). The line profiles from three different spatial locations (A, 
B and C) are displayed in the right panel together with a 
reference profile representing a typical quiet Sun profile at rest 
wavelength. 


kmh-~!). In the other leg of the loop, at location B, there 
is surprisingly no shift, and hence no motion. Location 
C belongs to a different loop where we again observe 
clear shifts, corresponding to motions of 50 km s~! (180 000 
kmh~!) in the opposite direction, away from the observer. 

The fact that one observes a large Doppler shift in only 
one part of the loop is intriguing. If gas is moving up one 
leg and coming down the other one would expect to see the 
flows continue in the other leg. This is not always the case; 
thus one needs to consider other possible mechanisms 
causing the Doppler shifts, e.g. Alfvén waves or magneto- 
sonic waves running along the magnetic field in the loop. 
However, flows seem to be a general property of active- 
region loops as observed at transition region temperatures. 
Typical values correspond to velocities of the order +50- 
100 kms™!. In the line formed at coronal temperatures 
the shifts are much smaller, often not detectable. Thus, 
the high shifts seem to be a phenomenon occurring at 
transition region temperatures. 

While the hot coronal loops develop more slowly, re- 
cent observations made with CDS, and in particular TRACE 
(TRANSITION REGION AND CORONAL EXPLORER), demonstrate that 
the large cool loops from the transition region are very dy- 
namic (see figure 3). It is clear that the cool loops change 
on a timescale shorter than 1 min. This should be com- 
pared with the 17 min it takes to complete the monochro- 
matic image in figure 2. Thus, the dynamic state of the 
loop changes significantly over the time it takes to build 
up a raster image with any spectrometers. The time se- 
quence in figure 3 also suggests substantial movements of 
emitting plasma. Blobs of emission move along the loop, 
sometimes from one footpoint to the other. At other times 
gas appears to drain down from the top of the loop to- 
wards the footpoints. In some cases the loop seems to be 
filled from one footpoint to the other as is illustrated in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region Flows 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. Active-region loops observed with Transition Region 
and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) illustrating the dynamic 
behavior of the plasma in the transition region. The images run 
with time from the start in the upper left corner and to the right 
in every horizontal row. Time between images is about 30 s. 


figure 3. The observations were made with the TRACE 
and show active-region loops on the limb. The emission 
comes mainly from C IV formed at 10° K and the time ca- 
dence between the images is 30 s. The field of view is 55 
x 55 arcsec. The images run with time from the start in 
the upper left corner and to the right in every horizontal 
row. In just about 3 min a cluster of thin loops are filled 
from the onset at the lower footpoint almost to the other 
loop footpoint. Again, even if flows may be a plausible 
explanation we cannot rule out other mechanisms such as 
waves. 


Flows above sunspots 

The spectrometers CDS and SUMER on SOHO have 
been used to observe the spatial distribution of line 
emission and line-of-sight velocities above a number of 
active regions that all included a single sunspot or a 
sunspot group. All the active regions show enhanced 
EUV line emission in the transition region, the emission 
is distributed non-uniformly and is located both inside 
and outside the sunspots. Both up- and downflows are 
observed in the regions often with velocities higher than 
+30kms-!. 

The spatial extent of both emission features and 
flow regions increases with increasing temperature within 
the transition region. The observations show a marked 
difference between the transition region and the low 
corona, regarding both the spatial distribution of the line 
emission and the line-of-sight velocity. Two out of three 
sunspot regions show enhanced line emission above the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


sunspot, i.e. sunspot plumes. The line-of-sight velocity 
in sunspot plumes is directed away from the observer 
and is found to increase with increasing line formation 
temperature; it reaches a maximum value up to 40 kms“! 
near temperatures of (3-4) x 10° K, then decreases abruptly. 


Flows related to flares 

Mass motions in SOLAR FLARES have been extensively 
studied in the lower chromosphere and in the corona. 
However, there are only a few measurements of mass flows 
in the solar transition region during flares. Redshifts in 
flare spectra from OSO 8 and Skylab suggested downward 
motion of 30-50 kms~!. However, coronal emission lines 
appeared to show a blueshifted component of emission 
together with a strong stationary component based on 
observations from the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM). 
Upflows reaching velocities of 200 kms! during the 
impulsive phase of the flare have been observed in 
the coronal line Fe XXI 1354 A. Similar upflows (200- 
300 kms~') were also observed with the Bent Crystal 
Spectrometer on SMM. Based on a large survey of more 
than 200 flares observed in soft x-rays with Yohkoh, the 
centroids of flare profiles were found to be blueshifted 
with an average velocity of 58 km st during the early 
impulsive phase. However, the blueshifted components 
reached velocities up to 800 kms™!. 

Considerable improvement in stellar flare observa- 
tions followed the deployment of the Hubble Space Tele- 
scope (HST), in particular from observations with the 
Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS). Doppler 
shifts during stellar flares have been detected with veloci- 
ties as large as 1800 kms~’ away from the observer. 


Bibliography 

For further reading about flows in the transition region a 
few selected pointers to key books and papers are listed 
below. 


Fleck B and Svestka Z 1997 First Results from SOHO Solar 
Physics 170 & 175 

Mariska J T 1992 The Solar Transition Region (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


P Brekke 


Classes of terms: 

DOPPLER EFFECT 

ACTIVE REGIONS 
EXPLOSIVE EVENTS 
MULTIPLE FLOWS 
MAGNETIC RECONNECTION 
FLARES 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Transition Region Models 


The SOLAR TRANSITION REGION comprises the PLASMA between 
the CHROMOSPHERE and the corona. In both of these regions 
the temperature is fairly uniform. The transition region, 
by contrast, is believed to be characterized by a very steep 
temperature rise from a chromospheric temperature of 
slightly less than 10* K to coronal temperatures on the 
order of 10° K. The goal of modeling the transition region 
is to construct physical models, i.e. the run of density, 
temperature, velocity with height, such that the physical 
processes dominating the region are illuminated and the 
important aspects of the line emission from the transition 
region may be reproduced. As hydrogen is fully ionized 
and therefore cannot radiate in the transition region, 
radiative emission is mainly in the form of the resonance 
lines of (multiply) ionized metals; the ions of carbon, 
silicon, nitrogen, oxygen, neons and iron dominate. 


Basic principles 

The outer layers of the Sun require a mechanical, as 
opposed to radiative, heat input in order to support energy 
losses through radiation, heat conduction, and SOLAR WIND 
ACCELERATION. Much can be learned about the outer layers of 
the Sun, and in particular about transition region structure, 
by considering how this dissipated mechanical energy 
flux is disposed of. In the chromosphere, where the 
density is comparatively large, a dissipated energy flux can 
easily be radiated away by slightly raising the temperature 
that is required to maintain radiative equilibrium. In 
the less dense transition region and in the corona other 
loss mechanisms dominate: assume for a moment a sun 
without a corona and consider the radiative losses as a 
function of height. The scale height (the height over which 
the plasma pressure drops by a factor of e; Hp = kT /mg) 
in the chromosphere is on the order of a few hundred 
kilometers. As we proceed outward from the photosphere 
the gas becomes rapidly less dense and as we approach 
the upper chromosphere, say 1.5-2 Mm or roughly 10 
scale heights above the photosphere, the radiative losses 
which scale with the product of the electron and total 
hydrogen density (nen) decrease exponentially. Any 
excess mechanical energy flux dissipation will therefore 
necessarily overwhelm the plasma’s ability to radiate 
and its temperature will rise dramatically: a corona will 
form. The temperature of the material will continue to 
rise until energy losses balance the excess mechanical 
energy flux dissipation. In the corona radiative losses 
remain ineffective and there are two potential energy 
sinks: through inward heat conduction (with subsequent 
radiative losses from the upper chromosphere) and, in 
magnetically open regions, through the acceleration of the 
solar wind. The temperature sensitivity of these processes 
will almost invariably ensure that the coronal temperature 
is on the order of 10° K and that the transition region has 
a rapid temperature rise, from 10* K to 10° K in roughly 
1 Mm, almost regardless of the form or magnitude of the 
CORONAL HEATING MECHANISM. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Spatial structure 

The corona receives an energy flux of approximately 
500 W m7? in magnetically open regions and perhaps 
2-20 times that in closed and active regions respectively. 
Let us consider the temperature structure that arises in 
a magnetically closed region. We assume that all the 
energy deposited in the corona is conducted back towards 
the chromosphere through the transition region, and that 
radiative losses are not energetically important in the 
corona or transition region. The temperature structure in 
the transition region is then given by solving the energy 
equation 


dT 
Fo= KD * Fimo (1) 


where Fmo is a constant that represents the mechanical 
energy flux dissipated in the corona. As an example let 
us set Fino = 100 W m~, with kp = 107! W m7! K~””; this 
results ina temperature gradient dT/dr ~ 3K m7! at10°K 
or, equivalently, a temperature scale height of Hy ~ 35 km. 
The temperature scale height is much smaller than the 
transition region pressure scale height H, ~ 5000 km. 
Thus, the temperature gradient is expected to be steep 
while the pressure will be approximately constant across 
the transition region, which only extends some 1 Mm. 

A typical CORONAL Loop has length on the order of 
10-30 Mm while the chromosphere’s vertical extent is 
roughly 2 Mm. The transition region in the loop will be in 
a location such that the divergence of the conductive flux 
flowing from the corona balances the radiative losses at 
the top of the chromosphere. If the energy flux dissipated 
in the corona increases, the conductive flux received 
by the chromosphere will also increase: chromospheric 
material will heat up and ‘evaporate’ into the corona and 
the transition region will move down towards a higher 
pressure. The opposite phenomenon will occur if less 
energy is deposited in the corona: the material at the 
top of the chromosphere will radiate more energy than 
can be replaced by conduction and the material will cool, 
moving the transition region upward until energy balance 
is established again. Since the intensity of EUV emission 
lines formed in the transition region scales with the density 
squared we expect that the most vigorously heated loops 
will be the densest and therefore radiate most intensely. 
In figure 1 we illustrate the effect of varying the energy 
input into a coronal loop. The temperature structures of 
several models are plotted showing the variation of the 
location of the transition region and the transition region 
temperature gradient. The chromospheric scale height is 
on the order of 200 km in these models so the density 
(pressure) at the base of the transition region varies by a 
factor of 20 between the model with Fyng = 100 W m~ and 
Fino = 3000 W m~. The intensity of the transition region 
line C IV 1548 A which is formed at 10° K varies from 
0.5 W m~ sr7! to 11 W m~ sr! in the same models; some 
of the increase expected because of the density is canceled 
by the increased temperature gradient which reduces the 
extent of the line-forming region. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


0.87 7 
ae: err 
Na L sit | 
= | 
ee Oar . gee 

ie BESS ] 
2 pe | 
ie Sy 

O.2 Fr : a | 

; ; | 
L i ofe | 
0.0 Pe NAN h cei taste nat Gtvaaed 
O | 2 i) 4 5 
z [Mm] 


Figure 1. Temperature structure of models used to illustrate the 
effect of varying the energy flux dissipated in the corona: 

Fmo = 100 W m7? (chain curve), Fmo = 500 W m7? (broken 
curve), Fmo = 1000 W m~? (dotted curve), Fmo = 3000 W m~* 
(full curve). 


Thermal conduction flows freely parallel to the 
magnetic field and dominates the energy balance in this 
direction. The heat conductive flux is carried by electrons. 
Perpendicular to the magnetic field the electrons ability to 
carry heat conductive flux is severely inhibited since the 
typical length of interaction between electrons is reduced 
from mean distance between collisions which applies 
along the field to the much smaller electron gyro-radius. 
Thus, while the structure of the transition region along the 
magnetic field is fairly well established by processes that 
depend on the plasmas (in)ability to radiate energy, the 
structure of the transition region across the magnetic field 
is not as easily inferred. However, it seems clear that the 
typical size of a structure, or loop, will depend both on 
the topology of the magnetic field and on the nature of 
the dissipation mechanism itself, neither of which is well 
known or understood. Observations clearly show that 
coronal heating is a sporadic process that seems to operate 
on several spatial and temporal scales and we should 
therefore expect that coronal loops will quite disparate in 
their properties. 


Temporal structure 

The magnetic field also plays an important role in the 
dynamics of the transition region and corona. The 
gas pressure dominates the magnetic pressure in the 
photosphere and convection zone allowing the magnetic 
field to be carried around by mass motions. In the 
corona and transition region the situation is reversed 
and it is the plasma which must follow the magnetic 
field as it in turn is churned by mass motions deeper in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the atmosphere. In the soOLAR PHOTOSPHERE the magnetic 
field seems to be confined to small regions. Proceeding 
upwards through the chromosphere the gas pressure 
decreases exponentially and the magnetic field should 
eventually spread out to cover all space. 

The speed of sound in the chromosphere is roughly 
cs © 10 kms“! while the total height of the chromosphere 
is on the order of 1.5-2 Mm. The chromosphere is 
pervaded by upwardly propagating wave-trains (shocks) 
with periods on the order of 3 min. These waves are 
acoustic in nature and are presumably excited by the solar 
5 min oscillations. Observations of the chromospheric 
internetwork seem well accounted for by these waves. In 
the chromospheric network where the magnetic field is 
stronger, Alfvén waves or other magneto-acoustic modes 
of significant amplitude are certainly important, although 
this has yet to be convincingly demonstrated. The 
transition region will be buffeted by these waves and will 
ride like a ‘cork’ on top of the chromosphere. Because of 
the rapid variation of the sound speed with height in the 
transition region some of this wave energy will be reflected 
back towards the photosphere. We should expect to see 
evidence for remnants of the characteristic 3 min SOLAR 
CHROMOSPHERIC OSCILLATIONS in transition region spectral 
lines. We should also see signatures of the magnetic 
modes that reside in the chromospheric network or that are 
generated as a result of the interaction between the acoustic 
3 min oscillations and the spreading magnetic field. 

The corona may be characterized by several time 
scales. The conductive cooling time of a 10 Mm long 
coronal loop is on the order of several hundred seconds. 
The speed of sound is approximately 100 km s-! while the 
Alfvén speed, assuming a magnetic field strength of 10G, is 
on the order of 1000 kms~!. This gives wave crossing times 
of 100 s and 10s respectively for a 10 Mm long loop. Both 
wave speeds vary rapidly through the transition region 
and waves generated in the corona will only partially be 
transmitted through the loop’s transition region and will 
‘bounce’ back and forth between the transition region— 
chromospheric footpoints situated at either end of the 
loop. Another important time scale is of course set by the 
energy dissipation mechanism itself. Rapid variations will 
generate waves that will propagate through the transition 
region. Likewise, slow variations will lead to flows 
through the transition region: increased coronal heating 
requires higher densities supplied by evaporative flows; 
conversely, reduced coronal temperatures will lead to 
cooling flows through the transition region. 

As all these processes are presumably occurring 
simultaneously it is of vital importance that the formation 
of emission region lines is understood so that the 
signatures of the most important phenomena may be 
identified. 


Spectral line emission 

Given the transition region structure as outlined above 
let us consider the formation of emission lines in detail. 
Hydrogen is completely ionized in the transition region 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and emission occurs in multiply ionized elements largely 
in the EUV portion of the spectrum. The plasma is 
optically thin and the ionization balance is dominated by 
local collisional processes. We may write the rate equation 
for ion number density nj as 


oe Stn) = Si(Ne, Te) — Lie, Te). (2) 
Zz 


The source and sink terms are represented, respectively, by 
S, and L;, in the transition region the important processes 
are collisional ionization and radiative recombinations 
and di-electronic recombinations. The rates are mainly 
functions of the local electron temperature TJ. and are 
proportional to the electron density ne. Notice that in the 
transition region where the plasma is fairly tenuous these 
rates are slow (characteristic times vary from 1 s to 10° s) 
and the left-hand side of the equation must generally be 
retained. However a rough idea of the ionization state 
of the transition region can be obtained by solving the 
time-independent part of these equations and a grid of 
temperatures; we then find that a given ionization state 
is confined to a narrow region in temperature around its 
temperature of maximum concentration. 

Emission from a given ionization state is determined 
locally by the balance between collisional excitation and 
spontaneous de-excitation. The emergent intensity from 
the transition region and corona, for an optically thin 
transition of energy hv, and an emission profile equal to 
the absorption profile ¢,, may be written 


h Vul 


[, 
An 


So 
/ Py NjNeChy As. (3) 
0 


where n.C}, is the collisional excitation rate. The 
integration is carried out along the line of sight, here 
represented by the path length variable s. A given ion 
is confined in temperature and thus height in the steep 
temperature gradient transition region. Integrating over 
line frequency, assuming that the relative abundance of 
hydrogen and the element the radiating ion belongs to is 
constant, and using the expression given above, the total 
line intensity is seen to vary as 


lx NeNyXiCy Az (4) 


where the variables are evaluated at some appropriate 
place in the line-forming region. The intensity arises 
mainly from the region of maximum concentration where 
x; © 1 and the temperature and thereby Cy, are roughly 
constant. Because of the steep temperature gradient 
emission lines formed in the lower transition region will 
be markers of a plasma confined to a small range in 
height (lines formed at higher temperatures will have 
contributions from a larger range of heights and will 
appear diffuse or ‘smeared out’). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Numerical models 

There are several technical difficulties associated with 
developing numerical codes designed to cover the 
transition region. The large temperature gradient that 
invariably arises requires high spatial resolution as does 
the even more rapid change in ionization state with 
temperature. It is not known a priori where these large 
gradients will be located nor whether they will remain in 
the same position as the model evolves in time. We must 
also expect that waves generated in the chromosphere will 
be highly non-linear and shocked as they interact with 
the transition region implying that we must resolve large 
gradients in the thermodynamic variables. In addition, 
the high Alfvén speed in the corona will because of the 
Courant condition (the time step must be shorter than the 
grid size divided by the largest characteristic velocity in 
the system; At < Ax/v,) force very short time steps in 
explicit codes in problems where wave propagation is to 
be studied. For one-dimensional models most of these 
difficulties have been overcome and there are a variety 
of numerical codes that can treat these processes. It also 
seems likely that these technical difficulties should be 
resolvable for two- and three-dimensional codes now or 
in the very near future owing to advances in computer 
technology and to the availability of good MHD and grid 
refinement algorithms. 

A more fundamental difficulty lies in the lack of 
knowledge about the magnetic field topology as it extends 
from the photosphere into the corona. This lack of 
knowledge also impacts our understanding of the spatial 
extent of the coronal energy flux dissipation mechanism 
which presumably involves the magnetic field in some 
manner. This has hampered the development of two- and 
three-dimensional models of the transition region. It could 
be argued that since conduction along the magnetic field is 
so dominant the study of one-dimensional models should 
be sufficient to reach an understanding of the important 
processes in the transition region. However, the coupling 
of the transition region to the chromospheric motions and 
the interactions between the various wave modes as the 
magnetic field expands to fill all space is a theme that 
seems accessible only in two or three dimensions while 
at the same time seems to be a theme which has great 
potential for increasing our understanding of the outer 
solar atmosphere. 


Confrontation with observations 
Several one-dimensional models designed to explain 
transition region emission have been constructed since 
Pottasch’s original work describing this emission in 1964. 
The solar chromosphere-corona transition region is 
highly structured, both in space and in time. Intensity 
observations indicate that the dominant portion of the 
transition region radiation arises in regions of variable 
emission. There are, however, two characteristics of 
the observations that seem to be invariant from region 
to region and from time to time; the shape of the 
emission measure curve and the net redshift of spectral 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region Models 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


lines. It should be mentioned that the redshift decreases 
toward the limb of the Sun indicating that motions are 
primarily vertical. The invariant shape of the emission 
measure curve and the net redshift are also seen in the 
observations of several other stars. Most of the numerical 
models constructed have been designed to explain these 
observational facts. 

An outstanding problem in transition region physics 
is that the temperature structure one derives from 
assuming that the dominant term in the energy equation is 
thermal conduction does not seem to correctly reproduce 
the observed emission of spectral lines formed at 
temperatures below, say, 2 x 10° K but instead predicts 
intensities several orders of magnitude less than is 
observed. The cause of this discrepancy is the sharp 
temperature gradient, due the dominance of thermal 
conduction, and the associated paucity of material in 
the temperature range which supports emission from 
a specific ion. Antiochos and Noci have proposed a 
promising solution to this dilemma by assuming that much 
of the lower transition region emission stems from regions 
where the local heating is low enough to ensure low 
loop apex temperatures, thus reducing the role of thermal 
conduction and ‘stretching’ the temperature profile in the 
loop. On the other hand it has been argued by Athay and 
Holzer that transition region emission may the result of 
episodic heating and that the observed transition region 
intensities may be reproduced by models of loops that 
cycle between having high and low apex temperatures. 
The resolution of this issue awaits a better understanding 
of spicule dynamics and the coronal heating process. 

Analysis of spectral line profiles show that transition 
region lines display a net redshift (redshifts imply motions 
towards the solar surface). The observed mean redshift 
is typically 5-10 km s! for the spectral line C IV 41548 
which is formed near 10° K. The amplitude of the shift 
is reduced for lines formed at lower temperatures and 
chromospheric lines display little net shift. There are 
few observations of higher-temperature lines but there is 
evidence that the net redshift is reduced or disappears in 
the upper transition region. Models of the net redshifts 
have invoked selection effects in the radiative or temporal 
properties of gas flowing up versus down. Athay and 
Holzer hypothesized that the redshifts were caused by the 
return of spicular material. Alternately, the observational 
signatures have been interpreted as siphon flow through 
coronal loops. _McClymont and Craig, and Mariska, 
showed that asymmetric heating of coronal loops may 
drive such flow. Both ideas seem compelling; however, 
the development of both into detailed models has been 
hampered by the lack of numerical computations or, in the 
case of siphon flow, by the fact that calculations by Spadero 
et al predict blueshifts rather than the observed redshifts 
when time-dependent ionization is incorporated into the 
models. Hansteen has proposed that the net redshifts 
may be explained as a consequence of nanoflare (episodic) 
coronal heating: episodic heating in a coronal loop should 
generate waves, some of which will propagate along the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


loop and through the transition region. Propagating 
compressive waves will cause spectral line asymmetries 
and line shifts in the ‘direction’ of wave propagation 
which in this scenario are primarily directed downwards 
producing redshifts. The further development of this idea 
awaits two- and three-dimensional simulations as well as 
theoretical predictions on the nature of episodic energy 
release in the corona. 

As we have seen, transition region emission is fairly 
sensitive to processes occurring in both the chromosphere 
and corona and could to used to effectively discriminate 
between various models of these regions. The availability 
of observations from the Solar and Heliospheric Obser- 
vatory (SOHO) instrument Solar Ultraviolet Measurements 
of Emitted Radiation (GUMER) which feature transition 
region data of unprecedented temporal, spectral and spa- 
tial quality should push transition region modeling into 
considering full two- and three-dimensional models of the 
outer solar atmosphere where the details of the interaction 
between the chromosphere, the transition region and the 
magnetic field are treated with more seriousness than has 
been the case until recently. 


Bibliography 

Antiochos S K and Noci G 1985 The structure of the static 
corona and transition region Astrophys. J. 301 440—7 

Hansteen V H 1994 A new interpretation of the redshifts 
observed in optically thin transition region lines 
Astrophys. J. 402 741-55 

Mariska J T 1992 The Solar Transition Region (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Pottasch S R 1964 On the interpretation of the solar 
ultraviolet emission line spectrum Space Sci. Rev. 3 
816-55 


Viggo Hansteen 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region: Explosive Events 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Transition Region: Explosive Events 


Explosive events are frequent, very small bursts that 
occur throughout the solar transition region. There are 
something like thirty to forty thousand of these events 
on the Sun at any time. Each event lasts for roughly a 
minute so every second there are about 600 new events. 
Present-day solar telescopes are just able to resolve the 
largest of these events. The events give an impression 
of explosion because highly supersonic mass motions 
(measured as Doppler shifts) are nearly instantaneously 
produced within a small area. The velocities reach up 
to 150-200 km s7! during the first few seconds and they 
last for 1-5 min. The typical size is 1000-4000 km and 
there is no detectable transverse motion of the event 
site. Explosive events are most clearly seen in ultraviolet 
spectral lines formed at temperatures of about 10° K. The 
few measurements of number densities indicate densities 
of about 5 x 10° m~°. Their mass and kinetic energy are 
estimated to be 5 x 10° kg, and 10" J respectively. 

A distinguishing feature of explosive events is that 
they produce large Doppler shifts in emission lines 
formed at transition region temperatures. Emission lines 
from plasma at these temperatures are all found in the 
ultraviolet wavelength range (as explained in the soLaR 
TRANSITION REGION). The image in figure 1 shows line profiles 
of an ultraviolet line from the three times ionized silicon 
ion, along a long, narrow strip of the Sun. This line, 
Si IV 1393 A, is formed at roughly 10° K. Three prominent 
explosive events all with very different but characteristic 
line profiles can be seen. In the event at the top, the red- 
and blueshifted emission is slightly offset along the N-S 
directed spectrometer slit. The event in the middle has a 
highly asymmetric blueshifted profile (strongly redshifted 
profiles are also common). It is also typical that the larger, 
brighter events, such as the lower event in the image, have 
higher Doppler velocities. 

Explosive events have now been observed in many 
spectral lines. They are most often seen in lines such as 
CIv 1550 A, Si IV 1393 A and O IV 790 A that are formed 
at plasma temperatures near 10° K. Higher temperature 
events that show up in lines such as Ne VIII 780 A formed 
near 5 x 10° K are about ten times less frequent. Likewise 
events exhibiting emission in lines from lower temperature 
(2-3 x 10* K), singly ionized species, for example in 
C II 1335 A, are also about ten times less frequently 
seen. The high velocity ultraviolet line shifts that 
characterize explosive events are usually accompanied by 
a brightening of the line intensity; however the converse is 
not true. For example, the brightening of transition region 
lines associated with x-ray bright points is not usually 
accompanied by explosive events (See SOLAR CORONA: X-RAY 
BRIGHT POINTS). 

The fact that explosive events are only observed 
in ultraviolet spectra which must be obtained from 
space telescopes makes them difficult to study. Their 
small size and comparatively short lifetime requires 
high spatial, temporal and spectral resolution. So 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a 


24,000 km 


red =— 2X blue 


Figure 1. An example of three explosive events in Si IV 1393 A 
observed with the long slit ultraviolet spectrometer SUMER on 
the spacecraft SOHO. The image shows line profiles along the 
90000 km long slit with spatial resolution 800 km, velocity 
resolution 12 km s~! and integration time 10 s. Blueshifts 
(decreasing wavelength) are on the right. 


far only two instruments have had high enough 
resolution to unambiguously identify explosive events. 
They were first discovered in spectra from the High 
Resolution Telescope and Spectrometer (HRTS) of the 
Naval Research Laboratory during its first rocket flight in 
1975. Subsequent rocket flights and a Spacelab 2 mission 
with this spectrometer enabled a basic understanding of 
their observational statistics, their relationship with x- 
ray bright points and the photospheric magnetic field. 
In 1996 with the launch of SUMER (Solar Ultraviolet 
Measurements of Emitted Radiation), the high resolution 
ultraviolet spectrometer on board the spacecraft soHo (the 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) it became possible to 
observe the relationship of explosive events to the network 
structure over periods of several hours. 

The results of one such study are shown in 
figure 2 where the supergranular network pattern (see 
CHROMOSPHERE: NETWORK) Of bright cell boundaries with dark 
centers is shown on the left and the evolution of the line 
profiles at four representative positions on the right. These 
four positions lie on a bright network lane (A), a dark cell 
center (C) and faint network lanes (B and D). 

This figure illustrates the frequency of explosive 
events and their relationship to the network structure. 
Most explosive events and brightenings are in the network 
lanes and, in particular, close to bright emission regions. 
There are also one or two faint, low-velocity (~60 km s~') 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region: Explosive Events 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


80 


60 
N-S 
(10 >km) 


40 


20 


0 | 
0 25 50 
E-W (10 °km) 


30 60 90 120 


Time (min) 


Figure 2. Explosive events and their relationship to the chromospheric network as observed by the spectrometer SUMER. The picture 
on the left shows the structure of the chromospheric network. The positions chosen to demonstrate typical line profile evolution are 

marked with white crosses and letters. The time evolutions of the Si IV 1393 A line profiles at these four positions over a period of two 
hours are shown in the right-hand frames. In each frame, the profiles range from blueshifts of about 150 km s~! at the top to redshifts 


of about 150 km s7~! at the bottom. 


events in the dark cell center. Along the network lanes, the 
individual events often occur in bursts that can last up to 
30 min. 

Since their discovery, it has been suggested that the 
underlying process triggering the events is the conversion 
of magnetic to kinetic energy by magnetic reconnection. 
There is also strong observational evidence that the 
events are related to the structure and evolution of the 
photospheric magnetic field. As illustrated in figure 2, 
explosive events occur predominantly along network 
lanes. This is where weaker magnetic field elements are 
continually merging and cancelling with stronger network 
fields. In recent ultraviolet line profile and magnetic 
field observations, several explosive events were seen 
simultaneously with evolving magnetic field elements. 
Figure 3 shows the position of the explosive events in 
relation to the magnetic field and it can be seen that 
most events lie on or near magnetic neutral lines (i.e. the 
boundary between positive and negative field regions). 
The small burst of events on the left side of the positive field 
region marked with an arrow, seems to be associated with 
decreasing photospheric flux. Some explosive events have 
been seen far from any detectable magnetic fields. These 
are however always single events, not bursts of events, 
and it is possible that very small magnetic field elements 
are involved. 

Another clue to the origin of explosive events comes 
from their spatial flow structure. By making small 
repetitive scans with a long slit spectrometer it is possible 
to build up an image of the time evolution of the explosive 
event flow. Figure 4 illustrates the evolution of the time 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. A quiet Sun magnetogram with the position of 
explosive events marked with white crosses. The brighter 
(darker) features are positive (negative) polarity magnetic 
fluxes. The tick interval on the E-W and S-N axes is 3600 km. 
(Courtesy of J Chae, Big Bear Solar Observatory.) 


pattern of observed Doppler shifts. As in figures 1 and 
2, this again is a series of Si IV line profiles. One of the 
most important features illustrated in figure 4 is that the 
Doppler shifts change from red to blue as the bright central 
position of the event is scanned in the E-W direction. 
Closer inspection shows that the width of the event slowly 
increases in both the E and W directions although the 
position of brightest emission does not move. 

These features show that the word ‘explosive’ is 
misleading. An explosion would eject material in 
all directions and should produce symmetric red- and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region: Explosive Events 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mens 


90 


120 


32,000 
km 


150 


180 


Figure 4. Evolution of Si IV line profiles. Each sub-plot of the 
figure shows a 32000 km section of a spectrum along the slit for 
Doppler velocities from redshifts of 150 km s~! to blueshifts of 
150 km s~!. Time increases from top to bottom. Each row shows 
the profiles along an E-W scan with a step size between subplots 
of 800 km. 


blueshifted profiles. Also material that has moved across 
the disk furthest from the explosion site would have the 
lowest line-of-sight velocity. Therefore the high-velocity 
asymmetric profiles on the east and west edges of the 
events cannot be explained by an explosion. There are two 
flow configurations that can produce the pattern observed 
in figure 4. One is a bi-directional jet and the other is a 
spinning disk of gas. At present no-one has been able to 
find an observational means of determining which flow it 
is. 

If the flows are bi-directional jets then the observed 
pattern of red and blue Doppler shifts could be a 
confirmation of the Petschek theory of fast reconnection. 
This theory predicts oppositely directed plasma jets ejected 
from a small localized site. As described elsewhere 
(see MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS: MAGNETIC RECONNECTION AND 
TURBULENCE) magnetic energy is converted into plasma 
thermal and kinetic energy at the jets’ source, the diffusion 
region, and along stationary slow mode magnetoacoustic 
shocks that form along the jets’ boundaries (figure 5). 
Petschek models reproduce the high-velocity components 
but they do not account for the bright emission at the center 
of the line profiles. It is likely that the diffusion region is 
more complex than the small localized site assumed in the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ffusion Region 


= 


Magnetoacoustic 


scan position 


Figure 5. Flow geometry of jets that would reproduce the 
observed pattern of red and blue Doppler shifts shown in 
figure 4. In Petschek-like models the reconnection site would be 
at the centre of the bi-directional jet. 


Petschek theory. 

Explosive events play a crucial part in the understand- 
ing of quiet Sun transition region heating, flows and most 
probably also the solar corona. The total energy in the ob- 
served mass motions of explosive events is insufficient to 
be important for coronal energy balance but they probably 
represent the high-energy tail of a spectrum of network 
events that occur on scales unobservable with currently 
available techniques. 


Bibliography 

Brueckner G E and Bartoe J-D F 1983 Observations of high- 
energy jets in the corona above the quiet Sun, the 
heating of the corona, and the acceleration of the solar 
wind Astrophys. J. 272 329-48 

Dere K P, Bartoe J-D F and Brueckner G E 1989 Explosive 
events in the solar transition region Solar Phys. 123 
41-68 

Innes D E, Inhester B, Axford W I and Wilhelm K 1997 
Bi-directional plasma jets produced by magnetic 
reconnection on the Sun Nature 386 811-13 


Davina Innes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region: First lonization Potential Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Transition Region: First lonization 
Potential Effect 


The first ionization potential (FIP) effect causes a 
fractionation, i.e. a change of the relative abundances, of 
elements with a low FIP in the corona and solar wind 
as compared with the SOLAR PHOTOSPHERE. These elements 
(specifically Mg, Si and Fe) are becoming enriched 
somewhere in the solar atmosphere by an average factor of 
2-5 relative to the high-FIP elements (specifically oxygen). 
The process most likely involves separation of atoms and 
ions across magnetic field lines in a partially ionized 
gas, and the site can probably be identified with the 
upper chromosphere or the lower transition region. An 
understanding of the FIP fractionation effect is important 
for obtaining element abundances in the Sun from solar 
wind measurements, and in turn it provides information 
on the conditions prevalent and the processes operating at 
the relevant site in the solar atmosphere. 


FIP fractionation observations 

When we compare the normalized elemental abundances 
(relative to oxygen) of the SOLAR WIND and of the CORONA (as 
inferred from the solar energetic particle (SEP) population) 
with the photospheric abundance ratios, we notice a 
significant fractionation between the two populations. If 
this fractionation is plotted as a function of the FIP, a 
regular pattern emerges. Elements witha low FIP (S10 eV) 
lie on a plateau which is enhanced by a factor of ~3-5 
with respect to elements with a high FIP (210 eV). The 
intermediate elements with an FIP near 10 eV, carbon and 
sulfur, are also enriched, but by smaller factors. The high- 
FIP elements again lie on a plateau up to, and including, 
neon, but helium, the element with the absolute highest 
FIP, is underabundant by a factor of ~2 relative to the 
high-FIP elements. This basic FIP pattern is obeyed by 
the SEP population and, with some exceptions discussed 
below, by the slow solar wind normally encountered near 
the ecliptic plane (see figure 1). It was first described for the 
SEP population by Hovestadt in 1974, and in 1981 Meyer 
first noted the same effect to hold in the slow, in-ecliptic 
solar wind. 

With the abundances of more elements becoming 
available, and with the possibility to determine abun- 
dances as a function of the solar wind flow type, excep- 
tions from the basic FIP pattern described above have be- 
come apparent. The most important one is a reduction 
of the fractionation factor between low- and high-FIP el- 
ements, the FIP bias, in the fast solar wind from CORONAL 
HOLES (i.e. in high-speed streams) to a factor of ~2 instead 
of ~3-5 (figure 1). It is interesting to note that carbon, 
which is slightly enriched relative to oxygen in the slow 
wind, seems to remain unchanged in fast streams, i.e. its 
slight enrichment is not reduced proportionally with that 
of the low-FIP elements. It may therefore be that this ele- 
ment behaves as a (slightly enriched) high-FIP element in 
the slow, interstream solar wind but as a low-FIP element 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in fast streams, even though its enrichment factor does not 
change. 

The heavy noble gases, krypton and xenon, do not 
follow the basic FIP pattern either. Both are high-FIP 
elements, but both are enriched in the solar wind, by 
factors of 2 (Kr) or even 4 (Xe). (These abundances were 
obtained from inclusions in the lunar regolith, which were 
integrated over millions to billions of years; therefore the 
values are identified with the slow, in-ecliptic solar wind, 
and no fast wind value can be given.) This enrichment may 
be understood to be a consequence of their high mass (see 
next section), and of their relatively short ionization time 
as compared with other high-FIP elements. It has been 
argued that the first ionization time (FIT) may therefore 
be the better ordering parameter than the FIP. Ionization 
times are calculated by folding the solar UV and EUV 
spectrum with the ionization cross sections. Indeed, when 
the abundance data are represented versus FIT, a simple 
new fractionation pattern is easily visible: low-FIT (S10) 
elements again lie ona plateau, but the fractionation factor 
of high-FIT elements now is roughly a power law in FIT 
with an exponent of ~—0.5, and all high-FIP elements, 
including Kr, Xe and He, follow this pattern (see figure 2). 
However, the FIT is not a fundamental atomic parameter, 
and it is highly variable as a consequence of the UV and 
EUV variability with the solar activity cycle. Therefore, the 
name of the ‘FIP’ effect should nevertheless be preferred. 

Recently, the FIP effect has also been observed by 
remote sensing techniques, using the SUMER telescope 
on the soHo spacecraft. By comparing optical emission 
lines originating from the corona with lines from the 
CHROMOSPHERE, the existence of an FIP bias of ~4 was 
observed in coronal plasmas above quiet equatorial 
regions from where the slow wind originates, while this 
factor was much smaller above coronal holes, from where 
the fast solar wind streams emanate, thus confirming the 
in situ measurements. 

The same spectroscopic technique can even be applied 
to other stars than the Sun (but obviously only as a full- 
disk integration). The existence of an FIP effect was found 
in cool stars such as ~wCen AB and ¢Eri, but notin the hotter 
star aCMi (Procyon). 


FIP fractionation models 

From the shape of the FIP fractionation curve, we obtain 
two key ingredients for the construction of models. (1) Any 
mechanism is to operate at a region in the solar atmosphere 
where it is (at least partially) neutral, or else it is not 
clear how the FIP (or FIT) could be a relevant parameter. 
Many different possibilities have been considered in the 
models for this ‘mode of separation’. (2) The step near 
10 eV suggests that photoionization by Lyman-a photons 
(10.2 eV) may play an important role (particularly for C, 
which has low-lying metastable levels that can be ionized 
by Lyman-a, whereas the ground state cannot). The flux in 
the Lyman-a line is more than a factor of 2 higher than the 
integrated flux at shorter wavelengths. Photoionization 
should therefore be included in any attempt to model the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region: First lonization Potential Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10 


2 
oO 
il L \ 
8 
2 
e [hf t 
Ss Pe ees i) 
x | —_ = 
eS al es 
a r 
OQ f{ 
tad 
Si Kr 
Fe H 
Mg S C Xe 


¢ Solar Wind (Interstream) 
{| SW from Coronal Holes 
i Solar Energetic Particles ] 


20 25 


First lonization Potential [V] 


Figure 1. Abundances of elements measured in the solar wind relative to their photospheric abundances versus their FIP. 


10 


$ Solar Wind (Interstream) 
{| SW from Coronal Holes 
1 Solar Energetic Particle 


2 
2 Pi 
Q x 4 
g : 
2 3 
a r N 
fe) | | sha Silesia ctbienende ee ew eae {> 
eles a 4 
3' a 
©) a 
x | . 
oa 4 
N 4 
H 
L s fe) 4 
Mg Si Fe Xe KrC Ar Ne He 
n po aid n po iil 1 po iid n 1 
0.1 1.0 10.0 100.0 


First lonization Time [s] 


Figure 2. Abundances of elements from figure 1, plotted versus their FIT. 


FIP fractionation, and most models indeed use it for the 
‘mode of ionization’. 

Over the past decade, several models have been pro- 
posed to explain the observed FIP fractionation, most of 
which operate by ion-neutral separation in the chromo- 
sphere, predominantly by diffusion perpendicularly to a 
magnetic field. Geiss, in 1982, has shown that ion—neutral 
separation is much more effective than ion—ion separation 
and gives quantitative estimates for the conditions under 
which it could take place: temperature T < 10* K and den- 
sityn < 10'° m~%, i.e. inthe upper chromosphere and lower 
transition region. The density estimate was obtained with 
gravity as the only driving force for the diffusion of neu- 
trals; if other driving forces are considered, the limit on n 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


may be higher. 

The first attempt was to consider a model in which 
ions and neutrals separate in the chromospheric canopy, 
where the magnetic field is horizontal, 1000-2000 km 
above the photosphere. Neutral atoms may settle 
downward, driven by gravity, but the diffusion of ions is 
impeded by the field. This reduces their diffusion velocity 
by a factor of (1 + w*12,)~1, where w is the gyrofrequency 
and foi is the typical time between collisions. The degree of 
ionization of the elements considered was not calculated 
self-consistently in this model, but rather taken from an 
existing non-LTE model atmosphere. It was found that an 
FIP-dependent fractionation may indeed be obtained in 
such a model, but the resulting diffusion times needed to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region: First lonization Potential Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


separate the species are much larger—hours to days—than 
the typical lifetime of structures in the solar atmosphere. 
This was not surprising, as the density in the adopted 
model atmosphere was higher throughout the considered 
region than the limiting density for gravity-driven ion— 
neutral separation mentioned above. The idea may be 
saved by taking a dynamical approach along the same 
line, in which the horizontal magnetic field is rising 
from the photosphere through the chromosphere and into 
corona, lifting an overabundance of low-FIP elements 
(the ‘skimmer’ model). Preliminary results look quite 
promising if a field of 5 G at a velocity of 5 km s-! is 
considered. 

In a quite complementary approach, the excitation 
and ionization of elements under chromospheric condi- 
tions were explicitly investigated, at first without speci- 
fying the mechanism of ion—neutral separation. A neutral 
gas mixture is exposed to the solar spectrum in an optically 
thin environment. Excitation and ionization by photons 
made the main contribution, but collisional ionization by 
electrons (n. = 10!° m~3, T, = 10* K) as well as radiative 
recombination are also taken into account. The resulting 
FIT (used in figure 2) suggest that any separation of neu- 
trals from ions has to occur on short time scales of the order 
of 1 min, as this is the typical ionization time of high-FIP 
elements once they become exposed to the EUV radiation 
from the corona. This in turn suggests that the separation 
is to operate on small length scales, in order to keep the 
relative velocities within reasonable limits. 

The first attempt to construct a model considering 
both ionization and separation operated on an initially 
neutral gas mixture of photospheric composition and 
uniform temperature, concentrated in narrow, vertical or 
nearly-vertical magnetic structures. The gas mixture is 
assumed to rise along the magnetic field, and at the same 
time to become excited and ionized by EUV photons and 
by electrons; radiative recombination is also considered. 
The newly created ions remain attached to the magnetic 
field, i.e. trapped in the upward flow. The neutrals, on the 
other hand, are driven across the field lines by an initial 
density gradient and lost in a downward stream outside 
the structure under consideration. Thus the resulting gas 
mixture exiting at the top of the structure is enriched 
in low-FIP elements, since they have been ionized more 
quickly, and fewer neutrals were lost from the structure. 
The resulting gas mixture obtained in a typical model run 
compares favorably with the slow solar wind composition: 
not only is the step between low-FIP and high-FIP elements 
reproduced, but also the critical elements near this step, C 
and S, are obtained partially enriched, as observed, and 
even the ‘FIP exceptions’, Kr and Xe, result roughly with 
their observed enrichment. The model parameters were 
n = 10% m, T = 10* K, and d = 10 km (d is the 
width of the considered structure). Moreover, the reduced 
step height observed in fast streams can also be accounted 
for by the model: it is sufficient to consider less narrow 
structures, of the order of 30-100 km, to obtain an FIP step 
height of a factor of 2 only. This may be interpreted with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


a chromospheric structure that could be coarser beneath 
coronal holes than under closed field regions. However, 
the model has been criticized, less for the need of an 
(as yet) unobservable chromospheric fine structure and 
of a specific geometry in which the mechanism operates, 
but for its need of relatively low densities, because at 
n = 10'® m~ the reduced mobility of the neutrals would 
no longer allow them to leave the considered structure. 

A few authors have tried to overcome this difficulty 
by constructing a similar model, which was retaining 
the careful treatment of ionization and collisions of the 
one described above, but considering a less specific 
model geometry. The fractionation was obtained by 
diffusion across a horizontal slab, again along a (nearly) 
vertical magnetic field. For specific, but naturally chosen, 
boundary conditions at the slab interfaces, the observed 
FIP fractionation pattern in the slow solar wind with a 
step height of ~5 was obtained at the upper slab interface, 
as was the depletion of helium relative to the high-FIP 
elements. The crucial boundary condition is that the flux 
at the top of the slab is the same for each heavy ion 
species in natural units: density normalized to one at 
the slab bottom, and velocity expressed in units of the 
natural diffusion speed, (Dt)'/?, where D is the diffusion 
constant in the ambient main gas and tf is the ionization 
time. The fractionation obtained in this model was found 
to be almost independent of the background density and 
temperature for realistic chromospheric conditions. On 
the other hand, the agreement for Kr and Xe is less good 
than it had been in the model described above. Moreover, 
an adaption of the model to yield the reduced FIP bias 
observed in fast streams is not straightforward either. 
It could possibly be obtained by arguing that diffusive 
equilibrium is not quite reached beneath coronal holes, 
resulting in an incompletely fractionated mixture being 
output at the top of the slab and into the fast solar wind. 

A class of recently proposed models works with 
diffusion driven by electromagnetic forces, either (1) by 
dragging ions into a chromospheric gas parcel that is to 
be supplied to the corona or (2) by expelling neutrals out 
of such a parcel. A mechanism of type (1), investigated 
qualitatively, considers a small region of the chromosphere 
being heated by downward heat flux from the corona along 
a magnetic flux tube, leading to localized evaporation 
and lifting of chromospheric material. This, in turn, 
produces a horizontal thermoelectric field, dragging ions 
from the surroundings into the uplifting region. This 
leads to an accumulation of low-FIP elements in that 
region, since they are already ionized in the surroundings, 
whereas the high-FIP ions still are predominantly neutral 
there. A mechanism of type (2) was investigated, again 
qualitatively, by considering a cylindrically symmetric 
magnetic field structure in a partially ionized atmosphere, 
and calculating the system of direct currents created by 
such a configuration. It could be shown that, near the 
periphery of the flux tube, there is a strong diffusion of 
neutrals relative to the ions out of the structure, which 
may produce the observed FIP fractionation. However, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Transition Region: First lonization Potential Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


this class of models has yet to be worked out quantitatively 
and to make predictions that can be compared with the 
observations (see also SOLAR PHOTOSPHERIC MAGNETIC FLUX 
TUBES: OBSERVATIONS; THEORY). 

Finally, the FIP fractionation may be caused, or 
supported, by waves on a magnetic field in a partially 
ionized gas mixture, an idea put forward already in 1989. 
Such waves could heat the mixture and thus lead to the 
preferential loss of neutrals while the ions remain bound 
to the field. Again, in order to assess the value of this idea, 
quantitative predictions are needed, but no worked-out 
models of this kind exist in the published literature as yet. 

In summary, none of the nearly a dozen FIP 
fractionation models that have been published is without 
its shortcomings, and much detailed work remains to 
be done in order to pinpoint the location and the 
mechanism(s) producing the observed FIP fractionation. 


Bibliography 

For a recent and comprehensive account on all aspects 
of solar composition, including many theoretical and 
observational articles on FIP fractionation, see 


Frohlich C, Huber M C E, Solanki S K and von Steiger R 
(ed) 1998 Solar Composition and its Evolution—from 
Core to Corona (ISSI Space Sciences Series 5) (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 


Two earlier review articles on the topic are 


Meyer J-P 1993 Element fractionation at work in the 
solar atmosphere Origin and Evolution of the Elements 
ed N Prantzos, E Vangioni-Flam and M Cassé 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 26-62 

von Steiger R, Geiss J and Gloeckler G 1997 Composition 
of the solar wind Cosmic Winds and the Heliosphere 
ed J R Jokipii, C P Sonett and M S Giampapa (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 581-616 


Rudolf von Steiger 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Trans-Neptunian Object (TNO) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Trans-Neptunian Object (TNO) 


An outer Solar System object whose orbit has a semi- 
major axis greater than that of Neptune (30.1 AU). Such 
objects comprise the Kuiper Belt. They are given aster- 
oidal designations, though they are not asteroidal in 
nature, but most likely planetesimals that have remained 
unmodified since the early history of the Solar System. 
The TNOs are often classified according to their orbital 
characteristics. The first group, which accounts for about 
50% of known TNOs, are known as ‘classical’ Kuiper Belt 
objects, or cubewanos—after the designation of the first to 
be discovered, 1992 QB . These objects have orbits of 
quite low eccentricity and mean radius 42-47 AU. About 
40% of TNOs are, like Pluto, in a 3:2 resonance with 
Neptune in orbits of mean radius 39 AU: for every three 
orbits of Neptune, they complete two. For this reason 
they are sometimes referred to as plutinos. This ‘resonant’ 
class also includes objects having other orbital reso- 
nances with Neptune: about 5% of TNOs show a 2:1 res- 
onance and have mean radius 48 AU; other objects have 
a 4:3 or 5:3 resonance. There are also a small number of 
so-called scattered disk objects (SDOs), characterized by 
high eccentricities, the best-known example being 1996 
TBge, whose distance from the Sun varies from about 35 
to 135 AU. Such objects are surmised to have been per- 
turbed, early in the history of the solar system, from their 
original orbits in the Uranus—Neptune region of the 
Kuiper Belt. The orbits of SDOs are dynamically similar 
to those of the Centaurs, with which they are sometimes 
grouped. By April 2000 a total of 270 TNOs had been 
found. It is estimated that there may be ten thousand of 
them 200 km in size. 

In 2001, a trans-neptunian object known as 2001 
KX76 was discovered that may be the largest minor body 
in the solar system. Its diameter, which is not very well 
determined, lies in the region of 1200 km, possibly even 
1400 km. This makes it significantly larger than CERES. 
Ceres, the first asteroid (minor planet) to be discovered in 
the solar system, has held the record as the largest known 
object of its kind for two centuries with a diameter about 
950 km. 

See: CENTAURS, CUBEWANO, KUIPER BELT, PLANETESIMAL. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Trapezium 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Trapezium 


The multiple star 6! Orionis, in the heart of the Orion 
Nebula, visible when viewed directly with moderately 
powerful telescopes and on short-exposure photographs 
of the nebula; it can be seen on long-exposure photographs 
only where image-improving techniques have increased 
the contrast with the surrounding nebulosity. It consists 
of four stars arranged in a pattern resembling an irregular 
trapezium, with sides ranging from 8.6” to 18.4” and 
diagonals of 16.9” and 20.6”. 

Identification of the individual stars can be rather 
confusing; they were formerly designated 6! Ori A, B, 
C and D in order of increasing right ascension; in the 
Hipparcos Catalog, however, they are lettered in order of 
decreasing brightness. Clockwise from the southernmost 
component they are now designated A (formerly C), C 
(formerly D), D (formerly B) and B (formerly A). Their 
apparent magnitudes are A, 4.96; B, 6.35; C, 7.20; D, 7.49. 

The faintest component, 6! Ori D, is an eclipsing 
binary with a period of 6.5 days and is also known as BM 
Orionis; 6! Ori B has recently been discovered to be an 
eclipsing binary also, with a period of 65.4 days. All four 
components are hot, blue-white stars of spectral types O 
and B, and together with several other fainter stars in the 
region form an embryonic cluster of stars newly formed 
from the nebular material. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Triangulum 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Triangulum 


(the Triangle; abbrev. Tri, gen. Trianguli; area 132 sq. deg.) 
A northern constellation which lies between Andromeda 
and Aries, and culminates at midnight in late October. Its 
origin is uncertain, though the ancient Greeks likened it 
to a capital delta (A) and it was also associated with the 
Nile delta and the island of Sicily. Its brightest stars were 
cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

A small but distinctive constellation, the brightest 
stars of Triangulum, 6 Trianguli, magnitude 3.0, a Trian- 
guli (Mothallah), magnitude 3.4, and y Trianguli, magni- 
tude 4.0, form a narrow isosceles triangle, with a at the 
apex. Interesting objects include 6 Trianguli, a multiple 
star system with yellow (G5) and pale yellow (F5) com- 
ponents, magnitudes 5.3 and 6.8, separation 3.9”, each of 
which has an unseen companion that revolves around its 
primary in 14.73 days and 2.24 days, respectively, and the 
Triangulum Galaxy (M33, NGC 598, sometimes called the 
Pinwheel Galaxy), a sixth-magnitude spiral galaxy and 
member of the Local Group, about 2.6 million light-years 
distant. 


See also: Triangulum Galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Triangulum Australe 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Triangulum Australe 


(the Southern Triangle; abbrev. TrA, gen. Trianguli 
Australis; area 110 sq. deg.) a southern constellation which 
lies between Norma and Apus, and culminates at midnight 
in late May. It was first shown in Johann Bayer’s atlas 
Uranometria of 1603, though it is usually attributed to the 
Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known 
as Petrus Theodorus) and Frederick de Houtman, who 
charted that part of the southern sky in 1595-7. Another 
southern triangle, Triangulus Antarcticus, was shown to 
the south of Argo Navis on a celestial globe by the Dutch 
theologian and geographer Petrus Plancius in 1589, but 
was never accepted. 

A small but conspicuous constellation, Triangulum 
Australe is easily recognized by virtue of its three 
brightest stars, w Trianguli Australis (Atria), magnitude 
1.9, 6 Trianguli Australis, magnitude 2.8, and y Trianguli 
Australis, magnitude 2.9, which form an almost equilateral 
triangle. Other bright stars include 6 Trianguli Australis, 
magnitude 3.9, and e Trianguli Australis, magnitude 4.1. 
Interesting objects include NGC 6025, an open cluster of 
about 60 stars, the brightest of which is of magnitude 7.3. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Triangulum Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Triangulum Galaxy 


A nearby spiral galaxy in the constellation of Triangulum. 
Otherwise known as M33, it is a face-on spiral that lies 
at a distance of 2500 000 light-years (slightly further away 
than the much larger Andromeda Galaxy) and is a member 
of the Local Group of galaxies. With a diameter of about 
40 000 light-years and a population of about 15 billion stars, 
itis about half the size, and has about one-tenth of the mass, 
of the Milky Way Galaxy. With a relatively small central 
bulge and open spiral arms, which contain numerous HII 
regions and young star clusters, it is classified as an Sc 
galaxy within the Hubble classification scheme. Its core 
contains a bright, variable, x-ray source, which may be 
powered by a central black hole. 


See also: Andromeda Galaxy, black hole, H II regions, 
Hubble classification, Local Group, Milky Way Galaxy, 
spiral arms, spiral galaxy, x-ray astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Trieste Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Trieste Astronomical Observatory 


Founded in 1866 as the Austrian K. u. K. Maritimes 
Observatorium, in 1898 the Trieste Astronomical Obser- 
vatory became an independent institute for research in 
astronomy. Now it is part of INAF (Istituto Nazionale 
di Astrofisica) and the Italian council for research in as- 
trophysics. Staff include 20 researchers and 42 techni- 
cians and administrators. Research fields are extragalac- 
tic, stellar physics, solar radioastronomy (10 m antenna), 
solar system astrophysics, astrophysical technologies for 
ground-based and space astronomy, international cooper- 
ation projects. The facilities include an astronomical li- 
brary, museum and public observatory. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.oat.ts.astro.it/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Trifid Nebula (M20, NGC 6514) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Trifid Nebula (M20, NGC 6514) 


An emission nebula in the constellation Sagittarius, 
position RA 18 h 02.6™, dec. —23°02'. It is of ninth 
magnitude, with quite a high surface brightness, and 
measures 29’ by 27’. It surrounds the multiple star HN 40, 
the light of whose brightest members energize the nebula. 
The Trifid gets its name from dark lanes that trisect it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Triton 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Triton 


Triton is the largest satellite of NEPTUNE. It was discovered 
in 1846, a few weeks after Neptune. Its orbital motion was 
soon established, but its physical and chemical properties 
remained basically unknown until the Neptune encounter 
of the voyAGER 2 spacecraft in August 1989. 

The orbit of Triton, which is nearly circular, is 
retrograde and shows a high inclination (157°) which 
suggests that this satellite was captured by Neptune’s 
gravity field, rather than formed in the Neptunian 
proto-subnebula. The high inclination of Triton’s orbit, 
combined with Neptune’s obliquity, leads to large and 
complex periodic variations of the latitude of the subsolar 
point, which ranges between +52° and —52°. These large 
variations induce very large seasonal effects, probably the 
strongest ever observed on a solar system object. As in the 
case of the Moon and the Galilean satellites, Triton’s orbit 
is synchronous, so that the satellite always turns the same 
hemisphere towards Neptune. 

Prior to Voyager observations, little was known 
about Triton’s chemical composition. | Ground-based 
spectroscopy in the infrared range had detected the 
presence of methane and nitrogen ices which suggested 
the presence of a nitrogen-rich atmosphere, but the surface 
pressure of this atmosphere was completely unknown. 

Voyager observations of Triton, in August 1989 
have provided us with a determination of its diameter 
(2700 km), its density (2.08 g cm~), its surface temperature 
(38 K), its surface pressure (14 bar) and its atmospheric 
chemical composition (molecular nitrogen with traces of 
methane at the 0.01% level). The presence of a stable 
atmosphere is unusual on an object as small as Triton; 
this stability is due to the very low temperature of Triton’s 
surface which inhibits gravitational escape. 

Voyager images also revealed the extraordinary 
aspect of Triton’s surface. The very high albedo of Triton 
(0.7 in the visible range) puts the satellite among the 
most reflective of solar system objects. The Voyager 
images mostly covered the southern hemisphere. They 
showed a bright polar cap extending widely around the 
south pole. North of this polar cap, a rugged terrain, 
reminiscent of the skin of a cantaloupe melon, is cross-cut 
by a pattern of intercepting ridges, possibly the remnants 
of a past TECTONIC event. Triton’s surface shows relatively 
few impact CRATERS, which implies that it is relatively 
young. Amore cratered region, near the equator, shows an 
impact density comparable to the 3-billion year-old lunar 
maria. The chemical composition of Triton’s surface was 
identified from ground-based infrared spectroscopy after 
the Voyager flyby. Ices of N2, HzO, CO2, CO and CHy were 
detected. The abundance of gaseous nitrogen, and thus the 
surface pressure of Triton, is consistent with equilibrium 
with the solid phase. 

In spite of its very low density, the atmosphere of 
Triton exhibits several characteristics which are unique 
in the solar system. The temperature profile consists 
of a troposphere up to an altitude of 8 km where the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. The southern hemisphere of Triton as observed by 
Voyager 2 in August 1989. The southern polar cap extends 
widely around the south pole. Dark plumes are detectable over 
the bright surface of the polar cap. 


temperature is minimum. Above the tropopause, the 
thermosphere starts immediately, without the presence of 
an intermediate radiative stratosphere, which is usually 
found in PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES. In the thermosphere, the 
temperature increases by conduction up to an altitude of 
about 400 km where ionization takes place. Several traces 
of condensates were detected by Voyager in the lower 
troposphere. They are presumably due to methane and 
hydrocarbons produced by methane photodissociation; 
nitrogen clouds were also observed above the southern 
polar cap which is at present exposed to maximum solar 
insolation and is sublimating part of its nitrogen ice. 

Seasonal effects are very strong on Triton, due to 
the high inclination of the satellite. Climatic variations 
involve the condensation of the two major atmospheric 
species, nitrogen and methane, which are both involved 
in the formation of the polar caps. This situation may be 
compared to the Martian atmosphere, with CO, and H,O 
acting respectively on Mars like Nj and CH, on Triton (see 
MARS: ATMOSPHERE). 

As in the case of Mars, seasonal effects induce on 
Triton large-scale dynamical motions. Some of these 
dynamical motions are illustrated by the detection of active 
plumes in Voyager images of Triton’s surface. These 
plumes were observed as dark trails, rising vertically 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Triton 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


up to an altitude of 8 km and then trailing to the west 
over more than 100 km. Four of these plumes were 
observed by Voyager in a continuously illuminated region 
close to the subsolar point. Several interpretations of 
these phenomena have been suggested, including active 
volcanism and solar-driven geysers. 

Apart from Triton’s density, we have little information 
about its interior. According to models, the internal 
structure of Triton could consist of a core of metals and 
rocks, surrounded by a mantle of water ice covered witha 
variety of ices: CO2, HO, possibly NH3, CO, CHy and No, 
the two latter ices being transported into polar caps along 
the seasonal cycle. 

What could be the origin of Triton? Its striking 
similarity with Pluto, in terms of size, density, surface 
chemical composition and atmospheric composition, 
suggests a common origin for the two bodies (see PLUTO 
AND CHARON). It is now believed that Pluto is the biggest 
representative of the newly discovered class of KUIPER 
BELT objects which populate the outer solar system at 
heliocentric distances larger than 30 AU. Triton, like Pluto, 
most probably originated from the Kuiper Belt and was 
later captured by Neptune’s gravity field. Such a capture, 
however, is only temporary unless sufficient energy is 
dissipated in the process. Moreover, the probability of 
such a capture is quite small, so this scenario suggests 
the presence of a large number of triton-size PLANETESIMALS 
coming from the kuiper Belt in the early stages of solar 
system history. 


Bibliography 

Benner L A M 1997 Triton Encyclopedia of Planetary 
Sciences ed J H Shirley and R W Fairbridge (London: 
Chapman and Hall) 

McKinnon W B and Kirk R L 1999 Triton Encyclopedia of the 
Solar System ed P R Weissman, L McFadden and T V 
Johnson (New York: Academic) 


Thérése Encrenaz 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Trojan Asteroids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Trojan Asteroids 


Two groups of asteroids whose orbital elements are similar 
to those of Jupiter. One group orbit ahead of Jupiter, 
clustered around the Ly Lagrangian point, while the other 
group orbit behind the planet, around the Ls Lagrangian 
point. The Ly group, which are more numerous, are 
sometimes called the Achilles group, after the first Trojan to 
be discovered, (588) Achilles. The Ls group are sometimes 
called the Patroclus group, after the second Trojan discovery, 
(617) Patroclus. Achilles and Patroclus are both around 
150 km in diameter, and were both found in 1906. The 
largest Trojan is (624) Hektor, at 225 km; the names given 
to Trojans are those of heroes from Homer’s writings on 
the Trojan Wars. As of April 2000 there were 425 known 
Trojans in the Ly group, and 188 in the Ls group. Two 
Martian Trojans have also been found. 

Perturbations by other planets cause Jupiter’s Trojans 
to oscillate about the Lagrangian points. An individual 
Trojan will drift back and forth in longitude by 15° to 
20° either side of its Lagrangian point with a period of 
up to 200 years. Trojans have low albedos, in the range 
0.02-0.07. About 60% are D-type, with reddish reflectance 
spectra indicating a carbon-rich surface; most of the others 
are C-type, with compositions similar to carbonaceous 
chondrites, and the remainder P-type, with quite red 
surfaces indicating an organic surface composition. 


Seealso: Lagrangian points. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Troughton, Edward (1753-1836) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Troughton, Edward (1753-1836) 


Instrument-maker, born in Corney, Cumberland, England, 
designing instruments to aid navigation, surveying and 
astronomy. With his brother John, in their family business 
in London, he made transit circles for Greenwich and other 
observatories, buying in the optics from, for example, the 
Dollonds, because the family trait of color-blindness meant 
that they were unable to test lenses. Troughton invented 
a method to make accurate scales by dividing a circle. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Trumpler, Robert Julius (1886-1956) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Trumpler, Robert Julius (1886—1956) 


Astronomer, born in Zurich, Switzerland. He worked at 
the Lick Observatory in California, where he showed that 
distant clusters of stars are systematically too faint for their 
size, as if dimmed by an obscuring medium whose effects 
accumulate with distance. This was the first convincing 
evidence of the presence of an interstellar medium in 
our Galaxy, consistent with the indications from HEBER 
curtis’ recognition that spiral galaxies seen edge-on had 
obscuration along their central plane. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tsiolkovsky [Ciolkovskij, Ziolkowski], Konstantin 
Eduardovich [Eduardowitsch] (1857-1935) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tsiolkovsky [Ciolkovskij, Ziolkowski], 
Konstantin Eduardovich 
[Eduardowitsch] (1857-1935) 

Russian physicist and rocketry pioneer, born in Izhevsk, 
Russia. Developed the basic theory of rocketry including 


the idea of liquid propellants and multistage rockets, but, 
unlike GODDARD, carried out no practical work. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tucana 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tucana 


(the Toucan; abbrev. Tuc, gen. Tucanae; area 295 sq. deg.) 
a southern constellation which lies between Indus and 
Hydrus, and culminates at midnight in mid September. 
It was first shown on a celestial globe by the Dutch 
theologian and geographer Petrus Plancius in c.1598, 
though it is usually attributed to the Dutch navigators 
Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known as Petrus Theodorus) 
and Frederick de Houtman, who charted that part of the 
southern sky in 1595-7. 

A small, rather inconspicuous constellation, the 
brightest stars in Tucana are a Tucanae, magnitude 2.9, 
B Tucanae, a multiple system consisting of a wide pair 
of bluish-white (B9 and A2) components, magnitudes 4.4 
and 4.5 (combined magnitude 3.7), separation 27”, both of 
which have a fainter companion, the former of magnitude 
13.6, separation 2.4”, the latter white (A7), magnitude 
6.0, separation 0.1-0.6", period 44.4 years, and another 
bluish-white (A2) component 10’ to the southwest, which 
is also double, with components of magnitudes 5.8 and 
6.0 (combined magnitude 5.2), separation 0.1”, all six stars 
having a similar proper motion, and y Tucanae, magnitude 
4.0. Another interesting star is « Tucanae, a quadruple 
system consisting of pale yellow (F6) and orange (K1) 
components, magnitudes 5.0 and 7.7, separation 5.0”, and 
a yellow (G5) component, magnitude 7.9, 320” distant, 
which has a magnitude 8.4 companion, separation 0.9- 
1.1”, period 86.2 years. 

Other interesting objects in Tucana include the Small 
Magellanic Cloud, 47 Tucanae (NGC 104), the second most 
impressive globular cluster in the sky (after w Centauri), 
visible to the unaided eye as a fuzzy fourth-magnitude 
star, and NGC 362, another globular cluster, of seventh 
magnitude. 


See also: Small Magellanic Cloud. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tully—Fisher Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tully—Fisher Relation 


Cepheid variable stars are the primary means by which 
distances are measured over the local volume of space. 
However, beyond about 20 megaparsecs (Mpc) Cepheids 
become too faint, even for Hubble Space Telescope, and 
so alternative means of measuring distances are needed. 
One of the more popular secondary methods makes use 
of the strong correlation between the luminosity of sPrRAL 
GALAXIES and their rotational velocities. This is known as 
the Tully—Fisher relation. 

The Tully—Fisher relation has become one of the 
most widely used methods of measuring extragalactic 
distances since spiral galaxies are relatively common 
and contain young, massive stars. As a result, they 
also contain Cepheid variables, making the calibration of 
the Tully—Fisher relation using nearby systems relatively 
straightforward. In applying this technique the rotational 
velocity serves as a predictor of the luminosity, or absolute 
magnitude, of the galaxy. The distance is then calculated 
from the distance modulus, the difference between 
the apparent magnitude and the predicted absolute 
magnitude of the galaxy. The Tully—Fisher relation 
provides an opportunity to step from the local calibrating 
galaxies to the smooth Hubble expansion in a single step. 
Consequently, this technique is extremely valuable for the 
mapping of large-scale structure, the Hubble flow and any 
associated peculiar (i.e. non-expansion) velocities. 

The origin of the Tully—-Fisher relation remains 
somewhat uncertain but arises from the correlation 
between mass and luminosity. A spiral galaxy rotates 
under the influence of its own gravity and so the rotational 
speed is connected with its mass. A more massive galaxy 
also contains a larger number of stars and is therefore 
more luminous. The result is a correlation between the 
luminosity and the rotational speed for spiral galaxies, 
the Tully—Fisher relation. There are a few complications 
to this simple explanation. First, the total luminosity 
of a particular spiral galaxy is a reflection of its star 
formation history. This might be expected to vary from 
galaxy to galaxy. Second, the fact that spiral galaxies 
have considerable amounts of ‘DARK MATTER’ means that 
the mass of a galaxy is not necessarily well represented 
by the amount of mass contained within its population 
of stars. That is, the ratio of mass to light for spiral 
galaxies might be expected to vary at a given total mass. 
The fact that the Tully—Fisher relations show relatively 
small scatter indicates that these variations are small and 
this in turn provides a strong constraint on models for 
the formation and evolution of spiral galaxies. While 
these details are still uncertain we can still measure galaxy 
distances through an empirical calibration of this relation. 


Observational data for the Tully—Fisher relation 

The necessary observational data consist of apparent 
magnitudes, corrected for Galactic and internal extinction 
by dust, and some measure of rotational velocities, 
corrected for projection effects. Usually, the rotational 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


velocity is measured via the Doppler broadening of the 
HI 21 cm line, since spiral galaxies are easily detected 
in this spectral line using RADIO TELESCOPES. However, for 
galaxies with REDsHIFTS of only a few thousand km st, 
the 21 cm line is shifted into heavily used regions of 
the radio spectrum, resulting in severe interference from 
terrestrial sources (radars, cell phones, etc). In addition, at 
this wavelength the resolution of even the largest single- 
dish radio telescopes is only a few arcminutes and so for 
redshifts beyond about 5000 km s—! the detected signal can 
be confused with that from neighboring galaxies. This has 
prompted interest in using optical emission lines such as 
Ha to measure the rotational speed of spiral galaxies. 

Early application of the Tully—Fisher relations used 
photographic photometry, but today CCDs are the 
detectors of choice at optical wavelengths owing to their 
superior performance. The redder Johnson bandpasses 
(R and /) are usually used because of their reduced 
sensitivity to dust extinction and because the spectral 
energy distributions of spiral galaxies are dominated by 
late-type giant stars at these wavelengths. Thus, these 
measurements are less sensitive to variations in the star 
formation history and dust content of the individual 
galaxies. These advantages continue into the near-infrared 
H and K bands. However, the night sky at these 
wavelengths is as much as a factor of 104 brighter than at 
optical wavelengths, making accurate surface photometry 
at faint levels extremely difficult. 

Atypical procedure for measuring the magnitude of a 
galaxy from a calibrated CCD image begins by identifying 
and masking contaminating regions from foreground 
stars, background galaxies and cosmetic defects. The 
surface brightness profile of the galaxy is constructed by 
binning pixels as a function of radius. The integrated 
magnitude within some surface brightness level can 
then be computed and this measurement extrapolated to 
infinite radius using some model, such as an exponential, 
to produce a total magnitude for the galaxy. Ellipses are 
often fitted to the isophotes of the galaxy to yield the best- 
fit axial ratio of the inclined disk as a function of radius 
and surface brightness. The axial ratio can then be used to 
estimate the inclination of the galaxy. 

There are several advantages to using the Doppler- 
broadened 21 cm line of H I as the measure of the rotation 
of late-type galaxies. First, spiral galaxies are H I rich 
so the line is extremely strong. Second, the H I within 
these systems has an extended distribution such that the 
outer, flat portion of the rotation curve is well sampled, 
providing an accurate measurement of the maximum 
rotational velocity. However, low angular resolution and 
interference become significant limitations at redshifts of 
~10000 km s“!, as described above. The use of the Ha 
emission line avoids these issues. In this case, the slit 
of a spectrograph is positioned to lie along the long axis 
of a DISK GALAXY such that the resulting spectrum will 
sample the velocity as a function of radius for the galaxy. 
However, since the Ha emission line is produced within 
regions of active STAR FORMATION, the outer regions of spiral 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tully—Fisher Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


galaxies may not have enough Ha emission to be detected. 
This can result in the outer, flat portion of the rotation 
curve of lower-luminosity galaxies not being adequately 
sampled since these systems generally have slowly rising 
rotation curves. Thus, 21 cm measurements are usually 
the best choice for nearby galaxies and Ha measurements 
are optimal for redshifts beyond about 10000 km s-!. For 
redshifts beyond about 0.2 (60000 km s~') the Ha line 
becomes contaminated by increasingly strong emission 
lines from the night sky (mostly due to OH). This has 
prompted investigations into whether other lines such as 
[O Il] (43727 A) and [O IE] (45007 A) could be used 
such that the Tully—Fisher relation could be applied at 
larger distances. The preliminary results appear to be 
very promising and efforts are underway to use the Tully— 
Fisher relations to examine the structural and evolutionary 
properties of GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFTS. 


Inclination corrections to the observational data 
Some method of measuring galaxy inclinations is required 
in order to correct the magnitudes for internal extinction 
and the observed rotation for projection. Assuming that all 
spiral galaxies can be adequately represented as an oblate 
spheroid with the same intrinsic flattening, the inclination 
can be calculated from the projected shape of the disk. 
Specifically, 
(b/a)* — a? 

1—a? 
where i is the inclination, b/a is the observed axial ratio 
of the best-fitting ellipse and @ is the intrinsic axial ratio 
for an edge-on system. Complications arise from the fact 
that some galaxies do not have perfectly circular isophotes 
at face-on orientation. As a result, most investigations 
restrict the sample to those systems whose inclinations 
are at least 30°-45° in order to minimize the resulting 
uncertainties on the deprojected rotational velocities. 

The parameter of choice for predicting the luminosity 
of a disk galaxy is Vmax, the maximum amplitude of the 
rotation curve. This is especially convenient given that 
most galaxies have flat rotation curves over much of their 
extent. Tully and Fisher advocated using the Doppler 
width of the 21 cm line profile measured at 20% of peak 
intensity (W29), corrected for inclination. That is, Wp = 
W29/ sin(i) ~ 2Vmax. However, if the Tully—Fisher relation 
is to be applied to low-luminosity spiral and irregular 
galaxies a more complicated correction is required in order 
to account for the effects of internal turbulence and subtle 
variations in line-profile shape. However, for Wi > 
150 km s“! these corrections are negligible. When optical 
spectra are used Vmax can be measured directly from the 
rotation curve. 

Historically, the internal extinction with disk galaxies 
has proven to be a difficult problem. However, the advent 
of CCDs and infrared detectors has allowed accurate 
photometry of galaxies over a broad range in wavelength 
enabling the amount of extinction to be statistically 
estimated from the amount of reddening. The extinction 
corrections to the magnitudes are often expressed in terms 


cos*i = 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the observed axial ratio. Specifically, Ai = y, log(a/b), 
where A is the wavelength of the observation in the 
standard bandpasses and a/b is the observed axial ratio. 
The dependence of this correction on the luminosity of 
the galaxy, due to variations in dust content, etc, can also 
be described by expressing y, in terms of the projection- 
corrected rotational velocity (W;). A representative result 
is 
Ye = 1.57 + 2.75(log WR — 2.5) 


Yr = 1.15 + 1.88(log Wp — 2.5) 
v1 = 0.92 + 1.63(log Wp — 2.5) 
Yu = 0.43 + 0.76(log Wi — 2.5) 


where the subscripts on y represent the standard 
bandpasses. Here, Wi ~ 2Vinax aNd Vinax is the amplitude 
of maximum rotation within a galaxy. 

The apparent magnitudes also require correction 
for Galactic extinction. In the past, this has been a 
difficult problem. However, there now exist extensive 
maps of both the neutral hydrogen gas (H I) and the 
distribution of dust (IRAS 100 zm) within the Galaxy. The 
good correspondence between these two maps indicates 
that the H I gas and dust trace each other. The 
amounts of the extinction which correspond to these 
two components have been calibrated from detailed, 
multicolor observations of distant stars. As a result, the 
Galactic extinction for any galaxy can be estimated given 
its position on these maps. As the Galactic latitude falls 
below about 25-30°, the corrections for Galactic extinction 
become large with correspondingly large uncertainties. 
Therefore, most investigators limit the application of the 
Tully-Fisher relation to galaxies above this latitude. 


Absolute calibration of the Tully—Fisher relation 
using Cepheids 

Ground-based Cepheid surveys are extremely difficult 
because the Cepheids in all but the nearby Local 
Group galaxies are very faint and subject to significant 
contamination by neighboring stars. However, the advent 
of Hubble Space Telescope has allowed the detection of 
Cepheids within galaxies out to about 20 Mpc in distance 
and enabled the number of calibrating systems to be 
significantly increased. A large effort to obtain Cepheid 
distances to a number of nearby galaxies, known as the 
Hubble Key Project of Extragalactic Distances, and a 
similar project to obtain Cepheid distances to galaxies 
containing type Ia supernovae, has brought the number of 
galaxies suitable for calibrating the Tully—Fisher relation 
to 30 systems. Figure 1 shows the resulting Tully—Fisher 
relations for this calibration sample. A least-squares fit to 
these data gives the following relations: 


Mb! = —7.41dog Wi — 2.5) — 20.04+0.04 (0.22) 


mM? = —8.09(log Wi — 2.5) — 21.054 0.04 (0.19) 
Mi = —8.55(log Wi — 2.5) — 21.5140.04 (0.22) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tully—Fisher Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


tT | Te ot 1 rol a TTT Tora T ty -4 | es eS | Oa a ae a | TT T7| T 
L ob iva 4 
[ T yl 
—22 [ Mp Pa T Ma oe 7 
L . BE aa 4 
L se elt o* 4 

7 e 
=20°> o/e at lca Cy4 | 
L <o ae re 4 
L ° ih i 4 
r %, Er. 9 & e 7 
-18 + a + a a 
L Yo 4 a PYA 4 
P cg 7 

L y ap P | 
ES ag? tT ee 7 
au a aie 7 

Ce a | as | es ae | sae eS | | Pe Sit i {oj | jj | a | Ee eS | | bee | | i 
[ | cr'¥ | TTT | | sae rae | headed | TTT Dslia 1: oy | | eee eae | | ae es | | re ih | a wl | 
L ot rs 4 
-24 -- - 
L M, aaa b My Pa 4 
L ao L 9e J 
ee fF ger ap oe 
“ il 
L ae [ J 4 
-20b i + ae al 
L “A + 7 4 
[ o4P 4 aE } ee “6 1 
L : . aE , J 
ie. ae ag / 7 

rt o- 

L 96 ae gf J 
—16 }— Se A 4 
La Ta | 1 ee ES | | ) ae ae | > Ee | | ie | ti jt | pS ee | as ae | pas Ek: | es | | _| 

1.8 2 22 24 26 28 2 22 24 26 28 

log W log Wy 


Figure 1. B, R, I and H band calibrations of the Tully—Fisher relation. Solid circles are galaxies with distances measured using 
Cepheids, solid triangles are galaxies with distances estimated via surface brightness fluctuation measurements within dE companions 
and open circles are systems thought to be group members with at least one galaxy with a Cepheid distance, and therefore thought to 
be at a similar distance. The dashed line is a least-squares fit to the solid points in each panel. 


Mt? = —10.39(dog Wi — 2.5) — 22.22 + 0.08 (0.30) 


where the superscripts b and i indicate Galactic extinction 
and internal extinction corrections, respectively. The 
zero points give the absolute magnitude for galaxies 
with log Wi 2.5, OL Vmax 160 km sl. In all 
bandpasses, the random uncertainty in the zero point 
is negligible compared with the remaining systematic 
uncertainty in the absolute calibration of the Cepheids 
themselves (~0.13 mag, or 7% in distance). The rms 
dispersions of the relations are given in parentheses. 
Given these calibrations, the absolute magnitude of any 
spiral galaxy can be predicted from its rotational velocity 
and its distance estimated from its measured apparent 
magnitude. 


Application of the Tully—Fisher relation to field 
galaxies 

The Tully—Fisher relations have been used to estimate the 
distances to several hundred spiral galaxies within an 
expansion velocity of about 8000 km st. An example of 
the resulting ‘Hubble flow’ is shown in figure 2. Since 
the velocities are a combination of both the expansion 
and any local peculiar velocities induced by gravity, the 
deviations in velocity can be correlated with position on 
the sky to produce maps of the deviations from the mean 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


expansion field. The primary features seen in such maps 
are (1) local streaming of ~100 km s7! associated with 
the non-uniform distribution of matter within 10 Mpc 
of the Local Group, (2) retarded expansion velocities of 
several hundred km s~! near the Virgo cluster of galaxies 
and (3) a large-scale streaming of about 400 km s7! 
towards a ‘Great Attractor’ located at a distance of about 
60 Mpc in the direction of the Hydra—Centaurus cluster 
complex. These peculiar velocities are usually assumed 
to result from the gravitational accelerations produced by 
the irregularities in the large-scale distribution of mass. 
With this assumption, various research groups have used 
these ‘flow maps’ to constrain the mean mass density 
of the universe (2) as well as to examine the degree to 
which the distribution of galaxies follows the distribution 
of mass. These investigations appear to favor low values 
of Q (~0.2) and also imply that mass is generally traced by 
the distribution of galaxies. 


Distant clusters and the Hubble constant 

The errors in the distances of individual galaxies measured 
using the Tully—Fisher relations are about 15% when using 
high-quality observational data. As a result, the absolute 
errors can become large for distant galaxies. Since there 
are still significant peculiar velocities out to velocities of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tully-Fisher Relation 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


120 


100 


80 


Poe a Pa Ps 


60 


Distance (Mpc) 


40 


20 


4000 60 
Velocity (CMB) 


00 8000 


Figure 2. The velocity—distance relation, or ‘Hubble flow’, 
illustrating the expansion of the universe. The plus signs show 
the distances to individual, nearby galaxies measured using the 
Tully—Fisher relation. Since the errors are fractional (i.e. 
logarithmic), the absolute errors increase with distance and 
result in a cone-like spread of the data. The solid points with 
error bars represent the average distance and velocity for 
clusters. The cluster samples typically contain 15-20 galaxies, 
correspondingly reducing the errors. The dashed line shows a 
Hubble constant (Hp = V/D) of 80 km s~! Mpc. 


about 5000 km sq, large samples are needed at these 
distances in order to accurately sample the Hubble flow 
and map the distribution of peculiar velocities. Recent 
Tully—-Fisher surveys using cluster samples have been 
used to measure the mean distances for a number of 
clusters over this volume. The mean distances and 
velocities of these clusters are shown in figure 2 along 
with those of the nearby field galaxies. Together, these 
data yield an estimated value of the HUBBLE CONSTANT of 
77 +7 kms! Mpc. 

The inverse of the Hubble constant is related to 
the age of the universe. For a universe with zero 
density H 1 ig equal to the age of the universe. If 
the universe has the ‘critical density’, ie. Q = 1, then 
its age is (2/3)H~*. At the present time, a typical 
estimate for the age of globular cluster stars is 14 + 2 
billion years. For comparison, the value of the Hubble 
constant given above corresponds to ages of 12.7 +1 
and 8.5 + 0.7 billion years for Q = 0 and Q = 1.0, 
respectively. At present, it appears that a cosmologically 
flat, critical universe is inconsistent with the observational 
data. This discrepancy has helped to generate interest 
in cosmological models with a non-zero COSMOLOGICAL 
CONSTANT A and, in particular, in cosmologically flat 
models with non-zero A. A cosmological constant is one 
way of reconciling these disparate estimates of the age of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the universe. 


Bibliography 

The literature regarding the Tully—Fisher relation and 

its application to measuring extragalactic distances is 

extensive. A few representative papers are presented here. 
The first description of what is now called the Tully— 

Fisher relation was originally given by 


Balkowski C et al 1974 Astron. Astrophys. 34 43 


However, Tully and Fisher were the first to advocate its 
use for measuring extragalactic distances in 


Tully R B and Fisher J R 1977 Astron. Astrophys. 54 661 


Application of the Tully—Fisher relation using CCD 
detectors can be found in 


Pierce M J and Tully R B 1988 Astrophys. J. 330 579 


Application of the Tully—Fisher relation using infrared 
detectors can be found in 


Aaronson M and Mould J R 1983 Astrophys. J. 265 1 
Peletier R and Willner S 1993 Astrophys. J. 418 626 


The absolute calibration of the Tully—Fisher relation is 
discussed in 


Freedman W L 1990 Astrophys. J. 355 L35 
Pierce M J and Tully R B 1992 Astrophys. J. 387 47 


An example of the application of the Tully—Fisher relation 
to the measurement of the distances to clusters of galaxies 
can be found in 


Giovanelli R et al 1998 Astron. J. 116 2632 


Examples of the application of the Tully—Fisher relation to 
the measurement of the local velocity field can be found in 


Aaronson M et al 1982 Astrophys. J. 258 64 

Giovanelli R et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 502 L91 

Tully RB, Shaya EJ and Pierce M J 1992 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 
80 479 


The technical details of correcting the magnitudes 
and rotational velocities for inclination and projection 
corrections can be found in 


Giovanelli R et al 1997 Astron. J. 113 53 
Tully R B and Fouqué P 1985 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 58 661 
Tully R B et al 1998 Astron. J. 115 2264 


A comprehensive review of various methods of measur- 
ing extragalactic distances, including the Tully—Fisher re- 
lation, can be found in 


Jacoby G H et al 1992 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 104 599 


The use of optical rotation curves as traced by Ha and [OII] 
emission to measure Vmax is described by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tully—Fisher Relation ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Courteau S 1997 Astron. J. 114 2402 
Vogt N P et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 465 L15 


An extensive compilation of H I 21 cm line widths can be 
found in 


Huchtmeier W K and Richter O-G 1989 A General Catalogue 
of HI Observations of Galaxies (New York: Springer) 


Technical issues regarding sample selection biases and 
their effect on distances measured via the Tully—Fisher 
relation are discussed in 


Tully R B 1988 Nature 334 209 


Michael Pierce 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Tunable Imaging Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tunable Imaging Filters 


While tunable filters are a recent development in night- 
time astronomy, they have long been used in other 
physical sciences, e.g. solar physics, remote sensing 
and underwater communications. With their ability to 
tune precisely to a given wavelength using a bandpass 
optimized for the experiment, tunable filters are already 
producing some of the deepest narrowband images to date 
of astrophysical sources. Furthermore, some classes of 
tunable filters can be used in fast telescope beams and 
therefore allow for narrowband imaging over angular 
fields of more than 1° over the sky. 


The physics of tunable imaging 

A rich variety of physical phenomena can isolate a 
finite spectral band: absorption, scattering, diffraction, 
evanescence, birefringence, acousto-optics, single-layer 
and multilayer interference, multi-path interferometry, 
polarizability and so on. Most of the available optical filter 
technologies are listed below (see also FILTERS): 


linear or circular variable filter 
multilayer dielectric filter 
Fabry-Perot interferometer 
Michelson interferometer 
acousto-optic filter 

solid etalon filter 

solid Michelson filter 

generalized resonant grating filter 
sub-lambda evanescent grating filter 
volume phase holographic grating filter 
Lyot-Ohman filter 

generalized Lyot filter 

generalized Solc! filter 

liquid crystal filter 


There is a bewildering array of future possibilities, 
including tunable crystal lattice structures, and many 
possible variants on the above technologies. Here, we 
focus on a few key technologies. 


The ideal device 

The ideal filter is an imaging device which can isolate 
an arbitrary spectral band 6) at an arbitrary wavelength 
i over a broad, continuous spectral range, preferably 
with a response function which is identical in form at all 
wavelengths. 

The tilting interference filter is much the worst form 
of tunable filter. The spectral range covered is almost 
negligible, and the filter profile varies with tilt angle. Some 
devices (e.g. Lyot, linear variable filter) work only at a fixed 
resolving power but have the ability to tune over a wide 
spectral window. Better devices allow for a wide selection 
of resolving powers over a wide range of wavelengths. 

The different techniques rely ultimately on the 
INTERFERENCE of beams that traverse different optical 


1 The proper Czech pronunciation is ‘Sholtz’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


paths to form a signal. The technologies which 
come closest to the ideal tunable filter are the air- 
gap Fabry-Perot and Michelson (Fourier transform) 
interferometers. To understand why, we highlight the 
Taurus tunable filter (TTF) which was the first general- 
purpose such device for night-time astronomy (see 
http://www.aao.gov.au/local/www/jbh/ttf). This is a 
Fabry-Perot filter where interference is formed between 
two highly reflective, moving plates. To be a useful filter, 
not only must the plates move through a large physical 
range, but they must start at separations of only a few 
wavelengths, as we show. 

The condition for photons with wavelength A to pass 
through the filter is (see figure 1) 


md = 2k cosd (1) 


from which it follows that 


dR dm deé 
Sa ae Q) 


R m L 

For an order of interference m, the resolving power is 
R=mN where WN is the instrumental finesse. The finesse 
is determined by the coating reflectivity and is essentially 
the number of recombining beams. For the TTF, the plates 
can be scanned over the range ¢ = 1.5-15 ym, and the 
orders of interference span the range m = 4—40, such that 
the available resolving powers are R ~ 100-1000. 

The sharp core of almost all tunable-filter transmis- 
sion profiles is not ideal. Even a small amount of flatness 
at peak transmission can ensure that we avoid narrowly 
missing most of the spectral line signal from a source. In 
theory, all band-limited functions can be squared off, but 
in practice this is difficult for all but two devices. Since 
the Michelson interferometer (filter) obtains its data in the 
frequency domain, the profile can be partially squared off 
at the data reduction stage through a suitable choice of 
convolving function. For the Solc filter, the instrumental 
profile can be modified through the use of partial polariz- 
ers and birefringent retarder elements. 


Summary of filter technologies 
Here, we provide a brief outline of some of the key 
technologies. 


Monolithic filters 

Interference filter. The principle relies on a dielectric 
spacer sandwiched between two transmitting layers 
(single cavity). The substrates are commonly fused silica 
in the ultraviolet, glass or quartz in the optical and 
water-free silica in the infrared. Between the spacer and 
the glass, surface coatings are deposited by evaporation 
which partly transmit and reflect an incident ray. Each 
internally reflected ray shares a fixed phase relationship 
to all the other internally reflected rays. For constructive 
interference, for a wavelength A to be transmitted, it must 
satisfy equation (1) where 6 = 6g is the refracted angle 
within the optical spacer, and the optical gap is the product 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tunable Imaging Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Etalon Wedged Etalon 
ii) iii) 
pl 
‘4 bed 
reflective reflective 
coatings coatings 


anti-reflective 
coatings 


Figure 1. (i) Interference filter: the internal structure is not shown. (ii) Fabry-Perot etalon. (iii) Wedged Fabry-Perot etalon which 


avoids the problem of the plates behaving like interference filters. 


of the thickness ¢ and refractive index yz of the spacer. The 
construction of these filters has undergone a revolution 
through the use of dielectric, multilayer thin-film coatings, 
and a proper description is more involved. All such 
filters can be tuned through a small wavelength interval 
(64/A = —62/2u”), which amounts to no more than 2%A in 
practice. Suffice it to say, interference filters make for poor 
tunable devices. 


Gap-scanning filters 

Fabry-Perot filter. The air-gap etalon, or Fabry-Perot 
filter, was introduced in the previous section. The etalon 
comprises two plates of glass kept parallel over a small 
separation where the inner surfaces are mirrors coated 
with high reflectivity 3. The transmission of the etalon 
to a monochromatic source A is given by the Airy function 


4m 
A= ren 


=i 
sin? (27 jl cos ain] (3) 
where 6 is the off-axis angle of the incoming ray and 
pl is the optical gap. The condition for peaks in 
transmission is given in equation (1). Note that 4 can 
be scanned physically in a given order by changing 6 
(tilt scanning), 4 (pressure scanning) or £ (gap scanning). 
Both tilt and pressure scanning suffer from serious 
drawbacks which limit their dynamic range. With the 
advent of servo-controlled, capacitance micrometry, the 
performance of gap scanning etalons surpasses other 
techniques. These employ piezoelectric transducers that 
undergo dimensional changes in an applied electric field 
or develop an electric field when strained mechanically. 
Queensgate Instruments Ltd have shown that it is possible 
to maintain plate parallelism to an accuracy of 4/200 while 
continuously scanning over several adjacent orders. 
Fabry-Perot filters have been made with 15 cm 
apertures and physical scan ranges up to 3 cm. The 
etalon is ultimately limited by the finite coating thickness 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


between the mirrors, so it really only achieves the lowest 
interference orders (m < 5) at infrared wavelengths. 


Solid etalon filter. These are single-cavity Fabry-Perot 
devices witha transparent piezoelectric spacer, e.g. lithium 
niobate. The thickness and, to a lesser extent, refractive 
index can be modified by a voltage applied to both faces. 
For low-voltage systems, tilt and temperature can be used 
to fine tune the bandpass. High-quality spacers with 
thicknesses less than a few hundred microns are difficult to 
manufacture, so that etalon filters are normally operated 
at high orders of interference. The largest devices we have 
seen are 5 cm in clear aperture. 


Michelson filter. In the Fourier transform or Michelson 
filter, the collimated beam is split into two paths at the 
front surface of the beam-splitter. The separate beams then 
undergo different path lengths by reflections off separate 
mirrors before being imaged by the camera lens at the 
detector. The device shown in figure 2 uses only 50% 
of the available light. As Maillard has demonstrated at 
the CANADA-FRANCE-HAWAII TELESCOPE, it is possible to recover 
this light but the layout is more involved. 

The output signal is a function of path difference 
between the mirrors. At zero path difference (or arm 
displacement), the waves for all frequencies interact 
coherently. As the movable mirror is scanned, each input 
wavelength generates a series of transmission maxima. 
Commercially available devices usually allow the mirror 
to be scanned continuously at constant speed or to be 
stepped at equal increments. At a sufficiently large arm 
displacement, the beams lose their mutual coherence. 

The filter is scanned from zero path length (x = y = 
0) to a maximum path length y = L set by twice the 
maximum mirror spacing (x = L/2). The superposition of 
two coherent beams with amplitudes b; and bz in complex 
notation is bj + b»e**”” where y is the total path difference 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tunable Imaging Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fixed 
Mirror 


Compensating 
Plate 


Reflective 
Coating Movable 
y 


Collimator 4 
<+—\ Mirror ——» 


Lens 


Beam 
Splitter 


Camera 
Lens 


Figure 2. Schematic of a two-beam Michelson (Fourier 
transform) interferometer. 


and v is the wavenumber. If the light rays have the same 
intensity, the combined intensity is 4b* cos? xvy, where 
b = b,; = b). The combined beams generate a series 
of intensity fringes at the detector. If it was possible 
to scan over an infinite mirror spacing at infinitesimally 
small spacings of the mirror, the superposition would be 
represented by an ideal Fourier transform pair, such that 


b(y) = i B(v)(1 + cos 27 vy) dv (4) 
Biv) = a b(y)(1 + cos 2m vy) dy (5) 


where b(y) is the output signal as a function of path length 
y and B(v) is the spectrum we wish to determine. B(v) and 
b(y) are both undefined for v < 0 and y < 0: we include 
the negative limits for convenience. Note that 


loo) 


b(y) — 5b(0) =f B(v) cos 2x vy dv (6) 


—oo 


Biv) = [v0 — $b(0)] cos 2x vy dy (7) 


The quantity b(y) — $b(0) is usually referred to as the 
interferogram although this term is sometimes used 
for b(y). The spectrum B(v) is normally computed 
using widely available fast Fourier transform methods. 
The construction of a Michelson filter is a major 
optomechanical challenge. The ideal Fourier transform 
pair is never realized in practice. However, the Michelson 
filter probably comes closest to achieving the goal of an 
ideal tunable filter. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The Michelson does not suffer the coating thickness 
problems of the Fabry-Perot filter, and therefore reaches 
the lowest orders even at optical wavelengths. 


Grating filters 

Resonant grating filter. These novel filters are inspired 
by the diffractive colors in many insects and constitute 
dielectric gratings with three-dimensional, sub-micron 
microstructure. The zeroth-order reflection exhibits a 
broad to intermediate bandwidth (R ~ 20), is highly 
polarized and maintains useful efficiency over a £30° tilt 
(or rotation) range. Gale (1998) presents one grating design 
that produces a roughly self-similar bandpass from 450 
to 850 nm over this tilt range. Grating filters, and their 
close relatives, evanescent gratings, show great promise 
but most have yet to leave the drawing board. However, 
since much of the research is driven by bank note security, 
we expect rapid progress. Volume phase holographic 
gratings—in reflection—can produce a highly efficient 
grating filter through Bragg diffraction. 


Acousto-optic filter (AOTF). These are electronically 
tunable filters that make use of acousto-optic (either 
collinear, or more usefully, non-collinear) diffraction in 
an optically anisotropic medium. AOTFs are formed by 
bonding piezoelectric transducers such as lithium niobate 
to an anisotropic birefringent medium. The medium 
has traditionally been a crystal, but polymers have 
been developed recently with variable and controllable 
birefringence. When the transducers are excited to 10- 
250 MHz (radio) frequencies, the ultrasonic waves vibrate 
the crystal lattice to form a moving phase pattern that 
acts as a diffraction grating. The diffraction angle (and 
therefore wavelength) can be tuned by changing the radio 
frequency. These devices are often water cooled to assist 
the thermal dissipation, although this is less important in 
the UV where AOTFs are particularly useful. The largest 
devices are 2.5 cm in diameter since it proves to be difficult 
to maintain a uniform acoustic standing wave over larger 
areas. An additional problem is the 15 wm structure in the 
LiNO, crystal which is not always optimal for good image 
quality. However, the acceptance angle of the AOTF is 
generally larger than that of the Fabry-Perot. 


Birefringent filters 

The underlying principle of the birefringent filter is that 
light originating in a single polarization state can be 
made to interfere with itself. An optically anisotropic, 
birefringent medium can be used to produce a relative 
delay between ordinary and extraordinary rays aligned 
along the fast and slow axes of the crystal. (A birefringent 
medium has two different refractive indices, depending 
on the plane of light propagation through the medium.) 
Title and collaborators have discussed at length the relative 
merits of different types of birefringent filters. The 
filters are characterized by a series of perfect polarizers 
(Lyot filter), partial polarizers, or only an entrance and 
an exit polarizer (Solc filter). The highly anisotropic 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tunable Imaging Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


off-axis behavior of uniaxial crystals give birefringent 
filters a major advantage. Their solid acceptance angle 
is 1-2 orders of magnitude larger than is possible with 
interference filters although this is partly offset by half the 
light being lost at the entrance polarizer. 


Lyot filter. This is conceptually the easiest to understand 
and forms the basis for many variants. The entrance 
polarizer is oriented 45° to the fast and slow axes so that 
the linearly polarized, ordinary and extraordinary rays 
have equal intensity. The time delay through a crystal 
of thickness d of one ray with respect to the other is 
simply dAu/c where Aw is the difference in refractive 
index between the fast and slow axes. The combined 
beam emerging from the exit polarizer shows intensity 
variations described by / 2 cos(2xdAu/2) where I is the 
wave amplitude. As originally illustrated by Lyor (see 
figure 3), we can isolate an arbitrarily narrow spectral 
bandpass by placing a number of birefringent crystals in 
sequence where each element is half the thickness of the 
preceding crystal. This also requires the use of a polarizer 
between each crystal so that the exit polarizer for any 
element serves as the entrance polarizer for the next. The 
resolution of the instrument is dictated by the thickness 
of the thinnest element. With quarter-wave plates placed 
between each of the retarder elements, 1. can be tuned 
over a wide spectral range by rotating the crystal elements. 
However, to retain the transmissions in phase requires that 
each crystal element be rotated about the optical axis by 
half the angle of the preceding thicker crystal. 

Woodgate (NASA Goddard Space Flight Center) has 
made a Lyot filter utilizing eight quartz retarders with a 
10 cm entrance window. The retarders, each of which is 
sandwiched with half-wave and quarter-wave plates in 
addition to the polarizers, are rotated independently with 
stepping motors under computer control. They achieve 
a bandpass of 0.4-0.8 nm tunable over half the optical 
wavelength range (350-700 nm). 


Solc filter. These highly non-intuitive filters use only two 
polarizers and a chain of identical retarders with varying 
position angles (Evans 1958). There are folded (zigzag) 
and fanned designs with the former having the better 
performance. Title has made a tunable Solc filter with 
7 cm clear aperture. It has the extraordinary capability 
of tuning the spectral profile: an n-element Solc filter can 
have a profile that is determined by n Fourier coefficients. 
The same can be achieved with polarizing filters by proper 
choice of crystal lengths. 


Liquid crystal filter (LCTF). These are rapid switching, 
electronically tuned devices which employ either ferro- 
electric or nematic liquid crystals. The more commonly 
used nematic LCTF (Morris et al 1994) comprises a series 
of liquid crystal elements whose thicknesses are cascaded 
in the same way as the Lyot filter. However, the tuning 
is achieved by electronically rotating the crystal axes of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


P:R:P 


P:R:P:2R:P 


P:R:P:2R:P:4R:P 


P:R:P:2R:P:4R:P:8R:P 


La Poin sable 


P:R:P:2R:P:4R:P:8R:P:16R:P 


a ON 


ee | ee | ee | Vee | 


Figure 3. The transmission profile of a simple Lyot cascade with 
(top to bottom) 1, 2, 3,4 and 5 stages. The thinnest element has 
retardance R and the following elements have thicknesses which 
are multiples of this element. The polaroids P are aligned with 
each other and oriented at 45° to the retarders. 


the liquid crystal waveplate. When no voltage is applied, 
the retardance is at a maximum; at large applied voltages, 
the retardance reaches a minimum. The retardance can be 
tuned continuously to allow the wavelength to be tuned. 

Liquid crystal filters are now commercially available 
from Cambridge Research & Instrumentation, Inc. The 
biggest device we have seen has a clear aperture of 4 cm, 
requires about 5 V toscana single order of interference and 
appears to have good image quality. The tunable band for 
a single-stage device is about R ~ 5 but can be tuned over 
the optical window. The peak transmissions are 30% or 
less. 


Differential imaging 

There are many important reasons for pursuing tunable 
filter imaging, as demonstrated by the TIF since the 
mid-1990s at the ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN 3.9 m TELESCOPE and 
the William Herschel 4.2 m telescope (see ISAAC NEWTON 
GROUP OF TELESCOPES). Conventional imaging has a major 
limitation in that images are taken sequentially which 
is not ideal at even the best sites. Even small detector, 
instrument or atmospheric variations lead to systematic 
error between images. A better approach is a multiband 
camera so that different bands are observed in parallel. 
However, even this is not ideal in that the optical path 
is different for each filter. A tunable filter provides a 
powerful alternative since band switching can be linked to 
charge shuffling with the CCD. This is a truly differential 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tunable Imaging Filters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


technique which leads to much smaller systematic errors 
than is possible with conventional imaging. 


Wide-field imaging 

Few telescopes offer more than a wide-field imager at 
prime focus simply because it is very difficult to exploit 
the fast beam spectroscopically (See WIDEFIELD CCD IMAGERS). 
Spectral passbands are degraded in converging beams 
which is unfortunate as the widest fields are achieved 
at the fastest f ratios. The wide-field expanded Lyot 
filter is (almost) the last word in exploiting the widest 
possible field with a given telescope. Remarkably, 
beams as fast as f/2 can be compensated with crossed 
birefringent elements, in concert with half-wave plates, 
such that even a constant sub-angstrém bandpass is 
possible over a degree-sized field. This opens up many 
new astronomical programs, e.g. Lyot filters can be vastly 
more efficient for GALAXY REDSHIFT SURVEYS of galaxies (e.g. 
high-redshift clusters) compared with existing multi- 
aperture SPECTROGRAPHS. To our knowledge, a wide-angle 
Solc filter using half-wave plates has not been attempted 
although it is entirely feasible. 


Bibliography 

Bell R J 1972 Introductory Fourier Transform Spectroscopy 
(San Diego, CA: Academic) 

Evans J W 1958 The Solc birefringent filter J. Opt. Soc. Am. 
48 142 

Gale M T 1998 Optical Document Security ed R Lvan Renesse 
(Boston, MA: Artech House Publishers) ch 12 

Morris H R, Hoyt C C and Treado P J 1994 Imaging spec- 
trometers for fluorescent and Raman microscopy: 
acousto-optic and liquid crystal tunable filters Appl. 
Spectrosc. 48 857-66 

Title A M and Rosenberg W J 1981 Tunable birefringent 
filters Opt. Eng. 20 815-23 

Vaughan J M 1989 The Fabry-Perot Interferometer: History, 
Theory, Practice and Applications (Bristol: Hilger) 


Jonathan Bland-Hawthorn 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tunguska Event 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tunguska Event 


An explosion in mid-air on the morning of 30 June 1908 
over a remote forest region of eastern Siberia near the 
Podkamennaya Tunguska river that caused widespread 
devastation. The few eyewitnesses reported a fireball as 
bright as the Sun. The explosion itself was heard up to 
1000 km away, and sent pressure waves twice around 
the planet that were recorded by seismographic stations. 
The forest canopy burned for over two days. Trees and 
reindeer in the central 1000 km? area beneath the blast were 
incinerated, and up to 50 km away trees were felled by the 
shock wave. Dust from the explosion blanketed the area 
and was carried round the world by atmospheric currents, 
causing colorful sunsets. It was 20 years before the first 
scientific research team, led by Leonid Kulik, reached the 
area. They found no main impact crater or meteoritic 
fragments; later expeditions, however, recovered dust 
particles preserved in tree resin and found them to be 
consistent in composition with stony meteorites. It seems, 
then, that a stony meteorite with a diameter of about 50 m 
fragmented and vaporized at an altitude of about 8 km. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tuorla Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tuorla Observatory 


Founded in 1952, Tuorla Observatory lies at an altitude of 
53 m and is located 12 km from Turku in Finland. It is the 
site of the headquarters of the NORDIC OPTICAL TELESCOPE. 

Early research activities included setting up a geodetic 
triangulation network for measuring distances, optical 
work, zenith tube studies of polar motion, detections and 
orbital calculations of minor planets and comets. Today, 
research includes active galaxies and stellar dynamics. 

The main instrument is a 1 m Dall—Kirkham reflector, 
used for CCD photometry of quasars. Other instruments 
include a 0.7 m Schmidt telescope, a 0.6 m Ritchey— 
Chrétien telescope and a 0.39 m zenith telescope. 
However, the observatory’s most important observations 
are made abroad, especially at the Nordic Optical 
Telescope. 

During the 1974 nationalization of Turku University, 
the observatory lost its independent status and became 
part of the Department of Physical Sciences. In 1989 the 
observatory buildings were enlarged, and in 1991 Tuorla 
once again became independent under the jurisdiction of 
the University. 

Tuorla also contributes to the VLBI facility at 
the Metsadhovi Radio Research Station of the Technical 
University of Helsinki. 

For further information see 
http: / /0j287.astro.utu.fi/tuorla/new /. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Turner, Herbert Hall (1861-1930) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Turner, Herbert Hall (1861-1930) 


Born in England, became Savilian Professor of Astronomy 
at Oxford University. Following the suggestion of 
E Mouchez (Paris) he organized the international scientific 
project, Carte du Ciel to make astrographic charts by 
photography. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Twilight Glow ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Twilight Glow 


The scattered light before sunrise and after sunset that 
partially illuminates the sky. This relatively steady glow is 
part of the overall phenomenon called airglow—the light 
produced and emitted by the Earth’s own atmosphere. 
The spectrum ranges from 100 nm to 22.5 wm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Tycho (Crater) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tycho (Crater) 


A prominent young lunar crater in the Moon’s southern 
uplands, and the hub of the Moon’s most striking ray 
system. Its diameter is 102 km, and it is centered at 43.4°S, 
11.1 °W; itis named after the astronomer Tycho Brahe. The 
crater is one of the youngest features of the Moon, perhaps 
just 100 million years old. Its ray system extends for up 
to 1500 km in all directions, and is most prominent at full 
moon, when the fresh ejecta from which it is composed 
reflect sunlight back toward the Earth, and the rays are 
seen to extend over much of the Moon’s nearside. The 
crater itself has terraced walls, caused by partial slumping 
of sections of the inner rim, which rise to 4.5 km, and a 
pronounced central peak. For over 80 km beyond the rim 
there is a continuous deposit of ejecta (an ejecta blanket) 
in all directions. Rock melted by the impact flowed down 
the outside to solidify in pools, and down the inside of 
the rim in rivulets toward the crater floor. Material ejected 
on higher trajectories produced the rays and also many 
secondary craters. 


See also: Moon. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) 


Much of Tycho (Latinized from Tyge, pronounced ‘Teeko’) 
Brahe’s accomplishment was made possible by the unique 
circumstances of his birth and upbringing. He was born 
on 14 December 1546 to Otte Brahe and Beate Bille, 
and thus into the highest stratum of Danish society, a 
powerful oligarchy of aristocratic families. Strangely, he 
was kidnapped by his uncle before he was two years old, 
and raised as the foster son of Jorgen Brahe and Inger Oxe. 
The tradition of the Oxe family seems to have influenced 
Tycho to cultivate learning rather than the aristocratic 
martial pursuits of his birth brothers. 

After attending the University of Copenhagen (1559- 
1561), Tycho proceded to the Lutheran universities of 
Germany, primarily Leipzig (1562-1565) and Rostock 
(1566-1567), ostensibly pursuing humanistic and legal 
studies but actually becoming more and more interested 
in alchemy and astronomy. It was at Rostock in December 
1566 that Tycho lost the bridge of his nose in a duel 
with another Danish noble student. Thereafter he wore 
a prosthesis of gold and silver blended to a flesh colour. 
Tycho traveled widely in Germany and Switzerland 
during the late 1560s, finding congenial intellectual circles 
in Basel and Augsburg. 

Recalled by his ailing father, Tycho returned to 
Denmark at the end of 1570 and settled at his ancestral 
home Kundstrup Manor in Skaane (now southern 
Sweden) and then at nearby Herrevad Abbey. Around 
1571, he fell in love with Kirsten Jorgensdatter, with whom 
he remained for the rest of his life, though they could never 
marry because she was a commoner. After publishing a 
book on the nova of 1572 and lecturing informally at the 
University of Copenhagen in the autumn of 1574, Tycho 
was on the point of emigrating from Denmark better to 
pursue his intellectual interests and for the sake of his 
common-law wife and family. 

Having heard of Tycho’s plans, on 11 February 1576 
King Frederick II offered Tycho the isolated island of Hven 
in the strait off Copenhagen and the funds to found and 
maintain an observatory. That summer Tycho began the 
construction of a castle/scientific institution, which he 
named Uraniborg, Urania’s castle. From the alchemical 
furnaces in the basement, to the high observing decks with 
their removable roofs, to the library with its great celestial 
globe, to the garret rooms for students and assistants, 
every element of the structure was devoted to Tycho’s 
dual interests of astronomy and alchemy. His facilities 
also included an instrument shop and a printing press 
and paper mill for disseminating his findings. With 
the problems of wind and vibration atop Uraniborg as 
well as the increasing scale of Tycho’s instruments, he 
subsequently founded a nearby subterranean observatory 
called Stjerneborg, the castle of the stars, which housed his 
largest and most sophisticated instruments. 

Tycho’s whole enterprise on Hven was underwritten 
handsomely by King Frederick. After his death in 1588 
during the minority of King Christian IV, when the country 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


was run a council of regents filled with Tycho’s relatives 
and friends, the generous funding continued. Tycho’s 
heirs later estimated that he spent 100000 florins over his 
lifetime amassing his observations. However, if Tycho was 
adept at soliciting patronage, he was not conscientious 
about fulfilling his modest responsibilities. He was 
therefore an easy target when King Christian came of age in 
1596 intent on recapturing control over crown funds. The 
sudden collapse of Tycho’s royal funding and persistent 
fears about transfering wealth to his family, who could 
not inherit because they were not noble, led Tycho to close 
Uraniborg and withdraw to northern Germany in 1597. 

By the middle of 1599, Tycho had secured an even 
greater patron, the eccentric Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf 
II. Offered his choice of castles, Tycho selected Benatky 
Castle in the countryside north of Prague, where he began 
trying to construct a ‘New Uraniborg’. However, by early 
1601, the emperor had him move into the city in order 
to be more accessible for astrological advice. Tycho’s 
research and publishing programs never recovered from 
the frequent moves of his last years. Finally, after drinking 
overgenerously at a party and not excusing himself from 
the table for some reason of etiquette, he suffered a fatal 
bladder complication, and died on 24 October 1601. 

Tycho’s dying words, ‘Let me not seem to have lived 
in vain’, were inscribed on the final page of his observing 
log by an assistant, who by virtue of the attrition in Tycho’s 
staff during his final years unexpectedly rose to become his 
successor. His name was Johannes KEPLER. 


The nova of 1572 and the comet of 1577 

The two most celebrated of Tycho’s observational findings 
involved transient phenomena, the nova of 1572 and the 
comet of 1577. Ironically, both occurred before the golden 
age of observing at Uraniborg, and were observed with 
Tycho’s more primitive instruments. However, both had 
profound cosmological implications. 

On 11 November 1572, Tycho noticed a new, intensely 
bright star in cassiopeiA. The new star (nova stella), now 
technically known as a SUPERNOVA, was bright enough to 
be visible during the daytime. Observing it with an 
astronomical radius and his early wooden half-sextant, 
Tycho discovered something of extreme importance: it 
displayed no diurnal parallax whatsoever, and therefore 
lay beyond the sphere of the Moon (a rather solid 
conclusion because the Moon itself displays 1° of diurnal 
parallax). Tycho published his findings in a modest book 
entitled De nova stella (1573). 

According to Aristotelian cosmology, the supralunar 
realm consisted entirely of the fifth element, ETHER, which 
by its nature was incapable of change. However, the 
star had come into being and passed away. This single 
inconsistency was not itself enough to bring down a 
cosmological system that stood near the center of Western 
philosophy (Tycho himself regarded the nova as a special 
creation of God), but it became an important element in the 
reconsideration of Aristotelian cosmology that took place 
during the latter half of the 16th century. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tycho was privileged to observe not only a supernova 
but also one of the most spectacular comets in recorded 
history. He first sighted it at dusk on 13 November 
1577 while catching fish for dinner from one of his 
ponds on Hven. Although Uraniborg was only under 
construction, Tycho managed to observe the comet with 
his new medium brass quadrant and his steel sextant. 
Because of the comet’s movement, the reduction of the 
observations was more complex, but Tycho was able to 
plot its motion both in equatorial and ecliptic coordinates. 
He eventually concluded from the comet’s motion and 
its imperceptibly small diurnal parallax that the comet 
was moving through space somewhere near the sphere 
of Venus. 

This was a result of great significance, for by the 
late 16th century many had come to the conclusion that 
Aristotle’s ether spheres were to be understood in terms 
of hard, impenetrable, crystalline spheres. According to 
Tycho, the comet had moved through those spheres, and 
he later claimed that he had shown that those spheres 
had no reality. His treatise on the nova having been 
overwhelmed by a mass of hysterical amateur literature 
interpreting its meaning, Tycho resolved to wait to publish 
until he could collect and rebut the literature generated by 
the comet of 1577. 


The Tychonic system 

Ever since the publication of NICOLAUS CoPERNICUS’s De 
revolutionibus (1543) astronomers were in a quandary. 
On the one hand, they admired Copernicus’s elegant 
mathematical planetary theories, which had done away 
with the physical non-uniformity of motion inherent in 
Ptolemy’s equant. On the other hand, the motion of the 
Earth in the heliocentric system was regarded by most as 
‘offending the principles of physics and of Holy Scripture’, 
as Tycho put it. A few pursued the idea of transforming 
the COPERNICAN SYSTEM to keep the Earth at rest and to put 
into motion the Sun with the planets circling around it. 
However, the relative distances of the Earth and Mars in 
the Copernican system proved a stumbling block, for the 
transformed system required a problematic intersection of 
the Sun’s and Mars’ spheres. 

The available evidence suggests that Tycho began 
developing his TYcHONIC sysTEM only around 1584. He was 
at that time in the midst of an observational campaign to 
detect by means of Mars’ diurnal parallax near opposition 
whether it approached closer to the Earth than the Sun. 
Since Mars does so in the Copernican system but not in 
the PTOLEMAIC SYSTEM, the observation promised the ability 
to decide observationally between the two cosmological 
systems. 

With the evidence of Mars’ parallax ambiguous but 
suggestive, and the evidence from the comet of 1577 for 
the incorporeality of the celestial spheres, Tycho was in 
the position to propose his new cosmological system. 
In the Tychonic geoheliocentric system, the Earth is at 
rest in the center of the universe while the Sun, with 
the planets orbiting around it, orbits the Earth. Tycho 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


inserted his account of the new system as an initially 
unplanned chapter 8 in his book on the comet of 1577, De 
mundi aetherei recentioribus phaenomenis (1588), published 
as the second volume of Tycho’s planned three-volume 
Astronomiae instaurate progymnasmata (the first volume of 
which finally appeared posthumously in 1602). 

Tycho’s compromise cosmology was widely adopted 
and taught, giving rise to vociferous priority claims, 
especially against Nicholas Reimers Ursus, who published 
a similar system as his own later in the same year. (In 
Tycho’s defense, it should be noted that an essential 
element of the system was his resolution of the problematic 
intersection of the Sun’s and Mars’ spheres.) The Tychonic 
system remained a serious alternative to the Copernican 
system well into the 17th century, long after the demise of 
the Ptolemaic. 


Instrument design 

Tycho improved instrument design in every respect, from 
the details of sights and divisions, to materials, to the type 
of instruments he made. He had his best instruments 
made during the 1580s, but even before the founding 
of Uraniborg Tycho had arrived at some of his most 
fundamental innovations. 

Although Tycho eventually developed techniques 
to harness the power of instruments of great size, the 
precision of his instruments depended primarily on his 
innovative sights and divisions. He instituted the use 
of linear transversals applied to his circular scales on an 
experimental basis on his medium brass quadrant (ca 1577) 
and steel sextant (ca 1574), and then used them on all 
subsequent instruments. Although criticized by some for 
not being mathematically rigorous, Tycho demonstrated a 
maximum geometrical error of linear transversals to be 3”, 
far too small to be detectable. On his larger instruments, 
the transversals were capable of resolving angles as small 
as 20 arcsec. 

Traditional pinhole sights were a far greater source of 
error. Since the front sight had to be at least big enough 
to sight the object through, it necessarily introduced an 
error of 5-10’. Tycho’s innovative twin-slit sights did 
away with error in the front sight by replacing it with 
an obstruction. If an object could be sighted on either 
side of the obstruction through two parallel slits at the 
rear, it would be correctly oriented to the limit of the 
error introduced by the finite width of the rear sights, 
which could be progressively narrowed. These too were 
first introduced on the medium brass quadrant. The only 
significant modification of the system was the substitution 
of a cylindrical obstruction at the front, which would 
appear as an identical rectangular obstruction from any 
location along the arc, a very useful feature especially for 
his later quadrants and sextants, where two observers used 
a single post at the apex as a shared front sight. 

Tycho experimented with a wide variety of designs 
but his working instruments fell into three families. 
Greatest in number were the azimuth quadrants, a design 
series that culminated in the revolving azimuth quadrant 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(1586) and the great steel sextant (1588) in Stjerneborg. 
Tycho had less success with another traditional class of 
instruments, the armillary family. Although armillaries 
offered the advantage of being able to measure directly in 
equatorial or ecliptic coordinates, with their many rings 
they were fussy to make and use. Tycho was only able to 
become satisfied with them by progressively simplifying 
the design, and finally abandoning the ring arrangement 
altogether. His great equatorial armillary (1585) in 
Stjerneborg consisted only of a very large declination 
circle pivoting around a polar axis, with differences in 
right ascension being measured by means of a large fixed 
equatorial arc (See ARMILLARY SPHERE). 

Tycho’s signature instrument—the one for which he 
most vigorously claimed priority—was his astronomical 
sextant, which reached its mature form in the trigonical 
sextant (1582). It was explicitly designed as a replacement 
for the unsatisfactory traditional astronomical radius, or 
Jacob’s staff, for the purpose of measuring angular sepa- 
ration in any plane. Because Tycho never developed satis- 
factorily accurate clocks, he did not measure positions in 
absolute equatorial coordinates but determined positions 
by triangulating from the positions of reference stars, for 
which the sextant was essential. 

Various analyses have been made of the accuracy of 
Tycho’s observations, which he acknowledged increased 
over his lifetime. It is safest to say that during his mature 
observing career, he consistently achieved his stated goal 
of 1’ accuracy. 


Planetary theory 
Tycho planned a restoration of astronomy based on a 
comprehensive collection of accurate observations, but 
died before the task was complete. The only theories he 
left in a reasonably satisfactory state were a solar and a 
lunar theory. 

His solar theory followed a long tradition begun 
by HIPPARCHUS in consisting of a circular orbit with a 
simple, unbisected eccentrity. His major contribution was 
a thorough redetermination of the parameters; his final 
form had an apogee of 953° and an eccentricity of 0.0358 
(equivalent to a post-Keplerian eccentricity of 0.0179), with 
an obliquity of 23° 31’30”. The only value he did not re- 
establish was the erroneously large value of 3’ for solar 
parallax from antiquity, which played havoc with his solar 
theory. However, the results were tempered by Tycho’s 
pioneering systematic attention to atmospheric refraction, 
with his exaggerated solar refraction table essentially 
canceling out the spurious value of solar parallax. 

Most of the work on the lunar theory was undertaken 
by Tycho’s most capable assistant CHRISTIAN SEVERIN (1562— 
1647). Too complex to be described here, the work was 
notable for Tycho’s discovery, based on his extensive 
observations, of two new lunar anomalies, the variation 
and the annual equation. 

Tycho put off the production of finished theories for 
the rest of the planets (the subject of the never-completed 
third volume of the Progymnasmata) until his Prague 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


period, when first Longomontanus and then Kepler was 
assigned to the theory of Mars. He died before any were 
reduced to a finished form. Kepler would not produce 
a complete set of planetary tables based on Tycho’s 
observations until long after Tycho’s death. Although 
Kepler had in the meantime wrought decisive changes to 
astronomical theory, his Rudolphine Tables (1627) still listed 
Tycho as first author. 


Bibliography 

Christianson J 2000 On Tycho’s Island: Tycho Brahe and 
his Assistants, 1570-1601 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) 

Dreyer J LE 1890 Tycho Brahe: A Picture of Scientific Life and 
Work in the Sixteenth Century (Edinburgh: Adam and 
Charles Black) 

Gingerich O and Voelkel J R 1998 Tycho Brahe’s 
Copernican campaign J. Hist. Astron. 29 1-34 

Thoren V E 1990 The Lord of Uraniborg: A Biography of Tycho 
Brahe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


J Voelkel 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tycho Star Catalogs: The 2.5 Million Brightest Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tycho Star Catalogs: The 2.5 Million 
Brightest Stars 


The knowledge of positions, motions in the sky, 
brightnesses and colors of the brightest stars is the basis 
for investigations in nearly all branches of astronomy 
and astrophysics. The HIPPARCOS space astronomy mission 
launched in August 1989 and operating until mid-1993 was 
dedicated to obtain such information. The measurements 
by the Tycho experiment onboard the satellite have 
increased the previous knowledge of this kind by several 
orders of magnitude. The first Tycho Catalog (Tycho-1) 
published in 1997 gives the positions and magnitudes in 
two color bands for one million stars. 

The motion in the sky (PROPER MOTION) could not be 
accurately derived from the change of star position during 
the short time interval of three years of the Hipparcos 
mission. The positions in the one hundred year old 
Astrographic Catalog have therefore been combined with 
the Tycho-1 positions to produce accurate proper motions 
for all stars, as published in 1998. 

A second reduction of the Tycho observations has 
been carried out with more powerful modern computers, 
resulting in the Tycho-2 Catalog to be published in 
2000. It will contain accurate information for 2.5 million 
stars, including proper motions based on the positions 
in the Astrographic Catalog and 145 other ground-based 
catalogs. 


Catalogs of star positions 

Catalogs of star positions and brightnesses (magnitudes) 
in the optical range are prerequisites for the study of almost 
all celestial objects. Given the position on the sky the 
stars are identified as individual objects, and can then 
in principle be observed by any kind of telescope for 
electromagnetic radiation, from radio waves over infrared 
and optical to x-ray and gamma-ray, in order to assess 
the physical nature of the object. The brightest stars in 
the optical range encompass a wide range of astronomical 
objects, from the compact white dwarfs to red giants 
and variable stars. The positions of other fainter objects 
such as galaxies and quasars are derived from special 
observations, relative to the positions of brighter reference 
stars. 

The first prominent catalog in modern time was 
produced by TYCHO BRAHE in the late 16th century 
and contained about 1000 stars with an unprecedented 
accuracy of position. The accuracy of measurement was 
gradually improved as the technology became available, 
and the number of stars could be increased. The 
most accurate primary instrument (before Hipparcos) for 
ASTROMETRY, Or positional astronomy, was the meridian 
circle, a telescope mounted on an east-west axis and 
observing the stars as they cross the meridian, one star at 
a time. This resulted in catalogs of fairly bright reference 
stars. 

A large number of fainter stars could then be 
tied to these reference stars by means of exposures 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Copenhagen University Observatory - E. Hoeg 1995 


arcsec T l T T T 


1000 -L ® Hipparchus - 1000 stars J 
@ The Landgrave of Hessen - 1000 


100 


10 F 


Pane gy Argelander - 26000 
Pu @ PPM - 400 000 

01 “-@FK5-1500 7 

Goi Tycho-1 

i Errors of 1 million 

0.001 - me Hipparcos 

best star positions 120 000 
0.000,1 - al 
0.000,01 - @ GAIA + 


many million| 
Bree ore ! ! | | | 


150 BC 1600 1800 2000 year 


Figure 1. Errors of star positions in the most accurate catalogs. 
Tycho Brahe achieved a jump in accuracy. After four centuries 
with more gradual improvements another leap was obtained 
with the ESA satellite giving the Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogs 
containing a total of one million stars. Further improvement is 
expected with the planned ESA satellite GAIA for many more 
stars; about 40 million stars with 10 microarcsecond and 1 billion 
with better than 150 microarcsecond accuracy. 


on photographic plates covering the whole sky. The 
first photographic survey of the sky was one of the 
largest international cooperations in astronomy carried 
out mainly from 1891 to 1920. It resulted in the 
Astrographic Catalog containing 8.6 million positions of 
about 4.5 million stars. But this catalog made very little 
scientific impact for nearly a century for two reasons. 
Firstly, the Astrographic Catalog positions were only 
available in 254 printed volumes, until a few years ago 
when they were painstakingly key-punched and thus 
put on machine-readable form. Secondly, an accurate 
net of reference stars only became available through the 
Hipparcos Catalog. 

During the 20th century great efforts were expended 
by astrometrists in the production of hundreds of position 
catalogs both by meridian circles and photographically 
in order to satisfy the needs of astronomy. In the 1990s 
the scene changed with the completion of the Hipparcos 
satellite mission. A larger and more accurate reference 
system became available, and the Tycho Catalog contained 
positions of one million stars in a second observation 
epoch nearly 100 years after the Astrographic Catalog so 
that accurate proper motions could be derived from a 
combination of these two catalogs. 


Tycho observations 

The European Space Agency (ESA) satellite Hipparcos 
carried out astrometric and photometric observations from 
1989 to 1993 resulting in the HIPPARCOS AND TYCHO CATALOGS. 
The satellite obtained very high accuracy astrometry for 
120000 stars, the Hipparcos Catalog. These stars plus an 
additional 935 000 stars were detected and measured with 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tycho Star Catalogs: The 2.5 Million Brightest Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a more modest accuracy by the satellite’s star mapper slits 
resulting in the Tycho Catalog, hereafter abbreviated to 
Tycho-1. This catalog contains astrometry and two-color 
photometry (Br, Vr) for all stars. The two color bands in 
the blue and visual parts of the spectrum are close to the 
so-called Johnson B and V frequently used in astronomy. 

The star mapper slits were placed in the focal plane 
of the Hipparcos telescope, beside the Hipparcos main 
field. The light passing through the slits was measured 
by simultaneous photon counting with two photo- 
multipliers, one in each of the color bands. The original 
Tycho reduction was done by detecting a significant 
signal whenever the stars of an input catalog crossed the 
slit system. The improvement in the new reduction is 
achieved by superimposing the photons that were counted 
during all the about 130 observations per star obtained 
during the mission. 


Table 1. Principal observational characteristics of the Tycho-2 
Catalog. ICRS is the International Celestial Reference System. By 
means of proper motions the observed positions are transferred 
to the year J2000.0, the epoch of the catalog. The median values 
of standard errors are given. Unit: mas=milliarcsecond. 


Observation period of satellite 


1989.85-1993.21 


Mean observation epoch ~J1991.25 
Epoch of Tycho-2 Catalog J2000.0 
Reference system ICRS 

coincidence with ICRSt +£0.6 mas 

deviation from inertialt +0.25 mas/yr 
Number of entries 2540 000 
Astrometric standard errors 

Vr < 9 mag, positions 9 mas 

all stars, positions 60 mas 

all stars, proper motions 2.5 mas/yr 
Photometric errors on Vr 

Vr <9mag 0.012 mag 

all stars 0.09 mag 
Sky densityt ~60 deg? 
Limiting magnitude V ~ 12.5 mag 
Completeness to ~90 % V ~ 11.5 mag 
Completeness to ~99 % V ~ 11.0 mag 
Total number of observations ~300 x 10° 


t per axis for all three axes. 
+ depending on galactic latitude. 


In the original Tycho-1 project astrometric and 
photometric data for 1052000 stars to a limit of 
Vr =11.5 mag were derived. The brightest 99% of the 
stars obtained magnitudes in two passbands Bry and Vr. 
A precision (median internal standard error) of 7 mas was 
achieved in astrometry (positions, annual proper motions 
and parallaxes) for stars with Vr < 9 mag, and 25 mas 
for all stars. The median precision in photometry was 
0.012 mag for Vr of the bright stars and 0.06 mag for the 
whole catalog. Double stars with sufficient brightness 
and separation larger than 2 arcsec were resolved. The 
processing was based on predicted star transits using a 
dedicated “Tycho Input Catalog’, compiled from existing 
star catalogs. The data treatment was carried out by the 
Tycho Data Analysis Consortium, using satellite attitude 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


0.12 


° 
— 
oO 
T 
! 


GSpos [arcsec] 
o 2S 98 
oO oO oO 
oS (o>) (oe) 
T 
| 


0.02 - | 


0.00 1 rae ffi joel een di 
6 8 10 12 14 
V; [mag] 
0.40741 | ro 
C / 
eee Op. VS By / 
0.30 ___ oy, vs Vz ee es 
— — 6g, y, VS Vz : 
E 0.20; j 
/ 
/ 
0.105 Py j 
x 
O00 EEE TT | 
6 8 10 12 14 


B, or V; [mag] 


Figure 2. The Tycho-2 Catalog: standard errors of position 
components, magnitudes and color indices. 


information, and photometric standard stars from the 
Hipparcos data reduction consortia. 


The Tycho-2 catalog 


The processing of Tycho observations for the first Tycho 
Catalog was based on detections of each transit above a 
certain signal-to-noise ratio (1.5 or 1.8). 

For the second Tycho Catalog a much better solution, 
namely a photon superposition for the whole mission, has been 
realized. This idea was already suggested in 1982 when the 
Tycho project was proposed to the EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY 
(ESA), but had to be abandoned at that time in favor of the 
more modest approach. The photon superposition gives 
better astrometric and photometric values for the fainter 
half of the original one million stars. A major reason for 
the improvement is that an astrometric estimation based 
on very few photons does not achieve the so-called CRAMER- 
RAO LIMIT. An estimation based on all photons from many 
transits comes much closer to that limit. Furthermore, 
many transits of the faint stars were below the limit 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tycho Star Catalogs: The 2.5 Million Brightest Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of signal-to-noise ratio for the detection and were thus 
completely lost. 

The Tycho-2 Catalog (see table 1 and figure 2) contains 
astrometry and photometry for 2.5 times as many stars as 
the Tycho-1. 


Future developments 

In the Tycho-2 processing, emphasis was placed on the 
optimal treatment of the bulk of stars which are single, but 
an effort was also made to detect and measure double stars. 
This resulted in about 8000 pairs with separations down 
to 0.8 arcsec, while the resolution limit in Tycho-1 was 
about 2 arcsec. The processing also gave insight into still 
unexploited possibilities. A special double star processing, 
where the Tycho-2 results are used as input, will give 
detection and measurement of closer pairs and of presently 
unknown fainter companions of many thousands of stars. 
It has also become clear that a special variable star 
processing should be applied because thousands of new 
variables can be detected, many more than can be detected 
from the published photometric annexes to the Tycho-1 
Catalog. These surveys of double and variable stars would 
be complete and uniform over the sky to an extent which 
could only be superseded by a future astrometric satellite. 


Bibliography 

ESA 1997 The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues European 
Space Agency, ESA SP-1200 (17 volumes) 

Heg E et al 1997 The Tycho Catalogue Astron. Astrophys. 
323 L57-60 

Heg E et al 1998 The Tycho Reference Catalogue Astron. 
Astrophys. 335 L65-68 

Heg E et al 1998 Progress on the Tycho-2 Catalogue 
from the Hipparcos Mission Proc. Int. Colloq. Modern 
Astrometry and Astrodynamics (Vienna, May 25-26, 
1998) at press 

Urban S E et al 1998 The ACT Reference Catalog Astronom. 
J. 115 1212 


Erik Hag 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tycho’s Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tycho’s Star 


A supernova remnant in Cassiopeia, 7.7° north of 
a Cas, which suddenly appeared as a brilliant naked- 
eye star in November 1572 and reached a maximum 
apparent magnitude of —3.5. Until its disappearance 16 
months later, it was extensively studied by the Danish 
astronomer Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), who described its 
early appearance as follows: ‘Initially, the new star was 
brighter than any other fixed star, including Sirius and 
Vega. It was even brighter than Jupiter.... It kept 
approximately the same brightness for almost the whole 
of November. On a clear day it could be seen at noon.’ (De 
Stella Nova, 1573.) 

In 1952 observations made by Robert Hanbury-Brown 
(b. 1916) at the Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories, 
Jodrell Bank, identified the supernova location with the 
discrete radio source 3C 10 (also known as Cassiopeia B). 
Hanbury-Brown mapped the detailed structure of the 
radio source, following which Rudolph Minkowski (1895- 
1976) detected optical remnants with the 5 m (200 inch) 
Hale telescope at the Palomar Observatory, California. 
(This radio source should not be confused with the much 
stronger nearby source, Cassiopeia A, which is believed to 
be an ancient type II supernova remnant.) The remnant 
of Tycho’s supernova has also been identified as a weak 
x-ray source. 

The detailed records kept by Tycho Brahe enabled a 
light curve to be constructed which indicates that the object 
was a type I supernova. Recent measurements suggest 
that the remnant is probably between 8000 and 10000 
light-years distant, in which case it reached an absolute 
magnitude at maximum of about —16. This is equivalent 
to a luminosity approaching 250 million times that of the 
Sun. 

At present the faint remnants of the expanding gas 
shell have a radius of 3.7’, equivalent to an actual diameter 
of between 17 and 22 light-years, and a rate of expansion 
of 6000-7500 km s~'. This is the highest expansion rate 
deduced for any object, and is about ten times that of the 
Crab Nebula, also a young supernova remnant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Tychonic System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Tychonic System 


The world system proposed in 1583 by the Danish 
astronomer Tycho Brahe (1546-1601). Unable to accept 
the Copernican doctrine that the Earth moves around the 
Sun, he put forward the view, later disproved by Kepler 
(1571-1630), that the planets move around the Sun, but 
the Sun and Moon move around the Earth. The theory 
explained the observed variations of the phases of Venus, 
for which the Ptolemaic system had no explanation. 


See also: Copernican system, Kepler’s laws, Ptolemaic 
system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


U Gem Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


U Gem Stars 


U Geminorum (U Gem) is the prototype for one subclass 
of dwarf nova (DN) systems. U Gem stars, like other DNs, 
brighten by factors of hundreds to thousands, sometimes 
in just a few hours. The eruptions recur quasi-periodically 
on intervals of weeks to years, with durations from a few 
days to a few weeks. U Gem stars, like all cataclysmic 
variables, are BINARY STAR systems consisting of a low-mass 
RED Dwakr Star (the secondary) and a WHITE Dwakr star (the 
primary). The red dwarf is losing mass to the white dwarf 
through the inner LAGRANGIAN POINT (L1). This gas forms 
an ACCRETION DISK surrounding the white dwarf. The disk 
is usually the major source of radiation in the system. 
Another source of light is a bright spot formed where the 
stream collides with the outer edge of the disk. The other 
two subclasses of DN are the Z Cam and SU UMa stars. 
The Z Cam stars have similar outburst patterns with the 
addition of occasional extended standstills about 0.7 mag 
below maximum brightness. The SU UMastars sometimes 
have superoutbursts that are brighter and longer duration 
than an ordinary outburst. 

White dwarfs are very small yet contain about one 
solar mass. So they have deep gravitational potential 
wells. In DN systems the matter streaming from the 
red dwarf star releases a large amount of gravitational 
potential energy. In fact, accretion energy is the dominant 
light source in these systems. The gas stream leaving the 
L1 point of the secondary star cannot fall toward the white 
dwarf directly. Because the stream material carries angular 
momentum from the orbital motion of the secondary star 
it follows a curved path around the white dwarf star. 
The stream material forms a flat accretion disk. Most of 
the continuum radiation from DNs originates in dense 
regions of the disk and the bright spot formed by the 
stream-—disk impact. The emission lines are formed in the 
lower-density outer disk or in the disk’s chromosphere and 
perhaps the stream—disk impact site. In systems where 
the orbital plane is seen nearly on edge, the emission line 
profiles are double peaked. This is because the profile 
is actually composed of two Doppler-shifted components 
originating from opposite sides of the rotating disk. The 
accretion disk is the source of the DN outbursts. This was 
demonstrated by photometric observations of Z Cha. This 
binary is an ECLIPSING BINARY system, and during outburst 
the eclipse became much deeper, indicating that the disk 
was the source of the eruption rather than the foreground 
red dwarf. 

Most of what we know about the visual light curves 
of DNs comes from the monitoring done by groups of 
amateur astronomers such as The American Association 
of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO). For many stars 
these visual observations span decades. The light curves 
reveal several details. Even for the same DN, no two 
outburst light curves are exactly the same (figure 1). For 
some systems (e.g. U Gem and SS Cyg (ss cyent)) there 
is a bimodal distribution of outburst durations with a 
tendency for outburst to alternate between long and short 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Apparent Visual Magnitude 


40050 
Julian Date (+2,400,000) 


40000 40100 40150 40200 40250 


Figure 1. The U Gem star SS Cyg has an outburst about every 50 
days. However, the duration, shape and amplitude of the 
outbursts are variable and mostly unpredictable. The light 
variations of SS Cyg are the best studied with the visual 
estimates made by members of the AAVSO. The figure above 
shows a small portion of their SS Cyg observations. 


durations. Outbursts are classified, types A through D, 
based on their rise times to maximum light. Type A 
outbursts have rapid (~2 days) rises. The system brightens 
at longer wavelengths first, with a delay of about a day 
between optical and the UV. In type B outbursts the rise 
of optical flux is a bit slower and nearly simultaneous at 
all wavelengths. There is a correlation (the Kukarkin— 
Parenago relationship) between outburst amplitude, A (in 
mag), and outburst duration, T’ (in days), 


A = 0.70 (£0.43) + (1.90 + 0.22) log T’. 


In quiescence the optical spectra are dominated by the 
hydrogen Balmer lines on a blue continuum. There are 
weak He I lines. Higher-excitation emission lines such as 
He II A 4686 and the blend of C III and N III at 4 4650 
are always very weak or absent. In the UV photospheric 
absorption lines of the white dwarf are visible, while lines 
from the secondary star can be seen in the IR for long- 
orbital-period systems. The light curve is often modulated 
on the orbital period owing to the changing aspect of the 
hot spot. In high-inclination systems this can produce a 
broad bump when the spot is seen face on, followed by an 
eclipse of the spot, disk and white dwarf by the secondary 
star. Analysis of eclipse light curves yields information 
about the size and location of these components. 

In outburst the continuum brightens and the emission 
lines can become difficult or impossible to detect. They 
are often replaced by broad absorption lines. In the 
UV, low-inclination systems show blended emission and 
absorption lines (P Cygni profiles) that indicate mass 
outflow in a wind from the disk. In high-inclination 
systems the light curve bump produced by the bright 
spot remains at its quiescence level. This indicates 
that the outburst is not triggered by enhanced mass 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


U Gem Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


— Stable 


<*— Unstable 


Temperature 


+— Stable 


Surface Density 


Figure 2. In the thermal instability model of DN outbursts there 
is a region in the disk with two stable temperature-surface 
density regimes. The mass transfer rate into the region 
determines where the region falls on the temperature-surface 
density curve. The outburst cycle is driven when the mass 
transfer rate into the region is too high for the lower branch and 
too low for the upper branch. The region cycles between the 
cooler region where mass transfer is less efficient (and mass 
accumulates) and the hotter upper branch with high transfer 
efficiency and larger mass inflow. 


transfer from the secondary star. As time progresses 
the continuum fades, and the emission lines once again 
become prominent. However, the UV flux declines much 
more slowly, in some cases fading until the next outburst. 
This has been interpreted as the cooling of the white dwarf 
after the outburst. 


Accretion disk models 

In theoretical models the disk is treated as thin and flat 
with a constant flow of mass from the secondary star. 
The gravity of the disk itself is considered negligible 
compared with that of the white dwarf. The gas is assumed 
to move according to KEPLER’S LAWS. (This is not strictly 
true or there would be no inward motion and no mass 
accretion.) Gas particles above the plane of the disk feel a 
restoring force due to the vertical vector component of the 
central gravitational force. This is balanced by the local 
gas pressure, i.e. there is hydrostatic equilibrium in the 
‘vertical’ direction. The surface density, &, at any point is 
defined as the amount of mass located beneath a square 
centimeter of surface, i.e. 


=2f pd: 


where p is the volume density and the z-axis is 
perpendicular to the disk plane. Because the disk particles 
orbit in a Keplerian fashion the rotation of the disk is 
differential. This results in shear between adjacent annuli 
producing a heating of the gas and an outward transport 
of orbital angular momentum. The net result is that most 
gas slowly spirals toward the white dwarf, releasing its 
gravitational potential energy as radiation. This process 
is determined by the viscosity of the gas. Unfortunately, 
we do not have a complete understanding of this viscosity. 
Convection may play animportant role. In the disk models 
viscosity, v, is treated as an adjustable parameter, q, ie. 


v=aC,H 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where C, is the local sound speed and H is a density scale 
height. The disk models assume axial symmetry, that is for 
a given radius in the disk all physical parameters are the 
same. The disk models can predict the run of temperature 
and pressure throughout the disk. The emitted continuum 
spectrum is usually calculated by summing the BLACKBODY 
RADIATION from each annulus of the disk. 


Outburst models 

There are a variety of disk outburst models. The thermal 
instability model described below has been particularly 
successful. The following discussion is designed to give 
the reader a general idea of how this model works. 
References for further reading can be found in the 
bibliography. 

The outbursts seen in DNs most likely result from 
increased mass flow through the accretion disk with 
accretion onto the white dwarf star. The rate of mass flow 
from the secondary star is usually assumed to be constant 
but there is a mechanism in the disk for temporarily storing 
matter. When the surface density reaches a critical value 
the viscosity increases and the matter is suddenly accreted 
onto the white dwarf. This produces the outburst. With 
time the surface density of the disk and the viscosity 
decrease and the mass build up in the disk begins anew. 

Normally the temperature in a disk is expected 
to increase with surface density because higher surface 
densities lead to greater viscous heating. A plot of 
all possible combinations of local temperature versus 
surface density (T versus Y) at a particular radius would 
give a positive-sloping curve. However, the outburst 
models require that at some location in the disk there 
are two possible values for temperature, for the same 
value of surface density. The outburst state corresponds 
to the high-temperature solution and the quiescent state 
to the low-temperature solution. The required curve in 
the temperature-surface density (T-X) plot is s shaped 
(figure 2). Only the upper and lower branches of this curve 
represent stable solutions for a disk. The outbursts are 
departures from thermal equilibrium. 

For a disk to be in thermal equilibrium the 
temperature must return to its initial value despite small 
perturbations. Normally this is the case. For example, if 
the midplane temperature is slightly reduced for a time, 
the surface density would increase owing to a reduced 
efficiency of viscosity in transporting mass inward. The 
increased surface density results in increased viscous 
heating, which returns the temperature and the surface 
density to their initial values. This thermally stability 
is characterized by a positive slope of the T—X curve, 
because regions with high temperatures require high 
surface densities in order to supply sufficient viscous 
heating. 

This scenario maintains thermal equilibrium pro- 
vided that the gas opacity does not have a strong temper- 
ature dependence. A large opacity change affects the disk 
temperature because the opacity determines how freely 
the energy in the disk can escape into space. In zones of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


U Gem Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


partially ionized hydrogen (approximately 10000 K) the 
H™ ion is an important opacity source. It is very tem- 
perature sensitive, with opacity increasing as T'°. In this 
case, if the midplane temperature is perturbed downward 
slightly, the opacity will drop dramatically, allowing more 
energy to escape into space. This causes the temperature 
to drop even further. Likewise, if the temperature is per- 
turbed upward, the temperature will continue to rise. A 
region of the disk in this state will either heat or cool until 
it reaches the stable branches at the top or bottom of the s- 
curve. The lower branch of the curve is thermally stable be- 
cause it is too cool for significant hydrogen ionization and 
the opacity due to molecular absorption has a weak tem- 
perature dependence. Likewise, the upper branch is ther- 
mally stable because hydrogen is mostly ionized, which 
also gives a weak temperature dependence for the opacity 
(Kramers opacity ~T~*°). 

The conditions at each radius in the disk correspond to 
some point on the T—2 curve, which is determined by the 
local accretion rate. If this dictates a temperature where 
hydrogen is partially ionized, the local solution will fall 
on the middle branch of the s-curve, which is thermally 
unstable. This region of the disk will either heat or cool 
to reach thermal equilibrium. If the temperature in this 
unstable region is perturbed downward the temperature 
will decrease until the lower branch is reached. However, 
the accretion rate into this region is too high for this 
portion of the T—X curve. The surface density increases 
as matter enters the region at a rate greater than it is 
being transported inward. The temperature rises because 
of increased viscous heating and increased gas opacity. 
The local temperature and surface density both increase 
following the lower branch of the curve until the lower 
bend of the s-curve is reached. The region must then 
rapidly heat until the temperature equals that of the 
thermally stable upper branch of the s-curve. The local 
accretion rate is then too low for this hot state, and both 
the temperature and surface density decrease until the 
upper bend of the s-curve is reached. The region then 
cools until it reaches the lower branch of the s-curve. The 
entire process then repeats. For the entire disk to go into 
outburst a heating wave propagates to other regions of the 
disk. Fully time-dependent models show that this does 
happen. 


Comparison with observations 

The disk model makes predictions that can be tested 
observationally. Steady-state disk models predict a flux 
distribution of F, ~ A~”/%. The spectra of DNs in outburst 
show a match to this exponent to within +£0.3. If the 
disk instability begins near the outside the disk radius 
should increase during outburst. Studies of the eclipse 
light curves of U Gem in outburst have shown this to 
be true. The disk diameter peaks at about 0.4 times the 
stellar separations just after the start of an outburst and 
declines to about 0.28 just prior to the next outburst. Also, 
in this type of an eruption, the far-ultraviolet region of the 
spectrum should brighten after the optical region. This 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is expected because the ultraviolet light comes from the 
hotter inner disk and the heating wave requires time to 
travel to the inner disk. As mentioned above, type A 
outbursts show this behavior. The theory also predicts 
that, when the rate of mass transfer is above a certain 
critical level, the accretion disk should in a stable, high 
state where the gas is totally ionized throughout. This 
means that high-mass-transfer-rate cataclysmic systems 
should not have outbursts. The novalike systems (which 
show no outbursts) have mass transfer rates above this 
limit while the DNs have accretion rates below this limit 
in good agreement with the theory (see also CATACLYSMIC 
BINARIES: CLASSICAL AND RECURRENT NOVAE). This appears to be 
a strongest confirmation of the disk instability theory. 

Details of the onset of an outburst and the manner in 
which it spreads through the disk still need to be worked 
out. For example, several observers have found evidence 
that changes in the disk begin 1—2 days before the start of an 
outburst. These include changes in emission line strengths 
and widths and slight rises (~0.1 mag) in the continuum 
level. For the most part, current theory does not address 
these observations which contain valuable clues to the 
outburst trigger mechanism. 


Bibliography 
An authoritative review of U Gem stars and all types of 
cataclysmic binary stars can be found in 


Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


An introduction to the accretion disk outburst model can 
be found in 


Cannizzo J and Kaitchuck R 1992 Accretion disks in 
interacting binary stars Sci. Am. (January) p 92 


A review of static disk structure can be found in 


Pringle J E 1981 Accretion disks in astrophysics Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 19 137 


Ronald H Kaitchuck 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uhuru (SAS-1/Explorer 42) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Uhuru (SAS-1/Explorer 42) 


NASA satellite, launched from the San Marco platform 
off the Kenyan coast in 1970. The first satellite dedicated 
to x-ray astronomy. Completed an all-sky x-ray survey 
and studied individual sources. Discovered x-ray binaries, 
including Hercules X-1 and Centaurus X-1, and confirmed 
the variability of Cygnus X-1. Uhuru means ‘freedom’ in 
Swahili. (See also SMALL ASTRONOMY SATELLITE, EXPLORER.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


Ultraviolet (UV) astronomy is the study of the electro- 
magnetic radiation emitted by celestial bodies in the UV 
wavelength range, a portion of the spectrum simultane- 
ously shielded by our own atmosphere and beyond the 
sensory limits of our sight. 

Actually, the electromagnetic ‘window’ accessible to 
ground-based observers is quite limited, being virtually 
confined to the wavelengths the human eye is responsive 
to. In particular, the shielding effect of the Earth’s atmos- 
phere on the radiation coming from space becomes very 
high at wavelengths shortward of 320 nm, the adopted 
limit of the UV region of the spectrum. This phenome- 
non, mainly due to the absorption of oxygen and ozone, 
affects the entire UV and x-ray spectral regions, thus pre- 
venting astronomers from recording not only high- 
energy phenomena giving origin to x- or y-rays, but also 
common processes (such as the thermal emission from 
hot stars) involving intermediate energies and producing 
mainly UV radiation. This obstacle could be overcome 
only when—starting in the 1960s—it became possible, by 
means of rockets and orbiting vehicles, to carry astro- 
nomical telescopes above the bulk of the atmosphere. 

The nomenclature commonly adopted to split the 
UV domain is to some extent ambiguous. The wide term 
‘UV’ often refers to the wavelength interval starting from 
the atmospheric cut-off (~320 nm) down to the ‘Lyman 
break’, i.e. the limit of the hydrogen Lyman line series at 
~90 nm. The shorter-wavelength segment from the 
Lyman limit down to the beginning of the x-ray portion 
of the spectrum, arbitrarily taken at A~6 nm (or ~200 eV, 
in x-ray nomenclature), is generally referred to as the 
‘extreme UV’ (EUV). At the same time, the radiation 
whose wavelength is shorter than 200 nm (strongly 
absorbed by most gases) is frequently called, as a whole, 
the ‘vacuum UV’. In the following I will keep to the con- 
vention of referring by ‘far-UV’ (FUV) to the region 
below Ly a (121.6 nm), by UV to the range between 121.6 
and 200 mm, and by ‘near-UV’ (NUV) to the radiation 
emitted longward of 200 nm. 

The advantage of accessing the UV range was man- 
ifold. First, as already pointed out, the majority of radia- 
tion emitted by stars whose photospheric temperature 
exceeds 10 000 K falls in the UV region (figure 1). The 
reason is that stars’ energy distribution crudely follows 
Wien’s law for an ideal radiator: 


Amax 1 = constant (1) 


(where Amax is the wavelength of maximum emission 
and T the temperature), thus showing the emission peak 
at shorter wavelengths as the temperature increases. As 
a consequence, one has to access the UV to properly 
record the energy distribution of the hottest stars as a 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Visible 
spectrum 


infrared roe Ultraviolet 


_t 


ma 
ow 
. 
cc 
ae 
= 
co 
— 
= 
2 
= 
~ 
oe 
= 
3 
Cc 
a 
= 


1012 1013 1014 4o15 1918 
Frequency (Hz) 


ae ees Se er 
105 104 1000 100 10 
Wavelength (nm) 


Figure 1. The energy distribution emitted by stellar photo- 
spheres as function of wavelength (or, equivalently of frequen- 
cy) matches approximately the so-called Planck’s curve, a math- 
ematical idealization strictly correct for a body that absorbs all 
radiation falling upon it and thus—in a steady state—capable of 
re-emitting the same amount of energy. The curve shifts toward 
higher frequencies (shorter wavelengths) and greater intensities 
as the star’s temperature increases. The net result is that stellar 
photospheres hotter than ~10 000 K emit most of their light 
beyond the visible region of the spectrum. From Fortin E. 2002 
Above the Skies (Harvard Extension School). 


function of wavelength, as well as their total energy out- 
put. 

Secondarily, UV observations represent a superb 
research tool to investigate both physics and chemistry of 
astronomical bodies owing to the occurrence, in this 
wavelength range, of the so-called resonance spectral 
transitions, i.e. the most intense, ground-state transitions 
for most common atoms, ions and molecules. 

Finally, when moving to UV, one can carry out deep 
surveys at significantly reduced levels of sky back- 
ground. Actually, space observations ensure a sky 40x 
darker than at any wavelength from the ground at A~200 
nm. This is obviously valuable when observing faint, 
extended sources such as distant galaxies. 

One should not forget, however, that orbiting UV 
experiments are also influenced by specific background 
sources, namely the Earth’s AIRGLOW and polar AURORA, as 
well as UV emission lines such as the far-UV hydrogen 
Ly a. Such a feature—ubiquitous within the solar system 
owing to the resonant scattering of solar photons off both 
interplanetary hydrogen and interstellar hydrogen flow- 
ing through interplanetary space—includes a particularly 
strong ‘geocoronal’ component, i.e. the Ly a resonant 
scattering produced off hydrogen atoms in the halo sur- 
rounding the Earth. As a consequence, unlike other 
sources such as the neutral oxygen O1 130.2 nm and 135.6 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nm emission lines which affect only observations at low 
orbital altitudes, the geocoronal Ly a heavily interferes 
with UV observations obtained also by intermediate- and 
high-orbit (geosyncronous) satellites. 


The Detection of UV Radiation 

Although UV radiation is neither transmitted nor reflect- 
ed as efficiently as are visible light and infrared (IR) wave- 
lengths by optical components, the telescope construction 
techniques adopted to record the UV portion of the 
spectrum are still basically the same as those used in 
ground-based optical astronomy, consisting of parabolic— 
hyperbolic mirror combinations. One exception to this 
tule is the EUV waveband, as the observational tech- 
niques used in this wavelength range are more similar to 
those of x-ray astronomy. More precisely, observations in 
this range cannot make use of normal-incidence optics 
and the geometry of EUV telescopes has to ensure reflec- 
tion via grazing incidence. 

In order to provide a satisfactory reflection of UV 
radiation down to A~100 nm, surfaces are usually made of 
aluminum overcoated by MgF, (or LiF). High-efficiency 
normal-incidence reflection at shorter wavelengths, fulfill- 
ing the need to access the region shortward of the Lyman 
limit, can instead be reached by SiC mirror coatings. 

As far as detectors are concerned, the present wide 
availability of silicon CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs), 
capable of recording photons over a very wide wave- 
length range (from 0.1 to 1000 nm), is appealing also in 
view of possible applications in the UV field. Such detec- 
tors are indeed the standard choice in many areas of 
today’s astronomy and, together with MICROCHANNEL 
PLATE DETECTORS (MCP detectors) (see below), are cur- 
rently replacing obsolete photographic emulsions to 
record UV observations (among recent missions, only 
the Shuttle-based Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UIT) 
still hosted image intensifiers/converters coupled to 
photographic films). When used as UV detectors, CCDs 
suffer from some limitations, however. Frontside- 
illuminated CCDs are insensitive to wavelengths short- 
er than 400 nm, for instance, although better perfor- 
mance in the UV can be obtained by resorting to 
thinned, back-illuminated chips. Moreover, a wide- 
spread practice intended to reach a suitable level of 
quantum efficiency (QE, i.e. the fraction of detected pho- 
tons out of those reaching the detector) is to apply a flu- 
orescing phosphor coating layer a few hundred 
nanometers thick, able to ‘down convert’ UV light, i.e. to 
absorb wavelengths shorter than 420 nm and re-emitting 
their energy in the visible region (around 520 nm). The 
CCD capable of the highest UV imaging sensitivity 
(down to A~200 nm) currently operating in space is the 
single 1024 pixel x 1024 pixel, back-illuminated detector 
of the Advanced Camera for Surveys—High Resolution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Channel (ACS/HRC) on board the HUBBLE SPACE TELE- 
SCOPE (HST). 

A step forward in UV light detection is now ensured 
by recently available MCP detectors. MCPs consist of a 
thin disk of a lead oxide glass crossed by many micro- 
scopic channels which act as individual photomultipliers 
and make the detector as a whole an image intensifier, 
when an electric potential is applied to its faces. They 
represent excellent two-dimensional (2D) detectors for 
the UV and EUV, when coupled with position-sensitive 
anodes which act as read-outs. Photon-counting, MCP- 
based detectors cope efficiently with many drawbacks of 
currently available CCDs, such as finite read-out noise, 
limited UV response and slow data access. This is the 
case of the state-of-the-art multi-anode microchannel 
array (MAMA) detectors which make both the Space 
Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) and the so-called 
Solar Blind Channel (SBC) of the just-mentioned ACS the 
most advanced UV-sensitive instruments currently oper- 
ating on board HST. In the case of STIS, the combination 
of two MAMAs, whose sensitive wavebands slightly 
overlap (115-170 nm and 165-310 nm), ensures solar- 
blind, photon-counting capability (together with high 
spatial resolution imaging) over wide UV spectral range. 
A further step beyond CCD and MCP devices currently 
in use is expected shortly from the employment of a new 
class of detectors based on superconducting tunnel junc- 
tion (STJ) technology. The main advantage of STJ detec- 
tors will be their ability to not only register each photon 
event but also to measure the wavelength of the detect- 
ed photons over a very large spectral range, from FUV to 
the near-IR. What is more, STJ detectors hold particular 
promise in space-based UV astronomy, where their 
intrinsic spectral resolution is the highest and their QE 
exceeds that of the current instrumentation. 


The Dawn of UV Astronomy 

The technological development inherited from the World 
War IL, especially in the field of long-range ballistic 
weapons, made it possible to take rocket-borne payloads 
above the atmosphere starting in the late 1940s. In par- 
ticular, the first, unguided experiments flown by the 
Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) on board captured 
German V2 rockets returned unique information on the 
intensity and spectral distribution of the UV emission of 
the Sun. Space solar astronomy is indeed less demanding 
in terms of instrumentation sensitivity and rocket atti- 
tude control systems, thus forcing early UV astronomy to 
start as solar astronomy. 

The rate of progress of UV space astronomy was 
quite fast, however. Actually, very simple, single-band 
UV photometers, flying on board unstabilized US 
Aerobee rockets were already able to provide the first UV 
observations of non-solar objects in the 1950s. More 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


exactly, the first UV data collected in space were broad- 
band (AA=35 nm) flux measurements at 270 nm of 49 
stars. UV spectrophotometric data were obtained for the 
first time a few years later (1961), by means of a scanning 
objective grating spectrometer flying again on board an 
Aerobee rocket, while the acquisition of spectra of point- 
ed individual stars had to be postponed until 1965, when 
three-axis stabilization systems could be implemented 
on rockets. Although hampered by the very limited 
observing time available (a few minutes per flight), these 
pioneering observations (recorded on films to be collect- 
ed after parachute landing) led to a revision of the tem- 
perature scale for hot stars and allowed astronomers to 
begin the study of mass loss phenomena from supergiant 
stars as well as to identify the UV interstellar absorption 
lines. 


UV Imaging and Surveys 

Although UV-sensitive facilities have brought unprece- 
dented insights into many, largely unexplored, physical 
processes, their observations have been predominantly 
confined to the study of individual objects (as in the case 
of the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and HST 
satellites) or relatively small fractions of the sky (as in the 
case of recent balloon- or shuttle-borne imagers). As a 
consequence, our knowledge of the UV sky as a whole 
relies essentially on the pioneering survey mission of the 
TD-1 satellite in the early 1970s, whereas a sensitive, 
high-resolution (3-5 arcsec) all-sky UV survey is expect- 
ed only with the launch of the Galaxy Evolution Explorer 
(GALEX) satellite (currently planned for April 2003). 

In order to properly compare the capabilities of UV 
space imagers, one should be familiar with the most 
common units used in UV astronomy. Typically the flux- 
es of UV sources are given in ‘monochromatic magni- 
tudes’ m, defined as follows: 


m, = -2.5 log (f,) -21.175 (2) 


where f, is the source flux density in erg cm s-! A+ at 
wavelength A. As an alternative one can adopt the so 
called ‘AB magnitudes’ defined as 


AB = 2.5 log (f,) 48.60 (3) 


where flux units f, are now expressed in erg cm s-1 
Hz. The latter system has been specially defined to 
coincide with V magnitudes for a source with a flat spec- 
trum. Its (wavelength-dependent) conversion into mono- 
chromatic magnitudes becomes myy = AB-2.26 in the 
middle of the UV domain (200 nm). An additional unit, 
used mainly to measure the UV background, is the count 
unit (CU), where 1 CU = 1 photon cm~ sr-! s-1 At, 

With reference to the above photometric scales, the 
TD-1 catalog contains ~58 000 sources brighter than 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Myy=8.5, measured in four UV spectral bands centered at 
~ 155, 195, 235 and 275 nm. For comparison, the All-Sky 
Imaging Survey catalog to be provided by GALEX will 
contain ~107 spiral/irregular galaxies and ~10° quasi- 
stellar objects (QSOs), as well as ~4x105 hot stars down to 
mag AB~22 in two contiguous UV bands (135-180 and 
180-300 nm). 

TD-1’s successful flight showed the potential of 
long-lived, UV orbiting observatories, i.e. of UV-devoted 
telescopes operating on board satellites. On the other 
hand, the advent of UV orbiters did not stop the devel- 
opment of other kinds of UV-oriented missions—both 
imagers and spectrometers—intended to exploit short- 
duration flights of rockets, stratospheric balloons and 
finally space shuttles. The first balloon-borne UV tele- 
scopes flown in the 1970s had the advantage of remark- 
ably extending the observing time in comparison with 
sounding rockets, and although the observing window 
of these payloads floating at an altitude of ~40 km is con- 
fined to the NUV owing to atmospheric extinction, long- 
duration balloon flights are still felt to be appealing 
enough to conduct all-sky surveys. Just as an example, 
upgraded versions of the French—Swiss balloon-borne 
FOCA experiment, which surveyed ~70 sky square 
degrees imaging hundreds of galaxies down to a limiting 
magnitude myy~19, will presumably fly in the future. 
Analogously, modern rocket-borne instruments such as 
the Narrowband Ultraviolet Imaging Experiment for 
Wide-Field Surveys (NUVIEWS) launched in 1996 
turned out to be competitive in mapping the mid-UV 
background at a resolution of a few arcminutes. What is 
more, short-duration missions can be highly productive 
when multitask payloads are brought into space. This is 
the case for the two consecutive ASTRO-1 and ASTRO-2 
Shuttle missions which hosted three co-mounted UV 
instruments: a UV imager (the UIT), a spectrometer capa- 
ble of measuring UV fluxes down to the Lyman limit (the 
Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope HUT) and the Wisconsin 
Ultraviolet Photo-Polarimeter Experiment. 

Turning back to the orbiting telescopes which pio- 
neered access to the UV sky, one should mention the rich 
dataset (consisting of pre-selected targets) of another 
successful mission, the Astronomical Netherlands 
Satellite launched into a polar elliptical orbit in 1974 and 
operated until early 1976. Its 22 cm diameter telescope 
focused UV light through a 2'.5x2'.5 aperture onto the 
focal plane of a spectrometer, thus sampling five, close 
UV spectral bands 15-20 nm wide starting from ~150 nm. 

A few additional experiments compensated for the 
lack of all-sky surveys by means of their high sky cover- 
age. Among them one should mention the Far- 
Ultraviolet Experiment $201 which operated from the 
surface of the Moon during the Apollo 16 mission in 
1972 assuring UV imagery of 10°-20° diameter fields, 
down to a limiting monochromatic magnitude myy~12. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Two additional wide-field UV imaging facilities, namely 
the Wide-Field UV Camera (WF-UVCAM) and a first 
version of the Far-UV Space Telescope (FAUST), operat- 
ed during the Spacelab 1 flight aboard Space Shuttle in 
the early 1980s. The WF-UVCAM’s survey covered a 
large fraction of the sky, mostly in the southern hemi- 
sphere, taking advantage of its ultrawide field of view 
(66°), imaged with a resolution of 5'. FAUST was con- 
versely designed to image a smaller field of view (~8°) 
with a better angular resolution (1-2 arcmin). 
Unfortunately the high background experienced in orbit 
affected both experiments, whose data were recorded on 
photographic emulsions, and the best WF-UVCAM 
images did not record objects fainter than myy=9.3, 
while almost no objects were detected by FAUST. A sec- 
ond opportunity for this telescope came at the time an 
improved version flew on board the Space Shuttle 
Atlantis in 1992. This time the telescope, taking advan- 
tage of a modern MCP imaging detector, was capable of 
reaching a limiting magnitude myy=13.5 at 165 nm, as 
planned. Altogether FAUST’s UV images covered a sky 
area of 0.33 sr (i.e. about 3% of the whole sky), thus 
ensuring UV photometry of more than 4000 star-like and 
extended sources. 

Among UV archive images widely used are the data 
obtained by UIT. This instrument, namely a 38 cm tele- 
scope equipped with two selectable cameras providing 
both FUV and NUV 3 arcsec resolution images, gave 
extremely useful overall pictures of a wide variety of UV 
extended sources such as supernova remnants, globular 
clusters, OB associations, spiral galaxies and circum- 
nuclear starbursts. These UV images of nearby galaxies 
are still highly valuable to date, owing to their relevance 
(as morphological templates) to high-redshift galaxies 


z=0,1520A 


z=1.5, 3800 A 


Figure 2. Left panel: a UV (150 nm) image of the luminous Sc 
galaxy M101 obtained by UIT. Right panel: a simulation of a 
galaxy with the same structure but 10x higher surface brightness 
at a redshift z=1.5 as observed by a 10 m class telescope. Owing 
to both reduced spatial resolution and changes in the galaxy’s 
appearance with wavelength, the simulation is not easily recog- 
nizable as a normal spiral galaxy as seen at optical wavelengths. 
As a consequence, the observer could be induced to misinterpret 
such a difference as a genuine evolutionary effect. From 
Marcum et al 2001 Astrophysics Journal Supplement Series 132 129. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


whose ground-based observations are preferentially 
made in the rest-frame UV (figure 2). 


UV Spectroscopy 

As in any other field of observational astronomy, the 
amount of physical information carried by UV spec- 
troscopy is much larger than that of simple imaging 
and/or photometry. This can explain the large effort 
devoted to taking into space UV spectrometers as early 
as possible in the history of space exploration, as well as 
the great scientific achievements of relatively simple 
facilities, like the IUE satellite. 

UV spectrographs flown in the last few decades are 
characterized by improving performance in terms of lim- 
iting flux, sensitive spectral range and resolving power 
R=A/Aa (a resolving power R=1000 corresponds to the 
ability to recognize individual features as close as a thou- 
sandth of their wavelength A). 

Among early successful instruments one has to 
include a satellite of the OAO series, ie. the OAO-3, 
called COPERNICUS which was launched in 1972 and oper- 
ated for eight years. Copernicus carried as the main UV 
experiment the UV Princeton equipment consisting of an 
80 cm telescope and a grating spectrometer equipped 
with four UV-sensitive phototubes covering a short 
(95-145 nm) and a long (165-300 nm) wavelength range. 
The first high-resolution UV spectra (down to AA=0.5 
nm) of early-type bright stars are due to this facility, 
although the primary goal of this mission was to make 
use of interstellar absorption lines, as seen against spec- 
tra of UV-bright stars, to estimate abundances in the 
interstellar medium (ISM). 

The end of the same decade represented a turning 
point owing to the launch of the IUE. This long-lived, 
extremely successful satellite was brought into a geosyn- 
chronous elliptical orbit and operated as a guest observ- 
er facility from two stations located on either side of the 
Atlantic Ocean. Its instrumentation consisted of a 45 cm 
telescope with a 16' field of view, equipped with two 
echelle spectrographs covering two overlapping ranges 
from 115 nm to 335 nm. The majority of spectra were 
obtained through a large, oval aperture 10"x20" in size. 
The satellite could operate at low (R~300) and high 
(R~10 000) resolution, providing a spatial resolution 
orthogonal to the dispersion of ~4". Its archive, contain- 
ing about 108500 spectra, is a unique heritage that the 
UV community will continue to exploit in the future. 

A step forward in UV spectroscopy came with the 
two consecutive missions of the HUT telescope (see 
above) thanks to its unique ability to explore the UV ener- 
gy distribution down to the Lyman limit (91.2 nm) and 
thus derive reliable temperature estimates for hot thermal 
sources (e.g. stellar populations including objects with 
T.~20 000-30 000 K). More precisely, HUT consists of a 
90 cm telescope with a spectrograph covering the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


82.5-185 nm _ region coupled with a_ photon- 
counting microchannel-plate intensifier providing a 
resolution of AA=0.3 nm. 

UV-sensitive spectrographs have also operated on 
board HST since the beginning of its operational life. 
First-generation instruments were FOS and GHRS, both 
sensitive to UV wavelengths and largely complementary. 
The former UV-optical device operated at low and mod- 
erate resolution (R~250 and 1300) with a variety of aper- 
tures to optimize throughput, while two photon-count- 
ing detectors (digicons) could be used to select either a 
blue (115-550 nm) or a red (165-850 nm) channel. An 
interesting feature of FOS was its ability to isolate sub- 
arcsecond regions of an extended source. Conversely, 
GHRS was a UV-dedicated instrument capable of obtain- 
ing much higher-resolution spectra (up to R~ 80000) of 
small wavelength intervals (from 28.5 nm to less than 1 
nm). The above UV-sensitive spectrographs were 
replaced in 1997 by STIS, an innovative instrument mak- 
ing use of 2D detectors, thus providing spatially resolved 
long slit or slitless spectroscopy from 115 to 1100 nm 
from low to medium spectral resolution (R~600-14 000), 
together with high-resolution UV echelle spectroscopy 
up to a resolving power R~100000. 


The EUV 
Overcoming the atmosphere’s opacity by means of 
space-borne telescopes in not enough when moving to 
the EUV portion of the spectrum. Actually, at wave- 
lengths shortward of the Lyman limit (91.2 nm) observa- 
tions are hampered by the intervening opacity of the 
ISM, a phenomenon due to the line-of-sight atoms of 
hydrogen as well as of neutral and singly ionized helium 
(below 50.4 nm and 22.8 nm respectively). Moreover, as 
stressed above, a conventional optics consisting of 
curved reflecting mirrors would indeed absorb photons 
at wavelength shortward of ~50 nm and the goal of 
reflecting the majority of such radiation can be achieved 
only by imposing sufficiently low incidence angles on 
traveling EUV photons. In other words, one has to resort 
to specifically designed telescopes, including a series of 
(metal) grazing-incidence surfaces, to focus EUV light. 
Since the beginning of EUV astronomy interplane- 
tary probes and manned spacecraft played quite a large 
role in this field. This is the case, for instance, for the ear- 
liest measurements of the EUV background (i.e. below 
Ly a) obtained by means of simple Geiger counters on 
board Soviet probes Venera 5 and 6. A later major step in 
the exploration of the EUV sky was made possible in 
1975 during the the joint Apollo-Soyuz mission. Its EUV 
experiment—a 37 cm grazing-incidence telescope with 
selectable fields of view of a few degrees—discovered the 
first four EUV point sources, thus showing that, contrary 
to the prevailing opinion at that time, EUV astronomy 
was indeed possible. Other long-lasting experiments, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


namely modern UV spectrometers employing MCP 
intensifiers and covering the range 50-170 nm, were part 
of the scientific payload of Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 
which started their journey into interplanetary space in 
1977. A modified spare UV spectrometer (the EUVS 
experiment) built for the above Voyager program has 
been finally adapted to the currently operating Galileo 
spaceprobe, thus ensuring EUV/UV spectral capabilities 
from 54 to 128 nm. 

The modern age of EUV astronomy came at the 
beginning of our decade thanks to the all-sky survey per- 
formed by the EUV Wide Field Camera on board the x- 
ray ROSAT satellite. Such a camera explored the whole 
sky in two, slightly overlapping, bands (6-14 nm and 
11-20 nm) and the resulting final catalog contains 479 
EUV sources, consisting mainly of hot white dwarfs and 
late-type (i.e. not hotter than the Sun) active stars. 

An additional successful facility which, although 
brought into orbit in the Shuttle’s payload bay, operated 
twice (in 1993 and 1996) as a free-flyer space UV/EUV 
telescope, was the German—US ORFEUS-SPAS platform. 
The ORFEUS (Orbiting and Retrievable Far- and Extreme 
Ultraviolet Spectrometer) instrument consists of a 1 m 
telescope equipped with two spectrographs, one of 
which, devoted to EUV, covered the region between 40 
and 120 nm with a fairly high resolving power (R=3000). 

Actually, the present-day reference dataset for 
knowledge of the EUV sky is represented by the source 
catalogs, images and the spectral atlas of the EXTREME 
ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER (EUVE) satellite, which operated 
from 1992 until 2001. This facility included three grazing- 
incidence, co-aligned telescopes and an EUV spectro- 
meter—deep survey instrument. The first three scanning 
telescopes, which are perpendicular to the spacecraft 
spin axis and possess a 5° field of view, allowed a com- 
plete survey of the EUV sky to be made in four band- 
passes from 7 to 76 nm, while the fourth telescope could 
simultaneously scan the sky over a 2°x180° area along 
the ecliptic (i.e. the plane of the Earth’s orbit). The latter 
telescope, aligned parallel to the spacecraft spin axis 
pointing away from the Sun, was allowed to integrate on 
a given source for a time as long as ~0.5 h during a single 
orbit (versus a typical 500 s exposure of the main survey), 
so as to provide much deeper images. Altogether, EUVE 
obtained a vast amount of data from a largely unex- 
plored region of the electromagnetic spectrum, thus 
ultimately giving to the field of EUV astronomy its own 
scientific identity, separate from other previously exploit- 
ed spectral windows. 


Highlights of UV Astronomy 

The Solar System and The Sun 

The study of cometary physics and Jupiter’s auroral 
activity represents highly valuable achievements of UV 
astronomy. As far as the Jovian auroral phenomena are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


concerned, one should be aware that current knowledge 
of their time-scales comes mainly from a successful coor- 
dinated IUE-Galileo probe UV campaign. More than 
that, UV observations of comets are studded with dis- 
coveries: IUE spectra of the comet IRAS—Araki—Alcock 
led, for instance, to the discovery of an unexpected mol- 
ecule (S,) never observed before in any astrophysical 
object, while more recent EUVE spectra of comet 
Hyakutake at 8-70 nm revealed for the first time the 
emission lines of ions that are brought to the comet by 
the solar wind and excited in charge exchange with 
cometary neutral species. 

UV and EUV solar spectroscopy is presented in 
detail elsewhere in the Encyclopedia and the reader 
should refer to such a specific issue. It suffices to mention 
here the successfully operating solar experiments of the 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory and Transition 
Region and Coronal Explorer, which have given unprece- 
dented insight into the phenomena affecting the solar 
corona (such as the temperature structure and the ‘seis- 
mology’ of coronal loops), as well as into coronal plasma 
heating and the generation of the solar wind. 


Stars 

The impact of UV studies of stars is incalculably large, 
spanning an extremely wide variety of classes, evolu- 
tionary phases and phenomena. Roughly speaking, one 
can refer to three major subfields, namely studies of mas- 
sive hot stars, (active) cool stars and binaries. 

The role of very massive ((30-100) Mg) hot stars and 
their progeny (e.g. Wolf—Rayet stars and luminous blue 
variables) can be fully appreciated by taking into account 
that—when present—they dominate the appearance of 
their parent galaxies and, what is more, heavily affect 
their evolution through continuous mass loss, supernova 
explosions and ionizing radiation. Observations in the 
FUV domain are particularly well suited to characteriz- 
ing the physics of strong stellar winds produced by the 
above stars (most of the strongest transitions of ionic 
species in their accelerated envelopes fall shortward of 
200 nm) as well as to deriving the basic parameters of 
such extreme stars. This is the case, for instance, of a WO- 
type star (Sand 2) in the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC), 
whose recent FUV spectrum obtained by the Far- 
Ultraviolet Spectrograph Explorer (FUSE) indicates a 
temperature T,~150000 K and a luminosity approximate- 
ly 200 000x higher than that of the Sun. The evolution of 
such ultraluminous stars is so fast that this object is 
expected to undergo a supernova explosion within the 
next 10000-50000 yr. Surprising results have been 
obtained, again in the FUV, by observing the low-mass, 
very hot stars which expel huge, glowing layers of gas 
(the so-called planetary nebulae, excited by the UV radi- 
ation from the central star itself), while moving towards 
their final stage of white dwarf stars. In effect, when 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


FUSE recently observed an object of this kind, namely 
the M27 nebula, it turned out that, although the central 
star is extremely hot, there is a lot of molecular hydrogen 
in the surrounding material, a discovery posing the 
unanswered question of how does molecular gas survive 
in such a harsh environment. 

At the opposite end of the star temperature scale, 
UV data gave basic clues to the nature of activity in chro- 
mospheres and coronas of stars as cool as T,~3000 K. 
These objects, characterized in both the UV and the FUV 
spectral domains by a very weak continuum and a rich 
spectrum of emission lines formed in the regions going 
from the chromosphere to the corona (where the temper- 
ature grows from 4000 up to 150000 K), show indeed 
spectra qualitatively resembling the chromospheric and 
transition region spectrum of the Sun, although with 
emission fluxes several orders of magnitude larger. The 
physical insight obtained by the study of UV emission 
lines of magnetically active stars is amplified by the 
occurrence of flares, ie. energy release episodes in 
response to magnetic reconnection events. Their distrib- 
ution in energy and relation to cool stars’ activity and 
rotation has been fruitfully studied also in the EUV by 
means of the EUVE satellite. 

Interacting binary systems such as symbiotic stars— 
consisting of a cool red giant and a hot, UV-bright white 
dwarf and thus characterized by highly energetic 
processes such as colliding star winds, nova-like out- 
bursts etc—are also quite suitable for UV investigations 
and have been extensively studied. Clues to the geome- 
try of these binary systems also came from the study of 
the conversion of UV emission lines originating near the 
hot component into optical emission lines in the extend- 
ed atmosphere of the cool giant (the so-called Raman 
scattering). Observers had instead to resort to EUV 
observations to succeed in detecting hot white dwarfs in 
Sirius-type, non-interacting binary systems containing a 
sufficiently hot (i.e. of the O, B and early A spectral type) 
main-sequence star. The reason is that the emission of the 
brighter star dominates here the radiation down to the 
UV and FUV regimes and neither IUE nor HST could be 
used to identify the degenerate companion. 


Star Clusters 

In globular clusters—old, roundish systems containing 
up to a million stars—the large majority of the population 
is quite cool. Their emission shortward of A=200 nm 
comes indeed from a minority of stars crossing specific 
hot evolutionary phases. Among them have been identi- 
fied single, highly evolved luminous stars which domi- 
nate the integrated UV light of the whole cluster, as well 
as populated ‘tails’ of lower-luminosity hot (up to T,~20 
000 K) core helium-burning stars which also emit most of 
their light in the UV domain. In addition, the present abil- 
ity (by means of HST) to detect much fainter UV sources 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is offering a more complex and potentially interesting 
scenario where other star classes (eruptive variables, the 
mysterious ‘BLUE STRAGGLERS’, etc.) also play a role. 

HST UV imaging opened recently the possibility of 
studying also what might be the progenitors of today’s 
globular clusters, namely a population of compact, 
young star clusters located in a variety of starburst envi- 
ronments (preferentially circumnuclear star-forming 
rings in galaxies). The most luminous of them—general- 
ly termed ‘super star clusters’ (SSCs)— could indeed sur- 
vive as bound entities for more than 10 billion years, thus 
representing, on the basis of their radii, high luminosi- 
ties, and presumably high masses, genuinely young 
globular clusters. 


Supernova 1987A 

The nearby supernova which appeared in the LMC in 
February 1987, monitored on a regular basis with all pos- 
sible telescopes since the time of the explosion, is by far 
the best-studied object of its class. It is specifically men- 
tioned here because a substantial contribution to the 
knowledge of its early evolution came from intensive UV 
spectroscopy ensured by the IUE satellite and, since the 
time of its launch in 1990, by HST. Among the exciting 
results obtained by means of UV observations one has to 
mention the identification of the supernova progenitor 
(which unexpectedly turned out to be a blue supergiant 
star), the possibility of deriving the complex structure of 
the intervening medium both in our own Galaxy and in 
the LMC toward the UV-bright supernova and an accu- 
rate determination of the distance to the supernova. 
Moreover, the fast evolution of the supernova remnant is 
still giving rise to phenomena on a time-scale of a few 
years (such as the appearance of brightening spots on the 
equatorial ring surrounding the exploded star, caused by 
radiative shocks created where the blast wave strikes 
dense gas regions). The physics of this phenomenon is 
currently under study by means of UV (STIS) spectra on 
board HST. 


Galaxies 

Observations of galaxies at UV wavelengths represent a 
highly effective means of investigating both their hot 
stellar content and energetic phenomena in their central 
regions. The latter is obviously the case of galaxies host- 
ing active galactic nuclei (AGN). These two classes of UV 
sources reflect, in turn, two distinct mechanisms (thermal 
and non-thermal) of radiation emission. 


Stellar Populations in Galaxies 

For disk-dominated galaxies UV imagery offered a direct 
way of recognizing active sites of star formation at dif- 
ferent scales (spiral arms, nuclear rings, star-forming 
complexes, etc.) as well as of estimating the rate at which 
new stars form. Moreover, the patterns of star-forming 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


sites seen in the UV for nearby galaxies of different mor- 
phologies turned out to be of great relevance to recon- 
structing the morphological class of very distant galaxies 
whose visible and IR images recorded by ground-based 
telescopes do actually show—owing to cosmic expan- 
sion—their rest-frame UV emission (figure 2). The role of 
UV observations of young, massive stars became even 
more pronounced for galaxies hosting a ‘starburst’, i.e. a 
major event of star formation dominating their energetic 
output. For these objects, the ability to address many key 
issues, such as starburst morphology, the nature of the 
so-called SSCs and the impact of dust obscuration, is 
largely dependent on the availability of UV images. 

The access to UV spectroscopy proved, in turn, to be 
imperative for characterizing stellar populations’ tem- 
perature, metal content and age. In particular, the contin- 
uing decrease of UV emission of aging starbursts can be 
properly modeled by means of synthetic spectral energy 
distributions (SEDs) of single-generation stellar popula- 
tions, thus providing a reliable dating method up to ~1 
Gyr. More than that, the sensitivity of the UV to stellar 
properties proved to extend even to the relatively cool, 
lower-mass main-sequence stars which dominate the 
mid-UV light after the exhaustion of star formation activ- 
ity so that even the mid-UV region of the spectrum can 
be used for dating purposes for both local and distant 
galaxies (figure 3). Analogously, UV and FUV spectra of 
local starbursts provided by IUE, HUT and FUSE now 
ensure unique templates to quantify the chemistry and 
age of galaxies experiencing major star formation 
episodes in the early universe. Finally, UV turned out to 
be an effective window to understand also the late evo- 
lution of low-mass stars dominating spheroidal systems, 
such as elliptical galaxies and spiral bulges. These sys- 
tems are indeed characterized by a sharp rise of their 
spectrum shortward of ~200 nm (generally referred as 


16 


A) 


10 


5L NGG 3610 43) 


(107 erg /s/cm?/ 


| LBDS 53W091 


2000 2500 ~~=~SS*~*~*«S 0 
Rest Wavelength {A} 


Figure 3. Comparison of the rest-frame UV spectrum of the 
galaxy LBDS 53W091 at z=1.5 and those of the local ellipticals 
M32 and NGC 3610. The vertical lines indicate the spectral inter- 
vals used to measure the breaks observed in the energy distrib- 
ution. Such a comparison indicates that the age of the distant 
galaxy is not lower than ~4 Gyr. From Spinrad et al 1997 
Astrophysical Journal 484, 581. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wavelength (A} 


Figure 4. Comparison between the IUE energy distributions of 
NGC 4649, a typical metal-rich giant elliptical (full circles) and 
the low-luminosity metal-poor elliptical M32 (crossed squares), 
normalized to the visual flux. The adopted flux scale is logarith- 
mic. Note the striking difference between the two spectra in the 
UV region dominated by the hottest stars, as opposed to the 
approximate match longward of ~200 nm. 


the ‘UV-upturn’ phenomenon), ascribed to some fraction 
of hot, evolved stars (figure 4). Since the onset of this 
phenomenon does depend on both the composition and 
age of the old populations, observers in the UV have at 
their disposal a second major probe of stellar populations 
(besides the strong UV emission of young, massive 
stars). More precisely, although the first hint of this fea- 
ture came from the pioneering observations of the 
ANDROMEDA GALAXY bulge by means of the OAO-2 satel- 
lite, a much deeper insight into the origin of this behav- 
ior has been reached only by means of the large body of 
data recorded by IUE. IUE spectra showed indeed that 
the amplitude of this phenomenon depends on the chem- 
ical composition, as the higher the mean metallicity (per- 
centage of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium) 
of the galaxy, the higher its UV flux. A further constraint 
on the nature of stars causing the UV upturn—namely its 
narrow range in temperature (T,~20000-24000 K)—came 
later from the spectra obtained by means of HUT. The 
maximum emission of hot stars of such a temperature 
falls indeed around 105 nm, just within that telescope’s 
sensitive range. 

Since then astronomers have faced the need to iden- 
tify one (or more) evolved stellar components sufficient- 
ly hot, bright and long lived as to provide the observed 
UV flux and such a debate is still going on. While both 
observers and theoreticians favor the hottest, core- 
helium burning objects known as extreme horizontal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


branch stars and their progeny as the sought hot source, 
one cannot yet firmly establish whether they belong to a 
metal-poor or metal-rich minority of the population. This 
last issue, in turn, is quite important in the context of 
galaxy evolution, especially if the UV upturn onset is 
related to the attainment of a given maximum metallici- 
ty in the stellar population. If this is the case astronomers 
could indeed make use of it to constrain both metallicity 
and age of distant ellipticals. 


Active Galactic Nuclei 
Prolonged, IUE-based spectral monitoring campaigns 
aiming at understanding continuum and emission-line 
variability of Seyfert 1 galaxies (see SEYFERT GALAXIES) 
turned out to be quite successful, confirming the exis- 
tence of time delays between continuum variations in 
different parts of the spectrum as well as of broad emis- 
sion lines in response to UV continuum variations. Such 
phenomena, in turn, impose strict constraints on the the- 
oretical models of these massive black hole candidates. 
At the same time UV imaging showed its unique 
potential in the study of galaxy nuclei. Unlike optical and 
IR images of elliptical and bulge-dominated galaxies— 
dominated by the emission of surrounding cool stars— 
shorter-wavelength pictures permit nuclear non-thermal 
sources to show up over the galaxy stellar background. 
This, in turn, permits better study of known nuclei and 
searches for objects hosting low-luminosity activity. Such 
contrast enhancement made possible, for instance, the 
discovery of UV flares at the center of optically normal 
galaxies which would have been lost if recorded in other 
wavebands. AGN have also been successfully used as 
cosmic ‘lighthouses’ in the UV to investigate the proper- 
ties of absorbing systems at high redshifts. In particular, 
the observation of high-z quasars enabled IUE (and sub- 
sequently to HUT, HST and FUSE) to explore the rest- 
frame EUV portion of their spectrum, thus leading to the 
detection of the continuous depression of the flux blue- 
ward of the He II Ly a emission line at 30.4 nm due to the 
singly ionized helium (He*), the most abundant absorb- 
ing ion in low-density regions of the young universe. 
Such a phenomenon is known—by similarity to the effect 
expected for neutral hydrogen—as the He II 
Gunn-Peterson effect. 


Interstellar (and Intergalactic) Medium 

For a long time it has been well known that the space 
between stars is filled by highly rarefied gas and micro- 
scopic solid particles, generally referred to as ‘interstellar 
dust’. UV spectroscopy provided the tool to properly 
investigate the composition and physical conditions of 
interstellar gas by analyzing the strongest absorption fea- 
tures of common elements (such as C IV, N V and O VI 
ions) and molecular species (such as H, and CO) towards 
bright stars. The UV continuum shape gave, in turn, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


information on the constituents of dust particles, show- 
ing, for instance, that the extinction they operate on the 
UV light shows a typical ‘bump’ around 220 nm. 
Likewise, the vast regions between galaxies and groups 
of galaxies is permeated by a tenuous gas, made up 
primarily of hydrogen and helium atoms, called the 
intergalactic medium (IGM). The amount and composi- 
tion of this widespread cosmic component can be studied 
by recording the absorption features it produces in the 
spectra of distant quasars. Very fruitful observations of 
these kinds obtained by FUSE allowed astronomers to 
identify helium absorptions in the FUV that have no cor- 
responding hydrogen absorptions in optical, ground- 
based spectra along the same line of sight. Although the 
IGM is very tenuous, the amount of matter locked up in 
such a previously invisible component is huge, and its 
existence must be taken into account in current cosmo- 
logical models. 


UV Background 

As noted above, the FUV background, i.e. the diffuse 
astronomical flux incident upon the Earth at wave- 
lengths of 91.2-200 nm, is quite faint (mainly because of 
the zodiacal light’s dramatic decrease below A=250 nm) 
and, as such, does offer a window of very low sky con- 
tamination for observations of objects of low surface 
brightness. On the other hand, a proper, uncontaminat- 
ed estimate of the true diffuse FUV background is ham- 
pered both by the terrestrial airglow and the galactic 
background, resulting from the scattering of the UV 
radiation field by interstellar dust. In spite of that, dif- 
ferent UV-sensitive imagers (namely the rocket experi- 
ment NUVIEWS and the STIS instrument on board 
HST) have recently provided reliable measurements of 
both astronomical components. In particular, the galaxy 
contribution at A 174 nm has been successfully mapped 
by NUVIEWS with a resolution of 5-10 arcmin over a 
substantial fraction of the sky, while the true diffuse 
FUV background along a line of sight with very low 
galactic neutral hydrogen column and without any sig- 
nificant contribution from airglow has been estimated 
by STIS (after masking Galactic and extragalactic 
sources to very faint magnitudes) in the bandpass 
145-190 nm. 


UV Telescopes Currently in Operation 

The highly successful observations of FUSE, launched on 
24 June 1999, are enhancing the role UV astronomy is 
playing at the beginning of the new century. FUSE con- 
sists of four co-aligned 39 cm x 35 cm mirror telescopes 
coupled with four spherical, holographically ruled grat- 
ings. It makes use of two MCP detectors and is specifi- 
cally designed to obtain high-resolution spectra (R~24 
000-30 000) in the range between the Lyman limit and 
Ly a@ emission (90.5-118.7 nm). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


.-7° HotGalactic corona ~~. 


| 


infalling clouds 


Figure 5. FUSE found evidence for a corona of tenuous hot gas 
much more extended than the well-known hot halo around the 
disk of the Milky Way. Clouds of gas raining into the Galaxy 
from the outside are heated as they pass through this corona— 
much like a meteor heats up as it passes through the Earth’s 
atmosphere—and eventually become detectable in the FUV by 
FUSE. This hot, high-velocity gas has been detected at over 50 
directions looking through our Galaxy’s halo, indicating that it 
is widely distributed around our Galaxy. 


The access to this largely unexplored FUV window 
represents indeed a breakthrough for many poorly 
known astrophysical fields. In effect, although previous 
missions did provide brief glimpses into the above wave- 
length range (suffice it to remember the Copernicus mis- 
sion which opened the FUV window in the 1970s, and 
the two HUT and ORFEUS telescopes flown on Space 
Shuttle missions in the 1990s), FUSE is able to observe 
sources more than 10000 times fainter than Copernicus at 
a resolution many times better than that obtainable with 
either HUT or ORFEUS. Thanks to this increase in sensi- 
tivity FUSE can explore, for instance, the outer reaches of 
the Milky Way (figure 5) as well as making use of quasars 
as continuum sources for absorption line studies of dis- 
tant gas clouds (figure 5). 

FUSE is a principal investigator (PI) class mission, 
and as such was developed to carry out several primary 
scientific objectives proposed by the PI science team and 
selected by NASA. The main programs include (i) a sur- 
vey of O VI absorption in the Milky Way disk and halo 
and the Magellanic Clouds, in order to determine the 
physical properties and distribution of hot gas, as men- 
tioned above, (ii) determining the abundance of deuteri- 
um in a wide range of Galactic environments, (iii) explor- 
ing the nature and distribution of the hot IGM and (iv) 
understanding the role of molecular hydrogen in circum- 
stellar environments and planetary atmospheres. 

Among other operating, UV-sensitive facilities, one 
has to mention again the ACS, a third-generation imager 
installed on board HST during Servicing Mission 3B in 
March 2002. This instrument actually consists of three 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 6. Expected 60 
throughput for the 
WECS instrument 
compared with those 

of other HST imagers. 
Note the extension into 
the UV of the wide-field 
imaging capabilities of 
HST ensured by the 
WEC3 instrument. 


O WFCS3 UVis 


9 WFC3 IR 


Py 
Oo 


Throughput (%) 


20 


0 500 


cameras covering a large spectral region from the UV to 
the near-IR (120-1000 nm). As already pointed out, its 
UV-devoted imagers are the SBC, equipped with a pho- 
ton-counting MAMA detector (whose sensitivity is con- 
fined to the range 115-170 nm) and the HRC equipped 
with a CCD detector operating longward of A=200 nm. 
Present-day UV astronomy is also taking advantage of a 
piggy-back UV instrument belonging to an x-ray-devot- 
ed mission, namely the UV/Optical Monitor on board 
the XMM-Newton satellite. This telescope, operating in 
the 170-650 nm range, can provide imaging on the cen- 
tral region of the 17 arcmin x 17 arcmin x-ray field of 
view. 


Forthcoming UV Missions and the Future 

As already mentioned above, among survey-devoted 
projects, a highly valuable scientific return will come 
from GALEX, expected to be launched in April 2003. 
GALEX is intended to obtain a series of spectroscopic 
and imaging surveys in the range 130-300 nm in order to 
study both the UV properties of local galaxies and the 
star formation and metal production history of galaxies 
over the redshift range 0<z<2.! 


ACS WFC 
© NICMOS 3 


WFPC2 


1000 
Wavelength (nm) 


1500 


2000 


At the same time, the highly improved HST UV 
imaging capabilities ensured by the recent deployment 
of ACS will be further expanded when the state-of-the- 
art Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3) is put into operation on 
board HST during the last servicing mission (scheduled 
for early 2005, following Columbia’s accident). This 
instrument is configured as a two-channel camera. The 
incoming beam, once corrected for spherical aberration 
in the HST primary mirror by means of a two-element 
optical system, is sent to either a near-IR channel or a 
UV-visible channel. The latter will image a 160 arcsec x 
160 arcsec field, thus providing unprecedented wide- 
field imaging capabilities in the UV down to A=200 nm 
(figure 6). 

The last HST servicing mission will also include the 
replacement of the spherical aberration corrective 
optics—no longer necessary after the removal of the 
Faint Object Camera—with the Cosmic Origins 
Spectrograph (COS), a medium resolution spectrograph 
specifically designed to operate into the NUV and mid- 
UV. COS—optimized for observing faint point sources 
with intermediate spectral resolution (R~20 000)—con- 
sists of two channels: an FUV channel that is sensitive in 


1Qwing to the expansion of the universe the light coming from distant galaxies shows a redshift (expressed as z=AA/A in terms of increased wavelength), 
thus appearing graually shifted toward the red with increasing receding galaxy velocity which, in turn, reflects increasing distance and lookback time. 
As a consequence, a given redshift range Az corresponds to a well-defined interval in lookback time, once a specific cosmological model is chosen. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


10 


Ultraviolet Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the 115-177 nm wavelength range and an NUV channel 
that operates between 170 and 320 nm. Taking advantage 
of its design, which minimizes the number of reflections 
(thus ensuring a dramatic improvement in sensitivity to 
faint objects over previous UV spectroscopic instruments 
flown aboard HST), it will permit several major issues in 
current astrophysics to be addressed, such as the proper- 
ties of QSO absorption line systems and the IGM, the 
dynamics of the ISM in galaxies and galaxy halos, as well 
as the UV extinction in the Milky Way and the study of 
volatile gases in the atmospheres of solar system bodies. 

The second half of the current decade should finally 
see the deployment of the World Space Observatory 
(WSO/UV). This spacecraft—to be regarded as a UV- 
devoted astrophysical observatory rather than a targeted 
mission—will consist of a 1.7 m diameter telescope 
equipped with both spectroscopic and UV-imaging 
instrumentation. More precisely, it will include a com- 
posite spectrograph capable of both high (R~60000) and 
low (R=1000) resolution, as well as two UV imagers— 
one for maximum spatial resolution, one for maximum 
sensitivity—operating essentially in the same wave- 
length range (110-340 nm). 

WSO/UV will be innovative in many respects. For 
instance, it will be brought into an L2 orbit, i.e. it will 
operate from a point in space known as the second 
Lagrangian point located about 1.5 million km from the 
Earth in the anti-Sun direction. Such an orbit, besides 
being a very stable thermal and radiation environment, 
does offer the possibility of long uninterrupted observa- 
tions, since Earth, Moon and Sun are permanently 
behind the spacecraft viewing direction. In addition, the 
approach chosen for the planning and execution of the 
WSO/UV will ensure significant cost savings, while 
facilitating the participation in space science of new 
countries. 


Bibliography 

A summary of all fields of UV research is given in the 
conference volume Ultraviolet Astrophysics Beyond 
the IUE Final Archive, eds W Wamsteker and R 
Gonzdlez Riestra, ESA SP-413 (1998). 

A concise history of UV space programs is compiled by 
De Martino D and Buson L M 1999 UV space mis- 
sions: from the past to the future Memorie della 
Societa Astronomica Italiana 70 (2) 315, while the spe- 
cific issue of space surveys is discussed by Brosch N 
1999 Ultraviolet sky surveys Experimental Astronomy 
9119. 

A description of the FUSE telescope, its performance and 
scientific background is given by Moos H W, et al 
2000 Astrophysical Journal 538 L1; an analogous 
description for the GALEX satellite can be found in 
Bianchi L, et al 1999 Memorie della Societa Astronomica 
Italiana 70 (2) 365; readers interested to the WSO 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


project should instead retrieve from the website 
http:/ /arXiv.org the preprint astro-ph 0209333 by 
M A Barstow et al. 

The most promising UV detectors under development 
are presented in Ultraviolet—Optical Space Astronomy 
Beyond HST (ASP Conf. Series 164) (1999) by OH W 
Siegmund (MP detectors) and P Jakobsen (STJ 
detectors). 


Updated information can be retrieved via the following: 

http:/ /www:stsci.edu/hst/HST_overview /instruments 
(HST instrumentation) 

http:/ /astro.estec.esa.nl/SA-general / Research/Stj 
(STJ detectors) 

http: / / www.vilspa.esa.es /iue (IUE satellite) 

http:/ /spacescience.nasa.gov / missions /index.htm 
(past UV space missions) 

http: / /www.galex.caltech.edu (GALEX) 

http:/ /fuse.phajhu.edu (FUSE) 

http: / /www.seas.columbia.edu /~ah297 /un-esa 
/wso.html (WSO/UV). 

Lucio M. Buson 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


11 


Ulugh Beg (1394-1449) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ulugh Beg (1394-1449) 


Astronomer, born in Soltaniyeh, Timurid, Persia (now 
Iran), the grandson of the Asian conqueror Tamerlane, 
and under his father’s patronage built a large observatory 
in the city of Samarkand, directed by Ali-Kudschi, with 
Al’Kashi and Kadizada amongst the staff. The observatory 
was well equipped with large instruments that revealed 
errors in Ptolemy’s data. Ulugh Beg and the staff observed 
the positions of the Sun, the Moon, the planets and 992 
stars, publishing a catalog Zij-i Sultani. The book of tables 
contained trigonometric functions. Ulugh Beg also wrote 
poetry and history. When his father died, he reigned 
briefly as ruler of the Timurid empire but was overthrown 
and slain at Samarkand at the instigation of his own son, 
Abd al-Latif. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Umbriel 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Umbriel 


A mid-sized satellite of Uranus, discovered by William 
Lassell in 1851. Its diameter is 1170 km and it orbits 
the planet at a distance of 266000 km. The satellite 
was not well imaged by Voyager 2; an ancient, cratered 
surface was visible, broken only by the bright-floored 
crater Wunda (diameter 160 km). Umbriel appears to 
be a primitive, undifferentiated body: one that has never 
melted internally and segregated into a core and mantle, 
and has remained largely geologically inactive. 


See also: Uranus. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uncertainty Principle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Uncertainty Principle 


A principle, named after the German physicist Werner 
Heisenberg (1901-76), which states that it is impossible to 
know simultaneously the precise position and momentum 
of a subatomic particle. 

In order to measure the position of an electron, for 
example, it has to be observed. In order to observe 
it, we have to shine light on it. Because photons 
(particles of light) carry energy and momentum, each 
time a photon strikes an electron, the electron is deflected 
in an unpredictable way, so inducing an element of 
uncertainty into its velocity and momentum. The position 
of an electron cannot be measured to an accuracy much 
better than the wavelength of the illuminating radiation. 
The shorter the wavelength, the better the positional 
accuracy but the higher the energy and momentum of 
the illuminating photons and the greater the resulting 
uncertainty in momentum. As Werner Heisenberg 
proposed in 1927, the uncertainties in position (Ax) and 
momentum (Ap) are related as follows: AxAp > h/4z, 
where h is the Planck constant. Similar uncertainties exist 
in other pairs of measured quantities, such as energy and 
time. If the energy of a microscopic system is measured 
over a time interval Ar, the uncertainty in the measured 
energy (AE) is related to At by the following relation: 
AEAt > h/4x. The shorter the time interval, the greater 
the uncertainty in energy. 

When the equivalence between mass, m, and energy, 
E, is taken into account (E = mc*, where c denotes 
the speed of light), the uncertainty relationship between 
energy and time has important consequences. For 
example, over a very short interval of time, there is 
inherent uncertainty about the quantity of energy (AZ) 
contained in any microscopic volume of space. If the time 
interval (Ar) is sufficiently short, the uncertainty principle 
implies that the volume may contain sufficient energy to 
create particles of mass m < AE/c’, provided that those 
particles vanish again before the end of the time interval 
(in practice, particle-antiparticle pairs form and mutually 
annihilate within time interval At). Such particles, which 
are called virtual particles because they cannot directly be 
detected, play an important role as force-carrying particles 
in quantum theories of the fundamental forces. The higher 
the mass of the virtual particle, the shorter its permitted 
lifetime. Because no particle can travel faster than the 
speed of light, the range to which a virtual particle can 
convey an influence is itself inversely proportional to its 
mass; thus forces that are conveyed by high-mass particles 
act over short ranges, while those that are conveyed by low 
or zero-mass particles have long, or infinite, ranges. 


See also: electron, energy, fundamental forces, mass, 
photon, quantum mechanics, quantum theory, special 
relativity, wave—particle duality. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


United Kingdom Infrared Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


United Kingdom Infrared Telescope 


The 3.8 m United Kingdom Infrared Telescope (UKIRT) 
is the largest telescope in the world dedicated solely to 
observations at infrared wavelengths. UKIRT is sited near 
the summit of Mauna Kea, Hawaii, at an altitude of 4194 m. 
UKIRT was designed and built in the UK in the 1970s on 
a low budget. A recent program of upgrades has resulted 
in outstanding image quality, approaching the diffraction 
limit in the K band in the best seeing conditions. 

The current main instruments in the near-infrared, 
both with polarimetry capability, are the CGS4 spectrome- 
ter (providing resolutions from 400 to 40 000), and the UFTI 
imager. These will be largely superseded in 2001 by UIST, 
a near-infrared imager/spectrometer. A mid-infrared im- 
ager/spectrometer Michelle (covering 8 to 25 micron) is 
due to be delivered in 2000. From 2003 a large fraction 
of UKIRT time is expected to be devoted to deep surveys 
using a new wide-field camera (WFCAM), and covering 
several thousand square degrees in J, H, K—the infrared 
equivalent of the SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY. 

The telescope is owned and funded by the United 
Kingdom PARTICLE PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY RESEARCH COUNCIL 
and operated along with the JAMES CLERK MAXWELL TELESCOPE 
by the staff of the Joint Astronomy Centre, located in Hilo. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.jach.hawaii.edu/JACpublic/UKIRT/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universal Distance Scale 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Universal Distance Scale 


The HUBBLE CONSTANT is the local expansion rate of the 
universe, local in space and local in time. The equation 
of uniform expansion is 


v= Aor (1) 


where v is recession velocity and r is distance from the 
observer. To measure the proportionality constant, we 
adopt a definition of the Hubble constant as the asymptotic 
value of the ratio of recession velocity to distance, in the 
limit that the effect of random velocities of galaxies is 
negligible. In galactic structure the velocity of the local 
standard of rest has wider significance for the dynamics 
of the Milky Way than the velocity of the Sun. We have 
to abstract the Hubble constant from local motions in a 
similar way. 

Existence proofs of the Hubble constant so defined, 
that we would still accept today, include the Hubble 
diagrams for cluster ellipticals (Gandage and Hardy 1973), 
for the Arecibo clusters (Aaronson and Mould 1986)! and 
for type Ia supernovae (Hamuy et al 1996). 

It is also desirable to employ the Hubble constant in 
models which apply to larger spatial and temporal scales. 
The present value of the Friedmann model's a/a, generally 
acknowledged as the standard model of the universe, is 
Hy. The expansion age of the universe is Hy" to a factor 
of order unity. If the standard model of cosmology were 
the Einstein—De Sitter model, then that factor would be 
two-thirds. 


How to measure the Hubble constant 

Three current schools of thought on this subject are 
represented in Critical Dialogues in Cosmology (Turok 
1996). Two of these schools see the CEPHEID PERIOD- 
LUMINOSITY RELATION for Cepheid variable stars as crucial 
for establishing the distances of galaxies within 20 Mpc, 
which then calibrate ‘standard candles’. These secondary 
distance indicators reach out into a region where an 
asymptotic ratio of recession velocity to distance can be 
sought. 


Supernova Ia standard candles 

The SUPERNOVA phenomenon results from instability in the 
equation of state of the degenerate material in the interior 
of WHITE Dwarrs. According to Branch and Tammann (1992) 
SNela are explosions of a standard maximum power. 
Cepheid distances can be measured to some of the host 
galaxies. 


The Hubble Space Telescope key project 

The key project strategy has been fully described by Ken- 
nicutt et al (1995), and involves calibration of the infrared 
TULLY-FISHER RELATION and the equivalent dynamical relation 
for ELLIPTICALGALAXIES, the (D,, o) relation. Also calibratable 


1 But note that velocity perturbations as large as 5% may exist on 
these scales (Lauer and Postman 1994). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from key project Cepheid distances are surface brightness 
fluctuations in galaxies, the globular cluster luminosity 
function, the planetary nebula luminosity function and the 
expanding photospheres method for type II supernovae. 


One-step methods 

Critics of both the above approaches point to the 
propagation of errors in a three-step ladder from 
trigonometric parallaxes to Cepheids to secondary 
distance indicators to Hy. One-step methods to determine 
Ho include GRAVITATIONAL LENSING of distant QUASARS 
by intervening mass concentrations, which results in 
measurable phase delays between images of the time- 
varying input signal from the source. Where these phase 
delays can be accurately determined, and when the model 
mass distribution can be uniquely inferred, they directly 
lead to z/Hp, where z is the REDsHIFT of the lens (Turner 
1997). 

Compton interaction between the microwave back- 
ground and hot gas in clusters of galaxies (the SUNYAEV- 
ZELDOVICH EFFECT) allows the physical size and distribution 
of the absorber/scatterer to be inferred, at least in projec- 
tion, if the properties of the hot gas are also constrained 
by direct detection in x-rays. A distance can be deter- 
mined by comparing the angular and physical projected 
size (Lasenby and Jones 1996). 


The Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) 

The LMC is an anchor-point of the extragalactic distance 
scale. From the LMC it is possible to calibrate essentially 
all of the secondary distance indicators using the Cepheid 
PL relation. 

The HIPPARCOS revision of the Cepheid PL relation, 
designated [H] in table 1, brings trigonometric PARALLAXES 
(Perryman et al 1997) to bear on the calibration in place 
of cluster main sequence fitting. Although this is a step 
forward in principle, the signal-to-noise of the parallax 
measurements, the short periods of the nearby Cepheids 
and the need for a fuller photometric study of the 
Hipparcos stars combine to render their impact on the 
problem uncertain at this stage. 

The HST key project has adopted an LMC distance 
modulus of 18.50+0.13 mag corresponding to 50+3.2 kpc. 
The adopted reddening is E(B — V) = 0.10 mag. 


Calibration of the Tully—Fisher relation 
The Tully-Fisher relation is a luminosity—linewidth 
correlation for SPIRALGALAXIES (Fisher and Tully 1977). Sakai 
et al (1999) present a calibration of BVRIH_o5 Tully—Fisher 
relations based on Cepheid distances to 21 galaxies within 
25 Mpc, and they go on to determine the Hubble constant 
based on 23 clusters of galaxies within 10000 km Sry 
Primarily, these are clusters studied by Giovanelli et al 
(1997). They obtain Hyp = 71+ 8 kms! Mpc"t. 

Like Giovanelli (1997), Sakai et al find that the effect of 
incompleteness biases in their sample is small (cf Sandage 
et al 1995, Teerikoorpi 1997) and correctable. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universal Distance Scale 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. The distance of the Large Magellanic Cloud. 


Distance indicator | m-M Reference 
RR Lyrae 18.5440.07 Walker (1992, 1993a, b) 
MACHO RR Lyrae 18.48+0.19 Alcock et al (1997) 
Cepheids 18.47+0.15 Feast and Walker (1987) 
Bump Cepheids 18.51+40.05 Wood et al (1997) 
Cepheids [H] 18.70+0.10 Feast and Catchpole (1997) 
Cepheids [H] 18.57+0.11 Madore and Freedman (1998) 
SN1987A 18.50+0.13  Panagia et al (1991) 
SN1987A [E] <18.44+0.05 Gould and Uza (1998) 
Red clump Stanek et al (1998) 
Eclipsing binaries 18.44+0.07 Pritchard et al (1998) 
Adopted 18.5+ 0.13 

The (D,, o) relation for ellipticals Type II 


The analogous scaling relation for elliptical galaxies relates 
velocity dispersion and isophotal diameter (Burstein et 
al 1987). Mould et al (1996) selected all the groups 
with four or more (D, o) measurements from Faber et 
al (1989) and renormalized their distances so that the 
geometric mean of that of the Fornax, Virgo and Leo 
groups was 15 + 1 Mpc, which is obtained purely from 
Cepheid distances. Kelson et al (1999) used a similar 
approach to calibrate the fundamental plane of radius, 
surface brightness and velocity dispersion. They obtained 
Hy = 78+10kms~' Mpc! froma sample of clusters with 
a mean redshift of approximately 6000 km Ssh 


Supernovae 


There has been significant progress in the discovery, 
analysis and understanding of supernovae in recent years, 
not least in the area of theoretical models (Hoflich and 
Khokhlov 1996). Supernovae of type I are explosions 
of hydrogen-poor degenerate material, and mark the 
endpoint of the evolution of a class of white dwarfs, 
probably accreting in BINARY SYSTEMS (see Branch (1998) for 
a review). 


Type la 

Independent analyses have teased out some of the 
systematic differences between these onetime ‘standard 
bombs’. Hamuy et al (1996) found improved fits on 
including decline rate as a parameter in their analysis of the 
HUBBLE DIAGRAM. Riess et al (1996) included intrinsic color in 
their analysis as well, and found further improvements 
in the model fit (but see Branch et al 1996). The data 
strongly reject the hypothesis that either or both of these 
dependences appear by chance. Calibration of this 
standard candle was initiated by Sandage et al (1994) with 
their distance to the host galaxy of SN 1937C. Gibson et 
al (1999) use the reddening corrected Hubble relations of 
Phillips et al (1999) and obtain Hp = 68 +6 km s~! Mpc", 
significantly higher than the results of Saha et al (1996a,b, 
1997). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A fundamental technique for distance determination in 
both expanding and radially pulsating objects is that 
pioneered by Baade and Wesselink, in which the angular 
size of the expanding photosphere is monitored by means 
of the associated flux and temperature variations, and the 
linear size is monitored by integrating the radial velocity 
variations. 

Although not blackbodies, as Baade and Wesselink 
assumed, Type II supernovae have photospheres whose 
emissivity can be calculated. Distances are derived from 
a comparison of photospheric angular diameter and the 
time-integrated expansion velocity (Kirshner and Kwan 
1974). In the work of Schmidt et al (1994) the expanding 
photosphere method (EPM) has been employed to cz = 
14600 km s7!. 

There is no evidence that any empirical recalibration 
of EPM is required at present by the Cepheid data. 
EPM provides independent and consistent constraints 
on the Hubble constant, currently yielding Hy) = 73 + 
11 km s7! Mpc". 


Surface brightness fluctuations 


Surface brightness fluctuations (SBF) in early-type galaxies 
result from the counting statistics of the number of stars 
in a galaxy encompassed by a detector pixel (Tonry and 
Schneider 1988). If N is the average number of stars in a 
pixel, and f is the average flux from a star, the average 
brightness in a pixel is 


L=Nf. (2) 


Since the number ina pixel of fixed angular size scales 
with distance as r? and the flux scales as r~?, this mean 
surface brightness is independent of distance. The local 
rms from pixel to pixel, however, is 


o=/Nf 3) 


and this scales as r~!: the smoothness of otherwise 
identical galaxies is proportional to distance. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universal Distance Scale 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


We can derive a distance from a measurement of both 
p and o, provided that we know the average luminosity 
L corresponding to f: 


B.S L 
f= wo Amr?" (4) 
The radial power spectrum of o/./w yields f for 
early-type galaxies in a relatively straightforward manner, 
although the presence of GLOBULAR CLUSTERS in these 
galaxies adds a source of noise and potential systematic 
error (Blakeslee and Tonry 1995). The quantity f has been 
measured at a number of wavelengths, and its behavior as 
a function of galaxy color is reasonably well understood 
(Worthey 1993, Pahre and Mould 1994, Ajhar 1993) in 
terms of giant branch systematics in stellar populations. 
It remains to calibrate L, and this has been done by Tonry 
et al (1997). Recently it has proved possible to employ the 
resolution of HST’s planetary camera (WFPC2) to measure 
surface brightness fluctuations to 7000 km s7! redshift 
(Thomsen et al 1997, Lauer et al 1998, Pahre et al 1998). 
Ferrarese et al (1999) find Hy) = 69 +7 kms7! Mpc’. 


Results from the HST key project 

We collect the results from calibrating five secondary 
distance indicators in table 2. There is good consistency 
between the results from widely different techniques, 
suggesting that the Hubble constant indeed lies between 
60 and 80 km s"! Mpc"!. The key project calibration is 
entirely based on the Cepheid period—luminosity relation. 
Combining the constraints from the first four entries in 
table 2 yields 71 km s"' Mpc7!. Correction for the 
rather shakily known chemical composition dependence 
of the period-luminosity relation decreases the key project 
estimate of Hy by 4% to 68 + 6 kms! Mpc". 


Table 2. The Hubble constant from secondary distance 
indicators. 


Indicator Ho (km s~! Mpc~?) 

Tully—Fisher 71+8 Sakai et al (1999) 
(Dn ©) 78 + 10 Kelson et al (1999) 
SBF 6947 Ferrarese et al (1999) 
SNIa 68 + 10 Gibson et al (1999) 
SNII 73 412 Schmidt et al (1994) 
Key project 68 + 6 Mould et al (1999) 


We caution the reader against the conclusion that the 
uncertainty in Hp can be estimated from the consistency of 
the results in table 2. Uncertainties such as the distance of 
the LMC affect all the entries in Table 2 systematically. 
Detailed distinctions between random and systematic 
errors have been made by Madore et al (1998), to which 
we refer the reader. 


Cepheid independent methods 

Gravitational lensing 

At the time Blandford and Narayan (1992) reviewed the 
cosmological applications of gravitational lensing, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


time delay for the prototype lensed QSO 0957+61 was 
still in dispute at the 30% level. A clear observational 
determination has now been made (Kundic et al 1998), 
leaving the accurate description of the gravitational 
potential of this lens as the principal source of uncertainty 
in the measurement of the Hubble constant from it. 
Finding a unique model of the mass distribution is in 
general a difficult task for a system to which a major 
galaxy, its perturbers and the common cluster halo can 
all contribute. Turner (2000) asserts that the model for 
0957+61 is robust and that the resulting Hy) = 64+ 
13 km s~* Mpc7? for Q = 1 represents 95% confidence 
limits. The cosmological geometry is not a major issue for 
this z = 0.36 lens, affecting Ho by +7% if Q = 0.1. 


Sunyaev-—Zeldovich effect 
The thermal bremsstrahlung luminosity of the hot gas in 
x-ray emitting clusters of galaxies is given by 


Ly =14 x 10°n2r3T)” ergs (5) 


where n, is the number density in the cluster core, r, is the 
core radius and T, is the temperature of the gas. 

The Compton effect of electron interactions with the 
microwave background radiation yields a temperature 
diminution of the radiation: 


kT, 
6T/T = —0.0128n.r,—,. (6) 
MeC 
One may then solve for r., whose angular diameter is also 
observable. According to Birkinshaw (1998) the current 
best fit to the clusters observed to that date is for a Hubble 


constant of about 60 km s~! Mpc!. 


Do we live in a bubble? 

Apparently lower values of Hp from more distant probes 
of the expansion suggest a model with a locally low 
density of galaxies. There are, however, constraints on 
the hypothesis that we live in a bubble, which we should 
consider. These are the observational determinations that 
the expansion is linear on 100 to 1000 Mpc scales, such as 
the work of Sandage and Hardy (1973) on brightest cluster 
galaxies. 

More modern demonstrations include supernovae at 
intermediate distances and extension of the Tully—Fisher 
relation to 15000 km s7! (Dale et al 1999). These results 
limit the difference between the global and local values 
of the Hubble constant to a few per cent. The rarity of 
low-density bubbles is also attested by the microwave 
dipole anisotropy on degree scales. Wang et al (1998) find 
a robust upper limit on the global deviation from the local 
10* km s7! sphere of 10.5% in Hg with 95% confidence. 


The future 

The Hubble constant appears to be a quantity which is 
well defined on large scales. Homogeneity and isotropy 
suggest that we are measuring a property of the universe 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universal Distance Scale 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


at the current epoch and not some local ad hoc parameter. 
A number of projects therefore suggest themselves: 


e@ Microarcsecond astrometry from space will allow us to 
measure the trigonometric parallax of the LMC (Shao 
1999). A parallax based Cepheid PL relation would be a 
nearer-term goal, improving on the results of Hipparcos. 


@ Interferometric measurement of Cepheid angular diam- 
eter changes will yield geometrical distances to these 
standard candles. 


e The key project distances to galaxies in that program 
are now capable of improvement with infrared cameras 
on HST. This will essentially remove remaining 
uncertainties arising from extinction. 


@ One-step distance measurements which avoid the 
classical extragalactic distance scale will be further 
developed. The astrophysical models which describe 
rich clusters and galaxy lenses at large distances need to 
be probed in more detail. 


e@ Miyoshi et al (1995) have shown that H,O masers 
orbiting a massive compact object and following a 
Keplerian rotation curve provide a remarkably good fit 
to the radial and transverse motions of the components 
in NGC4258. There is potential in this technique to 
achieve higher precision and greater distances. 


Developments in the subject are logged by Huchra (1998). 


Acknowledgments 

I wish to acknowledge my fellow team members in 
the Hy key project. Team members include Shaun M 
Hughes, Fabio Bresolin, Shoko Sakai, Barry F Madore, 
Robert Hill, Laura Ferrarese, Holland C Ford, Garth 
D Illingworth, Daniel Kelson, John A Graham, Nancy 
Silbermann, Lucas Macri, Randy Phelps, Brad Gibson, 
John G Hoessel, Mingsheng Han, John P Huchra, Anne 
Turner, Abhijit Saha, Kim Sebo and Peter B Stetson. We 
are grateful to Brian Schmidt and John Tonry for their 
contributions. Much of the work presented in this paper 
is based on observations with the NASA/ESA Hubble 
Space Telescope, obtained by the Space Telescope Science 
Institute which is operated by AURA Inc under NASA 
contract no 5-26555. 


References 

Aaronson M and Mould J 1986 Astrophys. J. 303 1 

Ajhar E 1993 PhD Thesis MIT 

Alcock C et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 482 89 

Birkenshaw M 1998 Phys. Rep. 310 197 

Blandford R and Narayan R 1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 30 311 

Blakeslee J and Tonry J 1995 Astrophys. J. 442 579 

Branch D 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 17 

Branch D et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 470 L7 

Branch D and Tammann G 1992 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 30 359 

Burstein D et al 1987 Astrophys. J. (suppl) 64 601 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dale D et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 510 L11 

Faber S M et al 1989 Astrophys. J. (suppl) 69 763 

Feast M and Catchpole R 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 286 
Ll 

Feast M and Walker A 1987 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 25 
345 

Federspeil M, Sandage A and Tammann G 1994 Astrophys. 
J. 430 29 

Ferrarese L et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 529 745 

Fisher J R and Tully R B 1977 Astron. Astrophys. 54 661 

Gibson B et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 529 723 

Giovanelli R 1997 The Extragalactic Distance Scale ed 
M Livio, M Donahue and N Panagia (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) p 113 

Giovanelli R, Haynes M, Herter T, Vogt N, da Costa L, 
Freudling W, Salzer J and Wegner G 1997 Astron. J. 
113 53 

Gould A and Uza O 1998 Astrophys. J. 494 118 

Hamuy M, Phillips M, Suntzeff N, Schommer R, Maza J 
and Aviles R 1996 Astron. J. 112 2398 

Hoflich P and Khokhlov A 1996 Astrophys. J. 457 500 

Huchra J P 1998 http:/ /www.cfa-harvard/~huchra 

Kelson D et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 529 768 

Kennicutt R et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 498 181 

Kennicutt R, Freedman W and Mould J 1995 Astron. J. 110 
1476 

Kirshner R and Kwan J 1974 Astrophys. J. 193 27 

Kundic T, Turner E, Colley W, Gott J R, Rhoads J, Wang 
Y, Bergeron L, Gloria K, Long D, Malholtra S and 
Wambsganss J 1998 Astrophys. J. 482 75 

Lasenby A and Jones M 1996 The Extragalactic Distance Scale 
ed M Livio, M Donahue and N Panagia (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) p 76 

Lauer T and Postman M 1994 Astrophys. J. 425 418 

Lauer T et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 499 577 

Madore B and Freedman W 1998 Astrophys. J. 492 110 

Madore B et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 515 29 

Miyoshi M et al 1995 Nature 373 127 

Mould J, Sakai S, Hughes S and Han M 1996 The 
Extragalactic Distance Scale ed M Livio, M Donahue 
and N Panagia (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) p 158 

Mould J et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 529 786 

Pahre M and Mould J 1994 Astrophys. J. 433 567 

Pahre M et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 515 79 

Panagia N, Gilmozzi R, Macchetto D, Adorf H M and 
Kirshner R 1991 Astrophys. J. 380 L23 

Perryman et al 1997 Astron. Astrophys. 323 L49 

Phillips M et al 1999 Astron. J. 118 1766 

Pritchard J et al 1998 New Views of the Magellanic Clouds 
(ASP Conf. Ser.) ed YH Chu, J Hesser and N Suntzeff 
in press 

Riess A, Press W and Kirshner R 1996 Astrophys. J. 473 88 

Saha A, Sandage A, Labhardt L, Tammann G A, Macchetto 
F Dand Panagia N 1996a Astrophys. J. 466 55 

Saha A et al 1996b Astrophys. J. (suppl) 107 693 

Saha A et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 486 1 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universal Distance Scale 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Sakai S et al 1999 Astrophys. J. 529 698 

Sandage A and Hardy E 1973 Astrophys. J. 183 743 

Sandage A and Tammann G 1997 Critical Dialogues in 
Cosmology ed N Turok (Singapore: World Scientific) 
p 130 

Sandage A, Tammann G and Federspiel M 1995 Astrophys. 
J. 4521 

Sandage A et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 423 L14 

Schmidt B, Kirshner R and Eastman R 1992 Astrophys. J. 
395 366 

Schmidt B et al 1994 Astrophys. J. 432 42 

Shao M 1999 Space Interferometry Mission JPL 400-811 
(Pasadena: NASA) 

Stanek K, Zaritsky D and Harris J 1998 Astrophys. J. 500 
L141 

Teerikoorpi P 1997 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 101 

Thomsen B, Baum W, Hammergren M and Worthey G 1997 
Astrophys. J. Lett. 483 L37 

Tonry J 1996 The Extragalactic Distance Scale ed M Livio, 
M Donahue and N Panagia (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) p 300 

Tonry J and Schneider D 1988 Astron. J. 96 807 

Tonry J et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 475 399 

Turner E 2000 Gravitational Lensing: Recent Progress and 
Future Goals ed T Brainerd and C Kochanek in press 

Turok N 1997 Critical Dialogues in Cosmology (Singapore: 
World Scientific) 

Walker A 1992 Astrophys. J. 390 L81 

Walker A 1993b Astron. J. 105 527 

Walker A 1993b Astron. J. 106 999 

Wang Y, Turner E and Spergel D 1998 Astrophys. J. 498 1 

Wood P, Arnold A and Sebo K 1997 Astrophys. J. 485 L25 

Worthey G 1993 Astrophys. J. 409 530 


Jeremy Mould 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universal Time (UT) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Universal Time (UT) 


A measurement of time used for civil timekeeping and 
based on the Sun’s daily apparent motion. It is the mean 
solar time of the Greenwich meridian at 0° longitude. 
Universal Time replaced Greenwich Mean Time in 1928. 
In 1955 the International Astronomical Union defined a 
number of categories of Universal Time with increasing 
accuracy. UTO, the least accurate, is based on the optical 
observations of star transits at various observatories and 
represents the initial values of Universal Time. These 
values differ slightly from each other because of the effects 
of polar motion. By correcting for polar motion, UT1 
gives the precise angular coordinate of the Earth about its 
spin. UT2 derives from UT1 by taking into account annual 
changes in the Earth’s speed of rotation. Coordinated 
Universal Time is the international basis of civil and 
scientific time and is used for broadcast time signals. It is 
obtained from an atomic clock that is set to remain within 
+0.90 s to UT. In this way, the solar time that is indicated 
by Universal Time is synchronized with atomic time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Universe 


The sum of everything that exists and of which we can be 
aware; the entirety of space. There is a semantic difficulty 
in talking about the universe; on the one hand, we define 
it to be ‘everything’, but it may be (a) that our universe is 
finite, yet unbounded; (b) that the accessible universe is 
only a small part of a much larger entity, most of which 
we cannot observe; or (c) that there exist other universes 
of which we are not ‘aware’. 


See also: astrometry, astronomy, astrophysics. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Universe: 
Formation 


Simulations of Structure and Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Universe: Simulations of Structure 
and Galaxy Formation 


The current cosmogonic paradigm posits that structures 
in the universe (such as galaxies and clusters) originated 
from tiny density fluctuations generated around the time 
of the Big Bang and subsequently amplified by gravity. 
The precise origin of the primordial density fluctuations 
is uncertain. One possibility is that they were generated 
when the universe underwent a brief period of exponential 
expansion known as inflation, a tiny fraction of a second 
after the Big Bang. In the most successful model, the 
mass density of the universe is dominated by an exotic 
form of matter called cold dark matter which consists of 
elementary particles that do not make any contribution to 
the luminosity density of the universe. The predictions 
of this model have been set out extensively, using both 
analytic calculations and computer simulations, the latter 
having become increasingly important over the past 20 
years. The build-up of structure in a cold dark matter 
universe is hierarchical: small-mass objects are the first 
to condense out from the expanding universe at early 
times (high ReDsHFT), whilst more massive objects (such 
as rich clusters) form later by repeated mergers of smaller 
objects. Aremarkable confirmation of this framework was 
provided by the discovery, in 1992, of anisotropies in the 
temperature of the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND radiation 
(CMB) by the DMR instrument aboard the COBE satellite. 
The amplitude of these anisotropies was within a factor 
of two of the extant theoretical predictions. Spurred on 
by the deep images of the sky produced by the Hubble 
Space Telescope, which show galaxies as they were when 
the universe was only about 10% of its present age, a great 
deal of effort is now being directed towards modeling the 
formation and evolution of galaxies within the setting of 
cosmological structure formation in the dark matter. The 
dissipative gas dynamical processes involved in GALAXY 
FORMATION make this a challenging task that can only be 
tackled using either idealized models or large amounts of 
supercomputer time. 


The physics of galaxy formation 

Studies of the dynamics of galaxies confirm a fundamental 
inference made 25 years ago from studies of the 
kinematics of stars within galaxies: on scales larger 
than galactic nuclei, the dominant physical interaction 
is gravity. Furthermore, it is now well established that 
the predominant source of gravity is dark matter, that 
is matter that does not emit detectable electromagnetic 
radiation. Dark matter is now routinely ‘imaged’ through 
the phenomenon of GRAVITATIONAL LENSING, the relativistic 
deflection of the light from distant galaxies as it passes 
near an intervening cluster of galaxies. Independently of 
the exact identity of the dark matter, the dominance of 
gravity leads directly to a general scheme for structure 
formation, first outlined by Landau and Lifshitz in the 
1950s, rigorously developed by Peebles during the 1970s, 
and calculated in detail using computer simulations in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the 1980s and 1990s. The key concept is the gravitational 
instability experienced by small matter overdensities in 
the expanding universe. Matter fluctuations present in 
the early universe grow in amplitude approximately as a 
power-law in time and eventually collapse to form self- 
gravitating objects. 

The process of gravitational instability sets the scene 
for galaxy formation, the main physical ingredients of 
which are set out in figure 1. Although the precise 
details depend on the identity of the dark matter, under 
quite general conditions, galaxy formation is expected to 
proceed via a two-stage process originally outlined by 
White and Rees in 1978. First, gravitational instability 
acting on collisionless dark matter, results in the formation 
of self-gravitating dark matter haloes. Gas, initially 
well mixed with the dark matter, participates in this 
collapse, but it is heated by shocks to the thermal (or 
virial) temperature of the dark matter haloes. Second, 
the hot gas cools radiatively, on a time scale set by 
atomic physics, due to bremsstrahlung, recombination 
and collisionally excited line emission. The rate of 
cooling depends upon the density of electrons and atomic 
nuclei, and so it was most efficient at high redshift, when 
the universe was denser. (In practice, the heating and 
subsequent cooling of the gas may occur rapidly and 
chaotically, particularly in small galaxies.) Just prior to 
gravitational collapse, angular momentum is imparted 
on the generally aspherical perturbations by gravitational 
torques exerted by neighboring clumps, as proposed by 
Hoyle in 1948. Thus, the initial collapse generically 
results in the formation of a gaseous disk. Once the 
disk has become centrifugally supported, the material 
in it begins to fragment into stars by processes that are 
still poorly understood. In this simplified picture, the 
spheroidal components of galaxies form by mergers of disk 
galaxies whichjumble up the stellar orbits, disrupting their 
organized configuration. 

The scheme outlined above provides a natural 
explanation for why there are galaxies of two basic types: 
disks and spheroids. It also elegantly explains why 
there is a limit to the luminosity that galaxies attain at 
the present day. The most luminous galaxies form in 
the most massive dark matter haloes. These have only 
recently collapsed because, as is the case in most current 
models, the amplitude of mass fluctuations is smallest 
on large scales. At the high temperatures and low gas 
densities prevailing in recently formed structures, cooling 
is very inefficient and the gas has not had time to cool 
and fragment into stars over the lifetime of the universe. 
One problem of hierarchical structure formation models 
is that the number of low-mass haloes that form exceeds 
the number of faint galaxies seen in the local universe. 
However, a likely solution is that the feedback of energy 
into the cooled gas from early generations of stars will 
have acted as a self-regulating mechanism. This feedback 
prevents substantial star formation activity in shallow 
gravitational potential wells, thus causing most of the 
small-mass haloes to harbor extremely faint galaxies. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Simulations 


Formation 


of Structure and Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


¢ QUANTUM DENSITY FLUCTUATIONS} 


INFLATION 


{ PRIMORDIAL SPECTRUM OF FLUCTUATIONS ) 


DARK MATTER 


| 


= EXPANSION OF UNIVERSE) 


GRAVITATIONAL INSTABILITY 


FORMATION OF DEEP GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL WELLS 
DARK MATTER HALOES 


VIRIALIZATION 


[| RADIATIVE COOLING = ——=] 


| 


FEEDBACK PROCESSES | 


supernovae, stellar winds 


DISSIPATIVE 
GAS DYNAMICS 


| STAR FORMATION a 


Figure 1. The ingredients of the standard model for the formation of galaxies and cosmological structure. 


Cosmological structure formation 


The processes of gravitational instability and collapse, gas 
cooling and star formation operate under quite general 
conditions. A quantitative theory of galaxy formation, 
however, requires that two key cosmological questions 
be addressed: (i) what is the origin of primordial mass 
fluctuations and (ii) what is the identity of the dark matter? 
Significant progress towards answering these questions 
was made in the early 1980s, as the result of a fruitful 
interaction between particle physics and cosmology. 

The first influential idea of the ‘New Cosmology’ was 
proposed around 1980 by Alan Guth and extended by 
Andrei Linde. Searching for a solution to the ‘magnetic 
monopole problem’, Guth proposed that the universe 
had undergone a period of exponential expansion, or 
INFLATION, very soon after the Big Bang, triggered perhaps 
by the transition of a quantum field from a false to the 
true vacuum. Quantum fluctuations generated during 
this epoch would be swept across the event horizon 
and thus become established as classical ripples in the 
energy density of the universe. When they cross the 
horizon back again, their amplitude is independent of 
scale. Thus, the inflationary model predicts a scale- 
invariant power spectrum of primordial fluctuations, 
P(k) « k, with a Gaussian distribution of amplitudes. 
(More elaborate versions of the same idea can produce 
models whose power spectra have an exponent that differs 
slightly from unity.) The subsequent evolution of the 
fluctuations depends on the values of the cosmological 
density parameter, Qo, the Hubble constant, Ho, the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


COSMOLOGICAL CONSTANT, Ag, and the identity of the dark 
matter. 

The second key idea from the 1980s concerns the 
identity of the dark matter. The abundance of the 
light elements (H, D, He, Li) produced during Big Bang 
nucleosynthesis agrees with astronomical data only if 
the present-day density of baryons is low enough for 
deuterium to form in at least the abundance measured 
in primitive gas clouds at high redshift. The baryon 
density required for this is about one order of magnitude 
smaller than the total mass density of the Universe inferred 
through a variety of tests. Thus, a fundamental conclusion 
is that the dark matter must consist of non-baryonic 
elementary particles. 

Particle candidates for the dark matter are conve- 
niently classified into ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ varieties, a nomen- 
clature introduced by J R Bond around 1980. The pro- 
totype of a hot particle is a stable neutrino with a mass 
of the order of a few eV. (A single species of neutrino 
would give Q = 1 if its mass were approximately 30 eV 
and Hy = 50 kms“! Mpc7!.) Examples of cold particles 
include the least massive stable supersymmetric particle, 
the neutralino, and the much lighter axion. Cold particles 
are often referred to as weakly interacting massive parti- 
cles or WIMPs. There is a fundamental difference in the 
way in which galaxies are predicted to form in hot and 
cold dark matter cosmogonies, arising from the different 
damping mechanisms that affect the development of pri- 
mordial fluctuations in the two cases. If the universe were 
dominated by massive neutrinos, then fluctuations below 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: 
Formation 


Simulations of Structure and Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


some critical mass would be wiped out because the neu- 
trinos move at relativistic speeds in the early universe and 
rapidly free-stream out of overdense regions. For a single 
neutrino of mass 30 eV, this critical scale corresponds to a 
fluctuation wavelength of 


a> Mpc (1) 


where we have parametrized Hubble’s constant as Hp = 
100h km s“! Mpc7!. The power spectrum decays 
exponentially for wavenumbers k > k,. 

In the case of cold dark matter, the damping of density 
fluctuations is much less severe. The free-streaming 
scale of cold dark matter is many orders of magnitude 
smaller than that of hot dark matter, and so this effect 
is not important. The most relevant damping process is 
the Mezaros effect, whereby oscillations in the radiation 
energy density stifle the growth of matter fluctuations. 
This situation persists until the energy density of matter 
dominates over that of the radiation, which occurs after a 
redshift of 1+ z.4 = 23 900Q2h?. The size of the horizon at 
this epoch is imprinted upon the cold dark matter power 
spectrum, marking the turnover of the primordial form, 
P(k) « k, to the damped fluctuation spectrum which 
asymptotes to P(k) « k~3 at small scales. 

In neutrino dominated models, the first structures 
that form are flat, pancake-like objects of mass comparable 
to that enclosed within the critical free-streaming scale, 
corresponding approximately to 10'°Mo. These are objects 
of supercluster scale which must somehow subsequently 
fragment, in a ‘top-down’ fashion, in order for galaxies to 
form. Early computer N-body simulations of this process 
carried out by Frenk, White and Davis in 1983 showed that 
for a neutrino dominated universe not to exceed the level 
of clustering measured in the galaxy distribution today, 
galaxies would need to form at redshifts z < 1. Yet, it 
was already known at that time that quasars can have 
much higher redshifts than this and, today, we know that 
there is a large population of galaxies already established 
at z = 3-5. Thus, although rather appealing at first sight, 
neutrino dominated universes with Gaussian primordial 
fluctuations were soon abandoned. 

The alternative, a cold dark matter universe, proved 
to be much more successful, as discussed, for example, ina 
series of papers in the 1980s based on N-body simulations, 
by Davis, Efstathiou, Frenk and White. The defining 
property of the fluctuation spectrum in a cold dark matter 
universe is that small-scale perturbations are preserved. 
Thus, subgalactic mass haloes are the first to collapse and 
separate out from the expansion of the universe. These 
haloes then grow, either gradually by accreting smaller 
clumps, or in big jumps by merging with other haloes 
of comparable size. The timetable for the formation 
of structure in a universe dominated by cold particles 
is hierarchical or ‘bottom-up’—small objects form first, 
larger objects form later. The cold dark matter fluctuation 
power spectrum thus specifies completely the evolution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the merging hierarchy of dark matter haloes into which 
the baryons must fall in order to make the galaxies. 

Currently, the most successful version of the cold dark 
matter model has around 30% of the critical density in cold 
matter and 70% in the form of a vacuum energy density 
or cosmological constant term, so that the universe has a 
spatially flat geometry. This model is in good agreement 
with a range of observational data: the amplitude of the 
angular power spectrum of temperature fluctuations in 
the cosmic microwave background (including the location 
of the first ‘Doppler’ peak), the abundance of clusters of 
galaxies ranked by their x-ray luminosity, the clustering 
of galaxies on large scales, and the expansion rate of 
the universe as deduced from the brightness of distant 
supernovae. 

The recent detection of oscillations in neutrino flavour 
by the Super-Kamiokande experiment, which require the 
neutrino to have a non-zero mass, has rekindled interest 
in the possibility that neutrinos might, after all, make 
some contribution to the density of the universe. In order 
to avoid the problems faced by a universe dominated 
by hot dark matter outlined above, most of the mass in 
the universe must still consist of cold dark matter, with 
neutrinos providing only a minority contribution. Such 
‘mixed’ dark matter models have not proved as successful 
at matching the data as the pure cold dark matter 
model. Another possibility for accommodating massive 
neutrinos is to replace inflation with a different mechanism 
for generating primordial density fluctuations. Tom 
Kibble suggested in the 1980s that TOPOLOGICAL DEFECTS IN 
COSMOLOGY might arise during phase transitions in scalar 
fields present in the early universe. Certain classes of 
defects, such as strings and textures, can act as seeds 
onto which matter gravitates, generating inhomogeneities 
in the mass density of the universe. These have the 
defining feature of being non-Gaussian. Unfortunately, 
modeling the formation of structure in defect models has 
turned out to be more complicated than in the Gaussian 
case because, amongst other subtleties, the properties of 
the defects themselves evolve with time. Defect models 
have not yet been explored with the same degree of rigor 
as the cold dark matter model. However, the current 
indications are that they have difficulties reproducing the 
spectrum of temperature anisotropies measured in the 
cosmic microwave background radiation. Thus, from 
a cosmological point of view, the oscillation data are 
best accommodated if the neutrino mass is very small 
(much less than 1 eV), so that neutrinos make a negligible 
contribution to the cosmic mass budget. 


Computer simulations of galaxy formation 

The remarkable developments of the past 15 years—the 
idea of cosmic inflation, the cold dark matter model, the 
discovery of ripples in the microwave background, and the 
observations of galaxies at high redshift—have laid down 
very solid foundations on which to build an understanding 
of galaxy formation. The ‘initial conditions’ for the 
evolution of the dominant dark matter component and its 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: 
Formation 


Simulations of Structure and Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ACDM 


SCDM 


TCDM 


OCDM 


Z=1 z=0 


Figure 2. The formation of structure in N-body simulations of representative cosmological volumes of the universe. The intensity of 
the shading indicates the density of cold dark matter. Each row shows results from different versions of the cold dark matter model. 
The top row is a flat universe with Qo = 0.3 and a cosmological constant; the middle two rows are Qo = 1 universes, with different 
power spectra; the bottom row is an open universe with Qo = 0.4. The images, from left to right, show the evolution of structure in 
each model as a function of redshift. The present day corresponds to z = 0 while z = 3 corresponds to the epoch when the universe 
was approximately 15% of its current age. (Courtesy of the VIRGO Consortium for Cosmological N-body Simulations.) 


subsequent gravitational evolution are well understood. 
Yet formulating an ab initio theory of galaxy formation 
and evolution over 10 billion years of cosmic history 
remains a tall order. The main stumbling block is our 
poor understanding of the behavior of cosmic gas— 
most probably a complex, dynamic, multiphase medium, 
of the physics of star formation, and of the feedback 
between the two mediated by winds from massive stars 
and supernovae explosions. The best way to address 
these issues is through extensive computer simulation and 
modeling. 

The basis for present-day cosmological simulations is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the N-body technique, which has been very successfully 
applied to modeling the evolution of collisionless dark 
matter. Using various computationally efficient methods, 
the computer solves the coupled equations of motion 
of N particles, interacting only through gravity, in the 
expanding universe. Progress over the past two decades 
has been driven mainly by dramatic improvements in 
the speed and memory of computers. By way of 
illustration, the early simulations of the cold dark matter 
cosmogony in 1985 employed 32768 particles. In 1999, 
the largest simulations performed on massively parallel 
supercomputers (using essentially the same algorithms as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Simulations of Structure and Galaxy 


7 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
Formation 


Figure 3. A high-resolution simulation of the formation of a single dark matter halo in a cold dark matter universe. The brighter colors 
indicate higher densities of dark matter. The sequence shows a series of snapshots of the evolution of the halo, at the redshifts 
indicated in the legend. The present-day halo displays a significant amount of substructure within its virial radius. (Courtesy of Ben 
Moore, Joachim Stadel, Tom Quinn and George Lake.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 69. 


those of the 1980s) can follow the evolution of 10° particles. cold dark matter model, differing only in the values of the 
cosmological parameters, 2 and A. At the present day, the 

Snapshots from simulations of representative, cosmo- _—_ dark matter is arranged in a complex network of voids, fil- 
logical volumes are displayed in figure 2. This figure il- | aments and super-clusters (dubbed the ‘Cosmic Web’ by 
lustrates the evolution of structure in four versions of the | Bond, Kofman and Pogosyan). It is similar in all the sim- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 5 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Universe: Simulations of Structure and Galaxy 
Formation 
fraction of age of universe 
ow i>] Ww Oo 
ex 8 a = 
“Oo oO oO oO 
ley Cla 7 
n 
Cc 
o 
ao} 
c 
) 
oe 
F 
Q 
) 
ror 
ey 
© 
aes) 
n 


Figure 4. The star formation history of the universe. The curve 
shows the theoretical prediction for a cold dark matter universe, 
from the Durham semi-analytic model of galaxy formation. The 
points show a selection of recent observational determinations 
of the star formation rate density expressed in units of the 
present-day value. 


ulations, partly because the amplitude of the initial fluc- 
tuation spectrum was adjusted so that all models would 
approximately reproduce the observed local abundance of 
hot, x-ray emitting clusters. (In addition, the initial fluctu- 
ations were set up with the same random phases in all the 
simulations, so that structures form at the same locations 
within each volume.) The development of structure pro- 
ceeds at different rates in the different cosmological mod- 
els. In those with a low value of Q (top and bottom rows in 
figure 2), the formation of structure is essentially frozen at 
high redshift, whereas in the models with Q = 1, growth 
continues to the present. This merely reflects the fact that 
low-density universes expand more rapidly at late times, 
with the result that the expansion overwhelms the accre- 
tion of matter onto overdensities which lies at the root of 
their growth. 

Simulations of sufficient size to resolve the internal 
structure and dynamics of dark matter haloes have 
recently become possible. The largest of these employ 
several million particles to model the formation of a single 
halo, revealing the existence of a rich substructure of 
lumps within the virial radius (figure 3). The simulations 
show that there is a remarkable uniformity in the density 
structure of dark matter haloes: over a wide range of 
scales, the spherically averaged halo density profile in 
follows a simple form proposed by Navarro, Frenk and 
White in 1996: 


1 
r/r;1+[r/rs]}?) 
where r; is a scale length related to the density of the 
universe at the time when the halo formed. This functional 


form appears to be universal, independent of the choice of 
halo mass, power spectrum or cosmological parameters. 


p(r)« (2) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The N-body technique can be augmented with 
numerical hydrodynamic methods to model the evolution 
of gas subject to cooling and heating processes and coupled 
gravitationally to the dark matter. Two such methods are 
currently in use: Eulerian methods (including adaptive 
mesh refinements in some cases) and a Lagrangian 
scheme known as smoothed particle hydrodynamics. The 
two techniques have advantages and disadvantages, but 
so far the latter has proved to be the best suited to 
studying galaxy formation, because of the formidable 
dynamic range in thermodynamic quantities involved 
in the problem. At present, most progress has been 
achieved in modeling the physics of primitive gas clouds 
at high redshift, the so-called LYMAN ALPHA FOREST, detected 
observationally as absorption lines in the spectrum of 
distant quasars. The first simulations capable of following 
the evolution of gas to the present, with enough resolution 
to model the brightest galaxies, are now being carried 
out by various groups around the world. Currently, 
only a subset of the relevant gas physics, such as the 
shock heating of gas within dark matter haloes and its 
subsequent radiative cooling, are treated reliably. 

A complementary technique for simulating galaxy 
formation ab initio, known as semi-analytic modeling, 
was developed in the 1990s by researchers at Durham 
and Munich. The main difference with the direct 
simulation approach is the abandonment of the ideal 
of solving the equations of hydrodynamics directly, 
in favor of a simple, spherically symmetric model in 
which the gas is assumed to have been fully shock- 
heated to the equilibrium temperature of each halo, from 
where its cooling and accretion onto the halo can be 
accurately calculated. This simplification speeds up the 
calculations enormously and has the added advantage of 
bypassing resolution considerations which are one of the 
main limiting factors of full hydrodynamic simulations. 
Phenomenological models of star formation, feedback 
and metal enrichment by supernovae are included in the 
semi-analytic program, through simple scaling relations. 
The semi-analytic machinery may be grafted onto haloes 
grown in a cosmological N-body simulation or onto 
haloes whose formation histories have been generated 
using a Monte Carlo approach. The models describe the 
entire star formation and merger history of the galaxy 
population. The free parameters of the model, which, 
perhaps surprisingly, are rather few in number, can be 
set by requiring a good match to a selection of properties 
of the local galaxy population, such as its luminosity 
distribution. This results in a fully specified model that 
provides an ideal tool for comparing the predictions of 
the cold dark matter theory with observations of the high 
redshift universe. 


Confronting the high-redshift universe 

The combination of direct simulations and semi-analytic 
modeling has revealed in detail the manner in which 
galaxies are expected to form in the cold dark matter 
model. The picture that emerges is one of gradual 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Simulations of Structure and Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Formation 


Figure 5. The evolution of clustering in the dark matter and galaxies. The left-hand panel shows an N-body simulation of a flat, 
low-density, cold dark matter universe with a cosmological constant, in a cube of comoving side 141h~! Mpc, at z = 3. The right-hand 
panel shows the same simulation evolved to the present day. The gray scale indicates the density of the dark matter. Dark matter 
haloes in the simulation have been ‘populated’ with galaxies using a semi-analytic model of galaxy formation. The color of each spot 
reflects the color of each model galaxy, which is sensitive to the star formation rate. The size of the spot increases with the absolute 
luminosity of the galaxy. The inset shows the development of a cluster of galaxies. (Courtesy of Andrew Benson, Shaun Cole, CSF, 
CMB and Cedric Lacey.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plates 70 and 71. 


evolution punctuated by major merging events that are 
accompanied by intense bursts of star formation and 
which trigger the transformation of disks into spheroids. 
Galaxy formation stutters into action around z ~ 5. Onlya 
tiny fraction of the stars present today would have formed 
prior to that time. By z ~ 3, the epoch when galaxies 
isolated by the ‘Lyman-break’ technique! are observed, 
galaxy formation has started in earnest, even though only 
10 per cent of the final population of stars has emerged. 
The midway point is not reached until about a redshift 
of 1-1.5, when the universe was approximately half of 
its present age. These theoretical predictions are shown 
in figure 4. Observationally, the star formation rate per 
unit volume can be inferred from the density of ultraviolet 
radiation, which is a measure of the number of high-mass, 
short-lived stars. Estimates of the star formation density 
based on data taken by ground-based telescopes and by the 
Hubble Space Telescope are shownas the points in figure 4. 
The major uncertainty in the interpretation of these data 
is the obscuring effect of dust, a modest amount of which 
has been allowed for in the models. But unless this effect 
turns out to be much stronger than anticipated, the theory 
and data in figure 4 suggest that we have now tracked 


1 The so-called ‘Lyman-break’ galaxies are detected in passbands 
above the redshifted Lyman-limit at 912 A and undetected in 
passbands below this limit; the strength of the Lyman-limit break 
is enhanced by absorption due to cold gas in the galaxy and in 
clouds along the line of sight. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


most of the star formation activity, and the associated 
production of chemical elements, over the entire lifetime 
of the universe. 

Asecond important prediction of the cold dark matter 
theory concerns the clustering properties of galaxies at 
high redshift. At the heart of the hierarchical clustering 
process lies the fact that galaxies tend to form first near 
high peaks of the density field because these are the 
first to collapse at any given epoch. This predilection 
for high-density regions is known as ‘biased galaxy 
formation’ (a term introduced by M Davis in 1985), 
because the distribution of galaxies offers a biased view 
of the underlying distribution of mass. An important 
consequence of biased galaxy formation is that bright 
galaxies tend to be born in a highly clustered state and 
remain so for long periods of time. The process of biased 
galaxy formation is illustrated in figure 5. The left-hand 
panel shows a snapshot of an N-body simulation of a 
cold dark matter universe at z = 3, whilst the right-hand 
panel shows the same simulation evolved to the present. 
The semi-analytic model of galaxy formation has been 
implemented in the dark matter haloes identified in the 
simulation at each redshift, in order to populate them with 
galaxies. Galaxies that are bright enough to be detected 
at z = 3 may be seen to form at the locations where the 
dark matter density (depicted by the gray scale) is highest. 
Observational confirmation of this clustering prediction 
came with the discovery that the population of galaxies at 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: 
Formation 


Simulations of Structure and Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


z ~ 3 identified by the Lyman-break technique is about as 
strongly clustered as bright galaxies are today. The relative 
clustering strengths of galaxies and dark matter evolve 
quite differently. The right-hand panel of figure 5 shows 
that the dark matter is much clumpier today than it was at 
z = 3. On the other hand, the clustering pattern of galaxies 
has hardly changed over this long period of time. Galaxies 
today are found in a wide range of environments and have 
a clustering amplitude similar to that of the dark matter. 
This was not the case at high redshift when bright galaxies 
were much more strongly clustered than the dark matter— 
in other words, when they were very strongly biased. 


The next steps 

The two areas of agreement between theory and data 
highlighted here—the cosmic history of star formation and 
the clustering of high-redshift galaxies—are particularly 
noteworthy because they concern fundamental aspects of 
the theory. The broad agreement between models and data 
suggests that the main ingredients of a coherent picture of 
galaxy formation are now in place. These ingredients are: 
primordial Gaussian density fluctuations; collisionless, 
non-baryonic dark matter; gravitational instability; and 
the growth of galaxies by hierarchical clustering. There 
are justifiably high expectations for the next decade. The 
number of 10 m class telescopes is proliferating: the 
first of the four European Space Observatory ‘Very Large 
Telescopes’ came into full operation in 1999, the same 
year in which the Gemini and Subaru telescopes first saw 
light. Other large telescopes are under construction in 
the USA and Spain. The middle of the first decade of 
the new century should also see the launch of NASA's 
Next Generation Space Telescope, that will search for 
galaxies out to a redshift of 10, and ESA’s Planck Surveyor, 
that will map the microwave background radiation with 
unprecedented precision. Towards the end of the decade, 
the ‘Large Millimeter Array’, sponsored by a major 
international partnership, is scheduled to come into 
operation in the Chilean desert. It will search for galaxy 
formation at high redshift and examine star formation 
in nearby galaxies in the still relatively unexplored sub- 
millimeter waveband. Ultimately, the cornerstone upon 
which much of modern cosmology rests is the idea that 
the universe is dominated by non-baryonic dark matter. 
Experiments under way in the UK, Italy and the USA stand 
a good chance of detecting it, if it really exists, within the 
next few years. This will no doubt count as one of the 
most exciting discoveries in the history of science. For 
their part, theorists will not be standing still. Increased 
computing power, more efficient algorithms and, above 
all, a better understanding of the astrophysics of galaxy 
formation, are likely to result in a pretty good imitation, 
by computer, of the processes through which galaxies in 
our universe formed. 


Bibliography 


A pedagogical discussion (at an advanced level) of the 
physics of structure formation in the expanding universe 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and of the processes that play a role in galaxy formation 
may be found in: 


Peacock J A 1999 Cosmological Physics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


Numerical simulations are reviewed in: 
Bertschinger E 1998 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36 599-654 


Some of the observational data discussed in this article are 
reviewed in: 


Ellis RS 1997 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 35 389-443 


Carlton M Baugh and Carlos S Frenk 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Thermal History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Universe: Thermal History 


HUBBLE’S discovery of the expansion of the universe in 1929 
revealed our beginning from a much smaller and much 
denser initial state (BIG BANG THEORY). Penzias and Wilson’s 
discovery of the COSMIC MICROWAVE BACKGROUND radiation 
(CMBR) in 1964 implied further that just after creation 
the universe was a hot soup of the fundamental particles 
whose dynamics was controlled by the energy density of 
the CMBR. 

The microwave radiation that A A PENzIAs and R W 
WILSON discovered is more precisely BLACK-BODY RADIATION 
characterized by a temperature of around 3 K. Because 
this black-body radiation fills space and its photons 
outnumber all other photons and known particles by 
a billion to one, it sets the average temperature of the 
universe. Of course, many hotter places exist in the 
cosmos—stars, planets and even the interstellar medium. 
As the universe expands its temperature decreases 
inversely as its linear size. While the temperature today 
seems unimportantly small, the fact that the universe still 
has a measurable temperature means that it was incredibly 
hot in the beginning. 

The thermal history of the universe is thus the story 
of what happens when a tremendously hot and dense 
plasma expands and cools. Understanding the very 
earliest moments requires knowledge of the fundamental 
particles and their behavior under extreme conditions 
(high densities and temperatures). The connection 
between the inner space of elementary particle physics 
and the deep outer space of cosmology which plays such 
an important role in cosmology today was born with the 
discovery of the CMBR. 


The known thermal history 
The hot Big Bang cosmological model (see cosmMoLocy: 
STANDARD MODEL) provides an account of the universe from 
the hot soup of quarks, gluons, leptons and photons that 
existed before 10~° s, when the transition from quarks and 
gluons to neutrons, protons and related particles occurred, 
until the present. During much of the time the universe 
was in a state of near thermal equilibrium; needless to 
say, the departures from thermal equilibrium are very 
important and make the universe an interesting place 
today! As the universe expanded, it cooled, T « 1/R(t), 
where R(t) is the cosmic scale factor which sets the size of 
the universe. As it cooled, layer upon layer of structure 
evolved, beginning with the neutrons and protons being 
produced from quarks culminating with the building of 
the largest structures seen today, the great walls of galaxies. 
During its earliest moments, the temperature was 
the key to describing the state of the universe, because 
it sets the level of thermal particle energies. The thermal- 
energy scale kgT ~ 1 MeV (7/10! K) determines when 
it is energetically favorable for the next layer of structure 
to form, and which particle species are present in great 
number. When kgT was much greater than the rest mass 
of a particle, it and its antiparticle were easily produced in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pairs and were present in the thermal soup in numbers 
comparable to photons. During the radiation era, the 
thermal-energy scale and age of the universe were related 
by: kgT ~ 1 MeV Vt (ins). 

The soup of particles that existed at 10~° s consisted of 
the up, down and strange quarks and their antiparticles; 
electrons, electron neutrinos, muons, muon neutrinos, tau 
neutrinos and their antiparticles; eight types of gluons and 
photons (the eight massless gluons are the carriers of the 
strong color force). The thermal-energy scale at this time 
was about 200 MeV (T ~ 2 x 10!" K), and the other quarks 
(charm, bottom and top) and the tau lepton were too heavy 
to be pair produced and were not present (any present 
would have annihilated). At even earlier times, when it 
was hotter, they (and possibly other particles) would have 
been present in great numbers too. 

According to quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the 
theory of the strong color force, a phase transition from 
a quark-gluon plasma to hadronic matter occurred at a 
temperature of around 10” K. Because of the increasing 
strength of the color force with distance, all particles with 
color (quarks and gluons) became confined in colorless 
quark triplets (neutrons, protons and other particles, 
known as baryons) and quark—antiquark pairs (pions, 
kaons and other particles, known as mesons). Collectively, 
the mesons and baryons are known as hadrons; the 
hadrons are the particles that experience the strong nuclear 
force. 

At the end of the phase transition from quarks and 
gluons to hadronic matter, almost all the hadrons were 
too heavy to be pair produced. They could, of course, 
still annihilate, and as the temperature approached 10"! K 
annihilations had eliminated almost all of the hadrons. 
Were it not for the slight excess of baryons over antibaryons 
(whose origin is still a mystery, but see next section), 
nucleons (neutrons and protons) would have annihilated 
and disappeared too. The one additional nucleon for every 
billion or so antinucleons, left a few nucleons for every 
several billion photons without antinucleon partners to 
annihilate with. The primordial excess of baryons over 
antibaryons is responsible for all the ordinary matter that 
exists in the universe today. 

At an age of about 1s and temperature of about 10° K, 
the primary constituents of the universe were photons, 
electron—positron pairs, and neutrinos and antineutrinos 
of all three species. There were also a few nucleons for 
every ten billion or so photons, about equally divided 
between neutrons and protons. Over the next 200 s or so, 
a sequence of nuclear reactions occurred out of thermal 
equilibrium and synthesized about 25% of the nucleons 
into “He. Trace amounts of D (a few parts in 10°) and 7He 
(about one part in 10°) escaped being incorporated into *He 
anda tiny amount of ’Li (a few parts in 10'°) was produced. 
The other 75% of the nucleons remained as free protons. 
This series of events is known as Big Bang NUCLEOSYNTHESIS 
(BBN). The rest of the periodic table was produced billions 
of years later by nuclear reactions in stars. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Thermal History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Big Bang nucleosynthesis occurred rapidly and at low 
density (around 10~? g cm~°), while the rest of the elements 
were cooked more slowly and at higher density (around 
10? g cm™ or higher) in stars and stellar explosions. This 
explains the great differences in the nuclear yields of 
the Big Bang and stellar nucleosynthesis. In particular, 
Coulomb barriers and the lack of stable nuclides of mass 
5 and 8 prevented BBN from producing elements beyond 
"Li. 

Big Bang nucleosynthesis provides the earliest test of 
the standard cosmology as well as a probe of conditions in 
the early universe. The fact that the pattern of abundances 
seen in the most primitive samples of the cosmos is 
consistent with its predictions is one of the experimental 
cornerstones of the standard cosmology. Further, the exact 
yields of the light elements, most especially deuterium, 
depend upon the baryon mass density; from recent 
measurements of the primeval deuterium abundance in 
high-redshift clouds of largely unprocessed hydrogen, we 
can infer that ordinary matter (i.e. matter comprised of 
neutrons and protons) today contributes between about 
4% and 6% of the critical density. (The average density of 
the universe determines its curvature: a critical-density 
universe is spatially flat; a subcritical-density universe 
is open or negatively curved and a supercritical-density 
universe is closed or positively curved.) Because BBN 
‘weighs’ all the ordinary matter at a simpler time, it 
provides the most accurate determination of the amount 
of ordinary matter. Today, baryons exist in many forms— 
bright stars, faint stars including white dwarfs and black 
holes, clouds of cold gas and of hot gas, and dust—and 
are more difficult to inventory. Thus far, only about one- 
third of the BBN-determined baryon abundance has been 
directly accounted for. 

Light-element production also depends upon the 
ambient conditions in the universe, and Big Bang 
nucleosynthesis can thus also be used as a probe of 
the particle soup that existed then. For example, the 
existence of an additional neutrino species beyond the tau 
neutrino would have led to additional *He production, in 
contradiction to the observations. This argument against 
the existence of another neutrino species was put forth 
in the 1980s by David scHRAMM and his collaborators and 
was confirmed by experiments at particle accelerators in 
the 1990s. 

Two other important thermodynamical events took 
place during Big Bang nucleosynthesis. At a tempera- 
ture of around 10”° K neutrinos and antineutrinos (all three 
species) ceased interacting with electron—positron pairs 
and decoupled from the electromagnetic plasma. There- 
after, they evolved independently of the rest of the uni- 
verse, interacting only through gravity. Neutrino decou- 
pling occurred because the decreasing particle energies 
and densities made neutrino interactions with other par- 
ticles increasingly infrequent. When the temperature was 
around 10° K, essentially all of the electrons and positrons 
disappeared as pairs destroyed by annihilations were no 
longer replenished by thermal pair creation. The slight 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


excess of electrons over positrons preserved the few elec- 
trons per ten billion photons required to balance the charge 
of the protons. The electron—positron annihilations raised 
the number of photons in the universe by a factor of 11/4 
and heated the photons slightly relative to the neutrinos; 
thereafter T, = (4/11)!9T. 

The radiation era ended when the universe was 
around 40000 years old and the temperature was about 
10000 K. At this epoch, called matter-radiation equality, 
the energy density contributed by matter (both baryons 
and exotic dark matter, more below) and that by relativistic 
particles (photons and three neutrino species) were equal. 
Thereafter, the matter density would exceed that of 
relativistic particles, growing in proportion to the linear 
size of the universe. (The matter density decreases as 
1/R(t)° due to the volume dilution effect of the expansion; 
the energy density of the CMBR decreases as 1/ R(t)*, with 
the extra factor of 1/R arising because photon energies are 
redshifted with the expansion.) Today, the energy density 
of matter is about a factor of 4000 times larger than that of 
the energy density of photons and neutrinos. 

The dawning of the matter era marked the beginning 
of the formation of large-scale structure in the universe 
(see also UNIVERSE: SIMULATIONS OF STRUCTURE AND GALAXY 
FORMATION). The small inhomogeneities in the distribution 
of the exotic matter that existed (spatial variations in the 
mass density at the level of about one part in 10°) began 
growing through the attractive force of gravity; prior to 
matter—radiation equality the universe was expanding too 
fast for this to occur. Their tight coupling to photons 
prevented baryons from participating in this growth. 

Shortly after the radiation era ended, at a time of 
around 400 000 years and a temperature of around 3000 K, 
two related and very significant events involving the 
radiation took place. The first was the transition from 
ionized matter to neutral matter (called ‘recombination’, 
which is paradoxical since neutral matter had not 
previously existed). As the temperature dropped below 
3000 K neutral matter became thermodynamical favored, 
and all but a few ions combined with the free electrons 
to form neutral atoms (a residual ionization fraction 
of around 10-* persisted thereafter because ions and 
electrons became too rare to find one another to combine 
to form atoms). When the universe became neutral, its 
opacity dropped precipitously (free electrons efficiently 
scatter light, neutral atoms do not), and matter and 
radiation decoupled. Photons streamed freely and have 
not scattered since; this important event is referred to 
as last scattering. Once baryons decoupled, they were 
rapidly pulled into the cosmic structures being formed by 
the gravity of the exotic dark matter. 

The black-body character of the radiation, established 
by the hot, dense conditions in the early universe, was 
preserved by the expansion of the universe (the deep 
mathematical reason involves the conformal invariance 
of Maxwell’s equations and the conformal nature of the 
expansion), albeit with a decreasing temperature, T « 
1/R(t)). Today, this black-body radiation, which at last 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Thermal History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


scattering resembled the light emitted by the Sun today, 
has been redshifted to the microwave part of the spectrum. 
In 1996, the far infrared absolute spectrophotometer 
(FIRAS) instrument on the Cosmic Background Explorer 
(cose) satellite made the most precise measurement of its 
temperature, T = 2.7277 + 0.002 K, and showed that any 
deviations from a perfect black-body spectrum are smaller 
than 0.005%. Because there is no other viable mechanism 
for producing such perfect black-body radiation, the 
spectrum of the CMBR is one of the experimental pillars 
of the hot Big Bang cosmology. 

The radiation in the CMBR has not scattered since 
the universe was 400000 years old, and so it provides a 
snapshot of the universe at a simpler time, when matter 
was still nearly uniformly distributed and stars, galaxies 
and clusters of galaxies did not exist. The variations 
in the intensity (or temperature) of the CMBR across 
the sky today map the two-dimensional distribution of 
matter at this time because variations in the mass density 
produce temperature variations of the same size. Thus, 
the temperature variations of a few parts in 10° measured 
by the differential microwave radiometer (DMR) on 
the COBE satellite and other balloon and ground-based 
experiments imply the existence of variations in the matter 
density of approximately the same size. This level of 
inhomogeneity is just what is needed to produce the large- 
scale structure seen today—provided that the bulk of the 
matter is exotic dark matter and not baryons (more below). 
The variations (or anisotropy) of the CMBR also encode a 
wealth of information about the early universe and how 
large-scale structure formed. Higher precision and higher 
angular-resolution measurements will be made by future 
experiments including NASA’s MAP satellite (scheduled 
for launch in late 2000) and ESA’s PLANCK SURVEYOR Satellite 
(scheduled for launch in 2007). 

Three cosmic seas of thermal neutrinos should 
be with us today. Just as with the CMBR, the 
expansion of the universe maintained their thermal 
(Fermi—Dirac) distributions with a temperature that has 
decreased inversely with the cosmic scale factor since 
they decoupled. Because neutrinos did not share in the 
energy release from the electron—positron annihilations, 
the temperature of the neutrino seas is predicted to be 
smaller than that of the photons, 7, = 1.947 K. If they 
can be detected, these neutrinos will reveal the universe 
as it was about 1 s after the beginning. However, 
because low-energy neutrinos interact extremely weakly 
with ordinary matter their detection presents one of the 
greatest challenges in all of science. 


Beyond the standard cosmology: the very early 
universe 

The earliest history of the universe (before 10° s) is still 
a mystery, but is under intense study. The motivation 
is twofold: the hope that events which took place may 
explain some of the most pressing cosmological puzzles. 
For example, the reason for the small excess of matter 
over antimatter, the explanation for the regularity seen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


in the universe, and the origin of the primeval density 
inhomogeneities. The second motivation is the possibility 
that the early universe can be used to probe fundamental 
physics more deeply than particle accelerators and other 
Earth-based experiments. At the moment, the discussion 
of the universe at times earlier than 10~° s is speculative, 
both because of uncertainties about the microphysics 
needed to describe these early times and the absence 
of cosmological tests like Big Bang nucleosynthesis. In 
any case, the physics and the cosmology are of sufficient 
interest to merit the discussion of the possibilities. 

On fairly firm ground, the discussion of the thermal 
history of the universe can be extended back to around 
10-"' s when the temperature was about 10'° K. This was 
sufficiently hot that the thermal-energy scale exceeded 
the rest masses of all known particles. At this time the 
thermal soup should have included all the quark and 
lepton species, gluons, photons and the W* and Z° bosons, 
all in roughly equal abundance. 

The state of the universe earlier than this is much 
less certain. The prevailing belief is that a phase 
transition occurred and restored the full symmetry of the 
SU(2) ® U(1) gauge theory of the electroweak interactions. 
(SU(2) ®U(1) is the mathematical symmetry that underlies 
the unified theory of the electromagnetic and weak 
interactions.) At low temperatures the symmetry between 
the weak and the electromagnetic interactions is not 
manifest: the electromagnetic interaction has long range, 
while the weak interaction has very short range because 
the mediators of the weak force, the W* and Z° bosons, are 
very massive. The symmetry is said to be spontaneously 
broken, by the Higgs mechanism. When the symmetry is 
restored, all of the force mediators become massless. If the 
Higgs mechanism is correct, then there is at least one more 
spin-zero particle species, the Higgs boson, whose rest 
mass is greater than about 100 GeV and probably less than 
300 GeV. Its discovery would be a striking confirmation 
of spontaneous symmetry breaking, and thus the Higgs 
is at the top of the ‘most wanted’ list at all accelerator 
laboratories. 

As successful as the electroweak theory is, it provides 
only a partial unification of the forces, leaving out the 
strong color force and gravity. One possibility is there 
are other levels of symmetry breaking and symmetry 
breaking phase transitions. The simplest idea, grand 
unification, unifies the color force with the electroweak 
force. Estimates for the temperature at which the grand 
unification phase transition might take place are even more 
uncertain, but are around 10” K, corresponding to a time 
of about 10-* s. 

Another interesting feature of symmetry breaking is 
the possibility that the phase transition did not occur 
smoothly and that ‘defects’ are created. (Such defects are 
known to be produced in phase transitions in condensed 
matter systems: vortices and magnetic flux tubes.) These 
so-called topological defects are concentrations of energy: 
point-like magnetic monopoles, one-dimensional cosmic 
string and two-dimensional domain walls. The kinds of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Thermal History 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


defects that can be produced depend upon the symmetry 
breaking pattern. Thus far, the cosmology of topological 
defects has not been promising: monopoles should 
have been grossly overproduced, domain walls have 
disastrous cosmological consequences, and cosmic string, 
once thought to be a possible seed for the formation of 
structure in the universe, predicts a pattern of CMBR 
anisotropy that is inconsistent with the measurements. 

A much more promising idea arising from the con- 
sideration of cosmological phase transitions is INFLATION. 
Inflation refers to an enormous burst of expansion which 
might have taken place very early on (probably earlier than 
about 10-* s). Because of its potential to explain a number 
of the most fundamental and most puzzling features of the 
universe, inflation has been the dominant theoretical idea 
in cosmology over the past 15 years. It can account for the 
smoothness of the universe, the origin of the primeval mat- 
ter inhomogeneity, the heat of the Big Bang, and the nature 
of the Big Bang itself. Originally inflation was thought 
to be driven by the latent heat (or false-vacuum energy) 
associated with a first-order phase transition. Most mod- 
els of inflation no longer involve a phase transition, but 
instead rely upon the potential energy of a fundamental 
scalar field. 

Besides inflation, the most compelling ideas of 
early-universe cosmology are particle dark matter and 
BARYOGENESIS. It has been known for more than 50 years 
that most of the matter that holds galaxies and clusters of 
galaxies together is not in the form of visible stars but is 
‘dark’ (i.e. does not emit or absorb detectable radiation 
of any form; see DARK MATTER: ITS NATURE). For at least a 
decade it has also been known that the total amount of 
dark matter exceeds by more than a factor of three the 
amount of matter in the form of baryons as determined 
from Big Bang nucleosynthesis. Further, with the level of 
inhomogeneity measured by COBE, the observed large- 
scale structure can only form if there is exotic dark matter. 
These facts are strong circumstantial evidence for a new 
form of matter in the universe. 

The most promising candidates for the dark matter 
are elementary particles that were present in copious 
numbers in the thermal soup early on and which failed 
to annihilate away because of the weakness of their 
interactions. Of all the possibilities considered, the three 
most attractive are neutrinos (if they have a small mass) 
and axions or neutralinos (if they exist). (The axion and 
neutralino are as yet hypothetical particles predicted to 
exist by theories that unify the particles and forces of 
nature.) 

Baryogenesis is a higher-level analog of Big Bang 
nucleosynthesis: BBN explains how baryons come 
together to make nuclei and baryogenesis hopes to explain 
the origin of the excess of quarks over antiquarks that leads 
to the existence of ordinary matter. The idea is that particle 
interactions that violate matter-antimatter symmetry and 
the conservation of baryon number and which occurred 
out of thermal equilibrium produced a slight excess of 
quarks over antiquarks. When the quarks formed into 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


neutrons and protons, this led to the excess of baryons over 
antibaryons needed to ensure the existence of the ordinary 
matter. 

The weak interactions violate matter—antimatter 
symmetry at a small level and are also predicted to violate 
baryon-number conservation through subtle quantum 
effects. Moreover, baryon-number non-conservation is 
a generic prediction of grand unified theories. While 
the details are not currently understood, nor is there 
any experimental evidence for the non-conservation of 
baryon number, nonetheless baryogenesis is a promising 
framework for understanding how the crucial excess of 
matter over antimatter arose. 

To date, superstring theory has been the most 
successful approach to the unification of gravity with 
the other forces. Superstring theory makes two generic 
predictions relevant for cosmology. First, the existence 
of a new symmetry of nature that relates fermions and 
bosons (supersymmetry), and second, the likely existence 
of additional spatial dimensions. Because the known 
particles of nature cannot be paired off as fermion—boson 
partners, supersymmetry requires the doubling of the 
number of fundamental particles. The superpartners, as 
they are called, are predicted to have rest energies of the 
order of 100 GeV. If correct, this implies a doubling of the 
number of particles in the primordial soup only occurs 
at temperatures greater than around 10" K. The lightest 
superpartner, usually the neutralino, is stable or very long- 
lived and has a rest energy of order 100 GeV. As mentioned 
above, it is a prime candidate for particle dark matter. 

If there are extra spatial dimensions they must be 
‘small’ enough to have escaped detection or be otherwise 
hidden from us. Small here refers to their being curled 
up like the circular dimension of a straw. While many 
versions of superstring theory predict that the extra 
dimensions are exceedingly tiny—10-™ cm or smaller— 
some versions suggest that they might be as large as a 
millimeter in extent! The cosmological implications of 
extra dimensions are not well understood and raise a 
host of additional cosmological questions, for example the 
explanation for the size discrepancy between the familiar 
three spatial dimensions and the extra spatial dimensions. 

Even if superstring theory does not prove successful 
in unifying gravity with the other forces and in providing 
a quantum description of gravity, ‘interesting physics’ 
should have occurred at times earlier than 10-** s and 
temperatures greater than 10” K. This is the Planck era, 
the epoch when quantum gravitational effects should have 
been extremely important and the classical description 
of gravity given by general relativity should have been 
inapplicable. It could be that the universe achieved a 
limiting temperature due to the exponentially growing 
number of particle species (also a prediction of string 
theory), or that space-time dissolves into a foam. Even by 
the standards of early universe cosmology, speculations 
about the Planck era are extraordinarily speculative. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Universe: Thermal History ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bibliography 

Bernstein J 1988 Kinetic Theory in the Expanding Universe 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Kolb E W and Turner MS 1990 The Early Universe (Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley) 

Schramm D N and Turner MS 1990 Rev. Mod. Phys. 70 303 


Michael S Turner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


Universitat Radioastronomisches Institut, Bonn 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Universitat Radioastronomisches 
Institut, Bonn 


An institute of the University of Bonn, Germany. 
Carries out research at infrared, radio and submillimeter 
wavelengths. Particular research interests are the 
interstellar medium and intergalactic medium, especially 
galactic halos, and dwarf galaxies. 

The institute was responsible for the discovery of the 
x-ray halo around the Milky Way in 1991. 

Although it has recently disposed of a 25 m radio 
telescope in the Eiffel Mountains, the institute has a 
cooperative agreement with the Institute of Physics, 
Cologne, to use KOSMA, a 3 m radio telescope on 
Gornergrat in Switzerland. 

For further information see 
http://www.astro.uni-bonn.de/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


University Observatory, Ludwig-Maximilians- 
Universitat 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


University Observatory, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat 


The University Observatory of Ludwig-Maximilians- 
Universitat was founded in 1816. Astronomers who 
worked or graduated at the Munich Observatory 
include: Fraunhofer, Soldner, Lamont, Seeliger and Karl 
Schwarzschild. At present four professors and ten staff 
astronomers work here. Funding comes from the Bavarian 
Government, the German Science Foundation, and other 
German and European research programs. 

Facilities include the Wendelstein Observatory in the 
Bavarian Alps with a 0.8 m telescope. The Observatory 
is also a partner in the Hobby—Eberly Telescope Project in 
Texas. 

The Observatory’s mission is to teach astrophysics 
at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat in Munich, to 
research astrophysics and instrument development for the 
Very Large Telescope (ESO), the Hobby-Eberly Telescope 
(Texas) and the Wendelstein Observatory. 

Research specialties are stellar atmospheres and 
winds; binary stars; structure, formation and chemical 
evolution of galaxies; galaxy clusters; dark matter and 
gravitational lensing; plasma astrophysics. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.usm.uni-muenchen.de. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


University of Crete Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


University of Crete Observatory 


Based in Heraklion. Scientific activity is evenly distributed 
between theory and observation. Observational research 
has been undertaken using a small observatory on Mount 
Ida (Skinakas), and international facilities such as Arecibo 
and Effelsberg (radio), the ATO-Australia (optical) and 
Rosat (x-ray). The observational activities cover a wide 
range of objects including comets, supernova remnants, 
planetary nebulae, nearby galaxies, the Magellanic 
Clouds, dwarf galaxies, radio pulsars and the Earth’s 
ionosphere and magnetosphere. 

For further information see 
http://www.physics.uch.gr/english/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


University of Hawaii Institute for Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


University of Hawaii Institute for 
Astronomy 


The University of Hawaii Institute for Astronomy was 
founded in 1967 to manage Haleakala Observatory on 
Maui, and later, Mauna Kea Observatory, and to carry 
out its own program of fundamental research. Institute 
staff also make extensive use of spacecraft for astronomical 
research and planetary exploration. The Institute’s main 
offices are located in Manoa valley, just off the University’s 
main campus on Oahu. A research institute within the 
University of Hawaii (UH), the IfA has a total staff of 
approximately 200, including about 50 faculty staff. 

The Institute is one of the world’s leading astronom- 
ical research centers. Its broad-based research program 
includes studies of the Sun, planets and stars, as well as 
interstellar matter, galaxies and cosmology. Most IfA as- 
tronomers use the giant telescopes atop Mauna Kea and 
Haleakala. They also use space observatories, such as the 
Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray Observa- 
tory, to make observations that cannot be made from the 
ground. In addition to doing research, some astronomers 
design and build new instruments to measure and anal- 
yse the radiation collected by the telescopes. Other IfA 
scientists develop theories which explain the observations 
made by their colleagues. 

During the last 30 years, the State of Hawaii has 
become the most sought-after location in the world for the 
construction of large ground-based telescopes. The focal 
points for this construction are Mauna Kea (4200 m) on the 
island of Hawaii and Haleakala (3000 m) on Maui. The 
remarkable clarity, dryness and stillness of the air above 
these isolated high-altitude sites led to the commissioning 
by the University of Hawaii of the Mees Solar Observatory 
on Haleakala in 1963 and the UH 2.2 m telescope on Mauna 
Kea in 1970. 

Haleakala is lower in altitude than Mauna Kea, 
yet when compared to other astronomical sites outside 
Hawaii, Haleakala is an excellent location for optical and 
infrared observations of objects in Earth orbit, solar obser- 
vations, laser ranging and laser guide star experiments, 
and the whole range of night-time astronomical observa- 
tions. The IfA’s Mees Solar Observatory on Haleakala is 
central to the Institute’s solar astronomy program. It is 
set in a naturally fine location for studies of the extremely 
faint radiation emitted by the solar corona and chromo- 
sphere. At sea level, these outer atmospheric layers of the 
Sun are normally obscured by light scattered by small air- 
borne particles, such as dust or pollen. Mees is a perfect 
use of Haleakala, which means ‘The House of the Sun’. 

The Lunar Ranging Experiment (LURE Observatory) 
operated by IfA for NASA, measures the motions of the 
Pacific Basin and interior of Earth by bouncing laser beams 
off reflectors on satellites. It has also been used to bounce 
laser beams off reflectors left on the Moon by the Apollo 
astronauts. 

Institute for Astronomy staff will receive a share 
of the observing time on the University of Tokyo 2 m 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


‘Magnum’ telescope and on the US Air Force 3.7 m 
Advanced Electro-Optical Systems (AEOS) Telescope, 
both of which are located at the Haleakala Observatory. 
Rocketdyne Technical Services is contracted by the US Air 
Force to carryout satellite ranging, surveillance and other 
developmental activities at the Maui Space Surveillance 
Site on land leased from UH at the Haleakala Observatory. 
Hawaiian students will share the use of the 2 m Faulkes 
telescope with students in the UK when it is installed in 
Haleakala Observatory in 2001. 

The summit of Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii 
houses the world’s largest astronomical observatory, with 
telescopes operated by astronomers from eleven countries. 
The combined light-gathering power of the telescopes on 
Mauna Kea is fifteen times greater than that of the Palomar 
telescope in California—for many decades the world’s 
largest—and fifty times greater than that of the Hubble 
Space Telescope. 

In addition to developing its own research program, 
the IfA has provided the scientific impetus for the 
development of Mauna Kea into the world’s premier 
site for ground-based astronomical observatories. More 
major telescopes are located on Mauna Kea than on any 
other single mountain peak, and Mauna Kea is widely 
recognized as offering better observing conditions for 
optical, infrared and mm/sub-millimeter measurements 
than any other developed site. 

The success of the 2.2 m telescope led to proposals 
for the construction of several other telescopes on Mauna 
Kea by national and international organizations. By 
the end of the 1970s, there were three new 4 m class 
telescopes—the NASA INFRARED TELESCOPE FACILITY (IRTF), the 
UNITED KINGDOM INFRARED TELESCOPE (UKIRT) and the CANADA- 
FRANCE-HAWAII TELESCOPE (CFHT). Two of these telescopes 
are specifically designed to collect infrared radiation; 
the dryness of the atmosphere above Mauna Kea is 
particularly advantageous at these wavelengths. 

The characteristics that make Mauna Kea a pre- 
eminent site for optical and infrared astronomy also make 
it an excellent site for measuring short-wavelength radio 
waves. In 1987, two submillimeter-wave observatories 
were completed just below the summit. The California 
Institute of Technology and the US National Science 
Foundation supplied the expertise and funds for the 
CALTEC SUBMILLIMETER OBSERVATORY (CSO). The JAMES CLERK 
MAXWELL TELESCOPE (JCMT) belongs to a consortium of the 
United Kingdom, Canada and the Netherlands. More 
recently, the Smithsonian Institution, in collaboration with 
astronomers from Taiwan, has built an array consisting 
of eight 6 m submillimeter antennas designed to work 
together as a single telescope. 

The 1990s saw the construction of a new series of 
giant optical/infrared telescopes on Mauna Kea. The 
twin telescopes of the W M KECK OBSERVATORY are the 
largest optical/infrared telescopes in the world. Their 
10 m diameter mirrors each consist of 36 hexagons 
whose positions are controlled by computer. Japan and 
an international consortium led by the United States 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


University of Hawaii Institute for Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


have built the Subaru and Gemini Northern Telescopes, 
respectively. Both of these telescopes contain thin 
meniscus 8 m primary mirrors, and are designed for both 
optical and infrared astronomy. 

At a lower altitude, on the southern flank of Mauna 
Kea, is the Hawaii antenna of the Very Long Baseline Array, 
which is part of a 5000 mile wide system of ten 25 m radio 
dishes that work together as the world’s largest dedicated 
full-time astronomical instrument. 

As part of the agreement between these organizations 
and the University of Hawaii, astronomers at UH are 
entitled to 10-15% of the observing time on each non-UH 
telescope on Mauna Kea, in addition to full use of the UH 
2.2 m and 0.6 m telescopes. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.ifa.hawaii.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


University of Tokyo, Institute of Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


University of Tokyo, Institute of 
Astronomy 


Founded in 1987, the Institute of Astronomy, University 
of Tokyo, is located at Ohsawa, Mitaka, Japan, 30 km west 
of central Tokyo. Its objectives are research and education 
in observational astronomy. It has a staff of 3 professors; 
5 associate professors; 8 research associates, 2 technical 
support staff, 2 administrative officers and several part- 
time staff (secretary, catering etc). Its major facilities 
include Kiso Observatory (105 cm Schmidt telescope); 
two 60 cm submillimeter telescopes; 2 m IR telescope (in 
collaboration with the Physics Department). Research 
specialities: galactic and extragalactic radio astronomy; 
galactic center; extragalactic optical/IR observations; 
observational cosmology/formation and evolution of 
galaxies; infrared stellar physics. 

The Institute is supported by an annual fund from the 
University of Tokyo (Ministry of Education) and science 
research aids from the Ministry of Education. 

Its member organization (in joint ventures) is the 
University of Tokyo, Graduate School of Sciences 

For further information see 
http: / /www.ioa.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Unséld, Albrecht (1905-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Unsold, Albrecht (1905-95) 


German astrophysicist, became professor at the University 
of Kiel, where he studied stellar atmospheres and the way 
that spectral lines were formed and shaped—the effects of 
abundances, radiation damping, Doppler shifts, electric 
fields and atomic collisions. He analysed the spectrum of 
the star Tau Scorpii, which he obtained on a visit to the 
Yerkes and McDonald observatories. This was the first 
detailed analysis of a star other than the Sun and yielded 
the physical conditions in the atmosphere of the star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uppsala Astronomical Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Uppsala Astronomical Observatory 


The Uppsala Astronomical Observatory (UAO) is a 
department of Uppsala University (UU) with research, 
undergraduate, graduate and public education as its main 
objectives. 

UU was founded in 1477, and preserved lecture notes 
show that astronomy was taught in the 1480s. Among 
well-known professors at UAO are Anders Celsius (1730- 
44), Anders Angstrém (1842-58), Gunnar Malmquist 
(1939-59), Erik Holmberg (1959-75) and Bengt Westerlund 
(1975-87). 

Current research focuses mainly on galaxies, stellar 
astrophysics and solar system minor bodies and is char- 
acterized by the combination of theory and observations. 
Nowadays the observational material comes from large 
international facilities like ESO (EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSER- 
VATORY) or space observatories like the HST (Hubble Space 
Telescope). 

At UAO, about 70 km north of Stockholm, there is 
a 36 + 33 cm double refractor from 1893 currently used 
mainly for public shows and at Kvistaberg, 50 km south of 
Uppsala, there is a 135 cm Schmidt telescope from 1964. 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.astro.uu.se. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Uranus 


With an equatorial diameter of 51118 km (at the 1 bar 
atmospheric pressure level), Uranus is the third largest of 
the planets in the solar system, slightly larger than the 
more distant NEPTUNE. However, because of its lower 
density (1.27 g cm compared with 1.64 g cm for 
Neptune), Uranus ranks fourth among solar system 
planets in mass at 14.54 terrestrial masses. Its character- 
istic blue-green appearance is due to a layer of clouds of 
methane ice in its upper atmosphere that is not present in 
the atmospheres of JUPITER and SATURN. This cloud layer 
and the overlying methane gas preferentially absorb the 
red portion of sunlight, resulting in the distinctive color. 
Prior to the flyby of Uranus by VOYAGER 2 in 19839, little 
was known about the rotational or other physical char- 
acteristics of Uranus (given in table 1). 

Uranus has a ring system and many satellites. The 
rings were first detected from observations of stellar 
occultations as the narrow rings passed in front of distant 
stars, causing the observed light to blink out temporarily 
as viewed from Earth. Nine narrow rings were detected 
in this manner. Voyager 2 detected a tenth narrow ring, a 
broad diffuse ring closer to the planet, and tenuous dust 
rings scattered among the rest (see URANUS: RINGS). 

Prior to 1986, only five moons of Uranus were 
known. Voyager 2 found an additional 10 (plus one iden- 
tified in 1999 from Voyager images). Earth-based obser- 
vations since 1986 have resulted in the finding of anoth- 
er five confirmed or probable moonlets much more dis- 
tant from the planet. The satellites, known and suspect- 
ed, are listed in table 3. 

Uranus is the first of the non-naked-eye planets to be 
discovered. Observations of the closer planets (Mercury 
through Saturn) date back to antiquity, but Uranus was 
discovered by William Herschel in March of 1781 using 


Table 1. Orbital and physical characteristics of Uranus. 


Semimajor axis of the orbit 19.191 AU 
Eccentricity 0.046 
Inclination over the ecliptic 0.77° 
Sidereal period 83.7474 yr 
Mean orbital velocity 6.83 km s* 
Equatorial diameter 51 118 km 


Equatorial diameter relative to Earth 4.007 


Polar diameter 49 946 km 
Flattening 0.023 
Mass relative to Earth 14.54 
Mean density 1.27 g cm 
Surface gravity (at P=1 bar) 8.86 m s2 


Surface gravity relative to Earth 0.906 


Escape velocity 21.28 km s+ 
Sidereal rotation period 17.24h 
Inclination of equator to orbital plane — 97.9200 
Albedo (visual geometric) 0.57 
Albedo (bolometric Bond) 0.30 


Main atmospheric composition H, (83%), He (15%), 


CH, (2%) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


his home-made telescope in the back yard of his home in 
Bath, England (see HERSCHEL FAMILY). Technically, at sixth 
magnitude, Uranus is marginally visible with the unaid- 
ed eye. However, it was indistinguishable from back- 
ground stars until Herschel’s telescopic observations. 


The early observations 

In the 200+ yr of observation since its discovery, there 
have been monumental changes in our understanding of 
the planets in general and of Uranus in particular. The 
first major change was a recognition that the solar system 
was much larger than previously supposed. Uranus was 
more than twice the distance of Saturn from the Sun; its 
discovery gave great impetus to searches for even more 
distant planets. Perturbations to the orbit of Uranus led 
to independent predictions by mathematicians John 
Couch Adams in England and Urbain Jean Joseph Le 
Verrier in France. On the basis of Le Verrier’s predictions, 
Johann Gottfried Galle and his student Heinrich Louis 
D’Arrest found Neptune on 23 September 1846, the same 
day they received Le Verrier’s prediction. 

In the meantime, Herschel continued his observa- 
tions of Uranus with a telescope, again of his own mak- 
ing and far superior to those available to other 
astronomers of his day. OBERON and TITANIA were discov- 
ered by him in 1787, less than 6 yr after the discovery of 
the planet. For more than 10 yr, no other astronomers 
were even able to confirm his findings. Herschel was 
convinced that other satellites must also exist, but in 40 
yr of searching he found none, although some historians 
claim that he may have been the first to see UMBRIEL (four 
times between 1790 and 1801). Credit for the discovery of 
Umbriel and ARIEL is generally given to William Lassell, 
who reported their sighting in 1851 to the Royal 
Astronomical Society. MIRANDA was discovered by 
Gerard Peter Kuiper in 1948, using the 82 in reflector of 
the McDonald Observatory in Texas. The same instru- 
ment was used by Kuiper and co-worker D L Harris to 
discover Neptune’s Nereid in 1949. 

The orbits of the Urananian satellites provided the 
first evidence of the unusual tilt of the equator of Uranus 
relative to its orbital plane. Excluding Miranda and the 
irregular satellite discovered in 1997 and 1999, all other 
Uranian satellite orbits are within 0.4° of being coplanar 
with Uranus’s equator. The actual tilt of the rotation axis 
of Uranus is 97.92°, although by International 
Astronomical Union convention, which specifies as the 
north pole that rotation pole which lies north of the eclip- 
tic plane, the tilt is more properly designated as 82.08° 
with retrograde rotation. Much speculation has sur- 
rounded this unusual rotation of Uranus. One popular 
theory is that, during its early history, Uranus had a more 
normal tilt, but that during the latter stages of formation 
the planet was struck by an Earth-sized PLANETESIMAL, 
resulting in the present extreme tilt. The only other plan- 
ets to exhibit more than a modest tilt are VENUS and 
PLUTO, which are 1-3 orders of magnitude smaller in 
mass. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Uranus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


It was the low reflectivity of Uranus at the red end of 
the spectrum which led spectroscopist R Wildt to propose 
in 1932 the presence of methane (CH,) in the atmospheres 
of each of the gas giant planets of the solar system. The 
low densities of these giant planets had also led to the 
conclusion that the primary atmospheric constituent was 
hydrogen (H,), but confirmation of that fact came from 
Kiess et al. in 1960. Formal detection of helium (He) in the 
atmosphere of Uranus first came from Voyager 2 in 1986. 
All other gaseous components of Uranus’s atmosphere 
(above the cloud tops) constitute a combined abundance 
of much less than 1%. 

By analogy with Jupiter, each of the other gas giant 
planets in the solar system was expected to have an 
intrinsic magnetic field. However, the strength and ori- 
entation of those fields and the associated radio emis- 
sions were not determined until Pioneer and/or Voyager 
spacecraft flew close to these planets. It was the monitor- 
ing of these radio emissions that enabled Voyager scien- 
tists to determine the rotation periods of Saturn, Uranus 
and Neptune (see also URANUS AND NEPTUNE: ATMOS- 
PHERES, IONOSPHERES AND MAGNETOSPHERES). 


Space exploration 

The only space vehicle ever to fly close to Uranus was 
Voyager 2. This hardy spacecraft was launched in August 
1977, flew by Jupiter in July 1979, Saturn in August 1981, 
Uranus in January 1986 and Neptune in August 1989. As 
of late 1999, Voyager 2 continued to send back useful 
data about the particle and magnetic field environment 
of the outer solar system. Voyager 2 provided high- 
resolution images of Uranus’s atmosphere, the ring sys- 
tem and 16 of the 21 known satellites. In fact, 11 of the 16 
moons it imaged were discovered by Voyager 2. Voyager 
2 also determined the detailed composition of the atmos- 
phere, confirmed the presence of a highly tilted and off- 
set magnetic field and measured the rotation period of 
the planet’s interior. In fact, more than 90% of all we 
know about Uranus came from the measurements made 
by Voyager 2 and the subsequent interpretation of those 
measurements. 

No other space missions to Uranus are at present 
planned and funded. Nevertheless, continued improve- 
ments in Earth-based telescopes and techniques are now 
providing updates to some of the Voyager data, especial- 
ly in the area of atmospheric studies (as well as in the dis- 
covery of the new satellites mentioned earlier). The pre- 
sent emphasis on smaller, faster, less expensive missions 
does not bode well for missions to Uranus or Neptune, 
each of which requires long flight times and concomitant 
higher space flight operations budgets. 


Composition and structure 

Like its larger counterparts (Jupiter, Saturn and 
Neptune), Uranus is composed primarily of the light ele- 
ments hydrogen and helium. Even the somewhat heavier 
compounds, confirmed methane (CH,) and suspected 
ammonia (NH;) and water (H,O), are composed largely 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


of hydrogen. This dominance of light elements is reflect- 
ed in the low densities of the gas giant planets and in the 
absence of distinct liquid or solid surfaces in the interiors 
of these planets. However, in contrast to Jupiter and 
Saturn, methane, ammonia, water and the heavier core 
materials are thought to constitute a larger total mass 
than the overlying hydrogen and helium. These mea- 
sured or deduced characteristics are thought to be the 
consequence of the formation process by which these 
planets came to be. There are a number of competing the- 
ories about the nature of that formation process. Since 
each theory, if sufficiently developed, predicts outcomes 
that are generally dependent on the starting conditions, 
the measured or deduced characteristics can become 
both an effective discriminator between theories and a 
means of determining the starting conditions. 

All formation theories have certain characteristics in 
common. For example, each assumes a decrease in tem- 
perature in the presolar nebula as a function of increas- 
ing solar distance. That temperature gradient in turn 
determines which compounds are solid at a given dis- 
tance from the Sun and which are not. With more mater- 
ial from which to coalesce, it is likely that the planetary 
cores which formed from the coalescing solids were larg- 
er at the distances of the gas giants than for the Earth-like 
planets, enabling the gas giants to capture more massive 
atmospheres. Uranus and Neptune may be smaller than 
Jupiter and Saturn as a consequence of the solar nebula 
being less dense at these greater distances from the Sun. 
Perhaps the growth of Uranus and Neptune therefore 
lagged behind that of Jupiter and Saturn. If the Sun went 
through its T-Tauri stage when atmospheric accretion 
was more or less complete for Jupiter and Saturn, but 
incomplete for Uranus and Neptune, most of the remain- 
ing source material may have been swept away, and fur- 
ther growth of the planets would have essentially 
stopped. In that scenario, the cores of Uranus and 
Neptune would have occupied a much larger percentage 
of their interiors than would have been the case for 
Jupiter and Saturn. Jupiter and Saturn were therefore 
expected to more closely represent the mix of materials in 
the original solar nebula (and in the present-day solar 
atmosphere). 

Actual measurements confirm the predicted higher 
relative abundance of methane in the atmosphere of 
Uranus than that of Jupiter, Saturn or the Sun. These 
numbers imply an enrichment of carbon (relative to 
hydrogen) in Uranus’s atmosphere that is about 24 times 
as high as the C/H ratio in the Sun. Carbon enrichment 
was also noted for Jupiter (Galileo probe measurements) 
and estimated for Saturn, although to a lesser extent than 
for Uranus (as predicted). As in the other gas giants, pho- 
tochemistry of methane in the upper atmosphere pro- 
duces a suite of hydrocarbons, but only acetylene (C,;H;) 
has been detected thus far. Water (H,O) has also been 
detected in the upper atmosphere (Feuchtgruber et al. 
1997); its presence reveals an exogenic source of the 
water, presumably micrometeoroid ablation. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Uranus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Helium abundance relative to hydrogen is also high- 
er for Uranus (and Neptune) than for Jupiter and Saturn. 
Strangely, the helium abundances for Uranus and 
Neptune coincide (within the uncertainties of the mea- 
surements) with that measured for the Sun. Jupiter’s 
atmosphere is moderately depleted in helium relative to 
the Sun; Saturn’s is strongly depleted, having only a 
scant 20% of the solar He/H abundance. At very high 
pressures (>3 million bar) in the interiors of Jupiter and 
Saturn, hydrogen is transformed into a liquid metallic 
state. It is possible, especially in the case of Saturn, that 
higher-density liquid helium droplets slowly sink 
through the liquid hydrogen owing to the force of gravi- 
ty, thus depleting the source of helium to the visible 
atmosphere. No such mechanism can operate in the inte- 
riors of the smaller Uranus and Neptune. 

The vertical temperature profile of Uranus below the 
600 mbar level increases monotonically with depth at an 
adiabatic lapse rate. Voyager radio science occultation 
measurements detected the presence of a methane cloud 
deck near the 1 bar pressure level, where the temperature 
is near 80 K. This value is colder than the minimum tem- 
peratures in the atmospheres of Jupiter and Saturn; it is 
for that reason that no methane clouds are present in 
their atmospheres. Uranus’s tropopause is located near 
100 mbar, where the temperature is near the minimum 
value of about 50 K. 

Extrapolation of measured atmospheric tempera- 
tures into the interior of Uranus at an adiabatic gradient 
would lead to a central temperature between 6000 and 10 
000 K. Unlike the other three gas giant planets, Uranus 
appears to have little or no heat escaping from its interi- 
or to warm the upper regions of the planet. Whether that 
is a consequence of its extreme axial tilt or is due to insu- 
lating layering below the visible cloud deck is not known 
at present. Interior modeling yields central densities of 
between 4.5 and 9 g cm-3, depending on whether or not 
there is a separate molten rocky core out to a distance of 
about 5000 km from the center. Such a model might have 
the larger density values at its center, whereas a relative- 
ly well-mixed massive core of molten rocky and icy 
material extending through most of the interior would 
have the lower central density value. The measured sec- 
ond-order gravity harmonic (J;=0.003 343), combined 
with a rotation period of 17.24 h and an oblateness (polar 
flattening) of 0.023, tends to favor the well-mixed core. 


Dynamics 

With little or no discernible internal heat source, Uranus 
might be expected to have little atmospheric turbulence. 
Figure 1 depicts the planet Uranus as seen by Voyager 2. 
The left-hand view is true color; the right-hand view is a 
highly color and contrast-stretched version of the same 
image. It is apparent that essentially all atmospheric fea- 
tures are symmetric around the rotation axis whose posi- 
tive pole is just left of and slightly below the center of the 
disk in these images. Zonal wind velocities were measur- 
able for only a few latitudes on the planet, mainly because 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Figure 1. Uranus in true color (left) and contrast-enhanced false 
color (right). The planet’s south (positive rotation) pole is left 
and below the center of the disk, at the center of the concentric 
patterns. Image from Voyager 2 courtesy of NASA Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. 


of the paucity of non-axisymmetric cloud features. 
Furthermore, only the illuminated southern hemisphere 
was visible. The data are best fitted with a latitudinal 
wind velocity in m s+ of 200 (0.4cosb—cos3b), where 
-90°<b<0° is the latitude. This formula predicts a maxi- 
mum prograde wind speed of about 240 m s— near -60° 
latitude, zero wind speed near —23° latitude and 120 ms 
retrograde wind speed near the equator. 

More recent images from the Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST) show greatly increased atmospheric 
activity for Uranus than was seen during the Voyager 2 
flyby. Two color-stretched images, each including rings 
and satellites, are displayed in figure 2. The increase in 
atmospheric activity between 1986 and the 1997 HST 
images may be due in part to seasonal changes. During 
the Voyager 2 flyby, Uranus was near its southern sum- 


Equator 


Figure 2. Uranus as seen from the HST’s Wide Field Planetary 
Camera in 1997. The image on the right was taken later and 
shows the motion of satellites and atmospheric spots in the 
intervening time. The bright portion of the ring is the unre- 
solved epsilon (¢) ring; the dimmer portion is a composite of 
several of the rings. Image from HST is courtesy of NASA Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Uranus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mer solstice (beginning of summer). In 2008 Uranus will 
reach an equinox, and all latitudes will be illuminated by 
sunlight. If the changes are due to seasonal effects, 
atmospheric cloud activity may be expected to increase 
until 2008 or beyond. 

The temperature in the troposphere does not exhibit 
any north-south asymmetry despite the peculiar insola- 
tion pattern. The horizontal thermal structure shows lit- 
tle contrast other than shallow minima at mid-latitudes. 
The observed latitudinal dependence indicates that the 
zonal winds decay with height. Dynamical models sug- 
gest that the mid-latitude cool regions result from adia- 
batic cooling associated with upwelling in the tropos- 
phere and that poleward and equatorward flow occurs at 
upper levels. 


Uranus’s magnetosphere 
The magnetic field of Uranus was first detected about 8 h 
before Voyager 2’s closest approach to Uranus. 
Amazingly, the best dipole model of that magnetosphere 
indicates a magnetic dipole tilt of 58.6° and an offset from 
the center of the planet of 1/3 the radius of the planet in 
the direction of the unilluminated north pole. The high 
tilt and offset may indicate that the magnetic field is gen- 
erated by electrical currents at fairly shallow depths 
within the liquid icy-rocky core. The dipole moment is 
more than a factor of 50 greater than the dipole moment 
of Earth’s magnetic field, but, because of the larger size 
of Uranus, typical surface magnetic fields are of compa- 
rable magnitude for the two planets. The magnetic field 
of Uranus, like those of other planets in the solar system, 
is highly distorted by the solar wind. Its typical sunward 
extent is about 18 Uranian radii; the magnetic tail proba- 
bly extends to thousands of radii downwind. 
Ultraviolet auroral emissions were observed by 


Table 2. Uranus’s rings’ orbital data. 


Ring Semimajor Orbit Inclination Period 
name axis (km) eccentricity (°) (h) 

6 41 837 0.001 01 0.062 6.1988 
5 42 235 0.001 90 0.054 6.2875 
4 42 571 0.001 06 0.032 6.3628 
a 44 718 0.000 76 0.015 6.8508 
B 45 661 0.000 44 0.005 7.0688 
n 47 176 0.000 00 0.001 7.4239 
Y 47 627 0.000 11 0.002 7.5307 
é 48 300 0.000 00 0.001 7.6911 
oS 50 024 ~0.0 ~0.0 8.1069 
€ 51 149 0.007 94 0.000 8.3823 


Voyager 2 near the 44.2° north latitude magnetic pole. 
The auroral region was 15°-20° in diameter and is 
believed to be excited by electrons with energies of about 
10000 eV. A variety of radio emissions originating with- 
in the magnetosphere were detected. It was variations in 
the narrowband emissions near 60 kHz that enabled 
Voyager to determine that Uranus rotates once every 
17.24 h. Detected charged particle species within the 
magnetosphere included mainly electrons and protons, 
although small amounts of ionized hydrogen gas (H,*) 
may have been present. It seems evident that the prima- 
ry source of these particles is the extended hydrogen 
atmosphere of Uranus, which has a temperature of about 
800 K at altitudes of 5000-7000 km above the cloud tops. 


Rings 

Uranus has 10 narrow rings with sufficient optical depth 
to block out starlight as they passed between a star and 
the Voyager spacecraft or groundbased observers. By far 
the densest and widest of these rings is the ¢ ring, which 


Table 3. The satellites of Uranus. 


Name Distance (km) Period (days) Incl (°) Eccentricity Diameter (km) Density (g cm-3) 
Cordelia 49 792 0.3350 0.08 0.000 ~26 ? 
Ophelia 53 764 0.3764 0.10 0.001 ~32 2 
Bianca 59 165 0.4346 0.19 0.001 ~44 ? 
Cressida 61 767 0.4636 0.01 0.000 ~66 ? 
Desdemona 62 659 0.4737 0.11 0.000 ~58 ? 
Juliet 64 358 0.4931 0.07 0.001 ~84 ? 
Portia 66 097 0.5152 0.06 0.000 ~110 ? 
Rosalind 69 927 0.5585 0.28 0.000 ~54 ? 
Belinda 75 255 0.6235 0.03 0.000 ~68 2 
1986U10 76 500 0.637 ? ? ~40 ? 
Puck 86 006 0.7618 0.32 0.000 154 ? 
Miranda 129 847 1.4135 4.22 0.027 472 1.15 
Ariel 190 929 2.5204 0.31 0.0034 1158 1.56 
Umbriel 265 979 4.1442 0.36 0.0050 1170 1.52 
Titania 436 273 8.7059 0.14 0.0022 1578 1.70 
Oberon 583 421 13.4632 0.10 0.0008 1522 1.64 
Caliban 7 168 900 579 139.68 0.082 ~44 ? 
Sycorax 12 213 600 1289 152.67 0.509 ~40 ? 
1999U1 ? ? @ ? ? ? 
1999U2 ? ? ? ? ? ? 
1999U3 2 ? ? 2 ? ? 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Uranus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


varies in width from 20 to 95 km as its particles circle the 
planet. The other rings have typical widths of 1-10 km. 
The ‘equivalent depth’ of the ¢ ring (and most of the 
other variable-width rings) is constant; in other words, 
the same number of ring particles pass through the nar- 
rower portions of each ring during each orbit as through 
the wider portions of the same ring. Their narrow ring 
widths are the result of gravitational interactions with 
nearby satellites, which act as ‘shepherds’ to keep the 
ring material from spreading. The orbital characteristics 
of the narrow rings are given in table 2. 

In addition to the 10 narrow rings, Uranus has a 
broad, diffuse and optically thin ring component seen in 
some of the Voyager 2 images. It is interior to the other 
rings, extending from a radius of about 37 000 to about 39 
500 km from the center of the planet. During passage 
through the shadow of Uranus, Voyager 2 also snapped 
an image of the rings that is unlike any other taken at 
Uranus. In this unique geometry, forward-scattered sun- 
light brings out the optically thin dust bands that occupy 
much of the area between the ten narrow rings men- 
tioned above. There is a lot of radial structure in these 
dust rings (see figure 3), little of it understood at present. 


Satellites 

Prior to 1999, Uranus had 17 known moons. The discov- 
ery of the five largest (Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania 
and Oberon) was discussed in the introductory material 


Figure 3. This long-exposure image from Voyager 2 was taken 
of the back side of the rings of Uranus during the spacecraft 
passage through the rings. The image was taken during rotation 
of the spacecraft and is therefore motion compensated at the left 
edge of the image, but the right side and the background stars 
are smeared. The outermost ring is the ¢ ring, but most of the 
other features seen are not identifiable with the narrow, optical- 
ly thicker rings normally seen in backscattered light. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2003 


earlier in this article. Ten more (Cordelia, Ophelia, 
Bianca, Cressida, Desdemona, Juliet, Portia, Rosalind, 
Belinda and Puck) were discovered by Voyager in 1986. 
All of the moons discovered by Voyager orbit Uranus 
closer to the planet than the five ‘classical’ satellites. In 
1997 Caliban was discovered by Brett Gladman and his 
associates. The same year Sycorax was discovered by 
Phil Nicholson and his associates. Caliban and Sycorax 
are more than 10 times as far from the planet as any of 
the previously known ‘regular’ satellites. Their orbits are 
retrograde, highly inclined and more eccentric than is 
true for the regular satellites. 

In 1999, Erich Karkoschka found a previously undis- 
covered moon in images shuttered by Voyager 2 in 1986. 
This moon, which has an orbit almost identical to that of 
Belinda, was found in seven different Voyager 2 images. 
Based on a preliminary orbit, it is estimated that Belinda 
laps (passes) 1986U10 about once a month, a highly 
unusual circumstance. 

Three more probable satellites of Uranus were sight- 
ed in 1999 by Gladman, J J Kavelaars and others. Orbits 
for these satellites are not yet well-determined, but they 
are probably all distant, irregular satellites. Their tempo- 
rary designations are 1999U1, 1999U2 and 1999U3. In 
2002 the discovery of another satellite was confirmed. 
Named S/2001 U 1, this brings the total number of con- 
firmed Uranian moons to 21. $/2001 U 1 and five others 
like it have very irregular, eccentric orbits that do not 
share the same orbital plane as the larger moons of 
Uranus. Ranging in size from 10 to 20 km (about 6 to 12 
mi), these moons are thought to be remnants of ancient 
collisions that occurred at the early stage of planetary 
formation. 


Bibliography 

The Voyager 2 Encounter with Uranus 1987 J. Geophys. 
Res. 92 14 873-15 375 

Bergstralh J T, Miner E D and Matthews M S (ed) 1990 
Uranus (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Feuchtgruber et al. 1997 Nature 389 159-62 

Miner E D 1998 Uranus: the Planet, Rings and Satellites 2nd 
edn (Chichester: Wiley) 

Ellis D Miner 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2003 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, lonospheres, and 
Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, 
lonospheres, and Magnetospheres 


Nearly the entire mass of URANUS and NEPTUNE consists 
of gas, much like the other gas giant planets Jupiter 
and Saturn. Therefore Neptune and Uranus might be 
regarded as essentially all atmosphere, although it is 
conventional to limit the definition to the outermost layers. 
In a tenuous outer layer of the atmosphere we find the 
ionosphere (see PLANETARY IONOSPHERES), where ultraviolet 
light and other radiations knock electrons loose from 
atmospheric molecules so that electrical currents can flow 
there. The magnetosphere begins even further out, where 
the atmosphere becomes so thin that collisions between 
its molecules are rare, and so they fly freely like orbiting 
satellites. In this region, the largest forces on electrons 
and tons (electrically charged atoms or molecules) come 
from electric and magnetic fields, and so their motions 
are organized by the planetary magnetic field instead of 
planetary gravity (see PLANETARY MAGNETOSPHERES). 

Most of what we know about Uranus’s and 
Neptune’s atmosphere and everything we know about 
their ionospheres and magnetospheres were learned from 
data collected during the close passes of vOYAGER 2 near 
Uranus in January 1986 and near Neptune in August 
1989. Unfortunately this also means that it will be difficult 
to learn much more without more dedicated spacecraft 
encounters. As a result, our mental picture of these 
planets, especially Uranus, is dominated by their state 
during their Voyager flyby, and will become increasingly 
unrealistic as time progresses. 


Atmosphere 

Visually, Uranus and Neptune are blue planets, chiefly 
because of absorption of red light by atmospheric methane 
(CH). Uranus is virtually featureless, while Neptune 
has large but short-lived cyclonic storms that appear as 
spots. By tracking cloud features, strong east-west winds 
varying with latitude were found (especially at Neptune), 
indicating the presence of weather. 

As tables 1 and 2 show, Neptune and Uranus are 
nearly twin planets about four times the size of the Earth 
and at much greater distance from the Sun. During the 
formation of the solar system, the material coalescing into 
the planets was extremely cold because of its distance 
from the Sun, and so most common gases (such as 
water, carbon monoxide and dioxide, ammonia and 
methane) were frozen. Because solid material more 
easily accumulates into planets than does gas, Uranus 
and Neptune incorporated much more of this material 
than did planets like the Earth, that formed in warmer 
regions. Once these frozen gases were incorporated into 
Uranus’s and Neptune’s warm interiors, they became 
gaseous again, but nevertheless were still bound by 
gravity. Because they were able to accumulate these 
more common materials, Uranus and Neptune grew much 
bigger than the terrestrial planets, and thus were massive 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


enough to attract substantial amounts of the still-gaseous 
hydrogen and helium. 

Thus by number of atoms, Uranus’s and Neptune’s 
atmospheres are mostly hydrogen with some helium and 
heavier gases, like the other gas giant planets and the Sun. 
Compared with the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn, however, 
Neptune and Uranus are highly enriched in oxygen, 
carbon and other elements heavier than hydrogen and 
helium. As a result, these heavy elements constitute 
at least 80% of Uranus and Neptune by mass. In 
these planets’ atmospheres, carbon mostly combines with 
hydrogen to form methane, which is slowly broken down 
by solar ultraviolet light to form smog, just as on Earth (see 
PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES, EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE). Oxygen mainly 
joins with hydrogen to form water, which freezes out, 
leaving a dry upper atmosphere just as at Earth. Both 
of these condensible materials fall into the interior, where 
they are recycled back into gaseous water and methane. 


Table 1. Useful Uranian constants, in units compared with Earth 
(®) and SI metric units. 


Quantity Earth units SI units 
Distance from Sun 19.186 2.870 x 10 m 
Radius 4.018 2.556 x 107 m 
Mass 14.540 8.683 x 107 kg 
Orbital period 84.016 2.651 x 10° s 
Rotation period 0.7208 6.206 x 104 s 


Table 2. Useful Neptunian constants, in units compared to Earth 
(®) and SI metric units. 


Quantity Earth units SI units 
Distance from sun 30.068 4.497 x 102 m 
Radius 3.896 2.476 x 10” m 
Mass 17.238 1.024 x 1076 kg 
Orbital period 164.88 5.200 x 10° s 
Rotation period 0.6738 5.800 x 104s 


Uranus One of Uranus’s most remarkable traits is the 
direction of its rotation axis. Most planets’ orbits lie in 
approximately the same plane, and their rotation axes (and 
the Sun’s) are roughly perpendicular to this plane. Not 
Uranus; its rotational axis lies nearly in its orbital plane. 
It is believed that this great tilt was caused by a near- 
catastrophic collision at the time when Uranus was still 
forming out of infalling bodies, one of which must have 
been comparable in size with Uranus itself. 

This ‘tipped-over’ orientation means that, part of the 
time, the Sun will be nearly overhead at Uranus’s north 
or south pole. Because the rotational axis stays fixed 
in direction while Uranus orbits around the Sun, 1/4 
of an orbit later the Sun will be over Uranus’s equator. 
Therefore the differences between the solar heating during 
Uranus’s summer and winter are much more extreme than 
at Earth, in addition to being much colder overall because 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, lonospheres, and 
Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


of Uranus’s much greater distance from the sun. Despite 
these extremes of heat input, the temperature extremes 
are small, apparently because the atmosphere can equalize 
temperature differences by transporting heat. 

Another anomalous trait of Uranus is its low rate of 
internal heat release. Heat slowly leaks out of the interiors 
of the other gas giant planets, at rates comparable with 
the planets’ absorption of sunlight. However, Uranus’ 
internal heat loss is undetectable. 


Neptune Despite Neptune’s greater distance, its temper- 
ature at its apparent surface is about the same as Uranus’s. 
The reason for this is the heat release from Neptune’s inte- 
rior, which makes up for its relative shortfall of sunlight. 
In this aspect Neptune is a more typical gas giant planet 
than Uranus. Neptune’s rotational axis is also more typ- 
ical, in being roughly perpendicular to its orbit plane, so 
Neptune’s seasonal variation of solar heating is much less 
extreme than Uranus’s. 


Ionosphere 

Uranus’s and Neptune’s ionospheres are currently poorly 
understood, because of the limitations of the observations 
and gaps in theoretical knowledge. However, it appears 
that ionization due to solar ultraviolet and galactic cosmic 
rays is mostly responsible for maintaining the ionosphere, 
with enhancements from meteoritic impacts. 


Magnetosphere 

Uranus and Neptune have planetary magnetic fields 
whose surface intensity is the same order of magnitude 
as the Earth’s field, but whose distribution is completely 
different. At Earth the field is oriented roughly north— 
south and its strength is roughly the same everywhere. 
Neptune’s and Uranus’s fields are much more variable in 
strength and direction. 

Like Earth, Neptune and Uranus have auroras, 
which are glows created by electrons hitting the upper 
atmosphere where the magnetic field lines converge. At 
Earth auroras occur near the north and south geographic 
poles, but at Uranus and Neptune the magnetic poles lie at 
middle latitudes so that is where their auroras occur also. 


Uranus The magnetosphere of Uranus is tilted once by 
Uranus’s rotation axis and once again by the magnetic 
field’s tilt with respect to the rotation axis. The charged 
particles in Jupiter’s and Saturn’s magnetospheres mostly 
rotate with their planets. At Earth charged particles flow 
ina kind of back-eddy opposite to the direction of the solar 
wind. At Uranus they do both at the same time, although 
this may change as Uranus’s orbit carries it from Sun-over- 
pole to Sun-over-equator orientation. 

Uranus’s magnetosphere contains mostly atomic 
hydrogen ions (H*), which probably come from Uranus’ 
atmosphere. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Neptune The magnetic field of Neptune is also drastically 
tilted and offset with respect to the rotation axis. Despite 
Neptune’s normal rotation axis orientation, charged 
particle trajectories are even more complicated here 
than at Uranus. Many of these trajectories exit the 
magnetosphere, so the density of ions in Neptune’s 
magnetosphere is very sparse. 

Neptune’s magnetosphere contains mostly atomic 
hydrogen ions (H*) and atomic nitrogen ions (N*). 
These ions are probably derived from the atmosphere of 
TRITON, Neptune’s large, icy moon. Triton’s atmosphere 
is mostly molecular nitrogen with traces of hydrogen- 
bearing species such as methane. 


Lower atmosphere and interior 

Because Uranus and Neptune are gas giants, the 
distinction between atmosphere and interior is arbitrary. 
By convention the boundary between them is placed 
at a level where the pressure is 10-100 bar (1 bar = 
10° N m~™ is about the pressure at the bottom of the 
Earth’s atmosphere). This definition is based partly 
on observability and partly on the diminished effect of 
weather at that level. 

Also by convention, the planetary radius is defined 
as the distance from the planetary center out to the level 
where the pressure is 1 bar at the equator. These are 
abbreviated as Ry = 25559 km and Ry = 24764 km, for 
Uranus and Neptune respectively. 

Most of what is known of Uranus’s and Neptune’s 
interiors is derived from the slight departure of their 
gravity fields from spherical symmetry, detected by 
perturbations of Voyager’s flyby trajectory. From these 
slight perturbations has been deduced an approximate 
density versus radius profile, which suggests the presence 
of rocky cores roughly half the size of Earth, representing 
about 0.1-1% of Neptune’s or Uranus’s total volume. 

The properties of Uranus’s atmosphere are summa- 
rized in figure 1, while Neptune’s is summarized in 
figure 2. The number of molecules per cubic centimeter 
(number density) of each of the more important species is 
profiled versus altitude and pressure. The H density is 
controlled by the temperature profile via the hydrostatic 
equation, 

dp mpg(r) 
dr —skT(p) 


with p is the pressure, m the mass of an H) molecule, k 
Boltzmann’s constant, g(r) the acceleration of gravity as 
a function of altitude and T(p) the temperature versus 
pressure profile. The densities of the other species are 
controlled by their interactions with the dominant H). 
The temperature profile is controlled by the balance 
of heat gain and loss, which is in turn controlled by 
the mechanisms by which heat is transported. The 
different temperatures seen at different levels result from 
different heat sources and transport modes dominating at 
different densities. 

Both planets’ tropospheres (from words meaning the 
region of changes; the lower atmosphere, where there 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, lonospheres, and 
Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Temperature (K) 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 
12 
1Q07F 


I 
Leoblse ! 
- + 5000 


Bh Ne a. ae ee 7 


ey 
Oo 
te) 
107k T = is 
a Ee a oe 2000 © 
© oO a 5 
a sf He >< 8 
So a ae =| 1000 2 

of i ae 
5 [-—< CH, ~~ > 500 > 
Cd - a a homopause c 
n _ foe axe i= 
“io °b ee eos \ + 200 & 
. iar: 100 © 
es F +—{— tropopause ie. ES 
10 \ eS +4 of 
rT, oo \\ 4 288 3 
| Sh Sf Sere SG 

igs ee | _. ASS -500 

5: 15 20 
10 10° 10 10 


Density (em) 


Figure 1. Profiles of temperature and density versus altitude in 
Uranus’s atmosphere. The temperature (T) is read from the top 
scale, the densities (labeled by chemical symbol) from the 
bottom. Important boundary altitudes are marked on the 
profiles that determine them. 


Temperature (K) 


0 200 400 600 800 1000 
af 1 T T I I 
10 12) exobase 4 u 
L o 
He T = 
bs age as 2000 
210i" SS Se o 
uy - ye 
F tr Ee ‘ —| 1000 
—_ 10° ce ca Oe “SS — He mopause 3 
» L \CHy XA zi 500 
Biases yee ER ) se 
Bios} Shy o + 200 <4 
e [a % ; 
10° Pas tropopause Ae ~~ — re) £ 
Po “\\\J -100 2 
4 <= | 200 
10° + 4s — 30 


10 10°° 10° 10 


Density (em) 


Figure 2. Profiles of temperature and density versus altitude in 
Neptune’s atmosphere. The temperature (T) is read from the 
top scale, the densities (labeled by chemical symbol) from the 
bottom. The temperature profile is an approximation 
constructed to match the observations; its sharp bends are not 
real. Important boundary altitudes are marked on the profiles 
that determine them. 


is weather) are very cold compared with Earth. Within 
the troposphere the dominant heat transport mode is 
convection, whereby heat is carried along with the gas as it 
rises and falls. Because the pressure changes with altitude, 
the gas is cooled by expansion as it rises and heated by 
compression as it sinks. Thus in the troposphere the 
temperature variation with altitude follows the adiabatic 
rate of change, that is, the rate at which a column of rising 
air would cool just as a result of expansion without heat 
exchange. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


At Earth the vertical temperature profile is compli- 
cated by the condensation of water, but, in the colder Ura- 
nian troposphere, water condenses at a deeper level. At 
Neptune and Uranus the visible clouds are probably con- 
densed methane. These clouds are located near the level 
of the sharp bend in the CH, profile just below the 1 bar 
level in figures 1 and 2. Above that level the ratio of CHy 
to Hz density abruptly decreases because of methane con- 
densation. 

At the tropopause (the upper boundary of the 
troposphere, where the temperature stops falling with 
altitude), the temperature is about 50-52 K (much colder 
than liquid nitrogen) at both planets. The altitude of this 
transition point is marked on the temperature profiles 
displayed in figures 1 and 2. At this altitude the methane 
vapor pressure (at a given temperature, the pressure of 
vapor in equilibrium with its solid form; usually extremely 
temperature dependent) is at a minimum. Any methane 
abundance in excess of this pressure is frozen out and the 
resulting ice falls to lower altitude, which is why the CHy 
profiles in figures 1 and 2 show abrupt decreases there. 


Uranus 

The temperatures within Uranus’s interior are probably 
high, but unknown. Heat constantly leaks out of the other 
gas giant planet interiors, and from the rate of heat loss a 
temperature versus radius profile necessary to maintain 
that loss can be calculated for those planets. Uranus’s 
internal heat loss, by contrast, is too small to have been 
measured, so its internal temperature is unknown. 

It may be that Uranus’s interior is actually cooler than 
the other gas giants’, perhaps because the collision that 
tipped Uranus over also stirred it enough to let its excess 
heat out. Another possibility is that the settling of denser 
materials has stabilized the interior so that hot gas does not 
rise and carry out heat, because even if the lower regions 
are hotter they would be compositionally denser and so 
not buoyant. 


Neptune 

Unlike Uranus, Neptune does have a measurable rate of 
heat loss, which is about 1.6 times as large as the rate of 
heat absorption from sunlight. From this heat loss rate, a 
temperature versus radius profile can be calculated, which 
is very near to an adiabat. The temperatures within the 
interior are high, reaching a maximum of probably about 
6000 K at the center. 


Upper atmosphere 

Above the tropopause in each planet is the stratosphere, 
where the atmosphere is relatively stable (hence the name) 
because the temperature rises with altitude. Atmospheric 
stirring does not completely cease here, but it is greatly 
attenuated compared with the troposphere. In the 
lower stratosphere, the temperature profile is mainly 
controlled by the absorption and reradiation of heat 
absorbed from sunlight. The upper atmosphere is 
heated by a high-altitude energy source of unknown 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, lonospheres, and 
Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


nature. Because the energy is input at such low densities, 
no known component of sunlight or bombardment by 
magnetospheric charged particles can be responsible. 

This heat is not reradiated from where it arrives, 
because H, and He are very poor radiators of heat 
and the more effective radiators, the hydrocarbons, are 
scarce here. Thus thermal conduction transports the heat 
down to the level where it can be radiated into space 
by the hydrocarbons. In order for conduction to carry 
the heat this far, the heat-source region’s temperature 
must rise to high temperatures. From there up to the 
exobase (the atmospheric level above which atomic and 
molecular collisions are negligible), the atmosphere is 
roughly isothermal. 

Because of the factor of m in the hydrostatic equation, 
atmosphere pressure diminishes with altitude at a rate 
proportional to m, the atmospheric molecular mass. 
When an atmosphere is a mixture of gases, atmospheric 
turbulence and other stirring mechanisms tend to keep 
the different gases mixed in equal proportions. Thus all 
gas densities decrease with altitude at the same rate, an 
average value which, at Uranus and Neptune, is about 
equal to the rate for Hy. However, above a certain altitude, 
where the mixing is not vigorous enough to keep the 
proportions uniform, each gas density decreases with 
altitude at its own individual rate. The point where 
this separation of rates begins is called the homopause, 
which is marked on figures 1 and 2. Notice the change in 
slope of the He and CH, profiles there, above which each 
constituent is decoupled from the others and so follows its 
own independent profile. 

It is because of the rapid falloff of the CH, density 
compared with the lighter elements that the hydrocarbons 
are confined to lower altitudes, to which heat absorbed 
at high altitudes must be conducted before it can be 
radiated into space. Thus the level of the homopause helps 
determine the maximum temperature of the uppermost 
region of the atmosphere. 


Uranus 

The stratosphere of Uranus has been discovered to be 
unusually calm compared with the other giant planets, 
so that heavier gases such as helium and methane are 
not well-mixed with the hydrogen at higher altitudes. In 
other words, the homopause lies at lower altitude and 
higher pressure, about 10-4 bar in figure 1. Because of 
the low methane abundance at the higher altitudes where 
solar extreme ultraviolet light can penetrate and drive 
photochemistry, there are also lower abundances of the 
higher hydrocarbons such as ethane and acetylene there. 
Therefore there are fewer photochemically produced 
aerosol particles, or smog (an aerosol is a particle so small 
that it settles out of the air very slowly). As a result, 
Uranus’s stratosphere is unusually clear for a gas giant, 
so that Rayleigh scattering (light scattering caused by 
spontaneous microscopic fluctuations of the air’s density) 
is the dominant atmospheric opacity at wavelengths away 
from methane absorptions. At Earth, when opacity from 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


water aerosols (clouds) is negligible, Rayleigh scattering 
is also important, turning the sky blue and sunsets red 
because of its A~+ wavelength dependence. 

Because the hydrocarbons lie so deep in the 
stratosphere, heat conducted from its source around 
10-" bar must travel a great distance. In order for 
conduction to carry the heat this far, the heat-source 
region’s temperature must rise to about 850 K. 

This high temperature inflates the upper atmosphere 
greatly, particularly the light atomic hydrogen component 
(a minor component at lower altitudes), so that it falls 
off slowly with altitude. Therefore even at the great 
altitudes (1.64Ry < r < 2Ry) of Uranus’s rings, which 
are basically icy orbiting pebbles, the gas density is high 
enough to produce frictional drag. As with artificial Earth 
satellites, atmospheric drag causes Uranus’s ring particles 
to gradually lose their orbit-maintaining momentum 
until eventually they fall vertically into the troposphere. 
Because the ratio of gas drag to particle inertia is largest for 
the smallest ring particles, Uranus’s inflated atmosphere 
selectively removes the finest ring particles. The steady 
shrinkage of ring-particle orbits, piling up against the 
repulsive perturbations of larger orbiters with slower 
orbital decay, may be part of the reason that Uranus’s rings 
are a series of very thin concentric bands, in contrast with 
the nearly continuous disk that constitutes Saturn’s rings. 


Neptune 

The upper atmosphere of Neptune is much more 
vigorously mixed than is Uranus’s, as shown in figure 2 by 
its higher homopause altitude (at around 10~° bar instead 
of 10-* bar as at Uranus). For this reason methane and 
other hydrocarbons are found at significant densities much 
higher in the atmosphere at Neptune, as is also evident in 
figure 2. Neptune’s degree of atmospheric mixing is more 
typical of the other giant planets, Jupiter and Saturn, than 
is Uranus’s. 

Probably because the hydrocarbons reach higher 
in the atmosphere, the heat flow from Neptune’s high 
altitude heat source (not well defined, but probably at no 
higher an altitude in pressure units than at Uranus) has 
a shorter distance to travel before it can be radiated into 
space. Therefore the hot uppermost regions of Neptune’s 
atmosphere, at about 550-650 K, do not reach as high a 
temperature (about 850 K) as Uranus’s does. 


Ionosphere 

Ionospheres are formed by ionizing radiation and 
represent a balance between the ion production rate 
and the recombination loss rate. Because both the 
recombination loss rate and the atmospheric opacity 
to ionizing radiation are proportional to gas density, 
which increases rapidly with depth in the atmosphere, 
ionospheres typically have sharp lower boundaries. The 
upper part of the ionosphere, however, typically decreases 
upwards at an exponential rate determined by the local 
atmospheric temperature. This rate has been measured for 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, lonospheres, and 
Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Neptune’s and Uranus’s ionospheres and is about right for 
H* ions. 

In addition to this smooth variation, thin layers of 
higher electron density were observed in Uranus’s and 
Neptune’s ionospheres. It has been conjectured that 
these are transitory effects of meteor showers, which are 
observed to create ionization in Earth’s atmosphere. These 
thin layers are at the bottoms of the two ionospheres, which 
lie at about 1000-2000 km above 1 bar at Uranus and about 
500-1000 km at Neptune. 


Magnetosphere 

The magnetosphere is the region outside a planet’s 
exobase, where the planetary magnetic field is strong 
enough to deflect the solar wind. On the upwind side, 
the pressure balance between field and wind creates a 
roughly parabolic boundary, called the magnetopause, 
with nose distance about 20Ry upstream at Uranus and 
25Ry at Neptune. This boundary envelops its associated 
planet and extends downstream in a wake many tens 
of planetary radii long. Outside of this boundary is a 
roughly hyperboloidal bow shock standing in the highly 
supersonic solar wind. 

The inner boundary of the magnetosphere is 
effectively its planet’s exobase, below which collisions 
with atmospheric molecules control charged-particle 
motion. However, atmosphere—magnetosphere coupling 
can extend more deeply than the exobase, as magnetic- 
field-aligned currents can flow into the ionosphere, 
across to other field lines and back out into the 
magnetosphere. It is this coupling that drives much 
collective magnetospheric motion. 

The magnetosphere encompasses a wide range of 
phenomena, described in their individual sections (see 
figures 3 and 4). Because of the long-range coupling 
present in the magnetosphere, its seemingly independent 
phenomena mutually interact more than is the case in the 
neutral atmosphere. 


Plasma 

PLASMA is a gas which contains significant numbers of 
ions and electrons, so that it conducts electricity at least 
along the magnetic field, and often perpendicular to it 
as well. The plasma at both Uranus and Neptune was 
composed of ions and electrons with kinetic energies 
covering Voyager’s entire range of measurement, from 10 
to about 10’ eV (1 eV = 1.6 x 10°” J is a particle kinetic 
energy equivalent to a temperature of about 8700 K). 
Plasmas in different energy ranges behave differently, so 
we discuss them separately. 

The high-energy (> 10° eV) plasma at both planets is 
extremely sparse and forms radiation belts similar to those 
at Earth. It diffuses inwards through the magnetosphere, 
so that its absorption by satellites and rings creates 
decreases in density that were observed by Voyager. A 
few faint rings and satellites were discovered in this way. 
When these energetic particles strike icy satellites and ring 
particles, hydrogen and oxygen atoms are ejected. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ZGSM 


Figure 3. Diagrams of Uranus’s magnetoshere. The curved lines 
depict the magnetic field as it is confined within the 
magnetopause. The arrow labeled Q is Uranus’s axis of rotation, 
and is fixed in space. The arrow labeled D is the magnetic dipole 
axis and rotates with the planet. The two diagrams show the 
magnetosphere at half-rotation intervals. The axis labeled Xcsm 
points toward the Sun. (Figure from Voigt et al 1987 

J. Geophys. Res. 86 15 337.) 


The low-energy (<10* eV) plasma drifts through 
these magnetospheres on paths determined mostly by 
the electric and magnetic fields. Both the rotation of 
the planets and the interaction of the solar wind with the 
magnetospheres create electric fields that fluctuate in time 
as well as space. In the following, we describe what is 
known of the behavior of the low-energy plasma. 


Uranus. Uranus’s magnetospheric plasma is rather 
tenuous and consists almost entirely of H*. It appears 
to originate from Uranus’s atmosphere, because if it came 
from the icy satellites there would also be O*, which is not 
observed. It drifts Sunward as at Earth, but because of 
the pole-on configuration simultaneously co-rotates with 
Uranus. However, the co-rotation does not interfere with 
the plasma drift, as it does in the Earth’s plasmasphere, 
because the rotation occurs about an axis parallel to the 
drift. 

As the plasma drifts toward (away from) Uranus, 
it sees an increasing (decreasing) magnetic field strength 
which compresses (expands) the plasma and heats (cools) 
it drastically. Thus there is a plasma adiabat in the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, lonospheres, and 
Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Rotation 


: yp \ axis 
| KC ¥ y Magnetic 


Magnetotai! 


Figure 4. Diagram of Neptune’s magnetosphere, showing its 
components. The curved lines with triangular arrowheads 
depict the solar wind flow deflected around the magnetopause. 
Those with V-like arrowheads are magnetic field lines, except 
the one labeled ‘Triton’, which is Triton’s orbit. The line with the 
full dots is the trajectory of the Voyager flyby. (From Schulz et al 
1995 Magnetospheric configuration of Neptune Neptune and 
Triton ed D P Cruikshank (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press). Copyright © 1995 by The Arizona Board of Regents. 
Reprinted by permission of the University of Arizona Press.) 


magnetosphere just as there is a gaseous adiabat in 
Uranus’s interior. 

The plasma consists of a number of components, 
which are distinguished by their temperatures. Because 
of the adiabatic drift compression, their densities and 
temperatures are best compared by referral to a standard 
distance from the Uranian magnetic dipole. Two low- 
energy populations are known; a warm plasma (0.5 cm™3 
and 10 eV at 5Ry) and a hot plasma (0.3 cm? and 
1000 eV at 5Ry). The warm plasma drifts by Uranus 
without much change, but the hot electrons continually 
lose energy (relative to their adiabatic temperature) as they 
approach Uranus. The hot ions also abruptly disappear 
inside approximately 5 Ry, as though their drift paths were 
avoiding Uranus. 


Neptune. Neptune’s magnetospheric plasma is very 
tenuous and consists mostly of H* and N* ions. Its 
source appears to be the atmosphere of Triton, because 
of the presence of N* ions. In addition, a measure of the 
plasma density, corrected for compression by the magnetic 
field, appears to decrease as Neptune is approached. If 
Neptune were the source, the plasma density measure 
would increase towards the planet instead. 

The decrease of plasma density measure towards 
Neptune is due to loss of some of the plasma to collisions 
with the atmosphere as the charged particles bounce back 
and forth along the magnetic field lines. Unlike the 
case of the aurora, where high-energy (104 eV or more) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


charged particles from far out in the magnetosphere hit 
the atmosphere near the magnetic poles, this plasma loss 
refers to low-energy (tens of eV) plasma on field lines near 
the planet that is impacting the atmosphere far from the 
magnetic poles. 

The motion of Neptune’s magnetospheric plasma 
is complex and not completely understood. Neptune’s 
spin axis is roughly perpendicular to its orbital plane, 
just as it is at Jupiter and Saturn, where magnetospheric 
plasma rotates with the planet. However, the large 
tilt of the magnetic field results in Neptune’s magnetic 
dipole alternating between states pointed at the Sun and 
perpendicular to the Sun—Neptune line as Neptune rotates. 
As a result plasma motions in Neptune’s magnetosphere 
fluctuate as Neptune rotates. As at Uranus, plasma motion 
is part Sunward back-eddy and part co-rotation. 


Aurora 

Auroras are regions where the atmosphere glows 
because of bombardment by high-energy charged particles 
(usually electrons) which flow into the atmosphere along 
the magnetic field lines. They typically occur near, but 
not quite at, magnetic poles because the field lines there 
connect to the largest regions of the magnetosphere. 


Uranus. Uranus’s magnetic poles, and therefore its 
auroras, are far from the geographic poles because of 
its large magnetic dipole tilt (60°) and offset (0.3Ry). 
Moreover, both auroras are on magnetic field lines that 
connect to the magnetospheric tail, so that the aurora- 
exciting particles (probably 10* eV electrons) streaming 
down the field lines into the atmosphere are still drifting 
toward Uranus. Because the plasma drift paths continue 
on past Uranus, on field lines where there is no aurora, it 
seems likely that the auroras are exhausting the available 
hot electrons before they can drift completely past Uranus. 

The aurora is visible primarily at in the extreme 
ultraviolet at wavelengths between 90 and 110 nm, emitted 
by electronic transitions between low-lying states of 
molecular hydrogen. These bands are excited by the low- 
energy secondary electrons emitted when high-energy 
charged particles impact the atmosphere. 


Neptune. Neptune’s magnetic poles and auroras are also 
far from the geographic poles because of its large magnetic 
dipole tilt (47°) and offset (0.55Ry). The light from 
Neptune’s aurora, like Uranus’s, is extreme ultraviolet 
H» molecular band emission between 90 and 110 nm, 
stimulated by auroral secondary electrons. Some diffuse 
glow is also stimulated by electrons which are emitted by 
the day-side atmosphere in response to solar ultraviolet 
light and which follow the magnetic field lines around to 
impact the dark side. 


Radio waves 

There are a number of types of radio waves emitted 
by Uranus and Neptune with frequencies in the range 
100-1000 kHz, both narrow and wide bandwidth and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus and Neptune: Atmospheres, lonospheres, and 
Magnetospheres 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


emitted both in bursts and semicontinuously. Uranus’s 
and Neptune’s radio emissions are more similar to each 
other than to those of other planets. They can be 
observed from outside the magnetosphere, although, at 
the present orientation of Uranus, the strongest Uranian 
radio emissions are beamed away from the Earth 

Several types are emitted from regions not far 
out of the atmosphere on the auroral field lines. In 
most cases they are generated by electron velocity 
distributions that are relaxing to equilibrium by means of 
collective instabilities. One of the ways to cause electron 
velocity distributions to depart from equilibrium, and so 
generate these waves, is to selectively remove part of 
the distribution by atmospheric absorption in an aurora, 
which is why these radio emissions are located there. 

Most of the radio emissions are confined to a narrow 
range of directions, or beamed, and rotate with the 
planet. The rotation periods of both Neptune and Uranus 
were measured by timing the recurrent detection of these 
emissions in the weeks after each Voyager flyby. 

Another radio emission emitted at Uranus, but only 
marginally at Neptune, is the radio noise produced by 
lightning discharges. The strength of these emissions 
suggests that lightning discharges are weaker at Uranus 
than at Saturn but considerably stronger than at Neptune 
and at Earth. At Neptune, however, whistler plasma 
waves (see below) originating from lightning were found 
instead. Therefore lightning does occur at Neptune, but 
the discharges must be much weaker than at Uranus. 


Plasma waves 

Plasma waves are collective disturbances in a plasma that 
are coupled to perturbations in the electric and magnetic 
fields and that move with respect to the plasma. They are, 
like the radio emissions, typically generated by departures 
of the plasma from thermal equilibrium. Unlike the 
radio waves, however, they do not propagate out of the 
plasma, and so cannot be observed from outside the 
magnetosphere. 

The strongest of them, Whistler-mode noise, is caused 
by the depletion of magnetospheric electrons traveling 
along the magnetic field when they impact the atmosphere 
and create an aurora. This imbalance between the numbers 
of electrons with velocities parallel and perpendicular 
to the magnetic field is unstable, and the whistler-mode 
noise is generated by the motions of the electrons as 
they approach equilibrium. In the process, however, 
more electrons stream along the field and impact the 
atmosphere, perpetuating the process. Unsurprisingly, 
therefore, whistler-mode noise was observed at its greatest 
intensity at Uranus when Voyager was on field lines that 
were connected to the aurora. 

Whistlers are plasma waves propagating in the same 
mode as whistler-mode noise (and vice versa) but are 
generated by a different process—lightning discharges. 
Whistlers are very short bursts of plasma wave noise 
that are spread out in frequency as they propagate along 
the magnetic field. In a radio receiver they sound like 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


pure tones descending in frequency; hence the name. 
Whistlers emitted by lightning discharges were detected 
in Neptune’s magnetosphere. 


Current research 

Mostly because of the lack of new data, Uranus and 
Neptune research has declined greatly in recent years. 
The HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (or HST, a 2.4 m aperture 
orbiting telescope covering the wavelengths 115-2500 nm) 
and large-aperture ground-based telescopic infrared 
observations of the ionospheric species H3; between 3890 
and 4090 nm are the main sources of new data. 

There are many questions for future research. How 
does Uranus’s atmosphere smooth out such great seasonal 
extremes of solar heating? Why is Uranus’s internal heat 
source so small compared with those of the other gas 
giants? Why is Uranus’s stratosphere so much calmer and 
less mixed than other giant planet stratospheres?) What 
is the high-altitude heat source that heats Neptune’s and 
Uranus’s upper atmospheres to such high temperatures? 
What is the pattern of motion of Uranus’s and Neptune’s 
magnetospheric plasma? Whatis the origin of bursty radio 
emissions? Why are Jupiter’s, Uranus’s and Neptune’s 
radio emissions rotation controlled, while Earth’s and 
Saturn’s are solar wind controlled? 


Bibliography 

Bergstralh J T, Miner E D and Matthews M S 1991 Uranus 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Cruikshank D P 1995 Neptune and Triton (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) 

Lunine J I 1993 The atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune 
Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 31 217-63 


Floyd Herbert 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Uranus: Rings 


The Uranian ring system comprise ten narrow rings, 
one diffuse ring and some tenuous material between the 
narrow rings. With a mixed nomenclature arising from 
historical tradition, the names of the ten narrow rings (in 
order of increasing distance from the planet) are 6, 5, 4, a, 
B, n, y, 6, A, €; the name of the diffuse ring is 1986U1R. 
The innermost narrow ring lies about 16 000 km above the 
microbar pressure level in the Uranian atmosphere, and 
the entire ring system is about 10000 km in radial extent. 
The distinctive feature of these rings is their narrowness, 
most having a radial width less than 12 km (table 1). 

Although these rings can now be easily imaged 
from the Earth with modern detectors, they were first 
observed with the technique of stellar occultations. A 
stellar occultation occurs when starlight is blocked from an 
observer by an intervening body—in this case the Uranian 
rings. Observations are carried out with high-speed 
photometric equipment, ideally with several observing 
sites well spaced in the direction perpendicular to the 
motion of the ring shadows across the Earth. The 
recording of the starlight intensity as a function of time 
then provides a ‘line scan’ of the transmission of the 
ring material. With multiple observations of the same 
occultation by a network of telescopes, several points 
around each ring are recorded, and the ring orbits can 
be constructed. By repeatedly observing occultations 
over several years, one can learn the ring orbits to 
great accuracy. One advantage of the stellar occultation 
technique over ordinary imaging observations with Earth- 
based telescopes is that occultations achieve a spatial 
resolution (limited by fresnel diffraction) of just a few 
kilometers, rather than the much coarser resolution 
achievable with Earth-based telescopic observations. 

The discovery of the Uranian rings with airborne and 
ground-based observations of a stellar occultation in 1977 
ushered in the beginning of modern ring research. With 
only the broad, bright ring system of Saturn as an example 
(See SATURN: RINGS, no one had suspected the existence 
of dark, narrow rings. Any thought of narrow rings 
was quickly dismissed because collisions between ring 
particles would cause them to spread out into a broader 
ring over time. In order to explain the existence of narrow 
rings, theorists postulated the existence of small satellites 
near the rings, termed SHEPHERD MOONS, that would confine 
the particles through their gravitational interaction. This 
idea was borne out by voyacer’s discovery of Prometheus 
and Pandora, two satellites that shepherd the narrow 
F ring of Saturn. Voyager also discovered Cordelia 
and Ophelia, the two shepherd satellites of the « ring. 
However, pairs of shepherd satellites have not yet been 
identified for the other Uranian rings, so the mechanism(s) 
for maintaining narrow rings may not be completely 
identified. 

In the two decades following their discovery, about 
20 stellar occultations by the rings were observed, 
mostly in methane bands where the background light 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Table 1. Orbital propertiest of Uranus’s rings. 


Semimajor Radial Inclination 
Ring axis (km) width (km) Eccentricity (degrees) 
6 41 837.2 1.0-2.5 0.001 013 0.062 
5 42 234.8 1-7 0.001 899 0.054 
4 42570.9 1-7 0.001 059 0.0323 
a 44718.5 4.5-10.5 0.000 761 0.0152 
B 45 661.0 5.5-12 0.000 442 0.0051 
n 47 175.9 55 ~0.004 ~0.0011 
Y 47 626.9 1-8 0.109 ~0.002 
5 48 300.12 2-8 0.004 0.0011 
A 50 023.9 1.3-2.5 ~0.0 ~0.0 
g 51 149.3 20-96 0.007 936 ~0.0002 


+ Errors in these quantities are in the least significant digit, and 
values preceded by a tilde have an error comparable to the 
value. These results are from French et al (1991). 


from Uranus is minimized. In 1986 the Voyager 2 
spacecraft flew by the Uranian system and recorded 
several high-resolution images of the rings. In addition, 
the Voyager Photo-polarimeter Subsystem (PPS) and 
Ultraviolet Spectrometer (UVS) instruments observed 
stellar occultations by the rings, and occultations of the 
Voyager radio signal (from the Radio Science Subsystem, 
RSS) were observed from Earth. Due to the much closer 
vantage point of the spacecraft, the Voyager data have 
provided the highest spatial resolution observations of 
the rings that we have so far. In particular, the radio- 
occultation data at X-band has a resolution of 50 m, which 
can be compared with the 2 km resolution of ground-based 
stellar occultation data at visible wavelengths. 

Several ring phenomena were first observed in the 
Uranian ring system. After the extreme narrowness of the 
rings, the most surprising of these is the elliptical and/or 
inclined orbits exhibited by some of the rings. Dynamical 
theories had predicted that rings would be limited to 
circular orbits in the equatorial plane of the planet. The 
eccentricities and inclinations are excited by the shepherd 
satellites, which can also produce an extremely sharp ring 
edge, if it is located at an exact orbital resonance with the 
satellite. Examples of sharp edges produced by resonances 
with the satellites Cordelia and Ophelia are the inner and 
outer edges of the « ring, the outer edge of the 6 ring and 
the inner edge of the y ring. 

Elliptical ring orbits exhibit PRECESSION, which is a slow 
change in the orientation of the ellipse. The precession of 
the ring orbits is caused by the oblate mass distribution 
within Uranus, and the rate of this motion gives us 
information about the interior structure of the planet. 
Here we can consider the rings as ‘test particles’ moving 
within Uranus’ gravitational field. From their precessional 
motions, two of the gravitational harmonic coefficients 
have been precisely established (J. = 3.3434 x 10-% and 
J, = —2.89 x 10-5). These allow the computation of the 
Uranian internal density distribution, which provides a 
constraint on allowable interior models for Uranus. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


RINGS OF URANUS 
KAO March 10, 1977 


Rings: 6 54 a@ B ny ‘ 
Wes yeh i ' Ve tee 


Pre- immersion 
Occultations 


Stellar Intensity (linear scale) 


Post-emersion 
Occultations 


t 
‘ 
i 
1 
\ 
i 
I 
| 
( 1 
\ 
l 
\ 
' 
i 
1 
1 
1 
( 


1 | 
ei 
' | 
| 1 ; ! 
: rood yd 
‘ Hl 1 pod 
i oe a 
1 
1 I 1 rot 
4 U t bof 
’ £ 1 i) 1 


40,000 42,500 45,000 47,500 


50,000 
Distance from a B y & Center,(km) 


52,500 


Figure 1. Discovery observations of the Uranian rings from the 
Kuiper Airborne Observatory. The intensity of starlight before 
and after Uranus occulted the star is plotted versus distance 
from the center of the planet. Nine dips were observed on each 
side, which occurred at the same radius, indicating that Uranus 
is encircled by a system of narrow rings. (After Elliot J L 1979 
Stellar occultation studies of the solar system Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 17 445-75. Reprinted, with permission, from the 
Annual Reviews of Astronomy and Astrophysics Volume 17, ©1979, 
by Annual Reviews www.AnnualReviews.org.) 


The largest ring of the system (¢) has a minimum 
radial width of 20 km (at pertapsis, its closest distance to 
Uranus) and a maximum 96 km (at apoapsis, its furthest 
distance). This width is a strict linear function of the 
ring radius, which implies that the precessions of the 
individual particle orbits are ‘locked’ at the same rate. 
If the precession rates were not all the same, then the 
orbits of the particles in the outer parts of the ring would 
precess more slowly than those for the particles closer to 
the planet, and the radial width of the ring would become 
uniform around the ring. The radial widths of rings a and 
B also vary linearly as with distance from the planet, but 
the variation is only 4.5 to 10.5 km for the ring and 5.5 
to 12 km for the 6 ring. One mechanism proposed for 
maintaining the locked precession of the particle orbits is 
the gravity of the ring particles themselves, but this has 
not been conclusively proven to be the case. 

In discussing the structure of the Uranian rings, 
one property of interest is the equivalent depth, which 
is the optical depth (minus the natural logarithm of the 
ring transmission) integrated along the radial direction. 
Thus the equivalent depth measures the amount of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Dun 


Figure 2. Voyager observations of the Uranian ring system. The 
three faint rings in the lower right are (in order of increasing 
radius) 6, 5 and 4; these are followed by a, 6, n, y,d and ¢. The 2 
ring is not visible. Ring ¢ contains the most material and is the 
brightest because it reflects the most sunlight. (Courtesy 
NASA/JPL/Caltech.) 


material in the ring in a way that is independent of the 
angle at which the ring occults a star or other source of 
radiation. For most rings the equivalent depth is the 
same all around the ring, indicating a constant amount 
of material at each longitude of the ring orbit. Equivalent 
depth has the dimensions of length. 

Rings 6, 5 and 4 have a structure similar to each 
other, being very narrow with equivalent depths of 0.8, 
1.8 and 1.4 km. These rings have variable widths, but 
the widths do not correlate with orbital radius (as they 
do for the a, 6 and « rings). The Voyager occultation 
data reveal significant internal structure. Rings a and B 
are more substantial, with equivalent depths of 6.0 km 
and 3.8 km respectively. These rings rarely exhibit the 
sharp edges characteristic of resonances with satellites 
(two sharp-edged profiles were observed for the a ring 
in the Voyager data). Rings y and 6 are concentrated, with 
equivalent depths of 6.6 km and 4.1 km. Each of these rings 
has an excited normal mode, with an amplitude of 5 km for 
the y ring and 3 km for the 6 ring. The 6 ring may also have 
aninternal density wave. The 7 ring is unique, with a sharp 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Uranus: Rings 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ring « ingress 


Normal Radio Opacity 


30° 


Radius (Km) Bae 


Figure 3. Occultation profile of the ¢ ring. This graph shows the 
normal radio opacity (optical depth) of the ring as a function of 
radius. Note the sharp inner and outer edges caused by orbital 
resonances with Cordelia and Ophelia and the detailed internal 
structure. Below the dashed line, the variations are mostly due 
to noise, rather than structure of the ring. (After Gresh D L, 
Marouf E A, Tyler G L, Rosen P A and Simpson R A 1989 
Voyager radio occultation by Uranus’ rings. I. Observational 
results Icarus 78 131-68.) 


inner feature (similar to rings 4, 5 and 6) and an adjacent 
broad, low-optical-depth component about 55 km in radial 
extent and with a sharp outer edge. Both components of 
the 7 ring follow circular orbits in the equatorial plane 
of Uranus. The A ring is tenuous and clumpy, with an 
equivalent depth of only 0.1 km. Finally, the « ring has 
very sharp inner and outer edges and an equivalent depth 
of 83.8 km. Its occultation profile has a ‘W’ shape, showing 
that its material becomes more concentrated at its edges 
(figure 3). 

The rings are very flat—with a vertical thickness 
(perpendicular to the plane of their orbits) of only a few 
tens of meters. The ring particles themselves are dark, with 
ALBEDOS of a few per cent. Comparison of the occultation 
profiles of the rings at different wavelengths reveals that 
they contain very few particles smaller than centimeter 
sizes, with particle sizes tens of centimeters having been 
inferred in the « ring. A Voyager image of the rings (in 
forward scattered sunlight) shows a small population of 
micron-sized dust particles in the ring system. 

Compared with the other ring systems, Uranus’ rings 
have less material than those of Saturn, but more than 
the ring systems of Jupiter and Neptune (see JUPITER: RINGS 
NEPTUNE: RINGS). All the Uranian rings lie inside the ROCHE 
uimit, which is the smallest radius for which a body can 
remain intact by its self-gravitational forces alone (without 
being pulled apart by the tidal forces from Uranus). For 
a satellite (such as Cordelia and Ophelia) to exist within 
this region, it must have sufficiently high density and/or 
tensile strength to prevent the tidal forces from Uranus 
breaking it up. In fact, each of the rings could have formed 
in this manner. Once formed, a ring is subject to erosion 
processes, such as radiation drag, meteoroid impact and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


drag from Uranus’ exosphere. One can then estimate how 
long these processes could have been operating in the past, 
which sets limits on the age of the rings. Estimates along 
these lines suggest ring ages of a few x 10° years—much 
less than the age of the solar system (4.5 x 10° yr). 


Bibliography 

Elliot J and Kerr R 1984 Rings: Discoveries from Galileo to 
Voyager (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press) 

Elliot J L and Nicholson P D 1984 The rings of Uranus 
Planetary Rings ed R Greenberg and A Brahic (Tucson, 
AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 25-72 

Esposito L W, Brahic A, Burns J A and Marouf E A 
1991 Particle properties and processes in Uranus’ 
rings Uranus ed J T Bergstrahl, ED Miner and MS 
Matthews (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 
pp 410-65 

French RG, Nicholson P D, Porco C C and Marouf EA 1991 
Dynamics and structure of the Uranian rings Uranus 
ed J T Bergstralh, E D Miner and M S Matthews 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 327-409 


] L Elliot 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Urey, Harold Clayton (1893-1981) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Urey, Harold Clayton (1893-1981) 


Chemist, born in Walkerton, Indiana, Nobel prizewinner 
for Chemistry in 1934 ‘for his discovery of heavy 
hydrogen’. It was at Columbia University that he isolated 
the isotope deuterium by distilling liquid hydrogen; in 
the Second World War, he directed the effort to separate 
uranium-235 from uranium-238 for the atomic bomb. At 
the University of Chicago, he worked on the origin of the 
elements, their abundance in stars, and the origin of the 
planets, including the chemical properties of the Earth. 
He invented a technique that used oxygen isotope-bearing 
minerals to date rocks and to measure paleohistoric water 
temperatures (see MILUTIN MILANKOVITCH). He analysed 
lunar rocks from the Apollo missions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ursa Major ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ursa Maj or See also: Groombridge 1830, Mizar and Alcor, Plough. 
(the Great Bear; abbrev. UMa, gen. Ursae Majoris; area 
1280 sq. deg.) a northern constellation which lies between 
Draco and Leo Minor—Leo—Canes Venatici, and culminates 
at midnight in mid March. Its origin is uncertain, though 
it was known to the ancient Greeks, who identified it 
with two mythological figures—Callisto, a mortal who 
was turned into a bear after having fallen victim to Zeus’s 
passion and whom he placed for safety in the sky, and 
Adrasteia, a Cretan nymph who raised the infant Zeus 
and whom in gratitude he placed among the stars. Its 
brightest stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. aD 100-175) 
in the Almagest. 

The third-largest and probably the best known of 
the constellations, Ursa Major is easily recognized by the 
asterism of the Plough or Big Dipper, formed by seven of 
its brightest stars, w, B, y, 5, €, ¢ and n, which since ancient 
times has been used for navigation, as a line drawn from B 
through a Ursa Majoris points to a Ursae Minoris (Polaris), 
a second-magnitude star that lies within 1° of the north 
celestial pole. The brightest stars of Ursa Major are ¢ Ursae 
Majoris (Alioth), magnitude 1.8, @ Ursae Majoris (Dubhe), 
a very close binary with orange (KO) and pale yellow 
(FO) components, magnitudes 2.0 and 4.9 (combined 
magnitude 1.8), separation 0.7”, period 44.4 years, n Ursae 
Majoris (Alkaid or Benetnasch), magnitude 1.9, ¢ Ursae 
Majoris (Mizar), a multiple system consisting of two 
white (A2 and A7) components, magnitudes 2.3 and 3.9, 
separation 14.4”, both of which have a fainter companion, 
which forms a wide optical double with 80 Ursae Majoris 
(Alcor), magnitude 4.0, separation 11.8’, 6 Ursae Majoris 
(Merak), magnitude 2.3, and y Ursae Majoris, magnitude 
2.4. There are 13 other stars of magnitude 4.0 or brighter. 
The five central stars of the Plough (f, y, 5, € and ¢ Ursae 
Majoris) are part of the Ursa Major Moving Cluster, which 
is the closest star cluster to the Sun, its center being about 
75 light-years distant. 

Another interesting multiple star system is € Ursae 
Majoris (Alula Australis), which consists of two yellow 
(GO) components, magnitudes 4.3 and 4.8 (combined 
magnitude 3.8), separation 0.9-3.1", period 59.8 years, 
the former of which has an unseen companion which 
revolves around it in 669 days, and the latter two unseen 
companions, one of which revolves around it in 3.98 days. 
The main components were the first binary system to have 
an orbit computed, by M Savary in 1828. Other interesting 
stars include Lalande 21185 (magnitude 7.5), which, at a 
distance of 8.3 light-years, is the fourth closest star to the 
Sun, and Groombridge 1830 (magnitude 6.4), which has 
the third largest proper motion of any star. 

Other interesting objects include M81 (NGC 3031), a 
seventh-magnitude spiral galaxy, its near neighbor M82 
(NGC 3034), an eighth-magnitude irregular, starburst 
galaxy which is thought to have experienced disruption 
following a near-collision with the much more massive 
M81 some 40 million years ago, and M101 (NGC 5457), an 
eighth-magnitude face-on spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ursa Minor 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ursa Minor 


(the Little Bear; abbrev. UMi, gen. Ursae Minoris; area 
256 sq. deg.) a northern circumpolar constellation which 
is surrounded on three sides by Draco and includes the 
north celestial pole. Its origin is uncertain, though it was 
known to the ancient Greeks, who identified it with Ida, a 
Cretan nymph who helped her sister, Adrasteia, raise the 
infant Zeus and whom in gratitude Zeus placed among 
the stars alongside Adrasteia (who is represented by the 
neighboring constellation of Ursa Major). Its brightest 
stars were cataloged by Ptolemy (c. ap 100-175) in the 
Almagest. 

A small, rather inconspicuous constellation, Ursa 
Minor’s only claim to fame is that its brightest star, w Ursae 
Minoris (Polaris or Alrucaba), lies within 1° of the north 
celestial pole. « Urase Minoris is actually a triple system 
with pale yellow (F7 and F3) components, the primary of 
which is a Cepheid variable (range 1.86—-2.13 decreasing, 
period 3.97 days) and the secondary a star of magnitude 
8.2, separation 18.4”, and a third, unseen component which 
revolves around the primary in 30.5 years. There are 
two other stars brighter than magnitude 4.0: 6 Ursae 
Majoris (Kochab), magnitude 2.1, and y Ursae Majoris 
(Pherkad), magnitude 3.0, which together are known as 
the ‘Guardians of the Pole’. The seven brightest stars of 
the constellation (8, y, n, ¢, €, 6 and a) form an asterism 
similar to the Plough and are sometimes called the Little 
Dipper. 

There are no bright star clusters, nebulae or galaxies 
in the constellation, the brightest being NGC 6217, an 
eleventh-magnitude spiral galaxy. 


See also: Polaris. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


US Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


US Astronomy 


As the 19th century ended, astronomy underwent a period 
of rapid growth in the United States, a growth that was 
fueled by both the expansion of the university system 
and private philanthropy and which also paralleled the 
growth in astrophysical research. For the first half of the 
20th century, the US government took little interest in the 
funding of astronomical research, concentrating on those 
aspects of astronomy that were of greatest commercial 
and military interest: navigation and the determination 
of time. 

Following World War II, the involvement of the US 
government in funding all branches of science grew and 
the National Science Foundation (NSF) established and 
built the national observatories. With the birth of space 
astronomy in the 1960s, the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) became a major force in 
astronomical research. Despite an increasing government 
presence, there remained a steady source of private 
and institutional funds contributing to the operations of 
astronomical facilities and to the support of research. 
Together with this growth in funding came steady growth 
in the number of practicing research astronomers in the 
US, a number which grew more than six-fold in the three 
decades from 1960 to 1990. 


Funding sources 

The dominant portion of US government funding for 
astronomy is provided through two agencies, NASA and 
the NSF. Other agencies supporting astronomical research 
include the Department of Defense, the Department 
of Energy and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration. 

NASA currently provides about 80% of the total 
federal funding, with most of the balance provided by 
the NSF. NASA funds astronomy through the Office of 
Space Science (OSS), which had a budget of 2.1 billion 
dollars in fiscal year (FY) 1999. This office funds the 
planning, construction, launch and operation of space- 
based astronomical observing facilities. It also provides 
funding for the archiving and analysis of data from space 
missions. Furthermore, the OSS operates some high- 
altitude observing facilities, which fly on balloons or 
airplanes. 

The NSF division of astronomical sciences (AST) 
operates within the Mathematical and Physical Science 
directorate of the agency. Its budget for FY 1999 
was 119 million dollars. The NSF operates several 
national observing facilities, directly funds astronomical 
researchers and provides some funding for educational 
purposes. The NSF also provides funding for the design, 
development and construction of national ground-based 
observational facilities. In FY 1999, 8 million dollars 
was allocated for the design and development phases 
of the ATACAMA LARGE MILLIMETER Array (ALMA, formerly 
known as the MMA or millimeter array), an international 
collaboration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


There are numerous sources of non-federal funding 
for astronomy. These include private organizations, 
private universities, state universities, state and local 
governments and private foundations. The amount of 
non-federal funding for astronomical research is difficult 
to determine owing to the broad array of sources. 
Universities typically provide a significant level of support 
through salaries for faculty members. Private universities 
such as the California Institute of Technology or Harvard 
University as well as public universities such as the 
University of California or the University of Texas also 
use institutional funds to support observatory operations. 
Among private organizations, the Carnegie Institution of 
Washington and the Lowell Endowment provide ongoing 
operating funds for specific observatories while other 
groups such as the Keck Foundation, the Sloan Foundation 
and the Ford Foundation have provided substantial 
funding for the construction of observatories or for specific 
research projects. 


Facilities 

To effectively study the diverse array of objects in the uni- 
verse, observations must be made using all wavelengths 
of electromagnetic radiation. Some wavelengths of light 
are not able to penetrate the Earth’s atmosphere. Some 
methods of observation require extensive instrumentation. 
Some direct physical data are gleaned from analysis of col- 
lected cosmic dust particles or meteoritic material. For 
these reasons, observations must take place both from the 
surface of the Earth and from space. 

In the United States, observatories are funded by the 
Federal Government and through private sources. The 
NSF owns the facilities of and contracts for the operations 
of the National Observatories. These are as follows: 


e the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, with 
observatories on KITT PEAK, Arizona, CERRO TOLOLO, 
Chile, and Sunspot, New Mexico; 

e The NATIONAL RADIO ASTRONOMY OBSERVATORY, With 
observatories at Green Bank, West Virginia, Socorro, 
New Mexico, and Kitt Peak, Arizona; 

e the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center at 
ARECIBO, Puerto Rico. 


In addition: 


e The NSF provides operational support to a number 
of university radio astronomy facilities and the NSF 
Office of Polar Programs, which operates several 
astronomical facilities at the South Pole, 

e the NSF is a member of an international optical 
telescope partnership named GEMINI, which has 
built two identical telescopes, one in the northern 
hemisphere and one in the southern hemisphere (the 
United States funds approximately 48% of the overall 
budget; see GEMINI OBSERVATORY). 


The non-federally funded observatories are mainly 
supported through universities, consortia of universities 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


US Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


or private foundations. Many observatories operate 
with mixed sources of funding. For example, some 
observatories are constructed using university funds or 
with grants from private foundations and then rely 
on grants from the federal agencies to provide funds 
for development and construction of instruments and 
sometimes for operations. 

In the last 10 yr, NASA has launched three of 
the four so-called ‘Great Observatories’. These include 
the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE, the CHANDRA X-RAY OBSERVATORY 
and the COMPTON GAMMA-RAY OBSERVATORY. The final Great 
Observatory, the SPACE INFRARED TELESCOPE FACILITY, is 
scheduled for launch in December 2001. These satellites 
have radically changed our view of the universe and 
provided unprecedented discoveries unattainable from 
the ground. 

In addition to the Great Observatories series, NASA 
has a range of other missions from small to large. There 
are several major mission programs including Discovery, 
Explorer, Mars Exploration and New Millennium. Each 
mission has specific goals. Discovery missions explore 
objects within our solar system such as planets, moons 
and other small bodies. The Explorer program provides 
frequent flight opportunities at three separate funding 
levels for missions that support one of the four major 
themes of the Office of Space Science: university (less 
than $7.5 million), small (less than $71 million) and 
medium (less than $140 million). These themes are the 
Astronomical Search for Origins, Planetary Systems, The 
Sun—Earth Connection and the Structure and Evolution of 
the Universe. 

NASA maintains 15 research centers across the United 
States, each of which fulfills various portions of NASA’s 
overall mission. The centers most closely associated 
with astronomy missions include the GODDARD SPACE 
FLIGHT CENTER in Greenbelt, Maryland, the JET PROPULSION 
LABORATORY in Pasadena, California, and MARSHALL SPACE 
FLIGHT CENTER in Huntsville, Alabama. 

NASA has led the way in archiving astronomical 
data. It has created numerous facilities such as the Hubble 
Data Archive, the Astronomical Data Center, the Planetary 
Node system and the Astrophysics Data System, which 
provide researchers access to archival data. 

There has been a recent trend toward major projects, 
whether on the ground or in space, being undertaken 
through international collaborations because of the large 
costs and complexity of the projects. This trend is likely to 
continue into the near future. 


Demographics and employment patterns 

After a decade of rapid growth in the 1980s, the number of 
astronomers in the United States has grown more slowly 
but steadily in the 1990s. The median age of astronomical 
researchers has remained approximately the same, but the 
age distribution has widened somewhat with the number 
of astronomers in the age range from 35 to 50 decreasing 
from about 50% at the end of the 1980s to 40% at the end 
of the 1990s. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Toward the end of the 1990s there has been a leveling 
off and even a decrease in the number of students pursuing 
studies in physics and astronomy at the undergraduate 
and graduate levels in American universities. Almost 
all graduate students in astronomy or astrophysics have 
prepared themselves for graduate study by obtaining an 
undergraduate degree in either physics or astronomy. 
Among astronomy PhD recipients from US institutions 
in 1997, 19% were female and 27% were not US citizens 
(source: American Institute of Physics, 1997 Graduate 
Student Report). 

About six out of every ten astronomers in the United 
States are employed in academic institutions, colleges or 
universities, and slightly over half of these are in tenured 
or tenure-track positions. Most of the others are working 
in federal laboratories or research centers or for industrial 
contractors supporting these centers. 


Research publications 


The bulk of the research published in the United States 
appears in one of the four scholarly journals published 
by the astronomical societies. The AMERICAN ASTRONOMICAL 
society (AAS) publishes The Astrophysical Journal, The 
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series and The Astronomical 
Journal. The ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY OF THE PACIFIC (ASP) 
publishes The Publications of the Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific. In addition, there is a section of The Physical Review 
(published by the American Physical Society) devoted 
to astrophysical research, and both Icarus (Academic 
Press) and The Journal of Geophysical Research (American 
Geophysical Union) publish research in planetary and 
space physics. 

Annual Reviews, Inc., publishes a review volume, 
The Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics. The 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific and the American 
Institute of Physics are the principal publishers of 
conference proceedings. 

As technology has developed in recent years, there 
has been an increasing use of on-line preprint posting 
services for rapid dissemination of research results. The 
most popular of these is part of the arXiv e-print archive 
service hosted at the Los Alamos National Laboratory 
(http:/ /xxx.lanl.gov /archive /astro-ph). 


Amateur astronomers in the US 


Astronomy appeals to nearly everyone. Since the sky is 
accessible to all, astronomy is blessed with a large and 
active amateur community. The US has a number of 
amateur organizations that serve many diverse purposes. 
These range from small local clubs that meet regularly 
to exchange advice on telescopes and host ‘star parties’ 
to large national organizations that coordinate research 
activities easily performed by amateurs. Some of the larger 
national organizations that include amateurs are listed in 
table 1. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


US Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Larger national organizations. 


Organization Purpose Webpage 

AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF VARIABLE 

STAR OBSERVERS (AAVSO) Variable star research Wwww.aavso.org 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific | Education, outreach wwwaaspsky.org 
Astronomical League Observation wwwaastroleague.org 
INTERNATIONAL DARK SKY ASSOCIATION Light pollution control © www.ida.org 


Summary 

Astronomy in the United States is ending a period that 
has lasted a few years more than a century and has seen 
the US emerge as a world leader in astronomical research. 
At the beginning of the 20th century, the US was leading 
observational astronomy into an era of increasingly 
powerful and sophisticated telescopes. The 40 in refractor 
had just been commissioned and the two powerful 
telescopes on MOUNT WILSON Were in the near future. When 
these were put to work, our view of the universe changed 
completely. Edwin Hussite explored the extragalactic 
distance scale and we began to understand the expansion 
of the universe. These discoveries, in turn, spurred the 
construction of newer, more powerful telescopes such as 
the 200 in Hale telescope. Following the discovery of radio 
waves from cosmic sources, powerful instruments such as 
the Very Large Array were commissioned (see VERY LARGE 
ARRAY NATIONAL RADIO ASTRONOMY OBSERVATORY). The United 
States led the way in space beginning in the 1960s and 
opened new and previously unexplored regions of the 
electromagnetic spectrum for astronomical observations. 
A series of increasingly ambitious and complex spacecraft 
were built and operated, leading finally to NASA's Great 
Observatory Series, which reaches completion in the early 
years of the 21st century. 

At the beginning of the 21st century, American 
astronomers have access to an unprecedented suite 
of instruments and techniques with which to observe 
the heavens. New technology has made possible the 
construction of telescopes of a size that was inconceivable 
a generation ago, and the Keck Telescopes, at 10 m each, 
have led the way in showing what can be achieved with 
such powerful instruments. The successors to the NASA 
instruments of the 1990s are being planned even while the 
current generation is at its peak of performance. 


Kevin B Marvel and Robert W Milkey 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


US Naval Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


US Naval Observatory 


The US Naval Observatory is the oldest astronomical 
observatory in the United States, and the oldest 
continuously operating scientific institution in the US 
government. Founded in 1830 as a Depot of Charts 
and Instruments for rating chronometers and maintaining 
navigational instruments, by 1844 it had become the 
first national observatory of the United States, analogous 
to the ROYAL OBSERVATORY IN GREENWICH, England. The 
observatory’s headquarters are located in Washington, 
DC, including the historic 0.66 m refractor used to discover 
the two moons of Mars in 1877. The observatory’s largest 
telescope, a 1.55 m astrometric reflector, is located at its 
station in Flagstaff, Arizona. The observatory’s mission 
has always been to aid in the improvement of navigation 
as well as to conduct basic research in astronomy. Today, 
it provides the national time service for the United States, 
determines the precise positions and motions of celestial 
bodies, measures Earth rotation parameters including 
polar motion, and produces a variety of almanacs for use 
by astronomers, navigators and the general public. 
For further information see 

http://www.usno.navy.mil/ 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Ussher, James (1581-1656) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ussher, James (1581-1656) 


The Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of All Ireland, 
Ussher was a churchman and a scholar. He correlated 
Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories with Jewish 
genealogies of the Old Testament, and the resulting 
chronology was incorporated into the Authorized Version 
of the Bible of 1701. The chronology established the year of 
creation as 4004 sc. Lightfoot followed Ussher, improving 
on Ussher’s accuracy by declaring that the Earth had been 
created at 6:00 am. on 26 October 4004 Bc. The dates of 
other biblical events followed, for example, that Adam and 
Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10 November 
4004 Bc, and that the Ark landed on Mount Ararat on 5 May 
1491 Bc, ‘on a Wednesday’. Ussher was a great scholar, 
if over-literal in his analysis of the Bible. He collected 
the earliest available manuscripts into his library, which 
formed the nucleus of the great library of Trinity College, 
Dublin. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Valles Marineris 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Valles Marineris 


A complex system of canyons on Mars, centered at 11.6°S, 
70.7 °W, stretching for a total of 4128 km in the east—west 
direction just south of the equator, and reaching depths 
of over 6 km. It is named after the Mariner probes which 
returned the first close-up images of the planet’s surface, 
and is also referred to as Mariner Valley. Individual 
sections of the systems are termed chasmata. Atits western 
end, where the system abuts the faulted area at the east 
of the Tharsis Bulge known as Noctis Labyrinthus, lie 
Tithonium Chasma and, to its south, Ius Chasma. To their 
east, the system expands into the three parallel canyons 
named, from north to south, Ophir Chasma, Candor 
Chasma and Melas Chasma. To the northwest lies the 
unconnected Hebes Chasma. The main system continues 
eastward with Coprates Chasma, and then opens out, via 
Capri Chasma to the north and Eos Chasma to the south, 
into the so-called chaotic terrain of the region known as 
Margaritifer Sinus. 

Valles Marineris was created largely by faulting, but 
other forces have been at work. The deep branching 
valleys running into the southern edge of Ius Chasma 
suggest erosion by groundwater, while at the eastern end 
are teardrop-shaped islands suggestive of flowing water. 
Close up views of Coprates and the other central chasmata 
clearly reveal the presence of layered sediments, which 
could only have been deposited under water. 


See also: Mars: surface. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Valongo Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Valongo Observatory 


The Valongo Observatory, part of the Federal University of 
Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), sited in downtown Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, was founded in 1881. Its main activity is scientific 
research in the field of astronomy, carried out by its staff 
of twelve astronomers. The professors/researchers keep 
scientific collaboration programs with other institutions at 
both national and international levels. The main research 
areas are: fundamental astronomy, stellar astrophysics, in- 
terstellar medium, extragalactic astronomy and laboratory 
astrophysics. Funding comes chiefly from the Brazilian 
government agencies. The Valongo Observatory offers an 
undergraduate course in astronomy, attended by approx- 
imately 90 students. Its astronomical instruments include 
an original turn of the century Thomas Cook & Sons 30 cm 
refractor telescope, and a Zeiss reflector of 15 cm, for un- 
dergraduate teaching. As extracurricular activities, there 
is a visitation program offered to the general public, also 
serving secondary schools, which features telescopic ob- 
servations and conferences given twice a month. 
For further information see 
http://www.uftj.br/ov. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Van Allen Belts ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Van Allen Belts 


Two toroidal regions surrounding the Earth which contain 
trapped charged particles, discovered by James Van Allen. 


See: Magnetosphere of Earth: radiation belts. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Van Allen, James (1914-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Van Allen, James (1914—-) 


Magnetospheric physicist, born in Mount Pleasant, Iowa, 
discovered the Van Allen belts that surround Earth. After 
war-time service, Van Allen used V-2 rockets on high- 
altitude experiments, specifying a replacement rocket, 
the Aerobee, when supplies of the V-2 ran out. During 
the International Geophysical Year (1957-8), the first 
American satellite, Explorer 1, carried a micrometeorite 
detector and a cosmic ray experiment designed by Van 
Allen. Data from Explorer 1 and Explorer 3 (launched 26 
March 1958) revealed the existence of a doughnut-shaped 
region of charged particle radiation trapped by Earth’s 
magnetic field. Later in 1958, Pioneer 3 led to the discovery 
of a second radiation belt. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


van de Kamp, Peter (1901-95) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


van de Kamp, Peter (1901-95) 


Astronomer, born in Kampen, Netherlands, became 
director of the Sproul Observatory and professor at 
Swarthmore College, PA. He worked on the astrometric 
measurement of proper motions of stars across the sky 
and discovered oscillations in their paths. He interpreted 
the deflections as due to the revolution of planetary 
systems around the stars. The oscillations have not 
been confirmed, and many astronomers think that they 
were instrumental effects caused by the telescopes and 
measurement techniques. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


van Maanen, Adriaan (1884-1947) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


van Maanen, Adriaan (1884-1947) 


Dutch astronomer, became a member of the Mount Wilson 
staff, and studied the rotation of spiral nebulae as a means 
to establish their distances. His detection of rotational 
motions was illusory and misleadingly suggested that they 
were relatively nearby. Through its proper motion and 
parallax, he discovered the white dwarf van Maanen’s star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Van Maanen’s Star 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Van Maanen’s Star 


This star in the constellation of Pisces, although faint, is 
of much importance as it is the nearest readily observable 
white dwarf—a class of star of considerable significance 
in studies of stellar evolution. The white dwarfs Sirius B 
and Procyon B are both closer, but their proximity to their 
much brighter companions makes them very difficult to 
study as individual stars. 

Van Maanen’s Star, also known by the catalog 
designation Wolf 28, is situated about 2° south of 6 
Piscium. It was discovered in 1917 by the Dutch-American 
astronomer Adriaan Van Maanen (1884-1946), from a 
comparison of plates exposed in 1914 and 1917, to have the 
large proper motion of 2.978” per annum. Its spectrum is 
classified DG. With a parallax of 0.227”, itis only 14.4 light- 
years distant, yet its apparent magnitude is only 12.37, 
indicating that it has a very low intrinsic luminosity (its 
absolute magnitude is 14.1). It has been estimated that its 
diameter may be no more than 12500 km, comparable to 
that of the Earth. 


See also: white dwarfs. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Van Vleck Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Van Vieck Observatory 


The Van Vleck Observatory on the campus of Wesleyan 
University in Middletown, Connecticut, was built in the 
years 1914-16 upon the disassociation of the departments 
of mathematics and astronomy. It was named in memory 
of John Monroe Van Vleck, Professor of Natural Science at 
Wesleyan throughout much of the nineteenth century. 

The primary instrument of the observatory is a visual 
refracting telescope of 0.5 m aperture and a focal length 
of 8.41 m. The crown and flint lenses were made by 
CAR Lundin of the Alvan Clark Co. and were installed on 
a Warner and Swasey mounting in 1992. The two lenses 
are separated by about 10 cm, allowing cleaning of all 
surfaces without disturbing them. Their alignment has 
thus not been altered, and this and other features make the 
refractor among the best for astronomical research. Since 
1992, the telescope has been mainly used to determine 
trigonometric parallaxes and proper motions of many 
hundreds of faint nearby stars. In the last few decades 
the Van Vleck astrometric program has been one of the 
leaders in the use of parallaxes to respond to problems in 
stellar astrophysics. 

In 1971, a 0.6 cm reflecting telescope was obtained 
from the estate of Richard Perkin, founder of the Perkin- 
Elmer Corp. Like the refractor, the on-campus site of 
this instrument has encouraged a monitoring program 
using photoelectric photometry and later CCD imaging 
capability, of properties of T Tauri variables and other 
young stars. The department of astronomy offers the 
BA and MA degrees, and research programs on both 
telescopes feature student participation at every level. 

For further information see 
http://www.astro.wesleyan.edu/astro.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Variable Stars 


Stars vary in many ways and for many reasons. Broad 
categories of variation include stars that pulsate, 
fluoresce, become veiled, are disturbed by companions, 
erupt, explode and even change their spots. Variations 
may be episodic, irregular, semi-regular or periodic. A 
separate wide class comprises the extrinsic variables such 
as eclipsing and tidally distorted binaries and 
gravitationally lensed stars, whose variations result from 
changing aspect, but here we survey the intrinsic 
variables. 

The first recognized variable stars were novae and 
supernovae (‘new’ stars), with some very old records 
being astrophysically useful, chiefly because they fix the 
accurate date of a stellar explosion. Although the ancient 
accounts are obscure and fragmentary and do not 
recognize modern distinctions (such as nova versus 
supernova), the type of event may still be discernible. For 
example, a supernova can be visible for 6 months or even 
longer, whereas ordinary novae are prominent for a 
matter of weeks, so a nearby nova can mimic a distant 
supernova in brightness but is typically a much briefer 
event. Observations of exploding stars go back to several 
centuries BC with records of some objects from two or 
more places, and would go back further if not for library 
burnings. The records were kept by imperial astrologers 
in China (later in Japan and Korea) as the ‘new’ stars 
were considered important omens. Today’s telescopic 
observations provide good statistics of novae, but useful 
statistics of the infrequent supernovae in our Galaxy rely 
on the old records. Events observed in other galaxies 
have demonstrated enormous differences in scale 
between supernovae and novae. Theory has shown those 
differences to be far greater than optical observations 
indicate, as supernovae release the vast bulk of their 
energy in invisible forms. 

Except for novae, stars were regarded as constant 
until the mid to late 1600s, when the first non-eruptive 
variables were recognized. Most notable was the 
pulsating red giant o Ceti (Mira, the Wonderful) with its 
~330° large-amplitude variations. An appearance and 
disappearance of Mira had been noticed by D Fabricius 
in 1596, but was taken to be a nova. The early histories 
of intrinsic and extrinsic variables are inextricably linked, 
as ideas about causes emerged only slowly over several 
centuries. Systematic recording replaced casual notes 
over the 1700s, with the improved records leading to 
further discoveries. Thus @ Serpentis was conclusively 
shown to be variable by E Pigott, confirming G 
Montanari’s suspicions of a century earlier, and J 
Goodricke found periodic variation in 6 Cephei, the 
prototype of Cepheid variables, and in the eclipsing 
binary B Lyrae. The improved records also led to some 
success in identifying variation mechanisms. Speculation 
of the late 1700s cycled among eclipses, moving and 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


transient spots on rotating stars, and rotating distorted 
stars. All of these phenomena commonly occur, but early 
assignments to particular stars were usually wrong. 
Pulsation was advocated only much later. Algol was 
(correctly) said to eclipse by Pigott and Goodricke, but 
both later favored other ideas. Curiously, the eclipse 
hypothesis of Algol was cast into disrepute by discovery 
of variable stars that clearly were not eclipsing binaries, 
apparently from a wish to have all variables follow a 
single theory. Spots on rotating stars were very popular 
in the 1700s and 1800s, even for Mira, and have now 
returned for RS Canum Venaticorum, W Ursae Majoris, 
FK Comae and BY Draconis type binaries. As late as c. 
1930, pulsating star velocity curves were fitted in terms 
of orbital parameters, even when there was little or no 
doubt about their pulsational origin. A common finding 
was that the orbit of a star’s unseen (and non-existent) 
companion was actually inside the observed star. The 
orbit parameters would be printed anyway after a 
comment or two on the unphysical situation and the need 
to fit something. Although the reality of pulsation for 
Long Period Variables (LPVs) and Cepheids was not 
seriously disputed, there was much uncertainty in sorting 
true pulsators from a miscellany of competing 
phenomena. Most authors simply avoided explicit 
mention of pulsation while discussing effects that 
scarcely could be due to anything else, with an 
occasional remark that velocity variations might not 
really be due to line of sight motion of any kind. The 
popularity of pulsation was undeniable in the 1920s and 
1930s, however, when up to 10% of Astrophysical 
Journal papers concerned Cepheids and related stars— 
remarkably high for one subject. Nearly all contributions 
were observational at that time, although major 
theoretical advances had already been made by A Ritter 
in the 1870s and 1880s and by A S Eddington in the 
1920s. Full acceptance of spectroscopy’s implications for 
the pulsation hypothesis took nearly a half century (c. 
1890-1935), yet many kinds of pulsating stars were 
eventually recognized as a direct consequence of the 
radial velocity and temperature changes discovered 
spectroscopically. Not only the existence of radial 
motion, but its phasing compared with that of light 
curves, is a crucial discriminant among models. 
Realization that large numbers of variable stars exist 
was slow to develop until the breakthrough of 
photography. Only ~10 non-exploding variables were 
known in the early 1800s, but the permanent records in 
photographic plates quickly extended the list into the 
hundreds between 1850 and 1900. Systematic 
photographic surveys in the 1900s at Harvard, Bamberg, 
Leiden and other observatories raised catalog listings into 
the tens of thousands. Recent automated gravitational 
lens surveys with electronic detectors have produced 
light curves of thousands of variables as a by-product of 
the surveys’ primary objective, thereby substantially 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


increasing the discovery rate. The General Catalog of 
Variable Stars (‘GCVS’, Kholopov 1984) is a four- 
volume listing of coordinates, types and other 
information on 28 211 variables of all kinds, nearly 70% 
being intrinsic variables. A companion catalog of New 
Suspected Variables (“NSV’, Kholopov 1982) contains 
14 811 stars of uncertain status. 

A reasonably complete list of variable star types with 
minimal descriptions would exceed available space, but 
the GCVS devotes five pages to descriptions. It 
recognizes 88 types of intrinsic variables, including 34 
pulsating, 7 rotating, 10 x-ray, 22 eruptive and 15 
cataclysmic types (cataclysmic and other eruptive 
variables are kept distinct). A standard naming 
convention allows immediate recognition of a star as 
variable, although some bright variables have only their 
Bayer names. To begin the sequence, a single capital 
letter is assigned alphabetically in order of discovery 
from R to Z, then double letters RR, RS, ..., RZ, then 
double letters AA, AB, ... to AZ, then BB, BC, ... to BZ, 
and ultimately to ZZ, followed by the constellation name 
(e.g. T CrB; ZZ Cet). Letter J is not used. Designations of 
the form V335 Cygni, V336 Cygni, etc. follow the 334 
names of the letter system. 

There is great interest in variable stars among 
amateur astronomers, whose observations are 
indispensible for professionals. Not only visual 
brightness estimates but phototube and charge-coupled 
device (CCD) measures are now made available in large 
quantities through bulletins, journals and especially the 
Internet. Variable star organizations include the 
American Association of Variable Star Observers 
(AAVSO), the Association Frangaise des Observateurs 
d’Etoiles Variables (AFOEV), the British Astronomical 
Association Variable Star Section (BAAVSS), 
Bundesdeutsche Arbeitsgemeinschaft fiir Veranderliche 
Sterne (BAV), the Center for Backyard Astrophysics 
(CBA), the Hungarian Astronomical Association, 
International Amateur-Professional Photoelectric 
Photometry (I[APPP), the Variable Star Group of the 
Astronomical Society of Southern Australia, Variable 
Star Network (VSNET), and the Variable Star Section of 
the Royal Astronomical Society of New Zealand. 
Information on all these organizations can be found via 
the Internet. Their imprints on professional astronomy 
date at least as far back as the 1920s—for example in 
Joy’s use of an AAVSO Mira light curve in the 1926 
Astrophysical Journal. The role of such organizations is 
rapidly expanding today. The central professional 
organization is Commission 27 of the International 
Astronomical Union. 

LPVs and Cepheid variables were not only 
discovered early but still dominate our catalogs. LPVs 
are pulsating red giant stars of great luminosity and are 
thereby rather easy to discover. The name Mira type is 
reserved for the LPVs of larger light amplitudes, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


although there probably is continuity in the overall class, 
including Galactic distribution, space velocity and 
composition as well as light variation. There may also be 
continuity with ‘non-variable’ red giants, which probably 
have some variation. Spectra of LPVs and especially 
Miras show prominent emission lines that are clearly due 
to pulsation, as non-variable red giants lack emission 
lines but otherwise have similar spectra. More 
specifically, pulsation amplitude correlates with emission 
line strength. Miras vary by up to 9” in blue light (a 
factor of ~4000), but the enormous optical variations are 
caused by emission being ultra temperature-sensitive, 
with the optical band lying far to the short-wavelength 
side of the spectral energy peak. Bolometric amplitudes 
are similar to those of Cepheids. A problem for 
spectroscopy, especially prior to modern efficient 
spectrographs and large telescope apertures, was the 
faintness of Miras near minimum light. Observations 
must cover full cycles if much is to be learned about 
pulsation, and it was only in 1926 that A Joy produced 
the first complete velocity curve of Mira. The classical 
Cepheids are highly luminous F and G type pulsating 
giants and supergiants that vary periodically up to 
roughly a magnitude. Periods range from a few days to 
over 100 days. Rather early it was realized that the 
important relation between period and mean density 


P./p = constant 


applies to Cepheids and several other prominent 
categories of pulsating stars. The relation exists because a 
star’s dynamical timescale depends on its size and mass, 
with some dependence on internal structure (thus a 
different constant for each category). Stars with given 
HR diagram coordinates have the same size, but not 
necessarily the same mass and structure, so pulsation 
periods provide a link to structure and thereby to 
understanding evolution. The W Virginis stars, members 
of a very old Galactic population, pulsate with their own 
Pp'” relation and are understood to be in a later 
evolutionary stage than classical Cepheids, having lost 
much of their original envelopes. Thus pulsation is an 
important evolutionary diagnostic that can even help 
trace Galactic origins. 

In addition to the essentially periodic and roughly 
periodic classes of pulsating stars, there are giants and 
supergiants of spectral classes F to M that pulsate 
irregularly or semi-regularly. Curiously they lie mainly 
between the more regular Cepheids and LPVs in the HR 
diagram. The less regular and typically redder of these 
are known as RV Tauri stars, while the somewhat more 
regular ones are simply called yellow semi-regular 
variables. Periods, in so far as they can be quantified at 
all, range from tens to thousands of days, and amplitudes 
can be up to about four magnitudes. These stars may be 
interesting in terms of chaos theory, as some show 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


alternating cycles of larger and smaller amplitude that 
hint of the period doubling seen in the approach to chaos. 


Brightness measurement 

We have astrophysically useful records of the brightness 
variations of the supernovae of 1572 and 1604, as 
observed by T Brahe and others and by J Kepler 
respectively, despite lack of light detection equipment 
and even of telescopes 400 years ago. Their usefulness 
illustrates two points about astronomical brightness 
measurement. First, although precision requirements are 
stringent for small variations, they can be relaxed for 
large variations. Second, in no case can we allow the 
scale to be wrong, unless mere detection of variability is 
the only objective. One might expect eye estimates to be 
quantitatively useless, but Brahe’s and Kepler’s light 
curves demonstrate otherwise. The situation has been 
saved by the ‘secret? advantage of the photometric 
astronomer—the remarkable long-term constancy of 
normal stars. Brahe and Kepler recorded their 
supernovas’ magnitudes relative to known stars that, as 
far as we know, are essentially unchanged in brightness. 
Modern photoelectric observations of the reference stars 
have accordingly placed the supernova estimates on an 
objective scale. Of course the old estimates are 
subjective, but the largest overall errors are limited by the 
magnitude spacings of reference stars. An estimation 
method involving magnitude steps, introduced by F 
Argelander about 1840, further diminished maximum 
errors. 

The existence of natural constant brightness 
standards largely accounts for the accuracy of 
astronomical photometry, which is typically better than 
that of laboratory photometry despite the disadvantage of 
observing through Earth’s irregular atmosphere. 
Astronomers also have an advantage in the temperatures 
of reference sources, as very hot laboratory standards 
would vaporize their surroundings, while hot stars have 
no surroundings to vaporize. Difficulties due to daylight 
and weather as well as complete blockage of spectral 
regions are best dealt with by observing from space, 
although many less severe problems have been 
minimized through a variety of clever techniques. 

The history of star brightness measurement can 
roughly be divided into an early era of qualitative notes 
(c. 1600 to c. 1800), a middle era of quantitative but 
inaccurate estimation by eye or photography (beginning 
c. 1800 and still somewhat active), and a recent era of 
accurate quantitative measurement with various 
electronic detectors (beginning c. 1910). Even the early 
qualitative work was a major improvement on the 
unplanned occasional notices of preceding times. It made 
possible the discovery of periodic variation and, coupled 
with long baselines in time, even accurate periods. Thus 
Goodricke estimated Algol’s period in 1784 with an 
uncertainty of less than a minute out of 2.87 days. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Entering the middle era, note that the eye can reliably 
judge brightness equality between two stars, a point well 
appreciated and exploited by F W Herschel, J Herschel, 
Argelander, J Hartmann and K Schwarzschild, but eye 
estimates of inequality are notoriously subjective. The 
better visual work accordingly employed a variety of 
now obsolete ways to reduce the apparent brightness of 
one star by a known factor so as to equal that of another. 
Techniques, sometimes applied also to photographic 
observing, included partial aperture blocking with twin 
telescopes, extra-focal imaging, tapered neutral filters 
(wedges), and crossed polarizers. Photographic 
magnitudes were extracted from diameters of focused 
images or blackening of unfocused images. The modern 
definition of astronomical magnitudes, _ relating 
magnitude (m) differences to light (/) ratios, m; — m2 = 
—2.5 log (/\/h), was suggested in 1850 by N Pogson. 
Simple as it may seem, Pogson’s contribution was 
crucially important, as the quantitative meaning of 
magnitudes had previously been vague. The new 
accuracy and increased time lines allowed period 
changes to be measured, with S Newcomb’s text of 1884, 
Astronomy, already mentioning period changes for Algol, 
Mira and B Lyrae. The above-mentioned accuracy tricks 
work only within small fields, so measurement of actual 
magnitudes, as opposed to ‘local’ magnitude differences, 
received a large boost with the arrival of photoelectric 
detectors. Invention of the photomultiplier tube in the 
1940s especially helped to surmount atmospheric 
attenuation problems via all-sky photometry, and also 
greatly improved accuracy of magnitude changes for 
variable stars. Development of modern standard 
magnitude systems began when photomultipliers came 
into widespread use. Examples include the U, B, V, R, J, 
J, K, L wide-band systems and the uvby medium-band 
systems. A standard star has accurately known constant 
magnitude in one or more standard systems (e.g. y Oph 
has V = 3".72, B = 3.76), while a comparison star has 
(presumably) constant but not necessarily known 
magnitude. CCD detectors similar to those in video 
cameras are now replacing photomultipliers because of 
their ability to measure many sources simultaneously and 
thus provide for accurate differential photometry. New 
practical problems have arisen out of the enormous 
quantities of data coming from CCD _ photometry. 
Advanced computer technology is being applied to 
storage and distribution problems, in some cases with 
data collection directly from the detecting equipment. 
Automatic telescope operation is becoming ever more 
widespread in many spectral regions, not only in 
discovery modes (as in extra-Galactic supernova 
searches) and quick follow-up on y and x-ray transients, 
but also in routine observation of known variables. The 
acronym APT, for Automatic Photometric Telescope, 
implies remotely operated, programmable instruments 
that are primarily used for variable star research. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Astrophysical importance of variable stars 
The scientific value of variable stars can be seen in two 
issues—why they vary (theory) and what their variations 
allow us to measure (observation). The theoretical point 
connects physical makeup with behavior, while the 
observational one concerns properties such as size, 
distance and internal structure that are measurable or 
estimable because of variation. 

Most astronomical distance estimates are based on 
the standard candle method, a comparison of apparent 
and intrinsic brightness. The extra-Galactic distance scale 
is an important application, and distances to multiple 
stars and clusters within our Galaxy also are found from 
embedded standard candles. The method applies to any 
stellar group that contains a standard candle and whose 
diameter is small compared with its distance. Good 
standard candles are consistent (small luminosity range 
among individuals), highly luminous (for observation at 
great distance) and reliably recognizable. Variable stars 
naturally satisfy the recognition requirement, while some 
types satisfy the other requirements reasonably well and 
in some cases quite well. Cepheids, being giants and 
supergiants, can be observed in distant galaxies. 
Individual Cepheids differ in luminosity by factors up to 
about 100 and so might seem not to satisfy the 
consistency requirement, but H Leavitt discovered (c. 
1905) that Cepheid luminosities are closely related to 
their directly measurable periods of brightness variation. 
After calibration, the period-luminosity (P-L) relation 
allows Cepheids to be used as standard candles, although 
essentially correct calibration required another half- 
century and is still being refined. However, even faulty 
early calibrations established distances to galaxies that 
were correct to an order of magnitude and thereby helped 
elucidate the nature of the ‘spiral nebulae’ and the scale 
of the Universe. Early applications were E Hertzsprung’s 
distance estimate for the Small Magellanic Cloud and H 
Shapley’s work on the extra-Galactic distance scale, 
following E Hubble’s discovery of Cepheids in several 
galaxies. The distinction between Galactic and extra- 
Galactic objects was well established by 1925, five years 
after the famous Shapley—Curtis debates, when Hubble 
found 11 Cepheids in galaxy NGC 6822 and derived a 
distance. The Hubble Space Telescope and large ground- 
based telescopes have recently produced important 
increases in the Cepheid distance limit. Several kinds of 
exploding stars have very high luminosity, but Type Ia 
supemovae are best for recognition and consistency, in 
addition to being especially luminous. However, even the 
far less luminous and far less consistent ordinary novae 
have been used as distance indicators. 

The large-amplitude pulsations of Cepheids and 
related variables can be exploited to measure radii rather 
directly. Luminosities then follow from combination of 
the radii with effective temperature (Te) estimates, so as 
to provide standard candles. Observed variation is due to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


separable changes in surface brightness and _ size. 
“Wesselink radii’ (after A Wesselink) require three kinds 
of accurate observations—a radial velocity curve, a light 
curve and a color index curve (briefly ‘color curve’-— 
formed by differencing light curves (in magnitudes) for 
two effective wavelengths). Color curves of Cepheids 
resemble their light curves at first glance, having smaller 
amplitudes and subtly different shapes. Points with given 
color occur at paired times that are close together near a 
color maximum or minimum and well separated at 
intermediate color. The basic idea is that color index is a 
reliable indicator of To and therefore of surface 
brightness. However, a quantitative relation to predict 
surface brightness from color is not needed—just the 
reasonable assumption that when the star returns to a 
given color it also returns to the ‘original’ surface 
brightness. Any change in observable light, /, between 
those two times is due to changed surface area, so the 
ratio of radii at the two times is 


The difference of radii follows from an integration 
between the corresponding points on the radial velocity 


curve, 
fz 
Rb _ Ry = Ur dr. 
fl 


Now having both ratio and difference, we find the 
individual radii at the two times. Repeating the procedure 
for many time pairs, we find the run of R with time. The 
fundamental assumption that surface brightness is a 
unique function of color for a given star may not be quite 
true, but is close enough for useful applications. With 
actual radii in kilometers and with model stellar 
atmosphere predictions of surface emission per unit area, 
a final step computes luminosities. The method is one of 
the few direct means to find accurate radii of giant stars 
and to calibrate P-L relations. 

Another natural situation to exploit is the existence 
of variable stars in binaries and multiple star systems, 
where the variable star and binary star characteristics 
should be compatible if our evolutionary understanding is 
correct. For example, the age of a variable should agree 
with that of its companion(s), and its absolute dimensions 
and distance may be derivable from observations of the 
binary or multiple system. Examples include 6 Scuti (see 
below) type members in Y Camelopardalis and AB 
Cassiopeia, a Cepheid in V350 Sagittarii, and a B Cephei 
star in 16 Lacertae. It is important to discover more such 
systems. 

There are few probes of stellar interiors so it is 
important to have a wide variety of checks on global and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


surface properties, and the measures provided by 
pulsation and other forms of variation are welcome. For 
example, Cepheid masses can be inferred from both 
evolutionary and pulsational models, so the comparison 
either provides a check or sounds an alarm. Light curve 
and velocity curve details also can be predicted from 
pulsation models. The help comes where needed, as 
pulsational instabilities occur primarily in highly evolved 
stars where structure is complicated and theories are 
uncertain. Not only stellar structure theories but also 
equations of state, opacities, and energy generation rates 
(‘laboratory physics’ in principle but not in practice) are 
thereby subject to scrutiny. 

On a wide front, galactic evolution is largely 
understood in terms of population types. For example the 
RR Lyrae type pulsating stars found in globular clusters 
and spheroidally distributed Galactic populations are not 
just short-period Cepheids, but have quite different 
Galactic distribution, motions, history and _ structure. 
Insight into RR Lyraes and Cepheids can apply to their 
non-variable neighbors in the HR diagram. On the 
observational side of galaxies, certain variable stars can 
be recognized at large distances and thus serve as 
population indicators. 

Pulsation studies have now broadened into the 
rapidly developing field of asteroseismology, in which 
new observing methods and theoretical work on stellar 
oscillations extract structural information from multiple- 
frequency small amplitude variations in light and 
velocity. Applications to the Sun (helioseismology) are 
particularly successful because the Sun is spatially 
resolved and because it has a rich spectrum of 
oscillations. The directly tapped energy of solar 
oscillations is that of convective motions in the outer 
envelope that generate sound waves. Certain other kinds 
of stars, such as Ap, 5 Scuti (see below) and especially 
some white dwarf stars, show intricate oscillations that 
are clues to their evolutionary states. World-wide 
observing networks such as the Whole Earth Telescope 
(WET) allow the long, nearly continuous, coverage 
needed to separate closely spaced frequencies. 


Explosion mechanisms 

Nova theories of the early to mid 1900s involved rapid 
contraction to the white dwarf state or dynamical 
resonances combined with nuclear reactions. Those 
theories now seem inapplicable to known kinds of stellar 
explosions. A modern schematic model that covers many 
particular categories includes a donor star to provide a 
supply of gas and an accreting star on which eruptions 
occur. The flow may be a stream from overspilling a 
critical lobe or it may be a wind, and the eruptions may 
be powered by thermonuclear or gravitational energy. 
Ordinarily the donor is non-degenerate while the accretor 
is some kind of compact degenerate object, and most 
commonly a white dwarf star. Neutron star accretors are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


much rarer, and main sequence donors greatly outnumber 
evolved donors, but a wide variety of combinations 
occur. An especially abundant class is that of the 
cataclysmic variables (CVs) where the compact object is 
a white dwarf, although the white dwarf often cannot be 
detected directly. In most CVs the companion is a low- 
mass main sequence star, the orbit period is well under a 
day, and the entire binary is similar in size to the Sun, 
and smaller in many cases. CVs are typically old objects 
as shown by their distribution in the Galaxy, which is in a 
thicker disk than ordinary Population I stars. 

A major clue into mechanisms and evolution was the 
inferred presence, via radial velocities and light curves, 
of white dwarfs in post novae, recurrent novae and nova- 
like variables in the 1950s to 1960s. Although 
thermonuclear models had been proposed earlier, ideas 
for explosions soon focused on accretion-driven surface 
hydrogen-burning runaways on white dwarfs. CV 
component masses are difficult to estimate, but the white 
dwarfs are typically much more massive than their non- 
degenerate companions. Relatively massive donors 
should be subject to unstable mass transfer that would 
radically change the configuration (flow from high to low 
mass or between comparable mass stars favors 
instability). Evolved donors (giants and subgiants) have 
the same problem—for structural reasons they tend to 
expand, overflow their lobes and transfer gas unstably on 
a large scale. So the lack of evolved and of relatively 
massive donor stars is commonly explained by their self- 
destructive tendencies. However, a CV needs some level 
of slow mass transfer to fuel its eruptions. A suitable 
level can be maintained by orbit shrinkage due to 
magnetic wind braking or gravitational radiation. 

Classical novae brighten by 9” or more over a few 
days and then decline irregularly over weeks for fast 
novae or months for slow novae. Symbiotic novae (see 
below) are much slower (duration ~ decades) than the 
slowest classical nova and are much wider binaries than 
the ordinary CVs. The mass donor is typically a giant. 
For classical novae, more or less standard spectral 
developments occur, with emission and absorption line 
episodes and ejecta velocities of the order of 10° kms", 
but with a large velocity range among examples. 
Interpretation is difficult, as the state of the gas is hard to 
compute and the dynamical situation is intricate, with 
multiple velocity systems seen at most times. Classical 
novae have had only one known outburst, but that 
circumstance is attributed to the short history of 
observational astronomy. Thus there are also nova-like 
variables that are probably the same as classical novae 
but have not exploded in (astronomical) historical times. 
Observations of post-novae find the underlying binaries 
not markedly changed by their outbursts. 

Recurrent novae explode like classical novae but the 
eruptions are frequent, typically decades apart. Current 
thinking favors accretors that are close to the white dwarf 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


mass limit, such that only small accretion build-up is 
needed to start a thermonuclear runaway. Chemical 
abundances in the ejecta do suggest advanced nuclear 
processing, as expected for remnants of stellar cores near 
the edge of collapse. 

A computation of simple energetics shows that 
gravitational energy alone can power a large outburst 
from a white dwarf for a plausible sudden accretion 
episode. Objects identified with that mechanism are the 
dwarf novae—CVs that have cyclic outbursts with high 
repetition rates. Brightenings of up to about five 
magnitudes are separated by typical intervals of weeks to 
months and complicated shorter-term behavior includes 
fast flickering. Ideas to account for the episodes include 
sudden release of matter from a circumstellar disk (disk 
instability) and variable supply from the donor star 
(source instability). Examples are SS Cygni, U 
Geminorum, Z Camelopardalis and SU Ursae Majoris, 
each a prototype in a finer classification. Thermonuclear 
energy may play some role in dwarf novae. Ideas about 
evolutionary relationships among the several kinds of 
CVs are under continual revision. 

Impressive as they are, CV explosions are small 
firecrackers compared with supernovae. In contrast to 
CVs, where the basic configuration remains after an 
explosion, a supernova event involves the entire star. 
Supernova mechanisms include thermonuclear 
incineration of a massive white dwarf star (in a binary) 
and collapse of an old, dense stellar core to nuclear 
degeneracy. Other types that are probably much less 
common have been proposed. The energy release in 
burning a white dwarf star can be estimated by 
multiplying a white dwarf mass (~ 3 x 10°° g) by c’ and 
by an efficiency factor (10° for helium burning and 
beyond) to arrive at an energy between 10°! and 10” erg, 
about a million times that of a typical nova. The 
minimum energy of a core collapse supernova is even 
much larger and follows from energy conservation in 
formation of a neutron star, whose gravitational binding 
energy, E,, is of order -10° erg. Obviously a positive 
energy that at least matches E, must appear in the 
radiative and material ejecta. The visible radiation 
amounts to only ~10*° to 10” erg, and thus is a tiny 
fraction of the energy budget. Theoretical simulations 
indicate that nearly all of the energy is carried by 
neutrinos. The detection of about two dozen neutrinos 
from supernova 1987a in the Large Magellanic Cloud 
was a great triumph of supernova theory, as the number 
observed was the number predicted for a core collapse, 
within the uncertainties. 


Pulsation 

Pulsating stars undergo true pulsations (oscillations in 
size or shape). The pulsations are of the envelope, as the 
core is static and not directly involved. One could 
imagine the high-temperature sensitivity of nuclear 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


reactions leading to core pulsations (the « mechanism), 
but theory predicts that core pulsations will be quickly 
damped, except for supermassive stars. There are no 
candidates for core pulsation among the recognized 
variable stars, except perhaps the bizarre object n Carinae 
(see below) which may be a supermassive pulsating star. 
Pulsations grow when there is net conversion of thermal 
to mechanical energy, so the star is a heat engine. There 
are zones that drive pulsation (net [thermal > 
mechanical]) and others that damp pulsation (net 
[mechanical > thermal]). Elementary thermodynamics 
requires net heat injection in the compression stage if 
heat is to be converted to work so that the engine runs. 
However, direct injection of heat around maximum 
compression (as in an ordinary engine) is not the only 
way. Eddington realized in the 1920s that favorable 
circumstances could occur if a star is relatively heat-tight 
when compressed. Rather than thermal energy being 
inserted, its escape is prevented. This is the famous 
Eddington valve mechanism—a generic means to achieve 
net driving that covers all specific ways to implement 
heat-tightness upon compression. Two specific ways are 
the « and y mechanisms. The k mechanism traps thermal 
energy by making material in driving zones more opaque 
upon compression (k is the usual symbol for opacity). 
Kramers’ Law, « = kop/T°°, provides roughly correct 
opacity for given density (p) and temperature (7). With p 
and T entered from accurate stellar structure models, it 
predicts that stellar material becomes /ess opaque upon 
compression, and indeed most stars do not pulsate. 
However, actual opacity depends in a complicated way 
on thermodynamic variables and, although it decreases 
with compression in most parts of most stars, it increases 
with compression in the driving zones of Cepheids and 
some other pulsating stars. The y mechanism operates by 
increasing the surface density of absorbing particles upon 
compression. Imagine a thin pulsating shell of gas at its 
maximum and minimum radii. The number of contained 
particles is the same whether the shell is large or small 
but the number per unit area is greatest when the shell is 
small. Therefore the shell more effectively blocks 
radiation, or is more heat-tight, when compressed. The y 
mechanism always contributes to driving for obvious 
geometrical reasons, while the k mechanism can produce 
either driving or damping. 

Driving will be weak if the main driving zones are 
too close to the surface (high) or too deep inside the star 
(low), and net damping will arrest pulsation. In the high 
case, the problem is insufficient density in the driving 
zones so that too little matter contributes to driving. In 
the low case, the driving zones lie in the nearly adiabatic 
interior where, although there is plenty of mass, each 
gram makes only a small contribution. Because driving is 
associated with ionization zones of the abundant 
elements H and He, net driving zones will be high in 
relatively hot (blue) stars and low in relatively cool (red) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


stars. Thus we have a roughly vertical instability strip in 
the HR diagram where Cepheids are found. However, its 
red and blue borders are not well defined and many non- 
pulsating stars lie within the strip. The instability strip 
extends down to and below the main sequence and 
includes the little-evolved or mildly evolved 6 Scuti and 
related variables with their typical periods of hours. It 
then continues to the region of the pulsating white dwarfs 
(ZZ Ceti stars). 

Several major distinctions characterize _ stellar 
pulsations. To begin, there are radial pulsations that 
preserve a star’s figure (shape) but change its volume, 
and non-radial pulsations that preserve volume but vary 
the figure. An example of radial pulsation could be the 
expansion and contraction of a balloon under cyclically 
changing external pressure. A small-amplitude example 
of the non-radial case is provided by the tidal distortions 
of the Earth and its oceans. A large-amplitude example 
would be the oscillations of a disturbed water globule. A 
more formal description of the contrasting behavior is in 
terms of a vector field. In radial pulsation, the 
displacement vectors of local matter elements pass back 
and forth through zero length but maintain fixed 
alignments along local radii. Non-radial pulsation is more 
complicated, with the vectors cyclically changing both 
length and direction. Of course, real pulsations need not 
be purely radial or non-radial but can involve both 
volume and figure changes. However, many realistic 
situations approximate these idealized types. 

Another distinction involves fundamental and 
overtone pulsation. The situation is conceptually the 
same as for a flexible string with one fixed and one free 
end, where the free end is the analog of a pulsating star’s 
surface. The string can have a fundamental oscillation, 
with a node only at the fixed end, and also overtone 
oscillations with 1, 2, 3,..., 1 additional nodes. At a given 
instant, adjacent inter-node regions have opposite 
motions (up versus down), and of course there is no 
motion at the nodes. Similarly a pulsating star can have 
fundamental and overtone pulsations, with extra nodes 
for the overtones. For a uniform string the nodes will be 
equally spaced, but a star has inwardly increasing 
density, with the consequence that node spacings are not 
even approximately equal and must be computed. 
Fundamental and overtone pulsations can coexist and, 
accordingly, some unusual stars show beat phenomena. 

Still another distinction is among pulsation modes, 
i.e. possible ways to pulsate. The large amplitude radial 
pulsations of Cepheid and RR Lyr type variables are in 
pressure modes (p-modes), so called because they 
involve large local pressure variations. Both radial and 
non-radial p-mode pulsations can occur. Gravity modes 
(g-modes) involve global oscillations about a hydrostatic 
level surface and are necessarily non-radial. They have 
much smaller pressure variations than do p-modes. Of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


course, energy can feed from one mode to another and 
between fundamental and overtones. 

No one kind of pulsation analysis serves all 
purposes. As in other areas, success in computing 
detailed behavior does not guarantee understanding. The 
general phenomenon is highly nonlinear and one might 
expect maximum insight to follow from all- 
encompassing computations, but much insight has been 
gained from linear analyses in which only infinitesimal 
pulsations are studied. N Baker realized that outcome by 
restricting attention to a single mass shell—the One Zone 
model. However, pulsating stars are complicated 
structures with many (thermally and mechanically) 
coupled zones, so quantitative predictions of periods 
need complete models. To view the problem the opposite 
way, a full nonlinear computation should settle into a 
correct period, but will not identify all possible periods 
found from linear theory. Although linear analysis leads 
to insight on several fronts, it deals only with 
infinitesimal pulsations and therefore cannot produce 
complete models for comparison with observations. 
Possible pulsation modes and overtones are identified 
through linear analysis, with detailed behavior at finite 
amplitude examined via nonlinear analysis, including 
possible interactions of fundamental and overtones. 
Similarly, growth and decay rates of small-amplitude 
pulsations can be investigated via linear analysis, but 
rates for large pulsations and final saturation amplitudes 
are matters for nonlinear analysis. Of course, specific 
light and velocity curve features can be modeled only 
with full nonlinear computations. 

A wealth of observed phenomena in pulsating stars 
remain only partly understood or have only recently been 
understood, including light versus velocity phase lags 
that are characteristic of a given class, unusual surface 
abundances, changing velocity amplitudes and multiple 
periodicity. Magnetic fields, fast rotation and binary 
companions are clearly present in some cases, but their 
roles in pulsation are not usually obvious. Specific 
driving mechanisms may not be clear. An active testing 
ground for pulsation theory is provided by the £ Cephei 
stars, a class sometimes called the 6 Canis Majoris stars, 
although current usage seems to have settled on the name 
B Cephei. These stars have remarkably short pulsation 
periods of order 0.42, with about half being doubly 
periodic and thereby showing beat behavior in light and 
velocity. Many RR Lyr and 6 Sct stars also are doubly 
periodic, but the two periods of a B Cep star can differ by 
as little as 1%. The prototype B Cephei (not itself doubly 
periodic) is strongly magnetic and at least a triple system, 
with weak B-emission (Be) characteristics. A 
phenomenon that must occur but is difficult to model is 
that of dynamical tides in eccentric and/or asynchronous 
binaries, which can be regarded as forced non-radial 
pulsations. Like ocean waves, such tides are largely 
stochastic so that prediction is mainly limited to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


statistical behavior. Several supergiants with neutron star 
companions show the expected fluctuations in light and 
velocity, including GP Velorum = Vela X1 and V884 
Scorpii, but quantitative matches with tidal theory remain 
unrealized. 


Other variation mechanisms 

While eruptive and pulsating stars vary due to a variety 
of dynamical, thermal and cyclic instabilities that are 
more or less understood, or at least largely identified, 
variations in many categories are caused by instabilities 
that are not so well understood, by random events and by 
random drifts in conditions. Some of these stars live on 
the border between intrinsic and extrinsic variables. For 
example, RS CVn, BY Dra and W UMa binaries can be 
heavily covered by magnetic spots, similar to sunspots. 
The agent understood to produce such spots is dynamo 
action in a fast-rotating convective envelope, so cool 
stars that have convective envelopes are likely 
candidates—if they spin fast. The RS CVns, BY Dras, 
and W UMas naturally spin fast because they are tidally 
locked close binaries, but FK Com and a small number of 
similar stars are fast spinning single giants! Their fast 
rotation currently is attributed to their being recently 
merged ex-binary systems, with the binary orbital 
angular momentum now existing as spin angular 
momentum. Spot-modulated stars are extrinsic variables 
in that they vary on the orbital time scale because of 
changing aspect of their spots. However, the spots grow, 
decline and move, so they are intrinsic variables on 
longer time-scales. 

Accretion tends to be highly irregular and causes not 
only modest brightness fluctuations in active binaries, but 
variations of up to several magnitudes in newly formed 
stars that accrete from their surroundings (T Tauri stars). 
Much of the luminosity of T Tauris and related stars is 
from the accretion process. Young objects of the FU 
Orionis type have brightening episodes of up to five 
magnitudes on a time-scale of decades to centuries. 
Outflows are associated with accretion but are not well 
understood at present. Some classical T Tau stars are 
surrounded by circumstellar disks that have been imaged 
in the infrared, with spectroscopic and imaging evidence 
of bipolar outflows. Accretion onto white dwarfs not only 
leads to circumstances that eventually produce nova 
explosions but also directly converts gravitational energy 
to more tangible forms, as seen above for dwarf novae. 
Even an occasional non-degenerate binary such as V361 
Lyrae has a hot spot where high-speed gas impacts one of 
the stars, having flowed in a well defined stream from the 
other. Variable flows produce variable spot luminosities 
and thus another kind of intrinsic—extrinsic variable. In 
post novae and dwarf novae, the hot spot is on a disk 
surrounding the stream’s target star. Most exploding stars 
show variability between outbursts in their ‘quiescent’ 
light curves. A common seat of variation is the hot spot 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


as it flickers by 0.1 to 0.2 on a time scale of minutes, 
due to irregular inflow. Usually the hot spot itself, rather 
than either star or the overall disk, is the brightest light 
source in the binary. X-ray binaries whose accreting 
objects are neutron stars have accretion power at least 30 
times their thermonuclear power (for H burning; more 
than 100 times for He burning), so the promptly released 
energy is about the same whether the material burns or 
not. However, large thermonuclear bursts can occur on 
neutron stars if substantial amounts of fuel accumulate, 
providing the sources known as x-ray bursters, where 
helium is the fuel. As a group, x-ray binaries are variable 
in all spectral regions, from radio to gamma, although 
most individuals are detected only in restricted ranges. 
There are two essentially disjoint classes on greatly 
different scales, low-mass x-ray binaries (LMXBs) and 
high-mass x-ray binaries (HMXBs). At first inspection, 
LMXBs and HMXBs have little in common except that 
they contain neutron stars, and even a sketch of ideas 
about their origins would exceed available space. 
Configurations are such that HMXBs accrete mainly via 
winds from their blue supergiant companions and many 
pulse in x-rays, while LMXBs accrete mainly via lobe 
overflow and very few pulse. LMXBs bear a remarkable 
similarity to CVs, including absolute dimensions, with 
the notable difference being that a neutron star replaces 
the CV’s white dwarf. It has been noted that some 
LMXBs may form from CVs in rare cases of accretion 
beyond the white dwarf mass limit. 

Still another kind of intrinsic—extrinsic hybrid is the 
symbiotic star, where ultraviolet radiation from the 
environs of a small, hot accretor interacts with the wind, 
extended atmosphere or chromosphere of a red giant 
companion. Fluctuations in UV radiation and in wind 
flow lead to intrinsically variable fluorescence modulated 
by orbital aspect effects, sometimes including eclipses. 
Orbit periods are long compared with most variable 
binaries, being typically hundreds of days or more. 
Because of observational difficulties, the defining 
characteristics of the class are necessarily superficial— 
the accreting objects are not usually directly observed 
and may be as diverse as neutron stars, white dwarfs and 
main sequence stars. Extreme examples of symbiotics 
include symbiotic novae that have outbursts by brightness 
factors of order 100 and are believed to contain white 
dwarf accretors. Unlike CVs, a symbiotic nova can be in 
outburst for decades. The mechanism usually assumed is 
a thermonuclear surface flash on the accretor followed by 
slow cooling. These objects are often called slow novae 
but differ radically from the CVs with the same name, so 
‘symbiotic nova’ should consistently be applied. 
Examples of symbiotic novae include PU Vulpeculae, 
RR Telescopii and V1329 Cygni. 

Variable polarization can result from scattering by 
circumstellar gas, but really spectacular variable 
polarization is seen in CVs that contain accreting white 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


dwarfs with extremely strong magnetic fields. These are 
the polars, or AM Her binaries, where cyclotron 
radiation in an oblique rotator produces strong circular 
polarization over a wide range of wavelength, including 
optical light. Polars also are moderately strong x-ray 
sources and natural laboratories for studying 
hydrodynamic flows under combined gravitational and 
magnetic fields, with variable light and polarization as 
diagnostics. Intermediate polars have magnetic fields 
that are intense but somewhat below those of polars. 
Examples of intermediate polars are EX Hydrae and GK 
Persei. 

Fluctuations in stellar winds can generate small-scale 
emission line and continuum variation, particularly where 
winds are strong. Most Wolf-Rayet (W-R) stars 
accordingly vary by a few hundredths of a magnitude. A 
W-R star is the highly evolved residue of a very massive 
star that has lost much of its envelope so as to expose hot 
inner regions. Often there is an evolved close companion 
with its own strong wind, so that wind—wind interactions 
cause further variation. 

Intermittent veiling is a very unusual variation 
mechanism and a major diagnostic of circumstellar 
conditions and interior structure in certain (usually giant) 
stars. In veiled stars we find intrinsic and extrinsic 
variation combined, as clouds come and go while 
changing aspect controls their influence on light curves. 
Hydrodynamic flow in a mass transferring binary can 
lead to concentrations of partially opaque material being 
projected onto the face of one or both stars, so that light 
curves can help map circumstellar gas. An example is 
AX Monocerotis. Particularly spectacular examples of 
veiling are the R Coronae Borealis stars—extremely 
carbon rich and hydrogen deficient (apparently single) 
supergiants that are veiled by carbon particles at irregular 
times, with brightness drops by factors of up to about 
1000. These pulsating stars eject clouds of gas whose 
carbon condenses to soot when sufficiently far from the 
hot photosphere, with clouds that happen to lie on the 
line of sight producing the veiling. Pulsational 
characteristics, together with the strange abundances, 
provide strong constraints on possible evolutionary 
histories of R CrB stars. Given that only a few dozen are 
known, R CrBs must either represent a very brief stage of 
normal evolution or products of an unusual formation 
process such as a merger. 

Large evolutionary changes over the brief history of 
observational astrophysics are extremely unusual. 
Perhaps the most spectacular example is FG Sagittae, 
which has evolved from the small, hot exciting star of a 
planetary nebula into a pulsating R CrB type red giant in 
only a century, with decade to decade developments. 
Whether FG Sge is typical as a progenitor of R CrBs is 
an open issue at present. 

Flares are brief local eruptions, prominent in both 
continuum light and lines, from the chromospheres of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetically active stars. The UV Ceti or flare stars are 
low-mass main sequence stars with unusually high levels 
of chromospheric activity. Flares are much hotter than 
red dwarf photospheres, so the brightening in magnitudes 
is highly wavelength dependent, increasing strongly into 
the ultraviolet. As with spot-modulated stars, rotation in a 
deep convective envelope generates strong dynamo 
action, with UV Cet stars being especially fast rotators. 
Flare activity is at least statistically a sign of youth, since 
red dwarf rotation decreases with age. 

Stars described as variable are traditionally those that 
vary in brightness, especially over broad spectral regions. 
However, several kinds of spectrum variables vary most 
notably in spectral details, with behavior that can be as 
interesting as in the more obvious variables. For 
example, strong variable magnetic fields are involved in 
spectral variations of Ap and Am stars (Ap = peculiar 
stars of spectral type A; Am = metallic line stars of 
spectral type A). Stars that lose matter via powerful and 
unsteady winds, such as those of spectral type Of, show 
variable emission lines with great Doppler broadening. 
Stars of type Be (B emission stars) were among the first 
to draw special attention as spectroscopically interesting 
in the 1800s, and continue to stimulate hypotheses, 
observations, and controversy. The emission lines of Be 
stars are usually ascribed to circumstellar equatorial rings 
associated with centrifugal ejection of matter, but 
circumstances leading to that situation are not widely 
agreed upon. Even the basic point of whether binary 
nature is essential or irrelevant to Be behavior remains at 
issue. 


Unique objects 
Much of the fascination of variable star astrophysics is 
provided by unique objects that may result from 
anomalous formation, short effective lifetime or selection 
effects. A few examples may give some of the flavor. 

Most recognized causes of variation, including 
pulsation, gas dynamic interactions and _ rotation 
phenomena, have been proposed for the spectacular and 
mysterious n Carinae. Especially notable are its great 
luminosity and enormous swings in apparent magnitude 
over centuries, including an interval in the 1840s when it 
approached Sirius in brightness. It is usually regarded as 
a supermassive star with mass above (and perhaps far 
above) 60 solar masses, and therefore a candidate for 
core pulsation via unstable thermonuclear burning. 
Speculation that it is a binary is supported by recent high 
resolution imaging of a bipolar nebula that must have 
been ejected in n Car’s great outburst of c. 1840 and by 
discovery of 5.5 year spectroscopic and photometric 
periodicities. Understanding of mn Car is_ rapidly 
developing but still rudimentary. 

The recurrent nova T Corona Borealis has the basic 
red star—blue star binary morphology of novae, but with a 
red giant in place of the usual main sequence red star and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Variable Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


an orbit period (228) typical of symbiotic novae. 
However, it can scarcely be called a symbiotic nova, as 
the outbursts last not for decades but only for weeks. T 
CrB has no known siblings, but does have a rich and 
extensive literature. 

And then there are the pulsating WHITE DWARF stars, 
the DUSTY CIRCUMSTELLAR DISKS, the QUASIPERIODIC 
OSCILLATIONS IN X-RAY BINARY STARS, the incredible 
Ss433 and HERCULES X-l, ..., but wait—those are other 
articles. No brief synopsis could do them justice. So turn 
to those articles—your instrumentation is a comfortable 
chair and a cup of hot chocolate. Enjoy. 


Bibliography 

Clark D H and Stephenson F R 1977 The Historical Supernovae 
(Oxford: Pergamon) 

Gallagher J S and Starrfield S 1978 Annu. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 16 171 

Hoskin M 1979 J. Hist. Astron. 10 23 

Lewin W H G, van Paradijs J and van den Heuvel E P J (ed) 
1995 X-ray Binaries (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Kholopov P N 1982 Catalog of New Suspected Variable Stars 
(Moscow: Nauka) 

Kholopov P N 1984 General Catalog of Variable Stars 
(Moscow: Nauka) 

Kippenhahn R and Weigert A 1990 Stellar Structure and 
Evolution (Berlin: Springer) 

Payne-Gaposchkin C 1957 The Galactic Novae (Amsterdam: 
North Holland) 

Warner B 1995 Cataclysmic Variable Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 


RE Wilson 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


Vatican Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vatican Observatory 


The Vatican Observatory is one of the oldest astronomical 
institutes in the world. It began with the reformation 
of the calendar in 1582. At the Roman College, Father 
Angelo Secchi first classified stars according to their 
spectra. With these rich traditions Leo XIII, in 1891, 
formally founded the Vatican Observatory on a hillside 
behind the dome of St Peter’s Basilica. In 1935 Pius 
XI provided a new location for the Observatory at the 
Papal Summer Residence at Castel Gandolfo. In 1981 the 
Observatory founded a second research center in Tucson, 
Arizona. In 1993 the Observatory, in collaboration with 
STEWARD OBSERVATORY, completed the construction of the 
Vatican Advanced Technology Telescope (VATT) which 
has pioneered the new technology of creating large, 
lightweight, stable mirrors in a rotating furnace. Research 
includes cosmological models, spectral classification of 
peculiar stars, photometric studies of metallicity, mass- 
exchanging binary stars, material in star-forming dark 
clouds, dust envelopes about young stars, planetary 
dynamics. The Observatory is supported with an 
annual budget from the Holy See and by contributions 
to the Vatican Observatory Foundation, a tax-exempt 
corporation in the State of Arizona. 
For further information see 
http://clavius.as.arizona.edu/vo/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vega 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vega 


The star w Lyrae, the only bright star in the constellation. 
Its name, formerly Wega, derives from the Arabic Al Waki, 
‘the Swooping (or Falling) Eagle’, hence the form Alvaka 
used on some seventeenth century celestial globes. In 
ancient Greek and Latin writings it sometimes shared 
the constellation name Lyra, and consequently appears 
as ‘the Harp Star’ in some later texts. It is the dominant 
component of the Summer Triangle asterism, with Altair 
and Deneb. It was the Pole Star about 12000 years ago, 
and will be again 14000 years hence. 

Vega is the fifth brightest star in the heavens, with an 
apparent magnitude of 0.03. It is the brightest star with 
sufficiently high northern declination to appear overhead 
in north temperate latitudes, and dominates their skies 
on clear summer nights. It is a striking object when 
viewed with binoculars or a low-power telescope, its blue- 
white color (sometimes described as ‘sapphire’) belying its 
relatively cool spectral type (AOVvar). Fairly close at 25.3 
light-years distance (parallax 0.129”), Vega is in fact the 
third closest of the bright stars. Its absolute magnitude 
is 0.6. In 1983 it was discovered by the IRAS survey 
to be surrounded by a disk of gas and dust, which may 
eventually form a planetary system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


VEGA Space Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


VEGA Space Mission 


VEGA (mission) is a combined spacecraft mission to VENUS 
and COMET HALLEY. It was launched in the USSR at the 
end of 1984. The mission consisted of two identical 
spacecraft VEGA 1 and VEGA2. VEGA is anacronym built 
from the words ‘Venus’ and ‘Halley’ (‘Galley’ in Russian 
spelling). The basic design of the spacecraft was the same 
as has been used many times to deliver Soviet landers 
and orbiters to Venus. In June 1985, these spacecraft 
successfully delivered the first balloons into the Venus 
atmosphere and also landers. After this the VEGA 1 
and VEGA 2 cometary probes were directed to the comet 
Halley. They encountered it on 6 and 9 March 1986. Such 
a trajectory was possible only because of the favorable 
mutual positions of the comet and Venus at this time. The 
gravitational field of Venus turned the spacecraft to the 
comet and only a short switch-on of the spacecraft engine 
was necessary. 

The most important scientific achievements of the 
VEGA mission were as follows: (a) the first direct tracing 
of Venusian atmospheric properties (winds, turbulence, 
illuminance, cloud density) on a long horizontal path; (b) 
the first look at a cometary nucleus, not as a star-like object, 
but as a spatially resolved body; (c) the first identification 
of a set of components of the cometary atmosphere, 
including organic matter; (d) the first study of the cometary 
environment by direct (contact) methods. The VEGA 
mission was an important step in the development of 
international cooperation in space studies. Scientists 
and engineers of many countries were involved together 
with Russians in the creation of sophisticated scientific 
instruments and supporting systems. Such international 
cooperation in a space project was new not only for Russia. 
Professor R Sagdeev (leader then of the Institute of Space 
Research in Moscow) was the head of the whole project, 
and these innovations were in many points results of his 
enlightened activity. 


Venus 

Balloons 

The launch of balloons with meteorological instruments 
is traditional in studies of the terrestrial atmosphere. It 
is natural to apply this for atmospheres of other planets. 
The concept of a Venusian balloon was first proposed by 
J Blamont in 1967, but only after 18 yr of technical studies 
(in the USSR and France) was it realized in the VEGA 
mission. 

The Venus module of the VEGA spacecraft entered the 
atmosphere of the planet and separated into two parts at a 
height of 64 km. One of them was a descent probe (lander) 
and the other was a canister containing balloon, ballast, 
parachute and inflating systems. Beginning at 64 km the 
container went down with the parachute to about 50 km 
(where the atmospheric pressure is near 1 bar); there the 
balloon was inflated, and parachute and ballast separated. 
After this balloon went up to about 53.6 km corresponding 
to a pressure of 535 mbar and a temperature of 305 K. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Both balloons were inserted on the nightside of Venus, 
one (VEGA 1) ~7° north of the equator and the other 
~7° south of the equator. They drifted westward with 
the predominant zonal wind closely parallel to the lines of 
latitude. Each balloon was tracked over a distance of more 
than 11000 km, encountering dawn and then penetrating 
far into the daylit atmosphere (figure 1(D)). Transmission 
was stopped after 46 h of flight owing to limited battery 
resources. 

There were two types of measurements: in situ by 
means of on-board instruments transmitted by telemetry 
and ground-based determination of balloon motion by 
very-long-baseline interferometry (vLB1). The balloon’s 
transmitter sent directly to the Earth signals at a 
wavelength of 18 cm used ordinarily by VLBI astronomers 
for observations of distant galactic OH sources. Because 
of Earth’s rotation, continuous reception of telemetry data 
required the use of many antennas widely distributed in 
longitude. 

It was known earlier that so-called superrotation is 
the dominating dynamical property of Venus’ atmosphere: 
its rotation period (about 4 days near cloud top) is much 
shorter than for the solid surface. This means that a fast 
westward wind is a permanent feature on Venus (see VENUS: 
ATMOSPHERE). VEGA balloons provided its mean velocity 
(67-69 m s~') and its fine fluctuation pattern also. 

Strong turbulence was found with amplitude to 
2 ms! with a time scale of 30-100 s (figure 1(C)). The 
influence of surface topography on atmospheric motions 
was found; it was not expected for such high altitudes. 
The measurements covered the twilight zone which was 
found to be 7° wide in the clouds of Venus. The horizontal 
profile of the clouds’ optical properties (backscattering 
coefficient) was measured for the first time. It was found 
that at the height of flight it is smooth in general; even the 
strongest variations were no more than a factor of 3 from 
the average level (figure 1(E)). Such an experiment has not 
yet been repeated; however, balloons are present in many 
proposals for future studies of the atmospheres of Venus 
and Mars. 


Descent probes 

Studies of Venus by means of descent probes were started 
by the VENERA 4 mission in 1967. Another 10 Soviet 
VENERA MISSIONS followed during 1969-1983; eight of them 
included descent probes with instrumental packages that 
provided measurements of the chemical composition of 
the atmosphere and soil, images of the landscape around 
landers, vertical profiles of temperature and pressure, the 
cloud particles’ properties and solar illuminance within 
the deep atmosphere of Venus. VEGA 1 and 2’s descending 
probes landed on the nightside of the planet, unlike most 
of the previous descenders, but the general scheme was 
traditional: entry to the atmosphere, fast aerodynamic 
deceleration of capsule with descenders between 100 and 
64 km, opening of capsule, about 10 min of descent to 
46 km, separation of parachute, landing after about 51 min 
and 20 min of working data transfer from the surface. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


VEGA Space Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Temperature (K} Pressure (mbar) 


Velocity (m sec”') 


lilumination (tux) 


Cloud backscatter 
(x10 4m 'se7') 


Altitude (km) 


es 30 35 40 45 
Time (hours U.T.) 


Venus longitude (degrees) 


Figure 1. Mission history for VEGA 1 balloon showing (A) pressure, (B) temperature, (C) atmospheric vertical velocity, (D) ambient 
light level and (E) cloud backscatter coefficient as functions of time after insertion on 11 June 1985. Venus longitudes are also shown on 
the abscissa. The approximate position of the terminator is shown as a broken line in the plot (D). Gaps in the data sets indicate times 
when no in situ measurements were transmitted by the balloon (Sagdeev et al 1986b). 


Improved measurements of atmospheric temperature 
were made in the full range between ~63 km and the 
surface. The temperature rises monotonically from up 
to down but an inversion was found near 61 km. The 
lapse rate is not constant; its variations confirmed the 
existence of two convective zones, one below 15 km, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


another between 45 and 58 km (unlike our planet where 
only one convective zone exists, between ~10 km and the 
surface). 

Cloud particles were studied in different ways with 
a set of sensors that measured size distribution, number 
density and chemical composition. Sulfuric acid (H2S5O.) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


VEGA Space Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


as one of the constituents of the Venusian cloud particles 
was detected by in situ measurements. This compound 
dominates the upper and probably the middle clouds 
(down to 54 km) but below this level cloud particles mostly 
consist of a phosphorus compound (probably H3PQ,). 

A UV lamp and spectrometer were used to study the 
strong UV spectral band created by small traces of SO, 
which was found by earlier probes by another method 
(gas chromatography). Analysis of the new measurements 
confirmed the presence of SO, but gave different quantities 
and covered larger height ranges. 

Measurements of soil composition were made 
after landing by two methods. One of them (x- 
ray fluorescent spectrometry on VEGA 2) showed that 
elemental composition is like that of very ancient lunar 
rocks (see also VENUS: SURFACE). Another (based on K, U and 
Th abundances) in both places showed rocks like toleit 
basalts. 

The VEGA descent probes were the last in a long set of 
Soviet VENERA missions but most of the studies resulted 
in new questions that require new experiments. However, 
it is impossible to say at the moment where and when new 
steps will be made for prolongation of the study of Venus. 


Comet Halley 

COMETARY NUCLEI are probably samples of pristine solar 
system material and their study may be important for an 
understanding of the origin of the solar system. However, 
they are practically not available for observations from 
the Earth; only products of their evaporation (coma and 
tail) are observable. Spacecraft give a unique possibility of 
approach to the cometary nucleus and investigation of it as 
a spatially resolved object. Comet Halley was selected for 
the first try. At every periapsis passage (once per 76 yr) it 
is available for astronomical observations but the relative 
position of the comet and Earth is not same in different 
apparitions. For example, the passage of 1986 was not 
favorable, because the comet periapsis point and Earth 
were nearly in opposite directions from the Sun. So it 
was reasonable to use spacecraft during this apparition. 
Comet Halley was especially attractive for such a mission 
because it is a periodic comet with a well-known orbit, it 
is the brightest among the periodical comets and it is the 
only periodic comet having physical properties like those 
of a young comet. 

In reality not one but five spacecraft were sent to the 
comet Halley: Soviet VEGA 1, VEGA 2, European GIOTTO 
and Japan suIsel and SAKIGAKE. The VEGA cometary probes 
were the largest and had more scientific instruments 
than the European and Japanese craft put together. The 
mass of every VEGA spacecraft (figure 2) was about 
4500 kg, including about 2500 kg for the cometary module. 
There were two sorts of experiments on VEGA cometary 
modules: (a) camera and other optical instruments for 
remote sensing studies of the nucleus and inner coma 
and (b) instruments for contact measurements in cometary 
gas, dust and plasma. Imaging of the comet from the 
spacecraft required a steerable platform which could be 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


111° 


NUCLEUS 


Figure 2. The Halley probe of the VEGA spacecraft , showing 
the locations of some subsystems and scientific instruments: 

1, solar panels; 2, pencil-beam antenna; 3, omnidirectional 
antenna; 4, steerable platform; 5, the pointing sensor; 6, camera 
system TVS; 7, infrared spectrometer IKS; 

8, ultraviolet—visible—-near-infrared spectrometer a; 9, dust 
particle sensor SP-1; 10, particle composition analyser PUMA; 
11, plasma composition analyser PLASMAG; 12, dust protection 
shield; 13, astro-orientation unit. The Venus probe is not shown. 
Its location before separation is on the top of the Halley probe. 


automatically pointed with high accuracy to the cometary 
nucleus. A TV camera, IR spectrometer and UV-Visible— 
near-IR spectrometer were placed on this platform. The 
most difficult task was to locate the nucleus, with its low 
albedo, against the background of the bright coma with 
gas and dustjets, and this problem was solved successfully. 
The fly-by speed was extremely high (~78 kms~'), because 
the direction of orbital motion of the comet is opposite 
to that of the Earth, and thus of the spacecraft. This 
high speed resulted in a strong dust hazard and required 
protection of parts of the spacecraft. 

VEGA 1 passed through the comet Halley coma on 6 
March 1986 at a nearest distance to the nucleus of 8890 km, 
VEGA 2 did it 3 days later at a distance of 8030 km. Most of 
the data were sent to Earth in real time , because loss of the 
spacecraft due to the dust hazard was possible. However, 
this did not happen; both of the spacecraft were alive after 
the fly-by, although the solar-battery current dropped by 
50%. Figure 3 shows how comet Halley looked from the 
spacecraft VEGA 2 on 6 March 1986. Results of the analysis 
of images, spectra, and in situ data obtained are briefly 
outlined below. 

It was concluded that the nucleus is a single solid 
body. Its shape is irregular (like a potato); the size is 
approximately 8 km x 8 km x 16 km. It has a very low 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


VEGA Space Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 3. How comet Halley looked from spacecraft VEGA 2 
flying through its coma. (a) The distance to the nucleus 

d = 29000 km, the Sun is on the left, the nucleus is near the right 
edge of the bright dust fan directed towards the Sun; the frame 
size is 228 km x 308 km. (b) d = 8000 km, the Sun is above the 
plane of the image (phase angle ~30°), the frame size is 

62 km x 84 km; the upper part of the visible spot is the nucleus, 
the lower is a dust jet. (c) The Sun is to the right, the nucleus is to 
the left; the distance and size are the same as in (a). (Moroz 1989). 


reflectivity; the geometrical albedo is ~0.04. So it is one 
of the darkest bodies of the solar system. Dust is emitted 
by its surface from the sunlit side. The dust flow consists 
mainly of narrow jets. The thermal IR radiation of the 
nucleus was measured by an infrared device. Its value 
corresponds to a temperature of about 380 K near the 
subsolar point. This was unexpected because a lot of 
water ice with a temperature about 200 K should exist 
in the upper layers of the nucleus to provide the H,O 
flux observed by the same instrument and also in many 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


other experiments. This discrepancy may be explained by 
a patchy structure of the surface (icy and rocky patches) 
or by a porous mantle which may be hot on the upper 
boundary and cold on the lower. The mass of nucleus was 
estimated as 3 x 10'* t and density about 0.6 tm7°. 

Indirect estimates of the chemical composition of 
the nucleus are possible on the basis of measurements of 
the chemical composition of gas and dust going out from 
the nucleus surface to the coma. HO was identified as the 
most abundant constituent with a production rate of about 
10° molecules s~'. Organic substance outflow (never 
observed earlier) was identified using IR spectra obtained 
by VEGA 1. Its production rate may be comparable 
with that of H2O. CO., CO and HCHO were observed 
with same instrument as parent species with mixing 
ratios of a few per cent. It is important that mainly 
secondary components arising from the decay of such 
parent molecules were observed earlier from the Earth. 
Detailed observations of secondary species with the VEGA 
spacecraft revealed their production rates, geometry of 
ejection, lifetimes of species and their parent and species 
velocities. 

Neutral atoms and molecules in the coma are 
converted to ions by photoionization. The SOLAR WIND 
when it encounters them creates a shock wave that was 
met by the spacecraft at a distance of ~10° km from 
the nucleus. Nearer, at a distance ~10° km, another 
characteristic boundary (not predicted by theory) was met; 
later it was called the ‘cometopause’. Cometary ions 
dominate the plasma inside this. The plasma composition, 
its energy distribution, plasma waves and magnetic fields 
were measured. 

Grains of different masses (from ~10~"? to ~107!! kg) 
were counted by a few VEGA instruments. The dust mass 
production rate was estimated. One of the instruments 
provided measurements of the chemical composition of 
individual particles and showed its large diversity. Some 
of them contain simultaneously C, H, O, N as was 
predicted for interstellar particles; others are icy, silicate 
or metallic bearing. Very small particles (<10-™ g) are 
dense (1 and 2.5 g cm~° for organic and silicate particles, 
respectively), while optically active particles (>107'° g) are 
of low density (0.3 g cm~?) and of a complicated structure. 

VEGA’s flight to comet Halley was an important part 
of coordinated international efforts giving a very strong 
impulse to studies of comets and other small bodies of the 
solar system. 


Bibliography 

Moroz V I 1989 Halley’s comet (part II): space studies 
Highlights Astron. 8 17-31 

Sagdeev R Z, Blamont J, Galeev A A, Moroz V I, Shapiro 
V D, Schevchenko V I and Szego K 1986a Vega 
spacecraft encounter with comet Halley Nature 321 
259-62 

Sagdeev R Z et al 1986b Overview of VEGA balloon in situ 
meteorological measurements Science 321 1411-4 


V Moroz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vela 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vela 


(the Sails; abbrev. Vel, gen. Velorum; area 500 sq. deg.) 
a southern constellation which lies between Antlia—Pyxis 
and Carina, and culminates at midnight in mid February. 
It was introduced by the French astronomer Nicolas L de 
Lacaille (1713-62), who charted the southern sky in 1751- 
2, from stars that formed part of the ancient constellation 
of Argo Navis (the Ship), which had been included by 
Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

The brightest stars in Vela are y Velorum (Regor), a 
multiple system consisting of the brightest Wolf—Rayet star 
in the sky (bluish-white, WC8 + O9, range 1.81-1.87) and 
a bluish-white (B2) component, magnitude 4.3, separation 
41”, the former of which has an unseen companion that 
revolves around it in 78.5 days, and a fourth, bluish-white 
(B6) component, magnitude 7.7, separation 63”, 5 Velorum, 
a very close binary with a white (A1) primary, magnitude 
2.0, and a fainter secondary, magnitude 5.6, separation 
0.74”, 4 Velorum (Suhail), magnitude 2.2, « Velorum 
(Markeb), magnitude 2.5, and  Velorum, another binary, 
with yellow (G5 and G2) components, magnitudes 2.9 and 
5.9, separation 2.0”. There are nine other stars brighter 
than magnitude 4.0. 5 and « Velorum together with and 
é Carinae make up as asterism called the False Cross, as 
it is sometimes confused with the constellation Crux (the 
Southern Cross). 

The Milky Way passes through Vela and the 
constellation contains more than 40 open clusters and 
many planetary nebulae, including IC 2391, an open 
cluster of more than 20 stars scattered across a 1° field, 
the brightest of which is o Velorum, magnitude 3.6, and 
NGC 3132 (the Eight-Burst Nebula), a ninth-magnitude 
planetary nebula with a tenth-magnitude star at its center. 
Other interesting objects include NGC 3201, a seventh- 
magnitude globular cluster, and the vast Gum Nebula, an 
expanding emission nebula some 36° across that extends 
into the neighboring constellations of Antlia, Pyxis, Puppis 
and Carina, and is thought to be the result of a supernova 
explosion that occurred more than 1 million years ago, 
inside which is the more recent Vela supernova remnant 
and at its center the Vela pulsar. 


See also: False Cross, Gum Nebula, Vela pulsar, Vela 
supernova remnant. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vela Pulsar 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vela Pulsar 


The pulsar PSR 0833-45, discovered in 1968. With a period 
of only 9.3 ms, it has one of the fastest pulse-rates known, 
implying that it is one of the youngest pulsars. This is 
borne out by an observed deceleration in its pulse-rate 
of 10.7 ns per day, which sets an upper limit to the time 
elapsed since it was formed in a supernova explosion 
of about 11000 years. In 1977 its pulsations were also 
recorded in visible light, making it one of the first optical 
pulsars to be confirmed. 

The Vela pulsar is located in the southern Milky Way, 
2.8° south of the galactic equator and approximately at the 
centre of a triangle formed by the stars ¢ Puppis, y Velorum 
and 4 Velorum. It is surrounded by extensive nebulosity 
more than 5° across, also a product of the supernova, and is 
associated with a moderately strong radio source, Vela X; 
its distance has been estimated at between 1300 and 1600 
light-years. The Vela pulsar and supernova remnant lie 
within a much older and larger supernova remnant, the 
Gum Nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vela Supernova Remnant ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vela Supernova Remnant 


A supernova remnant in the constellation Vela, position 
RA 08 34™, dec. —45° 45’. It extends to nearly 5° in 
diameter, and consists of material expelled by a supernova 
an estimated 11000 years ago. The core of the supernova 
remains as the Vela Pulsar. 


See: Vela Pulsar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Velikovsky, Immanuel (1895-1979) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Velikovsky, Immanuel (1895-1979) 


Physician, psychoanalyst, cosmologist and writer, born 
in Vitebsk, Russia. His book Worlds in Collision claimed 
from analysis of mythology and scientific fragments that 
a breakaway piece of the planet Jupiter had collided with 
the Earth, causing various disasters recorded in the Bible, 
and ending as the planet Venus. None of his theories stood 
up to analysis and further exploration. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Venera (Missions) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Venera (Missions) 


Veneras 1 to 16 are the Russian (Soviet) spacecraft missions 
to VENUS launched in the period 1961-1983 (table 1). Venus 
was also studied by the VEGA MISSION. 

The first three Venera (hereafter V) missions, V1-V3, 
were developed by the space center headed by Sergey 
Korolyov, father of the Russian space industry (1906— 
1966). (This space center is now a division of the Energia 
Association.) Since 1967, spacecraft for missions to planets 
have been developed by the Lavochkin Association. V1- 
V8 are the first generation of the Venera spacecraft. The 
spacecraft mass varied from 900 to 1200 kg. The three- 
stage Soyuz missile, with the first two stages similar to 
those used for the first manned flights to space, launched 
a spacecraft and the fourth stage into Earth orbit. Then the 
fourth stage accelerated the spacecraft and moved it into 
the interplanetary orbit to Venus. Due to the insufficient 
reliability of the fourth stage and some subsystems in the 
early 1960s, some spacecraft were lost or their programs 
were not completed in full. However, the first generation 
spacecraft made the first soft entries into the atmosphere 
and landed on the surface of Venus. 

V9 to 16 (and also Vega 1 and 2) represent the second 
generation of missions to Venus. Their mass was 5000 kg, 
and they were launched by the Proton rocket. Those 
missions were successful, reliable and, along with ground- 
based observations and the USA Mariner 2, 5 and 10, 
Pioneer Venus and Magellan spacecraft, they provided the 
basis of our current knowledge of Venus. 


Scientific objectives 

The objectives of these missions were to study (i) the 
surface relief and properties of rocks, (ii) the ther- 
mal structure and chemical composition of the lower 
atmosphere (h < 65 km), (iii) the atmosphere and 
ionosphere above the cloud layer (h > 65 km), (iv) the 
magnetic field and plasma environment near Venus, and 
(v) the solar wind, interplanetary magnetic field, cosmic 
rays and micrometeorites during the cruise phase. 


Scientific instrumentation 

V2. Magnetometer, plasma detectors, cosmic ray and 
micrometeorite sensors, telecamera, infrared (5-40 um) 
and ultraviolet (1700-3500 A) spectrometers, radiometer 
in the decimeter range. Only some data during the cruise 
phase were obtained. 

V3. Flyby: magnetometer, plasma detectors and 
cosmic ray sensors, photometer at H 1216 A and O 1304 A. 
Lander: atmospheric temperature, pressure and density 
sensors, chemical gas sensors, photometer, y-ray counter. 
Only some data during the cruise phase were obtained. 

V4. The same as V3 with an altimeter instead of 
the lander photometer. Results: the first entry and direct 
measurements in the atmosphere down to h = 23 km. 
Pressure at 55-33 km, density at 55-28 km, temperatures 
at 55-23 km, atmospheric composition (CO, > 90%, No < 
7%). Hydrogen corona, upper limit to atomic oxygen 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


density, plasma bow shock at 19000 km from the planet, 
low density of the nightside plasma, magnetic moment 
(< 3 x 10~* of the Earth’s value). 

V5, 6. Measurements of pressure, density and 
temperature (p, p, T, respectively) at 55-17 km, chemical 
gas sensors. 

V7. First soft landing on Venus. Measurements of T 
from 55 km to the surface. 

V8. p, pe, T from 55 km to the surface, radar altimeter 
for determination of altitude, photometer to study the 
light conditions and the cloud structure (the lower cloud 
boundary was observed at 33 km), measurements of wind 
speed using the Doppler shift of the radiotransmitter 
frequency, y-spectroscopy of the surface rocks. 

v9, 10. Lander (1560 kg): y-spectrometer, y- 
densitometer, p, T sensors, camera, accelerometer (p, T 
at 90-65 km), mass spectrometer, nephelometer (angles 
of 4, 15, 45 and 175°), photometer for five broad 
intervals in the range 0.44-1.16 um, narrow band 
photometer for 0.8, 0.82 and 0.87 wm (continuum, 
H,O and CO, bands, respectively), onboard transmitter 
(Doppler measurements of wind speed). Orbiter: imaging 
system (0.3-0.4 wm), spectrometer (0.24-0.75 ym), IR 
spectrometer (1.7-2.8 wm), IR radiometer (8-28 sm), 
multiband photopolarimeter (0.35-0.8 4m), photometer at 
H 1216 A with absorption cells, magnetometer, plasma 
electrostatic spectrometer, plasma sensors, cosmic rays, 
dual-frequency onboard transmitter (radio occultations 
and bistatic radar). 

V11, 12. Lander: p,T sensors, accelerometer, mass 
spectrometer, gas chromatograph, optical spectropho- 
tometer (0.45-1.2 um), nephelometer, x-ray fluorescence 
spectrometer, low-frequency electromagnetic detector, on- 
board transmitter (Doppler measurements of wind speed). 
Flyby: ultraviolet spectrometer (304-1657 A), plasma sen- 
sors, cosmic rays, y-ray bursts. 

V13, 14. Color camera, rock sampling, penetrometer, 
electric conductivity of rocks, x-ray fluorescence spectrom- 
eters for (a) rocks and (b) aerosols, p, T sensors, accelerom- 
eter, mass spectrometer, gas chromatograph, spectropho- 
tometer (0.32-1.2 wm), electromagnetic and microseismic 
detectors, electric conductivity of aerosol, onboard trans- 
mitter (wind speed measurements), y-ray bursts (cruise). 

V15, 16. Synthetic aperture radar, radio altime- 
ter, Fourier transform spectrometer (5-40 ym), dual- 
frequency onboard transmitter (radio occultations). 


Main scientific results 

Relief. Detailed mapping of the Venus relief was made 
with the synthetic aperture radars and radio altimeters 
(V15, 16). This study covered the vast area north of about 
30° that is about a quarter of the total surface of Venus. 
This mapping had a spatial resolution of 1-2 km, which 
is sufficient to distinguish various landforms and terrains 
and determine the geological processes responsible for 
their formation. This resolution is better than that of 20 km 
in a similar study from the Pioneer Venus orbiter in 1979 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venera (Missions) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Venera 1 to 16 missions. 


# Launch Encounter Comment 
1 12/02/1961 — First interplanetary spacecraft; flyby 100000 km 
2 12/11/1965 27/02/1966 Flyby 24000 km 
3 16/11/1965 01/03/1966 First hard landing 
4 12/06/1967 18/10/1967 First soft entry (to 23 km) and flyby 
5 05/01/1969 =16/05/1969 Soft entry (to 17 km) 
6 10/01/1969 17/05/1969 — Soft entry (to 17 km) 
7 17/08/1970 15/12/1970 _ First soft landing 
8 27/03/1972 22/07/1972 Soft landing 
9 08/06/1975 22/10/1975 Soft landing and first orbiter hmin = 1560 km 
10 14/06/1975 =25/10/1975 Soft landing and orbiter hmin = 1620 km 
11 = 09/09/1978 21/12/1978 — Soft landing and flyby at 40000 km 
12 14/09/1978 25/12/1978 — Soft landing and flyby at 40000 km 
13. 30/10/1981 01/03/1982 Soft landing and flyby 
14 04/11/1981 05/03/1982 Soft landing and flyby 
15 02/06/1983 10/10/1983 = Orbiter Amin = 1000 km 
16 07/06/1983 14/10/1983 = Orbiter Amin = 1000 km 


but not so good as the 0.12 km achieved by the Magellan 
orbiter seven years later (1990-1994). 

The Venus surface (see VENUS: SURFACE) is dominated by 
plains formed by vast floods of the non-viscous volcanic 
lavas, probably basalts. About 15% of the mapped area 
is covered by so-called tessera, which is a specific terrain 
formed by heavy tectonic deformation of some unknown 
precursor terrain. The morphology of numerous ring-like 
volcanic plain features, so-called coronae, is evidence of 
their formation due to tectonics and volcanism related 
to the uplifting plumes in the planet’s interior. Several 
large fracture zones sharing many properties with the 
continental rift zones on Earth were found. Many impact 
craters of 8 to 150 km diameter show the age of the mapped 
area to be 0.5-1 billion years. The main conclusion is that 
the geology on Venus, contrary to that on Earth, is not 
driven by plate tectonics. 

Panoramas of the landing sites of V9, 10 (figure 1), 13 
and 14 show the small-scale structure of the surface. Of 
four sites, only two are similar (V10 and 13). V9 shows 
a slope of the mountain ridge covered by irregular and 
sharp-edged stones having sizes up to 0.5-0.7 m. V10 and 
13 landed on the rolling plain with outcrops of crystallized 
magmatic rocks changed by deep chemical weathering. 
Steeply sloped uplands with layered structured rocks are 
seen sloping away. V14 found a smooth region of the 
stone plain (lowland) composed of relatively fresh fine- 
grained rocks having a horizontal layered structure which 
resembles the accumulation of volcanic tuff. 

Composition of rocks. The abundances of Mg, Al, Si, 
K, Ca, Ti, Mn, S, Cl and Na given as their oxides were 
measured by the x-ray fluorescence spectrometers at the 
V13, 14 and Vega 2 landing sites. Abundances of the 
natural radionuclides (K, U, Th) were measured by the 
gamma-ray spectrometers from V8, 9, 10, Vega 1 and 2. 
Both elemental and radionuclide abundances are typical 
of various types of erupted basalts, with the exception of 
V8 which is more similar to granites. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Mechanical properties of rocks. The density of rocks was 
measured by the gamma-ray densitometer from V10 to 
be 2.8 + 0.1 gcm %, which is typical of crystalline basalts. 
Determinations of the bearing strength and firmness of 
rocks were made by V13 and 14 using three methods: (i) 
a penetrometer which impacted the ground, (ii) sampling 
the rocks by drilling for the x-ray fluorescence analyses, 
and (iii) accelerometer observations during the shock of 
landing. Heavy clays and compacted dust-like sand are 
the terrestrial analogs for V13, and volcanic tuffs and 
fissured rocks are those for V14. 

Temperature, pressure and dynamics in the lower 
atmosphere (0-60 km) were measured by all landing and 
entry probes. TJ and p vary from T = 735 K and 
p = 90 bar near the surface to 260 K and 0.2 bar at 
60 km. The temperature lapse rates (gradients) may be 
compared with the adiabatic lapse rate for the CO, (97%) 
+ N> (3%) mixture which varies from —11.2 Kkm™! at 
60 km to —8.0 Kkm~! near the surface. The adiabatic lapse 
rate corresponds to the static stability of the atmosphere. 
Significant deviations from static stability were observed 
at 50-35 km and 22-7 km. Wind speed (measured using 
the Doppler shift of the radiotransmitter frequency) varies 
from 70 ms7! at 50 km to 0.5 ms“! near the surface. See 
also VENUS: ATMOSPHERE. 

Abundances of noble gases and isotope ratios were 
measured by the V11-14 mass spectrometers. The total 
argon abundance is 100 parts per million (ppm). The 
ratio of primary isotopes, *°Ar/**Ar, is that on Earth, while 
the radiogenic isotope “Ar is depleted by a factor of 270 
relative to the Earth’s value. The abundance of Ne is 
8 ppm, and *°Ne/*Ne = 12.15 + 0.1, which is between 
the ratios found on the Earth’s (10.1 + 0.4) and in the solar 
wind (13.7+0.3). The abundances of Kr and Xe are 35 parts 
per billion (ppb) and less than 20 ppb, respectively. The 
isotope ratios for C and O are equal to the Earth’s ratios. 
All these values are important for the origin and evolution 
of the atmosphere. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venera (Missions) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 1. Panoramas of the surface of Venus observed from V9 and V10. Each panorama is 180° x 40°. 


The chemical composition of the atmosphere was studied 
by the V12-14 gas chromatographs: N, ~*~ 3% and 
Ar = 100 ppm (both were also measured by the mass 
spectrometers), SO7 = 130 + 35 ppm, CO varies from 30 
ppm at 36 km to 17 ppm at 12 km. Detections of some 
other gases are disputable. 

Strong CO, and H20 bands observed at various 
heights with the V11-14 spectrophotometers resulted in 
an estimate of the full water abundance of 1 gcm™ above 
the surface (first done at V11). The absorption at 0.37 wm 
observed with V14 below 58 km is due to SO), which varies 
from 50 ppm at 50 km to 10 ppm at 57 km. 

Observations with the V15 Fourier spectrometer 
resulted in H,O abundances of 5-15 ppm at 60 + 3 km. 
SO, abundances at 70 km were equal to 20-40 ppb at the 
low and middle latitudes, 1-10 ppb in the polar collar, and 
100-1000 ppb near the north pole. 

Structure of clouds and aerosols. Illumination. Analysis 
of the solar radiation scattered in the atmosphere and 
measured by the photometers and spectrophotometers 
onboard the V8-14 landing probes established three main 
layers within the cloud deck structure and the lower cloud 
boundary at 48 km (near 35 km at V8 and Vega 1 and 2). 
Optical depths of the layers were derived at each landing 
sites. The V14 near-UV (0.32-0.39 um) photometer 
established two absorption layers, above 60 km and below 
58 km. 90% of the solar near-UV energy is absorbed above 
60 km and supports strong winds in the upper cloud level. 
A few per cent of the solar flux reaches the surface. 

A nephelometer is an instrument that illuminates a 
volume of atmospheric medium by a narrow beam and 
measures the scattered radiation at fixed angles. Four- 
angle nephelometers were used onboard V9 and 10 and 
one-angle (backscattering) nephelometers on V11, 13 and 
14. They also established the three-layer structure of the 
main cloud deck and determined aerosol properties in 
those layers. 

The chemical composition of clouds was measured by 
the V12 and 14 x-ray fluorescence spectrometers, which 
determined the presence of S, Cl and Fe, with the Fe/Cl 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ratio corresponding to FeCl3. Later, on Vega 1 and 2, this 
method was used to measure the abundances of S, Cl and P. 
Gas chromatographic and mass spectrometric analyses of 
aerosol pyrolysis products (Vega 1 and 2) revealed sulfuric 
acid and sulfur aerosols with the mass ratio 1:0.1. FeCl; 
is probably present as very small (0.3 um) particles and 
constitutes 1% of the total aerosol mass. These particles 
may serve as condensation centers for sulfuric acid and 
explain the near-UV absorption. The Vega data favor P as 
phosphoric acid H3PQ, at locations where the lower cloud 
boundary extends to 35 km. The observed excess of Cl may 
indicate AlCl. 

Lightning. Strong and frequent electromagnetic 
pulses at 10-100 kHz observed at V11 to 14 favor 
lightning on Venus. The Pioneer Venus electromagnetic 
observations also support lightning. However, of three 
sets of observations in the visible (V9, 10, and Pioneer 
Venus orbiters, Vega 1 and 2 balloons), there was only one 
case for suspecting a thunderstorm. Overall, the problem 
is uncertain. 

Properties of clouds and the atmosphere near the upper 
cloud boundary (68 km) were studied by the near-UV 
camera, visible spectrometer, photopolarimeter, near-IR 
spectrometer and IR radiometer onboard the V9 and 10 
orbiters, and Fourier spectrometer (FS) on V15. 

FS covered the range 5-40 ym with a spectral 
resolving power 4/54 ~ 200. 1500 spectra obtained mostly 
in the northern hemisphere showed sulfuric acid as a 
main cloud species at all latitudes. The cloud deck is 
homogeneous with a smooth decrease in particle density 
at latitudes < 50°, and is horizontally variable with a steep 
vertical decrease at the polar and subpolar regions. 

Limb observations of haze above the clouds by the V9 
and 10 visible spectrometers resulted in vertical profiles 
of the haze particle size, their number density and eddy 
diffusion at 70-100 km. 

Pressure, temperature and dynamics in the middle atmo- 
sphere were studied by three methods: (i) accelerometers 
on the entry and landing probes, (ii) dual-frequency radio 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venera (Missions) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


occultations from the V9, 10, 15 and 16 orbiters, and (iii) 
FS spectra of the CO, band at 15 ym. 

50 and 90 p-T profiles in the range 40-90 km were 
observed with radio occultations from V9, 10 and 15, 
16, respectively, to study the thermal balance, day- 
night variations and latitudinal behavior with a special 
emphasis on the polar and collar regions. Temperature 
profiles deduced from the FS spectra are different at low 
and high latitudes and depend also on local time. Wind 
velocities (~ 100 ms at 70 km) estimated from the 
temperature profiles vary with local time, showing the 
half-day period typical of the atmospheric tides. 

Airglow. Observations with the high-sensitive visible 
spectrometers (V9 and 10 orbiters) solved the three- 
centuries-old problem of the Venus ashen light (nonzero 
brightness of the night side) and revealed spectra of the 
nightglow. Laboratory simulations of these spectra helped 
to identify four O2 band systems. Their intensities, vertical 
profiles and variations with local time were obtained. 
These emissions originate near h = 100 km in the reaction 
O+0+CO, > O}§ + CO, with subsequent quenching and 
excitation trasnfer. 

Dayglow emissions of H, O, He and O* were observed 
with the V9 and 10 airglow photometers and V11 and 
12 spectrometers. The densities of these species and the 
temperature of the upper atmosphere were obtained from 
the observations. 

Profiles of electron density in the ionosphere were 
measured using dual-frequency radio occultations from 
the V9, 10, 15 and 16 orbiters. About 100 profiles were 
used to study variations of the density maximum and 
its height, the scale height above the maximum, and the 
ionopause height with solar zenith angle, solar activity and 
other geophysical parameters. The nightside ionosphere is 
especially variable and often shows a two-peak structure. 

The magnetosphere and interaction with the solar wind 
were studied by two plasma spectrometers and a 
magnetometer onboard the V9 and 10 orbiters. The shape 
and location of the bow shock indicated that the solar 
wind is diverted almost completely by a magnetic barrier. 
Charge exchange between the solar wind protons and 
atmospheric hot oxygen atoms and their photoionization 
add mass to the solar wind. This mass loading was 
observed in the boundary layer of the solar wind flow 
around the planet and plays a crucial role in the formation 
of the magnetosphere. The planetary ion outflow on 
the nightside forms the distinct plasma tail. Its polarity 
is controlled by the local direction of the interplanetary 
magnetic field, thus confirming the induced nature of the 
Venus magnetosphere. Both plasma flow from the dayside 
and electron precipitations on the nightside support the 
nightside ionosphere (see also VENUS: INTERACTION WITH SOLAR 
WIND). 


Bibliography 

Barsukov V L, Basilevsky AT, Volkov V Pand Zharkov VN 
(ed) 1992 Venus Geology, Geochemistry, and Geophysics 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Hunten D M, Colin L, Donahue T M and Moroz V I (ed) 
1983 Venus (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Keldysh M V 1977 Venus exploration with the Venera 9 
and Venera 10 spacecraft Icarus 30 605-25 

Krasnopolsky V A 1986 Photochemistry of the Atmospheres of 
Mars and Venus (Heidelberg: Springer) 

Moroz V 11981 The atmosphere of Venus Space Sci. Rev. 29 
3-127 


Vladimir A Krasnopolsky 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Venus 


Venus is the second planet from the Sun. It orbits the 
Sun at 0.72 times the Earth’s distance, or 108.2 million 
km. Because of its location relative to the Earth, Venus 
is always seen close to the Sun, at less than 48° angular 
distance from it. The planet appears either as a morning 
‘star’ or as an evening ‘star’. Actually, as in the case of 
Mercury, for a long time it was thought that there were 
two different bodies (the ancient names for Venus were 
Eosphorus and Hesperus), until the Greek astronomers 
realized that there was only one body. The distance of 
Venus to the Earth varies from 41 million km to 257 million 
km. As seen from the Earth, Venus’s apparent diameter 
varies from 10 to 64.5 arcsec. However, we see the full 
disk illuminated by the Sun only at Superior conjunction. 
The planet has phases, like the Moon (figure 1). They were 
first seen by Galileo in 1610. Venus is the brightest object 
in the sky, after the Sun and the Moon, but the planet’s 
brightness is very variable. Venus is the brightest between 
maximum elongation and inferior conjunction. At inferior 
conjunction, which happens about every 19 months, when 
Venus’s size is the largest, the disk is completely dark at 
visible wavelengths. The brightness of Venus is due not 
only to its close proximity to the Sun (Venus receives twice 
more solar light as the Earth) and to the Earth but also to 
the high reflecting power of the clouds that reflect 75% of 
the solar light. 

The rotation of Venus is nearly synchronous. Indeed, 
the period of rotation of Venus around the Sun is 224.7 
days, while the planet’s rotational period is 243 days (Earth 
days), which is extremely slow, and in the retrograde 
direction (i.e. opposite to the direction of the movement 
of the rotation of the planet around the Sun). Because 
of the combined effects of the slow retrograde rotation of 
Venus and of its orbital motion around the sun, the solar 
day (time between two sunrises) on Venus corresponds 
to 117 Earth days. The eccentricity of the orbit and the 
inclination of the planetary rotation axis are both very 
small. Therefore no major seasonal changes are expected. 
In fact, Venus is the planet with the most circular orbit. 
It is also the most Earth-like of the terrestrial planets in 
terms of size and bulk properties. The planetary radius 
at the equator is 6051.5 km, which corresponds to 95% 
of the Earth’s radius (6378 km). Furthermore, Venus’s 
mean density (5.24 g cm~°) and surface gravity (8.6 ms~’) 
are comparable with those of the Earth (5.97 g cm~? and 
9.78 ms, respectively). However, now that we know 
Venus better, we find many more differences from the 
Earth than was believed only 50 yr ago. In particular, 
Venus has a very high surface temperature of 740 K (hot 
enough to melt lead) and a very dense atmosphere (93 
times that on Earth). The main atmospheric constituent 
is carbon dioxide, instead of nitrogen for the Earth. The 
clouds are made of sulfuric acid and not pure water as 
on Earth. Besides, the surface of Venus is essentially of 
volcanic origin and does not present evidence for lateral 
plate tectonics in recent history. Furthermore, Venus has 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


no intrinsic magnetic field. In addition, Venus does not 
possess any satellites. 


Earth-based investigations 

Until the first successful space mission to Venus in 1962, 
all that was known about Venus came from Earth-based 
investigations. In 1761, M V Lomonosov, who observed a 
transit of Venus accross the Sun in an attempt to measure 
the distance from the Earth to the Sun, was the first to 
detect a halo around Venus that he interpreted as being due 
to the presence of an atmosphere. Spots or markings on 
the planet had been seen since about 1666. Around 1930, 
ultraviolet measurements detected the Y-shaped features 
of the upper clouds. Studies of these markings established 
in 1966 that the atmosphere was rotating in about 5 days 
at the cloud tops. These features appear much better in 
the ultraviolet than in the visible. The first identification 
of an atmospheric constituent was that of CO, in 1932 
by spectroscopy at 8000 A. Later on, H»O was detected 
from the ground, but also from balloons and aircraft, in 
visible spectra of the planet and in very variable amounts. 
Infrared spectroscopy from Earth around 1967 led to the 
detections of CO, HCl and HF in small amounts above the 
clouds. Ultraviolet measurements allowed the detection 
of SO, in 1979. The cloud composition remained unknown 
for a long time. It was believed that the clouds were made 
of water, as on Earth. It is only around 1974, through the 
analysis of the polarization of Venus’s radiation, that a 
value for the refractive index of the particles was obtained, 
n = 1.45, and it was then correctly inferred that the cloud 
particles were in fact droplets of concentrated sulfuric acid 
(H2SO,). This was confirmed later on by space missions, 
which provided much more information about the clouds. 
However, it is interesting to note that an explanation for 
the ultraviolet markings in the upper clouds is still lacking, 
although it is suspected that they are related to sulfur 
chemistry. 

Measurements of the radio emission of the planet 
at 3.15 cm in the late 1950s seemed to indicate that the 
temperature at the surface of Venus was much higher than 
that on Earth. As it was believed at that time that Earth 
and Venus were very similar planets, this came as a big 
surprise, and a confirmation was needed. This was one 
of the goals of the first American spacecraft that went to 
Venus in 1962. 

Concerning the surface itself, it is only by radar 
measurements that are not stopped by clouds that 
information on the surface could be gained. Information 
on the rotation of the planet as a solid body came only 
with the first radar studies of Venus with the Goldstone 
radio antenna around 19649 that allowed the direction 
and rate of rotation of the solid planet to be obtained. The 
extremely slow rotation thus inferred, and the fact that 
Venus was rotating in the retrograde direction were other 
significant surprises. It was also found at that time that the 
rotation axis is nearly perpendicular to the ecliptic. Radar 
observations from Goldstone, California, and Arecibo, 
Puerto Rico, at 12.6 cm (S-band), around Venus’s inferior 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SUPERIOR CONJUNCTION 
EAST"  ——-O- ————_ WEST 


on aR 


INFERIOR CONJUNCTION 


Figure 1. A schematic view of Venus as observed from Earth at 
various phases. Venus is largest at inferior conjunction, but then 
it is very dark. At superior conjunction, Venus is smallest but 
completely illuminated by the Sun. Venus is brightest around 
east and west elongations. (From Colin L 1983 Venus ed DM 
Hunten, L Colin, TM Donahue and V I Moroz (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) p 21.) 


conjunction, provided the first radar images of portions of 
the surface at 5-20 km resolution. 

The studies of the atmosphere made nowadays 
by Earth-based telescopes cover all wavelength ranges 
from the ultraviolet to the radio range. Earth-orbiting 
ultraviolet satellites as well as sounding rockets are also 
used regularly to probe the upper atmosphere of the 
planet. 

As the planet is covered by thick cloud layers, the part 
of the atmosphere below the clouds is difficult to probe by 
Earth-based observations. For many years, information on 
the deep atmosphere came essentially from space probes 
that went into the atmosphere or from occultations of 
spacecraft by the atmosphere of the planet during a space 
mission. However, in 1984, it was discovered that the 
night-side of Venus emits near-infrared radiation coming 
from deep atmospheric layers below the main clouds. This 
property has since been used to probe these deep layers 
using Earth-based telescopes. It led to measurements of 
sulfur compounds (SO, OCS), CO, H2O and halides (HCI, 
HF), below the clouds. 

Radio measurements that are made today concern 
mostly the millimeter range, and they pertain to the upper 
atmosphere of the planet. They provide information on 
minor species such as CO and H2O and on the temperature 
profile in the upper atmosphere. They allow the variations 
with the time of the day to be studied. For instance, larger 
concentrations of CO have been found on the night-side 
than on the day-side. Also, Doppler shifts of the CO 
lines have been used to measure wind speeds. Long-term 
variations in CO have also been observed by this method. 


Space missions 

Space exploration of Venus started in 1962. Since then, 
there have been many spacecraft explorations with fly- 
bys and orbiting spacecraft. The most favorable periods 
for launch occur at times of inferior conjunction, when 
Venus is closest to the Earth, which happens about every 
19 months. Venus is the planet that has been the most 
explored by space missions. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The first fly-by was that of the American Mariner 2 
spacecraft, in 1962, which carried a microwave radiometer 
to check whether the surface temperature was high. Then, 
another American spacecraft, Mariner 5, that went to 
Venus in 1967, confirmed that the surface pressure was 
very high, about 90 atm. Mariner 10 on its way to Mercury 
explored Venus in 1974 (see MARINER MISSIONS). The Soviets 
began exploration of Venus in 1967 with Venera 4 (first 
successful launch) which carried an atmospheric probe. 
The first successful landing on Venus was achieved by 
Venera 7 in 1970 (another Soviet spacecraft), and the first 
photographs of the surface were obtained by the Venera 
9 and 10 Soviet spacecraft in 1975 (see VENERA MISSIONS). 
Venera 8, 9 and 10 lander capsules carried gamma- 
ray spectrometers, which allowed the first geochemical 
measurements to be made. The amounts of radioactive 
elements U (uranium), Th (thorium) and K (potassium) 
were determined. 

Then, in 1978, came the American Pioneer Venus 
1 and 2 missions, with an orbiter on Pioneer Venus 1 
and entry probes on Pioneer Venus 2. Pioneer Venus 
orbiter penetrated the upper atmosphere and made mass 
spectrometer measurements. Four probes reached the 
surface. The orbiter part of the mission lasted from 
December 1978 to October 1992. Topographic maps were 
obtained by the radar altimeter on Pioneer Venus 1 in 1978 
with a resolution of about 50 km in horizontal extent and 
about 200 m in altitude (see PIONEER VENUS MISSION). The 
Venera 11 and 12 spacecraft, which carried descent landers, 
were also sent to Venus by the Soviet Union in 1978. 
Altogether, in December 1978, ten separate spacecraft 
visited Venus. 

The Soviet exploration continued with other Venera 
missions (up to Venera 16) and with the Vega 1 and 2 
spacecraft that were initially designed for an exploration 
of Venus but were sent to comet Halley as well as to 
Venus (See VEGASPACE MISSION). The Venera 13 and 14 probes, 
which landed on Venus in 1982, and the Vega 2 probe, 
which dropped a landing module in June 1985, carried an 
instrument that was able to measure the x-ray fluorescence 
of soil samples introduced into a vacuum chamber. Venera 
13 and 14 obtained some more images of the surface of 
Venus, and the Venera 15 and 16 probes provided radar 
mapping at a resolution of 1-2 km of the northern 25% 
of the surface of Venus close to the north pole, starting in 
1983. 

Another major step in the exploration of Venus was 
achieved by the American Magellan Radar Mapping 
spacecraft that was launched from the space shuttle 
Atlantis in 1989. Between 1990 and 1992, it mapped 98% of 
the surface at resolutions between 120 and 300 m. It also 
provided altimetric, radiometric and gravity data. The 
final orbit occurred on October 1994. The radar maps are 
spectacular. The American spacecraft, Galileo, designed to 
explore the planet Jupiter, accomplished a fly-by of Venus 
in February 1990. It has allowed us, in particular, to study 
the deep clouds of Venus from near-infrared imaging of 
the night-side. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The atmosphere 

Composition and temperature 

Our current knowledge of the composition of the 
atmosphere of Venus comes from a number of in situ 
analyses with infrared and ultraviolet spectrometers, 
mass spectrometers and gas chromatographs on space 
probes that went into the atmosphere of the planet. It 
is also the result of spectroscopy obtained with Earth- 
based telescopes, airplanes, rockets and satellites. Venus 
has a very dense atmosphere, with CO, as the major 
constituent (mixing ratio: 0.965), instead of N2 as on 
Earth. Minor components are nitrogen (N2), water vapor 
(H,0), sulfur dioxide (SO), sulfur monoxide (SO), carbon 
monoxide (CO), carbonyl sulfide (COS), sulfuric acid 
(H2SOx,), oxygen (O2), hydrogen chloride (HCl), hydrogen 
fluoride (HF), argon (Ar), neon (Ne) and krypton (Kr) (see 
VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). The atmospheric surface pressure is 
95 bar, or 95 times that at the surface of the Earth. The 
temperature at the surface is very high: 740 K. 

One of the striking characteristics of Venus is its 
dryness. At the high surface temperature of Venus, 
water could not currently exist in the liquid state at the 
surface. However, even in the atmosphere, only very 
small amounts of H2O vapor are found. The deuterium- 
to-hydrogen ratio is very high (about 150 times that on 
Earth). In contrast, isotopic ratios of C and O are the same 
on Venus and Earth. 

Concerning the nonradiogenic noble gases Ne, ®Ar 
and Kr, *°Ne is about 20 times more abundant on Venus 
than on Earth, *°Ar about 70 times more abundant and Kr 
only 3 times more abundant. Radiogenic argon (*°Ar) is 
about 4 times less abundant on Venus than on Earth. 

The high average surface temperature is somewhat 
surprising. Indeed, in spite of the close proximity of Venus 
to the Sun, because of the high reflecting power of the 
clouds, only about 25% of the solar flux penetrates into 
the atmosphere. However, the high surface temperature 
can be explained by a very efficient greenhouse effect as 
the atmosphere of Venus contains gases that are strong 
infrared absorbers (COz, SO2, H,0, OCS) and clouds 
that trap the thermal radiation emitted by the deep 
atmosphere. This causes an increase in the surface 
temperature of nearly 500 K (compared with the expected 
temperature without an atmosphere). 

The measurements of temperature in the atmosphere 
come from infrared radiometry and radio occultations. 
Spacecraft radio-occultation measurements indicate that 
the temperature decreases from 740 K at the surface 
to about 240 K at the cloud tops. Temperatures 
below 35-50 km approximately follow an adiabat. This 
indicates that the temperature structure below the 
clouds is controlled essentially by atmospheric dynamics 
(convection). Diurnal and latitudinal variations are very 
small below the clouds. 

Above the clouds, in the region called the mesosphere, 
temperature measurements obtained from Pioneer Venus 
around 15 wm have provided maps covering the 60- 
105 km vertical range. The temperature (averaged over 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


time) varies from 170 to 330 K. These maps indicate that, 
at these altitudes, the polar regions are up to 20 K warmer 
than the equator, which is very surprising. 

At still higher altitudes, in the thermosphere, the 
temperature in the day-side is around 300 K, and therefore 
much colder than on Earth (where it is 1000-2000 kK). 
Heating in this part of the atmosphere is caused mainly 
by the absorption of ultraviolet photons from the Sun. 
The difference in temperature with respect to the Earth 
is due to the greater abundance of CO, which is very 
efficient at radiating heat to space. The temperature varies 
spectacularly from day to night. At night, it can be as cold 
as 100 K. The long duration of the days on Venus and the 
cooling effect of CO, on the night-side probably combine 
to produce this strong contrast in temperature. 

The homopause is the region of the atmosphere above 
which the gases are no longer uniformly mixed (gases of 
different mass have different scale heights). On Venus, 
this occurs at around 130-145 km altitude. What is found 
is a surprisingly low concentration of the dissociation 
products of CO,—O and CO—above the homopause. 
These products must be quickly removed and transported 
to lower altitudes where they recombine (maybe through 
a catalytic cycle that involves chlorine, which is about 1000 
times more abundant on Venus than on Earth). 

Still higher up, Venus has an ionosphere, which 
was first detected by the radio-occultation experiment on 
Mariner 5 in 1967 and has been studied in more detail by 
an ion-mass spectrometer that went to the ionosphere and 
by remote-sensing observations with other instruments on 
the Pioneer Venus orbiter. The day-side ionosphere peaks 
near 140 km and stops at about 500 km. It is produced 
primarily by solar extreme ultraviolet radiation. The most 
abundant positive ions are O3, O* and CO}. O} (and not 
CO3) is the dominant ion up to about 190 km because 
of the rapid reaction rate of CO) + O. Higher up, O* 
dominates. Quite surprisingly, the night-side ionosphere 
can sometimes be rather significant. This happens during 
periods of solar maximum when the day-side ionosphere 
is so dense and extensive that the solar wind cannot 
penetrate the planet’s environment. A large flux of O* 
ions then goes to the night-side of the planet and creates 
a significant night-side ionosphere (the long duration of 
the nights prevents the ions from recombining). At solar 
minimum, the day-side ionosphere is much less extensive, 
and the flow of ions to the night-side not as strong (see 
VENUS: INTERACTION WITH SOLAR WIND). 


Clouds 
Although the upper part of the cloud layers can be 
observed and monitored from the Earth, the vertical 
structure of the clouds can be studied only during space 
missions. Probes and the Vega 1 balloons have gone 
through the cloud layers, and the Galileo spacecraft has 
imaged the clouds on the night-side of the planet around 
40-50 km altitude during its fly-by of Venus. 

Clouds cover Venus globally in generally three layers 
between 48 and 68 km. At some times and at some 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


VENUSIAN SULFUR CYCLE 


FeSp CaS04 


fast atmospheric cycle slow atmospheric cycle geologic cycle 


Figure 2. A possible model for the Venusian sulfur cycle (from 
Lewis J S and Prinn R G 1984 Planets and their Atmospheres: 
Origin and Evolution (New York: Academic). 


locations, the lower two layers may combine. However, 
the variability in structure is much less important than in 
the Earth’s clouds. Hazes are present above and below the 
clouds. The total cloud optical depth has been estimated 
to be between 25 and 35. Their total mass is relatively 
small; the Venus clouds are more like the hazes on Earth. 
The droplets are about 2 wm in size, but the particle size 
distributions differ from layer to layer. 

The clouds are made mostly of concentrated sulfuric 
acid, with about 75% by weight sulfuric acid and 25% 
water vapor. They resemble terrestrial acid rain (caused 
by pollution). This composition is probably the result of 
photochemical production of SO3 from SO2. H2O and SO; 
then react to make H2SO, (figure 2). H2SO, is thermally 
decomposed into SO; and H,O in the lower atmosphere. 
Chemical reactions with the surface should be removing 
sulfur quickly from the atmosphere, maybe through the 
formation of anhydrite (CaSO,). Some sulfur must go 
back into the atmosphere from the decomposition of sulfur 
compounds present in the crust, such as pyrite (FeS2). To 
explain the presence of permanent cloud layers of sulfuric 
acid on Venus, a source of sulfur (continuous or episodic) 
is needed, and it is postulated that surface volcanism plays 
an essential role in the release of sulfur gases from the crust 
(see also CLOUDS IN PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). 


Atmospheric circulation 

The atmospheric circulation of Venus is very different 
from that on Earth (see EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE). This is not 
surprising given the different rotation rates, the different 
atmospheric composition and structure, and the lack of 
seasons. Furthermore, on Venus, solar light is mainly 
deposited within and above the upper cloud layer which 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


is always present, whereas on Earth it is mostly absorbed 
at the surface. 

What we know about the global circulation in the 
atmosphere of Venus comes from various sources of 
information. Direct sources are cloud-feature tracking and 
the radio tracking of descending probes (Doppler tracking 
of Veneras 8, 9, 10 and 12 and interferometric tracking of 
the Pioneer Venus probes) and of balloons that went into 
the atmosphere (Vega mission). Doppler-shifted emission 
lines from atmospheric gases (such as CO, and CO) also 
provide direct measurements of wind speeds. Spatial 
variations in gaseous abundances are also used as tracers 
of the global circulation. Ina more indirect way, theoretical 
analyses of planet-wide variations in temperature at a 
given pressure, obtained by radio occultations and IR 
radiometry, have been used. However, winds can be 
determined in this manner only if the atmosphere is in 
cyclostrophic balance, a condition which, on Venus, occurs 
in the non-equatorial regions below 60 km altitude. 

As we have seen, Venus rotates extremely slowly, 
in 243 days, whereas the atmosphere at the cloud levels 
(around 60 km altitude) rotates in 4-5 days, which 
corresponds to wind speeds of 100 m s~!, in the same 
retrograde direction as the planet. This zonal (along 
a line of constant latitude) superrotation of the entire 
atmosphere of Venus from about 10 km up to about 100 km, 
which is so different from what is found on Earth, is the 
main mode of circulation of the atmosphere. 

The zonal winds are not constant with altitude, 
however. They decrease regularly from a speed of 
100 m s~' at the cloud tops to values close to 1 ms7! near 
the surface. However, there exist some layers of relatively 
constant wind speeds that alternate with regions of large 
increase in velocity. Differences in zonal wind speeds with 
time of the day also exist. 

Above the clouds, zonal winds generally decrease 
with altitude up to about 100 km, where they reach 
very small values. At still higher altitudes, a very 
different circulation regime exists. The global circulation 
is there dominated by a strong flow from the day-side 
hemisphere to the night-side hemisphere (subsolar to 
antisolar circulation). Peak velocities reach approximately 
250 ms! across the terminator. This circulation, which is 
also different from that existing on Earth, is a consequence 
of the high temperature contrasts between the day-side 
and the night-side above 150 km. With only a strong 
subsolar-to-antisolar flow, one would expect upwelling 
centered on the subsolar point and subsidence centered 
on the antisolar point, with a return flow around 70- 
90 km altitude. However, subsidence does not occur 
at midnight but, instead, at around 2-3 a.m. local time. 
This asymmetry may be due to the superposition of the 
subsolar-to-antisolar flow and of some zonal retrograde 
winds (these two flows add across the evening terminator, 
but go in opposite directions at the morning terminator). 

There is, in addition, a slow meridional (in the 
equator-to-pole direction) circulation that may consist of 
Hadley cells, as on Earth. Cloud-tracked winds from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


HYPOTHETICAL 
LOWER ATMOSPHERE 
HADLEY CELLS 
AND INDIRECT CELLS 


CLOUD LEVEL 
HADLEY CELL 


WESTWARD 
SUPERROTATION / 


| 


Ne 
=. ati 


Figure 3. A possible model for the general circulation of the 
Venusian atmosphere (from Schubert G 1983 Venus ed DM 
Hunten, L Colin, TM Donahue and V I Moroz (Tucson, AZ: 
University of Arizona Press) p 730.) 


Pioneer Venus and Mariner 10 have shown equator-to-pole 
velocities of about 5 ms~! in each hemisphere. However, 
the interferometric tracking of the Pioneer Venus probes 
has revealed a complex altitude variation, with changes 
in magnitude and in direction. Interpretations of these 
observations and theoretical considerations suggest that 
the Pioneer Venus probes went through several vertically 
layered large meridional cells that each extend from the 
equator to high latitudes. There may be three different 
cells: a Hadley cell near the surface, a weak indirect cell in 
the stable layer below the clouds (between 30 and 50 km) 
and a Hadley cell at the cloud level (that may be ‘thermally 
indirect’) (figure 3). 

There are many indications of wave motions on 
different scales in the atmosphere of Venus. In particular, 
the relative stability of the large-scale dark markings in 
the ultraviolet photographs may be due to planetary-scale 
waves drifting slowly with respect to the atmospheric 
superrotation. The thermal tides that follow the motion 
of the Sun in Venus’s sky (the Sun rises in the west and 
sets in the east) may also play an important role. There 
is also evidence for small-scale turbulence. One of the 
main problems in Venus’s global circulation is to explain 
the existence and maintenance of the superrotation. The 
eddies that have been observed in the lower atmosphere 
may, in combination with the mean meridional circulation 
and the planetary-scale waves, help in providing the 
upward transport of angular momentum required to 
explain Venus superrotation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Origin and evolution 

Although giant planets have retained most of their 
primitive atmosphere, this is not the case for the terrestrial 
planets Venus, the Earth and Mars that have lost their 
primitive atmosphere, probably through massive escape, 
and have acquired a secondary atmosphere. A large part 
is made of gases outgassed from the interior which is 
heated during planetary formation by contraction and by 
decay of natural radioactive elements. During periods of 
large-scale volcanism, CO2, SOz, H2O and other volatiles 
are injected into the atmospheres. An extra component 
comes from cometary and meteoritic impacts (for the 
Earth, biological processes also play a role). Gases can be 
removed by atmospheric escape (solar wind interaction), 
interaction with the surface or major impacts. See also 
PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES. 

As Venus and Earth were formed in approximately 
the same region of the solar nebula, they may have had 
the same global composition. There are some indication 
that this may be the case. Indeed, the total estimated 
oxidized carbon inventories on Venus and Earth are 
comparable, although on Earth the carbon is mainly 
present in carbonate rocks at the surface of the planet 
and in the oceans while, on Venus, it is mainly present 
in the atmosphere, where it can accumulate because of the 
absence of liquid water. Nitrogen inventories on Earth and 
Venus are also comparable. 

The underabundance of radiogenic argon “Ar 
(produced by the decay of “°K—potassium) could be due to 
different outgassing rates and/or duration on Venus and 
on Earth. If it is due essentially to a shorter duration of 
outgassing on Venus than on Earth, then the measurement 
would indicate that most of Venus’s outgassing happened 
during the first billion years. 

The high values of the nonradiogenic noble gases 
°Ne, Ar and Kr on Venus compared with Earth have 
not yet found a completely satisfactory explanation. The 
postulated early episode of massive supersonic escape of 
the early hydrogen-rich atmospheres by enhanced extreme 
ultraviolet radiation from the young Sun would probably 
have carried along the noble gases on both Venus and the 
Earth, in spite of their high molecular weight. The only 
major difference in the evolution of the two planets may 
come from the giant impact with a planetesimal that must 
have occurred on Earth (but not on Venus) to explain the 
Moon’s formation. This would have produced another 
major erosion of the Earth’s atmosphere, including the 
noble gases, and, according to some scientists, it could 
be the main reason for smaller abundances of noble gases 
on Earth than on Venus (except for Xe, which may be a 
particular case because of its higher molecular weight). 
The current endowment in these noble gases for the 
Earth would come essentially from subsequent periods of 
outgassing from the interior, with, maybe, some additional 
contribution of less destructive and more recent cometary 
or meteoritic impacts that could enrich the atmosphere in 
noble gases. More measurements of noble gas abundances 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


on Venus, as well as measurements in comets, are needed 
to enable the further development of these hypotheses. 

Venus’s atmosphere currently contains about 100 000 
times less water than is found in the oceans and 
atmosphere of the Earth. Venus could originally have had 
the same amount of water as the Earth. A significant loss 
of water could have occurred on Venus, but not on Earth, 
because of a runaway greenhouse effect due to the much 
higher temperatures of Venus that would have vaporized 
the water. The water molecules dissociate in the upper 
atmosphere, and hydrogen then escapes. After a period 
of massive escape, it has been computed that fractionation 
would start (the heavier deuterium D does not escape as 
easily as the lighter H) after the amount of water has been 
reduced to the equivalent of a layer of water a few meters 
thick covering the surface of Venus. The very high value of 
the D/H ratio measured on Venus could therefore indicate 
that much larger amounts of water were present in the past, 
with, maybe, the possibility that ocEANs once existed on the 
planet. However, such calculations are not simple, as it is 
hard to track the amount of water present at a given time. 
Indeed, during the more recent past, significant ejections 
of water could have been produced by a major volcanic 
episode or by a massive outgassing event. Furthermore, 
cometary impacts continually replenish the atmosphere 
with relatively weakly deuterated water. 


Surface and interior of Venus 

Little was known about the surface until the 1970s. 
After the first observations by Earth-based Goldstone and 
Arecibo radar mapping in the 1960s, global-scale radar 
mappings of large parts of the surface were carried out by 
Pioneer Venus in 1978 and Venera 15 and 16 in 1983. This 
was then followed by the US Magellan mission in 1990-4 
that has provided radar images, altimetric and radiometric 
data at a remarkable spatial resolution of 120-300 m for 
98% of the surface of Venus. 


Main characteristics of the surface 

The radar altimetric data indicate that more than 90% of 
the surface has an elevation between —1 and +2.5 km, 
compared with Venus’s reference mean radius of 6051.8 
km. The surface is dominated by plains. One can 
distinguish the lowland plains (or planitiae), such as the 
Atalanta Planitia, that have elevations between 1 and 2 km 
below the mean Venusian radius and that cover about 
27% of the surface, and the upland or rolling plains that 
constitute 65% of the surface and have elevations between 
0 and 2 km above the mean surface radius. The rest (about 
8% of the surface) is made of highlands with 2-12 km 
elevation. 

The lowland plains are generally very smooth (dark 
at radar wavelengths), whereas the upland or rolling 
plains are a little more rough and possess many small- 
scale landforms such as scarps, ridges, troughs, hills, 
channels, .... The plains are interrupted by the large-scale 
landforms at higher elevations called highlands (see vENus: 
SURFACE). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The highlands are dominated by two continent-size 
features: APHRODITE TERRA and ISHTAR TERRA (figure 4). The 
largest one, Aphrodite Terra (about 10000 km across), 
is larger than Africa in surface area. It lies mostly in 
the southern hemisphere, close to the equator, at 1- 
5 km elevation. Ishtar Terra, about 5600 km across 
(about the size of Australia), and located in the northern 
hemisphere, possesses the highest mountain belts on the 
planet, including Maxwell Montes which is up to about 
12 km high. Following V L Hansen and colleagues, 
the highlands can be subdivided into three groups: the 
volcanic rises, the crustal plateaux and Ishtar Terra. The 
volcanic rises are more than 1000 km across, they rise 1- 
2.5 km above the surrounding plains and they have gentle 
slopes. They include the Atla, Beta, Bell, Dione, Imdr 
and Themis Regiones. The most prominent volcanoes 
on Venus and numerous coronae (which are circular to 
elliptical features with tectonic annuli unique to Venus) 
are found there. The volcanic rises are mostly located in 
equatorial regions of Venus. The crustal plateaux such 
as Ovda and Thetis in Aphrodite Terra, or the Alpha, 
Phoebe or Tellus Regiones are 1000-3000 km across; they 
have steep slopes and reach elevations of 2-4 km above 
the surrounding plains. They contain regions of very 
rough, highly deformed terrain called tesserae, and some 
volcanic features, as well as many other structures such 
as ridges, fractures and grabens. Ishtar Terra has unique 
characteristics; it is an irregular platform with a complex 
topographic profile that includes a high interior plateau, 
Lakshmi Planum, with mountain belts in its periphery, and 
surrounding high tesserae. In addition, its tesserae are 
different from the ones found elsewhere. They have more 
coherent structures. 

Thousands of volcanoes have been identified on 
Venus, from kilometer-size vents to broad _ shields 
hundreds of km across. Volcanoes and other volcanic 
features are found everywhere, but they are less abundant 
in the tesserae regions and more abundant in the Beta— 
Atla—Themis region which covers about 20% of the planet. 
So far, 167 volcanoes more than 100 km across have been 
found. Examples are Maat Mons in Atla Regio (figure 5) 
and Theia Mons in Beta Regio, which have diameters 
in the range 100-200 km and rise to 1-9 km above the 
mean planetary radius. These volcanoes are surrounded 
by radar-bright (rough) ejecta with circular or elliptical 
shapes that sometimes form kinds of festoons. About 300 
intermediate-size volcanoes have been found (20-100 km 
in diameter), including several ‘pancake domes’ that 
are steep-sided, circular, flat-top features. The smallest 
volcanoes are mostly found in groups called shield fields. 

There are about 1000 impact cRaTERs on Venus, which 
is not much compared with what is found on Mars or 
the Moon. The largest crater, Mead, has a diameter of 
270 km, and the smallest ones have diameters of about 
1.5 km. The absence of small craters and the fact that 
craters on Venus seem to come in groups are probably due 
to the presence of a dense atmosphere around the planet 
that has broken the large meteroids and completely burnt 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PLANET 
RADIUS 
(um) 


606) 


AUALAMTA 
MANITIA 


Figure 4. Topography of Venus in a Mercator projection (from Hunten D M, Colin L, Donahue T M and Moroz V I (ed) 1983 Venus 


(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) p 1059). 


smaller ones. Higher crater densities are usually found 
in the plains. Most craters are pristine. The low number 
of craters, their distribution and their shapes suggest that 
the surface of Venus cannot be older than 500-800 million 
years on average. 

Information on the surface composition comes from 
in situ data and from radar data. The geochemical data 
from the Venera 9, 10, 13 and Vega 1 and 2 landers 
imply a predominantly basaltic composition, with one site 
indicating possibly more alkalinic rocks. Venera 8 found a 
more granitic composition for the soil. Radar backscatter 
is a function of both roughness and the bulk properties of 
the target material. The radar properties of the lowland 
plains indicate surface dielectric constants of 3-8, which 
corresponds to low values of the dielectric constants of 
basalts on Earth. Much higher dielectric constants have 
been found for some regions at high elevation. They 
can be explained by highly conducting materials such as 
iron-bearing minerals (pyrite (FeS2) or iron oxides such as 
magnetite (Fe;O,)) but identification of a specific phase 
which would exist only in a narrow band of elevation is 
problematic. 


Volcanism and tectonism 

Volcanic deposits and volcanic centers are very important 
characteristics of the surface of Venus. The processes of 
volcanism have been largely preserved on this planet, 
which is not the case for Mars and the Earth (see VOLCANISM 
IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The plains are apparently completely covered by 
volcanic deposits. Concerning the volcanic centers, one 
can distinguish two main categories. The first category is 
characterized by very significant flows that generally come 
from a vent region during repetitive eruptions. It includes 
large and intermediate-size volcanic edifices, flow fields 
and calderas. To explain the formation of centers of 
repetitive volcanic eruption it is necessary to assume the 
presence of stable shallow magma reservoirs. The global 
eruption rates corresponding to the population of large 
volcanoes have been estimated by L S Crumpler and 
colleagues to be about 1.7 x 10~? km? yr! of magma. 

The second type concerns regions of the order of 100- 
200 km in diameter characterized by the presence of many 
small edifices and by relatively limited associated volumes 
of lava flows. It includes the groups of small-size edifices 
that are called shield fields. Some calculations indicate that 
these shield fields form where magma replenishment rates 
are about 10-4 km? yr“! or less, but there is no estimate of 
the global rate for this category. 

Concerning Venus’s resurfacing history, it looks as if 
a substantial decrease in area resurfacing rates from about 
4km/? yr! during plain emplacement to about 0.5 km?yr=! 
over the past 290 million years has occurred. This 
reduction has probably been accompanied by a change 
in volcanic style from flood-type volcanism in the plains 
to more localized development of volcanoes, coronae and 
rifts. 

Concerning the types of lava, some indication comes 
from the existence and morphology of some of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. Magellan image showing a perspective view of Maat Mons, with a vertical exaggeration factor of 10. Maat Mons is a 5 km (or 
8 km above the mean planetary radius) high volcano located in Atla Regio, at the eastern end of Aphrodite Terra (image P-40175 from 
the NASA/JPL Magellan Radar Mapping Mission). This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 45. 


coronae & chasmata ISHTAR 


crustal 
plateaus 


volcanic 
rises 


LOWER 
BOUNDARY 


plains LAYER 


perovskite 


decayed plumes 


tessera TERRA 
Lakshmi 


montes 


LEGEND 


[crust 


mantle 
residuum 


upper mantle 
= lithosphere 
[Es] upper boundary 
layer 


[plumes / diapirs 


Figure 6. A possible global tectonic model for Venus (from Hansen V L et al 1997 Venus II ed SW Bougher, D M Hunten and R J Phillips 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) p 835.) This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 46. 


channels observed on Venus. The longest of the various 
classes of channels observed on Venus are called canali. 
They have remarkably constant width along very long 
paths, exceeding 500 km and up to 6800 km (Baltis Vallis). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


They are 1-3 km wide, and their depth seems to be 
less than 50 m. Highly fluid lavas, that have erupted 
during sustained, high discharges, seem best to explain 
many of the channel features, particularly the canali. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Possible candidates for this fluid are native sulfur or, 
preferably, alkali-carbonatite lavas (very rare on Earth) 
which would have resulted from the melting of the crust 
altered by interaction with the CO,-SO,-halogen-rich 
atmosphere. In contrast, the pancake domes and festoon 
flows correspond to high-viscosity lavas. 

Hundreds of coronae are distributed across the 
surface, most with diameters of less than 300 km, but 
a few exceed 1000 km in diameter. They are not seen 
on any other terrestrial planetary body. Many of them 
are associated with rift zones, forming linear chains 
thousands of kilometers long. In other places, they occur 
individually or in clusters in the plains. All coronae have 
some association with volcanism. Coronae may represent 
collapsed domes over large magma chambers. 

There are numerous other tectonic surface features 
on Venus that have been formed by compression or by 
extension: ridges, valleys, mountain belts, ... . In tesserae, 
one finds ridges and grooves that intersect and form 
very chaotic patterns. They probably reflect a complex 
deformation history. One also finds rift zones on dome- 
like features that are linear depressions that probably 
formed where Venus’s lithosphere has ruptured owing 
to horizontal extension. The most important one is Beta 
Regio, which presents some analogy with the terrestrial 
East African Rift. 


Geological evolution and the interior of Venus 

Studies of impact craters on Venus indicate that about 
80% of the history of Venus is not accessible to us. The 
surface we see is very young. The oldest terrain on 
Venus is tesserae. They are probably due to intensive 
tectonic deformation. Other apparently younger tectonic 
features must have formed during successive episodes 
of compressional and tensional deformations: fractures, 
broad ridges, wrinkle ridges. A period during which 
several stages of extensive volcanism occurred, burying 
areas of tesserae and forming the plains we see now, 
probably occurred afterwards. 

Similarities in mean density and moment of inertia 
factor between Earth and Venus could indicate similar bulk 
compositions and internal structures. Models suggest that 
the interior of Venus is indeed compositionally similar 
to the Earth, except for small differences in iron, sulfur 
and oxygen content. Venus has certainly differentiated. 
It must have a crust, a mantle and a core. Although the 
relatively large value of the mean density of Venus strongly 
suggests that the planet has an iron core, Venus lacks an 
intrinsic magnetic field that would be strong evidence that 
at least part of its core exists in the liquid state, as is the case 
for Earth. Most models predict the radii of the core and 
mantle to be of the order of 3200 and 2800 km, respectively. 
Venus probably has a lithosphere, as does the Earth, but 
gravitational data indicate that it most likely does not have 
the low-viscosity astenosphere that exists on Earth below 
the lithosphere. 

Most of the sites exhibit compositions similar to 
basalt, a volcanic rock that is very common on Earth 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and that constitutes most of the Earth’s seafloor. The 
crust, therefore, probably formed from melting of an 
upper mantle with an Earth-like composition. Theoretical 
models constrained by the observed depths of impact 
craters and the spacings of ridges and rifts imply crustal 
thicknesses in many parts of Venus of 10-20 km, which is 
less than the average thickness of the Earth’s continental 
crust (about 40 km) but greater than the thickness of the 
oceanic crust (about 6 km). Gravitational data indicate 
that the mean thickness of Venus’s crust is 20-50 km. 
Alternatively, arguments based on mineralogy and high 
topographic elevations suggest crustal thicknesses insome 
areas of 100 km or more. Seismic probes are needed to 
obtain more information on the thickness of the crust. 

The depth of the lithosphere is even more uncertain. 
Some think that Venus’s lithosphere may be thicker than 
Earth’s, owing to its lower water content in mantle rocks, 
thus making its surface geology somewhat less active. 
Others speak of a lithosphere only about 100 km thick, 
similar to or thinner than Earth’s. They argue that the 
high temperature of the surface of Venus prevents a thick 
lithosphere from forming because the rocks are near their 
melting points. 

Based on the identification and study of the different 
types of volcanic and tectonic features on Venus, and on 
gravitational data, it appears that there cannot be on Venus 
a global plate-tectonic activity as on Earth. There is instead 
evidence for active mantle convection with a recycling that 
occurs mainly in the vertical direction through regions of 
upwelling and downwelling. According to some models, 
volcanic centers must be associated with regions of mantle 
upwelling. The long-lived plumes (which are narrow 
regions of hot mantle upwelling) that allow sustained 
eruptions may be at the origin of the large volcanoes. 
Short-lived plumes may explain coronae. They may 
be due to local upwelling currents in Venus’s mantle 
(figure 6). 

One must also take into account the fact that the 
lithosphere may have been thin early in the history 
of Venus and has thickened with time. This would 
result in differences in the surface response above mantle 
upwellings. For instance, as has been suggested by some 
scientists, crustal plateaux could represent the interaction 
of ancient deep thermal plumes (or hotspots) with a 
thinner lithosphere. In contrast, volcanic rises may have 
formed only in the relatively recent past, after Venus’s 
lithosphere had thickened enough to support them. 

The gravitational data and the presence of ridge belts 
that indicate compressive stress suggest that the plains 
may correspond to regions of mantle downwelling on a 
broad scale. Regions of diffuse mantle upwelling would 
result instead in extension of the lithosphere and formation 
of coronae and chasmata (the chasmata are arrangements 
of troughs and scarps). 

There is certainly a very complex time evolution. The 
regions of mantle upwellings and mantle downwellings 
may change location with time, which could result for 
instance in formation of coronae and chasmata in plain 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


regions. In contrast, some early-formed crustal plateaux 
may have collapsed owing to changes in temperature or 
to tectonics and could constitute some of the plains we see 
today. 


Bibliography 

Bougher S W, Hunten D M and Phillips RJ (eds) 1997 Venus 
II (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Hunten D M, Colin L, Donahue T M and Moroz V I (eds) 
1983 Venus (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


C de Bergh 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 10 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Venus: Atmosphere 


VENUS is the nearest planet to the Earth, both in terms of 
distance and in overall size and mass (table 1). However, 
Venus has lost most of its atmospheric and surface water, 
probably because it is significantly closer to the Sun. As a 
result of this, much of the carbon dioxide which on the Earth 
has been processed by the oceans to produce carbonates is 
still free in the atmosphere on Venus. This in turn means 
that Venus’ atmosphere is very massive by terrestrial 
standards, with a surface pressure of almost 100 bar and a 
searingly high surface temperature in excess of 730 K. 

The rotational axis of Venus is nearly perpendicular to 
the ecliptic, and the orbit is nearly circular, so seasonal 
changes in the climate are probably very small. The 
Venusian year is 224.7 Earth days, longer than the time for 
Venus to rotate on its axis, which is 243 Earth days. The 
solar day, defined as the time for the Sun to go from noon 
to noon as seen from the surface of Venus, is about 117 
Earth days. This very slow rotation of the solid body of 
Venus is retrograde, i.e. backwards compared with the 
other planets, a curious state of affairs which is difficult to 
explain in terms of currently accepted models of the 
evolution of the SOLAR SYSTEM. The resulting absence of a 
strong Coriolis force at the surface is likely to be a major 
factor in determining the structure and dynamics of the 
atmosphere. Persistent high winds of the order of 100m 
s | are observed near the cloud tops, 50 or 60 km above the 
surface, where the density of the air is similar to that near 
the ground on the Earth. It is not known reliably how these 
are produced. 

The surface of Venus is obscured at visible 
wavelengths by planet-wide cloud cover, the upper layers 


at least consisting of sulfate aerosol similar to the much 
thinner layers of volcanic origin found in the terrestrial 
stratosphere (see VENUS: SURFACE). On Venus, the clouds 
have a complex layered structure and, although never 
completely absent, their coverage is very variable. They 
play an even larger role in the energy balance of the planet 
than clouds do on Earth, through their contribution to the 
atmospheric “GREENHOUSE EFFECT’. 

Localized dynamical or ‘weather’ activity on Venus, 
as far as is known at present, is dominated by four major 
phenomena: the cloud-top zonal super-rotation, the 
ultraviolet markings and associated planetary waves, 
cumulus dynamics in the deeper layers and the double- 
vortex structures at the poles. These and other types of 
activity, such as atmospheric tides, are no doubt linked to 
each other and to the general circulation, but all remain 
poorly understood. 


Energy balance 

At a distance of 108.2 million km, Venus is closer to the 
Sun than the Earth by a factor of about 2', and so has 
about twice the incidence of solar energy. It is also much 
hotter at the surface, nearly 23; times more than the 
terrestrial mean of about 300 K. These facts are not 
simple to reconcile, however, because the ubiquitous and 
highly reflective cloud cover on Venus reflects 76% of 
the incoming solar flux and this results in a smaller net 
solar constant for Venus than for Earth. The high surface 
temperature must, therefore, be due to ‘greenhouse’ 
warming produced by the thick, cloudy atmosphere, 
possibly augmented by a contribution from the internal 
heat of the planet. 


Table 1. Physical constants for the terrestrial planets. 


Venus Earth Mars 
Orbital and rotational data 
Mean distance from Sun(km) 1.082 x 108 = 1.496 x 108 ~=—- 2.279 x 108 
Eccentricity 0.0068 0.0167 0.0934 
Obliquity (deg) 177 23.45 23.98 
Sidereal period (days) 224.701 365.256 686.980 
Rotational period (h) 5832.24 23.9345 24.6229 
Solar day (days) 117 1 1.0287 
Solar constant (kW m~) 2.62 1.38 0.594 
Net heat input (kW m™~) 0.367 0.842 0.499 
Solid body data 
Mass (kg) 4.870 x 10% 5.976x 10% 6.421 x 10” 
Radius (km) 6051.5 6378-6357 3398 
Surface gravity (m s~*) 8.60 9.78 3.72 
Atmospheric data 
Composition See table 2 
Mean molecular weight 43.44 28.98 (dry) 43.49 
Mean surface temperature (K) 730 288 220 
Mean surface pressure(Nm~) 92 1 0.007 
Mass (kg) 4.77 x 107° 5.30 x 1018 ~10'° 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


6000 
Woavenumber (cm*’) 


160600 


Figure 1. The computed transmission of Venus’ atmosphere from the surface to space, showing the spectral gaps to be plugged by 
cloud opacity in order to maintain the observed ‘greenhouse’ effect (V Meadows and D Crisp). 


It is not simple to prove that the observed 
atmospheric conditions can in fact generate such a large 
‘greenhouse’ effect. The problem is that the massive 
amounts of carbon dioxide are very effective at blocking 
the emission of thermal infrared radiation, but only at 
those wavelengths where the gas has absorption bands, 
which are far from covering the entire spectrum. 
Moderate amounts of water vapor are also required, and 
even then considerable spectral gaps or ‘windows’ 
remain (figure 1). These could be blocked by the clouds, 
since liquid or solid absorbers present some opacity at 
every wavelength, the details depending on composition 
and particle size. The difficulty for early theorists was 
that using clouds to ‘close’ the greenhouse also tended to 
block the incoming sunlight, so that the calculated 
equilibrium temperature of the surface remained well 
below that observed. 

This problem began to be resolved when it was 
realized that the clouds are made of sulfuric acid 
droplets, at least in the higher, most easily measured 
layers. These have the property of being highly absorbing 
at thermal infrared wavelengths, while being nearly 
conservative scatterers in the visible and near-infrared. 
Thus, the clouds tend to diffuse downwards those of the 
incoming solar photons that they do not reflect to space, 
while blocking thermal emission from the lower 
atmosphere and surface. This explains the result, 
surprising at the time, that the VENERA landers in the 
1970s were able to photograph the surface in natural 
light. It also means that radiative transfer models, 
involving weak as well as strong bands of CO, and H,O, 
plus those of the minor constituents CO, HCI and SO, 
can account for the high surface temperatures by careful 
incorporation of the scattering and absorbing properties 
of the clouds. 

The total solar energy diffusing through the cloud 
cover on Venus corresponds to about 17 W cm” of 
surface insolation on the average, about 12% of the total 
absorbed by the planet and the atmosphere. The high 
opacity of the gaseous atmosphere and cloud at longer 
wavelengths requires the surface to reach temperatures 
high enough to melt zinc before the upwelling flex is 
intense enough, and at shorter wavelengths, so that 
equilibrium is attained. An airless body with the same 
ALBEDO and at the same distance from the Sun as Venus 
would reach equilibrium for a mean surface temperature 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


of only about 230 K. This 500 K _ greenhouse 
enhancement of the surface temperature compares with 
only about 30 K on Earth and 10 K on Mars. 


Composition 

The primordial atmosphere of Venus which originally 
formed with the solid body, like those of the other 
TERRESTRIAL PLANETS, was likely to have been lost in the 
distant past as the young Sun went through phases of 
high activity. The present atmosphere would have been 
produced much later by outgassing from the crust, a 
process which we are probably observing today as active 
volcanism, and by the influx of cometary and meteoritic 
material, which is also still going on. The relative 
contributions of these distinct sources can, to some 
extent, be deduced from the data which are gradually 
being accrued on the composition, and in particular the 
isotopic ratios, in the contemporary terrestrial planet 
atmospheres and in comets and meteorites. 

COMETS are a rich source of volatile compounds such 
as carbon dioxide, water vapor, methane and ammonia. If 
the last of these was the source of the nitrogen now 
present, and we allow for processes such as_ the 
production of argon by the decay of radioactive 
potassium in the crust, the contemporary atmosphere 
could all be of external origin. On the other hand, the 
high abundance of sulfur in Venus’ clouds is strongly 
suggestive of extensive volcanic activity and volcanoes 
are also prolific sources of carbon dioxide, nitrogen and 
the other gases required to explain present-day Venus. 

Apart from carbon dioxide and water vapor, Venus’ 
atmosphere consists primarily of inert gases, particularly 
nitrogen and argon (table 2). The amount of water 
present as gas and bound up with sulfuric acid and other 
compounds in the clouds is between 10 and 100000 
times less than exists in the oceans and atmosphere of the 
Earth (see EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE). Thus Venus is overall 
very dry compared with the Earth while, at the same 
time, deuterium is about 100 times more abundant on 
Venus than Earth. This suggests that Venus may have 
had much more water initially, but that most of it has 
been lost. Loss takes place by dissociation of the water in 
the upper atmosphere by solar ultraviolet radiation and 
the subsequent escape of the hydrogen. Both deuterium 
and normal hydrogen escape from the atmosphere while 
there is free water on the surface, but the heavier isotope 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


escapes less 
fractionation. 

The loss rate of the water depends strongly on its 
abundance in the relatively cool middle atmosphere as 
well as the intensity of the solar ultraviolet flux. Models 
of the process suggest that Venus could have lost an 
ocean of present-day terrestrial proportions in only a few 
hundred million years. The oxygen produced at the same 
time is too massive to escape at any significant rate, 
according to Jeans’ formula, and must remain on the 
planet, presumably most of it bound chemically within 
the crust, mainly as carbonate rocks. As on the Earth, this 
process would remove atmospheric carbon dioxide 
efficiently as long as liquid water was available. Once the 
free water was all used up, the mixing ratio of water 
vapor in the upper atmosphere would fall sharply and the 
loss rates of both forms of hydrogen, and the take-up of 
oxygen into minerals, have also declined to the present 
relatively low levels. 

In the present-day atmosphere of Venus, chemical 
reactions coupled with the transport and _ radiative 
processes regulate the abundances of the most important 
minor constituents. The most important are the cycles 
involving water vapor, sulfuric acid and their products, 
which maintain the cloud layers, and which probably also 
involve reactions between the atmosphere and _ the 
surface. However, there are currently very few hard data 
on the abundances of reactive species near the surface, 
and still less on the composition and mineralogy of the 
surface itself. It seems likely, however, that the surface is 
a net sink for sulfur compounds, the combination of 
sulfur dioxide with calcite being an example of likely 
importance in this regard. Similar considerations must 
apply to interactions between halogen compounds and 
the surface, since relatively large (compared with Earth) 
amounts of hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride are 
present above and below the clouds. Halogen chemistry 
may also have an important role in the formation of the 
clouds themselves. 

Another important chemical cycle is that which gives 
rise to the observed distribution of carbon monoxide. CO 
is very abundant (mixing ratios of the order of a few parts 
per thousand by volume) in the upper atmosphere of 
Venus, as would be expected from the action of solar 
ultraviolet radiation on carbon dioxide. It is strongly 
depleted in the cloud layers (<1 ppm), again not too 
surprisingly, since it is involved in reactions with SO, 
and the other species which make up the sulfur cycle. 
Below the clouds, and near the surface, however, the 
carbon monoxide values recovers to around 30 ppm, and 
shows a marked equator-to-pole gradient. It seems likely 
that CO is transported rapidly down from the 
thermosphere in the polar vortices (see below) to the 
troposphere where it is gradually removed by reactions in 
the hot lower atmosphere and at the surface. 


efficiently, leading to the observed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Table 2. Compositions of the terrestrial planet atmospheres. 


Venus Earth Mars 
Carbon dioxide 0.96 0.0003 0.95 
Nitrogen 0.035 0.770 0.027 
Argon 0.00007 0.0093 0.016 
Water vapor 0.0001(?) 0.01 0.0003 
Oxygen 0.0013 0.21 0 
Sulfur dioxide 0.00015 0.2 ppb 
Carbon monoxide 0.00004 0.12 ppm 0.0007 
Neon 5 ppm 18 ppm 2.5 ppm 
Hydrogen chloride 0.5 ppm 3 ppb <0.1 ppm 
Hydrogen fluoride 5 ppm 1 ppb 


Values are given as fractional abundances except where parts per 
million (ppm) or parts per billion (ppb) are stated. 


Thermal structure 

The solar radiation which penetrates the clouds warms 
the lower atmosphere, which is prevented by the opacity 
of the overlying layers from cooling by radiation to 
space. It therefore forms a deep convective region, the 
troposphere (figure 2). This links the high surface 
temperature of around 730 K, produced by the 
‘greenhouse’ effect as described above, with the level at 
which the temperature is close to the effective bolometric 
temperature of Venus (about 230 K), where strong 
radiative cooling to space can occur. The adiabatic lapse 
rate, which applies when the vertical gradient is 
controlled by convection, is -g/c, (g being the 
acceleration due to gravity and c, the specific heat at 
constant pressure) or about 10 K km‘! for Venus, so that 
the troposphere is around 50 km in vertical extent, much 
deeper than on Earth or Mars. 

Above the troposphere the temperature tends to be 
constant with height, because the atmosphere here is 
optically thin and, to a first approximation, each layer 
tends to find the same equilibrium temperature. The 
temperature is determined by the balance between the 
absorption of upwelling infrared from the surface and 
troposphere and cooling to space, with no significant 
absorption of direct solar energy taking place. 


Venus 9 Yanue 


{night} (day) 


Height (km) 
100 200 


A] 


oO 200 400 600 800 1000 
Temperalura (K)} 


Figure 2. Mean model temperature profiles for the atmospheres 
of the terrestrial planets. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ww 190 210 230 BO 270 AO 310 
TEMPERATURE. K 


Figure 3. Measured details of the temperature profiles on 
Venus and Earth, on a common pressure scale. 


On the Earth, this situation is altered by the ozone 
layer, which is responsible for substantial heating which 
divides the middle atmosphere into the stratosphere, 
where temperature rises with height, and the mesosphere, 
where it falls. There is no corresponding effect on Venus 
(figure 3), except for small amounts of absorption of 
solar and thermal energy in the near-infrared bands of 
water vapor and carbon dioxide. The two profiles are 
quite similar near 1 bar and near 10™* mbar, away from 
the ozone heating region on the Earth which peaks near 
1 mbar. 

The tendency for temperature to increase at the top 
of the range covered by figure 3 marks the base of the 
thermosphere, which on Venus begins at a height of 
around 120 km above the surface. Here the atmosphere is 
very rarefied, and short-wavelength solar radiation and 
energetic particles drive rapid photochemical reactions 
and high temperatures by day. When the heating is 
absent, efficient radiative cooling by CO) results in the 
rapid decline of temperature, so there is a sharp gradient 
across the terminator, from over 300 K on the illuminated 
hemisphere down to 100 K or less on the night side. 

Data on the planet-wide variability of temperature 
below the clouds are sparse and are still mainly limited to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


the small number of direct measurements made by the 
various entry probes. Remote sensing of the lower 
atmosphere has recently been shown to be possible, in 
particular at near-infrared wavelengths, as well as in the 
microwave, but uncertainties in the distribution of 
opacity sources in both spectral regions make these 
difficult to interpret in terms of temperature variations. 
Such data as exist show that the temperature gradients in 
the lower atmosphere are close to adiabatic in the 
vertical, and close to zero in the horizontal, as would be 
expected theoretically from the high opacity and high 
density. (However, there must be temperature structure 
associated with the dynamical activity seen in the deep 
atmosphere cloud structure—cf figure 5—although this 
has yet to be measured or even estimated.) 

Above the clouds, where the density is lower, more 
temperature variability is expected, and this has been 
observed as gradients of the order of several tens of 
Kelvins on constant-pressure surfaces planet wide. Figure 
4 shows the time-averaged (72-day mean) global 
temperature field from Pioneer Orbiter infrared 
soundings, in which several features clearly related to the 
general circulation stand out. Note the ‘polar warming’, 
in which the equator-to-pole temperature gradient leads 
to higher temperatures over pole than equator, in spite of 
the fact that the trend in radiative heating is in the 
opposite direction. The ‘polar collar’ feature stands out in 
the meridional cross-section; this is an intense ribbon of 
cold air surrounding the pole at about 65° latitude. These 
are both features of dynamical origin, related to the zonal 
super-rotation and the polar vortex respectively. The 
meridional average temperature field is dominated by the 
diurnal variation or solar tide, the temperature cycle 
which is induced by the apparent motion of the Sun 
overhead. This contains a whole spectrum of Fourier 
components, because the forcing is non-sinusoidal; the 
actual atmospheric response depends on the mean wind 
and the interference between the various components. 
The solar tide on Venus and classical atmospheric tidal 
theory as originally developed for the Earth (see TIDES) 
can be reconciled, provided that a realistic representation 
of the zonal wind is incorporated. 


Clouds 

Venus is completely enshrouded by clouds in a complex 
layered structure over 30 km deep; their properties are 
summarized in table 3. As already noted, the clouds are a 
key part of a highly interactive climate system (see 
CLOUDS IN PLANETARY ATMOSPHERES). Concentrated 
H,SO, droplets have properties which contribute very 
significantly to the atmospheric ‘greenhouse’, by 
scattering conservatively at short (solar) wavelength 
radiation while strongly absorbing at long (planetary) 
wavelengths. Changes in the optical properties or depth 
of the cloud layers, for example if the clouds dissipated 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


110 


100 


© 
a 


J o 
wa oO 


2 
Qa 


- Log 10(prassyra /bore} 
Approximate oltitude / km 


a 
a 


“10 © 
North lotitude (Yenua solar -fixed coordinotes} 


{a} 


190 20 30 40 $0 60 70 80 96 


lig 


105 


«Log tO{ prasaure/dare) 
Approximaie altiiude/km 


#0 
Salcr longitude {Venut solar-fixed coardinotas) 


160 2790 360 


(b) 


Figure 4. Time-averaged temperature fields in the middle atmosphere of Venus: (a) the zonal mean field and (5) the variations 
around a latitude belt from 0° to 30° N, both plotted against pressure and approximate height. The horizontal stepped line represents 


the retrieved mean cloud top height. 


Table 3. Properties of clouds and dust in the terrestrial planet atmospheres. 


Venus Earth Mars 
Fractional coverage 1.00 0.40 0.05 (cloud); 0-1.0 (dust) 
Typical average depth 25-40 5-7 0.01—1.00; 0.2—6 (dust) 
Composition H,SO,'H,O H,O H,0, CO;, magnetite etc (dust) 
Number density, liquid (em™) 50-300 100-1000 0 
Number density, solid (cm™) 10-50 0.1-50 30-1000 (near surface) 
Typical mass loading (g m™*) 0.01-0.1 0.1-10 0.0002-0.1 
Main production process Chemistry Condensation Condensation, windblown (dust) 
Equivalent depth (mm) 0.1-0.2 0.03—0.05 1-100 
Effective radius (um) 0.2-30 10 0.4—2.5 (dust) 
Main forms Stratiform Stratiform, cumulus Stratiform, mixed (dust) 
Temporal variability Slight High High 
Dominant heat exchange process Radiation Latent heat Radiation 


The equivalent length is the estimated thickness of the cloud material if it were deposited on the surface. The effective radius is 
the radius of the spherical particles having most nearly the same scattering properties as the cloud at visible wavelengths. 


or changed their composition, owing to a reduction in the 
supply of SO, and other source gases from volcanoes, or 
to an instability in the dynamical regime, would cause the 
lower atmosphere and surface gradually to cool down (or, 
conceivably, to become even hotter). Changes in 
temperature would be likely to further modify the 
atmospheric circulation and the formation of clouds, 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


producing feedback which seems more likely to be 
positive (accelerating the change) than negative. At 
present the radiative, dynamical and chemical processes 
appear to be in balance, but the stability of the currently 
observed state may be precarious. 

Most of our detailed knowledge of the cloud 
properties comes from optical measurements: polarimetry 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


as a function of phase angle from the Earth, 
nephelometry and particle size measurements from entry 
probes, and visible, ultraviolet and infrared remote 
sensing from orbiter and fly-by spacecraft. It has recently 
been discovered that near-infrared spectroscopic 
measurements in atmospheric ‘windows’, that is 
wavelength regions where the main atmospheric gases 
are weakly absorbing, penetrate the clouds, in some 
windows all the way to the surface. This type of 
observation reveals the cloud morphology all over the 
planet and shows that the integrated vertical opacity is 
very variable, by factors of 20 or more. Thick and 
relatively thin clouds form patterns suggestive of large- 
scale cumulus dynamics, presumably with the cloud 
material actively condensing and dissipating in rising and 
falling air associated with weather systems (figure 5), 
although the details are lacking because of a shortage of 
high-resolution data in space and time. 

At the PIONEER VENUS Large Probe entry site, the 
main cloud deck extends from about 47 to about 67 km 
above the surface, declining gradually at the upper 
boundary with a scale height of a few km, and with a thin 
haze layer some 13 km deep below. Within this vertical 
structure, detailed, and presumably variable, layering 
occurs and particles of different sizes congregate at 
different height levels. The particles range in diameter 
from less than | to over 30 um and tend to a trimodal size 
distribution, with the commonest diameters falling 
towards the ends of the overall range and in the 2-3 um 
region. It is these intermediate size or ‘mode 2’ droplets 
which are visible from outside Venus and for which 
spectroscopic, polarimetric and other evidence yields a 
composition of 75% H»,SO, and 25% H,O. The 
composition of the smaller drops, which form an aerosol 
haze extending throughout the cloud layer, is unknown. 
Most of the mass of the clouds is in the biggest drops, for 
which there is some inconclusive evidence of a non- 
spherical shape, implying a solid composition, perhaps 
crystalline sulfur. The formation of the cloud droplets can 
be explained by a model in which H,O and SO, (the 
latter possibly of volcanic origin) combine 
photochemically near the cloud-top level. It is more 
difficult to explain the size distribution, particularly the 
existence of more than one mode. Compositional 
contrasts and dynamical effects may be at work but once 
again the observations which would elucidate these are 
lacking. 

There is some evidence in infrared maps from the 
Pioneer Venus orbiter of cold, high cloud, presumably 
condensed CO, near the tropopause above the dawn 
terminator, where the atmosphere is coldest as it comes 
to the end of the long (>50 h at this altitude) Venus night. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 5. 2.7 um image of Venus from Galileo-NIMS. 


Dynamics 

As a result of the slow rotation of the planet, its near- 
circular orbit and small obliquity, the underlying 
circulation of Venus’ atmosphere is quite simple. The 
Sun is always above the equator, to within a couple of 
degrees, so the air warmed at low latitudes rises and 
moves towards the poles, where it cools and descends 
before returning equatorwards at lower altitudes. 

On top of this simple picture are superimposed 
various complications. One that has been observed for 
many decades, but remains difficult to explain, is the 
global ‘super-rotation’, which manifests itself in cloud 
structure which moves rapidly around the planet in a 
direction parallel to the equator. The cloud markings, 
which appear with high contrast through an ultraviolet 
filter, have their origin at heights 50 or 60 km above the 
surface (where the pressure is of the order of 100 mbar) 
and travel around the equator in 4—5 days, corresponding 
to speeds near 100 m s/. This is more than 50 times 
faster than the rotation rate of the surface below. 
Measurements of the winds below the clouds, and 
calculations (from temperature data) of the winds above 
the cloud tops, show that the zonal wind speed declines at 
higher and lower levels, reaching values near zero at 
about 100 km and near the surface respectively. 

Direct measurements of the winds 1 m or so above 
the surface by the Russian landers Venera 9 and 10 found 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


velocities of <1 m s'. Tracking of the Pioneer and 
Venera landers during their descent showed that there is a 
steady decrease with height from the 100 m s” or so 
observed in the ultraviolet markings near the cloud tops. 
Earth-based observers had earlier shown, by the 
measurement of Doppler-shifted emission lines from 
atmospheric gases, that the cloud-tracked winds do, in 
fact, apply to mass motions, rather than the phase speed 
of waves as had also been suggested. 

Attempts have been made to explain these high zonal 
wind speeds on Venus by several mechanisms, all of 
which fall into one of three main categories, i.e. (i) the 
gravitational interaction of the Sun with the atmospheric 
tides, (ii) the overhead motion of the Sun in the sky (the 
‘moving flame’ mechanism) and (iii) the upward 
transport of momentum from the surface. Currently 
prevailing opinion favors a version of mechanism (iii), in 
which momentum from the solid planet is transported by 
waves whose interaction with the main flow is complex 
and in which the mean meridional circulation plays an 
important role. Parameterizations have been found which 
are able to produce large zonal velocities in dynamical 
models of the Venusian atmosphere, although of course 
this is not the same as saying that we understand the 
forcing or dissipation mechanisms responsible for the 
transfer of momentum from the surface to the cloud tops. 

The cloud motions which trace the zonal winds also 
reveal the pattern of the meridional circulation on Venus. 
As expected on the simple theoretical grounds outlined 
above, Hadley cells exist in each hemisphere. These are 
global-scale circulation cells characterized by rising 
motion all around one constant latitude belt and 
descending motion at another. Each cell extends to higher 
latitudes than on Earth, in part a consequence of the 
slower zonal rotation speeds. Near the poles on Venus, a 
complex instability develops, resulting in dramatic long- 
lived wave structures. The polar collar takes the form of 
a band of very cold air, some 10 km deep and 1000 km in 
radius, centered on the pole. Inside the collar, 
temperatures are some 40 K cooler than outside the 
feature. Poleward of the inner edge of the collar lies the 
polar dipole, a wavenumber 2 feature consisting of two 
well-defined warm regions circulating around the pole. 
Both the dipole and the collar have so far resisted 
attempts to model them as normal modes of the 
atmosphere. 

The cloud-tracked winds obtained from Pioneer 
Venus and Mariner 10 both show equator-to-pole 
velocities of around 5 ms‘! in each hemisphere. Tracking 
of the Pioneer Venus probes shows winds of this 
magnitude at about 50-60 km altitude, with a very 
complicated vertical structure (figure 6). One possible 
interpretation of the alternations in the direction, as well 
as the magnitude, of the meridional wind is that these 
could mark the passage of the probe through the different 
components of a stack of Hadley cells, each extending 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


from the equator to high latitudes. The layered eddy 
sources and sinks which could drive the zonal super- 
rotation may be related to the cell interfaces. 

Motions in the deeper atmosphere were observed by 
near-infrared imaging carried out by the Galileo probe in 
1990. The features observed on the night side of the 
planet at wavelengths from 1 to 3.5 um originate in the 
main cloud deck, illuminated from below by thermal 
emission from the hot lower atmosphere. The typical 
velocities inferred near the equator were about half as 
fast as those from UV markings, which is consistent with 
the vertical profiles of wind and cloud opacity measured 
by the Pioneer and Venera probes, since the cloud layer 
providing most of the opacity in the case of the near-IR 
markings is 10-15 km deeper than for the UV markings. 
Galileo winds feature a zonal jet of more than 100 ms! 
at middle latitudes and equator-to-pole drifts of a few 
ms”, 


Conclusion 
Venus presents an arresting picture. What we appear to 
see is an Earth-like planet whose atmosphere failed to 


Hetgtyt (hm 


—— Day 
saeereeniae Nighi 
smemaee — North 
——— Sounder 


“100 -0 0 -40 20 
Veloctly Im +") 
Figure 6. Profiles of the zonal (east-to-west) and meridional 


(north-to-south) wind on Venus as measured by tracking the 
descent of the Pioneer Venus probes. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Atmosphere 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


evolve in the same way, primarily because of the early 
loss of water, and which now supports a thick, primitive 
atmosphere in rapid, turbulent motion. Thick, sulfurous 
clouds, probably originating in volcanic activity on the 
surface and possibly requiring present-day volcanism for 
their maintenance, blanket the planet. The resulting 
‘greenhouse’ effect drives the surface temperature to 
remarkably high levels. 

These conditions make exploration difficult since 
remote sensing is inhibited (but not prevented altogether) 
by the clouds, while landings are arduous and short lived. 
Advanced techniques are under development that will 
allow sample return from Venus’ surface and clouds and 
submarine-like ‘aerobots’ to cruise in the hot, thick 
lower-atmospheric regions. New remote-sensing 
techniques for the lower atmosphere will be applied from 
orbit. 

The focus of this new generation of Venus 
atmospheric studies will be an understanding of the 
dynamical regimes present, the photochemistry of the 
clouds, the scale of volcanism on Venus and the question 
of whether or not our sister planet once had oceans, like 
the Earth. Above all, however, will be the need to 
understand the dynamical regimes present. Knowledge of 
even the principle of the origin and maintenance of the 
zonal super-rotation is lacking; the same is true of the 
spectacular giant vortices in the high-latitude regions, in 
particular the phenomena known as the polar collar and 
the polar dipole. The deep atmosphere shows huge 
weather systems whose very existence was unsuspected 
until about a decade ago and for which there exists no 
theoretical basis at all. How can such a simply rotating, 
nearby, Earth-like planet be in such an incomprehensible 
state? 


Breaking news update (30 April 2002) 

Scientists have captured the first x-ray view of Venus 
using NASA’s CHANDRA X-RAY OBSERVATORY. The 
observations provide new information about the 
atmosphere of Venus. Venus in x-rays looks similar to 
Venus in visible light, but there are important 
differences. The optically visible Venus is due to the 
reflection of sunlight and, for the relative positions of 
Venus, Earth and Sun during these observations, shows a 
uniform half-crescent that is brightest toward the middle. 
The x-ray Venus is slightly less than a half-crescent and 
brighter on the limbs. The differences are due to the 
processes by which Venus shines in visible and x-ray 
light. The x-rays from Venus are produced by 
fluorescence, rather than reflection. Solar x-rays bombard 
the atmosphere of Venus, knock electrons out of the 
inner parts of the atoms, and excite the atoms to a higher 
energy level. The atoms almost immediately return to 
their lower energy state with the emission of a 
fluorescent x-ray. A similar process involving ultraviolet 
light produces the visible light from fluorescent lamps. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


For Venus, most of the fluorescent x-rays come from 
oxygen and carbon atoms between 120 and 140 km (74 
to 87 mi) above the planet’s surface. In contrast, the 
optical light is reflected from clouds at a height of 50 to 
70 km (31 to 43 mi). As a result, Venus’ Sun-lit 
hemisphere appears surrounded by an almost-transparent 
luminous shell in x-rays that appears brightest over the 
limb. 


Bibliography 

Two major surveys of Venus have been published in recent 
years. The reader is referred to the atmospheric chapters in 
these for a more detailed overview of current knowledge and 
problems and for a complete set of references to original work. 


Bougher S W, Hunten D M and Phillips R J (eds) 1997 Venus 2 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Hunten D M, Donahue T M and Moroz V (eds) 1983 Venus 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 


F W Taylor 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


The solar wind interaction with VENUS provides the 
archetypal interaction of a flowing magnetized PLASMA 
with a PLANETARY IONOSPHERE. Mars interacts with the 
solar wind in much the same way as does Venus, while 
the rotating plasma in the Saturnian magnetosphere is 
believed to interact similarly with its moon, Titan (see 
SATURN: MAGNETOSPHERE INTERACTION WITH TITAN). The 
interaction of the Jovian plasma with its moon Io is 
intermediate between the cometary and Venus interac- 
tions (see 10: PLASMA TORUS). From a more academic per- 
spective, this interaction illustrates how a magnetized 
plasma interacts with an unmagnetized plasma, and how 
mass pickup (of planetary ions, in this case) affects a 
flowing plasma. Our understanding of the interaction 
has been built up over a series of flight missions: Mariner 
2 and 5, Venera 2, 4, 6, 8-14 and Pioneer Venus. The lat- 
ter mission remained in orbit for 14 yr investigating the 
solar wind interaction with Venus over a complete solar 
cycle. 

Although Venus is famous for its sulfuric acid 
clouds and sulfur dioxide haze, its main atmospheric 
constituent is carbon dioxide of mass 44. Because Venus 
is similar to the Earth in mass and size (6051 km radius), 
we might expect a priori its atmospheric behavior to be 
similar. Paradoxically, while the lower atmosphere is 
much warmer than the terrestrial atmosphere owing to 
the greenhouse effect, the upper atmosphere of Venus, 
above 100 km, is much cooler than that of Earth because 
of the absence of heating by a magnetosphere at Venus 
(see VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). As a consequence the scale 
height of the neutral Venus atmosphere is quite small. In 
the cold (cryosphere) nightside it is only a few km. In 
general, the atmospheric density falls off according to the 
equation of hydrostatic equilibrium that balances the 
upward pressure gradient force with the downward 
force of gravity on that parcel of gas: 


dakT 
dh 

where n, m, 9, k, T and h are respectively the number of 
molecules per unit volume, their mass, the force of grav- 
ity, Boltzmann’s constant, their temperature and the alti- 
tude of the point of interest. 

For an isothermal atmosphere the density decreases 
as 


nage = — 


n=noeap|—h/H,) 


where H, = kT/mg. The isothermal description fails at 
the highest altitudes (above about 200 km) for some con- 
stituents, such as atomic oxygen, where nonthermal 
processes, notably dissociative recombination of O>t, 
increase the average temperature. The important non- 
thermal processes are both photochemical (e.g. involving 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


neutralization of ionospheric ions and electrons pro- 
duced by solar EUV radiation) and ‘mechanical’ (involv- 
ing collisions of energetic particles from above with the 
ambient gas). Thus atomic oxygen at Venus has a cold 
component, with a scale height of a few tens of km, and 
a hot component that extends to high altitudes with a 
scale height of hundreds of km. This latter component 
plays a special role in the solar wind interaction, 
described below. 

As on Earth the Venus upper atmosphere is partial- 
ly ionized by solar ultraviolet radiation and energetic 
particles that enter from the surrounding space. The rate 
of ionization decreases rapidly with decreasing altitude 
at low altitudes where the ionizing radiation and _parti- 
cles are absorbed. It also decreases with increasing alti- 
tude at high altitudes where the ionizing radiation is 
constant but the ionizable neutral particles decrease with 
altitude. Thus there is a maximum ion production rate at 
some altitude h,,. The rate of ionization, Q, varies with 
altitude for a simple one-component isothermal ionos- 
phere as 


@ = O,exp[! — + — expt—v)] 


where Q,, is the peak production rate and y = (h-h,,)/H,, 
where H, is the neutral scale height and h,, is the height 
of peak production. This function is sketched for a scale 
height of 25 km in figure 1, representative of oxygen in 
the warmer dayside upper atmosphere of Venus. If the 
ionosphere is in photochemical equilibrium in which the 
recombination of electrons and ions takes place without 
vertical transport, then the rate of recombination is pro- 
portional to the product of the electron and ion number 
densities which are equal in our simple ionosphere. 
Hence the electron number density is 


N. = Nag exp{[l — z—see x expt —z)]/2} 


where x is the solar zenith angle and we have referenced 
the density to the maximum at the subsolar point, Nino, 
and the normalized altitude, z, to its altitude, h,,9, and 
the scale height, H,. This function is shown in the bottom 
panel of figure 1. 

At Venus the high-altitude ionospheric electron tem- 
perature is about 5000 K. The peak of the dayside ionos- 
phere is at an altitude of about 140 km and has a peak 
number density of just under 10° cm_5. At 400 km the 
number density is about 20000 cm_3 under solar maxi- 
mum conditions near the subsolar point. At this altitude 
the collision rate is quite low and the electrical conduc- 
tivity quite high. This is important for the solar wind 
interaction because the solar wind is a magnetized plas- 
ma. When it flows against the Venus ionosphere it does 
not generally penetrate below about 400 km unless the 
solar wind conditions are disturbed. The ionospheric 
pressure at 400 km under solar maximum conditions is 
sufficient to stand off the typical dynamic pressure of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


400 


300 


200 


-6 5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 
Log Radiation Flux [I/lo] 
400 rT 


Altitude [km] 
pe) 
(oe) 
oO 


-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 
Log Production Function [cm$sec""] 


Log Ne [cm’3] 


Figure 1. The formation of a Chapman-layer’ ionosphere. Top: 
UV radiation from Sun drops in intensity as it is absorbed in 
photoionization process. Middle: Rate of electron production 
with altitude. As altitude decreases, the rate first increases 
owing to the increasing atmospheric density and then decreases 
when the UV radiation is exhausted. Bottom: The electron den- 
sity consistent with the production if there is no vertical or hor- 
izontal transport. 


solar wind. This is not expected to be the usual case at 
solar minimum when the ionospheric pressure is less. 
The SOLAR WIND is a supersonic flow of electrons and 
ions with a number density near the orbit of Venus of 
about 15 particles per cm, a velocity of about 440 km s_1, 
an ion temperature of about 105 K, an electron tempera- 
ture of about 2-105 K and a magnetic field strength of 
about 10 nT. The velocity of a wave that could compress 
the solar wind flow and deflect it around Venus is about 
100 km s-! or about 1/4 of the speed of the solar wind. 
Thus, the deflection has to occur via the formation of a 
standing shock wave whose strength is measured by the 
ratio of the compressional wave velocity to the incoming 
flow velocity. This interaction is sketched in figure 2. The 
Venus bow shock has a shape similar to Earth’s bow 
shock shape but, because the obstacle producing the 
shock is in this case the planetary ionosphere (and not an 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Bow Shock 


lonopause 
lon Pick 

Soli ion Pickup 
Radiation . 


Atmospheric Neutrals 


Solar 
Wind 
Tail Rays Tail 


lonosphere 


Magnetosheath 


Figure 2. The solar wind interaction with the Venus ionosphere 
and neutral atmosphere. The solar UV ionizes the atmosphere 
and the ionosphere deflects the solar wind. Some neutral atoms 
are ionized in the solar wind and are picked up by the electric 
field. 


internal magnetic field), the size of the bow shock is 
much smaller (see MAGNETOSPHERE OF EARTH: BOW SHOCK). 
At the nose of the Venus shock the Mach number or 
shock strength is close to 4 under typical conditions. 

In the ideal case when none of the solar wind is 
absorbed by Venus and no ions are added to the flow by 
the atmosphere of Venus, the shock front, or bow shock 
as it is called, stands off from the obstacle at a distance 
sufficient to allow all the material that is compressed and 
deflected by the shock to flow around the obstacle. When 
the shock is strong, the density of the solar wind flow can 
increase a factor of 4 across the shock. At solar maximum 
when the pressure of the ionosphere is high, the shock 
front is about 2000 km above the surface of Venus at the 
subsolar point. If the shock weakens, the density jump 
becomes less and the shock moves away from the planet. 
In the limit as the Mach number approaches unity, the 
shock moves away to infinity. At solar minimum the typ- 
ical ionosphere does not have sufficient pressure to pre- 
vent some direct interaction of the solar wind with the 
neutral atmosphere and the shock moves closer to Venus 
as some solar wind is absorbed by Venus. 

The shocked plasma immediately downstream from 
the shock front is simply heated and compressed solar 
wind whose properties can be calculated by a set of mag- 
netohydrodynamic equations called the Rankine- 
Hugoniot equations. However, the flow velocity perpen- 
dicular to the magnetic field direction drops drastically 
as the subsolar point on the obstacle is approached. The 
magnetic field of the solar wind plasma is compressed as 
the stagnation point is approached, and the field 
becomes draped around the obstacle. The thermal veloc- 
ity of the particles is then able to evacuate the field lines 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bow Shock 


Streamlines 
of Solar Wind 
Plasma Flow 


lonosphere 


Magnetic 
Barrier 


ss 


Magnetic 
Field Lines 


Figure 3. The solar wind flow and interplanetary magnetic field 
as it interacts with Venus, leading to the formation of a mag- 
netic barrier. 


so that the inner edge of the shocked plasma, or mag- 
netosheath, becomes a magnetic barrier in which the 
transverse pressure is exerted almost totally by the mag- 
netic field and not by the thermal plasma pressure. A 
similar situation occurs in what is called the ‘depletion 
layer’ just outside Earth’s magnetosphere. As sketched in 
figure 3 the magnetic field wraps around Venus, main- 
taining a barrier between the flowing solar wind and the 
ionosphere and contributing to the formation of a mag- 
netic tail in the antisolar direction. The plasma in the 
magnetosheath accelerates with distance behind Venus 
and the shock expands and weakens. Eventually far 
behind Venus the solar wind that interacted with Venus 
is indistinguishable from solar wind that did not interact, 
as long as Venus did not add anything to the solar wind 
flow. 

Even though the bow shock marks the upper extent 
of the pressure wave that Venus launches to deflect the 
solar wind, there still are phenomena that can be seen in 
advance of the bow shock. These upstream phenomena 
consist of charged particles and waves. The particles are 
electrons and ions that either were reflected at the shock 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Upstream Foreshock 


Tangent 
Field Line 


1 lon Foreshock 


L] Electron Foreshock 


Downstream 
Foreshock 


Figure 4. The geometry of the electron and ion foreshock at 
Venus. These regions mark the field lines that intersect the shock 
and along which electrons and ions can reach a spacecraft at the 
velocities to which they have been accelerated. 


or leak from the hot population behind the shock and 
move upstream against the solar wind flow. The geome- 
try of this region is sketched in figure 4. The waves can 
either be generated by the backstreaming particles (and 
generally be convected toward the shock) or be generat- 
ed at the shock and move upstream. In many respects the 
wave and particle phenomena in front of the Venus bow 
shock are the same as those generated in front of the bow 
shocks of magnetized planets including Earth. The 
nature of the obstacle is not important here. 

Returning to the obstacle for a moment, we note 
that the magnetic barrier has the effect of maintaining a 
cap on the ionosphere. This upper boundary is called 
the ionopause. Ionospheric plasma is not detected 
above the barrier because the atmospheric ions pro- 
duced there are immediately removed by the interplan- 
etary electric field (equal to -V,,,B), either swept away 
from Venus or deposited into the deeper atmosphere. 
Two such ions are sketched in figure 2. Nevertheless, 
most ions are produced within the ionosphere and 
remain in the ionosphere proper until they recombine. 
At comets the opposite is true. The recombination rate 
at high altitudes in a planetary ionosphere is small so 
that in steady state ions must flow to low altitudes to 
recombine. In the subsolar region the typical motion of 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ORBIT 176 
Inbound 


ALTITUDE (km) 


IBI (nT) 


Figure 5. Vertical profiles of the electron density, N. (symbols), 
and magnetic field strength, B, (full curve), on days of low (left), 
moderate (middle) and (high) solar wind pressure. 
Measurements by the Pioneer Venus orbiter on three early orbits 
when the spacecraft was entering the dayside ionosphere and 
periapsis, the closest approach to the planet, were at low alti- 
tudes. 


the ionosphere is downward. There are few ions creat- 
ed at any altitude in the Venus shadow so that the 
nightside ionospheric pressure is much less than on the 
dayside. Away from the subsolar region the pressure 
gradient induces a supersonic expansion of the upper 
ionosphere into the nightside whenever the ionosphere 
is present at altitudes of 400 km and above. This flow 
produces a significant nightside ionosphere even 
though little ionosphere is produced there. At solar 
minimum or when the solar wind dynamic pressure is 
high the ionopause is too low to allow horizontal trans- 
port to the nightside ionosphere, which becomes very 
weak as a result. 


Complications 

The above description is a correct first-order model of the 
Venus interaction but there are details that need to be 
added to complete the picture. We look first at the varia- 
tions in the ionosphere caused by varying solar wind 
pressure. We then examine the effects of planetary ion 
mass added to the solar wind flow and finally examine 
how the interaction varies with the solar cycle. 


The effect of varying pressure 

The boundary between the magnetic barrier and the 
ionosphere, the ionopause, is generally a thin current 
layer, at least when the solar wind pressure is low and 
the ionopause altitude is high (about 400 km). This thick- 
ness appears to be about one ionospheric thermal ion 
gyroradius. As mentioned above, the electrical conduc- 
tivity is so high under these conditions that there is no 
diffusion of the draped solar wind magnetic field across 
the ionopause current layer. The left-hand panel of figure 
5 shows such a situation illustrated with vertical profiles 
of the magnetic field and plasma density seen by the 
Pioneer Venus orbiter. Nevertheless, magnetic field can 
apparently get into the ionosphere in the form of flux 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


bundles or ropes. These flux ropes cause the large spikes 
in field strength that are seen low in the ionosphere in the 
left-hand panel of figure 5. Observations suggest that 
they are untwisted at high altitudes but become twisted 
and even kinked as they sink. Figure 6 illustrates the for- 


Magnetic 
Barrier 


Magnetic 
Barrier 


Figure 6. Formation of a flux rope in the Venus ionosphere due 
to the sinking of an initially buoyant flux tube from the magnet- 
ic barrier. In the middle panel the flux tube has become heavier 
owing to mass addition through photoionization of the neutral 
ionosphere and sinks. The magnetic force due to the curvature 
in the plane perpendicular to the page accelerates this motion. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Interior Structure of Flux Rope 


Figure 7. The magnetic structure of a flux rope. In the interior 
the magnetic field is strong and parallel to the axis of the rope. 
In the outer parts of the rope the magnetic field is weak and 
wraps around the axis. 


mation of one of these ropes from an originally buoyant 
flux tube of the magnetic barrier. The twist in the ropes 
helps to maintain the coherence of the rope and to bal- 
ance the outward pressure of the magnetic field. The 
twist is believed to arise as the rope sinks through a ver- 
tical shear in the horizontal velocity of the ionospheric 
plasma. Often the magnetic field of the ropes is almost in 
force balance by itself so pressure gradient forces in the 
plasma are not important. Such ropes are called force 
free. A sketch of the magnetic structure of such a flux 
rope is shown in figure 7. 

Because the ionopause forms where pressure bal- 
ance with the solar wind pressure occurs, its height 
varies with solar wind conditions. As illustrated by the 
rightmost two panels of figure 5, when the solar wind 
pressure increases to about 20 nPa and the altitude of the 
ionopause current layer falls to 250 km or less, the cur- 
rent layer thickens and magnetic field diffuses into the 
ionosphere because of ion—neutral and electron—neutral 
collisions. The downward ionospheric plasma velocity 
near the subsolar region carries the magnetized plasma 
to low altitude where it recombines and deposits the 
magnetic flux. Thus the collisional Venus ionosphere can 
become magnetized from the ionopause down to the 
peak of the ionosphere. The magnetic flux then collision- 
ally diffuses through the current layer at the bottom of 
the ionosphere, creating a magnetic field between the 
ionosphere and the planet’s core. The diffusion of mag- 
netic flux below the dayside ionopause is balanced by the 
upward diffusion of magnetic field on the nightside. 
Since field lines in the ionosphere generally have their 
ends in the solar wind, these field lines on the nightside 
have ends that have moved far down the magnetotail. 
Hence the field lines are mainly vertical or radial on the 
nightside and close beneath the ionosphere. These 
regions of radial magnetic field on the nightside prevent 
the plasma from entering these regions so that they 
appear as ‘holes’ in the plasma measurements. The mag- 
netic pressure in the holes is enhanced by the amount 
that the plasma pressure is diminished so that the plas- 
ma and field pressures are in equilibrium. 

If the dayside ionosphere becomes fully magnetized, 
then the flow of plasma from the dayside to the nightside 
is cut off. Under those circumstances the nighttime plas- 
ma density drops to very low values and the phenome- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Low Dynamic Pressure 


lonosphere 


SS 


High Dynamic Pressure 


Figure 8. The magnetic configuration of the Venus ionosphere at 
times of low (top) and high (bottom) solar wind dynamic pres- 
sure. 


non called a ‘disappearing’ ionosphere results. This same 
situation prevails at solar minimum when the dayside 
ionospheric pressure is lower than the typical solar wind 
pressure. The magnetic structure of the ionosphere under 
these low and high solar wind dynamic pressure condi- 
tions (relative to ionospheric plasma pressure) is shown 
in figure 8. 


Mass addition to the solar wind flow 

The interaction of a comet with the solar wind is well 
understood (see SOLAR WIND: INTERACTION WITH COMETS). 
Gas sublimes from the comet nucleus and expands 
rapidly into the relative vacuum of space. This gas is 
ionized and swept up by the solar wind. The mass addi- 
tion to the solar wind in the form of cometary ions slows 
it down by the conservation of momentum. The ends of 
the interplanetary field lines threading the cometary 
atmosphere are rooted in the undisturbed solar wind 
and thus carried past the comet at the solar wind speed. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bow Shock 


Magnetotail 


RESSEeS Flow 
B (In Tail) 
B (Outside Tail) 


Figure 9. The formation of the Venus magnetotail. Flux tubes 
that pass closest to Venus are slowed the most, while their ends 
are carried along in the solar wind. 


A long tail is formed downstream of the nucleus as a 
result. 

The rate of addition of mass by Venus to the solar 
wind is much less than that of a comet because the plan- 
et’s gravitational pull prevents the atmospheric gas from 
expanding rapidly and keeps it close to the planet. 
Nevertheless, as noted above, Venus does have a neutral 
oxygen exosphere that extends to at least 4000 km. Ions 
produced above the ionopause, by photoionization or col- 
lisions with the solar wind particles themselves, interact 
directly with the solar wind. The atomic oxygen exos- 
phere is produced by the ionosphere, in particular by the 
dissociative recombination of O + ions at lower altitude, 
in which ions recombine with an electron to form two 
suprathermal oxygen atoms. These atoms have enough 
energy to allow them to reach altitudes above the 
ionopause where, if ionized, they will be carried away in 
the magnetosheath or solar wind flow. This additional ion 
mass can slow down the flow near the magnetic barrier 
where the ion production is highest owing to the greater 
neutral densities there. A larger region of stagnation 
could increase the size of the barrier and push the shock 
away from the obstacle. It could also add additional mag- 
netized plasma to the ionosphere and enhance the mag- 
netic tail. As illustrated in figure 9 the magnetic field lines 
approaching closest to Venus are slowed down in their 
motion at closest approach while their ends in the undis- 
turbed solar wind are carried away at the solar wind 
velocity. This produces a long comet-like ‘induced’ tail. 

The ions on these field lines are eventually accelerated 
up to the solar wind velocity. However, the composition of 
these ions always tags them as Venus ions. The Venus mag- 
netic tail was regularly detected at the apogee of the Pio- 
NEER VENUS spacecraft (12 Venus radii) but the ions have 
been detected as far away as the orbit of the Earth. 

The draped magnetic field will apply a stress to the 
plasma surrounding Venus but under steady-state condi- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


tions this stress should be rather uniform. When the 
magnetic field changes direction the uniformity of this 
stress changes and ridges and enhancements at the 
ionospheric plasma-solar wind boundary can form. 
When spacecraft pass through such a structure, the den- 
sity enhancement may appear to be a ‘cloud’ of ionos- 
pheric plasma near the ionopause. These clouds stretch 
out from the nighttime ionosphere of Venus and are cor- 
related with interplanetary magnetic field rotations. 
Other filamentary structures of ionospheric plasma 
extend out of the nightside upper ionosphere when solar 
wind conditions are steady. These ‘tail rays’ may repre- 
sent a low-altitude component of planetary ions picked 
up by the solar wind from the denser cold upper atmos- 
phere. 

A final phenomenon that has been seen at Venus that 
appears to be associated with the solar wind interaction 
is the Venus aurora. On Earth AURORAS are often associat- 
ed with parallel electric fields that accelerate electrons 
down into the atmosphere causing atoms to be excited 
and to emit photons. Weak, patchy auroras exist on the 
nightside of Venus also, but no explicit cause of these 
auroras has been determined. 


2.6 7 fii t= sd 250 
* Venera 9/10 

ee Bow Shock Position 200 

S Sunspot 
N 
cc umbers a 
§ § 
BS 24- 150 @ 
B 8 
a 
r-4 

: 5 
Hw 23 100 = 
= a 
jo} 
=“ Bow Shock 

2.2 50 

24 i Me he 0 

75 OL 79 81 83 85 87 89 


Year 


Figure 10. The motion of the bow shock in the course of the solar 
cycle. Top: An ecliptic plane view. Bottom: Position above the 
terminator and sunspot number through a solar cycle. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Venus: Interaction with Solar Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Solar cycle variation 

The above discussion enables us to now address how 
Venus responds to the solar cycle changes on the Sun. 
The Earth’s solar wind interaction is sensitive to the 
SOLAR CYCLE mainly because there are more coronal mass 
ejections launched from the Sun near solar maximum 
than solar minimum. The Venus interaction is also sensi- 
tive to these episodic, mainly magnetic, structures (albeit 
in very different ways than is Earth’s magnetospheric 
interaction), but it is more generally sensitive to the 
changing ultraviolet flux during the solar cycle. At solar 
minimum the ionosphere is not as well developed, and 
so the same solar wind pressure results in an ionopause 
deeper in the atmosphere where the ionosphere is less 
highly electrically conducting. This routinely magnetizes 
the dayside ionosphere and drastically reduces the flow 
to the nightside ionosphere. The obstacle becomes a little 
smaller but more importantly some of the solar wind is 
probably absorbed. Thus the solar wind does not have to 
be deflected so far above the planet as at solar maximum. 
This effect is so marked that the shock approaches to 
within 1000 km of the planet of solar minimum as 
sketched in figure 10. 

At solar maximum the dayside ionosphere is denser 
and better able to stand off the solar wind plasma above 
the ionosphere. In addition the neutral exosphere of hot 
oxygen is denser and more ions are created within the 
magnetosheath itself. This extra ionization further 
enhances the deflection of the solar wind. 


Web Update (31 July 2002) 

Scientists have captured the first x-ray view of Venus 
using NASA’s CHANDRA X-RAY OBSERVATORY. The observa- 
tions provide new information about the atmosphere of 
Venus. Venus in x-rays looks similar to Venus in visible 
light, but there are important differences. The optically 
visible Venus is due to the reflection of sunlight and, for 
the relative positions of Venus, Earth and Sun during 
these observations, shows a uniform half-crescent that is 
brightest toward the middle. The x-ray Venus is slightly 
less than a half-crescent and brighter on the limbs. The 
differences are due to the processes by which Venus 
shines in visible and x-ray light. The x-rays from Venus 
are produced by fluorescence, rather than reflection. 
Solar x-rays bombard the atmosphere of Venus, knock 
electrons out of the inner parts of the atoms, and excite 
the atoms to a higher energy level. The atoms almost 
immediately return to their lower energy state with the 
emission of a fluorescent x-ray. A similar process involv- 
ing ultraviolet light produces the visible light from fluo- 
rescent lamps. For Venus, most of the fluorescent x-rays 
come from oxygen and carbon atoms between 120 and 
140 km (74 to 87 mi) above the planet's surface. In con- 
trast, the optical light is reflected from clouds at a height 
of 50 to 70 km (31 to 43 mi). As a result, Venus’ Sun-lit 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


hemisphere appears surrounded by an almost-transpar- 
ent luminous shell in x-rays that appears brightest over 
the limb. 


Bibliography 

Bougher S W, Hunten D M and Phillips R J (ed) 1997 
Venus II (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Hunten D M, Colin L, Donahue T M and Moroz V I (ed) 
1983 Venus (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona) 

Luhmann J G, Tatrallyay M and Pepin R O (ed) 1992 
Venus and Mars: Atmospheres, Ionospheres and Solar 
Wind Interaction (Washington, DC: American 
Geophysical Union) 

Russell C T (ed) 1991 Venus Aeronomy (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer) 

CT Russell and J G Luhmann 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Venus: Surface 


Because of its thick and dense atmosphere, vENus has only 
very recently revealed the aspect and the characteristics 
of its surface. In fact, the only means to penetrate the 
atmosphere and to see what is underneath is to observe 
the planet in wavelength regions of the electromagnetic 
spectra where the atmosphere is transparent such as 
the radar centimetric wavelengths or some near-infrared 
windows around 1 micron. An alternative solution is to 
send probes that directly land on the surface. These two 
means have been used to explore the surface of Venus and 
they give two complementary kinds of information. The 
first gives global and large-scale information about the 
surface, such as topography, surface roughness, altimetry, 
etc, while the second gives very local information such 
as surface images and/or composition. These two 
complementary techniques have greatly enhanced our 
knowledge of the surface of Venus and of its history. 


The Venus coordinate system 

The map coordinate system used for measuring longitude 
on Venus is different from that used on Earth. On Earth, 
longitude (an imaginary line stretching from pole to pole) 
is measured from a starting point (the prime meridian) at 
Greenwich, England (near London), toward the east and 
toward the west with increasing values in degrees until 
east meets west at the 180° point (the dateline), which is 
diametrically opposed to Greenwich. On Venus, longitude 
is measured from 0 to 360 degrees with the prime meridian 
centered within a small impact crater named Ariadne, 
located in Sedna Planitia. There is an arbitrary convention 
that determines the direction of increasing longitude on 
planetary bodies other than Earth: longitude shall be 
measured ina direction opposite to that in which the planet 
rotates. Because Venus rotates in a clockwise direction 
as viewed looking down on the north pole, longitude on 
Venus increases in numerical value toward the east from 
the planet’s prime meridian. 


Large-scale observations 
Most of the large-scale and global observations of the 
Venusian surface have been obtained by radar. There 
are different kinds of radar data: (a) altimetric data, 
(b) reflectivity data and (c) emissivity data. The first 
gives the altitude of the topography, the second gives 
information about the roughness of the surface and the 
last gives information about the brightness of the surface. 
The first reflectivity data for the Venusian surface 
were obtained from ground-based radar observatories. 
The first images were acquired in 1972 from the Goldstone 
satellite radar tracking system located in California. 
Observations with the Goldstone station were made until 
1988 covering essentially the equatorial regions between 
15°N and 15°S latitude and 260°E and 30°E (through 0°) 
longitude. The spatial resolution, that was of the order 
of 5-10 km in the first images, has been improved to near 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


1 km in the data acquired since 1986. The second ground- 
based observations from the Venusian surface come from 
the Arecibo observatory in Puerto Rico. On this site, the 
first reflectivity images were taken in 1975 and the last 
in 1988. With these data, that covered latitudes up to 
50°N, the spatial resolution was 1.5 km. From space, the 
first almost global observation of the surface of Venus was 
obtained by the NASA PIONEER VENUS Orbiter that arrived 
at the planet on 4 December 1978. Around 93% of the 
surface was covered between 74°N and 63°S latitude. 
These observations gave the first large-scale altimetric 
and topographic coverage with an altimetric precision of 
150 m at a sampling resolution of about 60 km. Then, 
from October 1983 to July 1984, the twin Soviet probes 
VENERA 15 and VENERA 16 surveyed the planet and mapped 
essentially the north pole area covering approximately 
25% of the surface from 30°N to 88°N. The resolution 
of the reflectivity images ranges from 1 to 4 km and the 
topographic precision was 50 m witha sampling resolution 
of about 8 km. The last global data from the surface of 
Venus were obtained by the NASA MAGELLAN Orbiter. The 
insertion of the probe into the mapping orbit took place 
on 10 August 1990 and the formal mapping of the surface 
began on 1 September 1990. These operations, divided 
in four observation cycles, lasted until 14 October 1994 
when the probe was lost. The coverage of the surface was 
almost complete. The precision of the altimetric data is 
below 50 m at a sampling resolution of the order of 10 km. 
The resolution of the reflectivity images is of the order of 
75 m. 

Infrared observations of Venus have been made from 
the ground and during the flyby of Venus by two probes. 
The first one was GALILEO during its travel to Jupiter on 
10 February 1990 and the second occured very recently 
with the CASsINI/HUYGENS probe on 24 June 1999 during 
its travel to Saturn. These two probes have infrared 
spectrometers on board (NIMS on board Galileo and 
VIMS on board Cassini). The surface was detected on 
the nightside of Venus by its thermal emission. These 
observations show that the surface temperature is in 
equilibrium with the atmosphere at the same altitude (see 
VENUS: ATMOSPHERE). 


Local observations 

All available on-ground local observations and measure- 
ments come from the various Soviet Venera/vEGA landers. 
These probes have made images of the ground surround- 
ing them and/or composition analysis of the surface. The 
first of these landers was Venera 8 that landed in 1972 and 
gave the first natural radioactive element composition of 
the surface. Then three sets of twin probes reached the 
surface. The first pair of landers were Venera 9 and 10 that 
made images of the surface and chemical analyses in Octo- 
ber 1975. They were followed seven years later by Venera 
13 (1 March 1982) and Venera 14 (5 March 1982) landers 
that made color images of the surrounding surface and also 
surface composition analyses. Finally the Vega 1 and Vega 
2 probes in 1984 were able to analyse the soil composition. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


| Massachusetts Institute of Technology —=————sSNatiomal Aeronautics and Space Administration = Set Propulsion Laboratory” 
MAGELLAN 


ur 2N xr 36r r ur 


a 


VENUS TOPOGRAPHY 


GTDRP.3;2 


oar wr i iar uur 2 


Mercator Scale 
) 2 


Kilometers 


Polar Stereographic Scale 
Prt 2x S10 


Kilometers 


North Polar 
Stereographic 
(teom 44.1°N) 


Oa 


PEEP EBeE) 5s BGs Die iI 
so 6 OR 


a OM 4158 ae or 


Planetary Radius (km) 


‘ | 


South Polar 
Stereographic 


(from 44.1°S) 


2 


Propucrion Date; 02/02/93 
Propucrion Time: 23:06:43 
HARDWARE VERSION: 01 

SOFTWARE VERSION; 02 


GTDRP.3;2 
STARTING_ ORBIT 376 
ENDING ORBIT: 


Propuct ID: 
_PIXEL SIZE: 


Figure 1. Topographic map of Venus. The highland at the equator is Aphrodite Terra and the highland at the north is Ishtar Terra. 


Global topography 

Although Venus, like most of the TERRESTRIALPLANETS, can be 
divided into two broad physiographic regions, highlands 
and lowlands, its hypsometric distribution is unimodal, 
unlike that of the Earth (bimodal) or Mars (trimodal) and 
over 80% of the Venusian surface lies within 1 km of the 
mean radius of 6051.84 km (figure 1). The mean slopes on 
Venus are of the order of 1° but average kilometer-scale 
slopes greater than 30° are not uncommon. 


Highlands 


@ Regio (regiones, pl.) are topographically high regions, 
often hosting large shield volcanoes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e Terra (terrae, pl.) cover vast areas and have variable 
topographic relief, as continents do on Earth. 


e Planum (plana, pl.). Lakshmi Planum is the only 
planum recognized on Venus. It is a 3-4 km high 
plateau, bordered by mountainous ridges. 


There are four highland areas on Venus: (1) ISHTAR TERRA in 
the north, (2) LADA TERRA in the south, (3) APHRODITE TERRA 
in the equatorial zone east of the prime meridian and 
(4) the last area is defined by Beta REGIO, Phoebe and Themis 
regiones distributed along roughly the 285° meridian. 
Ishtar Terra comprises the high Lakshmi Planum 
plateau to the west and the extremely elevated region 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 2. This Magellan full-resolution image shows Maxwell 
Montes, and is centered at 65°N latitude and 6°E longitude. 
Maxwell is the highest mountain on Venus, rising almost 12 km 
above mean planetary radius. The western slopes (on the left) 
are very steep, whereas the eastern slopes descend gradually 
into Fortuna Tessera. The broad ridges and valleys making up 
Maxwell and Fortuna suggest that the topography resulted from 
compression. Most of Maxwell Montes has a very bright radar 
return; such bright returns are common on Venus at high 
altitudes. This phenomenon is thought to result from the 
presence of a radar reflective mineral such as pyrite. 
Interestingly, the highest area on Maxwell is less bright than the 
surrounding slopes, suggesting that the phenomenon is limited 
to a particular elevation range. The pressure, temperature and 
chemistry of the atmosphere vary with altitude; the material 
responsible for the bright return is probably only stable in a 
particular range of atmospheric conditions and therefore a 
particular elevation range. The prominent circular feature in 
eastern Maxwell is Cleopatra. Cleopatra is a double-ring impact 
basin about 100 km in diameter and 2.5 km deep. A large 
amount of lava originating in Cleopatra flowed through this 
channel and filled valleys in Fortuna Tessera. Cleopatra is 
superimposed on the structures of Maxwell Montes and appears 
to be undeformed, indicating that Cleopatra is relatively young. 


surrounding the Maxwell Montes that are, with their 12 km 
altitude, the highest topographic point on Venus (figure 2). 


Lowlands 

e Planitia (planitiae, pl.) are topographic low-lying 
regions, generally the most featureless on Venus in terms 
of tectonic and volcanic structures. 


There are five lowlands areas in which lie other smaller 
highlands: (1) Atalanta Planitia at the north of Aphrodite 
Terra, (2) Aino Planitia and (3) Helen Planitia at the 
south of Aphrodite Terra, (4) Guinevere Planitia at the 
equator between Aphrodite Terra and Phoebe Regio and 
(5) Lavinia Planitia at the south of Guinevere Planitia. The 
small highlands are Alpha Regio (6°E, 25°S), Eistla Regio 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(39°E, 18°N), Bell Regio (49°E, 33°N) and Tellus Regio 
(82°E, 39°N). 


The landscape of Venus 

The landscape of Venus is characterized by some very 
particular and specific geomorphological and tectonic 
features that illustrate how Venus can be very different 
from the Earth and that can help to understand its 
geological history. 


Volcanic features 

Several types of volcanic flows and edifices are recognized. 
The presence of volcanic features on Venus suggest local 
magma sources at depth. The distribution of these features 
may provide clues about the crustal properties and thermal 
history of Venus. They can be divided into three groups 
according to their mean size. Brief characteristics are given 
for each below: 


(i) Large volcanic forms (<100 km): large shield 
volcanoes are characterized by numerous lava flows 
radiating away from a central caldera) Many 
individual flows extend for hundreds of kilometers. 
Several of the 156 identified shields are located 
in topographically high regions (e.g. Gula and Sif 
Montes at Western Eistla Regio; Sapas, Maat and 
Ozza Montes at Alta Regio) reaching elevations as 
high as 3-5 km above the surrounding area. 

(ii) Intermediate-sized volcanic forms (20-100 km): 


e@ Anemones: a type of volcanic edifice characterized 
by flows radiating outward, often in bilateral 
fashion from a central graben or fissure. They 
are relatively rare; only 25 have been identified. 
Anemones are typically 30-40 by 40-60 km in 
dimension. 


@ Ticks are volcanic domes, sonamed because of their 
appearance in radar images. They have flat or 
depressed circular domes about 25 km in diameter 
and are flanked by strongly defined radial ridges 
and troughs. At one end, the tick edifice may 
exhibit signs of a collapsed graben with extensive 
fault scarps. Occasionally, flows originating from 
the small central calderas appear to be directed 
outward along the radial fault-valleys. About 50 
have been identified. 


@ Steep-sided domes, commonly referred to as 
pancake domes: these volcanic domes have well- 
defined circular outlines and are characterized by 
radial fractures near the steep perimeter, radial and 
concentric fracturing on the flat interior and small 
summit calderas near the center. Over 150 have 
been recognized, very often in groups, sometimes 
overlapping one another. 


@ Calderas and paterae are volcanic depressions 
bounded by arcuate fault scarps and are the source 
area of numerous lava flows. 86 calderas have 
identified. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(iii) Small volcanic forms (>20 km) shield fields cover 
relatively large areas (average area 17700 km?) and 
are delimited by numerous, but small (typically 
2-3 km across, but 6-12 km ones are not unusual) 
volcanic domes or vents. Some shield fields 
develop extensive flow fields surrounding the shield 
volcanoes whereas others are located within tectonic 
structures such as coronae or linear extensional zones. 
Overall, 556 shield fields have been recognized on 
Venus. 


Tectonic features 

Many features recognized from Magellan images are 
reminiscent of TECTONIC structures on Earth. Some of these 
features cover regions of thousands of square kilometers, 
whereas other features are narrow linear structures that 
appear to be related to fractures, grabens and perhaps 
dykes. A classification and nomenclature of Venusian 
physiographic features and how they may be related to 
tectonism has been made. Some of these features are 
described below. 


(i) Large tectonic forms (100 to 1000 km) are: 


@ Tessera (tesserae, pl.): a terrain network consisting 
of two or more directions of anastomosing linear 
ridges and troughs. They are tectonically complex 
terrains, thought to be largely compressional in 
origin and may represent the oldest part of the 
crust. 


@ Chasma (chasmate, pl.): a broad trench or 
linear zone consisting of a parallel arrangement 
of troughs or valleys bounded by fault scarps. 
These zones are interpreted to reflect extensional 
tectonics. 


e@ Mons (montes, pl.): large highland provinces 
are termed montes (e.g. Maxwell Montes, Danu 
Montes, Akna Montes and Freyja Montes), descrip- 
tive of their mountain range-like appearance (fig- 
ure 2). 


(ii) Others features likely to be associated with volcanic 
and/or intrusive activity are: 


@ Corona (coronae, pl.): (mean diameter = 250 km) 
are large circular structures whose circumference 
is defined by an elevated ring-like zone consisting 
of compressional ridges and extensional troughs. 
The interior part often shows evidence of volcanic 
activity and early fracturing. Radial graben-like 
structures may extend beyond the outer diameter. 
Topographically, the interior may be raised or 
depressed relative to the surrounding terrain. 
Corona structures likely represent the surface 
expression of mantle upwelling. They range from 
75 to over 2000 km across and occur in groups, in 
chains or as isolated structures. More than 360 have 
been recognized, of which about half have been 
formally assigned names (figure 3). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. This region, roughly 100 km on a side, shows a 
gigantic structure known as a corona. Coronae are circular to 
elliptical features marked by a ring of concentric ridges. Such 
features are thought to be the result of hot rising bodies of 
magma that reach the crust. As hot material rises, it weakens the 
upper layers of the crust, causing the surface to dome upwards. 
Then as the region cools, the dome begins to subside. As the 
upper layers rise and fall, they are subjected to stresses that 
crack the surface, creating both circular and radial fractures. 
Magellan acquired this view of Venus during its first mapping 
cycle around the planet in 1990 and 1991. 


@ Arachnoid(s) (mean diameter = 115 km) are 
circular to elliptical structures that consist of a 
central dome or depression surrounded by an 
extensive network of radial and concentric linear 
features. These locally developed structures 
may represent the surface expression of faulting 
and dyke emplacement associated with magma 
injection at shallow depths. About 259 have been 
found on Venus. 


e@ Nova (novae, pl.) (mean diameter = 190 km) 
are similar to arachnoids, but are dominated by 
radial structures. Novae are generally centered on 
a domal uplift and may possibly represent the early 
stages of corona formation. Over 50 have been 
identified. 


Impact craters 

There are 935 recognized impact CRATERS on Venus. About 
half the craters have been formally assigned names, the 
others remain unnamed. All have been named after 
famous women in history, but craters with diameters 
less than 20 km have been given female common names. 
Venusian craters range in size from 1.4 km in diameter to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Uranium, thorium and potassium content in the Venusian surface rocks given by gamma ray spectrometry. 


Venera8 Venera9 Veneral0 Vegal Vega 2 
kK2,0O,wt% 48414 06401 0440.2 0.54+0.26 0.48 + 0.24 
U (ppm) 2.2 + 0.7 0.6 + 0.2 0.54 0.3 0.64 + 0.47 0.68 + 0.38 
Th (ppm) 6.5 + 0.2 3.7404 0.7+ 0.3 1541.2 2.0 + 1.0 


Table 2. Contents of the major elements in the Venusian surface 
rocks given by x-ray fluorescence. 


Venera 13 Venera 14 Vega 2 
SiO 45.1+3.0 48.7 + 3.6 45.6 + 3.2 
TiO, 1.59 + 0.45 1.2+0.41 0.2+0.1 
AlbO3 = =15.8+ 3.0 17.9+ 2.6 16.0 + 1.8 
FeO 0 Boe 22 8.8+ 1.8 Pt 2 Mek. 
MnO 0.2+0.1 0.16 + 0.08 0.14 + 0.12 
MgO 11.4+ 6.2 8143.3 11.54 3.7 
CaO 7.1 + 0.96 10.3 + 1.2 7540.7 
K2,O 4.0 + 0.63 0.2 40.07 0.1 + 0.08 
S 0.65 + 0.4 0.35 + 0.31 19+0.6 
Cl 0.3 0.4 0.3 


280 km. Crater Mead is the largest impact crater identified 
on Venus. 

In contrast to Mercury, Mars or the Moon, which are 
covered with thousands of craters that have accumulated 
over the last 4 to 4.5 billion years, Venus is scarred by 
curiously few. In fact the spatial distribution of craters 
is uniform (random and anticlustered) over the entire 
planet, suggesting that Venus experienced complete global 
resurfacing in the relatively recent (geologically speaking) 
past. 

In the global resurfacing model, tectonic and volcanic 
activity affected the entire surface of Venus which 
obliterated the majority of (if not all) previous impact 
craters. An observation that lends support to the sudden 
arrest of these events is the fact that the majority of 
craters, 84%, do not show any signs of modification. This 
resurfacing activity is thought to have ceased between 300 
to 800 million years ago. The uncertainty of the timing lies 
in the uncertainty of estimating the impact flux. 

Craters on Venus are recognized by their expression 
on images and hence classified by their morphology. The 
high temperature of the Venusian surface (470°C) and 
its thick atmosphere make Venusian impact morphology 
unique among planetary bodies in the solar system. Based 
on the development of crater floor structures and degree of 
circularity, a classification of simple craters and five types 
of complex crater into a six-fold scheme can be made. 


e Structureless craters are simple craters where the 
internal floor is flat and featureless. The smallest craters 
are generally of this type. 


@ Central peak craters have a central uplift that rises above 
the crater floor. These craters range in size from 8 to 
79 km, but are most commonly 16-32 km. Outlining 
rims are quite circular and often terraced. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


e Double-ring craters are defined by an outer rim and a 
circular arrangement of inner peaks and ridges. These 
craters are typically greater than 40 km. 


e@ Multiple-ring craters have two or more concentric ridge 
structures that rise above the crater floor. The largest 
craters on Venus, ranging from 86 to 280 km in diameter, 
are of this type. 


e Irregular craters have non-circular rim outlines and 
structural disruptions to otherwise flat crater floors. 
Almost one-third of the craters on Venus are of this type, 
most of which are less than 16 km across. 


e@ Multiple crater formation occurs when a falling body 
fragments into pieces. Each fragment creates a separate 
impact crater whose rim may overlap with adjacently 
formed craters. Individuals of this type are up to 44 km 
in diameter, but most are less than 11 km. 


In general, small-diameter craters are flat-floored, 
have irregular outlines and may be part of a multiple 
impact event. Complex internal structures occur in large 
craters and tend to develop progressively as a central peak, 
a double ring, or a multiple ring, with increasing crater 
diameter. 


Surface properties and composition 

A somewhat unexpected finding in the Magellan images 
was the abundant wind streaks. More than 4000 wind 
streaks have been identified and this evidence of eolian 
activity is widespread and is particularly concentrated 
between 17°S and 30°S latitude and at 5°N-52°N on 
smooth plains. These wind streaks are generally oriented 
with the downwind direction towards the equator. This 
eolian activity is also demonstrated by parabolic crater 
deposits, made up of fine, centimeters thick debris 
distributed by high-speed zonal E-W winds. These 
observations are consistent with the radar signature of 
the surface that indicates that weathering, mass wasting 
and eolian activity operated continuously on deposits 
similar to lava flows. This activity confirms the aspect 
of the surface as it is known by the Venera lander images 
(figure 4). The reddish color of the images taken by the 
Venera 13 and Venera 14 landers also supports the volcanic 
origin of the surface which is confirmed by the chemical 
composition. 

Our knowledge of the chemical composition of the 
surface of Venus comes from two types of experiment on 
board the seven Russian landers. These two methods are 
gamma spectroscopy and x-ray fluorescence spectrometry. 
The first one gives the contents of the radiogenic elements, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


PABOTKAa nn 


Z to of ‘ 
BEHEPA-14 OBPA 


AH CCCP HW UdkK 


Figure 4. Venera 14 lander images of the surface of Venus at 1°S, 310°E on 5 March 1982. The lander survived for 60 min. Both images 
show part of the lander at the bottom. This area is composed of flat basalt-like rocks, but little soil or fine-grained material, as was seen 
at other Venera lander sites. Near the center of the top image is a lens cover, and the bottom image shows a test arm. 


uranium, thorium and potassium (table 1). The second 
one gives the contents of the major elements of the surface 
rocks (table 2). 

Most of these analyses show a trace element and/or 
bulk chemistry typical of tholeitic basalts. Moreover, 
all the dominant type of terrain within the Venera/Vega 
landing sites is plains so that their measurements can 
be considered representative samples of the Venusian 
plains. Finally morphological observations of long and 
vast lava flows together with the results of the geochemical 
measurements show that the plains of the landing sites as 
well as the Venusian plains as a whole are predominantly 
the result of large basaltic volcanism. Two exceptions come 
from the data of Venera 8 and Venera 13. The gamma 
spectroscopic analysis at the Venera 8 landing site shows 
that the surface material contains relatively high amounts 
of K, U and Th (table 1). X-ray fluorescence analysis at 
the Venera 13 site shows that the bulk chemistry of the 
surface rocks is analogous to that of alkaline basalt. Its 
potassium content is indeed very similar to that of the 
Venera 8 site. For these two sites, where non-tholeitic 
composition of the surface material was identified, steep- 
sided domes have been found which are not present at 
the other sites. These particular morphological features, 
together with the fact that the Venera 8 and possibly 
Venera 13 material compositions are the combination of 
evolved igneous rocks and more mafic and primitive rocks, 
suggest that these rocks are the geochemical signature of 
the presence and involvement of material of continental 
crustal origin in their magma genesis. This raises the 
question about the presence or absence of continental-like 
crust on Venus, which remains an enigma. 


Stratigraphic history 
From the study of all these features and of their 
morphological and chronological relationships, a tentative 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


geological history of Venus can be proposed, defining units 
of common ages, their formation and evolution through 
time as described by Basilevsky and Head (1998) (see 
figure 5). 

The oldest unit, the Fortuna Group, is mainly 
composed of tessera terrains that cover about 8% of 
the Venusian surface. The morphology of this unit is 
dominated by intersecting systems of ridges and grooves 
of tectonic origin. This deformation does not extend into 
the surrounding plains that clearly embay the tessera. 
It is not clear if this group was formed in a very short 
time or if it is composed of various subunits of different 
ages. However, it is clear that all other units overlie or 
embay this group, making it the oldest recognized unit 
of Venus like the Precambrian basement of continents on 
Earth. Although this group may have formed at different 
ages, its heavy deformation seems to have spanned a 
relatively short period of time as suggested by the density 
of superposed impact craters that is approximately the 
same. 

The next unit in chronological appearance is called 
the Guinevere Supergroup. It represents an assemblage of 
plains-forming units and consists of four groups separated 
from one another and from the underlying Fortuna Group 
by episodes of tectonic deformation. 

The first unit consisting of material of densely 
fractured plains is called the Sigrun Group and covers 
3% of the surface of Venus. It appears as uncovered 
terrains by the younger plains and is deformed by densely 
spaced swarms of faults usually subparallel to each other. 
The material composing this unit appears to be primarily 
plains that were emplaced as floods of lavas. 

The second group, called the Lavinia Group, is 
represented by the materials of fractured and ridged plains 
and covers about 3% of the surface. The ridges are 
sometimes clustered forming ridge belts. They appear 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


generally as elongated islands among the younger plains 
but embay the tessera and the Sigrun Group. The Lavinia 
Group material, as the Sigrun Group, was also primarily 
emplaced as lava floods (figure 5(a)). 

The third group consists of materials of shield plains 
and plains with wrinkle ridges. Together this group, 
called the Rusalka Group, occupies 70-75% of the surface 
of Venus. The wrinkle ridges plains dominate among 
this group and represent 60-65% of the total surface. A 
characteristic of these plains is the presence of wrinkle 
ridges, typically 1 km wide, that often form a network with 
a dominant trend. Usually subunits can be recognized 
in this group because they are deformed by a single 
ridge network, thus separating them all from the younger 
stratigraphic units. The youngest of these subunits form 
extended flow-like features. This observation and the 
in situ geochemical measurements made by the Venera 
9,10 and Vega 1,2 landers suggest that these plains formed 
by extended floods of mafic lavas. The shield plains is the 
second component of the Rusalka group. It is represented 
by materials of plains formed by clustered and coalescing 
sloping shields of volcanic origin. These plains occupy 
10% of the surface of Venus and are usually embayed by the 
wrinkle ridge plains that appear consequently younger. 
The volcanic shields, on the basis of their gentle slopes, 
are made by lavas composed of alkaline basalts or even 
more differentiated material such as andesite as shown by 
the Venera 8 analyses. 

The last group of the Guinevere Supergroup is 
mostly made of the materials of lobate and smooth plains 
undeformed by wrinkle ridges. This unit covers 10-15% 
of Venus and is called the Alta Group. It overlies 
and embays all the already described units. Most of 
the Alta Group materials are associated with rift zones 
occurring in the form of large, gently sloping volcanic 
edifices. Some materials of this group are associated with 
coronae, forming lava flows aprons around them. Their 
morphology as well as their geochemical composition 
given by Venera 14 suggest that they also are mafic lavas. 

The last and youngest group, the Aurelia Group, 
is represented by the materials of radar-dark parabolas 
associated with the youngest impact craters as well with 
the eolian patches and streaks. 


Absolute age estimates 

The duration of the morphologically distinguishable part 
of the geological history of Venus is estimated on the basis 
of impact crater densities. The average age of the surface 
of Venus is estimated to vary between 300 and 500 million 
years, for the lower bound, up to 800 million years for the 
upper bound. In terms of this average age T, the age of 
the oldest group represented by the tessera is estimated 
to be about 1.47. Then, the average age T of the surface 
of Venus is apparently a good estimate of the age of the 
Rusalkian Group. This means that the total duration of the 
Sigrunian, Lavinian and Rusalkian group is of the order 
of 0.2-0.37 that is, approximately a few tens of millions 
of years to about one hundred million years. Finally, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the upper boundary of the Atlian time (that is, the lower 
boundary of the Aurelian period) was estimated from the 
proportion of craters with radar-dark parabolas to be about 
0.17 prior to the present (figure 5(a)). 


Geological history of Venus 

The history of Venus as recorded on its surface represents 
only the last 10-20% of the total history of the planet 
because the morphological signatures of the terrains 
before those of the Fortuna Group were not preserved. 
The beginning of this part of the history of Venus is 
characterized by intensive tectonic deformation on a 
global scale which formed the tessera terrains. Early 
stages of this deformation were clearly compressional 
and later changed into extensional. Termination of the 
compression stage is estimated to have occurred at about 
time 1.47, while the extensional stage lasted for another 
0.1-0.2T. Numerous internal dynamical processes 
have been proposed to account for the tessera-forming 
deformation sequence; from chemical instabilities causing 
mantle overturn, an oscillatory convective behavior of 
the mantle or catastrophic avalanche within the mantle 
due to the presence of high-pressure phase transitions. 
These hypotheses raise the question of whether the large 
currently preserved tessera blocks might represent relicts 
of downwelling or upwelling. Anyway, this intensive 
tectonism was accompanied by volcanic activity so that 
the emplacement of tessera-forming material and its 
deformation into tessera terrain are the major geological 
events of Fortunian time (figure 5(a)). 

After tessera formation, several stages of extensive 
volcanism occurred that buried vast areas of the tessera 
and formed the regional plains of Sigrunian, Lavinian 
and Rusalkian ages. The combined duration of the 
emplacement of these plains is estimated to be 0.2- 
0.37. Plain forming of all these groups is separated 
by episodes of tectonic activity that occurred generally 
synchronously in different areas of Venus. These episodes 
are characterized by the dominance of compression, then 
tension, then again compression, and finally tension. 
The last globally distributed tectonic episode, extensive 
wrinkle ridging, happened at about time T and marked 
the transition to the present stage of the history of Venus, 
which is dominated by regional rifting and its local 
associated volcanism in the form of large shield volcanoes. 
The majority of this stage is represented by the Atlian 
period, which appears to have lasted until 0.17 from the 
present. This period is thus the longest in duration among 
all the other units, although its resulting tectonic and 
volcanic features and deposits represent only 10-20% of 
the surface of Venus. The last period of the history of Venus 
is the Aurelian period and is characterized by a certain 
level of reworking of the surface by eolian processes. From 
the point of view of volcanic and tectonic processes, it 
represents simply the continuation of the Atlian period 
so that Venus may be today already endogenically active 
at a low level (figure 5(b)). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Venus: Surface 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Gedlogic Time Time«stratigraphic. Rock-stratigraphic units and structures @ 
Aurelian Period Aurelian System Aurelia Group Cdp 
| 
= 
OAT 
Atla Group Ps, Pl 
g Rusalka Group Pur, Psh_5] 
Guineverian Guineverian 2 eB 
Period System a —, 
2 Lavinia Group Pit, RBZ 
2 
5 
o 
Sigrun Grou Pdf 
1.47 a i 
0.46T 
Fortunian Period Fortunian System Fortuna Group Tessera, Tt 
Pre-Fortunian Pre-Fortunian ‘ A 
Period System ? 
TECTONICS VULCANISM 1) 
Compression Plains-forming 
2 
3 
Gj 
$s 
Extension Rift-associated 


0 
9 


Figure 5. (a) Venus stratigraphic units following Basilevsky and 
Head (1988) (Tt: tessera terrains; Pdf: densely fractured plains; 
Pfr: fractured and ridged plains; RB: ridge belts; FB: fracture 
belts; Pwr: wrinkle ridge plains; Psh: plains with shield; Ps: 
smooth plains; Pl: lobate plains; Cdp: dark parabola craters). 
(b) Summary of the geological history of Venus. The tectonic is 
dominated by the succession of compression—tension cycles and 
the volcanism, intense at the beginning, decreases and changes 
in style with time (Basilevsky and Head 1998). 7, the average 
age of the surface of Venus, is of the order of 300-500 million 
years or possibly up to about 800 million years. 


In summary, the observable part of the history of 
Venus is characterized by two key points that stand in 
contrast to the comparable period of Earth history when 
global geodynamical processes are dominated by plate 
tectonics. 


(a) Venus shows no signature of plate tectonics. Instead, 
its global tectonic environment is characterized by 
two successive compression-tension cycles with 
the magnitude of the deformation and strain rate 
declining with time. 

(b) During the first cycle, plains-forming volcanism 
occurred at a rate comparable to terrestrial volcanism 
but in a non-plate tectonic style, and then during 
the second cycle Venus was dominated by a 
rift-associated volcanism emplaced at a very low 
production rate comparable with that of today’s 
intraplate volcanism. 


The surface features, structures and composition 
illustrate the distinctive difference between the recent 
history of Venus and the Earth that are in other ways so 
similar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Bibliography 

Barsukov V L et al 1986 The geology and geomorphology 
of Venus surface as revealed by the radar images 
obtained by Veneras 15 and 16 Proc. Lunar and Planet. 
Sci. Conf. 16th, Part 2, J. Geophys. Res. 91 (suppl B4) 
D378-D398 

Basilevsky A T and Head J W 1998 The geologic history of 
Venus: a stratigraphic view J. Geophys. Res. 103 (E4) 
8531-44 

Bougher, S W, Hunten M and Phillips R J 1997 Venus 
II-Geology, Geophysics, Atmosphere and Solar Wind 
Environment (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona 
Press) 

Carlson R W et al 1991 Galileo infrared imaging 
spectroscopy measurements at Venus Science 253 
1541-8 

Chapman C R (ed) 1992a Magellan at Venus J. Geophys. Res. 
97 (E8) 13 063-689 

Chapman C R (ed) 1992b Magellan at Venus, part 2 
J. Geophys. Res. 97 (E10) 15921-6380 

Surkov Y A et al 1984 New data on the composition, 
structure and properties of Venus rock obtained by 
Venera 13 and 14 Proc. Lunar and Planet. Sci. Conf. 14th, 
J. Geophys. Res. 89 B393—B402 

Surkov Y A et al 1986 Venus rock composition at the Vega 2 
landing site Proc. Lunar and Planet. Sci. Conf. 17th, 
Part 1, J. Geophys. Res. 91 E215-E218 


Olivier Forni 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Verbiest, Ferdinand (1623-88) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Verbiest, Ferdinand (1623-88) 


Flemish cartographer and astronomer, member of the 
Jesuit mission to China in the early seventeenth century, 
was made President of the Astronomical Board and 
produced textbooks on astronomy and maps for the 
Chinese Emperor. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Very Large Array, National Radio Astronomy Observa- 
tory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Very Large Array, National Radio 
Astronomy Observatory 


The Very Large Array (VLA), 80 km west of Socorro, NM, 
is one of the world’s premier radio-astronomy facilities, 
offering researchers a unique combination of resolving 
power, sensitivity and observational flexibility. Dedicated 
in 1980, the VLA includes 27 25 m diameter dish antennas, 
arranged in a ‘Y’ pattern, that work together as a single 
aperture-synthesis interferometric imaging system. 

A facility of the US National Science Foundation, the 
VLA is open for use by all scientists on a peer-reviewed 
basis. Capable of observing at frequencies from 74 MHz 
to 50 GHz (non-continuous), and with antennas deployed 
through a 16 month cycle of four standard configurations, 
the VLA provides resolution ranging from 15 arcmin to 
0.05 arcsec. 

The VLA’s versatility has allowed it to serve a wide 
range of research specialties, including planetary, solar, 
stellar and galactic astronomy as well as cosmology. 
It has made important contributions to the study of 
both galactic and extragalactic relativistic jets; the Milky 
Way’s central region; galactic structure, dynamics and 
evolution; supernova remnants; and transient events such 
as supernovae and gamma ray bursters. 

For further information see 
http://www.nrao.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Very-high-energy Gamma-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Very-high-energy Gamma-ray Sources 


Gamma-ray photons at TeV energies have been observed 
in recent years from a special class of active galactic 
nuclei, the so-called BLAzARS. The maximum photon energy 
observed is now approaching energies beyond 10 TeV, 
opening up new windows into the high-energy universe. 


The basic concept in our present day understanding 
of ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI is the existence of a central BLACK 
HOLE (our Galaxy is now well established to harbor one 
of ~2.5 x 10° solar masses (Genzel et al 1997)) with a 
surrounding ACCRETION DISK. Perpendicular to the inner 
accretion disk is a stream of high-velocity gas, commonly 
referred to as a jet; one expects jets on both sides. The 
material in this jet is usually moving at very near the speed 
of light. In addition, this basic picture appears to hold 
quite well for solar mass black hole systems such as some 
compact binary stars in our Galaxy, as well as for the most 
powerful quasars we know, with black hole masses of the 
order of 10° solar masses. 


From Hubble Space Telescope observations we have 
also learned that these massive black holes always sit in 
the dynamical center of their host galaxies. The spheroidal 
distribution of older stars within these galaxies has a mass 
which appears to be approximately proportional to the 
mass of the central black hole, with a factor of order 
300. This can be readily understood in an accretion disk 
scenario by modelling the entire galaxy as a system of 
accreting gas, out of which stars are formed and which 
feeds the budding black hole at its very center. Mergers of 
galaxies then turn these disks of stars into a more spherical 
distribution (Faber et al 1997, Wang and Biermann 1998). 


The radio emission from the environment of these 
black holes and their associated jets is usually dominated 
by non-thermal emission from the jet, most often 
synchrotron emission from the gyrating motion of highly 
energetic electrons/positrons in a magnetic field. This 
emission process is accompanied by absorption, and so 
often synchrotron self-absorption becomes important. In 
the overall radio emission from the various segments of the 
jet this leads to an approximately flat spectrum, where the 
flux density (energy per bandwidth per second received 
in a unit telescope area) is approximately constant with 
frequency. A survey of the data shows that such flat 
spectrum radio sources are almost always variable, and 
show signs of bulk relativistic motion along the jet. 


The power from active galactic nuclei ranges from 
under 10% erg s“! to over 10” erg s“! (1 erg = 1077 J). 
The source sizes, best measured by intercontinental radio 
interferometry, can extend from smaller than the solar 
system to many millions of light years. Their emission 
in the electromagnetic spectrum has been observed from 
around 10 MHz in the radio to a photon energy beyond 
order of 10 TeV (1 TeV = 10” eV = 1.6 erg = 1.6 x 107 J). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Basic concepts 
We measure motions close to the speed of light in terms of 
the Lorentz factor y, where 


1 
Lorentz factor y = ————— (1) 


J1-B 


The relative speed is 8B = v/c, where v is the velocity of the 
particle or material such as gas in a jet under consideration, 
and c is the speed of light. 

We call the motion of matter relativistic, when y is 
much larger than unity. Since the total energy E of a 
moving particle is given by E = ymc*, where m is the 
rest mass of the particle, the total energy can be very 
large. The largest particle energies directly observed are 
3 x 107° eV, which corresponds for protons to a Lorentz 
factor of 3 x 10''. The motions of jets in active galactic 
nuclei can often be characterized by a bulk Lorentz factor 
of order 10. From the electromagnetic emission from 
these jets, we can infer Lorentz factors of electrons moving 
around inside the jet in its frame of reference of order 10° 
and lower. 

We observe the electromagnetic emission from highly 
relativistic electrons, and possibly protons, from these jets 
at all wavelengths, and interpret the radiation at TeV 
energies also as emission from a relativistic jet. The 
principal source of this emission can be synchrotron 
emission, due to the gyrating motion of highly relativistic 
electrons in a magnetic field. It can also be inverse 
Compton emission, from collisions between relativistic 
electrons and photons. Obviously, at high photon 
energies approaching or exceeding 10° (1 GeV), it can 
also for instance derive from 2° decay following hadronic 
interactions. 

Hadronic interactions are interactions between nuclei 
or between other particles where pions (or at extreme 
energies nuclei) are created. Since pions have a large 
rest mass, and in turn decay into photons or muons and 
neutrinos, hadronic interactions are usually heralded by 
the emission of neutrinos. 


Observational techniques 

At TeV energies photons are observed on Earth with 
Cerenkov telescopes. These telescopes use the Cerenkov 
light emitted from the products of the shower maximum 
produced by interactions of the incoming primary par- 
ticle, to determine its energy and direction. Since the 
overwhelming number of all primaries are directional ran- 
domly distributed charged nuclei, the intrinsic properties 
of photon and hadron initiated air showers (see COSMIC RAYS: 
EXTENSIVE AIR SHOWERS) may be also used for a separation 
between photons and hadrons (see Gaisser (1990) and re- 
views by Weekes (1996), Cawley and Weekes (1996) and 
Weekes et al (1997)). 

Looking into the air shower one sees an image, 
which is rather different for hadronic showers and purely 
electromagnetic showers. Hadronic showers produce 
an image which is very irregular in its appearance, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Very-high-energy Gamma-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


while electromagnetic showers, initiated by a high-energy 
photon, give an elliptic image, which points towards the 
source on the sky. This analysis was originally developed 
by M Hillas of Leeds, and then evolved into a technique 
by T C Weekes, of Tucson, at the Whipple telescope (in the 
mountains of Arizona, USA). 

There are internationally many telescopes using this 
technique, with one of the most active telescope arrays 
being HEGRA, on La Palma in the Canary Islands. There are 
further such telescopes in many countries now, such as 
in Australia, France, India, Russia, South Africa, Ukraine 
and USA (Meyer 1997, Ong 1998). Table 1 lists some of the 
major telescopes already in operation. 

The acceptance of a large initial detectable photon 
energy is a strong function of the zenith angle of the 
observation, and one needs large zenith angles to reach 
beyond 10 TeV. 


Observations 

These observations started in 1992 with the first successful 
detection of Mrk421 by the Whipple observatory (Punch 
et al 1992). 

There are now several blazars, which have been 
observed at such energies, with the most observations 
being taken of the objects Markarian 421 and Markarian 
501, originally discovered by the Armenian astronomer 
BE Markarian. TeV energies means a factor of 1000 higher 
than the photon energy (1 GeV = 10° eV) at which a much 
larger class of blazars have been observed with the EGRET 
instrument onboard the COMPTON GAMMA RAY OBSERVATORY 
satellite (Mattox et al 1997). But all these blazars, whether 
seen only at GeV energies or at TeV energies, have common 
properties: all of them have a flat radio spectrum in 
the GHz range, are variable at almost all frequencies 
observed, and their radiation is interpreted as emission 
from a relativistic jet. In the case of the TeV blazars, their 
emission appears to be the greatest at these energies, far 
greater than at any other wavelength observed (Aharonian 
et al 1997, Bradbury et al 1997, Funk et al 1998, Hayashida 
et al 1998, Krennrich et al 1997, Zweerink et al 1997). 

The observations now show that the spectral shape 
is variable, and occasionally extends to the edge of 
what is observable, suggesting that perhaps the emission 
continues to many 10 TeV. Some of the time the spectrum 
is flat, which means that the energy output per logarithmic 
photon energy interval is constant with energy. The 
variability time scale is as short as can be detected with 
the photon counting statistics, at a few hours or less. 

Figure 1 shows the spectrum of Mkn501 measured 
by HEGRA. The work of Aharonian et al (1999a) shows 
that the spectrum continues without an obvious break to 
24 TeV. 


Physics 

These observations are interesting in their own right: the 
Big Bang produced a bath of microwave background 
radiation as a remnant of its early hot phase, which 
can be characterized by a temperature of 2.73 K, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


3 gp L* = | 
Tip E ‘ HEGRA 5 
. [ : Mkn 501, 1997 4 
oS L + J 
S ‘ ; 
~—11 
Cid Fb ; = 
E ¢ :l 
L ' | 
+ 4 
—12 
Oo te 
—13 
10 = 1 1 4 1 — 
2 3 4 5 6 78910 
E (TeV) 


Figure 1. The spectrum of MKn501 as measured by HEGRA 
(Aharonian et al 1999b). 


based on cose observations (Fixsen et al 1996). Early 
galaxy star formation extended the background radiation 
from dust emission around young stars to the far- 
infrared. Encounters of TeV photons with this microwave 
and far-infrared background produces electron—positron 
pairs, which translates to an effective absorption. 
Therefore observing a source at multiples of TeV 
energy gives us information about the far-infrared 
background at wavelengths otherwise nearly inaccessible. 
Interestingly, early models for galaxy formation in the 
universe exceeded the level required by the gamma-ray 
observations by a large margin. The gamma-ray data 
are still pushing the envelope lower for the possible level 
of far-infrared background radiation. Therefore these 
gamma-ray observations provide one of the most stringent 
limits known for the violent early phases of the universe 
(Malkan and Stecker 1998, Mannheim 1998, Stanev and 
Franchescini 1998). 

There are two main interpretations proposed for the 
physical process of the TeV gamma-ray emission itself, a 
leptonic and a hadronic process (Mannheim 1996). 

The leptonic process proposed is a collision between 
a very energetic (and highly relativistic) electron and a 
photon from its surroundings either outside the jet, or 
inside the jet. In such a model electrons are presumed 
to be accelerated, all the while undergoing losses; this 
implies one stringent limit to their maximum energy, 
which leads to a maximum energy of any photon with 
which the electrons interact. This encounter, called the 
inverse Compton process, boosts the energy of the photon 
to much higher energies. In such a picture the maximum 
photon energy is then limited by the maximum energy 
the electron could have, and by the kinematics of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Very-high-energy Gamma-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Main parameters of the Air Cherenkov Telescope. 


Sensitivityt 


Mirror Threshold at the 

Elevation No of area No of Pixel or FOV energy threshold 
Telescope Site Country Longitude Latitude (m) telescopes  (m?) pixels @ (deg) (deg) (deg) (GeV) (cm~* s~!) 
Whipple Mt Hopkins — USA —110.5° 314° N_ 2300 74 51 025 0. 3.5 250 10°" 
CAT Themis France —2.0° 42.5°N 1650 75 548 + 52 0.10 0. 4.8 250 to" 
HEGRA La Palma Spain —17.8° 28.89 N 2200 4 4x84 4x 271 0.25 0. 500 4x 10-2? 
HEGRA CT1+t La Palma Spain —-17.8° 28.8° N 2200 5.0 27 0.25 0. 46 1500 3x 10-2 
TA Dugway USA —113.0° 40.3°N_ 1600 3 3x60 3x 256 0.25 0. 45 500 
TACTIC Mt Abu India +72.7° 24.62 N 1300 4 4x95 4x81 0.31 2.8 700 
CANGAROO Woomera Australia +136.8° 31.1°S 160 1.3 256 0.12 0.18 3.0 1000 4x10-? 
Durham Mk 6 _ Narrabri Australia +149.8° 30.5°S 200 (3 dishes) 3x 42.0 109+19+19 0.25 0. 3.4 250 5x 10-1 
CrAO GT-48 Crimea Ukraine +34° 45°N 600 2x6dishes 2x13 6x37 0.40 0.2 27 900 5 x 10-2 
Nooitgedacht Potchefstroom South Africa +27.2° 26.9°S 1440 4 7 4 17 17 700 
Patchmari Patchmari India +78.4° 22.5° N 1075 25 4 3.0 
SHALON Tien-Shan Russia +75.0° 42.0°N 3300 0 44 0.4 7.2 1000 


+ For the old mirrors, i.e. up to November 1997. 
+ Defined as the 5o limit for 50 h observation time. 


collision. In standard models this leads to a limitation of 
the maximum photon energy to about 10 TeV. 

A hadronic process can easily produce photons 
of much higher energy, by starting with energetic 
protons, which can clearly produce very energetic photons 
through proton—-photon or proton—proton encounters and 
subsequent decay of a pion produced in the interaction. 
We observe high-energy particles directly from outside 
the Galaxy with energies up to several 10” eV; since the 
gyration motion of such particles—if they are protons— 
is larger than the size of the Galaxy, they must come 
from outside, as argued early by Cocconi (1956). Also, 
the interaction of these high-energy particles with the 
microwave background ought to limit their energy upon 
arrival at Earth to less than 5 x 10!” eV, if they are 
protons; this expected cut-off is called the Greisen— 
Zatsepin—Kuzmin cut-off. It is not observed. We are still 
trying to identify the sources for particles at these extreme 
energies. If these active galactic nuclei could be shown to 
require protons at extreme energies, then we would have 
a very good candidate class. The experiments AGASA 
in Japan, HIRES in the US, and in the future AUGER in 
Argentina, are looking for more events at these extreme 
energies, to beyond 10*! eV (Biermann 1997). 

We also expect TeV photon emission from the interac- 
tion of the known cosmic Ray population (Berezinsky et al 
1990, Wiebel-Sooth and Biermann 1999) in the Galaxy with 
the interstellar medium (Hunter et al 1997); since the cos- 
mic ray spectrum of probable Galactic sources extends to 
3x 10!8 eV, very high photon energies are expected from the 
decay of pions resulting from nucleus—proton encounters. 
Since the cosmic ray population is likely to be stronger in 
the galactic center region, we expect the as yet unobserved 
TeV emission to peak at the galactic center. 

There is another class of sources for which TeV 
photons are expected to be detected at some point in the 
future: the now famous gamma-ray bursts (GRBs; see 
also GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY). GRBs are characterized by a 
sudden outburst of gamma-ray photons at typical energies 
of tens of keV to MeV, occasionally to GeV. The time scale 
of the emission is a few seconds, with substructure down 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to milliseconds. The time-integrated spectrum can be 
approximated by two power laws which break around 
150 keV, suggesting a non-thermal process just as in active 
galactic nuclei jets. These GRBs are now known to be 
at cosmological distances (Metzger et al 1997), and thus 
require enormous powers to be released; it is still unknown 
what physical picture can explain all these features. 

One immediate and clear consequence of the hadronic 
picture is the emergence of a cosmological neutrino 
background at high neutrino energies. This neutrino 
background would be much stronger at high energies 
than both the atmospheric neutrinos (which have now 
been used to present impressive evidence for neutrino 
oscillations by the Super-Kamiokande experiment), and 
also higher than the Galactic neutrino background, from 
P-p interactions of cosmic rays in the Galaxy (which in 
turn can be estimated from the observed GeV gamma-ray 
spectrum). There is currently an experiment at the South 
Pole, AMANDA, which hopes to detect this expected 
cosmological neutrino background. 

Similarly a gamma-ray background is expected, 
which leads to another implicit use of those TeV gamma- 
ray data: what fraction of the diffuse gamma-ray 
background is due to active galactic nuclei such as blazars, 
and what fraction, if any, is left to be derived from different 
physics? Standard Bic BANG THEORY predicts ubiquituous 
relics, among them topological defects, which can decay 
into particles of the order of 104 eV in most versions of 
the theory, which in turn decay via a cascade into protons, 
neutrinos and gamma rays, thus producing a truely diffuse 
gamma-ray background (Sig] et al 1995). If we could find 
an upper limit to the GeV and TeV contribution from 
the decay of topological defects, it would give a major 
constraint to particle physics near the energy scale of GRAND 
UNIFIED THEORIES for particles (GUTs). 

Once we have thus identified a class of sources re- 
sponsible for very-high-energy protons, possibly observ- 
able in high energy photons following interactions, and 
also other high-energy particles, then these accelerators in 
the cosmos and their environment provide us with tools— 
albeit very distant tools—to do very-high-energy physics 
at energies far beyond any physicist’s dream. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Very-high-energy Gamma-ray Sources 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Acknowledgments 

I wish to thank Torsten Ensslin, Heino Falcke, Galen 
Gisler, Todd Haines, Norbert Magnussen, Karl Mannheim, 
Sera Markoff, Hinrich Meyer, Rene Ong, Rainer Plaga, 
Ray Protheroe, Wolfgang Rhode, Giinther Sigl, Todor 
Stanev, Heinz V6lk and Yiping Wang for contributions, 
discussions, perusing the manuscript and/or suggesting 
corrections. 


Bibliography 

Aharonian F et al 1997 Astron. Astrophys. Lett. 327 L5-L8 

Aharonian F et al for the HEGRA collaboration 1999a 
Astron. Astrophys. 349 11-28 

Aharonian F et al for the HEGRA team 1999b Astron. 
Astrophys. 342 69-86 

Berezinskii V S et al 1990 Astrophysics of Cosmic Rays 
(Amsterdam: North-Holland) 

Biermann P L 1997 J. Phys. G: Nucl. Phys. 23 1-27 

Bradbury S M et al 1997 Astron. Astrophys. Lett. 320 L5-L8; 

Cawley M F and Weekes T C 1996 Exp. Astron. 6 7 

Cocconi G 1956 Nuovo Cimento 10th Series 3 1433-42 

Faber S M et al 1997 Astron. J. 114 1771-96 

Fixsen D J et al 1996 Astrophys. J. 473 576-87 

Funk B et al 1998 Astrophys. Part. Phys. 9 97-103 

Gaisser T K 1990 Cosmic Rays and Particle Physics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 

Genzel R 1998 Nature 391 17-8 

Genzel R et al 1997 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 291 219-34 

Hayashida N et al 1998 Astrophys. J. 504 L71-L74 

Hunter S D et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 481 205-40 

Krennrich F et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 481 758-63 

Malkan M A and Stecker F W 1998 Astrophys. J. 496 13-6 

Mannheim K 1996 Rev. Mod. Astron. 9 17-47 

Mannheim K 1998 Science 279 684 

Mattox J R et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 481 95-115 

Metzger M Ret al 1997 Nature 387 878-80 

Meyer H 1997 Proc. TAUP97 ed A Bottino, A Di Credico 
and P Monacelli p 392 

Ong R 1998 Phys. Rep. 305 93 

Punch M et al 1992 Nature 358 477-8 

Sig] G et al 1995 Science 270 1977-80 

Stanev T and Franchescini A 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 494 
L159-L162 

Wang Y and Biermann PL1998 Astron. Astrophys. 334 87-95 

Weekes T C 1996 Space Sci. Rev. 75 1 

Weekes T C et al 1997 Proc. Extremely High Energy Cosmic 
Rays: Astrophysics and Future Observations ed M 
Nagano (ICRR, University of Tokyo) p 160 

Wiebel-Sooth B and Biermann P L 1999 Cosmic rays in 
Landolt-Bornstein, Handbook of Physics vol 6 (Berlin: 
Springer) pp 37-90 

Zweerink J A et al 1997 Astrophys. J. Lett. 490 L141-L144 


Peter L Biermann 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vesta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vesta 


Vesta, with a mean diameter of 529 km, is the third 
largest main-belt asTEROID and was the fourth asteroid 
to be discovered. It was found in 1807 by the German 
Astronomer HEINRICH OLBERS and named after the goddess 
of fire and the hearth in the Roman mythology. Vesta is 
the sole ‘intact’ asteroid that may have undergone heating 
at temperatures able to produce a complete planetary- 
type DIFFERENTIATION (when the heaviest element sank to 
the core of the asteroid while lighter minerals remained 
near the surface). Telescopic observations at high angular 
resolution, either from space or from the ground, can 
now provide images of Vesta’s surface that help to better 
understand its formation and collisional history. Such 
images show that Vesta has undergone a large impact 
event, 4.5 billion years ago. This discovery supports the 
idea that Vesta is the parent body of a group of small Vesta- 
like asteroids and possibly the source of a particular type 
of METEORITES (the basaltic achondrite meteorites) collected 
on Earth. Although space agencies have not yet selected 
a large main-belt asteroid as primary target for a robotic 
mission, Vesta is considered an excellent candidate for 
future in situ exploration of the ASTEROID BELT. 


Surface properties 

About every 18 months, Vesta is at OPPosITION. Because 
its surface is made of high-aLBeDo material (table 1), 
the asteroid can be, at that time, visible with a naked 
eye (its visible magnitude becomes close to 6th). Early 
photometric measurements made by Bobrovnikoff in 1929 
showed that the surface of Vesta reflects irregularly the 
solar flux over a rotation period (~5.34 h). These 
brightness changes could be more easily explained by 
strong albedo variations over its surface than through 
effects purely induced by an irregular shape. The 
particularity of its surface properties was confirmed in 
the 1970s when McCord et al obtained the first spectra 
of Vesta at visible wavelengths. They attributed a strong 
absorption band centered at 0.93 um to the electronic 
transitions on the M) site of a magnesian pyroxene, 
transitions characteristic of magmatic minerals. The 
nature of its basaltic surface was confirmed soon after 
with the detection of the second absorption band of 
pyroxene near 2.0 wm. Figure 1 shows an averaged 
reflection spectrum of Vesta at visible and near-infrared 
wavelengths. In addition to the 1.0 wm and 2.0 wm 
bands attributed to pyroxene, a wide absorption band, 
also diagnostic of basaltic material, is visible between 
1.1 wm and 1.4 wm and is produced by the presence of 
feldspar on Vesta. The strength of these bands varies 
across the surface, depending on whether the material has 
been excavated from underneath the crust by impactors 
or is a relic of the original eucritic layer. When compared 
with the spectra of other asteroid classes, the depth of 
the absorption bands displayed in the reflection spectrum 
of Vesta is among the strongest. Vesta has undergone 
powerful but localized impacts in its history that have 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


" , 


: Feldspar 


° 
° 
8 


? 
% 


aie Pyroxene 
47 Olivine - 


Pyroxene 


Relative reflectance 


0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 25 
Wavelength (um) 


Figure 1. Mean reflectance spectrum of Vesta’s surface at visible 
and near-infrared wavelengths. The deflections from the 
continuum are attributed to pyroxene and feldspar minerals. 
Olivine is also present on Vesta but locally only, and its 
absorption band is not visible in this rotationally averaged 
spectrum. Pyroxene, feldspar and olivine are characteristic of 
magmatic material. Their presence on Vesta is the signature of 
the high temperature it has undergone. Therefore, complete—or 
partial—melting occurred on Vesta, which is the only large 
differentiated asteroid that has escaped catastrophic and fully 
destructive collisions with other bodies of the asteroids’ main 
belt. Spectrum from Gaffey (1997). 


preserved part of its primordial crust. As a result of these 
impacts, the variegated surface of Vesta produces strong 
features in the asteroid’s lightcurve. 


Table 1. Vesta’s ID card. 


Mean diameter 529 km? 
Density 3.5gem32 
Rotation period 5.34h> 
Semimajor axis 2.362 AU 
Orbital period 3.63 yr 
Orbital eccentricity 0.097 


Orbital inclination 7.14° 
Pole coordinates RAgo00 = 301°, DE2000 = 41° * 


Asteroid type Vv 
Albedo 0.423 
Composition Pyroxene, feldspar, olivine 


* Thomas et al (1997). 
> Gaffey (1997). 
© TRAS catalog (1992). 


Link to HED meteorites 

The distribution of minor planets as a function of their 
heliocentric distance is such that, the further from the 
Sun, the more primitive are the asteroids. All asteroids 
having surface properties characteristic of magmatic 
material are concentrated at the inner edge of the belt. 
Asteroids of types A (olivine + metal), M (metal), R (iron- 
poor pyroxene + olivine) or V (pyroxene—plagioclase, 
diogenite) can be found up to 3.2 AU from our star. 
Vesta’s eucritic crust is nearly intact and is typical of a 
differentiated object that has undergone thermal heating 
at temperatures above 1000 K. The source of this heating is 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vesta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


still not certain but the actual adopted theories implicate 
electrical heating induced during the early T Tauri phase 
of the Sun or decay of long-lived radionuclides. Basaltic 
ACHONDRITE (or HED, for howardite, eucrite, diogenite) 
meteorites have similar composition to Vesta: the eucrites 
display the pyroxene absorptions as well as the weaker 
band of feldspar while diogenites are pyroxene rich and do 
not display the feldspar feature. Because of the similarity 
of their spectra, Vesta is suspected to be the parent 
body of the HED meteorites. Among the population 
of differentiated asteroid, Vesta, with a semimajor axis 
of 2.36 AU, does not occupy a remarkable position that 
could provide a significant flux of meteorites to Earth. 
Delivering pieces of Vesta to Earth would require some 
very energetic impacts that could produce fragments with 
velocities of the order of ~1000 m s7!. Only with such 
a kinetic energy could the fragments reach the nearest 
resonance zone (3:1 resonance with Jupiter) and be ejected 
towards inner regions of the solar system, and, for some of 
them, into Earth-crossing orbits. Binzel and Xu discovered 
in 1993 a family of small Vesta-like asteroids extending 
from the secular resonance vg (a = 2.18 AU) to the 3:1 
resonance with Jupiter (2.5 AU). Their visible spectrum 
displays the 0.9 4m absorption band which is also present 
in the spectrum of Vesta, eucrites and diogenites. More 
recent observations with the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE and 
ground-based telescopes equipped with ADAPTIVE OPTICS 
showed the presence of a large impact zone located near 
the Vesta south pole (figure 2). These observations support 
the big picture in which Vesta could be the source of the 
family of small Vesta-like asteroids and be the parent body 
of the HED meteorites. 

Although the pieces of the puzzle fit together nicely, 
alternative solutions still exist. Indeed, Vesta is the 
only differentiated asteroid that has survived catastrophic 
collisions, but we know from spectroscopic studies that 
asteroids from class A represent the inner mantle of 
some differentiated asteroids now disrupted. Similarly, 
asteroids from class M could be fragments of the core of 
some fully differentiated asteroids while class R asteroids 
are likely to be the product of the disruption of a Vesta- 
like asteroid, exposing material from the mantle and 
outer crust. These three asteroid classes originate from 
Vesta-like asteroids that have been entirely disrupted by 
impactors and constitute an additional potential source 
of basaltic achondrite meterorites. Astronomers have 
found several Earth-approaching asteroids whose surface 
composition is similar to HED meteorites. In addition, 
measurements of the oxygen isotope ratios in HEDs match 
closely those found in stony-iron meteorites and sustain 
the possibility that the HEDs might come, in fact, from a 
completely disrupted parent body, more than originating 
from removal of the outer layers of Vesta. 

Regardless of whether the HED meteorites come 
from Vesta itself or have been created by disruption of 
one or several Vesta-like asteroids, the undoubted point 
is that Vesta is unique as the sole ‘intact’ differentiated 
asteroid. This point alone provides strong constraints to 
the collisional history of the whole asteroid belt. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 2. Asteroid Vesta imaged from the ground and space. 

(A) Image obtained at 0.83 zm from Mt Wilson Observatory on 
14 June 1996 using the adaptive optics system on the 2.5 m 
telescope. A 20° phase angle is responsible for the strong 
increase in brightness of the right-hand side (eastern) limb of 
Vesta. The sub-Earth coordinates of Vesta are latitude = —3° and 
longitude = 255° in this picture. (B) Image obtained by the 
Hubble Space Telescope and its visible camera WFPC2 on 6 May 
1996 with a 5° phase angle. The central coordinates on Vesta 
correspond to latitude = —9° and longitude = 12°. Both images 
are oriented so the spin axis is vertical, north pointing up. Note 
the strong albedo marks visible on Vesta that correspond to 
various geological units. These albedo changes are related to 
spatial variations in the surface composition as well as to the 
action of space weathering (aging process). A complete study at 
near-IR wavelengths is needed to fully understand the nature 
and history of these geological units. A simple picture would be 
to attribute the low albedo regions to old eucritic assemblages 
and the high albedo features to fresher material excavated from 
below the crust. The irregular shape of the south pole is believed 
to be the result of a major, but not fully destructive, impact that 
occurred on Vesta early in its history. These recent observations 
support the theory that HED meteorites and small Vesta-like 
asteroids might originate from such impact. Credit for (A): 
Christophe Dumas and Chris Shelton. Credit for (B): Alex Storrs 
(image processing) and NASA/STScl. 


Surface mapping 


Because of its early differentiation and volcanism, Vesta 
can be considered as the smallest terrestrial ‘planet’ of 
the solar system. Detailed mapping of its surface is 
important to understand how PLANETESIMALS accreted from 
the material that was present in the inner regions of the 
PROTOPLANETARY NEBULA and what endogenic and exogenic 
processes these planetesimals have undergone. Only a 
few techniques are currently available to return images 
with the required spatial resolution for mapping. The 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vesta 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


most direct and expensive solution consists in obtaining 
in situ measurements of Vesta’s surface from a spacecraft. 
At the present time, only three main-belt asteroids have 
been visited by a spacecraft: GALILEO flew over GASPRA 
and ipa (and discovered Ida’s satellite named Dactyl) 
while en route to Jupiter, and the NEAR spacecraft visited 
Mathilde during its journey to a rendezvous with the near- 
Earth asteroid ERos. Ground-based optical observations 
were, until recently, limited in spatial resolution because 
of the deformations undergone by the wavefront of 
the light while traveling through atmospheric layers of 
different optical indices. For this reason astronomers 
used the Hubble Space Telescope to obtain the first 
resolved images of Vesta. However, new ground-based 
observational techniques, such as adaptive optics, can 
now measure the wavefront deformation and correct 
it in real time. Adaptive optics allows the large 
telescopes to image at angular resolution equivalent to 
their theoretical diffraction limit, providing performances 
at least comparable with HST. Other techniques such 
as speckle interferometry can provide diffraction-limited 
images but are still strongly limited to the observation 
of the brightest objects. Recent improvements in the 
sensitivity of radar detectors will allow radar observations 
of asteroids to be extended to the largest bodies in the main 
belt and their topography to be derived from Doppler- 
delay measurements. 

The surface of Vesta is mostly a pyroxene—plagioclase 
assemblage with few regions where the excavated 
crust displays the feldspar-poor inner mantle material 
(diogenite). At a few locations, impacts occurred at 
energy sufficient to expose the deeper olivine-rich layer 
of the mantle. The core of Vesta is presumably made 
of metallic-rich material or even pure metal. In order 
to understand how Vesta differentiated, we need to 
measure the distribution of the diverse geological units 
over its surface. Depending on how Vesta melted, the 
distribution of diogenites would be different. In case 
of total melting of the asteroid, the diogenite-like layer 
would be confined underneath the eucritic crust while 
a partial melting would implicate a crust composition 
made of a mixture of feldspar-rich (plagioclase) and 
feldspar-poor (diogenites) units. Prior to the HST and 
adaptive optics observations, the first successful attempt 
to map the surface of Vesta from the ground was realized 
in 1981 by Gaffey using rotational spectroscopy. This 
technique consists in measuring the variation in depth 
and position of the bands with the rotational phase of 
the asteroid to derive the location and nature of the main 
geological units. Such measurement is better constrained 
in longitude than in latitude but a compositional map 
of Vesta could be derived and several geological units 
identified across Vesta. Thanks to the particular inclination 
of Vesta’s rotation axis at the time it was observed, it was 
possible to locate several diogenite units near Vesta’s south 
pole as well as one olivine-rich region near the equator. 
These units correspond certainly to a partial removal of 
the outer crust, or lava flows that transported diogenitic 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


material to the surface through cracks in the mantle. The 
images recorded at various visible wavelengths by HST 
confirmed the existence of a large crater near the south 
pole. This feature is apparently the result of a large, but 
not entirely destructive, impact which had occurred on 
Vesta soon after its crust cooled down. Recent ground- 
based and HST results show an increase in the band 
depth of pyroxene at high southern latitude that could be 
explained by a local removal of the crust by the impactor 
to expose fresher material from the mantle. The family of 
small Vesta-like asteroids and HED meteorites could have 
originated from the FyEcTA produced during this violent 
impact. The topology of the asteroid derived from the 
HST images agrees with this picture and the estimated 
mass excavated from Vesta during this impact could easily 
accommodate the formation of Vesta-like asteroids and 
HED meteorites. Complete mapping of Vesta at similar 
and even higher spatial resolution in the near-infrared 
(at a wavelength that provides a better diagnostic of 
the nature of the minerals) is currently under progress 
using HST and ground-based telescopes equipped with 
adaptive optics systems. These observations will bring 
some important insights to understanding the processes 
of planetary differentiation that occurred on Vesta and 
investigating the existing scenarios that link Vesta to the 
HED meteorites. 


Bibliography 

Binzel R P and Xu S 1993 Chips off of asteroid 4 Vesta: 
evidence for the parent body of basaltic achondrite 
meteorites Science 260 186-91 

Binzel R P, Gaffey M J, Thomas P C, Zellner B J, Storrs A D 
and Wells E N 1997 Geological mapping of Vesta from 
the 1994 Hubble Space Telescope images Icarus 128 
95-103 

Gaffey MJ 1997 Surface lithologic heterogeneity of asteroid 
4 Vesta Icarus 127 130-57 

Gaffey M J, Bell J F and Cruikshank D P 1989 Reflectance 
spectroscopy and asteroid surface mineralogy Aster- 
oids II ed R P Binzel, T Gherels and M S Matthews 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) pp 98-127 

Thomas P C, Binzel R P, Gaffey M J, Storrs A, Wells E 
and Zellner B H 1997 Impact excavation on asteroid 
4 Vesta: Hubble Space Telescope results Science 277 
1492-5 


Christophe Dumas 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Viking Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Viking Mission 

The Viking mission was a spacecraft mission to MARS whose 
main purpose was to search for life. Four spacecraft 
were involved: two identical orbiter-lander pairs. Each 
pair was launched separately in the summer of 1975 and 
arrived at Mars the following year. At Mars the orbiters 
searched for safe and scientifically interesting sites. The 
landers were then targeted to those sites and conducted a 
variety of life detection experiments. The consensus view 
was that no compelling evidence for life was found (see 
also LIFE ON OTHER WORLDS). 


The spacecraft 

The Viking Orbiters (VO-1 and VO-2) were designed and 
built by the JET PROPULSION LABORATORY (figure 1). The 
orbiters were solar-powered, three-axis stabilized vehicles 
with substantial propulsive capability. The launch mass of 
the orbiters was over 2300 kg of which more than 1400 kg 
was fuel required for orbit insertion. The orbiter science 
payload was mounted on a moveable scan platform which 
provided both thermal control and pointing capability. 
In addition to communicating directly with Earth, the 
orbiters were capable of relaying data from the landers 
as well. 

The Viking Landers (VL-1 and VL-2) were built 
under contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace Corporation 
(figure 2). The contract was managed by Nasa’s 
Langley Research Center. The landers housed the 
scientific instruments and were powered by radioisotope 
thermoelectric generators. Each lander had a sampling 
arm with a scoop for returning samples to selected 
instruments for analysis. Meteorology sensors were 
mounted on a boom, and a seismometer was mounted 
on the lander underside. The landers had a two-way 
communication link with Earth and a one-way (transmit) 
link with the orbiters. The mass of the landers was about 
600 kg. 

To avoid possible contamination from Earth organ- 
isms, the landers were heat sterilized and encapsulated in 
a bioshield. The encapsulated landers, including the entry 
system, had a total mass of almost 1200 kg. The landers 
were then mated to the orbiters and the combined craft 
placed in the shroud of a Titan III launch vehicle. The final 
launch mass of the orbiter—lander pair was 3530 kg. 


Experiments 
While the primary scientific objective was to search for 
life, other objectives were to image the surface and moons, 
determine the composition of the atmosphere and surface, 
monitor the weather and climate, and detect marsquakes. 
To meet these objectives, 13 investigations were conducted 
(table 1): three mapping experiments from orbit, an 
atmospheric investigation from the lander during entry, 
eight investigations on the surface and a radio science 
experiment. 

The orbiter mapping experiments were carried out 
by three instruments: (1) a pair of high resolution 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


vidicon cameras incorporated into a Visible Imaging 
Subsystem (VIS), (2) an Infrared Thermal Mapper (IRTM) 
to determine the thermal properties of the surface and 
atmosphere and (3) a Mars Atmospheric Water Detector 
(MAWD). Each of these instruments was mounted on the 
scan platform and aligned along a common axis to view 
the same area of the planet. 

During the time the landers were traversing the 
atmosphere, an entry science investigation was conducted. 
This consisted of a retarding potential analyzer to measure 
the ion and electron abundances of the upper atmosphere, 
a mass spectrometer to measure neutral species and 
a three-axis accelerometer to measure the spacecraft 
deceleration history. Pressure and temperature were also 
measured (see also MARS: ATMOSPHERE). 

The lander cameras were designed to characterize the 
local geology, look for macroscopic evidence of life and 
support the other lander experiments. The two cameras 
also provided a stereoscopic capability. Furthermore, 
by monitoring the brightness of the Sun and sky, the 
cameras could provide information on the opacity of the 
atmosphere. 

The lander biology investigation consisted of three 
experiments. Each of these acquired small samples of 
Martian surface material and exposed them to substances 
of various kinds and then monitored the results. The 
Carbon Assimilation Experiment was designed to detect 
photosynthesis of organic compounds by introducing 
radioactively labeled CO and CO; gases incubated under 
Mars-like conditions. The Labeled Release Experiment 
sought to detect metabolic processes by introducing an 
aqueous solution of labeled simple organic materials. 
The Gas Exchange Experiment also looked for metabolic 
processes, but by wetting Martian soils with a more 
complex and unlabeled nutrient solution. 

While not principally a life detection instrument, 
the landers also carried a GCMS which could detect 
organic compounds in surface material, and measure the 
composition of the atmosphere. They also carried an x-ray 
fluorescence spectrometer to measure the abundance of 
selected elements in Martian surface material. In addition 
to determining the composition of surface materials, these 
data provided chemical and mineralogical information to 
help interpret the biology experiments. 

The remaining lander experiments were not directly 
related to the biology investigation. The lander 
meteorology sensors recorded the pressure, temperature 
and wind velocity to help characterize Martian weather 
systems. The lander seismometers were designed to 
characterize the background noise level and to listen for 
major seismic events which would provide information 
on the interior structure of the planet. An array 
of magnets of differing strengths was attached to the 
sampling arm and to the top of the lander. By monitoring 
(with the camera) the accumulation of particles on these 
magnets, information on the abundance and composition 
of magnetic minerals could be obtained. Finally, the 
physical properties of the soil could be ascertained from 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Viking Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CANOPUS TRACKER 
STRAY LIGHT SENSOR 
ORBITE 


LOUVERS 


MARS ATMOSPHERIC 
WATER DETECTOR 


ORBITER PROPULSION MOTOR 
OXIDIZER TANK 


RELAY ANTENNA 


S- AND X-BAND 
HIGH GAIN ANTENNA 


ATTITUDE 


CONTROL 
INFRARED THERMAL MAPPER GAS JETS 


VISUAL IMAGING CAMERAS 


Figure 1. Viking Orbiter. 


5-BAND HIGH GAIN 
ANTENNA (DIRECT 
TO EARTH) 


CAMERA TEST TARGET & 
MAGNIFYING MIRROR 


SEISMOMETER 


UHF ANTENNA 
(RELAY TO 
ORBITER) 


X-RAY FLUORESCENCE FUNNEL 
BIOLOGY PROCESSOR 
GCMS PROCESSOR 


METEOROLOGY 
SENSORS 


Figure 2. Viking Lander. 


engineering data such as variations in motor currents from 
the sampler arm during digging operations (see also MARS: 
SURFACE). 

The communication system (along with a tracking 
system) on the orbiters and landers was also used 
for science. The orbiter radios mapped the planet’s 
gravity field, measured its surface relief and determined 
local atmospheric temperature profiles during occultation 
events. Lander radios were used to determine lander 
locations, the spin rate of the planet and the orientation 
of the spin axis. 


Mission profile 

Viking 1 and 2 were launched respectively on 20 August 
and 9 September 1975 and were inserted into elliptical 
orbits around Mars on 19 June and 7 August 1976. After 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


several weeks of surface observations, a landing site was 
selected and the landing sequence was initiated. The 
lander separated from the orbiter and oriented itself for a 
4kms7! entry into the Martian atmosphere at about 300 km 
above the surface. An ablatable aeroshell protected the 
lander from the heat of entry. At 6 km above the surface, 
a parachute was deployed, the aeroshell was jettisoned 
and the three lander legs were extended. At 1.5 km, retro- 
rockets were fired to slow the lander to several m s~! and 
eliminate horizontal drift. VL-1 touched down on 20 July 
1976 in Chryse Planitia (22°N, 48°W) at about 4 p.m. local 
time; VL-2 landed on 3 September 1976 in Utopia (44°N, 
226°W) at about 10 a.m. local time. Both landings were 
successful. 

After landing, there were several months of intense 
activity. The cameras systematically returned images 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Viking Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Science investigations and instrumentation. 


Investigation 


Instrumentation 


Orbiter investigations 
Orbiter imaging 
Water vapor mapping 
Thermal mapping 
Entry science 


Lander investigations 
Lander imaging 
Biology 


Molecular analysis 
Inorganic analysis 
Meteorology 
Seismology 
Magnetic properties 
Physical properties 


Two vidicon cameras 

Near-infrared grating spectrometer 

Solar and infrared radiometers 

Retarding potential analyzer, mass spectrometer, 
pressure, temperature and acceleration sensors 


Two facsimile cameras 

Carbon Assimilation, Labeled Release, and 

Gas Exchange Experiments 

Gas chromatograph—mass spectrometer (GCMS) 
X-ray fluorescence spectrometer 

Pressure, temperature, wind velocity sensors 
Three-axis short-period seismometer 
Permanent magnets on sampler arm 

Various engineering sensors 


Orbiter and lander investigations 
Radio science 


of the entire panorama around the lander. They also 
photographed the sky, the Sun, small permanent magnets, 
trenches dug by the sampler arm and rocks that were 
intentionally displaced. The meteorology boom was 
deployed and began returning weather data. Seismic 
experiments were initiated, although the seismometer at 
VL-1 failed to uncage (the VL-2 seismometer operated 
nominally). Numerous soil samples were acquired and 
subjected to chemical and biological analysis. 

The primary mission was to last 90 days for each 
lander. However, the mission was repeatedly extended 
as long as the spacecraft remained healthy and returned 
useful data. The first hardware problem occurred in 
September of 1977 when VL-2 was no longer able to 
communicate directly with Earth, but it was not shut down 
until 12 April 1980. Leaking attitude control propellant 
left the VO-2 spacecraft unable to align itself with the Sun 
and it ceased operations on 25 July 1978. VO-1 was also 
running out of fuel and was commanded off on 7 August 
1980. The mission finally ended on 13 November 1982 
when contact was lost with VL-1. 


Scientific results 
Biology 
The most significant result was the lack of detection of 
organic compounds at either landing site by the GCMS 
experiment. The GCMS was extremely sensitive to organic 
compounds and could detect them at the parts per billion 
level for large molecules, a level some 100 times less than 
those found in deserts on Earth. Yet the results were 
unambiguously negative. The absence of organic matter, 
regardless of the results of the biology experiments, argued 
strongly against the possibility for life in Martian soil. 
While the three biology experiments produced results 
which in some ways simulated life, in detail they were 
more consistent with the presence of soil oxidants. The 
Gas Exchange Experiment showed a significant increase 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Orbiter and lander communication systems 


in CO, and O, after the soil was humidified. The CO, 
can be explained by the displacement of adsorbed CO, 
molecules by water vapor, but the O) requires some other 
explanation. The observed 200-fold increase in Oy is 
best explained by the decomposition of peroxides in the 
Martian soil. Such peroxides are theoretically expected 
from photochemical processes in the Martian atmosphere. 
Also, a highly reactive oxidant in the Martian soil could 
readily explain the absence of organic material. 

The Labeled Release Experiment showed a surge in 
radioactive CO, after wetting the soil with its mixture of 
nutrients. Taken by itself, this result satisfied the criteria 
for a biological interpretation. However, when viewed in 
context with the other biology experiments and the GCMS, 
this too was believed to be a chemical rather than biological 
result. Peroxides present in the soil would have oxidized 
one of the compounds in the nutrient solution (formic acid) 
and produced CO; gas. Also, if microorganisms were 
involved, a second injection of the nutrient solution should 
have produced a further increase in CO) levels, yet none 
was observed. 

The results of the Carbon Assimilation Experiments 
were more complicated, but they too favor a chemical 
explanation. The amount of fixed carbon produced in 
these experiments was generally higher than the expected 
background levels, particularly the first experiment at 
VL-1. This experiment also showed a temperature 
sensitivity to the amount of fixed carbon produced. It 
is now believed that an iron-catalyzed reaction was the 
source of the signals seen in the Carbon Assimilation 
Experiment. 


Meteorology 

Lander meteorological measurements showed that the av- 
erage surface pressure on Mars is about 7 mbar. However, 
it varies semiannually owing to the condensation and sub- 
limation of CO; in the polar regions. The amplitude of the 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Viking Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


fluctuation is about 2.3 mbar, or about one-third of the 
annual mean. Thus, the seasonal polar caps on Mars are 
made of dry ice (frozen carbon dioxide). 

The pressure data also revealed eastward-traveling 
weather systems and westward-propagating thermal 
tides. The temperature at the Viking sites ranged from 
180 K to 240 K depending on time of day and season 
and was more repeatable during summer than winter. 
Winds were found to be strongest during winter with gusts 
up to 30 m st. During summer winds were calm by 
comparison. 

During autumn of the first year, the sky opacity at 
the Viking sites increased dramatically on two occasions. 
These increases were associated with the development of 
global scale dust storms. No such storms were observed 
during the second and third (Mars) years of operations. 


Seismology 

No major seismic events were detected. A magnitude 2.8 
event (on the Richter scale) was detected 110 km from the 
Viking Lander 2 site. The signal was significantly damped 
within minutes, indicating the likely presence of water 
and gas within the crust. From shear wave reflections, 
the crust was estimated to be about 15 km thick in this 
region. The natural background level of seismic activity 
was found to be very low. Winds were a major source of 
the seismic background because of the poor coupling of 
the seismometer to the ground. 


Atmospheric composition 

The composition of the Martian atmosphere was measured 
by the Viking landers during entry and descent and 
while on the surface. The principal components are CO, 
(95.32%), No (2.7%), Ar (1.6%) and O> (0.13%). The mean 
molecular weight is 43.34. These gases were found to be 
well mixed up to 120 km altitude. Above 120 km they begin 
to diffusively separate. In the ionosphere O* was found 
to be the dominant species with CO* about an order of 
magnitude less abundant. 

Isotopic ratios of various elements were also 
measured. The stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen were 
found to be similar to Earth’s, but "N/‘4N was enriched 
by 60%. The enrichment is due to the selective escape of 
the lighter isotope with respect to the heavier one, and 
it implies that Mars may have had a denser atmosphere 
in its distant past. “Ar/%°Ar and !Xe/1%*Xe were also 
found to be enriched with respect to terrestrial values. In 
this case, however, the enrichment is thought to be due to 
removal of a substantial fraction of Mars’ early atmosphere 
by impacts events followed by the accumulation of the 
radiogenic isotopes “Ar and °Xe. 


Atmospheric water detection 

Water vapor in the Martian atmosphere was found to vary 
seasonally and spatially. On average, a column of Martian 
air contains the equivalent of a layer of liquid water about 
10 xm deep. EARTH’S ATMOSPHERE, by comparison, contains 
2-4 cm of water. Approximately 100 wm of water vapor 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


was observed over the north polar cap during summer. 
Very little water vapor was observed over the south polar 
cap during its summer. This difference in behavior is due 
to the different compositions of the summer residual caps: 
the north summer cap is made of water ice, while that in 
the south is made of CO, ice. 


Atmospheric structure 

During their descent to the surface, the Viking landers 
recorded the spacecraft deceleration history. These data 
were used to construct a temperature profile from near the 
surface to about 200 km. The profiles at the two landing 
sites were found to be very similar even though they were 
collected at different locations and times. Temperatures 
decreased from 230 K near the surface to about 150 K aloft, 
and they showed considerable structure possibly due to 
thermal tides and/or gravity waves. 


Thermal mapping 

Surface temperatures were mapped by the IRTM instru- 
ment. Highest temperatures (300 K) occur in early af- 
ternoon in southern subtropical latitudes during summer. 
Lowest temperatures (130 K) occur in polar regions dur- 
ing winter. The daily variation in surface temperature 
was used to map the thermal inertia of the soil. Ther- 
mal inertias range from about 50 to 500 SI units and in- 
dicate fine sandy material and well-consolidated bedrock, 
respectively. Atmospheric temperatures near 25 km were 
also mapped and showed great sensitivity to dust. 


Orbiter imaging 

Over 50 000 images were returned by the Viking orbiters. 
The images covered the entire planet at a resolution of 
200 m and large areas at resolutions as high as 7.5m. Much 
of the planet has been photographed in color and stereo, 
although at lower resolution. Orbiter cameras also imaged 
the moons of Mars (PHOBOS AND DEIMOs), and photographed 
the shadow of Phobos as it crossed the VL-1 site. 

For almost two Mars years, the orbiter cameras 
monitored weather patterns, the advance and retreat of 
the polar caps, dust storm activity and the continual 
redistribution of fine-grained material on the surface. 
They returned pictures of enormous volcanoes, a vast 
equatorial canyon system, numerous impact craters, 
polar layered deposits and fluvial features suggesting 
catastrophic flooding and possible climate change. 

The northern hemisphere was found to be geologi- 
cally young and covered with volcanic fields. The giant 
shield volcanoes in the Tharsis region have relatively few 
craters indicating that volcanism lasted for an extended 
period of time. In contrast, the southern hemisphere is 
old and heavily cratered. Parts of its surface may have 
formed at the end of the heavy bombardment period 3.8 
billion years ago. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Viking Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Soil properties 

The fine-grained material at the two Viking sites has 
similar elemental abundances. Silicon is the most 
abundant element (21%), followed by Fe (13%), Mg (5%), 
Ca (4%), Al (3%) and S (3%). The surprisingly uniform soil 
composition suggests planetary-scale homogenization of 
the soil by winds. The soil is weakly cohesive and has 
a bulk density of about 1.2 g cm. Magnets on top of 
the landers attracted soil-derived airborne dust. About 
2% of the soil contains magnetic material with maghemite 
(y-Fe.O3) being the most likely candidate. A plausible 
model for the soil material is that it is a basaltic weathering 
product. 


Bibliography 
Soffen and Young 1972 Icarus 16 1-16 


give a description of the Viking mission as it was originally 
envisioned. For an historical perspective of the Viking 
mission see 


Ezell and Ezell 1983 On Mars: Exploration of the Red Planet, 
1958-1978 NASA SP 4212 


The Viking Project as flown is described by 
Soffen 1977 J. Geophys. Res. 82 3959-70 
The first results of the Viking mission were published in 


1976 Science 193 (27 August) 
1976 Science 194 (1 October) 
1976 Science 194 (17 December) 


More comprehensive papers were published in special 
issues: 


1977 J. Geophys. Res. 82 (September) 
1978 Icarus 34 (June) 

1979 J. Geophys. Res. 84 (December) 
1982 J. Geophys. Res. 87 (November) 


The state of the art in our thinking about Mars has been 
summarized in the book 


Kieffer et al (ed) 1992 Mars (Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press) 


Robert M Haberle 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vilnius University Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vilnius University Observatory 


Vilnius University Observatory, the astronomical obser- 
vatory of Vilnius University, Lithuania, was founded in 
1753. In 1831, when Vilnius University was closed, the ob- 
servatory was entrusted to the Academy of Sciences of St 
Petersburg (Russia) and continued its activities until 1881. 
The Observatory resumed its operation in 1919 when Vil- 
nius University was reopened. Activities of the observa- 
tory were again interrupted by Nazi occupation (1941-44) 
and resumed after World War II. Its main instruments are 
a 60 cm reflector located at Moletai Observatory 80 km 
north of Vilnius and a 48 cm reflector located at the Maid- 
anak observing site in Uzbekistan, Central Asia. Present 
staff consists of eleven astronomers and six technicians. 
Activities are in the field of construction of photometric 
equipment, investigation of physical properties of stars, 
interstellar matter and galactic structure. 
For further information see 

http://www.ff.vu.lt/astro/inde40.htm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Virgo 


(the Virgin; abbrev. Vir, gen. Virginis; area 1294 sq. deg.) 
an equatorial zodiacal constellation which lies between 
Leo and Libra, and culminates at midnight in mid-April. 
Its origin dates back to Babylonian times and it has been 
associated with numerous female deities, including Ishtar 
(Babylonia), Isis (ancient Egypt), Demeter (ancient Greece) 
and Astraea (ancient Rome). Its brightest stars were 
catalogued by Ptolemy (c. AD 100-175) in the Almagest. 

Virgo is the second-largest of the 88 constellations but 
is not particularly prominent, save for its brightest star, 
a Virginis (Spica or Azimech), magnitude 1.0. Other bright 
stars include y Virginis (Porrima), a fine binary with pale 
yellow (FO) components, both magnitude 3.6 (combined 
magnitude 2.7), separation 2.7”, period 168.7 years (closest 
2005), e Virginis (Vindemiatrix or Almuredin), magnitude 
2.9, ¢ Virginis, magnitude 3.4, and 5 Virginis, also 
magnitude 3.4. There are five other stars of magnitude 
4.0 or brighter. 

There are no bright open star clusters or nebulae 
in Virgo, but the constellation contains a large number 
of galaxies, many of which are members of the Virgo 
Cluster, which extends into neighboring Coma Berenices. 
The brightest members of the Virgo Cluster are the giant 
elliptical galaxies M49 (NGC 4472), 8th magnitude, and 
M87 (NGC 4486, Virgo A), 9th magnitude, which isa strong 
x-ray and radio source and from which emanates a jet of 
material thought to have been expelled from a black hole at 
its center. An interesting non-cluster galaxy is M104 (NGC 
4594, the Sombrero Galaxy), an 8th-magnitude spiral with 
a dark lane of obscuring dust presented almost edge-on. 

The constellation also contains the first quasar to have 
been detected (in 1963), 3C 273, magnitude 12.9. 


See also: Sombrero Galaxy, Spica, Virgo A, Virgo Cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo A 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Virgo A 


The brightest radio source in the constellation of Virgo. 
Virgo A, otherwise known by the catalog number 3C 274, 
coincides with M87 a giant elliptical galaxy, and active 
galaxy, located at a distance of some 50 million light-years 
in the Virgo cluster of galaxies. Although part of the radio 
emission comes from two elongated lobes, one on either 
side of the center of the galaxy, the lobes, which span an 
overall diameter of about 16 000 light-years, are contained 
within the optical galaxy (rather than, as with most radio 
galaxies, extending beyond its visible perimeter). The 
majority of the radio output comes from a jet that emerges 
from the core of the galaxy and stretches out some 8000 
light-years into one of the two lobes. 

The jet radiates at all wavelengths from x-ray to radio. 
Like the lobes, it emits synchrotron radiation (radiation 
that is generated by electrons moving at very high speeds 
in magnetic fields). The motion of bright knots in the jet 
indicate that they are traveling outwards at about half the 
speed of light and implies that the electrons themselves 
must be traveling within the jet at speeds at least as high, 
if not higher, than this. 

With a mass of at least 10!2 solar masses, M87 is an 
exceptionally massive galaxy. Observations of the rates at 
which stars and gas clouds revolve within its central core, 
and of the way that stars appear to be concentrated at its 
center, imply that M87 contains a compact massive object, 
most probably a black hole, of about 3 billion solar masses. 


See also: active galaxy, astrophysical jets, radio galaxy, 
synchrotron radiation, M87, Virgo cluster. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Virgo Cluster 


The Virgo cluster is the nearest and best-studied rich 
CLUSTER OF GALAXIES, lying at a distance of about 55 million 
light-years in the constellation of virco. Figure 1 is a 
map of the distribution of nearby galaxies (as determined 
by their REDSHIFTS) in a 1500 square degree region of 
the constellation of Virgo. The Virgo cluster is the 
strong, somewhat irregular, concentration of galaxies at 
the center. In three-dimensional (3D) space, the Virgo 
cluster constitutes the nucleus of the Local Supercluster 
(LSC) of galaxies, in whose outskirts our MILKY WAY GALAXY 
is situated. 

As early as 1784, CHARLES MESSIER noted an unusual 
group of ‘nebulae’ in Virgo. Fifteen out of the 109 famous 
‘Messier objects’ are, in fact, member galaxies of the Virgo 
cluster. However, only in the 1920s, following EDWIN 
HUBBLE’s proof of the extragalactic nature of those ‘nebulae’, 
was Messier’s group understood as a self-gravitating 
system of hundreds of galaxies, and the first systematic 
investigations of the Virgo cluster, as it was henceforth 
called, were carried out by HARLOW SHAPLEY and others. 

Virgo was the first galaxy cluster to be studied 
dynamically by Smith and Zwicky in the 1930s. Their 
work showed that the dynamical mass of Virgo, estimated 
by using the virial theorem 


2T+U=0 


where T and U are the time-averaged kinetic energy 
and potential energy of the relaxed system, was much 
larger than the mass inferred by integrating the light 
of all the galaxies in the cluster and multiplying by a 
mass-to-light ratio (M/L) like the average of stars in the 
solar neighborhood. This was the first clear detection 
of ‘DARK MATTER,’ Or more properly, non-luminous mass. 
The distribution of galaxies in the direction of Virgo in 
redshift space is shown in figure 2, and figure 3 displays the 
histogram of galaxy velocities inside a circle of 6° radius 
centered on the core of the cluster at 12’28” and +10°28’. 

The Virgo cluster lies at the center of the LSC, 
first dynamically studied by G de Vaucouleurs and 
collaborators in the 1950s. The Milky Way appears to 
be falling into the Virgo cluster, relative to the general 
expansion of the universe, with a velocity of ~250 km get, 
That is to say, we are still moving away from the cluster 
core with an apparent velocity, cz, of ~1100 km s“, but 
that velocity is 250 km s-! less than it would have been 
if the cluster had no mass. Curiously, the M/L for the 
whole LSC derived from this Virgo infall is similar to that 
derived via the virial theorem for the dynamically relaxed 
cluster core; both M/L values, when applied to the mean 
luminosity density of the universe derived from redshift 
surveys, imply a mean matter density of the universe that 
is only 1/4 to 1/3 of the critical density. 

The kinematics of the cluster is quite complex as 
can be seen in figures 1 and 4. There are two main 
concentrations of galaxies; the largest and densest is 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


centered on the well-known galaxy ms7 (NGC4486) which 
is both a strong radio source (viRco A) and a strong x- 
ray source. This subcluster, at 12'30".8 + 12°23’, is also a 
strong x-ray source produced by a reservoir of extremely 
hot intracluster gas. This INTRACLUSTER MEDIUM is at a 
temperature of ~10’ K, emits thermal bremsstrahlung 
radiation and is a major contributor to the total mass of 
the system. The southern large subcluster is centered on 
M49 (NGC 4472) at 12"29”.8 + 8°00’, the most luminous 
galaxy in the cluster, but is significantly less massive than 
the M87 subcluster. The total mass of the Virgo core region 
is ~10'° Mo, that of the M87 subclump ~3 x 10'4Mo and 
the M49 subclump is ~1 x 10'*M 5, assuming a distance 
to the cluster core of 16 Mpc. The cluster distance of 
~16 Mpc has been estimated via a variety of techniques 
including measurements of Cepheids to six galaxies with 
the Hubble Space Telescope, studies of globular clusters 
and planetary nebulae (PNe) luminosity functions, and 
surface brightness fluctuations (SBFs). 

At present, approximately 1300 member galaxies of 
the Virgo cluster are known, most of which are very faint 
DWARF GALAXIES (but this number is bound to grow fast 
in the near future, as ever fainter members are going to 
be detected with improving techniques). Their projected 
positions within the cluster—spread over a large sky area 
of roughly 100 square degrees, or 500 full moons (see 
figure 4)—reveal a rich substructure. The Virgo cluster 
indeed represents the most common type of clusters of 
galaxies that are loosely concentrated and ‘irregular’. 
Several gravitationally bound subsystems of galaxies have 
been identified. Of these, the subcluster centered on 
Messier 87 is by far the largest and most massive structure 
(the Virgo cluster proper, so to speak)—and M687 itself, 
the giant, active galaxy with its famous jet, can truly be 
regarded as the heart of the Virgo cluster. The smaller 
subclusters seem to be in a state of merging with the M87 
subcluster. In this sense, the Virgo cluster (like many, if 
not most, clusters of galaxies) is still in the making. 

The Virgo cluster has always been, and still is, one of 
the most important stepping stones for the cosmological 
distance scale. Much of the current debate on the value of 
the HUBBLE CONSTANT boils down to a debate on the mean 
distance of the Virgo cluster (see below). 

Anew and very exciting era of Virgo cluster research 
has recently been opened by the first detection of 
intracluster PLANETARY NEBULAE (PNe) and single RED GIANT 
STARS, i.e. stellar objects that are not bound toa single galaxy 
but to the cluster as a whole. This adds a whole new 
population to the cluster, which in the future will be used 
to explore the 3D structure and dynamical history of the 
Virgo cluster. 


Global structure 

The primary optical database for the galaxy content of 
the Virgo cluster is the Las Campanas photographic 
survey, carried out in the 1980s by Allan Sandage and 
collaborators, and encapsulated in the Virgo Cluster 
Catalog (VCC). Figure 4 is a map of the ca 1300 galaxies in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Virgo 
ees om [BP Ooh me) 
(or = i OO 3) Oo O° ° fe) 
° © ‘eo © o ° 
6 O O° oc £ ° 8 O 
° a GO ° 
° @ &) 


20 
ie} 
DEC 
10) [= 
o . 
@) = 
O 
14h 13h30m 13h 12h30m 12h 11h380m 1ih 
RA 
O -1000 <=V <= 500 Magnitude <= 0.00 (including those entries with no magnitude) 
oO 500 < V <= 1300 
ie) 1300 < V <= 2100 
ie) 2100 < V <= 3000 


Figure 1. The distribution of nearby galaxies (apparent recession velocities less than 3000 km s~') in the direction of Virgo. Each circle 
represents a galaxy; the size of the circle represents its apparent brightness. Galaxies with apparent velocities less than 500 km s~! are 
shown in red, those above 2100 km s~! in green, and those between 500 and 1300 km s~! and between 1300 and 2100 km s~! in blue 
and magenta, respectively. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 63. 


the sky area covered by the Las Campanas survey that 
were judged to be members of the Virgo cluster. The 
membership criteria were based on (1) the morphological 
appearance of the galaxies, e.g. dwarf ellipticals have a 
characteristically low surface brightness, and/or (2) the 
measured radial velocities, which for members have to be 
smaller than ca 2700 km s~ (heliocentric). Velocities are at 
present available only for the brightest 400 members (but 
this number, too, will steadily grow in the future). 

The magnitude limit of completeness of the Las 
Campanas survey is around apparent blue magnitude 
B = 18 or, if we assume a mean distance of 16 Mpc, 
absolute magnitude Mz = —13.0. However, fainter 
members (up to B = 20) were included as well. For 
comparison, the brightest cluster members, M49 and M87, 
have B ~ 9.0 and B ~ 9.5, respectively. Thus the known 
cluster population spans a range of +10 000 in luminosity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


From the distribution of symbol sizes in figure 4 one can 
obtain a feeling of the exponentially growing luminosity 
function of galaxies. Of the 1300 known members, 850 
alone are of the dwarf elliptical (dE) type. The basic 
characteristic of dEs is a relation between luminosity and 
surface brightness: fainter dwarfs have also lower surface 
brightness. As the detection limit for extended objects such 
as galaxies is set by the surface brightness rather than total 
magnitude, itis clear that many hundreds, if not thousands 
more, of extremely faint and diffuse dE members of the 
Virgo cluster have yet to be discovered by future deep 
surveys. These will be the analogs of the dwarf spheroidal 
companions of our Galaxy, which are as faint as Mg = —8 
(corresponding to B © 23 at Virgo distance). 

Among the remaining 450 member galaxies, there 
are roughly 80 elliptical (E) and SO galaxies, 130 spirals, 
90 irregulars and 90 dwarf galaxies of intermediate type 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo Cluster ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ez (km/s) 
Virgo 
-5 << 6 < 30 


mgs 22 


Figure 2. The distribution of galaxies in redshift space in the direction of the Virgo cluster. We are at the apex of the wedge. The main 
body of the cluster is the picturesquely named ‘Finger of God’ at the center of the wedge. This is not a real feature. Its extension along 
the line of sight in this plot is a measure of the internal velocity dispersion (and thus the mass) of the galaxy cluster so that a galaxy 

with a given radial velocity is placed in front of or behind its true position. The large and diffuse structure seen to the right (10.5’—11' 


and 1100 km s~?) of Virgo is the Leo group. 


Number 


—1000 0 1000 2000 3000 
Velocity 


Figure 3. Histogram of apparent velocities for galaxies within a 6° radius of the center of the Virgo cluster. The breadth of the 
distribution from 0 to 300 km s~! accounts for the ‘Finger of God’ structure in figure 2. 


(Irr-dE). The distribution of these morphological types are strongly confined to the regions of highest galaxy 
within the cluster varies considerably—in accord with density, defining the ‘skeleton’ of the cluster (dwarf Es only 
Dressler’s GALAXY ’MORPHOLOGY-DENSITY RELATION’: Es and SOs to a slightly lesser degree), while spirals and irregulars 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 3 


Virgo Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


18° 


16° 


14° 


12° 


DECLINATION (1950) 
3 


ca 


jah4om 34m 26m 18” 10m 
Right Ascension (1950) 


Figure 4. Map of the Virgo cluster as it appears in the sky. All 
cluster members are plotted with luminosity-weighted symbols. 
The symbol size (area) is proportional to the luminosity of the 
galaxy. The most prominent Messier galaxies are indicated. The 
broken lines indicate the boundary of the Las Campanas survey. 


(S+Irr) are very weakly clustered, lying preferentially in 
the cluster outskirts. 

This morphological segregation is also reflected in the 
velocity distributions. An analysis of the radial velocity 
data so far available gives a velocity dispersion (10) of 
~600 km s“! for early-type galaxies (E, S0, dE), but one of 
750 km s7! for late types (StIrr), i.e. late types are more 
dispersed in space and velocity. Moreover, the velocity 
distribution for S + Irr is distinctly non-Gaussian with 
a low-velocity and a high-velocity wing. These wings 
are probably caused by infalling and expanding shells of 
galaxies around the cluster core. Most Virgo spirals and 
Irrs may have fallen only recently, or are still in the stage of 
falling, into the cluster from the surroundings, explaining 
their lack of dynamical relaxation (virialization). Those 
spirals observed to be HI deficient have apparently 
already fallen through the cluster core. 

The all-cluster mean heliocentric velocity is (v)netio X 
1050 km s! (there is no difference with respect to type). 
Note that this is not the cosmic (Hubble flow) recession 
velocity of the Virgo cluster, (v)., which can be derived 
by (1) correcting for the solar motion with respect to the 
centroid of the Local Group by subtracting ~100 km s~1 
and (2) correcting for the Virgocentric infall (deceleration) 
of the Local Group by adding +250 km s7!. This finally 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


gives (v). ~ 1200 kms}. 


Subcluster dynamics 

The primary structural characteristic of the Virgo cluster 
(cf figure 4) is certainly its high degree of irregularity 
and subclustering. Several subclumps (gravitationally 
bound subclusters) of galaxies suggest themselves: a main 
northern subclump around M87, M86 and M84, a southern 
clump around M49 and possible subgroups around M60 
and M100. The global structure of Virgo seems defined 
by two main axes: one N-S, i.e. M100-M86/M87-M49, 
and one E-NW, i.e. M60-M87-M86/M84. Remarkably, the 
former axis is nearly perfectly aligned with the position 
angle of the outer isophotes of M87, while the latter is 
perfectly aligned with the jet axis of M87. This shows once 
more that M87 is the heart of the Virgo cluster. 

The reality of the main N-S double structure cannot 
be doubted, because the northern and southern subclumps 
are sufficiently well separated. Both have a very similar 
mean radial velocity, which would suggest that they are 
at the same distance, ie. lying in the plane of the sky 
(however, see below). The southern M49 clump is rather 
spiral rich and has a surprisingly small velocity dispersion 
of o, © 500 kms“. 

The core region with M87, M86 and M84 is much 
harder to disentangle. The key observation here is 
that the velocity distribution of galaxies in this northern 
clump (especially for dEs) is strongly skewed towards 
low velocities. In the low-velocity tail we find the most 
blueshifted galaxies known in the sky (the record holder, 
VCC846, has v = —730 km s7!). These objects tend to be 
clustered around M86, which itself has a negative velocity 
(v = —227 km s“'). On the other hand, the velocity 
distribution is peaked around v = 1300 km s-!—nearly 
coinciding with the velocity of M87 (v = 1258 km s~'). 

A clear asymmetry in the velocity distribution of a 
cluster of galaxies is almost certainly an indication of 
ongoing subcluster merging. In the Virgo cluster we seem 
to witness the merging between a subclump around M87 
and another clump around M86 (or rather, the infall of the 
M86 subcluster into the more massive M87 subcluster, see 
below). Both giant galaxies must be the centers of huge 
swarms of dwarf galaxies. M86 is apparently falling into, 
or through, the M87 subclump from the back, hence witha 
high relative (negative) velocity, dragging along its dwarf 
companions. (The giant galaxy M84, very close to M86 in 
the sky, but with v = 1000 km s“!, has to be a member of 
the M87 subcluster.) 

This whole picture is fully confirmed by an analysis 
of the x-ray structure of the Virgo cluster. Figure 5 
shows, as a gray-scale image, the distribution of the x-ray 
intensity in the Virgo cluster as measured by the Rosar x- 
ray satellite. The x-rays originate from the hot intracluster 
gas via thermal bremsstrahlung. The gas feels the same 
gravitational potential of the cluster as the galaxies. The 
global appearances of the cluster in the x-rays and in the 
optical (figure 5 versus figure 4) are therefore very similar. 
However, the main subclusters around M87, M86 and M49 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. X-ray image of the Virgo cluster from the 

ROSAT All-Sky Survey. Various foreground stars, quasars, Abell 
clusters and Virgo cluster members (NGCs and Messiers) are 
indicated. The large, bright spot is centered on M87. Compare 
with figure 4. Courtesy of Dr H Bohringer and the MPE 
Garching. 


are popping out much more clearly in the x-ray image. 
M87 hasa huge x-ray halo and is obviously the center of the 
dominating subcluster in Virgo. M86 has a large gas halo 
as well—larger than expected for an isolated giant, but of 
the right order for a whole subcluster. The infall of this 
subcluster from the back is supported by the observation 
of a ram pressure plume in the x-ray structure of M86. 

Subcluster merging has turned out to be a general 
feature of cluster of galaxies, even with so-called ‘regular’ 
ones, such as the coma CLUSTER. This is not unexpected in 
a bottom-up (clustering) picture of structure formation, as 
described by the much favored ‘cold dark matter’ scenario. 

Under the (tested) assumption of hydrostatic equilib- 
rium, the x-ray halo profiles can be used to calculate the 
gravitational masses of the subclusters that are binding 
the gas. For the dominating M87 subcluster the integrated 
mass out to 1 Mpc from M87 amounts to M ~ 1.4x10"Mo, 
of which 14% is in the gas, and only 4% in the galaxies. 
This means that the cluster is essentially dark matter, sec- 
ond comes the intracluster gas and only in third place the 
luminous matter in galaxies, with a correspondingly high 
mass-to-light ratio of M/L ~ 500. This is quite typical for 
clusters of galaxies. 


Distance and depth 

The mean distance of the Virgo cluster is still a matter of 
debate. Distances quoted range from 14 to 22 Mpc. In 
general, the most reliable extragalactic distance indicators 
are the Cepheids. Cepheids at (and slightly beyond) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the Virgo cluster distance are now within the reach of 
the HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST). This achievement was 
so long awaited that the first Cepheid-based distance 
determination of a Virgo cluster spiral in 1994 (M100 at 
17 Mpc) had an enormous impact. The caveat with this 
was, and is, that spirals tend to avoid the cluster core and 
may be in the field far off the cluster (cf also above). It has 
been conjectured that M100, as well as other spirals located 
by Cepheids with HST later on, might lie at the near side 
of the cluster. 

On the other hand, from work based on the TULLY- 
FISHER (TF) RELATION, which allows the distance to an 
individual spiral galaxy to be given with an accuracy of 
~0.4 mag, there is consistent evidence that Virgo late types 
are distributed in a prolate cloud, or filament, stretching— 
nearly along our line of sight—from the cluster backwards 
to the so-called ‘W cloud’ at twice Virgo’s distance. 
Probably this is part of a very long filament that is running 
way back to the ‘Great Wall’ at the distance of the Coma 
cluster. On the near side of Virgo it might even be 
connected with the ‘Coma-Sculptor cloud’ that is running 
through us, i.e. includes the Local Group. 

There is a hint, again from TF distances, that the 
southern M49 subcluster is lying significantly in the back 
of the M87 subcluster. If so, the M49 subcluster must 
be infalling from the back with a velocity of several 
100 km s~!, as the mean observed velocities of the two 
subclusters are very similar. The merging of subclusters 
along the large-scale filament in which they are embedded 
is plausible. 

To determine the distance of the core of the Virgo 
cluster one should avoid late-type galaxies. The safest 
would be to use only elliptical and dwarf elliptical 
members. Unfortunately, the primary distance indicators 
here, RR LYRAE STARS, are much too faint at the distance of 
Virgo even for HST. The secondary distance indicators 
which can be applied to Virgo ellipticals give controversial 
results: globular clusters, D,—o and novae tend to give 
large distances (D ~ 20 Mpc), SBFs and PNe lead to 
a small D ~ 16 Mpc. Great efforts are spent in the 
application of the SBF method because its claimed distance 
uncertainty for an individual galaxy is almost as small as 
with Cepheids (<0.2 mag) and hence would allow us to 
resolve the cluster depth (the front-to-back depth is about 
2 Mpc, or 0.2 mag, if the cluster is spherical). Individual 
Virgo E distances, with a surprisingly large scatter, have 
indeed been reported, but there is still some concern 
whether all variations of the stellar content of ellipticals, 
on which the method critically depends, are sufficiently 
well understood. For instance, the SBF distance of M49 is 
much smaller than the (probably more reliable) TF distance 
of the whole M49 subcluster, which means that either 
M49 is lying in the foreground, being projected on top 
of the background ‘M49’ subcluster by chance, or the SBF 
method is wrong. 

Some hope for the future is resting with dwarf 
ellipticals, of which there is an almost inexhaustible 
reservoir in the cluster. A first, very promising 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo Cluster 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


application of the tip-of-the-red-giant-branch (TRGB) 
distance indicator to a particular dE based on HST 
observations has given D ~ 16 Mpc. A recent claim that 
dEs are distributed in a prolate structure pointing towards 
us, based on the shape of the luminosity profile of these 
galaxies, will soon be tested by an extension of the SBF 
method to dEs. 

A new tool to determine the mean distance and 
depth of the Virgo cluster core may be provided by the 
recently discovered population of free-floating giant stars 
and PNe. Such a population has long been suspected in 
clusters of galaxies, as stars will be ripped from galaxies 
by tidal encounters in the cluster core, a process called 
‘galaxy harassment’. The data available so far suggest that 
approximately 10% of the stellar mass of the Virgo cluster 
is in intergalactic stars. There are ongoing programs 
with large telescopes to measure the radial velocities and 
metallicities of a large number of intracluster PNe. These 
data will provide crucial constraints on the dynamical state 
and history of the Virgo cluster. 


Bibliography 

Binggeli B 1999 The Virgo cluster—home of M87 The 
Radiogalaxy M87 ed H-J Réser and K Meisenheimer 
(Berlin: Springer) p 9 

Binggeli B, Tammann G A and Sandage A 1987 Studies of 
the Virgo cluster. VI. Morphology and kinematics of 
the Virgo cluster Astron. J. 94 251 


Bruno Binggeli and John Huchra 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Virgo Gravitational-wave Interferometer (VIRGO) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Virgo Gravitational-wave 
Interferometer (VIRGO) 


VIRGO is a collaboration between Italian and French re- 
search teams to construct an interferometric gravitational 
wave detector at Cascina, near Pisa, Italy. It relies on a 
technique called laser interferometry to measure with im- 
mense accuracy the minute changes in distance induced 
by gravitational waves from astronomical sources. 

The VIRGO project plans to set up a laser interferom- 
eter made of two, 3 km long, orthogonal arms. Light from 
a laser is split into two beams which travel down the arms 
and are then reflected back by mirrors. In effect, multiple 
reflections will increase the optical length of each arm to 
120 km. Variations in the pattern of interference between 
the returning beams will enable gravitational waves to be 
detected and their sources to be identified. 

VIRGO will be sensitive to gravitational waves at 
frequencies from 10 to 6000 Hz. It should be able to detect 
radiation produced by supernovae and by the coalescence 
of binary systems in the Milky Way and other galaxies, for 
instance from the Virgo cluster. 

It will use high-power ultrastable lasers and high- 
reflectivity mirrors, as well as seismic isolation and control 
of position and alignment. Each optical component is 
isolated by a 10 m high elaborate system of compound 
pendulums, called a ‘superattenuator’. The 6 km long, 
1.2 m diameter evacuated tube through which the light 
beam passes will be one of the largest vacuum vessels in 
the world. The signals will be detected, registered and 
elaborated by computer. 

For further information see 
http://www.virgo.infn.it/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Visual Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Visual Binary Stars 


Already since the early development of telescopes, an 
increasing number of stars—single to the naked eye— 
were found to consist of two or more components. They 
became known as ‘double stars’ (étoiles doubles, dvoinye 
zvozdy, Doppelsterne) and soon were too numerous to 
be explained as random pairings of stars in the sky. 
With increasing observing-time span, some pairs showed 
around 1800 that the components orbited one another. 
The English term ‘BINARY sTARS’ tends to emphasize this 
gravitational connection. In distinction from close doubles 
recognized by stellar eclipses or by periodic changes 
of spectral-line shifts (photometric and spectroscopic 
binaries), the directly resolved objects are termed ‘visual’ 
although eyepiece observations are no longer the only 
method of study. Telescopes and techniques of the 20th 
century have improved the angular resolution to below 0.1 
arcsec, but in order that components be separated, that is 
be recognised by their different positions in the sky, visual 
pairs are subject to at least one of two limitations. 


(a) They are not very distant from Earth. Visual objects 
thus are predominantly of the more populous types 
in the solar neighborhood: stars from the middle and 
lower main sequence; 

(b) The true distance between the components is not too 
small. The orbit periods are therefore generally much 
longer than in ECLIPSING and SPECTROSCOPIC BINARY STARS, 
and so it is important that measurements dating back 
100 yr and more are available for many of them. 


In addition, detection is impeded when the stars have 
a large brightness difference. Hence not many lowest- 
luminosity dwarf components, or companions of bright 
supergiants, are known. 


Designations of visual double stars 

The celestial position for J2000 (the beginning of the Julian 
year 2000) is generally used, for instance 07346 + 3153 
means right ascension 7h 34.6m and declination 31° 53’ 
N (Castor). Cataloguing confusion can occur when the 
positions of faint stars are not well enough determined or 
when the transfer to J2000 ignored proper motions. 

Also used are discoverers’ codes, e.g. Bu 1077 for a 
Ursae Majoris (Dubhe) after the finding by s w BURNHAM. 
These letter codes are unambiguous but owing to their 
variety a bit cumbrous. The master file of visual 
double stars, maintained at the US Naval Observatory, 
Washington DC, and currently being revised, lists both 
these identifiers for nearly 100 000 entries, and in addition 
the Durchmusterung number (Bonn, Cordoba, Cape), if 
any. 

The double-star catalogue by R G AITKEN contains 
objects discovered before 1927 in the sky north of —30° 
declination. Since it includes many well-known binaries, 
the ADS number is still used. Some publications cite the 
HIP number after the star catalogue from the HIPPARCOS 
satellite mission. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Some results of statistics 

Adding all kinds of binaries, and with a statistical estimate 
of the occurrence of undetected, low-mass components, 
the fraction of stars on the upper and middle main 
sequence which are members of binary and multiple 
systems comes to about 80%. This membership rate 
decreases toward RED DWARF STARS, and for faint dM types— 
of which only the nearest are well studied—may be as 
low as 40%. Thus the most abundantly occurring stellar 
masses, around 0.2 of the solar mass, are less frequently 
found in binaries. 

Very wide pairs have only a weak gravitational bond, 
which may be disrupted by fairly close random encounters 
with passing stars. As estimated from the star density in 
the Galactic disk, the limit of separations, below which a 
pair is expected to remain bound through its lifetime is 
at 10000-20000 AU (astronomical units), or 0.05-0.1 pe. 
Existence of orbit periods up to some millions of years is 
thus to be expected. 

Inevitably some pairs of stars appear close together 
by chance alignment, although the components are at 
different distances and unrelated. These are ‘optical’ 
or ‘perspectivic’ double stars. Statistics show that the 
probability of a random alignment to within 5” or so is 
quite low for stars down to about 12th magnitude. Most 
of the catalogued double stars thus are genuinely physical 
systems. 


Observing techniques 
Visual measurement by micrometer 
The FILAR MICROMETER contains a set of thin wires, one 
movable against another with a precision screw, and 
mounted on a rotatable frame in the focus of a high- 
power eyepiece. This simple device supplies the position 
of one double-star component relative to the other in 
polar coordinates: the position angle (direction in the 
sky) counted from N over E, S, W from 0° to 360° by 
orientation of the frame, and the separation between stars 
in arcsec by the spacing of the wires. Since the eye 
has a good time resolution of 0.05 s, it can suppress 
much of the atmospheric turbulence, often reaches the 
diffraction-limited resolving power provided by the 
telescope aperture and may even recognise elongated 
double-star images below resolution. (The often-heard 
statement that atmospheric blurring limits ground-based 
instruments to about 1 arcsec of resolution is false; it 
applies only to long recording times.) Although a 17th- 
century invention, the filar micrometer became a high- 
precision tool only in the hands of F W struve in 1820. 
Since then most double-star positions have been obtained 
that way, quite close binaries being reached already with 
the refractors around 1900 (Aitken and others), at least in 
the northern hemisphere. The southern sky lagged behind 
until W H van den Bos began his micrometric productivity 
in the 1920s, and R A Rossiter followed with the discovery 
of many thousands of fainter pairs. 

A modification favored by some observers is the 
double-image micrometer which uses a birefringent prism. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Visual Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The four star images produced from a double star are 
brought into a well-measurable configuration by rotating 
and shifting the prism. 


Photography 

During much of the 20th century, photography was the 
best direct-imaging method in astronomy, but its resolving 
power was limited by adjacency effects from the chemical 
processing and by blurring during the fairly long exposure 
times needed. Extensive double-star data were obtained 
for wider pairs, typically over 2 arcsec. The long-term 
photographic monitoring of stars has helped in other 
ways: with PARALLAX results for nearby binaries, their mass 
ratios from the orbital shifts of blended images against 
their centre of mass and sometimes the detection of unseen 
components from periodic shifts in the motions of stars. 
Such work could now be done with digitizing cameras 
(CCDs) which have replaced photographic emulsions in 
direct imaging. 


Interferometry 

Owing to high instrumental demands, the original form 
of interference was little used. A successful variant is the 
eyepiece interferometer as was constructed and widely 
used by W S Finsen. 

In the last 25 yr a combined high resolution in both 
angular separation and recording time, now also for 
modest-size telescopes, has been achieved by ‘speckle’ 
interferometry (see SPECKLE IMAGING OF BINARY STARS). It 
results in superior precision by correlating numerous, 
very short-exposure images (speckles, tavelures). Most 
currently used devices consist of microscope optics as 
objective and collimator, a CCD camera with image 
intensifier as detector and computers for very fast 
recording, centering, autocorrelation and processing; 
colour filters and usually a pair of prisms, to remove 
atmospheric dispersion in both amount and direction, 
are added. The full theoretical resolving power at 
large reflectors, around 0.03 arcsec, can be reached. An 
important development toward yet higher resolution is 
the application of long-baseline interferometry (long used 
in radio astronomy) now at optical wavelengths, as 
evidenced by results from devices such as the Mark III 
interferometer. 


Space instruments 

The Hipparcos satellite measured around 1991 numerous 
double stars and added some 3000 new pairs, mostly those 
of larger brightness differences whose detection from the 
ground was impeded. 


Orbits 
Apart from their significance for the understanding of 
stellar origin and of evolutionary patterns, binary stars 
supply direct determinations of the masses of stars as 
fundamental quantities. This requires knowledge of their 
orbits. 

Main-sequence stars have a relation between mass 
M and luminosity L, as expected from theory, because 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


for stars of nearly identical composition the equilibrium 
conditions governing interior stability make the luminosi- 
ties and radii dependent only on the mass: L increases 
with the kth power of M. The exponent k varies along the 
main sequence, and it also depends on the colours within 
which the luminosities are defined; for visual magnitudes, 
k = 3.8 for the middle main sequence, but k decreases to 
about 2.6 for both high- and low-mass (B and M) types. 

The apparent orbit of a visual binary as seen in the sky 
(at right angles to the line of sight) is a parallel projection of 
the true orbit ellipse. Seven constants, the so-called orbital 
elements, are needed to describe the motion. Three of them 
are angles specifying the projection: the inclination is the 
angle between orbit and projection planes, the node is the 
celestial direction in which the planes intersect and the 
longitude of periastron (the point of closest approach of 
the components, and of fastest orbital motion), counted 
from the node, gives the orientation of the ellipse. The 
other elements fix the motion within the orbit: the period 
(P) in years, the eccentricity, the time of passage through 
periastron, and the semimajor axis (a) in arcsec. The 
position in the orbit at any time is then given by formulae 
which represent Kepler’s first and second laws (see KEPLER’S 
Laws). There are several computer routines on how to 
solve for the seven elements as best fitting a given set of 
observations. 

Visual binaries with known orbits (some very precise, 
others tentative and subject to future revision) now 
number about 1000. The orbit sizes (a) are mostly under 
1 arcsec; the periods range from a few years to some 
centuries (in cases with well-observed periastron passages 
up to about 1000 yr), and almost all objects are within 
150 pe from Earth. Contrary to the planetary system and 
to close binaries, orbits of medium or high eccentricities 
dominate among visual pairs. 

To determine the total mass (M; + M2), Kepler’s third 
law is used in the form a? = P?(M; + Mp) only if a is 
determined in astronomical units: 


a (length in AU ) = a” (angular size in arcsec) 
x d (distance in pc). 


Inaccuracies of distances d cause often the largest 
uncertainty in the masses. This can be remedied in other 
ways. 


(a) By spectroscopic observations of the orbital motion. 
Doppler-shift amplitudes alone yield only the 
one-dimensional radial motion, leaving the orbit 
inclination and hence the true orbit size and the mass 
undetermined, but the combination with the visual 
elements supplies the missing link. The speckle 
technique in particular has resolved many short- 
period pairs discovered by spectroscopists. 

(b) When the components can be assumed to be 
main-sequence stars, a mass-luminosity relation 
can be invoked, along with the known apparent 
magnitudes, to connect the masses and the distance. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Visual Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Cases where this assumption does not hold are 
revealed by a disagreement between spectral type 
and the computed mass. Many stars spectrally still 
classified as main sequence are found to be already 
evolved in luminosity to above ‘zero age’ level. 


Multiple systems 

Abouta third of binary stars contain at least one additional 
component. However, the separations are almost always 
quite different: the ratio of wider versus closer pair is at 
least 6:1 and often much more. Long-term stability of 
multiple systems with stellar (not very unequal) masses 
demands this ‘hierarchical’ order. So the periods are very 
different, and there are few visual systems in which both 
orbits are reliably known. 

More common are close spectroscopic subsystems 
within visual pairs, and there are also cases of definite, 
periodic deviations from the elliptical motion indicating 
the presence of an unresolved component. These objects 
require elaborate analysis since two orbits (14 elements 
instead of seven) have to be computed simultaneously. 
Slow changes in the orbits owing to perturbations between 
components are known in two of them: € Ursae Majoris 
(11182 + 3132) and ¢ Cancri (08122 + 1739). 


Some noteworthy objects 
Within 3 parsec from the Sun, four apparently single dwarf 
stars and the following three interesting binaries are found. 

a Centauri (14396 — 6050), the nearest system, 
consists of two solar-type stars (masses 1.1 and 0.9) in 
an orbit of period 79.9 yr, now slowly closing in after 
maximum separation was reached in 1980, and a red- 
dwarf companion, a full 13000 AU distant from the 
primary pair, but even closer to Earth, hence called 
Proxima Centauri. 

Sirius (06451 — 1643) has a companion with a period 
of 50.1 yr, which was predicted from periodic changes in 
the proper motion of the bright star. Resolved in 1862, the 
companion was found to be almost 10 magnitudes fainter, 
and the identical white color indicated an enormous 
disparity of the radii of the stars. It was the first 
identification of a white dwarf star. (40EridaniB = 
04153 — 0739 had been observed long before but its 252 yr 
orbit with a faint red-dwarf companion and its white- 
dwarf nature were not known until later.) 

LDS 838 (01390 — 1757), a 12th magnitude object with 
a period of 26.5 yr is one of the lowest-luminosity pairs of 
red dwarfs. Each component has only 0.12 solar masses; 
one of them is the very active flare star UV Ceti. 

A few other remarkable binaries and multiples may 
be added. 

Castor (a Geminorum, 07346 + 3153) is a sixtuple at a 
distance of 14 pc. The bright pair has been observed for 
almost three centuries, and the latest orbit gives it a period 
of 467 yr. Bothcomponents are close spectroscopic binaries 
with low-mass companions (periods of 9 and 3 days), and 
the distant 9th magnitude star YY Gem, which belongs to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the system, is a unique case of a red-dwarf eclipsing binary 
(type dM) with a period of 19.5 h. 

Capella (w Aurigae, 05167 + 4600), a long-known 
spectroscopic binary with P = 104 days, and at a 
distance of 13 pc, was resolved and well observed by 
interferometers and speckle cameras. It consists of two G 
type giants of nearly equal masses (2.5 solar masses each) 
and luminosities, evolving synchronously. Also part of the 
system is a later-discovered, distant red-dwarf pair which 
may have a period around 400 yr. 

The closest pair resolved by a large interferometer is 
Spica (a Virginis, 13252 — 1110) at a separation of only 
0”.0015, with a period of 4 days. 

é Hydrae (08468 + 0625), at a distance of 36 pc, is 
of interest because of the diversity of its five known 
components: a G type and a fainter F type subgiant in 
a 15 yr orbit, an F type main-sequence star (period about 
1100 yr around the primary pair) which is a spectroscopic 
binary with a low-mass companion (P = 10 days), and 
a still more distant, subluminous dK dwarf star whose 
period may be around 10000 yr. 

Finally, GC 20393/4 (15102 — 1623) is a faint, wide 
pair of very old subdwarf stars, separated by 5 arcmin, 
and 30 pe distant. They race through the solar vicinity at 
a record speed of nearly 600 km s“! relative to the Sun, 
or practically at escape velocity within the Milky Way, 
suggesting an origin in the outer galactic halo. It should 
be noted that, although separated by at least 10000 AU, 
they have kept together on the long trip for twice the age 
of the solar system. 


W D Heintz 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


VLBI (Very Long Baseline Interferometry) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


VLBI (Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry) 


The Michelson stellar INTERFEROMETER was developed by 
MICHELSON as an optical instrument to measure the angular 
diameter of stars. In recent times, the method has 
been extensively used at radio wavelengths, to achieve 
extremely high angular resolution, greater than that 
achieved by single-aperture telescopes at any wavelength. 
The principle is as follows: two RADIO TELESCOPES, receiving 
a signal from a distant radio source, amplify the signals 
and send them via transmission lines to a radio receiver. 
the radio signals arrive at different times at the two 
radio telescopes, so the shorter path length is lengthened 
by a delay line that equalizes the time at which the 
signals are combined by the receiver. If the signals are 
in phase, they will reinforce one another and the signal 
amplitude will be twice that of a single telescope (i.e. 
four times the power). If the signals are 180° out of 
phase, there will be no signal, since they destructively 
interfere. If the telescopes are rotating with the Earth, and 
the time delay is held fixed, the alternating constructive 
and destructive interference will give a sinusoidal output 
whose amplitude and phase can be measured. (The optical 
Michelson stellar interferometer is functionally identical; 
the radio telescopes are replaced by plane mirrors that send 
plane waves into a telescope, where they are combined 
at the focus, where interference fringes are detected.) By 
extension from the optical case, the sinusoidal radio signal 
is also called a fringe, even though it is seldom seen directly 
in modern interferometers. This is because the receiver 
has, in effect, two channels that cross-correlate the two 
signals, directly and in quadrature. From the amplitudes 
of these two outputs, the fringe amplitude and phase are 
derived. 

The great power of the Michelson interferometer lies 
in its extension to APERTURE SYNTHESIS, in which the signals 
from an assemblage of many telescopes are combined 
pairwise. As in so many areas of modern science, 
the Fourier transform technique is used to derive an 
image. Given a radio source with a brightness distribution 
B(a, 6) on the sky, where a and 6 are right ascension 
and declination, one constructs an approximate Cartesian 
coordinate system x,y. The distribution B(x, y) has 
a Fourier dual b(u,v), and it can be shown that the 
amplitude and phase of the radio fringe from a Michelson 
interferometer is proportional to the Fourier transform of 
the source brightness distribution. The dual coordinates 
(u,v) are determined by the baseline b,, measured in 
terms of the observing wavelength 4, projected on the sky 
perpendicular to the line of sight to the radio source. This 
plane is usually taken with uv in the east—west direction, and 
with v north-south, and is commonly referred to as the uv- 
plane. Asufficiently large sample of fringe amplitudes and 
phases, with interferometers sampling many points on the 
uv-plane, can give a good approximation to the Fourier 
transform b(u, v) of the brightness distribution, and by 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


numerically calculating the Fourier inversion, the actual 
brightness distribution B(x, y) can be constructed. 

It follows that an array of N radio telescopes, suitably 
distributed on the Earth, will yield N(N — 1)/2 pairs, thus 
allowing one to map radio sources with an instrument 
having an effective diameter, and a corresponding angular 
resolution, of a telescope of diameter Dmax, the length of the 
maximum interferometer spacing. Such an instrument is 
called an aperture-synthesis array; the density of Fourier 
transform samples can be increased by observing as the 
Earth rotates, thus changing the projected baseline length 
on the uv-plane. In this case, the technique is known 
as Earth-rotation aperture synthesis. The VERY LARGE 
ARRAY (commonly known as the VLA), operated by the 
National Radio Astronomy Observatory on the Plains of 
St Augustine, near Socorro, New Mexico, with 27 antennas 
in a variable-length, Y-shaped array, is a good example of 
an aperture-synthesis instrument. 


Techniques of VLBI 

The technique of Very Long Baseline Interferometry, or 
VLBI, is an extension of Michelson interferometry, made 
possible by the exquisite control that modern electronics 
exerts over the time domain. If the transmission lines 
from the telescopes to the receiver are removed, it is still 
possible to observe the interference fringes by having a 
highly stable clock (usually a hydrogen maser frequency 
standard) at each telescope. The amplified signals are 
recorded on wide-band magnetic tape recorders (typically 
at a data rate of the order of 10° bits per second or more), 
using the hydrogen standards for time control. The tapes 
are then shipped to a central processing facility, where 
the received signal is now a string of discrete samples 
e(t;) at known times t;.. The two data streams are then 
cross-correlated numerically, giving the fringe amplitude 
and phase. (For a general treatment of interferometry, 
including VLBI, see Burke and Graham-Smith (1997).) 

Several VLBI arrays are in operation: the VLB Array 
(VLBA) of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory 
with its processor in Socorro NM, the European 
VLBI Network (EVN), with a processor in Dwingeloo, 
Netherlands (see JOINT INSTITUTE FOR VLBI IN EUROPE), and 
the Southern Hemisphere Array, with its processor in 
Narrabri, NSW, Australia. There is also a worldwide 
network, a collaboration among the above VLBI arrays 
with the addition of other national radio telescopes. 

The VLBA can be taken as an example of a dedicated 
VLBI system. It consists of ten similar radio telescopes 
spread across the USA and its outlying territories; the 
array is bounded by telescopes in St Croix, US Virgin 
Islands, on the southeast, Hancock NH on the northeast, 
Brewster WA on the northwest, and Mauna Kea HA on 
the southwest, with a maximum baseline of 10000 km. 
At the present time its shortest operating wavelength is 
7 mm, giving a maximum angular resolution of about 
150 microarcseconds. The operating wavelength can 
be switched rapidly from one band to another, and the 
observing schedule, sent out to the individual telescopes 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


VLBI (Very Long Baseline Interferometry) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


some time in advance, includes the time and duration of 
observation the source to be observed, and the frequency 
band. 

There are some practical considerations that arise 
when making VLBI observations. The masers at 
the individual telescopes will have slightly different 
frequencies, and therefore the time base on each magnetic 
tape will have systematic errors, showing up as time 
differences and differences in fringe rotation. The VLBA 
correlator, therefore, performs the cross-correlation for 
a number of different time delays and fringe rotation 
rates, in order to correct for these differences. In the 
case of a ‘hard-wired’ interferometer such as the VLA, 
timing variations occur, and these are usually corrected 
by observing a nearby calibration source and deriving 
the necessary corrections. For VLBI observations, this is 
sometimes possible, but in many cases it is not feasible to 
do so. For an array of several telescopes, however, there 
are closure relations that allow extra information to be 
derived. If three telescopes are observing the same source, 
there is a sum condition on the three fringe phases that 
gives useful phase information, and there is a condition 
on the fringe amplitudes, when observing with four 
telescopes, that gives useful constraints on the individual 
amplitudes. When an array of ten telescopes is used, as in 
the case of the VLBA, there is enough redundancy in the 
various combinations to constrain the uncertainties in the 
Fourier transform, giving maps of remarkable fidelity. 


Science applications of VLBI 

There is a surprising variety of scientific problems that 
can be addressed by the methods of VLBI. Quasars 
and the nuclei of active galaxies (BL Lac sources, radio 
galaxies and Seyfert galaxies) all have structures in the 
milliarcsecond range or smaller. Pulsars and gamma-ray 
burst sources are even smaller, requiring baseline lengths 
far longer than anything currently feasible, Molecular 
maser sources are also of milliarcsecond size, and these 
occur in association with star-forming regions and cool, 
evolved stars such as the Mira variables. Three general 
classes of observation can be identified: the mapping 
of milliarcsecond structures, the measurement of relative 
source positions to achieve higher astrometric accuracy, 
and the use of known sources as references to study 
geophysical phenomena such as continental drift and 
polar wandering. 


Active galactic nuclei 

The detailed study of Active GALACTIC NUCLEI (AGNSs) 
has shown that the jet-like structures seen on large 
scales persist at the smallest angular scales that have 
been studied. Paradoxically, the (relatively) long radio 
wavelengths are closely related to phenomena at x-ray 
wavelengths. The radio phenomena observed by VLBI 
are in large measure relativistic, since the radio waves 
are generated by synchrotron radiation from relativistic 
electrons circulating in magnetic fields. A large fraction 
of the sources involve massive black holes, surrounded 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


by accretion disks (the hot gas in these accretion disks, 
observed at ultraviolet and x-ray wavelengths, is in the 
process of spiralling down into the black hole at the 
center). The exact process is still unclear, but seems to 
involve magnetic fields in the accretion disks, twisted 
by differential rotation in the disks, ultimately releasing 
enormous amounts of energy by accelerating electrons to 
relativistic energies and confining the particles to a narrow 
jet. Shortly after VLBI was developed, it became clear 
that rapid changes were developing in the structure of 
the jets, and it is now well-established that the jets exhibit 
apparent motions that significantly exceed the speed of 
light, sometimes by an order of magnitude. Although 
the structure of fundamental physics might be questioned, 
such a dramatic revision as superluminal velocity does not 
seem to be needed. The effect is almost certainly caused 
by the aberration effects observed when a relativistic beam 
is directed at the observer. The effect requires a beam of 
particles having bulk motion close to the speed of light, 
directed within a few degrees of the observer. 

A relativistic effect that must be considered in 
conjunction with these compact, relativistic sources of 
SYNCHROTRON RADIATION is the self-Comptonization of the 
radiation. As the sources increase in energy density, there 
can be so many radio photons generated that they are 
Compton-scattered by the electrons and become x-ray 
photons, which can be observed by x-Ray TELESCOPES. This 
has the effect of limiting the possible surface brightness 
at radio wavelengths; expressed in terms of ‘brightness 
temperature’ (the temperature a source would need to 
have at the observing band to give the observed specific 
intensity, not a physical temperature necessarily). As a 
consequence, it is not possible for a synchrotron source 
to exhibit a brightness temperature in excess of 10! K. 
Unfortunately, it is not possible to verify this prediction 
by interferometer baselines on Earth. The flux of a 
RADIO SOURCE is proportional to the product of its average 
surface brightness and its angular size, and the wavelength 
dependences cancel out. At any wavelength, therefore, an 
interferometer with a baseline length of an Earth diameter, 
observing even the strongest radio source, can only set a 
limit of 10’? K on the surface brightness of the compact 
structures. 

This limitation to our knowledge can be overcome by 
using interferometer baselines that exceed the diameter of 
the Earth. By placing a VLBI telescope in space, there is in 
principle no limit on the angular resolution that might be 
achieved. It has turned out that the technical difficulties 
can be overcome; a successful demonstration was carried 
out, using the TDRSS (a data relay satellite system), that 
showed the practical feasibility of such measurements. 
This was followed up by HALcA, a dedicated VLBI satellite 
launched by the Japanese Space Institute ISAS in February 
1997. The results are clear: a large fraction of quasars 
and AGNs have radio nuclei that exceed the self-Compton 
limit. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


VLBI (Very Long Baseline Interferometry) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Maser sources 

The extragalactic maser sources have been another major 
object of VLBI research. The lambda-doublet lines of 
the hydroxyl radical at 1612, 1665, 1667 and 1720 MHz 
all exhibit high surface brightness (10'? K or more) 
that can only be a consequence of gas clouds being 
pumped by radiation or by collisions to invert the level 
populations, resulting ina one-pass maser that can amplify 
the background radiation. The same phenomenon occurs 
in the rotational lines of water, silicon oxide and methanol 
that are accessible in the radio spectrum. Star-forming 
regions frequently have many such maser sources, as do a 
wide variety of evolved stars. In such cases, the difficulty 
in determining the fringe phase can be overcome by self- 
referencing: a particular compact line feature can serve as 
a reference within the maser complex, and the positions 
of other line sources, often separated in Doppler shift 
by several kms™!, can be measured with respect to the 
reference maser. 


Megamasers 

Extragalactic maser sources have also been discovered. 
These are referred to as ‘megamasers’ since the necessary 
energies are so high. One of the best studied of these, the 
megamaser in the active galaxy NGC 4258, appears to be 
emitting 300 solar luminosities in the 22 GHz water line. 
The line structure turned out to be extraordinary: there 
was a complex of strong central lines, having very little 
velocity relative to that of the galaxy, but in addition there 
were Satellite maser lines with relative Doppler velocities 
+900 kms7! to either side of the central complex. A 
detailed analysis of the VLBI-derived map showed that 
the velocities could be accurately explained by a simple 
model. A ring of gas surrounds the (presumed) black hole 
at the center, and we see the ring nearly edge-on. The 
central line complex changes linearly in Doppler velocity 
across the source, and is amplifying the radiation from the 
central source; this allows the acceleration of the molecular 
gas to be measured. The high-velocity lines come from 
masers at the terminus of the edge-on ring, and these allow 
the Keplerian velocity to be determined. The result is firm 
evidence of a central black hole having a mass of 70 million 
solar masses (see Miyoshi et al 1975, Herrnstein et al 1999). 


Bibliography 

Burke and Graham-Smith 1997 An Introduction to Radio 
Astronomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 

Herrnstein et al 1999 A geometric distance to the galaxy 
NGC 4258 from orbital motions in a nuclear gas disk 
Nature 400 539 

Miyoshi et al 1975 Evidence for a black hole from high 
rotation velocities in a sub-parsec region of NGC 4258 
Nature 373 127 


Bernard F Burke 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vogel, Hermann Carl (1841-1907) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vogel, Hermann Carl (1841-1907) 


German astronomer, became director of the Potsdam As- 
trophysical Observatory, where he made spectroscopic 
analyses of stars, planets, comets and the Sun. He used 
photography to measure Doppler shifts of stars to deter- 
mine their radial velocities, discovering spectroscopic bi- 
naries and, with Julius Scheiner, determining stellar diam- 
eters and masses. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Voids 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Voids 


Galaxies have a strong tendency to cluster. They have 
been drawn together by mutual gravitational attraction. 
Seventy per cent of galaxies are found in groups or clusters 
that are probably gravitationally bound. In turn, the 
groups of galaxies lie along filaments that interconnect. 
The largest clusters of galaxies tend to be found at the 
intersections of several filaments. Even the 30% of galaxies 
that are not in bound groups lie, almost entirely, within the 
filaments. 

The filaments occupy only a small fraction of space. 
Most of space has no observable matter. These empty 
regions are the ‘voids’. 


The discovery of voids 

Although the general tendency for galaxies to cluster was 
known for a long time, the extreme segregation of galaxies 
into a small fraction of the available volume was not 
appreciated until recently. With information about the 
distribution of objects on the plane of the sky augmented 
by only crude information about distances from galaxy 
sizes and magnitudes, there is too much confusion from 
projection overlay to get a good sense of structure. It 
is necessary to have the REDsHIFTS of galaxies in order to 
place them in distance and, hence, to be able to construct 
a three-dimensional map of the distribution of galaxies 
(See DISTRIBUTION OF GALAXIES, CLUSTERS, AND SUPERCLUSTERS). 
Only in 1978, with galaxy redshifts in hand, did Stephen 
Gregory and Laird Thompson comment that there were 
regions nearly devoid of galaxies to the foreground of 
a supercluster that extends from the Coma cluster to 
the cluster Abell 1367. Several other empty regions 
were found within the next few years and, in 1981, the 
instantly famous Bodtes void was reported by Robert 
Kirshner, August Oemler, Paul Schechter and Stephen 
Shectman. This void extends over roughly a million cubic 
megaparsecs (30 million cubic light-years). 

Over the years since, there have been searches to 
see whether there is anything to be found in the Bodtes 
void. A few small galaxies have turned up. Still, it 
is an empty place. The Bodtes void may not even be 
the biggest empty region within the currently accessible 
universe. It is distinctive in part because it is surrounded 
by the prominent supercluster domains of Hercules— 
Corona Borealis, Leo and Ursa Major. There are even larger 
regions of substantial underdensity. The larger regions are 
hard to characterize because they extend so far across the 
sky that they become lost in the obscuration of our Milky 
Way Galaxy and they extend so far in distance that redshift 
surveys become incomplete. 


Nearby voids 

There is no need to go far to find a void. The Milky Way 
Galaxy is part of the LocAL Group which in turn is part 
of the Coma-Sculptor cloud, a filament that lies in the 
equatorial plane of the Local Supercluster. In the plane 
of this filament there are galaxies in all directions and to 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the south of this plane in supergalactic coordinates there is 
anther filament. However, to the north of this plane, just 
beyond the last galaxies of the Local Group, is the Local 
Void. This empty region is poorly surveyed because it 
is intersected by the Milky Way. However, there are few 
nearby galaxies on either side of the Galactic plane over a 
wide segment of the sky. 

There are several voids that are somewhat farther 
away but better studied because they cover a restricted 
part of the sky and stand out with good contrast against 
pronounced filaments. The Perseus—Pisces filament is 
particularly well defined, at a distance of 60 Mpc (200 
million light-years). Immediately to the foreground is a 
large region devoid of galaxies. 


The topology of voids 

The complement of voids are the superclusters and figure 1 
in SUPERCLUSTERS AND THE LOCAL SUPERCLUSTER illustrates both 
the filamentary nature of the distribution of galaxies and 
the voids. The filament—void network can be compared 
with a sponge. The material of the sponge can be equated 
with the filaments and the sponge holes with the voids. 
The sponge material is all interconnected, else the sponge 
would fall apart, but also the holes are all interconnected, 
so water can pass through. However, with this analogy, 
the universe is a very tenuous sponge with frail material 
connections and big holes. 

The universe must have begun with only minute 
density variations. Over time, matter has gathered 
through self-attraction in the high-density regions and 
evacuated the low-density regions. Hence, even in co- 
moving coordinates the domain of the voids has been 
growing. In metric coordinates, the voids are much bigger 
now than in the past. It follows that matter is moving away 
from voids, toward high density concentrations. 

There is still debate about how much residual matter 
there is in voids. Galaxy formation may only occur 
above a certain density threshold which leaves open the 
possibility that there could be a considerable amount of 
total mass tenuously spread through the voids. Stringent 
limits are set by failure to detect intergalactic gas over 
a wide range of temperatures. The only hint that there 
might be residual gas comes from studies of absorption 
lines in distant quasars. These absorption lines arise from 
tenuous intergalactic gas in the foreground of the quasars. 
However, at low redshifts (the present epoch) there are 
relatively few absorbing gas clouds and it remains to 
be demonstrated whether that gas is associated with the 
intersection of filaments with the line of sight or with voids. 


Bibliography 
Rood HJ 1988 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 26 245 


R Brent Tully 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volans 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Volans 


(the Flying Fish; abbrev. Vol, gen. Volantis; area 141 sq. 
deg.) a southern constellation which lies between Mensa 
and Carina, and culminates at midnight in mid January. 
It was first shown on Petrus Plancius’ celestial globe of 
c. 1598 as Piscis Volans, though it is usually attributed to 
the Dutch navigators Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser (also known 
as Petrus Theodorus) and Frederick de Houtman, who 
charted that part of the southern sky in 1595-7. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
stars in Volans are f Volantis, magnitude 3.8, y Volantis, a 
binary with yellow (G8) and pale yellow (F2) components, 
magnitudes 3.8 and 5.7, separation 14.11”, ¢ Volantis, 
magnitude 3.9, and 5 Volantis and a Volantis, both 
magnitude 4.0. Another interesting star is ¢ Volantis, 
a double with bluish-white (B6 and B9.5) components, 
magnitudes 4.4 and 7.5, separation 6.0", that have the 
same proper motion, the former of which has an unseen 
companion that revolves around it in 14.17 days. 

There are no bright star clusters, nebulae or galaxies 
in the constellation, the brightest being NGC 2442, an 
eleventh magnitude barred spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


Volcanism is the main endogenous process (a process 
originating within the planet) which gives PLANETARY 
SURFACES most of their characteristic features. 
Volcanism consists of the superficial outflow of liquid 
mixed with a variable quantity of gas and crystals, which 
comes from the PLANETARY INTERIOR. These liquids are 
produced by the melting of the planet’s or satellite’s 
interior. They are called ‘lava’ or ‘magma’ and come up 
to the surface owing to buoyancy forces. Water and 
hydrocarbon springs on Earth are not part of these 
magmatic liquids. 

Volcanism not only modifies the structure and the 
morphology of the planetary surface. During and just 
after the formation of planetary bodies, accretional 
heating partially separated volatile from refractory 
elements, degassed the mantle and produced primitive 
atmosphere. Volcanism causes this degassing of the 
mantle to continue, and it is gradually modifying both the 
planetary interior and the atmosphere. 

The morphological types of volcanic features 
strongly depend on the magma viscosity and gas content. 
Very-low-viscosity magma induces flat lava flows and 
may produce lava plains in the case of abundant flooding. 
An increase in the viscosity produces shield volcanoes 
with shallow sloping flanks (inclined at about 10°) for 
intermediate-viscosity lava or domes with steep 
peripheral flanks (inclined at about 25°) for high- 
viscosity lava. A significant gas content fragments the 
magma during volcanic explosions and _ produces 
fragments of rock called ‘tephra’. During low-energy 
explosions, the tephra again fall around the outflow 
points, forming scoria or cinder cones. High-energy 
explosions cover large areas with ash or pyroclastic 
deposits expelled aerially from a vent. Some volcanoes 
may produce continually the same magma with the same 
gas content that produces monogenic volcanic 
construction (built up by one kind of eruption). 
Elsewhere, the gas content and the magma viscosity may 
change during a single eruption or throughout the 
volcano’s history, inducing a complex polygenic volcanic 
construction (built up by several kinds of eruption). 

Volcanism timing allows the distinction between 
three kinds of worlds: (1) active worlds, with present 
evidence of endogenic activities, (2) recently active 
worlds on which active resurfacing processes have 
occurred on a large scale after the end of the heavy 
bombardment, but which now seem dead, and (3) dead 
worlds, on which the majority of the surface pre-dates the 
end of heavy bombardment and where the geological 
activity has occurred only occasionally after the end of 
this bombardment. 

Two types of solid planets and satellites exist in the 
solar system. There are silicated and rocky bodies in the 
inner solar system and icy bodies in the outer solar 
Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


system. Io and Europa, two Galilean satellites of Jupiter, 
are silicated bodies, although they belong to the outer 
solar system. Volcanism exists on almost all of these 
bodies. 


Volcanism in the inner solar system 


Active worlds 

The Earth (diameter 12 750 km), the basis for 
planetology. Volcanism on Earth has been studied 
considerably since Pliny the Younger died studying the 
famous eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79. Terrestrial 
volcanism is the reference for comparative planetary 
volcanism studies, and the definitions of rocks, eruptions 
and feature types were proposed on Earth. 

The geographical distribution of volcanoes on Earth 
is one of the characteristics of our planet. About 95% of 
active volcanoes are grouped together and form volcanic 
lines. The first group is located on the islands or 
mountains near oceanic trenches around the Pacific and 
near Indonesia and the West Indies. This volcanism is 
mainly andesitic (SiO, 55%), basaltic (SiO. 50%) and 
thyolitic (SiO, 60%). The second group lies under 
oceans, on the top of oceanic ridges. This volcanism is 
basaltic (SiO, 50%). The location of these two volcanic 
types is strongly correlated with the global dynamics of 
the EARTH’S INTERIOR (plate tectonics). Volcanism 
mainly occurs near plate boundaries. The other 5% of 
volcanoes are isolated volcanoes, spread over ocean 
floors or continents. These volcanoes are basaltic ones 
and are called ‘hot spots’. 

The popular notion of the Earth’s interior is a world- 
wide layer of magma beneath a solid thin shell. 
Following this notion, volcanism is simply the arrival of 
magma through a hole or a fracture crossing the crust. 
This popular notion is totally false. The Earth is divided 
into three levels: the superficial crust 540 km thick, the 
mantle from the base of the crust to 2900 km and the core 
from 2900 km to the centre of the Earth. The Earth is 
entirely solid with the exception of the outer core, which 
is made of molten iron. This liquid outer core represents 
less than 15% of the Earth’s volume, 2900 km below the 
surface, which is not directly involved in volcanism. The 
Earth’s interior is solid, but hot, with a temperature of up 
to 5000 °C. This heat is generated by natural radioactive 
decay. The solid state of the Earth despite this high 
temperature is due to the very high pressure created by 
the weight of overlying rocks. 

Temperature differences between the cold superficial 
layers and the hot interior produce density differences 
and enormous buoyancy, circulatory and convective 
forces. Impelled by these convective forces, the solid 
mantle flows very slowly like ice in a glacier. These 
mantle motions induce superficial motion of the cold 
superficial layers, called continental drift or plate 
tectonics. Downward-flowing superficial oceanic rocks 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


introduce oceanic water deep into the mantle. This water 
lowers the melting point and produces a small proportion 
of molten material. Upward-flowing mantle reaches a 
level where the drop in pressure allows a_ small 
proportion to melt. If enough is formed, the formed 
magma rises away from the denser residue of solid 
infusible rocks, owing to buoyancy forces. On Earth the 
convective cells are more than 1000 km wide; the upper 
parts of these cells are the tectonic plates with only 
horizontal motion. Volcanism occurs at the plates’ 
boundary where upwards or downwards motions exist 
and induce a partial melting of the mantle. Some other 
circulatory motions exist inside the mantle, with 
localized upward flows of solid mantle. These localized 
upward flows which induce localized drops in the 
pressure, partial melting and volcanoes, and are far from 
the plates’ boundaries, are called ‘hot spots’. 

In 2001, a NASA mission to study Alaska’s unique 
terrain provided scientists with their first detailed look at 
the changing topography of one of Earth’s most active 
volcanic regions. Researchers at the Alaska Synthetic 
Aperture Radar Facility, Fairbanks, created a high- 
resolution digital elevation model of Umnak Island, 
home to the Okmok volcano. This model can be used to 
produce new, accurate geologic maps. The most recent 
topographic map of the region was made in 1957 from 
aerial photographs. Okmok has erupted four times since 
then, dramatically changing the landscape. The Alaska 
scientists used data gathered in October 2000 by the 
NASA/JPL Airsar instrument, a side-looking imaging 
radar system carried aboard a NASA DC-8. It collected 
the Alaska data as part of its PacRim 2000 Mission, 
which took the instrument to French Polynesia, American 
and Western Samoa, Fiji, New Zealand, Australia, New 
Guinea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Cambodia, Philippines, 
Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, Northern Marianas, Guam, 
Palau, Hawaii and Alaska. Researchers there combined 
numerous Airsar strips of data into a mosaic, fused it to 
Landsat imagery, checked its accuracy and generated a 
number of data products, including the mosaic of Umnak 
Island. 


Venus (diameter 12 102 km) (figure 1). There is no doubt 
that volcanism has been responsible for the generation of 
the majority of the Venusian surface. The Venusian 
surface is affected by only few impact craters, indicating 
a geologically young age. Venusian plains exhibit long 
flow-fields, with long lava channels in some places. 
Many thousands of volcanoes exist on Venus, either on 
plains or in the highlands (see VENUS: SURFACE). The 
MAGELLAN pictures revealed 550 concentrations of small 
volcanoes <20 km in diameter, 270 intermediate 
volcanoes between 20 and 100 km in diameter with a 
great variety of morphologies, 150 large volcanoes in 
excess of 100 km in diameter, 80 caldera-like features 
and more than 100 steep-sided domes sometimes called 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


‘pancakes’. Some strange volcanic features without 
equivalents on Earth or other planets exist on Venus. 
There are complex overlaps of bulges, faults, cinder 
cones and lava flows, and they are called ‘coronae’, 
‘arachnoids’, ‘novae’.... The majority of these volcanic 
features are consistent with basaltic composition, a 
hypothesis confirmed by the findings of Soviet landers 
whose soil analyses are chemically similar to those of 
basalt (SiO, 50%). The steep-sided domes may represent 
more silicic magma (SiO, 60%), while lava channels may 
represent ultramafic lava flows (SiO, 45%). Only a little 
evidence was found for extensive pyroclastic deposits. 

The volcanic features show a _ broad global 
distribution, in contrast to the distribution of volcanoes 
along plate boundaries on Earth. Some highlands show 
an excess of volcanic features, while some lowlands 
show only lava floods. 

There is no direct evidence in the Magellan data for 
current volcanic activity. Some atmospheric analyses 
have shown sulfur dioxide variations, which may be due 
to volcanic activity. However, the dynamics of the 
atmosphere may also explain these observed variations. 
Crater counts would indicate that the whole Venusian 
surface is younger than 0.8-0.5 Gyr. An equilibrium 
resurfacing model for explaining the impact craters’ 
density implies a current volcanic lava flux of 
0.5 km’ yr', a value comparable with the terrestrial 
intraplate volcanism. Thus there is hardly any doubt that, 
as is the Earth, Venus is a geologically active planet 
despite the lack of active eruptive processes identified 
during the Magellan mission. 


Figure 1. A volcano on a rocky body: Sapas Mons on Venus. 
Sapas Mons is 400 km across and 2 km high. It is a typical 
shield volcano. The sides of the volcano are covered with 
numerous overlapping lava flows which appear clear in this 
image. This volcano looks like Hawaiain volcanoes or large 
Martian volcanoes. No impact craters are visible on this picture, 
which indicates a very young age for the Venusian volcanism. 
This three-dimensional perspective view is produced with radar 
data from Magellan (NASA). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The density of Venus indicates that the Venusian 
interior is theoretically more or less similar to the Earth’s 
interior. On Venus, mantle convection produced and still 
produces superficial motions and tectonic features, which 
are different from plate tectonics. The volcanism 
distribution confirms that the global dynamics of Venus’s 
interior is quite different from that of the Earth. The 
localized ‘hot-spot-like’ convection strongly dominates 
the plate-tectonics-like convection. The origin of this 
difference is poorly understood. 


Recently active worlds 

Mars (diameter 6794 km). Volcanoes are unquestionably 
on Mars (see MARS: SURFACE). Four enormous shield 
volcanoes and many smaller ones rise 15—25 km above 
the surface. These volcanoes are mainly located on a 
8000 km wide broad topographic bulge which stands 
about 10 km high. OLYMPUS MONS, the largest volcano in 
the known solar system, rises 26 km above the 
surrounding plateau. These volcanoes possess nested 
summit calderas and have numerous lobate lava flows on 
their flanks. Other smaller shield volcanoes exist in other 
places. Low-relief shields with irregular summit craters 
and numerous radial flows on their flanks are called 
‘paterae’. Some domes (called ‘Tholus’) and cinder 
cones have also been identified across Mars. Volcanic 
plains with multiple overlapping flow lobes are found 
around the periphery of the shield volcanoes. The 
complex flows can extend for >1000 km beyond the 
shields. Large plains covering wide areas in the northern 
hemisphere (but rare in the southern hemisphere) have 
controversial origin. The preferred origin is a volcanic 
one, based primarily on morphological similarity to lunar 
maria. No or only little evidence was found for extensive 
pyroclastic deposits. 

In 1976 and 1997, respectively, the two VIKING 
landers and MARS PATHFINDER made in situ chemical 
analyses of soil and rocks. These analyses are consistent 
with volcanic rocks (mainly basalts, and one andesite- 
like analysis). Some meteorites (the SNC METEORITES) are 
supposed to have a Martian origin. These meteorites are 
mainly volcanic rocks (basalts and pyroxenites). 

Volcanism existed on Mars from the earliest epoch, 
the lower Noachian, to the latest one, the upper 
Amazonian. The maximum of visible volcanic materials 
was produced during the Hesperian (from 3.5 to —2 Gyr). 
The younger volcanoes, Olympus and Arsia Mons, are 
estimated to be near 0.5+0.25 Gyr. 

The Martian interior is theoretically more or less 
similar to the Earth’s interior. On Mars, mantle 
convection produced superficial motions and tectonic 
features which are different from plate tectonics. The 
lack of active volcanoes since 500 million years ago 
indicates that the mantle convection now is either very 
low or has completely stopped. In the past, the mantle 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


convection was active, and looked like hot-spot-like 
convection rather than plate tectonics convection. 


Dead worlds 

The Moon (diameter 3476 km figure 2). On the MOON, 
84% of the surface which was called ‘terrae’ by GALILEO 
in the 17th century consists of old anorthositic cratered 
crust. However, about 16% of the surface consists of 
younger flat basaltic plains and flows which fill the old 
low-lying basins and form black patches on the Moon’s 
face. These plains were called ‘maria’ by Galileo. The 
lava flows inside the plains are very long (up to 1000 km) 
with very low slopes (less than 1°), a factor that indicates 
a very low viscosity for the lava, with very low gas 
content. Many of these flows present sinuous rilles, 
which may be interpreted as collapsed lava tubes or 
erosional features caused by very hot lava flows. The 
thickness of lava may reach 10 km under Mare Imbrium. 
A very few cinder cones, shield volcanoes and volcanic 
domes rise up from the lava flows. The majority of maria 
are located on the near side. 

This volcanism became evident during the waning 
stage of heavy bombardment which occurred before 
—3.9 Gyr. The volcanism was important from —3.9 to 
—3.5 Gyr, then decreased and virtually stopped 3 Gyr 
ago. The larger maria fill very old impact basins, but the 
superficial flows are some hundreds of millions of years 
younger than the impact itself. The maria are more 
abundant on the nearside than on the farside. Apollo 
samples indicate that lunar lava chemical composition is 
relatively similar to that of terrestrial basalts. 


Pus 


Figure 2. A lava plain on a rocky body: Mare Serenitatis (left) 
on the Moon. White mountains (on the right) are ‘terrae’. No 
visible volcanic structures are seen inside this part of Mare 
Serenitatis, which only consists of very flat lava flows. 
Numerous small impact craters are visible on the mare, because 
the lava flows are 3.5 Gyr old (NASA—Apollo). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


On the Moon, volcanoes ceased 3 Gyr ago. The 
dynamics of the lunar mantle during these very old 
epochs is poorly known. It is only known that this 
volcanism was not accompanied by significant tectonic 
motions, contrary to the Earth, Venus and Mars. 
Volcanism is more abundant on the nearside than on the 
farside, because the crust thickness is more significant on 
the farside, and the buoyancy forces seldom allowed the 
magma to reach the surface. There is a geographical 
relation between volcanism and large impact on the 
Moon, but genetic relationships are not clear because of 
the large chronological interval between large impacts 
and maria flooding. 


Mercury (diameter 4878 km). On MERCURY, maria-like 
plains called ‘smooth plains’ are probably volcanic in 
origin. Unfortunately, the modest resolution of MARINER 
10 images makes it difficult to clearly identify volcanic 
features. These smooth plains are mainly inside and 
around CALORIS BASIN, the major impact basin of 
Mercury. These smooth plains cover large areas of 
relatively ancient ‘intercrater plains’ which are possibly 
volcanic plains flooded during the heavy bombardment. 

Crater chronology would indicate that the maximum 
of smooth plain flooding is geologically 
contemporaneous with the Caloris impact. The end of 
volcanism probably occurred 3.5 Gyr ago. 

The dynamics of the Mercurian mantle during these 
very old epochs is poorly known. As on the Moon, it is 
only known that these periods of volcanism were not 
accompanied by significant tectonic motions, in contrast 
to the Earth, Venus and Mars. There is a geographical 
and a chronological relation between volcanism and large 
impacts on Mercury, suggesting genetic relationships 
such as a pressure fall in the mantle under the Caloris 
cavity. 


The meteorites’ parent bodies and the asteroid belt. 
About 8% of the catalogued METEORITES are volcanic 
rocks, mainly basalt or pyroxenite. There are five main 
kinds of these volcanic meteorites and they are called 
eucrite, howardite, aubrite, diogenite and urellite. The 
meteorites are suposed to be Earth-crossing fragments of 
asteroids. Thus, some ASTEROIDS with past volcanic 
activity exist in the asteroid belt. Some asteroids have a 
spectral signature of volcanic rocks. VESTA is supposed to 
be the diogenite and eucrite parent body, and Nysa is 
supposed to be the aubrite parent body. 
Radiochronological dating of volcanic meteorites indicates 
that the volcanism in the asteroid belt occurred only 10- 
100 million years after the formation of the solar system. 


The relationship between the duration of volcanism 
and planetary size 

After the end of ACCRETION, the heat inside a planet is 
mainly produced by radioactive decay. This heat 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


production by massive bodies is supposed to be the same 
for all the silicated bodies and identical to the chondritic 
heat production value (about 10°'' W kg’'). This heat 
production inside the planets’ interior balances the heat 
lost to space. This balance fixes the interior temperature. 
If the loss is efficient with regard to the production, the 
temperature is low; if the loss is not efficient, the 
temperature is high. The heat is produced inside the 
planet and is related to its volume; the heat is lost by the 
surface. This balance is thus regulated by the 
volume/surface ratio, which is proportional to the 
planetary radius: a small planetary body with a low 
volume/surface ratio has efficient heat loss and a low 
internal temperature ; this is the case now for the Moon, 
Mercury and the asteroids. A large planetary body with a 
high volume/surface ratio has inefficient heat lost and a 
high internal temperature ; this is now the case for Venus 
and Earth. An intermediate planetary body has an 
intermediate volume/surface ratio and has an 
intermediate internal temperature; this is the case for 
Mars today. 

At the beginning of their history, all the planetary 
bodies were hot because of the accretional heating and the 
short-lived radioactivity. After the end of this primeval 
heat production, the heat production was mainly due to 
long-lived radioactive elements (K, U, Th). When 
considering the solution to the spherically symmetric heat 
equation, the accumulation of heat from long-lived 
radionuclides produces a maximum in temperature after 
several hundred million years in large bodies. This has 
been confirmed by the extensive magmatic phase on the 
Moon which started 500 million years after its formation. 
After this maximum in temperature, because of the natural 
decay of radioactivity, there has been a secular cooling for 
all the planetary bodies. This cooling has induced a 
gradual stoppage of volcanism, with end times related to 
size and volume/surface ratio of the planets: this stoppage 
occurred very early for the small bodies (the meteorites’ 
parent bodies), 1-1.5 Gyr after the accretion of Mercury 
and the Moon, 4 Gyr after the accretion of Mars and has 
not yet occurred for Venus and the Earth. 


Volcanism in the outer solar system 

In the outer solar system, where the temperature is 100 
K, one planet (Pluto) and almost all large satellites have a 
low density (<2 g cm”) and water ice spectral 
reflectance. This indicates that water ice is a major 
component of these bodies, with a proportion larger than 
50%. Other volatile compounds (N>, NH3...) may be 
mixed with water ice. These bodies are called icy bodies. 
Only two satellites of Jupiter, Io and Europa, have a 
density >3 g cm™ and are mainly rocky bodies. 


lo, Europa and tidal heating 
Io (diameter 3630 km, figure 3) is one of the four 
Galilean satellites of Jupiter. Its density of 3.55 g cm™ 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


indicates a global composition of silicates and iron. Io’s 
surface displays a wide variety of colors and spectra 
which are dominated by sulfur compounds. Io’s surface 
geology is dominated by volcanic vents, craters, fissures, 
flows and other morphological forms attributed to 
volcanic processes (see also 10: VOLCANISM AND 
GEOPHYSICS). Active plumes of volcanic material 
reaching heights of 300 km were seen by Voyager and 
GALILEO MISSION spacecraft in 1979 and 1997. These 
plumes are thought to be driven up by SO) or sulfur 
vapors. Sulfur compounds are certainly present on the 
surface, but, because of the low viscosity of solid sulfur, 
the heights of mountains, 9000 m, indicate a dominantly 
silicated composition for high mountains. Temperatures 
>1500 °C measured by Galileo above active volcanoes 
prove the existence of molten silicates. It is not known 
whether low topography lava flows are composed of pure 
sulfur or sulfur rich silicates. 

New large volcanic deposits and flows were seen by 
the Galileo spacecraft 18 yr after the Voyager fly-bys. No 
impact craters can be seen on JIo’s pictures, an 
observation which indicates that the volcanism is a very 
active resurfacing process. The global average height of 
To’s resurfacing is about 100 m (10° yr)". 

Io’s volcanism supplies a very thin atmosphere 
(10-10 Pa). Around Jupiter, a plasma torus is a result 
of material escaping from Io (see also 10: PLASMA 
TORUS). 

Io is a small planetary body, with theoretically not 
enough radiogenic heating to be active now. However, 
Voyager revealed that Io is the most active solid world in 
the solar system. Another heat source other than 
radiogenic heating must be present for Io. The orbit 
of Io has a measurable forced eccentricity, which is 


Figure 3. Global view of Io, showing numerous lava flows, and 
two active plumes: one on the limb (right) and the other on the 
terminator (left). These two plumes are about 200 km high. 
Detailed views of these plumes are shown on the right. Note the 
shadow of the plume located near the terminator (NASA— 
Galileo). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


particularly pronounced because of the phenomenon of 
orbital resonance with Europa and Ganymede. The result 
of this forced eccentricity is that Io’s tidal bulges are 
continually flexed and moved with respect to Io’s 
interior. The tidal bulge is about 7 km in height, and its 
periodic flexion is +100 m. This is a significant source of 
friction and of tidally generated heat. In the case of Io, 
heat generated by tidal dissipation (about 10'* W, 
corresponding to 10° W kg’) is probably 100 times the 
rate of radiogenic heating. This is enough to melt at least 
some parts of Io’s interior. 

EUROPA (diameter 3138 km) is a satellite of Jupiter, 
3.04 g cm™ in density. This density indicates a silicated 
composition. It may be briefly described in this section 
even though its visible surface is completely covered by 
water ice. Density calculation and modelling indicate a 
silicated sphere of radius 1400-1500 km, surrounded by 
a 100-150 km thick H,O layer. Voyager and Galileo 
images revealed geologically active or recent resurfacing 
processes bringing liquid water or ice-crystal mush to the 
surface. The 100-150 km thick H,O layer is probably not 
completely frozen, and a liquid water ocean is probably 
overlain by an ice field. The flooding of liquid water on 
the surface does not correspond to volcanism sensu 
stricto, but rather to polar-like phenomena. The H,O 
layer is probably warmed at the H,O-silicate boundary 
by volcanism, similar in origin to Io’s volcanism, but 
with a lower intensity. 


The icy bodies 

The surfaces of 13 of these icy bodies larger than 450 km 
in diameter have been well imaged by Voyager and 
Galileo spacecraft. On these kinds of bodies, volcanism 
may bring to the surface the molten compound of the 
interior: liquid water. The morphology created by this 
water volcanism is very different from that of their 
silicated counterparts. Fractures, vents and dykes may 
exist, but volcanic morphologies similar to the popular 
notion of volcanoes do not exist. On many satellites 
(Ganymede, Enceladus, Miranda, Triton), the surface of 
resurfaced ice is affected by sets of parallel or 
crosscutting ridges and grooves, poorly understood in 
origin, despite their frequency in the solar system. 


Active worlds: Enceladus (Saturn’s satellite) and Triton 
(Neptune’s satellite). ENCELADUS (diameter 500 km) 
displays two different terrain units: old heavily cratered 
terrain units, cut and overlain with smoother units closest 
in morphology to bright grooved or smooth terrains of 
GANYMEDE. There are essentially two types of grooves 
on Enceladus: Ganymede-like sinuous grooves, which 
may have the same origin (extruded and ridged low- 
viscosity fluid, probably liquid water or a mush of water- 
ice crystals), and straight grooves generally interpreted as 
tensional or volcanic fissures. The grooved and smooth 
terrains of Enceladus have no detectable impact craters, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


which implies a very young age, of less than a few 
hundred million years. The albedo of Enceladus is 
uniform and virtually equal to 1. Analysis of the way the 
surface scatters light suggests that it is covered by fresh 
ice frost. A likely cause of this is a deposit of frozen 
spray from young volcanic eruptions perhaps continuing 
on Enceladus up to the present day. Another argument in 
support of the present dispersion of spay from Enceladus 
is that Enceladus orbits in the middle of the E ring, which 
consists of spherical particles about 1 «um in size. Such 
small particles would not survive more than ten thousand 
years in the interplanetary medium, suggesting that active 
volcanism from Enceladus is at the origin of the E ring. 

TRITON (diameter 2720 km) is the largest satellite of 
Neptune. The entire visible surface is crater poor and 
relatively young. The older terrains (the hummocky and 
the cantaloupe terrains) show volcanic evidence: flow- 
generated terrains containing a variety of domes and 
ridges which appear to be viscous extrusions which have 
erupted along the fault lines. These older terrains are 
overlain with smooth plains, which in some places form 
full flat-floored depressions 200 km wide. These younger 
terrains seem to have been formed as a series of large- 
volume, viscous flows. In the center of the flat-floored 
depressions is a collection of pits and flows, which may 
be the site of the most recent volcanic activity. The 
southern part of Triton is covered by a polar cap probably 
made of frozen nitrogen. In 1989, two active plumes 
were seen by Voyager inside the polar cap. Each plume 
sends a jet of dark material upwards to an altitude of 
8 km and produces dark deposits. Triton is the only icy 
body in the solar system where eruption processes have 
been seen without doubt in action. 


Recently active worlds: Ganymede (Jupiter’s satellite), 
Dione, Tethys (Saturn’s satellites), Ariel, Miranda and 
Titania (Uranus’s satellites). These are worlds where 
there are evidences of both tectonic proceses on a global 
scale and vast volcanic outpourings which occurred after 
the end of late heavy bombardment. 

Ganymede (diameter 5262 km, figure 4) represents 
the best known of these bodies. Ganymede is divided into 
dark heavily cratered terrains that occur as polygonal 
regions and poorly cratered bright terrains in the form of 
bands that separate the heavily cratered polygons. The 
bright terrains are usually strongly grooved and ridged 
and provide unequivocal evidence of widespread-to- 
global volcanism and tectonism. In some place, bright 
terrains are smooth, notably where they overlay the dark 
terrains. This suggest that the bright terrains were 
emplaced during extensional tectonic events, such as an 
extruded low-viscosity fluid, probably liquid water or a 
mush of water-ice crystals. The age of the end of this 
flooding is strongly dependent on cratering models in the 
outer solar system, and may be estimated to be 3- 
3.5 Gyr. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Figure 4. (a) Global view of the south pole of Ganymede. Flat 
terrains probably consist of large frozen water flows. Ridged 
and grooved terrains are deformed ice flows. Numerous impact 
craters indicate that this flooding stopped 3.5 Gyr ago (NASA-— 
Voyager). (b) Detailed view of Ganymedean surface. Flat and 
ridged terrains are crosscut by an elongated caldera-like feature. 
Viscous flow (probably ice—liquid mush) is visible inside the 
caldera (NASA-Galileo). 


Large-scale resurfacing and flooding without 
tectonics is visible on DIONE (diameter 1120 km) and on 
one area of TETHYS (diameter 1060 km), while evidence 
of water volcanism and resurfacing related to tectonism 
exists on other parts of Tethys, and on TITANIA (diameter 
1580 km) and ARIEL (diameter 1158 km). On Ariel, 
canyons called ‘Chasma’ have clearly been flooded by 
some kind of volcanic flow processes which somewhere 
produced sinuous rilles with scales and morphology 
comparable with their lunar maria counterparts. 

MIRANDA (diameter 472 km) is one of the most 
remarkable and complex worlds in the solar system 
despite its small diameter. Half of Miranda is a uniform 
densely cratered plain, while the other half is occupied by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Volcanism in the Solar System 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


regions of younger grooved terrains, the detailed 
appearance of which has never been found elsewhere in 
the solar system. These regions are called ‘corona’ and 
exhibit belts of parallel or crosscutting ridges. These 
ridges are commonly interpreted as fracture-controlled 
extrusions of warm ice or mush. The pattern of ridges is 
not understood at all. Somewhere, the ridges seem 
submerged by lava-flow-like structures. 


Dead worlds: Callisto (Jupiter’s satellite), Iapetus, 
Mimas, Rhea (Saturn’s satellites), Oberon, Umbriel 
(Uranus’s satellites). The Voyager and Galileo fly-bys 
revealed six satellites as intensely cratered worlds. If 
some kind of volcanic resurfacing processes had existed, 
they ceased before the end of late heavy bombardment. 
Possible volcanic morphologies have now almost 
completely disappeared, with the possible exception of 
Callisto and Rhea. 

On CALLISTO (diameter 4800 km), some flat plains 
are associated with fractures surrounding a large impact 
(Valhalla) and may be due to some water resurfacing. 

On RHEA (diameter 1530 km), one-third of the 
known surface is less cratered than the other two-thirds. 
Possible clues that there was endogenic activity on Rhea 
are given by features such as linear troughs and ridges, 
which may be interpreted as subdued volcanic vents. 


Origins of volcanism on the icy satellites 

Icy bodies are not large bodies (smaller than or equal in 
size to Mercury), and their volcanism should be 
completely extinct. Moreover, the size does not display a 
significant effect on internal activity: the small Enceladus 
is still active, while the large Callisto never has 
significant activity. Two physical reasons may produce 
abnormally active volcanism. 


(1) With the exception of the unimaged Pluto, all the icy 
bodies are satellites of large planets, and permanent 
or transitional orbital resonances with other satellites 
may produce permanent or transitional orbital 
eccentricity and tidally generated heat. That would 
explain the difference between Ganymede and 
Callisto: Ganymede is closer to Jupiter than Callisto; 
tidal heating may have been greater for Ganymede 
and sufficient to produce volcanism during the first 
billion years. Tidal heating was never sufficient for 
Callisto. The heat sources of Enceladus and other 
bodies smaller than 1000 km in diameter are more 
uncertain and may be searched for in temporary 
orbital resonances with other satellites. The nature 
and shape of convective motions inside icy mantles 
are unknown at present. 

(2) If a temperature of 1100 °C is necessary to melt 
silicates, a temperature of about 0 °C is sufficient to 
melt pure water ice, and a temperature of —100 °C 
induces the melting of a water-ammoniac ice 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


mixture. Even low internal heating could increase 
the temperature sufficiently to reach the melting 
temperature and to produce water or water— 
ammoniac volcanism. 


The case of Triton is more complex. Volcanism- 
induced resurfacing which occurred everywhere is 
probably due to radiogenic and tidal heating, as for 
Ganymede or other large icy satellites. Such mechanisms 
could explain the active plumes. However, these active 
plumes are only located on the southern polar cap, and an 
exogenous origin is possible. The polar cap is made of 
transparent nitrogen ice covering a darker substrate. This 
was Tritonian ‘springtime’ when Voyager 2 imaged the 
south pole of Triton in 1989, and the temperature was 
increasing. Nitrogen ice is transparent and allows most of 
the sunlight to heat the underlying darker layer. A rise of 
only 10 °C of this dark layer above the surface 
temperature of —236 °C would cause the vaporization of 
the base of the nitrogen ice layer and its eruption as a 
nitrogen gas plume, through the icy superficial crust. 


Pierre Thomas 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Voyager Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Voyager Mission 


If one were to ask a space scientist which of all the space 
missions ever flown he or she would consider the most 
scientifically successful, there is a good chance that 
NASsA’s Voyager Mission to Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and 
Neptune would be mentioned more than all others com- 
bined. Launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 1977 
(Voyager 2 on 20 August and Voyager 1 on 5 September), 
these two hardy spacefarers celebrated their 20th 
anniversary in late 1997. Although their last planetary 
encounter was in 1989, they continue to collect useful 
data about the outer solar system and will probably cel- 
ebrate their 40th anniversary in the year 2017 before their 
useful lives come to an end. 

As early as 1966, engineers at NASA's JET PROPUL- 
SION LABORATORY (JPL) realized that it was possible with 
a single spacecraft to visit all of the giant gaseous plan- 
ets in the solar system (JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS and NEP- 
TUNE). After rejecting a number of more costly and more 
ambitious missions proposed by JPL, NASA approved a 
two-spacecraft Mariner Jupiter/Saturn Mission to take 
partial advantage of this fortuitous planetary align- 
ment. The initial approval was for a 4 yr mission, 
including flybys of Jupiter and Saturn only by each of 
the two Voyager spacecraft. The official project start 
date was 1 July 1972, and launch was slated for the late 
summer of 1977. The mission was renamed Voyager 
shortly after project start. (The name Voyager had pre- 
viously been selected by JPL for an unsuccessfully pro- 
posed mission to Mars. The basic concepts of that 
earlier Voyager mission were essentially reproduced in 


the successful dual-orbiter, dual-lander VIKING MISSION 
to Mars.) 

The two Voyager spacecraft were built with identical 
engineering designs and identical scientific payloads. 
Part of that design was based on results from the smaller 
PIONEERS 10 and 11. Neither Pioneer spacecraft detected 
dust particles in their passages through the Asteroid Belt. 
As a consequence, the Voyager dust detector was dis- 
carded in favor of a plasma wave detector. The eleven 
investigations and their Principal Investigators or Team 
Leaders are given in table 1. The two Pioneer spacecraft 
also experienced very high levels of radiation in the 
vicinity of Jupiter; this led to a campaign to build the 
Voyager engineering and scientific hardware to be resis- 
tant to damage from these higher radiation fields. 

Although the Voyager Mission was approved by 
NASA for the 4 yr flight including Jupiter and Saturn 
encounters only, NASA gave approval for JPL to design 
the mission of Voyager 2 (but not the spacecraft or its 
scientific payload) to go beyond Saturn to Uranus and 
Neptune (or to Pluto). As noted earlier, Voyager 1 was 
launched more than two weeks after Voyager 2. 
However, the flight to Uranus required a slower flyby of 
Saturn; Voyager 2’s flight to Jupiter and Saturn was 
therefore a few per cent slower than that of Voyager 1. It 
was prior knowledge of that fact that prompted the 
‘reverse numbering’ of Voyagers 2 and 1. Voyager 1 
encountered the planet Jupiter on 5 March, 1979. Voyager 
2 followed on 9 July of that same year. Voyagers 1 and 2 
flew by Saturn on 12 November 1980 and 25 August 
1981, respectively. 

Following Voyager 1’s successful flyby of Saturn, 
which included a very close approach of Saturn’s largest 


Table 1. Voyager Investigations and their Lead Scientists. 


Investigation and acronym 


Lead Scientist 


Affiliation 


Cosmic Ray Subsystem (CRS) 

Infrared Imaging Spectrograph Subsystem (IRIS) 
Imaging Science Subsystem (ISS) 

Low Energy Charged Particles Subsystem (LECP) 
Magnetometer Subsystem (MAG) 


Plasma Science Subsystem (PLS) 


Photopolarimeter Subsystem (PPS) 


Rochus E Vogt (1972-84) 
Edward C Stone (1984—) 
Rudolph A Hanel (1972-87) 
Barney J Conrath (1987-91) 
Bradford A Smith (1972-91) 
S M (Tom) Krimigis (1972-) 
Norman F Ness (1972-) 


Herbert S Bridge (1972-87) 
John W Belcher (1987-97) 

John D Richardson (1997) 
Charles F Lillie (1972-78) University of Colorado 
Charles W Hord (1978-9) 


California Institute of Technology 
California Institute of Technology 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
University of Arizona 

APL, Johns Hopkins University 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
and University of Delaware 
Massachusetts Inst. of Technology 
Massachusetts Inst. of Technology 
Massachusetts Inst. of Technology 


University of Colorado 


Arthur L Lane (1979-91) NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
Planetary Radio Astronomy Subsystem (PRA) James W Warwick (1972-91) Radiophysics, Incorporated 
Plasma Wave Science Subsystem (PWS) Frederick L Scarf (1972-88) TRW Systems 

Donald A Gurnett (1988-) University of lowa 


Radio Science Subsystem (RSS) 


Ultraviolet Spectrometer Subsystem (UVS) 


Von R Eshleman (1972-8) 
G Leonard Tyler (1978-91) 
A Lyle Broadfoot (1972-91) University of Southern California and 


tanford University 
tanford University 


S 
i) 


University of Arizona 


a Note that Edward C Stone also served as Project Scientist from project start through the present time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Voyager Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


moon, TITAN, NASA gave approval for the Voyager 
Project to target Voyager 2’s Saturn encounter for a con- 
tinuation on to Uranus. The transition between the pri- 
mary mission and the Voyager Uranus/ Interstellar 
Mission (VUIM) occurred on 1 October 1981. Similar 
approvals were given for subsequent portions of the 
extended Voyager Missions. The Voyager 
Neptune / Interstellar Mission (VNIM) started 1 April 
1986; the Voyager Interstellar Mission (VIM) began 1 
October 1989. Because of Voyager 1’s close approach to 
Titan, the spacecraft’s trajectory passed well south of 
Saturn. The massive gravity of Saturn pulled Voyager 1’s 
path northward of the ecliptic and hence northward of 
the orbits of Uranus, Neptune and pLuto. However, the 
measurements Voyager 1 makes of interplanetary 
charged particles and magnetic fields continue to be of 
great interest to solar system scientists. Voyager 2 
encountered Uranus on 24 January 1986, and Neptune on 
25 August 1989; like Voyager 1, its mission is now direct- 
ed at interplanetary and interstellar measurements. 

The intensive data collection periods surrounding 
each of the planetary encounters generally included 
about 3 months prior to closest approach and one month 
thereafter. The first approximately two months of the 
encounter period constituted an ‘Observatory’ phase. 
‘Far Encounter’ spanned the period from the end of the 
Observatory phase to about 1 day before closest 
approach. ‘Near Encounter’ generally lasted about 2 
days, more or less centered on the closest approach to the 
relevant planet. A ‘Post Encounter’ of about 1 month con- 
cluded each planetary encounter period. Each of these 
phases included two or three sequence computer ‘loads’, 
which updated the central computer and sequencer 
(CCS) contents. The CCS would then control spacecraft 
activity, including recording to and playback of the digi- 
tal tape recorder storage device. A full tape recorder 
would hold the equivalent of about 100 full-resolution 
(i.e. uncompressed) images. 

Because Voyager was designed to operate at great 
distances from the Sun where solar panels were ineffec- 
tive, power was (and is) provided for each of the Voyager 
spacecraft by means of radioisotope thermoelectric gen- 
erators (RTGs). These ‘batteries’ generate electricity by 
transforming heat radiated by the natural decay of plu- 
tonium dioxide. These batteries, which utilize non-fis- 
sionable plutonium-238, are highly reliable and long 
lived, a perfect combination for a mission like Voyager. 
The RTGs carried by each Voyager generated about 500 
W of power at launch and are decreasing in output by 
about 5 W yr-!. This will permit them to continue to 
power the two spacecraft with usable amounts of 
wattage until about the year 2020. 

Communication with the spacecraft occurred via 
digitally modulated radio signals. Commands transmit- 
ted from the ground occurred at S-band, near a frequen- 
cy of 2113 MHz. Data were transmitted to the ground at 
X-band, near a frequency of 8415 MHz. Early in its mis- 
sion, the Voyager 2 primary radio receiver failed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Following a week of no command receipt by Voyager 2, 
a computer-stored failure algorithm automatically 
switched to the spacecraft’s backup receiver. It was soon 
discovered that the backup receiver was ‘tone deaf’. In 
other words, if the S-band signal arriving at the space- 
craft differed by more than 96 Hz from the receiver’s 
frequency, it would not be detected. Factors such as the 
velocity of the spacecraft and the rotation and revolution 
of the Earth would cause changes (due to Doppler shift- 
ing of the transmitted radio signal) that easily exceeded 
96 Hz. While adjustments in the transmitted S-band 
frequency could be made for the factors mentioned, inde- 
terminate shifts in the central receiver frequency would 
occur each time power usage (and hence temperature) 
would change by more than a couple of watts. Power 
changes were therefore minimized; when power usage 
changes were necessary, a command moratorium of from 
24 to 72 h was honored, providing enough time to deter- 
mine the new receiver frequency. Voyager engineers 
became very proficient at dealing with this shortcoming 
of Voyager 2, and it never substantially limited the space- 
craft’s capabilities. 

Another Voyager 2 hardware problem occurred dur- 
ing the Saturn flyby. Voyagers 1 and 2 are three-axis sta- 
bilized spacecraft. Except for brief periods of time, the 3.7 
m wide high-gain communications antenna is kept 
pointed at Earth, and the star tracker is locked on a 
selected bright star. The cameras and spectrometers were 
then pointed at their targets by means of a steerable two- 
degree-of-freedom scan platform. One of the two axes of 
that scan platform seized about half an hour after 
Voyager 2’s closest approach to Saturn. The problem was 
traced to the migration of lubricant out of the gear train 
during periods of heavy usage. Motion was restored a 
few days later. Careful study of the characteristics of the 
failure, both from spacecraft engineering data and from 
life tests on similar gear trains at JPL, enabled engineers 
to devise a usage plan that would avoid another seizure. 
The scan platform operated flawlessly during the Uranus 
and Neptune encounters. 

There are several examples of engineering ‘tricks’ 
that improved the Voyager science return. Normal limit 
cycle motion of the spacecraft was controlled within 
0.05° in each of the three spacecraft axes. Attitude 
knowledge was provided by monitoring the Sun Sensor 
and Star Tracker. Attitude control was accomplished by 
200 ms bursts of hydrazine fuel through appropriate 
thruster jets. Using that scheme, the motion of the cam- 
era field of view across the sky was slower than the 
motion of an hour hand on a clock. Nevertheless, long 
exposures and low light levels demanded even slower 
rates. The Attitude and Articulation Control System 
(AACS) aboard Voyager 2 was programmed to shorten 
the thruster pulses, slowing the resultant rates across 
the 0.05° deadband to less than 10% of the normal qui- 
escent rate, almost eliminating image smear in more 
than 90% of the images obtained at Uranus and 
Neptune. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Voyager Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Another scheme to reduce image smear involved 
rotating the cameras at a rate that matched the apparent 
motion of a nearby satellite (moon) during flyby of that 
satellite. This scheme involved using onboard gyro- 
scopes for attitude reference (instead of the Sun Sensor 
and Star Tracker). The AACS was fooled by doctored 
data in the spacecraft computer into thinking the gyro- 
scopes were drifting. As the AACS compensated (as it 
was designed to do) for this false ‘gyro drift’, it caused 
the spacecraft to turn in a way that kept the cameras 
pointed at the nearby moon without having to use the 
(somewhat jerky) movement of the scan platform. This 
technique was first used to obtain unsmeared images of 
Saturn’s moon Rhea and was particularly successful in 
image sequences of Uranus’s moon MIRANDA, and 
Neptune’s moon TRITON. 

The scientific findings of the Voyager Mission have 
been the most notable of its contributions. The individual 
scientific articles based on Voyager data now number in 
the thousands, and Voyager data continue to be the 
source of detailed comparative studies of the giant plan- 
ets and their rings, satellites and magnetospheres (the 
magnetic fields surrounding each of the giant planets 
and the electrically charged particle population trapped 
within or traversing those magnetic fields). 


Atmospheres and interiors 
Voyagers 1 and 2 obtained the first detailed composition, 
temperature and pressure profiles of the atmospheres of 
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune and improved our under- 
standing of those characteristics of the atmosphere of 
Jupiter, previously visited by Pioneers 10 and 11. The 
GALILEO MISSION has dropped an instrumented probe into 
Jupiter’s atmosphere and completed its orbital mission 
around the solar system's largest planet, improving on 
many of the measurements made by Voyagers 1 and 2. 
Ulysses also completed a high-latitude flyby of Jupiter on 
its way to study the polar regions of the Sun (see SOLAR 
WIND: ULYSSES). The CASSINI/ HUYGENS MISSION is designed 
to make enormous improvements in our understanding 
of Saturn’s atmosphere and interior as it circles the plan- 
et for 4 yr starting 1 July 2004. However, for Uranus and 
Neptune, the Voyager in situ results and the high-resolu- 
tion and high-phase-angle remote-sensing observations 
will probably remain unique for the foreseeable future. 
Our understanding of the interiors of the giant plan- 
ets is based largely on theoretical considerations. 
However, there are many bits and pieces of information, 
mostly from Voyager results, that serve to constrain the 
range of viable models. Careful measurements of the 
paths of the Voyager spacecraft helped determine accu- 
rate measurements of the masses of the giant planets and 
of their entire systems. Voyager determined the rotation 
rates of the interiors of Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. 
(Jupiter’s interior rotation rate was determined by 
radiowave measurements made from Earth.) The orien- 
tations of the strange magnetic fields of Uranus and 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Neptune (see below) offer additional clues. Excess heat 
in the form of infrared energy escaping from each of the 
four planets is also important in constraining models of 
the interior. 


Rings 

The Voyager spacecraft revealed the enormous amount 
of detail in the rings of Saturn, discovered the rings of 
Jupiter and provided the first detailed images of the 
rings of Uranus and Neptune. Ring data from Voyager 
have raised even more questions on the nature of ring 
systems than they have answered. The answers to those 
questions may be important to studies of the asteroid 
belt, the Oort cloud of comets, galactic structure and 
clusters of galaxies within the universe. 


Satellites 

Voyager imaged Earth’s Moon. Three new satellites of 
Jupiter (Metis, Adrastea, and Thebe) were discovered in 
Voyager data, and Voyager images were obtained of 
eight of Jupiter’s 16 known moons. Only the outer eight 
moons, all thought to be tiny captured asteroids, were 
missed. Voyager revealed active volcanoes on 10, an obvi- 
ously fractured and geologically young icy surface on 
EUROPA (first evidence of a global subsurface ocean), a 
variegated array of surface structures on GANYMEDE and 
an ancient cratered icy surface on CALLISTO. The sizes, 
masses, densities and reflectivities of the four Galilean 
satellites were also measured, showing Ganymede to be 
the solar system’s largest satellite, Europa to be the 
brightest Galilean satellite and a decrease in bulk densi- 
ty with increasing distance from the planet (presumably 
due to water depletion from the closer satellites due to 
heat from Jupiter). 

At Saturn, four new satellites (Pan, Atlas, 
Prometheus and Pandora) were discovered in Voyager 
data. These data also showed that Janus and Epimetheus, 
previously thought to be a single satellite, were actually 
two satellites with remarkably similar orbits. Three satel- 
lites (Telesto, Calypso and Helene) were discovered from 
Earth as a result of the increased interest in Saturn gen- 
erated by the approaching Voyager. Voyager revealed 
that Titan was the solar system’s second largest satellite, 
and the only one with a substantial atmosphere. Titan is 
covered by a high atmospheric haze, which hides the sur- 
face from visible imaging. However, infrared and 
radiowave measurements penetrated to the surface of 
this strange moon, which may be the only body in the 
solar system (other than Earth) with both liquid and 
solid material at its surface. Voyager obtained images of 
all 18 known satellites of Saturn. These images revealed 
a geologically young surface on ENCELADUS, erratic rota- 
tion for HYPERION and a remarkably sharp boundary 
between dark material on Iapetus’ leading face and 
bright material on its trailing face. Phoebe, apparently a 
captured asteroid, was revealed to have the darkest sur- 
face among Saturn’s satellites. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Voyager Mission 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Voyager added 10 new satellites (Cordelia, Ophelia, 
Bianca, Cressida, Desdemona, Juliet, Portia, Rosalind, 
Belinda and Puck) to the five previously known at 
Uranus. Miranda has unique surface features known as 
coronae owing to their strange concentric patterns. Six 
new satellites (Naiad, Thalassa, Despoina, Galatea, 
Larissa and Proteus) were added to Neptune’s prior 
repertoire of two. Triton was discovered to have nitrogen 
ice, extremely cold temperatures (32 K), and geyser-like 
plumes spewing dust through cracks in the icy surface. 


Magnetospheres 

Little was known about the magnetospheres of the giant 
planets before the Voyager flybys. Pioneers 10 and 11, as 
Voyager ‘pathfinders’, had made preliminary measure- 
ments of Jupiter’s magnetosphere, and Pioneer 11 
probed Saturn’s magnetosphere. Voyager made signifi- 
cant improvements in those measurements and provided 
the first measurements of the magnetospheres of Uranus 
and Neptune. The magnetic fields of the latter two plan- 
ets were found to be highly inclined to the planetary 
rotation axes, something previously expected only for 
certain stars. 

The final frontier for Voyager is a search for the outer 
edge of the heliosphere (the Sun’s magnetosphere). 
Theoretical calculations show that the boundary should 
be at a distance of between 80 and 120 astronomical units 
(AU) (1 AU is the mean distance between Sun and Earth). 
Voyager 1 crossed 80 AU in 2001; Voyager 2 reaches that 
distance in 2006. Once Voyager 1 is beyond the helios- 
phere, humanity will be able for the first time to sample 
the magnetic fields and charged particles in the space 
between the stars. 

The two Voyager spacecraft are still sending back 
data, 25 years after their launch. Voyager 1 is now the 
most distant human-made object; in August 2002 it was 
about 85 times as far from the Sun as the Earth and 
Voyager 2 was about 68 times the Sun-Earth distance. 
They are both continuing outwards at about 3 AU per 
year (slightly more for Voyager 1 and slightly less for 
Voyager 2). The Voyager team at JPL still receives infor- 
mation almost daily from the Voyagers which are exam- 
ining the far reaches of the solar wind. 


Bibliography 
A detailed pre-launch description of the Voyager mis- 
sion, the spacecraft and the scientific investigations is 
given in Space Science Reviews 21 pages 75-376 (1977). 

Voyager scientific results have been chronicled in 
multiple dedicated issues of Science, Nature, Icarus and 
the Journal of Geophysical Research. They have also result- 
ed in at least six separate many-hundred-page scientific 
texts on planetary science published by The University of 
Arizona Press. 

Ellis D Miner 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Vulcan 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vulcan 


The name given to a hypothetical planet believed by 
Urbain Le Verrier to exist within the orbit of Mercury. 
At the request of Francois Arago, Le Verrier first studied 
the orbit of Mercury in the early 1840s. He managed 
to explain the greater part of the discrepancy between 
its calculated and observed positions (the advance of its 
perihelion) as being caused by gravitational perturbations 
by the other planets. The residual discrepancy eluded 
him, and he abandoned the problem as intractable. He 
returned to it in 1859, having in the meantime successfully 
predicted the existence of Neptune. Now he invoked 
an intramercurial planet or asteroid belt as the cause of 
Mercury’s irregularities. Shortly after, he heard that a 
physician and amateur astronomer, Edmond Lescarbault, 
had observed a small body in transit across the Sun’s disk. 
Le Verrier examined Lescarbault’s observations closely 
and, convinced they were genuine, announce the existence 
of a new planet which he named Vulcan. Subsequent 
sightings were reported but never confirmed. Vulcan is 
now known not to exist. 


See also: perihelion. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Vulpecula 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Vulpecula 


(the Fox; abbrev. Vul, gen. Vulpeculae; area 268 sq. deg.) 
a northern constellation which lies between Cygnus and 
Sagitta—Delphinus, and culminates at midnight in late July. 
It was introduced as Vulpecula cum Ansere (the Fox and 
Goose) by the astronomer Johannes Hevelius (1611-87) of 
Danzig (Gdansk), who included it in his atlas Firmamentum 
Sobiescianum sive Uranographia of 1687. 

A small, inconspicuous constellation, the brightest 
star in Vulpecula is a Vulpeculae, magnitude 4.4. The 
Milky Way passes through Vulpecula and the constellation 
contains a number of open star clusters and planetary 
nebulae, including Cr 399 (Brocchi’s Cluster, the Coat- 
hanger), which consists of about a dozen stars of 
magnitudes 6-8, elongated east-west, NGC 6940, another 
open cluster with about 100 stars fainter than ninth 
magnitude, and M27 (NGC 6853), the Dumbbell Nebula, 
an eighth-magnitude planetary nebula. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


W M Keck Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


W M Keck Observatory 


The W M Keck Observatory, located on the island of 
Hawaii, operates the world’s two largest optical/infrared 
telescopes, each with a primary mirror 10 m in diameter, 
near the 4200 m summit of Mauna Kea. Made possible 
through grants totaling more than $140 million from the 
W M Keck Foundation, the observatory is operated by 
the California Institute of Technology, the University of 
California and the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA), which joined the partnership in 
October 1996. The Keck I telescope began science 
observations in May 1993; Keck II in October 1996. 

A staff of 80 scientists, engineers, technicians and 
support personnel operate the observatory whose 
administrative facility is located in Waimea, Hawaii, and 
whose mission is to provide a world-class research 
facility for astronomers from Caltech, University of 
California, NASA and the University of Hawaii. Over 
400 astronomers per year are involved with observations 
from the Keck telescopes, which are carried out from 
Waimea via a fiber-optic link to the summit of Mauna 
Kea. 

The Keck telescopes employ a unique segmented 
design for their primary mirrors: 36 1.8 m diameter 
hexagonal segments are fitted together like a floor-tile 
mosaic to form each primary, the segments being aligned 
with respect to each to a tolerance of one-millionth of an 
inch under computer control. This expandable technology 
is that most likely to be adopted for the giant telescopes 
being planned for the 21st century. 

A $55 million project funded by NASA is aimed at 
joining the two Kecks, along with four 1.8 m ‘outrigger’ 
telescopes, as an infrared interferometric array to achieve 
unprecedented angular resolution, by the year 2003. 

The first test observation obtained by linking the two 
Keck 10 m telescopes was made on 12 March 2001. 
Light from HD61294, a faint star in the constellation 
Lynx, was captured by both Keck telescopes. The 
collected light waves were combined and processed with 
a beam combiner and camera. To phase the two 
telescopes properly, adaptive optics on both telescopes 
removed the distortion caused by the Earth’s atmosphere. 
In addition, the optical system in the tunnel adjusted the 
light path to within a millionth of an inch. 

Major discoveries from this young observatory 
include: the discovery of several planetary systems 
around other stars; the identification of gamma-ray 
bursters as being at cosmological distances; the discovery 
of the most distant objects in the universe; the 
measurement via supernova observations of the apparent 
acceleration of the universe. 

For further information see 
http://www2.keck.hawaii.edu:3636/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wallenquist, Ake Anders Edvard (1904-94) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wallenquist, Ake Anders Edvard 
(1904-94) 


Swedish astronomer, worked at the Bosscha Observatory 
in Indonesia and became professor in Uppsala at the 
Kvistaberg Observatory. He worked on double stars and 
open star clusters. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Ward, Seth (1617-89) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Ward, Seth (1617-89) 


Born in Aspenden, Hertfordshire, became Savilian 
Professor of Astronomy at Oxford, formulated an ‘empty 
focus’ alternative to KEPLER’s law of areas. (A planet moved 
with uniform angular velocity around the empty focus of 
its ellipse.) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Warner & Swasey Observatory ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Warner & Swasey Observatory 


Located at Washburn University in Topeka, Kansas, home 
of the Warner & Swasey 29 cm refractor. Built in the late 
1800s, the telescope was displayed at the 1912 World’s Fair, 
then acquired by Washburn College. Crane Observatory 
was built on campus to house the telescope. The Warner & 
Swasey survived a tornado in the 1960s. During telescope 
refurbishment, which was completed in 1998, all of the 
original parts were retained. 
For further information see 
http:/ /www.icstars.com/warner_swasey /wsmain.htm. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Warner, Worcester Reed (1846-1929) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Warner, Worcester Reed (1846-1929) 


American mechanical engineer, designed the 36 in 
telescope for the Lick Observatory and built telescopes for 
Canada and Argentina. With aMBRosEswasey he established 
a machine manufacturing company, and established the 
Warner & Swasey Observatory. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Water Cycle 


The Earth’s water cycle is the endless circulation of water 
on a planetary scale, from ocean to continent through 
the atmosphere and back to the ocean, under the driving 
influence of solar energy and gravity. This main cycle in 
fact consists of many overlapping loops and branches at 
all scales, involving more or less durable storage, more or 
less rapid transfers, more or less intense transformations 
between water phases. Because of this complexity, it was 
only in the late 16th and 17th centuries that the concepts of 
water cycle and balance arose, with the pioneering work 
of B Palissy, P Perrault, E Mariotte and E Halley founding 
scientific hydrology. Earth is a system approximately 
closed for water but largely open for energy. The particular 
properties of water together with the strong coupling 
between water and energy cycles regulate the Earth’s mean 
temperature and shape weather and climate patterns and 
their fluctuations (see CLIMATE). The water cycle interacts 
also strongly with most biogeochemical cycles, with long- 
term environmental feedbacks. Human activities have 
an increasing impact on the water cycle and the coupled 
fluxes, with some alarming consequences for the quantity 
and quality of water resources. 


Properties of water 

Water (H2O) is a very stable molecule (covalent link), 
which has very specific physicochemical properties, 
mostly because of its dipolar structure and the related 
hydrogen link between molecules. These properties 
explain its multiform importance within the Earth’s 
hydrosphere and its four main functions as resource, 
agent, vector and biotope. 


@ Its three phases (solid, liquid, vapor) are present within 
a relatively small range of temperature, corresponding 
to the temperature range observed on the Earth. 


@ Its very high latent heats of vaporization (2.454 MJ kg! 
at 20°C) and fusion (0.334 MJ kg~') play a major role in 
the heat transfer by water through the atmosphere. 


e Itshigh specific heat and low thermal conductivity make 
water bodies very good thermal regulators and water 
fluxes very good heat convectors: oceans play a major 
role in heat storage and transfer. 


e Water vapor absorbs most of the infrared and ultraviolet 
radiation but is transparent to visible radiation; 
atmospheric vapor leads to the ‘greenhouse effect’, 
while liquid water and solid water have contrasting 
reflectivities. These radiative properties are central to 
the thermal budget of the Earth (See GREENHOUSE EFFECT). 


@ Because of its high dielectric constant, water is an 
excellent solvent, able to alter most minerals: natural 
waters are in fact more or less dilute aqueous solutions, 
providing nutrients to aquatic life and contributing 
by their movement to the redistribution of substances; 
water can also combine with many substances. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


@ Its density is maximal at 4°C, permitting ice to float over 
liquid water: freezing and warming of water bodies 
occur from the top, progressive freezing of the whole 
ocean being avoided. 


@ Its low viscosity makes it a very mobile liquid, able to 
occupy all the space available, even within very small 
pores, and its surface tension allows soil water retention 
by capillarity against gravity, by which vegetation can 
persist between two rainfalls. 


e Water molecules present several isotopic combinations, 
whose relative abundances provide very useful (pa- 
leo)thermometers and tracers of the water’s origins. 


Origin and uniqueness of water on the Earth 
Earth, the ‘blue planet’, is unique within the solar system 
by the presence in great abundance of water in its three 
phases. 

The Jovian planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune) 
are composed of light elements, including hydrogen and 
helium, and most of their satellites contain a large fraction 
of water ice, because of the very cold conditions prevailing 
so far from the Sun. The Jovian satellite Europa, in 
addition, might contain a water ocean below its icy crust. 
In the Telluric planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars) 
constituted of heavy elements, water was partly outgassed 
by tectonic and volcanic activity and partly brought by 
impacts of meteorites of asteroidal or cometary origin. The 
fate of water in the Telluric planets has differed largely 
according to the very different temperature and pressure 
conditions prevailing on each planet, mostly as a result of 
their distances from the Sun (figure 1). 

While Mercury no longer has an atmosphere and 
probably still contains only a little ice in cold regions, 
on Venus the thick carbon dioxide atmosphere is much 
too hot for water condensation because of a strong 
greenhouse effect, and most outgassed water vapor was 
subsequently photodissociated (photolysis) (see VENUS). 
Mars is currently cold and dry because of its thin carbon 
dioxide atmosphere, but there is much geomorphological 
evidence of past water-related erosion, and some limited 
water is probably still contained in permafrost and ice 
caps (see Mars). Earth is the only planet where the 
three water phases coexist: a greenhouse effect due 
to the presence of water vapor and carbon dioxide in 
its atmosphere has maintained temperature conditions 
permitting the condensation of very huge amounts of 
outgassed water, and therefore the development of life. 
Uniformly distributed over the whole planet’s surface, the 
depth of all the water on Earth would amount to about 
3000 m, as compared with rough estimates of about 200 m 
for Mars and 0.20 m for Venus. 


Main reservoirs and fluxes 

The total amount of water within the Earth’s hydrosphere 
(that is, above and within the upper 2 km of the crust) 
can be considered as constant, even though there are 
very small net water exchanges with both space (loss by 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Venuse 


WATER VAPOR 


Mercury ( daylight sce) | 


10,000 
1,000 + 
1004 ICE 
— 10- 
& Jupitere 
ra 
> 17 
7) 
7) 
wl 01 _ @Uranus ICE 
a 
0.01- Mars . triple point 
0.0017 ICE 
0.0001 
l | | 
-200 -100 0 


100 200 300 400 500 


TEMPERATURE (°C) 


Figure 1. Planetary positions on the phase diagram of water. Adapted from National Research Council (1991). Reproduced by 


permission of National Academy of Sciences. 


diffusion, gain by icy comets) and the Earth’s mantle (loss 
by subduction, gain by volcanic activity), where there is 
a much slower tectonic water cycle. This huge amount of 
water (about 1386 million km’, of which only 2.5% is fresh 
water) is stored in several main interconnected reservoirs 
differing by the volume and quality (salt, fresh) of the 
water they contain. The fluxes they permanently exchange 
within the water cycle control their renewal rates, which 
differ largely according to their size and the water phase 
they store. Current estimates of global storages and mean 
annual fluxes are still affected by rather large uncertainties 
especially for groundwater (compare for instance values 
in table 1, table 2 and figure 2). 

The largest reservoir is by far the world ocean, which 
covers 71% of the 510 million km? of Earth’s surface with a 
mean depth of 3700 m. It contains 96.5% of all the water, as 
salt water, and has a long mean residence time of 2500 yr. 

Continents store the remaining 3.5% of water in 
several main reservoirs with a very large range of sizes 
and renewal rates. 


e@ Ice caps, glaciers and permanent snow cover store 1.74% 
of total water over 3% of Earth’s surface (essentially in 
the Antarctic). This solid phase represents 69% of all 
fresh water, with a very long residence time in ice caps 
(104 yr). 


e Groundwaters within the upper 2 km of the Earth’s 
crust contain about 1.7% of total water (45% only as 
fresh water), with very variable residence time (1- 
10° yr) according to their depth and the porous media 
properties. Soil moisture accounts for 0.001% only. 


e Surface water (lakes, rivers, swamps) represents only 
0.01% of all water, most as fresh water. The mean 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


residence time is short for rivers (about 18 days) and 
much longer for lakes (up to 1000 yr). 


e Biomass contains only 0.0001% of total water, but the 
high water content (>70%) of most plants and living 
organisms is renewed within a few hours or days. 


The atmosphere stores 0.001% of total water, mostly as 
vapor. Liquid and solid phases are also present in clouds, 
which cover more than 60% of Earth’s surface on average. 
Atmospheric water corresponds to an equivalent height 
of only 26 mm but is frequently and rapidly renewed in 
9 days, ensuring an intense recycling of water. 

The global water cycle presents two main intercon- 
nected loops of different intensity (figure 2). 


@ Ocean and atmosphere exchange large fluxes: the ocean 
loses much water by evaporation (434000 km? yr}; 
1202 mm yr~'), a flux only limited by the energy 
available. Most of this flux returns directly to the ocean 


by precipitation (398 000 km? yr~!; 1102 mm yr“). 


e Continent and atmosphere exchange fluxes that are 
smaller because less water is available: precipitation 
on continents (107000 km? yr-'; 719 mm yr!) 
is in great part compensated by evapotranspiration 
(71000 km? yr!; 477 mm yr7')—that is, water 
evaporated from the land surface and transpirated by 
vegetation. 


e The water balances of both loops are equilibrated by 
the fluxes they exchange: vapor flux in excess from the 
ocean (36000 km? yr~!; 100 mm yr") is transported 
by atmospheric circulation over continents, while an 
equivalent flux of precipitation excess on the continent 
(36000 km’ yr~!; 242 mm yr~') returns to the ocean by 
gravity as surface and subsurface runoff. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. Water reserves on the Earth. 


Distribution Water Water Proportion 
area volume depth of total water Residence 
Reservoir (108 km?) (10 km*) (m) (%) time 
World ocean 361 200 1338 000 3700 96.5 2500 yr 
Glaciers, permanent snow 16 230 24 064 1463 1.74 Up to 104 yr 
Antarctic 13980 21600 
Groundwater (upper2km) 134800 23 400 174 17 Up to 10° yr 
Fresh water 10530 78 0.76 
Soil moisture 16.5 0.2 0.001 Days—months 
Ground ice-permafrost 21000 300 14 0.022 
Lakes 2060 176.4 85.7 0.013 Up to 10° yr 
Fresh 91 
Saline 85.4 
Swamps 2680 11.5 43 0.0008 
Rivers 148 800 2.12 0.014 0.0002 18 days 
Biomass 510 000 1.12 0.002 0.0001 Hours-days 
Atmosphere 510000 12.9 0.025 0.001 9 days 
Total water reserves 510 000 1386 000 2718 100 
Total fresh water 148 800 35 029 235 2.53 
Adapted from Shiklomanov (1993). 
Table 2. Estimates of mean annual water fluxes at global scale. 
National Research 
Council (1991) Shiklomanov (1998) 
Water flux km? yr-) — mmyr-! km? yr7! mm yr! 
Ocean 
Evaporation 434 000 1202 502 800 1392 
Precipitation 398 000 1102 458 000 1268 
Advection to continent 36 000 100 44800 124 
Continent 
Precipitation 107000 719 119 000 800 
Endorheic areas 9000 
Exorheic areas 110 000 
Evapotranspiration 71000 477 74.200 499 
Endorheic areas 9000 
Exorheic areas 65 200 
Runoff to ocean 36 000 242 44 800 301 
From rivers 42700 
From groundwater 2100 
Total 
Evaporation 505 000 990 577 000 1131 
Precipitation 505 000 990 577 000 1131 


Endorheic/exorheic areas: not connected/connected to the ocean. 


Globally precipitation and evaporation fluxes are 
equal and amount to 505 000 km? yr“! (990 mm yr“). 


Space and time variations 

Mean global values of storage and annual fluxes in fact 
mask very large variations at different scales in both time 
and space. Variations in evaporation (£), precipitation 
(P) and the resulting continental runoff are mainly due 
to seasonal and latitudinal variations in solar energy 
modulated by seasonal thermal contrasts between ocean 
and continent (figures 3 and 4). An observation network 
and remote sensing mainly from satellites help to assess 
and monitor the variability of water storages and fluxes 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and the environmental factors controlling them (see sPAce- 
BASED OBSERVATIONS OF THE EARTH). 

In the intertropical zone, where solar energy is 
maximal, the redistribution of water and energy within 
the atmosphere is ensured by the rather stable vertical 
circulation within the Hadley cells generated by large 
vertical contrasts in temperature, in the absence of a strong 
Coriolis effect. In the equatorial zone, the convergence of 
trade wind systems generates the uplift (low pressure) of 
warm air moistened by high evaporation from the ocean: 
this results in heavy convective precipitation exceeding 
the local evaporation, which is reduced by frequent cloud 
cover (P > 2000 mm yr~', E < 1600 mm yr7’). Inversely, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TERRESTRIAL ATMOSPHERE 
4.5 


Evaporation & 


Precipitation allot 
Transpiration 
71 


ZL ICE & SNOW | > 


43,400 
SURFACE WATER 
360 
UNDERGROUND WATER 
15,300 


BIOMASS 
Z 2 


LAND 


[| Reservoirs, volumes in 102 km? 


——"_ Fluxes in 10° km yr" 


MARINE ATMOSPHERE 
11 


Precipitation Evaporation 


434 


Runoff 
(River, etc...) 
36 


OCEAN MIXED LAYER 50,000 
1,400,000 


THERMOCLINE 450,000 


ABYSSAL 890,000 


OCEAN 


Total Reservoir Volume = 1.46 x 109 km$ 


Figure 2. The water cycle at a global scale. Adapted from National Research Council (1991). Reproduced by permission of National 


Academy of Sciences. 


subsidence of warm and dry air (high pressure) in the 
subtropical zones favors evaporation, which exceeds local 
precipitation (P < 1200 mm yr“, E > 1800 mm yr“). 

In the mid-latitude zones (between 30° and 60°), the 
redistribution of water and energy from tropics to poles 
is rather organized horizontally, through successions of 
unstable eddies moving from west to east and generated 
by horizontal contrasts in temperature and by the Coriolis 
effect: cyclonic depressions provide precipitation, while 
dry anticyclonic conditions favor evaporation. At high 
latitudes, because of minimal solar energy and subsidence 
of cold and dry air (high pressure) precipitation and 
evaporation are very low (only a few mm yr™! at the 
poles). In the extratropical zones, precipitation generally 
exceeds evaporation, but, while evaporation decreases 
rather regularly toward the poles, precipitation presents 
in the mid-latitude zone a maximum (P > 1200 mm yr“) 
associated with the depression systems. 

This latitudinal climate zonation is most clearly 
observed on the ocean, where evaporation is only limited 
by the energy available. Differences in water (P — E) and 
energy balances associated with each climatic zone also 
generate a salinity pattern at the ocean surface (increasing 
by sea-water evaporation and freezing, decreasing by 
precipitation and sea-ice melting). Redistribution of 
water, heat and solutes within the world ocean is 
ensured by large-scale circulations and eddies (see OCEANS). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


While rapid surface currents are mainly induced by the 
prevailing surface winds, slow deep currents are mainly 
due to differences in water density (depending on water 
temperature and salinity). This thermohaline circulation 
generates the oceanic ‘heat conveyor belt’: in its main 
branch, cold dense water sinks in the Norwegian Sea, flows 
as deep water through the Atlantic ocean to the Indian and 
Pacific oceans where it warms and wells up and returns to 
the North Atlantic as dilute surface water in about 1000 yr. 

On continents, where evapotranspiration is limited by 
water rather than energy, the climate pattern exhibits still 
more contrast, with warm deserts belts (P < 300mm yr“) 
in the dry subtropical zones. This pattern is disturbed by 
other factors depending on the position, size and shape of 
each continent, whose cumulative effects result in a very 
large range of mean continental precipitation (from almost 
0 to 12000 mm yr~’). 


@ Ocean-continent interactions: in the tropical zone, the 
western coasts of continents receive less precipitation 
than the eastern coasts, which are supplied by easterly 
trade winds carrying much moisture evaporated from 
the tropical ocean—for instance in the Amazonian basin. 


@ Continentality effect, especially in the middle latitude 
zones: precipitation on continents decreases from west 
to east, because of a progressive drying of air mass. 
Precipitation is more than 600 mm yr! in temperate 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Water Cycle ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


90° N 


over sea 
mm.yr! 


2000 
1600 
1200 
800 
400 


30°N 


0° 


over land 
mm.yr! 

30°S 1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 


60°S 


90°S 
180°W 120°W 60°W 0° 60°E 120°E 180°E 


Figure 3. Global distribution of mean annual evaporation. Adapted from Robinson and Henderson-Sellers (1999). Reproduced by 
permission of Pearson Education. 


90° N 


60°N 


30°N 


30°S 


60°S 


90°S 


180°W 120°W 60°W O° 60°E 120°E 180°E 


Figure 4. Global distribution of mean annual precipitation. Adapted from Robinson and Henderson-Sellers (1999). Reproduced by 
permission of Pearson Education. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 5 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Western Europe, less than 100 mm yr} in continental 
Kazakhstan. 


@ Orographic effect: mountain ranges on continents, 
islands in oceans, act as barriers to dominant humid 
air mass. The windward side receives much more 
orographic precipitation than the leeward side—as is 
the case for the Western Cordillera in North America or 
the Hawaiian Islands. 


These mean annual spatial patterns are modulated 
by diurnal and seasonal variations in insolation or longer- 
term fluctuations. 


e At high altitudes as at high latitudes, a great part of 
winter precipitation falls as snow, forming a seasonal or 
even permanent snow cover affecting both water and 
energy cycles. 


e@ Slight seasonal fluctuations of the Hadley cells around 
the equator explain the alternation of rain and dry 
seasons in the tropical zone. 


@ Seasonal variations in thermal contrasts between ocean 
and continent also explain the monsoon, providing 
huge amounts of summer precipitation to the Indian 
subcontinent. 


e@ Multiannual fluctuations can also occur in the ocean— 
atmosphere system—as for instance the ‘El Nifio 
Southern Oscillation’ (ENSO) affecting the Pacific but 
having dramatic effects on the water balance of the 
whole tropical zone. 


In the much longer term (10-10+ yr), cyclic variations 
in solar activity and Earth’s orbital variations modify 
the insolation and the seasonal contrasts between both 
hemispheres, and therefore the climate and water 
cycle patterns. Ice caps and oceanic sediments 
provide paleoclimatic archives allowing us to date such 
fluctuations and characterize their hydrological impact, 
especially during the past glaciation—deglaciation cycles. 

Precipitation generally exceeds evaporation on con- 
tinents, but both are lower than on oceans at the same 
latitude, because less energy (higher albedo) and water 
(unsaturated soils) are available on continents. Water in 
excess within continental basins is collected by aquifer and 
river networks and returns in great part to the ocean as 
river runoff, with inputs spatially concentrated at the river 
mouths. The relative contribution to total river runoff to 
oceans is 16% for the Amazon alone, 27% for the five major 
river systems (draining 10% of continental areas) and 50% 
for the 50 major rivers, while 40% of river runoff is con- 
centrated in the equatorial region (flowing mainly into the 
Atlantic). Endorheic basins, that are not connected to the 
ocean, represent 22% of continental areas (mainly in dry 
regions): runoff disappears by infiltration or accumulates 
in closed lakes and seas, where water evaporates—as in 
Lake Chad or the Aral Sea. 

River runoff varies during the year with usually a 
strong seasonality of high and low flows, and successions 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of relatively short floods separated by longer recession 
periods—with the extreme case of ephemeral streams. 
Runoff variations are controlled by the time and space 
variabilities of precipitation and evaporation, which are 
very different. Precipitations are usually episodic and 
intermittent, more or less concentrated during rainy 
seasons and irregularly distributed in space, while the 
energy available for evapotranspiration is much more 
regularly and continuously distributed but more affected 
by diurnal and seasonal cycles. Evaporation intensity, 
which is limited by the insolation, varies within a 
much smaller range (0-10 mm day~') than precipitation 
intensity, whose maximal recorded local values are greater 
than 40 mm in 1 min, 400 mm in 1 h, 1900 mm in 1 
day, 26000 mm in 1 yr. Precipitation is often buffered 
seasonally in snow cover and glacier at high latitudes or 
altitudes, while evapotranspiration depletes soil moisture 
and is often reduced by summer water stress. The 
interannual variability is much larger for precipitation 
than for evapotranspiration. There is a large variety 
of river runoff regimes as a result of combinations of 
precipitation and evaporation regimes on their basins. 


Water cycle on the basin scale 

As the oceanic and atmospheric branches of the water 
cycle are presented elsewhere (see OCEANS and EARTH'S 
ATMOSPHERE), only its continental branch is detailed here, 
especially on the basin scale. A basin (or catchment) 
is defined as the total drainage area of a river at some 
specified outlet. Catchments, which can be defined at any 
scale and in any environment, are functional units very 
useful for both the study and the management of water 
resources. 

The water balance of a catchment expresses the 
principle of water conservation: the incident precipitation 
is redistributed between runoff, evapotranspiration and 
water storage within the catchment, through a competition 
between three main sources of energy and driving 
forces: (1) gravity, which controls most flows of liquid 
and solid water and depends mainly on topography 
and morphometry; (2) the evaporative demand of the 
atmosphere, which controls vapor fluxes and depends 
on energy input (radiative, advective) and climatic 
conditions; (3) capillarity, which controls soil water 
retention and depends on the pore size distribution. At 
any point and any time, the dominant form of energy and 
thus the dominant component in the water balance depend 
on soil moisture conditions. 

There is a large variety of surface and subsurface 
processes and pathways governing the hydrological 
response of a catchment to water and energy inputs from 
the atmosphere. They result in a strong vertical and 
lateral redistribution and recycling of precipitated water 
within a catchment. The main fluxes (evapotranspiration, 
groundwater recharge, streamflow) are usually generated 
simultaneously or successively by several processes, 
whose combinations are very variable in time and space. 
They are indeed controlled by local characteristics and 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


variations of atmospheric inputs, by the water storage 
and transfer properties of the various compartments and 
their geometry. Because of many functional thresholds, 
catchment response is usually highly non-linear, much 
depending on initial water conditions. 

After some interception by vegetation, precipitation 
reaches the soil surface: snow remains stored on the 
surface until it melts, while rain infiltrates into the soil and 
recharges its water storage. When soil moisture exceeds 
some threshold depending on both soil texture and 
structure, water percolates further vertically to recharge 
groundwater. Biological activity, soil cracks and bedrock 
fissures, chemical dissolution (karstic cave systems,) 
often create networks of non-capillary macropores, which 
provide preferential pathways for free water, bypassing 
the less permeable bedrock or soil matrix. If the 
percolating flux exceeds the hydraulic conductivity of 
some subsurface layer, water in excess forms a perched 
groundwater or flows laterally as hypodermic interflow. 
Groundwater flows are essentially lateral and controlled 
by the conductivity of the porous media and the slope of 
the piezometric surface (which is the water table slope 
for unconfined aquifers). If the water table is shallow, 
precipitation can create locally rapid groundwater ridging 
by saturating its capillary fringe. 

If precipitation intensity exceeds the infiltrability 
(depending on surface conditions), the soil surface is 
saturated from above: water in excess accumulates in 
small depressions, then flows as diffuse surface runoff. 
If subsurface lateral flows exceed locally a threshold 
depending on soil slope, depth and conductivity, soil 
surface is saturated from below: the excess flux exfiltrates 
as return surface flow. Precipitation on already saturated 
areas also tends to flow as surface runoff. Whatever 
its generating process (infiltration—excess, exfiltration, 
saturation-excess), surface runoff tends to concentrate in 
small rills to reach the stream channel but can also infiltrate 
downslope, depending on local surface topography, 
roughness and infiltrability. 

Surface and subsurface processes contribute to 
streamflow, provided that the generated fluxes are 
connected to a stream channel. While the slow drainage 
of groundwater and soil water supplies stream baseflow 
between successive rainy events, floods are generated 
by rapid surface and subsurface flows and by direct 
precipitation on the river. Streamflow is routed downward 
as a turbulent flux controlled by the bed slope and 
roughness. Within the channel network, it increases 
at each confluence, decreases at each diffluence and 
accumulates in lakes and artificial reservoirs. Along the 
channel, streamwater and groundwater exchange fluxes 
whose direction and intensity depend on their water 
levels and the bed’s conductivity. Flooding occurs when 
streamflow exceeds some threshold fixed by the bed 
geometry. 

Both surface and shallow subsurface waters are 
subject to evapotranspiration, returning water vapor to 
the atmosphere. Evaporation combines a phase change 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(liquid or solid water to vapor), which consumes much 
energy (radiative or thermal), and a turbulent vapor 
transfer within the air, which increases with air saturation 
deficit and wind speed. Transpiration of the vegetation 
is the vaporization within leaf stomata of the sap flow 
extracted from soil by roots. Evapotranspiration is limited 
by the water and energy availability: evaporation of 
free water (wet vegetation, surface water, groundwater) 
depends on the available energy only, while capillary 
retention makes water in unsaturated soil less and less 
available when soil dries out. During dry periods 
transpiration, which exploits water within the whole 
root zone, lasts much longer than evaporation, which 
affects the soil top layer only. Stomatal regulation limits 
transpiration in dry soil conditions, to avoid vegetation 
wilting. 

Any catchment presents a functional, spatial and 
temporal organization, because of the non-uniform and 
non-random distributions of the hydrological processes, 
factors and inputs: (1) at each point, process activation 
or deactivation results from a balance between water 
supply from above and local water storage or transfer 
capacities; (2) spatio-temporal variations of factors lead 
to some recurrence of conditions favorable or unfavorable 
to each process in some areas of variable extent and 
some periods of variable duration; (3) these variable 
active areas and periods are also contributing areas to 
main outfluxes only if they are hydraulically connected 
to the catchment boundaries. Because of many possible 
interactions and processes, zones of interface between 
atmosphere, vegetation and soil, or between surface water 
and groundwater are very sensitive to any change. 


Coupled water, energy and matter cycles 

Water and energy cycles are intimately coupled in the 
atmospheric and oceanic general circulations, controlling 
the radiation and energy balances at both global and local 
scales, and carrying energy from equator to poles and 
water from ocean to continent. 


e@ Atmospheric water vapor maintains a rather high 
temperature at Earth’s surface by a ‘greenhouse effect’, 
while the net solar radiation on surfaces is reduced by 
an ‘albedo effect’ depending on water phase and content 
and generating local thermal contrasts: reflection is very 
high for low clouds and ice or snow cover, low for 
water bodies and higher for dry bare soils than for moist 
vegetated soils. 


e At evaporation sites, cooling occurs by vaporization 
consuming much energy (solar radiation, sensible heat), 
which is stored as latent heat in the water vapor; 
both are transported within the atmosphere by vertical 
convection and lateral advection to the precipitation 
sites where warming occurs by condensation releasing 
the latent heat as sensible heat in the atmosphere. 


e Huge amounts of energy are stored as sensible heat in 
ocean water and transported from warm to cold regions 
by ocean currents (for instance the great ‘heat conveyor 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


belt’): the ocean acts as a thermal regulator, tempering 
also seasonal climatic contrasts in many continental 
regions. 


Water and matter cycles are also strongly coupled. 
On continents, water is a powerful agent of transforma- 
tion and vector of material, depending on climate, topog- 
raphy, bedrock and soil types and vegetation cover. Wa- 
ter in porous media (rocks, soils) increases their weath- 
ering by low-temperature biogeochemical alteration and 
mechanical fragmentation and reduces their mechanical 
resistance. Surface flows of water, snow and ice gener- 
ate soil and river bed erosion and carry downward the 
eroded material, while subsurface flows transport solutes 
washed out of the soil matrix and favor mass movements 
on slopes (landslides, solifluxion). At river outlets, the 
ocean receives large amounts of fresh water and its so- 
lute and particulate load, which modify locally its salinity 
and induce mixing processes. These point inputs of matter 
from continents contribute to compensate for the chemical 
precipitation and mechanical sedimentation occurring in 
the ocean and to maintain constant its mean salinity. Trans- 
port of material by water is still much more discontinu- 
ous and irregular than water flow, with many possible cy- 
cles of erosion-sedimentation, dissolution—precipitation, 
concentration—dilution. Evaporation and freezing tend to 
concentrate water solutions, while precipitation and melt- 
ing tend to dilute them, even though precipitated water 
can reach high concentrations in some elements through 
the washing out of the atmosphere. As a result, water 
quality varies all along the different branches of the water 
cycle. In the long term, water activity modifies the land- 
scape, with some possible feedback on water pathways 
and flows. 

Since life originated in the ocean about 3.4 billion 
years ago, water is essential in the biosphere also, where 
its cycle is strongly coupled with other biogeochemical 
cycles. Water is the main component of biomass 
and is involved in major metabolic reactions such as 
photosynthesis and respiration. In terrestrial ecosystems, 
the redistribution within plants of nutrients extracted by 
roots is ensured by the sap flow induced by transpiration, 
and the development of vegetation modifies the surface 
water and energy properties. Vegetation maps reflect 
well at all scales the patterns of climate and water 
balance—as can be clearly seen in Africa, with the 
latitudinal succession of equatorial rain forest, tropical 
savanna, semi-arid steppe and subtropical desert. In 
aquatic ecosystems, which have some ability for self- 
purification, fresh, brackish or salt water bodies are 
biotopes for many living organisms linked in complex 
trophic chains, structured according to the vertical 
and horizontal patterns of water’s physicochemical 
parameters. Continental wetlands, estuaries and coastal 
regions are aquatic interface ecosystems very sensitive to 
any change in water quality and supply. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Humans and water 


Water is an essential part of humanity’s environment: it 
is one of the most important natural resources for human 
life and activities; it is also a risk factor because of human 
vulnerability to water-related hazards such as floods 
and droughts, avalanches and landslides, waterborne 
diseases and toxicities. Humankind has therefore always 
attempted to regulate the availability of water resources 
and to protect itself against such risks. Human activities 
have also many other major impacts on the water cycle 
and the coupled fluxes, directly by modifying continental 
surfaces and altering water quality and indirectly through 
the climate changes they could provoke. While the water 
resources available tend to decrease, there is a rapid 
increase in water demand by several uses competing for 
limited resources. The struggle for water is becoming a 
major source of regional conflicts, which could be avoided 
only by a strong international collaboration in order to 
increase the necessary solidarities between upstream and 
downstream regions. 

Very fast population growth and economic develop- 
ment have dramatically increased in recent decades the 
demand for high-quality fresh water, which is at present 
estimated to be about 3750 km® yr~!: about 2/3 for ir- 
rigated agriculture (providing 50% of food production), 
1/4 for industrial production and 1/10 for domestic use. 
Because of their easy accessibility, rivers, lakes and su- 
perficial aquifers are the main sources of renewable fresh 
water resources. Evaluated by the difference between con- 
tinental precipitation and evapotranspiration rates, cur- 
rent mean global estimations of renewable fresh water re- 
sources vary between 36000 and 45000 km? yr7, about 
95% as river runoff and 5% as groundwater. This global 
amount is much larger than the present demand, and 
should also largely meet the expected increase of about 
10% each 10 yr. Technological development should help 
reducing water demand. 

Unfortunately, these resources are very unevenly 
distributed throughout the year and present large 
variations from year to year, as shown by the intense 
Sahelian drought during the 1970s. They are also 
very unevenly distributed over continents, with patterns 
that do not match the spatial distribution of population 
and economic activities. Significant fresh water deficit 
already occurs in many regions, affecting their social and 
economic development: 35% of the world’s population 
has very low or catastrophically low water supplies (for 
instance in North Africa) and 75% lives in regions where 
water use exceeds 20% of available renewable water 
resources, leading to a mining-type exploitation of deeper 
groundwaters, which rapidly become depleted because 
of their much lower renewal rates. Disparity in water 
resources, population growth and economic development 
already generates a very large inequality in fresh water 
availability per person: more than 5001 day“! in developed 
countries, less than 50 1 day"! in some arid regions. Water 
supply is already one of the key issues for humankind. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Water Cycle 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Human activity also has a rapidly increasing 
impact on the natural behavior of most hydrosystems. 
River and aquifer regimes are often severely modified 
by water intake for irrigation, artificial reservoirs 
regulating discharge, or massive water exchanges between 
basins. Large-scale changes in land use (reafforestation— 
deforestation, urbanization, wetland drainage, field 
management) have deeply affected the precipitation 
redistribution between evapotranspiration, surface runoff 
and groundwater recharge. Irrigation with poor-quality 
water has generated soil salinization in many arid regions. 
The discharge in river courses of untreated domestic and 
industrial wastewater as well as groundwater recharge 
by polluted irrigation-excess waters have also drastically 
depleted water quality, further reducing the availability of 
good-quality fresh water. In the longer term, the possible 
global warming due to the anthropogenic increase in 
atmospheric carbon dioxide is likely to alter precipitation 
volume and seasonality, especially in arid regions, and 
to raise the sea level because of ocean thermal dilatation 
and ice cap melting: this would submerge many coastal 
lowland regions, which are among the most densely 
populated. 


Conclusions 

The water cycle is very complex at all scales, because of the 
numerous physical, chemical and biological processes in- 
volved and the high spatial and temporal heterogeneities 
of the controlling factors. Despite much progress recently 
achieved thanks to large interdisciplinary scientific collab- 
orations and international effort to develop measurement 
and observation networks, there is still much to be done 
to understand and model all feedbacks and interactions 
with coupled energy and matter cycles. Impacts of in- 
creasing anthropic change and possible climate change on 
water cycle and resources are therefore still difficult to an- 
alyze and predict with some confidence. Nevertheless, the 
growing awareness of the numerous interactions control- 
ling the water cycle and the scarcity and fragility of fresh 
water resources should contribute to improve the protec- 
tion and management of both surface and subsurface wa- 
ter resources and the control of long-term effects of human 
activities on the Earth’s water cycle. It is crucial for the fu- 
ture of both humankind and the ‘blue planet’. 


Bibliography 

Dingman S L 1994 Physical Hydrology (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall) 

Gleick P H (ed) 1993 Water in Crisis—a Guide to the World’s 
Fresh Water Resources (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) 

National Research Council 1991 Opportunities in the Hy- 
drologic Sciences (Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press) 

Robinson P J and Henderson-Sellers A 1999 Contemporary 
Climatology 2nd edn (London: Longman) 

Shiklomanov I A 1993 World fresh water resources Water in 
Crisis—a Guide to the World’s Fresh Water Resources ed 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


PH Gleick (Oxford: Oxford University Press) pp 13— 
24 

Shiklomanov I A 1998 World Water Resources: a New 
Appraisal and Assessment for the 21st Century (Paris: 
UNESCO) 

Shiklomanov I A (ed) World Water Resources at the 
Beginning of the 21st Century (IHP Monograph) (Paris: 
UNESCO) in preparation 

Zebidi H (ed) 1998 Water: a Looming Crisis? Proc. Int. 
Conf. on World Water Resources at the Beginning of the 
21st Century (Paris, 3-6 June 1998) (IHP-V Technical 
Documents in Hydrology No 18) (Paris: UNESCO) 


Bruno Ambroise and Michel Vauclin 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wave-Particle Duality 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wave-Particle Duality 


The concept that electromagnetic radiation and subatomic 
particles behave in some respects like waves and in others 
like particles. 

Various phenomena, such as interference and 
diffraction, clearly demonstrate the wave-like nature of 
light (and other forms of electromagnetic radiation). 
For example, if light of some particular wavelength, 
originating from a single source, passes through two 
adjacent narrow slits, each slit then acts as a source of 
light. Where the light waves spreading out from each 
slit meet, they interfere with each other, their amplitudes 
(‘heights’) adding together where they are in phase (e.g. 
where two wavecrests coincide) and canceling where they 
are completely out of phase (e.g. where a crest meets 
a trough). On the other hand, the particle behavior 
of light is demonstrated by the photoelectric effect, a 
phenomenon whereby certain substances emit electrons 
when illuminated by a beam of light, but do so only if 
the wavelength of the light is shorter than a particular 
minimum value. This behavior is consistent with light 
being a stream of particles (called photons) each of which 
carries a discrete quantity of energy that is inversely 
proportional to the wavelength of that light. If the energy 
of a photon exceeds the minimum energy that is needed 
to expel an electron, an electron will be ejected, but if the 
photon energy is less than this minimum, no electrons will 
be ejected. 

Streams of subatomic particles exhibit wave-like 
behavior through phenomena such as interference and 
diffraction. For example, if a beam of electrons passes 
through two narrow slits before falling on a phosphor 
screen, which registers the arrival of each electron as a spot 
of light, the distribution of light spots takes the form of an 
interference pattern consistent with the pattern that would 
be produced by waves of a certain particular wavelength. 

As Prince Louis Victor de Broglie (1892-1987) 
proposed in 1924, the wavelength (A) associated with a 
particle of momentum, p, is given by 4 = h/p, where h is 
the Planck constant (=6.63 x 10-*4 J s). Since p = mu 
(momentum = the mass of a particle multiplied by its 
velocity), 4 = h/mv. The wavelength associated with 
a particle is known as the de Broglie wavelength. For 
example, the de Broglie wavelength for an electron of mass 
9.11x10-! kg traveling at a speed of 3x 10° ms“! (1 percent 
of the speed of light) is: 6.63 x 10-™/(9.11 x 1073! x 3 x 
10°) © 2.4x 107!° m = 0.24nm. For light of wavelength a, 
the energy, E, of the photon is given by E = hc/d, where c 
denotes the speed of light, and the momentum associated 
with a photon is E/c = h/d 


See also: electromagnetic radiation, electron, light, pho- 
ton, quantum theory, subatomic particles, wavelength. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wavelength 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wavelength 


The distance between two successive crests of a wave 
motion. Usually, in transverse waves (waves with 
points oscillating at right angles to the direction of their 
advance), wavelength is measured from crest to crest. In 
longitudinal waves (waves with points vibrating in the 
same direction as their advance), it is measured from 
compression to compression. The term is applied to 
electromagnetic radiation which is regarded as a wave 
motion. For example, blue light has a wavelength of 
about 440 nanometers and red light about 700 nanometers. 
X-rays have wavelengths of the order of 10-!? meters and 
radio waves of the order of meters. Wavelength is usually 
denoted by the Greek letter lambda (A); it is equal to the 
speed (v) of a wave train in a medium divided by its 


frequency (f): A = v/f. 


See also: frequency. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wegener, Alfred Lothar (1880-1930) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wegener, Alfred Lothar (1880-1930) 


German climatologist and geophysicist who suggested the 
phenomena of continental drift and plate tectonics. His 
idea was that a super-continent he called Pangaea had 
broken up, the pieces drifting to their present positions. 
His evidence was the fit of South America and Africa, and 
similarities in climate, fossil record and geology across 
the join. His path had been prepared by ALEXANDER VON 
HUMBOLDT and Frank Taylor, but his book, published in 
English in 1924, was scorned. His ideas are now widely 
accepted. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Weight 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Weight 


The force experienced by a body resting on, for example, 
the surface of a planet. A person standing on the Earth’s 
surface experiences weight because the surface on which 
he is standing resists the effect of the force of gravity which 
otherwise would accelerate that person towards the center 
of the Earth. In other words, there is a reaction up through 
his feet equal and opposite to the gravitational attraction 
exerted upon him on Earth. The weight of a body depends 
upon the gravitational force to which it is subjected. On the 
surface of a planet it is equal to the mass of the body times 
the surface gravity. For example, a body that weighed 
100 kg on the surface of the Earth would have the following 
weights on the surfaces of the bodies listed below: 


the Moon 16 kg 
Mars 38 kg 
Jupiter 264 kg 
the Sun 2790 kg 


awhite dwarf 30000000 kg 


See also: zero gravity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Weizmann Institute of Science ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Weizmann Institute of Science 


At the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel, astrophysics 
is practiced by a small theory group in the physics faculty. 
Main interests are high-energy astrophysics (currently 
mostly gamma-ray bursters, compact stars, and cosmic 
rays) and galaxy dynamics (alternatives to dark matter). 
For further information see 
http://www.weizmann.ac.il/physics/physics.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Werner, Johann (1468-1522) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Werner, Johann (1468-1522) 


Astronomer, mathematician, instrument-maker and ge- 
ographer, born in Nuremberg, Germany, follower of Re- 
giomontanus. Regiomontanus had suggested that the tim- 
ing of eclipses and the orbits of comets could be used as 
clocks to determine longitude. Werner developed a prac- 
tical version of this idea with the method of lunar dis- 
tances (i.e. measuring the angle of the Moon from the Sun). 
He published this concept in In Hoc Opere Haec Cotinentur 
Moua Translatio Primi Libri Geographicae Cl’Ptolomaei (1514) 
and described an instrument with an angular scale on a 
staff from which degrees could be read off, to measure 
the lunar distances. This founded the movement to deter- 
mine longitude by astronomy and led to the state-funding 
of observatories at Greenwich and Paris, the invention of 
the chronometer by JOHN HARRISON, and the accurate mea- 
surement of star positions and planetary orbits. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Westerbork Synthesis Radio 
Telescope 


The WSRT (Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope) in 
Hooghalen, The Netherlands, is an aperture synthesis 
interferometer that consists of a linear array of 14 antennas 
arranged on a 3 km east—west strip. The array works by 
combining the signal from all the antennas and simulates 
a3 km aperture telescope. 

The antennas are equatorially mounted 25 m dishes 
with an f/D ratio of 0.35. This type of mounting ensures 
a fixed orientation of the receiving systems with respect to 
the sky. Ten of the telescopes are fixed, 144 m apart, while 
two nearby dishes are movable along a 300 m track and 
two others are on a 180 m track at a distance of 1.5 km. 
In the array, the baselines extend from 36 m to 3 km. The 
pointing accuracy of the dishes is 15 to 20 arcseconds, the 
surface accuracy is of the order of 1.7 mm. 

The WSRT telescope with the first 12 antennas on a 
1.5 km baseline was inaugurated in 1970. The second 
phase with two antennas on the 3 km extension was 
completed in 1980. A major upgrade due to be finalized 
in 2000 has added multi-frequency front ends capability 
and new state-of-the-art backends. The array can routinely 
operate at 92, 49, 21, 18, 13, 6 and 3 cm wavelength and 
change frequency in less than a minute. An observing 
capacity with instantaneous bandwidth up to 160 MHz is 
being added. 

The WSRT is used by astronomers from The 
Netherlands but also from many other countries for a wide 
range of scientific research starting from our Galaxy to 
objects at the far reaches of the universe. There are two 
proposal deadlines each year. The WSRT also participates 
in the European (EVN) and Global Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry networks. 

The WSRT is operated by the Netherlands Foundation 
for Research in Astronomy (NFRA), which is funded by the 
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). 

For further information see 
http://www.nfra.nl. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Whipple, Fred Lawrence (1906-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Whipple, Fred Lawrence (1906-) 


Astronomer, born in Red Oak, IA, became director of 
the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. While still 
a graduate student he helped compute the orbit of newly 
discovered Pluto. Using a new method of photography 
from two separated wide-angle cameras, he triangulated 
on meteor tracks and determined their orbits. He 
deduced that nearly all are made up of bits from comets. 
He proposed the ‘dirty snowball’ model for comets, 
suggesting that comets have icy cores inside layers of dirt. 
This was confirmed in 1986 when the Giotto spacecraft 
flew near to, and imaged, Comet Halley. Whipple tracked 
artificial satellites to determine the shape of the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Whirlpool Galaxy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Whirlpool Galaxy 


A face-on, spiral galaxy, M51, which derives its name from 
its bold and clear-cut spiral pattern. Located at a distance 
of some 20 million light-years in the constellation of Canes 
Venatici, M51 (also known as NGC 5194), which has two 
well-defined arms that spiral out from its relatively small 
central bulge, is a classic example of a ‘grand design’ spiral. 
It is classified as an Sc galaxy in the Hubble classification 
scheme. Although, with a diameter of 65000 light-years 
and a mass of about 5 x 10" solar masses, it is somewhat 
smaller than the Milky Way Galaxy, it is several times more 
luminous, its spiral arms being laden with bright young 
clusters and HII regions. 

M51 has a smaller, fainter companion (NGC 5195), 
which lies at the end of one of the larger galaxy’s spiral 
arms. Although NGC has traditionally been classified as 
an irregular galaxy, it contains an elongated bar structure 
and hints of incipient spiral arms. NGC 5194 appears to 
be orbiting around M51 in a period of about 500 million 
years. Tidal interaction between the two, during their last 
close encounter, which took place some 70 million years 
ago, probably played a large part in establishing the bold 
spiral pattern in M51 and stimulating a vigorous bout of 
star formation within it. 

M51 was the first galaxy to be recognized as having a 
spiral shape. This discovery was made in 1845 by William 
Parsons (1800-67), third Earl of Rosse, with the aid of the 
1.8 m (72 inch) telescope that he had set up at Birr, in 
Ireland, and which, at that time, was the largest telescope 
in the world. 


See also: barred spiral galaxy, Hubble classification, 
interacting galaxies, irregular galaxy, Messier Catalog, 
spiral galaxy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Whiston, William (1667-1752) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Whiston, William (1667-1752) 


Born in Norton, Leicestershire, became the controversial 
third Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge 
University, succeeding Issac NEWTON. He used the 
principles of the Principia in a popular book to explain 
the Book of Genesis and the Flood, which he envisaged as 
caused by the near approach of a comet, an interesting 
foreshadowing of current theories. He published in 
1716 the first undergraduate course based on Newton’s 
principles under the cumbersome title Sir Isaac Newton’s 
Mathematic Philosophy More Easily Demonstrated with Dr. 
Halley’s Account of Comets Illustrated. He wrote on 
numerous problems of astronomy and observed an aurora 
borealis, solar eclipses and sunspots. His downfall in the 
so-called Whiston’s affair was due to his popularization 
of what were regarded as heretical ideas about the Trinity, 
theology and politics. He wrote letters to archbishops 
that raised eyebrows, caused debates in the Houses 
of Parliament and caused his dismissal from his post. 
Plunged into poverty, he lived off the income of a small 
farm near Newmarket and lectured in the coffee houses 
of London, giving scientific demonstrations for a fee as an 
entertainment. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


White Dwarfs 


White dwarf stars, also known as degenerate dwarfs, 
represent the endpoint of the evolution of stars with 
initial masses ranging from about 0.08 to about 8 solar 
masses. This large range encompasses the vast majority 
of stars formed in our Galaxy and thus white dwarf stars 
represent the most common endpoint of STELLAR EVOLUTION. 
It is believed that over 95% of the stars of our Galaxy 
will eventually end up as white dwarfs. The defining 
characteristic of these objects is the fact that their mass 
is typically of the order of half that of the Sun, while their 
size is more akin to that of a planet. Their compact nature 
gives rise to large average densities and surface gravities. 

The first glimpse of the existence of these objects 
came in 1844, with the study carried out by F BESSELL, 
the great German mathematician and astronomer, of the 
proper motion of sirius, the brightest star in the night 
sky. The irregularities in the apparent motion of Sirius on 
the celestial sphere led Bessell to suggest the presence of 
an unobserved, solar-mass companion orbiting the bright 
primary. The companion, Sirius B, was first observed by 
A G Clark in 1862 and represents, together with 40 Eri B, 
the first known examples of white dwarf stars. 

The luminosity of the white dwarf in the Sirius 
system is ~10000 times smaller than that of its bright, 
main-sequence companion. Its effective temperature was 
thus thought to be suitably smaller than that of the A 
star. However, the first spectrum of Sirius B, secured 
by W Adams in 1914, showed that the white dwarf had 
an effective temperature quite comparable with that of 
its companion. Since the stellar luminosity scales as 
R°T3,, for the white dwarf to be both fairly hot and 
quite faint required it to have a very small radius, and 
a correspondingly very high average density. A similar 
conclusion was reached in the case of 40 Eri B whose 
spectrum was also secured at about the same time. 
However, how could such stars withstand the tendency 
to collapse onto themselves under the influence of their 
gravitational field? 

The answer to that question came in 1925, when 
R H Fowler first applied the newly-developed principles 
of QUANTUM MECHANICS to stars. He showed that, in white 
dwarf stars, the density is high enough for the gas of 
free electrons to become degenerate. Electrons are said 
to be degenerate when a majority of them occupy the 
lowest possible energy states available to them. This 
occurs, at fixed temperature, when the electrons are 
packed sufficiently close to each other. Because of the 
PAULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE that no more than two electrons 
with oppositely directed spins may occupy the same 
energy state, the electrons retain kinetic motions even 
when cooled to zero temperature. The amplitude of this 
kinetic activity increases with increasing density, when 
electrons become more degenerate. In a white dwarf, 
the pressure generated by this kinetic motion, clearly of 
quantum mechanical origin, prevents the gravitational 
collapse of the star. The first detailed stellar models 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


appropriate to white dwarfs were calculated in the 1930s 
by S Chandrasekhar, who received the 1983 Nobel Prize in 
Physics for his achievements. 


Observed properties 

Several properties of white dwarf stars can be determined 
fairly directly from observations. Analyses of their energy 
distribution, as well as of their optical and ultraviolet 
spectra, fix their effective temperature; they range from 
~150 000 K for the hottest stars to the coolest degenerate 
dwarfs, at Tog near 4000 K. Spectroscopic analyses also 
yield the surface gravity (¢ = GM/R’, but traditionally 
given in terms of its logarithm to the base 10, log g) since 
the strength and width of spectral features are sensitive 
to the density of particles in the atmosphere, which is 
controlled by the surface gravity. The average surface 
gravity of white dwarf stars is log g ~ 8 (cm s”), 
compared with log g ~ 4.4 for the Sun. This value implies, 
as we discuss below, that the mean STELLAR MASS must 
be of the order of half that of the Sun. The luminosity 
range encompassed by white dwarfs exceeds 7 orders 
of magnitude and reflects the large range of observed 
effective temperatures (L x T4,); the faintest known white 
dwarfs have L ~ 10-*3Lo, while the rare intrinsically 
brighter ones, just entering the cooling sequence, reach 
L ~ (107-103)Lo. 

Because of the intrinsic faintness of the most common 
white dwarfs, the observation of these objects tends to be 
restricted to small distances; the bulk of the sample of 
~2200 spectroscopically confirmed white dwarfs available 
today resides within ~1 kpc from the Sun. It must 
be noted, however, that work with large, ground-based 
telescopes and with the Hubble Space Telescope now 
allows the observation of white dwarfs in GLOBULAR 
CLUSTERS located at several kpc from the Sun. Traditionally, 
however, white dwarfs have been culled from samples of 
objects showing significant PROPER MOTION, and thus located 
relatively nearby the Sun. A selection criterion based 
on color then allows the distinction to be made between 
true white dwarfs and nearby main-sequence stars, 
and their degenerate nature is then confirmed through 
spectroscopic observations. More recently, large numbers 
of hot white dwarfs have been detected in colorimetric 
searches. Selected fields are typically photographed 
through both U (~3650 A) and B (~4400 A) filters. A 
comparison of both images for a given object allows the 
selection of blue or very blue objects, whose nature can be 
confirmed through spectroscopic means. Surveys of this 
kind, carried out both at high Galactic latitude and in the 
plane of the Galaxy, have yielded substantial numbers of 
new hot white dwarfs, selected only on the basis of their 
colors without regard for their proper motion. 

The existence of homogeneous samples containing 
substantial numbers of white dwarfs allows analyses of the 
statistical properties of these objects. Their distribution in 
the Galaxy is consistent with that of an old disk population, 
with an estimated scale height of 250-300 pc. Their space 
density is of the order of 0.005 pe? for Mpo < 15, and their 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


: 
prrretnns 
Mrmr, PG 0038+199 DO 
4d | tert tN eRe 
; OES OR hn Se i | 
E GD 358 DB 
ees pea, 
o \ val \/ N\A ny" 
g \f \ f \ IV 
yrs] 
aiganees De er ale 
| ee ee 
ae went” 
‘ | | i 1 | 
4000 4500 eee 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 1. Sample optical spectra of white dwarf stars: from top 
to bottom, a DA spectrum, dominated by the regular pattern of 
the Balmer lines of hydrogen, seen here near their maximal 
strength, a DO spectrum, dominated by the lines of ionized 
helium, in particular the n = 3 ton = 4 transition at 4686 A, a DB 
spectrum, featuring many strong lines of neutral helium, and a 
featureless DC spectrum, characteristic of a helium-rich star too 
cool (Teg < 12000 K) to show neutral helium lines. 


birthrate is of the order of (1.5-2.3)x10-” pe~3 yr~! when 
allowance is made for the contribution of unseen white 
dwarfs in BINARY SYSTEMS. 

The optical spectra of white dwarf stars are 
characterized by a rich variety which reflects, to a 
considerable extent, complex and varying patterns of 
atmospheric abundances. Sample spectra are shown in 
figure 1. About three-quarters of white dwarfs have a 
spectrum dominated by the Balmer series of hydrogen, 
which originates on the first excited, or n = 2, level of 
that atom. These objects are termed DA stars; they are 
found over the whole effective temperature domain of 
white dwarfs, from the very hottest stars above 100 000 K, 
where the hydrogen lines are fairly shallow, to the coolest 
white dwarfs near 4000 K, where the lines are sharp and 
extremely weak. Another important group of objects have 
optical spectra dominated by the lines of helium. The 
spectrum reflects the vastly different chemical makeup of 
their atmosphere, which is dominated by helium. At high 
effective temperatures (Tom > 45000 K), the lines observed 
are those of ionized helium. These stars are called DO 
stars. Between 30000 K and 12000 K, neutral helium is 
the dominant ion, and the spectrum is dominated by a 
bevy of transitions from that atom; these are the DB stars. 
Finally, below 12000 K, the effective temperature is too 
cool for a helium-rich atmosphere to show transitions of 
neutral helium; the spectrum is then featureless, and is 
termed DC. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The scheme of spectral classification of white dwarfs 
is flexible enough to accommodate several other important 
classes of objects, not illustrated in figure 1; hence the DQ 
stars, whose spectrum is characterized by the presence 
of carbon, generally in molecular form, in a helium-rich 
atmosphere too cool to show lines of neutral helium. 
Similarly, the DZ stars show lines of heavy elements 
other than carbon, for example calcium, magnesium or 
iron. Sometimes, the star is hot enough for weak carbon 
or heavy element features to be present simultaneously 
with the dominant neutral helium lines: the stars are 
then classified DBQ or DBZ stars, respectively. At high 
effective temperatures, near T.¢ ~ 100000 K, another class 
of objects, termed PG 1159 stars, includes stars with spectra 
featuring ionized helium as well as highly ionized carbon 
and nitrogen features. 

As hinted above, the chemical composition of the 
atmosphere of a white dwarf star is intimately related to 
its spectral appearance. The hydrogen line DA stars have 
atmospheres where hydrogen is the dominant element, 
to the near complete exclusion of any other. For their 
part, the so-called non-DA stars, which encompass objects 
of the DO, DB, DC, DQ and DZ spectral types, all have 
helium-dominated atmospheres. Within both classes, this 
purity is understood today as the result of gravitational 
settling in the intense gravitational field of the white 
dwarf. Under its influence, all elements heavier than 
the dominant atmospheric constituent rapidly sink into 
the deep atmospheric layers of the stars and remain out 
of sight. In fact, this settling mechanism is so efficient 
that the presence of any element heavier than hydrogen 
in the atmospheres of DA stars, or helium in those of 
non-DA stars, constitutes a puzzle. For example, lines of 
heavy elements (in the DAZ stars) or of helium (in the 
DAB stars) are occasionally seen in DA stars at effective 
temperatures below 25000 K. Similarly, traces of heavy 
elements are observed in the DBZ and cooler DZ stars, 
while carbon is seen in the cool DQ stars. We discuss below 
the mechanisms which may permit the existence of such 
chemical impurities in the photospheres of white dwarfs. 

Another point of interest for white dwarfs is their 
mass distribution. Only in a handful of cases are direct, 
dynamic masses obtained for these stars. In general, 
surface gravities are obtained either from the optical colors 
(e.g. on the Strémgren uvby system, suitable for DA stars 
with effective temperatures between 16000 K and 8000 K) 
or, preferably, from optical spectra which tend to be 
more sensitive to surface gravity. The M/R® relation 
provided by the log g determination can then be coupled 
to an assumed mass-radius relation, characteristic of 
the mechanical structure of these stars (see below), to 
determine M. The mass distributions (based on optical 
spectroscopy) available for samples of two spectroscopic 
subclasses of white dwarfs are shown in figure 2. The 
mass distribution of the DA stars is sharply peaked, and 
the mean mass is M = 0.590Mo, with a dispersion 0 = 
0.134M.. Tails extend at both ends of the mass spectrum: 
the low-mass tail of the distribution is thought to be 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


40 4 
30 = 
Zz, | J 
20 - SI 
10 - = 
[ p LUT] | 

Sar eee L 

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 


M/M, 


Figure 2. Mass distribution of DA (thick outline) and DB 
(shaded area) white dwarfs. The average mass appears the 
same, but the DB sample studied seems to lack both the 
low-mass and the high-mass end of the distribution seen for DA 
stars. These wings are probably related to binary evolution. 


populated by low-mass white dwarfs with helium cores 
probably resulting from binary and common envelope 
evolution, whereas the high-mass tail could well be the 
result of merging events in binary systems. Nevertheless, 
the case of Sirius B(M = 1.05M 4), located in a wide binary 
system, shows that there are genuine high-mass white 
dwarfs which have not been produced by close binary 
evolution. It is worth noting, as well, that independent 
mass determinations for roughly three dozen DA stars can 
be obtained from the gravitational redshift of their Balmer 
lines. General relativity predicts that the wavelength of 
photons emitted in a strong gravitational field should be 
redshifted by an amount Ad which depends on the M/R 
ratio. Provided that the star under scrutiny belongs to an 
open cluster or a binary system with a well-determined 
radial velocity, and that the spectral line shifts induced by 
the high pressures of white dwarf photospheres are well 
understood, the gravitational redshift can be isolated, and 
the mass can be determined. 

The mass distribution of the DB stars, while based on 
asmaller sample of well-studied objects, shows at the very 
least that there are no substantial differences between the 
mean mass of the DA and of the DB stars (the latter being 
M = 0.585Mo, with a dispersion o = 0.063M,). There 
is a tantalizing suggestion, however, that the low-mass 
and high-mass tails present in the DA sample may not be 
present in the DB sample; this absence accounts for the 
smaller dispersion of the DB mass determination. 

While most of the white dwarfs identified today 
can be considered normal, garden-variety objects, two 
families of peculiar, and fascinating, white dwarfs have 
also emerged over the years. One such family is that of the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic objects, which currently includes nearly 50 stars. 
The detected magnetic fields range from 10° G all the way 
to 10° G and are measured through a variety of techniques 
which include the detection of circular polarization in the 
optical continuum (B, > 10’ G), the direct observation of 
the Zeeman pattern in absorption lines (10°°G < B < 
10’ G), and Zeeman spectropolarimetry for low fields 
(Be < 10° G). In the high-field objects, the spectrum 
is so perturbed by the magnetic field that spectroscopic 
classification is often difficult if not impossible. The 
inferred field morphologies tend to be rather simple 
and generally range from centered or offset dipoles to 
quadrupoles. Statistical arguments favor an evolutionary 
link between the chemically peculiar main-sequence Ap 
and Bp stars and the magnetic white dwarfs. The other 
distinct subgroup of interesting white dwarfs is that of the 
variable white dwarfs, or pulsators, examples of which 
are known among the hot PG 1159, the DB and the DA 
stars. The usefulness of these objects for our sounding of 
the internal structure of white dwarfs is discussed briefly 
below, as well as in the entries on Zz CETI STARS and DB 
PULSATING STARS. 

Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, white dwarfs appear 
to be slow rotators, in the sense that they rotate more 
slowly than would be expected if the ANGULAR MOMENTUM 
present in earlier evolutionary phases had been conserved. 
Determinations of the rotation velocity of white dwarfs 
rely on three different techniques: (i) measurement of 
the additional broadening of the core of absorption lines 
caused by rotation; (ii) measurement of the variation of 
the degree of circular polarization caused by rotation in 
magnetic white dwarfs; (iii) measurement of the rotational 
splitting present in the Fourier spectrum of the light curves 
of pulsating white dwarfs. While the use of any of 
these techniques is restricted to small subsamples of white 
dwarfs, the picture which emerges is one where substantial 
quantities of angular momentum must have been lost by 
stars on their way to the white dwarf stage. While no 
definite model exists to explain this loss, current ideas 
focus on the fact that most stars will need to shed a lot 
of mass, perhaps concomitant with angular momentum, 
before they do become white dwarfs. 


Origin and generic properties 

It is generally believed that the immediate progenitors 
of most white dwarfs are nuclei of PLANETARY NEBULAE, 
themselves the products of intermediate- and low-mass 
main-sequence evolution. As mentioned above, stars 
that begin their lives with masses less than about 8Mo, 
that is the vast majority of them, are expected to become 
white dwarfs. Among those which already have had the 
time to become white dwarfs since the formation of the 
Galaxy, a majority have burned hydrogen and helium 
in their interiors. Consequently, most of the mass of a 
typical white dwarf is contained in a core made of the 
products of helium burning, mostly carbon and oxygen. 
The exact proportions of C and O are unknown because of 
uncertainties in the nuclear rates of helium burning. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The observed narrow mass distribution of isolated 
white dwarfs discussed above is a remarkable property 
of this category of stars. Apparently, the process of mass 
loss in white dwarf progenitors, which may have a wide 
range of initial masses, is regulated by mechanisms that 
are tuned finely enough to leave remnants with similar 
masses consistently. Also, the empirical evidence suggests 
that small amounts of helium and hydrogen are left over 
after the mass-loss phases have subsided. Taking into 
account previous thermonuclear history and the efficiency 
of gravitational settling, the expected structure of a typical 
white dwarf is that of a compositionally stratified object 
with a mass of ~0.6M, consisting of a carbon—oxygen 
core surrounded by a thin, helium-rich envelope itself 
surrounded by a hydrogen-rich layer. Such an object 
has an average density of ~10° g cm, a millionfold 
that of a normal star such as the Sun. The thicknesses 
of the hydrogen and helium outer layers are not known 
a priori and must depend on the details of pre-white-dwarf 
evolution. On theoretical grounds, however, it is expected 
that the maximum amount of helium that can survive 
nuclear burning in the hot planetary nebula phase is only 
10-2 of the total mass of the star and that the maximum 
fractional amount of hydrogen is about 10-4. Although 
these outer layers are very thin, they are extremely opaque 
to radiation and regulate the energy outflow from the star. 
They consequently play an essential role in the evolution 
of a white dwarf. The question of the exact masses of 
the hydrogen and helium layers present in white dwarfs 
constitutes a topic of intense research interest in the field. 

The large opacity of the outer layers of a white 
dwarf implies that radiation escaping from the star 
originates from the outermost region—the atmosphere— 
which contains, typically, less than 10-4 of the total mass 
of the star. Spectroscopic and photometric observations 
can only probe these outer regions, which are usually 
dominated by hydrogen. Thus, a majority of white 
dwarfs are referred to as hydrogen-atmosphere objects 
(or DA stars as discussed above). It turns out, however, 
that about 25% of the known white dwarfs do not 
possess such a hydrogen layer. These are called helium- 
atmosphere white dwarfs (or non-DA stars) with, again, 
the understanding that the underlying carbon—oxygen 
core must contain essentially all of the mass, even though 
it is not directly observable. 


3 


Mechanical structure and cooling 

As former nuclei of planetary nebulae, most white dwarfs 
are born in the form of extremely hot, collapsed objects 
which can only cool off: their nuclear energy sources 
are depleted, and gravitational energy can no longer 
be tapped efficiently as degenerate electron pressure 
prevents additional contraction. Because this pressure 
is independent of the temperature, a white dwarf is 
condemned to evolve at essentially constant radius. 
The mechanical structure of such a star is therefore 
specified by the degenerate electrons. In particular, 
electron degeneracy is directly responsible for the curious 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Log Ter 


Figure 3. Evolutionary tracks (solid curves) of five (M = 0.4Mo, 
0.6Mg, 0.8Mo, 1.0Mo and 1.2Mo, from top to bottom) 
representative models of DA white dwarfs in the 
Hertzsprung—Russell diagram. Each model is a compositionally 
stratified object made of a pure carbon core surrounded by a 
pure helium envelope containing 10~? of the total mass of the 
star and an outermost pure hydrogen layer containing 10~* of 
the total mass. The thick solid curves are isochrones, that is, loci 
of constant evolutionary timescales. The number next to each 
isochrone gives the cooling time in units of 10° yr. The small 
filled circles indicate the onset of crystallization at the center of 
each evolving model. The open circles at high (low) luminosity 
indicate the onset of superficial convection (the convective 
coupling of the surface with the thermal core). 


relationship between the mass and the radius of a white 
dwarf: the more massive the star, the smaller its size 
is. Likewise, relativistic degeneracy is also responsible 
for the existence of a limiting mass above which a white 
dwarf cannot exist. This limiting mass is known as 
the Chandrasekhar mass, and is of the order of 1.4Mo. 
The effects of this peculiar mass—radius relationship are 
apparent in the diagram presented in figure 3 which shows 
the cooling tracks of five representative DA white dwarf 
models that differ in their total mass. 

Degenerate electrons also possess another property 
of high relevance for white dwarfs: they are excellent 
conductors of heat, and thus they thermalize the internal 
regions of white dwarfs efficiently (a familiar illustration 
of this property is provided by the conduction electrons 
in ordinary metals). We can thus envision a typical 
white dwarf as consisting of a nearly isothermal core that 
contains more than 99% of the mass, surrounded by a 
thin, opaque, insulating, nondegenerate outer envelope. 
In the range of effective temperatures 16000-8000 K, 
where the bulk of the known white dwarfs is found, core 
temperatures vary from ~2 x 10’ K to ~5 x 10° K. The 
very large temperature drop between the central regions 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and the surface takes place mainly in the stellar envelope. 
In the cooler models, this temperature gradient leads to the 
formation of superficial convection zones, similar to those 
found in the Sun. When present, atmospheric convection 
plays an essential role in the determination of the emergent 
flux from a white dwarf and, thus, in the interpretation 
of its spectrum and colors. The small open circles at 
high luminosity in figure 3 show the onset of a superficial 
convection zone due to the recombination of hydrogen 
in evolving models of DA stars. Convection plays also 
a key role in the subsequent evolution of a white dwarf 
by affecting directly the cooling rate. This occurs when 
the base of the superficial convection zone reaches into 
the degenerate interior, thus coupling the surface with the 
core and, thereby, increasing the rate of energy transfer 
across the outer opaque envelope beyond what is possible 
through radiative transfer alone. The small open circles at 
low luminosity in figure 3 show where convection starts 
to play a significant role in the cooling process. 

Largely decoupled from the electrons, the (nondegen- 
erate) ions provide the thermal energy that slowly leaks 
through the outside, thereby producing the star’s lumi- 
nosity. Thus, an isolated white dwarf shines at the ex- 
pense of its thermal reservoir. In this context, the electrons 
do not contribute significantly to the energy reservoir be- 
cause degenerate particles, already occupying their states 
of lowest energy, cannot be cooled. As thermal energy is 
gradually lost from the star in the form of radiation, the 
kinetic motions of the ions lose amplitude, become corre- 
lated, and the ionic state evolves from a gas to a fluid toa 
solid. Ultimately, the reservoir of thermal energy becomes 
depleted, and the star disappears from sight in the form of 
a cooled-off, crystallized object known as a black dwarf. 

It should be noticed that the timescale for this final 
demise is strongly dependent on the total mass of the 
white dwarf. Indeed, because of their larger masses and 
smaller radii, more massive stars have larger internal 
densities (for comparable temperatures) and, therefore, 
develop a crystallized core earlier, at higher luminosities. 
By the same token, they also reach earlier the state 
where the specific heat in the solid regime plunges to 
very small values, a phenomenon well explained within 
the framework of the simple Debye theory of solids in 
quantum statistical mechanics. In effect, matter under 
these conditions has lost its ability to store thermal energy, 
the energy reservoir of the white dwarf has become empty 
and the star must then disappear from sight in a relatively 
rapid and final phase sometimes referred to as ‘Debye 
cooling’. Figure 3 illustrates, among other things, how 
Debye cooling is a strong function of the total mass of 
the white dwarf. It is easily seen that the isochrones 
are strongly dependent on the total mass; crystallization 
and subsequent Debye cooling are responsible for the 
‘accelerated’ evolution of the more massive models at low 
luminosities. To complement this, figure 4 provides more 
details on the evolving structure of a representative white 
dwarf model in a phase diagram. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


8.5 
_ 35000. 
— 25000. 
~ 20000. 
15000. 
12500. 
10000. 
7500 
6:9. |- aaa | 
5000. 
mB 3000 
on - 7 
3 2000 
454 4 
oa 
2.5 |__l__| 
=12,0 —8.0 AO 0.0 4.0 8.0 
Log p 


Figure 4. Evolving structure of a representative model of a DA 
white dwarf in a phase diagram. This is one (0.6Mo) of the five 
models presented in the previous figure. Each curve 
corresponds to the density-temperature distribution from the 
surface to the center of the model at an effective temperature 
given by the number alongside. The solid, dotted, and thick 
solid (for the three cooler epochs) portions of each curve indicate 
the radiative-conductive, convective and crystallized regions. 
Electrons become degenerate to the right of the small filled circle 
on each curve. Likewise, the small open circle on each curve 
indicates the location where the ions become strongly correlated 
(fluid phase). The dashed curves define the composition 
transition zones, H—-He at lower densities, and He-C at higher 
densities. 


A final point about the cooling evolution of white 
dwarfs should be made. In the early, short-lived phase 
of evolution following immediately the planetary nebula 
phase, white dwarf interiors are still hot enough that 
NEUTRINOS can be formed in great quantities there through 
a number of processes involving the electromagnetic 
and the weak interactions. The vast majority of the 
neutrinos escape directly from the central regions where 
they are created to the outer space, thus contributing to 
an important stellar energy sink. For instance, neutrino 
luminosities may become 2 orders of magnitude larger 
than photon luminosities in these objects. The evolution 
of a very hot, young white dwarf is thus dominated 
by neutrino cooling. Neutrino processes largely specify 
the cooling timescale and lead as well to a temperature 
reversal in the stellar core. Such a reversal is still visible 
in the hotter model shown in figure 4. By the time a white 
dwarf has cooled down to To ~ 25000 K, however, the star 
has lost its memory of the neutrino cooling phase, and its 
subsequent evolution and structure depend exclusively on 
the properties of its degenerate electrons and thermal ions. 

It should be clear from this discussion that there 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


exists an intimate relationship between dense-matter 
physics and the structure and evolution of white dwarfs. 
For instance, a detailed knowledge of the opacity and 
thermodynamics of strongly coupled plasmas is necessary 
to compute the cooling rate of a white dwarf. Indeed, this 
rate basically depends on how much thermal energy is 
stored in the interior of a star and how rapidly this energy 
is transferred from the hot core to the cold interstellar 
medium through the thin, opaque outer layers. Hence, a 
reliable description of the constitutive properties of dense 
plasmas is required to build a theory of evolving white 
dwarfs. By the same token, the observed properties of 
cooling white dwarfs can be used, in principle, to test 
theories of strongly coupled plasma physics. 


Spectral evolution 

There is strong observational evidence that spectral 
evolution takes place among white dwarfs, that is, 
some of the hydrogen-atmosphere stars become helium- 
atmosphere objects, and vice versa, during various 
evolutionary phases. Indeed, the ratio of DA to non- 
DA white dwarfs changes as a function of effective 
temperature along the cooling sequence. In particular, 
the cases for the existence of a so-called DB gap— 
an interval of effective temperature from 45000 K to 
about 30 000 K in which no helium-atmosphere object has 
been found—and of a cooler and narrower non-DA gap 
between ~6000 K and ~5000 K are well documented. 
Completely convincing explanations for these phenomena 
(especially in the case of the cooler gap) have not been 
worked out yet, but the very existence of ‘holes’ in the 
distribution of helium-atmosphere objects as a function 
of effective temperature is a strong empirical proof that, 
at least, some of the white dwarf stars must change their 
superficial chemical composition from helium-dominated 
to hydrogen dominated and back to helium rich again as 
cooling proceeds. It is suspected that a complex interplay 
between mechanisms such as hydrogen and helium 
separation (through diffusion) and convective dilution 
and mixing is responsible for the fact that a white dwarf 
may show two different ‘faces’ along its cooling track. For 
example, in DA stars below 15 000 K, convective mixing is 
thought to be effective in bringing deep-lying helium to the 
surface and drastically changing the surface composition. 
Unfortunately, at these effective temperatures, the helium 
brought to the surface is spectroscopically invisible, and its 
presence must be inferred through rather indirect analyses. 
The case for spectral evolution is further strengthened by 
another observational datum of importance: as pointed 
out above, there is no significant difference between the 
mass distribution of DB white dwarfs and that of the 
DA white dwarfs, excluding those objects that have been 
formed through binary evolution. This is what one would 
expect for stars changing only surface compositions. This 
being said, while spectral evolution appears unavoidable, 
it cannot currently explain all the peculiarities of the 
abundance patterns observed in white dwarfs. Alternative 
schemes, for example different channels feeding the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cooling sequence, should be considered in order to account 
completely for the rich variety of spectral types. 

White dwarf stars are not only unusual in that 
the abundance of their main atmospheric constituent 
(hydrogen or helium) may change in a complex way as 
a function of time, but they also show an amazing variety 
of heavier trace elements in their atmospheres, arguably 
making them the most fascinating of all chemically 
peculiar stars. This is because the cooling phase of 
white dwarfs, a relatively uneventful phase from an 
evolutionary point of view as discussed above, is, in 
contrast, a most active phase for the evolution of the 
chemical composition of the envelope. Indeed, it is now 
well established that the often puzzling variety of surface 
abundances observed in white dwarf stars can be traced 
to the simultaneous operation, in the outer layers of 
these stars, of a variety of physical processes which will 
also erase the abundances present in the photosphere at 
the onset of cooling. As discussed above, downward 
element diffusion in the intense gravitational field of a 
degenerate star is perhaps the mechanism which is the 
most closely identified with white dwarf stars. However, 
in its presence, the observed abundances of various 
atmospheric impurities, while small, are much too large 
to be accounted for. 

Mechanisms which compete with the downward 
settling must thus be called on to explain the presence 
of these impurities in the atmospheres. At high effective 
temperatures, say Terr > 20000 K, the dominant competing 
mechanism is thought to be the selective radiative support 
of elements in the atmosphere. This mechanism, which 
involves the transfer of momentum from the intense 
radiation field to ions of heavy elements such as carbon, 
nitrogen, silicon, iron and helium, is able to counteract 
the downward gravitational force exerted on these ions 
and allows a small, but measurable, amount of impurities 
to remain in the atmosphere. Unfortunately, detailed 
calculations of this radiative support still do not reproduce 
the observed abundances, and it is currently thought that 
a small mass loss rate (of the order of ~10-% Mg yr™'), 
when coupled to radiative levitation, might be able to 
account for the observed abundance patterns. For cooler 
stars, it is believed that ACCRETION from the interstellar 
medium plays a role in accounting for the traces of heavy 
elements occasionally seen. Individual accretion events, 
probably related to encounters between a white dwarf and 
a small patch of neutral gas in the interstellar medium, 
might be able to account for the small fraction of DA and 
non-DA stars which display impurities in their spectra. 
In the DQ stars, it is thought that the convection in the 
helium envelope is deep enough to dredge up traces of 
carbon from the deeper carbon-rich layers. Much energy 
has been expended, in the last two decades, to untangle 
the relative importance of these competing mechanisms 
and to decipher the complex patterns of photospheric 
abundances observed in white dwarfs. Nevertheless, 
much work remains to be done. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Some areas of current interest 

In the era of the Hubble Space Telescope and of giant, 
8-10 m ground-based telescopes, faint white dwarf 
populations are being routinely discovered and studied 
in open and globular clusters. In addition, evidence 
has been provided for the existence of a very old, faint 
population of white dwarfs in the Galactic halo on the 
basis of an interpretation of some MICROLENSING events 
and, more directly, on the basis of the observed proper 
motions of some very faint objects in the HUBBLE DEEP 
FIELD whose positions in a color-magnitude diagram are 
consistent with very cool (Te ~ 2000-3000 K) DA white 
dwarfs. These exciting developments have led to a 
renewed interest in white dwarf cooling calculations and 
model atmosphere calculations using upgraded input 
physics and extending into the regime of very low effective 
temperatures. Such efforts are clearly worthwhile since 
white dwarf physics holds the potential for providing 
the best indicators of the ages of, and distances to, these 
systems. 

The usefulness of white dwarfs as cosmochronome- 
ters was firmly established about a decade ago when it 
was first demonstrated that the white dwarf population 
in the solar neighborhood—a population characteristic of 
the Galactic disk—could be used to estimate the age of 
the disk to much improved accuracy. This method ap- 
plies because (intrinsically) faint white dwarfs cool down 
extremely slowly (see the isochrones in figure 3). This im- 
plies that, if white dwarf formation has been going on more 
or less constantly over the distant past, many more faint 
white dwarfs than bright white dwarfs should be present 
in a given volume of space. This is indeed what the distri- 
bution of observed white dwarfs in the Galactic disk gen- 
erally shows (figure 5). However, a very important and 
significant observational result of the last decade has been 
the realization that there is a significant decrease in the lu- 
minosity distribution of these stars: there is a real deficit 
of low-luminosity white dwarfs in the solar neighborhood. 
The simplest model to account for this observational fact is 
to assume that the oldest white dwarfs in the Galactic disk 
are still visible. In other words, the corpses of the very first 
generation of intermediate-mass stars formed in the disk 
of the Milky Way have not yet had the time to cool to invis- 
ibility, beyond the reach of our telescopes. By comparing 
the location of the observed low-luminosity decrease in 
the white dwarf distribution with cooling calculations, it 
is possible to infer the age of the white dwarf population in 
the Galactic disk (see figure 5 for an example of this). While 
the method continues to be refined through numerous nu- 
merical simulations of evolving white dwarfs in the con- 
text of the Galactic disk, its potential for the white dwarf 
populations in open and globular clusters as well as for 
the putative population in the Galactic halo is evident. 

Another area of current active interest is related to 
the presence of so-called instability strips along the cool- 
ing sequences of white dwarfs in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL 
DIAGRAM. Helium-atmosphere white dwarfs become un- 
stable against nonradial gravity-mode pulsations as they 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


| 
iv) 
oO 

I 

| 


a 3.5 | + 

z t 

S&S -40b 4 

is q 

& 

3 245 | 

Bs ? | 

= -5.0b | 4 
/ \ 
/ See 

5.5 


A 


0.5 —0.5 —1.5 —2.5 —3.5 —4.5 —é 


on 
oO 


log (L/Le) 


Figure 5. Luminosity function of white dwarfs in the solar 
neighborhood, that is the number of white dwarfs per unit 
volume per unit luminosity interval as a function of luminosity 
in solar units. The observed values are indicated by error bars. 
Note, in particular, the deficit of low-luminosity stars shown in 
the last bin. The solid curve is a fit to the data points based on 
cooling calculations which assume an age of 9.3 x 10° yr for the 
Galactic disk. 


evolve through an interval of effective temperatures from 
~25000 K to about ~22000 K. The instabilities are inti- 
mately connected to the recombination of helium in the 
envelopes of these stars and the concomitant formation of 
a superficial helium convection zone. There also exists an 
analogous instability strip for the hydrogen-atmosphere 
white dwarfs, related, this time, to the recombination of 
hydrogen in the outer layers, and, consequently, which 
is located at lower effective temperatures, in the range 
12500-11000 K. In both cases, the pulsational instabili- 
ties manifest themselves as temperature waves at the stel- 
lar surface that cause multiperiodic luminosity variations. 
The pulsating DB white dwarfs are referred to as V777 Her 
stars, while their DA counterparts are known as ZZ Ceti 
variables. The importance of these two instability strips 
stems from the fact that they provide windows through 
which the internal structure of white dwarfs can be probed. 
For instance, a detailed comparison of the observed period 
structure of pulsating white dwarfs with those of mod- 
els provides a unique way of inferring the internal consti- 
tution of white dwarfs and, in particular, the run of the 
chemical composition as a function of depth. Although 
the potential of this technique has been barely tapped, it 
is likely that asteroseismological studies of white dwarfs 
will soon become a major contributor to our knowledge of 
the internal structure of these stars. One of the major po- 
tential impacts of these studies is the determination of the 
thicknesses of the outer layers of helium and hydrogen (in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the DA stars) in individual objects, which will serve as cali- 
bration of evolutionary models in more refined attempts at 
the cosmochronology of various white dwarf populations. 


Bibliography 

D’Antona F and Mazzitelli I 1990 Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys. 28 139 

Liebert J 1980 Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 18 363 

Rudermann M 1971 Sci. Am. 224 (2) 24 

Van Horn H M 1979 Phys. Today 32 23 

Wesemael F, Greenstein J L, Liebert J, Lamontagne R, 
Fontaine G, Bergeron P and Glaspey J W 1993 Publ. 
Astron. Soc. Pac. 105 761 


Gilles Fontaine and Francois Wesemael 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


White Dwarfs in the Galaxy’s Halo 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


White Dwarfs in the Galaxy’s Halo 


The Galaxy’s large spherical halo (see GALACTIC METAL- 
POOR HALO and HALO, GALACTIC) may harbor as many as 
several hundred billion WHITE DWARFS, a population as 
large in number as the total number of stars in the 
Galaxy’s disk (see DISK GALAXIES and GALACTIC THIN DISK). 
Although this assertion is controversial, several astro- 
nomical surveys provide strong support for it and the 
implications affect fields of astronomical inquiry as 
diverse as dark matter and star formation. The reason 
that this population of white dwarfs may be related to 
dark matter is tied to the fact that white dwarfs cool and 
fade as they age. This means that a white dwarf as old as 
the ancient halo is extremely faint. Current large-scale 
imaging surveys can only see relatively nearby white 
dwarfs, and only a tiny fraction of the halo’s mass exists 
near the Sun, while the vast majority of the Galaxy’s halo 
is thousands of light-years away. 

The theory of gravity requires that the mass of the 
halo must dominate that of the Galaxy’s disk. Since the 
halo is largely invisible, it is almost entirely made of dark 
matter (see DARK MATTER IN GALAXIES). Indeed, the known 
population of normal stars in the halo constitutes a triv- 
ial fraction of the total mass. However, those stars exhib- 
it properties distinct from disk stars, including rapid 
motion relative to the Sun. As a result a halo star that 
happens to be within the solar neighborhood can be dis- 
tinguished from a disk star by examining the rapidity 
with which it passes through the solar neighborhood. 
This is a statistical criterion, meaning that for any given 
star one can assign a probability that it belongs to the 
disk or halo. For a survey of many stars with such prob- 
abilities one can estimate the actual number of stars in 
the disk and halo populations. 

The first hint that white dwarfs may be a significant 
part of the halo emerged in 1996, when a group conduct- 
ing a MICROLENSING experiment claimed to detect indi- 
rectly a large population of objects in the Galaxy’s halo 
all with masses characteristic of white dwarfs. Instead of 
actually seeing the white dwarfs themselves, they 
observed the effect they have on images of stars in the 
Milky Way’s companion galaxy the Large Magellanic 
Cloud (see WIMPS AND MACHOS). The microlensing results, 
now backed by several independent, similar experi- 
ments, have found that at most 20% of the total mass of 
the Galaxy’s halo may be in this supposed population of 
white dwarfs. 

In 2001 a search for moving stars in an archive of 
photographic plates taken between 1950 and 1998 
revealed about 20 nearby white dwarfs which are mov- 
ing so fast that they must be members of the Galaxy’s 
halo. Statistical analysis of the data showed that at least 
1% of the halo’s mass is due to a population of white 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


dwarfs. Alternative interpretations of this survey suggest 
that a fraction of this population may be part of the 
Galaxy’s thick disk. In all of the interpretations, howev- 
er, there still appears to be an unexpectedly large number 
of white dwarfs in the halo, constituting at least 0.5% of 
the halo’s mass. 

With 0.5-20% of the halo’s mass accounted for by 
white dwarfs, a fraction of the Galaxy’s dark matter has 
finally been identified. Furthermore, the halo white 
dwarf population is important to STAR FORMATION theory. 
Ongoing star formation creates many low-mass stars for 
every high-mass star. If the same proportions of high- 
and low-mass stars formed 13 billion years ago, when the 
halo formed, only one to five halo white dwarfs should 
have been found by the recent survey. This is known 
because the low-mass halo stars have not had enough 
time to evolve into white dwarfs, and we know the num- 
ber of low-mass stars in the halo. That number, assuming 
a universal star formation process, determines the num- 
ber of high-mass stars that have evolved into white 
dwarfs in the halo. The actual numbers observed imply 
that high-mass stars formed more readily in the halo 
than they do at present. 

Ben R Oppenheimer 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Whitford, Albert Edward (1905-) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Whitford, Albert Edward (1905-) 


Astronomer and photometrist, worked as a student with 
JOEL STEBBINS and succeeded him as professor at Wisconsin 
and director of the Washburn Observatory. Became 
director of the Lick Observatory. As a student he made 
a successful device for measuring very small currents 
from photoelectric cells, and used it to measure the light 
from stars and galaxies. This turned into his career as an 
astronomer. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Whittaker, Edmund Taylor (1873-1956) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Whittaker, Edmund Taylor (1873-1956) 


Mathematician, born in Southport, Lancashire, became 
Astronomer Royal of Ireland, director of Dunsink 
Observatory and professor of astronomy at the University 
of Dublin. Wrote the influential History of the Theories of 
Ether and Electricity, from the Age of Descartes to the Close of 
the Nineteenth Century (1910). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Whole Earth Telescope (WET) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Whole Earth Telescope (WET) 


A world-wide network of cooperating astronomical 
observatories which was established by astronomers from 
the University of Texas in 1986. WET HQ moved to Iowa 
State University in 1997. 

Intended to obtain uninterrupted time-series mea- 
surements of variable stars (white dwarfs and Delta Scuti 
stars) and cataclysmic variables. This is done by resolv- 
ing the multiperiodic oscillations observed in these objects 
into their individual components. The temporal spectrum 
allows astronomers to probe the interiors of the target ob- 
jects using the technique of asteroseismology. 

Since the first campaign in March 1988, the WET team 
has coordinated global photometry campaigns so that the 
target objects are visible from the night side of the planet 
24 hours a day. These campaigns typically take place twice 
a year. 

For further information see 
http:/ /ceti.as.utexas.edu/wetpage.html. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Widefield CCD Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Widefield CCD Imagers 


Since the early 1980s, the CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE, or CCD, 
has emerged as the primary detector for astronomical 
observations. At the present time, CCDs are virtually 
the only detectors used for observations in the optical 
portion of the spectrum (300 nm-1000 nm), and their use 
has been extended into the UV (200 nm-300 nm) and x-ray 
(100 eV-10 keV) regions as well. Modern CCDs are superb 
detectors. When thinned and backside illuminated, 
and with new multilayer anti-reflection coatings, CCDs 
can offer quantum efficiency (QE) exceeding 70% and 
approaching unity over most of the optical waveband. 
The best CCD amplifiers now have readout noise below 
2e~ rms and some have achieved the elusive le~ noise 
level. One of the main areas of development has been, 
and continues to be, in device size and pixel count. The 
very first CCD imagers had 100 x 100 pixels, while the first 
astronomically useful device was the RCA 320 x 512 with 
30 wm pixels, followed by the 800 x 800 15 zm pixel device 
built by Texas Instruments for the WF/PC-I on the NASA 
HUBBLESPACE TELESCOPE. As the 1990s began, the sizes of these 
devices began to grow. 2048 x 2048 pixel devices were 
produced by Ford Aerospace (which eventually became 
Loral, Loral/Fairchild, and now Lockheed-Martin) and 
Tektronix (now SITe). These 2Kx2K pixel, and similar- 
sized, devices are now produced with good yields by 
several manufacturers. 

The technical advances in ground-based instrumenta- 
tion have included increases in telescope apertures and im- 
provements in image quality and sEEING. It is not unusual 
to obtain 0’.5 images or better at premier astronomical 
sites. Consequently, optics and detector systems must be 
designed with sufficient resolution to sample these sharp 
images, requiring that the detector pixels be no larger than 
~0".25. This requirement for small pixels, coupled with 
the need for large fields, drives the high pixel count needed 
in widefield imagers. For example, to be optimally sam- 
pled while spanning a 0°.5 x 0°.5 field requires that the 
array measure of order 8000 x 8000 pixels. In the near 
future, the image quality is likely to improve even more, 
driving the pixel sizes smaller and the pixel count higher 
in order to maintain the same field of view. 

Monolithic devices are not suitable for such very large 
focal planes. Limitations in wafer size and yield set a 
practical limit to device size. In addition, other factors such 
as finite charge transfer efficiency (CTE) and readout time, 
as well as cost, must be considered when the number of 
pixels increases. In order to build the very large detectors 
needed to image wide fields of view at seeing-limited 
resolution, one must construct mosaics of smaller devices. 


Large-gap CCD mosaic focal planes 

The simplest approach to constructing a large mosaic focal 
plane is to mount large, packaged devices as tightly as 
possible on a common base. The resulting mosaic will 
have large gaps (1 cm or more) between the packaged 
CCD imagers that come from the wire bond pads that are 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


SDSS CAMERA 


Figure 1. Drawing illustrating the layout of the SDSS CCD 
mosaic. The CCDs are arranged in six parallel columns each 
having five CCDs. Each CCD in a ‘row’ is covered by a different 
filter (ugriz). The imaged scene ‘drifts’ along the columns and 
the clocking of the charge is synchronized with the image 
motion. As a 2°.5 strip of sky is scanned, images in five colors 
are obtained from the camera. For this specialized application, 
the large gaps are not considered to be a serious problem. 


required to make electrical connections to the silicon die 
and the wire bond pins that are usually located around the 
perimeter of the typical device package. 

Nevertheless, several widefield mosaic CCD imagers 
have been constructed using this technique, for example 
the 4Kx4K pixel Big Throughput Camera constructed 
by the University of Michigan and Bell Labs, the 
4Kx 8K mosaic imager built by the National Astronomical 
Observatory of Japan and the 10K x 12K pixel camera built 
by Princeton University for the SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY 
(SDSS). 

The SDSS camera (figure 1) consists of a 5 x 6 
array of SITe 2Kx2K CCDs with 24 wm pixels and is 
somewhat special in that it is designed to operate in the 
‘drift scanning’ mode where the sky image is allowed to 
scan along the device columns while the accumulating 
photoelectron packets (or charge) are clocked to follow 
the image. This application differs from the conventional 
‘shift and stare’ technique where the telescope is pointed 
at some region, an image is taken (typically only a few 
minutes integration), the telescope is shifted by an amount 
larger than the gaps separating the CCDs, another image 
is taken, and so on. The multiple images at different 
positions allow the gaps between the mosaic elements to 
be filled while also enabling the removal of cosmic rays 
that hit the device during the exposure. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Widefield CCD Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


SS eS 
(SIM gIwMeIweiwnue: 


pyerere: (OCIL) | 


) GSES ee 
#31153} [eal (351 [25) |3a) [82] | 56 | | 

z ; io 90-50. / 00-00 0G, 0G Go 

Iso. 00 00 95 $0" 00 - 90° 90 
5 sJalslelelclalolslolelalsjelelelejyoyoruyoye, 

(slelele 
, g 
4 ejejelelele) : 


Figure 2. This photomicrograph of the lower left-hand corner of 
a three-edge buttable CCD illustrates several key design features 
for edge buttability. This particular device (a 2Kx4K LL 
CCID-20 with 15 wm pixels) can be operated in framestore mode 
(if desired) so there are six metal bus lines distributing the 
three-phase parallel clocks to the imaging and storage regions. 
These can be seen as the vertical lines to the far left of the 
photograph. The saw cut would be made at the edge of this 
image. The last three or four rows are tapered inward, and the 
serial register is wrapped around vertically so the output 
amplifier does not increase the width of the device (photograph 
courtesy of Dr Barry Burke, MIT Lincoln Laboratory). 


At one time, drift scanning may have offered some 
practical advantages such as continuous readout with no 
dead time, and improved flat fielding in one dimension 
(the pixel-to-pixel sensitivity non-uniformities ina column 
are effectively smoothed out by clocking the scene along a 
column). However, except for specialized projects like the 
SDSS, these advantages no longer exist. Modern mosaics 
can be read out quickly (under 1 min), so the readout 
time is only a small fraction of the typical integration 
time. Also, modern CCDs do not have the gross flat- 
field non-uniformities that plagued earlier devices, so 
the column smoothing obtained by drift scanning is 
not only unnecessary but viewed as a disadvantage. 
Furthermore, requiring a telescope and camera to operate 
in drift scanning mode places strict tolerances on the 
optical system field distortion because the image tracks 
cannot deviate from straight lines that must map onto 
device columns or else the image quality will deteriorate. 
Considering the advantages and limitations of both 
methods, the large majority of mosaic cameras have been 
designed to operate in the shift and stare mode. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. Shown are four 2K x 4K three-edge-buttable CCDs 
with 15 xm pixels from four different manufacturers. These 
devices are the present-day building blocks for large, 
close-packed mosaics. From left to right are devices made by 
Loral (now Lockheed-Martin), MIT Lincoln Laboratory, SITe and 
EEV. Note that the EEV package has considerably less structure 
along the wire-bonding edge making it the preferred design for 
focal planes with more than two rows of devices. 


Close-packed CCD mosaic focal planes 

For most applications, a continuous focal plane with 
minimal gaps between the CCD imagers is preferred. 
While it is not possible to construct a mosaic with 
zero gaps, there are techniques in the CCD design and 
packaging that allow for the construction of close-packed 
mosaics where the gaps are of order 0.5 mm or less. 


Device design considerations for close-packed mosaics 

To enable CCD imagers to be used in close-packed mosaics, 
the devices must be specially designed from the outset 
to be edge buttable. This involves confining the wire 
bonding pads to only two or, better yet, one of the four 
edges of the device. Consider a three-edge buttable design. 
The only structures that need to run up the sides of 
the device are the metal clock bus lines that distribute 
the parallel clock signals to the polysilicon gates that 
establish the potential wells in the imaging region of the 
device. To keep the dead regions along sides of the 
device as small as possible, the output amplifier must 
be designed so it does not not protrude from the side 
of the device. This can be accomplished by turning a 
corner with the serial register and tucking the amplifier 
inside the edge boundary defined by the outermost clock 
lines (see the photomicrograph in figure 2). Allowing the 
smallest reasonable space for the vertical bus lines and 
the boundary to the saw cut, the minimum gap from the 
imaging area to imaging area on two adjacent arrays is 
~200 wm. 

Currently, at least three manufacturers (EEV, SITe and 
MIT Lincoln Laboratory) are producing thinned, high-QE 
2Kx4K devices with pixels of sizes in the 10-15 wm range 
that are three-edge buttable and suitable for building large 
mosaic focal planes (see figure 3). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Widefield CCD Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 4. This 8Kx 12K pixel CCD mosaic camera built by the 
University of Hawaii for the 3.6 m Canada—France—Hawaii 
Telescope is the largest close-packed mosaic in operation at the 
time of this writing (larger mosaic focal planes are under 
construction). The mosaic consists of 12 thinned, high-QE 
2Kx4K three-edge buttable CCDs with 15 wm pixels. The 
devices were made by MIT Lincoln Laboratory. The imaging 
area, corresponding to the black rectangular region in the center 
of the photograph, measures 185 mmx 122 mm. When used at 
the prime focus of the CFHT, the mosaic spans a field of view of 
45/ x 30’ at a scale of 0”.21/pixel. The gaps separating CCDs are 
less than 0.5 mm or less than 10” on the sky. 


Packaging and mosaic construction 

Once an edge-buttable device is designed, it can be 
mounted close to its neighbors to form a CCD mosaic. 
The very first attempts at this involved permanently 
attaching (i.e. gluing) the CCD dies to a common substrate. 
There are several disadvantages to this approach. A 
mosaic assembled in this manner cannot be taken apart 
safely if one of the CCDs is damaged. Furthermore, 
the selection of the CCDs that will be used in a mosaic 
involves thorough testing at cryogenic temperatures. This 
is difficult to accomplish with unpackaged CCD dies, so 
one could permanently assemble a mosaic and find after it 
is completed and tested that some of the mosaic elements 
are not suitable for scientific observations. These problems 
led to the development of edge-buttable packages that do 
not compromise the tight packing ability of the buttable 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


imagers and yet allow a mosaic focal plane to be assembled 
and dis-assembled. Examples of such packages are shown 
in figures 3 and 4. In choosing a package material, one 
must consider that the device will be operated at ~170 K, 
so the coefficient of thermal expansion difference between 
that material and silicon is important. The standard 
package materials that are a reasonable thermal expansion 
match to silicon are aluminum nitride (AIN), Invar and 
molybdenum. 

Using the devices shown in figure 3, several close- 
packed CCD mosaic focal planes containing at least 
8Kx8K pixels have been constructed and are in operation 
(e.g. UH 8Kx8K, NOAO 8Kx8K mosaic imagers for the 
Kitt Peak and CTIO 4m telescopes, ESO 8Kx8K, CFHT 
8Kx 12K—see figure 4). 

Devices that are three-edge buttable are suitable for 
close-packed mosaics having two rows and an unlimited 
number of columns. If one wants to build a larger mosaic 
with more than two rows, one must tolerate a larger gap 
between the rows on the fourth, non-buttable edge. With 
these larger mosaics in mind, some designs have been 
developed for pseudo four-edge buttable packages that 
minimize the packaging structures along this fourth edge. 
EEV has developed a package (see figure 3) that keeps the 
dead space along this fourth edge to under 3 mm from 
the edge of the bottom imaging row to the edge of the 
package. Another prototype design with a 3 mm dead 
space is shown in figure 5. 


The future 

Widefield CCD imagers are at present being constructed 
by many observatories. Several current projects are 
designed to span fields in excess of 1° x 1° using CCD 
mosaics measuring 18K x 18K pixels. If widefield imaging 
telescopes with 3° x 3° fields are constructed, they will 
require CCD mosaics having 36Kx36K pixels or more. 
Work is also progressing on the designs for the individual 
building blocks that make up the mosaic elements. Three- 
edge buttable devices with 3K x6K 10 xm pixels are now 
under development, and wafer-scale devices that can fill 
a 150 mm wafer are being considered as yields improve. 


On-chip image motion compensation—the OTCCD 

One exciting CCD variation that has emerged in recent 
years is the multi-directional or orthogonal-transfer CCD 
(OTCCD)—a device that can shift charge in up to 
eight directions, thus allowing active image motion 
compensation or fast guiding ‘on chip’ (see figure 6). A 
mosaic array of close-packed, independently addressable 
OTCCDs would allow compensation for image motion 
caused by the atmosphere over very wide fields, as well as 
correcting for windshake and other mechanical pointing 
instabilities common to the telescope as a whole. 

Large, buttable OTCCDs with 2Kx4K pixels have 
been successfully fabricated and the first mosaics of such 
devices are at present under construction. Even larger 
devices subdivided into small (~1' x 1’) independently 
controllable OTCCD cells are under development. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Widefield CCD Imagers 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. This drawing shows one design for a package that can be used in close-packed mosaics having more than two rows. A 
ceramic piece with metallized traces that wrap around one edge is mounted at right-angles to the device. Wire bonds are made to the 
traces on the short edge of the ceramic and the traces connect the signals to a surface mount connector that emerges from the backside 
of the package. Mounting holes and alignment holes are shown for locating the package in focal plane mosaic. 


Channel stop 


Figure 6. This diagram illustrates the gate layout and charge clocking directions for a multi-directional OTCCD. The symmetry of the 
gate structure allows clocking of the charge in eight directions: horizontally and vertically (as shown), or diagonally. Subpixel 
stepping is also possible. In this image, the triangular structures are polysilicon gates that can be biased to form the potential wells in 
the silicon below. This type of structure requires four gates per pixel, whereas the typical CCD has only three gates. In the illustration 
at the left, the dark triangular gate is biased low to serve as a barrier phase while the other three phases are modulated to transfer the 
charge in the vertical direction. At the right, a different gate serves as the barrier phase, and, by modulating the voltage on three 
different gates, the charge can be transferred in the horizontal direction. 


Bright stars and antiblooming 

Bright stars present a serious problem for widefield 
CCD imaging. Even at high GALactic LATITUDE, there are 
numerous bright (m < 15) and several very bright (m < 10) 
stars in any 0°.5 x 0°.5 field. Larger fields only make 
the problem worse. Light from these stars can reflect 
off optical surfaces, including the surface of the CCD 
itself, and create out-of-focus halos and other scattered 
light artifacts. Large diffraction spikes can extend well 
away from the bright stars and break up into faint pieces, 
resembling faint galaxies, especially in very good seeing. 
Bright stars will also produce saturated, bloomed charge 
trails; the result of filling the pixel potential well capacity 
(typically 150 000-300 000 e~) and having the excess charge 
spill up and down the columns into the neighboring 
pixels. For some brighter stars, the bloomed trails can 
extend the full length of the device, destroying any 
information about objects in the path of the bloomed 
trail. Device manufacturers can address the blooming 
problem by implementing antiblooming drains in their 
CCD structures. An antiblooming drain is an implant on 
the CCD with a potential level near full well, but slightly 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


less than the barrier potential of the neighboring vertical 
phases. When the charge in a pixel exceeds the potential 
level of the drain, but before the charge can spill over to 
the neighboring pixel, it is intercepted by the drain. Such 
structures can be made so that they do not obscure any 
of the imaging regions (e.g. the drain can be run down 
the center of the channel stop). Implementation of such 
structures will be very valuable in future devices designed 
for widefield imaging. 


Gerard A Luppino 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Widmansiatten, Alois von Beckh- [Alois Beck, Edler 
von Widmanstatten] (1753/4-1849) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Widmanstatten, Alois von Beckh- 
[Alois Beck, Edler von 
Widmanstatten] (1753/4—1849) 


Printer and businessman, born in Graz, Austria, became 
head of the Fabriksproduktenkabinett, a private technol- 
ogy collection of Emperor Francis I. Discovered the crys- 
talline structure of iron/nickel meteorites by etching pol- 
ished slices from an iron meteorite from Zagreb and print- 
ing from the etched surfaces. The patterns are known as 
Widmanstatten figures. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Widmanstatten Pattern 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Widmanstatten Pattern 


A characteristic, roughly hexagonal pattern of intersecting 
lines that appears on the surface of an octahedrite, a type of 
iron meteorite, when it is sectioned, polished and etched 
with acid. The Austrian mineralogist Aloys Joseph von 
Widmanstatten discovered the pattern in 1804. Itis formed 
by the intergrowth of two nickel-iron alloys under the 
conditions of slow cooling that pertained in the solidifying 
core of an asteroidal parent body that had undergone 
differentiation, and is found only in meteorites. The two 
alloys are kamacite, with a low nickel content, and taenite, 
which is richer in nickel. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wien, Wilhelm (1864-1928) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wien, Wilhelm (1864-1928) 


Born in Gaffken, East Prussia (now Poland), Nobel 
prizewinner (1911), became professor of physics at Munich 
and discovered Wien’s law, for the distribution of light 
in the spectrum of a black-body. Discovered the proton 
in an early mass-spectrometer experiment (confirmed by 
Rutherford). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Wilcox Solar Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wilcox Solar Observatory 


The Wilcox Solar Observatory (WSO) at Stanford Univer- 
sity measures the Sun’s large-scale synoptic magnetic and 
velocity fields with the goal of understanding solar vari- 
ability and how it affects our terrestrial environment. With 
more than a 22 year solar cycle of spectrograph observa- 
tions since 1975, WSO staff investigate the solar interior, 
photosphere, corona, wind and cycle. 

The Observatory was first funded by the Office of 
Naval Research (ONR), the National Science Foundation 
(NSF) and the M C Fleischman Foundation. Continuing 
support comes from NSF, NASA and ONR. The 
Observatory was rededicated in honor of its first director, 
J M Wilcox, in 1984, shortly after his death. Stanford 
University is located south of San Francisco, CA. 

For further information see 
http://wso.stanford.edu. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wilkins, John (1614-72) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wilkins, John (1614-72) 


Churchman, born in Fawsley, Northamptonshire, became 
Warden of Wadham College, Oxford, and Master of Trinity 
College, Cambridge. Founded the Royal Society from a 
discussion group of scientists at Wadham. In 1638 Wilkins 
wrote a book describing the Moonas a habitable planet and 
predicting that, one day, space travel to the Moon would 
be possible. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Wilson, Alexander (1714-86) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wilson, Alexander (1714-86) 


Born in St Andrews, Scotland, became professor at 
Glasgow, observed sunspots and showed that they 
were depressions in the Sun (following LA HIRE and 
CASSINI). Published Thoughts on General Gravitation (1770), 
answering NEWTON’s question ‘What hinders the fixed stars 
from falling upon one another?’ with the speculative 
answer that the entire universe rotates about a center. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Wilson, Olin Chaddock (1909-94) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wilson, Olin Chaddock (1909-94) 


Astronomer and spectroscopist, became a staff member 
at Mount Wilson Observatory. He studied stellar 
chromospheres and stellar activity cycles, showing by 
intensive analysis of the H and K lines of ionized calcium 
that other stars besides the Sun have cycles of activity. 
With  k VAINU BapPu, he found a means of determining 
luminosity, and thus distance, of stars from the widths 
of the emission in these two lines that comes from the 
chromosphere (Wilson—Bappu effect). He studied spectra of 
nebulae, eclipsing stars, Wolf-Rayet stars and planetary 
nebulae. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wilson, Robert Woodrow (1936-) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wilson, Robert Woodrow (1936-) 


Born in Houston, Texas, Nobel prizewinner for physics 
in 1978) with ARNO PENzIAS ‘for their discovery of cosmic 
microwave background radiation’. Interested in radio 
as a boy, drawn to radioastronomy by working with 
JOHN BOLTON at CalTech mapping the Milky Way. Joined 
Bell Laboratories at Crawford Hill where with Arno 
Penzias he shared a small allowance given to the Lab 
for radioastronomy projects. With new millimeter wave 
receivers at 100-120 GHz they discovered unexpectedly 
large amounts of carbon monoxide in a molecular cloud 
behind the Orion nebula, including isotopic spectral lines 
so that it was possible to determine isotope ratios as a 
probe of nucleogenesis. With a large radio telescope (the 
Holmdel horn) and a new sensitive, low-noise receiver 
discovered the cosmic microwave background radiation. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


WIMPs and MACHOs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


WIMPs and MACHOs 


WIMP is an acronym for weakly interacting massive par- 
ticle and MACHO is an acronym for massive (astrophys- 
ical) compact halo object. WIMPs and MACHOs are two 
of the most popular DARK MATTER candidates. They repre- 
sent two very different but reasonable possibilities of 
what the dominant component of the universe may be. 

It is well established that somewhere between 90% 
and 99% of the material in the universe is in some as yet 
undiscovered form. This material is the gravitational 
glue that holds together galaxies and clusters of galaxies 
and plays an important role in the history and fate of the 
universe. Yet this material has not been directly detected. 
Since extensive searches have been done, this means that 
this mysterious material must not emit or absorb appre- 
ciable electromagnetic radiation in any known wave- 
band. Thus it is called dark matter. The nature of this 
material is one of the biggest unsolved problems in sci- 
ence. It is important to identify the dark matter, but since 
it is easy to invent substances that could fill intergalactic 
space and yet have escaped detection, there are a very 
large number of dark matter candidates. Thus several 
generic classes of dark matter candidates have been sug- 
gested, and each dark matter search experiment concen- 
trates on one of these classes. The most important dark 
matter classes, in terms of detection efforts, are neutri- 
nos, WIMPs, MACHOs and axions. 

For example, NEUTRINOS are weakly interacting par- 
ticles that were almost certainly created in great abun- 
dance during the big bang. These fill the Galaxy, moving 
freely through the Galaxy and even the Earth, and yet are 
almost impossible to detect. This is because they can be 
sensed only through the very small electroweak interac- 
tion. If each neutrino had a mass of several electronvolts 
they would contribute enough mass to make up the bulk 
of the dark matter. For various reasons, it is unlikely that 
neutrinos of the type discovered in particle accelerators 
and nuclear reactors on Earth make up much of the dark 
matter. 

However, it is very possible that some as yet undis- 
covered weakly interacting particle was created during 
the big bang and today remains in large enough abun- 
dance to make the dark matter. The masses typically 
required for these particles are in the range 1 GeV-1 TeV, 
and these hypothetical dark matter particles are called 
WIMPs. There are hundreds of elementary particles that 
fall into this class of dark matter particles, including 
supersymmetric particles such as neutralinos, photinos, 
higgsinos or sneutrinos, and new heavy neutrinos. 

This hypothetical WIMP is well studied and 
attempts to detect these particles have been mounted 
both by creating them in accelerators and by sensing 
them in underground detectors as they pass through the 
Earth. However, there is a large class of astronomical 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


objects that could be the dark matter and still escape 
detection. For example, if the Galactic halo were filled 
with Jupiter mass objects (10-3M,) they would not have 
been detected by emission or absorption of light. Brown 
dwarf stars with masses below 0.08M, or the black hole 
remnants of an early generation of stars would be simi- 
larly invisible. Thus these objects are examples of 
MACHOs. Other examples of this class of dark matter 
candidates include primordial black holes created during 
the big bang, neutron stars, white dwarf stars and vari- 
ous exotic stable configurations of quantum fields, such 
as non-topological solitons. 

An important difference between WIMPs and 
MACHOs is that WIMPs are non-baryonic and 
MACHOS are typically (but not always) formed from 
baryonic material. As discussed in the article on big bang 
nucleosynthesis (see UNIVERSE: THERMAL HISTORY), baryon- 
ic material probably cannot make up all of the dark mat- 
ter, although it could make up most of the dark matter in 
the halos of spiral galaxies such as the Milky Way. There 
is preliminary, although controversial, evidence for the 
existence of large numbers of MACHOs, but because 
they probably cannot make up all the dark matter, the 
search for WIMPs continues unabated. 


WIMP thermal relics as dark matter 

Among the particle dark matter candidates an important 
distinction is whether the particles were created thermal- 
ly in the early universe, or whether they were created 
non-thermally in a phase transition. Thermal and non- 
thermal relics have a different relationship between their 
relic abundance Q and their properties such as mass and 
couplings, so the distinction is especially important for 
dark matter detection efforts. For example, the WIMP 
class of particles can be defined as those particles that are 
created thermally, while dark matter axions come mostly 
from non-thermal processes. Light neutrinos are also 
thermally created relics, but because of their very small 
mass have a different history. 

In thermal creation one supposes that early on, 
when the universe was at very high temperature, ther- 
mal equilibrium obtained, and the number density of 
WIMPs (or any other particle species) was roughly equal 
to the number density of photons (particles of light)!. 
This is just equipartition of energy among all possible 
degrees of freedom. As the universe cooled the number 
density of WIMPs and photons decreased together. 
When the temperature finally dropped below the WIMP 
mass, however, creation of WIMPs became very rare 
while annihilation still proceeded. Thus in equilibrium, 
the number density of WIMPs dropped exponentially : 
exp(-myymp/T). If equilibrium were maintained until 


1 There is a small difference between the number density of photons and 


neutrinos since photons obey Bose-Einstein statistics and neutrinos obey 
Fermi-—Dirac statistics. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


WIMPs and MACHOs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


today there would therefore be very few WIMPs left, but 
at some point the WIMP density dropped low enough 
that the probability of one WIMP finding another to anni- 
hilate became small. Note, we must assume that an indi- 
vidual WIMP is stable if it is to become the dark matter. 
The WIMP number density stopped dropping at this 
point and we are left with a substantial number of 
WIMPs today. Detailed evolution of the Boltzmann equa- 
tion that describes this process can be done for an accu- 
rate prediction, but roughly the predicted relic density 
today of WIMPs is inversely proportional to their inter- 
action strength. The remarkable fact is that, for a relic 
density equal to the known dark matter density, the 
interaction strength must be that expected for particles 
with electroweak-scale interactions: thus the ‘W’ for 
‘weakly’ in ‘WIMP’. There are several theoretical prob- 
lems with the standard model of particle physics that are 
solved by new electroweak-scale physics such as SUPER- 
SYMMETRY. Thus these theoretical problems may be clues 
that the dark matter does indeed consist of WIMPs. Said 
another way, any stable particle that annihilates with an 
electroweak-scale cross section is bound to contribute to 
the dark matter of the universe. It is interesting that the- 
ories such as supersymmetry, invented for entirely dif- 
ferent reasons, typically predict just such a particle. 

The fact that thermally created dark matter has 
weak-scale interactions also means that it may be within 
reach of accelerator experiments such as LEP and LHC at 
CERN, and the proton collider experiments at Fermilab. 
Thus many accelerator searches for exotic particles are 
also searches for the dark matter of the universe. Also, 
because of the weak-scale interactions, WIMP-nuclear 
interaction rates are within reach of many direct and 
indirect detection methods, as discussed below. 


Supersymmetry and dark matter 

Supersymmetry is a new hypothetical symmetry of 
nature that relates bosons and fermions. If supersymme- 
try exists in nature then every known particle should 
have a supersymmetric partner. Bosonic ordinary parti- 
cles have fermonic superpartners with the same name 
except with the suffix ‘ino’ added, while fermonic ordi- 
nary particles have bosonic (scalar) superpartner names 
with the prefix ‘s’ added. Examples of proposed super- 
symmetric particles include photinos, higgsinos, Z-inos, 
squarks and selectrons. Some supersymmetric particles 
have the same quantum numbers as each other and 
therefore can mix together producing particles that are 
not exact partners of any standard model particle. For 
example, the photino, Higgsino and Z-ino can mix into 
arbitrary combinations called the neutralinos. 

In most models, the lightest supersymmetric particle 
(LSP) is stable, and since supersymmetric particles have 
electroweak-strength interactions, the LSP makes an 
excellent dark matter candidate. Typically the neutralino 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


is the LSP so most investigations of WIMP dark matter 
have concentrated on the neutralino. However, there are 
many possible supersymmetric models and many free 
parameters in the models, so precise predictions of 
supersymmetric relic abundance and supersymmetric 
particle detectability are not possible. Typically experi- 
ments attempt to probe a range of model parameters. So 
far no concrete evidence of any supersymmetric partner 
exists. If even one supersymmetric partner is found, the 
theory predicts that they all must exist. 

Note that the parameters that determine the relic 
abundances also determine all the particle production 
and rare decay cross sections, as well as the rate in vari- 
ous detectors. Thus once these parameters are specified 
or measured, one can compare the model predictions 
with experimental results. 


Search for WIMPs 

Accelerator searches 

Extensive unsuccessful searches for the particles 
involved in supersymmetric models have been per- 
formed at particle accelerators throughout the world. 
Thus substantial regions of prime neutralino dark matter 
parameter space have already been eliminated. This does 
not yet mean that low-energy supersymmetry is unlikely 
to exist, since only a small portion of the allowed mass 
range under 1 TeV has been explored. Since supersym- 
metry predicts a Higgs boson with mass under about 120 
GeV, such a discovery would be very important, espe- 
cially if the Higgs boson showed non-standard proper- 
ties indicative of supersymmetry. It is correct to think of 
the particle physics search for supersymmetry as a pow- 
erful search for the dark matter. 


Direct detection of WIMPs 

A satisfying solution to the dark matter problem would 
be the detection of WIMPs from our Galactic halo as they 
move past and through the Earth. This would also allow 
measurement of the local density of dark matter and 
establish beyond doubt that the dark matter is non-bary- 
onic cold dark matter. There are several ways to do this, 
and currently two methods are being aggressively pur- 
sued. 

The most exciting result would be direct detection of 
the WIMP particles in the laboratory. Since we roughly 
know the speed (~220 km s-!) and the density (e~0.3 pro- 
ton masses cm-3), we can say that for a WIMP of mass of 
order 10-100 GeV, roughly 100000 dark matter particles 
per second pass through every square centimeter of the 
Earth. However, if WIMPs exist, they are very weakly 
interacting particles, so it is quite rare that one of them 
will interact at all; most of them pass right through the 
Earth unimpeded. In addition, if a WIMP does elastic- 
ally scatter off a nucleus, the deposited energy is usually 
in the keV to 100 keV range, too small to be noticed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


WIMPs and MACHOs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


except by exquisitely sensitive equipment. These difficul- 
ties, however, have not stopped many groups through- 
out the world from developing devices capable of detect- 
ing WIMPs. The detection rates turn out to be within and 
just beyond the reach of current experimental efforts. 

The basic idea is to detect the small energy deposit- 
ed when a WIMP scatters off a nucleus in some well- 
instrumented piece of material. When a WIMP scatters 
off a nucleus in a crystal, the nucleus recoils, causing dis- 
location in the crystal structure, vibrations of the crystal 
lattice (ie. phonons or heat) and also ionization. These 
signals can be detected. For example, some experiments 
use kilogram size germanium and silicon crystals and 
attempt to detect the ionization and phonon signals. 
Other groups use sodium iodide crystals and look for the 
scintillation light caused by the ionized electrons or 
search for crystal dislocations in samples of billion year 
old mica. Another possibility is to record the recoil of an 
ionized atom in a gas using drift chamber techniques. 

The main difficulties in these experiments come 
from the fact that the WIMP events are rare and that 
there are many backgrounds that deposit similar 
amounts of energy on much more frequent time-scales. 
Thus the experiments operate deep underground, where 
ionizing COSMIC RAYS are less frequent, and typically 
operate their detectors at extremely cold temperatures to 
keep thermal excitations low. Also many types of shield- 
ing, as well as redundant detection methods, are now 
becoming standard. Even so, these are difficult experi- 
ments and tiny amounts of radioactivity in the detector 
or shielding can swamp the expected signal. With effort, 
a background rate of under one event per kilogram of 
detector per day can be achieved. The expected signal is 
highly dependent on the supersymmetry model, but typ- 
ically is in the range from 105-10 events kg-! day-!. The 
events can be separated from the background in two 
ways. In some detectors the background (non-WIMP) 
interactions can be recognized and simply ignored. In the 
larger detectors this is not possible, so they use the fact 
that the WIMP event rate is predicted to be larger in June 
than in December. This annual modulation in event rate 
is caused by the Earth’s orbit either being aligned with 
the Sun’s motion in the Galaxy (in June) or anti-aligned 
(in December). 

The current generation of detectors have detection 
thresholds of around 1 event kg-! day—!, with hopes that 
within the next few years signals as small as 102 events 
kg-! day-! will be detectable. Thus there is a reasonable 
chance that dark matter neutralinos will be detected by 
this type of direct detection within the next few years. 
It is also clear, however, that there are many values of 
the supersymmetry parameters that predict detection 
rates of below the 10 events kg-! day! threshold, and 
so would not be detectable in the near future by these 
methods. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Indirect detection of WIMPs 

A great deal of theoretical and experimental effort has 
gone into another potential technique for WIMP detec- 
tion. The idea is that if the halo is made of WIMPs, then 
these WIMPs will have been passing through the Earth 
and Sun for several billion years. Since WIMPs will occa- 
sionally elastically scatter off nuclei in the Sun or Earth, 
they will occasionally lose enough energy, or change 
their direction of motion enough, to become gravitation- 
ally captured by the Sun or Earth. The orbits of such cap- 
tured WIMPs will repeatedly intersect the Sun (or Earth) 
resulting in the eventual settling of the WIMPs into the 
core. As the number density increases over time, the self- 
annihilation rate will increase. Since ordinary neutrinos 
can result from WIMP self-annihilation, one predicts a 
stream of neutrinos coming from the core of the Sun or 
Earth. Neutrinos easily escape the Solar core and detec- 
tors on Earth capable of detecting neutrinos coming from 
Sun or Earth have operated for some time. The energy of 
such neutrinos is roughly 1/2 to 1/3 of the WIMP mass, 
so these neutrinos are much higher energy than the MeV 
scale solar neutrinos from nuclear reactions that have 
already been detected. The higher energy of these WIMP 
annihilation neutrinos makes them easier to detect than 
ordinary solar neutrinos and somewhat compensates for 
their much fewer numbers. It also makes them impossi- 
ble to confuse with ordinary solar neutrinos. Thus the 
presence of a source of high-energy neutrinos emanating 
from the centers of the Sun and Earth would be taken as 
evidence for WIMP dark matter. 

While the above chain of reasoning may seem long, 
it appears to be robust, and several experimental groups 
are in the process of designing and building detectors 
capable of seeing such a neutrino signal. For this signal, 
it is not the mass of the detector that is relevant, but the 
surface area. Neutrinos from the core of the Sun or Earth 
produce muons in the atmosphere and rock around the 
detectors, and it is primarily these muons that the detec- 
tors watch for. Muons are also copiously created by cos- 
mic rays entering the Earth’s atmosphere, so there is a 
substantial background of ‘downward’ traveling muons. 
These detectors, then, are located deep underground, 
where the rock shields many of the background muons, 
and they also focus on ‘upward’ traveling muons, that 
are much more likely to have been created by neutrinos 
that have traveled through Earth and interacted in the 
rock just below the detector. Thus surprisingly, the best 
way to see high-energy neutrinos from the Sun is to go 
deep underground at night (when the Sun is ‘under’ the 
Earth). 

The new generation of detectors are designed to 
have very large surface areas. A comparison of direct and 
indirect detection methods indicates that for a typical 
neutralino a kilogram of direct detector germanium has 
about the same sensitivity as 104-10 m2 of indirect 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


WIMPs and MACHOs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


detector. The new generation of detectors should have 
areas in this range and should be able to start to probe 
realistic supersymmetry models, but again viable super- 
symmetric models exist which predict rates too small for 
these detectors to measure, and a definitive test of the 
WIMP hypothesis does not seem possible in the near 
future. 


MACHOs and microlensing 

An exciting development in the dark matter story is the 
detection of MACHOs by three separate groups, 
MACHO, EROS and OGLE. All three groups monitored 
millions of stars in the LARGE MAGELLANIC CLOUD (LMC), 
in the SMALL MAGELLANIC CLOUD (SMC) or in the GALACTIC 
BULGE, for signs of gravitational microlensing, and all 
three groups have found it. It has now become clear that 
these objects constitute some new component of the 
Milky Way, but whether they constitute a substantial part 
of the dark matter or new stellar components of the 
Galaxy or LMC is not clear. 

MICROLENSING is a powerful new tool for discovering 
and characterizing populations of dark objects in our 
Galaxy, and the current experiments may have the capa- 
bility to give a definitive answer to the question of 
whether the dark matter in our Galaxy is baryonic. The 
reason is that the microlensing searches are probably sen- 
sitive to any objects in the range 10-8M,<m<109M, just 
the range in which such objects are theoretically allowed 
to exist. Objects made purely of H and He with masses 
less than ~(10-9-10-7M,) are expected to evaporate owing 
to the microwave background in less than present age of 
the universe, while dark matter objects with masses 
greater than ~10°M, would have disrupted known GLOs- 
ULAR CLUSTERS. So unlike the searches for WIMP dark 
matter, which if they detect nothing will remain incon- 
clusive, if the MACHO searches find nothing, we would 
at least know what the dark matter is not. However, the 
MACHO searches have found something, as we describe 
below. 

Microlensing is also described in the article on GRAV- 
ITATIONAL LENSING. The idea of microlensing rests on 
Einstein’s observation that, if a massive object lies direct- 
ly on the line of sight to a much more distant star, the 
light from the star will be lensed and form a ring around 
the lens. The ring is called the ‘Einstein ring’ and it sets 
the scale for all the microlensing searches. In the lens 
plane, the radius of the ring is given by 


mod us 
rg =610R, (Fon -1) 
12] 


where R, and Mg are the solar radius and mass, m is the 
MACHO mass, L is the distance to the star being moni- 
tored and x is the distance to the MACHO divided by L. 
The formation of a ring is very unlikely, but even with 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


imperfect alignment two images result and a large mag- 
nification can occur. 

Since the MACHO, Earth and source star are all in 
relative motion, the star appears to brighten, reaches a 
peak brightness, and then fades back to its usual magni- 
tude. Thus the signature for a microlensing event is a 
time-symmetric brightening of a star occurring as a 
MACHO passes close to the line of sight. When a 
microlensing event is detected, one fits the lightcurve 
and extracts the peak magnification A,,,qy, the time of the 
peak, to, and event duration t. The primary physical 
information comes from ¢, which depends on the 
MACHO velocity, the MACHO mass, the source dis- 
tance, and the lens distance. The source distance can be 
determined since it is visible, but unfortunately, one can- 
not determine the other three physical parameters from t. 
However, statistically, one can use information about the 
halo density and velocity distribution, along with the 
distribution of measured event durations to gain infor- 
mation about the MACHO masses. Using a standard 
model of the dark halo, MACHOs of Jupiter mass 
(10-3M,) typically cause events lasting 3 days, while 
brown dwarf mass MACHOs (0.1M,) cause events last- 
ing about a month. 

Assuming a halo made entirely of MACHOs, the 
probability of any MACHO crossing in front of a star is 
about 5x10-7. Thus many millions of stars must be mon- 
itored in order to see a handful of microlensing events. In 
addition, if one wants to see microlensing from objects in 
the dark halo, the monitored stars must be far enough 
away so that there is a lot of halo material between us 
and the stars. Therefore, the best stars to monitor are 
those in the LMC and SMC at distances of 50 kpc and 60 
kpc respectively, stars in the galactic bulge at 8 kpc and 
stars in nearby galaxies such as M31 at 750 kpc. 


Microlensing experiments 
There are several experimental groups that have under- 
taken the search for microlensing and have returned 
results. All together about a dozen events have been 
detected towards the LMC, a couple towards the SMC, 
and more than 400 towards the galactic bulge. For detec- 
tion of dark matter MACHOs, it is primarily the LMC 
events that are relevant. All survey collaborations oper- 
ate a medium-size telescope and monitor millions of 
stars nightly. Since the fields are crowded, each CCD 
frame contains hundreds of thousands of stellar images, 
the brightness of each which must be determined by 
computerized photometry. These stellar brightnesses are 
arranged sequentially in a lightcurve, each of which is 
finally searched for microlensing-like bumps. All togeth- 
er many terabytes of data have been analyzed by the sur- 
vey experiments. 

Most of the monitored stars are constant brightness 
as one expects, but about one-half of 1% are variable. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


WIMPs and MACHOs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


These are mostly identified as variable stars of known 
types. Several signatures of microlensing, including the 
unique shape of a microlensing lightcurve are used to 
pick out microlensing events from this background of 
variable stars. For example, the MACHO collaboration 
analyzed about 9.5 million lightcurves from its 2 yr LMC 
data set and found six to eight microlensing events. 


Experimental results 

In order to interpret microlensing events, the efficiency 
with which an experiment can detect microlensing is 
needed. Bad weather, bad seeing, crowded stars, etc 
cause microlensing events to be missed by the experi- 
ment. The MACHO collaboration finds an efficiency of 
around 30% for microlensing events that last 50 days. For 
events lasting less than a few days and events lasting 
longer than 6 months the efficiency is very low. 

Using the efficiency and a model of the dark halo, 
the number of microlensing events one expects to see if 
the halo consisted entirely of MACHOs is found to be 
about a dozen for the MACHO collaboration 2 yr data 
set. This quantity is related to the lensing ‘optical depth’, 
the roughly 5x10-7 probability that at any time a source 
star is lensed (if the halo is made entirely of MACHOs). 

Using the eight observed MACHO collaboration 
LMC events, the observed optical depth is ~(2.5+1x10-7), 
roughly half the value if the halo consisted entirely of 
MACHOs. A careful likelihood analysis of these events 
gives, for a standard dark halo model, a most likely 
MACHO halo fraction of 0.5+0.3 and a most likely mass 
of the MACHOs of around 0.5M,, This result depends on 
the assumption that the events are due to lenses in the 
Galactic halo and on the model of the galactic halo used. 

Another analysis based on noticing that none of the 
eight detected events had durations of less than 20 days 
can rule out low-mass MACHOs. This is because ¢:m1/2, 
and no short-duration events have been observed 
toward the LMC. This analysis gives the strongest con- 
straints to date on the baryonic content of the dark halo. 
The EROS and MACHO collaboration limits show that 
objects in the mass range from 10-7M, to 10-3M, cannot 
make up the entire dark halo. Objects in the range from 
3.5-10-7M, to 4.5-10-5M,, make up less than 10% of the 
dark halo. Thus we now know that the dark matter is not 
mostly objects of Earth mass, or Jupiter mass, or any 
combination thereof. The only compact baryonic dark 
matter candidates left are objects in the brown dwarf and 
higher mass range. This result is independent of any 
assumptions about the observed microlensing events, 
but does depend on the model of the dark halo. 

In 2002, an international team of astronomers 
observed a dark matter object directly for the first time. 
Images and spectra of a MACHO microlens were taken 
by the NASA/ESA HUBBLE SPACE TELESCOPE (HST) and the 
European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


(VLT). This result is a strong confirmation that gravita- 
tional microlensing is the cause of the events detected by 
teams searching for MACHO dark matter. 

In addition, Christopher Kochanek of the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Centre for Astrophysics in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts and Neal Dalal of the 
University of California, San Diego have used radio tele- 
scopes and gravitational lensing to search for cold dark 
matter. They have studied seven galaxies, each magni- 
fied by four nearer ones. Because each lensing galaxy is 
in a slightly different position, the researchers got four 
different images of each of the seven distant galaxies. The 
four images should have been identical. But each is actu- 
ally slightly different. The difference was enough to have 
been caused by the kind of clumps of dark matter around 
lensing galaxies that mathematical models predict. 


Interpretation of results: dark matter or not? 

The naive interpretation of the microlensing results is 
that between 20% and 80% of the dark matter in the 
Milky Way has been identified. However, the result 
that the mass of the objects is above the brown dwarf 
limit of 0.1M, is surprising. Main sequence stars with 
masses above 0.1M, would have been seen and there- 
fore cannot be the dark matter. Several interpretations 
are possible. 

First, perhaps the MACHOs are white dwarf stars or 
neutron stars. These are dark remnants of an earlier gen- 
eration of stars, but it is problematic to have enough of 
these around to be the dark matter and not have detect- 
ed the other byproducts of such an early stellar popula- 
tion. Second, perhaps the model of the Galactic halo used 
is incorrect, and the masses of the MACHOs are actually 
safely below the brown dwarf limit. However, most rea- 
sonable halo models investigated do not have this prop- 
erty. Next, perhaps MACHOs are primordial black holes, 
or other exotic objects not currently known. This is pos- 
sible, but quite surprising. Most importantly, perhaps the 
microlensing events are not due to halo lenses, and there- 
fore are not telling us about the dark matter. In a typical 
microlensing event, the distance of the MACHO is not 
determined, so it is not known where the lens population 
is located. The estimate of the amount of MACHO dark 
matter relies on an assumed distribution of lens material, 
and therefore on the model of the Galaxy and LMC. 

It has been suggested that the lenses could be faint 
stars in the LMC itself, or in some small undiscovered 
dwarf galaxy between the Sun and the LMC. These pos- 
sibilities are being vigorously pursued, but strong argu- 
ments have been given against both possibilities. Thus 
the outcome is very unclear at the moment. 

If one could measure the distance to the MACHO, 
that would be enough to distinguish between the above 
possibilities. Thus a ‘microlensing parallax’ satellite has 
been proposed to measure these distances. Other ways to 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


WIMPs and MACHOs 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


measure the distance to lenses, and therefore determine 
whether or not they are part of the dark halo, include 
ground-based lensing parallax, binary lens caustic cross- 
ing, and the finite source star effect. Unfortunately, 
events where these effects can be measured are rare, so 
luck, or new larger surveys and better follow-up, is need- 
ed to resolve this issue of what the MACHOs are. 

The next generation of microlensing surveys and fol- 
low-up efforts are underway or being planned and 
should determine some lens distances, as well as gather 
more events. Thus, while the question of baryonic dark 
matter remains open, the next few years should bring an 
answer. 


Bibliography 
Dalal N and Kochanek C S (in press) 2002 Direct detec- 
tion of CDM substructure Astrophys. J. 


An older very nice review of WIMP dark matter is 


Primack J R, Seckel D and Sadoulet B 1988 Annu. Rev. 
Nucl. Part. S. B 38 751-807 


and a newer review of supersymmetric dark matter is 


Jungman G, Kamionkowski M and Griest K 1996 Phys. 
Rep. 267 195 


A survey of experimental results in particle dark matter 

detection can be found in the book 

Bottino A, di Credico A and Monacelli P 1997 TAUP 97: 
Proceedings 5th Workshop on Topics in 
Astroparticles and Underground Physics, Nucl. 
Phys. B (Suppl.) 70 


Recent reviews of microlensing include 

Gould A 1996 Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 108 465-576 
Paczynski B 1996 Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 419-59 
The analysis of the MACHO collaboration data can be 
found in 


Alcock C et al 1998 Astrophys. J. Lett. 499 L9 
Alcock C et al 1997 Astrophys. J. 486 697 
Kim Griest 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 


Wind 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wind 


NASA satellite, part of NASA’s Global Geospace Science 
programme and the International Solar Terrestrial Physics 
programme. Launched November 1994. For the first nine 
months it followed a double-lunar swingby orbit with 
apogee of 80-250 Earth radii and perigee 5-10 Earth radii. 
In this orbit, lunar gravity assists maintained apogee over 
Earth’s day hemisphere for magnetospheric observations. 
Later inserted into a ‘halo’ orbit at the sunward Sun—Earth 
gravitational equilibrium point (L1) to measure the solar 
wind, magnetic fields and particles, and provide a one- 
hour warning to other ISTP spacecraft of changes in the 
solar wind. Since October 1998, placed in ‘petal’ orbits 
that take it out of the ecliptic plane. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wing, Vincent (1619-68) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wing, Vincent (1619-68) 


Born in North Luffenham, Rutland, he supported himself 
as a surveyor, almanac compiler (his almanac sold 
50000 copies per year), astrologer and prolific writer of 
astronomical works. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Winthrop, John (1714-79) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Winthrop, John (1714-79) 


Astronomer, mathematician, born in Boston, MA, became 
professor of mathematics and natural philosophy at 
Harvard and observed sunspots, a transit of Mercury and 
of Venus, eclipses and the weather. He predicted the return 
of Halley’s Comet in 1759. He is credited as the first 
professional scientist in America. He was an ardent patriot 
during the American Revolution. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Wise Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wise Observatory 


Wise Observatory, in Mitzpe Ramon, Israel, is owned 
and operated by Tel Aviv University, and has a well- 
equipped 1 m telescope. Since construction in 1971, 
the large percentage of clear nights at its desert site 
and its unique longitude have made the observatory 
particularly useful for long-term monitoring projects (e.g. 
reverberation mapping of quasars and active galaxies), 
and as a part of global monitoring networks (e.g. the 
first detection, via gravitational microlensing, of a planet 
orbiting a binary star system). 
For further information see 
http: / /wise-obs.tau.ac.il. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wittich, Paul (c. 1546-86) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wittich, Paul (c. 1546-86) 


Born in Breslau, Silesia (now Wroclaw, Poland), invented 
(or at least developed) ‘prosthaphaeresis’, a formalism 
of trigonometry that allowed one to multiply and divide 
trigonometric functions by the easier process of adding 
and subtracting instead (in the manner of logarithms). 
He wrote a commentary on copERNicus’s De Revolutionibus, 
which foreshadowed the Tychonic system. He worked 
with TYCHO BRAHE for four months at Uraniborg. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


WIYN Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


WIYN Observatory 


Located at Kitt Peak in Arizona. The WIYN Observatory 
is owned and operated by the WIYN Consortium, which 
consists of the University of Wisconsin, Indiana University, 
Yale University and the National Optical Astronomy 
Observatories (NOAO). Most of the capital costs of the 
observatory were provided by these universities, while 
NOAO, which operates the other telescopes of the KITT 
PEAK NATIONAL OBSERVATORY, provides most of the operating 
services. 

The 3.5 m WIYN Telescope, which was completed in 
1994, is the second largest telescope on Kitt Peak. The size 
of the telescope enclosure is kept to a minimum by the 
short focal length of the primary mirror, which results in 
a shorter telescope, while the alt-azimuth mount requires 
less space. The moving weight of the telescope is a mere 
46 tons. 

Other innovative design features are active primary 
mirror supports, primary mirror thermal controls and 
active ventilation of the telescope mount. The support 
system for the primary mirror includes 66 actuators, which 
adjust the back face of the mirror to maintain the best 
optical figure. The primary mirror thermal control system 
keeps the temperature of the mirror’s surface to within 
0.2°C of the ambient air temperature, eliminating local 
turbulence. These innovations enable the WIYN Telescope 
to produce much sharper images than any of the other 
telescopes on Kitt Peak. 

WIYN is equipped with the latest instruments for 
astronomical spectroscopy and imaging. A multiple- 
object spectrograph employing optical fibers allows the 
simultaneous observation of the spectra of 100 objects. 
The imaging cameras employ highly sensitive arrays of 
electronic detectors. 

For further information see 
http://www.noao.edu/wiyn/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf, Charles J E (1827-1918) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wolf, Charles J E (1827-1918) 


French astronomers Charles Wolf and GEORGES RAYET, using 
the 40 cm Foucault telescope of the Paris Observatory, 
visually observed the spectra in 1867 of several eighth 
magnitude stars in Cygnus before the systematic use of 
photographic plates and found very broad emission lines. 
The ‘bands’ were originally thought to be hydrocarbon 
molecules. The stars became known as Wolf—Rayet (WR) 
stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Wolf, Johann Rudolf (1816-93) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wolf, Johann Rudolf (1816-93) 


Born in Fallanden (near Zurich), Switzerland, became 
professor of astronomy at the University of Bern and 
director of the Bern Observatory, then professor of 
astronomy in Ztirich where he founded an observatory. 
He devised a system now known as Wolf's sunspot numbers 
used to quantify solar activity by counting sunspots and 
sunspot groups and used it to confirm the sunspot cycle 
discovered by HEINRICH SCHWABE and measure its period at 
11 years. He also co-discovered with EDWARD SABINE its 
connection with geomagnetic activity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf, Max[imilian] Franz Joseph Cornelius (1863-— 
1932) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wolf, Max[imilian] Franz Joseph 
Cornelius (1863-1932) 


Astronomer, born in Heidelberg, Germany, founded 
and became first director of the Ko6nigstuhl Observatory 
at the University of Heidelberg. He took wide-field 
photographs of the Milky Way and counted stars of 
different brightnesses, plotting the results in a Wolf diagram 
of number versus magnitude to prove the existence of 
clouds of obscuring dust. He showed that the spiral 
nebulae have absorption spectra typical of stars, rather 
than emission spectra from gas. He pioneered the use of 
photography to discover hundreds of asteroids. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Nebula 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wolf—Rayet Nebula 


Nebulosity surrounding a Wolf—Rayet star. Wolf—Rayet 
stars are of around 10 solar masses and have very high 
surface temperatures, up to about 40000 K. This gives 
them powerful stellar winds, up to 2000 km st, and an 
enormous rate of mass loss. Material is usually ejected 
in the form of a spherical shell or ring (the term Wolf— 
Rayet bubble is sometimes used), and the accumulating 
envelope from successive ejection episodes comprises 
the nebula. Examples of Wolf—Rayet nebulae are NGC 
2359, surrounding the star HD 56925, and NGC 6888, 
surrounding the star MR 102. 


See also: Wolf-Rayet stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


Wolf-Rayet (W-R) stars are a class of peculiar stars first 
identified in 1867 by cj £ wor and c Raver. Unlike the 
spectra of most stars, which are dominated by narrow 
absorption lines, the spectra of W-R stars show broad 
emission lines. The rich emission line spectrum makes 
them easy to identify, by spectroscopic observations, even 
at large distances. 

W-R stars are divided into three broad spectroscopic 
classes (WN, WC and WO) based on the emission lines 
present in their spectrum. WN stars show emission lines 
predominantly of helium and nitrogen, although emission 
due to carbon, silicon and hydrogen can readily be seen in 
some of these objects. In contrast, the spectra of WC stars 
are dominated by carbon and helium emission lines with 
hydrogen and nitrogen emission absent (figure 1). WO 
stars, which are much rarer than either WN or WC stars, 
are similar to WC stars except that oxygen lines are more 
prevalent, and there is a tendency to exhibit lines arising 
from atomic species of higher ionization. 

These spectral classes are further divided into 
subclasses on the basis of line ratios, yielding a 
classification by ionization. The WN stars which exhibit 
spectra showing emission from high-ionization species 
(e.g. He II, N V,O VI)! are designated WN2. Those showing 
emission from low-ionization species (e.g. He I, N III) are 
classified as WN9, although recently the W-R spectral 
classification has been extended to WNI11. Similarly, 
WC stars showing emission from high-ionization species 
(e.g. He IL, C IV, O VI) are designated WC4 while those 
exhibiting the lowest ionization (e.g. He I, C II) are 
designated WC9. In the literature there is also a tendency 
to refer to WN stars of classes 2-5 as early type (WNE) 
and classes 6~9 as late type (WNL). Similarly, WC4-6 stars 
are designated as WCE, while WC7-9 stars are designated 
as WCL. Although there are important exceptions, WNE 
stars generally show no evidence for H emission while H 
emission is present in WNL stars. 

The distribution of population I W-R stars, which are 
discussed in this article, is similar to that of O stars; they are 
primarily located in the spiral arms of our galaxy and near 
HII regions. W-R masses range from an uncertain lower 
limit of about 5M. to in excess of 60Mo, while surface 
temperatures range from a lower limit of 25 000 K to greater 
than 100000 K. Because of their spatial association with O 
stars, and their peculiar surface abundances, W-R stars are 
generally believed to be descended from O stars. 

Approximately 220 W-R stars are known in our 
Galaxy but this number is certainly incomplete. Most are 
hidden from our view by dust, which absorbs and scatters 
light (a process termed interstellar extinction) within our 
Galaxy. Estimates of the total number of W-R stars in 
our Galaxy range from 1000 to 2000. The rarity of W-R 


1 He Il is a spectroscopic designation used to indicate the ion for 
a transition between bound levels in singly ionized helium (i.e. 
He?*). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stars is due to the initial mass function, which favors the 
production of low-mass stars, and the short evolutionary 
lifetime of W-R stars, which is only a few x 10° yr. Their 
rarity belies their importance. All stars more massive than 
approximately 25M. (for solar metallicity) pass through 
a W-R phase. Further, over the lifetime of a galaxy, W-R 
stars (and their progenitors) have an important influence 
on the energetics, dynamics and chemical evolution of the 
interstellar medium. 

W-R stars are expected to end their life via a 
spectacular supernovae explosion. In some cases a 
neutron star is formed, while for the more massive stars 
a black hole is formed. In the latter case the details of the 
mechanism that actually produces the supernova are still 
very uncertain. As the supernovae ejecta expands, it will 
interact with the complex circumstellar environment that 
reflects the previous mass loss history of the progenitor 
star. 

In addition to the population I W-R stars, some 
planetary nebula central stars also show W-R emission 
features (see PLANETARY NEBULA CENTRAL STAR MASS LOSS/WINDS, 
W-R NEBULA). Their spectral types are inserted in [] to 
distinguish them from population I W-R stars. They are 
of type [WC] and have lower masses (less than 1M.) and 
lower luminosities (generally <3 x 10*L«). The spectra of 
planetary nebula W-R stars are often dominated by strong 
narrow nebula emission lines. In some cases they can 
be difficult to distinguish spectroscopically from normal 
population I W-R stars although in some [WC] stars N and 
H emission is seen. Because of their distinct evolutionary 
histories, they will not be further discussed in this article. 


Basic model 

The basic model for W-R stars is that of a hot star which 
is suffering extreme mass loss. The mass loss occurs via 
a continuous stellar wind which is accelerated from low 
velocities near the surface of the star to velocities that 
exceed the surface escape speed. The observed spectrum 
originates over a range of radii with the optical continuum 
forming close to the stellar core, while the emission lines 
originate from a volume that can extend beyond 10 stellar 
radii. 

The observed mass-loss rates (i.e. the amount of 
material lost per year) are extreme, typically in excess of 
10-°Mo yr!. These mass-loss rates are sufficient to affect 
the evolution of the star (see STELLAR EVOLUTION) and must 
be incorporated into stellar evolutionary calculations. 
The (average) maximum velocity of material in W-R 
winds (called the terminal velocity, V) ranges from 
800 km s~! to in excess of 3000 km s7!, and typically 
exceeds the escape velocity from the surface of the star. It 
is generally believed, although it has yet to be rigorously 
demonstrated, that the mass loss is driven by radiation 
pressure acting through numerous bound-bound atomic 
transitions of Fe and other atomic species in the extreme 
UV (A < 900 A). 

The bulk of the material in the wind is believed to 
be cool—that is, it has a temperature substantially lower 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


T 
HD 50896 (WN5) 


He Il 1640 


Fy) 


1800 2000 


20 1 1 T T T 
HD 165763 (WCS5) 
15 7 
O V 1371 He Il 1640 
i Si IV 1397 4 
o~ OW 1342 
S 10 - st 
me 
be FeV C Ill 1909, 1923 4 
5 4 
0 h ! 
1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
nA) 
20 T T T T T T T 
HD 50896 (WNS) 
i He ll 4686 i| 
15 Fak 
NIV 4058 
NV 4609 He Il 5412 He Il 6560 4 
_— He Il 4859 
Ss 
“a 
He | 5876 
0 ! ! i L l L | 1 
4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500 7000 
nA) 
8 T T T T T T T T T T T 
HD 165763 (WCS5) 
[ C Ill 4649 (+ CIV, He Il) | 
Bele C Ill 5696 C ill 6741 
= CV 5471 He Il 6560 
= 
a «| | 
He Il S412) 
ae 
| 0 V 5590 | 
0 ! ! ! L | L | 1 
4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500 7000 


X¢:9) 


Figure 1. UV and optical spectra of the WN5 star HD 50896 and the WC5 star HD 165763. The major emission line features are 
identified, although it should be noted that many lines, particularly in the WC star, are blends. Notice the very distinct differences 
between the WN5 and WC5 spectra. The optical spectral region, which can be observed from the ground, has typically been used to 
classify W-R stars. Since the advent of space astronomy, the UV spectral region has provided additional invaluable diagnostics on the 
properties of W-R stars. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


than the effective temperature of the star. Energy input 
into the wind primarily occurs through photoionization by 
the intense UV radiation field emanating from the central 
source. Thus photoionization is the ultimate source of 
the line emission that originates in the wind, although 
individual emission lines form through a variety of 
different processes—recombination, collisional excitation 
and continuum fluorescence. 


Determination of stellar parameters 
The spectra of most stars are determined by three basic 
parameters: the effective temperature (To), the effective 
surface gravity (ge) and the chemical abundances. For 
an assumed metallicity, large grids of models can be 
constructed simply by varying Tor and ger. 

The effective temperature is defined by the relation 


L=4n Reo Ts 


where L is the luminosity and o is the Stefan—Boltzmann 
constant. The effective temperature is the surface 
temperature that a star of radius R, would have if it 
radiated as a blackbody (a perfect thermal emitter and 
absorber). 

The effective surface gravity is defined by 


GM 
S8eff = (1 — Nar 


where M is the star’s mass, G is Newton’s gravitational 
constant, and [is a correction for the influence of radiation 
pressure. In conjunction with the equation of hydrostatic 


equilibrium 
dP | R,\ 
qd P8eft a 
where P is the pressure and p is the density, this sets 


the scale height of the atmosphere, h,. For an isothermal 
atmosphere, h, is given by 


kT 
he 


7 LMA Seff 


where yu is the mean particle mass in atomic mass units 
(amu) and my is the atomic mass of hydrogen. For most 
normal stars h, « R,, curvature effects can be ignored 
and the atmosphere can be treated as a plane-parallel slab. 
As a consequence of the small scale height, the Sun has a 
definite radius at optical wavelengths. 

For W-R stars the situation is quite different. First, 
the atmosphere is extended, and consequently radiation 
escapes from the star over a range of radii. Further, 
the radius of the star at an optical depth (r) of 2/3 
depends on the adopted mass-loss rate and is a function 
of wavelength (figure 2). The difficulty of uniquely 
defining R, has led to difficulties in comparing Test 
derived from evolutionary models with that obtained from 
spectroscopic analyses. Second, ger does not have a direct 
influence on the stellar spectrum, simply because emission 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


from the stellar wind dominates the spectral appearance of 
the star. Third, the abundances are non-solar and must be 
determined observationally. Indeed it is the abundances 
that determine to which class (WN, WC or WO) a W-R star 
belongs (see also STELLAR ATMOSPHERES: EARLY-TYPE STARS). 

In addition to the abundances (primarily of H, He, N, 
C and O) it has been found from numerical experiments 
that the spectra of W-R stars are determined primarily by 
two parameters: Ter and a wind density parameter, W,. 
The latter, which plays a similar role to geg¢, can be defined 
by 

W, = (M/ Vo.) Ro? 

where R, is the radius of the hydrostatic core. Two 
stars will have very similar spectra if they have similar 
abundances, and if To and W, are similar. The dependence 
of the spectra on W, arises because most of the radiative 
processes in an extended atmosphere depend on the 
square of the density. As a consequence of the scaling, 
it is impossible to deduce the distance of a W-R star from 
the Sun using its spectrum’. In principle, Mand V,, should 
depend on the other stellar parameters—composition, M, 
Land R,, but as yet our theoretical understanding of mass 
loss from W-R stars is not sufficiently advanced to deduce 
the relationship. 

Because of the low wind densities (10°-10" electrons 
cm-3)> the simplifying assumption of local thermo- 
dynamic equilibrium (LTE) cannot be made when 
modeling W-R spectra. When LTE holds, it can be 
assumed that the ionization state of the gas and the 
populations of the atomic levels can be found via 
application of the principles of statistical mechanics and 
thus are (simple) functions of the local temperature and 
density only. For LTE to prevail, collisional processes, 
which couple the atomic populations with the electrons 
(and hence to the local electron temperature), need to occur 
faster than radiative processes. 

In contrast, in W-R atmospheres radiative processes 
tend to dominate over collisional processes, and hence it is 
necessary to solve the equations of statistical equilibrium 
at each depth. For each atomic level of each species we 
assume that all the processes (radiative and collisional) 
populating the level are in equilibrium with all processes 
depopulating the same level. The major difficulty arises 
because the rates are a function of the radiation field, which 
in turn is a function of the unknown populations. Thus the 
radiation field and atomic populations must be solved for 
simultaneously, and in general an iterative procedure is 
necessary to obtain consistency. 


? Stellar evolution introduces a correlation between spectral 
type and luminosity which may statistically allow distances 
to be derived for stars of a given spectral type. However, 
for an individual star the derived distance may be grossly in 
error, particularly if the spectral type can originate via different 
evolutionary sequences. This is exemplified in the difficulty of 
determining whether some W-R stars belong to population I or 
are the central stars of planetary nebula. 

3 For comparison, the density of water on Earth is of order 107 


molecules cm~>. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


C. 


0.33]/R 


ao 
T 


R[ 


ae L ime 


104 10° 
A(R) 


Figure 2. Illustration of how the ‘radius’ of the star varies with wavelength for the WC5 star HD 165763. The solid curve shows the 
‘radius’ at which the ‘continuum’ optical depth, t, is 1/3, which occurs in the wind at all wavelengths. The broken curve is identical 
except that the electron scattering opacity was not included in the computation of t. The bulk of the observed flux in this model is 
emitted between 300 and 2000 A. R; is the radius of the hydrostatic core—that is, the approximate radius the star would have in the 


absence of a stellar wind. For the illustrated model it was 1.8Ro. 


Initial modeling of W-R spectra concentrated on the 
H and He spectra only. The second generation included 
CNO elements, while the most recent generation of models 
include iron and other species. The inclusion of iron (and 
similar species) in non-LTE calculations has been a major 
stumbling block for atmospheric calculations for O and 
W-R stars for many years. The iron-group ions have both 
a wealth of atomic levels and an enormous number of 
bound-bound transitions. The advent of faster computers 
with large memories, new numerical techniques and the 
availability of atomic data have now made it feasible to 
include iron and other species in non-LTE calculations. 


Determination of Tos 
The effective temperatures of W-R stars are determined 
primarily using ionization arguments. Consider a 
sequence of models with prescribed mass loss and velocity 
law, but with different effective temperatures. Such a 
sequence of models will exhibit a smooth variation in line 
ratios for lines from two successive stages of ionization. 
In early WN modeling it was customary to compare He II 
5411 with He 15876 since both lines are easily observed and 
are relatively blend free. In more recent modeling N lines 
can also be used to constrain the effective temperature, 
while in WC stars C and O lines can be used. The 
analyses generally give consistent results. Discrepant 
results do occur, and probably result from a poor treatment 
of line blanketing (the generic name given to the influence 
of thousands of bound—bound atomic transitions on an 
atmosphere) and/or density inhomogeneities in the stellar 
wind. 

Analyses of the spectra of ring nebula around 
W-R stars offers a method of checking on the energy 
distributions predicted by atmospheric modeling, since 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the nebula are ionized by the star’s radiation field. For 
ring nebula around WNE stars these analyses have usually 
shown reasonable consistency. However, for some WNL 
and WC stars the observed nebular spectrum was of lower 
excitation than would be predicted using the stellar UV 
radiation field derived from the modeling. The recent 
inclusion of line blanketing in the stellar atmospheric 
models has removed this discrepancy for at least one ring 
nebula around a WN8 star. 


Abundances 


The severe non-LIE conditions in W-R stars initially 
made it difficult to understand their peculiar emission 
line spectra. Do W-R stars possess peculiar (ie. non- 
solar) abundances? Is the difference between the WN 
and WC stars due to an abundance difference, or is 
it an excitation effect? Detailed recombination and 
spectroscopic analyses have now firmly established that 
W-R stars are characterized by non-solar abundances. 

In WN stars H, C and O are depleted, while N and 
He are enhanced. For WN stars, N(H)/N(He) ratios (by 
number) range from approximately 4 to <0.1 (the solar 
value is 10). The observed abundances are consistent 
with the idea that material processed by the CNO nuclear 
burning bi-cycle has been revealed (or mixed) at the 
surface (see ‘Evolution’). 

In WC stars, He, C, O and Ne are all enhanced. 
N(C)/N (He) = 0.1-0.5 while the less certain N(O)/N (He) 
ratios are typically 0.1. H and N are not expected in WC 
stars and are not detected. The variation of N(C)/N(He) 
and N(O)/N(He) with WC subtype is still the subject of 
much debate. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Determination of mass-loss rates 

Mass-loss rates can be determined in several ways. First, 
free—-free radiation in the dense stellar wind gives rise to a 
detectable flux at radio wavelengths. From measurements 
of the radio flux, S,, the mass-loss rate, M, can be 
determined from the simple formula 


se 4/3 2/3 
s, = 23.2( 2%) { ve" 
Voofl ad 


where d is the distance to the W-R star in kpc, M is the 
mass-loss rate in Mg yr!, Voo is the terminal velocity of 
the wind in km s“!, z is the mean ionic charge, y is the 
mean ionic mass (in amu), y is the number of electrons 
per ion, v is the frequency in Hz and g is the free-free 
Gaunt factor (which is the quantum correction factor to the 
semiclassical formula for free-free radiation) at frequency 
v. S, is measured in janskys (1 jansky = 10-* erg cm? $7! 
Hz"'). The greatest uncertainties in the derived M arise 
from uncertainties in stellar distance and in the ionization 
state of the gas in the radio-emitting region. 

Second, the IR flux can be used in a similar manner, 
although in this case it cannot be assumed that the wind 
has reached its terminal speed. Third, optical and UV 
emission lines can be used. Typically, recombination lines 
are used since they are less sensitive to the precise details 
of their formation. Mass-loss estimates obtained from 
different methods generally agree to within a factor of 2. 

It has generally been assumed that the winds of W-R 
stars are spherical and homogeneous. Thus at any location 
in the wind the density can simply be found from the 
principle of mass conservation, giving 


M 


0 = Gru) 


where v(r) is the velocity as a function of distance and 
is assumed to monotonically increase with r. However, 
emission line variability studies and analyses of emission 
line profiles suggest that the wind is clumped (i.e. non- 
homogeneous) on small scales. If this is true, mass-loss 
estimates are too large—possibly by factors of 3 or more. 
This has very important implications for stellar evolution 
calculations. A change in M by only a factor of 2 (over 
a star’s life) has a profound influence on the evolution 
of massive stars. This is seen in theoretical evolutionary 
calculations and can also be indirectly inferred from the 
different WN/WC ratios in the galaxy and our nearest 
extragalactic neighbor, the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). 
In the LMC the mass-loss rates are expected to be lower 
because of the lower metallicity. 

The extreme mass-loss properties of W-R stars can 
be characterized by the ‘wind performance parameter’, n, 
defined by 

_ MVox 
a L/c * 


MV, is the (scalar) momentum of the wind, while L/c 
is the momentum that could be transferred if all the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


photons, and hence all the momentum in the radiation 
field, were absorbed. For O stars, 7 is typically less than 
unity. For W-R stars values as high as 100 have been 
obtained, although by allowing for inhomogeneities and 
line blanketing it has been possible to reduce the values to 
less than 10. Values of 7 in excess of unity do not rule out 
a radiation-driven wind—they simply indicate that each 
photon has to scatter many times within the wind so that 
it delivers n times its momentum to the wind. It has been 
difficult to produce radiation-driven winds for W-R stars 
since current models do not have the necessary number of 
bound-bound atomic transitions to perform the required 
number of scatterings. 


Binaries 

Approximately 50% of W-R stars occur in binaries—a 
number comparable with O stars. In the past there has 
been considerable discussion on the importance of binarity 
for the W-R phenomenon. For example, it was once 
thought that W-R stars could only originate in a binary 
system. Mass loss from the W-R progenitor would then 
occur by Roche-lobe overflow. The major uncertainty 
in evolutionary calculations of binary systems is how 
much material is lost from the system during Roche-lobe 
overflow (rather than being accreted by the companion). 
More recently the binary channel for the production of 
W-R stars has virtually been ignored. There is little doubt, 
however, that the binary channel is important, and it must 
be considered when linking W-R types with evolutionary 
calculations (although many researchers would disagree 
with this statement). 

At least three (broad) distinct classes of W-R binary 
systems can be envisioned: W-R + OB star, W-R + W-R, 
W-R + compact companion (neutron star or black hole). 
All (confirmed) W-R binaries belong to the first class; 
W-R + W-R systems are expected to be rare, although 
WR98 (where WR98 denotes the 98th W-R star in the 
sixth catalogue of W-R stars) may be an example of such 
a system. The third class is expected on evolutionary 
grounds. Although the existence of such systems has 
been difficult to verify, several good candidate systems are 
known. Cyg X-3 can be considered a possible example. 

W-R binary systems are extremely useful. First, 
and foremost, they allow a direct determination of stellar 
masses, independent of evolutionary models. The use 
of these masses in constraining single-star evolutionary 
models presupposes that W-R stars in binaries have 
properties similar to single W-R stars—a proposition that 
cannot be reliably tested because of poor statistics and 
uncertainties in the properties of W-R stars. 

Second, the O star can be used to probe the structure 
of the W-R stellar wind. Indeed it was this technique, 
applied to the W-R + O binary V444 Cygni, which gave 
the first direct evidence that W-R stars are hot (i.e. surface 
temperature in excess of 60000 K). More recently it has 
become evident that polarization studies of binary systems 
may allow determinations of mass-loss rates which are 
insensitive to the presence of inhomogeneities within the 
stellar wind. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf-Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


X-ray emission 

Most W-R stars are thermal x-ray sources. They can be 
classified into two categories—single W-R stars and binary 
W-R stars. In single W-R stars the observed ratio of x-ray 
to bolometric luminosity is approximately 10~’, although 
there is a scatter of at least a factor of 3 about this value. 
The x-rays are believed to originate within the stellar 
wind through radiation-driven wind instabilities which 
lead to high-velocity shocks (Vshock = 100-600 km s~!) 
and clumping of the wind. These shocks generate x-ray 
emitting gas characterized by temperatures between 10° 
and 10’ K. The shocks probably permeate most of the wind; 
however, because of the high wind densities most of the 
x-rays are absorbed in the wind. 

A few W-R stars are stronger and/or variable x-ray 
emitters. In these binary systems the x-rays can be 
generated from the high-temperature gas (of order 10’ K) 
created via shocks generated in a wind—wind collision. 
The two best examples are the WN +O system V444 Cygni 
and the WC + O system HD193793 (WR140). Both exhibit 
a periodic x-ray variability broadly consistent with that 
expected from a wind-wind collision in a binary system. 
Alternatively the x-rays could be generated via accretion 
of wind material onto a compact companion. 


Dust formation 

This topic, by all rights, should not belong in a discussion 
on W-R stars since dust is destroyed by intense UV 
radiation and requires low temperatures (<3000 K) for its 
formation. Yet dust is seen around some WC stars, and 
moreover dust is seen to be created in the vicinity of some 
WC stars. Two distinct dusty WC classes may exist: binary 
systems and single stars. 

In many WC9 stars, presumed to be single, conditions 
within the C-rich stellar wind appear to allow dust 
formation. The dust nucleation routes and how the 
dust (and the necessary prerequisite molecules) forms 
despite the presence of an intense UV radiation field are 
unclear. If the stars are single, inhomogeneities generated 
by radiation instabilities probably play an important role 
in allowing dust to form. 

The second class are the binary systems, with eccen- 
tric orbits, with HD193793 (WR140) being an excellent ex- 
ample. In these systems dust does not normally form; 
however, binary interaction near periastron (i.e. minimal 
orbital separation) can facilitate dust formation. Appar- 
ently the high densities generated in the wind—wind inter- 
action have the right conditions for dust formation. As in 
the single WC stars, the dust formation is not understood. 

Recent interferometric observations of WR104 with 
the KECK telescope have revealed directly the dust 
outflowing from the interaction region of the binary 
(figure 3). 


Related stars 

In the upper part of the Hertzsprung—Russell (H-R) 
diagram, many different classes of massive luminous stars 
exist (See HIGH-LUMINOSITY STARS): Of stars, blue supergiants 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 3. A gray scale image at 2.27 um showing the 
distribution of dust in WR104, as found by interferometric 
observations with the KECK telescope. The dust moves away 
from the system radially—the apparent spiral motion is an 
illusion. It results from the rotation of the dust formation zone 
as a consequence of the orbital motion of the binary system. The 
ring of dust, as illustrated, has an angular diameter of 
approximately 160 AU (or 0.1 arcsec). (Picture courtesy of 

W Danchi, J Monnier and P Tuthill, Berkeley.) 


(BSGs), red supergiants (RSGs), LUMINOUS BLUE VARIABLES 
(LBVs) and WN/Of stars. One of the goals of massive star 
evolution is to understand the links between the various 
classes of objects and the distribution of massive stars 
between the different classes. Below we briefly discuss 
some of the salient features of each class. 

Of stars are O supergiants exhibiting emission lines in 
the optical. They are O stars that have evolved off the main 
sequence. WN/Of stars exhibit spectral characteristics 
of both Of and WNL stars. It was this intermediate 
characteristic that suggested an evolutionary link between 
the Of stars, and bona-fide WN stars. 

LBVs, as their name suggests, are luminous blue stars 
which show irregular variability on a time scale of hours 
to centuries. Some LBVs have exhibited giant outbursts in 
which their visual brightness and bolometric magnitude 
increased by several magnitudes. During such outbursts 
several solar masses of material may be ejected. Other 
LBVs, such as AG Car, show moderate outbursts on a 
timescale of a decade. During these outbursts the effective 
temperature changes but the bolometric luminosity and 
mass-loss rate are almost constant. The most famous LBVs 
are P Cygni, which suffered a giant outburst in the 1600s, 
and n Car which underwent a major outburst in the 1840s. 
The outburst suffered by 1 Car ejected a bipolar nebula, 
referred to as the Homunculus, which has a major axis 
diameter of 17” (approximately 4000 AU). Images of the 
Homunculus are amongst the most spectacular obtained 
by the Hubble Space Telescope. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


A major breakthrough in our understanding of 
massive stars was achieved when one LMC Of/WN star 
(now classified as WN11), R 127, was observed to undergo 
an LBV-like outburst, suggesting an evolutionary link 
between LBVs and Of/WN stars. 

LBVs are now regarded as a key phase of massive 
star evolution. It is believed that during the LBV phase 
a massive star ejects most of its hydrogen-rich outer 
envelope, allowing it to become a W-R star. A key 
observation that has led to this scenario is the absence 
of RSGs with luminosities comparable with the most 
luminous O stars. Evolutionary calculations show that, 
during the LBV phase, extensive mass loss can prevent 
the star from evolving into an RSG. The mechanism of 
mass loss during the LBV phase is not yet understood, 
although it may be related to the star evolving towards the 
modified Eddington limit. The classical Eddington limit 
provides a lower limit on the mass of a star, of a given 
luminosity, based on the assumption that the radiative 
force arising from the electron scattering opacity cannot 
exceed gravity. The modified Eddington limit takes into 
account that other radiative processes also contribute to 
the opacity, and further that stellar rotation can effectively 
lower the surface gravity. The maximum luminosity 
exhibited by supergiants in the H-R diagram is termed 
the Humphreys—Davidson limit. 


Evolution 
W-R stars are believed to be descended from O stars. The 
basic evolutionary sequence, first proposed by Conti in 
1976, is 

O > Of ~ W-R 


Since that time observational and theoretical work has led 
to refinements in this basic sequence. From the theoretical 
work of Maeder and collaborators, one such sequence for 
stars with initial masses greater than 50Mo is 


O — OIf > BSG — LBV — WN — WC = supernova 


while stars between 35M, and 50Moz have the alternative 
sequence 


O — BSG > YSG > RSG — YSG — WN 


— WC = supernova. 


Other sequences have also been proposed. Suffice it to 
say that the precise evolutionary path that an individual 
massive star follows (which depends on the star’s initial 
mass and composition, and possibly its rotation rate and 
whether it has a companion) is still uncertain. No firm 
link has been established between the different ionization 
classes within the WN and WC sequences, although there 
has been some success in linking spectral types with initial 
stellar mass. The unknown roles of binary interactions and 
rotation only add to the confusion. 

Both WN stars and WC stars are generally believed 
to be on the helium-burning main sequence, although 
some of the luminous hydrogen-rich WN stars may 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


still be core hydrogen burning. If the latter is true, it 
means that the spectroscopic and theoretical definitions 
of W-R stars are inconsistent. This creates difficulties 
in comparing observed W-R/O number ratios with 
theoretical predictions. The W-R/O ratio is an important 
observational constraint since it provides a method (at 
least in principle) of determining the minimum stellar 
mass which will evolve into a W-R star. For a solar 
metallicity this is generally believed to be approximately 
25Mo, but higher values cannot be ruled out. 

In massive stars, H burning occurs via the CNO 
bi-cycle through a sequence of reactions, with the CNO 
species acting as catalysts. In the CN cycle the following 
reactions occur: 


PC+ i]H> BN+y 
BN > BC+et+v 

BC+ iH UN+y 

4 1 5 

IN+ jH> 3Ot+y 
BO > BN+et+v 


15 1 2 4 
>N+ j;H—> {C+ 5He. 


The fourth reaction is the slowest, and as a consequence 
much of the original C (and O from the other reactions 
in the CNO bi-cycle) is converted to N. The total number 
of CNO nuclei remains unchanged. When equilibrium is 
obtained, the ratio of !N to °C nuclei is approximately 50, 
very different from the solar ratio of 0.27. 

In normal stars the nuclear processed material 
remains within the stellar core and cannot be observed. 
However, in O stars and their descendants, extensive mass 
loss peels off the outer hydrogen-rich layers. Nuclear 
processed material, once inside the convective core of the 
star, is eventually revealed at the surface. In addition to 
mass loss, it is now believed that mixing, possibly induced 
by stellar rotation, can help reveal nuclear processed 
material at the stellar surface. 

In WC stars the mass loss has been so extensive that 
the products of He burning are revealed at the stellar 
surface. The predominant reactions for helium burning 
are 


5He + 3He = {Be 
SBe + SHe > ’C+y 
12 4 16 
6C + sHe > 3O+y. 


The variation in surface abundances as a function of 
current mass for a star with an initial mass of 40Mo is 
shown in figure 4. 


W-R stars in external galaxies 

W-R stars are moderately easy to detect in external 
galaxies owing to their strong emission lines. Typically 
they are found by performing a photometric survey in two 
filters. The passband of one filter is centered on a strong 
emission feature (generally the He II-C III/C IV complex 
at 4640-4690 A) while the second passband is centered on 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Log(mass fraction) 


Figure 4. A diagram showing the evolution in surface abundances as a function of mass for a star with an initial mass of 40Mo. The 
WN phase occurs when the star’s mass is between (approximately) 15Mo and 30Mo, while the WC phase occurs when M < 15Mo. 
For most of its 4.8 x 10° yr life the star has a mass close to its initial value (e.g. after 4.2 x 10° yr, its mass is still ~36Mq). The lifetimes 
of various stages are very dependent on the adopted assumptions (e.g. overshooting and mixing) and the adopted mass-loss rates. 
Overshooting refers to the phenomenon of convective motions extending into a convectively stable region because the convective 
velocities are non-zero at the interface between the convectively stable and unstable regions. Mixing refers to the process of mixing 
two chemically distinct regions of the star—for example rotation might induce nuclear processed material to be transported to the 
surface layers. The calculations were undertaken by the Geneva group (Maeder, Meynet, Schaller and Schaerer) for solar metallicity, 


with overshooting and ‘normal’ mass-loss rates. 


the continuum only. W-R stars will be relatively bright 
in the emission line passband. Alternatively, they can be 
found using low-dispersion prism spectroscopic surveys. 

Both the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) and the Small 
Magellanic Cloud (SMC) have been extensively surveyed 
for W-R stars. In the LMC 134 W-R stars are known, 
while in the SMC only nine are known. The difference 
in the number of W-R stars is believed to be due to a 
combination of the star formation rates and the lower 
metallicity of the SMC (which inhibits W-R production). 
Interestingly, the ratio of WN to WC stars in the LMC is 
4.5, substantially larger than the observed ratio of 1 in 
the solar neighborhood. This is generally interpreted as 
a metallicity effect. 

W-R stars have also been found in many Local Group 
galaxies, e.g. M31, M33, IC1613 and NGC6822. The 
study of individual W-R stars in these galaxies is in its 
infancy. To date, efforts have been directed primarily into 
determinations of the WN/WC, O/W-R and RSG/W-R 
number ratios which allow global issues, such as the 
effect of metallicity and the star formation rate on W-R 
production, to be addressed. 

W-R stars have also been found in many galaxies 
exhibiting extensive star formation (often called STARBURST 
GALAXIES). Indeed some galaxies are termed W-R galaxies 
if they exhibit strong W-R features in their integrated 
spectra. The presence of W-R stars in these galaxies 
immediately provides an age determinant. The starburst 
has to be older than approximately 2 million years so that 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the most massive O stars that formed in the burst have had 
sufficient time to evolve into W-R stars. They also provide 
an upper limit of about 7 million years since after this time 
all massive stars that pass through a W-R stage will have 
done so. Both age limits are metallicity dependent. 


Outstanding problems 

There are many outstanding problems related to W-R 
research. Several of the most important problems related 
specifically to W-R stars are discussed below. 


(1) What initiates and drives mass loss from W-R 
stars? Is radiation pressure, as currently believed, 
responsible for mass loss from W-R stars? Why are 
mass-loss rates for W-R stars an order of magnitude 
higher than those of their O star progenitors? 

(2) What is the role of rotation in W-R stars (and their 
progenitors) in modifying the spectral appearance 
of the star? What is the role of rotation in massive 
stars in enhancing mixing processes and in enhancing 
mass-loss rates, and hence in modifying stellar 
evolution? 

It is essential for evolutionary calculations, 
whatever the mass-loss mechanism, that we are able 
to derive mass-loss rates from first principles. Ideally 


M = M[Minit, t, x, y, z, Q(t)] 


where Minit is the initial stellar mass, t is the current 
age of the star and x, y and z are the chemical 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wolf—Rayet Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


abundances (hydrogen mass fraction, helium mass 
fraction and metal mass fraction), and where the 
rotation rate Q(t) is itself determined via the initial 
rotation rate and the subsequent mass loss. 

A related question is the role of magnetic fields 
in massive star evolution. While the magnetic fields 
may be too weak to affect mass-loss rates they could 
be important in determining angular momentum 
losses, and hence play an indirect role in mass loss 
through the dependence of {2(t) on magnetic field 
strengths. 

(3) What is the detailed structure of W-R winds (shape 
and homogeneity)? How does the presence of 
inhomogeneities affect the determination of the 
fundamental stellar parameters? How coupled is the 
mass loss to the details of the wind structure? 

(4) Whatis the role of binaries in massive star evolution? 
Are there classes of W-R stars (and LBVs) that only 
come from a binary evolutionary scenario? How 
much is our understanding of single-star evolution 
being confused by the evolution of OB stars in 
interacting binary systems? 

(5) Because of uncertainties in the treatment of convec- 
tion, mass-loss processes and rotation, there are still 
many issues in single-star evolution which must be 
addressed. Also of concern is whether W-R stars give 
rise to black holes (as presumed), and to what class a 
W-R supernova belongs. 


Acknowledgments 

This contribution is a brief synopsis of our current 
understanding of W-R stars. This understanding is the 
cumulative result of 130 years of W-R research by many 
astrophysicists whose individual contributions cannot be 
acknowledged. 


Bibliography 

Abbott D C and Conti P S 1987 Wolf-Rayet stars Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 25 113 (an excellent review article 
which discusses W-R stars in greater depth) 

Bappu M K V and Sahade J (ed) 1973 Wolf—Rayet and High 
Temperature Stars (IAU Symp. 49) (while some of the 
articles are somewhat dated, the discussion between 
the symposium participants is rewarding and is sadly 
missing in most recent symposia) 

Maeder A and Conti P S 1994 Massive star populations 
in nearby galaxies Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 32 227 
(an excellent review article which discusses massive 
star populations and evolution, with an extensive 
discussion of W-R stars) 

Tylenda R 1996 Wolf—Rayet Central Stars of Planetary Nebulae 
(ASP Conf. Ser. 96) ed CS Jeffery and U Heber (review: 
several other papers on W-R central stars are also 
contained within the same volume) p 101 

van der Hucht K A, Conti PS, Lundstrém I and Stenholm B 
1981 The sixth catalogue of galactic Wolf—Rayet stars, 
their past and present Space Sci. Rev. 28 (3) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


van der Hucht K A, Koenigsberger G and Eenens P R J 
(ed) 1999 Wolf—Rayet Phenomena in Massive Stars and 
Starburst Galaxies (IAU Symp. 193) (Astronomical 
Society of the Pacific) (review and research articles 
on different aspects of W-R research) 

Vreux J M, Detal A, Fraipont-Caro D, Gosset E and Rauw G 
(ed) 1996 Wolf—Rayet Stars in the Framework of Stellar 
Evolution: Proc. 33rd Liege Int. Astrophysical Colloq. 
(Université de Liége) (contains many review articles 
on different aspects of W-R research) 


D John Hillier 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wollaston, William (1766-1828) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wollaston, William (1766-1828) 


Chemist and physicist, isolated two new metals from 
platinum ore, one of which he named palladium (after 
the newly discovered asteroid, Pallas). He was one of the 
first scientists to observe ultraviolet radiation, and in 1801 
discovered the dark spectral lines in the solar spectrum 
which were later investigated by FRAUNHOFER. This was the 
first observation of spectral lines. A Wollaston prism is used 
to study the polarization of light. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Woolley, Richard van der Riet (1906-86) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Woolley, Richard van der Riet 
(1906-86) 


Astronomer, born in Dorset, England, and followed 
a varied career in England, South Africa, California 
and Australia. Became director of the Commonwealth 
Solar Observatory and steered it away from solar 
observations and wartime optics work to become the 
Mount Stromlo Observatory and part of the Australian 
National University. He worked on stellar and solar 
atmospheres. In 1955 he became Astronomer Royal in 
Britain, directing the Royal Greenwich Observatory in 
Sussex. He worked there on the motions and astrophysics 
of stars and clusters of stars, directing a small army of 
workers on the measurements of star positions on the 
thousands of photographic plates that he caused to be 
taken. He discovered the orbit of the globular cluster 
Omega Centauri, which moved radially in the Galaxy. 
He caused the Isaac Newton Telescope to be erected at 
Herstmonceux: it was later moved to the clearer sky of La 
Palma. He retired from the Royal Greenwich Observatory 
and became director of the South African Astronomical 
Observatory at the Cape. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wormhole 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wormhole 


Ahypothetical shortcut, or ‘tunnel’, that, in principle, may 
link the interior of a black hole to another universe or 
to another location in our universe. During the 1930s, 
Albert Einstein (1879-1955) and Nathan Rosen (1909-95) 
showed that the sharply curved spacetime of the interior 
of a black hole may open out again into another spacetime 
(another universe). The hypothetical connection between 
these two regions of spacetime came to be known as an 
Einstein-Rosen bridge. An alternative interpretation is 
that the bridge, or tunnel, links two different regions in 
the spacetime of our own universe. More recently, the 
term ‘wormhole’ has been used to describe a spacetime 
tunnel of this kind. Although it has been speculated 
that wormholes could be used to facilitate virtually 
instantaneous interstellar travel, in practice it seems likely 
that, even if wormholes do exist, they will be too small 
and too short-lived (and too physically hazardous) to be 
utilized in this way. 


See also: general theory of relativity, spacetime. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wren, Sir Christopher (1632-1723) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wren, Sir Christopher (1632-1723) 


Architect and astronomer, born in East Knoyle, Wiltshire, 
became professor of astronomy at Gresham College, and 
Savilian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford. He rebuilt 
London after the fire of 1666, planning the entire city 
and rebuilding 51 churches, including St Paul’s Cathedral. 
Newton acknowledges Wren as a mathematician in the 
Principia. Wren independently proved kepLer’s third law 
and formulated the inverse-square law of gravitational 
attraction. He solved Kepler’s problem on cutting a 
semicircle in a given ratio by a line through a given point 
onits diameter (it had arisen as a problem in Kepler’s work 
on elliptical orbits). Wren was a founder member of the 
Royal Society, and its president for two years. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Wright, Thomas (1711-86) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wright, Thomas (1711-86) 


English astronomer, born near Durham, clock-maker and 
mathematics teacher, wrote in 1750 a curiously argued 
book in which he suggested that the Milky Way was a 
disk-like system of stars with the solar system near the 
center. Wright suggested that nebulae were star systems 
similar to the Milky Way, but very far away. Conjectured 
that the gap in the planets between Mars and Jupiter had 
been cleared by the collision of a comet witha planet which 
had then been ejected from its orbit. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Wrinkle Ridge 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Wrinkle Ridge 


A long ridge on the surface of a planetary body. Wrinkle 
ridges were first identified on the Moon, where they are 
often associated with rilles. As the lunar maria solidified, 
tensile forces in the outer regions opened up the faults 
that produced rilles, while compressive forces nearer the 
center pushed up the surface to form wrinkle ridges. 
Some wrinkle ridges may result from small-scale extrusion 
of lava along fissures; others extend from the maria 
into surrounding upland terrain. Lunar wrinkle ridges 
are typically several hundred meters high and several 
hundred kilometers long. On Venus wrinkle ridges are 
common features on the plains, where they extend for 10 to 
50 km. The alignment of many of them suggests that they 
are associated with the compressive forces that uplifted 
the northern upland region of Aphrodite Terra. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Xenocrates of Chalcedon (396-314 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Xenocrates of Chalcedon (396-314 Bc) 


Philospher and mathematician, born in Chalcedon (now 
Kadikoy, near Istanbul), Bithynia (now Turkey), succeeded 
Speusippus as head of the Athenian Academy which 
pLaTo had founded. Believed that matter is composed of 
indivisible units (and thus an early atomist). He believed 
(and perhaps originated the notion) that people have a 
threefold existence, mind, body and soul, and that they die 
twice, once on Earth, then on the Moon, when the mind 
separates from the soul and travels to the Sun. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Xenophanes of Colophon (c. 570-c. 480 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Xenophanes of Colophon (c. 570-c. 
480 Bc) 


Greek philosopher, born in Colophon. He believed Earth 
to be the fundamental element of the universe, noting that 
that because seashells are sometimes found on mountain 
tops, the physical arrangement of the Earth changes with 
time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


XEUS (X-ray Evolving Universe Spectroscopy Mis- 


ion) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 
sion 


XEUS (X-ray Evolving Universe 
Spectroscopy Mission) 


Proposed European Space Agency x-ray observatory 
mission to be located on the International Space Station. 
Specifications include a 10 m diameter mirror with 25-50 m 
focal length, spatial resolution of 1 arcsecond, covering the 
energy range 0.1-100 keV. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


X-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


X-Ray Astronomy 


X-ray astronomy is an achievement of the space age as 
the Earth’s atmosphere is completely opaque at photon 
energies beyond the ultraviolet region. 

In 1949 the first x-rays from the solar corona were 
detected by a Geiger counter on a V-2 rocket. In 1962 the 
discovery of the first x-ray source outside the solar system 
followed—scorpius x-1. With the same rocket experiment 
an apparently diffuse x-ray background was found. Since 
these early days x-ray astronomy has developed at an 
enormous pace. Today, we know more than 150000 
x-ray sources in the sky and they include almost all 
astrophysical species—from the nearby comets to the most 
distant quasars at the edge of the universe, from the tiny 
neutron stars to the clusters and superclusters of galaxies 
as the largest physical formations in the cosmos. Some 
species radiate most of their power in x-rays, for instance 
black holes or neutron stars accreting matter from a binary 
companion, as well as supernova remnants and single, 
cooling neutron stars. 

Many of the known objects shine in x-rays because 
they are hot—having temperatures of millions to billions 
of kelvins. Other emission mechanisms are synchrotron 
radiation of extremely energetic electrons spiraling in 
magnetic fields or the inverse Compton effect which occurs 
when high-energy electrons scatter at low-energy photons, 
e.g. from stellar light or from the 2.7 K cosmic background 
radiation. In any case, the emission of x-rays points to 
extreme physical conditions in the source region. Also, 
these x-rays carry information which is not available from 
observations in other spectral bands. In this article we 
shall give a brief summary of the development of x- 
ray astronomy, describe the evolution of experimental 
techniques and x-ray space missions and highlight some of 
the results which have had a major impact on astrophysics. 


The beginnings with sounding rockets 

Like GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY, the field of x-ray astronomy 
was pioneered by physicists. Herb Friedman, who 
detected the first solar coronal x-rays in 1949, had been 
working previously in ionospheric physics; Giacconi and 
Rossi, who led the group discovering Scorpius X-1 and 
the x-ray background in 1962, were nuclear and cosmic 
ray physicists. 

The instruments used in these pioneering experi- 
ments were rocket-borne Geiger counters and spectral dis- 
crimination was achieved by means of windows and fil- 
ters. A little later proportional counters became the stan- 
dard instrument, working in the 1-10 keV band and having 
amodest spectral resolution (~20% at 5 keV). Observations 
were first performed by scanning the sky by spinning or 
precessing the rocket. Later on more sophisticated attitude 
control systems allowed pointed observations to be made 
with greatly improved sensitivities. 

The first discoveries of cosmic x-ray astronomy were 
totally unexpected. Sco X-1 showed a luminosity many 
orders of magnitude larger than that of the Sun. It 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


soon became clear that the mechanism by which such 
sources are powered was the infall of matter into the 
deep gravitational potential well of a NEUTRON STAR (as in 
Sco X-1) or a BLACK HOLE. Most of the few dozen sources 
found during the rocket era, i.e. until the end of the 1960s, 
were of this kind. The other major class was SUPERNOVA 
REMNANTS. The identification of the CRAB NEBULA as a bright 
x-ray source by means of a lunar occultation was one of 
the early highlights. Other important discoveries of this 
era were the x-ray pulsations of the CRAB PULSAR and the 
x-ray emission from the active galaxy ms7 at the center of 
the Virgo cluster. 

After the advent of x-ray satellites rocket-borne 
experiments with their short observation time (~5 min) 
were generally not competitive any more. However, they 
continued to play a role as a test bed for instruments to be 
flown on satellites or for special observations, in particular 
those ones of short lead time (e.g. on the famous SUPERNOVA 
1987A). 


Hard x-ray balloon experiments 

The rocket experiments had shown that the spectra of 
compact x-ray sources are quite hard, extending much 
beyond 10 keV. This opened up the possibility of using 
balloon-borne instruments as the atmosphere becomes 
transparent for altitudes above 40 km at high x-ray 
energies (>20 keV). Balloon flights offered the advantage 
of long-duration observations (up to 100 h) and the crystal 
scintillation counters used in these experiments allowed 
spectra to be taken up to ~500 keV. Balloon observations 
were pioneered by the MIT group in the 1960s. Important 
results of these early years were the measurement of the 
Crab spectrum to high energies (~500 keV), the discovery 
of variability in GX1 + 4 and the detection of a 20 min flux 
from Sco X-1. This field of research culminated in the 1970s 
with experiments of the MIT-Leiden and the Tiibingen— 
MPE groups which flew very large detectors operating in 
the pointing mode. Highlights of these activities were 
the observation of a lunar occultation of the Crab, the 
discovery of a spectral break in the Cyg X-1 spectrum 
corresponding to a temperature of about ~20 x 10° K and 
the discovery of cyclotron lines at ~40 keV in the accreting 
neutron star Her X-1, allowing the first direct measurement 
of its polar magnetic field (~5 x 10!” G). 


X-ray astronomy satellites 

Most significant progress in x-ray astronomy came with 
the advent of satellite observatories. Their ancestor, the 
first satellite entirely devoted to x-ray astronomy, was 
uHuru. Launched in 1970 it was a spinning spacecraft with 
a simple, but very powerful, instrument package: an array 
of proportional counters of 840 cm? area working in the 2— 
20 keV band. It performed the first all-sky survey and 
located 339 objects, mostly x-RAY BINARIES and supernova 
remnants, showing a strong clustering near the galactic 
plane. At fainter flux levels an isotropic distribution of 
Seyfert galaxies and clusters of galaxies was found. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


The discovery of two pulsating and eclipsing x- 
ray binary systems, Cen X-3 and Her X-1, proved in 
an impressive way that these systems contained matter- 
accreting neutron stars. The discovery of short time 
variability of Cyg X-1 by Uhuru led to follow-up rocket 
experiments yielding accurate source positions which 
enabled the optical counter-part to be identified and the 
mass of the accreting compact object to be determined. 
This mass turned out to be larger than the limiting mass 
of a neutron star. Thus it had to be a black hole. 

Uhuru also marked the beginning of an impressive 
series of satellites with ever-increasing capabilities listed 
in table 1. We cannot discuss them in detail here, but rather 
describe the main directions of developments. 


Imaging x-ray telescopes 

Imaging of x-rays is possible in different ways. Early 
solar observations used pinhole cameras and Fresnel zone 
plates, but the sensitivity of such devices is insufficient for 
studies of the rather weak cosmic x-ray sources. Therefore, 
the standard X-Ray TELESCOPES use Wolter optics which 
consist of paraboloidal-hyperboloidal mirrors reflecting x- 
rays under grazing incidence (see GRAZING INCIDENCE OPTICS). 
The first x-ray telescopes of this kind using x-ray film as a 
detector were used for solar observations from rockets and 
Skylab. The first x-ray satellite carrying a Wolter telescope 
was the Einstein observatory launched in 1979. It provided 
images with ~10 arcsec resolution and represented a real 
breakthrough, putting x-ray astronomy on equal footing 
with optical astronomy. 


X-ray sky surveys 

All-sky surveys have traditionally been a foundation of 
astrophysical research, and in the era of multiwavelength 
astronomy their importance has dramatically increased. 
Such surveys provide an unbiased view of the sky, they 
deliver large homogeneous samples of objects and they 
allow rare species to be discovered. Cross correlating the 
surveys from different wavelength bands—e.g. optical and 
x-rays—is a very effective method to select sources of a 
certain type, e.g. active galactic nuclei and quasars. 

The Uhuru and Ariel V surveys have revealed 
~350 sources in the standard x-ray band (2-6 keV). The 
subsequent HEAO-1 sky survey was not much more 
sensitive (840 sources) but widened the energy band 
considerably (0.1-200 keV). The limitations of all these 
collimated counter surveys in terms of angular resolution 
(<1 deg’) and sensitivity were overcome by the German- 
led rosat which performed the first all-sky survey in soft 
x-rays by sweeping an imaging Wolter telescope across the 
whole sky. Although it took only half a year of the more 
than 8 yr of ROSAT’s life this survey discovered 80000 
x-ray sources and located them with 25 arcsec resolution. 
In addition, the survey provided a complete map of the 
diffuse x-ray emission with 12 arcmin resolution (figure 1). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ROSAT PSPC ALL-SKY SURVEY Sources 


Aitoff Projection Galactic Il Coordinate System 


Energy range: 0.1 - 2.4 keV 


ROSAT PSPC ALL-SKY SURVEY Soft X-ray Background 


red: 0.1-0.4 keV green: 0.5-0.9 keV blue: 0.9-2.0 keV 


Figure 1. The x-ray sky as known at the end of the 20th century 
on the basis of the ROSAT All Sky Survey. Top: distribution of 
the ~19 000 brightest x-ray sources; Bottom: diffuse emission 
from hot interstellar matter heated by supernova explosions. 
This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 61. 


Recent highlights of x-ray astronomy 

A rather detailed account of the development of x-ray 
astronomy until ~1990 with a description of missions and 
their results can be found in Bradt et al (1992). Here we 
want to highlight the progress made in the 1990s by the 
powerful x-ray telescopes on ROSAT and asca. 

In addition, there have been two very successful 
recent missions which must be mentioned here. The ROSSI 
Timing Explorer (RXTE) carrying large-area collimated 
counters covering a wide energy range (2-200 keV) has 
deepened our understanding of compact sources by high 
time resolution and spectral studies. One of its most 
exciting results was the discovery of 2.75 ms pulsations 
occurring during the bursts of the low-mass x-ray binary 
(LMXB) 4U 1728-34. The data suggest that the pulsation 
came from the rotation of a thermonuclear hotspot on the 
surface of the neutron star. 

In another LMXB which had been previously 
identified as an X-RAY BURSTER by BEPPOSAX, RXTE found 
2.5 ms pulsations in the persistent flux which must be 
due to the rotation of the neutron star. This is the first 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. X-ray astronomy satellites 1969-2000. Adapted from Charles and Seward (1995) updated January 2000. 


Satellite Country Launch Demise Type 

Vela 5 A,B USA May 1969 June 1979 Scanning, small scintillation counter, 
gamma-ray range 

Uhuru USA December 1970 = January 1975 Scanning, proportional counters 

OSO-7 USA September 1971 May 1973 Scanning, proportional counters 

Copernicus USA-UK August 1972 February 1981 Pointed, x-ray telescope (non-imaging) 

ANS Netherlands-USA August 1974 July1976 Pointed proportional counters, Bragg 
crystal spectrometer 

Ariel-V UK October 1974 March 1980 Scanning, rotating modulation collimators 
(RMCs) + proportional counters 

SAS-3 USA May 1975 April 1980 Scanning, RMC 

OSO-8 USA June 1975 October 1978 Scanning, proportional and scintillation 
counters, Bragg crystal, polarimeter 

HEAO-1 USA August 1977 January 1979 Scanning + short pointings, proportional 
and scintillation counters, RMC 

Einstein USA November 1978 = April 1981 Pointed, imaging x-ray telescope, Bragg crystal, 
transmission gratings 

Hakucho Japan February 1979 April 1985 Scanning, RMCs 

Tenma Japan February 1983 ~1985 Gas scintillation proportional counter (GSPC), 
all-sky monitor 

EXOSAT ESA May 1983 April 1986 Pointed, imaging x-ray telescope, large 
proportional counters, GSPC 

Ginga Japan-UK February 1987 October 1991 Pointed, proportional counters 

Kvant USSR-UK-— June 1987 - Pointed, GSPC, coded mask, scintillation counter 

Netherlands—Germany 

Granat USSR-Russia December 1989 August 1999 Pointed, coded masks, all-sky monitor 

ROSAT Germany-UK-USA June 1990 December 1998 Scanning, pointed imaging x-ray and 
EUV telescopes 

ASCA Japan-USA February 1993 = Pointed, imaging x-ray telescopes, imaging GSPC 

RXTE USA December 1995 Pointed, large proportional counters, 
scintillation counters, all-sky monitors 

BeppoSAX Italy—Netherlands April 1996 Pointed imaging x-ray telescope, coded mask, 
scintillation counter 

Chandra USA June 1999 Pointed imaging x-ray telescope, spectrometers 

XMM-Newton ESA December 1999 Pointed imaging x-ray telescope, spectrometers 


and so far only LMXB showing both persistent pulsations 
and bursts. BeppoSAX is an Italian—Dutch satellite with 
instruments covering a wide energy band (0.1-200 keV). 
By discovering the x-ray afterglows of gamma-ray bursts 
it pointed the way to the solution of an old puzzle, the 
physical nature of gamma-ray bursts. 


Highlights from ROSAT and ASCA 

ROSAT and ASCA have complementary properties. 
ROSAT carries a large x-ray telescope with a position- 
sensitive proportional counter (PSPC) providing moderate 
spectral resolution (~40%) in the 0.1-2.4 keV band. 
With its High Resolution Imager (HRI), a microchannel 
plate detector ‘black-and-white’ images with 5 arcsec 
resolution can be taken. The telescopes of ASCA cover 
the energy band 0.5-10 keV with CCD detectors and 
imaging gas scintillation proportional counters having 
superior energy resolution (~20%), but worse angular 
resolution (~3 arcmin), compared with ROSAT. Both 
satellites have been used by many astrophysicists to study 
a wide variety of problems. The numbers of scientific 
publications resulting from ROSAT and ASCA run to about 
4000 and 1600, respectively, covering almost all fields 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of astrophysics. 
presented. 

ROSAT took the first x-ray picture ever of the MOON 
(figure 2(a)). The Sun-lit side of the Moon contains 
a uniform brightness distribution as in optical light. 
This is due to solar coronal x-rays undergoing Thomson 
scattering in a very thin layer of the lunar surface. The 
PSPC spectrum shows a broad spectral bump at 0.6 keV 
which is due to fluorescent resonance scattering by oxygen 
of the minerals of the lunar surface layers. The effective 
reflectivity of the Moon in the ROSAT band is only ~0.01%; 
this means that the Moon behaves as a black body at x-ray 
energies. At the same time it casts a shadow on the ‘diffuse’ 
x-ray background (see later section). The small flux of x- 
rays apparently coming from the dark side of the Moon 
is probably produced in the Earth’s upper atmosphere 
by charge-exchange processes of solar wind ions. This 
is the same mechanism which is responsible for the x-ray 
emission from cometary comas (see below). 

coMETS are cold objects that have been described as 
dirty snowballs. Therefore the discovery with ROSAT 
of x-rays from COMET HYAKUTAKE on 27 March 1996 was 
surprising to many scientists (figure 2(b)). Later, another 


In the following a few highlights are 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ROSAT PSPC 
The Moon 
June 29 1990 


Comet Hyakutake ©C/1996 B2 
ROSAT HRI + ROSAT WFC + OPTICAL 


1996 March 27.77-27.85 
. 


Figure 2. Solar system objects in x-rays: (a) the Moon reflecting solar coronal x-rays and casting a shadow on the x-ray sky; (b) x-ray 
emission from comet Hyakutake superimposed on an optical amateur photograph. 


four comets were found in the ROSAT All Sky Survey 
archive, including comet Levy. In total about a dozen 
comets have been detected by now in x-rays, mostly with 
ROSAT. Various physical processes have been proposed to 
explain the observed extended x-ray emission, including 
scattering of solar x-rays by cometary dust, x-rays 
produced by collisions of cometary and interplanetary 
dust particles and bremsstrahlung x-rays from electrons 
accelerated at the shock between the solar wind and the 
coma. However, all these mechanisms fail to explain the 
observed characteristics. The most successful and widely 
accepted model suggests that charge exchange between 
highly charged ions (such as C**, C®, O% and O”*) in 
the solar wind and neutral particles (such as water) in the 
cometary coma is the dominant source of the observed x- 
ray emission. 

ROSAT has given many exciting results about stars 
of all types. The study of a complete sample of stars 
of solar type has revealed the existence of a sharp lower 
bound to the x-ray flux, measured at the surface of the star. 
Interestingly, this minimum stellar x-ray flux is identical 
to the flux observed in the coronal holes of the Sun. This 
result suggests that the stars of minimal x-ray flux are 
completely surrounded by stellar analogs of solar coronal 
holes. 

With ground-based optical follow-up observations 
of unidentified ROSAT All-Sky Survey sources, several 
hundred new T TauRI sTARS have been identified based 
on Ha emission of hydrogen and lithium absorption. 
Surprisingly, many new T Tauri stars have been found far 
outside regions of ongoing star formation. Such ‘off-cloud’ 
T Tauri stars must have been either ejected from their 
birthplaces in the clouds with high velocities or formed in 
small cloudlets which have largely dispersed since then. 

Recently, deep ROSAT observations have led to the 
discovery of young (<10° yr) brown dwarfs showing x- 
ray emission. The x-ray properties of these brown dwarfs, 
in particular their x-ray to optical light ratio, are similar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


to those of nuclear burning stars of low mass. This 
may suggest that young brown dwarfs have hot coronae 
responsible for the x-ray emission just like nuclear burning 
stars of low mass. 

Early in the ROSAT mission a number of objects 
were discovered emitting extremely soft x-rays. They are 
very luminous and show temperatures of a few hundred 
thousand kelvins. It turned out that these sources are a 
species which had been predicted to exist but which had 
not been found before. They are WHITE Dwarrs in binary 
systems accreting matter from their companions at a rate 
just sufficient to sustain steady nuclear burning on the 
surface of the white dwarf. Thus, they represent a unique 
situation in which steady nuclear burning is observed at 
the surface of a compact star. 

Massive stars explode giving rise to a supernova 
when the nuclear fuel in their cores is exhausted. The 
core collapses to a neutron star or a black hole while 
the shell of the star is expelled in a giant explosion. A 
large fraction of the kinetic energy is converted by shocks 
into high-temperature x-ray emitting plasmas. Supernova 
1987A was ROSAT’s first-light target on 16 June 1990, but 
it turned out to be too faint to be seen at that time. Its 
remnant was first discovered in soft x-rays with ROSAT 
in 1992 and has steadily become brighter since then. A 
large increase is expected to occur in the near future 
when the shock reaches the high-density regions of the 
red giant wind. In total, some 200 supernova remnants 
have been found with ROSAT. Three of them are clustered 
in the Vela region (figure 3). One is the VELA SUPERNOVA 
REMNANT, Which, at a distance of 1500 ly, is one of the 
closest supernova remnants. Its diameter is about 200 Ly, its 
age about 20000 yr. Protrusions discovered with ROSAT 
at the periphery of the shell are probably produced by 
fragments of the exploding star; x-ray spectroscopy with 
ASCA has revealed that they show different chemical 
compositions (figure 3(a)). The Puppis A remnant at 
the north-western rim of the Vela supernova remnant 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


(4) (0) () 


Figure 3. The Vela complex of supernova remnants: (a) Vela 
supernova remnant with the Vela pulsar and Puppis A; 

(b) Puppis A with its central source, probably the remnant 
neutron star; (c) A young, ~680 yr old supernova remnant, 
superimposed on Vela supernova remnant, showing titanium-44 
emission. This figure is reproduced as Color Plate 62. 


is located at a much larger distance (figure 3(b)). It is 
younger and has a much higher temperature than the 
Vela supernova remnant. Surprisingly, a third supernova 
remnant has been discovered recently in the Vela complex 
with ROSAT. Radioactive titanium-44 has been detected 
from it with the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory 
(figure 3(c)). Titanium-44 is produced in supernova 
explosions and has a mean lifetime of only 90 yr, which 
means that the remnant is very young (~680 yr). Actually, 
this supernova remnant looks like a twin of SN 1006. Like 
the latter it must have been very bright at maximum (about 
a quarter of the full Moon) and it is unclear why it has not 
been recorded in the Chinese and Japanese annals. 

Neutron stars shine in different ways. If they are 
highly magnetized and rapidly rotating, they appear 
as radio puLsars. These objects emit beamed radiation 
produced by high-energy electrons (and positrons) that 
are accelerated in their magnetospheres. In about half 
a dozen young pulsars, optical and gamma-ray pulses 
have also been seen. With ROSAT and ASCA, 34 radio 
pulsars have been detected through their magnetospheric 
x-ray emission, including the 89 ms Vela pulsar. The 
characteristic features of this magnetospheric radiation 
are power law spectra and sharp pulses. Four of the 
radio pulsars seen with ROSAT, including the Vela pulsar, 
exhibit an additional thermal spectrum corresponding to 
a temperature of the order of 10° K, which is interpreted 
as the thermal radiation from the surface (photosphere) 
of the neutron star. A few point sources discovered near 
the centers of young supernova remnants also show very 
soft x-ray emission, which must be attributed to neutron 
star surface emission as well. A prominent example is the 
central source in Puppis A (figure 3(b)). 

Since the ages of radio pulsars and supernova 
remnants can be determined quite well, one can use 
these observations to test cooling models of neutron stars. 
The result is that standard cooling models describe the 
observed temperatures and luminosities quite well. Rapid 
cooling as expected in the presence of a Bose-Einstein 
condensate of pions or kaons in the neutron star core can 
be excluded for the observed objects. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


A few x-ray sources have been found in the ROSAT 
data showing very soft thermal spectra, (temperatures be- 
low a million kelvins) and very faint optical counterparts 
(25™-26™). These objects might be either single neutron 
stars accreting interstellar matter or, more likely, old (10°- 
10° yr) cooling neutron stars whose supernova remnants 
have already vanished. The importance of all these obser- 
vations lies in the fact that the surfaces of these tiny stars 
(with radii 10 km) have now become visible. Future x- 
ray spectroscopy should make it possible to measure their 
enormous gravity as well as their radii, which depend on 
the physical properties of matter at supranuclear densities. 

The ROSAT deep survey of the Andromeda galaxy 
led to the discovery of 550 x-ray sources, comparable in 
number with the bright x-ray sources in our own galaxy 
found by Uhuru. As in the Milky Way, the brightest of 
them are young supernova remnants or binary systems 
with neutron stars or black holes accreting matter from a 
companion. These bright source populations have been 
studied with ROSAT in many galaxies. In addition, the 
hot interstellar medium, which is heated by supernova 
explosions, has been investigated. 

Asmall fraction of all galaxies have an ACTIVE GALACTIC 
NucLEUS (AGN) emitting huge amounts of energy in all 
spectral bands. The radiation is variable, indicating that it 
is emitted from a small region, generally not more than 
a few light-weeks or light-months across. Such AGNs 
often display jets, originating in their core. It is generally 
believed that the central engine is a supermassive black 
hole swallowing matter at a high rate. QUASARS are 
the most extreme representatives of the class of AGN 
sources. ASCA spectroscopy of the AGN MCG-6-30-15 
and a few other sources has led to the discovery of iron 
Ka emission lines with broad and asymmetric profiles. 
This profile is most probably caused by gravitational and 
relativistic Doppler shifts of the rapidly rotating matter 
in the accretion disk near the central black hole. These 
AGNs are very bright x-ray sources, and more than 50% 
of all 150 000 ROSAT sources belong to this class. Because 
of their enormous brightness, they can be detected at large 
distances or redshifts. In the ROSAT Deep Surveys with 
a total accumulated observation time of 2 weeks, about 
1000 sources are detected per square degree in the sky. 
Optical spectroscopy has shown that most of them are 
quasars and other AGNs at cosmological distances. The 
ROSAT Deep Surveys have also answered one of the oldest 
questions of x-ray astronomy, namely the origin of the 
extragalactic x-ray background: at least, in the soft x- 
ray band, around 1 keV, some 80% of the background 
has been resolved into discrete sources, mostly quasars. 
An important current question is what evolved first, the 
galaxies or the supermassive black holes. 

Galaxies are not distributed randomly in the universe 
but form clusters or groups of galaxies consisting of a 
dozen to thousands of members which are gravitationally 
bound. With diameters of millions of light-years, they are 
the largest physical objects in the universe. As early as 
1932, Fritz Zwicky found that CLUSTERS OF GALAXIES must 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Astronomy 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ROSAT PSPC 
COMA CLUSTER 
05-2.4 keV 


Figure 4. X-ray image of the coma cluster showing the merging 
with a smaller cluster of galaxies. 


contain much more gravitating mass than accounted by 
the total visible mass of all member galaxies. Actually, the 
amount of ‘DARK MATTER’ had to be of the order of 95% of 
the total cluster mass. 

One early surprise of x-ray astronomy was the 
detection by Uhuru of large quantities of hot plasma in 
clusters of galaxies shining in x-rays. Later Einstein and 
ROSAT observations showed that the mass of the hot 
plasma is typically a factor of 4 or 5 larger than that of 
the galaxies and represents some 20% of the cluster mass. 
In other words, a large fraction of the ‘dark matter’ turned 
out to be hot, visible only in x-rays and not in optical 
light. ASCA spectroscopy has allowed us to measure 
the heavy element (iron) abundance of the hot matter in 
clusters, which is typically only one-third of the so-called 
universal abundance. This can be explained by the infall 
of primordial matter onto the clusters. 

Many clusters show double structures, indicating the 
merging of two clusters; others exhibit complicated inner 
structures which must be due to earlier merging processes 
(figure 4). Thus, the x-ray images reveal how these large 
objects evolve with cosmic time. 

In total, several thousand clusters have been found 
with ROSAT. About 1500 of them have been optically 
identified and have known redshifts, and thus known 
distances. From this information one can derive the 
evolution of the cluster population with time. <A 
comparison with simulations shows that the observed 
time dependence of the cluster population is significantly 
smaller than expected in a universe having the critical 
density. Actually the matter density inferred from cluster 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


evolution is only about one-third of this critical density 
which is necessary to close the universe. 


The future 

During the years to come enormous progress is expected 
in x-ray astronomy owing to two new very powerful and 
complementary x-ray telescope missions: CHANDRA and 
XMM-NEWTON. Both satellites carry x-ray CCD detectors and 
dispersive spectrometers for high-resolution spectroscopy. 
The special strength of Chandra, launched in summer 
1999, is its high angular resolution (~0.5 arcsec) which 
allows us to resolve fine structures such as jets and to 
go at least a factor of 1000 deeper than the ROSAT deep 
surveys did. On the other hand XMM-Newton, launched 
in December 1999, provides a very high collecting power 
(~4-10 times that of Chandra, depending on energy) at 
moderate angular resolution (~10 arcsec). It will be very 
powerful for spectroscopic and time variability studies. 
The first results of these two powerful missions are very 
tantalizing. 

Plans for the future thereafter are already quite 
concrete. NASA is discussing a fleet of four x-ray 
telescope satellites called ‘Constellation’ to be launched 
in ~2007. They can observe the same object with different 
instruments simultaneously or point to different regions 
of the sky. ESA’s XEUS (x-ray mission for spectroscopy in 
an evolving universe), to be launched after 2010, foresees a 
giant x-ray telescope with a huge mirror system and focal 
instruments sitting on two separate satellites, which means 
that pointing requires orbital maneuvers. The collecting 
area of the telescope (~30 m7’) is a thousand times that 
of ROSAT and about a hundred times that of XMM or 
RXTE. It should be able to penetrate into the ‘dark ages’ 
of our universe at redshifts of 5-10, where galaxies and 
supermassive black holes have been formed. 


Bibliography 

Bradt H V, Ohashi T and Pounds KA 1992 X-ray astronomy 
missions Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30 391-427 

Charles P and Seward F 1995 Exploring the X-Ray Universe 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 


Joachim Triimper 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-ray Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


X-ray Binary Stars 


X-ray binary stars are luminous (~10°°-* erg s~') x- 
ray sources that consist of a neutron star or black hole 
compact object accreting material from a close (usually 
<1Ro) orbiting companion star which, in most cases, has 
properties similar to those of normal main sequence stars. 
Such x-ray binaries are rare (only ~200 are present in 
our Galaxy and are distributed in the Galactic Plane, the 
Galactic Bulge and a dozen or so aS GLOBULAR CLUSTER X- 
RAY SOURCES, see figure 1), whereas the related (and in 
many respects similar) cataclysmic variables (where the 
compact object is a white dwarf) are much more common. 
The extremely high intrinsic luminosity of x-ray binaries 
(the brightest are at the ‘Eddington Luminosity, a level at 
which radiation pressure limits the rate at which matter 
can accrete’ for a 1Mo star) accounts for their discovery 
in the early days of x-ray astronomy (via rocket-based 
experiments in the 1960s) and their domination of the field 
for most of the next two decades. 

X-ray binaries can be divided into two basic classes 
of objects according to the mass of the mass-losing (or 
donor) star. The division is remarkably clean with those 
>5Mo classified as ‘high mass x-ray binaries’ (HMXBs) and 
those <1M© as ‘low mass x-ray binaries’ (LMXBs). The 
nature of the mass transfer from the donor also divides 
between these classes, with the (radiation driven) stellar 
wind dominating in HMXBs and Roche-lobe overflow 
being the principal mechanism in LMXBs (although there 
are circumstances in which a combination of the two can 
occur). The x-ray characteristics also depend on the nature 
of the compact object. High magnetic field neutron stars 
produce x-ray pulsators, whereas lower magnetic fields 
make it much harder to detect the spin of the neutron 
star, although ‘x-ray bursts’ can occur. Note that coherent 
pulsations and bursts are never seen in black hole systems. 

X-ray binaries are extremely important objects as 
they demonstrate that stellar and binary evolution can 
produce compact objects via supernova explosions in 
which the binary survives. They currently provide 
the only circumstance in which stellar-mass black hole 
masses can be derived within our Galaxy (see BLACK HOLE 
CANDIDATES IN X-RAY BINARIES) aS Well as a majority of the 
accurately known neutron star masses. They are also 
a well-defined and constrained laboratory for studying 
accretion onto highly degenerate matter and the effect of 
ultra-high magnetic fields, and for testing the effects of 
general relativity in the strong gravity limit. 


High mass x-ray binaries 

X-ray pulsars 

The very first x-ray astronomy satellite, UHURU, discovered 
X-ray pulsations at 4.8 s and 1.2 s in Cen X-3 and Her 
X-1, respectively, and also found that those pulsations 
were modulated (and eclipsed) on their orbital periods of 
2.1 d and 1.7 d (see figure 2). These results immediately 
established the binary star model for these sources beyond 
any doubt. In combination with optical spectroscopy of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 1. Distribution of x-ray binaries in the Galaxy. Top: 
HMXBs, associated with young, massive stars in the spiral arms. 
Bottom: LMXBs, an older population concentrated in the 
Galactic Bulge (also including globular clusters as open 
symbols). 


the donor star (relatively bright, early-type stars for both 
sources), and the fact that they are eclipsing, they allow 
full orbital solutions and hence accurate masses for both 
donor and compact object (see table 1). Furthermore the 
duration of the eclipse provides an accurate estimate of the 
size of the donor which can be compared with the size of 
its Roche lobe. 


Spinning up and down 

The spinning neutron stars are orbiting their massive 
companions and accreting material from the dense 
and (presumed) uniform stellar winds. This physical 
situation is essentially identical to Bondi-Hoyle accretion 
as calculated for a single object moving and accreting from 
a uniform interstellar medium. Matter is accreted onto the 
neutron star from within a cylinder of radius rac, defined 
as the point at which the kinetic energy of matter in the 
wind is equal to the potential energy due to the neutron 
star. If the wind’s velocity is v,,, and the orbital velocity of 
the neutron star is v then the fraction accreted is given by 
(Mns/Meec)?(v/dw)*[1 + (v/tw)?] 9? and is usually ~107 to 
10-5 for typical HMXBs. 

The angular momentum of this material will cause it 
to form a small accretion disk around the compact object, 
but its final capture by the neutron star is controlled by the 
intense magnetic field at the magnetospheric radius where 
the ram pressure of the (presumed spherical) infall is 
balanced by magnetic pressure. At this point the accreting 
angular momentum is transferred to the spinning pulsar, 
which then spins up ata rate P thatis broadly proportional 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-ray Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


At (SECONDS) 


INTENSITY (COUNTS/SEC) 


MAY 5 MAY 6 


mY 7 _ wre 


Figure 2. Uhuru observations of the Doppler delays in the 4.8 s x-ray pulsations from Cen X-3 as a function of the 2.1 d orbital period. 
The x-ray light curve (below) shows the eclipse and hence geometry of the binary. 


Table 1. Orbital parameters and masses for eclipsing HMXBs. 


Pulse period Orbital period f(M) Mps Msgec 
Source (s) (d) (Mo) e i (Mo) (Mo) 
SMC X-1 0.72 3.89 10.85 <0.00004 65 1.1 18 
Her X-1 1.24 1.70 0.85 <0.0001 >79 15 2.3 
Cen X-3 4.82 2.09 15.34 <0.0016 70 1.21 = 20.5 
LMC X-4 13.5 1.41 9.86 0.006 65 1.5 15.8 
Vela X-1 283 8.96 19.74 0.09 >74 1.9 23.5 
4U1538-52 = 530 3.73 11.8 <0.06 68 1.1 16.4 
207.70F a 
' Cen X-3 1 
L en 3 f | 
207.65 PA oy 4 
L + i ~~ 4 
w E ;*% at “J ‘ 1 
E 207.60F wf a 
> sh 4 
iS [ \, f 1 
3 207.55- \ aw 4 
3 [ ze *. ra | 
ig [ / “A : 
207.50 ; + 
Cy pat J 
LN 7 
207.45 
48500 49000 49500 50000 


Time (Julian Date — 2400000.5) 


Figure 3. Approximately five-year history of the variations in the spin rate of the Cen X-3 pulsar as monitored by BATSE on CGRO. 
The general trend shows that on average it is spinning up, but there are significant fluctuations about this trend indicating that it can 


spin down as well as up. 


to the observed x-ray luminosity (since this is directly 
related to the accretion rate). 


Figure 3 shows the variation of spin period in Cen X-3 
as observed by CGRO over almost five years. While the 
general trend is a spin-up, it is clear that the actual process 
involves periods of (almost equal) spin-up and spin-down. 
It might be expected that the spin-up rate would decline 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


with x-ray luminosity if the mass transfer rate were to 
decline, but how does it manage to reverse sign? This 
requires that material is being accreted whose torque is 
reversed with respect to the ‘normal’ expectation, and 
implies that the disk rotation itself has reversed. Details 
of this process are unclear, but could be due to non- 
uniformities in the stellar wind. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-ray Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


————e_ 


35 


a. 
= 


30 


He II 


Hy 
NIN 4C Tl 


H 124N 1 


25 


f,, (mJy) 


20 


15 


10 
3000 4000 5000 6000 


es a as a a 

4 

Paschen Lines = 

7 _ 

| of. 

A 

J 

Sco X-1 | 

retiree a tiiii I 

7000 8000 9000 10000 


Wavelength (A) 


Figure 4. Optical spectrum of Sco X-1 which is dominated by continuum from the disk and x-ray driven high-ionization emission lines. 


Table 2. Be x-ray binary parameters. 


Spectral Spin period Orbital period Lx(peak) 
Source type V (s) (d) e (ergs!) 
A0538-66 B2IIle 15 0.069 16.65 ~0.7. 10°? 
4U0115+63 OBe 15.5 3.6 24.3 0.34 8x 10% 
V0332+53 ~=Be 15.3 4.4 34.25 0.31 10%8 
A0535+26 O9.7IIle 9 104 111 ~0.3  2x10°” 
GX304-1 B2Ve 14 272 133 ? 3 x 10°6 
4U1154-61 BlVpe 9 292 188 ? 10% 
X Per O9.5ep 6 835 ~580 ? 10°4 


Note also that spin-up will only continue until 
the neutron star is rotating so fast that material at 
the magnetospheric radius would have to exceed the 
Keplerian speed at this radius in order to enter the 
magnetosphere (and hence would be ejected). Thus a 
magnetospheric ‘barrier’ then exists to counter any further 
accretion until either the neutron star has spun down or 
the mass transfer rate significantly increases. 


Cyclotron lines 

The magnetic fields of neutron stars that are x-ray pulsars 
are inferred to be ~10" G. Such fields control the accretion 
of material onto the neutron star’s surface, leading to well- 
defined hot spots. x-rays are emitted either from the hot 
spot or froma shock immediately above the surface (within 
~10° 3 m), producing either pencil-beam or fan-beam 
emitting patterns. The very strong field will then lead 
to quantization of the energy levels within the accretion 
column, which produces resonant scattering cross sections 
and hence cyclotron emission and absorption features. 
In fact, cyclotron emission lines have only been seen in 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


magnetic white dwarfs in the infrared, whereas cyclotron 
absorption features (most in the ~12-40 keV range) have 
been detected in a dozen x-ray pulsars, implying magnetic 
fields of ~2-3 x 10% G. 


Be star transients 
Many of the x-ray pulsars have long orbital periods with 
B-type companions which exhibit emission lines. These 
represent a sub-class of HMXBs and are associated with 
the rapidly rotating Be stars, so-called because of their 
strong and variable emission lines (usually hydrogen) 
superposed on otherwise normal B star spectra. Anumber 
of transient x-ray sources (most of them x-ray pulsators) 
have been identified with Be stars, establishing that both 
single and binary Be systems exist. The Be transients 
have rare outbursts (~ hundreds of days) and long orbital 
periods (many weeks). Some (e.g. A0535+26, GX304-1) 
have poorly determined orbital periods >100 d, even with 
the accurately determined x-ray pulsation. 

The Be phenomenon is interpreted as being due to 
the presence of an equatorial ring around the B star as 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-ray Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


No obscuration of X-rays 
by disc 


60" 


Dippers 


Dips & 75. 
Eclipses 
80 ~ 


Partial Eclipses 
ADC Sources 


Companion 
Star Accretion Disc 


Figure 5. Schematic diagram of an LMXB showing the effects of 
disk shadowing and obscuration by the secondary star. Above 
an inclination of about 80°, LMXBs are seen only as ADC 
sources. Below about 75°, orbital modulation can still be seen in 
the form of regular dips, but these tend to evolve in form from 
cycle to cycle. 


Counts/sec 


0.0 
12.0 13.0 140 15.0 160 17.0 180 18.0 20.0 21.0 220 23.0 
UT Hours 


Figure 6. Continuous monitoring of X1916-053 by EXOSAT 
reveals both the regular x-ray ‘dipping’ due to azimuthal 
structure in the accretion disk, and the way in which this 
structure can evolve from orbit to orbit. 


a result of its rapid rotation. Significant mass is lost via 
this ring and this material can be accreted by the orbiting 
neutron star, thereby producing x-rays. Almost all of the 
Be transients with measured orbits show significant orbital 
eccentricities (see table 2) and this may be related to the 
transient x-ray outbursts. An example here is A0538-66 
in the LMC, which showed dramatic x-ray and optical 
outbursts on a 16.6 day cycle which was stable for at 
least 50 years (based on archival plate material), even 
though these outbursts did not always occur. At their 
peak these outbursts exceeded 10° erg s~! and yet the 
compact object was shown to be a neutron star based on an 
observed 69 ms pulsation. The most likely interpretation 
is that of a highly eccentric orbit (e ~ 0.7) in which the 
neutron star interacts (ina complex way) with the Be ring at 
periastron. Longer term (hundreds to thousands of days) 
variations are present in almost all Be systems, the nature 
of which is unclear. A recent extended (18 year) period 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of inactivity in A0538-66 has been attributed to the effect 
of the magnetospheric barrier given the very fast spin 
period of the neutron star. This could only be overcome 
by another interval of very high mass transfer from the 
secondary. 


Low mass x-ray binaries 

The brightest (and first discovered) extra-solar x-ray 
source is the x-ray binary Sco X-1, which was optically 
identified with an unremarkable 13th magnitude blue star 
in 1967. However, proof of its binary status was extremely 
hard to establish and this was not accomplished until 
the mid 1970s. This was due to the optical light being 
completely dominated by the x-ray heated accretion disk, 
making the secondary undetectable (see figure 4). Unlike 
HMXBs, the principal mass-transfer mechanism in LMXBs 
is Roche lobe overflow from the cool, low-mass secondary 
directly into the accretion disk. Furthermore, the thickness 
of the accretion disk itself can render a direct view of 
the compact object impossible at all phases (and not just 
when it is behind the secondary star), thereby making 
evidence for binarity less obvious than in HMXBs. This 
is demonstrated in figure 5 where the effect of shadowing 
by the disk leaves only a narrow range of viewing angles at 
which an orbital modulation can be seen. X-ray irradiation 
of the disk has been demonstrated in simultaneous multi- 
wavelength observations of X-RAY BURSTERS, Which show the 
optical burst lagging the x-ray as a result of reprocessing 
of x-rays in the accretion disk and heated face of the 
companion. 

A significant subset of LMXBs are globular cluster x- 
ray sources. Indeed, they are grossly over-represented 
in globular clusters when compared with the density of 
LMXBs in the Galaxy as a whole. Furthermore, all the 
globular cluster sources (see table 3) exhibit type I x-ray 
bursts, and recent HST studies of the extremely crowded 
UV/optical fields have revealed that several of these 
sources are ultracompact binaries with orbital periods 
<1 hour (including X1820-30 which has the shortest orbital 
period of any known object). It is likely that stellar 
interactions within the cluster core lead to the formation 
of such exotic objects. 


X-ray dippers 

A number of LMXBs display sudden ‘dips’ in their x- 
ray light curves which occur at particular orbital phases 
(around ~0.8). These are attributed to extended vertical 
structure in the edge of the accretion disk at the point 
where the mass transfer stream impacts the disk. This 
material temporarily obscures our direct view of the x- 
ray source, absorbing the x-rays more effectively at lower 
x-ray energies (a signature of absorption which confirms 
the process). Extended observations of these x-ray 
dippers shows that the vertical disk structure evolves from 
orbit to orbit and on much longer timescales, sometimes 
disappearing altogether, at other times producing dip 
features throughout the orbital cycle (see figure 6). 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-ray Binary Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 3. Properties of LMXBs. 


Orbital 
Source period (h) X-ray type Vv My Notes 
X1820-303 0.19 Burster >19 globular cluster (NGC 6624), degenerate companion 
4U 1850-087 0.34 Burster 21 5.6 globular cluster (NGC 6712), degenerate companion 
X1626-673 0.7 Burster, pulsar 18.5 7.7s pulsar, degenerate companion 
X1832-330 0.73 Burster 19.4 globular cluster (NGC 6652), degenerate companion 
X1916-053 0.83 Burster, dipper 21 5.3. x-ray and optical periods different, degenerate companion 
J1808.4-3658 2.0 Burster, pulsar, transient 16.5-20 millisecond (2.5 ms) pulsar, ~0.1Mo companion 
X1323-619 2.9 Burster, dipper 
X1636-536 3.8 Burster 17 13 
X0748-676 3.8 Burster, dipper, transient 17 14 no decline 
X1254-690 3.9 Burster, dipper 19 
X1728-169 4.2 17 
X1755-338 44 Dipper 19 
X1735-444 4.6 Burster 17.5 2.2 
X2129+470 5.2 ADC 16.5 now ‘off’; triple? 
X1822-371 5.6 ADC 15.5 
X1658-298 7.2 Burster, dipper 18.3 
A1742-289 8.4 Burster, transient eclipsing 
X1957+115 9.3 18.7 
X2127+119 17.1 Burster, ADC 15.5 1.0 eclipsing, globular cluster (M15) 
Aq| X-1 19 Burster, transient 21.6 2.9 frequent outbursts, kHz QPO 
Sco X-1 19.2 Prototype LMXB 12-14 0.0  Zsource 
X1624-490 21 Dipper 
250921-630 216 ADC 15.3 
Cyg X-2 235 Burster 14.7 —2.0  Zsource 
J1744-28 283 Burster, pulsar, transient 0.47s pulsar, type II bursts 
3b a 
vba [AP 
ane adie - 
k ¢ 
N ! “et | 
fs / 29: 
maky X1822-371 i 
3 [ | 
vo 
=I 
BF 
Ba 
Z, 
X0748-676 
oF a 
[= i L 1 | . | 
0 0.5 1 5 2 


Binary Phase 


Figure 7. Comparison of the x-ray light curves of the prototype ADC source X1822-371 (top) with the eclipsing ‘dipper’ X0748-676. 
The orbital periods are very similar, but the orbital inclinations are only slightly different, with that of X0748-676 being just low enough 
to allow a direct view of the neutron star whilst still allowing the companion star to eclipse it (see also figure 5). 


One particular source, EXO 0748-676, displays not transient that turned on in 1985, and has remained ‘on’) 
only x-ray dips but also an (almost) total eclipse, albeit must be in the very narrow range (73°-83°) that allows 
very brief (see figure 7). The inclination in this LMXB (a both dips and a short total eclipse by the secondary star. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 5 


X-ray Binary Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Accretion disk coronae 

However, a closer examination of figure 7 will show that 
the eclipse in EXO 0748-676 is not in fact completely total. 
There is a small but significant residual x-ray flux which 
is about 3% of the normal, out-of-eclipse level. This 
residual flux is due to x-rays which are scattered into our 
line of sight from material (possibly a disk ‘wind’) above 
and below the disk. Hence for sources at even higher 
inclinations, we would not expect to see total eclipses, 
but instead partial eclipses of this extended ‘accretion disk 
corona’ (or ADC). Figure 7 also shows the x-ray light curve 
of X1822-371, the classical ADC source which combines a 
long smooth modulation of the x-ray flux by the accretion 
disk rim structure with a partial eclipse by the secondary 
star. This is essentially what would be expected if the 
dipper light curve were to be smoothed out. ADC sources 
and x-ray dippers are important objects for the information 
that they provide on the azimuthal structure of accretion 
disks in interacting binaries. 


X-ray pulsations 

The much larger accretion discs in LMXBs compared to 
HMXBs should lead to substantial transfer of angular 
momentum onto the compact object and hence very fast 
spin periods (comparable to millisecond radio PULSARS). 
However, QUASIPERIODIC OSCILLATIONS IN X-RAY BINARIES were 
seen with large area x-ray detectors, an effect attributed 
to an interaction between the inner accretion disk and 
the neutron star magnetosphere. Very recently, the first 
millisecond x-ray pulsar was discovered (SAX J1808.4- 
3658) with a coherent pulsation at 401 Hz. It also displays 
x-ray bursts that indicate a weak (<10'° G) magnetic 
field, and has a 2 h orbital period with a very low mass 
companion. This object is considered to be a direct link 
between LMXBs and the ‘black widow’ millisecond radio 
pulsars. 

There is a further group, the ‘anomalous x-ray 
pulsars’ (AXPs), the nature of which remains very unclear. 
Only half a dozen are known, the best studied of which is 
1E2259+587. They all exhibit coherent x-ray pulsations 
with periods in the range 5-12 s, have x-ray luminosities 
far too high to be explained by their observed spin-down 
rates and yet show no evidence for binary motion in these 
pulsations, nor has any been optically identified. It has 
been suggested that they may be linked to the ‘soft gamma- 
ray repeaters’ (a sub-class of gamma-ray bursters, see 
GAMMA-RAY ASTRONOMY) Which also display similar pulsation 
periods during their bursts, an effect which led to the 
proposal that they had much larger magnetic fields than 
hitherto suspected (the so-called ‘magnetars’). 


Long-term or superorbital modulations 

From the early days of x-ray astronomy there have been 
satellites that scan the sky repeatedly and regularly (usu- 
ally because they are spin-stabilized). This automati- 
cally provided the ability to monitor x-ray sources for 
many weeks (sometimes continuously), providing long- 
term light curves. These yielded the presence in a number 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of x-ray binaries, both LMXB and HMXB, of yet another 
modulation, this time quasi-periodic and on a timescale 
of tens to hundreds of days. The first discovered was the 
35 d on-off cycle in HERCULES x-1, and which is attributed 
to a tilted, precessing disk. A similar ~30 d modulation 
has been seen in LMC X-4, but a substantial change in this 
timescale over a year or so is difficult to account for. Sub- 
sequent long-term modulations (from 70 to 200 d) have 
been found in a variety of sources, including both LMXBs 
and HMXBs. These are currently attributed to the effects 
of a warped accretion disk driven by the central x-ray lu- 
minosity. 


Bibliography 

Bildsten L et al 1997 Astrophys. J. Suppl. 113 367 

Charles P A and Seward F D 1995 Exploring the X-ray 
Universe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 
ch 7-9 

Lewin W HG, Van Paradijs J and McClintock J E (eds) 1995 
X-Ray Binaries (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press) 


Philip A Charles 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Bursters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


X-Ray Bursters 


X-ray bursters are a class of sources which emit bursts 
of X-Rays lasting from a few seconds to a few minutes. 
They are further classified as either type I or type II. 
Typical type I bursts have a faster rise than decay and 
the average energy of the x-rays decreases as the burst 
smoothly decays. Typical type II bursts stop abruptly 
without changing the average photon energy. There are 
now over 50 sources of type I x-ray bursts known, while 
only two sources are known as type II bursters, and one 
of these also has type I bursts. Because of this imbalance 
in numbers, ‘x-ray burster’ is assumed to mean a type I 
x-ray burster, although there are other kinds of sources of 
short bursts or flashes of x-rays, ranging from the Sun to 
black hole candidates. Type I bursters are NEUTRON STARS on 
which gas accreted from a binary companion undergoes 
sudden nuclear burning. The sources which have been 
called type II bursters are also neutron stars accreting gas 
from a binary companion. The type II burst is a sudden, 
large, but brief, increase in x-ray producing ACCRETION. 

The neutron stars in x-ray bursters of both type I 
and type II have binary companion stars in close orbit 
such that the companion loses matter to the neutron 
star’s gravitational attraction. (The companion fills the 
gravitational equipotential called the ROCHE LoBE.) The 
transferring matter has ANGULAR MOMENTUM around the 
neutron star, so that it circulates around it and mixes 
with gas already there in a flat ring distribution called an 
ACCRETION DISK. The disk material slowly moves inwards 
until it reaches the neutron star, where it accumulates 
on the surface. As helium and hydrogen accumulate 
under conditions of very high density and increasing 
temperature, the collisions of the ions can produce 
inelastic nuclear reactions which generate heat. The rising 
temperature increases the rate of collisions, raising the 
temperature further, until a nuclear fusion chain reaction 
is set off. This is the thermonuclear flash. The heat from 
burning the thin layer of helium, and sometimes hydrogen, 
diffuses out of the region. It heats the surface layers 
of the neutron star to a temperature at which x-rays are 
the dominant radiation emitted. Generally the radiation 
increases very quickly to its peak, sometimes in less than 
1s. The heat of the flash spreads to the surface and the 
burst decay corresponds to cooling of the surface. 

From the burst x-rays and information about the 
distance or with assumptions about the peak brightness 
that the source can have, the radius and mass of the 
neutron star can be estimated. These values are close 
to those predicted for neutron stars and to the values 
measured in other ways, so that the conclusion that the 
star is compact enough to be a neutron star is firm. The 
measurements may eventually determine neutron star 
parameters, identify the composition of the matter falling 
on the neutron star and confirm ideas about the sequences 
of nuclear reactions that turn the accreted hydrogen and 
helium into the heavy elements of a neutron star’s crust. 
The neutron stars have accreted angular momentum as 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


well as mass. In some cases during the x-ray bursts the 
star is not uniformly hot and the flux has been found to be 
modulated with a period of 2-3 ms. These modulations 
are believed to indicate the spin of the neutron star and the 
characteristics of the modulation also provide information 
about the parameters of the neutron star. Thermonuclear 
bursts provide one of the few ways to obtain information 
about the densest matter. 


Type I x-ray bursts 

In 1975 there were three X-RAY ASTRONOMY satellites 
exploring the properties of sources found in the first 
x-ray survey mission, UHURU. Strong, short bursts of x-rays 
were first seen with the Astronomical Satellite of the 
Netherlands, then with SAS-3 and OSO-8, as sources in 
the region of the center of the Galaxy were observed. It 
turned out that the phenomenon had been seen as far back 
as 1969, by the Vela-5 satellites. 

The sources from which the bursts appeared were in 
the direction of the bulge of the Galaxy, approximately 
10 kpc away. From burst peak fluxes of 10-8 erg cm~ s“, 
factors of 5-20 times normal or persistent flux of the 
sources, the peak luminosities are ~10°° erg s~!. This 
is close to the maximum luminosity possible for a 1Mg 
object, at which the radiation pressure due to photon 
scattering balances the force of gravity. (This ‘Eddington 
limit’ depends on the chemical abundances of the gas.) 

The bursts were observed mostly in the photon energy 
range 1-20 keV. Generally they have a distribution with 
energy at a given time that is well approximated by a black 
body function with a temperature of T ~ (1-4) x 10’ K, 
corresponding to kT ~ 1-3 keV. Equating the estimated 
luminosity to the radiation rate from a spherical black 
body, 

Ly =4nR’oT* 


the radius R can be estimated to be ~10 km. This is 
consistent with the expected radius of a neutron star. It 
is one of the best pieces of evidence that the objects are 
neutron stars. Figure 1 contains schematics of the x-ray 
luminosity, temperature and apparent radius derived for 
a type I x-ray burst. The integral of the excess luminosity 
due to the burst is its fluence. 

When a source is burst active, the bursts recur at 
intervals, usually of several hours to days, as illustrated in 
figure 2. The phenomenology points to a process in which 
the fuel builds up until it catastrophically ignites. The 
energy output is consistent with the nuclear burning of the 
accumulated matter. If the gravitational energy released 
in accretion is turned into x-ray flux L, = GM M /R, the 
mass accumulated in time T is 


_ Ly 
~ GM/R 


Scaling to nominal observed values for L, and T, 


Ly R M T 
10°’ ergs-!\10km/ 14M, ]/5h 8: 


AM ~ 107! 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Bursters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


38 _a— Eddington Limit L, 


Rise Time >} 


log Ly 


Decay Time 


Persistent L, 


kT 
2keV 7 


- 15km lkeV _| 


- 7km 


| | 
5 10 
time (sec) 


Oo 


Figure 1. Type I burst parameters. The upper panel shows a 
schematic of the x-ray luminosity of a burst as a function of time. 
The lower panel shows a typical behavior of the fitted black 
body kT (right-hand scale) and the deduced apparent radius of a 
spherical emitter (left-hand scale). 


log Ly 


37 


time (hr) 


Figure 2. Persistent and burst luminosities. The average burst 
luminosity is the fluence in a burst per the recurrence time T. 


There are a number of nuclear reaction sequences by 
which accreted material with the abundances of the outer 
layer of the companion star can convert into the iron and 
higher atomic number elements of the neutron star crust. 
The amount of energy released per nucleon is 2-8 MeV, so 
that the potential for energy release from burning, in the 
mass accumulated, is 


AE = (15-76) x 10° 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


ie R M Ree 
x rg. 
10” ergs"! \10km/ 1.4M, ] 5 hr 6 


If the peak flux were the Eddington limit 2.0 x 
10°°M/1.4Mo erg s“! (assuming cosmic abundances here), 
it would take 7-40 s to cool the hot layer, with the heat 
convecting and diffusing to the surface in <1 s. 

Generally, in the thermonuclear flash, the ratio of the 
persistent x-ray luminosity to the average burst luminosity 
(the fluence per burst divided by the recurrence interval) 
should be the ratio of the gravitational energy released 
per gram falling on the neutron star to the nuclear energy 
released in burning it. The observational quantity, denoted 
a, is equal to the ratio of the fluxes. The predicted 
values of @ are in the range 25-200, depending on 
the nuclear reaction track. Some reaction tracks imply 
particular correlations between burst characteristics and 
the persistent luminosity. Theoretical calculations indicate 
that the nature of the reactions is more likely to go through 
cycles than to be a steady state, as the accretion rate 
changes and with it the ambient temperature of the settling 
material. The general agreement is regarded as a strong 
confirmation of the thermonuclear flash model of type I 
bursts. 


Type II x-ray bursts 

Type II x-ray bursts usually (but not invariably) have 
the ratio of persistent luminosity to burst luminosity (a) 
too small to be consistent with what is known about 
thermonuclear reactions, well below 25. The first and 
recurrent example of this type is MXB 1730 — 335, 
appropriately called the Rapid Burster. The source 
becomes bright approximately every 6 months and for 
a few weeks goes through several metamorphoses of 
behavior, sometimes exhibiting rapid-fire bursts a few 
minutes apart. The Rapid Burster is also a source of type I 
bursts, so that the two different types of bursts can be 
compared for the same source. The second source was the 
transient GRO J1744 — 28, which first became known in 
1995 as the Bursting Pulsar. This transient has reappeared 
once, so that it is recurrent, although irregularly. Bursts 
typically came about 30 min apart when it was active. 

An increase in the rate at which matter falls on the 
neutron star can explain these bursts. Several possible 
mechanisms have been identified to store up the matter 
coming in, at some distance from the neutron star, and to 
release it suddenly to complete its journey to the neutron 
star. 

The matter in accretion disks works its way to smaller 
radii as viscous interaction with neighboring cells of the 
accretion disk removes its angular momentum. As matter 
is continuously fed into the disk by the companion star, 
the viscous properties change and a sudden transition 
can occur from a state of low viscosity to high viscosity. 
The higher torques allow matter to start moving rapidly 
through the disk. The emission that we see as the burst can 
come both from the disk itself and from the neutron star 
where the matter falls on it. This instability can operate on 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Bursters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a range of recurrence time-scales, from years to minutes, 
so that it could give rise to bursts as well as to dwarf and 
x-ray NOVAE. 

A different possible cause of the intermittent flow 
onto the neutron star is the interaction of the neutron 
star’s magnetic field with the matter approaching the star. 
The magnetic field of the neutron star, if strong enough, 
interacts with the inner accretion disk. In the case of strong 
field PULSARS at some radius the field channels the disk 
material out of the plane and along the magnetic field lines 
to the magnetic poles. For the case of weaker fields, the 
disk may interact with the field over an extended region. 
It has been suggested that material could accumulate 
outside the magnetosphere until some threshold condition 
occurred that would allow the material to suddenly feed 
onto the neutron star. 

For the Bursting Pulsar, pulsations with a period of 
0.5 s continued throughout the bursts. Considerations 
of how low the accretion rate can go before pulsations 
cannot occur have allowed the surface magnetic field to 
be estimated at 5 x 10! G. The Rapid Burster is likely to 
have a field weaker by several orders of magnitude and 
possibly the two sources represent two different instability 
mechanisms. 


Thermonuclear flashes 

Hydrogen and helium burning 

As the accreted material collects on the neutron star, it will 
spread out over the surface if the magnetic field is too weak 
to confine the plasma (below 10" G). If the companion is 
still on the main sequence, the material is, by weight, 70% 
hydrogen, 30% helium, with no more than a few per cent in 
heavier elements (C, N, O). However, in at least one case, 
4U 1820-30, the companion is known to be a helium wHitE 
pwarr. When there is a layer of ~107! g on the surface of the 
neutron star, the density at the bottom of the accreting layer 
reaches 10° g cm~?. Nuclear reactions begin to convert 
hydrogen into helium and helium to oxygen. These 
reactions release heat. At very low and very high rates the 
heat can be radiated as fast as the energy is released and 
the hydrogen burning is stable, but under many conditions 
the burning is unstable, and the temperature increases 
rapidly until the fuel is completely burned. Helium burns 
by the triple-alpha reaction 3a >!C and by ?C(a, y)!%O, 
usually unstably. Detailed calculations have examined the 
kind of succession of bursts that should occur, for a range 
of accretion rates, central neutron star temperatures and 
neutron star masses and radii. 


Observed and modeled burst properties 

For the intermediate accretion rates at which instabilities 
occur, three regimes have been distinguished. Helium 
burns unstably but, depending on the accretion rate, 
hydrogen, if present, may burn stably or unstably. In the 
middle of these three regimes the hydrogen burns stably 
(unless the interior temperature is very hot) and produces 
helium which flashes with a > 100, recurrence times 
>10h, and burst rise times <1 s. At either higher or lower 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


accretion rates, the hydrogen and helium burn together, 
with complex reactions, building to iron and heavier 
elements. These reactions give the burst a longer rise time 
and can leave unburned fuel, so that the thermonuclear 
luminosities, and therefore the values of aw, are lower. 

Type I bursts from different sources are observed to 
be similar, but not identical. Bursts rise times range from 
0.3 to 10 s and decay times range from 5 to 100 s. The 
decay times (r) and the values of w vary with the persistent 
luminosity. The exosat Observatory caught several sources 
in different states. Comparison of the behavior of the 
parameters with the predictions of models has led to 
investigations of other degrees of freedom, for example, 
dependence of the internal temperature on the history of 
the burning and the extent of the burning area on the 
neutron star. 

For many of the x-ray bursters the persistent 
luminosities vary, sometimes consistently, but not exactly 
periodically. Some are transient persistent sources in 
which accretion may hardly occur in between episodes 
years apart. Then they rise to maximum in hours and 
decay over several weeks to a year. The sources 4U 
1608 —52 and Aquila X-1 are regularly recurrent transients. 
As the persistent flux may vary by factors of a thousand 
and the supply of mass to the neutron star envelope is 
believed to vary accordingly, the integrated effect must be 
considered. 


Radius expansion during bursts 

As the temperature during bursts rises and falls, the 
projected area of the hot emitter can be tracked. For 
many burst measurements the size of the emitter has 
been consistent with it remaining approximately constant 
throughout the burst. For a subset of bursts the apparent 
size increases near the beginning of the burst to values as 
much as 10 times sizes theoretically estimated for neutron 
stars. The apparent size then drops back and levels off at an 
asymptotic value consistent with that of a neutron star (as 
in figure 1). In these cases the bolometric luminosity stays 
approximately constant during the expansion episode. 
The temperature goes down during the expansion. The 
peak luminosity appears to be the Eddington limit for 
helium for most ‘radius-expansion’ bursts. 

Theoretically, helium flashes can generate enough 
energy to cause photospheric expansion of the neutron 
star. When the surface luminosity reaches the Eddington 
limit, it drives a wind from the neutron star. There is 
evidence within bursts from a single source that some 
reach a plateau of luminosity ~1.7 times lower than the 
radius-expansion plateau luminosity of others. This has 
been interpreted as the Eddington limit for hydrogen-rich 
gas, a factor 1.7 below that of helium. These characteristics 
can be identified from the spectra, without knowing the 
distance of the source, and are used as the basis for 
estimates of the distances to some burst sources. In the 
cases in which a distance is known on other grounds, they 
are in approximate agreement. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Bursters 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


General relativity corrections and radiation 
transfer 


The assumptions of black body emission and Eddington- 
limited flux seem to offer the possibility of measuring the 
radii and masses of neutron stars. These are interesting 
because they depend on the properties of the matter at 
densities of 10° g cm” at the center of the neutron star. 
At least seven of the type I bursters are in GLOBULAR CLUSTERS 
and some of their distances are known to within 10%. 
However, several important effects must be included in 
interpreting the measurements. For neutron stars, the 
corrections of general relativity can be important; for a 
nominal 1.4Mg. star, the Schwarzschild radius is 40% of 
the nominal radius of 10 km and the relativistic effects 
can be larger for some equations of state. Further, the 
surface temperature of the neutron star exceeds 10’ Kand 
the neutron star has a scattering atmosphere. The surface 
has an energy-dependent emissivity. These effects need 
to be taken into account in understanding and using the 
observations to determine the neutron star parameters. 

A spherical black body neutron star has an apparent 
radius larger than the radius at the star, because of the 
gravitational bending of rays. Taking this into account, 
with 

147,= C= Rf R) 


Ro = R,(1 + 2x) 


(as long as R, > (3,/3/2)R,), where R, = 2GM/c’ is the 
Schwarzschild radius, R,, the real neutron star radius and 
Ro. the apparent radius we measure, which exceeds the 
real radius. The Eddington limit for the luminosity as 
observed by a distant observer gives another constraint 
on M and R,. Together with possible theoretical mass— 
radii relations the Eddington limit implies a limit on the 
‘effective’ temperature (defined by T. = (Lx/42 R?0)'/*), 
such that kT. should never exceed 2 keV. The black body 
fits determine a ‘color’ temperature T,, which at its peak 
often exceeds this limit on the effective temperature. This 
is a measure of the error in the assumption of black body 
emission. When the competition between scattering and 
absorption, the temperature increase with depth in the 
atmosphere and incoherent scattering in the atmosphere 
are all included, the ratio T./T. has been found to vary 
between 1.4 and 1.7 as the flux approached the Eddington- 
limited flux. 

Detailed data for bursts have been obtained by 
x-ray experiments on many satellite missions, notably 
OSO-8, SAS-3, HEAO-1, EXOSAT, Tenma, Ginga, RXTE 
and BeppoSAX. Extensive work was done attempting to 
determine the properties of the neutron star using the 
EXOSAT and Tenma data. Measurement and perhaps 
systematic errors prevented definitive results from being 
obtained. Similar projects to examine RXTE observations, 
which have much smaller statistical error and higher time 
resolution, are still in progress. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The neutron stars 

X-ray bursters are in very old BINARY SYSTEMS, as shown by 
the population in globular clusters. At least three may well 
have degenerate dwarf companions (4U 1916 — 053, 4U 
1820—30 and SAX J1808.4—3658) and all of the companions 
are low-mass stars. It has been suggested that in accreting 
over 10°-10° yr the neutron star’s magnetic field has 
decayed. When radio pulsars with 108-10" G fields were 
discovered with rotation periods of a few milliseconds, 
it was suggested that accretion in the low-mass x- 
ray binaries spins up the neutron stars to millisecond 
periods. Then irradiation could evaporate the companion, 
leaving a rejuvenated, millisecond, radio pulsar. Recent 
observations with RXTE discovered evidence tending 
to confirm this scenario. The transient and burster 
SAX J1808.4-3658 is now known to be an x-ray pulsar. It 
has a magnetic field estimated to be 5 x 10° Ganda rotation 
frequency of 401 Hz (a period of 2.5 ms). 

In six other bursters an inhomogeneity in temperature 
on the star appears during bursts and appears to rotate. 
The periods are similar to the period of SAX J1808.4— 
3658. At the beginnings of bursts a high-amplitude (as 
high as 60%) sinusoidal oscillation starts. The oscillation 
amplitude decays along with the rise in flux. This behavior 
would be consistent with a growing burning region. The 
periods are 1.7-3 ms. During the decays, 10 s trains 
of oscillations occur with typical amplitudes of 10%. 
Whether the asymmetry is associated with one spot or 
two is uncertain. Together with new and related results on 
fast quasi-periodic oscillations in the persistent flux, they 
provide new, and potentially precise, tools to determine 
properties such as the masses and radii of the neutron stars, 
their magnetic fields, the radii at which the disks terminate 
and how the accreting gas traverses from the disk to the 
neutron star. With RXTE, BeppoSAX, Chandra and XMM 
it will be possible to address many questions about x-ray 
bursters, the evolution of the systems, the flow of accreting 
gas, the progress of thermonuclear flashes and the neutron 
star solutions for collapsed stars of <3Mo. 


Bibliography 
The literature on the subject of x-ray bursters includes 
a number of reviews, which are well represented in the 
chapters by 


Lewin W H Gand Joss P 1983 X-ray bursters and the x-ray 
sources of the Galactic bulge Accretion Powered X-Ray 
Sources ed W H G Lewin and E P J van den Heuvel 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 41-115 


and by 


Lewin W HG, van Paradijs J and Taam R E 1995 X-ray 
bursts X-Ray Binaries ed W H G Lewin, J van Paradijs 
and E P J van den Heuvel (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press) pp 175-232 


Brief summaries of the newest results are in 


Bildsten L and Strohmayer T 1999 Phys. Today 52 4 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Bursters ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


and in articles in 


Bucceri R, van Paradijs J and Alpar M A (ed) 1998 The Many 
Faces of Neutron Stars (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 


and in 
Scarsi L, Bradt H, Giommi P and Fiore F (ed) 1998 The 
Active X-Ray Sky (Amsterdam: Elsevier) 


Jean Swank 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK le) 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


X-Ray Telescopes 


X-ray telescopes produce images of x-ray-emitting objects 
within the telescope’s FIELD OF VIEW by reflection from 
precisely shaped mirrors. Hans Wolter’s design in the 
early 1950s of an x-ray microscope using reflective optics 
led Riccardo cIAcconl to suggest an ‘inverted’ set of optics, 
not subject to the fabrication limitations of the microscope, 
could be used as a cosmic x-ray telescope. As described 
in 1960 by Giacconi and Bruno Ross!, imaging with x-ray 
telescopes offers a significant reduction in noise, both from 
cosmic ray induced events and the soft x-ray background. 
This is because most background counts are the result 
of charged particles and are uniformly distributed over 
the detector area. An imaging system concentrates the 
source counts in one or a few pixels. As an example, 
the EINSTEIN (HEAO-2) Observatory x-ray telescope offered an 
improvement in sensitivity of about a factor of 1000 over 
that of the large-area, collimated proportional counters 
on High Energy Astrophysical Observatory (HEAO) 1 
satellite. The improved instrument sensitivity resulting 
from increased signal to noise enables the study of fainter 
sources, extending the number and age of detectable 
objects. 

Imaging observations enable deeper study of ex- 
tended cosmic x-ray sources. Imaging of CLUSTERS OF GALAX- 
les reveals details of the intracluster gas temperature pro- 
file and isolates the x-ray emission from component galax- 
ies. Imaging of GALAxiEs allows study of any central source 
as well as the identification and location of the galac- 
tic emitters. Study of SUPERNOVA REMNANTS allows the vi- 
sualization of the x-ray-emitting regions and potential 
identification of a remnant’s compact object. None of 
these types of studies is readily undertaken with non- 
imaging instruments. Other imaging approaches employ- 
ing such devices as modulation collimators or scanned, 
tightly collimated detectors provide much poorer resolu- 
tion (~1 arcmin.) than that available with current x-ray 
telescopes and suffer from image reconstruction artifacts. 

Studies of point sources also benefit from x-ray 
telescope resolution. Using the large-area proportional 
counters on board HEAO-1, positions accurate to ~0.1 
square degrees were obtained for weak point sources. 
On average, there will be one star brighter than 12th 
magnitude in the position error box. For comparison, the 
optical counterparts of Sco X-1 and Cen X-1 are about 13th 
magnitude, and that of Her X-1 about 15th magnitude. 
Imaging enables more accurate optical identifications. 
With better than 0.5 arcsec resolution of the Chandra X-ray 
Observatory (CXO) positions of point sources accurate to 
~10-7 square degrees may be obtained—on average less 
than a single unrelated 20th magnitude star will be found 
in the error box. 

This article will first briefly discuss how x-rays may 
be reflected and what optical systems can be used to form 
images. Key considerations for performance and system 
design will be discussed, followed by the various ways 
of implementing x-ray telescopes. We will review the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


more significant past and current x-ray telescopes, and 
then discuss future trends in x-ray telescopes. 


X-ray reflectance 
X-rays specularly reflect from a surface under two 
conditions, when striking a surface at grazing incidence 
and when constructive interference takes place between 
many layers of a material whose atomic number varies in 
a periodic fashion. 


Reflection at grazing incidence 

At x-ray wavelengths the real part n, of the complex index 
of refraction n, — ik of the reflecting surface is less than 1. 
Thus x-rays in vacuum are incident upon an interface that 
is less optically dense. From Snell’s law the angle of the 
wave transmitted 6, into the less dense material is 


sin & = (1 /nz) sin 6 (1) 


where 6; is the angle of incidence and n, and np are 
the indices of refraction for vacuum and the reflecting 
material, respectively. When n, > nz one obtains a real 
value for @ only for incident angles 6; < sin” !(n2/n,). For 
example, if nz = 0.99, then the maximum real value for 
6; is 81.9°: at this incident angle the transmitted angle is 
90°, parallel to the interface. For larger incident angles 
(shallower grazing angles) no radiation is transmitted. 
This is seen by allowing 6 to be complex, with 


cos @ = +i[(m,/n2)? sin? @, — 1]. (2) 


Substituting equation (2) into the Fresnel equations, 
solving for the transmitted electric and magnetic fields, 
and determining the time-averaged Poynting vector 
reveals that no energy flows through the interface— 
the field intensities normal to the interface decay 
exponentially into the less optically dense surface. 

Reflectance is calculated from the complex index of 
refraction using the Fresnel equations. The real and 
imaginary parts of the index are computed from the atomic 
(forward) scattering factors f; and fy: 


p 2, 1 
r=1—6 =1- —Aoredv fi — 
o Wm a fy 


= Were” fe (3) 
where p is the material density, W, is the molar weight 
of the reflecting material, Ag is Avogadro’s number, r. 
is the classical electron radius and A is the incident 
wavelength. The scattering factors are material and 
wavelength dependent. They are derived in a variety 
of ways: they may be computed from measurement of 
the forward scattering amplitude or back calculated from 
measured x-ray reflectance. Well-known sets of constants 
have been published by Henke et al, Auerbach and Tirsell, 
and Windt. As better reflectance is achieved with materials 
with high electron density grazing incidence optics are 
typically coated with metals to enhance reflectance. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Reflectance of Iridium 


a. = 


ac = rN 


1) | ial i 


! 
o4 


Normalized Reflectance 


Ot 1 10 
Incident Energy (keV) 

— 30 arc-min. graze angle 

--7> 60 arc-min. graze angle 

—7 90 arc-min. graze angle 


Reflectance of Gold 


5 Saeed =i — 


4 ¥ 


Normalized Reflectance 


Ol 1 10 
Incident Energy (keV) 

— 30 arc-min. graze angle 

--7> 60 arc-min. graze angle 

—7 90 arc-min. graze angle 


Reflectance of Nickel 


cae Ee ee eS =a —L 
b| 


ie — A 


lI \ t 


OL 


Normalized Reflectance 


OL 


1 10 


Incident Energy (keV) 


— 30 arc-min. graze angle 
77> 60 arc-min. graze angle 
—7 90 arc-min. graze angle 


Figure 1. X-ray reflectance as a function of incident energy and graze angle. 


Common materials used as reflecting coatings are iridium, 
gold and nickel. A plot of x-ray reflectance as a function of 
incident energy and grazing angle is shown in figure 1. 
Note the local minima in reflectance at the location of 
x-ray absorption edges. The product of reflectance and 
geometric collecting area (the entrance aperture) is called 
the effective area. Reflectance decreases as a function 
of increasing graze angle and starts to decrease rapidly 
near the so-called critical angle. The critical angle may be 
expresses as cos!(n,) * (26)1/? for 6 « 1 (see equation 


(3)). 


Reflection from multilayer coatings 

Multilayer coatings contain alternating layers of high-Z 
(atomic number) and low-Z materials. Reflection occurs at 
each interface, and the layer optical thicknesses are chosen 
so as to produce constructive interference between each 
layer. Reflection occurs only for those wavelengths which 
satisfy the Bragg equation, 


mir =dsind (4) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


where d is the layer spacing and 6 is the incident angle. 
In practice the coating reflects a bandwidth Ad that is a 
function of various fabrication parameters including layer 
thickness uniformity, density, and layer materials but is 
typically only a few angstréms wide. Typical layer ma- 
terial pairs include (but are not limited to) nickel/carbon, 
tungsten/silicon, rhodium/beryllium, rhodium/carbon, 
molybdenum/carbon and platinum/carbon. A typical 
coating may contain between 40 and 500 layer pairs, with 
the larger number of layers yielding higher reflectance. Re- 
flectance of 10-80% has been achieved, depending on the 
incident wavelength (higher reflectance at longer wave- 
lengths) and material choices. 

Several soft x-ray-EUV, normal incidence, multilayer 
telescopes have been launched on board sounding 
rockets and small satellites, including the recently 
launched Transition Region and Corona Explorer (TRACE). 
To overcome the spectral bandwidth limitations of 
multilayer coatings, experimenters have resorted to 
integrating several smaller telescopes into a single 
payload, each telescope with a different multilayer. In 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


the case of TRACE, different multilayer coatings were 
applied to each of the four quadrants of the optics so that 
a single telescope was sensitive to four separate spectral 
bandwidths (one of which was visible light). 

An alternative to several different telescopes or 
multiple different coatings on a single telescope is graded 
multilayers, or ‘supermirrors’. Here, the layer thickness 
varies as a function of position (depth) in the layer stack. 
The thickest layers are at the top of the stack to reflect the 
longest wavelengths with a minimum of absorption. Good 
broadband reflectance has been achieved using a thickness 
law 

d; = a(b+i)~* (5) 


where d; is the thickness of the ith layer (starting from the 
top), a and c are positive parameters that are a function of 
the materials used, and b is a constant greater than —1. 
Substrate and coating roughness degrades multilayer 
performance. ‘Low’ frequency roughness (>1 jm periods) 
causes scatter which degrades image contrast. ‘High’ 
frequency roughness (<1 zm periods) reduces reflectance. 


Types of telescopes 

Two approaches are used to achieve imaging: grazing 
incidence (GI) and normal incidence (NI). Grazing 
incidence telescopes utilize large angles of incidence (near 
90°) so that the x-rays graze or glance off the surface and 
are reflected. Normal incidence x-ray telescopes use more 
conventional shaped optics with multilayer coatings. 


Grazing incidence telescopes 

In 1952 the German physicist Hans Wolter was able 
to show that a two-element system containing an even 
number of confocal conic optics will come close to 
satisfying the Abbe sine condition; rays that reflect off 
both surfaces are focused and form an image. Wolter, 
attempting to produce systems for x-ray microscopy, 
produced three designs, referred to as Wolter types I, land 
III. The type I telescope (figure 2) consists of a paraboloid as 
a primary mirror and a confocal and coaxial hyperboloid as 
the secondary mirror. The paraboloid focus is coincident 
with the back hyperboloid focus. X-rays strike the 
paraboloid at the grazing angle (approximately the field 
angle of the source plus half the angle subtended by the 
best-fit cone to the paraboloid), are reflected and strike the 
hyperbola. The image is formed at the front hyperboloid 
focus. Usually, the hyperboloid cone angle is three times 
that of the paraboloid so that on-axis x-rays are incident 
upon both mirrors with essentially the same grazing angle. 
X-rays that strike the forward end of the paraboloid reflect 
to strike the aft (back) end of the hyperboloid, and vice 
versa. 

The entrance aperture is the projection of the primary 
mirror in the aperture plane. This results in an annular 
aperture whose width is approximately the product of 
the optic length and the half-angle of the best fit cone 
(the cone angle). For the CXO the largest paraboloid has 
a surface area of approximately 3.2 m2 but an entrance 
aperture of only 0.047 m’, a reduction of a factor of 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


TYPE | 


CONFOCAL 
HYPERBOLOID 


REFLECTING 
SURFACES 


Figure 2. Schematic representation of the Wolter type I telescope. 


Figure 3. Cutaway schematic drawing of the nested four shells 
(paraboloid and hyperboloids) of the Chandra X-ray 
Observatory (courtesy of the Raytheon Co). 


~68 times. Collecting area is built up by nesting mirror 
pairs within one another (figure 3). Each mirror pair, or 
shell, is co-aligned and confocal. The telescope entrance 
aperture consists of a set of concentric annular apertures, 
all contributing to the same focus. Ideally, the shells are 
designed so that each one has the same focal length and 
therefore the same plate scale (the proportionality constant 
relating angular distance on the sky to linear distance at 
the focal plane). All shells do not necessarily contribute 
the same to the image as a function of x-ray energy. As 
shown above in the section ‘X-ray reflectance’, reflectance 
is a function of graze angle and incident energy. The inner 
shells have a shallower graze angle than outer shells. Thus 
the inner shells of a nested telescope have a larger spectral 
bandwidth (reflect higher-energy x-rays) and comparable 
or slightly higher reflectance than the outer shells, while 
also having a smaller entrance aperture. 

The type I design yields a perfect image for on- 
axis illumination. Off axis, the design suffers from field 
dependent coma and spherical aberration. In addition, 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


TYPE Il 
‘ CONFOCAL ‘ 
ie HYPERBOLOID ee seuees 
ba PARABOLOID oe eee 
= 


ae REFLECTING . Wak 
’ SURFACES . Pe 


Figure 4. Schematic representation of the Wolter type II 
telescope. 


the telescope focal surface is curved. Van Speybroeck and 
Chase (1972) approximated the off-axis rms blur diameter 
for a flat focal plane detector at the Gaussian focus as 


& +1 (tan fea)? L 


z 2 
10 tanw Z Stan(Fieia)(tana)* (6) 


Oblur ~ 


where @ficia is the field angle (the off-axis angle), a is the 
graze angle, Zp is the axial distance from the intersection 
of the paraboloid and hyperboloid surfaces (the ‘virtual 
joint’) to best on-axis focus, and L is the axial length of the 
paraboloid. The first term in equation (6) represents the 
field-dependent coma. The second term is split between 
a GI equivalent of spherical aberration and image defocus 
(relative to a flat detector) due toa curved focal surface. For 
the Chandra X-ray Observatory ata field angle of 5 arcmin, 
the rms blur diameter ranges from 2.5 arcsec to 4 arcsec. 
Alternative Wolter I type designs exist that mitigate the 
off-axis aberrations at the expense of degrading on-axis 
performance. These designs consist of using two coaxial 
(but not confocal) hyperboloids or using generalized (non- 
conic) mirror prescriptions such as a power law. Because 
of the relative mechanical simplicity of the design and the 
ability to increase collecting area by nesting telescopes the 
type I design (or its variants) is the most common form of 
grazing incidence designs used in x-ray astronomy, being 
employed on the Einstein Observatory, Roentgen Satellite 
(RosaT), CXO, X-ray Multi-mirror Mission (xmm) and many 
others described later. 

The type II design also consists of a grazing incidence 
paraboloid primary and hyperboloid secondary mirror, 
but the outer surface of the hyperboloid is used, as 
shown in figure 4. In the type II the image is formed 
at the back hyperboloid focus. Type II telescopes enable 
longer focal lengths than a type I with comparable grazing 
angle and entrance aperture, affording an increased plate 
scale. Field-angle-dependent aberrations are greater with 
type II designs than with type I designs. Also, nesting 
of telescopes to increase collecting area is impractical. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Instead, collecting area may be increased by increasing the 
grazing angle, thereby increasing the projected area on the 
aperture plane, while maintaining a usefully long focal 
length and acceptable plate scale. The increase in graze 
angle, however, limits the useful spectral bandwidth of the 
telescope so that most practical type II telescopes are used 
for the extreme to far ultraviolet and longer wavelengths 
(>100 A). 

The type III design employs the outer surface of a 
paraboloid as the primary element and the inner surface 
of an ellipsoid as the secondary mirror. The paraboloid 
focus is coincident with one of the ellipsoid foci, and the 
image falls upon the other ellipsoid focus. The type III 
design has never been used for x-ray astronomy. 

Wolter developed variants of the original designs 
by extending results obtained by Karl scHwarzscHILD in 
1905 for normal incidence telescopes. The modified 
prescriptions are called Wolter-Schwarzschild (W-S) 
designs and differ slightly in their second-order figure 
(shape). These optics satisfy the Abbe sine condition 
strictly and so do not exhibit any comatic aberration. The 
improvement in off-axis performance of W-S designs over 
conventional designs is graze angle dependent. Thus W— 
S designs provide negligible improvement at the shallow 
graze angles (<1°) employed on many x-ray telescopes 
to achieve good reflectance at shorter wavelengths. W-— 
S-type designs have been used on a number of extreme 
ultraviolet telescope applications which use much larger 
graze angles (>5°). The EXTREME ULTRAVIOLET EXPLORER (EUVE) 
contained a W-S type I EUV telescope and a W-S type II 
for the stellar spectrometer. ROSAT, besides carrying the 
large Wolter I x-ray telescope, also carried a W-S type I 
EUV telescope—the Wide Field Camera—which had a 5° 
field of view, ~450 cm? aperture and image half-power 
diameter of ~1.7 arcmin (on axis). 

Contamination of the optical surface will degrade 
performance. Particulates both absorb and scatter the x- 
rays, degrading the point spread function and reducing 
the effective collecting area. Hydrocarbons absorb x-rays. 
Grazing incidence telescopes are extremely sensitive to 
both. This is a direct result of the shallow grazing angle, 
as can be seen in figure 5. A round particle of cross section 
ma maps onto an entrance aperture area of 271 a* because x- 
rays may strike the particle before or after reflecting off the 
mirror surface. The mirror surface area is 27 RL where R is 
the average radius of the nearly conical optic. The mirror 
entrance aperture has an area of 27RLsina. Thus the 
fraction of mirror surface area F, covered by the particle 


1S 


ma 


— 7 

2n RL (”) 
but the fraction of the entrance aperture F, ‘covered’ by 
the particle is 


Fy 


2n a? 2 
= = F, 8 
2a RL sina (8) 


Fa no. 
sin @ 


For a 1° graze angle Fa is ~114 times larger than Fy. 
Similarly for a hydrocarbon layer ¢ thick, the x-rays 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Particulate 
Contamination 


Z Z 
ee wee oe 


Optical Surface 


Figure 5. Illustration of the effects of particulate contamination. 
Incident x-rays from the upper left are absorbed or scattered by 
the particle either when directly impinging upon it or when 
impinging upon it after reflection from the mirror. 


must traverse a distance 2r/sina. In addition, because 
of their construction with little space between telescope 
shells and very narrow entrance and exit annuli, it is 
extremely difficult to clean a dirty grazing incidence 
optic. Contamination control is a critical issue for grazing 
incidence optics. 

Finally, an earlier realization than the Wolter designs 
was the Baez—Kirkpatrick telescope in which an array of 
parallel plates, parabolic in the plane of incidence, focus 
the incident x-rays to a line image. Placing a second 
set of plates oriented at a right-angle to the first set 
focuses the line image to a point image. This design has 
more aberrations than the Wolter designs, but may be 
approximated using optically flat plates bent in one axis 
so as to inexpensively build up large collecting area with 
moderate resolution. 


Multilayer telescopes 

Conventional optical telescope designs, when used as the 
substrate for multilayer coatings, are suitable for x-ray 
telescopes. The distinction between normal incidence x- 
ray and optical telescopes is that optical telescopes are 
diffraction limited and x-ray telescopes (to date) are not. 
To achieve diffraction-limited performance, the telescope 
wavefront error must be less than ~/,/13, rms, where i, 
is the x-ray wavelength. For a two-mirror system being 
used at 171 A, this equates to a surface error figure of ~5 A, 
rms, or better than 4/1300 (A = 633 nm), rms (neglecting 
other error contributors such as mirror figure degradation 
due to coating, support deformation, misalignments, etc). 
The ability to manufacture such optics is only starting 
to be feasible at the end of 1999. In addition, because 
of the short wavelength (relative to visible light) and 
current detector technology, extremely long focal lengths 
(>10 m) are required to make use of diffraction-limited 
performance. 

Mechanical stresses in the multilayer coating can 
produce deformations of the optic, degrading imaging. 
Recent studies have shown that the stresses do not appear 
to vary as a function of the layer pair thickness, but 
do vary as a function of the equivalent d thickness 
and the materials. Thin-film technologists have found 
that coating stresses are also functions of a number of 
deposition parameters including substrate temperature 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


and deposition process. Thin-film stresses may be 
estimated from Stoney’s equation: 


Et? 


~ 601 — vet (°) 


Of 
where E£;, v, and ft, are, respectively, Young’s modulus, 
the Poisson ratio and the thickness of the substrate, tf; 
is the thickness of the coating, AC is the change in 
radius of curvature of the substrate after the coating 
is applied and o; is the induced stress (a negative 
value of o; is compressive). Typical stresses range 
from —1200 to +200 MPa. These stresses can produce 
significant deformations on thin substrates, requiring 
either a modification of film or substrate design, or 
the use of post coating stress reduction techniques such 
as annealing (annealing, however, may cause diffusion 
across the interfaces, degrading reflectance). 


Design, specification, and performance 
Typical design constraints for an x-ray telescope will 
include focal length, spectral bandwidth, collecting area, 
resolution or fractional encircled energy, and size and 
weight. Not always independent of one another, these 
constraints determine whether a normal or grazing 
incidence telescope is desired, mirror figure requirements, 
coating design and element size. 

Spectral bandwidth can determine whether an NI ora 
GI telescope is more appropriate. For extreme ultraviolet 
and very soft x-rays with wavelengths greater than ~100 A, 
NI multilayer telescopes offer lower cost, better imaging 
and larger collecting area. Spectral regions above 0.1 keV 
are better served by GI optics which offer much greater 
reflection efficiency and better performance. 

Diffraction by the annular entrance aperture can be 
significant at low energies. The intensity as a function of 
radial position x is expressed as: 


2 
o 4 Sie) (n\? AQ) 
MO [1 — (ri/ro)? FP Xo (2) Xi 


where 


x 
Xo = 2nro— and 


Af 


where ro and r; are the outer and inner radii of the 
annular aperture, respectively, f is the focal length, 
is the first-order Bessel function and A is the incident 
wavelength. For NI telescopes diffraction does not limit 
imaging performance until one produces extraordinarily 
precisely figured optics, as discussed above in the section 
‘Multilayer telescopes’. Depending on telescope size, 
aperture diffraction can be more significant for GI optics. 
For example, the X-Ray Telescope (XRT) on the joint US— 
Japan Solar-B satellite has an aperture width of about 
0.6 mm and an outer radius of ~170 mm. At a wavelength 
of 60 A, the 68% point of the fractional encircled energy (the 
radial integral of the normalized point spread function) 


x= dan (10) 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


is about 1.4 arcsec in diameter. For the large Chandra 
aperture diffraction is negligible. 

Grazing angle, focal length and radius are related by 
the relation 

a= Tans ae (11) 
4 Zo 

where a@ is the graze angle at the intersection of the 
paraboloid and hyperboloid surfaces, and ro is the radius 
of the virtual joint (Zp is not the focal length but it 
is fairly close). The choice of graze angle affects the 
short-wavelength limit of the telescope because of the 
precipitous loss of reflection efficiency near the critical 
angle. Therefore spectral bandwidth coupled with focal 
length can drive the maximum allowable optic size. 
From these few parameters one can derive the optical 
prescription of the paraboloid and hyperboloid using 
the method of Van Speybroeck and Chase (1972). If 
we constrain the graze angle of the hyperboloid at the 
virtual joint to be 3 times that of the paraboloid, then the 
prescription of the optics can be determined as 


P = Z, tan(4a) tana (12) 
d=P (13) 

and 
e = cos(4qa)[1 + tan(4a) tan(3a)] (14) 


where the optical surfaces are represented as 


r= P?+2PZ+4ePd/(e?—1) paraboloid (15) 


2 
P 
and 


r=e(d+Z)y—Z* — hyperboloid (16) 


and Z represents the coordinate along the optical axis and 
is zero at the system focus and e is the eccentricity. The 
effective focal length of the system, fL, is expressed as 


2e*d 
fL= Zoi" (17) 


(The ratio of f L/Z, is a function of a and is approximately 
equal to 1 + 0.002505...) 

Typically, performance of GI systems is expressed in 
terms of the encircled energy (usually as a fraction or as a 
per cent). This is the integral of the point spread function 
within a given angular diameter. One can think of the 
encircled energy as the fraction of incident flux that falls 
on a detector pixel or some other suitable area (e.g. a slit 
for some spectroscopy applications). It is a measure of 
how compact or spread out the light from a point source 
is imaged. The encircled energy may be normalized or 
scaled two different ways. In the first, normalization is 
with respect to the flux that leaves the last focusing optic 
(reflection losses are ignored). In the second approach 
the normalized encircled energy is scaled by the entrance 
aperture area and has units of area. 

Image quality is affected by mirror surface imperfec- 
tions (figure error and microroughness) which scatter the 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


incident flux and broaden the point spread function. For 
conceptual purposes mirror errors may be loosely grouped 
into three categories. Low spatial error frequencies (long 
error periods) produce small-angle scatter which has only 
a small effect on the image ‘core’. Mid-spatial-frequency 
errors produce intermediate-angle scattering and can have 
a significant effect on the image core, limiting resolution— 
the ability to discern two closely placed sources. High 
spatial error frequencies (typically microroughness) pro- 
duce large-angle scatter (this might be on the order of 10- 
100 arcsec and greater) which degrades image ‘contrast’— 
the ability to find a dim source in the presence of a bright 
source. The definition of what error frequencies corre- 
spond to the various bandwidths is dependent on the sys- 
tem requirements and grazing angle. On Chandra, errors 
that scatter x-rays by 0.5 arcsec would be considered mid- 
frequency. On XMM, mid-frequency errors might be con- 
sidered as those that scatter by 5 arcsec. 

A zeroth-order estimate of encircled energy can be 
made using the total integrated scatter, or TIS. This term 
represents the fraction of incident energy that is scattered 
by a surface (or equivalent surface) with a given rms 
surface figure error. The fractional encircled energy (or 
EE) is approximately 1 — TIS. The EE is both incident 
wavelength and included angle dependent, so the choice 
of rms figure error must take this into account. This is done 
by using a bandlimited rms amplitude and making the 
assumption that this amplitude includes all surface error 
frequencies that will scatter the light outside the desired 
region of interest. The encircled energy is expressed 
(approximately) as 


EE ¥ exp[—(2ko sina)’] (18) 


where k is equal to 27/4, o is the bandwidth-limited 
effective rms surface error (in the plane of incidence) 
and a is the average graze angle. Using encircled 
energy goals we can estimate an acceptable value for 
o, or, alternatively, o can be used to estimate EE. (Of 
course, we want to leave some additional margin as we 
recognize that pointing stability—jitter, alignment, etc will 
all degrade performance.) To determine the bandwidth for 
which o applies we use the grazing incidence equivalent 
of the grating equation (making use of the small-angle 
approximation)— 

Af = 0;,sina (19) 


where A is the incident wavelength, f is the spatial 
frequency of the surface error and 4, is the angle through 
which the radiation is scattered. All errors of higher 
spatial frequency will scatter through larger angles and fall 
outside the region of interest. In doing this analysis we are 
mostly concerned with errors in the axial direction. This 
is because the deviation of specular rays out of the plane 
of incidence by azimuthal errors is reduced by a factor of 
sina. Similarly, the scattering distribution is elongated 
in the plane of incidence by a factor of 1/sina (the 
grazing incidence foreshortens the spatial error periods 
in the plane of incidence, making the errors appear as a 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


higher-frequency and increasing the scattering angle (see 
equation (19))). 

A more exact method of computing telescope 
requirements and estimating performance is obtained 
using the scalar scattering theory of Beckmann and 
Spizzichino. (Vector scattering theory may also be used 
for modeling performance. Some references by E Church 
are listed in the bibliography.) The output intensity 
distribution is given as 


dP dP dP dP 


= Strehl @ : 
AQ otal AQ spec AQ spec AQ scatt 


(20) 


Strehl is the Strehl ratio and equals the right-hand side 
of equation (18). dP/dQspec is the intensity distribution 
in the absence of scattering—diffraction, such as results 
from large-scale geometric figure and alignment errors, 
dP/dQscar is the scattered intensity distribution and ® 
signifies a convolution operation. Using scattering theory 
to determine d P /dQscae and integrating over dQ yields the 
encircled energy. After much algebra this can be reduced 
to a one-dimensional integral where the scattering is a 
function of the Fourier transform of the optic axial figure 
error power spectrum density (PSD). Thus, by measuring 
the axial surface errors (i.e. the axial one-dimensional 
profiles), computing the error PSD and measuring the 
geometric in- and out-of-plane contributors, we can 
estimate performance. Initially appearing complex, this 
formalism is very useful because optic (and replication 
mandrel) fabrication processes are essentially surface 
filters. Imaging performance is a function of surface 
error PSD, and optical fabrication technology provides a 
means to operate on the surface error PSD. This approach 
provides much more fabrication guidance than merely 
specifying a single bandlimited rms amplitude as an optic 
requirement. This approach also correctly takes into 
account the impact of the frequency content of the figure 
errors in estimating performance. 


Fabrication 

Grazing incidence telescopes are produced by one of 
several methods: direct polishing of the optics, replication 
of polished mandrels or forming of thin foils. Multilayer 
telescopes are manufactured using standard precision 
optical fabrication methods but require the application of 
the multilayer coatings. 

Material considerations for x-ray optics are important. 
Since all x-ray observations are made in space, the optical 
elements must be strong enough to survive rocket launch 
acoustic and seismic loads. At the same time, optic weight 
must be minimized to reduce payload weight. Depending 
on the complexity of the spacecraft an active temperature 
control system may or may not be present, so mirror 
elements should have both a low coefficient of thermal 
expansion (CTE) and a uniform one. This minimizes optic 
distortion due to temperature variations and gradients in 
the spacecraft as it orbits the Earth. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Typical glasses used for x-ray telescopes are 
Zerodur™, a glass ceramic produced by Schott with an ex- 
tremely low CTE, and ULE™ (which stands for ultralow 
expansion) produced by the Corning Glass Co, another 
very low-CTE glass. Fused quartz was used for the Ein- 
stein Observatory mirrors. Potential new materials in- 
clude silicon carbide which has an extremely high strength 
to weight ratio offering the promise of very light weight 
non-replicated optics. 


Optical fabrication of grazing incidence optics 

Optic blanks arrive from the glass supplier as rough 
machined pieces, within 250-1000 ym of final dimensions 
(by contrast, final allowable figure error might be only a 
few hundred Angstroms, rms, or 10*-10° times better). 
A carefully scripted material removal schedule utilizing 
ever-finer grinding grits and polishing compound is used 
to coarse figure the optics and remove residual machining 
stresses (subsurface damage, or microcracks) that can 
degrade figure stability or even lead to catastrophic failure 
under load. The inside (optical surface), outside and 
ends of the blank are polished for damage removal, to 
provide a surface that is easily cleaned and kept free 
of contamination, and to provide a controlled bonding 
surface for the optic mounting system. 

The optical surface is figured in (grinding and) pol- 
ishing using computer-controlled fabrication technology 
where a computer provides a set of commands to move 
the polishing head in a controlled fashion over the sur- 
face of the optic. Typically, the optic is supported with its 
axis nearly horizontal, the optic is made to rotate about its 
axis at a controlled rate, and the polishing tool is driven 
axially along the optical surface to describe a fixed path 
(e.g. a spiral), but with variable path velocity. Since ma- 
terial removal is inversely proportional to the path veloc- 
ity, control of that velocity allows correction of the optical 
figure. The velocity commands result from deconvolving 
the polishing tool material removal profile from the op- 
tic surface error map. The fabrication process, along with 
the associated measurements, is iterative with typical er- 
ror correction rates of 50-90% per iteration depending on 
the optics manufacturer. For Chandra, the correction rates 
were typically 85-95% depending on the error spatial fre- 
quency content. 

Smoothing of the optic, critical for controlling scatter, 
is usually performed as a separate operation from figuring. 
ROSAT optics were smoothed to surface roughness levels 
of about 3 A, rms, and the Chandra optics were smoothed 
to about 2-3 A, rms. 

The combination of computer-controlled fabrication 
and smoothing function as spatial frequency filter 
operations, making them readily linked to the PSD 
requirements that can be generated from the encircled 
energy requirement. 

Because of the unusual optic geometry, most 
fabrication and metrology equipment is custom designed 
by the manufacturer. For larger optics such as on ROSAT 
and Chandra specialized handling equipment is also 
required. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Fabrication of grazing incidence optics by replication 

When extremely good imaging (less than a few arcsec 
diameter) is not required, or when extremely large 
collecting area is required, replicated optics can be a 
superior alternative to individually fabricated glass optics. 
In this approach a set of replication mandrels that are 
the inverse of the desired final figure are fabricated first. 
Multiple replicas, each the inverse of a mandrel and 
therefore possessing the desired mirror figure, are then 
formed. 

The advantages of replication are several. First, when 
multiple copies of the same mirror are required, replication 
is cheaper and less time consuming than individually 
fabricating each mirror. Second, many more shells can 
be nested within one another (without unduly growing 
the size of the outermost elements) because the replicas 
are typically much thinner than glass elements. This 
results in higher telescope ‘throughput’. Third, because 
of their relative ‘thinness’ replicated optics may weigh 
substantially less than corresponding glass elements, 
reducing payload weight. (As an example, the largest X- 
ray Multi-mirror Mission (XMM) replicated nickel optics 
are less than 1/4 the weight per unit axial length of 
the corresponding size Zerodur™ Chandra counterparts.) 
These advantages mean that either the instrument can 
carry multiple copies of the telescope optics and detector 
(such as XMM) or multiple identical satellites can be placed 
in orbit (such as planned for Constellation-X). Replication 
is a way to achieve much larger collecting area and higher 
telescope throughput with lower weight per unit area at 
less cost than with non-replicated elements. 

The disadvantage of replication (to date) is the 
level of figure quality which may be achieved, limiting 
imaging performance to ~14 arcsec, half power diameter 
(or 50% encircled energy). The mandrels themselves 
may be fabricated with the same accuracy as large glass 
elements. The difficulty arises in attempting to remove 
the lightweight replica from the mandrel, maintain its 
figure against internal stresses created while producing the 
replica and then support it for flight, without introducing 
low spatial frequency distortions in the figure. 

The strengths of replicated optics and individually 
figured optics telescopes such as XMM and CXO 
are complementary. Replicated telescopes, with their 
large collecting area and good imaging capabilities, are 
generally more useful for imaging spectroscopy. For 
bright objects, however, telescope throughput is not a 
limiting factor and the full imaging capabilities of glass 
optics can be brought to bear. Replicated optics are more 
suitable for some observations of very faint objects or 
deep sky surveys where the photon noise limit obviates 
finer resolution, but the limiting angular resolution may 
also result in an inability to resolve discrete sources. 
Alternatively, glass optic telescopes may be limited in 
the number of deep surveys possible owing to the 
extended observing time needed to collect enough photons 
necessary to make full use of their imaging. 

Several methods of replication are briefly described 
below. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Nickel replicas An aluminum mandrel is coated with 
~200 um of electro-less nickel (Kanigen). The electro- 
less nickel surface is loose abrasive ground and computer- 
controlled polished or diamond turned to the nominal 
figure (after diamond turning additional figuring may be 
required). The surface is smoothed (polished) to about 5 A, 
rms, roughness, to complete the mandrel. The replica is 
produced by first depositing 100-200 nm of gold on the 
electro-less nickel surface and then electroplating the gold 
with nickel to the desired thickness (~1 mm). The replica 
is separated from the mandrel by cooling the mandrel (the 
coefficient of thermal expansion for aluminum is about 
twice that of nickel). The gold coating separates with 
the nickel replica because its adhesion to the electroplated 
nickel is much greater than to the Kanigen. Multiple 
replicas may be made from a single mandrel before the 
mandrel needs to be refurbished. Replicas of this type have 
been used for the BePPosax, JET-X and XMM. Replica sizes 
range from 300 mm long, 68 mm diameter on BeppoSAX to 
600 mm long, 700 mm diameter on XMM. The half-energy 
width of the point spread function at 1.5 keV is 13 arcsec 
for XMM. 

As previously mentioned, internal stresses in the 
electroplated nickel will deform the replica when it is 
removed from the mandrel. Potential solutions to the lack 
of structural rigidity of these replicas include the use of 
stiffening structures fixed to the replica during the nickel 
plating process and the use of ceramics or silicon carbide 
(SiC) in place of the nickel replica substrate. In the latter 
approach the SiC substrate is formed to near final shape 
by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to a second mandrel 
slightly larger (10? zm) than the first. The first mandrel is 
coated with 100 nm of gold, and then the SiC substrate 
is positioned around it. The gap is filled with epoxy, 
and, after curing, the gold-coated epoxy/SiC replica is 
separated from the Kanigen-coated aluminum mandrel 
by cooling. The CVD SiC has little residual internal 
stress and has a Young’s modulus approximately 3 times 
larger than that of nickel. The SiC replica can be made 
substantially thinner than the nickel replica. A similar 
process using a beryllium substrate instead of SiC has been 
used on the Exosat program. An alternative approach 
in which aluminum oxide is plasma sprayed directly on 
the gold-coated Kanigen/aluminum mandrel is also under 
investigation at the time this article is being written. 


Epoxy replicas In epoxy replication an aluminum foil 
serves as the replica substrate. A glass (Pyrex™ or 
Zerodur™) mandrel is coated with ~100 nm of gold. 
A thin (~100 wm) aluminum foil is pre-formed to the 
approximate shape of the coated mandrel but slightly 
oversized. Both the gold-coated mandrel and the (inner) 
surface of the foil are sprayed with epoxy and the two 
are then mated. The epoxy film, several tens of microns 
thick, is cured in an oven before the foil is removed. 
The foil maintains the smoothness of the polished glass 
mandrel. Epoxy replicas have not at this time achieved 
the imaging capabilities of nickel replicas, but the replicas 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Table 1. An abbreviated list of some of the more notable x-ray telescopes. 


Effective Energy 
area Resolution bandwidth? 
Mission Type (cm?) (HPD, arcsec) (keV) Comments 
Skylab GI 42 (collecting ~2 arcsec 0.2-2 First x-ray telescope; 
(1975) area) resolution solar observations 
Einstein GI ~200 at 1 mlb 0.2-4.5 First telescope observatory; 
Observatory keV discovered 7000+ sources 
(1978-81) 
RXRS? NI ~50 ~2 arcsec 17.3, 25.6 First NI solar telescope(s); 
(1987) (collecting resolution nm 6.3 cm diameter primary mirror 
area) 
ROSAT GI 400 at 1 keV ~5 0.1-2.4 4 Au coated Zerodur shells; 
(1990-9) discovered 150 000+ 
sources 
ASCA GI 1300 at1keV, 174 0.5-10 Conical foil Al mirrors, 
(1993) 600 at 7 keV Au coat over lacquer, 
4 separate telescopes 
BeppoSAX GI 330 at 1 keV 60 0.1-10 Nickel-replicated conical 
(1996) optics, 
30 nested shells 
TRACE NI ~20 1 17, 20, 28 30 cm diameter primary, 
(1998) nm 2 m focal length solar telescope 
Chandra GI 800 at 1 keV 0.5 0.1-10 Highest resolution, 4 shells, 
(1999) largest mirror 1.2 m diameter 
transmission gratings 
XMM GI 4650 at1lkeV, 14 0.1-12 Nickel replicas, 
(1999) 1800 at 8 keV 3 telescopes, 58 shells each, 
reflection gratings 
Constellation-X GI 15000 at 15(<10 keV) — 0.25-10, Replicated optics (type to be 
(200?) 1 keV 60 (>25 keV) 6-40 determined), ~80+ shells, 
1500 at largest 1.2 m diameter 
>6 keV grating 


* For NI telescopes the tabulated values represent the approximate centers of the reflection bandpass(es). 
> Stanford University /NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Rocket X-Ray Spectroheliograph. 


are substantially lighter owing to their much thinner 
wall and less dense substrate material. To date limiting 
performance is ~1 arcmin. 


Segmented foil replicas Segmented foil mirrors have been 
used on the Broad Band X-Ray Telescope (BBXRT), asca 
and the Sodart telescope on board sPECTRUM-x-GAMMA. 
Here the mirrors do not form the complete surface of 
revolution, but instead form (typically) only a single 
quadrant. Aluminum foils less than a millimeter thick and 
optically smooth are rolled into a 90° section of the desired 
conical shape (note that the mirrors, being true cones, 
are only approximations to Wolter I telescopes). Plastic 
deformation (rather than elastic bending) is employed to 
produce a final shape that more closely approaches the 
nominal and does not introduce stresses into the support 
structure. After rolling, the foils are dip-coated with 
an acrylic lacquer to improve (reduce) scattering due to 
surface roughness. Care is taken to avoid introducing 
variations in lacquer thickness that would change the 
optical shape of the mirror, degrading imaging. Mirrors 
of this type are very inexpensive to produce but have not 
achieved better than a few arcminutes resolution. In part 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


this limitation is a result of the approximation to a Wolter I 
system, but, more importantly, it appears that the lacquer 
is ineffective at smoothing errors with spatial periods 
greater than a few microns. These errors significantly 
affect the ability to image at better than the 1 arcmin level. 


Fabrication of normal incidence multi-layer telescopes 
Normal incidence x-ray multilayer telescopes are essen- 
tially manufactured using the same processes as conven- 
tional precision optics with two major exceptions: optic 
smoothness (or microroughness), which affects both scat- 
ter and multilayer reflectivity, and the deposition of the 
x-ray multilayer coating. 

As discussed above in the section ‘Reflection from 
multilayer coatings’ reflectance is a function of high spatial 
frequency roughness (f > 10° mm7'). Super-smoothing 
of the surface roughness in this very high spatial frequency 
regime to levels of 2-4 A, rms, is necessary for good 
reflectance. 

Along with substrate roughness, the multilayer 
coating is the most critical element of the optics. To achieve 
the desired reflectance over the correct spectral bandwidth 
requires uniformity of coating thickness both across the 
face of the optic as well as from layer to layer. Coating 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


X-Ray Telescopes 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


density must also be uniform throughout the multilayer. 
In addition, interlayer diffusion must be minimized as 
must thin-film stresses. 


Telescope systems 

Other parts of a telescope system are the detector, optical 
bench and mirror mount or support structure. CHARGE 
COUPLED DEVICES (CCDs) have supplanted position-sensitive 
proportional counters. CCDs may be either front or 
back illuminated. Front-illuminated CCDs have the x- 
rays impinge upon the semiconductor gate side. Back- 
illuminated CCDs have additional wafer processing to 
thin the backside of the chip (the side away from the 
gates) and are then set so that the x-rays impinge upon the 
backside. Front-illuminated CCDs provide better energy 
resolution and slightly higher quantum efficiency at high 
energy than back-illuminated CCDS. Back-illuminated 
CCDs provide substantially higher low-energy x-ray 
quantum efficiency. A wide range of pixel sizes are 
available: the Chandra CCDs have 24 jum pixels; the Solar 
X-ray Imager (SXI) on GOES N and O will have ~15 wm 
sized pixels. The long focal length (~10 m) of Chandra 
coupled with 24 wm pixels yields ~0.5 arcsec angular 
resolution. CCDs provide excellent energy resolution, 
about 120 eV for the Chandra detectors. Several CCDs may 
be arrayed to cover the full field of view of the telescope, 
and the detectors may also be arrayed so as to be aligned 
to the curved focal surface, thereby eliminating focus error 
that occurs with a flat detector and a curved focal surface 
(see equation (6)). Higher imaging resolution is achieved 
with less energy resolution using detectors such as the 
Einstein, ROSAT and Chandra High Resolution Imager. 
This is a pair of stacked multichannel plates with an 
electronic readout. Future developments include the use 
of microcalorimeters, which will be used for the first time 
on Astro-E. This device has an energy resolution of ~12 eV 
at 6 keV but has a relatively large pixel size and so limits 
spatial resolution. Spectroscopy with x-ray telescopes is 
also accomplished by the use of transmission gratings that 
may be moved in and out of the focused beam, such as 
on Chandra, or reflection gratings fixed in the beam as on 
XMM. 


X-ray telescope missions 
Some significant x-ray telescopes and performance details 
are listed in table 1. 


Future trends 

In grazing incidence telescopes future trends will continue 
the development of increased collecting area, improving 
resolution and increasing reflectance. The use of 
ceramics and SiC, including the use of monolithic support 
structures, will improve the limiting performance of 
what used to be nickel mandrels, while also allowing 
denser nesting of mirror shells. Researchers have 
been experimenting with the application of broadband 
multilayer coatings to grazing incidence optics, increasing 
reflectance at higher energies. With respect to normal 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


incidence telescopes future development will probably 
focus on achieving diffraction limited performance with 
increased focal lengths to more fully utilize the improved 
optics. 


Bibliography 

There are a multitude of excellent articles in the literature 
discussing the technology of x-ray telescopes. For design 
issues of GI telescopes one is referred to 


Van Speybroeck and Chase 1972 Design parameters 
of paraboloid—hyperboloid telescopes for x-ray 
astronomy Appl. Opt. 11 440 


An excellent review is found in 
Aschenbach B 1985 X-ray telescopes Rep. Prog. Phys. 48 579 


Discussions of alternative Wolter-I-like designs with 
improved off-axis performance can be found in 


Nariai K 1987 Geometrical aberration of a generalized 
Wolter type I telescope Appl. Opt. 26 4428 

Werner W 1977 Imaging properties of Wolter I type x-ray 
telescopes Appl. Opt. 16 764 


Atomic scattering factors for computing reflectance are 
found in 


Henke, Gullickson and Davis 1993 At. Data Nucl. Data 
Tables 54 (2) 


This information is also available on the Wide World Web 
at URL 


http: / /xray.uu.se/hypertext/henke.html. 
A second site, 


http: //www-cxro.lbl.gov:80/optical_ constants 
contains the same data along with a reflectance ‘calcula- 
tor’. A general review of multilayer coatings can be found 
in 


Barbee 1990 Advances in multilayer x-ray/EUV optics: 
synthesis, performance, and instrumentation Opt. 
Eng. 29 711 


Discussions of vector and scalar scattering theory are 
reviewed by 


Church E 1979 Role of surface topography in x-ray 
scattering SPIE Proc. 184 196 

Church E 1986 The interpretation of glancing incidence 
scattering measurements SPIE Proc. 640 126 


For more detailed discussions of developments the reader 
is best referred to the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumen- 
tation Engineers (SPIE) annual proceedings for grazing 
incidence and multilayer x-ray optics. Some recent vol- 
umes are SPIE Proceedings volumes 3444 (published in 
1998), 3113 (1997), 2808 and 2805 (1996) and 2515 (1995). 


Paul B Reid 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


10 


X-rays 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


X-rays 


Energetic electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths 
in the range 10 nm (10°§ m) down to 0.01 nm 
(10-"' m). Although the boundaries are somewhat 
arbitrary, wavelengths shorter than 0.01 nm are called 
gamma-rays and those longer than 10 nm extreme 
ultraviolet (EUV). Cosmic x-rays are usually described 
in terms of photon energies, a wavelength of 10 nm 
corresponding to an energy of 80 electron volts (eV) and a 
wavelength of 0.01 nm to 8 x 10° eV (80 keV). 

X-rays from cosmic sources are absorbed high in the 
Earth’s atmosphere. Even the most energetic (shortest- 
wavelength) x-ray photons fail to penetrate much closer 
to the ground than an altitude of about 40 km. 

X-rays were discovered in 1895 by the German 
physicist Wilhelm Konrad Rontgen (1846-1923). 


Seealso: electromagnetic radiation, electromagnetic spec- 
trum, electronvolt, x-ray astronomy. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Yarkovsky Effect ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Yarkovsky Effect 


The Yarkovsky effect changes the rotation and the orbit 
of a body orbiting in the Solar System by the asymmetri- 
cal re-radiation of thermal energy from the Sun. The 
effect constitutes a non-gravitational force which causes 
the orbits of smaller, kilometer-sized asteroids to change 
over time. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2002 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2002 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS21 6BE, UK 1 


Year 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Year 


The period of the Earth’s revolution around the Sun, or 
of the apparent motion of the Sun on the ecliptic. It may 
be defined in a number of ways, each of which leads to a 
slightly different value: 

Sidereal year. The time interval during which the Sun 
apparently completes one revolution of the celestial sphere 
relative to the stars (which, for this purpose, are regarded 
as being fixed in space). This is equal to the revolution 
period of the Earth around the Sun as measured relative 
to the stars, and is equivalent to 365.2564 mean solar days. 

Tropical year. The time interval between two 
successive passages of the Sun through the vernal equinox. 
Its length is 365.2422 mean solar days, about 20 minutes 
shorter than the sidereal year. The difference arises 
because of the effects of precession. As this definition of 
the year is related to the recurrence of the seasons, the term 
‘year’, if unqualified, is generally taken to mean ‘tropical 
year’. 

Anomalistic year. The interval between two 
successive passages of the Earth through the perihelion 
of its orbit which, because of a slow change in the position 
of perihelion, is not quite the same as the sidereal year. Its 
length is 365.2596 mean solar days. 

Gregorian calendar year. This is the value of the year 
adopted for calendar purposes, and is equal to 365.2425 
mean solar days. For practical purposes it can be taken as 
equal to the tropical year (the difference amounts to 0.0003 
mean solar days). 


See also: calendar. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Yerkes Observatory 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Yerkes Observatory 


Yerkes Observatory lies 334 m above sea level in Williams 
Bay, Wisconsin. Itis a research branch of the Department of 
Astronomy and Astrophysics of the University of Chicago. 

The observatory was completed in 1897. It 
was financed by Charles Tyson Yerkes, a Chicago 
transportation tycoon, but the inspiration behind its 
construction was George Ellery Hale. The showpiece of 
the observatory was the 1 m refractor, the world’s largest 
telescope in 1897, and still the largest refracting telescope 
ever built. 

Until the mid-1960s, Yerkes Observatory housed 
all of the university department's activities (including 
managing the operations for MCDONALD OBSERVATORY in 
Texas from 1932-62). Today, the 77 acre site provides 
laboratory space and access to telescopes for research 
and instruction. A substantial fraction of the university’s 
library holdings in astronomy are housed at Yerkes. 

The principal telescopes are the 1 m refractor, a 1 m 
Ritchey-—Chrétien reflector which is used for adaptive 
optics studies, a 0.6 m reflector and an 18 cm Schmidt 
camera for wide-field photography. 

Recent research at Yerkes includes measuring the 
velocities and distances of the furthest star clusters 
within the Milky Way to better determine the mass 
of our Galaxy; spectroscopic measurements of lithium 
abundances; spectra of the dust disk around Beta 
Pictoris; and studies of the properties of distant galaxies. 
Yerkes astronomers are currently developing a camera 
for the airborne Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared 
Astronomy (SOFIA). 

For further information see 
http:/ /www.astro.uchicago.edu/yerkes/. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Yohkoh 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Yohkoh 


The Yohkoh satellite was launched by Japan’s INSTITUTE OF 
SPACE AND ASTRONAUTICAL SCIENCE (ISAS) on 30 August 1991 
for observations of solar FLARES and the solar CORONA in x- 
ray and gamma-ray wavelengths. Excellent observations 
have been made over the last nine years (see figures 1 
and 2). The satellite has experienced the entire transition 
from the maximum to the minimum of the last SOLAR CYCLE 
and is proceeding to observations of the rising phase of 
solar cycle for the first time. 

Yohkoh carries two X-RAY TELESCOPES: the hard x-ray 
telescope has imaging capability above 40 keV because 
of its utilization of modulation collimators. These hard x- 
ray images allow us to obtain new information on where 
and how energetic electrons are accelerated in solar flares. 
The soft x-ray telescope is a grazing-incidence x-ray (5- 
50 A) telescope to observe the solar corona and solar flares 
with high spatial (3 arcsec) resolution. The soft x-ray 
telescope is sensitive to plasmas with temperatures from 
2 MK through 20 MK. Two other instruments onboard 
are the Bragg crystal spectrometer to observe the iron, 
calcium and sulfur lines from flare plasmas and the wide- 
band spectrometers to observe flare spectra from 5 keV to 
10 MeV. 

The discoveries made so far by Yohkoh cover a 
wide area of solar physics. In the following, we give 
representative examples. 

(1) Mechanism of solar flares. The Yohkoh data, for the 
first time, showed unambiguously that magnetic recon- 
nection is responsible for significant energy release in solar 
flares; intense heating occurs owing to magnetic reconnec- 
tion possibly with standing slow magnetohydrodynamic 
shocks. 


Figure 1. X-ray image of the Sun taken with Yohkoh. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


(2) Microflares and coronal heating. Yohkoh x-ray 
movies showed numerous small transient brightenings 
far smaller than flares in energy (microflares) as well as 
structural changes of coronal magnetic fields. Magnetic 
reconnection is again responsible for these brightenings. 
Although the heating mechanism of the persistent corona 
remains unknown, these observations imply that an 
ensemble of nanoflares, which are too faint to be resolved, 
maintains the persistent solar corona. 

(3) X-ray jets. Yohkoh discovered x-ray jets with speed 
reaching several hundreds km s~'. X-ray jets may be 
driven by the slingshot effect of the reconnected field lines 
or maybe due to chromospheric evaporation caused by 
heat flow from the reconnection site. 

(4) Electron acceleration in solar flares. The Yohkoh hard 
x-ray telescope showed that hard x-ray flares essentially 
have double-source structures, which are located at the 
footpoints of the soft x-ray loop. This clearly indicates 
that a rich population of non-thermal electrons (up to 
10 MeV or higher) are created in flare loops in association 
with magnetic reconnection and emit hard x-rays with 
bremsstrahlung. A surprising discovery from the hard x- 
ray observations is the detection of an impulsive hard x- 
ray source located above the soft x-ray loop. The loop-top 
source is due to bremsstrahlung of high-energy electrons 
with energy up to at least 50 keV. The energization 
probably occurs at the fast magnetohydrodynamic shock 
formed by the supersonic outflow from the reconnection 
site. 

MAGNETIC RECONNECTION with associated slow magne- 
tohydrodynamic shocks appears to be a powerful engine 
to convert magnetic energy to plasma kinetic and ther- 
mal energies. The hard x-ray observations also show that 
the resultant supersonic outflow creates fast shock, which 
converts the flow energy to further heating and/or non- 
thermal acceleration of electrons and protons as a result of 
Fermi acceleration. In spite of the large magnetic Reynolds 
number of the solar corona, Yohkoh has delivered unam- 
biguous evidence of magnetic reconnection in flares and 
in the corona. 

Yohkoh is therefore revolutionizing our understand- 
ing of the solar corona and the behavior of magnetized 
plasmas in general. Yohkoh shows for the first time how 
the Sun dynamically relaxes its magnetic energy, buoyant 
as a result of the subsurface dynamo mechanism, by the 
process of magnetic reconnection. The formation of the 
solar corona with frequent sporadic (10-100 Alfvén transit 
times) energy releases including solar flares, solar wind 
and coronal mass ejections is a consequence and manifes- 
tation of the energy release process. This suggests that 
magnetic energy conversion through magnetic reconnec- 
tion is likely to be a common occurrence in the cosmos. 


Bibliography 

For details on the instrumentation on board Yohkoh, the 
interested reader is referred to volume 136 of Solar Physics 
(1991). 


Saku Tsuneta 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Yohkoh ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


21-FEB-1992 Flare SXT Image Filter : Al.1 


03:10:30 UT 04:52:22 UT 06:35:30 UT 09:06:42 UT 


Figure 2. Gigantic flare arch observed with Yohkoh. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 2 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Young Stellar Objects 


Young stellar objects (YSOs) are stars in the earliest 
stages of development. There are two principal kinds 
of YSOs: protostars and pre-main sequence stars. YSOs 
are intimately associated with fundamental by-products 
of the star formation process such as bipolar outflows, 
circumstellar jets, masers, Herbig—Haro objects, and 
circumstellar (protoplanetary) disks. YSOs are always 
found within or near interstellar clouds of gas and 
dust. Most YSOs populate giant molecular clouds and 
a significant number are members of fully or partially 
embedded stellar or protostellar clusters. 


Background 

Stars are the fundamental objects of the astronomical 
universe. They are self-gravitating balls of (mostly) 
hydrogen gas which convert the primary product of the 
big bang (hydrogen) into heavier elements. For most 
of its life a star maintains a state of stable equilibrium 
in which the inward force of gravity is balanced by the 
outward force of pressure. This internal pressure is 
generated by the energy released in the nuclear reactions 
which burn hydrogen at the star’s center. These nuclear 
reactions are also the source of the star’s luminosity. 
During the time the star burns hydrogen in its core it 
maintains a fixed radius and luminosity and consequently 
a constant surface temperature. The exact value of the 
equilibrium radius, luminosity and surface temperature 
of a star depends almost exclusively on one parameter, 
the star’s mass (see STELLAR MASSES). The more massive 
the star, the greater its luminosity, size and surface 
temperature. Together, hydrogen burning stars of varying 
mass form a well defined locus of points in the observable 
luminosity—effective temperature plane (the HERTZSPRUNG- 
RUSSELL DIAGRAM). This locus of points is called the main 
sequence and the hydrogen burning phase of a star’s life 
is known as the main sequence phase. Main sequence 
stars range in mass from about 0.08-100 Mo (solar masses). 
Stars with smaller masses have insufficient weight to raise 
their central temperatures enough to enable hydrogen 
fusion. (Such objects are referred to as brown dwarfs.) 
Stars with larger masses are presumably too luminous to 
hold on to their outer atmospheres. 


The formation and early evolution of stars 

STAR FORMATION and early STELLAR EVOLUTION occur prior to 
the main sequence or hydrogen burning phase of stellar 
life. Most stars in the Galaxy originate in giant molecular 
clouds (GMCs). With temperatures seldom in excess of 
10 K and maximum dimensions of 50-100 pc, GMCs are 
the coldest objects in the universe and the largest objects in 
the Galaxy. With masses in excess of 10° Mo they also rival 
globular clusters as the most massive objects in the Galaxy. 
GMCs are composed primarily of molecular hydrogen and 
are characterized by mean densities of ~100 cm-~?. About 
10% of the mass of a typical GMC is in the form of dense 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


cores with n(Hz) ~ 10* cm-%. 


regions that stars are formed. 

Although there is no complete theory of stellar 
origins, basic astrophysical considerations result in the 
following general picture of star formation and early 
stellar evolution. Stars form through the gravitational 
collapse of dense molecular cloud cores. Before being 
incorporated into a star, the interstellar material must 
increase its density by 20 orders of magnitude and collapse 
to a size nearly 7 orders of magnitude smaller than the 
dimensions of the original dense cloud core. Because the 
dust in the cloud is optically thin, internal energy gained 
by its collapse is effectively radiated away. Thus the cloud 
material remains isothermal and dynamically collapses. 
The collapse also proceeds in a non-homologous manner, 
with the inner regions becoming denser and collapsing 
faster than the outer regions which are left behind. 
Eventually, the innermost infalling material becomes 
dense enough to be optically thick to its own radiation 
resulting in the development of a central quasistatic stellar 
core surrounded by an infalling envelope. Thus is a 
protostar born. 

After the formation of its embryonic core, the 
protostar enters the accretion phase of protostellar 
evolution. During this time the central stellar core 
gradually gains mass via the accretion of material from its 
infalling envelope. Before being finally incorporated onto 
the growing stellar core, accreting material must dissipate 
the gravitational potential energy lost in infall, giving rise 
to an accretion luminosity: 


It is within such dense 


GM,M 
R, 


Laccretion = 


where M,, and R, are the mass and radius of the 
protostellar core and M, the mass accretion rate. This 
accretion luminosity can be a significant component of 
a protostar’s luminosity. The mass accretion rate is 
generally expressed as: 

M = Mo ial 

G 

where a is the effective sound speed and mp is a 
constant which is sensitive to the initial conditions in the 
collapsing core. Different theories of star formation predict 
somewhat different values of mo. Insome models mp varies 
with time and is quite large (~10) in the early stages of 
collapse, falling to near unity in the later stages. However, 
for most protostars, this constant must be near unity to be 
consistent with the observed luminosities of protostellar 
objects. 

Initially the mass of the embryonic stellar core is very 
small, approximately 10~? Mo and the central temperature 
of the core is not sufficient to ignite nuclear reactions. 
As the embryonic core begins to grow its luminosity is 
dominated by accretion. The mass of the protostellar core 
increases as M,(t) = Mt. Once a protostellar core reaches a 
mass of roughly 0.2-0.3 Mo, its central temperature reaches 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


10° Kand deuterium-burning nuclear reactions are ignited 
providing the protostar with another source of luminosity. 
ACCRETION of new material and a fully convective core 
enable the protostar to continue burning deuterium as it 
grows. If placed on the HR diagram the protostellar core 
would follow a trajectory parallel to and somewhat above 
the deuterium-burning main sequence which itself lies 
significantly above and roughly parallel to the (hydrogen- 
burning) main sequence. A protostellar core can continue 
to gain mass by accretion until its central temperature 
reaches 10’ K and hydrogen fusion is ignited, at which 
point the embryonic core reaches the main sequence. This 
occurs when the cores attain masses around 7-8 solar 
masses. Presumably, the protostar can still continue to 
grow and increase its mass. However, for reasons not 
yet fully understood, most protostars cease growing long 
before this point. In any event, stars which end up with 
masses in excess of 7-8 solar masses have a very different 
post-protostellar evolution than stars which end up less 
massive. 

The physical reason for this becomes apparent if one 
compares the timescale for pre-main sequence evolution 
with that of protostellar collapse. The timescale for the 
gravitational collapse of a cloud core, the free-fall time, is 
determined largely by p, the density of the cloud: 


3x 
Tt = ./ ——. 
# ¥ 32Gp 


For the typical mean density (n * 10* cm~’) of a cloud 
core (of either low or high mass) the free-fall time is 
about 4 x 10° yr. The timescale for pre-hydrogen-burning 
evolution is the Kelvin-Helmholtz time: 


GM? 
RL, 


TkH ~ 


which is very rapid for a high mass star (i.e. ~10* yr for 
M, = 50 Mo) and relatively slow for a low mass star 
(ie. ~3 x 10’ yr for M, = 1 Mo). More importantly 
for high mass stars tx < tg and these stars begin 
burning hydrogen and reach the main sequence before the 
termination of the infall or collapse phase of protostellar 
evolution. On the other hand, for low mass stars txy > Te 
and low mass stars have an observable pre-main sequence 
stage of stellar evolution. 

The initial conditions for pre-main sequence evolu- 
tion are those which describe the mass, radius and lumi- 
nosity of an embryonic protostellar core at the the point 
in time that infall and accretion cease. For this reason the 
locus of points on the HR diagram which traces the initial 
starting points of PMS evolution for all stars is called the 
birthline. The position of a given star on the birthline is a 
function of the mass it has acquired by the end of its proto- 
stellar accretion phase. Presumably, the protostellar evolu- 
tion of a given star is identical to that of all other stars until 
the time that the star stops accreting and reaches the birth- 
line. Prior to its appearance near the birthline, a young 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


stellar object is surrounded by an infalling protostellar en- 
velope which renders it invisible. Once the envelope is ei- 
ther mostly accreted onto the protostellar core or removed 
by some agent, the protostar becomes a visible PRE-MAIN 
SEQUENCE STAR. Its initial luminosity and surface tempera- 
ture place it near the birthline which, for low mass stars, 
is itself basically coincident with the deuterium-burning 
main sequence on the HR diagram. Because the abun- 
dance of deuterium in the young star is relatively low, it 
is burned up very rapidly. Without accretion to replen- 
ish the burned deuterium, nuclear reactions cease and the 
star slowly contracts to the main sequence. The timescale 
for this quasistatic contraction to the main sequence is the 
Kelvin-Helmholtz time. 


Observational characteristics of the low mass 
young stellar objects 
The evolutionary status of a normal star is usually 
determined by its placement on the HR diagram. This 
in turn requires measurements of two quantities: stellar 
luminosity and effective temperature. A star can be 
meaningfully placed on the HR diagram provided it emits 
a black-body-like spectrum that can be characterized by a 
single effective temperature. For YSOs this is not always 
possible. This is because throughout their formation and 
early evolution stars are intimately associated to varying 
degrees with natal gas and dust. This circumstellar gas and 
dust can absorb and reprocess substantial amounts of the 
radiation emitted by a young stellar object, significantly 
altering its spectral appearance. The circumstellar gas 
and dust associated with a young stellar object has a 
spatial extent considerably greater than that of its stellar 
photosphere. Consequently, emitting circumstellar dust, 
which is in radiative equilibrium with the stellar radiation 
field of the buried star, will exhibit a wide range of 
(effective) temperature and the emission that emerges will 
have a spectral distribution much wider than that of a 
single temperature black body. In addition, at the optical 
wavelengths the youngest objects are rendered completely 
invisible by the obscuration of opaque circumstellar dust 
and a significant fraction, if not all, of their luminous 
energy is radiated in the infrared portion of the spectrum. 
To determine the evolutionary status of a young 
stellar object requires knowledge of its overall broadband 
energy distribution, particularly at infrared wavelengths. 
The shape of the broadband energy distribution of a YSO 
will depend on both the nature and distribution of the 
surrounding material. Consequently, the shape of the 
spectrum will be a function of the state of evolution of 
a YSO. The earliest (protostellar) stages, during which 
an embryonic star is surrounded by large amounts of 
infalling material, have a very different infrared signature 
than the more advanced (pre-main sequence and main 
sequence) stages, where most of the original star-forming 
material has already been incorporated into the young 
star itself. This is clearly apparent for low mass (0.1- 
2.0 Mo) YSOs where the majority of known sources can 
be meaningfully classified by the shapes of their observed 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


YSO ENERGY DISTRIBUTIONS | 
i. 
1000 


100 10 


Class I 


Class 0 


Log (VF ,) —> 


Class II Class IIT 


Log (v) ——> 


Figure 1. The classification scheme for the spectral energy 
distributions (SEDs) of young stellar objects. A vertical fiducial 
line is located at the infrared wavelength of 2.2 4m for reference. 
(Figure courtesy of C J Lada.) 


spectral energy distributions (SEDs) into one of four broad 
classes designated 0, I, II and III (see figure 1). 


Embedded sources: protostars 

Class 0 and I sources are characterized by SEDs that 
peak in the submillimeter and far-infrared portions of 
the spectrum indicating that the SEDs are dominated 
by emission from cold dust (see CLASSIFICATION OF STELLAR 
SPECTRA). These objects are the most deeply embedded 
YSOs. 

Class I SEDs are broader than a single black-body 
function. Longward of two microns these SEDs usually 
rise with increasing wavelength producing a huge ‘excess’ 
of infrared emission compared to that expected from a 
normal stellar photosphere. They typically exhibit the 
silicate absorption feature at 10 ~»m wavelength. Class 
I sources derive their large infrared excesses from the 
presence of large amounts of circumstellar dust. These 
sources are usually deeply embedded in dense molecular 
cloud cores and rarely exhibit detectable emission in 
the optical portion of the spectrum. However, they 
are detected at near-infrared (i.e. 2.2 wm) wavelengths 
and frequently associated with small (infrared) reflection 
nebulae. Indeed, a significant fraction, in some cases 
all, of the near-infrared emission from a class I source 
is scattered light. Roughly half of the class I sources 
exhibit atomic emission lines in the infrared. Otherwise, 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


the infrared spectra of these objects are found to be 
featureless and heavily veiled. Class I sources are almost 
always associated with very energetic, relatively massive, 
collimated outflows of cold molecular gas known as 
bipolar outflows. The luminosities of class I sources in 
regions of low mass star formation typically range between 
0.1-100 Lo. Class I sources are relatively rare among YSOs 
in molecular clouds and statistical arguments suggest ages 
of these sources of order 1-5 x 10° yr. 

Class 0 sources are considerably more extinguished 
and embedded than class I sources. Their energy 
distributions peak at submillimeter wavelengths and 
most are not detected at wavelengths shortward of 
20 wm. Unlike class I sources, their energy distributions 
have widths similar to single-temperature black-body 
functions however, they are characterized by extremely 
low temperatures, 20-30 K! All are associated with bipolar 
molecular outflows which are typically more energetic and 
much better collimated than those associated with class I 
objects. On the other hand, as a whole class 0 sources are 
not significantly more luminous than class I sources. In 
addition, some observations suggest that class 0 sources 
emit significantly more submillimeter radiation on small 
spatial scales than do class I objects. In particular, the 
circumstellar mass traced by submillimeter measurements 
within 1000 AU of a class I source is usually found to 
amount to a fraction of a stellar mass, while for a class 
0 source this mass can be comparable to that of the 
central star. Class 0 sources are relatively rare making 
up roughly 10% of embedded sources. This suggests that 
their lifetimes are only of the order of ~10+ yt, which is 
consistent with estimates of the dynamical ages of their 
associated outflows. 

Asubset of the class I sources, known as flat-spectrum 
sources, merit additional comment. Flat-spectrum sources 
are embedded YSOs that have SEDs intermediate between 
class I and II sources. Unlike the standard class I source, 
these objects are often visible stars which display extreme 
T Tauri characteristics. That is, they are optical emission- 
line variable stars, whose optical spectra display little 
in the way of photospheric absorption features and are 
heavily veiled (most likely by excess continuum radiation 
from accretion shocks at the stellar surface). Indeed, 
the most well known member of this group is T Tauri 
itself. Like class I sources, these objects are also veiled 
at infrared wavelengths, but not as strongly. Roughly half 
the flat-spectrum sources display atomic and molecular 
absorption lines at 2.2 zm. This is significant because these 
are the only embedded objects for which the inner stellar 
component can be spectrally classified and placed on the 
HR diagram. These objects are found to be characterized 
by late-type (M) photospheres whose luminosities place 
them near or above the birthline. Flat-spectrum sources 
appear to be objects in transition between the class I and 
II phases and can be considered ‘optical protostars’. 

The embedded sources are generally considered to 
be protostars. Operationally, we define protostars as 
YSOs in the process of accumulating into a stellar-like 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Kinematic Signature of Protostellar Infall 


NGC 1333-IRAS2 


(yD) sanjesoduray, 


LSR Velocity (km/s) 


Figure 2. The expected kinematic signature of infall from gas surrounding a protostellar source. Oval curves represent lines of 
constant infall velocity. The thick dashed line represents blue-shifted gas, the thick solid line red-shifted gas. Along a single 
line-of-sight the radio telescope beam intercepts the t = 1 surface in the outer, colder regions of the cloud at redshifted velocities and 
the inner, hotter regions of the cloud at blueshifted velocities producing an asymmetric emission- line profile. The observed spectrum 
of carbon monoxide emission from the protostellar source NGC 1333 IRAS2 in Perseus is also shown. (CO spectrum adapted from 


Ward-Thompson et al 1996 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 314 625.) 


configuration the bulk of the material they ultimately 
will contain as main sequence stars. Evidence for a 
protostellar nature of the embedded sources is derived 
from the following considerations. 

First, theoretical models of collapsing, rotating cloud 
cores predict the density and temperature structure of 
protostellar objects and these models produce SEDs which 
closely match those of known class I sources. 

Second, the only viable source for the enormous 
energies of the bipolar outflows generated by class 0 
and I sources is gravity. Specifically, it is the release of 
gravitational potential energy by material falling deep 
into the potential well of a protostellar system. That is, 
material falling all the way down to the surface of the 
embryonic stellar core. Exactly how this energy from 
infall and accretion is tapped to drive a protostellar wind 
is unclear. However, observational relations between 
accretion and outflow diagnostics suggest that the mass- 
loss rate characterizing the outflows is related to the mass 
accretion rate as Mwing = f Maceretion, With 0.01 < f < 0.1. 

Third, the observed veiling of class I spectra in the 
infrared requires the existence of dust very close (ie. 
<1 AU) to the protostellar surface. Theoretical models 
predict that dynamically infalling protostellar envelopes 
contain enough such material close to the protostellar 
surface to account for the degree of observed veiling. 

Fourth (and most significant), kinematic evidence for 
collapse has been observed toward a number of mostly 
class 0 sources. Under favorable conditions sub-millimeter 
and millimeter-wave spectral lines from collapsing clouds 
will display a kinematic signature of infall motion (see 
figure 2). This signature takes the form of an infall 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


asymmetry in the line profile in which the redshifted 
portion of an optically thick emission line is depressed 
relative to the corresponding blueshifted portion. Surveys 
of embedded sources have revealed the infall symmetry 
towards a substantial number (~ 3) of class 0 sources. Such 
kinematic signatures provide the most direct evidence 
for infall and for a protostellar nature for these heavily 
embedded sources. 


Revealed sources: pre-main sequence stars 

Class II SEDs peak at visible or near-infrared wavelengths. 
Like class I sources the class II SEDs are broader than a 
single black-body function. However, longward of two 
microns class II SEDs fall with increasing wavelength 
usually in a power-law-like fashion. This results in an 
infrared excess which, though significant, is much smaller 
than that exhibited by class I sources. The infrared excess 
indicates the presence of circumstellar material associated 
with the star. 

Theoretical calculations predicted more than two 
decades ago that T TAURI STARS would display such energy 
distributions if they were surrounded by luminous 
accretion disks. Consider an optically thick and spatially 
thin disk that surrounds a young star and radiates 
everywhere like a black body. Imagine the disk to be 
composed of concentric annuli with radial dimension AR 
and area 27 RAR (see figure 3). Each annulus radiates as a 
blackbody of temperature T(R). The emergent spectrum 
of the disk will then be the superposition of a series of 
black-body curves of varying T(R). Now if T(R) ~ R™, 
the Wien law tells us that the frequency of maximum 
emission scales as v ~ T(R) ~ R™. The luminosity 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


CIRCUMSTELLAR DISK 


R, 
a ENERGY DISTRIBUTION 


Power-Law 
v Slope: a=2/n-4 


logu—> 


Figure 3. Schematic diagram of a spatially thin, optically thick 
disk and its emergent (class II) spectral energy distribution, 
which is composed of a superposition of black-body functions. 


radiated in each annulus is given by: 
L, dv =2nRdRoT(R)* ~ R27" dv ~ v2, 


Therefore, if the temperature gradient in the disk is 
characterized by a radial power law, the emergent 
spectrum will also be characterized by a power-law slope 
in frequency or wavelength. In an SED, vL, ~ v*~?/” or 
a = (2/n)—4 where a is the slope of the SED when plotted 
as a function of log A. 

Thus the power-law shape of the infrared portion of 
class II SEDs strongly suggests that the infrared excess 
arises in an optically thick circumstellar disk. The slope 
of the SED is directly related to the temperature gradient 
in the disk. The slopes of class II SEDs longward of 
2 wm wavelength are observed to have values in the 
range between —0.7 and —1.3, corresponding to a range 
in n, the index of the disk temperature gradient, of 0.6— 
0.75. A viscous accretion disk is predicted to produce a 
temperature gradient characterized by n = 0.75 which 
corresponds to a = —1.33. This also turns out to be the 
same temperature gradient and spectral slope predicted 
for a flat purely passive disk which derives its luminosity 
from the reprocessing and re-radiation of light it has 
absorbed from the central star. The majority of class II 
sources have shallower slopes (typically a ~ —0.7) which 
suggests that they are surrounded by flared (passive) 
disks. 

The excellent agreement between the predictions of 
disk models and observations suggests that the most likely 
interpretation of the nature of class II sources is that they 
represent young stars surrounded by circumstellar disks. 
They differ from class I objects in that they lack large, 
massive (infalling) envelopes of gas and dust (see DUSTY 
CIRCUMSTELLAR DISKS). However, it is interesting to note that 
the infrared to millimeter excess emission from class II 
sources is sufficiently large that, if the emitting material 
were spherically distributed and not confined to a highly 
flattened structure, such as a disk, the star would suffer 
significantly more extinction than is observed. Indeed, 
disk masses derived from detection of optically thin 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Figure 4. Resolved HST image of a circumstellar disk observed 
in silhoutte aganist the Orion Nebula. (Courtesy of the Space 
Telescope Science Institute.) 


continuum millimeter-wave emission range between 0.01- 
0.1 solar masses. Compelling evidence confirming the 
disk interpretation of class II SEDs has been provided by 
resolved images of YSO disks obtained by interferometric 
observations at millimeter wavelengths and dramatic 
optical images by the Hubble Space Telescope (see 
figure 4). 

Class II sources can be observed at optical as well 
as infrared wavelengths. Therefore, considerably more 
is known about the nature of these objects than is known 
about class I or class 0 sources. When observed optically 
class II sources typically exhibit the characteristics of 
classical T TAURI stars (CTTS). Conversely, most all CTTS 
stars possess class II SEDs. Classical T Tauri stars 
are low-mass, pre-main sequence, emission-line variable 
stars. In addition to excess infrared continuum emission, 
these stars also exhibit excess emission at ultraviolet 
wavelengths. The optical spectra of CITS contain 
hydrogen emission lines and frequently various forbidden 
emission lines as well. The forbidden lines are believed to 
arise in stellar winds originating near the surface of the 
star. Typically these lines are observed to be blueshifted 
and the absence of redshifted emission is interpreted 
as strong supporting evidence for the presence of an 
occulting disk close to the stellar surface. The origin of 
the Balmer emission lines is more mysterious. Analysis of 
these lines provides evidence for both mass loss and mass 
loss in these objects. However, both the mass loss and 
ultraviolet excess are believed to be consequences of disk 
accretion onto the stars. The accretion rates are typically 
~10-8 Mo yr! and, though significant, are relatively 
low compared to the typical infall rates encountered in 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


protostellar evolution. 

Because they are visible, CTTS can be placed on 
the HR diagram, and they are found to lie between 
the birthline and the main sequence, consistent with 
theoretical expectations for pre-main sequence stars. 
The existence of CTTS near the birthline indicates that 
circumstellar disks form in the protostellar phase of 
evolution as part of the collapse and infall process prior 
to PMS evolution. When their positions are compared to 
theoretical PMS calculations (which predict trajectories or 
tracks of early stellar evolution on the HR diagram) one 
derives ages for CTTS usually between 10° and 4 x 10° 
years, although such comparisons are hampered by the 
fact that most existing calculations assume diskless stars 
and the process of accretion of disk material can have 
an effect on the evolution of a star’s luminosity and 
temperature. Class II sources are relatively common in star 
formation regions where they typically outnumber class I 
sources by more than 10 to 1. 

Knowledge of the duration of the class IT or CTTS 
phase of evolution has interesting implications for the 
formation of planetary systems. Analogy with the 
solar system suggests that planets are likely formed in 
circumstellar disks. The duration of the class II phase of 
evolution therefore sets limits on the duration of planet 
building around a young star. The typical lifetime of a class 
II source deduced from observations of young clusters 
is about 3-4 million years. The initial stages of planet 
formation must occur during this interval. However, it 
is important to note here that the duration of the class II 
phase may vary significantly between stars of differing 
mass and even stars of similar mass formed in different 
environments or with different initial conditions. For 
example, in the Trapezium cluster in Orion, ionizing 
radiation from a massive O star appears to be evaporating 
the circumstellar disks of other nearby cluster stars. This 
results in abbreviated disk lifetimes (<10° yr) for those 
stars and may present difficulties for planet formation in 
their short-lived disks. 

Class III SEDs typically peak at visible and infrared 
wavelengths for low mass stars and decrease longward 
of two microns more steeply than class II sources. 
Since their shapes are more or less similar to single- 
temperature black bodies, the energy distributions of class 
III sources are readily interpreted as arising from extincted 
or unextincted photospheres of young stars. By definition 
these stars display no infrared excess. However, their light 
still could be substantially extinguished by foreground 
dust. 

Class III sources can be readily placed on the HR 
diagram. Class III sources are found to lie above the 
main sequence and can be thought of as ‘classical’ pre- 
main sequence stars in the sense that their positions 
on the HR diagram can be unambigously compared to 
predictions of theoretical PMS tracks (for diskless stars). 
Comparison with such theoretical tracks shows that the 
ages of class III sources range from roughly 10° yr to more 
than 10’ yr. Although most class III sources have ages 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


>5 x 10° yr, and are likely candidates for post T Tauri 
stars (PTTS), a significant number have ages which overlap 
with those of classical T Tauri Stars (CTTS). This indicates 
that many stars may evolve through the CTTS or class 
II phase of evolution very rapidly (<10° yr). Class III 
sources are relatively strong (but variable) x-ray sources 
and can be identified in x-ray surveys. In the Taurus region 
such observations suggest that the population of class III 
sources is at least comparable in size to that of class II 
sources. Older class III objects are also found to extend 
well beyond the boundaries of star formation regions in x- 
ray surveys. Class ITI sources typically produce little or no 
Ha line emission. All class III sources are therefore weak- 
lined T Tauri stars (WTTS). (Optical astronomers classify 
PMS stars with Ha equivalent widths less than 10 A as 
WTTS and PMS stars with Ha equivalent widths greater 
than 10 Aas CTTS.) 


Bipolar jets, outflows and protostellar evolution 

Although the SED classes discussed above correspond 
to distinct physical classes of YSOs, the variation in the 
shapes of the energy distributions from class 0 to III 
is quasi-continuous. It corresponds to a sequence of 
the gradual dissipation of circumstellar gas and dust 
around newly formed stars and represents a continuous 
sequence of evolution from protostar to main sequence 
star. To evolve from class 0 to I to II requires the removal 
of the circumstellar material contained in a protostellar 
envelope. In principle, the clearing of circumstellar 
gas and dust could be accomplished by accreting all 
the surrounding material onto the star itself. However, 
this possiblility conflicts with the observation that star 
formation is an inefficient process. The cores which form 
stars contain considerably more mass than the stars which 
they produce. Thus, the removal of circumstellar gas and 
dust would appear to require some active physical agent. 
This agent is most likely the energetic bipolar outflow that 
is ignited early in the protostellar phase of evolution (see 
figure 5). 

An unanticipated phenomenon of fundamental 
importance for star formation, bipolar molecular outflows 
were only discovered by millimeter wave observations in 
the late 1970s and early 1980s. Bipolar outflows are very 
energetic flows of cold molecular gas generally consisting 
of two spatially separate lobes moving diametrically away 
from an embedded YSO at hypersonic velocities. These 
outflows are very massive, often containing considerably 
more mass than the central YSO which drives them. 
This indicates that the molecular outflows primarily 
consist of swept-up material and not ejecta from the 
embedded driving star itself. Bipolar outflows are the 
manifestation of an underlying primary wind generated 
by the embryonic protostellar core. 

Other manifestations of this primary driving wind 
include Herbig—Haro objects, circumstellar jets and water 
masers. Herbig—Haro objects are clumps of shock- 
excited gas created by the collision of the primary 
wind with dense ambient cloud material. Herbig—Haro 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Figure 5. HST image of a bipolar outflow at optical wavelengths. The two blobs of emission are the Herbig—Haro objects 1 and 2. The 
visible emission originates in shock-excited gas interacting with a hidden high-velocity bipolar wind generated by an invisible class I 
protostar located in the dark cloud core between the two lobes. (Courtesy of the Space Telescope Science Institute.) 


Figure 6. Infrared HST (NICMOS) image of one of the 
circumstellar jets that drives the bipolar Herbig—Haro 1-2 
outflow system shown in figure 5. The class I protostellar source 
which produces the jet is so deeply buried that it is not visible 
even in this deep infrared image. It is located near the upper 
right corner of the image in a region devoid of emission. 
However, light from the protostar is visible in this image. The 
extended infrared reflection nebula, which surrounds the jet, is 
produced by light from the obscured protostar which has been 
scattered into our line of sight by dust in the cavity created by 
the outflow. (Image courtesy of John Bally and Bo Reipurth and 
the Space Telescope Science Institute.) 


objects emit primarily emission-lines and are brightest at 
optical and infrared wavelengths (see HERBIG-HARO OBJECTS 
AND EXCITING STARS). They are known to be interacting 
with very fast (vwing > 100 km s~') winds and often 
display proper motions of similar magnitude. Similar 
to molecular outflows, Herbig—Haro objects often exhibit 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


bipolar morphologies and can extend over distances (i.e. 
1 pc) comparable to the largest molecular outflows. 
Water maser sources arise in very small but dense regions 
where the conditions are such that certain microwave 
transitions of HzO become nonlinearly amplified by 
stimulated emission and as a result extremely bright. 
Like Herbig—Haro objects, maser sources often display 
significant proper motions and likely represent material 
interacting with and swept up by the fast primary wind. 

Very close to the surface of the protostellar object, 
the primary wind is most often manifest by a highly 
collimated, circumstellar jet (see figure 6). These jets 
contain sufficiently hot and ionized gas to emit at optical 
as well as centimeter wavelengths. Although such jets 
appear to originate very close (<50 AU) to the protostellar 
core, they can also extend to large distances from the 
central object. Such jets are frequently observed to 
terminate at Herbig—Haro objects which have the shapes of 
extended bow shocks. Such jet-bow shock systems often 
exhibit bipolar morphologies similar to bipolar outflows. 

Bipolar outflows are individually energetic enough 
to disrupt a protostellar envelope as well as an entire 
dense cloud core. Indeed, the masses of some outflows 
(e.g. MonR2) are known to be comparable to those of the 
cloud cores in which they originate. Bipolar outflows are 
therefore capable of driving the evolution of a protostar 
from the embedded class 0 to the revealed class II 
phase. Moreover, in the process of removing surrounding 
circumstellar material, outflows play a significant role in 
determing the final mass of the central star. Exactly how 
this mass is determined and how the initial spectrum of 
stellar mass (i.e. the initial mass function or IMF) originates 
are open questions. 

The high frequency of association with embedded 
sources indicates that such outflows are ignited very 
early in protostellar evolution and have a duration 
comparable to the lifetimes of the protostars that drive 
them. This raises the apparent paradox that protostars are 
simultaneously sources of both infall and outflow. The 
resolution to this paradox, as mentioned earlier, is that 
outflows must be accretion driven. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young Stellar Objects 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Bipolar outflows are almost always associated with 
embedded class 0 and I sources and very rarely with class 
II or III stars. There is some evidence to indicate that 
outflows decline in energy as a source evolves from a class 
0 to class I stage. Without massive infalling envelopes, 
accretion rates in class II sources are not robust enough 
to continue to drive energetic outflows. To evolve from a 
class II to III stage likely results from the accretion of the 
remaining circumstellar disk material onto the star. 

Disk accretion in the class II (or even class 0 and I) 
stages may not be steady. There is a subset of YSOs, 
called FU Ori stars, which appear to be characterized 
by non-steady accretion histories. These stars display 
either episodic brightness variations of large amplitude 
or spectral signatures associated with unusually high disk 
accretion rates. The prototype of this class, FU Orionis, 
experienced an intense outburst in which its luminosity 
increased by a factor of 100 in less than one year. Prior to 
this outbust, FU Ori appeared to be a typical CTTS. The 
accretion rate necessary to power its outburst luminosity 
is ~10-* Mo yr™! which is significantly in excess of the 
accretion rates characteristic of protostellar objects (2- 
6 x 10° Mg yr) and class II sources (~10-8 Mg yr’). 
FU Ori outbursts are believed to be short lived (~100 yr) 
and for most sources not as energetic as that experienced 
by FU Ori itself. However, such bursts of accretion may 
occur frequently during the early evolution of a YSO and 
a star could accrete a significant portion of its final mass 
in such episodes. 


Young stellar objects of high mass 

Despite their somewhat different history of formation 
and early development, high mass (M, > 2 Mo) stars 
can sometimes display characteristics similar to low mass 
YSOs. This is particularly true for intermediate mass stars 
(2 < M, < 10 M©) whose formation and early evolution 
is most similar to that of low-mass YSOs. Intermediate 
mass pre-main sequence stars are known as Herbig 
AeBe (HAEBE) stars. More massive analogs of CTTS, 
the HAEBE stars are emission-line stars which typically 
display class II SEDs and therefore possess circumstellar 
disks. They range in age between 0.5-5 x 10° yr, similar 
to CTTS. Luminous (L > 10? LO) class I sources are the 
likely precursors to HAEBE stars. 

For more massive stars (i.e. M, > 8 Mo) there is 
no pre-main sequence phase. When a protostar grows 
to a mass in excess of about 10 Mo, it begins to emit 
copious amounts of ultraviolet radiation. This results in 
the dissociation and ionization of all the hydrogen in the 
immediate circumstellar vicinity of the protostellar core. 
A small, dense region of hot (10* K) ionized gas, known 
as an ultra-compact HII REGION, is then produced. Because 
the pressure in the ionized gas can be as much as three 
orders of magnitude higher than that in the surrounding 
material, the H II region expands rapidly, at the speed of 
sound (10 kms~') characterizing the ionized gas. It quickly 
evolves into a compact H II region and then ultimately 
a fullblown H II region. In the process the protostar 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


quickly evaporates and disrupts its circumstellar disk and 
infalling envelope and perhaps even those of neighboring 
stars as well. The lifetime of such massive protostars is 
likley very short (<10*—10° yr). Yet, high-mass protostars 
also manage to produce bipolar outflows and masers. 
Little more is known about the protostellar evolution of 
massive stars. Their brief protostellar lifetimes, coupled 
with the fact that massive stars are intrinsically rare, makes 
it extremely difficult to find and investigate examples 
of such protostars. Such objects can be expected to be 
located at very large distances from the Earth making their 
detailed study difficult. Moreover, massive protostars are 
so energetic that they significantly alter the conditions in 
the surrounding natal material making the processes of 
protostellar and early post-protostellar evolution difficult 
to distinguish. 


Bibliography 

Bachiller R 1996 Bipolar molecular outflows from young 
stars and protostars Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34 
111-54 

Beckwith S V W and Sargent A I 1996 Circumstellar disks 
and the search for neighbouring planetary systems 
Nature 383 139-44 

Lada C J and Kylafis N D (eds) 1991 The Physics of Star 
Formation and Early Evolution (Dodrecht: Kluwer) 

Lada C J and Kylafis N D (eds) 1999 The Physics of Star 
Formation and Early Stellar Evolution II (Dodrecht: 
Kluwer) (in press) 

Levy E Hand Lunine J (eds) 1993 Protostars and Planets III 
(Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press) 

Shu F H, Adams F C and Lizano S 1987 Star formation in 
molecular clouds: observations and theory Ann. Rev. 
Astron. Astrophys. 25 23-81 


Charles J Lada 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Young, Thomas (1773-1829) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Young, Thomas (1773-1829) 


English physicist who developed the wave theory of light 
to explain interference. He explained the aberration of 
starlight by suggesting that the Ether was not disturbed 
by the motion of the Earth through it. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Yunus, Abu’l-Hasan ibn (950-1009) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Yunus, Abu’l-Hasan ibn (950-1009) 


Astronomer, born in Egypt, calculated trigonometric 
functions for use in astronomy and wrote an astronomical 
handbook, al-Zij al-Hakimi al-kabir, the Great Tables of Caliph 
al-Hakim, which contained observations made by Yunus, 
including 30 lunar eclipses used by sIMON NEWCOMB in his 
lunar theory. Yunus was also an astrologer, predicting 
the date of his own death in seven days’ time. He made 
preparations, locked himself in his house and recited the 
Koran, dying on the day predicted (see also JEROME CARDAN). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Z Andromedae (Z And) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Z Andromedae (Z And) 


Z And is the prototypical symsioric sTaR. Discovered as a 
mundane M-type VARIABLESTAR with a 2 mag range in visual 
brightness, Z And rose to prominence in the 1920s when 
JOHN STANLEY PLASKETT reported a peculiar class A spectrum 
with strong nebular lines on spectra near maximum light. 
Frank Scott Hogg later noted TiO bands on Plaskett’s 
spectra. The simultaneous presence of A-type features 
with the TiO bands observed in much cooler M-type stars 
led Hogg to speculate that Z And and a handful of similar 
‘stars with combination spectra’ might be a new type of 
(binary) stellar system. Roughly a dozen of these systems 
were known in the 1940s, when PAUL MERRILL coined the 
term symbiotic star for the class. 


Basic properties 

As in all symbiotic stars, the behavior of Z And can 
be divided into two states, eruption and quiescence. 
During quiescence, the optical spectrum resembles an M- 
type giant, with a strong red continuum and deep TiO 
absorption bands (figure 1). This continuum peaks in the 
near-infrared, where CO absorption bands dominate the 
spectrum. In addition to the M-type stellar photopshere, 
optical data show a weak blue continuum and intense 
emission lines from a variety of ionized species. The H I 
Balmer lines are the strongest optical lines; He II, He I 
and occasionally [Ne V] and [Fe VII] are also intense. The 
strong Balmer emission jump at 3646 A indicates that an 
ionized nebula produces much of the optical continuum. 
This ionized nebula is roughly 10*-10° times denser than 
the low-density gas in a typical planetary nebula or H II 
region. In most planetary nebulae the [O III] and [Ne III] 
forbidden emission lines are strong, and the He I triplet 
lines are usually three times more intense than the He I 
singlet lines. In Z And, the [O III] and [Ne III] lines are 
weaker than intercombination lines from C III], N II] and 
OIll]; the He I singlet lines often rival the intensities of the 
triplet lines. 

Ultraviolet spectra of Z And confirm the hot stellar 
source suggested by the prominent He I and He II emission 
lines. The blue continuum from this component rises 
steadily into the far-ultraviolet and must peak shortwards 
of the Lyman limit. The shape of the UV continuum 
suggests a temperature exceeding 10° K for the hot star. 
The emission line spectrum is particularly intense, with 
He II, CIV and N V as the most prominent features. These 
lines are fairly broad and indicate material motions in 
excess of ~200 km s~!. Despite the intense far-ultraviolet 
continuum and the presence of high-velocity gas, Z And 
is not a bright x-ray source due to strong hydrogen 
absorption between the binary system and the Earth. The 
system is a modest far-infrared and radio source due to 
the large amount of dust and gas in the BINARY SYSTEM. 

The quiescent photometric and spectroscopic varia- 
tions of Z And are remarkably complex. The main varia- 
tions in the system are phased with the orbital period of 
759 days. Orbital motion of the hot component has not 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


20 


Flux (10°'? erg cm? s! A’) 
3° 


4000 


5000 6000 7000 
Wavelength (A) 


8000 


Figure 1. Spectra of Z And in quiescence (lower curve) and 
outburst (upper curve). The red end of the spectrum is 
dominated by TiO absorption bands and a strong Ha emission 
line. The blue continuum is weak in quiesence but rises by a 
factor of 3-10 in outburst. Several strong emission lines fade in 
outburst, while other increase in intensity. 


been detected. The small amplitude of the red giant or- 
bital motion, ~7 km s“!, implies masses of ~2Mo for the 
red giant and 0.5-1.0M, for the hot companion if the ratio 
of stellar masses is 2-4 as in other symbiotics. The in- 
tensity of the blue continuum and many strong emission 
lines varies by factors of 2-3 every orbit. The continuum 
variations are usually smaller, ~0.2-0.4 mag in the optical 
and up to 1 mag in the ultraviolet. The system is brightest 
when the giant lies behind the line-of-sight to the hot star 
and is faintest when the giant lies in front of the hot star. 
This behavior suggests that the RED GIANT occults the emis- 
sion line region. The giant does not eclipse the hot star 
itself; variations in the bright ultraviolet continuum and 
the polarization of several emission lines indicate an or- 
bital inclination of ~45°. This inclination is much smaller 
than the 70° inclination needed for eclipses of the hot star. 

Z And also varies on extremely short time scales. 
Some emission lines, notably O III 13444, vary markedly 
from one night to the next, while other lines appear 
constant. Some emission lines, such as H I and He I, 
have velocity fluctuations that are several times larger than 
the orbital motion of 7 km s~!, but these have not been 
investigated in much detail. 

In addition to these quiescent variations, Z And 
undergoes occasional outbursts. Figure 2 shows a 
complete light curve for the system that includes all known 
major outbursts. Most outbursts last ~7 years, and begin 
with a slow increase in brightness, V ~ 10.5-11.0 to V ~ 
9.5, accompanied by a periodic 0.5-1.0 mag oscillation. 
This phase is followed by a more rapid rise to visual 
maximum, V ~ 8.5-9.5, where the optical colors decrease 
and the UV colors increase. Visual maximum is followed 
by aslow decline with a continuing 0.5-1.0 mag oscillation. 
Within this train of oscillations, the interval between 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Z Andromedae (Z And) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


successive minima is 10-15% shorter than when the system 
is quiescent. During a complete outburst, there is exactly 
one more minimum present than in a corresponding time 
period during quiescence. This behavior is observed in at 
least two other symbiotic stars, CI Cyg and AX Per, and 
resembles the ‘superhumps’ observed in the SU UMa class 
of cataclysmic variables. 

The fine details of these phenomena change from 
outburst to outburst, but the overall behavior is 
remarkably repeatable. During the rise to maximum, 
the high ionization emission features fade as the optical 
continuum brightens. Some high ionization emission 
lines, such as [Ne V] and [Fe VII], appear to weaken 
considerably during the rise in brightness, but the He II 
lines often remain strong throughout the eruption. At 
maximum light, the optical spectrum resembles an A- 
type or F-type supergiant. Bright H I lines with strong 
absorption cores are prominent, and He I emission lines 
may also have weak absorption features. These absorption 
and emission lines fade as the system declines from visual 
maximum. The TiO bands and high ionization emission 
lines reappear as the system fades and re-establish their 
pre-outburst levels once the optical continuum returns to 
normal. 

The history of outburst observations at other 
wavelengths is shorter than at optical wavelengths. 
The infrared brightness of the giant remains constant, 
indicating that the giant does not participate in the 
eruption. In the ultraviolet, the continuum longwards 
of ~1400 A appears to rise in step with the visual 
brightness. The continuum at shorter wavelengths has 
not always followed the optical variations, but the data 
are sparse. The low-ionization emission lines track the 
optical variations; higher-ionization emission lines track 
the short-wavelength ultraviolet continuum. At longer 
wavelengths, the radio continuum flux declined as the 
optical brightness increased in the most recent eruptions. 
The light curve for these last two eruptions, however, does 
not resemble the prolonged outbursts in the 1930s, 1940s 
and 1950s. Observations of future outbursts will beneeded 
to see whether or not this behavior is ‘typical’. 

A new feature of Z And’s quiescent behavior is 
the discovery of a persistent 28 min oscillation in the 
optical continuum. The oscillation has an amplitude of 
0.002-0.005 mag and is visible during quiescence and 
the most recent small outburst. The short period of the 
coherent oscillation suggests an association with the hot 
component. Although this variation could be due to 
pulsations in the hot star, a rotational period is the most 
likely explanation. If true, the period demonstrates that 
the hot component must be a WHITE DwakF instead of a main 
sequence star. 

Finally, two of the strongest optical emission lines in 
Z And occur at 6830 A and 7088 A. These lines remained 
unidentified with any known atomic or molecular 
transition until Hans Schmid proposed an association with 
Raman scattering of the O VI 1032 A and 1038 A lines off 
neutral hydrogen atoms surrounding the binary. With 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


8 

° Lia? 

10 NWA ne 
11 


24000 25000 26000 27000 28000 
8 

: H 
10 } NAN 
11 

29000 30000 31000 32000 33000 


) 
xe} 
2 
5 
g 34000 35000 36000 37000 38000 
gS 8 
2. 6 
S 
N \ an 
11 rd Veet ; 
39000 40000 41000 42000 43000 


44000 45000 46000 47000 48000 
8 
9 
10 ‘ee 
11 
49000 50000 51000 52000 53000 


Julian Date (2,400,000 +) 


Figure 2. Optical light curve for Z And using the 10 day means 
of observations from the AAVSO International Database. 


high-quality optical spectropolarimetric observations, 
Schmid and colleagues confirmed this hypothesis and 
derived an orbital inclination of roughly 45° from the 
variation of polarization position angle with orbital phase. 
They followed up these measurements with a similar 
analysis of the symbiotic AG Draconis. The optical Raman 
lines at 6830 A and 7088 A are strong on the optical 
spectra of many symbiotic stars, which should allow 
the measurement of accurate orbital elements for many 
systems. 


Interpretation 

Figure 3 shows our current picture of the Z And binary 
system. The two stellar components are a red giant with a 
bolometric luminosity of roughly 3000L. and a low-mass 
white dwarf with a luminosity of roughly 1000L, for an 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Z Andromedae (Z And) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


a 
v4 
a i 
=~ 
eo <+_ ~+_ + 
~ 
~~ «a 
Ae 
An 
0° gs 


Figure 3. Schematic picture of the Z And binary. The binary 
consists of a red giant star (right) and a small white dwarf star 
(left). The red giant loses material in a stellar wind indicated by 
the arrows. In the orbital plane, the white dwarf deflects wind 
material into an accretion disk. This gas spirals inwards through 
the disk until it encounters the white dwarf magnetosphere. 
Disk material then falls onto the white dwarf along magnetic 
field lines, indicated as dashed lines. High-energy photons are 
produced by accretion through the disk and by material falling 
through the white dwarf’s magnetosphere. These photons 
ionize the red giant wind. The wind heats up as it approaches 
the white dwarf and accretion disk. (Adapted from Kenyon 
(1986) and Sokoloski and Bildsten (1999).) 


assumed distance of 1.5 kpc. The high luminosity of the 
red giant drives alow velocity stellar wind, which forms an 
extended envelope surrounding the binary system. Some 
of this material feeds an accretion disk around the white 
dwarf. This gas drifts inwards through the disk and falls 
onto the hot component. The energy generated by mass 
infall—either through the accretion process itself or by 
nuclear burning of the accreted material—produces the 
blue continuum; the high-energy end of this spectrum 
ionizes some of the surrounding nebulosity. The densest 
portion of the ionized nebula lies within an outflowing 
wind near the photosphere of the red giant. This gas has 
a density of at least 10!° cm~°. The density in the gas 
surrounding the binary system as a whole is much lower, 
10° cm~ or less. 

The simple picture is deceptive, because some of 
Z And’s behavior remains unclear. Despite relatively 
good knowledge about the system geometry, the mass 
of the white dwarf is uncertain by a factor of two. The 
relative contributions of the disk and the hot white dwarf 
to the total luminosity are not known. The origin of 
some emission lines is also poorly understood. In current 
models, low-ionization emission lines, such as H I and 
He I, form close to the red giant; higher ionization lines, 
such as He II and C IV, form close to the hot white dwarf. 
The line fluxes and profiles generally fit this picture, but 
the radial velocities of the lines do not. This failure 
probably reflects our poor understanding of wind-driven 
mass transfer in a close binary system. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The origin of Z And’s eruptions is also a mystery. 
In the simplest model, the outbursts of Z And and other 
symbiotic stars are due to thermonuclear runaways similar 
to those that produce classical novae. These eruptions 
occur when hydrogen from the accretion disk collects 
on the surface of the white dwarf. Nuclear reactions 
begin when this material reaches a critical mass. These 
reactions cause the white dwarf to expand in radius by 
a factor of 10-100, thus producing the large observed 
increase in optical brightness. This dramatic increase 
in radius occurs at roughly constant luminosity, so the 
temperature of the white dwarf cools from over 10° K 
to roughly 7000 K. Aside from the apparent constancy 
of some high ionization emission lines, much of the 
ultraviolet and optical spectroscopic behavior is consistent 
with this picture. However, the rapid recurrence time of 
10-20 years is much smaller than has been achieved in 
any calculation of an outburst in conditions appropriate 
for symbiotic stars. Most calculations imply a recurrence 
time of 100 years or more. 

Additional study is needed to unravel the nature 
of Z And’s eruptions. Further work on repetitive 
thermonuclear runaways may reveal a mechanism that 
allows outbursts every 10-20 years. The main alternative 
to the thermonculear picture, disk instabilities similar 
to those responsible for dwarf Nova eruptions, naturally 
produces such short recurrence times, but cannot explain 
the apparent constancy of the bolometric luminosity 
throughout an eruption. If future observations show that 
the luminosity is not constant, a disk instability might 
provide a better explanation for the eruptions of this 
prototypical symbiotic star. 


Bibliogaphy 

Ferndndez-Castro T, Gonzalez-Riestra R, Cassatella A, 
Taylor A R and Seaquist E R 1995 The active phase 
of the hot component of Z Andromedae Astrophys. J. 
442 366 

Kenyon S J 1986 The Symbiotic Stars (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press) 

Mikotajewska J and Kenyon S J 1996 The inscrutable hot 
component in the symbiotic binary Z Andromedae 
Astron. J. 112 1659 

Schmid H M and Schild H 1997 The polarimetric orbit of 
Z Andromedae Astron. Astrophys. 327 219 

Sokoloski J L and Bildsten L 1999 Discovery of a magnetic 
white dwarf in the symbiotic binary Z Andromedae 
Astrophys. J. 517 919 


Scott Kenyon 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zollner, Johann Karl [Carl] Friedrich (1834-82) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zollner, Johann Karl [Carl] Friedrich 
(1834-82) 


German astronomer, born in Leipzig, was a pioneer 
solar astronomer, classifying solar prominences. He first 
suggested that the spectral types of stars represent an 
evolutionary sequence, starting hot and cooling. This idea 
was taken up with variations by Hc voGEL and NORMAN 
LOCKYER. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zach, Baron Franz Xaver von (1754-1832) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zach, Baron Franz Xaver von 
(1754-1832) 


Hungarian astronomer, became director of the Seeberg 
Observatory (Gotha), organizer of the ‘celestial police’ 
who took it upon themselves to search for the planet 
missing, according to BobE’s law, between Mars and Jupiter. 
Recovered Ceres according to Gauss’s prediction, when it 
had been lost behind the Sun following its discovery by 
PIAZZI. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zeeman Effect 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zeeman Effect 


The splitting of a spectral line into two, three or more 
components, that occurs when the source of that line 
lies within a magnetic field. This phenomenon is named 
after the Dutch physicist, Pieter Zeeman (1865-1943), who 
discovered the effect in the laboratory, in 1896. The 
separation of the components of a line is proportional 
to the strength of the magnetic field and the number of 
components, and the polarization of the light in each 
component depends on the orientation of the field to the 
observer’s line of sight. The Zeeman effect enables the 
strength and orientation of magnetic fields (for example, 
the magnetic fields in sunspots) to be measured. Where 
the components are too close together to be resolved into 
separate lines, the line appears broader than would be the 
case in the absence of a magnetic field (this phenomenon 
is called Zeeman broadening). 

The Zeeman effect occurs because each of an atom’s 
orbiting electrons has a small magnetic field (or magnetic 
moment). When the atom is placed in a magnetic field, the 
electrons can align themselves at certain discrete angles to 
the magnetic field (the orientations are quantized), each 
of which corresponds to a marginally different energy 
level. Consequently, each energy level of the atom is 
split into two or more closely spaced sub-levels, and more 
transitions (movements of an electron from one level to 
another) are then possible, each transition corresponding 
to a spectral line (or a component of a line). 


See also: absorption spectrum, atom, emission spectrum, 
polarization, quantum mechanics, quantum theory, 
spectrum, sunspots. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zeeman, Pieter (1865-1943) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zeeman, Pieter (1865-1943) 


Physicist, born in Zonnemaire, on the isle of Schouwen, 
Zeeland, Netherlands, Nobel prizewinner for physics 
in 1902 with HENDRIK ANTOON LORENTZ ‘in recognition 
of the extraordinary service they rendered by their 
researches into the influence of magnetism upon radiation 
phenomena’. Became professor at Leiden University, 
where he discovered the splitting of spectral lines by 
a strong magnetic field, indicating the quantization of 
the spin of the electron, their negative charge, and the 
unexpectedly high ratio of their charge and mass (e/m). 
Zeeman predicted that Zeeman splitting should be seen in 
the magnetic field of the Sun, and this was completely 
verified by GEORGE HALE, at Mount Wilson Observatory, 
even to the correct interrelationship between the directions 
of polarization and the magnetic fields. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zeiss, Carl (1816-88) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zeiss, Carl (1816-88) 


Optician and industrialist, born in Weimar, Germany, 
established at Jena the optics factory noted for the 
production of lenses, microscopes, and telescopes. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zel’dovich [Zeldovich, Seldowitsch], Yakov Borisovich 
(1914-87) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zel’dovich [Zeldovich, Seldowitsch], 
Yakov Borisovich (1914-87) 


Russian physicist, worked at the Institute of Chemical 
Physics in Leningrad (later in Moscow), played a 
significant role in the development of Soviet nuclear and 
thermonuclear weapons. In the 1960s he worked on 
astrophysics and cosmology, including the theory of black 
holes, the formation of galaxies and clusters, and the large- 
scale structure of the universe. He identified the Sunyaev- 
Zel'dovich effect of a ‘shadow’ in the cosmic microwave 
background caused by intervening electrons in clusters 
of galaxies. He developed astroparticle physics in the 
cosmological theory of the Big Bang and started to develop 
a quantum theory of gravity. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zenith ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zenith 


The point on the celestial sphere that is vertically above an 
observer on the Earth’s surface. It is 90° distant from any 
point on the horizon. The point 180° opposite the zenith, 
directly underfoot, is the nadir. 


Seealso: nadir. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zenith Distance ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zenith Distance 


The angular distance, measured along a great circle on the 
celestial sphere, between the zenith and a celestial object. 
The zenith distance of a celestial object is equal to 90° 
minus the object's altitude. 


See also: altitude, celestial sphere, great circle, zenith. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zenithal Hourly Rate (ZHR) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zenithal Hourly Rate (ZHR) 


Ameasure of the activity of a meteor shower that takes into 
account various observational factors. It is defined as the 
number of meteors that would be seen by a single ‘ideal’ 
observer in a cloudless, perfectly dark sky if the radiant 
were at the zenith. The ZHR is always greater than the 
observed hourly rate. It is calculated as 


ZHR = (N/t)x Rx LxC 


where N is the number of shower meteors observed in time 
t (in hours), R is the radiant-elevation correction factor, L 
is the limiting-magnitude correction factor and C is the 
cloud correction factor. The simplest expression for R 
is 1/sina, where a is the mean elevation in degrees of 
the radiant over the time t; more complex formulae give 
slightly better results, particularly for small values of a. 
The next correction factor, L, is given by r°°-™, where 
r is the population index and LM the observer’s limiting 
magnitude, 6.5 being the assumed limiting magnitude for 
a perfectly dark sky. Values of ZHR become unreliable 
when LM is worse than about 5. The population index 
is a measure of the magnitude distribution of a shower. 
Older meteor streams are depleted in smaller meteoroids 
and produce a lower proportion of faint meteors; their r 
values are higher (e.g. for the Lyrids, r = 2.9). Younger 
meteor streams yield a more even distribution of meteor 
magnitudes and have lower r values (e.g. r = 2.1 for 
the Quadrantids). The third correction factor is given by 
C = 1/(1 — x), where x is the cloud cover expressed as a 
fraction; if x exceeds one-fifth the calculated ZHR will be 
unreliable. The error associated with the overall result is 
obtained by dividing it by ./N. Asimilar formula (without 
the R term) can be applied to observed rates for sporadic 
meteors to give the sporadic hourly rate (or corrected hourly 
rate). For sporadic meteors, r = 3.42. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zeno of Elea (c. 490—c. 425 Bc) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zeno of Elea (c. 490—c. 425 Bc) 


Philospher, born in Elea, Lucania (now southern Italy), 
formulated Zeno’s Paradoxes, identifying inconsistencies 
in the linguistic formulation of the mathematical theory 
of infinitesimals. Diogenes Laertius reports that Zeno 
proposed a universe consisting of several worlds, 
composed of ‘warm’ and ‘cold’, ‘dry’ and ‘wet’ but no void 
or empty space. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zero Gravity 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zero Gravity 


A term sometimes used to describe the state of 
weightlessness or free fall. Weightlessness is the sensation 
experienced by a body falling freely under the influence 
of gravity, in other words, experiencing no resistance to its 
acceleration. An astronaut ina spacecraft which is coasting 
in a gravitational field experiences no sensation of weight 
as both he and his surroundings are ‘falling’ at the same 
rate. Zero gravity does not imply that there is no gravity 
acting. A person in a freely falling lift will be accelerating 
at the same rate as the lift itself; therefore, there will be 
no relative acceleration (and therefore no force) between 
the floor of the lift and his feet. He feels no sensation of 
weight, but both he and the lift are falling in the Earth’s 
gravitational field. 


See also: weight. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zhang Heng [Chang Heng] (78-139) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zhang Heng [Chang Heng] (78-139) 


Mathematician, astronomer and geographer, born in Nan- 
yang, China, became chief astrologer and minister under 
the Emperor An’ti, corrected the calendar to bring it into 
line with the seasons. Invented the first seismoscope 
for measuring earthquakes, essentially a series of finely 
balanced balls that dropped and made a noise when there 
was a tremor. He constructed a rotating celestial globe asa 
model of the universe and described the 320 stars that can 
be named, out of the 11520 very small stars, apparently 
visible to the naked eye (it must have been possible to see 
beyond magnitude 6.5 in China). 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zhu Xi [Chu-hsi] (1130-1200) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zhu Xi [Chu-hsi] (1130-1200) 


Philosopher, classical commentator, scientific thinker, and 
historian, bornin Yu-hsi, Fukien Province, China. He hada 
theory explaining fossils and realized that mountains had 
once been under the sea. He visualized the Earth’s origins 
in condensation from cosmic matter, and perceived the 
universe as evolving and spinning from elemental force. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zodiacal Light 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zodiacal Light 


A faint cone-shaped glow in the night sky stretching 
along the ecliptic, alternatively known as the counterglow 
or gegenschein. Given a dark sky and the absence of 
moonlight, it is visible at all times from the tropics. From 
temperate latitudes it is best seen about an hour and a half 
before sunrise in the fall or the same time after sunset in 
the spring, for at these times the ecliptic makes its greatest 
angle with the horizon. The zodiacal light is caused by 
sunlight scattered by interplanetary dust particles in the 
plane of the ecliptic. 


See also: interplanetary dust. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


Zodiacal Stars ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zodiacal Stars 


Stars located within 8° of the ecliptic, i.e. within the zodiac. 
There are 3539 stars listed in the Zodiacal Catalog (ZC), of 
apparent magnitude 8.5 and brighter. They are the only 
stars that can be occulted by the Moon: observations of 
lunar occultations are valuable as a check on the Moon’s 
position. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zond ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zond 


Series of eight Soviet deep space missions. Launched 
1964-1970. Zond 1 was a failed Venus flyby. Zond 2 
was a failed Mars mission. Zond 3 (launched July 1965) 
conducted a lunar flyby. Zonds 4-8 were part of the test 
programme for a Soviet manned lunar mission. Zond 
5 (launched September 1968) was the first spacecraft to 
successfully circumnavigate the Moon and return to Earth. 
Zond means ‘probe’. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zucchi, Niccolo (1586-1670) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zucchi, Niccolo (1586-1670) 


Born in Parma, Italy, became a Jesuit, and in 1608, or 
perhaps 1616, used a lens to observe the image produced 
by a concave mirror, the first reflecting telescope. He 
described it in a book Optica Philosophica, in 1652. He 
was the first to observe the spots on Jupiter, in 1630. In 
about 1640, he is reported to have examined spots on 
Mars, as discovered by Fontana, but this must be regarded 
skeptically, unless his telescope was better than is believed. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 

Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 

and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 

Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 1 


Zwicky, Fritz (1898-1974) 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


Zwicky, Fritz (1898-1974) 


Swiss physicist, born in Varna, Bulgaria, became professor 
at the California Institute of Technology. He researched 
galaxies and produced a comprehensive catalog of them. 
He had an all-inclusive approach to astronomy, which 
suggested that if something was physically possible then 
it existed somewhere in the universe—he called this 
‘morphological astronomy’. In 1934 he predicted the 
existence of neutron stars and black holes, formed by 
supernovae (a word he coined). His studies of the 
dynamics of galaxies showed the existence of dark matter 
decades before this was generally accepted. 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ZZ Ceti Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


ZZ Ceti Stars 


ZZ Ceti is the generic name for pulsating WHITE DWARFS 
of type DA, which have a pure hydrogen outer layer 
composition. This name is equivalent to DAV (for variable 
DA white dwarfs) frequently used in the literature. 

At the end of their evolution, medium mass stars 
(M Ss 68M.) become white dwarfs. After trans- 
formation of their central hydrogen into helium on the 
main sequence, and of their helium into carbon and 
oxygen during the subsequent evolutionary phases— 
giant branch, horizontal branch (HB) and asymptotic 
giant branch (AGB)—the stars evolve towards the white 
dwarf stage. The white dwarfs are the naked degenerate 
carbon-oxygen (C-O) core surrounded by a tiny helium 
layer (in ~ 20% of cases—the DB white dwarfs), itself 
surrounded by an even thinner hydrogen outer layer (in 
the remaining ~ 80%—the DA white dwarfs). This late 
evolution proceeds either through the PLANETARY NEBULA 
phase, during which the stars expel their outer layers 
into the interstellar medium, or through the subdwarf 
sequence (sdO, sdB). The way a star becomes a white 
dwarf depends on whether enough hydrogen mass is left 
on top of the degenerate core on the HB, allowing the star 
to increase its luminosity from shell hydrogen burning to 
climb the AGB in the HERTZSPRUNG-RUSSELL DIAGRAM (HRD); 
if not enough hydrogen is left at this stage, the star evolves 
directly towards a white dwarf through the subdwarf 
sequence. 

As no more nuclear fuel is available once the stars 
have reached this stage, their subsequent evolution is 
governed by the release of the internal thermal energy 
stored in their degenerate core, and of the gravitational 
energy available during the final contraction of the outer 
layers onto the degenerate core. This latter source of 
energy may still contribute to the stellar luminosity during 
the early phases of the white dwarf lifetime but rapidly 
becomes negligible as the stars reach their final degenerate 
structure. 

White dwarfs constitute accordingly the graveyard of 
most of the stellar population in our Galaxy, and in other 
galaxies, except for those most massive stars which end 
aS SUPERNOVAE. So they offer astrophysicists a way to test 
their current knowledge of STELLAR EVOLUTION, Some phases 
of which are still poorly understood. 

Along the two currently known channels leading 
to white dwarfs, the stars may become pulsationally 
unstable: these are the Variable Planetary Nebula Nuclei 
(PNNV) and the variable sdBs (also called EC14026 
pulsators). Once on the white dwarf sequence, the stars 
cross three more instability strips as they cool down: 
(1) the pulsating pc159 stars (also called GW Vir stars), 
which are the nuclei of planetary nebulae after the nebulae 
have been diluted in the interstellar matter, at an effective 
temperature between 150000 K and 80000 K; (2) the 
variable DB white dwarfs (DBV) at about 25000 K; and 
(3) the variable DA (ZZ Ceti stars) at about 12000 K. Each 
of these groups of pulsators offers a way of studying 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


many interesting features of their internal structure at 
various stages of evolution through the powerful tools of 
asteroseismology. 

The first white dwarf pulsator discovered was the 
DA HL Tau 76, in 1968. But it is the one discovered 
next, in 1971, R548 or ZZ Ceti, which gave its name to 
the subsample of pulsating DA. The number of pulsating 
white dwarfs may seem quite small: only four PG1159, 
seven DB and 29 DA white dwarfs are known to pulsate 
at present. Not surprisingly, the ZZ Ceti form the 
largest group because (1) the hydrogen atmosphere white 
dwarfs (DA) are the most numerous and (2) the cooling 
time scale increases with decreasing luminosity and the 
ZZ Ceti define the coolest instability strip, so more stars 
will be found in a given range of temperature. But 
considering that we have been able to discover only those 
pulsating white dwarfs that are close enough, because of 
their intrinsic faintness, the population of pulsating white 
dwarfs may in fact constitute the largest group of VARIABLE 
STARS in our Galaxy. 

White dwarfs have been discovered in two main 
ways: from surveys of PROPER MOTIONS and from surveys 
of objects with a blue color excess. Faint blue stars with 
a large proper motion have a high probability of being 
white dwarfs; systematic proper motion studies such as 
those conducted by Giclas, Luyten and the Bruce Proper 
Motion survey have led to the discovery of many faint blue 
stars later identified spectroscopically as white dwarfs. 
More recently, systematic surveys aimed at discovering 
quasar candidates among UV or blue color excess objects 
have also produced new white dwarfs: i.e. the Kiso, 
Palomar-Green, Hamburg Quasar, Edinburgh—Cape and 
Montreal-Cambridge-Tololo surveys. White dwarfs 
with appropriate colors, or atmospheric parameters, to 
be candidates for pulsators are subsequently observed 
through fast photometry techniques to search for STELLAR 
PULSATIONS. Efforts to search for new pulsating white 
dwarfs are still ongoing and new pulsators are regularly 
discovered, mainly among the ZZ Ceti group. 


General properties of ZZ Ceti stars 

ZZ Ceti stars are found in a narrow instability strip 
in the HRD. The hot (blue) and cool (red) edges are 
beginning to be well defined since 29 ZZ Ceti stars are 
known. However, the precise observational location of 
the instability strip still needs to be improved. This 
can be achieved partly by improving the precision in 
the determination of atmospheric parameters (effective 
temperature 7, and surface gravity log g) and partly by 
finding more ZZ Ceti stars. The boundaries of the ZZ Ceti 
instability strip depend on stellar parameters like T, and 
the total mass of the star, but also on less well understood 
physics entering into the models like the efficiency of 
convective transport in the envelope. Accordingly, the 
location of the blue edge of the ZZ Ceti has been debated 
for years and is still a matter of discussion. The red 
edge is even more poorly understood because convection 
becomes an ever more important conveyor of the energy 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ZZ Ceti Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


radiated by the stars as they cool across the instability 
strip from blue to red. At the red edge, most of the 
energy is transported by convection and there is as yet 
no satisfactory description of the interaction between the 
pulsations and the convective motions. Both the blue 
and red edges depend on the total mass of the stars, 
the instability strip being wider for more massive white 
dwarfs. The observationally determined instability strip 
is about 1200 K wide for the average ZZ Ceti population, 
whose mean mass is the same as the mean mass of white 
dwarfs: 0.6Mo. It extends from about 12400 K on the 
blue edge to about 11 200 K on the red edge. Because the 
instability occurs at the effective temperature for which the 
hydrogen Balmer lines have their maximum equivalent 
widths, the method for determining T. based on fitting 
these lines is unfortunately not very sensitive. The method 
based on fitting the satellites of the strong La absoption 
observed in the UV spectra of ZZ Ceti stars at 1 = 1400 A 
and a = 1600 A is more sensitive but requires UV spectra 
with a high signal/noise ratio, i.e. from the Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST). 

Within the uncertainty in the determination of the 
atmospheric parameters, and the detection limit of the 
pulsations, there are no stable stars in the ZZ Ceti 
instability strip. All DA white dwarfs crossing the 
ZZ Ceti instability strip should become pulsators. As 
a consequence, the properties derived for ZZ Ceti from 
asteroseismology are presumably applicable to all DA 
white dwarfs. 

The pulsations observed in ZZ Ceti stars are non- 
radial oscillations excited by the x—y mechanism and 
by the response of the surface convection zone, both 
resulting from the recombination of ionized hydrogen 
in the stellar envelope. Theoretical models show this 
to happen at the 7. corresponding to the blue edge. 
Additional complications occur at cooler temperatures as 
the radiative flux and the convective flux, both perturbed 
by the oscillations, start interacting nonlinearly, making 
the theoretical modeling much more complex. Most of our 
present understanding of pulsating white dwarfs comes 
from linear pulsation theory, in which only information 
derived from the frequency of the oscillations is used. 

Non-radial oscillations in stars manifest themselves 
in the form of waves of two types: (a) pressure modes (or 
p-modes) for which pressure is the restoring force; they 
are acoustic waves; and (b) gravity modes (or g-modes), 
for which buoyancy is the restoring force. In ZZ Ceti stars, 
p-modes would have periods of the order of 1 second or 
less, and the corresponding motions of the gas, mainly in 
the vertical direction, would have to fight the high gravity 
of the star, resulting in a very small amplitude. These 
modes, while predicted to be unstable, have never been 
detected. The g-modes have periods two to three orders 
of magnitude longer, from about 100 s to about 1200 s. 
The motion of the gas induced by the pulsations becomes 
dominantly horizontal close to the surface and the high 
gravity is no longer an obstacle to the propagation of 
the waves. g-modes propagate as waves at the surface 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


of the stars, producing temperature fluctuations which 
translate into flux variations detectable by very sensitive 
instruments like photomultiplier photometers and, more 
recently, CCD photometers. They also propagate inside 
the stars, but they can do that only in those regions of 
the star where their frequency is lower than the Brunt- 
Vaisala frequency (N) and the Lamb frequency. WN is 
the characteristic frequency with which a particle of gas 
taken away from its equilibrium position in the radiative 
part of the star returns to its original location through 
oscillations. The Lamb frequency characterizes the local 
sound frequency corresponding to the degree of the non- 
radial mode £. This criterion defines cavities inside the 
star in which the waves can propagate. 

Because of the spherical symmetry of the star, and 
assuming that the rotation is small enough to preserve that 
symmetry, the non-radial oscillations follow a geometry 
defined by spherical harmonics in the horizontal direction. 
This horizontal structure is characterized by the degree ¢ of 
the spherical harmonics, which may be understood as the 
number of lines of nodes of the gas motions on a spherical 
surface, and by the azimuthal number m, which is the 
number of those particular lines of nodes passing through 
the poles defined by the pulsation axis of symmetry. In 
the vertical direction, a given mode has a structure which 
is the solution of the eigenvalue problem obeying the 
boundary conditions at the surface and in the center of the 
star. The order k (or n depending on conventions adopted 
by various authors) is the number of nodes of the radial 
component of the eigenfunction. In white dwarfs, because 
the core is degenerate, the g-modes do not propagate deep 
in the interior as N tends to 0 in degenerate matter. A g- 
mode of frequency f is consequently reflected at the depth 
where f equals the local value of N. So, contrary to the 
case of normal stars, like the Sun and other low-mass main 
sequence stars, where the expected detection of g-modes 
would allow study of their deep internal structure, in white 
dwarfs the observed g-modes allow study of the structure 
of the outer regions lying above the degenerate core. 

An interesting property of the g-modes is that, for a 
given degree £, and for high order k, modes of successive 
order become regularly spaced in period: this is called the 
asymptotic regime and the difference in period between 
successive orders is the period spacing. Departures from 
regular spacing are induced by quasi-discontinuities in 
the chemical composition found in white dwarfs at the 
interface between the outer H and He layers, and deeper 
between the He and the C-O core: this is referred to as 
mode trapping. 

Modes of same degree and order, but with different 
value of m (where —£ < m < €) have the same frequency 
in a non-rotating, non-magnetic star (mode degeneracy). 
Rotation breaks the degeneracy, and in the limit of slow 
rotation (rotation period long compared to the pulsation 
periods) amode of degree ¢ is split into 2¢+1 modes equally 
spaced in frequency. From the frequency separation 
between the components of such multiplets, it is possible 
to derive the rotational period of the star. Detecting triplet 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ZZ Ceti Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


or quintuplets also allows an independent check of their 
identification as £ = 1 or £ = 2 modes. Similarly, the 
magnetic field breaks the degeneracy, each mode of degree 
£ being split into ¢ + 1 components, the frequency shift 
being proportional to B?. 

While theoretical calculations predict a large number 
of non-radial modes to be unstable in ZZ Ceti stars, only 
a small number are generally observed. The first reason 
is trivial: because we see the star as a point source, 
only large-scale perturbations of the stellar surface can be 
detected, i.e. small ¢ values (¢ < 3) because of geometrical 
averaging. Another reason is that most of the ZZ Ceti show 
amplitude variations. Some modes are not found when 
their amplitude is below the detection limit. In most cases, 
many observational campaigns are necessary to recover a 
more complete frequency spectrum. But even then, the 
most complete frequency spectrum is far from the expected 
large number of non-radial modes that can be produced 
by the combination of various ¢, k and m. A very efficient 
selection mechanism must be invoked. The first selection 
mechanism that has been invoked is mode trapping: in 
compositionally stratified white dwarfs, it has been shown 
that those particular modes which have a node of their 
eigenfunction close to the composition interfaces have 
minimum pulsation kinetic energy. As a consequence they 
have smaller growth rates. Their amplitudes grow linearly 
until they saturate the energy available to the pulsations. 
This simple explanation is rather unsatisfactory since, as 
the amplitudes of the modes grow, nonlinear effects couple 
modes and the energy stored in the trapped modes can go 
back and forth in other modes, stable or unstable. But 
this could still act as an efficient selection mechanism. 
Another selection mechanism implies coupling between 
the pulsations and convection. Pioneering works show 
that convection may damp very efficiently the pulsations 
in large frequency domains. But the predicted instability 
strip in this case does not fit with the observational one. 

With the increasing number of known ZZ Ceti stars, it 
becomes possible to determine some global properties. A 
clear relation between pulsation periods and T. emerges: 
pulsation periods increase as TJ, decreases across the 
instability strip. This is a consequence of the fact that the 
unstable g-modes should have periods comparable to or 
longer than the thermal time scale at the bottom of the 
convection zone. As the ZZ Ceti cool from the blue to 
the red edge of the instability strip, the outer convection 
zone induced by hydrogen recombination becomes deeper 
and the thermal time scale at the bottom increases. There 
is also a clear tendency for ZZ Ceti of longer periods to 
have larger amplitude, except close to the red edge where 
amplitudes fall abruptly to small values. This shows that 
the pulsation excitation mechanism stops being efficient at 
a given T, (for a given total mass) and this defines the red 
edge. 


Asteroseismology of ZZ Ceti stars: internal 
structure and evolution 

The comparison of the observed frequencies with 
theoretical calculations based on the linear theory of Non- 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


RADIAL STELLAR PULSATIONS allows one in principle to derive 
many basic parameters about the structure of the STELLAR 
INTERIOR and the evolution of ZZ Ceti stars. A necessary 
requirement, however, is to be able to unambiguously 
identify the pulsation modes. In the case of multiperiodic 
stars this is not a trivial task. The aliases introduced in 
the frequency spectrum by gaps in the data, unavoidable 
a fortiori in single-site observations, have encouraged 
the development of international ground-based networks. 
The Whole Earth Telescope (WET), operating since 1988, 
has been quite successful in the asteroseismology of 
PG1159 stars and the DBV. For ZZ Ceti stars, which have 
much fewer modes, the safe identification of the pulsation 
modes requires additional constraints. Such constraints 
may be provided by time-resolved spectroscopy, using 
the capability of the HST to get UV spectra, or of 
the Very Large Telescope. The wavelength-dependent 
variations of the ZZ Ceti spectrum induced by the 
temperature changes during the pulsation cycle have 
different observational signatures according to the degree 
£ of the mode, because of the different limb darkening 
effects on the stellar surface averaging. The simultaneous 
combination of ground-based fast photometry and time- 
resolved spectroscopy seems a promising avenue for the 
future of the asteroseimology of ZZ Ceti stars. 

From the period spacing, one can in principle deduce 
the total mass. But this requires that enough modes can 
be identified, which is not the case for most ZZ Ceti. 
Additional constraints from spectroscopy are necessary to 
get T. and log g. When PARALLAXES are available, the radius 
and the mass may be derived and comparison of calculated 
g-modes in white dwarf models may solve the ambiguity 
in the identification of the degree ¢ of the observed modes. 

The departure from regular period spacing predicted 
by mode trapping could also be used in principle to derive 
the mass of the outer hydrogen layer. But for the same 
reason that it precludes unambiguous ¢ identification, the 
small number of observed modes makes mode trapping 
very difficult, and often impossible, to detect. The mass of 
hydrogen is then derived from best fits with stellar models, 
but the solution is generally not unique. Determining the 
mass of the hydrogen layer left on top of the degenerate C— 
Ocore is one of the main issues in white dwarf astrophysics 
today because it is the main uncertainty in the white dwarf 
models used in other calculations: i.e. cooling time scale 
and calibration of the white dwarf luminosity function, 
effect of crystallization etc. 

Rotational splitting has been measured in some 
ZZ Ceti. The resulting rotation periods, found in the range 
of a few hours to more than one day, are an indication 
that most, but not all, of the angular momentum is lost 
during stellar evolution. The exact physical mechanisms 
are not completely understood, but from asteroseismology 
of ZZ Ceti and other white dwarfs we know the final state. 

Only upper limits to the magnetic fields in pulsating 
ZZ, Ceti have been derived. No ZZ Ceti is known with a 
magnetic field greater than a few kG. None of the known 
strongly magnetic white dwarfs has been found to pulsate. 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


ZZ Ceti Stars 


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 


In spite of the fact that the ZZ Ceti have typical cooling 
times of the order of 10° years, the great stability of their 
pulsation frequencies should allow us to measure the effect 
of evolution on the pulsation modes. The cooling time 
scale depends mainly on the total mass of the degenerate 
quasi-isothermal core and its chemical composition. As 
the star cools, the internal structure changes, and the 
spectrum of the eigenmodes changes accordingly. A 
few ZZ Ceti stars are regularly observed in a follow-up 
program to ultimately measure the rate of period changes 
induced by their evolution (P). Measuring P would bea 
unique check that the theory of stellar evolution correctly 
predicts the composition of the white dwarf core. The best 
case to date is G117-B15A, for which one has only an upper 
limit for P = 2.8+1.7 x 10-" ss7!. This is consistent with 
the core being a C—O mixture. 

In addition to the poorly determined hydrogen 
envelope mass in ZZ Ceti, the other major uncertainty 
in the calculation of the cooling sequence is the role 
of the crystallization phase. The release of the latent 
heat of crystallization slows the cooling. This is an 
important effect when determining the age of the oldest 
and coolest white dwarfs in the solar neighborhood, which 
in turn may be used to determine the age of the galactic 
disk. The predicted effect of crystallization has never 
been confronted to observational tests. Massive DA 
white dwarfs should be in the crystallization phase while 
crossing the ZZ Ceti instability strip. Most DA have the 
same mass of 0.6 Mo and are predicted to crystallize at 
a T, lower than the red edge of the ZZ Ceti instability 
strip. The only exception is BPM37093, which has a mass 
of 1.1 Mg and is currently the only massive ZZ Ceti on 
which testing the efficiency of the crystallization may be 
undertaken. Unfortunately, the effect of crystallization on 
the oscillation frequency spectrum is small and the present 
uncertainty on the hydrogen mass layer hides its signature. 

Progress on both the theoretical side of non-radial 
pulsations and the observations of ZZ Ceti stars should 
allow us in the near future to use the calibrated 
cooling sequence of white dwarfs to get an independent 
determination of the age of the galactic disk, of globular 
clusters etc, and to better understand the evolution of the 
stars whose lives end as white dwarfs. 


Bibliography 
The essential reference book for understanding the theory 
of non-radial pulsations in stars is: 


Unno W, Osaki Y, Ando H, Saio H and Shibahashi H 1989 
Nonradial Oscillations of Stars (Tokyo: University of 
Tokyo Press) 


A recent IAU Symposium dedicated to helio- 
asteroseismology contains a review on pulsating white 
dwarfs in general: 


Provost J and Schmider F-X (ed) 1997 Sounding Solar 
and Stellar Interiors, LAU Symposium 181 (Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic) 


Copyright © Nature Publishing Group 2001 


The more recent European Workshops on White 
Dwarfs contain many contributions concerning ZZ Ceti 
stars; these are published in: 


Koester D and Werner K 1994 White Dwarfs, Springer 
Lecture Notes in Physics (Berlin: Springer) 

Isern J, Hernanz M and Garcia-Berro E 1997 White Dwarfs 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic) 

Solheim J-E and Meistas E G 1999 11th European Workshop 
on White Dwarfs (ASP Conf. Ser. 169) (San Francisco: 
Astron. Soc. Pacific) 


The original description of the Whole Earth Telescope 
concept may be found in: 


Nather R E, Winget D E, Clemens J C, Hansen C J and 
Hine B P 1990 Astrophys. J. 361 309 


Recent results on ZZ Ceti asteroseismology may be found 
in the proceedings of the WET workshops; the latest 
published one is: 


Meistas E G and Moskalik P (ed) 1998 The Fourth WET 
Workshop Baltic Astronomy 7 nos 1/2 


Gérard Vauclair 


Brunel Road, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS, UK Registered No. 785998 


and Institute of Physics Publishing 2001 
Dirac House, Temple Back, Bristol, BS1 6BE, UK 


